26166


THE

IDEA  OF  THE  HOLY

AN  INQUIRY

INTO  TIIE  NON-  RATION  A L l’ACT'OR  IN  THE  IDEA
OF  THE  DIVINE  AND  ITS  RELATION  TO
TIIE  RATIONAL

BY

RUDOLF  OTTO

PROFESSOR  OF  THEOLOGY  IN  TJIK  UNIVERSITY  OF  MAMilWU


TRANSLATED  J3Y

JOHN  W.  HARVEY

LECTUllEII  IN  PHILOSOPHY  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  UlItMI NGJIAM


Das  Sehaudern  ist  der  Menschlieifc  bestos  Toil.
Wie  aucli  die  Welt  Him  das  Gefulil  verteuere,
Ergriften  fulilt  er  tief  das  Ungelieueru.


HUMPHREY  MILFORD
OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS
London  Edinburgh  Glasgow  Copenhagen
New  York  Toronto  Melbourne  Cape  Town
Bombay  Calcutta  Madras  Shanghai
1924


DEDICATED  TO


THEODOR  YON  HARING


BJM.T  O LIT  ' \r-y

Class  'Nc

\

Date

St.

Clas;

Cat

A

Bk.  Card  1

r--‘

Ghacke<l  |

worn

Printed  in  "England


CONTENTS


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE


TAGS

V


Chap.

I.  The  Rational  and  the  Non- Rational

II.  ‘Numen’  and  the  ‘Numinous*

III.  The  Elements  in  the  ‘Numinous’

Creature-Feeling  ......

IV.  Mystkiuum  tremendum  :

TIie  Analysis  of  ‘Tremendum’  .

1.  The  Element  of  Awefulness

2.  The  Element  of  ‘ Overpoweringness  ’

3.  The  Element  of  ‘ Energy  ’ or  Urgency  .

V.  The  Analysis  of  ‘Mystkiuum

4.  The  ‘Wholly  Other’  .

VI.  5.  The  Element  of  Fascination

VII.  Analogies  and  Associated  Feelings  .

The  Law  of  the  Association  of  Feelings  .
Schematization  . .....

VIII.  The  Holy  as  a Category  of  Value:

Sin  and  Atonement

IX.  Means  of  Expression  of  the  Numinous:

1.  Direct  Means  .....

2.  Indirect  Means  .....

3.  Means  by  which  the  Numinous  is  ex-

pressed in  Art  .....
X.  The  Numinous  in  the  Old  Testament
XL  The  Numinous  in  the  New  Testament
XII.  The  Numinous  in  Luther  . . . .

XIII.  The  Two  Processes  of  Development  .

XIV.  The  Holy  as  an  a priori  Category.  Part  I

XV.  Its  Earliest  Manifestations

XVI.  The  ‘Cruder’  Phases


1

5

8


12

13

20

23

25

31

42

43
4fi


52


02

64

08

74

85

97

113

116

121

136


IV


CONTENTS


Ciiap.

XVII.  Tiie  Holy  as  an  a riuoitr  Category.  Part  II
XVIII.  The  Manifestations  of  the  ‘Holy’  and
the  Faculty  of  ‘Divination’

XIX.  Divination  in  Primitive  Christianity
XX.  Divination  in  Christianity  to-day  .

XXI.  History  and  the  a fiiiom  in  Religion :
Summary  and  Conclusion

APPENDIXES :

I.  Chrysostom  on  the  Inconceivable  in  God

II.  The  Numinous  in  Poetry,  Hymn,  and  Liturgy

III.  Original  Numinous  Sounds  .

IV.  ‘Spirit’  and  ‘Soul’  as  Numinous  Entities  .

V.  The  Supra-Personal  in  the  Numinous  .

VI.  The  Mystical  Element  in  Luther’s  Conception
of  ‘ Faith  ’

VII.  ‘Signs  Following’  . . .

VIII.  Silent  Worship

IX.  A Numinous  Experience  of  John  ltuskin

X.  The  Expression  of  the  Numinous  in  English


PAGE

140

147

159

166

179

183

191

194

198

201

209

212

216

221

222

226


INDEX


TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE

This  translation  of  Dr.  Rudolf  Otto's  Das  lleiVuje  has  been
made  from  the  ninth  German  edition,  but  certain  passage's,
mostly  additions  to  the  book  in  its  first  form,  have  been
omitted  with  the  concurrence  of  the  author.  The  chief  of
these  are  certain  of  the  appendixes,  especially  a long  one  upon
* Myth  and  Religion  in  Wundt's  Volker psychologic  \ and  some
citations  in  the  text  from  German  and  other  hymns  and
liturgies  which,  besides  defying  adequate  translation,  appeared
to  be  of  less  interest  to  the  English  than  to  the  German
reader.  On  the  other  hand,  I would  refer  the  English  reader
to  the  brief  appendix  (No.  X)  that  I have  ventured  to  add,
in  which  I have  n^ted  some  points  relevant  to  the  subject
discussed  in  the  book  suggested  by  the  usage  of  English  words,
and  added  one  or  two  illustrative  passages  from  English
writers.

My  warmest  thanks  are  due  to  the  author,  not  only  for  the
many  corrections  he  has  made  in  the  text  of  the  translation,
the  whole  of  which  lie  read  in  manuscript,  but  more  for  his
generous  and  patient  encouragement,  without  which  it  would
have  been  neither  undertaken  nor  completed.  My  best  thanks
are  also  due  to  the  readers  of  the  Oxford  University  Press  for
many  helpful  suggestions  and  corrections  in  my  English  text.
* * *

In  the  six  years  since  its  first  publication  in  1917,  Das
lleiluje  has  already  passed  through  ten  editions.  At  a time
when  circumstances  are  as  adverse  to  writers  and  purchasers
of  serious  books  as  they  have  been  for  the  last  few  years  in
Germany,  this  fact  would  alone  suggest  that  the  author's  work
has  met  a genuine  need  in  his  own  land  ; and  any  one  who  has
followed  the  movement  of  religious  thought  abroad  during
this  period  is  aware  that  the  success  of  his  book  is  much  more


vi  ' TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE

than  a mere  vogue,  ancl  that  it  is  exerting  no  little  influence
upon  religious  thought  in  Germany  and  North  Europe  at
the  present  time.  It  may  be  of  interest  to  consider  briefly
where  its  chief  significance  may  be  found  from  the  point
of  view  of  the  English  reader.

One  of  the  most  unmistakable  points  of  contrast  between
the  thought  of  to-day  and  that  of  the  later  nineteenth  century
is  the  increased  comprehensiveness  and  adequacy  with  which
the  study  of  religion  is  being  pursued.  Not  only  has  the  older,
harder,  more  dogmatic  tone  on  all  sides  given  place  to  one
more  tolerant  and  sympathetic,  but  the  study  of  religion  has
come  to  claim  a much  wider  reference  and  to  draw  material
from  far  more  diverse  sources  than  would  at  one  time  have
been  recognized ; and  the  frontiers  of  the  subject  have  been
enormously  extended  in  consequence.  Anthropology,  Sociology,
Psychology,  and  the  history  and  comparative  study  of  religious
forms  and  institutions,  if  they  have  at  once  modified  and  com-
plicated the  problems  of  religious  inquiry,  have  definitely
increased  the  range  of  observations  likely  to  throw  light  upon
them.

. If  we  consider  only  the  English-speaking  countries,  a future
generation  may  perhaps  judge  that  no  writer  did  more  to
introduce  or  render  more  effective  this  new  spirit  in  the  study
of  religion  than  William  James  in  his  famous  Gifford  lectures
on  The  Varieties  of  Religious  Experience^  published  just  over
twenty  years  ago  (1902).  In  any  case  the  title  of  that  book
might  be  taken  as  giving  the  chief  characteristics  of  that  spirit,
the  preoccupation  with  religion  in  all  its  manifold  forms  as  a
specific  experience,  rather  than  as  either  the  vehicle  of  a system
of  dogma  or  metaphysics  on  the  one  hand  or  as  simply  the
emotional  ‘ heightening 9 of  morality  on  the  other.  This  latter
view  is  well  represented  by  Matthew  Arnold,  himself  in  many
respects  a very  typical  child  of  his  age;  and  Arnold's  well-
known  phrase  that  1 the  true  meaning  of  religion  is  “ morality
touched  by  emotion  is  a fair  expression  of  the  limita-


TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE  - vii

tions  and  bias  of  the  nineteenth- century  mind.  It  suggests
the  fundamentally  * rational 9 temper  (‘  rational 9 even  when
attacking  c rationalism  ')  of  an  age  interested  almost  wholly  in
practice  and  conduct,  which,  rightly  reacting  against  views
tending  to  identify  religion  with  creed  and  dogma,  was  content
to  correct  them  by  one  that  practically  reduced  it  to  an  ethic.
It  has  been  justly  noted  1 that  such  an  account  leaves  un-
answered the  question,  which  to-day  so  obviously  needs  asking
and  which  is  in  part  the  theme  of  this  book,  what  sort  of
feelings  or  emotions  it  is  by  which  morality  is  enkindled  into
religion.

For  to-day  this  almost  purely  rational  and  ethical  approach!
to  the  study  of  religion  has  been  abandoned.  Modern  in- 1
quiries  into  the  nature  of  religious  experience  have  indeed
tended  to  overweight  the  opposite  scale.  F eeling  has,  perhaps,
something  more  than  come  into  its  own.  Instinct,  emotion,!
intuition,  the  more  obscure  and  the  more  subjective  aspects  of  |
religious  experience — it  is  these  that  are  to-day  the  main
centre  of  interest.  The  vogue  (perhaps  now  already  declining)
of  M.  Bergson’s  philosophy,  in  which  instinct  and  intuition
are  put  in  fundamental  contrast  to,  if  not  actually  opposed  to,
rationality  and  the  needs  of  practical  life,  has  been  one,  but
only  one,  of  the  influences  making  in  this  direction.  Equally
significant  is  the  quite  modern  interest  in  Mysticism,  which
owes  so  much  to  the  admirable  works  of  such  writers  as  Dean
Inge,  Miss  Evelyn  Underhill,  and  Baron  von  Hiigel  in  this
country,  and  Professor  Rufus  M.  Jones  in  America.  In
Germany,  where  the  popular  interest  in  Mysticism  is  even
more  recent  than  it  is  with  us,  the  same  tendency  is  marked  by
a special  leaning  towards  the  study  of  oriental,  and  especially
of  Indian,  religions.  There,  as  here,  a constant  stream  of  books
indicates  how  widely  held  is  the  conviction  that  there  arei
essential  elements  in  religion  which  are  not  to  be  comprised  in/

1 C.  C.  J.  Webb,  Problems  in  the  Relations  of  God  and  Man  (1911),

p.4.


viii  TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE

any  systematically  thought-out  fabric  of  ideas,  nor  wholly
exhausted  in  practice  and  conduct — elements  which,  if  they
admit  of  expression  at  all,  can  find  it  only  in  symbolism  and
imagery.

If,  as  one  suspects,  there  are  already  signs  of  a new  reaction
against  the  possible  over-emphasis  of  what  may  be  called,  for
want  of  a better  single  term,  the  elements  of  f feeling*  in
religion,  such  a movement  of  criticism  need  not  be  regretted.
We  may  note  at  any  rate  two  points  in  which  it  may  prove
salutary.

In  the  first  place,  it  has  been  urged,  not  altogether  uryustly,
that  some  modern  students  of  religion,  and  especially  of  religion
in  its  * mystical  ’ forms,  have  been  misled  by  their  interest  in
the  experiences  of  exceptional  men  into  a distorted  account  of
religion  as  a whole.  They  do  not  see  the  wood  for  the  trees;
or,  more  accurately,  they  fail  to  get  a true  view  of  the  common
nature  of  the  trees  in  their  structure  and  growth  through
an  undue  preoccupation  with  certain  particularly  striking
examples.  It  is  easy  (so  it  may  be  urged)  to  pursue  tho
varieties  so  far  as  to  neglect  the  identities  of  religious  expe-
rience, those  fundamental  elements  which  distinguish  it  as
religious  from  experience  of  other  kinds.  Mystical  experience
is  surely  after  all  something  exceptional.  Religion  is  some-
thing wider  than  Mysticism.  Yet  sometimes  one  gets  the
impression  that  the  non-mystic  is  only  rather  grudgingly
and  half-heartedly  admitted  to  have  any  first-hand  genuine
religious  experience  at  all.  The  abnormal  is  often  the  more
interesting,  the  more  fascinating  study,  but  it  ought  not  on
that  account  to  be  allowed  to  usurp  the  place  of  the  normal ;
and  this,  it  may  be  suggested,  is  one  mistake  to  which  the
modern  comprehensive,  fertile,  and  far-casting  study  of  religion
is  prone.

This  is  one  possible  point  of  criticism.  A second  would
emphasize,  the  danger  of  subjectivism.  It  is  possible  to  devote
our  attention  to  religious  ‘ experience  * in  a sense  which  would


TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE


ix


almost  leave  out  of  account  the  object  of  which  it  is  an
experience.  We  may  so  concentrate  upon  the  ‘ feeling  \ that
the  objective  cause  of  it  may  fall  altogether  out  of  sight.  Is
religious  experience  essentially  just  a state  of  mind,  a feeling,
whether  of  oppression  or  of  exaltation,  a sense  of  ‘ sin ' or  an
assurance  of  ‘ salvation  ’ ; or  is  it  not  rather  our  apprehension
of  ‘the  divine’,  meaning  by  that  term  at  least  something
independent  of  the  mental  and  emotional  state  of  the  moment
of  experience?  In  short,  it  is  suggested  that  by  a one-sided
over-emphasis  of  the  subjective  aspect  of  it  the  matter  of  our
study  may  cease  to  be  ‘religion*  and  come  to  be  merely
‘ religiosity to  employ  a word  which,  commoner  in  German
than  in  English,  might  well  be  better  acclimatized  in  our
language.

The  enlarged  and  emancipated  study  of  religion  character-
istic of  to-day  has  sometimes  given  just  ground  for  these  two
criticisms.  It  lias  not  always  avoided  exaggerating  the
exceptional  experience  at  the  expense  of  the  normal;  and  it
has  perhaps  not  infrequently  allowed  itself  to  become  so  far
absorbed  in  the  subjective  states  of  mind  manifested  in  religious
experience  as  to  ignore  or  half  ignore  the  objective  significance
of  them.

It  is  not  least  in  reference  to  these  two  points  that  the  value
of  Dr.  Otto’s  volume  lies.  He  is  concerned  to  examine  the
nature  of  those  elements  in  the  religious  experience  which  lie|
outside  and  beyond  the  scope  of  reason — which  cannot  bej
comprised  in  ethical  or  ‘ rational  ’ conceptions,  but  which  none  l
the  less  as  ‘feelings’  cannot  be  disregarded  by  any  honest \
inquiry.  And  his  argument  shows  in  the  first  place  that  in  all  j
the  forms  which  religious  experience  may  assume  and  has  as- t
sumed,  so  far  as  these  can  be  re-interpreted— in  polytheistic  and  *
monotheistic  cults,  non-mystical  and  mystical  worship  alike — '
certain  basic  ‘moments’  of  feeling  (again  a word  of  which!
our  language  might  well  make  fuller  use)  are  always  found
to  recur.  All  genuine  religion  exhibits  these  characteristic


X


'TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE


reactions  in  consciousness.  They  are  seen  emerging  as
religion  itself  emerges,  and  we  are  shown  their  antecedents  in
the  crude  and  savage  stages  of  4 pre-religion  *,  in  magic  and  in
the  world  of  primitive  superstition.  For  this  inquiry  the  author
not  only  draws  upon  his  long  familiarity  with  the  theories  of
the  anthropologists  and  the  literature  of  Naturalism,1  but  also
lays  under  contribution  his  great  erudition  in  the  history  of
religious  development  in  all  its  varieties.  He  has  4 ransacked
the  ages,  spoiled  the  climes  The  remote  Mosaic  and  pre-
Mosaic  religion  of  Israel,  the  Hebrew  prophets,  and  modern
Judaism;  the  religions  of  Greece  and  Rome  and  Islam,  of
China  and  of  India ; the  New  Testament,  the  Fathers,  the
medieval  mystics,  the  reformers,  and  modern  Protestantism:
the  author  calls  them  all  as  witnesses.  He  makes  particularly
effective  use  of  examples  drawn  from  India  through  his
familiarity  with  Sanskrit  and  the  great  classics  of  Hinduism.
His  argument,  while  laying  due  stress  on  the  essential
differences  between  religions,  emphasizes  and  establishes  their
no  less  fundamental  kinship  on  the  side  of  feeling;  and
Mysticism,  especially,  falls  into  its  proper  place  as  neither
a morbid  freak  nor  the  sole  true  fruit  of  religion,  but  as  differ-
ing from  other  forms  of  religious  experience  not  so  much  in
its  essential  nature  as  in  the  degree  in  which  it 4 stresses  and
overstresses  ’ certain  common  elements  shared  with  them.

But  of  still  more  significance  is  the  author’s  argument  in
relation  to  the  second  of  the  two  points  already  mentioned —
the  question  of  subjectivism.  Here  we  are  shown  that  the
religious  ‘feeling’  properly  involves  a unique  kind  of  appre-
Jhension,  sui  generis , not  to  be  reduced  to  ordinary  intellectual
or  rational  4 knowing  ’ with  its  terminology  of  notions  and
concepts,  and  yet— and  this  is  the  paradox  of  the  matter —
1 itself  a genuine  'Jknowing  ’,  the  growing  awareness  of  an  object,

5 His  book,  Natumlistische  ttnd  wligidse  Weltansicht  (The  Naturalistic
and  the  Religious  View  of  the  World),  has  been  translated  into  English
under  the  title  Naturalism  and  Religion , 1907.


TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE


xi


deity.  All  the  ‘ feelings  * and  emotions  that  recur  the  same
through  all  their  diversities  of  manifestation  in  different
religions  are  shown  to  be  just  the  reflection  in  human  feeling
of  this  awareness,  as  it  changes  and  grows  richer  and  more
unmistakable ; a response,  so  to  speak,  to  the  impact  upon  the/
human  mind  of  ‘ the  divine  *,  as  it  reveals  itself  whether*
obscurely  or  clearly.  The  primary  fact  is  the  confronta-i
tion  of  the  human  mind  with  a Something,  whose  character
is  only  gradually  learned,  but  which  is  from  the  first  felt
as  a transcendent  presence,  ‘the  beyond*,  even  where  it  is
also  felt  as  ‘ the  within  * man.  Hence  the  author  shows  that
Schleiermacher,  who  did  so  much  to  emphasize  the  function  of
1 feeling  * in  religion,  is  wrong  in  starting  his  account  with  the
‘ sense  of  absolute  dependence  *,  for  that  is  to  start  from  what
is  after  all  secondary  and  derivative,  the  reflection  in  self-
feeling of  this  felt  presence  of  the  divine.

The  ‘feeling*  element  in  religion  involves,  then,  a genuine
‘ knowing  * or  awareness,  though,  in  contrast  to  that  knowing
which  can  express  itself  in  concepts,  it  may  be  termed  ‘non-
rational  *.  The  feeling  of  the  ‘uncanny  the  thrill  of  awe  or^
reverence,  the  sense  of  dependence,  of  impotence,  or  of  nothing-'
ness,  or  again  the  feelings  of  religious  rapture  and  exaltation, j
— all  these  are  attempted  designations  of  the  mental  statesj
which  attend  the  awareness  of  certain  aspects  of  ‘the  divine’/
In  some  religions  one  may  be  more  prominent  and  in  some
another ; and  different  individuals  will  vary  widely  in  their
susceptibility  to  these  feelings,  or,  in  Dr.  Otto’s  terminology,
in  the  degree  and  character  of  their  faculty  of  ‘divination*.
But  all  of  these  feelings  have  a necessary  and  some  a per-
manent place  in  the  developing  recognition  of  the  divine
nature.  The  particular  aspect  of  it,  glimpsed,  as  it  were,  in
each  of  them,  he  tries  to  isolate  the  better  by  having  recourse
to  a Latin  terminology : but  such  terms  as  * mysterium  ’,)
(‘maiestas*,  ‘fascinans’,  are  confessedly,  like  ‘fear’,  ‘awe’,

‘ love  ’,  in  their  religious  application,  not  so  much  precise  and


xii


TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE


definable  concepts  as  what  he  calls  ‘ideograms’,  hinting  at
meanings  which  elude  exact  formulation.

A word  of  explanation  and  defence  (for  the  English  reader-
does  not  take  kindly  to  fresh  word-coinages)  may  be  offered
in  respect  to  the  chief  new  word  introduced  by  the  author.
Dr.  Otto  is  maintaining  the  autonomy  and  uniqueness  of  a
particular  sort  of  ‘knowing’.  Just  as  the  recognition  and
appreciation  of  beauty  cannot  be  reduced  to  that  of  moral
goodness,  just  as  * the  beautiful  ’ and  ‘ the  good  ’ are,  in  the
philosopher’s  phrase,  ‘ categories  ’ in  their  own  right,  so,  too,  it
is  with  religion.  There,  too,  we  have  to  deal  with  a peculiar
and  irreducible  kind  of  apprehension — we  employ  or  apply
a distinct  ‘ category  ’.  The  natural  term  for  this  would  be
that  which  stands  in  the  title  of  this  book : ‘ the  holy  ’,  or  else
' the  sacred  ’.  But  the  meaning  of  these  words  is  at  once  too
lofty  and  too  narrow.  ‘ Holiness  ’,  ‘ sanctity  ’,  are  words  which
are  charged  with  ethical  import.1  A large  part,  perhaps  the
chief  part,  of  their  meaning  .is  moral.  This,  as  the  author
maintains,  is  necessarily  the  case,  inasmuch  as,  the  better  the
character  of  deity  and  the  divine  becomes  known,  the  more
intimately  it  absorbs  within  itself  all  the  highest  moral  and
* rational  ’ attributes.  But  though,  in  our  final  experience  of
God’s  ‘ Holiness  ’,  perfect  goodness  has  an  absolutely  essential
and  central  place,  yet  there  remains  a something  beyond.|
Holiness  or  sanctity  has  an  element  in  it  independent  of  the(
category  of  the  good.  And  to  this  the  author  gives  the*
name  of  the  ‘ numinous  ’ element,  from  the  Latin  numen,  the  I
most  general  Latin  word  for  supernatural  divine  power.

‘ Numinous  ’ feeling  is,  then,  just  this  unique  apprehension’of'
a Something,  whose  character  may  at  first  seem  to  have  little
connexion  with  our  ordinary  moral  terms,  but  which  later
‘ becomes  charged  ’ with  the  highest  and  deepest  moral
significance.  And  ‘ the  holy  ’ will  be,  in  Dr.  Otto’s  language,  I
a complex  category  of  the  ' numinous  ’ and  the  ‘ moral  ’,  or,  in  1

1 See,  further,  Appendix  X,


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE  xiii

one  of  his  favourite  metaphors,  a fabric  in  which  we  have
the  non-rational  numinous  experience  as  the  woof  and  the
rational  and  ethical  as  the  warp.

* Numinous'  and  * Numen ' will,  then,  be  words  which  bear
no  moral  import,  but  which  stand  for  tlie  specific  non-rational
> religions  appr^hfinsinn  And  .its  object,  at  all  its  levels,  from  the
first  dim  stirrings  where  religion  can  hardly  yet  be  said  to
exist  to  the  most  exalted  forms  of  spiritual  experience.  And
then  we  can  keep  the  words  ‘ holy ' and  ‘ sacred ‘ holiness ' and
1 sanctity to  their  more  usual  meaning.

Dr.  Otto  is  concerned  in  this  volume  primarily  to  establish  \
the  autonomy  and  uniqueness  of  this  ‘ numinous  ' experience — )
to  show  its  essential  place  in  religion  and  its  significance  in
religious  development.  But  so  far  from  claiming  that  this  is
all, — that,  for  example,  mystic  ‘intuition1  can  dispense  with  the
knowledge  that  comes  through  human  reason  and  moral
experience, — he  asserts  emphatically  the  contrary.  And  in  his
later  chapters  he  makes  it  clear  that  for  him  the  supremacy  of
Christianity  over  all  other  religions  lies  in  the  unique  degree
in  which  (as  he  holds)  in  Christianity  the  numinous  elements,
such  as  the  sense  of  awe  and  reverence  before  infinite  mystery
and  infinite  majesty,  are  yet  combined  and  made  one  with  the
rational  elements,  assuring  us  that  God  is  an  all-righteous,
all -provident,  and  all-loving  Person,  with  whom  a man  may
enter  into  the  most  intimate  relationship.

Wnat  is  maintained  in  this  book  is,  in  fact,  that  religion  is
something  not  only  natural  but  also,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the
word,  paradoxical.  It  is  a real  knowledge  of,  and  real  per-
sonal communion  with,  a Being  whose  nature  is  yet  above
knowledge  and  transcends  personality.  This  apparent  con-
tradiction cannot  be  evaded  by  concentrating  upon  one  aspect
of  it  and.  ignoring  the  other,  without  doing  a real  injury  to
religion.  It  must  be  faced  directly  in  the  experience  of
worship,  and  there,  and  only  there,  it  ceases  to  be  a contra-
diction and  becomes  a harmony.  And  many  who  are  grateful


TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE


siv

to  Dr.  Otto  for  his  clear  exposition  of  the  unity  of  Religion
through  all  the  diversity  of  religions,  and  for  his  emphasis
upon  the  objective  significance  of  religious  feeling,  will  be  per-
haps still  more  grateful  to  him  for  insisting  that  both  elements
in  the  harmony  must  be  preserved.

For  in  this,  too,  the  argument  of  this  book  has  something  to
Dffer  to  the  thought  of  to-day.  It  would  hardly  be  denied  that
the  dominant  movement  of  thought  in  this  nearly  completed
first  quarter  of  the  twentieth  century  has  been  what  has
been  called  * humanistic  ’,  and  what  might  better  be  termed
anthropocentric  In  religion,  as  in  other  domains,  we  have
learned  to  view  things,  in  the  phrase  of  a brilliant  exponent  of
this  way  of  thinking,1  1 from  the  human  end  ’ ; man,  an  ideal
humanity,  has  come  to  be  increasingly  our  measure.  We  seo
one  example  of  this  in  such  a popular  religious  philosophy
as  that  of  Mr.  H.  G.  Wells,  with  its  virtual  apotheosis  of
the  spirit  of  striving  mankind  and  the  sharp  antagonism  it
introduces  between  the  * God  in  man  ’ and  the  Veiled  Being,  the
mysterious  Power  in  Nature.  It  is  only  the  former  who  has
any  religious  significance  for  Mr.  Wells.  In  such  cases
a standard  less  merely  ethical  may  be  employed  than  that
which  the  moralistic  tendency  of  the  nineteenth  century
demanded,  but  it  is  far  more  a purely  human  standard.  We
need  not  repeat  the  taunt  of  the  later  nineteenth-century
agnosticism  which  finds  nothing  in  the  God  of  traditional
orthodoxy  but  * man’s  giant  shadow,  hailed  divine  To  say
that  religious  thought  to-day  is  too  anthropocentric  does  not
mean  that  it  is  thus  crudely  anthropomorphic.  But  it  does
suggest  that  by  undue  preoccupation  with  the  human  and  the
personal  we  may  blind  ourselves  to  that  transcendent  and
supra-personal  character  of  the  deity  which  cannot  be
surrendered  without  a real  loss  to  religion.

Is  it  possible  that  once  more  in  this  too  anthropocentric

1 Dr.  L.  P.  Jacks.

* Sir  William  Watson,  The  Unknown  God.


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE


xv


trend  in  religious  thought  the  tide  is  on  the  turn,  and  that
men  are  beginning  to  feel  it  insufficient  to  think  of  God  in
wellnigli  exclusively  human  terms  ? One  suspects  that  it  may
be  so,  and  that  at  any  rate  a religion  which  sets  God  as  Person
and  Friend  of  Man  at  scarcely  disguised  enmity  with  the
inscrutable  power  and  mysterious  tremendousness  of  nature
will  not  for  long  satisfy  the  demands  of  the  soul.  And  those
who  think  thus  will  value  all  the  more  an  exposition  which  \
recalls  us,  as  this  volume  does,  to  the  unsearchable  ‘ otherness '
as  well  as  to  the  human  likeness  of  deity.  >

* * * 1

In  this  book  there  are  certain  features  that  may  be  puzzling
and  unfamiliar  to  some  readers.  Those  unaccustomed  to  such
terms  may  find  words  like  ‘category * a priori ‘ schematize  \
repellent  to  them.  To  the  general  reader  the  quasi-Kantian
treatment  of  this  matter  or  that  may  be  a stumbling-block,
and  to  the  mystic  perhaps  foolishness.  Again,  some  may
find  the  argument  too  much  of  an  analysis  ; others,  too  much
of  an  apologetic.  To  some  it  may  seem  too  logical ; to  others,
too  theological.  But  it  is  good  that  our  incurable  propensity
to  think  in  compartments,  to  keep,  if  we  admit  them  at  all,  our
philosophy  and  theology  strangers,  should  receive  a shock  now
and  then.  And,  for  the  rest,  it  is  surely  good  that  a book
upon  religion  should  be  written  by  a man  who  feels  that
religion  stands  at  the  very  centre  and  basis  of  life — that  ‘ the
divine ' i n man  is,  in  Plato’s  phrase,  the  head  and  the  root  of
him — and  who  can  make  no  pretence  of  viewing  his  own
religion  from  without,  as  though  it  meant  no  more  to  him  than
any  other.  For  though  in  so  many  departments  in  life  it  is  the
detached  and  unprejudiced  observer  who  can  best  pronounce
judgement,  in  this  one  the  paradox  must  hold  that  he  who
professes  to  stand  outside  religion  and  view  all  the  religions  of
the  world  in  impartial  detachment  will  never  wholly  under-
stand any  one  of  them.


March  1923.


J.  W.  H.


CHAPTER  I


THE  RATIONAL  AND  THE  N ON -RATION AL

It  is  essential  to  every  theistic  conception  of  God,  and  most
of  all  to  the  Christian,  that  it  designates  and  preoisely
characterizes  Deity  by  the  attributes  Spirit,  Reason,  Purpose,
Good  Will,  Supreme  Power,  Unity,  Selfhood.  The  nature  of
God  is  thus  thought  of  by  analogy  with  our  human  nature  of
reason  and  personality;  only,1  whereas  in  ourselves  we  are
aware  of  this  'as  qualified  by  restriction  and  limitation,  as
applied  to  God  the  attributes  we  use  are  ‘completed*,  i. e.
thought  as  absolute  and  unqualified.  Now  all  thefce  attributes
constitute  clear  and  definite  concepts:  they  can  be  grasped  by
the  intellect;  they  can  be  analysed  by  thought;  they  even
admit  of  definition.  An  object  that  can  thus  be  thought  con-
ceptually  may  be  termed  rational . The  nature  of  deity
described  in  the  attributes  above  mentioned  is,  then,  a rational
nature ; and  a religion  which  recognizes  and  maintains  such
a view  of  God  is  in  so  far  a ‘ rational  * religion.  Only  on  such
terms  is  Belief  possible  in  contrast  to  mere  feeling . And  of
Christianity  at  least  it  is  false  that  ‘ feeling  is  all,  the  name
but  sound  and  smoke  * 1 ; — where  ‘ name  * stands  for  conception
or  thought.  Rather  we  count  this  the  very  mark  and  criterion
of  a religion's  high  rank  and  superior  value — that  it  should
have  no  lack  of  conceptions  about  God ; that  it  should  admit
knowledge — the  knowledge  that  mmes  by  faith  — of  the
transcendent  in  terms  of  conceptual  thought,  whether  those
^already  mentioned  or  others  which  continue  and  develop  them.
Christianity  not  only  possesses  such  conceptions  but  possesses
them  in  unique  clarity  and  abundance,  and  this  is,  though  not
the  sole  or  even  the  chief,  yet  a very  real  sign  of  its  superiority
over  religions  of  other  forms  and  at  other  levels.  This  must
be  asserted  at  the  outset  and  with  the  most  positive  emphasis.

1 Goethe,  Faust .

B


2 THE  ItiTIONAL  AND  THE  NON-RATIONAL

But,  when  this  is  granted,  we  have  to  be  on  our  guard
against  an  error  which  would  lead  to  a wrong  and  one-sided
interpretation  of  religion.  This  is  the  view  that  the  essence
of  deity  can  be  given  completely  and  exhaustively  in  such
4 rational  * attributions  as  have  been  referred  to  above  and  in
others  like  them.  It  is  not  an  unnatural  misconception.  We
are  prompted  to  it  by  the  traditional  language  of  edification,
with  its  characteristic  phraseology  and  ideas ; by  the  learned
treatment  of  religious  themes  in  sermon  and  theological
instruction ; and  further  even  by  our  Holy  Scriptures  them-
selves. In  all  these  cases  the  ‘ rational  * element  occupies  the
foreground,  and  often  nothing  else  seems  to  be  present  at  all.
But  this  is  after  all  to  be  expected.  All  language,  in  so  far  as
it  consists  of  words,  purports  to  convey  ideas  or  concepts ; —
that  is  what  language  means; — and  the  more  clearly  and
unequivocally  it  does  so,  the  better  the  language.  And  hence
expositions  of  religious  truth  in  language  inevitably  tend  to
stress  the  4 rational  * attributes  of  God.

But  though  the  above  mistake  is  thus  a natural  one  enough,
it  is  none  the  less  seriously  misleading.  For  so  far  are  these
‘ rational * attributes  from  exhausting  the  idea  of  deity,  that
^they  in  fact  imply  a non-rational  or  supra-rational  Subject  of
which  they  are  predicates.  They  are  'essential*  (and  not
merely  * accidental  *)  attributes  of  that  subject,  but  they  are
also,  it  is  important  to  notice,  synthetic  essential  attributes.
That  is  to  say,  we*  have  to  predicate,  them  of  a subject  which
they  qualify,  but  which  in  its  deeper  essence  is  not,  nor  inde  d
can  be,  comprehended  in  them  ; which  rather  requires  com-
prehension'of  a quite  different  kind.  Yet,  though  it  eludes  the
conceptual  way  of  understanding,  it  must  be  in  some  way  or
other  within  our  grasp,  else  absolutely  nothing  could  be
asserted  of  it.  And  even  Mysticism,  in  speaking  of  it  as  to
&ppr]Tov,  the  ineffable,  does  not  really  mean  to  imply  that
absolutely  nothing  can  be  asserted  of  the  object  of  the  religious
consciousness;  otherwise,  Mysticism  could  exist -only,  in  un-
broken silence,  whereas  what  has  generally  been  a character-
istic of  the  mystics  is  their  copious  eloqi$we»

Here  for  the  first  time  we  come  up  Against  the  contrast


THE  RATIONAL  AND  THE  N ON -RATION AL  3

between  Rationalism  and  profounder  religion,  and  with  this
contrast  and  its  signs  we  shall  be  repeatedly  concerned  in  what
follows.  We  have  here  in  fact  the  first  and  most  distinctive
mark  of  Rationalism,  with  which  all  the  rest  are  bound  up.
It  is  not  that  which  is  commonly  asserted,  that  Rationalism  is
the  denial,  and  its  opposite  the  affirmation,  of  the  miraculous.
That  is  manifestly  a wrong  or  at  least  a very  superficial
distinction.  For  the  traditional  theory  of  the  miraculous  as
the  occasional  breach  in  the  causal  nexus  in  nature  by  a Being
who  himself  instituted  and  must  therefore  be  master  of  it —
this  theory  is  itself  as  massively  * rational  * as  it  is  possible  to
be.  Rationalists  have  often  enough  acquiesced  in  the  possi-
bility of  the  miraculous  in  this  sense  ; they  have  even  them-
selves contributed  to  frame  a theory  of  it; — whereas  anti-
Rationalists  have  been  often  indifferent  to  the  whole  controversy
about  miracles.  The  difference  between  Rationalism  and  its
opposite  is  to  be  found  elsewhere.  It  resolves  itself  rather
into  a peculiar  difference  of  quality  in  the  mental  attitude  and
emotional  content  of  the  religious  life  itself.  All  depends
upon  this : in  our  idea  of  God  is  the  non-rational  overborne,
even  perhaps  wholly  excluded,  by  the  rational  ? Or  conversely,
does  the  non-rational  itself  preponderate  over  the  rational  ?
L^qkjngiriKthe  matter  thus,  we  see  that  the  common  dictum,
that  0&h<$doxy  itself  has  been  the  mother  of  Rationalism,  is
1ft  sorafe  measure  well  founded.  It  is  not  simply  that  Ortho-
dB^y&'Wa#Alissipated  in  doctrine  and  the  framing  of  dogma,
for  tlaese  have  been  no  less  a concern  of  the  wildest  mystics.
It  is  rather  that  Orthodoxy  found  in  the  construction  of
dogma  and  doctrine  no  way  to  do  justice  to  the  non-rational
aspect  of  its  subject.  So  far  from  keeping  the  non-rational
element  in  religion  alive  in  the  heart  of  the  religious  experi-
ence, orthodox  Christianity  manifestly  failed  to  recognize  its
‘value,  and  by  this  failure  gave  to  the  idea  of  God  a one-sidedly
intellectualistic  and  rationalistic  interpretation.

This  bias  to  rationalization  still  prevails,  not  only  in  theology
but  in  the  science  of  comparative  religion  in  general,  and  from
top  to  bottom  of  it.  The  modern  students  of  mythology,  and
those  who  pursue  research  into  the  religion  of  ‘ primitive  man f


4 THE  RATIONAL  AND  THE  NON-RATIONAL


and  attempt  to  reconstruct  the  ‘ bases  * or 1 sources ' of  religion,
are  all  victims  to  it.  Men  do  not,  of  course,  in  these  cases
employ  those  lofty  ‘ rational  * concepts  which  we  took  as  our
point  of  departure ; but  they  tend  to  take  these  concepts  and
their  gradual  * evolution  * as  setting  the  main  problem  of  their
inquiry,  and  fashion  ideas  and  notions  of  lower  value,  which
they  regard  as  paving  the  way  for  them.  It  is  always  in
terms  of  concepts  and  ideas  that  the  subject  is  pursued,
‘ natural  * ones,  moreover,  such  as  have  a place  in  the  general
sphere  of  man’s  ideational  life,  and  are  not  specifically  ‘ reli-
gious \ And  then  with  a resolution  and  cunning  which  one
can  hardly  help  admiring,  men  shut  their  eyes  to  that  which
is  quite  unique  in  the  religious  experience,  even  in  its  most
primitive  manifestations.  But  it  is  rather  a matter  for
astonishment  than  for  admiration  ! For  if  there  be  any  single
domain  of  human  experience  that  presents  us  with  something
unmistakably  specific  and  unique,  peculiar  to  itself,  assuredly
it  is  that  of  the  religious  life.  In  truth  the  enemy  has  often
a keener  vision  in  this  matter  than  either  the  champion  of
religion  or  the  neutral  and  professedly  impartial  theorist.
For  the  adversaries  on  their  side  know  very  well  that  the
entire  1 mystical  unrest  * has  nothing  to  do  with  * reason ' and
‘ rationality  \

And  so  it  is  salutary  that  we.  should  be  incited  to  notice  that
Religion  is  not  exclusively  contained  and  exhaustively  pom-
prised  in  any  series  of  ‘ rational  * assertions ; and  it  is  well
worth  while  to  attempt  to  bring  the  relation  of  the ‘diffen.it
c moments  * of  religion  to  one  another  clearly  before  the  mind,
so  that  its  nature  may  become  more  manifest.

This  attempt  we  are  now  to  make  with  respect  to  the  quite
distinctive  category  of  the  holy  or  sacred.


CHAPTER  II


‘NUMEN’  AND  THE  ‘NUMINOUS*

‘Holiness* — ‘the  holy* — is  a category  of  interpretation
and  valuation  peculiar  to  the  sphere  of  religion.  It  is,  indeed,
applied  by  transference  to  another  sphere — that  of  Ethics —
but  it  is  not  itself  derived  from  this.  While  it  is  complex,  it
contains  a quite  specific  element  or  ‘ moment  *,  which  sets  it
apart  from  ‘ the  Rational  * in  the  meaning  we  gave  to  that
word  above,  and  which  remains  inexpressible — an  dpprjrov  or
inejfabile — in  the  sense  that  it  completely  eludes  apprehension
in  terms  of  concepts.  The  same  thing  is  true  (to  take  a quite
different  region  of  experience)  of  the  category  of  the  beautiful.

Now  these  statements  would  be  untrue  from  the  outset  if
‘ the  holy  * were  merely  what  is  meant  by  the  word,  not  only
in  common  parlance,  but  in  philosophical,  and  generally  even
in  theological  usage.  The  fact  is  we  have  come  to  use  the
words  holy , sacred  (heilig)  in  an  entirely  derivative  sense,  quite
different  from  that  which  they  originally  bore.  We  generally
take  ‘ holy  * as  meaning  ‘ completely  good  ’ ; it  is  the  absolute
moral  attribute,  denoting  the  consummation  of  moral  goodness.
In  this  sense  Kant  calls  the  will  which  remains  unwaveringly
obedient  to  the  moral  law  from  the  motive  of  duty  a ‘ holy  *
will;  here  clearly  we  have  simply  the  perfectly  moral  will.  In
the  same  way  we  may  speak  of  the  holiness  or  sanctity  of  Duty
or  Law,  meaning  merely  that  they  are  imperative  upon  conduct
and  universally  obligatory.

But  this  Common  usage  of  the  term  is  inaccurate.  It  is
true  that  all  this  moral  significance  is  contained  in  the  word
‘holy*,  but  it  includes  in  addition — as  even  we  cannot  but
feel — a clear  overplus  of  meaning,  and  this  it  is  now  our  task
to  isolate!  Nor  is  this  merely  a later  or  acquired  meaning;
rather,  ‘ holy  *,  or  at  least  the  equivalent  words  in  Latin  and


6


‘NUMEN'  AND  THE  1 NUMINOUS  1


Greek,  in  Semitic  and  other  ancient  languages,  denoted  first
and  foremost  only  this  overplus : if  the  ethical  element  was
present  at  all,  at  any  rate  it  was  not  original  and  never  con-
stituted the  whole  meaning  of  the  word.  Any  one  who  uses  it
to-day  does  undoubtedly  always  feel ‘ the  morally  good  * to  be
implied  in  ‘ holy  1 ; and  accordingly  in  our  inquiry  into  that
element  which  is  separate  and  peculiar  to  the  idea  of  the  holy
it  will  be  useful,  at  least  for  the  temporary  purpose  of  the
investigation,  to  invent  a special  term  to  stand  for  * the  holy  *
minus  its  moral  factor  or  ‘ moment  ’,  and,  as  we  can  now  add,
minus  its  1 rational*  aspect  altogether.

It  will  be  our  endeavour  to  suggest  this  unnamed  Something
to  the  reader  as  far  as  we  may,  so  that  he  may  himself  feel  it.
There  is  no  religion  in  which  it  docs  not  live  as  the  real  inner-
most core,  and  without  it  no  religion  would  be  worthy  of  the
name.  It  is  pre-eminently  a living  force  in  the  Semitic  religions,
and  of  these  again  in  none  has  it  such  vigour  as  in  that  of  the
Bible.  Here,  too,  it  lias  a name  of  its  own,  viz.  the  Hebrew
qaddshy  to  which  the  Greek  aymy  and  the  Latin  sanctus , and,
more  accurately  still,  saccr,  are  the  corresponding  terms.  It  is
not,  of  course,  disputed,  that  these  terms  in  all  three  languages
connote,  as  part  of  their  meaning,  good , absolute  goodness ,
when,  that  is,  the  notion  has  ripened  and  readied  the  highest
stage  in  its  development.  And  we  then  use  the  word  ‘ holy '
to  translate  them.  But  this  4 holy  * then  represents  the
gradual  shaping  and  filling  in  with  ethical  meaning,  or  what
we  shall  call  the  4 schematization  ’,  of  what  was  a unique
original  feeling-response,  which  can  be  in  itself  ethically
neutral  and  claims  consideration  in  its  own  right.  And  when
this  moment  or  element  first  emerges  and  begins  its  long
development,  all  those  expressions  (qaddsh,  ay  my,  saeer,  &c.)
mean  beyond  all  question  something  quite  other  than  ‘the
good  \ This  is  universally  agreed  by  contemporary  criticism,
which  rightly  explains  the  rendering  of  qaddsh  by  ‘ good  9 as
a mistranslation  and  unwarranted  4 rationalization  * or
4 moralization  ’ of  the  term.  ^

Accordingly,  it  is  worth  while,  as  we  have  said,  to  find
a word  to  stand  for  this  element  in  isolation,  this  4 extra  ’ in


‘NUMEN’  AND  THE  ‘ NUMINOUS  ’


7


the  meaning  of  * holy 9 above  and  beyond  the  meaning  of
goodness.  By  means  of  a special  term  we  shall  the  better  be
able,  first,  to  keep  the  meaning  clearly  apart  and  distinct,  and
second,  to  apprehend  and  classify  connectedly  whatever  sub-
ordinate forms  or  stages  of  development  it  may  show.  For
this  purpose  I adopt  a word  coined  from  the  Latin  numen .
Omen  has  given  us  ominous , and  there  is  no  reason  why  from
numen  we  should  not  similarly  form  a word  * numinous \
I shall  speak  then  of  a unique  ‘ numinous 1 category  of  value
and  of  a definitely  ‘numinous  * state  qf  mind,  which  is  always
found  wherever  the  category  is  applied.  This  mental  state  is
perfectly  sui  generis  and  irreducible  to  any  other ; and  there-
fore, like  every  absolutely  primary  and  elementary  datum,
while  it  admits  of  being  discussed,  it  cannot  be  strictly  defined.
There  is  only  one  way  to  help  another  to  an  understanding  of
it.  He  must  be  guided  and  led  on  by  consideration  and
discussion  of  the  matter  through  the  ways  of  his  own  mind,
until  he  reach  the  point  at  which  ‘the .numinous’  inliim  perforqp
begins  to  stir,  to  start  into  life  and  into  consciousness.  We  can
co-operate  in  this  process  by  bringing  before  his  notice  all  that
can  be  found  in  other  regions  of  the  mind,  already  known  and
familiar,  to  resemble,  or  again  to  afford  some  special  contrast
to,  the  particular  experience  we  wish  to  elucidate.  Then  we
must  add : ‘ This  X of  ours  is  not  precisely  this  experience,
but  akin  to  this  one  and  the  opposite  of  that  other.  Cannot
you  now  realize  for  yourself  what  it  is  ? ’ In  other  words  our
Ar  cannot,  strictly  speaking,  be  taught,  it  can  only  be  evoked,
awakened  in  the  mind;  as  everything  that  comes  ‘of  the
spirit  ’ must  be  awakened.


CHAPTER  III


THE  ELEMENTS  IN  THE  ‘NUMINOUS’

Creature-Feeling.

The  reader  is  invited  to  direct  his  mind  to  a moment  of
deeply-felt  religious  experience,  as  little  as  possible  qualified
by  other  forms  of  consciousness.  Whoever  cannot  do  this,
whoever  knows  no  such  moments  in  his  experience,  is  requested
to  read  no  further ; for  it  is  not  easy  to  discuss  questions  of
religious  psychology  with  one  who  can  recollect  the  emotions
of  his  adolescence,  the  discomforts  of  indigestion,  or,  say,  social
feelings,  but  cannot  recall  any  intrinsically  religious  feelings.
We  do  not  blame  such  an  one,  when  he  tries  for  himself  to
advance  as  far  as  he  can  with  the  help  of  such  principles  of
explanation  as  he  knows,  interpreting  ‘ Aesthetics  ’ in  terms  of
sensuous  pleasure,  and  ‘ Religion  ’ as  a function  of  the  gre-
garious instinct  and  social  standards,  or  as  something  more
primitive  still.  But  the  artist,  who  for  his  part  has  an  intimate
personal  knowledge  of  the  distinctive  element  in  the  aesthetic
experience,  will  decline  his  theories  with  thanks,  and  the
religious  man  will  reject  them  even  more  uncompromisingly.

Next,  in  the  probing  and  analysis  of  such  states  of  the  sc 'll
as  that  of  solemn  worship,  it  will  be  well  if  regal’d  be  paid  to
what  is  unique  in  them  rather  than  to  what  they  have  in
common  with  other  similar  states.  To  be  rapt  in  worship  is
one  thing;  to  be  morally  uplifted  by  the  contemplation  of
a good  deed  is  another ; and  it  is  not  to  their  common  features,
but  to  those  elements  of  emotional  content  peculiar  to  the  first
that  we  would  have  attention  directed  as  precisely  as  possible.
As  Christians  ~we  undoubtedly  here  first  meet  with  feelings
familiar  enough  in  a weaker  form  in  other  departments  of
experience,  such  as  feelings  of  gratitude,  trust,  love,  reliance,
humble  submission,  and  dedication.  But  this  docs  not  by  any


THE  ELEMENTS  IN  THE  1 NUMINOUS  ’


9


means  exhaust  the  content  of  religious  worship.  Not  in  any
of  these  have  we  got  the  special  features  of  the  quite  uniquo
and  incomparable  experience  of  solemn  worship.  In  what  does
*this  consist  ?

Schleiermacher  has  the  credit  of  isolating  a very  important
element  in  such  an  experience.  This  is  the  ‘ feeling  of  de-
pendence \ But  this  important  discovery  of  Schleiermacher
is  open  to  criticism  in  more  than  one  respect.

In  the  first  place,  the  feeling  or  emotion  which  he  really
has  in  mind  in  this  phrase  is  in  its  specific  quality  not  a * feel-
ing of  dependence  * ip  the  ‘ natural  * son  so  of  the  mil,  As
such,  other  domains  of  life  and  other  regions  of  experience
than  the  religious  occasion  the  feeling,  as  a sense  of  personal
insufficiency  and  impotence,  a consciousness  of  being  determined
by  circumstances  and  environment.  The  feeling  of  which
Schleiermacher  wrote  has  an  undeniable  analogy  with  these
states  of  mind  : they  serve  as  an  indication  to  it,  and  its  nature
may  be  elucidated  by  them,  so  that,  by  following  the  direction
in  which  they  point,  the  feeling  itself  may  be  spontaneously
felt.  But  the  feeling  is  at  the  same  time  also  qualitatively
different  from  such  analogous  states  of  mind.  Schleiermacher
himself,  in  a way,  recognizes  this  by  distinguishing  the  feeling
, of  pious  or  religious  dependence  from  all  other  feelings  of
dependence.  His  mistake  is  in  making  the  distinction  merely
that  between  ‘absolute  ’ and  4 relative 7 dependence,  and  there-
fore a difference  of  degree  and  not  of  intrinsic  quality.  What
he  overlooks  is  that,  in  giving  the  feeling  the  name  4 feeling  of
dependence 9 at  all,  we  are  really  employing  what  is  no  more
than  a very  close  analogy.  Any  one  who  compares  and  con-j
trasts  the  two  states  of  mind  introspectively  will  find  out,

I think,  what  I mean.  It  cannot  be  expressed  by  means  of  any-
thing else,  just  because  it  is  so  primary  and  elementary  a datum  .
in  our  psychical  life,  and  therefore  only  definable  through  itself.  J
It  may  perhaps  help  him  if  I cite  a well-known  example,  in
which  the  precise  4 moment  ’ or  element  of  religious  feeling  of
which  we  are  speaking  is  most  actively  present.  When
Abraham  ventures  to  plead  with  God  for  the  men  of  Sodom,
he  says  (Genesis  xviii.  27) : ‘ Behold  now,  I have  taken  upon


10


THE  ELEMENTS  IN  THE  ‘NUMINOUS*


me  to  speak  unto  the  Lord,  which  am  but  dust  and  ashes.*
There  you  have  a self-confessed  ‘ feeling  of  dependence  \ which
is  yet  at  the  same  time  far  more  than,  and  something  other  than,
merely  a feeling  of  dependence.  Desiring  to  give  it  a name  of
its  own,  I propose  to  call  it  ‘ creature-conscious^^  * nr  creature-
feeling.  It  is  the  emotion  of  a creature,  abased  and  overwhelmed
by  its  own  nothingness  in  contrast  to  that  which  is  supreme
above  all  creatures.

It  is  easily  seen  that,  once  again,  this  phrase,  whatever  it  is,
is  not  a conceptual  explanation  of  the  matter.  All  that  this
new  term,  ‘ creature-feeling  can  express,  is  the  note  of  self-
abasement  into  nothingness  before  an  overpowering,  absolute
.might  of  some  kind ; whereas  everything  turns  upon  the
character  of  this  overpowering  might,  a character  which
cannot  be  expressed  verbally,  and  can  only  be  suggested
indirectly  through  the  tone  and  content  of  a man’s  feeling-
response  to  it.  And  this  response  must  be  directly  experienced
in  oneself  to  be  understood.

We  have  now  to  note  a second  defect  in  the  formulation  of
Schleiennacher’s  principle.  The  religious  category  discovered
by  him,  by  whose  means  he  professes  to  determine  tl*e  real
content  of  the  religious  emotion,  is  merely  a category  of  self-
valuation,  in  the  sense  of  Rtdf-dppve^intivn.  According  to  him
the  religious  emotion  would  be  directly  and  primarily  a sort
of  ^//-consciousness,  a feeling  concerning  ones  self  in  a special,
determined  relation,  viz.  one’s  dependence.  Thus,  according
to  Schleicrmacher,  I can  only  come  upon  the  very  fact  oL'iod
as  the  result  of  an  inference,  that  is,  by  reasoning  to  a cause
beyond  myself  to  account  for  my  ‘feeling  of  dependence’.
But  this  is  entirely  opposed  to  the  psychological  facts  of  the
case.  Rather,  the  ‘ creature- feeling  ’ is  itself  a first  subjective
concomitant  and  effect  of  another  feeling-element,  which  casts
it  like  a shadow,  but  which  in  itself  indubitably  has  immediate
and  primary  reference  to  an  object  outside  the  self.1

1 This  is  so  manifestly  borne  out  by  experience  that  it  must  be  about
the  first  thin#  to  force  itself  upon  the  notice  of  psychologists  analysing
the  facts  of  religion.  There  is  a certain  naivete  in  the  following
passage  from  William  James's  Varieties  of  Religious  Experience  (p.


THE  ELEMENTS  IN  THE  ‘NUMINOUS*


11


But  this  object  is  just  what  we  have  already  spoken  of  as
‘the  numinous*.  For  the  ‘creature-feeling*  and  the  sense  of
dependence  to  arise  in  the  mind  the  ‘ numen  ’ must  be
experienced  as  present,  a c numen  praesens  \ as  in  the  case  of
Abraham,  There  must  be  felt  a something  ‘ numinous  *,
something  bearing  the  character  of  a ‘ numen  to  which  the
TOiind  turns  spontaneously ; or  (which  is  the  same  thing  in
other  words)  these  feelings  can  only  arise  in  the  mind  as

(accompanying  emotions  when  the  category  of  ‘ the  numinous  *
is  called  into  play.

The  numinous  is  thus  felt  as  objective  and  outside  the  self.
We  have  now  to  inquire  more  closely  into  its  nature  and  the
modes  of  its  manifestation.

where,  alluding  to  the  origin  of  the  Grecian  representations  of  the  gods,
he  says : ‘ As  regards  the  origin  of  the  Greek  gods,  we  need  not  at  pre-
sent seek  an  opinion.  But  the  whole  array  of  our  instances  leads  to  a
conclusion  something  like  this : It  is  as  if  there  were  in  the  human  con-
sciousness a sense  of  reality , a feeling  of  objective  presence,  a perception  of
what  we  may  call  “ something  thcre'\  more  deep  and  more  general  than
^any  of  the  special  and  particular  " senses”  by  which  the  current  psycho-
logy supposes  existent  realities  to  he  originally  revealed.’  (The  italics
are  James’s  own.)  James  is  debarred  by  his  empiricist  and  pragmatist
stand-point  from  coming  to  a recognition  of  faculties  of  knowledge  and
liotentialities  of  thought  in  the  spirit  itself,  and  he  is  therefore  obliged
to  have  recourse  to  somewhat  singular  and  mysterious  hypotheses  to
explain  this  fact.  But  he  grasps  the  fact  itself  clearly  enough  and  is
suffiviient  of  a realist  not  to  explain  it  away.  But  this  4 feeling  of  reality
the  feelings  of  a ‘numinous  ’ object  objectively  given,  must  be  posited  as
primary  immediate  datum  of  consciousness,  and  the  ‘ feeling  of  depen-
di^c¥^ls~^h?Tl7Tr_consequencel  following  very  closely  upon  it,  viz.’  a
depreciation  of  the  subject  in  his  own  eyes  The  latter  presupposes  the
former.


CHAPTER  IV


MYSTERIUM  TREMENDUM

The  Analysis  of  i Tremendum  \

We  said  above  that  the  nature  of  the  numinous  can  only  be
suggested  by  means  of  the  special  way  in  which  it  is  reflected
in  the  mind  in  terms  of  feeling.  4 Its  nature  is  such  that
it  grips  or  stirs  the  human  mind  with  this  and  that  deter-
minate affective  state/  We  have  now  to  attempt  to  give
a further  indication  of  these  determinate  states.  We  must
once  again  endeavour,  by  adducing  feelings  akin  to  them  for
the  purpose  of  analogy  or  contrast,  and  by  the  use  of  metaphor
and  symbolic  expressions,  to  make  the  states  of  mind  we  are
investigating  ring  out,  as  it  were,  of  themselves.

Let  us  consider  the  deepest  and  most  fundamental  element
in  all  strong  and  sincerely  felt  religious  emotion.  Faith  unto
Salvation,  Trust,  Love— all  these  arc  there.  But  over  and
above  these  is  an  clement  which  may  also  on  occasion,  quite
apart  from  them,  profoundly  affect  us  and  occupy  the  mind
with  a wellnigh  bewildering  strength.  Let  us  follow  it  up
with  every  effort  of  sympathy  and  imaginative  intuition
wherever  it  is  to  be  found,  in  the  lives  of  those  around  jus  in
sudden,  strong  ebullitions  of  personal  piety  and  the  frames  of
mind  such  ebullitions  evince,  in  the  fixed  and  ordered  solemnities
of  rites  and  liturgies,  and  again  in  the  atmosphere  that  clings
to  old  religious  monuments  and  buildings,  to  temples  and  to
churches.  If  we  do  so  we  shall  find  we  are  dealing  with
something  for  which  there  is  only  one  appropriate  expression,
mysterium  tremendum . The  feeling  of  it  may  at  times  come
sweeping  like  a gentle  tide,  pervading  the  mind  with  a tranquil
mood  of  deepest  worship.  It  may  pass  over  into  a more  set
and  lasting  attitude  of  the  soul,  continuing,  as  it  were,  thril-
lingly  vibrant  and  resonant,  until  at  last  it  dies  away  and  the


MYSTERIUM  TREMENDUM


13


soul  resumes  its  'profane',  non-religious  mood  of  everyday
experience.  It  may  burst  in  sudden  eruption  up  from  the
depths  of  the  soul  with  spasms  and  convulsions,  or  lead  to  the
strangest  excitements,  to  intoxicated  frenzy,  to  transport,  and
to  ecstasy.  It  has  its  wild  and  demonic  forms  and  can  sink  tc
an  almost  grisly  horror  and  shuddering.  It  has  its  crude
barbaric  antecedents  and  early  manifestations,  and  again  it
may  be  developed  into  something  beautiful  and  pure  and
glorious.  It  may  become  the  hushed,  trembling,  and  speech-
less humility  of  the  creature  in  the  presence  of — whom  oi
what  ? In  the  presence  of  that  which  is  a Mystery  inexpressible
and  above  all  creatures.

It  is  again  evident  at  once  that  here  too  our  attempted
formulation  by  means  of  a concept  is  once  more  a merely
negative  one.  Conceptually  ‘ mysterium  * denotes  merely  that
before  which  the  eyes  are  held  closed,  that  which  is  hidden  and
esoteric,  that  which  is  beyond  conception  or  understanding,
extraordinary  and  unfamiliar.  The  term  does  not  define  the
object  more  positively  in  its  qualitative  character.  But  though
what  is  enunciated  in  the  word  is  negative,  what  is  meant  if
something  absolutely  and  intensely  positive.  This  pure  positive
we  can  experience  in  feelings,  feelings  which  our  discussion  can
help  to  make  clear  to  us,  in  so  far  as  it  arouses  them  actually
in  our  hearts.

1.  The  Element  of  A v:eful ness.

To  get  light  upon  the  positive  ‘ quale  9 of  the  object  of  these
feelings,  we  must  analyse  more  closely  our  phrase  mysterium
tremendum , and  we  will  begin  first  with  the  adjective.

‘ Tremor  ’ is  in  itself  merely  the  perfectly  familiar  and  ‘ natu-
ral 9 emotion  of  fear.  But  here  the  term  is  taken,  aptly  enough
but  still  only  by  analogy,  to  denote  a quite  specific  kind  oi
emotional  response,  wholly  distinct  from  that  of  being  afraid3
though  it  so  far  resembles  it  that  the  analogy  of  fear  may  be
used  to  throw  light  upon  its  nature.  There  are  in  some
languages  special  expressions  which  denote,  either  exclusively
or  in  the  first  instance,  this  ‘ fear 9 that  is  more  than  fear
proper.  The  Hebrew  hiqdwh  (hallow)  is  an  example.  To


14  MYSTERIUM  TREMENDUM

4 keep  a thing  holy  in  the  heart  ’ means  to  mark  it  off  by
a feeling  of  peculiar  dread,  not  to  be.  mista^  for  any  ordinary
dread,  that  is,  to  appraise  it  by  the  category  of  the  numinous.
But  the  Old  Testament  throughout  is  rich  in  parallel  expres-
sions for  this  feeling.  Specially  noticeable  is  the  emdt  of
Yahweh  (4  fear  of  God  ’),  which  Yahweh  can  pour  forth,
dispatching  almost  like  a daemon,  and  which  seizes  upon  a
man  with  paralysing  effect.  It  is  closely  related  to  the  Stifia
nai/ucov  of  the  Greeks.  Compare  Exodus  xxiii.  27 : * I will
send  my  fear  before  thee  and  will  destroy  all  the  people  to
whom  thou  shalt  come  . . .’ ; also  Job  ix.  34;  xiii.  21  (‘  Let
not  his  fear  terrify  me  V Let  not  thy  dread  make  me  afraid  ’).
fHere  we  have  a terror  fraught  with  an  inward  shuddering
such  as  not  even  the  most  menacing  and  overpowering  created
thing  can  instil.  It  has  something  spectral  in  it.

In  the  Greek  language  we  have  a corresponding  term
in  vtficujTos.  The  early  Christians  could  clearly  feel  that  the
title  aefiaoTos  (augustus)  was  one  that  could  not  fittingly  be
given  to  any  creature,  not  even  to  the  emperor.  They  felt  that
to  call  a man  orejSaoro?  was  to  give  a human  being  a name
proper  only  to  the  numen,  to  rank  him  by  the  category  proper
only  to  the  numen,  and  that  it  therefore  amounted  to  a kind
of  idolatry.  Of  modern  languages  English  has  the  words
4 a^j e \ 4 aweful  \ which  in  their  deeper  and  most  special  sense
approximate  closely  to  our  meaning.  The  phrase, 4 he  stood
aghast  is  also  suggestive  in  this  connexion.  On  the  other
hand,  German  has  no  native-grown  expression  of  its  own  for
the  higher  and  riper  form  of  the  emotion  we  are  considering,
unless  it  be  in  a word  like  4 emhanern  \ which  does  suggest  it
fairly  well.  It  is  far  otherwise  with  its  cruder  and  more
debased  phases,  where  such  terms  as  4 grausen  9 and  4 Schemer
and  the  more  popular  and  telling  4 gruseln * grue  '*), 4 griisen
and  4 grdsblich  9 (4  grisly '),  very  clearly  designate  the  numinous
element.  In  my  examination  of  Wundt's  Animism  I suggested
the  term 4 Scheu  ’ (dread) ; but  the  special 4 numinous  ’ quality
(making  it 4 aiue 9 rather  than  4 dread 9 in  the  ordinary  sense)
would  then  of  course  have  to  be  denoted  by  inverted  commas.

4 Religious  dread  * (or  4 awe  ’)  would  perhaps  be  a better


MYSTERIUM  TREMENDUM


15


designation.  Its  antecedent  stage  is  * daemonic  dread  ’ (ct‘.  tho
horror  of  Pan)  with  its  queer  perversion,  a sort  of  abortive
off-shoot,  the  ‘ dread  of  ghosts  It  first  begins  to  stir  in  the
fueling  of  ‘ something  uncanny  ‘ eerie  or  ‘.weird  It  is  this
feeling  which,  emerging  in  the  mind  of  primeval  man,  forms
the  starting-point  for  the  entire  religious  development  in
history.  ‘ Daemons  ’ and  ‘ gods  ’ alike  spring  from  this  root,  and
all  the  products  of  ‘ mythological  apperception  ’ or  ‘ fantasy  * are
nothing  but  different  modes  in  which  it  has  been  objectified.
And  all  ostensible  explanations  of  the  origin  of  religion  in
terms  of  animism  or  magic  or  folk  psychology  are  doomed  from
the  outset  to  wander  astray  and  miss  the  real  goal  of  their
inquiry,  unless  they  recognize  this  fact  of  our  nature— primary,
unique,  underivable  from  anything  else — to  be  the  basic  factor
and  the  basic  impulse  underlying  the  entire  process  of  religious
evolution,1

Not  only  is  the  saying  of  Luther  that  the  natural  man
cannot  fear  God  perfectly  correct  from  tho  stand-point  of
psychology,  but  we  ought  to  go  further  and  add  that  the
natural  man  is  quite  unable  to  shudder  (graue n)  or  feel  horror  in
the  real  sense  of  the  word.  For  ‘ shuddering  ’ is  something  more
than  ‘ natural  ’,  ordinary  fear.  It  implies  that  the  mysterious
is  already  beginning  to  loom  before  the  mind,  to  touch  the
feelings.  It  implies  the  first  application  of  a category  of  valua-
tion which  has  no  place  in  the  everyday  natural  worlds  of
ordinary  experience,  and  is  only  possible  to  a being  in  whom
has  been  awakened  a mental  predisposition,  unique  in  kind  and

- 1 Cf.  my  papers  in  Theologische  Rundschau,  1910,  vol.  i,  on  ‘ Mytli  and
Religion  in  Wundt’s  VOlkerpsyehologie',  and  in  Deutsche  lJteratuizeitung,
1910,  No.  88.  I find  in  more  recent  investigations,  especially  those  of  R.  R.
Marett  and  N.  86deiblom,  a very  welcome  confirmation  of  the  positions
1 there  maintained.  It  is  true  that  neither  of  them  call  attention  quite
as  precisely  as,  in  this  matter,  psychologists  need  to  do,  to  the  unique
character  of  the  religious  ‘awe ’and  its  qualitative  distinction  from  all
‘ natural’  feelings.  But  Marett  more  particularly  comes  within  a hair's
breadth  of  what  I take  to  be  the  truth  about  the  matter.  Cf.  his  Thres-
hold of  Religion  (London,  1909),  and  N.  SOderblom’s  Das  Wei  den  des
Gottesglaubens  (Leipzig,  1915),  also  my  review  of  the  latter  in  Theol.
Litentnrzeitung,  Jan.  1915.


16


MYSTKRrUM  TREMENDUM


different  in  a definite  way  from  any  ‘ natural  ’ faculty.  And
this  newly-revealed  capacity,  even  in  the  crude  and  violent
manifestations  which  are  all  it  at  first  evinces,  bears  witness
to  a completely  new  function  of  experience  and  standard
of  valuation,  only  belonging  to  tljie  spirit  of  maij.

Before  going  on  to  consider  the  elements  which  unfold  as  the
4 tremendum  * develops,  let  us  give  a little  further  consideration
to  the  first  crude,  primitive  forms  in  which  this  ‘ numinous
dread  * or  awe  shows  itself.  It  is  the  mark  which  really
characterizes  the  so-called  ‘ Religion  of  Primitive  Man ',  and
there  it  appears  as  4 dagmonicjkead  '.  This  crudely  naive  and
primordial  emotional  disturbance,  and  the  fantastic  images  to
which  it  gives  rise,  are  later  overborne  and  ousted  by  more
highly-developed  forms  of  the  numinous  emotion,  with  all  its
mysteriously  impelling  power.  But  even  when  this  has  long
attained  its  higher  and  purer  mode  of  expression  it  is  possible
for  the  primitive  types  of  excitation  that  were  formerly  a part
of  it  to  break  out  in  the  soul  in  all  their  original  naivetd  and
so  to  be  experienced  afresh.  That  this  is  so  is  shown  by  the
potent  attraction  again  and  again  exercised  by  the  element  of
horror  and  * shudder  * in  ghost  stories,  even  among  persons
of  high  all-round  education.  It  is  a remarkable  fact  that  the
physical  reaction  to  which  this  unique  ‘ dread  ' of  the  uncanny
gives  rise  is  also  unique,  and  is  not  found  in  the  case  of  any
* natural 1 fear  or  terror.  We  say  : ‘ my  blood  ran  icy  cold  ',
and  ‘my  flesh  crept \ The  ‘cold  blood'  feeling  may  be  a
symptom  of  ordinary,  natural  fear,  but  there  is  something  non-
natural or  supernatural  about  the  symptom  of  ‘ creeping  flesh  \
And  any  one  who  is  capable  of  more  precise  introspection  must
recognize  that  the  distinction  b^fween  such  a ‘dread*  and
natural  fear  is  not  simply  one  of  (Wyjga  and  intensity.  The
awe  or  ‘ dread  * may  indeed  be  so  oVerw^ielmingly  great  that
it  seems  to  penetrate  to  the  very  marrow,  making  the  man's
hair  bristle  and  his  fimbs  quake.  But  it  may  also  steal  upon
him  almost  unobserved  as  the  gentlest  of  agitations,  a mere
fleeting  shadow  passing  across  his  mood.  It  has  therefore
nothing  to  do  with  intensity,  and  no  natural  fear  passes  over
into  it  merely  by  being  intensified.  I may  be  beyoncTall


17


o,.  A:  MYSTERIUM  TREMENDUM

measureaf^d  and.  terrified  without  there  being  even  a trace
pf  the  jie^cig  of  albWminess  in  my  emotion.

-IflTe  ebeuld  see  therfects  more  clearly  if  psychology  in  general
would  make  a mote-decisive  endeavour  to  examine  and  classify
the  feelings  and  emotions  according  to  their  qualitative  differ-
ences. But  the  far  too  rough  division  of  elementary  feelings
in  general  into  pleasures  and  pains  is  still  an  obstacle  to  this;
In  point  of  fact  * pleasures  ’ no  more  than  other  feelings  are
differentiated  merely  by  degrees  of  intensity ; they  show  very
definite  and  specific  differences.  It  makes  a specific  difference
to  the  condition  of  mind  whether  the  soul  is  merely  in  a state
of  pleasure,  or  joy,  or  aesthetic  rapture,  or  moral  exaltation,
or  finally  in  the  religious  bliss  that  may  come  in  worship.
Such  states  certainly  show  resemblances  one  to  another,  and
on  that  account  can  legitimately  be  brought  under  a common
class-concept  pleasure  ’),  which  serves  to  cut  them  off’  from
other  psychical  functions,  generically  different.  But  this
class-concept,  so  far  from  turning  the  various  subordinate
species  into  merely  different  degrees  of  the  same  thing,  can  do
nothing  at  all  to  throw  light  upon  the  essence  of  each  several
state  of  mind  which  it  includes.

Though  the  numinous  emotion  in  its  completest  development
shows  a world  of  difference  from  the  mere  * daemonic  dread’,  yet
not  even  at  the  highest  level  does  it  belie  its  pedigree  or
kindred.  Even  when  the  worship  of  ‘ daemons  ’ has  long  since
reached  the  higher  level  of  worship  of  ‘ gods  *,  these  gods  still
retain  as  * numina  ’ something  of  the  ‘ ghost  ’ in  the  impress
they  make  on  the  feelings  of  the  worshipper,  viz.  the  peculiar
quality  of  the  ‘ uncanny  * and  ‘ awful  which  survives  with
the  quality  of  exaltedness  and  sublimity  or  is  symbolized  by
means  of  it.  And  this  element  does  not  disappear  even  on  the
highest  level  of  all,  where  the  worship  of  God  is  at  its  purest.
Its  disappearance  would  be  indeed  an  essential  loss.  The
^shudder  ’ reappears  in  a form  ennobled  beyond  measure  where
the  soul,  held  speechless,  trembles  inwardly  to  the  furthest
fibre  of  its  being.  It  invades  the  mind  mightily  in  Christian
worship  with  the  words : ‘ Holy,  holy,  holy  * ; it  breaks  forth
from  the  hymn  of  Tersteegen :


18  MYSTERIUM  TREMENDUM

God  Himself  is  present:

Heart,  be  stilled  before  Him :

Prostrate  inwardly  adore  Him,

The  * shudder  ’ has  here  lost  its  crazy  and  bewildering  note,
buf  not  the  ineffable  something  that  holds  the  mind.  It  has
become  a mystical  awe,  and  sets  free  as  its  accompaniment,
reflected  in  self-consciousness,  that  ‘ creature-feeling  * that  has
already  been  described  as  the  feeling  of  personal  nothingness
and  abasement  before  the  awe-inspiring  object  directly  expe-
rienced.

f The  referring  of  this  feeling  of  numinous  < tremor 9 to  its

^ object  in  the  nurnen  brings  into  relief  a * property  * of  the
latter  which  plays  an  important  part  in  our  Holy  Scriptures,
and  which  has  been  the  occasion  of  many  difficulties,  both  to
commentators  and  to  theologians,  from  its  puzzling  and  baffling
nature.  This  is  the  opyrj  (orge),  the  Wrath  of  Yahweh,  which
recurs  in  the  New  Testament  as  opyrj  0eov,  and  which  is
clearly  analogous  to  the  idea  occurring  in  many  religions  of  a
mysterious  ‘ ira  deorum  \ To  pass  through  the  Indian  Pantheon
of  Gods  is  to  find  deities  who  seem  to  be  made  up  altogether
out  of  such  an  opyrj ; and  even  the  higher  Indian  gods  of  grace
and  pardon  have  frequently,  beside  their  merciful,  their  ‘ wrath  ’
form.  But  as  regards  the  ‘Wrath  of  Yahweh  \ the  strange
features  about  it  have  for  long  been  a matter  for  constant
remark.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  patent  from  many  passages  of
the  Old  Testament  that  this  * Wrath  ’ has  no  concern  what-
ever with  moral  qualities.  There  is  something  very  baffling
in  the  way  in  which  it  * is  kindled ' and  manifested.  It  is,  as
has  been  well  said,  ‘ like  a hidden  force  of  nature like  stored-
up  electricity,  discharging  itself  upon  any  one  who  comes  too
near.  It  is  4 incalculable  * and  * arbitrary  \ Any  one  who  is
accustomed  to  think  of  deity  only  by  its  rational  attributes
must  see  in  this  * Wrath  ’ mere  caprice  and  wilful  passion.
But  such  a view  would  have  been  emphatically  rejected  by
the  religious  men  of  the  Old  Covenant,  for  to  them  the  Wrath
of  God,  so  far  from  being  a diminution  of  His  Godhead,  appears
as  a natural  expression  of  it,  an  element  of  4 holiness 1 itself,
and  a quite  indispensable  one.  And  in  this  they  are  entirely


MYSTERIUM  TREMENDUM


19


right.  This  opyrj  is  nothing  but  the  ‘tremendum*  itself,
apprehended  and  expressed  by  the  aid  of  a naive  analogy  from
the  domain  of  natural  experience,  in  this  case  from  the  ordinary
passional  life  of  men.  But  naive  as  it  may  be,  the  analogy  is
most  disconcertingly  apt  and  striking;  so  much  so  that  it  wdf
always  retain  its  value,  and  for  us  no  less  than  for  the  men  ot
old  be  an  inevitable  way  of  expressing  one  element  in  the
religious  emotion.  It  cannot  be  doubted  that,  despite  the
protest  of  Schleiermacher  and  Ritschl,  Christianity  also  has
something  to  teach  of  the  1 Wrath  of  God\

It  will  be  again  at  once  apparent  that  in  the  use  of  this
word  we  are  not  concerned  with  a genuine  intellectual  ‘ con-
cept ’,  but  only  with  a sort  of  illustrative  substitute  for  a
concept.  ‘ Wrath  * here  is  the  ‘ ideogram  * of  a unique
emotional  moment  in  religious  experience,  a moment  whose
singularly  daunting  and  awe-inspiring  character  must  bo
gravely  disturbing  to  those  persons  who  will  recognize  nothing
in  the  divine  nature  but  goodness,  gentleness,  love,  and  a sort
of  confidential  intimacy,  in  a word,  only  those  aspects  of  Cod
which  turn  towards  the  world  of  men.

This  opyrj  is  thus  quite  wrongly  spoken  of  as  ‘ natural  *
wrath:  rather  it  is  an  entirely  non-  or  super-natural,  i.  e. I
numinous,  quality.  The  rationalization  process  takes  p’ace )
when  it  begins  to  be  filled  in  with  elements  derived  from  thoi
moral  reason righteousness  in  requital,  and  punishment  for|
moral  transgression.  But  it  should  be  noted  that  the  idea  of
the  Wrath  of  God  in  the  Bible  is  always  a synthesis,  in  which
the  original  is  combined  with  the  later  meaning  that  has  come  j
to  fill  it  in.  Something  supra* rational  throbs  and  gleams,
palpable  and  visible,  in  the  ‘Wrath  of  God’,  prompting  to
a sense  of  ‘ terror  * that  no  ‘ natural  * anger  can  arouse.

Beside  the  Wrath  or  Anger  of  Yahweh  stands  the  related
expression  ‘Jealousy  of  Yahweh  The  state  of  mind  denoted
by  the  phrase  ‘being  jealous  for  Yahweh  ’ is  also  a numinous
state  of  mind, in  which  features  of  the  ‘ tremendum  * pass  over
into  the  man  who  has  experience  of  it.


c


20


MYSTERITTM  TREMENDUM


2.  The  element  of  ‘ Overpower  in guess'  (*  majestas9).

We  have  been  attempting  to  unfold  the  implications  of  that
aspect  of  the  ‘mysterium  tremendum*  indicated  by  the  adjec-
tive, and  the  result  so  far  may  be  summarized  in  two  words,
constituting,  as  before,  what  may  be  called  an  ‘ ideogram  \
rather  than  a concept  pi'oper,  viz.  ‘ absolute  unapproachability \

It  will  be  felt  at  once  that  there  is  yet  a further  element
which  must  be  added,  that,  namely,  of  ‘might  *,  4 power  *,

‘ absolute  overpoweringness  *.  We  will  take  to  represent  this
the  term  ‘ majestas  ’,  majesty — the  more  readily  because  any
one  with  a feeling  for  language  must  detect  a last  faint  trace
of  the  numinous  still  clinging  to  the  word.  The  * tremendum  ’
riSS|y  then  be  rendered  more  adequately  ‘ tremenda  majestas
or^tweful  majesty'.  This  second  element "oFlnajesty  may
contifr^g  to  be  vividly  preserved,  where  the  first,  that  of
unapproachability , recedes  and  dies  away,  as  may  be  seen,  for
example,  in  Mysticism.  It  is  especially  in  relation  to  this,
element  of  majesty  or  absolute  overpoweringness  that  the
creature-consciousness,  of  which  we  have  already  spoken,
comes  upon  the  scene,  as  a sort  of  shadow  or  subjective  j
reflection  of  it.  Thus,  in  contrast  to  * the  overpowering  * of
which  we  are  conscious  as  an  object  over  against  the  self,
there  is  the  feeling  of  one’s  own  abasement,  of  being  but
‘dust  and  ashes’  and  nothingness.  And  this  forms  the
numinous  raw  material  for  the  feeling  of  religious  humility.1

Here  we  must  revert  once  again  to  Schleiermacher’s  expres-
sion for  what  we  call  * creature-feeling  viz.  the  ‘ feeli  .g  of
dependence  \ We  found  fault  with  this  phrase  before  on  the
ground  that  Schleiermacher  thereby  takes  as  basis  and  point
of  departure  what  is  merely  a secondary  effect ; that  he  sets
out  to  teach  a consciousness  of  the  religious  object  only  by  way
of  an  inference  from  the  shadow  it  casts  upon  ^/-conscious-
ness. We  have  now  a further  criticism  to  bring  against  it,
and  it  is  this.  By  ‘feeling  of  dependence'  Schleiermacher
means  consciousness  of  being  conditioned  (as  effect  by  cause),
and  so  he  develops  the  implications  of  this  logically  enough

1 Cf.  R.  R.  Marett,  ‘The  Birth  of  Humility/  in  The  Threshold  of  Religion,
2nd  ed.,  1914.  [Tr.]


MYSTERIUM  TREMENDUM


21


in  his  sections  upon  Creation  and  Preservation.  On  the
side  of  the  deity  the  correlate  to  1 dependence  * would  thus
be  * causality  *,  i.  e.  God’s  character  as  all-causing  and  all-
conditioning. But  a sense  of  this  does  not  enter  at  all
into  that  immediate  and  first-hand  religious  emotion  which  we
have  in  the  moment  of  worship,  and  which  wo  can  recover  in
a measure  for  analysis ; it  belongs  on  the  contrary  decidedly
to  the  rational  side  of  the  idea  of  God  ; its  implications  admit
of  precise  conceptual  determination  ; and  it  springs  from  quite
a distinct  source.  The  difference  between  the  ‘ feeling  of
dependence*  of  Schleiermacher  and  that  which  finds  typical
utterance  in  the  words  of  Abraham  already  cited  might  be
expressed  as  that  between  the  consciousness  of  created  ness  (Ge-
schaffenheit)  and  the  consciousness  of  creaturehood  (Geschopf-
lichkeit).  In  the  one  case  you  have  the  creature  as  the  work
of  the  divine  creative  act ; in  the  other,  impotence  and  general
nothingness  as  against  overpowering  might,  dust  and  ashes
as  against  ‘ majesty’.  In  the  one  case  you  have  the  fact  of
having  been  created  ; in  the  other,  the  status  of  the  creature.
And  as  soon  as  speculative  thought  has  come  to  concern  itself
with  this  latter  type  of  consciousness — as  soon  as  it  has  come
to  analyse  this  ‘ majesty’ — we  are  introduced  to  a set  of  ideas
quite  different  from  those  of  creation  or  preservation.  We
come  upon  the  ideas,  first,  of  the  annihilation  of  self,  and
then,  as  its  complement,  of  the  transcendent  as  the  sole  and
entire  reality.  These  are  the  characteristic  notes  of  Mysticism
in  all  its  forms,  however  otherwise  various  in  content.  For  one
of  the  chief est  and  most  general  features  of  Mysticism  is  just
tills  self -depreciation  (so  plainly  parallel  to  the  case  of  Abra-
ham), the  estimation  of  the  self,  of  the  personal  ‘ 1 ’,  as  some-
thing uot  perfectly  or  essentially  real,  or  even  as  mere  nullity,
a self-depreciation  which  comes  to  demand  its  own  fulfilment
in  practice  in  rejecting  the  delusion  of  selfhood,  and  so  makes
for  the  annihilation  of  the  self.  And  on  the  other  hand  Mysti-
cism leads  to  a valuation  of  the  transcendent  object  of  its
reference  as  that  which  through  plenitude  of  being  stands
supreme  and  absolute,  so  that  the  finite  self  contrasted  with  it
becomes  conscious  even  in  its  nullity  that  ‘ I am  nought,  Thou


$r  b I £ £


22


MYSTERIUM  TREMENDUM


art  all  \ There  is  no  thought  in  this  of  any  causal  relation
between  God,  the  creator,  and  the  self,  the  creature.  The
point  from  which  speculation  starts  is  not  a 4 consciousness  of
absolute  dependence' — of  myself  as  result  and  effect  of  a
divine  cause — for  that  would  in  point  of  fact  lead  to  insistence
, upon  the  reality  of  the  self ; it  starts  from  a consciousness  of
the  absolute  superiority  or  supremacy  of  a power  other  than
myself,  and  it  is  only  as  it  falls  back  upon  ontological  terms
to  achieve  its  end— terms  generally  borrowed  from  natural
science — that  that  element  of  the  4 tremendum  \ originally
apprehended  as  4 plenitude  of  power  becomes  transmuted  into
‘ plenitude  of  being  \

This  leads  again  to  the  mention  of  Mysticism.  No  mere
inquiry  into  the  genesis  of  a thing  can  throw  any  light  upon
its  essential  nature,  and  it  is  hence  immaterial  to  us  how
Mysticism  historically  arose.  But  essentially  Mysticism  is  tlie^
stressing  to  a very  high  degree,  indeed  the  overstressing,  of
the  non-rational  or  supra-rational  elements  in  religion ; and  it  ,
is  only  intelligible  when  so  understood.  The  various  phases
, and  factors  of  the  non-rational  may  receive  varying  emphasis,
iand  the  type  of  Mysticism  will  differ  according  as  some  or
others  fall  into  the  background.  What  we  have  been  analys-
ing, however,  is  a feature  that  recurs  in  all  forms  of  Mysticism  j
everywhere,  and  it  is  nothing  but  the  4 creature-consciousness ' j
stressed  to  the  utmost  and  to  excess,  the  expression  meaning, .
if  we  may  repeat  the  contrast  already  made,  not  4 feeling  of
our  createdness  ’ but 4 feeling  of  our  creaturehood that  is,  the
consciousness  of  the  littleness  of  every  creature  in  face  of  that
which  is  above  all  creatures.


A characteristic  common  to  all  types  of  Mysticism  is  the
Identification , in  different  degrees  of  completeness,  of  the
personal  self  with  the  transcendent  Reality.  This  identifi-
cation has  a source  of  its  own,  with  which  we  are  not  here
concerned,  and  springs  from  4 moments'  of  religious  experience
which  would  require  separate  treatment.  4 Identification 1
alone,  however,  is  not  enough  for  Mysticism ; it  must  be  Iden-
tification with  the  Something  that  is  at  once  absolutely
supreme  in  power  and  reality  and  wholly  non-rational.  And  it
is  among  the  mystics  that  we  most  encounter  this  element  of


MYSTER1UM  TREMENDUM


23


religious  consciousness.  R&d)ac  has  noticed  this  in  his  Easai
sur  les  fondements  de  la  connaissance  mystique  (Paris,  1897).
He  writes  (p.  90) :

‘ Le  mysticisme  commence  par  la  crainte,  par  le  sentiment
d'une  domination  universelle,  invincible , et  devicnt  plus  tard
un  clesir  d'union  avec  ce  qui  domine  ainsi/

And  some  very  clear  examples  of  this  taken  from  the  religious
experience  of  the  present  day  are  to  be  found  in  W.  James  (op.
cit p.  66) :

‘ The  perfect  stillness  of  the  night  was  thrilled  by  a more
solemn  silence.  The  darkness  held  a presence  that  was  all  the
more  felt  because  it  was  not  seen.  I could  not  any  more  have
doubted  that  He  was  there  than  that  I was.  Indeed,  I felt
myself  to  be,  if  possible,  the  less  real  of  the  two/

This  example  is  particularly  instructive  as  to  the  relation  of
Mysticism  to  the  ‘ feelings  of  Identification  for  the  experience
here  recounted  was  on  the  point  of  passing  into  it.1

3.  The  Element  of  ‘ Energy’  or  Urgency .

There  is,  finally,  a third  element  comprised  in  those  of  4 tre-
mendum ' and  ‘ majestas  \ awefulness  and  majesty,  and  this  I
venture  to  call  the  urgency  or  energy  of  the  numinous  object.
It  is  particularly  vividly  perceptible  in  the 4 opyrj  ’ or  ‘ Wrath  * ;
and  it  everywhere  clothes  itself  in  symbolical  expressions —
vitality,  passion,  emotional  temper,  will,  force,  movement/4
excitement,  activity,  violence.  These  features  are  typical  and
recur  again  and  again  from  the  daemonic  level  up  to  the  idea
of  the  1 living  ’ God.  We  have  here  the  factor  that  has  every-
where more  than  any  other  prompted  the  fiercest  opposition  to
the  * philosophic  * God  of  mere  rational  speculation,  who  can
be  put  into  a definition.  And  for  their  part  the  philosophers
have  condemned  these  expressions  of  the  energy  of  the  numen,
whenever  they  are  brought  on  to  the  scene,  as  sheer  anthropo-
morphism. In  so  far  as  their  opponents  have  for  the  most
part  themselves  failed  to  recognize  that  the  terms  they  have
borrowed  from  the  sphere  of  human  conative  and  affective  life
have  merely  value  as  analogies,  the  philosophers  are  right  to

1 Compare  too  the  experience  on  p.  70 : 4 . . . Wliat  I felt  on  these
occasions  was  a teinporaiy  loss  of  my  own  identity/

9 The  * mobilitas  Dei  ’ of  Laciantius.


24


MYSTERIUM  TREMENDUM


condemn  them.  But  they  are  wrong,  in  so  far  as,  this  error
notwithstanding,  these  terms  stood  for  a genuine  aspect  of  ths
divine  nature— its  non-rational  aspect— a due  consciousness  of
which  served  to  protect  religion  itself  from  being  ‘ rationalized 9
away.

For  wherever  men  have  been  contending  for  the  ‘ living1
God  and  for  voluntarism  there,  we  may  be  sure,  have  been
non-rationalists  fighting  rationalists  and  rationalism.  It  was
so  with  Luther  in  his  controversy  with  Erasmus  ; and  Luther’s
‘ omnipotentia  Dei*  in  his  De  Servo  Arbitrio  is  nothing  but
the  union  of ‘majesty  * — in  the  sense  of  absolute  supremacy —
with  this  ‘ energy  *,  in  the  sense  of  a force  that  knows  not  stint
nor  stay,  which  is  urgent,  active,  compelling,  and  alive.  In
Mysticism,  too,  this  clement  of  ‘ energy  * is  a very  living  and
vigorous  factor,  at  any  rate  in  the  ‘voluntaristic*  Mysticism,
the  Mysticism  of  love,  where  it  is  very  forcibly  seen  in  that
r consuming  fire  * of  love  whose  burning  strength  the  mystic
can  hardly  bear,  but  begs  that  the  heat  that  has  scorched  him
may  be  mitigated,  lest  he  be  himself  destroyed  by  it.  And  in
this  urgency  and  pressure  the  mystic's  ‘love*  claims  a per-
ceptible kinship  with  the  opyrj  itself,  the  scorching  and  con-
suming wrath  of  God  ; it  is  the  same  * energy  only  differently
directed.  ‘ Love  says  one  of  the  mystics,  c is  nothing  else
than  quenched  Wrath  \

The  element  of  4 energy  * reappears  in  Fichte’s  speculations
on  the  Absolute  as  the  gigantic,  never-resting,  active  world-
stress,  and  in  Schopenhauer’s  daemonic  * Will  \ At  the  same
time  both  these  writers  are  guilty  of  the  same  error  that
is  already  found  in  Myth ; they  transfer  * natural  * attributes,
which  ought  only  to  be  used  as  4 ideograms  ’ for  what  is  itself
properly  beyond  utterance,  to  the  non-rational  as  real  qualifica-
tions of  it,  and  they  mistake  symbolic  expressions  of  feelings
for  adequate  concepts  upon  which  a 4 scientific  * structure  of
knowledge  may  be  based.

In  Goethe,  as  we  shall  see  later,  the  same  element  of  energy
is  emphasized  in  a quite  unique  way  in  his  strange  descriptions
of  the  experience  he  calls  4 daemonic  *.


CHAPTER  V


THE  ANALYSIS  OF  ‘ MYSTERIUM  *

Kin  begriffoner  Gott  ist  kein  Gott.

'A  God  comprehended  is  no  God/  (Teksteegen.)

We  gave  to  the  object  to  which  the  numinous  consciousness
is  directed  the  name  ‘ mystcrium  tremendum  \ and  we  then
set  ourselves  first  to  determine  the  meaning  of  the  adjective
‘ tremendum  * — which  we  found  to  be  itself  only  justified  by
analogy — because  it  is  more  easily  analysed  than  the  sub-
stantive idea  ‘ mystcrium  \ We  have  now  to  turn  to  this,
and  try,  as  best  we  may,  by  hint  and  suggestion,  to  get  to
a clearer  apprehension  of  what  it  implies.

4.  The  ‘ Wholly  Other  \

It  might  be  thought  that  the  adjective  itself  gives  an
explanation  of  the  substantive ; but  this  is  not  so.  It
is  not  merely  analytical;  it  is  a synthetic  attribute  to  it;
i.c.  ‘ tremendum  ’ adds  something  not  necessarily  inherent  in
‘ mysteriuin  \ It  is  true  that  the  reactions  in  consciousness
that  correspond  to  the  one  readily  and  spontaneously  over-
flow into  those  that  correspond  to  the  other ; in  fact,  an/
one  sensitive  to  the  use  of  words  would  commonly  feel  that
the  idea  of  < mystery  ’ (myslerium)  is  so  closely  bound  up  with
its  synthetic  qualifying  attribute  ‘ aweful  ’ (tremendum)  that
one  can  hardly  say  the  former  without  catching  an  echo  of
the  latter,  ‘ mystery  ’ almost  of  itself  becoming  4 aweful
mystery  * to  us.  But  the  passage  from  the  one  idea  to  the
other  need  not  by  any  means  be  always  so  easy.  The  elements
of  meaning  implied  in  ‘ awefulness  ’ and  4 mysteriousness 9 arc
in  themselves  definitely  different.  The  latter  may  so  far
preponderate  in  the  religious  consciousness,  may  stand  out  so


26  . THE  ANALYSIS  OF  ‘MYSTERIUM'

vividly,  that  in  comparison  with  it  the  former  almost  sinks  out
of  sight ; a case  which  again  could  be  clearly  exemplified  from
some  forms  of  Mysticism.  Occasionally,  on  the  other  hand,
the  reverse  happens,  and  the  ‘ tremendum  * may  in  turn  occupy
the  mind  without  the  4 mysterium  \

This  latter,  then,  needs  special  consideration  on  its  own
account.  We  need  an  expression  for  the  mental  reaction
peculiar  to  it ; and  here,  too,  only  one  word  seems  appropriate
though,  as  it  is  strictly  applicable  only  to  a 'natural*  state  of
mind,  it  lias  here  meaning  only  by  analogy  : it  is  the  word
‘ stupor  \ Stupor  is  plainly  a different  thing  from  tremor ; it
signifies  blank  wonder,  an  astonishment  that  strikes  us  dumb,
amazement  absolute.1  Taken,  indeed,  in  its  purely  natural
sense,  ‘ mysterium  * would  first  mean  merely  a secret  or  a
mystery  in  the  sense  of  that  which  is  alien  to  us,  uncom-
prehended and  unexplained ; and  so  far  ‘ mysterium  * is  itself
merely  an  ideogram,  an  analogical  notion  taken  from  the
natural  sphere,  illustrating,  but  incapable  of  exhaustively
rendering,  our  real  meaning.  Taken  in  the  religious  sense,
that  which  is  ‘ mysterious  * is— to  give  it  perhaps  the  most
striking  expression — the  * wholly  other  * (Odrepov,  any  ad,  alie-
?mm),  that  which  is  quite  beyond  the  sphere  of  the  usual,
the  intelligible,  and  the  familiar,  which  therefore  falls  quite
outside  the  limits  of  the  * canny  ',  and  is  contrasted  with  it,
filling  the  mind  with  blank  wonder  and  astonishment.

This  is  already  to  be  observed  on  the  lowest  and  earliest
level  of  the  religion  of  primitive  man,  where  the  numinous
consciousness  is  but  an  inchoate  stirring  of  the  feelings.  What
is  really  characteristic  of  this  stage  is  not — as  the  theory  of

1 Compare  also  * obxtnpefacere’.  Still  more  exact  equivalents  are  the
Creek  Bdfipos  and  The  sound  0 a { thamb ) excellently  depicts  this

state  of  mind  of  blank,  staring  wonder.  And  the  difference  between  the
moments  of  ‘ stupor  * and  * tremor  ’ is  very  finely  suggested  by  the  pas-
sage, Mark  x.  32  (cf.  infra , p.  163).  On  the  other  hand,  what  was  said  above
of  the  facility  and  rapidity  with  which  the  two  moments  merge  and
blend  is  also  markedly  true  of  6dfipost  which  then  becomes  a classical
term  for  the  (ennobled)  awe  of  the  numinous  in  general.  So  Mark  xvL
5 is  rightly  translated  by  Luther  ‘ und  sie  entsetzten  sich  and  by  the
English  Authorized  Vernon  4 and  they  were  affrighted  \


THE  ANALYSIS  OF  ‘MYSTERIUM*  27

Animism  would  have  us  believe — that  men  are  here  concerned
with  curious  entities,  called  ‘ souls  * or  ‘ spirits  which  happen
to  be  invisible.  Representations  of  spirits  and  similar  con-
ceptions are  rather  one  and  all  early  modes  of  ‘ rationalizing  *
a precedent  experience,  to  which  they  are  subsidiary.  They
are  attempts  in  some  way  or  other,  it  little  matters  how,  to  guess
the  riddle  it  propounds,  and  their  effect  is  at  the  same  time
always  to  weaken  and  deaden  the  experience  itself.  They  are
the  source  from  which  springs,  not  religion,  but  the  rationaliza-
tion of  religion,  which  often  ends  by  constructing  such  a
massive  structure  of  theory  and  such  a plausible  fabric  of
interpretation,  that  the  4 mystery  * is  frankly  excluded.1  Both
imaginative  ‘ Myth  when  developed  into  a system,  and  intel-
lectualist  Scholasticism,  when  worked  out  to  its  completion,
arc  methods  by  which  the  fundamental  fact  of  religious
experience  is,  as  it  were,  simply  rolled  out  so  thin  and  flat
as  to  be  finally  eliminated  altogether.

Even  on  the  lowest  level  of  religious  development  the
essential  characteristic  is  therefore  to  be  sought  elsewhere
than  in  the  appearance  of  ‘ spirit  * representations.  It  lies
rather,  we  repeat,  in  a peculiar  * moment ' of  consciousness,  to
wit,  the  stupor  before  something  ‘ wholly  other  whether
; such  an  other  be  named  ‘ spirit  * or  ‘ daemon  * or  ‘ deva  or
!be  left  without  any  name.  Nor  does  it  make  any  difference
in  this  respect  whether,  to  interpret  and  preserve  their
apprehension  of  this  ‘other’,  men  coin  original  imagery  of
their  own  or  adapt  imaginations  drawn  from  the  world  of
legend,  the  fabrications  of  fancy  apart  from  and  prior  to  any
stirrings  of  daemonic  dread.

In  accordance  with  laws  of  which  we  shall  have  to  speak
again  later,  this  feeling  or  consciousness  of  the  ‘ wholly  other  *
will  attach  itself  to,  or  sometimes  be  indirectly  aroused  by
means  of,  objects  which  arc  already  puzzling  upon  the  * natural  *
plane,  or  are  of  a surprising  or  astounding  character;  such  as
extraordinary  phenomena  or  astonishing  occurrences  or  things

, 1 A spirit  or  soul  that  has  been  conceived  and  comprehended  no

f longer  prompts  to  ‘ shuddering  as  is  proved  by  Spiritualism.  But  it
' thereby  ceases  to  be  of  interest  for  tbe  psychology  of  religion.


28


THE  ANALYSIS  OF  ‘MYSTERIUM'


in  inanimate  nature,  in  the  animal  world,  or  among  men.  But
here  once  more  we  are  dealing  with  a case  of  association
between  things  specifically  different — the  ‘ numinous  * and  the
‘natural*  moment  of  consciousness — and  not  merely  with
the  gradual  enhancement  of  one  of  them — the  ‘ natural  * — till
it  becomes  the  other.  As  in  the  case  of  ‘ natural  fear  * and
‘daemonic  dread*  already  considered,  so  here  the  transition
from  natural  to  daemonic  amazement  is  not  a mere  matter  of
degree.  But  it  is  only  with  the  latter  that  the  complementary
expression  ‘ mysterium  * perfectly  harmonizes,  as  will  be  felt
perhaps  more  clearly  in  the  case  of  the  adjectival  form
‘ mysterious  \ No  one  says,  strictly  and  in  earnest,  of  a piece
of  clockwork  that  is  beyond  his  grasp,  or  of  a science  that  he
cannot  understand  : ‘ That  is  “ mysterious  ” to  me.*

It  might  be  objected  that  the  mysterious  is  something
which  is  and  remains  absolutely  and  invariably  beyond  our
understanding,  whereas  that  which  mei’ely  eludes  our  under-
standing for  a time  but  is  perfectly  intelligible  in  principle
should  be  called,  not  a ‘ mystery  but  merely  a ' problem  \
But  this  is  by  no  means  an  adequate  account  of  the  matter.
The  truly  ‘ mysterious  * object  is  beyond  our  apprehension  and
comprehension,  not  only  because  our  knowledge  has  certain
irremovable  limits,  but  because  in  it  we  come  upon  something
inherently  ‘ wholly  other  whose  kind  and  character  are  in-
commensurable with  our  own,  and  before  which  we  therefore
recoil  in  a wonder  that  strikes  us  chill  and  numb.1

This  may  be  made  still  clearer  by  a consideration  ^f  that
degraded  offshoot  and  travesty  of  the  genuine  ‘numinous*
dread  or  awe,  the  fear  of  ghosts.  Let  us  try  to  analyse  this
experience.  We  have  already  specified  the  peculiar  feeling-

1 In  Confessions,  ii.  9.  1,  Augustine  very  strikingly  suggests  this  stiffen^
ing,  benumbing  element  of  the  ‘ whplly  other*  and  its  contrast  to  the'
rational  aspect  of  the  numen  ; the  ‘dissimile  1 and  the  4 simile  \

‘ Quid  eat  illud,  quod  interlucet  mihi  et  percutit  cor  meum  sine  laesione  ?
Et  inhorresco  et  inardesco.  Inho?rcsco,  in  quantum  dmimilis  ei  sum.
Inardesco,  in  quantum  similis  ei  sum,*

(‘What  is  that  which  gleams  through  me  and  smites  my  heart  without
wounding  it?  I am  both  a-shudder  and  a-glow.  A-shudder,  in  so  far  as
1 am  unlike  it,  a-glow  in  so  far  as  I am  like  it.*)


THE  ANALYSIS  OF  ‘ MYSTER1UM


29


element  of  ‘ dread 5 aroused  by  the  ghost  as  that  of  * grue  ’,
grisly  horror  ( gruseln , grtisen).  Now  this  ‘grue*  obviously
contributes  something  to  the  attraction  which  ghost-stories
exercise,  in  so  far,  namely,  as  the  relaxation  of  tension  ensuing
upon  our  release  from  it  relieves  the  mind  in  a pleasant  and
agreeable  way.  So  far,  however,  it  is  not  really  the  ghost
itself  that  gives  us  pleasure,  but  the  fact  that  we  are  rid  of  it.
But  obviously  this  is  quite  insufficient  to  explain  the  ensnaring
attraction  of  the  ghost-story.  The  ghost’s  real  attraction
rather  consists  in  this,  that  of  itself  and  in  an  uncommon
degree  it  entices  the  imagination,  awakening  strong  interest
and  curiosity ; it  is  the  weird  thing  itself  that  allures  the
fancy.  But  it  does  this,  not  because  it  is  ‘ something  long
and  white  ’ (as  some  one  once  defined  a ghost),  nor  yet  through
any  of  the  positive  and  conceptual  attributes  which  fancies
about  ghosts  have  invented,  but  because  it  is  a thing  that
* doesn’t  really  exist  at  all  *,  the  ‘ wholly  other  *,  something
which  has  no  place  in  our  scheme  of  reality  but  belongs  to  an
absolutely  different  one,  and  which  at  the  same  time  arouses
an  irrepressible  interest  in  the  mind.

But  that  which  is  perceptibly  true  in  the  fear  of  ghosts,  which
is,  after  all,  only  a caricature  of  the  genuine  thing,  is  in  a far
stronger  sense  true  of  the  * daemonic  ’ experience  itself,  of
which  the  fear  of  ghosts  is  a mere  off-shoot.  And  while,
following  this  main  line  of  development,  this  element  in  the
numinous  consciousness,  the  feeling  of  the  ‘ wholly  other  \ is
heightened  and  clarified,  its  higher  modes  of  manifestation
come  into  being,  which  set  the  numinous  object  in  contrast
not  only  to  everything  wonted  and  familiar  (i.e.,  in  the  end,
to  nature  in  general),  thereby  turning  it  into  the  ‘ super-
natural but  finally  to  the  world  itself,  and  thereby  exalt  it  to
the  cs^|famij@dane},  that  which  is  above  the  whole  world-order.

In  Mysticism  we  have  in  the  1 Beyond  * (kneKeiva)  again  the
strongest  stressing  and  over-stressing  of  those  non-rational
elementstfwhich  are  already  inherent  in  all  religion.  Mysticism
conti^ftes^O  its  extreme  point  this  contrasting  of  the  numinous
object  (the  ijtiffteo),  as  the  4 wholly  other  ’,  with  ordinary  experi-
6iiee^/N|^gont^at  with  contrasting  it  with  all  that  is  of


30


THE  ANALYSIS  OF  * MYSTERIUM  ’


nature  or  this  world,  Mysticism  concludes  by  contrasting  it
with  Being  itself  and  all  that  f is  *,  and  finally  actually  calls
it  4 that  which  is  nothing’.  By  this  ‘nothing’  is  meant  not
^only  that  of  which  nothing  can  be  predicated,  but  that  which
is  absolutely  and  intrinsically  other  than  and  opposite  of
everything  that  is  and  can  be  thought.  But  while  exaggerat-
ing to  the  point  of  paradox  this  negation  and  contrast — the
only  means  open  to  conceptual  thought  to  apprehend  the
‘ mysterium* — Mysticism  at  the  same  time  retains  the  positive
i quality  of  the  ‘ wholly  other  ’ as  a very  living  factor  in  its
• over-brimming  religious  emotion.  £L  £>  [ (zb

But  what  is  true  of  the  strange  ‘ nothingness  ’ of  our  mystics
holds  good  equally  of  the  ‘ sunyam  ’ and  the  * sunyata’,  the
‘ void  * and  ‘ emptiness  * of  the  Buddhist  mystics.  This  aspira-
tion for  the  ‘void’  and  for  becoming  void,  no  less  than  the.
aspiration  of  our  western  mystics  for  ‘nothing  ’ and  for  becom-
ing nothing,  must  seem  a kind  of  lunacy  to  any  one  who  has
no  inner  sympathy  for  the  esoteric  language  and  ideograms  of
Mysticism,  and  lacks  the  matrix  from  which  these  come  neces-
sarily to  birth.  To  such  an  one  Buddhism  itself  will  be  simply
a morbid  sort  of  pessimism.  But  in  fact  the  * void  ’ of  the
! eastern,  like  the  ‘ nothing  ’ of  the  western,  mystic  is  a numinous
[ideogram  of  the  * wholly  other*.

These  terms,  ‘ supernatural  * and  ‘ transcendent  * (literally,
supramundane  : iibcnveltlich ),  give  the  appearance  of  positive
attributes,  and,  as  applied  to  the  mysterious,  they  appear  to
divest  the  ‘ mysterium  * of  its  originally  negative  meaning
and  to  turn  it  into  an  affirmation.  On  the  side  of  conceptual
thought  this  is  nothing  more  than  appearance,  for  it  is  obvious
that  the  two  terms  in  question  are  merely  negative  and  ex-
clusive attributes  with  reference  to  ‘ nature  ’ and  the  ‘world’
or  cosmos  respectively.  But  on  the  side  of  the  feeling-content
it  is  otherwise ; that  is  in  very  truth  positive  in  the  highest
degree,  though  here  too,  as  before,  it  cannot  be  rendered
explicit  in  conceptual  terms.  It  is  through  this  positive
feeling-content  that  the  concepts  of  the  ‘ transcendent  * and*
‘ supernatural  ’ become  forthwith  designations  for  a unique*
‘ wholly  other*  reality  and  quality,  something  of  whose  special
character  we  can  feel , without  being  able  to  give  it  clear
conceptual  expression.  „


CHAPTEK  VI


5.  THE  ELEMENT  OF  FASCINATION

The  qualitative  content  of  the  numinous  experience,  to
which  ‘ the  mysterious  ’ stands  as  form,  is  in  one  of  its  aspects
the  element  of  daunting  ‘ awefulness  ’ and  ‘ majesty  which
has  already  been  dealt  with  in  detail ; but  it  is  clear  that  it
has  at  the  same  time  another  aspect,  in  which  it  shows  itself
as  something  uniquely  attractive  and  fascinatiny.

These  two  qualities,  the  daunting  and  the  fascinating,  now
combine  in  a strange  harmony  of  contrasts,  and  the  resultant
dual  character  of  the  numinous  consciousness,  to  which  the
entire  religious  development  bears  witness,  at  any  rate  from
the  level  of  the  ‘daemonic  dread’  onwards,  is  at  once  the
strangest  and  most  noteworthy  phenomenon  in  the  whole
history  of  religion.  The  daemonic-divine  object  may  appear
to  the  mind  an  object  of  horror  and  dread,  but  at  the  same
time  it  is  no  less  something  that  allures  with  a potent  charm,
and  the  creature,  who  trembles  before  it,  utterly  cowed  and
cast  down,  has  always  at  the  same  time  the  impulse  to  turn  to
it,  nay  even  to  make  it  somehow  his  own.  The  ‘ mystery  ’ is
for  him  not  merely  something  to  be  wondered  at  but  some-
thing that  entrances  him ; and  beside  that  in  it  which
bewilders  and  confounds,  he  feels  a something  that  captivates
and  transports  him  with  a strange  ravishment,  rising  often
enough  to  the  pitch  of  dizzy  intoxication ; it  is  the  Dionysiac-
element  in  the  numen.

The  ideas  and  concepts  which  are  the  parallels  or  ‘ schemata  ’
on  the  rational  side  of  this  non-rational  element  of  ‘fasci-
nation’ are  Love,  Mercy,  Pity,  Comfort;  these  are  all
natural  ’ elements  of  the  common  psychical  life,  only  they
are  here  thought  as  absolute  and  in  completeness.  But
important  as  these  are  for  the  experience  of  religious  bliss  or


32


THE  ELEMENT  OF  FASCINATION


felicity,  they  do  not  by  any  means  exhaust  it.  It  is  just  the
same  as  with  the  opposite  experience  of  religious  infelicity —
the  experience  of  the  opyrj  or  Wrath  of  God : — both  alike
contain  fundamentally  non-rational  elements.  Bliss  or  beati-
tude is  more,  far  more,  than  the  mere  natural  feeling  of  being
comforted,  of  reliance,  of  the  joy  of  love,  however  these  may
be  heightened  and  enhanced.  Just  as  ‘Wrath*,  taken  in
a purely  rational  or  a purely  ethical  sense,  does  not  exhaust
that  profound  element  of  atrefidncss  which  is  locked  in  the
mystery  of  deity,  so  neither  does  ‘ Graciousness  * exhaust  the
profound  element  of  wonderfulness  and  rapture  which  lies  in
the  mysterious  beatific  experience  of  deity.  The  term  * grace  *
may  indeed  be  taken  as  its  aptest  designation,  but  then  only
in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  really  applied  in  the  language  of
, the  mystics,  and  in  which  not  only  the  * gracious  intent  * but
^‘something  more*  is  meant  by  the  word.  This  ‘something
more  * has  its  antecedent  phases  very  far  back  in  the  history
of  religions.

It  may  well  be  possible,  it  is  even  probable,  that  in  the  first
stage  of  its  development  the  religious  ^consciousness  started
with  only  one  of  its  poles— the  ‘ daunting  * aspect  of  the  innnen
— and  so  at  first  took  shape  only  as  ‘ daemonic  dread  *.  But
if  this  did  not  point  to  something  beyond  itself,  if  it  were  not
but  one  ‘ moment * of  a completer  experience,  pressing  up
gradually  into  consciousness,  then  no  transition  would  be
possible  to  the  feelings  of  positive  self-surrender  to  the  numen.
The  only  type  of  worship  that  could  result  from  this  * Iread  *
alone  would  be  that  of  ‘ dnatTuaOai  * and  ‘ dnorptireiv  \ taking
the  form  of  expiation  and  propitiation,  the  averting  or  the
appeasement  of  the  ‘ wrath’  of  the  numen.  It  can  never  explain
how  it  is  that  ‘the  numinous*  is  the  object  of  search  and
desire  and  yearning,  and  that  too  for  its  own  sake  and  not
only  for  the  sake  of  the  aid  and  backing  that  men  expect
from  it  in  the  natural  sphere.  It  can  never  explain  how  this
takes  place,  not  only  in  the  forms  of  ‘rational*  religious
worship,  but  in  those  queer  ‘sacramental*  observances  and
rituals  and  procedures  of  communion  in  which  the  human
being  seeks  to  get  the  numen  into  his  possession.


THE  ELEMENT  OF  FASCINATION  33

Religious  practice  may  manifest  itself  in  those  normal  and
easily  intelligible  forms  which  occupy  so  prominent  a place  in
the  history  of  religion,  such  forms  as  Propitiation,  Petition,
Sacrifice,  Thanksgiving,  &c.  But  besides  these  there  is  a series
of  strange  proceedings  which  are  constantly  attracting  greater
and  greater  attention,  and  in  which  it  is  claimed  that  we  may
recognize,  besides  mere  religion  in  general,  the  particular  roots
of  Mysticism.  I refer  to  those  numerous  curious  modes  of
manipulation  and  fantastic  forms  of  mediation,  by  means  of
which  the  primitive  religious  man  attempts  to  master  ‘ the
mysterious’,  and  to  fill  himself  and  even  to  identify  himself
with  it.  These  modes  of  manipulation  fall  apart  into  two
classes.  On  the  one  hand  the  ‘ magical ' identification  of  the
self  with  the  numen  proceeds  by  means  of  various  transactions,
at  once  magical  and  devotional  in  character — by  formula,  ordi-
nation, adjuration,  consecration,  exorcism, &c. : on  the  other  hand
are  the * shamanistic  ’ ways  of  procedure,  possession,  indwelling,
self -imbue ment  with  the  numen  in  exaltation  and  ecstasy.  All
these  have,  indeed,  their  starting-points  simply  in  magic,  and
their  intention  at  first  was  certainly  simply  to  appropriate  the
prodigious  force  of  the  numen  for  the  natural  ends  of  man.
But  the  process  does  not  rest  there.  Possession  of  and  by  the
numen  becomes  an  end  in  itself;  it  begins  to  be  sought  for  its
own  sake ; and  the  wildest  and  most  artificial  methods  of
asceticism  are  put  into  practice  to  attain  it.  In  a word,  the
1 vita  veligiosa ' begins ; and  to  remain  in  these  strange  and
bizarre  states  of  numinous  possession  becomes  a good  in  itself,
even  a way  of  salvation,  wholly  diiFerent  from  the  profane
goods  pursued  by  means  of  magic.  Here,  too,  commences  the
process  of  development  by  which  the  experience  is  matured
and  purified,  till  finally  it  reaches  its  consummation  in  the
sublimest  and  purest  states  of  the  ‘ life  within  the  Spirit  ’ and
in  the  noblest  Mysticism.  Widely  various  as  these  states  are
in  themselves,  yet  they  have  this  element  in  common,  that  in
them  the  ‘ mysterium  ’ is  experienced  in  its  essential,  positive,
and  specific  character,  as  something  that  bestows  upon  man
a beatitude  beyond  compare,  but  one  whose  real  nature  he
can  neither  proclaim  in  speech  nor  conceive  in  thought,  but

D


34


THE  ELEMENT  OF  FASCINATION


may  know  only  by  a direct  and  living  experience.  It  is  a bliss
whiph  embraces  all  those  blessings  that  are  indicated  or
suggested  in  positive  fashion  by  any  ‘ doctrine  of  Salvation  *,
and  it  quickens  all  of  them  through  and  through ; but  these  do
not  exhaust  it.  Rather  by  its  all-pervading,  penetrating  glow
it  makes  of  these  very  blessings  more  than  the  intellect  can
conceive  in  them  or  affirm  of  them.  It  gives  the  Peace  that
passes  understanding,  and  of  which  the  tongue  can  only
stammer  brokenly.  Only  from  afar,  by  metaphors  and
analogies,  do  we  come  to  apprehend  what  it  is  in  itself,  and
even  so  our  notion  is  but  inadequate  and  confused.

‘Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into
the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them
that  love  Him/  Who  does  not  feel  the  exalted  sound  of  these
words  and  the  4 Dionysiac  ’ element  of  transport  and  fervour
in  them  ? It  is  instructive  that  in  such  phrases  as  these,  in
which  consciousness  would  fain  put  its  highest  consummation
into  words,  ‘all  images  fall  away'  and  the  mind  turns  from
them  to  grasp  expressions  that  are  purely  negative.  And  it  is
still  more  instructive  that  in  reading  and  hearing  such  words
their  merely  negative  character  simply  is  not  noticed ; that  we
can  let  whole  chains  of  such  negations  enrapture,  even  intoxi-
cate us,  and  that  entire  hymns— and  deeply  impressive  hymns
— have  been  composed,  in  which  there  is  really  nothing  positive
at  all ! All  this  teaches  us  the  independence  of  the  positive
content  of  this  experience  from  the  implications  of  its  overt
conceptual  expression,  and  how  it  can  be  firmly  grasped,
thoroughly  understood,  and  profoundly  appreciated,  purely  in
with,  and  from  the  feeling  itself.

Mere  love,  mere  trust,  for  all  the  glory  and  happiness
they  bring,  do  not  explain  to  us  that  moment  of  rapture  that
.breathes  in  our  tenderest  and  most  heart-felt  hymns  of  salva-/
tion,  as  also  in  such  eschatological  hymns  of  longing  as  that
Rhyme  of  St.  Bernard  in  which  the  very  verses  seem  to  dance.

Urbs  Sion  unica,  nmnsio  mystica,  condi ta  caelo,

Nunc  tibi  gaudeo,  nunc  tibi  lugeo,  tristor,  anhelo,

Te,  quia  corpore  non  queo,  pectore  saepe  penetro ;

Sed  caro  terrea,  terraque  carnea,  mox  cado  retro.


35


THE  ELEMENT  OF  FASCINATION

Nemo  retexere,  nemoque  promere  sustinet  ore,

Quo  tua  moenia,  quo  capitolia  plena  nitore.

Id  queo  dicere,  quo  modo  tangere  pollice  coelum,

Ut  mare  currere,  sicufc  in  aere  figere  teluin.

Opprimit  omne  cor  ille  tuus  decor,  0 Sion,  O Pax.

IJrbs  sine  tempore,  nulla  potest  fore  laus  tibi  mendax.

O nova  mansio,  te  pia  concio,  gens  pia  munit,

Provehit,  excitat,  auget,  klentitat,  efficit,  unit.1

This  is  where  the  living  ‘ something  more  * of  the  ‘ fascinans*,
the  element  of  fascination,  is  to  be  found.  It  lives  no  less
• in  those  tense  extollings  of  the  blessing  of  salvation,  which
recur  in  all  religions  of  salvation,  and  stand  in  such  remarkable
contrast  to  the  relatively  meagre  and  frequently  childish
import  of  that  which  is  revealed  in  them  by  concept  or  by
image.  Everywhere  Salvation  is  something  whose  meaning
is  often  very  little  apparent,  is  even  wholly  obscure,  to  the
* natural  ’ man;  on  the  contrary,  so  far  as  le  understands  it,
he  tends  to  find  it  highly  tedious  and  uninteresting,  sometimes
downright  distasteful  and  repugnant  to  his  nature,  as  ho
would,  for  instance,  find  the  beatific  vision  of  God  in  our
own  doctrine  of  Salvation,  or  the  ‘Heuopi.s*  of  ‘God  all  in  all*
among  the  mystics.  ‘ So  far  as  he  understands  ’,  be  it  noted ;
but  then  lie  docs  not  understand  it  in  the  least.  Because  he
lacks  the  inward  teaching  of  the  Spirit,  he  must  needs  confound
what  is  offered  him  as  an  expression  for  the  experience  of
salvation — a mere  ideogram  of  what  is  felt,  whose  import
it  hints  at  by  analogy — with  ‘ natural  ’ concepts,  as  though  it
were  itself  just  such  an  one.  And  so  he  ‘ wanders  ever
further  from  the  goal

1 ‘0  Zion,  thou  city  sole  and  single,  mystic  mansion  hidden  away  in  the
heavens,  now  I rejoice  in  thee,  now  I moan  for  thee  and  mou;n  and
yearn  for  thee  ; Thee  often  I pass  through  in  the  heait,  as  I cannot  in  the
body,  but  being  but  earthly  flesh  and  fleshly  earth  soon  I fall  back.
None  can  disclose  or  utter  in  speech  what  plenary  radiance  fills  thy  walls
and  thy  citadels.  I can  as  little  tell  of  it  as  I can  touch  the  skies  with
my  finger,  or  run  upon  the  sea  or  make  a dart  stand  still  in  the  air.
This  thy  splendour  overwhelms  every  heart,  0 Sion,  0 Peace  ! 0 time-
less City,  no  praise  can  belie  thee.  0 new  dwelling-place,  thee  the
concourse  and  people  of  the  faithful  erects  and  exalts,  inspires  and  in-
creases, joins  to  itself,  and  makes  complete  and  one.1

D 2


30  THE  ELEMENT  OF  FASCINATION

It  is  not  only  in  the  religious  feeling  of  longing  that  the
moment  of  fascination  is  a living  factor.  It  is  already  alive
and  present  in  the  moment  of  ‘ solemnity  both  in  the  gathered
concentration  and  humble  abasement  of  private  devotion,
when  the  mind  is  exalted  to  the  holy,  and  in  the  common
worship  of  the  congregation,  where  this  is  practised  with
earnestness  and  deep  sincerity,  as,  it  is  to  be  feared,  is  with  us
a thing  rather  desired  than  realized.  It  is  this  and  nothing
else  that  in  the  solemn  moment  can  till  the  soul  so  full  and
keep  it  so  inexpressibly  tranquil.  Schleiermacher’s  assertion 1
is  perhaps  true  of  it,  as  of  the  numinous  consciousness  in
general,  viz.  that  it  cannot  really  occur  alone  on  its  own
account,  or  except  combined  and  penetrated  with  rational
elements.  But,  if  this  be  admitted,  it  is  upon  other  grounds
than  those  adduced  by  Schleicrmacher ; while,  on  the  other
hand,  it  may  occupy  a more  or  less  predominant  place  and
lead  to  states  of  calm  (^av^ia)  as  well  as  of  transport,  in
which  it  almost  of  itself  wholly  fills  the  soul.  But  in  all  the
manifold  forms  in  which  it  is  aroused  in  us,  whether  in
eschatological  promise  of  the  coming  kingdom  of  God  and  the
transcendent  bliss  of  Paradise,  or  in  the  guise  of  an  entry
into  that  beatific  Reality  that  is  ‘ above  the  world  * ; whether
it  come  first  in  expectancy  or  preintimation  or  in  a present
experience  (‘  When  I but  have  Thee,  I ask  no  question  of
heaven  and  earth  ') ; in  all  these  forms,  outwardly  diverse  but
inwardly  akin,  it  appears  as  a strange  and  mighty  propulsion
toward  an  ideal  good  known  only  to  religion  and  in  its  : ature
fundamentally  non-rational,  which  the  mind  knows  of  in
yearning  and  presentiment,  recognizing  it  for  what  it  is  behind
the  obscure  and  inadequate  symbols  which  are  its  only
expression.  And  this  shows  that  above  and  beyond  our
rational  being  lies  hidden  the  ultimate  and  highest  part  of  our
nature,  which  can  find  no  satisfaction  in  the  mere  allaying  o£
the  needs  of  our  sensuous,  psychical,  or  intellectual  impulses
and  cravings.  The  mystics  called  it  the  basis  or  ground  of
the  soul.

We  saw  that  in  the  case  of  the  element  of  the  mysterious  the
1 Glauben$lehret  § 5.


37


. THE  ELEMENT  OF  FASCINATION

f wholly  other  * led  on  to  the  supernatural  and  transcendent
and  that  above  these  appeared  the  ‘beyond  * (kntKtiva)  of  Mysti-
cism, through  the  non-rational  side  of  religion  being  raised  to
its  highest  power  and  stressed  to  excess.  It  is  the  same  in
the  case  of  the  element  of  1 fascination 9 ; here,  too,  is  possible
a transition  into  Mysticism.  At  its  highest  point  of  stress
the  fascinating  becomes  the  4 overabounding  V the  mystical
' moment’  which  exactly  corresponds  upon  this  line  to  the
iireKtiva  upon  the  other  line  of  approach,  and  which  is  to  be
understood  accordingly.  But  while  this  feeling  of  the  ‘ over-
abounding * is  specially  characteristic  of  Mysticism,  a trace  of
it  survives  in  all  truly  felt  states  of  religious  beatitude,  how-
ever restrained  and  kept  within  measure  by  other  factors.
This  is  seen  most  clearly  from  the  psychology  of  those  great
experiences— of  grace,  conversion,  second  birth— in  which
the  religious  experience  appears  in  its  pure  intrinsic  nature
and  in  heightened  activity,  so  as  to  be  more  clearly  grasped
than  in  the  less  typical  form  of  tranquil,  ordinary  piety.  The
hard  core  of  such  experiences  in  their  Christian  form  consists
of  the  redemption  from  guilt  and  bondage  to  sin,  and  we
shall  have  presently  to  see  that  this  also  does  not  occur  with-
out a participation  of  non-rational  elements.  But  leaving  this
out  of  account,  what  we  have  here  to  point  out  is  the  unutter-
ableness of  what  has  been  yet  genuinely  experienced,  and  how
such  an  experience  may  pass  into  blissful  excitement,  rapture,
and  exaltation  verging  often  on  the  bizarre  and  the  abnor-
mal.2 This  is  vouched  for  by  the  autobiographical  testi-
mony of  the  ‘ converted  ’ from  St.  Taul  onward.  William  James
has  collected  a great  number  of  these,  without,  however,

1 Das  L'berschwengliche.

2 This  may  be  found  fatal  to  the  attempt  to  construct  a ‘Religion
within  the  limits  of  pure  reason  * or  ‘ of  humanity  * ; but,  none  the  less,
the  matter  is  as  we  have  described  it,  as  far  as  concerns  the  psychologi-
cal inquiry  into  religion,  which  asks,  not  what  it  is  within  the  afore-
mentioned limits,  but  what  it  is  in  its  own  essential  nature.  And  for
that  matter  this  proceeding  of  constructing  a 4 humanity  * prior  to  and
apart  from  the  most  central  and  potent  of  human  capacities  is  like
nothing  so  much  as  the  attempt  to  frame  a standard  idea  of  the  human
body  after  having  previously  cut  off  the  head.


38  THE  ELEMENT  OF  FASCINATION

himself  noticing  the  non-rational  element  that  thrills  in
them.

Thus,  one  writes

* . . . For  the  moment  nothing  but  an  ineffable  joy  and
exaltation  remained.  It  is  impossible  fully  to  describe  the
experience.  It  was  like  the  effect  of  some  great  orchestra,
when  all  the  separate  notes  have  melted  into  one  swelling
harmony,  that  leaves  the  listener  conscious  of  nothing  save
that  his  soul  is  being  wafted  upwards  and  almost  bursting
with  its  own  emotion/  ( Varieties , &c.,  p.  66.)

And  another  :

f . . . The  more  I seek  words  to  express  this  intimate  inter-
j course,  the  more  I feel  the  impossibility  of  describing  the  thing
; by  any  of  our  usual  images/  (Ibid.,  p.  68.)

And  almost  with  the  precision  of  dogma,  a third  (Jonathan
Edwards)  indicates  the  qualitative  difference  of  the  experience
of  beatitude  from  other  4 rational  ’ joy :

‘The  conceptions  which  the  saints  have  of  the  loveliness  of
God  and  that  kind  of  delight  which  they  experience  in  it  arc
quite  peculiar  and  entirely  different  from  anything  which  a
natural  man  can  possess  or  of  which  he  can  form  any  proper
notion/  (Ibid.,  p.  2 29.)

Cf.  also  pp.  192,  225;  and  the  testimony  of  Jacob  Boehnie
given  on  p.  417.  Also  this  of  Boehnie  :

* But  I can  neither  write  nor  tell  of  what  sort  of  Exaltation
the  triumphing  in  the  Spirit  is.  It  can  be  compared  with
nought,  but  that  when  in  the  midst  of  death  life  is  born,  and
,•  it  is  like  the  resurrection  of  the  dead/

With  the  mystics  these  experiences  pass  up  wholly  into  the
‘ over-abounding  \ 4 O that  I could  tell  you  what  the  heart

feels,  Tiow  it  burns  and  is  consumed  inwardly ! Only,  I find
no  words  to  express  it.  I can  but  say : Might  but  one  little
drop  of  what  I feel  fall  into  Hell,  Hell  would  be  transformed
£ into  a Paradise/  So  says  St.  Catherine  of  Genoa ; and  all  the
multitude  of  her  spiritual  kindred  testify  to  the  same  effect.

What  we  Christians  know  as  the  experiences  of  grace  and
f,  the  second 'birth  have  their  parallels  also  in  the  religions
of  high  spiritual  rank  beyond  the  borders  of  Christianity.
Such  are  the  breaking  out  of  the  saving  ‘ Bodhi  *,  the  opening


THE  ELEMENT  OF  FASCINATION


39


of  the  'heavenly  eye’,  the  Juana  by  ISvaras  prasdda ,
which  is  victorious  over  the  darkness  of  nescience  and  shinesout
in  an  experience  with  which  no  other  can  be  measured.  And
in  all  these  the  entirely  non-rational  and  specific  element  in
the  beatific  experience  is  immediately  noticeable.  The  quali-
tative character  of  it  varies  widely  in  all  these  cases,  and  is
again  in  them  all  very  different  from  its  parallels  in  Chris-
tianity ; still  in  all  it  is  very  similar  in  intensity,  and  in  all  it
is  a 4 salvation 5 and  an  absolute  ‘ fascination which  in  contrast
to  all  that  admits  of  4 natural  ’ expression  or  comparison  is
deeply  imbued  with  the  4 over-abounding 5 nature  of  the  numen.

And  this  is  also  entirely  true  of  the  rapture  of  Nirvana,
which  is  only  in  appearance  a cold  and  negative  state.  It  is  only
conceptually  that  * Nirvana  ’ is  a negation  ; it  is  felt  in  con-
sciousness as  in  the  strongest  degree  positive ; it  exercises  a
4 fascination  * by  which  its  votaries  are  as  much  carried  away
as  are  the  Hindu  or  the  Christian  by  the  corresponding  objects
of  their  worship.  I recall  vividly  a conversation  I had  with
a Buddhist  monk.  He  had  been  putting  before  me  methodi-
cally and  pertinaciously  the  arguments  for  the  Buddhist
4 theology  of  negation  ’,  the  doctrine  of  Anatman  and  4 entire
emptiness  \ When  he  had  made  an  end,  I asked  him,  what
x then  Nirvana  itself  is ; and  after  a long  pause  came  at  last  the
■ ‘single  answer,  low  and  restrained  : 4 Bliss — unspeakable  \ And
the  hushed  restraint  of  that  answer,  the  solemnity  of  his  voice,
demeanour,  and  gesture,  made  more  clear  what  was  meant  than
the  words  themselves.

And  so  we  maintain,  on  the  one  hand,  following  the  4 via
eminentiae  et  causalitatis  that  the  divine  is  indeed  the  highest,
strongest,  best,  loveliest,  and  dearest  that  man  can  think  of ;
but  we  assert  on  the  other,  following  the 4 via  negationis  *,  that
God  is  not  merely  the  ground  and  superlative  of  all  that  , can
be  thought ; He  is  in  Himself  a subject  on  His  own  account*
and  in  Himself.

* * *

In  the  adjective  8eiv6$  the  Greek  language  possesses  a word
peculiarly  difficult  to  translate,  and  standing  for  an  idea
peculiarly  difficult  to  grasp  in  all  its  strange  variations.  And


40  THE  ELEMENT  OF  FASCINATION

if  we  ask  whence  this  difficulty  arises,  the  answer  is  plain ; it
is  because  8eiv6?  is  simply  the  numinous  (mostly  of  course  at
a lower  level,  in  an  arrested  form,  attenuated  by  rhetorical  or
poetic  usage).  Consequently  SecvS?  is  the  equivalent  of  ‘ dirus *
and  ‘ tremendus  *,  It  may  mean  evil  or  imposing,  potent  and
strange,  queer  and  marvellous,  horrifying  and  fascinating,
divine  and  daemonic,  and  a source  of  ‘ energy  *.  Sophocles
means  to  awaken  the  feeling  of  ‘ numinous  awe  * through  the
whole  gamut  of  its  phases  at  the  contemplation  of  man,  the
creature  of  marvel,  in  the  choric  song  of  the  A ntigone :

noWh  ra  Sewa,  kov8\u  avOpdorrov  Seivorepoi/  iriXti*

This  line  defies  translation,  just  because  our  language  has  no
term  that  can  isolate  distinctly  and  gather  into  one  word  the
total  numinous  impression  a thing  may  make  on  the  mind.
The  nearest  that  German  can  get  to  it  is  in  the  expression
‘decs  Ungeheuere 9 (monstrous),  while  in  English  ‘weird*  is
perhaps  the  closest  rendering  possible.  The  mood  and  attitude
represented  in  the  foregoing  verse  might  then  be  fairly  well
rendered  by  such  a translation  as  :

‘ Much  there  is  that  is  weird ; but  nought  is  weirder  than
man/

The  German  ungeheuer  is  not  by  derivation  simply  ‘ huge  *,  in
quantity  or  quality ; — this,  its  common  meaning,  is  in  fact  a
rationalizing  interpretation  of  the  real  idea ; it  is  that  which  is
not  (gehcuer  *,  i. e.,  approximately,  the  uncanny—  in  a word,  the
numinous.  And  it  is  just  this  element  of  the  uncanny  in  man
that  Sophocles  has  in  mind.  If  this,  its  fundamental  meaning,
be  really  and  thoroughly  felt  in  consciousness,  then  the  word
could  be  taken  as  a fairly  exact  expression  for  the  numinous
in  its  aspects  of  mystery,  awefulncss,  majesty,  augustness,
and  ‘energy*;  nay,  even  the  aspect  of  fascination  is  dimly
felt  in  it.

The  variations  of  meaning  in  the  German  word  ungeheuer
can  be  well  illustrated  from  Goethe.1  He,  too,  uses  the  word

1 Cf.  Wilhelm  Met siers  Wanderjahve,  Bk.  I,  ch.  10;  Wahlvenvandtachaf-
ten,  2.  lo  ; Diclitung  and  Wahrheit , 2.  9 ; 4.  20.


THE  ELEMENT  OF  FASCINATION


41


first  to  denote  the  huge  in  size — what  is  too  vast  for  our
faculty  of  space-perception,  such  as  the  immeasurable  vault  of
the  night  sky.  In  other  passages  the  word  retains  its  original
non-rational  colour  more  markedly;  it  comes  to  mean  the
uncanny,  the  fearful,  the  dauntingly  ‘ other 'and  incomprehen-
sible, that  which  arouses  in  us  1 stupor  ’ and  ‘ 6dfi(3os  1 ; and
finally,  in  the  wonderful  words  of  Faust  which  I have  put
upon  my  title-page,  it  becomes  an  almost  exact  synonym  for
our  ‘ numinous'  under  all  its  aspects.

Has  Schaudern  ist  der  Menschheit  bestes  Toil.

Wie  auch  die  Welt  ihm  das  Gefuhl  vertcuerc,
Ergrifien  fiihlt  er  tief  das  Ungoheuere.1

1 Awe  is  the  best  of  man : howe’er  the  world’s
Misprizing  of  the  feeling  would  prevent  us,

Deeply  we  feel,  once  gripped,  the  weird  Portentous.

(Goethe,  Faust,  Second  Part,  Act  i,  Sc.  v.)


CHAPTER  VII


ANALOGIES  AND  ASSOCIATED  FEELINGS

In  order  to  give  an  adequate  account  of  this  second  aspect
of  the  numinous,  we  were  led  to  add  to  its  original  designation
as  4 mysterium  tremendum  ' that  it  at  the  same  time  exercises  a
supreme  * fascination  And  this  its  dual  character,  as  at  once
an  object  of  boundless  awe  and  boundless  wonder,  quelling  and
yet  entrancing  the  soul,  constitutes  the  proper  positive  content
of  the  ‘ mysterium  ’ as  it  manifests  itself  in  conscious  feeling.
No  attempt  of  ours  to  describe  this  harmony  of  contrasts  in
the  import  of  the  mysterium  can  really  succeed ; but  it  may
perhaps  be  adumbrated,  as  it  were  from  a distance,  by  taking
an  analogy  from  a region  belonging  not  to  religion  but  to
aesthetics.  In  the  category  and  feeling  of  the  sublime  we
have  a counterpart  to  it,  though  it  is  true  it  is  but  a pale
reflexion,  and  moreover  involves  difficulties  of  analysis  all  its
own.  The  analogies  between  the  consciousness  of  the  sublime
and  of  the  numinous  may  be  easily  grasped.1  To  begin  with,
‘ the  sublime  like  ‘ the  numinous  is  in  Kantian  language  an
idea  or  concept  ‘ that  cannot  be  unfolded  * or  explicated  ( unaus -
u'kkdbar).  Certainly  we  can  tabulate  some  general  * rational  *
signs  that  uniformly  recur  as  soon  as  we  call  an  object  sublime ;
as,  for  instance,  that  it  must  approach,  or  threaten  to  overpass,
the  bounds  of  our  understanding  by  some  4 dynamic ' or
‘ mathematic  * greatness,  by  potent  manifestations  of  force

1 We  are  often  prone  to  resort  to  this  familiar  feeling- content  to  fill
out  the  negative  concept  4 transcendent1,  explaining  frankly  God’s  ‘trans-
cendence* by  His  ‘sublimity*.  As  a figurative  analogical  description
this  is  perfectly  allowable,  but  it  would  be  an  error  if  we  meant  it  literally
and  in  earnest.  Religious  feelings  are  pot  the  same  as  aesthetic  feelings,
and  ‘ the  sublime1  is  as  definitely  an  aesthetic  term  as  ‘the  beautiful’,
however  widely  different  may  be  the  facts  denoted  by  the  words.


ANALOGIES  AND  ASSOCIATED  FEELINGS  43


or  magnitude  in  spatial  extent.  But  these  are  obviously
only  conditions  of,  not  the  essence  of,  the  impression  of  sub-
limity. A thing  does  not  become  sublime  merely  by  being
great.  The  concept  itself  remains  unexplicated;  it  has  in
it  something  mysterious,  and  in  this  it  is  like  that  of
‘ the  numinous  \ A second  point  of  resemblance  is  that  the
sublime  exhibits  the  same  peculiar  dual  character  as  the
numinous;  it  is  at  once  daunting,  and  yet  again  singularly
attracting,  in  its  impress  upon  the  mind.  It  humbles  and  at
the  same  time  exalts  us,  circumscribes  and  extends  us  beyond
ourselves,  on  the  one  hand  releasing  in  us  a feeling  analogous
to  fear,  and  on  the  other  rejoicing  us.  So  the  idea  of  the
sublime  is  closely  similar  to  that  of  the  numinous,  and  is  well
adapted  to  excite  it  and  to  be  excited  by  it,  while  each  tends
to  pass  over  into  the  other.

The  Law  of  the  Association  of  Fecit  nys.

As  these  expressions  4 excite*  and  ‘pass  over’  will  later
assume  importance,  and  as  the  latter  in  particular  is  hedged
about  with  misconceptions  which  are  prominent  in  the  modern
doctrines  of  Evolution  and  give  rise  to  quite  erroneous  con-
clusions, we  will  enter  at  once  upon  a closer  consideration  of
them.

It  is  a well-known  and  fundamental  psychological  law  that
ideas  attract’  one  another,  and  that  one  will  excite  another  and
call  it  into  consciousness,  if  it  resembles  it.  An  entirely  similar
law  holds  good  with  regard  to  feelings.  A feeling,  no  less
than  an  idea,  can  arouse  its  like  in  the  mind ; and  the
presence  of  the  one  in  my  consciousness  may  be  the  occasion
for  my  entertaining  the  other  at  the  same  time.  Further,
just  as  in  the  case  of  ideas  the  law  of  reproduction  by  similarity
leads  to  an  exchange  and  replacement  of  ideas,  so  that  I come
to  entertain  an  idea  x , when  y would  have  been  the  appro-
priate one,  so  we  may  be  led  to  exchanges  and  replacements
of  feelings,  and  I may  react  with  a feeling  x to  an  impression
to  which  the  feeling  y would  normally  correspond.  Finally,
I can  pass  from  one  feeling  to  another  by  an  imperceptibly
gradual  transition,  the  one  feeling  x dying  away  little  by


44  ANALOGIES  AND  ASSOCIATED  FEELINGS

little,  while  the  other,  y , excited  together  with  it,  increases  and
strengthens  in  a corresponding  degree.  But  it  is  important
here  to  recognize  the  true  account  of  the  phenomenon.  What
passes  over — undergoes  transition — is  not  the  feeling  itself.
It  is  not  that  the  actual  feeling  gradually  changes  in  quality
or  ‘evolves’,  i.  e.  transmutes  itself  into  a quite  different  one,
but  rather  that  I pass  over  or  make  the  transition  from  one
feeling  to  another  as  my  circumstances  change,  by  the  gradual
decrease  of  the  one  and  increase  of  the  other.  A transition  of
the  actual  feeling  into  another  would  be  a real  ‘ transmutation*,
and  would  be  a psychological  counterpart  to  the  alchemist’s
production  of  gold  by  the  transmutation  of  metals.

And  yet  it  is  this  transmutation  that  is  assumed  by  the
modern  ‘ Evolutionism  * — more  properly  to  be  called  c Transmu-
tationism’ — by  the  introduction  of  the  equivocal  phrase,
‘gradually  evolve*  (i.c.  from  a tiling  of  a certain  quality  to
something  qualitatively  different),  or  the  no  less  equivocal
words  4 Epigenesis  *,  ‘ Heterogony  V and  their  like.  In  this
way,  they  would  have  us  believe,  the  feeling,  e.  g.  of  moral
obligation,  ‘ evolves  * or  develops.  At  first,  so  it  is  said,  all
that  exists  is  the  simple  constraint  of  uniform  custom,  as  seen  in
the  community  of  the  clan.  Then,  out  of  that,  it  is  said,  ‘ arises  *
the  idea  of  a universally  obligatory f ought*.  How  the  idea  can
do  so  is  not  disclosed.  Now  such  a theory  misses  the  fact  that
in  moral  obligation  we  have  something  qualitatively  quite
different  from  constraint  by  custom.  The  finer  and  more  pene-
trating psychological  analysis  that  can  apprehend  differences
in  quality  is  rudely  ignored  and  in  consequence  the  whole
problem  is  misconceived.  Or,  if  something  of  the  essential
difference  is  felt,  it  is  covered  up  and  glozed  over  by  the
phrase  ‘ gradually  evolve  *,  and  the  one  thing  is  made  to  turn
into  the  other  ‘ par  la  dur^e  *,  much  as  milk  grows  sour  from
standing.  But f ought  * is  a primary  and  unique  meaning,  as
little  derivable  from  another  as  blue  from  bitter,  and  there  are
not  ‘ transmutations  * in  the  psychological  any  more  than  in  the

1 Neither  Heterogony  nor  Epigenesis  is  genuine  Evolution.  They
are  rather  just  what  the  biologists  call  ‘generatio  equivoca’,  and  there-
fore mere  formation  of  an  aggregate  by  addition  and  accumulation.


ANALOGIES  AND  ASSOCIATED  FEELINGS  43


physical  world.  The  idea  4 ought 9 is  only  ‘ evolvable ' out  of
the  spirit  of  man  itself,  and  then  in  the  sense  of  being  £ arous-
able  because  it  is  already  potentially  implanted  in  him.  Were
it  not  so,  no  c evolution ’ could  effect  an  introduction  for  it.

The  evolutionists  may  be  quite  correct  in  reconstructing  the
kind  of  historical  process  that  took  place,  viz.  the  gradual
and  successive  entry  upon  the  scene  of  different £ moments  ’ of
feeling-consciousness  in  historical  sequence,  and  the  order  of
entry  itself  may  have  been  correctly  discovered.  But  the
explanation  of  this  process  is  quite  different  from  that  which
they  intend  ; it  is,  namely,  the  law  of  the  excitation  and
arousing  of  feelings  and  ideas  according  to  the  measure  of
their  resemblance.  There  is  in  point  of  fact  a very  strong
analogy  between  constraint  by  custom  and  constraint  by  moral
obligation,  as  both  are  constraints  upon  conduct.  Conse-
quently the  former  can  arouse  the  latter  in  the  mind  if  it —
the  latter — was  already  potentially  planted  there  ; the  feeling
of  4 ought  * may  start  into  consciousness  at  the  presence  of  the
other  feeling,  and  the  man  may  gradually  effect  a transition
to  it  from  that  other.  But  what  we  are  concerned  with  is  the
replacement  of  the  one  by  the  other,  and  not  the  transmuta-
tion of  the  one  into  the  other.

Now  it  is  just  the  same  with  the  feeling  of  the  numinous
as  with  that  of  moral  obligation.  It  too  is  not  to  be  derived
from  any  other  feeling,  and  is  in  this  sense  4 unevolvable  \ It  is
a content  of  feeling  that  is  qualitatively  sui  generis , yet  at  the
same  time  one  that  has  numerous  analogies  with  others,  and
therefore  it  and  they  may  reciprocally  excite  or  stimulate  one
another  and  cause  one  another  to  appear  in  the  mind.  Instead
of  framing  4 epigenetic  ’ and  other  fabrications  of  the  course
the  evolution  of  religion  has  taken,  it  is  our  task  to  inquire
into  these  4 stimuli 9 or  4 excitations  ',  these  elements  that  cause
the  numinous  feeling  to  appear  in  consciousness,  to  intimate
by  virtue  of  what  analogies  they  came  to  be  able  to  do  so,  and
so  to  discover  the  series  or  chain  of  these  stimuli  by  whose
operation  the  numinous  feeling  was  awakened  in  us.

Such  a power  of  stimulation  characterizes  the  feeling  of  the
sublime,  in  accordance  with  the  law  we  found,  and  through


46  ANALOGIES  AND  ASSOCIATED  FEELINGS


the  analogies  it  bears  to  the  numinous  feeling.  But  this  is
indubitably  a stimulus  that  only  makes  its  appearance  late  in
the  excitation-series,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  feeling  of  the
sublime  is  itself  first  aroused  and  disengaged  by  the  precedent
religious  feeliftg — not  from  itself,  but  from  the  rational  spirit
of  man  and  its  a priori  capacity.

Schematization .

The  ‘ Association  of  Ideas  ’ does  not  simply  cause  the  idea  y
to  reappear  in  consciousness  with  the  given  idea  a?  occasionally
only,  it  also  sets  up  under  certain  circumstances  lasting  com-
binations and  connexions  between  the  two.  And  this  is  no  less
true  of  the  association  of  feelings.  Accordingly,  we  see  religious
feeling  in  permanent  connexion  with  other  feelings  which  are
conjoined  to  it  in  accordance  with  this  principle  of  Association.
It  is,  indeed,  more  accurate  to  say  'conjoined’  than  really  Con-
nected ’,  for  such  mere  conjunctions  or  chance  connexions
according  to  laws  of  purely  external  analogy  are  to  be  distin-
guished from  necessary  connexions  according  to  principles
of  true  inward  affinity  and  cohesion.  An  instance  of  a con-
nexion of  this  latter  kind — an  example,  indeed,  of  an  inner
a priori  principle — is  (following  the  theory  of  Kant)  the  con-
nexion of  the  Category  of  Causality  with  its  temporal
6 schema  ’,  the  temporal  sequence  of  two  successive  events,
which  by  being  brought  into  connexion  with  the  Category  of
Causality  is  known  and  recognized  as  a causal  relation  of  the
two.  In  this  case  analogy  between  the  two — the  category
and  the  schema — has  also  a place,  but  it  is  not  chance  external
resemblance  but  essential  correspondence,  and  the  fact  that
the  two  belong  together  is  here  a necessity  of  our  reason.  On
the  basis  of  such  a necessity  the  temporal  sequence  ' schema-
tizes ’ the  category.

Now  the  relation  of  the  rational  to  the  non- rational  ele-
ment in  the  idea  of  the  holy  or  sacred  is  just  such  a one  of
* schematization  ’,  and  the  non-rational  numinous  fact,  schema-
tized by  the  rational  concepts  we  have  suggested  above,  yields
* us  the  complex  category  of  * holy 9 itself,  richly  charged  and
complete  and  in  its  fullest  meaning.  And  that  the  schematism


ANALOGIES  AND  ASSOCIATED  FEELINGS  47


is  a genuine  one,  and  not  a mere  combination  of  analogies,  may
be  distinctly  seen  from  the  fact  that  it  does  not  fall  to
pieces,  and  cannot  be  cut  out  as  the  development  of  the
consciousness  of  religioxis  truth  proceeds  onwards  and  up-
wards, but  is  only  recognized  with  greater  definiteness  and
certainty.  And  it  is  for  the  same  reason  inherently  probable
that  there  is  more,  too,  in  the  combination  of  4 the  holy  ’ with
' the  sublime  1 than  a mere  association  of  feelings ; and  per-
haps we  may  say  that,  while  as  a matter  of  historical  genesis
such  an  association  was  the  means  whereby  this  combination
was  awakened  in  the  mind  and  the  occasion  for  it,  yet  the  in-
ward and  lasting  character  of  the  connexion  in  all  the  higher
religions  does  prove  that  * the  sublime  ’ too  is  an  authentic
'scheme’  of  'the  holy*.

The  intimate  interpenetration  of  the  non-rational  with  the
rational  elements  of  the  religious  consciousness,  like  the  inter-
weaving of  warp  and  woof  in  a fabric,  may  be  elucidated  by
taking  another  familiar  case,  in  which  a universal  human
feeling,  that  of  personal  affection,  is  similarly  interpene-
trated by  a likewise  thoroughly  non-rational  and  separate
element,  namely,  the  sex  instinct.  It  goes  without  saying
that  this  latter  lies  just  on  the  opposite  side  of  ‘reason  ’ to  the
numinous  consciousness;  for,  while  this  is  'above  all  reason’,
the  sex  impulse  is  below  it,  an  element  in  our  instinctive  life.
‘ The  numinous  ’ infuses  the  rational  from  above,  ‘ the  sexual  ’
presses  up  from  beneath,  quite  wholesomely  and  normally
out  of  the  nature  which  the  human  being  shares  with  the
general  animal  world,  into  the  higher  realm  of  the  specifically
‘ humane  ’.  But  though  the  two  things  I am  comparing  are
thus  manifestly  opposite  extremes,  they  have  a closely  corre-
sponding relation  to  that  which  lies  between  them,  viz.  the
reason.  For  the  quite  special  domain  of  the  ' erotic  ’ is  only
brought  into  existence  as  the  reproductive  instinct  passes  up
out  of  the  merely  instinctive  life,  penetrates  the  higher  humane
life  of  mind  and  feeling,  and  infuses  wishes,  cravings,  and
longings  in  personal  liking,  friendship,  and  love,  in  song  and
poetry  and  imaginative  creation  in  general.  Whatever  falls
within  the  sphere  of  the  erotic  is  therefore  always  a composite


48  ANALOGIES  AND  ASSOCIATED  FEELINGS


product,  made  up  of  two  factors:  the  one  something  that
occurs  also  in  the  general  sphere  of  human  behaviour  as  such,
as  friendship  and  liking,  the  feeling  of  companionship,  the
mood  of  poetic  inspiration  or  joyful  exaltation,  and  the  like ;
and  the  other  an  infusion  of  a quite  special  kind,  which  is  not
to  be  classed  with  these,  and  of  which  no  one  can  have  any
inkling,  let  alone  understand  it,  who  has  not  learnt  from  the
actual  inward  experience  of  ‘eros7  or  love.  Another  point
in  which  the  ‘ erotic  * is  analogous  to  the  ‘ holy  7 is  in
having  in  the  main  no  means  of  linguistic  expression  but
terms  drawn  from  other  fields  of  mental  life,  which  only  cease
to  be  ‘ innocuous  7 (i.  e.  only  become  genuinely  4 erotic 7 terms)
when  it  is  realized  that  the  lover,  like  the  orator,  bard,  or  singer,
expresses  himself  not  so  much  by  the  actual  words  he  uses  as
by  the  accent,  tone,  and  imitative  gesture  which  reinforce
them.

The  phrase  ‘ he  loves  me  7 is  verbally  identical,  whether  it  is
said  by  a child  of  its  father  or  by  a girl  of  her  lover.  But  in
the  second  case  a ‘ love  7 is  meant  which  is  at  the  same  time
< something  more  7 (viz.  sexual  love),  and  something  more  not
only  in  quantity  but  in  quality.  So,  too,  the  phrase  ‘We
ought  to  fear,  love,  and  trust  him’1  is  verbally  identical f
whether  it  refers  to  the  relation  of  child  to  father  or  to  that
of  man  to  God.  But  again  in  the  second  case  these  ideas  are
infused  with  a meaning  of  whiclji*r6ne  but  the  religious-
minded  man  can  have  any  comprehension  or  indeed  any
inkling,  whose  presence  makes,  e.  g.,  the  ‘ fear  of  God 7 ‘ some-
thing more  7 than  any  fear  of  a man,  qualitatively,  not  merely
quantitatively,  though  retaining  the  essence  of  the  most
genuine  reverence  felt  by  the  child  for  its  father.  And  Suso
means  in  the  same  way  to  distinguish  ‘ love 7 and  c love  of
God 7,  when  he  says :

‘ There  was  never  a string  so  dulcet-toned  but  ceased  to
sound  if  stretched  to  a withered  frame  ; a heart  poor  in  love
can  no  more  understand  speech  rich  in  love  than  a German
can  an  Italian.7  2

' Luther’s  amplification  of  the  First  Commandment.

8 Works,  cd.  Denifle,  p.  809.


ANALOGIES  AND  ASSOCIATED  FEELINGS  49

There  is  another  kind  of  experience  in  which  we  may  find
an  example  of  the  way  in  which  rational  elements  in  our
feeling-consciousness  may  be  thus  penetrated  by  quite  non-
rational  ones,  and  an  example  even  more  proximate  to  the
complex  feeling  of  the  holy  than  that  just  described — * erotic  ’
experience ; — in  so  far  as  the  non-rational  element  is,  like  the
‘ numinous  ’ feeling  but  unlike  the  sexual  impulse,  at  the  same
time  mpra-rational.  I refer  to  the  state  of  mind  induced
in  us  by  a song  set  to  music.  The  verbal  text  of  the  song
expresses  feelings  that  are  ‘ natural  *,  homesickness  perhaps,
or  confidence  in  time  of  danger,  hope  for  a future  good,  or  joy
in  a present  possession—  all  concrete  elements  in  our  * natural  *
human  lot,  and  capable  of  being  described  in  conceptual  terms.
But  it  is  otherwise  with  the  music,  purely  as  music.  It
releases  a blissful  rejoicing  in  us,  and  we  are  conscious  of  a
glimmering,  billowy  agitation  occupying  our  minds,  without
being  able  to  express  or  explain  in  concepts  what  it  really  is
that  moves  us  so  deeply.  And  to  say  that  the  music  is  mourn-
ful or  exultant,  that  it  incites  or  restrains,  is  merely  to  use
signs  by  analogy,  choosing  them  for  their  resemblance  to  the
matter  in  hand  out  of  other  regions  of  our  mental  life  ; and  at
any  rate  we  cannot  say  what  the  object  or  ground  of  this
mourning  or  exulting  may  be.  Music,  in  short,  arouses  in  us
an  experience  and  vibrations  of  mood  that  are  quite  specific  in
kind  and  must  simply  be  called  ‘ musical  ’ ; but  the  rise  and
fall  and  manifold  variations  of  this  experience  exhibit —
though  again  only  in  part — definite,  if  fugitive,  analogies  and
correspondences  with  our  ordinary  non-musical  emotional
states,  and  so  can  call  these  into  consciousness  and  blend  with
them.  If  this  happens,  the  specific  * music-consciousness  * is
thereby  ‘ schematized  * and  rationalized,  and  the  resultant
complex  mood  is,  as  it  were,  a fabric,  in  which  the  general
human  feelings  and  emotional  states  constitute  the  warp,  and
the  non-rational  music-feelings  the  woof.  The  total  song  is
therefore  music  ‘ rationalized  \

Now  here  is  illustrated  the  contrast  between  the  legitimate
and  the  illegitimate  processes  of  ‘ rationalization  \ For,  if  the
song  may  be  called  music  ‘ rationalized  * in  the  legitimate  sense,

E


50  ANALOGIES  AND  ASSOCIATED  FEELINGS


in  programme-music  we  have  a musical 1 rationalism  * in  the
bad  sense.  ^Programme-music,  that  is  to  say,  misinterprets  and
perverts  the  idea  of  music  by  its  implication  that  the  inner
content  of  music  is  not — as  in  fact  it  is — something  unique  and
mysterious,  but  just  the  incidental  experiences — joy  and  grief
expansion  and  repression — familiar  to  the  human  heart.  And
in  its  attempt  to  make  of  musical  tones  a language  to  recount
the  fortunes  of  men  programme-music  abolishes  the  autonomy
of  music,  and  is  deceived  by  a mere  resemblance  into  employ-
ing as  a means  what  is  an  end  and  substantive  content  in  its
own  right.  It  is  just  the  same  mistake  as  when  the  ‘ august  ’
aspect  of  the  numinous  is  allowed  to  evaporate  into  the
f morally  good’,  instead  of  merely  being  ‘ schematized  ’ by  it,
or  as  when  we  let c the  holy  ’ be  identified  with  ‘ the  perfectly
good  ' will.  And  not  only  programme-music  is  at  fault  here.
The  ‘ music-drama  ’ of  Wagner,  by  attempting  a thorough-
going unification  of  the  musical  and  the  dramatic,  commits  the
same  offence  against  both  the  non-rational  spirit  of  the  former
and  the  autonomy  of  either.  We  can  only  succeed  in  very
partial  and  fragmentary  fashion  ill  * schematizing ’ the  non-
rational  factor  in  music  by  means  of  the  familiar  incidents  of
human  experience.  And  the  reason  is  just  this,  that  the
real  content  of  music  is  not  drawn  from  the  ordinary  human
emotions  at  all,  and  that  it  is  in  no  way  merely  a second  lan-
guage, alongside  the  usual  one,  by  which  these  emotions  find
expression.  Musical  feeling  is  rather  (like  numinous  feeling)
something  ( wholly  other  ’,  which,  while  it  affords  analogies  and
here  and  there  will  run  parallel  to  the  ordinary  emotions  of
life,  cannot  be  made  to  coincide  with  them  by  a detailed  point-
to-point  correspondence.  It  is,  of  course,  from  those  places
where  the  correspondence  holds  that  the  spell  of  a composed
song  arises  by  a blending  of  verbal  and  musical  expression.
But  the  very  fact  that  we  attribute  to  it  a spell,  an  enchant-
ment, points  in  itself  to  that  ‘ woof  ’ in  the  fabric  of  music  of
which  we  spoke,  the  woof  of  the  unconceived  and  non-
rational.1

1 This  is  the  point  of  view  from  which  to  estimate  both  the  excellent  and
the  inadequate  features  of  E.  Hanslick’s  book,  Vom  Musicalisch-Schonen.


ANALOGIES  AND  ASSOCIATED  FEELINGS  51


But  we  must  beware  of  confounding  in  any  way  the  non-
rational  of  music  and  the  non-rational  of  the  numinous  itself,
as  Schopenhauer,  for  example,  docs.  Each  is  something  in  its
own  right,  independently  of  the  other.  We  shall  discuss  later
whether,  and  how  far,  the  former  may  become  a means  of
expression  for  the  latter.


CHAPTER  VIII


THE  HOLY  AS  A CATEGORY  OF  VALUE
Sin  and  Atonement

We  have  already  met  that  strange  and  profound  mental
reaction  to  the  numinous  which  we  proposed  to  call  ‘ creature-
feeling * or  creature-consciousness,  with  its  concomitant  feelings
of  abasement  and  prostration  and  of  the  diminution  of  the  self
into  nothingness ; bearing  always  in  mind  that  these  expres-
sions do  not  hit  with  precision,  but  merely  hint  at  what  is
really  meant,1  inasmuch  as  this  ‘ diminution  of  the  self  *,  ire.,
is  something  very  different  from  the  littleness,  weakness,  or
dependence  of  which  we  may  become  aware  under  other
conditions  than  that  of  numinous  feeling.  And  we  had  to
notice  that  this  experience  marks  a definite  depreciation  or
devaluation  of  the  self  in  respect,  so  to  speak,  of  its  reality
and  very  existence.  We  have  now  to  put  alongside  of  this
another  sort  of  self-disvaluation,  which  lias  long  been  a
matter  of  common  observation,  and  only  needs  to  be  suggested
in  order  to  be  recognized.  * I am  a man  of  unclean  lips  and
dwell  among  a people  of  unclean  lips/  * Depart  from  me
for  I am  a sinful  man,  0 Lord/  So  say  respectively  Isaiah
and  Peter,  when  the  numinous  reality  encounters  them  as
a present  fact  of  consciousness.  In  both  cases  this  self-
depreciating  feeling-response  is  marked  by  an  immediate,
almost  instinctive,  spontaneity.  It  is  not  based  on  delibera-
tion, nor  does  it  follow  any  rule,  but  breaks,  as  it  were,
palpitant  from  the  soul— like  a direct  reflex  movement  at
the  stimulation  of  the  numinous.  It  does  not  spring  from

1 Cf.  Hugo  of  St.  Victor’s  words  : * Sumpta  sunt  vocabula,  lit  intellegi
aliquatenus  posset  quod  comprehendi  non  poterat  \ These  words  were
chosen,  that  that  which  could  not  be  comprehended  might  yet  in  some
measure  be  understood/)


THE  HOLY  AS  A CATEGORY  OF  VALUE  53


the  consciousness  of  some  committed  transgression,  but  rather
is  an  immediate  datum  given  with  the  feeling  of  the  numen  :
it  proceeds  to  ‘ disvalue  * together  with  the  self  the  tribe  to
which  the  person  belongs,  and  indeed  together  with  that,
all  existence  in  general.  Now  it  is  to-day  pretty  generally
agreed  that,  all  this  being  the  case,  these  outbursts  of  feeling
are  not  simply,  and  probably  at  first  not  at  all,  moral  deprecia-
tions, but  belong  to  a quite  special  category  of  valuation  and
appraisement.  The  feeling  is  beyond  question  not  that  of  the
transgression  of  the  moral  law,  however  evident  it  may  be  that
such  a transgression,  where  it  has  occurred,  will  involve  it  as
a consequence  : it  is  the  feeling  of  absolute  ‘ profaneness  \ v-  *'

But  what  is  this  ? Again  something  which  the  4 natural  ’
man  cannot,  as  such,  know  or  even  imagine.  He,  only,  who  is
‘ in  the  Spirit ’ knows  and  feels  what  this  4 profaneness  * is ; but
to  such  an  one  it  comes  with  piercing  acuteness,  and  is  accom-
panied by  the  most  uncompromising  judgement  of  self-deprecia-
tion, a judgement  passed,  not  upon  his  character,  because  of
individual  4 profane  * actions  of  his,  but  upon  his  own  very
existence  as  creature  before  that  which  is  supreme  above  all
creatures.  And  at  the  same  moment  he  passes  upon  the
numen  a judgement  of  appreciation  of  a unique  kind  by  the
category  diametrically  contrary  to  4 the  profane’,  the  category
4 holy  \ which  is  proper  to  the  numen  alone,  but  to  it  in  an
absolute  degree ; he  says  : 4 Tu  solus  sanclus  \ This  4 sanctus  ’
is  not  merely  4 perfect  ’ or  4 beautiful  * or  4 sublime 5 or  4 good  \
though,  being  like  these  concepts  also  a value , objective
and  ultimate,  it  has  a definite,  perceptible  analogy  with  them.
It  is  the  positive  numinous  value  or  worth,  and  to  it  corre-
sponds on  the  side  of  the  creature  a numinous  disvalue  or
4 un worth  \

In  every  highly-developed  religion  the  appreciation  of  inoral
obligation  and  duty,  ranking  as  a claim  of  the  deity  upon  man,
has  been  developed  side  by  side  with  the  religious  feeling
itself.  None  the  less  a profoundly  humble  and  heartfelt
recognition  of  4 the  holy ' may  occur  in  particular  experiences
without  being  always  or  definitely  charged  or  infused  with  the
sense  of  moral  demands.  The 4 holy  ’ will  then  lie  recognized  as


54  THE  HOLY  AS  A CATEGORY  OF  VALUE


that  which  commands  our  respect,  as  that  whose  real  value  is  to
be  acknowledged  inwardly.  It  is  not  that  the  awe  of  holiness
is  itself  simply  ‘ fear  ' in  face  of  what  is  absolutely  overpower-
ing, before  which  there  is  no  alternative  to  blind,  awe-struck
obedience.  4 Tu  solus  sanctus 5 is  rather  a paean  of ; praise , which,
so  far  from  being  merely  a faltering  confession  of  the  divine
supremacy,  recognizes  and  extols  a value,  precious  beyond  all
conceiving.  The  object  of  such  praise  is  not  simply  absolute
Might,  making  its  claims  and  compelling  their  fulfilment,  but
a might  that  lias  at  the  same  time  the  supremest  right  to  make
the  highest  claim  to  service,  and  receives  praise  because  it  is  in
an  absolute  sense  worthy  to  be  praised.  4 Thou  art  worthy  to
receive  praise  and  honour  and  power’  (Rev.  iv.  11).

When  once  it  has  been  grasped  that  qaddsh  or  sanctus  is  not
originally  a moral  category  at  all,  the  most  obvious  rendering
of  the  words  is  ‘ transcendent  * (‘  supramundane  Ubenveltlich).
The  one-sided  character  of  this  rendering  to  which  we  had  to
take  exception  has  been  supplemented  by  the  more  detailed
exposition  of  the  numinous  and  its  implications.  But  its  most
essential  defect  remains  to  be  noted : ‘ transcendent  * is  a
purely  ontological  attribute  and  not  an  attribute  of  value ;
it  denotes  a character  that  can,  if  need  be,  abash  us,  but
cannot  inspire  us  with  respect . It  might  once  again,  therefore,
be  an  advantage  to  introduce  another  term  to  underline  this
side  of  the  numinous,  and  the  words  a ugustus  and  creyvos
suggest  themselves  for  the  purpose.  ‘ Augustus  *,  4 august  *,  no
less  than  cre/n'o?,  is  really  appropriate  only  to  numinous  objects
— to  rulers  only  as  offspring  or  descendants  of  gods.  Then,
while  crtPaoTo?  indicates  the  being  of  the  numen,  ae/xros  or
augustus* would  refer  rather  to  its  supreme  wortlf  or  value , its
illustriousness.  There  will,  then,  in  fact  be  two  values  to  dis-
tinguish in  the  numen  ; its  * fascination  ’ (fascinans)  will  be  that
element  in  it  whereby  it  is  of  subjective  value  (=  beatitude)  to
man;  but  it  is  ‘august*  (augustum)  in  so  far  as  it  is  recognized
as  possessing  in  itself  objective  value  that  claims  our  homage.

Mere  * unlawfulness  * only  becomes  4 sin  4 impiety  *,  4 sacri-
lege \ when  the  character  of  numinous  unworthiness  or
disvulue  goes  on  to  be  transferred  to  and  centred  in  moral


THE  HOLY  AS  A CATEGORY  OF  VALUE  55


delinquency.  And  only  when  the  mind  feels  it  as  ‘ sin  9 does
the  transgression  of  law  become  a matter  of  such  dreadful
gravity  for  the  conscience,  a catastrophe  that  leads.it  to
despair  of  its  own  power.  The  meaning  of  ‘ sin  ’ is  not  under-
stood by  the  4 natural  ’,  nor  even  by  the  merely  moral,  man ;
and  the  theory  of  certain  dogmatists,  that  the  demand  of
morality  as  such  urged  man  on  to  an  inner  collapse  and  then
obliged  him  to  look  round  for  some  deliverance,  is  palpably
incorrect.  There  are  serious-minded  men  of  sincere  moral
endeavour  who  cannot  understand  what  such  a 4 deliverance
or  4 redemption  5 may  be,  and  dismiss  it  with  a shrug  of  the
shoulders.  They  are  aware  that  they  are  erring  and  imperfect
men,  but  they  know  and  put  into  practice  the  methods  of  self-
discipline,  and  so  labour  onward  upon  their  way  with  sturdy
resolution.  The  morally  robust  older  Rationalism  was  lacking
neither  in  a sincere  and  respectful  recognition  of  the  moral  law
nor  in  honest  endeavour  to  conform  to  it.  It  knew  well  and
sternly  condemned  what  was  ‘ wrong  ’,  and  the  aim  of  its
exhortations  and  instruction  was  that  men  should  realize  better
and  take  more  in  earnest  the  facts  of  moral  right  and  wrong.
But  no  4 downfall  * or  4 collapse  * and  no  ‘ need  of  redemption  '
came  within  its  scheme,  because  the  objection  brought  against
it  by  its  opponents  was  in  fact  just ; Rationalism  lacked  under-
standing of  what  4 sin  9 is.1  Mere  morality  is  not  the  soil  from
which  grows  either  the  need  of  4 redemption  * and  deliverance
or  the  need  for  that  other  unique  good  which  is  likewise

1 Cf.  the  testimony  of  Theodore  Paiker— certainly  a man  of  far  from
crude  mental  development- as  to  his  own  experience,  given  by  W.  James,
Varieties , p.  81 :

4 They  (sc.  the  heathen  of  classical  antiquity)  were  conscious  of  wrath,
of  cruelty,  avarice,  drunkenness,  lust,  sloth,  cowardice,  and  other  actual
vices,  and  struggled  and  got  rid  of  the  defoimities;  but  they  were  not
conscious  of  “enmity  against  God”  and  didn't  sit  down  and  whine  and
groan  against  non-existent  evil.  1 have  done  wrong  things  enough  in
my  life,  and  do  them  now : 1 miss  the  mark,  draw  bow,  and  try  again.
But ...  I know  there  is  much  “health  in  me’^;  and  in  my  body,  even
now,  there  dwelleth  many  a good  thing,  sgite  of  consumption  and
Saint  Paul.’

If  there  is  nothing  ciude  about  such  a statement,  it  is  at  any  rate
supefjtcial.  The  depths  of  the  non-rational  consciousness  must  he  stirred
to  find  with  Anselm  4 quanti  ponderis  sit  pecofttum*.


56  THE  HOLY  AS  A CATEGORY  OF  VALUE

altogether  and  specifically  numinous  in  character,  * covering  \
and  ‘ atonement  \ There  would  perhaps  be  less  disputing  as
to  the  warrant  and  value  of  these  latter  in  Christian  doctrine
if  dogmatic  theology  itself  had  not  transferred  them  from  their
mystical  sphere  into  that  of  rational  ethics  and  attenuated  them
into  moral  concepts.  They  were  thus  taken  from  a sphere
where  they  have  an  authentic  and  necessary  place  to  one  where
their  validity  is  most  disputable.

We  meet  the  * moment  ’ of  ‘ covering  * in  specially  clear  form
in  the  religion  of  Yahweh,  in  its  rites  and  the  emotion  they
excite  ; but  it  is  contained  also,  though  more  obscurely,  in  many
other  religions.  It  comprises,  first,  a manifestation  of  the
numinous  awe,  viz.  the  feeling  that  the  ‘profane* creature  can-
not forth wi tli  approach  the  numen,  but  lias  need  of  a covering
or  shield  against  the  opyij  of  the  numen.  Such  a ( covering  ’
is  then  a ‘consecration*,  i. e.  a procedure  that  renders  the
approacher  himself  ‘ numinous  *,  frees  him  from  his  ‘ profane  *
being  and  fits  him  for  intercourse  with  the  numen.  The  means
of  ‘ consecration  however — * means  of  grace  * in  the  proper
sense — are  derived  from,  or  conferred  and  appointed  by,  the
numen  itself,  which  bestows  something  of  its  own  quality  to
make  man  capable  of  communion  with  it.  And  this  act  is
something  very  different  from  the  ‘ annulment  of  mistrust  *,
the  phrase  in  which  Ritschl  seeks  to  rationalize  these  relations
between  God  and  many

‘ Atonement  *,  following  our  view,  is  a ‘ sheltering  ’ or  4 cover-
ing *,  but  a profounder  form  of  it.  It  springs  directly  from  the
idea  of  numinous  value  or  worth  and  numinous  disvalue  or
unworth  as  soon  as  these  have  been  developed.  Mere  awe,  mere
need  of  shelter  from  the  1 tremendum  has  here  been  elevated  to
the  feeling  that  man  in  his  4 profaneness  * is  not  worthy  to  stand
in  the  presence  of  the  holy  one,  and  that  his  own  entire  personal
unworthiness  might  defile  even  holiness  itself.  This  is  obviously
the  case  in  the  vision  of  the  call  of  Isaiah  ; and  the  same  note
recurs,  less  emphatically  but  quite  unmistakably,  in  the  story
of  the  centurion  of  Capernaum  (St.  Luke  vii.  1-10),  and  his
words : ‘lam  not  worthy  that  thou  shouldest  enter  under  my
roof  \ Here  we  have  both  the  light  thrill  of  awe  before  the


THE  HOLY  AS  A CATEGORY  OF  VALUE  57


* tremendum  ’ of  the  numcii  and  also,  and  more  especially,  the
feeling  of  this  unique  disvalue  or  unworth  of  the  profane
confronted  by  the  nuuien,  which  suggests  to  the  man  that  even
holiness  itself  may  be  tainted  and  tarnished  by  his  presence.

Here,  then,  comes  in  the  felt  necessity  and  longing  for
‘ atonement  and  all  the  more  strongly  when  the  close  presence
of  the  nuuien,  intercourse  witli  it,  and  enduring  possession  of
it,  becomes  an  object  of  craving,  is  even  desired  as  the  summum
bonum.  It  amounts  to  a longing  to  transcend  this  sundering
unworthiness,  given  with  the  self’s  existence  as  4 creature  ’ and
profane  natural  being.  It  is  an  element  in  the  religious  con-
sciousness, which, far  from  vanishing  in  the  measure  in
which  religion  is  deepened  and  heightened,  grows  on  the
contrary  continually  stronger  and  more  marked.  Relonging,
as  it  does,  wholly  to  the  non-rational  side  of  religion,  it  may
remain  latent  while,  in  the  course  of  religious  evolution,  the
rational  side  at  first  unfolds  and  assumes  vigorous  and  definite
form ; it  may  retire  for  a time  behind  other  elements  and
apparently  die  away,  but  only  to  return  more  powerfully  and
insistently  than  before.  And  again  it  may  grow  to  be  the  sole,
one-sided,  exclusive  interest,  a cry  that  drowns  all  other  notes,
so  that  the  religious  consciousness  is  distorted  and  disfigured  ;
as  may  readily  happen  where  through  long  periods  of  time  the
rational  aspects  of  religion  have  been  fostered  unduly  and  at
the  cost  of  the  non-rational.

The  special  character  of  this  consciousness  of  need  for
atonement  may  perhaps  be  brought  home  more  clearly  by  an
analogy  from  our  * natural  ’ emotional  life  ; but  at  the  same
time  it  is  important  that  the  religious  feeling  we  are  con-
sidering should  itself  be  kept  distinct  from  its  analogue,  as  the
two  are  frequently  confounded.  The  analogy  is  with  the
feeling  arising  from  moral  transgression.  There,  too,  we
practise  a kind  of  self-depreciation  which  is  clear  and  familiar
and  perfectly  intelligible  to  us,  when  we  esteem  ourselves
guilty  of  a bad  action  and  the  action  itself  as  morally  evil.
The  evil  of  the  action  weighs  upon  us  and  deprives  us  of  our
self-respect.  We  accuse  ourselves  and  remorse  sets  in.  But
alongside  this  self-depreciation  stands  a second  one,  which


58  THE  HOLY  AS  A CATEGORY  OF  VALUE


while  it  may  have  reference  to  the  same  action  as  the  other
yet  avails  itself  of  definitely  different  categories.  The  same
perverse  action  that  before  weighed  upon  us  now  pollutes  us ;
wc  do  not  accuse  ourselves,' *we  are  defiled  in  our  own
eyes.  And  the  characteristic  form  of  emotional  reaction  is
no  longer  remorse  but  loathing.  The  man  feels  a need,
to  express  which  he  has  recourse  to  images  of  washing
and  cleansing.  The  two  kinds  of  self-depreciation  proceed
on  parallel  lines  and  may  relate  to  the  same  action ; but
none  the  less  it  is  obvious  that  they  are,  inwardly  and  in
their  essence,  determinately  different.  Now  the  second  of
them  has  a plain  analogy  with  the  need  for  ‘ atonement  \ and
so  can  fairly  be  drawn  upon  for  its  elucidation  ; while  at  the
same  time  it  is  yet  nothing  more  than  an  analogy  from  another
sphere,  viz.  that  of  morality.

No  religion  has  brought  the  mystery  of  the  need  for
atonement  or  expiation  to  so  complete,  so  profound,  or  so
powerful  expression  as  Christianity.  And  in  this,  too,  it
shows  its  superiority  over  others.  It  is  a more  perfect  religion
and  more  perfectly  religion  than  they,  in  so  far  as  what  is
potential  in  religion  in  general  becomes  in  Christianity  a pure
actuality.  And  the  distrust  and  suspicion  which  so  widely
obtains  with  regard  to  this  mystery  is  only  to  be  explained
from  the  general  custom — for  which  our  theoretical  cult  of
homiletics,  liturgy,  and  catechism  is  largely  responsible — of
taking  into  account  only  the  rational  side  of  religion.  Yet
this  atonement  mystery  is  a ‘ moment  ’ which  no  Chiistian
teaching  that  purports  to  represent  the  religious  experience
of  the  Christian  and  biblical  tradition  can  afford  to  surrender.
The  teacher  will  have  to  make  explicit,  by  an  analysis  of  the
Christian  religious  experience,  how  the  * very  numen  by
imparting  itself  to  the  worshipper,  becomes  itself  the  means  of
‘ atonement  \ And  in  this  regard  it  does  not  matter  so
very  much  what  the  decisions  of  the  commentators  are
as  to  what,  if  anything,  Paul  or  Peter  wrote  on  the  sub-
ject of  expiation  and  atonement,  or  whether,  indeed,  there
is  any  ‘ scriptural  authority 1 for  the  thing  at  all.  Were
there  in  scripture  no  word  written  about  it,  it  might  still


THE  HOLY  AS  A CATEGORY  OF  VALUE  59


be  written  to-day  from  our  own  experience.  But  it  would
indeed  be  extraordinary  if  it  had  not  long  ago  been  written
of.  For  the  God  of  the  New  Testament  is  not  less  holy  than
the  God  of  the  Old  Testament,  but  more  holy.  The  interval
between  the  creature  and  Him  is  not  diminished  but  made
absolute  ; the  unworthiness  of  the  profane  in  contrast  to  Him
is  not  extenuated  but  enhanced.  That  God  none  the  less
admits  access  to  Himself  and  intimacy  with  Himself  is  not
a mere  matter  of  course ; it  is  a grace  beyond  our  power  to
apprehend,  a prodigious  paradox.  To  take  this  paradox  out
of  Christianity  is  to  make  it  shallow  and  superficial  beyond
recognition.  But  if  this  is  so,  the  intuitions  concerning,  and
the  need  felt  for,  ‘ Covering  ’ and  ‘ Atonement 9 result  imme-
diately. And  the  divinely  appointed  means  of  God's  self-
revelation, where  experienced  and  appraised  as  such — ‘ the
Word', ‘the  Spirit*,  ‘the  Person  of  Christ’, — become  that  to
which  the  man  ‘flees’,  in  which  lie  finds  refuge,  and  in  which
lie  ‘locks’  himself,  in  order  that,  consecrated  and  cleansed  of
his  ‘ profaneness  ’ thereby,  ho  may  come  into  the  presence  of
Holiness  itself.

That  these  ideas  are  viewed  with  a certain  distrust  may  be
traced  to  two  causes.  One  is,  that  what  is  a specifically
religious  element  is  distortingly  moralized.  If  we  start  from
mere  morality  and  in  relation  to  a Gcd  understood  as  being
the  personification  of  the  moral  order  endowed  with  love,
then  all  these  things  are  wholly  inapplicable  and  a source  of
genuine  difficulty.  But  we  are  concerned  with  religious  (not
merely  moral)  intuitions,  and  it  is  impossible  to  dispute  how
right  or  wrong  they  are  with  a man  whose  interest  is  wholly
in  morality  and  not  in  religion,  and  who  is  therefore  quite
incapable  of  appreciating  them.  Whoever,  on  the  other  hand,
penetrates  to  the  unique  centre  of  the  religious  experience,  so
that  it  starts  awake  in  his  own  consciousness,  finds  that  the
truth  of  these  intuitions  is  experienced  directly,  as  soon  as  he
penetrates  into  their  depths.

The  other  ground  of  distrust  is  that  usually  in  our  theo-
logical systems  an  attempt  is  made  to  develop  conceptual
theories  of  these  ideas,  which  are  all  pure  intuitions,  emotional


60  THE  HOLY  AS  A CATEGORY  OF  VALUE

rather  than  conceptual  in  character.  They  are  thus  made
objects  of  speculation,  and  the  final  outcome  is  the  quasi-
mathematical ‘ Doctrine  of  Imputation  * and  its  drastic  ascrip-
tion to  the  credit  ol*  the  c sinner  ' of  the  ‘ merit ' of  Christ,  not
to  mention  the  learned  inquiry  whether  this  transaction
involves  an  * analytic  ’ or  a 1 synthetic  'judgement  of  God.

* * * *

Let  us  look  back  once  more  from  the  point  we  have  reached
over  the  course  our  inquiry  has  so  far  taken.  As  the  sub-
title of  this  book  suggests,  we  were  to  investigate  the  noil-
rational  element  in  the  idea  of  the  divine.  The  words  ‘ non-
rational  * and  ‘ irrational  ’ are  to-day  used  almost  at  random.
The  non-rational  is  sought  over  the  most  widely  different
regions,  and  writers  generally  shirk  the  trouble  of  putting
down  precisely  what  they  intend  by  the  term,  giving  it  often
the  most  multifarious  meanings  or  applying  it  with  such  vague
generality  that  it  admits  of  the  most  diverse  interpretations.
Pure  fact  in  contrast  to  law,  the  empirical  in  contrast  to
reason,  the  contingent  in  contrast  to  the  necessary,  the  psycho-
logical in  contrast  to  transcendental  fact,  that  which  is  known
a posteriori  in  contrast  to  that  which  is  determinable  a priori ;
power,  will,  and  arbitrary  choice  in  contrast  to  reason,  know-
ledge, and  determination  by  value  ; impulse,  instinct,  and  the
obscure  forces  of  the  subconscious  in  contrast  to  insight,
rcilection,  and  intelligible  plan ; mystical  depths  and  stirrings
in  the  soul,  surmise,  presentiment,  intuition,  prophecy,  and
finally  the  "occult'  powers  also;  or,  in  general,  the  uneasy
stress  and  universal  fermentation  of  the  time,  with  its  groping
after  the  thing  never  yet  heard  or  seen  in  poetry  or  the
plastic  arts— all  these  and  more  may  claim  the  names  ‘ non-
rational  *,  ‘ irrational  and  according  to  circumstances  are
extolled  or  condemned  as  modern  * irrationalism  '.  Whoever
makes  use  of  the  word  ‘non-rational'  to-day  ought  to  say
what  he  actually  means  by  it.  This  we  did  in  our  intro-
ductory chapter.  We  began  with  the  ‘ rational ' in  the  idea  of
God  and  the  divine,  meaning  by  the  term  that  in  it  which  is
clearly  to  be  grasped  by  our  power  of  conceiving,  and  enters  the
domain  of  familiar  and  definable  conceptions.  We  went  on  to


THEl  HOLY  AS  A CATEGORY  OF  VALUE  fil


maintain  that  beneath  this  sphere  of  clarity  ami  lucidity  lies
a hidden  depth,  inaccessible  to  our  conceptual  thought,  which
we  in  so  far  call  the  * non-rational*.  So  that  this  name  is  for
us  a purely  formal  one,  merely  connoting  a contrast  and  hence
merely  provisional.  It  has  no  longer  any  particular  aptness
when  once  we  have  succeeded  in  coming  to  an  understanding
of  the  way  in  which  this  hidden  deep  affects  religion.  This
we  attempted  to  hint  and  suggest  in  the  ideograms  of  the
numinous.


CHAPTER  IX


MEANS  OF  EXPRESSION  OF  THE  NUMINOUS
1.  Direct  Means

It  may  serve  to  make  the  essential  nature  of  the  numinous
consciousness  clearer  if  we  call  to  mind  the  manner  in  which
it  expresses  itself  outwardly,  and  how  it  spreads  and  is  trans-
mitted from  mind  to  mind.  There  is,  of  course,  no  ‘trans-
mission 1 of  it  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word  ; it  cannot  be
‘ taught’,  it  must  be  ‘awakened'  from  the  spirit.  And  this
could  not  justly  be  asserted,  as  it  often  is,  of  religion  as
a whole  and  in  general,  for  in  religion  there  is  very  much  that
can  be  taught  — that  is,  handed  down  in  concepts  and  passed
on  in  school  instruction.  What  is  incapable  of  being  so
handed  down  is  this  numinous  basis  and  background  to
religion,  which  can  only  be  induced,  incited,  and  aroused.
This  is  least  of  all  possible  by  mere  verbal  phrase  or  external
symbol ; rather  we  must  have  recourse  to  the  way  all  other
mocds  and  feelings  are  transmitted,  to  a penetrative  imagina-
tive sympathy  with  what  passes  in  the  other  person's
mind.  More  of  the  experience  lives  in  reverent  attitude  and
gesture,  in  tone  and  voice  and  demeanour,  expressing  its
momentousness,  and  in  the  solemn  devotional  assembly  of
a congregation  at  prayer,  than  in  all  the  phrases  and  negative
nomenclature  which  we  have  found  to  designate  it.  Indeed,
these  never  give  a positive  suggestion  of  the  object  to  which
the  religious  consciousness  refers ; they  are  only  of  assistance
in  so  far  as  they  profess  to  indicate  an  object,  which  they  at
the  same  time  contrast  with  another,  at  once  distinct  from
and  inferior  to  it,  e.  g.  * the  invisible  \ * the  eternal  ’ (non-
temporal), ‘the  supernatural’,  ‘the  transcendent Or  they


MEANS  OF  EXPRESSION  OF  THE  NUMINOUS  63

are  simply  ideograms  for  the  unique  content  of  feeling,
ideograms  to  understand  which  a man  must  already  have  had
the  experience  himself.  Far  the  best  means  are  actual  * holy  *
situations  or  their  representation  in  description.  If  a man
does  not  feel  what  the  numinous  is,  when  he  reads  the  sixth
chapter  of  Isaiah,  then  no  ‘ preaching,  singing,  telling  *,  in
Luther's  phrase,  can  avail  him.  Little  of  it  can  usually  be
noticed  in  theory  and  dogma,  or  even  in  exhortation,  unless  it
is  actually  heard . Indeed  no  element  in  religion  needs  so
much  as  this  the  * viva  vox  ',  transmission  by  living  fellowship
and  the  inspiration  of  personal  contact.1

But  the  mere  word,  even  when  it  comes  as  a living  voice
is  powerless  without  the  * Spirit  in  the  heart  ’ of  the  hearer
to  move  him  to  apprehension.  And  this  Spirit,  this  inborn
capacity  to  receive  and  understand,  is  the  essential  thing.  If
that  is  there,  very  often  only  a very  small  incitement,  a very
remote  stimulus,  is  needed  to  arouse  the  numinous  conscious-
ness. It  is  indeed  astonishing  to  see  how  small  a stimulus
suffices — and  that  too  coming  sometimes  only  in  clumsy  and
bewildered  guise— to  raise  the  Spirit  of  itself  to  the  strongest
pitch  of  the  most  definitely  religious  excitement.  But  where
the  wind  of  the  Spirit  blows,  there  the  mere  ‘ rational  ’ terms
themselves  are  indued  with  power  to  arouse  the  feeling  of  the
‘ non-rational and  become  adequate  to  tune  the  mood  at
once  to  the  right  tone.  Here  ‘ schematization  ’ starts  at  once
and  needs  no  prompting.  He  who  ‘ in  the  Spirit  * reads  the
written  word  lives  in  the  numinous,  though  he  may  have
neither  notion  of  it  nor  name  for  it,  nay,  though  he  may  be
unable  to  analyse  any  feeling  of  his  own  and  so  make  explicit

1 Suso  says  of  the  transmission  of  the  mystical  experience : ‘One  thing
there  may  be  known  ; unlike  as  it  is,  when  a man  heareth  himself  a dulcet
instrument  of  strings  sweetly  sounding,  compared  to  whoso  but  heareth
tell  thereof,  even  so  are  the  words  which  are  received  in  the  purity  of
grace  and  flow  forth  out  of  a living  heart  by  a living  mouth  unlike  to
those  same  words  if  they  are  beheld  upon  the  dead  parchment.  . , . For
there  they  grow  cold,  I know  not  how,  and  wither  away  like  roses  that
have  been  plucked.  For  the  lovely  melody  that  above  all  toucheth  the
heart  is  then  quenched  to  silence  ; and  in  the  waste  places  of  the  withered
heart  are  they  then  received.’


64  MEANS  OF  EXPRESSION  OF  THE  NUMINOUS


to  himself  the  nature  of  that  numinous  strand  running  through
the  religious  experience.


2.  Indirect  Means

For  the  rest,  the  methods  by  which  the  numinous
feeling  is  presented  and  evoked  are  indirect;  i. e.  they
consist  in  those  means  by  which  we  express  kindred  and
similar  feelings  belonging  to  the  * natural  * sphere.  We  have
already  become  acquainted  with  these  feelings,  and  we  shall
recognize  them  at  once  if  we  consider  what  are  the  means  of
expression  which  religion  has  employed  in  all  ages  and  in
every  land.

One  of  the  most  primitive  of  these — which  is  later
more  and  more  felt  to  he  inadequate,  until  it  is  finally
altogether  discarded  as  * unworthy  ’ — is  quite  naturally  the
‘ fearful  * and  horrible,  and  even  at  times  the  revolting  and
the  loathsome.  Inasmuch  as  the  corresponding  feelings  are
closely  analogous  to  that  of  the  ‘tremendum’,  their  outlets
and  means  of  expression  may  become  indirect  modes  of
expi'essing  the  specific  ‘ numinous  awre  ’ that  cannot  be
expressed  directly.  And  so  it  comes  about  that  the  horrible
and  dreadful  character  of  primitive  images  and  pictures  of
gods,  which  seems  to  us  to-day  frequently  so  repellent,  has
even  yet  among  naive  and  primitive  natures — nay,  occasionally
even  among  ourselves — the  effect  of  arousing  genuine  feelings
of  authentic  religious  awe.  And,  vice  versa,  this  awe  operates
as  a supremely  potent  stimulus  to  express  the  element  of
terror  in  different  forms  of  imaginative  representation.  The
hard,  stern,  and  somewhat  grim  pictures  of  the  Madonna  in
ancient  Byzantine  art  attract  the  worship  of  many  Catholics
more  than  the  tender  charm  of  the  Madonnas  of  Raphael.
This  trait  is  most  signally  evident  in  the  case  of  certain  figures
of  gods  in  the  Indian  pantheon.  Durga,  the  f great  Mother ' of
Bengal,  whose  worship  can  appear  steeped  in  an  atmosphere
*of  profoundest  devotional  awe,  is  represented  in  the  orthodox
tradition  with  the  visage  of  a fiend.  And  this  same  blend-
ing of  appalling  frightfulness  and  most  exalted  holiness
can  perhaps  be  even  more  clearly  studied  in  the  eleventh  book


MEANS  OF  EXPRESSION  OF  THE  NUMINOUS  65


of  the  Bhagavad-Glta,1  in  which  Vishnu — who  is  yet  to  his
votaries  the  very  principle  of  goodness — displays  himself  to
Aryuna  in  the  true  height  of  his  divinity.  Here,  too,  the
mind  has  recourse  for  mode  of  expression  first  to  the  fearful
and  dreadful,  though  this  is  at  the  same  time  permeated  with
that  element  of  ‘ the  grand ’ to  which  we  next  turn.

This  mode  of  expression,  by  way  of  'grandeur*  or  ‘ sub-
limity*, is  found  on  higher  levels,  where  it  replaces  mere
‘terror*  and  ‘dread*.  We  meet  it  in  an  unsurpassable  form
in  the  sixth  chapter  of  Isaiah,  where  there  is  sublimity  alike
in  the  lofty  throne  and  the  sovereign  figure  of  God,  the  skirts
of  His  raiment  ‘ filling  the  temple  * and  the  solemn  majesty  of
the  attendant  angels  about  Him.  While  the  element  of
‘ dread  * is  gradually  overborne,  the  connexion  of  ‘ the  sub-
lime * and  ‘ the  holy  ’ becomes  firmly  established  as  a legi-
timate schematization  and  is  carried  on  into  the  highest
forms  of  religious  consciousness — a proof  that  there  exists
a hidden  kinship  between  the  numinous  and  the  sublime
which  is  something  more  than  a mere  analogy,  and  to  which
Kant’s  Critique  of  Judgement  bears  distant  witness.

So  far  we  have  been  concerned  with  that  element  or  factor  of
the  numinous  which  was  the  first  our  analysis  noted  and  which
we  proposed  to  name  symbolically  ‘ the  aweful  * ( tremendum ).
We  pass  now  to  consider  the  means  by  which  the  second —the
element  of  ‘ the  mysterious  * (mysterium) — is  expressed.  Here
we  light  upon  the  analogical  mode  of  manifestation  that  in  every
religion  occupies  a foremost  and  extraordinary  place,  and  the
theory  of  which  we  are  now  in  a position  to  give.  I refer  to
miracle . ‘Miracle  is  the  dearest  child  of  Faith’;  if  the
history  of  religions  had  not  already  taught  us  the  truth  of
Schiller’s  saying,  we  might  have  reached  it  by  anticipation
a priori  from  the  element  of  ‘ the  mysterious  ’,  as  already
shown.  Nothing  can  be  found  in  all  the  world  of  ‘natural’
feelings  bearing  so  immediate  an  analogy — mutatis  mutandis —
to  the  religious  consciousness  of  ineffable,  unutterable  mystery,

1 See  Appendix  II.  Nowhere  can  the  non-rational  element  of  opyfj  be
better  studied  than  in  this  chapter,  one  of  the  perfectly  classical  passages
for  the  theory  of  Religion.


66  MEANS  OF  EXPRESSION  OF  THE  NUMINOUS


the  ‘absolute  other’,  as  the  incomprehensible,  unwonted,
enigmatic  thing,  in  whatever  place  or  guise  it  may  confront
us.  This  will  be  all  the  more  true  if  the  uncomprehended
thing  is  something  at  once  mighty  and  fearful , for  then  there
is  a twofold  analogy  with  the  numinous — that  is  to  say,  an
analogy  not  only  with  the  ‘ mysterium  ’ aspect  of  it,  but  with
the  ‘ tremendum ’ aspect,  and  the  latter  again  in  the  two
directions  already  suggested  of  fearfulness  proper  and  sub -
limity.  This  exemplifies  the  general  truth  already  considered
that  any  form  of  the  numinous  consciousness  may  be  stirred
by  means  of  feelings  analogous  to  it  of  a ‘ natural  ’ kind,  and
then  itself  pass  over  into  these,  or,  more  properly,  be  replaced
by  them.  And  in  fact  this  is  everywhere  manifest  in  the
experience  of  man.  Whatever  has  loomed  upon  the  world  of
his  ordinary  concerns  as  something  terrifying  and  baffling  to  the
intellect ; whatever  among  natural  occurrences  or  events  in
the  human,  animal,  or  vegetable  kingdoms  has  set  him  astare
in  wonder  and  astonishment — such  things  have  ever  aroused
in  man,  and  become  endued  with,  the  ‘ daemonic  dread  ’ and
4 numinous  * feeling,  so  as  to  become  1 portents  \ 4 prodigies  *,
and  ‘marvels’.  Thus  and  only  thus  is  it  that  ‘the  miraculous’
rose.  And,  in  the  reverse  direction,  the  feeling  of  the  numen
as  ‘the  mysterious’  worked  as  a potent  stimulus  on  the
naive  imagination,  inciting  it  to  expect  miracles,  to  invent
them,  to  ‘ experience  ’ them,  to  recount  them,  just  as  before
the  felt  awefulness  of  the  numen  became  a stimulus  to
select  or  fashion  inventively,  as  a means  of  religious  < xpres-
sion,  images  of  fear  and  dread.  ‘The  mysterious’  became
an  untiring  impulse,  prompting  to  inexhaustible  invention
in  folk-tale  and  myth,  saga  and  legend,  permeating  ritual
and  the  forms  of  worship,  and  remaining  till  to-day  to  naive
minds,  whether  in  the  form  of  narrative  or  sacrament,  the
most  powerful  factor  that  keeps  the  religious  consciousness
alive.  But  here  too,  as  in  the  case  of  the  fearful  and  terrible,
progress  to  a higher  stage  of  development  shows  the  gradual
elimination  of  this  merely  external  analogue  to  the  numinous,
viz.  the  miraculous;  and  so  we  see  how,  on  the  more
enlightened  levels, 4 miracle  * begins  to  fade  away  ; how  Christ


MEANS  OF  EXPRESSION  OF  THE  NUMINOUS  67


is  at  one  with  Mohammed  and  Buddha  in  declining  the  role
of  mere  ‘ wonder-worker  ’ ; how  Luther  dismisses  the  ‘ out-
ward miracles  ’ disparagingly  as  'jugglery  ' or  ‘ apples  and  nuts
for  children  and  finally  how  the  ‘ supernaturalism  * of  miracle
is  purged  from  religion  as  something  that  is  only  an  imperfect
analogue  and  no  genuine  c schema  ' of  tlie  numinous.

There  are  other  manifestations  of  this  tendency  of  the
feeling  of  the  ‘ mysterious ' to  be  attracted  to  objects  and
aspects  of  experience  analogous  to  it  in  being  ‘uncompre-
hended *.  It  finds  its  most  unqualified  expression  in  the  spell
exercised  by  the  only  half  intelligible  or  wholly  unintelligible
language  of  devotion,  and  in  the  unquestionably  real  enhance-
ment of  the  awe  of  the  worshipper  which  this  produces.
Instances  of  this  are — the  ancient  traditional  expressions,
still  retained  despite  their  obscurity,  in  our  Bible  and  hym-
nals; the  special  emotional  virtue  attaching  to  words  like
Hallelujah,  Kyrie  eleison,  Selali,  just  because  they  are  ‘wholly
other  ’ and  convey  no  clear  meaning  ; the  Latin  in  the  service
of  the  Mass,  felt  by  the  Catholic  to  be,  not  a necessary  evil,
but  something  especially  holy ; the  Sanskrit  in  the  Buddhist
Mass  of  China  and  Japan  ; the  ‘language  of  the  gods  * in  the
ritual  of  sacrifice  in  Horner ; and  many  similar  cases.
Especially  noticeable  in  this  connexion  are  the  half-revealed,
half-concealed  and  esoteric  elements  in  the  Communion  Service,
in  the  Greek  Church  liturgy,  and  so  many  others ; we  can  see
here  one  factor  that  justifies  and  warrants  them.  And  the
same  is  true  of  the  remaining  portions  of  the  old  Mass  which
recur  in  the  Lutheran  ritual.  Just  because  their  design
shows  but  little  of  regularity  or  conceptual  arrangement,  they
preserve  in  themselves  far  more  of  the  spirit  of  worship  than
the  proposed  recastings  of  the  service  put  forward  by  the
most  recent  practical  reformers.  In  these  wTe  find  carefully
arranged  schemes  worked  out  with  the  balance  and  coherence
of  an  essay,  but  nothing  unaccountable,  and  for  that  very
reason  suggestive ; nothing  accidental,  and  for  that  very
reason  pregnant  in  meaning ; nothing  that  rises  from  the  deeps
below  consciousness  to  break  the  rounded  unity  of  the  wonted
disposition,  and  thereby  point  to  a unity  of  a higher  order—

F 2


68  MEANS  OF  EXPRESSION  OF  THE  NUMINOUS


in  a word,  little  that  is  really  spiritual.  All  the  cases  cited,
then,  have  one  and  the  same  point  of  agreement ; they  are  all
instances  of  the  analogy  to  ‘ the  mysterious  ’ afforded  by  that
which  is  not  wholly  understood,  unwonted  and  at  the  same
time  venerable  through  age  ; and  in  the  resemblance  they
present  to  the  'mysterious’  they  arouse  it  in  the  mind  by
a sort  of  ‘ anamnesis  ’ or  reminder,  and  at  the  same  time  con-
stitute its  outward  analogical  representation.

3.  Means  by  tvhieh  the  Numinous  is  expressed  in  Art

In  the  arts  nearly  every  where  the  most  effective  means  of
representing  the  numinous  is  ‘ the  sublime  \ This  is  especially
true  of  architecture,  in  which  it  would  appear  to  have  first
been  realized.  One  can  hardly  escape  the  idea  that  this  feeling
for  expression  must  have  begun  to  awaken  far  back  in  the
remote  Stone  Age.  The  motive  underlying  the  erection  of  those
gigantic  blocks  of  rock,  hewn  or  unworked,  single  monoliths
or  titanic  rings  of  sto;ne,  as  at  Stonehenge,  may  have  well  been
originally  to  localize  and  preserve  and,  as  it  were,  to  store  up
the  numen  in  solid  presence  by  magic ; but  the  change  to  the
motive  of  expression  must  have  been  from  the  outset  far  too
vividly  stimulated  not  to  occur  at  a very  early  date.  In  fact
the  bare  feeling  for  solemn  and  imposing  magnitude  and  for  the
pomp  of  sublime  pose  and  gesture  is  a fairly  elementary  one,
and  we  cannot  doubt  that  this  stage  had  been  reached  when
the  mastabas,  obelisks  and  pyramids  were  built  in  Egypt.  It
is  indeed  beyond  question  that  the  builders  of  these  Temples,
and  of  the  Sphinx  of  Gizeli,  which  set  the  feeling  of  the
sublime,  and  together  with  and  through  it  that  of  the  numinous,
throbbing  in  the  soul  almost  like  a mechanical  reflex,  must
themselves  have  been  conscious  of  this  effect  and  have  in-
tended it.

Further,  we  often  say  of  a building,  or  indeed  of  a song,
a formula,  a succession  of  gestures  or  musical  notes,  and  in
particular  of  certain  manifestations  of  ornamental  and  decora-
tive art,  symbols,  and  emblems,  that  they  make  a * downright
magical’  impression,  and  we  feel  we  can  detect  the  special
characteristic  of  this  ' magical  ’ note  in  art  with  fair  assurance


MEANS  OF  EXPRESSION  OF  THE  NUMINOUS  69


even  under  the  most  varying  conditions  and  in  the  most
diverse  relationships.  The  art  of  China,  Japan,  and  Tibet,
whose  specific  character  has  been  determined  by  Taoism  and
Buddhism,  surpasses  all  others  in  the  unusual  richness  and
depth  of  such  impressions  of  the  4 magical  *,  and  even  an  in-
expert observer  responds  to  them  readily.  The  designation
4 magical  * is  here  correct  even  from  the  historical  point
of  view,  since  the  origin  of  this  language  of  form  was
properly  magical  representations,  emblems,  formularies,  and
contrivances.  But  the  actual  impression  of  4 magic  ’ is  quite
independent  of  this  historical  bond  of  connexion  with  magical
practices.  It  occurs  even  when  nothing  is  known  of  the
latter;  nay,  in  that  case  it  comes  out  most  strongly  and
unbrokenly.  Beyond  dispute  art  has  here  a means  of  creating
a unique  impression — that  of  the  magical — apart  from  and
independent  of  reflection.  Now  the  magical  is  nothing  but
a suppressed  and  blurred  form  of  the  numinous,  a crude  form
of  it  which  great  art  purifies  and  ennobles.  In  great  art  the
point  is  reached  at  which  we  may  no  longer  speak  of  the
4 magical but  rather  are  confronted  with  the  numinous  itself,
with  all  its  impelling  motive  power,  transcending  reason,
expressed  in  sweeping  lines  and  rhythm.  In  no  art,  perhaps,
is  this  more  fully  realized  than  in  the  great  landscape  painting
and  religious  painting  of  China  in  the  classical  period  of  the
Tang  and  Sung  dynasties.  It  has  been  said  of  this  great  art :

‘These  works  arc  to  be  classed  with  the  profoundest  and
subliinest  of  the  creations  of  human  art.  The  spectator  who,
as  it  were,  immerses  himself  in  them  feels  behind  these  waters
and  clouds  and  mountains  the  mysterious  breath  of  the  primeval
Tao,  the  pulse  of  innermost  being.  Many  a mystery  lies  half-
concealed  and  half-revealed  in  these  pictures.  They  contain
the  knowledge  of  the  44  nothingness  ” and  the  44  void  ”,  of  the
44  Tao  ” of  heaven  and  earth,  which  is  also  the  Tao  of  the  human
heart.  And  so,  despite  their  perpetual  agitation,  they  seem
as  remotely  distant  and  as  profoundly  calm  as  though  they
drew  secret  breath  at  the  bottom  of  a sea/ 1

1 From  an  article  by  Otto  Fischer  on  Chinese  landscape  painting  in
Das  Kunstblait,  Jan.  1920.


70  MEANS  OF  EXPRESSION  OF  THE  NUMINOUS

To  us  of  the  West  the  Gothic  appears  as  the  most  numinous
of  all  types  of  art.  This  is  due  in  the  first  place  to  its
sublimity ; but  Worringer  in  his  work  Probleme  cler  Ootldk
has  done  a real  service  in  showing  that  the  peculiar  impressive-
ness of  Gothic  does  not  consist  in  its  sublimity  alone,  but
draws  upon  a strain  inherited  from  primitive  magic,  of  which
he  tries  to  show  the  historical  derivation.  To  Worringer,
then,  the  impression  Gothic  makes  is  one  of  magic ; and,  what-
ever may  be  said  of  his  historical  account  of  the  matter,  it  is
certain  that  in  this  at  least  he  is  on  the  right  track.  Gothic
does  instil  a spell  that  is  more  than  the  effect  of  sublimity.
But  * magic  ’ is  too  low  a word : the  tower  of  the  Cathedral  of
Ulm  is  emphatically  not 4 magical  \ it  is  numinous.  And  the
difference  between  the  numinous  and  the  merely  magical  can
nowhci'e  be  felt  more  clearly  than  in  the  splendid  plate
Worringer  gives  in  his  book  of  this  marvellous  work  of  archi-
tecture. But  when  this  is  said,  we  may  still  keep  the  word
‘ magic  * in  use  to  denote  the  style  and  means  of  artistic
expression  by  which  the  impression  of  the  numinous  comes
into  being,  y

But  in  neither  the  sublime  nor  the  magical,  effective  as
they  are,  has  art  more  than  an  indirect  means  of  representing
the  numinous.  Of^directer  methods  our  Western  art  has  only
two,  and  they  are  in  a noteworthy  way  negative,  viz.  darkness
and  silence.  The  darkness  must  be  such  as  is  enhanced  and
made  all  the  more  perceptible  by  contrast  with  some  last
vestige  of  brightness,  which  it  is,  as  it  were,  on  the  point  of
extinguishing ; hence  the  ‘ mystical  * effect  begins  wTith  semi-
darkness. Its  impression  is  rendered  complete  if  the  factor  of
the  * sublime  ’ comes  to  unite  with  and  supplement  it.  The
semi-darkness  that  glimmers  in  vaulted  halls,  or  beneath  the
branches  of  a lofty  forest  glade,  strangely  quickened  and
stirred  by  the  mysterious  play  of  half-lights,  has  always
spoken  eloquently  to  the  soul,  and  the  builders  of  temples,
mosques,  and  churches  have  made  full  use  of  it.

Silence  is  what  corresponds  to  this  in  the  language  of  musical
sounds.  4 Yahweh  is  in  His  holy  Temple,  let  all  the  earth  keep
silence  before  Him.’  (Habakkuk,  ii.  20.)  Neither  we  nor


MEANS  OF  EXPRESSION  OF  THE  NUMINOUS  71


(probably)  the  prophet  any  longer  bear  in  mind  that  this
‘keeping  silence*  (as  evcj>r]fjL€?i/  in  Greek),  if  regarded  from
the  historical,  ‘ genetic  * standpoint,  springs  from  the  fear  of
using  words  of  evil  omen,  which  therefore  prefers  to  be
altogether  speechless.  It  is  the  same  with  Tersteegen  in  his
‘God  is  present,  let  all  in  us  be  silent \ With  prophet  and
psalmist  and  poet  we  feel  the  necessity  of  silence  from  another
and  quite  independent  motive.  It  is  a spontaneous  reaction
to  the  feeling  of  the  actual  ‘ numen  praesens  \ Once  again,
what  is  found  coming  upon  the  scene  at  a higher  level  of
evolution  cannot  be  explained  by  merely  interpolating  links
in  a ‘ historico-genetic  ’ chain  of  development ; and  the  Psalmist
and  Tersteegen  and  even  we  ourselves  are  at  least  as  interesting
subjects  for  the  analysis  of  the  psychologist  of  religion  as  are
the  ‘ Primitives  \ with  their  habitual  practice  of  ev^rj/xia,  the
silence  that  merely  avoids  words  of  ill  augury.

Besides  Silence  and  Darkness  oriental  art  knows  a third
direct  means  for  producing  a strongly  numinous  impression,  to
wit,  emptiness  and  empty  distances.  Empty  distance,  remote
vacancy,  is,  as  it  were,  the  sublime  in  the  horizontal.  The
wide-stretching  desert,  the  boundless  uniformity  of  the  steppe,
have  real  sublimity,  and  even  in  us  Westerners  they  set
vibrating  chords  of  the  numinous  along  with  the  note  of  the
sublime,  according  to  the  principle  of  the  association  of
feelings.  Chinese  architecture,  which  is  essentially  an  art  in
the  laying  out  and  grouping  of  buildings,  makes  a wise  and
very  striking  use  of  this  fact.  It  does  not  achieve  the
impression  of  solemnity  by  lofty  vaulted  halls  or  imposing
altitudes,  but  nothing  could  well  be  more  solemn  than  the
silent  amplitude  of  the  enclosed  spaces,  courtyards,  and  vesti-
bules which  it  employs.  The  imperial  tombs  of  the  Ming
emperors  at  Nanking  and  Peking  are,  perhaps,  the  strongest
example  of  this,  including,  as  they  do,  in  their  plan  the  empty
distances  of  an  entire  landscape.  Still  more  interesting  is  the
part  played  by  the  factor  of  void  or  emptiness  in  Chinese
painting.  There  it  has  almost  become  a special  art  to  paint
empty  space,  to  make  it  palpable,  and  to  develop  variations
upon  this  singular  theme.  Not  only  are  there  pictures  upon


72  MEANS  OF  EXPRESSION  OF  THE  NUMINOUS

which  * almost  nothing  * is  painted,  not  only  is  it  an  essential
feature  of  their  style  to  make  the  strongest  impression  with
the  fewest  strokes  and  the  scantiest  means,  but  there  are  very
many  pictures— especially  such  as  are  connected  with  con-
templation— which  impress  the  observer  with  the  feeling  that
the  void  itself  is  depicted  as  a subject,  is  indeed  the  main
subject  of  the  picture.  We  can  only  understand  this  by
recalling  what  was  said  above  on  the  4 nothingness  ’ and  the
‘ void  * of  the  mystics  and  on  the  enchantment  and  spell
exercised  by  the  1 negative  hymns  \ For  4 Void  ’ is,  like  Dark-
ness and  Silence,  a negation,  but  a negation  that  does  away
with  every  4 this  ’ and  4 here  in  order  that  the  4 wholly  other 9
may  become  actual.

Not  even  music,  which  else  can  give  such  manifold  expression
to  all  the  feelings  of  the  mind,  has  any  positive  way  to  express
4 the  holy  \ Even  the  most  consummate  Mass-music  can  only
give  utterance  to  the  holiest,  most  4 numinous ' moment  in
the  Mass — the  moment  of  transubstantiation — by  sinking  into
stillness : no  mere  momentary  pause,  but  an  absolute  cessation
of  sound  long  enough  for  us  to  4 hear  the  Silence  ’ itself ; and
no  devotional  moment  in  the  whole  Mass  approximates  in
impressiveness  to  this  4 keeping  silence  before  the  Lord  \ It  is
instructive  to  submit  Bach’s  Mass  in  B minor  to  the  test  in
this  matter.  Its  mystical  portion  ris  the  4 Incarnatus ’ in  the
Credo,  and  there  the  effect  is  due  to  the  faint,  whispering,
lingering  sequence  in  the  fugue  structure,  dying  away
pianissimo.  The  held  breath  and  hushed  sound  of  the  passage,
its  weird  cadences,  sinking  away  in  lessened  thirds,  its  pauses
and  syncopations,  and  its  rise  and  fall  in  astonishing  semi-
tones, which  render  so  well  the  sense  of  awe-struck  wonder —
all  this  serves  to  express  the  mysterium  by  way  of  intimation,
rather  than  in  forthright  utterance.  And  by  this  means  Bach
attains  his  aim  here  far  better  than  in  the  4 Sanctus  \ This
latter  is  indeed  an  incomparably  successful  expression  of  Him,
whose  is  4 the  power  and  the  glory  \ an  enraptured  and
triumphant  choric  hymn  to  perfect  and  absolute  sovereignty.
But  it  is  very  far  distant  from  the  mood  of  the  text  that
accompanies  the  music,  which  is  taken  from  Isaiah  vi,  and  which


MEANS  OF  EXPRESSION  OF  THE  NUMINOUS  73


the  composer  should  have  interpreted  in  accordance  with  that
passage  as  a whole.  No  one  would  gather  from  this  magnifi-
cent chorus  that  the  Seraphim  covered  their  faces  with  two
of  their  wings.1  In  this  point  Mendelssohn  shows  very  fine
sensibility  in  his  musical  setting  of  Psalm  ii  at  the  words
(v.  11) : ‘ Serve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and  rejoice  with  trembling.’
And  here  too  the  matter  is  expressed  less  in  the  music  itself
than  in  the  way  the  music  is  restrained  and  repressed — one
might  almost  say,  abashed— as  the  Cathedral  choir  at  Berlin  ^o
well  knows  how  to  render  it.  And,  if  a final  example  may  be
cited,  the 4 Popule  meus 9 of  Thomas  Luiz  gets  as  near  to  the  heart
of  the  matter  as  any  music  can.  In  this  the  first  chorus  sings  the
first  words  of  the  € Trisagion  ’ : ‘ Hagios,  ho  tlieos,  hagios  ischyros,
hagios  athanatos  and  the  second  chorus  sings  in  response  the
Latin  rendering  of  the  words : ‘ Sanctus  deus,  sanctus  fortis,
sanctus  immortalis’,  each  Chorus  thrilling  with  a sort  of  muffled
tremor.  But  the  Trisagion  itself,  sung  pianissimo  by  singers
kept  out  of  sight  far  at  the  back,  is  like  a whisper  floating
down  through  space,  and  is  assuredly  a consummate  reproduc-
tion of  the  scene  in  the  vision  of  Isaiah.

1 The  Jewish  tradition  has  been,  however,  very  well  aware  of  the  import
of  the  matter.  In  the  splendid  New  Year's  day  Hymn  of  Melek  Elyon
the  words  run : ‘ All  the  mighty  ones  on  high  whisper  low : Yahweh  is
King.’


CHAPTER  X


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT

While  the  feelings  of  the  non-rational  and  numinous
constitute  a vital  factor  in  every  form  religion  may  take,
they  are  pre-eminently  in  evidence  in  Semitic  religion  and
most  of  all  in  the  religion  of  the  Bible.  Here  Mystery  lives
and  moves  in  all  its  potency.  It  is  present  in  the  ideas  of
the  daemonic  and  angelic  world,  which,  as  a ‘ wholly  other  \
surrounds,  transcends,  and  permeates  this  world  of  ours  ; it
is  potent  in  the  Biblical  eschatology  and  the  ideal  of  a ‘ king-
dom of  God ' contrasted  with  the  natural  order,  now  as  being
future  in  time,  now  as  being  eternal,  but  always  as  the  down-
right marvellous  and  ‘ other  ’ ; and  finally  it  impresses  itself
on  the  character  of  Yahweh  and  Elohim — that  God  who  is
nevertheless  the  ‘Heavenly  Father 1 of  Jesus  and  as  such
* fulfils  *,  not  loses,  his  character  as  Yahweh.

The  lower  stage  of  numinous  consciousness,  viz.  daemonic
dread,  has  already  been  long  superseded  by  the  time  we  reach
the  Prophets  and  Psalmists.  But  there  are  not  wanting
occasional  echoes  of  it,  found  especially  in  the  earlier  narra-
tive literature.  The  story  in  Exodus  iv.  24,  of  how  Yahweh
in  his  opyrj  met  Moses  by  the  way  ‘ and  sought  to  kill  him  *,
still  bears  this  ‘ daemonic  ’ character  strongly,  and  the  tale
leaves  us  almost  with  the  suggestion  of  a ghostly  apparition.
And  from  the  standpoint  of  the  more  highly  developed  ‘ fear
of  God  * one  might  easily  get  from  this  and  similar  stories
the  impression  that  this  is  not  yet  religion  at  all,  but  a sort
of  pre-religious,  vulgar  fear  of  demons  or  the  like.  That
would,  however,  be  a misconception ; a ‘ vulgar  fear  of  demons  ’
would  refer  to  a ‘ demon  * in  the  narrower  sense  of  the  word,
in  which  it  is  a synonym  for  devil,  fiend,  or  goblin,  and  is
contrasted  with  the  divine.  But  * demon  9 in  this  sense  has


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT  75


not  been,  any  more  than  ‘ ghost  * or  ‘ spectre  *,  a point  in  the
transition,  or,  if  it  be  preferred,  a link  in  the  chain  of  develop-
ment which  religious  consciousness  has  undergone.  Both
‘demon*  (=  fiend)  and  ‘spectre*  are,  so  to  speak,  offshoots
from  the  true  line  of  progress,  spurious  fabrications  of  the
fancy  accompanying  the  numinous  feeling.  We  must  carefully
distinguish  from  such  a ‘ demon  ’ the  Sai/ioou  or  ‘ daemon  * in
the  more  general  sense  of  the  word,  which,  if  it  is  not  yet
itself  a ‘ god  *,  is  still  less  an  anti-god,  but  must  be  termed
a • pre-god  *,  the  numen  at  a lower  stage,  in  which  it  is  still
trammelled  and  suppressed,  but  out  of  which  the  ‘ god  *
gradually  grows  to  more  and  more  lofty  manifestations.  This
is  the  phase  whose  after-effects  can  be  detected  in  these
ancient  stories.

It  will  be  worth  while  to  consider  this  matter  further.
Two  things  may  help  to  an  understanding  of  the  real  relation
with  which  we  are  here  concerned.  First,  we  may  refer  back
to  what  was  said  on  an  earlier  page  upon  the  capacity  of  ‘ the
dreadful  * and  ‘ terrible  * in  general  to  attract  and  arouse,  and
also  to  express,  the  true  ‘ numinous  * consciousness  or  emotion.
In  the  second  place,  we  may  refer  to  the  parallel  case  of
music.  A man  with  a pronounced  musical  faculty,  so  long  as
he  is  a mere  raw  tyro,  may  be  enraptured  by  the  sound  of  the
bagpipes  or  the  hurdy-gurdy,  though  perhaps  both  become
intolerable  to  him  when  his  musical  education  has  been  com-
pleted. But,  if  lie  then  recalls  the  qualitative  character  of  his
earlier  musical  experience  and  compares  it  with  his  present
one,  he  will  have  to  admit  that,  in  both,  one  and  the  same  side
of  his  mind  is  functioning,  and  that  what  has  taken  place  in
the  rise  of  his  feeling  for  music  to  a more  elevated  form
is  no  transition  to  something  different  in  kind,  but  a process
which  we  may  call  ‘ development  * or  ‘ growth  to  maturity  *,
but  can  hardly  further  specify.  Were  we  to  hear  to-day
the  music  of  Confucius,  it  would  probably  be  to  us  merely
a succession  of  queer  noises.  Yet  already  Confucius  speaks
of  the  power  of  music  on  the  mind  in  a way  we  moderns
cannot  better,  and  touches  upon  just  those  elements  which  we
also  must  recognize  in  the  experience  of  music.  But  the  most


76  THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT


striking  consideration  in  this  regard  is  the  way  in  which
some  savage  tribes  are  endowed  with  a capacity  for  a ready
appreciation  of  our  music,  which  they  grasp  quickly,  practise
assiduously,  and  enjoy  intensely,  when  it  is  brought  before
them.  This  endowment  did  not  first  enter  their  minds
at  the  moment  they  heard  the  music  by  a ‘ heterogony ',
‘epigenesis’,  or  other  miracle;  it  simply  existed  all  the  time
as  a natural  predisposition  or  latent  capacity.  It  was  aroused
and  began  to  develop  as  soon  as  the  proper  incitement  came
to  stimulate  it,  but  to  the  end  it  was  yet  the  selfsame  disposi-
tion that  had  been  formerly  excited  to  such  primitive  and
crude  manifestations.  This  ‘ crude  ',  ‘ primitive  ' form  of  music
is  often  almost  or  wholly  unrecognizable  as  real  music  by  our
developed  musical  taste,  although  it  was  the  manifestation  of
the  same  impulse  and  the  same  element  of  our  psychical
nature.  Now  it  is  exactly  a parallel  case  when  the  ‘ God-
fearing ’ man  of  to-day  finds  it  hard  to  detect  in  the  narrative
of  Exodus  iv  that  which  is  akin  to  his  own  religious  experience,
or  misjudges  it  altogether.  All  this  involves  a point  of  view
which  should  be  taken  into  consideration  more  generally  with
respect  to  the  religion  of  ‘ primitive  man  though  naturally
great  caution  should  be  used  in  applying  it,  seeing  that  very
mistaken  conclusions  can  be  drawn  from  it  and  there  is  a
real  danger  of  confounding  the  lower  with  the  higher  levels
of  development  and  of  making  too  little  of  the  interval
between  them.  However,  it  is  still  more  dangerous  to  exclude
this  point  of  view  altogether,  as  is  unfortunately  very  com-
monly done.1

Recent  research  has  sought  to  discover  a difference  in  char-
acter between  Yahweh,  the  austere  and  stern,  and  Elohim,  the
familiar,  patriarchal  God,  and  there  is  something  very  illumi-
nating in  the  suggestion.  Soderblom’s  supposition2  is  that
the  notion  of  Yahweh  had  its  point  of  origin  in  earlier  ‘ ani-
mistic' ideas.  I do  not  dispute  the  importance  of  such
‘animistic'  ideas  in  the  religious  evolutionary  process;  in

1 Tn  this  regard  Mr.  Marett  in  particular  has  important  and  novel
considerations  to  offer.

8 SOderblom,  Das  Werden  des  Gottesglaubeas , 1916,  pp.  297  ff.


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT  77


fact,  I should  go  even  farther  than  Soderblom  in  that  respect,
for  he  would  explain  them  as  a sort  of  primitive  ‘philosophy’,
and  therefore  has  to  exclude  them  altogether  from  the  domain
of  genuinely  religious  imagination.  It  would  be  perfectly
compatible  with  my  own  view  to  hold  that  where  ideas  of
an  animistic  character  had  been  framed  they  could  serve  as
an  important  link  in  the  ‘chain  of  stimulation  ’ by  which  true
numinous  consciousness  is  aroused  (namely,  in  so  far  as  they
served  to  disengage  and  free  the  obscure  feeling-element  of
‘ existent  being  latent  in  it).  But  what  distinguishes  Yah  well
from  El-Slmddai-Elohini  is  not  that  the  former  is  an  ‘ anima
but  (and  the  distinction  may  be  applied  to  differentiate  all
god-types)  that,  whereas  in  Yahweh  the  numinous  preponder-
ates over  the  familiar  ‘ rational 9 character,  in  Elohim  the
rational  aspect  outweighs  the  numinous.  1 Outweighs  ’ is  as
much  as  we  can  say,  for  in  Elohim  too  the  numinous  element
is  certainly  present ; Elohim  is,  for  instance,  the  subject  of  the
genuinely  numinous  narrative  of  the  theopliany  in  the  burning
bush,  with  the  characteristic  verse  (Exodus  iii.  6) : ‘ And  Moses
hid  his  face ; for  he  was  afraid  to  look  upon  God.’

For  the  copious  and  diverse  characteristics  of  the  idea  of
God  of  the  ancient  Israelites  which  might  be  instanced  here
the  reader  is  referred  to  works  upon  the  history  of  religion.1
The  noble  religion  of  Moses  marks  the  beginning  of  a process
which  from  that  point  onward  proceeds  with  ever  increasing
momentum,  by  which  ‘ the  numinous  ’ is  throughout  rational-
ized and  moralized,  i.e.  charged  with  ethical  import,  until  it
becomes  ‘ the  holy  * in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word.  The
culmination  of  the  process  is  found  in  the  Prophets  and  in
the  Gospels.  And  it  is  in  this  that  the  special  nobility  of
the  religion  revealed  to  us  by  the  Bible  is  to  be  found,  which,
when  the  stage  represented  by  the  deutero-Isaiah  is  reached,
justifies  its  claim  to  be  a universal  world-religion.  Here  is
to  be  found  its  manifest  superiority  over,  e.  g.,  Islam,  in  which
Allah  is  mere  * numen  \ and  is  in  fact  precisely  Yahweh  in  his
pre-Mosaic  form  and  upon  a larger  scale.  But  this  moralizing

1 They  are  given  exhaustively  in  the  Encyclopaedia  Die  Religion  in
Oeschichte  und  Gegemcati,  vol.  ii,  pp.  1530,  2036.


78  THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT


and  rationalizing  process  does  not  mean  that  the  numinous
itself  has  been  overcome,  but  merely  that  its  preponderance  has
been  overcome.  The  numinous  is  at  once  the  basis  upon  which
and  the  setting  within  which  the  ethical  and  rational  meaning
is  consummated.

The  capital  instance  of  the  intimate  mutual  interpenetration
of  the  numinous  with  the  rational  and  moral  is  Isaiah.  The
note  struck  in  the  vision  of  his  call  is  the  keynote  of  his
entire  prophecy.  And  nothing  is  in  this  regard  more  signifi-
cant than  the  fact  that  it  is  in  Isaiah  that  the  expression
‘ the  Holy  One  of  Israel  * first  becomes  established  as  the
expression,  par  excellence , for  the  deity,  prevailing  over  all
others  by  its  mysterious  potency.  This  remains  so  in  the
writings  of  the  ‘deutero-Isaiah  who  follows  the  tradition  of
the  earlier  Isaiah.  Assuredly  in  deutero-Isaiah,  if  in  any
writer,  we  have  to  do  with  a God  whose  attributes  are  clear
to  conceptual  thought : omnipotence,  goodness,  wisdom,  truth ;
and  yet  all  the  time  these  are  attributes  of  ‘ the  Holy  One  *,
whose  strange  name  deutero-Isaiah  too  repeats  no  less  than
fifteen  times  and  always  in  passages  where  it  has  a special
impressiveness.

Related  expressions  akin  to  the  ‘ holiness  ’ of  Yahweh  are  His
* fury  \ His  ‘jealousy  *,  His  ‘ wrath  ’,  the  ‘ consuming  fire  *,  and
the  likev  The  import  of  them  all  is  not  only  the  all-requiting
righteousness  of  God,  not  even  merely  His  susceptibility  to
strong  and  living  emotions,  but  all  this  ever  enclosed  in  and
permeated  with  the  * awefulness  * and  the  ‘ majesty  *,  the
‘mystery1  and  the  ‘ augustness  of  His  non-rational  divine
nature.

And  this  holds  good,  also,  of  the  expression  * the  living  God  \
God’s  ‘ livingness  ’ is  perceptibly  akin  to  His  ‘jealousy  * and  is
manifested  in  and  through  this,  as  in  His  other  ‘passions*
generally.1  It  is  by  His  ‘life*  that  this  God  is  differ-

1 Cf.  Deut.  v.  26:  ‘For  who  is  there  of  all  flesh,  that  hath  heard  the
voice  of  the  living  God  speaking  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire,  as  we  have,
and  lived?'  Cf.  also  Josh.  iii.  10  ; 1 Sam.  xvii.  26,  36  ; 2 Kings  xix.  4;
Isa.  xxxvii.  4, 17  ; Jer.  x.  10  : ‘ He  is  the  living  God  : ...  at  His  wrath  the
earth  shall  tremble  and  the  nations  shall  not  be  able  to  abide  His  indigna •


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT  79


entiated  from  all  mere  ‘ World  Reason and  becomes  this
ultimately  non-rational  essence,  that  eludes  all  philosophic
treatment.  This  is  the  God  that  lives  in  the  consciousness  of
all  prophets  and  apostles  of  the  Old  and  the  New  Dispensa-
tion alike.  And  all  those  who  later  championed^  against  the
‘ God  of  philosophy  ’ the  ‘ living  God  ’ and  the  God  of  anger
and  love  and  the  emotions  have  unwittingly  been  defending
the  non-rational  core  of  the  Biblical  conception  of  God  from
all  excessive  rationalization.  And  so  far  they  were  right.
Where  they  were  wrong  and  sank  into  ‘ anthropomorphism  *
was  in  defending,  not  figurative  ‘ anger 9 and  4 emotion  \ but
literal  anger  and  emotion,  misconceiving  the  numinous  character
of  the  attributes  in  question  and  holding  them  simply  to  be
‘ natural 7 attributes,  taken  absolutely,  instead  of  realizing  that
they  can  only  be  admitted  as  figurative  indications  of  some-
thing essentially  non-rational  by  means  of  symbols  drawn  from
feelings  that  have  analogy  to  it.

We  find  the  power  of  the  numinous — in  its  phase  of  the
mysterious — to  excite  and  intensify  the  imagination  displayed
with  particular  vividness  in  Ezekiel.  Hei'e  are  to  be  classed
Ezekiel's  dreams  and  parables  and  fanciful  delineation  of
God's  being  and  sovereign  state,  which  are,  as  it  were,  an
example  by  anticipation  of  the  later  more  spurious  sort  of
excitement  of  the  religious  impulse  to  the  mysterious,  leading
(in  accordance  with  analogies  already  expounded)  to  the
merely  strange,  the  extraordinary,  the  marvellous,  and  the
fantastic.  When  such  an  operation  of  the  religious  conscious-
ness works  itself  out  in  accordance  with  a wrong  analogy,  the
way  is  prepared  for  miracle  and  legend  and  the  whole  dream-

tion';  Jer.  xxiii.  36  ; 2 Macc.  vii.  33  ; Matt.  xxvi.  63  (the  adjuration  ‘by
the  living  God*,  the  God  of  terror  and  dread) ; and  Heb.  x.  31 : ‘ It  is  a
fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God.’  The  Old  Testa-
ment idea  of  the  terrible  ‘ living  ’ God  reaches  its  completion  in  the  ideas
of  the  ‘avenging  God’,  of  which  the  most  ruthless  expression  is  in  the
almost  appalling  image  of  the  treader  of  the  wine-press,  Jsa.  lxiii.  3 : ‘ I will
tread  them  in  mine  anger,  and  trample  them  in  my  fury  ; and  their  blood
shall  be  sprinkled  upon  my  garments  and  I will  stain  all  my  raiment/
The  dreadful  image  recurs  in  the  New  Testament  in  Rev.  xix.  15  : * He
treadeth  the  wine-press  of  the  fierceness  and  wrath  of  Almighty  God/


80  THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT


world  of  pseudo-mysticism  ; and,  though  these  are  all  truly
enough  emanations  from  the  genuine  religious  experience,  they
are  emanations  broken  by  the  opaque,  dull  medium  through
which  they  pass,  a mere  substitute  for  the  genuine  thing,  and
they  end  ii^  a vulgar  rankness  of  growth  that  overspreads
the  pure  feeling  of  the  ‘mysterium  * as  it  really  is  and  chokes
its  direct  and  forthright  emotional  expression.

But,  if  Ezekiel  hardly  shows  the  numinous  moment  apart
from  an  admixture  of  excessive  fantasy  and  imagination,  the
same  is  not  true  of  the  Book  of  Job.  In  the  38th  chapter  of
Job  we  have  the  element  of  the  mysterious  displayed  in
rare  purity  and  completeness,  and  this  chapter  may  well  rank
among  the  most  remarkable  in  the  history  of  religion.  Job
lias  been  reasoning  witli  his  friends  against  Elohim,  and — as
far  as  concerns  them — ho  has  been  obviously  in  the  right.
They  are  compelled  to  be  dumb  before  him.  And  then  Elohim
Himself  appears  to  conduct  His  own  defence  in  person.  And
He  conducts  it  to  such  effect  that  Job  avows  himself  to  be
overpowered,  truly  and  rightly  overpowered,  not  merely
silenced  by  superior  strength.  Then  he  confesses : ‘ There-
fore I abhor  myself  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes/  That
is  an  admission  of  inward  convincement  and  conviction,
not  of  impotent  collapse  and  submission  to  merely  superior
power.  Nor  is  there  here  at  all  the  frame  of  mind  to  which
St.  Paul  now  and  then  gives  utterance;  e.g.  Bom.  ix.  20:

4 Shall  the  thing  formed  say  to  him  that  formed  it,  Why  hast
thou  made  me  thus  ? Hath  not  the  potter  power  over  the
clay,  of  the  same  lump  to  make  one  vessel  unto  honour,  and
another  unto  dishonour?’  To  interpret  the  passage  in  Job
thus  would  be  a misunderstanding  of  it.  This  chapter  does
not  proclaim,  as  Paul  docs,  the  renunciation  of,  the  realization
of  the  impossibility  of,  a ‘ theodicy  ’ ; rather,  it  aims  at  putting
forward  a real  theodicy  of  its  own,  and  a better  one  than  that
of  Job’s  friends;  a theodicy  able  to  convict  even  a Job,  and
not  only  to  convict  him,  but  utterly  to  still  every  inward
doubt  that  assailed  his  soul.  For  latent  in  the  weird  expe-
rience that  Job  underwent  in  the  revelation  of  Elohim  is
at  once  an  inward  relaxing  of  his  soul’s  anguish  and  an


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT  81


appeasement,  an  appeasement  which  would  alone  and  in  itself
perfectly  suffice  as  the  solution  of  the  problem  of  the  Book
of  Job,  even  without  Jobs  rehabilitation  in  chapter  xlii,
which  is  merely  j^later  addition  to  the  real  narrative.  But
what  is  this  strange  ( moment  * of  experience  that  here  operates
at  once  as  a vindication  of  God  to  Job  and  a reconciliation  of
Job  to  God  ?

In  the  words  put  into  the  mouth  of  Elohim  nearly  every  note
is  sounded  which  the  situation  may  prepare  one  to  expect
a priori : the  summofl8|$|fJob,  and  the  demonstration  of  God’s
overwhelming  power*  Pig  sublimity  and  greatness,  and  His
surpassing  wisdom.  Th^fest  would  yield  forthwith  a plausible
and  rational  solution  of  the  whole  problem,  if  only  the  argu-
ment were  here  completed  with  some  such  sentences  as : ‘ My
ways  are  higher  than  your  ways ; in  my  deeds  and  my  actions
I have  ends  that  you  understand  not  ’ ; viz.  the  testing  or  puri-
fication of  the  godly  man,  or  ends  that  concern  the  whole
universe  as  such,  into  which  the  single  man  must  fit  himself
with  all  his  sufferings.  If  you  start  from  rational  ideas  and
concepts,  you  absolutely  third  for  such  a conclusion  to  the  dis-
course. But  nothing  of  the  kind  follows;  nor  does  the  chapter
intend  at  all  to  suggest  such  teleological  reflections  or  solutions.
In  the  last  resort  it  relies  on  something  quite  different  from
anything  that  can  be  exhaustively  rendered  in  rational  con-
cepts, namely,  on  the  sheer  absolute  wondrousness  that
transcends  thought,  on  the  mysterinm , presented  in  its  pure,
non-rational  form.  All  the  glorious  examples  from  nature
speak  very  plainly  in  this  sense.  The  eagle,  that  ‘dwelleth
and  abideth  on  the  rock,  upon  the  crag  of  the  rock,  and  the
strong  place  \ whose  * eyes  behold  afar  off*  her  prey,  and
whose  4 young  ones  also  suck  up  blood,  and  where  the  slain
are,  there  is  she* — this  eagle  is  in  truth  no  evidence  for  the
teleological  wisdom  that  ‘ prepares  all  cunningly  and  well*,
but  is  rather  the  creature  of  strangeness  and  marvel , in  whom
the  wondrousness  of  its  creator  becomes  apparent.  And  the
same  is  true  of  the  ostrich  (xxxix.  13-18)  with  its  inexplicable
instincts.  The  ostrich  is  indeed,  as  here  depicted,  and  ' ration-
ally * considered,  a crucial  difficulty  rather  than  an  evidence  of

a


82  THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT

wisdom,  and  it  affords  singularly  little  help  if  we  are  seeking
purpose  in  nature:  ‘ which  leaveth  her  eggs  in  the  earth,
and  warmeth  them  in  the  dust,  and  forgetteth  that  the  foot
may  crush  them  or  that  the  wild  beast  may  break  them.
She  is  hardened  against  her  young  ones  as  though  they  were
not  hers:  her  labour  is  in  vain  without  fear;  because  God
hath  deprived  her  of  wisdom , neither  hath  he  imparted  to  her
understanding .*

It  is  the  same  with  the  4 wild  ass  * (verse  5)  and  the  unicorn
(verse  9).  These  are  beasts  whose  complete  4 dysteleology  *
or  negation  of  purposivencss  is  truly  magnificently  depicted ;
but,  nevertheless,  with  their  mysterious  instincts  and  the
riddle  of  their  generation,  this  very  negation  of  purpose
becomes  a thing  of  baffling  significance,  as  in  the  case  of  the
< wild  goat*  (verse  1)  and  the  hind.  The  ‘ wisdom ’ of  the  in-
ward parts  (xxxviii.  36),  and  the  ‘ knowledge  ’ of  dayspring,
winds,  and  clouds,  with  the  mysterious  ways  in  which  they
come  and  go,  arise  and  vanish,  shift  and  veer  and  re-form  ;
and  the  wonderful  Pleiades  aloft  in  heaven,  with  Orion  and
‘Arcturus  and  his  sons’— these  serve  but  to  emphasize  the
same  lesson.  It  is  conjectured  that  the  descriptions  of  the
hippopotamus  (behemoth)  and  crocodile  (leviathan)  in  xl.  15  ff.
are  a later  interpolation.  This  may  well  be  the  fact ; but,
if  so,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  interpolator  lias  felt  the
point  of  the  entire  section  extraordinarily  well.  He  only
brings  to  its  grossest  expression  the  thought  intended  by
all  the  other  examples  of  animals ; they  gave  portents  only,
he  gives  us  ‘monsters’ — but  ‘the  monstrous’  is  just  the
‘ mysterious  ’ in  a gross  form.  Assuredly  these  beasts  would
be  the  most  unfortunate  examples  that  one  could  hit  upon
if  searching  for  evidences  of  the  purposefulness  of  the  divine
‘ wisdom  ’.  But  they,  no  less  than  all  the  previous  examples
and  the  whole  context,  tenor,  and  sense  of  the  entire  passage,
do  express  in  masterly  fashion  the  downright  stupendousness,
the  wellnigh  daemonic  and  wholly  incomprehensible  character
of  the  eternal  creative  power;  how,  incalculable  and  ‘ wholly
other  *,  it  mocks  at  all  conceiving  but  can  yet  stir  the  mind
to  its  depths,  fascinate  and  overbrim  the  heart.  What  is


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT  83
+

meant  is  the  mysterium  not  as  mysterious  simply,  but  at
the  same  time  also  as  ‘ fascinating', and  ‘august1;  and  here,
too,  these  latter  meanings  live,  not  in  any  explicit  con-
cepts, but  in  the  tone,  the  enthusiasm,  in  the  very  rhythm
of  the  entire  exposition.  And  here  is  indeed  the  point  of
the  whole  passage,  comprising  alike  the  theodicy  and  the
appeasement  and  calming  of  Job’s  soul.  The  mysterium,
simply  as  such,  would  merely  (as  discussed  above)  be  a part
of  the  ‘absolute  inconceivability’  of  the  numen,  and  that,
though  it  might  strike  Job  utterly  dumb,  could  not  convict
him  inwardly.  That  of  which  we  are  conscious  is  rather  an
intrinsic  value  in  the  incomprehensible — a value  inexpressible,
positive,  and  ‘fascinating’.  This  is  incommensurable  with
thoughts  of  rational  human  teleology  and  is  not  assimilated
to  them  : it  remains  in  all  its  mystery.  But  it  is  as  it  becomes
felt  in  consciousness  that  Elohim  is  justified  and  at  the  same*
time  Job’s  soul  brought  to  peace.


A very  real  parallel  to  this  experience  of  Job  is  to  be  found
in  the  work  of  a writer  of  our  own  day,  which  is  not  the  less
deeply  impressive  because  it  is  found  in  the  fictitious  context
of  a novel.  Max  Eyth  recounts  in  his  story  Be rufo-Tr affile
(in  the  collection  IH liter  Pfl-ug  nntl  Sehraubslork)  the  build-
ing of  the  mighty  bridge  over  the  estuary  of  the  Ennolmcht.
The  most  profound  and  thorough  labour  of  the  intellect,  the
most  assiduous  and  devoted  professional  toil,  had  gone  to  the
construction  of  the  great  edifice,  making  it  in  all  its  signifi-
cance and  purposefulness  a marvel  of  human  achievement.  In
spite  of  endless  difficulties  and  gigantic  obstacles,  the  bridge
is  at  length  finished,  and  stands  defying  wind  and  waves.
Then  there  comes  a raging  cyclone,  and  building  and  builder
are  swept  into  the  deep.  Utter  meaninglessness  seems  to
triumph  over  richest  significance,  blind  ‘ destiny  ’ seems  to
stride  on  its  way  over  prostrate  virtue  and  merit.  The
narrator  tells  how  lie  visits  the  scene  of  the  tragedy  and
returns  again.

‘ When  we  got  to  the  end  of  the  bridge,  there  was  hardly

a 2


84  THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT


a breath  of  wind ; high  above,  the  sky  showed  blue-green,
and  with  an  eerie  brightness.  Behind  us,  like  a great  open
grave,  lay  the  Ennobucht.  The  Lord  of  life  and  death  hovered
over  the  waters  in  silent  majesty.  We  felt  His  presence,  as
one  feels  one's  own  hand.  And  the  old  man  and  I knelt  down
before  the  open  grave  and  before  Him/

Why  did  they  kneel  ? Why  did  they  feel  constrained  to  do
so  ? One  docs  not  kneel  before  a cyclone  or  the  blind  forces  of
nature,  nor  even  before  Omnipotence  merely  as  such.  But
one  does  kneel  before  the  wholly  uncomprehended  Mystery,
revealed  yet  unrevealed,  and  one's  soul  is  stilled  by  feeling
the  way  of  its  working,  and  therein  its  justification.

It  would  be  possible  to  cite  many  other  traces  of  numinous
feeling  in  the  Old  Testament.  But  they  have  already  been
admirably  put  together  by  one  who  wrote  sixteen  hundred
years  ago  in  the  same  sense  as  we  ‘ upon  the  non-rational
This  was  Chrysostom.  We  shall  be  considering  him  later  on
and  will  not  anticipate  farther  in  this  place.1


1 fcSee  Appendix  I.


CHAPTER  XI


TIIE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT

In  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  we  see  the  consummation  of  that
process  tending  to  rationalize,  moralize,  aud  humanize  the
idea  of  God,  which  began  with  the  earliest  period  of  the  old
Hebrew  tradition  and  became  specially  prominent  as  a living
factor  in  the  Prophets  and  the  Psalms,  continually  bringing
the  apprehension  of  the  numinous  to  a richer  fulfilment  by
recognizing  in  it  attributes  of  clear  and  profound  value  for
the  reason.  The  result  was  the  faith  in  ‘the  fatherhood  of
God  J in  that  unsurpassable  form  in  which  it  is  peculiar  to
Christianity.

But  in  this  case,  too,  it  would  be  a mistake  to  think  that
such  a rationalization  means  that  ‘the  numinous  * is  excluded
or  superseded.  That  is  a misunderstanding  into  which  we
are  led  by  the  all  too  plausible  delineations  of  Jesus’s  faith  in
God  as  Father 9 now  prevalent,  but  it  certainly  misrepresents
the  attitude  of  the  first  Christian  congregations.  The  error
is  only  possible  if  we  disregard  in  the  message  of  Christ  that
which  it  really  purports  to  be,  first,  last,  and  all  the  time,  viz.
the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom.  As  against  all  rationalizing
attempts  to  tone  it  down  into  something  less  startling,  the
most  recent  research  shows  quite  decisively  that  the  ‘ kingdom  ’
is  just  greatness  and  marvel  absolute,  the  1 wholly  other  *
‘ heavenly  ’ thing,  set  in  contrast  to  the  world  of  here  and
now,  ‘ the  mysterious  * itself  in  its  dual  character  as  awe-
compelling  yet  all-attracting,  glimmering  in  an  atmosphere  of
genuine  ‘religious  awe As  such,  it  sheds  a colour,  a mood,
a tone,  upon  whatever  stands  in  relation  to  it,  upon  the  men


86  THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT


who  proclaim  it  or  prepare  for  it,  upon  the  life  and  practice
that  are  its  precondition,  upon  the  tidings  of  it,  upon  the
congregation  of  those  who  await  it  and  attain  to  it.  All  is
made  into  a ‘mystery’ — all,  that  is,  becomes  ‘numinous’.
This  is  shown  most  strikingly  in  the  name  by  which  the
company  of  the  disciples  call  themselves  collectively  and  each
other  individually,  the  numinous  ‘ technical  term  ’ ol  aytoi ,
the  holy  ones  or  ‘the  Saints’.  It  is  manifest  at  once  that
this  does  not  mean  ‘the  morally  perfect*  people:  it  means
the  people  who  participate  in  the  mystery  of  the  final  Day.
Their  title  is  the  clear  and  unambiguous  antithesis  to  the
term  ‘ the  profane  which  wc  have  already  met  with.  For
this  reason  the  early  Christians  are  able  later  to  call  them-
selves also  actually  a ‘ priestly  ’—or  sacerdotal — ‘ people  ’,  that
is,  a group  of  ‘consecrated’  persons.  But  the  precondition
of  all  this  was  given  with  the  Gospel  itself  and  its  claim  to  be
the  preaching  of  the  coming  Kingdom.

What  of  the  lord  of  this  kingdom,  the  ‘heavenly  Father’?
As  its  lord  He  is  not  less,  but  far  more  ‘holy’,  ‘numinous’,
mysterious,  ‘qadosh’,  a yios,  ‘sacer’,  and  ‘sanctus’  than  His
kingdom.  He  is  all  these  in  an  absolute  degree,  and  in  this
aspect  of  His  nature  lie  represents  the  sublimation  and  the
consummation  of  all  that  the  old  Covenant  had  grasped  by  way
of  ‘ creature-consciousness  ’,  ‘ holy  awe  ’,  and  the  like.  Not  to
realize  this  is  to  turn  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  into  a mere  idyll.
That  these  moments  do  not  occur  severally  in  Jesus’s  message
in  the  form  of  special  ‘doctrines’  is  due  to  the  circumstances
already  mentioned  more  than  once.  But  apart  from  the
inherent  impossibility  of  teaching  them,  how  could  He  have
had  need  of  ‘teaching’  what  was  simply  the  primary,  self-
evident  fact  to  every  Jew,  and  especially  to  every  believer  in
4 the  Kingdom  ’,  namely,  that  God  was  ‘ the  Holy  One  in  Israel  ’?
Christ  had  rather  to  teach  and  to  proclaim  what  was  not
self-evident  to  the  Jews,  but  His  own  original  discovery  and
revelation,  that  this  very  ‘ Holy  One*  is  a ‘heavenly  Father*.
This  point  of  view  necessarily  occupied  the  whole  of  His
‘ teaching  *,  and  all  the  more  so  because  it  was  the  point  of
view  thrust  sharply  into  the  foreground  by  the  two  opposed


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  87

influences  of  His  time,  against  both  of  which  the  Gospel  came
historically  as  a reaction.  On  the  one  hand  was  Pharisaism,
with  its  servitude  to  Law ; on  the  other,  John  the  Baptist,
with  his  harsh,  ascetic  interpretation  of  God  ; and,  in  con-
trast to  both,  the  Gospel  of  the  Sonhood  of  man  and  the
Fatherhood  of  God  came  as  the  easy  yoke,  the  light  burden.
But  though  it  is  necessarily  this  new  message  that  the  parables
and  discourses  and  pronouncements  of  Jesus  complete  and  fill
out,  it  is  in  such  a way  that  it  always  remains  an  over-
whelming and  daring  paradox,  claiming  our  utmost  homage,
that  He  who  is  4 in  heaven  * is  yet  4 our  Father  \ That  that
‘heavenly  9 Being  of  marvel  and  mystery  and  awe  is  Himself
the  eternal,  benignant,  gracious  will : this  is  the  resolved
contrast  that  first  brings  out  the  deep-felt  harmony  in  true
Christian  experience;  and  the  harmony  cannot  be  heard
aright  by  the  man  whose  ear  does  not  detect  always  sounding
in  it  this  sublimated  ‘ seventh  \

It  is  significant,  and  yet  again  so  natural,  that  the  first
petition  in  the  prayer  of  the  Christian  fellowship  is : ‘ Hallowed
be  Thy  name.1  What  I have  already  said  should  make  the
meaning  of  this  clear  in  its  connexion  with  the  Biblical  mean-
ing of  the  word.  And  we  can  sometimes  detect,  even  in  the
teaching  of  Jesus,  notes  still  vibrating  which  seem  to  suggest
a trace  of  that  weird  awe  and  shuddering  dread  before  the
mysteries  of  the  transcendent  of  which  we  have  already
spoken.  Such  a passage  is  Matthew  x.  28 : ‘ But  fear  him
which  is  able  to  destroy  both  soul  and  body  in  hell  *

The  dark  and  awful  ring  of  this  saying  cannot  be  missed,  and
it  is  a rationalization  of  it  merely  to  refer  it  to  the  Judge  and
His  judgement  on  the  Last  Day.  The  same  note  rings  out  again
clearly  in  the  saying  in  Hebrews  x.  31 : ‘ It  is  a fearful  thing
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God  ’ ; and  in  Hebrews  xii.
29  : ‘ Our  God  is  a consuming  fire/  (Here  the  adaptation  of
Deuteronomy  iv.  24 : ‘ The  Lord  is  a consuming  fire  ’ into  ‘ Our
God  is  a consuming  fire  ’ gives  a contrast  whose  effect  enhances
the  horror  of  the  saying.)  And  when  occasion  demands  it
the  Old  Testament  God  of  * vengeance  * recurs  even  in  the
teaching  of  Jesus  Himself,  unveiled  and  in  His  own  authentic


88  THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  .

character ; as,  for  instance,  in  Matthew  xxi.  41 : 'He  will
miserably  destroy  those  wicked  men/

Finally,  it  is  in  the  light  of,  and  with  the  background  of,
this  numinous  experience,  with  its  mystery  and  its  awe  —
its  myaterium  tremeudum — that  Christ’s  Agony  in  the  night
of  Oethsemane  must  be  viewed,  if  we  are  to  comprehend  or
realize  at  all  in  our  own  experience  what  the  import  of  that
agony  was.  What  is  the  cause  of  this  * sore  amazement  * and
‘ heaviness  ’,  this  soul  shaken  to  its  depths,  ' exceeding  sorrow-
ful even  unto  death  ’,  and  this  sweat  that  falls  to  the  ground
like  great  drops  of  blood  ? Can  it  be  ordinary  fear  of  death
in  the  case  of  one  who  had  had  death  before  his  eyes  for
weeks  past  and  who  had  just  celebrated  with  clear  intent  his
death-feast  with  his  disciples  ? No,  there  is  more  here  than
the  fear  of  death ; there  is  the  awe  of  the  creature  before  the
' mysterium  tremeudum  before  the  shuddering  secret  of  the
nuinen.  And  the  old  tales  come  back  into  our  mind  as
strangely  parallel  and,  as  it  were,  prophetically  significant,
the  tales  of  Yahweh  who  waylaid  Moses  by  night,  and
of  Jacob  who  wrestles  with  Cod  'until  the  breaking  of  the
day’.  ‘He  had  power  with  Cod  . . . and  prevailed’,  with  the
Cod  of  4 Wrath’  and  ‘Fury’,  with  the  aumeit,  which  yet  is
itself  ' My  Father  \ In  truth  even  those  who  cannot  recog-
nize ' the  Holy  One  of  Israel  ’ elsewhere  in  the  Cod  of  the
Cospel  must  at  least  discover  Him  here,  if  they  have  eyes  to
see  at  all.

I have  no  need  to  dwell  upon  the  numinous  atmosphere
pervading  the  writings  of  St.  Paul.  ‘ Cod  dwelleth  in  a light
that  none  may  come  nigh/  The  ‘ over-aboundingness  ’ of  the
idea  of  God  and  the  feeling  of  Cod  leads  with  Paul  to  the
special  terminology  and  experiences  of  Mysticism.1  But  it  is

1 As  a provisional  definition  of  Mysticism  would  suggest  that,  while
sharing  the  nature  of  religion,  it  shows  a preponderance  of  its  non-rational
elements  and  an  over-stressing  of  them  in  respect  to  the  4 overabounding  *
aspect  of  the  4 nuinen  \ A type  of  religious  experience  acquires  * mystical
colouring1  if  it  shows  an  inclination  to  Mysticism.  In  this  sense
Christianity  since  St.  Paul  and  St  John  is  not  Mysticism,  but  religion
with  a mystical  colouring.  And  this  is  justified.


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  89


not  confined  to  these:  it  can  be  seen  alive  through  all  his
utterances  in  the  feelings  of  exalted  enthusiasm  and  his
spiritual  terminology  of  the  4 pneuina  which  are  alike  far
removed  from  the  merely  rational  side  of  Christian  piety.
His  dualistic  depreciation  of  ‘ the  Flesh  *,  as  of  all  that  pertains
to  creatureliood,  is  that  numinous  sclf-disvaluation  spoken
of  on  pp.  52  ft*,  carried  to  its  extreme.  These  catastrophes
and  sudden  reversals  that  befall  the  religious  conscious-
ness, the  tragedy  of  sin  and  guilt,  or  again  the  glow  of
beatific  joy,  are  only  possible  and  intelligible  on  the  basis
of  numinous  experience.  And  just  as  the  opyfj  0eoD  with
St.  Paul  is  more  than  the  mere  reaction  of  righteous  retri-
bution, just  as  it  is  permeated  by  the  ‘ awefulness  ’ of  the
numinous,  so  on  the  other  side  is  the  ‘ fascination  ’ of  the
experienced  love  of  Cod,  that  bears  the  spirit  beyond  its
boundaries  into  the  third  heaven,  more  than  the  mere  con-
summation of  the  natural  human  feeling  of  a child  for  its
parent.  The  opyi]  Oeov  is  potently  and  vividly  present  in  the
grand  passage  in  Romans  i.  18fi’,  where  we  recognize  directly
the  jealous,  passionate  Yahweh  of  the  Old  Testament,  here
grown  to  a God  of  the  Universe  of  fearful  power,  who  pours
out  the  blazing  vials  of  His  wrath  over  the  whole  world.  In  this
passage  there  is  an  intuition,  genuinely  lion-rational  in  char-
acter, the  sublimity  of  which  has  an  almost  horrible  quality:
that  the  commission  of  sin  is  the  angry  God’s  punishment  for
sin.  St.  Paul  reiterates  this  thought— so  intolerable,  if  con-
sidered ‘rationally’ — in  three  separate  verses.  ‘Wherefore
God  also  gave  them  up  to  unclcamicss  through  the  lusts  of
their  own  hearts,  to  dishonour  their  own  bodies  between
themselves  ’ (Romans  i.  24) ; ‘ For  this  cause  God  gave  them  up
unto  vile  affections  ’ (i.  26) ; 4 God  gave  them  over  to  a repro-
bate mind,  ..  . being  filled  with  all  unrighteousness’,  &c.
(i.  28,  29).

To  feel  the  full  weight  and  force  of  this  intuition  it  is
necessary  to  escape  as  far  as  possible  from  the  mental
atmosphere  of  our  dogmatic  interpretations  and  judiciously
toned-down  catechisius,  and  to  try  to  recapture  the  awe  that
could  be  felt  by  the  Jew  toward  the  fury  of  Yahweh,  by  the


90  THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT


Hellenistic  Greek  toward  the  horror  of  Heimarmene  or  Destiny,
and  by  primitive  man  in  general  toward  the  4 ira  deorum  * or
anger  of  the  gods.

There  is  one  other  point  in  the  teaching  of  Paul  that
demands  notice  in  this  connexion — his  doctrine  of  predestina-
tion. It  is  perhaps  precisely  the  ‘ rationalist 5 who  feels  most
directly  that  with  the  idea  of  predestination  we  arc  standing
on  downright  non-rational  ground.  Nothing  remains  so
alien  to  the  rationalist  as  this  doctrine.  And  from  his  point  of
view  lie  is  quite  right ; from  the  standpoint  of  the  rational
this  notion  of  predestination  is  a sheer  absurdity,  an  absolute
offence.  Let  him  acquiesce  in  all  the  paradoxes  of  the  Trinity
and  Christology,  predestination  will  yet  remain  perpetually  to
confront  him  as  a stumbling-block.

Not,  as  need  hardly  be  said,  in  the  form  in  which  it  has
been  put  forward  since  the  time  of  Schlciermacher,  following
the  tradition  of  Leibniz  and  Spinoza.  That  is  simply  a
capitulation  to  Natural  Law  and  4 causae  secundae  ’,  a sur-
render to  the  claim  of  modern  Psychology  that  all  human
resolves  and  actions  are  subject  to  the  compelling  force  of
motives,  so  that  a man  is  unfree  and  predetermined  thereby.
And  so,  this  predetermination  by  nature , having  been  identified
with  the  all-embracing  efficacy  of  God,  in  the  end  the  outcome
of  the  profound  and  purely  religious  intuition  of  divine  pre-
determination— which  has  no  concern  at  all  with  ‘laws  of
nature  ‘—is  the  comparatively  trivial  ‘ scientific  ’ notion  of  uni-
versal causal  connexion.  There  can  be  no  more  spurious  product
of  theological  speculation,  no  more  fundamental  falsification  of
religious  conceptions  than  this  ; and  it  is  certainly  not  against
this  that  the  Rationalist  feels  an  antagonism,  for  it  is  itself
a piece  of  solid  rationalism,  but  at  the  same  time  a complete
abandonment  of  the  real  religious  idea  of  ‘ predestination  \

This  false  ‘ scientific ’ interpretation  of  ‘ predestination  *
having  been  put  aside,  it  may  be  shown  that  as  a religious  idea
it  springs  from  two  sources  and  has  two  quite  distinct  aspects,
which  should  be  distinguished  by  separate  names.  The  one
is  4 election  the  other — striking  an  essentially  different  note
— ‘ predestination  ’ proper.


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  91

The  idea  of  ‘ election ' — i.  e.  of  having  been  chosen  out  and
pre-ordained  by  God  unto  salvation — is  an  immediate  and  pure
expression  of  the  actual  religious  experience  of  grace.  The
recipient  of  divine  grace  feels  and  knows  ever  more  and
more  surely,  as  he  looks  back  on  his  past,  that  he  has  not  grown
into  his  present  self  through  any  achievement  or  effort  of  his
own,  and  that,  apart  from  his  own  will  or  power,  grace  was
imparted  to  him,  grasped  him,  impelled,  and  led  him.  And
even  the  resolves  and  decisions  that  were  most  his  own  and
most  free  become  to  him,  without  losing  the  element  of  free-
dom, something  that  he  experienced  rather  than  did.  Before
every  deed  of  his  own  he  sees  love  the  deliverer  in  action,
seeking  and  selecting,  and  acknowledges  that  an  eternal
gracious  purpose  is  watching  over  his  life.  But  this  ‘ pro-
vidence’ is  purely  a providence  unto  salvation  and  lias  in  itself
nothing  to  do  with  the  ‘ praedestinatioambigua’,  the  predeter-
mination of  all  men  either  to  be  saved  or  to  lie  damned.  The
rational  and  logical  conclusion  of  course  would  be  that,  if  he
is  elected  of  God  but  others  arc  not,  God,  in  appointing  the
elect  to  bliss,  determines  also  the  rejected  for  damnation.
But  this  conclusion  is  not,  and  must  not  be,  drawn,  for  what
we  are  concerned  with  is  a religious  intuition  which,  as  such,
stands  alone  and  is  only  warrant  for  itself,  and  which  indeed
is  outraged  by  any  attempt  to  weave  it  into  a system  or
make  it  yield  a series  of  inferences.  In  this  respect  Schleier-
maeher  is  quite  right  when  he  says  in  his  Discourses  upon
Deiiffion  1 : 6 Every  (sc.  religious)  intuition  is  a self-subsistent
work  . . . knowing  nothing  of  derivation  and  point  of
connexion.’

So  much  for  * election  From  it  must  be  distinguished
‘ predestination  ’ proper,  as  it  appears  in  St.  Paul,e.  g.  Romans
ix.  18 : ‘ Therefore  hath  He  mercy  on  whom  He  will,  and  whom
He  will  He  liardeneth.’

It  is  true  that  the  thought  of  ‘ election  prominent  in
St.  Paul,  can  be  detected  here  as  well.  But  the  reflection  in
v.  20  is  obviously  the  utterance  of  quite  a different  frame  of
mind : ‘ Nay,  but,  O man,  who  art  thou  that  repliest  against

1 Schleiennacher,  lieden  uber die  lteliijwn , ed.  R.  Otto,  4th  ed  , pp.  37-8.


92  THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT


God  ? Shall  the  thing  formed  say  to  him  that  formed  it,  Why
hast  thou  made  me  thus  ? * That  is  a line  of  thought  wholly
out  of  keeping  with  the  set  of  ideas  centring  about  ‘ election  \
And  yet  even  less  can  it  be  derived  from  any  abstractly
theoretic  ‘doctrine’  of  the  all-causing  nature  of  God.  Such
a doctrine  we  find  in  Zwingli,  and  with  him  it  does  indeed
give  rise  to  a ‘doctrine  of  predestination *,  but  one  that  is
rather  the  artificial  product  of  philosophical  speculation  than
the  result  of  immediate  religious  experience.  The  true  ‘ pre-
destination *,  springing  directly  from  religious  intuition,  has
its  origin  beyond  question  in  St.  Paul.  But  in  him  it  is  easily
recognized  as  the  numinous  feeling  in  face  of  the  ‘mysterium
tremendum,;  and  that  unique  phase  of  it  that  we  met  with  above
(pp.  9 ff.)  in  the  narrative  of  Abraham  recurs  here  in  a signally
intensified  form.  For  the  religious  conception  in  the  notion  of
predestination  is  nothing  but  that  ‘ creature-consciousness *,
that  self-abasement  and  the  annulment  of  personal  strength
and  claims  and  achievements  in  the  presence  of  the  trans-
cendent, as  such,  The  nuinen,  overpoweringly  experienced,
becomes  the  all  in  all.  The  creature,  with  his  being  and  doing,
his  coming  and  going,  his  schemes  and  resolves,  becomes
nothing.  The  conceptual  expression  to  indicate  such  a felt
abasement  and  annihilation  over  against  the  nurnen  is  then —
here  impotence  and  there  omnipotence;  here  the  futility  of
ones  own  choice,  there  the  will  that  ordains  all  and  deter-
mines all.

It  is  next  to  be  noted  that  c predestination  * in  this  sense,
as  identical  with  the  absolute  supremacy  of  the  numen,  has
nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  ‘unfree  wilP  of ‘Determinism*.
Rather,  it  finds  very  frequently  precisely  in  the  1 free  will  * of
the  creature  the  contrast  which  makes  it  stand  out  so  pro-
minently. ‘ Will  what  thou  wilt  and  how  thou  canst;  plan
and  choose;  yet  must  all  come  about  as  it  shall  and  as  is
determined  * : that  is  the  earliest  and  most  genuine  expression
of  the  matter.  In  face  of  the  eternal  power  man  is  reduced  to
nought,  together  with  his  free  choice  and  action.  And  the
eternal  power  waxes  immeasurable  just  because  it  fulfils  its
decrees  despite  the  freedom  of  human  will.  This  is  the  aspect


THE  NUMTNOUS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  93

of  the  matter  designedly  thrust  into  the  foreground  in  many
typical  Mohammedan  narratives  which  profess  to  display  the
inflexibility  of  the  decrees  of  Allah.  In  these,  men  are  able  to
devise  and  decide  and  reject ; but,  however  they  choose  or  act,
Allah's  eternal  will  is  accomplished  to  the  very  day  and  hour
that  was  ordained.  The  purport  of  this  is  precisely,  not  that
God  and  God  alone  is  an  active  cause,  but  rather  that  the
activity  of  the  creature,  be  it  never  so  vigorous  and  free,  is
overborne  and  determined  absolutely  by  the  eternal  operative
purpose.1  The  thought  of  the  deity  as  the  absolutely  sole  and
all-embracing  active  cause  first  occurs  where  the  creature-
feeling is  intensified  still  further,  and  is  at  the  same  time
combined  with  theoretic  considerations.  It  then  leads  to
Mysticism;  and  it  is  only  again  a further  consequence  if  the
speculations  about  Being,  peculiar  to  and  characteristic  of
Mysticism,  become  then  attached  to  the  thought  of  God  as  sole
cause.  To  the  creature  then  is  denied,  not  merely  efficacy
as  a cause,  but  true  reality  and  complete  being,  and  all  existence
and  fullness  of  being  is  ascribed  to  the  absolute  entity,  who
alone  really  is,  while  all  1 being  ’ of  creatures  is  either  a function
of  this  absolute  Being— which  brings  them  into  existence-  or
mere  illusion.  This  sequence  of  ideas  is  found  in  particularly
explicit  form  in  the  Mysticism  of  Geulincx  and  the  Occa-
sionalists.  c Ubi  nihil  vales,  ibi  nihil  velis/  Sometimes  we
hear  the  same  mystical  chord  in  St.  Paul  also,  as  in  his
mysterious  saying  about  the  final  issue  of  all  things,  where

1 The  story  told  by  Beidhavi,  an  expositor  of  the  Koran,  illustrates  this :
Once  when  Asrael,  the  angel  of  Death,  came  before  Solomon  lie  directed  his
gaze  upon  one  of  the  king's  companions.  ‘Who  is  that?*  asked  the
man.  ‘The  angel  of  Death,’  replied  Solomon.  ‘ lie  seems  to  be  looking
at  me,1  continued  the  other,  ‘so  command  the  wind  that  it  bear  me  hence
and  set  me  down  in  India.’  Solomon  did  so.  Then  said  the  Angel,
‘ 1 gazed  upon  him  for  so  long  out  of  astonishment,  seeing  it  had  been
commanded  me  to  fetch  his  soul  out  of  India,  while  he  was  yet  with  thee
in  Canaan.*  This  is  a predestination  which  presupposes  free  will  just  as
its  foil.  However  freely  man  makes  his  plans,  Allah  has  always  set  this
countermine.

[This  story  is  told  inverse  by  Leigh  Hunt  in  his  poem  ‘The  Inevitable*;
cf.  Oxford  ed.  (1922),  pp.  95-6.  (Trans.)]


94  THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT


* God  shall  be  all  in  all But  the  passage  in  Romans  is  differ-
ent. It  goes  no  farther  than  the  thought  of  predestination
itself;  and  predestination  we  have  found  to  be  nothing  but
the  intensified  4 creature-feeling , in  conceptual  expression,  and
to  be  altogether  rooted  in  the  numinous  consciousness.

A further  consideration  may  make  it  plainer  that  this  must
be  so.  If  it  be  really  true  that  the  consciousness  of  the
numinous,  as  ‘ creature-feeling  is  the  root  of  the  predestina-
tion idea,  then  we  should  expect  that  the  form  of  religious
faith  marked  by  an  undue  and  exaggerated  insistence  on  the
non-rational  elements  in  the  idea  of  God  would  also  lean  most
markedly  to  predestination.  And  such  is  obviously  the  case.
No  religion  has  such  a leaning  to  predestination  as  Islam  ; and
the  special  quality  of  Islam  is  just  that  in  it,  from  its  commence-
ment onwards,  the  rational  and  specifically  moral  aspect  of  the
idea  of  God  was  unable  to  acquire  the  firm  and  clear  impress
that  it  won,  e.  g.,  in  Christianity  or  Judaism.  In  Allah  the
numinous  is  absolutely  preponderant  over  everything  else.  So
that,  when  Islam  is  criticized  for  giving  a merely  ‘ fortuitous  ’
character  to  the  claim  of  morality,  as  though  the  moral  law
were  only  valid  through  the  chance  caprice  of  the  deity,  the
criticism  is  well  justified,  only 4 chance  * and  fortuitousness  have
nothing  to  do  with  the  matter.  The  explanation  is  rather  that
the  numinous  in  Allah,  nay,  even  his  uncanny  and  daemonic
character,  outweighs  what  is  rational  in  him.  And  this  will
account  for  what  is  commonly  called  the  ‘ fanatical 9 character
of  this  religion.  Strongly  excited  feeling  of  the  numen,  that
runs  to  frenzy,  untempered  by  the  more  rational  elements  of
religious  experience  — that  is  everywhere  the  very  essence  of
Fanaticism.

The  above  interpretation  of  the  notion  of  predestination
gives  at  the  same  time  our  estimate  of  it.  It  is  an  attempted
statement,  in  conceptual  terms  and  by  analogy , of  something
that  at  bottom  is  incapable  of  explication  by  concepts.  Fully
justified  in  this  sense  as  an  analogical  expression,  it  is  wholly
unjustified  ('  summum  jus 9 becoming  ‘ summa  injuria  ’)  if  its
character  as  analogy  is  missed,  so  that  it  is  taken  as  an  adequate
formulation  of  theological  theory.  In  that  case  it  is  disastrous


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  95

and  intolerable  to  a rational  religion  like  Christianity,  in  spite
of  the  attempts  that  are  made  to  render  it  innocuous  by  all  the
arts  of  evasion  and  mitigation.

There  is  another  element  in  the  thought  of  Paul  besides
his  notion  of  predestination  that  is  rooted  in  the  numinous:
I refer  to  his  utter  depreciation  of  ‘ the  Flesh  \ ‘ The  Flesh ’

with  Paul  is  simply  the  condition  of  the  creature  in  general.
And  this  is  utterly  disparaged  and  depreciated  by  the  numinous
consciousness  (as  we  saw  on  pp.  9 ft’.,  52  ft*)  in  contrast  to  the
transcendent,  both  in  regard  to  its  existence  and  its  value ; in
respect  to  the  first  as  ‘Dust  and  ashes’,  ‘ nothingness in-
sufficient, weak,  transient,  and  perishing,  and  in  respect  to  the
second  as  the  ‘ profane  the  impure,  which  is  unable  to  assume
the  worth  of  holiness  or  to  come  into  its  presence.  We  find
these  two  same  sorts  of  depreciation  among  the  ideas  of  Paul,
and  the  specifically  Pauline  feature  in  them  is  only  the  vigour
and  completeness  with  which  he  expresses  them.  It  is  a quite
separate  question  whence  Paul  derives  this  intensity  in  his
denunciation  and  depreciation  of  ‘ the  Flesh’,  whether  it  is
original  to  him  or  stimulated  by  the  4 dualistic  ’ environment
of  thought  in  which  he  moved.  As  has  been  already  said,  one
can  determine  nothing  about  the  essential  nature  or  the  value
of  a thing  by  tracing  its  genesis  and  continuous  historic
derivation  from  other  sources.  And  at  least  we  may  main-
tain that  Paul  might  well  be  stimulated  to  this  emphatic
expression  by  many  genuine  cases  of  the  numinous  experience
recorded  in  the  Old  Testament.  There  too  Pasar,  the  flesh,
is  both  the  principle  of  being  ‘ dust  and  ashes  ’ and  the
principle  of  the  ‘pollution’  of  the  creature  in  the  presence  of
holiness.

In  St.  John,  no  less  than  in  St.  Paul,  there  is  a strong  strain
of  the  numinous.  The  element  of  ‘ awefulness’,  it  is  true,  dies
away  in  him,  as  so  commonly  in  mysticism,  without  ever
quite  vanishing,  for,  pace  Ritschl,  even  in  John  ‘ the  wrath  of
God  abideth  ’ (John  iii.  36) ; but  this  only  makes  the  elements
of  ‘mystery’  and  ‘fascination’  the  stronger,  even  in  their
mystical  form.  In  John,  Christianity  absorbs  0a>y  and  far},

‘ light  ’ and  * life  ’,  into  itself  from  the  religions  at  rivalry  with


96  THE  NUMINOUS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT


it;1  and  justly  so,  for  only  in  Christianity  do  they  win  home.
But  what  is  this  ‘light*  and  this  ‘life*?  Not  to  feel  what
they  are  is  to  be  made  of  wood,  but  none  can  express  it.  They
are  a sheer  abounding  overplus  of  the  non-rational  element
in  religion.

And  the  same  is  true  even  of  that  saying  of  St.  John  to
which  the  ‘Rationalists*  are  so  specially  fond  of  referring : ‘God
is  a Spirit  * (John  iv.  24).  This  was  the  text  on  account  of  which
Hegel  held  Christianity  to  be  the  highest  because  the  most
truly  spiritual  (geistig)  religion.  But  Hegel  meant  by  ‘spirit*
the  ‘absolute  reason*.  St.  John  when  he  speaks  of  nvevfia  is
not  thinking  of  ‘ absolute  reason  * but  of  that  which  is  in
absolute  contrast  to  everything  of  ‘ the  world  * and  ‘ the  flesh  *,
the  utterly  mysterious  and  miraculous  heavenly  Being  who
surpasses  all  the  understanding  and  reason  of  the ‘natural*
man.  He  is  thinking  of  that  ‘ Spirit  * which  ‘ bloweth  where
it  listeth,  and  thou  hearest  the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell
whence  it  cometh  and  whither  it  goeth  * — the  Spirit  which
just  on  that  account  is  not  confined  to  Zion  or  Gerizim,  and
whose  worship  is  only  for  those  who  are  themselves  ‘in  spirit
and  in  truth  *.  So  that  this  saying,  apparently  wholly  ‘rational*
in  import,  is  itself  the  strongest  and  clearest  indication  of  the
non-rational  element  in  the  Biblical  idea  of  God.

1 And  thereby  drains  these  religions  of  their  life-blood,  according  to
‘ the  right  of  the  stronger  \ And  henceforth  these  elements  belong  to
Christianity  indissolubly  as  its  very  own.  For
Wenn  starke  Geisteskiaft
Die  Elemcnte
An  sich  hereingerafft :

Kein  Engel  trennte
Geeinte  Zwienatnr
Der  innigen  Beiden —

and  still  less  can  the  criticism  of  scholars!  [‘When  the  vigour  of  the
spirit  has  gathered  the  elements  into  itself,  then  may  no  angel  sunder
the  double  nature  now  made  single  of  the  united  twain/]


CHAPTER  XII


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  LUTHEll

In  Catholicism  the  feeling  of  the  numinous  is  to  be  found
as  a living  factor  of  singular  power.  It  is  seen  in  Catholic
forms  of  worship  and  sacramental  symbolism,  in  the  less
authentic  forms  assumed  by  legend  and  miracle,  in  the  para-
doxes and  mysteries  of  Catholic  dogma,  in  the  Platonic  and
neo-Platonic  strands  woven  into  the  fabric  of  its  religious
conceptions,  in  the  solemnity  of  churches  and  ceremonies,  and
especially  in  the  intimate  rapport  of  Catholic  piety  with
Mysticism.  For  reasons  already  suggested,  the  mysterious
is  much  less  in  evidence  in  the  official  systems  of  doctrine,
whether  Catholic  or  Protestant.  Particularly  since  the  time
when  the  great  mediaeval  scholastics  (the  : theologi  moderni  \
so  called)  replaced  Plato  by  Aristotle  and  welded  the  latter
and  his  method  on  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Church,  Catholic
orthodoxy  has  been  subjected  to  a strong  rationalizing  influ-
ence, to  which,  however,  actual  living  religious  practice
and  feeling  never  conformed  or  corresponded.  The  battle
here  joined  between  so-called  ‘Platonism7  and  ‘ Aristotelian-
ism 7,  and  in  general  the  long  persistent  protest  against  the
scholastics,  is  itself  in  large  part  nothing  but  the  struggle
between  the  rational  and  the  non-rational  elements  in  the
Christian  religion.  And  the  same  antithesis  is  clearly  opera-
tive as  a factor  in  Luther’s  protest  against  Aristotle  and  the
‘ theologi  moderni  ’.

At  that  time  Plato  himself  was  known  (very  imperfectly)
chiefly  through  the  interpretations —and  misinterpretations —
of  him  by  Augustine,  Plotinus,  and  Dionysius  the  Areopagite.
Yet  it  was  a true  feeling  that  led  the  contrasted  attitudes  of

H


98


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  LUTHER


mind  to  choose  the  names  of  Plato  and  Aristotle  as  their
battle-cries.  Plato  did  indeed  make  a powerful  contribution
towards  the  rationalization  of  his  religion,  for  according  to
his  philosophy  the  deity  had  to  become  identical  with  the
‘ Idea  of  the  Good  ’,  and  consequently  something  wholly  rational
and  conceivable.  But  the  most  remarkable  characteristic  of
Plato’s  thought  is  just  that  lie  himself  finds  science  and
philosophy  too  narrow  to  comprise  the  whole  of  mans  mental
life.  He  has  indeed  properly  no  Philosophy  of  Religion ; he
grasps  the  object  of  religion  by  quite  different  means  than
those  of  conceptual  thinking,  viz.  by  the  ‘ideograms’  of  myth,
i by  ‘ enthusiasm  ’ or  inspiration,  ‘ eros  ’ or  love,  * mania 1 or  the
divine  frenzy.  He  abandons  the  attempt  to  bring  the  object
of  religion  into  one  system  of  knowledge  with  the  objects  of
‘science’  (imaTrjfJir)),  i.c.  reason,  and  it  becomes  something
not  less  but  greater  thereby ; while  at  the  same  time  it  is
just  this  that  allows  the  sheer  non-rational  aspect  of  it  to  be
so  vividly  felt  in  Plato,  and  indeed  vividly  expressed  as  well
as  felt.  No  one  has  enunciated  more  definitively  than  this
master-thinker  that  God  transcends  all  reason,  in  the  sense
that  He  is  beyond  the  powers  of  our  conceiving,  not  merely
beyond  our  powers  of  comprehension.

‘Therefore  is  it  an  impossible  task  both  to  discover  the
Creator  and  Father  of  this  Whole  Universe  and  to  publish
the  discovery  of  him  in  words  for  all  to  understand.’ 1

Aristotle’s  thought  is  much  more  theological  thsn  Plato’s,
but  his  temper  is  far  less  religious ; and  at  the  same  time  his
theology  is  absolutely  rationalistic.  And  this  contrast  between
the  two  is  repeated  among  those  who  profess  themselves
‘ Platonists  ’ or  ‘ Aristotelians  \

1 Timaetts,  28  C tqv  ptv  ovv  itoitjti'jv  teal  ncirepri  roidf  rot)  miprof  fvpeip  T€
*pyov  Kot  (vpovra  tit  mu'ras  advvnrov  \tyav.  For  the  non-rational  and
supra-rational  strain  in  Plato  the  reader  is  referred  to  von  Wilamowitz-
M Ollendorff,  Plato , i.  418 : and  especially  to  the  splendid  passage  from
Plato’s  seventh  letter:  341  C:  ‘Concerning  these  things  (sc.  ultimate
truth)  there  is  not,  nor  will  there  be,  any  treatise  written  by  me.  For
they  do  not  at  all  admit  of  being  expounded  in  writing,  as  do  objects  of
other  (scientific)  studies.  . . . Only  after  long,  arduous  conversance  with
the  matter  itself ...  alight  suddenly  breaks  upon  the  soul  as  from  a kindled


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  LUTHER


99


Another  influence  which  orthodox  doctrine  underwent,  from
the  earliest  patristic  period  onwards,  and  which  tended  to
weaken  the  non-rational  element  in  religion,  came  from  the
acceptance  of  the  ancient  theory  of  the  divine  dnadeia  or
immunity  from  passion.  The  God  of  Greek,  and  especially
of  Stoic,  theology  was  constructed  after  the  ideal  of  the
‘Wise  man  ’,  who  achieves  this  ‘apathy’  by  the  overcoming
of  his  ‘ passions ' and  ‘ affections  ’ ; and  the  attempt  was  now
made  to  assimilate  this  God  to  the  4 living  God  ’ of  Scripture.
And,  as  intimated  above,  an  effective  if  unconscious  factor
in  this  contest  was  the  antithesis  between  the  non-rational
and  the  rational  aspects  of  the  deity.  Lactantius,  in  his
treatise  De  Im  Dei , illustrates  particularly  strikingly  this
fight  against  the  God  of  the  philosophers.  He  uses  the  same
wholly  rational  terms,  taken  from  man’s  emotional  life,  as
do  his  opponents,  but  raises  them  to  a higher  power,  so  that
he  makes  God,  as  it  were,  a gigantic  mind,  quick  with  an
immense  vitality.  Eut  whoever  in  this  way  contends  for  the
‘ living  God  ’ is  at  the  same  time  contending  unwittingly  for
the  divine  in  God,  that  which  cannot  be  reduced  to  Idea
world-order,  moral  order,  principle  of  Being,  or  purposive
will.  And  many  of  Lactantius’s  own  expressions  point  of
themselves  to  something  beyond.  Thus,  quoting  Plato,  he
says:  ‘Quid  omnino  sit  Deus,  non  esse  quaerendum : quia
nec  inveniri  possit  nec  enarrari.’1  lie  is  in  general  fond  of
emphasizing  the  ‘ ineomprehensibilitas ’ of  God:  ‘Quern  nec
aestimare  sensu  valeat  humana  mens  nec  eloqui  lingua  mortu-
lis.  Sublimior  enim  ac  maior  est,  quam  ut  possit  aut  cogita-
tione  homiuis  aut  sermonc  comprehendi.’ 2 He  is  fond  of  the
expression  ‘ maicstas  Dei  ’,  and  blames  the  philosophers  for

flame,  and  once  born  keeps  alive  of  itself.  . . . Only  to  a few  men  is  the
exposition  of  these  things  of  any  profit,  and  they  only  need  a slight
indication  of  them  for  their  discovery.*

1 Kd.  Fritsche,  p.  227 : ‘We  ought  not  to  ask  what  God  is  altogether ;
for  it  can  neither  be  discovered  by  any  nor  stated  in  words.*
a Ibid.,  p.  116  : ( (God)  whom  the  human  mind  has  no  power  to  appraise,
nor  tongue  of  mortals  to  utter.  For  he  is  too  sublime  and  too  great  to  be
grasped  in  the  thought  or  the  speech  of  man.*

II  2


100


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  LUTHER


misjudging  the  ‘ unique  majesty’  of  God.  And  lie  feels  the
‘tremendum’  in  the  ‘maiestas’  when  he  asserts  that  God
* is  wroth  ’,  and  demands  ‘ awe  ’ as  a fundamental  characteristic
of  religion  when  he  says:  ‘Ita  fit,  ut  religio  et  maiestas
et  honor  meta  constet.  Metus  autem  non  est,  ubi  nullus
irascitur.’1  He  says  that  a God  who  cannot  be  angry  cannot
love  either:  and  a God  that  knows  neither  love  nor  anger
would  be  ‘immobilis’  and  not  the  ‘ Deus  vivus\  the  living
God  of  Scripture.

This  ancient  battle  of  Lactantius  against  the  ‘ deus  philo-
sophorum  ’ comes  to  life  again  in  the  Middle  Ages  in  Duns
Scotus’s  battle  for  the  God  of  ‘ Willing  ’,  as  opposed  to  the  God
of  ‘Being’,  and  for  the  validity  of  volition  as  an  essential
in  religion,  as  opposed  to  ‘ cognition  ’.  And  the  non-rational
elements  which  are  still  latent  in  Duns  Scotus  break  out
openly  in  Luther  in  a whole  series  of  some  of  his  most
characteristic  thoughts.

This  aspect  of  Luther’s  religion  was  later  tacitly  expunged,
and  is  to-day  readily  dismissed  as  ‘ not  the  authentic  Luther  ’,
or  as  ‘ a residuum  of  the  scholastic  speculations  of  the  nomi-
nalists \ But,  if  that  is  so,  it  is  strange  that  this  ‘residuum
of  Scholasticism’  exercised  such  a power  in  Luther’s  own
mental  life  as  it  palpably  did.  In  point  of  fact  this  is  not
a ‘ residuum  ’ at  all,  but  beyond  all  question  the  mysterious
background  of  his  religious  life,  obscure  and  ‘ linear ny  ’,  and
to  estimate  it  in  all  its  power  and  profundity  we  need  to
abstract  the  lucid  bliss  and  joyfulness  of  Luther’s  faith  in  the
divine  grace,  and  to  see  this  faith  in  relation  to  the  back-
ground of  that  mysterious  experience  on  which  it  rests.  It
matters  not  from  what  source,  whether  ‘nominalism’  or  the
traditional  teaching  of  his  Order,  his  consciousness  was  first
stirred;  we  have  in  any  case  in  Luther  the  numinous  con-
sciousness at  first  hand,  stirred  and  agitated  through  its
typical  ‘ moments  ’,  as  we  have  come  to  know  them.  It  is
a corroboration  that  these  ‘moments’  appear  in  Luther  in

1 * Thus  it  comes  that  religion  and  majesty  and  honour  depend  upon
fear.  But  there  is  no  fear  where  none  is  angry/


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  LUTHER


101


their  completed  series,  and  so  point  back  to  the  common  basis
that  unites  them  all.

(1)  We  are  not  here  concerned  with  the  many  strands,
strong  at  the  outset,  weaker  later,  but  never  altogether  dis-
appearing, that  connect  him  with  Mysticism.  Nor  are  we
concerned  with  the  surviving  effects  of  the  ‘ numinous  ’ element
of  the  Catholic  worship  in  his  doctrine  of  the  Eucharist,
which  cannot  be  wholly  derived  either  from  his  doctrine  of
the  forgiveness  of  sins  or  from  his  deference  to  the  written
word  of  scripture.  Let  us  rather  consider  Luther's  ‘ mime
speculations  ’ upon  the  * unrevealed  ' in  God  in  contrast  to
the  ‘facies  Dei  revelata’  (revealed  face  of  God),  upon  the
‘di vina  maicstas’  and  the  ‘ omnipotentia  Dei*  in  contrast  to
liis  ‘gratia',  as  he  treats  of  them  in  his  work  De  (Servo
Avhitrio . The  investigation  as  to  how  far  Luther  took  over
‘doctrines’  from  Scotus  does  not  amount  to  much  ; they  stand
in  most  intimate  connexion  with  his  own  innermost  religious
life,  of  which  they  are  a genuine  first-hand  utterance,  and
should  be  examined  as  such.  Luther  himself  guarantees
expressly  that  he  does  not  teacli  such  things  merely  as  subjects
of  dispute  in  the  schools  or  as  philosophical  deductions  and
corollaries,  but  because  they  are  a central  part  of  the  religious
experience  of  the  Christian,  who  must  know  them  in  order
to  have  faith  and  to  have  life.  He  rejects  the  cautious  fore-
sight of  Erasmus’s  view,  that  such  things  should  at  least  be
withheld  from  the  common  people,  preaching  them  himself
in  public  sermons  (e.g.  upon  Exodus,  in  reference  to  the
hardening  of  Pharaoh’s  heart)  and  writing  them  in  his  letter
to  the  men  of  Antwerp.  And  again,  just  before  his  death,
speaking  of  his  book  l)e  (Servo  At  b Ur  to , in  which  these
ideas  stand  clearly  expressed,  Luther  acknowledges  that
nothing  he  wrote  was  so  truly  his  own.

Is  this  borne  out  in  his  general  teaching?  His  words  in
the  Great  Catechism , ‘To  have  a God  is  nothing  else  than
to  trust  Him  from  the  heart’,  might  seem  to  imply  the
negative.  And  certainly  to  Luther  God  is  He  who  ‘ overbrims
with  pure  goodness’.  Yet  this  same  Luther  knows  depths
and  abysses  in  the  Godhead  that  make  his  heart  despond,


102  THE  NUMINOUS  IN  LUTHER

from  which  he  flees  for  refuge  to  the  4 Word  *,  like  a ‘ hare  to
his  cleft  in  the  rocks  ’,  flees,  it  may  be,  to  the  Sacrament  or
to  absolution,  or  to  the  comforting  official  pronouncements
of  Dr.  Pommcranus,  but  in  general  no  less  to  every  word  of
comfort  or  promise  in  the  Psalms  and  the  Prophets.  But
that  before  which  his  soul  quails  again  and  again  in  awe  is
not  merely  the  stern  Judge,  demanding  righteousness — for
He  is  wholly  a ‘ God  of  revelation  ’ — but  rather  at  the  same
time  God  in  His  ‘ unrevealedness in  the  aweful  majesty  of
His  very  Godhead ; He  before  whom  trembles  not  simply  the
transgressor  of  the  law,  but  the  creature,  as  such,  in  liis
‘ uncovered  ’ creaturehood.  Luther  even  ventures  to  designate
this  awe-inspiring,  non-rational  character  of  deity  as  * Deus
ipse,  ut  est  in  sua  natura  et  maiestate’1  (an  assumption  which
would  be  in  fact  a dangerous  and  erroneous  one;  for  no
distinction  of  the  non-rational  and  the  rational  aspects  of
God  should  imply  that  the  latter  is  less  essential  than  the
former).

The  passages  relevant  in  this  connexion  from  Luthers  De
/Servo  Arbitrio  are  cited  often  enough : but  to  understand
the  wellnigh  daemonic  character  of  this  numinous  feeling  the
reader  should  particularly  note  the  effect  of  the  following
passage  from  Luther’s  sermon  on  Exodus  xx.  The  preacher
leaves  no  means  untried  to  bring  out  effectively  the  element
of  numinous  horror  in  his  text :

‘ Yea,  for  the  world  it  seemetli  as  though  God  weiv  a mere
silly  yawner,  with  mouth  ever  agape,  or  a cuckold,  who  lets
another  lie  with  his  wife  and  feigneth  that  he  sees  it  not.’

But  ‘ He  assailetli  a man,  and  hath  such  a delight  therein
that  He  is  of  His  Jealousy  and  Wrath  impelled  to  consume
the  wicked  ’.

‘Then  shall  we  learn  how  that  God  is  a consuming
fire,  . . / ‘That  is  then  the  consuming,  devouring  fire/
‘ Wilt  thou  sin?  Then  will  He  devour  thee  up / ‘ For  God  is
a fire,  that  consumetli,  devoureth,  ragefh ; verily  He  is  your
undoing,  as  fire  consumeth  a house  and  maketh  it  dust  and
ashes/


1 ‘God  Himself,  as  He  is  in  his  own  very  nature  and  majesty/


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  LUTHER


103


And  in  another  place  :

‘Yea,  He  is  more  terrible  and  frightful  than  the  Devil.
For  He  dealeth  with  us  and  bringeth  us  to  ruin  with  power,
smiteth  and  hammereth  us  and  payeth  no  heed  to  us.*  ‘ In
His  majesty  He  is  a consuming  tire/  ‘ For  therefrom  can
no  man  refrain : if  he  thinketh  on  God  aright,  his  heart  in
his  body  is  struck  with  terror  . . . Yea,  as  soon  as  he  heareth
God  named,  he  is  filled  with  trepidation  and  fear/ 1 *

It  is  the  absolute  ‘numcn’,  felt  here  partially  in  its  aspect
of  ‘ maiestas  ’ and  ‘ tremendurn  And  the  reason  I introduced
these  terms  above  to  denote  the  one  side  of  the  numinous
experience  was  in  fact  just  because  I recalled  Luther’s  own
expressions,  and  borrowed  them  from  his  ‘divina  maiestas  ’
and  4 metuenda  voluntas  ’,  which  have  rung  in  my  ears  from
the  time  of  my  earliest  study  of  Luther.  Indeed  1 grew  to
understand  the  numinous  and  its  difference  from  the  rational
in  Luthers  De  Servo  Arbitrio  long  before  I identified  it  in
the  ‘ qadosh  ’ of  the  Old  Testament  and  in  the  elements  of
1 religious  awe  ’ in  the  history  of  religion  in  general.

One  must  have  beheld  these  gulfs  and  abysses  in  Luther  to
understand  aright  how  significant  it  is  that  it  is  the  same
man  who  on  the  other  hand  endeavours  to  put  the  whole  of
Christianity  into  a confiding  faith.  The  same  contrast  noted
above  in  the  religion  of  the  Gospel  and  in  the  paradoxes  of
the  ‘ faith  in  God  the  Father  ’ recurs  in  the  religious  experience
of  Luther,  but  in  unexampled  intensity.  That  it  is  the
unapproachable  which  becomes  approachable,  the  lloly  One
who  is  pure  goodness,  that  it  is  4 Majesty ’ which  makes  itself
familiar  and  intimate — there  is  the  inwardness  of  the  matter^
and  this  finds  only  very  dubious  expression  in  the  subsequent
one-sided  doctrine  of  the  schools,  where  the  mystical  character
of  the  ‘Wrath’, — which  is  of  the  essence  of  ‘holiness’  infused
with  that  of  ‘ goodness  — is  referred  simply  to  the  righteous-
ness of  God,  and  taken  thus  as  righteous  anger  or  indig-
nation.

1 Vide  the  Erlangen  edition  of  Luther’s  works,  xxxvi,  pp.  210  ff.,  222,

231,  237  ; xxxv,  p.  167  ; xlvii,  p.  145 ; 1,  p.  2C0.


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  LUTHER


1Q4

(2)  Once  the  numinous  consciousness  has  been  aroused,  it
is  to  be  expected,  seeing  that  it  is  a unity,  that  one  of  its
moments  will  be  found  to  be  bound  up  with  the  rest.  In
the  case  of  Luther  we  find  next  after  this  element  of  ‘ Wrath  '
the  numinous  manifesting  itself  in  the  set  of  ideas  which  we
may  fairly  call  those  of  Job.  The  Book  of  Job,  as  was  seen
above,  is  not  so  much  concerned  with  the  mvefidness  of  the
majesty  of  the  numcn  as  with  its  mysterious  ness ; it  is  con-
cerned with  the  nen-rational  in  the  sense  of  the  irrational,
with  sheer  paradox  baffling  comprehension,  with  that  which
challenges  the  ( reasonable  ’ and  what  might  be  reasonably
expected,  which  goes  directly  against  the  grain  of  reason.
To  this  place  belong  Luther's  violent  onslaughts  upon  the
4 whore  Reason  which  must  seem  grotesque  to  any  one  who
has  not  rightly  grasped  the  problem  of  the  non-rational
element  in  the  idea  of  God.  But  certain  set  phrases,  con-
stantly recurring  in  Luther  and  very  typical  of  him,  are
specially  significant  in  this  connexion,  as  showing  the  strong
feeling  he  had  for  the  non-rational  aspect  of  the  divine  nature
in  general.  The  most  interesting  passages  are  not  those  in
which  he  gives  this  feeling  currency  in  the  small  change  of
popular  edification,  that  soothes  itself  with  the  thought  that
God’s  ways  arc  too  high  for  us  men ; but  those  in  which  he
lays  hold  of  some  startling  paradox.  He  can  indeed  tell  in
quite  a homely  and  popular  way  4 how  strange  a lord  our  God
is',  and  refer  this  to  the  fact  that  God  does  not  esteem  or
count  as  the  world  counts,  and  that  lie  disciplines  us  by
the  strange  ways  of  His  guidance.  Such  expressions  are  of
general  currency  ; but  others— and  these  the  more  character-
istic— strike  a loftier  note.  God  is  altogether  ' mysteriis  suis
et  iudiciis  impervestigabilis'  (‘beyond  tracking  out  in  His
mysteries  and  His  judgements'),  displays — as  in  Job — His
‘ vera  maiestas ' ‘in  metuendis  mirabilibus  et  iudiciis  suis  incom-
prehensibilibus  ’ (‘  in  His  fearful  marvels  and  incomprehensible
judgements'),  is  in  His  essence  hidden  away  from  all  reason,
knows  no  measure,  law,  or  aim,  and  is  verified  in  the  paradox :
*ut  ergo  lidei  locus  sit,  opus  est,  ut  omnia,  quae  creduntur,
abscondantur ' (‘  in  order,  therefore,  that  there  may  be  a place


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  LUTHER  105

for  faith,  all  the  things  that  are  believed  must  be  hidden
away  ’).  And  his  concern  is  not  simply  to  note  this  as  an
inconceivable  paradox,  to  acknowledge  it  and  bow  before  it,
but  to  recognize  that  such  a paradox  is  essential  to  the  nature
of  God  and  even  its  distinguishing  characteristic.

‘Si  cnim  tabs  esset  eius  iustitia,  quae  humano  captu  posset
iudicari  esse  iusta,  plane  non  esset  tlivina  et  nihilo  dillerrot
ab  humana  iustitia.  At  cum  sit  Dens  verus  et  unus,  deinde
totus  incomprehensibilis  et  inaceessibilis  humana  ratione,  par
est,  immo  necessarium  est,  ut  et  iustitia  sua  sit  incomprehensi-
bilis.’1

Theology  gives  expression  to  its  perplexed  endeavour  to
find  a name  for  the  elements  of  the  lion-rational  and  the
mysterious  in  the  repulsive  doctrine  that  God  is  ‘ exlex  ’
(outside  the  law),  that  good  is  good  because  God  wills  it,
instead  of  that  God  wills  it  because  it  is  good,  a doctrine  that
results  in  attributing  to  God  an  absolutely  fortuitous  will,
which  would  in  fact  turn  Him  into  a ‘capricious  despot’.
These  doctrines  are  specially  prominent  in  the  theology  of
Islam,  and  this  can  be  immediately  understood  if  the  two
positions  we  maintain  are  sound,  viz.  that  such  doctrines  are
really  perplexed  expressions  of  the  noil-rational,  numinous
side  of  the  divine  nature,  and  that  this  is  altogether  the  pre-
ponderant aspect  in  Islam.  And  we  find  them  also  in  Luther
in  the  same  connexion.  In  this  very  fact,  however,  lies  the
excuse  for  doctrines  in  themselves  so  blasphemous  and  horrible:
they  are  caricatures  prompted  by  a deficient  psychology  and
a mistaken  choice  of  expressions,  and  not  by  any  disregard  of
the  absoluteness  of  moral  walues.

(3)  From  the  point  of  view  already  considered  in  detail  it
will  be  seen  that,  with  such  feelings  as  a basis,  it  was  in-
evitable that  the  doctrine  of  predestination  would  in  due
course  make  its  appearance  in  Luther’s  religion.  And  in  his

1 ‘ For  were  His  justice  such  as  could  be  adjudged  as  just  by  the  human
understanding  it  were  manifestly  not  divine,  and  would  differ  in  nothing
from  human  justice.  But  since  God  is  true  and  single,  yea  in  His  entirely
incomprehensible  and  inaccessible  to  human  reason,  it  is  right,  nay  it
follows  necessarily,  that  His  justice  also  is  incomprehensible.’


106


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  LUTHER


case  we  do  not  need,  as  we  did  in  the  case  of  Paul,  to  postulate
the  close  inner  connexion  between  this  doctrine  and  the
numinous  temper,  for  in  the  De  Servo  Arbitrio  it  is  palpably
evident.  The  one  explicitly  depends  upon  the  other,  and  the
< inward  bond  of  union  between  the  two  is  so  unmistakable
that  this  treatise  of  Luthers  becomes  a sort  of  psychological
key  to  related  phases  of  religious  experience.

It  is  only  occasionally  that  these  purely  numinous  ele-
ments in  Luther’s  religious  consciousness  are  displayed  so
strongly  and  forcibly  as  in  the  treatise  De  Servo  Arbitrio .
But  in  his  battles  with  ‘ desperatio  ’ and  with  Satan,  in  his
constantly  recurring  religious  catastrophes  and  fits  of  melan-
choly, in  his  wrestlings  for  grace,  perpetually  renewed,
which  bring  him  to  the  verge  of  mental  disorder,  in  all  these
there  are  more  than  merely  rational  elements  at  work  in  his
soul.  Moreover,  even  when  he  is  speaking  solely  in  rational
terms  of  Judgement,  Punishment,  and  the  Wrath  of  God,  we
must,  if  we  are  to  recapture  the  real  Luther  in  these  expressions,
hear  sounding  in  them  the  profoundly  non-rational  strain  of
'religious  awe’.  For  this  Wrath  of  God  also  has  often,
perhaps  has  always,  something  in  it  of  that  Fury  of  Yahweli,
that  opyrj  of  the  numen.

(4)  This  circumstance  suggests  a further  point.  The  ex-
pressions * unrevealed  God  * and  f tremenda  maiestas  ’ mani-
festly repeated  only  those  { moments  ’ of  the  numinous
which  we  found  first  in  our  analysis  of  it  (p.  13),  especially
the  ‘ tremendum  the  daunting  aspect  of  the  numinous.
What  of  that  of  * fascination  ’ in  Luther  ? Is  it  missing
altogether,  to  be  replaced  merely  by  the  rational  attributes
of  trustworthiness  and  love  and  the  corresponding  element  in
the  mind  of  the  worshipper,  viz.  faith  and  trustfulness  ? No,
beyond  all  question  it  is  not.  Only,  the  element  of  fascination
is  in  Luther  wholly  interwoven  with  these  rational  elements
and  comes  to  utterance  with,  them  and  in  them.  This  can  be
felt  forcibly  in  the  boisterous,  almost  Dionysiac,  blissfulness
of  his  experience  of  God.

‘ Christians  are  a blissful  people,  who  can  rejoice  at  heart


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  LUTHER


107


and  sing  praises,  stamp  and  dance  and  leap  for  joy.  That  is
well  pleasing  to  God  and  doth  our  heart  good,  when  we  trust
in  God  and  find  in  Him  our  pride  and  our  joyfulness.  Such
a gift  should  only  kindle  a fire  and  a light  in  our  heart,  so
that  we  should  never  cease  dancing  and  leaping  for  joy.

Who  will  extol  this  enough  or  utter  it  forth  ? It  is  neither
to  be  expressed  nor  conceived.

If  thou  feelest  it  truly  in  the  heart,  it  will  be  such  a great
thing  to  thee  that  thou  wilt  rather  be  silent  than  speak
aught  of  it/1

Here  should  be  borne  in  mind  what  was  remarked  earlier
(p.  48)  respecting  the  interweaving  of  the  non -rational  with
the  rational  and  the  consequently  deepened  import  of  rational
expressions.  As  the  awe-inspiring  character  of  the  Tran-
scendent is  comprised  in  the  God  of  sternness  and  punishment
and  justice,  so  is  its  bliss-giving  character  included  in  the
God  who  4 overbrims  witli  pure  goodness  ’.  Indeed  it  is
involved  in  the  4 overabounding  ’ and  mystical  tone  of  Luther’s
actual  creed.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  there  is  no  mistaking  his
connexion  with  Mysticism.2  Though  for  Luther  faith  begins
more  and  more  to  take  the  place  of  ‘ knowledge  ’ and  ‘ Love  of
God’  (Gottes-Minne) — which  means  a marked  qualitative
alteration  of  the  whole  religious  temper,  as  compared  with
that  of  Mysticism — yet,  despite  the  change,  it  remains  obvious
that  there  are  definite  features  in  c Faith  *,  as  the  term  is  used
by  Luther,  which  justify  us  in  classing  it  with  the  mystical
ways  of  response  to  which  it  is  in  apparent  contrast,  and
clearly  distinguish  it  from  the  4 tides  ’ taught  by  the  Lutheran
school  with  its  determinate,  well-ordered,  unmystical  temper.

‘ Faith ’ for  Luther  plays  the  same  essential  part,  mutatis
mutandis,  as  4 knowledge  ’ and  4 love’  for  the  earlier  mystics:
it  is  the  unique  power  of  the  soul,  the  4 adhaesio  Dei  ’,  which
unites  man  with  God:  and  ‘unity’  is  the  very  signature  of
the  mystical.  So  that  when  Luther  says  that  Faith  makes
man  ‘one  cake’  ( ein  Kuche)  with  God,  or  holds  him  ‘as  a ring
holds  a jewel’  ( sicut  annulus  gemmam),  he  is  not  speaking
any  more  figuratively  than  when  Tauler  says  the  same  of
Love.  ‘Faith’  for  Luther,  as  ‘Love’  for  Tauler  and  the
1 Erlangen  ed.,  xi.  104,  2 See  Appendix  VI.


108  THE  NUMINOUS  IN  LUTHER

j mystics  generally,  is  a something  that  cannot  be  exhaustively
comprised  in  rational  concepts,  and  to  designate  which  4 figures 9
and  * images  * are  a necessity.  To  him  4 Faith ’ is  the  centre  of
the  Soul — the  fundus  animae  or  ‘basis  of  the  soul’ of  the
mystics — in  which  the  union  of  man  with  God  fulfils  itself.
It  is  at  the  same  time  an  independent  faculty  of  knowledge,
a mystical  a priori  element  in  the  spirit  of  man,  by  which
he  receives  and  recognizes  supra- sensible  truth,  and  in  this
respect  identical  with  the  ‘ Holy  Spirit  in  the  heart  ’ (Spiritus
Hanctus  in  corde).  ‘Faith’  is  further  the  ‘mighty  creative
+ thing  ’ in  us  and  the  strongest  of  affects,  most  closely  akin  to  the
Greek  ‘ enthusiasm  ’ (evdovo-iafarOai).  It  even  takes  over  all
the  functions  which  all  c enthusiasts  ’ from  Paul  onwards  have
ascribed  to  4 the  Spirit  * ; for  it  is  4 faith  ’ that  ‘ transforms  us
inwardly  and  brings  us  forth  anew  In  this  regard,  different
as  it  is  in  its  inner  attitude,  4 Faith  ’ is  very  similar  to  the
‘amor  mysticiis’.  And  in  the  bliss  of  the  ‘assurance  of
salvation’  (certitudo  saint  is)  that  it  arouses,  and  the  intensity
of  Luther’s  ‘ childlike  faith  we  have  in  a subdued  form
a recurrence  of  the  ‘ childhood  ’ feelings  of  Paul,  which  go
beyond  mere  comfort  of  the  soul,  appeasement  of  conscience,
or  feeling  of  protectedness.  All  subsequent  mystics  from
Johann  Arndt  to  Spener  and  Arnold  1 have  always  felt
r these  aspects  of  Luther’s  inner  life  to  be  congenial  and  akin
to  their  own,  and  have  carefully  collected  the  relevant  passages
from  his  writings  as  a defence  against  the  attacks  of  the
rationalized  doctrine  of  the  Lutheran  school.

For  in  opposition  to  the  4 rationalizations  ’ of  the  schools
the  non-rational  elements  are  maintained  and  fostered  in  the
western  Mysticism  that  came  to  its  later  flower  both  on
Catholic  and  Protestant  soil.  In  this,  as  in  Christian  Mys-
ticism as  a whole  from  its  first  stirrings,  the  elements  of
the  non-rational  already  detailed  are  easily  recognizable,
most  prominently  of  all  those  of  4 mystery  4 fascination
and  ‘majesty’.  The  element  of  ‘awe’,  on  the  other  hand,

1 [Johann  Arndt,  1555-1621  ; Gottfried  Arnold,  1666-1697;  Philipp
Jacob  Spener,  1635-1705:  the  last-named  was  one  of  the  founders  of
‘ Pietism  ’ in  Germany.  (Trans.) ]


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  LUTHER  109

recedes  and  is  subdued ; there  has  never  been  in  the  West
a Mysticism  of  Horror,  such  as  we  find  in  certain  kinds  of
Indian  Mysticism,  both  Fuddhist  and  Hindu — in  Bhagavad-
I Ghita,  ch.  11 1 — in  some  forms  of  the  Shiva  and  Durga  worship,
\ and  in  the  horrible  form  of  Tantrism.  Yet,  though  the
{ tremendum  element  in  Christian  mysticism  is  subdued,  it
is  not  entirely  lacking.  It  remains  a living  factor  in  the
Caligo  and  the  album  Silentium , in  the  £ Abyss  the  ‘ Night',
the  ‘Deserts'  of  the  divine  nature,  into  which  the  soul
must  descend,  in  the  ‘ agony  ‘ abandonment’,  ‘ barrenness’,
taedium , in  which  it  must  tarry,  in  the  shuddering  and  shrink-
ing from  the  loss  and  deprivation  of  self-hood  and  the  ‘anni-
hilation ’ of  personal  identity.  Thus  Suso  writes:

4 In  this  inconceivable  mountain  of  the  supra-divine  Where
(the  £ height  of  the  divine  Majesty  transcending  substance ’)
there  is  a precipitousness  of  which  all  pure  spirits  are  sensible.
Here  the  Soul  enters  a secret  namelessness,  a marvellous  alie-
nation. It  is  the  bottomless  abyss  no  creature  can  sound  —
. . . the  spirit  perishes  there,  to  become  all-living  in  the  won-
ders of  the  Godhead/ 2

And  he  can  pray :

‘Ah,  woe  is  me,  Thy  wrathful  countenance  is  so  full  of
fury.  Thy  turning  away  in  anger  is  so  unendurable.  Woe
is  me ! And  the  words  of  Thy  enmity  are  so  fiery,  they  cleave
through  heart  and  soul/  a

This  note  is  familiar  also  to  the  later  mystics.  Thus
St.  John  of  the  Cross  says  :

‘As  this  clear  sight  of  the  divine  comes  like  a violent
assault  upon  the  soul  to  subdue  it,  the  soul  feels  such  anguish
in  its  weakness  that  all  power  and  breath  leave  it  together,
while  sense  and  spirit  as  though  they  stood  burdened  beneath
a dark  unmeasured  load  suffer  such  agony  and  are  oppressed
by  such  deadly  fear  that  the  soul  would  choose  death  as
a mitigation  and  refreshment/  4

And  again :

4 The  fourth  kind  of  anguish  is  brought  into  being  in  the
soul  . . . from  the  Majesty  and  Glory  of  God/6

1 See  Appendix  IT.

2 Suso,  German  writings,  ed.  Denifle,  pp.  289  ff.  3 Ibid.,  p.  353.

4 St.  John  of  the  Cross,  Ute  Ascent  of  Mount  Carmel.  6 Ibid.


110


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  LUTHER


Once  more  :

‘Therefore  He  destroys,  crushes  and  overwhelms  (the  soul)
in  such  a deep  darkness,  that  it  feels  as  though  melted  and  in
its  misery  destroyed  by  a cruel  death  of  the  spirit.  Even  as
though  it  were  to  feel  it  had  been  swallowed  by  some  savage
beast  and  buried  in  the  darkness  of  his  belly.’ 1 * *

But  in  our  Western  Mysticism  the  writer  in  whom  the
non-rationally  ‘ dreadful  ’ and  even  the  4 daemonic  ’ phase  of,
the  numinous  remains  a most  living  element  is  Jakob  Bbhme.
For  all  his  adoption  of  its  motives,  Bolune  is  in  his  specula-
tion and  4 theosophy  ’ sharply  distinguished  from  the  earlier
Mysticism.  He  is  at  one  with  this  (as  represented,  for
instance,  by  Eckhart)  in  aiming  at  a ‘ construction  * and
an  understanding  of  God,  and  from  Him  of  the  world :
and,  like  Eckhart,  he  finds  as  a starting  point  for  his
speculation  the  ‘primal  bottom the  supra-comprehensible
and  inexpressible.  But  this  stands  to  him,  not  for  Being  and
Above-being,  but  for  Stress  and  Will ; it  is  not  good  and  above-
^good,  but  a supra-rational  identification  of  good  and  evil  in
an  Indifferent,  in  which  is  to  be  found  the  potentiality  for
evil  as  well  as  for  good,  and  therewith  the  possibility  of  the
dual  nature  of  deity  itself  as  at  once  goodness  and  love  on
the  one  hand  and  fury  and  wrath  on  the  other.2 * *  If  the

1 St.  John  of  the  Cjoss,  The  Ascent  of  Mount  Carmel.

8 The  ‘ ferocity 9 is  the  origin  of  Lucifer,  in  whom  the  mere  potentiality

of  evil  is  actualized.  It  might  be  said  that  Lucifer  is  ‘fury  * the  o,)jrj,
hypostatized,  the  ‘ mysterium  tremendum  ’ cut  loose  from  the  other

elements  and  intensified  to  mysterium  horrendum . The  roots  at  least

of  this  may  be  found  in  the  Bible  and  the  early  Church.  The  ideas  of

piopifciation  and  ransom  are  not  without  reference  to  Satan  as  well  as  to
the  divine  Wrath.  The  rationalism  of  the  myth  of  the  ‘ fallen  angel  ’
does  not  render  satisfactorily  the  horror  of  Satan  and  of  the  4 depths  of
Satan  * (Rev.  ii.  24)  and  the  4 mystery  of  iniquity  ’ (2  Thess.  ii.  7).  It  is

a horror  that  is  in  some  sort  numinous,  and  we  might  designate  the  object

of  it  as  the  negatively  numinous.  This  also  holds  good  of  other  religions
than  that  of  the  Bible.  In  all  religions  4 the  devilish  1 plays  its  part  and
has  its  place  as  that  which,  opposed  to  the  divine,  has  yet  something  in
common  with  it.  As  such  it  should  be  the  subject  of  a special  inquiry,
which  must  be  an  analysis  of  fundamental  feelings,  and  something  very

different  from  a mere  record  of  the  4 evolution  of  the  idea  of  the  devil


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  LUTHER  111

inventions  and  comparisons,  with  whose  aid  Bohrne  com-
poses a sort  of*  chemico-physical  romance  of  God,  strike  us
as  extremely  queer  and  bizarre,  the  strange  intuitions  of  the
religious  feeling  underlying  them  are  yet  highly  significant.
They  are  intuitions  of  the  numinous,  and  are  akin  to  those
✓of  Luther.  With  Bohrne,  as  with  Luther,  the  non-rational
energy  and  majesty  of  God  and  his  'awefulness*  appear  con-
ceptualized and  symbolized  as  ‘ Will  A And  with  Bohrne,  as
with  Luther,  this  is  conceived  as  fundamentally  independent
of  moral  elevation  or  righteousness,  and  as  indifferent  toward
good  or  evil  action.  It  is  rather  a 'ferocity  ’,  a 'fiery  wrath*
about  something  unknown  ; or,  better  still,  not  about  anything
at  all,  but  Wrath  on  its  own  account  and  without  reference
to  any  object ; an  aspect  of  character  which  would  be  quite
meaningless  if  taken  literally  in  the  sense  of  a real  con-
ceivable and  apprehensible  anger.  Who  is  not  directly  con-
scious that  it  is  simply  the  non-rational  element  of  'awefulness
the  tremeudum , for  which  ‘Wrath’, ' Fire  ‘ Fury’,  are  excellent
ideograms?1  If  such  an  ideogram  is  taken  as  an  adequate
concept,  the  result  is  anthropomorphism,  such  as  mythology
illustrates,  and  the  writings  of  Lactantius  (v.  p.  99).  And  if
speculation  follows,  based  upon  such  concepts,  the  result  is
-the  pseudo-science  of  theosophy.  For  the  characteristic  mark
of  all  theosophy  is  just  this:  having  confounded  analogical
and  figurative  ways  of  expressing  feeling  with  rational  con-
cepts, it  then  systematizes  them,  and  out  of  them  spins,  like
a monstrous  web,  a ' Science  of  God  which  is  and  remains
something  monstrous,  whether  it  employs  the  doctrinal  terms
of  scholasticism,  as  Eckhart  did,  or  the  alchemical  substances
and  mixtures  of  Paracelsus,  as  Bdhme  did/  or  the  cate-
gories of  an  animistic  logic,  as  Hegel  did,  or  the  elaborate

1 Btfhme’s  disciple,  Johann  Pordage,  has  some  feeling  of  this  when
he  writes ‘ So  hope  I then,  that  you  will  not  be  angered  with  me,  if

(you  find  that  I impute  to  God  acerbity  and  bitterness,  dread,  wrath,
fire,  . . . and  the  like.  For  even  Jakob  Btfhme  found  no  other  words  in
which  to  express  his  exalted  sensation  ( Empfindung ) of  God.  You  must
then  take  all  those  forms  of  speech  in  a high  divine  sense,  far  removed
from  all  imperfection*  ( Divine  and  True  Metaphybic , i.  166).


112  THE  NUMINOUS  IN  LUTHER

diction  of  Indian  religion,  as  Mrs.  Besant  does.1  For  the
history  of  religion  it  is  not  on  account  of  his  theosophy
that  Bdhme  is  interesting,  but  because  in  him  behind  the
theosophy  the  consciousness  of  the  numinous  was  astir  and
alive  as  an  element  of  genuine  value:  so  that  herein  Bdhme
was  an  heir  of  Luther,  preserving  what  in  Luther's  own  school
came  to  be  overlooked  and  disregarded.

For  the  Lutheran  school  has  itself  not  done  justice  to  the
numinous  side  of  the  Christian  idea  of  God.  By  the  exclusively
moral  interpretation  it  gave  to  the  terms,  it  distorted  the
meaning  of  ‘holiness'  and  the  ‘wrath  of  God',  and  already
from  the  time  of  Johann  Gerhardt  and  onwards  Lutheranism
was  returning  to  the  doctrine  of  divine  andOeia  or  passion-
lessness. More  and  more  it  deprived  the  forms  of  worship
of  the  genuinely  contemplative  and  specifically  ‘devotional'
elements  in  them.  The  conceptual  and  doctrinal— the  ideal
of  orthodoxy — began  to  preponderate  over  the  inexpressible,
whose  only  life  is  in  the  conscious  mental  attitude  of  the
devout  soul.  The  Church  became  a school,  and  her  communi-
cations, in  truth,  found  a more  and  more  contracted  access  to
the  mind,  as  Tyrrell  has  put  it  somewhere,  ‘through  the
narrow  clefts  (?)  of  the  understanding

Schleiermacher  was  the  first  to  attempt  to  overcome  this
rationalism,  most  boldly  and  uncompromisingly  in  the  rhapsody
of  his  Discourses , with  less  heat  and  more  subdued  tone  in
his  Glaubenslehrc  and  his  theory  of  the  ‘ feeling  of  absolute
dependence  which  in  point  of  fact  give  a representation — as
has  been  pointed  out  already — of  the  first  stirring  of  the
feeling  of  the  numinous.  It  will  be  a task  for  contemporary
Christian  teaching  to  follow  in  his  traces  and  again  to  deepen
the  rational  meaning  of  the  Christian  conception  of  God  by
permeating  it  with  its  non-rational  elements.

1 The  ‘fluid  concepts’  of  Bergson  are  also  properly  ideograms  of
i aesthetic  and  religious  feelings  and  intuitions.  In  so  far  as  he  confounds
i them  with  scientific  conceptions,  in  his  case  too  we  have  the  same  mixing
up  of  ‘ idea  ’ and  ‘ experience  ’ for  which  Schiller  found  fault  with  Goethe.
Cf.  my  Goethe  und  Dancin , Gottingen,  1906,


CHAPTER  XIII


THE  TWO  PROCESSES  OF  DEVELOPMENT

This  permeation  of  the  rational  with  the  lion-rational  is
to  lead,  then,  to  the  4 deepening  ' of  our  rational  conception  of
God;  it  must  not  be  the  means  of  blurring  or  diminishing
it.  For  if  (as  suggested  at  the  close  of  the  last  chapter)
the  disregard  of  the  numinous  elements  tends  to  impoverish
religion,  it  is  no  less  true  that  1 holiness  ‘ sanctity  as  Chris-
tianity intends  the  words,  cannot  dispense  with  the  rational,
and  especially  the  clear  ethical  elements  of  meaning  which  Pro-
testantism more  particularly  emphasizes  in  the  idea  of  God.
To  get  the  full  meaning  of  the  word  4 holy  * as  we  find  it  used
in  the  New  Testament  (and  religious  usage  has  established  it
in  the  New  Testament  sense  to  the  exclusion  of  others),  we
must  no  longer  understand  by  4 the  holy  ' or  4 sacred  * the
merely  numinous  in  general,  nor  even  the  numinous  at  its
own  highest  development  ; we  must  always  understand  by
it  the  numinous  completely  permeated  and  saturated  with
elements  signifying  rationality,  purpose,  personality,  morality.
It  is  in  this  combined  meaning  that  we  retain  and  apply  the
term  holy  ' in  our  subsequent  chapters.  But  that  the  course
of  the  historical  development  may  be  clearly  understood,  we
venture  first  to  recapitulate  our  view  upon  this  matter  as
explicitly  as  possible.

That  which  the  primitive  religious  consciousness  first
apprehends  in  the  form  of  4 daemonic  dread',  and  which,  as
it  further  unfolds,  becomes  more  elevated  and  ennobled,  is
in  origin  not  something  rational  or  moral,  but  something
distinct,  non-rational,  an  object  to  which  the  mind  responds
in  a unique  way  with  the  special  feeling-reflexes  that  have
been  described.  And  this  element  or  ‘moment'  passes  in
itself  through  a process  of  development  of  its  own,  quite  apart

I


114  THE  TWO  PROCESSES  OF  DEVELOPMENT

from  the  other  process — which  begins  at  an  early  stage—
by  which  it  is  ‘ rationalized  * and  4 moralized  \ i.  e.  filled  with
rational  and  ethical  meaning.  Taking  this  non-rational  pro-
cess of  development  first,  we  have  seen  how  the  ‘ daemonic
dread  after  itself  passing  through  various  gradations,  rises  to
the  level  of  ‘ fear  of  the  gods  and  thence  to  f fear  of  God  \
The  Saifioviov  or  daemonic  power  becomes  the  Qdov  or  divine
power : ‘ dread 9 becomes  worship  ; out  of  a confusion  of  inchoate
emotions  and  bewildered  palpitations  of  feeling  grows  ‘ religio
and  out  of  4 shudder 9 a holy  awe.  The  feelings  of  dependence
upon  and  beatitude  in  the  numen,  from  being  relative,  become
absolute.  The  false  analogies  and  fortuitous  associations  are
gradually  dispelled  or  frankly  rejected.  The  numen  becomes
God  and  Deity.  It  is  then  to  God  and  Deity,  as  4 numen  ’
rendered  absolute,  that  the  attribute  denoted  by  the  terms
qddosh,  sanctum,  ayio s\  holy,  pertains,  in  the  first  and  dircctest
sense  of  the  words.  It  is  the  culmination  of  a development
which  works  itself  out  purely  in  the  sphere  of  the  non-
rational.  This  development  constitutes  the  first  central  fact  of
religious  study,  and  it  is  the  task  of  religious  history  and
psychology  to  trace  its  course.

Next,  secondary  and  subsidiary  to  this,  is  the  task  of  tracing
the  course  of  the  process  of  rationalization  and  moralization
on  the  basis  of  the  numinous  consciousness.  It  nearly,  if  not
quite,  synchronizes  and  keeps  pace  with  the  stages  of  the
purely  numinous  development,  and,  like  that,  it  can  l^p  traced
in  its  different  gradations  in  the  most  widely  different  regions
of  religious  history.  Almost  everywhere  we  find  the  numinous
attracting  and  appropriating  meanings  derived  from  social
and  individual  ideals  of  obligation,  justice,  and  goodness.
These  become  the  4 will  ’ of  the  numen,  and  the  numen  their
guardian,  orclainer,  and  author.  More  and  more  these  ideas
come  to  enter  into  the  very  essence  of  the  numen  and  charge  the
term  with  ethical  content.  4 Holy  ' becomes  4 good  and  ‘good  ’
from  that  very  fact  in  turn  becomes  4 holy  4 sacrosanct  * ; until
there  results  a thenceforth  indissoluble  synthesis  of  the  two
elements,  and  the  final  outcome  is  thus  the  fuller,  more  com-
plex sense  of 4 holy  \ in  which  it  is  at  once  good  ami  sacrosanct .


THE  TWO  PROCESSES  OF  DEVELOPMENT  115


The  greatest  distinction  of  the  religion  of  ancient  Israel,  at
least  from  Amos  onwards,  is  precisely  the  intimate  coalescence
of  both  elements.  No  God  is  like  the  God  of  Israel : for  He  is
the  absolutely  Holy  One  (=  perfectly  goQd).  And,  on  the  other
hand,  no  law  is  like  Yahweh’s  Law,  for  it  is  not  merely  good,
but  also  at  the  same  time  ‘ holy  * (=  sacrosanct).

And  this  process  of  rationalization  and  inoralization  of  the
numinous,  as  it  grows  ever  more  clear  and  more  potent,  is  in
fact  the  most  essential  part  of  what  we  call  ‘ Sacred  History  *
and  prize  as  the  ever-growing  self- revelation  of  the  divine.
Rut  at  the  same  time  it  should  be  clear  to  us  that  this  process
of  the  ‘ inoralization  of  the  idea  of  God  often  enough  repre-
sented to  us  as  a principal  problem,  setting  the  main  line  for
inquiry  into  the  history  of  religion,  is  in  no  wise  a suppression
of  the  numinous  or  its  supersession  by  something  else — which
would  result  not  in  a God,  but  a God  substitute — but  rather
the  completion  and  charging  of  it  with  a new  content.  That
is  to  say,  the  c inoralization  ’ process  assumes  the  numinous  and
is  only  completed  upon  this  as  basis.


CHAPTER  XIV

THE  HOLY  AS  AN  A PRIORI  CATEGORY
Part  I

It  follows  from  what  has  been  said  that  the  4 holy ' in
the  fullest  sense  of  the  word  is  a combined,  complex  category,
the  combining  elements  being  its  rational  and  non-rational
components.  But  in  both — and  the  assertion  must  be  strictly
maintained  against  all  Sensationalism  and  Naturalism — it
is  a purely  a priori  category.

The  rational  ideas  of  Absoluteness,  Completion, Necessity, and
Substantiality,  and  no  less  so  those  of  the  good  as  an  objective
value, objectively  binding  and  valid,  are  not  to  be 4 evolved  ’ from
any  sort  of  sense- perception.  And  the  notions  of  ‘ epigenesis  ’,
4 heterogony  or  whatever  other  expression  we  may  choose  to
denote  our  compromise  and  perplexity,  only  serve  to  conceal  the
problem,  the  tendency  to  take  refuge  in  a Greek  terminology
being  here,  as  so  often,  nothing  but  an  avowal  of  one's  own
insufficiency.  Rather,  peeking  to  account  for  the  ideas  in
question,  we  are  referred  away  from  all  sense-experience  back
to  an  original  and  underivable  capacity  of  the  mind  implanted
in  the  ‘ pure  reason  * independently  of  all  perception.

But  in  the  case  of  the  non-rational  elements  of  our  category
of  the  Holy  we  are  referred  back  to  something  still  d eper  than
the  4 pure  reason  at  least  as  this  is  usually  understood,  namely
to  that  which  Mysticism  has  rightly  named  the  ‘ fundus  aminae',
the  4 bottom  ’ or 4 ground  of  the  soul  ’ ( Seele iifjmind ).  The  ideas
of  the  numinous  and  the  feelings  that  correspond  to  them  are,
quite  as  much  as  the  rational  ideas  and  feelings,  absolutely
4 pure/,  and  the  criteria  which  Kant  suggests  for  the  4 pure  ’
concept  and  the  4 pure ' feeling  of  respect  are  most  precisely
applicable  to  them.  In  the  famous  opening  words  of  the
4 Critique  of  Pure  Reason 9 lie  says: —

5 That  all  our  knowledge  begins  with  experience  there  can
be  no  doubt.  For  how  is  it  possible  that  the  faculty  of  cogni-
tion should  be  awakened  into  exercise  otherwise  than  by  means


THE  HOLY  AS  AN  A PRIORI  CATEGORY  117

of  objects  which  affect  our  senses  h . . . But,  though  all  our  know-
ledge begins  with  experience,  it  by  no  means  follows  that  all
arises  out  of  experience/

And,  referring  to  empirical  knowledge,  he  distinguishes  that
part  which  we  receive  through  impressions  and  that  whicli  our
own  faculty  of  cognition  supplies  from  itself,  sense-impressions
{ jiving  merely  the  occasion .

The  numinous  is  of  the  latter  kind.  It  issues  from  the
deepest  foundation  of  cognitive  apprehension  that  the  soul
possesses,  and,  though  it  of  course  comes  into  being  in  and
amid  the  sensory  data  and  empirical  material  of  the  natural
world  and  cannot  anticipate  or  dispense  with  those,  yet  it  does
not  arise  out  of  them,  but  only  hy  their  menus.  They  are  the
incitement,  the  stimulus,  and  the  ‘ occasion  ’ for  the  numinous
experience  to  become  astir,  and,  in  so  doing,  to  begin — at  first
with  a naive  immediacy  of  reaction — to  be  interfused  and
interwoven  with  the  present  world  of  sensuous  experience,
until,  becoming  gradually  purer,  it  disengages  itself  from  this
and  takes  its  stand  in  absolute  contrast  to  it.  The  proof  that
in  the  numinous  we  have  to  deal  with  purely  a priori  cogni-
tive elements  is  to  be  reached  by  introspection  and  a critical
examination  of  reason  such  as  Kant  instituted.  We  find,  that
is,  involved  in  the  numinous  experience,  beliefs  and  feelings
qualitatively  different  from  anythitig  that  ‘ natural  ’ sense,
perception  is  capable  of  giving  us.  They  are  themselves  not
perceptions  at  all,  but  peculiar  interpretations  and  valuations,
at  first  of  perceptual  data,  and  then — at  a higher  level — of
posited  objects  and  entities,  which  themselves  no  longer  belong
to  the  perceptual  world,  but  are  thought  of  as  supplementing
and  transcending  it.  And  as  they  are  not  themselves  sense-
perceptions,  so  neither  are  they  any  sort  of  ‘ transmutation’  of
sense-perceptiQns.  The  only  ‘ transmutation  ’ possible  in  respect
to  sense-perception  is  the  transformation  of  the  intuitively
given  concrete  percept,  of  whatever  sort,  into  the  corresponding
concept ; there  is  never  any  question  of  the  transformation  of
one  class  of  percepts  into  a class  of  entities  qualitatively  other .
The  facts  of  the  numinous  consciousness  point  therefore — as
likewise  do  also  the  ‘ pure  concepts  of  the  understanding  ’ of


118  THE  HOLY  AS  AN  A PRIORI  CATEGORY


Kant  and  the  ideas  and  value-judgements  of  ethics  or  aesthetics
— to  a hidden  substantive  source,  from  which  the  religious  ideas
and  feelings  are  formed,  which  lies  in  the  mind  independently
of  sense-experience ; a ‘ pure  reason  ’ in  the  profoundest  sense,
which,  because  of  the  surpassingness  of  its  content,  must  be
distinguished  from  both  the  pure  theo:etical  and  the  pure
practical  reason  of  Kant,  as  something  yet  higher  or  deeper
than  they.

The  justification  of  the  4 evolutionist  ’ theory  of  to-day  stands
or  fails  with  its  claim  to  ‘ explain  ’ the  phenomenon  of  religion.
That  is  in  truth  the  real  task  of  the  psychology  of  religion.
But  in  order  to  explain  we  must  have  the  data  from  which  an
explanation  may  be  forthcoming ; out  of  nothing  nothing  can  be
explained.  Nature  can  only  be  explained  by  an  investigation
into  the  ultimate  fundamental  forces  of  nature  and  their  laws  :
it  is  meaningless  to  propose  to  go  further  and  explain  these
laws  themselves,  for  in  terms  of  what  are  they  to  be  explained  ?
But  in  the  domain  of  spirit  the  corresponding  principle  from
which  an  explanation  is  derived  is  just  the  spirit  itself,  the
reasonable  spirit  of  man,  with  its  predispositions,  capacities,
and  its  own  inherent  laws.  This  has  to  be  presupposed  : it  can-
not itself  be  explained.  None  can  say  how  mind  or  spirit  ‘is
made’ — though  this  is  in  effect  just  what  the  theory  of  Epi-
genesis is  fain  to  attempt.  The  history  of  humanity  begins
with  man,  and  we  have  to  presuppose  man,  to  take  him  for
granted  as  he  is,  in  order  that  from  him  we  may  und  irstand
his  history.  That  is,  we  must  presuppose  man  as  a being
analogous  to  ourselves  in  natural  propensities  and  capacities.
It  is  a hopeless  business  to  seek  to  lower  ourselves  into  the
mental  life  of  a pitheca uthropus  ere, tux;  and,  even  if  it
were  not,  we  should  still  need  to  start  from  man  as  lie  is,  since
we  can  only  interpret  the  psychical  and  emotional  life  of  animals
regressively  by  clumsy  analogies  drawn  from  the  developed
human  mind.  To  try,  on  the  other  hand,  to  understand  and
deduce  the  human  from  the  sub-human  or  brute  mind  is
to  try  to  fit  the  lock  to  the  key  instead  of  vice  versa ; it  is  to
seek  to  illuminate  light  by  darkness.  In  the  first  appearance
of  conscious  life  on  dead  unconscious  matter  we  have  a sifhplc,


THE  HOLY  AS  AN  A PRIORI  CATEGORY  119

irreducible,  inexplicable  datum.  But  that  which  here  appears
is  already  a manifold  of  qualities,  and  we  can  only  interpret
it  as  a seed  of  potentiality,  out  of  which  issue  continually
maturer  powers  and  capacities,  as  the  organization  of  the  body
increases  in  stability  and  complexity.  And  the  only  way  we
can  throw  any  light  upon  the  whole  region  of  sub-human
psychical  life  is  by  interpreting  it  once  again  as  a sort  of  4 pre-
disposition' (Anlage)  at  a second  remove,  i.  e.  a predisposition
to  form  the  predispositions  or  faculties  of  the  actual  developed
mind,  and  standing  in  relation  to  this  as  an  embryo  to  the
full-grown  organism.  But  we  are  not  completely  in  the  dark
as  to  the  meaning  of  this  word  ‘ predisposition  \ For  in
our  own  awakening  and  growth  to  mental  and  spiritual
maturity  we  trace  in  ourselves  in  some  sort  the  evolution
by  which  the  seed  develops  into  the  tree — the  very  opposite  of
‘ transformation ’ and  4 epigenesis  ’ by  successive  addition.1

We  call  the  source  of  growth  a hidden  ‘ predisposition ’ of
the  human  spirit,  which  awakens  when  aroused  by  divers
excitations.  That  there  are  ‘predispositions’  of  this  sort
in  individuals  no  one  can  deny  who  lias  given  serious  study
to  the  history  of  religion.  They  are  seen  as  propensities,
‘predestining’  the  individual  to  religion,  and  they  may  grow
spontaneously  to  quasi-instinctive  presentiments,  uneasy  seek-
ing and  groping,  yearning  and  longing,  and  become  a religious
impulsion,,  that  only  finds  peace  when  it  has  become  clear  to
itself  and  attained  its  goal.  From  them  arise  the  states  of

1 The  physical  analogue  to  these  spiritual  or  mental  relationships  is
the  relation  of  potential  to  kinetic  energy.  The  assumption  of  such  a rela-
tion in  the  world  of  mind  (i.  e.  a relation  between  potential  and  kinetic
mind)  is,  of  course,  only  to  be  expected  from  one  who  is  prepared  to  accept
as  the  final  cause  of  all  mind  in  the  world  as  a whole  the  absolute  uiind
as  ‘ pure  actuality’  whose  eltampatio  or  effulgence  (in  Leibniz’s  phrase)
all  other  mind  is.  For  all  that  is  potential  presupposes  an  actual  as  the
ground  of  its  possibility,  as  Aristotle  long  ago  showed.  But  indeed  how
can  we  afford  to  reject  such  a ‘ pure  actuality  ’ ? It  is  an  inconsequent
proceeding  to  postulate  actuality,  as  is  (lone,  for  a starting  point  for  the
physical  world,  as  a system  of  stored-up  energy,  whose  transference  to
kinetic  energy  constitutes  the  ‘ rush  of  worlds  and  wheel  of  systems’,  and
yet  tS  reject  the  analogous  assumption  in  the  world  of  mind  and  spirit.


120  THE  HOLY  AS  AN  A PRIORI  CATEGORY

mind  of  1 prevenient  grace  described  in  masterly  fashion  by
Suso : —

* Loving,  tender  Lord  ! My  mind  has  from  the  days  of  my
childhood  sought  something  with  an  earnest  thirst  of  longing,
Lord,  and  what  that  is  have  I not  yet  perfectly  apprehended.
Lord,  I have  now  for  many  a year  been  in  hot  pursuit  of  it,
and  never  yet  have  I been  able  to  succeed,  for  I know  not
aright  what  it  is.  And  yet  it  is  something  that  draws  my
heart  and  my  soul  after  it,  and  without  which  I can  never
attain  to  full  repose.  Lord,  I was  fain  in  the  earliest  days  of
my  childhood  to  seek  it  among  created  things,  as  I saw  others
before  me  do.  And  the  more  1 sought,  the  less  1 found  it ; and
the  nearer  I went,  the  further  I wandered  from  it. . . . Now  my
heart  rages  for  it,  for  fain  would  I possess  it.  . . . Woe  is  me  !
. . . What  is  this,  or  how  is  it  fashioned,  that  plays  within  me
in  such  hidden  wise  '! 5 1

These  arc  manifestations  of  a predisposition  becoming  a
search  and  a driving  impulsion.  But  here,  if  nowhere  else,
the  ‘ fundamental  biogenetic  law  * really  does  hold  good,  which
uses  the  stages  and  phases  in  the  growth  of  the  individual
to  throw  light  upon  the  corresponding  stages  in  the  growth  of
his  species.  The  predisposition  which  the  human  reason
brought  with  it  when  the  species  Man  entered  history  became
long  ago,  not  merely  for  individuals  but  for  the  species  as
a whole,  a religious  impulsion^  to  which  incitements  from
without  and  pressure  from  within  the  mind  both  contributed.
It  begins  in  undirected,  groping  emotion,  a seeking  and  shaping
of  representations,  and  goes  on,  by  a continual  onward  i ‘‘riving,
to  generate  ideas,  till  its  nature  is  self-illumined  and  made
clear  by  an  explication  of  the  obscure  a priori  foundation
of  thought  itself,  out  of  which  it  originated.2  And  this  emotion,
this  searching,  this  generation  and  explication  of  ideas,  gives
the  warp  of  the  fabric  of  religious  evolution,  whose  woof
we  are  to  discuss  later.3

1 ll'oife,  ed.  Denifle,  p.  311.

2 The  reader  may  compare  what  Kant  says  in  his  Lectures  on  Psychology

(Leipsic  ed.,  1889,  p.  11)  of  ‘the  treasure  buried  in  the  field  of  obscure
ideas,  constituting  the  deep  abyss  of  human  knowledge,  which  we  cannot
sound.1  This  ‘deep  abyss1  is  just  the  ‘fundus  unimae  ’ that  is  aroused
in  fciuso.  3 Cf.  pp.  180,  181.


CHAPTER  XV


ITS  EARLIEST  MANIFESTATIONS

Only  upon  the  basis  of  the  foregoing  assumptions  is  it
possible  to  understand  the  historical  origin  and  further  develop-
ment of  religion.  It  must  be  admitted  that  when  religious
evolution  first  begins  sundry  curious  phenomena  confront
us,  preliminary  to  religion  proper  and  deeply  affecting  its
subsequent  course.  Such  are  the  notions  of  ‘ clean  * and
‘ unclean  belief  in  and  worship  of  the  dead,  belief  in  and
worship  of  ‘ souls  ’ or  ‘ spirits  magic,  fairy  tale,  and  myth,
homage  to  natural  objects,  whether  frightful  or  extraordinary,
noxious  or  advantageous,  the  strange  idea  of  ‘ power  9 (uremia
or  mana),  fetishism  and  totemism,  worship  of  animal  and
plant,  daemonism  and  polydaemonism.  Different  as  these
things  are,  they  are  all  haunted  by  a common — and  that
a numinous — element,  which  is  easily  identifiable.  They  did
not,  perhaps,  take  their  origin  out  of  this  common  numinous
element  directly  ; they  may  have  all  exhibited  a preliminary
stage  at  which  they  were  merely  ‘ natural  ’ products  of  the
naive,  rudimentary  fancies  of  primitive  times.  Rut  these
things  acquire  a strand  of  a quite  special  kind,  which  alone
gives  them  their  character  ns  forming  the  vestibule  of  religion,
brings  them  first  to  clear  and  explicit  form,  and  furnishes
them  with  the  prodigious  power  over  the  minds  of  men  which
history  universally  proves  them  to  possess.  Let  us  attempt  to
grasp  this  peculiar  strand,  common  to  all  these  modes  of  thought
and  practice  which  stand  upon  the  threshold  of  religion.

1.  We  will  begin  with  magic . There  has  been  at  all  times,
and  there  still  is  to-day,  a < natural  * magic,  that  is  to  say,
modes  of  behaviour  exhibiting  some  simple  analogy  and  carried
out  quite  unreflcctively  and  without  any  basis  in  theory,  whose


122  ITS  EARLIEST  MANIFESTATIONS

object  is  to  influence  and  regulate  an  event  in  accordance  with
the  wishes  of  the  agent.  It  may  be  noticed  on  any  skittle-
alley  or  bowling-green.  A bowler  aims  and  plays  his  bowl,
wishing  it  to  roll  straight  and  hit  the  jack.  He  watches  eagerly
as  it  rolls,  nodding  his  head,  his  body  bent  sideways,  stands
balancing  on  one  leg,  jerks  over  violently  to  the  other  side  as
the  critical  point  is  reached,  makes  as  though  to  push  the  ball
on  with  hand  or  foot,  gives  a last  jerk — and  the  end  is  reached.
Its  hazards  past,  the  ball  rolls  safely  into  position.  What  was
the  man  doing  in  this  case  ? He  was  not  simply  imitating  the
course  of  the  ball ; lie  meant  to  prescribe  and  determine  it,  but
this  obviously  without  any  reflection  on  his  queer  behaviour,
without  the  belief  of  primitive  man  in  ‘ universal  animism  i.  e.
in  the  animatedness  of  everything,  in  this  instance  of  the  ball,
and  without  a belief  in  some  sympathetic  rapport  between  his
own  ‘soul  * power  and  the  ‘soul  7 of  the  ball.  His  action  was
merely  naively  analogical,  for  the  attainment  of  a definite
wish.  The  proceedings  of  ‘ rain-makers  ’ were  often,  perhaps
at  first  were  always,  just  the  same  sort  of  thing ; and  so  were
the  naive  charms  purporting  to  influence  the  course  of  sun  and
moon,  clouds  and  winds.  But  clearly,  so  long  as  they  are  not
more  than  this,  these  are  not  by  any  means  magic  in  the  proper
sense.  There  must  be  in  addition  a new  ingredient,  unique
in  quality,  the  element  that  is  usually  called  ‘supernatural
efficacy7.  But  this  expression  is  a misnomer:  ‘supernatural 7
lias  nothing  to  do  with  the  case ; it  is  much  too  imposing  an
expression,  and  ascribes  far  too  much  to  the  naive  mind.  The
conception  of  Nature  as  a single  connected  system  of  events
united  by  laws  is  the  final  and  most  difficult  outcome  of
abstraction  ; and  this  conception  of  nature,  or  at  least  some
hint  of  it,  must  have  been  arrived  at  before  there  could  be  any
place  for  its  negation,  the  ‘ supernatural  \ Again,  nothing  is
explained,  as  Wundt  would  have  it,  by  ‘ spirit-power ' or  ‘ soul-
power7,  For,  first,  it  is  to-day  universally  recognized  that
magic  is  independent  of  a belief  in  spirits  or  souls,  and  probably
existed  before  it.  And,  second,  the  point  at  issue  is  not  by
means  of  what  class  of  powers  the  magical  effect  was  produced
— whether  ‘soul-powers7  or  others — but  by  means  of  what


ITS  EARLIEST  MANIFESTATIONS  123

quality  or  character  in  the  powers.  And  this  quality  can
be  indicated  solely  through  the  ‘ daemonic  ’,  a cliaracter  ascribed
to  certain  definite  operations  of  force,  be  they  strong  or  weak,
extraordinary  or  quite  trivial.  The  quality  can  be  only
suggested  through  that  unique  element  of  feeling,  the  feeling
of  ‘ uncanniness  of  which  we  have  already  spoken,  whose
positive  content  cannot  be  defined  conceptually,  and  can  only
be  indicated  by  that  mental  response  to  it  which  we  called
‘ shuddering  \

2.  The  same  is  true  of  the  worship  of  the  dead . It  does  not
arise  out  of  any  theory  of  animism,  according  to  which  the
primitive  man  thinks  of  inanimate  objects,  and  so  also  of  the
dead,  as  animate  and  operative.  Even  in  itself  this  entire
theory  of  an  ostensible  attribution  of  ‘ soul  ’ or  the  principle  of
animation  to  everything  is  a mere  fabrication  of  the  study,
llow  much  more  when  it  is  clumsily  spatchcocked  and  welded
together  with  ‘belief  in  spirits  or  souls’,  which  is  something
quite  different ! The  dead  man,  in  point  of  fact,  exercises
a spell  upon  the  mind  only  when,  and  only  because,  he  is  felt  as
a thing  of  horror  and  ‘ shudder  But  alike  to  the  naive  mind
of  the  savage  and  to  the  blasd  mind  of  modern  civilized  man
this  feeling  comes  about  with  such  an  immediate  compelling
force  that  we  usually  accept  it  as  something  immediately  self-
evident,  failing  altogether  to  remark  that  even  the  estimating
something  as  ‘horrible’  or  ‘grisly’  shows  the  emergence  of
a qualitatively  separate  content  of  feeling  which  the  mere
fact  of  death  does  not  explain.  Feeling- reactions  to  the  dead,
if  prompted  ‘ naturally  are  pretty  obviously  only  of  two
kinds:  on  the  one  hand,  the  exponent  feels  disgust  at  the
corpse’s  putrefaction,  stench,  revoltingness : on  the  other,
he  feels  his  own  will  to  life  disturbed  and  checked,  the  fear  of
death  and  the  startled  fright  that  directly  follows  on  the  sight
of  a corpse,  especially  if  it  be  that  of  a member  of  one’s  own
species.  Both  these  sorts  of  feeling-response,  viz.  disgust  and
startled  fright,  are  already  found  manifested  among  animals.
I observed  this  in  a very  pronounced  degree  on  one  occasion,
when,  upon  a lonely  ride,  we  suddenly  came  upon  the  body
of  a dead  horse,  and  Diana,  my  excellent  mount,  on  recog-


124


ITS  EARLIEST  MANIFESTATIONS


nizing  her  dead  fellow,  gave  every  indication  of  the  most
natural  fright  and  disgust.  But  these  two  * moments  ’ of
feeling  do  not  by  any  means  afford  in  themselves  the  materials
for  the  ‘ art  of  making  shudder  * (in  the  words  of  the  old  folk-
tale). It  is  something  new  and  demands  to  be  ‘ learnt  ' as  the
folk-tale  rightly  declares  : that  is,  this  is  a feeling  that  is  not
simply  present  with  the  other  4 natural  ' and  normal  mental
functions,  disgust,  or  fright,  and  cannot  be  got  from  these  by
analysis.  It  is  a ‘ dread  ' (or  awe),  qualitatively  sui  generis  ;
and  even  with  regard  to  this  rudimentary  stage  represented  by
the  primitive  * worship  of  the  dead  * we  cannot  admit  that  we
have  to  do  merely  with  a universal  feeling,  that  has  simply  to
be  presupposed  at  the  outset  as  a regular  factor  of  folk  psycho-
logy,  a collectively  engendered  feeling  that  explains  itself.  On
the  contrary,  it  cannot  be  disputed  that  here  too  there  have
been  persons  endowed  with  special  propensities  in  this  direction,
who  possessed  such  feelings  actually,  and  then,  by  giving
expression  to  them,  aroused  them  in  others.  Even  the  ‘ awe
of  the  dead  ' and  from  it  the  ‘ worship  of  the  dead  ’ have
been,  as  it  were,  ‘ instituted  ' and  have  had  ‘founders
3.  We  consider  next  ideas  of  * souls'  and  ‘ spirits '.  It
would  be  possible  to  show,  did  not  the  subject  lead  us  too  far
afield,  that  these  were  not  conceived  by  the  fanciful  processes
of  which  the  animists  tell  us,  but  had  a far  simpler  origin.
But  again  the  important  point  is  not  the  origin  of  ‘spirits'  in
their  ideational  aspect,  but  the  qualitative  element  of  feeling
relative  to  them.  And  this  does  not  consist  in  the  fact  that
1 spirits ' or  ‘souls'  are  thinner  or  less  easily  visible  than  the
body,  or  quite  invisible,  or  fashioned  like  air:  often  all  this
is  true  of  them  ; no  less  often  none  of  it  is;  most  frequently
of  all  it  is  both  true  and  false.  The  essence  of  the  ‘soul'  lies
not  in  the  imaginative  or  conceptual  expression  of  it,  but
first  and  foremost  in  the  fact  that  it  is  a spectre ; that  it
arouses  ‘dread'  or  ‘awe',  as  described  above.  But  again,
a ‘ spectre ' is  not  to  be  explained  from  ‘ natural ' feelings,  and
these  are  equally  unable  to  explain  the  further  development
by  which  these  ‘ somethings ' (and  this  is  the  only  core  of
conceptual  meaning  that  can  really  be  given  them),  at  first


ITS  EARLIEST  MANIFESTATIONS  125

always  very  eagerly  shunned,  later  on  become  beings  honoured
in  a positive  way  and  loved,  capable  of  rising  into  heroes,
pitris,  daemons,  holy  or  sacred  ones,  and  gods.

4.  We  turn  to  the  idea  of  ‘ power  ’,  the  mana  of  the  Pacific
Islands  and  the  orenda  of  the  North  American  Indians.  It
can  have  its  antecedents  in  very  ‘ natural  ’ phenomena.  To
notice  power  in  plants,  stones,  and  natural  objects  in  general
and  to  appropriate  it  by  gaining  possession  of  them ; to  eat  the
heart  or  liver  of  an  animal  or  a man  in  order  to  make  his
power  and  strength  ones  own — this  is  not  religion  hut  science.
Our  science  of  medicine  follows  a similar  prescription.  If  the
‘power*  of  a calf’s  glands  is  good  for  goitre  and  imbecility,
we  do  not  know  what  virtue  we  may  not  hope  to  find  in  frogs’
brains  or  Jews*  livers.  All  depends  here  upon  observation,
and  our  science  of  medicine  in  this  respect  only  differs  from
that  of  the  medicine-man  in  being  more  exact  and  in  possess-
ing experimental  methods.  ‘Power’  does  not  take  its  place
in  the  ante-chamber  of  religion,  is  not  appropriated  by
religion  in  ‘ communion  rites  ’ and  ‘ sacraments  ’ (as  we  call
them),  until  it  too  has  come  to  include  the  idea  of  ‘spell’
and  ‘ magic

5.  Volcanoes,  mountain  peaks,  moon,  sun,  and  clouds  are
regarded  by  primitive  man  as  being  a live  or  animate , not  in
consequence  of  a naive  theory  of  the  omnipresence  of  ‘spirit’
or  ‘ soul  ’ — ‘ Panthelisrn  ’,  so  called — but  as  a result  of  precisely
the  same  criterion  that  we  ourselves  apply  when  we  recognize
anything  to  be  alive  or  animate,  apart  from  the  one  live  thing
we  can  observe  directly,  our  self ; that  is  to  say,  both  we  and
the  primitive  credit  an  object  with  life  if,  and  in  so  far  as,  we
think  we  remark  in  it  living  efficacy  and  agency;  and  whether
we  do  so  rightly  or  wrongly  is  again  simply  a matter  of  more
or  less  exact  observation.  But  while  from  this  criterion  the
natural  objects  mentioned  above,  and  of  course  others,  may  be
invested  with  life  by  the  naive  observer,  this  does  not  in  itself
lead  to  myth  or  religion.  Purely  as  animate  or  living  beings,
these  entities  are  far  from  being  yet  ‘ divine  ’ or  ‘ gods  ’ ; nay,
they  do  not  even  become  so  when  the  man  turns  to  them  with
desire  and  petition ; for  petition  is  something  less  than  prayer


ITS  EARLIEST  MANIFESTATIONS


120

and  trust  need  not  have  a religious  character.  The  objects  in
question  only  become  ‘divine ’—objects  of  worship — when  the
category  of  the  numinous  is  applied  to  them,  and  that  does  not
come  about  until,  first,  an  attempt  is  made  to  influence  them
by  numinous  means,  viz.  by  magic ; and,  second,  their  special
efficacy  or  way  of  working  is  at  the  same  time  accepted  as
something  numinous,  viz.  something  magical.

6.  As  regards  fairy-stories , these  presuppose  the  ‘natural’
impulse  to  fantasy,  narrative,  and  entertainment,  and  its
products.  But  the  fairy-story  proper  only  comes  into  being
with  the  element  of  the  ‘ wonderful  ’,  with  miracle  and  miracu-
lous events  and  consequences,  i.  o.  by  means  of  an  infusion
of  the  numinous.  And  the  same  holds  good  in  an  increased
degree  of  myth .

7.  All  the  factors  and  elements  named  so  far  in  this  chapter
are  but,  as  it  were,  the  vestibule  at  the  threshold  of  the  real
religious  feeling,  an  earliest  stirring  of  the  numinous  conscious-
ness, which  comes  upon  the  scene  blended  with  associated  feel-
ings in  conformity  to  principles  of  analogy  which  it  would  be
easy  to  specify  for  each  several  case.  Only  with  the  rise  ot*  the
'daemon'  do  we  have  a really  separate  beginning.  The  most
authentic  form  of  the  ‘ daemon  ’ may  be  seen  in  those  strange
deities  of  ancient  Arabia,  which  are  properly  nothing  but
wandering  demonstrative  pronouns,  neither  ‘given  shape  and
feature  by  means  of  myth  for  there  is  in  the  main  no  mytho-
logy attached  to  them  at  all,  nor  ‘ evolved  out  of  nature-
deities,’  nor  grown  out  of  ‘souls’  or  ‘ spirits  but  none  the
less  felt  as  deities  of  mighty  efficacy,  who  are  the  objects  of
very  living  veneration.  They  are  pure  products  of  the  religious
consciousness  itself.  And  in  their  case  it  is  very  evident  that
they  do  not  arise  as  a collective  product  of  crowd-imagination,
and  that  they  do  not  therefore  have  their  origin  in  ‘ group-  ’ or
‘ folk-  ’ psychology,  but  were  the  intuitions  of  persons  of  innate
prophetic  powers.  For  there  is  always  the  Kahin  (the  primi-
tive form  of  the  ‘prophet’)  belonging  to  these  ‘numina’,  and
he  alone  experiences  a ‘numen’  or  divine-daemonic  power  at
first  hand.  Only  where  and  when  it  has  been  ‘ revealed  ’
through  such  a one  do  the  forms  of  worship  and  a common


ITS  EARLIEST  MANIFESTATIONS  127

cult  arise.  To  eacli  numen  is  assigned  a Seer  and  there  is  none
without  one.

8.  The  notions  ‘ clean  ’ and  ‘ unclean  ‘ pure  * and  4 impure
are  already  found  in  a purely  natural  sense,  prior  to  their
religious  application.  The  unclean  is  the  loathsome,  that  which
stirs  strong  feelings  of  natural  disgust.  And  it  is  just  during
the  more  primitive  stages  of  human  development  that  the
emotion  of  disgust  exercises  such  special  power.  Probably  these
emotional  reactions  are  a part  of  our  natural  self-protective
endowment,  instinctive  safeguards  for  many  important  vital
functions.  The  effect  of  civilization  is  to  refine  these  emotions
of  disgust  and  loathing  by  diverting  them  to  different  objects,
so  that  things  which  were  loathsome  to  the  savage  cease  to  be
so  and  things  which  were  not  become  so.  This  refinement
spells  at  the  same  timo  a weakening  in  the  intensity  of  the
emotion  ; we  do  not  now  loathe  and  feel  disgust  with  the
unbridled  violence  and  strength  of  the  savage.  In  this  respect
we  can  notice  even  to-day  a plain  distinction  between  our  more
primitive  rural  and  our  more  4 refined  ’ urban  population  : we
townsmen  feel  disgust  at  much  that  is  harmless  to  the  country-
man, but  where  the  latter  does  feel  it  he  is  affected  by  the
emotion  more  radically  than  we  are  ; it  is  a profounder  reaction
in  him.

We  have  so  far  been  concerned  with  the  ordinary  feeling  of
disgust.  Between  this  and  the  feeling  of  the  ‘ horrible’  there
is  a very  close  analogy ; and  from  this  it  becomes  apparent,
in  accordance  with  the  law  of  reciprocal  attraction  between
analogous  feelings  and  emotions,  how  the  4 natural 5 unclean  or
impure  is  bound  to  pass  over  into,  and  develop  in,  the  sphere
of  the  numinous.  Once,  in  fact,  we  have  in  our  hand  the  key
of  the  problem — the  analogy  and  the  law  just  mentioned — we
can  reconstruct  a priori  the  actual  genetic  process  involved,
by  which  the  one  emotion  prompts  the  other.  We  indeed  have
ourselves  a direct  experience  of  the  same  thing  to-day  in  our
emotional  reaction  to  the  sight  of  flowing  blood,  in  which  it
would  be  hard  to  say  whether  the  element  of  'disgust’  or
‘ horror ' is  the  stronger.

Later,  then,  when  the  more  maturely  developed  elements  of


128  ITS  EARLIEST  MANIFESTATIONS

‘awe’  came  upon  the  scene  and  went  to  shape  the  more
elevated  ideas  of  the  daemonic  and  the  divine,  sarer  and
sanctus,  things  could  become  * unclean ' or  ‘ impure ' in  the
numinous  sense  without  any  substratum  of  ‘ natural 1 impurity
to  serve  as  point  of  departure.  And  we  can  learn  something
of  the  relation  of  feeling-analogy  involved  from  the  fact  that
in  the  reverse  direction  the  feeling  of  the  numinously  impure
calls  up  easily  by  association  the  ‘ natural  ’ emotion  of  disgust
(i.e.  the  feeling  of  the  'naturally’  impure),  so  that  things
become  disgustful  or  loathsome  which  intrinsically  were  not
objects  of  disgust  at  all,  but  of  numinous  horror.  In  fact  such
secondary  and  derived  feelings  of  disgust  can  maintain  them-
selves independently  long  after  the  original  numinous  awe
which  they  once  evoked  has  died  away.  Certain  social  feelings
of  loathing,  such  as  those  of  caste,  can  be  explained  in  this
way:  they  had  once  a purely  daemonic  root,  but  long  after
that  has  died  out  they  still  survive  in  their  secondary,  acquired
character  as  feelings  of  disgust.

9.  If  the  examples  numbered  1 to  8 may  be  termed  4 pre-
religion this  is  not  in  the  sense  that  religion  and  the  possi-
bility of  religion  are  explicable  by  their  means : rather,  they
are  themselves  only  made  possible  and  can  only  be  explained
from  a religious  basic  element,  viz.  the  feeling  of  the  numinous.
This  is  a primal  element  of  our  psychical  nature  that  needs
to  be  grasped  purely  in  its  uniqueness  and  cannot  itself  be
explained  from  anything  else.  Like  all  other  primal  psychical
elements,  it  emerges  in  due  course  in  the  developing  life  of
human  mind  and  spirit  and  is  thenceforward  simply  present.
Of  course  it  can  only  emerge  if  and  when  certain  conditions
arc  fulfilled,  conditions  involving  a proper  development  of  the
bodily  organs  and  the  other  powers  of  mental  and  emotional
life  in  general,  a due  growth  in  suggestibility  and  spontaneity
and  responsiveness  to  external  impressions  and  internal  ex-
periences. But  such  conditions  are  no  more  than  conditions;
they  are  not  its  causes  or  constituent  elements.  To  recognize
this  is  not  to  relegate  the  whole  matter  to  the  domain  of  mystery
and  supernaturalism,  but  simply  to  maintain  that  the  same  thing
holds  good  of  this  which  holds  good  of  all  other  primal  ele-


ITS  EARLIEST  MANIFESTATIONS


129


ments  of  our  mental  or  spiritual  life.  Pleasure  or  pain,  love  or
hate,  all  faculties  of  sense-perception,  such  as  susceptibility  to
light  and  sound,  consciousness  of  space  and  time,  and  sub-
sequently all  higher  capacities  of  the  mind,  all  duly  emerge,
sooner  or  later,  in  the  course  of  development.  That  they  do
so  in  conformity  to  laws  and  under  definite  conditions  is
indisputable,  but  not  the  less  is  each  a new,  original,  underiv-
able  fact,  and  they  are  only  to  be  ‘ explained  ’ on  the  assumption
of  a rich  potentiality  of  spirit  or  mind,  which  underlies  the
course  of  their  development  and  realizes  itself  more  and  more
abundantly  in  them  in  proportion  as  the  conditions  of  organic
and  cerebral  evolution  are  more  fully  realized.  And  what  is
true  of  all  these  other  elements  of  our  mental  life  is  also  true
of  the  feeling  of  the  numinous.

10.  The  purest  case,  however,  of  the  spontaneous  stirring  of
numinous  emotion  would  seem  to  be  that  mentioned  in  No.  7
(the  feeling  of  daemons),  which  is  of  quite  special  signifi-
cance for  the  evolution  of  religion.  This  is  because  here  the
1 religious ' emotion  does  not  from  the  first  get  diverted  (follow-
ing the  ‘ stimulation 1 of  emotional  associations)  to  earthly
things,  wrongly  taken  as  numinous : but  either  it  remains
a pure  feeling,  as  in  ‘ panic  ’ terror  (in  the  literal  sense  of  the
word),  or  itself  invents,  or,  better,  discovers,  the  numinous
object  by  rendering  explicit  the  obscure  germinal  ideas  latent
in  itself.  Even  this  latter  case  is  not  altogether  beyond  the
reach  of  introspective  analysis,  which,  moreover,  can  throw  some
light  upon  the  transition  from  mere  feeling  to  its  ‘ explication  ’
and  to  the  positing  of  the  numinous  object.  At  least  there  is
none  of  us  who  has  any  living  capacity  for  emotion  but  must
have  known  at  some  time  or  at  some  place  what  it  is  to  feel
really  ‘ uncanny  ’,  to  have  a feeling  of  ‘ eerieness  \ And  more
exact  psychological  analysis  will  notice  the  following  points
in  such  a state  of  mind.  First,  there  is  the  point  of  which  we
have  already  spoken,  its  separate  and  underivable,  irreducible,
qualitative  character.  Second,  there  is  the  very  curious  circum-
stance that  the  external  features  occasioning  this  state  of
mind  are  often  quite  slight,  indeed  so  scanty  that  hardly  any
account  can  be  given  of  them,  so  disproportionate  are  they  to

K


130


ITS  EARLIEST  MANIFESTATIONS


the  strength  of  the  emotional  impression  itself.  Indeed  the
clutching  force  and  violence  of  the  emotion  so  far  exceeds  any
impressiveness  contributed  by  the  circumstances  of  time  and
place  that  one  can  often  scarcely  speak  of  an  ‘ impression  * at
all,  but  at  most  of  an  encounter,  serving  as  cue  or  occasion  for
the  felt  experience.  This  experience  of  eerie  shuddering  and
awe  breaks  out  rather  from  depths  of  the  soul  which  the  circum-
stantial, external  impression  cannot  sound,  and  the  force  with
which  it  breaks  out  is  so  disproportionate  to  the  mere  external
stimulation  that  the  eruption  may  be  termed,  if  not  entirely,
at  least  very  nearly,  spontaneous.  And  with  this  we  are
brought  to  the  third  point  which  psychological  analysis  of  the
‘ uncanny * experience  brings  to  view  ; meanings  are  aroused
and  awakened  in  it  of  a unique  and  special  content,  though
altogether  obscure,  latent,  and  germinal,  which  are  the  real
ground  for  the  emotion  of  awe.  For,  if  such  meanings  are  not
there  at  the  start  in  some  form  or  other,  the  mental  and
emotional  disturbance  could  never  take  place.  In  the  fourth
place,  the  mental  state  we  arc  discussing  may,  on  the  one  hand,
remain  pure  ‘ feeling  pursue  its  course  and  pass  away  with-
out its  obscure  thought-content  being  rendered  explicit.  If  in
this  implicit  form  it  is  summed  up  in  a phrase,  this  will  be
merely  some  such  exclamation  as : ‘ How  uncanny  ! 9 or  * How
eerie  this  place  is  1 ' On  the  other  hand,  the  implicit  meaning
may  be  rendered  explicit.  It  is  already  a beginning  of  this
explicative  process — though  still  in  merely  negative  terms —
when  a man  says : * It  is  not  quite  right  here ; ’ ‘ It  is
uncanny/  The  English  ‘This  place  is  haunted'  showTs  a
transition  to  a positive  form  of  expression.  Here  we  have  the
obscure  basis  of  meaning  and  idea  rising  into  greater  clarity
and  beginning  to  make  itself  explicit  as  the  notion,  however
vague  and  fleeting,  of  a transcendent  Something,  a real  opera-
tive entity  of  a numinous  kind,  which  later,  as  the  development
proceeds,  assumes  concrete  form  as  a ‘ numen  loci  \ a daemon,
an  ‘ El  \ a Baal,  or  the  like.

In  Genesis  xxviii.  17  Jacob  says:  ‘How  dreadful  is  this
place ! This  is  none  other  than  the  house  of  Elohim/  This
verse  is  very  instructive  for  the  psychology  of  religion ; it


ITS  EARLIEST  MANIFESTATIONS


131


exemplifies  the  point  that  has  just  been  made.  The  first
sentence  gives  plainly  the  mental  impression  itself  in  all  its
immediacy,  before  rellection  has  permeated  it,  and  before  the
meaning-content  of  the  feeling  itself  has  become  clear  or
explicit.  It  connotes  solely  the  primal  numinous  awe,  which
has  been  undoubtedly  sufficient  in  itself  in  many  cases  to  mark
out  * holy  ' or  ‘ sacred  ’ places,  and  make  of  them  spots  of  aweful
veneration,  centres  of  a cult  admitting  a certain  development.
There  is  no  need,  that  is,  for  the  experient  to  pass  on  to  resolve
his  mere  impression  of  the  eerie  and  aweful  into  the  idea  of
a ‘ numen  *,  a divine  power,  dwelling  in  the  ‘ aweful  ’ place,
still  less  need  the  numen  become  a nomen , a named  power,
or  the  * nomen  ’ become  something  more  than  a mere  pro-
noun. Worship  is  possible  without  this  farther  explicative
process.  But  Jacobs  second  statement  gives  this  process  of
explication  and  interpretation ; it  is  no  longer  simply  an
expression  of  the  actual  experience.

The  German  expression  Es  spukt  Icier  (literally,  it  haunts
here)  is  also  instructive.  It  has  properly  no  true  subject,  or  at
least  it  makes  no  assertion  as  to  what  the  es,  the  ‘ it  is  which
‘haunts';  in  itself  it  contains  no  suggestion  of  the  concrete
representations  of  ‘ ghost  *,  ‘ phantom  *,  1 spectre  \ or  * spirit  ’
common  to  our  popular  mythology.  Rather  is  the  statement
simply  the  pure  expression  of  the  emotion  of  ‘ eerieness  * or
‘ uncanniness  ’ itself,  when  just  on  the  point  of  detaching  and
disengaging  from  itself  a first  vaguely  intimated  idea  of  a
numinous  something,  an  entity  from  beyond  the  borders  of
‘natural'  experience.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  German
language  possesses  no  general  word  less  vulgar  than  ‘ spuken  ’,
no  word  which,  instead  of  pointing  us  aside,  as  this  word  does,
to  the  domain  of  superstition  and  the  impure  offshoots  of  the
numinous  consciousness,  should  retain  its  fundamental  meaning
in  an  unperverted  form.1  * But  even  so  we  can  feel  by  an  effort  of

1 The  expiession  es  geistet  liter  may  serve,  but  it  has  an  artificial
sound.  The  English  ‘to  haunt’  is  a nobler  expression  than  the  German
‘ spuken  \ We  might  legitimately  translate  Habakkuk  ii.  20  : ‘ Yahweh
haunts  His  holy  Temple.1  Such  a ‘ haunting  1 is  frequently  the  meaning
of  the  Hebrew  shakan . And  we  get  a fuller  and  truer  rendering  of

K 2


132


ITS  EARLIEST  MANIFESTATIONS


imaginative  introjection  how  akin  the  debased  feeling  of  haunt-
ing, given  by  this  word,  is  to  those  primary  numinous  experi-
ences by  which  long  ago  seers  had  experience  of  ‘aweful’,  ‘holy’,
numen-possessed  places,  discovering  thereby  the  starting-points
for  local  cults  and  the  birth-places  of  the  1 El 1 worshipped
there.  The  echo  of  such  primaeval  experiences  lingers  in
Genesis  xxviii.  17  (Jacob  at  Bethel)  and  Exodus  iii  (the  burn-
ing bush).  The  places  here  set  apart  by  Moses  and  Jacob  are
genuine  ‘haunted  places’,  at  which  ‘ cs  spukt’,  places  about  which
‘ there  is  something  eerie  Only,  the  feeling  of  being  haunted
has  in  these  cases  not  the  impoverished  and  debased  sense  of
our  modern  eerie  feeling  of  being  haunted  by  ghosts  and
spectres ; it  comprises  all  the  rich  potentialities  and  possibilities
of  development  inherent  in  the  true  primal  numinous  emotion.
Nor  can  we  doubt  that  even  to-day  the  finer  awe  that  may
steal  over  us  in  the  stillness  and  half-gloom  of  our  own  present-
day  sanctuaries  has  ultimate  kinship  not  only  with  that  of
which  Schiller  writes  in  his  verses :

Und  in  Poseidons  Fichtenhain
Tritt  er  mit  frommen  Schauder  ein,1

but  also  with  genuine  ‘ ghostly 5 emotions.  The  faint  shiver
that  may  accompany  such  states  of  mind  is  not  unrelated  to
the  feeling  of  ‘ creeping  flesh  ’,  whose  numinous  character  we
have  already  considered  (p.  16).  In  its  efforts  to  derive
‘ daemon  1 and  'god’  forcibly  from  ‘souls’  and  ‘spirits’,  animism
is  looking  the  wrong  way.  It  would  be,  at  any  ra*e,  on  the
right  path  if  it  maintained  that  they  are  haunting  apparitions.

This  is  partially  proved  by  certain  ancient,  still  extant
terms,  which  long  ago  had  reference  to  the  original  awe  of  the
haunting  spirit  (in  the  good  sense),  and  later  grew  to  become
designations  both  of  the  lowest  and  the  highest  forms  of  ‘awe’.
Such  a term  is  the  enigmatical  word  ‘ asura  ’ in  Sanskrit.

Ps.  xxvi.  8 : ‘the  place  where  Thine  honour  dwelleth  9 by  translating  it :
‘ the  places  haunted  by  Thy  majesty  \ The  SheJcinah  is  properly  the
haunting  pwsence  of  Yahweh  in  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem.

1 Schiller,  Die  Kraniche  des  lbyhus  (The  Cianes  of  Ibykus) :

* And  to  Poseidon’s  grove  of  pine
With  awe  devout  he  enters  in.*


ITS  EARLIEST  MANIFESTATIONS


133


A sura  is  the  * aweful  ’ or  ‘dreadful*  in  the  sense  in  which
Jacob  used  the  word,  the  eerie  or  uncanny.  Later,  in  Indian
religion,  it  is  used  as  the  technical  expression  for  the  lower
forms  of  the  spectral,  ghostly,  and  daemonic.  But  at  the  same
time  it  is  from  primaeval  times  a title  of  the  sublimest  of  all
the  gods  of  the  Rig-Veda,  the  weirdly  exalted  Vanina,  And
in  the  Persian  expression  Ahu ra-mazda  it  becomes  the  name
of  the  one  and  only  eternal  godhead  itself.  The  same  thing
is  true  of  the  term  ‘ adbhuta  You  experience  an  adhhuta
when  you  are  ‘in  an  empty  house',  says  an  old  definition.1
It  is  the  experience  of  our  4 shuddering  '.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  adbhuta  is  also  the  name  for  the  supreme  transcendent
marvel  and  its  attractive  spell,  the  element  of  ‘fascination',
even  for  the  eternal  Brahman  himself  and  his  salvation,  the
Adbhutam  that  passes  beyond  the  reach  of  speech.2

11.  Finally,  it  is  only  upon  our  assumption  of  an  a priori
basis  of  ideas  and  feelings  that  an  explanation  is  forthcoming
for  the  interesting  phenomena  to  which  Andrew  Lang  3 rightly
drew  attention.  These  do  not,  of  course,  support  the  hypo-
thesis of  a ‘ primitive  monotheism  ',  that  offspring  of  missionary
apologetic,  which,  eager  to  save  the  second  chapter  of  Genesis,
yet.  feels  the  shame  of  a modern  at  the  walking  of  Yahweh  ‘ in
the  garden  in  the  cool  of  the  day  \ But  they  do  point  to  facts
which  remain  downright  riddles,  if  we  start  from  any  natural-
istic foundation  of  religion — whether  animism,  pantheism,  or
another — and  must  in  that  case  be  got  out  of  the  way  by  the
most  violent  hypotheses.  The  essence  of  the  matter  is  this,

1 A-dbhuia  means  literally  the  inapprehensible,  inexpressible.  But  in
the  first  instance  it  is  exactly  our  wysterium  slupendiim,  whereas  lasura'
is  the  tremendum.

* Adbhuta  (and  dscarya ) would  be  an  accurate  rendering  in  Sanskrit
for  our  ‘ numinous*,  were  it  not  that  the  word,  like  the  German  ‘ wunder-
bar*  and  the  English  ‘awful’,  has  long  ago  become  trite  and  shallow
from  the  ‘ profane  *— non-religious— uses  to  which  it  has  been  so  per-
petually put.

3 Myth,  Ritual , and  Religion , 1899.  The  Making  of  Religion , 1902.
Magic  and  Religion , 1901.  Cf.  also  P.  W.  Schmidt,  Grundlinien  einer

Vergleichung  der  Religionen  und  Mythologien  der  austronesischen  Volken
Vienna,  1910.


134  ITS  EARLIEST  MANIFESTATIONS

that  elements  and  strands  are  to  be  found  in  numerous
mythologies  and  the  stories  of  savage  tribes,  which  reach
altogether  beyond  the  point  they  have  otherwise  attained
in  religious  rites  and  usages.  Notions  of  ‘high  gods’  are
adumbrated,  with  whom  the  savage  has  often  hardly  any  rela-
tions in  practice,  if  any  at  all,  and  in  whom  he  yet  acknow-
ledges, almost  in  spite  of  himself,  a value  superior  to  that  of
all  other  mythological  images,  a value  which  may  well  accord
with  the  divine  in  the  highest  sense.

Sometimes,  but  by  no  means  always,  we  can  discern  that  these
anticipations  of  a higher  religious  experience  are  the  outcome
of  a past  growth  of  myth.  What  is  characteristic  and  at  the
same  time  so  puzzling  is  the  elevation  with  which  they  stand
out  from  the  surrounding  more  primitive  religious  life  amid
which  they  are  found.  Indeed,  in  cases  where  missions  have
introduced  the  preaching  of  Christian  theism,  these  appre-
hended, exalted  divinities  are  readily  and  frequently  identified
with  God  and  reinforce  the  preaching  of  the  missionary.  And
converts  often  come  to  admit  that,  though  they  had  not
honoured  God,  they  had  had  knowledge  of  Him.  It  is,  of
course,  true  that  this  sort  of  fact  can  sometimes  be  explained
as  due  to  traditional  influences,  protracted  from  an  earlier  time,
when  the  tribe  in  question  was  in  contact  with  a higher  theistic
religion : the  very  names  given  to  these  higher  beings  some-
times prove  as  much.  But  even  in  this  form  the  phenomenon
is  a very  singular  one.  Why  should  ‘ savages  set  in  other
respects  in  an  utterly  alien  milieu  of  barbaric  superstition,
accept  and,  what  is  more,  retain  these  notions,  unless  their  own
savage  minds  were  so  predisposed  to  them  that,  so  far  from
being  able  to  let  them  go,  they  were  obliged  to  take  at  least
an  interest  in  them  as  a tradition  and  very  frequently  to
acknowledge  their  authority  by  the  felt  witness  of  their  own
consciences?  But,  though  the  theory  of  a surviving  tradi-
tion is  sometimes  applicable,  there  are  many  of  these  cases  in
which  it  is  impossible  to  apply  it  without  doing  violence  to  the
facts.  In  these  we  have  clearly  to  do  with  anticipations
and  presentiments  rather  than  survivals.  Assuming  the
continual  pressure  and  operation  of  an  inward  reasonable


ITS  EARLIEST  MANIFESTATIONS


135


disposition  to  form  certain  ideas,  these  anticipations  are  not
only  no  matter  for  surprise;  they  are  as  naturally  to  be
expected  as  are  the  achievements  of  gipsy  musicians,  who,  set
otherwise  in  a milieu  of  the  most  primitive  culture,  yet  respond
to  the  pressure  of  a strong,  innate,  musical  disposition.  With-
out such  an  assumption,  the  facts  would  remain  as  an  insoluble
puzzle.

Naturalistic  psychologists,  in  this  as  in  other  cases,  ignore  a
fact  which  might  be  thought  at  least  to  have  a psychological
interest,  and  which  they  could  notice  in  themselves  by  careful
introspection,  namely,  the  self-attestation  of  religious  ideas  in
one's  own  mind.  This  is,  to  be  sure,  more  certain  in  the  case
of  the  naive  than  in  that  of  the  more  blasd  mind ; but  many
people  would  identify  it  in  their  own  consciousness  if  they
would  only  recall  deliberately  and  impartially  their  hours  of
preparation  for  the  ceremony  of  ‘ confirmation But  what  the
mind  ‘ attests 7 it  can  also  under  favourable  circumstances
evince  and  elicit  from  itself  in  premonitory  stirring  and  felt
surmise.  The  upholders  of  the  theory  of  'Primitive  Mono-
theism on  the  other  hand,  show  no  less  serious  disregard  of
this  central  fact  than  the  naturalistic  psychologists.  For  if
the  phenomena  we  have  been  considering  were  based  simply
and  solely  on  historical  traditions  and  dim  memories  of  a ‘ pre-
historic revelation  ’,  as  on  such  a theory  they  must  be,  this
self-at testation  from  within  would  be  just  as  much  excluded
a3  before.


CHAPTER  XVI


THE  ‘ CRUDER  ’ PHASES

It  is  not  only  the  more  developed  forms  of  religious  experi-
ence that  must  be  counted  underivable  and  a priori.  The  same
holds  good  Throughout  and  is  no  less  true  of  the  primitive,
‘ crude  *,  and  rudimentary  emotions  of  ‘ daemonic  dread  ’ which,
as  we  have  seen,  stand  at  the  threshold  of  religious  evolution.
Religion  is  itself  'present  at  its  commencement : religion,  nothing
else,  is  at  work  in  these  early  stages  of  mythic  and  daemonic
experience.  Let  us  consider  the  circumstances  in  which  alone
the  primitive  and  crude  character  of  these  consists.

(a)  First,  it  is  due  to  the  merely  gradual  emergence  and
successive  awakening  of  the  several  moments  of  the  numinous.
The  numinous  only  unfolds  its  full  content  by  slow  degrees,  as
one  by  one  the  series  of  requisite  stimuli  or  incitements  becomes
operative.  But  where  any  whole  is  as  yet  incompletely  pre-
sented its  earlier  and  partial  constituent  moments  or  elements,
aroused  in  isolation,  have  naturally  something  bizarre,  unin-
telligible, and  even  grotesque  about  them.  This  is  especially
true  of  that  religious  moment  which  would  appear  to  have
been  in  every  case  the  first  to  be  aroused  in  the  human  mind,
viz.  daemonic  dread.  Considered  alone  and  per  se , it  necessarily
and  naturally  looks  more  like  the  opposite  of  religion  than
religion  itself.  If  it  is  singled  out  from  the  elements  which  form
its  context,  it  appears  rather  to  resemble  a dreadful  form  of
auto-suggestion,  a sort  of  psychological  nightmare  of  the  tribal
mind,  than  to  have  anything  to  do  with  religion ; and  the
supernatural  beings  with  whom  men  at  this  early  stage  profess
relations  appear  as  phantoms,  projected  by  a morbid,  unde-
veloped imagination  afflicted  by  a sort  of  persecution-phobia.
One  can  understand  how  it  is  that  not  a few  inquirer’s  could
seriously  imagine  that  * religion ’ began  with  devil-worship,
and  that  at  bottom  the  devil  is  more  ancient  than  God.


THE  ‘ CRUDER ' PHASES


137


To  this  serial  and  gradual  awakening  of  the  different  aspects
and  moments  of  the  numinous  is  also  to  be  ascribed  the
difficulty  of  classifying  religions  by  genus  and  species.  Every
one  who  undertakes  the  task  produces  a different  classification.
For  the  facts  to  be  classified  are  for  the  most  part  not  at  all
related  as  the  distinct  species  of  one  and  the  same  genus;  they
are  not  alternative,  determinate  forms  into  which  the  whole —
* religion  ’ — may  be  analysed,  but  constituent  elements,  out  of
which  it  is  to  be  * synthesized  1 or  built  up.  It  is  as  though
a whale  should  begin  to  show  itself  above  the  water  part
by  part,  and  as  though  people  should  then  attempt  to  classify
the  arched  back,  the  end  of  the  tail,  and  the  head  spouting
water,  by  genus  and  species,  instead  of  seeking  for  such  a real
understanding  of  these  phenomena  as  would  recognize  each  of
them  in  its  place  and  proper  connexion  with  the  rest  as  a part
and  member  of  one  whole  body,  which  must  itself  have  been
grasped  in  its  entirety  before  its  parts  could  be  properly
apprehended.

(ft)  In  the  second  place,  the  ‘ primitiveness  1 of  the  cruder
phases  is  due  to  the  abrupt,  capricious,  and  desultory  character
which  marks  the  earliest  form  of  numinous  emotion  ; and,  in
consequence,  to  its  indistinctness,  which  causes  it  to  be  merged
and  confounded  with  ‘ natural  ’ feelings.

(c)  It  is  due,  next,  to  the  fact  that  the  valuation  prompted
by  the  moment  of  numinous  consciousness  (e.g.  the  ‘ daemonic
dread  ’ phase)  is  attached  in  the  first  place,  and  very  naturally,
to  objects,  occurrences,  and  entities  falling  within  the  workaday
world  of  primitive  experience,  which  prompt  or  give  occasion
to  the  stirring  of  numinous  emotion  by  analogy  and  then  divert
it  to  themselves.  This  circumstance  is  more  than  anything
else  the  root  of  what  has  been  called  nature-worship  and  the
deification  of  natural  objects.  Only  gradually,  under  pressure
from  the  numinous  feeling  itself,  are  such  connexions  subse-
quently ‘ spiritualized  ’ or  ultimately  altogether  rejected,  and
not  till  then  does  the  obscure  content  of  the  feeling,  with  its
reference  to  absolute  transcendent  reality,  come  to  light  in  all
its  integrity  and  self- subsistence.

(d)  A fourth  factor  contributing  to  the  crudity  of  primitive


138


THE  ‘CRUDER’  PHASES


' religion  ’ is  the  uncontrolled,  enthusiastic  form,  making  for
wild  fanaticism,  in  which  the  numinous  feeling  storms  the
savage  mind,  appearing  as  religious  mania,  possession  by
the  numen,  intoxication,  and  frenzy.

(e)  Again,  a quite  essential  factor  is  the  wrong  schematiza-
tions  it  undergoes,  when  interpreted  in  terms  of  some  experi-
ence analogous,  perhaps,  but  not  really  appertaining  to  it.
Examples  of  this  have  already  been  given  (e.g.  p.  127).

(/)  Finally,  and  most  important,  there  is  the  deficient
rationalization  and  moralization  of  the  experience,  for  it  is
only  gradually  that  the  numinous  feeling  becomes  charged
with  progressively  rational,  moral,  and  cultural  significance.

These  considerations  account  for  the  primitive  and  savage
character  of  the  numinous  consciousness  at  its  outset.  But  it
must  be  repeated  that  in  its  content  even  the  first  stirring  of
1 daemonic  dread  ’ is  a purely  a priori  element.  In  this  respect
it  may  be  compared  from  first  to  last  with  the  aesthetic  judge-
ment and  the  category  of  the  beautiful.  Utterly  different  as
my  mental  experiences  are  when  I recognize  an  object  as
‘ beautiful  ’ or  as  ‘ horrible  ’,  yet  both  cases  agree  in  this,  that
I ascribe  to  the  object  an  attribute  that  professes  to  interpret
it,  which  I do  not  and  cannot  get  from  sense-experience,  but
which  I rather  ascribe  to  it  by  a spontaneous  judgement  of  my
own.  Intuitively  I apprehend  in  the  object  only  its  sensuous
qualities  and  its  spatial  form,  nothing  more.  That  the  mean-
ing I call  ‘ beautiful  ’ fits  the  object,  i.  e.  that  these  sense-data
mean  * beautiful  ’,  or  even  that  there  is  any  such  meaning
at  all — these  are  facts  which  sensory  elements  can  in  no  wise
supply  or  tell  me.  I must  have  an  obscure  conception  of  ‘ the
beautiful  itself  and,  in  addition,  a principle  of  subsumption,
by  which  I attribute  it  to  the  object,  else  even  the  simplest
experience  of  a beautiful  thing  is  rendered  impossible.  And
this  analogy  may  be  pursued  further.  Joy  in  the  beautiful,
however  analogous  to  mere  pleasure  in  the  agreeable,  is  yet
distinguishable  from  it  by  a plain  difference  in  quality,  and
cannot  be  derived  from  anything  other  than  itself ; and  just
'such  is  the  relation  of  the  specific  religious  awe  to  mere  natural
fear.


THE  ‘ CRUDER ’ PHASES


139


The  ‘ crude  ’ stage  is  transcended  as  the  numcn  reveals
‘ itself  * (i.  c.  becomes  manifest  to  mind  and  feeling)  ever  more
strongly  and  fully.  An  essential  factor  in  this  is  the  process
by  which  it  is  filled  out  and  charged  with  rational  elements,
whereby  it  passos  at  the  same  time  into  the  region  of  the  con-
ceivable and  comprehensible.  Yet  all  the  time  all  the  elements
of  non-rational  4 inconceivability  ’ are  retained  on  the  side
of  the  numinous  and  intensified  as  the  revelation  proceeds. «

* Revelation  5 does  not  mean  a mere  passing  over  into  the
intelligible  and  comprehensible.  Something  may  be  profoundly
and  intimately  known  in  feeling  for  the  bliss  it  brings  or  the
agitation  it  produces,  and  yet  the  understanding  may  find  no
concept  for  it.  To  know  and  to  tmderstand  coneeptwdhj  are
two  different  things,  are  often  even  mutually  exclusive  and
contrasted.  The  mysterious  obscurity  of  the  numcn  is  by  no
means  tantamount  to  unknowableness.  Assuredly  the  ‘ deus
abscomlitus  et  iiicomprehensibil is  9 was  for  Luther  no  ‘ deus
ifjnotus  And  so,  too,  St.  Paul  ‘ knows  * the  Peace,  which  yet

* passeth  understanding


CHAPTER  XVII


THE  HOLY  AS  AN  A PRIORI  CATEGORY
Part  II

We  conclude,  then,  that  not  only  the  rational  hut  also  the
non-rational  elements  of  the  complex  category  of  c holiness  *
are  a priori  elements  and  each  in  the  same  degree.  Religion
is  not  in  vassalage  either  to  morality  or  teleology,  ‘ethos'  or
1 telos  \ and  does  not  draw  its  life  from  postulates ; and  its
non-rational  content  has,  no  less  than  its  rational,  its  own
independent  roots  in  the  hidden  depths  of  the  spirit  itself.

But  the  same  a priori  character  belongs,  in  the  third  place,
to  the  connexion  of  the  rational  and  the  non-i'ational  elements
in  religion,  their  inward  and  necessary  union.  The  histories
of  religion  recount  indeed,  as  though  it  were  something
axiomatic,  the  gradual  interpretation  of  the  two,  the  pro-
cess by  which  ‘the  divine ' is  charged  and  tilled  out  with
ethical  meaning.  And  this  process  is,  in  fact,  felt  as  some-
thing axiomatic,  something  whose  inner  necessity  we  feel
to  be  self-evident.  But  then  this  inward  self-evidence
is  a problem  in  itself;  we  are  forced  to  assume  an  obscure,
a priori  knowledge  of  the  necessity  of  this  synthesis,  com-
bining rational  and  non-rational.  For  it  is  not  by  any
means  a logical-  necessity.  How  should  it  be  logically  inferred
from  the  still  ‘ crude  ’,  half-daemonic  character  of  a moon-god
or  a sun-god  or  a nuraen  attached  to  some  locality,  that  he
is  a guardian  and  guarantor  of  the  oath  and  of  honourable
dealing,  of  hospitality,  of  the  sanctity  of  marriage,  and  of
duties  to  tribe  and  clan  ? How  should  it  be  inferred  that  he
is  a god  who  decrees  happiness  and  misery,  participates  in  the
concerns  of  the  tribe,  provides  for  its  well-being,  and  directs
the  course  of  destiny  and  history  ? Whence  comes  this  most
surprising  of  all  the  facts  in  the  history  of  religion,  that


THE  HOLY  AS  AN  A PRIORI  CATEGORY  141


beings,  obviously  born  originally  of  horror  and  terror,  become
gods — beings  to  whom  men  pray,  to  whom  they  confide  their
sorrow  or  their  happiness,  in  whom  they  behold  the  origin  and
the  sanction  of  morality,  law,  and  the  whole  canon  of  justice  ?
And  how  does  all  this  come  about  in  such  a way  that,  when
once  such  ideas  have  been  aroused,  it  is  understood  at  once  as
the  plainest  and  most  evident  of  axioms,  that  so  it  must  be  1

Socrates,  in  Plato's  Republic,  ii.  382 E,  says:  'God  then  is
single  and  true  in  deed  and  word,  and  neither  changes  himself
nor  deceives  others  . . / And  Adeimantos  answers  him : ' So
too  is  it  apparent  to  me,  now  that  you  say  it/  The  most
interesting  point  in  this  passage  is  not  the  elevation  and  purity
of  the  conception  of  God,  nor  yet  the  lofty  rationalization  and
moralization  of  it  here  enunciated,  but,  on  the  side  of  Socrates,
the  apparently  4 dogmatic  ' tone  of  his  pronouncement — for  ho
does  not  spend  the  least  pains  in  demonstrating  it— and,  on  the
side  of  Adeimantos,  the  ingenuous  surprise  and,  at  the  same
time,  the  confident  assurance  with  which  he  admits  a truth
novel  to  him.  And  his  assent  is  such  as  implies  convincement ;
he  does  not  simply  believe  Socrates ; he  sees  clearly  for  himself
the  truth  of  his  words.  Now  this  is  the  criterion  of  all  a priori
knowledge,  namely,  that,  so  soon  as  an  assertion  has  been  clearly
expressed  and  understood,  knowledge  of  its  truth  comes  into
the  mind  with  the  certitude  of  first-hand  insight.  And  what
passed  here  between  Socrates  and  Adeimantos  has  been  repeated
a thousand  times  in  the  history  of  religions.  Amos,  also,  says
something  new  when  he  proclaims  Yahweh  as  the  God  of
inflexible,  universal,  and  absolute  righteousness,  and  yet  this  is
a novelty  that  he  neither  proves  nor  justifies  by  an  appeal
to  authorities.  He  appeals  to  a priori  judgements,  viz.  to
the  religious  conscience  itself,  and  this  in  truth  bears  witness
to  his  message.

Luther,  again,  recognizes  and  maintains  such  an  a priori
knowledge  of  the  divine  nature.  His  rage  against  the  ‘ whore
Reason  ’ leads  him,  to  be  sure,  usually  to  utterances  in  the
opposite  sense,  such  as  the  following  :

1 It  is  a knowledge  a posteriori , in  that  we  look  at  God  from
without,  at  His  works  and  His  government,  as  one  looketh  at


142  THE  HOLY  AS  AN  A PRIORI  CATEGORY

a castle  or  house  from  without  and  thereby  feeleth  (spiiret)  the
lord  or  householder  thereof.  But  a \ priori  from  within  hath  no
wisdom  of  men  yet  availed  to  discover  what  and  of  what
manner  of  being  is  God  as  Tie  is  in  Himself  or  in  His  inmost
essence,  nor  can  any  man  know  nor  say  aught  thereof,  but  they
to  whom  it  has  been  revealed  by  the  Holy  Ghost/

Here  Luther  overlooks  the  fact  that  a man  must  ‘ feel  *
or  detect  the  ‘householder’  a priori  or  not  at  all.  But  in  other
passages  he  himself  allows  the  general  human  reason  to  possess
many  true  cognitions  of  what  ‘God  is  in  Himself  or  in  His
inmost  essence  ’.  Compare  the  following  :

‘ Atque  ipsamet  ratio  naturalis  cogitur  earn  concedere
proprio  suo  iudicio  convicta , etiamsi  nulla  esset  scriptura.
Omnes  enim  homines  inveniunt  hanc  sententiam  in  cordibus
suis  scriptam  et  agnoscunt  earn  ac  probatam,  licet  inviti,  cum
audiant  earn  tractari : primo,  Deum  esse  omnipotentem  . . .
deinde,  ipsum  omnia  nosse  et  praescire,  neque  errare  neque
falli  posse  . . . Istis  duobus  corde  et  sensu  concessis  . . ,’ 1

The  interesting  words  of  this  statement  are : proprio  suo
iudicio  convicta,  for  they  make  the  distinction  between  cogni-
tions and  mere  ‘ innate  ideas’  or  supernaturally  instilled
notions,  both  of  which  latter  may  produce  ‘thoughts’,  but  not
convictions  ‘ ex  proprio  iudicio  ’.  Note  also  the  words : ‘ cum
audiant  earn  tractari  ’,  which  exactly  correspond  to  the  experi-
ence of  Plato’s  Adeimantos,  already  quoted.2 *

1 Luther,  Weimar  cd.,  xviii.  719:  4 * * * 8 And  the  natural  reason  itself  is

forced,  even  were  there  no  holy  scripture,  to  grant  it  ( sc . this  assertion),

convinced  by  its  otcn  judgement . For  all  men,  as  soon  as  they  hear  it

treated  of,  find  this  belief  written  in  their  hearts,  and  acknowledge  it

as  proved,  even  unwillingly  : first,  that  God  is  omnipotent,  . . . then,

that  He  has  knowledge  and  foreknowledge  of  all  things  and  can  neither

err  nor  be  deceived  . . . Since  these  two  things  are  admitted  by  heart
and  feeling  . . .*

8 The  most  interesting  features  in  Luther  in  this  connexion,  however^
are  the  passages  upon  * Faith  ’,  in  which  Faith  is  described  as  a unique
cognitive  faculty  for  the  apprehension  of  divine  truth,  and  as  such  is  con-
trasted with  the  * natural  ’ capacities  of  the  Understanding,  as  elsewhere
the  ‘Spirit*  is  contrasted.  ‘Faith’  is  here  like  the  ‘Synteresis’  in  the
theory  of  knowledge  of  the  mystics,  the  ‘inward  teacher 9 (magister  in -
ternus)  of  Augustine,  and  the  * inward  light 1 of  the  Quakers,  which  are  all
of  them  of  course  1 above  reason  *,  but  yet  an  a priori  element  in  ourselves.


THE  HOLY  AS  AN  A PRTOJil  CATEGORY  143

It  is  the  same  experience  which  missionaries  have  so  often
undergone.  Once  enunciated  and  understood,  the  ideas  of  the
unity  and  goodness  of  the  divine  nature  often  take  a surpris-
ingly short  time  to  become  firmly  fixed  in  the  hearers  mind,  if
he  show  any  susceptibility  for  religious  feeling.  Frequently,
thereupon,  the  hearer  adapts  the  religious  tradition  that  has
hitherto  been  his  to  the  new  meaning  he  has  learned.  Or,

A particularly  striking  passage  is  the  following  from  Luther’s  Table-
Talk  (Wei.  v.  5820)  :

‘Omnium  hominum  mentibus  impressa  est  divinitus  notitia  Dei.  Quod
sit  Deus,  omnes  homines  sine  ulla  artium  et  disciplinarum  cognitione  sola
natura  duce  sciunt.et  omnium  hominum  mentibus  hoc  divinitus  impressum
est.  Nulla  umquam  fuit  tarn  fera  gens  et  immanis,  quae  non  crediderit,
esse  divinitatem  quandam,  quae  omnia  creavit.  Itaque  Paulus  inquit:
Invisibilia  Dei  a ereatura  mundi  per  ea,  quae  facta  sunt,  intellecta  con-
spiciuntur,  sempiterna  eius  virtus  et  divinitas.  Quare  omnes  ethnici
sciverunt  esse  Deum,  quantumvis  fuerunt  Kpicurei,  quant  umvis  con-
tenderunt,  non  esse  Deum.  Non  in  eo,  quod  negant  esse  Deum,  simul
confessi  sunt  esse  Deum  ? Nemo  enim  negare  id  potest,  quod  noseit.
Quare,  etsi  quidam  per  omnem  vitam  in  maximis  versati  sunt  fhigitiis  et
sceleribus  et  non  aliter  omnino  vixerunt,  ac  si  nullus  esset  Deus,  tamen
nunquam  consoientiam  animis  potuerunt  eicere  testantem  et  affir-
mantem,  quod  sit  Deus.  Pit  quamvis  ilia  conscientia  pravis  et  perversis
opinionibus  ad  tempua  oppressa  fuit,  redit  tamen  et  convincit  eos  in
extremae  vitae  spiritu.*

‘The  knowledge  of  God  is  impressed  upon  the  mind  of  every  man  by
God.  Under  the  sole  guidance  of  nature  all  men  know  that  God  is —
without  any  acquaintance  with  the  arts  or  sciences  ; and  this  is  divinely
imprinted  upon  all  men’s  minds.  There  has  never  been  a people  so  wild
and  savage  that  it  did  not  believe  that  there  is  some  divine  power  that
created  all  things.  And  thus  it  is  that  Paul  says : “ the  invisible  things
of  God  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly  seen,  being  understood
by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  His  eternal  power  and  Godhead.”
Wherefore  all  the  Gentiles  knew  that  there  is  a God,  however  much  they
were  Epicureans,  however  much  they  maintained  that  there  is  no  God.
Did  they  not  confess  God’s  being  in  that  very  denial  of  Him?  P'or  no
one  can  deny  that  of  which  he  has  no  knowledge.  Wherefore,  although
men  have  all  their  lives  long  been  occupied  in  the  greatest  sins  and
crimes  and  have  lived  just  as  though  there  were  no  God,  yet  they  have
never  been  able  to  cast  forth  from  their  minds  the  conscience  that  testifies
and  affirms  that  God  is.  And  although  that  conscience  has  been  over-
borne for  a time  by  evil  and  perverse  opinions,  yet  it  comes  back  to
oonvict  them  in  their  life’s  final  breath.*


144  THE  HOLY  AS  AN  A PRIORI  CATEGORY

where  resistance  is  offered  to  the  new  teaching,  it  is  yet  often
noticeably  in  the  face  of  pressure  the  . other  way  from  the
man’s  own  conscience.  Such  experiences  have  been  made
known  to  me  by  missionaries  among  the  Tibetans  and  among
African  negroes,  and  it  would  be  interesting  to  make  a collection
of  them,  both  in  regard  to  the  general  question  of  the  a priori
factors  in  religion,  and  especially  as  throwing  light  upon  the
a priori  knowledge  of  the  essential  interdependence  of  the
rational  and  the  non-rational  elements  in  the  idea  of  God.
For  this  the  history  of  religion  is  itself  an  almost  unanimous
witness.  Incomplete  and  defective  as  the  process  of  moralizing
the  ‘ numina  ’ may  often  have  been  throughout  the  wide  regions
of  primitive  religious  life,  everywhere  there  are  traces  of  it  to
be  found.  And  wherever  religion,  escaping  from  its  first
crudity  of  manifestation,  has  risen  to  a higher  type,  this
process  of  synthesis  has  in  all  cases  set  in  and  continued
more  and  more  positively.  And  this  is  all  the  more  remark-
able when  one  considers  at  what  widely  different  dates  the
imaginative  creation  of  the  figures  of  gods  had  its  rise  in
different  cases,  and  under  what  diverse  conditions  of  race,
natural  endowment,  and  social  and  political  structure  its
evolution  proceeded.  All  this  points  to  the  existence  of
a priori  factors  universally  and  necessarily  latent  in  the
human  spirit:  those,  in  fact,  which  we  can  find  directly  in
our  own  religious  consciousness,  when  we,  too,  like  Adeimantos,
naively  and  spontaneously  concur  with  Socrates’  saying,  as
with  an  axiom  whose  truth  we  have  seen  for  ourselves  : ‘ God
is  single,  and  true  in  deed  and  word.’

As  the  rational  elements,  following  a priori  principles,  come
together  in  the  historical  evolution  of  religions  with  the  non-
rational,  they  serve  to  ‘ schematize  ’ these.  This  is  true,  not
only  in  general  of  the  relation  of  the  rational  aspect  of  ‘ the
holy  ’,  taken  as  a whole,  to  its  non-rational,  taken  as  a whole,
but  also  in  detail  of  the  several  constituent  elements  of  the
two  aspects.  The  tremendum , the  daunting  and  repelling
moment  of  the  numinous,  is  schematized  by  means  of  the
rational  ideas  of  justice,  moral  will,  and  the  exclusion  of  what
is  opposed  to  morality ; and  schematized  thus,  it  becomes  the


THE  HOLY  AS  AN  A PRTORl  CATEGORY  145


holy  ‘ Wrath  of  God  which  Scripture  and  Christian  preaching
alike  proclaim.  The  fascinans , the  attracting  and  alluring
moment  of  the  numinous,  is  schematized  by  means  of  the
ideas  of  goodness,  mercy,  love,  and,  so  schematized,  becomes
all  that  we  mean  by  Grace,  that  term  so  rich  in  import,  which
unites  with  the  holy  Wrath  in  a single  ‘ harmony  of  contrasts  ',
and  like  it  is,  from  the  numinous  strain  in  it,  tinged  with  Mys-
ticism. The  moment  mysteriosum  is  schematized  by  the  ctbso -
luteness  of  all  rational  attributes  applied  to  the  Deity.  Probably
the  correspondence  hero  implied — between  'the  mysterious'
and  the  absoluteness  of  all  rational  attributes — will  not  appear
at  first  sight  so  immediately  evident  as  in  the  two  foregoing
cases.  Wrath  and  Grace.  None  the  less  it  is  a very  exact
correspondence.  God's  rational  attributes  can  be  distinguished
from  like  attributes  applied  to  the  created  spirit  by  being  not
relative,  as  those  are,  but  absolute.  Human  love  is  relative,
admitting  of  degrees,  and  it  is  the  same  with  human  know-
ledge and  human  goodness.  God's  love  and  knowledge  and
goodness,  on  the  other  hand,  and  all  else  that  can  be  asserted
of  Him  in  conceptual  terms,  are  formally  absolute.  The  content
of  the  attributes  is  the  same;  it  is  an  element  of  form  which
marks  them  apart  as  attributes  of  God.  But  such  an  element
of  form  is  also  the  ‘ mysterious ' as  such : it  is,  as  we  saw  on
p.  31,  the  formal  aspect  of  the  ‘wholly  other'.  But  to  this
plain  correspondence  of  the  two  things,  4 the  mysterious ' and
the  absoluteness  of  rational  attributes,  a further  one  must  be
added.  Our  understanding  can  only  compass  the  relative.
That  which  is  in  contrast  absolute,  though  it  may  in  a sense
be  thought , cannot  be  thought  home , thought  out ; it  is  within
the  reach  of  our  conceiving,  but  it  is  beyond  the  grasp  of  our
comprehension.  Now,  though  this  does  not  make  what  is
c absolute  ’ itself  genuinely  ‘ mysterious  ’,  as  this  term  was
expounded  on  p.  28,  it  does  make  it  a genuine  schema  of  ‘the
mysterious '.  The  absolute  exceeds  our  power  to  comprehend ;
the  mysterious  wholly  eludes  it.  The  absolute  is  that  which
surpasses  the  limits  of  our  understanding,  not  through  its
actual  qualitative  character,  for  that  is  familiar  to  us,  but
through  its  formal  character.  The  mysterious,  on  the  other


146  THE  HOLY  AS  AN  A PRIORI  CATEGORY


hand,  is  that  which  lies  altogether  outside  what  can  be  thought,
and  is,  alike  in  form,  quality,  and  essence,  the  utterly  and
‘ wholly  other  \ We  see,  then,  that  in  the  case  of  the  moment
of  ‘ mystery  as  well  as  those  of  ‘ awefulness  ’ and  ‘ fascina-
tion’, there  is  an  exact  correspondence  between  the  non-
rational  element  and  its  rational  schema , and  one  that  admits
of  development.

By  the  continual  living  activity  of  its  non-rational  elements
a religion  is  guarded  from  passing  into  ‘rationalism’.  By
being  steeped  in  and  saturated  with  rational  elements  it  is
guarded  from  sinking  into  fanaticism  or  mere  mysticality,  or
at  least  from  persisting  in  these,  and  is  qualified  to  become  a
religion  for  all  civilized  humanity.  The  degree  in  which
both  rational  and  non-rational  elements  are  jointly  present,
united  in  healthy  and  lovely  harmony,  affords  a criterion
to  measure  the  relative  rank  of  religions — and  one,  too,
that  is  specifically  religious.  Applying  this  criterion,  we
find  that  Christianity,  in  this  as  in  other  respects,  stands
out  in  complete  superiority  over  all  its  sister  religions.
The  lucid  edifice  of  its  clear  and  pure  conceptions,  feelings,
and  experiences  is  built  up  on  a foundation  that  goes  lar
deeper  than  the  rational.  Yet  the  non-rational  is  only  the
basis,  the  setting,  the  woof  in  the  fabric,  ever  preserving  for
Christianity  its  mystical  depth,  giving  religion  thereby  the
deep  undertones  and  heavy  shadows  of  Mysticism,  without
letting  it  develop  into  a mere  rank  growth  of  irysticality.
And  thus  Christianity,  in  the  healthily  proportioned  union  of
its  elements,  assumes  an  absolutely  classical  form  and  dignity,
which  is  only  the  more  vividly  attested  in  consciousness  as  we
proceed  honestly  and  without  prejudice  to  set  it  in  its  place  in
the  comparative  study  of  religions.  Then  we  shall  recognize
that  in  Christianity  an  element  of  man’s  spiritual  life,  which
• yet  lias  its  analogies  in  other  fields,  has  for  the  first  time  come
to  maturity  in  a supreme  and  unparalleled  way.


CHAPTER  XVIII


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  THE  ‘HOLY’  AND  THE
FACULTY  OF  ' DIVINATION  \

It  is  one  thing  merely  to  believe  in  a reality  beyond  tho
senses  and  another  to  have  experience  of  it  also ; it  is  one
thing  to  have  ideas  of  ‘the  holy’  and  another  to  become
consciously  aware  of  it  as  an  operative  reality,  intervening
actively  in  the  phenomenal  world.  Now  it  is  a fundamental
conviction  of  all  religions,  of  religion  as  such,  we  may  say,
that  this  latter  is  possible  as  well  as  the  former.  Religion  is
convinced  not  only  that  the  holy  and  sacred  reality  is  attested
by  the  inward  voice  of  conscience  and  the  religious  conscious-
ness, the  ‘ still,  small  voice  * of  the  Spirit  in  the  heart,  by  feeling,
presentiment,  and  longing,  but  also  that  it  may  be  directly
encountered  in  particular  occurrences  and  events,  self-revealed
in  persons  and  displayed  in  actions,  in  a word,  that  beside  the
inner  revelation  from  the  Spirit  therein  an  outward  revelation
of  the  divine  nature.  Religious  language  gives  the  name  of
‘sign’  to  such  demonstrative  actions  and  manifestations,  in
which  holiness  stands  palpably  self-revealed.  From  the  time
of  the  most  primitive  religions  everything  has  counted  as
a sign  that  was  able  to  arouse  in  man  the  sense  of  the  holy,
to  excite  the  feeling  of  apprehended  sanctity,  and  stimulate  it
into  open  activity.  Of  this  kind  were  those  factors  and  circum-
stances of  which  we  have  already  spoken — the  thing  terrible,
sublime,  overpowering,  or  astounding,  and  in  an  especial
degree  the  uncornprehended,  mysterious  thing,  which  became
the  'portent*  and  'miracle*.  But,  as  we  saw,  all  these  were
not  ‘signs’  in  the  true  sense,  but  opportunities,  circumstances,
prompting  the  religious  feeling  to  awake  of  itself;  and  the

L 2


148  THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  THE  ‘HOLY’

factor  promoting  this  result  was  found  to  lie  iti  an  clement
common  to  them  all,  but  merely  analogous  with  ‘the  holy*.
The  interpretation  of  them  as  actual  appearances  of  the  holy
itself  in  its  own  nature  meant,  we  saw,  a confounding  of  the
category  of  holiness  with  something  only  outwardly  resembling
it : it  was  not  a genuine  ‘ anamnesis  \ a genuine  recognition  of
the  holy  in  its  own  authentic  nature,  made  manifest  in  appear-
ance. And  therefore  we  find  that  such  false  recognitions  of
the  holy  are  later  rejected  and  wholly  or  partly  extruded  as
inadequate  or  simply  unworthy,  so  soon  as  a higher  level  of
development  and  a purer  religious  judgement  have  been  reached.
There  is  a precisely  parallel  process  in  another  department  of
judgement,  that  of  aesthetic  taste.  While  the  taste  is  still
crude,  a feeling  or  fore-feeling  of  the  beautiful  begins  to  stir,
which  must  come  from  an  obscure  a priori  conception  of
beauty  already  present,  else  it  could  not  occur  at  all.  The
man  of  crude  taste,  not  being  capable  of  a clear  ‘ recognition  ’
of  authentic  beauty,  falls  into  confusion  and  misapplies  this
obscure,  dim  conception  of  the  beautiful,  judging  things  to  be
beautiful  which  are  in  fact  not  beautiful  at  all.  Here,  as  in
the  case  of  the  judgement  of  holiness,  the  principle  underlying
the  erroneous  judgement  of  beauty  is  one  of  faint  analogy.
Certain  elements  in  the  thing  wrongly  judged  to  be  beautiful
have  a closer  or  remoter  analogy  to  real  beauty.  And  later
here,  too,  when  his  taste  has  been  educated,  the  man  rejects
with  strong  aversion  the  quasi-beautiful  but  not  reedy  beauti-
ful thing  and  becomes  qualified  to  see  and  to  judge  rightly,
i.  e.  to  recognize  as  beautiful  the  outward  object  in  which  the
‘ beauty  ’ of  which  he  has  an  inward  notion  and  standard
really  ‘appears’.

Let  us  call  the  faculty,  of  whatever  sort  it  may  be,  of
genuinely  cognizing  and  recognizing  the  holy  in  its  appear-
ances, the  faculty  of  divination . Does  such  a faculty  exist,
and,  if  so,  what  is  its  nature  ?

To  the  ‘ supernaturalistic  * theory  the  matter  is  simple
enough.  Divination  consists  in  the  fact  that  a man  encounters
an  occurrence  that  is  not  ' natural  ’,  in  the  sense  of  being
inexplicable  by  the  laws  of  nature.  Since  it  has  actually


AND  THE  FACULTY  OF  ‘ DIVINATION  1 149

occurred,  it  must  have  had  a cause;  and,  since  it  has  no
‘ natural  * cause,  it  must  (so  it  is  said)  have  a supernatural
one.  This  theory  of  divination  is  a genuine,  solidly  rationalist
theory,  put  together  with  rigid  concepts  in  a strict  demon-
strative form  and  intended  as  such.  And  it  claims  that  the
capacity  or  faculty  of  divination  is  the  understanding , the
faculty  of  reflection  in  concept  and  demonstration.  The
transcendent  is  here  proved  as  strictly  as  anything  can  be
proved,  logically  from  given  premisses.

It  would  be  almost  superfluous  to  adduce  in  detail  in  oppo-
sition to  this  view  the  argument  that  we  have  no  possibility
of  establishing  that  an  event  did  not  arise  from  natural  causes
or  was  in  conflict  with  the  laws  of  nature.  The  religious  con-
sciousness itself  rises  against  this  desiccation  and  materializa-
tion of  what  in  all  religion  is  surely  the  most  tender  and
living  moment,  the  actual  discovery  of  and  encounter  with  very
deity.  Here,  if  anywhere,  coercion  by  proof  and  demonstra-
tion and  the  mistaken  application  of  logical  and  juridical  pro-
cesses should  be  excluded  ; here,  if  anywhere,  should  be  liberty,
the  unconstrained  recognition  and  inward  acknowledgement
that  conies  from  deep  within  the  soul,  stirred  spontaneously,
apart  from  all  conceptual  theory.  If  not  ‘ natural  science*  or
‘ metaphysics  at  least  the  matured  religious  consciousness
itself  spurns  such  ponderously  solid  intellcctualistic  explana-
tions. They  are  born  of  rationalism  and  engender  it  again ;
and,  as  for  genuine  ‘divination’,  they  not  only  impede
it,  but  despise  it  as  extravagant  emotionalism,  mysticality,
and  false  romanticism.  Genuine  divination,  in  short,  has
nothing  whatever  to  do  with  natural  law  and  the  relation
or  lack  of  relation  to  it  of  something  experienced.  It  is  not#
concerned  at  all  with  the  way  in  which  a phenomenon— be  it
event,  person,  or  thing— came  into  existence,  but  with  what  it
means,  that  is,  with  its  significance  as  a 4 sign  ’ of  the  holy.

The  faculty  or  capacity  of  divination  appears  in  the  lan-
guage of  dogma  hidden  beneath  the  fine  name  4 testimonium
Spiritus  Sancti  internum the  inner  witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit
— limited  in  the  case  of  dogma,  to  the  recognition  of  Scripture
as  ‘ Holy  \ And  this  name  is  the  only  right  one,  and  right  in


150  THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  THE  ‘HOLY’


a more  than  figurative  sense,  when  the  capacity  of  divination
is  itself  grasped  and  appraised  by  divination.  This  is  not
our  task  here.  We  therefore  employ  a psychological  rather
than  a religious  expression  as  being  more  appropriate  to  the
nature  of  our  discussion.

In  this  sense,  then,  * divination’  is  no  new  theological
discovery.  Sehleiennacher,  in  his  Discourses  upon  Religion
(1799),  Jacob  Friedrich  Fries,  in  his  doctrine  of  ‘ Ahndung  ’
(‘ inkling’,  surmise,  presage),  and  Sehleiermacher’s  colleague
and  Fries’s  pupil,  Do  Wette,  have  all  in  effect  made  use  of  it
and  given  it  a footing  in  theology,  the  last-named  with  special
reference  to  the  divination  of  the  divine  in  history,  under  the
name  ‘ Surmise  of  the  divine  government  of  the  world  *.  I
have  discussed  Schleiermachers  discovery  at  greater  length  in
my  edition  of  his  Discourses,1  and  in  my  volume,  Kantisch -
Fries  sake  Religionspldlosoplue  und  Hire  A nwendung  auf  die
Tkeologie , I have  given  a more  precise  statement  of  the
‘Ahndung*  theory,  as  it  is  found  in  Fries  and  De  Wette.
To  these  two  works  the  reader  is  referred  for  a more  detailed
exposition  of  the  matte]*,  and  I shall  here  note  only  very
briefly  the  more  salient  featui'es  of  this  doctrine.

What  Schleiermacher  is  feeling  after  is  really  the  faculty  or
capacity  of  deeply  absorbed  contemplation , when  confronted
by  the  vast,  living  totality  and  reality  of  things  as  it  is  in
nature  and  history.  Wherever  a mind  is  exposed  in  a spirit
of  absorbed  submission  to  impressions  of  'the  universe*,  it
becomes  capable — so  he  lays  it  down — of  experiencing  ‘ intui-
tions* and  ‘feelings*  (Anschauungen  and  GefiiMe)  of  something
that  is,  as  it  were,  a sheer  overplus,  in  addition  to  empirical
reality.  This  overplus,  while  it  cannot  be  apprehended  by
mere  theoretic  cognition  of  the  world  and  the  cosmic  system
in  the  form  it  assumes  for  science,  can  nevertheless  be  really
and  truly  grasped  and  experienced  in  intuition , and  is  given
form  in  single  ‘intuitions*.  And  these,  in  turn,  assume
shape  in  definite  statements  and  propositions,  capable  of  a
certain  groping  formulation,  which  are  not  without  analogy

1 SchleiermacheFs  Uber  die  Religion . Vandenhoeck  & Ruprecht,
Gottingen,  pp.  17  ft'.


AND  THE  FACULTY  OF  * DIVINATION  * 151

with  theoretic  propositions,  but  are  to  be  clearly  distin-
guished from  them  by  their  free  and  merely  felt,  not  reasoned,
character.  In  themselves  they  are  groping  intimations  of
meanings  figuratively  apprehended.  They  cannot  be  em-
ployed as  ‘statements  of  doctrine * in  the  strict  sense,  and
can  neither  be  built  into  a system  nor  used  as  premisses
for  theoretical  conclusions.  But,  though  these  intuitions  are
limited  and  inadequate,  they  arc  none  the  less  indisputably
true , i.e.  true  as  far  as  they  go  ; and  for  all  Sfchleiermacher’s
aversion  to  the  word  in  this  connexion  they  must  certainly  be
termed  cognitions , modes  of  knowing,  though,  of  course,  not
the  product  of  reflection,  but  the  intuitive  outcome  of  feeling.
Their  import  is  the  glimpse  of  an  Eternal,  in  and  beyond  the
temporal  and  penetrating  it,  the  apprehension  of  a ground  and
meaning  of  things  in  and  beyond  the  empirical  and  transcend-
ing it.  They  are  surmises  of  a Reality  fraught  with  mystery
and  momentousness.  And  it  is  to  be  noted  that  Schleiermacher
himself  sometimes  avails  himself  of  the  term  * cthnden 1 (divin-
ing, surmise)  instead  of  his  principal  ones,  ‘ intuition  9 and
‘ feeling  and  expressly  connects  together  the  divination  of
prophecy  and  the  knowledge  of  ‘ miracle  ’ in  the  religious
sense  of  a ‘sign7*

When  Schleiermacher,  in  expounding  the  nature  of  the
experience,  tries  to  elucidate  its  object  by  giving  examples,  he
is  for  the  most  part  led  to  adduce  impressions  of  a higher
rcAoy,  an  ultimate,  mysterious,  cosmic  purposiveness,  of  which
we  have  a prescient  intimation.  Here  he  is  quite  in  agree-
ment with  the  exposition  of  Fries,  who  defines  the  faculty  of
‘ Ahndung’  as  being  just  a faculty  of  divining  the  ‘objective
teleology  ’ outlie  world.  And  De  Wette  says  the  same  thing
even  more  unreservedly.  But  in  Schleiermacher  this  rational
element  is  none  the  less  grounded  in  eternal  mystery,  that
basis  of  the  cosmos  that  goes  beyond  reason.  This  is  shown
in  the  groping,  hesitant,  tentative  manner  in  which  the  mean-
ing of  the  experience  always  reveals  itself.  And  it  is
emphasized  especially  forcibly  when  Schleiermacher  shows
where  in  his  own  case  this  experience  is  to  be  found  in  the
world  he  confronts;  that  it  is  not  so  much  in  its  universal


152  THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  THE  1 HOLY '


conformity  to  law — a rational  quality,  interpretable  by  the
intellect  in  terms  of  purpose — but  rather  by  means  of  what
appears  to  us  as  a baffling  ‘ exception  * to  law,  thereby  hinting
at  a meaning  that  eludes  our  understanding.1

No  intellectual,  dialectical  dissection  or  justification  of  such
intuition  is  possible,  nor  indeed  should  any  be  attempted,  for
the  essence  most  peculiar  to  it  would  only  be  destroyed
thereby.  Rather  it  is  once  again  to  aesthetic  judgements  we
must  look  for  the  plainest  analogy  to  it.  And  the  faculty  of
judging  (Urteilsvermiigen), here  presupposed  by  Schleiermacher,
certainly  belongs  to  that  'Judgement ' (Urteilskraft),  which
* Kant  analyses  in  his  Third  Critique,  and  which  he  himself  sets
as  ‘ aesthetic  judgement  * in  antithesis  to  logical  judgement.
Only,  we  may  not  infer  from  this  that  the  particular  several
judgements  passed  in  this  way  need  be  judgements  of  ‘ taste  ’
in  their  content  Kant’s  distinction  between  the  ‘ aesthetic  ’
and  logical  judgement  did  not  mean  to  imply  that  the  faculty
of  ‘ aesthetic  ’ judgement  was  a judgement  upon  ‘ aesthetic  *
objects  in  the  special  narrow  sense  of  the  term  ‘aesthetic  \ as
being  concerned  with  the  beautiful.  His  primary  intention
is  simply  and  in  general  terms  to  separate  the  faculty  of  judge-
ment based  upon  feeling  of  whatever  sort  from  that  of
the  understanding,  from  discursive,  conceptual  thought  and
inference ; and  his  term  ‘ aesthetic  ’ is  simply  meant  to  mark
as  the  peculiarity  of  the  former  that,  in  contrast  to  logical
judgement,  it  is  not  worked  out  in  accordance  with  a clear
intellectual  scheme,  but  in  conformity  to  obscure,  dim  princi-
ples which  must  be  felt  and  cannot  be  stated  explicitly  as
premisses.  Kant  employs  sometimes  another  expression  also
to  denote  such  obscure,  dim  principles  of  judgement,  based  on
pure  feeling,  viz.  the  phrase  ‘ not-unfolded  * or  ‘ unexplicated
concepts  ’ (‘  unausgewickelte  Begriffe  ’) ; and  his  meaning  is
here  exactly  that  of  the  poet,  when  he  says:

Und  weeket  der  dunklen  Gefiihle  Gewalt,

Die  im  Herzen  wunderbar  schliefen.2

1 Op.  cit.,  p.  53.

2 4 It  waketh  the  power  of  feelings  obscure
That  in  the  heart  wondrously  slumbered.*

(Schiller:  Der  Graf  von  Uabshury.)


AND  THE  FACULTY  OF  * DIVINATION*  153
Or  again :

Was  von  Menschen  nicht  gewusst
Oder  nicht  bedacht,

Durcli  das  Labyrinth  der  Brust
Wandelt  bei  der  Nacht.1

On  the  other  hand,  those  judgements  that  spring  from  pure
contemplative  feeling  also  resemble  judgements  of  aesthetic
taste  in  claiming,  like  them,  objective  validity,  universality,
and  necessity.  The  apparently  subjective  and  personal  char-
acter of  the  judgement  of  taste,  expressed  in  the  maxim : ‘ Dc
gustibus  non  disputandum  *,  simply  amounts  to  this,  that
tastes  of  different  degrees  of  culture  and  maturity  are  first
compared,  then  so  opposed  one  to  the  other  that  agreement  is
impossible.  But  unanimity,  even  in  judgements  of  taste,  grows
and  strengthens  in  the  measure  in  which  the  taste  matures
with  exercise;  so  that  even  here,  despite  the  proverb,  there  is
the  possibility  of  taste  being  expounded  and  taught,  the
possibility  of  a continually  improving  appreciation,  of  cou-
vincement  and  conviction.  And  if  this  is  true  of  the  judgement
arising  from  aesthetic  feeling  in  the  narrower  sense,  it  is  at  least
equally  true  of  the  judgement  arising  from  ‘contemplation*.
Where,  on  the  basis  of  a real  talent  in  this  direction,  ‘contempla-
tion * grows  by  careful  exercise  in  depth  and  inwardness,  there
what  one  man  feels  can  be  ‘ expounded  * and  ‘ brought  to  con-
sciousness * in  another : one  man  can  both  educate  himself  to
a genuine  and  true  manner  of  feeling  and  be  the  means  of
bringing  others  to  the  same  point ; and  that  is  what  corre-
sponds in  the  domain  of  ‘ contemplation  * to  the  part  played
by  argument  and  persuasion  in  that  of  logical  conviction.

Schleiermacher’s  exposition  of  his  great  discovery  suffers
from  two  defects.  We  will  consider  one  of  them  here,  leaving
the  other  to  the  next  chapter.  Schleiermaclier,  then,  naively
and  unreflectingly  assumes  this  faculty  or  capacity  of  ‘ divi-
nation * to  be  a universal  one.  In  point  of  fact  it  is  not

1 ‘What  beyond  our  conscious  knowing
Or  our  thought’s  extremest  span
Threads  by  night  the  labyrinthine
Pathways  of  the  breast  of  man/

(Goethe:  An  den  Monti.)


154  THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  THE  * HOLY  *

universal  if  this  means  that  it  could  be  presupposed  necessarily
ii*  every  man  of  religious  conviction  as  an  actual  fact,  though
of  course  Schleiermacher  is  quite  right  in  counting  it  among
the  general  capacities  of  mind  and  spirit,  and  regarding  it
indeed  as  the  deepest  and  most  peculiar  element  in  mind,  and
in  that  sense — man  being  defined  by  his  intelligent  mind —
calling  it  a 'universal  human’  element.  But  what  is  a
universal  potentiality  of  man  as  such  is  by  no  means  to  be
found  in  actuality  the  universal  possession  of  every  single
man;  very  frequently  it  is  only  disclosed  as  a special  endow-
ment and  equipment  of  particular  gifted  individuals.  And
Schleiermacher  gives  an  excellent  indication  of  how  the  matter
rightly  lies  in  his  very  interesting  exposition  of  the  nature  and
function  of  the  f M it  tier  ’ (mediator)  in  his  first  ‘ Discourse  \
Not  Man  in  general  (as  rationalism  holds),  but  only  special
‘divinatory*  natures  possess  the  faculty  of  divination  in
actuality;  and  it  is  these  that  receive  impressions  of  the
transcendent,  not  the  undifferentiated  aggregate  of  homo-
geneous individuals  in  mutual  interplay,  as  held  by  modern
social  psychology.1

It  is  questionable  whether  Schleiermacher  himself,  in  spite
of  his  (re-)discovery  of  ‘ divination  ’,  was  a really  ‘ divinatory  ’
nature,  although  in  his  first  ‘ Discourse  ’ lie  maintains  that  he
is.  One  of  his  contemporaries,  to  wit,  Goethe,  was  at  any
rate  decidedly  his  superior  in  this  respect.  In  Goethe’s  life
the  power  of  divination,  not  latent  but  finding  vital  exercise,
plays  an  important  part,  and  it  finds  singular  expression  in
the  meaning  he  gives  to  the  term  ‘ daemonic  put  with  such
emphasis  in  Dichtuny  and  Wahrheit,  Book  20,  and  in  .his
Talks  with  Eckermann.2  Let  us  briefly  examine  these.  The
most  characteristic  feature  in  his  notion  of  the  ‘ daemonic’  is

1 And  this  is  undoubtedly  true  as  far  back  as  the  lowest  levels  of
development,  when  the  ‘ religious  dread  ’ first  begins  to  stir  in  primitive
form  and  to  manifest  itself  in  ideas.  To  derive  these  from  an  original
group-  and  mass- fantasy  collectively  operating  is  itself  sheer  fantasy,  and
the  results  this  theory  helps  to  produce  are  about  as  queer  and  grotesque
os  any  of  the  ideas  of  which  it  treats.

8 Cf.  Goethe’s  Scimtliche  Werhey  ed.  Cotta,  vol.  xxv,  pp.  124  fif. ; Ecker-
tnann,  Gesprftche  wit  Goethe , ed.  A.  v.  d.  Linden,  Part  II,  pp.  140  ff.


AND  THE  FACULTY  OF  ‘DIVINATION’  155

that  it  goes  beyond  all  ‘ conceiving  ’,  surpasses  ‘ understand-
ing ’ and  ‘ reason  and  consequently  is  4 inapprehensible  * and
cannot  properly  be  put  into  a statement :

‘The  Daemonic  is  that  which  cannot  be  accounted  for  by
understanding  and  reason.  It  chooses  for  itself  obscure  times
of  darkness.  ...  In  a plain,  prosaic  town  like  Berlin  it  would
hardly  find  an  opportunity  to  manifest  itself.  ...  In  Poetry
there  is  from  first  to  last  something  daemonic,  and  especially
in  its  unconscious  appeal,  for  which  all  intellect  and  reason  is
insufficient,  and  which,  therefore,  has  an  efficacy  beyond  all
concepts.  Such  is  the  effect  in  Music  in  the  highest  degree,
for  Music  stands  too  high  for  any  understanding  to  reach,
and  an  all-mastering  efficacy  goes  forth  from  it,  of  which  how-
ever no  man  is  able  to  give  an  account.  Religious  worship
cannot  therefore  do  without  music.  It  is  one  of  the  foremost
means  to  work  upon  men  with  an  effect  of  marvel /

‘ Docs  not  the  daemonic  (asks  Eekermann)  also  appear  in
Mentis  V ‘ Pre-eminently  so/  said  Goethe,  ‘and  assuredly  in
all  which  we  cannot  explain  by  intellect  or  reason.  And
in  general  it  is  manifested  throughout  nature,  visible  and
invisible,  in  the  most  diverse  ways.  Many  creatures  in  the
animal  kingdom  are  of  a wholly  daemonic  kind,  and  in  many
we  see  some  aspect  of  the  daemonic  operative/

We  notice  here  how  the  elements  of  the  numinous  we
discovered  plainly  recur:  the  wholly  lion-rational,  incom-
prehensible by  concepts,  the  elements  of  mystery,  fascination,
awefulness,  and  energy.  The  note  of  the  1 daemonic 5 in
the  animal  kingdom  reminds  us  of  dob  and  the  ‘ leviathan  '.
But  in  another  respect  Goethe's  intuition  falls  far  short  of  Job's
intuition  of  the  ‘ mysterium  \ By  his  ignoring  of  the  warn-
ing of  the  book  of  Job  and  by  applying  to  the  ‘ mysterium  ’
the  standards  of  the  rational  understanding  and  reason  and
conceptions  of  human  purpose,  the  non-rational  comes  to
involve  for  Goethe  a contradiction  between  meaning  and  mean-
inglessness, sense  and  nonsense,  that  which  promotes  and
that  which  frustrates  human  ends.  Sometimes,  however,  he
approximates  it  to  wisdom,  as  when  he  says :

‘So  there  was  something  daemonic  governing  the  circum-
stances of  my  acquaintance  with  Schiller  all  through.  We
might  have  met  earlier  or  later.  But  that  we  should  have


156’  THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  THE  ‘HOLY’


met  just  at  the  time  when  I had  my  Italian  tour  behind  me
and  Schiller  had  begun  to  weary  of  his  philosophical  specula-
tions— that  was  a fact  of  great  significance  and  fraught  with
success  for  both  of  us/

It  even  conies  near  the  divine :

‘Such  occurrences  have  often  befallen  me  throughout  my
life.  And  one  comes  in  such  cases  to  believe  in  a higher
influence  ( Kimvirkung ),  something  daemonic,  to  which  one
pays  adoration,  without  presuming  to  try  to  explain  it
further/

Invariably  the  ‘ daemonic ’ lias  an  import  of  ‘energy  9 and
‘ overpoweringness and  sets  its  stamp  upon  men  of  vehement
and  overpowering  personality.

‘Napoleon  said  I,  * seems  to  have  been  a daemonic  sort  of
man/

‘ He  was  so  absolutely  and  to  such  a degree  ’,  said  Goethe,
‘ that  hardly  any  other  man  can  be  compared  with  him  in  this
respect.  The  late  Grand  Duke  also  was  a daemonic  nature,
full  of  limitless,  active  force  and  restlessness/

‘ Has  not  Mepbistopheles  also  “ daemonic  ” traits  ? *

‘No,  he  is  much  too  negative  a being.  The  daemonic
manifests  itself  in  a downright  positive  and  active  power/

In  Diddling  und  Wahrheit  (p.  126)  he  delineates  still  better
the  impressions  such  numinous  persons  make,  and  in  this
passage  especially  sets  in  the  foreground  our  ‘ tremendum  * as
the  element  alike  of  ‘ dread  ’ and  ‘ overpoweringness  \

‘ This  daemonic  character  appears  in  its  most  dreadful  form
when  it  stands  out  dominatingly  in  some  man.  Such  are  not
always  the  most  remarkable  men,  either  in  spiritual  quality
or  natural  talents,  and  they  seldpm  have  any  goodness  of
heart  to  recommend  them.1  But  an  incredible  force  goes
forth  from  them  and  they  exercise  an  incredible  power  over
all  creatures,  nay,  perhaps  even  over  the  elements.  And  who
can  say  how  far  such  an  influence  may  not  extend  ft  *

But  the  efficacy  and  influence  of  such  a ‘ daemonic 9 man,
even  when  it  is  beneficent,  moves  to  amazement  rather  than
to  admiration ; it  is  more  a tumultuous  urgency  than  ordinary
agency,  and  is  at  any  rate  absolutely  non-rational.  This  is


1 i.  e.  they  are  merely  ‘ numinous  not  ‘ holy 1 men.


AND  THE  FACULTY  OF  DIVINATION'  157

what  Goethe  tries  to  describe  in  the  series  of  antitheses  in
Diddling  und  Wahrheit  (p.  124) :

4 . . . Something  that  only  manifested  itself  in  contradictions
and  therefore  could  not  be  comprehended  under  any  concept,
still  less  under  any  one  word.  It  was  not  divine,  for  it  seemed
unreasonable;  not  human,  for  it  lacked  understanding;  not
devilish,  for  it  was  beneficent ; not  angelic,  for  it  often  dis-
played malicious  joy.  It  was  like  chance,  for  it  pointed  to  no
consequence ; it  resembled  providence,  for  it  indicated  con-
nexion and  unity.  All  that  hems  us  in  seemed  penetrable  to
it ; it  seemed  to  dispose  at  will  of  the  inevitable  elements  of
our  being,  contracting  time  and  expanding  space.  Only  in
the  impossible  did  it  seem  at  home,  and  the  possible  it  spurned
from  itself  with  contempt.

4 Although  this  daemonic  thing  can  be  manifested  in  every-
thing corporeal  and  incorporeal,  finding  indeed  most  notable
expression  among  animals,  still  it  is  pre-eminently  with  men
that  it  stands  in  closest  and  most  wonderful  connexion,  and
there  fashions  a power  which,  if  not  opposed  to  the  moral
world  order,  yet  intersects  it  in  such  a way  that  the  one
might  be  taken  for  the  warp  and  the  other  for  the  woof.'

There  can  be  no  clearer  expression  than  this  of  the  pro-
digiously strong  impression  which  divination  of  the  numinous
may  make  upon  the  mind,  and  that  obviously  not  on  a
single  occasion  but  repeatedly,  till  it  has  become  almost
a matter  of  habit.  But  at  the  same  time  this  ‘divina-
tion ' of  Goethe  is  not  one  that  apprehends  the  numinous  as
the  prophet  does.  It  does  not  rise  to  the  elevation  of  the
experience  of  Job,  where  the  non-rational  mystery  is  at  the
same  time  experienced  and  extolled  as  supra-rational,  as  of
profoundest  value , and  as  holiness  in  its  own  right.  It  is
rather  the  fruit  of  a mind  which,  for  all  its  depth,  was  not
equal  to  such  profundities  as  these,  and  to  which,  therefore,
the  non-rational  counterpoint  to  the  melody  of  life  could  only
sound  in  confused  consonance,  not  in  its  authentic  harmony,
indefinable  but  palpable.  Therefore,  though  it  is  genuine
divination,  it  is  the  divination  of  Goethe  4 the  pagan as  he
sometimes  used  to  call  himself.  Indeed,  it  is  a divination  that
functions  only  at  the  level  of  the  4 daemonic  * which,  as  we
saw,  precedes  religion  proper,  not  at  the  level  of  the  divine


158


THE  * HOLY 9 AND  ‘ DIVINATION'


And  the  holy  in  the  truest  sense  ; and  it  shows  very  clearly  how
that  sort  of  merely  ‘ daemonic  * experience  of  the  numinous
may  in  a highly  cultivated  mind  only  stir  emotional  reactions
of  bewilderment  and  bedazzlement,  without  giving  real  light
or  warmth  to  the  soul.  Goethe  did  not  understand  how  to
adjust  this  divination  of  the  'daemonic9  to  his  own  higher
conception  of  the  divine;  and,  when  Eckermann  turned  the
conversation  to  that,  his  answer  was  hesitating  and  evasive  :

* The  operative,  efficacious  force  (said  I tentatively),  which
we  call  the  “ daemonic”,  does  not  seem  to  fit  in  with  the  idea
of  the  divine.9  4 Dear  boy,9  said  Goethe,  4 what  do  we  know
of  the  idea  of  the  divine,  and  what  can  our  narrow  conceptions
presume  to  tell  of  the  Supreme  Being  ? If  I called  him  by  a
hundred  names,  like  a Turk,  I should  yet  fail  short  and  have
said  nothing  in  comparison  to  the  boundlessness  of  his  attri-
butes.9

Put,  if  we  leave  out  of  account  the  comparatively  low  level
of  Goethe's  4 divination 9,  we  have  yet  in  it  a most  exact
example  of  what  Schleiermacher  had  in  mind.  These  are
‘intuitions  and  feelings9,  if  not  of  something  divine,  still  of
something  numinous  in  the  natural  world  and  in  history,  and
intuitions  brought  to  the  higher  vitality  by  an  individual  with
an  innate  ‘ divinatory  9 gift.  At  the  same  time  the  principles
on  which  this  divination  works  cannot  even  be  suggested,  for
all  the  examples  Goethe  may  give.  What  does  the  4 daemonic  9
really  consistin'?  How  does  he  come  to  be  conscious  of  it?
How  does  he  identify  it  as  one  and  the  same  through  all  the
manifold  and  contradictory  forms  in  which  it  manifests  itself?
These  are  the  questions  to  which  Goethe  can  suggest  no  answer.
It  is  evident  that  in  this  experience  he  is  being  guided  by
‘mere  feeling9,  that  is,  by  an  a priori  principle  that  is  not
explicit  and  overt,  but  dim  and  obscure.


CHAPTER  XIX


DIVINATION  TN  PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY

In  the  last  chapter  we  spoke  of  two  defects  in  Schleier-
macher’s doctrine  of  divination.  The  first  of  these  — his
misleading  assumption  that  this  is  a universal  human  faculty
— has  already  been  considered,  and  we  have  now  to  turn  to
the  second.  This  is  that,  though  Schleiermacher’s  description
of  divination  in  relation  to  the  world  of  nature  and  history
has  both  warmth  and  insight,  he  gives  no  clear  detailed
account,  but  only  the  scantiest  hints,  of  what  is  after  all  its
worthiest  object  and  the  object  most  propitious  to  its  develop-
ment, namely,  the  history  of  relii/iou,  especially  that  of  the
Bible  and  its  culmination  in  the  person  of  Christ  himself.  His
concluding1  discourse  ’ makes  emphatic  and  significant  mention
of  Christianity  and  Christ,  but  Christ  is  here  only  introduced  as
the  supreme  divining  subject,  not  as  the  object  of  divination  pur
excellence . And  it  is  the  same  in  Schleiermacher’s  ‘ Glauhcnr-
lehre  \ In  this,  too,  the  significance  of  Christ  is,  essentially,
intended  to  be  fully  given  in  the  fact  that  he  c admits  us  into
the  power  and  beatitude  of  his  consciousness  of  God\  Now
this  is  a thought  of  high  value,  but  it  does  not  attain  to  that
supreme  value  which  Christianity  imputes  to  Christ,  of  being
in  his  own  person  4 holiness  made  manifest  \ that  is,  a person
in  whose  being,  life,  and  mode  of  living  we  realize  of  ourselves
by  4 intuition  and  feeling’  the  self-revealing  power  and  pre-
sence of  the  Godhead.  For  to  the  Christian  it  is  a momentous
question  whether  or  no  a real  divination — a direct,  first-hand
apprehension  of  holiness  manifested,  the  ; intuition  ’ and  ‘ feel-
ing * of  it — can  be  got  from  the  person  and  life  of  Christ ;
whether,  in  short,  ‘ the  holy  ’ can  be  independently  experienced
in  him,  making  him  a real  revelation  of  it.


ICO  DIVINATION  IN  PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY

In  this  matter  we  can  obviously  get  no  help  from  the  pain-
ful and  fundamentally  impossible  inquiries,  so  often  started*
into  c Jesus’  consciousness  of  himself  \ They  are  impossible,  if
for  no  other  reason,  because  the  evidence  at  our  disposal  is
neither  sufficient  in  quantity  nor  appropriate  to  such  a purpose.
Jesus  puts  as  the  content  of  his  message  and  all  his  utterances,
not  himself,  but  the  ‘ kingdom  *,  its  beatitude  and  righteous-
ness, and,  in  its  first  and  most  straightforward  interpretation,
the  ‘gospel*  is  the  ‘good  tidings*  of  the  kingdom  of  God.
What  statements  about  himself  do  occur  are  fragmentary  and
incidental  But  even  were  this  not  the  case,  even  if  we  could
find  in  the  gospels  a detailed  theory  of  Jesus  as  to  his  own
nature,  what  would  this  prove  ? Religious  enthusiasts  have
not  infrequently  had  recourse  to  the  most  exalted  modes  of
self-proclamation,  and  often  enough  n6  doubt  their  statements
about  themselves  have  been  completely  bona  fide  and  sincere.
And  it  is  just  such  self-revealing  statements  of  the  prophets  of
all  ages  that  are  more  than  any  others  dependent  for  their  form
upon  their  temporal  or  local  context,  the  equipment  of  myth
or  dogma  with  which  his  environment  supplies  the  speaker.
The  fact  that  the  prophet  or  seer  or  inspired  teacher  applies
all  this  material  to  state  something  about  himself  merely
demonstrates  the  intensity  of  his  self-consciousness,  his  sense
of  mission,  his  conviction,  and  his  claim  to  belief  and  obedi-
ence— all  of  which  are  to  be  taken  for  granted  where  a man
stands  forward  in  response  to  an  inner  call.  The  immediate,
intuitive  ‘ divination  * of  which  we  arc  speaking  would  indeed
not  come  as  a result  of  such  statements  by  the  prophet
about  himself,  however  complete  ; they  can  arouse  a belief  in
his  authority,  but  cannot  bring  about  the  peculiar  experience
of  spontaneous  insight  that  here  is  something  holy  made
manifest.  * We  have  heard  him  ourselves  and  know  that  this
is  indeed  the  Christ  * (St.  John  iv.  42).

It  cannot  now  be  doubted  that  such  an  avowal  was  made  to
him  as  a result  of  a spontaneous,  original  divination.  This  must
at  any  rate  be  true  of  Christ’s  own  first  disciples.  Otherwise
it  would  be  unintelligible  how  the  Church  could  have  come
into  existence  at  all.  Mere  proclamation,  mere  authoritative


DIVINATION  IN  PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY  161


statement,  cannot  bring  about  these  massive  certainties  and
that  impelling  strength,  that  power  to  maintain  and  assert
itself,  which  were  necessary  if  the  Christian  community  was
to  come  into  being  and  which  can  be  recognized  in  it  as  its
unmistakable  characteristics.

Misapprehension  of  this  is  only  possible  if,  attempting  a
one-sided  approach  to  the  phenomenon  of  the  origin  of  the
Christian  Church,  we  try  to  .reconstruct  the  facts  solely  by
the  methods  of  scholarship  and  out  of  the  material  afforded  by
the  staled  feelings  and  blunted  sensibility  of  our  present-day
artificial  civilization  and  complex  mentality.  It  would  be  an
advantage  if,  in  addition  to  these  methods,  an  attempt  were
made  to  frame  a less  abstract  intuition  of  the  genesis  of
original  and  genuine  religious  communities  with  the  aid  of
living  instances  of  the  thing  as  it  may  still  be  found  to-day.
It  would  be  necessary  for  this  to  seek  places  and  moments
at  which  even  to-day  religion  shows  itself  alive  as  a naive
emotional  force,  with  all  its  primal  quality  of  impulse  and
instinct.  This  can  still  be  studied  in  remote  corners  of  the
Mohammedan  and  Indian  world.  Even  to-day  one  may  come
upon  scenes  in  the  streets  of  Mogador  or  Marrakesh,  which
have  the  strangest  outward  resemblance  to  those  recorded  by
the  Synoptic  Gospels  : 4 holy  men  * (and  very  queer  specimens
they  generally  are !)  now  and  then  make  their  appearance,
each  the  centre  of  a group  of  disciples, and  about  them  the  people
come  and  go,  listening  to  their  sayings,  looking  at  their  miracles,
observing  how  they  live  and  what  they  do.  Bands  of  adherents
gather  round  them,  more  loosely  or  more  closely  united  as  the
case  may  be.  ‘ Logia  tales,  and  legends  form  and  accumulate ; 1
new  brotherhoods  arise  or,  if  already  arisen,  extend  in  widen-

1 It  Li  astonishing  that  the  main  problem  of  Gospel  criticism,  viz.  how
the  collection  of  * Logia*  arose,  is  not  studied  in  this  still  living  milieu.
It  is  even  more  astonishing  that  the  logia-series  were  not  long  ago
elucidated  from  the  closely  corresponding  milieu  of  the  4 Sayings  of  the
Fathers’  (dirotpOtyfuiTa  tu>v  7rarepa>y),  from  the  Hadith  of  Muhammed,  or
from  the  Franciscan  legends.  And  a particular  striking  case  of  the  same
thing  is  the  collection  of  the  Logia  of  Rama-Krishna,  which  has  grown
to  completion  in  our  own  day  and  under  our  very  eye9.


> 162  DIVINATION  IN  PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY


ing  circles.  But  the  centre  of  it  all  is  always  the  man  himself,
a e holy  man  * in  his  lifetime,  and  what  sustains  the  movement
is  always  the  peculiar  power  of  his  personality,  the  special
impression  he  makes  on  the  bystander.  Those  who  should  know
assure  us  that  ninety-eight  per  cent,  of  these  ;holy  men’  are
impostors  ; but,  even  so,  we  are  left  with  two  per  cent,  who  are
not,  a surprisingly  high  percentage  in  the  case  of  a matter  that
invites  and  facilitates  imposture  as  much  as  this  does.  The
consideration  of  this  remaining  two  per  cent,  should  continue  to
throw  much  light  on  the  actual  fact  of  the  genesis  of  a reli-
gious community.  The  point  is  that  the  4 holy  man  ’ or  the
4 prophet  ’ is  from  the  outset,  as  regards  the  experience  of  the
circle  of  his  devotees,  something  more  than  a 4 mere  man’
( \jri\b 9 av6p<ono$).  He  is  the  being  of  wonder  and  mystery,
who  somehow  or  other  is  felt  to  belong  to  the  higher  order  of
things,  to  the  side  of  the  numen  itself.  It  is  not  that  he
himself  teaches  that  he  is  such,  but  that  lie  is  experienced  as
such.  And  it  is  only  such  experiences,  which,  while  they  may
be  crude  enough  and  result  often  enough  in  self-deception,
must  at  least  be  profoundly  and  strongly  felt,  that  can  give
rise  to  religious  communities.

Such  cases  of  contemporary  religious  movements  afford
after  all  a very  inadequate  analogy,  far  removed  from  that
which  occurred  long  ago  in  Palestine.  Yet,  if  even  these  move-
ments are  only  made  possible  by  the  fact  that  men  actually
experience,  or  presume  that  they  experience,  verital^e  holiness
in  the  personalities  of  individuals,  how  far  more  true  must
this  not  be  of  the  early  Christian  community  ! That  this  was
so  is  attested  directly  by  the  whole  spirit  and  the  universal
conviction  of  the  early  communities  as  a whole,  so  far  as  we
can  discern  it  in  their  modest  records.  And  certain  of  the
slighter  touches  in  the  Synoptic  portrait  of  Jesus  confirm  the
fact  expressly  in  particular  cases.  We  may  instance  here  the
narratives  already  referred  to  of  Peter's  haul  of  fishes  (Luke
v.  8),  and  of  the  centurion  of  Capernaum  (Matt.  viii.  8 ; Luke
vii.  6),  which  point  to  spontaneous  responses  of  feeling  when  the
holy  is  directly  encountered  in  experience.  Especially  apt  in
this  connexion  is  the  passage  in  Mark  x.  32 : Kal  r\v  irpody^v


DIVINATION  IN  PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY  163

avToir?  6 * Irjcrov? ' teal  e6a/if$ovvTO,  oi  Se  <zko\ovOovvt€$  €0o-
fiovvro  (‘  and  Jesus  went  before  them:  and  they  were  amazed  ;
and  as  they  followed,  they  were  afraid’).  This  passage
renders  with  supreme  simplicity  and  force  the  immediate
impression  of  the  numinous  that  issued  from  the  man
Jesus,  and  no  artistry  of  characterization  could  do  it  so
powerfully  as  these  few  masterly  and  pregnant  words.  The
later  saying  in  John  xx.  28  (the  confession  of  Thomas,  ‘My
Lord  and  my  God  ’)  may  perhaps  appear  to  us  by  contrast
the  utterance  of  a time  too  far-reaching  in  its  formulations,  and
very  far  removed  from  the  simplicity  of  the  original  experi-
ence of  the  disciples.  And  this  passage  in  Mark  may  appeal
to  us  all  the  more  just  because  the  living  emotion  here  dis-
dains any  precise  formulation  at  all ; none  the  less  does  it
contain  the  real  roots  of  all  later  developments  of  Christology.

Such  intimations  of  the  numinous  impression  made  by  Jesus
upon  those  who  knew  him  occur  in  the  Gospel  narrative  only,
as  it  were,  incidentally  to  the  main  purpose  of  the  narrator,
who  is  scarcely  interested  in  them,  but  absorbed  rather  in
miracle-  or  other  records.  In  our  eyes  their  interest  is  all  the
greater,  and  we  can  fancy  how  numerous  similar  experiences
must  have  been  of  which  no  trace  survives  in  the  records, just
because  there  was  no  miracle  to  be  told  of  in  connexion  with
them  and  they  were  simply  taken  for  granted  by  the  narrator
as  a matter  of  course.

To  this  place  belong  further  the  belief  in  Jesus’  supremacy
over  the  demonic  world  and  the  tendency  to  legend  that  began
to  take  effect  from  the  start;  the  fact  that  his  own  relatives
take  him  for  a man  ‘ possessed  an  involuntary  acknowledge-
ment of  the  ‘ numinous  ’ impression  he  made  upon  them  ; and
in  an  especial  degree  the  conviction  that  breaks  spontaneously
upon  the  minds  of  his  disciples  as  by  a sudden  impact,  won  not
from  his  teaching  but  from  the  very  experience  of  him,  that
he  is  the  ‘Messiah’,  the  being  who  stood  for  the  circle  in
which  he  moved  as  the  numinous  being  par  excellence . The
experiential  character  of  this  belief  in  his  Messiahship  stands
out  clearly  in  Peter’s  first  confession  and  Jesus’  answer  to
it  (Matt.  xvi.  15—17),  ‘ Flesh  and  blood  have  not  revealed  it

M 2


104  DIVINATION  IN  PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY


unto  thee,  but  my  Father,  which  is  in  heaven.’  Jesus  himself
is  astonished  at  Peter’s  confession,  which  shows  that  this  was
not  learnt  on  authority,  but  found  out  by  Peter  himself,  a
genuine  discovery , arising  from  the  impression  Jesus  made
upon  him  and  the  testimony  borne  to  it  in  the  depth  of  the
mind,  where  no  teaching  of  flesh  and  blood,  or  even  of  * the
word’,  can  avail,  but  only  ‘ my  Father  in  heaven’  himself  and
without  any  intermediary.

For  this  factor — the  mind’s  own  witness  to  the  impression —
is,  it  need  hardly  be  said,  an  indispensable  one.  Without  it
all  ‘impression’  is  without  effect,  or  rather  no  impression
could  occur  at  all.  Therefore,  all  doctrines  of  the  ‘impression
made  by  Christ  ’ arc  inadequate  if  they  do  not  pay  regard  to  this
second  element,  which  indeed  is  nothing  but  the  mental  pre-
disposition necessary  for  the  experience  of  holiness,  to  wit,  the
category  of  the  holy,  potentially  present  in  the  spirit  as  a dim
or  obscure  a priori  cognition.  ‘ Impress  ’ or  ‘ impression  \
that  is,  presupposes  something  capable  of  receiving  impres-
sions, and  that  is  just  what  the  mind  is  not,  if  in  itself  it  is
only  a ‘ tabula  rasa  In  that  richer  sense  in  which  we  use  the
word  here,  we  do  not  in  fact  mean  by  4 impression  ’ merely  the
‘impression*  which,  in  the  theory  of  the  Sensationalist  school,
is  the  psychical  result  of  sense-perception  and  is  left  behind  as
a psychical  trace  or  vestige  of  the  percept.  To  be  ‘ impressed  ’ by
some  one,  in  the  sense  we  use  the  term  here,  means  rather  to
cognize  or  recognize  in  him  a peculiar  significance  and  to
humble  oneself  before  it.  And  we  maintain  that  this  is  only
possible  by  an  element  of  cognition,  comprehension,  and  valua-
tion in  one’s  own  inner  consciousness,  that  goes  out  to  meet
the  outward  presented  fact,  i.  e.  by  the  ‘ spirit  within  ’.  In
Schleiermacher’s  language  the  ‘ presentiment  ’ goes  out  to  meet
the  c revelation  * to  which  it  belongs.  Music  can  only  be  under-
stood by  the  musical  person ; none  but  he  receives  an  ‘ impres-
sion * of  it.  And  to  every  unique  kind  of  real  impression
corresponds  in  the  same  way  a unique  and  special  sort  of  *'  con-
geniality if  the  word  may  be  used  in  this  special  sense  of
a particular  disposition  or  aptitude,  akin  to  the  object
arousing  the  impression.  * Nemo  audit  verbum,  nisi  spiritu


DIVINATION  IN  PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY  165


intus  docente.5  Once  again  let  us  recall  the  example  of  the
beautiful.  A beautiful  thing  can  only  make  an  impression
as  such,  i.  e.  as  signifying  beauty,  if  and  in  so  far  as  a man
possesses  in  himself  a priori  the  potentiality  of  framing  a
special  standard  of  valuation,  viz.  aesthetic  valuation.  Such
a disposition  can  only  be  understood  as  an  original,  obscure
awareness  and  appreciation  of  the  value  of  ‘beauty5  itself.
Because  a man  has  this  in  him,  or  better,  because  he  is  capable
of  realizing  it  by  training,  he  is  able  to  recognize  beauty  in
the  particular  given  beautiful  object  that  he  encounters,  to
feel  the  correspondence  of  this  object  with  the  hidden  ‘standard
of  value5  within  him.  And  so,  and  only  so,  will  lie  get  an
‘ impression  \


CHAPTER  XX


DIVINATION  IN  CHRISTIANITY  TO-DAY

The  question  whether  the  primitive  Church  did  or  could
experience  holiness  in  the  person  of  Christ,  which  we  can  but
answer  in  the  affirmative,  is  not  so  important  to  us  as  the
question  whether  we  too  to-day  can  still  do  so.  Has  the
portrayal  of  Christ’s  life,  his  actions  and  achievement,  as  pre-
served and  handed  down  by  the  Christian  Church,  the  value  and
power  of  a revelation  for  us  to-day,  or  do  we  in  this  matter  but
live  upon  the  inheritance  bequeathed  us  by  the  first  community
of  Christians  and  base  our  faith  on  the  authority  and  testimony
of  others?  There  would  be  no  hope  of  answering  this  question,
were  it  not  that  in  us  too  that  inner  divining  power  of  appre-
hension and  interpretation  which  lias  already  been  considered
may  find  a place — that  witness  of  the  spirit,  only  possible  on  the
basis  of  a mental  predisposition  to  recognize  ‘ the  holy  * and  to
respond  to  it.  If  without  this  no  understanding  and  no  ‘impres-
sion’ of  Christ  was  possible  even  to  the  first  disciples,  of  what
avail  should  any  tradition  be  that  requires  the  mediation  of
generations  of  Christian  men?  But  if  we  may  make  this  assump-
tion of  a predisposing  inner  ‘witness  of  the  Spirit’ — as  we  must
— the  matter  is  very  different.  In  that  case  there  is  no  harm
even  in  the  fact  that  the  records  of  Christ’s  life  are  fragmentary,
that  they  contain  manifold  uncertainties,  that  they  are  inter-
mingled with  legendary  and  overlaid  with  Hellenistic  elements.
For  the  Spirit  knows  and  recognizes  what  is  of  the  Spirit.

As  evidence  of  the  way  in  which  this  inward  principle —
this  co- witnessing  spirit  within  us— works,  prompting,  inter-
preting, and  sending  out  intimation  and  surmise,  I have  found
the  information  of  a keenly  observant  missionary  from  a
remote  field  very  instructive.  He  told  111c  that  lie  had  found
it  a constant  matter  for  fresh  astonishment  to  see  how  a pro-


DIVINATION  IN  CHRISTIANITY  TO-DAY  167

sentment  of  the  Word  so  inadequate — which  could  only  hint
at  its  meaning  in  a difficult  foreign  tongue  and  had  to  work
with  alien  conceptions— could  yet  at  times  win  so  surprisingly
deep  and  inward  an  acceptance.  And  he  said  that  here  too
the  best  results  always  were  due  to  the  responsive  apprehen-
sion that  came  out  of  the  hearer’s  heart  half-way  to  meet  the
presented  truth.  Certainly  it  is  only  in  this  fact  that  wo  have
a clue  to  the  understanding  of  the  problem  of  St.  Paul.  Perse-
cutor of  the  Church  as  he  was,  the  intimations  he  had  of  the
being  and  meaning  of  Christ  and  his  Gospel  must  have  come
to  him  piecemeal,  in  fragmentary  hints  and  caricature.  But
the  spirit  from  within  forced  upon  him  the  acknowledgement
to  which  he  succumbed  on  the  way  to  Damascus.  It  taught
him  that  infinitely  profound  understanding  of  the  Christ  made
manifest  which  has  led  a critic  like  Wellhausen  to  confess
that,  when  all  is  said,  no  man  has  understood  Christ  himself
so  deeply  and  thoroughly  as  Paul.

If,  now,  the  experience  of  holiness  and  ‘ the  holy’  in  Christ
is  still  to  be  possible  and  so  afford  support  to  our  faith,  one
thing  is  evidently  to  be  presupposed  at  the  outset,  namely,
that  his  own  most  immediate  and  primary  achievement  and
intention  can  be  directly  understood  and  appraised  in  our
experience,  so  that  out  of  this  may  grow  the  ‘impression  ’ of
his  holiness  with  a like  directness.  And  here  a difficulty
seems  to  confront  us,  which  has  to  be  removed  if  the  entire
problem  is  not  to  be  barred  from  the  start.  It  is  this  ; is  that
which  we  to-day  think  we  find  in  the  person  of  Christ  and  in
Christianity  at  bottom  at  all  the  same  as  that  which  he  really
intended  to  achieve  and  that  which  the  first  community  of  his
disciples  found  in  him  ? In  other  words,  has  Christianity
really  a ‘ principle  ’ of  its  own,  which,  however  capable  of
historical  evolution,  yet  remains  unchanged  in  essence,  so  that
the  Christianity  of  to-day  may  be  measured  against  the  faith
of  the  first  disciples  and  awarded  a rank  essentially  the
same  ?

Is  Christianity  at  all  and  in  a strict  sense  Jesus’  religion  ?
That  is,  is  the  religion  we  know  to-day  as  Christianity,  with
its  peculiar  and  unique  content  of  belief  and  feeling,  standing


168  DIVINATION  IN  CHRISTIANITY  TO-DAY

in  all  its  historic  greatness  and  supremacy  when  measured
against  other  religions,  with  all  its  power  to-day  over  the
hearts  and  consciences  of  men  to  elevate  or  to  excite,  to  launch
accusation  or  confer  benediction,  to  attract  or  to  repel — is  this
religion  still  in  its  essence  and  inner  meaning  the  same  thing
as  the  simple,  unpretentious  religion  and  form  of  piety  which
Jesus  himself  had,  which  he  himself  aroused  and  ‘ founded '
in  the  circle  of  those  little,  heart-stirred  bands  of  men  in
that  out-of-the-way  corner  of  the  world,  Galileo  ? It  must  be
generally  agreed  that  it  lias  at  least  changed  its  form  and  its
colour  very  significantly  since  those  days,  and  that  it  has  been
exposed  to  violent  alterations  and  metamorphoses.  But  is
there  any  abiding  essence,  any  enduring  1 principle 1 at  all
behind  all  the  sequence  of  its  manifestations,  susceptible  of
evolution  and  development,  but  remaining  one  and  the  same
throughout?  Is  it  a case  of  development  and  evolution,  or
rather  merely  of  continual  transmutation,  the  influx  of  some-
thing quite  different,  which  one  man  laments  as  a perversion,
a second  admires  as  a welcome  substitution,  and  a third
merely  records  as  a simple  historical  fact  ?

Christianity,  as  it  stands  before  us  to-day  in  present
actuality  as  a great  * world  religion  5,  is  indubitably,  so  far  as
its  claim  and  promise  go,  in  the  first  and  truest  sense  a reli-
gion of  Redemption.  Its  characteristic  ideas  to-day  are
Salvation — overabounding  salvation,  deliverance  from  and
conquest  of  the  f world  ’ and  from  existence  in  bondage  to  the
world,  and  even  from  creaturehood  as  such,  the  overcoming  of
the  remoteness  of  and  enmity  to  God,  redemption  from  servi-
tude to  sin  and  the  guilt  of  sin,  reconciliation  and  atonement,
and,  in  consequence,  grace  and  all  the  doctrine  of  grace,  the
Spirit  and  the  bestowal  of  the  Spirit,  the  new  birth  and  the
new  creature.  These  conceptions  are  common  to  Christendom,
despite  the  manifold  cleavages  that  divide  it  into  different
confessions,  churches,  and  sects,  and  they  characterize  it
sharply  and  definitely  as  a f religion  of  redemption  ’ par  excel -
Icucc,  setting  it  in  this  respect  on  a level  with  the  great  reli-
gions of  the  East,  with  their  sharp,  dualistic  antithesis  of  the
state  of  liberation  and  bondage,  nay,  justifying  its  claim  not  to


DIVINATION  IN  CHRISTIANITY  TO-DAY  169


fall  short  of  these  in  regard  to  the  necessity  of  redemption
and  the  grant  of  salvation,  but  to  surpass  them,  both  in  the
importance  it  gives  to  these  conceptions  and  in  the  richness  of
meaning  it  finds  in  them.  It  cannot  be  doubted  that  here,  in
these  elements, is  to  be  found  the  inner  ‘principle*  and  essence
of  contemporary  Christianity  to-day,  and  what  we  have  to  ask
is  whether  the  wealth  of  mental  and  emotional  content  was  in
very  truth  the  4 principle  * of  that  plain  4 religion  of  Jesus  * long
ago,  whose  establishment  must  be  termed  the  first  and  most
immediate  achievement  of  Christ.

In  answering  this  question  in  the  affirmative,  we  would
point  to  a parable  which,  intended  to  have  reference  to  the
kingdom  of  Cod,  fits  the  principle  of  Christianity  equally  well:
the  parable  of  the  grain  of  mustard  seed  and  the  tree  that
grew  therefrom.  This  parable  hints  at  a change  and  altera-
tion, for  the  grown  tree  is  something  different  from  the  seed,
but  an  alteration  that  is  no  transformation,  no  transmutation
or  ‘epigenesis’,  but  genuine  ‘evolution*  or  development,  the
transition  from  potentiality  to  actuality.

The  ‘religion  of  Jesus*  docs  not  change  gradually  into
a religion  of  redemption  ; it  is  in  its  whole  design  and  ten-
dency a religion  of  redemption  from  its  earliest  commencement,
and  that  in  the  most  uncompromising  sense.  Though  it  lacks
the  theological  terms  which  the  Church  later  possessed,  its
‘ redemptive  * character  is  manifest  and  unambiguous.  If  we
try  to  determine  as  simply  and  concisely  as  possible  what
really  characterized  the  message  of  Jesus,  ignoring  what  was
historically  inessential,  we  are  left  with  two  central  elements:
(1)  First,  there  is  the  proclamation  of  Lite  ki)njdom  of  God , as  no
mere  accessory,  but  the  foundation  of  the  whole  Gospel.  This
is  characteristic  of  His  ministry  from  the  beginning  and
throughout  its  course.  (2)  Second,  there  is  the  reaction  against
Phariseeism,  and,  in  connexion  with  this,  Jesus*  ideal  of  godli-
ness as  the  attitude  and  mind  of  a child  when  its  fault  has
been  forgiven.  But  both  points  comprise  in  principle  every-
thing which  later  became  separately  formulated  in  the  specifi-
cally ‘ redemptive  * doctrines  of  Christianity : Grace,  Election,
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  Renewal  by  the  Spirit.  These  were


170  DIVINATION  IN  CHRISTIANITY  TO-DAY

possessed  by  and  experienced  by  that  first  group  of  disciples
as  truly  as  by  any  later  Christians,  though  in  an  implicit
form.  A closer  consideration  may  make  this  more  plain.

To  speak  of  a ‘religion  of  redemption  ’ is,  one  may  say,  to
be  guilty  of  a redundancy,  at  any  rate  if  we  are  considering
the  more  highly  developed  forms  of  religion.  For  every  such
religion,  when  once  it  has  won  its  autonomy  and  freed  itself
from  dependent  reference  to  an  ideal  of  merely  worldly  4 wel-
fare' (ei jSatfiovia),  whether  private  or  public,  develops  in
itself  unique  and  overabounding  ideals  of  beatitude  which
maybe  designated  by  the  general  term  ‘salvation'.  Such  a
‘ salvation 7 is  the  goal  to  which  the  evolution  of  Indian  reli-
gions has  tended  ever  more  markedly  and  consciously,  from
their  beginning  with  the  notion  of  deification  of  theUpanishad-
Pantheism  on  to  the  bliss-state  of  the  Buddhist  Nirvana,
which,  as  wre  have  seen  (p.  39),  is  negative  only  in  appearance.
It  is  also  the  goal  of  the f religions  of  redemption  7,  specifically  so
called,  which  spread  with  such  vigour  over  the  civilized  world
from  Egypt,  Syria,  and  Asia  Minor  about  the  beginning  of
our  era.  Further,  it  is  obvious  to  an  examination  sharpened
by  the  comparative  study  of  religions  that  the  same  tendency
to  ‘salvation*  is  operative  also  in  the  vesture  of  eschatology
that  gives  form  to  the  religion  of  Persia.  Islam,  too,  embodies
the  longing  for  and  the  experience  of  salvation.  In  this
case  ‘ salvation  ’ is  not  simply  in  the  c hope  7 of  the  joys  of
Paradise:  rather  the  most  vital  element  in  Islam  is  ‘Islam7
itself,  i.  e.  that  surrender  to  Allah  which  is  not  merely  the
dedication  of  the  will  to  him,  but  also  at  the  same  time  the
entering  upon  the  ‘Allah*  state  of  mind  here  and  now,
the  object  of  longing  and  striving,  a frame  of  mind  which  is
already  ‘salvation7,  and  winch  may  possess  and  enrapture
the  man  like  an  intoxication  and  can  give  rise  to  a mystic
transport  of  bliss.

But  if  the  idea  of  ‘ salvation  7 thus  lies  at  the  base  of  all
higher  religion  everywhere,  it  is  manifested  quite  unmistakably
and  in  supreme  fashion,  both  in  intensity  and  intrinsic  purity,
in  the  ‘Kingdom  of  Heaven  7 of  Christianity,  which  is  at  once
a tenet  of  faith,  an  object  of  desire,  and  a present  experience.


DIVINATION  IN  CHRISTIANITY  TO  DAY  171


It  is  quite  immaterial  whether  this  thought  in  ancient  Israel
issued  from  purely  political  considerations,  only  gradually
rising  above  the  ground  of  mere  fact,  till  it  finally  was  exalted
to  a transcendent  meaning,  or  whether  there  were. from  the
first  authentic  religious  motives  at  work  to  shape  and  develop
it.  All  this  is  beside  the  point,  inasmuch  as  the  materials  by
which  the  religious  impulse  works  are  very  frequently  at  first
of  an  unspiritual,  earthly  nature.  It  is  just  the  unresting
activity  and  continual  urgency  of  this  impulsion,  enabling  it
to  attain  to  freedom  and  press  onward  and  upward  to  ever
higher  levels  of  development, — it  is  just  this  that  manifests
it  most  characteristically,  and  reveals  best  its  inner  essential
being.  And  this  is  nothing  else  than  the  pure  impulsion
to  redemption , and  the  pre-intimation  and  anticipation  of  a
boded  ‘good’,  transcendent  and  ‘wholly  other  *,  a ‘salvation*
comparable  to  those  ‘salvations*  striven  after  in  other  reli-
gions, but  supreme  above  them  in  the  measure  in  which  the
Lord  of  the  Kingdom  found  and  possessed  in  the  Christian
experience  is  supreme  above  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Ormuzd,  Allah,
as  also  above  the  Absolute  in  the  form  of  Nirvana,  Kaivaly am,
Tao,  or  whatever  other  name  it  may  be  given.  So  redemp-
tion is  throughout  the  purport  of  the  gospel  even  in  its  first
and  simplest  form,  a redemption  which  is  both  to  be  fulfilled
by  God  hereafter  and  yet  at  the  same  time  already  experienced
here  and  nowr.  In  the  former  aspect  it  comes  as  the  assured
promise  of  the  Kingdom  of  God ; in  the  latter,  by  the  present
experience  of  His  fatherhood,  instilled  by  the  Gospel  into  the
soul  of  the  disciple  as  his  most  intimate  possession.  That  the
early  Christians  wrere  conscious  of  this  as  something  entirely
novel  and  unheard  of  and  exceeding  all  measure  (a  good  new8)%
is  seen  in  the  saying  of  Jesus  that  ‘the  Law  and  the  Prophets
were  until  John:  since  that  time  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom  of
God  is  preached  * (Luke  xvi.  16),  in  which  John  the  Baptist,
who  also  preached  a ‘ Kingdom  of  God  ’,  is  yet  classed  with
1 the  Law  and  the  Prophets  ’.

But  to  describe  this  novelty  most  truly  and  concisely  it
would  be  necessary  to  invent  the  saying  of  Paul  (Romans  viii.
15),  did  it  not  already  stand  w ritten :


172  DIVINATION  IN  CHRISTIANITY  TO-DAY


4 For  ye  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to
fear ; but  ye  have  received  the  spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we
cry,  Abba,  Father/

Here  Paul  lias  penetrated  to  the  heart  of  the  matter,
breaking  definitely  with  the  older  religion  and  seizing  un-
erringly upon  the  very  principle  and  essence  of  the  new.  And
this  ‘ principle  and  essence ’ was  the  same  for  the  first  fisher-
men by  the  Lake  of  Galilee  and  has  remained  one  and  the
same  throughout  the  whole  history  of  Christianity.  With  it
is  given  the  new  attitude  to  Sin  and  Guilt,  to  Law  and  to
Freedom,  and,  in  'principle , ‘Justification’,  ‘Second  Birth’,
‘ Renewal  ’,  the  bestowal  of  the  Spirit,  new  creation,  and  the
blissful  freedom  of  God’s  children.  It  was  inevitable  that
these  or  similar  expressions  and  doctrines  and  the  profound
speculation  to  which  they  would  give  rise  should  make  their
appearance  when  the  Word  called  to  the  Spirit  and  the  Spirit
answered.1

And  so  Christ’s  first  and  direct  work  and  achievement,  as
we  can  clearly  understand  it  to-day,  is  the  effectual  bestowal
of  ‘salvation’  as  future  hope  and  present  possession  by
arousing  a faith  in  his  God  and  in  the  Kingdom  of  God.

And  now  how  can  Divination,  in  respect  to  such  work  of
Christ,  awake  in  us  also,  in  us  who  stand  so  remote  in  time
from  him  ? How  can  we,  too,  come  to  experience  in  him
‘ holiness  made  manifest  ’ (

Obviously  not  through  demonstration  and  proof  by  apply-
ing some  conceptual  rule.  We  cannot  suggest  any  conceptual
criterion  in  the  form  : ‘ When  the  elements  x and  y are  brought
together,  a revelation  results/  It  is  just  this  impossibility
which  makes  us  speak  of  ‘ divination  ‘ intuitive  apprehen-
sion ’.  The  experience  must  come,  not  by  demonstration,  but
by  pure  contemplation , through  the  mind  submitting  itself
unreservedly  to  a pure  ‘ impression  ’ of  the  object.  For  this
purpose  all  that  was  given  and  contained  in  the  message  and
work  of  Jesus  must  be  combined  with  the  picture  of  his  person
and  life  and  viewed  as  a whole  and  in  its  context  with  the

1 Yfe  can  even  comprehend  thereby  the  later  influx  of  ‘dualistic’  or
‘gnostic  f currents,  or  at  least  see  how  they  became  possible.


DIVINATION  IN  CHRISTIANITY  TO-DAY  173


long  and  wonderful  advance  in  the  religious  history  of  Israel
and  Judah  that  was  the  preparation  for  it,  and  with  the  inter-
play of  diverse  tributary  lines  of  development  which,  even  where
apparently  divergent,  ultimately  converged  upon  this  as  their
single  culmination.  Account  must  be  taken  of  the  elements
of  ‘ fulfilment  ’ which  the  Gospel  contains,  and  due  heed  given
to  the  attraction  and  impelling  force  which  it  owed  to  its
contrast  with  its  Judaic  environment  or  to  parallels  which  it
bore  to  this.  And  all  the  while,  for  the  full  impression  to  be
received,  regard  is  to  bo  paid  to  the  non-rational,  the  woof  of
the  web,  the  strange  setting  of  the  whole  experience,  which
can  nowhere  be  felt  so  palpably  as  in  the  case  of  Jesus  Christ ;
— how  his  effect  upon  the  men  of  his  own  day  rises  and  ebbs,
revealing  his  spiritual  content,  on  which  the  salvation  of  the
world  depends,  ever  more  and  more  manifestly,  and  revealing  at
the  same  time  that  mysteriously  growing  opposition  of  powers
in  which  the  problem  of  Job  recurs  a thousandfold  more
urgently — where  we  have  the  suffering  and  the  defeat  not
merely  of  a righteous  person,  but  of  all  that  is  most  vitally
important  for  the  highest  interests  of  humanity.  In  fine  there
is  that  burden  of  non-rational,  mystical  significance,  which
hangs  like  a cloud  over  Golgotha.  Whoever  can  thus  immerse
himself  in  contemplation  and  open  his  whole  mind  resolutely  to
a pure  impression  of  all  this  combined  will  surely  find  growing
in  him,  obedient  to  an  inward  standard  that  defies  expression,
the  pure  feeling  of  ‘ recognition  of  holiness',  the  4 intuition  of
the  eternal  in  the  temporal  \ If  something  eternal,  something
holy,  ever  results  from  the  blending  and  interpenetration  of
rational  and  non-rational,  purposive  and  indefinable  elements
in  the  way  we  tried  to  describe,  in  the  person  of  Jesus  tins
stands  as  nowhere  else  potently  and  palpably  apparent.

And  in  a very  real  sense  we  of  the  later  day  are  not  worse
but  more  fortunately  placed  for  grasping  it  than  Jesus' own
contemporaries.  Realization  of  him  through  ‘surmise  (A/m-
dung)  of  the  divine  government  of  the  world ' 1 depends  essen-
tially upon  two  factors.  On  the  one  hand  there  is  the  gene-
ral view  of  the  marvellous  spiritual  history  of  Israel  as  a

1 An  expression  of  De  Wette.  (v.  p.  150.)


174  DIVINATION  IN  CHRISTIANITY  TO-DAY

connected  whole,  with  its  prophetic  and  religious  development,
and  with  Christ  appearing  as  its  culmination.  And  on  the
other  hand  there  is  the  complete  life-work  and  achievement  of
Christ  himself  in  its  entirety.  Now  in  both  cases  a general
comprehensive  view  is  more  perfectly  to  be  attained  by  us
to-day  than  in  the  time  of  Christ ; for,  not  only  is  our  histori-
cal insight  more  keen,  but  we  can  also  see  the  whole  in  better
perspective  at  our  greater  distance.  Whoever  sinks  in  con-
templation of  that  great  connected  development  of  the  Judaic
religion  which  we  speak  of  as  the  5 old  covenant  up  to  Christ 1
must  feel  the  stirrings  of  an  intimation  that  something  Eternal
is  there,  directing  and  sustaining  it  and  urging  it  to  its
consummation.  The  impression  is  simply  irresistible.  And
whoever  then  goes  on  to  consider  how  greatly  the  scene  is  set
for  the  completion  of  the  whole  story  and  the  mighty  stature
of  the  personality  that  is  its  fulfilment,  his  firm,  unfaltering
hold  upon  God,  his  unwavering,  unfailing  righteousness,  his
certitude  of  conviction  and  assurance  in  action  so  mysterious
and  profound,  his  spiritual  fervour  and  beatitude,  the  struggles
and  trustfulness,  self-surrender  and  suffering,  and  finally  the
conqueror’s  death  that  were  his — whoever  goes  on  to  consider
all  this  must  inevitably  conclude : ‘ That  is  god-like  and
divine ; that  is  verily  Holiness.  If  there  is  a God  and  if  He
chose  to  reveal  himself,  He  could  do  it  no  otherwise  than  thus.'

Such  a conclusion  is  not  the  result  of  logical  compulsion ; it
does  not  follow  from  clearly  conceived  premisse  ; it  is  an
immediate,  underivable  judgement  of  pure  recognition,  and  it
follows  a premiss  that  defies  exposition  and  springs  directly
from  an  irreducible  feeling  of  the  truth.  But  that,  as  we  have
seen,  is  just  the  manner  in  which  genuine  divination,  in  the
sense  of  an  intuition  of  religious  significance,  takes  place.

Such  an  intuition,  once  granted,  issues,  for  us  no  less  than
for  the  first  disciples,  necessarily  and  independently  of  exege-
sis or  the  authority  of  the  early  Church,  in  a series  of  further
intuitions  respecting  the  Person,  the  Work,  and  the  Words  of
Christ,  and  it  is  the  task  of  theology  to  render  these  explicit.
Such  are  the  intuitions  gained  of  f sacred  history 1 in  general,
of  its  preparation  in  prophecy,  and  of  its  fulfilment  in  Jesus’


DIVINATION  IN  CHRISTIANITY  TO-DAY  175


1 Mcssiahship ’• — the  Being  in  whom  all  the  religious  potentiali-
ties of  prophet  and  psalmist  and  all  the  anticipatory  move-
ments and  currents  in  the  old  covenant  became  actualized,
in  whom  all  previous  development  found  its  culmination,  and
the  evolution  of  a people  at  once  its  real  significance  and  its
goal,  the  completion  of  its  course  and  the  consummation  of  its
allotted  historical  task.  And  there  are  further  intuitions
which  have  the  same  origin  : the  intuition  by  which  we  recog-
nize in  Christ  the  portrayal  and  presentment  of  God,  divining
in  his  agony  and  victory,  his  redemptive  search  and  love,  the
very  stamp  and  signature  of  God ; the  intuition  of  his  4 Son-
ship  \ by  which  we  recognize  Christ  as  the  4 only  Begotten
the  called,  the  fully  empowered  with  deity,  as  one  whose
being,  only  made  possible  and  intelligible  of  God,  repeats  and
reveals  the  divine  nature  in  human  fashion;  or  the  intuition
of  the  * new  covenant  \ of  adoption  and  reconciliation  through
Christ,  of  his  life-work  and  self-surrender  to  God  as  sacrifice
and  as  a warrant  of  divine  grace.  And  last,  not  least,  the
intuition  of  the  ‘ covering  ’ and  ‘ propitiating  ’ Mediator.  For
the  abyss  between  creature  and  Creator,  ‘ profanum * and
* sanctum sin  and  holiness,  is  not  diminished  but  increased  by
that  deeper  knowledge  that  comes  from  the  Gospel  of  Christ:
and,  as  a result  of  the  emotion  spontaneously  stirred  in  the
recognition  of  it,  that  in  which  4 the  holy  * stands  self-revealed
is  taken  here,  as  in  other  cases,  both  as  the  refuge  from,  and
the  means  by  which  to  approach,  Holiness.  And  this  impul-
sion of  the  mind  to  see  in  Christ  mediator  and  propitiator  may
be  roused  to  seek  expression  spontaneously,  even  in  cases
where  it  is  not, — as  in  Hebrew  and  primitive  religion, — pre-
pared for  and  sustained  by  a traditional  cult  and  mysticism  of
4 sacrifice  \ That  is,  it  is  a natural  religious  instinct,  due  to
the  pressure  of  the  numinous  experience  and  to  nothing  else.

We  are  not,  then,  to  deplore  the  fact  that  intuitions  of  this
kind  find  a place  in  the  doctrines  of  the  Christian  faith  : they
do  so  of  necessity.  What  we  must  deplore  is,  that  their  free
character,  as  springing  from  4 divination  ’,  is  so  generally  mis-
interpreted ; that  too  commonly  we  dogmatize  and  theorize
about  them,  deducing  them  from  * necessary  truths  ’ of  exegesis


176  DIVINATION  IN  CHRISTIANITY  TO-DAY

or  dogma  (which  are  in  fact  always  dubious),  and  so  failing
to  recognize  them  for  what  they  are,  free-floating  utterances
and  trial  flights  at  expression  of  the  numinous  feeling ; and
that  too  often  we  give  them  an  emphasis  which  puts  them
unwarrantably  at  the  centre  of  our  religious  interest,  a place
which  nothing  but  the  experience  itself  of  God  ought  to
occupy.

In  this  connexion  we  may  draw  attention  to  what  are  com-
monly called  the  ‘ miracles ’ of  Christ,  but  which  we  may  per-
haps more  aptly  call,  in  the  words  of  Mark  xvi.  20,  ‘signs
following 9 (inaKo\ovQovvTa  arj/xeia).  It  is  not  upon  them
primarily  that  the  experience  of  ‘ holiness  made  manifest  ’ is
based ; but,  where  there  has  been  real  ‘ divination  there  cer-
tain traits  in  the  portrait  of  Christ  come  to  acquire  a fresh
significance,  as  confirmation  of  the  divination  rather  than  its
ground.  I refer  to  the  signs  of  exalted  spiritual  power  over
nature  to  be  detected  in  the  portrait  of  Jesus.  These  have
their  parallels  elsewhere  in  the  history  of  religion:  in  the
great  prophets  of  Israel,  for  instance,  they  are  shown  in  the
form  of  that  visionary  intuition  and  boding  foreknowledge
with  which  the  prophet  was  endowed  for  his  calling.  In  the
life  of  Christ  they  recur  unmistakably  as  ‘gifts  of  the  Spirit',
raised  to  a supreme  power.  These  things  are  not £ miracles’,
for  they  are  powers  of  the  spirit,  and  so  are  as  * natural  ’ as  our
will  itself  is,  with  its  control  over  our  body.  But  they  clearly
only  come  upon  the  scene  where  the  spirit  is  itself  exalted
to  its  fullest  stature  and  in  its  fullest  vitality,  and  are  most
of  all  to  be  expected  where  the  spirit  is  in  closest  and  most
intimate  union  with  its  eternal  cause  and  foundation,  and  is
thereby  set  free  to  the  highest  it  can  itself  achieve.1

It  is,  in  the  last  place,  clear  that  it  is  in  the  Passion  and
death  of  Christ  that  the  objects  of  the  strongest  religious  intui-
tion must  be  sought.  If  his  Incarnation,  his  mission,  and  the
manner  of*  his  life  come  to  be  considered  as  a piece  of  self-
revelation, in  which  an  eternal  Will  of  Love  is  mirrored,  before
all  else  is  this  Love  and  Faith  seen  accomplished  in  the  Passion.
The  Cross  becomes  in  an  absolute  sense  the  * mirror  of  the
1 See  further  Appendix  VII.


DIVINATION  IN  CHRISTIANITY  TO-DAY  177


eternal  Father*  {speculum  aeterni  Patris );  and  not  of  the
* Father  ’ alone — the  highest  rational  interpretation  of  the
holy — but  of  Holiness  as  such.  For  what  makes  Christ
in  a special  sense  the  summary  and  climax  of  the  course
of  antecedent  religious  evolution  is  pre-eminently  this — that
in  his  life,  suffering,  and  death  is  repeated  in  classic  and  abso-
lute form  that  most  mystical  of  all  the  problems  of  the  Old
Covenant,  the  problem  of  the  gu  iltless  suffering  of  the  righteous ,
which  re-echoes  again  and  again  so  mysteriously  from  Jere-
miah and  dcutero-Isaiah  on  through  Job  and  the  Psalms.  The
38th  chapter  of  Job  is  a prophecy  of  Golgotha.  And  on  Gol-
gotha the  solution  of  the  problem,  already  adumbrated  in  Job,
is  repeated  and  surpassed.  It  lay,  as  we  saw,  entirely  in  the
non-rational  aspect  of  deity,  and  yet  was  none  the  less  a
solution.  In  Job  the  suffering  of  the  righteous  found  its
significance  as  the  classic  and  crucial  case  of  the  revelation,
more  immediately  actual  and  in  more  palpable  proximity  than
any  other,  of  the  transcendent  mysteriousness  and  ‘ beyond-
ness*  of  God.  The  Cross  of  Christ,  that  monogram  of  the
eternal  mystery,  is  its  completion.  Here  rational  are  enfolded
with  non-rational  elements,  the  revealed  commingled  with  the
unrevealed,  the  most  exalted  love  with  the  most  awe-inspiring
‘wrath*  of  the  numen,  and  therefore,  in  applying  to  the  Cross  of
Christ  the  category  ‘ holy  *,  Christian  religious  feeling  has
given  birth  to  a religious  intuition  profounder  and  more  vital
than  any  to  be  found  in  the  whole  history  of  religion.

This  is  what  must  be  borne  in  mind  in  the  comparison  of
religions,  when  we  seek  to  decide  which  of  them  is  the  most
perfect.  The  criterion  of  the  value  of  a religion  as  religion
cannot  ultimately  be  found  in  what  it  has  done  for  culture,
nor  in  its  relation  to  the  1 limits  of  the  reason’  or  the  ‘limits
of  humanity*  (which,  forsooth,  are  presumed  capable  of  being
drawn  in  advance  apart  from  reference  to  religion  itself !),  nor
in  any  of  its  external  features.  It  can  only  be  found  in  what
is  the  innermost  essence  of  religion,  the  idea  of  holiness  as
such,  and  in  the  degree  of  perfection  with  which  any  given
religion  realizes  this.

There  can  naturally  be  no  defence  of  the  worth  and  validity

N


178  DIVINATION  IN  CHRISTIANITY  TO-DAY


of  such  religious  intuitions  of  pure  feeling  that  will  convince
a person  who  is  not  prepared  to  take  the  religious  conscious-
ness itself  for  granted.  Mere  general  argument,  even  moral
demonstrations,  are  in  this  case  useless,  are  indeed  for  obvious
reasons  impossible  from  the  outset.  On  the  other  hand  the
criticisms  and  confutations  attempted  by  such  a person  are  un-
sound from  the  start.  His  weapons  are  far  too  short  to  touch
his  adversary,  for  the  assailant  is  always  standing  right  out-
side the  arena ! But  if  these  intuitions,  these  separate  responses
to  the  impress  upon  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel  story  and  the
central  Person  of  it — if  these  intuitions  are  immune  from
rational  criticism,  they  are  equally  unaffected  by  the  fluctuat-
ing results  of  biblical  exegesis  and  the  laboured  justifications
of  historical  apologetics.  For  they  are  possible  without  these,
springing,  as  they  do,  from  first-hand  personal  dirt  nation.


CHAPTER  XXI


HISTORY  AND  THE  A PRTORI  IN  RELIGION:
SUMMARY  AND  CONCLUSION

We  have  considered  'the  holy  * on  the  one  hand  as  an
a priori  category  of  mind,  and  on  the  oilier  as  manifesting
itself  in  outward  appearance.  The  contrast  here  intended  is
exactly  the  same  as  the  common  contrast  of  inner  and  outer,
general  and  special  revelation.  And  if  we  take  ‘reason*
(ratio)  as  an  inclusive  term  for  all  cognition  which  arises  in
the  mind  from  principles  native  to  it,  in  contrast  to  those
based  upon  facts  of  history,  then  wo  may  say  that  the  distinc-
tion between  holiness  as  an  a priori  category  and  holiness  as
revealed  in  outward  appearance  is  much  the  same  as  that
between  ‘ reason  1 (in  this  wide  sense)  and  history.

Every  religion  which,  so  far  from  being  a mere  faith  in
traditional  authority,  springs  from  personal  assurance  and
inward  convincement  (i.  e.  from  an  inward  first-hand  cognition
of  its  truth) — as  Christianity  does  in  a unique  degree — must
presuppose  principles  in  the  mind  enabling  it  to  be  indepen-
dently recognized  as  true.1  But  these  principles  must  be
a priori  ones,  not  to  be  derived  from  c experience  * or 1 history  *.
It  has  little  meaning,  however  edifying  it  may  sound,  to  say
that  they  are  inscribed  upon  the  heart  by  the  pencil  of  the
Holy  Spirit  ‘in  history*.  For  whence  comes  the  assurance
that  it  was  the  pencil  of  the  1 Holy  Spirit  ’ that  wrote,  and
not  that  of  a deceiving  spirit  of  imposture,  or  of  the  ‘ tribal
fantasy*  of  anthropology?  Such  an  assertion  is  itself  a

1 The  attestation  of  such  principles  is  the  * testimonium  Spiritns  Sancti
internum*  of  which  we  have  already  sjoken.  And  this  must  clearly  he
itself  immediate  and  self-warranted,  else  there  would  be  need  of  another
‘witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit 1 to  attest  the  truth  of  the  first,  and  so  on  ad
infinitum .

N 2


180  HISTORY  AND  TTIE  A PRIORI  IN  RELIGION:

presumption  that  it  is  possible  to  distinguish  the  signature  of
the  Spirit  from  others,  and  thus  that  we  have  an  a priori
notion  of  what  is  of  the  Spirit  independently  of  history.

And  there  is  a further  consideration.  There  is  something
presupposed  by  history  as  such — not  only  the  history  of  mind
or  spirit,  with  which  we  are  here  concerned — which  alone
makes  it  history,  and  that  is  the  existence  of  a quale , some-
thing with  a potentiality  of  its  own,  capable  of  becoming , in
the  special  sense  of  coming  to  be  that  to  which  it  was  predis-
posed and  predetermined.  An  oak-tree  can  become , and  thus
have  a sort  of  ‘history';  whereas  a heap  of  stones  cannot.
The  random  addition  and  subtraction,  displacement  and
rearrangement,  of  elements  in  a mere  aggregation  can  certainly
be  followed  in  narrative  form,  but  this  is  not  in  the  deeper
sense  a historical  narrative.  We  only  have  the  history  of  a
people  in  proportion  as  it  enters  upon  its  course  equipped  with
an  endowment  of  talents  and  tendencies ; it  must  already  be
something  if  it  is  really  to  become  anything.  And  biography
is  a lamentable  and  unreal  business  in  the  case  of  a man  who
has  no  real  unique  potentiality  of  his  own,  no  special  idiosyn-
crasy, and  is  therefore  a mere  point  of  intersection  for  various
fortuitous  causal  series,  acted  upon,  as  it  were,  from  without.
Biography  is  only  a real  narration  of  a real  life  where,  by  the
interplay  of  stimulus  and  experience  on  the  one  side  and  pre-
disposition and  natural  endowment  on  the  other,  something
individual  and  unique  comes  into  being,  which  therefore
neither  the  result  of  a ‘ mere  self-unfolding  * nor  yet  the  sum
of  mere  traces  and  impressions,  written  from  without  from
moment  to  moment  upon  a ‘tabula  rasa’.  In  short;,  to  pro-
pose a history  of  mind  is  to  presuppose  a mind  or  spirit
determinately  qualified  ; to  profess  to  give  a history  of  reli-
gion is  to  presuppose  a spirit  specifically  qualified  for  religion.

There  are,  then,  three  factors  in  the  process  by  which  reli-
gion comes  into  being  in  history.  First,  the  interplay  of  pre-
disposition and  stimulus,  which  in  the  historical  development
of  man’s  mind  actualizes  the  potentiality  in  the  former,  and  at
the  same  time  helps  to  determine  its  form.  Second,  the  recog-
nition, by  virtue  of  this  very  disposition,  of  specific  portions


SUMMARY  AND  CONCLUSION  181

of  history  as  the  manifestation  of  ‘ the  holy  *,  with  consequent
modification  of  the  religious  experience  already  attained  both
in  its  quality  and  degree.  And  third,  on  the  basis  of  the
other  two,  the  achieved  fellowship  with  ; the  holy  ’ in  knowing,
feeling,  and  willing.  Plainly,  then,  Religion  is  only  the  off-
spring of  history  in  so  far  as  history  on  the  one  hand  develops
our  disposition  for  knowing  the  holy,  and  on  the  other  is
itself  repeatedly  the  manifestation  of  the  holy.  ‘Natural*
religion,  in  contrast  to  historical,  does  not  exist,  and  still  less
does  ‘innate’  religion.1

A priori  cognitions  are  not  such  as  every  one  does  have
— such  would  be  innate  cognitions — but  such  as  every  one
is  capable  of  having.  The  loftier  a priori  cognitions  are
such  as — while  every  one  is  indeed  capable  of  having  them
— do  not,  as  experience  teaches  us,  occur  spontaneously,
but  rather  are  ‘awakened’  through  the  instrumentality  of
other  more  highly  endowed  natures.  In  relation  to  these  the
universal  ‘predisposition*  is  merely  a faculty  of  rccepticitt/
and  a principle  of  acknonicdfjeuient , not  a capacity  to  pro-
duce the  cognitions  in  question  for  oneself  independently.
This  latter  capacity  is  confined  to  those  specially  ‘endowed*.
And  this  ‘ endowment*  is  the  universal  disposition  on  a higher
level  and  at  a higher  power,  differing  from  it  in  quality  as
well  as  in  degree.  The  same  thing  is  very  evident  in  the
sphere  of  art:  what  appears  in  the  multitude  as  mere  recep-
tiveness, the  capacity  of  response  and  judgement  by  trained
aesthetic  taste,  reappears  at  the  level  of  thu  artist  as  invention,
creation,  composition,  the  original  production  of  genius.  This
difference  of  level  and  power,  e.g.  in  musical  composition,  seen
in  the  contrast  between  what  is  a mere  capacity  for  musical
experience  and  the  actual  production  and  revelation  of  music,
is  obviously  something  more  than  a difference  of  degree.  It  is
very  similar  in  the  domain  of  the  religious  consciousness,  reli-
gious production  and  revelation.  Here,  too,  most  men  have
only  the  ‘predisposition*,  in  the  sense  of  a receptiveness  and
susceptibility  to  religion  and  a capacity  for  freely  recognizing

1 For  the  distinction  between  ‘innate1  and  a priori , cf.  R.  Olfo,
lid igionaph  ilosophie,  p.  42.


182  HISTORY  AND  THE  A PRIORI  IN  RELIGION

and  judging  religious  truth  at  first  hand.  The  ‘ Spirit  * is  only
‘universal*  in  the  form  of  the  ‘ testimonium Spiritus  internum  *
(and  this  again  only  ‘ ubi  ipsi  visum  fait  The  higher  stage,
not  to  be  derived  from  the  first  stage  of  mere  receptivity,  is  in
the  sphere  of  religion  the  prophet . The  prophet  corresponds  in
the  religious  sphere  to  the  creative  artist  in  that  of  art : he  is
the  man  in  whom  the  Spirit  shows  itself  alike  as  the  power  to
hear  the  ‘ voice  within  * and  the  power  of  divination,  and  in
each  case  appears  as  a creative  force.  Yet  the  prophet  does
not  represent  the  highest  stage.  We  can  think  of  a third,  yet
higher,  beyond  him,  a stage  of  revelation  as  underivable  from
that  of  the  prophet  as  was  his  from  that  of  common  men.  We
can  look,  beyond  the  prophet,  to  one  in  whom  is  found  the
Spirit  in  all  its  plenitude,  and  who  at  the  same  time  in  his
person  and  in  his  performance  is  become  most  completely  the
object  of  divination,  in  whom  Holiness  is  recognized  apparent.

Such  a one  is  more  than  Prophet.  lie  is  the  Son.


APPENDIX  I

CHRYSOSTOM  ON  THE  INCONCEIVABLE  IN  GOD

4 But  that  is  an  impertinence  to  say  that  lie  who  is  beyond  the
apprehension  of  even  the  higher  Powers  can  be  comprehended  by
us  earthworms,  or  compassed  and  comprised  by  the  weak  forces  of
our  understanding  ! ’

This  protest  of  Chrysostom  occurs  at  the  beginning  of  the  third
of  his  five  discourses  7 rcpl  aKaraXyirrov  (De  Incomprehcnsibili ),  which
were  directed  against  the  ‘ cho/xoioi  ’ who  were  perverting  the
Christian  community  of  Antioch,  and  more  especially  against
disciples  of  the  Arian  Aetios,  with  their  doctrine  Ocbv  olSa  d>s  a vtos
6 0cos  Lavrov  ol.Sc  (‘  I know  God  as  He  is  known  to  Himself’).  Our
histories  of  Dogma  do  not  generally  say  much,  if  anything,  upon
these  sermons  of  Chrysostom,  and  their  contribution  to  ‘ dogmatics’
is  not  indeed  very  important.  But  their  interest  for  the  psycho-
logy of  religion  is  all  the  greater  ; and  this  would  still  remain,
even  if  they  had  not  contained  the  passages  bearing  upon  ‘ Christo-
logy  which  begin  at  the  conclusion  of  the  fourth  sermon.  For
wo  have  in  them  the  primary  promptings  of  genuine  religious
feeling  in  its  specifically  numinous  character,  excited  to  a passionate
intensity  and  directed  with  all  the  charm  and  eloquence  of  the
‘ Gclden-mouthed  * against  the  theoretical  ‘Aristotelian’  God  of
the  schools.  All  that  is  non-rational  in  the  feeling  of  God  is
hero  in  conflict  with  what  is  rational  and  capable  of  rationalization
and  threatens  to  break  loose  from  it  altogether.

A strange  spectacle!  Fordoes  not  the  distinguishing  character
of  Christianity  consist  in  just  this — that  God  is  near  us,  that  we
can  possess  and  apprehend  Him,  and  that  man  himself  is  His
image  and  likeness  ? And  yet  we  find  this  Father  of  the  Church
battling  passionately,  as  for  something  that  concerned  the  very
essence  of  Christianity,  for  the  view  that  God  is  the  Inconceiv-
able, the  Inexpressible,  that  which  gives  denial  to  every  notion.
And  this  he  does  not  do  on  speculative  grounds,  with  the  aid  of
the  terms  and  phrases  of  any  ‘ school  ’ of  theology  ; it  is  rather  a


184


CHRYSOSTOM  ON  THE


sort  of  instinct  in  him  that  guides  him  with  astonishing  assurance
and  accuracy  to  track  out  and  collect  the  most  wonderful  texts  of
Scripture,  so  that  their  full  weight  becomes  felt,  as  his  profoundly
penetrating  interpretation  explains  and  applies  them.

First  and  chiefly  he  takes  his  stand  against  * Conceiving 9 and
‘Comprehension  * in  general,  against  the  idea  of  to  KaraX-q-irrovy  and
against  the  oIkziol  Aoynr/Aoi  (i.  e.  constructions  of  the  understanding)
which  seek  to  delimit  and  circumscribe  God  (7r€/xypd0€O',  7repiAa/x-
fiavtiv).  For  his  opponents  had  maintained  that  a conceptual  know-
ledge of  God  is  possible,  definitive  and  exhaustive,  by  means  of
notions,  in  fact  by  a single  notion  (viz.  of  ayewYjo-La,  unbegottenness),
in  a word,  that  it  is  possible  ‘ to  know  God  exactly*  (/act  aKpifizias
zldzvai).  ‘ But  wo,’  says  Chrysostom,  ‘ in  opposition  to  this  view,
call  Him  tov  dvzK<f>pa(TTov,  to v uurzpLVorjTOv  6z6vy  to v doparov,  tov  ttKcmx-
Xrj7TTOVy  TOV  VLKWVTU  yA<iJTT7/9  SvvafUV  dv0p<O7Tiyrj 5,  TOV  i'7T€p/3aLVOVTa  OvrjTrjs
Siavoias  KaTuXrj\piVy  tov  dvz^i^via.o'Tov  dyye'Aoi?,  tov  dOzarov  Tots  ^zpa<f>tjL9
tov  aKaTavorjTov  Tots  Xcpov/ft/x,  Toy  doparov  dp^ais  c^ovcriais  Swu/xccrti',
Kut  tt7r\ws  7ra<ry  rfi  ktlo-zl.’  1 (Migne,  p.  721.)  ‘ He  insults  God  who

seeks  to  apprehend  His  essential  being  * (vfipi^zi  8c  o ri)v  ouaiav
avrov  7r€pizpya£6fjL€vos3  714  e),  he  says,  and  goes  on  to  urge  that  God
is  incomprehensible  even  in  His  works — how  much  more  in  His
own  essential  nature  even  in  llis  ‘ demeanings  5 (vvyKuTaftdcrzis)
- - how  much  more  in  His  own  transcendent  majesty  ; even  to  the
Cherubim  and  Seraphim — how  much  more  to  mere  ‘humanity5
(dv6pw7rLVi]  <£vtrts) !

The  dKaTa\rj7TTov  ill  this  sense  is  for  Chrysostom  primarily  the
‘ exceeding  greatness5  of  God,  which  escapes  our  mental  grasp  and
compass  because  of  the  dUr&Veia  tCov  Aoyior/xuii',  the  over-ohort  reach
of  our  faculty  of  conception.  We  call  it  ‘incomprehensibility5,
and  distinguish  from  it  the  ‘ inapprehensibility 5 which  springs,
not  from  the  ‘exceeding  greatness5,  but  from  the  ‘wholly  other-
ness 5 of  God  (Odrzpov  tov  Actor),  from  what  is  alien  and  remote  in
Him,  from  what  we  have  called  the  ‘ mysterium  stupendum  \
And  it  is  instructive  to  see  how  for  Chrysostom  too  this  latter
sense  of  dKarviXrjTrTov  passes  into  the  former,  sometimes  blending
with  it,  sometimes  plainly  distinguished  as  something  beyond  and

1 1 We  call  Him  the  inexpressible,  the  unthinkable  God,  the  invisible,
the  inapprehensible ; who  quells  the  power  of  human  speech  and  tran-
scends the  grasp  of  mortal  thought ; inaccessible  to  the  angels,  unbeheld
of  the  Seraphim,  unimagined  of  the  Cherubim,  invisible  to  rules  and
authorities  and  powers,  and,  in  a word,  to  all  creation.'


INCONCEIVABLE  IN  GOD


185


higher  than  it.  We  have  said  already  that  we  have  the  experi-
ence of  the  ‘ wholly  other ’,  where  we  come  upon  something
which  not  merely  overtops  our  every  concept,  but  astounds  us
by  its  absolute  and  utter  difference  from  our  whole  nature.
Chrysostom  similarly  contrasts  the  avOpumivg  <f>v<ris  with  the  Bela
as  being  incommensurable  with  it,  and  therefore  incapable
of  understanding  it,  and  his  words  refer  not  only  to  the  narrow-
ness and  meagreness  of  our  understanding,  but  just  to  this  sheer
difference  in  quality  of  the  ‘ wholly  other  \

This  sort  of  apostrophe  is  common  with  him  : "hvOpumos  tov  Otbu
noXvirpayiioi'CLS  ; 'Ap/cct  yap  ra  avopara  if/iXa  rrjs  urmu$  Setfui  tiju
inrtpfioXijV'  avBpunro^  yi)  Kal  or 7to8os  vt, r«/>^wr,  (Tapi  Kal  a i/ia,  \opr 09  Kal
didos  \o provj  ctklo.  Kal  Kairvos  Kal  fiaTaioTrjs  (712)/  And  the  same
note  sounds  even  more  clearly  in  an  exposition  of  Romans  ix.  20,
21  (715),  As  little  as  the  clay  can  master  or  comprehend  the
potter  because  of  its  essential  difference  from  him,  even  so  little
can  man  comprehend  God.  ‘ Or  rather,  far  less,  for  man —the
potter — is  in  the  end  himself  but  clay.  But  the  difference  between
the  being  of  God  and  the  being  of  man  is  of  such  a kind  that  110
word  can  express  it  and  110  thought  appraise  it/  llis  position  is
put  more  unmistakably  still  in  the  following  passage :

‘ He  dwells,  says  St.  Paul,  in  an  unapproachable  light.-’  Observe
here  the  exactitude  of  St.  Paul’s  expression.  . . . For  he  says  not
merely  in  an  incomprehensible,  but  (what  conveys  far  more)  in  an
altogether  u unapproachable  ” light.  We  say  “inconceivable  ” and
“ incomprehensible  ” of  something  which,  though  it  eludes  con-
ception, does  not  elude  all  inquiry  and  questioning.  “ Unap-
proachable ”,  011  the  other  hand,  means  something  which  in
principle  excludes  the  very  possibility  of  inquiry,  which  is  quite
inaccessible  by  conceptual  investigation.  A sea  into  which  divers
may  plunge,  but  which  they  cannot  fathom,  would  represent  the
merely  “ incomprehensible  (dfcaruA^inw).  It  would  only  repre-
sent the  “ unapproachable  ” (dirpoWoi')  if  it  remained  in  principle
beyond  search  and  beyond  discovery/  (p.  721.)  And  so  too  in  the
fourth  discourse  (upon  Eph.  iii.  S)  (p.  720) : Tt  Ivtlv  dveii^naa-Tov  ;
firj  SvvapL€ vov  ^rjTrjByjvat,  ov  povov  Sk  pij  hvvdpAvov  €vp€0rjratf  dAA  ovdk

1 ‘ Dost  tlion,  a man,  presume  to  busy  thyself  with  God  ? Nay,  the
bare  names  (of  man)  suffice  to  show  the  extent  of  this  folly  ; man  that  ia
earth  and  dust,  Jlesh  and  blood,  dung  and  flower  of  dung,  shadow  and
awoke  and  van  it g.'

2 1 Tim.  vi.  16  oIkHov  dn(  6jitov,  R.V.  ‘ unapproachable  .


186


CHRYSOSTOM  ON  THE


dvixytvGrjvai.  (‘  What  is  “ unsearchable  ” ? To  be  beyond  searching,
that  is,  to  be  such  as  excludes  not  discovery  only  but  also
tracing.’)

And  this  line  of  thought  draws  him  imperceptibly  farther.  The
bounds  of  the  * incomprehensible  ’ are  extended,  and  the  whole
numinous  consciousness  is  set  astir  in  it,  one  element  in  the  feel-
ing prompting  to  the  others.  The  mysterium  stupcndum  passes
directly  over  into  mysterium  tremendum  and  maicstas , so  that  we
might  entitle  the  Discourses,  instead  of  ‘ De  Incomprehensibili
‘ De  Numine  ac  Numinoso  \

Specially  noticeable  in  this  connexion  is  the  passage  in  which
Chrysostom  brings  clearly  out  the  psychological  distinction
between  numinous  and  merely  rational  wonder . He  cites  that
truly  significant  text  from  Ps.  cxxxix.  14,  which  runs  in  the
Soptuagint : ‘ I praise  Thee  : for  that  Thou  madest  Thyself  fearfully
wondrous  V and  then  gives  a subtle  analysis  of  the  feelings  thore
expressed.

* What  does  u fearfully”  mean  here?  Many  things  move  us  to
wonder  in  which  there  is  nothing  “fearful” — the  beauty  of  a
colonnade,  for  example  ; the  beauty  of  pictures,  or  bodily  loveli-
ness. Again,  we  wonder  at  the  greatness  of  the  sea  and  its
measureless  expanse,  but  terror  and  “fear”  only  seize  upon  us
when  we  gaze  down  into  its  depths.  So,  too,  here  the  Psalmist.
When  he  gazes  down  into  the  immeasurable,  yawning  (aware's)
Depth2  of  the  divine  Wisdom,  dizziness  comes  upon  him  and  he
recoils  in  terrified  wonder  and  cries : . . . “Thy  knowledge  is  too
wonderful  for  me  ; it  is  high,  above  my  power  (I  am  too  weak
for  it:  LXX).”’  The  ‘dizziness’  and  the  unique  feeling  of  the
uncanny,  which  we  have  called  stupor  and  tremor , are  here  clearly
noted  by  Chrysostom.  And  he  rightly  cites  also  the  profoundly
numinous  exclamation  of  St.  Paul  (Rom.  xi.  33) : ‘Dizzy  before  the
unfathomable  main  and  gazing  down  into  its  yawning  depths,  he
recoils  precipitately  and  cries  aloud : “ O the  depth  of  the  riches
both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God. . . ’ (Migne,  p.  705).

The  passage  on  page  733  should  be  read  in  close  connexion
with  this.  Nowhere  has  the  awe  and  even  the  eerie  shuddering
and  amazement  at  the  supernatural  been  more  vividly  and  truly
recaptured  in  feeling,  and  nowhere  has  it  been  portrayed  with

1 ' E£ofin\oyii(TO]jLai  aoi  on  (fiofteficos  t0avfiaoT(l)6rjs,

* Heading  fiaOvs  for  the  undoubtedly  erroneous  ntkayos.


INCONCEIVABLE  IN  GOD


187


a more  gripping  and  constraining  power.  Expertus  loquitur!
This  is  the  voice  not  of  the  PJatonist  or  Neo-Platonist ; it  is  the
voice  of  antiquity  itself,  typified  in  one  who  had  found  in  Pagan-
ism and  Judaism  and  Christianity  alike  those  primal  and  ele-
mental experiences  out  of  which  all  religion  has  arisen  and
without  which  no  religion  is  worthy  of  the  name,  and  who  had
made  them  his  very  own  in  all  the  force  of  growth — sometimes
rank  and  violent  enough —which  originally  characterized  them.
Chrysostom  describes  thus  the  experience  of  Dan.  x.  5 -8,  and  the
state  of  ecstasy  into  which  Daniel  falls  in  his  encounter  with  the
Unseen  : ‘ For  just  as  happens  when  the  charioteer  looses  hold  of
the  reins  in  terror,  so  that  the  horses  bolt  and  the  chariot  over-
turns, ...  so  it  befell  the  Prophet.  His  affrighted  soul  could  not
bear  the  sight  of  the  Angel  made  manifest,  could  not  endure  the
supernatural  light,  and  was  overwhelmed.  It  strove  to  break
free  from  the  bonds  of  the  llesh  as  from  a harness  . . . and  he  lay
there  in  a swoon.’  Very  similar  is  the  comment  on  the  vision  of
Ezekiel.  Chrysostom  realizes  that  the  awe  in  these  experiences  does
not  find  its  origin  in  any  self-depreciation  of  an  ethical  or  rational
sort  (e.  g.  from  an  uneasy  conscience  or  the  like),  but  that  they  are
the  natural  reactions  of  the  creature,  of  the  uu-Oa  uu.  c/>tVco>s  face  to
face  with  transcendent,  unearthly  reality,  as  such.  ‘ 1 cite  to  you
the  case  of  the  holy  Daniel,  the  friend  of  God,  who,  because  of
his  wisdom  and  righteousness,  might  well  have  been  justly  con-
fident, just  in  order  that  no  one  may  suppose,  if  I show  even  him
Lo  you  weakening,  collapsing,  powerless,  and  overwhelmed  before
the  presence  of  the  Angel,  that  this  befalls  him  because  of  his
sins  and  his  evil  conscience,  but  that  this  example  may  throw  a
clear  light  on  the  impotence  of  our  nature.’

Naturally  the  passage  in  Genesis  xviii.  27  has  not  escaped  him  ;
still  less  the  scene  in  Isa.  vi.  ‘But  let  us  now  leave  St.  Paul
and  the  prophets  and  ascend  into  Heaven  to  see  if  haply  any  one
there  knows  what  God’s  essential  being  is.  . . . Wliat  do  we  hear
from  the  Angels  ? Do  they  inquire  and  reason  meticulously
among  themselves  about  God’s  nature?  By  no  means.  What  do
they  do  ? They  praise  Him.  They  fall  down  and  worship  Him
with  a great  trembling  (/mc-ra  7r oAXtJs  <f>ptK7] s,  p.  707).  They
turn  their  e3’es  away,  and  can  themselves  not  endure  the  vouch-
safed revelation  of  God.’  Again:  ‘Tell  me,  wherefore  do  they
cover  their  faces  and  hide  them  with  their  wings?  Why,  but


18S


CHRYSOSTOM  ON  THE


that  they  cannot  endure  the  dazzling  radiance  and  its  rays  that
pour  from  the  Throne  ? ’ Nor  does  he  ignore  the  loci  classici  of
the  tremenda  maiestas , viz.  Ps.  civ.  32  and  Job  ix.  G sqq. : 4 lie
looketli  on  the  earth  and  it  trembleth : he  toucheth  the  hills  and
they  smoke/  Ps.  cxiv.  3:  ‘The  sea  saw  and  fled:  Jordan  was
driven  back.’  4 7rd<ra  7/  ktivls  craAcvcrai,  ScSolkc,  rpifjit t.’  And  he
concludes  his  commentary  upon  all  this  with  the  remark:  (I
will  conclude,  for)  4 thought  grows  weary,  not  from  the  extent  of
what  I have  spoken  but  from  the  trembling  it  brings.  For  the
soul  that  concerns  itself  in  these  contemplations  trembles  and  is
appalled  ( c/ca/acr  i/fuv  7/  Sidvoia,  ov  rJJ  t rXyOii  dXXd  rrj  rut v

tlpr)fj.tvu)V,  TfHfxe i yap  kcu  cK7re7rXr/KTat  rj  t;X V c7r^  Tats  dra)

iv^iarpifiawa  0co>pcats)  * (p.  725).

Chrysostom,  then,  is  combating  the  arrogance  and  overweening
presumptuousness  of  the  human  understanding  and  of  the  creature
in  general  in  imagining  that  any  escape  is  possible  from  the
incomprehensible,  supreme,  transcendent,  and  4 wholly  other’
nature  of  God.  And  it  is  because  he  wishes  to  shatter  this  human
complacency,  to  overawe  and  overwhelm,  that  he  portiays  these
aspects  of  the  numinous.  But  he  does  not  leave  out  the  others  or
fail  to  note  the  paradox,  that  this  4 incomprehensible  ’ is  at  the
same  time  a 4 fascmans  ’ and  an  intimate  and  essential  possession
of  the  human  soul.  Blank  amazement  is  to  him  at  the  same  time
enraptured  adoration ; speechlessness  in  the  presence  of  the  inap-
prehensible passes  over — and  only  an  understanding  of  the
‘harmony  of  contrasts’  can  show  liow — into  a humble  gratitude
that  it  is  so,  that  it  is  4 fearfully  wonderful  ’.  lie  cites  again
Ps.  cxxxix.  14,  and  interprets  it  thus : 4 See  here  the  nobility
of  this  servant  of  God  (David).  44 1 thank  Thee  ” (€v\apurrut  croi),  he
says  in  effect,  4 4 for  that  I have  a Lord  who  is  beyond  comprehen-
sion.” ’ Tersteegen  means  the  same  when  he  uses  the  words
4 A comprehended  God  is  no  God  ’ to  express  praise ; as  does  Goetlie,
in  the  words  of  the  archangels’  hymn  in  Faust :

Ilir  Anbliek  gibt  den  Engeln  Starke,

Weil  keiner  sie  ergrUnden  mag.1

And  so  with  Chrysostom  : this  aKard\r)TrTov  is  iKcivrj  fiaKapla  ov<rla
— * favourite  and  recurring  expression  of  his.  And  we  feel  that

1 ‘ Its  (sc.  the  Sun's)  aspect  gives  the  angels  strength  because  none  may
fathom  it.’  (The  usual  reading  is  tcenn,  ‘though’,  for  i ceil,  ‘because*.
Trans.]


INCONCEIVABLE  IN  OOI)  189

this  ‘Being’  is  ‘incomprehensible’  because  it  is  ‘blessed’,  and
‘blessed’  because  it  is  ‘incomprehensible’.  In  the  very  passion
with  which  he  battles  for  the  unimaginable  God,  who  makes
His  worshipper  weak  and  dizzy  with  awo,  there  yet  glows— un-
uttered  and  unexpressed  — an  enthusiastic  sense  of  the  soul
having  been  carried  away  in  rapture  and  taken  up  into  the  being
of  God.

The  aKardXrjTrTov  involves  a denial  of  conceptual  designations,
and  hence  come  the  negative  attributes  of  deity,  which  Chryso-
stom frequently  employs,  singly  or  in  series — a negativa  t/ico -
log  hi  in  little.  But  this  4 negative  theology  ’ does  not  mean  that
faith  and  feeling  are  dissipated  and  reduced  to  nothing  ; on  the
contrary,  it  contains  within  it  the  loftiest  spirit  of  devotion,  and
it  is  out  of  such  4 negative  ’ attributes  that  Chrysostom  fashions
the  most  solemn  confessions  and  prayers.  He  thereby  shows
once  more  that  feeling  and  experience  reach  far  beyond  conceiv-
ing, and  that  a conception  negative  in  form  may  often  become  the
symbol  (what  we  have  called  an  ‘ideogram’)  for  a content  of
meaning  which,  if  absolutely  unutterable,  is  none  the  less  in  the
highest  degree  positive.  And  the  example  of  Chrysostom  at  the
same  time  shows  that  a ‘ negative  theology  ' can  and  indeed  must
arise,  not  only  from  the  4 infusion  of  Hellenistic  speculation  and
nature  mysticism  but  from  purely  and  genuinely  religious  roots,
namely,  the  experience  of  the  numinous.

The  insistence  upon  the  ‘inconceivable  and  incomprehensible’
in  God  did  not  cease  to  be  a point  of  honour  in  Christian  theology
with  Chrysostom.  The  forms  this  protest  took  did  indeed  vary  :
it  appears  as  the  assertion  at  one  time  that  God  stands  above
the  reach  of  all  possible  predication  whatever,  and  so  is  Nothing-
ness and  the  ‘ Silent  desert  ’ ; at  another,  that  lie  is  uiwiyiof,
7ravu>i'v/Aos,  o/iwvu/xos  ; at  another,  that  lie  can  indeed  be  made  the
subject  of  predication,  but  only  in  so  far  as  all  attributes  are  mere
4 nomina  ex  parte  intellectus  nosin';  or  again,  the  sternest  form
of  all,  it  reproduces  the  line  of  thought  of  Job,  as  can  be  seen
now  and  then  in  Luther  in  his  notion  of  the  deus  absconditus —
the  thought,  namely,  that  God  Himself  is  not  only  above  every
human  grasp,  but  in  antagonism  to  it.1

1 Compare  also  Luther's  Short  Form  of  the  Ten  Commandment s,  the
Owed,  and  the  Lord's  Prayer  (1520) : 1 1 venture  to  put  my  trust  in  the  one
Go<J  alone,  the  invisible  and  incomprehensible , who  hath  created  Heaven
and  ttarth  and  is  alone  above  ali  creatures.’


190


CHRYSOSTOM  ON  TITE


All  these  doctrines  are  preserving  a heritage  passionately  won
against  the  opposition  of  .ancient  errors.  They  do  so,  certainly,
at  the  cost  of  a one-sided  emphasis,  for  the  meaning  Christians
attach  to  the  word  1 God  ’ is  indubitably  also  a profoundly  rational
one,  the  basis  indeed  of  all  reason.  Yet  this  is  bound  up  with  a
still  profounder  meaning,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  beyond  and
above  all  conception.

With  the  discourse  of  Chrysostom  we  may  compare  Gregory  of
Nyssa,  Contra  Eunomium  (Migne,  S.  Gr.  45).  What  stirs  Chryso-
stom passionately  as  a matter  of  the  first  moment  is  indeed  only
of  secondary  importance  in  Gregory,  incidental  to  his  dogmatic
inquiries.  But  even  so  he,  too,  can  write  (p.  G01) : el  8c  t*s


dpaOels  elvat  ttjs  roiavTrjs  croc/uas  ovk  apvrjcrofJLcOa  . . . cm  ovk  ccrrt  to
ddpicnov  Kara  tij v (favcriv  errirota  tlvl  p rj/juinor  SiaXrjcfiOrjvat.  C7ret  oTv
Kp€LTT OV  €(TTl  KCLl  V\j/7)\oT€pOV  T7]S  OVO/AaCTTlK^S  <Tr) p.(iar  1(1?  TO  ®€10V  [llUmCn

says  the  Latin  translator]  o-iwirr}  Tipav  rd  virlp  Xdyov  re  koX  Sidvoiav
pL€p.a6r}Kapev.  (‘  But  if  one  asks  for  an  interpretation  or  description
or  explanation  of  the  divine  nature  we  shall  not  deny  that  in  such
a science  as  this  we  are  unlearned.  . . . For  there  is  no  way  of
comprehending  the  indefinable  as  it  is  by  a scheme  of  words.  For
the  Divine  is  too  noble  and  too  lofty  to  be  indicated  by  a name :
and  we  have  learned  to  honour  by  silence  that  which  transcends
reason  and  thought.’)

But  another,  long  before  Chrysostom — the  ‘ heretic’  Marcion  —
writing  in  a different  situation,  not  within  but  on  the  fringe
of  the  Church,  had  experienced  the  inconceivable  aspect  of  the
numinous  and  extolled  it  in  words  of  an  almost  intoxicated  fervour:
*0  it  is  a marvel  beyond  marvels,  enravishment,  power,  and
wonder,  that  one  can  say  nought  about  the  Gospel,  and  think
nought  about  it  and  compare  it  to  nothing.’

It  is  remarkable  to  see  how  the  several  moments  of  the  numinous
in  experience  are  constantly  compounded  and  blended  afresh  so  as  to
produce  quite  special  and  peculiar  types  of  religion.  In  Marcion
the  original  moment  t iremendum  ’ is  silenced  before  the  consoling
power  of  the  Gospel,  in  fulfilment  of  the  word  1 Perfect  love  casts
out  fear’.  But  there  remains  strongly  and  profoundly  fell  the
i wholly  other’,  the  ineffable  and  inconceivable,  in  his  ‘strange
God  \ and  in  the  first  words  of  hi3  treatise,  whose  ‘ violent  fer-
ment’ (in  Harnack’s  phrase)  reveals  the  element  of  ‘fascination  ’.


INCONCEIVABLE  IN  COD  191

The  sense  of  the  i august ' lives  in  the  1 feeling  of  distance ' in  face
of  the  ‘ strange  God  and  in  that  too  we  detect  a light  thrill  that
is  the  awe  of  the  1 tremcndum  ’ reawakened  and  returning  in  a n older
form.1


APPENDIX  II

THE  NUMINOUS  IN  POETRY,  HYMN,  AND  LITURGY
KrawpJe  of  ‘munitions’  poetry.

From  Rhagarad-Gita , Chapter  XI  (Barnett’s  translation  slightly

altered).

In  the  Rhagavad-Gita,  Krishna,  the  embodiment  of  Vishnu —
Vishnu  himself  in  human  form — instructs  Aryuna  in  the  deepest
mysteries  of  his  religion.  Aryuna  then  desires  to  behold  God
himself  in  his  own  form,  and  his  petition  is  granted.  And  now
in  Chapter  XI  there  follows  a theophany  of  terrific  grandeur,  which
seeks  to  give  a feeling  of  the  unapproachable  essence  of  the  Divine
before  which  the  creature  trembles  and  falls,  by  embodying  the
human  and  ‘ natural  ’ means  of  terror,  majesty,  and  sublimity.
Aryuna  stands  in  his  war-chariot,  about  to  enter  the  carnage  of
the  battle  against  his  brother  Yudhishthira’s  enemies.  Krishna
is  his  charioteer.  Aryuna  tells  him  his  request.  ‘Show  to  me
thy  changeless  Self,  Sovran  of  the  Rule.’  Krishna-Vishnu  answers
him :

7.  Behold  now,  O Weaver  of  the  Hair-Knot,  tho  whole  univorse,

moving  and  unmoving,  solely  lodged  in  this  my  body,  and
all  else  that  thou  art  fain  to  see.

8.  But  for  that  thou  canst  not  see  Me  with  this  thine  own  eye,

I give  thee  a divine  eye  ; behold  my  sovran  Rule,

9.  Thus  speaking,  Ilari  (i.  e.  Vishnu),  the  great  Lord  of  the  Rule,

then  showed  to  Pritha’s  son  his  sovran  form  supreme,

10.  of  many  mouths  and  eyes,  of  many  divine  ornaments,  with

uplifted  weapons  many  and  divine  ;

11.  wearing  divine  flower-chaplets  and  robes,  with  anointment  of

divine  perfumes,  compound  of  all  marvels,  the  boundless
god  facing  all  ways.


1 See  Harnack,  Men  cion,  1921,  p.  138.


192


THE  NUMINOUS  IN  POETRY


12.  If  the  light  of  a thousand  suns  should  of  a sudden  rise  in  the
heavens,  it  would  be  like  to  the  light  of  that  mighty
being.  ...

14.  Thereupon  the  Wealth-Winner  (i.  e.  Aryuna),  smitten  with
amazement,  with  hair  standing  on  end,  bowed  his  head,
and  with  clasped  hands  spake  to  the  God,  ...

17.  ‘I  behold  Thee  bearing  diadem,  mace,  and  disc,  massed  in
radiance,  on  all  sides  glistening,  hardly  discernible,  shining
round  about  as  gleaming  fire  and  sun,  immeasurable.  . . .

20.  For  this  mid-space  between  heaven  and  earth  and  all  the

quarters  of  the  sky  are  filled  with  Thee  alone.  Seeing
this  Thy  fearful  and  wonderful  form,  O great-hearted  one,
the  threefold  world  quakes.

21.  Those  hosts  of  Suras  come  unto  Thee;  some,  affrighted,  praise

with  clasped  hands.  With  cries  of  “ Hail ! ” the  hosts  of
Great  Saints  and  Adepts  sing  to  Thee  hymns  of  abounding
praise.

22.  All  the  Spirits  and  Divine  Powers  that  live  in  heaven  and

earth,  in  clouds  and  winds,  in  air  and  water,  Daemons,
Manes,  Asuras,  Saints,  and  Adepts,  all  gaze  on  Thee  in
amazement.

23.  Looking  upon  Thy  mighty  form  of  many  mouths  and  eyes,

of  many  arms  and  thighs  and  feet,  of  many  bellies,  and
grim  with  many  teeth,  O mighty-armed  one,  the  worlds
and  I quake.

24.  For  as  I behold  Thee  touching  the  heavens,  glittering,  many-

hued,  with  yawning  mouths,  with  wide  eyes  agleam,  my
inward  soul  trembles,  and  I find  not  constancy  nor  peace,
O Vishnu.

25.  Seeing  Thy  mouths  grim  with  teeth,  like  to  the  fire  of  the

last  day,  I recognize  not  the  quarters  of  the  heavens,  and
take  no  joy  ; Lord  of  Gods,  home  of  the  universe,  be
gracious !

26.  These  sons  of  Dhritarashtra  all,  with  the  hosts  of  kings,

Bhishma,  Drona,  and  the  Charioteers  son  yonder,  and
likewise  the  chief  of  our  warriors,

27.  hasting  enter  into  Thy  mouths  grim  with  fangs  and  terrible  ;

some,  caught  between  the  teeth,  appear  with  crushed  heads.

28.  As  many  currents  of  rivers  flow  to  meet  the  sea,  so  these

warriors  of  the  world  of  mankind  pass  into  Thy  blazing
mouths.

29.  As  moths  with  exceeding  speed  pass  into  a lighted  fire  to

perish,  so  pass  the  worlds  with  exceeding  speed  into  Thy
mouths  to  perish.


HYMN,  AND  LITURGY


193


30.  Thou  devourest  and  lickest  up  all  the  worlds  around  with
flaming  mouths  ; filling  the  whole  universe  with  radiance,
grim  glow  Thy  splendours,  O Vishnu  !

81.  Relate  to  me  who  Thou  art  in  this  grim  form.  Homage  to
Thee,  chief  of  gods  ; be  gracious ! I would  fain  know  Thee
as  First  Being.  . . /

Thereupon  Vishnu  reassumes  his  friendly  Krishna-form.  Ar-
y una’s  petition  to  comprehend  the  incomprehensible  is  not  granted
him.  It  is  forbidden  to  man,  as  Luther  says,  4 to  soar  into  the
height  of  Majesty  ’ : lie  must  confine  himsolf  to  the  Word  of
gracious  Promise.  Such  a word  is  imparted.  The  tremendous
chapter  closes  with  the  words  which  expositors  take  as  the  sum
and  epitome  of  the  whole  Gita  :

55.  4 He  who  does  what  he  does  for  Me  alone ; who  is  given  over
to  Me,  who  is  devoted  to  Me,  void  of  attachment,  without
hatred  to  any  born  being,  0 son  of  Pandu,  comes  to  Me.*


The  Numinous  in  Hymn  and  Liturgy .

A comparison  of  two  poems  may  indicate  the  difference  between
a merely  1 rational ' glorification  of  the  Godhead  and  one  that  also
prompts  to  a feeling  of  the  non- rational,  the  numinous,  in  its
aspect  of  1 mysterium  tremendum Gellert  can  sing  of  ‘The
Honour  of  God  from  Nature  ’ powerfully  and  finely  enough —

Die  Hinimel  riihmen  des  Ewigen  Ehre,

Ihr  Schall  pflanzt  seinen  Namen  fort.

Here  everything  is  bright,  rational,  and  intimate  up  to  the  last
veise :

Leh  bin  Dein  SchOpfer,  bin  Weisheit  und  Gate,

Ein  Gott  der  Ordnung  und  Dein  Heil.

Ich  bin’s  ! Mich  liebe  von  ganzem  Gem  ate,

Und  nimm  an  meiner  Gnade  teil.

But,  beautiful  as  this  hymn  is,  we  do  not  encounter  there  the
‘ honour  of  God  ’ in  all  its  fullness.  Some  element  is  missing,  and
what  this  is  we  feel  at  once  when  we  compare  with  this  hymn
that  composed  at  an  earlier  date  by  E.  Lange,  * To  the  Majesty  of
God’:

Vor  Dir  erbebt  der  Engel  Clior,

Sie  schlagen  Aug’  und  Antlitz  nieder,

So  schrecklich  kommst  Du  ihnen  vor
Und  davon  schallen  ihre  Lieder.  . . .

O


194  NUMINOUS  IN  POETRY,  HYMN,  AND  LITURGY

Denn  Dein  ist  Kraft  und  Ruhm,

Das  Reich  und  Heiligtum,

Da  mich  Entsetzen  mir  entreisset.

Bei  Dir  ist  Majestat
Die  liber  alles  geht,

Und  heilig,  heilig,  heilig,  heisset.

That  goes  farther  than  Gellert.  And  yet  even  here  there  is  still
something  lacking,  something  that  we  find  in  the  Song  of  the
Seraphim  in  Isaiah  vi.  Even  Lange,  despite  his  ‘numb  amaze-
ment *,  sings  ten  long  stanzas  ; the  angels  sing  a bare  two  lines.
And  he  incessantly  speaks  to  God  in  the  second  person  singular  ;
whereas  the  angels  speak  before  Yah  well  in  the  third  person.1

A liturgy  unusually  rich  in  numinous  hymns  and  prayers  is
that  of  Yom  Kippur,  the  great  1 Day  of  Atonement9  of  the  Jews.
It  is  overshadowed  by  the  ‘Iloly,  Holy,  Holy  9 of  the  Seraphim
(Isa.  vi),  which  recurs  more  than  once,  and  it  has  prayers  in  it  as
wonderful  as  the  ubclccn  ten  pachilcka  :

‘ So  then,  let  Thy  fear,  O Yahwoli  our  God,  como  over  all  Thy
creatures,  and  reverent  dread  ( emdtcfol ) of  Thee  upon  all  that
Thou  hast  made,  that  all  Thy  creatures  may  fear  Thee  and  every
being  bow  before  Thee  and  that  they  may  all  become  bonded
together  to  do  Thy  will  with  all  their  heart,  even  as  we  know,  O
Yahweh  our  God,  that  Thine  is  the  lordship,  that  might  is  in  Thy
hand  and  power  in  Thy  right  hand  and  Thy  name  exalted  above
all  that  Thou  hast  created.*


APPENDIX  III

ORIGINAL  NUMINOUS  SOUNDS

Feelings  and  emotions,  as  states  of  mental  tension,  find  their
natural  relaxation  in  uttered  sounds.  It  is  evident  that  the
numinous  feeling  also,  in  its  first  outbreak  in  consciousness,  must

1 In  point  of  fact  one  cannot  always  speak  to  God  as  ‘Thou',  and
sometimes  not  at  all.  St.  Theresa  addresses  God  as  ‘ Eternal  Majesty*,
and  the  French  readily  use  4 Vous  ’ for  4 Tu  And  Goethe  came  very  near
to  the  4 tremendum  mysterium  * when  he  said  to  Kckermann  (Dec.  31,
1823)  : 4 People  treat  the  name  of  God  as  though  the  inconceivable  and
wholly  incomprehensible  supreme  Being  were  not  far  more  than  such  as
they.  Else  they  would  not  say : 44  The  Lord  God,'*  “ the  dear  God,”  44  the
good  God.*’  Were  they  penetrated  through  and  through  by  a sense  of
His  greatness,  they  would  be  dumb  and  unable  to  name  Him  for  very
veneration.*


ORIGINAL  NUMINOUS  SOUNDS  193

have  found  sounds  for  its  expression,  and  at  first,  inarticulate
sounds  rather  than  words  ; but  it  is  improbable  that  it  devised
special  and  peculiar  sounds  for  itself  Analogous  as  it  is  to  other
feelings,  it  no  doubt  adopted  the  already  familiar  sounds  expressive
of  the  emotions  of  terror,  amazement,  joy,  and  the  like.  But  it
could,  and  sometimes  did,  put,  as  it  were,  a special  stamp  upon
sounds  coined  for  a different  uso.  The  German  interjection  1 IIu  ! %
for  instance,  expresses  to-day  invariably  and  exclusively,  not
terror  in  general,  but  terror  accompanied  by  shuddering,  i.e.
numinous  ‘terror'.  So,  too,  uhoreas  lius  in  vulgar  Arabic  is,  I
am  told,  a sound  expressive  of  soothing  in  general,  the  correspond-
ing Hebrew  sound  has  is  only  found  in  a numinous  context.  (Cf.
Amos  vi.  10 : ‘ Hold  thy  tongue  (i has ),  for  wo  may  not  make  men-
tion of  the  name  of  the  Lord.'  Zeph.  i.  7 : ‘Hold  thy  peace  at
the  presence  of  the  Lord  God.’  Ilab.  ii.  20;  Judges  iii.  19;
also  Amos  viii.  3.)  Such  a specialization  of  a common  interjection
has  very  possibly  often  come  about.  When  the  ecstatic  Dervishes
of  Islam  bring  their  ‘Zikr  ' to  an  end,  they  break  into  ejaculations,
such  as  ‘Allah  Akbar’,  which  end  finally  in  a protracted  groan-
ing Hu.  This  Hu  has  indeed  been  explained  on  rational  grounds
as  the  Arabic  personal  pronoun  of  the  third  person,  ‘He',  i.e.
Allah.  But  any  one  who  has  actually  heard  these  ejaculations
finds  it  hard  to  think  of  them  simply  as  pronouns.  Rather  we
have  the  impression  that  in  this  sound  the  numinous  feeling  is
seeking  to  discharge  itself.

This  specialization  is  perhaps  the  clue  to  the  understanding
of  the  Sanskrit  word  ascarya , to  which  reference  has  been  made
more  than  once.  Its  derivation  has  been  hitherto  an  enigma ;
but  one  may  conjecture  that  the  explanation  is  in  fact  very  simple,
and  that  the  word  is  just  a compound  of  the  two  words  as  and
carya . Carya  = ‘ agendum  ’,  that  which  is  done  or  is  to  be  done  ;
while  as  is  a primitive  sound  to  express  the  ‘ stupendum  \ the
long  protracted  open  vowel  of  wonder  (a,  oh,  ha),  combining
with  the  sibilant,  which  in  all  languages  is  used  to  express  or
produce  a terrified  silence  (cf.  Ilist ! Sh ! Sst !).  An  ‘ ds-carya 9 1
would  not  then  be  properly  and  primarily  anything  conceptual
at  all,  nor  even  a ‘ marvel but  simply  ‘ that  in  the  presence

1 Compare  the  exactly  parallel  forms  a-hlrdy  ahan  lcdra : and  vide
Sflderblom,  Das  Wtrden  des  Gotti  sglaubens,  1916,  p.  96,  on  the  Manitu  of
the  Indians.

o 2


196  ORIGINAL  NUMINOUS  SOUNDS

of  which  we  must  exclaim  “as!  &s!”\  If  this  interpreta-
tion is  correct,  we  can  detect  in  this  word  just  the  original
1 shudder  ’ of  numinous  awe  in  the  first  and  earliest  form  in  which
it  expressed  itself,  before  any  figure  of  speech,  objective  represen-
tation, or  concept  had  been  devised  to  explicate  it;  it  bursts
forth  crudely  and  vehemently  in  this  primal  cry  and  is  unable  to
name  its  object  otherwise  than  as  a something  before  which  such
sounds  must  involuntarily  bo  uttered.  Professor  Geldner  has
kindly  sent  me  a reference  to  a passage  in  the  Kena-Upanisliad
(iv.  29)  which  seems  to  me  to  be  an  excellent  confirmation  of  this
and  at  the  same  time  to  illustrate  how  the  primal  numinous  feel-
ing did  originally  emerge  as  pure  feeling,  before  any  concept  or
concrete  representation  of  it  had  come  into  being.  The  fine,
naive  old  Kena-Upanishad  aims  at  making  perceptible  to  the
disciple  that  before  which  ‘all  words  turn  backhand  proceeds
just  as  we  do,  by  trying  to  produce  in  him  an  appropriate  feeling-
reflex  by  means  of  a simile.  The  lines  run :

This  is  the  way  It  (sc.  Brahman)  is  to  bo  illustrated :

When  lightnings  have  been  loosened  :
aaali !

When  that  has  mado  the  eyes  to  be  closed —
aaali ! —

So  far  concerning  Deity  (devaid).

What,  then,  is  the  devata,  the  Brahman ? It  is  an  d-caryam ,
i.  e.  4 that  in  whose  presence  we  must  exclaim  44  aaah  ! ” 9 And  one
cannot  4 illustrate  * the  numinous  character  of  this  4 aaah  ’ by  any
better  analogy  than  that  of  the  lightning  here  rnven.  The
unexpectedness  and  suddenness  of  the  lightning-flasli,  its  dreadful
weirdness,  its  overpoweringness  and  dazzling  splendour,  the  fright
and  the  delight  of  it,  give  it  an  almost  numinous  impressiveness,
and  indeed  often  do  produce  an  actual  numinous  impression  on
the  mind.

This  reference  of  Professor  Geldner’s  seems  to  me  all'the  more
significant  from  the  fact  that  it  appears  to  me  to  adumbrate  quite  a
new  method  of  solving  the  old  puzzle  of  the  ‘Brahman',  and  what  it
means.  For  this  task  philosophical  speculation  is  too  elevated,  mere
etymology  too  insufficient,  a method.  What  is  necessary  in  order
really  to  get  at  the  heart  of  the  matter  is  to  have  rediscovered  and
recaptured  the  feelings  which  this  word  originally  connoted  and
which  thrill  through  it.  And  for  this  we  have  again  a very


ORIGINAL  NUMINOUS  SOUNDS  197

instructive  passage  in  that  which,  immediately  preceding  the  one
just  quoted  (Kena,  iii.  15),  at  the  same  time  serves  to  elucidate  it.
It  is  where  the  Devas  catch  for  the  first  time  an  intimation  of  the
4 Brahman  They  ask,  in  amazement,  and  yet  obviously  also  in
extreme  eagerness  : 4 Kim  idatnyahsam  ? 9 of  which  Deussen’s  trans-
lation 4 What  marvellous  thing  ( Wunderding)  is  this?'  is  too  tame
a rendering.  It  is  more  exactly:  4 What  utvtliing  (Unding)  is
this?’  in  the  sense  in  which  this  expression  is  popularly  used  for
a thing  of  which  no  one  can  say  what  it  is  or  whence  it  comes,
and  in  whose  presence  we  have  the  feeling  of  the  uncanny.
4 Yaksa  like  4 Unding9 , is  sometimes  a word  for  a ghost,  and  is
originally  the  4 ungchcuer ’,  ‘monstrous’,  in  the  sense  of  the  un-
canny, eerie,  4 apparition or  spectre.  And  it  is  just  as  such
that  the  ‘Brahman’  in  this  passage  behaves.  It  does  the  things
goblins  and  magical  creatures  usually  do,  vanishing  suddenly  like
a true  phantom  at  the  climax  of  the  transaction.  Such  feelings,
which  we  meet  at  the  commencement  of  the  great  Mysticism
of  Brahman,  attend  its  course  continually,  and  he  who  cannot
recognize  and  detect  their  presence  there  cannot  do  more  than
reconstruct  the  meagre  skeleton  of  concepts  they  have  left  behind.
And  the  same  thing,  mutatis  mutandis , holds  good  also  for  Western
Mysticism.

Another  original  sound  in  which  the  numinous  feeling  is
articulated  is  certainly  the  holy  syllable  4 om  ’.  It  likewise  has
no  sort  of  conceptual  connotation.  Like  the  particle  as,  it  is
simply  an  articulated  sound — no  word,  nor  even  a complete
sellable,  for  the  m in  which  it  ends  is  not  an  ordinary  4m*,  but
simply  the  long  protracted  nasal  continuation  of  the  deep  4 o ’
sound.  It  is  really  simply  a sort  of  growl  or  groan,  sounding  up
from  within  as  the  quasi-reflex  expression  of  profound  emotion
in  circumstances  of  a numinous  magical  nature,  and  serving  to
relieve  consciousness  of  a felt  burden,  almost  physical  in  its
constraining  force.  And  this  constraint  and  compulsion  to
expression  are  still  recoverable  to  our  feeling  when  we  recapture
this  mood  of  submergence  and  absorption  in  the  4 wholly  other

This  Om  is  exactly  parallel  to  the  similar  sound  in  Sanskrit,
Hum — like  it,  nothing  but  a numinous  ejaculation,  with  probably
no  further  significance.

It  would  be  a task  for  the  history  and  psychology  of  religion
alike  to  examine  the  innumerable  names  of  gods  and  demons,  anrj


198  ORIGINAL  NUMINOUS  SOUNDS

perhaps  also  the  various  designations  for  ghost,  soul,  and  spirit,
with  a view  to  seeing  whether  many  of  them  may  not  simply
have  arisen  from  original  numinous  sounds  and  thus  be  parallels
to  the  name  akarya,  already  considered.1


APPENDIX  IV

‘SPIRIT  * AND  4 SOUL  ’ AS  NUMINOUS  ENTITIES

The  non~rational  which  we  were  looking  for  in  the  Idea  of  the
divine  was  found  in  the  numinous,  and  in  our  recognition  of  this
we  came  to  see  that  rationalistic  speculation  tends  to  conceal  the
divine  in  God,  and  that  before  God  becomes  for  us  rationality,
absolute  reason,  a personality,  a moral  will,  He  is  the  wholly
non  rational  and  4 otlior  the  being  of  sheer  mystery  and  marvel.
We  had  to  turn  to  the  feelings  of  horror  and  shudder  and  spectral
haunting  in  order,  by  means  of  these  caricatures  of  the  authentic
numinous  emotions,  to  break  through  the  hard  crust  of  rationalism
and  bring  into  play  tlio  feelings  buried  deep  down  in  our  religious
consciousness.

Now  what  is  true  of  our  apprehension  of  the  divine  is  true  also
of  its  counterpart  in  the  creature — soul  and  spirit.  Gregory  of
Nyssa  well  says:  ‘Since  one  of  the  signs  of  the  Divine  Nature  is
its  essential  incomprehensibility,  in  this  also  must  the  copy  bo
like  the  original.  For  were  the  nature  of  the  copy  comprehended,
when  the  original  was  above  comprehension,  the  copy  would  be
a mistaken  one.  But,  inasmuch  as  the  nature  of  our  spirit  is
above  our  understanding,  it  has  here  an  exact  resemblance  to  the
all-sublime,  representing  by  its  own  unfathomabloness  the  incom-
prehensible Being  of  God.’  Here,  too,  we  need  to  break  up  anew

1 K.  Muller  suggests  that  the  divine  name  Yah,  Yahu,  may  have  had
this  origin.  4 Euoios’,  the  secondary  name  of  Bacchus,  may  also  denote
simply  him  in  whose  presence  one  ejaculates  ‘ Euoi  \ He  could  cite  in  his
support  Jelaleddin,  who  says  in  Divan  31.  8:  ‘I  know  no  other  than
Yahu.’  This  is  here  certainly  nothing  but  4 one  of  the  most  familiar
dervish  cries’  (as  the  translator  adds  in  a note,  p.  282),  and  will  then
mean,  in  accordance  with  the  usual  rendering,  ‘ 0 he  \ or,  as  we  rather
suspect,  simply  * 0 hu\  Nicholson  puts  1 Yahweh*  in  brackets,  without
further  justification.  Cf.  R.  A.  Nicholson,  Selected  Poems  from  the  Divani
Sham  si  Tabriz,  Cambridge,  1898.


1 SPIRIT  * AND  ‘ SOUL  ’ AS  NUMINOUS  ENTITIES  199


our  hardened  and  crusted  feelings  and  to  withstand  the  intellec-
tualizing  tendency  to  which  we  are  so  prone  in  our  doctrine  of  the
soul  and  its  creation  in  God’s  image.  For  this  divine  image  in
man  also  does  not  merely  consist  in  the  fact  that  he  is  reasonable,
moral,  intelligent,  and  a person,  but  primarily  in  the  fact  that  in
its  profoundest  depths  his  being  is  indeed  for  religious  self-con-
sciousness something  numinous — that  the  soul  is  mystery  and
marvel.  This  is  how  Mysticism  apprehends  it,  and  wo  can
understand  at  once  why  this  is  so  from  our  definition  of  Mysticism
as  the  tendency  to  stress  up  to  an  extrdfne  and  exaggerated  point
the  non-rational  aspect  of  religion.  And  what  was  already  stir-
ring in  crude  fashion  at  the  earliest  and  lowest  stage  of  numinous
feeling  recurs  at  the  most  exalted  level  of  Mysticism  with  after-
effects that  colour  the  whole  experience.  In  the  mystic’s  praise
of  the  soul,  and  in  that  i fundus  animae  ’ of  which  he  tells  the
mysteries,  there  echoes  the  ‘ stupor  ’ beforo  the  i wholly  other ’
that  characterized  the  primitive  belief  in  souls  and  even  primitive
feeling  of  the  presence  of  ghosts.

We  said  above  (p.  124)  that  the  most  interesting  point  in  the
primitive  idea  of  soul  is  not  the  form  given  to  it  in  fantasy,
multifarious  in  its  variations,  but  the  element  of  feeling — * stupor  ’
— which  it  liberates,  and  the  character  of  ‘ mystery  ’ and  ‘ wholly
otherness’  which  surrounds  it.  This  fact  is  obscured  in  tlio
measure  in  which  the  ‘ soul  ’ becomes  later  the  subject  of  myth,
fairy  story,  and  narrative,  speculation  and  doctrine,  and  finally  of
psychological  investigation.  It  then  becomes  more  and  more
something  entirely  rational  ; its  origin  in  magic  and  mystery
becomes  overlaid  with  concepts,  scholastic  terms,  and  classifica-
tions. The  Doctrine  of  souls  or  ‘ Atman  ’ of  the  Indian  Sankhya
system  is  the  best  example  of  this.  But  even  this  cannot  entirely
conceal  the  fact  that  1 Soul  ’ or  ‘ Atman  ’ is  properly  the  thing  of
marvel  and  stupefaction,  quite  undefinable,  outsoaring  all  concep-
tions, i wholly  alien’  to  our  understanding.  And  this  finds
wonderful  expression  in  the  verses  of  the  Gita,  2.  29,  which  we
transcribe  here  of  intention  in  the  original :

Ascaryavat  pasyati  kascid  enam.

Ascaryavad  vadati  tathaiva  canyah.

Ascaryavac  cainam  an  yah  srinoti.^
orutva  ’pyenam  veda  na  caiva  kascit.

The  sound  of  these  verses  suggests  a magic  formula,  almost  a


200


* SPIRIT  * AND  ‘SOUL’


conjuration,  especially  when  they  are  heard  intoned  in  the
peculiar  sacred  sing-song  in  which  such  , lines  are  commonly
recited.  The  note  of  magic  and  mystery  is  very  palpable  in  them.
As  for  the  translation,  it  is  usual  to  render  AScaryam  by  4 strange
4 wondrous  4 a thing  of  wonder  * or  * marvel  * ; but  we  should
perhaps  catch  the  emotional  accent  in  the  lines  more  exactly  as
follows :

As  ‘wholly  other’  doth  one  gaze  upon  it  (sc.  Atman).

He  speaketh  of  the  4 wholly  other  *,  who  speaketh  of  the  A tman.
Something  4 wholly  other  ’ hath  he  learned,  who  hath  learned

the  Atman.

Yet  none,  albeit  he  hath  learned  it,  may  come  to  know  it.

But,  however  they  be  rendered  into  another  language,  there  is
living  in  these  old  phrases  a profoundly  numinous  self-feeling,
which  still  retains  a trace  of  the  4 stupor  ’ before  an  apparition  of
spirits.  And  it  is  continued  where  the  Gita  (2.  25)  designates  the
Atman  the  4 acini ya  *,  i.  e.  that  which  is  incomprehensible  by
thought.  In  this  it  is  exactly  like  the  4 fundus  animae  *,  the
‘spark*,  4 Synderesis’,  or  4 Inner  Abyss’  of  our  own  Western
mystics.  In  both  cases  we  have,  surviving  in  an  ennobled  form,
the  primal  awe  and  shrinking  before  the  presence  of  4 dscaryam  *
and  4 adbhutam  the  haunting  presence  that  prompts  the  earliest
numinous  feelings.  For,  as  an  old  mystic  tells  us,  the  soul  and
its  bottommost  depth  lie  hidden  away,  ineffable  as  God  himself —
4 so  that  no  human  skill  ever  attains  to  be  able  to  know  what  the
Soul  is  in  its  bottommost  depth.  For  that  a supernatural  skill  is
needed.  It  is  what  is  without  a name.’  And  4 the  heights  and
depths  which  are  disclosed  in  these  Men  can  be  grasped  by  no
human  sense  or  reason,  for  they  surpass  in  their  profundities  all
understanding  \ 1

Finalty,  it  may  be  said  that  we  catch  a last  reflection  of  the
numinous  wonder  in  the  wonder,  one  might  almost  say  in  the
eager  curiosity,  with  which  Augustine  roves  through  the  chambers
of  the  soul,  even  when  he  is  pursuing  4 psychological  ’ discussion.
He  feels  that  he  has  a story  of  marvel  to  tell  when  he  describes
the  soul.  His  psychology  is  half  4 numinology  \ Cf.  Confessions ,
x.  6-27.

The  clearer  insight  into  the  inmost  marvel  of  the  soul  is  not  set
free  as  a sort  of  reflex : it  comes  in  the  experience  as  an  uprusli,

1 Gieitli,  pp.  70  and  80.


AS  NUMINOUS  ENTITIES


201


an  irruption,  a burst  of  illumination,  ‘ like  a flash  in  the  English
phrase,  as  a ‘ sudden  apersu  ’,  in  Goethe’s.  And  so  it  easily  shows
the  two  elements ; on  the  one  hand  there  is  an  entry  or  penetra-
tion into  consciousness  of  inspiration,  sudden,  unmeditated,  once
and  for  all  achieved ; and  on  the  other  hand  there  is  a reminis-
cence (anamnesis),  a recollection  of  something  that  was  a familiar
possession  in  the  obscurity  of  feeling  even  before  the  moment  of
insight.  Both  of  these  elements  are  indicated  in  the  old  ICena-
Upanishad,  when  (iv.  30),  after  speaking  of  the  Brahman  in  the
significant  verses  we  have  already  considered  (p.  196),  the  text
goes  on  at  once  to  speak  of  the  Atman,  in  words  which  may  be
rendered  thus :

Now  in  respect  to  the  Atman :

It  is  as  though  something  forces  its  way  into  consciousness
And  consciousness  suddenly  remembers —

Such  a state  of  mind  illustrates  the  awakening  of  knowledge

of  the  Atman.

We  may  compare  the  saying  of  Plato,  already  quoted  (p.  98  n.) ;
and,  finally,  the  words  of  Meister  Eckhart :

‘Upon  this  matter  a heathen  sage  hath  a fine  saying  in  speech
with  another  sage:  “I  become  aware  of  something  in  me  which
flashes  upon  my  reason.  I perceive  of  it  that  it  is  something,
but  what  it  is  I cannot  conceive.  Only  meseems  that,  could  I
conceive  it,  I should  comprehend  all  truth.”  * (W.  Lehmann,
Meister  Eckhart,  Gottingen,  1917,  p.  243.)

And  the  ‘obscure’  Heracleitus  says:  ‘Thou  canst  not  discover
the  bounds  of  the  soul  albeit  thou  pacest  its  every  road:  so  deep
is  its  foundation.’


APPENDIX  V

THE  SUPRA-PERSONAL  IN  THE  NUMINOUS

We  said  above  that  the  feeling  of  the  ‘wholly  other’  gives  rise
in  Mysticism  to  the  tendency  to  follow  the  ‘via  negationis’,  by
which  every  predicate  that  can  be  stated  in  words  becomes
| excluded  from  the  absolute  Numen — i.  e.  from  Deity — till  finally
j!  the  Godhead  is  designated  as  ‘ nothingness  ’ and  ‘nullity  ’,  bearing


202


THE  SUPRA-PERSONAL


in  mind  always  that  these  terms  denote  in  truth  immeasurable
plenitude  of  being.  )Now  this  is  also  the  origin  of  that  tendency
to  let  the  conception  of  personality  and  the  personal  also  be  sub-
merged in  the  same  'nothingness’,  a tendency  which  is  in  appear-
ance so  irreligious.  We  need  not  dispute  that  the  denial  of
personality  to  God  does  often  in  fact  denote  a wholly  irreligious
attitude ; mostly  it  is  simply  a disguised  form  of  atheism,  or
betokens  a desperate  attempt  to  equate  faith  in  God  with  belief  in
natural  law  and  with  naturalism.  But  it  would  be  a huge  error  to
suppose  that  anything  of  this  kind  is  in  the  minds  of  the  mystics
when  they  set  themselves  to  oppose  the  idea  of  personality  in  God.
We  shall  bo  in  a better  position  to  understand  what  they  are
contending  for  if  we  take  Mysticism — following  our  previous
definition — as  meaning  the  preponderance  in  religious  conscious-
ness, even  to  the  point  of  one-sided  exaggeration,  of  its  non-
rational  features.  What  we  have,  then,  is  a sort  of  antinomy,
arising  from  the  inner  duality  in  the  idea  of  the  divine  and  the
tension  of  its  more  rational  and  its  more  lion-rational  elements.
(The  noil-rational  assumes  thus  an  apparently  irrational  character.)
It  is  the  ' wholly  other’  aspect  of  the  numen,  resisting  every
analogy,  every  attempted  comparison,  and  every  determination  ;
so  that  it  is  here  really  true  that  ' omnis  determinatio  est
negatio

Now  this  holds  good  not  only  in  the  case  of  the  most  lofty  and
reverent  feelings,  in  which  devotion  and  worship  reach  their  con-
summation, but  also  in  the  case  of  that  primary  and  elemental  ‘ awe’
of  which  we  spoke  on  pages  129-132.  Lot  us  glance  once  more  at
the  experience  given  in  the  story  of  Jacob  at  Bethel,  the  ve  cited  (Gen.
xxviii.  16*17).  If  we  use  as  a clue  to  it  our  own  power  of  imagina-
tive sympathy,  introspection  will  show  that  even  this  experience
contains  a clear  antinomy,  a conflict  of  opposites.  We  said  that
the  pure  elemental  ‘awe’  mirrored  in  Jacob’s  first  words,  ‘How
dreadful  is  this  place  ! ’,  is  rendered  explicit  in  the  words  that  fol-
low. The  simple  experience  of  ' awefulness  ’ is  intetpreted — all  but
instinctively,  and  apart  from  reflection— and  the  interpretation  is,
in  the  English  phrase,  ' a presence  a real,  present,  and  personal
being.  Now  though  we  certainly  feel  that  such  an  interpretation
is  needed  and  in  some  sense  right,  and  that  we  should  in  Jacob’s
.place  have  found  no  other  to  ' explicate  ’ our  feeling,  yet  we  are  no
li§s  certainly  conscious  of  a counter-impulse  in  us  which  resists


IN  THE  NUMINOUS


203


it,  suggesting  that,  when  all  is  said,  such  expressions  as  4 Being’,

4 Person  \ 4 Thou  ’,  * He  are  strangely  alien  and  repugnant  to  the
very  import  of  the  experience.  Does  this  Power  that  impresses  us
with  such  awe  admit  of  being  comprised  in  such  a firm  outline,
admit  of  question  and  answor  in  the  second  person  ? Is  not  this
interpretation  at  first  glance  distinctly  anthropomorphic?  The
abstract  English  expression,  'a  presence  is  itself  a good  indica-
tion of  this — for  4 a presence’  is  simply  felt,  and  the  English
usage  of  words  is  chary  of  saying  anything  more  specific.  The
4 Personalism  * of  the  later  developed  mythology  and  the  later
developments  of  ordered  worship  (mostly  practised  on  a wholly
1 personalist  ’ basis)  have  tended  more  and  moro  to  extrude  this
authentic  and  sensitive  element  of  feeling  from  the  religious
experience;  and  the  4 daemon  * or  ‘god’,  which  they  both  con-
tributed to  shape,  is  not  richer  but  poorer  in  content  than  the
object  of  that  primal  4 awe  corresponding  only  to  certain  sides
and  aspects  of  it.  Before  the  4 gods  ’ were  the  hard-outlined,
clear-featured  gods  of  the  myths,  they  were  4 numina  and,  though
the  nuinen  certainly  gains  something  from  subsequent  mythology
in  definiteness  and  fixity  of  representation,  it  also  certainly  loses
something  of  its  original  wealth  of  meaning  in  the  process.  In
drawing  more  near  to  earth  and  to  humanity,  it  comes  itself  to
acquire  human  traits,  and,  that  this  tendency  may  not  be  carried
too  far,  it  is  necessary  now  and  then  to  melt  down,  as  it  were,
the  human  lineaments  of  God  in  the  more  elemental  entirety  of
the  original  experience.  The  numen  has,  no  doubt,  in  itself  per-
sonal features,  which  somehow  enable  the  worshipper  to  refer  to
it  by  a pronoun,  as  ‘ ho  ’ or  4 she  But,  while  the  limits  of  the
personal  are  at  this  stage  still  fluid,  they  cannot  (any  more  than
in  the  case  of  the  more  definite  figure  of  the  ‘God’)  quite  com-
prise the  full  import  of  the  inapprehensible  and  unnameable,
which  presses  out  beyond  them.

Thus  already,  at  the  outset,  we  find  in  the  numen  of  primitive
religious  feeling  that  tension  between  the  personal  and  the  supra-
personal  which  recurs  again  in  the  maturer  stages  of  the  developing
experience  of  God.  It  is  to  be  found  next  in  the  comparatively
low  level  of  4 the  daemonic  where  it  is  disclosed  in  an  actual
difference  in  the  verbal  forms  employed.  The  Greek  8a tfiu>v  is
indisputably  a single,  concrete,  personal  Being  ; the  Sai/omov,
that,  for  example,  of  Socrates,  is  certainly  none  of  these— ■ neither*;


204


THE  SUPRA-PERSONAL


concrete,  nor  personal,  and  hardly  even  to  be  called  a being  or
individual  entity.  Yet  in  the  impressiveness  and  devout  awe
which  it  suggests  Scu/xoviov  is,  if  anything,  the  richer  of  the  two
terms.  In  Indian  terminology  raksds  is  the  concrete,  persona),
and  masculine  i Daemon  but  a transposition  of  the  accent  to  the
first  syllable  gives  rdlcsas  (the  neuter),  i the  daemonic  or  rather
demonic  ; a word,  perhaps,  more  charged  with  terror  than  is
ralisds ; and  the  fact  that  the  difference  is  merely  one  of  accent
shows  very  clearly  how  easily  the  one  meaning  passes  into  the
other.  But  exactly  the  same  thing  is  seen  again  at  that  highest
stage,  at  which  the  unfolding  of  the  numinous  consciousness
reaches  its  climax  in  India  : brahman  is  the  everlasting  Lord  and
God,  the  personal  Brahma  ; while  brdliman  is  the  divine  Absolute,
the  supra-personal  Brahma,  an  * It ’ rather  than  a 1 He  \ And  the
two  are  bound  together  in  indissoluble  union  as  the  two  essential
poles  of  the  eternal  unity  of  the  Numen.  And  here,  again,  the
closeness  of  their  interconnexion  is  emphatically  shown  by  the
fact  that  they  are  denoted  by  one  and  the  same  word  and
distinguished  by  a mere  change  of  accent  and  gender.

Now  it  is  generally  supposed  that  there  is  something  peculiarly
and  specifically  1 oriental’  in  this  characteristic  of  Indian  religion.
But  this  is  by  no  means  the  case.  On  the  contrary,  one  may
venture  to  assert  that  all  gods  are  more  than  mere  (personal)  gods,
and  that  all  the  greater  representations  of  deity  show  from  time
to  time  features  which  reveal  their  ancient  character  as  ‘numiua’
and  burst  the  bounds  of  the  personal  and  theistic.  This  is
obviously  the  case  where  the  experienced  relation  of  the  worshipper
to  his  god  does  not  exclusively  take  the  form  of  contact  with  a
i beyond  * and  transcendent  being,  but  comes  somehow  as  the
experience  of  seizure  and  possession  by  the  god,  as  being  filled  by
him,  an  experience  in  which  the  god  wholly  or  partially  enters
the  believer  and  dwells  in  him,  or  assimilates  him  to  his  own
divine  nature,  commingling  with  his  spirit  and  becoming  very
part  of  him ; or,  again,  where  the  god  becomes  the  sphere  * in
which  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being  And  what  god  has
not  in  some  sense  had  this  character  ? It  is  certainly  true  of  the
personal  ‘Isvara’  of  India,  who,  besides  his  personal  character,
pervades  his  ‘Bhakta’  as  ‘ antaryamin  ’,  the  immanent  Indweller ;
it  is  true  of  Ahura-masda , who  by  his  spirits  does  the  same  ; and
it  is  true  of  Dionysus,  Apollo,  and  Zeus.  No  less  than  the  mere


IN  THE  NUMINOUS


203


crude  4 daemon  * can  the  4 god  ’ become  7 rvedfia  and  permeate  the
soul  of  man.  And  in  so  far  the  notion  of  a 4 god  ’ passes  beyond
the  sphere  of  social  and  personal  ideas  and  breaks  through  the
confines  of  the  merely  personal.  Persons  cannot  strictly  inter-
penetrate, cannot  become  one  inclusive  of  another.  Such  relations
experienced  between  man  and  deity  become  altogether  irrational,
if  we  judge  them  by  the  standard  of  personality.

The  Yahweh  of  the  Old  Testament  is  also  more  than  a 4 god ’ in
the  merely  personal  sense,  for  though  it  is  a sign  of  his  superior
value  to  all  tribal  gods,  that  the  personal  traits  are  so  incompar-
ably more  strongly  marked  in  him,  yet  other  and  non-personal
features  are  not  lacking.  Wo  come  up  against  these  in  groping
fashion  in  the  comparison  made  between  God’s  dealings  with  men
and  the  working  of  an  inexplicable  ‘force’  spontaneously  released.
But  the  second  name  of  Yahweh,  ‘ Elohim  is  also  a proof  of  their
existence.  Elohim  is  4 gods  ’,  in  the  plural ; and  4 in  the  begin-
ning created  (sing.)  44  gods 99  heaven  and  earth  ’.  Our  way  to-day,
when  we  try  to  escape  from  the  too  narrow  confines  of  the  notion
of  unitary  personality  applied  to  God,  is  to  use  either  an  abstract
noun,  4 deity’  (die  Gotthcit ),  or  an  adjectival  neuter  expression,
4 the  divine  ’ ( das  gottliche).  In  Israel  the  same  groping  instinct
had  recourse  to  the  adoption  or  adaptation  of  a plural  substantive
form,  which  was  yet  made  to  govern  a verb  in  the  singular !
There  cannot  be  a more  uncompromising  expression  of  what  we
called  the  antinomy  or  conflict  of  opposites  in  the  experience  of
the  numinous.  It  is  very  similar  when  later  Shdmayim , 4 Heaven
becomes  a name  for  God — to  be  used  once  as  such  also  in  the
Gospel.  It  does  not  in  the  least  signify  an  ‘abstract’  way  of
conceiving  God ; but  rather  the  feeling  that  endeavours  to  escape
from  any  too  anthropomorphic  conception.  Above  all  does  the
God  of  Job  burst  the  bounds  of  interpretation  by  mere  persona-
lity, as  we  have  already  seen.  Moreover,  Yahweh  also  is  the
numen  which,  blowing  in  the  form  of  spirit,  enters  as  4 ruach '
and  Trvcvjxa  into  his  chosen,  mingling  with  their  spirit,  an
antarydmin  in  full  completion.

And  so,  when  we  turn  to  the  New  Testament,  we  see  that  the
4 Pneumatology 9 and  doctrine  of  Immanence  in  Paul  and  John,
wh^ph  give  such  unmistakable  expression  to  the  supra-personal
aspect  of  the  divine  as  the  4 Light 9 and  the  4 Life  ’,  do  not  mean
a sudden  irruption  into  religion  of  a wholly  novel  and  alien


206


THE  SUPRA-PERSONAL


element,  but  merely  the  complete  realization  of  what  was  all  the
while  potential  in  the  character  of  Yahvveh  in  his  essence  as  a
numen.

And  what  of  the  loftiest  of  all  Christian  claims, 1 God  is  Love  ’ ?
Usually  we  hear  this  saying  without  remarking  how  extraordinary
it  is.  If  wre  think  of  God  in  strictly  and  narrowly  personal  terms,
He  can  indeed  be  * He  that  loves  ’,  ‘ the  loving  One  \ But  the  God
who  is  Love , who  pours  Himself  out  as  love  and  becomes  the  love
whereby  Christians  love,  is  something  more  even  than  this.1  In
fine,  even  our  God  is  more  than  merely  4 * * * * god  \ And,  when
Meister  Eckhart  says  that  one  must  stand  apart  from  God  in  order
to  find  deity,  his  error  is  certainly  grave,  but  it  is  one  which  we
can  easily  conceive  as  springing  from  the  very  heart  of  re *ligion.2

But  it  is  very  evident  that  the  religious  attitude  in  face  of  this
supra-personal  aspect  of  the  numen  must  be  different  from  the
ordinary  attitude  in  personal  intercourse  by  petition,  prayer,
colloquy.  These  have  all  assuredly  pertained  to  the  essence  of
religion  from  the  earliest  times,  yet  from  the  beginning  they  were
not  the  only  forms  of  intercourse.  The  numen  on  its  side  ‘ lias
intercourse 9 with  man  in  attracting  him  to  it,  seizing  upon  him,
possessing  him,  breathing  upon  him,  filling  and  permeating  him.
Its  function  is  ivcpytLo-Oai,  and  on  his  side  the  man,  the  ivepyov/juvos,
is  filled,  possessed,  made  one  with  the  numen.  And  what  is  true
at  the  lower  levols  is  true  also  at  the  highest.  The  Divine,

1 There  is  an  echo  of  this  antinomy  in  the  dispute  of  the  Scholastics
•whether  the  love  whereby  we  love  is  the  ‘Spiritus  Sanctus  ’,i.e.GodHimse]f,

or  merely  His  ‘ donum  \

8 We  have  seen  that  it  is  an  indication  of  its  superiority  that  in  the

Biblical  conception  of  God  the  pole  of  the  personal  rather  than  of  the

impersonal  is  altogether  preponderant.  Taoism  stands  at  the  opposite

extreme  ; but  it  too  is  genuine  and  deeply  felt  religion,  moving  as  it  does

wholly  in  the  numinous.  H.  Hackmann  says  of  it:  ‘Taoism  originates

in  the  contemplative  speculation  upon  the  secret  of  the  world,  the
mystery  of  existence.  Its  basic  instinct  is  to  pay  reverent  and  surmiseful
heed  to  the  marvellous  forces  operative  in  our  phenomenal  life,  which
give  to  its  particular  details  system  and  connexion  with  the  great  unknown
background  of  the  universe.  The  word  mystery’1—  the  mysterhnn  tre~
mendum — occupies  a more  central  position  in  Taoism  than  in  almost  any
other  religion. . . . Here  sounds  a genuine  note  in  the  prodigious  symphony
of  that  life  of  the  soul— the  religious  life— which  searches  and  surmises
a deeper  unity  and  a firm  foundation  in  the  beyond  behind  the  happenings
upon  earth/  (H.  Hackmann,  ‘Die  Mdnchsregeln  des  Klostertaoismus  *,

Ostasiatische  Zeitschriftj  yii.  p.  170.)  For  this  whole  question  cf.  the
same  author’s  essay : ‘ Uber  Objekt  und  Gebietsumfang  der  Religion,’
in  Nieitw  Theologisch  I'ijdschrift , 1918.


IN  THE  NUMINOUS


207


experienced  as  ‘ light’,  ‘fire’,  and  7 rrtvfia,  cannot  properly  accost
or  be  accosted.  It  is  a penetrating  glow  and  illumination,  fulfil-
ment, transfiguration — most  of  all  where  it  is  experienced  as
* Life  ’,  or  (what  is  but  the  intensification  of  this)  as  very  ‘ Being  *.
One  can  make  a petition  for  life,  but  not  to  life.  One  is  simply
quickened  through  and  through  by  it ; one  cannot  address  it  as
‘Thou’.  And  so  intercourse  with  the  numen  comprises  a way
other  than  that  of  personal  intercourse,  that  of  the  ‘mystic’.
Each  of  the  two,  the  personal  and  the  mystical,  belongs  to  the
other,  and  the  language  of  devotion  uses  very  naturally  the  phrases
and  expressions  of  both  commingled.  They  are  not  different
forms  of  religion,  still  loss  different  stages  in  religion,  the  one
higher  and  better  than  the  other,  but  the  two  essentially  united
poles  of  a single  fundamental  mental  attitude,  the  religious  atti-
tude. In  Luther’s  conception  of  ‘faith’  they  are  found  in  this
relation  openly  manifested,  where  ‘ tides  ’ denotes  both  ‘ fiducia  ’
or  trust— a term  implying  personal  intercourse — and  ‘ adhaesio  *,
or  intimate  contact,  a term  essentially  mystical.

It  is  in  the  light  of  this  primal  fact  of  religion  that  we  must
seek  an  answer  to  the  question  as  to  the  general  place  of  ‘ Per-
sonalism ’ and  ‘ Supra-personalism  ’ in  religious  history,  and  only
so  are  we  likely  to  avoid  confounding  this  question  with  the
question  of  Theism  and  Pantheism,  with  which  it  has  nothing  in
common.  In  my  books  Vishnu-NCirdyana  (pp.  59,  03)  and  Sid*
dhdntd  des  Rdmdnija  (pp.  2,  80)  I have  referred  further  to  the
subject.  And  I have  shown  in  a paper,  ‘ Neues  Singen  ’ ( Christ -
7iche  Weltj  1019,  No.  48),  its  important  practical  bearings  for
religious  conduct  and  its  expression  in  prayer  and  hymn.  I
reproduce  the  relevant  passage :

‘ Our  usual  Prayers  and  Hymns  confine  themselves  to  the
region  which  I call  the  “ rational  ”.  They  lack  that  element
which  I call  the  non-rational  or  the  “numinous”.  But  this  is
the  other  half  of  religion,  its  profounder  and  more  mysterious
background  and  basis.  Yet  only  seldom  has  liymnody  hitherto
done  justice  to  it.  Consequently  we  are  very  deficient  in  the
great  and  impressive  “Hymns  of  Reverence  ”,  the  hymns  of  the
(grammatical)  third  person,  and  our  hymns  are  almost  entirely  in
the  second  person,  “ Thou  ”,  not  “ He  ”.  Now  there  is  something
lacking  in  this  constant,  direct,  obvious  mode  of  accosting  God
in  the  second  person  singular.  The  Seraphim  in  Isaiah  vi  do  not
venture  on  such  an  address,  and  many  a glorious  Ekteny  and
Litany  of  the  older  Liturgies  follows  their  example.  The  creature


208  THE  SUPllA-PERSONAL  IN  THE  NUMINOUS

is  simply  unable  to  stand  face  to  face  with  the  Eternal  without
-interruption  ; his  vision  cannot  bear  the  perpetual  sight  of  Holi-
ness without  an  occasional  screen.  He  needs  sometimes  the
oblique  as  well  as  the  straight,  frontal  approach,  the  indirect
relationship  with  face  half  averted  and  covered,  as  well  as  the
direct ; and  consequently  his  utterance  should  not  be  so  continu*
ally  in  the  form  of  an  address  to  God  as  to  exclude  prayerful  and
thoughtful  discourse  about  Him.  The  same  holds  good  of  prayer
in  general,  not  merely  of  hymns.  “ Third  person  ” hymns  in
this  sense  are  not  necessarily  less,  but  under  certain  conditions
may  even  be  more  genuine  and  first-hand  utterances  than  those
which  address  God  as  “Thou  There  is  a further  consequence.
It  is  often  thought  that  the  designations  of  deity  in  impersonal,
neuter  terms  (“  it  ”),  rather  than  in  terms  of  person  and  masculine
pronoun  (“lie”,  “Thou”),  are  too  poor  and  too  pale  to  gain  a
place  in  our  Christian  thought  of  God.  But  this  is  not  always
correct.  Frequently  such  terms  indicate  the  mysterious  overplus
of  the  non-rational  and  numinous,  that  cannot  enter  our  “ concepts  ”
because  it  is  too  great  and  too  alien  to  them  ; and  in  this  sense
they  are  quite  indispensable,  even  in  hymns  and  prayers.  It  is  a
defect  in  our  devotional  poetry  that  it  hardly  knows  any  other
image  for  the  eternal  mystery  of  the  Godhead  than  those  drawn
from  social  intercourse  and  personal  relationship,  and  so  it  tends
to  lose  sight  of  just  the  mysterious  transcendent  aspect  of  deity.
Assuredly  God  is  for  us  “ Thou  ” and  a Person.  But  this  Per*
sonal  character  is  that  side  of  His  nature  which  is  turned  man-
ward — it  is  like  a “Cape  of  Good  Hope”,  jutting  out  from  a
mountain  range  which,  as  it  recedes,  is  lost  to  view  in  the  “ tene-
brae  aeternae  ” — only  to  be  expressed  by  the  suspension  of  speech
and  the  inspiration  of  sacred  song/

So  far  we  have  spoken  of  the  personal  and  supra-personal  as
applied  to  the  supreme,  spiritual  Being.  But  what  is  true  here  is
no  less  true  of  that  which  was  created  in  its  ima6e,  our  own
human  soul  or  spirit.  In  us  too  all  that  we  call  person  and  per-
sonal, indeed  all  that  we  can  know  or  name  in  ourselves  at  all,  is
but  one  element  in  the  whole.  Beneath  it  lies,  even  in  us,  that
4 wholly  other’,  whose  profundities,  impenetrable  to  any  concept,
can  yet  be  grasped  in  the  numinous  self-feeling  1 by  one  who  has
experience  of  the  deeper  life.

1 We  say  ‘ numinous  self -feeling  \ not  ‘numinous  self-consciousness  \ as
Schleiermacher  called  it,  who  may  be  said  to  have  rediscovered  it.  The
ambiguity  of  his  nomenclature,  however,  does  not  detract  from  the
importance  of  his  discovery.


209


APPENDIX  VI

, THE  MYSTICAL  ELEMENT  IN  LUTHER'S
CONCEPTION  OF  * FAITH  *

In  connexion  with  the  discussion  of  Luther’s  conception  of
faith  on  page  107,  I would  refer  to  my  book,  Die  Ansrhauung  vom
HeiligenGcisfe  bei Luther,  the  chapter  ‘GeistundQlaube’  (pp.  25-46),
which  includes  the  inquiry  into  Luther’s  conception  of  Faith  and
how  far  Faith  for  him  is  not  merely  confidence  and  trust  ( confiderc ,
fiducia),  but  also  a ‘cleaving  to  God 9 in  feeling  and  will  (adhacrcre
Deo).  And  then  let  the  reader  study  the  noble  little  work  of
Albertus  Magnus,  Dc  Adhacrendo  Deo,  to  recognize  tlio  inner
connexion  of  Luther  with  Mj^sticism  in  regard  to  his  conception
of  faith,  especially  the  12th  chapter,  ‘ De  A in  ore  Dei  quod  eflicax
sit.’  Luther  says  nothing  of  the  impelling  power  of  Faith  to
bring  to  new  birth,  to  justify  and  to  sanctify,  that  is  not  also  said
in  this  chapter  of  the  ‘ Amor  Mysticus  \

‘ Solus  amor  est,  quo  convert  imur  ad  Deum,  transform  Amur  in
Deum,  adhaeremus  Deo,  unimur  Deo,  ut  simus  unus  spiritus  cum
eo,  et  beatificemur  cum  eo.’ 1

Here  ‘ amor  ’ is  the  ‘ potent,  active,  creative  thing  that  changes
us  and  brings  us  to  new  birth  ‘Love  ’,  too,  like  Faith,  is  the
‘ affect  ’ that  knows  no  quiescence.

‘ Proinde  nihil  amore  acutius,  nihil  subtilius,  aut  penetrabilius.
Nec  quiescit,  donee  universaliter  totam  amabilis  penetravit  virtu-
tem  et  profunditatem  ac  totalitatem,  et  unum  se  vult  facer©  cum
amato.  Vchcmcntcr  tend'd  in  eum  et  ideo  nunquam  quiescit , donee
omnia  transeat  et  ad  ipsum  in  ipsum  veniat.’2

The  effect  of  this  ‘adhaesio’  is  thus  exactly  that  which  Luther
also  frequently  describes :

‘ Quippe  qui  Deo  adhaeret,  versatur  in  lumine  . . . qua  ex  re  est

1 1 It  is  Love  alone  whereby  we  are  turned  to  God,  and  changed  into  the
form  of  God,  whereby  we  cleave  to  God  and  are  made  one  with  God,  so
that  we  are  one  spirit  with  Him  and  are  beatified  with  Him.'

2 * For  nothing  is  keener,  nothing  more  subtle  or  more  penetrating,  than
Love.  Nor  does  it  rest  until  it  has  penetrated  the  whole  power  and  depth
and  entirety  of  its  object,  and  its  will  is  to  make  itself  one  with  the
loved  one.  It  strives  towards  him  with  vehemence  and  so  never  has  rest
until  it  has  passed  through  all  things  and  reached  him  and  entered  into
him.'


210


THE  MYSTICAL  ELEMENT  IN


hominis  in  hac  vita  sublimior  perfection  ita  Deo  uniri,  ut  tota
anima  cum  omnibus  potentiis  suis  et  viribus  in  Dominum  Deum
suum  sit  collecta,  et  unus  fiat  spiritus  cum  eo.9 1

Luther  calls  this,  in  a still  more  violent  expression, 1 2 3  4 mit  Gott
ein  Kuche  werden  9 (to  become  kneaded  into  one  cake  with  God).

It  should  at  the  same  time  be  noted  that  in  Albertus  Magnus
this  4 amor 9 is  already  permeated  through  and  through  by  Faith,
Trust,  Comfort,  and  the  longing  for  certitude,  and  that  for  him  no
less  than  for  Luther  the  4 Kemission  of  Sins’  stands  as  the  first
step  in  the  4 ordo  salutis  ’,  the  order  of  salvation.  Thus :

‘Sic  scilicet  in  Domino  Deo  de  omni  sua  necessitate  audeat
plene  totalitcr  confidcrc . Hoc  ipso  facto  in  tantum  Deo  complacet,
ut  suam  ei  gratiam  largiatur  et  per  ipsam  gratiam  vernm  sentiat
caritatem  et  dilectionem,  omnemque  ambiguitatcm  et  timorcm  expel -
lentcm  in  Deoque  confidenter  sperantem  ’ 2 (op,  cit,  ch.  5).

And  so  ‘adhaesio’  may  come  about  just  as  well  by  means  of
4 faith  ’ : 1 sed  tantum  fide  et  bona  voluntate  adhaerere  Deo  ’ a
(ch.  6).

Here,  too,  are  freedom  from  care  and  the  assurance  of  consola-
tion the  things  to  be  prized : 4 et  eius  consolatione  suaviter
reficitur  ’ 4 (ch.  7).

And  the  whole  series  of  religious  experiences,  so  often  recurring
in  Luther,  are  already  displayed  in  Albertus  Magnus  in  their
characteristic  order :

4 . . . peccatorum  remissio,  amaritudinis  expressio,  collatio
dulcedinis  et  securitatis,  infusio  gratiae  et  misericordiae,  attractio
et  corroboratio  familiai'itatis  atque  abundans  de  ipso  consolatio,
firmaque  adhaesio  et  unio.’5 * * *

1 ‘He  indeed  who  cleaves  to  God  abides  in  light.  . . . Wherefore  is  it
man’s  loftier  perfection  in  this  life  to  be  so  united  to  God  that  the  whole
soul  with  all  its  strength  and  all  its  powers  is  gathered  into  its  Lord  and
God  and  becomes  one  spirit  with  Him.’

2 ‘ So  then  let  (the  soul)  of  its  very  necessity  make  the  venture  to  trust
wholly  and  completely  in  the  Lord  God.  In  this  very  wise  is  the  soul  so
pleasing  to  God,  that  He  bestows  His  own  grace  upon  it,  and  by  that
very  grace  it  comes  to  feel  the  true  love  and  atfection  which  drives  away
all  doubt  and  all  fear  and  hopes  confidently  in  God.’

3 ‘ but  only  to  cleave  to  God  in  faith  and  good  will.’

4 ‘ and  by  his  consolation  is  (the  soul)  sweetly  restored.’

6 ‘ The  forgiveness  of  sins,  the  expelling  of  bitterness,  the  bestowal  of

sweetness  and  security,  the  inpouring  of  grace  and  of  mercy,  the  attraction

and  the  strengthening  of  friendship  with  Him  and  abundant  comfort  in

Him,  and  a firm  cleaving  to  llim  and  union  with  Him.*


LUTHER’S  CONCEPTION  OF  c FAITH  ’ 211

But  a complete  judgement  upon  Luther’s  connexion  with  Mysti-
cism will  only  he  possible  when  all  the  manuscript  remains  of  the
popular  mystical  preaching  of  his  time  become  known,  which  as
yet  lie  undisturbed  in  our  libraries.  They  will  show  the  back-
ground and  setting  of  Luther’s  thought  and  phraseology,  the  soil
out  of  which  they  grew,  and  how  many  similarities  and  analogues
there  are  to  the  feelings  to  which  Luther  gives  expression.  Were
we  unaware  that  the  pamphlet  Of  the  Liberty  of  a Christian
was  by  Luther,  we  should  probably  count  it  among  these  writings.
And  in  any  case  there  are  to  be  found  within  the  limits  of  the  so-
called  ‘mystical’  literature  contrasts  in  mental  attitude  that  go
farther  than  that  between  this  work  of  Luther’s  and  that  of
Albertus  Magnus  from  which  we  have  been  quoting.  And  Luther
is  really  far  more  akin  to  such  a mystic  as  Muster  Eckhart  in  his
attitude  than  are  either  Plotinus  on  the  one  hand  or,  on  the  other,
the  crowd  of  God-enamoured  monks  and  nuns,  the  ‘doctores
ecstatici’  and  ‘serapliici  such  as  Ignatius  and  John  of  the  Cross,
Theresa  and  Madame  Guyon.

But  such  comparisons  as  this  are  illuminating  not  only  upon  the
question  of  the  historical  relation  between  Lutheranism  and  mystical
religion,  which  is,  after  all,  not  a very  important  issue,  but  also
upon  the  question  as  to  the  connexion  between  the  two  in  their
essential  nature.  It  has  been  said  that  for  a Protestant  to  love
Mysticism  is  mere  dilettantism : if  he  is  in  earnest,  ho  must
become  a Catholic.  But  then  ‘ Mysticism’  is  an  ambiguous  term.
If  we  mean  by  it  the  melting  transport  of  a transcendent  quasi-
nuptial  rapture,  then  the  assertion  may  be  justified.  But  the  really
typical  ‘moments’  of  mysticism — ‘creature-feeling’  and  ‘union’
— are  not  less  but  more  possible  upon  the  basis  of  Luther’s  ‘ tides’
(‘  faith’  as  ‘ fiducia’  and  ‘adhaesio  ’)  than  upon  the  basis  of  the
* amor  mysticus  \

Johann  Arndt  says  at  the  commencement  of  his  Four  Boohs  of
True  Christianity  (ch.  5) : ‘ By  this  heart  felt  confidence  and  heart-
felt trust  man  gives  his  heart  to  God  utterly,  reposes  only  in  God,
surrenders  himself  and  attaches  himself  to  Ilim,  unites  himself
with  God,  becomes  a sharer  in  all  that  is  of  God  and  of  Christ,
becomes  one  God  with  God.’  This  is  simply  Luther’s  doc-
trine (his  ‘fides’  as  ‘ fiducia’  and  ‘ adhaesio  ’),  clarified  and  raised
to  a higher  power.  These  expressions  might  well  be  found  in
Luther’s  Of  the  Liberty  of  a Christian—  indeed  tlieir  meaning  is

V 2


212  THE  MYSTICAL  ELEMENT  IN  LUTHER


to  be  found  there.  St.  Paul  says  the  same,  only  more  forcibly
still,  in  Gal.  ii.  20  and  1 Cor.  vi.  17.

But  this  question  of  the  possibility  of  the  transition  from
* tides  * to  the  experience  of  union  is  not  to  be  definitely  decided
by  a citation  of  texts  from  Luther  or  from  the  Bible,  but  by  a
consideration  of  what  1 Faith  ’ is  in  essence.  Faith  is  more  than
a conviction  of  the  truth  of  the  eternal  verities.  It  is  a deeply
felt  state  of  tension  with  regard  to  them  and  of  absorption  in
them  ; and,  as  1 trust  it  is  the  most  intimate  feeling  of  nearness.
But  in  all  this  it  contains  in  itself  the  core  of  that  which  is  meant
by  mysterious  terms  like  1 union  ’,  something  that  is  more  than
the  1 knowledge  ’ or  the  ‘ love  ’ of  the  earlier  mystic  schools.  And
this  becomes  still  plainer  to  any  one  who  has  clearly  recognized
by  deeper  contemplation  the  profoundly  non- rational  elements  to
be  found  in  the  very  act  of  faith.


APPENDIX  YII

1 SIGNS  FOLLOWING’

(I  give  here  a passage  from  my  Leben  and  Wirken  Jesu  rele-
vant to  this  subject,  touched  upon  on  p.  176.)

Jesus  begins  his  work  on  the  shore  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  and
the  Gospels  present  us  with  its  main  features  unmistakably.  He
preaches  in  the  synagogues,  in  the  houses  of  his  friends,  on  every
sort  of  occasion  at  table  and  under  the  open  sky,  now  sojourning
in  one  spot,  now  journeying  from  place  to  place.  His  fame  is
spread  abroad  especially  by  means  of  the  mysterious  gift  of  healing
which  is  active  in  him.

What  are  we  to  say  of  this  ? The  Jesus  who  works  the  miracles
in  the  Synoptic  narrative  is,  as  we  saw  above,  not  the  wonder-
worker par  excellence , of  whom  we  read  in  St.  John’s  Gospel  or
whom  the  traditional  view  presents  to  us.  But  even  in  those
passages  which  can  be  least  impugned  by  criticism  there  is  some-
thing incommensurable  with  our  rational  standards  in  the  setting
in  which  we  see  his  figure,  and  this  gift  of  healing  is  an  example
of  it.  The  narratives  of  these  acts  of  healing  stand  out  with  such


1 SIGNS  FOLLOWING*


313


an  assured  and  plain  simplicity,  with  a clarity  so  wellnigh
disconcerting,  that  they  cannot  be  the  fabrications  of  legend.  We
have  only  to  read  the  sober  account — it  is  almost  like  an  official
report— of  the  healing  of  Peter's  wife's  mother  (Mark  i.  29-31),  or
that  of  the  healing  of  the  man  with  the  palsy  (Mark  ii.  1-12),
with  its  concreteness  of  detail.  And  it  is  the  same  with  many
other  cases.  The  story  of  the  centurion  of  Capernaum,  and  Jesus’
astonished  wonder  at  the  faith  of  this  Gentile  ; the  story  of  the
woman  of  Canaan,  and  of  how  Jesus,  at  first  reluctant,  comes  to
be  inwardly  won  over ; this  is  not  the  way  of  imagination  and
legend.  Moreover,  there  is  the  fact  that  we  encounter  exactly
similar  occurrences  among  the  early  Christian  communities.
Even  if  we  are  ready  to  impugn  the  accounts  of  Jesus’s  miracles  of
healing  in  the  Gospels,  we  cannot  impugn  the  accounts  in  the
Pauline  epistles  of  the  same  thing  as  happening  among  the
Corinthians,  Galatians,  and  Romans,  aud  to  Paul  himself.  Here
they  stand  in  the  full  light  of  history  and  with  the  fullest  testi-
mony of  history.  It  is  quite  evident  that  both  Paul  and  the  first
Christian  communities  were  firmly  convinced  that  they  had  the
'charismata  the  ‘ gifts  among  them.  St.  Paul  gives,  in  1 Cor.
xii.  4-11,  a formal  catalogue  of  these,  in  which  the  gifts  of  healing
the  sick  and  of  the  exercise  of  super-normal  physical  power  and
other  abnormal  psychical  gifts  take  their  place  alongside  the  gifts
of  tongues  and  prophecy.  No  doubt  he  says  (1  Cor.  xiii)  that
something  is  higher  and  more  precious  than  all  ' gifts  namely,
the  simple  Christian  virtues  of  Faith,  Hope,  and  Love,  and  Love
'the  greatest  among  these'.  But  it  is  implied  thereby  that  those
ether  gifts  too  are  a reality  and  a present  possession.  He  has
them  in  himself  and  frequently  exercises  them,  and  in  every
Christian  congregation  they  make  their  appearance.  In  fact  we
have  sure  historical  warrant  for  holding  that  ' gifts ' of  this  kind
were  in  evidence  for  a long  time  beyond  the  borders  of  the  early
Church — just  as,  for  that  matter,  we  have  similar  warrant  for
recognizing  that  analogous  phenomena  have  been  since  observed
in  other  than  Christian  surroundings.  Will  this  mysterious
region  one  day  be  clearly  revealed  to  us  ? We  can  at  any  rate
say  this : that  our  procedure  is  very  uncritical  if  we  propose  to
rule  it  out  as  non-existent  simply  because  it  does  not  square  with
our  current  conceptions  of  ' agreement  with  the  natural  order  \
Now  the  fewer  the  preconceptions  which  we  bring  to  our  reading


214  ‘ SIGNS  FOLLOWING  *

of  the  narrative -material  of  the  Gospels,  as  reviewed  and  guaran-
teed by  a thorough  criticism,  the  stronger  becomes  the  impression
that  in  Jesus  these  powers  were  present  with  a rare  potency.  We
have  in  a sense  a key  to  the  matter  in  the  peculiar  predisposition
and  endowment  for  their  calling  which  marked  the  great  prophets
of  the  Old  Testament.  What  characterized  them  really  was  not
omniscience  and  not  the  capacity  of  predicting  a future  many
hundred  years  distant : it  was  beyond  question  in  many  cases  a
unique  power  of  forefeeling  and  foreboding  impending  super-
normal occurrences  that  threatened  to  break  in  upon  the  natural
course  of  events.  This  gift  we  have  held  to  be  not  something
‘supernatural  ’ and  miraculous  in  the  old  sense  of  the  word,  i.  e.
something  that  falls  altogether  outside  all  analogies  of  what
happens  elsewhere  ; on  the  contrary,  analogies  in  plenty  for  this
extraordinary  prophetic  gift  are  to  be  found  in  the  phenomena  of
clairvoyance,  presentiment,  second-sight,  &c.  Now  it  is  possible
that  the  gift  of  healing  of  Jesus  which  appears  so  puzzling  was
‘merely’  a heightened  and  intense  form  of  capacities  which  lie
dormant  in  human  nature  in  general.  But  for  a manifestation  of
the  influence  exerted  by  the  psychical  upon  the  physical  we  need
in  fact  go  no  farther  than  the  power  of  our  will  to  move  our  body
— the  power,  that  is,  of  a spiritual  cause  to  bring  about  a mechani-
cal effect.  There  assuredly  is  an  absolutely  insoluble  riddle,  and
it  is  only  the  fact  that  wo  have  grown  so  used  to  it  that  prevents
it  from  seeming  a ‘ miracle  ’ to  us.  But,  this  granted,  who  can
pronounce  beforehand  what  intenser  and  heightened  manifesta-
tions of  this  power  may  not  be  possible  ? Who  can  presume  to
determine  what  direct  results  a will  may  not  acl  :eve  which,
wholly  concentrated  and  at  one  with  itself,  rests  altogether  upon
God  ? We  have  had  in  recent  years  many  indications  of  parallels
and  analogies  to  the  miraculous  power  of  Jesus  in  the  newly-
discovered  methods  of  suggestion  and  hypnotism,  in  telepathy,
‘action  at  a distance’,  and  (in  my  opinion)  animal  magnetism.  All
these  suppositions  may  be  accepted  without  misgiving,  only  with
this  addition,  that  what  Jesus  did  passed  gradually  far  beyond
anything  known  to  us  in  these  fields;  and  moreover,  that  Jesus’
whole  power  grew  out  of  his  consciousness  of  his  mission,  and  his
will,  unusually  strong  as  it  was,  drew  its  strength  only  from  his
religious  and  moral  consciousness,  from  the  fact  that  he  was
rooted  and  grounded  in  God.


SIGNS  FOLLOWING


215


If  it  be  granted  that  Jesus  really  had  an  abnormal  power  in
action,  it  is  evident  that  this  very  fact  would  stimulate  rumour
and  imagination  to  exaggeration  and  embellishment  and  invention
of  miraculous  incident.  It  is  evident  that  we  may  quite  properly
approach  tho  miracle  narratives  with  a certain  expectation  of
finding  such  features  in  them  ; and  that  it  will  not  do,  in  face
of  some  sheer  prodigy,  to  rest  content  with  ‘the  mysterious
gift’  as  a solution  to  every  difficulty.  Thus  a raising  from
the  dead,  as  that  of  Lazarus,  or  a changing  of  water  into  wine
(both  stories  only  in  St.  John),  is  excluded  from  the  region  of
the  historically  conceivable  and  admissible.  And  there  is  in  the
Synoptists  also  matter  enough  that  parses  those  limits,  e.  g.  the
walking  on  the  sea,  the  feeding  of  tho  five  thousand,  tho  tale
of  the  Gadarene  swine.  When  such  stories  have  been  deducted,
then  practically  all  that  is  left  in  tho  Synoptic  narrative  are  cases
of  healing,  though  of  course  some  of  these  are  of  an  astonishing
character.  There  are  also  two  cases  of  raising  from  the  dead —
that  of  Jairus’s  daughter  and  that  of  the  young  man  of  Nain.
Criticism  will  be  inclined  to  reject  these.  It  must,  however,  be
granted  that  there  is  a real  difference  between  these  stories  and
that  in  St.  John  of  the  raising  of  Lazarus.  Jairus’s  daughter  had
not  lain  three  days  in  tho  grave,  like  Lazarus  ; she  had  only  lost
consciousness  a short  time  before  tho  miracle.  Where  is  the
margin  that  divides  complete  death  from  the  last  faint  glow  of
the  spark  of  life,  very  likely  already  passed  into  unconsciousness?
May  not  he  who  by  his  will  had  power  to  restore  a consciousness
confused  by  madness  have  had  also  the  power  to  arrest  a con-
sciousness just  vanishing  over  the  borders  of  life,  and  even
awaken  again  in  the  body  one  that  has  but  just  vanished  ? Here
the  account  is  strikingly  concrete.  Even  tho  very  words  Jesus
uses  to  awaken  the  girl  as  uttered  in  Aramaic — 4 Talitha  Cumi  *
— are  still  given  in  the  Aramaic  form  by  the  Greek  narrator.
There  is  nothing  grandiose  or  theatrical,  as  is  customarily  the
case  with  a miracle  designed  for  display.  Jesus  only  admits
the  most  intimate  even  of  his  disciples,  and  the  whole  incident
closes  with  the  soberly  practical  injunction  to  give  the  newly
restored  child  food,  and  with  the  direct  prohibition  to  talk
further  about  the  event.  We  have  only  to  compare  with  this  the
raising  of  Lazarus ; here  is  the  exact  opposite,  a genuine  miracle
of  display.  The  wonder-worker  designedly  delays  his  arrival,  so


216


‘SIGNS  FOLLOWING  *


that  a miracle  becomes  necessary  ; the  whole  proceeding,  with  its
solemn  mise-en  scene , takes  place  in  public,  and  is  accompanied  by
a prayer,  which  is  at  the  same  time  a sort  of  address  to  the  sur-
rounding spectators.  The  act  is  to  be  performed  expressly
‘ because  of  the  people  which  stand  by  \ This  is  how  a miracle-
narrative  looks  when  it  is  the  offspring  of  literary  art.  The
raisings  from  the  dead  given  in  St.  Mark  are  quite  other  than  this,
and  consequently  a circumspect  criticism  may  perhaps  in  their
case  suspend  judgement.


APPENDIX  VIII

SILENT  WORSHIP

Still-born  Silence,  thou  that  art
Flood-gate  of  the  deeper  heart.

I take  these  lines 1 from  a little  Quaker  book  on  Silent  Worship  2 3
which,  recently  translated  into  German,  should  give  the  German
public  a good  impression  of  .the  worship  of  silent  waiting  upon
God  which  has  been  a feature  of  the  Quaker  community  from  the
days  of  George  Fox  up  to  the  present  day.  It  is  the  most  spiritual
form  of  divine  service  which  has  ever  been  practised,  and  contains
an  element  which  no  form  of  worship  ought  to  be  without,  but
which,  as  has  been  hinted  on  a former  page,  is  unduly  neglected
in  our  Protestant  devotional  life.  We  must  learn  it  once  again
from  the  Quakers,  and  thereby  restore  to  our  divine  service  a
spirit  of  consecration  the  loss  of  which  has  cost  it  dearly.


Devotional  Silence  may  have  a threefold  character.  There  is
the  numinous  silence  of  Sacrament,  the  silence  of  Waiting,  and  the
silence  of  Union  or  Fellowship.

1.  The  first  of  these  is  that  silence  meant  in  the  verse  of  the
Prophet  (Hab.  ii.  20),  ‘ Let  all  the  earth  keep  silence  before  him.’

1 They  are  quoted  from  Charles  Lamb’s  essay,  ‘A  Quakers’  Meeting’.

(Trans.)

3 Silent  Worship ; The  Way  of  Wonder , by  Violet  Hodgkin.


SILENT  WORSHIP


217


Such  impressive  moments  of  silence  were  known  not  only  in  the
worship  of  Israel  but  in  that  of  other  peoples.  They  are  the
culminating  sacramental  point  in  the  worship,  denoting  as  they
do  the  instant  when  6 God  is  in  the  midst  experienced  as
‘ numen  praesens  \ All  the  preceding  part  of  the  service  is  but
a preparation  for  this,  a preparation  for  the  moment  of  which  the
words  hold  good,  ‘Das  Unzulangliche,  liier  wild's  Ereignis,,  ‘the
Insufficient  here  becomes  Event  \ For  what  was  previously  only
possessed  in  insufficiency,  only  longed  for,  now  conies  upon  the
scene  in  living  actuality,  the  experience  of  the  transcendent  in
gracious  intimate  presence,  the  ‘ Lord's  Visitation  of  Ilis  people
Such  a realization  is  Sacrament,  ami  what  occasions  it,  attends,
or  prepares  for  it,  must  be  termed  sacramental.  Sucli  a silence
is  therefore  a sacramental  silence.  It  was  found  in  the  forms  of
worship  of  ancient  Israel,  and  it  is  found  to-day  in  the  Roman
Mass,  in  the  moment  of  ‘ transubstantiation  \

2.  Next  there  is  the  silence  of  Waiting . The  meaning  of  this
is  primarily  other  than  sacramental.  When  the  Quakers  assemble
for  a quiet  time  together,  this  is  first  and  foremost  a time  of
waiting,  and  it  has  in  this  sense  a double  value.  It  means  our
submergence,  i.  e.  inward  concentration  and  detachment  from  the
manifold  outward  distractions  ; but  this  again  has  value  as  a
preparation  of  the  soul  to  become  the  pencil  of  the  unearthly
writer,  the  bent  bow  of  the  heavenly  archer,  the  tuned  lyre  of
the  divine  musician.  This  silence  is,  then,  primarily  not  so  much
a dumbness  in  the  presence  of  Deity,  as  an  awaiting  His  coming,
in  expectation  of  the  Spirit  and  its  message.  But  it  passes  over
naturally  into  the  Sacramental  Silence  of  which  we  have  spoken.
And  in  fact  ‘ Silent  Worship  ’ may  remain  without  words  from
first  to  last — it  may  exclude  all  utterance  of  the  Spirit's  message
in  vocal  form,  and  in  that  case  the  worshippers  part,  as  they
met,  without  any  audible  exhortation  or  thanksgiving.  Yet  the
worship  need  not  have  been  in  any  way  defective,  for  the  silence
may  have  been  a direct  ‘ numinous ’ experience,  as  well  as  a wait-
ing upon  God.  The  Eternal  was  present  in  the  stillness  and  Ilis
presence  was  payable  without  a word  spoken.  The  solemn
observance  of  silence  became  a Sacrament.

3.  The  consummation  of  the  Sacrament  is  the  achievement  of
unity,  i.  e.  fellowship  and  Communion . This  third  silence  is  the
completion  of  the  waiting  and  the  sacramental  silences.  The  Silent


218


SILENT  WORSHIP


Worship  of  the  Quakers  is  in  fact  a realization  of  Communion  in
both  senses  of  the  word — inward  oneness  and  fellowship  of  the
individual  with  invisible  present  Reality  and  the  mystical  union
of  many  individuals  with  one  another.  In  this  regard  there  is
the  plainest  inward  kinship  between  the  two  forms  of  worship
which,  viewed  externally,  seem  to  stand  at  the  opposite  poles  of
religious  development,  viz.  the  Quaker  meeting  and  the  Roman
Catholic  Mass.  Both  are  solemn  religious  observances  of  a
numinous  and  sacramental  character,  both  are  communion,  both
exhibit  alike  an  inner  straining  not  only  ‘ to  realize  the  presence’
of  God,  but  to  attain  to  a degree  of  oneness  with  Him.

II

‘ Silent  Worship’,  in  the  fully-formed  character  in  which  the
Quakers  practise  it,  is  not  possible  in  a 1 Church ',  as  we  under-
stand the  word  to-day,  but  only  within  the  narrower  limits  of  a
more  intimate  i Brotherhood  of  the  Spirit  \ May  God  grant  that
such  a brotherhood  may  one  day  arise  among  us,  not  as  a sect  or  a
Church  alongside  our  other  Churches,  but  as  a circle  of  self-
dedicated  enthusiasts,  who  have  rediscovered  the  ancient  heritage
of  the  early  Church — the  Spirit  and  its  sevenfold  gifts  !

But  if  the  Quaker  Silence  is  excluded,  still  less  is  any  imitation
of  the  Sacramental  Silence  in  the  form  of  the  Catholic  Mass
possible  in  our  Protestant  services.  All  that  tends  in  this  direc-
tion is  bound  to  go  astray.  The  Communion  Service  does,  it  is
true,  celebrato  Christ’s  Passion,  that  event  which  in  all  world
history  is  the  numinous  event  par  excellence , the  mtry  of  the
divine  in  fullest  and  loftiest  presence  upon  the  human  scene.  But
the  Communion  Service  is  emphatically  not  a Mass,  and  the  Mass
has  grown  to  be  a distortion  of  its  true  form.  The  Communion
Service  is,  in  the  original  intention  of  its  first  celebration  or  insti-
tution, not  a piece  of  public  ceremonial  at  all,  far  less  a drama  to
be  performed  by  one  or  at  most  a few  participants  in  the  presence
of  spectators,  but  a tender  mystery,  restricted  to  a fellowship  of
brothel's,  pertaining  to  a special  time  and  hour,  and  needing
particular  preparation — in  short,  something  that  should  be  pre-
cious and  rare.  For  Protestants  it  is  to  be  kept  entirely  apart  from
the  regular  and  congregational  Divine  Service,  and  should  be
reserved  for  particular  feasts,  for.  celebration  at  evening  or  in  the


SILENT  WORSHIP


219


night  stillness.  It  ought  to  be  withdrawn  altogether  from  the  use
and  wont  of  every  day  and  become  the  most  intimate  privilege
which  Christian  worship  has  to  offer.

But  though  these  two  means  are  excluded,  it  is  yet  possible  to
find  another  way  to  introduce  Silent  Worship  into  our  ordinary
Sunday  services,  and  so  to  give  these  a consecration  which  is  as
yet  lacking  to  them.  We  can  make  the  servico  culminate  and
find  its  climax  in  a short  period  of  silence,  which  shall  be  at  once
the  silence  of  sacrament  and  the  silence  of  waiting,  and  which
may  become,  at  least  for  the  more  practical,  also  a realization  of
union.  We  may  devise  an  opportunity  of  silent  dedication  which
will  avoid  the  ceremonial  apparatus  and  mythology  of  the  doctrine
of  1 Transubstantiation  and  yet  in  its  simplicity  and  pure
spirituality  may  be  more  deeply  sacramental  than  the  Mass,  for
which  many  are  again  beginning  to  crave.  We  have  only  to
follow  the  indications  afforded  by  the  example  of  the  ‘ Silent
Worship’  of  the  Quakers.

Where  lies  the  essenco  of  the  sacramental  ? It  is  in  fact — in
the  expression  of  the  English  High  Churchmen — the  ‘real  pre-
sence the  real  presence  of  the  transcendent  and  holy  in  its  very
nature  in  adoration  and  fellowship,  so  as  to  be  laid  hold  of  and
enjoyed  in  present  possession.  No  form  of  devotion  which  does
not  offer  or  achieve  this  mystery  for  the  worshipper  can  be  per-
fect or  can  give  lasting  contentment  to  a religious  mind.  And  it
is  just  because  our  usual  Divine  Services  fall  short  in  this  that  we
see  to-day  again — quite  comprehensibly— such  a ferment,  and
stirring  of  all  sorts  of  uneasy  ‘ High  Church  ’,  ‘ Ritualistic  ’,  and
* Sacramental  ’ movements.

But — we  may  well  be  asked — has  it  any  meaning  to  ask  for
‘ the  presence  of  the  divine  ’ ? Does  not  that  Sacramental  idea  at
once  cancel  itself,  when  thought  out  ? Is  not  God  ‘ omnipresent  ’
and  ‘really  present always  and  everywhere?

Such  a view  is  often  put  forward,  and  with  a confident  air  of
assurance  which  is  in  sharp  conflict  with  the  testimony  of  genuine
religious  experience;  so  much  so,  indeed,  that  one  is  tempted  to
venture  a very  blunt  reply  to  it.  We  say,  then,  that  this  doctrine
of  the  omnipresence  of  God — as  though  by  a necessity  of  His  being
He  must  be  bound  to  every  time  and  to  every  place,  like  a natural
force  pervading  space — is  a frigid  invention  of  metaphysical
speculation,  entirely  without  religious  import.  Scripture  knows


220


SILENT  WORSHIP


nothing  of  it.  Scripture  knows  no  6 Omnipresence  ’,  neither  the
expression  nor  the  meaning  it  expresses ; it  knows  only  the  God
who  is  where  He  wills  to  be,  and  is  not  where  He  wills  not  to
be,  the  * deus  mobilis  \ who  is  no  mere  universally  extended
being,  but  an  august  mystery,  that  comes  and  goes,  approaches
and  withdraws,  has  its  time  and  hour,  and  may  be  far  or  near  in
infinite  degrees,  1 closer  than  breathing  1 to  us  or  miles  remote
from  us.  The  hours  of  His  < visitation  ’ and  His  1 return 9 are  rare
and  solemn  occasions,  different  essentially  not  only  from  the
‘ profane  ’ life  of  every  day,  but  also  from  the  calm  confiding
mood  of  the  believer,  whose  trust  is  to  live  ever  before  the  face  of
God.  They  are  the  topmost  summits  in  the  life  of  the  Spirit.
They  are  not  only  rare  occasions,  they  must  needs  be  so  for  our
sakes,  for  no  creature  can  bear  often  or  for  long  the  full  nearness
of  God  s majesty  in  its  beatitude  and  in  its  awefulness.  Yet  there
must  still  be  such  times,  for  they  show  the  bright  vision  and  com-
pletion of  our  sonship,  they  are  a bliss  in  themselves  and  potent
for  redemption.  They  are  the  real  sacrament,  in  comparison  with
which  all  high  official  ceremonials,  Masses,  and  rituals  the  world
over  become  the  figurings  of  a child.  And  a Divine  Service  would
be  the  truest  which  led  up  to  such  a mystery  and  the  riches  of
grace  that  ensue  upon  the  realization  of  it.  And  if  it  be  asked
whether  a Divine  Service  is  able  to  achieve  this,  let  us  answer
that,  though  God  indeed  comes  where  and  when  He  chooses,  yet
He  will  choose  to  come  when  we  sincerely  call  upon  Him  and
prepare  ourselves  truly  for  His  visitation.


221


APPENDIX  IX

A NUMINOUS  EXPERIENCE  OF  JOHN  RUSKIN

My  attention  has  been  called  by  Professor  Deutschbein  to  the
following  passage  in  Ruskin,  in  which  he  recounts  experiences  of
his  youth  that  repeatedly  recurred.  They  are  purely  numinous
in  character  and  wellnigh  all  the  1 moments  ’ which  we  discovered
reappear  here  quite  spontaneously.  I give  the  passage  without
detailed  comment :

1 Lastly,  although  there  was  no  definite  religious  sentiment
mingled  with  it,  there  was  a continual  perception  of  Sanctity  in
the  whole  of  nature,  from  the  slightest  thing  to  the  vastest  ; an
instinctive  awe,  mixed  with  delight  ; an  indefinable  thrill,  such
as  we  sometimes  imagine  to  indicate  the  presence  of  a disembodied
spirit.  I could  only  feel  tills  perfectly  when  I was  alone  ; and
then  it  would  often  make  me  shiver  from  head  to  foot  with  the
joy  and  fear  of  it,  when  after  being  some  time  away  from  hills  I
first  got  to  the  shore  of  a mountain  river,  where  the  brown  water
circled  among  the  pebbles,  or  when  I first  saw  the  swell  of  distant
land  against  the  sunset,  or  the  first  low  broken  wall,  covered  with
mountain  moss.  I cannot  in  the  least  describe  the  feeling ; but  I
do  not  think  this  is  my  fault,  nor  that  of  the  English  language,
for  I am  afraid  no  feeling  is  describable.  If  we  had  to  explain
even  the  sense  of  bodily  hunger  to  a person  who  had  never  felt  it,
we  should  be  hard  put  to  it  for  words  ; and  the  joy  in  nature
seemed  to  me  to  come  of  a sort  of  heart-hunger,  satisfied  with  the
presence  of  a Great  and  Holy  Spirit.  . . . These  feelings  remained
in  their  full  intensity  till  I was  eighteen  or  twenty,  and  then,  as
the  reflective  and  practical  power  increased,  and  the  “ cares  of  this
world”  gained  upon  me,  faded  gradually  away,  in  the  manner
described  by  Wordsworth  in  his  **  Intimations  of  Immortality  V
(Modem  Painters , Popular  Edition,  vol.  iii,  p.  809.  George  Allen.)

Schleiermacher  calls  such  an  experience  1 intuition  and  feeling  of
the  infinite 9 ; we  give  it  the  name  4 divination  \ Schleiermacher
was  right  in  saying  that  even  greater  than  all  this  divination  in
the  sphere  of  nature  is  divination  in  the  sphere  of  history.  Will
not  a Ruskin  arise  to  divine  and  reveal  the  n on-rational  and
‘numinous’  character  of  our  own  epoch?


222


APPENDIX  X

THE  EXPRESSION  OF  THE  NUMINOUS  IN  ENGLISH1

Although  it  could  hardly  be  disputed  that  the  German  philo-
sophical vocabulary  is  superior  to  the  English  both  in  fullness  and
in  precision,  in  regard  to  the  subjects  discussed  in  this  book  our
language  does  not  seem  to  be  altogether  at  a disadvantage.
Indeed,  the  English  wealth  of  synonyms  has  presented  the  trans-
lator with  an  embarrassment  at  the  very  outset.  In  place  of  the
single  German  adjective  heilig,  with  its  derivative  noun  and  verb,
we  have  the  words  sacred  and  holy , sacrcdncss , holiness  and  sanctity ,
hallow  and  sanctify.  Gotlheit  again  gives  us  a triad  of  synonyms,
deity,  divinity , Godhead . Each  of  these  alternatives  is  probably
the  most  appropriate  rendering  in  some  special  context,  and  in
choosing  any  one  of  them  we  are  bound  to  sacrifice  subtle  differ-
ences in  meaning  which  would  be  suggested  by  the  others,  and
which  are  perhaps  implicit  in  the  single  German  equivalent.  The
deciding  factor  in  the  choice  of  holy  rather  than  sacred  as  the
regular  rendering  of  heilig  was  the  fact  that  it  is  the  Biblical  word,
found  especially  in  those  great  passages  (e.  g.  Isaiah  vi)  of  which
this  book  makes  repeated  use,  and  which  seem  central  to  its  argu-
ment. Holy  will  be  felt,  I believe,  to  be  a distinctly  more
' numinous  * word  than  sacred  : it  retains  about  it  more  markedly
the  numinous  atmosphere.  And  although,  as  is  urged  in  the  text
with  perhaps  still  moro  reason  of  its  German  equivalent,  it  refers
mainly  to  the  higher  levels  of  religious  experience  at  which  the
numinous  has  been  interpreted  in  rational  and  moral  terms,  and
therefore  means  to  us  mainly  goodness , the  word  'holy  ’ is  found
also  in  contexts  where  this  more  exalted  meaning  is  excluded,  and
where  it  is  simply  the  numinous  at  an  early  and  savage  stage  of
development.  The  well-known  lines  from  Coleridge’s  Kubla  Khan
give  an  example  of  such  a use  :

A savage  place  ! as  holy  and  enchanted
As  e'er  beneath  a waning  moon  was  haunted
By  woman  wailing  for  her  demon-lover !

This  is  a finely  numinous  passage,  but  it  is  the  numinous  at  the
primitive,  pre-religious,  1 daemonic  1 level : it  conveys  nothing  of

1 Added  by  the  translator.


EXPRESSION  OF  THE  NUMINOUS  IN  ENGLISH  223


sanctity.  For,  while  the  daring  use  of  * holy  * in  this  context  may
be  just  permissible,  we  reserve  * sanctity  *,  if  I mistake  not,  for  the
more  restricted  and  elevated  meaning.

Apart  from  these  words  it  would  appear  that  the  English  lan-
guage is  in  general  rich  in  numinous  terms.  Dr.  Otto  has  him-
self noted  (p.  14)  that  the  English  4 awe  ’ has  a numinous  suggestion
lacking  in  the  German  4 scheu  *,  and  (p.  131  n.)  that 4 haunt  * has  no
precise  German  equivalent  in  all  its  range  of  significance.  And
besides  4 uncanny  * (a  moro  or  less  exact  rendering  of  unhcimlich)
I have  made  use  of  words  like  weird  and  eerie , which  convey  the
indefinable  numinous  atmosphere  unmistakably.  The  old  word
freit  (a  supernatural  intimation  or  sign)  may  be  another  such;
and  possibly  the  obsolote  verb-form  ougy  which  gives  us  ugly,
may  have  conveyed  originally  a suggestion  of  unnatural,  uncanny,
daunting  or  repulsion.  It  should  be  noticed  that  these  numinous
words  are  all  (except  4 awe')  concerned  primarily  with  the  4 cruder*
and  more  primitive  forms  of  the  experience  : they  are  not  in  the
first  instance  religious  words  in  the  higher  sense,  though,  unlike  such
words  as  grue , grisly , and  ghastly,  they  can  bo  used  with  a
loftier  and  more  ennobled,  as  well  as  with  a lower  and  more
primitive  meaning.  And  it  can,  finally,  be  hardly  an  accident
that  they  all,  or  nearly  all,  are  northern  in  origin.  A peculiar
susceptibility  to  numinous  impressions — what  Dr.  Otto  would  call
a peculiarly  sensitive  faculty  of  4 divination  * — would  seem,  indeed,
to  be  a characteristic  of  the  North  British.  Such  phenomena  as
those  of  Clairvoyance  and  Second-sight  would  seem  to  make  for  the
same  conclusion.

Apart  from  the  expressiveness  of  single  English  words,  it  would
be  easy  to  amass  from  English  poetry  and  prose  alike  passages
(like  that  from  Coleridge  already  quoted)  illustrative  of  the  different
elements  in  numinous  apprehension  which  have  been  discussed  in
this  book.  I venture  to  give  three  further  citations.

On  page  193  the  contrast  between  the  piety  in  which  the
‘rational  moments*  predominate  and  that  in  which  a more
numinous  feeling  is  to  be  noted  is  illustrated  from  two  German
hymns  of  praise.

The  same  antithesis  could  hardly  be  shown  more  clearly  than
by  the  contrast  between  two  poems  familiar  to  every  English
reader,  Addison's  hymn  based  on  Psalm  xix,  and  Blake’s  poem
‘The  Tyger*.  Both  poets  are  hymning  the  Creator  as  revealed  in


224


THE  EXPRESSION  OF  THE


his  creation,  but  the  difference  of  temper  is  unmistakable.  On  the
one  hand  there  is  the  mood  of  tranquil  confidence,  serene  dignity,
thankful  and  understanding  praise ; on  the  other,  a mood  of
trepidation,  awed  surmise,  the  hush  of  mystery,  in  which  rings
none  the  less  a strange  exultation.

The  spacious  firmament  on  high
With  all  the  blue  ethereal  sky,

And  spangled  heavens,  a shining  frame,

Their  great  Original  proclaim.

The  unwearied  sun,  from  day  to  day,

Does  his  Creator’s  power  display
And  publishes  to  every  land
The  work  of  an  Almighty  hand.

Soon  as  the  evening  shades  prevail
The  moon  takes  up  the  wondrous  tale
And  nightly  to  the  listening  earth
Repeats  the  story  of  her  birth  ;

While  all  the  stars  that  round  her  burn,

And  all  the  planets  in  their  turn,

Confirm  the  tidings  as  they  roll

And  spread  the  truth  from  pole  to  pole.

What  though  in  solemn  silence  all
Move  round  the  dark  terrestrial  ball ;

What  though  no  real  voice  or  sound
Amid  their  radiant  orbs  be  found?

In  reason’s  ear  they  all  rejoice,

And  utter  forth  a glorious  voice  ;

For  ever  singing  as  they  shine:

‘The  hand  that  made  us  is  Divine/

This  is,  confessedly,  rational  piety ; it  is  ‘ reason  ’ that  listens  to
nature’s  hymn  of  praise.  As  such  it  is  characteristic  not  only  of
a certain  type  of  mind,  but  of  the  particular  age  in  which  it  was
written.  And  the  contrasted  numinous  note  can  hardly  be  missed
in  Blake’s  wonderful  verses  :

Tyger,  Tyger,  burning  bright
In  the  forests  of  the  night,

What  immortal  hand  or  eye
Could  frame  thy  fearful  symmetry  ?

In  what  di&tant  deeps  or  skies
Burnt  the  fire  of  thine  eyes?

On  what  wings  dare  he  aspire?

What  the  hand  dare  seize  the  fire  ?

And  what  shoulder  and  what  art
Could  twist  the  sinews  of  thy  heart?

And,  when  thy  heart  began  to  beat,

What  dread  hand  and  what  dread  feet?


NUMINOUS  IN  ENGLISH


225


What  the  hammer  ? What  the  chain  ?

In  what  furnace  was  thy  brain  ?

What  the  anvil  ? What  dread  grasp
Dare  its  deadly  terrors  clasp?

When  the  stars  threw  down  their  spears,

And  watered  heaven  with  their  tears,

Did  he  smile  his  work  to  see  ?

Did  he  who  made  the  lamb  make  thee  ?

Tyger,  Tyger,  burning  bright
In  tlio  forests  of  the  night,

What  immortal  hand  or  eye
Dare  frame  thy  fearful  symmetry  ?

Tho  remark  of  the  author  on  page  221  suggests  my  last  quota-
tion. Wordsworth,  in  the  tonth  book  of  The  Prelude,  recounts
the  profound  impression  made  upon  him  by  the  terrific  events  in
which  the  French  Revolution  culminated.  Then,  as  now,  out-
ward convulsion  and  catastrophe  had  their  inward  counterpart  in
spiritual  tumult  and  overthrow,  in  widespread  disillusionment
and  despair.  And  Wordsworth  tells  us  in  effect  how  the  very
treinendousness  of  the  time,  its  ‘portentousness’,  became  to  him
a revelation  of  the  sustaining  presence  of  the  holy  and  the  divine
(see  The  Prelude , x.  437-469) :

. . . ‘ So,  with  devout  humility  be  it  said,

So,  did  a portion  of  that  spirit  fall

On  me  uplifted  from  the  vantage-ground

Of  pity  and  sorrow  to  a state  of  being

That  through  the  time's  exceeding  fierceness  saw

Glimpses  of  retribution,  terrible,

And  in  the  order  of  sublime  behests  :

But,  even  if  that  were  not,  amid  the  awe
Of  unintelligible  chastisement,

Not  only  acquiescences  of  faith

Survived,  but  daring  sympathies  with  power,

Motions  not  treacherous  or  profane,  else  why

Within  the  folds  of  no  ungentle  breast

Their  dread  vibration  to  this  hour  j^rolonged  ? . . .

Then  was  the  truth  received  into  my  heart,

That,  under  heaviest  sorrow  earth  can  bring,

If  from  the  affliction  somewhere  do  not  grow
Honour  which  could  not  else  have  been,  a faith,

An  elevation,  and  a sanctity,

If  new  strength  be  not  given  nor  old  restored,

The  blame  is  ours,  not  Nature's.*


Q


INDEX


A.

Adbhuta , 133.

Addison,  J.  (quoted),  224.

Aesthetic  judgement,  the,  138,  148,
152  ff.,  165.

Ahndung , 150.

Ahura-Mctzda , 133,  204.

Albert  us  Magnus,  209,  210.

Allah,  numinous  character  of,  77,
92,  94.

Amor  My sticusy  107-8,  209  If.

Amos,  115,  141.

Anselm,  55  n.

Aristotlo,  97,  98,  119  n.

Arndt,  Johann,  108,  211.

Arnold,  Gottfried,  108.

Art,  expression  of  the  ‘Numinous  1
in, GS-73.

Ascarya , 195.

Asura , 132.

Atman , 199ff.

Atonement,  the  doctrine  of,  its
‘numinous  1 character,  66  if.
Augustine,  St.,  28  n.,  97,  142  n.,  200.


B.

Bach,  J.  S.,  72.

Beautiful,  the,  and  the  Holy,  138,
148,  152,  165.

Bergson,  112  n.

Bernard,  St.,  of  Cluny,  34.

Besant,  Mrs.,  112.

Bhagavad-Gitd , the,  65,  109,  191  ff.,
199.

Blake,  Win.  (quoted),  224.

Boehme,  Jacob,  88  ; on  ‘ wrath ' of
God,  HOff.

Brahman , Brahmanism,  133,  196  ff.,
204.

Buddha  (Gautama),  67.

Buddhism,  80,  89,  69.


C.

Catherine,  St.,  of  Genoa,  88.

Chinese  art,  its  numinous  character,
69,  71.


Chrysostom,  St.,  84,  188-90.

Coleridge,  222.

Confucius,  75.

‘ Creature-feeling 9 ff.,  20  ff.,  52  ff.,
92  ff.

Cross,  the,  177.

D.

Daemon,  ‘the  daemonic  \ 15,  16,  28,
126  ff.,  129,  203;  (in  Goethe),
155  ff.

Dead,  worship  of  the,  123.

Determinism,  its  difference  from  pre-
destination, 92.

Do  Wette,  W.,  on  Ahndung , 150,  161.

Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  97.

‘ Divination’,  as  a faculty,  148 ff.

Duns  Scotus,  100.

Durga,  64,  109.

E.

Eckermann,  Talks  Kith  Goethe  quoted,
151  ff.,  194  n.

Eckhart,  Meister,  110,  111,  201,  206,
211.

Election,  doctrine  of,  its  numinous
character,  90  ff.

Elohim , significance  of  the  name,  76,
205.

Epigenesis,  44,  116,  118.

Erasmus,  24,  101.

Evolution,  meaning  of,  44  ff.,  118  ff.,
169.

Eyth,  Max  (quoted),  83.

Ezekiel,  79.

F.

Fairy  stories,  126.

Faith,  its  meaning  for  Luther,  107-8,
142  ff.,  207,  209  ff.

Fichte,  24.

Fries,  J.  F.,  150,  151.

Fundus  animae , 116,  120  n.,  199,  200.

a

Gellert,  C.  F.,  193.

Gerhardt,  Joliann,  112*


INDEX


227


Geulincx,  03.

Ghost  stories  and  ghosts,  15,  16,  28,
20,  131.

Goethe,  24,40, 112 n. ; ‘divination’  of
the  ‘ daemonic  'in,  154  ff. ; on  God,
194  n.  ; (quoted),  1,  41,  153.

Gothic,  its  ‘ numinous*  character,  70.

‘Grace’,  numinous  significance  of,
32  ff.,  145.

Gregory  of  Nyssa,  190,  195.

Guyon,  Madame,  211.

H.

Ilackmnnn,  H.,  on  Taoism,  206.

Ilarnack,  A.,  on  Marcion,  190.

Haunted  places,  130  ff.

Hegel,  96,  111.

Heracleitus,  201.

Hugo  of  St.  Victor,  52  n.

I.

Ignatius  (Loyola \ 211.

Isaiah,  52,  63,  65,  78,  177,  207.

Islam,  its  conception  of  Allah,  77,
92  ; of  predestination,  94  ; of  sal-
vation, 170.

J.

James,  William  : The  Varieties  of  Reli-
gious Experience  (quoted),  10  n.,  38,
55  n.

Jel-aleddin,  198  n.

Jeremiah,  177.

Jesus  Christ;  the  paradox  of  His
gospel,  85  ff.  ; the  supremo  object
of  ‘divination’,  159  ff.,  172  ff.  ; Ilis
miracles,  212  ff.

Job,  The  Book  of,  on  4 the  myste-
rious*, 80  ff.,  104,  155,  177,  205.

John,  St.,  95,  96,  205.

John  Baptist,  St.,  86.

John  of  the  Cross,  St.,  109,  211.

K.

Kant,  5,  46  ; Critique  of  Pure  Reason ,
116 ff.;  Critique  of  Judgement , 65,
152  ; Lectures  on  Psychology  (quoted),

120  n.

Kena-Upanish art,  the,  196,  201.

L.

Lactantius,  23 n.,  99,  111.

Lang,  Andrew,  133.

Lange,  E.,  193.

Leibniz,.  90,  119  n.

Lucifer,  significance  of,  110  n.

Lu  iz,  Thomas,  73.


Luther,  15.100;  on  miracles,  67;
on  ‘wrath’  of  God,  101  ff.,  Ill  ;
His  4 mystery*,  104  ff. ; His  * fasci-
nation *,  106;  meaning  of  ‘faith*
for,  107,  141  ff.,  207,  209 ff.;  on
4 dens  abscond  it  us  \ 139;  l)e  Servo
Arbitrio , 24,  101  ff.  ; On  the  Liberty  of
a Christum,  211  ; Table  Tull: , 142  n.

M.

Magic,  a form  of  the  numinous,  121 ;
in  art,  68-70.

Mana , 125.

Marcion,  190.

Marott,  It.  K. : The  Threshold  of  Religion ,
15  n.,  20  n.,  76  n.

Mass,  the,  numinous  moments  in,
67,  72,  218.

Mendelssohn,  73.

Miracles  and  tlio  miraculous,  65  ff.,
147-8  ; the  miracles  of  Jesus,  176,
212-16.

Mohammed,  67.  {Sre  Islam.)

Music,  analogy  of,  with  the  ‘ numin-
ous’,  49  ff.,  72,  75,  76,  155.

Mysticism,  what  it  is,  21  ff.,  88  n.,
199,  202  ; of  void  and  nothingness,
20,  29,  30,  93;  in  Lull.er,  107  ff.,
211.

N.

Nirvana,  39,  170.

O.

Occasional ists,  the,  93.

Orenda,  125.

P.

Paracelsus,  111.

Parker,  Theodore,  55  n.

Passion,  the,  88,  176.

Paul,  St.,  37,  88  ff,  139,  167,  172,  205,
212.

Persia,  religion  of,  170.

Personal,  the,  and  the  supra- per-
sonal, 201-8.

Pharisaism,  86.

Plato,  97,  98,  141.

Plotinus,  97,  21 1.

Pordage,  Johann,  111  n.

Predestination,  doctrine  of,  in  St.
Paul,  90 ff.;  in  Luther,  105;  in
Islam,  92  ff.

Primitivo  Monotheism,  133  ff.

Q.

Quakers,  the,  142  n.,  216  ff.


228  INDEX


R.

Raphael,  64.

R6e<$jac,  23.

Redemption,  doctrine  of,  55,  168  ff.

Jlig-Vcda , the,  133.

Ritschl,  19,  66,  95.

Ruskin,  221.

S.

1 Schematization’,  40  ff.,  144  ff.

Schiller, 112 n.;  (quoted), 65, 132,  152.

Schleiermacher,  on  ‘ feeling  of  abso*
lute  dependence*,  9,  10,  20,  21,
112  ; on  divination  and  ‘ intui-
tion \ 150-4,  158  ff.,  221;  36,  91,
164,  208  n.

Scholasticism,  27.

Schopenhauer,  24,  51.

Shiva,  109.

Silence,  numinous  value  of,  70  ff.,
216  ff.

SOderblom,  N.,  15  n.,  76,  195  n.

Sophocles,  40.

Souls  and  spirits,  primitive  belief
in,  27,  124  ; as  numinous  entities,
198  ff.

Spenor,  P,  J.,  108.

Spinoza,  90.

Spiritualism,  27  n.

Sublime,  the,  and  the  holy,  42,  47,
65.

Supernatural,  the  conception  of  the,
122,  148.

Suso,  63  n.,  109,  120.

Synteresis , 142  n.


T.

Taoism,  69,  206  n.
Tauler,  107.

Tersteegen,  17,  71,  188.
Theosophy,  111.

Theresa,  St.,  194  n.,  211.


U.

Ungeheuer , 41.

V.

Vishnu,  65,  191  ff.

* Void  numinous  significance  of,
30,  89  ; in  art,  71,  72.


W.

Wagner,  50.

Well  hausen,  167.

Wordsworth,  225.

Worringer,  on  Gothic,  70.

‘ Wrath  9 of  God,  meaning  of,  18-19,
23-4,  32,  78,  99,  145  ; in  St.  Paul,
88 ; in  Luther,  102  ff.  ; in  Boehme,
110.

Wundt,  122.

Y.

Yah  well,  56,  74,  76  ff.,  89,  115,  206.


Z.

Zwingli,  92,


210/OTT


26166
