NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

Microfilm Publication M887


RECORDS OF THE UNITED STATES
NUERNBERG WAR CRIMES TRIALS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KARL BRANDT ET AL. (CASE I)
NOVEMBER 21, 1946-AUGUST 20, 1947

Roll 7

Transcript Volumes (English Version)

Volumes 16-18
Apr. 9-30, 1947


THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES
NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS SERVICE
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION


WASHINGTON: 1974


INTRODUCTION

On the 46 rolls of this nicrofiln publication are reproduced
the records of Case I (United States of America v. Karl Brandt
et al., or the "Medical" Case), 1 of the 12 trials of war criminals
conducted by the U.S. Government from 1946 to 1949 at Nuernberg
subsequent to the International Military Tribunal held in the
same city. These records consist of German- and English-language
versions of official transcripts of court proceedings, prosecution
and defense briefs, and final pleas of the defendants as well as
prosecution and defense exhibits and document books in one lan¬
guage or the other. Also included in this publication are a
minute book, the official court file, order and judgment books,
clemency petitions, and finding aids to the documents.

The transcripts of this trial, assembled in 2 sets of 30
bound volumes (1 set in German and 1 in English), are the recorded
daily trial proceedings. The prosecution and defense briefs and
answers are also in both languages but unbound, as arc the final
pleas of the defendants delivered by counsel or defendants and
submitted by the attorneys to the court. The unbound prosecution
exhibits, numbered 1-570, are essentially those documents from
various Nuernberg record series offered in evidence by the
prosecution in this case. The defense exhibits, also unbound,
are predominantly affidavits by various persons. They are
arranged by name of defendant and thereunder numerically. Both
prosecution document books and defense document books consist
of full or partial translations of exhibits into the English
language. Loosely bound in folders, they provide an indication
of the order in which the exhibits were presented before the
tribunal.

The minute book, in one bound volume, is a summary of the
transcripts. The official court file, in four bound volumes,
includes the progress docket, the indictment, amended indictment,
and the service thereof; appointments and applications of defense
counsel and defense witnesses and prosecution cosmcnts thereto;
defendants applications for documents; motions; uniform rules of
procedures; and appendixes. The order and judgment books, in
two bound volumes, represent the signed orders, judgments, and
opinions of the tribunal as well as sentences and coesaitcent
papers. Clemency petitions of the defendants, in five bound
volumes, were directed to the military governor, the Judge
Advocate General, the U.S. district court, the Secretary of
Defense, and the Supreme Court of the United States. The finding
aids suBxtarise transcripts, exhibits, and the official court file.

Case I was heard by U.S. Military Tribunal I frora November 21,
1946, to August 20, 1947. The records of this case, as the

1


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


records of the other Nuernberg and Far East (IMTFE) war crimes
trials, are part of the National Archives Collection of Korld War
II War Crimes Records, Record Group 238.

The Brandt case was 1 of 12 separate proceedings held before
several U.S. Military Tribunals at Nuernberg in the U.S. Zone of
Occupation in Germany against officials or citizens of the Third
Reich, as follows:


Case No.

United States v.

Popular Name

No. of
Defendants

1

Karl Brandt et al.

Medical Case

23

2

Erhard Milch

Milch Case
(Luftwaffe)

1

3

Josef Altstoetter

ct al.

Justice Case

16

4

Osvald Pohl et al.

Pohl Case (SS)

18

5

Friedrich Flick

Flick Case

6


et al.

(Industrialist)


6

Carl Krauoh et al.

I. G. Farbcn Case
(Industrialist)

24

7

Vilhelm List et al.

Hostage Case

12

8

Ulrich Graifolt
at al.

RuSHA Case (SS)

14

9

Otto OhUndorf

Einsatzgruppen

24


et al.

Case (SS)


10

Al fried Knqjp

Krupp Case

12


at al.

(Industrialist)


11

Ernst von
Weizsaecker et al.

Ministries Case

21

12

Vilhelm von Leeb

High Comand Case

14


et al.

Authority for the proceedings of the International Military
Tribunal against the major Nazi war criminals derived from the
Declaration on German Atrocities (Moscow Declaration) released
November 1, 1943, Executive Order 9547 of May 2, 1945, the London
Agreement of August 8, 1945, the Berlin Protocol of October 6,

1945, and the Charter of the International Military Tribunal.

Authority for the 12 subsequent cases steraacd mainly from
Control Council Law 10 of December 20, 194S, and was reinforced
by Executive Order 9679 of January 16, 1946; U.S. Military Govern¬
ment Ordinances Nos. 7 and 11 of October 18, 1946, and February 17,
1947, respectively; and U.S. Forces. European Theater General
Order 301 of October 24, 1946. The procedures applied by U.S.
Military Tribunals in the subsequent proceedings were patterned
after those of the International Military Tribunal and further
developed in the 12 cases, which required over 1,200 days of
court sessions and generated more than 330,000 transcript pages.


2


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


The crimes charged in The Brandt case consisted largely of
medical experiments performed on defenseless concentration camp
inmates against their will; "euthanasia" carried out on the
mentally defective, the physically sick, the aged, and ethnic
and racial groups; and the murder of concentration camp inmates
for the express purpose of collecting skulls and skeletons for
the Anatomical Institute of the Reich University of Strassburg.

The following, medical experiments were conducted:

1. High altitude: to investigate effects of low pressure
on persons.

2. Freezing: to test'human resistance to cxtcmely low

temperatures.* '

3. Malaria: to develop controls over the recurring nature
of the disease.

4. Mustard gas: part of a general research program in gas
warfare.

5. Sulfanilamide: to test the efficacy of the drug in bone
muscle and nerve regeneration and bone transplantation.

6. Seawater: to test methods of rendering seawater potable.

7. Epidemic jaundice: to develop an antitoxin against the
diseaso.

8. Sterilization: to test techniques for preventing further
propagation of the mentally and physically defective.

9. Typhus: to investigate the value of various vaccines.

10. Poison: to test the efficacy of certain poisons.

11. Incendiary bomb: to find better treatment for phosphorus
bums.

The prosecution alleged and the judgment confirmed that these
experiments were not isolated acts of individual doctors and
scientists on their own responsibility but that they were the
result of high-level policy and planning. They were carried out
with particular brutality, often disregarding all established
medical practice. Consequently, large numbers of the victims
died in the course of or as a result of the experiments.

The euthanasia program was the direct result of a directive
by Hitler of September 1, 1939. It resulted in the secret killing
not only of aged, insane, incurably ill, and deformed German
citizens in sanatorium in Germany but also in the clandestine
murder of foreign workers. The killing in gas chambers and by
injections in the sanatoriums served as a proving ground for
these forerunners of much larger installations in the mass
extermination camps.

In addition to these experiments, over 100 concentration
camp inmates were killed for the purpose of obtaining their
skeletons. Their ghastly remains were found in Strassburg by
Allied troops.


The transcripts of the Brandt case include the indictments
of the following 23 persons all of whoa were physicians except
defendants Rudolf Brandt, Viktor Brack, and Wolfram Sievers:

Karl Brandt: Personal physician to Adolf Hitler, Gruppcn-
fuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant'(Major General) in
the Waffen SS, Rcichskomnissar fuer Sanitaets- und Gesund-
heitswosen (Reich Commissioner for Health and Sanitation),
and member of the Reichsforschungsrat (Reich Research
Council). ' % .

Kurt Blooc: Deputy (of the] Reichsgesundheitsfuehrer (Reich
Health Leader) and Plenipotentiary for Cancer Research in the
Reich Research Council.

fc

Rudolf Brandt: Standartenfuehrer (Colonel) in the Allgemeinc
SS, Persoenlicher Referent von Hicaler (Personal Admin¬
istrative Officer to Reichsfuehrer SS Hiraler), and Min¬
isterial Counselor and Chief of the Ministerial Office in
the Reich Ministry of the Interior.

Joachim Mrugowsky: Oberfuchrer (Senior Colonel) in the
Waffen SS, Oberster Hygienikcr, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Hygienist of the Reich Physician SS and Police),
and Chef dcs Hygicnischen Institutes dcr Waffen SS (Chief
of the Hygienic Institute of the Waffen SS).

Helmut Poppendick: Oberfuchrer in the SS and Chef des
Persoenlichen Stabes dcs Rcichsarites SS und Polizei (Chief
of the Personal Staff of the Reich Physician SS and Police).

Wolfram Sievers: Standartenfuehrer in the SS, Reich Manager
of the "Ahncnerbe" Society and Director of its Institut
fuer Wehrwissenschaftlichc Zwcckforschung (Institute for
Military Scientific Research), and Deputy Chairman of the
Managing Board of Directors of the Reich Research Council.

Karl Gcnzken: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS and Chef des Sanitaetsamts dcr Waffen SS
(Chief of the Medical Department of the Waffen SS).

Karl Gcbhardt: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Gcnerallcutnant
in the Waffen SS, personal physician to Reichsfuehrer SS
Hinaler, Oberster Kliniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Surgeon of the Staff of the Reich Physician SS and
Police), and President of the German Red Cross.

Viktor Brack: Oberfuchrer in the SS and Sturnbannfuehrer
(Major) in the Waffen SS and Oberdienstleiter, Kanzlei
dcs Fuehrers dcr NSDAP (Chief Administrative Officer in
the Chancellery of the Fuehrer to the NSDAP).


4


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Waldemar Hoven: Hauptsturafuehrer (Captain) in the Kaffcn
SS and Chief Physician of the Buchenwald Concentration Camp.

Herta Oberheuser: Physician at the Ravensbrueck Concentration
Canp and assistant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the
hospital at Hohenlychen.

Fritz Fischer: Sturmbannfuehrer in the Kaffen SS and assist¬
ant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the hospital
at Hohenlychen.

Siegfried Handloser: Generaloberstabsarzt (Lieutenant
General, Medical Service), Heeressanitaetsinspekteur
(Medical Inspector of the Amy), and Chef des Kehr-
machtsanitaetswesens (Chief of the Medical Services of the
Armed Forces).

Paul Rostock: Chief Surgeon of the Surgical Clinic in
Berlin, Surgical Adviser to the Army, and Antschcf der
Dienststelle Medizinische Kissenschaft und Forschung
(Chief of the Office for Medical Science and Research)
under the defendant Karl Brandt, Reich Coeoissioner for
Health and Sanitation.

Oskar Schroeder: Generaloberstabsarzt; Chef dcs Stabes,
Inspekteur dcs Luftwaffc-Sanitactswescns (Chief of Staff
of the Inspectorate of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe);
and Chef des Sanitaetswesens der Luftwaffe (Chief of the
Medical Service of the Luftwaffe).

Hermann Bccker-Frcyseng: Stabsarzt in the Luftwaffe
(Captain, Medical Service of the Air Force) and Chief of
the Department for Aviation Medicine of the Medical Service
of the Luftwaffe.

Georg August Weltz: Oberfcldarzt in the Luftwaffe (Lieu¬
tenant Colonel, Medical Service of the Air Force) and
Chief of the Institut fucr Luftfahrtaedizin (Institute for
Aviation Medicine) in Munich.

Wilhelm Beiglbocck: Consulting physician to the Luftwaffe.

Gerhard Rose: Generalarzt of the Luftwaffe (Brigadier
General, Medical Service of the Air Force); Vice President.
Chief of the Department for Tropical Medicine, and Professor
of the Robert Koch Institute; and Hygienic Adviser for
Tropical Medicine to the Chief of the Medical Service of
the Luftwaffe.

Siegfried Puff: Director of the Department for Aviation
Medicine at the Deutsche Versuchsanstalt fuer Luftfahrt
(German Experimental Institute for Aviation).

S


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Hans Wolfgang Rooberg: Physician on the staff of the Depart¬
ment for Aviation Medicine at the German Experimental Institute
for Aviation.

Konrad Schaefer: Physician on the staff of the Institute for
Aviation Medicine in Berlin.

Adolf Pokorny: Physician, specialist in skin and venereal
diseases.

The indictment consisted of four counts. Count one charged
participation in a common design or conspiracy to commit war crimes
or crimes against humanity. The ruling of the tribunal disregarded
this count, hence no defendant was found guilty of the crime charged
in count one. Count two was concerned with war crimes and count
three, with crimes against humanity. Fifteen defendants were found
guilty, and eight were acquitted on these two counts. Ten defendants
were charged under count four with membership in a criminal organiza¬
tion and were found guilty.

The transcripts also contain the arraignment and plea of each
defendant (all pleaded not guilty), opening and closing statements
of dofense and prosecution, and the judgment and sentences, which
acquitted 7 of the 23 defendants (Bloee, Pokorny, Romberg, Rostock,
Ruff, Schaefer, and Keltz). Death sentences were imposed on
defendants Brack, Karl Brandt, Rudolf Brandt, Hoven, Gebhardt,
Mrugowsky, and Sievers, and life imprisonment on Fischer, Gcnzkcn,
Hand loser, Rose, and Schrocder; varying terns of years were given
to defendants Becker-Freyscng, Beiglboeck, Oberheuser, and
Poppcndick.

The English-language transcript volunes arc arranged numer¬
ically, 1-30; pagination is continuous, 1-11538. The German-
language transcript volumes arc numbered la-30a and paginated
1-11756. The letters at the top of each page indicate morning,
afternoon, and evening sessions. The letter "C" designates com¬
mission hearings (to save court time and to avoid assembling
hundreds of witnesses at Nuernberg, in most of the cases one or
more coraissions took testimony and received documentary evidence
for consideration by the tribunals). Several hundred pages arc
added to the transcript volumes and given number plus letter
designations, such as page number 1044a. Page 1 in volume 1
(English) is preceded by pages numbered 001-039, while the last
page of volume 28 (English) is followed by pages numbered 1-48.

Of the many documents assembled for possible prosecution use,

570 were chosen for presentation as evidence before the tribunal.
These consisted largely of orders, directives, and reports on
medical experiments or the euthanasia program; several interrogation
reports; affidavits; and excerpts from the Reickegesetzblatt (the
official gazette of Reich laws) as well as correspondence. A number


of the medical reports were accompanied by series of photographs
and charts of various experiments.

The first item in the arrangement of the prosecution exhibits
is usually a certificate listing the document number, a short
description of the exhibit, and a statement on the location of
the original document of the exhibit. The certificate is followed
by the document, the actual prosecution exhibit (most of which are
photostats), and a few mimeographed articles with an occasional
carbon of the original. In rare cases the exhibits are followed
by translations or additional certificates. A few exhibits arc
original documents, such as:

Exhibit No. Doc. No. Exhibit No. Doc. No.


301

NO-1314

410

NO-158

307

NO-120

441

NO-1730

309

NO-131

443

NO-890

310

NO-132

451

NO-732

357

1696 PS

462

NO-1424

362

628 PS

507

NO-365

368

NO-817

546

NO-3347

403

616 PS


No certificate is attached to several exhibits, including
exhibits 433, 435-439. 462, 559, and 561. Following exhibit 570
is a tribunal exhibit containing the interrogation of three
citizens of the Netherlands. Number 494 was not assigned, and
exhibit 519 is followed by 519a and 519b.

Other than affidavits, the defense exhibits consist of newspaper
clippings, reports, personnel records, RcichagoBotzblatt excerpts,
and other items. There are 901 exhibits for the defendants. The
defense exhibits arc arranged by name of defendant and thereunder by
exhibit number, each followed by a certificate wherever available.

The translations in the prosecution document books are
preceded by indexes listing prosecution document numbers, biased
descriptions, and page numbers of the translation. They arc
generally listed in the order in which the prosecution exhibits
were introduced into evidence before the tribunal. Pages 81-84
of prosecution document book 1 arc missing. Books 12, 16, and
19 are followed by addenda. The document books consist largely
of mimeographed pages.

The defense document books are similarly arranged. Each
book is preceded by an index giving document numbers, description,
and page number for each exhibit. The corresponding exhibit
numbers arc generally not provided. There are several unindexed
supplements to numbered document books. Prosecution ar.d defense
briefs are arranged alphabetically by names of defendants; final
pleas and defense answers to prosecution briefs follow a similar

7


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


scheme. Pagination is consecutive, yet there are many pages .where
an "a" or "b" is added to the numeral.

- The English-language final pleas, closing briefs, and replies
to prosecution briefs of several defendants are missing, as are
a few German-language closing briefs and replies to prosecution
briefs.

At the beginning of roll 1 are filmed key documents from
which Tribunal I derived its jurisdiction: the Moscow Declaration,
U.S. Executive Orders 9547 and 9679, the London Agreement, the
Berlin Protocol, the Charter of the International Military Tri¬
bunal, Control Council Law 10, U.S. Military Government Ordinances
7 and 11, and U.S. Forces, European Theater General Order 301. .

Following these documents of authorization is a list of the names
and functions of the members of Tribunal I and counsels.

These documents arc followed by the transcript covers giving
such information as name and number of case, volume numbers,
language, page numbers, and inclusive dates. They arc followed
by summaries of the daily proceedings providing an additional
finding aid for the transcripts. The exhibits are listed in an
index, which notes type of exhibit, exhibit number and name,
corresponding document number and document book and page, a short
description of the exhibit, and the date when it was offered in
court. The official court file is indexed in the court docket,
which is followed by a list of witnesses.

Not filmed were records duplicated elsewhere in this micro¬
film publication, such as prosecution and defense document books
in the German language that are largely duplications of pros¬
ecution and defense exhibits already microfilmed or opening
statements of prosecution and defense, which can be found in
tho transcripts of the proceedings.

The records of the Brandt case arc closely related to other
microfilmed records in Record Group 238, specifically prosecution
exhibits submitted to the International Military Tribunal, T988;

NI (Nuernberg Industrialist) Series, T301; NOKK (Nuernberg Armed
Forces High Command) Scries, Til 19; NG (Nuernberg Government)
Scries, Til39; and records of the Milch case, M888, the List case,
M893, the Grcifelt case. M894, and the Ohlendorf case, M895.

In addition, the record of the International Military Tribunal
at Nuernberg has been published in Trial of the Major War Crirrinale
Before the International Military Tribunal (Nuernberg, 1947), 42
vols. Excerpts from the subsequent proceedings have been pub¬
lished as Trials of War Criminals Before the Buerhberg Military
Tribunal Under Control Council Lav Ho. 10 (U.S. Government
Printing Office: 19S0-S3), IS vols. The Audiovisual Archives
Division of the National Archives and Records Service holds motion
picture records and photographs of all 13 trials and tape re¬
cordings of the International Military Tribunal proceedings.

8


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


John Mendelsohn wrote these introductory reearks and arranged
the records for microfiloing in collaboration with George Chalou.


9


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 7
Target 1

Volume 16
Apr. 9-15, 1947


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vs KARL BRANDT et d
VOLUME 16


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


9-15 April 1947 pp. 5594-5971


9 jpril -17-:;-?JC-I-1-703 ter (Int. BrewsJ

Court I


Official Transcript of tho African military
Tribunal in the ratter of the United 3 tat as of
jperica against Earl Brandt, ot ai, defendants,
sitting at Ihirnberg, Germany, on 9 April 1947,
0930-1630, Justice Seals presiding.

TO KiESUL: Persons in the court roec will pleaso find their
soots.

The Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal I.

J'111tar:* Tribunal I is new in session. Crd save the United
States of icerlca and this honorablo Tribunal.

Ifcere will bo ordor in the court rocc.

TO FB3:i?-2r?: Hr. Tarehal, you ascertain if the defendants oro
all present In tho court.

TO !JIBTtAL: Jioy it pleoce ycur Honor, all dofondontn oro prosont
'•1th the exception of the Defondant Olerhouaer, abooat duo to illnosa.

TO PEEID2JT: Tho Tribunal haring rocoivod a cortiflcato from
tho prison Jootor to tho offeet that Dofondant Oborhounor Is unablo
to appoor in cairt today, she will bo axcused frau uttondaneo for
this day, it appearing that her intorosts ^111 not bo ;oapardizod
by :ar absonoo.

The Socrotary-Gonoral >411 filo tho cortiflcato frm tho prison
physician.

Counsol nay procood.


:ni77T PC??.? DICE - Sosuood

DR. BOSK! (Counsel for thj Dofondant Poppondick): Hr. PronJdont,

I should liko to oontinuo in ay interrogation of too witnosa Poppondick.

DIIGC? i'A'CinO*’ (Continuod)

tho incendiary beat oxporiaonts on 5 January 1^4,

:*o 2 So, Prococution St hi bit 12, page 48 in tho
Ecok oatry according to uhick too ninutos of tho so
sont to tho ?.oichsorzt-SS to bo f3r.:a--od to tho
bollovod that ho real that thoso

539i -


9 April 47-"-?JC-l-2-?a:tor (Iat., 3rown)

Coart I

ro -crts '..oat to you. Did you ovor aoo such a roport?

A !>°i at loast I cannot roc all ovor having soon ouch a roport
with jloturoa. i certainly should Lava noticod tho pictures.

2 '.las It custonary for oxrorlrontal reports to bo sont to you?

A No, such roport3 dots sont direct to tho aoicha physician.
Corroapondorco with staff ixcbors In such nattorr was priccipally
forblddon. if dosplto that such a caso did arlso, naxtly, if
saooaj bocauso ho didn't knew asy bottor sont such a roport to
sccaaono who shouldn't rocolro it, tfcon tho roport would novortholoss
still havo £o:.o to tho aolchs physician.

2 Did you knot; tho lfalnus *Torkc?

A As 1 have alroody said, I kn tr tho ca:* only frees nodical
periodicals.

^ Do you know Dr. Eoch?

A ?fo.

u?.. B01!!: In oonnoction with thla quostlon, I ahall oubooquontly
aubj_lt Dr. Koch's affidavit shloh arrived within tho past days as
ovldonco for Dr. iirugoasky, in .hlch Dr. Koch says that ho did not
know poppondlok that no corrospondonco was cont through Itopponlick
to Lla, or to tho :ktlaus :/orko.

3V OP.. 503£l:

^ tho Hlchor SS and Pollco Load or Tfoyrsch who was

stationed In Dro3don?

A I only know his na # ».

{* Did you attoal an;' conforonco3 at which th;-o uos dlaoinsion
of ox :orLnontB with tho «lru c 1 17?

A Jto.

1 Do you know tho drug r 17 at all? #

A J<o t I did not know about it until this trial.

^ Did you havc anything to do with tho taking of tho contents of
tiio incendiary beets Buchoxwnld or did you of this?

A Nq, not that oithor.

‘ 5595


9 x ril 47-:i_7jC-l-?-rostcr (I at., Brora)

Cc^rt 1


* I:: othor words, you had notconnoction with tho planning or
direction of izcoadlary oxporizionts doscrlbod by tho prosocutIon
-or uoro you tho conpotont anport uhoso Job it uas to concern
hinsolf '.rith thia wholo question?

A :Iq.

»R. r;QS::: I autsdt new HPO 7, an affidavit of Dr. Dire hart,

In this connoction, rich la on por.o 18 of th. ilocunont poppondick
bo*, i culclt it as Poppondick Schibit So. 9. tho nawnt X
shall road point 2 of thin affidavit, i *uoto:

2. Trortt -on t cf -honp h- ma burns ith "8 I T".:

Xho dropping of phosphorus lr.condiory baub3 rvodo it uocosscry to
find tho approoriato :.oa:.; for ltn tror.tr.ont, Siroo tho usual coppor
nulfato solution Sid not ah ow satisfactory rocults, tho fixe of
Dr. r.ndauc of Dro.tdorv sought onothor rx>Ji\c: to diccolvo phosphors,
"hoy found thi-. in a liquid which thoy rr.mfacturod and called
"R 17" (carton totrachlorldo). Tho offoa tiro none of R 17 was
provod by tho fir: of Dj., h’adau* through tho oxporlrwnto on rabbits.

After thoeo rabbit arporiiocta voro concludol Dr. Hadauc •c!ni t'.io
Kl .her 33 and Polloo Loador v. Woyrcch of Drosdon to watch thoeo
o. pori .or.tn. siuco ny aor-jonoy offico «-c at t!» orooisoo of
Orupponfuohror v. Woyreeh, :*> aflkod r.o to caw along to tho firn
of Ipd-.us in capacity as a physician and .o obsorvo thoeo
onporlnoxrto. ihr.t as in tho fall of 1943. in aocordanco with tho
ro^uont of Gmpponfuahror v. ’JOyrsoh and tho fizr. of n-daus, I
ropertoi to t :-j Reich Physician 33 and polico or. tho results in tho
troataont of phosphorus bums found try th- fir: of !>.dnun; I suygostod
to hi., to inclulo tho : duct R 17 in tho fircW.il kits for air-raid
procautions. Grawitz •'rowlrod an irostlgation. 7or thi* purpo£o,
scno tirio lator, ho sort Dr. Ding, in his capacity as hygienist, to
Drosdon and ordorod no to arrar.po for Ding to :o to tho :>.daus fixe
and sc<» tha results ;4th tho drug a 17 obtained by that fine. I did
so* Ding can-- to Dro3don and in ay prosor.co watchod tho oxporinonts

55%


9 4^-11 ‘c-l-:-?cstor (I-t., Broun)

Court I

•

mationod. Hb doclrtrod lr.tor that ho would investigate tho offic.-cy
o? that preparation, also on r-bbits, in 3uchonw-ld, upon oxdors of
tho Botch Physician 32. Ho nskod that tho firm J&dnus «hould plnco
tho crop’.mtion a 17 at his disposal. Ir=adiatoly aftor tho lnspoction
of tao fire of Kadnus ho loft Droedon again.

It is -.lao Jam: to no that Dr. Ding hod roquostod tho offico of tho
Highor SS and Polico Locdor to supply bin wi th tho contonts of an
Snglish incjndiary bonb; this request was, as far as I knew, fillod

V/ th0 1,01100 Prosi-lont of Loinzig. Dr. Ding sont for tho drug and
tho incondiary benb.

It io also kr.arr. to ao that Ding nado a report about his oxporicor.ta;

I know this, bocauso Ding inquired sovoral tieos at ny offico in

Drosdan, both in writing and by tolophono, whothar tho report was

thoro, sinoo fco could not find it. it was supposed to bo a report

with illustrations. Thothor tho report wont through ay office, i do

not k::tr, a a I usod to bo in Droaion only ono da; oach wook. at tho

«

tico whon Ding was looking for tho report, it was not In zy offico.

I proauao therefore that ho sont it directly to tho fire of iindaus,

•~i:ioo they wore intoroatod in hio investigations.


>577


9 ..?ril—Ii-DJG-2-l-lfcohfta (Int. Brown)
C-urt i=. 1


"..s I had hocrd nothing for seme time frjs the. hcich Physician,
os tc whether R 17 was tc be included in first-aid kits for air¬
raid precautions, I naked the Reich Physician about it. He explained
to no that the preparation would net be introduced, since it sorely
dissolved the phosphorus but did not directly help in the healing
of the turns, /.nether source, however, w^s producing a preparation
which cabined both those qualities, and this one was tc bo introduced*"
The prosecution in the course cf its ease mentioned the .method
of treatment cf the Danish physician Dr. Vcerr.et, who carried out
transplantations on homosexuals end people whe wore prematurely old;
what do you know cfccut this?

.. I hoard erveo that Dr. Veemet wos working in rrogue in a
pharmaceutical f: ctcry an tho technical uevdejiaent of - h. men pill.
This tablet hrd a certain shape and ho oallod it artificial gland.

Q In this connect! ;n I subsdt the Bcier ..ffiS-.vit, Document
H ;0 12, ,.rcu 33 of tho Dccuncmt Dock rcppcndick, it will bo Peppon-
dick Exhibit 10. I quote from tho third paragraph:

"..t Himmler's order Dr. Vaernet was given a suite bio laboratory
in th<- Hoilnittel-G.a.b.H. in Prague, which wan subordinate to tho
‘.’/Hi.. Dr. Ve.mot worked th>re in Praruo in the year 19 Uu,

"Equipment end porscimcl were jl.-cod at hie disposal, .a wo knew.
Dr. Vaomot is said to have worked as an independent scientist on tho
development .f the ortifici.l gland, which had bocn patented. Ho
was convinced that his scientific method wculd be successful and
worked continuously on it,

"«s far as I raauibor, Dr. Vaernet was said tc hr.vo had succossful
results on his Danish private p tients in his treatment with tho
artifici. 1 eland, which w*s perhaps, net technically perfected. *
nyself, saw tho so-called artificial eland during a visit
in Prague. It was a «a01 tablet, in the shape cf a. cylinder, only
a few m illim eters thick, its diom-ter I estimate, wt-3 nc mere than

1 ecu The cuter edge w-s surr.unded by a silvery layer.

5598


9 Aprll-tf-DJG-2-2-l6Bohnn (Int. Brcwr.)
Court Ho. 1


"Vaarnet tcld us that these tablets wore tc teko the place cf
nusercua heznene injections, because after implantation in the body
they w«r. -ssidlatod sickly and evenly.

"Tie *orc ccnvinccd cf the haralcssr.ess cf this tablet, particularly
sincu we know that such iagfl ant a tic ns cf hcrrocne crystals wore customary
in aedic-l science."

Did you speak with Dr. Veornct?

i. I n-t Dr. Vrornct or.ee in Grewitt 1 'nto-rcca while ho was
waiting thero, he introduced himself tc cc a:td wo sj*ckc together.

I remember that w- spoke about his nc-thed, one* he s.'id th~t ho had
already employed this luothcd in Denmark or. e muaber cf private pa¬
tients with very cox* success. If I recall ccrroctly, Dr. Vaemot
wont :d t. have a pur- hcna;nc substance for hio tochniccl work, which
w.s difficult at that tire tc obtain.

Q The j rcsecuti .n hes put in Document 1300, Exhibit 229, which
y u signed rnd which concerns Dr. Vaernct 1 * activities; this letter
-oks Dr. Ding tc place lcbcrrUry f-cilitios at Vremet’s dispcsal
if it oh.uld b-«mc n.ccssary; how decs it happen that you signod
thio lottcr?

.. This, as I r jaember, is a case similar to the cno of which I
spsku yesterday; nec-ly whore Cr'wita dictated the lett-r and tcld
the socre(ory ho did net want tc wait tc sign it cr 1 should dc so.

I road the lett-r her-, and this is net =y stylo of letter-writing.

In connection '-1th such on experiment u Veem-t was carrying cn, I
would net have used the words "humane axpurlacnts". I would use the
word "iarOanta-ticn" and the vocabulary in tho letter is net nine in
general. In additi-n I was not fried Her with the connect! ns
c-nti ne-d in it.

Q TMs lottcr was acidr-ss-i t. Ding rlth ugh his name was
Schuler?

L I assume th-t the s-oratory -.sk~l wh: t the heading wr.s tc be

and sincu I did n t know th't Ding was rlre-nd; naaod Schuler I said

3599


9 Acril-4«JG-2-3-Jcehan (Int Brcwn)

Ccurt Sc. 1


Sing.

Q Hew dees it happen that the letter is addressed to the Csn-
ceotrati n Cesp Buchcnwali cad not to tho Typhus end Virus Research
Institute at Buchonwald, which wculd have been acre correct?

.. I did net kn.w anything acre precisely abcut Ding's address
at Buchenwald; I did net knew the none l the Institute at Buchenwald
oxy 1 consequently I Just had it addressod tc tho Ccnccntraticn Comp at
Buchenwald, and I knew that it w.uld arrive.

CJ D: ycu kr. w whether Ding had a further correspondence with
the Rolchs Physician in this natter, which ycu f.und cut ebeut?

A I cairn-'t recall ever having seen such a letter, hut I think
it is qiitc p saiblo that Dinr rnswired this letter and stated that
Vr -mot Ceuld nnko uso 'f the laboratory facilities at Buchenwald.

Q K gon testified that Ding wroto n letter tc ycu, in which ho
did n: t report in detail abcut experimental results, ho did give
ycu general infcmati.n about the activities of Vcomot; did you
rocoivo such a letter?

A ..a I remaster neither fr a Vaernot, xxr frea any cno else,
nor fr.n Grnwitz, did I see such a natter.

Q K-gon said th .t Vr.cmct usod his nethcd cn rt least fifteen
parsons, he said further that Vaomot's treatment was the partial
cause fer t*c lee tho; did ycu knew anything about th"t?

A N:, I do net knew cf fifteen pursens ncr dc 1 kn.w hrw many
people he had applied hie Ceth \ tc; and this harmless Bethed ceuld
certainly n-t have led to fatalities, 1 consider that cut . f the
question.

Q In the letter tc Ding there is nenti r. cf Vaemet wantli.£ tc
carry ut preliminary e-xvdnati.ns cn persons fer which he used Ding's
laboratory; the prcsecutd.cn speaks cf prdiminrry operations witheut
ever having -_ny pr. :f cf that; what lid ycu imagine was meant by pre¬
liminary oxpxdnnticns?

A X certainly did net imagine that those- were any sert cf surgical

5600


9 ~prjl-m»G-2 I, lfrahai (Int. Brcrr.)
Ccurt Ic. 1


operations; in such ?. hrrelcss cjwraticn as this any surgical work
would hr.vo been altogether unnecessary. I can only iatgino that
these were bleed or urine cnelysstc test the hemcno contents,
or a sinilar analysis tc that-which arc frequently carried cut in
clinics cr laboratories, Moreover Dr. Horn recently testified hero
that castrated persons were rise aVailablo here and that these,
according tc the law, were crininals whe had been castrated fer
iaacrcl offenses legally.

Q In this letter that yeu signod, there was centim that further
details about Vauroot's work had been sent tc the crap physician, did
yeu 3co this dccucentaticn?

 whftt this decuaontaticn was I dc net kn.w, but I did seo a
ccllecti.n by Vc.ornct, a cellecti:n cf literature, and cf the sol¬
ubility Cf the tablets with ranth<aatic*l calculations.

C * Dr * Kirchcrt's affidavit, which hrs already been subedited,
which la HTO 7, Peppsodick Exhibit No. 9, reports cn this natter
of Vaemet's documentation and it is qy intention new to rend this
Decun-nt regarding Vaernot's aoth.d:

1) R-. Dr. Vnomet's cothcd of tro&toont:

"Grawitz and Kaltonbrunnor had talked abiut the possibilities
-i pjlyi.ag the Vr.ornot here no preparation and submitted suggestions
thereon tc the Roichsfuchrer SS Hiarler. Ono of these sufrcsti.ns
was tc soli that preparation abroad cn the black n-rkot and thus tc
obtain foreign currency. It was aloe proposed t; precise these
‘‘reparations tc foreign agents ns a reward for useful infermati. n.

S ffir ‘ s 1 kncw > thcSa suggestions were rejected by Hisraler.

".’.fter-that had happened Grrvits rove no the Vaornct file fer
-rientr.ti.n 3C that I would be inf.reod in ease Knltantrunncr # should
r^ise any queries.

"I * 2 s at the tise in chvrgo cf the nodical cere cf the numbers
°f tho Security JC-dn Office.

"Fren studying the file, 1 .-.ther^d tho fcllowiar, C s far as I


9 .-prll-tt-D JG-&-£4fochen (Int. Ercwn)

Court K-. 1

still r-acetoor:

"Dr. Vr.crnet, c Danish physician, had used a h;rocne flond
^reparation, produced *:y hie, with a large nuBbcr of his Danish
private patients. Quite a nuaber cf eases ware described in the
file, which shewed the uxoellcnt result of this preparation. It was
intended f-r: impotence, pcrlatic diseases, find finally hem;sexuality.
The tfl-ni itself was planted benoath the ald-aiial skin, n completely
naraless operation, and was suppaod t. be effective fer rbcut cno
year. -ft.r - peri i of :ne year, a new -land w.uld have to bo im¬
planted.

"Gr-witz t Id a- when he <>rvu a*. the file thrt Dr. Vccrnct was
*.in< tc r«lr.ce his prccoss at the disposal of Gcrarn radical author¬
ities. !:;thin - is known t: so personally about an application cf
this treatment in G.ra-ny.

"In the file were -Iso t-thoo- tied calculations rteut tho
size -nd the typo cf cover of th. fland in c-nn.-cticn with tho
period f Its absorpti n in the human body.


r yb02


9 Apr.-M-OJ-3-l-lLiloy-(int.2rewn)-
Ccurt 1

• After I had read the file I made a note to that effect re¬
turn-! the file to Oranits. A iiscursion -with ,^;tcnbrunner did not
materialise:."

q 3hat ia yrur attitude towards these sc-called experiments
C V-cm-t, s-r- these experiments or sirply m-thods of treatment?

A They w.rcn't cx-pcrim-nos. I*' contradistinction the German
n V_rsuch* 1 is a much breeder term than the German ward "-xp-riment."

The werd ■Yorsuch'’ is used net only in the sense her- as the prosecution
us-a it as th. experiments, but it is use.’ daily in every hospital and
every clinic. .."hen any uethed cf treatm-nt in the Charitou oesn't load
to success then Dr. His sail, n n ire will try an experiment with such
nil such a aothaC." I m other words, the word n Vorsuch" does not have
the sine cooptation as the th- word" Experiment" used literally. And
f course in this c nnecticn professor Hcst'.ck,, as an -Xpert, testifi¬
ed at;ut th. crystal implantstl n, and reC-ntly Dr. H'rn made statements
n this subject, who was an cy- witn-ss cf this treatment, and both said
it was a question of an ir.tcmuti nally known method cf treatment that
was altc.cth.r harmless.

Di:. BCEHL: In ccnnccti-n with the implantation of synthetic
lands I submit HPO 10 iv* 11, both excerpts fr a scientific publications.
Th-.Se •’.ra only t« f the r-.ny publications in this file , and which
_3crib- implantatic n as on. cf the .wtheds of hem no thor ipy. I sub¬
mit an exc-rpt fr*n Clinical SnJ crin l y, as Poppcndick Exhibit, No. 11,
tc b. f-und on pa* -- 27. I afatul. Idle- t. read a part f thi3 oxccrpts

n Excerpt fren A Jcr.s ’ Clinical E.-r , ccr ( in' > lo-'y" ( Klinische
Eai.crin-lo rio’’.

n A manual ; r physicians ns stu-mts by Arthur Jeres,

Dr. Cd.1. hebil.^t anbury.

Berlin, P t blishe: by Julius Splinter, 1939. ?z»o 3&:

Therapy with sox hormones.

a. Physi lc--ical prefact.


Sene years ago, by the clarification cf th- ch-oicil constitution

5603


9 Aprl...-GJ-3-2-Kal;y-<int 3r-*zi)~

Ocurt 1

~{ the sex h no nos, the way was pened for their synthetic productions
It 11 1 n t tnk<- lon^ until synthesis was achieved, thus opening a largo
and new filed for therapy.....


Th.rc can bo n; drubt that by c.ans of ch-aically pure sex
hem c_s it is p< ssiblc tc cccpcnsote fully fer the functions of the

•■v is both in the c.strate' anlaal and in the human c--strata.™

I Oaitt-d realin. 12 linos, and take up in the ni.'dle of the thirds pa¬
ragraph at™ 7no I_plr.ntanti<n of Crystals.™

" The isplantotin f Crystals, first intr duccd by Farkes and
Dcanwsly and later repeated by Scfceller and others, pr:ved that the
b.tt^r effect f esters is u. t the at vc ccnti no . factors. Ciystal
inplantai-n sh ws a clear superiority of the pure subst-.nc. ccapared
with the -aters. In the .xpericont* by Sch-eller and Ovhrkc, tho
in, l-.ntati n of 1 a testosterone, had a lij higher effect than the same
' so lv„n by injecti-n. 7he effect f crystal icplantai n also lasts

uch 1 rverj the rvuciaac effect is reached lotcrj.*

N w, pn..e 30JiS

" Therapy with sale sexual hrraonos.

" ‘roatcent by c.ans of thy preparati n cencornc hoe, besides
- the 3-xuil sphoro, a nuobcr f ffcctfl.

1 First there is a general stisul.tion, particularly in tho
case of a in.; powens.™

I begin n;w, with the last par ^raph of this 'cuoent:

" On casos of ..unuch idisc an 5 weakness cf p-.t ncy, n t fa pure¬
ly physical nature, th. aecesnry esc is generally scalier. In such ca¬
ses, Vcnscer f.r instance rccccnen Is 5-50 e.; of tcst-st.rcno prrpicnato
i-cr lose and a total of afc.ut 10 i:tfccti ns.

. Tht i=prev_ntnt in g.ncril c:n.iitirns, physical elasticity, and

the feeling of physical fitness ar* particularly rvticeable. Sreticisn
( Erctisierung) d'eS n t occur. Ir.-sc cbsen*ati n3 ir. *icote therapeutic
use of calc sexe h-rc.ncs particularly in coses f senile complaints sad

premature inp-Unce. Here, els , the results rep rte J art. very good."

56C4


9 kp-m -H-G J-3-3-hl oy-(iat ^rcwn)-
Curt 1

3 cuscnt HOP 11 is an excerpt fora the " Schweiscrische bo iizinischo
TT-chenschrift’', an article by Dr. Mueller. This is cn page 29, and I
.ut it in as Poppeadick Exhibit So. 12 Here also I should like ta read
- fun excerpts. I quote:

" Exc-rpts fTeC ' Swiss Helical Weekly* ( Schwciterischo nedi-
zinischc .rchenschrift' .»"• 25, 2U June 19Uw

THE ?R SIESHT: Da ycu fine it necessary to read any portion of
th exhibit into th- record? Ia it n~t enough t- refer to it as an ex¬
hibit?

DR, BCtK’.: Perhaps I i>n*t have t< read it, but 1 sh ul.' like
U read :nc paragraph f ab ut eipht lines, t*is is n page 3, P^gc
675, 't page 31 rf th- Ikcu^-nt 3c k.

" Pag© 675?

* H raoncs b 'ies un\r hi.* prossure ( c.g. hydraulic) but solid
singl. crystals in particular, will naturally ff-r longer rcsistrmc .

! the pr cess . f n luti n than 1 s ly presso substance.

... With re r.' t its off-ct, th- iapL.ntoti n of hero n-r. is sinilar
t the priciplc which couli bust be called ' Glandular prothesis'. As
fith the intact organ wh Se natural functi n is to be replaced the
re f lacuaent f the ovary by inplantati n f cstradi 1 in the ease of
castr'ti n), toe crystal, in an lnfinit-ssiral division, in a c'-ntini-
uo fl f snail, s -t -cp.uk physi 1 -leal cscs f h raon-s, has
the saa effcot...O“ly thu3 can it be ex ulaine ' that with ' landular'
pr~thesis' Excllont therapeutic results can be obtained*"

The originals f th-s. exhibits, can, if y-u wish, be seen.

Q In the c ursc . f its ease the Pr. secutirn, asi le- frea the ox-
periia nts a-nti n. ir. the in’.icto.nt, nuiti nc ' also bl- Kl cca .ulating

-xp-ria>.nts; y-u wore n t celled particularly resp .asible 1 r this,

•

tut I sh ul ncv-.rthclcss like t ask y.u, !i yu know ab ut too c.a-
ulatin,* oxocrincnts cirri -1 n in ^achau?

A V. t I knew n. thin of th-Se p<ly al ex, eriu-nts.

Q Did y u kn w th- wor ” p ly-il" at all?

A Th- t rd I hav- heard s a^wnert r an th-r.

5605


9 ipril-JWJJ-3-Wfeloy-apcim-
C:urt 1-

g Did y-M know that polygal was proiuc.d in the Ahnenerbe?

A That night have been centime’ cnee also, ixit I don't knew
nay details.

Q If you .heard that experiments were being undertaken with drug
what wcul' yeu have suppose^ that scant, that is tc say you have th ugh
they were in any way clnical experiments?

a It never would have ec cured tc ae t: think of sene thing, that •
was n t permissible for the t-stinp ~f coagulants, as surgical ro as
in a h spital provide that adequate material.

Q D cunent 61 h was put in by the pr sc-cuti n as Exhibit 2U5,
English D cecont Beck, 11, page 25, whore thv.ro is nenticn of an arti¬
cle by n aschor n the uso cf P ly.;nl 10 in the Munich Medical Weakly
Rancher was accused f not having submitted tnls work t. the Hclch
.hysician f r approval; lid ycu sec this canuscript?

A The manuscript cr wort: by RMchcr I rwvcr saw. If I had I a
sh ulhave rccxcber it.


5606


9 A. rii- 2:?- -1-Pixity-Int• Sr «r.
Cart' • !•


Q PurthOrtr^ro, the rr see oil., r. -lit in a rep.rt vn the
>i chenAcnl trerv- «..t f £--sia in which it ia said that savals
i B ica rrtuicially h xrs as. This is O-cu-

«;it 0-UO;, .-r secuti.n nxhi'^it 2U9, £n;;lish D cuaent 3c.k 11,
.. :;v. n . bn w this re. rt fcfcr.t ia haro in questi r,?


1 ir. Crs’dfci'a .xsfers there rue a pc.or n artificial in-
fvc-i iaia io ir socuti n 2x1.1 4t 251 in ^cuaent 3: k 11,

X C . 2 , Dl-' ; u knew a. this c 150 rist ry?

A Z 'iu not.

Q V.' there ia D'CW&iHt lie, 3xfcT.lt 12h, p3?« 13 -f : ‘ c
Sr. llah D.cu -t k re.err- . . t i 1 leal vnrfaro. This ia
loiter Xr i Ornwit* t iilT^lar a..-' t'*crc if ila «enti n 1 n
... :ram*ui.ia this letter. Did :• <■ k.. : tliia lett-r ur -f

thia .wnjr.-miva, or -'Id y u hr.v- an) me- lo' o of this question
-.t rll?

A ;v, 1 di’n't kn:w the let~>r, or.i I .itln't k:rw any¬
th!. ' . t! 1 Via questi n.

-j yurf.ier y u -re accuse.’ uiv’or r-int b nf boir s , a xtiicr
f t , SS. As a v.- -r f tl* SS 'iC -u tako .art in -. ux-
cusa-s tv eh as the r cocutir. -f the Jc..*s in '33 r '33?

A I iwv-r t k part in any ouch excesses 'a a :x>Rxr «f

t!» SS.

1 In t.;o c urre f t!w cnaa tU ir coevtl a &-nti na'

B' ry a.-sriaanta tU-.t wv.ru cithor ‘ir-ctl r in-irectly -c= da¬
ta. In :• v '” 1 ‘ n ‘ h ' Vd

he vu i thos- ex^crix-nte?

A I -• rank s cnivf ,fc*ri: H. S. • “ia .

Office, in’ w? rank was ;r. .rti •- - :y . siti n. Y u cen

'r~' n. dc-ucti its fr a ny rnrk * ith ro arc t- a -.ctivitiss in

Grntritz's cffico n:r ro -rhl:, ‘c vlu-V.a f v.’.nt ■v.; i eno< ir.

Qrawitt's a wro. In. / rs t toe »» -

5607


“


o A ril-_ :> i-2-rutty-Iat. Br.am
C-.urt ’ . i.


jSfx co sow i,;- -.os £ erred tc t* .-ieich rhysicihn, r. t s. tnat they
c j 1- rk ua-.’er the Reich fhysicica, ut t lioy varo t-. c ntinvc
* o active in t:w Basse und Siocliur... Office.

’7 Ii. tl»r w.rde, y.u were i..t Granite's staff c.:icf r..r

r ^ rs n r-iio. bnow ill o ut Grawitz's varfc n- r vere y u his 4 vr-

t acl advisor?

A , I vns neither staff e def r-r the c-. 11 «'j-. rater vhe
knav erectly what me .in, .n. T.«j chief -I staff is a uan who
stan s lnt rudirry m tween the chief cw! tnc th-r ffices vho
represents the crief, and s far -t c nsultuti.n or a-vice is

c noernc I rmat saj tr.at Orawits hi is-lf was a profess r f

and tnd n: need f , . rv v..r, this

ms - o ns nant with hie a tc lot suxvdJnates adviso hia.

(J Did y.ur activity ir. thu Basse Siad2uo»8 : Of-

i Lee havu .»> rnlati :n t t>v. eri;v. al -otivitios f the SS?

A t e -ctiritios f the tin 1-cc r id S-ttlc-o-nt Officu
c ncoroc '. ily mvasti atin. t.*o hereditary health and fitiuss
af mw xirs of tho Si tbmelna. T.uire vers n.. c..nnucti:»o ttfcb
i«c,Io who *wro nit SS osa vrs. -

internal SS -oittor.

» Hi: the ain r.acv nik! SottlOMdt Offioo, in y UT flpin-
l.a, i.v- - h - with criminal activities? -ore an>
.•rfsucuo f octorlnati r. tlu.ro r carried at?

A I -*v - t kn * anythin-. Vnatsccvcr a ut rich things.

The air. flr.ee ant’ Settlement Offico was founded in 1932 <n
Barr: 'a initiative, an* its r.in ms to : vo cr to persuade th*
...polati a in ti» hi citi to tc the c arrtry. Tiiis vee

t .• no tlir . h tlv. S.ttl.-v.: t Office s. cr -r tro So *t.s •»
c nenrood, *u *, n. v.r, SS _v -.rs r.nd th-ir lives rare tc c

•

activity f the ?.‘cc Cffxco. i- tlv c- rs. ; y*zrs t.r. s -
called "Si^n-Act" !ovil „ . T.:is •. *s . r 'll metical .tv-


5 -3-rvttr-lRt. 9r 1.3

Z' art . I.

r sus tnrria c fficc of t j SS, 2 .'.'’ it developed to o tbo
X*r *st :in the ah lc r oniaaticn. The activities of tS»
at Office and the Race Office regained very sli nt. I
^ 5ur«, t6ct-lc«ent Office 'id set up a few SS aattlcsumts,

•t this s Halted to 1 tan wndertakin.a, I =eauno secauao fin-
-r.oi-.l ^.c.u.r3 played r:L-. L: -- •- Scttlesunt Office, and

porticulnrl;. ir. the Mr, c nc.r.Kd ice 1. rJ.; Kith the dcvolcp-
Ui f fathers' i l~cnU mu f=-' «» octtlu^nt. 1 liovo
it c na>.at-d Jy f six «r ol_ht .e-rs-.-s, raid the Pjco Offlco
ai- :ly c-nc.r.-- Itself *ith t.. :rriui.:;. - W^ na r/ho ncru to
test tha rr.cir.l nuali/icsti-ns f -~rs I thj SS *h&n tl.->

stine- • c - activities of tho Br.«e

- •- &e. ;i-..nt vrfiw.

the >*it i-s: Kits, this att'i eh.nld »J v lifcu to Stf-cit n tan t' cu-
ix-nta.

- .-7 : Aro thero nny qecsti •'* to *» pre ; ur..o'’ t

thia sfii»~ae : -..y th.r IX.fcaso 0 v..cel?

1

C10£S- . A UL/IOJI

•ji 1 .: • •«

o ill-co, 1 h-*. >- u ::n v : t . - ixirti r.a 'oot».cui.

Or-.ritz rr.i ni>veJcy?

A T knot* cr.ly that it vac = . r.-otly factual ant’ a ‘*.r
relati nsM t . Any -i -•*>»« -

ia t «j cli -it.st.

1 in , vr ir-ct oxr-=i -U a ‘e 1 . th-.t > u hat. a-cn

Or. t re . . - . • ^ r

it pMafOo t rtt hu ns n?re ir.qvoitly tvre withaot y ur h .v-

ir.. fiw.n hit?

* A Thrt ia quite ; sei* L. vcavsc i -.:ns n;t -ila-.ya froaont

5605


-t t.’_ fficc


0X1


; il- otty-Int. arsr.

art 1.

!> you kacr anythin. n..ut tb* fact that .-xu^-waky c;n-
c-rn-d hi 5.If with specific 4 hilvs- r -ic'.l qu-sti.ns which were
ceu attcc a*’ repudiated jy tho '-si rarty and that he identified
hiaaelf with tlvse views?

A v c -re ,r .~;iy rufcrric, tc a.-callert "Soliecus." It
toys KOxvn that , ru. -waky had rola 1 a > ; h ' iiseic" circles.

A far -.a to.cw, this was a philcroi-.iical acre .ont, I aclievo,

•

which ri taste;'. ir. En.lnnd and which uiahud to «o-'uce- tho Lavs
,t .ntur- *r tho direct chscrv.-.ti.o f .c uru h-rrclf, vaA I
•xli.ve f "Mis us" it w’s r-.f y thw r.zic t..ct the ■ ". lists"
hr.d t. - rcL-ei.a with tha pcllc; Cath.licit*, jut I can't sy
that tvan, id it ir trw ru 3 •"= 'ccuacd i hav-
ctl it.-. s— "H lie ic* 1 -.

. 7r-.u the i Lit -f-vt-w tho ati . arty and th- SS,

ociu in -ny wy c nc rr.-' 1 vub t.ua ilcs^hicil -latter waa a
Utility.

A f.s; I ■ ..r. that t io .cirifwa wAn e ittod, hut 1
' n' to-. y • u

m. “1^ l'0» Thank y .. "o forth r qu-sti .is.

T. . i; T* Any t : r iaterre -ti n f the witness '.y any
Defense 0 wo-lt Than >uin non*, tha ft-caocati n^ croaa-
^xaslr.-.

cross-.: ii i. .no :

3Y . .'.uHT:

0 r. • Lek, first >r all I > cui: like tc clarify in

•qy . . r t .ri 1

Now in All vict r 1935 J- U XC- a a . yrici-.i in tho I'ain Knee
and Settle.*r.t Office ir. v.rl. .

A In 1935 the n. i >as cA yet a £fcc and Settlement Of-
fic-". It was tho *=t Fuer -t.- lk.ru. ._a-r-lit ik und G.aundhoita-
rllu v f ex which s tr-aa -rr-d a. t a year later tc
t>. .rce d Scttlc.xttt Office.


5 A.ri i- - "-Ij-S^rutty-Int. Er wn
Ccart 1.


^ . vr ir. 19L1 y;u ».ra ajjjxinte' chief physician a

the “.in arc- an Eettlcacnt Office.

“Cnl • ^bysiciaa* is net the c-rr-ct w.rrt. .c use the
u r-’ ":sv.c i.. v’.yaici*-n", jocncse rw was n-t in char- o ef tr.j
•h.le ail i Office hut siaply c.ul£ .ivc certain r^ors ir. .V. --
‘ic -1 e^crt-or.t.

'I oil, there ms a-t -15- -fc>~? —eic'-l -an hi Iwr then
y-U, rr a :

A - 1:. t.-._ ;;'c- Settle -nt Office*

o .1 r ; .u hull” t'r.t ;esii,i r. i.-. vto :‘_*.cc rn'’ Settle-rat jf-
ficc until •• \n?

.. Autvi. . t 'Ut, r a hly.


9 »prlL-¥-JP-5-l-ourns (Tat. £rc*n)

c surt I

i. How thee, will yo acplair. what your positions? in this sc-
ciilad "Sippon-emt? ..as that a departrent of the *ain Race and Settlenent
Office or just whit was the Sipper>-ent? as you explained it here?

A. The Sippen-ftit <*as an office in the Race and Settlement Office,
onu oliice of i*ny and in this Sippen-ant there was a Wain *4odical
Departnent in which the doctors were included altrough this depended
di.for-nt-y fro:- ti-v to ti o.

3, Nov: then, in 19L3 you wore appointed to the a taff of Gr&witz
when the ru-orsani»aUon of the 35 .‘odical Services to. k place; is that
right?

a. No, > d.< -n't hold of'ic.. tat riret «.*.» ir. I?li3. in

1939.

Q. *iw;, rher. >mwitz had tiu re-or.onlsuti cn you wore ap ointed
Chief of tho Personal Staff of tho* arat SS. Th..t was in Septwbor
or first of Soptj.-bor 19h3j is that ri^ht?

A, :»e doctors oi th~ Race Sottlo*-nt Cliico, really, T. bulx>nf,od
lr. tie cun .r of 1939 to the -.ich rhysici'ns.

Liston to question! on the first Soptcrbar 19^3 you baewno
Chi of o tiv. i-oraona.' Stiff o Granit z is Itichcarxt SS, did you not?

Yootarday t 3 t .tud I fjCOivud thu titlo without there -vor
uxi3tln.. ouch an office. .

Ihen you hr- t!»- title "Chief oi the Personal Staff of tho
Cfi ice of lioichsorzt SS5 n
A. Yes.

Q. j:*t, prior to 1 S;.s:ttt±ur 19b3 mat cas your contact with
Grawits? .ihu position did you hold relotiwo OrawiU, if aryt

-W. Before 19U3 since 1939 I was an ordinary arbor of Urawits' staff,
not havlr-i any Spec! - tlon in t-he TO :.s I nod b-cn transferred pri-
narily to werh in the Race and Sottloaaxt Office end I was si ply used
to do small .jobs t^c-us- I was p»-«s nt at Grawits' office for :ours at

5cl2


i tij Vi.


? (Int. 3rcsro;

Court I

4 , Itaw, if I undorstead it correctly then you hold that ainor
position under Grawits fro about 1939 until th-_ «.nc; is that right?

A. IuB| that*8 true,

„ And you t.ll -is that position was one in which you handled
.incr testa r 3?aci.d. assigr. ..ntsj 5 that right?

A* Ycs«

„ ivro or loss a general handym an when n-vded?

A. !Io, that's goinj to© far boeocsv I wasn't always th^ro.

Q, ..ell, non then, tr- first ti a ycu received th- titlw was
in the ro-organi-ticn cn 1 Sc >t- >i-r If; 3; in that right?

a, Yus.

Jail now, after you raceivud tha till- ~ Chi ,f of tho
Personal fit-uT 'id y<> have -r.., dutl-s?

A. I wasn't Ci.i.-f of thu Personal Staff out Chief of the
Personal Qificu and a titl-r but as t said yesterday quit- explioitiy
drawits stated that ho was given* s.ocific responsibilities but in
A: thins wi ul. re - *• v it had b. -n.

v*. ..ell, thon What did yen co:-si or y ure Jf un er QriWltsf Did
you considar jourself ■: isa-.i; r bey or a lotWr-cirri-r like Rudclf
Sr-'.nut ,r first an a' visor or jus? rh ’dd you consider yoursolf?

iw. If . >u want uc c U it t .t, - raally was a m-ssongcr boy
for Growit* boc-uso . r nd a’’ c. .:•/ cUviU.s carried out

in tho Roco Sottla Iain Glfico*

rottgr high r-;j: wh-n it's an Si (fcurfuohror.

A. I h /- .ire sta . tilt V 'J* "-3 connected with V?
activities as a jx-r doctor in tv. and S-ttl-r-.nt Off lea and
tr.at you c ulr draw ar. :.durti;r.3 about ny activities olaewhar^f ar
exauplo by the ta-ic.is joysicioa.

... ..ell now, did j . t r. • atoy ; nnoctii n wfc itsoavtr with Iaipslg?

Mow, you hr.vo heard her. relating to institutions at r-iizi" or 3too

such thing? "ow, did yea have ar - action r oflnt ct with on

*13


9 .vpril-.:-JP-5-3-ourns (Ir-t. Brown)

°oort I

Ins-I-'.it ■ n in Leipzig?

I knew only of one, net two institutions in Leipzig. That
■is the r-search labor tor;- of rrof-ssor Von Kennel, tho I knew.

... Did « cu have any contact with that experimental laboratory
of rref. Von Konnol?

I Jena • * Von K*. o', and I also re enbor that onco I provided

r.L -1th a secretary, a specific socratcry *h? was elsewhere employed
at tho tine by the Plannir.-; office and I went t; the offico wfcoro
sho was o pluy-d ana cado olforte to got Prof. Von Kennel#

Did ; h.-vre ny capacity uhats sv#r in th'.s Instituto at

Leipzig?

•k \ln

€ * •

Q. ,f.ll n , y ur contact pri -r t-: 1913,that is, 1 Su pie bur 191*3
with tho Roichsorz*. ra»lts wasn't a close contact. Is that tho
inpjxssicn you wish to convoy?

Too.

Q. -..-oil, hew do you account for tho fact, doctor, in Docunont
UC-321 rich is cn 116 of ?r section's Document Book — this
io a docununt whoroin tescher .v/ Ira-ltz w-r- having their discussion
c neomlng frogling and whoroin j n interrupted cr you w u ro qxoUxl
hero as stating an pa:,- 116* ■Soil, I already had to *k Stondarton-
fuohr-r Siovors several tirns t. c ■ • . t receive information, In
-run all radical setters wind up with us any • :-y." Now,
isn't that cor.voyin, tho thought you -rfora closwly fennuctod with nil of
the activities :f Irr.aitz* office?

A. This text is Raaefaer* text. In ether w. rds, by no neons a

dqctrxmt ns t what was discuss-' tburo and -trover the rest *>f tho

letter show this as a very cno-aidod coloration; I think a very opo-

ciflc purpose, naroly, to achieve, Certain results with tho Ruichsfuohrer

SS. I .stqr that I did net ale. that statement in that fom but Haschor

conducts d hiaself in this o p-.ri.-nt soat peculiarly and although ho

561*


9 ..-*il-lWJr-5-ii-8urns (lot. Brown)

C. 3U rt I

tulongwi to tho General S3 he disputed tho fact that bo was subordinate
tc the Raich Physician, Therefore, I pointed cut our situation in
t£ w Sip;x.D-%nt, that wo tco wore subordinate to the P-ich Physician
and as necessary consoquonccd after all nedical natters did have to go
through curtain channels and here as the Staff Physician of the Race
Sottlttiunt Office I also, outsido cf Orowitz* Office said something
and namely, that Silvers could not rx>t ask so to ectre tc htv in an
official capacity} that I said yesterday* that argument is a distorted
representation which isnot true at least in this s-nso nor can 1 ever
r«j,r.o. bor haring discussod anything with Sievors pr-vi usly.

«. Now, you wore in this gathering as stated further in this
document — I reckon that is the cootin ; . with Raschor and Grnwitz and
yeursolf — you wore prosont?

I was called in later#

Q. .*hcn was that meting?

a# Tho mooting to.k placo at tho boginning cf 19li3, if 1 recall
correctly#

Q. January m3?

Yoo.

e# Kjw, you Stated or. direct oxniimti n that you had visited
Dachau trice; that is in 1?3; and 19ixl?

Yes, that's truo,

tfh accompanied you r. y ur 1935 visit t Dachau?

I cannot say.

Q# /as Grawitz with y.u?

I didn't knew Qrawitz at that tire and had nothing to do
with him. That happonad *ion I was e onncctod ii tfa tho Race Settlement
Office, that visit.

2, No", was Qrewitz with y ■- i' tho 19hl visit?

Ho, ondor no circurhtancos.

3. Did you soy on direct that CrctEitz was with y.-u when you visited

5a5


? ..pril-tt-JF-S-S-Curns (Int. Srcwr.)

Court I

Dachau in 19U1?

a. No, I did not s=y that,

-a. Shoo ia ust b. interpretation — ysur Hcn.r, I will have tc
chocU that. Lot's 30 on to t.-.c sulfa usperi-ents, doctor. How, you
attended the : odied Confororcu ir. Berlin ir. 19L3 *hon Gebhardt and
Fischer ro; rtod :n the results of tho sulfanilioddc -xpori-aunts,
did yji n t?

% Yea. I hoard t'n-.t report.

3. .tore , u .a’olo toruco tain fr. 1 thet report that concentration

c.p ircuatos vroro user ir. those -ntc?

No, that could not bo 3 .-n un -r any eireur. t*ncc as I ro m-
bor th« th.n?*.

4. , v, didn't Oobhar ’t to 1 y u that c ul- b- soon readily

that the; exporiaontou on c ncontration c up inmates r F-cplo coi.-.wi;nod
to death?

„s far ns 1 rone.fcor What r. Oobhardt say was that tho
ojq.oriivjntai aubjocts w.r. persons c .r/ionnsd to c’ooth but ho didn't
: iy thoj 1 jro ccncontrati c •


9 April L7-: W.TD-6-l-Gcrs 5 (lnt« Brown)
Court ?to. 1


q you ir. fact knsx before this seating that these experi-
ants sere being conducted at the Concentration Can? Ravensbrueck,
didn't you?

A Ho.

Q Are you sure, doctor?

« Jfo. I knew nothing about that.

Q reU, now, to your knowledge, did Crawiti - pardon no,
strike that - to you knowledge, did Gebhardt over:,' subnit roports to
Grawitz concerning his experiments at Ravensbrueck?

A Professor Gebhardt himself said that he sont reports but
I wouldn't know that particularly.

Q You never saw arything in the nature of preliminary roports
originating from Professor C-ebhardt co no or nine sulfanilamide experi-
sonta at Ravcnabreock?

I cannot rocall havin,; seen anything in this connection.

q -.foil, suppose Gebhardt sent a preliminary report to Grat.itz
concerning experiments with gas gangreno carried out on inmates of
P.avonsbruoek Concentration Crap, would you have boon in a position to
see it?

L 'lo, by no means.

q And you never saw such a roport?

A I cannot rocall anything of that sort.

q Lot us establish a tino element, doctor. Assume Grailtz re¬
ceived a preliminary report from Gebhardt in Juno 19U2 - would you have
seen that roport then?

A '.to, by no means. There was no reason rfy I should,

q yould you have seen such a roport if he had received it in

July?

A The time doesn't raka any difference.

q rfauld you have seer, such a rop<rt in August?

A I just said that tine doesn't rake any difference here. As a

natter cf policy such things wouldn't go to me. Occasionally I saw some

5617


9 April l*?-M-ATD-6--2-£ross (Int. Brown)

Court No. 1

details but rot in context and I couldn't tell you now.

Q That was your rank in August 19!^?

A In August 191*2 I believe I ras Oborstuimsbannfuohror.

Q Oborsturrbannfuehrer, is that right? Well, I will shot; you
the report, ffector, the .preliminary report or such. I want you to
identify the original. I Just rocsivod it from Berlin this noming. I
haven't had an opportunity to prepare it. I would like to present thl3
to the witness for identification of his signature. Defense counsel ray
look at it. I will offer it formally at a later date.

Is that your signature. Dr. Pcpondiek?

A Yes.

~i -Darn to the second page of that document - Just tho second
page, rhat is tho subject, Just tho subject - tho heading at tho top -
tho subject of tho report?

A "Interim Report on tho Clinical Sxpcrincnts at On vensbruoek
Concentration Canp by orders of tho "cions fuohror-SS". On the 20 th of

7-1*2 -

1 That i3 enough, 'ould you kindly give that document to tho
dofenso counsol, ploa 3 e?

A ! 3 ow, doctor, in your position as Chiof, or as what you call
Vara f-ing Physician in tho Mein race and Settlement Offico —

THE PRESIDENT t Counsel, do you dosiro this docunent markod with
an idontification number, having been introduced?

!R. HARDY I was going to wait until such a tine as dofenso
counsel finished porusing tho document, your Honor.

EXPIRATION COinWJED 21 IS. c..?IT£t

q Car. 70 U toll tho Tribunal what tho negative racial policy

A

was?

A The nogativc racial population policy concerned all exter¬
mination assures in contradistinction to the positive racial population
to tho positive racial population policy which wa 3 to bo promoted by

5618


Dr. Lora


9 April U7-^ W.HV-6-3-Groes (Int. Brown)

Court So. 1

'l 'Tell, new ’fhat was this negative racial policy - what was
the theory behind it?

k Lena, for instance, called sterilization which becana law
in the Third Reich as negative population policy and ho believed that
no final conclusive rosult could be achieved.

n. In other fords, negative racial policy was that policy
w herei n anyone who did rot noet requirements as pore Aryans would bo
exterminated?

A Theso natters wore completely outsido my sphere. At any rato
negative population policy at the hi-b school was not something that
had to do with extermination at least not the way wo studied it in
college. It was a ratter that concemod the rolation between the
identity of the German raco and other pooplo. In othor words, apocifio
groups or people having off springs or having one child laS3 than
another ijroup of porsons, then this would docroaso the birth rato.

Q •'ell, was this negative racial policy and positivo racial
policy of concern to th Race and Sottlcront Officof That was one of
your problems, rasit not?

A ?fo.

P. Itwasr.H?

a foil, yon, 30 far as the positivo population policy played
a role bocause it was Important to the SC Bffbora to have more children
than other pooplo but actually that didr.U irork out that way and tho
SS didn’t sake any distinction.

fj "'ell, if it -rasn’t of interest to the J'ain Raco and Sottlo-
-cr.t Office why did you concern ycursolf with sterilization?

A Ito?

0

Q Tee, you.

« I novor knew I concerned ryaelf with that. I did not belong
to an;- faoriditary health court and that was tho department that was

561S


concemod with sterilization.


9 April l7- , W,TD-6-i-Grcss (Int. Broun)

Court :;o* 1

q Assume in 191*1 - let's assume this for a nomant 1 that you
did concern yourself with sterilization in 19U1. !few, would you have
concerned yourself with sterilization in your capacity as physician
In tto Jbin Raoo and Settlement Office or in your capacity as tho nan
,vho took caro of special assignments of odd Jobs for Dr. Grawitz.

Suppose the situation over arose wherein you would hive to concern
yourself with sterilization, would it arise out of ycur Job as phy¬
sician in tho Ifcin Race and Settlement Office or a3 position of sub¬
ordinate to Grawitz - in which capacity?

A Questions of this sort night have represented no through -

q )kn, you teati fled in tircot oxrsdnation that you only know
about logal sterilization, ia that right?

A Yco*

q 7011, now lot's look at Document Book HD VI, docuaont HD
2 U , Exhibit 63, found on -. ago 51 of the English, your Itonor. If
difenao counsel has tho Goman copy I would approoi-ato it if ho would
subnit that to tha witness for tho purpeso of this examination. That
is *D-21liundor Qauborg'a Section, Sterilization Section, Document 3ook

VI.

Now, the date of this lottor?

A 20 thy 19U1.

q That *3 right, "oil, now, 'doctor, it says hero - Reference
Report to Roichsf l ihroivSS 27 May 19la. H Do you know anything about
that report that -.fas snio to Rcichsfuohrer-SS 27 !hy l?lil?

A I know that fiaalo sterilization was to bo treated according
to this yi-aubar:' method and I also know tho nano but I do not knew
thi3 letter. I know nothing of tho report to tho Roichsfuuhror. If I
knew anything it is only concerned with the treatment of female* sterili¬
sation.

q tToll, sot did you concern yourself with the treatment of

fir.ale storilisation at this tine hero 19-jl, in ".ay, Jan., or July?

. 5620


9 April L7-?W.7>6-5-Gros3 (Int. =ro*r.)
Court !*o» 1


A Ho? No. I was interostod in this as a doctor in the
Sippon-ant*.

q Than you wouldn't have any knowledgo that they wero preparing
to perforn troatnonts, upon wonen, to perfOro expertisents on ronon
in conneotion with Klaubcrg'3 aethodf

A I know nothing about sterilisation.

0. ’tothing about it doctor? Lot's aco if ro can refresh your
nenory.a little. It night bo a good tina to break, your Honor. So can
introduce this ctocuasnt after tho rocoss.

THE FHZSDSWT* Tho Tribunal rill bo in rocess.


5621


9 ^jril-E -3-1-i^chan-Int. --- l~r
Court :fj« 1.

; .. S J-L: Tho Tribunal is r._ain in session.

H. ._J3Y: ,.t his fci-ic, Your Honor, I should like to nark
f ri i .i tho P cu.-x:.t cr. r'lich t ~ defendant P'-pjcr.dick

ture. . da s c D cnuant, which contains a
c si no ' y tho-tteichsnrts SS Dr. Orawit*, addressee

t t'.u .u.ir -.SiUOiXvr SS. Hi .0,r, iv.’wrrir to an vnclosu*: copy
f n r_. rt y Guhhardt r. txy.ri . ts -t nave as. ruck, a:*' 1
tr.c co y f thi :Tolinlntry r> r *.rt y O- ler t cxperi'xnte at
il-.vuna ruck is attached there*.--. i is la D cuj~nt SS 2/35 and
. - irkud .'-r identificati .. 5* • - -- Sxhinit Ko. • 73»

Tiiir is the ..ly c>y wc have of 1 c.Y or H n.r and whon

Cwssod we will th«r. si it it forcally.

Z i si .. I: C uncol, t is •-*- . 1639.

R. . or* That is tho n-at no, I ct , Tear \ -
. r. This is t:.. no that was so dttof to tho dofoncant f r
i'otiti;ictci /. of hia si nature, of v.dcl: t o c urt -s rut ;»*>«.
* c .-y.

, uo uill turn t, D:cu. i.t <>-l>39, t,.ich is • ffcroc'. for

leontificati n as FrtsoCttti n tfiCd it .. L'‘h, icr.

. : r. ixusi' - .t, I - - - t tho suVoiasi n f

Uda act -:■> 50-1639, feCouso It \v‘ sly canrot x wvt it

an id '.e tee r i. tr the c nier.t: f . - -irst . v _, nrrelj a
list f physicians* In -

liur c.tc than tha letter itself, ‘r:-. V t tho Riichsf alrur
Sc-s t ie l_tt-ir tw thu ficic.’.siuciir^r St ears t -t 'ate ;f e Juno
17al, . r t. - c -call-”! u.wx, r:ich V s n. t -1 n to it,

-eCti’Do I itr c nt.nts, '.e rs . > u i 29 ny 1?U; t -rc-
f re, the lict f the physicians •••* ro t: -rf.rr tnu tr-".txft
r- u- n’ sU-rilisati n rust nnvo -vdi lesoj • wov.r, in no .cnj
can t.x l.ttur t- the Eelchsf'ichrer SS li -l_r, .ftich is attached
as an annex, •- in any way ccnr.eci-' with the -irst ictt_r, ”iich
v.t.s si rt ! -adick.


5622


..rrii- *>5-2- wcluia-Int.

2 'rt . 1.

i. 'i_'u3T» Y-ur Hen r, cr. t-cuc-nts that I _a-nti.n h.rc
iru i*-i- tiiw an&a d.cu-ent r.u.a._r, _,vi_usly ^cause in t..o oor-
1 .. D.cur_nt Center t:.-> were - .uad a wt.~r; h.wcvor, it is true

th-t — if '.tv-: 2> .ay 19iil and ai-t:„r is dated U Jur._ l>iilj

h-v_v..r, n t or:, s- tc ffor tha "ji lish and trw Gcra-n
c ..ics -s .w .irst d.cuaer.t, I will take u? each no of then
c_.aratvl". a. is J in. t. the ether Jocausu they rccoivud
tha s ■ *! c-. ...a nuobor in B^rlir., to-y arc baling with the

snix se j.O -nd I 8ui.lt then u Yevr H iwr 1 -r perusal .ocr.uso

• - 1 ■ ro *- °y

cause f .r . -c;i. r • " - "-at n -ay .-'’rt.

7 n ; ^,1 v. 1: C ur.Sul, . u !- . t c.: -.at that thosa tw
•..c.-ats, an o'rin_ t/.u .«M-r rQ-1;39, "r. attachui dici.-
isjnts?

i.c . .;ts.

' -••• - of > u oonton

L.iTft T.ioy -rv e^.ara*. ett r.W e.vi Uflly, Sc urn' m
tliu sa ' 1-r 1:. 41'. 1-r'o lie-.

. 5T2WT: But then f ocuijac tho daplicatl n f the
:IC-1'39 i3 ii Tact an err r.

. T-TOEt e d.n't claln it »ns an ,rr r, Y ur H-nor,
r. ...' Qtamta ar 'cali • tho SUO subject, ar..‘

they ‘re 1 -t'.-p as nu ctsvnt, . o ’ t\-* vlll *xj fully -cx-
laiiw' ..•'•-r. ,-r-cjr.co-'.

f 2 .-ir:T: r., t a-; -i- - c acral nrte£

1 r i Vjxtificati :i?

* .eOT* That is ri .t, Y x : r.

OB. 03 - And than in trial * s , : oJiculd like t- -sk #iu-.t
the ori inrl f the see n D.cwa-ttt , su -itt-c. in r*-r t< as¬
certain si .' it as thi irst C.cu ,r.t i as si no >y t R-n-


icr: aiid in via- cas*. f tlie ?.c cun_.it --.-re is no si luituro
.. .jUTir. Too si_.ir.turo is "r. Orai.its n the ri inl,


9 ..-ril- -.ohm-Int. I'/Lr

C.urt . X.

; or .‘Lair.

I • J . - ^.D- T: Thcs- d-Ctti-r.ts should ~ar iosn-

tliicr.ti a -re; I s-.j r.c c-mv.ction tjv-r..

:E. ".JBZi Ta-r. I will fcavu to ivo t hta r iffcrcr.t 0 r.uri-
’.crs “lac, Y or n r. The jr.a«-cutiv,n .ni'. -s to .ut tnci: ir. as
nc DcC'^i-nt.

, . They arc cot c r jetoi, t »oj wo t sue

CUT*—. •

" .. ft 2 T : It ie tty ..it.i r. tint this is not r-r'-ise-.,!-,
thos- t— jet* ..its fciv, n.-thin. -.11 tr . 1 th iv: anctlur,
they p-c. : L.U>3) s. r rxtv.

.. . : Then I 1 «ill 6 B ... tho KO-1639 ai

-r - c it ;:0-l639-.\. Dtcu. , ;t 1639 *.111 .car ,.r~a..cuti.?i
.xhi.it l*7h I r i-icntificati'r. .er .s.t, •; *.) cvn^nt ;.0-l33>-..,

rr secu. i - .Ixu it i.75 f r i \jnU - ti n.

I j,.m c'io*’ u. take up tl- cu- it .’0-1639, and if Your
H .» r hr# 1 . at tli*. rl in-.l o; u.:t, I s.i.ulc like to ou -
.nit i- oo t a. It .job.

Dr. : ick, rill ... - - o letter a pa «

51 i ) cu-ut 2 .k 6, wine.; is 3- 1911, which ras Dc-

eu\4.t .'0-21-:, referr.'* t *. r-,.n t. - _ .c is's fuehrer S6 -<j
27 . 1 Mj v t.-is D cu ...t C-.'.r'39 vhich Is x-ir. . ffor~d for

iautii .*.&'/• i .. “t xr secuticr. -e-J;’ ie bVi is -.ted 29 "ny 191.1 r.-v’
th; r_fv.r c. 1 -.

n 1*1 Is C utffvl, your D rc ,..t 1.0-1639 it ••--.tod !i

. .. 'V: lour Hen r, I n for : cu -r.t fO-163?, "Mob

is tl'« iret -cwunt, it is ’*sU- 2; r 191:1, tho th. r i% at-sT
U J-’-J 1 1 r>*.rK^- th~i *0-- 3

f 7: Jun. t«i -C 163?--.?

. Ji*: Yes, Y.or H-n-r, nhlch is .r s-cutim Uxl»i it
. 175 for identification. »: • , t is 1-tt.r *at.; 2? 15'«1,


9 ril-' jeehaa-Iot. R=l_r

: urt :.c. i.

tl - r. 'u-^nco 13 'Oral Riy.rt ^-idwfuahi ir SS r. 27 y 191:1'
<*.vic'is; -hror: .»t a c nToroncc ta 27th Ay 19hl in t'lA
4 rcjs^nc. : • v-rr jt iess.r Clau* -r , c--ncumln_, his n-n a-th 1 :f
suiriliza'-l . f infcrirr r .;-n without an o>raticn, n rc ret-
. 1 . ..isvr. jrvta:. lin. has cccurco:

' r . . : real, Cl* -r. requires t'\a \nmn

f rrJ.ri - ' : r this iurj^Sw to ~ n» .is >r. ital ii» Xts.r.i.,e-
: 4 -x.vtw r i.i v. vicinity, as the :.th. ' is still -i:». tv rl;--'.
at, as -v :i- • .r s a . .n oli n l cr .1 apparatus, just
prccur -• , e jk mot t tUcxo,

R OT i : - --r.

“Tix itu-r 'ns a sin Own ■nocussec*. 1. *11 'ctails > ith
; r . :i .. it ivoul: , :'.cr ... .roviilir., eircua-

otar.c.s, tlu c-rryin ut wf c.:w -rl ..:vrl v.rie ir. nivcno-
ru-ci. ir •- i q-.-vCti.n.

ki.i int- \cc unt t;w -x r i-*nt si luficinco which such
a xth v *.:1 ..r.vc f r i .— .r.iv- , i,.vlr.tica . alley an'. it in¬
sults t w:.. ; t- a. f in,ortrjtco u outsort tbo jotajlishv-nt

t k.th i! wit.. *il oanaj bncroJ r., I »; t c-.-. .-it

L, . ■.

-r rur.arc. institute ir. r nr. und “w.d rhu.ttu a.i v attach
it t. r. r c i-xntriti r. , r - t 10 ..rr ns.

fir .n w'i that y u c .t.-.t i - i. v.'ti rite rx t 'Accuse
tho atts.r rc. -.r i.: ur a- .t; > rv r^nfucluvr ; hi .an:’
c*5 5ri a:!ofuc'.m.r ulu-chs."

The oi,.nati r\i w,or« t ,.r. nt "Or.a^its."


9 ^rril-^-OJG-9-l-Pu^ty-Int. Rcolcr
Court :;c. 1


4 I lew, Doctor, do you know anything about these matters?

n I could only conclude therefree that we are here concerned
with t.c entirely different fields Ciauberg dealt with, one of the
fields regarding eruption of sterility itself, and cn<$ regarding the
treatment of sterility, t only knot scoething cf the treatment of
women already sterile-.

C. i.ell, then, as a result of this research work of Ciauberg,
he established a method therein ether doctors performed sterilizations.
Is that a clear understanding cf the situation?

„ If I see correctly, the data and the physicians that are to
perform the treatment end th« begi.ming cf the experiments do not
tolly. Sven if this was correct, the result cf these experiments hr.d
y ;t tc be expected, but "lrocdy at thet tine in the Spring cf 19*»3 the
physicians \'clf, Schultz rnd nncthor two had been mentioned to no
regarding their treatment of ote-rilc SS wxsen. These must bo two
distinctly separate erttors.

Q ..ell, now it status hero In the fourth paragraph of tho letters

"Inking into account the exorbitant significance which such n
method would have for a neg-tive population policy and it results
therefrr-.," >nd so forth. !,‘c», then, dc you underst-nd th-t to uoan
that the purpose of this experimentation was in order to apply a
sterilization aethed tc complete -nd fcllcw up the ncg-biV'-' population
P-Ucy?

,» i don't knew nhr.t this expression "negative population policy"
is supposed tc mean.

Q It is very simple, isn't it. Doctor, that if th-y have persons

thrt they consider tc be in the class that is set forth in the negative

racial policy or negative population policy thrt they could »tell

sterilise those people mid thereby use then os slave laborers or use

then for work cf any description and have r>c ferr thrt ether persons

fitting into the category would b. born to sale parsons? Isn't that

very simple? Isn't that cn~ of the purposes of the negative racial

5c26


9 April-i3-3JG-9-2-Putty (Int. F^al-r)
Court So. 1


or population pcUcy? That i«, sterilise tier.?

«. No. ..ft-r reading that letter I would hove only considered
it rs r. sterilisation progrwa for these people who according tc the
1 -w would have to be sterilized in any ease.

r Then the nly kncvl«Jgo you have of this is the legal phr.se
of -tcr‘.liz-.ticn? That is, ell theso cricii.’-l rets wore known ail
-round you, yet Pcppendick only heard cf the legal phase of the
sterilisation, is th:t it?

.. ;.Vether ail this ent cn -round _e 1 don't knew. A t any rato,
cs c physician cf the .etcc end Settlement jdn Office, I was concerned
with the tr-ataent of sterile SS wcaen using Clauborg's cs wen as
ether physicians* nothods who had a good roputati-n in the Raich.

Q i-r.j you never hoard that Claufccrg was using concentration camp
innatoa to wxp.riaent so as to fin. a better a.thcd for storilisatien?

/. No, and if I heard that; ev-r. if he h:d worked in i; concen¬
tration c\ap, 1 could only hrve assumed thot :.c ore hero cor.cornod
with sirll-.r natters, nenoly, the tro-.tcent cf wccen whe wore already
st.rile.

Q 1.01, new, did ycu eVtr talk tc Graaits .-bout any of theso
natters if fenininu sterility?

Yes, I probably rpoko about finale sterility tc him. It is
“.uie. pcosiblo that wo discussod 1 sterility.

Q '.on. then, during the course of the discu33irn cf the treat-
aont of f eagle sterility, did ycu ever discuss the possibility of
experinenting along those lines in cn*.cr to find r. xrc ef.icient
and effective way to rain y ur go - 1 ?

„ tl r. effective way? Dc y. u .oe\n for th. tror.tncnt of sterility?

Q The treatment, 70 s.

I can't rjauobcr.

Q '..ell, new, we have this document >£-1639-.. ••hieh is offered
for identification. New this is a letter :*ro= ycu tc 3S-Siurabcnn-
fuehrer "r. Brshdt dotoi Z, June 1941. h'cw this is Deevsaont NO-1639-*-


9 :.pril-lHJJ3-9->-rutty (Int. .-nlcr)

Court So. 1

0

„hich is cff.red for identification 's Prosecution Exhibit No. 475:
"Dear Cenrod Brandtl

"By crier of 5S-.>rig-dcfuchrcr Dr. Grawitz I enclose herewith the list
cf :*ysiciwxs who -.re prep-rod to perform tho trectnent of sterility
ns ruqueftod by hoichsfuchrcr-SS.

Hull Hitlerl"

end y< ur sifiiv turo. That is’ your signature, isn't it?

*. Yes.

C ’..ell, new, then you nair.tnin that this list wo do net havo
was attached horetc end had nc connections nh'tsofevcr with the
progrra for cx?urinent*-.ticn?

„ Yes, I nr int'in thr.t. Yes. Those ore th.- four physicians who
»cr. supposed tc treat sterile wer.cn.

Dn. EOSKNt 'Jr. Trosident, If I rwy interrupt, it is an error
thet vo haven't r.ct this list of physicians. Thu Prcsocutlon itself
subedttod tnis list cs Document X-214, on pr. 3 c 40 of Document Bock
Ho. 6. Thu list is available. However, it was not sufcoitted in
connection with these documents sincu those twe natters do not fit
togethor. Page 4o of tho Document Beck 6. That is the G.,roan
Document Book.

]&. H.J3Y: I--fie 51, Dc cun ait Beck No. 6, Your Kcncr.


9 April 15A? -H-lC-i-?Er- Ualoy (Int. Hauler)
Court So. 1


q. Dr. Poppenrtlck, referring again to the letter which you have
bufore you which bears your signature end is dated L June 1941 which
states that you onclose herewith a list of physicians who are prepared
to perfam the treatment of sterility as requested by the Reichs Fuehrer
3 S; is the list of physicians you enclose thereto Document lO 21e
ahich is Prosecution Zxhibit Tk>. icB found in Docusunt Book 6, signed by
Grawitz?

A. No.

Q. That is i>ot the sane list you enclos-d or attached?

A. Tl*-y are tho srea physicians, tut it ic not the annex to th t
docuocnt. 1 noto it bears tbs designation "secret" or "top secret."

I kr.ow ;»thing .bout that. It cannot possibly bo tho annex to that letter,
but I ca sure they arc the sar.« plyciciens. It says here "Treatment of
Sterility", not tho bringing about of sterility, but the troataont of
people already Sterile. It could only iv-vu been those four physicians,
bvcauai I ao t; Iwad physician nust have knc*n exactly who it was.

Q. Non, when you enclosed the list what list did you cncloso with this
cover lutt.r, a lint you had composed or a list Grawitz corposed?

A. The list coisos froo Grawitz.

q. And you j»y tho physicians nftaod there on are tho same four physicians
as noacd in Document MD-21A?

A. I don't knew tho docua.nt.

Q. Don't you hQVfi Prosecution Document No. 6 before you?

A. Yes, those are the physicians.

Q. Then you exclude tlx. possibility that when Grawitz ordor-d you.
Doctor, to a li.-.t of the physicians who are prepared to porfom tho
treatment of sUri*ity to Stur.cbennfuchrer Dr. Brandt, thr.t the attachment
thereto was Document 1XT-21A, you exclude th t possibility?

A. Yes, tho cites arc entirely Afferent, It is already on the 30t.u
of :;sy Uu t Orawits r-ported tl> s- physicians to HLanlor. I think that
sene how this list get lost. Ho ray hav. asked =- or.ee nore to send tho
list to Brandt, because ben; there is achtion made of 3 telephone
conversation with Gr wits eo the 4th of June. I don't know exactly what

5b29


9 April 1947 -JUl3-2-.=*LP- Ualoy (Int. R . -mnUr )
Court 1


the situ- tion was.

Suppose this document fcC-214 did not contain therein as a reference!
the report to Reich Fuehrer SS on 27 Uay 1941, would you then bo inclinod
to tr.irJc that this was tU list attached to the Document Ko. ND 1639-A?

n . If wo aro merely concerned with the nines of the physicians then
I would be of th. opinion that it belonged to the first document, but I
know nothing 'bout any report to tno Reich Fuehrer SS. This must hrve
been a personal fitter of Grcwitz, and I don't knew why this list is
designated "too secret" becauso here wo :r- only concerned with the
tree toent of sterility.

Q. Of course in tho origin: 1 the "tep s-c.-ot" is handwritten, not
typewri -ton; it obviously acy hev- bcon put or. there scr.o other dnto.

Non, Doctor, did the list you submitted with your cover letter contain tho
saso four nerxe as contained in Docuccnt 215, is that right?

A. '.oil, I only know those nraus in that connection. I don't know
other nr bus.

C. New, tho ante of Docuaont NO-214 is 30 Ifiy 1941, and the date of
7 »ur cover lottor is 4 Juno 1941; they ere rather coincidental, aren't

they?

«. I already raid that 1 assuao that this letter o. Grawitz dated
the 30 11 *. y was oit her still enroute, which is quite probable considering
the short differonco of tine, or th t this Utter had boon lost. At any rate
1 must 'a.some that this letter was not available arri the Reich Fuehrer
wanted these names; thereupon Gr-witz telephoned ae in the !lain Settlement
Office too-rwl the list of these physicians once more to Brandt. Ho
probably said that Brandt had gotten in contact with him, and tha F.cich
Fuehrer wanted the :rnos of tb-so physicians w to could rdvise the. SS
families and troat thus.

*

Q. Alright, Doctor, will ;,\>u return thosj documents ploasc?

JlTTzC SSatlfti: Just a coojr.t, iir. Hardy.

3Y JUDGE SEffiUNG:

I

Q. Witness, in tho letter, ?ros_cution Exhibit 475 for identification
only, which you .uivo identified .-s your letter, tr.ure appears in the. upper

*30 . ... L


9 April 194? ‘-tt-HW-KF- Haley (Int. Baealfir)

Court Ho. 1

1_! |r-cd corner tho lot tore rid figures D A2 IV", then the figures "102-
_i;“ what significance do those nu»cr3 have, ccn you scy?

A. According to r\y kncwlodgu this probably was the entry in the so-
c-.ll-d lutcor diary •. r.-re the outgoing letters were entered daily. On
the basic of the docummta which I have seer, here I have concluded that
t; w roaaD nusoral refers to the volusu of th t letter diary, because tho
lett-rs dated 1941 bear ft loner nuabor t han those of the years 1943 '-nd
. Th. s-cor.d number is probably th- current number oontair.ud in that
voluaj, and the third fig-ire obviously moans the yurr.

A. You are of the opinion then thr.t that is a symbol or offico codo
number of SCO; kind used in your office to indicate outgoing sail, is that
corr-ct?

It obviously do-s rot refer to ny particular field of work. Theso
figures r l’er to the anil diaries where every letter was ontor-d. That
was don- by tto eicrotnry, 'nd quite irrespective of what field tho
l tters concerned.

Q. That was dor.o by the secretary in your office?

«. Yes.

Q. You ar- quito oure of that?

n. YeO.

Q. ..ill you pie' sw refer to Docunot No 217. as it appears in tho 2ngLish
Document Bock No. 6, nt pa go 51, and I boliev*. it appears in the Gorman
docvrxnt book r.t p je 48, rd you will note in the upper left hand cornor
of this letter, ..hich is signed by Granite, ard ahlch you say you did
ivit Send with the cmr letter ID-1639A; and there appears tncru the
symbols Hoaan IV, and then a dash'rd Kirbic 102-41, which is precisely
t.e sane cede nu-jb.r s is on your cover L-tt-r ID. 1639A; according to
your previous statecr-nt then that cede acsigr.aticn would indicate th*t this
was a letter tlr.t cruac iron year or.ice also, is th-t true?

Both letters .lure written by Grawitz's secretary and were entered
by her La tho daily diary. I conclude from that that it aist have been
=s I described it before, the fir ft letter of Grwitz must hve bc.n lost,

5631


9 April -=-li>-4-??_?- »£2iojr (Int facnlcr)
Court ;io. 1


r.c that g telephone conversation follow.d and thft that list had to fco .

gotten once core. Tho names wore tha sane and I probably cospiled these

n-aua once sore, end the secretary entered this list under the sane

figures, because she oust h'vc assumed that the first letter hadn't

rrived and had gotten lost. Tfc't is the only caplanation. At any rate

♦ _

both letters Went to the Secretary of Grawitz office. I only know of ono
letter though.

Q. hull, Witness, did you dictate the letter l». 1639-A, Prosecution
identification 475, which you signed?

A. I have only Docu.-v.nt No N0-16S3*


5632


9 April--M-GJ-11-1-Burns(in*.. Racier)-
C.'urt 1

JUDGE 3Z5RUG: Is that the letter that ucu signed 1639-A?

I can no lnger 3ay that. It's quit- p ssible that this letter
vr.3 .Titter, by the secretary pc re : anally as Grawitz had instructed her
• s *ct a list fr a cc. Ha.' I dictated the letter nysclf I prrbably would
hav- ictit-J it all at onco. Therefore, the physicians woulu already
oppoer in the text af the letter.

JUDGE S-.5r.I..'G: .Veil, ycu hr... a secretary, di you net, witness?

AX , nc, that was Grawitz secretary.

JUIXE SEBaiHS: leu ha. n: secretary tr wh.n ycu could lictatc a
letter if ycu wanted t:?

A I:.' Grawitz's ffic« I hr a clerk at ny disposal, a taalu clerk,
wli was ronlly working rith 1chief xntlst. Grawitz Secrotary gono-
r-lly rcjucte it. w rk fer ce. I had iifficultics with her because she
-.lvriys even after 19L3 stated that she was nly at Grawitz personal dia-
sal and that she was n t ,:in tc writ, any letters fer nc. Occa-
sl.nelly, howevar, I had t write sic-, letters cencornin*: SS physicians
an:’ I always had difficulties and I always had to lock ar und for a ty¬
pist for a h-ur o could write these letters.

JUDGE SEBRIJUt In this daily liary, as y u call it, >r list of
the lwtt^rs that we wore cent .ut.- wore letters which y u ’ictatod
c ntainod ir. the sane diary as lcturs dictate-I by Grawitz were listed?

» i\s, all cf the letters wnct through* that diary — all of ;.tho
letters that w^nt ut e-f Grawitz* fficc, the nodical quatenaaster and
the Chief Dentist had thler wn 11 ary.

JUDGE 5E5?.I”G: I note that ca ! cur—nt 1639, Prosecution IJenti-
licatl n !»7!i, theso l .tt .rs rca 17 ( R a-.n Nunoral 55) 96—«*zl.

litPXt Cfevi.ucly ty: ;ra;hical error, y.ur H n~r.

THE ifllH SS: Ididn't quite understand, Mr. President,

JUDE SESRIH1: In Prcsccuticn identifies tin li7J:, Docunent No.
1639, I n tie-, that the diary index re-a LV instead of IV. The Prose-
cut r subjects that ni h*. b. ; typ graphical err r f r IV.


THS WITNESS: That is bvi-usly a nisteJt , te ncan JV-98-lil.
JUD-E SEE RIMS: Very tr.ll. H.sune.


rt ?ril-i:-ll-2-^ J - ?urr - s99int -Baoler )-


Ccurt 1


]&. HARDY: While r.- are n this, d~ct~r, dccum-nts ycu naw have-
in y ur hand — what's the file in!ex number? * :ul:. y-u read it off,


pi-as-?


a rr-98-ia.

Q N'.w, would yeu read th. file in!ex number n the letter that
y u si nc!?

A IV-102-LI.

Q Jell, n w nruld it be that this letter dated 29 Hay 19U1 bea¬
rin'- the number 98 and then the letter n h J nc 1911 bearing the num¬
ber 102 , would it be there was only feur ether letters written in the
e-.antiac?

A Yes, that's possible. I already said there was very little
c rresp-r. ence in Gr-.wits’s ffice.

W Th-jn the letter beir.., 102 would be th. 102nd ccenunicaticn
coning ■ ut f Grawits's fficc?

A !* , the 102nd letter fr t tho lith v luuc. Every v Iudo star¬
ted s new cunt.

Q foil, then witness, that's rath-r unusual to number the letter
of 30 lay 19U1 xVbcr 102 tnd then number a letter <f li June Number
17i, if each number designates a lott.r?

A I didn't quite, understand that.

s

4 I will it very dear. I will :.3k you cncc again; was this _
l.ttcr which is Document :hicber 21_, Pr:socuti.n Exhibit 168, the in-
clcsuro that ; u aonti- ned in th- le tter signed by you cn June lith?

Thcr. is n reference tide in that letter t; any the-r letter.

d "her is m ther lett.r t , isn't th.re, dact.r?

a les, hut that's .nly a matter tnat c neernei the Secretary.I
cannot say in lotali h w it came ab ut that she entered th - «aa. nail
number n cy letter. I car. ox.; la in it by 3ayin- tnr-.t a t^lcph ne c.nver-
3ati r. must have cccure:’ wher- 3hc rr. 3 inr true tee tc sen the list ncc
s r- because it ha ' c & 1 st *r s m. such ther technical reason. I
can say that the first letter, bwa^ir. the san. nunb.r, da to the 3o Hay,

&&


'I


9 J-U-3-9ums-(lnt .Ranlcr)-

C'urt 1-

tcfc was signed by Grawitz is not kn w V rfc. It isn't clear at all
t uc *hat the reference, needy, Report t; heichsfuehrer SS" should
ra.an. Furthers;'re, I d:n't know why this letter is designated with
top secret" All I kn-w are the f ur physicians who were naaed far the
trea taint f feail-i sterility and wr.c pcnly did work f r the SS women.

Q Sow, will y-u return the docunent please,?

JUDGE SlBRX.Vj: Dr. Poppcndick, I notice that in both Jecunents
Hc-1639 and ?<e-1639-« there appears it thotep the rubber stanp file
nusber "Secret,332-13". San y.u explain the significance cf both
c taunicaticn. beirin the sanv secret file nunber?

A I can sco n. lcsi.*nati n n th.se ' cuucnts tt read " secret"


S ,.pri-Burns (Int. H'-.icr)


C ,urt I

JUDGE SEBftEiG: Ir. the English tronslcti ons before
the Tribun 1 b„th d.cu„ents NO-1639 and KC-1639-« appear
tv, be _ red " -Tet".

-3. H.-.RDY: Imay have t_ clarify that f-r you. That's •

. rubber st ap on the original document,and it's the personal
st-.p f the Keichsfuchror SS; file number 'secret' refers
t Rud.lf's ffice and :: rubber st :p put on by Rudolf 3r:.ndt's
ffice and ? rubber st ,p put >n by Rud If 3r nit's office
when they received thuSc c-.. ;unic*itlons.

JUDGE SEEKING: I issune th t but I am asking the witness if
he knows why this is marked with a rubber st:mp "secret 332-
13?"

I re lly don't know hew these letters were treated
t the Rwichsfuohrer's office r g rding secrecy. This matter
re lly need not hive been kept secret. Very often it was
up to tne secretary whether any letter w s cl-iosifled "secret 1 '
or not if she didn't know whether there was any such direc¬
tive reg-rding secrecy. «t .ny rate, the letter wnioh I
;s signed did not go out .s secret. There was no reason nt
11 to do th t.

H.JU3Y: Dr. Pop endicK, regarding the sulfnnilimide
experiments, 1 wish to submit to you now document — the ori-
gin* 1 of Document NO-582 which has been previously introduced
into evidence s Prosecution Exhibit No, 289. This i3 the
report th t Dr. Ding submitted to Dr. .drugowsKy for pub 11-
j t ... The second p ge of tuis report bears the st-mp
r.hereon nd - pencilled sign ture. Is th t .you£ sign ture?

Yes, th t’s .uy sign.ture.

3 . hill you return the document, pie se? Nov., during
the course of ycur air-ct exJain:tion you m de the point ra¬
ther emphatic ily tir t the testimony oi Dr. Kogon was incon¬
sistent reg rding the reports v.nich were rent to Po.pendick.

5636


5


rt pril-*i-J?-H-2a-Burns (Int.

Co rt I

You s id on p se 1256 :, Kogon st ted that the reports did
not go to Poppandick", oa p: ?e 1266 of the record.

Isa* t it possible th*.t Kogon st ted th t the re'orts
did not jx) directly to poppendick?


*


>637


9 ,^ril-”-BJG- 12 -l-GrcM (r.r-d-r)

Court >*o . 1

x. Kc. It. nui -.skcd *. hcthcr I received - report. Tc r.ssunc
Ictour vi-. - cc;:y ws rc .-.3. Kogan did net knew rbcut =y position
wit. :t- itz. i rcbebly he concluded ire- the f-ct thrt I signed c.
ubliceti n c? Ding's with the da 9 if 7 iftd.cn cf hcichsrcr«tcfuchrer-So
% hich ups if t^r sent br.ck to" Ding. Kescr. rest likely theurht thrt I
?;cul*l h-ve ecaothinc to dc vdth the typhus experiments cr th-.t 1 would
U-v. tc k:Kw nbcut thus. In rny cs- he r-elly Vine insight into
the position I huld in the StrXf cf Grewiti.

Q ’..c will let the record cf Keren's testimony sperk for itself,
dcct:r. Doctor, did you rt my tine ever r.ct ra gc-betrcon for Dr.

Von Kennel in order for bin tc hrve acu. cf Ids work tested nt
Buchcnw- 1 '?

I cannot sry thrt. I kno: thrt I rpproechofi Dinr with
reference tc Von Kennel. I said nlxv ly yesterday th t 1 vguoly
r-r.-T.! -r..d th t I tried tc trmanit Cr rlfcz* desire for experiments
with nnitils t: Ven Kennel. In rdditicu thcr- was soaothinf, in
connection ith r secret ry for Ven Kennel perhtps. Ding perhaps
jrfomed -ni. Is uc. -ri .unts fer Ven Konnd, l eennet tell you
in dot.- il.

Q .oil, ycu never went tc Ding cr llrugcwsky, fer ir.st-ncc,

-r. ani l "Von Kennel r nts ac_e »>crfc deno. dll ycu dc it for him?"
Did ycu ever ret r.s c~- etv ten?

.. I.e n't rtiioabcr.

Q ..ell, new in ycur c-<n Document Beck, which •. r.s ycur Fcppcndick
inhibit e, c:. : ve k5 - this is *n 'ifiivit cf Ven Kennel - he otnted
th t his dog rt.-.eiit in Leipzig never h 1 nythin< U Jo with the
hrrcr.c ocp.ri-jjnte cf Dr. Vr.-rr. t, with typhus, or vith oqroriaents
urns. Hc«, Cc ; cu t!dnh it is pcssibl. th t Dr.

Konnd i r r..t being truthful in tfc-t liicvit?

/. I really em't . v.rlsek thrt in detsdl.

Q ell, did you ever he r cf ti.v ru„ di.-cdnediphtnylsulphc.no
ich fer the bonoflt of th - rt reporter is spellei ca fellows:


1 .. ril-^-3«G-12-2-Grcs3 (i.-=Lcr)
Court :.'c. 1


tr. t Iru", doctor?

1 c"no:t roe-II vir.r heard th t cc^Lic-to: n :-.c. I ca
n.t n « rt in this field. It is quite possible ttrt this is
th- chwio l csisi; ticn cf sulf;-nUanidc prcprrnticns.

r. leu think if ycu ever heard it jvu -culd format it?

Th t is passible.

Q .dl, let'a s-c - Document KO-1164. This will be offered fer
identifier, tie a -c ?rc-^c=ti . ^hibit A76.

Is tt.t yw-ir riv. euro cn the tc'-U- th. t ::cu=cnt, D.ctcr?
Yes, th t is Jiyvturo.

Q This is it t«-d 15 Ju.it 19U. - secret at cap - it if - Crossed
t: . eich Physician SS -r.' . lice.

"Tc the Office HI in the building

ci ..junientien fx-.. SS-Stubrf. lrcfesscr Dr. Vcnkcnnol ires
tr naritti*! r. June 1 , 19U the 1 at paragraph cf which rends as
fOlcvu:

<r .0 h.-vc -lrerdr v.-’e cueTiflenta with Sulf;nnsi<".o in Typhua
c os, h v-r, ith.ub success, hl.dj, lie*.over, hr; aynthccitod
- ou. stance f l-.lacli; hcnylaul,JK nc which in n acuat carrying
Str-utccocd, is t< such r. extent superior to all sulfcnivd-Ico
th-.t it r.-rriy rv-.ches c . onicillin. Tho imcul-ti.n cf huii-n hoin^a
h -v«-r still crc~tv 3 v-r; unpi “a nt s^c.alrr; canifcst: tie ns, ncuto
cysntois. nevertheless it ia r-.rth ccnsi I-rias rh.th.r cr not sene
.ri.nt ti.r. teats sh' .Id v e pi Jo n .i.ra.r.o suffering free typhus in

r - efforts u *etv:dc .tc this rco . Gould you

•ct -c * r.uli-t r ia ur efforts t. c.cper-.te with s:..e clinic?"

.r r., V-nKv.»el h r! y u U net -s ;-4.et»ccn ^?r

hi.h.*a it n.t in th. V ricanO. letter?

«. Th't is ; ssille.

'i :k V. continue - «..cc. rUn - to ye ur c:a=inicrtien cf June 2,
19U, Di-ry He. 370/U, the C-d.f Ironist -rroo-.es tho f-ct tfcrt


v rll-L«-0JG-i2-3-Grc88 (3s-iLer)

O-urt .w. i

t:. 7;ihus rch Dcrt. iucheir.. II -h.ui jgjcri-itcfc *. ith the
"Ji-.i.r. lip cnylsulchenc" ".cccriing tc VcnKcnncl mi Kia ra ig cn typhus
c-.ac: i.i ;;-;cr t: loter-ino its effectiveness ml Ce_r- t-'uility. There
are er.clca-1 r-.re ’ctcilc' drt- ro the "c-vc remedy end it is requested
•h -t tlv.y -- further trenautted. tc SS-Stubaf. Dr. Dir.j, SS-Stubaf.
rrtfesa r Dr. Vcnhcnncl further3.ro f.lviso- th-t - certin quantity
f the .ve reswdy rill arrive here luting the next f<*. Jays. U,xn
rriv:l this re.iciy v .111 like* iae be for. aided there.

"Tre:-aa-r Dr. Ven Ke--e.cl c.nailers it Very r. Ms fclc thrt Dr.

Din^ sh.ull -."11 cn hln ir. hie clinic In Leipii.; f.r the purpcoo cf
liacusain t i: r Ih r different therapy. Thu ncec-aity for rbaclutc
s.or.cy is ctressed t_ rll institutions ccr.cem...

Signed rcjjpcrtlick"

uhcr. Dr. VcnTcnn l -eke’, yeu tc act as rc-betve.n fer hia
h-r lid ytu hey;, on t ; dijectly t. Uru£c*aky ni net directly to
Ir. Ding?

.. I lr.’t knew whether Yinfconncl pcracrrlly ckc/i mo tc be a
-t ttv.on. I ’.n’t kn t: h i he vr.tc. Ho jrobr.blj ur tc tc
r- .its. ..a r aria Dir..’a rctiviti-s 1 -n’t Knew in dot/il whft hia
j oiti n cf sul - , hrt hia activity vao, end a . n. I

-r-ly knv. ho x:a a hylenist,

C. i..Jl, then • u -asusei th't Dr. Jr u,;cwaky *.-s chief f the
Institute • f DucheWi!, 11 .‘n’t v-u? Din-'a su’.ri-r hen v u urslc
t:,ie letter?

.. I ki..n th-t he ur a - hyyicnlct, th-1 ho hr. ’, cccu fr—. ^ru-;.wa3;y's
1 , thorofoi , covs. . th t Dins bulc • - ' tc that institute-,
•h-t Di.is . ;rk *•— s in -rticulir I didn't Sen -t th t •. .

i -11, r. - it r?t t.i u. this thirl p-r *r ah r tnu acc-nd

r-_;h I cell.ve it "th't : ccrtcin quantity the -Uve roccdy
will -rri.ve hero during ti». r.jct lei cya. ‘ axrivcl this r*sc:!y
•..ill likcriac be fen xic'l th.r But is/ the Ir. 3 - ill be fnr-rdud
- --chx. 1 * 1 . fell, -.'he * t. f-n.~r_ this _ru- t. buchon&dd?- Ycu?

1 ':. I r .-liy ernrct tel^^j th'.t.


9 .ipril 47-»:-?jC-lC-la-0rcs3 (Int., ftffl lo r )

COLTt I

+ Did you c-ror rocoivo tha drag yoursolf frtn Von Xonnol to sond
to Suchors-'dd?

.. I can’t raar:top tfcct.

^ '.roll, rro './ill rofrosh your nectary, doctor in Doc-.nont JO-1182
which in offarod as Prosecution Schlbit 477 for identification.

»-./ this lottor is datod 15 Juno 1944. That is tho 8a=o doto
as tha lottor ti:at you a’droesod to Krugewsky. die lottor is free
Von Eonr.ol to SS-Btaalartonfuohror Dr. Poppondlck regarding your
lottor datod Juno 5, 1944 wboroin it statos ao folloi.’st
"Sta’.dartonfuohror,

-I oneloso tho first senplo of tho oxpari-Tontol preparation
dionined 1 phJr.ylsuphono which, for purposos of duplication I havo
callod "7K25."

"I point out again that I proposed for tho first tooting oxporinonto
tnblot tvlco, at tho aost throo tiaos, c doy; that, quito probably,
cyanosis will ocour, whioh ay bo avortod by intravonoua injoctiono
of ld -20 cco of 1 porcont :iothyl - bluo solution.

Hoil Hitlorl
Signed Von Koir.ol"

Ii*s 9 thon you did rocoivo this, doctor, didn’t you?

I c .n’t toll you. I really oan’t raaon-or. 1 don’t
runonbor having rocoivod it, at any rato tho lottor la addrossod to no.

'I Ding finally got it, too, didn’t ho?

I can’t toll you that, oithor.

Lock at tho top of tho lottor. Soo tho stars?. In tho stanp
is -Sacolvad 21 Juno 19-14 - thon tho nur.bor 144/44 dth tho Initial D
In tho corr.or." ITouli you say that would bo Dr. Ding’s rocoijjt?

.. I can’t soy that. It Is posdfclo.

'X Sight days lato-?

I ar. going Into another docur.ont on tho s-so subjoct. It
would taka two or throe ninutos to introduce thoso.


JUDOZ SSRIJW. Did you identify this docuizont by a author?

* 5641


5 /jrfl 47-;uTC-l2-2'- Orssa (Int., 3telor)
Cnirt I


*:a. rjaBY: ’/os, Prosecution 3xhibit 477 for identification.

’lay I say corathinf also about that docicont?

% Cortalrly.

It boccros ovidont free both lottors that this Is a quostion
cf c. Irus which has cortoin offocts, for lnataaco, cyanosis, i nust
point out that wo physician* knew that all nulfwanido drugs croato
cyar-taia which can bo crortod by ..othyl-bluo solution. In spito of
that sulfonllonido is usod today to a largo oxtont. Ono, thoroforo,
cannot draw tho coreluaion that those aro axpoi-lronts which can lr.
any '-■ay bo considorod to to dcugoroun. In addition, on that lottor
•D.1184 it is :u3co3sary to infcrc all agor.cios tc hoop this rotter
socrot. rsu, tho conclusion can bo draws for that - end no othor
conclusion can bo urcur. that any dergorous ox.x>ri:or.ts uoro C'rrlod out
tho o:Oy conclusion that ccr. bo drawn is that Yon Konr.ol war.tod to
hoop tho dovolojnonts of t ia cn preparations socrot toe cooo ho vaa
ralrtalning a cortaln carotition with tho firs* involvod. ?or that
reason Uu togged hlo rosoareh laboratory "V".

- 4 I nr. not intoroctod doctor ir. tho purposo of tho oxporiaonts
of tho outc'r.o nf tho or.porlnonts, I eoroly asking ycu that you
did net ns .-diary or e>-bjtwoon of Von Kor.nol and Dr. Ding. Didn't
y-u accorling to this docuiunt whoroin your oignaturo uppoors?

.. Ton, I already said tfc-t if it roforc to axporinor.tal ontaal*
and l’rcra this lottor I ccncludoi that I obviously sar.t ono or two
othor lottors to yen Komol.

1 tltnoss, In addition, you had fcawlodgo that Dr.

IrugOKsJcy, CMof Kysionst of tha ttoffin-es, C7ild uako available
facilitio3 fer on ori_ontation of any nature at V. j typhus rosoarch
ot;tlon in Bucbonuald acc .rfi^ to thic lottor?


9 April 47-^1—?jG-12—3c- Gross (Intitnlor)

CC-3t I

A I know that I^ru£Ot.*sky Instituto sont out socrot pc-pars
rojarliOo acw ozporioncos goinod with typhus illnossoa, numbers of
th.ao pooplo xoro sor.t to SS hcspitols, whoro in dotall it happonod
I cannot say. i n opinion this was a clinical to3t. It «Q3
possibly do no on sick SS rxin in scctj SS hospitals.

^ I*c actually shoe that Dr. Ding actually rocoivod tho irug
I :riah to introduco anothor docunont.

TR27IDZVT: Cho Tribunal will nev bo In rocoss.


CTOXt So. 1

3 Apr 3-i-iSi-F os t e r (!nt. Brown)


aJTB= 50QS SiSSICS

(She hutring reconvened at 1230 hours, 9 April IS*.?.)

TEL .iaEStAL: -he Tribunal is again in session.

EU-OT PCPrZKICi: - Sc tuned

IE. FI—-.ISi (Counsel fer the- defendant j.rugcwsky): Mr. President,
the prosecution sub -itted this norning various documents in which the
defendant .irugovsky is Mentioned. In iy opinion the prosecution so frr
as the uatorlal is concerned vr.ich it is using against one specific
defendant, this xtwrici .ust b« submitted when the defendant is in the
stand, otherwise the counsel for the defendant has no opportunity to
defend hlnsolf ageintt this -.eterlal. Therefore, I nek tho Tribunal
either to «rd*r that the arterial now suV.ittcd against the defendant
.jugoveky should not be used cguinct the dofwndant a.rugowsky or that
the defendant arugovoky later be again colled to the stand so that ho
ccn :irk». ctrto.-enta regarding this ante riel. The saao objection I raise
rleo on behalf of Koufoann for defendant B.udolf Brandt who vrn also ra¬
tioned thio nornice in one cf the docuuvntc.

MB. EaKJY: Your Honor, I k; rfraid that the defense counsel isn't
ivrru of thu concept of rebuttal evidence.

TEE PEESIBEUT: Tho docuu.nts to vhich defense counsel reforo have
uercly beon itrkod for idcntificttion; they have not yet boon even of-
ferod in evidence. Vhen they are offered in evidence, counsel for any
defendant lay bo heord to interpose any objection to the odnloelon into
evidence which h« thinks aey be well taken. Tho Tribunrl will then
rule uoon tho cduisslbility of tho docu vnte. Of course, if these
docuientB ere offered in ovidence at thio tine or when they rrc offered,
tny defendant would have an opportunity to take the stand and exolain

.etrfJhSj ia^coaaection with those docu ents thft night refer to hln.

*_'

CEOSS xXu.:: TICK (Continued/

BY .iE. HaEBY:

'-j. Just bvftre the recess v e were discussing d-cu eat SO 1182
which vf3 edc'cc^ted tc the cefcndcst Poop end lek concrning the drug VX 25.


C-ur'. S3. 1

5 K-~ •i7---13-2-ia-ro«t«r CInt. Srovn)


Z. ie letter la addressed to y,u, Sr. Pop’Oendick, end I esk you agein
did you receive thlfc first sr:.ple of *fco exoerimentri prccarjticn VK 25,
a outlined In this letter fro: Vonkennel?

A. So sneak honestly, I cannot say one way or the other now.

-oil, assume thrt you did receive It, would you have then ueesed
it on to the Hygiene Institute of the Vaffen SS for delivery to Ding
yourself?

A. I can't eey that either.

KR. HaBDT: Well, now. Document NC-1165. Vo offer this at thio
ti::e for ldentiflcotlon as Prosecution ixhlbit So. 476. This document is
dr ted 21 Jur.* 1544, iddrecsed to SS Hauotstur-fuehrer Prof. Dr. Soharlau,
Hygiene Institute of the trffon-SS, and Herr Ding acknowledges recoiot
of one smell bottle of Dienindodiphonylsulfon tablets rs testing ouantity
for the clinical station of Deoert lent for Typhus and Virus Research.

The tablet* originate fror. rrof. Dr. Vonkennol, Loiorig, thon in onron-
thosis, set our letter of June 15, 1944, t'.gnod Doctor Irvin Ding.

3Y fffi. FaMJTI

^ How, ft tho top of this letter you will notice underneath tho
v.rj "subject" the words •?.«: Tour letter dated Juno 19, 19*4". Now,
taking this letter into consideration cad looking bick at the letter
addressed tc you of 16 Jons 194t, would you state that thusu sanplos
were Boat to you by Vonkennol cac. ‘-ere ir. turn delivered to the Hygiene
Institute A the leffon-SS who in turn on Juno 19, 1944, sent thon on to
Dr. Ding? Is that c reasonable oxoianr.tlon of the nanner in which Dr.

Ding received this drug at Suchen^ald?

A. I em not in a nosition to nake statements cbout what route
th. 06 e drugs took. I ennnot renutber thrt I received it. It is ouito

possible that it vent on its vey without my -oersonrl par ticlottion at all.

•

v Sow, doctor, the orosicutijn hr* introduced Document Number NC
1500 p.8 Prosecution inhibit To. 269 which v- ef admit tod into evidence on
7 January 1547. This is e docu.vn: concerning the hormone research of
SS Sturmbenefuchrer Dr. Tpern.t. Will you kindly look at the bottom of

5U?


Court Sc. 1

9 Air <17 -A-lS-3-iEl.-Tester (let. 3r ovn)


:r.i: loco:'.eat tee toll ::c vfaetfcer or not that is your signature, doctor?
a. i ce, thrt is signature,
na. H.J’JEf: So further cue6tisns.

i-riSSISJS: «ny further auostioas of this witness on the oart
of cry defense counsel?


9 -C-I2-1—l-3iolsi (Int. Srovn)

Court l*o. i.


73-Z‘T.ZC? ZLJ IXhTIO-J
3Y3L. 30X-1 (Tor defend at Zcppendlck):

"itn.ss, this :3nin, you were shown r. photo copy, vfclch I
urf -rtuu. Cely h vo not yet roccivoi, but I oclicvc you will bo able to
recall it; it wns initi.lcd by you, “A certified true copy, yo^on-
hich. B "-is concerned iteolf with s auvrono, and wns rddrO»sod to
:..c heichafuhrcr -SS Ki.alor. Did you oosporo this copy with tho
c .y drawn up by tho sccrotary before you certified tho correctnoon of
the c*. y?

... JO, in no co.se, bee use the secretary vt-s Gmvita's confidant,
Bct.lcilr.il sorts of u ttors for Fr-.wits, but did not ci,-n tsuch
-rttcra, p xticuiirly not r-.tt.rs dircctod to the acichalurbror hiix
solf. .t hid to bo rifued by n officer, -.r/ it happonod several
ti »a t.'i t I wns ashed by her for a si.-ai-turo, and aho told no th .t
b..c h ' : o eery of such ■ ai rue., r docuncnt, th-1 it wns n correct
c y, nd th t I should plonao ut ;ijr siT-rturo to it rs a ccrtifi-
c tion; rad sine; tnis secret ry h d Or vltr'o coinUto confidcnco I
ys -xarx ed everythir. was in order. X know nothin,- abopt tho
oxporioe&t■ in fevonabruch except what I heard whon it van reported..

./ \ 1 } is is in Intori, report or. th. clinic:.1 exporiuento In

!v".v. nob ruck. Vero you tho tocanlc 1 arar wor or the treater of thio
t.dnj;?

... l*o,

V you ^ d it before you si, nod it?

.. I think that it nost InprobaVlo.

.. &e document see.a to indicate th t y r. would know the c'&-
t.nir o.* t o document if y-u certified its correctness.

... Under other circc: stance a iu t .1 ht be so, but in Grwitz«e
offic. v.cve, :.« I s. id, the secret jy took care of theoe ttors with
3rr-ri;;;*s c .;:lete confidonc , ta : v s not cuct . ry. I could accent
t~. aecret xy's word as r. uirr-.t...

.. r words, you certified tr. t the extents w r. correct

5647


9 pJ>-~-r*Z5-l«-2-3i3l8i (Int~3rovn)
Court i'o. 1.


without Iir.vin, reed it?

... Ye8, tU t ie Juet what .lrpponod.

. J ‘-e .orain.- 2x..i\lts U7I* nad U75 w.ro sub.ittcd; 11 letter of
- Jhly i^:l re. rdla.: Cl.c tr r.t-^at of faxlo storilo persons* in
c.h - ’' ids• the tre' t..cnt-of votiun who is storilo. This letter, too,
is lv.lt 1 led 5 r si.-ecd by you. Thor, wr-s rise another letter subaitted
concciv-ia sterilization of wowa. ro you know of isp connection bo-
tvoca t.-oco two letters?

-• Jo, ns I sr.id before, I h-ai no experience ••hatsoever with
sterilisation.

.. r.:c second letter is si,nod, not by you hut by Grnvltz. In
other •:onlB, you knew only of tuo first letter, Exhibit U75?

-- ¥-*• lB connection wit a the trentnent of sterile S 3 -wivos and
weic.. this letter cancer lin.; J.e in hy capacity ns n doctor In tho
Slype nr t.

*• .did t..e doctors hero mentioned are rdruber/:, Wolf, Yhrhnrd,
Cuent.r — th.y win.: the doctors to wkou this report was ;• do.

. Jhe Inst r.'s nr..e Is Schulsoj Cuenter is the firot nnuoj
Sehulso is th. ln-t.

.. Tea, tart is ri.kt. . ” error. ;.t any rnto. you know nothin,;

• .out the e ntente of th* second document concern!*" sterilization of
vo ( .en. You found out r.bout it t-.e first ti a tod-y?

... Y-p, sir, that ic rll I knew nbout it.

.. Caere is mother d>eu:^nt submitted, U76, fro.e Reich sfuehroi^-
SS, ..oic.: Physician . yolico and S“ conccrnin.; t.;a dnu v 7 . 25 that
wr.o spelled out t..is 11 rain.*. I now would like to csk you whother ;-ou
v - ro She c ..root ..t expert who worked vita Von ~onnol?

•

... .0, Yon2;rxel t''k c-rc of ..ic ;a.ttors are anally with tho

hern - a lav lvcd. .s I h-.va lr_ d- said, I once provided hir» with
experimental nnl.r-la and th t is probably tho raao a why VOnXonncl vroto

• ‘ •■c ia t.:is connection. That car. o:.ly h ve hcTOpacd this o:xe. /jod

-i-rvonou I work.d on the —-'tier; or, it can .Iso k vc been that {Jrm/itz

5U3


»


9 &-1—(Ex'-wn)

Court . - 2.


3 “-- t:_-t : should write letter to VonKonnol, bcc-uso, ns a natter of
f ct, theso n. tt.r6 didn't concern ..t .11; it w.--s just occidental
that I Is fl onyt.-in, to do vlth the...

.. 1 ft document sub itted to you, which vr.s rddroased to you

-7 ;r. •onj'or.nol, ~ 3 cribos the production of this dru,T nnd

pointo out tb.t it w-.b eo.st to you. Do you know of any experiments in
t.-.ia s-.tter? Did y. u Sr w t.i t expori.^nta w r. bolxv; carried out with
t..in dru,-; 7125 . or wore to be crxried out?

. ..out certainly I <i rot, because I ra:~ubor nothin.- about it.
.o.coYor, I r.. t>o: turdo.' ill t in t-:is c- o- also It vr.s not a cuoeti'.n of
ox but that t..e tr in,- out of t la druf van bo la" curriod out

lr. rxy cli.dc.

V uito no; .vcd you know whore t..ic drug was to bo trio! out?

... In bo .>o clinic or ,-n SS hospitrl.

> You ..re r.sau in,; th t?

— Y-o, th-1 lo to.

.. .bovo *21, you didn't fc-.ov that there vere t< bo any sort of
cri. l czpori wntt ir. this counoctisn - experiments which could lord
to t.-.o death or tori out viunds, — voundlr,; of hurra boin,:s?

— ’'>• There vis no ra o>n to oven think of ouch a thin,;.

.* .row, if I ;.-y tumirixe, I tould like to r.sfc you: You hed no
octroi's. ; u ttj no ordors to c rry out orlrlnnl oa^ori wntp, you did
:.ot lnstii-.to such er -ri.wn.s, or I r.ovin, ly su port such exrcrlsoentoT
— * cc-. nnsw r :11 those or stior.o with no. It w.io only horo in
...lr ojurtroom th .. I f.uac. out about tho oxporl. oai b that v..ro c rrlod
•ut, but : a. attain: t- i -it., thus- thire -jid I h:4 no rorson to
su.rjoec they ver- -oln,; a, ^

.. Si' you r.ot i:. officio! c nversotio-.s find -at about exyjri-
-r.tr ru n-ied out or conceit.* tl*n c ..p ire: toe -. rir.nt their villa ,'nd
v -* lc * i Icev’ to death, crip.lir. c, or other for.is of cruelty or torture?

-•* l-oS if ther_ h...' boon ry conversations about tn t it must hr.vo


5 -c*-..-

Court "c


“S-lV-h-Biols! (Drove)


etruch a oapocially. but it vr.s not the subject o.’ conversation. *Jhon
th-ro ur.a calk around the office actual natters were discussed; the
fr*. ;-li;ic situation. the 1 st bo. bin.: on 3orli.-., or such thiols, but
there was no discuss or. o: such things r.s you Just mentioned.

D?.. iiZ IHi: So further quoiti'ns. your Honor.

??. C I3BC* .uty othor ox--.ln-.tion of teis witness by nay of
defense c.uns.l?

US. S.JE33 (for Blo^o): ilr. Prosidont, I should like to nsk ono
question which ! could tot ask boforo beccusa I was ill. I h-vo only
one ruosti on.

_."Z PF-SI321T: Counsel :ey proceed.

BY DR. SJJET:

. "ltr.osB, you rcc-.li the ixotin.: at Kohonlychont

... Tec.

‘."'U know which root in,; I rz. referring to?

... Y-3, tit*, li.at c .nforonco in lhj' I 9 UU.

.. Hi t wt n the confcrcnco ro.T rdin* welch tho prosecution sub-
.iited list of those present; and you aaw t.t t?

... Yes.

. Xa this 1 iat of p rtlolpoatf there io r. uention of ss-
Oberaturornnfuehrer Dr. Gross. Do you reikslbcr th t? Th*.rc has boon
considor.-.Me discussion of tiu.t here. Do you know this SS-Db-rstun*-
bannfuohror Dr. Gross w.'.a to.’k pert in this -teotin/; r.t -'ohonlychon?

Z. I do know t. Dr. Gross who wv.s, I believe, an SS-3borotur:>-
bmmfuohror in IShU. Ho v s chief physician of tho SS hospital in
Hi r. ad I boll ova I re;*=-.ber th t t..is Dr. Gross w .a present r.t tho
-Ajcti.t t .oaeniycr.cn *ooc use I t..ink I saw hi * there.

.. Y u fc-vc heard ..era on scverr-l d/ys th t •- cert< in Dr. Gross ur.s
' c U:.eor:tt-r of t.\. co-dofond ;.t Dr. 3lo:c; yru ha rd that hero?

— Yea. .

> X 3 this Dr- Gross who;, you r-ictionod ad know as the chief

physician >f Hi- • identic..! with tho collaborator Dr. Gross who

5650 .


Q .^r-.-i-JS-lU-r-Blalei (3rown)

Court '-"3. i.


c:li--.'-or .Sod with Dr. 3lor-o; or is th t .-mother Dr. Gross?

... H:. t :.uat h-.rc been another Dr. Gross. I know fro:. fccnrWy

ta-.t ;horo vs r. sccon'. Dr. Gross who, I believe, w-s r. hy,-ioni3t.
yoveror, I do not icnoy hia. nay rate, ho was not the one I sr.u nt
t.-^3 .-;otia. nt Eohonlychcn tut, m I s-id. »-* tko chief physician in
7.1 nc v f the on- who wr.o nt rohcnlyehon, not the hy.-ionist.

> Did you know prof. Dr. 3lono before?

... I heard tho nemo once beforo but I didn't know hi;, personally.

i. Did you sco Dr. 3lono nt tnis .octia; nt Kohonlychcn?

so.

D?.. L-cTSH: So further questions. Sir. k you.

Z?\. 3021!: Kr. President, I wi throu,;h intorrofr.tia: tho witnooo
po/ociulick. I snoul* aoroly like now to sub:iit n fow docunonts.

P-CSIDJ.i?: There tola: no further quott. -ns to tho witnooo,
the dof-rhrv.t .jxj r-sur.o ..is pine- in the dock. Counool ;«y prooood.


(Uitnen oxcuaod).


Court I

April 9-A-15-16-l-HD-.'_ehcn-3rovn.


DR. BOSKM: Or. Jong already submitted an affidavit,

I snould like to read part three, which has not yet been
read. Tr.la Is HPO-2, Poppcndlck exhibit No. 2, the part
wr.lch I shall read is on page four:

■3. The personality cf Poppcndlck and his activities:

"I act roppondlcfc floetlngly In 1-3? or 1938 end again
v on I took up ay duties in the Medical Inspectorate in
Berlin, whore he was the chief of thw nodical department
of the Race and Settlement Rain Office; I do not remember
exactly whr.t tr.w deportment w; 6 cnll-d officially. *8
far no I remember, Poppcndlck, In this capacity, dealt with
the m-dlc -1 supervision of eugenic and matrimonial questions
which vooohed the Race end Settlement P. In Office. Thio
depcrtaer.t of Poppcndlck, to e _thcr with Its small group
of molw nd female workers, w: a aubordinrt-d In medloal
questions directly to the R Ich P.,yslclrn toward the
mludle of 1D39. Poppendlcn worked for the Race und
Settlement Main Office In tnls capacity until the out¬
break of the war, -whan.lie w.-.s drafted into the aroy-ur.d,
as far co I remember, later ns well.

■: 3'W Poppcndlck frequently during this tine and I
nod the opportunity of forming a picture of his purs-nnllty
w ich I Judg.. as follows:

■Poppcndlck 13 a sen who Is conscientious one reliable
in his routine work; basically serious, but r bit soft
nd tr. n~ed of spurring on. he 6c w ne- to be interested
exclusively lr. nls speclalltcd e ralnlng (internist) nnd
in his professional routin e autles In the Rjco*rnd
settlement .icln Office. His woy of living was calm and
6 ber, in intercourse with others he v s reserved.

X 52


Court 1

A -rIl 9-A-15-io-2-HJ-.wdhrn-Brovn.


“as far as I ceaa into contact with yopoendlcu end ..is
work _arin B the snort visits w..«r. I reported in Berlin
aurin a the v. r, nothin© scon.d to have changed r.s far as
..is position k ntt r.ls tasks were concerned; and equally, the
r-or 6 onl:ntlon of the of!ice w. s not each in eviaencd
except t.. t there were so re people there.

"L t.r ce well, I never met anybody in the ente-
chrJbwr except the Secretary, and I w: s not under the
ihpressl n tnat anything had changed In tno way visitors
or experts w. re received or treated. 2 never had any

vled&o of the institution of a 'Private Office' in 1943.
I-.orc wr6 no outward sign of one.

"2 know fr,2 conversations with rospencilcu that ho
tried a.Vwrel tla.o to be sent to the front n b aln, but it
s-o.oo t.. t theeu nttespto led to nothing, periiapa p: ■ tly
oecrua- ropper.dick was procot.u to ranks in accordance
• th r.ia appolntoont md it w s difficult to b lve an
a.poir.thent rt the front to a aan of uls rt nk ana without
fr.nt lln- experience. 1 rea.hbcr that when 1 con b rotulated
.1- or. r.ia or-aotlun to otr.ndnrtenfuehrer, he said nn b rliy
t.:rt this promotion was neither in < ccordance with nls
intent -r. nor his wishes, bee. use nov n. could colculcto
for himself .:w alf»ic-lt It weuld be for nia to ,xet a
fr nt-l.no appointment.

"as I ,u»v sold above. Dr. Gravltr v a included to
~ jud b eents on external noperrancos. Certainly these
r .otlons h-u s-=e connection with this tendency."

It is 6i ft ncd and certified. *

Furth.r, I should like to re d fr a the rlreody
submit t u document a?0 7, exhibit Ko. 9, the Klrchert
affidavit, I should like t- r.nd rt 3, which concerns

Crawitc office • nd ropp^nhlci 1 s activities in this office.

5653


Court 1

rtpril 9-A-15-16—5-HD-Jfcchnn-Brown.


The pcssege la on p 30 20 of tno ik >cement booh:

3 . Routine nt the Office of Grawltz:

:I a 3 Reich Physician of the 53 and Police, Grawltz was
ay superior offloer In the health service, and I had
frequently to acke reports to him. On these occasions,

I hrd the opportunity to obtain some Insight In the work-
lngs of his office.

■The appointment with Grawltz was made by telephone
through hla receptionist, rraeuleln Sommerfeld. It was
from Poppendlck, whoa I ned telophon-d several tines to
make an appointment, that I 1 -arned that appointments
sr.ould be made not through hla but through Froouleln
aootuirfeld. Wr.cn, at the appointed time, one presented
oneself in the recelptlor. rooa of the Reich Physician,
where Fraoululn Socaerfeld 6at nlone, It was she who
announced one's arrival to Grawltz by house telephone.

■Orawltz wns in the habit of conducting conferences
lr. complete prlvnoy. Irrespective of whether lnportont
matter* or matters of oecondnry slgr.lflc. ncc were r.t stake.
He oocd to keep the documents Cennectod with th_ conferences
lr. hla ds.sk. If it should happen that a written
communication hid to be prep: red aurln b the course of c.
conference, Fraeuloin 5-mmerfcla would be summoned. From
inis conduct, the Impression which I formed was of
necessity that the Helen Physician 55 discharged personally
most of the official work, without the cooper: tlon of his
colleagues In the building.

“Poppendlck was Cnlef of the Personal Offlcs of the
Helen Physician S3. «3 6ucr., hv was neltfier his deputy,

nor wr.6 ho authorized to sign on nls behalf, Poppendlck's

status underwent no change In the reorganization of 1943.

565 L


r. > -.Vic i-fi n— 5rc v


Court 1

.’ 1 - r --


I! »s for as I car. Judge, v-rawitz, was able to decl
with -is correspondence clone with his secret*ry, without
farther resistance, and according to his known cetncd6
f v rhing, this was what he liked to do.

"I crr.not rohchbJr over having spoken of the troatcent
f -hospor-a burns with .-oppendick. Those discussions took
place with drewitz only.

"Ir. 1343, several conferences of the lording
-hyslclnns took pi: ce in Crravitz 1 office, regarding
Pvtaonr.el nr.a c.uipnent requlreocnts. Hxperlnonta with
Rdaan Lein u s were never the subjects of tneae conferences."

Hr0-14, on nf:ldovlt of tne co-defendant Rudolf
dr-'ndt. In view of tne fact that rtcdolf Srondt ha a
clr.ady been on the senna, I wish to simply draw »ho
attention uf the Tribunal to this affidavit. I shall
dlspjnoo with the reading ef It, ecc use It concerns itself
with the nn.erous affidavits that .Hud'.lf 3ror.dt signed
regarding t.ie other defendants, he Blmly i delta r.ere
tr.ot ..ie strtc_ont that Popper.dlci: had knowledge of
crlhlnrl experiments was based not on personal experience,
b t er. tr.e fact thrt ho *v a seen doc Pefita to tnrt effect
r.ere.

!h£ rRRcUHiiT: Does c.unsel offer this afflaavit cs
nn exhibit in the erse?

JR. SU£hM: I nave offered It rs exhibit io. 14, but
I snrll disperse with recdln.. It — correction exhibit Kp.

13.

MR. HaRDY: I object to this -ocuncr.t as being Irregular,
1 . ruouch r.s -efense c.unswl nr.a nnpie tine to e xml no the
witness Rudolf 5r- ndt vher. he was on the witness stand.

DR. H02HM: I nevertheless r-.sk tr.e c^urt to adroit this
Jicuncnt as evidence because I wish to -Se It In oy closing

5*55


Court 1

/»pril 9-A-16-16-5-ED-itoeh-n-3rovn.


summary.

THE PRESIDENT: The objection will bo over-rulod end
the affidavit will bo admltt.d as ovldor.co with the
privilege o. the Prosecution to cross-examine the defendant
Rudolf Brandt If It- desires to do so.

.4R. HJxRDY: The Pros.cation will not wish to cross
examine the defendant Rudolf 3rcndt on this setter,

Inasmuch os the material of Rudolf Brandt Is in the record
and *. . hove a duplication of It.

PR. 30EKR: as the next Document for the present In
the persontatlon cf ay case for Poppondick, I offer
Document Ho. KPO-16, viilch Is on pages 41 and 42. This
will be Poppendlck Exhibit No. 14. This Is an Excerpt
from an article "The Sentencing of Internees 0 by Dr.

Arthur Strnotor, Minister of Justice, Nordrhein-Westphalla,
published In the Wostfalonpoot, 31 January 1947. I do not
Intend to end nnytnlng fr a this Document.

This concludes my case for the tine bolng.

THE PRESIDENT: Is counsel for defendant Wolfram
Sievers ready to proceed with hlo case?

DR. VEI60ER32R for tho Defendant Wolfram Siovero: vln ly
the presentation of ay case for Wolfram Slevors, I Intend
first of all to cell my client to the stand and ash now
the Irlb-nal's permission to do so.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho Defendant olfraa Slevere will
take the witness stand.

VOLE.-UX SIE7ZPS, a witness, took the st nd and
testified as follows:

ST THE PRESIDENT:

Q. Tho witness will raise his right hand nd be sworn.

I swear by God, the" almighty mu Omniscient, that I

will speck the cure truth and will withhold and add nothing.

5£56


Court 1 /

n- rl I S-A-15-16-6-HD- Aeehc n-3rown.

(The witness repented the oath.)

DIRECT SXakINaTION.

BY DR. VEIS9ERBER:

i. Vitness, your naase is H’olfrnn Slevers end you
wore born 1C July 1^05 rn slidestasia os the son of the
church ousicftl ulrector Ehrnard Heinrich rnd Sllrabeth
Slovers?


After visiting ^rode sor.ool and gyznaaiua, you
then went two yeira to college in Hi Idea he la?

a. Yes.

'rfhat profession ,-id you then cr.ooso?
a. It was ay intention to becoso e aerchont.

how lon c were you octlve in tnla profession?
a. ^fter two years training I was in a oubllshlng
i. Usc; froi 1924 I worked until 1935 with a few interruptions
In that branch.

<. Did you carry out r.ny orlvato studies in oddltlon
t our orofossior.?

a. Yea; I wrs interested in historical and rellgiouo
questions, ns well os aualc.

i. Did ou Join : ny youth covenants; the Pfad-flndor
Bund or any such novecent?

a. Yea wr.on I wc.s in tr.o dyannlsuu:, I w. 3 a neober
of tr.e '.’andervogel und lot<-r I Join .a the Pfndfinder Bund.
(Boy Scouts)

Did .ou have any le din* positions in these youth
org. nizoticns?

Froa 1928 on, I led c •- urging cossur.lty, it was

* a

cwe;oosc 4 of uiwabers of various outh organizations.

How Ion-, were you so active?

Until the iiezl Party dissolved these orgcnlrations

5657


A.


Court 1

«pril 9 -a- 15-15-T-HD-P-: ehan-3ro vn.

in 1&33.

Was your activity In the Youth itoveoents of a
p lltical nature or nonpolltlcnl?

It was in general unpolitical; ita goal was simply
tho healthy ed-catlon of youth and the repudiation of
political cohesion whether for the rl b ht or the left and
also demanded respect for deep religious convlctlcna.

Mr. President, at tr.ls time I subnit Docunent
Slcvers Ho. 13 ns Exhibit Slevers Ho. 1, page 30 of the
docunent book. Tnle is on affidavit by Heim Ulrich Slebor,
which I shall road:

"I bocane personally acquainted with Volfrau oleverB
in the years 1931 tnrough 1933 ct Stuttgart in tno boy-
scouts movement. At tnat tine I was /bout 15 yoars of ago
and met him, who was my older charade, often at caopo and
hikes of tho buy scouts. He also case frequently to dog
me ct the house of ny parents in those days.

"olevers iapresoed no, as woll as the other boys, as
a scr. of singular integrity, at whatever occasion we cane
into tvuch with hie. In verd and deed he was an example
cf the bty-scouts 1 virtues; correctness, efficiency and
readiness to help others.

"In no wry has he influenced us in any party-political
sense nor nr.s he preached hatred ogalnst other huorn beings,
and thus ho helped all the boys, who cane in touch witn him
tower^6 a humanly irreproachable and genuinely Independent
aorcl basis for their future llv^6. B

How I put in as evidence clovers Document No. lfi, page
48 of elvers Document 3cck Ho. 1; this will be Exhibit
clovers No. 2. This is an affidavit on the tx rt of the
n c renant Goor b e «dolf Monzel, I read the contents:

"I set «r. .'clfram clev.re in the second half of the
n


twenties


5656


Court I

9 Apr u7-A - 15-16 - la - LJG - -cchan (Int. Brow.)

•?-. HaHDI: Hay I inquire at this tiro how -any such character
ref-renc- affidavits tfao dofonso ccunsol wishes to introduce? In addition,
I should like to inquire if the four witnesses requested by defendant
Si-v-rs will bo available during trio presentation cf the Sievers' case
tnis weak, so that I »ay as well know what typo of evidence is being
submitted so th.t 1 nay =oro or lass object to any as I SuO fit?

DR. BQEJCi: *t this time, I sinply intend to subnit these two docu-
&-nts. In the course of the direct examination, I shall introduce
roughly UO documents. Document Book Ho, 2, as I have just found out,
has not yet been submitted to the Tribunal but I hav«, been promised that
Document Book Ho, 2 will be r.ady by tomorrow corning. The four wit¬
nesses, v-hon I havo narud, will bo available at the correct timo and I
ossuoj th:t day after tomorrow when I an through interrogating ny client,

I can put than on tho stand.

MR. Ha?DT: Thank you.

DR. 3CiKI continue with ry reading of this affidavit:

"I ..«-t t. .lolfrosi Siovors in the socond half of tho twenties in
Stuttgart, whore ho bolongud to tho youth movement (formerly '*iandor-
vcogol'). In accord with this raerborship, ilr. Siovors was a dofinito
individualist with high idoals, genuine husur. warnth and a strong fooling
of right and justico. At that timo ho was coirplutoly opposed to tho
..'azi r-rty and its aethedsj he rejected tho Hitler Youth, since it was
ir. naturo and fora diametrically opposed to the ycuth rovo&ent of the
'aardorvocgol' (Iiandorors). He was an aesthete and an upright, frank
character, for whom a thing was useful only if it was also morally good.

-is sensitive and soft nature was one of his typical characteristics.

M Later I 3aw .lr. Silvers onco again, briefly, in Evrlin. *t thU
ti-e ho was already working fer the 'Ahnftnorbo. 1 There igaln I did not
.-a the improssion th:t r. Si.vors had c icgsd his inner attitude toward
l!w tMtoncy and methods of the Pfcrty and tow-rd ..osis-,. In other r-sp-cts,
ten, he had ruralned thu sa-e."

An<1 » t.en thure follows the signature and tho certification.

5659


Court I


9 « j 17-a - 15-16 - LOG - 2a - l-eehan (Jnt. Brown)

.Li KJSrDBNT: The co of this affidavit, contained in tho
Dccuruat Book furnished .tho Tribunal, contains a further statement in
tho affidavit.

D?-. dCZrL.s I aa sorry, but I did not understand the Tribunal?

TH3 r.-ZSIDSLT: In tho copy of this affidavit in tho Document Book,
tnjrc is another par. - .g r a ph .

DR. &CSH i Document Ko. 19, which I have just put inj that is tho
one you are referring to is it net?

THE PRESIDENT i las.

DR. BCE2C.ii I read the essential port of tho Documont.

LIE RiESYDBNTi I understood you to st..to you intended to road tho
ontiro Document; that was tho reason for my question.

DR. BCSD.i No, I siu;-ly wants--d to read tho ossontlal oart of tho
Document, «hich I shall do in tho futuro with all =y Docuaonts.

BY DR. BCSKKt

3 . Mltnoss, is it correct that you narried in 193h and that throo
chlldror. resulted from that marriage?

A. Y-3.

Until your ontranco in th- Nasi *arty, did you havo anything
to do with party politics?

a. No, I as not int-r-stud in politics at all.

«. Arcund 1930 did not political pr<*l«->s btgin to encroach on
the ycuth organisations to ihich .ou belonged?

a. Our efforts wuro dir.ctud to hoop the- youth organizations free
of party influence ana various political parties. Tn-ro were at that
tine t.:ro than thirty parties in ‘.rr.any who made an effort to rooruit
tho youth. Gur efforts wora directed to develop tho ycung men's per¬
sonalities, but not to -onku prty tubers cf then.

Q. Around 1730 did you — t in the youth organizations a person
sno was of decisive i portar.ca in the develop of your career*

a. Yes; in 1929 I -t Dr. iriedrich Hielscher, who exercised a

strong i.ifluence upon ae by hi3 lucturas befor- the youth movements.

5660


9 . -ril-»-DJG-17-l-Bums (Br.-wr.)

court. 1


In the puri.d thereafter ii'i y.u have- any particular contact
-„ith tills ’.ct r Kiulscher fer any special reason?

«. Ifc* cent,act with Dr* Hiclschcr was net interrupted after wo
z-.-'t each ther's acquaintance. On this it becaa*. closer and closer
-n *-v<-r. in 1929 i»&s -f the cpini.n that thv. Nazi Party was o danger
f r cur y uth organization. In the ccurac .f longer, extensive
c nverseti ns we e-no tc the question wo would have U recognize this
danger. Dr. Hielseher suggested that I should apply for acaborship
in the Nazi .arty which I did then in 1929 sc that wo might have a c
closer insight in this -longer.

Q VJhrt lid you end Dr. Hiolschtr hepo tc achieve fcy y<ur
entering the HSDaP?

.. The only thin- that wrs important uns for us tc have insight
into the party's intentions. ho lid r. .t trust their propaganda uvon
at thnt tine.

Q C-uld you realize this intonti n at thrt ti.-ao? Could yeu do
anythin? regardless f it?

.. Yes, I would achieve insight into tho cultural aspects of tho
*’rty end the real set for the y.uth organizations .f the Nazi Party.

T Did y u inferu Dr. Kieiochcr ef what y.u had found cut?

>. I kept hin currently info re. d.

Q -r.i hew lour 'lid yeu continue this activity?

.. Until about 1930.

Q Fer rrhr.t r risen thor. did you withdraw frea the 1 arty in 1931?

.. Hiclschcr and I felt thft the reas.no I join d tho Party had
tcvn sufficiently net. In afJiti.n I was ».3kct: U jein tho S,. which
I lidn't want tc dr.

Did Dr. Hiclschcr Iv,. yeu any specific tasks r duties in
the KSD..T?

1 rra t. attest tc £et in touch *ith lending persenarcs cf

the J1SDAP in order tc report or. then. rurth_r, I wos tc attend to

achieve r. position from which I could have insight into the activities

5661


9 .-rril-..-3JG-r7-2-Bums (Senior)
C urt 1


ie: ir personages -f the Tarty.

C Did you succeed in this?

.. Yes. In the Spring cf 1935 I succeeded by ,ref. Hermann
drth te get in tcuch of the Ahnonorbe.

C Did y i kn.w iref. ;.irth earlier?

.. Yes, I sale his acquaint,-uicc arcund 1930. rref. birth lived
in H'rfcur.; and was c pro-hist, rian and I h d boon interested in pre-
hist ry md wes his Secretary. I r< 2 oained his sccr«.tery from Nevonber
:f 1932 until Pebruary 1^,3.

Q bh an did rrof. birth appear in tho .Jinenerbe Institute?

4 . That uas in the course ef the year 1933.

Q «ni then in 1935 ycu turned tc i rof. birth asking hie to

«

uso y-u f.r hiaself cr the ..hncnerb„?

He, cn tho contrary, Iref. birth turned tc oc.

f t bh"t opportunities did y.u see ct carrying cut tho took that
Dr. Hielscher had said y.u were?

.. be knot that birth had cennocticns rith Himler. I thought
I dght have run opportunity of penetrating into Hinder's str.ff in
this way if havirv* insight inte it.

Q lea the nhnenorbo Instituto cf KLanlvr?

«. bell, it was in sc far as birth auegootod t hin tc create
an institute which ■- ul' ccnccrn it3vlf with Nordic ruaearch werk.

Hind or t. .k up that Hop. end that's h.w tho Ahnenorbe became a
re.lstarod Ess.clati.r. on tho lat cf July 1935 with birth the i resident
an* 1 I bucw: the SccTetary-Concral.

DR. bilSGZRBZR: Ur. *re3i !cnt, in th»t ccnnucti^n I should like

• refer t. the instituti n oallwi .-hne-norbo. I sn uld like- t^ offer

0-cu-ent Sievers He. 1 tvhich can be found cn pegs 1 cf tho Document

VcIubo H . 1. This will beevno Exhibit He. 3. This is a chart of tho

personal staff. This chart w, 3 droriy submitted in tho D. cucont

V.-lua. Kudo If Brandt. I else inciu !o that cua-nt in ny beuaent

VOlunc by purposes cf ccapaniscn. The office Afcnenorbe —

5662


9 ril-..—DJG-17-3“Buma (Rcalcr)
G. .rt Be. 1


15.. K-iiDI: It's dready cn exhibit. Is it necessary t( dve
th- ether jehibit number?

THE I h.ISESJn: It Kill probably zzkc it rcru convenient to have
it nunt.r.! in the Dccuacnt Beck but carkei duplicate by riving it
another exhibit nuafccr.

Eft. ’;22SG7I£u.i I give the dccuacnt as Exhibit No. 3 and ns I
aii fcof' re I cnly include it, this dccuaent, in ray bo*k in order tc
.;ive y;u a ccapletc picture of the .Jmcnorbo Institution. The Offico
.hr.unorbc r.ppvnra cn this ch'rt in the first re* cn the left-hand sido.
Jit further wcplanaticn is necessary in ay opinion. I further offer
the Dccuacnt Siwors Ko. 2 nhich ern be found on p-;o 2 of D-cunent
V-luiv Silvers lie. 2 which will bee eve Exhibit Sievers Nc. L. This is
’ chart end contain# = description ef the Institution ,-hn.ncrbo. Wit¬
ness, I shall have this document hondod to y.u in erdor t. enable you
t dv_ the Tribunal a short description f the organisation cf the
Institution .hnen^rbe, in other words.

J£i. H.Ju>?: If I understand thie correctly tho affidavit of
Sievers is the certificate with the chart -ttnehed thereto. Is thrt
it? In ether words, the chrrt is *rt of Exhibit No. 4. Is thet
c rrect?

Dh. .EISCJiBS.s The chart is Exhibit .Jo. 4. I think tho
.rcsocutcr was not quito dorr ab.ut thrt.

il-i. H./0* . That'# whet I unduTstcc !; thr.t the chrrt is Siovors
Exhibit 4.

DK. ■..5ISGS33.: Yes. ’.Itncss, usin; this chrrt Kill you plorso
Ie3;ribo the reeniaction cf .hnenerte? Strrt froa the * resident
nd work dcKTiKirIs.

" The . reoi-wnt rn! Chrirnan cf the .hnenorbe ..ssocir.tion, was

the heichsfuohror SS Hinder. The .Jinenerbo, which «as to be a

recwrch and reaching rjscd ti.n was tc be a similar . r rani catio n

l; cxistin g acaled-s or scientific societies which, in addi-

-ion to the Universities had tc vor certain spheres cf research end

5tc3


9 .. rti-. .-jJG-l 7 -4-5ums (uczUcp)
C urt : l . 1


suvccrt thoa* The scicatif head cf the .Jincncxbc ms the Director
tii- University -imich, .ref. ucst, *hc w: s the Cur ter. Under hin
woro th- su'-cr’in-tcs, the scientif departments, 'hieh esn bo feuni
:n the left-hind cf the chrrt. There were 46 of such dopartaents.
3,y:nrt that thcro ».cra t' ut 15 research assipnaents and nunbers cf
these ■ ssi^/nients, thv. sciantif department, wore headed by scientists.
Th-v r .'. 1 t • r pi fossors r lecturers at - University,

Suaaerltin?, thvxc 46 scientific .lercrtncnts ,vai th- 15 research
rsai-nxciits in’, arriving t the Si urc cf 61, 1 h/.vc tc state th.it 30
f thoc Mere prrfess rs, th't is, pccplj rh- -.tcre residing r.t G.rann
Universities. Fourt-cn voro l.ctun-rs end t*c - ere rcturlly lecturing
r.t Universities -art 13 Cf thus 1 ore -c "eic -rr X tes, poc;-lc "he at
iny tin. could start r. univrsity cere or.


56*4


..pril 9-..-BK-18-1-Gross (int. Ecnhler)
Court No. 1 * -


. .'itaoss, uo sh.J.1 cone to that later when discussing
subsequent locun^nts. I don't think wo need go into tho
details t this tine. Would you plouso explain your own
poMcncl position?

.. ..3 Gonorr.l Secretory, which was later eh ngod into
Reich Business Manager, I had to bo responsible for end
care for the jntiro administrative problems of the Secre¬
tary’s office, budjet, cs is sot out in tho square which
one orn soo undornoath Hoich Business Unnagor. In addition
I had to hond tho ..hnonorbe Foundation Publishing H 0 uso
whioh was founded in 1937 and which can bo found on tho
right hand side of the chart.

. ..nd now, Witnoss, on tho l~ft bottom half of this
chart one can see : little square which roads: "In3titutu
for Military Scientific Sosenreh'' with seven subordinate
dap art Dents. ..t this time I only want to ask you when
this Institute was founded and -offill ted to .dmonerbo?

.. Th t was in tho year 19 «2.

(. The n.xt Exhibit whioh will be No. 5 i3 Dooumont
Siov.rs No. 3 which follows right of tor Docunent Siovurs
No. 2, exhibit No. -i. This is tho affidavit of wolfrau
Siov.r3 Certifying the correctness of the two charts
submitted, n;u.oly chart no. 1 r.r.d ch'rt no. 2 .

..3 tho next dooucent 1 offer Siovors No. 3 which can
b, found in Document nook Biuv.rs I or. p.ago 3, that will
become Exhibit No. 6

JI7DGN SNARING: .that was counsel’s Exhibit 5?

DK. ..2I30.RB2R: Exhibit 5 is Document No. -1 - Docun^nt
Ne. -i. I think I nrdo a nistr.ko right now. Dcouoont No. 4
is to bo found on p-ge 5 of Dee urn .at Volume I.

Then I offer document oi.v rs No. 3 qhioh is found on
I ,e 3 in Document Volume I which will be Exhibit Slavers

56o5


..pril 9--.-BK-lS-2-Grcss (let. Rsnnlor)
Court -« T 0 . 1


6. This is a compilation of the Scientific Departments
3f the H.s- rch -nd Instruction Society ..hnenorbe. They
rro listed her*- - the 46 departments which already apporr
an oh- chart and it is st .t*d hero quite briefly what the
scientific activity of the various departments was. I don't
door; it necessary to road this document in its entirety
and I should like tho Tribunal to take judioial notioo of
it.

On the second page of this docuaent ono finds another
list of research assignments which were already mentioned
by my client. The last listing is the Institute for
Military Scientific Research of tho Wnffen S3 and the.; .®
Polioe. This includes the deprrtr.onts: 1. Rcscher. 2.
rlootnur, end 3. Hlrt, and then 4. Lnta.ologloal Instituto.
Ttu-n, 3. Military Scientific Department for Ch .lk Geology,
il.ath-n .tioal Dop-rtmont, and finally, tho Institute for
Breeding Research.

witness, would you please answer a few questions relating
to that document? You woro already speaking about tho *16
scientific dopartnont3 iid about the various research
assignments and we arrived at a total of 61. Tho dopart-
;:-nt:.l heads and tho people in chrrgo of research assignments
ycu said woro 30 professors, 1-. lecturers, and furthermore
th-re woro 13 noadonio graduates who -wore lecturers at
universities an! four laymen re soar oh workers?

.. Y-s, that Id corr-ct.

: I an now interest-d about tho political nako-up of
these 61 persons. Can yeu tell us something as to what extent
th-3o 61 people woro combers cf the 3J, MeD.-P, etc?

— It was net c-npulsory that the do; .rt..-nt heads of tho

-tn-nerbo were to ec members cf the Party or tho S3. Of

th-31; 61 persons 47 woro n-r-bers cf the ?;rty, 20 woro members

5666


9 ... ;-il-.-CJG-1S—3-Grr ss (Int. Krsl.r)
Cco.’fc - L. 1


o' the SS, 33 were net in the SS end 14 wore net even in the Forty.

Q Could j u subdivide these f urti.cn c little further?

.. ..ell, S cf these 14 were pclijicnl p-rsecutcos, tw;. were
ceth lie clorcyson, end three *orc foreigners.

C. Thank ycu. Th t is sufficient.

la th- next lccu.-v.nt I offer Sievers He. 5 which is in DccuiLent
Vcluac Silvers I cn p? ;c 7 which sill btccao ebehioit Sievers Ne. 7.
This is r dceuoent which >*s already submitted tc the ILfT cs Decua^nt
49GIS. It contains tho statutes of the Research rthd Teaching Society
.hnenerbo. I "sk the Hijh Tribunal tc take judicial n.tico ;f that
i cua.nt zsii I only c.nsi’er it expedient tc renu paragraph# 5,6,7,

and G.

"5. Directors.

"The directors cf tho Research *>nd lunching Society consist of.."

This can be f ;und en - •-.ge- 9 cf the Decuaent Book.

"1. The prosident who is rt the sccc tic;c tho chcirarn ml
lc t -rl re. resent tive .f tho ruisteiod sccicty in tho oenso of *ar.

26 cf the Ctra-ji Civil Cedo.

"2. The curator.

"3. Tho Reich Business iinr^cr.

"The Reichsfuchre^SS is tho president.

"6. .rcsi'ent,

"Th-- president at-neo at the h.ad cf tho Rose-rch :nd Tot chine
Society. Hu is in ch-r’o cf:

"1. the rlirocti. n cf the Research ml Top chin; Society. Ho
decide# :n the distribution cf business ml dutemin-a the individual
tasks; m* 0

"2. He a.. :ints and ir^ic3-s ohe curator and the Kuich
alciinistrrt.r;

"3. Ho ; : ints m ' diaadssos tho ctbbors;

"4. He authorizes the budget;

"5. He- ?lcne is authorised tc undertako alterations -f the

56c7


9 ... rfl-.-Jv'G-ir-<-Gr; ss (Int. L*aler)
Jcurt 'I . 1


charter end tc dissolve the society, in cs far ns this is permissible
-.Tier tho existin' Iv’ni rccul-ticns.

"7. Curat r.

"The curator is in charge vT the scientific w.rk cf tho society
«thir. the fr oxncrk cf the <iir«.ctiv.a fiv.n hia by the president.

"E. ich c'-iinlstratcr.

••Th-- hoi eh business aaneger will deal with the society's business
hj is res,-: ns ill f r business : ..-nisnticr end "lainistr/ti: n, fer
diming up the tu -.t ■ t twC; ... accounts."

i.i'.nasb, tea th ru a flncncid Mvrntago which caused you tt
ch-nv y.ur rjfoasicn a pubiishin busLnesa srr.?

.. !I . In 1935 I alr.riy h- d -n ii«cc~- f rt ut 6CO narks
in th.-t profess! r., thorora Secr-t ry (kn.rni t f hhnontrbo _nly paid
narks n xor.th,

C ‘ orw th0 finrncid expeevtiena in the .JmujerLe .-ro t.r
thrn -xpectiti.ns ycu c. ul .! h.pe f,r in the .utliahin burinoss?

- • an liA'b. nhlch sets sbscwhnt

-ievo 700 Berks Jitar Benth. I -a sure that In Ulu publishing business
* * eld hive had such ir.c.taich, each c'-rlivr -a’ I re 3uro 1 would
u’Vo . m_d n.ru in 19i3 *.r - .-ullieh-r.

; uere there r«y ether rdv-nt- .s c. nnected vith y.ur pvsiticn
* l th - < J;r »-r..rV- < r ‘ ,j ru v.u lead U expect such advantages?

• • d anrriod .-t the ond -f 193*..

r business was very fnv rchla.

Seci-.t-ry . r the .dmcnerbo 1 h-d U chtn-e qy flat end reside -.t


’ Xl:: - But u —J in 1936 when I suceoodod In fladin -rt-
*n: a.til tle-.t ti hr i t by oc;-- rate -1 frto a: wife and bnly *

• i-f-v.r in th-t ccnnuCticn.


- Witness, is. ether words y.u are s:yi n- th-t it was «n ieer.

" U '‘ *. “«uae this ; siti. n -3 :._ich business Jana* or

iJir.cnerte and you will probably arr-c with me th-t it is net

v *-: 'olievc that anyone r_uld be prepared tc trite into account

5tc8


9 ..pr4I---3JG-l-5-Grcaa (Int. n«clur)

Ccurt K:. 1


s-.z h iissdvantar._3 end only f.llcws a new ecurse cn account of or.
ilea, £.3 y:u said ycu did?

I crr.seier.ti -sly oxa t dncd all cf these lisadvanta.-es be¬
cause th_ oir.3 rf irofssscr Klelscher and his yrcups wore acre important
t: nc then any disedventr ws.

Q The position cf hoich Business manner cf ..hnenerbo was held
ty you until the end of the l.sr?

.. Yea.

q Did ycu ernsi '.tr this position having the . oasibility cf
resuming ycur position with Kiulsehcr?

« .Jinoncrbc was a rc,ia; r«! s doty. Sinew Hi.-A ct was its
president it was net -asy tc -establish c- ntrct Uth evury rrcncy
'.r..r th.\n these that ease within juris-licticn -f the SS. It was
such easier tc •>. any ».rk fr.u the ..hn.nerbo which was cure or less
in neutral rrcun s than it would havg boon free any SS efency.

~i In tho subsequent period ycu eft.n pet in touch with Himmler
• I *> -1! bo int-rwstx’. tc h- rx somethin * fr a you about that,

.. '.hen Hinder in 1937 be-coac .'.resident of .'•hncn-.rto I occas¬
ionally establish eel ccntrct with his. Hew end * ; Jr; I vas trie red
i- rt to him or scootines ordered to have dinner with him.

: i -hat rc-s it that y u htd tc re-p.rt t KLsalvr?

.. ..beat rc-niztticnnl and financial quest! on? as they rulatod
* f.M-s ss •••.ich busineiaaanr ‘er.

' - irl "- u ^3= report t: the curat:r ru-erJin-* these questions?

“ I reported to both rcoilarly <dx«tt ell these quest':ns bo-
'- uae t-th wore ouporiorr.

; in order t. clarify forth t happenings I consider it necessary *
:*-u riwfly tell the Tribunal about this situation sc they r.iay
-i! r • or. i -hat train thewhto you sere subject tc. . refesser
■ * 15 iif<-ct r-cf the limich University, icsn't he? Crnsideriru-
*' - r ration, you must consider that ycu yourself were in Berlin,

-- any difficulties arise?

5649


9 ;r.-A-GJ-19-i-Bi~lsi-(int.Ranler)-
C'urt 1


A This Separati n naturally aa!c the work a*rc difficult, cspe-
cirlly sin. I had t go very ften v- .iuest at Munich while th. . thor
tuin 'iAiuSt repeat ily visited nt in Berlin. Cwing t the special sepa¬
rate n it b.cnnc accessary that I repeatedly had tc represent Wuest at
c nf.rences and had t si, n letters rclatin to natters which really
i n t c«lcn; within ny sper. cf tasks.

Q The prcsccuti-n in connection with the counts which arc hare
un Yr the in.!ict9cnt has sufcoittod a noaber f letters which bear si¬
gnature. I an at first interest..'. t lor wether the entire ccrresp. n-
!.nc. arriving at the Ahntnerbo went thruh y-ur hanls.

A That ms n t the cis.. Because rt the Independence af tho dt-
vartcental heads and the decentralise * creanixati n -,f the departments
it canu ab ut that a lur-ro amount -f the nail lid net through ne
' orriwd at the icpartocntil heads, respectively. They, in turn,
when icprrtant natters cane up sutoitu those natters t> the curator
Pref. 'ucst.

r 4 Could y u y ursclf re'er any research assignenent to bo carried
ut in th. franc w.nc .f tho .vhnonerbo?

a S , 1 could n t lc that. Only the. president, Hiaalcr, r thu
curat:r, -ucst, could .lc that.

4 «t a liter tine r. shall c.ao back t the fact that in one or
thcr cases you did that, n.-vorth.less, but at any rate we shall talk
ib-ut that later. The Ahnuwrbc nlj loalt scientific tasks?

“ In accordance with its r anisaticn its tasks nly dealt with
cultural -and scientific w rk end actually corric * such w rk thr ugh.

o Vh-n f r the firet tine, ms the Ahnenerbe L rivcn ti3ks rtiich
r nicr.Uy ha n thin t '. with that society?

“ That happ.nc n tiu. 1st f January 19h2, by order f Hinnlcr
-h.n h. riere’ that an .nth ocl ical institute be rectcd.

Q T Hinder .ivc that rdcr?

“ ”« the «hnciierb-_.

' .'os the Ahn.ncrfce at that tine an ffice within the KcichsfUeh-
rcr 3 S rganizitin? ? 670


9 »?r.-„-GJ-19-2-3i-lsi-(int.rta=lcr)-
C urt 1-

* Yes.

Q noil, thu iopartcont chief ins *r f. fucst, wasn't he?

« Yes, that is true.

Q Did the Ahncncrfcc in subsequent perieds receive tasks which
r aMcally lidn't bclcn^ t? it?

* «t the bt^innin^ :f -arch 19 12 Dr. Raschcr approached the
nhncnwrbc and inf med then that h'ir=ltr had erdered that the Ahnener-
be wul' take ~vcr his work at Jaehau.

Q Hed ycu kn wn this Dr. Sascher fr a bef re?

A Yes, I ha. kn. wn his since the year 1939.

i Inwtmt c nnccticn i.l yru nakc Dr. .^aschcr's acquaintance?

a truest at that tin,, was inf rs. • by HiBtdor that a certain Dr.
Baschor was to r coive a ia^.n sis ef cancer illn.ssos. This assi,meant
r»-s not t. carried cut because ef ftaschcr be-in.; r'rafte:' irt the Luft-
vraffo I this canner .:n oppcsitl.n btcano suporflu us is records a
science whei ha: really- n thin, t Sc with the Ahnerwrbo.

Q <,hy did ycu at that tine bclivVu that yru Wvul! have to epprse
mi- such nssi.-na^nt -iven t Dr. Raschcr?

a At the tine wh.n neither Pr> f. Wucst >.s curat-r n.r I as busi¬
ness nr.nv.cr had kn wloigc cf any dopartauntal head by the nano of Ra-
scher, n article appearui in th~ wcll-kn wn periodical callei n The--
.eek in which quiu excitin. results in cancer research w u rc nonti nod,
n! thu sane f Dr. Raschor was p inteJ ut as the icpartacntil head in
thw nhnon roe. I iccciiatcly n.tifie! curat r it’uest, as well is Hicalcr,
: that fact fcu n thin- cone f this entire affair because Raschcr
*“- 3 !raftt int Luftwaffe. Sincu ru.st an! 1 iod nbt approve of this
iac n3i: '' r “ tc noth f Dr. Rascher tr put Hlc-.Kr int the f rernund
-r rej^ctin attitude revive., itself when Rascher nc^ n ro appeared
in I9!i2 at the Ahnenerfc-.

5 1 n * c ce t y ur participati n in the hi. h altitude -xperi-
: r.ts f Dr. Rascher, in: I shall nave the D euaent S k Jftabor 2 f the
Fr secuti n shrwn to yeu.

( witness receives the- purp-rted 3c k.)

5671


? :pr.- a-GJ- 19-3-5iclsi- (int. basic r) -
Cfurt 1 -

.'ill ycu please turn to pa^c 61, and page 59, in the English Bock
translation. This is the Dccuaont Me. 15161-A, Exhibit L6 of the Pre-
socutim. As it can be sewn free this dccuncnt ycu nacle an inquiry on
thw 9th of March t- the 9th cf “arch 19la2 to the personal staff of
the n-ichsfuehrer SS. The inquiry referred tc Dr. nascher, since this
inquiry itself is nrt available as a drcuccnt I should like to ask you
toll us fres your on non cry what its subject was.

n As far as I reaoabcr Hasehor at that tiae turned tc Wucst, who
ms in -'Munich, oni then t- no, ani told us that certain research werk
which he was carrying ,ut by crier of the Luftwaffe at Dachau were to
supported by the a.toinistration cf the nhm.nerbc. Since he, however

said that he wasn't allowed tc -ivc us any n re dotaila I turned tr the

••

pure.ml staff cf the ^eichofuehrcr S3 in ricr tr. t *ain more information
ftbcut that natter.

Q ihat support was to be .;i.vn - Dr, lecher on the part cf the
a Jainistrati.n cf the »hnencrbc?

« He was tc be supp rtc■ re.ardin; the supply of equipnent, ap¬
paratus, arv:' tho cstafclisho-nt cf c nnecti ns with scientific institu-
ti ns with when Cwllr.b ratten Seined t' be necessary with reference tc
r’schwr'3 werk. T tt is supprrt was n t used at the bc.;innin because
the Luftwaffe rtadu everythin, that was me e! available.

3 Di ! ycu at that p.ricd cf tino kn.w - that is, when receiving
U: - letter of tr.e 21st f “arch 19L2 - that this c.ncern:; with experi¬
ments :n hunan boin,^?

A This nly b cane evident t a. when n the basis cf this letter
:atc! the 21st cf March 19Ji2 0 talk-.: t Dr, Raschcr at Dachau.

Q 'hen was that?

A That ns at the ,ni :f March 192x2, er n the 1st cf April. At
22 - r ' m -» after tills letter - oither the end -f March of the bc-

jinning -f April.

Q Had you be-cn in any c sneentratien c an before that date?


9 April-A-GJ-19-fe-BicIsi-(int.Rmlcr)-
C.-urt 1-

Q Ccul-I ycu «.ntcr the etneentratirn casp at Dachau in the
subsequent period ,-f tia; without any ADO?

.. Nc. For that pBepese an express approval was necessary, an ap-
. reval an: a directive by H'mler, which was done during that first
visit. After that I had t' repert to the ccmaniant >f that casp and
ha.: t shn i statement *hich cbli/;od ct tc kocp sccrc-cy, and further-
= re, I was n tt, talk to the ireaates recording porscnal natters.

It was always necessary tc report tc the c man*ant personally if

-t nay tin- in the future a IXirtner visit was tc take place.

4 - , V * -


9 April li7-A-A7D-20-l-Burns (Int. Racier)

Court Kb. 1


0 It vas at the end of ’larch 19k2 whan for tho first time
you cano in contact with Dr. Rase her in the Concentration Cnep at C
Dachau?

A That's right.

q '•'cro at that tiiao tho high-altitudo exparinor.ts of Dr.
Raschor started?

A Tos, thoso exporinonts wore alroa-fcr being carriod out for
a littlo noro than one month. That is, ovor sinco tho 22nd of Febru¬
ary 19U2 but that is soaothing I only found out hero through the
testimony of Koff.

q Up to that period of tdno you know nothing of thoso
exporinonto?

A V o.

q Is it corroct that on invitation of Raschor you watchod
one 3uch axporlnont?

u Yes, that is corroct. Yhon on that day I arrived at Dachau,
of courso, at tho end of March Dr. Raschor intro'Jucod Dr. Ronborg to
-o and wo thon carriod out an oxporir.ent.-ct tho pros sure chanbor. I
sntchod two of thoao oxporir-ento.

1 Did participation of thoso experiments fall within your
tasks os they wore dofined by tho ordor of Hirrlor?

A No, it didn't belong to ry tide but Raschor roquostod no
to watch thoso experiments.

q Tfhat did you find out about tho oxporlr.ontal subjoct on this
accasion, and whit did you know about tho courso of t heso experiments
ml I an 3poakinr of tho experiments which you yourself watchod?

» A nusbor of experimental subjects wero there. The experiments
>a-o carriod out by Dr. Rc-iorg and Dr. Raschor. I 3Fokc to thoso
experimental subjacts both of whon received no ham and urxrrod con-
pi toly fit after tho experiments. One person rho had lost his con¬
sciousness during tho experiment afterwards refused to believe that ho

tel baco-o unconscious. This pfconmena inter os tod no and I entered in*r

567A


9 April .7-.--.IT-2C-2-Purns (Int. Ranler)

Cocrt Yo. 1

a conversation with that ran sinco I couldn’t isaglaQ that one
vculdr.’t know about the fact of having bccoce unconscious. In that
correction tt® nan pointod to a rwrber of fi&uros which ho wrote
tiring thi3 aq^ortoent which woro not interrupt <x!ir*.n his opinion.

1 frvs Dr. Ronborg prosont during thoso oxperinonts?

A Yes, Dr. Rosborg was present.

o Did you discuss with those exporlrontal subjects whether
thoy vrero volunteers?

A I spoke to both of then sinco I was intcrostod in that
ratter. Rancher had told no that those eccporinontal subjects woro
volunteers, and HL-nler oonfimod that, "or that reason I askod
whether hurnn people had voluntcorc 1 for thoso oxporlr.'nts. Tho
answer was mda that =»ro pcoplo had volunteer od for the - xporir.;mt
than ooull bo used at the nonont. I inquired what tho reason was that
thoy volunteered for such oxporl* .arts and the roFly was node tlmt in
this carp ovary opportunity is oeiaod to improve ono’s condition. This
v-aa a new train of thought for no booauso up until that tine I had

never boon in a concentration can?.

q Did you roport to Hlmlor about thoso two ©cperlnonto whioh
yyi attended at the <md of ".arch, Rancher hintod this in hie lottor of
5 .rril 19U2addrossed to the Roichsfuehrer SS? In this connection I
refer to pago 62. This is tho lottor by Raachor to tho Reichsfuehrer
3S, datod 5 April 19U2 which is Docunont of tho Prosecution 1971--,
Exhibit L9, rrhich is to bo found on .ag. 6C of tho English trans¬
lation. In this lottor it says SS OborstAunbannfuahror Diehl took
*.t for a few days wntohin.;; axporiewnts and probably my hovo pi von
you - brdof report. Did you report to Hisnlor about what you had soon
in ~ech.au and wh- n was that?

A In viwr of tho way Raschor expressed Mnsalf it is impor¬
tant to stato that he i3 Boralc' (repressing an assumption. Has tor 19U2,
that is on tho 5th of April, shortly aft r I ha ’ sc r. this experiment
I discussed :dth RirrOor. Certainly I wasn’t in a position to give him

56? 5


9 April U?^-A7T-20-3-5urns (Int. Realor)

Court !5o, 1

report about it for the tochnical pro-requisites or anything that
nouli have enabled no to givo hin a corroct description I lacked.

Raaohor in this letter aentioned that you had been very
lntorootod In thi3 woric. How do you explain this passago in Raschcr's
letter?

A This letter written by Raschor to HL-nlor is not known to
-ic, which also applies to the entire correspondence of Rascher with
Hirnlor or vico vorsa. For that r eason I car. only assuao that Raschor
chose this expression in tho letter to HJrelor in order to score a
point with Grawitz with whoso visit ho was probably not rsatisfied .

If ho speaks about ay interest, ho probably nentions it bocauso accord¬
ing to HLsnlor'fl ordor I had to carry out the support which I had boon
orldrod*

Q ;.t that tir.o in Dachau you recognized that human oxpori-
ronfcal subjeota woro used during thoso high-altitudo oxperinonts.

Apart fron tho order which you, <ld you havo — didn't any oortain
conscquonoo arise for you . orsonally fror. that fact, ovor. if I toko
into consideration that theso two oxperinonts which you observod had
no fetal outoono?

.. Yos. I personally rojoctad thoso oxperinonts on bumn boings.

I rejoctod then without boinr in a position to Judgo whether thoy
woro natoriolly and essentially necessary.

0 Did you co-r.unicato this thought of yours to any higher
agencies?

.. Yos, wh.n I reported to Hiraler at Easter 1912, ordered to
lttoni to field hoatkjoartors, that is, to report regarding othor na^trrs,
I stated tc hin that I had boon to Dichau and that I there witnessed
a high-altitude experiment, and that I was personally rejecting such
jxpjrincr.ts.

•1 And how did HLrlrr ro-act to this stator.^nt?

A HL-nlor spoke tc re and gave no sosao long explanation. Ho

stated that oxperinonts on taenn beings were always carried out where

5676


9 ;.pril U 7-A-*.7D-20-ii-Burr.s (let. Rader)

Coart So. 1

nothing else would do. Ho said that w e were concerned with saving our
Goman fliora whon con dieting theso experiments, and he asked no
whether I when rejecting to such experiments was not indicating that not
ill was being done to save German soldiers.

q Was tho furnishing of experimental subjects your task?

„ Ho, all of these experiments had to bo personally approved

/

by Himnler. Rinaler p-rsonally issuod further directives to tho Reich
Security }fein Offico (RSH-'»). That is, to tho conpotent aeoncios thoro.
Hlnal^r during ttat oonforenco told no that only volunteers woro u3od
for thoso experiments, and in case those oxporimonts nay havo a fatal
rosult only those criminals condemned to death could bo usod and in no
circui-Jtanco wore ar.y political protective prisoners to bo used*

Q On this occasion, during that Easter conforonco of April
191,2, didn*t you oro noro ask HLmslor to givo such research assignments
to another institute, as this ono given to Dr. Raschor?

A Yes, I told Hirrlor that a layman I could nako no reply to
Ids state:, nt but that ir. spito of that I asked him to consider, whothor
it would rot bo more correct — that such nodical experiments wore
transferred to tho sphor* of tho Roichsnrzt S3, since ho was at least
noro ccreiotont in regards thoso oxporinontq than tho Ahncnorbo was.

^ *7oro you succossfbl whon voicing thoso misgivings?

A Unfortunately, no, HLmr-lor statod that no person in tho
world was asking no to carry out theso experiments. I should havo to
laavo to hir. thit his directives w-iro correct. Ho neither wanted
Graa-its nor anyone ?lso ir.du.iod in tho3o research activities, but
wanted to maintain then directly nt his own control. Ho said exprossly
that it was bocau3o he wanted to exorcise a personal influence sir.co ho
? rscr.ally carri jd the responsibility.

THE '~2SIDE!~! ~q rill new adjourn until nine thirty tomorrow

5677


-.-rr.ir-r


mi

10 April-St-G J-l-l-Fos tc r-&z£ .RazOur)-
Court 1

Official Transcript cf th_ ft,trican Military
Tribunal I in the natter cf the U“itc-d States
cf Ac-rica, against Karl Brandt, ct al,
defendants, sittin at »taerabcr.j, Gcroany, on
10 April 1917, 0930, Justice w cals presiding.


I'*7. MARSHAL: pers.ns in the court re- a will please find their seats.

The Hon: rabjo, the Jui'es nf Military Tribunal 1.

military Tribunal 1 is now in sussi n. 0c' 1 save tho U«itc-d States
of Aaerica an this Tribunal.

There will be or-’er in the. court raea.

THE IR SIDS.’fT: hr. Marshal,'will you ascertain that the defen¬
dants are- all present in c urt?

T-IH. UfiSriALt lay it please ycur Hen r, all tho ’.ofenJants are pre¬
sent in tho c urt with the -xouti'.n :f th- Defen .ant Ctoornouser, absent
due tc llln-ss.

THE Pf£SH£NT: The Secretary-General will net- f<r tho record the
.r-acncw cf all the lefon ants in court save the Duf-nlnnt Ob-rh-user
abs-nt on account f illness, pursuant tc .'cct.r's certificate which
will b- filed. Dofoadont Cfc-rh-user r»y be excused free attendance, it
appeirin, that her interests will net be prejudiced.

MR. HARDY:May it pleas-, ycur H n r, at the present tin- we have
in Huernber,; a re. rcs-ntative af th. Mar Criccs Group who has requested
; -raisci n if the Tribunal to intorro at- the Defendant Bevtn this rarrnin,.
The defense counsel of th- Defendant H-v-n has a.;reod an! prosecution is
ai-reo^bl- t. such int-rrr.-ati n if the Tribunal should 3uo fit V 1 disniss
Hovun this armie f.r this interirvati n.

THE PR^SnEHT: Cn th- statement vf c^uns-l for th- pr.sscution anJ


k /■ m - 'x. % j »

acr-JOehi *f counsel f.r the 'efonsc. Defen ant Keren aay be excused fr.n
attendance bef re the Tribunal this n min., subj-ct t thu interrogation

/. I

which has fct-n Dcnti ne:, it a; ;-.aria that his air r.ce fr : th* tribunal


this c^rniaf. will n.t ; r-ju ic. hie irv.r.sts.

5578


10 ril-M-Gj—1-2-?cst,r-(int.33sler)“

Ccurt 1 -

C'unscl may proceed.

WOLFio\!» SILVERS - Resume i
DIIiZCT EX&KZHdTION (Continue)

BY Dr.. LI£G*.UBER ( Counsel for the Defendant Silvers):

Q .'itr.ess, I rcrln:! >xu that yen arc still under oath; you were
sworn In y-steriay.

A Yes.

'2 i.itncss, yesterday at the end f the sossi-n we had reached the

question wither yw were successful your cis. ivim.s tc Hianlcr rtiich went

•

to th effect that the attachment cf the- dspartoont Raschcr and h’lrt to
th. Ahnanorbe ms alien to its tasks an.’, that ycu f-r certain reasons
endoaverod t: keep these departments out of the «hjwnorbo society. Did Hiro-
alor on this occasion state that the execution of further research assi. n-
cents were to be carried cut with the supp rt of the Ahnonerbo?

A Yes. Kimler said th-t in addition r.e wanted the research work
rr f'-rser Hlrt linked to the «hnenerbc since ho considered that to bo
of the utr.cst ir-pjrtmoo. Wi then discussod tho Lest experiments cf which
riirt ha: sp.kcn t. bo, and in which connection he had f naerly carried
ut. ex; erinunto at tho military medical acadexy on /CO's. Hiaoler then
sj>:ntane ualy declared that such experiments would have u step. Ho said
that tho wore beirv; carried cut a ;ain3t tho will of Hltlor, n n etned-
cslencd officers were a re in; rtant as soldiers. I waa told to toll Hirt
that he would ahve t. rej rt to Hisdor about hio work in detail and I
*.-!3 to transmit Himmler's wish to him that Hirt in addition tc his nnlnul
cx, eric_nts, weuli make a f-w practical ox;ericents cn human beinco. Hina-
1 r, who ri -inally wantoi Hirt tc report t. hi... pers onnally-but Hirt was
ill-asked ne tc relieve Hirt f all his *• rk, which * uld keep hia away
l'r.m nls r-.al research activity. In tnisnann.r I cane into contact with
Hirt re. rrdirt- his work.

Q How, .i : ycu :i.cuss this situ:ti.a vith any t.iri parties into
tic.h you .at n tr.. basis of Hical r.s order?

«. subsequent tr this bjtcticn I raise with hinder and which had
a success, I spoke to. ny departmental su p-jrior uu.st


£6 T9


10 April-, —GJ-l-3“F'.stcr-(int.k-.=!cr)•-
Court 1

H, caintaincd the point of vior, however, that Kirsmltr's orders were
*- be carried ut. I than iscusse - ’. this question with cy secretary, :.ndl
t-Id her that I -islik- this entire dcv^ltpacnt. I discussed this ques¬
tion ale with scce of sy friends, for instance. Dr. Hiclschcr.

Eh. .iISGhUIXR: Mr. President, in this connection I intend to
sutait an affidavit of Frau Dr. Scheldt. This affidavit is contained
in -ijcunent Volun-. 11. I heard this nernia that this will bo cospilcd
earin th^ course cf the cornin' ana it is expected it will be delivered
to the Tribunal in the afterno-n.


35e0


10 ,.pril -:7-:r-S* -2&5-1- aloy-Xnfc : . lor

C urt Ho. 1


. 2ubsoouontly iv ro.a rts, roqucsts and inquires
f Dr, “c.scLeir nrrivod at y ur >fi’ico, end tl 01*0 is
reason for tlo assur.jtion tbit ycu gel nod a rather oxton-
sivo piccuro ab ut tie nnr.cr of oxwcutin of Dr. ;: 3 cl.or's
ox. v-ri .onts; isn't tfat c rrect?

. - a sonfc lis ro._ rts liroctly r. Biralcr.

itoy novor r/ont thre uyh no.

.. Didn't any c: >ics cf tloso reports arrive . t your
cfflco?

Hr, tfco ontiro scientific affair, tbo execution, was
calt with ir. ’.iroct cent act trltl Hin lor rod naacl-or.
ru.sckor n.v’.o a socrot rot> rt entitled In c-rdor to savo
tr 1 high altitude.

It np. o rs ti t. this socrot rop rt was sont tr
.lnonorjc, ..t lei st a c of It; f r tl. t roas n tl.oro in
ror.at.n frr tl.o asauupti.n you at lo..st gainod knowledge
«:f this ro;j rt?

I trruldn't went to o xclu’.o tlx possibility that tl.ia
re, rt v s .vise cent tc tl 0 Alxonor'o. It ray h:.vo boon
11a tribat ion list. Kouover, I didn't ro.d th.oao
scientific roperta. 0 ia did n t fall within ay tasks. I
kr.uv n t: ing > t its toclnic .1 . 3 poct. I vr.a r. t infcor-
-i tod in it, bo ecus o it i nly .It vitl :odic..l que tiens.
in -.ret eases I roe. 1 tl.o usia 1 six: cry r:l lch c uld bo
f nl ..t tlo on- tf cay such rop' rt; an.’. the so roperte, as
r t: xjy didn't c neon Rcscl.or , voro oithor trans-
: ittud tc ill:-- lor, r ducat, tr tc tl.o c . .jetont clop; rt-
•cint-.l l oad. .

• Id all new 1 .ve tl o Docirxnt 3 ok 2 of tlx Prvso-
1 ti r. s’, o*./n t. ou ; I s i 1.. 1 3 :o tc discuss r. passage

-r c ..taniea in tl I t, " -223, Exhibit 75,

5581


10 -V ril 47-3I—S“-«2&5-2- .lcy-Int
Ccurt 3I<-. 1


■>-—


lor


:a pago 123 or tho C*orr_-^i toxt, nd page 127 cf tfco
filial. text. ^ is is ; letter by you tc tho Porsonr.l
St.-Tf cf tho --'cicfc-s Fuerror SS, Ir.tod tho ?lst Octcbor
194 In passago 2 you writo thoro that tho high r.ltltudo
ox i'i:.o:v;s wruld hr.vo tc bo err. timed r.n.3 tr .t thcrofr ro
"ho low pressure chcabor wra a'jain required. h'rr did this
lottv r originate?

Fii:ilor l r I i apeotod r. nunbor cf r.g ncios cf tho
:hnonor'-o in Munich* Afterwords c r^otir.y trek place,
wl ich Kaschcr was preront. 3 L;:lor nakod Raechor how tho
situr.ti n *\ r rojardin 1 prossuro chmbors, Rasch.or
acid that tho lew prorauro cir.;bor hadn't ceno back, and
art r. result 3 L:;lor erdurod that I should sorvd fcln n
draft cf r. luttor eddroesod to .Jrrr.lt, which ho wantod to
con*, to tilch. According to Raschor's instructions I
font this draft to Brandt, including this lottor which
;ru have just sutr.itto.*, to

Q# ”0X0 t 0 high r.ltltudo oxp ri:.or.tr thon continued?

. Tfco 3 i k altitu'.o oxpor ;onts woro n-t c ntihttod
' oc v.ro t' o lew proesuro chnabor Vidn't return tr Dachau,

C v,l' ;ru assist in scciny tc it that this lew
.rocauro c;:_f „r i.’.n' t c c beck t Dachau?

. Y. r, th t was .»-.» bio by octr.b irking a c ntact with
tho -olch .'too carck C noil. Dy roforring tr tho empotont
o:p>.rt rh '.o tho vi» c f tho -.1” i'erco Officer and tho
VL, Lch woro known tc no, h.is own, it could "jo provontod,

t’.: in r.lEo f tho oxororr i\.or by Hh-ilor, this lev;

•

pros sure chcabor w: s ro turned “tc. lachr.u cnco noro.

'• I now e it marls o ;• ur activity in crnnocti i wit} tho
• r.ltltudo oreporinonts rf 3>r. Saschor vory briofly* You
rdor free sist Dr, J a eel r in

is oapjr.* • on'ts at dach.au > potting for 3in al tho

56S2


10 .. pril •:7- f-SH-3&2-5- :rlo'/-Int: Hrcsslop
C urt Ifo. 1


necoaanry laboratory oquipnont. I gteto in tl :.t connection
that at ti c tine this cr-'or wc.s issued by Hi ::lur. Dr.
.^.3cl..r fce-i i.lro.'.dy boor. carrying cut lis exporiiionta
f r . poried f r .jprcxiur.toly four wooka. In addition
I air.to th. t ti c lew'pros sure clcnbor w r net furnial.od
by jtu. Upon Iirself's requoat you participator intro
hir) altitude oz. cn. jnta no day, during wlich Dr.

Rc.".bor,; v/r.s also orosont. Ho hr.ruful rosuits ccuid bo
aacortninod aft*.r tl^so oxyoriirenta m tlx oxporfc.ic.ntr .1
subjocta. 3 th oxxrinor.tal subjocta c nfimod to you
t: at t: o; :... volunteered for tl oro oxpori.ionta, Ihoruupon
l’ 1 - si- i t ro.. rt *.c ITi;:lcr r.bcut tkoao oxporironta,

ml up:n tlia cco;.ai n ..skod IlJJtilcr r.ct t: iffillr.to
tiiio rank cf .x.schcr t. tlx ..hnonorbo, acr.oti.ing wlich
Hi: 2%-:« s -rictly rojoctod. "uring tl o c-urao of t: oao
r ta y U t ole no nc tico f any ro. . rta of Raachor,

:r.: t: socrut ropert rl id: I provi ualy diccuarod cnly
i.rrivo; .t tfco . hnon roo ..t r. tl.io wl.on thoro oxporir.onts
already boon ccnclu od. You y ( ,ur3olf st..to tl .5 you
. t roru that socroo ro rt. Ycu . lriit, korovor, tho
^ aaibility f 1 -vijx, ro:. tho f ln.\l aan tones. You v/rrto
tuc thcr lottors, tlo sublet if wlich v.vc tl.o new
furnid-X cf a lew prosruro cl sibor, end in largo cutlino
this If : 11 ycu v .d tc x with .,..sclcr»3 high aititudo
o:: vri :ccite; ia ti ..t correct?

. i*or, t’. is true. ir. tl ia c nncction I did nyboat
‘ : to it ti .t axporl.xr.trj. S u‘ a’ ro) r.sod.

. .a rl 11 1 .tor rev rt t tl is quosti' n. During tho
ru’c-quont p riui y u cu a in ccn-:.ct with tho C'l.l
'-~^orii rents f Dr. --anci - r?

• I • nco urt* in lx .to in


3633


Iry-Int: r


10 -pril 47-:!-S~-268-;-::i.

G urt lie. 1

. . Lnlstr'.tivo c nforancos, at tic. tiro trhon Dr. Raachor,
r fossf'r Hclzlc ohncr -.n! Dr. Finiro v^ro ccncluilins a
c 1*.'. on.JGrir.ont. Zl'-.t Is to tho oxpcrinontr.l subjoct
..a Just plr.cod intf r. rcon, but I didn’t soc anything also
f this Gxp«ri:ont.

o. c« cl o occasion cf this cxporlnont, r n tho occasion
! dlacuasi-n ri .c! perhaps followed, did you h ..r nny-
tl inc *.:crc in ‘otr.il ..’nut F-.cch.er rog: rcling th.oso
oxpori'ionte?

. . too ontlorion voro vory busy in r or. ling tho

c.x ratua wi ieh was used in c mootl*- w fe ox-orii:ont.

I \: r t Id that it v.-.s noboar ry t rocoivo tho vr.rnth
covers c quichly ns p^aniblo, ;.r.! "’roforscr Kolzloohnor
afcr.tod that cloy hr.! airiest ocnoludod thoir oxporiienta,
r.nl c’.r.t fu tl or o re por inant 0 hardly aco:»:! nocoaeary. Ho
sciontific qu-jetions woro '’.lscuasod at that tlno,

' y.u aoc rojy ro..'rt or did yru rocoivo roperts
fr n P.nsclor ..VuC the:o cold oxporxr.onta?

... He, t> .so re rts ire tn nt lirootly to 111) lor fr n

? rclcr, s boc in ovi out fre :• tiro errant a v;) ».ch hrvo

bo n fi'j it tod 1 oro.

. o " c» ont Vrluno No. 3 of tho

t< In l>ro«noct H0-1C11, Exhibit

, ef cl o ?rt eoctttir n, p o 1C of tl - Gdyr.n toxt ' n!

17 of tho English toxt, "U f!n! a letter ront by tho

Ro 1 cl p “ual.ror ' * fee Dr. .-'cc ? .,r cf 22 : optorfior 10-12;
iv. eho coctnl p..rayr;.rh it says “font to S3 Oberrtun:-

r . f-r. • tim ccpy.“ “-r rr.pK 1
'- -time tl o inter;:, i rop rt cf the ee l’ exper-onts
by Dr. sol r at :1 - - neon trat ion cm? Dachau. Pm ecu Id
e r.clu'.o cl urfrrr, tint ; \: r. . rucoiv-..*. tl ir ir.tomodiqto


10 -.pril 47-::-£T-S&3-5- '-lr.y-mt; Server
spurt HP. 1


... t: is internodi to roprrt rent liroefcly frrn ttr.schor
tc Eii iloi* , <- tlxrwiao Hiii-lci wcul n't l:.vo r.nacorod to
Rr.sch~r iroctly. I c’.cn't think, fcrwever, th .t it is cut
of t’o qx’ostlrn thet Reactor had tell Ditl. r by ray rf this
intornodie tc r.? rt, cr ir. r.ny rthor rcjKrt tfci.t I when
ho . rin_* f thoso col’. oxn.rinontr co aiioroi tl cm to bo
p rvorsc. I re rune ti't by son-in'' no th t row* rt lii.rr.lor's
plni'n n tlr.t subject v:.a tc bo trensnitto.l tc no, c.nd
fer th .t ro.'.acr. I rocoivc:’ tro copy cf tl r.t lot ;or for ray
infer r. cion.

Q. hew, trculu you bo goc-d c=x< • to turn ovor ono pr.30,
end yco rill thoro fini hr. H. schcr's littcx* etod
:• Detebor 19 * 12 , Z.ia lot tor ia obviruely dlractod to Dr,

Rule If Br r-’.t. It boa no a evident fr;: t lottor, end

I r»»f,,rrin to do lest liroc n p. *o 17 cf tie I'rOUnont
book, t...t dead or !•£ titrnod tc you in r. nun'or of nettors,
ia tl r t ccrroct?

. ”.r, I sir. 11 v overt tc tl o low proaauro cl enbor

a

‘ rl'ifly. ;o a. ; r lore tl- t ho turned tc no in r.\ r tc

i- ir. • tl . lew procauru cl nbor, ] didn't
.'.ryt’lnr; -.brut thet, lo rt r t ,-n ti e V.oir of this
raquoct by Rrecher, nl;- 3 ; tor -Ion Kinilor rrivod r.t
i .unieh -i • "-.’hon ho h.i. rolT gevo ru c '-rdur tc - on’, hin

. Ls 1 r, trhicl •• - v’ - r 1; - .ire-;; 1.

further cr.yc tl; t 1 a Sum- ', tc ; .o rocerding e tolotyno vrl ich
eskod f r the fuv.iehin;- rf *.r ncn fer the purpe so cf thoso
urinonte. Since !'i . l.r ' elrozxly leouod orc'.ora
" I til .vrn : i ir ; . l ;;.x r:. or.tr.i subjects, there
• r n^ tl inc l_ft f- r .x< t 1, .

coi xmt?

•. " , . . • • ■


5o€5


10 ...-I'll 47-H-S'-2&3-6-.\.Ioy-Int: R&mlor
C urt ;fc. 1

by r r-or f as Lo had bcun include! ir. Reachor 1 a

o;:_. .r. .ants by tho approval .f Eiir.lor. Kimlor probably
h; ' ror.liaod Ir. tho udmtlco tfcr.t for the purp' su of tho
clarifier, tier. tf t!‘i so sciont If icaily very extorsive • nd
Ifficult queati_n3 Rcschcr al no vruld net c aufficiont.
hirt, because r f Lis state of health, could not couo to
I'unlch fer rr.o day, ..nd for £ - r or. sen asked tl at cv\.ry-
ti.ing bo proparod *joforo! :nd, that ho could ~.ir. Insight
into all tie t/erk rosults vl ich had boon obtained sc for#

I tf Id Easel «r to prop.ro everything according to Hint • a
.loairc. . profooalonr.l criminal was presented for tho
purpi so cf this or.pcrinont.

. t profosalonr.1 crinaai ul i. ..lror.d.y boon

ccndoanod ttc death, on. i-.tr did yru tart whether it was
such a cmuinal?

... Eirt, buf«ro tl o ox.-cri. ont s o rted, rc.ntod to It ok
at tho filoo, bocauso thoro s c. p selblllty that this
oxporl :or.t v.-uid ond. f tally. o aontonco w c furnisbod
by tie Crtiiinr.l Pclico Dop rtrwnt cf tho Car p ;~h.inls-
tr tlon. ..’c rr.tr tl t this r: a a eontonccuMcl. 1 .. * boon
pasood by r. ro^ul r court, r»C it booano ovidont thorofroa
tl-.t t: is urn 1 .id. i.ero tlx.r. 10 yen’s ponitontlary ''ol ind
hU, and lx., boon . cr.tonccd rocontly to loath bocr.uso
of uUrdor :ni tl oft. i'irt fur :I dr:* ro ..rued tho :rjt wlotfcor
lo Ir.crr tl r.t this oxperij ont li'l'.t end f;.tally, v/h.crouptn
tl o :r n nr.r\;_rod tl ..t l\o was troll avc.ro :f that. Hu ar.id
t‘ tie rruid l.avo tc d io anyj.*^y f r he trr.a an 'R crl ilnsl,
• c t ...- cri. Lncl bocr.uso ho c ul'.n’t be rr. *fcl in * Iso, .r.d
tl. t ho tl orefero doaorvod loath.

. -'ll you convince y urroif rf t' t by .? !nr ti o o::por-
'• ont.-.l subject •• ti er 1 o •. . .ctu. ily volunteer?

56 es


ril 47-!'-S - - r '- i : -

CcurS Ko. 2


r^-Tilcr


.. .i't.r Uirt's qucsti ninr I -rsr'nr.lly sl:od tho
r. .ootV or fco r.^roc \ tc t! :.t oxpor xnt. Fo thoroupnn
..i'. SU.t I.o v:-.s in full rrrrc^ucnt, providin': it didn't
l.urt 11'., die :.rsuTi-T.co c v.ld bo .'Ivor. tc 1 iu, bocr.uso
-1 _ . . >ivi xnt w.a c : . i cut unCor crapXoto mostl aaic.
I didn't p;rticiputu in tlo on tiro oxpori x>nt, but I
sr.'.r fch t f. is rim rrc.s giver. mo s tic tics.

. Y« u y ursolT roccivM 1 naif# t intc t: o files frm
tlo criMnr.l pc lie o?

. . •• , : ;• V ‘ Ion, tegStbor vltfc dirt.

. , : tier.- ccn bo no d ubt that 6’ is vtr. a r.

preform ero.l cr inr.l sontoncod tc Icrtl V.* ;; ro'-ulrr


C'-urt?

. 'Vis r. ■ r. vory ropvd r aontoneo. All provicua
:on:onooi vorc liatod in tlo fil-a, ex.d I renonbor in
.lticn to ti.c ! or.«l sontonco, Lo MroMy 2 10 >r.rs

. c nltcnti .r

. rooS lent, in t:. t cenhooticn I
r.fcyr. ■ c’ P tr ro; A . cur. nt, v*. .cl unf< rtunntoly is Man
c» r. fed- d in Dccurwnt VMvuo i?r. 2, ..rid I el'euld lilco to
i’.rorv. tlo ri^l'-t tr rovort t- tl t ::r. ; tcr :.c rrrn s this
•’ lui a is Hr.*' lo» xVio is r. nr.t cor roi..tin~ to n-
tr ti.-n c.i-p ln.--.tos vS * "itr..srod tl ip opierdo ''otv/oon
!!rt ; nd x.rci r r tic *.c;.th sontenco r.d vMun-


tr.ry rrpoct rf tl. t rubjoct.

SSBRl'TO: C ur.col - .y prcror.t tlo drcurmnfc when
■ .v~ A- bio.

. :t-.-ss, it cm bo . further V. cunonts

: , wcn*t • into '.otr.il :d\-ut,

t: •„ • f« ver, intor.st ir. 1. sc; ur cir- sort dr n tlo
.’uftut-ffo t- t l ic.dfc SS; fr-r: tl .t it c v.2' bi .- snr-od

PCS?


10 ..-rll ,7-"-sr-2&2-8-::

Court I r :. 1

cl:-t ycu Tf.ro in £ocx*. fcoti n£ with Reachor, r.n.'. t! .t you
I ’ pcrs'nal interest in souinc; that Iu.sch r ’jo trr.ns-
f.rro t the '.'rSC on SS fro:: tho Luftwnffo, is that
ccrroct?

... hi. :ior over cinco 19'l-2 on..oavorod r.rv.’. purruod the r.in
tc .■ ut Ih achor into tl o SS, r.n* havo hlu transforrod fron
tho Luf traffo. he cr.'.orcd no tc c:.ro cf this porsrnnol

uattor, It isn't ccrroct tl. t Ire por 3 -nelly intor^atod
in it, if only frr tho rorren tl t R-achor we a only
actually tranaferre.* ftcr 19-M,

C. Did hrsoher rop afcodly Impress uprn ycu to accolor to
lis transfer to tie Taffon SS?

... r.cacl.or w s very insistent on tl r.t natter, bocaueo
ho boliuvoC. that erring tc 1 is cioso rol.iticnahip tc
Himlor c would .,ot I cl. 'jott.r in tho Heffon SC. In
tl.o si:, ray Klinlor uta alr;ayo preprint in tl io aftttor.


10 *' r i —i-l-tarrov (Iat. r)


Court I

In other words, yax wart to s_y th-t you didn't further the
•.r^aifor of Hascher to the Vaffen-SS on your ovn initiative nor did you
ister it.

X Wai not interested in it at all and only on the basis of this
insistence which v.s displayed by thee tvo parties I wrote a lotter.

Q. How, would you plr.se oo good enough to turn to Page 86 of
taw docuntnt voluso which is before you? Ifcis is a report about u so-cal¬
led "Cold Conference* dated the 26th and 27th of October, 1942. It is
to bo found on page 83 of the Xfcglith translation. Did you receive this
report in the «hnunerbe?

I certainly didn't recoivo it and I don't rasuaoer having soon

it unyvhorc.

Didn't Surator Vuost receive that report?
a. I don't ooliwvu so. The scientific vorJc in connection with
H-tcher, which only concerned Hia.;lor porsonully, v a s always dealt with
directly by Haschor and hinalur. Those Cutters were only ownt to Vuost
vnen Hinder -ctually sent anythin* to t,uo«t. I don't oelievo that thin
has ah’ipor.ud in this particular Cast. At uay rate, -ueot never told
he anything about th_t. Those roiorts and the research asnignsontc which
v«-rw Just discu red lay eccplctcly outside the interests and ophero of
Vueot.

'..hat do you icaov aO-ut tno so-Cailcd dr;.* cold cxpcriccnts of
HaSCher,

“• z Onl o’ know aoout tn^sw cx’criswnts on the b..-is of Hinnl_r'o
order which Vac sent oy iisla to ?ohl and Gr-witr becjise of tho
furnishing of the c^uipcent. I don't <now whether these exoorlacnts

actualy carried out. a, any r^te, I only found out about that

•

rc 13 • 3is COurt rota. A3 - prerequisite for the execution Haschor

8,414 " lt v -* hecessary that they bo carried out in the aount-ins.

=lUiler had also ordered that these axpcriCeOts b. carried out on the

 rr ■'“ ot 6tt fountain Villa at *uielfeli. I VoB to a - to it that

Eo=9


1; 1-Zorr ov (Int. -l>-r)

Court I

ucca-.odaciosi v^r-. aVail-ble there. Investigations, however, proved
'.a.*. the terrain at Sudolfeld w_ 5 not suituble for that purpose, at tne
s^:t tiao I had heard to_t there w.rc a sufficient aBoont of cases of froo-
xing to be found at front hcapit-ls. 2 therefor® asked Huschor why it
w«c necessary for hiu to carry out any further experiaents. He evaded
ay qu.ation and uercly declared c_tcgoric_lly ta_t he would have to abido
by Hinkler's ordor.

liut year did tn_t occur?

JU ili-t w .s at thw ted of 19-.2.

3. The erd-r w_e at the end of 1942?

a. afterwards tnore endued th-t conversation with Huschor.in
connection with .xccceod.tloss.

i. 0.4 that W..S intoaded for tne winter of 1943 end 19->4?

a. Kc, for 1942 and 19C3. Siaco the torruin ut Sudclfold was
not suitable, sccc other pl-co h_d to be found ~nd I handled thio
tu.ttvr very negatively. Hatcher pressed nc on that natter and nisxiler
*-a rather indignant, but, at any r-to, I couldn't create a houeo by
-yself. ainnler subsequently ordered th^t prepar -tionn be n.do that these
oxp.rinwhts could at least bo Carried out in tne next winter. I think
I node a mistake, I think it .vast haVO ocu; tee viator of 1943 to 1944,

I'o surw it w js 1943 to 19,4, a.4 I think that afterwards Hlcalvr o^id
•-h-t p: ..par .tions be undo for 1944 to 194C-. Iheso eXJerluoats, however,
were n^v-r carried out bocu'ise Rncchor w..s larc_dy arrest ad in tho
spring of 194--.

Q. In tn^t c_so you are spying th_t these dry cold experinonto
ver not carried Oit -r. tae nount_ins in the wi..tcr of 1943 and 1944.

Tou assisted in tho f-iluro of these experlaonts being carried out because
you d.l.ycd finding - suit-ole »ccot=od-tion?

*

a. TCS.

I .a. nci shortly s-.i-._ri zing your tecti-ony with reference to

i.. count which concerned itself viti. coli exo^ri-.e..to.

foSO


10 ^ril-K-C?-4-3-Zarrov (I-- 2ilcr)

Coart I

x3. HJsDY: If it pi._so Your Honor, ohc dcfons* counsel has put
questions to toe witness and the witness fa-s testified to these ques¬
tions. I roily think aun_..:ions _ftcr each experiment uro unnecessary
here. 2h.it c_; tJto place in his closing st-tcacnt.

SI PRoSIDefcT: a short imnation on the p-rt of defense counsel
eight be in order, as long us it docs not contain too much repetition.

DR. VUSSi?3iS: Yes. Tour Honor.
iY DR. ''SXSOiTuiill:

You Occident..!ly attended the completion of a cold experiment
of Dr. Ruschor at Dachau. You hud o.va no r-*>orts about Dr. Rancher 1 o
exp. rin oats su i r-coived no knowledge .cout theu in any other way.

2 he furnishing of the vxporiucatal subjects for tno revolting expori-
ue..to woro not your ousineos, und you actually n-d nothing to do with
it. You attended - further experiment under tac eircuastunc-s vhich
yj- h.-.r- pr viously described. You know nothing about any dry cold
experiments being c-rrlod out in Dachau itself. You buve succeeded in
having delayed and finally counlot.ly frustrated tno dry cold experiments
in t:.e mountains. Is th_t correct?

a. Yes, th-t is correct.

^ftcr scorching year aind. didn't you do anything in that
connection which went oeyoud tno orders vhich ware giv*n to you by
Hlculer?

a. aO, in no v^r at all.

P. I nov cose to the next count of the indictment, nul-ric
expvriaonta. 2ho croc cuticn _lso connate you with th^t count of tho
indicts cat. During th- co-irs. of tnie tri-1 it t as mentioned th .t a
certain Professor Schilling ves c -Trying out m_laTia experiments in the
’oncer.tr tion enp of Decheu. Ws this Dr. Scnillirg a ucaber of tho
Ahmaeroo Society?

a. He neither Oulian, cd to t-c annenerbe ncr tr the Xnstituto of


Aiiitary ...dic-1 Research.


£591


I


10 <>ril--w.-vP-4-*-r-rrsw (ir.t. R-^lcr)

Court I

l. ’-ben did you g_in -<novl.-d £0 for the first ti.e about these
- -l_ri- oxpwriuentc of Dr. Schilling?

a. Shat w^a ..t the beginning of 1942. Hiu-l-r then briefly
a.ntio.ied tb t - c-rt-in ?rof o*sor Schilling was carrying out a_l„riu
re8e_rch verb ut D-ch„u. at th_t tine nothing becauo Known to u- aoout
tn« uaun-r in which he v_b conducting bis work.

rid ycu, in the sucacq \ent period, estaoliah any contact with
Profess* Schilling?

A. A contact with Schilling was for the firot tile established
around tho uiddlc of 1944.

And for what purpose did you cont-ct hia?
a. Ca..t w .a u aere courtesy visit in connection with tho tr iixs-
f*r of Dr. Ploeta-r, who vj .. coll-oomtor of Schilling's, to the
Institute for ..ilitury hcdlc-1 Roso.rch.

To-, v ill rcueaber tb .t tbc witness Viewcg, who wot cxdainod
here 1-st DeCeab.r, h_j st_ted th..t r.o h.d ouon you ..t Profcosor
acnil’in, 's institution. la vn„t connection did you vialt Schilling's
l-oor-tory?

n. I a.b- Dr. Ploetncr's .xqvu.lntanco ut the end of 1943 and
I then visited hi- In his living roou which v.s loc .ted -t the uolnria
Bt-tion where Schilling worked. Otherwise I wasn't present in the station
itself.

la other words, 70uv-at to s.y tn..t you h_d nothing in tho
lc.oi to do with the ad.-rfa croe^riaeats of Professor SchillingT

•w Ho, nothing at all. Phis visit w_s occ-sioavd by the pectin
re. e^rch verb which w .s c_rrled out by Dr. Ploctner.


5692


10 Arril 47-*:-rjC-5-l-Cross lint., Tiller)

Court I

^ Did you have anything, to do with nalarla experiments ahioh
-ora conduct®! by other physicians or research workers, be it in
concentration camp or in another research place?

A JCblther the Ahnenorbe nor the Institute for !!ilitnry Uodioal
Toccorch, nor I personally, rartici rated in nalarla experiments on
human beings.

1 I shall now have Document Volune IV handed to you. Would
you please turn to document NO-781 v 2chibit 126 of the Prosecution,
to bo found on peso 15, pago 10 of tho Snslish translation. Wo oro

horo conce-nod with a file notation signed by you concerning a

\

consultation with Dr. Hay at Munich on 1 April 1942. Would you look
at raragraph four. This paragraph aeoms to bo in controdlotion with
what you have ao far testified.

A With roferonco to this plan dlacusaod with Dj.. lay it woo
only ontaaolcgical question and investigations ro 0 ordin3 combatting
Innocts.

% Well, paragraph four specks about observations nado on
convicts. How about that?

A TToll, wo oro horo cancomod with infoir-atlon vhleh HI ml or
•ssu®i when ho orlorod the oroction of an institute for combatting
iasootc. it was to bo tho task of that institution to ccnbot insects
hloh wore plaguing kic-.-n beings, such as flioo, lico, ar.d bugs.

1 -rlor •.•antod to see that tho results woro to be at his disposal in
*'.o surr.er of 1942. 1?!© notation which is available hero was dictated
!a 3orlin to ny secretary after I returned from Munich. The fact that
: .3 race Schilling is uiapriatod .’are 03 Schling iwlicate3 thot tho
:1 ° Schilling was completely unknown to ao at that tino and,
f-rt; or—oro, tbs witness Viotrog :*3 hero testified that Schilling
-u only concern®! with oxporii:outs of malaria terziona - was not
a-aria tropica.


S6ZZ


10 A:rl 1 47-!:-?'C-5-2-G-*oss (IntI, Sigler}

Court I


4 This notation bears the la to of 3 April 1942. 7 r or. the
point of view of tine It 13 after year consultation with Dr. Hay
in ‘ unich. During that consultation It beaane very clear that any
o^ orL.an.r on hUB&n beings were out of tha question, at least aa
far as the order wont that Dr. :^y had r ceived. How it is soaewhat
surprising that in your notation, dated the 3ri of April, wo find
this paragraph four. There was really no rea9or for any such
notation being Bede at that tiuo, was thoro? How do you explain
this paragraph four being included in this notation?

A :iy consultation with Dr. 1'oy on tho first of April was tho
first ono with his, I already sail that Hinnlor boon speaking
about those oxporir-oats, and ’lay iaaodlatoly declared that an
obsorr ticn of convicts anl using nodical oquijxujnt in Dachau was
out 0: tho question sinco ontccological rosoorch work was not bolng
considorod. Arri, ho said t'at ho lad his own rotheds in carrying
out that kir*i of research work.

^ I'jr. Prosidont, in this connoction I should llko to subait
Doc vers Do. 11 and I offor It as Sievere Sxhiblt Ho. 8.

Thia io to bo found on pago 24 of Dccuant 7olurao I. It is an
ofl'idarl 1 uorlu by hiiioeaxd Wolff. I real tho following paragraphs,
3*.rtlng ’ lth paragraph two, and I quoto:

"?rca 1 Horch 1937 until 1 July 1943 1 worked as a socrotary
in tho aoce-jch md Instruction Socioty "/ihnor.orbo", aa:. iUQ., for
«' J Doich Businoss lianogor folfra:. Clovers.

"h’orr Siovars ropo-.tadly gavo ro assigasonts to conpleto, and
ovun 03-ienrjjnts to doal with icdorondontly.

"rren the ^onoraaiua of 3 Arril 1942 on the conforanca with
• lay In Ilunlch of 1 April 1942 that was shown to no 1 ronanbor
: Jt Dr. Siovors told ra in tho cr-^-so I 9 vary rapid dictation
’ J * I 'Jld lnciuio as paragraph four of this noto Hirulor’s
^ or - ao during a tolophona conversation on 1 January 1942

irr.icg tho ostabli3bz»nt of tho institute at Dachau.

5694


n


10 A?-H 47-:;-7jc-5*-3-Gross (Int., Hoalor)

Court I


I ship tho aozt throo paragraphs ana I road thu last paragraph
:n r®o° 24. Ani I quote:

"At any rata, in this cns a tho warding of paragraph four
:ioorly xondors tlio opinion of Hinalor's and not ono of Horr Siovors
«ho, as I positivoly know, w Q3 at that tino not yot faniliar \i th tho
ostabli absents at Dachau and who also lator ropaatodly ox grossed his
anr.oyonso atou. tho fact that I'imlor had in any *oy connected tho
".J'.ronorbo" with q oneontrati ?i> entsps.*

Thon follows the certification.

’fitness, new in ordur to ostoblish your activity .commotion
with tho solaria axporirwnta tho Prosocution rolios on a nuebor o*
ontrloo you cado in your diary. I shall now havo tho diary of 1943
or. 1944 shown to you.

trould you look at Docuront 3456P3, Schibit 123 of tho
Prosocution,•to bo found in Docunont Voluso III. Hilo do to bo
forn.1 on pago 53 of tho diary and p»6o 169 of tho Dooxraont Book III
of tho Proaocution which only contains a fow oxcorpto of tho diary
in it.' £rj.lsh translation. In y ur diary ucdor tho dato of 22 of
pobruary 194*; thoxo in a notation about a conforoneo with Dr. 1’ay
•.rith roforonco to a collaboration with Dr. Ploitnor nl Pr-fossor
SO hilling. It, thoroforo, appoars that c cr*j connoction oxistod
botvoon Dr. Kay and Profossor Schilling.

Tho situation is as follows: In January 1944 Ilimlor told

j on t!:j oc.a3ion of a confjrunco that Schilling's royorta would havo

: r.o to tho ontasolofcical inatltuto erf Dr. Hay for thoir inforoation.

C\ • 3 occasion of this conforonco of 22 ? Q bruory, hold with Dr. "ay»

•

I Id Dr. !loy about thi3 rdar of Hisnlor. Dr. Kay ropliad that
thoro -..'3 nothing ho could do with tho so reports and xontod^to know
:* hoy wore boing Jont to hla. Ea rajoctod a collaboration vdth

tiling. Schilling hlcsolf noror =ont thoso roperte.

56SS


10 A rll 47-::-?jC-5-4-Croos R^lor)

co-rt I


^ !Tc*: wculd you ploaso. turn to tbo diary of 1943. Look at
t'-~ or.try of tha 29 of ij-ch 1945, ;rhich is to bo found on pafco 164
of t:u Sj'.Us'i translation. Undor that dato cf 29 Ilarch 1943 a
conforonco Is nontionod that you hold with tixj curator and
iocartrior.tal chief TTuaet, which rofors to tho appoint rent of
3S Hauptstumfuohror Plootnor. Hew about tfci3 coaforonco-thla
also oppoora to bo in ao=» connootion ’.‘ith ralarla exporiiconts.


Court I


10 ftpr U7-I. - 6-1 - LOG - Siolsi (Int. Rader)

Dr. Ploetner was an SS physician active at so*e frontal
hospital, itt-aler had transferred rloetner to the .Oinonerbe.

..itnosa, you nay be a littla nore brief. Did Dr. Ploetner
have anythin*, to do itlf sal aria experiments? I near., did he havo
anything to do with Dr. Hay's assignment?

«. No, nothing at all. ..ue.it "t * ^ Mm. ploetner'a

transfer ifco at that had not even anything to do with Schilii.no,

Because of .roast's rejection Ploetner went to Schilling because
Grawits then transferred hin to Schilling's office.

Q. New, under the 31st of May 19U3 — there is no translation
of thi 3 passage — there is an entry which rofers to a conference
with Dr. Ploetner about tho collaboration with Professor Schilling.

Did this conference havo anything to do with nalaria experlnents?

«. That uust have boen 19Ui.

It is quite possible, yes; it oust havv boen l-U*. New,
why don't you turn to tho diary of 19UU?

... l’os, 31at of Kay l?l*h.

Did this confurunco havo anything to do with aaloria experi¬
ments?

•

... No, it had notiiing to do with it. .i3 I already explained
before, I only =ado Plootrv-r'3 acquaintance at tho ur.d of 191.3. Ho
bliterly conrlained at t.-.at ti;v that ewing tothe rejection and the
treatment afforded to hd by ..uest ha had been sent to Schilling
against his will, and he asked for assistance to get away fren there.

x. New, witnoss, I think that is sulficiunt since it has Obviously
nothing to do with malaria expert vents.

m |

... Notiiing in the- least.

■i. lie-', if I shortly surv.rie: AS regards your person there was
no rtici:-ition in ar.; tho alaria c-xporiaenta .i Dr. Schilling?

Bone whatsoever.

4. : he nasigJEjent of Dr. ay '.s cl-arly on wntosological field

:.d had nothing ir. the liost to go with the salaria experiments of

5657


C -Tt I


1 : a=r -V- - 6-2 - UG - Hiisi (Ir.t. Rader)

Jr. Schilling at Dachau?

/v. Ko, th.ro vis no contact whatsoever.

4 . >itno33, wo have briefly discussed your diary. This diary
ia c naiaerod by the prosecutionx an inportont wieco of evidence.

•or that reason I shall fill in the tiao until the recess by briefly
discussing taat diary with you. riith reference to your activity as
business cana^er of the aH rv.norbe society it was this position which
caused you to keep this diary, which .fas done very extensively and
very carefully. «u this : orely a hobby or. your part?

«. On the cor.tr ry, ‘t T.as a rather tedious task. Hiraler on
the other hand had ordered, on the basis of an 35 directive, that all
agencies would have to keep such c diary. Hlaaler attached consider¬
able iaperto.nco to th t diary being kept carefully and in an orderly
fashion. I therefore tried to give tho inprcsslon that this diary was
kept very accurately.

9

i. Could you, ir. a few words,stato an incident which would tend
to shew wh-.t value Himslor attached to the careful keeping of such a
diary?

•

A. “his diary had to be submitted to Hinnl I regular intervals,
•d't.r tho 'uvoreok of the war, . non aoru important work was to bo done,

I 3poka to tho chi of of staff rog rding this very burdensome task;
m hereupon ho told rc that the dismissal of the chief adjutant of Hirwlor,
v - n .atonslobor., had brought tho fact about that thj diary had boon
neglected. Therefore the diaries iad to be kept also during tho war
* 1 ~' J P-3 the* woro kept during p_ xo.

He do you yourself Jud,;_ the accuracy ar.d reliability of
* t'.j'u diaries? Ueru traase diarioB kept particularly accurately, and
'll tho entries in this diary ir. strict accordance with the facts?

Orring to ry frequent acs-nca free ay agency I often could

r.ly dictate these entries -ft_r days cr sco-ti-ots uv^r. weeks. Those

.".tries ir. cany cases are eftor. not in accordance with the facts,

5*?e ;


Court I

.0 .v -r 1*7-- - 6-3 - LJ3 - Biolsi (Ir.t. HsaLar'>

rwithur frau the point of view cf tiro, nor sifcstar.ee. ..hen looking
tnreugh that diary on- notices discussion of conferences which had last¬
ed until Into at ni^ht. In these casos wo w.rs often concerned with
i.r.tri-3 wnich would have to constitute an alibi for certain casos,

.ad likewise the compilation of the points of discussion as they arc
entered there are often in contradiction to the truth.

1 . hitness, according to the assertions cade by the prosecution
one could gain the ir ression that your activity, at least starting
fraa the year 19i*2, for the most .art concerned itsolf with tho facts
Tihich are h-ru under indictment. I h:.vc thought it to be expedient
to look through your diary of 19l*3 and 1 found out that in this diary
of 1913 which only covers the time starting from the 1st of January
up to the 30 th cf o*uno 1U3, ycu had spoken with 326 persons, either
verbally or by tclophcr.o. Several persons arc list-.d there with whom
ycu had '. n , fc.,r of convers tions, and the number of such conversations,
Including the telephone conversations, aoounts to 878. 1 th-n soloctcd
those person® who aro naced hero .rithin tho facts which are hero under
indicant. I extonded the circle of these as for os possible, find
I arrived at tho ratrber of 21 persons with *hoo you had 82 conferences
durir^ the first six oonth3 of the year 191*3. •'nong thoso 21 persons
aloe appears the curator and de .artnontol chief ..uost, with whom ycu
Rid altogether 23 conferences, th'.t i3, person 1 eonf-roncos, as well
:\s telephonic conversations, and i* b-cn-xs evident from th t that you
er. in very cloeu inf oration contact with your departmental head
.. i -st; Ig t.i t correct?

•*. t-o, absolutely. I couldho decisions at all unlo33
I iiscuss x at.rs with ry oepartnontal hoad. From this co-silation
it twCOire3 -vidunt very clearly th't a quarter cf these conversations
"ere rl h dopertcxtital chief.


£<*99


20-i:-B«C-7-l-i^ohca (Int. -<nnrJ.or)
Joura I*o. 1


. I then worked out tho percentage of those conversa¬
tions and person3, end I arrived at the figure of 6.5/3 of
the persons mentioned in your 1943 diary and when consider¬
ing the 82 .conversation, I cane to a percentage of 9.2.

I tried to include os r .any persons ns possible cton
including personnel workers in the personal starf of tho
33, personnel officers in the 3tr.ff of the ..hnunerbo, end
in spite of all this, I only arrived at this relatively
snail percontago; is this percentage correc t with rofor-
oncc to tho counts which ere charged hero under tho indict¬
ment as regard to your entire work?

- That is absolutely true; this work was so much on
the border line of ray entire activities as it i3 very
instructively described by your comparison.

... P.IZ3ID2NT: Tho Tribunal will ho in recess.

(.. reooss was taken .)


E?OC


.. r!l 10.-3K-8- 1-Putty (In?* "or. 3cfccon)
Court '.'c. 1


. IJS-Lii Thi tribunal is again ir. session.

BY D.i. ..i.I3G_<B_?.:

. Sow I cor.o to your participut ior. La the sea water
exporioents. I shell show you Document 3ook Mo. 5. Ploaso
look at page 21. It is Document MO-132, Exhibit 137. It
scans to be n lottor fren you to Dr. Grnwitz datod the 26th
of July, 19-i-i. On what occasion was this latter written?

~ Grawitz had demanded laboratories in thQ Institute
for Military Scientific Research to carry out sea water
experiments for the Luftwaffe. That was the contonts of
Grawitz' letter of the 11th of July which is m.ntionod as
reference in this letter of nine of tho 26th of July.

\ Did not Grawitz ask you to supply oxporinontal subjects
ca woll?

.. Neither in this oaso r.or in any other caso did I have
;nythinj to do with supplyins the subjects. Grawitz had
3 ild that those questions would be settled by hit* directly
with tho Luftwaffe.

i ..s this letter shows, you tnlkod to 3S-Hauptstum-
fuehrer Dr. Ploetner and Obercrzt Dr. B^iglboock on tho 20th
:f July, .as that tho anno Dr. Ploetner whon wo have spoken
about beforo?

.. Yes, that was Dr. Plootnur who continued tho pectin
work aft or Rase her was arrested.

L Had you known Dr. B_iolboeck up to that tine?

... ilo, not up to that time. I ajt hie for tho first and

1 .st tir.e on the 2Gth of July. 1 did not know that I would

-t Dr. Boi^lbocck La Dachau on that day in this connection.

%

-n ccnr.octi’ n -.with the sea water -xpericonts I had heard only
’be r.-r.o of the Vienna Professor 1 pin^r, and ;:y v ery brief
av rant ion with Dr. Boi-slboock referred only to ny Inbora-
:*y roons available in thu ccitctiolojical institute where

57C1


ril 10 -1I-3K-8-2 - Put t y (Ir.ti Vcn Schoon)
zarfc 1


the discussion took plcco, and Dr. Boiclbocck said that
ell other questions would bo settled directly between
himself and Grnwitz.

. How Ions did this talk with Dr. 3oiglboock last?

.. Twenty minutes, as I recall.

. How, was not Dr. Ploetnor to participate in some
way in th~ sua water experiments?

.. Yes. Grow its had wanted Ploetnor to participate in
an advisory capacity cs on internist.

. —nd did he pr r tic ip at a?

.. Ho. In the bog inn ins of 19 i-., when ho took over
the Reach r section/ Dr. Ploetnor had refused to participate
in experiments on hunen beings.

. Did Dr. Ploetnor not oncountor opposition from
Himmler in this?

.. iilanV s rooognizod Ploetnor's standpoint and I
supported it. It was finally achieved that the ..hnenerbo
should no longer be included in research assignments which
involved human experiments, Th .t was then exclusively c •
natter for Gr awit z.

. How in the document book which you have Uforo you
pie ,3o look rt Document LJ-163, Exhibit 136 of tho Prosecu¬
tion, on pagu 20 . .then did you loam of this lottor?

.. 0ly h-ru during th~ proceedings. The letter did

not ;o through ny office. It went from Dr. Brandt to
Gruwitz.

How let us look at th- next document again, the lottor

ft

t D r . Grr./itz of tho 26th of July, li'-i-.. This letter sponks
th icconoi'.ticn of forty experimental subjects. Did you
not instigate that, too? .

.. Ho; although ther- was room f r forty experimental
subjects in Plo-tnor's section, this roca wr.s not used

£7C2


..'-il 10-^-BK-3-3-Putt y (Inti Von Schocn)

Court No. i

bocauso the corj..nndaat' s offico had 3ivon tho gontloncn
fra tho Luftwaffo roocs, wbich belonged to tho nalaria
station.


5702


Isi ril-i^-SJ-9-l-Karrcw-(int."c,r. Schoo)-
Cscr- 1


. Tha talari a station which you cr the Ahnenerbe had nothin/ -

tc do

n That is right, wo had nothin,: tc do with it.

T .'for, were ycu present, at ny ex-crinonts connected with 3ca
water natt-.rs?

rt Ho, I was net present.

Q On one of ycu subsr.quv.nt visits to Dachau did you not take
in interest in these ex; orients?

A After the 20th of July, I never went tc Dachau st ain.

Q Did net the .hnenerbe receive reports cn these experiments?

n Ko, wo did not receive reports of then nor did we learn any¬
thin.; about the course of these oxp-ricents.

Q Then you cay, in connection with the sc-calleu sea water ex¬
periments, you did nothin, further than tc pass or. this letter of tho
26th of July, 19W*, one! talk tc Dr. Bel. lboeck in Dachau?

A T‘*nt is true, that was all I did in that connection.

Q An* 1 this discussion do*It seroly with making laboratory roons
available?

A Yes.

Q .'.'or, I ecce to th. next cooplex of questions. It deals with
the skeleton collection. I shall have Document Bo k 9 of the prosecution
hin* ! t< you. Lock at pare 1 here. T_is is document He.-095, Exhibit
175 of the Prosecution. T i3 is a letter to Rudolf Brandt and contains
a preliminary report froo Dr. Hirt of Strasbourg. This lettur deals
first with the work den. by Dr. Hirt in the field of intra-vital rsi3cro-
cospy and the second part contains a su- e-stion for securing skulls of
Jewish Bolshevik Cooexissara. '.7as this report fron Dr. Hirt made at
your sue,nation?


Q «hc had this report made?

« At the first sentence of the letters iniicat _, srandt hau
■5ke' for this repert. «r I Lamed 1*1.r, he was aotin cn Hicoalor's


-rdtrs


10 ... ril-^-GJ-9-2-K2rroa-(int. vcn Schca)-
Z cure 1-

^ Vnat do you knew about the back *rcund of this report?

.w I Learned cniy later of what had proceeded this report. «t
Zoster, 19L2, when Hisol<j rave dotailod instructions fer the execution
•irrJer sail that the race office Rassenoct had riven him such an assi.jn-
c at -Ir.ily in 19U1.

Q Did your office chief, Professor tuost, talk to you or H in g nl er
about Scttinrup a Jewish Boshevist skull collection before your letter
of the 9th of Fcbraury, 1912?

« I do not recall that facst talke- to oe about it. Aether Hianler
discusso. this natter Tdth fucst I cannot say. I nay point cat that fron
Hay until August, lObl, 1 was on active service with the Kaffcn-SS and
h only . very loose conn,ct*on with the Ahntnerbo durin. this period.

*vfter that I was working for the Southern Tyrolean Cultural Association
an ' way Tree Berlin ilr»st at the tia,. It would be possible that
a :u.-. ustion sale by the Rossenont went throurh the Ahncnerbo for some
reason, although in vi_w of the rcneril nature of the work of the Ahnu-
nerbu tiler would have been no occasion for thin.

« . k t any rate, at tho time when this letter was written,
on th~ 5th of I-ebruary 19U2, ypu knew nothin about the previous history?

.. !Io, I did not.

< Do you know wether any offic- of the ..hn-ntrbu had suggested
octttn.; .p such a skull collection?

.. I know nothin about that. I »o not i=_.;ine that this happe¬
ned lurir. my absence.

■J -Thy do ycu assuse that?

.» Becausj s.-c'll- 1 ' racial research was th. duty of th. race .and
Cetfclc=.nt ruin office ( Rasscn ur.i Siudlunos Hauptamt). There was no
c"i f r racial res.arch in the Ahnencrt-c.

0

i Had ycu km to Dr. Hire before 19127

*

« Tes, I saw him twice previously cn official occasions, The first
-i=. w - in 1935 in Qu. :lir-bur ini the second time was in the spring

' 15'il wh-.n the U iversity cf Strasty-r: ms ot-ened.

• “ 5735


1 n;-ril-k-GJ-9-3-S5Tro*-(i nt. 7n Schen)-
Ccurt 1

Q That Jo you knew about Higgler's acquaintance with Jtt. r t?

•i «s I learned later, free 1931 on Hirt bclcn cd to the 55. Hio
a c^iaintancaship with Kinder I learned of in 1936 in Quodliiurtur*.
Subsequently, however, I had no opportunity to observe the relations
fc.tw—n Hirt an Higgler. I learned, however, that Hirt nad been .;ivcn
an assi nc-nt by Higgler to decide the anthropclcrical a^o of the skull
cf K‘rv- E.nry 1.

Q Then you are of the cpinicn that Hirt -njoyed the special con¬
fidence f Higgler?

A Yes, :t the Celebration in Qus.dlin.hir;; in 1936, I observed
that Hirt, who wi* present as an Honor .juust .1 Hianl-r'a rus .jiven
special att<ati:n by Kic-l.r and had his special confidence.


6706


10 icril-..-J?-l -1-Srcss (1st. Yon Sctoea)


Court I

- *iut waB the position of Dr. Hirt in 1941?
a. Hirt vas a university profesror ona director of tnc unatony
Institute of the University of Strasbourg.

'.‘as Dr. Hirt - uenber of the *hnenorbe?
a. 1.0, ho'Was not at that tine, Hiiaoler appointed hi= ot the end
of 1942 or tne beginning of 1943.

Vhoa you neac to Say tho point of departure for tnis preliai-
nary r.tort was net due to you or souo other office of the ahnenorbo
but lay in tho relations botveca Hirt and cimler?

a. Yes.

Ihis report which wc h.vc before ’-is, did you change it any
w^y? Did you add anythin,; to it when you p-ssod it on to Dr. Brandt?

I passed on tho reiort la its original fora without -ny ctenant

to Brandt.

X. Sow lot uo go on a few p-geo, to p^g»J 7. Dh-t is Docuuont KO-
090, Exhibit 176, pago 9 la the nagliBh. 2fc-t is a letter frou nudolf
ar-ndt to you. I shall quote frou this letter, the second sontjneo.

•a 3 I k-Tc told you before, tho Reichsfuehrer-os is very uuch lntorost
la ^r if os e or Dr. cirt's wor<e. Perhaps you could c-11 on Hirt soeio tioo
so-h _;d tell hi- ug-in that tnc Roichsfuunrur-SS will place at his
cisoooal everything he needs for his experinouto." Sui of quoto.

•..hen, -ati on wfc-t occ-sioa, did Dr. Br-ndt say th^t to you?

«a far as I recall it w-s in a telephone conversation whoa ho
-shed for Hirt'a report for HiunUr,

%. here you not surprised th_t Hinnler w..s giving or was going
to give Profo-sor nirt overyth'.ag he he.dcd for his uxperluon’.s?

a. ;,o. ^cording to the ob3e-r/ .tlons which I a„4 n-dc at this
netting in Pucdliaburg -nd also frou the infoJv_tion fru. -frt I was
able to .other th-t cirt Was give.-, definitely preferential treutneat
by Eia.l-.r. In such c-sus Hlra.Ier displayed oncruoua renerosity.

But would it not h_ve been ro«:iole for you, considering the

57C7


1C ^r 11-. .-JP-lO-2-Sross (Int. "on Schocaj


Court I

*h * Kiaalcr w_s v<-ry busy, to reduce tnis generosity sxro what in
Ir-uivi -i C_8eS?

I could not do th-t without its bocccing noticcablo.

1 , jut the correspondence went through your hands? If any cco-
pl-iata h_i been rccoired it would iu.vo been poBBiblo for you to deflect
the setter in sccc way.

^ 2i..t w a quite impossible t or two reasons. First Einaler, o

Well os ny office Chief Vuost Were in direct written and oersonU contact
with the indiwidUul acicntisto. Slat is shown, for ex-oplc, by Hinder 'b
visit t^ Hirt In StraBbourg at tno and of 1942 or the beginning of 19*z
I don't xnow exactly when. *.d, in the Becond ulacc, SimmUr a-id Hirt
act quite frequently so tn.t ces-pl-inta could r.-ca end reined Hinulor
fron Hirt .jA otfc-r people without uy having -ny knowledge of it.

In the letter wnich I Just quoted the l_ot p-rugr-ph mentions
a visit Which you were to pay to Hirt. -nen did you u>xe tnis visit?

.W jj ' .r j I c.x ruiei-bor th_t was in the aumuer of 1942.

Sow, I c-’Uld ioegiuo th .t - request for you to visit hirt night
lo..d to .he conclusion th.t you woro to do -1 with the scientific part
:f 2r. Hirt's work. How you told us yvsterd-y th-t your work as Reich
nsineen uunag-r w..s li-ituC to purely -dnir.istr^Uvo thingo. How about
th..t?

.w jfc.t w..s true ir. this c_Se - Iso. I w-o not to talk to Hirt
-bout scientific -utters, jesidco he b-d Just cent .. report to Hinmlcr
about these n.'.-.-rs a« tao lettor of 27 February sh:ws.

q. Kow. if we go on tc the next page w. find Document xJO-086,
ax-ioit 177 of Prosecution. locuscct volume 9. rbis mentions 150 ske-lo-
on» of prisoners, how did you r._ch tnis number?

u. Hirt mentioned this nu-o.r. I hare -lrcafly said tn.t Him-iler
ami visited hirt in Strasbourg. I w-s net p.-eteat during this visit.

clrt then told me- ho v_s to contact 31u-c/:8 directly according to
Hitler's instructions and if neCMS-ryJ to ttu s.rvices as Winter


10 _*>rll-n-JP-1 &-3-Gr os■ (Int. von Sc~.cn)


Court I

if h.- could not col- to 3-rlin niusclf.

q. before you talked to Slutcka hiusclf. hod Jluccks known of

hi— -Kr'a order?

^ I on. Oluecks hod already rocoived Si—ler'e order whoa I talked

to Olujcka at Kirt's request.

'Jew, the next document SC-116 la a letter froa ar.uhdt to
iichuann. Shy *us »uch a letter s-nt to SiclL—an woo wjrkvd ia tho
sg-:,? ’.toy v..B thia teccasary if Oluecks already knew about thie order?
Oluecka w-s the uaa in cr..r,> of all the coacentr-tioa coapo.

Oluecks o. at u« to ittchuana. I h-d not known hiu at all up
to tfc.t tiao. Jic.oxm h .d been infor-cd by Oluocka by telcphono
but he o .id tr. .t no needed u letter froa Hi-Ur or froa hit p.roonal
Bt.-ff, ,ud thereupon thia letter w^t written.

q. «nd wa-.t did you discuaa with iidzitma?

a. I ,,-ve xdclu-oia th- report froa riirt -ad I Cold that ussoci-toe
of airt Wonted to conduct aoue uathropolc,^c_l teota, and th.it he,
-Igr-anw; Voa to uivo tnca the accessary prori^uiaitea in ouachwitz

.wording to Klttoler'a inatructioac.

flow, if we go on ia the Document Book to Docuaent SO-092,
ve find - 1 otter wnich bo. oka of short coai-vs. Did those short clings
h ,*-e ay connection ia obtaining persons?

^ l-o, there is no connection. This refers to Hirt'a work on Lost.
1 . In tac next docuaoat, H0-087, Szhibit 181, you mention a Dr.

3e-,;er. Uut wj Dr. Seder's asslg-.ent?

a. Elrt i._d .'iven aehgcr tne assign-oat froa the persons cPndctmcd
to death to select certain arsons frio the inotiouto and conduct anthro-
polrgic 1 Lo-sures.

X. Tou sj Professor -irt g-ve hi this aisigruent?

TeS.

q. 2fcia letter of 21 junc 1943, which vc hav. acre Exhibit 181,
did you diet ..to it yourself?


10 jprtl-fc-v^lG-^-GrosB (I-!, von Schicr.)


Court :

— - 0. I lid not dictate It us tu. Initial S~2 indicates.

Sl-sov. I v_r n-Vw in ^aschwiti and kncv nothing about jefagar’s invcs-
ti,._ti .:.s, only 3ebg<jr could give the nocess-ry infarction; and
neU,>r van in direct cout_cv vita £irt and received instructions frou bin.

v cut you signed tnie letter — vhy?

•e Since it v^s u too secret letter - on the basic of sccrccy
reguluti ,n§ I ii_d to sign it.

Vould ta .t not fc .ve been a —tier uo to thu curator?

actually tne letter b could h_Ve been sent to .melon nud signed
hy Uuest, but occt&so of the urgency of tne :._ttcr, -s tho contents
abov, t..is v..s not possible. It is one of tne cases vhich we h_vo
elri-dy diocv\ssed earlier horo. jecause of the sep .ration I bed to sign
letters v..lch ‘-ucst really should h_ve Signed; but he h..d boon inf on.cd
Jotut all these letters previously by telephone -ad ho vus sent conics
of tneti,

Eio -ent document is in bocuucnt 3ook 9 - 110-088, Sbchibit 182.

It la c teletype vhich ycu send to Dr. ^adolf cr-ndt. Vhy v a o tr.io
teletype Oent?

a. Bio -oletype v..s Uudo on request of Dr. airt Oy tole-ohono on
tne o.i.e d.y.


5710


10 .. (Int* vcnSchoca)

Court 1


£ Tii: t did Dr. Kirt have tc soy?

.. Th t cm bo sccr. free this teletype. It repeats Kirt's
inquiries word for word, and Hirt also nade the suprestiens which
ere listed at the ond cf the teletype.

C Then you were just passing on a telephone conversation fr.m

Hirt?

Hirt called ;e up end I sent it cn b; teletype, yes.

Q The next Dccu. v-.nt, JiO-091, speaks cf an SS Standartcnfuuhrcr
Hauoert.

Bnuoort *•£■ the heed of the personal staff cf ItUrlor.

Q Wre he your superior?

.. Yes. ,\a staff loader ho was sy discipiin*ry supericr sinco
the , 1 'nonurbe cffica was under the personal staff, “-rumor t had the
rljht tc issue instructions tc .ucst uti certainly t» c- 30 hucst's
subordinate.

Q The instructions ..cnti.ncd h-re, to Issolv., to take up tho
collection in Strasbourg, did net cri,^r. to with ycu?

/. He, not with a«-.

Q Yeu recoivod tho instiucticr.s fr:c Baunert me then passed
th.a cn tc Hirt?

.. Yes.

Q .sti when was that?

On the 7th cf Sot-dor 1944, as cy dirry shews.

Q Then after th-t, did yeu trko my further interest in this
a *.tur?

.. Ho. ..3 this ncte here sh-ws cn tho 12th of Octet or I was net
atlo tc t .11 K&uptsturafuohrcr bcr.* anythin about the diss;lvin<* of
this collection.

r l Then did ycu a-t in t.uch with Hirt?

.. YeS, I called Hirt u; in Str-sb ur* an5 r . 1 . ssoJ cn to

Dorr what Hirt tcld .me.

Q In this Document HC-,71, tho find sentence r.'cs: ’'He (that


5711


13 11-2-liclsi (Ir.t. vcr. Schtcn)

Court V.z. 1

refer-- t. SS Standrrtenfuohror Sievers — that is, you) thinks thr.t
this procedure ir-.s the best cne considerin' the xhclc situation."
za this yiur personal opinion?

He, I srii - I think I sorely passed cr. liirt»s statements
tc B rr -.-itheut’ my concent. _

Q You hevc Document KO-4B3 before you. That is the next Docu¬
ment, ,. 17, Exhibit 1G4. You recall the testimony en the lfth of
Duceabcr 1946, here, the witness Kiohr, and you know, therefore,

, hrt he: -_n-.d in Strasbourg *rvd Netzfccilor in 1943 and 1944. When
did you lcern fer the first tine of these events?

.crhrps in the Fell cf 1943 I hc*rd free Kirt that the bodies
h-c Vocn t-ken ever by tho .nntesded Institute. Hirt, and no cne
tiro, tell at 'hat happened in Str. aV:ur-;. I lerrnod that only hero
lurin this trlnl.

o It wra yeur opinion that the Je».a sulcctul by Bobber in
..uachvits no Ccaialaanrs -f the hud army TOO leaned tc death. Did
y u kr. n cf the Sv-c-llod Coralssrr Order?

.. Yea, r.t the Easter tiiocuasion in 1942 Hinder hrd tcld mo
• ut it.

. Yeu h-.vo r tot'.ly Denticned this Easter liscussicn in 1942

... ich y:u hrd *ith Ki^-iier. r.a Hirt . resent?

.. Hoj in the boginnihC Hiralcr h-d intended th't h- ah uld bo
present lut Hirt *r? net »ell rt the time ml HLnl.r lid net *nnt
l ask Hirt tc trke the Ion tri t- his he iou-rt ore.

r It suems to at thr.t this ->astv.r discussion, 1942, is cf
decisive inpertmee, f.r the further lvVulcp»ent6 in the .Jinuncrlo
rr. is; f r y.u pcrson-lly; therefore, I consider it expedient for
fCu t- t.U the Tri' un-1, re Iriefly as possible, iv* this ccnfurcnce
c.-a« -L ut, PS.: nhr.t the -ssmtil c ntents of the discussi.n were.

.. 1 shall ho ns Vrluf as possible. Tnis ~r.s* r discussion 1942

KC.s the leh-uSt Cc:ifer-nco I hr.' eVe-r had xith Hloaler. Usually,

c nf-.r-nc-s uith HL.-l-r lasted only - critter -f idtuitc*. Ills

n7i2


(let, vea Scfee.-a)


*0 1->

• i

. -rticui r ccnTercnco irated icYor. 1 heurs. ino -cc;sicn Ter it
»f?.2 the establish: ;.-.t of '■ nc~ cultural historic 1 auction. HI-filer
.•rdcr.d ;x rnd Dr. . ctrru, ah© was proposed co the director of this
section, tc eerie tc this secticr. tcecusi. there were Cort-ir. natters of
rr 'vd.soticn ra! fine-idnl Bettors tc be discussed. 1 neat tc Hisa-
l.r’s headquarters rdth the fir- doterainaticn tc iiscurs rdth his
t c inton tier, cf attrehin tc the .Jmener' -c teaks vhich hed nc
c r-iccticn *ith it; especially r-bout hucevr. ocperiacr.ts because
shortly w o or. I hod seen cne hi h rltitudc experiment in Dich-.u.

I r--'lined.th. t this vculd be very difficult in qy ixaiticn, and
uld n t bc/oaay. I therefore, pie,,'.rod in rder u

n-v.. an excuse f-r tho ^iscueslcr. vhich hold Hi sal r's ticn. flu
r ur»e f Katurc - "Kvus dor IJr.tur" in SrlsVurr i.rs rttrehwd tc the
norbo. Thst is hi • nusciri fer natural hiatcry rnd still exists
roooduro hrd been au • cstod ;• the hoed cf this auacua
irhlch i'.r.’Jo it p-ssill. t; . r serve .-11 {feats, ivo., th. .xst duli-
cr.U enca, s^ p.raancntly th.-t Vet. 1 . the fera -u»d the c.lcr aero pre¬
serve!.

.M you told Klmaler ebeut this?

*• I h-U * cwll.cticn .f those plants rx.du u. f.r i.iu.iler and
U .1 th_i v»ith no.

, Ycu <«nt<d tc Afctkcn Hiuaier's int.rest sc th:t after th . t
ycu c.uli present tc him • h t i«a cn y.ur aind?

.. Tea.

£ * cu tc jt the ,p.-.rtu.\ity tc -.eve r. len - discussion

itfc KLKUr?

. Yes; ; ec.-.use 1 ils i-r.trlity I t ck this cc-si n tc

'- rl •' * ‘ ?si- - *.ft-r th, oad f - senf rflteo

- *' -

Ko-snn Vv-sy such In throated in tiicso ;l-nts. . r. . co I ’ ,-r. to
t 'll hie. thVt I ’id net s my c. .....cti r. * _t t.i vi>. n_n -aiivry

“cieiitific r-.csrch 'it' t.-.t .. rfc i - ...... ...r . ’ ... rovi isly.


10 .... rU-lMJS-ll-t-Eiclsi (Int. vcnSchccn)
Cc_rt .... 1


and I personally did net like it, end I didn't see what I tea supposed
tc dc in this field which*as entirely alien tc no. Then Homier
be.an a discussion with ac, which lasted alcut two hours - until two
at nirht. Fron his point of view he presented explanations for oil
the questions which I rcurht up, but I held out in ay point of view,
jut HI ml .r did net change his ednd and we erne tc no a.-roesent.
Finally, he 3aid - ^ru'd^incly - "actually, r.s a business aanrgor
this is nene cf ycur busijioss; ycu don't hevu tc Interfere in
scientific natters. That is ay responsibility." He said he would
trke intc account the fact thrt I didn't understand these things,
but I had tc let hin .a?ke the decisions, and I should worry rbcut
ay c*n duties.


5714


..r.rfl ,ehaa (I*-. Yea 3c con)

Court a. 1

i:-:. I said that I would.,very each Hole to know -what ny
‘ utinc * f . Klnaler said that I had to take core of the
r/iainistrativ.. natters as before, I had to take care of
the wishes of the gontlonen, wfcoc ho appointed, just as
those of the people who had been heads of sections up to
r.ov; if th -y askod for r .y hol’p in administrative natters
r.nd want .d to bo roli-v~d of the ninor d>-tnil3 because I
know his point of view. Ho said that research workers
wero to carry out rose .roh and should not worry about inci¬
dent .1 things. He sail he would inform the gentlonon,
which h- did, anyhow .a far as the iiirt case anatomical
conn-ctions, it was a university natter and was none of our
be s t .11. Hicnlor beenne quito oxoltad. I a3kcd hin
for written order, because they wore quite now things.

That irrit ted Hinder, but finally I did get it.

. Do you mean by this order Document Mo. -122, which
is -xhibit !*o. 33 in Document Book 1, pngo 52 -- page 52,
Docursont -.22, exhibit 33: "Fra*, tho Roiohsfuuhrof S3 to
the Reichs Business »i:jiagor of tho ..hnonorbe, S3 Oborsturn-
b nnfuohror Siovrs: I assign tho ..hnen<-rbe, etc..."; do
you r.o-.n this ord-r?

.. Yes, this order was giver, to no .t first orally
•nd then on July 7th Ki.a.l r r-r-atod it in writing. It
also shows clearly whr.t the .dm.nerbe or I was to do in
connection with Hirt. BocauSo of ny opposition in this
natter, Hinler had made _ special point of Hirt’s r.ppoint-
r.a-.t. ... a I .. e a. is shown by roir.t 3 of the order.

I was to r.ake the necessary aquifn nt and personnel available
• e Is shown also in Point «. ..s far as the .eirenorbo or I

w .s concorn-d this r-ferrod only to i.bor .tori-s nd work-

A

3..023, that car. be sc^n from the fact ta t in each c-so, I
i to sond ti. section cfci.fs tc Hi-.l-r for ocporit-^ntol


5713


«ar'l 1C - /#- -SC * 1£ *-2 i- obh tin (tnt. Von Schoon)

c urt ::o, i

subjects and I believe that enough Documents submitted here
h~vo shown that. The question of the experimental subjects
was up to Hiemlcr and was always under the HoH.. or Gluock.
Finally , according to this order I had to deni with the
budget for the Military Scientific Research Institute
and had to contact the chief of the Tho funds were

to be supplied by the .'affon S3, os is shown by a Document
which I think is in this Doour.ent book.

I witness, did you net point out to Hiir.lor during
thi3 conference th .t such ro3c. rch assignnonts, as those
of Rnsohor and Kirt, eight bo more effectively attached
to tho office of the Roiohsarzt-SS?

.. Yes, I said that yesterday. ..ftor Hiur.ler had refusod
t.aat, 1 node another attor.pt.in that direction. I . pproached
Hirt bocnu.ao Hirt hinsolf had not expect d to get support
through tho ..hnonerbo, ho wen ovon surprised at it and ho
was quite willing to a3k lii.*i::l r to attach hi/, to sorr.e
r ory ■■r.iz at ion. He iskod no what suggestion hO ecu Id

to HintlqT and when I said perhaps tho fioiohscrzt SS,

Hirt 3 a id that he could not di3CU33 that, as ho did not
want to work under a nan like Growitz i3 ho said that ho
was a nlncor.poop, 3C he would have to g.t the support
directly fra. Hin. lor. when this atter.pt too failed
liirt was put under the Institute for military Scientific
H.search.

. You rv.ntionod the ConiJ,3sar order a while ego;
you knew about it?

 Yes.

i Did you consider tr.is Cc.-.issir ord :r legally ad-
nissable?

I -a:, not a lawyer; I can not ju'g Sr. .dnissability
f such orders. I was n soldi r . that , rivat , I


5715


..aril I0-*lf-3K-12-3-Ide..haa (Int. Von 3 c hour.)

Court -Jo. 1

hid no commission, when I osked for tho ordor in writing
fro:- Hirml.r, Himmler said as a soldi .r you have to carry
out ovoryorior. shewed no pictures of arrested commissars,
..on and woaon as well 13 pictures of GoiXian soldiers and
oivllicns who had boon terribly pained and killed by these
;.on and woaen. I could not then objoct any further to
this i.-.tt-r, but tho inner conflict which Hinder brought
to his subordinates, through his order, ho novur v;orried
about thoc. In the b.aokcround thor- war tho S3 courts
and if soc-cne failed, the 3i> courts ndninistorod ruthlessly
and thoy vier . stricter against S3 officers than they wero
in other caao3. I h*.d to adjust pyself to this situation,
which was vary difficult for no as it was an enorr.ous
s. iritual burdon.

n . .itnoss, now I cone to a few diary entries which
are connected with this subject; under tho date of 10
F.bruiry I9-.3 is .

Th- I'.o-SIDHOT: It is almost tine for adjournment,
j you are now going to procood with tho diary untries in
*his ..attar, the ocurt will be in ruC0S3.

(.. r-Cuos was taken until 1330 hours.)


19^1

10 i>- - - 15 - 1 -jOEtor (lat. —ii-r;

Court 1 . 1.


' S 3 SSI is.

(2.c nearing recorr/asod at 133 hiuri, 1C April 19-7-)

“ :_S£H.iL: Ths rribaacl ia ayain in session.

::;;!D2:r: She secretary General will file for the record
me certificate of the prism rhynici. n r.s to Deford nt Dborkcuser'n
iiluort.

Couaaol nay proceed.

i-znro 5II' , T.\S - hesuaod
“IITOT ZT'-U-If-.TI 1* (continued)


sir. v-is::-r3~ S

.. MMtos*. : ro.-iul you tint you -r: etill under o: th, and 1 now
vat t' ut to you C feu ontri j* ir. your cifry ir. connection with thin
nkolct-.:. collection. I Aril lv o ;• ur ii-irieo cub: it ted to ymr cove>-
ir.: ya ro I9U3 -mi iis 4 # Ywr diary of 1543 cost.-inn, under the

<L to of t..o 10t.. Of Fobru ry, •.he followin/ entry, which io to be
food on y c ^3 of the . : di.ry, rnl on pa/go 163 of DocuDent

“olvu’c *e. 3 of t..j Sn.-lia. tr r.olvti >r.. Shin dinry contains an or.try
to -/.Ac., the ro cut!'« hr.t «lr iy r f.^rrod. It cone arm itself with
Tr. ’Jeer..  v.. y u fou d t..ir pern • 0?

“. . iniecd.

. ror *fhr.t r .ao.. did yiu conc.r:. y ursclf uith thio "c?
nff ir?

.. .r I I lr ,n!~ t.rtificd this naming. Dr. 3o?. wns rr. old
c u..i..; see of Prof, a r "irt. Or. this v^r;- d : , on tho 10 th of
Voru. ry, he notified the 1-3*rt..oct 1 chi-f -JU.ot th. t ho hr d boor,
ir ftod i hi th. ar y ad th t .;o, thjreforo. could a»t cr *ry out tho
dir stl-.s riven hi., by irt if he hud to obo. thir ordor for Joininc
-4^:r.. . Professor Jttert th.Kmpon ordered no to of feet 0 dcinyln,;

"•JV rdiiu; t:.is drrft: tht, ir. effect, hojwonod.

/. ^dcr t-.o drto of tho l?tu of Jttnc •• ich is to be found

o: _ c Let of t..o S:-lia.. focuu. t booh *0. >, lh-re in a report of
3 .-. - uV tit anthrop:lo. ic- - .tr sureaenta at .uccf.'.'itr. Did you -in


. t 1 »u‘


^713


ip at

C*ufl-L

i--:-Occ;.v of t..ic report?

... “ » 3-re returnee fron huschvitz and informed us that he hod
int.r.u tk. work :Lor_, since on optdcalc hnd broken out at
_u-c -itz. Me said t- 1 he would hr.vo to report about this artter to
tnj iSEL.

Mow is it that you or t-ic ..kr.cncrbo conccrr.od itself '.rith that

✓

-.ttcr?

Boc uso, by or:'or of Hitriler, t:.c .Mr.er.orbo \-r.s co-raic-sioned
to toko c re of t..io tv.'. ir.iatr .tive work. Hi.taler, ir. Hirt's special
cate, issued express directives t^ support ''.irt in this ud..iniatrr.tivo
vorh.

. :*v. , under tk. dr.te of t..o 2 3rd of Juno l^-J, the oxccution

of H-roy n'rell j,:oto„-r >is are boi..*; rationed. Ufcr.t wr.o your connect¬
ion vith these hoto,;rn- ks.

. .. ::irt either lv A or var.t-d *n X-r v rvnarr.tur, or pvrhr.ps noi.io
t.:i>v; wr.u vror, with the current. I don't aiito laiou now what the
-if.’ ir c ...” rr.wd itself -it., nt that ti.«». t any r te. it was purely
technic 1.

. ”o i.. .11 now record to tl.o diary of 19’h. vould you turn to
the e try of t;.e 2nd of :.bru-.ry, vQicIi ic to bo found ^n p- 169 of

tho M lie.; Docun.-nt Book .0. Under t.:c <L .0 f tho 2nd of Feb¬

ruary, 1$^.. c conferonce wit:, *:irt t %r; ssbour,: ic ncr.tlonod. Ot-
vi-ucly, you v>ro ;.t that ti;\o at Str. oebourp with "irt?

... Yus.

t . 3i :-:irt or. t..in occ: s..ow you hie okeloton work?

... l*o, I didn't acs. is skeletons and w didn't discuoo that
natter. This collect! e, w..ic. - . of ter ..11 w.o a ar.ttor for the anatori-
c;u institute at StrussVmrg, was only. -i6ous3od with "irt or.ee, that

io. ... t. o early =ta.;os, vl.oa t«;is work \ra bcin : dovolopod. "'n that

•

occasion I exprec-cd ay _ jr-on l -’is -act about c is latter. Ho, hov>-
uovr, ridicul.d ... ar.d tried t instruct about tnis affair by


5719


1C pa-rrG r-I3-;-? 3 -t-r (Hauler)

Cruet Vc. 1.

tails: -- so_ot--ls about Qir.tony. Ho ^ido a few statements rc^-jd-
i:.- ree.tay stich I didn't know of up to that period of ti:.o. In
.. connection, he stated how asr.tozlcal r.-scarc., \?orkore received
.v-jir or cos, nd I w s quite surprised at tho mount of corpses such
.. anr.to ic-'l institution needs. He led uc to the big vorkrooa were
cor cc: were prorred rad tsicro the students w.r_ 'firkin-. However, I
.1 stay taorc very Ion,.. Hirt rt tho ti -j -rir.trir.od tho point of
view t.v t he, ns cn nnr.tortlc 1 ••orkor. wouli h.va to r.ttrck problons
wherever they hr/, cron ed up. He & id thrt those pcrcor.s who had been
condotaod to death would 4vo th_:. such opportuidty, and th ?1 to hie it
appeared to bo ridiculous to ..croly execute t—.. or burr. thei. instead
of head in,; the:. ov r to hie ocntonicai institution a.c it would ordin-
•rlly to done with people vh: hxl bo r. sentenced to dect... I vr.c
otro:,;ly undor t..e i .proooion of :jy inspection in this nraitoulor.1 rooa
«d I asked hi . not to discuss this :..tter with ao in future. Ho
• l'hi't aotuolljr iscuac it -ay longer. In this conference, dated tho
2nd of •'ebru-ry IQUU, “ irt only asked :a to instruct Dr. 3c ,71 to acral
..i ‘.he necoscary ..-.t.rll.


:,-r-t so. 1

10 Apr -.7~A-14-l-LB*-rutty (Ini. Sarlcr)


■v -idn't Dr. Be, re colleb-rate with Eirt et Strassturc?

A. S3. Eirt VPS not is Strassburg hi=£elf. -"e vts working in
nunich. 5 tr :e was f.r.-.erly ectivo at the Race Office and he knew Eirt
froa the tiPu of hi* studies.

v Thank y*.u, the t is sufficient. Kcv l.okin/: at y our er.tr>’ of
the 4th .f ril, 19-i~, I nut to you th: t the prosecution concludes fron
this oatry thr.t anthropological noesuro.ents wore carried out in ^rie r.er
A war cp- ms. Vbat do you have to say alout that?

A. *ntkrcr.olv.;lccl .lecsurenents vtre carried out in this v'.rld war
Just r.B in the last world war. For iastrnce, ! hoar' about such work
i:. coBaoetion with the research of the race research worker, Klaus. He
die a .o rcSvrroh work on nsctori of the crotorn ioPul"ti..n who hr.d
.eon drafted into the Vaffen SS.

v . Concluding this cor.-.lex of auesti .r.o, I ask you whether you
did anythin* in that connection which vent beyond the orders which voro
it sued t o yeu by Kiamlor?

A. So, in no vny *t oil.

v. You are further char,;od in tho Count concerned with coldor.lc
Jcuadice. -hen did you ,;ut into c'ntect with tho experiments with opI-
oic Jaundice? ‘best. were cX-<.ri.:er.to carried out at Snchecnhauctn
and I'p.tiveiler.

a. I >nly found nit here at this present trial in Euernber,* that
such ox erirents v^ro errrivn out.

% . '.Aren't you rnf the ahnenerbo or Belch Research Council In

al

c ntac* with It. Dofcr.eaT ‘hie nr o has boon centionod hero sever/tinea.

a. The tune of ?r. D-inen woe entirely unknown to .pc up to the
tine of thin trial. .

.. didn’t the *hnvnortc -r the Institute for Military Medical
R..O‘.;rch *ivc c research rssl.-n.Ant in that connection?

a; s..

. • Reid Eesoerch Council issu r?

a. I don't know about that. If such cn -r or was issue*d by the

5721

• • 4


C-urt So. 1

10 i-jr 47 (Int. EtT-ler)


l.ich Eecncreh Council, this *-e 6 only a zcttor for the -loainotcatirry
{ r the c-:.~r -,1 of el.'tflci who vse the Ge-ncrplarzt rrofeescr Dr.
ichroltwr.

.. Sow, if y/a lovk ct ic^e 65 of your Alary of 19^ bb 1 . tiw;* 170
f the it.\lish "ecu *nt Jock So. 3, end if you refer to the Ante of the
3rd -f .-lurch you will find the following entry, rad I ouotes

"Oenerrlnrzt rrofeesor Dr. Schrciber '*•0 telephoned. on hemtitia
research. ■ in t of cuotntion. The -.rooecuti-n tr.kos this entry r. s evi¬
dence that you v u -c c -nacctod with hepatitis research.

A. Professor Schrcitcr nt thi t tl .e tolohoner the Hcich Sesenrch
C.uncil Lec.-uco he vr.ntod r conference rrrpn-red with Hi:, lcr, who nt
tho cc « ti.oc vre r ::e::ber of the -residual council of the Roich Recenrch
Council.

v In that cosu Generalnrtt Schrolter told ycu nt that tiro thnt
ho wanted n conference with Kir.rler ro-y-rdiiv; he-ontltio research v.rk7

A. Soo, that is how it wcs. wjjitoC. to confor with Hlnnlor end
the rves.s ho otrted was thnt henatltls research work vrs to ho tho
subject of thnt conference. At that tisa I enterod thnt I didn’t ovcj;
kn-w what hopctltic noent.

v 21. Dr. Schrcltor rt thnt ti o discuss anythin,- with you ro*ard-
in»: hie research?

a. So. o said nothin - else. Shura wj no reason for him to do
thnt ;eccuso he really venter, to s-.enk t- Hicalcr.

v luring these ->roceedixys the none of rrofessor Ka?fien was
re^ertedly -lontiunc . Ear, or. wrs o ny-icao orofossor at Strassttuy.

Did you knov anythin clout rrofe-ssor Kep,-en’e 00 *inaction with hcnetltlu
ex-erL.ents7 #

A. 3o, : knew nothin, rt.ut that, rrofessjr Enc-en novor ao^rorchcd
e is. this c.nnecti n at til.

,. 'I shell have the '.cu.ent Yolu.e So. 6 ch-vn to you. •’uui< J
you lecss turn to *>e.;c 1- "here y.u will fin' vhe 2 :u ont ::0-125,
hxhi.it 19v of the r .Secuti on. Ijreri »nts tn ha ca lein.-s are Voinr


2722


(Tiers Sc. 1

10 a-r ty ( 1 st. r-a ier)


-iacuBBcd there. Did you ever ,-ain knowle'.-e about theEe experiments
u: t- the tir.e of this trial?

a. So. iothic-' became knovn to no «a J the nar.OB rocnti.ned in this
letter I herrd hero for the. first tine, canes such as Gutreit and Knlk.

.. Vith reference to midecie Jeundlce, you are testifying that
jr jU had nothin, whatsoever to do vith this entire research vork, and when
:r.w 3rd of .-.arch, 194-.-, you tare an entry in your diary, "Genoralarzt
Sr. Schreiner telephoned re,:cr. J in,* hepatitis research," this can to very
si oly explained, ty the fact that Dr. Schrdter raked you to arrange a.
einference *»ith r.l. ol«r?

-V. Yes.

^ Vitr.eoe, in connection vith the c-:rjlox >i questions referrlJV'

to Sr. finscher, olysrl or-.crinsnts v r « re-.oatcdly nontionod during

this trial. I snail have the Document Sock 11 shovn to you. Vould you

turn to pr.ro 22? This le D.cu..eat KO-61- - I t*,: y ur nard.cn - KC-616,

•

ixhiloit 242. It can bo found on *>c c 21 of the dear:ont rclur.o in its
Goman f or;. It boconos evident fron this dooanent that Rancher rocoivcd
y.ur i oroval for the nulli cat ion of an oasay in tho Munich Vaokly Kcdl-
crl ruri-jdieal. During the couroo of your tostlnony you have stated
tfcct you hr., n.thir- whatsoever to do vith the scientific ’'art of tho
lj vrl onto. Isn’t this document contradictory to your atrtenant?

A. So. Vu are hero concerned with a mention of publication.
fic.;rr-izv this assay in ouestion, I telooh.ncd * do vrtnontrl chief,
Vuoat, vho ;ave his approval for publication. I, in turn, inforned
fiaccher about that, end I, therefore, did not .:ive such ooprovnl on ny
vn initiative and under uy own Jurisdiction.

-v. There appeared a nunber of entries in your diary of # 1944 in
connection vith the production of ruly. nl. Could you state nuito gen¬
erally vhtt you he- t- do vith the oroduction of rolyital?

a. it '-as already* dcrified ty ?r. Blcsje’s ena-'inatlon, I had
received the .rder by Hinder in the rail of 19®3 tv take stems in order
t stirt th« production of this eoa^uletic,; dru^. A.cuter of confer-


Court 1

10 A*>r -.r-A-li—x-ziL.-rutty (1st. Hauler)


cnees ueceestry for that -'urootc re^ardliv- o*>aretion roor.6, nrenara-
tiis, erul.iceat, i ad whatever vat necessary for any ouch *»roduction.

.•21 this lee- cb av-ercat fro:i theta nu.er-us entries in the diary of
jg,i. In this c-nnection I vent to nolnt to zy statement of earlier
thle ..-ruins* vhtre I sal' fcov these entries originated.


Court 1.

April 10 — a —15- 1— HD— i-row-ReEule r.

Were yoa concerned In any for- with the development
of this corgaleting drug?

a. Ho, I w.-s only Included In thrt work -ifter the
i.vclopmcnt stage had already bwtn comoleted end when the
productive Butnod was to be considered.

Where was prouucti n of polygel strrted?
a. Tort w. a at ochlschters nor Lindau on the Souonsoe.

Who was the heud of the production?
a. Th; t was Dr. Ploatner.

h . «nd was the Ahnenerbe or the Institute of Military
Medical Research competent In r«g ris to th-t Projection.

A. At the beginning, yes, n- Inter this was to be
tr nuferrod to a Gero:n rfollmlttel G.rt.B.H.
h. And when was that?
a. Tnr.t was dcooubur, 1944.

■*. You will probr.bly remember teat tne witness Neff
stated on the witness stand tr. t you had c-used the
transfer of a number of inmates from daci.ru to Schlacht ro.
Is tn-t correct?

a. !\a that Is correct.

liow, I'd like to pclr.t out a contradiction which
can be found when comparing It to your statement that you
re lly n-d nothing to do with tn-. furnishing of Inmates
-r.i now you ere stating that you c uo^d the transfer of
tw»nty-flve Inmates to ichlcchters.

a. These approxlmately twehty-flve inmates had ; 1 ready
Oejn pi c-a at the disposal of tne dep- rtment rlcetner ot
dccnau where this coagulating drug was produced In the
I bor-tory stage. ..'nen production w": started a little
ic.ter I asked th.-1 these inm-te-3 be r.lso transferred in
orie;* to a^sur^ them a more tolerable life outside the
concentration ersap of dachau.


5725


Court 1

a.; ril 10 -A- 15 - 2 -aC—Kcrrcw— Ha osier.


«*. Ir. view of the t eneral war situation end the advance
of me rtlli^a .nr_les aid you consider such a transfer to
be expedient*

/». I cased for this transfer end I thought It vs
expedient in the interest of the incotes. Frou the point
of view of production tr.is transfer was cooplctoly eonseleas
considering the situation at thrt tine.

•c. do ou wont to any tnat tnis tr nsfer wrs only
^.vpcaicr.t in the interests of the ln.trtas?

*. !.ot each fent-.sy is required to lsa ft lr.e what the
inoctes vcula hr ve to or vrUtcc durin a the oendln L collapse
:-nd wnat m.eir conditions in the concentration caap would
b-. I .r.r.ted to save tn^se people froa that horrlblo fate
e .r.ot..lng in vnlch I succeeded.

G. Jid tr.uoe l.icotes rocmin alive?

*. I reci-iv.d repw ts tart tr.ey all survived the end
of the war und.r very favorable clrc--.stances.

Tile prosecution has 3Ub:~ittoa c document singly,

..C. 1424, -xhibit 462. This is an rfflunvl^ of 2v.

Fritz Frlcdrlor. rirscher, who is an uncle cf Jr. .-biocher.

It bocoavS evident froa thlj doeu-i-nt that fiascher, in
e n.'.ect* r. with tr.e :roa-ctlon of pcly^al, or i-ctnor the
v<.loonm.t of ablycal, vrs c rryin L . out fatal oxptrlaonto
or. n_n* beings. Jla you, ct cr.y tine, snov about thet?

«. ::o, I ho ru notning about it. «fter noscher'a

nrvoat, however, in the year of 13-P*, the Police

-■.•ucider.t of ..union, von Sbersttin, f.;-vo no u rat.ior excited

•

-ascription of c. 1 crixin-1 .-v:Scr.ur. Ir. th : connection
n- l : Id that Rrscner .u'd ever, snot at ;,un n boin 6 ir.
r^.r to teat .is cocmL .ir. dru t -. « cor.flr—tlon of
- - stitcJont 02 - id not o t.-ir..d t tust tine. I,

*’• - irot, didn't


bv-lluVv- it 3vc:.uo t . r r. -ors were


Court 1

April 10-ii-15i-3-HD-Z»rrcw-Raaaler.


flying p round about him and his wife after nis arrest -
uong them that ne removed his collaborator .Muschlcr by
murdering her. Ha.schor, incldent"lly, succeeded In
clearing hi-sclf of tnls suspicion of carder. «fter
everything had ooco_e newn through this trial - evory-
twln 6 tnat flcscher has on his conscience, 1 rc rather
inclinud to believe it. It becomes also evident from
Jr.clu Hr.ecner's st te-wnts now secret R:6cher kept his
ml3deeds. Only by interfering with his nephew's desk
Unclw rtnscher gained /.nowlud b e of whatever ne Is
tostlfyln* horc. He, rt the s me time, confirms in his
strteaent that his nepnov was r.'gin* with anger when
finding out about his interference.

Q. Concluding thc3e questions, I put to you Pohl's
affidavit w.lcn is Jocu-wmt Wo. Coo, £xniblt 221, to bo
found in Document Book 11 on page 2. I quote - (this is
on top of ? & o 3): "Slevors told u*e the following: /Oinone'rbo,
w.io ann-gor Sivers was, was developing n drug In D.chnu,
ay order of ..lnmler, Which had ns its result *ho quick
coagulation of blood. He sala tn: t it vug v«ry important
f r fl t .:tln B units because It prevents their blooding to
death. Thu experiments in J' chnu, during which one lnmr.to
vr.o snot r.t, h. vo proven these results." Did you toll
Por.l anythin* :o tiv t effect?

•- MH. HrtHDY: lour honor. This Document No. 06b merely
pur-tains to Oswald Pohl's testimony concerning Sivers. I
r.a not nwr.ro tnat the original or tr.e English cor..a ins the
wards "on orders of nlacl^r 0 in connection with tncee
experiments to find v. coagulant for blood.

Da. '*£I33n-^ER: This Is * dcc-w;nt which can be found
in Document Volume Vll w. lcn was s -bmitt. 1 by the prosecution. .
-::-,ro err. hardly be any doubt that tnls statement of Pohl

?727


"ourt 1

April lC-A-16-4-HD-iKarrow-na—aler.

refers to the experiment of Rascher in connection with
polygol. for that reason I tr.Inx that this is quite
necesar ry.

THE FRSSXJEI'T: If - understood correctly, counsel for
the prosecution v s suggesting that there was a mistrans¬
lation in :he English aocunent booh. least, certain

w ris voro ecd free. the Geraen tiint counsel said were not
in the English booh. did counsel for the prosecution aoKe
aoaa couipcrison between the c-ngllsh document btoh and
the German?

DR. 'EIcGERSER: Tnu po3.n 6 o I quoted cou.u6 word for
word fro- t..o German text.

hR. HnfJY: In phrigrapn 4, a. stated ns follows: "The
Ahnenerbo, vnos uonogor divers was, h d developed in

j o.*ou, fc" oru^r of :.l -Iv r . u medicine. n Th-.t

Isn’t in t.u tronslotlon.

THE r.'-ZdIJEM: The words "by order of Hiidler“ nro
lcohlng from the Snellen tranal. tion. Sid counsel for
t:.o prosecution examine the G^ra-n document?

HR. .v«?u>Y: I cm see the nr.ao “Jilaal* r" n^rv, four
...nor, but I c.uld not urfco vut the otner Ooraon words.

- v! ual.-, the defense c r.Sul 1= correct In his
translation from whf l I 6v. hero, four honor.

THE PREcIJEI’T: "ill co.n cl for the prosecution see

: the English transition is correctvd In occcratnce
*.tt the G. ann? I -on'- -er.n right now, but it souo
1 ter ti- so it will be correct.

.*UrJY: I will C...CK the German, Your Honor, and


retort to you


10 ..aril ^7-..-:.ir-i6-l-C-r-ss (Ink, Purler)

Court lie. 1

1 Did you tall Pohl anythin: to t. at effect, that an iraeto
sac shot e* in connection with polygal?

.. I told rohl exactly what I had found out fren Eberstein. As
I already caid the leveloecont stage of polygal was already conclude.!
shon ho received Hircler'a order to take caro of the production. If
Haschor 3hot at an innate in connection kL th polygal research then
tills, at ary rato, occurred at a poriod of tir.c Then ho had nothing
to do r.ith that natter, I only gained knowlodgo of this allogod
shooting after Rancher's arrest, as I alr^aiy testified earlier.

Q !tr, Free! lont, in this connection I offer Docunont Siovors
•to, 10 cs Exhibit Siovors No. 6, I bog your .nr on, Exhibit No, 9.

This is an offi ’.avit of Oswald Pohl on nago 21 of Docuncnt Book
Siovors I, I road the oaSs,ntinl points to bo founi on pafo one of
thia docunont, ar.d I quetor

"1, -y affidavit of 23 July 1916 concerning nodical oxporiaonts
was subrittod to -,j A th roferonco to ry statements in paragraph U
Siovors (..hnenerbo),

"2, Siovors' dary of 19UU (Doc, No. 3516-F3) was suboittod to
ro with roforonco to the ontry of 1 $ Aire l?Ui, 9 o'clock, (pago 167):

’SS-Obergrup.onfuohror Fohl,

"1, Prc'uction of pelygal an’ sottlenont Folix."

Tho ; ararrapha two to six are not interesting hure and I shall
ski, then. I quote a^air.i

"..ftor havin- reed this entry in th«. 'dory, 2 can ronenbor
“io*ers« visit vary well-an! I can state ccccr 11 rg to the best of ry
kr.'ndo-’gQ end ccnsdonco*

" her. all relevant points crnccrnin; tho possibility of pro jucing
(installation for rcnufuctury) th: blood-starching r no 5y '’polygnl" as
roll as c.ncernir. th. other it_-i3 had boon discusso 3, Siovors told no
a fear things conoomln tho Baschjr ease before I cell-*! in the SS-
2 tandartonfuahrer "auror to 13CUS3 tho nricyrxnt of scientist


10 _;rli !7^>5TSKl6-S-Gross (int. Ranlor)
Co-rt ibj 1


prison: ra in mthenatical cnlculatinj problems. He informed ae that
'--.ocher and his rife had been arrostod for jointly condtting child
Tubstituticn and abduction. Through Raacher’s arrest several urv-
’.olievabl.; thin-s had apparently ccco to light which were now being
invwtiratod. So it was also rair.tainoi that Rascher was supposod to
have fired at a prisoner in crier to test tho "polyr-al". Siovers
r.'.orofcra.express an assumption which ho himself had only hoard, but
r.- t a fact fhich corresponded to his knowlcdgo."

.ail then follows tho certification.

0 .Itnes:-, I core to tho nj::t count of tho Inttctnent which
ref rs to tho L^at experiments. I shall havo Document Book XIII
■hewn to you. . uld y-u turn to Eocoaont 13-793, Exhibit 258 of tho
Pnsocutionj . age 16 . This is o lotW into! the 9th of April 19h2
hioh you sent tc Professor hr. HLrt. In this letter you are writing
about apodal secret ax.urinonts at Oaehao. To what axporlnonls did
you refer in that ontry?

It rof >rrod to tho hi-h altituio oxporinantn which vroro
carri i! out by Raschor qt Dachau.

T Tho lottor Is lato! 9 ..pril 19ii2 which ia a rh^rt tine .after
yu yourself had attundod a hi. h altitude exporiaont of Dr. Raschor
at naehr.v. end reported to Hi. ;1 r 5 ..pril about it.

. Yoc, that is correct.

lorki^- at this letter of ? til 19U2, I have to ask
y yj v *hothor this lit tor oenstitutos your own opinion as to how theso
I at exporiaenta were to bo carried through?

- Ihis nor dr I already st-.tod in ‘otail vhot the subject of
'v conferonoo .i th Kimlor at “nst 1?U2 was -c-ur day3 after this I
od the 'IrocUvos to Kirt as I received then froa Hirclcr.

'I lid r'u your rdf consider tic Lest exporln ants as being
langorous?

 Tiv-.t L st jxperinent raist entaal a c;r‘ an -n.vr.t of danger
I ■--i’ V rr-solf as a layrvtr. H~ev.r, I b not consi Lr this danger


20 ,.?rfl f;7—.!-to7I>-16—3~Grcss (Int. Rader)
Ccurt to. 1


to ' o particularly extensive since Hirt had told =e by way of conver¬
sation that ho tri3 carrying out such experiments on NCOs at Military
'radical ~oa±xy.

Ir. this Document Volume H thcr^ appears as a Document l»-098>
Exhibit 263, on page 26, a notation which you transmitted to Dr,

Rudolf Brandt for his acknowledgement. On the 3th of .’.pril 19!i§,

Hirrier told ycu orally, and later in tho fom of an crior, that you
woro to sup-ert Dr, Hirt's task to a full extont. hy didn't you
personally leal with this notation which contains a few wiahos a Hirt?

« I only in a position to traroalt Dr. Hirt's wishes. In
spite of KL dor's basic order I could r.uithor doal with the pooplo *s
nourishment nor with tho question of tho socond camp physician nor
vith tho question of payment of certain innatos on ny own initiativo.

I ha • no jurisdiction whatever in concentration camps,

a tot., wtul! ycu turn to pago 30 of this Document Book which
is Docur-jr.t '0-193, Prosecution ’Exhibit 26U, ."hat was the roaaon for
this lottor of ..hn.-n,rbo hi eh -.Yas 3? nod by you addressed to Dr.

Rudolf Brandt?

.. TJ roa3 >n for this letter was tho report made by Dr. 'imor
on th. s---. dato about his baity drafted an' about tho report by Hirt
whore it is stated that those jxj.vrkvntsoould not bo conductor! without
the assistanco of * inner.

Q Did ycu at that ti:» liscuss those experiments \.ith Dr. inr.:or,
particularly exp-, rimer, ts on hurr.n boinps?

.. The oxp rlronta woro net iscussol with Dr. ' ire or that tino.
.-art from this affair wo only dismissed questions ;f a current nature
>-hich wore necessary. $

Q Tau fan,.--, however, whmt those .xporlaonts -..-ore, didn't you?

• * ' oci.vss evident free your diary that on tho 25 Juno 19li3 yeu wero
ir. Bat2w .ii or.

*- Tes, on tho cccasi-r. f -'.Is visit Dr. Isner showed no a few
rears with their lower arms bar. ,


1- *-prii. -j J j-17-l-r.i rl si (Int. von Schoen)

C-urt Sc. 1

h •hr.t -as y.:ur impression cf the general st:t_ of health -f
these experimental subjects?

i. There Sere a’ eUt ten cf them. “hey made quite a. lively ia-
: ressicn. 1 sai cna uan wheso drossing was Just bein ' chcn.-ed end
I saw thrt the place cn the treated arm w s ccvorod with scurf.

C. Did Dr. irr.-.r tell ycu cf any deaths?

.. Ho.

Q Ir - y-ur visit tc K. tzreiler lid you loam anythin/ ebeut
voluntoerin, cf cxpw±a.ntel sutj-.cts?

.. Yea. I -skud several cf the persons who wore intreducod tc me

by M a w . Iks told that after a lecture which «u .iven by irof.

Dr. Hirt they had volunteered fer Uds experiment, end 1 had already

1-rrnod th t fret: .rex'. ”irt. ..fter the conclusion cf the experiments

he else told cc thrt ho had fiven the ccsctnl-nt a report ebeut the
•

•-.J conduct of the prisoners and had recerm ended thrt they be rolonsod.

• :::w, W.J Kill re cn r. few ps os in iXcuucnl Bee'k 11; we will
find cn ; :c 13 tho S.cune.it h0-195, ircsocution Lxhi'.it 266. This
in r letter frem Brandt tc J&nisterlrlrat Dr. Gternert. It aayo,

".. re details about th- experiment Ceuid he -ivn U you by SS-Sf.nd-
rt.nfUehrer Siovers." Then :t leant in tho cpinien :t the j-orsen who
mvtc Uia letter - th\t .s, Sr. i.udclf Brandt - you were informed cf
th.ce *jx ; crlsents in Xatswciler?

- 1 was lnfcraod insofar rs I knew -£ the .Her ir .in Hixsalcr tc
jUpt - Btflrcnd th-t I w*o inf rood tc the extent tbit 1
1 ' ' crv,i th »- > ** l visit* . atst p-int cut that

h*t I sew rnc .wr: t .fctp eiUr -id net -ivc mo the i_i r resci. n cf

; JCi l denser. besides, since I was not a dcctif 1 was n t
1 - v - "i* 'ay dofirdtc impression cf any method of lnvustigntictf.

" r - v r > tB frr *s the lie -1 aide f thu -xpvrkiunts wrs concerned,
tb-t didn't concern me at all.

le.-m th-t in c..-..fti :. it L st experiments
>•. rl-._r.t-l subjects n-i ciyT?


1C „prii"..-DJG-17“2-Bicl8i (Ir.t. v-r. Schcon)

Z :urt 2Jc. 1

.. In 1 larch 1943 I eskal Hirt whether oxpsrincntrl subjects h- d
saff-T.l any hriu. Ho mentioned that two -f the experimental suljvCts
hoi die! :ut th't the. cruse cf death had nothin; to Co with the Lest
_x. orioents in both coses.

..s't.r this visit in Kerch 1943 did you visit h'irt in either
Str-at-ur- cr Kattwdler ayain?

.. 1 wp.s not in Nctrnollcr after January 1943; Iivisited Iiirt
L; Strasbourg cr.cc in rucry 1944.

c; IK you knew whether, md in whet f.ra, iiirt conducted Lost
ox^tria- nts cn himself?

Yes, in 1941 Hirt tell =« thnt ho w. s conducting experiments
II hiasel . i.eii h- became a.ri.usly ill Ucr.uao f this in 1942
I fe d to t..U hie cn bchrlf cf Hirdor that he »rs to swp these
experia-r.t* cn hir.s*-lf, Lut Hirt enswered that he couldn't d. that,
he would Cwnduct any experiments cn himelf that ho considered necessary.

C k .1: t nos ycur personal improesi-n ef Hirt? has he »ori-ua in
his research terK?

.. : h*d the Vest im; resale:: cf iiirt. 1 emsidcrod hin o very
.ri us reSe-rch j.rk.r wli.sc life wr.s completely ieveteJ t> science.

r In your dirry 1944 there appears or. the 15th cf March r report
; Hirt t-_ Hi-xd-r in 3alz v ur . '..ere you present?

.. Yes, I was presjr.t. .lsc =y office cnief t.uost.


It April i3-17-l:^?icl3i (Ir. .. vcr. Schos)

Court !io. 1


O ‘.'as tho course: of hur.an oxporiaents and any ioaths which
ha.’, occurred discussed?

A Thera was no nention of death in this report. Hirt demanded
aniral expori: ants to continue tho research, but Hinder ordered
Janann experinents. Hirt said that ha ccul:' obtain further results
only through aninal ox«>crinonts.

0 This mrnlnc in connoction with the Hirt report, nt tho
h -innific of 19li2, we sontionod intravital rricrosccpy. I should liko
to ask you only one question to clarity whether this nathod is
applied to huian beings r only to oxporlnental .aninals?

.. ..a I heard at this discussion, and as I knew otherwise,
those ir.tr-vital nicroscopic tests could bo ccniuctod only on arl-
•vals, aryl this was tho reason why Hirt, ^hoso studios wero alone tliio
Ur.-, .ran'.-id larger nurl.rs of ardnnls for expo: a.

PH. EISGa'32?.: “r. r ; sidont, in this connection I off or
Docu&ant SMfo. 9, as Siov^rs Exhibit 10. This ia a lottjr of tho
fira Carl Zoiss ecncomin.: thoso typos of microscopes. I buliovo I
can isponae with res lnr- this ’.ocurcnt.

UR. HA8DXi Defense counsol saif ho would ’i spans o with roading
this do currant. H wovor, I object to s'td3sion of this into ovidonco as
it lacks tho r«/fiir.'* Jurat. It loos i»t ccnply with tho ro-ulations


act forth by the Tribunal.

D?„ EI3G2<BE?.t It is tnio that this Iccurxmt has no certifi-


catoj that i3,tha si nature of tho Zeiss fira is not certified. Tho
Z.133 Qrn is in Jena, in tho Soviet occupation svonc, an! up to now


it fcao not boon possible to obtain a certifiod copy of this letter
fraa this ccnpony. 7h court has tho possibility ta atalt such docu-


nt ov-_n if th necessary cortl ficato is 1-aekin , if tho difficulties
of obtain!,.- a corUfi-- ’ 3i nafcara aro very -roat, and that is tho
case hare. Indopen ’ontly of this I have alrooty andoavrrod to obtain
this 'ocuTent with a erti fieri tier-.


573 -


1C ..pril U7-u-».IT>-17-2a—Biolsi (In?, von Schon)

Court No. 1

Tffi : :ZS DEI’T: The Tribunal will see or? this Dccunent pro¬
visionally.. If counsel is at soaa la tor tico ablo to obtain a prop or
jurat it •-'ill bo a boittodj if counsel is unablo at ary tino to pro euro
that jurat, counsel nay a^ain present the question to the Tribunal anrt
the Tribunal rill then role on it inic^micntly. It *111 now bo markod
Exhibit 10, ore vioicnally.

IP. TZ3GE7BSP.J I have already tried to obtain a co yj in tho
proscribo-l fore.


5733


„:ril 10 - - .-3K-13 - 1-J& Jfc ~b (Int. Von Schoon)

Gear- Ho. 1

Ir. your di ry for 1943, witness, you record on
£8 January 1943 r. conference with Curator Wucst and 3S
Obor jru; -jenfuohrer Pohl, concerning continuation of the
"L" «rp -rinents; -why was Pohl called to this conference
nd -what vias discussed?

.. Th: reason for this discussion was the nssignuent
0 f building sito for the ont ecological institute. I had
ju3t cone fron Stra3sbcurg, end I reported to r:y cffico
chiof about the talks I had there with Professor Hirt,
the nain subjoot of which was the expansion of the uninnl
breeding at Nntzwuiler. ..s I said before, oxporiaoncal
u.i i .Is voro needed in large numbers for .dirt's exporinunts,
and Pohl's approval was n-cos3 ry to -xpand the brooding

of on inn Is .t Natzwoiler.

i In your diary on tho 22 May 1943, thoro is the
following entry: "Conference with 33 Oboraturnbnnnfuohrer
Dr. Brandt about gas oxperiuonts, according to letter 14
Hay 1943"; this di -ry ontry is not contained in tho English
translation; what wore thss- gas experiments?

.. Those gas oxp-rL’-ent3 havo nothing whntov-r to do
With tho Lost experiments; but -t this opportunity I can
give information about it b-enuse the 1 tter nentionod in
tV.is diary entry was shown to the witness Moino hero during
cross-examination.

i Is thrt Document No. 1368-.., Exhibit 464, which I
shall now have shown to you; please look at it?

(Thu Document i3 shown to th- witness.)

.. Yes, it was t.^s letter wnich was 3or.t to r.a. ..ccord-
ing to request, I went to sov. Maine and I receiver, froa hin
- 3ealed envelope on which w-s written "u-turn Sealed' after
t Jeon notice of contents. Th- witness I— in a therefore could
;*.:t t.stify anythin\ about this c.t.t-r. Then, Dr. G-rlow,

573=


ri 1 iQ-..-BK-18-2-!!oohun (Xnt. Von Sonoen)
Court .To. 1


•-..0 ia r.ontionod in that lot tor, was at that tiac tho hoed
of thu o3 and Police Technical -c .dony. 3y order of Hinnler
h-j was to develop a 30 s bull-t with which it would bo
-onsiblo to ri-Jco . criainul, who w.s being pursued, incapable
of fighting or acting for a short tine, so that ho could be
seized, but which would not ham hir: in any way or kill him.
The expurin nts which w^ro rr.de ware without success.

How Hinalor, w;.o always had the nost remarkable ideas,
dermal od that Professor Hirt should none a substanco which
would aohi^ve the desired effect. Hirt, as oould be ex¬
pect J, 3 .id he was not occapetent to do so. He suid that
suoh a question could be answered only by on expert and
then I told Brand t about this for Himlor's information,

:id later I told Dr. Gurlow, and'that settled the antter
.3 I heard no r.oro ;bout it.

. In ny or.se th-so gas experiments had nothing to do
.ith Lost or any other poison gu3?

.. Ho, nothing.

; .”r. President, in this connection I would like to
offer mother Docuc-nt, -which however i3 *lso in Document
3cnk No. 2 . Upon ::y investigation this noon, I havo dis¬
covered that D^cur.wnt 3ook Ho. 2 will be finished this
-”-r.in; an’. I shall subr.it this Document luter.

iitn.ss, the Prosecution ha3 ch rgod you with experinunts
with the 30-c. lied N-substonee; in your iiary under the
■ * of 23 October 1 ?-.., there was recorded a discussion at
t: Ha is r uilheln Institute for physical chemistry; thu
fcr.tion re..ds: "Discussion concerning special substance,
iacussi n o: us. md biological t.sts." PlouSe in every
5 sent.noes .xplcin this natter.

- -t . iiscussi.n shortly b frr- this, Dr. Ploetner
•• '■ r -eii ; ; that on ori.rs free. Grow it 2 he v;_s to be called

* 3737


-aril 10-..-5K-13-3-^aohon (Int. Von Schoon)
Court l>o. 1


r on for tests with sp-cial substances. There was a nooting
t the Reich Rosouoh Council whon Dr. Ploutner mentioned
this, ct which Profess ?r Thysson was participating and I
’.v.nt to him for information about this mysterious now
su'eot .nc_ r.s Thysson know about the nattor. Ho reacted
auito violently to ny question, and he called it roily
nd Utopi .n thinking on the part of the SS to try and
use this substance :gein or even* to discuss it. The head
of the technical office in the 3o Operations Offico (SS
Fuohrung3hauptunt), Schwab, apparently h *d suggested
soaothing to Hicr.ler bee ; us a he thought he would be ublo
to have saio success and get 3oao luurols from this.

„ iitnoes, I t link wo can 3horton tho subjoct n
little; you, yoursolf, watohod 3uch an exporin-nt with
this N-substnncc, and what did you obsorvo?

.. Professor Thysson invited no to watch a laboratory
experiment, because he hi no concept of N-substnnco. This
experiment took plaoo on tho 23rd of October, as tho diary
- .try shows. Tho consequence was that Profos3or Thysson
C”- ;.e on expert opinion tc pass on to iiixxilor, which I
di ’ , sc th:t cvor Hi. ml -r gave up the idea of using the
u-3ubst ncc.

Then th- nattor was settled?

.. Ye3, then the natter was settled.


Court I

10 r U7-*. - 16-la - i JG - lieehan -(int. von Schoer)

The next subject, which I shall discuss, is your p.rticipation
in ty.-hus experiments. I shall new show you Document Book No. 12, on
page 76, there is a DociL^r.t No. NO-120, Exhibit 297 of the Prosecution;
the Institute for Hilit-rry Scientific Hescirch, according to this, on
30 S-pt^rccr 1913 inforoed the Director i the fygenic Institute of
the University oi Strasbourg according to his suggestion of 16 august
1?U3» -he persons desired would be .r.dc available; what w^re tho events
which led to this letter cf 30 SoptOL-toer 1&3?

. 4 . Inf or. ati or. ca o fro:. Frofossor Hirt that frofessor Haagen
nad boon aikod to perform t>c$ui3 vaccinations in Natzwcilor, Hirt wanted
Himmler's approval for this and thoruforo wrote to the Institute for
lodlcal Scientific ftesoorch. I posaud on the lettor to Himmler and
after several •vuks, as tho dates indicate, Himmler approved Haakon's
request, dverything olso v-a up to Dr. Lolling, therefore Hoagen's
request was to bo sent through Pohl as boiling's main office chief ar.d
to be sent on to lolling, tfio was tho doctor in charge of all concen¬
tration c~,-ps and tho letter was passed on on September 30th.

H . Did Haa;.on or Hj r t toll you about tho vaccinations, which thoy
intended to carry cut?

... No, I merely considored free tno application that it was a
question cf typhus protective vac cl nations with a n«-w vnccino.

i. Did this letter fro^Kirt c-ntnln on/re fur once to tho fact
that there was acn -r to the life of the exp-rimantal sifcjccts?

No, it said that there was no dr.r. ur to the porsens involved
tnrouth tho vaccinations although r. rather strong fever reaction might
a- expoctod.


5739


April 1917 -A-19-l-rr?- Putty (vor. Schca)
Ccurt :.'o. 1


Q. A tsequ.-r.tly Aid you ever t Ik to Hirt cr Haugen oout the results
; the vacoin-tiao?

A. I did not talk to Raagcn either then a- at any other time about it.

* _an R.ry n for tr-i first tic#i in 191b in tho prison in Nurnborg.

.-ref-ssor Hirt told =e “t the beginning of 1914 tht the typhus vac c in', t ion a
ir. j; tzweil~r had been successful, rnd 1 assuaod that tho expected
t.rotcction bei b_cn achieved.

Did you -ver v _ -r*y report froa R" von or Hirt ' bout this vaccination 7

A. No, unless tho latter which Hirt wrote to ru -fc the beginning of 1911
night be considered sue;. report. 1 pr.es*.A. it on to Pohl almost
verbatim

Q. if you till look at p ...c 92 in tho document book .<hich you have
before you, p-gu bl, 1 Dear., yc» will fin: letter iron iiangen to th_

Reich Ruouarch Council :’p.Ud the 21st af January, 1911. Did you soc this
letter*

A. No, 1 did not sej the reports which “re ner.ticnod in it. They wont
lir-ctly to the r.jad of the Dop'rtnont for General liciiicinu.

s. Did : 11 th r ;-crts, letters, ml so forth, not go over the Board
of tho Reich itese-arch Council, th. managing board?

A. Lite 11 letters th-y went through the nail room of the Reich
Heoarrch Council which sent tho reports to tne specie listr in the

Used dopartaunts or to their s.ctior. lor t card imiux orts.

SeC us. of tb. nuebor of reports 'r. the ind jpciltnc* of the speci liv.cd _
iepartaunts, the managing board was in ro positicn to take notico of thorn,
here you over To sent in ItatzwviW --*> n typhus vaccin ti«ns wero
c-,rrie ! out?

/*. !k>. As I ir Vv lr- Sy aril ir. • newer to ' .Tevious question, 1
ws in NataweLUr the Last tir* in January, '13, and at U.* lino tK-ro
of typhus vaccin tion,

Q. How in Doc L-*r.t Bock r. look : S5. Ihis is Docur.nt fO-009,

R>hitat 305 of the Prosecution, * lett-r fren Brr.lt to you. After the

•

Lpt.of this letter, . id you fc v : .r to 10 wit: typhus


:::n *iar. in - :jy fora?


574C


10 April 1947 -A-It- 2-F*P- Putty (voa Schcn)
Court .‘to. 1


ito. * p-ss-d on Hianlcr's decision tc Hirt.

Cl. «r- th-'.t wes ”11?

A. Yes, th"t was -11.

.. In this cor.n-cti or. I discuss briefly ycur work in the Reich
...search Council. I consi.tr it n-ccsstry to ask a few questions to clrrify
briefly your p^aition ir. the ixich Rec^rch Council. Hew was it thr.t
froa June, l'W.3, or. you w.-re eoployod in the Reich Research Council?

A. The he d of tr* raanaginc ooard, Professor lor.zcl, appointed ix
hia deputy.

Q. who was Professor l-nsel?

A. Professor Kernel was n nir.isteri:-l director and heftd of the office
of science in the .'ministry of 2!uc-tion. K. wa* 'Iso president of the
Gerrr.n Roseax*ch Associ”tion.

Q. Ha. you known Professor 1‘entel previously?

a. I h ’ known Cfenxol since 193<>. I n*t hia ct that tint as prosidont
of the Ger^n ifcsccrch wssoci'tion.

Hfc t was your function .s Professor Uonzcl's edputy?

a. I w:.a to ropr-s.nt ller.z-l when ho was absent, but th't happened
or.ly rarely.

Q. And what typ- of work did ya» e‘o?

A. Purely -u'ainistr .tive. 1 did not have to re~ch any decisions In
t:.is position. Booi es It was r. s-coi^rry Job. 1 retained my oooition
ar busin.ss aar-ngor of th» Ahr.eiv.rbe.


p7tl


1C . :=-19-la-Putty (C >- Sehoen)

Coe.-t


ll-on these tv- functions were not identic 1?

Rho; hiid notein.; to do with cac.; other. S'.o Reich -Research
0-uncil vt.c uxv.or Oooria," end the ..fcnenorbo wr.s under Kiu-ler.

.. C~e one a .y th t you w.ro r.n official or rji oirjloyoc of tho
Reich dosearch council?

I v.& n-it-cr. I received no salary frou tho Reich Research
Council. I h. d no contra ct with it. I w:.s i-eroly fiiroa :y tmvolin,;
-•xponsoc, nothin,; else.

.. Rhoa you noon to toy th t your osit on in tho Reich Research
Council u a ..a honorary on-?

h. Y-o.’it 'f o.

*, Rut in t-lc -oaici-.n y>u ct oinsider.bio ir.ni ht into v rlius
fiol 'B Of C-. »n r8c xch durin: t..o 7 r?

... Tho retenre.. .osi, a: eats iasuod t. tho Roioh Rofortrch Council
nwi-rod ir. the thnn v/.o. V. on?;- bec-.uso of tho -.u-hcr vno It i:>-
;osaiblc t> vt inoi.eit into 11 this roaorre; w.rh, hut rloo bcc-.uco
the tvcnt;five or thirty do of y/oci 1 dep rt..ento v-ro very i:>-
uaxii-Aoat in their functi ..a.

. Di ' r.ot the r-;vorta r-n reac re.- work ;o t.x<u.;o tho :anacln.-;

bord?

... r.:e reports went directly fro.. thepormns who hi boon riven
tho taaoaro. ntalfSKoata to tho indivi i hoots of i ooiol lo?nrt ente.

7c.c these reports not c..; lied, printed -nd ..- do Avcilnblo
to r. l-.r,;e nu-.b-r of >o lo?

. Yes, th v i done but the* ; rintod reports contrinei only
tuc title hut r. >t th. c • r.tcnta of t..e- reports or the work#.

. 2o you ..e- r. t * spy t.. t the y'pora did n t s-.ov how the

0

r-sc-rel. cei.T-~r.to v-ro c rried out?

... :•», it id not show hov it wns c rried out in ny vry.

h 7x w..o:- lid you cr tho ./urn,-is bo r 1-rrn of the contents
>f these r-_ orts?

.. .’ _ he.is of Ic -rt -uis and the plcnl Otcatirrios tol<* tho

572


10 (Ton SchOun)

Cau-'t _ . i.


t’e.nrtncnt for tho cord ir_iox tad reports, to ,-ivc the:- a tu.'.'.'trisod
Vhsi a Of the contents.

.. Sid ; ’u as doputy of the hc..d of the .•ann.-in, bo-rd rocoivo
>.;:vlo.'. - in nay other iny except la writ in.: of the dot:. 11 b *>f the
execution of reso-.rc. -sal.-OUvcr-tsT

~o, I did aot. Jor example, I never , ttoadod ecicntific

..cotiaps.

33. ISISGSiasa: .;r. Pr*sidoat. in this connection I :ilso intend
to sub .it n affidavit to clarify the subject of tho 2 c ic.: 3osearch
enroll* “ is locl-rati n is -Is in Docur-ent Look 2 .

Mtnvsa, the prosecution also chariot you uith prop-rationo
for Molo,ic.l vurfxe. Dr. 2lo..o iv-on.- others has discussod this
subj ct. I believe, therefore, that I c u be r«ry brief. Or. tho lb'th
of ..uuct, 194 U, you s.at a tolwtypo :ooi8a,.-o to 3udolf 3mndt. You
tiflkod for an ir.ter.-icv bot^eor. Profess >r Mo:.o rnd :-1:.clcr. *Ay v: o
t..ia done?

Shortloy bef -ro th.r. had boon a discus si a botvoon Professor
lo.c, ?r. .x;• :ai Dr. Sorchors concerning t..e expansion of the -ro-
‘uction facilities of tho fira Dorc-.ers Ur others in Ooslar. Ihis
oxt-.-.s seo;-c’ necessary ir. viov of an incro'so in tho product on of
insecticides. 2 \o..o c nsidcrol t ..-1 a discussion Kith Ui.-ler was
ncccctv r;-. So, th r.for , asked no to ot hi an rap'intrant with
“1 - lor and told e v.. t ho w.-ntod to discuss.

\ I slu.ll h-.Vv pou shovr. 3ocu;^r.t l.*0-6Ul — pr’o.cutiofl ZX-.ibit
327 . i'hio is. nc dmbt, tho teletype of the ISth of .ju.uet 19 hU.

d. Tee.

.. Point 1 deals Kith cr.e.y use of ir.socticidos hari-ful to husan
boin.». *ju.t does that uorat •

... 21 o: o k 1‘ t.i t tho XntolllfWncc Sorrico hr.-’ reported rroi'.ar-
atl-uB for bltlo,pical v-\rfarc on the eno :y side. 30 did not rjchtion any
dat.-llr. I cun s:iy a t~ln: nb^ut ;h Ko:iti>n k.-s a-da of drop in. ;
containers vita anopheles :»squitaos.

57U3


10 - *-r-A- 3--2C-l-:>rr Tr (V-r. Scbcn)

Ceurt K-. 1.

i Ac* what about th-j pet.-to beetles aanticncd bare?

A. .Lcc.r "ijig to reports free the Reich tic potato beetle had appeared
in crons vbero it ha'* teen heretofore ccnpletoly unknown.

a iwat about the prison experiments? '."hat does that uenn - under

*3?

A roint 3 says exactly a*ct Bloro told re on the subject. He
aorcly enti rud that thwr- wr.3 a suspicion that there i-ielit be sen. ccn-
n.cti 'n with the attack ef tho 20vh -f July. Ho had talked tc Himlor
about it cn tho 21st ef July an' that w s incorporate-* into this letter.

^ Dc you know ugrthlnr abaut -xperi_.-r.ts in July, 19U3, cn Russian
prisoners of war which w-ru .alio _d _c e in preparation fer biological
warfare?

A Ha, I knew nothin? about thus.

1 Cn the basis of your app*_ ,ntly only superficial contact with this
subject, did y.u have the inpressien that -ctivo .iological warfare was
intonde:'?

A !fc, 1 ’id not have that impression.

1 'I’itocsa, I r.jr; caiu to tho count of conspiracy. In t’.w cxaiiina-
tir.r. .if your cc-defendants or. the wither stand we nave already le-rned
wh w s in cli ht or clrsc cont-ct with you and who ’id n t know you at
all up t this trial, Vihich f tho r_::ainin ca-’tfendanto, with tho
exception f these who have rlr-ady tv. stifle' - t: this on the witness
stand, r-ro kni^m to y u?

A Dr. r.ctfror I net in lvh2 in Dachau. Lat-r I oar. hl>. twe :r throe
ti-ts in Berlin. Dr. P.iflbocck 1 ct in tho nid’lo ef 191A once in
Dachau. Of tho r.?t I know no oa.-.

1 .is tivj document >.ks sh t,xn was rather cl-sc official con-
t:ct ct“cji Dr. Ru-’alf Brandt aw’, y u. Tn-r-f re I shoui' lifcc to ask
yau tir quosti:ns to clarify this matter. •■'hat was yeur official rv-
lati-.nship with Dr. Ru -If Brar.-’t?

A Dr. ..u:’ If Brandt w s Hii l r's r,fcr t f r th_ SS in tho min
:ffic_ "cerbonal staff". Brrei-t r- s. in n way, ry superior, but HirrOor


10 . .T-A- B-20-2-&JTJir (Vcr. Sch-r.)

Court Mo. 1

L- rdcrod that all Atasner sc natters, and later those of the Institute
f r ’Jilitary Scientific Bosoarch, wuro to be subnittod to hin throuch his
personal r-f .rent Brandt, and -.Iso orders, docurcnts, etc., which caao
frer. KiirXr, or rhich wore issue ' on instructions froa Kimlcr, wont
through the ban’s f Rudolf Brandt. It was generally known that those
roro pora-nal decisions t Hinilcr and were evaluated as such.

.a new, tlvc thinre which epponr in the dacuixnt books of tbu pro-
cocuti n - iid you n:t discuss the:- with Brandt?

A I talked to Brandt fr:a tin- to tin-. I went to see hin w^n it
vs nocosocr/ to btiin Hirrlor's decision. I brought the portinont
documents along t: these discussions. 3rn t took shorthand notes on
then which ho su’sdttcd to Bimlxr. Br a this procedure it was always
possible to got a decision fr«a Hii'.l.r. Th.ro ware no disoussietts with
Brandt in the sense :f planning vote cut cf consideration since ho lacked
tho tl-tt.

you spake f urgent decisions you had to pet fron Hin lor.

Via that n.t aoruthine for the Office Chief (Aatschof) to do?

A Yes, that vas the case, but that is net in contradiction to ny
'lscusaiono with Rudolf Brandt. «uptri*r talked to Hinaler frequently
r.ithout ry presence - acre frequently than when I was present, and thon
h t It. c eh*t dscisi n Hinilor had reached insofar as it affected ry
w. rk; hut ir fcae r Auost rs in : Match and ho was director of the unlv-
rsity, as I rale yesterday, .and he *Ld net like to travel. H. frequent¬
ly Vaputixed a to 3btain the ikcoesaxy decisions fron Hir-alcr threur;h

Jh Tory f-n to hear u. m

■l H w fton ri 1 y e 800 Brandt in tenoral?

A Abjut overy f ur t ei^wo.ks, but only fer a short tino.

■1 !! w, ancthur question. Bl F-rticipate in ary nc<%cal

co-tin^-a?

A Ho. They wore ST busies -a s lyaaa,

i Are yu not -iven the rssi rcs.it t. at ten! ouch nectin s as

374 ?


s rv.r?


■ -20-3-Karr v (Yen Schcn)

C-ur-v I... 1

A Ho..

7 Hoi, a few questions on your -xjLorship in the SS. '.'hen did you
.c *i)Q a rurfcor of tho SS? .

A At the on-! -f 1935-

:* Did you apply f jr a-Mission?

A Ho. Hi. 1 ~r askad e* when I had x—n Ck.ner.il Secretary cf tho
Ahr»ncr-o f r several -.nths why 2 u-j net in the SS. I answered that
I r a interested. .nly in cultural work and that I was net into rested In
service in such a f onset Ion. HierAcr said that no actual service was
necessary, that ha x uld take aa into his staff. I asked for a short
tiro tc think it -Vur. 1 talked to Dr. liiolscbor a*xut it and at his
BU'-yjsti'r. I a iw‘. Then I was accepted into Hinder's personal staff
-s an SS n-an.

Q Did you toko the so-called SS oath?

A Ho. There was no fornality.

•» /cru you prec to-' later?

A Hinder proas tod no corsch&rfuehrar when I Joined and. then at
intervals I was predated as far as standartonfuchrer.

1 .<ore you .an SS loader on a fuii-ti-x basis? (Hauptc-itllch)

A N . I -. as always an c.ipl ye- f tlv. Ahnontrbo Secicty and I was
always pai< -y the Ahnenorbo.

-hil- y u xl n--->* t- the SS <1:1 y u p-rf m -ny service in the
SS?

A Ho, never.

■ Thon y.ur rrhip in the SS irs .rely cn F'.pcr?

A Yea, cn. c-uld say that.

1 Did y u receive any i-.riy a-rds ->r rcn.y?

A K., neither.

. 'Are you -’r-fte;' t- rilit-ry service?

A In 'ry l‘'Ul I was >'rrSU * iat. the * -fivr.-SS.

’! Ar<! rhat w-.a y. ur r ink ir. tho ..'"f f.r.-SS?


SS-Schuctso


13 Apr-.,- “-20~!i-::-.rr k (V n Schon)
C-urt N~. 1


3 That is private?

A Yes

• 1 .hat ir-s ycur rank in the SS at that tine?

u Oborsturi-'amifuohrer.

^ ^rvd hi* lorv did yen serve with the tfaffen-SS?

A About throw nonths.

h'as your {reaction in thi SS roco.-niti-n of your services as
tuslnoss can-f the .Jinoncrbo?

A No, it had n thin, tc *t with that. HLaal'-r wanted tc have a
pseudo ailit'ry . china in nil his jf'icoa, as is well ta'im. For that
re-sen uv-ryonc was Avon ar. SS rank rcc r in t his position.


10-..-BK- 20-la-Karrow (Xnt> Von Schoen)

Co'irt *•■>. 1

Did this SS rank seen any additional incone?

.. Ko f not in ny case.

i ...re you ever promoted prenaturely in your r
rank in the 5S?

No, as I just “said, when I was adnitted I was
cade Oborscharfuehrer by Hinder, and then X wont
through all the ranks at the nornal rate.

1 Your superior, Curator ..uest, was also an SS
ceuber. -hat v;as hi3 runk.

j. ..uest as far es I recall wus taken in us a
Hauptsturr.fuo.hror or Sturcbennfuohror, and in 19-.1-
19.2 ho hold the rank of Oberfuchror.

\ That was a few ranks above yours?

Yost, at tho end but ..uest was always one or
two ranks nbovo r.o.

. Did that express tho faot that you wore Dr.
.uost's subordinate?

„ Yes, I Y<us al-ways wuest's subordinate in rank
;.s wo 11 as othurv.i8o.

. -nd cy final question - why wore you roloused
froc. service in the woffou S3 after three J.cnth3.

.. Two substitutes wore employed who hud to bo
trainod when I was drifted und both of those people
ware killed in an auto accident at tho 3ario tine, so
that I was ordered back froc the -med Forces and yvos
assicnod to the personal staff.

DR. .2130233-^: kr. President, I have now con¬
cluded this subject. I would continue tcaorro«v . *
corning.

TH2 tPdioIDJNT: The Tribunal will bo in recess

until 9:30 tenor row -.orning.

57 ^


/W

11 j- r-..-::.5-i-l-?03tcr (Int. ^oaSchOCn)
Court .* . 1.


Official transcript of the ..^criccn . ilit:.ry
Tribunal ia the a-.ttor of th- United States
of —»iric-, vy.ir.st Xnrl 3^041, ct "l t
defendant a t sittir, at Rurnbor,;, Gcr.--.ny, on
11 ril 1947, 093c. Justice 3colo presiding.


-JIS-J,: Persons in the court roo.. will -lc-.so find their


scats.


She '.er.rr.elc, the Jair.it of . lilt' ry Tribunal 1 .

.ilitrjy Tribunal I is now ir. session. Cod sr.vo the United
St ics of ...eric on* t'..is honoro-.ble Tribun:J.

Ster- will be order in t;.e courtroo .

Z.Z T.JS12ZZ: .U-. i itr*L\ 1, will you oc^rt ir. th-t the defend¬
ants rrc nil ; resent la court.

;,2 ..JlSrlJ.! .:-,v it . lerse y ur I’or.or. -11 defendants -.re
.resent in the court.

TlZ TiQSZSStT: The $acretr.ry-Oon.r 1 "ill note for the record
the presence of nil the defendant b in court.

•xjua-: sis^ns - nosuod

.‘.r. ?;SSXSBLT: counsel :.ay proceed with the cxr«. iaation vf the
vitn-ar on the stand. wita„oc is re.indod ho is still untor oath.

2>3. (Counsel for tho Dcfndr.t Sievorn): If it :'lo~.so

the vribunri, in t stifyin- bof ro tJ; Internetioa-l ldlitr.ry Tribunal
cli-.nt has :ilr dy stated t.i t ho bolon.:od to resistance fruj
•-nat the 1 tion:l Soci'lift ro i.-o. This fact has resulted in
ur ur.t rcc.oono f r ry client to r. in yet in th. position of Relchs
usinoca «v,-er of t..e hn-nerbo vhor. fate br-uut hi- into contact
' it.. :*irt and H'.acner'e cr-ri;~nts. .-lth'U h t first he or e fir ly
deter daod f ive u his position -r i_ici:o bvsincse vn^tcr of the

i^orcci soly t-c use ho repudiated the oroorinants which ho hed

r* Row, the qUutti a -xIsce, was ther. r. 3^r.e«n •

real stance in;, .eat aicat t..e Jasi rc.-i..o. Gcr. n literature on tbit

.oliticci phorjacnon exists hlta rte only in r. very r- nil nonsuro. I
'■ * ” 3:1“ of u few po..ablets : nd brief • rticlca. I h ve heard, hov.-


;i „ >-L-CSS-l-3-?oster (Yon Sohsen)

Court 1*'-. i-


_vwi*, thr.t there is nlr^ry a 1 -r^ar n~our.t of litornture abroad on
i:.io question, unfortur. tcly. this literature w: c cot yet accessible


j.r, to introduce this fin! chapter of ;?• direct oxen inr.tioc, I
oh:uld like to tub-It Docuixat Siovers 50 . s Siovera SKhlbit 11.

It it in Document 50oh 2, union is lr.i.dy available, poflo 25 in this
iocura.nt booh.

I offer this document as Sxnlbit Siev-rs ;*o. 21. Tills in an
excerpt fr :i tne pwirulut by Si*. -Sank. -The Tr.-.edy of tho 20 th of
July 13lX", I quote: —

! S.Z PTiSIDS.?! !h*. r lev ~r.t docs not appear to be on pace 25
if t.;e SA-'ish biolc.

S 2 . ’J^ISOS-GEa: It is on p . e 27 in the 3nf;lioh.
in T ."SIDS: T: pr^ccod. ounncl.

5 . XISQSrQS.'.: B, 5 i- r.sist. r.c s.ovauont r.inct yitlcr lo ~.c
old ns yitlcr's dictatorship itself. 2 to stru*i le of his cnonlon
r.in#t his systo;. i.nd hi* torror W.n on the d y bo C’:.o to ;-ow-r.
;:itlvi- h y: asiin to dhercr.ts, but ho had r.lso roc luto o r: y.nonto
villi iv; t' die, fro:, the first lay up. to tho very Ary of his defeat.

Sc v- 4 » tho first ...3 in centuries t split the Ocr -a ;-oople into tvr
nostila t-.r.A irrcconcilr.ble c-u-s.

j be sure the virld sr.w only one of t.-.*sa Oor. nnios: The
rv-.l S:ci-liot one, rocl~i:»d with the flourish of trusts by tho
joebboio rop/.rxdn, The ot-.er <J-ronny wjj hardly visible to tho
■.uj .ic eye. It vn* oppressed. prohibited, -oersecutcd. 1. prisoned in
»:ils ad c ncentr- ti'n cc-.ps. In tne Phird Heich there von. indoed
fr. kinds of fr.r-ns. 2 icy spoke the tn-o lnjnyw.o but they did net
uni ere t .2 a* ce nr..r. .2 f nf.stic and unscrupulous • roprv-ndn spread
i caotrrb* a darkness over tho real str te of affair . Tho world stood
before the c locrus of ei^lcr's po*.r ctnte, the : st thorou hly
cinstructed despotiaa of 21 ti.xa, -r.d =0 one knew what v n .oin- on


..ciad


•rlls ef t.ois -xu e prison.

5??o


- -»t r . .


...aj


co u rt

•' s 6 “ c 2Ct " 5f i= r: nlity? U-jj it merely a ludicrous
-i-iz revolt, bound t- fail hopelessly in r. despotic r-ov.r state —
;r v - . r_ 1 politic 1 ; v.vr be kin. the ntte:. t?

Prebiv.ly it will cover bo possible f sh>w the whole widely
ratified conspiracy. .-11 tao^prop. .rations r.n d conferences, the y.-rs
of Obbin :id flowing in the plans for the revolt. It will never bo
possible r.rocd out before t.ie world tee hu o circle of conspirators
m.’. t:.e i. rr.tic secret or rails ti >n, in short the whole illcrl set¬
up of, .-.■onerrls, citisens nd politicians.

U:y not?

Juct bec.usv the 20 July w .c not n rwvolt ardo by t few f:onor;\l»,
btt t • c^nspir cy of vide strr.t t t- G.r. ,n ooplc. Si* threads of
t..ia c nspirsoy did t.ur for- n>t c'nv r.v In ;nc hr-rt. but rnn throw*
.eiy lira o, tariu.it .-rou s v..lch ver. roonrntod within the opposition.

rou; iou.tr oxnctly the set-u. of the it... r, no ,t up vt.s pondttod
’ ■ :uow it exactly, if only for security ra. aor.s.

.10 re over, tnc .on vh* lull thy t.:r ds in their harts nro dead

Vita thv except!of f •*, they ro.ained sil.nt even under the
t orturoe of the &.stnpo. ix’. now le t:. hr.t for ever closod their
'utke.

.t "irot 1’ nee t- >r.\ rou-t of c mnlratora ttr-ct our
t.c.iti i; t..e .Hit ry von .afi :...• civilians.

1 *1 r ie t cert in oxt .nt tei wn t the public. It

ia kn.tf to lu vo prepared th* r tte r.rt to c v. carried it out. 3 ut
t.i t me.. ray be # id in .’trace: a*.cut lo.COO .military .icn vor. in-
volvo.' ir th* rcv.lt. 2 a» -ro th;r. lb vnerrla fro, the inner, ast
circle of tan conspirators .lone w^r execute;*.. Ir.onsc numbers and
; “ ' rouo '' nr * i: - view of r . incrodial7 v ol-or :xisod (jestn:*o. *

Cr.j f ct i 3 self-evident: >:itl_r could -at be overthrown by the
■'* 1>-r: ‘ al9 ®* s - ’It-ou* be in.- Veiled by a oliticnl opposition r nd in
lac*. resort, by the r.asgoo of t.:o *ooplo even roccessful ntto;rot

vied., h vo.bc-B void of any u-mia nd s-nsu.

5751


11 .'.-r-;-" -r (?■>r. Schocc)

Court " . 1.


Uxo w.rc the politic-1 hen that prcra.rod red plnnnod thlc nttonpt
uaJ which wore tixo Politic. 1 Part&oa involved on too 20th or July?

Pc . cy s!,y unxlstokatly in .dv nee: Behind the revolt stood too
whole politic 1 GorannyJ

Tor the ti:x tela I should like to quote only thr t ::uch.

DtiZC? ZX- ir-.TIO'J (Continued)

37 a . v* ISCEZ3Z3:

.. Mtncsn, in the first > rt of y'ur exr. ination you have rl-
r. '.y cald .. v y-.u tee . c .-cqur.ir.t_d with Xiolschor red his ,Troup.

Uhr.t vero intentions of yrlodrich Hiolachor, u f r ns you kncif

the. ?

... Or. too JOtr. of J.r.u i7 1933 the rul_ of the 13W bo.rn; too
j.vrcriont uro r.t tl. t tiua .mch too strox.: for too people who oppoeod it
ti be r.t la t destroy it o<-ln. Zven the several iiillim noi&ora of
;fc.. trrio unions w-r_ not celo to prevent the Aostructloa of the unions
;it th.t 11'io. It w s dear to us tl. t r.t first *nly c-nsiotont infil¬
tration into tl. 781X1? by toe opposition ouid trJee ylnco. 5fce nd-
v nee ojto v. r . to tail! uj tneir posts c rofully nd try to fom
ru.itc of recist:a>cc within the rty. C^.t w.s r. process w-.ich could
; rocu.d >nly very si owl;, cir.ee th.. entlr. public md private life w o
lucre .sin ly controlled ty the SD tad tr.o O-stnpe. ’Jhen in the c >urso
of ye. rs it \o -c rvorc :;oro dour th t t. coll .poo of the Sfcxi
re :l:>e V uxu' raids. vent possl le, in our opinion too only wy
ljft v ' t of re r .el uprlain , n‘ wo worked toward th-t nin.


5752


O-urt 1 .

TrC plkSSnEOT: ’.’hit is the .1-tv or r-proxL-x-te ’ate, of the
. ublicr.tion of this Docudcnt.; Siov^rs I\>ciuxnt Ko.50?

Dl». ‘ZTSH-51GS1: !r. presi ont, this pm. hie L by 3J.1 Honk ura
.utliahud in 1946 in thujioconl clition. I suhuitto.l r. copy of tnis
4 .oxphlot c .s the ortjjirl Document.

7H“ FTvISIDnrr: PlOCood.

BY D.:. 'ZiCr,Z25.:

"i truss, vra Hielscher rlo-ie in this intention?

.. Our opposition .froup wra by no cetns the only a-. In the c-urso
of years various other resistance roups ir^r- four-led. Ir. view of tho
„ror.t drr.'er of their intent!-ns they hr..*, to proceed voiy slowly end
acre fully • foru the;* could establish con tret with occh other.

Q Cm i’j u tell us mythinj ebout .otter:, ts t.. establish c ntact
with people of sinilrr intentions fr-.-: y.ur am crqiurioncc?

Y<-3, be fun. 1933 Hielscher hr.*. established. contact \fith r. Munich
lawyer, Dr. Lielij, who -a I le m- later, ura in Very close contr.ct
with .Vloiral Canarlfl, the head of the. Counter Intollijerao Service of
the 'fohzTircht. d.t the end. of 1933, Hiolscher cr.*w to lunich, ifhure I
rrra woridn.. at thr.t tirw, rn\ toll .v. of his intention te brin„

Lie'll rn' nyself toother. L-. the su.xr of 193.'*, that was beluro tho
.looh.3 affair of the 30th of June 1934, there wra mother thorough dis¬
cussion betVeor. Hielscher, LieHr nd nyaulf r.t his h,U3e mil ct the
h-usc of ..1' reCht 3chauf:\,r t lias tin; on the Chivaseo.

0 Di 1 this c.nn.ctior. regain in t-.u follj > .dn„ tl.io?

A Frxi thr.t tine ,n I \r.a liaison nan between Hielscher end
li-'i , until 1936. 3ecance I novel t-. P-rim in 1935 it wra no
longer possible for ue t continue to rat ra lirison .-an, hut lliol-
acher c.ntinued to urintair. t;-.i3 c ntcat.

Q llr. Fresident, in this connect! :i I offer IX.cuuent SieVer3 No.17
fr .: IWcu._nt beok SieVe-rs IL.l, llo.41; I offer his ra


SieVors' Exhibit :: .12. This is tin affi r.vit the lawyer Fr ra

• - : . ,

5753


Xl.’^nil-i:-.'JC-2-2-acofecn(VonSchocn)

C .urt 1.

just, -.ontionc!. Franz Li-.'ij atr.t-s:

"I ’cclr.ru hcnrith, that ' ’olfrrn Sicvurs uas known to no fron
1933-193£ r.s th.. lir.iaon cm bctuooa Frie Irich Hielachu-r and loysolf.
Hu was reliable*, clever, uncon.litionr.lly .'iscr.et and a passie-natu
enooy of national Social is.

Then follows th. sijnr.ture rn ' certificate.

I also offer fro:: Dreuzent Book Ko. 2, Document Silvers ]Io,46
which ia on pnje 1C. I offur this aa SieVurs 1 Exhibit Ko.13.

THE PMSSIDE’r?: Tbxt Exhibit ’coa not c -uunco -n Pa^u 16.

IX.. 'ElSG^iiT.: Pa„e 1C ef thu Gunx.n, Document No.Z,6.

Document !!o,U&, I offer that za Sievers Exhibit 13. This ia cn af¬
fidavit of .Ubrucht Schaeffer, t!iu scar ..lbrucht Shnuff-r whoa tho
witness Juat owxtionoi*.

"Fro.. 1939 on I hr.vu tuun r. rofcldant of tho Unity.' States of
.XU}rice. I loft Gurornr because of :iy opposition tu thu Hzzi-rvtfbx,
"Frio .‘.rich Hiulachur, whose acquaintance,I ;iadj in 1930, ur.a r.
frequent guost in ,y house at Ideating on the Chirrs Lako and often
stayed then. with ua for weeks. Fr.:i ‘iscuasiona, conversations and
prjicro which Friedrich Kiolacliur shotted uo, I uas convinced thr.t ho
was a amber of nil crjanizativn vkich attu.vv.te V. . Ire in. confi !-n-
tirl agents »/ithin the HSa.P, to obtain info m.t ion on tho party an:',
to *.o Vaafio to tho ru^inu aa such,

"Thrju;^i Hiolachcr I *. t to ta-w several of hia friun'.o \iho
fculongo ‘ to thia organization, .jionj thou was also ‘.'olfmv. Sie-vors
when ho brought alon^ aa a viaitor in 1913,

"In tho course of the conversations which took place at that
tico, Hiulschor t i: o - as far as I rojenbur in the presence of
fiuvora - th't later Wurku ’ within tho 3S-organization, i.u. ir^ tho
so-called '..hr.unurbu 1 which :/as four.'.oil L; JILuler; his purpose was
to covur u;; f_,r tho activities _f th. Hiulachur organization, to
; rot cot :mburs of th. orgnniz.- ti on; t. caaouflago .luotings and uain-
ly t ur.er.iine the SS froi th... insiuo, end finally to jruparu an
• r.x ‘ revolution.


11- -prli—2!-1K-2-3-I !eohcn( vonSchoon )
Court 1.


"I therefore boliuvc that Uolfraa Siovors joined, end stayed in
tho SS, only in or.'or to serve tho purposes cf tho Hiolschor-Orgnniz-
ction.“

Th^: fcll-us tho certificate.

THE H1ESHEHT: "ell, counsel, in this affidavit by Schr.of-
ior, tho affiant states thr.t ho has boon a roSidont of th; United
Stcto3 sir.co 1939 end thr.t ho net tho ‘^fondant Sievorr in 19/»3.

D-- *ETSGE23—i: That i3 a typing uistcJai, Your Honor, it should
l:o 1934, the original Document hr.a 1934. I did not havo rr. opportunity
to ccxpr.iv tho translation vitfc the original and correct any typing
aistakoa.

THE P .2T-J3H7T: If that should bo rn error I desire it bo
corroctod at this tL». Tho Cate is correct in tho Gwraan Document
book -1934.

BY Eu., /EISG3M1

t vero y ur duties rs liaison to Dr. Ilydifi?

.. I hr ’ to carry lnfomaticn between Hiulschur end Lie-ig.

0 dnd uhr.t kin:! of infonxticn?

.. ..’oout events in Uu. party; for a&ryhj, the persecution of the
church, contact uith teth Christian sects ::ith the intent!* of inton-
sifyin_ their opposition to the Rational Socialist rogina. In cctmoo-
tion uith the church end. their knoulo !yo about relic’.lo elements, ro
, e' to Jin ' strength in our opposition at that tiiae. To tioro .iso
int.rosto 1 in the intenti.* of th. RSa.?, agricultural questions and
in culture.-fioll. Frw tho end of 2933 until the on ! of 1934, 2 :ias
'dtli the'"ehr* Publishing House in "unlch, the Central publishing
house of the HS&.P. Because r. great Joal cf socn-t infomntion of the
. -rty ucs collectu there, - h. very good opportunity for chaining
iAfoxnation. I u-s cblo to use' this opportunity for the benefit of the
r^sistmeo aaovoncnb for Hiclschur m: Lie ir.


11 April-M-G J-3—1-K rr *-(int. V n Set
Curt, 1


'■i Through the fact that y u novc-J to Berlin and y;ur work f r
rthi.cntrbc ther- rcsultet frr yen a new situation. I n this new
* rk f r yours -lid y u continue to work for Hielscher?

A Y-s, cy w rk for Hielscher ini has resistance . rcun was really
;nly to he jin h-r-.

Q The you first infers.! yourself abu the people with whoc
you w rked - the people a: cund Hinder?

n Y-3, I had tc f rtify ay pcsiti n first and feel ay wny caro

fully.

Q Tore you inconstant contact with Hielscher durin- this tine?

A Y.s, that was a perquisite for the success of ry work in
this position,

4 Air: how W’.s this contact secured? I ina-ine that in every-,
thin,: that you did in this direction at this tim you had to work with
xtrece cart..

a UN til 1937, iii-lsch-r lived in Berlin which nade it possible 1
1 : v "' RSt:nt contact. In 1937, Hielscher e ve! to Molalngon. We net
in 3erlin r at thor places. In 1939, Hielsch-r a ved to P tsdan which
reestablished c nstant c ntact.

Q Did Hielscher ,ive j u definite duties for this line too?
a 7'-3, w- wanted t et further insi *ht int. the .~r up of people
r ur.J Hinder t. find cut the plans road intentions of the SS.

v :.ir. President, 1 n w .ffer Dccuacnt Silvers fiZO in Docuncnt
3 k, Si-vcrsl, pa-:c 50. I ffer this as Si.vers Exhibit Ih. This is an
xficivit f th. G v.rnc-nt ;hysician. Dr, "rnst Friedrich Ebert, dated
• January 19li7. I shall rev' .n pare 51 the para -raph, n I swasT* in
tty- top third on Pare 51, I quato: #

ir n »u-ust 1936 on I was an active aecber f the sccre-t rra-
r.ia-ti. n f :-riedrich Hielscher, which fr a 1933 until th- e llipse
■ th- Nazi re in. f u-.-fct to is re-in- with, at interruption, a nr which
"* c nn ^ ctcd 1,1 th< - itteapte: V rthr :* if duly l-.„. Tr. 1936, n
ccasi n : c nf-roncos with Friedrich HiOsch-r, I not the fern-r
' r “‘ ir t--nfuehrer an: Reich Business -ana er f th- Ahn-nerbe, .’olfraa


11 -GJ-3-2-Xarr V. n Schcn)-


Court 1-


51 v-rs froc Berlin, as a atrfc-r of the secret organization. I know that
his duty was tu sup, ly us constantly with newsfrea the Rcichsfuchrun^ -
Si an’, by virtue -f his position, tc hoi; and conceal our nerk with
all deans t his disp sal. Free numerous ncctin : s with Friedrich Hiel-
sebor and nis, Siev-rs in the course of followir. years, I knew that he
always carried out this difficult task very well."

There follows the certification*

“itness, lid you succeed in carry!n. out this intention of gai¬
ning insi-ht into Hlsslcr 1 s entourage?

.» 1-s, in qy capacity f Reich Business llana;r-r of th*. Ahnenerbu
I had tc cooperate with Hlrd r'a personal staff, the head of which
ns wolf, l'.tor Cfc-rpru; .n!\i~nrcr. I*' the c ursc of tin- I had a very
Seed j. -rtunity for cbtainia inf mati n, tut I must point out that
I always had to be very careful not to -inturfc the appearance of loyol-


Q Ft fesser Oe^hardt hr! c.nticnui the so-called Freundenkrois
- Circle .f Friend# cf Hinder. -’hut can ycu say about that?

A hy lot wl-d. - :f th- oclstzncc f this «*rcup ctus back t ? the
year 1936. Th- circle : friends was composed primarily of bir. Indus tri¬
lists tn I bankers rt. net f-r . s cial ev-nln at re ular intervals.

On theoe ccaai.na a a.cber r a uest usually . avo abrief speech about

a sunject rhic interesU! th- t u i .n.rally. I -ain-d the impression
that ther- wcr- influential pi:pic, -.specially in industry, wh wanted
it int c ntact with Him! r. 1 rcseab.r :no case when a p-rs'nality
fr a industry effort t pay civ. aiUi.r. in order t b_ admitted into
this s -called Circle of Friends.

^ is it true, that th- circle of friends financed the Ahnunerbt?

« H , tnat is n t true. 11 is true that Hinder rccoirei an an-

:.al sur. :* ab ut ne ailli n fr a th- Circle f f ri-n_s, but he used

this = r—y (:r r .ra nil re. rcs-ntati.n purposes. The «hn-ncrbe received
n r. f this a It r finoac-l rnrtly fr a fun s f the German Re-

4

o-arch ..sc ci&ti.n, fr a h.ici funds, ccrsi nol c.ntributi n, an’, dues


.


5737


it „:ril-”-GJ-3-3-Karr.-*-(lnt.7 11 Sch-n)-
Ccurt i


Q Did yr .u y-urSelf bolcnr t- this Circle f Friends?

A Yes, from tho end f 19U1 on.

Q 523 this net ap_rsenal preference based -n frier.dschip with


Hlarder r die yeu pay-any lar^o sue c


It is well kn-wn that cany hi:


f arncy t; 'fc- accc
rh-soundin, nape c


accepted?


ften did net have


the implied bjek ycund. This was true f the Circle of Friends. It in¬
clude! number c*f influential pers:ns fr:c industry and business who
supplied Hia.der with funds. These n.n were, f course, persona xata
with Himmler. Higgler wanted ir. this sc-called circle- of triends to
aJeo kr.ewn his cultural aatiti ns . In this connection, frea the end
ef 191*1 cn, the Curator and Office -hief of the Ahnenurbe, Profess r
I, leyself as Reich Business Hana -r, and the Main Department
Chi.f of the Ahncxwrbc, the Tibet research man, Er. Schaeff.r, wero
colic - lnt the Circle :f rriends. Perh as the payin members - if 1
nay call them that - wero considered friends cf Hiral.r and were trea¬
ted as such by hie. Far the ethers this w:.s not the ease and certainly
n t fer c.-. I had n-> pers nal advantage frea it, but in the interest
f ay resistance work I hai a Teat deal rf advantage.


11 i^ril-IMJC-4-l-Groas (Yen Scbcca)
Court Sc. 1


q Ycu near. tc say then th..t you succeeded in getting a new

and important source cf infers?.ticn? .

k Yes, one might say that. I sbcold like tc au.ticn an

oc r.plo in this connection. St-te Secretary Meuraann 1 elcngod to

this circle cf friends free Gcebfcda .linistry. Frea 19^3 cn he

-CVS reports in the circle cf friends ebcut the situcticn at the

frent, the pclnticrl situation at hcac anc. el retd, and Gcebtels

. ice verted quite veil at tL-.es. Cnee at e mooting

Kounann rc;-:rtcd cr rather he tcld us of a stenc raphic ro]>crt cn

a mooting cf the British H use cf Cc-r^ns by Churchill "hieh he hrd

received tv - h urs after t-'.c Lectin*.

Q In y-ur vert for the hosistones ifcveacnt did y.u wcric done

In the .ihncncrfco -r did y:u have ;ss.ci*tcs? <

„ As tiaq .mt tnl ■ • MMei ti radually.

This \'s nr.do ersicr hoc.u o I succeoSod fr^a tiae t*. time in

rclt osi'TOUits Ivan to roliahlo non. In thin nay,

for cxiu. l., I gave Dr. ’ni Iscl.er a fake re c rch coal noent, and

I -ve hin c. p.-.ss cf jocticn chief ef the ..hnenerhe. <-fter that

%

it lies pcosillo fer him tc travel r.brcad, vhich .th-rtdao i.culd
net. he ve teen rcssi'.'lo fer fcin since he did net belong t. tho
Fart;", SS, cr ->ny ether ergrnixetion.

\ litnesa, y u sai l yesterday that ycu ycuraelf c uld net
issue rcse rch nasi juccnts and net. y.u just Jaid that ycu ebteinod
r reae-rch r.ssi.Tv:ent f r rii -lrc .vr. Jc ycu ne n V: srj tin t this
-.3si' r.-.-nt vos .* fake, rr.i ti/.t y.u y urself tcck tho risk fer
Kidjchor's ftp. cir.ta.nt in the .iinenurto?

*

4. YwS.

1 Can ycu t -11 U3 hor actors -f ycurs cr any ether
Resistance Croup • «r- cccu.ied in ny fern in the .Jir.-r.er‘« e?

.. Fer people bdmii directly t Sidsc-Ws Group, cr
pc-.pie in ccr.tc.ct uith i , I ne.ia e*d t Iifc-1 .--sit-, ns fer about
ten nd t. finfr.ee th<_u ’iesi !«s t t, tcpccially in usinoss


11 „nril-L*-DJG-4--2-Gr:ss (V:n Schcen)

Court .... 1

.-aanr-j.eacnt of the Ahnencr'.e, there were about eighteen persons
wherr I kner. were opposed tc the Il&si rerine. The .Jintnerfce in¬
cluded c total of about three hundred people.

Q Did you also have contact 1 ith ether rosistsncu '-roups?

You havo ccnticnod Leidi-.

/• Yos. Free: tine tc tiae I received instructions r.nd infera-
rticn frta iiielschcr uhc hod all the threads in his hands fer his
:roup end his contact with ether croups.

Q Cm yeu tell us a fa. netaserthy eases?
u Hid s eh or discussed his various conferences tdth no, uith
Count Ven Jer SchulenLur.;, head cf the Your. - Ccr.iurv. tive Gr.up
cf horistcncc ifcveaont, before and afterwards. .lac »dth Count
"luncnth’l who fren tho on-! of 190 r ni tho befinnin? cf 1944 *cs
the nan between Stcuff -n -r »nj Hiulschor.

'..hen 'id y^u establish ccr.t-.ct :.ith these people?

.. I t-s in touch 'ith Schuler.' ur/ first. 1 believe it vns in
1940 when Schulenhur- rnd Hiflschcr . ot t: ether. \.j catibllshod
contact uith Blunurthal in 190. also. It. Vch Haefton, Stouff-
cn’ urj'c adjutant.

Ur. . r-si'.oil, in this connection I should like t: offer
free D cu ;.nt Hock II, Decueer.t Si-v.rr Me. 52 >s Sievera Exhibit
•i:. 15. The dccuaent is n pi ro 36 cf tho aQ 11 sh transit ticn.
iiiis is •». short occorpt fr.= m rrticlc in the "!ieuc ..usleso"
Direst) 2nd ycr, h'o. 1. Tho rticl. has tho title “One cf
t. a Go man Keristanec." It doals -.ith Count Helxaith ven llltkc.

I do net intend t-_ real this demount tut on pc-:u 37 I should like
te point cut c few ru its. ..t the up there- is nenti-ned Theeder
Steltzer, then «d'n ven Irctt-Lu-S.lo, and Jchtnn-*s ven Hoof ten.

litres;, this is "ci article, -s I just srii free "Kouo ..usleso".
-cu just sp.kc- :* c Lt. .yen Ht .ft ... 1: t. u -. Jthchnes
V.n Msefter - is that thv a..?


That as r th.r


U .. ril-'-jJG-f.-3-Ci'-ss (Int. vcn Set; r.)

G :-rt 1

C. This article cn ?a~c 36 and 31 ves a nun'.cf nones
rhe r.rc ccnsid'.red the rest import-nt Berniers cf the Kreisau
-reup.

’.itness, did ycu hr.Vo any contact with ether embers cf tho
Kreisau -reup?

.. Yea. I kno*.. Lc^aticnarat ..dsn vcn !rctt-Zu-Sclz very wall.

Q He., -id ycu know cf his Wu-i-rship in tho resistance movement?

/. I learned thtt free. him. he learned te knew each ether in
-ur seer t political aitu. tien then there km an iir raid cn Berlin.
The name vcr. Hr.c-ften nr;- nentirne-t end -ft t r for c reful quest-
icna si. mutually rcverlcd ur nt-jenisn te tho Reels.

Q If 1 rncsbor c-rrcctlr the name vcn Trctt-Zu-Scla r.s noli
".s Friedrich Hidschcr occur repeatedly in y.ur diary. If this
u-a - very secret aattor k*.s it net careless cf ycu te mention
tn.Se nines in y ur di-ry?

i. Those rorc c?jacuflr- : :o entries in oqt dinry which I discussed
y-starchy. Th< frsnuency cf y talks with th-s men had te bo
:x}l-in«.d in seme wty 'r. consequently the diocussicno listed
. re n.t the “.ctu-1 r.-s disoursod ut Kero merely li‘is. Thrt
is opeci-lly tra ,t !r. vcn Vrett.

’ ere y.u in c.n’.*cv with ny tfcer r-sist-nc. rrutis?

.. Yes. 1 hod uspoeinlly clcro r - - ,s tilth the Catholic
Greup he ded y Freiherr v<- r Luo-'i -. .'.Iso -cd relati ns with

&cdelists, represented ’ey .. uc:.«cin n J . Liver ' y Haul
iiidsChor alee n.rfccd ith Dr. Tapf -s - respected in the
j jx critic or sccicl a clu- err tic circles. 1 porccn-lly had very
cl: re rd' tic ns with .sil n vcn Mi hausen vhc bulcnrod U tfie- s;-
e-ll^d '.elf Greu;, -hieh .-Is included Kunao (?) fer owuaplc, who
*‘-s i.i Cvnt-ct with th. ferr.-r . icr. Gh-.iceller ‘..irth in Switeor-
' nd, and there were air ccio.oct -d ith ncsist nco .cveaent in the
lories. I . . rs

— v : It. •* Orvr_i.-_ ; :i r.u vjs ~n isr t rtent m^rl-r of the Dutch

5761


-


11 ..prii-tf-iDJG-6-4-Grcs3 (Int. vc:. Schema)
Court Sa. 1


1 —oistance .Ivciwnt.

C. Mr. rro^dont, ^ client ^ Jtt6t lhc ^ of ;rcf#

comers. In this connection I should like tc off-u* Tree D>cu-
~«-nt Bock I -

:: . K-OY: Hay it pl-cs«- Ycur Honor, it aoens tc no that dc-
f.nso counsel has rene f-r oncu h into this defense, ct hi B in
resistance novenent. Tht is m -.tto=pt .-t :±ti ticn. That tho
dofendent *>as e ncu! or of the resistance to up - trey hrve explained
f-olly *hat the resistance creup did - and I think tt t the Tril-unnl
ie t<01 omro r*m f tho activities cf thot acvcoent. . 9

noro la yin; U have throe ctrer sitn-ascs c:mo hero tc testify in
his rctivity in resistance acvecwnt. I vculd nssuac th*t tho Tri-
-oncl has -athcrixl sufficient infenartion tc dcten-J.no the strtus
-* tho defend-nt Silver a in th-t pc rr.ic.dor .-roup, lhorcfore, I
- U rn ? further ti_o I:ci..j token up rith this rcoistrnco
vcuont business.

' £SU2NT: Central nay proceed. Objection is cv.T-mLd.


11 ;.?ril-::-X ? G-5-l-Cc-k Unt. vcr. Schocn)
C.urt ::c. 1


Ls.. i.rII5GS32i: I offer document . lft in Document Seek I,
c 32, cs S-Ivors Exhibit So. 16. This is an effidevit of Dr.

..ssicn Betours, duted 17 January 1947. I should like tc r-.ad merely
p. few excerpts fits this affidavit. I quote:

"I, Dr. ..salon Botaors, t:rr. cn 16 Jmucry 1912 p.t Kutfen, the
Netherlands, ..rcheolojist by prefessiv:., residin' ct Duitenpest,
julian“l'-nr. 375* swv .r, tostify and declare:

"It hoi been kncim tc a-., tlr^rdy since 1937, thrt Herr Wolfram
Si'-vox's kept i.;vr.xrlly vary ruch aloof from the official scientific
Has! doctrine cf rice, He. : nh sell, etc. In accordance vith this
-ttitudo, he tr.el tine rr. J . r • i.x, mi succocied ir. kcepin* typical
rc;res«;nt tivos cf tin official f-lse doctrine cut *f this br.nch
cf science, and that in • i-lcr u protect this science. . quosticn
r.rljes, cf course, vhy Uerr Si.vorc continued his offerts tc r.tin
in,-crtancc naon'j SS circle. In r A v cpinicn, his sole aim wrs, cn
the one hand, tc fenp cell by ordor and in accord *.ith the resint-
r.nco r U] s T.hich cxi: t«/S -lrtrdy p.t thrt time. It is difficult new -
tin acquainted \ ith tho dovclcjxiv-nt cf the .'tzi repine - t put
.'.ec-lf in the aontrl -positicn cf these Cv.ra-.ns he 'hen, under very
dosp* r.*t. drctaastrncca, c i:t> slated the possibility cf a revolution."

I sh 11 net re-.d wh t fcllcus, ’-ut cn pr. o >3 I shell reed
tU- seeend r.d 1 * at pr- r'. hs:

"It is knetm tc r.u th t Kerr SieVers, too, had mire or less
direct cont-.cts in th.se yerrs .it.*, persons vhc hed c nnccti.ne
•ith r. nodes interested in no-3 end Infir_.-ticn from under r.und
Gerosnj."

*

The Inst pern -rc.ph cn i!dx p- -o:

", have beer, in a position t.- c serve K rr Siwv.rs Curin':
r a. Fer el vie us roesens I

• km rlAnally by ns r.iucwd tc trust hi:, or . letcly. ."evor-

t .-l rs, ; have I-irrst t: - lx* hl_ .re ar.-I v-crq, in

tr.e c ur:, jf years .-.nd I ’.xavv .r- mi -..r, lermt tc trust him,

5763


U ..prU-w-DJG—5-2^Ccck (lot. vcn Sc v u.)
Court .... 1


as ter m his real political attitude is ccncorned. His role was
net ersy and certainly did net pay. i.t tho present nenent it is
not oasy t-. Judge the feelings cf the individual resistance men.

Their tr.--.ic fate was that :11 their efforts were in voir.."

Then there fellows the certification.

The fcllcuing decadent, fevers He. 15, cn pr/o 35 cf the docu¬
ment trek I, I offer .a Sievers Exhibit !.-. 17. This is an affi¬
davit c f the smo Dr. Bcheors, dated V. February, 19.'.7. It deals
with the warnin': rad about the savin.; cf this Dr. Bcl-aors by

trie notice of this affidavit.

BY uU. i.ilSG-iJ Ji:

c itn.as, cn r.ouest :f Hiclrcher, ycu vdntrincd contact
with n number of ether rusiotr.nce rouv.s; 1 want ti ivc the :rl-
bunel n comprehensive end ccnoise survey cf tiie nature cf your
c irat rial activities. Iltasc be brie .

..cccriin; t. ay pcsiticn, :y cain duty res t- obtain -nd
P '3 cn vrlua'le info ra-* tie n. .ilsc 1 hod tc cover difficult
siturtiens, tc ncko ccnfc.-vr.cus possible, for »hich I .--“.do iny
• ffice nvrila lc, rrvl cvnny evil incidents vhich noy seen unin-
. irtmt tc -n cutsii.r, ut in such - hi;hly dm-ere us nrttcr wo

h. *.< tc 1 e very uroM rt out cnacuflr ~o -.it 1 security. It wu» very

i. .; .rtrnt, f r exv-ple, h." ;-.*ny SS tr-.-ps •<:crv in tho I oich ft -ny
ti:.v. It w;.s .iy dut; t: -t this iufcttar.ticfl. Cf c urce, cno C.uld
•v t simply ;,ek the SS oair. ffice, ut I \.rs able tc v_ it L -cause
•11 f *.ho training of th-- Si ' 9 un/.er the main office and by reason
cf th :>ct th’t Kicaler .. r.tod tc. have the tiuienorbc public “tier,
t-r.t tc th-. traces, by the ad re-ssos and the appr.jai *-c
nunL-.r cl' pullic-.ticns ur-cd, I was ill-, U Jud-yu tho nusf*r -f

tr- ;p: . - is h-.d t* o drne r t. ily '.-.cause the revolt wne put
ff several ti_ius.

T.u cm perhaps *ivu ur- ancti:.r cxmpii •. .iei. -.’.Id clarify


11 -OJG—5—2-C: - k (ir.t. vca Sc ur.)

Court -iC. 1

is far as nis reel pcli-icei attitude is concerned. ills rcle was
net ersy end certainly did net pay. i.t the present ncaent it is
not ctsy tc .lud - the fedinrs cf tho individual resistence T.en.

Their tmic fete was that .11 thoir ufferts were in vein.”

Then there fellows the certification.

The fcllct.in: dccuncnt, Sievcrs He. 15, en payo 35 tf tho docu¬
ment bock I, I effer ns Siever? Exhibit he. 17. This ia an affi¬
davit cf tho seas Dr. rs, dated 1/. February, 1917. It deals
with the vendor. rod about the savin cf this Dr. 36hao» ly
Siovora. I csk thu Tribunal tc trk notice cf this affidavit.

by uK. i/aauiiut«

r ltn.es, en rwouust :f Kidreher, you nainuined contact
with a nuobor of cthur rosictftr.ee -roups; 2 want t: lvc thu Tri-
bunel a cc™ 'rchcr.sivu end ocnoiso survey cf the nature of ycur
eons >ir t rial activiti o. Ilu.se be ’-ri. ’.

..ccerdin; tc ay position, xy arln duty r-.s to c' tnin -nd
p-.-s en vr.lur lc infoi-a-tier,, Use 1 ht'l tc ccvur difficult
si turtle ns, tc nakc conference" pesaiUe, for which I nndo ay
:fficu ftvril:.' lc, and every evil incidents »hich eny s-cn ur.in-
.rt-r.t to rn cut&i l.r, ut in such - hi hly drjrcwus erttor v;o
hr.d tc be very saroful r' -ut cna-uflr u- end security. It wr.s very
L;.,ert=nt, T:r oxrnplx, he* nary SS tr -p3 -xr, in tho 1 eich at -ny
tiiw. It * < ay dut; t- t tf-ir nfcti.n. Cl' c ursc, cno c-.uld
.,-t Si.nr.ly : ek tho SS anir. ffic., ut I tea able tr ic it l .cause
"U f tho training of tho Si was uni or tho orin cfiico tiv* ‘-5* reason

th- fact th*t u itud U have thu ..hnvncrho pu lientior.

•: -r.t to thu troops, end thu nd’rassus -a* th- approprlWc
mwL-.r cf pullications use:’, I sea allc U Jui-> thu nun’ ur -f
tr- . . This had t- e da r v ly teausc th- revolt MB put
ff suvorol tlives.

T.u c-“. ,-.rheps -iv. us ar. th.r • leh - .vll clarify

:--r -ctiviti-s?


5761


11 ri 1— :-3vG-5—3-C- ek Lit. von S cheer.)

Ccurt Me. 1


Hivlscher nentod tc find -ut frea n* vhot trips Riscl.r
united tc make, especially abroad cr to the ric».

These tri: s were, cf courts, dvrys kept secret. Exploiting !iin>-
ler's pseude—scientific aspircticna, 1 r.sked hi= wheth r he did
jut went tc see the Bayeux errpot in Franco, rnd the rcyal -reves
in Homey, cr the ICc* lithic revea in HolL'M, and ir. trie vr.y I
frequently learned cf Hinder 1 s doatinaticn, «nd was c’le tc tell
Hiclachcr.

q Her. fli-i Hiolscher always keep ycu inf re '1 cf “11 details
.f his proper'tic ns about the finrl -bi ef this resist.* rco activity?
;ji d the final Bin, re y u hav already *d I, was am< •

Yes, th t vs cl. r. '-:i lacher infernal r. * f r s
nocoeeary :f the details, nd he rise infemed it- ^ cut me thinr
and -nether; but the individual pec ly never had .vet 1 net led.;«
jf everythin? th t vs tin cn, if only fer reasons :f cmcuflc, c;
but I knew quite r lar»Q number cf trxec cf people rh* bden ed tc
the vcricus rvsiotr.net ivups cotusc I cnao inte c. nt* ct with
quite - lr.r > nuahor cf ;.ccplc, fir <-x^.ylc, the circle ef Tri ends
which I hove Just trike’, nlcut; *ivl 3f tvnts t.ore ix. nti.ned in this
c .nn .cti:r., it ed'ht •. cf the retest inpertraeo to ascertain in
.ht c nr.ecticr. they t re .ienti na!, -nd it vs i= rrvr.t to v.ateh

this.

d ..rs it pcs si' I,. f«.r Jtu in nrny cceos tc nern era cf tho

re-cistnnca .^ veaent vh vcj • in '3 *cr an thus t; h -1 t

. Yes, I t. as able t- lc sc in ;.y T *

i... rtrnt case ^ iho fil. in;: In 19Lj 1 le-mc:, when I

hOpened tc ' e in"Ceponha cn, thr.t *. drive vs Vein- .jammed ft:Inst

-rash Jews. I hoard of t:.. dlfforcnceo cf opinion between the

SD ir. C penh* -r. and tho * thrcncht C c c rr-n dor in Denmark, r .ut the

• .11 kn.un _tc.ic physicist .refeoser lehr. Then in jerlin 1

1 earned free tho counter intelligence office ' . c!:rnc.c..t do-

•

trilr •-.hi- n-ie it dear t t .r fes-.r : chr ;.*e in rcr.t -rn-er.

• *

5765


11 «pril-irOJG-5-4-Ccck (Ir.t. v - Scicon)
Court .. . 1


I 75ilf hed ac opportunity to *am hi= directly. B-orefcrc, I
v ant tc Dr. Von Trctt ir. the fcreiyn office* I infomod hin cf
the pienned ''rive ejainst the Jews in Denserk and ir» perticultr
about Trefessor Bohr. I "asked hin whether it was possible for hiia
threu-h his connections nbroed to send r. stminf to the people who
Kero endangered ty ? relic:1*. scans and ho s"id "yes", end shortly
thereafter ho t.ld r.c that the naminr hed ’ con trnnsi.it ted, and
then r-fess-r Bohr succeeded in fl-ci:: t Sweden 'joforc the drive
was CLrrlod cut, end Inter he went tc _n lend find then u. tho United
States.


5766


II ..;;ril i7-"-S - 6cf? -1- ?utty-Int : Vcr. £cor.

C ur'fc Kc. i

Is tils t! c s.i:o Trcfcfc—Zu-Solz Trier: you r: on ti on oil
before?
d. Yos.

In tLo .rticlo B, Jno f tl.o Gor:r.n Roslstnneo I'.ovo-
:uRfc : W, lei I 2:.vo -lru- 7 suV.:lttod - r Silvers« byjibit
15 It la er.id t! .c Tclt’.co h;..>por.od tr fin.', out ti t
> .atlc .Air.auroa Wvra boiry pi-r.noJ r.inrt tie Dmis).
Jews, you ::o:.n tl 1 e ovnt?

Yoa; tlc.fc Is £ w r ccc.rlcn.

1' w era: ycu plw..su Co -1 tic 111 ^. Tribun. 1 vory
briefly r.’j ut 1 no c .so cr c.n'tlu: In icV. you lolpod
purple r vuro in :i.y c,' roasod by tl.o Kc.zi Ro.'jir.o
< r vpriv.d cf tl olr frowtlcra?

I holpod wl onov r I : t. tie c,:.. rtunity to dc so,
exploitin'; t! o dif foroncoo botvoon : 1 Lor end Kosonborg*

Ti r «.xc ...do, I \:.o -bio t 1 clp ti c voll-lmovn c-.rcl’oo-
1 n ~lot, ?i*r foa ac r : *•-r’. c , ;n d ,’rcf 0 tier R.R. Ochlidt. It
1- rfton nococr ry t. tie r.bvantr: :o <f !’i -1 r'a
scientific vr.nity 1 . cxnl-r V- rbtein re so. re) ..rriynr'cnta
1 ::u cc.ro s, f r 0 zc. pic. Ip t) w c; sc f '.'T'fcsser

Lcir, c 1 :. * o.n ‘.ianicoc . r c. un. vorsity pr- fusser,

0C0.U30 Ms Wifo U..3 Jt . • 0 ; •• 1 - it

univoreity f Froiburr:. l?uvorti*olocc, lb c pcaslblo
tc c.rrcn o f'r i la rocolvo c rose, rcl narirr;:ont fren
K .1 louorbo.

In 19-<^ I M-.si 0 .* lo t -br:_n tie libi.r..ti'n cf tl o
rwi. froc-.'.* 1 : f: -i ter, r f^sscr Eoidt, roctr^ f
- ctaiv i city f Oslo, . contr t. n ooap, I

•Is* loly.jd tl o i’orv-ri. n university preface re, Krr-cr
Losbotl • ocvorr.l I.ur rod .'.r: cxicn s -u 1 _nts In lP'.-I
I . . - rolcc.sud fr>:: tie c ncontav.ti n c:: :? “ucl cnu..ld by

n 19v2 .for ti first t LnO


il .nril -;7-::-S -6&7-2-?u;fc:-rnt:
Ccurs L'e. I


*-r. ciron


t; r-u^y :;y c'ntr.ct with H.schor I s-.w ccnconcr..ticn c.-jap,
I w;.a '.coyly -vo-’. by conditions tloru. .’.It] ugh I ]v.*
hoijxl r.brv.t t! o .Hr-cities ml tl o V' rri’'lo trirsphero on
v ri us cccj si' 's, s-oiny t! cso t! in a nysolf : ml tho
i. iproaelrn 'f such r. sle.vo c. :p surpr.aaod nnyt! in 3 1 l.r.rl
boor. .-.’’lo tc i.x.Inc. I wr.s capuci:.?l* c'xoho 1 to aoo tl*r.t
bcsilos cn. i :.l types t'uro roro highly iistolli -ont
pv,: r-.n. . :oo. I ccrsi '. ' t'.ic eystoa lovilirh, rml \;1 or-

evor p ssi* lo I lolpu*; ‘n't it :turt be c nsl'.orct'. th:.t
I * r.l only vury slii t eppertunitioe 'xc. ueo I J-r.J nr-thins
whi.twvor -• i*.a witl t! o ccncontr ti n crap 3 stoa. Voro
I c ul/, I trio:’, t hr.vo poepU role r tl erwiso I

brlof. to J .vo tlor: -ion v- r s.blo t. 1 vo

tho f< llrwiny Dr.olc.u yriomors ralcr-sud: Kutzoncru'jor,
Point, \rciz, Brem, to .onticn cnly c. for; :.n' by trr.nc-
forrin;. ^l-ctmr's ..ettirn crt.-i.lo .'f t! a crncontr tim
I Tr..s .bio tr crofto ;y C. living c^rvliti'ns for
'• v ^t tl lrt; :ris nors .ml pro servo tl 0:1 fr'n tl o 1 ^rrrro
f tie 1 ct fot? rrntlc cf ti o hr. .ml I t<*rk :• fonr.lo
Jul v. h'r ’itnocs ir.tr ;;y cm Pjuco,

'•!. BlfCIli.BBI.: ”r. Trr.si'ort, in t! is ci nm etien I
:Tcr fr I ^ cuncnt *3cc!: Siovors I cu.’.r,t Jfo. 29 en
. 75. Hr ir SicYoro HI bit JJc. 15, ;x.yc 75. ?-i r
ic n cffiH'.vit by Di ’ri'.: ..r'*p July, tho snno .'’refoaeer
5oi;> W1 r: the -.;itn sc Sievors ! s just »ntii not'. This
sx.to.’wnt, Osl< , 21 J .Jill ry 1C-17, ro. s s f Ilona — I
yu^to;


. on : v-.c -sc: r~on-.fr n t!o .*rir<-n ’’Tins /lbrocht
str see, -erlin, rn 21 ^occ-Hbor 1-'12 t.r I vin^; been
intx.mo' for seven rnt: s in tic C ncontr.-.ti n Cr-np Sach-


M u.-.r, 1 firs; llvjc*. in Hunich f-r cover:.! .intis;

•' r (" y 19-:5) : r*.cr - ? riven 1: t I s'. 1 : ' be . 11■ :


576


11 . ,ril -=7-::-S’ -6&7-5-.tott~-mt: V :: Sc!- or.
Court lie. 1


to ;:c/o ..’Jcut freely In Eorlln :r.* 1 t_r in ttl.o vilL "o
rf 'Pis: .'r-uts nenr Sorlin. orr > lfrox: i'iovcra s. v
tc it tl-.t I crui -V scientific tt-tI: in tie librerios
rf 3urlin, n-1 lo suppMo *. ;io -itl uiiplo irnoy. In
rcl — u tic j\rr is cuittoc*. 1 uru —I 1‘. ron’.oz-
veus wit! I.orr Silvers t tl.c ! : use f Frlc'ric! Toilec! or
in Pets \i:i. i:iclacl.or hinto:* ti iso tt . t l.o v;..a n. t r. truo
IT tienc.l S« clr.liat. Ilcrr Siovora ;v.vo no c.npl, to frouc’.rn
;n/. e. u t< it t! ;*.t I C' vlf. , ..a wull ? p asible, livo
\n t! .ifo nv r!:. IV, . : .\lv .yc tr t! < point :.n.l
ol r.voC in • fnir . r. i tolpfi 1 irjinor tcwcr.'i . T5.on
2 11 > wo 3! el n.tvro t! o c.rtif ientit r\,

ct • cv'vrt, - . 75, I eff^r

a . !k». 19. s la «» 1 vit cf i-

r.tzor of tie 30tl f J.nu ry, 1C .7.

033 VEGLEKT: C-unsol, t! o JJ.Jun.l is -Ij ppc Coe*. to
x-ocoivo tl.uco c»M-r.ts wJ ic’ y u offer r.a o:d ioitr in •
cvi’.oncc , 'cut I suy ort t: t ;• « ro:.’. nly very si oxt
n ' i rp- rtent porticna rf tl ex: sc th.t t*. o t/po-.-ritton

r ’ ' roc rwill not ' v. unduly oxtondod. C' unaol
wrvl*. ! .vo :n epp' r tun it; r.t t! o cl<'.ro rf t’.u tri.l in
fxliiy. lie brief <r bolv.If cf * is cli-nt to Cv.ll i.ttontion
of t: u rriburv.l.

“!:• -I.;.-:.! fl ia ia Silo .Cfiz.vlt -f tlo foiSiilo
>. 'itnoaa vim ijy'oliont t< ok ii i: 1 >uao« I
t intend t it t: ic st.touor.t. TS-cr. I ffor Sievors
. : ic j 136 zn G ci'iimt - cl: 1. *.©so

: t bock, Dccunont

c! a 1 r C tvr p cs f Iccvnort lock 1,

j . nt

> !cc t!j)rc 1 n x: t . »r tr nr - s t; n in s'-nc

i:nr.-p, . n . r - - l: p»pti«n rf x] c c:-c..ll-: Dxfiiak


5769


11 Inril -1-76^:7—;- 7 u-t--lnt: 7 n fchc-sr.
C- urt ?:c. i


Dccuncnt 3eok I s t> w C-urun :« cu :cnts ..n Cion rr.thor
t\ r. tfco ai.-lieh, .n.*. I : j: inclined to bcliovo t): t in
tl o to-c- llod Gorrv.n -'ocunent :k>ok only t! o documents
• - - cpi>orj in t4 o En-lisfc tr-rcl tion.

i)i!. HI.'G7 32R; :'r. I\»sidor.t, I 1 ..’0 .. fow mouo conploto
co.jiuc oi t! u 7n~l’sl tr.j'eL t-.c n 0 .>? tko docuxiont book, r.nd
I c! .11 coc to it tl t tkoy :.rd avbriittwd to ti o Tribunal,

J 1)02 '.RING: ‘ills is Docv ■out 3ook 1, N otk In^liaV
nd —

DP. RSTSSSOER; Yes.

JTO02 RIHC-: — Gorxr.n

Y...'7) Y: ! o Yosocv.tion3 deewnont book ir in fcho
r .no fern:. Your kon'r. 1 t: ink it involves only ono
docunont , 1 o\ ov..r,

JUDC-7 ?S3KIHC-: At the .jror.ont ncriont it ppo.-.rc tk:.t
tUs involves Docunont ifo. 40. .'oil, . s .. >•.. fctor of f.*.ct,

T .-o two Docuicr.t 40's In Gom n. *>. rl .no it c n bo
ttr i.ltonod out noro o. oily f. ..n it o. re.

: P: *1 t nurabor do you i.rsi-n to tMr ox3 bit.

Counsol?

) . “SI EC 1 ; : 23: Sieve re Exhibit No. 20.

iESIDS 7: £ is is do ff id-’.vifc of JYiodrioi' 7ro.vi.

. 51 7. X21j "or. 1 :r ir ; E’,..to.~ont by t: c cor.con-

t;' tion C'j-p xnr. tu, “ro-:., wkor =: o Dofond.nt Iv.s just
-i“ncd, I .d do IVibunnl to tnko notice of tko

-« t . 2 c not mtord to ro;.d it.

i • '-11 new bo ?.n rocoit. “o
ill one vor to '-djur t i? V. r dvr?.n- tlo rocors.

(-. rtco rr r: - ;..kon)

'M

5770


C-'urt 1

11 -v r -.7-»-S-l-ZS%-Kerrov (Inc. 3r vr.)

T>- -.-.rfT-'&l: Th» tribunal Is again la session.

SB. V&ISG&ES2S: Hr. .-resident, durln,- the recess I have got :jy
hand* on e few co-ies -f Dccuaent 3-Jc Uo. 1 rad I recuest osroiseion to
Ivc the- to the Trituart. First, though, I should liko to point out
-no thin.:. I hove /scertrined thrt the correct English text rad also the
Oerton text of Silvers Document So. 40 is to he found in English Document
3-ok *o. 1. the ether hand, in the Gerr-rn docuaont took the English
text is rlsi included. I can ex-.lrin that os follove. The witness
jjrlcencu, vhose document this is, <rvo _e r.t the tiro his English trrns-
lzti.a. Then, vfcen I turned in :;v document hook to be trrnslrted, I
rls. turned in this English translation In Tdcr to bo of nssistmoo to
the Irmclrti .r. Division. When the docu.cr.t took «rs finally *>ut
together, the defense, recorditg to iresent custon, has no influence and

s

consequently it vre not poesiUo for us t-. look through this took beforo
it ves -out before the Tritur.nl.

HE. EaSIY: Y^ur Hon.r, night ! rsk the defense cninsol whether or
not the rffirnt in Doeuient Xo. 40, Borkcnnu, is the sere Bcrkenuu thrt
he intends to cell here ns e vitne-cs?

DK. ValSGEBBEE: Yes, that is the sn:c rcen so that there' io no
cuestion A rending this docuront hero.

rtn. HvJvDYs Shen there will to no necessity of introducing Docur.ont

X.. iO.

DR. HXTSGLr3Sc.: Bo, the witness vlll rpucnr hero. Consooucntly,
this t .current vill net bo r t rd.

hey I r.-v in-uire whether Dvcur.vct S:. 41 is in English ir. Gor inn

s

lr. the d.cumcnt t .ok tefero the Tri bunal?

TFE «-SI55T: The c.-.y furnished re of Document Ko.*4l a-rocars in
~n.*lich. I don't knjv rt-ut ike other docunont tooke tut thot natter
vill U c-rrectec. .ay the, ere incorrect will be supplemented with an
in-disk translation.

FY 3-. '-SZSS&S513:

.. Witness, tefor.- the .recess you centionod e fc~ erses ir. vhich


5771


C-nrt 5.. 1

11 Apr '.7-.i-9-2-xc>.-iIerrc»v (Ir.t. Br vr.)

you were r.tlo to assist persons who were repressed toy the Knzi refine.

V»c the insistence that you were able to .jivo in certain cases possible
without cay further ado?

toy no means'. Luck, str^a? nerves, end courage were an es¬
sential part of this, Those vho don't icnov this period free: their ovn
er -riencc in Ger:uny can only have an epproxioa.te picture of the diffi¬
culties thrt clvrys had t^ toe over©one. Thus, in 19*4 the Chi-f of Strff
A the rcrsonnl Staff, re ny superior officer, vrntod to institute o
trial a»;cinst •<. for doin,,* fa.Vw.rs for prisoners and, in this connection,
the rights thit : had irtviously hrd wore taken away fre no; nenoly,
ri.'ht to hrvo 1 edirte pars teal eontaxt with the divloi;n chiefs. I
had to errry n r steady warfare with the SD vhick do undod very careful
tactics. This alone, h.vevcr, vrs not enough to tako care of the tick¬
lish situation. Rlrrlor vrs president of the Ahacncr’.u and fror. 1943 I
c.uld withdraw i-to .y position in the Soich Research Council and fre-
cuently ! could only nastcr the situation because A this. Let r.o *lvo
B brief example to clcrify that tatter. tinnier wanted t: «ivo Hitler
n birthday prosont, a printed v.rk which w r0 to too printed osoocielly
f.r the purpose. I received the order to arrange for this. I had this
volume prepared toy a fauous Lei-zi,’ orofossor vho was known as a book¬
binder. This artist, however, was not a sixty noatoer. In fact, he vr o
u:.‘er surveillance as c Social Democrat and the S3 r.efo r. ,-rci t Issuo
-f this. It vrs considered as lose najesty for Hinnler tc subnit a book
t “itler that hac. been prepared by e Social Democrat. Then, re a natter
-1 fact, Hianler did not ucc this book for the birthday nreoont a.c ho had
intended. I vr.s called to answer for this and only because it woo cueh
r hi h work A art which tinnier sc vrs I snared difficulties.

v Vitnees, in dtscribizt this event y.u wish nrke clear how care¬
fully y.u "tj. tela.- su-ervised an' watched by the SB. i8 that so?

A. i vo, thxt is s-, and I can .jive you an cxan-It to prove that I
rctu: lly vte ceinr- supervised. In 1944 I had a vi lent showdown with the
Vr - i ~- va.s concluded ^ith the escurenec that the -attor was settled.


5772


C .\irt So. 1

11 a-r ( 1 st. Br.vn)


E -vuvcr, such r-BBurtncac were always if e very <*ul leus nature rnd I
f.ur.:'. out thereafter that I was tn ho supervised by the SD in Bayreuth.
Ihc leader there cc-.o t- =e on the Pretense that ho wanted to .tot

is.f-r ti-r. on ny -ffica which hrd bean trrr.eferred to thrt neighborhood,
r^rln. the c .nvcrsption it avxJared that vt had cn rcr*uclr.trr.ce in ccct-
;-n. a non who vos cl .Bely befriended to this nra, end. because of thin
r.c »ti to -o vfcct his reel neei,:ns©nt ^vt. He then cent n report to
Berlin which clarified the eitueti fir p.o I vr.s ccnccrnod. This was
Just one of those ure uccif onte that soueti--.es p-xer. Hoover, I woo
oittir. on i kc,: of oowder, os it were, end ©t the end of 194*’. or the
beginnir. of 1S»5 the - .lice chief .i Ku^rnbor.: rt that tine wanted to
char, o :.e * ith sedition which, at that ti::e, v.uld hcvv beer, considerably
a.rc then Just o concentration cesn penalty. However, I regarded it no
V kttaw. duty alvayt to helo whenever Dr. Fiolecher or other nenbers of
.ur circle rekef. fir assistance.

S ,

’fitnoes, in the first tart of your direct exr.ulnatlon you ota.tod

that tho hu.uan being er.erlcentc with which you ccne in touch becauoo of

Kiniler -ero odioue to you -.erewelly. 'hy then did you not, on sor.o

excuse or ether, abandon yeur activities as tho F.oich Business kmrtor

-f the Ahn* r. u rbe? Ihuo, in one fell swoop you would have oxtrncjjyour-

c. If fr.j thin coaolicLted o-.sition in vhicfc you found yourself.

la tho boring of 19-2 I had clrondy this point of view when I

l * v tfci. ox-eriuonta in Dochau. 2 have already said that during tho

t.-ntir discussions with riunltr I ettonotod to fcev“> this natter separate

i?jz the rthnoctrbe because ’ wished to hrve nothing to do with that ;er-

%

c lly. It is true that after I v,. frustrated in this effort to effect
'.r.ie t-oeretion I night have b«<.n die to extract .uystlf ln # cor.e way or
•her fres this situation, however, this did not take place for the fol-
: rereons. Ac exn as I case in touch with the first exreriuonto
beings I tolc Dr. Hleiccher end ay ether fries :e about then and
declared unccuivocatlr that I wanted to have nothin t. do with these

3 di, £_t have anythin, to i. with than, .y frier..'s col-tod -ut


5773


Ciurt 5o. 1

ii =-r 7—ii-9—■—icX-fcerrov (I-*. 3r _vn)


t. no thet, should I rfo ewey, should I abandon tha position of Heich
3u*ineS& ..cna r ;or of the Ahnencrbe, I vould not thereby effect the least
Choates in these cxoerir.onts that Kinaler had ordered end it io true
tact this io correct, vfcat'they said. On the other hand., because of ny
cetorture the ucsbers of our ap-cruo vould no longer bo protected by r.e in
y ; coition in the /ihnenerbe and this vculd ucst assuredly direct the
attention of the 5e«taoo in =y direction, ivory thin,- th*-t I had. done in
the .nhnoner'.c vould have been ehecleed. very carefully erf. it could be
counted on that the secret thread that led. to the other /ttcups in tho
resistance novuucnt would be discovered. Ihcsc coneenuonces would be
scst unhappy itr the conoolratoriel activities of tho .-roun and, noreover,
ny vory Uocrtant observation tost f-r the Klolschor no%*nont would have
boen abandoned had I left. After nature cons id orr. tier. rad inner ttnv&cle
! decided to rocaln at ny ;cst in order, in this position, to contribute
to the destruction of the- Hozi ro^lnc. My ontlre contact with tho ox-
-.criaontc in vhich, according to the nroeccution, I partici^ntod In
tcao wey or another consisted, so for os I regarded those natters ns

criminal, in purely oxtornal things. Spiritually, ! repudiated then

•

definitively, My external oartlclocti’n cor.cistod only in noslotin.: in
the ccxryin,; cut of the Plans, tha r;ool of vhich veo the llbt.ratlon of
the ier.ocn poo-slc; but, nevertheless, I didn't let things ,*ust tnko
their cvn way. I v» B cot, by any noons, indifferent to vhrt was fioirv;
or., Accordingly, c=on<; otr.«r thirds Z was able to prevent first tho
un-'ertaxing of ieschcr'e hunar. bois.; ex.orinonts, which ho «pc olunnirv;
or. a ler ;c scale in the field, of cancer research, by interest in.: tho
chief cancer researcher in the heich hocvrrch Council, IT. Blono.
Secondly, I was able to prevent %ir.t Sicalor hed reportedly J^dcrcd;
m>-.oly, tho finding of p Icw-pressuro chenbor, b:th in tho Autunn of
19-2 and in the Autunn of 19-.3, ar.d this reent that hescher'c experiments
-ere net continued.

* f


57V/.


11 April—S5-3JG-10-l-Grcas (Int. Sr n)
c. urt I.':. 1

A (continued) Thirdly, I prevented the carrying cut cf has-
chcr's cclc experiments in the acuntcins because by prolonging
norcticticns I kept hin frc= xttin- the necessary oquipaont. Thus,
1 w?s also o' le tc brin;“ab;ut e union cf orders f r-c. Hisvrler to
r.each or > with asoi/mur.t by the heich hosefcrch Council. Sinco
Reich hcscarch Ccur.cil orders were issued r.t the end cf 1942
Hascher did net carry cn any further hun.tr. l .inf oxporinento, be-
couao frea then or. he wco r.rt responsible fc r his • .rk solely tc
Hinaltr but fer the first tin. ».r? responsible also tc a profess¬
ion*! faculty tc hich nc was - l li -A to report: t- the competent
non in the Reich Ixjsetrch Ccunoll, ready *rofcsscr Stuorbruch.

l-.ech«.r \culd never have been r’.le t. st -.-v- up a rinet the
criticisa such r acn. hen fi nelly, -.id f urthly, I not in

Dr. ilcetncr the first -an whe refused cutrl ht t< c. rry cn human
boin - cxji.riacr.ts, Hiataler finally in 1944 sw» tc it thc.t the
institute f_r itilitory fedical heaetrch r.c lender had .anythinr te
do with human ' elm; :xnori tentr.ti* n \nl raid that ouch uottors
tor-, exclusively Crovits' affair, h: als: carried tl.cci cn. I
. old have l .cn un:bio tc prevent this h i I loft jy p.siticn.

. Jr. .resident, i . t'is context 1 offer free Document Bcok 1,
J.cum-rt . 1~, cn pc o I*, is Sievirs Exhibit 21. This is cn
affidavit cf :.clfcon 'follomn. Pr t La affidavit 1 ahtuld like
t- r-rd j.eruly a riof -r-.ph, r.oaely n pap- 43, the first
par* rr.ph.

".11 these ccti-r.s .f Sicv.rs *c;c tactical -masterpieces which
I aduirel, *s Hirelur and a et cf the :th_r Leaders .f 1 rrty end
State Justifiably rad continually mistrusu.1 each othor rn£ their
cl-s-st -ircl. end protected ::.--*::clvcs by scar.3 .? r. well orfanisod
ana effectively s.cr.t police acchi:dsa,"

This affidavit is e.rr-ctly errtifi 1.

-s further document I offer free D cu ..:,t 1 k Stovers II,
r. pay. 22 in the anriish fc..k, This will be Slayers


5775


II ,.yril-l t-DJG-1 1 h-2-Grcoa K htt. Braun)
Court .... 1


Exhibit He. 22.

THE I HES IB SH Tt till . u please 4vc ae that Dccuncnt nua' or
a iic.


ua. nuidGJtBeiv; yecuauut «o. U-uv.sa - }«- ^ ^
Docuaent ?.cck II, pc*e 22, cf the English translation, and this I
offer rs Silvers Exhibit 22. Iris Is «i affidavit by .m: Sc-eaann-
Doutdcicser 'lac a ac=‘-r cf Kidacher's Resistance Or.up, end «dth
>.hcu 5icvv.rs speke at Teat length ebeut th- situr.ti n in v.hlch ho
feund hi n acl f V.e-use t;c ..hnener c c.ncerr..! itself ith oepori-
aantation. -.w-Deutdr. 'er state# here in iotr.il a nun' ur of

r-r.se nn for ehich Silvers c.t that tine wn t rin in tr.is
Ho istrncc Xvuoont, “.b:vc rll, ’ .cause .f his j.aiti in the
hhncnurl i . I need net reivl this dccur-ent.

Witness, in view cf tho eel «f the Resistance „vu-.cnt,
nci-.yly, un - rau! uprlain - id yeu undertake my lcr,.,r pinna
yourself?

.. In cmccticn tltfc -he tthur roups, it appenrod hft'or the

cellnpao rt Stdin r 1 thrt tr. n;pr- nricte tiue fer ccti n hod

- . . - • ■ .. .. • "~t$ »i > -• *

arrived. Kidschor, Deutelc^.’wr, oni aysclf hr i Ion c ov rsetiens

• •

*- :ut h ••• this final \al should o achieved. Hidsebar wlu ims

•

lsc In touch xith the leadin’ otfiicra cf -thcr -roups reported
•n th enc. rehenui le i -sit lion en the part of ti:. nilitary
clique \ .iich prL.-.rily «rs c:-xiiariened t. clc ->ay with the leadin'
•-rs. ' - iucii t. carry .ut cur own assas
•••i -I-r -* : itl-r, v.; if .r- not j. 3si: 1- t t lecst


TieTful


d nan. ’


• • :

flease ecl a ir, that.

n It .cos sound funny, *ut that is thu »nj . Ltlur

1 - ken li!:e the neat io.--;. tent atn, ut i.i.-l.r, ec use f con¬
centration cf naans :£ . War ir. ic h-_ ms actually the more

syfiil. flii.r = the c . . p-eint t-. -r.tir. ..zi:\n-a5

5776


11 x.prll-:«JG-10->Grcs£ (Int. 3r.wn)

Curt :.'c. 1

:f acst of th; jJlgaoeine (Generl) 3S. Bie entire iclicc,
includin': the S3 and the Gestape. Free; *o he was Reich Uinistcr
:f the Interior, and thus in ccntrcl cf the entire internal Goman
centre 1 > chin-x-*. IScroovar free 19U on, after lia cain.; cf
Can&ris, Hinder tcck cv-r the entire UHitary Countcrintclli ;enco
Service. Thus Hlr.nl or had acquired an -xtraerdinnry peter, and

consequently h-. cnFO : rod to to the .vtu ahea it ns the nest im¬
portant t' dc '-way with. There was, hewovar, another ii^crtant
factcr.


577 ?


Jourt 1

Apr 1 i 1 1 --. . 1 - 1-1 l-l-KD-Coofc- vonScho Jn .


a. nt this time oven in higher S3 lending circles
t .ere ■'.ire''dy were misgivings "boat Hitler, which were to
oe traced trek to his false decisions in military spheres,
rr.d rlso to p rsons_llke 3oriann's attitude townrd hln by
nlsalcr, whosee person sceood to them to be inviolable.

And they saw in Himmler to be sore, 1 rgely for their own
private selfish reasons, the man who should be nt the helm
of the state instead of Hitler. If Himmler were dono
nucy with first, then the d n b er of civil w r would be
acr.survably reduced because there v-’s the opposition to
Hitler which was founded on n larger b-sls, end thnt after
first getting rwr.y with Himmler it would be a simple matter
to do nwoy with Hitler, \*e could avoid civil war within
the frrmv. work of our revolt and this was in the interest
of the notion os a whole v..lch woe under serious enough
D'eSBicu ne It was.

Witness, was the Intention to do away with
Himmler dl3cussed with the oth_-r -.roups of the resistance
co -sment rnd was it oriented towards their intentions also?

a. In oil grouos that ore orated to set forcibly
could only be done by getting rid of the loading personage®
in tr.o 33 , nd the Nazi r glee, that way only could the
fcOsl bo attained. To Oe sura it wps not easy to reach
a & r<omonts with tho other groups r gordlng time and
technique. This circumstance end the preparations which
Wi.re necessary to make it pos isle for us to take over the
-htirc p dmlr.l8tr n tive c chinery of tho State, which we
our intention, and this kept co6tconln L the date nt which
our uprising was to take place.

<. Now, witness, I s. ould like to no r from you
very briefly somethin coat -our corf©rete -l^ns, which as
• - said previously, wore directed tow rd {rotting rid of


5T 7


Court I

«cril li-K-11-2-3D^-Cook-vonSol.oen.


Eisrlcr.

«. ' ell the point of departure was the following:

The assassination would have to e carried out sc try t

between the tine it was carried out and the tine it becnne

/.novn, triere were t least twenty-four hours. In this

- ny v were to have an opportunity to "cquoint the entire

5toto ruo-ratus and the Arny with the new st-te of aff-lrs,

T.d thus, if 0086 iblt, to void r civil war. rron the

lar.s t.vt were c st or. tr.ls oolnt of view, the following

•ccffl . to c::'er tile beat cr.mcea of success: I h-ve

already x-r.tion.d •.•eaterdry the "house of I"tur«" in

x.ic/. Klofler wc« very nuch Interested. Re had visited

lc ficVwrpl tl.ws •*’nd the xan tt er of the "r.ouse of lioturo"

..-a tolu nix that In c certain region of the « 1 ob vultures

still llv^d. r.lamler la ued the order to find out where

. «8J birds nestd rnd to observe then. After tneao

%

o-6orv t ons d been concluded, he hln ^lf wanted te
*o tr.e re or. c hunting trio. The olrce was found in tho
SftlxpChtol in Obettinr t "u 1 r. r deen side vrUey. Roughly
thirty vultures were seen there. I >d r file t"Jcon >t
t is 1 ;. order to Interest .-'lnnler even nore in this
a b: t *.-on. Ir. tho 6 oar o: 1143 I y-j all the
rrre.- l = . .unta nocosasry for tr.e assesslnrtion to be carried

A

n. '.-'itness, in • our diary c. 1943, under the date of
:= hry,- tnove Is rr. entry "Aovle ?lctuivs of Tlilte Headed
Vu*. t-.ru.'’ I.ov ore t.. ‘se tne ...ovles vou Just soo.-'-i of?

l-e, tr.e location vas : rt'.cul rly frvornble for
• is aaa-s:-lnptl:a. T-re vs a cllnb of Several hours up
‘ : _ ntin t re = lon, v. ice a de it certain, even if

- v ” ” -in fi r.r.t rcr. , t.. 1 wc would h vc a ..erd st rt of
' *-w ..-u.-;. -I ^ot 'hold of p err t rt c uld go through


5779


Court 1

April ll-A-11-5—ED-Cook-von3chpen.

rough terrain nnd found out that there would only be
nucossnry o short on*, hour's welk from where the car wo Id
hrvo to atop to the hut; The narrow valley, once the car
rad 1 ft tiu hut up the-valley, could nost readily be closed
for a*r/errl days. ”e worked out exactly where It was to
take ol.-ce and when. Signal star Iona were Trongod for
w ich re to communicate the news of the event a few
aoaents rfter It h»d occurred, to our mer. In Berlin, rnd
t..c; would then gc Into -ctior. Immediately. This would
e lve ue - very H roat nerd start srx tr.o f r ct th-t Himmler
was vat of the w y wo-Id only 0 cose now where we wonted
It to became inown, nr.d dur nx this decisive ooriod the
orders could -ctJolly be given to the 55 «s If the;’ cnao
from .-Homier.

’.-.on were tr.o ore or-r tlor.e for those olr»ns

concluded?

«. They were concluded in the "ulus of 1943.

<*. llow how Is It thf.fi these rlans were never
c rrl-d aut? n Just s-Hd tlirt In 1943 because of tho
c . aldernblu military reverses ”ou t .ou t thrt th*t would
-e a -os: «• aporcrl- to time :or suen r. r.d^rta’.lng?

«. r.-.eru were ;.;ree reasons for this: First of all,

t.tin could only . ton t an July -r.d September;

s c r.dly, It de-ended on ".hat time Himmler kicked for
trio; and thirdly, in 1343, the cooperation bet oen
t.'.o various groups --"s not so clos,. tht v L c-uld have
t .er. ovc • tn- .r.tlr. c ovcrnae.nt'l admlnistr' ion •

- - -dip tdly.

i. In other words, you had to out off the carrying
out oi o..r 1 -r.s until 194-;?

* «• - - Oi w ' la ty el rts, c: .tir.ua* ly

him.lcr of t .Is vulture r-untln- trio. I s-o/.e
; r -oout tersorrlly in Jrau-ry and in itofen 1344.

57-0


Court 1

n?rll II -1-.-11-4-K3- C ook-v onSc hoe a.


At the beginning of 1944 he biaself looked -t r> rriorrao
which v-s r.rmngvd In the house of nature ''tout the life
of the Bo vultures, nnd th^n Hinislor hicself sot the ante
for t.:Ia hunting trip r t the er.d of July or the beginning
of «u 6 ust.

o. Now now eoa>. you dldn‘t berry out the plan In

1044?

n. Or. IS July 1944, I w^nt to SoIzburg to chock on
nrr'ng_iB-nti once core for the lost tine. There w .lie I
w-'fl on the wry I received lr.forartlon on the 80th of July
on thw unsuccwfsfjl rttoept on Hitl.r 1 ® life. I hi*stoned
b ck to "orlin to gvt tsor. d.trllo nnd If oos c lblc to
hole ay friends. Cur Intended -ttwCDt vns abandoned
after the 20th of July, because oust of the l.ndere of our
resistance ioveaont, Including Hlelschor, wore arrested,
and Klnnler cnlled off the hunting trip be erase of the*
new duties that • ere falling uoon hln ns o consequence of
.»is new Job rs coca^nder of the Reserve Forces (2raetznoor)


Court So. 1

li ajjt -.?-ft-12-l-KEK-^.<. ehaa ( 1 st. Srovz.)


v You Just seii Chet Kielechtr v*s ait la orison in connection
vith the attennt of the 20th of July. Sov I an surprised thet you your¬
self, he cause ysu belonged to the resistance noveaent, vere not also
arrested..

a. I also van interrogated by the Krlrinalrat Seuhaus of the
Gesteno. Z vu6 accused of •lertleloatla, in the sovusent end Kchaufl told
::e that Kiel ocher had already confessed thet I oarticinrted end had naned
the Men in his f :rouo and that oorhaus I caild save =y life if I r.encd
those vho v_ro lr. the Kitlfchor. ,;r-u->. bir.ee ve hat. agreed not to nrue
tho neats of the others under any circumstances, I assumed auito cor¬
rectly Chat Souheus w®* merely bluff in,;. 7ro= hie aueotions I saw
that he hah oretty well unc-vercd the threads cf these rsoistanco .;rouos
and I hed t. confess that I had icncvr. of HUlschor's conversation vith
Stauf:enter, et Bomber,:. It vs* also unforturuto that a lcttor in tho
Villa Eacfton arevud hielschor's connection vith tho Ahncnerbo. Kv cx-
olsnation of this vas not accented by Seuhaus; I vac treated very roughly
end brutally by hir. and he released .no -ith orders to Keen nyoelf avail-
ode until I received further orders. • .

'..her. I vao coiled for a further Investigation, this v 0 * in October
of 19-^., I heard that msuhaus had toon transferred ond h Krialnalrat
by the tune of Sounders continued my interrogation end it vns boanusc
cf this that I tfot off. Ssnndore vac or. cld official, very correct and
decent in contrast to leuhaut. I ~rs able to cover f«*r Kielcchor or.
the basic of hie ohony orders frea the ahncnerbo end lr. tho tine that
follovtd I vj.B even able to trin,; it about that Elelschor


'


57


il April l . 7-:W.TL—12-la—'fe^han (Int. Bro-m)
Court :i> w 1


was set free after I had agreed to stand for bin; however, the con¬
’d tion was =ade that he should be freed fron prison so that ho
could join an SS 'probation* troop, but this in turn we wero ablo
to prevent as when he was sot free there was waiting for him an
induction order into the Wohnscht, which his friends and I had
arranged for hin.

0. Vfttnoss, what would yeur role had boon had tho assissi-
natior. boon carried out?

A actlvo participation in the assassination itself.

Q You flr=ly intondod to take part in itj did you not?

A Yos.

Q This what you and ycur frionds attorn. todj was it not
political nurdor?

A In our circle, for hurano and othicol reasons, wo
repudiated political nurdor, what wo intondod was to liborato
tho Oorcan pooplo and tho innur.irablo foroighors who had fallon
Into Hinder* s dutchos. Tho liboretion fron a nan, whonMio

•

rogardod as the incarnation of cruolty and oonscionticuslossnoss,
tho loing away of such a creature, in corparison to whon tho brutal
r.’. sadistio actions of persons liko Caosor Borgia woro nothing,
Appeared to no, in view of tho wholo situation, as a nwrally com¬
pletely justifiable deed. I boliovo that in tlds attitudo I an in
agraonont with not only tho groat najorlty of docent Oonaanc, ii>-
cluding preednent representatives of the two Christian faiths. I
ar. fully convinced tha.t this attitudo of nine will be approved by
every ethical and ri.nd.ocus thinkin* >orscn in tho wholo civilized
world.

DR. WEISGSRESR! !*r. President, this is tho end of ny direct
oxar!nation. I ask pemLssion to su'ait further Documents at a
later 'ate.


;/


y


11 .ipril L 7-K-«LTD-12-2£—ffcehon (Ir.i. Btcto)
Court Jfc. 1


Tl- PKSSID2i7: I understand that counsel rests his case for
the dofenae of this defondant at this tins.

OR. WEISOZRBER: That is true.

THE !F.ESIDE?n: With lea bo to subnit Ebcuncnts at a later

dato.

■ '• ’SISGSRSSR: The direct exani nation is concludoi.

7-— THESIDShT: That concludes tho direct examination of the
defonso counsel.

DR. RSZSOSRBERi That is so.

TK3 PHESIDEiTi Tho oourt will be in rooass until 1:30 o* clock.
(A rocois was taken until 1330 tours.)


57:i


U stor (Int-Vcn Schon)

C'-urt K-. 1


AFTiRSOCK SSSS1QF

(Tho hearing reconvened -t 1330 hours, 11 April 19li7)

THE 7&RSHAL: Tho Tribunal is again in scssivn.

V.’OliTLJ' SZ57ZAS - Resuaad

THE .RESIDE:/?: Arc thoro -ny questions tc the witness :n tho part
f any f tto defense counsel?


3Y D?.. : :vl> I_ .i (C ur.se 1 for the Defendant it', stick):

Q litnesf, you w v rc deputy business rsanager of tho Reich Research
Council end I can uiiro that y u arc inf-rocd about tho business in
tho Roxch Rosonrch Council. •

A Yes, I can , ivc you inf ;rr. ti n about that.

Iloeao, clarify once rod f.r all uho was responsible for issuinc
and supervising research assi^.-ajntc, ».oro tin sc individuals, irs it tho
Beard, th; business mn.a.>aont, r tho - .* tho special do>* rtiaonts?

A F~r the. issuing of the research assi.r.nunte ireu.ct by tho Reich
Research Crur.cil, tho nly p-rsens r.opansibiv and ccnpctont woro tho
30 dcpTtrxnt her eto and plenipotentiaries, who in turn wore responsible
e luly tc Goorin as »xvsid.nt f tiro Reich Research Ccuncil.

'4 Y u j id "30 depart unt heads*. ..as ruilicino tho sort inp-rt-
and cspuct f tho Reich Reoc-arcn Council, ^r were there ther dopart-
•: ntf, f.r ex-aplc, h r hi. h dn you ostinato the nunber f research


aerL .T-A-ntr?

A I cann t ive y u ary inf.rrr.ti.n about tfca research assi£n-
- r.ts issv»d in tho dopartnent fur general ncdicim., r about tho tho
nur.r f assigmonts issued in any thcr doprtc.cnt. The total f
Qur.ta iacuod by tho 30 lopart;«3nts vas several thousand.
£ji*^the persons ccn’uctin; r.eenrch in enc rp_cific field rc-
coivod thoi^.assl-naant frro tho w~-: f t:. t Jap rla.at, and if tiv.ro
aero -any uty -_f supervision then merely tho head f this dap-rtnant
uil bo r>sensible?

.A Jy*-j exclusive ly this hand f t.,ru ...t -«h was responsible,

57»5


11 . k pr-..-*s-13-2-F s'-.r (lnt-7 :n Sch;n)
C ,urt Ho, 1


rhc issued the asslgrcx-nt and who received the regular reports on the
res^'rch wnrk*

1 Thee- reports wore sent tc the do portent hear by the reaoarch
w rker, end hx, passed then on. In whet fern wore they passed n? Y u
knew of the rod panphlots. Was thav any other fore?

a I can explain that to you exactly. The research worker c 3VJ a
rcprrt tc the department head. The depart .«nt head drew up a list
every no nth vhich was *. c-npilati.n J" all tlw research assi,;n:x5nts.
This ho sont to th; dopnrtcant f;r c re! ind_x nd reports. Thoso lists
contained the nano f the scientist -vl._ n s carrying ut the assignoont,
the title cf the w rk in very .riof sitn-ry, and a -roti-aos tho nuiicr
f the aw it and the priority rati.-.,, Th_ deportnont f< r card in¬
dex nnd i\»p:rts sent thoso roports,~1n the f ;m which I hnv.. Just
described, tc porsons wh> wore int. rested They, In turn, if they
wished to, could approach tho individual research worker f^r further
inforantl-n. Free, tiao to tiaj, abeut every six nonths, these lists
were coepilod into the sc-callod red reports. Those wero printed, tho
lists v/ v r~ njroly ninjogriphed, and thoso rod rvp-rts were cent t tho
oc-abcrs f tic Board (prosidial-Rat), that hageonod about overy six
n nths .r nine ninths* Those rvd rop rto contained n thing but what
was in thu list, that ic, curtly a sunary, tho nano .f tho scientist,
an:’ tho title of the ac3i,;Tua,nt.

* Can you state precis.ly frer. y ur r.vn kn.wX^.’rt that in ad¬
dition to thoso lists, an-’ in a Vltion tc the rod b: klets, tlwso
P- pie, f r oraaplo, tho Bear-:, did cut receive thcr render and u.-ro
•'et-ilc roperte? Or is it your pinion that thu -acabers of thj, 3-nrd
received only these lists and re' f<ldcrs?

A Th.ro was n_vcr any t.u>r report issued.

•1 Kcw, you have said that the dopartaant head w-s alone rosp.n-
ri.lc f r his particular field, that is f ycat l.a.p'rtance far sj caso


?rrn the ar c^v 'ins sc far, y.u have hear.' that > fess’-r 2 stuck

5736


11 Acr-i-}2-13-3-?5St«r (Int-Von Schoa)

Court Ho. 1

•

frca l?Lu on, that is 1r. th. list year of the war, was in tic Reich Re¬
s’ ~-rch C-ur.cil as deputy f Brandt r.s center of the Beard. If, in that
capacity oa do.aity zanbor of the 3vard in the year 19UU, ho wanted any
research ass lament changed in any ray cr had any objection, could he
intervene personally r did ho have to approach tie dopirtrtnt head,
and who would that have been?


Cour t 2 T o. 1

11 ior 47-A-M-l-SiJi-*aloy (1st. 7cn Schoan)


a. rersonel intervention vee cuite isooseible. could only have
gon« to Jehelnrct Seuertruck rad vhether he coulc*. have induced bin to
effect any change he vented -1 dc sot knov, tut considering the oersonel-
ity of nr. Seuertruck, I laagiae he vould not have done eny such thing.

V -hen the Board vae e curetoriun, as it wore, end hrd nothing to
do vltfc oanaging the affairs of the Belch Eeeerrch Council?

a. -he Board had nothin,: to do with the aaargenent. It included
c large nu_tur of important n«rscnagoe, vfco re I eeld regularly received
theee red raorti, rad the .leut.ra of the Board vore aleo invited to the
aaetSxgs, cut generally they did not cone, did not send any reureeonta-
tlvee. It had no dcutt originally toon the ai= to avoid duplication cf
work in thie way tut it apnerred that ooodIo vvre very eager to oit on
the Board, tut actually did not vent to give the Roich Research Council
enything, neroly vor.ted to obtain benefits froa it. Fro-, ny ovr. knowledge
I knov thr.t cr tie factory cooncration existed cnly between the reurcoon-
tctlvoc of the cr:y, the nevy, the ocot office, and I believe the Food
rilnlitry, rr.d the Belch Forestry Office.

»• I have one a ore ruoaticn. You kr.cv the Inctitute for Military
*.iilcel Re scarch, the Ahnvnertu ir. Dachau end ir. Strcosbcurg. I believo
>"•« foii that these v-.rc exclusively under tho ahnenerto and, therefore,
under the Roichfuahror SS?

A. Yes.

.. Ihfcn these 1 infill tut e'O ve-re never under the Cannioelor.er Conorel
fir ..edical and Health Hatters?

A. Bo, certainly not.

v* lv, I have one aero cueslion. ^ccu“here in this ratfccr exten-
: ‘ v - under the date cf 1 June 19*6 there is an entry that rrofeSECr

;.adc an inculry of y«i -bout the drug uolygal and that you cn-
swured this inruiry. ycu recall this event and vhat hacocned?

*• -he coercion for trie iacmiry, end this v - c b referred to, vrs
-ullic. ticn ir. the ..union Medical '\--kly i.ixtnchexor ..idizir.ischc
-r-mochrift) and cecause cf this miblication --rrfessor Rostock asked


Coart So. 1

11 acr ,?-A-U-2-Sat-*telojr (let. 7=n Sehoen)


to be seat i* test Beetle of uoly^rl.

... And your entvi-r -ne to the eane -

a. I believe Er. rloctner Bunt this senole to Dr. Eostock.

V That vpg all?

A. To8.

EE. rEIBILLA: I have nc further ouestlcns.

Tlrr: Er. Tioo for the dcfer-dent • eltx.

S': EE. TIrr:

.. Witness, hcv Ion.; hr.va ycu hr.own rrofeoecr Welt* oersonrlly?

a. Since the bc^lanln#: of thi- trial.

v. Sid you or the Ahcencrbe have pny correspondence vlth rrofesflor
belts or hie office?

a. So, Certainly net, no fur n» I knov.

v And did Batcher, who at you knov -re rsol*r.ed to rrofessor
Veits, for ronetine ever talk to you abcut belts?

A. Too, he speku of rrofeocor ‘ «>ltr n fev tlaoo but I had no rcul
idea rtout hia because I did not knov his personally or officially.

v So-, -111 you please tell us -het Batcher tnld eb~ut *rofeeeor
Veits?

A. Bo veen't very pclite. He celled hia a typical acholor of the
old school and he eold ho vnt slov thinking, ecoecinlly because he did


Court Ho. 1

11 Aor v7-A-l‘»-3-iBt-h«loy (let. Von Schoen)


act nccvct Haschcr's no- ideas, end £e>cher nede fua of the Christian
Catholic attitude ef Dr. U-ltr. ht said he was United by his religious

ideas Ltd thiS at that tine elvers lnolicd a certain threat to the state.

*

. Kov, in connection with Hascher's high altitude cxnerincntr in
Dcchau, : should like to discuss e dccunent vith you. It is in the
Oernsr. Dccurtnt 3ock 2, on high eltitu c ex-Jcrinents, on cage 61 of the
inglieh, which is oage 59, the nutter is 15£l-rS, exhibit 46. It is a
letter froc the defendant Hudolf Brandt to you, dated 21 ..arch 19-.2. I
shall cucto for the sake of aiuolieity: "Che Kichfuehror-SS, rersorml
Staff, Fuehrer Headeuartcrs, 21 ..arcr 194- , to the .notch rucir.eoc kanager
of the Ahr.eSerbc, SS Ctcrstura'.ennfuehr-r Sleverc, Berlin, Dahlon:

Sear reared* SicVvrss I rofer to your inquiry of the 9th of Karsh 15*'2
concerning Dr. Hatcher." I want to correct aye elf, the letter io dated
3 21 19 -2. "aoforence is cr.do to the out-atcrsnheric treseure croeri-
ner.to which ore being carried cut or. concentration conn ianaten In the
lachnu case by the nir force. Ihe Boichsfhthr«r SS has anorevtd these
oxoorlnants under tho condition that SS 2nd Lieutenant Dr. hasche-r, vfco
in anyhow a nodical 1st Lieutenant of tho air force, takes curt in then.

I an euro that Hr. raccher will to able to give you further details.

Hell Hitler. Hudolf Brandt."

You hove already said in y*ur direct excnlnction that your ir.ouiry
of ..arch 9, 19-.2, which io stationed here, wet cn inouiry as to what
Haschcr's oxoeriaents vvre itcut. Sow, : should like to know *ho fol¬
lowing. Did you turhaps learn free Hascher for what reason he wnntod to
be uttcched tc ths Ahncncrte, ~hich he finally nrnoged to out through
4th ai-nlcr? #

«. Broc the decusents which have been subaitted here it can be
reer. that rs early tc 1S-1 Hascher had established contact with Hinnler,
tut only in'the beginning of 15-.2. after the high altitude c-oerinents
bed Jeer, begun, w EC there any contact with, the Ahnenorbe. I asked
H>i:h-r Irter wy he had teen ordered to :ni tc the «haon«.rtie. Heri.ve


r-'.te an extensive answer. I ccnnot r


her everythin*: thrt he said


court :-c. 1

11 -v" <i7-A-l*»-4-SEa.-Krl©y (Int. Von Schoen)

nov. Ei-.tchar did not vast to coze to the lhnonerbe. He vnr.ted to vork
under Hinder. In 19-*2 Binder ordered that he should he rttrehed to
the Ahccnerhe. 2ef:r* that Hatcher -*cs atteched to Binder's adjutant's
cffice in kunich, end he later retrained this association. It <T8 ay
opinion that treeher ves priaorily interested in bein^ free froa super¬
vision, including tupwrvi6ior. frer. Professor "clts's institute. I could
See no convincing reason fir this tt first end betides It -rs none- of ay
business, but as early ee 19-.2 Hatcher vented to ,:ct to r university,
rr.i hu tried thv University cf ..unich first. He -ent to the office cf
the chief of the Ahner.erbe, rrofeseor *ucst, vho vas at the cane tine
■'•.rector cf the University of ..unich. “rcr. luaet ! heard lctcr that
lath rr.fveaor Schittonholn, as v t il « rrofeeser '-cits, had. refused, to
help Hrscher ouolify. These tva gentlonun vxr« on the sedieal faculty
of the University of ..unich. .-.y ova Personal colr.icr. about Hatcher had
no ci jnif iconoe at that tide because I had r.c ri^ht to otto Jud«r-t>r.t ar.
r scientist, but in any case ny personal opinion vrs confirned by vhut
'.uest told =c. Unfortunately, Vueat did r.ot drrv any ecr.clur lor.e fret
this fact tt the tine I talked to hid rbcut it. ft e even refuted to tdk
to HiarAc r about the net tor although ho could have breed his ar»;unonto .
:r. thu JucVrncr.t of these tvp authorities. I vculd conclude free thie
circunotancu that the feet that ‘uist refused to help Rwscher achieve
his ciu contributed to his action to diseolvo his association "ith ’.’uest.


Court 1

A - rll 11-A-15-I-HD-Ko rro vo noc ~.o e r..

I..*n I s ould 11 Ao to discuss "nether doc-nont
v ?h 70 a. It Is in Docuaent Book 3 of the prosecution,
pe.o 54 In che Seroan and. 77 m the English. This Is
Joe-aunt 13C9P5, Prosecution Exhibit 92. It Is . personal
lector :rcc Aclchsfuehrer Si, fluid Hendqu-rtcrs, 24
October IS42. It Is a? rfcwd Top Secret. It is --adreesed
to Jr. Slcsund Roachwr, Munich, rr.d I quote:

Doer .-laacher:

"I achnowledfeO receipt of your letters of the 9th of
October end of tr.o 13th of Oct \r 1942. I hrve rend your
report rcgrrdlng coolln a wxporia.uts or. husrn bcin_s with
gr-nt interest."

I s.:lp r few t.'.ll^s rnd t o on to th. n. xt orr-r rph:

"I re c rrd t.-.oso people rs trrltors v. o still do reject
thjae experiments on toucans rr.d would instead let sturdy
J:ru" stl lers die na n result of these cooling conditions.
I s ..'<11 not r.eslt te tc report these men to the offices
e nebrned. I empower you to osfco :ay opinion on this
.newr. to the c xnctrned of lces. 4

Tr.o rest of t.-.e letter Is of no interest hero. It
Is s .t.eu “Kell -.itler, Your?, Heinrich Klnaler. ■

Jar. you toll -e, witness, did Koscher t-lk to you
at ,t t..le doc-sent?

rt . Yes, I reAumOwr It wry veil. "San .-o sc her
r.celvvd t..ls letter from aianl*. he care In wlt .1 It
'•■lux rwr.tly rr.d srid that now, fln-lly, thinks to t*ls
-- r.r decision by hlxxl-r, he tod rccelv d the outhorizr-
f. r. t, work without restriction, rr.d now av rybody should
-- c reful vac wereo-.pcaed t hia .• r.d objected.


Coart 1

April li-H-15-2-HD-Karrow-vonSchon.


In this dOcuncnt the Luftwaffe doctors nre
rationed who were coperop.tly age Inst Eoechcr. Do you
hove -ny reason to b-liove thrt Professor "feltr was
r-fomd to in tills document by Hiroler?

I c^n only speck about Hr. '.'eltz because Raachur
Mention d - re I said In answer to your pr. *lous question

- he nam-d Sr. ‘Foltz a.s an example.

h. Veltz was explicitly centlonLd?

a. Yes.

x Now, ybu icnew Raseher f; irly veil, witness.

C'n you t-li us, could Raacher be expected to rake use of
this dec-sent?

n. In view of Rn-chor 1 s r.ntallty ar.d character th* t
vs only too certain. In ay opinion, by giving Rascher
this uthoriTPtlon, lilrrlor out c dangerous instrument
into his c. nda bee use he knew tr.-t Raacher wculd use It,
ar.d a r-cher f.lt »o sur. of himself in cosaesslon of this
eefchorlz-tion that ever, to ac who woo higher in rank
C '- 0J «ih not r.ls superior he dared to spy that now, on the

- of this authorization by Klnrler, I vo Id withdraw
-ny objuctior.3 to these experiments. There was nothing
to do since Raacher had tr.is -utnorlrntion but to be very
cer-jful, although ay conscience r.s not satisfied.

x. The ooor relationship between Frofessor Voltr end
•V3chcr w ich you have rentier. I, -t least after Reseller
n-'ii tr.is letter, oeant a considerable danger for Professor
-Hz?

“• - assure so if Vcltz hod glv r. Raacher any occasion

Roseau r, on the tr sis of tr.is authority from Hianler,
;1 - : ' v "- net d accordingly.

'• 1 thank you. I have no.further questions.

5793


11 April 47-A-ATI~l5-3-Karrow (Ins. von Schor.)

Court :fc. 1

gj HR. FRITZ (Defense Counsel for the defendant Rose):

-J 'fitness, did you knew the defendant Rose before tho collapse?
a :;o.

q Did you over have any correspondence with hir.?

A No*

Q In a letter fren Professor Hirt tc you - it is Deeuisont 792 in
tho Prosecution Docueont Book 13 - Professor Hirt rantions Professor
Rose as a specialist in the field of entonolory. He addf, however,
that Professor Rose does not valong to tho SS. Witness, why did you
not pet in touch with Profossor r.oso on tho basis of this rocomorv- -
datton?

A In conttoctlai with tho establishncnt of a cntonological
institute which Himler had ordered on the 1st of January, 19l|2, I
asked not only Professor Hirt but -.Isa various other v^roonapos and
institutes, on instructions froa ny chief, about a suitable special¬
ist. All tho answers received, inclu-'inp that froa Profossor Hirt,

I possod or. to ny offico chief. Sinco lYofossor ■ Uost thon found
a specialist for the institute hinself thoro wa* no need to pet in
touch with Professor Rose about tho ratter,

q Am! another question in a different connection. In dis¬
cussing tho oxporie-'nts of Professor Haagan with his new typhus’
vaccina in Katzwoilor did any one over 3poak to you about any par¬
ticipation cf Professor P.oso?

A I did not partidpntc ir. any 3uch discussions, but I never
heard the naaj of Profossor Roso nontaored in this connection.

q P-ow, ny final question in still another conr.:ction,,Did
you ever hoar that Professor dcso had ary part in the nalaria
expetinonta of Professor Sc hill ing at Dachau?

A Since I a;/self knew nothin, about these oxnerlajnts I can
tell you nothin?, tut as I say, : never board'th na*. of Profossor
Rose mentioned at all escort in this lott?r frea Frcf usor Hirt-
Q !fe further questions, Hr. President.

5794


il April A7-A-ATD-l$-k-Sarros (In*-, von Schon)
Court No. 1


(DE?1NSS COU’BEL FOR TIE EEFSNDANT -C’SERG)

3Y DR. VOR-'ERK

Q Tfitneas, you sail yesterday that you know the defendant
Dr. Rcoborc. About how often <tld you soo hin?

A I saw P.orberg onco in Dachau and later two or throe times
in 3orlin#

Q "horo did you see hin ir. Dachau?

A I saw hin -when I was there at Rancher's invitation to
watsh a hi^h altitude oxpirinent hich Raschur carried out togothor
with Pr. Rocberr.

q About when was that?

A That was at tho end of arch or tho bowinninn of April. In
any ccsc, it was shortly boforo Raster bocauso at Sastor in 19W I
talkod to Hi^nlcr about it.

Q Tton you saw an oxporinont cn this occasion?

A Yos.

Q Was that tho only tiix chat you woro ir. Dachau and saw on
oxrerinont?

A It w 3 s tho only tine that I saw a hir h altitude experiment in
Dachau. I 'ms in Dachau sovcral tines 9

q 'for o the oxporlncr.ts which wore carriod out in your presenco
In Dachau carriod out correctly and with tho nccossary seimo of
responsibility as far as you ccul ’ jud^o as a layman?

• A I had the i-.prossion that they wore carriod out with proat
nodical care. I rwtic-J.that ir. one ejperinont tho experimental
subject complained of a violent aarocho and Ronberp inecdicatdly
changed the pressure an! tho nan who was in the low pressure chamber
indicated that tho pain had stopped®

q Gar. you tell tho Tribunal anything about whether thsso
subjects woro voluntary or net? Do you know whether they were volun¬
teers or not?


5795


11 April U7-^-ATD-l5-5-Sarros(lnt. von Scbon)

Court !fo* 1

A I spoke about that yestorlay in ry direct exacirration, I
asked both tho people ^self# Both of thee assured no that they had
volunteered for this experiment,

Q You did not ask any one oxcopt these Wo •’xperirantal
subjects?

A There ware only those two used in this exporiront and I also
said yost-.rlny that I asked thoso people how -any had volunteered,
T0ay said* "AH of us vclur.tecro.l but tro didn't need that nany pooplo
for tho oxporlncnt,"

Q Did thoso two pooplo also toll you why they had voluntoerod?

:P. EASY: Ycur Honor, tha dofor.uant has rather claborntoly
explained this situation to Airing tro course of his direct oxani-
r-ation, I ton't soo.any reason why wo havo to ?c ovor this tutorial
again, I objoot to this lino of questioning. Your Honor,

THE l-RRSIEE? : Ti Tho dofondant nay anrrer tho question.


1&-PE?- Cross (von Schon'


11 Aoril 1'jhl
Court lo. 1

Q. '.ill you r.s.;>.r the question, ulets-, witness?

n . You ' si:- ‘ sc ' --out the r- son. ’.Vs I " sk*: tawa '.bout thr.t.

Itii 7 told thr.t they h ’ volant—r- because this g vu tr.ea •tn
opportunity to Knrov- •r.-ir'positior. in th. c'ao - their situation.

C,. itr.ess, so you r.cll «vt insignir those two cxperirw.ntol
subjects wee-o end whether th'.t ir.Jiented wh-thor they »or. cri-oin Is,
oolitic' 1 prisoners, or wh t th.y vtr.?

I c-.nr.jt reoioabcr ny insi, v- *.at the cr~ - n with whoa I
had cont-ra-ticn toll- th-•- h- » s in Security cu-to.’y in
Dr.cUou. «s profession ho a as t saf. cr'.ckvr, ro h- toL’ ac - so 1
assutfe , 1 « v.v r. pref-saierr.l oriaii i.

Q. ,.ow - not her subject. l>o you n.*i *h-th-r 1 /aches- was
responsible' fir th- ' cinistr tior. n‘ the * £ nit tion of the
-XperLvento, for lc, fee-iur, c.'.elte* , n so fo:’th lor the
experiaeritr l oubj-ots?

n. Unless that was up to tho &•-> ininictr tion itoclf, of course,

р. -sch-r Vi-3 TeSfOnsifcle for it.

Q. D - ) you r.l33 knew whether h sch-r tins c-c-.p-teiit for the
3-l.ctivn A -ho axpuriaontal ucojods or whether Z>r. libber; had
any influence n it.

... RoaWf. certainly h no Ir.fi.-.i.c- whatever on thf-t because
Jtxiberg wss - civiU-r. ni cool not givi any orders in concentre.tion

с. -ap3.

Q. *..ouL' it h-Ve be n possible for Rorborc to consult the files on
• he prisoners to obt-in inforc .tior. about the s :.t-;ico pnaso
Deut previous coc-oit. -nts, etc. k-.s th" t possible?

X. I th*t was quite in possible. Roaberg fcould hftve

n r.ble to see those fil-s. It is tho 3-s- thine I just said -
R -r.be r^ v.s - civiliru. i .on't 3-iiuv- that r civili'n would be
- 11 7.1 e ’ to s-_ th. fil-s on criaiirls.

Dj you :Ml-cr it possibl- thr.t Fttburg c5u~ hftvc LX ' rt '- '
influence or. the experiments hixii-r h or er R- seller to e rry
:ut, ir. $e rticulr ,-auli. Romberg !rv> had jk r to T-v-nt fatal

_ 5737


11 „arii ly-7 -^-lc.-2-PKP- 3ross(v or. 6=ho_r.)

Court :to. 1

vx{hiri3-nts bo enrrloC out by Rnsch.r?

... I s• rx.ot iir.fi h- ccald have !ooo th fc. schor. vaa fin

br .lutu utocrat. H. r-ii,.: or. his personal relations with Riaalor
-n- fc~ r.- - ruthless use of this position.

no f'r s you kr~h "hat n s Dr. Ro ib-rc's opinion of Dr.

R-och.r?

„. n3 I sai' I ra :.o ;ivr; only few ti e S . 1 dwnya had th.
ipr.ssior. th t Ro:b-r ( . h Cefirite res-rv tiona in iv^ari to
3.-.ocher. I was ^ven this i ar-ssior. t the first visit, in Dachau.

Rase her :i* r*,t -nt Ko b-rg to t ke ny oor.si ^ration of th. P'-iss
:f th- eX>rL-nt-l sublets, n at 1-t.r .votings nh-r. *c saw
eh other •- -r tar— ti—s in 3-rlir., : .sch-r -as ■ . :X,

I lao ha-! tt L^r-ssion th t Romberg trie' to r-etrnin Raach-r

bthtaf waa not coing fast or.ou^ for Rasch-r. «r.’, Raaehtr
sai: to that Ho .berg waa ao--tis.es a brake -n l.ia .an' hamper-*
hia in Mo work. I c-n t-ll you nothing -Is-. 1 'i n't got aore
inf jra ti^n bout this matter.

-tailor

as teatifia*. her.?

„. 1 h-T tho t-.stLvony but I krxm nothin*; about it befoi\>.

. . . 11;- 0 bout thU whin you vloiWt Drtohmi?

„. Sd tro vr.as .j o-ntion of it.

. Do you believe, th t 11 • ^ccurr. before your

visit Rancher woult* irv. tol- you ixut it?

i > — : - i - - -M.r. 1 ^ tur •’ 4

o.tu -n Rrsciaer "n . ab-r

' :: '* :t r

visit?

«. I il r-ssua- so - /-t.

• fa*

"Itite eXacrt^-nts, witn-ss?

■ - - - " • '

... .re you eorsdneC or. tide subject whil*. you it.re ur. e:

3795


11 «?ril W»7 -A-lc->?K?- Cross (von 5cho.fi)
Court .<5. 1


rr-st In in^i'rv’.?

A . Y-s, I r.cs tcton to Lon-on lor th t purpose.
q. wh-t «~8 tfc. point of vi-w of the interrogation?

A. i nr.s the -nly n-r.-sei-r.tist th-r- in a sp-cir.l can for
scientists -x. finally I w.a cioatific sc.tU.ra.

C.. . h* t .o you b-li-v- th't th- int-rror tor»'s inter-ste ir.


ar vine t. you?

KrtRoYf Y:>ur Hon-r, th-s. int-rro£ ti;ns th- r.itr.-ss mas
. o3-cU’ to in Sntlr.n arc c^l-tuly irr-l-vnt h-r-. I obj-ct
to this Un- of cu.it:-nin. -o irml-vnt nn Lrtr.--Uri 1.

7Hr. T-.-oI- v V: TLv -bj-ctl r. '1U b- aust'.in-...

Q. Ur. -r vhw. Juris icti r. » .r ft ab rg -it-r h- v.-nt to th-

eoncer; ration e"J*>?

A. On th- b sis of th- .. iv.r which-v ryon*, ha-- * J si * r - h ' *


ur.'.or tin SS rv- ?-Uc- Courts.

Q. H*. y.u -x.ilr in th- .X- t int-mst which HinaLr h 2 in

th-a- exprl-.a»ta on high ltitu. - r.s- rch so that he.triw to
obtrjkft low pr-ssur. ch.cb-r. • s th t » hohalf .1 if.aclKr or
th-y ts.ru ly -.it mi otic c. tuns on b-hrlf of th- Liftw ff-?
1 . aU of ftl-nL r- renews .n ootiv-s ir. pursuing his inton-
na 1 atnnofc sey. But, c-rt inly ho u_s fallowing up Me wn


interest in that ens- n- h 1 •

C.. ' hat jOOl - you bulievu HimLa- h- ir =in.: in this caw?

U * *- tup ' a ^


unffw'far too SS. 1 su serving idth the troops itt IW I

•h-.t uri. « r. roU c U a .cm- Iron HinoLx w-s re:* utUiftg on non

ffo r. it ..i op-cii ic ily th t Mv
, et «umfiooua .w;l- .h-ul' v:iu:.i~r. *n., th. sprier rflic.rs


r


UeC US-


IS .ir force, I r. tie- t» t xortioul rly *
oth-rds- th. SS rl- to >t .:.-n ir -th-r branches


tin.
i the.


k hr C r cr.fc inr c!v. SS r th-r tirn u iv- th.-a uo.

. b pu te t ... •• ^ sa ,J1 ^ “

Ji tirt *ny ferthur


«ir Fore— Y.u jus* . r.s—r.


this qu-tti-n


11 ^rii-A-OJG-16-A-Ciross (Int. Von Schoon)

C-urt Hj. 1

u a that tbo only irvicitijn y-u h- ?

A Th- only vvi'-nco I h.-_ mss ay experience »ith th, troops,
n t ether tr.lfc there »-®*I £Ct -nly iron h.- rs-y.

C '„h't i you know [xrsontliy -.bout Hiral-r 1 e efforts in r-s~r-'
lj hi; h ' ltitu’.fe -x>rin-nts in a, ition to ,vi »nc, which h“-'. b-en
suboitt,. h-r- before th, Ki^h T r ibun I?

In tiv. t U of 1962 HLaalwr r•»- “n -.sripn-^nt to bay
lai pr.asur. chrnbor lor th. SS.

0 . „n uh“t -1- y u Co? User, i!i-' yxi buy it?

„ I 1 not try t :ir.. it ina- lately - n th. contrary. te®-
ch-r hri: t> i olUn -r-u,h t»r.t tn, .leal Insp-ctorr.U wa rrJdng
iificulti,a r.,/ tlr.t t.i, DVL irs -ostruct rts. Therefore,

h- juite enthusiastic when HLs&L.r gr.Vw n. the r ssipnx.nt to
bay low .or-soar, chaaber oi -cr jnn in c r- th, Luftirffo r.-lus-t*.
tj r.r»‘ their lOH T-saur, chr&.r t a. Rnacher oaf this

woul h. th, beat thin* r. th-n Sleichsfu.hrer nwl'n't h-Vu to Ut
the Lultu-ffo l^'-l hin aroun: by th, nos-. ' M I h ■ t!u * 38oi
a.nt I c* U-a up Or. n^b.r • in the DVL. I i not knot* his ntti-
tu . ,x-ctly but I kn4 it e.ll enough ir,.-. K ocher's otrUoenta. I
MUX th t ho r. l! IV.Ct in th W3/ th t I >■ t«J M* t->-


II . (Int., Brown & ToaS&oon)

Court 1 i. 1.

.> bfcat do yoji scan by tho way you oxpoctod hin to net? Uhrt
roecti m - id you Oxpoct fro- Boai_r e ;?

... gho letter vr.ico wa.» shown to m n vr.ilo go, tho letter fron
Hi--'lor to SiBchor, v s alrc dy accessible ct that tir-i, end any
opuonifci r. would bo contldcrod na high tree ton. In ordor to achieve
any'.hin.: wo h. d to proceed very carefully. I orfeod Spinor,; "bother ho
intosdod ot- rtln,: r. now orioe of oxporlnor.tr with Bachor bocuuso I
lied ra no i^nnont froa Ein-lor to buy a low preesuvo chncbor. Kobor i;
•eld ho know nothin,; about It or.d ho and no dofinito intontlona of
collnfcore.tin,; ‘dir. ; r. .-mcher in a now e.rioa of experiment* nr, d I
Qihud hln not to tfdk r.b >ut toe cutter ray further bectuoo I wr.* suro
- .Boiler would not like It, and I nil I aatuao you could h-vo lnforaod
..o of the dotolla red I aniunol th t becr.uso the reluctance vr.c
pc.lpc.blo ;h t ■ouothin.: would bo dor.o.

*. .ind do you knor whet, hnpponod of tor fchitT

... Of course, I d n't know what Somber,, did, but shortly thoro-
nftor : a;; rocched the SS rev natorinlt offico which wn* in charge of
obt dnlnfi machines nai supplies. ?ao raw notorir-ln office anid that
tho fim could doliver a low protsur© chamber only '/tor povoml
•lOntha and that it vai d retire the hipest priority, but to obtain
tniu i'.i;ho't priority or.o noodod tho tpprovil of the Luftwaffe bcctvuoo
:r.o 5S could not prove -ay urgency or n great need for n low prossuro
cncabor u . then the contr ct v o not given. could not bo given, bo~
c .uca the priority wr.s blocked. On. ye* r later, in tho fall of 13-;■»
aia-lov .>\ir. loauci an ordor for no to obtain a low procure chaabor
idea t‘;o ho d of the 3o! eh Kobo area Council.. T-'-is ecus rleo be so»»n
fr-.a -o of tho Inst docuc.nte sub./ttod, a Utter fron Rancher to
Ffcnaonstiol I had, rofcrrJr.- to an opinion of tho hood of tho So-
Ejcrc: of the Luftwaffe, w-ich I pretended I h i obtoinod: that from <
the point cf “ 1 ." of t -O people involved in the worft of rcs-arc.: ir. tho
Luftvr/.'c, it vaa no? ^cczz ry to continue r.s -e- o:; i,* altitude
and no low ■ re• sure ca-abcr could bu u*he ivail-.lo because it wna


ii - -17-k-Cook (3rc-.ni i TonSchoen)

Court r-- 1.


ur rontly uaoded for testis,. pilots, so -stschor could do nothing n#iinst
t^is explanation of -ir.o, bocnusc Sasekor wa ksowr. by the nodical
inspectorate but not by tha people in charge of tho rosearch at tho
Luftunffo.

.. •..ltncis, dii you over talk to your superior, Frofonsor yuosfc
ab ut Dr Rorb^r,., and ia ii t connection?

... "Most told nc of a conforcr.co which took placo in Hiaacrl's
fiold cocunad which w t in the ;>r sonce of Sosbor a end Bf-schor, and on
tain occasion he said that tho young ao of atschor, had apponlod to
fcia very -uuch. He dir. no* resohber ^onbvr^'s nr.uc any :oro. Sonborfi
h:..’ not onl; op-osod "i:=lor but also h-d ,riven his no explanations
w.;ich had load those prosont to fall into an onbarrnssod silence.

•}• Did he also tell hie in whet points ho opposod hia sal for
vn i rouoons?

... Che question t that tir.o was one if r. roport on thohi,
alcitu-'o orxriser.*s already concluded, and on t is occasion thor was
fiiscuccion for tho first ti o of carryinr on further experioonts,
R'-'-o'-r. tho froosin, oxpcri:k.ats.

.* Troa cals statcixnt of bluest, would you a-y t.v.t aoaborc
refused cerr; on further cxpcri:xn:s «itfc ar.schur or Just -hut
1-iproccion did you have?

. ’Most was prejudiced t. -lost Houb ry without rny real onuso.

It u n r.-t ir. :1s naturo tJ contradict Hi-lor.

.. ’"itnosB, you frequently h d occasion to talk with Hi.-ler.

Z-iU teeming you ev.-.tod th t you ranted to ta’.:o it upon yrersolf to do
avr : : l.-l.r, end consequently I aust ussuno th t you w fc peiv

* wCl --7 clear as to HiuJer's personality. Itov in i~ opinion it is
1 for t-.is trial, t le st to tae extent tl: t Hisaalor was
directly connected vita the experi-ents, to kn w souething about SUrv
l^r'3 -ees ..sal icy. Cfcatvfo o, .3 -:y la t ruo 3k you to pro-

--t - tho Tribunal . icturc of Hi. .'ler»s p./s . -lUy. ir. particular
dnus with res-ect to nedic 1 r.nd kua-n eorceriaonts?


11 - ~S-17-}-Coo.: (Brown * TonScaoen)

Court 7o. 1 .

Picture* of Hierior havo already been presented here. If I
an to '.never your quostijn, I cutset do so ir. Just a fov words. I
eu Id have to ask for a Cer nin lon^th of tiac to do so bocauso tills
c -icrra r.occos ry to no in order to contradict tho nictura thnt nust
an*. risen iron tao presentation cf Rudolf Brandt.

ca. YOfiVKRZ: l.r. president. l»r. Frosidont I consldor this wit¬
ness bo tlx r.a ru/y.rds his porsonnlity and ns re* rdc thoopportunity ho
had to co .>0 in contcct wi;h Hin-ilor, as ! any I hold t.iis witness per¬
fectly co:. not ant to present a character skatch of Tinnier welch ia of
laport-nco in t.;ia proccodia . -articulnrly since Siu^lor, ns for ln-
et uica t:o ii-ve soon fron hi'. correspondence vita aascr.or, v.-.b not nly
interested is c n-ryla; out those ax~triucr.ta but t'ofc an active p-.rt
ir. thou. I, thor fore, ;sk permission, that the witnos" bo ,:ivon
jK.rnia*ion to nnko those stntasonti.

(la-. H rdjr rises to uric objection)

=7 S1DZ:7: Tho Tribunal is of the opinion that tho character
of rlttilor Imd ;ir... dy boon sufficiently doscribcd to tho Tribunal
nd the objection will bo sustained.

D3. VC.-.URK: Ir. th .t cue I h vo no further cuootler.o.


11 -"SSS-IS -1-Kcsan (Int. Brown)
Court To- 1.


3Y - 1 . - 2 ZL\ 11*5 (?Jr Dr. rCufr.'irx who ie Rudolf Brandt's counsol.)

’• 'Itnuts lr. tao c:ursc of your activities In the ,'hnonorbo: flit 1 ,
you Rudolf Brandt?

— ,.t I have /lr.cdy s. id, I hi vc known Rudolf 3mndt sinco 1335 .

Qp Did y^u notice n difforoncc ia Rudolf Bra-Mt's n;titudo r.:sd
tao rctltudo on the part of other acn ia Hi:r-lor»s innodinte vicinity?

-• Yob, because during; tao years I vr.i lr. a pooltion to observe
not only udolf Brandt, but also tno other ixa in H nclor'o incedir.to
neighbourhood. Host of .hea w.ru very careful to oxtract for thon-
boIvjb ovory poesiole ndvrxta, o fro^ their position and to loud n norc
or loon damvod life. I ust say, in order to bo true, that Rudolf
Brandt on the other hand only was devoted to his work /xd livod only
for .:lo wor^. Ir. tnis respect ho differed ^ost considombly fro:: his
colic', uoo In Hiu.^er'B staff, particularly in that one could roly or.
nia vrord and one knew th t he would not, like sono of the othoro. stab
; ou In e'a. back.

> lit *. did you kn>u about the nj-our.t of w'rk ho had to do?

... ”h. amount of tork th t ne had to do incro rod fron year to

ye., to such rx extent th* t ho v: a r.ot able to .;ot through all his
vor’ O'* rd the end. During tne h ot yoare thero van no roir.t in
'elo '.:0;iir, to Rudolf 3r-\ndt to have hi:: try to settle EOnothin,:,

:cc..uce the sterntypo answer w..e: "I shall h vo to look tno iv.tter up,
pUc.sa cdLl up lr.tor." Therefore, ..s 1 said .VvEtord<y, I nlwayo
•cr.t to .:li. *'ith ny cor.c.rns vuon a decision on the ".art ’f "i: .der
vrv3 nocooc-ry. He was U03t roliablo r.d taose cases to be Bure voro
purely .cl xical. I caw Rudolf 3:pndt ixox'd 1940, when ho wno very
over uorked and rxyslc-lly vcrlc, consequently I did not ,,-o into tho
; ffici.*l .--.‘tors very dooply, particularly bocruse I kr.ow ais cultural
r -’ od.? li. ltatione. I and tea lapreBsiOn that hie asceticis:. in hia
V3 ‘“ *- '.i or loss ' 'led his cipln, so to specie.

> ITo :ur:r._r questions.

5804


11 ;.p:>-.r-'3S-lS-S-HvOhaa (2rowr.)
Court . 1.


3' ~v- --T1C (Counsel for 3cclcor-preysung.)

.. How loaf: wore you ir. your office in 3jriir.; froj «on until

•<ac.'.?

.U rri^ 1935 to 1943.

a . 13-»3T

... Ta«.

y How about tho oonth?

... ‘. 1 ? office, tr.v Hoichs lusir.oss Office and frou there I vna

transferred in the nontk of .u .utt to 'foisconfels.

y !/i'.en was the first ti->3 th t you saw or spoko to the defend-
nr.t Dr. Doctor-Treyaun,; or ever, heard of hi-?

... Here in t::lt tri rl.

.. Did you or ono of your subordinate« hwo any negotiations
with an y of the roprosontutivos of the Xodlcal Inspectorate of tho
Zuftiraffo rnd with whoa? Flor.se disre.r-ru tno discussion with Pro¬
fessor 3:1 A'joeck bock in 19UI, ns th t h/.s alrordy boor, reported. How
tho qjioat' or.; did you or ore of ; our subordin-1eo h-.vo any negotiations
>4t.: any representative of tho I^odicnl Inspectorate of the Luftwaffo
if co with wr.oa?

::o negotiations w.rc c rri>.d on.

.. .’hen a further quest! >n. In the scspI of 16 Docenber of
••uio tri th- witnos*- I'off tostiflei that ro/.ortn on Raschor's
ej,%.rluonts xr- sent to th- .'..ic-isfuehrer SS. to your.nl to tho Luft-
... .’.icri Office 7! not I csk :--ou do you know to wh-.t office in tho
L-ft •. ; e.’ici-l Of! ice 7 th : Snscnor sent sue.: reports: do you k -'U
• k'- i:i a’C'Ut that at .11?


“ know nothin,- about 3hsc..or sending ay reports to r.nyono
ot;-. 1- :.v- 1 Hiii-l.r.


.. r o:. I nay r.mo th t you do not consider Hoff* t. ^tinony


corr—-fc; • - other words y u w-nt to e y that those reports of Rr.schcr
zly to the F.eichsfuchrcr S5. nesdy Hitler?


— On the basis of =y own gr.“wlctL 0.


I :«st regard 2‘eff 's


li ..vj^v-K^S-^-ler-J-I cohas (irovn)
Court _*o. 1.


testin', ay is tele point as incorrect.

’• Did you over coo the nodical Inspectorate if the Luft,;nr
iistod - a., tho persons f-whon anchor's reports wore distributed:
ia t io to s.-y the entire list of pcoplo to whin roports were sent?

», I never snu nay such thing.

In other wirds, your answer to tho provl iub euostion already
unsvcrc this one; in other words you thin): Eschar never sont any ro-
r,crta to the hodicnl Inspectorate?

... Yen, Seacher aor.t his ro;*>rts to Kinulor and I never new r.

distribution.

.. Did you ov-r fixvl out ch-it these reports i*.ro sont to other
officers or vor. they kept secret .ieriif.ps?

... Px.scher w.s such a noauacr.t for secrecy in these riattoro that
the ne, 7 )ti .tiono took plnco only between hio and Kinalor.

*.'o further questions.

BY 3\. DBUi?. (Counsel for tho dofendnnt Poppondlck)r

\’itno»s, I should IIJcj to rofer to r. discussion between
Rancher and Cravitz, which took place in January I 9 IJ 3 . This io not
:ot.. in minutes by Dr. Rnschvr. U.cse uir.utes arc p rt of Docursont
\n 3k0, proo.cuti:n Sxnibit IO 3 , on ?uo 115 of tho Sn,;liah Document
Bo::: 5 . ccordini. to this dlo,;od sot of ainutos, tho following ro-

!• id to h .ve boor, ardor "Yco, I asked Siovcrc to c'm to no

cuvor-d ti'.u.6 to give e infirur.tion;* what do you h» vo to s-y about
th t?

I ;:ust s-.y th t poppondi ■ V. never asked .;o to couj and sou hia;
I m’.o his acquaint! nee only in 19--.

In Jth^r words, you never consulted P-paoidicfc about thin
untfcor nor did ho ever c-~ll *n you?

r>.

1 ‘: further quest - -ns.


• - • S'iZIiS.UDE (Counsel fir l.ie defeat oat Dr. poi/Tu-icck.)

.. .hr Siev^rs, do you roc ill that you are nccusod in tho


II 5 - 18 -—Ho eh _n '3rovn)

Court /o. l.


iniict-iout with conspiracy?

— Tea.

Did you have a conspiracy with 3 ci£lboock.

A. IJo, o I said yesterday, I only had a totel of twenty ainutcu
talk ’1th lila.

o. Sxactly, that la Just rifant I wanted to hear. Mow on page
*00 of y ur diary of 20 th of July, there la aoact.-.ir..? that I would like
to drr si your attention: "1:15 p.. t . ..rrived in Dachau*. " 10 : 30 - 12:05
C:af-ror.ee with various persons, v.-.ich w s interrupted by an air
attack." Itov cones the or-.in point: "I315-IWO Hours: Dr. Bolrlbooofc
diocuooitn of c'-rryirv; out the oca-w-.ter exportaonto in the ontoaolo-
ic 1 lr.»tituto, which zuont Glickner." Let ua toko r look /1 tho
huouat of tiu> involved: hero you put it down as U5 ninutes. tut I
rouedb r ;h t yesterday ;-ou o-’id 20 :dnut. o; now which one io rltfit?

... 3 vit ia right; to ;o fron the entomological instltuto to
rloetnor'n deportment you noodod a ( :ood 20 uinutoo.

> Splendid, now i* it further true that during tho so 20 uinutoo,
in vio- sf tho air attack that had Just taken place, you had n couplo
ef :olo*yhono conversations?

flk\t also io true.

So th- t yiur talk with Boiiblboack w:.o considerably loss than
20 uinutos?

... Yes, th t io so, of course I was interruotod.


11 Apr— a—' 5 - 19 - 1 - 2 hl^y (Int. Brcvr.)
Caurt Sc. 1


Q Y u vrcrw ?. neauor _f the Reich Research Council or at any rate
hr.' 1 sccsthins to do with it, but dc ycu kn.v anything abcut s-a water?

.1 I knew that yru c-n swin In it.

1 Don't ycu believe that y-ur ontry in the diary, '’iscussion of
carrying -ut so a water extxrirents, carrying cut scons a bit f.ar, is
a rowhat f n _v«.r3tatoax,nt; y-u said yesterday that yaur entries in
the diary w_r- -ft-n rv'bj days after the actual events and 1 rua asking
y.u non, isn't it possible that you wore ox-.ggorntlns a bit when ycu
nade this entry in n discussion f carryin.. cut so- w-ter expuriaonts?
Thio, let bo toll y u, is very inp rtrrnt. a have to go into this very
do-ply. rlease 'on't fool any hesitation in riving ao a strr.i, ht '•ut
.ansror. " 3 that cirryin? ot f -y>rUntr discussed? Yos or no.

A Ho, nothing.

1 That is sufficient f^r ao. Thon I can sun up your thought in
this natter by saying that y-u, so to spork, wore officer cn guard?

A As to nVt was f .in? to bo dene hero, -.11 I can s.ay hore is that
I heard somethin,-; was u cin* to be dcrxi with sea w»t^r an-’ I put that
’ wn in ny diary.

Q In ther w.rds, y:ur entry in the diary d. u s not correspond tc
facts?

A That is quite K, and as I said yesterday in ay direct examina¬
tion.

. Thank you. bo have in the trial Exhibit N . 92, that is a
letter fr»-r. Kinder t Raschor, Exhibit 238, the t.stir-ny on the part
f 31 ux. I could a Is quote y:u "r. iehl, but I den't like the uy, a?
I w n't. Herr, in these twe Icurxnts it is sal' 1 that Himlxr regarded
overyono as a trait-r wh didn't consent t carrying out hern ' oing ex-
p-rir«nts? Do ycu r^a^bor that?

A Yes, we 70.ro talkin' ab.ut that b-foro.

Kew, in y ur ‘iroct x ainati-n y.u trice c . Dp. -

wa3 a,.;iinst s- - irtcr exps-risxnto, ui ss they had Hi.valor's

approval. !?r. Hardy could re .an that qy client is in the sar*. situation.


II Ajr-A-:B-l?-2-3£ilo7 (Int. Breen)
Ccart . . 1


*, I t. -xL' liku you to say that i'l.otr_r was an exception?

A The whole situation her- play..cl an ec£_. ti:.l part in this. You
aust -oar in aind tint R-’seh-r was inprisoneu and that tha\.f.r. all
the files which r.ro token tc Him ir in ’crvr'l new bcenac v».ry cluar,
fri.-ht-nir. ly clear, that by exploiting this i-prcssi,n Hiir-l-.r told
ilcetmr that ta did n t Jvvw t carry cut nyocporincnts. Ho thought
ho could do it hir.solf.

3 .oil, n r. rlactitr w-s ;th r.'ioo • .scribed by ethers as n docont
s-vrt :f fellow. Nor, hid y u net als - rr jorato tl«c fact that this
is purely theoroticnl? ReojeLor thu lclish clcivyn'.n vh > t.stified
here, and vrh. ha ‘ se_n xl otner with Schilling?

A il.vt.vr carno ir a v»ry tra ic aanner t- Schilling as I rvjnti-nocl
yost-r V-y.

3 lk.7.r aind. V.- d .n't rant to b fchur tho Tribunal with this.

.0 sinply want t say xlootn.r, 'ispito liis disapproval <af hinan boinu
experiments, t- k part in tha;?

A Yu a, that is s- , hu was with Schilling.

3 Kc*.t, I have a quusti^n f r D-fo::dant Schacfforj in ycur !iary n
cort-in Dr. Schaeffer is ojr.ti not'* I sh uld like tc nek you whet ho r
the :‘.ufon:!ant Schaeffer is the am. as the Schaoffer ncnticivd in your
•'i ary?

A This Dr. Schaeffer in tho diary x-.s an enter l:.;ist who worked
a short ti;,_ La the- Entm lr ical Institute, and was net identical with
the def n '-r.t.

TKS . r.SIDS:rr: ..re there any further questicnr of this witness on
the part f defense c unsol? If not, tlx; .resecuti n my cr rs*exarino.

Ju3t a octant, c t unsol, the Tribunal has sere quest! ns.

5Y J*JDG2 SS9KHK}:

1 T>- y u r„ .mater th- an.s f tho tn. cx^orincntol hua-n rub-
'■ cts wh - yo u sou at D-.chau?

A K , I cnnr.t toll ;.*• u th. 3 es.

Kmr di’ y u hap>n tc asJ: th_s tr; oxp.rLvr.t .l subjects

5309


11 .ipr-A—UB-lS -3~. l'-i y (Int. 2r ti)
Court i


farther '-r nat they had volunt.cred for tho exporiaonts?

A I onid that both fro- Hicrlcr and fros Rase her I hat 1 bcun told
that those .re volunteers. I wanted to aako sure* cf this fer nysolf,
first, f all because 2 personally- because of ay general attitude did
a t believe that these sen were really voluntc .rs, -nd it su.net'. rather
curious to a. that in these cas-s and also later in N*tzwuil<.r whon I
isJcud p,.;;lu on this qu-.stiin I r as nosorud that they hid volunteered.
This state rent on their part prccl*i&.d qy invwsti^atinr the natter any
further.

1 -full, now whit differ*. Xu \< uld it h vc aide whether they wero
or "uru rxt vuluntoero, If no y u the -x-A-rinonts wore practically
himless and Kr«. bo in; carried . ut in nee rdar.ee with s und nodical
noth ds?

A I can ;nly testify tc this on tho basis of zy cwn kncwlod u
r.ith regard to the hi’h altituii ox;erir»nt that I saw, nrxl tho ten or
so oxporiaintcl rurs.no f Her who wore treat tl at. Tho
treatin. oxjxrL-ajnts wort by no rv.ans so horde so. I aloe said that
tho nan wh was br >ught for tho uxpuri:i:ntati n w?c q cridnal condonnod
t 'oath, an! thio .xpcriojnt also had fatal r mooquancoo. Put I did
n t t-!<o part in oithor axp^rin-nt, an-' consequently can say nothin,r
furtnor abcut tho natur*. f tho .xxrir^nta.

fi But yen dirt see tho hi-_h altitude uxporir. nt ccn Hie ted at
Dachau on twa oxperinontal subjects, and tho oxperir._nt was ~s you saw
entirely haraloss, and was bein carrie ut in acc r.:*nc<_ with sound
radical aith 's an non «h = y u h—'' ascertained 'ey direct canvursiti-n
*ur.- volintw.rs, is that c rruCt?

A T-.at is true, abs -lately true with r.rard tc tho experiments
that I :ysulf caw.

i T'-.-r. why i.oi it that when ycu retailed t; Berlin you caaplained
t Rir-Xer ab ut those extxri^nts?

A U ntt.r h w actually xc.rrary th.ru oxjxrincnt; nir-ht v
r *- v ortholoss, -c'use f the capfcasie that - -y received in tlx SS I rc-

5810


11 .’.pr-h-' 3-IS-h-Haley (Int. 3r. m)
Court Jo. 1


cu’j.atod thoa, because fr.r. &any -f -y friers there existed the nssur-
"rc-- and conviction that the laws -f humanity were being tripled under
f t fv-re .and that n: prisoner, no volunteer, because ha had no free
will, on! that there was n.thin^ n.ro aberdnabic, in cur opinion, than
t- nr.ko such use cf hunsn heir.vs in this fashion, whether or n:t the
use vaa dangerous or harmless, end the entire manner and scope cf these
thin s r.ppu-rvd tc ue as an oxpressi n net f sesc-ne's personal de¬
cision, but r what .we aL ht c-li a burocuocratized inf cay, and 3 had
the foclin_ precisely because I knew the cifferonct in the case .f tluao
high altitude oxparirents, since I Inter JLajcr,: was a v^rj* circumspect
and punctutili.ua persn, and n the ther hand I hoard Rcschcr express
him*.If brutally, c .yin the purs, ix in quusti.n wer- conpletoly un-
inp.rtant, and it w*’s f r this reason I said t. qysolf thcr- could bo
cvns<. quinces after such things got under way that cculd net bo forosoon,
and as a natter f fact uxv’ar Hwrr Raach-r these consequences really
!ld occur.

1 "'as that the ruis-n when y:u re turned to Berlin y«.u sought to
prevent the return cf thj low pressure Cnaabor to Dach.au fer th. second
tiru f r additional experiments?

.V *y objection t Himlur was a general ebj-ctl n Ofaii.st human
tine ;Xperi-»_nts, and hi3 connecting his with the Ahnonorbo* This
n-s in th>. Easter of 19U2. Tho low pressure chanter disappeared as I
recall, ir. "~y fren Dachau and nly in t!vi autorn whan Hiralcr rosj-oct-
Lvely and P.asch-r wished to continue the 1 w pressure cxp_rinentc
c lely thr:ugh Reach-r, and I w :• rdwr-d tc pr:vido a lew pressure
elevator, only th-n lii I try to ,rcv»-nt this precisely be cans# from tho
statements and xax-arks it could bo cotrn that beth the Luftwaffe avid the
OVL is approver f Raseter's further work in this field, tut there is a
lapse £ six norths between those tw:.


:;11


11 ..pril-A-DJG-20-l-KarroK (Int. 3rcor.)
Sc art Sc. 1


Q Ycu nerc able, hinever, tc prevent another leu pressure
chamber being sent tc Dachau fer additional experiments, is that
truo?

i. Thst was possible in the ..utumn through the v-rio: s circum¬
stances that I have hero tried tc describe so thet niter the lev.
pressure chamber in liy of 1912 was taker, away from Dachau there
never again appeared .-.nether lex pressure eh Haber : t Dcchou.

r . Hop, getting back tc this question cf the volunteer subjects
who participated in the loi pressure- experiments that ycu witnessed
at Dcchr.u, what nationality were tnes-- experimental subjects?

A Ono man - Anri I knrw t-^is from his dialoct - >: s an ..ustrlan.
The ether man was a Gur-vui.

Hew do ycu knet this feet?

.. I know it only from my talk with him. One cf t: aa told mo that
he came frem Vienna, I believe, or.i 1 asked tho other shore his heme
ana end I believe that ho said a locality in the Hhinolrnd although
I don't rataal -r the prucJso town.

C. Now, had ycur nasnssintticn pl.r.a to ext nainato Kiaalor
lean successful, whet plana did ycur rcsistnr.co movement party have
tc trke ever the govcrnauit?

.. The taking ever of the -cvernsent w;s planned * y tho lenders
• iividud .roups. i recis« information on this will bo cost
assuredly provided tc you by Dr. Hielschcr when he testifies as c
witness hero, tho entire structure and plan Lvidual

*rcups was aimed at r. f derated unicn .f the various Gernan pro¬
vinces, the creation f n free G-.ru-r. government .hich would rtst on
a sis that would pe-roct a:. Unburst nding tc le reached with the
•ilieS.

Da ycu knew cf ny -ccasicn wr.qn ncr.-Gtrsan natienals were
used as experiment,-! subjects, either -.4th cr with; at their consent?

He, I know nc ouch case -cause the jeepl. ml nysull sew

In tzw-eilur in the case c: tn. Lea: experiments, were all Gormans

5312


11 ..pril-„-X3-2C-2-K\rr-. (Int. re*::)

Court He. 1

so fer -3 I ~ct the inprassicr,. In x^r talks with these people I
cculd ascertain nothin: tc the contrary, eni in the fr.-i.tinr experi-
ntilts thu experimental subjects *vr~ lem in Berlin as cculd be
s-.-n from the verdict which I -yaelf sow. I sow nc ether oxperi-
wnts. Consequently, I did not spede with Uio experimental sui jocts.

C. Then, as 1 understand the situation, -sed upon your knowledge,
all cf these experiments, cs le'st se f-.r as ycu witnessed the-m cr
knew anything ebeut then, »vr. oeniuctcd upon German nrticnnls who
hV volunteered for the escpcrlnento with proaioos cf leniency, and
ycu ct.JwCte 1 tc these expert: jits solely because of the fret that
ycu were cf the ethical viov thet a tarn v he was a prisoner cculd
not freely volunteer fer such -xpurinentation. Is th't correct?

. Y-3, I repu Hotel Miy icanr._r of such uxji.rlnontntion or.

hue- n t.ings.

1HE iKESXDBRi The Tribun ..... bo in recoss until 9:30
..on lay cornin'.

(*. KECSS3 •.. S T.U.'TIL 0933 ISCUleS, 14 ,.pril 1947)


Court So. 1

l-i Ac.- 47-.vi -1 -LE1-Jo * t er ( Int. Hrovn)


Official Transcript of the Arerican ..ilitory
Tribunal I ir. the matter of the ’Jnited States
of Anerica ayainet .-.arl Brandt, et al,
defender.:#, ftttinc at Sueraberg, Geroaay, or.
Aoril 1947, Of 20, Justice Seale nrosidinir.


*tABSHAL: rorsons ir. the courtrooa vill please find their oeatP.
:.“.e Honorable, the Judges of ..ilitor?' Tribunal !. kilitary Tribunal I
ic r.ov in »estioc. Cod save tho United Staton of Jserica and thir hon¬
orable Tribunal. There vill be order in the courtrocc.

PSiSIffi.;.*: ..r. Haishul, you ascertain that the de:cndants are
oil orcaer.t in ceurt.

TT-i llAhihAL: ..ay it oleacc your Honor, all defendants nr* orooent
in the court.

r.-^SIDa-'T: She locretary Cenerel vill arte for the record the
orereace of ell the defondants ir. court.

Any further o"aaination cf the vitneso or. the oart -f an?' defanco
cour.#ol?


CUV A.. SliVIHS - r.etuaci


■ 2.-. SAIT;--. (Counsel f.-r tho defendant ileco):

v ‘.itness, I Should like to rutsticn you on tve points; ono of thon
ecncori.c your diary entry of 16 August If44. Ir. your dier?* there is a
rtohiru; "rrofeoeor -done ackc a date frthe aeichsfuchrcr-SS in
crier ‘ rooort tc hiu after cf ;.u,?t: :." r*»intc under discussion refer
to: "1. Infect - doesn't interest us; "2. Hoteto beetles" - doefn't
ir.t«rc: t u? cither; . .-circa c'-:;r!rcat* in connection v'th Beicht-
fuehrer St", ..urber 7 reads: "rrtfcessr Tone ic bcin,: oreeoed enow to
tee: the -.clear. r.ov." Tou •■ere olretiy asked about thir entry durlry?


ra: erealnation, Tr. $levers, end if I understood you correctly
ed that thir entry rc-ferrin,: to colter. her erne connection
r o:.-'.r„-or could have -cee c r-noction, vith the ettenpt on Hitler's
life ca Sidr 20, lf'4-». Hut I an not cult® sure that I understood you
oerrcOtl;/! Ihcr-fore, 1 should li<e you to state a^eir briefly just
••■hut/oigr.ifictr.cc of this entry is so far as Ir. Hast is concerned - this


•ntry concernin' poison.


5624


Court So. 1

14 Aor 47-.'.-l-2-iS:-7os t e r (Tat. Brown)


A. You arc asking re to cell on ry recollection to on ertcnt that
ftr eurpa-icc hucan nature. Just let re cheek on this once core. I eeid
in cy direct extrication that I vrote into the diary vhot ?r. Blero told
re. It reads, “Poison erreriaenta in connecticn with P.elchsfuehrer-SS
with n-oucsti fcr reoort on 21 July," That ic to say, Bl“ce said t# ae
that Eioalor had eaid soeethlx* to hie ->n the 21st of July ubout this
cutter. That docs n-t cean that Ir. Blocr, so for os I recall, said any¬
thin,: to the effect that this poison ~as connected vith the atteept on
Hitler, but vhot Tr. SI ore sold t- Elnalcr or. 21 July, ir. other vords,
oao day aftor the atteept. That, -f courcc, he didn't tell ao.

- un asklc* you this, Ir. Sicvcrt, only because you ir. your
direct cyaainotion oeccei to c-nr.eet this or.try strangely vith the events
f the 2Cth of July, ar.d I oa not curs vhother you exproored yourself
cwoctly or vhether understood you correotly. Perhaps you rererbor
that Ir. Pi -no, vhen hs v®s ir.terrcgatod or. the itand, raid that this
referred to Z.ryl, that is t» say, to that -ther poison which ’-80 found
t.urirv: partisan fi,:htin#: in the ta®t and vhlch “ai olcoot unknown in
Jersosy. Iherofore, witness, I should atk you olcpoc to evert your oer-
-ry a bit and spy whether or n't it is pcrciMo, a» for pb you recall,
that this talk in connect! ;r. with that tclotyoo cos u,te, which I think
*»a also the 21st of July, referred t Tiryl,

A. Ytc, that I recectcr. Dr. 31 see did cention Doryi, but then
ir. cy direct crurinatior. I didn’t e^oresc nyself clearly for ! nrant
that Ir. rlocc had already talked i bout this with Flccler or. the 21ct of
July. But 3r. Blocc seii nothing eb.ut c ccnr.iction with the events
20 July.

Then I heVO another cucsti-n, witness, icu recall that when
Ir. .-lie*. w o£ interrogated n the sto.-.i “c discussed at soce length the
-eri iniuv file which v 0e it the Belch research Council for Tr.

Pl.ce and Saueroruch. Y.u were present c-t this die curs*, r.. -hie concerns
two .ocuernts, onr is Iocuaent 650 concerning Bl:co nd the other ic 691,
Sauerbrueh's card index file. These documents, cad e few others that


t sc. 1

14 Apr 47-X-l-5-2Bi-7peter lint. Br.vn)


crc c-nr.ected vith this natter, ore is a supplencntary volune. They hrvo
sees turned in for 5io=c document b-to be translated and ’-ill cubsc-
auoctly be subaitted to the Tribunal. Siw, you renesber that in this
card index file f.r Tr. Blone there are two assignments aer.tioncd of
vklok Dr. Sloe* asserts that they have nothing to do with hin, that
through an oversight on the part -f the oerconr.el strff they v* r c entered
on his card index file, but really should have been put on Dr. Sauer-
fcruch's flit card. That is the acelgnncnt 0226 of Batcher, "Re-varcing
after cooling of entire human body; healing, with cares of partial
freezing, and ad Jus-.sent of the hunur. bod;.* to cold". And then the noxt
ooeigcBor.t is 022i>, Hlroch-Stnorbourg, which reads, "Alteration in the
living -rgunion after ure of cheolenl warfare agents". You remember
those d~curcntB?

A. Toe.

;i.v it would interest no to know - now I should like to hoar
fr.n you cotothing on this subject cinco you are well informed i bout the
f.oich Research Council. u kn«ho gave this oesignsent Rnschor,
0326, "Rewarning after general cooling"? 'ho gave that assignment? Do
y.u kn.w anything ab.ut that assignment ot all and. if so, .lust vhnt do
y-u know?

A. Tr.t Batcher asclgnscnt is, co fpr ps the contents arc concerned,
the siSiV :«r tho recignnent that Kinaler fornuloted end which wan cubnittcd
here pb a docustnt. "her. on = 5 .* initiative those assignments wore Joined
vith the Reich Roeearch Council, the roles of the Reich F.escprch Council
demanded that the researcher hineelf, that it to say, both Beecher and
hirt, had t> gujCc their aopliCoti.r. to the Belch Research Council. Thur.
it is altogether possible that this is a false entry because it is true
that at the tint the organization of the Reich Research Council ’••on euf-
firirg fr.m 1 : ck of personnel, but cn the other hand I consider it mite
t.osible that, f.r example, Roscfcer, vr.vn he turned in his application
: r research v rk, referred the fact thi-t he h connections -it>: Dr.


rlcn«-, which as you kn-v is true ir. connection with cancer research and

0816


Court Bo. 1

14 Apr 47-T.-1—i-sSi-Joetcr (1st. Brov-)

vith Poly gal, end that thereupon the entry vat made on both card index
files in ^rdcr t^ infora both Tr. Sauerbruch and 2r. -lose of the matter.
But both assignments vcr*. assigned through Br. Sauerbruch vfco alone vbb
competent fir that. But vith reg«rd to the Hint assignment I con toll
you s seething of m« tcrial importance-, In addition to this card index
there are copios of the original research assignments; in the cord index
cards, for reasons cf cpcco, there is only a vary brief notation of the
title of the research assignment. Both the card index and the conies of
the originals vere in the camp at /.rur. 2 berg, the interrogation camp
where I myself saw them in 1045. Tho r. lrt assignment reads: "Flouroe-
Cont microscopic examinations or. the behavior of Lost gee in living or¬
ganisms." If this cooclcte f»rcul* tion vxre- uresor.t hero, then this
matter vculd not need be discussed before this Tribunal because this
research in living organisms in liver, pancreas and so on, thon, «o the
orport for the prosecution, namely, 2r. Alexander, ouid, these ornorl-
mur.ta could only be cirried -ut on animals. Therefore, in these Hlrt
uxocrinor.tc they could only have been animal oxoorlncnts.


12; ..pril .7-^1—,.iT-2-l-*x;s3 :r (Int. Brora)
Court 'to. 1


Q Could you please reiterate the precise title of that research
assignment, such as you saw it in the Can? Kranzberg?

A "Fluorescent Microscopical examination of the roaction cf Lest
gas in living organism."

Q Hr, Sievers, because of your aotivites in the Reich Research
Council do you know what order nurier Saucrbruch»s department had and
what number Dr. Blcao had?

A ".very one of t!w 30 plenipotentiaries and department leaders
had an ardor number but I cannot say, from -unary. Just which minber
each one had.

Q To refresh y»r Denary, 1 put t».*o documents to you that I
have rccidvo ’. frer: the Prosecution. Those arc photo copies, document
Vo. 700 an oeux-nt !to. 699. *’hon I examined Dr. Bloae I already
stated that I was goir.' to includo those 2 documents in a subsequent
volume and submit thee later to the Tribunal. I have received thoso
photo copies from the Prosecution*....

)P. H-ulDYi lour Kenor, it is ny undorstandinc that Dr. Sautor
wishes 6o ostablish the filo number o one Dr. Saucrbruch and of Dr.
31ono. Tho prosecution will stipulate that Sauorbruch's nur.bor was*No.

10 an \ mono*a was Ivo. 15, and theso quustions will not bo nocossary.

3Y DR. S,.UTERI

Q You ore gottin nor tho list of order nusbers $nd also tho li3t
of tho variouo departments. Those'dr j Trosoculion iocuuonts and not
dof 'noo documents.

« Yos, I knew this list and it is corroct.

0 And you Suo from thj list that Trofosaor BIodj haj order
number 15?

A That is right,

THE PFEJIEEKT: Counsel, the Prosecution has stipulated that
Dr. Biono's nurior was 15 an Dr. Saucrbruch8 ns 10

D’ . S..ITER i In that .case I neod not ascertain it a-ain,

CS13


Ik April li7-45-AT>-2-2-Leaser (Ir.t. Brown)

Court ’fc. 1

Q Then I have one more question* Even if you are a layzan,
can you, bocausa of year activities in the Reich Research Council,
confirm that an assi recent, such as for exanplo, rewarding human
beings, or effecting changes in the human organism, does not belong
to Department 15 but to Department 10, which is General and Classical
IfcdLcino? You have already said this core or less indirectly, but I
would like you to 3-y it specifically nor.

•* I can tell ycu that Dr. »rouar, .-ho was Dr. Sauerbruch's
export in the Reich Research Ccnmcil, told no at that tine that Dr.
Sauorbruch gave these assignments.

'l Jfa.t or.j last short quostion. In your direct examination you
stated that you yourself wore in principle opposed to all huran being
axpoi'inonta, and express©! yoursolf to this offoot to Hinalor. Hor.>
thon, .lid it happon that you wore so opposol to hunan boinr; oxpori-
nonts? Can you explain that -ero precisely?

.. The roasons woro tha followingI ^Gvan, on Raster of 19b^ I
spoke with Hirrlor about this, I was under tlx rocont inproscion of
rtf first visit to a concentration camp. 3oforo that I lad had nothing
to do with concentration camps and this visit r»vod no greatly. Koro-
ovor, I hod Kirt*s report on tho Jewish bolshcvist collection of
akullsj and at t:io end of :'arch HdjrOor cr >rod that Hirt should, in
connection with tho Lost exporinonts, bo nor. closely affilintod to
tho ..hnonorbo. I also know Raschcr, although only sUqhtly, and had an
•unpleasant impression of him; and I kn ,w that Himlor had acted ns
protector of this research, and that it could not bo seen, in view Of
Himlor*s personality, just where this aotivity would stop. All of
thece factors played a role in in being mo to make the effort*to per¬
suade Hlnulor to disassociate this activity from tho v.hn.r.erbo. That
was the primary reason I had for expressing myself as I did to HimraLer.
Cvor an 1 beyond that I wanted to attcr t be interrupt nil tliis research
activity if I possibly cool’, boc.au3o T, personally, and lot me
emphasize that this is a purely c-otional re'.ter, repudiated human

asio


It April Ur^ 2 ->l€SS_- (Int# Broun)

Court ’ib. 1

being orpjrinonta, no matter under uhat conditions they took plr.ee,
and held then to be ethically intolerable. I saw this as ay humno
duty at that tine. ffcwovar, I Cephasiso that I an not a doctor of
nodicine, nor an I a physician; I did not nave any academic degrees
sinco I never raduatod froa a university. Until this Eastor conver¬
sation with KJmlor in 1912, I had never spoken either with a doctor
or a lnnyor on the question of tho a rdssibility of hunan boing
experiments, so that ry point of view was an entirely personal one.
Only hirlr. the ccurso of this trial, and in view of tho natorlel
horo subrdttei about hunan experiments in all countries and during
all perio-’s of tiro, havo I realized that this is a series of aost
difficult problems, which has persua lod no that ty attitude hcroto-
foro has boon onosiiod. Evon though after tho Easter conversation in
19U2 tho effort was cado by various physicians to sake it cloar to no
that in tho interests of nodical progress, and for tho good of
humanity, many problems could not bo troatod through aninal experi¬
ments but only could bo clarified through hunan boinr experiments;
tho groat sciontific importance of tho hi di altitado exporinonts as
■a pre-ruquisito fer fli ;ht at hi h altitu ’.os and that conditions
carnwt bo ascertained unless throu:h !wrvm exporinonts.


5S20


1-. P-3-1-;.Joy (Ir.t. 3rowa)


Co-art I

Wwsbroui^t h uc to no chruugb lnstrutlvc questioning by u high ranking
American ke&lc~l Officer ia 1945 ir. ^cgl-ud. where I h-d been specially
brought to iv._ inforo..tioa about t-is. I could, however, not answer
t..e nanjr questions he put to uc, occ_usc I not _ scientist, for which
he orronocusly held no.

S3- S..CTo?.: Hr. Presi out, I h..vo no further questions. Thank

you.

Eh P.aSXDSJT: arc th.ro any further questions to this vitness
or. the p_rt cf „ny dofe.xc cronsol? 2toero ociog done the Prosecution
a.y cross examine.

HE. KaHSY: jcfor. v. proceed to t:.c ccosB-exa-in^tion of *,r.
Siov-ro, I vculd li.:e t: cl. rify for record : our last stuttaonti
yj- v ro in is land; aid it c.~e ovor in the translation it w..s in 19-14,
in th..t correct?

U2 ’ftTJSSS: 1945.

CfiOSS SXaKIS^XOH

3Y HH. HaEJJT*

v Hr. SieVers, you vore a uu.be r of t:.o Secret Resistance)
Kovuaoat, vhoo- ourpose w^s t> overture.* the aitlcr rtgiuo, is th .t
CO'.TOCt?

A. Yes.

a'ow, you were willing to risk your lifo by working witi. tho
inner circle pretending to be r. ..rdoat USD^* t. cab or eo th_t you could
•yiin inf*ra-.tion t. tr..nsnit to t..c lowers of the Rcsist_nco novo-
nc.it, is th..t rir;-.t?

a. I V ..0 prep a--d t: o-crifico ay life fer tais if necessary.

|

oTjL your ptuposc v_s to ,-Jc inf or—tlon to cr_asuit tc the
leaders f the Roodstenco novu.ent?

A. Yes.

2. .:ow, why Was t— Resist _.cc Rova.cat so intent upon overthrow¬

ing the Snsi Regi-e?


5S11


1-- ~oril-^J?-3-2-k_l3y (Int. 3rowa)

C-urt I

«. I don't understand tr.c question. Since one of tho „.sia ro-
pronchce on the p.rt of the allies a.;aiast the (tenons i 3 th .t
-hero w a r. G-r-ji Bcsiat_neo kovc.cnt; and since we did Carry or. this
resist nee I cannot understand tne point of your question.

2. How, your purpose w.j to overthrow the hitler Sogix.o and in
carrying cut th .t purpose you were villln,; t. risk your life in your
c_pucity in the .inenorbe, wherein ycu wore in the position to *;uin
v_lu..olo information which could be tr_ns..i:tod to the leaders of
this Resistance hovutont; now, inasmuch uo you wore u at.bor of this
Resist .nee kova:ent and -;>Pi.rently u ctron,-; neubar, wfc„t w-s the
ronson for tho Resist_nco kovu.er.t boinc so intent in overthrowing tho
”-=i RegL-.o; what did they ftavo u :..inst tr.c Hull Ro,^:.c? Do you
undcrot-nd the question?

Mo rejected tn« contralls-d fom of Oovera-ont of tho Hazi
w vcrju.unt. -o re.;.rdcd tne p..rty us a wholo as consisting of riff-
r St. he recognized tueir SOClallz . _i a swindle, OOCuUSO in reality
a. rurinn feudillc- and Bi.- Industry Were furthered.

uTe there further Tv..s no, kr. iieverc?

a. These ..uin reasons I h..vo Just iCBtloaod Can, of course, bo
supplemented by ur*y number of dot..ila.

2. tft<m you uloo yourself, th..t is personally, subscribed
t; t;.vse views of tnc resi :t-r.co ,.ove....t, didn't you?

«. Of course.

3. *i'A now, I nssu.e th_t at the present ti~c you would bo
vi lontlr opposed t: t..o rise of such a t;pc of rule in Germany in
the future, wT.d t—t you w.uld be willing tc do whatever yy could
t prevent it, is tn t „ correct . 3 sumption on ^ p_rt?

a. Our b.. 6 ic oriont_tian w_s not c-scd on experi-nco that we hud
fter 1953, cut Vl s..v this ora dr_vin. ..car oef rc, and, of coureo,

— it Was tnen It is ,.;v our visa not t see - I-lit .ri_n Re,;iiiu arise

-i~.


f. Let no sc a little ..ere g^c^fic; would you 0e i.. f-vor


1 *» «prlalOy (I at. _rown)

Court I

now of anvil- Hitler ris- to power once again hero la Ccr-uay?

-*ftwr wh-t I h-vc just a-id _t , rc-t length -bout theco

:crs I oL.pl" c_-.not answer tb_t question. It does not_he sense.

You would do ull within your power, if you were in a position
t: do so, to avoid any riso of such un organisation of the Satis to
tr.c runlu or tho hell. hero in Ceruusy, wouldn't you?
a. Of course.

e. fhon I uss’i.c therefore tn.t you would bo willing to tell
us, th..t is t..e fribuaj. and tho Cor. .»n occple, all you H..ov _bout tho
activities of the O-Si Rcgii-o, to tr.e end t;._t tee Cornua people will
bo fully inf or. cd of such activities -nd best be in a position to
fT’itd th—reives uguinst tho rise of such a Covern.ent in the futuro?

.v. I have always declared :ysolf to do so, but unfortunately it
w..a only under the protection of this Hi,?: tribunal th-t 1 had a
c. -uico to spc.Je of our ^jtivitios at any :rc..t length. Frni tho very
oeglnning, at the very first d.y of :y interrogation in 19-.5 I pointed
this out, tut thu result sL.ply u„s tr._t I w..s trusted worse. Consequen¬
tly, I had no reason to press .ysclf forward, Ifton in December 19-15
I a.;dc .. written st_tccont on this subject. In the interrogation beforo
tne Cc.—isnion I Was, because of .in abjection on the p .rt of tho
Pros-cation, not Hlov.d to t la .bout those ...tt-rc. In tho Ii.T
also I v.s very li-lted, and when I -ode - written statement on this
subject in au -ust of 19-.5, I did not he-r usythin^ further. In other
words, it is not :y f .ult tf. t :.any of these ..jitoro h-ve not caau
to li ht, which it would tvn^s havo been very expedient to have
c -e t li ..t; „-.d during -y direct ax_iii~tion Trid-y, yqa yours elf
rais-d -Ji objection about ..y spea-uing on these matters.

How, :-.r, Sievers, inasmuch you are willing to toll uc
vh_t you h..ov about the _ctivitiee of tr.e Regiue, I wish yov
vo- Id cr.Hft.tea t..is fribun-1 further bn these experi -nts th_t arc

L.e subject cf t„is indiCeT-eUt.. 2nC3e__re . CtivititS w> ic:. tOCit

«-C


i-:


(let.


arovn)


Court :


pl-C>- under the l!-si reji~o vitu typic -1 i..zi ..ctions, oad you -in, in
pooitito snow .Just wh-t c_ch jd every one of these defend -.ts did
tc fur;h_r such experi_cat..ti&a on fcu- a oeincs; you now fully
.ale and willing to tell us how each one cf these defend xts p :iti-
cip-tcd in these ccperi-ents so w« c-a £ot a &ood cle-r picture and
the ,’rifcaaal c-n render decision v.ieh will bo a complete story;
till you do th-.t for us now?

*. I a. of course pr^p-red tc .xsver your quostion, but ns
ex-iiinution .,hd intorro.--tiva has -lre.-dy proved, I know very few of
uy cc—defendants. Ihc persona participated ia the exporiuento
to t I know of, n—cly Lirt xd Ruacaor, -re not hero in tao deck;
and roqcrding the other experiments th.t took place tutoldo ay
spnere, I a-, unfortunately not so Informed as to oc able to give you
detailed information, vhich otherwise I should n-turally oo roudy to do.

Zu ow, ,x. Siovers, v.r. any of the defendants -u-bers cf tho
ahn-norbo Society? - 3id you hear ay question?

a. You, I understood ou. Ue -ust discriminate _s la evident
frai the statutes, between t..e threw ,-roups of umbers of tho «hncaorbo
-Very Ser ...x could Oecohe - .e-.ber of tho «hr.cneroe. Those were tho
se—c. lied p .rticip-tin. .c..bers. ?hc scientific coll.-oor_torc could
nly, by _ spec 1-1 _ct on the p-rt A tho Society OeC^-e active au-bors;
xd then tr.erevnro tho so-Called correspond! a. -a-bera. Of the c>
defend—‘.ts only Rudolf ar-ndt v.s .. ordinary ..ember of the Society, and
.c fer us I know a oae else.

. ow, did any of the other .e-.-ers, such ..s _rundt or

.. xdloscr or any of the defend_ts, did any of these defend-its h .vc

sub ordin -tos wh: were ue.ocrs of t..e ahnenerbe Society?


5824


1-i -^>ril—K-J?—, _nd 5-l-i;eehan (lat, urcva)

Court I

a. Tuc ntcib -r of ordinary ambers r_a Into oao or two thousand;
nov whether or not there w.re cub ordinates a-oa^ thm, I don't know
I d;n't know thci b r.e-o or personally. Coacerala^ tau_ctive
..w bera I don't knew tala, Rocchcr vus a a cub or of tho Luftwaffe ad
u Jhivwraity Professor, therefore, I c_aaot a Just vh..t tho oubor-
(Hunting relationship would be thcro.

were the sore Inporto-t ..a.'ocrc of t..c ahnonorbo aocicty?

a. I —..vo .lrc_dy Bald th-t tney cioprisd rou^flly eixty-onO per¬
sona; a—cly the v.ri us d’cp.rt— at c..iefi _id tntse wh: h..d important
rco> rch aasic&.inta.

v That lo ..a outlined la your 3ocaicnt aooJc So. 1; tho ch..rt
you sub-ltt-d t the frlo jialT

a, Yea.

How, nr. Slavers, of course you ic.nw It lo of considerable
later cat t. everyone .a to how the f .-tuotic prs r.h of oxporiuentution
was cc..cdvxd; now la your p-.oitlon -o a deputy In tho Holcho Hoao..rch
Council .ad .tS the P.olcho a.oiuwso ..hi^r of t:.o *l;ncnurbc Society,
vero you able to .^certain vh conceived the idea of ::cdic..l experiments
or. hu.ua boWo in the c one cat r t Ion c-uipc? Sow I kt.-w tho olcuent
of esperi acuta on n’l.j beiiv.e la *11 idea, but I c^.a h.ro la

Str.aay, vfc; concdved the Idea to <xpi.ri..«at on c-ncontr-ti n cn-.p
in::..tee?

a. ao f-r i.s dcc*.=—at.T; a_terl.J. r-okca It clear to uc, Steadier
played a iecielv. r:l u in tfcla, _nf. h^schor h..d cloou connection! with
hi..lcr. Ki-.-ler. who -lw^-a ux^. -r-ted tninso -ad over-did thca, hod
bLetc onperL-unto :a in;: .t^a in c accatr..ti'.. Co-pa curried out and
.-da. pointed rot the possibility :f such oddments. In other words
I car. -aly deduct fr - the v y the ni._ altitude oxwL-oats cuuo about,
:f vale.. ?-_sc..er v_ s evidently the inau.ur_.tor. men, s also in shown
by the d-cheats, it w„ s nllch who. in Lis turn went t- hi—ler tc
h..ve the frwvtin: op.ri-.vnts c-rried -"t, -ad then 1 -tcr there wero


5825


14 ^pril-k.-JT—; oad 5-2—he-bun (Ir.t. jrovn)


Court I

-ddod tho so.-v^tcr experiments.

-oil, then, here you h_v t ho_rd all the evidaaci in thi 6
Tribunal _nd f: y-.ur own personal ia'vlodgo of tho sou-Water experi-
..ents, the fretting cxocrL.cats ..ad hijh „ltitudo experiments; do you
think th.it hir-ilur, oxclusivoly, without any furcations f r<\« other
po-plc, c.ncolvcd this idc.. if taia sphere if top orlm oat at ioa la tho
concoctrati .. c.h.ps?

It la :.y opiaita, -a I fa.ivc already said, th .t tho basic cause
for all this v .a tho connect! betv.on r-iacher and HI: - lwf, but then
viiea it voa eovr. vaut p sal oiUtica tncrc were other persona went to
Hinkler in i.rdor to extend auefc worx, for the idea of the free sing
experiments w..a certainly not aLnJ.«r's own idoa.

;:-.w, in (Addition to th .t, *r. Sievors, Kiu.lvr like yourself
nd ayeclf w.,a a ley-nun, ho hud n. *c»cvlcd£c of cudic..l research,
w.uld he 0c approached by Poacher ir. the instanco of high altitude cx-
jtoriaouto, by Kilch for fre.ria: experiments, parhapa by r.irt for loat
experiments, :r by vuri ua other individuals 1 1 sweuro huaun ooin,,o or
to huvo aado available in-..tcc of tho c ocontr-tlon c—pa fir the
turp .so of c r&uctin*: the oxporlmcntc, now would aii-.ler, or you, or
I, h..vc been ,.blo t determine vhothcr tnoae cricri-onto were Justified
vit..;ut first c .cultira- . specialist in tho uodic.1 research field?

— Ho, .aid v_a ny rt..a:a f .r v_utin< to break uwoy fra:
exjori .cate -f t..ls sort in tnc ahuenerbe, Scc_-;so tn re vac no speciaiiat
ta-rc wh cull supervise such things -a a speci-liat. hi—-lor arro¬
gated these things to hi-sclf, ho int.rfcrrca pers.r. Jly in tho e»-
perl.tntB, wnicfc c be scon n-.t inly frre. the d c-i.or.ta tne-.s*lvcs,
but Is: ia tia.t letter amm 'a-.If to kiicn where it is uvea explicitly
et.ted t. wh..t extent .-i—lcr pcrso^lly took part in this research ;;nd
iaterferred i„ it; but I c nsidor "i—Kr a-yt-.ir-: -it - 3 peci .list or •
cut 1 .', rity, He, h vevar, as I s .id, -r: .tod t.. .t t: hi—self a :A

-icr.* Gchhardt described cto&cr v-ry v.U i.-is respect.

55-aG


1 * ^ril-JWP-4 -ad 5-hechon (Int. orowaj

Court I

^ Vcll > a '"» rcc-ll th.t th« d..to 19% 3, ia tee fjl of
1543, fr a that point oa -11 natters of research hud to go mriugh Gcbhordt
-ad Gr..witz b^orc hi:.:ler would_nct oa it; sow do you know of say
otl.cr advieors Eix--l.r hod so th-t he could justify enaction thoso
wotperi.>biita?

-i. Ho, I ru.c.ior a. others, and th-t c-n be stoa fra- tho order
•.f 15 *»oy 19-.-: where he iacludca sp..ci_liy 3r..witz and Geth-rdt ia theso
natters.

Veil, a:w, fra. y ur kaovlcd.o -f thesv v xl'us activities,
what Individ -Is wlt..ia tho fr „.c-w r* of the &cr.._s 0 vwra.cnt, that
is t..o entire Gen.-n 3cv.-rr.-cnt t.jccn int c asidor..ti on, wh..t in¬
dividuals had hoewlcd,> 'f these wxi« rL.cnto?

<w It is hard t say who these pert‘.as wero by none, out it wao
Hi., lor* cuntx. -bout nutters ia which, ia r.ls voinl n, ho could
oo>.cl.iUy ohow off, to t..lie .ib ut thou in ceawortstions. I onco wan
a vitaoso at u luncheon for two submarine c-ptains, who h-d couo to
hoadftU:Jtors to rcceivo decir..ti as, .aid very proudly he told theso sub-
u.rine capt ins the results of his frcoxing experiments. That is what
I can say of -y ova Knowledge bec..uso I happened t: h..ve boon there,
whether he also sp.fcw ,.o ut this ulsovhcro, ._ad to whs:, that I do not
te .v. On the other h-r.d, he f .rb.idc r.norto facing iron t> pooplo on
tr.w outside, so th.t with the exemption of j.ilch -nd Goorine n. aor>-
■* ctor w..6 oc inforuwd of ta«.8C ....tters.

<• bell, aov hr. Sievers, y u vwrw ia the positi.n ia tho Heicho-
fors chunks rjt where y~u w.r. ...‘lc t ooswrvo a rrout deal; you fully
re lire, at c ursc, th..t the So h d «x*>ori_w:.t 1 rtse. rch irrolcr.c,.
ti.at tae V'chn.aCht h d «jcpcri~ l .at..l r-oc-rch pro&ltu-3, tao civilian sec-
’. r o»crLaeat.;l research pr-^alc-c; and due t t:.u chaotic c :ndi-
ti r.s ia Ger. J; fr .. 1941 t 19-.5 whwa -11 rer l Or_ja,;cd in all-out
v .rf ru; it _ust h-ve been awCwss t c rdia.vtc th.Cw -ctivities,

no tl:—fc y c uld utilize tho sup lies _nd ^COivitico t thw oeot .d-'

5£27


14 -^ril-44-C?—. _ad 5-4-Mochaa (lat. jrcvn)

Court I

v-cc.-jc. Lev in she Hcichsforaciunssrut, or in vfc„t organization in
tr.o ahr-u:Lt and Si, *h v_s tae coordinator of these .ctivitivs;

KV Was tat person or x-up of persons that studied these various
.ctivitics B- th-i taey would not h-ve a duplication of effort,in
other words 35 that they would not n_vo ai .71 -ltitudc cxp.rL.er.ts
0 -.i.v; on in ©oca c incor.tr.t ion c nap, and therefore it would bo
understood tn„t'9 of the research task dcolin,;, with fai,;h altitudo
export-eat were accessary, wh Was u.o individual or . rup of indi¬
viduals!, wi. c-.^od in this c:rcin..ti n *.f this research, that we
ovv hero in this Case?

a. h.injr exp*rit.cats hi -c.n in this direction, iirat of . 0.1
it w..b the c-.potent ejn*rt depurtsrotol lenders. Tor cxa-plo for
cdicino, Prof. Dr. Seuororueb. Then, when the c-nditins uroao which
cn 7 hi 1 . .ve Just described, the T )wiag chaotic conditions, required
a closer co'rdinatioa, and tho hllit.iry .-.oscorch «osici-ti=n
(b'chrforschun£S£Cioolnichcft) w_s called into belzv;, and Professor
Osenoor,, was to coordin.to. However, Professor Os-uberg was a
-cchino cn lnocr and he hud cany ,.r unenta with Professor Sauorbruch.

?:r th-.t reason, in 1945 it v..s decided th_t Professor ar.ntdt vug to
be in charge of all nedic-l nutters, h wevor, tnis coordination in
L.e hands of Dr. jr-ndt coir.cidod with tao uilit .ry collapse, 00 it
n-vor bec-.o effective.

3. J v, w..on y a spt Jc of Sauerercch .—d Oaenbor,';; th-t is within
the Heichs I-.csearch Council?

Yes.

3. .'ns it theoretic.-liy tne idc. t..,.t t~* heichs nose gp Council
v s t be t..c cc rdin-tin.; a >nt in tn.s field of ncdic -1 research?

a. Th .t w .jb a-t the idea, scc —usc :.eiicir.c v-c -nly one dep-rtuont
n :n.- thirty'in the ..cichs Secourcn C oncil. C.oly in 19-.-., vi.cn matters
vcrc coaccntr .ted .jjd c rdir—ted sever 1 t? rs. v..-.s were united
nnd iven preference, -rod the nu;:-cr : researches c.nductod by tne

:t;.ors v*re lL.itcd. ••edicine w_s one of tao research assignments

5223


1 -: -prll-iv-J?—i and 5-5-acehun (Int. arovn)


Court I

-ivca preference, and since Oson'ccrr could net Carry :ut this coor¬
dination, Dr. irandt w_s assi.Tncd tc it.

<£. '/ell new, one 1 -st question uloa: these lines of ceordi-
action und these experimental ideas, which were conceived; cupooBC
y.u and I together hud gone tc Hi.x-l^r with an idea, say to expori-
ucat with Lost, wfc _ would hiu.ler have culled into his offico to
advise aim «b;ut the feasibility of Stovers ..nd hardy's research
problem?

ainco we .re tv l_y-t.cn, niii.lcr in t.-io case would have

celled


S2£


Hi April- :-GJ-Llo-Li-.lcohan-(int. Fr.-wn)-
Cnirt 1

Grawitz, rut if ycu r I brcurht hin a proposal na v by a profess, r,
then that authority rtlJ avc sufficed f:r hin and he himself would
r~v>. e-cided tho ratter.

Q Do y;:u recall the afiilavit f Oswal; r'hl where he had
para.raph pertainir. to y urnoce, where Oswald Pehl stated, in the
ir.tr luct ry para raph, I ien't have the *ccu=_nt here n-w, it i3 D.cu-
c_afe Hc-06?, where in it states that he thought Hinaler had =en like
Brandt, C'nti, Orawitz, etc., sdvisin hin in th.se natters, new dc you
think that Oswald « -hi was crrrcct in his assumption, D_ you racall that
particular section?

n f-s, I rccuab..r that para ra, n, hut I .n't believe - at
loast ir e. ny n experience - that I can e nfira this. The close ccn-
n.cti n between Kiml-r ini Grawitz na kn wn t- ne, hinder never thought
vary -auch, .f C'nti, and the r-latinsb-tw.. n Hiarler and Prarvit were
r. r :<n an fa. a*, all. Hinder r.-v.r spelcc »t 3r;n't; tut 'f course
I ’ n:t kn w t-. what extent hiaal-r ha' c nv.raati ns with thesa these
Qjr. . 3 , I v-.3 neVv.r .Te3.nt.

^ Few, Mr. Si-Ver3, '.urin the c urse f yur direct exa -
liniti n ycu referred r.ary tic«n t the h rri: le conditions in conccn-
tr-.ti n ciz; s which y i - b s-rv.d .*hen y u visited them; will y u plcaso
. .scribj in otail t th. Tribunal Just what y u saw when y u went inU
these c neentrati n can, 3?

i. th- t tal inpr-ssicn vs what really ah k me. I could,
r. • visit r inspect th. wh le c nc.ntr. ti n ran;, b.cu: when I arrived
th .re I tts taken ri at t the ‘.opart tent 2 was viaitin.. 1 had to crcs3
*-• lar;- r il c urt, in n_ c rn r f which was Rrscher’s iepartaent,
u. 1 . th rc I scow h'w th- aris nors h* tc lir.. uj wh «.r- t t « rk.

It raa this that ave ra. th- . ictun. f which I sp'ke here, namely,

-.at the .....a, lik. myself, with all s rts : sins, rod ind ;r.cn, had
* 11 v_ Ivre t ether with; pris-n.rs f all types, in n- sir. le c.'=nu-
r.ity.'

, 'A w .i'. y u .-a thu -- rcssi n when y u visit.d the can;.


lu April- .'-GJ-J£5-2--i!Ciehsr.(int.5r rah
Court 1-

yy sp k. cf htrrible c ndlti.ns in the carps, id ycu ,’ct the inpres-
si.n as stated her- ani as stated ainy tires bef re these Tribunals,
that the c^ncentrati n carps. Were lik- b-y-sccuts recrcati-nal centers?

a I Isn't think yu c uld say s , no. The set-up w=3 such
f-r instance tnc sick-bay ms equipped ith ~ "d nodical equipment and
clean, but this questi<n of cleanliness was easy te achieve as it has
ften be.n sai that *ft-n the ccnccntratisn carps was visile-! everything
was 3crubfc.d and cleaned, and thuc the .welling ace..* iati ns made an
cxcllent iu-rossi n; but it. is n t just a cl-an h use cl no, that makes
life t .Ur lie. ns I said, what - truck ns s tvciy -at threwn together
hero.

Q Did y u aoo, my f th- inmates !rinJ:in chaspayno?

A : , I lid n t see that.

Q ,/ewl n r, we have been t Id that 2*1 the inmates wore very
happy in these cusps, th y ran abrit ;leefully, played ham nices, etc.;
did it ingress y u that way, *.:r. Sievtrs?

A H-, I did n t have that impression.

4 Nee, what I an ret?in. at, !r. Sicvers, is do you think
that any fficial visiter w:uli hiv- Se.n the sane things in those comes
that y~u saw?

A That depends when h. went th-re. !•* general the ccnccntra-
ti n c-rq:- w.rc empty urin, tiK day, b.c.tusc the inaate-s were taken
utsiic t w ric, an.' this w.s als the cjc in Dachau. Cly twice when
the pe pie were g in.' ut t w.rk Ml I have the t'tal inpressitn f
all these tia usr.nIs inr-ate s, fir, nr.' t line up,* visit r, say bot-

We .n nin an- eleven ’ deck in th- c min; , saw vuiy few puoplo, ncst-
ly they were rderlics .a. hu eiw -=;ty barracks, s that ?He not inpres-
si n ms altogether asc.w. I h; Id it t be r. t ut of the questi n and
in view f the wh le system f :r pa anda, I be-lio v. it was certain that
*h~ visit, rs w-.re taken tth-sc c-mps pur? scly during th-sc h-urs for
that reason.

3 :: haw many ti/xs ’id y u visit c neentrati ns cacus?


lU .oril-. -GJ-^5-3=-*cehsn( int. fir — }-
COurt 1-

A IS -.11 the years, I ins in Dachau eljht tines, tut net
always in the concentration cmas, because the ettrncl ,;:ical institute
nos utsi-lc cf the concentration co=.i It ms cnly twice that I saw all
the locates and I Gain-*', the lepressien about which I spoke. All thu
.thor tines thu esc? ms Just ab.ut asp ty ’uric: the ly, then you w.ulcl
, tin the icnressi:n that there ms s few ;e plo. F r cxaaple, the poe-
;lu wh ccul' 1 . n-t work, because they were* 3ick. they were walkin'- arcund,
an. y.u w*uld -ot th^ icpr.esion which really c ntradictes’ what it real¬
ly tr.s like.


» % .


14 ipril 47-K-?JC-6-l-Cook (Int., BrcKa)

C»rt I

^ '.loll now did you visit an;’ othor canps othor than Dachau?

A I mi twico in Tatzwoiler, which, howavor, '..'as under
constriction. Tho buildings sot up thoro woro quit© difforont from
that at Dachau, and I lid not soo ifcoro tho paoplo vorkod. 'larking
conditions in natsMiler in tho quarry wore cocsidorcd particularly
torriblo, tut wo woro not allcwod thoro. Than I onco vioitod
0ranior.hurc, but I did not 6 ot into tho conp itsolf, only in tho work
shop, and othor wiso did not bocaa> acquainted with othor concentration
oar-ps.

'foil now in tho course of all of your visits, ha: rany of tho
visits that you had, otj In tho catogory of an official visit? For
Jnstanco, you woro with Hirclor ono tlco ut Dachau. I ossuno that
would havo boon an official visit. Hon how woro coalitions that you
sot"?

A I was novor in Dachau with Hint lor.

^ Didn't you go with Itolor to Dachau in connoctlon with tho
high altltuio oxporlsonts?

A Ho, I wasn't prosont whan Uirslor took a look at those
axpari&onta.

Do you think coalitions would havo boon difforont on on
official visit than visits you node, or would your visit havo boon
an official visit also?

A I novor rado an official visit to Dachau bocauso 1 was always
thoro for official convocations.

- -loll now did thoso corriitions, the horriblo conditions you
havo narrated horo boforo this Tribunal, woro thoy on opon socrot tcaong
t j rectors of the nodical sorvico of th- Tohroacht?

A To woro not ollaroi to talk about what wo saw in concentration
TK.p3, That was oxpliclty sot down in the rapor that I hod to sign.
::oNovor, I had no opportunity vo talk with r/ntars of tho nodical

ctorat-.- of tho Tahiracht because I did not too: anybody in it.

5-23


14 April 47-M-?jC-6-2~Cook (Int., 3ro m)

Court I

’tor, doctor, do you think you understand - I don’t knot-’

-hothor tho interpretation is difficult, but do you understand tho
oxprossicn, "open socrot"? That is a familiar expression to you,
isn’t it? _

A Yos, I knar that expression.

q ’foil then yaa don’t think tho conditions ^hich you ha7o
narrated • bout tho concentration c =ps -ould have boon an opon
aocrot onone tho nodical services of tho 3S, o=on6 tho noabors of
tho nodical sorvico of the S SI

A That tho coalitions in tho concentration cur.ps voro not idoal
exist In, sc' opinion, have loon knoara rithin tho SS, but tho concopts
of "ideal" and "sufficient" wore not inform.

a 7 0 u than you would think that a porsoa with tho rank of
Oborerupponfuohror would htvo no knewlodr.o of th. conditions in tho
oowjoi.tration comps, that ho Just -.rould not casually aoro or loos hoar
about it frea ono of his frionds or othort.ioo? Do you oxcludo tho
possibility thut a -to:, vith tho rank of Qrupponfuohror or ovon a
3tondortonfuohror would huvo no ltr.crrlolgo of tha aothodo in which
the concontratlon can pa voro heirs oporatod?

A For a cortain cato*ory of thoso loodors that ray be true, but
1 consider it out of tho quostloi: that an Oborerupponfuohror, in
trhoso official shporo there was a concontratlon camr, n0t ;:no ''

..’hat wont on in3ldo it.

1 woe, doctor, did you ovor soko any uttor.pt during tho c our so
or those yours to aavo sa-o of this incrlninatlne tutorial so that
•-Ion tho ’.rar oalod or f»u tho resistance novoaont hod accanplishod
ti.jlr objective, if you had hod that eood fortuno, did you nako
attempts to save the filos of those criminal oxporinonts, or did you
rako any attempt to retain this information so that you could old i:i
ni.ei-e hcao to tho German puoplo just tftat tho b^sic activitios of
■no i; a si3 -..-ore?


553C


14 April 47—!‘C-c-3-CQo'* (Iat., 3ro-n)

Ccurt I


A I Jccpt =y Socirunts on tils in the ^Ich Rosoarch Council, arid
thoso dcciconts along with the othor docur-onts wore takon to Hoslar,
a a I -irxs lator told. All of tho natoriol of the iaforration offico
of tho ?.oieh Hosoorch Council'was thoro, aid ny docunonta woro tokon
thoro also.

^ Thun In dociront J! 0 -oe 8 , it Is =ost difficult for no to
understand why you boins a roalstcnco worker would havo writ tor.
ruot a lottor an appoai'S lr. document Book 9, whioh la Prosocution
2 -hlbtt 182. I think you are foniilar with tho lottor. It la a
latter addrossod to 3S Stnndartonfuohror Dr. Hudolf Brandt, whoroin
you oro oliciting throo proposal for tho dissolution and destruction
of tho Jewish sholoton colloctlon at strcaabourg. Mow horoln you
stato:

"Tho skoloton colloctlon aa such la not conopicioue. It could
to doclarol a a rannants of corpaon, opporoatly loft in tho anotcoical
Institute by tho ?ronch, an! ordorod to bo cro. utod. Dociolon on tho
follo , ..ln& proposals le requested:

1) Colloctlon c n bo procurvod.

2) Colloctlon la to to partly dostroyad.

3) Sntlro colloctlon is to bo dinsolvod."

That in signod Siovora. !fcr./ horo you haven't sc tod conslstont
with thoao bollofa that you had, and it would sox; to ix that you
vittli want tc oavo this mtorlal co that It could bo rocoivod by
th. Allios, ao that they cull bo fully aware of thin horriblo erL-oo,
killing those Jewish poorlo to cato a skolaton colloctlon. '.fcy did
-i act In this eoinnor, doctor?

A In cry diroct oxaeir-ation I haro already sold that this prorosal
aaa not of ny awn. It -.fas not si=ply tho quostion of tho okoloton
collection a Iona, but of all raocuroc, ^oosuros eoncomlnc Hlrt's
i-rurtryr.t as a whole in StressbouiYr. ard Hlrt wroto to . -, -'or this
ivj on, and I tolejfconod 'to his, ar.d ho hinnolf Jx'u tain rugeostion;
•den i, not :<r.anine -.'.-hat tho situation was at ;Uo Urivorsity of


14 A-ril 47-;;-?jC-:-4-Coo> (Int., Bra-n)

Court -

Strassboure in the mat tor of anotcay, and I caild act faavo *a«m
this, could not have modo; aid. I, orientated myself according to
viwxt Kirt said, and jassol on tho tolotypo to Brandt; but aft or
oil v*at should I have dono'if Hirt asked na what was to bo done,
and what would have happened if I hod sold to Hirt: "loavo
ovorythlng whoro it is, 30 that tfco Allios will find it"? I
would huvo boon shot the next day.

% 7oll now you state how in tho letter that you would loavo
YODnontS of those corpses around tho Strasbourg lot oratorios which
would indicate thoy wore apparently loft in the onotctiical institute
by tho Fronch, that la u flno hotf-doyou-do-, isn't it, trying
to put this crime off on tho French. fhoao idea i that? It was
Ciovor's signaturo.

A I hare olroody told you that this was not my idea but
Hirt's, and I con only explain this as follows: h-hon the Univorsity
of Strasbourg was token over there wore in the anatomical deportment,
of courso, corpses. In other wards, 1 simply transmitted what
Hirt told me. That was net my suggestion.

^ Woll now, did you over express any satisfaction to tho fact
•hut all of this data hoi boon destroyed or was that sorely that
you wore transmitting an order for Hirt? Did you feel happy that
this was destroyed or did you fool sad that it vas destroyed, so
that you could not bring it to the attention of tie Allies or
ot'.ior naobors of the resistavco movement when the inevitable end
come. In other words, Dr. Soivors you *aro not ?loacod that this
material 1 -ai boon iostroyud, voro you?


5635


14 April 47-5!-7jC-6-5-Cooic (Int., Brc»n)

Court I

A I wo3 not at oil ploasod about this bocouso thoro woro
enough documonts doscribing thl3 wholo nattor available Hirt's
r.ufcsoquont otatonont that tho colloction w Q s dostroyod was not
truo. I was not inforead what wont on horo and tho various
>ju«3tlons that woro asked of no I could not ansuor. I had to ask
Hirt*3 advico.

^ Wall no.: this tolotypo to Brandt was dated tho 5th Sopiccbor
1544; a.-xl truo, as you 3tato, it was indicated they voro not
destroyed at that tlno, but woro dostroyoi at a letor tino-uround
Octobor, 1944, th- skeloton colloction v; Q s dostroyoi.

I’jp, Colvor:’, you hovo boor, a littlo lnconsistant. "o havo horo a
lottor datod 20 January, 1045, which ia docuwnt JE-975, irhioh will
bo offaro! for ldontification us Prosocutlon Schibit ;io. 479.-Do
you havo a copy?

A Ho, I don't.


C Z1


1-. S-7-l-'darrow (X-t. Brown)

Court Jo. 1.


. vow, tala lottor ia dated 20 January ISU 5 . It la rddrescod
to ^Dcc-r co_rcdo Kirt":

■your letter of 4 January dealing vith Suobincon boi:* doclnrod
ua . hospitpl town iu .3 been forv. rded to uo fro. - dschcafeld to t.'iis
I U VO Interceded for t/.is plan, but I have declared for the
tine boin£ fron sub-itci.-* It to t.ic a..ichsfuchr©-SS: first of all It
-111 b. n-ccasory to cone to an oereonent vith tho rorei*h Offlc- ar.d
;.:o 2 -ich '..inlstry 3po:r.

•'Your report on Strasbourg hr.a duly couo to lund. '.fcny thnnlta for
It. T p.y 11 be bock In Hrischonfold t ti«o or.d of th* -onth, rnd if r.o
further notice will hvo lurrlvod there In t.:o nennticc, ! civil so- to
It tfcr.t .11 letters called to you rccontly aldl be diopatchcd orvee
ivfinin.

npuriB M voll co London la tnklat* quite retire ■*. intoroat in tho
..Enteric Institute of Strnabour.; rnd. r^rot that you h ve not been
seized. In tho ooontlao you vill probably n ve received, or shall ao
in tho very r...«*r future, cr. inquiry of t.i- rorei,^ Office via tho
1 ‘inlstry of vecloeinstical .-ffairs and 2 duc:.tion reforrinr to thio. Vo
^y be very „lul tact all d ta and papero on that vorl: have been doo-
troyod in tile Tho cncy could not offer any concrete stntonento so
f r. a I h ve dread; written to you, 1 sho Id be very glad if you
:e short trip out of your wor» to Uaischonfold, ttt tho
o;. ortunliy of one of your ,‘-urr..;c to vuerzbur,-;.

».i.h bert wishes -r . 1 hi:- rc i.rdt if usual.

Hoil HitlerJ

tours ('i-;aod Siovors.^"

Txn: sipaturo is a sttu-r- this happens to bo e. file copy.

■Ml «. j u iicvo c^r.-SiOd filoo Uoro, P« «t, that the *"“>

La. 1 , priors 't Strasbourg rtirorsity - ve been destroyed?

_. 2 irt told ne this.


:.3?j


14 5 >-.-^:&- 7 - 2 - 2 torro'j (Brovr.)

Csui*t 1.


. .. H 3DT: 7-ie i3 u ^od br-.>-ir^ point, your Honor.
?F..SICZ*~: 2kc Tribunal will sow bo in rcccsu.


( •. rocoas v»;« token )


?Gc9


1 - .nr-.-:- Leaser (Int - H 2 Xrier)

Court 1.


~-T. ..JLS:-iL: Persona in '.he Court roon will .lease find thoir

seats.

The Tribunal is a gai n in session.

3y ::. ^ -r:

.. ;j. slavers, .si jndorotand it fron jour diroct exanin.ition,
you were directly opposed to tr.o eatcbllahnent of ... institute for
Billtr— scientific ro.oarc.; in the franev-or/-. of tho hhnonorbo socioty?

... 'foe. Itoy I oo- aouet-.iu,; vor; briefly -dth re,curd to the
document which w: a sub. it ted to no befor. tho rccoea? Vith grert easo
you trill be able to find n-ny . i ilor letters. I rlrcody otntod that
thora ur.s c vory cIogj connection botvocn Hirs end Plrj-lor. Thin
1 otter rovee tiut I did not doatroy ny own filoa; otherviou you would
not — vc boor, able to fi td thet letter.

> rw coin* into the otnor subject, doctor. You ntato that you
voro dofinitoly opposed to the establish:-on*. of an lnotituto for
-llit'xy scientific rcsoarc: within the fnu*r,#ork of the hhnenurbo
Society, ••ell, now. an i ratter of fact, you vero quite active, openly
active, in the forrati a, the preparation, -nd tho foundation. of this
institute for uillturr scientific reaearc... v«.rcnU you?


5c 10


• ail April U7-:W.TD-9-l-^feloy (Int. S-ier)
Court Ho. 1


A I explained in detail what I triod to prevent when I had
that conversation with Kimlor at Easter 19U2. Tho possibilities of
objection cn -$* .art were extrenoly United. As it can be soon fron
the Statuto of tho Society, I only lad a right to interfere- in
•natters ecncornin budgets, or other orcanization natters. In this
-umor I was already able to Frovont two different thinrs. In tho
yoar 1939 nlroa*y Hi-ralcr t.antod to croata a Cancer Hesoarch Instd-
tuto under the ctargo of Professor Holts, and «nte*. to affiliate it
to tho Ahnonorto. At that tine Professor Itoltz wnntod a yearly bud*ot
of 900 theusan :nrks. 3y indicating this assirront as alien in its
naturo to our Socioty, and in view of tho larfco bud-rot rcqulrod, I was
able to prevent this affiliation. Professor l-Ioltz vns later supported
by Profeoo :• ir. this, and I saw Mn ofjain in tho year 19U3. lftr
rl-ht of objection was oxtroaoly linitod whon Pir.nlur at Sastor 191*2
stated that those mttors woro not to bo Mroisto* fron tho nonios bo-
lcn-in- to tho Ahnonorbo, but froc nonios of tho Vaffon SS. dYhc-r. ny
objection talno avail, on* at this occasion Rinrlor bocano very onor-
Cotio, I caul 1 succeed in sarin* to it that a separate institution was
created, nardy this instituto for Idlitary Scionco Rosoarch and
affiliated to the Ahnanorboj but this watr.iaroly a union with tho
..hivenerbo as far as personnel wsscer.comei as existe: olscr*horc. For
instance* tho personnel of the Gorsan Rosoarch Sxioty was also used
for tho Reich Research Council. However, tho tro institutions con¬
tinued to exist inlor-ndcntly of one another, hon Klnr:d-r finally
issued that order, an’ after ry objection was not successful, I did
as .-ireotel all tho .roi-sratory work to sot up this instituto for
military scientific research.

•1 Then you H. ’ onra 3 o in activities which eventually resulted
into the foundation of those, institute for military scientific ro-
*>arch?

I described ir. detail f- Vsvelopcvjnts causin: this 'urine


03 - direct exarination.


5841


Ik April I i 7-::-..IS-9-2->kloy (la-- ^salor)
Court :to. 1


1 Ifcr, Tfhat did you do personally to father the ostablish-
ojnt of tho Station in tho Natewoiler Concentration Carp for
Military Scientific Research? Did you do anything, did you take any
a rossive 3 tops to carry cut tho Reichs-Fuchrer*s or .lor, a3 you put
it, to establish this Military Scientific Rosoarch Station in tho
Matzvroilor Concentration Carp?

« In this respoot, in frefesror Hlrt's ratter, Hitnlor had
issued very clear directives. Ko orlcrod, end that can bo seon frora
Docunont 095, that I discusswith Hirt tho possibility f his boin::
still ooro closely lncluiod in tho work. That was done in tho exe¬
cution of Hinalar's or lor.

Q And rrhon you .stnblishod this station, Ail you have idoas
about ; Jhape establishing it, porhnps not at llatzwcilor but at sono


othjr onnp?

Upon Kimlor's roquost, Hirt in 3u?pljtiontation cf his
activities, too to carry out oxporlronts in Dachau. Ho, however,
rojoctod that bocauoo of tho Ustanco involvoi and bocauso of hia
toin; in Usponsoblo at Strasbourg. KLrlor thoroupon orderod that this
t.us to bo carriod out at Itatiwailar.

Q Than o:nsist>nt with your thought and your stator.ont, did
yu rake arrantosonts with, wo -.*111 say Gluocks, Bri -a ’.ofuohror
Pluicks, who wa3 in Char;*o of the etneontrotion canps at that tino?
Dii you aato arran-unjnts with Bluocks to cot a station for Military


Scientific Research in tho Katswoil r Concentration Cnnp?

A ;.ry such institute could only cow about through the arranr-o-
r,snt of tho a talnistrction of the concentration canps, an 1 it wn3 for
that rxtoon I ha 1 to discuss this matter with Gluecks.


C. And you HI discuss it with Gluocks, i -n*t ycu?

A . I os, I had to iscuss this ratter .ri.th Gluecks.
n An! what ‘i’ you i=cu33 with Gluecks? •

A 7bo creation of laboratories -r work roOTS at Natzwcdl or.


anl in articular experimental stations with oni-als, and arraneenents
for tho breedin; of aninals, which ware Sv,t up then.


ili ..pril ii7-*4-uE>-9-3-? '.aloy (Ir.t. rosier)
Sourt Bo. 1


0 Tcurere aware of the fact that experiments were to be carried

•

cut on the imates, weren't you? Or irasit just ardaals?

A I had alraa.^r pointed out, repeatedly that the principal basis
of art's work was anfaal exdbrinar.ts, or could only have boon animals
exporinontaj an’ abovo that, however, Hiarler wanted Hirt to carry out
exp-irina nts on hrzan beings, Eirt »i both of tlieso thin-s at Xatswoiler.

O irr, i ’ you, whan you consul tod with Gluooks, mko it apparent
tint oxperinonta roro tc bo porforaod on irentes? Di yeu know at that
tine whon you oonsulto* with Gluecks ir. order to lay the rrounrbtork for
tho formtion of the station at Itatswjilor, di:l you not know that
jx- r .rinonts were to to porfonoo ! or. huaan boinrs who woro incarcerated
in t>» concentration can? Natowoilor?

Hkx-ler air or. V ordered that at Pastor of 1912.
r\ foil, now, then ycu nnsv-r to ny question I put to you a few
lxnanto arc, is that ycu woro anaro that experiments woro to bo carriod
cut on inrntoa at Ifatzwoilor Concentration Cnp?

U 'Cos, I sal ’ that.

:c<. R'. T ®Ii That is fino. Vo turn to Bocunont Ho. :»-97fl, which
111 bo offoro! at this tino, your Honor, as Prosecution Exhibit No..
liBO, for id on tix‘1 cation. How, this is a letter da tod 11 Soptcrhor 19U2,
m tlx. lottarboa* ^f Tho Chief of tho Office Almanorbo, a *'ressod to
5' "ri lofuohrer Bluock3, Subject! :tUitary Scientific i>03oarch in
connection with tho concentration can.. Natsweilar. Rofarcncox Poroonal
■incuocion cf tho ?th inst.

"’-.-i a ’.ofuohrcrx

"Based or. :y r.^ rt that, as proposed by the Roichsfuohrcr-GS,
hero is a rod possibility for carryir.. out our ’-ilitary Scientific
- -arch' ork in tho coneontration cor. Katzwoilor, I hereby sumarizo
awaits your approval.

"1) Inf or: .ation to th c: - m .r's office, concentration cr-np
;il r; SS-Kauptst'rafhohror rof. i*. Eirt, tarsarzt Dr. 'd.-r-or
Dr. Kies Ibach, are authorize *. to enter the concentration camp

.c-:s


Ik ..Fril U?-;4-..;?-9-li-raloy (Int. rtariler)

Court »e. 1

Ikttswoiler. Durin their activity ir. t’r.o concentration carrp Natzweiler
they aro to be provide.’ with accomodations and board."

."jvl new --ill ycu turn to paragraph 5 ir. tho sane document,
wherein you state i

"The experioonte which are to be parfoma on prisoners aro to
bo carrlod out in four room of an alrea 'y existin' nodical barracks.
Only sli ht charges in the construction of tho bull inf aro required*
in articular the installation of a hood which can bo pr-> Saood with
vory littl'. arterial. In acoor/nnco with attached plan of construction
nane wxrnts at Xatsvrsilor, I roquest tJnt nooossary orders bo issued
to * serve to carry cut the reconstruction."

Thon you statoi

"I ould bo very Tate fill to you, =y ’.ear Bri n» ‘ofuohror, if
you would inform tho Cor.-var.Aor of ntzwoilor concentration oanp,
that you hr.vo approved tho oxocution of tho work at Katzwoilor, Just
as It was Uscussol with no thoru an about which I reported to you in
lotail, nr. I that you losiro that wo bo 'dven assistance in fulfilling
tho tasks with ahich wo havo boon or.trioted by tho Roichsfuohror-SS."


1 1 -ijr-!'- R-lG-1-rv.tty (Raalur)
C-'-urt Ko. I


i ThuU upcn rdt-rs f the Re-ichsfuohr-r-SS you handled almost ex-
clusivuly the preparations for tho foundation af the institute at the
il-r ennp, didn't y u?

A As I already stated earlier, and as it is be ins c> nfiiued in
this letter, free. paraerreph two of t.iis letter, it can be seen that
the breeding of animals was arranged very exclusively —

4 Just a ntaunt, 'Jr. Slevers.

A — And that a cortain .an, Walbort, was placed at the disposal-

Q Just n norant, I asked you a question. I want you to answer
that first, and tnon you nay explain the d cunont. Didn't yc^ nearly
oxciusivoly, rake all the arrangauents for the 03tablishncnt of tho
Institute f.r Scientific Resoarch in the Natzwuilcr concentration carp,
and I u-ill say in addition, on tho rdxrs f the RticSifuchrer-SS?

A Just as I answered yru bef re, by rdcr of tho Reichsfuohror-SS
I .arranged all the discussions in Kr.tnroilor in rdcr to enable Hirt to
v. rk there.

\ !!-n did you find out for HlsrQor that Xatswuilor would be tho
best place t. carry out these u.x; ri a-nts successfully?

A I said Uif-rc that Hinder had chested Dachau instead of
i.’-.t?v .il.r, and dial b-_c :ms ap, ar,nt fr.c tho letter, and that Hirt
v.h< w-r with re -t H«.tzwjilcr, stat^.’ that he could very well v rk
there.

 (oil, didn't y u actually ..ako a tour of errxentrati-n ccnpa
ir. order t. find .ut «hich cno would be the cost suitable f r this
purp so?

Ora.. UT I ha-' visito i no conc<-..tr-ii r. c r.p, and thlt Hi BBlnr act¬
ually finally .:.-.do that sux _sti n. It says in tho first contonco:

"as pro posed'by t'.;_- Roichsfuehr<:r-Sc. B

d 'A: let is turn f D cureiit HO-.>5 'd.ich is offered as iro-
sccution Exhibit Ho. 1*81 f:r idcr.tific Li. a.

y ur initials, d.esr.'t it, 'ir. SieVv-rs?

53*15


21. «». -- - r-l«-rutty (Raoler)
C urt K . I.


A

* •

Q '..'ell, not-, this document is dated 27 August, which is sh.rt
tirn prior to the tine the docunont was submitted to you wherein ycu
reported to Gluecks. This statas as follows:

"To SS—3ri u .a<kf uehivr Gluacks, Omnionburg.

Subject: Military scientific reso-rch in corxccti.n with the N.atswoilcr
c-np.

3rigr.defuehrcrl

"As a result of th«. 'fficial t ur in connection with the croation
- an Institute f r Military Scientific Sosoarch -rdcr.d by tho Reichs-
fuchrcr-SS, I have unf rtunatcly '-j n unahlo tc cort and sc^ ycu si far
in order t report to ycu about the particulars f tho researches end
investigations, as SS-Obsj cs tun&anai'uo hr-r Dr. 3randt j.r r '. see* to you
in his letter. 7 day, I again hr.ro to go to Strasrburp tc hold furthor
discussions :ith SS-Kauptstunsfuohrwr ir:fcs. r Dr. Hirt and shuld
liku to take tho opportunity of ,-cing t latawoilcr with hin on Monday
31 August L2. May I, .as this ffici-al fur had to bo decided on sud¬
denly, -sk y u to have tho c.r. -nd r if tho crap advised f ty visits?
Open cy return I wijl ccdj and r. ;>:rt tc you.

Hail Hiticrl
Sicvers."

Now is Hatewsilor tt>j -'nly cm. t- .d.ich y u nado an fficial visit
f r this purpose?

A You. it -.'-a f r that rvu n th - : wont t Strassburg tc see
ir fosoor Hirt. . v t that tine I ha-* net yot boon to Natzwoiler because,
as it becc xjs apparent fr r. this ’otter, J had had tc ask Glu cks for
ptraissi n to r-t into the exp. As I s~ in ry direct exardnntlon,

I c.ul.In't rot into tht catcp unless ho a - ;-, roved ny visit tb.ro. I
na !e aany fficial t urs, but n. ’■ icial t urs in r-’er t? find a
•"At !•. c* r.ccr.trati n casp.

•4 fell, r..r., y-n •-..re v.ry . • :h :: f v r f ^r.\s !y ch sang

itzr.-ilor, w_rcn*t y u? Ticrer.’t you in r —

P€46


1U A.-r-!f-12-lC-3-Put&y (P.aaler)
C-'irt "o. I.


A -cccccs apparent fr a tbo pr^vi us suhnittcd letter, H i g gl er
had rdared that bucause Hatz^ilcr was cl.sc to Strassburg.

i I s_«.. all, n:w, didn't you consider that the working confli¬
ct ns in !:atzv*_il_r were extroacly favorable fer this purr, so?

A Hirt established that because it was very close to Strassburg.

fl ell, lot's see if Hirt established that. Let ua have a lo k
at D cun-r.t :.*C—977 —

]£l. HARDY: — Which rill be offered f.r identification as Prosecu¬
tion Exhibit 11. . U52, Y ur Honor.

.1 Aro your initials there, :tr. Siovers?

A Yus.

Q Hew wo will r this littlo U cars y:ur initials.

■Koto

Sublets Tl-o carrying aut f military scientific research in concontra-
ticn crap Nctxwoilor.

"As a result of the eonforoncu n 31 August 19u2 at the concentra¬
tion camp Katrrwilcr, there is a possibility that the rosoarch erdorod
by tho Roichsfuohx\.r-SS in the concentration oanp Natzwollor bo carriod
out. ’.forking conditions cn tho whole arc oxtraordinarily favorable.

Tho difficulty lies in tho reaching of tho crap. For tho tino boin^c,
tho scientists rdored to carry out tho investigation, Professor Dr.
Hirt, St-bsarzt Dr. ’.iauur, and Dr. Xiosrclhac;: have ta use tho train
free Strassburg to Rctau. Froo there, hewavor, they have to bo picked
up by car. Fur thuso ldliti-nal tries, twenty liters cf gnstlino must
be .undo available t th~ local camp headquarters ninthly."

And that is signed, "Siov.rs." I call yur attention ta the* son-
t.ncc: ""i-rhing conditions on tlu wh lo are oxtra ordinarily favorable."
That is n t Hlrt's Ido .. That is "r. Siovers* idaa, is it not?

A At it- can be suen free tho letter, to Giuacks, there was a nan
in that cana call.d O^rscharfuofcrJr "al -rt rh by pr f^ssi n was a
fare :er f aniaals and, theref re, was ir. a pisiticn fa: be ir. charge


f tho entire aninal breeding there. This was sene thing that was ccr.-

S8-C-7


Hi <t-'-IT--'— i.-. aitty (Ridnr)
c art :fc. I.


aidersi t to cxtr^rxily fav-rcble by Hirt, and it was sc in effect.

'4 Hell, Doctor, do y.u r-call D-cuasnt KO-L22 which was Prosecu¬
tion Sxhi' it if. . 33, contained on page 80 of Docurent B k .'!o. 2?

That is the rdor signed by Heinrich Himier to establish ti» Military
Scientific Research Institute within the fr res rk f the Ahnon^rbe.

D yeu recall that?

A Yes.

^ That is d-ted 7 July 19U2, isn»t it?

A Yes.

'■ Haw was this idea tc establish an Institute far Military
Scientific Hoscarch exclusively t \& ids: f Heinrich Hiedtr?

A I -irur/y st:t. • o rlior th:.t aTU- this causers'. tion with Hiamlor
and his subsequent rdcr to get into cl sor contact with Hirt, and is
I also st-ted during ny direct oxrsinati.n that Hirt rejected to being
fit wider Or'wits'a jurisdiction, this th-.ught nr sc tc crento an
Institute f'r Military Scientific Roeoarch. This was in ccnnoctlcn
with tho rdors I wne jivun S :tor -iac with reference to ny -.sslgrment,
and tho rvsult cf the c nforonec .'ith Hirt inspiasod on tc Himlcr, nnd
it finally led tc tt» f reulaticn .f tho r' &

:* bell, nr, yuu wore vi lontljr ... ased tc tho attic; f my

sxh institutes is utlined in this r’.r by Hoinrich Hinder, tho at¬
tachment f ny ruch institutes t - tho bmonerbo S'cioty, as you have
stated or. direct, is that right?

A Y-a, that is c rroct, and it was for that very re-sen that I
«ts in fav.r f a separate institute v oin crc-tcd, nanoly, this Insti¬
tute f r ' ilitar- Scientific ReSc-rc!..

1 Tran who suggested tc Hie lJ that such an independent r_ani-
zatl a be used r be set up within tho fran-w- rk f Ahn nerbo?

A Tf t was da-no on the basis f the nutyal conversations between
Hirl . ye - IT, and than batwn w .-Sid ifeost wha • ar rtjfcntd

chief, and it was all sur, _st t Ki-a A-r.

3 hho su; us ted it t Hiraal_r ti*rr they f end an institute; tc bo

5848


lii npr-::-h>I0-5-iutty (Easier)
C-urt K-. I.


attached t the Aiu-inerbe Seciety?

A I sus .estod that to Hl rclcr on the basis of ny previous car.-
v. rs-iti -nc with flirt an.’, .'uest. I did it by crier of Wuost.

!i v/oll, nt last we are ccnir .3 aroenl. You sue rested that tho
Institute f r liilitary Scientific Research bo established within tho
frnaouerJc f tho .juvnorbo Society, didn't you?

A In rtfcr to create an institute n vhich ’.ns not in the Ahnar.orbc,
which would lio outside tho frmewerk f the Ahnenurte.

,* I have boon three ys tryinfe t get that answer fron you and


U '--futt;- (Ir.t. .V.-lcr)

Court ;k. 1

listctiir^- tc ycu cn direct; and it is certfdnly a fact that you
au-coated it.

-5-. HjJOT: Vie will turn new to Zfccuzent NO-2210 which will 'e
efforui at this tine far identification, Ycur Hen.r, :s Prosecution
Sxhi’ it He. U'3.

Q Cn th*t If.at pr..;o. Hr. Siovora, tho one rijht in front ef
you, is that your ai.TTturc?

A Yv. a.

r , Woll, new, 1 h-ivo -'rked in pencil where I w r.t ycu tc tako
note. Yru at-'to thurein after —

H.V.3Y: This repert io r. rv rt, Your Hem r, dated tho 26th
cf Juno, 19A2, -nt! the su' Ject io "Research 'y SS-K.au taturrfUchrcr
.-rofcaacr Or. Hirt, Stress' urj," and tho questicr. cf closer ccll-v-
' erntien etneon tho .Jt-.wior’. o wvi hie, and horo on tho last pr-ce
Defendant Sievera at.-tea — which ia tho thir j axr.jr.vj h frea tho
Up, Ycur Hen.r, cn tho next to tho lrat cf y~ur EnjUsh ccpy,
which ia incorrectly .naocJ lod. ho , --C 0 c^nlrdjdn tho sipv turo
;f SioV*.ra, which io h“lf jr^o ef sicac T.-phe! au’ j-ct ra-ttor —
ycu htvo it, Ycur H r.cr?

THR .nSSlDSKT : It ia ta rked p-..;o U cn euro.

:!!•.. 5L Jf: Thut'a rlht, Y< ur Honor.

« Hew h-rt ycu str.tor

•'To ciUoct thcao or.-: sirdi-.r rcauerch in the .Jmener’. o,
which certainly will -acur, *r.’ tr.ua f:cilit te tho :n rnizati. nnl
technical execution, I s r.;t:

"1) rounr , ’ti;n cf -r. Institute f r iiLlitary Scientific Ko*
3<»rrch within tho Rhtmacr v.

"2) ..ppointsont -f 3S-H r istumfuehror Frefasstr Dr. hirt -ao

an active Ratf>cr, and p intoenb tc Chief af M p rt-cer.t H

(si-nifyir.- Hirt) cf the Institute fer .'ilif r; Sc* rch.

"hrncher's wcriccul t._u ' ^ her. included. H. then cculd ' i

apj’-intcd 53 Chi f cf Ocy rtn<_nt R (Raaciicr). Hccossnry supplies

-• 3-10


1L ..prii-'S-jJG-iOiIl-2r,-rutty (In*. :„aiUr)
Court So. 1


fcr ruch an institute nhich in the first lint will surve the nvtds
cf the tree pa would ’ «= easier tc oqjl-in and sere recscna’.lo ns
if applied f -r under th- na.uc-cf the *hnenerle alone." Signed,
"Siwvora." „

'.h' t is the date that r.jpe-rs directly opposite ycur r.taa cn
that lrst pere, It. Siev-rs?
r. 26 June 1942.

,\ad the date cf the .x\K.r ‘y Hiicolc;- cats’ liahin ; ; tho Insti¬
tute fcr Military Scientific i.cst-.rch is 7 July 1912, is it net?

.. Y«s, that is also true. Free: this passage it ’ cccjccs evident
that I :£x hor«. reforrin tc Lin-lvr's ‘-.cisicn dated tho 25th cf
iirch, which I already e;nti r.^ riiur, wft.rc hu ordered th-t I
discuss with Hirt hia closer c-ile’ cratinn. The ’.iscu.-si ns that
wero continued with Hirt arc here set dewa; rad they were then auV-
iitted tc Frcfoas:r ‘.uost. Fr:a the last sentence cf this dccuaont
it can ' u seen that it was ir.teiiiod n t tc oentinue the werk under
tho rrao f ".‘Juicner! o." 2 :: -tfccr * rds, this document ccnfir.us
ry conversation with Hiaalcr Icater, 1912, and the su' sequent
or anixaticnal Uroctivos and c. asidurntiens.

1 It certainly is a. yrv.it, Dc ctcr. Lot's turn net t- nn-
cth-r su Joct. Suppose- p 'doctor want : tc ; in entrance into a
ccncentr-ti;n easy. Generally, weren't ycu the men >hc was tc 'o
contacted if such on entry pomLt wrs requested?

.. If anyone approached r:., ,.i vh t erttor, it was 135 * duty to
tranc.uit that wish U Kiiaolor, .r Gluecks, who alone » ere competent
•'cr f-.iy such p.rsAsalcn.

r » Kor let us turn tc Drexv-nt KO-1657 —
li . K.JBY: — which .ill o cf: -red f_r idcr.tific;ti. n os
Prosecution SthiJit V. . * i, Ycur E.ncr.

li-.Tt this d-current, It. fiev.r.-, is !et>i 10 J-.aucry 19c2.
a - it -idresced to‘ 0 : -return' o-wifuchivr Silvers.

“Highly Honored It. C-_rstum amxfuohrur Sievurs:

SCSI


L. IC3ell->'.-i; tt;* (Ini. linalor)

Ccurt lie. i


"I acknor-lodgo thu receipt cf your letter cf 3 January 1942.
DurL-.p Sunday I kill w. rk cn the report mi eh ycu wish to have,
since I hive already collected nil tho nccossary ar.teriel for it.
Qurir.- this week it nr. a net pesai le for ce tc cenpile the report,
as I h."d tc -lve a lecture in Lilhclssbaven, and cy tine was almost
con,letcly taken up with consul tativ ns cn cut’ rocks of typhus ’ cth
there find here. The report till roach Sorlin y Tuesday at the latest
".’.n cut’ rook cf typhus ir. the Neuen^aoBO Concentration Canp
occasions ac tc request your intervention, that I od-Jit ’ o (ranted
permission 'y the kcichsfuehrcr-SS in ry capacity as Ccnsultin,- Hy¬
gienist t: the Health ndalnl si ration here concerning the out’, ronk
of such epidemics tc visit the concentration ccaps an , if circum¬
stances perait, U. ’ o allcw«xi u undertake experiments ’ y treatment
cf the patients end tests of ddcusin- agents. .Iso the Typhus Kc-
ooarch La' oratory, established ’ y a« in tho Tropical Institute, needs
natoriftl fren fresh eases.

"The research results achieved in the la' oratory v.lth expjri-
montal oniaals, etc., cannot !c evaluated practically without such
*ork cn patients.

"The Han’ urr Tropical Institute is ovaila’ le for all ctllc' or¬
ation in typhus research -r.d the cca r.ttinc cf typhus,

Heil Hitler."
si Tied "Jduchlcns,

5 refesser Dr. Itaehlcns, Director cf the Tropical Institute, rlnvol

Idical Officer and Consultin' Hyji^nist .f the Bulgarian ..my."

h'ow we-a it usual fer people tc request th”.t ycu intervene* for

thee tc tdn admission tc the c. ncentraticn camps?

i. This letter constitutes a reply tc ar. inquiry wnich 1

directed tc a naa' cr .f institutes tad researchers at the 'uginninc

f January* 'y order cf rrrfeos.r ..Uvst, in connection with the

fcandation cf an enlcarlo£ical i;:stitute which cn the 1 st cf

January 1942.had teen ordered !;• HiMlcr. Ir. this connection I

5352


U ..rril-.DJC-lOiH-ta-rutcy (Lit. .maler)
Cirt lie. 1


also had tc write tc irofesscr Kirt whose re^-ly is ?lro here avail¬
s'le as a dcciaacr.t. I hed tc write tc irefesser Hirt because ho
nentic..ed r-cse in his replyj and when crcss-exaadnod, I rlroaly
answered the Defense Ccunsel cf i-08t as tc what I did with that
letter. I transferred it tc qjr Jepartacnt chief wh: then on his cwn
initiativ found a head for this cntcaolc jicrl institute. I didn't
knew irefessor i&iehlcns pcrs.-ndly, nor did ho know no personally,
an.l I think that ho pro' *' ly only asked no tc invcrvonc cn his ’ chelf
ocruse he received a letter with the headin,;, "Roichsfuchrer-SS."

\ hell, ruv, when ycu intervened, tc i*ca did ycu refer this
crater?

.. ..hat -latter are ;ou talkin; a’-cut?

Tnis loiter of Dr. Muohlons. Ho wanted i- >t into the ccnp.
T; wh n did ycu refer the .a'tt-.r?

'* I can't tell ycu that fr:;-. n^acry. I really don't knew it

anyaore.

'..ell, now, lexically let's think olvut it a acaont. ‘.he
w-uld ycu inf err., r wh- ><-uld y u as!;, oc that this iccicr cculd
'o adaitted int. tho Houcn^aet.e ccncontration cuap?

.. I would hove sent this letter cf iir. Ifcohlens to Rudolf
i'rer.dt eskirt hie U present it tc the Rcichsfuehrvr-SS and got his
iucisicn.

'feu wculdn't have sent it tc Granite?

«. Only rfter bavin: received a reply fren Drnnlt etne-rninn
Ki-xJer'r, decisien in that r-sp.ct, ut 1 was only directly in ccn-
tcct with Hinder and not with

Q ell, r. - , this arperrs tc • ^ free this letter ycu have 'oofere
y: a c nurlicai pro’ l*n. Isn't - ?

“ f-s. i.e ere hero c :,cc«r. ri with nodical re less.

'< '->- »hr were the tv., hi -host rr hi.: • -Sen In the r^iic -1
services cf the S3?


Grrwi*2.


U April-*S3JG-IO 1 11-5'-i -ttj (int. atnlcr)
Ccurt Ho. 1


Q «ihc else?


*•


Gr?.witz end Go hsret.


f k K^w a’ cut cur friend, Jr. Genzken? Ko was a pretty hirh
fellow, wasn't he?

A Yus, ’..ut I never had anythin; tc do with Jr. Genikan. Ho
w*.s the chief cf the Pedicel Service of the Aaffen-SS, end I hod no
connections with that agency cf the Anffen-SS.

A oil, were you ever ordered tc refer this natter tc hin, to

Gonokon?

A I already told you, I den 1 *, knew what I redly did in that
caso; * ut I think I pro’ca* ly transmitted that tc Dr.andt, and if
iiimler duelled tc sent it tc Gcnxkcn, it nay have ! con that later
1 trmscdttcd it to Genzkon, • ut I ern't rosea! er it.

* hell, wo win look r^ein at another socti.n cf this snno
dccuocnt, which is page 3 cf this document. It is dated 22 Janucry
vidressod tc Trefosser Dr. i&chlons, Director of tho Tropical
Institute. Su’ Joct: "Rosccrch rad Centre! cf tho Insects influencing
hunan Loin;s.

"Highly Honored rrofesser,

"I thank y u very such fer your extensive rupert as well os fer
the enclosures ittachod to it an. fcrwrrdod tc no. 1 have node use
cf ycur oat oriel fer ay rwpert to,tho ncichafuchr.r-SS and 1 shall
also infena ycu shortly In regard cf ycur requests expressed in
7=ur report.

"I have forrrardod your letter cf 10th January 1912 with ray
re c caaend at ions tc tho Hygiene Institute cf the haffen-SS (SS-''^L;-
adefuehror Dr. Genzkon), Berlin » 15, Knese' eckstrasso 43/U. I
think ycu rill c given tho epportunity ef do in; research werk in
Heuaigccao.

Heal Hitler:

and there clears ycur slnatur*, dcec it n t?

Yes, this is ay signature, tx. «hat I said ' tier ir quite

5£54


U i-pril-a-£UG-10Sll-6^-ru* iy (int. ;-.-dcr)
Ccurt . i


correct. I used this catorirl for ay report tc Hinder; end it
was froa there that I received the order tc tnxsnit Huchlcn's letter
tc the Hy ier.e Institute~cf tho t.affcn-SS, end that it what I
told liithlwTs.

1 Y a are sure you did r.'t receive the erdor tc transfer this
letter tc the hypicnist of the fcpff en-SS frta Gluocks. hasn't ho
the Ic.jicnl acn fer jr-u to have approached ir. the first instance
tc ain adniosicn into a concentration ca=p?


.. I don't understand ; -ur euesticn in that ccmxcticn. Maybe
tho translation was not quite correct.


1~ r-15-12-1-C30lc (lot. >

cooi-t .:o. i.


.. In the first lottcr Hr. iJiehlens is askln,- for permission or
a pcr:d.t to fr la or.tr” ir.tc cuar.<y.n.--e concentration canp. !Tow ho hr.c
nsited ;vu to lntorcodo In his behalf. iouldr.'t tho first stop which
you t.l:o bo In too direct! r. of Gluucks who h^d ell of thoso passes?

Ir. other words, ho kd the jo«»r of ad: ittirv; persons to concentration
cjzjal

... Gluccks would never have done th t upon any r.swor by no. Ho
couldn't have do..o th.it. Bic prorocuicite was always in ordor by
Hittlcr. 1 ^ only ehrjincl u o to >.tt roach •imacr, rs it wr.a actually
done in th t c< <c, -nd v.. au or. •l:_Jor aceidcd th t Itooblor.*' letter
bo directed to the I^*;lono Institute. It is possible thn he also
ordorod th t Gluccks bo tnforecd of iu-hlon'o dosiro niuultunoously.
•trtevor vein Aom 1:; th. t respect, of courts, required rn ordor by
••L-lor 3-rtonnlly. I could ordJr not :inf; whntcoovor.

;. '-’oil ta-n before you would h vo forwarded this letter to
Genskon you would have had to receive nn order froa Grandt or I-Iimlor,
is that right?

h. Yen, th t vo Id a -o b.:..r. n prerequisite.

.. i ybe p..;o two of this rr..c document will clarify that pro-
blo.. for uo. T..is ic dccuiicr.t, section lo d ted 19 January, Jind w o
cent for ' nforr.it ior. to; She /.knoaorbo - , nn<* t io dodunant soys:

That tho rvtt.r of professor iuohlons should bo referred to the S3
jhid-ruiijinhruptoat — . cdic 1 Sopartaent, 3orlin; and it ic sinod by
OIuo’xb, and upon receipt of t..is, for information only, v n that why
you forvardod thi ori. ir. 1 lctt.r of huenlons to 2 r. Oonskon?

-- I &n't to .1 you th : froa aonory.

.. Veil, did you ever talk to Ir. G» nzkon ji'nit this nrttor nt
11? Hid : tu cvvr hv.e an- conv. rs: ti^ne «ith Gonxfccn?

-• I never snoke to Goszkon in ill of ny lifo. I tmasnitted tho

Just re I lent* nod ir. tl„ lett r to liiohletft.

S you never lalhci. t? % s'r.n in your * i.c? Lot'- hive c

fourtu p v of *..is s u-o document. ...is i? addressed to tho

5356


look .


1*- 325-12-2- Cook (Sinai. r)

Court . 1.

Syr.lon- ..-.ctitutc of tcc buffer SS. for the ettontion of tho SS
3ri. dofuckror Dr. G-nskou:

"Subject: ~?plicati^r. by professor Dr. Kuohlor.s, Director of tho
Drovicol Dostituto ir. Sober g for natcrip .1 for hio spotted fover ro-
a carer. laboratory.

■Drigcdofuohror:

"with reference to >ur telephone coTvorw.ti-r. of yoetordoy, I an
for- rdin; you the enclosed lotter frou ?rofos:.or Dr lAxohlons, in
v/,ic:, ho requests that ho bo frortod an opportunity for conducting
ox . in. tions ir. the Keuc-^rrus Concentration Cusp. I hnvo lnfornod
nh that I hnvc passed this letter or. to you.

Hell *;itlor«

.jid bilow that appears tho signature of siov. rs. Ic that your signa¬
ture?

... Yes, thi t is qy si.~naturo.

.. i.ton you h v« taUcod to &.niton, haven't you?

... i it doosr.'t *«a that at all. Thin letter vns dlrectod to
the :-v u lono Institute of tho W«ffon SS for tho at or.tior. of Dr. G nzkcn.
I dl<j*.'; no.i: to 3anzkcn person lly.

"ell, it writ addressed t> 3ri. adofuohrcr. Tfco salutation on
•-no lc:.or Buys: Brigodofuchror, does it not?

. T.c, because he wr.a tho c..iof of that offlco.

• It srys: "p.oferring to vjr conversation 0 - doos it not?

. I; probably refers tc the coavereation wit . -.io adjutant. I
didn't speak to ir. Conxion.

" -or.'t arguo th t point any further, ‘fo will let fee ?ri-
bun ! decide t or;. r. Si-v.rs. I want to ao< a fow u»ro cuont : . >ns
-.c- t your of:illations with c_r:;Jn individuals. Shea did you first

«--ct Dr. sv Jdt?

You neon Prefers r rnudt, io you?

Yes, Professor 3rcndt, I rl ?randt?

— 'rhat vob on ere 51 st of K' re- 154 h.

5357


i*i S-12- 3 -cook (ausiler)

Court . . X.


.. iho 3lsc of .-lard: fees did you over neot Professor

3-adlooor?

.. I never not Frofeioor EAndlosor.

> *2:ob did you coot Kr. Huff, Dr. Raff, for tho first tir.o?
Hero during tho trial.

V i'ainovjr not hie when ho w s working vi;h Raschcr?

— i I only know that he u. t the caiof of the Gercan experi¬
mental station for aviation.

.sA you net Hoi* rg wjjr. you net Hatcher, io tlu-t right?
hb ut tho bi*-.o tit.o?

. Yea.

Thi'.t wr.n tao first tine .mu 1. d over ocon Ro.-berg?

•- Yen, that la whor. tho exporicwnt® were trendy boing enrriod


Chat w. • tho firet association you fc-.u with Dr. Rnrenor?

... I know Roachor beforo th.t, but I only not Rouberg on tho
occ. ti-.n of cy firat visit to Dachau.

> How long bud you > 3 vjwt. Raochor? Vor it orxly 19U2 or whon?

... I nlro -dy wild durin. ny direct oxnnir.-.tlon tht I h-d knovn

Rnsehor since 1933.

.• "id you over uafco on attempt to intcrcodo in boliolf of
HM ••or, r'.or to tr ie or criuontntion in Kay Of or larch of lghj,
3- th . no could .~o to tho concentration cn.ps for axpcriaentatlon
pur osor?

•’- i said that Rauehur up to tn-.t tine was working with Hi:viler'n
"-Jtt:-at office In Tunic ..

> r - r 1 - never interceded for Saachcr 00 .hat Rr.schur could go
to th concentration c _-b for oxocri. er.tnl purposon prior to the- first
• l~ cititudo cxperic.-nts?

— r , I ci.n't rcucabor tent.

> Isn't it n fact th : you .inr anrcaor were -dually old friends?

: “- t " M - 1 h d contact froc 13J8 on, nnd you and v rhod a lot together?

5653


1 - Cook (3-_-’.or)

Court .* .

— zy iiroct examination I already stated that Has eh or

at .La: tino intondod to wrr; out work in connection with or. .arly
dingnoaia of cancer.

.. ii.t your is the.? Establish tho year fo; us, I.;-, sioverc?

TJ-’.t was - trust hare been in 1935. Haschor was then drnftod
into tho arty, and thoa this tatter never was continued.

.. a£ trsor. aftor elk -1 particular situation concerning tho cancer
problau, jnu hr. no further contact with hr. Haachor until the high
altitudo >robleu urooo?

... Until tho high altitude -v:tt«rs aroso; in the neantino Rr.ochor
h il beer, i.'itl. too Luftvnffo.

.. Let'* have a look .t Document 1*0-1331. which in offerod for
idontiric..;*on as Prosecution Sxniblt *65. Y»ur Eoaoro. ]»w this in
d- Cv( ! 2- .ivy 1939, to the Rcichofuchror SS. personal staff, attention
S" •J.uytcturcfuohrcr Or. 3 randt:

"Subject: Identification for Dr. Faacner, Ifcxdch. to enter cor>•
contrr.;'. r. camps.

D U..on request of thu aoichofuohror-ss. among tho research oxpuri-
hur-.r.tl 0 which Dr. Bascher h-.s to carry out, tho crystallization of
tr.c blood 0 persons lo to bo oxnained, which servo Ion/: sentoncos in
COncontrr.t n camps or ;.ro i-jricor.od for a long thio. Flense aco to
It t.‘. t Ir. Bacchor can got authority onrtblin, h 1 to perform such
ox:'o;lEonta in the Dachau 0or.ccntr.-ti on C- ?. ana. lea so let no know
v.. .: Dr. p.tBCm.r cr.y contact there.*

Ia tlv.t SI •... t Cipenrs there under tho not.ti*n, Vo If ran Sievorn?
... Yoc. tie. t is ir* initial.

c.-.e late *..crcon is the 26 hry 19397
... Uoo, It concerns ...c crystallization rrocoduro with reforonco
... c r.c r ~ork whici Fnacner intended to c rr out.

.. t is right.

* !-'■ 3 ichsfuohrcr was i favor of that as cm. be sc.n frOB

SC 59


1- :c-.~ 3-12----GO V (- . ^ OT 'j

Court Sa. 1.


t.:o lcttor. It was transuitted to Brandt and eh'.*, is nil.

L*ov, doctor, her; in tnis trial the Prosecution his intro-
due <?. n-r .-I; acventy-fivo docunents in which your or. -, -.-penrs. $o,kj
of t'.ic. ora letters sifted by you, 'directed to you or whorcin n third
orcou hr..- mentioned you as a collaborator. 2ho document; xy ovidor.ee
has cvcfi-arovon, t i t you v rs. bettor infor.x-d in :.oct of those mttorn,
than the hu.. r. non-iex., 3r. 3: ndt. Kov do you ctill wish to oit hero
on t in witness stand r~t • t-11 this Tribunal that you do not have n
ore co.rjicte knowledge ->f t-.t activities as sot forth in tr.in iniict-
&ont tlir.n you hur elicit d Jure tha li-st two d yd — p; you h vo
-othine further to add about the cri inal iv-turc of those oxporinonts
■nd. about the p, rt those untie;>on in the dock too!: in the conduct of
such activities?

pcrticipi-.t.on in that work I doscribod it in detail during
y direct ext ire tion. I hr:;: fc A to lur.oon whatover to keen < nythin*;
cuiet, end I did not intend to fc-*op aaythir.t quiet. The doex nfes imb-
ittid in t.rt connect' r 11 refer to alters vie! I h d t > deal
wit.; in thv :r .vowork o. nj- .oaition c Gon^r .1 secret ry. If thoro
-•tt.ro, * 'rent fro., the 1-ttoro mJ sub; itt.d her and often thrown
'ut fr-.. their entext, a 7icture • :>c- rs w. .lch is not in accordance
with the f ctr.. On; only r... do to K ,vc out cv rythiiv; viler, ir.
sensible vat. clirlflcs tie situ tier, md t.. n it becu-ea very onsy to
corhcna r. _;creon.

.. l‘ov, hr. Sicv^rc, yrior to the dr.y you walked into the court
no for l..e rr*i,~n..er.t in this c re hr d you cv r appeared in this
court rso- before?

... Tes, I v r. ex in.d her. before the I. ,.?.

*• *.'’.y ci-l yon tr-v . here befor.. the Int.rnati oral l ilitary Tri-

CU.-U-1 ?

... use X w s c lied hero.

• V u V r Gi Ho.a • o _efe:.s. v;? . c:. h r t.i« S3

° r r - J,--.t n, v r. you not2

58 CO


a


-- -"M 5 -i 2 -o- 300 k (In i. _ ler)

C3U-*t _■% 1.


I didn't volunteer for that. St- dcfenso counsel of tho SS
c llo<. iic hcrcjud ay first xt v..a to s..ov Jr. Pclcfci-nn, ay letter
dr.tw'.'. -JoceSbcr 19^5, where I told about :y nonberr-.i? in the reniafcanco
nwenont, nd I toll -;ir: .r. that connection I v a an unsuitable witnoao
for i-:. Dr. Polder Ann, however. insisted v^ry urgently that ho
ex-.rlno iia in connect*, -r. fit.', the vwoblcn of the .Jmenorbe, r.lt5.ou,>:
t:.lo v ,1 not any voluntary action or. ay ? rt. Finally, under difficulty
I hd r.u opportunity to rncr.t before the l.h.?. rad tell then what I
really vr.B, and I toll you this . -min.- *dv t difficultiea I hr- in that
respect thr 'in. you.

.. i'ow, hr. Siwv.rc, you vppcArod before tho Co:: iocior. w..ich
w.s oot vn by th. Intrnr.tion -1 ..i.itnr Tribunal, did you not. Don't
,:ivo '.a a Ion • mover, now did you or did you not appear boforo tho
Coxincion of the International military Tribunrlt

Yea, under circunctancec, vhich I hr.vo Juat dcaoribod.

.. Y-a, and you .p.: red before tho International Military
Tribunal?

. Yec, /.a it besoioa .-parent frea thu record.

.. .jul didn't t... Internationa: t Hit try Tribiinal, ixd dooen't
t.. . roc orof the International Ulit.ir; Tribunal th t the
t-.tiiioay before tac Oo;; isci?n that it v a felt th t one Si overt vac
;;rjurir<; hi:.self in t.;ia ribunalT

... It v p thj ai.i — the v-rr colcul- ted ai: of the representa-
tiveo of the prorecuti to . . ho it i-r.oar that wry. I studied both
r-corda with ny lef.na- counsel ;,i I c .n ary that thia oor.hist.-y
I dcsplso, did . ot ncco;. ; U»i ita i:..
hr. Ihxdy: i’o further ^ue-sti ns.

PrSIDiT: The >i 5 nan 1 will bo in recess.


(L'he "ribvn-.l djourned i.t this ti. c for noon rccoas)


Court Bo. 1

1-i Apr 47-A-13-l-iEk-Foster (Int. Srovs)


AFZE&XOGS SZSSICS

(Che hearing reconvened at 1550 hours, 14 Aoril 1947.)

THE xAF.SHAL: -ho Tribunal 16 again In session.

22. ISITZ (C.ur.sol for the defendant Fose): iir. President, I should
liieo peruiseion tc here Roso excused fra: tonorrov's session. His cose
is fcho next one ccaicg up end I should like to discuss it vith him nt
sooovhat greeter detail.

TH1 PiiSIIfiKT: Upon request of counsel for the defendant Rose, vhoso
ceso vill next be hoard before the Tribunal, dofendent F.csc nay be ex¬
cused free attendance before the Tribunrl tonerrov for the purpose of
consulting vith his counsel.

DS. FRITZ: -hank you.

WOLFFS SliVaRS - Resumed

THE PRiSIDEli": Any further ouostions of the vitnoso by counoel for
the defense?

FiDiRic: ixaf:is.^icsj

BY DR. : iISGRtfIR (Counsel for the defondnat Siovoro):

Q* b'ltnoss, the documents that the prosecution subaitted this
norning give tie occasion for a fev questions. Tho rnever to the proso-
cutor'o ouootion regarding ycur letter of 20 Jenunry 1945 to Hirt, Exhi¬
bit 479 of th«- Prosecution, sonovhat brief. Hovevor, I consider it
absolutely necessary, in the interests of clarity, that you state briefly
vhrt your situ? tion *rs in Jrnurry '45 rnd vhethor fr:r. this situation
ycu hrd sene perticulrr induc^nor.t to vritc ir. the f emulation in ’'hich
this dccm.nt ntnerrs. Do you rcr.c ber tfcrt letter?

+,-■ J» i^ b. In ry direct crcnisvtion I attracted to =rke,clerr sh?t

‘—v v)\

difficult tetrad vhrt r. tens, situation, there vore at that tire, shortly
bcf.rt the colltpsc. r.-a like Kirt, -h. vas so clou. to Bisnlor »nd
vho enjoyed his prrticuirr confidence, rl-rye found it scceasrry to live
up to this relationship in the t.n= tfcrt he adopted ir. his rclntions vith

Ir * 'direct exar.in-tion I stated th- 1 not only fr:- the beginning
of 1S*4 on did I bfvc the feeling of b ing v-tchcd over by the Gestapo,


Court Ko. 1

14 Apr 47-A-13-2-iSi-7;ster (1st. Brown)


but is May I found cut confirmation that this vno being carried out on
the Chief cf Stfff above -.e, and the SD leader vho was in ny department
c.rrcborptod that. Thus, in this situation, vhere everything ‘••as touch
end go, it ves very iaportent to be careful end, therefore, I tried to
explain thrt the tone in which thie letter v»s held is auite cor.prohon-
■itlo.

<c *o Oocunent SC-935, that is exhibit *,61, I should like to ask
you c few questions. I shell have this document put to you again. This
document carries a postscript which Begins with the words "SS Untorsturn-
fuehrer JOlff. He wrs employed in the ..hnenerbo, was that not ooT

/v. Ice.

q. In this not- Uolff lo raked to find out the location of tho
cr. p Srtrv-lljr, and to find out *ho th« oxinrr.der was, end thic lnfor-
nation vro to bo translated to you by telephone at Strasbourg by tho
29th of the *o month at tho latest. Is ry assui^tion correct thr.t nt
that tiac, ficioly, lr. August 1943-

A. The letter vac dictrt-d by ..u on the 27th of August and nrovldod
with thic note regarding ’ olff, in which I asked hin to find out tho
exact address A the ceap end the c.mender of Katswuilcr, and to coav.lt
that to :.c by tclcphono to Strcssbcurg because I loft 3crlin on tho 26th
■' August on an cfficirl Journey, as the letter shows, and rskod Volff
to give ac this information by the 29th. In other words, when I left
Berlin on the 27th of August, I intended to go to Stracsbourg and at
that ti:u I did not know the lcca.tlon -f '.Ir.trwcilcr, nor did I know vho
the ccenandcr vac. In other v.rds, your assumption is correct.


C-urt So. 1

It --pr •i7-A-14-l-x&(-Karrov (Int. 5rovn>


Cv 1= the first pert of this letter there is section of m official
tour red the word "Dienatrcise" is translated by the word t^ir in English
-r.i v.-b interpreted by the prosecution aa r round trio, as c tour. Now,
tell l.c, did y-u ai-.ply take on officiol trip that wr.c necesspxy for of¬
ficiol rcrsons to Strasbourg, or did you really noke n tour, ouch on the
pr.eecution eaau-.oa, through various concentration cr:*ps?

a. ..t that ti-e I :u>de or; officiol trip to Stn osbourg and it la o
setter of incorrect translation if this officiol trip vra tronsloted as
on officiol round trip, end thie io -ne of the reported red unfair inter¬
pretation* on tho port of th* prosocuti:n.

I cr.n ocauro you thf t tho interpretation vro not ooant to ^ia-

lcnd.

A. Nevertheless it did ao.

Q. Your note of the 2oth of June, 19-.2, ixhibit 461 contain*... .

In other v^rdo, r.a con bo aeon frt it, ycur propoanl for thu founding
of r ilit-ry reasrrch Inatltute within the Ahnoncrbo. Kov, I boliovo
it ia accuserry in our Search for absolute truth to go into thu historical
dovclop-oont that preceded thie. You hrd thin discussion with Kiinlor
rbout which •■a. have hrd enough discutsi.n. Y.u sr.v that Hicviler wanted
t h'vu thus* oroorir.ucto carried out by Krccher and Elrt by rll r-.onna.

A. Yea.

tv Y-u a.-v that, fro : the rd.lslatrrtivo oolnt of this, thie Ha.schcr
and Hirt institute vrs to be 1 oked after by the Ahnenorbo. Did you know
then wr.tr-. the financial -.cans for this institute wore t bo provided, or'
was that do torn! nod only later?

«. khon I objected, Hi: l«r arranged for thrt. I ::entfc»ned this
herein# briefly the very li.ited opportunities I hrd to interfere, rnd
hu pxrrngcd thr.t ^on«y of the -'effen-SS and n-t thrt of the Ahr.enerbo
should bo used f:r this.

v And vas that n.t one rcrs_r. vfcy those Inctitutus, which were
tlit-n ir. nrture to the «hnentrbc, v*re t be .xic r s,rt -f annex to the
•ihnanerbe end this whole ides vrs discurccd in this conversation of Srstor


Court 5c. l

!•> Apr -*7—A—14—2—SBl—lCarrov (1st. rrcvs)

cf 19-.2? Ia that sot tol

"• Yes, oulte clearly. Therefore, the institute vr.s later colled
the i:at: tutc of the Veffejj-SS end Police.

q. In other words, to work out this note of the 26th ef Juno of
1942 there vr.s no d- rticulor reflection necessary on yc,ur prrt. The
wcrki:<6 out of this not. vr s einply a nettor ,f setting devn in •siting
vhat Kin ler ha.d very clearly decided at Pastor, 19-i2?

It vis einply thu latter of sotting down in writing whrt
Hi ..Ur had already cstrtliehod ns policy.

q. I co .0 cot to D.cu.ent KO-1667, Prosecution Z*hlbit 48-. On
page 2 there is r letter of the 19th f January, 19-2, sent "for lnfor-
•.ation'' t- tho Ahncnerbe and this letter io directed t- Cborsonrtsr/1 Dr.
Gfterdinger. Did y.u know this .rn ;r did you hrve anything to do with
hi within the scope of the Ahnencrbc?

Ho, I didn't know hi:, and I had no connections with hi-i r.t that
ti e, but I ossur.e that fcvrr .Aiehlcr.r turned to thic -an in this nnne
natter in the er:;c vry thet he wr.te t, o, although there vcc no possible
reroon f-r his doing e. becruse ho had received a letter fron no with
tho Uttorherd of the Eoichsfuohror SS.

q. Ko w , pr,;o -i of this decu.cnt w; e subnltted to you by the orosc-
cuti '-ith the accusation that your first cifte-ont that you hid never
spoken to Dr. Gen ikon w rr n . t true. Sec* use -f this r. tnti.n here p vith
reference to ur previous telephonic cnverB-tUn*. I sh .uld like to ask
o few Questions about the cd iir.ictr.-ti-n A the Eoichgoschaeftsfuehrung f
the Ahnoccrbc. There the .dmex-ortu hr.d a few collaborators, such as
fiouptsturafuohrer Wolf. In suer, cfss ac this did you y.ursel alwrys
erry or. telenh.nic c nvcrsrti ..ns with ther .ffiecs md ,nly uoe in such
cc8es this phrase "with reference t. -ur telcchmc c avorsali n f yeoter-
dny" -r ves it y.ur practice, re it we the practice s far as I kn^w in
•ary -ther offices, that the follow*^ • k rlrc>. The rdjutrnt or s', e
the.- c lla.b-r? t r an .-:e by tvlcnh with she e ber f another staff ;r

:fice and then, vtier. this c nversati-n vr.s c.rrrt r’tea in writing, this

5^5


v 'ourt So. l

14 A?r 47-A-1-.-3-SS'.-Zarrov Cat. Brown)


phraseology vna used such as we see hero ia this letter?

A. Yes, I tried to express that ia cy aasvcr this QOreing because,
if courst, it »t.b not possible* for it to carry on all the conversations
by telephone Tyeelf and, noreevor, in such general r atters it v/*s n^t at
all cub to :ry for a high SS leader of Gcnzken's rank to go to the tolo-
phono. That ~ca taken cere of by the adjutant vho vould say that his
3rlgr.defuchrtr askc that the letter be forvnrdcd and then the situation
took place exactly as you have described. I reror.ber very clorrly thnt
I never spoke Kith Gcnzkea rad didn't knew hi 1 .

l*. This icrr.ing the prosecutor expressed his opinion rogarding
your relntl ..a vith Dr. Beecher, saying that you vorc befriended with
Dr. Bcscr.or. ..cturlly, y.ur relations with Dr. Batcher '-ere clarified
well un.ugh in your direct ejrr-.ineti r. but this remark on the Drrt of
the prosecution induces r.c to return t. ycur rol-tijns with Rnschcr.

Voro yru over friends with Dr. Batcher?

A. *t no tine did I havo ctff cl.Bu or friendly rolatior.n with Dr.
Bencher because fror. the first no ;ent oa, rr.d particularly beenuoo of
his wife, I did not like hin at all and I never hed any reason to change
this opinion. On the contrary, it bect.o stronger and deepor and it was
c rejucti.n A Butcher's personality.

<<• • hlch, however. d-.ee not exclude the ocssibility that in offl-

cinl .;cttor3 and within the sc.pe A the rtters that y< u ha.d t deal
with hin.you wrote letters t hi such ns this letter .f 26 May 1939,
vfcich «C6 put ia this o^rning as rr aucuti-n Exhibit 465.

That wns .nc f *y -fficicl duties and I corrled cut thic duty
fie. i:. Baschor's case with nteri>‘l courtesy, and precisely because of
the cl-C l rel.ti.nc between the Bcscher fa: ily and Hi*r ler ! was partic¬
ularly crrvful since he vac rlvyc reed;.' to turn to Ei.-r.lsr directly if,
in hie pini r., ho ha.d any rens.n fer cc .plaint.

Zf.. ’IISGIT-J:!?.: .-r. President, thnt c r.cludcr y redirect exa-.ina-

*.i n.

72. rriSIDh:!: ^ny ex ..ination f this witness by way A redirect


Court 5-.. 1

!•» Apr -4-iEM-Kerr-v (Int. 5r_vn)

examination on the pert -f cay defendant?

3Y IB. VCa'^BX (Counsel for the defendant F.cnberg):

v Witness, veuldjrou please ..nee again concentrate upon your visit
t Dachau .n «hlch occnsi ,n you saw c high altitude oxuericent? Under
interrogation by Judge Scoring yn eeid that ycu ascertained on the occa¬
sion of thie visit that after the experi-.entcl subjects got earache Dr.
Romberg changed the pressure and thus brought about a condition that
the subject found nore tolerable. Do you rcr.e-ber that?
a. Yoa.

k. E.v did y-tt find eut that the subjects had earache?

A. Ont could see t hr-ugh the boirvati-n vic&cv that the nan
pointed to his car bbA I asewwd ft* that t had onrachc. I

c-uldn't hear him, .f courso.

q. .rnd vh«n this sign ves ;:adc by the subject, did Konborg then
change the proesuro?

A. a r.bcrg moved a f*v lcvors and frn tho altitude motor I could
a«o that the proesuro v n r being changed.

After a-cberg uwred this lever, did the oxporL'.entnl subject
continue t c ir.t tv his cor?

«. So, the . ho n ided in sotlefaction to shev that he liked tho
chnnge that had been !ado.

l*. 3- y u assure that betveon the oxpsri ;ontol subject and Ror.burg
there had been e conversation t the effect that if the subject DOintod
to his car Romberg t ei;t the chanber at a different altitude?


14 ;.pril-~-£JG—1>-1-Less~r (Znt. Lrcva)
Court Sc. 1


.. That RceJ.vrf a«d the cxpcrimcnV-1 su' jccts hrd reached an
arrcuaent ufcrchand, and cast have dene sc, that I learned su! sc-
qu.ntly :'r:z » cenvers ticn that hca! <.r~ had with the experimental
aa’ j-ct r>Xtcr the experiment.

Do ycu rcr.cn cr tha contents of that conversation?

.. I at any rate had the depression that they had reached n
s'tisfrctcr> c.Tccncnt re~<\rdina the course that the experiment
was tc trko.

Q New wh«. said that, the su! Joct cr i.ce‘ crr?

« Tho can aoro cr less thanked lwm' era for this.
c t New to rnothor natter. Ycu stated that has eh or had said
tnin.;c tc you in connection with these experiments; he had eursod
and said that the ex; orlacntcl su’ jocta were uniapertrat and that
it did net make any difference • bother fchqy wore dcn« harm or not.
*;id he make this statement after the experiments cr did he express
it in c loud cursing, so that everyenu could hear it?

'• then the experim.-nts had ‘ton concluded and tho chum-or
was no lender in Dachau, I rskc-l l.aschor hew _vcr>thinr had -ono
eff in the experiments, and whether nothin, had happened to tho
experimental su'Jects. To ay surprise, since this ccntx-rdicted
what I had c served at the experiments .ayself, hu s*id th t a
couple cf persons had died. Then 1 asked him "Hcv ccae?" Hu said
Kinder had cskod him tc carry cut e feu extreme experiments and
1 then asked him whether n=o! _r had \ -cn present, i^schor said
n -* he had iono then lone, end cn this occasion he male that
statement o' cut .»ca «.r.; — thrt i-cc' er • was in his wry l ec usc he
was too week. that HLauler had demanded his extrose experiments
can e seen free tho documents hero which, however, -id not -o tc
a * cr tho Ahnonerto at that time ’ ut cnly tc Gluecks and tho SD —
n am ely a_ document in which Killer commanded iiaschcr to c-rry cut
further experiments with criminal: cenaoantd t; death.

“ 1 asked ycu whether luaschor made this st.,taacnt at the tine


566S


li ... riJ r - i .-DJG- 15 - 2 -Lusscr (In*.. Drew)
Court l»c. 1


yen witnessed the experiment — whether ho sr.de any remarks rorardinr
the t re-.taunt cf the experimental su’Jeets at tho time when you
wore there.

4 . Me, ho did net.

DU. VCSuSiK: I have no further questions.

THrl iuSSIDSTT: .o*o there cay ether questions cf the witness
cn tho part of defense counsel? ,.ny further cress-ix r :unrticna
l.y tho ircsocution? Sxaainrticn cf tho witness havin', '.on clcsod,
the witness will * o accused f rc= the witness stand uid ar.y rosuoo
his place.

(Defendant S lev era loaves the witness stand.)

DU. WSSGSuiSK: It'. President, it is new ny intention to call
tho witness, Dr. Eduard Kay. I ah 11 appreciate tho Tri’ unal jivimj
no p.-rtission tc cell him to the otand.

THE I; ESIDE-JT s Tho oaxshcl vdli sucaxi tho witnoss Eduard Kay.

Ilv. H.JJY: Ycur Honor, may I inquire os tc whether or r.ct
the defense counsel has ell four witnessos availallo to u hjord
hero in the next day or two, -ad then is it his idoa to submit
the rest cf his docuaontny evidence after t!io witnesses hr.vo ‘ ecn
hoard?

DU. uSISGaiDS.: ’Jr. Presidont, all witnesses aro proa wit and
I intend to he* r then, one after the ether, ' ut efoi e ».c hear
Hidochcr I should like very ' ricfly tc put in a few docuaonts.

Id.. K.JtDY: Thank ycu.

(EDU.40 1L.Y, a witness, tcck thu stead and testified :.s follows:)
"Y JUDGE S5JJNG:

Ycu will held up your ri r.t j ; and rad c srem. Repeat this
rath rfter jo:

I swear ' y Ced, the .Jai-hty and Cenis dent, that I will speak
tho pure truth and will rithcld rad add nothin.-.


(The witness reported the ccth.)
JUDGE S23HIKG: You may e seated.


1A ....ri 1-.DJG-i5-3--- 5 3cr (Ir.t. Ircar.)
Court. :.c. 1


DJitSCT ELiUK-.TION

3Y Dr.. V.EISG5G3-:

r Aitness, ycur naae is ZSU.JJ) O?

/. Y.s.

. Ycu were ’em cn 14 June 1905 in liainz?

.. Yea.

ijv ,1 you livv in Kiefer' re-ck in. nc-.r Stem' er^?

<v Yes.

Ycu have the title cf Doctor, hhich one?

1 . Dectcr cf Natural Ihilcscphy.

(* hero ycu aver a sealer cf the Nazi Tarty, the SS or tho S«?

Ho, I '.denied neither tc the Nazi party nor to any of
its organizations cr affiliations*

Ci Ir. tho Dof«ndant Sievurs* diary, an SS Ohe-rscharfuohror,

Dr. l£ai, appears. Aro ycu identical with that aan?

.. Ho, I -a not. 'Jy aure is spelled with a "y" - U-A-Y, and I
roauz or bavin-' heard cr read tho naae cf this SS aan and ho spells
his n«mc with an "i" -

't Dector, r.3 a private scholar ycu have specialized in tho
field of .ntecolc y?

/. Y cs.

Since when?

A Since 19#.

^ «nd with whet did ycu concern ycur research?

A Uy special fluid as applied entcaclc.-y. This is rusoirch
intc cod t ttin* insect pests ir. agriculture, ir. forestry, in or¬
chards, etc. Sc far as inr.cts are concerned which dc daoa.ru to
huaan eir.-s y carry in; isecsos, you speak of nodicinnl entcmclcry;
that is, in other words, c ranch of applied cntcodlc.-y. All
applied cnt.o.lc y ei-us at fir.dinr oeans rnd Bethods tc destroy
insect p-.sts, and tc find — -ana -f pruvontin; their oass nultipli¬


cation.


5370


11 ..pril-..-.

Cipurt lie. I


^ss-r Cine. Brewn)


' teeter, have ycu t-.u ht?

Yes, in 1911 I was c lecturer in the University of Uunich.

, '..he was the r-ctcr cf the university at that tine?

.. The rector was the ordinary prefesser cf Indc^crnanic
laxv*uc'C3, Dr. halter *ucst.

. .uvi dc ycu knew whether Dr. . ucst hrd any other function at
that tin..?

'• Yes, I knew that ircfess;r .Uest was at the srne tine, end
this hrd nothin - tc io with the university, curator of the ,hnonorlo
Office. Shortly thereafter he ' cease chief cf the .-hnenord o Office.

Q Is it correct that irofesser i.uect, in the spring cf 1912,
asked ycu tc carry out a research -ssijnc-unt for the Hinenurl e?

*. Yes, in 1912 Dr. ..uest called upon ne and told no that
Kiralor had on applied catooelc.y research ossiijnaont tc o carried
out, and he ordered in this connection tc sot up a 1 eloratory or
institute where tho research fer this cssijna-nt cculd • c carried
out. Thio ccncornud the quosticn cf ccr£altin£ insects that do
daca/o tc huaan ‘ein -s and this research was tc ' e carried ctu
within the framework cf tho jhnuv.r o. 1 pointed cut tc Irefessor
..uoat that ecausc :f assijnaoits fron industry I was very overworked
axvi that, servevor, it was Kt cj‘ intuition to sacrifico oy free
.rcfessicr.-l p:siticn for the oaa- cf s;ao official position. Irc-
fesscr '..Uest thcuht tnat this was .f no icj crta_.ee rnd that 1 cculd
t.Jce over thi3 rose-arch rasi^nsent .-ad ny freo professional position
wculd not there y * o in any way uviangered; I weald have scrac sort of
loose contract with thu ..teener! c and thrt I shculd discuss this
.matter with the hcichs '.usiness r. nr.jer cf the <hnuicr’ e, neacly .‘Jr.
Sievers, That wag the first tine I ‘-.ccrd his naac. That was the
contents cf cur discussion, -nd ..uest said th;t Slavers would act
in touch with nc.

{ . *id ycu then have a trik with Sievers?

» Yes. In tho next fc-. days SidVurs called no u, . I then made

5-71


1L J.pril-..-£)JG-15-S-L cator (Int. 5r-TO)

Court No. 1

his acqucintcr.ce and xe aet end had cur first ccnvers'ticn.

. Do ~cu rcccrnizo Sicvcrs earn z the defendants?

.. Y«a — first row, first cno frea the ri-^ht.

Q i.hct wise was said d cut this research easi^noent that ycu
woro iven?


5=72


14 ,."ril-A-IXJ0-l6-l—-_rlcy (Int. Drown)

c.urt He. 1

A Hr. Silvers aaid the sene thin.’ tc ne thr.t - refesser
V.ueat had arid, nn&Qly thr.t this wes rc*se-“.rch into co«£ ottinr
insect p ata that dc droor o t: hunan 1 cinjs. I then pointed cut
tc Sievars thr.t thia was a very lerje prc‘ ion, and I should hcv«. to
knew precisely whr.t pro’ leas specifically interested Hinder.

Sievers answered that I zysc If should ivc these pro lo^s which I,
on the ’ sis ox' ay specialized knowledge, would ro/rl r s the nest
prcaainq. I then had tc soy tc Sievora .* .air. that that was net
pcssi'lc without further attention, that I could only ‘raw up n
preciae wcrkin-- ;»rc rra after I knew wh t equlpeent mi work nenns
wero tc ’ e put at ny disposal; end I asked hie whether there \vcre
any la' oratories, whether there were ir.struaenta, i.hethcr he had
the necessary assistants, technicians, assistants, specialists
mu! s x'erth, end U whet extent this uquijeaent was svflleble.

I was rcther surprised when Sievera told ne that there was nothing
thcr- at all y«t, that he didn't knot anything r' cut the wholo
natter hinsolf, ho sisply had the order, end there nr-an't evon a
' uildin. availa’lo, and if 1 tcck -vor this matter I should havo
to erect this wholo laboratory. Sievera rnd I roachod 3cr.o aert
cf an arreecont tc the effect that I a Toed to cr.rry cut a very
rcurh survoy cf the whole prc‘ lem cn the ’ asia cf which the specified
work cn the pre' ltc would later ' c arranged fer, and furthcracro,
thrt I shcul! make efferta uithcr in ttmich r in the nei'h’.crhcod
.f Munich to find a 'uildin.; thr.t could ‘ o used fer tr.o purpose of
this institute.

C Doctor, rejariin this ccnv .rs-r.tio n .f 1 ..pril Votween
and Sievera that tcck piece in idunich, there is c. file note which
I should like tc 8how tc ycu. Lock at He. A.

ft Yes,

' There is centicn of o’servatiens on prisoners; was this


question discussed cn 1 ..pril Vetweer. you end Siev.rs?

A He, this whole point 4 is incorrect, ’e-cause it says here


14 ..pril-. .-X3-lfc-2-. - Icy (Ir.t. 3rc»n)

Court i*o> 1

"in this connection I £u wondcrin-, whether «c eculdn't Ve^in the
experiments meat rapidly if v.e used Dechan installations." Now,
in this first talk with Sievers there was n- aention of Dachau.
Otherwise I never shcul? have nado the su...jcsticn that I find r.
‘uiidia; threu-h private r cr.cios, r.cr should I after this conver¬
sation have anile on effort tc find a ’ uii lir.r- in th~t way. It wi s
net very easy at that time tc fir.l uii:in.*s, s- I r-r. all ever the
country end looked r.t vrxicus ' uildin ;s which firas had nrs»od ns
for scle, and then rondo a su. cst.ien tc Slavers cn tnis su' Jeet,

*hteh wra then rcccptwd iy Sievers. In ether words, thoro was nc
mention either of prisoners cr cf Dachau in this first conversation.

•C . K hDT: Your Honor, c file note cf some description hr.s * eon
su’ uittod tc the ‘..itness. V.ill defense counsel kindly idontify
seme?

DK. h’EISCERSERs It is in dccuajnt '.cck 4, Document NO-721,

Sxhi' it 126 cf the Irosocuticn; pcfu 15 cf tho Document Book Nc. 4.

f t In ether vorls, there was no talk cf carrying out v sor-
vntions on prisoners?

Nc.

h has there any mention cf the excellent medical facilities
r.t Dachau?

He.

Q ’.os there any talk of i rofessor Schlinc, *A: carried cut
his oncphules experiments in connection with tropical aoloria in
Dachau?

i. No.

t. Thai whore vr.s r.ur Institute housed?

.. I f und c ’ uiidinp ir. the little town cf Hclzkirchon near
iteich, which was for sale, end which would e suita: le after ’ eing
expanded. I speke with .ir. Si-vers. H- r x*-=l, liked the place
and empowered nc tc enter ir.t negotiations with tho .-vr.cr fer t!;e
purpose cf purchasing it. ’ihxlc these acreti-.ticns were still


14 (Ini. .roan)

C:urt Sc. 1


-ir. • cn, Sicv^rs r.jsin caae tc Munich, end in this enird conver¬
sation, ill he for thu first ti*c toll n<. thet Hisaler had decided
that the 1 - er _ tory, respectively the Institute ups to ’ u set up
in Dachau. I w-s rather* surprised by this r.t first, end Sievtrs
-eve ex the followin' r-ascr. fer this. I hevo already mentioned
that tho takin ever cf this ’ uildi.;;; in Hclckirch-n, which ncs
cn eld inn, would have involved rtrxdolin', imd Spoor's prohi'iticn
recerdin- new construction v>»rk had already con issued, and Sievors
scid to co if the Instituto is set up in Dachau wo are no len ;cr
dependent :n this Spoor pro hi iticn, ecuso nt hevo all tho materiel
we need. <.c have land ’ olen.-i.'v; tc tho Si>, end moreover there ere
oncufh architects .end ail-din ■; technicians naans the . riscn<-rs at
O-.ch-u tc dc the work for us. Sievers then asked no whether I
c .reed tc this orran.-veent, ‘ cccuse he had tc tell ac riaht at tho
' opinnin, thet I cculd net fet any stcnc ' uiluin. s in Dcchcu, such
ts I had intended, 1 ut cculd siaply .;ot a ' arracks, and ho coked
whother tho cntcoolc deal laboratory cculd \ >d in p X arracks.

1 then told Silvers thet cn cntcaolo,~icd la' orator:' Just liko any
cthoro cculd *o heusod in c ’ arracks, end thet 1 had nt o’ Jecticns
to lee*.tin.- tho research institute in Dachcu.

(, ‘..hen did this conversation t ko plrcc, rou ;hly?
i. That, I ‘ olievj, wes feur weeks after the first c.nvers tion,
' ocauso I rco-a! er thnt I spent sees tine in leeatin, c ’ uildinf,
and thet there was scao length cf tiae a~nin clapsod ofere *hu
; len cf ! uyin: tho * uiidin in H^lzkirchen was a' andenod.

THn . IiESIDEDT: It secas counsel thet a considers’lo cf this
•-vidence is quite irrelevant. Can ycu net expedite the tustfaony
: f %thls witness?

* '-her. then did ycur 1 p‘ cr-tcry be-in its work?

i. Lot ac interrupt. I aa sorry, 1 didn't hear anything.

•« then did ycur institute ' eain its activity?

« The first exparinonts were in June of 19U..

5675


i


14 -iloj (Int. =r_-r.)

Court 1


Q Jfes, it is noteworthy that there is a lapse cf rourhly two
years ’ ctween the first discussion of this end the actual sottinr
up cf the institute.

Yes, the preparatory work, construction and ^ottinr tho
ins truants, and s: forth.

r . '-itness, was this delay to e tracod ' ‘cV tc the fr.ct that
Sievors went forward Kith this matter only very ruluctmtly and
hesitatingly?

* Yes, that is tho impression I had, xusoly thit Sievors
personally was not the Icost interests in these natters, and a 1 ove
oil I had the iapressien that he did n t use tho moans that on the
sis cf his position ho could, in .y opinion, r.-vo uiwd and should
have U3erf ir. order to carry cut the construction end prep.rations
and to hasten then.

C. In other words ho was very dilator;- in this whelo natter?

« Yes, very dilatory Lvioci; and I night soy in addition
that this was really n sicrplo matter of arr-efcs construction,
a '.nrrccks that could have lotn eroctel in three or four reeks,
and that it tc k ire re than hi If r. year.

Q .New, in yeur institute, lid you ever carry cut any oaloria
experiments?

Ko, oalerla is not in sgr fiold t all. I n r..d one cf tho
nain pro' I-roa already, md 1 ;*co tcld that I was to carry this cut,
namely to find new means of ccn* siting larvao cf itin mosquitos —

:f crostirj; a poison in ,<rder form tc c sprinkled ever water in
peels, sta-n-'nt wrter where mosquito ierv-o ro ' roediw in erder
t kill ^ff this larvae,. UcseTch ir. this was carried cut r.t crest
1 -r -th, and it wee lar dy rt this ti-e the pro lun ’ ucrao particular¬
ly import ant, tho pre l^a -f c c- ntti ti- them with ne-w means, since
the raw materiel situation was such the pr-vicus used means wore
not avrilr le- any mere in sufficient quantities.


-.*11 lv-..-3iC-17-l-xvX:hEn (Ir,t. Brown)
Court lio. 1


v I>i- you over work with Professor Schilling in
i)«ohau?

- No, I did not work with Professor Schilling, nor
’.id I know hin personally, hut I found out in Daotau itself
ir. conversations that in tho cr.r.p o Professor Schilling was
concerning hitisolf with caloric. md also was brooding
nosquitoos to obtain tho lnrvao, ns I did for cy experi¬
ments . Th. rose>roh institute was cutsido tho oanp.

4 Between you and tho rmlaric institute, which was
in the oenp itsolf wherein your institute was outside tho
oax-p, was there any collaboration or did that institute
mdo larvae available to you?

.. Me, I recoivod no a at or ini froc Schilling and tho
Schilling institute never asked for material fra: :.iy
institute.

, kid Sievers, in oonnootlvi: with your research
cotivitico, hr.vo anything to do with anl ria roaonrch?

.. No.

<, Ir. Si«v;T3' diary under 5 January 10ei, there i3
on entry record in : to which thcro was a talk between you
-.rv 1 Siovers on conbattin- ccl-rio in -.uschwitz?

.. Yos, th t was the followin’,: iir. Siovers reported
tc r.o on.j day that in tho ere.. of ..uschwitz tho nui.bcr of
c'.nos cf r:alorin-had increased, and it wr.s intended to
undertake erasures . ;ainst thi9. He- asked r.o whether
sou j thin; could be dc-no that applied on tho one.holes and
wh thor in oo;.b .tting one. hal-s the mosquito was possible.

I then told oiavers I would h vo to look at this first. ,
Consequently, I wont to -uschwitz and asc-jrt..ined thet
uni.r 3uch and such prerequisites tr.a shrinking of water
with this powder could be undartalcon. 1 ’h it is how this,
cocc about.


—:ril l'»--.-BK-17-2-i&eehin (Int. drown)
Court Mo. 1


. In other uords this activity o.t any rate had
nothinr; to do with nolaric experiments on huc-n boin^s?

.. Me, this was singly the business of clearin'; tho
area of mosquitoes.

- Dhdur 22 February 19-i-i thorois an entry in SiovorS'
diary, "Talk witn Dr. -ay, collaboration with Dr. Ploetnur
.nd Professor Schilling;" fra. this ono could infer that
there after all was sene sort of Collaboration?

- Perhaps this entry r f _rs to the following situa¬
tion - but first of nil I should like to 3ay, there was
never any talk aeout any collaboration: During the tine
the institution was constructed, I had taken over a number
of pooplo in tho30 barracks, who in themselves had nothing
to do with mybexporinents, but whoa I merely save an
opportunity to 3ottlo there. Ir I romembor correctly I
wes informed, or rather I was asked by Professor most,
not by Sieves, whether it w_s .possible to accommodate

c certain Professor Ploetnor to cnablo hin to onrry on
his oxporicents. I emphasize this is not a nnttor of
collaboration, but neruly the furnishin : of spaco. I
not Professor Plo~tnor, he was introduced to no, and we
won't out to the barracks, which at that tino had only been
h If oocplatcd.

r i Doctor, I believe that will suffico.

Perhaps I nay add that Dr. Ploetnor looked ut tho
barracks and said he did not hevo sufficient s; aoo thcro.

• Did you have on opportunity of ascertaining whether
biovors had anything to do with Dr. Schilling's do.._rtuont?

-• «* o •

i You really had nothinj to eo with the real ins id o
of the concent ration carp La Dach. u?

~ Mo, this rjsorrch stata.n was outside the S3 can;..


-v.ril I-*17 - 3 -Meehrn Unt. Brcwn)

Court Mo. 1

I was not oven ellowed to onter tho concentration coup.

•<. During the course of your activities at Dachau,
did you over ccao in contact with Professor Bicao?

.. Yes, that occurred .in the bo ginning; end I don't
know whether directly through 3loau or throu :h Siover3'
nodiQtion I rocoivod en inquiry to the effect that I
render an export opinion to Dr. 3loao concerning tho
possibility of taking a cccibnt noasyra in case that
harmful insects bo droppod free airplanes.

; Did this oonferor.co with blornc concern itsolf
with an active biological warfare?

.. No, at that tine the question was discussed whether
it was possible that in tho c .so of dropping potatoo
insoots, a oert.iin counter doasuro could be taken, and what
in detail was to bo dono.

i was Siovers preaont during that conference?

.. I bolievo.

; Did you soo Professor Hirt, the anatomical oxport
at tho University of Btrassburg ?

.. Yos, I nado his acquaintance upon my own desire.

In tho export world, it was well known that Hirt had
dovolopod a fluorescent cicrosoopic cothod with tho Zcis3
fin-. ..t this tine it was quite a n-w affair and I was
oxtroncly in tor os tod in the rettor, bocauso I r.ttoioptod
to a;; ly this cot hod also in the entomological field. ..t
tiii3 tine I drew Silvers' attention to this method where¬
upon Siovars replied that he know Professor Hirt, and
Professor Hirt was collaborating with him La soao aannur.

H; further said that hj would unko it possible for no to
ncot Hirt r.nd I would therefore be able to look at his
introy ittal microsoopic work.

. Youthen looked at Hirt' s work, and this mainly

507/


—pril l-.-i.-BK-X7-^-l.’-3aa n (I.:t. 3rown)
Court No. 1


concerned oxporinonts with insects?

- - nuob or of sentleaon were prosont at that tine. I
ruaenbor that Hirt hold an introductory loeture about his
oathod, end ho then dcoonstrctod it.

c -as tho other pert of Dr. Hirt's activities dis¬
cussed in Stras3bur{- ct thrt tino?

— No.

I I n the suncmr of 19-*: son-water cx.orinents wore to
bo carried out at Dachau; did Slevers discuss this question
with you?

.. No, iiiuvors said nothing to no about son-water

oxporinenta, but the followin': connection hcs'to bo

observod hero. Siovers, on- day u3kod no, when visitin'

no, whether it was ..ossiblo for no to furnish e roon. »«o

v/oro tl:on concerned with s nun be r of chemists who wore to

curry out choniccl examinations end had tc be accommodated

•

for two to thruo weeks. Ho oaid tact tho ^ontlo’aon would
brin,3 all tho qquipaor.t with then thet they only need a
roca and they ncodod -as and water. I abroad to do that,

'md after a certain period of tLio r. nux.bcr of tfontlcnon
arrived end settled there. It was cnly on this occasion
that I found out what tho connection was, nauoly that sea¬
water was to bo node pot able by c. lyin' a special method,
and this son-wator wes to bo ;ivcn to the in no tea tc drink
and that tha finely3is of urino was tc be carried out in tho
rooc I placod at the dis. osal of these chemists.

i You know nothinj about the manner of oxocution of
these experiment3?

- I'-, nothin.; at all.

. Can you say anythin at all about Sx-svers 1 par tic ip-
it ion in these experiments?

- bo, I know nothinj further than that Dp. oi^vors

58cO


.-pril li-i.-BK-17-o-I'eehan (Inc. Brown)
Courc So. 1


askod ao, if ic mould bo possible to accannodate a nuznbor
of these chcnists for a period of froc two to three weeks.


Ui April 17—A—.3-1:—l—Putty (Int. Senior)
Court No. 1


Q I onco core establish that your institute had nothing at all
tc do with those son water experiments. Do you know on the basis of
conversations which you hoard at your institute anything about tho
ox tent ard the result c? theso sea water experiments?

A Ho, I found out nothing about that. I only found out *:hat I
alroady told you concerning this roan which I furnished ani whoro I
fcner that urinalysos wore being carried through, I only came into a
very superficial contact with thoso gcr.tlonen. I renenbor a certain
man — I think his name was Schuster or Schunachcr — who ropc-atolly
approachod bo bocause ho as a civilian, like tgraolf, could not oat
at tho officors* ness, on: he ' to ;o sonenhoro aso for his food, and
that is how a very superficial oontact was established with that
gontlatum,

Q I an being infomsd that whon translating tho demonstration
of Hirt regarding intro vital rdcroscopical work, tho word "frogs" was
xx)t usod, in thi translation, and I should onco noro liko to ostablioh
that the denonstrations of Hirt's that you witnossod wero carried out
on frogs,.

A 7o3j that is correct.

1 In con.ioctt.on with thoso soa water oxpcrlronts, ck> you rjaenbor
tho nouo, "Dr. Boiylboock"?

.. 7os. 3y way of conversation I 1 nrnod through qy secretary
that this roup of ch.-mists who wero working with no were workin- under
a certain Profoscor Pei'lboock. Forsonally I did not sake tho acquaint¬
ance of Professor c ei.-lbo :ck»

1 This conforonco re ;arlir. tho furnishin- of tho rocr. topk
placo on tho 2Cth of July, l?uh, on tho basis of Stovers: diary. Do
you know whether 3iev»rs went to Dachau after this period of time?

A to,

- • GZ? : : '!r. *resi 'ent, I have c ncl: *•: i tb<- examination


of t!iis vritnoss.


3


Uj April -.::-i8—2~Patty (In*. Airier)
Court :fc. 1


T.v. Are there any questions to the witness on the

part of any other Defense Counsel? If not, the Prosecution say *cross-


c5»ss-axA?n»iTioH

BY -a!. H'JtDYj

Q VJitnees, what is your prosont address?

A present a-Air os s is the sane which was nontion_-d by Dafenso
Counsel boforo, Starnberg, Oborbayorn.

Q t/hom are you living with now7

A ' ; ith when?

Q Yos.

A I an living alone,

q Ycu are living alone. How roll id you know Fr.-fossor Hirt?

.. I nado Profossor Hlrt*s acquaintance at Strasbourg. That was
prohably around Cum or, 19Uh.

Q How well -id you knee n r . Anschor?

A I r.ada Dr. Aaschords acquaintance in Sprin , 19 Wj, rhon I was
ongagod in tho construction of tho institute. On onu occasion rhon I
rns out thoro an! obsurvod the Jcvcaopcwnt of tho institute, an oflicor
coem alono, an I intro *icol Massif to tv?. Ho said his nano was Dr.
Aaschor, and ho told no that ho tra3 active in tho canp doin oxpori-
r-;ntal work, an-* on that occasion askol no what r-y activity was. I
r "• ‘ «c out tv »crk, and he askod no to show hin sono of
ry laboratory equipment which was unpacked.

q Vfoll, new, aftor you had boon established in the entomological
institute which was cuesido of tho can;, at Dachau, did you ever havo a
visit front Profossor Blcne?

A 'Jo. Frrfesscr Flora? was never in Dachau*

q Ycu dcn*t over rar.onfcor sooinr -rofessor alone on his tray to
visit Dr. Putscher?

A !fo.

1 You never heard wfaothsr or not .-rofessor Alone exparinentod on
human beings with Dr. Aascher? 5883


*1; April U7^-ATD-l3-3-Futty (Int. .laaler)

Court Ho. 1

A !fcj I never heard anything about that,

3 hall, nor, do 70 U kncm a ’{iss Schnidt that used to ifork for
Professor StLrt?

A !b.

Q Di'n»t liiss Schnidt at one tiao work for Professor Hirt and
thon co- 10 to work with you?

A Schrddt?

Q That*s rlrht.

A Schnidt,

Q Yes.

A I bo.- your pardon. I un'orstood "Snead". It is "Schmidt".

Yos. Yos. I know that n :iss Schal.lt cano to .to and wcrkod with no as
a technical assistant. Sho had proviously boon workln- with Profo3aor
Hirt.

3 Old Idas Bomcnonn also cox to work with you fron Profossor
Hirt*3 laboratory?

A Yos. Yoa. Those twc ladios, Piss Schnidt and Idas Bonnanann,
had ccno fron Professor Hlrt.

0 /hat -.rac their specific field of rosoarch? Toro they special¬
ists ir. sono S’, rt cf ;-articular roblen thr.t you had an intorost in?

A Ho. Ih‘jy ha 1 no special rosoarch field at all. Thoy wero
ordinary tcohnical assistants as ono needs then ir. jvo ry laboratory. I
had a groat lack of technical assistants. I only had ono ho WQ3 not
vory £ooi, and I rep. atodly asked Hr. liovara to ct - at loast another
fc.’o technical assistants since I could not nako ary progress in any
0 -hor way. ..s a result, or.j 'ay those two iad.es arrived, Schnidt and
3om>?nann. They had no special knowledge of ary kin*, but only knew
about .jonoral technical matters as is Ujoandfrd of a technical assistant.

Q .ell, nor, h;w for is it — how lor. a ri io is it fren
Strasoburg to raohau?

A That -J1 ter^nds. It h-per. is shat tiz» you are speakin- of.


It depon/s whether an:-- dr attacks wore tokixg place or not. At any rate.


Ih April Ii7-.Win-l3-l.-ru tty (Ir.t.. P.-jilcr)
Court 1


"hen Iras in Str%ssburg at that time visiting Professor Hirt, thoro
wc3 an express tbair. from !*unLch to Stress burg rhich was very fast. I
an not sure whether It took eight or ten hours. At any rate, one could
1o it within one day. Later, hr.rover, that was no longer possible.

Q Toll, those tm assistants that you received fron Professor
Hirt, they later wont back to Profossor Hirt, didn't thoy?

A I dn't know that at tho nonont. I think they stayed with no
alnost until the laboratory dlssolvo-. I can't tell ycu that «aotly.

X think I can rexanbor that at least or.a of thoso two young ladies
loft a littlo earlier than tho othor one in ordor to go to Tuebingen.
Already in ’torch or April I sent ay fcaalo assistants hone.

Q 7/oll, now, the;/ wont to Tuoblngen to tho institute that
Profossor Hirt had sot up thoro, didn't they?

A I 'don't know whothor Professor Hirt had an instltuto at
Tuoblngon,

lector, you s to tod that you know that thoso experiments
woro to bo conducted concurring sea wr.tor. Did you know that thoso
oxperlmonts wore to bo cor.ductoi on tho imates of the Dachau concen¬
tration camp?

A ?'o, 3 only loarncd that lctor.

0 •‘’oil, didn't you assume that they would bo ccn^ctod on human
beings?

•* I thought that thio ruyonorato* soa water would bo given to
people to drink, but I -didn't think of inmates. I really considered thoso
ox.crinonts to be very harmless.

Q 'oil, then, i r.'t it strike you rather 3trar.go that thoy
would bo coring to Dachau to perform those experiments rathor than
king it ir. Porlin?

A ::o. This 'iir.'t strike a> asbainr peculiar at all. At tho
beginning X thou -ht that I -czs to accaxaodate a fewr chomists temporarily
~ho had boon beebod out free somewhere, and that X r s irinp these-
P>ople a taxorary possibility to work and that they wire later to

5685


1L April U7-.W-A?D-lfl-5-Putty (Int. P-onlcr)
Court :?o. 1


continue fchoir work at anothor place. That was what I thought
originally.

1 Did you know whore Professor Pei lbceck came from?

.. !fc. I ho-In't known his none or where ho caao from.

Q Ho was a Vionnc boy, wasn't he?

A I donH know that.

Q It is rather a substantial rid© from Vionna to Dachau,
isr.it it?

A That is not too bad from Vionna to Kunich, You can do that
normally within on? lay or three quarters of a day. That is no affair
at all.

Q Thon you exclude tho possibility that tha purpose of brin,~inr
thoso non to Dachau to experinont with soa rrator was only bocauso tho
subjects woro availablo thoro?

A "oil, after havin;: hoard that from this and that sido, I
naturally (jot to knew what tha connections woroi but you woro asking
mo whothor fren tho vory boinnir.;: I had known about it, ani nt that
tine I didn't. I hadn't known that Dr. Seirjlboock had como from
Vie ana j I -Hdn't know whit axperinonts ono was concomod with. All 1
learned was that a rwmbor of ch-rdsts would ccno aion.: to carry out
chcrdcal to3t3. I was asko ' whether it w 3 possiblo for mo to accoiro-
lato then for a 3hort poriod of time. That was all I know.

Q 'oil, now, you -avo thx-. a roon ir. ycur institute, i'ln't

jou?

A Yos.

Q Did you ever soc what happened to that room?

A Occasionally I passed the* rocc an’ I saw that chioical oxpori-
nonts wore carried out there, ~r. Schuster or Dr. Schumacher whom I
r.jntionc! bofore, an! whoso nai^ I Ain't rv.co-l?ct exactly, — I found
out that urinalyses wore beirv; car led cut.

0 ?vow do you knew Dr. Tlru -owsky, SS-Stan lirtenftoehrer ”nu-owsky,

who later bocaaa S3-Oberfuehror? Do you knew him?

5S56


Ik April U7-V.-» .ID-l3-6-Ptttty (lot* Ra”lor)

Court !fo, 1

A i33, I uala Dr. :{ru~orrsky*8 acquaintance. I saw hin once, and
that was in Berlin.

Q Do you recezber when you net hin in Berlin?

A '.’all, that is hard to say,

Q TTould you say it was —

A I was in 3orlin vor often*

Q "ould you say it was in the yoar 19U1? 19U2?

A No* Ho. No. No. Jto. That rust have boon in 19id*. Tho only
year in question is 19 U., but I iont know axnctly when in 19Ui

Q Lot*s hnvo a lcok at a docunont, Doctor, which was prosontod
haro in ovi lenoo os Trosocution Exhibit No* 121 —

HR. M i — which lour Honor dll fir.' in Document Dock No. 3,
.vhich is Docunont '.k>, !C-4!*7 and is on tho last pajo of Docuraont Book
No* 3. Jtow this statos: "Notico*" Tho subjooti "Cooperation rdth tho
ftyfjLcno Institute of tha Haffon-SS#

"Y.'ith roforenco to =y lottor of 5 Jno 191*2 rofjardinc vomln
oontrol, a noitin, took j laoo on 21 Ootobor 191*2 with tho jartioipation
of S3-Gtr.nlartonfujhrjr Dr. Ylrurowsfcy an’ SS-Untorstur-ifu-ihrer Dr.
Sohadlau, Koisbock Strasso l3/U. Utt'.or discussion was tho cooporation
r.ot only in the field of vomin control tut also in tho rosoarch
sphoro of Haschor, in! 7tith r^-nri to tho uso of pastoin wator in casos
of fro or. in-; os wall as in various operational fields of the Hynieno
Instituto* As had alr.jO'V boon laid down in tho interview with SS-
Untorstumfuohror, Dr. Scha.lau, on 6 Kovodbor 191*1, 'X' Sntorpriso:
roloaso of tho r.rchoolo 1st Hunt.

"A furth-ir zoo tin * took place then at tho Rypiono Institute of
the " fnffon-SS on 20 'hv^rbor 1?L2 in which S5-Staniart..nfuchrer Dr.

”rv ;owsley, SC-CtandartenfUohror 3i,\\rs, and loctunr Dr. 'lay, took
pert,"


research : lan.


lii April L7-A-AID-l3-7-?utty (Int. laaior)
Court S3. 1


q Do you rer--nbor that nee tin,". Doctor?

A Ies. I rcsu-ber this ooetdns very well, only it is ny
opinion that it took place aich lator and not in tha year of 19U2.

In effect there was a conference between Sicvers, irurowsJy, and ao,
at the Hygiene Institute of the affon-SS. }*y task3 woro discussod at
that tine, that is, the coriat against flics an! against nosquitoos.

■£. HARDY: I have no further questions. Your Honor,


1-- JLpril :7->? J&-19-1-Cc ok (Ir.t., Hernia-)
0 -urt :


73I3C2R33 1 .: 7cuid ycu r°irlt no to put one question to tho
-.-itnoas, iir. Prosidont:

3Y EE. TZEERSS:

i In connection with tic sob Witor oxporiront I should liko to
clarify tho following point: Bhon Si errors et tlmt tino told you that
you i.'culd furnish a rocn at ycur lnstituto temporarily, did you havo
tho inrossl on fr>n Siovor’3 roccrks that ho kn*r tho dotrlls about
tho plannod or.porirjnts?

•* Siovors hirso2f had no idoa cf tho .00 oxporir.ont3.

Z */hor. a llttlo lator chxdcal oxporii-or.ts :ioro carried out at
your lnstituto, roro thoy just analyson?

Yon, pure analye on,

InTatos of tho ccmpa roro n't <x nloyod'j

•’* ::o » ccurso not. Tho-o wasn’t any craco f r that. Tlsoro
c nt pcsolbility for it. Thoro woro throo or four gontloron flitting
ct a tablo whe uora analyzinr thoir subotnneos.

DR. "3ISCfI?DS?: I havo r.o further quostio.no to tho witnonn,

"r. Prosidout.

• 3. H/JDY: I havo ona quocticn, Y'ur Honors.

BY HARDY:

q You st-.tod dt. siovoro had no knarlodgo vhatscovar of thoco
dot. '..ator oxporl.or.6. H» d. you knew that?

. k Ot:.orwiso, ho probably uculd havo told :-o vhnt it v-s all
nbcut.

.'Y?. HARDY: !b further quoctions.

T3 HLi'IDST: If * aro aro no further question of tho uitnoss,
c1 " ol tho dofonso a:-- procood.

Iho tiltsoss .ill bo oxcusod fr::. tho stand.

ER. •*3I£03>?3': ~ith tho appr val f th- high Tribunal I rfcould
’■ ilko U Call the witness. Dr. ?ranz P"rho:xju.

— EHasiDH’?: Ifco ISarfihal '-ill call th- aitrass Dr. prar.z


'r-i.-.-iu.


. 5SJ5S


1-i April -V7-A-PJC-19-2-C3Ck (Int., R/crlor)

Court I


JUOG3 SZBHIIO: : ou ?riU plonso hold up your right hand and
bo sworn: Hopoat of tor no:

I swoor by Gcd, the Alcight and Cnnisciont, that I *111 spade
the pure truth and -./ill withhold nod add nothing.

(The witness repo*tod the oath)

You JT.y bo seated.


11133 :? B&awnosj


3Y DR. VZISG3RBiP:


^ If you profor to answer in tho fellah lcngurgo, plooao do
so. Yeur nrso io rrmz ?orkonnu?

.. Yoa.

*1 You voro born in Vionna on 15 Doca;bor 1900?

A Yoa.

'I Jil you now lire r.t Uorfeurg or. tho LaJ:n?

A Yoa.


*1 You hold n dogroof
A Yoa.

7. tflu&t dogroo?

A In philosophy.

^ Vitnoia, you :»y give roplios in Inglioh if you liko. You
rro new - locturor at tho i>rburg U nivoralty?

A Yoa.

1 Yoild 7'u ploaso doacribo yeur eoroor vory brlofly?

A I woo bora In Vienne, aoi wont to school thoro. ihcn I wont

to tho University in Vienna and at Loipcig, and grrsluatod at Lolpzig.

Thun I lived ir. Berlin a fo w yoars, and accoptod a rosorrch fellowship

ut Frankfurt Ur.ivorsity Inatituto rf social fiosonrek, which is now in

* w Y-rk, aai nhilo I had this f;ll-vshlp i Wa - working in Paris first

ard in Viorju* than und than I was surprised -y Hitier'3 advont to

P vor in Vienna; S3 i just didn't ye b/ck; and i didn't spool a day

i:: ynzi '3o-ar” t ir. a:.;- cthor c _r.tr;.- do.lnatcu by the >: a zis.

‘58-;0


1-5 April 4?~A-yj&-19-3-Cccfc (lot., RaZ-lor)

Court i

I i»nt to London ir. 1934 uni lived thoro first as a froo lanco political
writer, public hod a nvc-bor of books on political and sociological
sub jo c to and frcn 1933 onwards I taught International Affairs as an
cdult oducation lac tutor for Lordon-Caciridgo Unlvorsitios at
Stoton. i took up war work in the proper sonso in 1943. Only until
thou I vas torching international affairs, in 1943 I J oinod tho
3BC conitor sorvico, and in 1944 I changed ovor to tho zjx>rican
sorvico of tho CTJI Gor:an policy dopart:.ont, rad fra: thoro to tho
Zforienn broadcasting station in Baropo as a Garmn 3!itor. I was
schodulod t go to Luxor-bcurg at tho o*d of 1944, and thon that didn't
ccco off 'r.'inc t° the Tunistodt offensivo, so i nly got to tho
continont at tho ond of July 1943 with tho .Ullod Press Sorvlao at
LuxabxirG as an Alllod or.pl oyoo acccc.panying tho Aiorican forcos. i
rdgit stato that I was bom in ..ustrio and cr. etr.toloso now, so I
vrerkod in iMxor.bourg first, still in /.jor'ean civilian uniforn, ard
t!ur. wont to Bad Ihufcoln whoro I hoi pod build up tho fross Agency

•

Cana, for a tlxw had uador rso Foreign Affairs in tho Dana, aai than
o n tho suggestion of t: o African Unirorsity Officor Dr. Kartshorno,

I took up a locturosiil? in social ccionco and history in Unrburg
which I hold at prosoni.. Of courso, I had a sort of idoa I wculd do
that if posslblo whon I loft Siglanl aid rot j-n-d to tho continont.

1 titnoss, tho dofordant h'olfra:. Siovoro, uhcr. I nr. roprosonting
■oro is relying on tho fact in his dofenso that already yri'r to 1933
-rd then during tho onfciro subso^uor.t joried of tho national socialist
rociro ho was a u:,bor of tho rcsi3tanco grou- hcadod by Dr. Hlolschor.

" w i havo boon attxnti.as to giro tho High Tribunal tho possibility
ts gpla a picture f Dr. Fiolschor’s personality. Do y~u know •

Dr. Friedrich Hlolschor?


/. Yos.


5691


14 A>rll 47-;.-?jC-19-4-Coc3: (Iat., 3a; el or)

Court I

Q 3hon did you nko his acqu-intonco?

I ret Dr. Eiolschor first in tho spring of 1923. I was
than still c. Carainist. I loft tho ccemmist Party r. yonr -iftor
aai I was r . Ccnaini3t nenbor of tho Students' Ropresontation at
Borlin univorsity. 7o had intor-rerty studonts' dobatos and I
rot or. KLolscbor thoro os a sporjor for tho Ri.jht. Also wo had
a sr mil shoot free our Ccreunist Stud oats' group, and thoro onco,
free, reading Hiolschor's "Vommrsch", wo startod dobating briofs
with hit- which lod us to porscnal cent act. That :aict havo boon,

I chould say, parh«jp ?obruaPy r Karch 1928.


11; A-ril-..-20-l-riarr-w-(int.?.anal r)-d-J-


Ccurc 1

Q. Durin- the lat^r period did you --ct int* any close contact
7.1th Friedrich Hiclsch^r?

.•v I ah ruld say n . IN the y^ar after I left Berlin.

Alth-u h I left Berlin the year after and that, of course, United
ly c atact with Kidschcr t*. the peri.da when I was in Berlin, but
that was -n very frequent visits, and bof re that, one year I was still
Uvine; in Berlin,s. all through that tine I t -ct into increasingly close
contact:with hie. That, of course, was sad* still easier when I leftthe
Camunist Party lm! s I was n 1 n;or in the Party die ip lino and could
say an talk what I like ' and se„ wh.n 2 liked. 5 , all htrcu.ji that
tine, i7. talkc at lea th ab ut nany subjects, p 11 tics and also n:n-
P iitical thine®, and I t 1 nerves in ly inten.ste-' in Hiolschr becau¬
se ho was su utterly unUpic-l, ns ; nan c nin frrm the ri -ht. First
1 all, be was just an intcrestin • nan, t chat with, hut apart fren
that I stacte' t. w:n!er = re an. n. re ana I found points where ur
pir.l ns touche and .^rhap* ov.n net, lespiu tho fact that wo had
ecac fro* extr ticol :

dR. K.»TiDY: Y-ur li n r, this testln.ny f tho witness thus
far is c rely ceveri^ tl* jeric ' fr.o 1929 to 1933. The charts here
in tho Iniictoent include the years fron 1939 t 1935 in the first in¬
stance; an seemly,, I p int t- the b.xcti n by the pr sccutim t.
call In this .witness. Tne Pr.cecuti n objected n the .-r.un !s that the
witness is r.-r.ly t. testify ra t the ers.nality f Kids char, nn
it appears that that is all he is izv- t. d. . If that is the ease, I
think this t-stic T\y is irn.1 vant here. If he is soin.; t: testify t
n-. , -re r.ality f the D^fen: at SivV.rs, he nay c ntinuc, but this
r--nn..r f cxanlnati n I '-n't think is takin uo the valuable tine
• the :ri-.ur.‘;l c rrectly. Y ur :i n r, I w:ul . further request that the
Tribunal sks if this witness kn -s the !tfenfant SivVers.

Du. -'ISC- r r .I : ,_r. . resi‘ent, my I sh rtly !ufino ay .tti-
t- - t that? h.n nakin :y rrftt.n a:. licati n I slrcily ; into! ut
* J ‘~t Dr * 1 t^nau will *_ r. vdtnoss £ r the resistenc. activity f Dr.
KiUscher and will testify in that rear'. I b_licv. that the Tribunal

_ - 5S53


U A?rll-A-<a-20-2^=rr-»-(int.


Racnl'.r)

Court 1

t7i wc-ks ar when th- rrosccut r already raise 1 bjecticn against f.csc
witnesses. Dr. B rkenau an'. Dr. Tr.pf, I hadrhoirti the same arguments
as Just now. „t that tisc I^Icfin.d cy attitude and =y attitude new
is c-a lotoly the saco.If I an. callin' Dr. Hiclschcr s the principal
witness f-r Dr. Siov,rs' activity in his resistance ncvcuont, I cann t
ex; .ct the Hi^h Tribunal tc hav, a complete: picture- ab . ut Dr. Hiclscher's
activity in Germany. N nr, in xx!er t-onablc the Tribunal tr. .ain scoc
picture abrut Dr. Hiclschor, I call,' Dr. B-rkenau an: Dr. Topfas I
alrca.'y state at an arli.r Sato. I therefore ask tint th so two wit¬
nesses be appr ved, which h s alr-a 'y ha bp one , an’, y u permit me t
continue qu,sti nin these *itn sses.

Jit. Y_ur H,n,r, it was ay unlerstan lin that the nb-

Jecti n :f the prosecution t. th, callin f these tw witn-ss,s was
v,rrule. n thu ^mutts that it ms the un ,rstandin f th. Tribunal
that their tostieeny weui: r> rv,r an-' Lcy.nd that -f testifying as
t t .e ...rs anility tf Hielccner, and this nan hero Is merely t,stif y-
in: ’8 t. the personality «f Kid cher and the resistance movement and
that is n -1 an issu, in this trial.

TIL . .(ESlt’ WT: The Trinunil has .assumed tint the testimony
r th witness hcrct f-rc was lir r,ly preliminary. The witness will be
entitli t- t,st iry, within r. ns.-ruble licit, ir the fact that then.

•ns, at the ti: t-: stifle t. by the Defendant Ci-vore, a ;enuini re¬
sistance a vecunt ir. vi.rr.any, an testify* t


14 -soril-.i-CJ—20-4>-IL.rrov (Int. Ha-lor)


Court I

£-i- extwnt concornln,: *n..t that novtucnt v^s and what it did and
onytMcj. ho xu'.va if any tala,;, uwtut tr.e activities of tho defen¬
dant Silvers. Inc joj*cti:n to tn_t willow- overruled.

S3. UZlSChhalP: . Xr. President, -:-y I briefly ^4d that tho wit-
nos-, Dr. -iorkenau, as veil as tho witness. Dr. Topf, know os veil
«.a nothing .. ut Dr. Sievors' activity witr.in tho framework of tho
resist-nee uovaiont v..oro Dr. Hiolschcr v .e active, jut aoout Dr.
Eiolschor.

Tory veil, counsel. Tory veil, counsel. I wasn't
sure whether tj,c witness knew anythin. ut tr—t or not. The wit¬
ness uuy testify .a to tho existence of a n-cxistonco of u rcnuinc,
bona fldo real toneu uove..t=t ia Ger..jny during tne years testified
to by tho Defendant Clovers.

HR. H-u-JJY: Your no nor, u«y I interpose a question hero to
defense counsel th_t, lnusuuch „o Dr. Topf, nio ..ext witness to bo
cUlod, will testify substantially the so.iv tain,.® «o this witnoso
is testifying to, the nrcsocution will bo in a position to stipulato
that if they ouo. it on offid vit by the witness to oo called,

Topf, Cine or in, the b.xk.tround uhd tr.c history of tho rcoistanoo
::o/u.eut, ^nd unasuueh .s * : cpf h..c no Knowlod,;e aoout tho defendant
Siovers, th_t we will stl ulate th-t w. will not wish to crooo-
CXaOlno Topf, if th..t -o the c..eo, -::d th .t will save consider..JlO
tine, Your aoncr.

a.J Pr-SIT— 7: c.uns.l would not -c required tocrose examine
t..e witness if he didn't desire to dc so.

„t this tine tno iricuaol will jo in rtccse until 9;30 taaorrow
uoraie.; „t which tine c.-jnsel :-_v proceed with tho cx-.inati >n of
t..o witness.

U liaCi&S -S -JUL 0930 £OChS. 15 o?aIL 19-.7).


15 April -17-;^7jC-l-l-?'stor (Ir.t., Rnrlor)

Crypt I


Official transcript of tho Arorican Military
Tribunal In tha r.attor of tho Uni tod States*
cf .^orlca against Karl Brandt, ot rl,
dofonianfc, sitting at Nuraborg, (tommy, on
15 April 1947, 0930, Justice Bo^ls prodding.

?:rz Parsons ir. the cc urt rece , .;ill plor.so find

thoir coats.

5,50 Hcncrablo, tho Judgos of solitary Tribunal I.

solitary Tribunal I is now in cossion. Cod savo tho Uni tod
Statoo of /.norica and this hon ratio Tribunal.

T'-oro will bo rdor ir. tho oourtroai.

’n: -: Ppjcids’.T: .Ir. arshal, will you ascertain that tho
dofendants aro aU prosont in tho court.

7!I3 ."AR3KAL: 2Iay it pioaso your Hor.'rs, all dofo^ianto nro
prosor.t in court with the exception of tho defendant H'co who was
onoucod by tho Tribunal yostorday.

^2 F73SID«r: Tho fioOrotary-Conora1 rrlll r.rto for t!io rocord

th ° rr ° COnCO ° f ^ * 00 ^t save tho Dofondant Rose,

ho is oxousod ir. wdor to spord tho day consul ting with his counsol.

Tribunal dosiros to annouiKo that whon a rocoon is taken
ty.orr.v at 12:30 o'clock tho Tribunal will net roconvono until
ton I’lnutos after 10: W o'clock on T-uu-sluy naming. There will bo
no cossion of tho Tribunal torarrow afternoon.

Counsel ay pr-^ool.


WH37T at-HKATEOf; (C.ntinuod)

T ». '--TO My (S.-10M1 far tho §>fondoBt slorort):

I rorttd you that ycu aro «U1 teJay u-dor oath.

At tho cohci&U , f yortortay oftornoon., ooo.-lar. r , Many „ M „„

“Oh 71 u tado yrlodrich Hioiochor'o ae 4 ualntahOo ard for Wi* roaoono

- - a =1 ro eoatnst »:, Mr.. , ^ootioa. « 4

:Wly rTOlirb ‘ttituio tho ^ S-ploOlro at

- nt tl- 1 that was arcu^d 1930?


$?96


15 ASril 47-:._rjO-l-2-Jostor ( 1 st., Hanlor)

Court I

A I don't this;-: IHelnoher at that tlno tool: the ;fesis very
seriously, an in feet few people did. i think he xogardod Hitler
a- a sountobank, aluiaet as a sort of a harlequin. His whole
interest at that ti.« "as concontratod upon Italics Fascisn,
and that was just ono or the reasons why i got so interested in
hi--., that ho r;aa -.-iolontly hostile to Italian ?ascis= in all Its
an-octs. 3iat, of cour.-o, was oxeoptional bocauso practically
ovoryfcody of the right had at least sern sdld empathy for
"tissolini, and Hiolcchor :iaio dofinito an czcoption or. all
pounds. First of all, I :uist ay ho was vory .uuoh opposod to big
tuclnosn and to largo le.-xlcd property, and ho r.rariol Italian
FqsoIs; a- an a ont of theso social forcoc. Also ho 'fas opposod to
tho tfcolo at&oophoro, to tho rhelo spirit of tho thing, i rororibor
lf 1 :i °>’ Juot & vo incidont-x raa.bor on tho oroning vhon
v.-hon tho noun aa through of that nisorabla faliuro of that
.xandlloquoat North Polo expedition of Cocoral Hobilo, and I
and ono or two of ny frionds woro sitting togothor with Hiolcchor
cvi, I boUovo, ons of hi ; frlorUs aa-oakara-yorhap# o boor gardon
I don't ro‘.cc.fco- on*; ly-thoy worn Juot oxaitsd about that fclluro
rM cbout to. b *ow it -as to ? a ccict prosti^o.

roll, fro:; 1931 orr/erds H-nlrra of courfa tartod to booa»
i aortent, r-i eo talked about it a f«r ti .os—vo not in 1931 —end
Hiolschor wa -ottin^ -ora en* ;.oro bit tor about tho prospect of that
'°- t ° 1 ‘ »* tla ^.portent in (krnvujy. Ho- thoro is ono teak,
ln rnCt| th ° M tL ~ ‘-1 -»t hiu. ^cin in 1945—tho Inst
1- - I at hiii boforo Hitlor—thoy -aist hire boon tho boginning cf
••opto .bar 1«8, sorh-itr it uu tho uni of An uat: I ;rr 3 with ny
‘ rW ‘ I * 00,, «atpJ. ho in no; c.t Houtor's. Incido-tclly, I should scy
- v..c ronso.na ihy Hiclschor could u vor *-v.o -jjy track "ith
atiornl foe 1 * 11 .- :- 5 ; i definite frioulliuos. -ith . j

^ * " Ci ° is: ,ol r t * *° *« chard Loo ontul wfcaa I just ‘
: .tianod, ^ as far C 3 i know thr.t I know only indlractly-ho
-•a quito a clo3o contact with Hortin BtStxn, c -oll-kaara


15 :larch -I?-:?-? jc-l-r-rcstor (I=t., Hauler)

Court I


Zionist philoso-hor. I ccx-Jd give a mEbor of other instance*
ataxt that if that should lo nocossory.

7011, to caa bcc’.: to that tali: in 1S32. it v*s just towards
tr.o oxd of tuo Puron roji^o, aixl to discussed of course the pros-
poc^a of that. 5To boing vary definite that that thing could not
aton.!, t at f.-at thing would not last, that it lad r.o taels, i
roro-ior that wo ::oro very oegor to got dotalIs about his riows.
Ho dro« out of his cupboard a liat of tiw uoebors of tho Harron
club which was than th- real power bohintl tho econo. *,? 0 sow that,
and ho said aorothing Hho, TToll.nov Ico): at that crowd", and,
"Do you think tliat oant lr t?" :; a , startin' fror. that cssurption,
ho insicto^. that ’to wrs Certain that in tho very noar future now
Ihtional •'lociftiin ;c-tld -.'in. That ado a loop ltiproncion upon
:o bocauso I had tnlcor. in r. public dobato which -wont threap
polltloal porioUoals r.rki so on. I had takor. a vory dofinito
stand on tho oppoolto aldo.


58?o


15 ..prll-M-DJG—2-1-Cook (let. Kaaler)
Court. Jfo. l


I mas still convinced at tint time, ir. Sep teller 1932, that
:.’&2i3n would not win, and at that tine end in that talk we had a
long argument about it. I don’t rcaecber the details. I suppose
I said what I always said then, and I have already given his main
argument; and then the talk turned to the methods to ccmtat national
socialism, and that point of the talk is the reason why 1 offered
•tyself tc Sr. ei3£«r v er cr a witness, because in that part of our
tall:, then, Hielschor developed precisely the avtheds t-hieh roro,
as 1 understand it no., carried out by Sievors. Cf course, *.o vere
ill very interested in pro'lens cf underground r.crk cn the Left as
much a.i on the Sight, in view cf the possibility of s coming dic¬
tatorship; and, in fact, there was at that time, and nl-o later, a
strong ainogreosent between ay friend Lcer.enthal and .ysdf; to-
ccueo I at that tine was still believing in a sort cf cn idoo of a
:aaaa underground resistance on quasi-dcsccratic lines, even under a
dictatorship; and the problem was uhethor that was possible, whether
under a tctalitcrion regime of the Italian type, which then was tho
set pattern still, ' ut, of course, under the assumption that a Nazi
dictatorship ir. Germany would 1oven much mere cruel and more tho-
rou.jh than iiissolini'a detotership, whether under such conditions,
oono kind of organized unler-ivund mass resistance would be the right
principle, or whether for quite a icn.; time the main task would be to
fork from within the cor; cf the Nazi machine. I remaster that dis¬
cussion particularly well, Z3 I soy, tcc-us u that ruilly was not
ani; .m argument between tdclscher zr.d us t-.c boys frm the Left,
hut t - caurc Looicntol r. myself had debated that point - 1 don't •
knew hew nrny times; :icr. suddenly Hiolscher witheut knaving it,
i it cur problem directly, so we sat thcr., net sayin,; ouch or
rccUy v 7 Httie, teccusi it i. as already cn atmosphere

’•■here discussinp undergreuai techniques cn a pcssitly near future -
-no wouldn't say mere then was necessary, and Iso Hielschvr did
n0t nontio " ^ if he had I think we should have

5399


15 Arril-2~AJO-2-2-Ccck (Int. Rosier)

Court He. 1

been dene with his, fcocauso that would have shewn an utter leek ef
seriousness, but he pointed cut one thine to us, which was highly
interesting then, just as c. piece cf information. He pointed out
the extreme inpcrtanco cf the SS thich was still a relatively s.ocll
body, after all until the Rcthc Putsch cf 193A, rather the Hooho
anas acre, it wes the- SA which was the rust intcrostir.. to the public;
but Hidscher pointed out he htd contccts - he proved to be well
inferred - he pointed cut thrt the SA was not the important thin
but that the SS was the real cere, end in that connection he nc-n-
ticned the importance of Ki-.mler, who then probably, 1 don't
raneraL or, was known to so frea tin occasional notice In the papers,
but certainly was not the pcrsonnllty ho grew to * ter. "ow
Hidscher dcvuloped n trc-prcn.:od idea: the only possible attack
upon a compact totalitarian regime was working within the hlghont
attainable stratum of that rogimo, and ho predicted the core cf it
would be mainly the SS; and then he said quietly: " 'oil I an pushing

aa aany people os I cm as hi ;h up its ; on rtfele in the 3S machine."

Of course, wo didn't discuss tho da tails. I only roaaaft r - ptical
ns I was rl cut th<- whol casunption cf a Hasi victory - dospito
that skepticiso, 1 ruvs-ber sjy fueling cf envy, thinking: "ball,
of course, if vc on the left hr i those contacts and cculd push

that . . : bo a fine thing, ut mo haven't.”

«t th scse tine I kept ay basic r-.-survo on both .toints, the-
first c:i the question of a victory of .Itzisa and, second, on Hiul-
schcr's view3 ' out tho ir-csaibiiiiy of overthrowing such n r< g aio
by CA33 pressure. Kcv, .-her in vnflhrry 1933, Hitler ersue tc po- er,
arvi the r-tas acv-stent :c:.t Rnnsh, and within year it wan easy tc
see that nest cf these und.r;jroun , i scve&vnts ettemptin. to work
one a,- the nr s sos rise • ent smash - well, -:1s would of ccurs bo
•*. lenr story, describing all th- occuartl tin - eviier.co ; :ut the
impossibility cf developing my typ- cf mass resistance to a regime
of the Nazi type. Then, in retrospect, that talk with Hidscher

- 5*X>


15 .vrril-4W>JG-2-3-Ccck (Int. : *_l.r)
Court Sc. 1


'issu.-c-d quite different proportions in ay sine*.

Me*? durlnr this v-ry ispertoat conversation that you had
with Hielscher, the details cf which ycu so ;*oll reaenber, took
place in the fall cf 1932?

It was By lest hcliacy I spent in I.crlin.

1 You were surprised et the v cry sh* rp attitude and the very
precise n-thed of cccl-ttir. the dan re r as Hiclsch-r doscriiod it
to ycu?

l.cll, if ycu .UJ\n ’y "Scharfc Finsteliur.^" - "sh .rp attitude",
Hielscher's hostility to i.’aaiaa, that lid net surprise roe ?t ell,
after knowing hia feur years, th*t was *. natter of ccurse, and
that »»o shouldn't have talked coniidontirlly with hir. if we hadn't
cm sure of that; but it =. ic xc think a lot at the tin*, and it
iaertoaed xo deeply afterwards, thrt see-tody hed said with such
nerfect maurar.ee what was £oin<; tc core, ... t ho war going to do,
and ftodo hia oe&surea noil lr. advance: and 1 - i, that in the
li/ht of all disasters of v. ricus und srground jrcupe, ^hich have
cost the livco of aovurrl of q;; close friends, 1 .*rcn increasingly
impressed i.ith th t f-.-t of ccnapir-torl*i Uchniquo, end ccnspirc-
tcri''l t .chniquu nsaunea yiryntic proportions in the fight .-j-.ainst
• dict-t rahip and pushes a .:,whr.t b-ck prep r political consider-
ntitns in the (kaoeratlc seir-; -:,i .h=a 1 luariiwi th;t pncticclly
not . n had . killed cf th:t cr -anisaticn, I thought that was
really 'r. nunir-i per-:u.t s n xissi. . -hrt r si under-:r:un-J orconi-

t'-tic:i c.uld achiuvo. hat, . , 1 lc£rn«d cnly when I

•

returned to G.rae-ny, r.t - ic tri-co it back - I do trace it tick to
this correct prernoais v/i :i- iy pr rati a cf noasurcs.

Dcct.r, rhr.t did y u fl . ut *hcut Hielscher rr.d his
activities durii:.* ycur voluntary ci T '.i;:n, which ycu Vurrn in

19.3?


5501


15 -rr i 1 -k-J ?- 3-1 -Gr o r. & (Int. Staler)

Court I

.a. I Md of course ccstrict vith uoople who had stayed in Geracny
end teen uc underground workers, who could -so longer continue, went
out to London where I lived, in *?articular -gain. Dr. lower, tal, who
of course knew about Hielscher. and when ho c.ae out for the last
tlco, I believe in 1935, I asked Me, "So, what about Kielocher?"

Of oourae, not only aoout hie but -tout -iotaas of people, but also
about Hielscher. "Cfc.uielec-er continues not saying such about whut
he does but crying a lot of vhut ho thinks of Hitler -nd tno aaxio".
-hen, after the ropes tighto.ivd news ceased. Only during the Her
vc nud a falso rucor th.t ho had csc-pcd to China, and that was
tho loot, and I ru-lly thought either ho was do-d or ho was in
Chunking; except th..t if tor 29th July, -ftor the attiopt on Hitlor's
lifo, a few of uo who knew a is onco askid, "Voll, if ho is alivo
ho has certainly been in it.* Ifc-t, of course, w-c guess work. That

a

v-s not outod on any niws. Until I uot his again when I rotumod —

I. Doctor, after you returned to Germany, did yoa find thut
your Judgment, respectively views ..croad, aoout filolschor wr.s
conf inacd In eny Way?

a. I Set Hiolcchor ag-in, or core exactly 1 r-n into him in
the office of the Do^ai of 3 ailoocphicol Faculty at karburg. Ho
hud thinned so ouch, n« n.i physic. 11 • dcc.yod so th .t I didn't
rccognico bin. Inca when ho b^jponed to ccntlon ale ntco wo noarly
f«-ll into iach other's ..ras out of pic sure that w. were still alivo
•md from th .t tiao onv-rdo, .s Vi now both lived in .mrburg, wo hud
Buaorous and clo3i con .cts r aging ov.r every in-gia.blc subject.

3ut, before I re.-11;/ dcci. id to -llov e personal iatiu .cy to dovclop,
though I redly h-d little doubt in oy Mad -bout the tan, I took
references, .ad I found out th.t the art who ka-v tho cost v.a
Professor “tiler in k • rburg, iucologi.a, .M I re JJgr don't know
‘ :tr.er the techaic.J he_d bit the leading s.a of ta^. Una S.icctc,
-v v _;gclic .i church covcseat ia Gern_a;-. -ad Boiler is u Christian

b'902

•' -


lr -*pril-K-J?-3-2-Gross (Int. Seller)


Court I

pacifist ^nd through the Confession-1 Church _nd through a Church
p-per he isouod he curried out cCtiv^ resistance throughout the r.gino.
Sow Heller h_d - long talc a'oout sielscher, ,jd the two =ain points
woru taut ho, Holler, h_d coopor-tcd with Kielecfccr under tho * .sis
since Hielechcr was in Horburg, th-t ho h.d holpod Hidsohor to go
to Sweden and t Jee up contacts with the allies, especially Unglioh
contacts with 31shop of Chichester. That w_s one thing. So ho
Just testified to tho continued underground activities of Hlolschor,
.nd secondly, he told =c -Bout his ..rrect oft>r 20th July and
about Hiclschor'o repeated floggings vnich explained to so his
ro.liy r-thor s„d and frlg.-ter.lng locko, and tnat, despite this
repeated torture hod not dcnouncod oaybody. -ov, if I a-y aqf only
onv. thing about Hidscher's dcvclopncr.t and hie political opinions
an I found then now; Zac point w;ich created a continued oh.rp di-
oagromoat between ua h.at dlsajne-rcd, th t was tho question of tho
Prussian tradition, Eiclochcr who hat had a ed'£ tlon in a typical
Prussian University fraternity was . very strong Prussian when wo
know one anotucr before Hitler, undor tho experiences of /nzidcc
Hiclochor has becoao un oxtreae “udordist of tho Pan europoun
version n..latticed th..t ac sees no use for any kind of Oera_ny as
a whole in c wider European fresowork but th .t the individual regions
hid LuoadorG of hern-ny ehould be directly Integrated into scoo
P.a e>iropc-r. organisation sc tfc-t not only Prussic out also GetBony
ns a St to would be cup-rfiuous. IV...t, of courso. ir. hio case is
founded on vcr; strong views -bout dccci.tr lisation in genor .1, Ho
h d cltte}‘E been _n adversary of 1-rg. towns and largo industries.

I don't follow bin or. ta.t point ..ad his view -jout politic ..1 fedo-
• -.11 rut ion hangs together - belongs to hie views coent industrial
deao r .rate dcccntr.^in.tion. ^t any r .tc the political disc—
reua^ u valci. a..do us look -t cn. _'.otr.ef o.fo. ^ Hitler rs two

fellows wuc could agree on a taing 0 ;t not ca csBenti.-ls, hod

5903


15 jpril-S-J?-3-3-5ro3S (’nt. Holier)

Coart I

P-rtly vanished because he h_d levied under liuxisa vr...t Pruaaicn
tradition* ohd cuthcritarianisa acuat in proctiso and in its effect.

Doctor, ..fter you returned to Gora_ny you sew it confimod
that Stancher h,ui token up tee fight ^..inat the iT.tionul Socialist
rogluc until the vory end without going into any cccprcaiso?

■a. Tea, I h-ve toured th„t.

% Oac fin-1 question. You got acquainted with Hiolachor
personally free the tiac bofore your iiai b -r^tion and frrci the tiuo
you returned to Coition}'. In it now vour opinion th_t thia unn, thia
fighter .igoinat H .tionol Socialist, would at ad up for p ora on of
wheo h«. la not coaf1nod 6h .t :.o v..c waging th. t vory fight with tho
o:jjo definite attitude and w a a hia follower in thia fight gainst
tho °utlonxl Socialist's regiae?

u. -ith roapcct to that aay I - work to what Hiolachor
told no about the dO_th of nia father, woo waa, according to wh..t
ho told ac, on old Silcai in peasant, and who g.;vc to nit aon no hia
dioiag with, knowing about Eiulachcr'e underground vor*. that ho
should kill u* Sony n..xia .*a ac could get. -»lao I -.now th .t
Hiolachor out of a feeling of eh.u*c of the igaooiny which Hitler
and ihixiiau have Drought over Gon—sy io fillod with thirst, if I
a y a.y blood-thirsty, hatred cf the Sasis, and the vory idou that
r.e could try to shield any of theac bays would sua absurd to
ao freu all I c ;uld g-thar ov.r tr.e now nineteen years of our
acquaintance. Of ocurse, there v_s ——

3- how, if i)r. niolachor stands up for —yonc person ho
w:'ild only chooac a die body who h_s followed :-i-. in his fight with
full faithfulness. •

I aa sure of tn_t.

Hr. President, I have no further questions.


15 ATTil-H-OJ-3-la-Gr-ss(int. Eanl_r)-


C art 1


Q Doctor, tz a this Kiclscher Resistance li'-vcocnt, about
which y-u speck, Eerely a secret uovenant which ccnfinc ’ itself only
r largely t ’-cl-ato, tc oral iissursi-.n, to perhaps secret i-sidnaticn
f lit-r;,tur- an.’, ar. ucents a.Jainst thu rc~iac, -r was it on actual phy¬
sical, .r-anizei nov-sunt with loa .rs, arcs, mnuniticn, and supplies
prepare*: un'~r an :r anise ’, plan o f attack t liqui ’c the Nazi leavers
an! tc take .over the Gcv,.rrru.nt?

A I was never a neebur f that r onisati r., for ro3scn
->f basic political .iff. r*.nc>3 if r. ther.

Q Can y«u ray r.e« -a ay je. pi*, were neeburs f this Hielscher
Hes ictanc- Hcvcount?

.1 N;. I c.ulin't. M such ctails were ever iven in talks
.•ith uwi' -rs, i acquit- sure, I can answ.r f ne thin , they certainly
-in 't issue publicati'ns.

Q Lven sucrct publi -atiens?

A That was just the point that these things could net reach
nybody effectively an only hul, the “'-stap , t trace people

Q Can you say wdt hap. -n- V the Kicleehcr n v-nont
after Hitler cacc to pewe'r?

A W*U if - cay 1 just c. iae back t y ur rr-vi us question
which I haven't answer ccaplctely, if I nay s c nc-rnia the question
r.ther he had strict r.-anis.d r u 4 ., I think hie circle :f friin : s
w..-, fairly c c.act hof re thu Nazis an! they 'ov.lop- ! t--\.thcr, and
fr r. all I ccul -atr.cr fr-c nis rn etails, fr c talks -f a nueber
f his Irion s rh o I Jen w n w, fr n Hi- 1 r's acc unts, they hal he, f

c urse, was the can wh ran thu thin . I'l ha I a r.uBb.r -f lea irs and

he n-. a strictly r.paniz- r up. Ale , I assuce th> r.blec f Vespers
i ! net arise when y.u wurc in the S3 - access t weaj ns was n.~t the
, an it w;uld have been f r r u , fr c tr.v left. That is was

’• que *.i r. f j .rsu .-•’in pe pi. I an quit- c nvinc. , because on the

a r.tr ry th_ ilficulty rras that y u c ui nly c vt ^ re r lcss..fre<

5*)5


15 :.Fril-»-GJ-3-2e-Or :ss-(int.Bnslcr)-


Cjirt 1

oner- rcapl- whe w.rc versus led and the task «s not persuasion but ac-
ticn-ovorthrow :f the re Si.

Q An*! yu say, however that ycu know nothin.' that was actu
ally rv- in a nlysic-.l ir.y to overthrow th- re ;ine? Ycu say hrwvcvtr,
that of your own kncwlelrc you knew nothin that was actually 'one to
•verthrew the revise - I an talking ab-ut in a ractical physical way
either ction or preparations, os ’istin-uishc l fr n cnotions, or fee¬
ling, or debates, or ‘iscussiens about the natter?

A Here I can only answer frea what I hear l since ny return
but I \ net base syoelf, on what Hielschcr tel * ne ut n what Heller
toll no wh> is a '.ifferent -pini n n he sold, Hlelscher ha-! pr-siti-
vuly a,/ ra eh- hin lrcctly on the questi. n of killin Hitler.

(, Let us assun- that a nan i#k espouse.! the principles of
this resistance scven.nt ccul’ w.rk hinself into the hi;h circles of tho
Nasi 0«vurnncnt f:r the purpose, let us asouce, cf securin’ vital infor-
nati n. hat infornatien cul! hv inpart t- the leaders of this s.-called
resistance mevenent that cruld K use*, by the resistance nrvonent to
practical a'.vanta-e in actually, physically verthrewint on 1 roplacin.;
its leaders?

A I think If such a nan were sufficiently lii-jh in the ranks
:f the nasi i venent he ccul; itpart every kin! rf necessary inforaa-
ticn \r. nothin well tin. , .n: well cnctive could he Iona with such
ir.f.rn ti.n,

Q But the cr.:ani-wti n f th_ resistance nevenent, '-3 ycu
actunllykn.w it Iran y '.ir wn kn wlel^c, let us assume, that there wi3
within th. hi:h rinks • 1 the ."ehraacht, the Gv.rrr-ent-f thu 23, a nan
wh ha2 accessibility • nil inf rr.-.ri r., .hat could this niilscher Re¬
sistance it vecent had tone with it in usin it tc * ratical a .vintage in
actually brin in • about a rcas.nnbly quick liqui 'atin cf Nazi loaders
r verthr-w f the tn-n xistir Nazi r be.

~ Stnrtinr fr n the nssur. ti r. that th irr* iiate aia was


killin' Hitler


3906


15 A : ril 47jc-5-l-Lo.~cOr (1st., R^lor)

Court I

3 Starting fro:; the Ixradinto assumption that tho irraliato nia
was to ovort!ir<w tho govornaont i*nl to roplr.co tho govermant vd th
2 <x-o typo of eovorrca.it that tho group folt was noro accoptablo for
tho Gor'M paoplo.

A Tho first atop of such on- overthrew would bo tho hilling of
ill:rilor and Hitlor. Thor, you would nood a :-~n, high up in tho ranks,
for lnforr.tion on the- political ond on tho tochnical sido. On tho
technical sido you would hovo to h-.vo a non who ruol ly knew rocothing
r.bout tho uovoronts of HI:, dor -id Hitlor, about tho wry thoy *oro
nrotoctod, about tho people who would havo to olirtnatod or who woro
to liave boon rus’tol into tho jresonco of t._ to have boon killod;
about potor.tlal £r lords :ul or/x-ioa of such entorpriao; and, i
should ary, alnoct ovon .oro i:.portout—killing is nothing if it ic
not politically wall tLos, and in ardor to ti:a it voll you had to
havo u cloar idoa of tho wholo political art .dlit-ry situation.

Q And also you havo to bo ablo, upon tho daath of tho vie tin,
to solzo tho rolns of govornrant rnl to ootabllsh a wall organized
eovornrant in nccortar.co with your procopto and principles, is that
net trua?

A I think so...I think oo. I think tha quostion of tho formation
of a govorreant, as far as I can g-tbor nor, aftor ny roturn, was not
tho pri:a concorn of Hicl 3 chor, bocausa 1 *. -.fas in difforont hands.

Thoro mn tho Coart odor caibir-otion which had a covornr.ant r.oro or loss
ready but with which Hiolschor disagreed boc.-uso ho was oppoosod to
big tusinocs art lar 10 scale lartod property art rogardod that
govorrsont as a sa-sornrant which would bo largely dapondont on those
groups.


15 April 47-1 >?JC-5-2-Lo3£or (Int., Rsz-lor)

Court i

Hew long leva you kn<vn tho do forwent siovors?

A I did not •cr.cw Sievora nt nil.

^ I aoo.

A U&r W*s nay nnro rontionod to no oxcopt tLo sx-r-o of Plr\os,
o"° °- Hioichor»B frloalo, when I coutionod ropontodly togothor with
As I said nlrondy, i should r.ot h-.vo tnkon hin soriously if ho
hf«d divulged rraos end nirrbora.

* Thou you tiro not in n position to know, of your own know-
iodgo, that Siovora wna nr. cctivo ;vnter of tills resistance uovonont?

A Ho, I could r.ot testify to that.

TT3 Hl’SSTDST: B-.vo you nny furhtor questions, counsol? i an
addroooinc counsel for Dofondant Siovora.

D!>. WSE3CE©3: I hnvo no further questions, Your Honor.

"niTT PRSUDST: ato thoro nny quostlons on tho pnrt of dofonoo
ocu;i8ol of t. ia uitrose? Thoro bolng n<x;o, tho Proaocution nny
oroso-oxmino.

KA3D7: Bio prcaooution has no quoatlona, Your Honor.

TH3 PRJTID^T: Tho witness ny bo uxcucod fron tho stand.

(Uitnoso Borkonnu lonvos tho stand.)

CH. I now nek tho High Tribunal to pondt rxo to

call thj witrorw, :)r. Topf.

TK3 IRJSOHiT: Bx» rnrahol will rattan the Witooe Srwin Topf.

SOU: - 0 ?T, a witness, took t: o stand and tostifiod os follows:
BY JUDC3 SiEHire:

You will roi3o your right hard an’, toko tho oath, rorootinc
•ftar no;

I scoot by Cod, tho Alrighty and Cfcinsciont, that I will speak
tha puxo truth and ••ill withhold and add nothing.

(Tho witnoaa ropoatod tho cath.)

You ray bo suatoi.


DE37T SmiT'An Oi:

BY DP.. HaSGBES?:

^ t"033, your nano is Dr. Krwlr. Topf?

A Y03.

^ You vwro bom 22 Docor.bor 1098, ut Jkjinlngon?

A Yos.

^ Your proaout rosldonco is Haubure-Volkadorf, and your
profo33iou la olitor?

A Yos.

Z ?r-t; 192C 1936 you woro tho editor of tho Borlinor

Tp,6oblat t?

A Yon.

, “1 ?°r *rfcat reason did loavo that nawspnjx'r?

A *7ork lr. tho proas aft or 1933 hod bocc-.o increasingly
unploaoant frcri a subjoctivo point of view did not bring :v> any gain.
Svory expression of froo opinion n.! vary possibility of voicing
ovor. an indlroct critique raa provor.tod to on ir.croasing axtont. It
soared sonaoloss to rural a in a position which, aftor 1933, wan
ooncidorod by ;o to bo important and important for tho futnro. in tlio
crjo of tho Borlinar Tu&jblutt in particular tho danger oxlstod that
t':ic r.ows paper would bo cluvtgod into u rational Sceiulist shoot or
that it nsuld ba stopped ontiroly. a utror of fact, shortly aftor
:-V departure, tho chiof odltrr, Paul Schaoffor, who a ployod uo
and who supportod :a in ovory way, v *s disidaeod fron hia position
r.l wua lator cor.t to jparica as a foreign correspondent. year lator
tl.o ontiro publication coural.

~L Tit-.asc, a." I ask you briefly a* ut your political at'titudo?

I “soar, tho political attitude which you hold boforo and aftor tho
nor 1933?


5909


15 April 47--1-Fjo-5—i-Lossor (Ir.t., Raster)

Court I

; v TToll, during ::y tino at tho university i Influenced by

Socially and ir. tho year of 1923, stealing strongly undor tho

lr:pros3ior. ot tho riurdor of Rathor.au, wont ovor to tho social

da: ocratio party. I hod a fos frioads at Hor-burg who pornuadod :io

•

to do that. I rill root ion their no: os; thoy ¥*ro 2 gor- Wortlzeir-or,
yranzhofan ••ho is nwt: a ruridont of tho Uni tod States, a profossor
thoro, Hauhach, and : iorondorf also boic^od to his circio. I did
net caj into tho foreground ir. tho Social Doz-ocratic Party but
shortly before Loins t-.( tin 3orlinor Ta.oblatt, in tho fall of 1925,
for a fov: uor.tha i utrfcod with tho Roiohstac fraction of tho Social
Doriocratlc Party r.z u roior.tlfic noiistn t. Boir.fi a bor of that
party,. causal ..o difficulty c~::cor:vi:, :y i:: tho Borlir.or
logoblatt.*••

q Jitnofls, 1 vor.t to interrupt y-u. If you said "party" bof:*ro
you raoz.t tho Social Dozzocratic Port;*?

A Vos, thatla ox-.ctl7 shat I ou’.t. Thoro woro :.o difficultlos
f:r no to doUdbcmto : 1 th t:.o h’oltbuol ;o.

1 T/it..onn, *. ho:, lid you rxj» Priodrich Hioloohorte acquairta:«o?

A I • ot Hiolchor la 192S, through tho lodlation of a frloszd,

Dr. Soliagor, rtudiod :.*ith o.

a Uhnt did you got to kaoc about hie activity aid his political
attitude boforo and after tho year of 1933?

A Before 193: ho i to bo considered C3 a -an of tho political
Rights. Ho constituted a particular typo of tho Rightist eocsorr-.tivo
attitudo, vaa =v plotoly 3 v . : ad eortali socialist

traals without bringi a -at a u:.i :: b-»:oon tho Prussian cystor.
arA Socialise ac it . ! ; j i.. t'.o ciso f Oswald Sportier.

1 h'itnosc, tho Tribunal is .-.i ./ interested in Snowies wiothor
Hiolschor at th.at tL.u nlroaiy hal ai an opposinr attitudo towards
*-ho SBD.-J7


15 April 47-iI-?jC-5-5-Lo3Cor (Int., lender)

Ca-.rt I

A Eurlng tho fir3t yoers of our acquaintanceship, tho !SDAP
playod a? particular rolo '.rhats cover. Tho 2SDAP woo cons id or od ns a
hozcloss shoot of Face is::. I and ny frionds :?oro ir.torostod in
sooi:i Hiolschor as a cloar qpd dofinito opponent ox' Fascisr.. ilhan
Hitlor end his Forty erau and gradually dovolopod into a danyor, it
boca o very apparent that lie was a very sharp a~ dofinito opponont
of that :: vonort• Ho rojoctod it vary lofinitoly tut was also
convlncod about its danger, *ud f t a vary aarly tiiue realized tho
dar. ora which it ropronor.tod.

$ 3urinc tho ti;. 0 aft r 1933 did y-u rocularly ;eot Hiolschor?

.. If I ra-oiibor corrootly, Hloliohor loft 3arllr. shortly aftor
1933 end wort to :ioiul:s£on, to hervj iwn. I occasionally not hln
thoro occasionally i/hanover i visited :y parents. At any rnto # I
tool: ovary opportunity to scoa Y. to Mr. and to oxchanco opinions with
hin. I ostln atod hln ard his <ud<?.or.t highly.

Q Hasn’t thoro a very ii^ortant conversation botwoon you ard
Hiolschor In tho year of 193G?

a I roally Jo net tea: tc .:at you aro x-oforrlr.j.

1 Did not llloluohor at •:iy tl..o toll you that ho ha! rocoivod
a ronorrek rtosifiir:ont by tho Ahnonorbo?

A Yos, ho told :.o that. Ha.ovcr, I dc not fcolioro that that
was in tho 1-oar 1939; as far os I roro-ibor, that only occurod of tor
f:a outbreak of tb.o war. I ay bo nistnkan - I a*, not absolutely
cortnin aboxt tho dato. Than I hear’ abut that rocoorch assieiuont
it roproRcntal a sovoro chock to r,-i at first. I ms cmvincod that
ovoryonc who won a JofirJt opponent of tho Hitlor rogiro should

owuy ircri any clooo contact with any cf Hitlor’s rr^anizatloie.
murine that eonvorsnticn, he ;ov_r, Hiolschor cor.vir.co* * that ho
-U-. air.tainir.g hia prop,? innor uttituda and that it was only for
reasons cf onpodioncy that lu leek :vor this rosoerch a- sicc ont, in
r or te continue his work in a :c mriafiol ray a. i irith tho help
: his political foilcmrs »; :o woro also in that orsaniaiticn.


15 A'ril •' 7—.7JG—h—€—1 error
Court I


(lot., Stor-lor)


^ TTltsoss, did HlcX-ickor «ko «ny uttorosca:: to you with
refore.neo to otkor resistance .prcujs with which ha colloborc.tod?

A ’.'oil, wo pro now tuning to'.- Intor period of tii-o ncd r-ro
n a.i roforrlnc to the yonrs cf tho wnr, whoro i visited hi:: r.t ovory
opportunity in Borlin. Durin, thnso conversations I found out thr.t
ho hrd r. vory oxtonsivo kncnlcdoO of wh-.t efi on ir. tho

unlcr-r -:::i r.ovaiont, which t.u lid r.ot dosifnr.to thr.t ;:pj r.t thr.t
tl 3. ..yaolf, Vr: r.oh, Iloro'^'-rf, :ot tho clrclo cf Aoiohwoln,
llcdtiu, York, Ifeuochnor, Tin, tho •Kroicnaor" circle .-a/l thr.t wr
sprint 1941. Cf courco I lid not toll Hidschor f.-t I w.a in closo
oor.fcr.ot '..-it: th^so -oopio, bjciv.ro I ;mr r. t nut!.-rized by .y frioitfo
to liacv.es t;o*o .r.ttorn 1 th ny a olso. 3ut I ooncludod fra:
convorcrti ons i L-.d • «y Hiolrc/or t'.i/*.t ho tnX nn rpprcr.l rto
’.inovlodco cf this cr.u? rr,l t’^t boyon! thr.t ho : aut !wn hnd r.
vory clono cor.t-.ct with other clrclo- which i than did net Jcr.cn;
r.b .ut rni of -iioco onlntonco I only ;vt to kacr rtf tar tho 20th.

■ ' July, ••.at thoyworo ,,anorrlly known.

cj 7itBor-, ycu k-d cntUuoi tk u-. o <<f Kroisnu olrclo bof^ro
r.-.'i', end Ir. thin eonnootion you ootlonod r. mr .bcr of nr; or.
y c.ru :.oro porsonrlitioo who plryod n coaaidorr.blo prxt In tho
rocistivico :vevao:;t in Oor ny r* thr.t ti..u?

.. Tos. y-no cf uc know ur.r.ctiy hew cc:tausivo ro.nlly this
rocictrnco . ova or.t v-ns. Bro?y c au f us know vory few corse ns.

4ll f us ronlizod th-.t -boro . ur.t bo n number of ujfrononto if
i: - Jfction.nl Gcciclist ra ’ a -.ho -ora csc^iiorinp wL-t i.’rs taro
030 “ d who -/oro rrernri-.. r:.x» notion, tut or.o ocul • rwOiso tho
or.iJro ox- ant of this n.ctic r.t t .r.t tirsa. If I ry rtrto y cylalon
I 'ust c-y t’.r.t it wns orly nftor t .. cnpitulnt los. th-.t 1 toe no
“ 3 ;- “-i*tad thr.t cl-so frtendr f :d-.a b.lrxvi t t -t r»p. a
- ' rr -“" i - J -» * v o - *r:-:nb-.rsor, n‘ u- ich, colcn/o!

' -- - ‘ - " L * • •

r frier! f r± h i t in 2 rlia, of tho

5712


15 47-:>?jC-=-7-Loscor (Int., Hr;-.J.or)

Court I

ftrsrVfi!jrtor Zoltuc; issd rlso bolongoi to tho circlo of Louschnor,
/•n* hoyond tir.t corrected *ith tho pooplo of ...


Court I

15 A;.r £i7— - 6-1 - LJG - -.ley - (Int Ra-Lr)

i. Aro ye. apcrJdnc about tic s-co Kn.isau circle?
a. ■ -re furt-aar people involved. !«s, Geer'c-lor,

?yor f i^iysig, that .“.s the person I was locking for. Ho this
intended to be • .r . 73 office at that ti-ae.

Da. fcZESaSBBP.i And ir. that connection I nay draw the atten¬
tion of the Tribunal to the Document -lovers 15, which I have
already submitted, where tho r at i -ertar.t aenburs cf the Kreisau
circio are listed. This is Doeuaont Book 2, to be found on page 3U.

It is the second boforo tho last c*. a cf t at document book, whoro
one cm see tho no. :s, Tvrk, loltke, oronaorf, Haubach and
RoJ chwuin, which aro mentioned by tho witness.

«. ..itiwss, it is naturally very difficult for an outsider

• .

to gain a ..icture of this Ocnaan Rosistonco Movonont. One thing is
r.oticocblo, tr. .t an oxtrao ruinary r^ticonco was maintained when
D aos which belonged to that novamont. '.*hy was that?

One could p-rhaps think that a conspiracy against tho National
Socialist r. 1-j woulrl hnv. * > . .ve v uan port cf a broad basic, end
that of necessity would hav- involve' that everyone who wac a rw*nbor
of that novuraunt would al least knewr tho names of a large nurbor of
other rnburs f that r. v_c-:nt; and ny question is, ehy such a
rjtic.»r.co \ns displayed, .a sec .jdly h a wore thwSv individual
.*r '>!“ ;r -niz. vithir. th? entire -oosictance r-veicnt of Gornary?
a. .7, tactics arrployed .• t ry ne should know tie few
f that group by nj. That really vir .a natter
of course. lb«ro w re .t danger of anyone knowing too i.uch. One
r.i ’ to const -or t.at it nay -oil have happened that any reafcer^pould
h-vo been f rcud *.o testify *r_f re a national socialist agency
tape. • as adl -T ire :f the set

ir.turrii ation. :: ic o : ' sure fhirnelf tr the oxtont

th * . .nun a coercion was as. or various eh-.- '.cal --.ins w«re used

such as tho "truth' 1 'rug, of which .xist-arcc. I gained knowledge in

5 912 *


Court I

15 Apr 1-7-’: - 6-2 - LJG - Malay - (Int. Hsaaler)


shu Rsichtcgs fire precede, cn<- could not be sure that -it such a
aanent ena would r.ot break dewr. physically and psychologically and
testify t ■ ratters which would incriminate a nurber of pcoplo and
cause their death. As for th3 second part of your question —

}. Ir. this connection I rant to ask you another question. Is
this also the reason why Hielscher mentioned no names towards you
of the combers of his resistance circle?

A. Certainly. It was a natter of course for mo not to ask him
for any nares. Just as little as I asked Reichwein to give no any
namoa. Perhaps I say cent ion an oxample, at that time he mentioned
the name Stelzer, and the ccr.ent I heard Stelzer, whom I had already
know for n long time, I said whon ho is with you I can work with
you too.

Q. Witness, I have submitted a document to the Tribunal whero
tho most important combers cf the ?rcup of Kroisau are mentioned,
and the name of Theodor StoUor is mentioned, who was Landrat of
Schloawig-Holstoin up until 1933; is that the sir* one?

A. Yes. Ko is at present prosidont of tho County of Schleswig-
Holstein.

W. i.itnjss, in tho course of ycur Journalistic activity you
gained knowledge of the activity of tho various parties in Germany;
wasn't it on absolute necessity, prerequisite, to keop the naros of
tho party Barbers secret in the care cf associations whs were in
opposition to the prevailing system cf government; very often only
first nates or nicknames were known?

That cay be. ' feel cur activity ai ti-

tutirg a conspiracy, but I felt at that it was a natural thing for
those people who opposed National Socialism to get together, rrr.o had
decided to bo against it at personal risk and to see to it that
simultaneously with tho collapse of the repine the «r would end.

5. witness, do you know aiythir- about Hielschor after tho 20th


of -July l?Ui?


C715


Cc art I


15 At r L7— - 6-3 - 1<X5 - Haioj - Pj= 1?r

A. ‘'her. wo heard the news of the event on the 21st of July ir.
the ooming I na ^ -ally had reason to feel that Hielscher would be
incriminated ir. that ccnnection. I endeavored to gain certainty about
it, and I therefore wrote to his sister, who was tarried and residing
at Frankfurt on the !'air., and whosq address I got from hin ••'hen
visiting hin on ar. earlier date. I didn't get any news about that
until shortly before Christmas 19L., and then I suddenly received a
postal card fron Hielscher where he wrote that he h3d cnbarked on a
Journey which had lasted three months, and that he had now returned.
This nice it cl-, x to no without having arranged that as a codo, that
ho had bo.n under arrest fer three ..on ha, ird had new been roloasod,

I took the next opportunity to apeak to hin, which occurrod around
the niddlo of January then passing through Berlin, riding from tlio
iaat Front to the ..'ostom Front. 1 had a long and very impressive
conversation ..ith hir. on which occasion ho described to no how hio
arrest had coae about after he had visited Stauffonborg at his flat
in Baaborg, 1 also knmr Staufforfcerg beforehand. Ho related to do
what r.ithrda woro used when he was interrogated. Share was physical
sdstroatcont and hir face wan boaton. A 3trong moral prossuro was
exorciood on hin. Ho told ru that ho vary soon realised tnit they
didn't know very much about his activity, so that he once more gained
courage to deny everything. Be further said that his friends, vho
were within the party nd SS organisation, had sent hir i:.Tor.nation
into tho prison which confirmed hi- in his attitude, and in his de¬
cision to deny everything.

73".. 2XSCe38&Rz Mr. President, I •'ould suggest you take a
reces3. I shall reaiire ntpraxi ’tely ten core minutes for question¬
ing ry .itcess.

TK5'FH2SHfcffx Counsel, did L understand you to say that
Document Silvers 51 had been offered ir. evidence?

D.-l. SISGSHIE?.: Dccuce.it Sievors 52 I already submitted a3
Siovers Exhibit Ho. 15.

5916


Court I

15 A., r !*7-.I - 6-u - IJ1 ^loy - (Int. Earaler

THB R > 3SIT5!iT: I ais'ircerstood you. I thought you referred to
Document 51, which has not yet been offered in evidence. Tho Tribunal
will recess for a few minutes.

(Thereupon "a racc-ss mas taken.)


?917


15 -yril :7-:!-S"-B-l-.v;ty-IntT ' n Zc'. rcr.
Court !f<*. 1


• : rttWS.X Is '"-in in rosrir.:;.

T_' .... 3£Ci-Zr3Rs

. ct- r, I ! o ..lrc xly aired tv to ivo tl 0 Tribun-.1
r. brio* abofcci of »:! t-i? :• nt by - “C-oriv.n Ho.*iatcr.co
"0 -t C n ;iu lioccribo It lr. V 3 ror.toncoc?

. . eluir . cturo cf tl c t* irca which hovo boon built
»*. Bints t: - b -innin ••£ tl «. * r. ,nd w ici finr.lly led
tc tl. r.cbJnn ..f tic iOt’r of July, c. met *'c .incd yet
’ n tc: >i r my. rs 1 v. t leal about

«: br ck >/ . . orf . 3v rye n - of

uo wlc XI 5 -r ■» • t ir. by no <■* tier,© re: .>0 rr r;K~ 1 d
■)ol.-:v:od :r it IV tio V rirrir ; cr tld J.-.vo insist int

C‘ V, : \ . v-ific' V: xnt.

It crnriflfc'.d f . member *>f . or; lo :..th rod . rrvnd c»rt.\ln
•.c.ti’o . ra n ca. It • * tbs.:, unr.ev 1 , a ycnod

ir. 1- c.'.eo, f rr oc :o'-no to at nd t tie y>< ir.t v:J ;ro twe

n”-. r cr ctod, sVer n no cido, the otl >r

nido t: c or. ,j vnd Levee) nGr . r ! •‘oic)-;oin -nd t: o
roitr.u circle. 11 the :ot! ods resulted rf nocoeeity

C 1 f ollborr.tlcn. Dl-oyrcevlfcod fren
tio f .ct 6! i o. c) ~ I u a *■ * a tiro tor. ad *oy tl 0 Pc at..70
-nu fclo -uv tl t bsoi- to acorocy rr.a req ired,
t ur. _r; toed Inti : v t ir. . ie vo. ont, ’ - 1
lrr.’rod men: re rl rr lands frr _c lo xfr, m v Id * ' rritod
1 -or -:t r Ct f .1 f tic 1 itl-r l;o i tc t> he

iapttvbeatft . c • , So tlcri nd, -hen 1 not

n v yorplo, jc in tl o .4*.y, I ccnsidorod

a -•


r .yeolf \ r s Hi. r *r. tl

c, c t. t;‘ . I ;.


r-rt rf tl i<


-•a cv.t tVor. 1


-•tor.'’


* til tic ir-'cl «.-T July, 1 l'- b.-d rrt Ter cfficora rtx

ore, Jiret -f .-.11, c n.-otont o >-lc r/, rocor.J, docidod

550.6


15 -pril 47 -K-SV- 8 - 2 -?U Jtr-Ir.t: v n Scl con
Cen t i'r. 1


c. , neats cf tlx .;ci i-x.

.! on •.»; t is c..ll-d tl.o Qor.u'j'. hoslstdnco I'cve-
xr.t .hut; s C *:o 1. ined is >. co.v.plcto crecniz. tier, -.nth
. woll-c r'wni: od iv.cV.inc V. icl ccordin-.tod .11 tl o
dofcc-ils, -id one mot not L-. '--no . rxvoaont vd icl' lv.d
1 r o -r.-cn-.is, secret rson.'.ls, jh. mo use net i.w ;ir.o
i f ’o. lor t t/! icl liotri'.uto l’ivl*>illr • cr.j Cl:o
popul ticn. -lo vc t n-or wl icl tiro tonod tic
in&ivldu. 1 riv.1 tie G0st - md felt CD do .11 of tl.-.t
1 cei’.'lo, 1 o 0 x* r. .losir nee c r jont rr .* • .tier
mu- cf b ll ’ odat .nco c-" l>e 'd icl rcro cnly in
1 'ro c.-it.ct r itl ■ r.j rJvr« r , r’ .jorl .vjs nlf the
1 — J-rr lenotr u cl t! vr, -d tl oj v ,vo '■ m only vitkln
; c cji'cl.a. la t .t true 0


15 April . ?-J:-^r~-?-l-Grc3s (let. too -
Court 'o« 1


A Yes, that is true and I should especially like to era.hasize
there wasnot question of ary -ass propaganda because any attempt
at -ass propaganda would have iruaedLately betrayed the secret.

There was no possibility under the laws of ’.Tar to appeal to the
rasses ir. any way. !fo organization over all these snail groups,
which rould have organized then existed. Tbore were sinply a
nimbor of croups which somehow had contact in cany cases only
from the outtri.de, not fron the center. Tho hops of all these
snail groups was that at some central uilitary point a power
would bo founded which woull diaposo of cilitajy forces at tho
decisive nonont to be able to paralyse tho SS.

Q Did IJLulschor ovur toll you that rwrbers of his cirolo
prepared my attacks on Hitler cr H i ta lor?

A Kiclschor, at a tino - it :aist havo be n between tho fall
of l?h 2 .~ !Jo, I an sorry I havo to think for a ainuto —- tho fall
of 1912 and the fall of 191*3 — before Stalingrad — reported that
an attack was actually being 1 reparod which was to bo carried out by
a group of officers, and lw emphasized that Hlsrlor and Hitler would
hare to bo attacked at tho sot* tine, but that ir. his opinion it was
ever, more Important, if one had to. cheese between the two, to

'j the nan who was the executive, that is, Kierlor. Because
without Hitler Hirnlor .'ould be quite capable of carrying on ‘-ho
rogina but Hitler would not ba a" le to continue without
executive power.

Q And did Hialscher toll you that within his circle urh
plans ware hair.p cade?

A "run what he told no I could not tell whether the raociHo

M

group which wnspreparing these plans was under his or whether lie had
merely obtained knowledge of these plans through friends. I did not
adc hin tide because it didr.t' seen exp-diont to no to know too nuch
-bout a Vr±; in which 7 could not - n*tici.rit 'irectly.

Q As far as you kr.cr *33 there, any definite list drawn up -for
tho people to bo appointed to tho Government after the overthrew?

TfAj


15 April . ?-J >-r.!^-?-i-Oro ss (let. von Schoen)
Court *fo. 1


A Yes, that is true and I should especially like to emphasise
there wasnot question of any -ass propaganda because any attenpt
at nas3 propaganda would have immediately betrayed the secret.

Thera was no possibility under the laws of War to appeal to the
masses in any way. Ifo organization over all these snail groups,
which would have organized thee existed. There were sinply a
number of groups which somehow had contact in many cases only
from the outside, not from tho cor.tar. Tho hope of all these
small groups was that at some central military point a power
would bo founded which would di3poso of militajy forces at the
dociaivo moment to be able to paralyze tho SS«

Q Did ISiolschor ever tell you that Berbers of his cirolo
properod ary attacks on Hitler or Himmler?

A KLolechor, at a tino - it :aist have beon between tho fall
of 19h2.— Ho, I am sorry I have to think for a minuto — tho fall
of 19ii2 and the fall of 1913 — before Stalingrad — reported that
an attack ms actually being prepared which was to bo carriod out by
a (roup of officors, and ho emphasized that HLnsslor and Hitler would
havo to be attacked at tho same tin ?, but that in his opinion It was
over, aoro important, if one had to chooce botwoen the two, to
exterminate the- man who was the executive, that is, Hirrlcr- locauso
without Hitler Himmlor vrould bo quite capablo of carrying on '.ho
rogir.o but Hitlor would not be able to continue without Hi.mr'lor*s
executive power.

Q And did !ttolschcr tell you that within his circl- Jrh
plans wire being made?

A From what he toli no 1 could not tcli whothor the specific
group which waspreparing those plans was-.nndor him or whether ho had
merely obtained krowiedpe of theso plans through friends. I did not
d< him this because it diir.it seem o:q>edior.t to nr, to know tco much
about p. thin- in which I could ret participate : irectiy.

5 As far as you knew was there any acfir.ito list drawn up for
the* people to bo appointed to tho Government aftar the overthrow?


15 April !;?->fr-&TB-9-2-Gross (Int. von Sc'..oen)
Court 3b. 1


A At that tins I did not knew that anyone hid prepared a
prospective list of govenoont officials. later I learned that
people ir. Goerdeler's groups had worked this natter out in particu¬
lar detailj but fron ry own "knowledge at that tine I can only say
that Dr, Hielscher once asked ce how I felt about the question of who
wasto bo appointed to the position of Reich Food and Agricultural
Ministry. That was a question which interested ne particularly
because ir. rjy Journalistic work I had dealt especially with agri¬
cultural nsattors, and I had written a bode on the subject in the
Rcwohlt Publishing {feuae which was harmed In 1933. Hielscher asked
mo, '■’hat do you thin’., a group is cossidorir^; appointing Schlnnge-
Scho'-ninror "inintcr for Food and Agriculture." That is not tho right
word - appoint - but wo aro considering hin for tho position. Tsr.'t
that a wren." choice, isn't this aan a representative of big agrarian
lnterosts, would ho bo nblo to work in our spirit?" And no discussed
this question. I cannot recall discussing any other posts and who was
to bo appointod to then,

Q Is it old if sonsono work in.; in a suhordliato position in
son: refaistar.co group knew nothin-; about positions to bo appointed to
certain monitions after the ovorthror?

A It was a natter of courso that tho nanos or tho conspirators
and persona who night bo called upon later were net nor.tioned. That
was the practice in this work.

1 Then if I may sub up, on tho bases of obser i -a • - :r .-itretch¬
ing over about 17 years you aro convinced that Hielschei de¬
cidedly cf tho *iazi ro iro?


15 *n ril-U-j?-l G-l-Har row (Int. von Scuoon)

Court I

••• Or. tcc b_sis of your knowledge g_lned during -11 those years,

’ our kuowlcd. v of hiolsche-r's persor._lity, do you Otliove th-t he
would nolp g ex* 00 no if cc vtrt -not convinced th t taia porson v..s
abaolut-ly closed to cation-1 Socialist;?

Yea, I know Hlelschar -ad I Believe I *nov hi;; well. He
would not t Jr.c the p .rt of any one of whooe integrity he was not
co .vinead, and «.ic concept of integrity in nic opinion includes n
dofinite rejection cf everythine Belonging to tne hitler regiae. I
o-iefct ad th..t I re.*ubcr u conversation vhen he told nc th. t ono
of hit foruor frienda who w-a not in t..t closer circle of his group
had told hi.. th-t he h-d to Uuku ne..co with national oocialia.;, and
how indignant Hi cl setter w„s th.t sojc ono Occauo „ deaert, acno ono
w/.cj* ho ha -dr.ired and respected, _nd this -an had occcuo an object
of dotflov.tlon aeC..USO he Bald ttt .t 030 had tO Uafco OC-CO Vi th
1 ..tionul Social ion.

ZR. iZSOarJJi: hr. Prcaiiont, I h_vc no further quoationc.

3Y J’.TG- S2dh!2»:

Doctor, prior to the end of the War, did you Know wh .t the
.iinunerbe Society w-n?

•w I don't bolljve I understood tr.c question ccuplotuly. I
ho. rd "Did you know vh..t tr.e ahneneroc v„3 before tne ond of tho war?"

Is tl*..t right?

.o, ta.t in not ri :ht. Bo you jcnow vh_t the ^haenerbo Society

w.s?

I heard cf it -Oerr.-ps in 1958 for tne first tine, and tho
only concept t.:-t : ai cf it ».j - centra activity of the SS for
scientific and intellectuJ ;:-tte*rs, .a: attomt to noaopolize ouch
work for the SS. In uy coinion. it corresponded with what the nene
g.: s, primarily wrcr.istoric resc .re;. _ni the history of thw Genian
People, and th_t w 9 -or- or loss in accord vitn want aiolachcr told •


he aO-.ut the research -c-si.zx.ent vr.icn h .A oee-a .lvea.


15 -nrll-W?-10-2-XaProw (1-t. ? 0 a schoon)

Vourt I

1. 3c you know anything uCKmt w or_cca or institute within
c.:c jfcncaerbo which coscer.-.ci itself with ..iiit-ry scientific ro-
8c^reh?

• -°i 1 bc_rd of that only when tci3 trial hud b.\- ?n.

% You know nothin,- then uoout the f xts which the prosecution
insists existed in connection with that ailitury scientific rosocrch
institute? Ih-t is to Buy, t:.-t it w_s used for tne pur/cso of no¬
di c .1 experinont-tion upon non-3or_ar.-n_tional concentration c ; - p
i rentes?

-u i. 0 , I le.jned of these things onl? whoa tne trial had begun.

1. I believe th-t during tee course of your interrogation by
Dr. boisgorbor you audo soce ncatioa of the fact that tho an in point
of the various resist-nee uoveuents vj to paralyse the SS and ito
factions. Did I understand you correctly?

The preparation for rich an action w a e actually tho central
point on which everything depended to oc -blu to overthrow the Hutionol
Soci .list reglue.

*• ’-hy v^re these activities directed a...Inst tno S9 ir.

> rticul.r?

e

a. .310 ocwcutlw strength of tao .._tion«l Socialist regiuo
rested ossonttally in the -on of the SS who had the iuport-.t key
positions, w.io disposed of weapons. Tho Sa w„s unimportant, espe¬
cially during tr.e w-r, -nd in tne c-se of tne vhxtiaCht one could
expect that l_r,;e p-rtc of it very quickly would Oe willin to coo¬
perate.

3. I h_Va no further questions.

PRJSI3E.T: *ay question of tr.it witness on the n-rt of any
def \.nsu counsel? Sieve bcia • n:no, t;.e prosecution aay cross cxcciae.

CROSS Su^XlWZCS

3? KH. HaRST:

-• “itness, were you _ Ua-Oer of the uovuaent known as tho


15 ^ril-K-JP-10-3-2urrov (Iat. von Sc.-ocr.)

Court I

Eiclscher l-.ovoaeat?

2:o uo7eUeat v_s sot known under that nano. One cun only
subsequently speJc -oout tnc existence of such a group, at tho
ti;.e I /cr.ov only th_t he h_d - circle of friends with whoa ho
exchanged inforu_tion and whoa he w_s keeping re_dy for lator uso.

Ho further questions, Your Honor.

212 PiUSXDfiiT! any further question by dofer.se counsel?

witness uoy be excused frea thest^nd.

D3. VSZSC253SS; Kr. President, before I c_ll the witness
Hlelschor hiusclf I should like to sufctiit - few uorc docuuonts to
tho Tribunal. Those aro documents wnich deal with Hiolschur -Jid his
activity, and Z eonaidor it oxpodiont at the presont ti..o to offor
these documents'.

PnHSXDEwT* I understood you to say th„t these aro docunonts
which de-1 with Hitler and his activities. Ic th-t corroct?

3R. VZXSGZR33: Kiclocher, the witness who is to bo cullod -
Hiolscher.

I offer Document Siovers 32 ..s Sievoro Hxnibit 23 on pugo 80.
*'his is document book 1 on page 60 . Taie ic a curtific .to of tho
Ha or of h..rburg, where Hiolscher lives. 2iie is u brief cac-icnt
:n hie rcsist^nco xtivity. I uorcly wish to point out th~t at
tha o A of this otatc^ent tr.crc ic a refer nee to Dr. Sorkenau,
tho witness who was examined tod-c", ~nd Professor Friedrich Holler
wnr.u Dr. Horkanuj oontioacd.

The nert document wr.ich I offer is SieVers *33, as Slcvcro
oxikibit 2f\. It is on pjgo 82 in Document Book 1. This 1 g on
affidavit by Theodor Steltser now ?ri_o hi istcr of the Lund of
Schlcawig-holatoin. This i3 tnc s^o Theodor Stcltxcr whoa the
witness 3r. Topf Mentioned. Stcltzcr wno hiacelf bolon.7od to tho
Hreisau circle spoJc6 about Hi decker's ctivity within the frunovork
of the entire resistance ixor caont.

5521*


15 t-rrow (iat. vcn Sehcea)

Coart I

2 ho next docaioat which I wish to offer is Silvers 34 which
bee oats hxcibit 25. Ihis is in Doc-xicat 3 c ok 1, p^ge 84 and 85.
"ills is on affidavit by the attorney, ?ranr Liodlg, concerning tho
ctlvity of Friedrich Hitlachir. Zhis is the sane Liodig who wus
aoationod in Silvers exhibit y 12 which I already offered oorlier
who testified there -bout nis contact with Silvers.


15 .'.jril . or-Inb: Vcn Ccfcoen

Ce rt !,’o. 1

The no::t docunor.t is Sievors 3", which I offer r.s
Sx) ibit Siovor s 26. This is ir. Docuswr.t 3ook 1, pago
£>«-'• Z is is or affidavit of Dr. Lotkar ".ischko, about
Hlolachcr's work ir. tho /rosistr.nco -iovonont. Dio somo
subject is discussed in Docur.sont Sievors 37 which I
offor as Siovors Exhibit 27. This is cr. pr.go 89-90.
Dccu::ont 36 ... just c. nir.utc, oxcuso rx> .... Docunant
Sievors 36 on pngo 89-SO, that is Exhibit Siovors 26.

Iho next doeunant is s iov rs 37 on pa;-os 91 end 92 .of
Docuuont Bock I, W ich I offor as Ibd ibit 27.

Ihon I offer fcl o affidavit 'f the univoreity profossor,
Wax Ifos, as ^iovors Zxl ibit 28, Docwicnt 32. ^his also
doaln with Kiolsclor's work In tho rosistanco novomont.

f.s tbo last dccvricnt in this connoction I offor tho
affidavit of tho ujiivorsity professor. Dr, friodrich
hoilor. is is Decunont 'lo. 39, wl-ich I offor as
Siovor3 Exhibit 29, Docv^or.t Bool: I, pago 98 and
foil-win -. This is tho s: -.c - r. Friodrich Koilor whon
tho v/itnosr. Dr. Dorkonau, riontionod ropoatodly today.

I boliovo it will bo unnocosoary to toad all thoso
dccusiento. I a:.i c nvincod ti .t tho Tribunal will toko
notlco of tho centonto.

And , with tho approval of tic ir.biaial, 1 t to
call tho witness, rriodrlch hiolschor, to tho stand.

*SZDSTT: She : arsl 1 will r n tho witness,
Friedrich riels : or.

*

mrorjci: "ielsc a witness, tool- tio stand end
toetified as follows:

BY J *DG- SEDRi'.TC:

- witnoss will'raiso his rl it rd and bo rworn. I
r orj* by God, tho Alaitlity and Onnisciont , that I will

s.^-Jc tho puro trv.tt and will witld.old and add ncthing.

5926


15 «:ril 47-H-Sfr-11-2-Lessor-Int: Von Sc*con
Court Ho, 1


(U-o witness ropcr.tcd the CQtfc,)

JULGE SHORING: You nr.y ho so:.tod.

DIRE CT EXAMINATI ON
BY DR. V3ISGEH3ZR:

itr.oss, your nraao la Friedrich Klolaohor?

... Friedrich l.iolachor.

You wore hem on 31 !*ry 1902 ir. Plo.uon , endyou
r.ro now livin': in Fe rbur r, tfcr.t la right?

A, YqS.

Uhnt la your profession?

A. I ea r. adder.

"• >ht subjects do yru study?

... history, philosophy, Inn, fclkloro.
r -. sine, when hr.vo you tr.kon cn notlvo port In
politics?

since 1927.

Did you bo Ion:; tc . d«.finito political idoology?

Ho. I K.d c rroup of atvdonta wit: whon I oxpoundod
:ny historicc-l rrd philcoophicr.l tileries end idono.

c1 i<l it l r..j;x>n th: t you boccaco on opponont of
tho HS0/.P so early?

j.. Fr-cre tho lnfr.rstf.tion cvalloblo to no I know tho
porconr.l Inferiority of tho Hr.ti-nr.l Socialist lc. dors.

I could observe th. t tl oy w.ro const ntly lyin'- nnd
thr.t wh. t tLe;- redly wanted w s undoairc.blo,

'• Did you be Ho vo, s o-rly ..a 192S, that tho NSDAg
would erne to pewer?

A. HO, not in 1928. In 1930, aft^r tlco first election
buttlo r.t which the* .x.rty wr.c victcri-us, I crnsldorsd
it peas iblo. In 1951 I consider ■ it rcb.iblo. In 1932
I foie tth..t it was ccrtc.in.


Court i

April lb-M-ll-la-KD-Lesser-vonocaoen.


Bid you Join any definite political pc.rty with
the intention of comb tting the NoDAP?

a. So. I conslaered it impossible for any of the 33
Oerman prrtles, with their bureaucratic set hods, to oe able
to prevent a faacisc dictatorsnip, or if It ned come Into
existence, to overthrow It.

Whrt metnoda did you thing were the right ones?

A. The fascist dictatorship Is o mass machine In a
tecnnloal age. Therefore it Steco- to ..s to be out of the
question, when confronting suer, a mass body, to act openly.
It sooned impossible to carry out propa b mda publicly. We
were convinced that tne only thing possible w, a to form
very snail cadres which would not be recognizable to an
outoidur c nd Which at the proper tlmu could do laploycd for
a coupd'otat, that Is, for an arced overthrow.

-v. Then that was core or less the oetnod of the Trojan
Horse?

A. Yea.

tfuro you, In your ideas *nd in your e:forts to
combet tr.le oovement, were you alone or did /ou havo
associates?

a. First a selected group of ay students were willing
to collcbornte In this lllegrl work; second, I knew q.lte
a number of personages of various political backgrounds
with wnom I a Q reed that this regime would not lost.

•*. That was before IS33?

A. That was around 1933—1932/33.
s,. Now c mo the 30th of Jer.ilary 1933, trio so-called
seizure cf po:>er, and now your real work begsn. How and
vr.on did you apply your method of the Trojan r.orse?
a. Tnls a voJ'u of m/ students, who were villin 0 to

collaborate, I made into an Illegal orgrr.ization, with dues,

5928


Court 1

April It -14-11-la-HD-Le s s er-vo nScr.o en.


3. Did you Join ony definite political pc,rty with
the intention of comb tting the NoDA??

*. Ko. I cor.slaered It lnpcssible for ony of the 33
Oernan prrtie6, with tnelp bureaucratic net bode, to be able
to prevent a fascist dictatorship, or if It had cone Into
existence, to overthrow It.

Vhrt aetnods did you thing were the right ones?

A. The fascist dictatorship Is a mass nac..lne In a
technical age. Tnerefore it scene- to us to be out of the
question, when confront In® suer, a nass body, to act openly.
It aeeaed Impossible to carry out propa b rnda publicly. Wo
wero convinced that tno only thin* possible w<a to form
very onull cadres wf.loh would not be recognizable to an
outoldur 4 r.d which at the proper tlxu could ce lnployed for
a coupd'otat, that lc, for an arced overthrow.

s,. Then that was aore or less the nethod of the Trojan
Horse?


tfuro you, In your Ideas 'tnd In your el forts to
contort this nova cent, were you alone or did ^ou have
aosool?tes?

A. First a selected K roup of W students were willing
to collaborate In this lllo e cl work; second, I knew q-lte
a number of per6ona 0 es of various political b*.ck B rvund6
with wr.oo I agreed that this revise would not lest.

That was before 1£33?

A. That was around 1933—1832/33.

s,. Now cr no the 30th of January 1933, the so-called
seizure cf power, ana now your real work bc B =n. How and
wr.en did you apply your method of the Trojan horse?

A. This b ’oi of ny students, who wove villlri b to

collaborate, I cade Into an illegal orgrnlzatlon, with dues,

5923


Court 1

April 15->--ll-2a-HD-Les8er-von£cr.oen.

secrecy, and other necessary condltlor.6, end I r.pponited
people who were willing and suitable to grt into important
party positions.

When and how did you meet the Defendant, Wolfram

oievere?

a. as far os 2 can recall, I met oievors about 1929,
at one of my hlatorlcal-pnilcsorv.lcal lecture trips. He
was a boy scout at that time. ne apoke up durln b the
discussion and we took a lluln& to each other.

«%. Did sievers snow at that time that he was oppooed
to the NSDaF?

a. That was a matter of course w-th the people with
whom I had anythin*, to do at all.

<*. And did you consider him suitable to work in your
circle?

a. Yob.

h. In 1929 dievers Joined the SKiMP. Woo that done
with your knowledge?

A. Yes.

«}. Did you advise him to do so or how did It come
about? There nod to bo some special reason, since you
were both opponents of thi6 political party.

A. That was the first ti :o, aside from 1923, when tho
NoDAP was talked about, and it wus useful to know what was
going on In this growing machine ~ were there any people
of good will within the machine, what were the leaders fcolng,
wnat plan3 wore elr.g mode, what organisation was being
6et up.


592 9


1 5 - &-13-l-iSloy (lat. ron Schoon)

Court :'o. 1.

.. -Joa first of 11 you wasted to find out whet intentions tho
ITSD-J 1 htdf

"* Yos, end specifically in the youth work, beccuso thet hnd to
be tuo :oot important in tho_lon«j-rur..

• * 3 "« ia x 531 Siovcrs rosined from the ysnj -vain; did ho do
thr-t with yiur knovlod^o?

A. Yos.

«• On your orders?

A. Yon, ono ui,*t any. Ye discussol it, and I comidorod it tho
thins to Ao.

> "3H, why should he euddonly lonvo tho party since he had bocn
oont into tho Party with tho definite purpose of gotting inforantlon?

Ho hod found out what ho was to find out, tho nnturo and tho
make-uj, ospociivlly of tho youth organisation. It was Just as inforior
na wo h-d thought, and ovon at that time it was so corrupt that with-
~ Ui any further plan — rnd wo hod no Ion at the tiao — without any
further Vila it was not necessary to h-.ve hie continue.

I.ov, in tho yo.r 1933. and Siovcrs. liB tho Tribunal h s al~

ra-dy boon t'ld, Again Joined tho K3UP; was this also done on your
boiu-AY?

— Yes, I 6 that tiuo wo were alrondy a thornsghly orgenisod
or-y.rd = ti-n. Ve wore ;*lrc. dy isSdng for voluntoors, who wero vil31ng
»vnd. vivo voro capable o- working up in the tjr.so of tho “rojnn Horse.
Slovorn scorned euitablo, od ho v..* willing.

> "0 0 y^u ablo tv gat ..ia any position within tho Jfcrty?

A. He, I w;.8 not ablo to help hie to obt,dn «vny position, and
in tna second ylace i him intention of tolling tho individual por-
8,a whoa : trusted, in detail, ihat thoy w.-ro to do.

 Thon it was up to tho shill 0 f tho individual to got into a
po-i.ioa fr t. watch he w;uld be ablo to carry at tha assignment which
We hi:.?


15 3-ia-a-:taior (Ton sci-.ocn)

Court 'j. 1.


A. Yos.

nd how did Siovors obtain tuis position?

J.. Ho got into thio with He ream-. Virth in tho . hncnerbe.
o. !fio vas Eersann Vixtht

Hcraana Virtb was e. rather crazy student of pro-history,
wno h d oxcollent catoriel and torriblo concepts.

Vca Virth already in contact with tho .ihnanorbe r.t thnt tino?

.*.3 far as I knaw ho was one of the foundors.

Sion as you say siovors got in contact with Virth. and through
Virth ho got into tho .Jiaonorbo?

Yeo. Ho wao thoro fron 1935 on aB Soich iluoinoss Kanagor.

’Tow, did j-ou givo Siovors any specific assignment in tho
spirit of your covenantt

J.o soon as it was clear that thoro was a possibility of
exploiting Hianlor's racial rosoncing end half oduoation, tho nsolgr.-
nont dovolopod to goin Hiailar's cor.fidor.cc with tho old of


5931


15 A.'Til 1947 -::-12-L-ii-ioy (Irvt. von Sehaen)
Court Kc. 1


the A -nenerba, and to get -s close to .ia os possible. ..e, that i3
ay croup, ere amonc the people -ho very early recognized the
apecL r 1 personal d anger of Himmler, and ir. the second place from the
be.jinniiy no bed boon determined that one day we would have to
overthrow tho Party regime by force, and for that purpose one has
to ,;et as close -s oosiblo to the most dangerous nan.

Q. «nd what were tho duties which Sicvcrs had about the time when
he first belonged to the KSDAP, you said tie *.tcs to ret information
about the intentions of the youth movement cf the NSDaP?

a. This tine, of course, h. had to »;et as nony details ns ho
could from the office of th. neiehsfuehror-SS, and transmit them to
us. ’ o had to rrotjet people. \ w hud to build up esooflaufis positions.
Ws had to help tho other ooople end in turn to ro-nin ur.r.cc r.i? '.

(,. And hew id aiovors carry out those duties?

a. oil. It will bo best if I be in with myself. I myself was
known and consivcrod undesirable by tho ? rfcy leadership.

Q. You r.onn the USD APT

A. Yos, yos, of course. Tho party leaders know no and considered rao
undesirable. I hd already b-.cn under arrest, and had had my house
searched. I was .latohdti by the Gestapo, and in order to build up my
organization I rv ederi to oc able to travel anywhere without arousing
suspicion. Consequently, Slavers gave me fake research assignment,
which was to s tudy inc’o-Geraanic culture, cue tone of tho orr.ual
festivals.

Q. Sievcra s»i< during direct examine t ion th-t he hiss If
could r.ot is us cny research assignments; you said that you
received a lake research assignment :'r» him; wasn't this research
assienv-nt actually issu-d by the Curator, Professor .'uest?

A. Tvs. If ell, • ::d ueot was in a good mood,

or had beer, drinking with Sieverc, it --as ooei L. to r^rsuade him
to do soouthin , md so ho succeeded in persuSdirv uort that I was
' efficient for t:ds r_ so arch a a slimmer, t, and sc I jss given this


assignment, .ay ih t concerned ir.oo-Garnr.nic customs could be found

5932


15 April 1917 -*-13-2a-FKP- Stolej (Iat. van &cfcoos}
Court So. 1


any*herb. I ..as ^ivor. a false peas ns a section chief, though I
.-s rot a b :tion chief, end «ss not a accber of the SS nor the
Ahwmoxto.

C. Aw? with this peas you wero able easily to get visas to p
abroad?

n. Not necessarily. I needed a little ,-.oro for Ur-t purpose, but
it was easier.

Q. Thun thr actual purpose of the cosi .roent of this fidco
research assifjaont .?as th.t ycu, who wore a suspect -ai.'ht appear
ir* a ooro hornless llpht, ■ nd would be able to .aovu rather frooly
and without supervision?

A. Yes.

Q. How, did it bocc.*. nocessary for Sievors to


protect you person lly; I speak oi this, since you said before th*t
Sicvors work — you wanted to explain first hat tv. helped ar*i


15 Apr-*-: 3-12-lb-:'aloy (Int. Yon Schocn)
Court Ko. 1


pro toe ted ;x:i>ers of your organisation, and first cf ell yourself.

A Be protected ra when on the 2d of Soptcsbcr lyWi I was suspected
of participating in the events of the 20th of July. I v.® arrested and
was to be hanged. Sievers used* his position with Hirs ler, risldng his
own lifs, because Oberstunibanafudhrer Houhaus wanted to hang i-e, and
was con-zinced that Sievers and I had boon in conspiracy with Stauffonberg.
Sievers, through his skill, canagod to have aa released for lack cf
evidenco.

Q How long ware you under arrest at that tiie?

A Tho 2d of September 191:1 to tho 19th of Decenbor, the sane year.

Q Is it truo that you were once in tho next cell to tho well-
known Dr. Gcordolor?

A I onnnot say. I was in tiio Lehrtor Prison in Berlin. That is
noar tho lehrtor Station. I hod Coll Ho. 225.

03. 2ISGERBERt Itr. President, in this connection I offer Iron
Docunont Book 2, Sievers Exhibit Ho. !;9 — beg pardon, Sievers Docuaent
Ho. U9, as Exhibit 30, Docustnt Book 2, paf.e 23-21, 25-26 in the English.
This is a statcoont by Theodor B nsch about tiic inc arc oration of Dr.
Hiclschor after tho 20th cf July 1941 . Baonsch was a prisoner hinsolf
in the prison in lehrtcrstrasco in Berlin, and he testified to the fact
that Dr. Hielschor was also under arr st thoro.

THE WESIDfflOi Tho Tribunal t^. 11 now bo in recess until 1:30.

(Thereupon a recess wes taken until 1:30 P.:*.)


5534


15 April 47-A-?JC-13-l-^o3tor (Int., Bkt lor)
Court I


ZFT3RMQ0H S33SI0H

(Hio hoarlng roconvoncd at 1330 hours, 15 April 1947.)

H!3 rvaaui: Tho Tribunal is again in sossion.

DR. PHtaRICH HI2LSCK3? - Rosurod
DIR3CT 2C£3KmON (Contiuuod)

BY DR. TZISO^nss (C-unsol for tho Dofordant Siovers):

^ Trttno3?, it soora to r.o to bo doslrablo for you to glvo to
tho Tribunal a vory short description of tho politic-1 pjionononon
wlxich vo doscribod os tho Gorrr.n rosistnnco novoiont. Could you
clarify this pchnronon in a few short roatoncos?

A la orlor to uisiorstard it ono has to lnagino tho situation
In which ovorybody in tho oouatry found hirsolf whonoror ho wnntod
to bo activo in nay way. Ono has to iAAglno that poronts couldn't
spoak to thoir children boc-uao tho child did not knew hew to lio
in such a tatnnor that tho attltido of tho poronts did not boccta
apjxxront to thoir toachora• 0r.o ::ust lxv^ino tJirtt ovory nolehbcr
w.s in r. position to obsorvo ovory orrud, ovoryono who speko out of
plr.co was suro to find nn ono:y who would do.icunco hln. Ono nust
Uvigiao that ovor sinoo 1939 vo know that priConors In ordor to
rirvko tho:; tostify woro thrown into a bath of water wlh 80 dogrooo
?«».t rvd tho 3kin wa roolol off thoir bodioc. Ore :aiat irr»gino
th/'.t nono of us could bo suro that ho wo uld bo r.blo to koop qulot
•ud what ho would toctify undor torturo, cr undor tho pressuro of any
which was introducod to hin. That is to o-;*, it was quito out of tho
quoction to got together In largo :*>otings. It was ir.pooslblo to


_ c ^ r y^on any opon propaganda. I n Stockholm I vo3 nskod, "Why dop«t
; sft^publicly?" Well, it just w.sa't pcooiblo, it was absurd.
Only whoa -oho considers that situation ono can irogino hew ono could
•■•erk againstParty. Tiiaro woro littlo colls, Tory tiny groups,


whoro tho rusk
doing, whop* or


and file ‘-on didn't knew what tho cthor ono was


- y . V ono grrup was not allcwod to knew what tho other
doing.


5935


15 April 47-A-?jC-l?-2-?r;ctor (Int., H«nlor)

Court I

If ono would bo disccvorol it could bo troy tho ctfcor. a systtt;
cf Lunkheads wca r.ocosscry, if oao buckhoad "as full tho othor
oao Led to bo wator-tight. And this is the only way ia which it
wca pea si bio for a fow pooplo, who know oao cnotfcor boforo 1933,
to fpt to®5thur uador avory calculated elrcunatcnoos. Or.o always
had to knar uador what pfotxct oao Led :ot cod what oao would coy
if seabed 7 wc3 suddonly to interrupt. How inch could tho wifo
hr. err? •,'hat would tho wifo hero to toctify ia ceso sho wes os hod
hod aho aot c cort innunbor of tho so -an boforo? If so, bow long
had sho fcnewa that? Urdor wtr.t position did sho Ixrr that.?

Aftor lortring ono would !wwo to rrmngo '.at tho subjoct of convorsa-
tioa had boon, I think that this is a pict>tro of tho atnosphoro
in which wo had to work. At tfci bogiuaing of tho Has! rogL'o a
largo part of tho o ire loo an. greups upon which ono roliod v.-oro
oliilnatod, they lad boon put into concentration car-po, cj r:o of
than had boon killed, ono didn't knc*. herr th_so pooplo ia tho
concentration ctt.ps woro guarded, nni it took yocrs boforo ono
oould onco :.oro establish who roally was loft, who kopt $uiot, and
upon when ono could thorofaro roly. Only aftor yours ora> could
put his hood cut f eno's ca: .ouf lagod position, o-il could find out
what ono cculd do oa! how ono could .aot ono'c frlords. 7 L 0 r.oxt
difficulty was that nor.o of tho political :jr po could act unloss
th.oro wes a cooperation f parts of tho Ar.xri F-rcos. Hi:: lor
cortainly wouldn't have loft if oao Just talked to hin, a:d
upon that dopondod tho slornoos af tho ontiro work.


5936


C-.urt S'.. 1

15 Apr 47-A-14-1—2M-4 eehan (Int. fienler)

v K'v, I think It would to desirrtle that you describe to tho Tri¬
bunal how y-.u cooperated with circle* thrt "tre f your opinion, hf-v* you
etehlihed contact with the:, end to via t extent your collaborrticn was

possible with .ther group*?

od

a. Our group naintaifi/contr.ct rad cc:perrted with S cir.li*te; I
ncnti n Dr. Eoichwein, Dr. Icpf, who vss here bef re, end Dr. Kaubnch.

Then there wo* the young c.nsorvetivo group of Gni Friedrich v n dor
Schulenburg, the Cnth-lic circle* around the Freiherr Friedrich ven
Lucning, vh. wc» ;ne <f the r.c*t couregcoue and noblo non I over .rot tr
knov. There was the ,;r up nrcund August Venig, tho nil it pry group wound
Count Stouffunbcrg, end n amber ,f dorgynen.

v Vas there cooperation between y:u end thcoe gr up* which y'-u
Just nenttoned?

A. It v.uld bu best t doocribo hov vo actually not. I not Froihorr

Lucning end bscrr.o r.c^urinted with hiu in 1940 bocruoc he vr* tho oonnan-

der of n raorvo bottnli n Ah-9. He we uppood to help no t< rocrult

ft Jowlh friend under a falo nano int- thi* battall>n. At that tine I

vn* currently retire in the oucti-n f vhftt was to bo d.no Inter, and

ir. that connection I vr.* in c ntret with AUgutt Vo nig. It vr* in the

•

Spring of 1940 when Luoning t-ld no, "You fcr.cv Fritr Schulenburg!" I

vaguely routetbered hnvir. oeen hia in 1952, 1926. A Toy hour* Inter

Au,;u»t Vcnig t-Id ae tho spno thin#; cr.d both t Id nc thrt Schulenburg

w.uld c-.-.e at night when darkness had fnllon. he told no, "Y u knew vh'»

reewwondod ce; well how d- vo kill the plg7" Thoreupcn I said, "That

i* n recBinablo basis for conversoti .n; hv about tho Gcnorrlo?" Thon

-pini ns were exchanged - c t what nilitary opinions I sav, whrt nllitnry

pinions ha saw, rnd the next quest! -n wr* if the r.orole of tho *e'.untry

vt s ripe en.ugh. Schulenburg, as p vice president r whatever he vne,

Could not travel ar.unf the country very easily, thet is, apart froc his

fficifti trips, while : vas getting ar un,: the country, and the Question

crno up, "Vhet d es the tss f the p pulrti n think?"

Thct i* Just onti exajolo. I don't vent t tell nany such exanolcs

5937


Court !fc. i

15 Apr *»7—A-14-2-EEX-i{feehan (lat. ?.-.dcr)


and this is how c-nverseti-ns were carried ut with p number of these
pc-pic. Sveryonc exchanged lafcmetiu abeut their particular groups;
n-t-dy asicod where that inf ror.ti.n cane fr a, nobody aentimed any nanes,
except whoa it was ascertained in the case cf any such inf Croatian that

it nust -ri, incto fr n that s urco. ?hon one c^-.nunicrted only by using

•

a formula, very solder. vee tho real nano used. Tolopfcones had to bo die-
\

connected and it wes necessary to 1 k utside tha window to pscortaln if

anyone vr.s n the street. Vo found ut t hr-ugh a nenber *>f cur urganlza-

ti r. in what runner a hidden nicr-ph no c-.uld bo built let' the vrll,

ed *

the flat vrr scrrcli/crrefully and this is the wry vo w rked.

v What did Sicvcrs d in -.rdor to further the activities f y'ur
organization?

A. J\r instance, he tc k erre »f supalyin.; all lnf '-r vti .n which

was of lap rtroeo. He told us whr.t tr cps -f the Waffon SS were in Ger-

nany during the war. Eo gr.vo us frke fficicl trips and ho v:xkod out o
plpn f--r nn csscsslnotl n, which was t. bo errried thrugh by cur grc-uo
in cooo the generals plan did nt c .c ff. V c all thought it v 00 not
t-. rely on the generals. In Knrch f Vernor Rafton told no by
erdor >i S tauffenter,; that no w.uld have t . take into ncciunt the fact

thi-t the ,>nvrcls >ruld hrvo t be -vod into »cti.n V/ p certain nssnaoi-

•

— Ci-n and tvcrycno vro t -kv his vn orcnrrrti ns, in cpso he had nny,

ir. ouch r -tanner rs if he vre the nly no rctivo. ?hnt was the situation

in rtnrch f 19-.*.. ’ 0 v rk«d ut p substantial olro t-. rou.vc, if pos3iblo,

Einnlor rod Hitler simultaneously, tut in erse f d-uVt Hi rlcr hi coif.

We were of a c npletoly different -plr.i .n thoro then tho ether .rr'ups.

v Whet c ncrete preli -larry w rk vt.e dene for tho essnssinati n
in ycur gr.up?

“• Sievers wre the nly one in ur .;r'.up wh ctvie -into question
rOgerding that Essassinrti a becruee he wre the 'nly cne b- el se tc
Hirr.ler. He was theref re esci.-noe this task end we worked -ut this
nptter ss far as the detailed pirn wre c neerned; all that was necessary
a - we t prtiG the butt.a.


59o8


C.urt 5;. 1

15 Apr 47-A-14-3-£B(-f.oehea (let. Lv-l yr)


•V. And for vfcat period of tine vas this assassination Intended?

*• *o rterted our prepex/ti-ne in the yerr of 1943 and et the
earliest at the our of 19-^3 c-uld ve have started. Then ve finally
th ught :f the Riddle of 19—'- because Schulenburg and Luening told rc
that the cenernls v uld he ready at nr und that period of tine.

*■ VaU, an assassin/ti n is a natter for cniick decisi-n. Is it
n-t true, therefore, that all thete long preparrti-ns iro rather sur¬
prising that y. u are tellin.; us a'o ut7

*• Thc f - u vlr -: v hrve t be taken into c rsiderntion. Around
ELaler end Hitler there vtb c Ur n; -,-ucrd, r strenr ring cf ,.-uards,
th-u;:h which n.nc c.ulc ,:et unless he vc crxefully oenrehed and chocked.
Soc.r.dly, and that I already cccphasized. cae did a.t have to be ouito
suro that the generals v-uld carry ut thet ossnseinr.ti n but no had to-
bo sure that c sufficient au .bcr f generals were ready t. rca-vo the
N.S. ays ten innedir.toly eftor the rJii.nlutl n f f-r a. clininati n of
Just those twe oo.plo thonsolvcs v uld have no o.liticnl purpose vhntsc-
ever., to did n' t intend t. crxry ut r Putsch but ve Intended t^ ro") ,vo
c p lltlctl systo:, a political '.rdor, and f-.r that rom n w had to
wait until the olturti n becr-.o ri.-ht rnd the gonorolt were roady.

.. :« v, tho ouostl n cr-pc up whether theso plans f t r the rosnssi-

n^ti.n f Hitler and Kin lor n>rv nly in y«-ur fantasy, r tho fantasy

%

-.f y ur c-llab rrt.ro, .r v/s there ary real basic r conerote prowo-
tl n for such assassination?

a. I already said that the proprxrti ns hrd te^n worked -.ut t< the
detoiled technical point insofar as the essently location, the sheeting,
etc. were c-nctrned.

„ «ad vh v.uld have rS3nscinctcd Hliricr and Hitler?

a. Siovcra woo t C that and c fev y ur„- -.on hel ping to qy

rganiocti-n.

’v And why vob it in effect n t carried .ut?

A. After the Stcuffen«.er.- assossin^tl a hnd failed, the Vchmacht
circles thnt cc int otujsti r. v^ rt ell.in-tec by El.-.ler and therefore

' . . 5CZV


C-urt Su. 1 .

15 *pr i-ji£,i-r. l ,ehcn (1st. hanlcr)


it V8« no loader p-ssitle to renove thf.t system. The uajjr c nscouor.ce
ot an y attempted asscssinati-n v.uli have tees - since the foreign
political situation would not have changed, the -nly cmseouer.ee would
have teen here that the people would h; ve said (gain, "Thie is the stab
in the back for the victorious front-line."


5940


-pril 15-..-BK-15-1 -Putty (Rg.-r.lcr)

Court No. 1

*4 .»net did Silvers do to further your activity in
addition to whet you have already said?

*» Ho, for instance, supported cy representative,
-.mold Dcutclr.oser whan ho was put on the list of thoso
who wore to bo renoved under tho pretext of tho assasina-
tion which took pleco in Munich at the Buorgorbrauo. Ho
also protoctod Bonns who was working in tho Netherlands.

He protootod Dr. Schuettclkopf who c. we had sent into the
R3H-» end it was possible fer him in turn to sond no to
Swodon. He saved Niels 3or, Prafossor Soyb of Oslo
Univ rsity, and ho s'vod . number of Norwegian students,
oto.

■i Do you know that Siuv.rs infornod you about
Hinnlor's doublopl ;y in the case of tho minister, Popitz,
end that as a consoquonou ho savod that entiro group
against aonsun-s by Hionlor?

i. Yos. Tho following thing happonod. Ono day
Siovors approached ao and said that I had just hoard
Hinr.ler 3 ay in n close circle how ho ridiculed an attenpt
on tho part of Popitz. He said that Minister Popitz
with the aodiation of tho lawyer Lenpo had approached
Kicralcr and tri\jd to persur.de hie to bring about a
chango of tho National ooci.list system, perhaps by
removing Hitler. Ho said Himmler thought it was very V
funny that these non had so littlo sense as to think
of hira in that connection. Thmk Cod one could ontur
negotiations with then booauso it was sure that nobody
was behind thoso people in the country, but it did scon
that the so gcr.tler.on had many foreign political relation¬
ships and it would be advisable to find out what in offeet
w .3 behind it ell, and it would, therefore, bo advisablo

to enter into negotiations with then. .«o woro quite

5>_41


-oril l5-..-3K-l5-2-?utty (Hcanl.r)
Court No. 1


surprised about the naive attitude shown by Hiaalor, and
I sont Daut^lnosor to RcichWoin with who- I know he had
connections with Popitz. In th;t way Popitz was warned.
Roichwcin was so surprised and hardly wanted to bolievo
that situation.

I was -ssfcod to participate in c conference, and
Roiohwoin after having convinced hinsolf that all of
this w-.s true, procisod to warn all of the scntloaon
conoornod La Berlin and th-n r.skod Doutolcosur, who was
to go to Norv/ay shortly thereafter to notify Roichwcin's
friend, Stolzcr, tho present "Laister President of
Schloswie-Holstoin, in order to soo that he, too, took
tho necossa.ry precautionary noasuros. In this way wo
hoped that a nuubor of those pcoplo had aotually boon
savod. Popitz, however, hinsclf was careless and was
capturod.

. T.-.is conspiracy could not have been carried out
unloss you had tho nocossary financial n^ins at your
disposal. Hew did you got those nouns?

“ Lv-ryone of our pooplo, be it nan or woaon, had
agreed to giv^ u, ten percent of their ccnthly incaao for
thr t legal work. Liany gave a substantially larger sue;.

't How about oicvwrs?

•* Sievers gave _»ro than ho had to.
v Do you know tho case of the throo hundred
Norwegian students who on tho basis of Siov.rs' inter¬
vention wore ruloascd fron the concentration c.:np buchen-
’"ald?

.. Yes. Torboven, or sono oth^r offici-1 in Norway

lisliked sogc dononstration which occurred th^rc, and as

result arrested three hundred students. Through sonc-

rk channels they were brought into the concentration

5942


..aril 15-,v-BK-15 -3-Putty (Int. Raraalor)

Court No. 1

at Buobonwnld. Slavers found out about that, and if I
renonbor correctly, ho was in n position to see to it that
these students bo released froa tho concentration casp
usings Elurrler's Nordic ideas.

V 4 In that ccso you think that Siovors' activity was
substantially important for your resistance novouent?

.. Yu 8 . Th t wrs true of r .y organization, for ho
protected and covorcd no as. its chief, and, secondly, as
far as I know, ho was the only nan belonging to any
rosi3tr.noo novecont who wont as close as he to tho Ruichs-
Fuohror-SS. If .ny other group would have brought any
such information ns ho did, I would have noticed it that
it could hevo only oooo freer t' j saoo sourco.

Witnoss, I shall have a doounont handed to you

•

which was submitted by tho Prosecution. Thi3 is Docunent
NO-975, Prosocution Exhibit -.79, It is a lettor sent by
Slovor3 to Di*. Hirt. Jould you plor.30 look at that letter?

.. Yes.

t This lottor contains a tone of voioo which soens
to indioato that ho tried to cover i >r. Hire's activity.

Dr. Hirt was working In the .diatonic .1 Institute of tho
Strassburg University. I cs3ua- that for reasons which wo
shall centioa later that you knew Hirt's neco. How do you
-xplain that tone in this lettor?

.. I think that this is very proper and praisoworthy.
I would have thought it very foolish of ^ievors if ho
adopted any oth-r tono in any of his official correspond-
-nee. It was his task to say ‘'yes" but net in. a negative
way. Thor- couldn’t hnv- appeared any pretense of any
'isapproval on his part. Tho aoro aativo one had to bo in
n inti-toational racialist way, the core he had to speak
‘ r N-.tional d.cialisr..


5943


..-Til 15—--BK-15-4-Putty-(Int. Read or)
C vst if . 1


. I shnll now turn to enoth r cocplox of questions.

3‘^v-rs is indicted in this trill to h-ve participated in

* r. number of criaos. D\d ^i-v-rs *-t cny tie- toll you •

about th- so-c-llwd research cssijnc-nts of 5r. Rasoher

and Dr. Hirt, who was just o-ntionod? f .. .ore oxpori-

%

c~nts ocxriod out in tho concentration canps.

.. oiev rs, ns f ex as I ipcccbcr, cans to ce in tho
year 1942 and told co v^ry oxcitodly that ninclor in his
desire to oxtend th- .-hn-n-rbo oociety had onberkod on tho
thought of placing oxporin-ato on hucan b-in..;s under tho
work of tho ..hnonorbo Society. Ho acid tnnt ho did not
succeed in frustr. tin; that. Ho 3uid th t ho had no
dosiro whetsoov-r to participate in th-ce horrible nets
and as&d no what to do. ..t that tino wo considered this
horriblo situation very thoroughly end thought of what
we could do. It was Quito clear to us what tho 33
intonded hero, and it was questionable whether responsibi¬
lity could bo assuned for any such acts, whether it would
be advisable to bo th- instrument of Hinnler if he
ocbnrkod on cny such acts, ncasuros whore hucan beings
waro degraded to the level of inscots.

The following considerations proved to bo decisive
for us: if Silvers would leave, not one person, not ono
objoct of tno go oxporic-nts would be saved. In ease
3iovers stayed th-rc as a tochniccl secretory, he could
throw sand into that machinery end could, -perhaps, be in
a position to 3avo senobody. In addition, the entire plan
and the entire overthrow of the Party stood, or foil with
Sievers' staying it his post. The ox.ariaonts on hucan
beings vroro only p.rt of this horrible Party system, and
on-, had to concentrate on the decisive points in ord r to
finally reneve everything, end, as I h-evo said before,


-.prii 15-..-3K-15-5-Putty (Int. -iaccl-r)
Court No. i


thoro was no other wcy into the staff of th- Roichsfuohror-
SS. <o, therefore, suar.->r izcd in case Siovors resigned <x
booauso of that onso, it was suro that he v/ould bo
olicinatod end iprcbably that would also bo true of all tho
pooplo ho hed over entrusted with a research assignment,
and everything thet wo had done so far would bo lost in
case ho loft, and if anyone was to bo savod et all, ho
oould only bo saved by Siovors recoining at hi3 post.


59-. 5


Cour.


1-Cook (Ia:. 2 —lcr)

* 5 . 1 .

.. If I hare understood you corroctly, Sizars at fir3t v*\ntod
:o roei~a fr:a ala position s P.oicr. bosinoss uanagor o? the .hnor.oroo?

. . Tea. thi t is corroct.

'• - • Sicnrjrs prxovo of these arguaon'.B which you and your
friends ppt forv rd ia f-vor of „is itagrlag with tho Hcich ?udiror SS
as ho 7. ich busiaoas nsnftgor of tho .\hnonorbo? Did ho do It ia -odinto-
ly or or.i -iter trying to porsuado hie for sono tiaot

... J. io took a nuaber of days, because Siovors, according to his
n-’.turo, m a softer tear. &<ny of us aal did aot want to ngroo with us.

•° h d to tppoal to his sons, of duty ad uorsundo hie th .t ho

hid ia do it ead tfl«t w r the oal way out.

other a .tern, it wns cor.sidorod th .t by 1 siovoro
rojeiaias -t nis post. thor. v>uld bo * possibllit- of r.HJgr.ting those
horrible oxporlaunta.

. S.ia chanco wasn't very gre. t but wo vero coa^iacod th»vt .:1s
would bo tho only way poosiblo. if. .it all. Tnon it c>uld only bo dono
in th X - haor. If la? t> so, this war suca -. horrible situation
ih.t fO lv N v had to coau tack to it and we w.rc d- nod lucky at
lo at to h- vo tho hopo to sve \ nuabor of people. Oth.r opponontn >f
S5 oystoa have told ao About eiutlAr diloaans which wore Juct os
difficult, find where the altornatiro wo" yet uoro horrible, • nd vhoro
porooic, according to oy boliof aid knowledge, actod corroctly, and if
tno Jri'oml would permit ao I could reL- to n few rJLnost ir.crodiblo
slt\t if ns v.iich wero ovoa worse.

PH3SIDS.T: In vfc t connection, witness, *\ro theso norrntfono,

witncEr.?

■"-CT.SSS: In tho conne tion sc to tho quest m whether it was
Cir -11” justifiable to arrive at tnc result of Sijvors remaining t
-io post.

fhl 7775IDU 7: Such a tors as teat would jc bo aaterial in hf.c


I


15 ..j.r- -v‘$-l&-2-C03«: (3-nler)

Court 0 . 1.

3Y 33- '"I3GZ333?.:

.. 3id Slerjrt report to y-u that it vs rossiblo for hie to
allcvi to ih. t situation . all.

.3. Yes, I hr.ov of tho following cases. Ho told no about ni ~h
• altitude oxperic^nts welch he frustretod. Ho told about his sabotage
of the low prossuro cn-nfcor. He told shout sis interference in tho
nfauri^ oxporiBants; Jnv ho placed Plootr-er cge-inct Schilling. Ho told
co til t ho succeeded in getting a group of thirty ina.too for expori-
rsontnl purposes froc Dnehou to souo otucr plnco at -'odonsoo, and,
furihorcoro, that ho finally succeeded in suhordinoting t..oso ox;»ri-
aontrl oorios eia-ultanoously to tho Holeh Hoserrch Council, 00 th t tho
additional ou-ouat of papor <md rod tape which rocultod in dolcys to a
considor.-blo oxtont.

... Is it correct Siovoro ado it possible for you to go to tho
gnotto ;\t litztamnstadt tod save persons thoro?

6 is corroct. ..t tart tlno I wont there in ordor to n 0
tho p, routs of c Jewish I dy fron being cioood, a lady v.ioa 1 could „ot
to S-^cldi-l: with tho help of Si.vorr. I was unfortunately too lrto in
the c..to f tho c* rontn.

“cnee it is beyond ell doubt for you thet Slovors rejected tho
participant on in tr.ooo ox cria.nts which v 0 r. ordcrod by Hiculcr?
loo.

.. ?or you there is no"thor uny doubt that tho ontlrc activity of
Siovoro fr r. 1933 to 154p. no natter wit.-, whet situation ho cnee i:>-
to cnt.ct, wns only orod oad dictated by his opposition to tho
noti :iul socialist rogi.-o.

—• 3h:.t is beyond my doubt.

~ • i IESZH3 - ?.: .r. Fr.cidont: I hr.vt no further questions of

t .io vitneos.

--- pr. SIDS.: -rc tncra ?.ny fu. thor quv t ons of t-.is vitnoso
-y -he defense counsel?

3 . S_-JI273 .rSH (C'unsol for tne defendant, professor 3oi,:lbocc :)


59 -;?


15 -£*-.>G£5-l6-}-Cook (Eo—cl,r)
Court . 2.


•itness, I fu. « -uetrian, and I. thorofore, do not liko to
lntorforo la Goman oat tor 8. I ejz only putting thoaa quortlons bo-
Cr.u.c it is uy duty to do so as dof^nso counsel. Do you renonbor thr.t
tho first Goman wocan who v * sent to ixerlci- after tho war, and that
wr.a ir-.u Dr. Strcckor. v» e severely attacked for saying thcro was no
G^r. n roeistanco uovenent?

Yea.

ft. 30 ;-ou ler.ow the.*, she dofondod horsolf against that accusation
and eho arid that by saying th»t she only van tod to oxpross that
ever- fl*£t 'gainst t:.ia powerful .kixi systuc vaa rlcoat without any
hoyc 7

A. Yea, I know that.

You h vo already Indicated tfle.t tho ro iatancu work wns ado
difficult by tho or.orcous Goatopc organisation, SD, aal you could h vo
addod tha Pooploa' Court, and tho Concentration Ccn?«. If question In:
In .dditiOB to that police proaauro. wnan't there yot anotftor proonuro,
a psychological proeaura, v.iicn differed ltaolf in tho cnco of n £r->'-
oon ro--i stance sovoaont, a. coup-red to tho Trench roaiotunce uovo-
sent. In ordor to undoratrad so 1 want to tell you th .t a can nauod
Gear.viuc penrod hero ro r. witnesa a,^inat Goring Jt nl, who was a
nan of no resistance uovocont, wxl also • loader in tho Gootapo. hio
w.-D cHod he Goaavius complex. ,y cue tion is: Considering the
ecor...uc prea-ure of “i -i-r'a police eacnlfto, was thorn yot on adclod
psychologic 1 prosBurv, th ono would oppose the " thorlond when
opposing i'.ie enor-iue i^t?

... In tnie case one has to differentiate. There were rflargo
amber of people who fr:. the very beginning. <0 tm>t tho or ‘ tiro
notioni socialist rcgico w:a an alien body th t h C come up *nd with
it«s olitdnr.tion one world do gr at service to >no's country. Ir. otner
words, there vuro nany people in tho resistance wveaont. who frou tho
vo;-- bog-inning. Just as in the case of tho?ror.chr^n, SJutchcen and

, considered this national socialist group us an alien body


15 .-KS-lo-v-Cook (Ihw-lor)

Court /o. 1.

\

tad which was swotting liko a black plague. 'n bo other band, I
agree vlth you th' t all of those people who had no proper Judgaont
about &.t'.onnl aociulio- froa tho very beginning, troro inclined at

first -vf ..ivod by a political ar-lvo fooling, ..b it ia bo frequent in

• • ••

thin country, to conaidor th's rogluo as G-ic-i>.n.

» *.;ov, lwf revert t> t-iis trial. Do you boliuvo, vitneso, that
if tuJ«rdin-.to offic-r iu-d rocoivod or. order behind valch Fic-lor
person :iy vaa atandin.,, . be could fail tc obo. t.ii* order enoilyl
1. !. dupenda or. vh t . c order is. It depend a t< what extent ho

hd t j osalblllty to " • yos rood not no.

\ Veil, I eanll a tic ou a coro epocific quo at i «n. I>o you bo-
llcvo th. 1 if t-iia u/in c ncernsd had frilod to ob-y th-.t order to
entry out exp riaontf. on hua-.n being*, about which ho »lroady h».d co^-
vincod hiaaolf that they v^nxld not c-natituto a daogor to tho huxvr.
bolrv:, don't you think ho would ht*o boon placod i -oiictoly boforo a
tiiliV ry cturt?

.1. X turolly. a refusal to obey an order was oulcido. That io
clear. It only depends on Mother there waa a possibility to provent
tho oxocution of that ordor in any way.

73“. SaEUB-USa: Thank you. I hr.vo no furt.ior questions.

~ P . .i IDETT: .r» there any further quo-clous of tnu wltnosa

by Aof.aco counsel T

'jib ro boing i.ono. the prosecution oay crocs oxr—ino.


-


S99


C-urt Sc. 1

15 Aor •i7-A-17-l-SM-0rce« (let. Yon Sch.en)


CROSS UAiOSiJICK


3Y *?.. H.-J13T:


•v. Witness, 7 .u hrv*-»tated here la direct exa;:inrtic.n that it was
y u who influenced Sievcre tc Join the Nexi Perty, is that right?

A. Yes.

You h.-ve strtod that it vac y.u who influenced Sicvers to bscoao

a ne-bor of the Ahncnerte Society, is that c--reset?

A. If y.Ai ask at .ut the responsibility, yes. As far pb the technical

details cro concerned, no. I had loft Sicvers a free hand as tc how ho

vantod to y rk. Vhen he said, "This is a gc d position," ho took it,

and I said he did the right thing,

1* w, vhat Information did Sicvers gather t> furthor ycur purpose?

a. I said tof.ro that, for exsr.pl*, ho told no vhrt Hlrnler rs-

p-rtod about Popltx. I srid that he currently kept no and all tho other
resistance groups inferred f the strength of the V*ffon-SS within Oer-
neay. I said th/t he reported vtocn«vor Binnler rv.do an attormot t^. ourouo
s no particuli r p. litleal tendency. F r instonco, the fight against athor
perty gr.uos, Rosenberg f.r instance, C-uld be oxploitod, etc.

v Veil, n V, were tr .op novenoats, nunber .f non in the Vnffon-SS
capable f fighting for tho Xazi purpeec, natters which concerned tho
Ahnor.crbc S clcty?

A. 2 J.. «s far as I kn.v, Slovcrs knew thr ugh certain roaucsts
for newspapers or or pagnnda r delivery f t ro t rt f dccunont. cr
b nothing regarding thet, r Chrlstnas celebreti n, or fer the Party cclo-
brnti.n, that he c uld suggest certain figures free the Waffcn-SS t-: find
•*ut how - any penohlcts, etc. the Ahnenerbc had tc distribute. I hpve no
idea.


Did y.u ever hecr -f an rrter put vUt by the Fuehrer c*accruing
secrecy wherein n m c uld divulge what inf rnafci n he had obtained in
his Dtrticulcx p.siti n t an thcr ..an, regardless f his rreJc? Did ycu
ever hear f that rder - the Fuehrer's rder regarding secrecy?

A. Yes, cf course.


0 art 3'. 1

15 Apr •■7-A-17-2-xEH-Gr ss (let. V:a SebettT


Ehtn a - -ze vfco *r.a the neieh ncnager f e cultural sccioty v'uld
be able t receive infarratlcn of a secret nature fr u another comber of
the SS ceaDitw tfcia eecrecy erder cf the Fuehrer?

A. Vao hoa tc xke e distinction there. I have already arid that
ho got these figures indirectly. He simply said, "I have t knov h’c/w
W Cooiea f such and such a thing I have tc deliver f.r the Veffen-SS.”
He concluded the epnr xlnete strength of the SS, other inf emotion frrn
the Vehmacht vhich had oapivnage through Cenaris could bo used t< chock
it, and »fterverda had c nfidencc in tho fi.,-urea and ueed then. And, te-
cruao y u raked the queati'.n, it vaa ap ken differently in tho gre-uo
or und Bir.iler in Hauler's pretence and thank g dnoea thero vns a lot
A drinking there and < no c<uld get ir.f rai.ti> n.

- Well, n w rfter y u received thie inf (ration, hr. Kiolocher,
vhat did you d vith it?

A. Since I regularly aav the loo:'ora -r lapr-rtant sombera A othor
roalatnnco groups, I oxchangcd thia lnfomatlca vith thei bocauao thooo
other no plo rla< gvt ccrtrin inf r eticn. Vo could oxchrngo vhat they
found cut vith vhrt v« got e there vna a constant otrorn f inf'rinticn,
intolligonco, political acerct data vithln cur field.

%• S.v, v uld you kindly give mo tho names and nddreaaea f tho con¬
tacts that yur rcaistance movement had vith pe pie in Franco, England,
United Str.tea, and Huasie.

A. It vaa probably not cuite correct procedure thpt vo did n't
tef .re 1933 think f establishing tuck contacts abroad. If tho Karla
ah.uld ca« tack again, I kn.v that I have t ostrblieh contacts before
hand. Unfortunately ve did n t tf o before 1933 and after 1933 it vps
t -o late. Eut vith the help cf Slevere end Schuettekonf I aado an attenot
and I g t Svec.cn at least. I can rotation Er. 3 cas, vhc was e Eutch-
tw n, and as far as I as inf rr.cd I believe there is an affidavit < n the
subject, -hero ^re g.re people vith hin.

S v, vhen did you first hear f the experiments n hum- n beings
in the c ncentrati n earns?


5951


Court Hr. 1

15 Apr 47-A-17-3-EEK-Cress (Int. Vn Scfcsen)


a. 1S42, if I reaecber correctly.

V. Vail, now, did yvAl understand frua Slevers that —. You heard
at ut it free Slevore, I presume?

A. Yes.

v. Bid you understand frets Sicvers that subjects to bo used in tho
c-urse of these oxperinents wore inmates in concentration earns but that
said innatts had volunteered tc be usod for the experiments?

A. Yea. Of c'urae, they were celled volunteers. Of course, that
vos part of the Hein* system. bince ve knew the systen end since vo
know the concentration camps, it vos e cotter, of course, if ve «c and
sty you will cither bo .Tossed r v.luntcor. Of course, pers'.ns volunteerod.
That vos actually no froo vill for anycne who knew c< neentratien compo.

BY JUDOL SrL?.!SO:

v B ct - r . rt ld you understand that these volunteers vero all Oorrson
nrticnele who vere professional criminals who had boon sentenced to death
with tho understanding that if they survived tho cxnorinents they would
bo Krentod leniency or did you understand eor-cthliv; olse a.b.ut tho natter?

A. I don't kn v vh-t yu moan by understand. There van an ordor
*hlch Sievcrs told :o about that they vere supposed to bo crininals and
po.plo condemned to death. On tho ether hand, vo knov tho "avalanche"
roecticn. Vo knew that Hinder liked pcliticrl po-ple to dlsapnoar and
that if the order read differently there v*s still tho danger, tho ^roat
or bablllty, that the pcoolo in charge f the concentration ca-rroo «ho
had svnothiix t- do vith tho experiments would use political po-nlc ain-
ltS3ly ,r even intent 1 -nally. Ibis vrs very nr-table; besides, cur .jrcuo
was convinced enyh-v that even in the ense vf no .pie endc-'ned to death
f>r crinos, it d es not c rrosp.ac to di.*nity of human beings to be used
formally as a. volunteer but really under Cvnpulei-n cs guinea pi<s.

v Veil, then ycu c nsidered ray experinontati n unen human beings
incarcerated in c.ncontretivn ce_us e crir4aal act?

a, Ve «ere c evinced that this vrs in principle crininrl action.

Veil, n v, Sicvers, as you say, first told ycu f thess oxmeri-


Court £ 5 . 1

15 Apr 47-a-I?- 4-lHJt-Gr 0 81 (Iat. Yon Schoen)

cent* in 1942, it that ri*ht?

A. Yes.

.• Sever tcld you about any neg-_ tiati'-ne for experir.cntetion in
the year 1936?

A. K . I do n:t reaenber any euch thin*;,
v In the year 1939?

a. I th-uld like t< nelc you toaethlBg. Do you neon ne*'.tipticne
vhich lead to experiment* or ecy dUcuaei'ns?

v. Lct'e eay, furthir experlnonti, but tfceee exocriuonte to oh olrco
in 1939. Did ytu over hear «. f any?

A. That ox-or ir.cn t a to k place in 1939 that Sicvero told me, I don't

kn-v.

^ Sever heard f hi: bavin* anythin* tw d with experlnonte in

1940?

A. So.

.. 1941?

A. Kv.


59 E 3


15 ^rll-a-J?-16-l-Kurrov (1st. von Schon)

Court I

•

3. -ed you coafiru that the first tine he told you about ex¬
pert- onto v_8 in tne ye-r 19-.2?

'• lot exactly tne aonth, cut 1 can e«y a-->roxi..utely 1942.
bow, you have told this frlbu&dl that you had agreed anong
your colleagues prior to 1933 tnat tne out is could not oe allowed
to continue any longer. hat were you doing betwoon 1933 and *1945?

a. at. agreement oetween uy friends and uyself that uie basis
had to be ramoved existed since 1933. In 1943 - but ny group....

1. (Interrupting) I said 1933. 1933 is the date I st..tod.

a. Ch, I beg your Uardon, I understood 19*3.

3. Kow Uony guns did you purchase in 1933 in tnis resistanco

. .oveoentT

A. I ulgnt say , unfortunately, tnat the questloa rathor oy-puoocs
tno real uotnods of roslat-nco. In tno ya-r 1933, vhon nin^tentho
of tno population considered this swindler a decent Gsruon, wo
would not shoot hia, altoough, technically, tnat would; of course,
have been possible at that ii-c. is would not have succoodod in
destroying the ..'ational Socialist system wnich did not consist of
hiJ ulonc, out of a wnolo group. Wo would not have enunged tho
political situation. We were not u * , utsch sccioty tb-t wanted to
shoot bin.

>. -ell tnen, yc r najor interest Was ridding yourselves of
the two leaders, the big leaders, that is, jiicaler and Hitlor. Is

that correct?

a. Yes. If you shoot at u whole .rouo of birds ono doesn't
-it any of thot.. You have to snoot at an individual.

3.. I sec. Then your -ujor interest was in getting rid of
..i-.ler and hitler and let the rest of tho Paris continue?

a. *ho other Way around. Repeatedly, since 1940, we waited bo-


c «-us <j it would hare been possible to Kill iiitr-ler and nitler or
-c of thee, but it Was necessary, at tne sa-e tine, to hare a


15 ^ril-^-0?-18-3-iuCTOV (int. roa Scfaon)

Court I.

ltrg« enough Part cf tao -ned force* oa our side bo that 1 —:odictely
after the assassination we could eradicate the whole systao.
Otherwise, we would not h u ve needed to wait. ?h_t is what I said
before.

X. -ell now, how close u:tiu.lly w„s Slavers to Hi-xiler?

I have already said - Seich business j. onager of tho

ahneaerbo and a ua-bor of the Circle of Friends.

/

X. He Was U seeber of the Circle of Friends, w a e he not?

Tos.

X. Severs quite frequently c : talks witc hlualor only in
Hlu~lor's presence. ffaat it, no otner people there. Isn't that
right?

a. I don't understand. I Just neard the itaglioh.

X. Kiuuler and Silvers quiro frequently talkod alono, did thoy

not?

O. r reUly don’t know, but I assuuo so. I r«ally don't know.

I wasn't thero.

How nan:' tii.es h-vo you seen .-.oinrich hitler?

a. Jot at all.

X» Did you ovor scv hU. passing by in a parade or any such
thingaas Ihwtlld bo ver; c-reful not to o« out In vublic. Ctoo had
to say "Hoil hitler* often enough not to go out of one's way to
lcok for tho occasion.

X- -ain't Slevers actually physically lar.^er tnan Kiuulcr?
a bigger uan? here robust than hi-xilor?

I don't k..3v. I never thought about that.

X» '•-oil then, way didn't you think -oout that und instruct *
3icver6 to do away with niz^-ler vn-.n he had ono of these neetings
with hit. ulor.o. aople opportunity to uccocplish your oojoctivo
without going up to kill a wnitohcaded hawk in sodc mountain.

rhe oractical question w.,6 this. If sa-o cno not Elnalor


5955


15 april-^r-JP-lS-5-iCarrow (let. von Sefconj
Court X

and bat*, weapons with hia teat w„s ery notice-ole, if one wore .Just
going to a conference, a-'d in the second place, it wouldn't do any
nore tnan if oao of tno generals veo w„s willi.^ - for example,
Vitrlcbee sinco 1938 - would suddenly draw out hie pistol. I should
rcpo-todly lice to Cephasiso th-t teat would ueroly be an uesassinution.
The decisive tnlng wnict w-s so terrible for all of us - we had to
see to it that tno systun as a whole w_s destroyed.

3. tell then, you would say that th« July 20tn plot was poor ,
strategy? That Wo* »n oovious assassination, Ihat w-s poor strategy
in your wuy of thinking?

a. You have to n*aCe - distinction oetwucn str-tegy and tuctice.

I au eonvincod th-t tne nolitical preparation w„s good as far aa
I Know. In the second place I ^ eonvincod, froa all the information
which I got ir. personal conversation, that the preparation for tho
ullitary action -ftor tho execution of tn« assassination proper -
of tor the coup d'otat propor - was -Iso well proparod. Tno goneralo
had boon loarnln,. th-t for centuries, th«y xnew now to do th-t, but
what choy did not Know how to do Was the tuchniqu© of tho coup
d'otat itself because tho regulations of 1780 didn't cont-in that.

Tho tochniquo of tho ccup d'et-t itself, thoy did not Know how to
do that. Tho: had never studied it. Th-t was tho unfortunate thing.

I repeat - politically, good; for later strategic execution good;
for tho tochniquo of tho couo d'otat pro-jor, th-t wus b-d.

-nd now, what did Slevors over toll you about tho Siovore-
Hirt skeleton collection! Did ho over tell you about that?

«. Yes, ho told ce that ni—ilor had ordorod, -s far as I -.now,
they wore newish coui.iss-rs vno were under tnls torriolv execution •
order which w-s valid in tno n-st - tn-t sane of tc«c wore to oo
selected and used for tno sKeleton collection. The order was fran
h kail or as bievers reported to ae.

% and did you <now what they wero going to do with these peoolej


15 ^rtl- A -T?-18-4-Xirro* (Int. vw Scion)


Court I

Tea, it w„s tie Base a# in tnc es^ariaents. Shore a danger
of death v„e a possibility, here it v„s certain.

You know, of course, that they wero going to stand theso
people to, pick tha: out, select then according to site, take tnoir
anatculc-1 ut-suraiwots, then ship that to .-."attoiler and at
Hat swell or kill thcc, then deflesh th«ni, then send the skeletons to
tao Strasbourg Ynivorsity for cclloctionT and you knew tnatT
a. Yos.

q. a fino tning for a rceist-nco nan to be involved in, isu't it?
a. Ine situation, as I have said repeatodly, w u e as follows:

\,o tiado no distinction in tho roal evaluation of tne skeleton col¬
lection and otnor cxporluonts in wnich therew.s this so-called "vo¬
lunteering" and in which the result v-s tho sane - in our oyos, they
wore the Buko thing. I should likv to orobuslro ono noro thing.

2ooo ono havo tho -oral right to tolerate - lessor evil in ordor to
prevent a greater evil?

q. Just a uaiont. ..ow in connection witn tne skeleton collection,
do you further know that they dispenood with the idea of taking Jovioh
caanissurs but selected Jewish innate, of concentration ea-po?

a. Yes, what p-rticular parsons v.ro selected I do not know,
of course, but I know th-t u nuubor of Jews woro to bo g-esud and
wore selected for tnis anthropologic-1 collation. That was tho sane
Case aS or. tho Ghetto of Litznannstadt.


5957


15 April-A-GJ-ld-la-Iarrcw-f inti Vcn Schon)-
G:urt 1


the Jewish coo_ander of the Ghett' trie? c~, that was Liu*tenant Rcsen-
blatt-nfter ho had ,ain-_ 1 confidence in cc because I had --no in with
a false , nes - he tcld m, p..rs n inly" I was picked ait by the SS. V.'hcn
cf now r u; of Jews ernes into this GhettrLitzeannstaJt and crowd the
Ghetto I an not tc select exactly the sane nuaber of Jews, and I knew


that they wcul: tc assc !. That is I was selected by the SS, to deter¬
mine wh was to be nssse d. New, I ask you in the name cf G ', ,4r. Hi els
chur, y-u ore a Christian, what aa I V do? I had nothin to do with
that. I have aske ' the Rabbis. I nave asked the odl people themselves
an’, we have cane t the decisi n that I mist stay in this office. At
least I can .etwitain. the p^rs ns - I can at least select the oldest
people who can't stanl life in a Ghott and perhaps, in this way,
perhaps I will be able tc save the life f no person. Theco two eld
pocplo that I tell a v ut, w»re about seventy years Id. Thure were
five Christair. under the Jews. At least I was able tc sec that thcywcrc
all i assc ’ t ether. They asked no t , plense tell their au'hter »e
were able to achivc that. Tell Ee, did I ri.^it er not?" That is
even much horrible because the can could net even re-'ucc the number
••c haf n hope ns we had t suppress s me f thaa. Nevertheless I .
was ahnac that the people wh- were in char e -f this can. were called
Germans. 3ut I auids n Y^u have cted ri.;ht an.' ycur are Justified in
the eyes cf Or:.'*

J New, Dr. I assume that the- efense counsel ht3 sh wn ycu
all the cucents ccnc_min the skclet n cllccticn. Is that ri ht?

A Yes.

Q There won't be any n.e r for me to .;c rv»r then. Ypu have
state’ in ccnr.eeticn with the .ne cu— nt that was m ntc t' yr.u
t..day an the 3tan! that this was a very , raisew rthy net n the part
cf Siev,.rs in a ne. ativ^ w ay. cince ycu are fuailair with all the
3kel-tcn c-.llectien iicunents - I had intentc-d tc .;c into each one
ut I will Just rro intc one. That is, D cuaent S:-0 66, prosecution
exhibit 182, fCund in Document Bock 9 -THis is a Jocunent which w.s
written by Sievers. Ycu will see that thereon his signature ap. cars

5953


15 Apr-4.-: 3-19-1-Lesser (Int. Yon Schoon)
Court Ho. I.


Q Yes, but free this letter dees it not suggest that *ne was willing
to allow an innoc-.nt Frenchman to enswer for the crime' which flovod out
of this slcelcton collection activity?

A If you shew =c....

Q I have asked you—docs it not appear frora this letter, this let¬
ter signed by Siever:, that he was tilling to .allow a Frenchman to suf¬
fer for tho crises cccnittcd during the course of the collection of
theso skeletons?


A Yos, tho lottor quite deliberately, I believe, creates this im¬
pression. That was tho purpose of it, like all such letters.


:R. HARDY: I have no further questions, Your Honor.

JUDG2 S38RDWs Doctor, the Tribunal t;ould like to ask you a few
quostions, please.

BY JUDOS SDRTOi

Q To what o::tent was tho fact -f the existence of concentration
c trips in Qormny known to tho peoplo of Germany?

A Tho existence of concentration oenps, that is tho fact that thoro
woro any?

q The fact that there were concentration cm pc In Gcnr.ny—was that


known to anyone?


A In y opinion that was ©verywhoro known sinco 1933-

q You think then.... Was it known to you since 1933?

A Tho fact that there wore concentration caaps, that was general
knowlcdgo in ny opinion.

q *<as it actually known to you that there were concentration coaps
in O .naany?

A Y-s. Jlct only that, but what h-pponod in then, bec-nise sinco
1933 I had had opportunity to talk to jxoplu - ho had ixen in concentra¬
tion camps, and in one ease I succeeded in getting someone out; intjr-
-stingly u no ugh, I got a v„ry frightened and very short report fror.
this person.

} From your knowledge of the situation, hew may concentration

595C -


15 AjthL— 3-19-2-Lasser (Ini. Von Schoan)

Court So. I.

oa=pj would you any there were in Gerr-any during the year 1939?

A Op to 1939 the nuaber of concentration carps which I knew about
ma 5 , 6 , perhaps 7, no acre.

3 '•'bat would you say shout the yo-r 1910?

A The mmbor of concentration carps increased rapidly with tho be¬
ginning. of tho war. First, because tho KSDAP or rather the SS, began to
Send foreigners to those concentration caipa in larger numbers; and
secondly bocauao tho nurber of Geruana '.ho ir.rc arrested be cause they
were opposed to tho war wore also added.

3 oil, can you eat irate how aany were here in 19LC?

A No, I do not know any figures. The nurber increased consider¬
ably, how„v«r.

Q .’hat about lflilt

|

A I can only say that I did not trouble about those figures specifi¬
cally. That was outaido tho range of what was noodod, practically.

3 19L2?

A I c‘n only repoat, I do not know x.y figures.

3 I9li3?

A I can only ripest th; s.vc answer.

Q 19iiii?

A I can only repeat tho sa^ .ans.rer.

3 19U5?

A Tho real nuaber of concentration carpe. I learned from tho publi¬
cations cf tho Allies.

Q TI-osg nay aeon odd questions to you, doctor, but t ere bar boen
t-.stiaeny fro a this nitrwss stand tivit you now occupy, fron curtain wit¬
nesses who have taken tho stand, which would tend to load the Tribunal
to believo that during all of this period cf tine the sxistunco of con¬
centration cnope in Germany, in any conaidorablo numbers, was- fact not
known to tho Gcrvan pooplo and was a fact not known to people within tho
middle and higher lovc-13 of the Nazi govorn&jnt and tho Nazi nilitaiy
a-chino. That is the reason that th: Court has addressed that ou.stior.

5961


Court 1 fa"" 1 i" ,1S ~ 3 ” Ie68er * Int * 7on Schrcn )


to ycu.

. A I can only say the following. In qy opiulcn the existence of
several to speck very cerefuUy-ssTorcl concentration ccnps, «. gen¬
erally tec™ to the 0o- M population. The tact that those concentra¬
tion csnps increased .uidcniy after the outbreak of wr „s not so gen¬
erally knetn. It night be assunod. If I think of conversations «ith
hapless citizen, or .tational Socialists In railroad trains, they perhaps
assured that the concentration carps increased, but there uasno idea of
the nunbers. But the fact that they did exist and that there sere
several and that there .ore thousands of people In then, I consider that
corr.cn knorlodsc of the .hole population. But nobody kne .hat was aetu-
happening thoro.

Q Now you said sonothing a ooeent ago to the affect that you not
only know of the oxister.ee of concord*.tion canps but you know of tho

activities r.hich wont on in concentration cr J!pa . Did I understand you
correctly?

A r^a.

Q <.r "hat jxjriod of time have those activities boeax. kno to

you?

A It began with two pieces of information in 1933 which wore tho
first of this kind and which therefor* impressed thoasclvcs on my rwr.ory.

I hoard the first thing free Socialist friends in tho vory beginning. I
hC9rd ^ opl ° WcrG  into bathtub# with wat-r of 30 degree conti-
rr ' dc rMd th ‘ t thoir skin • then poulcd off while they wore living. At
about tho 3 *o time I received Ulf«r«tion fron ry friend, Karl August
•itvogel, who, through ry intervention, had boon released frea n con¬
centration c ap in northwestern G_r. What shocked nc nrst ms the
: ct that this am, who did not agree with a? politically but who ho#
tv-rsonol confidence in no, md who kn_w fren his wife that I had boon
iMtruaorrtal in having hi- released—that this nan was extroraely worried
-id afraid to tell no any <fct'ils although I was a friend of his. He

fin-Uy gave no hints about flog inf. and other kinds of punish ent; and

59o2


15 Apr-A- 3-19-ii-Iessor (Int. Von Schocn)
Court No. I.


fron then on I received information constantly.

Q Hhat typo of prisoner was this sen, a original or a political
prisoner?

A This non was a political prisonar,

3 A Goman political prisonar?

A A Goman political prisoner.

Q Now can you say to what extent those activities were generally
known cnong tho Go naan pjoplc?

A I can say that the so actions—what actually happened in concentra¬
tion canps—to our astorishnent, in viow of the large number of pcoplo
who went through the con entration craps, wore actually unknown -unong tho
Goman population. That was true up to 19U3. I recall long conversa¬
tions with Schulonburg and Rcichwcin, where it was repeatedly said - "It
is terrible we cannot toll the people about those things. .»s soon as
you open your ccuth you disappear yours.lf .and nothing gets talked around."

Q toll, would these activities bo tho sort of things that could bo
carriod on as a rattor of course in concentration camps without high
lovol officials in the SS or in tho govern:-cat having to havo somo know¬
ledge of those activities?

A In .-ay opinion, people of tho rank of Ribbontrop, to give .an
example, or Kaltonbrunncr, even h.for« they gained this or that position,
they must h.av_ known exactly what wa.3 ^oing on. But I do not know about
this, insofar as our group, as well as tho others who had bo«n seriously
thinking of an arajd uprising sinco 1?33, had to be very careful in con¬
tact with circles who were either convinced Nazis or, in tho unfortunate¬
ly still r-cro custorary way, wore without any convictions. Any work
could bo sulcitL. And so I an not informed*

q To w.iat oxtent, if any, was tho fact that concentration c-aap in¬
rates re re being used for bmon nodical «;X;.oriaents generally known to
the Goman people?

A Anong tho Gorman people I personally hoard nothing about it; that

Is, on ay many tripe and nany talks I noard nothing about it. I do not

5963


15 A|r-A-*-19-5-Lesser (Int. Von Schoen)
Court So. X#


Luginc that uany people knew about it.


Ijo-t


15 :-r-JSS-SO-l-.alov (Int. Ton Screen)

Court I . 1.

I understood you to say that tho defendant Slavers told
you so::ei ir.g about these tnlcgs; during t.:o coureo of any-of his con-
v-rs..;:. nc did ho auto anyone w.o wns associated in any of theso expor?-
cucis, did ho give you the ntsos of anyone?

. ... Y-o, t.io first “-no that no gave so, and this la how our ocj>-

TorM.tr a started, if - roccsbor, ho gavo so tho nano of Dr. ftischcr,
as tho real director. So s id ha wap a aost p rtieularly unpleasant
cronturo.

I think 7 'u said th.t t..o v rluntooring oaong concentration caap
incites for those oxporirxints was .ilways, in your opinion, ur.dor com¬
pulsion; thr.t thou^l it epp oared upon tho surfr.co th. t an oxporinontrJ.
subject w. o n volunteer; yet if tho feet w-ru known ho wn in truth ..nd
ir. fact acting under c»t«wjlBion: is th. t wh t you said?

USxvt I scant was the following: It was said formlly every
inu -.o v -lunteorod for such oxperioonts: if ooooone did not voluntoor
ho uii/ercd fro:: it, but if ho did volunteer ho van pronisod advantageo.
llo-j, tho important t.ilns; was tne following: 3 vory ixvn who was in a
concentration cusp know tho systeu; that is. a- oxpocted that soinur or
li tor ho would hi vc to dio. “or (hit reason ho spod at straws, and
tno .-ontso th t a person v.v> volunteered for such oxporirxint if ho
esc.:pod *dW aia lifo he wold receive a pardon of aose sort, in thin
pro .‘.oa,: boo objective enraulsi on. Tho pooplo woro put into such n
si.u tio,. b tho concentra tion cai.ps tart any door w. lch sight load b..cl:
to lifo, load to a rosulution to take advantage of ovary opportunity.

Th- trontnont was si torriblc they graspod at straw-., and th -1 is why
•uch strawr. wur« hold out to theu.

'• Doctor, I think you said siov .rs discussed with you the various

aspects of the30 oxp^ricen.s: lot Oo ask you in dotr.il what do yqn

u. the .igh altitudo cxporiccnts which were su posod to h vo boor.

conducted ; n Dachau fron at*ut ;._rch to -ji b u3t 1QU2 on concentration

- 1 i ina too for tno purposo of investigating the Halts of husan ondura

" ; ~° oxistenco at extrosoly high latitudes; did you learn boss thing

5965


15 jr.-SS- 20 - 3 ->^lor (73a Sea0or.)

Court ~ . 1.


of tills fri2 Siev.rs?

A. I did not ask for any dotails fro- Siovors about tho ver\ jus
experiments. I did not ask his for ar.y details or discussion at tho
beginair.a, end whoa ho va6 particularly oxcitod end again in tho ciuroo
of tho "h lo matter it vr.e or. tho othical question, whother th^ro was
an:' aral Juotification for*his staying o.; his post, io did not dis¬
cuss tho tcc nicel dotoils. Ona oust rooeabor vo gonorelly talked in
tho .inenor'co, rod oven if vo wore pretty s<ifo thoro, if a third person
h- -re*, ono word, — if t.-ird porsor. heard th t Sievero vao talking to
-0 4*3 ut those tiling? th .. v uld bu omv to have t ie Tuohror Order
;*5. 1, r.tlch the Prosecutor mentioned, put into offoct, so vo stuc?: to

t

tho prov ution of lid ting iur dlocussione to what was absolutely
nocouci.r", and that v 0 t.-.o othical quostioa.

.. : issuer then t.i t ho did not toll you tho rvcos of any poi¬

sons cinnoctod with this particular experiment, the hi,;h rltltudo
exporiusnt, othor perhaps t..:x RusenorT

A. Ho* with the exception of Ir. Rescuer, and onco vnon ho vr.u no
.io *r- ho iv.ui helped Flootnor, no centioncd plootnor to no. Othonrir. 0 ,
r.o t Id uj no nnujs.

.. 2 '.\ .n I an use fros what you sold ho did not give you any do-

t.■■.» 1 e <h ‘ut trooxin#. experiments conducted at Brchr.u in 1942, lo th; t
correct?

, I do not rteximbor of any specific dot ails.

: 0 id ho give you . ny particulars as to faumoi experiments coj>-
c.ucteh ; 2 ;hnu fir tho purposo of investigrtiiu; i. unixation for and
the tr_.tiK.it of ealoria, fr a different periods, bogi&ning with
Fcbru.r; 1^42 end ondia.; rbout ... ril I 9 U 5 ?

• 1 * , no did not. I rcae.b r only that the am Plootno* wan
ned in connoction vita Maloria, but I cry be cistakon.

21 d ne give y a .ay particulars abiut experiments conductod

t £ el --crluiuson, Satveiler, and otn.. concentration comps var' v*

ti-u;s :*r.-.. September 1939 until -pril 19 U 5 on concentration ennp

5966


15 'JV--GSS-20-3-Ktloy (?on Sefcocn)
court ro.


ir-i.tca, c: investigate tho • oet offoctivc treatoont for terns cpusod
by lost gas?

3oforc I3U2 I do not recall arvy such conversation, ..ftor 1$42
I do r.it re: cob.r anyt : rv: about tao nr no lAistard Get. I just rcnoabor
th . SxtBiax oxporioents were constantly being car iod out. It wp.a all
vor Conor 11 and Co used to soy tho whole thing v.-.s ao terrible ho
didn't hnow vfant to do. _

... Did ho toll y u anything about experiaonts conducted at
ifc.vo’.sabruocie concentr-iioc CrJip fron July I9U2 to $.ptonbor I9U3 on
conccntn.ti' , n coap iija.tos to invcsti&to tho offoctivcnoos of oul-
phruUw-iido who ruin wo-.xi.ds w ro deliberately inflictod on concentration
CRi’i oubjucto wno wuro thwC infoctod with atrcpticoccl or gas gnnj.-rcno,
niA then troi tnent for t—t: do you nothing About thrt frou SiovorcT
. . Jo, I don't Jeu-v auch nboixt t.xo individual exporinonto.

-Id Dr. SIoVjtb toll you anything about oxpwriconto conductod
st D chau . na July 19’.;. to Spotoabor 19U to study v. rious nothodn of
nCd..;: non vntor drinkable whoroin cor.contrati in c-jp lnoatoo were
doprivod of all food uv" given on choaicnlly procoonod soa wntor: did
no dincusc that with y u?

/, "o t not In detail.

*. Did ho discuso with you pnythlng about oxporiounts conducted
at .S“.ch>onhrmson and S.-.txuoiler cor.contn tion cacpo fros ab>ut Juno
19:3 t-. .bout J;t.u ry 1945 to investigate tho causos of and inoculation
ngninct o.iidoaic Jaundico, wherein oxpcrinontal subjects who were con-
contr. ;' xn eai.p ira t^s were dolivuratoly infected with opidouic
Jaundico?

— l*o, ho didn't toll ao any of the details.

/ jilC. Dr. sioVvTB discuss vita you anything about huuar. oxperi-
c'-nr.uctod at Buchomiald and Isatzwcllor concentration canps free
‘i- u. .oceabor 19U1 0 nb ut Tebrupry 1915 to investigate tho offoctivo-
: -*' r ■- spo.ted fever and otlur vaccines, wherein h^'-lthy concentration

a vt.-v dellbwT-toly infected with spotted fever virus?

£S67


15 - 20- h_ : .<a oy (Von Schoon)

Court L‘ . 1.

I

ITo, no details.

JU3S2 S23HI..'5: -hur-k you v.ry such.

.£ ITT: your ZoDOr, I hire another question or two, if tho
Court -:oraitB so, to put to t.-.is wi.nosa.

K'.'SIDZn?: I desire to ash a few questions, then you nay.

3Y SSL r/CSnSLT:

.• -ion was it. .'itness, that it began to occur to you ths.t Qoiv
uany h. d lost or would looo the 7rrT

A- Svt the War was lost cccsod to no very probable fron tho
nooont it bogs»r..‘

’,&.n did you b-soue convincad that the war wns lost?

A. That is hi-rd to s«,y. I should like to or.y it wi.s after tho
20th of July.

r- you faoili. r with G-rn.n cri.iinal procossos bofora the

War?

So.

.. H •• e you nny Ido.-., if a Cor. n n tional v. s convicted of
cui-Aor or tone criao w ich c. rriod dootn rcr.tonce, how long It would
bo *tor t.'.o sentonc- w 0 i posod b-fore the non would be oxocutcdf

•- I must rectify answer th. t I gave before. I v»s a Jurist,

■nt studied law and J went through nil the positions boforo I loft
the oorvii.o, but I know no till eg about thu period between the oontonco
arx' execution, .t least I don't recall knowing it.

.• Sit 1 you servo in :hu Ger_-.n ..r :zy1

■ v tCw tine I served as a Siloslor., I vs in tho J*roo Corps,
ln ISI'I 1 ninst tho Poles, nrd this was taken ovor by tho Soichswohr.
rhe i'voo Corps unit there wonted to take part in the JGspp-Putsch,,r.nd
olr.ee . diintt approve of this I loft, I loft.

In <• Goman .ray occupying foreign territory*, end if certain
of th:c foreign nationals were charged and coavictod of tho criao of
si-h'i; iguinst tne C-r *-n Iror, end condemned t death by silitary or

r G-rr. r. court, in :h t foroigr. country, hare you any idea how long

51-66


15 •*--2CU5-2^ioy (Ton Schoon)

Court M

it would bo before th.-.t sontonce would bo oxocutod?

— - • you scan in the Kutlonal Socialist JjayT
*. I don't understand you, Vitnars

* 20 you -car. the IT t' enal Socialist :xsy in tho second Vorld

VltI

. To*. %

— Z 'njow nothing about that in general. I only know that it vr.s
very cuichly carried out.

> Ho y>u h to any idea that foroign actionals who were so co»-
victod would bo sent b'.ck to Oir.-n;• to bo oxccutod?

•- I know of shooting*, avoa without a sontonco, and I don't
know uhr.t was doao if such quick Justice was not c rriod out.

'«• 1)5 y° u thlnk le Probcblo th * suer, foreign nationals, triod r.nd

convicted bofora a Gora.<n .ilitary or «Jccupati >ntl Court in a foreign
country, ad sontoncod to death, would then bo sont back to Ooronny,
parsons undor that sentence of death so lupoood.

... I don't know of .wy such c.so.

T' SIDZ.7: Has count el for tea Prosocution any Inquiry'?

. " >T: I Just h«\vo ona or tv, qu otiono, ysur H'onor.

3r ia. tqt .

.. Hoarding tr.aso letters written by Siev.rs that you say you
••d—irot" the wr.y in which Sieves wrote bemuse of his position: did you
letters prior to your copuaranco here in rufnKrg?

.• - 1 I did not soo tho letters boforo thay ;.~aoarod hero. !&r.t
I giro crodit for is tho authentic nntionnl socialist ton«.

.. Did y'u ever soa any letters wherein Slavers wroto to nonboro
of t.-.o P rty, or concerning P-rty activities, such as thoso lettorc
v.-.ich -ro in ovidonco boforo this Tribunal; did you over soo any of*thoso
lectors -orior to your /.ppearanco here in ITurnbcrg, of any doscripti n?

jnj.oca they ware sent to noabors of qy own organizati >n and
v c. jnouflnged lotto, s, no.

Die. Sievors ever tell you about the way ha coaductod hineolf

5569


I? pivT—GTS-2&-C-: alfiy (yon Schoac)
Covert 1 ' . 1 .


concerning sone of those various cri_lnal activitios of the Sezis?

-• Tu senr. in connection with the oxporinents, or what do you noan?

Toe, in connection with the oxporinonteT
. Si ever# told, ax, that was at the boginning *.hon wo had this fund¬
ament 1 discussion wuich lasted sons tine, ho said ho '*ould try t * c rry
ou: o.bitugo whororor ho could as Goneral secretary, :«.nd as always, Z
left hi r. coupletely free hand to carry this out, as I did with .-.11 try
poo?le.

> 1TW thon, »*on this process started, that is, I >ri!l go further
tie:., rhon the Internet 1 nnl 'ilitary Tribunal sorvod the indictment on
Goer in#, o: cl, did you -it thet timo volunteer the infer. nation you
poaaoo’xd to any investi. nfcing authority concerned i*ith those trir.lo
her. in BttrBbcrg?

. - Sinco I9U5, since Professor “ellor nado ::o Acquainted with tho
.mwrlcan Military Oovern^nt in rbv I doscribod to this h 0, an woll
as tho Sr,, Hob i.ilitary Government in joottingon end Kanburg our
rooiateuxo group. Is that what you tijar.T

I T-ean, did you over toll any Lilltnry (jovornaont directly coj>-
cernod with 1ilitary Tribunals, fo- instance, di you ever vrito to lr
H rdy, c ro >f I.<a& tell hi*.you h<ul information concerning
uodic. 1 or jric.nts. Darias tho pact two years, sinco tho ond of tho
wrx Aid you vrito to nnyono nl inforn then that you could onllghton
r. t ?>ao of t.-.o ctivities ro f ~ rding the nodical experinonts?

X did not vrito to i r. £ rdy.

.. Did ; »u writo t * anyone?

I -or.t to sev r-J goncios, s nd I was always given tho nr.no

of Ifforent office, -a:' they always said they vor not c^-npotont.

Sinco 1 -'5 I hi.v boon offering uy help, r.nd h vo boon saying I»could

ive inforuution about Siovers, nod -11 his actions. I vas never ftblo

to ivo tais tvstinony, bocauso as I h we said everyone Bent na on to

son; 'no else, and every ne said ho was cot cenpotent. T.sis continued

5970


ZZS-20- 7- ; ,i_lov- (“on Scr-oen)

Court Eo. 1.

4

until I finally found ,:r. 'folsgarfaor, end this'trial was finally ooonoA
to our Joy.

II*. H r DT: £0 furtlacr quostlons.

*- P1-. SIDZ;iT: Arg tfcjro any further questions of tho vitnoa:; of
an;* dofense counsel?

31!. 13ITZ: Dr. Holto, counsol for Eandlosor.

?.TSD2irr: Cvenaol, how long will you ox*ai.-j\tion of tho
nosa M:o.

PA. '.T. 1 C 2 : Porar.pa 20 .:inutoc.

P“ SIDSirr: ?h. jrifcuaal will now to ir. rocooo until 9:JO

%

to.-.orr5» ..irning.

(hereupon C'urt vljournod until $:}Q .j>rll l6, 19U7)


£S7l


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 7
Target 2

Volume 17
Apr. 16-23, 1947


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vs KARL BRANDT e» d
VOLUME 17


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


16-23 April 1947 pp. 5972-6356


C .urt Sc. 1

16 Aor V7-fc-l-l-ZEh-Gr se (Int. 7-n Sch.cn)


Official transcript f the African Military
Tribu nal in tho .»»•« f the United States
f Africa against lari 3racdt, et el,
defendants, sitting et Suernterg, Germany, vn
16 Aoril lS*-7, CS30, Jus'tice Seels ©residing.

Trj. i^HSHAL: rers.ns in the c urtr.-u vili olease find their seats,
rfac hW-ratle, the Juries -f .-.ilitary Tribunal !. Military Tribunal I
is new in sessi on. G-d save the United States f A-.ericr. and this h> n-
crable Tribunal. There viil be -rdor in the courtr'-cn.

W* FSiSXDlST: nr. harshal, will y u ascertain that the defendants
are all present in c urt.

*KE nABSrAL: hay it pleese Y ,ur K-n.r, all defendants ore oreeent
in C'.urt.

THE hriSIDij:!: The Secretary General will n.to f.r the roc rd tho
orosence cf all the defendants in c.urt.

C unsvl rjty pr.eed with ox.;lnati-n -f tho witness.

FHXSIIRICF HiLSCHnS - aeoir.od
ai-DIBLCT nXJUii:^T!Cy

THh WiaSIE*:?!: The witness is raalndad that he it still under oath.
BY Da. iihLTS (C-unsel f.r the defendant Kandlcsor):

v Yesterday, vitMii, tho Tribunal asked y.u a fev aucsti no,
thi.t witnesses and defendants hove declared on tho witness stand under
-nth that the terrible thii>;s which hoopenod behind the barbed wiro had
boen unkn.vn t than. Y_u will understand that oe ole vh . ha vo n.t
lived in -ur »*r.vlr aaant, ec they lock tack after all the ntrecities
have been revealed, cannot understand h w this c'uld be c ssiblc. Yes¬
terday, if ay n tos ore correct, 7cu said, "The existence >.f concor.trn-
ti .n car.ps vac kn-wc in Gercany but c-'t.dy knew vhat haooenod there, ■
le that ri*ht7

sa.v n-b dy. I neant neb dy vh was r. t eoliticaJAy

Tho auesti-n is: ~ic the ^-encrel oublic, tho
-r did .nly e few ce ole knew, or did certain
thin<;s7 S;v he asked y-u yesterday so ke A the


C-urt So. 1

16 Apr *7-H-l-2-x3(-Grv«• (Ton Schoen)


fuehrer Order S-. 1. Then 70 U know about it. ^ould ycu e^ree vith ce
if I were t say that this Fuehrer Order Sc. 1 vas the tyuical exoreBsi:n
of Hitler's principle, divide et i=pera, divisions of the various soheres
;-f v.rk and strictest secrecy? '--aild you a^ree vith aeT

fee, I would. I believe, in addition, the actual significance
-f the Fuehrer's order beccaes understandable only if one considers the
nressure under which the whole net! .a vas livin#:; that is, the knowledge
that if I say anythin#: carelessly I'll disappear end I don't knew what
*•111 hatnen to ae.

You say that vas tho prereouisitc f„r the effect and it vas the
cons«scuencc of this order, and it vas the intention, becauso in the lost
analysis the vh-le nation vas not behind the cystea t achieve by division
vhat could bo achloved with a cinorlty. Vere tho concentration canps
under tho SS ao early as 1933?

A. I know that concentration caios voro f^iarded by SA nnd that

there vas e stru#,v,le about tho control of evncoatrctl-n ca::no or.on* tho

hi.-^.er Dorty #*sncies. The oxaaplo that I cave yeeterdoy where uooolo

wore thrown into water at 60 decrees Ccnti^rrdo and thon thoir skin was

taken off, that vos d-ne by tho SA.

in#:

This Hitler -rder sott/uo the boeic urir.ciple of secrecy vas
n-v expanded and completed In the SS. Aro you aware that aside froa
this Hitler -rdor there wis a .:eneral trdor iron Hic:ler for tho SS which
or'.vlded sevoro Densities, even c.eatfc, f or violation of the bli,cation
to secrecy?

A. I don't recall the toxt but I know the general effect.

^ Y-u kn'.v that en order existed?

A. Yes, I kn.v that there '-ere soac such ordors.

v Hov, vhat if S -.ce -ae wanted to visit a c neentrati-n cand Could
ho to a ca-.o ccd esk to be let in?


5573


16 April 47-i>7jC-2-l-Karrcw (Int., Vor. Scboen)

Court I

I don't think that any one in Germany wcwld havo cono
upon the idoe of sinply going to a concentration canp and ask¬
ing to bo let In.

3 ^as it possible to visit a cop? aal what requirements
had to be fulfill©!?

A One had to havo concoction ulth the SS and under sone
pretext try to fial e leginato excuse for wanting to In.

Ono had to flnl on excuse tact ogroed ulth tho SS vocabulary.

I hove to look at this froa tho point of view of ry own work.

^ Yos, but, of course, I havo to . ak you, in Judging
thoso things, to distinguish betvoon y<xir apocific ceso and the
caao of tho person uho did not havo those special connections
which 70 U had.

.. normal Conan would not dare to think to got Into a
concentration coep.

\ Could the caabora Of tho ca;;p administration and tho
.jjaordc talk about the things uhleh thoy obsarvod to third
persons?

1 !*>, of course not.

'I Could tho lsratoc toll tholr rolotlvos or any ono else
In letters abcut what thoy obsorvod?

A ‘*o» of courso not.

"I If scce ono was fortunate enough to bo reloasol could ho
freely describe what ho had soon and oxporionced?

;» Sco t for personal convorsatloas with hlo boat frlond
or with hia ulfo, 3uch pooplo wore very retlcont.

^ 'fas that because of a systematic order, a waivor which
they hal io sign or rose 3uck thing?

It was because of the .oriuros which this non .:ad
oxporicmcol hL^solf, or l-al sean, and the knowledge which he led
recol7od in the concentration comp of the nalovolocce of the SS
ays ton, aul on the probability hich bordered on co: tolnty that
if ho sol- ary thing to any ono and was not lOC# certain that


16 ipril 47-i>ffjC-S-2-SorrOT (Iat., “on Schoea)

Court I

that person *.fould be silient he could be eoat back to the c®ap
q-~. would bo kill el ixrasdietely.

1 Hell, let ua no up this system. Primarily, the
basic Hitler ordor of secrecy, the spoolfic orders free Hinder
for the S3, the cowrote orders for the c®pa and events in tho
camps, ar.i tho conclusion is it correct that all these orders
•.zero carried out with tho greatest severity?

<1 7os.

Ci Thr.t this systewtic secrecy, in effect, hr.d to lend
to the general public that is everyone who did net hove something
to in sccc official connection cr scoe othor connection such as
yours, learning nothing about shat happenod in concentration
coops?

« I cm only repeat shat 1 said yesterday. The generd
public knew that tho ccaps existed. Thcro was a general impression
that something very unpleasant happened in tho coops, iihat
actually did happen in tho ccaps was not known tc the public
up tc the end of the war.

Q Icu said that thcro was a goneral herror of concentra¬
tion coops - this foaling that something was happening there. For
oxraplc. Bodied experiments on prisoners?

.. He, this did net refer to rny details nt rll. It had
tho following significance. Everyone know people disappearod frea
timo tc tine end were nc longer scon. « large nusfcor of these
people did net return at all. Those whe did return were extremely
reticent, even to their oar. brother, cousin or parents. That was
all. And this uneasy feeling that there is something going on,
something that enu wouldn't like to gut invclvod in - that was
th- intended effect cf the existence of the c aps.

». Did any cn-. cf the public get the idea that experiments


on human beings might to c rriod cut?

5975


16 April 47-:5-FjC-2-3-KftXTCjr (Int., Von Sch.cn)
Court I


A I can only repeat that no one had any idea of any details
or had any dear impression of what was going on. Otherwise, cur
underground work would have been such easier if we had been a ble
to use such general knowledge.

1 can, of course, imagine that if some one knew some one
has been sent to n concentration caap ho could inajinc that it wa3
rather unpleasant there, as if acno cnc is sent to prison or to a
penitentiary, but what I wen tc know is this. Could the idea of
horror mean anything so specific to the individual as the experiments
which wore carried out thoro?

A I can only repeat that tho general impression was a stricter
fora of penitenttary. Nothing specific, Just a general unpleasant
impression.

f. But in a penitenitnry one doesn't generally imagine that

® * •• W’

experiments are conducted on the inmates, then this fooling could
never arise that human oxporinents wore being carried cut in the
crop? Is that sc?

A I know nothing of any such specific impression among the
general public.

, In this system as you have discussod it I should like to
ask - did it make *ny difforvr.ee among tho German population in
genorcl, whether soao cno was in a high position, whothor he loamod
anything specific, anything positive about what went on in concentra¬
tion crops, or can cnc say that thrt was generally impossible and
did not depend upon the position of tho official?

Ur.. HAuDY: Tour Honor, this ground has been covered rather
extensively, both by the defense counsel, tho prosecution and tho
Tribunal. I object tc any further questioning of this kind.

THE . RESIDKrT: Objection overruled. Counsel ary proceed for
a few minutes.

BY Dh. liHLTS:

Did you understand co? The Tribunal asked whether any certain

groups, because of their position, wculd necessarily have tc knew

5976


16 rll i, 7 -^-FJC- 2 -W^rrcw (INt., Vcn Schocn)

Ccurt I

about.......

A I can answer tho question only generally for the higher
or dddle officials in the various ainistrics that was the subject
cf cur conversations - what can be done with these government
officials; and the impression cf all ry frionds in all the groups.
Right or Left, without any distinction, was that this class of
govornnont officials, not only sinco 1933, net only sinco 1919,
net only sinco Biasarck, were disgustingly unpolitical and had no
education outside of their specialized fiold. They worked in
their own field and had no idea abcut anything els*, and didn’t
worry about -nything olso. That was the whole psychological
prerequisite for holding National Soc i al!aa power. Nothing
could be done with theso people that didn't knew anything.

u Bow, if e gcnornl, for oxnoplo, says here on tho witness
stand in answer to tho question "Did you knew what hepponod in the
concentration craps?" If ho soys, undor oath "No", would you
boliovo that?

k That is a very difficult question because wo all laughed
at tho stupidity of the. generals. It is quite possible that Just
because ho was a general ho know nothing, unless he was related
to »3co ono who was connected with the 20th of July.

Wien you soy "unless thorc w.re specific connections

with the ovonts end with those craps."

k No, no, I scant to soy that the gonor-ls, who formed a
quito distinct class in society, end a large number cf pooplo
cxocutod after the 20th of July, w ere executed because this class,
insofar ns they weren't anti-Nazi, didn't always maintain secrecy.

I don't know who you are talkin about here, but if a general says
he knew nothing and he was related tc setae cnc connected witfi tho
20th cf July, then I don't bdiove it likely.

• Then, if I make cy question acre specific: irofossor
Handlesor said th. t he knew nothing cf the events in these
concentration camps?


5977


16 A>ril /.7-M-FJC-2-5-K" rrn (Int., Van Schaon)

COUT t I


A Uniortunatcly, I don't kna» Professor Kanilsoor's family
and social connections.

Q loU, assume that b«. had ivo relatives connected with the
20th of July, or with concentration ccaps, but ttet ho had an
enormous work as Amy physician, as Aray medical ins. octor and as
Chiof of the Vohraacht Medical Service, and that ho had no contact
with th, SS? Da you believe that this statement is correct. I
assume ti.st you Iokw hie n^m- an-' had som, idoa of whet judgment
you have to make of him.

A That's not possible. I can only say that if what you say
is truv- it is not impossible that ho would nit know anything.

I don't consider it impossible.

Q This prjbL-c is v„ry ieportant and it c-nnot b^ discuosod
in to much dote 11 . I believe it is on. of the problems which is

decisive t jr restoring Germany ta a rol*. in internetional Ufc.

As long as other countries believe that th>. general public
knew ab .ut and approved such things, we shall not hav« peaco anc'
that is why it is so iA^ortant to a. tj hear your opinion on this
(tatter and to give the Tribun-1 a oicture th-t the people in
general had no kn fledge,

I thank you.


16 Apr-1 K5-3-1-Iesser (2nt. vor. Schocn)
Court 22c, I-


BY JUDGE SSSEIfCr

Q Doctor, the Tribunal has listened with a great deal of interest
to t'r*i statements you have just cade, and as Doctor Nelto has indicated,
under the system of government which citizens of the United States havo
known for ono hundred and sixty years, it is difficult to understand tho
reign of torror under the guise of duly constituted and organized gov-
erncent which you have delineated in your testimony. Hoi* do you r»an to
oay it can bo possible that such a syatoc of practice as you have do-
line a tod as having occurred in the concentration cacpe, could exist over
a period of 8 to 10 years without such practices bccccing go r. or ally
known to niddlo and high lovol officials of tho so-called government,
tho ‘Yohrmecht, and tho SS?

A I oust soy tho following. In tho caso of tho middle and higher
govcrnco.it officials, it would not have been possible if wc had not,
for a very very long tira hero in Ocrmany, ospocially in tho East Elbe
area, had had a class grew up, trained to devote thocsclvos oxclusivoly
to their own dopartoont which they had studiod with abovo-averago
thoroughnosa and which thoy took caro of with the nocossary thorouglinoos
and, in addition, hod tho obligation to worry about nothing olso. Tliat
was a habit of tho middle and higher class which had lasted for conturios.
For example, in tho higher military offices wc political ptoplo always
talked about a domontia ailitaris maxima. It was not possiblo to talk
to those poo vlo about anything that was outside of thoir own fiold be¬
en uso they did not understand it. That has increased since, tho begin¬
ning of tho 19th contury. For the middle and higher government officials,
Your Honor, I cust answer your question with "No" in general. In gener¬
al they did not know about such things. In cur many attempts to ap¬
proach people there, unless they were actually relatives or friends of
ours, wo could do nothing, Tho thine was different if thoy were high
party, 'fohraocht or SS authorities; that is, tho poopla istodiatoly
around Hitler, Kirrler, Frick, Rosenberg, end so on. Then, of course,
things wore different. Thoy ’.era, of course, definitely informed.

5979


16 Act-::-: c-3-2-Losser (int. von Schoon)

Court !fo. I.

Q lot's drop down in tho party level from Hitler, Hinder,

Rosenborg, Hoydrich, Funk, and the rest of those non. let's drop down
on lower lovols of ran who wore Party neabers or still had contacts with
Party nembors officially. For cxanplo, lot's consider tte strata of
Party officialdom represented by these dofondants in the box. Tfhat is
your view?

A I TOuld bo grateful if tho ran!: of these con could be described
to nj because I have not followed this trial, with the exception of
Siovers. It is difficult for co to givo a goncral Judgment because I
do not knwr on what level these gontlonon were.

Q If that b true, thon tho Tribunal trill not press tho quostion,
because it would bo apparent that such an answor would bo simply an
opinion of the witness, is that correct?

A Yos.

f

JUDG2 SSBRWji Thank you.

TIE ratSIbEHTs Counsel ray procood.

BY DR. SERVATIUSt

5 'fitness, with your personal acquaintance of tho rosi3tar.ee move¬
ment, do you boliove that a porson rho was an active followor of Stroso-
mann nad Bruoning since Juno 1933, and was persecuted by tho Gestapo,
as of tho 2nd of Ivay 1935 would liavo been accepted into tho KSDAP?

A Only on condition that such a nan had changod suddenly in 1933.
That happened, of course. Thoro wore surprising people who changod their
allegiance immediate ly.

Q ffitnes., if 3 months bofera, this man had oponly protested
against the Party propaganda play at tho thaat.r and had beer, beaten up
and injured, do you believe it was likely that shortly after that he
would be accepted by the Party? •

A At the same place?

Q Yos.

A Ko, that is very unlikely.

3 Do you believe that 10 months Inter this nan would be admitted


1


16 Apr-?l-2©-3-3—Lesser (Int. von Schoen)

Court No. I.

to a State oxanination and r-c<-ivo a State position?

A Again, unless there ted beta a definite change in the ceantijac—
which happened in Go many very of ton—i- is vary, unlikely.

Q Do you believe that this nan Tould be kept under arrest only 1
nonth if, a year later, after this incident, as a government official he
sent 8,5CO pamphlets to high government officials?

A That he would be undor arrest only one nonth? No, I don't be¬
lieve so.

Q Do you beliovo that the cons.quencc would have been racroly that
ho lost his position and that ho could have studiod medicine until tho
beginning of the v^r?

A This was discovered?

Q Yos, ho says it was discovered and te lost his position and
studiod nodicino. That was in l?hl. Do you consider that probable?

A Ho, I considor it very unlikely. Tho nan wjuld very probably
have boon sent to a concentration camp.

Q Do you boliovo that oib could send 230,000 subvorsivo pamphlets
through the .tail without being discovered?

A I never heard of that happening.

Q Asid. from tho 230,000 pamphlets, do you believe that this nan
would bo hold for 6 weeks in a corxontration camp after being nrrostod
tho second ticu if ho had beer. Usuissed free the Party, as he says, 2
years boforo?

A That is oven norc unlikoly.

Q Do you believe that it wns possible for tho men, In 19U1, to re¬
ceive 2 letters of recorr»ndation from tho G-stapo, to becooc a n^nbor
of the ’’affer.-SS? f

A That pro-supposes a political c'.aango of allegiance.

Q This nan says that he did so in order to got into tho Party and
to investigate conditions in the cxt.raination cnnps, to reveal to the
world what ho discovered. Did you hoar anything about t'nir—about such
in an important position worki.% at Auschwitz, who wanted to in-

5951


a rar*


16 Apr-'3-3-Ji-LeSSor (Ini. von Schoen)

Court So. I.

fora the world?

A Ho, I know nothing about it. Of course, that doesn't prove any¬
thing. There waro so nany people who did not know each other. That
doesn't prove anything.

Q "'itnjss, this nan has recorded his activities in a document, it
is 1553-FS, sutritted by the Prosecution, Exhibit h28. I havo horo an
English copy. On page h of this document conditions were described as
I have Just repeated. This witnes* is Dr. Kurt Gcrstein. Do you know
the nano?

A No, I novor hoard it.

Q A graduate engineer for nine surveying (Borgasossor Diplouin-
goniour) who studied nodlcino?

A No, but that doesn't prove anything in itself.

Q fitness, when did you first hoar of the oxocution of tho
outhanasic pr ogr an ?

A I cannot give the year. I know in gonoral that tho Farty >rantod
it and I knor that those intentions v.-ro c~rriod out, not ,-s a private
citiior., of course, but that was infors-.tion which I received and wo dis¬
cussed it frequently.

3 in July or August 1938, did you kner.: anything about tho oxtor-
ninatior. of insane, fooblo-airxlod and sick people in tho nwntal instit¬
utions? Or v.t.c it later?

A I an sorry, I cannot givo any dates, but I can say that at tho
tine vhon it happened re knew about it. Ona of the rxn, I don't know
how it was, said - "The news is tho following — "

3 hall, witness, toll as, was it boforo or after the beginning of
the war?

A I on sorry, I c?.nnot tell you. All ny diaries were burned. It

was notod down there in sore forn.

Q fitness, this Dr. Gor stein -arc a long report to tho occupation
troops when they entered Gercany. Sven his f.tally has not bc_n able to
find it since. Don't you believe that tho odcupatior. troop3 failed to

5582


16 Apr-M- iB - 3 -$-La38er (lat. von Schoen)

Court No. I.

believe his statements?

A I car. only say that what you have told tje so far about the rcan
aaices it unlikely that he was in the rosistanco. But I do not know
enough about tho cathods of tho occupation authorities.

BR. S l-rATIUS: I have no further questions.


59S3


1c .?i'-..-SZy-4-l-. 1 ftlor (Inc Ton Scnoen)
Court i.


DR. 1.?tJZ3.Y.i YorwerJc for defendant Dr. Roabnrg.

.r. Zielscher, did you tain t about the problec of experiments
or. hvun:n boinge for a long tic or vere your anuwers In t. ie field
ycatordny really a result of a question for the .tonent?

... "'.vt problec did you e.-.y?

.> SiUoC experlsonto?

... I h ve dealt vita this problon for tone tice, long before the

Jtxic.

.. ,!r. Hlelecher, do you consider experiment* on huBftn beings

criuinnl under ».ll conditional

Under ay ethical convictions tho;* «-ro cr'ninel undor nil co>-

ditf.oni.

D''iS’.-SRX: Chanh you. 'Jo further questions,
m. ?RG2SC?}--KT: Dr. frooBcnaann for Titter Brack.

.. ’ficr.oBB, yostorday you a-.id th t shortly ftor 1933 you got one
or tuo of your acquaintances out of concentration cq)i, lo that right?
.1. One.

Did you cl so h to *n opportunity in lntor yonrs, lot ue ery
193 « - 1939 . to try to hnvo concentration ciujp lnaat< s rolonnod?

.. l*roa thrt tine on I *ua not ablo to nchiovo any diroct ro-
lo .00 poreonrlly. So.;o of ^ con woro able to help in thi# respect.

I h. .vo rlrondy Bold th- t Siovere did bo.

Did you know th. t thoro ».b r. way to h-ro inantoo rclensod
fro.j concentration cn.no through an offico in 3or?.in?

L* Conorrlly I know aother about this.

V Did you know she Chrncollory of the TUchror?

... T-e, r did. J'. t vpy oxtlstod, yoB.

Ci- Did you know...

xd tnon thero vc.s leo 1 second way, tor ugh 2ry Goering,

yoa.

Did yju know the rrork of -.nc Chancellor;- or tnc Puehror in


taio field?


15 r -1 - C-Z S- 2 -: rd oy (TOR Scaoen)

Cov_t LI. 1.


L. Eo, wo icopt free tnis method, boc<.noo it wan very u zt-
reliablo .nd dnngorous. I cm sty notnlng frou ny own oxporloneo.

\ -2ioa you didn't know Roichslciter 3ouhler personally?

Yos, but not in this connection.

.. '.’itnass, did y->u oeo prisoners personally who woro not in coiv-
contrr.tion equips one or two years, but cany yoc.ro, nd thon h -ot out.

Too.

\ Yosterday you epid that thoso preioonoro avdo •* vory dio-
turnod impression, nd ch t it wtt vory diffioult to c«t anything out
of tho.;, io th.it right T

... Jhtj wore oxtro-oly reticent, oxtreuely oocrotlve. Thoy
boro tho i. .yrocii ir. gra t foar, but tuoro wore pooplo who nnmv,*cd
to ndjuut C.'.OUBOlVuB to it.

.. G’.uld ono ueo .ho expression •nontel wrecks" for those peoplo?

I would eoy r. lar.jo proportion of then v.-ro. There woro poo-
lo who snrgud to adjust tnousolvve to it, and fchooo worn tho boot
onoo.

.. One could M jr that in pnrt tho psychiatric condition of c >i>-
contr.t ^n c y innatos eftor yonrs of i_prison=ont wno vory disturbod,
vory roducod — how would ;*ou oxprass itT

... In gonoral HiardoT succoodod in bro- kin# thoao pooplo to u
1 r^-o ortont. It wrs a devilish systou.

/

Is it truo th-.t e. 1 rgo pert of thoao pooplo, p.b * witnooo
rocoatly toetifiod in a different trie?., woro thrturfi with thoir whole
lifo?

... It is difficult for no to answer sinco I t- dopondont on tho
reports of tho prisoners wit- wnoc I worked Inter, . nd they # nro poo¬
plo who so not broken. If I can roly on thoir rooorts, and : nti
quito euro I can, I can t tout a Urge proportion, as I h- o alroedy
s dd, woro broken in their anilti n, and oo fort!..

; Do I* 3 ’- consider it possible, vitno'-s, thr.t there ^ria^nors
t..onsol-ro: lest any respect for the liver of others?


5SS5


lc .iav;-(S&.U-J-.v6loy (70S Scuooc)
Court ho. i.


—. That Is oxtroncly difficult to answer. I know two very
different reactions which wo oftor. discus»od. one is that ouch r.
person cones out and s;ys fron now on I shall nevor hurt a fly. ilou
I hnov uhr.t horrible things a hunar. being lo capablo of. I know how
e hunna being lives. I will never hurt anyone else. flint is or.o
reaction. The other reaction is. now I don't caro about anything,
nothing is Important cnyooro, and I will do tho sa:oc no thoy do.

Zioso aro the two typical reactions which follow fron huxa nature.

.. "itnoss, you h d soao knowledge about tho treatnont of tho
prltono.s by tho guards in tho concentration cnqpsT

— personally, of course, aside fror. the tiuo wh-n I was in
prison, but froc r.ports fron non in ay own group and other groups.

.. Do you know frou -*h. t part of flurardty, to speak carefully,
those currds were drawn!

... The guards in tho concontmtion c«npo? You noor. tho SSt
’• I rn taking about tuo guards. I vnr.t to avoid tho expression
3S. Cloy •a.re dressed in SS uniform, but I Just want to talk about
:.ie . u rdo in the coneontn tion ecops.

... flier.. v.r two heterogenic clouents, le to speak. Onu was
vh ‘- * Uu c llod the typic 1 SS a-n, .-nd the best thing to do today if
wo net the:. on the stroot is to shoot than down, shooting is too
,.ood for then. fli second group ore the ones who are brought in un¬
suspectingly. Th.-.t h-.pnoned often. tfo t in tho east in the foroi.-jn
(kr.irr. settlements the .icople were c-lied to n_oting and were told
'« vero to carry out c. census or socothing, end tAuy h d to sign c
list. ,n the next day they w^rc crllod in r.nd v 2 ioy said they vero
c. llod ir. for tho SS. Siey were put into fornnti>ns and suddenly dis¬
covered they w>r^ gu rds. ?or cx"-.ple, I was surrdod in the Lehrtcr
prison by coven Saxons, three fron Silesia. ..side fron tr.o oth^r kind
tr-at ia u:o v^re very very decent ctd regretted thoy had been forced
into this position, end I as a prisoner irdta opportunity to tolh to
die. bout sup.rvision, r.d v_ used to talk about who was the worst off.


lo ^av. -(SS-UBlogr (7m Schocn) >.c U--
Court go. 1.

1 “ 11 t: consolo thou. Those pooplo did exist. 3ut aside fron then
tli- nerds vera rather • n unpleasant bunch of people.

Did you learr. mything about the way in which the guards
tr - tcv the prisoners in the conccntr .tioa c:uos: do you know nny-
t.-ia,, abiut cietrcrtuect, or anything siailnr?

— Too, of course.

'• .-x*. into vh-'.t year did your experience cxtoal?

— 4 experience bogr-n in 1S33* reliable reports bo# n in
1933.

> -J* do you believe thet t-.is condition of the guards was
sup ortod frou above?

Yon, I do. They vent up to the Cou.nnd&nt offico, and wont
ui> to KlitJor and Kitlor, too, of course.

'• lion for n con who wr.s against this syston in the concent m-
ti->n ccpii did it involvo danger to his own lifo to offoct the ro¬
le..co of prisoners frou these ciiipo?

... Ike* I ask :ou to repeat tr.o quontlon.

\*.s it for a a r. ..

... ?.r a urn in t.-in hyr cay, y-.u ue n?

.* •• non outside the Syrnchy, r. nan w.;o wontcd to help tho

poor prioonero to be released fron tho conccntr tion ciiXJp; did It uorn
d i H * er t> ais own lif. t. do so?

... Unless tho nan ir.s oxtrc.-oly well covered he was under oxtrono
d ringer.

D?.. I'3BSSCHIhR’: Shank you. i'o further questions.

SB. "SISOrSE?.: Dr. V-isgorbor-

PHhSlflSWt 3eforo ;*ou proceed counsel I h ve a few questions.

By Ya BSS-nsra:

. "itness, have you nny idea as to the npproxiii.to nunbor of
Ocru-jis in societies, exclusive of the Jews, who were sent to the
concentration cap prior to S-ptonber 1, 1933 ?

... I cannot given ray exact fi urc, but it is cert-in that it wr.s


IS . :r-;_-^-ialoy^VCn Saiocn) G£S

Court /o. 1 .

ir. tlio 10 thousands, — 10 thousand, 20 thous an d, 30 thousand, UO
:~ -uc a'., sono thine like that.

"-re tb 06 c &er.. as taken fro a all levels of society throu^v-
out the entire country?

.• Yea, tbcoo poople jxmo fro:, the ws-.lo country.

la it true, as wo have r-nd, thrt oven the Gorenn school
Children wore instructed to net as irforaors oven against their owr.
p rontc as to disloyal st toaonts avr inst the IT sis, nnd so forth?

— Si-t vns not -n exception. Beat was a general phenononon.
m c 00 fron ny own f^nily, the nurse, children's nurse cones to r. lady
and o-ys "your duu^tor doosn't say 'Hoil Hitler' as often ns sho
should." ?hv lady says "th t isn't right. The little ones don't lio.

don't say such nonsense, rju d it turned out tivt the nurso took tho
lady to one side and said, "Lister you arc very fortunate. X BD no old
ooolaliot. I know you re conscrv .tiro. You must instruct tho c.’.ild
to lio to other people. In her class at school there arc four or fivo
fflrls u..o systematically infora on tholr parents and their school
friends. Shat wno quite common oxpericnco. I t.ilkod to ny worker
friends and. to soao c'.unt. I talked to ovoryor.o, end wo or.id "what do
wo do -ith tho children? *hey must either be UMjy .t at homo to lio
syttc-v tic lly, nd th t ia very had for tho child. 11 and wo don't want
to iui tho childron into such conflicting situation. Theso -ro only
children of six or seven, ad .he child is told at senool it is hie
duty to report his paronts if they don't think as they should.


16 April liWWTD-5-l-Mcohan (Int. von Schoen)
Court No. 1


q Kcnr that systea; was it or was it not well known throughout
Gornary that those things were done and the children were so in¬
structed?

To ay knowledge, that was a general experience that one had
to be careful in the presence of ones children, but 1 aist add, of
course, that this was only the experience of people who wero not
National Socialists, people who wore Nazis or who had no opinion at
all had no occasion to have this experience, it was only the grovdng
group within the country who wero not National Socialists who had
this experience.

q idoa was to ask you whether or not that system was known
by all Ocrnan National Socialists and if aonbors of all partios know
that such things voro going or.t
A That should I say?

Q Toll, ny question is, witness, whether or not throughout all
clasaos or political partios in Qomcry It as r.ot gonorally know
that things wore reported by chil»'ron, by voxyono, that ovoryono was
undor instructions to report disloyal statements to tho Nazi
authorities?

A In all classes of ary political training fro m right to loft,
in all circles, who were not definitely Ifetional Socialists, it was
known that spia wero everywhere, children and adults, and one had
to be careful oven in tho xost haralos3 conversations, it was called
the Goman look when two people not as they irsacdiately looked over
thoir shoulder beforo they could talk; that was quite goneral.

q Now, when persons wero arrested for alleged disloyalty; they
were taken fron their ho-xjs were they not? ,

A Tes.

Q Now, no one could bo, too adult person could be taken fron
his hone or her hose without a good nr.ny of the neighbors knowing
that that person had disappeared; is that true?

5989


16 April c7-»-AT!>-5-2-4ieehan (Ir.t. von Schoon)

Court iio. 1

A Yes, that is trae unless it was a nan who was constantly
travelling.

1 Of course, I understand that. So, it nu3t have been generally
known throughout all Units of Goman society that aany people from
time to tine Snply disappeared fron their hcaes; is that true?

A Yes, that is truo.

q Tioll, was it or was it not also generally known that when
those people disappeared fren their hones that thoy had boen arrested?

A Yes, that was tho general conviction*

q 'toll, was it or was it not goner.! ly known when such people
wero arrested whore thoy wore cent or whero thoy wore take*; I donH
mean tho dafinito locality; it was known thoy wore in tho custody of
tho !lu*i Govorrcont; was it not?

A Yoa, of course* I

Q Toll, would not that arouso considorablo general intorost
nnong tho population, anor-g their friends, ovon aaorg their onondos
who disagreed with then; would it not arouso sono genoral intorost as
to Whore tloso peoplo were put and whoro thoy wero kept?

A Ho, that was not the caso. It was generally said if you
investigate this thing you will possibly ondangor yoursolf, so don*t
ask ary qusstionsj that is tho boat for you, that wan the eunoral
roaotion*

q -y question was asto tho general reaction; that it would
raiso inter oat; not to ask questions I understand that; but it would
bo a rotter of sono genoral interest whoro these people were kopt
uvor. thewgh people would cot daro ask?

A }*r. President, that assuzos n namor, a type of thinking

which wo unfortunately -tic not develop in our county* fer generations.

This genoral intorost, what is going on hero, aside from ay vague

fooling ttat cooethine is wrong, was rdssing. Lot us not get ir.volvod,

leave things alone. Tho average nan, up to tho war, folt tho Govormont

probably does the right thing, thoce people Wore possibly crii.dr.als, who

5990


16 April h 7-*S-AlD-£-3-Meefaan (Ir.t. von Schoen)

Court So. 1

knows what they have don*? ffe ware not, before 1933, accustomed to the
Ooverment arresting people without ary legal basis, ‘ e wero accuatomod
to the Government acting according to its best Judgment. If poople
disappeared, as this wassudionly dona, without any legal reason, simply
arbitrarily, the average person never thought that nay, they felt tho
othor fellow was probably a criminal cr the police would not tako hin
away. One has to imagine the lack of political interest among tho
population.

Q ’era Ooraan nationals, ho .ore put in concentration canps,
allowod in any respect to cornunioato with thoir families?

A As far as I know there wasporaission at certain intorval3,
to write "I an here, I aa well."

q New, after Soptocher 1, 1939 ean you givo any ostiaato ns to
tho nurbor of Geroin nationals, oxdusivo of Jews, -.tho were oonfinod
in concentration canps after that dato?

A Ve assured at thi tine that it was two or throe tiros tho
r.unbor boforo tho war.

q Could you givo ary estimate, of courso I understand it could
not bo or. ac cur a to ostinato, but could you givo s<xu> figures as to
what you thirJfj undorstar.dire that is sinply ycur opinion as to tho
number of Gormans after 1939 who wore plncod ir. concentration camps?

A I assur.o that thoro ware sovorol hundred thousand.

q Have you any idea as to the nurbor of Jews, Goman Jons,
German citizons, who wero confined in coiicx.tration canps prior to
September 1st, 1939?

A I aa 3orry I did not understands.how mny thcro were

before?

C Rave you any idoa at all as to tho number of Jow3, who wero
Gorman citizens, who were confined in concentration canps prior to
September 1, 1939?

A I assuru that the nurbor of Jorfs before tho outbreak of war,

German citizens before tho outbreak of war, was not especially largoj

5SS1


16 April a*-#^TD-5-Mieehan (Int. -.-on Schoen)
Court !io. 1


I assume that it was ten thousand or twenty t^susand at the most.

q And after September 1, 1939; have you ary idea as to the
rainier?

A The number increased very rapidly, the idea of extermination
was put into effect during the war. It is difficult to say how many
were in concentration caaps before, e knew that they aoroly wont
through the concentration camps, they were transferred for example or
wore killed in the 3hettoo3 without being sent to a concentration oamp,
I donit think half of tho six million Jms who were finally killed
over went through the gas chambers in tho concentration camps. As wo
discovorod in the East, they wore taken dirootly from tho Ghetto to
tho maos graves or gas chambers as at Ghetto Litsmannstadt for
example wtoro thoro was a gas chamber; they were not sent to concen¬
tration oanpo at all and tho quostion is vory difficult to answor
that is all.

■~l Tho oourool cay pro coed.

REDIRECT SCJ (I NATION (Continued)

9 V D*>. ^EISGSHBERi

Q ’Vitnoss, to condudo y exanination I tavo four short
questions. "1th tho first quostion 1 want to clarity something.

•

Yostordny, I showod you Docunor.t ?k>. 975, I¥o30cution Exhibit U79,
this is a lottor which the Dofondnnt Siovcrs wroto on 20 January,

19U5 to Dr. Kirt. In cross axardnation, tho Prosecution showed you
tho teletype mc3sago of 5 September, 19Ui from Siovcrs to Rudolf
Brandt and askod you the quostion, at ioast thi3 was the German trans¬
lation that I heard, askod you whether it was adrdrablo for the

resistance cove&jnt to deal with such things; either there was a

•

translation mistake or the Prosecution misunderstood your answer to
ry quostion about the Docuror.t, which I showed you. Therefore, I
should like to give you an opportunity briefly to explain what you mean
by praiseworthy?

C092


16 April-ii-GJ-6-l-Pu tty-( int. Vcn Schccn)-
Ccuro 1-

A I did net mean that Hirt's idea which he had submitted to
HjacluT through Sievers tc ’ostray this Strasbourg collection and
to explain he bc'ics as bclan^in tc the French Anatomical Institute
I didn't think it ms praiseworthy for Himmler to order that and I‘did’
n't think it was praiseworthy that Hirt was rejoicin. that this would
escape free the notice of the Allies. All I meant was that if Sievers
coaid not chant the thine and if no one could be save 3 that it was
praiseworthy since the thine had already happened in view of the
threat tc him personally tc speak as in nazi terms about somethin?
which ha-. alrcc 'y happened to cover himself. Net what Hinml-r did was
praistworttgr but only the rcaacn which he use.',

Q I think you should speak a little, slower, witness, 'Witness,
yesterday yu said that you ha! rcpcatdcdly tc brin your kn >-lcd. c about
what happened urin. the Nazi rc.ir*. tc the attention f occupation au¬
thorities. Can you pleas.- tell us whea an’ wher- you made such attempts?
••

A I ccnncctlcn with a report abcut the activity of my orga¬
nization, I offerui to rep rt whnt we bad discover.-' abcut misdeeds
of the national socialists U the fellowin. cfficea i the C1C in Ilartur,,
the ICC in .larfcur , :lr. N--11 and. his successor, ,ir. No scamp, the English
flel: security in Oocttin ui, in Duesscleorf an : in l-arabur,. I offered
to report it at the Hers !crf camp when I allowed to visit the icfon-
ant Silvers, there breifly. I was referred to.an American office
in Nuern k tr -- the fcuildin; is next to this builiin - . 1 was send
■ is not authorised to .iesba. un frem thero. The Vitsbaden -fflco sene'
ae tc Frankfurt. The Frankfurt office refuse' t listen to mo. If
I had. been at all informed which of th. prosecute was '/-in; tc .
w-rk cn the matter, 1 would cf course, have gene to him.

Q .Titness, you said yesterday that Silvers :f torsion .dis¬
cussions and ccnsidcraticn decided t; remin in the cffice of the Reich
Eusinc33 aar,a :cr e7cn when the Ahn-nerbe came inti c.ntuct with ex¬
periments an human beiies. Di ‘ Sievers say, or did you ;ive him ..ny
instructions as to hew he was V. carry cut his a ainistrativc from
then cn?


5995


16 Aprii-M-GJ-6-2-?utty-(int ,7on Schocn)-
C.urt 1-

A ? { -at ins a cutter, of course, an ; , beside.'., caphasincd
by both sides that when passin cn the a.-Iministratlvc orders that
went through his secretary's office, he would, of course, pass on
cnly is cany as h. was unable to prevent, and wherever he could
prevent anythin., he would do so. In =y knowledge of Sieves, it is
quite impossible that he did anythin, beyond that.

Q My final question now, witness: .’id you consider exact
knowledge of details in the execution of the experiments of Raschor
and the activity of Dr. Hirt necessary in order to fora your opinion
on the ethical aisaibility of Siev^rs remaining in the Ahn'inerbo?

A I di not ccnsidcr exact knovlcd a necassary because our
ethical Ju-’ cent w-.c forced independently cf thu details, and the
discussions of the details -oul Barely have brought about now dan¬
gers. Free ny ftxn J scent.-. 1 attitude, which was the attitudo .f the whole
! roup, end rtiicn we tiscuaso: b-fcrc, I repudiated these oxperioents
on principle. Now .as is tho case in such c -roup as We were in a •
t.aa which has to count on the independence of ev-ry man, nhe.ro I had
to rely on the man's takin: up his duties in'epen’ently. I .;avo
oievers hia assi nuaont an. left him a completely fro hand as to how
he carried it cut. Otherwise w; coull not work ct all: but, of course,
I claim the responsibility since I avc the man his assi -ncment: since
I expected the nan to take this ri3k, I alone claim the responsibility
for everythin that he actually di ’ in tho spirit of our work.

DR. "SISilv.G : r. .-resident, I h :vo no further questions
to this witness.

THE PRLSHEST: Are there any iirther question3 to the wit¬
ness on the pert of the defense counsel conccrnin these matters which
have been brought cut after pr views c-aminations? Tcre bcinr no
'Questions has the rYosecution ;ny firther cross-examination?

IB. KAndl: !io further questions, Ycur Honor.

ThS iUSIDE.Tr: The witness may be excuse fore the stand.

5C94


16 April 1?47 -M-7-l-rKP- Cede (Int. von Scho^n)

Court No. 1

DR. 1I3XSGJZULE: iir. President to conclude ny case I should like to
offer a nuabar of documents. I believe that it will net bo necessary
to read th-st docira-nts. In s». casos I shell merely point out certain
statements.

The first document is Slevors Document No. 6, Exhibit No. 31,
Document Dock I, pego 14. This is = lottcr free tho Chief of th_ SS
personnel rr-in office to tho Chief of tho Personal Stiff of th- Roich-
sfuohrcr SS, Oborgruppenfuehrer lolff. This affidavit shews that the
Chief of the SS porsonrv.1 main of lice was trying to have Dr. Rascher
taken into tho .offen SS. It was c very high authority that was
interested in that.

Tho next document which I offer is Movers No. 12, on pages 26
and 27 *nd 28 of Document Book 1, wijich is Sievors Exhibit Ho. 32. This
is cn affidavit of Dr. Arno Secmann-Dcutclmoscr, who collaborated
closely with Slovers and Hielscher. On page 27 Dr. Scearrm-Doutolmosor
makes strtuuonts about tho planned assassination in which ho Mould
have p-rtioipatod. Tho next docue».nt is Si-vers No. 16 on p“go 37
to 40 of Document’ Book 1, Siev-rs Exhibit 33. This is an affidavit of
tho archeologist Alfred Rust, who knew Siovorn from 1937 to 1939,
who concludes this statement by saying: I quoto:

"Suraing up I would like to express the *inh as a party opponent -
I never t^L-ngod to either the NSDAP nor the SA not SS - and as .an
iivlivitiu'1, that all sabers of human socioty in their actions nay
behave as decent and as fin- as li^rr Sievors did towards mo ami ny
acquaintance3."

Tfx. next document is Clovers So. 21 on pages 53 to 55 af docum-nt
book I, Sievers Exhibit No. 34.

The next docim^nt is Sievers Ne. 22, or. page 56 and 57, Slivers
Exhibit No. 36, I bog your pardon. No. 35, an affidavit of Professor
Dr. Von LutUrotti.

The next docuswat is Sieves No. 23 in p gca 53 and 59, ' s Siovors
Exhibit No. 36, th- statement of Dr. .-ingrxtner.

6S95


16 April 1947
Court No. 1


7-2-PX?- Co.k (Int. vcn Schotn)


Thj next dc-cuaent is Sie7ers No. 24, on peges 60 and 61, docmifcnt
book I, Exhibit No. 37.

Tbj n-xt document is Si-vers No. 25, pages 62 to 64, docu»ont Book
I, Exhibit No. 36, an affidavit of Count Dr. Oswald Trapp, end

Sievora No. 26, on pages 65 and 66 of Docuauit Book I, an
affidavit of Dr. Georg Innercbncr, Siovors Exhibit No. 39.

Thu so six affidavits which I fr.vu just identified all do*l rith
Sievera activities in the Southern Tyrolean Cultural Ccrsmlssixi which
he headed froa. 1940 an. I shall not read these affidavits. They
speak for thuaselvcs.

Thjn I also sufcoit the affidavit -

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, the Tribun’ 1 will now be in recess.

(A short recess ncs taken)


16 xpril U?-:.-?JC-5-i-Grcss (Int., 5rc*n)

Court I

TH2 UlBSSALt The Tribunal is again in session.

TH£ Ff£SJDS‘.T i Counsel nay proceed.

OR. JSrSOERBS?.: You Honors, as the next document I subnit is
Sievers Mo. 27, Document Book I, pages 67 to 70, Sievers Exhibit
So. 1*0. This is an affidavit by University Professor Dr. Gustav
Schwantea. On page 69 -I refer to the Decbership in a nuabor of
for-ign scientific socities, and I should like to read the last
paragraph of his statement, to be found on page 69.

“Sunaiarizlng up, again and again 1 had the strong impression
that this nan Sievers inwardly nothing whatsoever to do with tho
actual power conscious and dictatorial National Socialism.’ 1

The next docuoant is Sievers No. 28 on pas« 71 and 72 of
Docvnont 3ook I which I put in as Sievers Exhibit No. 111.

This is an affidavit of the University Professor R.R. Schmidt.

Next is Sievers No. 31 on pages 78 and 79, Document Book I
Sievers Exhibit No. Ii2. This is an affidavit of tho former
Georg Schruofor of Weischonfold who hero describes Savors'
activity when ^lovers at the ond of the War, while tho American
Forces were approaching, hinaolf saw to it that the town of
Naischonfold was not dofoirfed, thus saving fcho lives both of
German inhabitants and Amorican ccldiors.


5S97


Court 1

April 16-I4-9-1-HD-harrow-orovn •


I coso not to a few docuaents fruit Document Book 2
end offer next Sieves Docusent 42, pOe>ea i to 5. Tne
£n t lisn translation us It on pr^e 3 to 7. I offer this
document os 6Ivors Bxalblt 43. this is an afflo/ vit by
Dv. Rudolf iiontzel w htT was the Chief of the Business
Co salt tee of the rtialch Research Council. I point out
briefly ..is statement re B erdln.> Slvers' attitude, particularly
toward foreign scientists w,.o were l„ Crormar. concentration
camps. Professor oe.p is mentioned, director oi Oslo
university, rrofessor Broo ct er of Oslo, end tne ccee of
the l»orwe 0 lsr. stuuer.ts is nentloned here whoa rivers saved
from the concentration- eras, “he case of the ctoalc
physicist . lela Bohr is «Iso mentioned, and ± -uld ii .e
to point o-t briefly : prss: e * to oe-fcu..d on r-b« 3 * P J *= e
5 of tne Snalisn transition In the ..lddle, I quote: "In
1942 lad the impression thr.t olevers Intended to dovi te
fr..t .is pt ji.n* wore.* nnc., flnclly, I olnt out the
passives lr. this affidavit referr r. 6 to oivore' nctlvlty
In tn- ^a e ln 6 coimlttue of tne .-wlcn ^oae ren Council.

as next docua nt i out in oievora 43, p- t e ®» P ‘b e
8 of the 2n*liah transit tl-n. Inis I offer as olevero
Sxr.ioit -i4. Inis is nr. cfildcvlt on tne p rt of the sr.ae
Dr. Rudolf uentzsl. It w s drawn up subseqaently ns :
result o: the saoolssion of -ocuuver.t he.-1368 a, Prosecution
Exhibit 464, w..lc.. w s >ut in o tne -jros»c tlon nnd which
wes to prove t... t ©levers i.c-- somethin^ to ao with
exp-rlmente with poison b c s. 61«-v«rfc exui.ir.od tills ^
setter in his direct exsalnrtlon end 1 r.*d this affidavit
t- .en down from jr. -tent:el in tr.is 3f»ne connection.

I o fer now divers 44, p?b*> 7 ~S» ,_11 of tne

English translation, ol^vera Exhibit 45. at. affidavit on
the p..rt of- Dr. ?olf P-nzen B raber, w.-.o w-s prisoner in


5938


Coart 1 _ .

Airil 16-A-9-2-HD-Karrov-3rown.


Dachau, w.x now tells of Rrscher's activities particularly
- n d clavcrs 1 testimony that the experimental subject who
wa6 used In the fra zln 6 experiment where Dr. hlrt was also
present w>s p hardened criminal, condemned to death. The
witness Punzengruber cr-r. make this stetemont under oath
oecause h* heard tnis conversation between elvers, riirt and
Hascher.

The next document, Is Slevers 45, on p-'ges 12 to 17,
wr.lch I put In as elevens 46. "r.ls Is cn affidavit from
Dr. Crlaela ochmitz, w..o, from 1337 to 1945 woe secretary
in the Ahnencrba, and os tnis nf. ldrvlt states, sno was
never a member of the National Socialist Party or any of
Its org-nlzations. She & l/.s various testimony recording
tne Intern. 1 business a.-fairs of thv «hnenorbe ur.d further
ot*to8 th t Slevors told nor how unplenscnt he found It
that th. Ahnenerbe came In tcuc.n with human being experiments
on hlmoler's orders. She says further that reports on
teacher's experiments in Dachau never aopaarod before nor.

If suen roports had come to th- nhnonorbe sno would
certainly tv ve seen It since she saw all Incoming mall.

I point out further her corroboration cf the perlimlnary
history of hlrt'a beln e commissioned to collect a Jewish
Bolshevist ahull collection. Document Mo. OB8, put In by
the prosecution as Exhibit 182, w. s dictated by Dr. Beger,
the same Dr. Scger vr.o cr.C6e the inm. leG in the concentra¬
tion camp of Docnau -'r.d tnis affidavit testifies to that
affidavit. I point oat also tnis afflaavlt's corroboration
of Slevers' membershlo In the resistance movement. oho
can testify to this of nor own knowledge because oievers
repeatedly spoke wit:: her aooat all these matters.

The next document, elevers 47, p'gos IS and 19, pages
20 and 21 of the English transl tlon, Slevers Exr.iblt 45-


5399


Court 1

„ ril 15--'i-S-3-HD-Karrov-3rovn.

pardon me correction. It is Exhibit 47. An af-ldavlt on
tao p rt of Cohrs regarding tne witness r.ere neard today,
friedrich Klelscher.

The next to lost document, divers 48, pages 20 to 22
respectively.-

TH2 PRESIDE: T: (interrupting) Counsel, that document
hca Ira dy been Introduced in evidence as olevers Sx-ilblt
22 .

DR. -V2I3CWn3-R: I bog your poraon, tnat is so. as
tne Inst document I put in clivers 51, page 31to 33 of the
German transcript, p ges 33 to 35 of tne English translation.
This will be Silvers Exhibit 48. This is an excerpt from
the periodical "Tne American Review" of January, 1947. Tno
article daals with the 20tn of July, 1944, and contains a
11ac of the various 6 roups active within the German
resistance movement, rs well as a scrutiny of the question
"How it came about that oven clergymen in the Christian
f lths rcochud thepoint of condoning political murder ns
the only means of disposing of the tyren.y of liatlonnl

I

ooclallsm. The submission of this document concludes my
presentation of evidence.


16 Apr-U-iS-10-l-iesaer (Lit. 3ro*n)
Court, So. I.


THE PR38ZDBHTX Counsel, I note that there are some documents con¬
tained In your document books which have not beer, offered in evidence.

It is your intention not to offer those documents, I understand?

DR. SO .IBSTc: Intentionally I omitted Sievers 7 and 8 because,
as I subsequently discovered, they had already been put in by the
Prosecution.

TIC RESIDENT I I Just wanted to be sura there was no omission
which would bo sought to be corrected later* I understand that Defend¬
ant Sievers now rests his case?

DR. '..EISaiQER: Tes. I shall only permit nyoell, at a later date,
with the remission of the Tribuncl, to put in a few more docunonts
which aro going to coao to no from foreign countrios but which have rot
yot been received.

TO: IRdSIDdl.T: I understand that, counsel. That permission has
boon granted you.

Tho Tribunal calls tho case of tho Defendant Roso.

:H. HARDY: }iay it ploaso Your Honor, it has boon called to ny at¬
tention that Dr. Servatiua will oxurinc ono of the witnesses that Is
coning horo in behalf of Defendant Roso and at that tiro ho will uso
Karl Brandt Docxtwnt Book #3> which has recently been delivorod to tho
Prosecution, .‘hon Dr. Sorvatius is using it I suggost that the Tribunal
havo it hare also, inasnuch as it lias boon recently dolivorod.

TIE HGSQENT: The Secret-^ry G:r.arcl will se- that the Karl Brandt
Docujont 3ook 3 is furnished to tho Tribunrl. I should like it notod
down that the Secretary General's Of ico should see that Karl Brandt's
Document Book 3 is seasonably dcliv;rcd to tho Tribunal.

Counsel :ay proceed.

D>. V R1TZ: (Counsel for tho Defendant Rose) Ilr. President!^ I in-

tond to conduct ny case for Rose in this way. First I shall call tho

witness Fr-u 3lock and tho witness Professor Hearing, and then shall put

the defendant hit. so if in tho witness box. During tho examination of the

defendant Rosa I nropose to offir several documents and at the conclusion

6001


16 Xpr-lr-'. 3-1C-2 -Lesser (Int. 3tct.t.)
Court :.’o. I.


of hi a esrmination to put in the rest of the docuaants.

THE PP-SSZDZtfT: Counsel :oay proceed with the defense in tho manner
indicated.

D;i. FRITZ: Then I should like to call the witness, '>8. Block, to
the stand.

TKS tH£S3)E:rrs Tho I Marshal rill sun_on the witness. Lotto Block.
LOT"! :LCCK, a nitness, took the stand and tostified as follows:

BY JTJ!X«2 SJjSL'C:

Please raiso your right hand and be sworn, repeating after no:

I si.-oar by Cod, the .Uaighty and Ctnicciont, that I will speak the
pure truth and will withhold and add nothing.

(Tho T.lfcnoss repeated tho oath.)

You asy bo seated.

DIRECT ic.:x.;atic:;

BY DR. FRITZ:

Q Please stato your full noi».

A hr is Lotto Block, noc SchUdt.

Q Titaen and whore wore you bom?

A August 7, 1901, in Silosic.

Q ’.'hat is your presont ad'ross?

A Fronkfurt-on-tho-y/\in, rtsserwandstrasso 6.

Q ihat is your presont profos3ion?

A Sixcial Servico employee in Frankfurt-on-tho-• tain.

Q Ploasc describe briefly to tho Tribunal your career.

A In 1919 I graduated from the C-yrnirinn and thon studiod national
economy :nd law in 3onr. and Heidelberg La 1922 I married Regiorum-srat
Friedrich Block of tho Culture I "inis try La 3erlin. During ny inrriage
I worked, without salary, for a Catholic charitable organization,
Carita3. In 1933 -v husband Ivad to resign, because of bis Joi ioh an¬
cestry, free his position as Oberregicrungsrat. In 1?35 I took ny State
examination as nurse. 3ecause of the politic 1 situation in Germany my

husband and I wanted to emigrate and I wonted sono practical training.

6002


16 Apr-: t-i ©-10-3-Lescer (Ins. Brown)
Court No. I.


never succeeded in emigrating and on the 11 th cf Noverber, 193?, «=y

%

husband was shot by the SA in 3erlin.

Q Your husband was Jewish?

A Yea.

Q Did you yourself suffer any disadvantages because you ware :.v.r-
rifcd to a Jew?

A On the day my husband wr.s shot I returned from the city to our
housa and there found 2 S»an who told a that they had liquidated my
husband for acts inimical to the State. I lost control of uysolf and
node statements to the S.» non that caused my in ediate arrest. Then for
9 months I was kopt in the collar of tho Frin* Albrecht Gestapo prison
in Berlin, in a dark snail coll. At the end of August 1936 I was re¬
leased, with t;» help of one of ay husoond«s frionds. In vie* of those
occurrences I wont to England for one year, in November of 1936, to
visit relatives, .ifter ay return to Ooraany I lived in Berlin, without
taking up any profession at first. At tho beginning of 1939 I hoard
from a friend that Professor Rose in tho Robert Koch Institute in Ber¬
lin, was looking for a private secret'ry. I appliod for this position
and was hired,

Q \ns rrofossor Rose aware of the ovonts that you have ju3t doc-
cribod?

A Yos.

3 Did Professor Rose continue to ctiploy you after tho police,with¬
in tho framework of tho supervision under hich you found youroolf, nnrio
representations to hin?

A lofl.

Q During your employment under Irofessor Rose was any pressure
exorcised on you by tho Robert Koch Institute that you should join tho
Gen an Libor Front?

A Yes. The President of the Robert Koch Institute, Professor
Glide: sister, and the managing director, rhon I refused to join the Ger-
Labor Frost, asked Professor Rs^scveral ti :cs to require that I


BD


16 A3--! r -:3-I0-U-Lesser (Int. Brown)
Court No. I.


join the Icbor Front or otherwise I should be fired. Professor Roso re¬
fused both of these alternatives. In this connection I should like to
renaric that the ecu pete at Genian authorities, tho Eain Comittec- for tho
Victi-.is of Fascisn in 3erlin, and a si pilar office in Frankfurt, have
recognized re as a vie tin of Fascisn.

Q How long wore you orrployed by Professor Rose as private secretary?

A Fra. 1939 to 191.3. I worked in tho Robert Koch Institute in tho
tropical aedical doportnont. Professor Rosa was frequently absent and
I worked in his own offico, if only to bo able to answer tho two tolo-
phonos thoro.

Q ’..Tut olso do you have to say about your activity?

A Profossor Rose wasoften on official tripe and nostly at his
cilitnry ofiico. Consequently I was troll infornod as to his official and
private activities. I openod all his rail, inforoed hir. of its contents
by phono, took care of tho answers by dictation or on his tolophonio in¬
structions, and kept his filos in the. Institute. I olso had to tako
ciro of his scientific work, take oxcorpto froa sciontific periodicals
for hin regarding; his scientific fiold, etc. Finally, I olso had to
take or.ru of those patters which concorncd Roso's activities as co-

uditor of tho Handbook for tropical Diseases.

6004


16 April ti?-J'^TD-li-i-haloy (Int. Brora;)
Court So. 1


n Did Professor lose work on typhus in his laboratory* or
did his collaborators do so?

A lb, at raa tine there was no dork on typbis. Nor did I never
hoar that that occurred either subsequently or previously. The old
uork reports that I saw when I worked ir. the files had not nentionod
in then of any work by Rose on typhus.

q Trot then did Frofessor Rose 1 department work on.

A That can readily bo seen fren tho annual reports of the
Robert Koch Institute, which contained a sinnary of all tho work in
progross, oven vork ttat had not been concluded. Profossor* . Rose's
dopartoont was called tho tropical disease department 0 f tho Robort
Koch Instituto. Thoro was a groat breeding activity poirg on thoro
whoro nvosquitoos, flies, and so on wore bred. AI30 an ima l cxporlnonts
woro carried out. Above all thoro was aico, rats and cats, hedgehogs
and such animals. Also thoro was an aquarium. Crabs and other marino
animals woro also brod and used for cxporlnonts.

q What sorts of disoasos woro experimented on in this
Tropical Jiodicirw Dopartoont?

A Above all nalaria. At first with <fcrsentary,n=»oobic dysontary,
and a diaoaso that had sonothing to do with snails, fish and crabsj
particularly, there was work on the roll played by fllos in trans¬
mitting intestinal diseasos. Moreover the dopartoont doliverod many
nosquitoos infected with nalaria to hospitals or clinics for thoir
own research.

q Did Professor fcse take oaro himself of the work that had to
do with malaria research?

A At first when I was there ho did it with intensity. Later
when he oaae to the department only infrequently he had such questions,
even if they woro directed tc his personally, turned over to tho
assistants. I read such reports to him over tho phono and turned then
over for iraaadiato settleaent, when, as often happened, Trofessor
Rose was absent.

6C05


16 April L 7->W>~>-ll-2-lcIoy (Hit. nrown)
Court Ko. 1


Q ^c-ro pationts treated ir. Professor’Hose*3 department?

\

A When I was first there Professor Hose did have patients

xith tropical diseases. Groover sary people pane to be vaccinated.

These innoeolations were subsequently taken caro of by the assistants.

Patients treated by Professor Hose personally I had to turn away when

they roportod, and givo then the address of tho three other tropical

•

nodical institutes in Berlin, Profossor TTornickc, Professor Haver,
and Professor Sienann. Because he had so little tine Professor Rose,
when I was there, did not have any private prcotico. Patients who
needed hospital caro ho turned over to the Virctov Hospital, but
fron 191x3 on ho had his own dopartror.t .rtth 20 bods. This dopartraont^
also ho loft in tho caro of two Any ebetors with oxp -rl :.co,

q Do you knew whothor Irofossor Hoso, or his collaborators,
carriod out Honan being oxporlnents?

A That, as far as I know, happonod only owe. Professor Roao
had discoverod a new typo of worn which eaused opidomal disoaoos.

-hon tho gentleaon w„ro unablo to infoct aninals with this dLioaso,
Professor Roso and a few of his assistants, infoctod thonselvos, and
tho infootior. took in a few oases. Also a fow of tho assistants
intentionally infooted tho.iselvos with solaria. ’foroovur, all ratters
that had to do with malaria, all persons in his department who had to
do with, solaria foil ill with solaria at one tiao or another in tho
course of yoars. Itoroover, r»3quitoos infooted with r.alaria woro sent
for rosoarch and therapy to the larger hospitals, but those wore not
exporinonts, but infections for other purposes of discovering troationt.

q And 03 to hucan being exporinonts outside tho departaont
you hoard nothing?

A '!0.

1 You said bofora Professor ?.cso did not werk on typhus?

A %.


q •oil, then who did work or. typhus in tho institute?

6C06


16 April U7-H-^7D-U—3-ifeloy (Ir.t. Brown)
Court No. 1


A Professor Kaagen, together with Professor Gildeneister,
and later Professor Gildeneister alone. The typhus department was in
a separate building of the Institute.

Q Were thora connections between Rose's department and the
typhus department?

A No. Professor Gildeneister forbado anyone entering the
typhus department, becauso of the danger of infection. Moreover
wo had no other contact with Professor Gildeneister *3 co-workers.


Court I

16 Apr li7->: - 11- 1& - LJG - Haloy (Ir.t. Brown)


since we had our own housing, dining room, and so forth, there was
no need for any connection between the two departednts.

«. In September 1SU3, rt ose was in Copenhagen in connection with

*

the question o! increasing production of typhus vaccine; do you knew
anything about this?

A. Yos.

%. Ploase tell us about it in detail?

A. The General of ine -edical Service asked FTofossor Rose to

negotiate directly with t.ie aerun nanufacturer in Copenhagen. This

is General Schrie'oer of the •ehmacht, he asked to find out if there

could not bo produced typhus vaccines for the Gernvan '.ehrmacht. This

trip of Rose was without any consequonces, because trie Copenhagen

Institute turned hla request down. After his return Rose drew up a

report on the trip, which ho sent a-jonj, others to Gehoinrat Otto in

•

Frankfurt, to tho Bahrlni. ..orkes, and to Professor Gilderwistor, as
Chiof of the T-.-phua Depart-.ent in the Robert Koch Institute. Profos-
sor Hose brought back froa Coperhagon a fow samples of the typhus
vaccine, or if ho did not do so at any rate he rocolvcd thee, ijairedi-
ately thereafter. Profossor Rose transmitted these samples to tho
aforementioned persons, including Profossor diideraeistor. Then Pro¬
fessor -<oso concomod hiasolf no furtnor about the natter.

Q. ./itness, I show you in this connection Document Book Ho. 12
of t.ie Prosecution. On pages 36 to 56, Document 265, Prosecution
Exhibit 207, there as a diary by one Dr. Ding regarding his hu.-.an
being experiments in the concentration cacp of Buchcnwald. Please
turn to pa,e 53 of this document book then under the date of 8 .'arch
19uh, you lire! the following entry. I quote: "Typhus vaccin-. Experi¬
mental Series No. Via. 8 •'arch l-uL. On Professor tose'a subject
the Copenhagen vaccine (pro uced from nice livers) was testud for
its protective qualities on hu-ar. beings." "hat do you have to ay
about that?

6006


Court I

26 Apr Ii7— :' - H- 2a - LJG - toloy (*nt. Brcwr.)


A. As 1 have already said, Prciessor ‘^ose sent all the samples
of vaccine tr.-t he had brought bach or had received froc Copenhagen,—
whether he sent thee to parsons other than the three I mentioned I
can no longer say unoer oath today, but aost assuredly he sent no
sanple to a concentration caap or to ar. SS office or to any Dr, Ding,
■hose naas I heard first in connection with this trial. If I had
Hoard it I should certainly have recalled it, I aa inclined to believe
on the contrary that Professor Giido^sister was the one who ser.t
these samples on, with an indication that he had received than from
Rose to be toeted in his laboratory. This is the only way I could
explain this entry here, which is nr-.de only 9 months after the
Copenhagen trip.

PRESIDENT: Counsel, what was the dato of the entry in the
Ding diary to which you referred?

it. HARD!I Pa?e U9 of the English, your "onor.

THE HbSID3:-T: he haven’t it Kara.

DR. FilTZ: The date is 8 V-aroh 19Ui, until tho 18 of *arch 19lih.

THE P.lSSiDEtfT: In the desciiption shoet of this witness It is
stated sho worked for the dofendar.t Rcee frea 1V39 until 19U3, not
19UU, io thut correct?


6CC9


16 ..pril 47-H-S -Ye char.-In t : Irowr. 12-1
Court Ho. 1


BY Su. FRITZ:

Yea, now I nu:t say the following In this connect¬
ion, - r. President; first in ny copy I cannot re d tlio
Irst digit ir. t’o iuentificr tion of the yo. r; it is one
4; I 0 r-l 7 .-xsuj. 10 d it is 1944, ny copy being unclorr;
witnoss, can you clarify tils?

- ft or I loft Professor Rose when ho was in Bor 1 in
on business, I did work for lie thoron: tor. * rom socirg
the ar.il, I know c littlo, but I nover hoard mytl ing
r.bout this Dr. bin? or any arch : tfcor.

. *ho Copenhagen trip tiok plr.co when?

... Iho c o. onhr.gon trip took pi .co wlilo I was workin"
for noso and r.t that ti*:o tl o vr.c ino wr.a pass d on.

It occurs to ua now that this ontry is co; oidorr.blo
later tl rn tl at trip?

A. 'os; end I know t! t tl o Copon: r.gen trip wr.a
includod in ttl.o fllo end storod rxd Proforsor koto
nover r.skod r.bout it ..gain,

TJ'E 7n‘JSIDENT: I dosiro tl r.t tlo :x ttor bo cl. rifiod.
:iYl>n. FRITZ:

P. Mam did tlo Coponhrgon trip tnko plr.co; I havo
it down for Soptonbor , 1945 in ny notes?

... Yos, r.utunn of 1943 wra tl o dr.to.

1 . You woro then onployod r.s -priv. to socretnry by
Professor Hoso at th. t tine?

Yos.

Q. and tl is entry thr.t I havo just put to you, but

w ich yew hed net previously soon, refors to 1944 oui I
ask you what you, on the basis of your own -nowlodgo of
the yoar 1943, can ary about tl is entry, r.nd the words
that ir.torcst ne r.ro: l; 0 r, Profossor nose's suggestion

such and such c sorios of osyoru oits?".

6010


SXS. = arc™


‘ Cn " 0t 1 * stos * *• Coins on h.ro, because
rrofo asor “oso abandoned tM s In 194 , ^

■'•» lone I or.a there, ho never r.skod no about the
business nor .ere sny inquiries directed to us from out-
s«o on « Is question. Profosaor hose did not interest
ilf-seir in tMs question sud I believe I c;n s,.y from

*‘“- t 1 :n °’' obout C!:a ^^ir that he undertook this
Coponhngon trip because he ur.s -sk* to do so .nd !*..

the set-up in Copenhagen end led tvo spocir.l vnooines.
*o hoped tint vo could cu-nont our supply of v.-.ccino
•out .hen the trip turned out to : ,vo been in v,in, th t
finished the «-ttor for Professor Ross.

"• ‘ ind n0W ° no ‘ oto inostion; the vr.cclno staple.
thnt y ° U C '° n ‘ l0n0d *“> ‘Vofor?or Rood brought bock
»lth him or uhich .ere sent to Urn often the trip, did
h. Puss them on *11. you .eu. still obeyed by h ta?

A * 5r ° a ’* OM Or  !i0 ™ 1 " --"Itlns or uhet, or one
qf the assistant, simply wo, asked to curry the sample.
OVO., bbr.t I do not know.

“»M»"H!0«tion.. t th. typhus department u

number of foreign guests .ore introduced to the methods

-qod; did those foreign guests else visit Professor
Rooo?

"* 0 ccr ‘ s i° li nliy gen tlonon dropped in .. 0 ., ald tirC
they hod wod ed ,.t the typhus dopertsent and w. 0 .anted
- oo introduced to Professor Rose. I remember « ere

m ‘ ~ "» 1,1 0 ! '°»* cn cc ,to e because he insisted
tntalking to Professor Hose, Kteovor, he did not spook to

tiM “* eU * b00I - US ° rt M1 = i~ -Wesson nose vs, on

“ ° rrlelnl «P- *<> ‘old H o. other go tlomen

; h ° er0?POd " “«* »*««« -i *». too busy nnd he
dW not r3C0lvc ‘-tynno in the instityte.

6011


16 ;.:ril 47-l£-Sft-12-2-:iGchaii-Infc: Broun

Court ifo. 1


1 . J at wore the role.tions in general b efcvoon Gildo-
noistor end Rose?

... Tho person 1 relations botwocr. then was not
r.uspiciOKe, -'rofesror Gildonoiator was vory punctilious
and boaurocratlc ncn_.nd it tr. c of gre t 1 oort_nco
to fell: tint ho si ould recoivo duo rospcct as tho suporior,
ho concorncd Musa If with ovory triflo. :> rofossor Roso, on
tho othor hand, v .s r. vory inrtopondrnt erson, very
^onerous end poraittd grunt froodon in our work. Thono
differoncos in charactor caused froquont friction
between tho'two .ion. It : Iso mist bo said tl ; t Profossor
Roso could buoono vory oxcitod end used vury drastic
language when lows rnnoyod by rod tr.po end ovon -/I on
ho w: a talkin'* to tl o rosidort, ho did r.ct restrain
h.tiieolf.

low did you !*. ow tJ.-.t; woro you proaont t such
ovonts?

. Yos, Proforsor ~oro only wont vory infroqrontly to
Dr. Gildonoistor ;nd if porriblo aottlod ovorytl ing by
phono, d en ho undo thoro pi ono calls, ho did not went
o rut of tho off ico, b oca uso I h d to tr.fco notoo,
consoquontly, I froquontly hoard the conversations or nt
least l.is 1. If of tho a. It was ..Iso his custom to h. vo
tho porsonr.l cor.foroncos tl- t h.o lx.d with tho Prosidont
ta!:on down i. .Madiatoly for tho rocoids so that at least
their contents si ould bo rocordod. bora this also I could


16 «rl1-h-J P-12-1.cchan- (let. arows)

Court I

tlu-t thoru were very frequent difference* of opinion between the two
gentleacn.

'•‘0*, at the beginning of 1943 Professor *ose bcceco Vico
Presidont of the aobert noch Institute; is that true?

*. Yes, on -oril 1st.

. now did this work out?

Pr-cticully it h^d no consequences, Professor Hose joined
tno .dr forco und could not exercise nis function as vice president
It was said around toe institute in those d-ys th-t Profossor Cildcooister
had strenuously opposed nose's u?>ointuent us vice presidont.

The ruupuointaoat of .. vico president at this tiuo Was in connection
with tho reorganisation of tha Prussian i.istituto oacfc for n Sol eh' a
institute on *pril 1, 1942, however, dose's uppointaent occurcd
only on -pril 1, 1943. this delay w a s attributed only to Gildocoiotor's
opposition.

Horo in this tri -1 ■’rofossor nose has been characterized by
the tribunal -c Gildcooistcr's closest friend and collaborator,
particul-rly in the field of typhus; is tnat so fur as you know correct?

Kew as I h~vc air.ad.v st-t-d, tno personal relatione but-
woen the tow non were not good and there nw-r could h-vo b-en any¬
thing such as a close friendship bctw.on tho two, rather tho con-
trary is true. aIso th-ro Was no ugrocn-nt in scientific natters
betwoon thvJi Insofar as I could judgv as an untrained observer; on
tnc contrary the two gantleccn frequently had ~lterCwtionB.

CrildcccioUr did :.ot work with Eos- in tho fiwld of typhus, now
Was there any connection between tnc typhus dopurtnont


6013


16 April—;i-GJ-12-lb-keehon-(int.Lrown)-
Ccurt Ir¬
ani the department for tropical ncdiciie. I n^ver took -cwn any dic¬
tation frat which it car. be seen that typhus experiments wore discus¬
sed by the two oen with one sin, le ex-ption, about which I will bo
subsequently examine-i. There was no connection or collaboration
between the two departments or men and this shews that neither ?rc
fesser Rose ncr any epplcyec in his .cportrxnt found cut, cxept for
the fact that someone felt ill when the laboratory assistants were
cne after the other injcctc J by Gidd'.eistcr in the typhus laborato¬
ry, '.espitc tho fact that thoy had receive! protective vaccines.

Q The Prosecution assets farther and has sutmittet docu-
oonts tc tho effect that 'rofessor Gildemeister tack part in the
typhus experiments in co.wcntratien camps and that Professor Rose
took part in the plannir. and carryin out of these experiments;
do you have anythin to say about that?

A I can say most definitely that I knew nothin.- about
that; if P ofessor Rose ever worked with r rofessor Girldcaeiotcr on
typhis I shoul. have Certainly found out anythin; on that sort.

T*‘ero was scientific '.cllaboration between the two men at all.
Professor Rose simply submitted the offici .1 reports of hie Jepart-
m.nt that vac all otherwise he worked completely independently in
hir department and not in connection with Gildeacister.

TUI FRESHT .71 The Tribunal will new be in recess until 1«30
this afternoon. I was in error, I for ot the Tribunal recesses until
lo:lo tomorrow so min .


( A recess was taken until 10:10 Hours
17 April, 19li7.)


Court 51

17 Apr <7—. l-5-I-hB<-loy Cat. Brovr)


Official transcript of the Arericer. Kilitary
Tribunal in the carter of the halted States
of .oericc egeinst harl Brandt, et el,
defendants, sitting et Suernberg, Gernaay. on
17 April 1947, 1020, Justice Beals oresidiog.

Tri jukoSEAL: The Honorable Judges of Military Tribunal I. Kilitery
Tribunal I is nov in session. God save the belted States of Anerica
end this Honorable Tribunal. There “ill be order in the ccurtrooa.

TH2. PBi6IBLBTi nr. Marshal, will you ascertain if ell the defendants
ere present?

Thi KinSHAL; «ay it aloesc Ycur Honor, all the defendants arc
proeer.t in court.

THi. rRiilDLST: The Secretrry General vill note for the record
the proBunco of ell the dofondants in court.

Tht Tribunal vill sit this corning until 12:30 without nny rocoss.
Counsel soy proceed.

L’.TTi. BLCCh - B.osused
D&iCT iXiuuSATIOS
BY Xfc. rnITZ (Counsel for tr.o dofondeat Hose):

„ Vitnoss, ! have a Question first of ell regarding your tostlnony
yesterday —

SEE PR£SIDU»T: I vill roolr.d the witness that she Is still undor

oath.

I shoved you yesterday Ding's diary and you testified yesterday

that you held it unlikely that the entry &f March 19-4 vrs correct,

according to vhich the aeries of expsr&oents with the Cccenhagcr. vaccine

HOSB;

vns supposedly carried out on the suggestion of Professor/ *'111 you
tell the Tribunal briefly hov you caac to this conclusion?


m in 19-3 fcose returned fr^. his trio to Cooenhogon, tho


ct&ffcie -pi vacc i ne vere lanediafely distributed. Professor Hoa#

bent the docuaettd'fo be filed rad regarded the vholo aettc-r es settled.

7 >‘

"he documents yt*e out avay. If rrofossor hose had wonted to verk on

this natter fbrjihed ar had ovpocted further shicccnts of the vaccine, he

vould have nacb / note to that effect on tho documents. That, however,
'jrrS&jr 6015


C:ur; 5'-. 1

17 azt 47-..-£-2-LHL '.-$-*1 oy (1st. 5r:v-)


did not teke piece. Professor Bose never Inquired further regarding
•hose filed documents end vfclle I ve.s vcrkicg there no furthor docunonts
errlvod about this natter.

v And you were employed by hie until the end of Dec«cber 19~3?

A. Yes.

v. I continue now with ny examination. Do you know anything ebewt
hunen being experiments with typhus!

A. So.

V Do you know anythin ebnit e conversation that Bose hud in tho
Soring of 1S-.3 regarding typhus, or ocveral conversations!

A. Ko, with tho execution of' ono between rrofessor Bose and
hrofoosor Gildeasister.

N . Did x'rofeseor Soso havo a conversation with S.erteoekretaer
Conti!

A. Professor Bose w B » asked to go on an official trip with Glldo-
oeistor and returned frees this trip very unset, asked ao to arrange for
c conversation over the telephone between hlc and Conti, nnd then to
arrange a date for a conversation with Profossor Olldomoistcr.

v Pleaso state this In detail, witness.

A, Vhsn ho returned froa his tolk with f rofossor Oildcaeistor, ho
dlctotod to no a aoaorondua regarding his talks with Conti and Gilde-
nelotor. was very excited at that tiuo and I con still recall that
Professor Boae, along with Professor Gildeceletor, had seen tyohus
iroorlnents on convicts condemned to death in Bucher.vrld. Peso charac¬
terised theso experiments ee coapletely useless pad unethical to Conti,
end thr.t onu could discover no nore froa then thus fr-a rniaal experiments.
However, he did not succeed in inducing the Stoatsekretaer to hrvo such
animal exocrlaents undertaken. In the discussion with Professor Gilds-^
meistor there ves hardly aention of these experiments. Professor Gilde-
meistcr ccepleined to Bose that Professor Bose had acted contrary to
discipline and against his orders end behind his back, when without hie

knowledge he went to have a conversation with Conti end told bin that he

6016


Court So. 1

17 Apr 47-K-6-3-sat-»taloy (1st. 3rovn)


v?* intervening in setters that did not concern hin end which belonged
within the sphere of vcrlc that pertained to rrofessor Gildeneieter. Ho
should have ashed Gildonoister to take pert in the talk with Conti. I
ecnnot recall further detail* today. The ceno I nentioned va* several
ccges long. I know alio that Professor Hose vpa very oprnest and excited
ned node no *ide ren» rke, such te ho often cade vhen ho van dictating.
After concluding the dictation he vemed =e, v-hich is another thin/; he
■eldoa did, to observe *trict silence to everyone, and iosediately loft
the Institute without being seer, or telklrv; to hie assistants, which is
another thing that he did not ofton do. The ccnvereation between Profos-
B.r Glldft'.eister and *'rofossor note -oust have led to serious altercations
between tha two nen bcceuee free then on, whenever thore vero teleohono
conversations, Hose vos vory formal in hi* behavior. Up until then he
had always addressed Professor Glide::* is ter as "Hr. Glldeseister" or
"icteoned Colleague", and now he used the address "xr. Proeident" end
e-.nfinod hies elf to the absoluto ainlsun. rt l*o hie mode of cxorcosior.
became very circuaspoct and he avoided making any renark of e draotic
nature to Professor Gildouoletor, which oreviously ho had efton dono in
cjaveroation.

v In ycur last answer you sold that Koto was with Glldoaelster in
Buchcnvald. The interpreter said Dcchau.

A. Yes, it vos BuchOQwald, end not Z>pchou.

v Con you toll us how you sew Hose's work during the war being
eerrlod out?

A. In the beginning of the war Peat hod cilitnrily little to do.

c g imply tOwk a few brief official Journeys, did a great dt-al of work

in the Institute, and vnB dressed almost always in civilian clothing.

In the Vinter cf 1939-19^0 and ir. the Autumn of 19 0 Profescor Hose /e-

sided in Hush la for several months working on the transfer of Gernens

the last. After his return his nllitary work increased in scone. Ko

sot up a second uffice in the Air Ministry end there was a direct tolc-

thone line laid between the office at the Army Institute and the Air

6017


Court Sc. 1

17 Apr 47-y.-5-4-I£i-Kaloy (1st. Brcvr.)


Inspectorate. Proa 1941 on /rofessor Rose, because of his tine taing
taken up vitfc nilitary natters, often did not ccce to the Institute for
weeks, evon when he was In 3crlin. =e sinoly had the call read to hir.

:ver the phone, gave Instructions by telephone and dictated urgent natters,
end discussed technical setters with the assistants, whan I had to cell
to the phone.

x. How then did you work cs private secretary «hon rrofccsor Hose
vrs at the radical Inspect orate and you were ir. the Robert Koch Institute?

A. As I told you, I had to attend to auxiliary scientific verk and
to getting extracts of a scientific nature, which - did in tho library or
in the office. I also discussed the current rail on the tcloohono and
trrnsaltted it vhon necessary. If sonothin,; v«.ry cresting enne uo and
rrofosior Rose was unable to cone to the Institute, I wont out to tho
nedlcal Inspectorate, moreover, ?rcfossor Rose dictated to ue usually in
the ovonlcg in his apartnent free 7 until 11, dictated hie orlvate call,
his sciontiflc work, office corrosoondencc, and ooaotlnoo allltory natters.

v Kov of ton did Roso ox< to tho Institute after he ned takon uo
Ms silltcry activity?

A. That deoended, scootiaos two or thr«,« ti.nos n week. Sonotir.oo
for -no or tv- aonths ho didn't ewe at oil ond than thore would *o wcoks
vhon he apooered aoro froouontly.


6016


jours 1.•-

A orl 1 17-A-6-1-HD-. *eehanr3rown.

aZ c he end of 1943, wny did you rer-ln: tc your
employment wise Professor .nose?

Professor .nose wns h-rdly lr* 3erll;. any -ore end
the '-Hear;- office wes reoov.d elsewhere. I nyself vented
to rejoin In oerlln *nd I did not wmt to vors with
rrofessor Glldemalster.

New, witness, or.otr.cr a ttor; dl~ Professor Hose
or one of his collaoorctors wor., or. yellow fever?

A. bo, a 8 lon e ns I nrd anythin^ to do with tne
dap rtaent chare w a no wor.. or. yellow fever, fellow fev_r
v ccino w< s produced in t;.o .nooert .<ocn Initlt-tc, out only
in Che virus dop rtzont.

%. «r.d w.-.o wna in on^r c e of t,.ls ^lrus -ep rtaent'
a. rrofessor haa t en and c. ft.r he left, rrofessor
dlldeuolator.

.Sow a fow quest.one on tr.e malrrln oroblox; with
wr.oa did Professor .nose wor.. on the aelrrir question?

a. 0 ;, one nondvith the assistants in nla dep. rtmcr.t,
also with Ooeroodirlnolrot dr. y* b el, vno wrs director of
? snnatoriuffl ot itrnsdorf nor.r dresden. This was in tnu
course of coll^oorr r.on, no w.ion the poetcl service oroko
d-.-wn . the end o. tn. v r ..la resist r.te frequently wont
t..era. Professor nose v a t ieo fro uontiy in ^rnadorf near
dreedan to dlacuae problems. rro£ 1G42 on ho worked Also
• t c..e Institute i’oorswaldo ne.-r Berlin, r.e hud r.ia owr.
"a_- latent fro.fi t.iero cox*. frequently to oerlin nnu reoort.d
to ..la or to the aeslstrnts on tne wor.. in Zoerswr.lde. Va
-Iso corresponded on tn c q-eetion of mol rl. wltn ln^ustrlel
firms Ssyes ir. Laverkuoeu ana -locr'cla, but these were
s m ly proohylactlc means o; come- tin t a,lrrlc.

did rrofessor nose fcrv© eny _ lorle wor with the
•D^oare, tropical Institute on malcrln?

6C19


Jo art i

April 17-K-6-2-KD-kechan-3rovr..


«. Ho, he held lectures at tne Hamburg Tropical
Institute end was a member of ch~ scientific senate of the
Hamburg academy, and he supplied scientific articles to
their papers. He was also a member of the 3cnrd of
Directors of the Tropical medicine ooclety in Hamburg, but
re^ rding hie own vor«c he did r.ot have corresp r.dcnce with
these gentlemen.

4. Did Professor Rose h'-vo ny correspondence with
Dr. Schilling, on malaria*

a. No, Dr. schilling, simply corresponded with the
assistants on tn- malaria question.

i. Did Proft-ssor ocnilllne, receive -ny solaria
arterial from Dr. Rose?

a. When Dr. Schilling act up his laboratory in Dachau,
ho wanted to visit Dr. nose in tho Institute, but did not
happen to run into him as Dr. H 0 £ wr.o on an official
journey. .10 tnon asked the tocimical caeiatant, ^rna von
rolkonhayn to B ivo nia anojholes o B gs and strain mosquitoes
for nia work in Dachau. This the assistant did and when
Professor Hose r turned from his trip, «lss von Folkonh-yn
told him that Professor schilling had oc_n there and that
she had sent him artericl to Dochcu. Thereupon Professor
Rose a.6kud Alss von Pclkonhryn not to make any future
deliveries to Dr. 3chllllu u , since ho • re not convinced
that Dr. Schillings’s research would be successful and he
dl not * ant to waste his vrlu bit. c t^rial for nls useless
attempts. I was struck at t..is time by tne rt.ltuue on Dr.
Hose's part, 6lnc» tne del .very rr.d ser.din b of & uch^ma terlal
w. s always t: ken care of In routine fashion by the assistants.
It w.s cent to hospitals ana such places ana was usually

called to Dr. Hose's attention afterword.

6C20


wcart i

«; p i 1 17-M-6-3-H£-.i6eoan-3rovn.


x. E".«jn, If I have understood you correctly, the
reason was tnat rrofessor Rose did ho longer wish nls
arterial to bo sent to rrofeesor Schilling rnd the
reason for tr.is vc= that h- did not a.prove of Schilling's
research .ctlvltles, or at 1 r.st die not thin/, they would
b- successful.

a. Yes, that w„s so. 1 wo8 present once when ho
apoie wlta alas von falkonhnyn nnd ho sola something to
the of feet: •.-ro.'essor oonlllir. e has had no reasonable
success so for with nls amlcria experiments end he
won't have or.y this time." nls stock of uosqultoe strain
«i"d been 0 rcatly reduced durir.-, the w«r r.nd n- wanted then
ior .ils own work •'nd for work from wnich one co-id expect
some sort of scientlfical success.

Jid you eoerny reports on Schilling's work In
Dachau aiaon* Or. nos-'a fllua?

a. .«o, there v-ro none.

You saw notnln c in writing, that nau to do with
Schillings activities?

a. Once, Jr. Rose, on requ-at of tne .Unlstry rf the
Int-rlor, drew up an -xter.sive report on frofeS6or schilling's
re8jarch work; I cya^lf wrote t..ls report, professor
re>8e c?tagorlcally r-puul t-d that res-rren work and
recommended for economic and prrctlcrl reasons that
rws-arch work should no longer be eup;ort-d by state funds
in this work. This report wrs on rt trip vnen the request
!-r it come ^r.d he went awry or. nothcr trip right away,
it seemed the antt-c w: s pressing. I, myself, toon the
document personslly to the nlnistry of the Int_rior.

Oo you .now when this toon olace; in what year?
a. rtt the end of 19,1.

6021


Court i.

april 17-J4-6-4-ED-rtjefaan-3ro vn -

ft. -'aa there mention In this report of work In
concentration crops?

Ko ar.d if trier,, lied been such mention It would
certainly neve occured to me ns ot that tine I ted not
ftecra of worlt In concentration c =ps and I would have
noticed It.

ft. When did you for the first time hear of experiments
on human beings In concentration camps?

h. From newspaper reports, after the collcps.

ft. In other words, from Jr. hose's conversation or
in other ways you found out nothing about experiments In
concentration comps?

A. No, with the one exception of the conversation
between Conti and illdoDclster.

ft. One last question, witness; for what reason did
you voluntcrlly appear as o witness for Professor Hose at
this Trial?

A. «t the beginning of tnls trial I found out
through a notice In the Zcltun 0 that Professor Hose was
a co-defer.dant end your name w s mention.d as that of his
oounaol. Tnon, on «y own initiative, I wrote to you and
placed myself at your disposal ra 3 witness. I did 00
boc use, as Professor Rose's former prlv to secretary, I
felt I knew so much about him and Ilia work th.t I neld It
to be lmpos lblo th t Professor hose snould have anything
to do with crimes against h-mnnlty or war crim-o in any
form or could h- ve known of tn.a.

ft. -it. President, for the moment x a vo no further
questions to this witness.

BY THE P.-.ESIDENT:

• Witness, you stated th t you first heard of

l

exovrlments In the concentration camps from newspapers;

6022


Coart 1

Apr 11 17-.4-6-5-HD-:Mehan-Brovr*.

Whet news? p„*rs do you ref^r to?

a. After the collapse I vos In erlin, the -Berliner
I g£seo_l tj el, I believe, wra the first paper to mention it,
then the Ncue Sol tang nrd an article on the subject. I
tlso uav. t-met:.in 6 ir. the ov.ee P?:-cr turt seaehov or otiur
was Bold In Berlin, but I car.not tell you whet that paper
was now.

Vher. w:.s that and w/.«t time?
a. In 1946.

Does any defense counsel novo any questions to
propound to t..lw witness?

3Y DP.. FLx..i.*Ii;G: (Counsel for J-fendant .'.rugowshy.)

%. Witness, In your direct ..xnainr tlon, you stated
that Professor Hose wrts v.ry upSvt w: on he returned from
his trip to auchenwnid and he coo-lsslonod you to arrange
for a conference with Conti, he tnen diet t».d p memorandum
to you .bout this conference with Conti; froa this
ajmorendum could It be se-n wnat connection Conti hud with
tno experiments in Buchonwald?
a. Ko.

Crn vou tell lis anything cor "b^ut tills conference
to tween Or. Ho9*. and Conti ns set down In this memorandum?

a. No, I c n only remember tant Conti h d said that
he could not entirely 'gree wltn Professor nosv's argument,
but th"t Is so lon t ago tr.rt I c nr.ot o-he cny statements
now under ootn about It.

No further questions.

THE PhEolJEHT: Any further questions to t.i. witness

c. any other defense counsel? '-acre bdn e none, the

Prosecution may cross-examine.

6023


Cook (Rrovn)


17

Crert . . 1.


c»ss sx.ni.?i s


37 .3. I3T:

l-rs. Block, uhcn did you first cater the o-rloy of Professor
•pai, the day, the ^onth rad tho year, please?

3 otvoen oac and toa Spctcab.r 1939.

*.hon did you corrloto your c.ployn.nt with Professor Hose?

-• ..t tho end of j>eco her 191*3.

1 * outlined for the Tribunal tho duties which you had

vailo vorkin/: ns n private secret' ry to Pnfessor Rose, at any tluo
durirv; tho course of ymr duties, did yiu oncouator ray secret or top
secret correspondence?

Hover.

Frofossor Rose had received correspondence of a secret or
top secret n ture, would he have porrittod y-.u to handle said zsitorial^

... I believe so, yes.

:>cn top secret a t.rial?

.. Tes.

t/oll now you h vc st.-tod th t Rose's work did not deal with tho
field of tyhus research, is that ri,-.ht?

7-s.

.. Ym h-.v^ furth.r sir ted that tec ,to ter prt of the work in
•.ho tropic ! diocaoe dovrUicnt if which Hose van the Chief, th t
breeding activities frvs ^squitoes, flios and other insects w_re ;>cr-
h pa r. ac.Jor task?

-• Tes, that is so.

> Yiu hr ve stated th t the various ..osquitces were handled by
?.o:o at hospital ixd other research stations, is th t ri,-fct?

— Yes.

.. "ell new in connect in 'dth teeso activities concernin' Ur.
ScMllin-, you h .0 st.'.tod th t Pr. schilling wan Verkin,* at Dach-.u.

- :u 'id you know ho was at B-chnu?

— Professor Schillia c:jjc to^hc Robert hoch Iastituto ono day,


Court L : . i


profcoaor pose wts ost there but iss You Jfclkunhcyn, who h d provi rasly
worked with Professor Schilling, cruso over to :y office and brou^t
Professor Schilling alor\;. Professor sAillin.- arid he would lifco to
have rr.opliolot o,-^s end aoequito o^s nad then went into soao dotr.il
scyia,*: ho wrntod to erect ?. roscarch instituto c.t Dcchou.

Sadly tell t.'.is rribuerd the :^onth and tho year th.t Profosnor
Schilling visited thw Robert Koch Instituto to eocuro thoto nosquito
oejo?

.- I believe it wr.s igUl.

> 19411 U» 5 Frofostor Schilling workin,; r.t D ckru in I9UI?

I BOO- to roaonbor tort ho sr-id th-.t ho h-A previously worked
In Itrly but that boc .ucu of ,;onornl difficulties ho wanted to work
thereafter in Ovrr. ny, and. thr.t the Ministry of tho Interior hrd
offorod hia c place to work 1 .1 Dachau?

0, How ana j letters did Dr. Ro«o write Dr. Schilling in core of
3-ChTAl?

... i’ono r.t ell.

. ro you certain?

I *.t -.ny mto roceircd none, r.ono were dictated to ikj.

rovld it hare boon pocniblo for Dr. 3000 to write Dr. Schilling
-t Dachau without h vln." dictated the letter to you?

... i‘o, bee-use there was no one else who could writo for hi i.

.. Did Dr. Rose cv».r writo letters hi.-self 'dthout diet fit in;; thoa?

... "oil whether ho did ta t nr not I don't know, but I don't
believe so.

IFOw you st ted th t Dr. Rose for conoid, r.-.bio periods of tino
would be atvy fro., the hobort Koch Institute. T.io would ho diet".to
ala letter to durirv; eh t ti.io?

... /‘•body, the u '1 piled u s' fur ns tho assistants could not
t c.nro of it and a - for -s I couldn't, find than if soaotnin.- soouod
very pros in,;. I sent c. lott-r to the .ersor. who hrd sent the letter to

UC Beyisv; that Professor Soso was on n trip and .-.shed hiu whr.t to do.

6025


Sourt . 5. l.


Veil now you think th t Frofoesor schilling; cazo to the
2ob-rt hoch Institute in 1941 md secured those o^.s for the nnlnric.
str.'in froa ono of the laboratory assistants, is that ri^tt

Yes, i.iss Yon ?alkenhayn.

V Did ho over cone beck in 1942?

-- I don't know. I can only renenter iu.vixv; seen Professor
Schilling onco in ny life.

\ Did you soo nny corrcspondenco in tho yor.r 1942 with r.ny one
in tho Robert Koch Institute concerning Schilling'- work at Dchau?

!To.

2* Did you soo nny correspondence in the yonr 19’4j?

Ko.

> In other words, the only thing yo U over honrd concerning i*.
Schi:line's work at Dr\chru was upon ais visit in thv yonr 1941?

.« Yea.

.. How, concernlc Professor Rose's trip to Ooponhigen in what
iwnth : n tie yer r 1943 did Frofossor Rose -Journey to Copenhagen?

... .'At ust.

V . AV.ust, 1943. 5ie purpose of his visit wan to discuss the
production of typhus vnoclno, is that right?

Yes.

.. •;w wns sent to Ooponh-gen by General schroibor, is that corroct?

— Go no ml Schroibor r.skcd hln, since he lint good connections with
foreign institutes. I bolievo to the Ipson Instituto, to ,;o there no
n rriv-.to porson in ordor to got roccir-o oince wo hd too llttlo of it,
beenuso ue needed ..oro v.-.ccinos th ui wo could produco.

'• t typo of r.ccincs w.r_ they producing in Coponhngon, do
you !mow?

.- ro, I don't.

Did y »u ev_r herx uh-.t type of vaccine they w.ro producing?

- t it fro;: mb aits ' lun s or nice lun. ■ or frou :ice liver?

•- I t..ink nice wore icTOlvod but vhothjr it w-.p lungs 'r liver

6026


:


*

t


Cvcxt


I don's .‘mcv.

> " sc't it co --on to use -ico luc. s to produce vaccines?

. I don't know.

loif you stated th .1 vice Soso roturned fran ais trip that ho
reported th-1 tho trip w*s to no -.Tail; that the poeplo in Copenhr^n
¥ero ucwillin,; to produco tho vaccine as doeired, therefore, Pose rx\do
c. report, ujd ho sect this report to three sources or throe authorities,
woi'ld you kindly tell tho Tribunal rw'-ln to vhou Profoasor Hose oont
t-ils report?

— Gchoi amt Otto at Prrahfurt oc the Urdu. to Leverkusen and to
Professor Gilioacistor r.s director of tee typhus dop<Ttaoat and
presidont of the instituto.

Vould you repeat tho second ono mz ain? I ca sorry I did r.ot
uxv’.orotand?

... Loverkusoa or tho 3chrla, ’for)cs. Lovorkusen is a locality.

V It w.c tho Behring VorJes :oid th«-a ho sunt r. report to
Gildcuoistor at tho sobort Koch Institute and one to Ochoiarnt Otto
«& ho reported no further?

- Shftt *• ri/3it. I cannot rcaoaber tfc t ho reported nnyvhoro

olso.

> :: ° Mt roport t- Professor Conti, Aid ho?

... I don't think 85, but I cot sure today. I do not soon to
recall conti's nnac in t:ie connocti>n.

'• * ; * :U n3w v™ °t -tod th t Soso brought back or later rccoivod
15:10 Bi.-iplos of t..i s vnocino fra.. Ooponfc.- r;on, and. th t ho transfer rod
t ’ 000 ar. roles to tho saac people to whoa fc_ sent c report. nnnely, tho -
3okrixv; Tforko, tho P.obcrt Koch Instituto, c.xo of Glide: ;oi at cr. and to
Oohoiurat Otto, is that Teat you vish to tell us?

... T-8, I don't rc a a - hor to day any longer, but Dr. Soso either

-r Ui£t cc.r.leB witn hin or they wore sent to hiu very shortly thoro-

'iv.r. hOtfuror, thoy wore only very snail, only fov little test

fubca, and. ho fnvo instruct' ns t.. t the so. ales should ncco.-ipeny tho

6027


17 .:r»-:W2S-7-5-099k (3rown)

Court ; 1.

report.

;• "oil now 70 U st■ ’o th. t Dose never sent any of these vr-ccincs
tv coac-ntrr.tion cr. n, is tfc-.t correct?

... Y~c.

*. Did ho over sond any to the i$>-iono Institute of the Vr.ffon SS?

... 'Jo.

«• Did hv ever send any to Professor Dr. Joachi.: 1 rvvewsky?
r%

:• 21’ he ever send any to Dr. Srvir. Diarr?

.- Ho.

. You r.rc TOaitivo r. vt that witness?

• - ..s Ion#: es I worked with oso I hoard noithor the nnno of
Din,-; v. icl: w e entirely unknown t> rw until I heard it now, nor so f r
r.s : c..n ranonbor, the nmo of .ru'iowsky. which to be suro I know froa
.ir.vin : re d reports in the ncvsprpors, nor did Z over have ray orroa-
pondonco with those *;ontlo.son.

.. You h vo never soon ray correspondence v th Dr. i;ru#y>wsky?

.. .jro you cort .in th t Dr. Soso didn*t h vc another Secretary?

. Jih ia typist with the Luftwvffo.

.. 2 o you consider it post! le th t he could have carried out
thoec u tters with Dr. i ru owsky rnd Dr. Schillin throu.i his nt..ff
in th. .-uftwaffo?

- “ro.. wh.t I fc.-.ow of tao .--.nor I don't believe so., flio Ger. \n

' r.y v b very pc cull r nu I do not believe th-..t n Gormn officor
c-.-.V h vj settled .-irttors th t were not of a luiiodi to nllitnry
a.turo in .vis .Jlitr.r;' office.


6023


C-fcTt Sc. 1

17 Apr 47-.-.—e-l-LErt-Gross Cat. Brown)

v ’.ell, aov y-u hove stated that Rose could not have seat any of
these to concentration carps, and he did not send any to en SS office
or to Dr. Ding. Eovever. on direct examination you also stated that
whether or not Professor Sose sent these vaccino6 tc- other than the three
•psOPlc, or the three organisations you mentioned, that is the Eohring-
'•-rlce, the Robert Xcch Institute in care of Gildecelstor. ond to Gohcln-
rct Otto, that you could not say. Ncv, I an asking you to he consistent.
Can yew definitely state on oeth that Professor Hose never sent vaccines
of any type to an SS office, to Dr. Ding, to Dr. Mrugcwsfey, or to a con¬
centration cesp?

A. The Copenhagen vaccines vero in the Robert Koch Institute at
first. Professor aoet novor had thorn first in hie hands ncr Aid ho send
ther. off. ho didn't send then to Ding or Krugovsky, that I knov. They
vent to tho three olaeot that I aentionwd before. There was such a
stall anount no noro could hrvo been cent.

s. Did Professor Eoso indicate vhnt hnooenod at tho Military rfodical
cjnforoncc ot the Berlin Academy in Hoy of 19-.? aftor Dr. Ding had re-
°-rtcd on his oxuoriaenta vith typhus at tho Puchonvold concentration
casp?

A. Ho, cot to =c.

v He never ncntloned that to you?

A. So.

v. You have stated that when rrofeesor Rose returned fros his
visit tc Buchcnvnld - that is the tiao when he accompanied Professor
Gildenolstur - that ho was cooplctely dissatisfied vith vhot ho sav at
iuchenvold. Sov realizing, as you have stated, that rrofessor Roso vrs
n very dramatic and drastic fellow, vill you kindly tell the Tribunal
Just what ho said W-.ich ind.ici ttd to y.u that ho was coaoletoly dissatis¬
fied with vhet ho sow at Buchonvrld?

A. Ko said nothing at all. ‘--hen he cane back, he seid that I should

h'ct in touch with Conti and Gildereister. Thon, after having this tclk

vith Conti he returned to the Institute. This v e g the first tine he care

6029


Court So. 1

17 Apr 47-*-8-2-!Ek-Grc«s (let. Brews)


to thw Institute since returning end without going into anything oersonally
ha wrote to Conti.

V Vhet do you suppose he '-rote to Dr. Conti? Were you able to
nsecrtcin why he decided to vritc to Conti?

A. Be wroto at the too sonething like "conference with Conti".

v What conference \«s that? Was that tfco conference that Rose and
Jildeaeister and several othors had with Conti in Doceater 19-1?

A. Suheeouant to the trio to Buchonvuld.

Yea. Do you reneater when that conference wee that you suggest
vaa autaoouent to the trip to Buchenvrld? Vet that prior to the ostab-
liabsent of the Buchenvald Institute?

A. I know nothing at all otcut any inatituto in Buchenvald.

v Veil, now you etnto thet Dr. Bobo vaa referring to hie confcr-
or.cv which took olece toforo hie visit to Suchcnweld end when he returned,
pfter bwlng disaatiefiod about what he ecv at Buchenvald, he wrote to
Conti. Kov, can you tell ua, with your kncvl„dgo of the files, your
knowledge of the activities of Professor Bote, con you tell ua Just
when this conference took -since that Professor Bose had with Conti nrior
to his trip to Buchenvald?

A. Boforc his trip to Buchenvald ho didn't talk to Ccntl at nil.
r.c aadft an official trio of tor tho visit, the -rorooso of which I vns not
Informed of and I didn't know he was going to Buchenvald. When ho case
ctck, ho said thet he wanted to have a tnlk with Conti and then fron
tho necorando I could sutsoouo.-.tly deduce thet he bad been to Buchenvald.

V veil, had he over had any c-cfcrencos with Ccntl Drier to tho
trip to Buchenvald? Ho must hove if he had determined that ho wanted
to 6oe Conti regarding tho Buchenvald situation.

A. Of that I know nothing. #

Don't know anythin,* about that?

A. Eg.

v Did Professor Best ».ver go to any conference with Gildenelster


concerning typhus natters? That is, did Gildencieter ever invite kin to

50 30


C-curt So. 1

17 Acr •i7-K-S-2-IEk-Orc.se (la?. Frown)


attend conferences regarding typhus7

A. So. That I tcov far sure.

v How do you know that for cure?

A. Because Professor Rose end Gildenelstcr, as I have said here,
v«re not on very good terns.

v Veil, now just a nonent. witness. How do you account for tho
fact that ex ofessor Eos«. and Gildeceieter visited 3uchenveld together?

A. I don't know. They were ordered, I guess.

HE. HARDY: I have no further Questions, Your Hon.r.

TKZ PE2SIDEKT: Has defense counsel any further oucstions of tho
witness?

If.. FRITZ: Ho further Questions, Your Honor.

THE PRESIDES!: There being no further ouostions to bt propounded
to the witness, tho witness will be excused.

If. FRITZ: With the approval of the Tribunal I should like to call
the witness Professor Dr. Hoering.

THE PRESIDE:;!: The karshel will sunnon the witness Felix Mooring.

7ILIX HQiRIHG, n witness, took tho stand and testified ac follows:

JWXa SJ3RIKG: rlease hold up year right hand and bo sworn.

I swear by God, tho Alnigkty and Qaniscivnt, that I will socok tho
truth ond will withhold and add nothing.

(Tho witness repvntcd the oath.)

DIRECT -XA..IKAIIC2:

BY DR. FRITZ:

%- Professor, won't you olorso state your full none?

A. Dr. Folix Otto Mooring.

v When vero you born?

A. On the 22nd of July 1902 et Frankfurt on tho :ioin. *

v '.hat is you r present residence?

A. Tuobiogen, Justlnus Zcrnerstracse 55.

%* Would you please shortly describe your career to the Tribunal.

A. After having passed ny netriculatlon exanination at Stuttgart ir.

£031


C:urt So. 1

17 Apr ■i7-K-E-4-lEj'.-5rc«s (let. Brovn)


the year of 1S20 I studied ocdlclat at Tuebingen, Vienna, Kiel, Birlin,
*ard nunich. I thee sterted to practice et the City Hospital et Kannhcia
for e period of three years. Ia the neantiae I studied pathology fur
half a year at the Pathological Institute at Rostock. In 1925 I -.-ns
hygienist for a half year et Heidelberg. Then for nine years I vac assis-
tent for nodical clinics at Kiel and Isunlch. I eualifled as a lecturer
for internal nedicinc in the year of 1535 in kunich. In January 1938
I followed a vish vhich I had long since followed and wont abroad. This
ve# due to tho feet that no a clinic worker I wts always interceted in
the field of infectious diseases end that ever eir.ee the early 193C'o
I had the desire to study infectious diseases outside of Ruropo persor.-
ally. I first went to Antwerp where I gained thu diplcna in tropical
oedlcino. Ihsn for five aonths I wao in London with the Bureau of Scien¬
tific Research. Bros there I wont to Brasil and worked with the Rocke¬
feller Institute for the first part cf ay stay thorc at Rio-do Janeiro
uador I>r. Prod L. Sepher.

■w and vhet are you doing now, Professor?


6032


17 April-W-CJG-9-1-Xarrow (Int, hauler)
Court Kc. 1


A Ever since the 1st cf April, 1944, I a= the chief phy¬
sician of the University ex-dic&l clinic and the head cf the
aodicel polyclinic at Tucbinrcr.. In addition, I an lecturing on
sedical polyclinic aodicinc.

Q So you ere new a professor cn the sedicai faculty cf
the University cf Tuebingen?

A Yes. I hold the title as an extraordinary professor
slnco 1941. In the year cf 1944 I chan ;od ay rusidcnce fr ca
lA-nich to Tuebingen, after having gained cy vonia le endi in
the field of tropical aodicinc in the year cf 1942, which ae&ns
that I na r.cw a professor for internal end tropical cedicine,

Q Ycu asftdo publications in the tropical uudicrl fluid,
didn't ycu?

A Yes, scao contributions in periodicals. The best known
probably is tho beck which was published in the year 193* entitled
"Clinical Toachin cf Infections”. In tho tropical nodical fiold
I published su;u work in th field of yellow fuv^r which appeared
in English, Brazilian and Genaan periodicals. I further published
sene work about nslr.ria. A work r«;ardin_- that subject will soon
appear in the Journal for tropical ucdicino in London.

Q •*hr\t did you do durinr the wer?

A At the' end cf July, 1939, I returned to Gomrny fren

Brazil in order to leave a ain for a> road after a short vacation.

In the aenntiau, hewe-ver, the war hod broken cut. I was drafted

into tho orry as cn assist.-nt physician. I went through tho

Polish and French campaigns is a physician with tho Trent troops.

In July, 1940, I was transferred to the tropical institute of

Professor licdcnwald at Berlin. Free iiay, 1941, cn'.sris I received

a nuaber of special assirnnents, cair.ly in connection vith the

coat at of solaria. That was in the Balkans and in Southern hussia.

In 1943 I be-cace ccnsultinj internal aedical oq-urt with the any

ir. Greece. Or. the 1st f *.pril, 1944, I was sent to Tucfcir.ron

6033


17 r.pril-Jf-DJG-9-2-tIsrrc * (Int. Easier)

Ccurt Ho, 1

‘■here I heeded the hospital crvd siadtcncoualy carried or. in ay
civilian capacity ss e university professor. In Jer.urry, 1945,

I was o’ain transferred tc the ar=y es a consult!..; occ-rt cn
internal cedi cine. Cn th“~th of ifcv, 1945, I <'.s captured by
thv Americana in Austrl*. ,»t the tad of Hay I received the
assignment tc institute c hospital for DPs et the reception camp
of Hourschin*; and to hoed t. I ms in ch: r of this hospital
until I wr.s released in July, 1945. I wr.s in ch-.rjo cf this
hospitcl under the su.-crvioicn of the iz ivriccn physicicno.

, Since *hcn did y cu knor rrofester i.eso?

« I knew Prcfecacr uese since 2 so hla rt the International
“repic Conference at ..noc-ir j i,i the f 11 of 193? vher- he held
" lecture, ,.s th- heed of the txvpie.'l cedici.no dc/rtacnt of
the Robert Koch Institute I h< d -lrery knevn hie fra: before.

f . Do ycu kne* hi.i personally?

•• X s. I orda hit toqUftintcnco ii 11 oi 1940 l'cr the

f.rst ti.:.... On th t ccersi.n I t. nted tc csi: hi*. .hi Uicr ny

is else # n, could nork for hi.:. -iu t.h ,

in offuct, worked for his 't the he’ -rt Koch Institute for ft
period cf spproxlaetay tve yars. 1 only say him ftcr on n
fa. effieir 1 occasions. Ihots r; c no seel /1 cr \rr-n*l connect¬
ions betVeon Professor 4 .csc end I.

Tou rise participated in the Thirl Ifcctln; of the Ccneult-
iny Physicians rt the dlitrry Ifcdicrl ..erdeqy, didn't ycu,

•..hieh took pi co in cf 1943? Did ycu, rt Uvt ti..e, t ke
p-rt in the sessions of ti e Section Hy.lono .-.-rf Ire.sic ft-lone?


Court I


17 Apr k7-M - 9-la - US - Xarrow (-nt. Ha=lerJ

A. Tcs, at that ti_e I vas mainly active as an internist with
the arny. At this casting I was supposed to hold a lecture about
yellow favor. This kcture had been included or. the program of the
tropic hygiene section where yellow fever vaccine wes also to be
discussed. For that reason I participated in that session on that
morning froa beginning or. and went to the section of this meeting
which dealt with hygiene.

Q. Did you, at t jt ti a, hear the lecture given by Dr. Ding
about the testing of typhus vaccine?

A. ias, he was supposed to speak oafore the subject of yellow
fever was discussed and, purely by accident, 1 was already present
at that time. As a rule, I had nothing to do with the typhus vaccino
quostions.

Q. Can you still reused)_r tho contents of that lecture?

A. As far os 1 re., e .her the locturor spoke about the influence
of various typhus vaccines on t.io course of on illness and provod
that n nu.h'.r of vaccines could bo used, vhureas other vaccines had
loss olfect.

Could it oo concluded from hat locturo t it these reports
wore based on exporiiconts on human boings? In other words, intcntiional
infections?

A. Whether that became apparent froa Dr. Ding's locturo or
whether it only boca.;*, apparent a3 a result of the subsequent dis¬
cussion I can no longer say today with any aocunl of certainty.

«. would you please dasc.- bo to t o Tribunal in detail what
hapuoned after Ding's lecture?

A. After Dr. Ding's-lactur t .re fol owed a discussion. - Tiws

discussion iras opened by Professor rfo6c. Ke, at first, referred

•'Ti-ifly to tho aUrial substance of the 1 cturo which he, by and

ler o, recognized. Ho emphasized, however, that this was a question

•f experiments on human boings ar.a that a number of people had lest

■'.oir lives as a result. Using rat _r strong words, he pointed out

6035


Court I

17 n t Ii7-M - 9-2 a - LJG - •'arrow (Ant. RanJur)

that any such procedure was a deviation of procedures us^d for decades
in the resc-rch of im.-.unity. He said that this was an extrenaly
serious attcr and that the hygienists would have to maintain their
old principles. Professor Bom spoke for a long ti-wj arri spoke in
sharp words. Naturally, I can no longer recall his words in detail,
but i am sure that ho voiced the substonco of w—t I have just said.

In accordance with his temperas*r.t, he did this in strong words which
went beyond the customary exchange of words used during such discus¬
sions. At any rate, every participant in this Acting was well aware
t-at this was on incident of aLocst sonsational character. For that
reason, after the end of that sossion ard during th- subsequent days,
this Incident was discussed among small circles ind 1 can well
ronei±or that.

Q. Ahat happened as a rosult of this speech by irofessor Hosot
I am now referring tothe tiro cf tho discussion.

a. The lecturer. Dr. rQpl\ v 6 to im»Rssor Most and do-

• • _

fonded his experiments. He adiaittod that this was a question of
oxporimonts on human boinga but ho said th t the experimental sub¬
jects woro criminals who had nil boon condoaxwd to death. Professor
ivwo thereupon orco norv. ropli-d, saying that this didn't chance *
anything in his criticism. Ho sold that w« were here concerned with
a basicul qu.stion. T.-v-r-iUpon the discussion was rather su donly
stopped by Professor J^hrciber. Gonoralurzt Schreiber said that if
the gentle «n wanted to discuss basical, ethical questions, thon they
would have ample opportunity to do that after the meeting. In tho
printed report of tho noting which I read these discussion remarks
*orc not printed. §

Q. Didn't you notice that whan reading the printed report?

Didn't it cose to your attention?

a. So, 1 would have thought it very surprising if any such dis-

-ossion at that time would have boon printed.

6026


17 ..prii ii7—: W.nW.O-1-Less or (Int. RaB&ar)
Court !vo. 1


Q Most this discussion took place during a military sooting,
did it not? In your opinion, her could Professor dose's objections
judged fron a silitary and disciplinary point of view?

A fell, fron a sdlitary point of view, his objection consti¬
tuted an offense against discipline, for ho criticized the attitude
of persons who held the leading positions and ho advocated that
°ttor pecpio would resist any such procedure. Considering tho
situation in Genarjy at that tijao, this alone would havo sufficod
to got hin into a rather awkward position, that is, if any
official stops had boon taken against fain in this ratter.

n - didn't you yairsdf adopt any atfcitudo in thi3 natter?

A I rms only a guost at that =». tir.g. This whole incidont
caao as a ccnploto surprise to no. I did not taw of all theso
ovjr.ts. At any re to I could not havo said anythin- acre than that
I was of tho earn opinion as Professor Roso. Beyond that, Frofossor
Schreibor had alroaty stop od tho discussion.

0 Tho Tribunal has a docucent boforo it which boars tho
signature of Dr. Ding. It is a so-oallod Mary cf Pr. Dinr. It says
there, anong other things, that one of too vaccines which was dis¬
cussed during that noting was furnished by Frofossor Hugo and
Professor Roso, for tho purpose of conducting axporlrunts on hunnn
boings. './as anything like that nuntionod luring that nootlr^? Did
Dr. Ding r»ntion it, or was it br-ught up during tho discussion?

1 otumot rorvdjor anything liko th.it. :hon roplyir* to
?.03c's objections tho loctur..r :ndo no nontd.cn of it at all. Such a
contradiction would »iato oroatad attention considering the 3 ovority
with which Rosa expressed hinsolf against tho exporinonts.

Q In the sane document it s-.ys further, under a difforent*
la to, that approximately onj year later a vaccina was tested in tho
concentration can? of Buchoir.nl.i, which originated fron Copenhagen and
that this was done upon tho initiation of Professor Rose. Do you know
’-bout that, Frofossor?


60S?


17 ApxSl u7-fW.TD-10-2-Laesor (Int, lianler)

Court Ko* 1

" i know nothing at all about any Copenhagen typhus
vaccL-.o, nor do I know anything about tests carried out in concen¬
tration coops. I can hardly Sang ino that Professor Rose had nich to
tSo wth typhus vaccine. In professional circles Professor Rose was
not conncotod with questions of typhus vaccines. A snail circle of

w

other nanos wore usod in that connection and I can raontion Otto,

Syor, Gildeceistor, Baagon, tfohlrob, all of whon I knew wero doing
that type of workj perhaps I know a mefcor of other gentlaxmt fron
tho industry and people who waro assisting tho pcoplo whors I just
nentionod.

Q According to ycur knowlodgo of '.-attors, do you think that
tho assertion is probablo that Professor Roso instigatod vaccinoo
being tostod in concentration canps?

A After the experience Airing that :aooting which I just
doacribod, I rust consider this as highly inprobablo. It would havo
constituted tho exact ophite of what ho statod during that nooting.
For that roason I was so surprised that Frofossor bso Is indicted
hero, ./hon I road that in a nowspapor I said to friends of nino that
I could not understand that in tho loast — that I could n >t undor-
atnnd why Professor Roso was indicted— for ho is the only porson who,
in ny exporionco, had coura e o, at a tino whon Himlor reigned, to
nppoar in public in tho nanner I describod.

Did you hoar about oth r oxp-rinonts on humn beings which
aero discussod at that very sano r ootin -? i an not.- speaking of a
lecturo hold by Professor Gobhardt and Irofo3sor Fischor about
sulfanilnnidos. That was prvsurably dono at tho sux-ical section of

that nooting.

A So, I did not participate in tho surrdeal 3o3sion, and
hiring conversations I heard nothing at all of any such axporinents.

Q Did you participate in the hth coo ting of tho consulting

Physicians in the year of 19hk, at Hohaniychon?

603€ .


con-


17 April A 7-: S-..7D-15-3—Loss. r (int. setiLor)
Co-art Ho. 1


A Yes, I was also present during th: rth noetinr of
suiting physicians because I had to hold a lecture there too. The
5 u';joct was to deal with tha clinical treatment of the sand fly
fever.

Knew what.Professor .lose discussed during that

coo ting?

A Ho hold a very interesting lacture in the hygiene soction
about tho application of DDT preparations in tho combatting of
cpidcnics. In addition, ha hald a lecture during the general
meeting, about Images to hoalth oonneoted with the air war. This
lacturo, too, demonstrated a groat skill in that field which was
rathor surprising bocauso ore assured that PTofossor Roso was a
littlo distent to that subjoot.

Q During that mooting of 19ldi was thoro any aontion nado of
exporlnonts on huaan boir^a?

A According to ay knowledge, no. In the yoar of 19U3 I hoard
about typhus op rinonts for the only tine and it was ny opinion
that this was Just a single ovont,

0 You wore saying bofbrc, iTofoscor, that in tho yoar 19U3,
you h:ld a locturo about tho clinical troabiont of yellow fovor.
Yellow fovor is also a subjoot of this trial. Did you, during tho
war, hoar anything about expo rinonts on humn baings with yollew
fovor?

A Fb t

q Durina the voty sono norning.you discussed yellow fovor.
Professor Hanger also hald a locturo about yellow fev^r vaccines.
Durirg that lecture of Professor Haagen, was there my mention nado
of expo rinonts on hunan beings?

A Ho. I naturally heard that locturo. Professor Haagen gave

a general survey about tho dovelerrant of protective vaccination

against yellow fever and he subsequently repertod on the faedno which

h ' had produced. As far as I r-.n-^or, he said that h- had carriod

6C3S


17 April U?-:t-ATD-lC-«-Lesser (Int. Staler)
Court Ho. 1


out a nunbar of vaccinations with the vaccine that he had produced,
in order to designate the sorus during the uouse protection tost.

He said that on this occasion he had found similar results as they
are generally known in literature. HLs lecture brought nothin,-; now
of general importance. It wasaorply a sunnary of tha current stato of
resoarch, which was also the oaso during =y lecture. Both looturcs
wore only dosigned for general orientation for tfc purposes of those
pooplo who only know a little about yellow fovor. In Gummy thcro
had boon no previous oi?portunifcy to stuty yellow fovor personally.

) Q You, yourself, hewovar, did you study yollcw fovor and
wore aotivo in that field, woronit you?

A Ios. During rgr stay abroad in tho yo~rs 1938 and 1939, I
dircotod rv attontion in particular to that interesting illness and
workod on yollrw fovor questions in .mtworp, London, and Rio do
Jnnioro.

0 What living Goman pooplo have gained a reputation in
international yollow fover literature?

A Only Frofossor Haagon. He was tho first ono to brood tho

•

yollow fovor strain. Ho ouccoodod in doing that in Hew York, whilo
ho wa3 working thoro with a Rockefeller Foundation. Then thoro is
Frofossor Hoflhann, of Cuba, but ho has boor, living in .joorioa now
for dooados.

CJ So Profossor Rose does not apply to that group, does ho?

A .‘fo, I nover hoard his nano or novor road M.3 nano in
connection with yollow fovor.

'I You woro sayin*; bofore that Frofossor Haagon had aado
Aperts about blood tests after yollow fovor vaccinations, what kind
of blood toots woro they. Professor?

A Wo arc hero cone or nod with tho nouso protection tests which


I already aontionod.


6040


17 April jC-11-1-:laloy (Ini,, Bonier)

Court I

3 IThat icl^i o' a tost is that?

A A vaccinated person or anyone - ho had survived the ill no as

is uflod aal blood la drawn free his person, from that a sona 13

•

croatod. This sorum is mixed T.-ith yellow fovor virus, and this

fixture, after half an hour, is lnjactod into tha brain of a nouse,

or rather is injected into the* brain of a number of aico. If the

none contains onaigh protection against yellow favor than tho mouso

concornod will survive that lnjoction. if on th. other hand it dooo

not than the ixuso will die after a poricxl of a few days. It Is

•

probably not necessary to doscribo this in groat detail.

1 ATo you yoursolf vaccinatod against 70 II 0 C fovor?

A .Vo, in tho year 193C I had a yellow fovor infection which
occurred at tha laboratory, Fortunately, tho illnoss took a (jood
courao, and 1 sanagod to survive it, and for that roaeon it was no
longor necossory for no to bo vacoluatod tt oia.

% Could you doscribo to tho Tribunal tho oubstanco of tho
yollow fovor vaccino; as I u dor stood you boforo, you woro spooking
of a living vaccine?

A Yoo, as In tho oace of all vaccinos against virus disoasos,
tho yellow fovor vaccino in basod on tho .'jiving of a living vroakonod
yollo fovor virtu to a 'orson, attenuated virus. This attonuation
cor. bo attained in caiy dlfforont ways. For tint roaeon a nuabor of
difforont vaccines aro In uso In dlfforont countrloa. my

knowledge I on host acquainted with tha othod which was dovolopod
with the ■’ockorfoiler Foundation. This method proved itoolf in
.Vsorica olroady boforo tho War in millions of cases. In that nothod
tho virus is bred with tho chicken ox, 0=1 than tha vaccine Is Gained
through coroful workia; on tho ohlckon ombryo. In Franco tho brooding
is carried on by usln G tho brain of living alco. This vaccination
•ith living vaccines Is basod on tho fact that ovary person vaccinated
la coing through a vory light but gaaulr.o Follow fovor dlsoaco. ^ls
la truo also In tha c Q so of vaccino against smallpox, whore the
vaccination has to be considorod tho s:co as though the person woro

6 C*rl


17 Ajrli-1 jon-2-ijjloy (Int., Sixler)

Court I

goi as through a light tut genuine dl3&aJO of snailpox.

q I stall am her a the 3a: icont Book 12 of tho Prosocution shown
to you, and you will find Document ’30-265, which is the Prosocution
yrhibit 287, tho so-called Ding Diary, which can bo found on .'ayos
36 to 56. professor, will you ploaso look at page 42 of this book,

•id you will flni on trios concornin/ yellow fo7er foccinos. Do you
know anything about this sat tor?

A !P, I knew nothing about this sat tor?

r\ Did you know at all Profossor, that yollow fovor 7aooino8 noro
produced in Gorrioay?

A Yos, I know that as a rosult of Profossor Hocgon's locturo.

q 1/hat can you, on tho basis of your gonoral knowledge of tho
yollow fovor quostion isaclno about tho toots that arc doacrlbod
in this document; lot us assu:» that tboao ontrlos uro In accordance
with tho facts?

A 7oll, it is always nocossory to tost a vaccino, uni • roaii ng
horo, — that living virus io underlined, — I os Just saying horo
that living virus is undorlVnod. ^ic -*oos not quito folia.: that
only ono cin/.lo tost is bo la: suggested, for tho quoation of uhothor
a vaccino io olivo or dooi dopondo on uhothor that vaccino 1: duroblo
and durability oannot bo ascortainod by ono slnglo injootlon. ?ho
ia-nyos which would occur whon injection such a vaccino cannot to
iotorrdnod oractly whon using tho aothod as is sug/ostod horo. At
tho most, the diroct prirary daa<o ca*ld bo ascertained, but that lc
Boaothin foot could hardly bo ox-oevo'.. Of courso, tho offoctivonoss
could bo ascertained, with rsforonco to tho orotection against
yellow forjr which tha vaccine offorod, but I con only rako vory
gonoral oeour.&tions after roaling this diort document.


6042


17 Apr-H-. 3-12-I-' eehan (Int. Raolcr)
Court Ho. Is


Q professor, would you please turn to Rige 109 in the same Document
Book which is before you; you will ind the nur.bers in the right-hand
corner. There you will find the Doctnsnt of the Prosecution HC-30k»
which is Prosecution Exhibit 315. It is a letter by Professor Kaagen to
the Inspector of the Ivedical Service of the Luftwaffe in 3erlin, and it
bears the dato of 22 October 19li2. 0a the next two pages you find dir¬
ections for use of the ye11 cm fever vaccine of the University of Stress-

tour . 'Vould you please look at that Document, and give us your opinion
as to whether yellow fever vaccination constitutes danger. According to
the direction of use, it is here said in detail that any infections
which night arise would have to bo reported innediately; that is at tho
end of that Document.

A Two different typos of d'..-ages :ust oe distinguished in tho caso

I

of yellow fevor vaccinations. There can ba very direct reactions, rhich
at the most last a half a day and have a rather light ooursc. However,
whon using the Arariccn nothod of yellow fever faccinations aixl using tho
English :aothod, one has round in various contries tint rathor undosirablo
incidents had occured. A rather high percont:i u e of poople vaccinatod in
tho case of cortain vaccines did not fall ill cf yellow fevor, but of
Jaundice. This is called the so-called sonsa hepatitis. As I.havo
learned froo Aaorioan periodicals, this hap e.iod to a largo o:.i^nt dur¬
ing this war in tho case of American soldiers. It was found out that
tho reason was the virus of this hepatitis accidentally had gotLer. into
the strain of tho yellow fever virus and that is quite possible for cor-
tnin technic 1 reasons. I road in an American periodical that thoy
succeeded in changing their technique) so that this incident can bo

avoided with certainty. Ac cor dir.. to these experiences, it vs correct
$

that all infections would have to bo reported la-odlately.

Q Thank you, and now one Last question; Professor, could you tell
the Tribunal -bat reputation Professor .lose hold as a scientist and as
a human being?

A Prof*-ssor Scse, on the basis of his nu merous and valuable contri-

60--?


17 Apr-»i-:3-12-2-:eehan (tot. Hosier)
Court So. I.


buttons ir. the field of tropical nedicino has a wide ary] good reputation.
His work has always excelled ir. its exactitude in professional circles.

He was furthermore known as a nan who could exercise valuable and ob¬
jective criticism and was often feared as such. He exercised this
criticism during discussions by putting forrard purely material points
of view. That no becomes easily apparent when considering the incident

which hap.^ned during Ding's locture in the year of 19L2, where in spite

*

of the personal danger which uy well lave resulted for h}», he protest¬
ed against the experiments on human bo mgs, which wore reported during
that seating. It was ho who spoke in the same sense as we, the Genian
scientifioal fiold, who were prosont during that meeting, and ho there¬
fore maintained the good, old tradition of the Goman medical profession.

Q Thank you, rrefoesor, I havo no further question to put to tho
witness for the moment.

THE JftJSIDKNrt Arc there any questions to bo propounded to this
witness by anyJJeionsc Counsel?

BY DR. FUarKNQs (Counsel for tho Defendant Mrugowsky.)

FTofosror, you have Just spoken about yollow fevor; in yellow
fever found in Africa?

A Yos.

<\ To whnt extent does tho zone in Africa extend tow-rd tho north
whero tropical yellow fever prevails?

A In tho east it goos as far as Sudan and in the west up to tho
territory of Dakar.

3 The territory around Dakar belongs to tha torritoxy which is on-'
dar^orod by typhus?

A Dakar is an old yellow fever net.

Q Is it correct that in tho home of yollow fevor, this disease is
oapeclclly feared because of its danger, and that such persons suffer
Particularly heavily as a result of this disease who are new arrivals in
:ich territories?

A From a lay-man's point of view, that is correct; scientifically,

50-4 *


17 Arr-iK3-12-3-I'3chan (Int. Saaler)
Court !kj. I.


however, it is not quite true.

4 Cn the basis of your tropic .i medical activities, do you know
that in the year of 192;3 ar. advance of the German .African Corps was
planned on from Tonis to Uskar?

A Mo, I did not know that, but from thofhet that yellow fever
vaccine was produced, I could perhaps assume that this may be the case.

4 In thr.t case, you knot' at that tine yellow fever vaccine was
produced in Germany, and you concluded thorefore that such # an advaitco
was in effect planned?

A Yos, but that advance could also have ba.n directed to the Sudan

area.

4 In tho case of any such advance of the troops into a ycliou
fovor cndan;orcd territory, would a vaccination of tha soldiors bscono
a necessity?

A Undoubtedly.

4 Ftofossor, during your direct examination, you raontioned that in

>

tho case of the Africans and English ;*ollur fovor vaccines, in tho foxn
in which it was producod earlier, many eases of Jaundloo occurred; woro
such or similar ccaplication3 known whon usiru; tho vaccino, according to
tho procedure of say for instanco Paltior, which was produced from mice
brains?

A I can only say something basod on Folticr's work and tho work of
his collaborators, arri in thoso ersos no such incidents occurod.

4 Do you know according to vhat roccdure there protective v.ac-
ainoa were roducod in Go many; wrs t!c Rlticr'r procedure used?

A I 'anvo Just learned from tha Docu^nt book, where mention is
nade that the Peltier procedure was .up lied.

4 The prosecution asserts that i_*tiatcs ware injected with .-'oilow
*- Vor ^ a concentration c-uap; according to our material however ro woro
cr-ly concerned with protective vaccinations, using the Peltier method,
o'uld an artificial infection of human beings after such a protective
initior. hove been necessary?


60*5


17 Apr-:i—13-12-^-- feehan (Int. Ranler)
Court So. I.


A Do you Doan would it have bc-cone necessary ir. order to prove the
effectiveness of the vaccine?

Q Yos.

A No, it would not have been necessary because in the case cf yel¬
low fever one can find out tha insanity by using the nice test without
infection.

Q I'r. President, I an bc-ir^ told that an error occured during tho
translation. I asked the vitr.es: -..bother it was correct that in the
case of vaccinations. Jaundice had occured in tho case of those English
and American vaccinations, that is hepatitis. Tha translation is yollow
fever and such yellow fever cannot occur after this protective vaccina¬
tion. .

A No, that never did occur.

Q I now return to thj case of artificial infoction of yellow fever;
do you know whotliar in Gemany thoro actually could have boon d : sca3oa
of tropical fovor or at any rate, do you know who tho r nr.y virus strain,
which could act pathogone to a husn being, was evailnblc in any Labors
tory in Go many?

A I knew nothing about that, and I think this is highly inpostiblo
that a virulent yollow fever str in was av liable in Gimany during tho
war.

q Did I understand you correctly buferu, when you a-id that, when
using tho i\sltfer vaccino in vaccinating hu m beings, it is out of tho
question that cny serious drveagos to health or oven fatalities could
occur?

A According to Peltier publication and the publications of his
collaborators, any such incident was never observed.

q You have seer, the entry in thj so-cr.licd Ding Diary regr-rding
Teller fever; is it your opinion that in the case of the protective
"’.ccinations used only on saall groups of persons was applied accord¬
ing to the Peltier nethod» we wore concerned i.-ith a not pcraissafclo ex¬
periment or rather a natter where the consequences would have be n daoag-

6046 .


17 Apr- :H2-12-5-rfeehan (Lit. Rial or)

Court Ko. I.

ins to the health or perhaps even lifa to tho people involved?

A This experiaunt, as you say, could have been carried out on
volunteer persons.

Q I wanted to ask you whether there tras any danger to life, or any
sorious danger to boalth?

A As this experiment was already ox-nined by using aninal experi-
=ents, then according to radical convictions there was no ap rcciablo
danger any noro.

Q In a lottcr of the Behring works at lirbur,;, addressed to tho
Defendant :s-ugowsky, which was submitted by tho Prosecution, it is
atatod that the yc-H<xr fever vaccine w e to be tested in Buchomrald on
human beings in ordjr to find out its harnlescnoss. The Prosecution
Interprets that in such a candor that thoro uust therefore hr.vc boon a
dinger to health whon carrying out those vaccinations, but according to
tho anffi cr which you Just gave, ono car concluda that this word "hara-
lossnoja" contained in tho letter of tho Sohring Works is to bo synonijnous
for a tsst of its toleranco, bocauso it is a fact that any vaccinos oann-
ating from tho Behring V.’orks wore touted very carefully by using miiials
before my such vaccinos were sent awry frci tho Dohrlng lories and that
le goner lly known in nodical circles?

A I nssu .10 that tho word n haralosrno3s B is hare to bo understood
in tho siuno sonso as toloranco.

Q Thank you I hivv. no further questions.

■ mzs matt t Thj Tribunal rill btt in recoss until 1:30 o'clock.

(A recess was taken until 1330 hours)


Coir' 1 Iff?

April 17-«-13-l~H0-P os ter-Brown.


«r TEfUfOON SESSION

0Ew faring reconvened at 1330 hours, 1? April 1947.)
IHE MARSHAL: The Tribunal is again in session.
Professor DR. FELIX HOERING * Resumed
TrJ: PRESIDENT: Any further exanlnntlon of the witness
by dof-nso counsel?

3i DR. TIP? (For the Defendants Scnroedor and Beckor-
Froyseng):

i. Witness, tr.l8 corning you mentioned a lecture
which Professor Hansen delivered lr. 1943 at the Consulting
Conference on Yellow Fever Vaccine. Did I understand you
to say that neither directly r.or indirectly was tiioro any
cention in this lecture of human being experiments which
Professor Hongen carried out in this connection?

a. Yo6 you understood me correctly, thrt there was
r.o mention of it lr. the lecture.

Vi tacts, do you /.now Professor Hangen well?
a. I mot hia only at tnls oor.feronce.

But no an expert you are familiar with r.ls
scientific reput'.tlon?

«. his solv-ntlfic reputation ps cn expert in virus
iatt^rs w s generally Known.

Q. And Han 6 cn was generally considered an expert in
w-le riuia of virus?
a. Yes.

Now, lot 30 nsK you Professor, virus research
presupposes detailed kr.ovled e e of all questions?

t is so. It requires many ye rs in that •
be celled or. authority in that field.


thp


,nn


Che.^Voc 1 doctor with the regular phvslclsns
•lining would bot^-vo that special Knowledge?

«. Ko, no/::qt than he would have special Knowledge


6CL8


Court 1

«orll 17- rt -l5-2-HJ-Fo3 ter-Brown.


about oacterlology ir. general.

Therefore, it would
a normally trained doctor to
this fluid?

«. Only an expert coiild hove done so.

% . 1 —nit you. How, witness, I snould lilce to discuss

:vo documents with you. I show you Document Booh 12 on

Sxperiaenttatlon. .toy I os* you to turn once again
P"su 10T>. This la the scat document tnot dr. Fritz put
;o »ou tnis mornln e —page 109, written In pencil. This la
che document NO-304, Sxr.ibit 315, a letter by Dr. Haagen
to the Inspectorate of the hod leal aervlce. The letter la
very brief—perhaps you could glance trhough It briefly,
oroioseor. Can you, s nn expert, see In this letter any-
: lng Indicating whetner or not riaagen in this yellow fever
v«oclno production carried out any experiments on hunnn
:olngo, or what car. you aeduco from the letter?

n. There la aention ho re of animal cpges out no
auction of human ooln^ exporlaenta.

-V. Tnen you c n deduce nothln 0 from tni6 lot tor about
r.-i-ann 'oein c experiments. Now the n„xt page docu-

ior.t “direction for uee of the fellow Fever Vaclno of the
-ytIonic Institute of Strasbourg Jnlvcrslty. This
-Tuacnt wao out In by the prosecution in connection with
,iUl ,rv boln e> exporlaenta which Haagen la alleged to have
0-t. I don't 4J0W Jus: what conclusions the
^caution draws froa this document, but the connection
wx ‘ lCa It was submitted seecs to Indicate that the
--caution sees lr. tale document proof of the exoorimenta
*“ fcumnn oeln c s. /Ill you pl.ase tell us, professor. Just
tals document Is.

«. :hose are the directions for use such as .ccoaoany

•SC 19


Goar? 1

pril I 7 —v~l3-3-Hn-?o3ter-Srown.

'■-ay vsccinee which are not generally known to physicians
5 = taat tae physician will know how to carry out the
fascination. Regarding those or. whom the vaccinations was
carried cat, there is no nontIon in the document.

I draw your rttenticn to the 1 -st sentence of the
lrat p r graph, I *uote: "#iny serious reactions especially
senifeatations of Jaundice, Etc., with mention of operation
somber must bo reported immediately to the kedlcnl Inspector¬
ate tf the Air force through official channels.■ Now, to
v.:oa Is this directive directed?

*. -hlo Doming 1 alr.tlonwd t.-:e incidents that hnd
nrrlsen, tnrou 0 h of eeroa hepatitis, - nd the aentloning of
Jaundice indicates thet It ura considered possible that
t.rt c ,uld arise here clso. The persons hero mentioned
re t .. 06 j to be v-cclnated.

«*h, t I mean la who snould o ply to the health
Inspector?to of tne Vehrs. cht— that could only bo a troop
doctor?

Yes, that is so.

Cud i con sunamrla.. /oar testinony os follows:

•r.wBj -re directions for use for troop doctors wj.an they
■Tccin tw ? (J -ln3t yeliow fevor.

Yes.

«*. Tnr nk you. Nov, in the 6me docuocr.t book please
‘•am to page 120. Tr.ls i 3 document NO 130, prosecution
txalalt 313. Let me quote from it briefly: "Oberstnb-
S ' Ptl . Professor Dr. risogen, consulting pnyslcion to the ^

* lr ?lcat physician-Aeidfi, otrasstourg, 4th «a 6 ust 1944.
reject—' That doesn't interest us. heading, "Report
the successes with Ta 3 Lhol. vaccine." This uoc-=ent
‘ 4 “ ot sl &nwd but it is cle- r tcet it originated with Dr.

5C50


Court 1

n.prll 17—13-3-HJ—Poster—Brown


' v ~ cclne6 which are not 0 enerally known to physicians
so t--., t the physician will know how to carry out the
va clnattoc. Regarding those on whoa the vaccinatlone was
c rrlcd jut, there Is no cent Ion In the document.

- draw your -ttenticn to the last sentence of the
ic6t p r arson, I luote: “Any serious reactions especially
manifestations of Jaundice, etc., with mention of operation
number must be reported immediately to the fcedical Inspector¬
ate of the «lr force through official channels." Now, to
v.:oo Is this directive directed?

*• Tnlo corning 1 mintioned few Incidents that had
arrlsen, tnt\>u 0 h cf serum hepatitis, and the mentioning of
Jaundice indicates tttot It vr o considered possible that
t.-j't could arise hero clso. The persons i.ore centloned
re t/.ose to be v-oclnated.

«*h t i oean Is who snould o ply to the health
Inspector-to of the >ohrc. cht—that could only bo a troop
dootor ?

Yes, that Is ao.

*• Then * cr.n o'uccnrlSw /our t^etlcony as follows:

Thesd rrc directions for use for troop doctors when they
vaccln^tu ’ b 'lnst yellow f^ver.

-■». Yog.

<4. Tn: nk you. Nov, In the same aocuoent book please
turn to page 120. Tnls is docu-^nt liO 150, prosecution
exhibit 310. Let ce quote : roc It briefly: "Oborstnb-
snrtz Professor Jr. risagen, consulting physician to the *

Hlr Fleet Physician'itolcn, ctrasscourg, -:th «u 6 -st 1944.
subject— 1 That doesn’t Interest -s. .-.oading-, "Report
on she successes with 1*3 enol. vaccina. ’ This docucent
-3 not 6i 0 n^d but it is cU- r that It originated with JJr.


5050


Court i

April 17-«-13-4-Hi)-Fo8ter-3rown.


Hedge n. This letter also was suboittod In connection with
nun. n b^ln : exner.cents and I assume thet the prosecution
feels thnt this is c report on exporiaents on hu.-aan beings
wcich either Haf-'on nine elf or 6one other persons carried
out with this T«3 Cnol. v-cclno. The letter is three pages
long. I shall not "8/. you to re-d the whole letter now
•'nd i sh*-11 spire the Tribunal the .nuisance of rending it,


but I shill cite e few sentences that 'r«. pertinent in
the first t.ilrd of the first page.


-rt 1

«?rll 17 -jv-I 4 -1_ KD—Cooic- Brown.

It begins -e follows:

"~ r -~ following Ta 3 CholJ vaccines were used."

A..d then follows the numbers:

"it •’ppoara that no stron a reactions wore pi-oauQnd by
..'os. 03, 05,10 and 13. -One unit reportod 1-2 days absence
fPo,a woiv. -s n result of C5, which would sees to Indicate
a stronger t en«ral reaction.*

lr. tho last parrgrrp.n on tnls p'ge:

"ifoa. Co, o?, Ob resulted throughout ir. such strong
r ° rc - tadlv ollity is questionable. No. 06 :

In or.o unit a lose of 1 aey by 5-7,« on account of fovor;

In one -;;lt -0/. fever up to 36.5 C, end loss of 1-2 days;
lr. or.e .nit . very atron e local and general re ctlona,
fever 38.5 0, loss of 1-2 days. Only one unit reported
itoa endurance, witnout particularly uron 0 or nuncrous
ructions. ■

Nov I believe thot is sufficient, rron these few
cit'dons, witness, air. you pern ps toll the Tribunal

v. v t tnla report Is Kaagon Is describing what :>ctu:lly
is r.otv boin e described?

*his is a report on the tolor-nce for n n^wly
arnuf ct-red tyoo of vaccine cgnInst typhoid fever, not,
tv-nue, pn- typr.ua and cholera. Vnonevor n now vaccine
is aanuf etured aucr. reports trust be collogod rnd to
juc. ; i from the sr.ort citations th“t you read it nust be
on- of tnere regular reports such as are always published

w. -.en .a newly xrnuf ct-r^d v coin, is first us.d.

'• uou Eoar. to say witness, that this is a

collective report that is co-piled froi. v-rlous single
reoorts, is that correct?

«. In-t car. aeon froz tho t.x: wr.ero it is pointed
ut that indlvlaurl units ro-orted such anti suen. Those


Court 1

April 17-A-14-2-KD-Cook-5rovn.


reports wore apparently collected and compiled and trans¬
mitted by the consulting physician.

Froa whom did these individual reports cose?

Tr*cy must h-'Vc come froa the troop physicians of
the indlvldu 1 troop units.

i. In other words, witness, this Is not a report
on experiments of human beings, but a report on v.cclnatlone
carried out on German soldiers with c new vaccine?

rt. Not with a now vaccine, but with a newly manufact¬
ured batch of an ola v cclne which was already in use.

ut It only submitted reports on vacclnrtlon
within the framework of the German 'ehrar.cht?

H. Yes.

T r.nk you, I have no further questions.

DR. SERVaTIUo: For Karl Brandt:

«*. ■’ltnoss, you were In foreign countries for quite

— '

o while In training and Ir. research, is tint not so?
a. Yes.

i. Consequently, you are In a position to express an

opinion regarding the prenlsslblllty of experiments on

human beings, and at any rate you must have formed somo

picture of Chat in connection with this trial?

a. I do not consider myself a first rate expert In

this field because that requires particularly trained and

experienced doctors nd I am too youn 0 for thrt, and I

have, of course, concerned myself with this question,

particularly In connection with t..ls trial, also.

^ •>

i. And your experiences ir. foreign countries have

substantiated lr. general whatever oplnior.3 you hold and

prove that such opinions re held elsewhere In the world?


a. I know from literature, particularly froa forel 6 n
literature, a little about what is customary In this respect.

* 6C53


Court 1

April 1 ;-«-U-3..r.D-Cook-3rovn


*• VttnocG, do you consider experiments on human
:-ln ; a permissible or for research purposes without the
voluntary permission of tb«. subject?

«. since I had e fowlin 0 tm -1 thlo question might
-e . c to I made a few notes on the subject. First
cf t il, I should like to remark In this connection that
thl6 is «■ matter concerning professional medical ethics,
ur. tnls very generally pnr sed question I can only
emphasize a few sides of it. I should like first of all
to emphasize It Is the hi.nest principle of the medical
rofesslon to serve life lr. o sense set forth In tho
Hippocratic oatn, «nd a second Important principle Is tho
"nil nocerc", to do no harm.

r'lrst of all ?*s to th^ question of the subject's
consent, If the subject docs not consent to bo experimented
on, is tho experiment pormlsslolc?

«• In cntloipotlin o.' my answer I should like to say
something about the concept of experiments so that we will
understand one another. For tnls concept is by no means
clear precisely ond to me there la always th*. danger that
a may be mlsunder 3 tood, because In tho cose of aesp.rute
illness one occasionally could tr/co recourse to a .n.-nna
in order to henl the person which 16 not—

TH£ PHEoIDSnT: -Id or aid not tho question which you
propounded to thv. witness cover the case In which the
patient himself was desperately 111 cr.d something might
bo necesaary to Oc dene on uehalf of the prtlent himself,
was that covered by your question?

HZ R?h.T3l: He didn't hear tho beginning ox' your
question because the switch wee wrong. Counsel did not
horr the question because the switch vns wren*.


Court 1

April 17-a—14-4— Hi>-Cook—3r own.


THS PR38lDZtfI: Vas mere Included in your question
to the witness an instance of a person who vas himself
deanerately ill end possibly something by way cf a new
line or 2 new thought in medicine or surgery al^ht have
to be followed Ir. order to benefit thit patient himself.

■'■s that concept Included In your question?

DR. SZRVkTIUd: No, I believe we do not have to go
into t..at question.

. ..'ltness, I ask you not to deliver a lecture on
the subject. Perhaps let r you will h: ve r.n op.ortur.lty
to go lr.to it at greater length but not plenae answer the
question cs briefly .a possible. Later you enn O o into
it, -a 1 s’iid, at gro’ ter length.

J.ow plenae onsu-r ay question: wo you consider
vo unt'iry consent a necessary prerequisite for experiments
j.'i ivujmn »oin c s?

a. Yes, but 1 should line to emphasize that deaplto
the voluntory aspect, th. subject not trained in medicine
cannot antlclp to oil of the consequences .and the respon¬
sibility lies b slcally with the pnyslclcn.

%. Then ; o- would any the person has to consent?

a. Ycb.

k. Do you hold that to bo neccacary even if the
oy orlitent is p lnleos?

a. es, if it is a clontlflc experiment, Certainly.

x. Du you consider the consent of the p rents nec-
essrry if it is a setter of children on whoa it c n be

expected th' c It woulu very shortly die?

a. In t..ls case the consent of the parent is necessary.

... Do you fcr.ow fr;m the history of a.diclr.e th"t for


research vurioses tflnt experiments re carried out on
nsane persons or incurably ill persons rr.d on childred


c u-t :

--.pr 1 1 12—rt- 14 — 5 -H J-Co:^— 3rown .

vho ennnot be expected to live?

a. - .-.now no suer, cases. I fcnov only chat where such

cl'in-e were done tney could contrlouce to the healing
ox the patient.


i: Apr-^'-3-
“ocrt lio. I.


(Int. Brora)


-1 i net want to have this ^ord cxp=rinont brought into associa-
’ l0n ' ith id -- heall ng I to koup those CTo concepts sep-
 rat - how I shall bring a few eases to your attention from Document
Hook t:., which is Document KB 1»C on j»ge 106. There are quotations from
1 bock fro ' thu 19th ccnt'iy entitled "A Doctor's Confessions" by V,’.
kerosa Russian doctor. The. foilnrLx cases are mentioned on page
137 in the text. This is pago 107.

" erthcli; inoculated four paralytics and ono idiot, tho 32 year old
SCH, -ith tho cultures. In the cas^ cf tho idiot SCH, a 'fairly pur¬
ulent secretion was still found two months after tho inoculation*."

Then follows the identifiertion of whore this occurred or where tho
citation is front "The Gonococcus .’oissor on the Culturing Plato and in
pure Culture. Berlin. Clinical c.kly 1$92.»

It .r on to statei "Tho othod ferthoin woe tostod by other
scientists. Gobhard successfully inoculated baton beings »dth thuao
■erth L-. cultures."

!E. HaRDr* The Tribunal has ruled that presentation and discussion
of any ovidenco relative to expurironts which are not at issuo in this
cocu shall \y. delayed until later on during tho trial and at such ti no
all ovidonce of this nature will bo at one ti» offered and then tho
Tribunal, at that tine, will rulu or. its adaissability. Honco, consist¬
ent with tho ruling of tho Tribunal, I object to Dr. Sorvatiua at this
tim cffcrlii r “"y evidence of this nature or discussing it in as much as
the Tribunal has sou fit to <Llay it until a future dato.

D.:. SWATHS: :tr. President, I ck not asking you to .acLiit this
as a dor.ua:nt La evidence no., but T or usi.r it in the courso of intcr-
rog-tLat tJii3 witness to find cut wiiat his point of view is. •

Th: purpose of this trial was outlined by General Taylor at tho be-
Kinnin.: as that cf .asccrtiLnir,-; in general that Barbaric methods were
hero be in.- used for tho first ti La the case of the defendants in
th: dock and that offenses agaLnst principles of lew of all countries of
the world. In this Document Book cf aloe I have shewn a for short but

6057


17 A;r-A- =-l5-2-<L*oss (Int. 3ronr.)
Court No. I.


pro;_n r.t excor rts .to prove the contrary.

I c-i si.-.ply putting this document to the witness to have his opinion
of it and I r.sk pornicsion to do so.

TrTJ HIES ID M T: Sucr.it the docurunt to the Tribunal fron which you

wire

D... SjP.V.A’IUS: Dccucent Book Pi of which I slid yesterday that I
would brir.; up today, the sr=o as the prosecution was ;»ntio:ied yester¬
day.

R. EdiDYr Your Honor, in this councction the Witness has already
stated he doesn't knew anythin,; about aattera in other countrios.

THF. IfteSID-../;: Lx 'joining counsel propounded to tto witness cer¬
tain questions. The witnaea answered the questions. Counsel my now,
if h- desires, ask the witness if ths, rritrxss is fmiliar with jsodical
ethics in general, if he has studied that nattor, and is faailinr with
g'inorri rulos in connection with tho governing of nodical ctides in

SUCh CQOeS.

DR. SARV.uIUS: Do 1 ujtderstrnd that you noon I can put this pass¬
age to the witness?

THE FRESJDci.Ti No, not at this tiau. I sinply outlinod to counsel
questions he might ask at this tino. This other mttor nay bo consider¬
ed liter on today*

BY DR. SERVAT1US:

Q ..itnosa, you have occupied an influential position as a profossor
at Tuobinf-on. Do you think you rr. in a position to expr.ss an opinion
on the ethical permissibility of oxjurinonts on humn beings in this
trial?

a I can't answer that question in such general terns. Ap.vrently
so nary questions an* b-iru; h_re debated. I could perhaps conpctontly
answer a foi of tlicra but not all of tlx=.

Q Mow lot s put a precise question to you in reference to this
passage. Do you think an exp^rirsent on an idiot is percies ibla.

•• 1 should dc aard in this c-.se -Iso the cc:^cnt of the porson in


17 .iir-;.-"=-l5-3-Grcss (Iat. 3rr.zi)
Court Ho. I.


q>scFfcion.

Q ould you consider it permissible if experiments on certain ser¬
iously ill persons or epileptics chose refusal to consent is to be con¬
sidered, that exserinente be carried out on them?

A Ho.

CJ Do you think that experiments should bo carried out on moribund
children, fer instance, providin those aro children whose death can bo
counted on as certain unless scoething is dors?

A I must ask n counter-qnosoioni Just what do you moan by moribund
children on whor: ore could carry out oxpjiujnta?

Q I have a quotation hero that roads to tho offect that experi¬
ments wore carried out on moribund children and it saye they lived for
another ten days. Ttero was purulent oyo infection as a result. In
other words, thu children died but lived ten days longer.

A Tho aonornl sonso of thu word moribund does not apply to child¬
ren who livod another ton d«ys. In such casos ono oust be very very
suro of dl tho danger in order to attempt an oxport opinion toward it.
Vo knot' no lets in nodicinc but only rules.

q Vitnoss, if sixh oxpcrimor.ts aro carried out on children or
sick perrons, *hy aren't they carried out on healthy persons? Wouldn't
ono as-ur-3 that thos.. oxpurixentr aro very dangorous?

.. This, too, f s e question which I cannot answer in such "oncral
turns.

1 \itrues, if these experi-vnus arc carried.out not on nationals
of orxf's cr.-n country but on forei .ners, is that not proof that they aro
dangerous experiments?

•i In nodical professional ethics tn.ro can bo no difference £o-
tween citizens of cr.o's own country -r.d forci.*nors.

Q Howovar, ‘f it does happen, caw-ot cno draw a deduction that it
is sere thing that would not be expected of a citizen of one's own count¬
ry but a forolpnar? »

A Tr.it ir a question of the psychclo.^y of the person who carries


Apr-A— 3-15-1-Gross (Int. Broun)
Court So. I.


t: t the cxpcricxnxt and has nothing to do with the general question of
nodical atalcs.

Q Do you think such oxporiacnts can bo carried out for irivatc ro¬
se arch on people?

A This again is such e funeral question that I cannot answer it.

Q Tl»n you say that you feel that a researcher if he feels it
necessary c r. carry out experirsnts if be thinks it Inport ant?

A Of course, but it depends on vhoa and the question of concent
plays a port here.

3 And how about on a person who doos not consent?

A Froie the point of view of radical othics I do not consider cx-
p:rlr>.nts on jxoplo *ho do not consent permissible.

Q Can each experiments be ordered in the interest of the State?

A I believe tnat has happened in tho course of history. That I
knew. I personally would disapprove of that. 1 personally ahould al-
" -y° prefer to forego scientific progress rather than tako such .a res¬
ponsibility upon ::ysvlf.

A Then you consider such cxj:orij»nts not pornissiblo ovon when tho
State orders then?

A Free tho point of view of nodical othics - yos.

Q TCcn, frofosoor, you agree with the Prosecution that such ox-
pjrirvntc art a cri-a?

A Again tharo iro two tilings to be considered hero. The one is
tho question of professional medical othics and tho other arc tho laws
that r.ay exist in the country in question for which the doctor is not
rr sponsible.


:-rrov (Ir.i. 3ror=)

c.«rt :•« i.


.. "itsess, if to<L.v such rn ox-;erineat were ordered by tho
•Tcraaor..-, on experiment on hunnn beings, then over- doctor would hj.vo

rr oso that T

— - c - o-7 2 uys_lf would not carry out the oxporinont nd

v ult’ profor to run the flanker of suff. rln* pcrs’.vl harn. iJoroovor,
th t ie n ldoelo.-lcal question nod wh t is to bo said fron the point of
rlcv of ;-.odlc-.i othics so frr r.s I iui concernod ;h t I h.-vo c-lrondy said
hoi-o.

1 * * always your opinion, witness, or did you Just nrrivo

at it here r.owT

. . a th 1 Ivys boon ny opinion.

.. IMdr.'t you ehuvo this opinion during tho cuirso of tino. S'. o
It .lit boon out-aododT

... I hi rdly bolioro c .

witness, I should like to put ran tho r docunent to you.

? i a is *.3 $3 end, for tho puxposo if identification, it will bo 13
^c-:i’;it 25 . I sa il ro~d the docu:.er.t to you:

"Copy.


r president of . orth.m-Hhtne Province i’ 632- III- C Iil/3.
■Dsoocldorf, June 2Tt.:, 1SU6.


8 ; t. Presidents of t .e frovernr.ont .1 Districts In lx-ln-Ch-.pollo,
Ifaeoceldorf i nd Cologne.

■Subject: . edic . Her. rca Co -ittoo.

■3.-x:'os;od you will fi:»l the text cd tr.-.r.sl''ti'’n >f /. vritin.; of
t:j - .’lit"-y Oover-uxst of Jixj 22. 191*6 - VZjyJ&JJ.

jj I hear t.;c le,,*ion.\2 Boso-.rch Dcp rt.-jnt wants to r.-Jco exaidnn-


t' ns i’ut the fur-cti nine* of the kidneys. I
la concerned. t . he tho reports.


the ref ore^tho


3 representative ci.^od: Hr. C rfeldt."


"C o-.r.


B “r .. si :l on.


= ."~ 'V u-Jt-rs 1 ilitrvr* Government Torth Siino 5e,:ion.


60Sl


-7 -ST*---'Z^-lc-l-Zt-rrov (In;. 2 rovr.)

C-vrt . 1 .

.. "itneso. if tod.-- such -n er e.-lcent were ordered by tho

-.T.-rsaoac, on oxperi:icnt on hu.-aui beings, than over-- doctor would Jv.vo
t-v 07-000 thnc?

"* ~ c n •-? th *t I nysel? would not carry out the oxporiaent and

•' ul' prof or to run the dan^u f of Buffering pore <.''-'-1 harn. KOroovor,
t‘ L 5 ,B r * ido^lo/lc-vl (luostion and wh.t is to bo said fron the point of
riev of uedic’.l othlcs so f.-r as I tm coneernod :h t I a-ve :lrsv .dy said
horo.

•'.s th-it blways y ur opinion, vitnoas, or did you Juot arrivo
at it hero now?

. . 2 h t h b "lwy» boon ay opinion.

.. Didn't you ehan/.-o this opinion durin,; the cmrso of tine, S'.*
i* - ; v ho on out-nedod?

... I h. rdly believe e .

witness, I should like to put another document to you.

T io io :s 53 end. for ^ piorposo >f identification. It will bo IX
2J. I Mill re-d the document to you:

■ 0 o*y.

President of brth.r&-thine Province y 632 - m_ c I 21 / 3 .

■Dnsoddorf. .Tunc 2 ?th, 1$)46.

“J t .. Presidents of t/.j Government d Districts in -lx-la-Ch-vpallo,
Duosceldorf . r.d Colo.-no.

"Bu' ject: ..odic : Pep. rce Co.-ittoe.

■^.closed you will fiad tfci text nd translation «f t\ writln-; of
th. Mit.-uy C-orer-u^at of Mo 22, 1$U6 - I^/p"/2457.

• -° - • wrr t-i-i Te^-ioix-J. HeSe rch Dop rt.^nt v-ants to :.~ko ox/udna-
tl r.n b not the functi air. - of the ki.ujoys. I -s. therefore tho A
noir-i ; In concerned, t: he tho reports.

•* represent, tivo six-ed: nr. G rfeldt."


*2r .:isl tion.

B : - f ' .« rt-rs .Slit r Government “ortn ?,;ino Pe.rion.


:*osi


1 “ ■ V 16 - 3 -v. rr ov ^rowu)

Court " . i.

■Subjoct: Kcdlc 1 anoarch co:_-lttoo
V ro 22 , 1$46.

toe Froaidoat it to. f :rtoorn ahino Provinco.

1 Frofocgor .cC ao r-nd too e-cabora of his ..odicnl Hosorrch
Do: ‘t.-ont v-rt to bo iafomcd, if and 'ice chil£ron rro bora in
l ur.-in fcorwa or vonen'a *rrda ia noapltola ffoctod with Ho&l&ft-
oc-olo or riailrr rbuonslltloa. which will a^ke it unlikely or iu-
vvaiblo tlv.t too children '-ill aurvivo longer ton r. toort tiieo.

n 2. profusaor ic&'nc 'lid hia do rtnont wish co nY.o aono experi-
oent® o-i tliooo childror., vhich will , ivo than no sort of rw-ina, but thoy
fool no; entitled to . -Joj toeao osroriconta on am: 1 , hor-lthy children,
iica tho birth of thoto c.iildron cone a to be known Profu^aor 1 ’cCno in
to bo inf'ruod t once by telephone, .Wipport"! .' 0 . 36665 .

al.;nod: Si-jvaturo for Deputy Bo^ioncl

Co Jiiaaionor
Horth Raino Re, ,-ion

(Lt. Col. R.J.O. 3/J.C).

“•Ja tie President of too Oovornnontol Diatrict 0 od 5 OC

3 $ 07/46

»0 >10,700, July 5 . I$li 6 .

"'JO too SeUlth Office r\t .

u - ooJY* the copy '*ith toe roqu.>at to iafom the birth^-rda of too
nac io lo in your dintrict.

a

by order:

pi nod. Dr. $-.v.:lc

c-rtificd: n at r. Ro.ricrun a inspector*.

:: ID?: Pirat f II. rour Sonora, bef ra I enter • ny forrv\l
object r., 1 would lil:_ to ao. the ori. in~l of t ie Aocniient. •

3. • S. I not in poaitiea to sub: it tr.», orl.tiBRl.

iS^ic ir . c\-y th t w . coat l ’ ~o. I a ref-rr'n. to rticlo 20 of
t..e net' trir 1 rocedur h . ccorlir,. to '•..ich if I 'ubrit -t co y I ary
insist to » notice be t >er. of iccur..nt which h c boon issued by on
.llio;. .ovcmuer.t. This is such - document. 2 hia, nr.eely, is


b052


17 - - • w {3rwa)

c-v: t . . 1.


doeur-eat on th. p--r. of 3rlti»a . ilivry Govcranont. I ek, tacro-
i'a-.-c, th . notice be c toe of it.

- TT: ?our ~'»or, I r~eu«£t tiv.t I bo --Hewed to aoo the
c^ril.'ic :i n of nuthoaticity of thla docun nt by B'ric ono of tho
r-o.-v yr. f the Mllt'-r- G/rdraaont. Etr-t Is, r-uthenticity of th-
c ;• of thi« docur-ent.

' ~y .IVS: In rticlc 20 . :r. President, it si;?ly st.vb thftt r.
c -/ hr. a t. bo submitted but not o cortifi-d eyy, rad it in not oOanibo
so . .e ;o mib.iit ih-.t .: <ut .*a offlci 1 document boc uoo I c»a't r.'ct ay
.vnt'a on it. ! h vj > ily - eo y -nd h v ov^ry re .o n to beliovo th-.t
It ir uthnntic. I r.skcd .a- lilt ry Oovemao..t in Colo.jio to osnd
no co y ~ i^A I BUjros. they 111 send no copy soon. but I crouiot
■nonit i: yot. ?he tol educe muber of tho doef-r io hero. I au^no
tho iv. .?.e ...in,, con bo chocked on.

.•! ST: If ho di n't reccivo the co;jy fren the : lilt ry
Oovonui*.'.:, where did no receive it frt.? 3. uot hrvo received it
fron uo;-.conj.

::: I- SIDS- Z: r.-e document offer d ir. thin aitu-'.tlon nhould h'-o
ooiu Juot'.fic tion brobin: of it. Of course, tho docunont i» not now
belr. offered in evidence, merely boln,: nr.rtod for identification.

. JTti "all, ?tur •*onor, in order to ..ice docunont for
idcntific tion I should think it would lo,.-ic lly follow th t you would
a. ?o to oo'.<ibli«h th t it i» - docunent, • nl t.iie h. o not boon
og; aliened do ament.

aTtXB SZ32 1.:0: . r. rdy. will you h -nd th t thin,- u;- here so vo
c n lo h t it rlc ae?

. . 3Tf: :-i» is Just too eo y I n vo, ?-’cr "'nor.

{Uocunedt is h adod to rribura i).

~ 2 S3.1I <?-: Sr. «.rv tiuo, «ill you R-y, f^r the benefit of tho

oribua 1, where, end a-' unfor wa. t clrcu .otancea tho text a ttor

of i.Sz er*er, r. c>-y o: •• .ich you have exhibited to the Tribunpl, vna

%

6C63


oi“/iacd?


----- -IS-VZtwjw C3ra*aj

5*«rt - . 1.

SZ”.:iUS: Eurin: infor-_ation trip to Cologne, which is r^*

:ivo t:vr., : we told cl; t this directive 1 md boon issued, nnd it

: ru 4 :o ..a over tho tclo^ono. Thereupon.

CXSS SEED'S: Issued by whoa?

I. ' ” :~S: Issued by the British 1 lit cry Governaont and
tr cul.tod by the »bjr-_>rcsident to hie ro.rion 1 presidents, who
-irect th t reports h to to ho aado by phono, F-icrcuyon, I visltod tho
health office of the City of Cologne end r.shcd the:, to tell no sono-
thiac -bout it; but I couldn't speak to the ^ontlonun in question, so I
vn-.;c til t the; would pie .oo connunic.'.to it to ;:o. TSicn, ay ir.f'ra-
'.ti'/. conter sent co this c>py end I h ve now subrdtted it boty.uoc i hrvo
r.o doubt of its authenticity. I <-lso assured .ysolf th t such direct¬
ives h d been sent to other institutes so I bcliovod I could roly on it.
JU302 3331 tX: you tfdo inquiry by lett. r7
a?.. S._Y -TIUS: Toe.

JUL'--U SS'.ITO: ? tftanT

3'.. 7:.7..?irs: ?o the ..unici,»rl health office in Coionno which is
competent f -r t..ia, but 2 h ve received no nnsu,r . I could woo r.o c.
•i-nes t this th. )b I'-.o* iiirv-lrnt Dr. S-belo who signed this thine.
iHDSJ S33"IhO: you ardo Inquiry by lotterT
3 . SJ V TIUS: yes.

vTCGS SlZRIl'S: Yu brv. nt r.o yet received r. copy or you h ve not
y-t received roply tt th t letter?

;j-. S :7. TITS: sot yet, ao.

JV; 3 £3311*0: I r.Bc\r:e tl- t the letter urn n hin,: inquiry con-
c-rdx the subject a. t.-r or t.xt a ttcr of tain docuaent. Is-tii t
CO.- -cct?

J . £*- Y.CIUS: Y-9, I ..shed about it -aid rcquo tod u co-y so th-.S
I c:uT.d sub-.it it to t..e rribuncl.

JU3£J SE3BZS0: T?u did not receive c reply t • your letter \nd con-
S-'count ly iid not roceivo tho co y of tho docunent you roquestod?

n.. S3-.Y-.riUS: sc, I do not h ve is official c y. I sirtuly ivurc

50SU


ij :-lf~-Z5-lo-5-Zzrv ;w (Brows)

0 ”wt /o. 1.

tho 70'*. conviction sh. . *. is ii e true document.

“-30Z S3ETJ3: 2aov., if you did sot rocolvo this document or its
con..- -;n fni tno office, ' don't quite understand v.:oro it did coieo
fnc.

- . ET T..7IUS: I rccoivod it fron person vho ia vox-” close to Ey
client. I should -.refer not to nontion the nr.na. I believe this c -a
*' thin professional oblicstion to ccrcey.

C7273 f22?J"3: JiA it crew to you ns boiu- an authentic ciiy?

3 *:. rn-s: rcc.

JIH'Z $Z31II ; C: Of document Vdieh ht-A been duly issued? Is thr.t
ritfxt

3?.. ST Y.7IUS: Ywo, nad tn-re. ftor I tol pinnod to nnoth-r offico
th i .. v, ru corroborated the fact thr.t thvy rlco hr.d received r.
c y of t..is siueo directive.

JU3"Z SZ3.1L 5: Ilo- then, tdx-.t ie your Air Ore in direct in,- itc
contoxi to this vitneoo?

—. 1 * TIUS: I V'St to a.;-iv this to the uitnosn to he/vr fron hin,

:.o roprosont tivo doctor of present dry Ger rjjy, how ouch uxperi.oontn
•ure cv lur.ted todiy. it la iy point of vi.v th t cx orlnaot# no r.ro
n«ro ordered «ro '.ordinsibl., und I h vu wsourt.vised thr.t the Vityas
h c t .u j ;.t of view represented by the prosecution, r.nd I cubuit it to
ou o.t conteati \ c. t such eor. ri.ients r, Jer-dasible if tho otnto
orders ihei..

feDGS CZ31IL'C: r n t I'. ;-ou understand t is orxorlnont to be.

Dr. "~ff tiust

D'.. S~ r .?IBS: I ou or. th t these r.ro oxporii-cnt c th-.t -iro
o.rried Out without tne consent of the person conc-rr.ed. Thr.t ihey rc
dun iwnuo bcc: use so one it told .-.bout tne... but, on tho other hand,
coroerinoncr th-1 :\r- necessary. It is furtj ; r intention to rovo thr.t
eutlu-ir.oia should bw practised on children who r. born with such
diseases rxd cysts bee .us. euthr.nr.sir. is certrdely ns easy death,


17 .rr.-r-srs-lS-o-Zerrov (3rovc)
Catrt I'-). 1.


vi._rcc.6 u-ro. In ^ o inion, the children do not mffor on oaay
death after tho oxjorisont. Ihua, all tho directives on tno prrt of tho
acich Cora ittoo for tiic Inrcstirotion of Horlditary Disoaoos shou'd bo
considered roraiaaible.


6066


Court 1

April 17—n-17-l-HT—Las b er -Brown.

Hardy: Your r.onor, if the Tribunal sees fit to
accept this R9 p.n authentic document, then I object to
tr.w admissibility of the document Inasmuch as it has no
DO-ring m this case; it is immaterial; furtnernore, the
contents of the uocuoent 19 not at issue hero and this
docs not state vnether or not permission of the parents
or gu.rdlon of these cnildren to be experimented upon
will oo obtained, rertneraoro, this is : n expression of
Intention and tnore isn't any evidence of cn overt act
to substantiate the document.

0

JlJu&£ SERBRIliG: Dr. Servatius, if you are of the vl^w
tact this witness entertains some ethical views concorn-
ihi* the extent to thlcn human exporiaonts may be conducted,
if to any extent at all, it would rpcear to mo that having
hoard hie statement on the matter you eight propound a
hypothetical question to hla as to whether or not he is
of the view that experiments concerning the functioning
of the kidneys to be c rrled out on certain abnormal
children wnicn will -lvo thee no sort of pain, is, in his
opinion, within the limits of ethical consideration of the
OOOpljx Involved. I think you mi^ht be able to propound
to him p-rn.ps a Selected range of hypothetical questions
which would probe tne witness for r.ls views of whr.t, in
him opinion, would come within or without the limits of
what nc considers to b. an ethical approach to the ocncept
of experimentation. It would seem to m«. that thet could
bs. done without any reference whatever to this document
and that it would be a proper source of inquiry.

DR. SSRVaTIUS: The hypothetical qjustlons I have
rlre-dy put to the witness—whether ne considers experi¬
ments permissible if they ere painless, vnether they should


Court 1

April l?-«-17~2-H3-lfi8ser-3rown.

'-a carried out on children without the consent of their
. cronts—he rejected. I C6ked him if they were permissible
if the Strte ottered them and he said that ne would oppose
that himself. I ashed him if his point of view was not
rather out of date and ween a State tr.at rules a B reat
part of the earth considers it permissible to order such
things, then perhaps the expert who is no-re to testify
as 3 witness will arrive c t a different conclusion ana
will correct *.is point of view, will admit that it is
out of date. ThAt is the very core of my defense of my
client.

JUJdJ 5E3R1KG: I think it ml ht be entirely proper
if you produced other witnesses to show th. t th. view
entertained by this non on the witness stand ic hopelessly
out of dato, re you say, but I am unable to see where,
assuming that t.io document speaks of somethin^ that

will*be delineated os n medical experiment, the f-ct
that this docum-nt 6-oaks of suer, an experiment doos not
lr. and of itself serve to upset this man's point of view,
ho wpa in the hopeless minority in the matter end it
would tiior. be for the Tribunal to consider, from all of
the evidence bofor. it, what It consld.rud a proper
approach to th. matter, cut personally I foil to see the
probative value cf tne inquiry cs it Is circumscribed by
the text cf tho document vr.lch you have presented to him.

Tn£ fn£5Zj6&T: I am in entire accord with Jud B e flebrlng
In foiling to find any materiality in nr-ndln tnls doc¬
ument to tne witness. Counsel aa> ask tho witness if the
witness is aware that other phyalcirna of re ute may hold
other opinions, but this is not counsel's witness, nor i6
r.o on opposin* witness. He is witness called by another

defendant. Counsel'has the privilege of Interrogating him

606?


Court 1

„prll 17-/v-17-3-hD-Lesfler-Browr.


_dlu Interrogate nlm, as*ed hia questions, end the

witness answered tin. The witness Is not subject tc
oroes-examinntlon or examination. He Is not an adverse

witness. ”e do not know of hie oositlon In regerd to any

other defendant. Counsel may ask the witness If the

witness la nwr.ro thet other physlolc.ns hold ideas which

do not coincide with his.

DR. dERVATIUS: hr. President, I asauooa that since
the witness has n different point of view than that of
the defense, tnct he was an Inimical witness end that I
could put everything to him necessrry to refute nls point
of view, jo a un .erst, nd fro - the President that 1 snould
put no further questions to the witness?

TH£ PRtSIDHNT: Ko, It was not that. The witness was
called by another dofendant. You are now trying to
cross-examine the witness ac to questions which you your¬
self asked him. But counsel may ask the witness if the
witness is aware t.vit other physicians of repute in other
communities, hold contrary ideas to his own.

3Y DR. SERViiTIUS:

Witnoss, arc you aware that other physicians do
not share your opinion but consider such experiments
pe- olsslble?

I believe without any further quostlon that all
doctors do not shore my point of view; but If I may make
a remark about this document, it Is a question. The
question Is whether children with ^nlngocoolo are to be
opected on or not, but may I tell you that the lives of a
part of these children could be saved.

JUjCrS g&BnXSQ: Witness, suppose you stert over. I
don't think the Interpreter 6 ct tnat. Will you start over
please.


Court 1

April 17-A~17-4-HD-LeBeer-3rown


It can be oeer. fron this document Indubitably that
not all children which are born, suffering with henir.go-
coele, are to be suojeoted to these experiments that
were planned, out.

v. witness, where do you get that idea? They must

reported?

• A, «11 ore to be reported but it oust be assumed as
a matter of course thrc frsa those who report, a selec¬
tion will be *:ae os to wnlch ore to be experimented
on, because if all children with .-.enlngocoele ore
to report, then port of theo certainly could not be
considered for the o-'pcrlmont sec. use tney could be
operated on <\nd their lives could bo caved. I aust
ng'ln point out that aedlclno Knows no eternal laws but
eimply pragmatic rules.

*. -ltness, tr.on wr.at does rtcnln b ocoole havo to do
with disturbances of the icidnoy?

a. That cannot bo answered in general. I do not
believe that the casco here were chosen because there
wna some connection b.tween kidney disorder and
menln 0 ocoelo but because par of the childron with
ir.enin^ocoolo, namely those wlt.i a very serious infection,
could only bo expected to live a very short tl«o.

Others could survive.

DR. sERVaTIUS: I have r.o farther questions.

THE PRESIDENT: Tnc Tribunal allowed the witness to
dlsciss tnlc document notwithstanding tr.e Tribunal held
that the document was not properly before the witness
but that matter has ooer. allowed and It 13 r.ow in the
record.

Any furthor questions of the vitr.-ss on the part of

• 607C


Coart 1

April 17-A-l?-5-HD-Le88ar-3roim.


dofor.se counsel?

The Prosecution may cross-examine.

CRfc 3 SEXMI NATION

=Y MR. HaRDY:

... Witness, I snail attes.pt to be brief ana would
appreciate your answering ay questions briefly so that
we nay finish this afternoon. First of all, I want to
diocuas with you the events which took place at the
meeting of the consulting physicians at the Military
Medical Academy in May 1943, aero specifically the lecture
given ^y Or. Ding. Now was it possible for a listener,
ouch as yourself, c an who was an expert on tropical
medicine, to h'vc readily ascertained after hearing Dr.
Dint’s lecture, that the experimental subjects used by
Dr. Ding wore inmates of a ooncontratlon camp?

a. I cannot remember now whether it only boenmo
apparent from the discussion.

». .«ell, now, you have stated that after the lecture
a discussion took place cr.d the discussion w s opened
by Professor Rose, is that correct? Did I understand
you correctly that the first one to speak ofter Ding’s
lecture was completed was Professor .Hose?

a. *s far as I remember. Professor Rose was the first
ont to speak.

ft. --md then first of all spoke on the subject itself,
that 16 , typnus research, ar.d then ho proceeded to
caastise i/lr.c, for the manner in which no carried out the
.experiments, is that correct.?

a. Ye6.

ft. Woll, now, will . ou klr.dly tell the Tribunal as
well as you can rcm=mbor, that is, verbatim or substant¬
ially, Just what Dr. Rose said?

6OT1


C-UTt 1

«prll 17~A-17-6-HD-lcs6or-Rno^lcr.

n. Airing ay tustloony this morning I endeavored to
repent his speech os well as I an In c position to do so
todny after c period of 4 years has olppsed.

Tell, will you kindly repeat It again for a c, doctor?


Ocurt 1

B nrl1 -I6—1-HD-Jfaloy Rammler.


«. rrofossor Rose sc Id approxinctwly that t.ils was
: c'3c of experiments o.; human beings, ttet f: t.-lltiea
ted occurred ir. Chat connection and that he considered
thrt tola was r v rj serious fundamental question alnce
-ny suoc procedure cannot ce brought In comformlty with
tne tradition of research of immunity. Ko further said
thrt no ds-ontinl results had boon achieved ir. the course
of t.iuao experiments which could not rise h'Ve boon
derived from cpldenlologlcr.1 ob3-rv tlons. For that
r-nson no aria he was of the opinion th-t one s..ould
me in tain the traditions t.r t one wo-Id O'-lr.tr In medical
tradition, nd tnorefore reject *ny euch procedure.

%. -ell, now before Hose— pnrdon mo. You and
I nlike know rrofossor Rose to b. a v^ry emotional
-rsen; did rrofossor * 08 e rt the time of this observation
"*CCOOe V.ry eXCltodf

«. I would soy tare no didn't got any more excited
t,.-n was ..la custom occ slonolly during discussions.

-*• Vie 11, now, did you g; thcr or did Professor Rose
s y It outright, — I will first ask you, did you gather
tn t Ros. considered chat these experiments rt 3 (Chonvvr.ld
were In he elicited those fatalities had occurred, to bo
just common murder?

«. I don't quite undorst nd your question:

V»oll, did RoOv consider this Just plain murder,
these experiments at Buchenwnld?

A. no didn't use tr.".t -xpr_salon.

<*• fell, dla you underst r.a nose to menn that?

«. Thrt was to oe concluded from :;ie newer Indirectly,
-.'ell, now were „.ou aw re of the f?:ct that Professor
oso ted himself visited Sueheavoid prior to this meeting?


Court 1

April 17-^-18-2-HO-Ma loy-Raanler.


<*. Veil, do you know that Professor Hose visited
5uchonwcld with Professor Glldeseister ar.d sow the opera¬
tion in npril 1942 a year before?

«. I as only hearing tnat new.

i. *nd tr.en n~yecr later Hose strenuously objected
at tela meotin e oefore tne consulting physicians; ond
nov la It clearer for you to understand way Ro6o objected,
or was it cl^ar from thw lecture of wing ttrt experimental
subjects used were numrn beln t s?

n. I don’t understand your question.

Vhnt I art trying to arJco clear, Doctor, la whether
or not you were able to ascertain et tnrt meeting that
concentration c no lnactoa were used in these experiments?

«. Yea.

Q. Now, Is Hose had not vlsltod Buchenvald one year
prior to t*.Pt time would he still have been /'bio to
rscertoin from the lecture of Dr. Ding that experiments
hrd oo v n conducted on human beln fi s In the concentration
camp?

*. I cannot romember tnat, because I no longer know
whether tnat clearly became pporent from the lecture.

•i. Well, then did the objection by Professor nose
come as n complete ourprlse?

a. Yes, for mo.

%. Veil, now would you consider It possible that
Professor Hose would later on hove sent vaccines to
3achenwcld to be tested there f

a. No.

i,. Thon In summation you felt assured that Rose
considered this work r .t Buchenwald to ,e core or less a

scientific cetnod of murder?

607U


A. Yes.


Court 1

«pr 11 17-^-16-2-HD-:«loy-Hasnler.

Sow, doctor, we have discussed here this morning
yellow fever, malerla, typhus and other problems; I have
one or two questions along those lines. Could you tell us
as r. expert now one cojld test the effectiveness of a
ti'O.lcal vaccine excaot by artificial Infection subsequent
tc vaccination; by that * neon, now would It ce pos.-i'olo
for -is to test hero in i.ernberg a vaccine for yellow fever
inasmuch as yellow fever 16 c tropical disease, without
first artificially infecting the subject upon whom we are
to test the efficacy of the vaccine? Do yo- understand
what I moan, doctor?

«. I believe, yes. One could do that In tne mentioned
mice test.

lou would h: ve to first urtlfloiolly Infect tho
.Ice, wouldn't you?

«. Hot the mouse that Is used In tho test alone,
but mice would hove to be available where yellcw fever
virus Is pr-eunt In tnoir brnln. This brcln containing
virus has been mixed with the serum of the hunen using
tc bo examined, an- then -e In injected Into other mice.

n• Well, now, -octor, if we wore going to have
wX.<orlGcnta on human beings hero in Nurnbor a , we would
n vo to first artificially Infect the human beings with
tne yellow fever vlr-*s in order to test tho efficacy of
thu vaccine, nd bear in mind now, Doctor, I am not
spooning of conpat-blllty tests?

n. Do you me&i comoa tab ill ty tests?

m

«t. I morn to test the efficacy of the vrcclne, net
a cosrpetlbllity test.

it. Efficacy,—not It Is not necessary at all. One
c"n rascertaln tho efficacy of the vaccine by using the mice
tost. i-:<_re is th case of yellow fever there Is one excep-

tV:n. £075


Court 1

«prll 17 -A- 18 — 4 -HH-Jfaloy-Hasaler.

only In the case of yellow fever can one decide by using
the seruE of e human being to what extent ho would be
immune.


6076


C JT*. 1

17 «pr -,7-A-19-1-Z31-Heehac (1st. Easier)


v Veil then, Doctor, la the case of yellow fever It !• a fact, is
It not, that tests on buses tein*s are sot necessary to deterslne the
cffleecy Of e ycllov fever vaccine?

Toe, thr-t Is the efficacy rcear^ic/; the *orotection against yellow
fever infection.

v And you, at a nediccl nan, would not use hoaan heists to test
the ofiicecy of a yullov fever vaccine?

A. So, it is only necessary when exaninirv: the ccouatalillty in
particular in view uf the cuestion of scnc hoortltis; aeru- heuatitis
only occurs in the ease of hu'xn beings.

How you h»vo oteted here, Doctor, that infcctl-us hcoatltis is
a rather disagreeable and ourlAis cc-spl lection, resulting fren yellow
lover vaccine lnfccti.no. I did not ruito understand that. v ould you
clarify thrt for ao, ulooso?

A. ivory sr.ullcot disorder, which lr.cludcc tho so-called direct
vaccination reactions or undesirable co -.oiler.tions which rrc to ho
rvoided ly ohysiclrns whenever r,,ssibio.

How, you say that this occurred in connection with tho British
rr.d American vaccines. Did thrt also occur in connection with tho Oerian
vaccine?

A. Ir. the croc of Cvimo yellow fever v.-ccincs, you ncra?

■v Too.

A. I know njthin#: about that.

v Veil now, “r. i'ra^cn. Dr. iu^cn Err/ton, vr.s the first cr.o to
devoid r. yellow fever strein hore in Ger-rny, v«c he not?

A. Err,:on he worked in Hew York on yellow fever rucctims and as
frr us I kn*w there wre neither r virulent ycllov fever strain nor an .
cdultorutad yellow fever str« in rvrilrtlc in ray Gcr:.an laboratory.

'.ell then, v.uld you state thrt the vaccines which wore used here
would not e,ntein thrt fceootitis condition which "'re created by the
American rnd inglith vccclnes?

ft. Ihct, one could n^t know before hand.

6077


Court So. 1

17 -r7-A-19-2-aSi-4ieehea ( 1 st. Sealer)


v '-ell nov, Doctor, Is bepetitis e rather serious disease?

*. Cn the i versge, ns.

M ’ell, let's teke it In itself. Suppose ~e go to the Crltnt;
vould hopi-tttis he considered a serious disease?

A. I kcov thet in the Balkans hepatitis is spread mong tho oooule-
tion end nostly is considered r.s a hirnlcss child disease.

’ hat I on getting at. Doctor, vould 70 U consider hepatitis
to he In tho sene category ns a had cold, a little norc serious than
that, isn't it?

A. It takes longer, hut I can siu fren having read an ingllsh thesis
on tho autj-ct that it is not a very serious disease, -here artificial
infection with hepatitis vna used in order to treet rheutetisr. of tho
Huts, in th« sa. -.e vay as nalario is used in order to treat ooralysio.
However, th-re v*e no success in that r.ethod, that is, trying to influonco
tho rheunttlsa of the llr.ts.

. D.ot-r, you have stated or mentioned here the Orth A Finoocmtes.
11 ov fron herring your testimony I can readily undorstend that you ahido
by tho Oath of Klppocrotco to the lcttor. Is the Onth of Hippocrates
rec..:nizod as the guiding staff in tho nodical orofossicn hero lr. Germany
like in ull other countries?

A. I don't knov to vfact extent the oath Is known abroad. To to sure,
it is if ton qu tod in literature abroad. It is the only vritten guiding
directive vhlefe exists about the professional ethical fundarontnls of
.•.odicine; that io, generally sneaking.

.. Thrng you, Doctor, I hove no further ouostiens.

THL PREMIUM: Any further cucstions t j the vitness? If not, the
witr.orc cry ho excused.

(The witness is excused.)

DR. FRITZ (Counsel f-r the defendant Bobu): iir. President, with the
roarovp.l jt the Tribunal I should n^w like to call tho dofondrnt Rose to
tho witness 6 tecd.


TKr. PRESIDENT! Has c :unrcl toy d’-cu'.ents which he could introduce

fcO?8


Court i

17 ir.r -*7-A-19-S-«af~«ueha& (1st. Paaler)


-itLin next half hour without cutting the defendant rose on the 8tend
right now?

2S. i&ISZs . President, it was ay intention to read the documents
end introduce then during the examination of tho defendant Pose, -his is
how I have prepared ay presentation.

TS-* Ku S IB H g * toll, the Tribunal doss not have any deslro to intor-
ferc with the orderly nresentetion of the case by counsel, so the Tribunal
vili n*v rccecs until 9:30 tonorrow awning.

(Tho Tribunal adjourned until C930 hours, 18 Auril 1947.)


6079


tfH

1C! Aprll-J£-DJB-l-l-Fcater (tot.
Court He. 1


Cfficirl transcript of the Aaurlcaa
ll.H t.--ry Iritunsl in the sntter cf
the United States cf verier, against
Kr.rl Brandt, et cl, dufond^nts,
sitting et KumhArn, Gcxnrny, on
1C ..prii 1SA7, 0930, Justice Beals
p rial din .


TIE lUtScUls Persons in tho court rc-n will pierso find


their scats.

The Honorable, tho Judges cf ittlitcry Tribund 1.

Uilit -ry Tribunal I is nor in session. Red sr.vo the United
St/teo cf ;.tx rica -.nd this hoiurablo Tribunal.

There -..ill be order in the courtroom.

TKS FRoSEET: J!r. .rrsh-l, you ascertain thr.t tho defen¬
dants ere nil present in c-urt.

THE UihSH«L: Itoy it please your Honor, ell defendants ero
present in tho court.

THZ PIESIOBtTi Tho Secretery-Ocncrel rill note fer the
record the prosonoc of ell the defendants in oourt.

Hk. H..HEY: 2£.y it pier sc ycur Honor, thj Dofendrnt Rose
to this date io Qbcr.'.od '<y th. preaecuticn cn Count Ho. 1 with
the ccnapirrcy, in Count He. 2 »-ith participation in the yellow
Jcundlcc ocperirx.nts, typhus experic. r.ts ruti -xperixionts in¬
volving yclloi- fever, : uallpcx, perctyphus nnd B, cholera
Tnd diphtheria. In a-’. iticr. thcr-tc, the Dofundent hose has
teen cherj.od with participrticn in tldofical i&rfer-, xro
specifically, participation in the cr ;ani=nticr, of Biitzabloiter,

also the aslr.ria exporliaints. In Count Jc. 3 it fellows that he '
*

ia charged with th«. soxx.

iv"*>4 this tine the trcsocuticn ..ithdrawe -'ll c; r;cs crto.inst


thc^b^ipHnnt Ix>se save the eh: r r- cf ccns- irscy ir. Count He. 1,
C*\ •

the ch:.f ,K c of participation ia the typhur cxr>cr±-: r.t- in Count

hr. 2 and tfce particip?tier in tho arlrxir cxueriifnts in Count

• |

:. 2, -r.d i-. Count Jo. 3, participation in the soco,. os sot forth
,A ✓ ’3000

lr*t V


1C April-If-DJG-i-2-F oatcr (Int. Baler)
Court No. 1


in Count He. 2.

THE PRESIDENT: ..ill counsel fer the prosecution prepare a
written stntcaont to that effect.

UR. VL.RDY: Yos, ycur Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: .aid file it with tho Tribunal in tho office
of the Secretary-General.

Mi. IlilDY: Yos, your Honor.

D!.. HEINZ FRITZ (Counsel for Dofaidant Rose): i<r. President,
with the, approval of the Tribunal, I an new cclliry the Dofundant
Rose tc the witness ntrxy!.

TICE PikESIDEIiTt Tho Deforient hose will take the witness
stand. Tho witness will “v ewom.

DR. GEhH.J<D ROSE, a defendant, took the stand and testified
as follows:

3Y JUDGE SEEKING:

Q Raiso your ri^ht hrnd, pl«.usc, ropoatinr aftwr no before
tho Tribunal:

I swear by God, tho alni^hty and Ccniscicnt, that 1 will
speck tho pur. truth end will withhold and add nothing.

(The witness repeated tho oath.)

TIE FFISIDSWi: You .-aaj sit down.

DIRECT aLJILJ..TIOK .

3Y DH. HEINZ FRITZ (Counsel fer the Defendant hose):

Ck Professor Soso, at first c few questions as to your person¬
ality. Kill you state ycur full nano.

k Gerhard august Heinrich I.osu.

Q Vilen and whoro wore you tom?

k I >:cs tern cn the 30th of Scvir±or 1C96 at Denti~ in
/.ostorn Prussia as a Goman. I have always retained G-.rsan citizen¬
ship, although ty hone was separated free Gumany ir. the year of 1920.

Q Would you olcasc Very bri_fly describe your prcfcssitnal


career, and, at first, up tc the tine you ccnpl_tcd your nodical

6081


1C April-M-DJG-l-3-Fostcr (Let. xcmlcr)
Ccurt Nc. 1


studies.

A Gymr.asiua ct Stettin, Dusscldcrf, Brcaca end then Breslau.
These changes cemo about owing.tc ay father's transfers who was
a e-jnior civil servant. I node my matriculation cn the 9th ef
I'rch 1914, end frea 1914 until 1921 I studied medicine. I did
»ay military service at the Second Guard Hcrimont with the Infantry,
and I went through the war with that r<-£ina:t free; 1914 until
191C. tty cedi cal State axrsination I passed ct the University of
Breslau on tho 15th of licvechcr 1921. medical approbation I
rccoivod on tho 16th of May 1922 ly the hcich Ministry of tho
Interior at icrlin.

Q i<hat success did you have in terminatin' yrur nodical
examination?

A iiy Stato cx-minaticn was very geed, doctor degreo "joagna
cun laudo".

C. V.ould you pi-.aso describe to tho Tribunal very shortly
ycur career qb a physician?

A I worked in breslau cs an intome with tho FnU.clcgical
Instituto of tho hospital there, end I was also at the laical
P'lyclinic and the Hygiene Instituto ef tho university. 1
started my yo'.xs rs assistant at th. Hy.icnic Instituto ef tho
University ct Breslau. In the year of 1922 I went to tho Robert
Kech Institute at Berlin “nd, finally, in the year ef 1923, I
went tc the Hy,bL-.nio Institute of the University at Basle in
Switzerland. Durln that tine- I studied fer two months as a guost
at the Truss! n Instituto for wat«.r, rth •'id air hygiene in
Berlin, D.ahlaa.

In order to supplement my education I decided tc do a few
years of clinical werk er. J f .came assistant at the surgical clirde
at the University of Hwidolb-rr. Upon the wish of =y clinical
chief there I hod spent cn^ winter t of ere that with the «r.ntcxical
Institute ef the University at Heidelberg. During my Heidelberg


1C ;.pril-tt-WG-l-4-Fostcr (Lit. Rader)

Court Nc. 1

■jeers I had « place for work with the Hygienic Institute in order
tc carry out ny scientific work there. In the year cf 1929, upon
recceocndetion cf the Hcrlin trepieel disease Professor Ziemann,

I waa assi.jned tc China tc the Government cf Chekiang, There 1
created the State Institute for Fublic Health cf Chekiang. Two
years later, I was appointed consultant for public health with
the Ccaaissicnor for Ci%-il Affairs 't Chekiang. In rdditicn, in
the year 193*. the Chincao National Cevernm-nt offered at the Job
as a director in tho Schistosomiasis control. I stayed officially
at Hangchow, during zy stay in China, which is the capitol of
Chekiang. Hangchow has half ft million inhabitants, and Chogiang
taoro then twenty million. During, that tine I had a number of
subsidiary offices such as are usually had in caso cf any such
hygienic position. I was a nenber cf the City Planning Ccoadttco,
of tho !>.tor Viorks Committee, of tho Committee for Felice Hefora
with the Ministry of th. Ir.toricr at Chekiang. I w - 9 “» honorary
nenber of the Hygienic Coaalttco of th- Chinese Modicrl Association.
Tr.en in the year 1934 I b-caao chr.irsian cf tho Parnoitclogical
Section cf tho Far Eastern Association for Tropical k'edicino.
Although tho Ccccdasicner for Civil Affairs had changod fivo
times during that period, I stayod in that position for a period
of 7 years until I nysolf asked to resign in crier to accopt rn
offer which was nado tc etc by the Robert Kech Institute of Berlin
as a professor.

CR. HEINZ FRITZ: Itr. President, with reference to Professor
Rose's activity in China, I should liko to submit to the Tribunal *
tho Dccunent Rose Number 1 under Rose Exhibit No. 1. This is a
certification cf tho Chinese Education Minister Chu Chia-fcua, end
it is dated 26 September 1946. The document can be found in Docu¬
ment Volume P.ose Number 1, page 1. I do not intend Hr. Frosident,
to reed that document, I merely attach value tc the feet that the
High Tribunal take notice cf that document since it represents a
characterization cf the Defendant Rose.


18 April 19A7 -Jt-2-i-ac?- !~ssir (Int. Rvxilor)
Caurt N-. 1


IP.. HARDY: May it plo-ao Your Honor, thia d-cuncnt contains n
Jurat, hence doos not ceet with the norulati -ns proscribed by the
Tribun 1 in that it is a .July authorized affidavit, certified,
and in good fora; hcnco the Prosecution objects to the sdaissi <n
of this document in cvi.ienco.

TKS PRESIDlkT: Counsel, have you the riyinel document?

(Original document honied to tiv; fribunal)

Objection will be o* or ruled. The cl -cunc.nt will bo admitted for such
probative veluo at *t cry few.

BY DR. FRITZ:

Q. Did you r-ooivo r.y special • ssiements during thoso years in
China?

A. In 1935 I rocoiwx. -n assignment fr the Hyicnc Section of
thu Leaguo of Nntiens in -rdvr to stu \v tho Schist oeonlasis problem
in '*icypt and to mnkc a rop.rt, which was to emstitute n comparison
between thrt problem in ccjpl as c vparorf to China. In 1935 I
participated in nn Intern tion'l Inf rnr.ti.n C urse for Seni r
Public Health Of floors .f thj Fnr East ct Siiuap.-ro. Ifclcrin
questions wero dealt with there ;nd then, with tho rupp rt f the Far
E-istern Bureau of tho Hygiene Sect! n f tho Ur.guo -f Natl .ns, I
visited tho most important malaria territories f British F.alaya
nnd Java and studied tho plague control at Ccntr: 1 Java. In 1935,
tho Public Hoalth administration -f the S uthern Chinscs Province,
Hwangs!, invitud no to adviao them -n plauo c-r.tr 1 quosti ;ns.

Before ny return to Gcrctny, 1 visits* the aost important parasito¬
logical inctitutos at Japan and then, up.n r^c_n.*-tion of th-
Rockefeller Foundation, I visited a number ,f important parasite- *
logical institutions in the United States -f f.orth Asurica. On
thc»j occasions I also hold lectures.

Q. After y ur return t; Goncny did y u immediately assume y.ur
office at the Robert Koch Institute?

A. -Vo, I only entered f rcr.lly ay new v siti ;n with ths- Robert

X-’Ch Institute. I innc iiatoly t k z vacation in -rlor D t^ke a

60S4


18 April 1947 -&-2-2-FKP- lesser (Ir.t. Bonier)
Court N.. 1


trip tj Africa for purposes A study. I wonted to fir.' out what the
tropical nodical specie 1 problems were as they prevailed in Central
Africa. »dth the agreoaont of the Colonial Office in Lendon, and the
Colonial Uiniatrioa in For is end Brussels, I traveled through Airico.
I visited thj raost inport-nt plaguo territories .f Africa. This
journey lasted f ,r approximately ono year Bad i*.nt through tlw Uni..n
of South Africa, Portuguese East ..fricn, the Tanganikn territory,
the CoLny Konya, the Protectorate of Ujanada, Ur'ndr.-Urundi, dor'.bat
Mandate, Belgian Congo, Fr. r.ch Equatorial Africa, prorch Conoro-ci,
Nigeria, Cali Coast, Sierra Leone and Ir-nch Scnor 1. On th basis
of an invitation which 1 received while on ny tr*vuls, 1 torrlnatod
ay Journey by visiting French Kor-cco. T<*n, in tho yorr f 1937,

I assumed tba lo-dor ship f tho Trvpic.al Lu-vrtoont at tho Robert
Koch Institute in Borlir.. In tho year 193V I received c oh-rt spoci'l
assignment In order to investigate hupr.titis opiconic in Sptin.

Ir. tho year 1943 I bocano th: vice president ,f th. Robert Koch
Institute but could not practically exurciao th t .ffico since ny
service with tho \cnrsacht t .k 11 ay lino.

Q. In .addition to tho ctivitics which you Jurt describe!, did you
havo any instruction assignments?

«. In the year 1938 I r-.coivo.; a lecture assignment for tropical
n.dicirfa *nd tropical hygionj for tho me ical faculty f 3crlin. In
tho year 1940 I received cinilr: .assignment far tbu faculty of
F reign Sciences. In additi.n, I held lectures *ith tho acr.dor.ios
f-r poet graduato codicil training.

Q. Did. y.u hold any 'ther scientific subsidiary fficoa?
n. I was Besber of th- Scientific Senate .f th. Academy fzr Post
Graduate Helical Training f r Kavr.l .and Tropical lie icire at Hanburj:.
I was a r.eafctr A tho Board of the fkrrtn «:s.elation for '.r picel
Medicine there. I was c.-aublishor f thu handbook entitled "Tropic: 1
Uodiciiu." I was a aoabor of the committee of the Gersnn Tr ..deal
Medical peritxlidai. I uns a nesber A th- "orking C araitt-e f^r

disinfectants nnd ch.rical for insect-pc3* c-r.tr 1.

6C£o


l£ April 1917 Usoor (Int. Rarxaisr)

Coirt K-. 1


Q. To wtet Gcrccn scientific tss .cit.ti.ns :’id yrn belmr?
a. To the Gorain liicrc-Biolocical ..ss-cioticn the Borlir.
!iicrc-Bioljricsl Association I bcljngot* t; tho Berlin Hodical
Associoti n, tho Gcrair. Tropical liedicino Association; * nd the
Assicintijn for Applied untcaolegy.

Q, ’.ore y>u -Iso a nenbor f fcrci.-n nodical associations?
n. I was a ncabor f r life of tfx: Chinese Medical ..ss .cl- tier.,
and in 1931 I was olcctcd a Folio* .f th- Royal S-cioty f.r Tr-pic 1
Medicine. I was a number f th. For anet-ero Ass-ciation for Tropical
Medicine. I was chaiir-an of the Pnracit io*y Section at tho Eighth
Intomati.-nal Congress f.r Tr.. ical Agriculture at Trip-lo in tho year
1939. In audition, I was tho official :al»:oto f . r Germany -t tho
International Congress f.r Tropical licln ~n. the Third
Intern tional Malaria C rces in tho yt-r 1V3S t An ster a.".,

Q. ~r. Proai’.ont, in art or to. pr vo the >\ll_wthip f Pr.fossar
Rose at tho R-yal Society, i >ffor ns h.ao Docuaont No. 2,which will
boc-mo Rose inhibit K . 2, tlx .rigiml ccrlific .tion of th. Royal
Sacioty in Lndon. This can be fund in D cucxnt Boek Rose '?>• 1,
an pago 2.

Did you publish any nodical scientific w,rk?

a. *os, those p ->ors are contained in tho list which was compiled

by you. Sinco all ay ... tcrirl was loot uri&g the war, this list

is probably not quite c.nplete but only few rclat.iv 1y unimportant

papers nay be aissir^. In addition to that, there '.re the yearly

work reports about the activity . f thu Institute f r Public Health

at Chokiarg iuririp tho 7 years ir. wr-ich I herded th t institute;

also there are tho work reports of the tr pic'i asdicino cop'rtnont #

at the Robert Koch Institute fr-a th- years >t 1937 up to 1911.

They are printod in tj*> yer.rly reports of that irctitutu an’ there

y. u can also find ‘11 the work published by ay c;ll/ , -b-.r-.u.rs.

Q. -r. President, with r.forercu t thu activity concerning

writing f r technical literature by Frifess-r H so, I offer int

evidence the affidavit ’ey tho Defendant R->se dated the 11 i jl-rurry

C3S6


18 April 1947 ---2-2,-.TCP- lessor (I.at. Hz.-rrJ.^)

Court to. 1

1947, as Rok Docua-nt to. 3, Hose Exhibit to. 3. The document can be.
f-ure' in Dvcuacnt B~»k F. so to. 1, on rcres 3 to 7. I *. > n. t inter/,
to real thrt document.

i.’oro yea a ccsbcr f the KSD..r?

/v. Yes, since 1930.

Q. But yea woro in Chinn, weren't y:u?

a. Yes.

Q. i.oll, how -’id it CEO bout th“t y u bee: aw acrdxr of the
NSDAP whon yiu wero in China?

A nuabor of National Socialists in .'Conking tried to recruit
pooplo into ttw 1CDAP ~n 1 also asked aa. I hee led that invitation.

Q. Did y-u at any tisw h Id an -fficc in tho Party or did you
ever rocoivo ary Party awards?

A. Ho, I hold n. office in the P*rty or in any f its affiliations,
although such offico was offored to so cn two ccasi ns. I
received n P~rty ancr-.'s not did 1 get any hon -r-ry ranks.

Q. Die! y:u ?t rny ti-e bei ng to tho SA or the SS?

a. to. Undor-Secretary f st to, C r.ti, “oko ' a- >n one occasion
to enter tfv. SS tut I did r. t d- so.

Q. Did y:u have rny isadvantagos by reas n f y-ur refusal to
join the» f orcr.tions?

A. Yes. »t tho end of 1939 I nr i boor, asked to participate in tho
Health Service rt the occasion of the r-s-ttlcoont A the racial
germans. This was dono by reis.n A th- Gervn-S.vict Pact. 1 was to
head this Public her. 1th Service outside tho Reich Bordors wy' that by
collaboration uith the Soviet, Yu,- si.-v ~n’ Hungarian

authorities. After the conclusi n ;f this w rk I rcsalnod the hygfonic
consultant to th- Chief f this public health servico. Th. actu-l
resottloDcnt on the Gcrrr.n si'o was he ed by Hisaler and n- agency,
which was affiliated to tho SS, th. so-c- lied Volkslcutscbo
ilittolstclle.


50/7


l£ April-it-G J-3-l-ldalcy-(intracd< r)-
Ccurt 1

The public health service it first was inJcp.nd..nt cf that a:cncy, end
ins subordinated tc the Undersecretary cf State, Centi. Physicians cf
the «cich Chamber c f Pnysicians werkei in that service, r physicians
that had teen loaned tc that CX anisaticn by the dchrmacht such as iqy
case, r^c V^lksdeutach-j kittclatelle cn tise other harri oa'oavcre ’ to
transfer those physicians that participate in the r settlement work
to the Si. Since I refused zy entry to the SS an disnee in addition I
ha- a number cf scraps with then cane rain scao fur.damcnt.l interests,
an.! that with a number of hi. her S3 leaders I was- asked tc rtsi»;n and
be replaced by an SS physician. In the year 1 9hh I w. invited to be
a president for a r.;w r<-ich institution which was yet t: tc founded, .an
institution for insect pests dan -reus to hunan health, aivJ for profes¬
sional reasons was supported by Centi, Tho SS at that time tried to * et
the field of insect control under their authority, since Hienlwr pwracn-
■ally was inte rreste in that subject. Tfcis fa et can also be seen froo
Sievers ‘iary which contained in the filer cf the Tribunal. In the Coo-
aiteo for !esinf>.cticn l had alrca’y opposed any that any special place
bo reserve! for the SS in that fiol!. 1“ a Liiti n to that I free the
resottleocnt I was knew os a trcubloscoo ccllrd rrat r an it was n t 'if-
ficult for the cntlcncn of the SS who were intei-rr-sted t. dissuade
Header frea n.qucstin. ay appointment, in the rantinc ha] become
Minister f the Interior.

Dfi. F.UTZ* Mr. President, with r_fcrcncc to the iifficulties
which Rose suffered in that re ar ’., I offer Hewe Dpeunent, MO l, as Poc-
hihit, no ij, an affidavit sa*e by Dr, Gerhard Peters, on tho 28th of
February 1987. This can be fcun* in the Oocum-nt, pa;cs 6 to 10, Docu¬
ment Book, no 1, I should like tc read the i_.st essebtial parts cf'that
‘ocuaent, and I quote on ;>s. e 1 , para rat* 2:

I have known Professor Dr. Rose since the _arly years of
the war,for, cs a consultant hy icnist cf the Luftwaffe, :_alt closely
Vith all questions -f insect central and enga, e-_ his '.epartnent in res¬
pective scientific work. Independent of this, he w-. 3 assi : at ’ in Lay

6033


18 A?rll-i{-GJ-3-2-ljlcy-(int.:aa—lcr)_

Ccurt 1

1912 fcy the Reich hcdtfc kakr as a -±.Ckcr to the tforkin- Cecadttco
on Dc-v.rninization an'. cpi- 1 --=ic control, inclu-l?- the. supply cf cquip-
nent, napewer a nd tncral enli.htacnt. frofesscr Res- here -avc valua¬
ble an 1 cnor ctic ass-stance, I cane to knew hie p-rsnilly urin this
werkand learnt to estimate Mn for his incorruptible objectivity.

n It hai been intonted to appoint Profosscr Res- prcsidc-nt
of a special Hcich I“stituto fer v-mir. control which was to be esta¬
blished in 19bli, an «p?' inteant which was oncrally ,roved in export
circles. This prop.sol ha i the be the special supp;rt of the under Secre¬
tary Dr. Centi. Rose, however, was turnci ’-wn in SS circles, of Hina-
lcr's entoura.c fer the reason that he was " toe difficult" Sturabann-
fuchror Pflaua, o had been appointed • Special Cccoisioner for Vornin
Control' by the Re ichsfuehrer SS was a particular appenent of Rc«-, and
ccnstatly criticizod the w.rfc of the Cosnittco for its lack cf cecpli-
anco with the Party and thv SS. Fin'll/ insuai of Rose, an SS can.iln-
te was considered. R:s< did not even then chan.% his often vx.rcsso(i
hostile attitude cencoroin the wishes cf the SS, n r his critic 1 re¬
jection of the Uacliinationr of the then pcrs-nal physician . rofesser
d'rull "(Russia r_w.r") ut rather further anta cnizc’ the opposition
throu.-h his support :t cy work in th. Cc=cxdtt.e an.' by his intercession
on ay behalf - I wa3 threaten' 1 with arrest by th. SS-."

New cotes the 3i f :naturc '-r Dr. Gerhard Pct.rs. Tis affidavit
w-s certified.

Q New, iVafvssor, Dr. * tors, in the affi lav it 1 have just
real s;xaks of difficulties which yeu had witn the SS in th. field of
insect control. C c ul. yeu pleas, ’-scribe these catt_r in .-r.at.r detail,
so that they bcccco acre un lorstanlabl.?

A It was at first a fundamental clash td-.un the r rkin • con

oittec was founded. These ccoaittccs had been f un!c? by ll'nistcr Sp..r,

as independent aloinistrative cr~aas of the industry. 1 was to represent

in this cerxittec the interest :f th. civilian c -nsuters, nan.ly th.

clvilian healt. authorities the private persons. Tv. cerxitt .0 wes to-.’e-

ci ; c what Evans for insect control ccul' yet tv pro.ucc : , what fines were

.' ; 080


m.pril^J-.JW-lrW 5cL,y<2rxril©r )

C curt Ho 1

these loans, :ih~t factories ha to be sto;po' and uhat ;._rs_mol of
tfccso factories hr.' to bo transferred tv oth-r fact-rios. Further-
^oro, it was to be decided h^r the predicts wore t- b> 'istri'utofl
cricng the vai*taus ^rarps. During the first nicotine 'there all

the interests*. p-rtios Uer- invitee, the representative of the OS
rojoctod jivinp in to decisions of that c exoittoo..Ho said irhe-nevor
HLaaler iras interested in protein- -ny loans for the c-ubattin;, of
insoct ccnt.ol it ifeul*. hove to be c.ntrlled cignay. .'!u further
acid tho S3 did net think of subrtlttlnj the ccisi.n of thr.t

cccuitteo ro^.r'inj tho Istributien of ru^t.s t. the various for¬
ties. :.t thot tLoe I rojoctod on;• intVpondont ...sition .f the S3,
including tho Reichs Fuehrer, because at thot tiw tho ivsidont
hesitated in vcicin. his o-.ini--n, r0.th.uji it v..s his lusinoss to
rioko this rejection. This of course was ften:~rt s always hold
o-rinst rtc. For reasons vnich I ’.en't taw, -!i olor v.r.s personally
intorestein ccaibattin, insocts.

Thnt urx always ncintainc' by his ru. recent-tive. The.r u vpn tried
to-ot tho professional orjnisati .ns and. insect c ntrvl under thoir
supa. vision. Ociu «f its hor. s a certr_n lr Daiwr tira rrrosted. -.riLh-
ut our over tao»dn w tho n-r.s ns why. Sc so r. >nt of the S3 -.vs .r-
tcMishcd as r. tnsteo. Stall'.r ;Oms w_r_ -. 'o rjainst the president
of ;ur c^riitteo. K. coul*. cnly bo .Ait tatv that bocauso of the inter¬
ference cf Govern:ont r instituti.no, who u..r- in -rested in tho
snooth w,rkin.j of th. c-initteo. I yerscnall;* was -nly concerned in
as iuch r.s it :ra »,xr!<o’. aj-.ir.st ;y app.intaait as .resident I w.uL*.
iLrdly accepted th.t p->3iti.n in .r' u r U. became the .resident of
cn independent institute. ddiixiler, of c.u se, was in position tf>
prevent such cn ~pp int ent since bo was a li ich . Iriotor. I p-rsen-
ally never taow vfcy the S3 hr-' such a s odal interest in the field
-f in3~ct control. The conflicts with Ittanli-r’s p-rr .rrl physician,

Dr. Ilorrcll, cans about for the ivasm thr.t he was .r-ducinj cn in¬
active lice rwrms in his --.-71 factcr. This was rdcre-d I Hitler for

6090


18. .priii I-AS-3-2c—1 ICiagrfcsza^r)

Court Ho 1

tho ..rsy, since I.orroli :icnr.”o! to r~,.r_scnt this i'.ru^ ir. a Wivn^
liffrt. Dr. X-rrell nao Jawm in this natter as notorious. Since ho
was usinj the aso ratr ^atorlnls that another fin.: ccul hr.v_ used
thr.t was usinr; a nrre effective Jruj, c.-nflicts idth t'v. c-mittoo
cr.so. Finally, I started t: bo v.ry Interest.-' in the proAicti^n of
DETT propara tiefis, s-rjethin;; which was chatted by .1 rxvll, bocauso
It hod a tenancy to licit his e:m production .f his lice .-.ardor.

It was all a very poor chapter.

Q ;.t any rate, during the cut'.r.ak cf tho xrar y.u Were professor
trith tho Robert Xoch Institute in Berlin end also director of Ry.iono
of that Instituto?

Yes, thr.t :r.o qy position.

0 Did you also hr.vo Certain assi-jvJor.ts abroad?

A Yes, in 1943 tho uodLer. director of the B-slo Ihivorsity at
Basic ,-ut a. or. the proposal list as ar. -X,x.r*- in hyjienc at thoir
university at Boslo, rr.d than ir. tho year 1944 I, including tw„ can¬
didates, was intondod to bo aoloctod fertile Turkish Pu' lie Health
Office in Anlccnu Both assijoints for >litioal reasons lid not
c-xjo about.

DR. FRITZ: In erder to substantiate tho r_.- cal t rsoi.71 Prof¬
ess r Rose to tho UniVe.slty .f Basic, I ffor a d^curont which was
sont to no by the faculty of Boslo, uhfch con bo frond or. ;<^o 11,
up to pa-o 14, of ur docurnot bool:. This is r.oso Docu.xsrt 5, end l.oso
Schibit Ho. 5. This is a certified oncer, t cf the oplni-n of tho fac¬
ulty ins-far as Professor Roso is uonti.nod therein. This fl.cur*ont is
ret her interest inj, 3ir.ee it ci'i:t,3 itsolf with tho year 1943. Ifct-
wreliy, it was very difficult at that yori_d of tine to .ait a 'jonion
ir. - ositicn uf a l.cturer at a :>..-iss University, and r.rru in thio
docisant is calcined why. In spito f these cassidoratiens Prof.as.r
Reso uos suco-sted. I ask you te tries notice of that ‘.ocuuent, end I
CO net intend to read it.

TH.T KL1SHE7T: (The C.urt '.fill r^r recess:

6021


16 April-J-GJ-5-1-C:ck-(in*.. Yen Schc.n)-

Ccurt 1

THF. 'JnlSHKL: Thu Tribunal is a a in ins-.-ssi,n.

BY DR. FRITZ:

Q Professor, two short questions. 7hc Persecutor, for rea¬
sons unknown to cc, his aide the subject of ycur evidence, the fact that
you wore a beard on:! -dss Schni.lt said you lidn't have a tear ' when
she saw you, is that ri,:ht, or did you always Kcre a beard?

A For twenty-on* years, from 1922 until 1912, 1 .-ore a mous¬
tache. Free 1929 until 1936 I were a full one nhich .n»s famous cn the
whole chincsa coast and if a caricature was made of n_ then th» nustr.che
was the aain point. In 19li2 I ruaove! it. Met. in the Hucrober; prison
I have let it frew a ain ’ ec us, when I can, here the rascr is taken away
fren the prisoners to prevent suicido -anJ we w.ro shave l cv,ry tcndjys
nt that tino and if I have to run around with a bear! nine days out
of ten, I thcu:ht I ni ht as w_ll row a tear .

Q Another quo ticn, the- rrasecuti-.n when exaninin the wit¬
ness, Schnidt, ho h,r t_ll hin how you -roato’ h.r durin an exhibition
in Strassbeur -. tas that custcra.ry at all tines?

a Mo, nly wh_n I was in unif rc. i^it tlio witness described
rather accurately was th_ :roscrib,-' salut; for ailitmv pers-nnol in
tho Oercan Vuhmacht in closed r. is wit h at h,a I coverin . Thu witness
no doubt saw that solute frequently .urin th- Oerr.an occupation in Strao-
bour

Q ‘.Then the war br:kc ut w,r, you drafted intc the '-hraacht?

A Yea, th- Luftwaffe.

Q Wcul you please describe tho icvelofcent cf your 'fficial
work after bcin; '.rafted intc th. airy?

A Inr.e liately after I was Irafted .n the 26th aU ust, 1939

I was ffercl the pcsiti.n f a c nsuitin hy Uniat un ier tho nodical

inspectorate, of the lUftwaff,. I reminvd in this position until the end

of the war, only finally a fe- changes took place urin- thi war at a

tine which I n Ion. _r recall. Th, nan. * consul tin hy icnist* was chan-

• o' an. raade ™ consultin hy ienist an tropic ! hyienist." when the pc-

5092


18 April-M-GJ-5-2-Ccck-(int.VonScfc n)-
Court 1

siticn cf the atrlical inspector war chon ed tr the chief of the lexical
Service of the Luftwaffe, qy title was also chan to . Also when the rcup
cf consulting physicians was ape abaaacnci in 19UL, a secer.! cznsultin,
.y Uniat unlcr the chief cf the Jcdical Service cf the L u ftwafU w. s
appointed.


G0S3


-pril 18-M-3K-S-l-0ross (Von Schoen ec Reader)
Court li o. 1


6 .»hat was tho military rank you hold?

- I wa3 drafted as Oborarzt of the Reserve, equival¬
ent to l3t Lieutenant; in 1940 I bocaae Stabscrzt,
equivalent to Captain; in 1941 0borstab3orzt, equivalent
to i-ajor; in 1942 Oborfeldarzt, equivalent to Lt. Colonel;
in 1943 Oborstazt, equivalent to Colonel; and finally
about oijht days before tho collapse, 1 Uoy 1945, I boo one
Coneralarzt whioh is equivalent to brig. Conorul, wodicul
Rosorvo Corps.

* How much tine did your ailitary activities toko up?

.. That changed considerably in tiio oourso of tlsao.

In the boginning of 1939 I wr.a only claimed for a vary
minor poriod of tino. lost of my tino I could still
devote to work in tho Institute and to my looturo3....t
tho roquest of State Soo.-etary Conti I was assigned cs
Hygienist to Resettlement in tho wintor of 1939-1940.
iuring the campaign in Vranoo in 1940 I had no military
dutios but after this campaign it was ^jr.in proposed ut
tho ond of 1940 for throe months to bo ossijned to re¬
settlement to Bossarabin and 3ukowir.<. and in 1941 thoro
was a docisivo chango. liy dutios for tho Luftv.affo bu-
oar.o 30 don ending that I had to work all day at ay
Luftwaffe office.

. Why via a this olungc?

« Thoro was _ basic ch ngo in tho organization in

tho Hygiene oorvico of tho Luftwaffe. Originally tho

pructioe had boon hygiene as territorial affair and

territorial affairs wore to bo settled for tho -nay by

tho Luftwaffe at the. son- tin— During the .«ar this

practice proved to bo unfeasible. The Hygi.no Service

of the -»rcy was so over-burdened that it could tako caro

only of its own interests. Tho Theater of .iar koat expand-

6094


.-”-11 18-M-3K-6-l-ftross (Von Schoon cc Rancler)
Court Ho. 1


u -'feat was tho military r ank you hold?

- I wa3 drafted as Oberarzt of tho Hosorvo, equivul-
ont to l3t Lieutenant; in 1940 I booame Stebsarzt,
equivalent to Captain; in 1941 Oborstabsnrzt, equivalent
to I.cjor; in 1942 Oborfoldarzt, equivalent to Lt. Colonel;
in 1943 Oborstart, equivalent to Colonol; and finally
about eight days before tho collapse, 1 L’ay 19*5, I bocur.©
Coneralarzt which is equivalent to Brig. funeral, liodicul
Rosorvo Corps.

-t How ouch tine did your military activities tako up?

“ That ohansod considerably in the course of time.

In tho beginning of 1939 I wr.a only claimed for a very
uinor poriod of timo. Host of my tino I could still
dovoto to work in tho Institute and to m: lootures ....t
tho roquost of Stuto Secretory Conti I was assigned U3
Hygienist to Resettlement in tho wintor of 1939-1940.
during tho campaign in Franco in 1940 I had :io railitary
duties but after this campaign it was again proposed nt
tho ond of 1940 for throo months to bo assigned to re¬
settlement to Bosscrabiu and Suk owin'. a.id in 1941 there
was a decisivo change, i'.y duties for tho Luftwaffo be¬
come so demanding that I had to work all day et ay
Luftwaffe offico.

. why was this ohijnjc?

" There was ^ basic ch.-.ngo in tho organization in
the Hygiene service of tho Luftwiffo. Originally tho
practioo had boon hygiene as territorial affair and
territorial affairs wer^ to be settled for tuo ..rmy by
tho Luftwcffo at the sa»o tia^. During the ..or this
praotice proved to be unfeasiblo. The Hygi.no Service
of tho -vrey was so over-burdened that it could take coro


only of its own interests. Tho 'Theater of ..ar kept expand-

60S4


-oril 18-iI-5K-6-2-0ross (Inc. Von 3choen ^ rtaznler)

Court No. 1

ing. Africa, Itely, 3clkan, Crota, Greece wore added.

In the sunnnr of 1941 there was added the Hussien front
too. Tho Luftwaffe was often cccnissionod in aroes where
it was alone or whore it was preponderant. The oxtont of
tho hygiene duties increased. Tho Luftgay physicians had
offices for hygienists under then which had existed only
undor «ir Fleet physicians. Thoro was tho necossity of
having our own baotariologicel laboratories for tho Luft¬
waffe sot up - tho so-oullod notor field laboratories.
/.Iso, noasuros against lico in tho Luftwaffo wuro assigned
to tho Medical Jorvico. Tropio;1 Hygiono whioh in 1941
had boon insignificant suddonly booaao important. Sinoo
tho Luftviaffo did not have old regular hygiono bffioos
this whole organization had to bo built up during the war
with rooorvo ofiicors. Of oourso, thet ciodo a grout doal
of basic work for tho oontra-l offiou. In addition
questions of Tropioal nedicino wore caaplotoly now for
tho troop physicians. Tht asdo a grout raany offioinl
trips nooco3ary, to hold lectures and to instruct the
officers or to invostigato conditions enong the troops.

» How could you coabino your strong nilitcry duties

with your civilian activity?

/. during ray absence for sovorul months in 1939 to

1940 for facial Ocraon rtesottleraont I assigned work in ray

section ir. tho xiobert Koch Institute to ny assistants who

had to work sore or less independently according to ray

long range in3truotions. In the lectures 1 had had ny

assistants organized to represent n_. I hud dictated

::enuscripts of all ny lectures. Of course, thoro woro

individual difficulties but during tho .tor ono hod to nokc

concessions in can;' fields. Other offices, too, wore

unable to go on a peace tine basis. resides, I hod tho

6095


jvpril 18-. L’-3K-S-3-Cross (Int. Von Schocn & kannlor)

Court No. 1

special good fortune to have two exporionoe tropical
doctors as ay assistants in cy section who woro not
obligated to the Lilitary sorvioo. That node things a
little easior. In addition I had to increase tho unount of
work which I did r.ysolf. I had to 3ubordinato ell personal
natters. I had to work in the evening and at night. Very
aeny other pooplo did the sane thing during tho war. Wo
allkncw that wo woro fighting for our existence.

I Well, how was your work and practioe?

.. .vs the nano of ay offico shows ay activity was that
of on advisor. I gave ndvioo orally and in writing. This
was not United to the nodical ins actor hiasolf, he was
also advisor for tho whole offico. -nyono who wanted to
havo ay opinion on a question tho inspector, his ^hief of
Steff, end Section Chiefs could call no in for personal
discussion. Tho roforonton could cone to sco no. Tho
quostions wore presented and I gave ay opinion. Sinplo
urtter3 wore soaotiaos oottlod by tolonhone, or docunents,
roports fro:, two doctors of oth^r cgo.aios ware sent to
no with a request for a writton opinion or for a oonprohen-
sivo opinion to be worked out. Or, I was c :llod upon to
proparo drafts nnd acnorandun for instructions concerning
ny specialized field. I was also sont drafts cr.do by
other consulting physicians, perhaps free consulting
intornists or consultants for skin and vencricl diseases
to supplonont suoh points in th_a which referred to
hygiono. In addition I was .Iso sunt inportant reports
for ay attention even if no opinion was roquirod fra* no
so that I would bo infomod about tho natters discussed
in then.

. .*hat quostions woro worked on by you?

.. In principle nil tho scientific 3ido of the field

6056


-pril 18 -3K-6 -4 - Jr os s (let. Yon Schoen ec Haat.l_r)
Court No. 1


of hygiono and tropical hygiene, unless in individual
cases other specialists were celled in for consult-tion
by the Inspectorate, ~lso free 1943 on the field of causes
of death in air war and too prevention and reduction of
health daaagos and doath acong the civiliu population in
olr raids. Sono tine free the ciddlo of 1943 to the ciddlo
of 1944 on that was tho f iold which .took cost of ay time.

ftor basic clarific tion of the aost important points in
this field had been achieved, cs ::y lecture in 1944 in
Hohonlychen indicates, tho aaount of work in this fiold
was lessened for no so that I could devote core tiao to
hygiono questions.

; In addition to working on such assicruiants aid
you hnvo ony other tasks?

.» I also had to give aany leotures wnich wore tiudo
Qcoordins to spooial instructions for p03t graduate courses
for Luftwaffo Doctors in -orlin. ..Iso, training courses
organized by tho -ir r'l-jt or -irgnu physicians whjro I
was asked to hold lectures. I also guv- n scries of :-u.
lectures to 3tudonts of tho licdical .»c».dur.y of tho Lul't-
waffo after they coaplotad their studies. I often had to
hold lectures to non-military -.udionces on r.on-air raid
measures. On tropic-1 codioino I also 1-ctur-d for
training cours_s of tho -ray at special requost. I hnvo
only mentioned tho important fields and there wore quite a
nunbor of others. «

«. You w.rv adding something before when describing
your fiold of activity in that you w~ro dealing with tho
-ntiro field of hygiene .and tropical hygiene. It cu3t be
said then, as f .r as you know, other specialists were usc4.
-••hat docs this licit at ion ceun?

-* Th?:t cear.s that Li limited fields the I.edical

sor.7


«pril 18-ii-3K-6-5-Gross (Int. Von Schoen « --iannlcr)
Court Ho. 1


I spectorato did not cull upon no but another specialist
for advice. fhet could bo done for three reasons, first
that I hed too auch work and my so If askul that the work
be glvon to soce one else. 1’h-t was,for oxacplo the reason
a sooond hygionist was appointed in the boginnins of 1944
bocauso I hed too auch to do with tho problem of dnmajo
fra; air war faro end ny DDT work.


6008


18 April 17-;!-sr-7-l-/.j.nov-Int: finranl».r & Von Schon
Court Ko. 1

Secondly, th .t happen IT tbo Insxctor vr.-.s of

tho opinion th t, for cortr.in question, ho hnd o
better aowcic.list uorhing under fcia or if I nysolf
e id tb t in ojrt..i fields I hrd no practical oxpor-
ionco und tb t eccu one olro r*>uld bo bottur. In tbo
third plr.co, th. t hr.pponod if tbo Inspector:.to did not
i. roo wltl iiy opinion but did not v.vnt to r.ct on its
o'n initi tivo c"nlnot ay dvico but wrnted r. socond
opinion.

1. Cnn you cito r.ny -«.l'loa for tte.t?

. *'or cxr ?lo, the tr ining of tbo lAn'tvnffo nodior.l

service in docontnnin..tlor. q vwstiona, I w.\t eliminated

fro.i tl t, She re. son wee th t wbon tbio r.rrmpoioont

v/. a cror.tod in questions of T.a uocor t. nin^ tion I b’d

rcpx*oaontod c. or. tic ally difforont point of viow tl on

tl o Inpoctor Profoaaor V ipp*:o who uid net r.groo with

ao. 'iberoforc, nil tlu:o coursor toro tumod over to tho

consulting h;sloniat of ..ir Ploot 3 \il o ngrood with tho

Inapoctor. .notion oxm plo, in tbo cro: tion of our

bacteriological 1 ior. torJoa for tbo Luftweffo, I bnd

oppoaod tl ok. I b d anid wo should roly on tho :.rny

lr.bor torlos. Ion tho decision foil out .^jclnat mo

boccuso • jdicr.l Inspector i'ipplco wonted to noko b.imcolf

indopondont to 1 rgo oxtont, I contir.uod to hold tho

point of viow tl t ono nouded at lor.at tho norar.l

oruipr.:unt of m ~ray laboratory. Koru c.^Gin tho

Inapcctor wuntod c. solution fer tho Jjuftwaffo r.lono.

Sinco I ando difficulties, t.ia duty wr.a r.l3o r.ssignod

•

to aiotl or consulting hygionist.

In aucl cocos you could no lonyor influcnco thoso
nottore, could you? / ' 0‘9


4


18 -pril 47-H-ff -7-2-EArrow-Int : Rturjl:r £ Von £chon
Court Ho. 1

A. Ho, I did rcc sio- lly rocolvo reports rf Jout thorn
for ny knewlod'o, but no longer offorod rr.y ..dvlco in
tMs field. Or.o scientific" r.dvlsor is norru.lly
sufficient. 1 ! on it roquiros r.oroly tie o::ocutivo
docision. Only by or.coption, when Cl -ro *ro dov'-ts,
door ono aook fer cocond opir.icn. I n . 0 , noroovor,
so ovorworkod th t I did rot hr.vo my r.iMtion to
h-.vo rn r.bsoluto -onopoly on dvlco in .t* fiold.
Qonorr.lly , I w a very fc.ppy if tlo work w s dono *oy
sorxo ether spool, list oven if it v'.r dono difforontly
tt-an I would ! .ao doro it. I old orctig to know
ti t tl oro ro i;:n*/ ro dr to dono end th t very of ton
ono c r. do c. t’ in? in 8 over. 1 wnye • n:\ tlo finr.l
roault will bo tho arm.

•• your tv ttionr cf .ny xrfluonco to tlo
Inspector? Did to .Mdo thou of nooorrlty?

... ."y dvlco r a ir. no woy binding on tlo Inapoctor.
'tfio oxanplos wl ich I 1 * vo nontionod rJ ov tl. t tl.cro
v/ci'o differoncoa of opinion onbr.aic quoetlona whoro
coiK.tlr.or oxr.ctly tl.o o -poolto w..a dono fron w) t-I h..d
r.dviscd. Of course, t) -ro voro oxcoptions. In £on*.rr.l,
ny ndvico w;.c .ccoptcd :nd qydr. ite. orfcnps they woro
revised *nd r.djuatod to tlo noods of tho troops. If ho
h.d rot considorod :ry work in £onorc.l useful, in epito
of laol.tod c.-.cos of cliff or-ncos of opinion, I would
h-.rdly fc.-.vo ror: in.d in tic amo position dur nG tlo
whole wrr,

. oil t: j n, how ft. of 'our au :-ort:.ona

workod oneftcr you cub.iittod then?

... .-f ter the co rndin- cffic.r of tho Pro up Scionco
• Rd Roscr.rch >. d t.J jn notico cf tl o:z r. nd n yiod then,

6100


18 -pril 47-K-S -7-c-i ;vov-Za-:
Court Ho. 1


- •


I* T on Scl-on


they went ir. writing to fc'o -odical Inspector., to.

’ ru tl.oy v q t r.-.tcd like inco.An,- nil from out-

?iio; 2 t ir, i cccrd-m- to ai^ifici.nco rsid contents

tk.ovrore stmt to tie C 1 icf of St.-ff or to ono of too

eoctlcn cilefs .r.d xr ro dor.lt witb ’>;• tlo roforor.t

ccncon od i.ccordir/ to in strict ions.

. Hid tie Inspootor lwnys rocoivo »er.*m 1 notice

•

of n» r xtitudo in fchoro qiorticio?

o, only f y 1. ‘ c .'ici .lly or ox 4*ossly noted
tl :.t on ti o opini- n or if tie Cl :of of St. ff or too
section c: .of corr . ior^d ole . ttor ii:port nt onrush
to c ')uit :.t to the inspector 1- *solf. let! r

* *•« dono i did not ;j rn in individual c ;.c. c or I

la..mod it nr y i. t? iro \, ro i:c irics or o Inspector
culiod . :o for in or..l ro.xirt.

". • r. -TeflU ere, c' -c coll ection I oTer l.’oto
Dtoi el t ifo. G vf. id I r do so hd.ibit fo. d, tie
“fl vit nf zfn.'ot r or Dr. '..lt.r Scl*no31, V.tod tlo
re* , 1U47. f is c n * e found in »oro Doer ont
iook • o. 1 on p roe i r to 19. ' s!on:d like to rt r.d

• 'M't of if ic f ffi'. vit. I :nst rtinn ta qooto from
tl o tl ird pfav.'SK.pfa of p ;o 15 rf t: is do'-

u Concern in- t c xs:.tion of tic “consult, v.ts" of tho

‘-uftwffo, i 1 vo jo.airul knowledge cvcu 1 » ; olf

hj Tionist in .n ..ir flaot, without.

1 ov;ov r, boxn-* ifclu tc quote vorbully tie servico

1*031.1 tiouo for consultant: , v j.c) incident.-J.ly, nor o

:.lso IV: U:v>lo nr pr*rt. -1 o consultants v ro, in fclw

.odic. 1 insect or to : .< veil s in t* u v r.cuc cir

fluetr, purely eci<*vtific onpe:v! c 1 :d o pduora

ol co . it’d or opor tictr.l • ; rs r‘. ..i ;oov< r.

G101


18 April 47-::-S -7-4-1 . «row-Int: -v.l r u Von Sci on
Court *io. 1


..a f..r s I lyiotr, tl c offxcc.1 p» ait? or of tbo
consult..r.ts in the .‘odlor.l Inspectorate rr.-.s erectly
fcl’.o er_io. ihoyw.ro not, sr.y, superiors of tbo consul¬
tants of t! o v ri us r.ir win^a; in fc.ct, thoy led not
ovon cny diroct contact wltl' tlon. If ;.r.y inportrmt
srr.itr.ry ovonts in .n r.ir fleet hr.d to bo reportod,
tl o cor.sv.ltins hycioniat rvdo 1 is rop.rt to tl*o vrins
pl.ycicir.n \;ho, in turn, pr.scod tbo ro.iort on to tbo
lcdicr.1 in ape c tor o. ’bother tbo Cl Iof of tho nodlcel
aoivico — or lie cl iof of at ff decided to includo
t-c consulting lv/sioniat cf tl*o cdic..l Inspector,to in
tlo oncuin discue- ior.8 or not, w e loft to his own
jud-aont. lion tlo consultin': VrsUmiat w. a includod
in tl o dlacuoalonr, in opinion w r by no :x:ao docisivo
but it i-roly rop osentod n or.p.rt opinionboforo tbo
odlcr.l j-nepoctor to.

"My on..er onco-roporte rad epoeirlroperta for tbo
lodici.l It specter to which b:d to bo prose; t od r.t flxod
porlodc, h. d to o routed vi tlo win;, oly eicim nd
vroro p..srcd on to tlo ^ iof of t’o odic.-.l Corvico, end
not to tlo conatitln3 bygloniet of tlo cdic. 1 Incpoct-
or. to.

I! Cfc one occasion wl on I v:rrt d to cr.rry out L r.30-

scelo -x.. avroa to c oribr.t nnL.ri.'. frorj uoroplnnoa in

4 - territory pnrticuii.riy subject to nr.l-.rir., I firrt

contc.ct?d *'r<x error Rose directly by tclo bono to win

faia re:istmro for tlo rorl: lr.nnod by *jc. I did thr.t

r.lt: o' -*h I now tbo .bo’ 0 doacr Jbod divirion of

functions v t in tl 0 .dic.'.l ‘ rp .o cr. to, rad it wr.s

in-.cdir.toly obvious tl r.t oven tYc".& Prof error Toro

u-rood rith no on tie .:orit.' tf tbo ..iter, 1 0 could

not lolp no, r cr did bo 1 r.or nyf ir.' .bout y ro :rrts

6102


10 April 47-!!-S"-Ef.rror-Int: It-. 3cl’ A V r. ‘chon 7-5-
Cotirt !fo. 1

about Che hygienic case in quoction. He roforrod eo to
Cfco offieif 1 charnels via tho Air King physician and
Che -cdic: 1 Inspector to. This can ho oxplaincd by tho
i\.ct :Y t tlcro v. s - sharp division botveen t) a adnin-
lctr ti* o fluid and £ o f lold of tho scientific consul¬
tants, within tho nodical inspector to .

'Thus, thoio was within tho inspector: to proper, also
c. hygionics or.port wlo, s tho oxocution yont of tho
cliof of st ff or of tho flop. rtnont ho-d, dealt wi th
tho day by d 7 flow of hygior-ic actors, whjJoas tho
consulting bycionict only n r c .Hod upon to doal v/ith
spocial aclor.tific .•aeigjvontc, oxport opinions, etc.
Thoro wore no official channels botwoon tho consulting
h’-gionipt of tho cdicnl I. spoctorato :nd tho consulting
hygloniflt of tho - ir wine.

‘•Tho consulting hygioniet of tlo odicr.l Inspector to,
hrofossor iJoro, d .. ter IS’*' also Cliof '•' sician Ur,
Muhlort — » . ro in r.o way ray superiors, r.nd 1 v s net
their subordinate, although both, '.old 1 >rhcr rark
tt.cn I. They lad no ri^it to diroct or ouprvioo i:o in
any way. The consultant of tie ..ir win,- w s subordinated
sololy to its ^ir wing phyaioim,

“On official visits to lorlin I alwr.ys roportod
personally to , and h . 0 . discossiors wit!, tlo chiof of
tho Modic .1 Aor\*icc, tho dop rtr.crt h dr and tl o cub-
dopf.rr:ont loads, w thout tho consulting hygienists of •
tho Inspoctorrto, 'rofoaoor .,oco or Ur. "vhl.rt, tricing
part. If possible, howov r, 7 visited >ofosror Moso
also in ordor to c xch ngo viovs with ’ ir.. It w s not ny
duty to rooort to hin. I ro yarded tho visits *s a r.rttcr
of profession*1 court 57 . •


6105


IS April 47-::-s -7-6-.^.rrow-Int
Court :*o. 1


--- lv r & Von Sci on


Hr. President, I slr.ll rovort, zt r. l. tor purled,
to the iurt: r contents or tl is effid. vit. Zouo vor,
t tie BZ-X3 tii^e I should like to offer the next
docr_.ont in tho docunont book of Roco ich ia Roso
!’o. 7 vl ich wiilbococo Roso Exhibit Vo, 7. This is on
nf fi..vlt of Dr. Fcrdin:.r.d Hufclvrt \/l o re ropo.-.tcdly
•a-r.tior.od in tho -ffidi.vit w’ich I 1 vo just r rd. *his
cffik.vit bo.-.rs t’u Onto cf Tobru ry, 1 47. You ccn
find it on pf. oa 20 to 23 of ::y docit:o\t book 1. Tho
dr.to is tho 25th of Fobriu ry , 1247. C. nsidorinf tho
i.uportunco of this sv.ttor I should r.lso liko to r u;\d
t'. ie affidavit xr. p-rt.


♦


6104


~pril lS-L r -BK-G-1-Lass-r (Int. 2anal.r)
Court No. 1


HK. H-oiDY: Hz y it please Your Honor, this quostion
as to tho duties and functions of a consulting physician
in either tho ichrcacht or tho Luftwaffe, has boor, most
olcboratoly explained to the Tribunal by Profosscr
Hcndlos>-r end Professor Schroodor, and it scons to mo that
it is unnecessary for any burdening of tho record with
reeding tho fact th e a consulting physician did not hnvo
tho authority to issue orders as such, thi3 his position
wc.s coroly one of suggestion, otc. That is tho whole
point of taking uy tho tine here now with discussion of
consulting physicians and I fool certain that the Tribunal
is wall uwaro of tho posibion of tho consulting physioian.
Thoroforo I objoct to any further details concerning the
capacity of a consulting physician.

T.ie. P223IDH..T: Tho Tribunal has hud no opportunity
to ror.d tho affidavit. If couns-l for t:w prosecution
sgroos with those statements token by Defendant 2030
03 tho facts stetod in thio affidavit, there would bo no
uso In roading it.

LL{. H.u<DY: Thu Prosecution has no objootion to tho
affidavit, as 3uch, Your Hi,or.

JUIXli. 3EB2ING: Do you egroo, Mr. Hardy, that the
position taker, by this defendant and prior defendants
in rc^rd to the scope end authority of consultants is
a3 maintained by thee?

elk. H-iiDY: lio. Your Honor, the Prosecution does not
agroc. Huwovor, the Prosecution submits that these
details have boon fully explained to tho Tribunal ut
groat length and, cs a nattor of fact. Dr. Hand loser
submitted nearly a treatise explaining tho position of
consulting physicians.

JUDO- o-^JklNU: w. ich ycu say you do not agree with?

GI05


~pril 13-AI-BK-9-2 -^Lessor (Iat. K -1 r)

Court No. 1

MH. H-iHDY: .«o do not whole-heartedly agroo, no,

Yvi'jr Honor.

Eii. T..e objoction will be overruled.

Counsol nay road suoh portions of tho affidavit as ho
deons particularly rolovant with due regard to the natter
of tine.

DR. FRITZ: Ur. Prosident, nay I cake one fundanontal
ronark regarding this p rob Ion, bcoauso wo shall, in tho
futuro, often rovort to this natter of a consultant. Ho
is not quito in ;-:roonent with the statements nado by a
number of the co-dofendants or witnesses and especially
sinco ho is also responsible with Haugen in Hanson's
notions, who was cl30 a consulting physician with tho
Luftwaffo, he has to speak about theso natters.

Hi- f.fcSIDZlW: Tr.e Tribunal understand that, -
Counsol. That is the reason for tho overruling of tho
objootion nado by Prosecution. Counsel ncy procood and
road suoh portions of this uffidavit a3 ho dooms important
to his dofanso.

Si DR. FRITZ:

I shell at first quo to from P O o 1 of thutdocument,
roadlng the oi :hth sentence of Paragraph 2:

"Fron the outbroak of war until 19*4 I was consult¬
ing hygienist with tho ..ir Fleet P„ysici ji of .Ar Fleet
No. 2. In 19-.1 I boc.-r.o consult lag hygienist with the
C-ief of the Luftwaffo ~edical Services in addition to
Professor Rose and remained in this position until the
bed of the war."

I shell now road fro:. Pago 2 of th.t document, start-

ins from the third paragraph:

"x-rofessor Rosa was n.v-r my superior, neither in the

medical service nor with tho troojs. I was therefore not

6106


.» ril 19-iI-i3K-3-3-L-.ssor (I t. np.nr.ljr)
Court So. 1


his subordinate. .»s consulting hygienist or ~ir Fleet
No. 2 I was subordinate to tho ~ir Float Physician.

N-ithar did Professor Hose have cny supervisory power
over cy activity with tho Luftwaffe.

•'•/her. I bococo consulting hygicni3t with tho Chief
of tho Luftwaffe Medical 5.rvico3, I also had no super¬
visory powers over other consultants, and was not their
superior. Thera was no Luftwaffe service regulation which
obliged or ontitlod tho consulting physicians of tho
Medioal I- specterato to supervise thuir collocguos ocongst
the ..ir Fleet physicians. T;-, 0 consulting physicians of
tho Uetlionl I .spootorcto wore entitled to report person¬
ally to tho C.:i.x of tho Lu. t..-ffe k.dic.l 3..rvic-3. Sh«y
had to give their expert opinions on questions about wnich
they were consulted. They had no power to issue orders
end no right to sivc directives; they woro also not on¬
titlod to C3k for roports. They oould not carry out any
inspections without a spoclel order, because such in¬
spections would necessarily encroach on the sphere of
oonoand of on -»ir Fleet physician, who had his own con¬
sulting physicians.

"The ailitary rank bestowed or. tho consulting
physicians was to incroaso their authority in scientific
aodicul nett or s Li contrast to ciroy doctors and other
offices. For this reason, special regulations existed
for the .rorotion of consulting physicians.

"tly own reports, which I had to aoku as consulting
hygienist of ..ir Fl-ot 2, went through tho ..ir 3?loot
Fhysician, -van if th-y were designed for the Inspector
of the Medical Services. In the Luftwaffe no reports
•wore nado to the consulting physicians with the Chief
of thv. Mud leal Services.

6107


... ri 1 18-!-i-3K-8—i-Lesser (Int. rfcuaalor)

Court .’o. 1

'•'It can be assunod that ay reports fron «ir Fleet 2
vjoro also direct-d to Professor Hosts for his expert
opinion, for inf 0 r 2 . 1 tion, and for exploitation. Whan I
bccano consulting hygienist - in addition to Professor
Hose - with th . Chief of the Luftwaffe tiodical Services,

I clso received reports fror. consulting physicians and
other nodical offices sent by the office of the Chief
of the Luftwaffe kodiea-1 Services, with a request to ex¬
press r-y opinion, to nako suggestions, or to ooapilo the
experiences fra* r. largo nunb-r of such reports fron
various sourocs into o critic .1 con. lets roport. ..s
aentloncd above, this happened only very occasionally.

"I do not know how r.y views and reports wore further
utilized.

..hllo I was consulting physio ion with ..ir Fleot 2 ,
Professor .»oso ropoctedly mdc official visits into ny
sphere. They wer- r.ado on special orders fron the Mudioal
I;:speotoratu end the ..ir ?l-ot physician w .s notified.

Th- object of thoao visits was not to supervise ny
activities but uithor to lecture at post graduuto courses
for -.hysioians, or to 3ue personally the conditions
anongst the troops, and therefore not to be conplctoly
dcpond-.nt on written reports.

"I ccconpenied Professor Ho3e on only one of theso
trips, baoaU3o at that tine he was particularly occupied
with the nalaria probl-i. in th- Loditorranoan, and as n
specialist for tro. icel nmicine he had greater experience
in this special sphor- than I.* 1 Lr.d of quoto.

Uc. President, th- Defendant Hose pointed out to no

that ir. the ..ffidavit Schnoll, -<oso ^ocunmt Ko. 6, which

I reed before, thore is a nistak- in the nnglish copy,

sine- the word 'Luftflctt,." which often appears, w; ; s

6106


—priI lS-^--3K-S-5-Loss~r (Ir.t. Her/.lor)
Court No. 1


translated with "Wing". In ordor to bo correct ono should
substitute "Fleet” for V<in 3 " - ..ir Fioot - Luf tf lotto -
«ir Fleet. In the sa-co affidavit, tho runic ‘'^berstarzt"
'.738 translated vjith “Chief Physician whereas it should
be "Colonel, medical Corps.'* This is of some considerable
ic:portanco.

fHJ PKioID£ 2 H': It would be of assistance to tno
Tribunal if a corrected ^n^lish translation of this
document bo furnished to each n»nber of the Tribunal
for his docunont booh; also for the reserve copies in
tho off iocs of tho Secretary General.


6103


i April— DJG-9-1-toloy (Ir.t. Rrualcr ral vcn Schccn)

Court .'ic . 1

3T DR. FRITZ:

C Did yea participate in the eectinrs «-f tho consulting
phyGi elfins?

A toy I rccari: tWt the difference between *..inr ond Fleet
is ceepctent, fccccuso e bint; is in Gtrmn, Goschw&der, end i3
under c Cclcnd, where Fleet is under a feur or five at nr general.
The rank end authority cf the work in this office ccnsoquently
differ considerably toe.

New, about the taco tings, since t.nc ncctinrs cf consulting
physicians wore h«-ld as *cint Heatings cf the three ' ranches cf
the ' ohraccht, I wr.s -lsc appointed tc r.ttcnd these acetifies.

The second in l%2, tho third in 19t3, rnd the fourth in 19U..

1 -Iso visited tho Bootings cf civilian scientific societies,
insofar as a-ttuis dorlin with ay specialized field wore dis-
cuooed there. ,.t tho 4th raoctins cf consulting physicians in 19 44
in Hchenlychcn I kps the chdracn cf the action for hygiene and
tropic-l hygiene.

Q Did you have to erko any official trips?

.. Yes, I nr* criorod tc =:Jco cfficicl trips ’ey the Inopoct-
orctu, rnd I would do thin on cwn initiative tee, I wculd
r *- K '-‘ cgplicticn for the.. The purpose cf the trips was tc in¬
vestigate conditions cs.n^ the tr ;ps in order tc avoid passinr
juigser.t cn tho basis sorely cf written inforaaticn. These trips
were often connected with lectures. In the first years cf the war
theso trips were s. stly tc the theatres cf war outside tho Reich.
FriE the si Idle of 1943 the heedend problem wrs in the foreground,
bee-use I was primarily dorling with the manage r.sultin- from nir
warfare.

G Did you hr.ve rnj ether silitary duties or any further
rights?

« No, ny position was the snsc as that cf thcr consulting

physicians. 1 could net issue any orders cr instructions, only

G110


1- .»p ril-'£-DJG-9—2-ifelcy 'Ir.t. Rosier and van Schccn)

Court Ito. 1

%

frc= the end cf 19L3 cn was there onb exception. The section fer
fever therapy cf the Luftwaffe wr.s expressly under ay contend,
end I cculd issue ardors and instrueticns fer it.

0 Sow, if you found coy deficiencies during ycur official
trips as a result cf it, in ycur cpinicn the tr eps were in danger,
wouldn't you issue orders right thero end then in erdor tc help
reaeve, theso deficiencies?

A He, that wos net possible. If it were something very
urgent I cculd inf cm the locally competent medical cfficcr cf ay
opinion. Whether he issued ccrrospcniSn ; instructions was up tc
Ilia. If they tier*- basic questions I cculd report to tho medical
inspeotor after ny return end I cculd make suggestions which wore
then narked out as I have already doscribod.

Ct Did you havo tc -xcrciao super vi si cn ever the consulting
hygienist in the airfloot?

A Me, I did net xcrciso any such supervision. If the Modicnl
Inspectorate considered it necessary I r:-s sorely given tho written
reports cither sorely f.r ny information or fer ny knowledge.

In that ease ycu uoro net tho suporier of tho ether
hygienists cf the Luftwaffe?

A Mo, I was in no wry their superior.

Q Professor, tho quosticn regarding y.ur supervisory right
or ycur duty tc supurviso Frefesser Haagen was the subject cf
reputed examination cf F ref esse r Schnoier cn the part cf the
Frcsecuti-n. I no-, hen ycu the transcript cf the 26 cl* February
19A7, which deals with that point. Hew, if ycu will te^geed
on.ugh t leek at the nft-rr.ccn sc3si n ycu will find cn page 3635,
rrxi this is the Goman transcript, a quosticn pr pounded by Ur.
JfcHoney: "It was Keso's duty that ho w.uld have to be continually
inferu^d about experiments n this field, isn't that right?" and
rrefesser S eh re eel or' s answer reed, "Rcse, -.cc:n5inr tc tho direct¬
ives, which his Chief Mi; rke gave his probably concerned hit-self

6111


1C npril-iI-ZUG-9-3-— = -l:y (Int. Rader and ven Schccn)
Court Nc. l


tilth these research assignments," and then the cr-d cf Schrceder's
manor reads, end that is in answer tc the next question of llr.
McHansy: "It could only be dene in the nay that he only exer¬
cised this inspection by rdc: cf his s> pcricr." .md 2 an new
askinr y u, was it ycur duty te caerciso supervision cf research
assignments which dealt with your field of work, and furthermore
did ycu at any tine receive an erder, ft special order in order tc
carry out an inspection of the research assijrssonts either ty
Schrocdor cr Kippke?

A Tc the first question, nc. I did net even hevo the right
cr the duty tc supervise the r ctivitics cf the hygienists cr con¬
sult hygienists In subordinate p.sitiena of the Luftwnffo. Of
course, I id not h.-vo any such uty cf supervision cf activity
which wes net in the service f tho Luftwaffe, hut in their civil¬
ian positions, for which they received r.. instructions from the
Luftwaffe, but acroly financial supjxrt. Tc the secend quooti.n
I coast else say, nc. Neither free Profess»r Hippke, nor from
rrefesser Schrcodcr did I ever receive any assignment to inform
rays elf rjj tc the v luc of w.rk at a research essigssaont and tc
report tn it, and therefore I never dd so. These whe had tho
res j~rch assignments n-.do thoir am ropcrt3. If they roperted
orally I was net callod in. If they sent in a written report,
this report was, in a:st eases, nr d uLt, sent tc ue either
for ry attention cr fer ay credent.

1 Fr:fcsscr, will you please leek at tho transcript cf

the aernin session of tho very s : ~-_ dry and turn to page 3572,

•

and the f.U.T-dn* sentence nan he f und in rn answer made by
Fref so-r Schr trier, and I quote-: "Tho consul tin- physicians had
a right tc obtain inf Croatian.* ’Ahat do ycu know about this right
to obtain infCroatic n?

» This cxprcssi.n I heard f:r the first tine in Professor
Schrceder's testing ny. I d net kne- what "right tc obtain


1 ..pril-l^-DJG-9-i-i irloy (lot. R.-sler cad vca Schccn)

Court Sc. 1

infcrnaticn" aeons, Infcm>.ticnsrccht; I do n-.t knew any service
regulations c .-xerni any such right of the consulting physicians,
sx»l at least I never exercised any such ri^ht.

Q Mutt was ycur relationship tc the ether ccnsultinr hy¬
gienists, I awn according tc their rank end rgu?

" - t the beginning cf the war the consulting hygienists
with the -irflect, with cnc exception were all elder than I end
dsc ny sonicrs in service. In nest casos they had r. higher rank
than I did. I began M Cbcrrrzt d. r.cscrvu, rhich is equivalent
to a First Lieutenant. The ethers were dl Stabsacrztc, and Ober-
str.fcsarete, cr captains and najera. During the war this was
civ n.-ed insef r with the increase f a nusbor cf hy.;lcnists younger
crlle-.jucs wore epy .intod U such pcsiti.ns. That chrnced nothing
in cur ■ fficial relationships, hewever. 1 did net boccao thbir
superior. Only when I was prca.tod tc Ccnoraloret, r.rlgadior
Gonci«1, cn the 1st cf Itey 19 L 5 , thet is a woek before tho collapso,
did I boccnc a general hygienist cf tho Luftwaffo, tut that does
net ruean that cn the 1st cf Itoy 1945 I bocaao the superior of
the ether hygienists.

Q Mint staff was ct y,ur dispcsnl ir. ycur position as c.n-
dultin • physician?

A I ird ne staff. I had cnc and sccetine 3 two clerical
assistants, and I did net have any do.-uty. Th position cf con¬
sulting physician ir. tho Luftwaffe was lirdtol to the person cf
the consulting physician and bis professional kn '-ledge.

'* Did you hav-. tc lorl with my questions cf p.viaticn
nedicine?

i. Nc, I had nothing tc dc with r.viaticn aeiicine. This

specialized field was Ivor. special attention in the Luftwaffe, of

course. There were quite a nuebor of specialists in that field.

..s r special consultant for aviation nelicinc thorc wore special

deputies and also a c.nsultir • physiologist. Theso pe.ple > ere

GUS


1C


e-


urt Sc. 1


'If*. rosier *ad v:.- Scb.cn)


consistent fcr such questions, and hri t vide the vtt i *us fluids
enci- tr. coselves. I km net c:nccrr.cxi in this ns a hygienist.
Simp I was wcrfcinr for the Luftwaffe, cf c urao Iren personal
interest, I retd Dr. Ruffe Fcck cn aviation ncdicinc, end I
ronjjarly lc;kod at the .nnfasine Journal for a via tic n n.dlcino,
but J personally noa never colled cn officially for this n rk.

» Dif*- ycu yourself rrite any eaarya for the poricdicol for
avlotl.n acdicinc?

* Sc, ’ jC'usc I knw n-thing clout it.

Q Put you . noo vrct« r.n eeacy are jt the spread cf opidcedes
cn the train cf rir traffic; thi didn't have r.isytldr; t' ] C *ith
aviation nedicine?

) k 1 <&'• write such w. rrticic in :• Uxtbsck cn hygiene, but
thiai dees net bclcn,- tc eviction eudicine. It ia c specialised
fi.l^ rf traffic hyriono. This is a spread f opidoedo by .v,i p3
cr rill reeds. Hyri wrists and public hctlth officers evermore

Lotion irociictl dcpsrtr, with tJda question.

«•

J

i


Gild


Court So. 1

Li Apr -,7--10-l-2E&-e«hen (1st. Baaler 4 Ton Schoon)

^ Did reecorch aseiganents given by the kedicftl Incpector«to of
the Air Torco in the hygenic field cone under your supervision? I -can
the hygenic field now.

A. So, the hygenic research eseignrente v^re not under my tuvor-
vii' c ° ithor * Iatof * r M thc perone holding such assignments submitted
v-rhieg rom-rte, I wi generally sent these reports for qy attontion or
eoav-nt, et lwrst in the later years of the war, fron 19/,1 on. There
were very few fcygonie assignments in the Luftwaffe and thc oxocutlon of
the reolgnmonts was in the hands of tho research workers given such
assignments. I r.m not a.vrro that any kind of supervision vre carried
j ut over the execution.

V. If my such assignments were giv^r., svnobedy must have had to .
supervise their execution.

A. I tolievc that thc v.rd assignment »rs nisusod conoidcrably.

It is thoref.ro advisable to clarify what such r B assignment counted to
*nd what its practical effects ^r,. 7irct of all, at lanst in tho cacc
of tho hygiono assign:*.nts which I knew rb.ut, without exception tho
initlatlvo ca.se fron the nerson who reeelved thc assignment. That io,
th*. direct .r of the Hygenic Institute makes an nopllcrti< r. that he bo
given a ec-called assignment rb.ut a certain orcblon. Ir. uoacc tino I
ysulf fcrd tho German research association give no such an assignment.

Iku ^ rcr *' a was that I did not want to be dependent on tho approval
-f y president for ever;/ r.intr detail, but needed certain moans which
- cmld 4isp.se of by .yself without ary teauronueretic restrictions.

*ho roprovcl .f the research assignment was ncccsscry u • sccuro n certain
SUiS ~ 0Co >‘. ns supervision wrs oxtrclscd over thc use .f this qoney so
:r nc accounts had t. be submitted, which were also checked fron tino to
tine, end work reports v,r c demanded. If anyone had even imagined that
threu*^ approval .f such finrncicl suom.rt he wr 8 undertaking penal and

responsibility for cli of the activities of the ncr. to vhcc ho was
ivin,; assistance, then there vculd certainly have beer. r.o one who would
“v« undert-ken t. distribute this money. To stick to my own exa-plc, in


Court So. 1

16 Aor •i?-j{-iC-2-ZEi-rveckaE (Int. Easier & 7on Schcen)

1535 I received a research assignment by the establishment and maintenance
A es nnophole* colony at the Robert Koch Institute. The assignment
vp 6 signed and aocroYod by Professor Seucrbruck. Later he bccane head
- f th0 B >ecialltcd department for cc-dicine in the Reich Rosc-rrch Council.

I an firaly convinced tkot Gvhoinra.t Saucrtruch even teday has no idea
vhat an anopheles colony is, or vhet was done with it, but he knows who
I on. c e knows that I wrote successful pepera or literature; ha no
doubt assumed so because I held this position in the Robert Koch Insti¬
tute. : do not believe that Seaer’oruch ever read, anything *hich I had
written; thoroforc, ho relied completely cn the fact that the applicant
personally offered adomiatc grantee f r the olncoro use of this nenoy.

In any case I, as the recipient of such an assignment, was always con¬
vinced that by repenting this money I did not in any wry bocomc sub¬
ordinate and that the person givirv; -.c the aonsy a ecu trod no other
rights than the t of regular recounting rbout tho uso of the nonoy with
r report, and that he assumed n> other dutios toward no thrn to supply
thu nonty furnlohud at tho tiao precised. I have considered nysolf
responsibly for *rt I did.

s. ^id ycu tnkc orrt in giving reserreh assignments in tho Luft-
vrffo in tho hygenie fiold?

^ I wns not called upon to nssiit in giving roaiarch assignments
and. I never iedo rny suggestions for such research assignments.

v How wr.s thnt really handled! Hew wore those research nssign-
Mr.te really given -ut?

A. I cennot sty for cure in the Luftwaffe since I had nothing to
do with It. I myself never received -ny such assignment froa tho Kedi-
ccl Inspectorate -f tho Luftwaffe. 7ror. ry own general knowledge of
the wry business *rs conducted there I assume that tho applicant presen¬
ted hie application in writing red no dcutt orally at the same tine.
ilthiT he c uld have trken it to the competent section chief, which would

hrve bcon the b-st way, tut of course he could also express his wishes

.6116


Court So. 1

18 A ~ r -' 7 ~«-10-o-i=H-lecher (1st. sailer « Toe Schoea)

t0 th0 Chlof cf Steff  to Inspector^ personally, tat that v^ul d
hr-vo been detour because the this* h,d tc reach the Beetles chief
eventually, Tho Beetles chief «*i9d the cotter os tc the referent, If
tho letter hed sot already taen celled tc the confer once. It vb» ectu-
elly not necessary for the reforest to carry the natter through, that
could only follov knowledge of the .ugge.tlon., othcrvi.e there was
nothing tc work .n. Then, after tho approval cf tho application, It
vnB BOat ta the D «P^t>.ont 11-1 fa- ferd issuance and then to tho
budget group, *ich hod to take care .f attributing the nosey. Bcckcr-
7ro:/.Ln« so doubt knows aoro rbcut theee event, but thl. 1 . nerely an
Mtnnption on ny pert. He vin probably be able to nako r.crc exact
Bt''to..onta.

V '.'ere you not at all participating la those negotiations?

Sc, that lc obvious• So decide Mother Ir.fluonxa research is
important, the section chief, after the natter has bocn -.resented te hin
* y cn 03 * urt ' A « B act ntsd as export opinion free anyono olsc. Frou
19U on, I no doubt generally received inforcation after an a.slgnnont
hr.d boon issued: then. as. I have .aid, I received tho work reoerts; If
fAv voro received, I sc doubt generally received thon.

-'id you act hrve tc nek. any uttcraccoe about tho value of
that work?

A. Is scr.e case. I, no doubt, nade a eronantiry cn It vhen I handed
* r#? '' rt trck tut th0 «• fell vs: If. for oxa-plc, Prrfos.or

Kncrr rocoived a. subsidy f.r such research for work on a nobile drinking
vr.tor nppnratue, he spoiled for rad received this n.sigmont because for
twenty years he hrd v.rkod very specifically vith drinking water emos-

tl.as, water filter., and water disinfection. He was the exuert ra this
cuestl n and ooini-n was .f sec ,ndnry value. If Prrfessor rracen
resorted on hie work on yell v fever vaccine, or tyohu. vaccines, then
hie rep.rt was Justly r. rc inportant in the eye. cf the Kedlcel Insuec-
t.ratc than any cogent I night have nade. Professor Eoericg testified
here yesterday that in resnect t yeUov fever Pr-foss r Her gen w- B the


Ccurt So. 1

16 9 Hfr-10-4-iB»-fceehaB Cot. fiaoler iT-s Scfaoac)

-nlr iatoroAtl' anily reeo=lcd covert la Gamany lo that field. Haugen
vr. the aoet 1 p rtrot virus socialist la Gemaay end for this reason
received the subsidies vhich he applied for. These ocedlticas resulted
fr-a the aaturc of thv caso.

x. But In your letter tc Pr-fcse.r Kaegea. dated 9 June 1948. ycu
rro tolling Eergeo about his research esslgmeat, rro ycu act? The *e-
slrfa.cnt to vfcich he -bjccted - this 1 . Document .t the ?r execution 30 -

S36 ' t& U ! ^ 00 Dr *« 77 * Bocuaent Bock So. 12, Prosecution Exhibit
296. E-v r bout thr tT


Clio


18 *prll-.»-J?-l 1-1-Cc(1st. Tec :>caoa _cd ? l^ri


Court I

as thv. nrcviaua document 3C5, p_^c 75 :f decuucat book 12
zi tco Prosecution skews, ?r;f.= 8 cr a—gen XjI given n. soac li>-
forr-utloa out of frioadliaoss; since at w..s cot la Hvrliu act ir.
Strasbourg ac obrlwal/ took advantage of *„' 8 opportunity to ic-
^cir fc cow els business w« 6 ecnlc* -long. ^Soch brivf inquiries bout
official iu.ttvn arc proCloloui cv.rywhor. but they u tc equally cus-
tcu_ry everywhere, no doubt. I needed norcly to c„ll the par-
ticul-r doctor, chief or referent -d a_vc tee iaforaation la ono
alautc. all I gold ia.iho lwtt-r w..o ta^t tr.o co-potcnt rcforcat
vco oa u trip, and tc .t uw w uld -.v. to v_it. fa..t w..s just a anttor
of courtesy which h^nens every d.y. ra..t a .ope ..i JL-ost ever;- Keck
la natters involving perso^cl Si dr#, t.-.-t one got a letter fron
B4ao -cqualatuioo tr lavestlgutc • *e n.tUr cr ether, or to put in
r , od word with tec refore.it, tuck requests, of Sensible, I, of
c unc, took oari. of .lthough i r. d aotnia* to do with personnel natters.
I discussed t.*.c u..ttcr briefly by telcparao with the roferc..t or
c Hod c.i hi., per#5 r.dlr If I c.d aooothin* to do .t to- inopoo-
•oratu uny how ....d than I sent tho required infer- .tim to tho
..equal at unco.

••• Professor, tne ^r-c.cuti ;: ..ecusos you of oouspir cy for
eou.lttl.ig crl os of - crii-in^l n.turc t gotCwT vita tho root of

of the defendants. How were you connected with tee other defendants?

a. Sever. *,f uy co-defocd -~ts wer. unknown t . n. until tho

beginning of tae tri.a, either b~ a-ae. position, crpv.rs.-a. Shoeo

re Rdolf er adt, Popptudlck, bis.vs.ra, Hcoberg, Jr..ck, Eevea,

Bclglbocck, ’’orecray, Gberk-user, .jsd 7*.ec...r. J;- a-e and ol^ht

: know tarco of u.o., Ccaskvn, Coen .rdt -ad Piff. I hoi nothin*

1 do wit., t-o; eith.r cfficl .lly .r ota^rviso .ad I did not talk

• theu >r k.vc uy correspond .nee vita t.;tc. Zh .t loaves ciglit.

- --.cv h.rl Hr „dt, of course. Ho 13 a veil known pvrson.ait;* in

■ l9 •’ sitl .1 .s Helens Ci —issioa.r. Pvicc led so-diking to do

GilS


saw


18 ^ril-ii-JP-Il-a-Cook (Int. Ton Scnon and rosier)

Coart I

with ci- officially. There ia an ofridarit on the subject. Ihen I
hie tuice t-t public lectures, but did not aneJ: to hie. Professor
Handloeer I -cnov cecuuse of nis office. I c„d official connection vith
hia and his office, eepecially'frca 1944 on, I hud to get opinions
wner. they were required but these relations were not very oxteneive.

It ha; ened ver rarely. Professor nostocX was icr.ovn to ce as tho
3«..n of tno ..ediCul Faculty of the Ifni varsity of Jerli.n. I hud
corres ;ondeuce with nU. in Cutters dealing vitn the faculty and with loc-
tures. I ,".sw he w_s the office cnief with the heichs Commissioner.

I had. correspondence with hia orxe in tnis capacity on questions of
electronic microscopy, and I as sure I saw hii ut nodical locturoo,
o .t uside frui exchanging corrosiondence ve did not talk becauee
gvr.ar. lly ho stayed with tho surgeons -sd I st-yed vith tno hygienists.
Profoooor bc.-roedar was Chief of Staff from 1939-1940 and later
free 1944 on Chief of the ..edical Sorvice of tho Luftwaffe, and as
such was ny superior, as consulting h. glcniot, I hud official
uo woll as personal relations vitn hie. Xevertholcst, tno questions
'w °r indictment here w»n. ruv^r discu-eod ootve n uo before tho
coll a ;so. after tno collapse we were in the suae internment c*np
lor so~atiBo and tnorv ve discussed this on the Oasis of reports from
tho press. I cut ■'rofeoBor Jloae during tho » u r. .a fur an I recall
I tulhed t-. hie at ut throe tines personally, and Jccxcr Freyeing I
Xii.v in his official position as auxilary r.ef erent under Profoscor
authony, and later as nis successor, -’rofessor ’felts I saw twice in
life, cnce at the glider contest at the Shocn in 1927, tho second
tl o at tho Cold seating in lurn'o. rg, in 19 2 , vnen he held a lecture
on a .Inal eaq?eriaunts. os far as I icnov I caV i... ^levers twice. I knew
th..t ho was studying the problcc of removing salt from sea water by
chemical neons, b-c I, myself. n*d no oi icial connection with this
v:r.: and Kr.ev no dot-ils about his wore. Oar acquaintance -was so

3 ‘ i: i^i-l that, for oxasr>le, I did not recognize bis when I met

6120


15 -»pri 1-^-J?-11-3-Cook (Int. 7on bcaoa »nd idler)

Court I

hi • aero on.'. ho Sod torceiad a- th^t I hud aevn bin before. Professor
arugowsxy I knew -s <. lecturer for hygiene frea the jerlia i-.cdical
Juculty. 2hen I act til at largo Hygiene Conferere os. I Was at his
institute oaco when a dolousing _j->ur»tus was to oo deccnstrated
va oh ha ha' had developed. Professor i.rugovsky io tac only ono of tho
co-defondents vita when, during the v a r. I discussed the orobloc
of capericaatn oa huaua oeings. rh-t w-s following tho lecture of
"lag on the oxperi=«ats ut Huchcavald, out I snail cca* bacie to
th-t whon we discuss the typhus expcriucntr.

3ho Prosecution doacrlced tso sceting of tho consulting
physicians as a t;-picU gathering of constir-tors who Were going
to olan crises,  you have testified, you ycursolf participated in
throe of s ch Seotlngs. Vkat w„i your luprvrelon of these nestings?

a. 2h«y were absolutely t;*nicU aedical noetings of nodical
societies only in two resnects, furst, b-c-uso the auaber of par¬
ticipants W-S liliited, end th..t ouroly for reasons cf space, und
nuscrous specialised groups were called together for one nc.ting,
vhcre durln* peace tin*, gener-lly only two or threo spcci Jiiico
had to coordi.V-te their a. tings. Ctn.rvisc, in contents and in
f:m I naw no dlficrencc between tr.eSe -nd tne isual ncdic-l ocior.tifio
congresses.

3* Jut directives Were sot up, weren't tnoy?

a. rh^t is also done in civilian sodicU aoetings. Bicre too

it onions th.t ouch directives are set un and ecceotod by sciontific

BeCietiC3 as official, _nd t..cn tn oy are p-rsed .> t tho authorities

aj.d to tho logislutiv- bodies _nd then cicdi.ig .‘egulatlons are acdo'

frea such directives of tho Congress.

3. firing such Meetings there were lectures held on experiaonts

on huoaa beings in th. Cose cf two sections of e ;ch Bootings?

a. But is done ia exact!; tne e_ae * _y as ut public Bcotlngs

Of Bedical societies. I nyself be„rd lectures about exoerinents on

6121


18 aaril-k-JP-ll-V-Cooic Cat. ?oa &Choa and A-l,r)

Court I

huaca beluga at international sedtiag*. fh_t is a ajttor of course.
a t congresses, especially i=port_xt a„.tor arc r<»orte4, and experi-
-enta on bosan Owing* -:>. in gcncr-1 a-do only in cjc of nost vital
problco*.

. Jut hero vc -re concerned vith ooperiaents on nuc-u being
vac ver- conde-xcd to do-th?

I advise you tb..t only -t the reuort of the ucoting of tho
. ..-illla ;.odic~l «aooci .tion of ..-aillu, tnero you vill find a n-aabor
of similar lecture* on oi=il-r oopcriouitB on poraone condccnod to
death vho v«.rc not voluntcvrs tad also on ac-cnilcd volunteer*,vboro
from a uuroly etbiOal at&nipoint one could n.v*. diff^r-ct opiniono
about the dogroo of volunteering in vnlca t.io audionco voro of
different opinion*.

q. Ho' did you toiov tni* Judgpont of tno listoner* in that caoo?

a. In ay n^ny yc-r* in 2L*t -el- I attended a xrenoor of
iavcnutienal Beating* and Congrorsco. In tnc 7,.r Sast I Vac * on
Chairna.. -t ono of thee, lnco the vorc of tba *uvrloan Health «d-
siniotr..tior. in xillu «..* for .11 of u of the g.-o..tu*t laocrtunco
oclontlfic-lly. It wj, of eour»v, discussed in dotuil in circle*
of ap.ci.-lists, ..nd of course tr.c question of tho ©jouriaontul oub-
J-ct i* discunsod. lor cx-o-ple, tr.w question hov it cot-o* .^out that
at a cert-in tico 29 pooplo condcencd to dc-th jro c ort-lnly -v..il..blo
for rx oxperinvnt.

q, *Jhat p-rt did you yourovlf ol_y in those Scotian of tho
consulting phyoiciana at the nilit-ry i^dic-I .c £ uy?

3io role of a n-rticiuont and auditor, -a veil _a thut of
a lecturer. «y rrnort* on t-lari- -t tees-- rivetings, b- B already
oc.cn tuXer. into tee -.vidonco suctittcd by the Prosecution.

2.i. TRT7Z: hr. Presidont, in cy document bo ic aoac Ho. 1, I
h .vo rc-preduced sou- of the ’oriuted escerpt* fret ntctingc of tho
cusulting m siciar.s vhich haVw bwcu duly certified and aisultunooUBly

GI22


18 il-E-Cook (lat. Vca Scaoa uhd r_lcr )


Court Z

for tho convenience of the .'riounal I ^l»o ropcrduccd the Exaiblt
-o. 922 of tl.c "’roSwC’itioa, or rather docuacat bo. 922 of tho
■•roacc-tloa which !« acnibit -.35, which is oxccrpt froa tho
second worLc nesting 1942. The excerpts wnich I n_do vorc given
tho ambers aosv. doe-neat ho. 36, which is 2oso inhibit i 0 . 8; then
foao doe* cat 'Jo. 37, which will bo Sort inhibit ,lo. 9. I beg
yv-.r >„rdon, i.r. B rcsldcat. filese excorpts _ro to be found ia
m’ dccuueat book .-to»« . o. 3, I -eg your pardon.


Sl?5


18 April 1947 -IT-12-1-PKF- Or-sa (v r. £ch :.)C. .--l.r)

Court No. 1

IBS PRESIDENT: Will you . ivo us * rain those document numbers,
counsel, ’. ill you repeat those clocusent numbers -nd Exhibit numbers?

DR. FRITZ: We are concerned with Rose Document No. 36, which is
to bo f-und or. p've 21 and 22 of Docun.nt 3c-k Rose III which
*ill be Rose Exhibit Ko. 8. Then follows in the sane Document Book
the. following docuaont of the Prosecution .‘C-922 which already has
an exhibit nuaher and I should, therefor-, r.vt like to rive it another*

TIE rRESIDii.t: V.hrt is the Prosecution Exhibit Ik., counsel?

DR. FRITZ: It is Exhibit No. 435, 1 tr. President. Then follows
thJ excerpt froa the Second Conference of the Consulting Specialists
Rose No. 37, which will he Exhibit R.sc :»'o. 9, to be found on pages
36 to 38 in R.'so Docunont Bo k III. Then, as Riso No. 33 I submit
the oxccrpt front he R-p rt -f tho Third Conference East of the
Consulting Specialists .f 24-26 Ur.y 1943, to be found on pages 39
to 52, which will bocoro Rose Exhibit Ho. 10. And, finally I offer
as p.ooo Dtcuaoni No. 39 tho excerpts froa tho roport about a fourth
conference if th., Consulting Specialists which is to be found on
ragos 53 to 7? of the Document Book Rose Uo. III. This document will
rocoivo R Jso Exhibit K-. U.

HR. HaRDTx Uay I inquir- rs to nbother or not those four
exhibits, 8-9-10-11, arc froa the report introduced by tho Prosocution?

DR. FRITZ: Hr. ^resident, the Goraan Docuront Book III hts not
yet hour, ffltaect rephod, • t wy rate it is net available to us os yot.

I should, theref jro, like to ask permission that I should hand then
first to Professor Rose before giving then to tho Secretary General,
This is tho only copy I h-ve. No further copies have been .Tineographod
but r.j s>on ns Professor Roso is finished with it I shall hand^lt
to the Secretary Conor-1.

THE PRESIDENT: Y-u any use yjur copy in that manner.

»

DR. TP.ITZ: Hr. President -

TIE PRESIDENT: Of cours*, in using this Document Book in

t is manner at this tiro it U understood lr tor on that complete

c r>i -s will b_ furnished t_ th. Tribunal, counsel, and the Secretary

6124


18 April 1947 -U-12-2-PT?- Grose (von Schoun-3aa»lur)

Court Ho. 1

Goner'-l.

ER. FRIT£: Ur. President, tho Secretary Generr-1 already has then,
I think. They To alrvcdy in Gertts. Tho Secretary General his three
Gorann c pi-s Ter tfco 7rH.ur.--l. Unfrrtunr.tely, I haven't as yet
ricciw: then.

5Y DR. FP.112:

C. I b vo Just sor.t these excerpts to ycu cm I shall h’ve
D ocinent Ko-922 of the Pr.-sccuti .r. s-nt to y-u.

a. Thank you. It isn't n».coss’.ry I have it.

Q. N'cw would you please describe those excerpts to tho Tribunal
very briefly, in particularly, the exhibit suheitted by tha
Prosccuti-n.

A. Perhaps I can cte.ni> the ,M,r. This second nocting - the first
cootin.- wr.a iv:t very -aportont, tho first conspiracy in lUy 1942,

I nr.s not present pets n* lly but ny work war. aontioned on page 77
by Ur. RLauberg who rtfors to the work - ay work on the trnnsfor
of bacterial dysentery by flios. I aay remark that this Ur. Klauborg
is not identical nith, nor does ho h'vo 'ny connection with
Gynecologist Kleberg i.ho was reportedly aentiunud in tho
sterilization docuaonts. This Professor Klauberg is a bactoriologist
and is etill in office today with tho approval of the Military
Gove mao r.t. About tho aicood conspiracy tho Prosecution has
sutraittod ay rnl-ri". reports. They ore on page 30 >f this docuoont.
No, I beg your pr.rdrn, 30 of th. Docuaont Book, p'-go 3 of tho
docuaont. I spoko about the effectiveness of atibrino prophylaxis.

Q. ir. President, this is docuocnt >f Prosecution Ko-922 to
be found on p.ges 25-35 of Dxuaunt 3-k Rose in. PIcpsc continuo.
Professor.

A. In ay lcct'jre on y -o 30 of the Docuoont Book I spoko about
atabriw ircohylnxis. Thun I spoke of stlerin troatesnt doses,
malaria relapses, then I discuss the scientific question -f
provocations is. he course of trv'tzent. Then I spoke of the
sirrific r.ee f osOaria ir. blood conserves 'nd a self experiment is


18 April 1947 ---12-3-P5P- Grass (van Schoen-RAmlor)

Gourt Jfc. 1


referred to which one of ay assistants carried >ut which has a certain
significance in literature. And, then I Coni with oosquito control.

Ur socoix: lecture is this meeting dealing with tho eaatetinr of
anopheles by planes. Other participants in this mooting c^cnont
on ay lucturo. Ur. .kmk speaks of wh t I said about atr.brine doaego
and is kind enough to confirm tho correctness :f ay st tenants.

Thon Professor Rodervcldt refers to ay lecture and he says," hhftt
Ur. P.oso has stated about prophylaxis nd tho ropy of ar.lnria will
be fully confirm d by «v«-ry_ne who hrs experience in tropical do Icino,
otc," That was v^r y frionlly of Ur. Rodennaldt to support me with
his authority.

Thon in Document 37 on v ro 37 of thieDecua;nt B -k another
participant at too eeetinr, Profoss.r Hau^r, r-fers to my statements
and adds something. Thon farther down tho bccteri-1 gist Klauborg
again, who aeain refers to ay work n flies rd bacterial dyaentory.

Tho third conspiracy in Uay 1943 is on pa e 1.0 of tho Document Book.
Ihtro cro '.iscusaion remarks by mo - first tho experiments of tho
Robert Koch Institute is reported compared to what lir. Dootzor had
previously reported. Th-.t is Lp>rtant f;r a document in this trial.
Yesterday Professor Kagcn was nontionod by the l~wyor f:r Boakcr-
Froyseng.

Q. You moan Pr-foss-r H-erinr?

A. Yes, Profos3or Hocrin. . I bog your pardon, And Beckor-Freyseng 1 s
counsel asked Professor Hooring about a report which Professor
Hv.gon had had preperod on v ccinc for typhoid and cholera. lir.

Hoerirg had considered this report a model or a c-nspiracy report of
troop physicians but ho said expressly that th- vrccinc usol in that
case was soaothing quite old. Here it says, blrck on white, that
several years before at tha S3etirx ,f consulting physici'ns I said
that for six years this method had boon usee’ at the Robert Koch
Institute and that it was go do rally used throughout the world, Ihon
tho last rcoark to Ur. Hugo - the cuostico whether with ne single

inoculation one c* n b: vc the s i-a*. success 3 with repeatod inocul" tiens.

6123


18 «cril 1947 -K-12-4-PKP- Grose (von Scboen-aal-.r)
C-urt No. 1


i:.-n I report on scarlet fever rnd diphtheria vccine. Then I answer
the question free* Professor Schreibcr as to whether passive
in culttioa is advisable in diphtheria. I say, "Ho." And I point out
t.r.t it is f .r-idden in the .Luftwaffe while it was rce cemented
in the .ir=y :n ray request - pr '-of of the difference in technical
regulations in the various branches of the lehroacht. Then thoro
cocas another apeakor and it says zy objection to a certain
vaccine was wrcni. Ho says ho had good oxpurionce with it. Then
conus another speaker wh. soys "Rose is right." Then c^nes ray
remrk on Ding's typhus report. Thi6 printed report f thu netting
cent air s nly ..hat I said about the scientific significance of Ur.
Ding's exporiraonts. 3ir.ee I intend to Discuss Di;ir's exporioonts
in another connection I ah uld like t. : b-ck to thi s at ttot time,
r.nd also the rocark :f Prof.ascr Uhlonhut.

THE PRESIDENT: i&tooM, ct this tine the Tribunal will bo in
recess until 2 o'clock. You may then continue.


6127


Court 1 Iffl

April 16-A-15-l-KD-Karrow-Ranslor.


iiFTE-JXCr. oESoIOK

(The hearing reconvened at 1400 hours, ie «prll 1947)
T.-.Z IjiRSHaL: Persons In the court room will please
find their seats. The Tribunal Is again In session.

OERHaRD ROSE - Re6used
DIRECT EXamINaTION (continued)

3Y DR. FRITZ:

«*. Profosaor, will you please continue with your
explanation of tno excerpts from the meetings wi.ich are
before you?

a. Whon I stopped speaking I was dealing with Rose
Exhibit #10, Document #39, wnlch is contained In Document
Volume #3.

JUDGE 5E3RING: Doctor, Is It possible, when you
refer to the nunbsr In the German document book, to also
B lvu the Tri'ounol the number In the English document book,
or do you h ve before you the English document book?

^ i

WITNESS: No, I only hov^ the German document book.
The pages ore nearly Identical.

BY DR. FRITZ:

In Document Books 1 end 2, I h-vo exaalndd them,
and the pa 0 es correspond exactly with the G.rman text.

In Document 3ook 3 A neve not checked It yet.

n. I stopped on pa 0 e 6 of tnat document wnlch Is
p ge 45 In Document Bcoz #3 In the German os well a6 In
the English, (.he Interpreter Just Kindly gave me an
1

./ •* on- 13, therd is c remark about disinfection of

carriers of protozoa In the Intestines end my experience

V* i .

tv^eralnj. Its $ieatnent.

Then, ph tile next pa 6 e, tnere are c few remarks about
tne danger \v malaria


6123


Court 1

April lS-«-li-2-Hi>-Xarrov-.-ia^ler and von Scr.on.

to tr.w German population fros retarnin b mnlorla infected
soldiers. This continues for a number of po c ea. Thera
are aone renanca nedo rcout field lrtrinwS.

I fiiip p.-gea -*9,50,51, end 52. These are not rosaries
uada oy se. 'Je snail 1 tor use these excerpts non deal¬
ing with tno cound cf the indietaent of a-lerio.

Elis brings ao to Soso kxfc-blt *11 wr.icr. la .-toee
Jocuaent #39, to be found in Jocusent =ooic #3 on p- b e 53
in the Germed ce well as tno £n 6 lisn. .'e ore here deal¬
ing witn the r*ourtn .wwtin B of che Consulting Pnyalclcns.

At first, there is ». very detailed lecture by a- aoout
the causes of danger to health origlnrting fron aerial
y rfnre. This wna tno 1-ctur*. to wr.icn Prof-asor noorlng
already referr d to in nis te.tiaony yootordny. On p b e
17 of th"t ori t ln"l docuc^nt, or 70 of the document oooa
in th- Sngllar. as well as in the G-rm, the discussion
of tne professional groups of hygiene "nu troolcol ny^iene
-ru etortln b in walch I, nt tr.rt tine, v a cnolrann.

At first, tnerv "re ay Introductory roofrka r^g rding
jeenrol and Gix. Tnoae were thu two moat important JJT
prep rations wnlch were rvnll"blv t U: in Germany. Then
chore : re n number of lectures oy other aclo:;tist3 on
tr. t scae subject. On po a - 71 tn^re is - furtnur discussion
ton r<t on tnot auoject oy ao. On page 72 there is n
diacuofllon of tno lectures on delcuain b with Uj7 prep ra¬
tions. On p e e 73 there la r discussion of the laportcnce
jT DU? prepomtlona wr.en combatting the flee plague vid
•t few ren-rsa w..icn I a^dc r^gerulng the lectures by other
scientists with reference to the importance of Du?
prep r tlone when combatting bugs. On pn tt a 7-: there are
:eoar«sB r. b ord.n 0 diphtheria and sc;.rl^t fever vaccination,
*r.d or. p ges 75 and 75 there is c snort report about the


Court 1

«prli 18-A-lS-3-HD-Knrrov-nam~ler cc von Schon.

experiences we jade in the Luftwaffe with these vaccina¬
tions. On pa B e 77 there is another discussion remark on
the s-se subject end, rt the end of ny introductory
remarks, you find remarks about poppatne 1 fever which 13
sand fly fever. Then there is * remark made by mother
lecturer who refers to my reports.

4 . Do tnese four documents. Professor, contain
everything that you ever reoorted yourself ct these meet¬
ings of conaultln e physlcl. ns or everything that you
remarked during discussions about lecturers or everything
that was said about you or your lectures at these meetings?

a. Yes, I looked through these foux- books oxo.ctly-
p-ge after page - and x made excerpts in every case wnoro
I said somet..ln B person: lly during these meetings, or
whenever otner people made *ny remarks i bout my utterances
during these maotings. I can hardly imagine that I missed
.nythlng when going throug:. those documents.

Q. «t the fourth neotlng of Consulting Physlcl'no
you yourself were the Cn lronn in the Section for r.ygione
and Tropical Hygiene? Did you h-vo anything to do with
sotting up the program?

a. Yes, in coll-roratlor. with the competent referent
at the Chief cf the Wuhrmocht Jwdlcnl Service, and in
collaboration with n number of specialists known to me
with the competent Wohrmacht agenda-, I drafted a program
for my section. This program later had to unuorgo a few
alterations by tne *ehraccht Medical Service w..lch, in
effect, meant tnot n few subjects to bo dealt with wore
stricken out. In addition, after the meeting, I compiled
the excerpts and tne draft for printing purposes and
then transmitted it to tne referent with the Cnlef of

the Wenrmacht Medical Service for further working.

6130


Court 1

«crll l&-«-15-4-*U)-kcrrow-RaBaler-von ocr.cn.

i. Professor, I cone b~c£ to ay previous question
very briefly. You mean, of course, that these oxcerets
r.t--' hid everything with tru. .xcoption of your remarks
left were not print_d made after Jlng's lecturer
a. Yes, tnnt is whot - said wnon dlocuesing the
printed port very briefly.

t earlier meetln B a did yo- h ve any p. rt in
setting up the program?

a. i*o, in the cose of the three former meetings I
w s n*vt asicou to participate in wording out the program.
1 an in no position to give r.ny inforn* t «n ns to how
the procedure w s applied at that time. Tnat is, wr.en
I was Chairman ct tne fourth mooting t the r.y t lvne
section. Then 1 prep-red tne program as I considered it
:o be expedient. I received no directives, there were
no regulations, ns a ehalriaon I worked it out ns 1
would have done in the case of civilian (Meting. The
assignment for tnls lecture or. nrlurlr In in» case of
Che second neetln B I received alrectly from tne <«edlo-l
Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe. I don't know who at
ir. t Clue Inltl.t.a my boln B called u-oor. to lectjro and
jefor- ti; t -eeti., e 1 did ..ot know who els* would spook
j;ut or la r la. ..y utterances during tort mo tln B had to
■o adr. ted to what otr.er gentlemen sold about malaria
-bring that meeting. These gentlemen partly aado
p.miiar remarks which caused ce to change my lecture in

A

o dec not to make repetitions.

6131


Court I


13 -ipr U7-.i - 16-1 - i-K J - Icss-r (Int Ragaer & Van Schoen)

Q. Now pie030 explain briefly the contents cf wh t wont on in
the Hygiene Group under your chairmanship ot the 1th meeting.

». This green book containing the reports of the 1th Dieting
was made available here by tho Prcsc-cuticn and 1 as therefore in a
position to say that the record of t.ao Section Hygiono and Tropical
Hygiene ore in p r,os 159 to 205 of the printec di-ily report. The
throo sain subjects of this s.ction dealt with, first cf all, tho
cocbatting of insects, .specially by using DDT preparations whon
coirbatting insects. T:-.uSj wore reports .ado on thu basis of labora¬
tory experiences and practical e::. orloncea. Lectures held by those
various scientists oro found n p -s 159 up to 169. The second
subject doalt with tho results of physicians against diphtheria and
scarlet fovor. Only practical experiences and tho application and
results of those vaccinations on treeps wore reported on. None of
the lecturers was n nsober of tho SS, therefore no physician of any
corcontration canp was participating so tn t no exp-rl«nco# could
have boon reported about vaccinations carried out in concentration
carps. Iho third icain subject was t o itsci f jv.r (s ind fly
fever.) In tho green book this is found in pagut 197 to 205. Hero
only clinical uxpurior.Cv-s on the sick bed were ruport.d on its
practical corbatting. H,.-u ;ln thu us-, of DDT preparation wan put
into tho foreground. One of the looturord was r rofesscr Hcoring.

Q. Ht this lith tooting you aloe hold a lecture at thu general
3u33ion for all >articipants in tho opting, '.hat did this locturo
deal with?

n. Mien dlscessi . ioeasont I already mentioned it briefly.

Ibis locturo was tho results <f a year's work about dosages t health

suiting from aerial arforo. It contains qjr own observations. It

furtheraoro speaks about the evaluation of the exp^ri-nce reports

frea various groups of physicians ifco rur- -issi.r.jC to tho various

-'Gaos in crd6r t- study these questions. Furthermore, therein is

6132


Court I

18 -*pr li7-i - 16-2 - LOG Lesser (Ir.t. Ra-asUr ic Ten Schoen)

contained the r.suits of scientific papers written by specialists on
the sibjcct «.-ho were working on single problems in this entire
cboplox.

»nd what did you hejr at those nestings about experiments
on hunen beings?

a. I only hear*! tto lecture by Dr. Ding, which was r-poatodly
jentioned hero, which f.avc rise to sj protest. Hcwovor, I think
it would bo more expedient to discuss this matter when dealing with
typhus.

q. Did you hear th t other participants spoke .'bout tho
lucturcs of Professor Oabhardt and Dr. Fisch-r?

«. Ho, I s^s If was not present during that lecture, and I did
not hoar it discussed afUrwnris. robably I i wu#t have r^ad it
afterwards, in the form as it is printed in the report of tho raooting.

Ut that tin©, however, I did not notice th.t this was a question of
intentional infection- on hurdn boir-gs. Of crurs- today, ftor know¬
ing the ontiro ccimoct on, one Could poraaps conclude sc-xthing like
that from reading tho diaiy. At that tl-u, however, I dli not notico
it or at least I ov-rlockod the entire lecture because, perhaps fca*
reasons of time, I did n>t road nil tho lectures which were hold in
tho surgical section. I can nc longer say th-t today with any amount
of certainty.

r M . Did you hear Professor Holslcuhner at tho second .noting
of consulting physicians?

a. No, 1 did not her Holsloehnor's 1-cture during the second
meeting of consulting physicians. I only went to the Hygfonu Section
when participating in the cestin.v 'f consulting physicians and wag
not always present during the --noral acting. Those general icetings
I sometimes failed to visit in canes when th- subjects aid nrt interact
■a in particular and I had more ur-ont ~:rk to do cJs-rhero. For

instance, I sa etiaas used that epp rtunitj in order tc speak to a

•

nur.oerof hygienists who had just edae from tho Front tc participate


6155


Ccjrt I


%

13 opr U7-A - 16 - 3 - WO - (4t. R^aler - von Schoan)

ir. this mooting.

Q. Kow I ccqu tc the subject cf typhus. You are charged with
apodal responsibility for typhus caperinsnta in the concentration
camps Buchenwald and fets-dlor. H-aso tell the Tribunal first of
all, to what extent, in your professional training you cane into
contact with typhus at all.

.. During tho war of 1911* to 1918 1 sot no typhus whatsoever
sire. I was only oonulttod in tho »ost uh.ro typhus did not prevail.

If tor tho war, howovor, I hod opportunity, during oy studio, and as
on intern at Bruslou, to soo a few casos of typhus which, os a rosult
of tho war, appoarod in Silesia. In tho inatltoto whoro I received
=y first training In hygiene, typhus was olthor not doolt with at all,
opart froea tho oxocutlon of tho so-caliod ..oll-Koll* reaction, or I
was busy in onothor do portent, as in tho oao. of tho Hobart Soch
instltuto. During my yoar. in China I rocoivod practical contact
rtth typhus, bocauoo on =*ny occasions I was asked to holp in tho
combat of typhus, in coses of smU.r epidemic. *lch broke out in
prisons, in tho case of soldl.rs, or refugee coops. Thoso, howovor,
wore very rare occasions. C h<-ki=r., is south of tho Jangtsu and in
tho south of China typhus does net occur frequently. ..t any rate,
it sufficed to g.t tys.lf infected, .t th t tiuo I spent U weeks in
a hospital, suffering from typhos. iron a solontlfio point of view
not much was done on typhus in .ay institute hooaus. it pluyod no
particular port in tho province in which I was residing and whoro wo
had many iwro important parasitological problems.

5. Then during this tLuo y=u were connected only with^tho

practical combatting cf it?

a. I just had to deal with tho combatting and not * th the

scientific work connected with it.

Q. Did ycu became acquainted with any typhus institutes on your


trips?


6134


Court I

18 pr U7-« - 16 - h - UQ - Lessor (Iixt. HasElr & von Sehoen)

In Peking a Typhus Vaccine Institute was founded during the
ti-ne I was in China whore tfu. :eigl procedure was adopted. Hoover,

I had no opportunity to’ visit that institute. During ny stay in the
South Seas, that is, in British Malaya, I got into contact with the
specialists there about their work and about the tropical t/jfcus.

.ihon traveling thrash northern *«.xicen, up.n recomendation of the
Rockefeller Foundation, I visited the Rocky 'ountain Spotted Fever
Institute which is in Hamilton, Montana. There I was vaccinated
with the vaccine produced there. I locked at the laboratories; I
looked at patients located in a neighboring hospital; and I Ronerally
had tho local situations sham tc a® where such Infection® occurred..
During ny Journey through africa I visited the specialists at Pretoria
arel Johannesburg Kao had tc d*al with tick-bite fov^r, urdch belongs
to tho group of typhus.


6135


Court H.. 1

}6 «pr 47-A-17-l-SEbi-!caliy (let. Sanler a Yen Sch en)

v Were you especially interested is typhus et that ti~o because
you visited euch typhus research verkors especially?

A. The rickctsia, the typhus ricketsia, rrc the rv.st i axrtont
epidemics that exist. Durin,; ^y Journeys I took every cuo^rtusity ts
inf .rn nyoolf A the v rk done by isoortrnt researchers’. In that way,
for instance, I visited lsncrtent eninal tnidenical institutes although
I an net a veterinarian and is practice never ^-t late contact with nni-
ral epide-.ice.

After y-.ur return t Oorr.rny did y u w.rk with tyohus?

A. Set in the laboratory. When in ths year 1937 I t- k nvor tho
tropical denartsent of the Hubert a ch Institute, nc.bcdy in that insti¬
tute vns v.rkintf tn typhus. I&r decades such work vns carriod 'nit thoro
by Otton, vh: vrs tho enly oers .n In Ger any vh dealt with tynhus ro-
oonrch during tho nori.d between tho tv. ,yoat wars. Ottcn in the noan-
tlie hod left for Frankfurt where he continued hie work. Then in tho
year 1939 entr-versy ar.se between Gildenoistcr and Horton on tho ono
hand and. nysolf cn thv .thor. I had accented Profoss-r Ikdlor'o roouest

tc vrlto a few chaotors about tynhus for a now edition of a hygiene toxt-
t. k. Tho othor tv, gontleson accused M of thoroby interfering in
thoir co -.potency anc. thoy said that, ovon if at tho tir.o they voro n t
v.rklrv. cn tynhus, tychus at tho or :o tl-e bolon^od la thoir snhere cf
verk, viz., tel n^ed in virus research, and they said I did net have tho
riht to recoot ary euch aesifprient and f-r reasns of c rxndoshin should,
hrvo coded it t th .sc tv r ;entlo'vn who were kn vr. t be tho virus ro-
Boarch v rkcre in that institute.

v Why did irr fees r Ho oilers, who should h"vc kn-n that, cwie to
y u and. n t t* no f the .thor tv. ^entltf-on?

A. Hoollors was a ucrsonnl friend f ’lne and :.fton had. •:« toll

hir: of -y J .urneys. He vantoi that the lx tic Hicketsia be *iven sano
C'nsidorati n in that nev edition, whereas bef.ro only the Sur ocan llco
tynhus ha.d been d.calt vith.

^ Does na have t. be a specialist to write such en carry f r «•

6136 *


Ccurt Hi.l „ „ . .

16 Apr 47-A-17-2-I£X-Halcy (Int. Bader & V'.n Scfccen)


rwdlcal textbook?

A. One doesn’t have to be such a specialist for that. A terttock
intended for students is. as a rule, eulte brief, a^d It often tecenee
necessary that -ne vrlte rerely on the basis cf the study of literature
In fields where personally one It act a specialist. ?'T Instance, I
vrote articles In text*.oka merely cn the basis of literature regarding
SvUth American Illnesses although I never actually saw the • aid never in
ry life had any opportunity to travel In South *: erica. Shis is a phono-,-
onun which occurs in the case cf all scientists vhc arc siting textbooks.
At any rate, in a textbook cf hygiene for students the outfitting cf epi¬
demics is the npet Inp.rtent thing there rad I had considerable exncrl-
onco in the case «.f typhus.

v Thon during the last war did ycu have nothing to do with typhus?

A. Yes. *y first contact camo about when tho racial Germans wore
resettled cn tho basis of the Oernan-S-viet Pact in the year 1939. At
that tine I was entrustod with heeding tho health service in the Soviet
controlled territory •luce the resettlement started fron the ouidonic
typhus areas in eastern P-land and because thero vac .Trent suffering fer
refugees in theso territories as a result of tho war ir. 1939, and there¬
fore tho coubatting of typhus constituted at that tine our nain vorry.

■ v Then why vtre y.u picked ut a* a tropical nedlcal opeciallst?

Voro no specialist*available cn that subject?

A. Naturally there voro « few tyohus soeoinlitt* fron tho First
V ,rld War who were still alive but these gentlemen usually vero -f 60
to 60 years of age and. in addition, with the exception f Otton. had not
dealt with typhus for a period, of tvonty years. It cculd net be assumed
that these old gentlemen could spend, tv- n-nths on tho read in Buss la
in a cold of 40 degrees. The young gentlemen liko Iyer, V hlrab, and
Haagen know very much about the laboratory problem but they had no exccr
icnce in practical coc.bet. In the final analysis ve were not only con¬
cerned with typhus aline as to that resettlement, tut ve were c ncerned

with a migration of p.pula-ti-n with all their medical problems. I wb

€137


Court He. 1

16 Apr -J7-A-17-3-iBC-.i*loy (1st. Sanler iT.s Sehcen)

veil rxouainted with each refugee problems end ciap cuestiocs. Is Chine
I had each t do with each ness or-bleas is case -f floods end feninos.

At the eenc tl :e I had the advantage, >f course, of having teen Afflicted
vith typhus vnee and therofere not being in so mefa danger. These ~»rc
probably the rsaecns it was asked I be relived frer. the Luft'v.ffe for
these tv. nenths. I az p general hygienist freo the etnrt and only later
did I study tropical hygiene without giving un general hygiene w.rk. In
the Luftvaffe I vr.s the c.nsult/nt f r general hygiene and n t tropical
hygiene alone.

^ Did you w.rk in the lab ration tyohus questions?

A. He, I never dealt with tyohus research in the 1/borat ry. During
ny entire scientific career I never had ,ne ricketsie culture in oy
laboratory and I never or -ducod one c-.ntlnetor of tyohus vaccino oysolf.

^ Did you have anything to do with testing tyohus vaccines?

A. Hover in ny life did I aysslf to«t tyohua vaccino .r have it
tooted by one of ry collaborators or any other oort'n.

During the war in Osrnany state regulations were iscuod. as to
the tosting of typhus vaccine. Did y ai hive anything t do with working
,ut those regulations?

A. Ho, nothing whatever. I never perticioated in conferences con¬
cerning these regulations, n.r vrs I invited f oarticiorto. I novor
gave any oxpert opinion about thej. I knew such regulatl ns existed. but
to this dato I have not seen thes. Sir.ce I never oartlciortcd In thooo
conforoncot, I do not know for certain who it vp* that v>rked. out these
regulations although I could nako sons assumptions oince I knew who in
Germany actually dealt with typhus.

^ But Kr. hcHeney called y u the cl-sost collaborator of tfrofossor
Gildonoister in conaooti n with tyohus vaccine, cn oego 1176 of the Ger¬
man transcript.

A. That lo a very erroneous aseunoti-n on the oaxt f Mr. hcEeney.
It is entirely incorrect.

IS. Jr.ITZ: kr. President, I w.uld like to offer two affidavits free

6133


Court So. 1 _ ;

18 Apr 47-A-17-4-i2i-rteloy (let. Ranlur a Yob Sefcoen)

S-bo Docoaont Bock So. 2. That i* Dccucent 16 on page 1 to 5 es P.c»e
Zrhibit 12. This is an affidavit dated Fetruery 3, 1947, by the proaont
director of the Robert Kcch Institute, Gehointr Cberrzedirinalrct Prcfos-
eor Dr. Otto Lentt, Berlin. I should, like to read this affidavit chin¬
ning with paragraph 2 -f pag* 1:

•Pr.fesaur Boa* w's n<t the 'typhut eroert' of the Robert K -ch Insti¬
tute ncr did. he v^rk cn typhus there, tut he vos the chief of the Dcpnrt-
nent of Tropical Kedicine and vas in this capacity, vith the except!'n of
one retoarch Jot about the trenanission dysentery end typhus taecllli
by Insects, exclusively cncemed vith tropical disersoo and. health
parasites (insects). She typhus oxport of the Institute was rether
Pr.feosor Easton, the chief of tho Virus Deoartnent. Aftor his depar¬
ture following his appointment to the Chair of Hygiene at Strresbturg
University, Prfoirr Gildcr-elster. then president of the Inotituto,
continued, tho roscerch on typhus.

"Thus various physicians, aa.ng ther. Dr. Din#;, received iuotruction
on typhus froo Professor Kangcn in the Ylrus Departr^nt. but net fron
rrofosoor Rose.

"Oving to tho destruction by air raids of r.any of tho files tf tho
Robert Koch inotituto, I can no 1-nger ascertain vhethor Profuse r Rooe
vrs associated, vith regulations for testing typhus. Several of tho r.cn
vho voro rt that tica dooart.xntal chiofs, howvor, assured no unar.i-
n.usly that this had not boon tho case.

"Professor R-.se wi nevor engaged in the ureparation of yell v fovor
vaccine at tho K.bort Koch Inotituto, either. For, nlth u^h yellov fovor
is a tropical disease, it v as dealt vith in tho virus denertrunt, as it
Is caused, by a virus. The specif 1 installations noccssax?- for nodern
virus research, such as. for instance, a high vacuum uu=o and an Intense
coding installati.n, did not exist at all in the Department of Tropical
Hodicine. Research work on yall' v fever too at the Robert E'-ch Instituto
ves in tho hands of rr .fesscr Haagen until 1941 and. aftervards ir. the


hnnd6 cf Professor Gildeneieter.


6139


Court Be. 1

16 Apr 47-A-17-5-l»-Hel y (let. Heeler & Tee Sch.cn)

■The rentereh on hepatitis et the Hebert Kech Institute vns also
exclusively curried cut toy the Virus Deoertr.ent (Hee^en-Oildcr.oistcr).
Thus Statoscrzt Dr. Dcaen vps detailed to Gilder.eister 1 e denar treat and
he is not knevn tc- have bed any ccanecti ns vith Profess r Ecse rr vith
anchors of the Departnent 'f Tropical Medicine.

"Finally, ncthins is kn'vn of Professor P-ose'e bavins had the
opportunity t toe nvare of Cehelnrat L clcenann's chop.'■-thorapeutleal


1C April—A-DJG—IG —I- fccbcn (Int. ?-*alcr - v:n School)
Court Kc. 1


(Chccctherapy cf cbdooinal typhoid with Otrhcain.) iho only re¬
search cn abdcr-ir.rl typhus carried cn in h-so's icp-rtnent ccn-
siatud cf the experiments cn the role, f the h.use fly in the
trrnsaissicn cf dysentery caused by bact^ri: and cf cidomincl
typhuw.

"I pn the prosont Director cf the Rcbort Kcch Institute in
Berlin."

Berlin 5 February 1947

I hen fellows thj si rvturc end certification. Doctor —

A Ucy I shortly interrupt? Cn Page 2 cf this Document in
the English Document Beck, it sr.ys end this is exactly hew it was
ropd by the interpreter: "hhothor Frefoos. r Reso w“s associated
with tho docisi.ns taken cn typhus experinent." 1 nay point cut
to you that it says in the Gemen original Document, "Whothor
Frefesser Rose had s.-xthing to ic with the re ulaticna f-r U3ting
typhus." Rocul-’.tions for testing refers U tho steto r ;:ulr.ticn
fer tho testinc cf typhus vcccir.es, cfceUt which y.u raked no n
few Ekfflta.ts age, wherein the English translation hero awakens tho
inprossicn ns if the R ;ert Kcch Institute carriud .n nogotiati.ns
oixut typhus experiments. In the English translations f tho
Document Beck? there rxc r.clly very surprisingly few orr.rs, but
unfcrtunntoly there is e ndstako here or. a very decisive qucsti.n
rnd I think cn cfficiel c.rrccti.n will have tc bo n*do.

THZ FRESIDEiT: Ropoat that slcwly, ‘will y.u?

THE brr.’ESS: This is Fere 2, fifth and sixth lino in tho
English beck end in the German fcc.k it is the secend pago rnd
the sixth and seventh lino. 0

JUKE SEBRIX: Reed, if you please, whet ycu think thu
correct English tx-nslnticn should be.

IKE '.J 7 NESS: According tc py kncwledgo cf Sn lish it should
read, "’.h other Prefesser xJeso t ;k part in setting up regulati ns
fer testing, regr.rdir.- typhus. roguL-tiens fer testing re-vrding


IS ..prU--.-DJG-lc-2-.Iechan (int. Healer -von Scheer.)

Court He. 1 _

typhus.

If). HARDY: Ycur Hener, aay I roquest whether tijc Interpre¬
tation Deportment in the court rccu ccncur with Dr. Rcso's inter¬
pretation cf this scntenco?

THE INTERPRETER: Ycur Hener, if I o.uld look at the Goman
Document beck I ceuld tell ycu.

THE 11THESS: I live as trwiale-icn: "lihothcr Frefesser Rc30
tcek pert in setting up rofulaticns fer testing ro^ardinc typhus."

THE INTERPRETER: Y ur Hener, 1 think this sets t. be a
correct translation.

JUDGE SORING: The one su ajestod by Fivfcsscr Kobo or the cno
appearing in the beck.

THE IWTfflPRETQt: The cno surgested by Preftss.r hose, Ycur
Hener.

JUDGE SEBRXNG: ..ill the. witness read enco mere his version
of the translation?

THE i.ITNESS: "•..bother ir.fvSacr Keso to.* part in setting up
roguatiens fer tcatin regarding typhus."

BY DR. FRITZ:

Q Ir. this connection, I an eff-rin*: the felloirinj Document,
Dccuncnt Deck Rcso Me• 2, He. 17, a R:ac Exhibit No.13. This is

an affidavit by the Ro L darungs-Uodizinalrnt, Dr. rinil Whlrnb,
dated 11 February 19N7 tc be f:und cn paces L and 5 of tho Document
Deck Rose Me. 2. I should like tc reed thi3 affidavit into tho
record; cn pare cno starting fr:a the oeccr.u par a raph:

"I xes fcmerly a scientific senior assist: nt t.ith the State
Institute fer Experimental Therapy (Paul Ehrlich Institute) Frank¬
furt cn liain, and I -_u at present in the capacity cf epidemic lc;dst
as hcpierungs-Uudizinclrr.t (Government Lcdical C-unscl) in tho -iin-
istrj cf Public Health end V. elf a re cf the Fr vincc of Li*or Saxony,
Hanover.

"Frcfvssr.r Rose ras the department chief cf tho department

6lU2


1C «pril-A-OJG-lS->Joah?ji (Int. .irnler -von Schccn)

Court Kc. 1

for tropical nedicinc cf the Robert Kcch Institute end was never
regarded among German scientists wbc worked on tacpcrinmntal typhus
research in the labcmtcrj, es a typhus expert of the Robert Kcch
Institute. I was oyself a scientific assistant r.t the Hebert Kcch
Institute in the year 1935 and after that I was a scientific senior
assistant at the Ehrlich Institute at Frankfurt cn ifcin, and I knew
that in both institutes, for reasons cf £ccd cellefcornticn, special
rcaorreh was in each particular case undertaken by one department
alone, unless there were special werkinr. rr.ups. Typhus research
at the Robert Kcch Institute was carried eut by Pr fess.r Gildo-
moistcr, whe started the research tegethtr with ?r:fcsser Haaren
r.t tho beginnin- cf the war. H; expcrlnuntal scientific work by
Prefosser hoso about typhus problems has c • •

This statement dees net refer t. Prefesser iicso'a activities
in tho field cf thu goncrrl campaign against typhus, to which ho
nest probably had t attend within the framework cf his activities
as a nodical efficor." It is datod H*-ncvcr, 11 F-brunry 19A7,
then follows th« si rvaturo and certification.

Frefess r, in the -ing Diary cn the first pa o a session
cf 29 Doe sober 19 LI is mentioned :o tho Deotin • frea which tho
Buchtnwald experiments originated. In that a otlnr. ycu era r* t
mentioned ac a participant; but the i resv-cution has submitted cn
affidavit cf Kaoc Dictsch, whe wes repeatodly described in tho
Documents as a murderer end the was werkin - in Block U6 at Duch-
enwald, wherein ycu aro cent! coed as c. participant in that i- oting.

Then Kape Dietsch s"yo, h- sorer, this o.ttinr tcck placo in .’J.vonbur
cf 1941. Did y u ever take part in any ruch aectin in Novoaher or
Doc enter cf 19U. end if not, did you hear alcut any such emetine
tcJdng place?

A ^t first, tho question cf a& perticiprticn: I neither was
present during this mooting cf 29 Decoct or 1941 «Kr can 1 raaMfcer
tv-.r having pcrticip-.ted in r meeting which dealt with typhus at

0IU3

_ __


1C April-A-OJG-lfi-4-iioohan (Is;t. Rader - ’• -- -=
Court He. 1


all, that is one during which the Under Secretary of Str.tc Crnti
and Goneralctorstabsarzt Handlesor participated together. Any
such meeting whore these two highly played chiefs were present
would have been a big nffeir, which 1 could hardly forget, be¬
cause n<- thrt tiac I won only an Cterstabsr.rzt, ;.t any rate, the
record cf the neeting cf 29 Dectcbcr 1941 is available as Ex-
hilit He. 454 fer the Prosecution end it bvc.ees cope rent from
that Document that I was net present.

It says there that the Robert Keen Institute was represented
by Professor Dr. CiV.eauiatcr. Kr.turdly Airing tho c urao cf the
years I tcck part in many meetings shore typhus was discussod, but
I an quite sure that I never tcck part in r. mooting which had tho
alleged ccntonts cf tho meeting which is ncnticnod here.

In addition, Gildoaeistor when at first tclliru: no about tho
plans fer ttuchcnwcld, and that was at tho beginning cf March 1942,
ho never tcld no Anything about semo such nectin.. Ho cnly said
thrt Cent! was tho ono thrt wrs representing that pirn. In tho
orcc wry, Centi, during ny lccturo aftor the visit tc i'uchenwtld,
did not acy anything about any such mooting cr about any particip¬
ation of Profossor Hrndloscr. „t that time I crnsiocrod tho whelo
matter a*.nothing tc Lo dealt with by tho civilian soctcr rnd this
ern els bo soon from tho feet tr when I turned rith ay objection.
If at that time I had hoard cf any participation cf the a ray, I
c rtninly w-uld have gono tc Gcr.,rclcb«rstnt5->rzt Dr. Handloser
with my objections; even theu-h I was net subordinated tc him,
this natter would ha.vo been iapertent enough tc mo tc p,c tc the
chief cf an ther section of the arsed forces, end that I did not
do this, which proves very dourly at th-t tiae I was cf tho
opinion that the army was net al all participating.

5lW*


13 Apr—A-iS-19-1^-Puttjr (Int. Rosier)
Court No. I.


» *


Perhaps I rty new point out that the names cf the participants dur¬
ing that mooting in both lists were obviously compiled by persons who
did not lave sufficient knowledge of the Berlin jiinistorial ccapoton-
cl«.e and personnel relations as they prevailed at the end of 19bl. I
know the situation as it existed on the civilian as well as the military
sido, and looking at those lists, I notice a number of discrepancies as
fellows: Schroibor at that time was not at all with the Amy I&dicnl
Inspectorate, that is, on the 29th of Doco her, 19lil« He at that time
was tho hygienist with the Arqy Fhyaician. In this capacity ho re¬
presented Handlosor is a ■Hoorus-nrzt" whenever ho wont to 3orlin from
headquarters. Therefore, daring tho ontiro tiro in question, it never
eccurrod that Handlosor and Schrciber appoarod in Berlin at the same
tine.

In Dr. FTofossor Hndlosor's tostinony I vaa quite surprised that
ho didn't refer to this fact of which ho must be quite well mrru\,. At
least one of tho so two gentlonon was at all tinos in hoadquartors. A
Berlin neotin at j ^^ty ^of 19U1 with Schroibor and Handlosor togothor
as participants is quite impossible. In addition to that, I nay point
out that, in particular, at that particular tire in December 19hl| the
terrible pli.ht prevailed in tho Ttdical Service in Russia, to which re¬
peated reference n-.s nado in this courtroom, and it follows from that
that tho hy^i-nist with the Heares-irzt cort-inly had other worrios than
intorforring in the business of tho Army radical Inspectorate, which was
conjxtent for ary such question dealing >ith typhus vaccines. Schroibor
only later boc-.o the Chief cf the DoportTont I. G., and it was tho nat-
t.r cf this Chief to accompany tho Army udical Inspectorate /hen doaling
*ith such matters. Oeneralarzt ..uellor was tho Chief of I. G. in the
yuar of 19lil. The hygiene referent who also should have b«.cn present was
Cb-.rstab3-.rzt Schmidt. Hia representative was Cberstabsarzt Scholtz who
is also mentioned in the record of the ;ieotin.~ which actually took place
on tlie 29th of December, 19hl. The nest capable typhus oxpert of the
..ray was Fr.fossor By or. The consulting hygienist of tho Amy at that


18 Apr-A-3-19-2-Futty (Int. R-nlar)
Court Ko. I.


tino was Professor Sartorius. Of all those gentlecen who reasonably
could have be-.n expected to participate in such a ueeting on the 29th
of IV.cer.bor, 19lu, not one was raantioned. Of course, it is quite
thinkable that anyone who knows of tho important position which Profes¬
sor Schroiber hold one year after that would make that mistake if recon¬
structing any such netting and would, theroforo, list his as a partici¬
pant.

The second point I want to nention with reference to tho civilian #
sector is tho following: Undersecretary of Stato Conti, naturally, would
nover havo visited any such netting i/itbout being accompanied by one of
tho throe raforer.ts. These reforoats, however, are left-out in tho caso
of both lists.

For Roitor ns well nsGildcnoister did not belong to tho Ministry
but rather belonged to Roich Institutions, or Reich ngcncioa, which woro
outside tho :iiniatry, agoncics which had no executive duties but gavo
only scientific opinions for tho bonofit of tho highest Reich authori¬
ties. In that connection it nay bo pointed out that Profossor Roitor
wnspresident of tho Reich Health Office and had nothing whatsoover to
do with vaccines. For vaccines and infectious diso-sos exports of tho
Robert Kcch Institutes ware always used. If, however, theso experts
woro usod far such a netting, always at loast one of those throo rofor-
onts was present, aa during the -actual confor-r.cc on 29th Dcccnbor 191*1
Frcfosscr Biebor is mentioned as boing in chrrgo and ho was tho oldest
one of tho so thr-c referents for opido.ic questions.

Thirdly, referring to ny cam person, Geraral-Ob-.-rstabsarzt Hand-

loser at the end cf 1941 had not yot been tho Chief of tho 'fehnajfht

-iidical Scrvico. Therefore, ho could only represent the .bnay and not

the ‘..chr- acht. Hcturally, a conftreixo of the Ministry of the Interior

without tho participation of tho other branches of tto T-'ahr.aacht is quito

assusn'ole. If, however, you invite tho highest level of the health

authorities of the nilitary and civilian sectors to any such nestings,

and if, in addition to that, you invito tho Luftwaffe, then certainly one

6145


13 Apr—A-i3-19-3-*?Qtty (Int. Hanl^r)
Court Ho* I.


d. ua not invito the consulting hygienist of the Luftwaffe but the nodical
chief of the Luftwaffe. He would either appear in person or he would

e. :d his chief of scoff os his representative, if te for sene reason
c old not cotm.

It is possiblo that ho would bring his consulting can along* but
ho cert-inly wouldn't send hie along aloro, in particular since ho only
holds the rank of an Oberstr.bs.arzt.

For tho other pirticipants in this oooting know very well that this
consulting uan has no oxccutivo functions whatsoovor and, therefore, it
not at all in a position to onto ny binding state rants during any such
rooting uters responsible chiefs are debating; firstly, becauso ho has
rvo oxccutivo functions; secondly, because as a scientist cannot overlook
the possibilities as thoy refer to executive questions. In addition, in
asking tho Luftwaffe to participate alongside with tho ..r.-y, it was al¬
ways custoiiary to invito tho Navy, too. In tho caso of both lists, thoro
is no rontion at all :.ado of tho Hftvy. Considering thoso discropancios,
both entries rocoivod a stacp of improbability.

(\ In any caso, you hoard nothing about a meting whore tho testing
f vaccines .at 3uchon*ald was supposedly docidcd upon?

A No. Noithor did I personally toko part in any such rooting,
nor did I at any tiro hear of any such rooting. Tho rooting dated tho
29 th of Doceiabor, 191*1, a record of which was submitted here, only
caao to 'iy kncvrlcdgo owing to tho docuront of tto ft-osecution.

Then how did you ccoc into contact at all with the testing of
typhus vaccines on human beings in Buchonwaid? Tou were in Suchonwald,

m»ren*t you? •

A Yes. On one occasion I was thoro together with Professor Gildc-
ceistor. This visit caro about in tJv. following manners when visiting
tho Robort Koch Institute, probably in oarly : .arch, 191*2, I spoke to
Professor Gilda.fi istcr. '.ben mentioning what period of tine it is, I
have tc state that this is a more estimation on my part which is givon
support by tte statements made in the Ding Diary. I know the difforonco


IS Apr-.i-i3-19-ii-Putty (Haaler)

Court !Io. I.

; tl.:c . hen I hod ay conversation with Glidesistor and cy visit to
Bucherorvld, but I neither know tho exact date whan I was in 3uchcnwald
nor do I kne* the exact date when I had ry conversation with Oilde-
-tistorj and if I em now saying "early in Slarch", I on only doing that
because I assuao that thie date is correct, naacly, tho 17th of -vorch.
ftnrevor, I don't know.

Professor Glide.*istor on tho occasion of this visit told no that
upon investigation of Dr. Conti, tho protective value of tho various ty¬
phus vacciivis was to be tested by rstfcing oxporiaonts on huaan beings at
Buchonrald in tho vicinity of .birar. Ho said that tho reason for thoso
experinints was tho difference of opinions on the part ef tho oxperts
dealing with thet question which could not be ever bridged regarding the
value of tho various procedures of production.

Gildenoister said that tho oxForinont* are to bo carried out on
crirdncla who had been condomod to death. I was very surprised at
hoarin*. that, and ijapulsivoly rejected that plan. I offered ny opinion
to tho ofroct that this plan was not in accordance with what should bo
used in tl» ease of vaccino procedure. It ms not in accordance with
the tradition of vaccino prcccduro and in addition to that I thought
that aniaal experiments wore completely sufficient in the ease of typhus
vaccino investigation.


16 April--*-GJ-20-1-Cock-(int. Rasalcr, Vcn Schcn)-
C'urt 1

I was rather iadicnant an;'. I said if this procedure was to
*-v custcc w. could hand cv-r tc on cxccutirn.r all cf the immunity
scUnc. cr a 'epartaent fer -xccuticns at cur institute. GildenLister
cviously ms rather indignant iboit tho saverety of my reaction since
ur . erscnal relationship was net friendly. He told r~ that he had been
invited tc lenk at hew these experiments were pre rtssirv at Buchon-
wal an:' he said that before sakin any utterances of that nature I i
should at first ccnvic- cysclf exactly whit was happenin. there an! how
it was hai\ enin there; a-i he soil ho waul! see tc it that I would got
peraissicn tc .-nt.r th. car*> in cr '-r to look at it. h few hays latur
he tolophon-l nu and tel st the date :f the Journey, as well as that
he ha ot permission for o. tc enter the canp. Gildea-istor neitn«r at
that tine, nor en any th-r occasion, tell ns that he was actively par¬
ticipating in the planr.in; and -xccutic n cf tho experiasnts.

Q Did you accept this inviwtian?

a Yes, a few hays after this teleph- ne conversation I to k
a train tc -lair U -th.r with *r feeser uildcacistcr an' froa there
went tc Euchenwald. by ear. Fere w. were lea ’ thru h the caap by a
hysicim into a hospital which w is Serrate' ;y set,, barbui wire. There
«e vere lead throu:h a nunl r cf stati ns. I '.n't know the none cf tho
physician or the na?os3 cf any ether p.rscnc who w.re introducoJ te me
at Suchsnwal', I cannot rcasahsr. I insure h.wever it was not Dr. Din,
'-..cause it was sail that h- had infected himself while carryin. cut
these experiments an hr..' fallen ill f typhus. The acccaponyin* physi¬
cians s bated that the in.'ivi '.ual :*r-u-s had been treated with a number
®i typhus vaccines an. w-re later lnjcctc * with typhus viru3. He said
that ne roup wa3 infect_c' witheut prcvl usly bein. v accinctcd. The
patients cf the rcup that was n~t vaccinate! sale a v.ry ill impression
The entire statics represents a picture f a typical stiti.n with pa¬
tients who w-re suf -rir. fr a SeV.rc typhus. The ;nrr.l laercssion in
th- cos, of ether stations that -f less ill ;atisnts. In th- In'; c rat ary
n-r 3h wn the fev.r charts f the In.'ivi dual .tient. There the dif-


16 .»pril--.-GJ-20-2-Cc _k-(int, Haokr, Yen Schcn)-
Ccurt 1

•*-rcacc -f tiic c curse cf th- illness-.with cr without vaccination cculd
easily be recoi.nize! fren lc-kiiv; at these favr chart;. Since it is cx-
tr ... .ly ifflcult to cooaprc 110 fever charts Kith on- another, the indi-
i ttal charts f the various .-jroups were sunaarizc ‘ in rdtr to,r-p:rt
the av-ra ;c charts cf th- various -roups at ni"ht. Next certain- these
sumariz.d cnrrts were shewn tc us, and l'ckin at these avcra-c charts
the iffTTence-oece t- li nt in even touch c. carer way. .to stayed aver
ni'fct in a barracks outside the carp, we w-re onco etc shown the patient
.n the n-xt day. Durin that visit th- physician cf the hcspital intro-
“uccd two inoates wh belen ul tc th- roup that was net vaccinated but
who had not fallen ill. This was at first a .erect sur,.rlsc for the phy¬
sicians wr.r particiapate in the experix-nts, fer 120 cr hiwtvcr nany
were vaccinated, at.’ -.11 fallen ill. Th- renew- 1 exacination of the caso
history cf these twr p ti-nts had shewn, howuv r that they Jurin* their
stay in prison in Berlin, had suffered typhus, that is while they were
in Berlin an before they w.rc sentence T,.cy however had said, that

they fell ill cf influenza then questioned bef-re'. The physician added
that eveiy ne w 3 quite upset abut that at first because .no intention¬
ally nly uai ! Goman cri-ainals for that ex erir.-nts, for in ease cf
crir.innls cf th- Lost -rv. always had ta taxo into account that at see-
earll.r tin- they ha: alrca!y in- thr-.u h typhus. In the ease cf Oor-
mns,hcwovt<r one theu ht thar wa3 n such p ssibility. In evaluatin
th- ex, -risents th-se t*.. patients who ha! net f.illen ill Kerne spe¬
cially icp rtant ’’ccause it was prevan thrcu’ht th-n that the patural
i.ojxnity prteetc' a ainst the infccti.n technique, while neno of the
vaccines actually protected any civ. 1 ainst the infection. The vaccines
...ly rdti ated the c ursc of the illness an! pr-v-ntc* any fitalitics.I
• k the r.: n train frrx -isar t B.rlin, ir.fcss'r Gil-cncsitcr on the
th-r hand us-' a later train.

Q In his c-ar-.ntary Din 's 'iary cn th: 17 March, 19li2
r. fcHoncy s i ', pxx 117? cf the demon transcrict-I shall quote- this


16 ..pril-..-GJ-20-3-C=-:Sc-(int.Rasr0.*r, V n Schenk¬
'S :urt 1


p Here we fin- that the 1.fun'.ant Rose with his friend and
supericr, Frefessor Gildcacistcr, visit*.! ^chcnwal! and was present
at the -xpriants, includin’ injections perform! :n th; inaates of
concentration caaps."

N w, I ask you, w-rc you present wh«.n. concentrati n canp
Instates wurc injects ?

A Bo, it bee ones clearly apparent fr» th- entry in the Jia-
ry that =y visit cccurcd at a period of tine wfc.n all -xperinental sub-
j-cts -.IreatV had fov-r. «ccor-in tc Din-'s iary, the inf-ctlens were
carried cut cn the 5 January 191*2, fer th- first tine, an! on the 7 Janua¬
ry 1912 fer the scccni tine, and cn the 3 narch 19li2 fer the- thrid tiao
the latter tiac,allcdg-’ly in th- presence f . ref-ss r Gilieneister
an that was th- lkth 'lay bef re =y only visit tc RuchLnwald.

Q fir. (cKaney sal : further in th* sar.c ccesxntary, and I .

Tuotes * The defendant Rose will n-t wish t deny that h- visited Du-

chenwnl!. He will a.’nit that he was th-re.* How I ask you did you ever

ieny that ycu visited Buchonwald :r that y u had kr. wlel *e ->f that first

»

typhus -xperinents?

A Ho, 1 n.v-r di!. I nev-r denied it. to the ther hand,
urin ry 1-ctur- in Sasl cn the 17 February 19liu, I said that I myself
s.w Din 's oc. eria-ntal su-j-cts. Th- lectur will tc su‘ fitted h-rc as
a document. I sold that t: ’urin the third ocetin -f tho crnsultin:

hysici-ns n the -ccasicn cf Din. 's lecture. In addition I said that
wh.n I was interrelatel at leticcre in June 191 j 5» and I stated that
when interr ate for th. only tin, here by the ir secuticn in Nuernben;
ef re I ha ', any kn wl-.’ . whatsoever abcut the existance cf Ding's Ua-
ry, «.r any -ther '.cuncnts f the rrasecutic-n.

Q ivcccr’in t the transcript cf the sane session \<c. HcHancy
went -n tc say:

" 'Tc saw that th* Ret ert K eh Institute Icliverod the virus

••

thr u h the dcf-nlant Rcsc,«dta which thes- un: rtun te victins were in¬
fected.' - I ask you, lid yu -liver typhus virus f r th- infecti:n c.f e-x-
. eria.nt .1 subjects in 3uch-nw?.l!?

$151


16 at- 11 47-A-7jC-21-l-0ross (Int., Re=Ior k Yon Schoon)

C<«rt I

^ you obviously r.oan tbo caanoat to the ontry of tho
liory Of tho 26 January 1943, don’t you?

^ "os, I bos your pardon, pago H 82 of tha COK ® r -
.rnnecript.

Iio, I no-ror dolivorod any such virus. I wouldn’t
havo boon in a position to do so bocauso roitkar sysolf nor
ny loprxtaont woro in t:.o rossos3lon of typtai virus. I r.ovor
hod typhus vnccino at ay disposal and for that rocson I aovor
could hr.vo dolivorod nay such virus to r.nycno olso. Tho
ontry in tho diary upon which l!r. KcKanoy ccrrontod rords as
follows: "26 January 1943 artificial Infection with ogg yolk
virus, operation jjo. 223 and 226, Rickotsio IWazocki strain
fraa tho Robort Koch Inctituto." Tuo rddition of ay nrco to
this ontry obviously lc b-eod upon Ur. McHanoy’s kn^rlod&o.
’flioro ho got this tacwlodgo froo, bowovor, I don’t know. At
any into this knouledgo cannot bo roll-bio bocauso this stato-
ajnt is lncorroot.

TS!2 PR2SID2?^T: Tho Tribunal new will bo in rocoss until
0930 :'.oilay coming.


*0

21 Apr-H-iS-u-i-Karrow (Int* Von Sphon)
Court So. I.


Official transcript cf the American Military Tribunal in
thj -atter of the United States of Africa against Karl
Brandt, ct al, defendants, sitting at Kurnbcrg, Gcraany,
on 21 April 19U7, 1015, Justico Bocls presiding.


TH3 ’(APSHALi Persons in tho court roes will be seated.

The Honorable Judges of Military Tribunal 1.

Military Tribunal Z is now in session. God save tho United States
of Arxricn and this Honorable Tribunal.

There vrill bo or Air in tho court.

THE PRESIDENTi Mr. Marshal, will you cscortain if all tho defend¬
ants are present?

TFE : ARSHAL: Jiay it please Your Honor, all the defendants aro uro-
sent in court.

THE FttESrDSHT: Tte Secretary Oonurnl rill note for tho record tho
prosonco of all tho defendants in oaurt.

Tho Socrotary Oonoral will also note fer tho roerd that Tribunal I
convonod this Doming at lDilS o*clock duo to delay in tho broadcasting


eystun.

Counsel any pressed.

GERHARD RC6E - Rosaunod
%

DIRECT EXAiiE.VTICN (oontinuod)

BY DR. FRITZ (Counsel for tho defendant Rose):

Q professor, at the ond of tho sossirn on Friday I had road you
S'jbo conontarios which Mr. ifcHnnoy had mAi on entries in tho Ding
Diary. Tho last cno was abcut an entry of 26 J-nu xej 19U3. I have two
brief questions on this subjoct. On the 2oth >f January, 19i;3, woro you
V- ir-Tilly* ° r tha Rrt»rt Koch Lastituto?

T^^^^npointoent as Vico President was either on tho let of
March or the lit: rtf April, 191.3. I cyself was infornod cf it only later
becauso at that tiie I ras with tho rfohrancht and, in effect, this ap-
P'intrent ncwjf w^s in operation becauso ny service with tho Wehrracht
/ • 6153


21 Apr-JW 3-i:-2-K3rrcw (Int. Von Schon)

Court Ho. I.

took all my time.

Q Did you loam that the Robert Koch Institute <feliver^d typhus
virus for infection?

A Ho, I did not learn that. Thorofore, I cannot oven say whether
the entry is correct or not, and, therefore, I do not know whother tho
head of the typhus deportment, Prcfossor Gildaao aster, was informed for
what purpose tho virus was to be used.which he delivered, assuming that
te did deliver any and that tho entry is correct.

Q Professor, cn Friday you had already told tho Tribunal your ox-
Forionce whon you visited Buch-rnrald. lie*/, I should like to com back
to this visit. I nek you what conclusions did you draw fron this visit
of yours to Buchenwold and what you saw tlioro?

A That was in part described by the testimony of tho witness ?&•».
Block. After a$r return to Berlin I had State Secretary Conti's offico
callod up and inftftr.od that I had boon in Ducheronld, and, at tho sug¬
gestion of Professor Gildcaoietvr I had r.-.tebod tho typhus experiments.

I asked State Secretary Conti for an appointment for n personal consulta¬
tion. Dr. Conti had ny private sccrotory givon an appointment. I wont
to see tho Stato Secretary and I told him briofly what I had soon, but
thon I said that I had rvat coos about tho details of those exporirunts
out about tho fundamental^ problems connected irith this question. Gildo-
rt-istor had told r.io, I said, that tJc exporlwnts wore made at tho in- •
stlgation of Stato Secretary Conti. Ho'.;, human experiments in infect¬
ious diseases wore nothing now, of course, but to make the adrissibi-
lity of cert-in vaccines dependent on their use in human experiments de¬
viated free all tradition of testing vaccines if the exp-riront was a
natter of life .and death. For feur decodes hygiene knot, tho problem of
testing vaccines and the traditional procedure was to tost tho compatibi¬
lity and protective effect of a vaccine by animal exprirents. If these
experiments were satisfactory, thon the tolerance in human beings was
tested and tto dose to be used deteminod in these oxp-riments. Then,

with serological and cutaneous reactions, an attempt is cade to do tormina

6154


21 Apr-L'-’ B-: -2-Karrow (Int. 7cn Schon)

Court Ho. I.

took all =7 time.

Q Did you learn that the Robert Koch Institute delivered typhus
virus for infection?

A Ho, I did not learn that. Therefore, I cannot oven say whether
the entry is correct or not," and, the ref re, I do not know whether the
tead of the typhus department. Professor Gildeaoister, was inforaed for
what purpose the virus was to be used which he delivered, assuming that
to did deliver any and that tho entry is correct.

Q Professor, cn Friday you had already told the Tribunal your cx-
porionco when you visited Buctomrald. Ho*/, I should like to cocu back
to this visit. I aik you what conclusions did you draw from this visit
of yours to Buchorwald and what you son thoro?

A That was in part described by tho testimony of tho witness Hrs.
Block. After ay return to Berlin I had State Secretary Conti's office
callod up end inf*rr.od that I had been in Buchcnwald, and, at tho sug¬
gestion of Professor Glidetaoistor I had watched tho typhus oxporinents.

I asked State Secretary Conti for an oppointoont for n personal consulta¬
tion. Dr. Conti had ny private socrotnry givon an appointment. I wont
to ace tto Stato Secretory and I told him briofly what I had scon, but
then I said that I had not coso about tho details of those experiments
but about tho fundamental problcas com .acted with this question. Oildo-
neistor had told tw, I said, that the oxporinents wore mdu at tho in¬
stigation of Stato Secretary Conti. How, human oxporinents in infect¬
ious diseases wore nothing no*/, of c outgo, but to make tho admissibi¬
lity of cort-ain vaccines dependent on their uso in human experiments de¬
viated from all tradition of testing vaccines if tho oxporinent was a
natter of life and death. For four decades hygicro know tho ju-oblon of
bating vaccines and the traditional procedure was to test tho compatibi¬
lity and protective effect of a vaccine by animal experiments. If those
experiments rera satisfactory, then the tolerance in human beings was
tested and tto dose to be used dotumined in those exp-riments. Thor.,

with serological and cutaneous reactions, an attempt is cr.de to determine

6154


21 Ajr-iWC-iip-3-Sarrcw (Int. Vcn Sc her.)
Court Ho. I.


whit change has occurred. Although ono knows exactly that these re¬
actions are not a reliable neasurenont of irsmnity, then era waits for a
natural exposure of the vaccinated persons to determine tho epidoniologi-
oal success, and this epidemiological success is aoasured by comparing
tho effects on vaccinated and unv.accinated groups. Earlier, artificial
infections may have occurred tore and there may have boon undertaken
here and thorc exceptions, but not in diseases which might be fatal. In
such a definito change from previous procedure, I would have considered
it necessary that at least the authorities of the field in question -
that is, in this case typhus - Gildcaoistcr, Otto, Eyor, Baa gen, 3ick-
hirdt, Bieling and Vohlrab - that thoy should bo askod first whothor
they considered such a vory significant stop absolutely ossontial.

Q Nov:, what was State Secretary Conti's answer?

A First, Conti askod no whothor Gilto oistor knor: that I was con¬
ing or whothor Gildecoistor had sont bo. I said "no". Thon Conti said
in answor that to too had had aisgivings bef rc to had decided to tako
this stop. Tho seriousness of the danger of typhus, hewover, nado extra¬
ordinary noasurus necossary. In the Govemaont General, that is, in
Occupied Inland c serious typhus opidcaic had already broken out. Tho
Russian prisoners of war tod, to a considerable extent, brought typhus
Into the Reich territory. In all posts, oanpe and prisons within tho
Reich thoro had already been local opiduoics. How it was in tho Wohr-
mcht I tod to know hotter than to, to said, but to tod had rathor ox-
troocly disturbing news free that source too. According to tho experi¬
ence of tto Ministry, hundreds of thousands of hue.an lives were at stoko
and ho, tho State Secretary, and not tto scientists had tho rosponsibili-

lity for tho noosures which had to be taken. In view of this omerroncy,

•

he tod tod to subordinate his nisgivings which ho tod had just as I had.
H; could not wait for epidemiological statistics which might give a clear
'rawer only after years or perhaps only after decades according to ex-
P-rienca. Ho could not wait so long if thoro was a possibility, with a
snail price of human lives, to learn the correct measures to protect-


6155


21 Apr-M-ME—h—a-larrcw (Int. 7cn Schon)

Court Ho. I.

hundreds of thousands. Ho was a doctor just as well as I and valued hu-
=an life just as highly as I, but in wart ice, when millions of the best
and conpletoly innocent nust sacrifice thoir lives, tho parasite of
society must also be required to sake his contribution to tho gonoral
welfare. How, .as for ny suggestion that tho specialists be consulted,
ho had considered it sufficient to have his staff info re hi-t about tho
whole natter but, in tho future, ho woyld bo glad to rononber iiy suggost-
ion in suitable cases.

Q Did you say anything core?

A I emphasised again that I was interested in tho fundanontal
question and that I cculd not change ny views cn that, and 1 added that
I did not believe that the results at Buchortmld would bo very different
than tho results it the anical cxporinjntr. I oust soy expressly that I
said this to Kr. Conti at that tiao but that the lator courso of ovonts
proved clearly that I was wrong in this assumption. The 3uchorn;ald ex¬
periments gave considerable inf c mat ion in adoitivn to what wo know at
tho titxi on the basis of anir/ii oxporlaonts. Tho Stato Secretary thon
dismissed txj with tho words that oven th.ugh ho cculd not agree with r,y
viows, ho wanted to thank do for having cuao to hln. Hu nuch proforrud
bearing objections than always to bo surround-d by "yos-con".

3 Did you report to Professor Gildenuister about your discyssicn
with Conti?

A Yos, that was ny official obligation. I had to report regularly
to ay icxdiato superior about every co.aforonco which I had with higher
offices. Thorof-i^, 1 reported this conference cubs-quontly to Frcnid-
ent Oildcnoist.r. He was very -uch annoyed because it was about a
fundamental question and a question which was his spjclal fiold. Ifc
said that I had overstepped cy authority and that I had intervened in
things which were no no of ny business. Ho also nad-j further ratlior
vi lent reproaches at tho tiro and said that I was presuaptu-us, that I
th:'ight I had better ethics than «y collcaguos and that ny discipline
and ry understanding for authority in general questions were net satis-


6156


21 Aft-H-MB-L- 5-Xarrow (Ir.t. Vca Schon) ,

Court No* Ii

factory. I had no.sense for authority or fcr collsaguality.

5 Why didn't you discuss your visit to Conti beforehand with Frc—
fees or Gildoaiistor?

A That President Gildeneister had a different view than I vas
• •

obvious froa our first discussions on the subjoco and also free the dis¬
cussions in the evening cn the visit to Buchonwald. It was clear to no
that if I told Gildisaistcr cf cy irtondod visit to Conti that ho would
forbid it. Ho had the right to do sc. He was :jy superior. I was only
a departnont director at the instituto at the tine. From the point of
viow of civil service, Gildcaoiat^r was quite correct. It was true that
I had gone over his head and that I had interfered with ry criticisn in
a field with which I had nothing to do in the institute. Typhus was
Gildoiwistor's field, not nine, but in tho wholo aattor, as I tcld Conti,
I was net Interested in tho problon of typhus especially, but tho funda¬
mental problem of oxperironts on h\rann beings and I felt that I was con¬
cerned and I fult justified in speaking.

Q Did you not have to oxpoct Conti to Reproach you for going over
GildoBoistor's head and talking to hin?

A Ho, this danger didn't cxiot. I had :et Conti fcr tho first tfcao
during the resottloamt. Tho health sorvico cf tho roscttlenont projoct
was dirv-ctly under hie, and in individual oases I had sc.n clearly that
Conti placed great value on being in diroct contact with sub rdinato
doctors and definitely « s n.t interested in vhothor tho intcnxdiato
authorities likod it or not. Conti was anything but a bureaucrat. Ho
ms in dofinito opposition to Gildccxict^r on such questions. Gildo-
-eistcr was very nuch concerned .rith be..-vine tho errrect forn and
going thrjujh chaivwls. li-roovor, it *. s such an inp.rtunt uattof that
I would net have carod r.uch far a violation f fern. I kntr? free tho
beginning that Gildeneister would object.


6157


21 Apr-a-JE-Ii-5-Karrcw (Int. Yen Schon) (

Court Ho* Ii

fact-.ry. I had no.sense for authority or for colienguality.

Q Why didn't you discuss your visit to Conti beforehand with Pro¬
fessor Gildoajiatar?

A That President Glideajieter had a different view than I v-s
obvious froa our first discussions on the subject and also fren the dis¬
cussions in the overling on the visit to Buchenrald. It was clear to no
that if I told Giidjneistcr of qy intended visit to Conti that he would
forbid it. Ho had the right to do sc. He was :jy superior. I was only
a department director at the institute at tho tine. Fre.r. the point of
view of civil service, Gilderniator r :s quito correct. It was truo that
I had gono over his head and that I fcr.d interforrod with ty criticism in
a field with which I had nothing to do in the institute. Typhus was
Glldunuistcr's field, not mine, but in tho vholo mattor, as I told Conti,
I was not interested in tho problem of typhus ospeoirlly, but tho funda¬
mental problem of uxperironts or. tauar. beings and I felt that I was con¬
cerned and I felt Justified in spoaking.

Q Did you not have to expoot Conti to Reproach you fer going ever
Gildcncistor's hoad and talking to hin?

A Me, this danger didn't oxist. I had :xit Conti for tho first tino
during tho resottloaont. The health servico of tho resettlement projoct
was directly under hin, and in individual cases 1 had sc-n clearly that
Conti placed great value on being in direct contact with sub rdinato
doctors and definitely was n t interested in whother tlic intermediate
authorities liked it or not. Conti was anything but a bureaucrat. Ho
was in definite opposition to Gildoreistcr on such questions. Gildc-
ojistcr was very much ccncurr.od ..ith bcervinj. the correct form .and
going through channels. Groover, it w s such an inportant natter Jhat
I would not have cared r.uch fer a violation f f :«• I knew frtxa tho
beginning that Glide os is ter would object.


6157


21 April 47-!«-S^-5-V’-loy-Int: Von Schoon
Coixrt Po* 1


~. I have another quostion r.bout your visit to
Biclonwald. ..t that tine didn't you wonder where such
. largo number of cr- inals ccraiod to death eerie fron;
thc.ro w .ro nearly 150 people?

... How, of course, this question soorss quito justifiod,
out c.t th. t ti n I had boon ivon tie infer, lat ion by an.
authority I considered absolutely trustworthy. I 2 r.d
no occasion to dc t at the tiao. As for the nuribor,
ono raxet ernsidor t! t ire woro living undor rr.rti 1
law r.t tho tL*:o; end in Qornany so nrny infractions
wjro punishrblo by dor.tl. undor tho spoc:' 1 lr.wa t* t
I w. f not :.t all surprised. I can yivo sc any era pics:
cria.os taking rdvanta o of a black-out; viol tions of
tho rationing laws; blaalm*rkotlny; plundering during
r.ir raids; refusal to survo in tlo ..r.-y, ospionr.-o, and
a groat tinny other things. .nd not a word was said in
3u chon wale* 1 tlo tiuo tl .t tho oxpormontr.l subjects
woro old prisoners of t‘ o c. p. Tho only two vA oso
person. 1 ui fairs woro discussod woro tio two pooplo
who ccuio fror. tho prison at ’ orbit, v.voro thay had 1 ad
typhU3, end for tho others I assunod also th \t th.oy had
boon teJron to Buokonwo.ld for tho orper .rents. Ono
r.iust conduct such oxptrJ.nonts sonowhoro in a cr:ip undor
gu. rd. In r. n ordi ary hospital p opio who mo ccndoMnod
to do. th. would i.nodia.toly break ovt, ird in a normal
rison, a. jonitonti ry wit! its colir, ono cannot carry
out such ;n o-.poris:ont. Th .t tl o o::oori*.cmts woro •
conductod in a concentration ca .p sjonofi quito roason-
a.blo to no, ho cause tho block r! ich 13 d soon w s
arranged just liko a 1 oepital. It w..s artron-: build in*
•itl largo rerns. It was quite shut off fre j tho rest of

the car-p as far as I could judge.

6158


21 April 47-!!-S~-5-2-;tJ.cy-Int : Von Schoon
Court No. 1


r 1 . '-nd then later did you talk tc Professor Gildc-
noistor ."bout the oxpcrinonts in Suchenwr.ld?

... I c cnnot ro::otj*oor that, -3 f. r as I know aftor
cur disputo r.bout ay visit tc Conti on r.y ovn init-
i tivo, tl o visit to -'uclcnvald and ny o poric.onfcs
rtu: o not discvssod . -r.in. .~f ter that ti.:o until tho
ti: o v" on ny section v c per: nontly dlsr.cerciatod fron
tho inatituto r-.rd turned into r. Luftwaffe Unit I saw
!!r. dilucnoistor only quito raroly. TJoso few ::cctinps
w.ro always bout • ttors of :y lop rtiiont, tho question
of tho transfer of ny dop rtt»nt for roasona of air
socurity, nlso coriplr.lnts that I could net rivo onovgh
supervision to :ty dop rtnont. -r. Gildo.-.oistcr \» : of
tho opinion th..t in :sy dop. rtr-.ont ov ryono did win.t
ho wantod to. o wanted to appoint per intent ropre-
sontr.ti vo for no cr ttachod L 17 porsonnol to an tl or
dopnrtnonfe» Peso ro rJ.lt ho difforoncos nhicl finr.lly
occc.sionod no to turn ny dop-.rtnont into a Luftwr.ffo
Unit in oricr togot rid of tho unpior.c ntnoss. ny
talk wi tl Profoeoor Gildorioiator turoort Into r. quarrel
sinco I "jocr.no vico- ro aidant crcinst his wish.

UK. II iOY: liny I ploaro 'our Honors, tho rosocution
has not objoctod to tho dof .ndunt usin;. notes to assist
I.in in tho courso of 1 is oxar.in.txon. I'cwovor, It h .a
bocoiio c. p .rort Profossor h s or.ch and ovory qvoation
answorou an detail boforo bin in writing. It rouus to
;o he ecu Id uso nctos to rofrosh his -onor. tc sono •
extont. XIowover, if r.o has o-ch quostion rr. 3 wo rod in
iotc.il in writing boforohtnl it bccc i u s a paront that
.'rofossor “oso could sign tho so answers and turn thon
in in tho foir. of m affidavit and dispense vtft* tl 0
lengthy oxciiir.ation, bccauro ho has t*o answers all


6159


21 dpril 47-!!tS*>7-5-o-:u.lo--Int: Von Scfcoon
Court Ho. 1

•

bcforo bin in do toll , nd is ;.^roly rowing tl or..

TEE P'-.SSIDEHTs it is, of course, c general rule tb:.t
a v/itnoss my uso notos in answering questions which
my bo r.skod tin; but if a wltnots is ^-roly rowing
answers, it w.uld soon to the Tribunal thoso n..ttoro
night bo filed as inoludod in n off it*, vit. Counsol of
tho Prosecution night cross-cx.a:ino the witness as to
who wrote tie noto, or tho papor fro;.i yf. ich ho is
roading, but if t: o vxtnoJ a is ncroiy ro.dini: tl.iso
answers tho Tribun. .1 Is of tin opinion ..n offIda it •
would o Just ..a good ;.s tbu testimony of th.o witness
frou tho stand ^

:'Jl. r. IDY: I night surest tho Tribunal ur.y loci: at
tho notos tho dofomlrr.t is using, *nd I think tl t ho
will so® o-.ch question nurborod and rftorvrards in
Garuan tl.o word ».n3»or', and a rather olaborato
answer givon to one]; question, wh cl appo rs to bo Just
what tho dofondant ia rosding. If tlo Tribunal will
poruso tho shoots tl. t tho dofoi*l:nt ia rof-rrlng to
you night cue th t t: oy r.ro in tho Xoru of :n . fi avit
and ho could sign thou and uso tlo:: horo in liou c-f
this oxai a nation.

H'S ?roSH)3.:T: I will ;.ek ccunsul for tl.o dofondfjit
what ha tl inks about whs.t the Tribunal lac said, wh ti er
or not an .affidavit would not bo just as good as rootl¬
ing freu ti.o writ ;on papor, w*. ici oiiountc or..ctici.lly
to an -f fidavit, siaply all tho sfc.toncnts under -oath,
instead of a writton statonont.

DR.7RITZ: l!r. Prosidont, as for tho answers w-ich tlo
dofondant has gl on , I fully ugroo tl t ho should rondor
then .lore frooly. -s for the questions, of courco, in
view c£ the difficulty of tho ri.torial :nd sinco I


6160


21 April 47-!V» 84-Tteloy-Int: V D nS c hcon
Court 3c. 1


nysolf on a lr.yaan in nodical nattors, I havo had to
discuss tho quo-tions, wb ch I r.slr tho dofond\nt
Hoso, with the dofondant boforohand.

PiSSIDEHT : Ttr . ± .t is porfoctly natural , but if
the witness has written out oaefa word of Ms nnswor
why would not tho filing of that writing in tho fern
of nn affidavit bo just s good :.s 1 is oral testimony
frori tho stand whoro ho si-iply reeds wi at ho hr.s alrordy
written?

DR. FRITZ: I shall thonr.sk tho Defendant I’.oso only
to consult 1 is notos w3 ich ho has had to nako bocau so
of datos, etc, and to rnswor ny quosti'ns tlv.t way.

TTE PRESIDENT : If tho witness sinply uses notos for
that ourposo ho rx.y erntinuo testifying. If ho is
g- ing to rood pa-o r.ftor pago of whet ho has writton tho
Tribunal soos no ndvantago in all tho tostinony over
an affidavit.

DR. PRITZ: u ay I continue tho oxaednaticn of tho
dofc ndnnt, --r. Prosidont?

THE ?..E SIDSIT: Y 0 s, if tho witnoss will sinply uso
what ho has in tho fern of notos, such. ..s datos vnd
places, and so forth, tho ©xciii nation ix .7 continuo.

n. Did you nov«r visit t: 0 ty.hus soetion of tho
Rcbort Koch Inctituto?

Porhaps I r.ry nako a co rent on tho objection
and o::pl. in what I rj- doing. I Lr.vo auito n turr.lly
thought ovor vory carefully tho questions whief you
vorkod out. For or.oh quustion I corpus what I need
for tho answer, but I or. not roading what I ha.vo writton
down horo. I an rot reading it word for word. I an using
tho notos tc fomulr.to ny answers, but of covrso fron
tino tc ti.o I look down at tho notos in addition to


6161


21 April 47-M-tS’^5»»5-*?icloy-int: Von Schoon
Court Ho* 1


your question Sosoo what I have notod down : s important
for tho answer which I nust givo to this questions. How,
as to your quostion a bout i^y visits to tho Typhus


DopjJtnonts of tho Ir.stituto, In tho tiuo w'ron work
w .3 dono on ell typhus during tho war, I have novor
ontorod this d opart: ont, bocruso it v. s ferbi.don for
~oplo who did not bolono to tl o d op rt::cnt to ont.r it.
This prohibition occistod ucauio of tho clangor of infoct-
ion, end tl. t is’quito roasonablo bocauso in t} o courso
of tiuo ell tl o porscns who vor’ od in tl is dopartnont
foil ill of ty hua. In ell such institutes ponplo wlio
h vo no business in tho dop-rt ont -ro not allowod to
ontcr it. Tho talks with Px*cfossor G: i .l.,or.ioistor took
pleco in 1 is offico, not in tho dop rtnont. Ho was
cr.llod thoro from tho typhus ucp\rt::ont, end gonorally
in order to avoid vesting ttmo, r.a to. 31oclc lea
r.lror.dy stated, I lad rn appoint :ont nr. do by hor boforo-
hend, .'nd thon ho .n 1 is office ct tfcr.fc ti:io. Tho

offices woro for discussion, not tho laboratories. I
didn’t let visitors into ay laboratory oithor. 1
rocoivod thou in uy offico.


6162


21 April li7-i-.TD-6-Wteahan (Int* von Schoen)
Court So. 1


Q Did Professor Oildoneister never discuss his work with you?

I knrr.T Gil Jeoeis tor's work only frcn his publication, from tho
annual reports of the institute. It is net custernary in such lar^e
research institutes for tho heeds of the various departments to discuss
their work it th one another unless -the;.* happen to bo voridr.r together.
Scientists normally do not make their work and plans pu lie before
publication. His thou hts a re his only scientific possession and ho is
.•-(morally ovor^-anxicus to protect then, thus ho 'rosorvos soerocy oven
toward people vorkinc in anothcrfiold than hs himself, because thoso
pooplo too sight by carolossnoss betray his soorots to others and thus
do ham to him.

q Thor, you hoard nothin noro about any work of Professor
Gildanoietor at Buchanwali after tho ono visit which you paid to tho
carp?

A So, I di1 not hoar anythin osrc about it, but also for oxanplo
I 'id not loarn that Professor Gildonoistcr had any part in tho pro-
iinlnory oxporinonts, as tho Din Diary assets, and whan wo visltod
Buchunwald, Gil 'oaoistor did not tell-so ho had boon thoro baforo and
his conduct durinr this visit id not load no to boliovo ho ha ’. It
was surprisir. to no to soo in Dr. Din «s iarj* how often Din- says what
frequent connections he had with Profossor Gildonoistor and tho Itobort
Koch Institutoj furthemoro if thoso statount* are actually truo, I
cannot Jud ;o for sure and for purely tochnical reasons I think that is
extremely unlikely.

Q 'ihy?

A I must coco bade to Docunont Book Ho. 12, in thu Din:: Diary,
Document Ho. 265 on Popes 39 to U7 of the Goman Dccunont Book, there is
i discovery of revolutionary importance) for typhus research, and
especially for the quostion of vaccine. It says in the Goman text on
rare Ho. 39, for 30 November, 19h2 that infection did not progress in
the control persons in tho experimental series of 26 Janecry to 20 October,

191*3, that is on Pares hi anc U2j according to the Diary, ono fourth of

6163


21 April 47->W.TD-6-2-’-Iceban (Int. von Schoen)
Court Mo. 1


those infected did net fall ill at all, the others only fairly severely,
in the group of 00 persons, on the 31st of Hirch, 19U3 of the 00
infected no cm fell ill. That is paces U5 an* U7. Fcr the hygienist
these dates show that a R event had occurred for which rnny typhus
research workers throughout the world wore waiting, a typhus strain, a
strain highly virulent for the laboratory animal, as Ding's work in
19U3 shows, which is Hru owaky Document, 1 believe. No. 9, here this
typhus strain was obviously ccoplotely a virulent for non. Ono hundred
people wore infected with this strain without a sin lo ono of -then
filling ill. Ttw event had occurred for which artificial creation
Professor Hocgen in Strasbourg worked with all tho facilities of nodorn
virus rosoarch. This event nl :ht have had tho nm instance as tho
*iscovory by Jonnor of the hanslussnoss of smll^pox vaccines, or tho
discover of livin- ovirulent pla uo strains by Roller and Otto, or tho
discovery of avirulont tubercular bocterlao by Calmette. I iuaodtfttoly
rcalizod tho si'nificanco of this discovery when I lockod at tho Ding
Diary hero for tho first tine. It did not take a ninuto to realize that,
and we are to believe this diary of Itr. Din; that a nan like
Oildeooistor, who in tho last four years of his life, had workod on
nothin* whatever but typhus vaooino, that such a nan foiled to roalizo
the inportanco of this event, that ho did mt follow up this question.

In tho Pity: Diary thero is mt a sir. lo notation to tho of fact whether
these persons who did mt fall ill, although they wore infected,
developed imunity. For the Lay-nan this mttcr nay not appear to bo
so important) for the hy;dorist, however, it is an absolutely sen¬
sational thin . It is quite incredible to m that a mn like Oildeneister
could overlook such an important fact an' that ho faUo-1 to roaltee
its inportanco if * told of it as tho Din Diary says on Page U7
and the entry of 11 April 19U3, whore it says: -Report for SS
jtandartonfuebrer Prof, •/xu-.ewsky. Professor C-ild-slator says the
hi -hly virulent strains of the Robert Koch Institute seen no Ion or


21 April U7-iWTD-6-3-Kaehan (lot, von Scboefa)

Court Ifo* 1

•

patogenlc for husan beings." That a youn^ nan like DLxv- ni ht overlook
such a thin; is possible, bat that with the knowledge and suggestion
of Professor Gildor-eistor these terrible pessare series should bo
startod and that no one takes any interest in this important Is cover:,-,
I cannot ira iiw as a specialist, 1 mist deny if anyone says that I
know it.

Thon another question: Gil Uswistor and -?r. Baagan bocane

onordos wton Kaagan loft tho institute, but, at least, I assuno, that
they had sono sono contacts, and that Oil’cloister tdi Professor
Hoapan that this Ifctolzka 3train had bocooo cc-^lctoly avlrulont, and
that one hundred people had.bocn infected with it alroa V without one
of thon (jotting a fovor. That is quito unlikely, Frofossor Kan :on
workod for nonths on tho fever reactions in his living dry vaccine to
woakon ttor., as ho raroly had to pot sono of tho I'Atolzka strain fren
tho Robort Koch Institute an:’, then ho woul-’ havo what ho was looking
for.

q You iwari tho locturo which Dr. Din:.: -avo on his oxporinont3
at tho third neetin- of consulting physicians in tho Section for
Kyf iona and Tropical Ky lono?

A Yes, that was tho time wtan I protested oponly a-ainst this

whole nathod.

q ’'oil, what happenod?


6165


Court So. 1 - .

21 Apr 47-k-7-l-iS:-Coclc (!nt. Y;c Sch.cn)


A. 2c. Ding gave his lecture In the eancuflaged vay es in his
oubllcation for the Journal A Fygieno and Infectious Diseases, hut the
audience could not tell that this concerned exoerinents on hu-ian beings.

then the discussion began, I consented on the results of those
axnerinents. Thrt -.art of ay stoteoent is cpnteined In the record of
the nooting. That is in Bose Document Book Ho. 3. Document 38. which
has already teen submitted, on cage 43 of Document Book 3. I do net
intend to read these rcaarks tut I sianly refer to it. I still want tr
•joint out one can find hero vfaa.t I said about the technical eoooct of
the expurlaents and ab-Ait the results.

Thon I spoke of the ethical side of the whole thing and'this oart
of ny statement has teen stricken freo the record. S cannot, of course,
t .day reor dueo the exact v.rding tut only the sonoo of *hat I said.

I cold aoro or loss as foil vs: As important and as basic ao tho ro-
sults aoy have boon, they voro nevertholcto achieved at tho *jricc of
a nuntor of huaan lives. That vs as hygienists =ust object that a life
and death cxncrinent be nade as tho rcorcouisito fer the introduction
A a vaccino. So fax, testing vith aninol oxporinonts and suboceucnt
dotoralnation of t^lercnco by huaan beings and eeldaal logical exultita-
ti..n have boon the cue to nary procedure. This orreeduro had nrovori its
value. Vo had to stick to it and vo couldn't lot othor ucliticel an«*
state authorities force us to enduet huarn erariaents. I so<*o nuch
1 ngor at th- tine. I spoke for at least ten nirntos. Ding ansvored
that he c.uld caln ny conscience. The er-erluontal subjects bad boon
crininals condennod to death. Ky answer ves: I know that nyself. I
vps not intorestod in the individuals concerned but in the principle
..f hunan exocrlncnts in testing vaccines. At this c-cnent Pr foes r
Schreibor interrupted tho discussion. Ke said he urctestcd against ry
criticise and if ve vented t«- discuss basic ethical Questions wo could
d. that during the recess. Be vould have this uart of the discussion
stricken free tho record and that vas done. After the -.oeting vexi uc

-.orticiuants c«M to ne end discussed the vk le thing with ue. S~no

6166


Court So. 1 _ _ • »

21 A?r 47-*-7-2-iBH)cck (Int. T.a Sck'-sn)

Agreed with no; ethers vere convinced that in such on looortwt oucstlcn
bunan exponents were justified. Cf ceurse. these necle vh agreed
believed Ding's assurance that the- subjects were crininnle c nc-enned to
death. I no lenger renomber the individual gcntlencn with vhr.r. I talked
during the recess end I don't kn:v who was in fare* and vh was against
it. The only one I rteenber le Professor Mrug.vsky because he onrke as
an SS oer.ber and the experiments had been c ndnetod by an SS doctor, and
because I- thought that Krugcvsky was Ding's verier in every way. Of
course. I renonter that Mrug.vsky cane .1 all ne-plo end said that in
nrinciple ho agreed with r.e and that he had expressed eiMler nisglvinge
to Grevit* and that Gravit* had rejected his misgivings and then 1 also
learned fron Krug-veky that Hinnler va. behind, all of these expovw^.

THh PRSSIDiCT* The Tribunrl will nor bo in ronete.

(X short rtcote was taken.)


6167


Court St. 1

21 Asr 47-IC-9-l-xBi-£arr .V (lr.t. 3r va)


GLEEAED B06S - Beta=ed

•

DI--.ICT SUrtBiSZtM - Coot limed

2g. J2ITZ (C: unsol f r the defendant S-'ee): Kr. President, regarding

Bloc's attendance at the c nsultints' cnference, I should like t read

Rosa

fren R-so D-cunent So. 6, Hceo Rxhibit Sc. 6, in/D.cuntnt B-fc S . 1,
ne*es 15 tc 19. This is an affidavit by Professor Dr. Schncll. I have
already read the first part of this and should like to road fr n urgo 17
tho last paragraph and thereafter:

■I took part in the session of the scctl n ftrrflenc in tho C .nforcnco
of Consultants held In 19^3 in the Military Medical Acadony in Berlin,
and I can renonber the f-11 via.: ah ut tho discusel n between B- so end
jjln^, as I had talked to colleagues in the c.rrid-r, I -vrs lrtc for
the lecture In ouostlon end thorof.ro heerd only a snail nart of It.

An SS nedical officor, corhms Dr. Din*:, - n t Kr. Xrug'veky - hed
opokon cn the outjoct f typhus vaccine end nenfci'npd in the erne ut
tho locturo that the various vecclnes and their c'.r.uerative valuo hed
boon tested n hunan beings and. that their effectiveness vac -i .ro 'r
loss coual. I ennn t rooerber any n.ro vhother I hcord this nrrt f
tho locturo aysolf r vhother I asked nthors vh hrd htrrd it t toll
-.o about It, owing t- the ensuing eherp attacks hy H- so. It Is euro,
h vovor, that tho locturor did n t nenti n vhero rnd in *hat vry oxuori-
:cnto on hurnns were carried -ut. After that B.so dou-nded the floor
and said in on excited and luprcesivo vey thr.t h th free a hu-rno and
nodical viovpoint ho hed to object to hunrn being. boin,: sacrificed in
rdor t secure certain facts. Ec v.icod discu^val f tuch cx-orincnto.
In this pr otest Rcee had the‘vivid syr.pcthy of us all, as anocront in
the ensuing vhisocred rmtuel auesti. nings an nc the nrxticioante if the
testing vhere it v„ B numuxed that those vere nr hahly exncxinonts in
concentrati n Mens. The discussi n botvecn Din.: end. B<sc vrr., hef ro
..there c-uld participate , interrupted ty the chaixran - probably Pr fes-
* .r Schreiber - vith tho remark that a discussi n ^f this natter ves
n t tho subject -ur c'nfercnce tut that vc were here t lely t discuss


6168


Court.S.. 1

21 aZT 47-?»-S-2-iSl-itrr v (Int, :T vn)


ouesti-n* -f hygiene. He continued that the oers as used f r these
• oraerir.ecta had exclusively teen crlai n als legally sentenced to depth,
eayvey."

la this sene natter I should like t out ia en ther affidavit. The
affidavit in R -to 3 cunent 3cUc !2 . 2, Hcse Dccucent Sc. 18, a& affidavit
a the part of Profess-r Sauck ;n pe*e 6-7. It vill he nut in pb Bobo
ixhibit Hu. 14. Thic, as I said, is aa affidavit a the oart cf the
present direct *r -f the Institute f r Ship end frooioal TIbccbcs in
Heabur. Prcfess.r Kauck, dated 5 February 197. In the soend oera-
ftraph it reeds:

"la May 1943 I took oert in tho C .n;rcee f C-/nsultin Physiciano
of tho kilttary Medical acedeuy in Berlin. At ne .f these bobbI-hs
Pr fccscr Rose, during tho discussion, or<tested against oroorlnonto -n
husan hoicks f r the ouro.se -f tostirv? tyihue vpccino. The ernct v. rdo
.f tho cplni .a ho croroesed Id n t recall. I kn'-v, hoover, that
Pr feos r H.se culte unr.istakrbly opocscd such orocrir.entc cn hunrn
boia»:s.

"I an tho present direct r f the Institute) for Shi-> e.rv* Tr -oicrl
Disorscs. HashuTr:, & February 1947."

And there fcllcva the si.:ncturo rn<* certiflcrtl n.

TKi PRaSIltt#?; Just a acoent, c uncei. Is that the d-cunont -.n
no*o 6 of B k 2?

DR. FRITZ: fee. That is R so ixhibit H-. 14. I read fr n this
second onra^ranh. In the sc;-.o d cuser.t b k I a.v %ut in F >oc D.cxtfont
19, ooaes 8 and 9, ns Ruse Ixhibit 15. This is an iffldpvit by Prfosc r
Veltor Blunenb’or* f 22 February 1947. I sh uld like t r*ed fr n the
sec .nd parn^raoh ’.n oe*e 6.

.SR. E-iRIfY: Hey it oleaso T ur Ha r, tho defense c un6cl a 1  hat
read tv*, r three d. cunentB vhercin it atrtus thnt Pr fotc.r R. sc c-
jected at the Hay 19x3 c aference uf r.edicel consultants. He 1b a v
about t- introduce tv. cr three *.ther d cu.: c nts to that sp.-e effect.

The or secuti a vill stimulate that 2 se hs .tjectcd at that sectixu

6169


Court S^. 1

21 a-.r 47-r.-9-2-iB.-i^rr v (Int. cr -Wc)


cs ho fees stated in the stand. I see no reas-n for reading these fur¬
ther docurents. We ere not cbjectln,' t. ad.-.ittins then intc evidence
tut readln* thcr. int^ the rec-rd UcM tc be uurcly remetiticus and un¬
necessary.

XHZ PELSIDiST: The rec rd nay sh v that c unsol f r the ->r eecutl n
has stimulated for the rec rd that at this Metis* of hygienists and
c-nsultacts Sr. R.ee objected t the erjerlnentatl-a ua a Jwnan teia.;e
and r.ade the objection as sh-va by the evldcnco, b-th rel end tor affi¬
davit. There Is n- objectl a t- the admission of these d cunents In

%

evidence but in view of the etlnula.ti n by counsel the Tribunal sees no
necessity for taking up the tlr.e in reading affidavits unleso c-unsel
can show scae occaalon f r reading thca.

DR. raiTZi In that enso I should like t say regtrdin* tho content*
,f this affidavit, I should like slaoly to uolnt cut that in oaragraoh
2 he etetos that ?r .fees r Rose vte regarded as an oxaert in tho conbat-
ting of typhus and n t ne an oxmert In the ar/d.ucti a of typhus vaccinoo
, r lr. typhus rotccrch. There le a great difference here. It can be
soon fr-.a this aff ida.vlt -n nage 9 that Profee sc r Schrolbor cav to it
that this pretest vas n t eot down In tho nlnutoe cf tho netting. .^n „
this sane natter I eutoit S cu-.ent R se So. 21 in tho sane Accunont b "k
as Rose exhibit 16, nagee 12 t. 1-. This ale. cxncorns Rose's urgent
at this c.nferenco. This witness describes In his affidavit with oor-
tlculnr nersmiculty the way in which Sr. R sc oxmrctsed. hinoolf at that
tine end that It vas tried t alloy his nlsgivlnge with the strtonont
that tho oxoerlncnts were carried, cut only, on crinlnals cleaned to
d.cath.

p

Profess ,r. d. you have nothing to add In this natter? . * •


6170


21 .jril 47-ii-FjC-10-lJ.Ialo7 (Int-, Brown)

Court I

A At tho conclusion of this affidavit by Hr. Atror an incidont
is nontionod,- whoro ho spools of zy aliosod by tie ss, and that thoro
was scco near to this offset at tho confororco. This was a rds under¬
standing, but a rdsurdorstandiag which was rathor charactoristic of tho
situation at that tiao. I haro already said that for reasons of air
socurlty, and on that nrotoxt, I attceptod to transfor cy doportcont
fron Borlin. At that tlBO I spoko with tho gontloran of tho
Volkfldoutscho Mittolstollo who woro in chargs ctf tho rosottlonont
canpa. Thoy offorod r_j a canp which thoy no loneor noodod. iho
Volksioutscho Mittolstollo was nar.nod sololy, or alnost exclusively,
by SS non at that tiso, and in erdor to toko o look at this corspT
proposod to tho gontlonon that thoy should fotch in on tho aftornoon
aftor tho nooting. l told than to coua at 5 o'clock. Tho conforonco
lootod longor than that. Tho non bocano iepationt and thoy nado
tholr way to tho rw. whoro I was. Whon tho ccuforonco w 0 a ondod aid
I cq;aj out tho two non who woro waiting, SS naj re in uniforms took
no totwoon thou and wo wont down tho stairs tcgotlior, and loft tho
building In tholr SS Tohiclo. That ovonlrg 1 did not corao to tho
social gathering that took placo at that tiao, Vboaieo I w Q s visiting
this coup which lay outsido Borlin. Ifcis ovont hoi boon obeorvod by
sovorak poo pi o, ard tho runcr sproad that I hod boon arrostod bocauso
of ny protost. in roality thoro was not a werd of truth in this, aid
I turnod up tho next day, but that thrwod a cortoir. light on tho wholo
situation.

'i Did you not offond against ailltary dlsolpllno in uttoring
your protests; Prof os cor Hoorlng r»do sta tenants on that nottor?

A I boliovo tho axprosssion "offonso against disciplino" which
Professor Hearing used was a rathor unhappy eh os on phrase, bocauso
it was al»uys ny idoa at such a consulting oonforonco ovoryono could
3ay during tho discussion what ho wishod, but free tho puroly factual
point of viow what I said was on offonso free: tho nilitary point of
Tiow, on tho ono hard, an offonso agaisnt tho orders to maintain


6171


21 April 47"i!-FjC-1G2~Jlaloy {Int;» 3rcwn)

Court I

socrecy because it was cceplotoly clear that the locturor and hi3

spcaor3 intonded that the auilorco, should not find out that those

-ora ozperir*ent3 on hurgn boings. I had found out, of tor being

•

told to naintain socrecy, that thoso waro exporiconts on hucan
beings, and calo thi3 fact intentionally kao*n\ to a troup of persons
who s h ould not have faind out about it. Koroovor in vfet I said I
attacked cy cwn superior, rarely Gildaralstor and Conti, and othor

9

loading porsonogos in tho future, for instance* Ki:iilor and Grawitz,

and I asked to bo disobodiont to tho directions of thoso high

porsonagoo, and said what 1 did 3ay in a rcthor axcitod tone of voico.

I said "turn this natter ovor to a court martial." I said, arri I

said, "if you do so you will fcavo a fino caso on your hands in tho

•

nateor of cointolnlng socrecy."

^ Did you lator discuss tho natter of hurar. being
oxporironts boforo a largo gr>up of pooplo?

A Yos, that happored onco core boforo a largo nunbor of
pooplo, but that was not about typhus oxporlconts. That oust hovo
boon abait October 1944. Tho quostion at hand thon was grlppo.

T-’oro was a coating, a rathor largo rooting at which trlppo vuoclno
v:as dlocuosod. a mmbor of gontlocon roportod on tho vacclnos that
thoy had thorotoforo boon dovolopad in tho laboratory, unne othors,
Profossor Horzborg on a vac cl no nado free deal grippo virus, and
Prcfoooor Haagon on a vaccino :«*do fr«: living avirulont grippo virus,
which ho had alrondy tootod on porsonnol at tho Strasbourg clinic.
Soaoono In tho cootinc nuggostod, I don't ronxbor who now, that tho
Haagon tost3 had not boo.i sufficiont, aal that this Vaccino should bo
to3tad on a largor nur.bor of porsons. Share was no ^ontion of
concentration cocps thon bit of studont cccpanios. 1 had coiwidorablo
riisgivings about such ox portion to 1 vaccination ani ozprossod thee.

I said that I considorod tha oxparIcontal ba3ls for this insufficient
for thoso vaccinos to bo usod on hnaen* beings, i wqs not convincod that
t’.o virus bad boon sufficiently attosuatod. Thoro was tho danger that
tb.o vaccine would load tc infoction, end cno could not take that


6172


21 April 47-i-7J010-3-taloy (Jnt., 3ro)
C=urt I


responsibility on cno's solf. It was first of all intoidod to obsorvo
tho offoctivocos3 of tho protection by observing whothor people foil
ill of grlppo in natural ways after bo ins vaccinated. Ihon sccoono
else nado tho suggestion that that would toko too long, and wo did
not know whothar thoro would bo or. influonza opldauic duri:*s that
tira, ard therefore after tho vaccinos tho subject should bo infootod
uith a vlrulort virus. Sinco I hod already expressed objections to
tho vaccination I o^iosod this proposal, over, nore strongly, ard tho
rosult ctf this discussion no 3 that infoctions woro net carried out,
but it was docidod to carry out thu vaccinations. Another thoso
vaccinations wore carried out or not I do not know, At any rate
I road no ordor to tho offoct that sauono should .a':o tho vaccina¬
tions nor did 1 ovor road a report that tho vaccinations woro oarriod
out. only Inter la imprisonment did I haar tint similar oxporicor.ts,
such as mro thon discussod, ard which I disapproved of, woro oarriod
out by tho 3nglish 3orvico on Coman Wo. Oonzkon probably had
personally to do with thio, but I had hoard abcut this in internment
hospital Karlsruho whoro tfcoro woro pooplo who had experienced.

DR. 7RIT7.: 1lr. Prooldont, rogarlicg Profossor Roso's
protost against oxporlrant3 cw hunon boings at tho conforonco, I
should liko, bocauso of tho luportanco of this point, to offor
two further docxconts. First of all In Docurant Book II, Roso
Docxnont 23, Roso 3*hiblt 17, pogo 20 to 24, affidavit by Univorsity
Profossor Dr. Bioling on 11 Doconbor 1946 which concorn a itsolf with
Rose’s protost regarding huuan boing experiments in tasting grippo
vaccine. 1 should liko to have road this into tlio record, Ur.
President,tocauso it can to soon free this that tho defendant
Rose hinsolf-- >


6173


21 «pril-iK}v'G-ll-l--fe«3h'a (inti Srcwn)

Ccurt ?,c. 1

7H2 rRESIDS.T: If this affidavit refers tc .another aoetin ,
other than the aeetin with which we were concerned eforc, the
Counsel atj read this effidevit cr the pertinent portions thereof
into the record.

—- • Hi.hDYs I wish to point cut this discussion concerns
information on influ oner vcccine rad rlppej *« hr.ve net chirked
the defendant *..ith any prrticipr tier, in experl&onta cr tests r.a
tc influenzr v-.ccinc; therefore I object tc the introduction of
this documents ry evidence re rein* iaietcrid tc ^-ttors concomin c
this Tritun:l.

THZ .F.oSIDJITi The affidavit in question pre-pesod, Exliilit
17, shews the r.ttitudo of tho Defcnd'/.t l.cso on experiments cn ’
huoi-n ’ tin o the c* jeetien is over-ruled civl counsel ury proceed.

:•! DU. FRITZ»

'« I rcr.d frea tho first n- o of this :ffid-vit, the second
prrr.-rrph:

"On 30 Octet .r 19hh 1 ettondod r ncctin 't tho .-ilit ry
iFcdic-d ..crdiny in Berlin, rt vhich I hrd tc at'to the rt3ult cf
r^r reaerreh into the production of influent-. vnccino rt iS-r’. ur .
<.ft..r I, rad the other cmtluajn, hr.d roperted r' out the results
of laboratory reao rch rn cniapl cxporin_nts, it was prepoaed 't
the au! soquont dUoussicn tfc;t the v-ccine shtuld nr tc tried cut
en hu.u/n * oin a rs woll. It w.- a considered r.dvisr. lo th» t tho
first inccul'tiona sheui: be tested on students of the 3’Jlo /. a
livin in Joint ‘illotr under acuowhat sioiil- r conditions, I
riaaa’ ,r »dl th>fc '.ref. Rose stren ly rad fcrcefull: c'ia.- To-d
with this prcpcsrl,

*

"I reo«l\.T this prrticul- rly well, since for tochnic-1

re-sens I could n:t undoratmd his point cf vi_w .'a - ’ rasuaed th.'t

it wca ' • sod cr. aiscoaccpticn. 1 did - rcc with his hewov.r,

thftt should invest! y.tiens cn hua-.n -im should only ! c :u.Co ' y

specialist physic!-ns, -n then only -fUr th.rcu h prelicin-ry

6174


21 ..pm-a-DJ G-ll-2-:fccbfc (Int. :r-»n)
Court Hoi 1


eniasl tests. If these ccnditlcns wore, however, fulfilled and
the h-trsleasness and effectiveness of the prep- rations wore thus
proved, there should bo, in =y opinion, no objection tc n.ke tho
step new free aniaal to huaen loin*, --hieh dw ys hr.d to bo nr-.do
in such erses. Fren tho experiences -athcrod in ey lr'-crrtcry, it
sccccd out of the question tc sc that ccnsideroblo injuries cr r_ny
infections cculr bo expected, nni ey point cf view wrs proved ri.ht
ty the a*ny thousand expcrionc-s rained with influenza vaccinations
carried cut, in recent years, c. . in the .ja.rican ..ray.

",.s f.-r rs I r-neei or, it wrs only proposed tc sec the ror.ction
cf the* inoculated persons tc r. natur-1 infection ter cn. The
effect cf the inocul ticn shculd ‘ c ascertain*! lsnodi-tciy after
tho inoculation, 'ey the cximb! nation of their serua. useful pro¬
cedure fer theso sorolo ic -1 oxcsiivticns was known in which o ccuplc
cf ccn cf tlocd rro Iron in tho ordinary way from the inocul ■'ted
persen. This prccoduro wra clrdcrated by the .^-^ricrn Hirst.

Durin • tho first ninths cf 191.5 I tested the aeru.u accord in u
this prccoduro here in iiax’.urr, cn nurses -rrl students who volun-
toored at lectures and who h*d boon ieeunized with ifforent in¬
fluenza vaccines, previously tested in animal export-iento. In this
wr.y I r.scorVlncd tho effect of the inoculation.

It bp. y to, that durln; tho nee tin-7, * further su . esticn was
Bade that this scran research should net bo considered cdoquato
'-ut that theso vclunt ry experiacntal su‘ Jects, L-xaunizc*! by tho
different influenza vaccines, shculd be inj.ctx! later on with
livin- influenza virus. This was not decided cn. iut no o’ Jecticn
-/ainst such decision, cculd le raised in principle, ’•s it corres¬
ponds completely with the views of respensil le physici-nrf. ,.s we
new knew frza present publications in tho scientific periodicals ef
•jr.crlcc, tho effectiveness cf influence vaccine cn huaan Lein s
has teen tested acccriin tc this procedure, in the United St-tas,
and as I heard, -Iso in Russia. licrnwhiio, I h.’.vt. ^isc h" d the


-ppertunity tc speak with /oaorican specialist coUoa. ues, who were

6175


21 Iprll-il-DJG-ll-3- Joehan (Lit* Lrcwn)
Ccux-t Nc. 1


actually wcrkin • cn this special sulject and who thecselves
carried cut these investigations. In their scientific prpers n
dear description sr.s iven tc the specialist world, as tc hew
they should injoct inoculated persons and the ncn-inoculrted
control persons i-ith livin virus, viz. l.y -temizin- the virus
end csitin - them inhalo it. .. ccspcriscn was then node as to hew
cany cf the inoculated and ncr.-inocul: ted persons fell ill after
the voluntary infection, rnd from this, the stren th cf the inocu¬
lation is taken in in'Avi ual c'-sos.

"Fren the information iven here, it fellows, that no natter
whether only the first cr the second su osti n as well, wero ode,
nc further ol Jactions existed in principle. But, as to hew for
this wrs the case w*s evidently net quite ole-or to Dr. hose, free
the statenants cf the specialists^ and this explains why ho raisod
c waminp voice rr.i node remarks r> cut the principle cf .luitifi-
or.ticn. It rise shews clorrly and distinctly ,fr. hose's root
sense of rospensi* illty, when he expressed in the ccst ir-prossivc
was his su’- Jectivc chj-cticns -fere r wide circle cf people.

If he did this here in opposition tc su • -stilus which “re net
contradictory to th- ^or;l c-dicol ethics cr the laws cf hum-nity,
it is quite cut cf tho question to consider that he hrd approved
cf acts which did not confers tc any greater do -roe with theso
demands which ho had sc stren ly supported."

There fellows tho si nature and the certification.

New further I would like tc put in heso Dccum-nt Nc. 20, Hose
Exhilit No. 1 , cn p cs 10 and 11 in the s-.ao document l ock.

This is an affidavit ly Dr. Gocr:c Fin ,r of 6 Fc ru-ry 1947. In
view cf the foot that this Affidavit also c.nc^rns the cciteultin;
conference, I sh-ll dispense with re-din- it, *ut I pcint out that
precisely Dr. Fin- r can very clo*rly rcncal cr tho incident, which
arose as a result cf Dr. Ixse's pretest.

Dr. Schncll says at tho conclusion of his nffid-vit that
Irefesser Schrcitxr stated that tho experiment'1 sul j-cts cf Dr.


6176


21 April— ^-DJG-U-t—iteehan (Int» Drew)
Court So. 1


Dir-jj were cridnals condemned tc dccth. i’rof oeacr ;;ruck, t.hc xns
else c witness to this occurence, soys nothin- clout that. Dr.

Dlunen' orc -lac soys nothin,; on this point, but he dcc3 mention
th t your protests were msvered in the conference. Dr. Fin*>r s'ys
simply you aeintainod y.ur point of view despite the fret th'.t
were crirdn:ls ccndonncd to derth, but he dees net ary '-he made this
statement. Dr. i.taor spoeka cf the possibility t!v t cneth-r Si
physician end not the sen rerdin the p'.per hr., answered ycur protest,
end which cf these various str.tooents are correct md the did make
that statement?

k It is cf course ocoprehuisiDle, after the four years that
now have presort, that thoso non c»n no Ion-or rascsicr what
happened wor*. for werJ, ’-ut dc rascal er the ossonti'-l frets, and
it is underst.-ndcllc th t there are individual discrepcncies in
the testimony of Just vho did wtirt. This »• tt.-r, 's 1 a-id, was
stricken from the record md nc cno ern refr-ah their c..ncry with
the help of tho fldnutoa. 1 rcaoa or very clearly th t Din.*, answered
no. Ke-on also described here in his tostia ny ns r witness that
Din* had told lan that he had r show-down with so. That is the way
I ruacc* cr it, and, s f-r ca I knew, Schrciler said that U re wnv«
crinltiftlo eendtflnol to doc*h; nc, Din ; - an Ida rnevor arid that they
wore cried nrla norwl'vwv/i tc death. Scnetldn.* which I k'»v.'.« "bout but
which the ethers attendin' the confuronm did iot hat about. Ihen,
Sahr-dber intorf>»rr/l, wl.-’n I op-k. for *h» n..» n*’ M in cri.r to
put an «.nd tc. this dis-Jiaait!.. It in deo thou -h i

swear to it tod'y, th t ho arid a.methin to tho effect that Din-
said that they »o o criminals conduonei tc death sc wo would net
hevo tc r.ct excited about it. Th't is pcsai le -«d 1 don't knew
today, he Dr. ..tour w~s urrj-r the impress!cn th-t this wra mother
SS doctor, he sold tht t least that w- a pcsai' le. I ern say th t
I resent ^r that several SS officers woro present, at I cm cnly
rescue er that they stayed entirely in the Uck:rcun. rni did not
p-rticip-.te in the discussion -t " 11 .


6177


21 .;pril-J-3JG-li-Wcch?_- (Ir.t, brown)
Ccurt Nc. 1


From the evidence autadtted, it con tc seen that you were
pa rticulerly excited at the tine; even Kc;cn, who had only heard
cf the nett-.r, speke cf r particularly violent discussici: here;
non why were ycu sc excited f* tc refce such wi iapressien <n the

witness.

» The su’ Joct cf this whole discussion rr s /. .\attv;r cf c v solute
fundtuncntal principle tc sc in ry profession, cf course, t!i.n
excited co TC-.tly,

h ’•hat did ycu knew r ;ut the tjpc cf the ixp-ri-a.ntrl

su’ jeets?

.. I kne^ that 3il CGcistur hrd told r.c 't .ur first n-ctinr
rnd wh.*t Centi hed c:rrr’ cr'tod, wh't Din - r \in f.ufirnoi, in this
pu!lic »rcurecnt f th- su'Jeet in thrt these were criiinrls ccndcmed
to donth. Thon I was -isc told by these In uch-.T aid, vhc had net
f.'llon sick, that thiy had Ucn threu h typhus, t: v hi eh they
a.ttril utcxl their immity, in :>r,‘it ’ efen. they hr/: Veen ccndcanc-J.

Ur. . resident, I cu ht say th't .*-• it v. the 're-trial
prison in :-rlin, r. prison known tc vvery p.rrcn ir, l-rlin. Thcro
is c section cf Lurlin cr._lcd u;c: it and if Ki-ocno says that ho
was sent to Ucr l it, th t cf ccursu Roans he w.s sent tc, this pre-
trial prison.

'.,hy did ycu urko this ouch n principle prf.La; ycu ro c
doctor end as a research rvn kr.er that Qoiic-1 exp.-i-on.nts net with-
cut i'n-.r had previ. .sly ' <-cn crrivd cut cn criminals condom«-d
to do: th?


*


6178


21 April 47-*J-Stt-12-l-Cook-Int; 3rcwn
Court No. 1

... You are now asking a question of decisive inport-
r.nco rogrrding ny notivos in tils whole natter; and
General Trylor in his opening statonent on pago 55 of
the Goman roccrd donandod, and I quote:

"It is our duty to oxposo with crystal clarity bho

•

idoas and notivos that load tho d of or,d ants to do what
thoy did."

I agroo with the Chief of Cour.sol. This is ono of
tho nost important quostior.s, anA ccr.soqucntly I
should liko to answor ti ls qucotlcn horo in so::o
dotail.

I shall stato ny own opinions and also vhr.t I
know of ny own oxporionco about tho rotivos of other
sciontiats who arc today flood and cannot answer for
thonsolvoo.

You asked why I notoatod against oxp^rinonts
on human boinga. Of courao, I lenew that such ox 4 ti r-
inento bad boon corriod out but eovoral cloar ccnsid-
orations holped to dutoniino ny attitudo.

^irst of all tho ccncopt of tl o criminal condonnou
to doath. This, of ccurso, in tho la st analysis ie
a puroly ouotionr.l reaction. For tho jurist and many
puoplc Who aro accustoned to thinking in formal toms
this nay perhaps bo a ncro elnplo question, '.lien a
BV’-n is condonnod to do..t- by law, tbon for thorn this
is an ordor, and th- t is tho way it oust be. Tl o
jurist concorns hi: iso If -*lth the legal phasos. Me has
a hoi vy res ioncibility to carry in rudeing \ ocisione,
Sjt the matter is sottlcd md the judgment ..Tusfc bo
carried out. I an not a jurist, and ny ctitudo is
sonobwt.t differont. I have boon muni f r enough
in the world ttc know hew extraordinarily revoring

6179

_l 'r* ... Mm M — -• -


21 April 47-H-ST-12-2*Cook-Iht; 3rcwn
Court Ho. 1

cad rolativo concepts of law .-jo, T3ioy differ not only
fron country to country and fror. pooplo to pooplc,
but within tho amo country they can chan go dim t-
rlcr.lly in c short ti::o. This is truo in norr-.l ponco-
ful ti.:oa :nd nil tho roro true in politically fonont-
ing tinos cr war tinos. Often tlnos r. nan is punished
for a crino which otl.or thousands cr persons rogard
r.s an act of hi.rcis.., and th.ro is settling clso to
bo nddod here, end I s aid wkon I answered that tho so
woro criminals c ndorned to donth, nanoly, that it was
r. fundanental professional quosticn. For :io in riy
profession as a hygienist and rosoarchur into tho
question of inuinlty, I hr.vo alroady said horo how
wo normally procood in ordor to tost a now v .ccino.

The tolerance is tostod cn hurr.n beings bocauso that
is aoriot! ing that si::ply cannot bo aacortainod in
tho rninal oxporlnont. Of courso, you c*r. find except¬
ions. Bio ling's Tidr.vit states suci an exception,

•horo tho protoctivo value cf tho n ccino is tostod by
infocting tJ~ hunan boing, but tkuso ro only except¬
ions; and so far s I could survoy the whole fiold,
thoro w.ro oxcoptions v' ich happened oxclvsivoly
abroad and I , as a hygienist and irxnmity researcher
did net rant that this practico to boc^.jo co s:cn in
Oo runny. I foared such would establish . preevdont. Of
courso, I also was porfoctly cwnro o. f tie crucial
position in which wo four*’ ouraolvos with roynrd t<
typhus vaccines, but I shall clarify this whon I
discuss tho technical side cf tho or.por onts, whorons
now I an discussing tho othical aspects. I was afraid
ti t if t} is iothod woro undertakon in tho quosticn cf

typhus vaccines, thr.t vory scon thcro would bo a do . nd

6180


21 April 47-:r-Sr-12-3-Cook-Int: Thrown
Court No. 1


tc r.pply it r.lso tc ether vaccines cr ether problems.

I ai> a specialist end knew this fiold wall enough,
and I know what oncr.rus advantages a research worker
would ke.vo if ve woro perfectly at lib'orty to carry
out buunn boing oxporluonts, but lore, as tho ;.dvr.n-
tago was ovi ionc t r uy reasoning, novortholuss ay
a'iotion3 r^voltoa against It, I was acting cn tho
principle of 'principo ia s.batr.t', :jv. 1 if one 1 I 003
net coubat such torx’.oncioa in tho v-ry boginniny they
got out of hand. Owt' w 2 tho socon pi int. *-na thon
thirdly thoro w a a puroly practical consideration.

Frou 1921 I worked in oxporlnonfcr.l nodicir.o in ivany
countrloa end I l*ncw with what prejudices i.iy profession
ia boaot. In wido public circles wo r.ro cursod cut
r.a torturors cf nnlcr.ls, bocauto cur fiold of i:^.un-
clow has to work in nni:ml uxporir.onta. Otherwise,
wo cannot work r.t .11, If then in r.Jdltion to this
projudico thoru should bo brought also tho :iuch x>ro
aorinu3 chr.rgo of hunan bolng uxporiaonta thon that
would throw ay pivfosaion ov-n doopor into tbo aodinont,
Ti;on thuro ia r. fourth psychological point. J!r.

HcHanoy, in discussing Profoaadr T'ip.ko'a attitudo
toward tho breathing expurironts, sr.id nu I quote:

"If Kipplco kn«,w that U oro r?uro criminals crncormod
to doath thon everything ras in rdcr and ho r.ood havo
no scruplea.

I boliovo t* t this scr.toaent of Ur. hoEanoy ccciplotly
ui3undorstands tho psychological factors that play a

a

rolo in tLia problon. I havo alro. dy said t!..t purhaps

tho jurist's attitude toward this is different. Tho

jurist has the heavy profess cnal rosp: nsibility of

putting into oxocuticn tho & oath v ordlct, or as

6181


21 April 47-H-S -12-4-Cook-Int : Brown
Court No, 1


pr s^cutor , he has the rosp.nsibility of requesting

such a verdict, but onco that has hr.pponod, tho nr.ttor

is clc3od ac :.a he is concerned, and thon tho

nr.ttor applios, fir.t Juafcitir., Hie very ethical

rosoarchor who is ihtor^stod only in scientific know-

lodgo, night also c mo tc the conclusion that onco r.

aontonco has boon passo&, ho try fool indifforont • s

tc whether tho nan is hanged or whether ho is killed

in a nodical c xp-riuont, but for r. ran n' c is not

a roaoarch fanatic, very ossontial considerations of

anothor s?rt play a rrlo, In Hichorwald 1 zjyso If saw

tho aorioua stato of illnoss of tho centre 1 persons who

had not boon vsccinatod, and I was undor that iirprossion.

After Kolzloohnor p: ssod cn tho froozing oxpcrlnonts,

I happonod to a peak with Prcfeacor Holzlrohnor, at

J’urnborg. Fron hia pc.por I could not cloarly soo tho

c- nnoctien, Conaoquontly, aftor Ma locturo I choclcod

into thlo natter and saw what on onenrus spiritual

burdon was placod cn Profossor Holzlrohnor by having to

go t trough this oxporlonco, bocaueo ovon a person

crndoinod tc i oath is a hurra boing. Ho can suffor pain

-nd new tc rotrrn to Hlppko, I knew hio personality

end coupletoly understand Ids attitudo, Hew I can

quito undo r s tend that if ho feund out tho do tails from

Hippko's ropert and fron tho othor roperts as to how

such oxporinc.' ts took placo, that that cculd havo boo n

quite enough fer hin to withdraw tlx> p^rnis3icn ho had

proviously givon, not knowing wlvt w.s going to go on,

And thon there is the fifth point, and you can say

about, this; This is professional ogoisri and has nothing

tc do with ethics, but as a r.vtivo it also plays n

rclo. Only the nest inpertant of oxporinents aro carriod

6132


21 April 47-U-S7:-12-5-Ccc>-Ir.t: Brown
C<-urt So. 1


out cn faunra boin£3. Many rosoc.rch ptrsms, o von ftor
the Str.to h..s s 1 '-' 0  it 1 3 pcrir. issicn f r thon, will
r.tttonpt to c vr.do enrryin z thon cut, siriply becr.uso
thoy r.ro not willing to tnko tho spiritual bur Jon
upon thonsolvos cf doing such oxporioontuticn. Thus
the danger c. risos r.t tho ucat inp- rtr.nt p.rt of tho
rosonrch, thr.t it el-culd fall into tl:o hands of tl o
puroly roaoarch fanatic, nv*. he is not tho happiest
roprosontativo of cur prcfosaion. You could any thr.t
tl ia ia not nr. othical consideration ’«ut it is r.
conaidor .tion n. vortholosc, l ow cl«l thia prcblon of tho
roaonrch fanatic in in rosuarch ;iodicino cm bo soon
fron Hell's br ck which tl o witnoas Liobrandt quetod
fron hero, r. prosecution witness, r.nd on prgo 557 it
says, rnd I qurto:

"If n doctrr dovetoa i luaoif tc rosonrch ho is ncro
or loss inclinod tc r 03 .- rd tho pntiontc fr \ this
print rf viow. u o is r.ll tci pr no tr uso r. pr.tiont who
ia trustod tc hii.i for tho solution cf r. scior.tiiic
prcblon find thus it hnppons thr.t ho put 3 tho interest
cf tho 3icl« porsen in tho soc ni placo. ifcia conflict
botwoon tho nodicr.l prefossion end tho roquirononta cf
acionco hr.s alro.uly boon tro;.tod in French litor.-Uiro
whuro tho dee ter sacrificed Mb pationt tr tho interest
cf scionco. 1 '

Hus wo soo tlv.; tho prcblor. of tho rosor.rch fanatic
is by no uonna a now rno bocr.uso tikeo w^rds I hr.vo

•

just quoted woro writcon in 1 S 00 .

HIE HIESIBEHT: ;.t tl is tiiao tin Tribunal will bo in
racos3. ^ounool rv-.y finish aftor tho rocoss.

(Tho C'urt adjourned fer tho no cn rocoss)


Court Fc. J

21 anr 3ter Cat. Y a Sch.ca)


«rai-.soas session

(The hear in.- reconvene* et 1C-30 fc urs, 21 1947.)

Tfc! *iAr.SKAl: The Tribunal is a.«;ein in session.

r.CSi - Feeuued

DH-iCC fcXAf.IFATICa (Continue*)

£T sa. fcilSZ FBITZ (C unsel f.r the defendant Soso):

v fcr fust r, fccf re the recess y u au ted a restate fr a the
t. Ic ncll. Fiuld y u dense cctinue t answer this im, rtant oues-
ti n?

a. ! sooke above all of the cortslderatioao which Influenced tho
doctor in tho orotle of exocrisunt?tioa n' I hare r. on Honed the ->rofc-
lon of tho rcstrrch f rattle and tho danger vfcich ho tcnlles for our
orofessioa. In consideration of this catlro nrofclo.j, aside fror: tho
doctor •jerforr.in^ tho eyericont, the-rw io a well-known historical
oxrc*:lo. '■hen tho Oriental nothod of variolation vas introduced in
iureno, not a vaccination with covnox, kin.; 5eor,: tho First ordered thrt
tho procedure he tested on fix crlnlnals vfco hod. toon condvraod to death.
The legation Doctor ..eitlrnd, who vas in char^o of carrying out this
croeri-.ont, rofuocd to oorfera the operation, not for nay ethical con-
sidorctions for tho fa.u of the txiori.-.entcl subjects, tut for tho
noreonal consideration that he ai^ht to co-.sid.crod an assistant of tho
harden if this c/ocriacnt shculc to unsuccessful. The rofusrl vpd
brought about ty fear of dana,;c to his ova r«. nutation. Maitland did
_o‘ -fit to «;ot into touch vith the hen.--.aa.

I cooko of the research fanatic boforc tut I io not van! to to
nisuaderstood. I do not v* r .t you to thirt :• •.-•csider every doctor
vfco accent* an essi.-naent for fcuunn exceil ..‘ cn antoelin*, cold, ro-
jtic. That would to unjust. I know too cany rcoccrch workers
•nr a easily vfco conducted, ex-oriuente on volunteers

'*■ and. on non-volufetVcrs. I, therefore, know ouitc veil "hat -ontal con-

\T*I

filets result fr.cn such vork for such e nan cad understand vfcpt an

eaomous burden i/«. feels hinsclf wfcofi he trices on such a task. The

61 - 31 ;


Court So. 1

21 -or 47-A-13-2-SEH--ot t er Cct. Ton Schoen)


prosecution end the rribucal a* jurors are ia the fortunate position of
n-ver having :een In touch with such a conflict, althcurh their profession
too involves serious responsibility. 2 0 then I cast er-lain this -hole
rs-icct of the problem of ctdical cx-eri pants 03 hu.:en beings. It vould
te useless to take examples from this trial. An impartial explanation
of tho real state of affairs would he very difficult with the persons
involved in this trial. I shall take as an example an experiment which
oust le discussed eayway because it fores the scientific basis and tho
imsdiato predecessor of the one for which I an held responsible horo.

- hlB is the first experiment for the development of vaccination with
living bacteria, living plague bacterle. If you lator read the corros-
pondir-; document you win see that theso exoerlr.cnts were conducted on
orliin/ili, on cricinals condc.med to death who wore not volunteers. You
will be atlo to read how the worker, the scientist, nrococdcd, step by
step, in this experiment with v»,ry snail Quantities of living bacteria,
,-rndually lncrons.d the mount until ho had reached tho onount necesoury
for vaccination.


21 April U7-..-ATD-H:—1-Oross (Int. von Sc boon)
Court So. 1


A (continued) If he than concludes the scries of experiments

with the conditions as astonishin; as it may sue-, with those large

■'osos, caused no serious consequences. And, if the fact that his

o

experimental subjects had fever up to hQ ho does not call that a

serious reaction. That nay seen to laymen a cynical remark but whoover

who knows this field of work and whoever knows this scientist

personally knows what amount of bit tor worry and concorn was borno by

this rxm throu h weeks and mnths that his theory right bo proved

false and that the persons nL;ht fall ill of plague an ' '-is of it,

ffcrr this oxpurinent irhich -.as conducted forty yoars aro is Justified

by its succors today. On that is based modern protective vaccino

a. ainst pla. uo with livir aviailont pla uo barilla. 3ut, thoro is

another aorios of ocp^riru-*nts conducted by the saioo nan, also on

criminals condoruw l to death. This tiao the experimental subjocto

had had to siioi an agrofloont that they su'sritted to the oxperinonts*

Th'jso woro experiments to do to mine the causo of bori-bori. For this

purposo the tLsoaso had to o caused artificially by inadoquato

nutrition. It was possi'lo to pro luco tho disease an' it is loacribod

ir. froat detail tow threu'h Ion weeks tho symptoms of this sorious

Hooaso dovdopod - paralysis, ainful neuritis, aoriouflheart ailnonta

ap carod which finally led tc tho loath of orv. opcrinuital subject and

tho porson was iissoctod a half an hour aft-jr loath. For the person

who docs not knor tho isoasc 3cri-B-ri it is difficult to iiaa-lno

th > s.irituel burden oh tho doctor who for wooks must obaorvo and nurso

these experimental subjects and nust rccor! all tho lotails of tho

synptens of tto dtsoaso which to himself has caused by his own measures.

This experiment was successful in so far as it was ? ssi lo to produco

a typical tLsoaso in a largo number of eqxrimantal subjects, but tho

-xporinont did r»t have scientific success. The answer as to what factor

ros th. raal cause of tho U.3oaso was not found because tho experiment

t.u 5 uneven in its course. Sven tto consolation of Justification by

"ucco3s was lackin'-, in this oxp-rLxnt to the ’actors who carriod it out,

‘ 6186


21 April IjT-.^KWW-Cross (int. von Schoen)
Court !fc. 1


to the C overmen t authorities who approval it, and to the persons rho

w- ro subjected to it. /hat burden this experience is on the loctor a

layr.cn cannot un’.eratan . The question ineHatoly results, "That is

the reason for a person voluntarily assunin-- this burden or accoptin-

it -'hen it is riven by crier of tho C-ovemaent authority?" It would bo

a cheap answer to find tho aotive or anbition for research fanatisn. I

know the real reason in this caso. I know the ran and the conditions

under which bo noticed. Tho driving forco was alone a foelin of duty

and responsibility — tho the fadin’ of responsibility to tho millions

of natives for ’diesa health ha was responsible that were dioin" by

hundrods an', tho-sands free this torriblo plaruo and the hundreds and

thousands that wore sufforin terrible pain fron this Bori-Bori diaoase.

The knowlodAo of having to help thoso pcoplo and still with tto stato

of knowlod-.o at tho tlno bain powsrloss. That was the reason to look

for non .-cans to toko such a burden on hinsclf and expectin ’ other

People to subnifc to such sufforin . Tho or^rii^nts which I have boon

spookin'. about wore carried out by Profossor Richard P. Strong. Ho was

Public Health officer in •.anUla at that tine, lator professor at

Harvard University in Boston and Chain an of tho ''odical Socioty for

Tropical ’'odicino. I hope : that tho prosecution woul! not attempt to

’isni33 the .cork of this hi hly rospootod rosoarch worker with tho words,

"Thoro cro criminals evcryvhoro". I ask you to boliovo uo that Stron;- was

i r.ar. cf rcatest foelin*f of duty and responsibility and of tho highest

ythic3 ar.* if the Prosecution doos not boliovo that ho can consult his

■ixjort, rrofossor ..loxandor bocauso ho i3 a doctor fron Boston and ho

probably knars Stron oven hotter than I do. But, I ask you to boliovo

-o - that in ethics an’ notivos of nost Gcman 'octors who consented to

oako over the collaboration in such oxpjrinanfcs woro not so onornously

ifforont fron thoso of their forei r. colloa. uos in the sano situation.

Tnjrc are three dead Goman professors in tho dock today - President

dil -.-ixistor, Eppir.ar of Vienna, an Professor ifelsloehner of Kid.

“ecauso thoy are dead they nro oven nore exposed to the ’.efonso and

6137


21 -,pril t7-~~-.n>-ll:-3-Grcss (Int. von Schcon)
Court So. 1


critic!an teforo the Tribunal than »e who at l.aat have tho opportunity
to 'ofand cur3elvo3. For tint vary reason I feel obligated to apeak for
these gontlenon today although at the tine vhcn they ware dcdnr their
work I was definitely opposed to this. Pros twe of these con I knor from
their own uouths that they - that is Gil d e o eistar and Holzloehnor - were
influenced by foeline as doctors their duty to provent disease and
distress that they 11 not accept thoir :»rt li htly and without re¬
sponsibility 0 But personally ’Yofessor Gildcceistor said that to no in
cur conversation. I do not knot: howovor about Professor Eppin or fron
his own nouth since I no7or 3poko '« hie but I know his personality
enough so that I nay include in this ctatceaant as well.

KU H.JUJY: Ycur Honors, I sud:ot that tho dofonlanb is "oing
outsido of tho scopo of this caso ’-/afore tho Bar an', tho axardnation
■Iscontinuo alonr those linos an’ cone back to tho issue of this
oaso. I didn»t oh Joe t to hin ivin tho example of Professor Strong
ovon though the Tribunal has ruled that such ovi ’er.co will bo taken
up at a la tor date, I think that wo havo one far -•nou-h along thoso.
linos an’ roquost tho Tri'ruml to Instruct ’ofonno counsol to continuo
hia oxardnation on tho issuoo,

T J .E PTESIFENTt Th.; defendant has taken tho stand an a »dtno 3 s in
his own -’ofonso. Ho i3 ontitlod to to3tify to ary facts which ho
blicvoa sfynil'’ bo placod boforo tho Tri’ uml for that defenoo which
ho has. But, natters of arv.unont should not bo intro ducod by tho
witness. His counsel nay ar uo tho caso an! draw knowledge fron tho
oxardnation which ho thinks would bo . urtincr.t and which ho thinks would
help the Tribural, But, tho testinony of » • . s should bo linitod

to facts which in his opinion boar upon his 'afonso.

A ray I reoaric foot I beliovo that hare 1 vas -ivim absolutely

factual tostinony on b-half of these non because Chief of Counsol in

his introduction spoko - expressly .’ananded that the notivos of the

afonlants bo presented here in all clarity, "y actives w?ra influenced

by :-y oxp-riences and work abroad. ‘ I v anted to explain her.- to what

6168


21 „pr\i . 7-v,-..ro-lWi-Grosa (Int. von ^ckcen)
Court To. 1


extor.t ^y considerations, :y decisions, in this question were influenced
'-y ry own personal approval.

}f;. Hi’.TDY: Your Honors, the Prcsocution true is interested in
fin •'in out actives of the defense. <o are oore interested in finding
out the no tiros of Professor "oso had in *:ein~ implicated in these
.attors but wo are cot interested in the cotivos of Oildeneistor and
Sppirvier and others. “To are only interested in the aotivos of the 23
defendants in the toot at this tine.

TIG PTCSIEEJm Tho Tribuml pomittod the witness to proceed so
far but as to natters of extraneous ar;uaant by analo y to what
othur ’octors ho has known havo :lono is not particularly pertinent
to this case and counsel nay ar uo in briof any natters which aro
'o>'iod porUnont as local nr uaent tut the witness should limit hij>-
cclf noro to facts with his own dofon3c.

/. VS\y I add Just one santonco perhaps that, of course, I did not
intend ir. ry atatovints to include Dr. It anchor and Din . If ho ti.-n»t
any that I an in tho tiary - that scans tho stat<*i-nt3 wore intorruptod,
ttoy night bo distributed to that offoct. Thon formulated list of
various roasons which occasioned no to protest oxporlnonts ovon on
crirdnalo condemned to 'loath. I would not want this onomous chargo
*° bo bayed on our profession. In addition to all that wo havo to boar
•ithout it. ;.b hjr ionists w 0 spend our lives anon human niaory and
anon oxporirontation. l 0 aro sent to places from where othor pooplo
floe. It is a natter of courso for us to risk our ovr. livos fron being


exposed.


Court 1

April 21-rt-15-l-HD-Karro w-v nSchon.


I don't know how army doctors and assistants in the more
than fifty years of the Robert Koch Institute heve died
thorw froa infections acquired in the laboratory.

Certainly more then twenty. There is no memorial toblet
in their honor. Such “a sacrifice 16 e lven silently. It
is simply noon-, th- ethics of our profession an* therefore
on- will probably underst nd ny uuslre to preserve at
least ay h>n-r.

Kow, to conclude this wr.ule consideration of the

ethical aspect a few worv.8 cbout the volunterrlnt of the

experimental subjects, and *n an experiment dangerous

to life wnat this means to the aoctor performing the

experiment. I am by no coons so one-sided researcher

th* t I would not realize that the question plays u very

important role from tno log*! point of view, but iron

the medical point of vlow I cay emphasize that there is

a v„ry definite O rour of experiments which includes, for

example, the typhus experiments in Buchonwnid, the yellow

fever experiments in Cube, the sabcoolln-. exp-rlmunts of

holzloehner in which the doctor in t enorrl, including

myself, must oonsiuur It immoral to take volunteers.

Thu spiritual burden on tn- uoct-r con^uctln^ tne experl-

aent is, In euch a c oe, intolerable. u docs not h ve

tne ri^ht t j accept an oifor of suicide, ouch experiments,

in my opinion, ar ndaiselblc only if tnu person wno holes

the et to authority determines the pursors from nwon 6

the -r^up of persons w..o nave for: . • ...ir lives through

committing deeds r. t oln6t society. That I, for ay person,

reject this netnod nlto^uthur I already stated publicly

years CfcO. The prosecution has already admitted this

6 a fact. I am not any ini this for thu first tlce here

ir. the court room. In the interests of my profession, ns

- 6190


Court 1

« ril 2i-«-15- -Hi*-karrow-von Schon.


g eseerch worker and for the eedic 1 profession 3 desire
fer oil future that human society «nc those wno hold
state sovereliRt; shall not inpose this bitter -uty on
es. I know tar t that Is ccrely my personal opinion, ana
nlstory teaches that ct all tin^a and in many states the
^eclsljr. was different and that there have always been
aorally hl L n doctors who believed they were f ulflllin-
:.ieir duty by carryln e out each experiments. On various
opportunities when I dealt with problen I presented these
c-naiuerotlona which I .v- vc presented here durln D half
cr. n.-ar are, lh effect, contoin-d in tnu one sentence
wit.. w..lch I Involuntarily reacted when Sild-molst^r,
for the first tine, told _o, and I therefore repent this
sentence. "If this method occ./Cos the fashion, tnen
we turn over ell immunology to tr.o h«ne®nn c.n« open a
s >eci 1 wXeC-tion department here in th^ Institute. 11
...is fe.lln 6 was tho decisive one in tnls problem. In
my statements I einphaalted tno spiriturl ourdon on the
doctor wuo must conduct this experiment. I hove spoken
very little >f the victim of the experiment, for the
simple reason tr.-t the vholw pi*oblom lies with the doctor
n*- -rises fr>c the au ferln_ of the victim to whom the
doctor c.r.duetin- the experiment is nearest, and tnls
sym-'tny witn the victim o: tu experiment Is such a
matcer o: c arse for r accent ».a.r that * would not
even mention it i. I .-1- r.ot see tne danger tnat, because
f tne fril-r^ t- mention t..is olr.t of view, one-«i e ht
l td* -lstort _y statements.

Is t.ic view of the problem of dangerous exporl-
j .ts on numn.-. i.ln-e w..lch yo- neve just propounded the
-r.v.r?l opinion of ; 11 doctors?

«. Certainly net. Otherwise experiments cn human

6191


Court 1

« rll 21-~-lo-3—-.i>-karrow-.'on dcnon.


bein ; a would not be os co&aen :e tooy actually - re. It
v. -1- r.ot be approved by the state.

^oa quote- froc Hill's boot about nedlcol ethics.
Jjea this wore ctoally h v*. tne fundamental Importance
:'.r tnc a.«-lcal profession which the witness Loifebrandt
escribed to it?

«. Tn:t 13 certainly not tnc co6e. Actors, if they
ore Jer-nna vac think about ted leal etr.ics certainly know
cn« book, out neon- otr.er doct-ra there say be perhaps
two r.xon^ * hundred v. o know it.

«nu now ao ou feel r:>ut the contents of this

book?

a. It is undeniable tlv.t the a-thor trl-s to deson-
atrrte a very hi t h lueol of the medic -1 profession but
the book also s. .ows very clearly ti.-’t he 19 aware th t In
r cticnl 11 . . t/.ln^s -re very often different from what
he ..oman-s as r-r. lueol. residue, the cock w a .-.uolishsd
f ji-ty-fivu ye ra . _.o nd, of course, is o’cs leto on
-any ooints today.

.v-„w -o *>u f-el abiut tno ;int of view expressed
in tOw book about -xpcrlu^nts or. human oeir..a nu ->n
animals?

a. Fundamentally, a^ll writes whot Is c .v. ttor of
c are- fur every,no, cut In tale fl»l- it 16 v.ry
efinitely s.iown toot t.u o^ok is influenced oy lta time.
—11 consl-ors laaunircti n • .r.lnst l mu p.j Inst
;ln c ue as experiments on n—r.n bwJ.. -• u n unad-^eslble
eroorlmont. I^n y«- 6 ■ ftcr j-ibllootion o. the

--•* these -ct..-us wo: - .cnorull. us*,d. ho also expresses
-ejections t i vaccln tl^ne against diphtheria on- a ilnst
tonus. Today, failure to carry jut tneee measures con,
•n-or certain clrcucstrnces, -e le .ally nros-cuted. But

6192


Court 1

-•* rll 4-LD-Karrov-Von bchon.


the control purpose of this trlcl xoll docs not deal
with at nil. The question of whether the state has the
ri ; hc to force individuals to submit to medical
uxp«3rlQent8 and to order doctors to conduct such exoerl-
--nts. One ai^.ht brln t one sentence from tnis oook into
this connection. On p: t e 500, .-oil says that the research
scientist fans no ri ht for executive such as the t overn-
□ent claims. «t tnis time he rejecta experiments by a
doctor on nis own initiative, but he obviously permits
ex criments with it to approval. In his lon c statements,
••loll repeatedly objects to experiments on patients,
particularly oxourl.wr.t8 3 .. nopelesaly ill patients which,
in tn^ past century, w a so common, so viuo-sproad tnat
there was a special tecnnlccl expression for it. It
w s c lied "the experiment or. the corpus vile". Sven
toda. this experiment has net «i6aopenrod completely
tv.a literature. From the document which Dr. borvatlus
submitted here we ft vc seen thot tne Military Oovernmont
itself apparently still considers t.-.ls ex-.-rl.uont
Surmioolblo. .it only one point 00 s Moll approve of a
.overnaent approved experiment. Th~t is the well-known
loser ox-erlrcent by the *meric-n Dr. Arning on a murderer
condomned to deoto, and Moll admits th~t others could have
a different oolnlon. "bother it Is worthy of a doctor
to -erferm such an experiment - here the oolnt of vlow
of medical ethics of a doctor is roocatodly the
rovrlllnK one, not thrt of the victim, and of the
volunt-rlness. Moll comes to the conclusion that
voluntariness under such conditions could not be ethi¬
cally recognized. That is on page 539 of the book
which Lelbbrnndt quoted. Also Moll objects to the

v.lidlty of such declarations of voluntariness which

6193


Court 1

April 2i-*-15-5-HD-Knrrov-Von Schon.

are often included in publications of roedlcnl work. He
troves tr.nt they ere quite generally untrue. First of all,
:e cause of the incapacity of the cxperlaental subjects
for cosine to any Judgment because of the influence
exerted by the authority of the doctor -nd fear of
consequences o. refusal. But the decisive point is that
>J>11 Is soe&clng only of ex erlsonts on p tionts ond not
on experimental subjects uetercined by the iOvernment.
to th- t extent the c.-ot tier, of Av. i-eibbrandt wee not
aooliccble to this trial.


6l9l»


21 April !i7-u-AlD-lS-l-J^aloy (Int. von Schoon)

Court !io. 1

Actually ;'oll knew about s tat© expirirents. The sn.ilipox vaccines
on cririnals, orphans, sol Hers, were knam, :foll deals with tho
transfer o? venereal disoasc to patients, a a! knew the experiments con¬
ducted 'rj order of the French Government. Ho must have known of
Huffpon*s oxperinents with fclacuo vaccine carried out in prison in
Bcnbay. That all happened before tho publication of his book. If he
ices not corEont on this problem at all I can only conclude that ho
approvod Stato approvo! exporlri-nts. Ho aaphasizod repeatedly that tho
<ar loos not havo the ri ht of axocutdon, that is up to tho state.

Q What do you knew; about tht copinions of tho doctors who con¬
sider state approvo! exporlnonts on human boin;s aboisaiblo?

A I havo alroa^r sai ’ in vy protest against Ding's locturo I
lid not fin' any uniform approval avrocnont. If you will look at tho
record of this rooti* you will find a sontonco there which cscaporl
tho ottention of tho Prosocutor, but which cloarly shows, for a
participant in the nootin , that ho was op-osod to thoso oxp.:rimonts,
and it proves that thoro was Iscussion a* out it. On pa^o 111 thoro is
a sontonco, "Such ojp orir-onta aro nocossary." This sontonco rofors to
tho discussion cnl this statcn.mt is proof that tho listonors, tho
*u Itors, boliovod slnco Din had issuod thci this that tho oxporl-
ncntal subjocts voro criminals con-’t mod to ’oath. Othondso, thoro
would rot havo boon anyono in public nootin? who would havo expressly
approvod such oxporlnonts. Certainly net tho por3on responsible for
t.iis sontonco, whoso lifo achievement in thj service of humanity and
hie international reputation could prctoct him from openly participatinp
in any action not in tho interest of humanity. Bosiios I have answerod
this quostion alr&a ^ ih ry funlanontal statement.

•

. FHIT2: 'r. President, this renark was made by Professor
Uhlonhuth. This is in do so Docunont 38, in Voluno III. I havo already
submitted this docunont as H 030 Exhibit 10, They are tho copies of the
report of tho third noetdn on pa-o UU of the Document book, last
Pararreph, page 111 of tho ori Inal. Professor Uhlenhuth is speaking of


21 April Ji7-iv-»-T3-l6-2-Jfaloy (Int. von Schoen)
Co-rt Jfo. 1


the typhus experiments. Cn pa-jo Ii5, first paragraph, the second lino from
t;» and thero is the sentence which the lofondant 'Jose his emphasized,
"Such experiments are necessary." This sentence shows that admissibility
was liscussod at tho mootin' on the basis of Frofessor RosqIq protest.

All theso statcconts about a.bdssihility were stricken out of the state¬
ment of Schroibor, but this statement of fTofessor Uhlonhuth was
forgotten*

Q Vfhat do you know about the reasons for this protest being
ip norod, and the typhus oxporimints bain;; carried out in spite of it?

A Ttey ara in ;art contained in tho explanation which Conti cave,
but tho rosult is tho experiment from tho situation prevailing at tho
tino. In tho dntor of 19U1—19U2 i.o woro at tho to~innia- of an enormous
tyi huo opi Ionic. It was cloarly to ’ o soon that it v.'ould bo serious, 'hat
typhus neans durlry- wartime or tew many human victims it noons, overy

loctor knot73, not only hi lenists, an 1 evory layman knows that who looks

•

at Cincor * s book, the ..ujrican typhus works, "’Ion. Lico and id story."

That is typhus axporlcunta Jurlr. tho la3t war. In view of tho now typo
of wnrfaro it was not intorruptod in tho winter, whoro obvious at thnt
time the uso of vaccines thoroforo was of importance. Roconizirv: value,
thoro was only ono vaccine, tho oi''l vaedno from lico intootinos, and
rith this oxporinent in Puchonwald ;rovod that our ju ’,-nynt which socood
basod or. tteocpcrionco of 10 to 15 yoar-3 was mistaken. ~o all believed
that this vaccine pretootod apainst infoction. In Buchurwald wo saw that
this was not truo.-3ut orx thin- ms certain, in tho caso of this lico
■r. ccino that it would bo impossible evor to produco it in an adoquato
mount. In tho d-l proco*uro ovory louso aust rccoivc an injection
separately in tho roctun, Tho into3tino of each louso nust bo sopr^ated
Separately. For ono doso of vaccine you must ; at from 50 toil25 louso
ii.tastinos. Ono louse needs sovorrl meals of blood ’-lily. Tho louso car.
o fed only on human boin s. Thoro is no other neans of foadin- lico in
tho laboratory, oven an infeeted louso can only feed on human beings. 7/o
thoroforo need in tho laboratory hundreds of people who Jo nothin;; except


21 April ii7-.;~A7D~l7-3-‘ ialoy (Int. von Ichoan)

Court Ho, 1

lot thonsolvea be bit by lice, That mkes it dear oven to layrmr. what
difficulties thoro aro in this prcco dure, naturally, thero are other
ifficultios, If one broods allllons of lice then thara ere eplderics
anon? tho lice. Then suddenly the n il lions of lice are load. But I don*t
vmnt to go into do tails. In rp o lity it is even noro difficult than I have
ioscribgi. Hut now at the very bayinning of tho war wo have nor.' pro¬
cedures that have boon dovolopad anon;- vaccine specialists, and wore
dovolopixv; our opinion about the value of those procedures, ifforont
noonings like black an *. white, but in tho concentration of those vaccir.os
thoro wna no clarity at all. Tho responsible a.-n of tho health sorvico,
like Conti, for oxruaplo, wore akin c 'ifficult digest, uffuctin;; tho
lifo of thousands an;', tons f thousands of hunan \oinrs, and tho decision
had to bo and* instantly, Typ" roul*. not wait, Thr epi’aiic was thoro
an'* was callin'- for victims, hun’rods ovory ay. Tho opinions of tho
spocialio.ta did not yivo ary holp to tho dofinito authorities. Tho
specialists disputed oach othor am' did not knew vhat was right, but
ono thinr* was cortoin if a falso docision was roacho!, if a wrong de¬
cision was roacho! this oistoko nonnt tho doath of thouoan's or tons
of thousands of huran beings. It wa3 said hero onco on thy witnoss stand
that oxporinonts on hunan beings to dotomlno tho valuo of typhus
vacoino 'fas not nocossary, bocauso an tnomous opldonic would have
offorod tho best opportunity to tost tho vaccines in jractico without
ary cxporlnont. Such a stat<oont can bo :ado only by a j-jrson w^o has
no idoa whatovor about what testing of vaccino and opidoniolo ical
uvaluatinc of vaccines noons. First of all, chat is testin'? In practioo
it noons nothin- but that lar^o groups of .^oolc aro vnccinatod with

0

various vaccines, and thon another roup ia x ft Without vaccination,
an’ thon ono waits to seo herr nary peopLo Hall ill, and hor nany dio in
the various groups, That is tho norrr.l proco Hiro in ncrml tir.es, It
cannot bo dono without .loath. On the contrary ono need neroly look at
thj statistics on such opi \<d olo ical evaluations in or der to know what


EUhburs of deaths thero aro. If after sore period of tire, after several

6157


21 April U7-i,-« 73-1’.sloy (Int. von Schcen)
Court No. 1


jean perhaps, the statistic^ are sot up, then I can detornine Vaccine-A
was excellent. Only a few people fell ill free "A", and only a vary
snail nicbor died* Vaccine-3 was considerably worse, ani there were
nary illnesses and nary died, and Vaccine-C was no good at all. People
diod like flies in that group. The whole thine has cost a few thousand
lives. The nan at the task can console hinsolf if ho had not vaccina tod
at all they would have died anyhow, but it is a higher power I have
nothing to do with. I selected tho various vaccines on the basis of
laboratory results, that Vacdn^C '.hich was so prord si nr according to
animal oxporinonts would bo a cooplato failure on human beings nobody •
could prodiot. I an not rjsponsihlo for the death. That is how tho
thing looks in theory, but how about practico? A theatre of war is not
a laboratory whoro ovary .uinoa pi;, has his number. Fleoin-j nassos of
pooplo rush back and forth, Tho atatenonts which individuals mko when
they are accoptod into hospitals are noro than quostionablo, They <Von»t
have thoir shot record any noro. You cvro forcod to rely on oral infor¬
mation. o havo oxporioncod horo that in tho third nonth of tho trial
typhoid and typhus and tho vaccines are confusod, althou-h it has boon
repeatedly pointed out an! although tho intorproters are no doubt
obovo avoropo in intaL'ifoneo. One can imagine what happonod,
quosUonir.” pationts about thoir vaccination, ospocially if thoy woro
a3kod what typo of vaccines woro used, vhothor lico or lung vacoino
or ogr vaednos. No doubt say in tho .'ohraacht, tho iifforont vaccinos
are rocordod on tho paper of tho soldier. Ono nood only to issue an
^rdor that tho nature of tho vaccines bo rocordod correctly. Of courso
ouch ar. orlor is ivon, but how is it car?/;! <. ,t* In a different
section I looked at tho record book cf sol.-u.o. of -no Guraan 7ohrnlhht
for record of vaccinations, and I looted at the papers of captured
allied soldiers for vaccination entries, when I could ret a hold of
such papers.


21 April 47-A-JT -17-1-Mu .hm)Int: 3rrwn
C -art He, 1


I era only assuro you If cno wonts to sot up critical
statistics of such urtorinl, that is r. he polo ss tesk.

Ti o opidoriclcgical cvr.lur.ti, r. is r. useful prccoduro
in tines rf por.co with r. aero or loss rosi.lont pcpul-
".tirn. Uhacr war condtirns, tho co.ipr.rr.tivo ovc.lur.tion
cf various vr.ccinos is prr.cticolly inprssiblo. Ifthr.t
w.ro not so, thon wo would nr t hr.vo bad tho disputo
lasting fer doccdcs a »rg oxports r.b ut typhus raid
cholorr. vr.ccinos rnd thr.t is qui-.o r.n ndvcntngocus
construction for this trial end is shewn by tho follow¬
ing fret. The nr.tcric .1 cf typhus vaccinations wr.s
censidorod by various oxports in Ooraeny; for tho Arny
by tho Instituto r.t yrr.ccw raid tho I.uftwaffo r.lso sont
thoir rr.tcriol thcro raid did net cot up its r wn instit¬
uto, for tho civilian population f Gorrany. Giluo-
noistor colloctod this raatorir.l for tho Robort Kcch
Instituto; Otto in FTraikfert colloctod this natorir.l.

V/o hr.vo hoard fre n !!rugcwsky that ho colloctod such
nr.torir.l r r r tho Acr.Aony for tho Gonorr.l Govomnont,
rand it nr.o Budocko whe colloctod this i:r.torir.l r.t tho
\~:ra:.v Instituto. Up to 19-15 not n singlo no rf those
authorities wr.s in any position to nako ovon r. proliu-
lnj-.ry ropert about tho vr.luo of tho various vr.ccinos,
net to nonticn .irking r.ny publlcr.ti n. In all world
literature, up to today, with tho exception cf tho
VTrk of Uing, l <■ not . new a singlo succossful public-
• tun rn this subjoct. It nay cf c«'urso bo, sinco I
t.vo boon in custody f r two yor.rs, that something has
boon published in tho norontino.

^ioso prroticr.l difficulties rf opidoniologicr.l

ovalur.ticn cf vaccino procoduros 1 as boon long known.

ho Goman health loader, C cntlf f - cod tho docision

6199 ’


21 April 47-.;-S&-17-2-!!oolicn-Int: Brrtrn

Curt Ho. 1

of whether ho was airily to t r.!:o fcfco pert of his untostod
vr.coinos, producod in largo quantities end uso thon or
whothor ho wanted tc a si: tfco G< vomnent for approval,
in view rf tho groet urgoncy cf ti.o problon, to cbtein
en anawor through hur-en oxporincnts. Steto Socrotary
C nci t ck t'. is way. Ho clocidod that a nurobor cf
po pic, Jotorr-inod by tho state, woro to risk thoirlivos
end in pert tc sacrifice their livoo in rrdor to obtain
this nnowor on which doponlod tho livos rf thousands
:.f others. *>.0 steto authorities at tho tino took tho
rasp nsibility frr this, ns in all states it takoa tho
responsibility in v. nr tino for hundrods of thousands
cf hit sen livos boing 3 criflcod for nuch Icon important
r.lne. Hie roaulta hnvo Justified intolloctually ;ir,
Conti's docision,

Puroly intolloctually I said, d.o *\ichonnnld oxp^r-
hionts had f.vr lain results. 1 irst f all thoy showod
tlir.t boliof in tho pro toe tiro cffoct rf tcigl veccino
wea a Mistake, c.ltb ugh tils boliof sooood tc bo
basod n long cbaorveticn. Socc.xlly, thoy ahowod that
tho unoful vr.coinos did net pr-toot fr-u infocti n ,
ut ahi st certainly frrr. death, undor tl-o c-nlltions
cf tho Buoh.jnrr.ld oxporinonts. Ihird, thoy ah.twod that
tl.o Lbjocticn of tho ole logical orports of -ho ogg yolk
vaccines t tho lico vaccines we 1 x 3 unjustified, but
°ofi yelk, rabbit iunjo, end lico intestines w..rc if
oqm.l valuo. Wo ioarnod t» xo Only through tho Buchon- •
v/ald ox..eririonta« ihis led thovCy epon to ness production
<f typhus vaccin-s.

T3‘.c •Atca.cnnald exper inents s-< 1 :ud in tiiiO that rovorcl

vaccines woro usolosc. first, tho ..rrcoduro ^according t(

■;tr and Wohlrab, tho pr coduro nee rding tc Pen, tho

6200


21 April 47-A-S'"-17-5-!!oc’.^n-Int: Brcwn
C urt No, 1


proccdura cf ^lckcCtai- prcv;.so.:i f ml liickottsiu
auriro., tfcr t is v.cclno fr u c?g cultures,

Soccndly tho vcccinos cf the Boliring works which v:oro
rcducod* a cccrding tc Otto prccoduro, but with • thor
c.neontrr.tions. F inr.lly tho Ioron vaccine frrn m uso
livor. '*>.o vr.eeino cf tho Boh:-f.ng werks wore in nctu.nl
uso r.t thnt tino in tioupm'.o of doses. *lu>y always
ropro3ontod r. trend t *. of-lol. ’..it! cut those or.porinonts
tho vaccine, which wero roc.(riizod r.s usolo3s, wvuld
hr.vo boon preducod in 1 1-30 ia ntitioa, bocr.uso thoy
all hnd no tl ins in co J , t’.r.t tl oir tochnicr.l
preauction wr.o such siiv-or Id nuch cl:or.per thr.t thnt
of tho usoful vr.eeinos. In my cr.so, rno thing in
cor -r.in, tl t tho. victim f tils typhus Buchowr.ld toot
did not suffor in vr.in nd f...d not dio invr.in, Ihoro
wr.s only ono ohcico, biGgov or.crifico cf hum livos
ef pore ns '.otondnod f r V t purp'co cr to lot things
run their c. urco, t: ondm^or tho livoo of innu:;l>orr.blo
huuan ‘joints wh rcull bo o loctod net by tho Bolch
Crininr.l IVlico effioo buh by blind fr.to.

How uony pocplo woro cr.crificod vo ern fisxiro out
today; how umy pooplu mco ar.vod by ti.cso oxpor nonto,
wo cm of ccurso net prv.o. do indivl.’.ucl vhc owos
his lifo t-- those oxperi ents cico3 net 1 new it and ho
porhepo is ono of tho accusore cf t! 0 lecterr, wi o
assumed tl io difficult 6c.sk,

($. V.'itnosp -kmh nZ Schrd.it n 19 l'obrur.ry hor. •
at .tod tfic.t in : i3 opinion huncui v'oing oxporlaor.ts
woro nc gcod wh .tover in tl o investigate n ef typhus
vr.ccir.cs; whr.t do y u held n t:i3 quostion?

A. 3ornh _rdt Scl-ilt's tustineny is clear prefof tc no


whi.t art cf ncnsor.so witness cm try when ho is undor

6201


21 -.pril 47-d-S"-17-4—'cohan-In t: 3r'rm
Crort No. 1


tho prossuro cf fcr.r end if afraid he trill express
hinsolf to publicity rjyl to the public oyo by his
tostinor.y, I roally don't think ycu 1 r.vo to bo a
ssocialist hysionist, but I think ovory lryn:n will
aoo iisiodl&toly what an o no incus ndvan tago it would
bo if hurian boing oxporinonts woro availablo for testing
tho officcy cf vaccines, who tier it bo typing vr.ccinos
cr any ether. And, t! on tho nunoreus hunen boing
oxporir.cn 13 wculd net hr.vo boon uedo , wl ich woro nndo
through' ut tho world, if tl oy hnil b ocn so nrnsonslcnl
r.s SolvUdt horo statod. Eff rfc w uifl hr.vo boon sp rod,
nany livos wcull hr.vo bocn sr.vod, if it woro not thr.t
th.o fundaricntr.l othicb.l principles steed in opposition
tc this i.nd nndo tl ou tho oxcoptlcn rr.tl or then tho
rulo, Schni.it's tostiaeny wr.c s sensolosa tk. t I ovon
do toe tod th.o prosecutor, r. I’cIInnoy, stilling*

Q. Cr.n ycu givo us nunbors by which wo con hr.vo sc no
standard to which, wo can .x.. suro tho extent of typhus
lnfoction?

A. Of courso, I V net 1 vc tho Dcounonts horo thr.t

I w ull hr.vo if 1 hr.', froodc::. hat I crllootod during

tl 0 wr.r wr.s oith.or tnkon into custcdy cr bur nod. moro

ia c. nuubor in ITr.ldor 'a diary fer Fobruary, 1942 only

f< r tho Any* ton ti uaend cases f typhus end 1,300

fatalities, but tlr.t is Just th.o beginning cf tllo catas-

trophy. Tv on I rononbor another r. v *. r tho yor.r

-f 1944, at th. t tino I c included r. cijx ry in order

tc Justify tl 0 ortont tf the Rood fer DDT preparations.

Or. tho basis cf tlo Dccuncr.ts that I had in 1944, I

r.scortdn tlr.t thoro wero 80,0^0 to 90,000 eases f

SjJma during t! t period, but I dt net know f~r contain

■ I ich circlo cf perse r.s Is c neoroed. Gv.rr.an ’fohrnacfct

6202


21 April -17-.'.—S'-17-5-IToofcan—Iht: Brown

C urfc Kj. 1

tr;:s included in tt!:o nunbcr; Prisoners of Var wore
cortc.inly not inciulod, beenuso tho nuriber ~f cr.3C3
c-urnc thoa was clwaya kept socrot free no. i>o torriblo
cat no tr phe Ir. Hussir. nrteng tho Russian ?ris ncra rf
T/c-r in 194C and 1941 In the win tor was tc r. l.rvo oxtont
r. typhus ontr.otrcpbo. In Doconbor cl* 1940, X wr.s in r.
fioL! hospital f'r typhus victins In tho cast - n typhus
h spit.nl fer Prism, rs 'f ’.'nr; ir. this cno hospital,
which trok caro cf rnly r. very liritod area, thoro woro
hun.iro'.s f ituesirna sick with typhus, just cn this ono
visit, «t onotJor plcco I wre tel;', that ovon mens tho
Oo:-.rn yurrls, thoro woro 140 eases of typhus. That
was just tho boginning, bocr.uso I redo this cbsorvnticn
in Doco::bor rf 1941.

In tho G.rtinn hcuo country, do leusing jonsuros in
tho o st pr-vidod soxao nrctocti n; howover, by the
owl rf tho war, r.s fnr r.s I 3mcw, thoro woro 16,000
cases rf typhus r.*x>ng tho civilian population, to whom
it r:.s tho lor.st langoroue of all, D:o ror.lly largo
nurtoors in ccncnotraticn cn-ps awl in tho carps < f
foroign werkors and in the prisrns. I never nscortainod
fr novor found "t, bocauso thoro statistics woro novor
published. Doepito tho pretest cf tho uodical sorvico
tJ.oy woro kopt socrot fir a us -n orders cf tho pclico.
Thuso carps woro ro ly tic rain s urco cf infoctlcn
end mat fatalities t 'k plr.co thoro. Xfco witnos3 from
tho crop at 11. tswoilassort i that in his can0 alono
thoro "f-ro ncro than tl usand casos. iho 1944 opidonic
ir, "olson in 1945 was tc a largo oxtont a typhus catas-
trrphy. 'll,cm clearly bo seen fr a tho Bolron trial.


6203


21 .-pril-u.—D JG-l1-Cook (Int. Brcvr. - von Schocn)

Court Ho. 1

In the sumer of 1942 I spcke with the Director cf the Health
Service and the Gcvomer General. There were known 150,000 cases
cf typhus, despite a very inadequate inforaaticn sorvico and the
peak had net teen reached 'ey my aoens. Thcu;h I cannot rivo any
precise figures I do kne* thr.t the responsible officers vero affected
’-y the misters, ..ftcr the war cf 1914-191C end tho lessons th<*t had
v acn tau./ht us, ne believed in Gcraany that no had no need to further
forr typhus end we could effectively dispose cf typhus ly the netheds
which hed hocn developed sc far end we theu ht thr.t the resettlement
in the years 1939 ''nd 1940 socaed tc corroborate thr.t view, at that
tine 500,000 persons tore transferred fr;~ n typhus -rer, and we
had cnly nine cscs of typhus and r.c sinjlo death, then ceoo entirely
different conditions, tlntcr warfare in ioissia, and nc cne had
counted cn this catastrophic devclcpjcnt which I heve already dese¬
rt ed. I heard often h the dispvivitc ccopl^int cn the p/.rt
cf dieters in tho Zest an- th: t they lid net h"Vo cncu h vnccino,
fnd then there was the ‘ifficultj of holousin.. In 1943 wo wore
*-!«• 10 !>>volcp useful DDT prej>-rations, which despite war ccnditicna,
wo intrciucod, Th^n hrr'ly had .c pro resnod sc far lut production
difficulties creso, destx*ucticn of r w act^rial end cf nanuf xturinr:
centers ly 'ca'in- attacks an-! the dostructi n of our transports
cn the w..y, Me cne car. io.- inc today with what * tier disappointment
this effert to cat at epidemics was leset.

Sc far as y.ur document. ticn i3 concerned, end with ycur
experience durin. the first worll war, hew c.uli this cat-strephic
development have been anticip-t d by any cne werkin with this
documentation act! with tils experience? *

The decun.nt st-tistics had made it pcssi .lo tc see as early
:-s 1940-1941 that this 'evelcjocnt w s *oin~ to take place hero as
f Hows: Cn tho cr.o hand there were the experiences in the Galician
o'.aps in -ustrin, the Galician evacuees, v.herc in * le\ weeks thirty
th.easrnd people fell ill c. typhus; rnd then there was the terrible'

620U


21 ,.pril-..-DJG-lC-2-Ccc k (Int. Brwm - vcn Schcen)

Ccurt No. 1

typhus outbreak aa=n~ the Serbia and ..lbanirn refugees, vJiero
there were 210,000 fatalities. Sinco these 210,000 fatalities are
proved it cust bo that the number cf actual cases was estimated
auch too Ion, beeruse that w-.uld be e fatality cf seventy per-cent
end tho fatality is never aero than thirty. Sinco the year 1915
the maker of people who fell sick of Typhus in Russia before the
war amounted to 40,000 annually. This meter rose durin • the winter
of 191-1919 to 1,700,000, In the yerr 1920 it rcso tc 3,0)0,000
and the Ukroinaniana an-' Turkest- ns are net included in this number,
ncr the Siberians. In Russia in 191''-1920 it was 15 million, and
Tarrasowitch, the Russian Ky.l-.nist, said it was 25 niUicn. Those
numbers wero known to every hy deciist end can bo found in any hy-
£i«nic text bock. It must lo said in addition, th't even under tho
acst favorable ccnditi ns, the f't-litios frea typhus are at least
five pur-cent of these infected end undor unfavcreblo circunatancos
thirty por-ccnt. New, despito thu improvement in tho health sorvico
in Russia, oftor the nussim Revolution, nevertheless in 19>6,

42,000 cases cf typhus occurrod. Thoso were the l“st official sta¬
tistics th-t wu received from Russia, .iru ,-cwsky has already men¬
tioned the fact that Napoleon's catastrophe in 1&2 was c typhus
catastrophe, ho in the Luftwaffe, as oarly as 1941, ! efere tho
typhus catastrophe 1 scan, wo saw tho reverts cf tho German doctors
on the typhus cat-stro.-hc in Napoleon's enmpai n. This was passed
from hand tc hand and could net have been issued pu*licly because
that would have ’c>n construed as defeatism.

'k .nd despito the fact that ycu ' • .* 1 cf these things ycu

pretested at first tc C-ilcxccistcr e^einat these expcAocnta, and
then after ycu ccac back fren Euchow old and had a t'lk with Ccnti,
ycu hed mother s6cw down with Gildeneistcr. Then a-ain despite
the fact that ycu knew these frets and despite tho kncwled. c cf tho
importance of the results at Buchtnwald ycu made c formal pretest.

.. The fact cannot be disputed, I put the ethical ccn3i.ierr.ticn

6205


21 April-..-DJG-lC-2-Ccck (Int. 3ro*n - vcn Schcen)

Court Sc. 1

typhus outbreak ixn; the Sv,rbi:n end .ibanien refugees, there
there were 210,000 fatalities. Since these 210,000 fatalities ere
proved it oust bo that the number cf actual cases was csti^aated
,oxch too low, because tij$t w.uld be a fatality cf seventy per-cent
and tho fatality is never acre than thirty. Since the year 1915

4

the number of people who fell sick of Typhus in Russia before the
war amount od to 40,000 annually. This number rcso durm the winter
of 191-1919 to 1,700,000, In the yerr 1920 it rcso to 3,000,000
and the Ukrainaniana and Turkcst ns are net included in this nuaher,
ncr the Siberians. In Russia in 191 -1920 it was 15 ndllicn, and
Tarrascwitch, tho Russian Ky ienist, said it was 25 aillicn. These
numbers were known to every hygienist end cm bo feund in any hy¬
gienic text beck. It must 1c said in addition, th't even under tho
nest f-vora’.ic ccnditi ns, th* f“t*liti«s fr~n typhus re at least
fivo por-cont of the so infectod end undor unfavorable circumstances
thirty por-ccnt. Sew, despite thu iaprevoaent in the health service
in Russia, aftor the oussirn Revolution, nevertheless in 1936,

42,000 cases cf typhus occurred. Those were the last cfficirl sta¬
tistics th-t wo received froa Russia, .Iru,-owsky has already men¬
tioned ths. fact that Napoleon's catastrophe in 1212 was a typhus
catastrophe, ho in the Luftw-ffo, as oarly as 1941, tofore the
typhus cat*strophe logon, we saw the reports cf the Gcram doctors
on the typhus c-t-strc.-hc in Napoleon's ewapei n. This was passed
fren hand tc hand md could net hvc been issued pu.licly because
that would have 'c_n construed as defoatisa.

Q .nd despite the fact that ycu ’ : ef these things you

pretested at first tc Gilceoeiator a-pans t those experiments, md
then after ycu cacc back fren Eucheiwmld and had a t-lk with Centi,
ycu had another snow dexn with Gildiaeistcr. Then train despite
the fact that ycu knew these facts and despite the kncwlod o cf the
importance cf the results at luchenwcld you oedo a formal pretest.

.. The fact’cannot be disputed, I put the cthicrl consideration

6205


21 ..prll—,.-DJG-ir-3-Cc ck (Ir.t. Brcwn - vcn Schoen)
peart :k. 1

in the ferepreund in this whale matter, althcu-^h I sen, cf course,
hor strong the or -uments were thrt the other persons had, nrncly
these- whe actually did the experiments.

Q How there are the entries in nine's diary thrt seta to con¬
tradict ycur attitude at cert*in times, first cf all the entry on
pc"c 3E cf docuaent book 12, that you received a Cucherest vaccine
free Frefesser Rare, which was nr.de available ’ y you. The Treso-
cutcr ccrxxr.twd on this on pa e UfO of the Gorman record. Ho said:
"Proa this we can deduce thrt . refesser hose was impressed Ly what
ho saw cn 17 ilrrch, and now by previdin vccincs which were tc bo
tested, he ccntri*utod tc the criminal conspiracy."

.. « lar ;e nushor cf v.-.ccines wore sent to the medical in¬
spector-to durin the course cf the war, including typhus vaccines.
They wore sent in frea doctors eutsido who wr.tned tc ' rin; cur
rttentien tc senothin.- new. Tho inspectorate ceuld dc nothin;:

>ith these vaccines either. They si>=ply sent thjn cn tc no. After
all of these years it is difficult tc xvjzonUr all of tho details
M to Just what vaccines did reach hands, bcc-.uao I couldn't dc
anythin; with theso vaccines oither. 1 aioply had a desk at ay
disposal -nd no laboratory facilities. In cy civilian laboratory
nc work on typhus w.-s bedn; done. If they wore vaccines which wero
already kn.wn, I stated thrt the vaccines could Vo used without any
ds dvin -s, -r»d if they wore new vaccines that I did net knew nlcut,
then dependin' cn tho size cf the sample, I sent thi3 Saaplo on tc
one ^.r several typhus rosc-rch aen nd raked then tc concern them¬
selves with this fro' lee and I concerned myself about the natter nc
further ecr.uae I had dene what w s expected of ne as the socialist.
I can ruaoabar one specific shipcent -f Feu -e frea Bucharest. That
was net a vaccine- fren tho institute Cent-.-uiesenn, as Din-* stated
in his di-'ry, but that was a v-ccine free the Frankfurt institute,
which w-s sent to thu inspectorate, lecauso tho reactions were-toe

3 overc. :-.u-e even asserted th t this v-ccine contained live virus

6206


21 April-..-Wj-l: *-4-Cc=k (Ir.t. Brcwn - von Scheer.)
Court He. 1


' bcgun the reaction tc it v :.ts ac severe. It could to 3cun froa the
lrhel that this r# n Frankfurt vaccine Wuch with oany people hr.d
teen vaccinated. In 1939 I fT.vo cyself throe injections of this
vaccine. Thrt was a double dese and nothin unusu.'l happened sc I
Svj-.t it to Frankfurt and porfcctly ncmtl report wna sent V.-ck
and then the vr.eeire was used. Whether over and above that . refesser
ftu;*e sent e second shipment tc ce or to the nodical inspectorrto
which then ftj je sent tc no, with the ost will in the world, I con
neither affirm nor deny today.


■


6207


Court So. 1

21 Anr 47-A-19-l-LEK-0ross Cat. Sr,-va)

A. (continued) I cea inly toy for certela oae thlivti I sent no
ouch senile to fir. Din*; because I had no connections vith 21a.; and I did
not think of hla ns one of the research aen to vhor I sent such sanies,
aor did I issue any order that this Bucharest vaccine or any other vac¬
cine should to tested on hunra -bein,:s. This diary entry strikes r.e re
very peculiar. It is stated - 29-B--12 - now fiin^ tvice reported on the
testing of this vaccine, onco at the Consulting Conference in 1943 nr.d
then in 19-.3 in tho "Zoltscbrlft fuer Hygiene und Infokticnskrankhelton"
(Journal for Infectious Diseases i r.d Hygiene). This is Kruqoveky Docu-
aent No. 9. pp^eo 61 tu 85. *oth times Din,: had occasion to express his
thanks for tho supoorl he hrd reca.ivod. If ho had cerriod out this
toetin,; on ay sw.;estion, then he wold have been obligated, according
to scientific custcr., to state that that vas so. Hcvevor, ho did not do
this in either case. His Duplication is avnilablo to the Tribunal. And,
finally, it ws at this sene conference at vhich he rooortod on this
vaccina that had our souabtls and tha.t would have been tho .rrontoot
oxcuso ho could have found to say, "I don't understand you, Dr. Roeo.

Send r.o vocelno to be tested and then all of a suidon you nrotest."

Ho nl,*t have said that he didn't have rresenco of Bind to dc this,
out, wo hoard fron the witness &*on tha.t Dias cone or nod hints If about
this na.ttor for days on ».nd and dunb as ho was, if ho th.u^ht about it
Un* onoUfih, this ar^ur.ent would h-vc -ccurred to hin. I con only ox-
nla.in this entry ty tho fact he received tho vaccine froa r third
s Aircc which knew sitnl7 it had #cone throu*;h ny hands. All this basod
on assumption that I really did have the vaccine in ny Dossccsior. vhich
I really do not know. Cr it could be tha‘ “ . A it,? out with corres-
Dcndence with Eu^e that ru.:c had s.nt :i« w.“u» rucnarect *iccino and also
this is bp.sod on at sumtion. -hat he really did this I do not know.

Frx; the documents it can b« seen that there v*e frccuently corresion-
dcnco between Din.- end RUf-w because both the witness K^on nentloned
Ru.:c a.e ono of Dizvr's correspondents on oa^e 1193 of the German record

and in D:eminent 464, which is Selech.vsky's affidavit, on wa 72 of the

6208


Court Ho. 1

21 r.-r - 7-a-19-2-iH-.-Or-ss (lot. Br.vn)


0ernwi 3-cu_«o; Seok. Here the neomlc ere listed vith whom Diiv; oorres-
’ >:a5od rod ai:o Is asntioned anon.: then, rut neither Kogon nor Bele-
chovsky's names ere given anon.,- those who bed contr.ct or connections with
Die,;. At any rate I novor transmitted *11 between Ding and Bugs. That
the two men had c-nnectlons I did not know until the beginning of this


s, ‘•oil, according to Din,; in the ncriodical for Ey«ieno Din,; says
in Hrusovsky Document Ho. 9, and from what he said at the consulting
conference, this Bucharest vaccine turned out to he useful and vro uood
by the Gerean Luftwaffe.

A. I saw no re*vort cc the testing of this vaccino which I should
hnv,. had to see if he had wanted it to to tested. According to Ding's
diary the resorts on the testing *>f this-vaccino were cent on *

20 Hovov.bor 19--2 to Berlin and on ma.:o 39 cf the German Docunont Book
XII 1* says that on 13 February 19-i3 - in other words a minrter of a
year lator - there v ft » a directive on the nert of tho Kcdical Insooctor
of the Luftwrffv in which tho tynhus vaccines art- liotod which are oor-
niosiblo in tho Luftwaffe.

•v. *r. Brosidont. the diroctivo that Dr. Bose Just nontioned I
havo in r.ooe Document Bock II. This is Bose Document Ho. 26 which I
out in as Boeo Exhibit Ho. 19. ^hio is the instructions for trooo doc¬
tors from tho ..vdical Inspect -rate of the Luftwaffe and is on -rge 55
56 of Document Book Eoso II, dated 18 February 19-53. I havo -nit in
the ,ri..incl of this as oviderxe and inclosed in ry document book a cony
A it. rletse continue, krofessor.

A. In iluoicxtlon -f this d-cumunt let me draw your attention to

the drt«. - ic Fw.rurry 15-.3 - -.c,-e 55 of the document book. Under number

7 you fine there the directive regarding ty-.huc vaccines. From "a* to

J ten different vaccines arc lirted, vaccines both frea Germany and

foreign Institutes. The Bucharest vaccine is not among these ten. Had

- «i-va et the* time that this vaccine hed been tested and oroved vclu-

i'-le in Bucharest, then, of course, I should have recommended its uso

6209


Court So. 1

21 ^pr 4 ?-a- 19-3-I»:-Or:• e (lit. Br.vc)

Just a.s I roconnended the use -f Pasteur vaccines free. Peris and Tunis,
/.orsever, this directive clearly shows that the Xedical Inspectorate
of the Luftwaffe, vho was advised by no, did cot allow itself to to
a.tivated lc his views ty wfcet had teen used in 3uchecvpld. In this
directive a nuntcr of vaccines ere neraltted which were not tested in
nucher.vald at all; that is,' if one can assuzjo thrt Sing's diary is cor¬
rect, which I do not know. Other veccines which Ding, according to his
diary, did test have hero teen remitted tefore Ding did tost thon. In
the third group is the Bucharest vcccinu which Ding tested end found
useful and it was not earnitted for uso lc tho Luftwaffe because the
Luftwaffo didn't know the retuits of tho tciticg.

q. Vhot other types of vjccitos wont through your hands during
the war?

A. It is, of course, very difficult for r.o to recall all that went,
riret of all, vaccinos froc groat institutes - CKK in Cracow, Sohriag-
Verke, Hotert Koch Institute, Pasteur Institute in Tunic and Paris, and
on Italian lnstituto, Ipson - Ccponhogon Institute. Thon I elnost for¬
got tho biggest thief thrt vvnt through =y hands during tho war. That
was tho 5,000 doses froa Vci.-l lnstituto nt Lenturg rt tho tiio that
this institute wrs st/il in Russian hands, lc tho Victor of 19.'!9-1®40.
«nd nartlculrrly in tho caso of this vaccine I nust to •-artlculnrly
hopoy that nono hod hit on the idea <f testing it in ^uchenwald tocouso
I turned this vaccine over tv the Roturt Koch Institute and it vp.b car¬
ried on far a long tine under ny nano because I had paid for it on 4 , it
took a long while -cf-rc the coney was cade a.vailatlo to reney no.
Conseouently this w*.nt under the na::o o' *'-••• •. • 'r.o and if Din.: had
kr.;vn a.tout this then there w.uld have bw.-n i.u\c .accin s -.cntlonod
in his diary and that w;uld hevc teen a little too nRcy. Ood to
preisod nobody hit on that idea.


6210


21 jcr-*~S_£-2C—l-£sr ow (Int. 3rovn)

Court i:j. 1.

v- -* acc listing the vaccines that vent through you hands during
thi war, you mentioned also tho Copenhagen vaccine. Ding's Diary bcjb
bout this vuccine, specifically on pugo 53 of Docisjcnt 3ook 12, that
it was tested on your incentive and the witness Zogcn said tho anno
thing on the basis of statcccnts that no alleges Ding nado to hia.

'Die prosecutor then construed tnis incentive on your p^rt us u con-
crotc proposal on your p a rt which load to the doatn of six persons.

Inc ra.nric of tho prosecutor is on page 1330 and 1331 of the Goman
record, "ow, shat did you h^vc to do with this Copenhagen vacclnoT
a. ICo situation, as I ricojoer it, w„s ns follows. Our ncods
for typhus vaccine could not be covered no unttor whut efforts woro
u do. Thorcforo, all sorts of offices wore in scorch of now production
methods. In tuis connaction Profossor Schroibor callod «y up about
taio ono dey — I can't rcnccbor exactly when, but it was at a tino
vhon ho Was ulroudy the deputy for the coubatting of opidaulco and con¬
sequently concerned nlxisclf with such gonoral questions us this. This
wns i~ Septaobor of 1943 us wo havo found out later. Schroibor said
that of .ill tho vaccine institutes th-t woro under Gom.»n influence by
njw tho Cop.nh^goa Institute h:.d not p u rticlputod at all in tho pro¬
duction of vuccine so far, although it was ono of the 'oost institutes

thore were. He w^uld like to havo this Inotituto undertake tho pro-

Auction f typhus vuccincs. Ifco politicJ nood in Denuark, becauso of
tho behavior of tho Gcr.._n Uccruacht tnero, m isost inauspicious.
Consequently, then. w.j nc point in sending a Gorman nodical officer
thero. Dhoroforo, Schroibor asked no vhothor I w-uld not want to
carry an these negotiations as Vice President of the Robert Zoch
lastituto; tho pr-spects would then bo sxocwhut better, woroovor, ho
• ta ’- w that I h_d prcvivucly worked in th„t Institute ^xd knew'tftc local
BOtu P» which Vue a gro^t advantuge in conducting such negotiations, I
stated ix; willingness. I got leave fro- tho Luftwuffo, asked for
Cildenoister's pemissi-a to speak in tho none of the Robert iCoch
Institute and then flew, via Luftonsa, to Cooenhugon. Ibis, as we

 lutor, wj on the 23rd. of Septo^ber 1943. Ikon I visited tho

6211


21 apr-^-:-_S-20-2-Z^r cw (3r;wn)
Court H3. 1.


director of the Institute, 3r. Oe. skov wax: I knev personally froa
before the War. I asked hiu if he could uni would produce typhus
vaccine. Serskov rejected this request because, as ho said, It vus
‘.possible to prevent peoples' falling ill frx: typhus if you undertook
such production and such anoccurrecco would arouso had blood in Dcn-
uerk, which Was C'xxpletely froe of typhus. Oerskov's uisgivings. were
brought aoout because typhus w^s u n k n own in Senaork, end uationdistic
daunts would thus find out tfa-t the Institute wae producing vaccino
for the Ger.—n goverruont, because thoro was no need for typhus vaccino
In Dt-ao^rk, since there w^s no typhus in Denmark; and ho w.s afraid
of repercussions frou such nuti-ru’Intic daunts; and ho, as diroctor
of the Institute, had to think not ,nly of tho dangor to typhus but of
tho tasks as a whole th-t the Inci'tutc had. I finally hud to adult
that this was so. Then I was shown Sr. Ipson's dopartuont whore ho was
producing a vaccino fr o r.urinc virus, not frou rickfttsie provazek,
which is a llco virus. Ho explained to ue tho dotuilo o' nic
technique but thoy aro sot forth in uy rtport on this trip.

*. hr. President, regarding this Copenhagen trip of 3r. Bose I
asked a few questions of tho director of this Copenhagen Institute.

Tho answers uro note D.cuucnt -i6, a suoplaumtury Bos- docuucnt, which
I boliovo tho Tribune'. has Just rccoivod. This is Booo Exhibit y20.
Warding tho external fora of this docuucnt, hr. President, I rogret
toot it docs not have tho introductory foruul- requested by tho Tri¬
bunal, b-ut it has been certified and -Iso ccrtifiod by the -uoricon
3xbcss7. I have also tho original docuuont hora and it is also
specifically stated hv.ro that Dr. Oorskov certifies the coraotncss of
tho copy. I believe, theref ore, that •: b no question about

accepting this docuucnt la evidence.

K5. H.a?DT: Tour honor, I h-vcc't received a copy yd. I would
like to sc. a copy of the S^lish.

~H" pa2SI2Z3S: 'Jill you exhibit a copy to counsd fsr the
prosecution?

6212


*1 -f>r-a-C'_ij-2&-3-£urrav (irova)

C^art So. l.

2» sLaSDY: So object loos, Your Soaor.

?3IIZ: Kr. President, the interpreters have no copy either.
;dght I perhaps shov tho original to tho Interpreters for a ncoentT
PSSSIBXIT: &<. Tribunal will now recose. You can have tho
r'.ccuncnt before tho interpreters ia tho uoraing.

Ih« Zribun-l will now recess until 9:30 o'clock teoorrow aornin^.
U recess Was t_kon until 0930 hours, 22 -pril 1947)


6213


22 April-M-DJG-l-l-roster (Ir.t. Brcwr.)
Ccurt Nc. 1


Official Tradscript of the American
Military Tribunal in the natter of
the United States cf series, against
Karl Brandt, et al, defendants, sitting
at Numb erg, Germany, cn 22 April 19 A7,
0930, Ju--ticc Beals presiding.


THE il-RSHAL: Persons in the ccurt rcc= r.iil please find
their seats.

The Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal 1.

Military Tribunal 1 is new in session. God savo the United
States of America and this honorable 'ri unal.

Thoro *iill be order in the ccurtrcoa.

THE PhESIDSiT: Jr. Marshal, ycu ascertain if tho defendants
aro all present in c^urt.

THE 1A KSHivL; Ur.y it please your Honor, ell defer.canto arc
present in the ccurtrocn.

THE PRESIDES: Tho Secretary-General sill nett fer tho record
the prosenco of all tho defendants in court.

Counsel nay proceed.

Grl-KARD ROSE - Resumed
DLH33T EL ill NATION (Continued)

DR. FRITZ (Counsel for tho Defendant Rose): Yo3terday 1 aiscusnod
with tho Defendant Itoso his trip to Copenhagen and wss about to
put in hose Document Uo wjong supplement ary documents ;:hich will


bo Roso Exhibit No. 25. I quote:

"STATENS SERUICHSTITOT, Kobonhavn, S. U llorch 19A7
«In answer to quostions asked us about the visit of Frofcssor
Rose, I can say thu following:

l) Did Prof. Roso, »hen he visited the Institute a£

tho end of September 19A>, request that the Copenhagen
^ y,' Institute take up the production cf tho typhus
‘ ,* ed /vaccine free Rickettsia Prcrascki In order tc help
/ / overcome the great shortage of typhus vaccine?


22 April-M-D JG-1-2-?oster (Int. Brown)
Court Ha. 1


to 2) has this request refused by Director Oerskcv fcr
valid reasons?

Yes,

to 3) has R. then token visit Dr. Ipsen's section?

I do net reocnlar this, tut it is apparent fren Dr. Ipson's
experiment reoords thet Frofessor Rose actually was in Dr, Ipsen's
laboratory on 24 September and probably discussed these problems
with him. Unfortunately Dr. Ipscn is r.t 5 resent in Asicricn on
a study trip and will not return bofero Juno or July. It is,
hewover, apparent from cur records that if Professor hose over
received samples cf cur vaccine it cculd only hove * o-n a acnll
quantity, end neither I nor Dr. Ip3un'a colleagues h“vo evor
heard anythin.; of the- possible effects cf cur vaccine.

Through the Danish *.bd Cress we sent cur vaccine to’Danish
as well as Norwegian prisonor-of-war etmps, lut sc that the
vaedno was given only to Danish or Norwegian colloagu^s. ho
heard fren Danish cclloacues that the effect of these vaccin-

s

atienn was good.

I can edd that I aa Tctoful tc Frefesoor He 00, because ho
pro’ably helped tc prevent cur Institute's oing compelled to
toko over the production of typhus vaccine. It is entirely
unpredictable what calamities sight have arisen if we had been
forced tc take up tho production of this vaccine.

signed J. Orskov
Dr. avd. J. Orskov"

Ttv t is certified by a not ary public and the American
Legation.

BY DR. FRITZ (Counsel for tho Defendant nose):

Q Professor, what did you dc now aft%.r this failure when
you returned tc Berlin?

A I infor me d Professor Schrdbcr briefly by pi me, end then
sent hiu an extensive written report. Ihis report was in two

6215


22 „pril-U-DJG-1-3-?c3tcr (Int. Brown)
Ccurt llo. 1


prrts, the first pert described the negotiations, the failure,
end the reasons shy vho institute es net willing to undertake
producing this vaccine, end =y stctirxnt that 1 held these
jrcunds to ho substantial. Then, the second pert, which I had
written separately as en annex, stated what I had heard from Dr.
Ipsen ncci-JcntrOly regarding his n.w rurinc vaccine. This annex
I had typed in several copies and 1 sent it tc the various typhus
specialists when I considered lcportcnt in Gonuny in erder to
inf cm then also cf wh.-t I h;d feurri cut in Copenhagen. A frog-
aent cf this report has boon found and you can s_o in that what
I proposed.

Di.. KvTTZi Ur. Provident, wo were atlo to find this report
en her.'a official trip to Cop.nhr.rcn, and I put it in as hoso
Document 22, this is in Use Dcciuxnt Code No. 2, pcr.oa 15 to 19.
This is hose Exhibit 21 — the bocuaont number is 22, the Exhibit
No. is 21. ,.s the Dofen ant ucso has Just described, he sont
this report cf tho tour to about six different offices that wore
concerned with typhus in Gcr=any, including the J eh ring berks
in I'-ariurj, and fres thee, I have received this cccrrunicnticn
cf hosu wldch I should liko to read.


22 April-if-DJG-2-1 Gross (Int. Drown)
Court No. 1


DR. FRITZ:

■01 orstarzt Prcf. Rose 29 Scptecfcur 1943 (place: unknov.ii)

"Tc: Behring - Works

Marturg/Lahn

"I take the liberty of sending herewith for your information
a file aeao regarding reports by Dr. Ipsen on his experience in
the production cf tj-phus vaccine.

"signed: Rose

"Oborstarzt cf the Reserve"

It is certified by the uayor of Uarbech. Then thero is
annexed to this letter the report of the trip end I should like
you to explain briefly the ccntonta of this report.

15.. HARDY: Your Heners, this dccuacnt is ccrtifiod to bo a
truo copy by tho Burgoeoiater. Might I inquiro whero tho original
document is located?

Hi. riJTZ: Iho original is in the files of tho Dchring-Worka.
It could be obtain*.!. It is certified by the Major of Uarbach,
norr Mirlurg.

2Si. iLihDY: Inasmuch os tho original cr a photcstctic copy
thereof could bo obtained, ycur Honors, I object to its intro¬
duction into evidenco ir. this fora.

THr . HESID27.T: On whet grounds do you base your objection,
counsel?

'Xs. HiJ.DY: This is sorely a copy which is herein certified
:nd it is cuatecyry nest original Gcraany dccuaents introduced
iu.ro in this trial have either certified photcstatic copies or
the original German document.

Dli. PHITZ: If I recall correctly, Ur. President, the Tribunal
rulo3 that the certification should to cade either by a German
Notary Public cr a Mayor and this dccuacnt has boor, certified
by a Mayor.

If.. H»RDY: That applied, as I recall, only to affidavits

621 ^


22 April—li-DJu—2-2-Grcss (Int. Brown)

Court He. 1

•herein they were certifying the signature cf affiants or taking
coth of an affiant. I don't believe that ruling applied to asking
copies of Gvrsan original documents.

?Wf. hOSEs Terhaps this difficulty could be overcono in
the following manner. Since these arc letters and reports from
me ami since I cm testifying under cath, I on ready to testify
here that they correspond tc the letters and reports which I
sent cut.

THE PRESIDENT: Defense counsel nay interrogate the witness
upon that subject.

DY Dh. FIJTZ:

Q You then testify, Frefosser, that this is the report that
you sent tc the various cfficos? 1 ask you please to lricfly
dilate cn the contents.

Yos, this is the report that I sent.

THE IKESIDZHT: Objocticn is over-ruled.

A I do net want to pretract the proceedings '-y reading tho
whole report tut 1 do ask the Tri* unal tc take notice cf the
ccntents of tho report. This is cn extensive description of the
procedure such as Ipscr. described tc me ihich 3ocms to offer
sovcrcl technical advantages ever previous procedures. Above all
the main advantage that the yield cf this procedure souacd tc be
greeter. It wis possible tc produce two and one-half times as
■such va.ccino with the seae number of animals; and, moreover,
this vaccine sottod to bo mere offectivo. I informed the various
offices cf this method rod new I point cut paragraph U cn page 3
cf the document, cn page 1C in the Document Peek:

m ,

"1 prepe3«-d, end Dr. Ipsen premised that a nua.'or of samples
cf his liv^r vaccine should bo sent tc me with the object of
testing, when the opportunity arose, its protective efficacy cn
humans who were in especial danger."


This is the passage which Ding characterized in his diary

as ry incentive t o oxacid mints cn human beings. 1 further point

6215


22 April-J#~DJG-2-3-Crcss (Int. Brown)
Court No. 1


out that at the foot of this page 18 and cn page 19 there is the
list of those to whoa this report was sent. Neither Urugowsky's
office, nor Heichsarzt-SS Grawitz, nor Dr. Ding are included in
this list of distribution.

Q Professor, free the text of this report one could have
the impression that you were pretty well acquainted with the pro¬
duction of the typhus vaccine although you say yourself that you
never concerned yourself scientifically with it. Could you make
a statement on this?

A I believe this would be a nisconception. The report
merely proves I am in a position when the specialists express scao-
thing to take notice and reproduce. And, I believe that is some¬
thing my degree of intelligence makes possible without being a
specialist in the matter.

Q What did you do with tho sample of typhus vaccine that
is mentioned in this report?

A If I had been asked about this before the witness Block
testified, then I should have said that 1 had sent this 3amplo
to Professor Schrelbur because 1 had assumed that he had given
me the order and that I should send everything to him. But, Frau
Block said here that she had 3cnt tho vaccines to a number of other
offices. I cannot corroborate that from ny own memory but, in
general, it is more probably that the secretary's aenory, 3ince she
was the one who 3ent these things cut, is more reliable than the
memory of the Chief who simply said briefly, "Send these things on."

h You, in explaining this report. Just drew the attention

of the Tribunal tc the fact that you make the proposal here that

•

the protective efficacy should, if the opportunity arose, be tested
on human beings in .special danger. Now, what does this phrase
"humans in especial danger" mean?

A "Humans in especial danger” is in the matter of typhus
vaccination a technical phrase which is generally current in German

621 ?


22 Aprii-M-DJ(r-2l -4-Gross (Int. Brown)
Court Nc. 1


medical services. Tfo did not have enough vaccine to vaccinate every
one and could only vaccinate certain persons. In other words, those
in eafjecial danger. These were, first of all, particularly old
people because old people die more readily when thoy get typhus
than young persons. Secondly, various occupational desses. For
instance, doctors ami medical personnel, and particularly personnel
of delousing agencies, or transport flyors who brought back the sick
Tilth them, or a nusbor of occupational groups. This was a protty
well fixed tern clearly explained by radical regulations.

Q V.'as the evidence you received from Ipsen enough so that
you could urdortako testing on husans in ospccial danger?

A Certainly. Ipscr. told bo that in animal experiments the
liver vaccine wes butt.r then tho lung vaccine and lung vaccine was
already being used by tho 'nchrcacht sod was gmornlly permitted.
Moreover, the report says that in the laboratory two assistants
had been subsequently infected - porsons who had boon voccinatod
by the vaccine, tho infection having taken place by accident - and
the degree to which thoy fell sick was only v,.ry minor. Tho uvidcnco
had to be sufficient to Justify such a proposal.

Q V.hy did you not undertake this testing ycursolf, for
apparently you considered it important.

A Of course, I considered it important and that is why 1

mndo it generally known to the specialists. I did not undertake it

myself because I didn't uMortcko testing of vaccines at all; and

then with respect to human baings in especial dengor, our position

in the Luftwaffe was not edventageous in this effect, he had few

such people because in tho r.oy the Luftwaffe was us<d the danger of

becoming infected with typhus was aich smaller. The number of people

in the luftweffc who full ill with typhus was never more than one to

two percent of typhus in the whole nehrmacht end the Aray boro the

main brunt. Ehurces, if the sickness typhus infection had been evenly

distributed numerically re would have had 15 to 2) percent of the

total number of thoso who became ill. There wore various delousing

6220


22 Arril-y-DJG-2-5-^ross (Int. Brown)
Court .ic. 1


centers and several transient carps in which for certain people
would fall ill of typhus 2 nd there were typhus laboratories. All
these we did not have- in the Luftwaffo but the specialists knew of
these centers end had accossto thee.

Q Did you perus.- this natter any further after you had passed

on the Ipsen typhus vaccine.

A Mo that had been cn unique order - a fevor that 1 did for
Professor Schreibcr. And when 1 found out accidontially that this
had nothing to do with Schreibcr's assignment that Ipsen had developed

a new method - this 1 passed or. to the specialists end thereafter it
was in th^r hrads end rs far as I was concerned the matter was
sottlcd. Peril.-^>s I can acxe some roanrka about the Document Mo. 22
which was not read. But, in the English translation on pgo 18, in
this paragraph where th-ro is mention of human beings in especial
dnrgor. Thun it says hero "its protective efficacy on humans whose
liver wore in especial danger". In the German text tiio words
simply means especially endangered humans. In other werda, no
mention is mrJo in the German text of the liver. I should like to
suggest th t the Tribunal change the translation accordingly.


6221


Court So. 1

22 Apr 47-H-3-1-KH-&3TOV (lat. Frown)

I£. FRITZ: It =uet be e tyac^raphicel error. Dr. Rose's correction
is justified.

T?i. BaRSIflaRT: kill the witnees please state that c-rroction a?ain.
VITTiSS: Y-ur Ecn.r, It is on p<v;e 18. "On huuane whose livers
vtrc in especial dancer," and it should read "on hunens who aro especi¬
ally endangered".

VJZixy.-1-y- I'Jox Honor. I thin* the word "liver" is a tyoographi-
col error for the w,rd "lives". Then it would read "on huneas whoso
lives are in eoiccial dancer". The witness Just stated that that also
would he a good transittion.

IKE PRESIDF’-TT: The correction has teen undo in the docunont bock.

BY DR. FRITZ:

v Jr ,n Dr. Corskiv's explanations it can be soon that you wore in

tho laboratory cn 24 Septeaber 19^3 in Insen's laboratory in Conenhacon.

Kow, in ouchonwald, according to Dial's diary, tho testing of theso vec-

cinos took placo free totveon the 8th cf «arch and tho 13th of Juno,

19*.. This can to so«n fros Zinc's diary, Dcunont Book 12, oa^o 53.

Sow, how do you oxnlein this lanso cf tir.w between tho 24th of Sonton-

\or, 19*13, and tho torfinnin,; of tho tostizv: in Ssachonwald cn tho 8th of

*

•torch, 1944?

A. That I canr. -t er*lain froa ny own knowledge. You alwnyo havo
to cunt n r. certain -cried A tiuo for the tusinoss t to attended to,
tut in a arttor s- pressing rni important as this one that is not suffi¬
cient to oxplcin a lapse -f 5* sonths. He didn't work ns slowly as
that. I cen c -njecturw vhnt happened in that lntcrin. Anon,: the
Gcr.em typhus specialists there were friends and enenies of the uurino
vaccine. It is possi.le that the vaccine vr.t discussed ty then and
that ^ rep.rt w? s passed eround end. in this way it apparently fell
int- the hands soue office which had sum influence at Buchonveld.
S.v. whether that was C.nti or Crawlts or Oildeieister or Hirmler I do
not know. Just whet devious paths this whole natter followed I Afl not

know. The direct path frea Schreibtr to Dine vmld not have token

6222


Court So. i

22 Anr -.7-X-3-2- i£X-Kerr^v (let. Breve)


:..uthc. I cannot even say whether the tyohus vaccine saanle thpt was
used in Buchenweld is identical vith the ene I received beceuee, pb I
re - er, that serxle was e very snail one and Kr. Oerskov corroborates
that. Sow, “rr.u Slock he! steted that this sanule was distributed not
Just t'- -no ntre e but to soveral, and I Tevicusly had ac official oues-
tlonaalrc cent by the Tribunal to the Cuoenhegen Inetitute in order to
find out Ju6t h-v largo these samples verc. The answer has not yet ccao
In but oorhaos it will eone day.

^ Do you feel y ursclf in eay way responsible for the exoorinents
which M>ro crxried out in * J uchcnvald because you rocorv.endod that the
loser, vaccine should be tested?

A. So, ! feel nyself in no toy reononsiblo for that. Vhnt I oro-
oosod is sot down here in black and vhito before tho Tribunal and theeo
ero no nr^poeal* for experiments on huaen belies. If tone other offlco,
.a the broio of the fact that I drew ite attention to a vaccino, thon
hit# on tho aotl.n of carrying out cxncriaonts on huaan being# with thlc
Vfccinc, that really ernn.t to charged ngalaet ao.

BY TEn rSSSIBLST:

Vitnooe, returning for n acuont to oa,:o 18. To a ley nan, vacci-
nr.ti n uourlly noons a protective ston.

A. Curtainly.

v That is, lore r.a vh arc veil are vaccinated to nrevent thoir
c.ntrnctir. r. diccase. S.v, I notice in the oaragreph which y'Ai hpvo
c.rroctcd "ite nr tective efficiency n huaan bclnge whose lives vero in
usnocid danger*. B.w, is that oereons whose lives - nereone who verc
t-xn.sed to infection? Is that the theory of this naragrnoh?

••

A. YAir Hon r, in tho Ocrnan text it is written "endangered" (ge-

faehrdut).

v I understand that.

A. And that neens "on-ted tw tyohus".

v ixp-sed to infection?


A. Lxn^Bcd t. infection


6223


Court So. 1

22 Apr -»7-k-3-S-iHK-i£rr..v (lat. Srovn)

v It night here the *.eaaing thet the 'oers-.nB vero already ill,
tut it aeens -lers as vfcc. vere exposed to infection?

a. Lx~. .8od t infection, Your Honor. This was e technical tera
vhich %, es c rc-nly used throughout the ver. "Hes-ndors gefaehrdote
.-creonen" (Pers.nB eeoccielly endangered).

LY Z£. FRITZ:

v At ray rate you challenge the correctness cf Ling's diary
entry; to vlt, thet you provided the incentive for these exoerioonte on
huian beings?

A. That I challenge aost eaahntlcelly. Pcrhaos, hovcver, I night
edd, since the -.rosocution nekes Professor Schroedcr rosoonsible for ny
activities in this respect, -xrhaps I could point out that ny lottcr or
rather cy r<n;rt is dated 29 Sweater 1943. At that tine Schr'odor
VBB not Chiof of the medical Servico of the Luftvnffo. la other vordo,
vhattvur duductl-ns can to drrvn fr< a this entry regarding no, cortninly
nono can be deducted against Horr Schrocder.

TEL p.-LSILL- Ts *■ltnoso, in ay docuccat back tho last mineral of
the year ic aissin*. It Just reads "lS-i". *hrt *ne tho dato of your
Utter?

VII1CSS: I aa Just *• ia; to look at tho Qcmnn docunent. Tho dato
is given on page 15-29 Seatonbor 19-»3.

TEL rLLSnJLL'Ss That enavors -y ouostUn, witness.

ST Da. FRITZ:

„ rr fees r, to sun uo y our testimony about this ^uchcnvrld
oucsti -n, let go ask a concluding Question. Tho nroeccution aoserts
- it states that you - rad AcHancy cells you the closest friond nad co-
vorker of Cilde toistcr - had the closest knowledge of everything that
vent cn ia "ucheaveld. rlcaee wrolain vhat you really know of vhat
vent ca in ruchenveld?

a. I have already described ny visit and vhat I sev there. One
acaoct A it I knew, that Oildcneister had told =e that the whole busi¬
ness f testing this vaccine on bunen beings was to be traced tack to


Court So. 1

22 A-r 47-K-?->i-131-ijirr/v (Int. Brown)

Conti. -jstt did not deny that when he talked to ne, although I •aid
vfaat : did la lntr duct-ry to exnleln why I had cone to hin, pad then,
through Dr. Ding's lecture at the consulting conference, which va» ofton
-ontionod, I f und out vhat I have told ycu; namely, that la addition
th«ro had alto teen carried out a second oxoerioont in Buchonvp.ld. Of
th«. entire activities In "uchenwald I heard nothing. I did not oven know
that the SS had lt» s-xiclel Installation! there for exooriuentlng In
tynhus vaccine*. During the vhole war I never eav one tingle tanole of
this vaccine. How little I knew -f tbit can he teen frra the one noint
that I discussed y e #tvrday; namely, the icocrtnct occurrence of the
.-.ctontka ctrelno teoaln.- avirulent. I shall lator nut In at a document
cy loeture on 17 rctruary 12-4 In Betel end In which thoro It atated,
one year after theto events took placo, that vc had novor yet aucccedod
In coking tho nrowetekl katezkr avirulont and that thlt vat one of tho
,:.clo of research, and Just at I knew nothing about tho tynhue CToorlnonto
that wvr j going on in "uchenvald, just at llttlo did I know of anything
elau that vent -n thorc.

v Shon hov d you ojnleic that Mr. Glldonelntor drew no conclusions

froei tho iaj-rtant events in Buchcnweld which you Just ncntlonod; nnnoly,
regarding tho Matezke strain?

A. I told yesterday that I could only understand thlt in view of
his rank at a typhus socialist by bolievin.: that ho timly wno not in-
forced of vfcrt vent on at Buchenvaid. rerhaos he made otrolns avallablo.
That I do cot kc-w. rvrhans ho wrs ordored to do so by Conti. That I
do cot knvv, either, "ut otherwise I had the inorcesion that he vno cot
intimately jrrticinetin.- ia this oucttioc. According to Ding's diary he
is alleged to have been In Buchenvaid only twice.


6225


22 Ap rll-M-G J-k-l-al 07 -( inU Brown)-

>•? 1


Q rrofesscr, would you like to sake a brief statement in
answer to the Prosecution's contention that you were the closest
'ricnd and collaborate. Block has already made a stateeent on that
subjoct?

A It is not very pleasant for a person to have to speak
openly about his superiors, particularly after they arc death and can
no longer defend themselves, and if the relations with the superiors
were not good. One thinh, however, I must say in introduction that
I always hold him to be a perfectly decent and upright person.

"c was particularly conscious of his obligations and duties, and
had a high sense of responsibility. Scientifically speaking he was a
leadin.; bacteriologist, and extraordinarily reliable research
man with a prodigiously largo knowledge of literaturo. My personal
relations with him: ifhon in 1923 I went to the Robert Koch institu¬
te I did not make his acquaintance, yot, because at that time
Mr. Oild« oeistcr was still with the Heich Hoalth offico. Then in
1925 an unfortunate -.vent occurod. I had publishod a work on
Herbla. Professor Gildooeiater had ciiticized ny findings in an
opon mooting, and th-n at a mooting of th; Ocman-biological
Society I brought cy experimental animals along and new histo¬
logical preparations which proved that I was completely in the
right. At that time, I was still very young, and I made
hinrathcr ridiculous in this meeting. That was not to nice of mo,
and ho took it ill and never forgot it. Then when I was called to the
Robert Koch institute in 1936 ho spoke inopposition to that and
r.commanded in ay stead a Dr. Kuhnert, who at that time was
Schilling's oldest assistant. However the tropical medicine export
of the University and other scientists spoke in ay behalf, and I
was appointed by the Ministry. When I was at the institute the
following situationarose: Professor Gildasoister was a pre-eminent .
administrator, and had the knowledge of laws and administrative regu¬
lations, such a scientist seldom has. Not only did he knew them, tut

6226


22 April-^-GJ-L-2--talo>-(int. 3ro*n)-
Court 1


it was very important to hin that they should be applied,
and that others should observe then. a v also had the
disavantage which too often adheres to the administrator, mainly
that he was an outright bureaucrat. I have nt.vcr had administrative
trai n i n g nor have I had military training, and Iujvc spent most of
ay life overseas. The old colonial with their in tpcnacnce are always
the terror of administrators throughout the rforld, and on the basis
of this there were very shortly developed between us frictions.

I had Dr. Rannon of tho University work for me, but Professor
Qildcmeistcr did not want any students in the institute. I acoopoted
teaching appointments at the University, but Professor Oildcaeistar
did not want any ins ruction to be carried on outaide the institute .

Q Professor, I think that sufficics regarding your diffi¬
culties with Professor Gildiauiater. I however hav^ a question
in this connection; how is it that despito this tension and tho
misunderstanding that you two had that you then became vice-
president of the Robert Koch institute, whore Sildcauister as
prcaidont certainly had socothingto s^y about this?

A The person concerned generally knows least of all about
the procedure, that goes on behind th. curtains in making such
an appointment. If they wanted to choose a vicu-p resident
fraa aeon g tho Professors of the Institute, then insofar
as seniority was concerned throe people could be considered, ono of
whcei was myself. Professor Gildcmjister did not get on much butter
with the other two then ho did with me, so they had to choose between
the devil and the Deop Blue Soa. I do know that he- expressed
opposition to ae to the Ministry, but he had apparently no better
proposal to make and so I was named. I took a year until tho
appointment -was f in a ll y approved. Apparently there war conside¬
rable exchange of corespondonce and discussion in this natter. In
addition to this, rrofessor Gildeadster was years old and it
was known that he was to resign at the ^ad of the war, and

6227


22 April-U-GJ-h-3-kaloy-(int, 5rown)-
Ccurt 1

the Important thing to the Ministry was when it appointed me,
vice-president that this should establish cy seniority for the
presidency. It was clear that I could not occupy that office
during the war, 3ince I was with the Luftwaffe.

Q In othjr rords, you never really for practical pur¬
poses practiced, you never really did anything is vice-president
of the institute?

A Ho, I never signed as Vice-president and I never
represented rofeasor flildcoeister even for one day.

DR. FRIT2: Mr. President, I should like to offer a
fuw documents in this connection. First of all from Rose Document
book No 1, Document No. 13, Rose Exhibit 22, pa^es 80 and Ql of
tho document book. This is an affidavit by Professor Dr. Poucker,
who is still active in the Robert Institute In Berlin, the affi¬
davit being dated 3 February 19u7. I should like to read from
Paragraph 2 on page 60—

THE PRESIDENT: ‘'hit Exhibit number are you giving this docu¬
ment?

DR. FRITZ: Numb r 22, Ur. President.

r Profossor Gerhard Rose was appointed or, 1 rebruary 19L3
vico-pr aidont of, and n rofe3for at the Robert Koch institute,
while ha was in the .Tohrnacht. Owing to his engrossment by his
3orvicc in the flehrcacS.t, Professor Rose did not actually officiate
as Vice-president, he was hardly ever available for the tasks
of the Institute- and for the tasks of his department. Tho lata
President of the institute, f rofessor Eugcn Gildccoister, occasion¬
ally deleagted a. to look after the pratically orphincd department
of f rofessor Rose ( Tropical diseases.)

n Relations between President Gilacm^ist-.r and Professor
Rose, were, as far as I knew rather strained on the whole.

" I do not know weth-r Professor hose was informed about


th^ thyphus research done by Professor 5ild_=_ist^r. Judging by the

6228


22 Aprll-H-GJ-i^-Saicy-Ont. Brown)-
Court 1

habits of President Jildcaeister and the relationship betsc.en him

•and Professor Rose, I do not think it likely that he informed Profes¬
sor Rose about it.

Berlin, l February 19l:7. p
and then follows tte signature and certification.

XM thia connection lot me put in the following document.
Rose Document No, U, Rose Exhibit No. 23 This is Porfessor Dr.

Gins affidavit on U February 191:7. I should like to road the last
two paragraphs into the record, .'rofessor Gins stated:

" Bccau3c of ay activity in th: . ohraacht freo 26 August
i:-39, I only went occasionally to tho Rob.rt Koch I n stitutc and only
worked there irregul.rly until spring 19 U.

n Within that tia. and after I was deferred for work at the
Institutc from Spring 19U3 on, I did not see Professor Rose acting
in his capacity as Vico-presidont of th. Institute. I only hoard
Frofto^r decker mentioned as deputy of Professor Gildcaeister.
Borlin-Charlottonburg 9,
ti February 191:7."

Thon folio--a the signature and certification . I should like to
state that * rofessor Gins is still working today in the Robert Koch
Institute.

1 should like to put in tho next document, pages 6U and 85,
Rose Document 15, Rose Exhibit No. 21: affidavit by Dr. Werner
Christiansen, on 12 February 191:7, Rose Exhibit No. 21. I should
like to read two paragraphs. First of all the second:


22 April-M-0JG-5-l-J&ehca (Int. Brown)
Court So. 1


"Fran 1940 until the capitulation ir. 19'.5, i was one of the
three officials in charge of the Department for Epidemics of the
Reich Ministry of the Interior."

I shall skip the nuct paragraph in view of the statements
that the Prosecution has made regarding the Rose case and 1 ahcll
continue - skipping paragraph:

"It is not known to no that Professor Roso, who had boon
appointed Vi^e President of the Robert Koch Institute in 1943,
actually over hold this office. Professor Rose was registered in
the Ministry as 'drafted to active service with tho Uehrmacht'.

If it became necessary fox* somebody to act as deputy for the Pres¬
ident Gildeceistur, because he was on leave or sick, for instance
while GildUBeister suffered from typhus, Professor Bocckor, ono
of tho directors of tho Robert Koch Institute, wcuid act as his
deputy, as far as I know,

"Nurenbcrg, 12 February 1947."

Then follows tho sigruture and certification.

And finally I should like to offor Rose Document No. 9 on
Pages No. 28 to 30 of the sane Document Book. This will bo Roso
Exhibit No. 25, an -.ffiir.vit of ..rs. Use Lundborg of 14 February
1947. I should like to read fro.-- noragraph 2:

"I worked as a secretory in the Nodical Inspectorate of tho
Reich Air kinistry from 31 January I9U until 1 November 1944. 1
first worked for Oborotarst Professor Luxemburger, the' psychiatric
specialist, and from March 1941 also for Professor Dr. Rose, then
Qberstabsarst, later O’oerstarzt of the Luftwaffe, who was consultant
hygienist for scientific consultation of ♦he ediccl Inspectorate
in the sphere of hygiene and trcpicrl modicine, jy place of work
was in the office, from sumc.r 1941 on, and later or. in the ante¬
room of Professor Rose. ’.£• work with him was terminated when I
had myself assigned to a Luftwaffen hospital in Italy on 15 February
1944.


''From ny work, I can slate that Professor Rose, was very

6230


22 Ap ril—U-DJG-5-2—lieehan (Int. Brew.)

Court No. 1

occupied in his military cities. He was ir. the office froa 0815
in the earning until 1730 ir. the afternoon, except for Ids frequent
official military trips, during which he was supposed to get ac¬
quainted with the actual conditions prevailing among the troops.

He was also a university lecturer for hygiene, as -toll 03 at tho
Faculty for foreign science, and as such he had to give lectures.
Uorecvar, ho frequently attended scientific meetings and congresses,
as for instance with tho Society far Tropical iiedicino, the Reich
Cocmitteo for Tuberculosis and other scientific t-sscciaticns, the
muses of which I no longer reet_-b«r. I always knew exactly the
whoruabcuts of Professor Rose, in order to k- able to switch ever
tho teluphono calls aM to Free on important nows. I knew therefore
that Professor Roso's activity in the Robert Koch Institute was
limited to occasional telephone calls and short visits (about once
every 2 or 3 weeks). According to his c*:; statements, ho charged
his finale tochnicol assistants who had leng years of experience
mid the cssistant Dr. E.acl with tho work, restricts himself to
chocking tho work and order of the department (only the deportment
for tropical aediclno was under his supervision).

"The npFcinta.nt cf Frcfosscr Rose ns vice-president of tho
Robert Koch Institute did r.ct take place until tho end of 19U2 cr
19A3 PS far as I rusonbor, and was ir. cy opinion cnly of a purely
representative character. As far as I renember, Professor Rose did
not make any use of his position as vice-president, such loss so as
he had the in-enticn of 1-aving tho Institute."

Q Professor, tho direction of yeur department, namely tho
Tropical Department you kept also duri.- i *.r?

A I kept ay department going throughout the war. At the
beginning of the war 19 depertaents at the institute wore closed,
their directors having beer, drafted, ar.d almost all tho assistants
wore draftod, however: I kept ay department open.

During the first year cf the war 1 worked there myself, as
long :b I was in Berlin; but at that time I was already half a year

6231


22 April-lir-DJG-5-3-Jk th an (Int. Brown)

Court So. l

or core in Russia and the Balkans, and during those periods of
absence =y assistants had to werk according to 27 policy directions.

At the beginning of 19U, work with the Luftwaffe increased
in scope so that I had to work at ay Luftwaffe offico the whole day
through. In order to facilitate cccnunicetions with cy department I
had a direct telephone line put in which made it possible that from
my Luftwaffe office I could communicate directly with my laboratory
without going through the office cr through the central telephone
switch boaai of tho various offices. Then in the evening my private
socrotary canc to my houso, bringing the matters from tho institute
that hrd arrived that day, erri I dictated qy P rivato correspondence
on matters concerning tho institute, scientific essays and scientific
correspondence.

Q Did net the work in your Department suffer greatly because
of ycur absuiico.

A Th: t was Professor GiiJ delator's opinion; namely that ay
deportment was ontirely without supervision and that I was not in a
position to check on tho work of ^ assistants, and onco os Professor
Scecker also says, ho attempted to ccanis3icn one of the other pro-
roasorn with the direction cf my department. This intorf-renco with
cy rights, cf course, lad to another altercation between me. Taking
war conditions into consideration, it certainly can be 3ocn that my
dopartmunt was well and efficiently conducted. 1 simply have to
draw ycur attention to qy assay cn tho DDT preparations, which are
also mentioned in this lecturo at Basel raid rfiich wero even translated
into French in 19A4.

Q What deductions did you draw when tho effort was nadoto
trans:or the supervision of ycur department to other hands?

A On the protact of seeking security from air-attacks, 2 made
tnt fcffcrt t ° transfer qy department cut of Berlin. Gilder;cister
personally did not wish to leave Berlin and did stay in Berlin to the
VJl7 iest Boa “ nt with his Typhus Deportment. Since Gildcaeister would


22 kpril-U-jjZ-5-L-'M:ch?r. (In*-. ?r-rr)
Court Nc. 1


not give h 18 approval for this transfer cf =y department, 1 took the
•cry unueuai step of turning ny whole department into a Luftwaffe
unit and with the sane personnel and equipment I sot it up ns a
department for Fever Therapy of the Luftwaffe.

Q 'Was this agrocable tc Professor Gildeaeister?

A Of course he made difficulties at first, finally I had the
impression that ho was on thewhelo happy that in this m-nner all
difficulties with each other wore alleviated.

Q The Frcsccuticr. calls you a collaborator in Gildesoistcr's
typhus experiments’

A I cm only ruitoretu *.hct never in my whole life did 1
we rk in the Typhus laboratory. When I w:s an assistant r.t tho
Robert Koch Institute Otto was working th-rc on typhus, but in tho
two months that I was with hin another assistant took care of that
aattor and 1 worked in thwrology. hhun I cane back to the Institute
in 1937, Otto had left but the Typhus department was taken up in the
Virus department, namely by Professors Giidemeictor and Hergon. I
never worked with those acn, never carried out Joint experiments and
never planned anything Jointly with ti.ua. This separation can very
clearly bo seen in tho printed annual reports of the Robert Koch
Institute.

Q Ur. President, the whole report that the Defendant Just
mentioned I have in ay Document Bock Ho. 1. Those aro Documents No,
10 on pages Nos. 31 to /*3, which 1 put in as Rose Exhibit No. 26,
also Rea- Documents Ho. 11, which will bo Kese Exhibit 27 cn Fegoa
Nos, UL to 60. Finally there is Dccum-nt No, 12, which will be Rcso
Exhibit He. 28, this is on Pages Hcs. 61 .. These, as I snfd,

ere the annual reports cu tho activities cf the Robert Koch Institute
from the period from 1 April 1939 tc 31 December 19/.3.


6233


Curt 5c. 1

22 Act -*7—k-6—l-LKX-C.ok (Iat. Brvs)


I havo a few oueotions to ask the defcadent about these dccuceats.
rrofess-r, in A.se Document Sc. 10 on pege 34. la the second uaragraoh,
corhe-s It would be test if I auotc this brief oaxagranfc:

■In infection exccrlieats-ca hu-oan beings c rooid devclcpnont of
rather high cosinophilia vee observed as early es a f«w h urs aftor tho
Infection of the skin with e few tllherrie cercarioe.*

Sow, who art those excerlr.cntal subjects, Professor7
A. These cxrcrl’ver.tftl subjects in the cese of tho first ex^crinent
were exclusively the neuters of ny ftesister.ts la the dooortnent and In
the laboratory, end la the second ejneriuent the:- wero dec tors who hed
attended a lecture on tr-oicU uedlclno in which I spolco about thoso cx-
periuents, end who declared their roadiness to bo exoerlncntcd on nloo.

■v. D ld yju also Infect yourself?

A. * ^s, I infected nysolf in the first series and had tho strongest
rocctlcn cf all the cx-ioriusntal subjects.

^ Did you carry out other cxoori.-mnts on yourself?

A. Toe, other oxnorlxnts I undortovk on syself or had others
undertake on no, end they vor. •anorinents with dyeontory toxin, infec¬
tions with lntostlncl flu, and oxrerlnonts on ouinino danrgo.

Did you nloo tost vaccines on yourself?

A. Cr.co I nade nysolf available as an exnericontal subject in tho
testln.; .f a vaccine, nauoly, c nev yellow fever vaccine fren living
yellow fever virus, -hat ves in Sow York in 193o and at the tine I wug
tyoelf producing vaccines in China. I tested the tolerability of a
lor^-o nujjber ^f vaccines by innoculating aysclf with a doublo dose.

x, bitkin the framework of your orofos6ionel or -ther u-fficinl
activities did you bee :c infected any other ways?

A. Mth the greatest care in the vorld it is still ionossitle in
ny profession to avoid infection. I have been infected with dysentery
and with skin tuberculosis, anc then cholera, tynhus dengue, nalcria con-
Olicatcd with black v*tor fever, hcoatitus enidenicr., and finally in
y m v-rk I got e chronic infection frrr. which I an still suffering.


Court So. 1

22 Aor 47-X-€-2-Z3t-Cook (1st. 3r-vr.)


?r.fessor, in & use P.cusert So. 10 , npcely, the annual rcourt
.f tho fijtert &-ch Institute fron 1939 to 1941, there is on oa,-o 42 to ho
seen fren tho pert^raph headed rooan sunoral III, "Practical tfork", it
can be seen that typhus vaccinations in the tr^oical deoartnent vere
undertaken.

A. Those inoculations were carried cut in sracticel work net under
tho scientific dopertnent. There v*s r sort of a ooly clinic attached
to the tropical deoartnent and vhen any one case to the institute and
wanted t- helnn-culcted against somethin* then ho ves innxulated thero.

It can to s«or. there fru: this list he *cc innoculntcd gainst snalloox,
cholora, typhoid, paratyphoid, and tynhus. These wore r.urely urncticol
innoculations or vaccinations that hod nothing to do with scientific
research. You con find the ini list in the next yeer't rooort on uivcoo
62-59 of Zbcunont So. 11 . There also of tho 4,000 innoculations tho
nu-itor of tyohoid inoculation* is only 33. Thor, in tho annual rcoort
f-r 1943 thoro is no r.ention of inoculations hecouso tho llnitntion
that tho war placed on tho v-rk «f tho deoartnent r.ade it no cess cry for
sc to stop » 7 ivin f - these vaccinati-no. Those vaccinations vero never
ovduntod. In any way the scientific work on vaccines didn't stop lr.

19-.3 in tho institute. Cu the contrary, it bocano larger «r.d lar,-or
and it rested thoro until tho ond of the war.

v Professor, I should llko you to sake whatever etatenento you
vjuld like on the contents of these resorts so far ps they concern tyohus
and to oxolcin the contents briefly. These are hose P-orients Sob. 10 ,

11 , and 12 .

A. rerhaps I cay point out first of r' - translation error ,^n
?t.;e 41 of Pocucont lio. 10 . Opposite the vords, in the third oare^raoh,
Poo’S 30, there is the word "Jaundice" in the Lavish text and in the
ucrr.an text there is the word "Golbfieber", which soans "yellow fever".

THE rriSIDi::": Whet is the scncin-; of the Gernan word in English?

VITHLSS: Yellow fever.

ISIEP. fB i. TEP .; The interpreter corroborates that.

6235


Court Fo. 1

22 Apr 47-K-€-3-SEM-C,wk (Int. Srovn)


A. Hov I shall exclain these documents. The rencrt fron 1 Anril
1S39 to SI karch 1S41 contains under So. 7 on cages 32 to 40 e renort on
the work of the tropical uedicine department. ^ince there is no Mention
at all of voric on tynhue, it is not ny intention to go into that here,
tut I should be grateful if the Tribunal vculd take e look ct this cne-
sa,;e in order ascertain that I and ny assistants concerned ouroclvoB
vith n greet nunber cf things tut not vith tynhue. On cage 41 of the
d.cuoent tack, page 10 cf the document, there is a short oxcemt froa
tho report of the department of cell and virus research under no. 8.

Only that naregrrch has here tc.n quoted vhich refers to the cnoo horo
at tar. And it says in the report f the next year that yellov favor
vao tho nov subject of v,rk. Rxccrlnor.ts wro nado priacrily on tho
brooding of virus, its preservation, and on the production of vnccino
cultures. ‘his deoart-ent vr.e at that tine under tho direction of
rrofoosor Kaogon. On the sane page thore coaec under So. 10 tho report
on tho work of the laboratory of the general nonaging diroctor, nanoly,
rrofeater Dr. Gildcnoiotor. I shan't road this In dotoll but horo thorc
is a description -f the collaboration vith rrofeaeor Kurgon, an indication
A tho work the denar', cr.t did in typhus, and it can be clearly soon fr'n
tho rooort that tho collnbcrati-n vith other docartnonto is here bolng
doEcribod but that there vne no collaboration vith tho tropical dcoort-
nent or vith rofessor Roso. This report continues on Pago 11 rosnoc-
tively 42, the nine typhus vaccines vhich voro carried out at tho trool-
cal nedicino department I havo already explained.


6235


22 Apr I l-y-AE-7-1-Oross (Brown )

Court I

r:2 PRESUEtfTj T;itnc3s, or. page 42 aftor "tho fol
lowing nunbor was ir.odulatcd r.gr.ir.3t small pox, cholera,
etc. tlaorc is first a total nunbor followed by two other
r.unbors* *Tnnt do tho two following numbers indicate?

A. !lr. Prcaidont, if you turn to pago 31 you will
seo that this report is a report for two years - 1 April
1939 until 31 Hnroh 1941.

FRESIDSITj Thoso two numbers thon simply lndic-
oto tho nunbor of inoculations in two yoars, with tho
total?

A. It is tho total for two yoars and it separates
tho numbors, giving the number for tho first year and tho
sooor.d year.

THE PRESIDE!? 2 Vory woll.

A. If you add up thoso two nunbors you roach tho
sur that corresponds to tho first nunbor. Now on pego
42 r.ro publications that appor.rod from tho Robort Koch
Instituto. Thoso works h"vo boon oxtractod which ooncorn
tho caso boforc this Tribunal. First of all, a papor by
Gild:noistor end Haagon on typhus. Thon a paper of Haagon'
s on yellow fevor, and thon a sorics of toxt book ussngys
by nysolf. And undor No. 3 thcro i3 tho word "rickottaino"
rhioh is typhu3 virus. Thi3 is a little toxt book essay
of four pr.gca in longth. I go now to Document 11, Roport
for Period 1 April 1941 to 31 Decombor 1942.

T!3r. PRESIDENT: Boforc you begin tho discussion of


that, witness, tho Tribunal will bo in recess.


22Apri 1-: I-AK-9-l-Kaloy (Omnlcr)

Court Ko.l

TEE EARSHALk The Tribunal is ageing in session.

BY DR. FRITZ:

Q Professor, you were going to start referring to
Rose Document 11 before the recess, which i3 to be found
on pages 44 to 60, Document Book I?

A :e cro here concerned with the first yearly report
aftor tho reorganization of tho Robert Koch Institute into
into a Reich Institution.. At the beginning of this yoarly
roport there arc to bo found tho speeches which woro made
on tho occasion of this reorganization. Or, Page 45 thoro
is to bo found an excerpt fro:, professor Gildemeistor«s
spooch vhorc ho gives you his survoy about the work of
tho institute. On Pago 45 tho dovolopr.ont of his typhus
work is boing described. Ono can soc boro that r.olthcr
ny nano nor the name of anyone of ny collaborators 13
boing mentioned. on tho next pogo of tho doaimcnt, which
ordinarily would bo threo pa.gos furthor on, in tho prin¬
ted roport, but wo find it hero on the next pa.go, slnoo
thcro aro only oxcorpta, ”o find a. description of tho
work at tho Tropical Department, the mt 1( rit Work, and
the work about tho transfer of bacteria, as boing trans¬
mitted by flics is being emphasized. I skip the pages
47 to 57. In theso 11 pages tho work of tho Tropical nodi¬
cal Dopa.rtnont is boing doscribod under Paragraph 7. 7
v;na tho number under which tho so roports appeared yoarly.

Tilth rofcronco to Department 8, tho department regarding

•

coll a.nd virus rcso'rch, there l . rent ion in this

yearly roport, sinco this dopartment, owing to tho dopar-
turo of professor Ha.a.ron, had bccorx vacant, and profes¬
sor Ha.agon obviously no longer sent in reports. Then on

• *

pago 5S, under Paragraph 10, thoro is a roport cbout .work
of the head of tho Institute, which is again Frofessor

6236


22APTI1-: :-;JC-9-2-MP.loy (Ramlor)

Court Nol

Gildomoistor. His participation in typhus is being des¬
cribed in this report. Professor Gildcmcistor, profo33or
Potor, and c certain Dr. Passer r.ro mentioned ns collab¬
orators. On pago 59, 33 typhus vaccinations arc nention-
cd nt tho top of tho pego, socor.d lino, which wero givon
undor tho prnctiocl cork of tho Tropical Department. I
have alrordy explained tho significance cf that ontrv.
Thoro follows an excerpt from the list of publications
which apperrod from tho instituto during tho timo this
report covorod. I only includod such publications in
this oxoorpt which oithor originate from mo or my col¬
laborators, or thoso which doal with typhus. Work publ¬
ications which boar tho titlo of "Typhus" nro found on
Pago 60# tho publicatlonathoro by Profossor Gildoraoiotor
and Profossor potor. Thon undor my nano wo find two
papors about typhus. Thoy r.ro "Typhus probloms at Homo,"
ond undornoath that "Typhus probloms arising from tho
Rosottlomont of Racial Gormans from 1939 to 1940."

Thoso two publications about typhus written by no donl
oxclusivoly with typhus oombnt as cn opldomoologlcnl
problon, and nro mostly basod upon my work during tho
rooottlor.ont. in ease tho prosocution should contost tho
authenticity of this statonont, it i3 naturally possiblo
to produco copies of thoso two papors. Naturally, wo did
not want to incroeso tho 3iro of our document books to
an unreasonable extent. I now turn to Roso Documont No.
12. This i3 tho annual report of my dopartnent'covoring
tho yoar of 1943. T his annual roport was printod for tho
entiro instituto, but unfertunntoly it was not possible
to find a copy of thi3 printed roport. Howevor, the
Robert Koch instituto mr.do tho manuscript available.

It was still available in tho files of tho institute.

623 ?


22Apri1-M-A 5-0-3-Ma loy ( Rnoalor )

Court Ho.l

p or yor.r of 1943 wo hovo not the report on typhus
^ork of tho institute, which naturally could bo found
in tho printed report. I regret that in particular, bc-
causo this would show clearly that I did not participate
in that work nor did hy collaborators participate in it,

I have..not gono into tho contents of tho annual report of
ny dopart-ont at this point, but i shall re roly limit
mysolf to stating the fact that thoro is no nontion in
this roport about typhus or yellow fovor. A short survoy
of this docur-ont will oonfim that statement,

Tfould you plcr.so turn to pr.go 77, which is pr.go 17
of tho documont, and you find v:ork by no and ny collab¬
orators, That is up to pogo 79, On pr.go 77 you find tho
titlo "Rickottslosis(typhus),” This is undor Figure 3,

It is a now odition cf tho toxtbook, Articlo 16 alroady
montionod boforo. On Pago 78 thoro aro again a number of
mnttors nentionod which rofor to typhus, Thoro is an ar¬
ticlo written in tho Roich Hoalth Periodical, "Progrosa
in Combatting of tho Clothed Lico, 1 ' It again reforo to
my DDT work. Then in tho contcr of tho pago you will
find the other "Typhus Vaccines," This rofors to tho
dinoussion remark rvado during c meeting of the Consult¬
ing Physicians, which is d. roady available hero in its
original. This Is tho tochnical introduction with refer¬
ence to my pro tost at Dingis work, Thon as the one but
last publication, n book written by -.c in collaboration
with a number of other gontlo-.-xm, : rding irododurfi3

for docontnmination, which again docls with typhus, of
courso, but only from a combat and opidomlological point
of view, I think that this d03cri*oos tho essential points
I wish to provo by submitting theso docucont3, I think
that you have already made available tho printed rr iginal

621x0


22April-M-AK- 9-4-Kaloy (Rrtmlcr)

Court Ho 1

covering the first tro annual rorortB, ha von* t you?

Q Yos.

A But ro n'ric cxcorpt3 of anything which is In any
ray essential for this trial.

DR. FRITZ: I offered the original printod roport as
cvidor.co, end I handod it to tho Goncrnl sccrotary.


62 H


22 April-lt-DJG-10-l-Kochaa (Int. F^lcr)
Court Sc. 1


Q I new turn to another subject, Frefessor; the Tribunal
put tho question tc Professor Restock during his examination whether
irraurdty could be discovered bv cn e xam! n ation of the blood. Professor
Restock answers this question in the affirm tive, but added the limit¬
ation by saying he did notccc.nsidor himself an oeport in that field;
was Professor Rostock's answer correct?

A I think that this question put by the Tribunal is very
important and I would like tc answer it as a question of tho Tri¬
bunal, because I think that the answer given by Professor Restock
was net correct.

It is not pcssiblo to rn:. or th- question whether a person
or cn animal is imaflinu against n diooaso by examin: ti n of tho blood;
but this question cannot bo answered by a sd yes" cr "nc." In
ordor to understand the real situation, which is of great importance
In order to clarify a number cf Documents, a aero detailed explan¬
ation becomes necessary.

The fact alone that Frefessor Cildaaoister knew about tho
series cf experiments at Bucherwcld, and perhaps participated as
a collaborator, was to have been a proof that something wes to bo
ascertained there, which could not easily bo ascertained by an
examination of the blood. Hobedy would start any such tests if by
a simple examination of tho bioed one could arrive ct the results.

Very shortly, I want tc illustrate the definition of tho word
"innunity." Laaunity is the capacity not to have tc fall ill in
3 pito cf infection with virulent germs.

One has tc basically differentiate bet*-on two forms, tho

naturally inborn immunity: this fcsunitj os in all case? absolute!

and in spite cf the severest infocticn nc illness results. Thus human

beings naturally i-nine against nagana end cattle plague; and the

dog is cf course imme against the human plague. On the other hand

there is the acquired immunity. This immunity con either be acquired

by die care cr by - protective vaccination, and it is only with this

621*2


22 Aprii-y-DJG-lQ-2-4teehaa (Int. Haalcr)
Court :io . 1


problem tfwt we are dealing with during this trial here.

Q Hew can let unity be ascertained at all.

A Only through the recognition of the feet of somebody not
falling ill in spite of an infection. This can to ascertained in
many ways. It ccn be discovered at on occasion when one cculd
assume thet during a large scale cpidaaic every person was subject
to infection, cr at loast ell rnebors of cert:in groups were subject
to infection, and that in spitu of that, a cert-in nunbor cf pocplc
did net fall ill. That is the usual method used in order to find
out the effectiveness of protective vaccination.

Subsequently, one tried to find cut how many of the people
who had fallen ill were vr.ccimtcd rnd hen aany v.cro not, then
theso two figures arc coopered.

Another possibility is the one cf artificial infection. This
method is being used on anLaals and in exceptional eases on experi¬
ments cn humor, beings.

Q Censidori.^ a dangerous illness such as typhus; wore such
artificial injections carried cut in order tc find cut whether a
p.rscn was imeaino after having been .dven a protective vaccination?

A That repeatedly happened before the war outside of Germany.
The artificial infections in the caoo cf typhus fall into two groups.
I shrll row leave cut the tiao before 1900, end then wo ccmo to tho
classical axporiments conducted by Jossil, one of tho two discoverers
of the plague bacilli. Jr.ssil found cut cn experimenting on coolies
that typhus can bo transferred by transmitting blood from ono
person tc another. Then, Sergoon, in his work cn natives, proved
that the typhus virus ccn be found in the louse; end finely in the
case cf the Reeky IRuntein Spotted fever, which is related to tho
louse feVvr, the transmission cf that disease by ticks wes found
in experiments cn human beings. These are the three great classical
experiments, which arc generally kr-wn, because they constitute
cornerstones ir. typhus resoar eh.

62U3


22 April-M-DJG-10-?-K«o».' rn (Tnt. RviLor)

Court Nc. 1

The second group covers the ocporinenra in order to test the
value ct typhus vaccines. These are the experiments cf the two
Frenchmen, 31an end Balthasar, «hc were vaccinating people with a
living o-virulent rickettsia strain, ar.d afterwards by an infection
with a virulent strain, tested the iccunity.

Next is the work of Van do Uillas for the Journal cf Insnunity
in the year of 1539, wftc was testing the essential vaccine by
artificial injection on twelve persons.

Finally we have the American experiments with typhus cn
inmates cf prisons that --ore carried cut during this war.

Here, I na only citing th- ’ -at known v_'mplc8 which brought
about results cf basic importance.

Q Hew, considering the situation as y:u Joscribc it, would
it be possible that Professor Restock answered tho question in the
affirmative as to whether inrunity can be ascertained b the
uxanination of the blood?

A ho stock hiaaolf oophnsizod that he hinaaf was not nr. export
in this field and .ririnally wanted tc reject tho responsibility.

••hen giving his answer, ho ctvicusly mixed up immunity and immunity
roacticns. The imouvity is a property of the living organism of
either the human b«ing or tho animal a, and the bearers cf L-aaunity
ere tha colls, tho tissuos or..', tho blood, ho knew quite a number
of things about the immunity in the tissue, tut technically there
is very little proof. It is caich easier tc observe the- changes cf
tho blood.

V.e are here concerned with the fdlcring .natter. After sur¬
viving an infectious disease a number cf ■> .zs arise in the blood,
cr in the 3erua either r.cwly cr tc an increased extent. Channels
-f tnese sycptcos ere tho sc-called enti-bedies. Aglutinin, praccip-
itins, bactoricligcnes, bactericidcnos, anti-bodies, complement
- ixaticn anti-bedies, etc. The presence and amount cf these anti¬
bodies can be proven in the test tube. The group of these reactions

6-lu,


22 April-iS-DJG-10-4-Mcahan (Int. Eanlcr)

C-urt So. i

zro designated iamirtl ty reactions, beecuso it occurs simultaneously
with I fle iml ty. But, it is cne of the fundamental teachings of
is s am ity research thet not cne of those ni—ircmii often highly com¬
plicated reactions cff.r a ace sure or proof of innunity. All of
these reactions play a huge part in labor tcry diagnosis and in
scientific work, but as I said ixxunity cannot be aoasurod by then.


Court Sc. 1

22 ACT i?-K-ll-l-ZHX-Ccck (let. Sealer)


v Dc each reections olay an J part during this trial here?

A. Yes, in the ccse of typhus and especially is Heaven's conulex
cf work tho so-called Veigl Felix rection hrs teen repeatedly mentioned,
which is an aglutinrtisn reaction with Proteus X-19.

Would you nlea.se descri v e briefly vhat this situati n is?

A. She Vslgl Felix reaction is the sost Important react1 n refor-
rln; to tho diagnosis -f tyuhus. A few days after the beginning of tho
illness the serum assuaes the property tc agglutinate those special
bacteria Proteus X-19. As th* illness progresses and takes tine, this
capacity increases in its strength so that finelly tho serum can agglu¬
tinate diluted one to ter. thousand. After surviving this illnoss tho
agglutlnants decrease in their /count and finally disapooar cccnletoly.
However, tho Immunity remains, and that this rgglutinati n, although it
is an incunlty reaction, has nothin.; t. Au with Immunity it boot shown
by this Woigl Jolix reaction; tho nrotcus becte-in, with which it is
boing carrlod cut, arc net at all tho virus of tychuo, and as I said
boforc, the agglutinins disappear within ir.o year but the Immunity ro-
noir.s for docados and genorally for a lifetime.

Why did Professor Hoagen aftor his protective vaccination wirk
on this Vol.;l Felix roacti ,n if it does not give rny woof of immunity?

a. The reason is tho following. Four facts are known. Aftor sur¬
viving infectious diseases an Immunity arises. Vo know that aftor pro¬
tective vaccination ianunity can eloo eo-ear to p vonk extent. V 0 know
on the other hand that after infectious dloor.se* agglutinin* often tu»o«ar
together with other anti-bodies. V 0 also know that after vaccination
agglutinins appear. Since tho only rolirble nothod in order to oxanine
immunity oatoricl, a subsoouont infection, is nostly and generally not
available, :ne tekot reciurse to such serological reactions. This is
en emergency aid and the exocrt knows thrt this is very unreliable and
can ocsily load to erroneous results, and this is ne of the essential
weaknesses in immunization research. ?or that reason one strrts out on
these ver- extensive a=d tedious stctistics In immunity research, which

62 hS


Court So. i

22 Apr 47-K-U-2-£a(-Ccck (let. Eerier)


in spite of that always hr la; very Questionable results, red for thet
roMc-s experiments on human heir: ere r,rln and esain eu^osted, rad in
thl6 connection I aey perhaps nolnt to a document which Prof cos ;r Pl< :o
is goin,; to submit here. In a oepor by an Aotrican author thu aatter
is deecribod in the very iptv Denser as I have Just done. Sow, ty entire
testimony could he merhens in contradiction t vhat rrofessor Hcerln,:
has seid. Professor Eoerln,; said that ac only exception in the case of
yellov fever immunity cen he estohlished by hl^od examination. >*o said
first of rll that thit ves the only oxco-.tion an.' einco ho did not know
the subject of tho trirl this testimony needs brief correction. It is
correct that in tho m.uso exnerinent wt« can establish that the sera*',
of a vaccinated merton kills the tjrrhus in tho test tubo and the conclu¬
sion is Justified that if the senm can do that in tho test tubo >hrs
tho hlcod has the sa.ro ability in the tody, but rrofvesvr Kvorinr forgot
to cry that this seru: reaction can have a ne^itWo rosult, namely, after
tho vaccination. Aopr-xi:atcly two yorrs afterwards the serum rorcticn
tecoaos negative but that is not at ell pro:f that infinity has coasod.
Immunity it a crlloboratl-.n -f the properties of bl-od and tissues and
trkes longer.

v Is tho doscriotlon rs it is ^ivtn by you tronorally recognised
or is that r.orely y.ur oers^nal opinion?

A. It 1* generally roc-jrnixod and rrafessor alios, who is lnter-
estod in this auostl<n on account of his nlanuo vacclnos, vlll eubalt
m American document; and if rr_fct6_r E.ctck nedo n different stete*
nent hero, it was due to the fact that the irnunity science tolan^-s to

the nost difficult questions of oedlcine and generally is only treated

•

hy specialists. The non-specialist »*ill rlvpys try to evade a Question
In this field.

<*, I now turn t- the cccplex of the typhus w rk carried rut by
Professor Hansen of Strasbourg. I should like f r you to tell no vhr.t
your connection to hr. Harden vrs end vhat you know about hit civilian
and ailitaxy position.


52li?


Court So. 1

22 Acr 47-*-ll-3-£HX-Csok (Int. «nl«r)

A. I heard of rrofoMOr Heaven for the first tine by rereon of
his yellow favor v-rk which he vra carrying out at the Rockefeller Insti¬
tute is Sew York. Then in the year 1936 I node his ncrscnal ecour.intcncc
when I cone tc the Eobert Koch Institute. Ihirin.: the fell‘.wing years
wo, of c.urso, act frecuently. Kaagon %*-s * reserve officer with the
Luftwaffe, just as I, end at the beginning of the war becrvie tho consult¬
ing hygienist with Air Float I. At the Robert Koch Instituto he had
the dorartuent for cell and virus rosaerch. ha worked closely with
rroftssor Glldeceistor. h« w;rltad cl scr with hie than wuo uounlly
custcrary at tho Institute. These two geatlaaen had already been tc-
gethor at the Reich Health Office and. t gether had. c ne to the Robort
Koch Institute. They nublishod ar. important handbook -n virus research
together. Harden vac considered to :t .so if the nast lr.-vrtcnt Goman
researchers and wrs sent to tho Rockefeller Institute in rder t> vrk
thoro cn yellow fever. Later ho was celled - I nr. Svrry, I node a nis-
tnke, I coant the Rockefeller Instituto in Kuw fork, bccnuco at that
tiuo already he ves considered to bo a virus socialist.

V ®id you collaborate with Mr. Bergen?

A. Ho, I s-iocialited on ptrneithologlcnl Questions during tho
lost decade and sinco =y Herb©* w^rk was concluded in the year •>/ 1936
I no longer carried cut toy virus w>rk.

1*. khat did Hergen do during the vrr?

A. He baccae consulting ihysicinn with Mr Fleet So. 1. Ho -.ar-
ticiontcd in the h-lish CKioaign in the year 1935. After tho end of
that canoaign, in addition to his consulting eoneity, he resuned his
vrk at the Robert Xoch Instituto -nee -tore end '•ken tho Air Fie t So. 1
van transferred to the lest he was transferred re tho c.nsulting nhysi-
clnn to Air Float Contor in -rdor t; enable hie t: cantinuo his work at
the institute. In the Fall of 19*1 he beeaae director of tho Eyglonic
Institute at Strasstourg and thus ceased v;rk with the Robert Koch Insti¬
tute. At the sane tine he ceased his work as consulting ohysicim with
the Air Fleet because he had to devote his tine exclusively to his insti-


Court So. 1

22 Apr ^7-K-lW-ZHX-Ccole (Int. heeler)


tute, vhioh vra to he nevly instituted. In addition, rr-feseor Eaa^cn
uo to that tine had not yet leen ectlvo e.s a university lecturer red he
hod to fiat used t-: thla field of v.rfc. Since there vra r. Irek -f rord
hygienists et tho Luftvaffo, I-vas aoir ixlnately two years letor, la tho
aiddle of 19-3, assigned t- zo on on -fficlnl trio t T:ul In Franco
and et tho tone tine Interrupt ny Journey et Strft8st:ur,: in or.'er to
discuss the cuestion with rrofessor Harden es to whether he c uld net,
os o side petition, participate In a consulting cencclty.


22 April-U-DJG-12-l-Grcss (Int. Easier)
Court So. 1


r. (Continued) I received this order free Professor Hipke,
informed hie accordingly, hhen I visited Strasbourg in the year
of 1943» Hasten declared himself ready to assume such side activity
•■ita a grot deal cf reservation. However, ho refused werk with
any other ^ir Fleet but che stationed at heme. Accordingly, he
reported to the Inspector, Frofosscr Hipko, end Haagen in the second
half of 1943 beccao consulting physician of the .dr Fleet Center
stationed in the Reich. Ho regained in this position until the end
of the l*or. I don't know the extent of his official activity but
I assume that Haagen went to his Air Fleet physician once or twice

a month and, in addition, made a number cf official trips in the
caso cf special assignoonts, Haagen, as in the case of all othor
hy-jienists, s.nt half yearly experimental reports from which nc
re*.t deal of activity became apparont. I rcaccfcer a suamariting
report particularly about experience gained with cholera and typhoid
vaccines, about doficiancics in the building of barracks, and
deficiencies in Housing and Settlement cf youthful air men. Since
the fact that oc littlo is reported about activity with the j.ir Floot
dceo net exclude that ho did a lot cf usoful wort: for the .dr Fleet
but all that work probably did net concern any fundamental natter
"hich could oven bo Cuntioned in any report to tho «ir Fleet.

Q hhat do ycu knew clout Frcfcssor Haagen's fate after
tho collapse?

u I merely heard that he- was kopt here in the Jhirnhcrg
nail fer a long tine. But, since cs a result cf the intorregftiens
the accuscticr.s cade r ;air.st him were found to be unjustifiable, he
was released by the CIC and released from Prison or 5 cf Y.ar by the
American authcritic-s as a nan without guilt.

Q '..hat do ycu knew about the research assignment which
, ref^sser Haagen received frea the Medical Inspectorate cf the
Luftwaffe?

« I cm hardly informed abcut the beginning -f these assign-
n-r.ts and ssy statements will therefore net be reliablo because

6250


22 April-lt-DJG—12-2-Grc 3 3 (Lnt. Rosier)
Court Rc. 1


this gc-3 beck to a time when I lcrnod nothing whatsoever about
these matters. Around the center of 1940 cn the cccasicn of tho
campaign in France he probably get himself a research assignment
with reference to yellow fever when one c.anted cn tho possibility
that the battlo field would extend tc Africa. This assignment
Hoager. received free the Robert Koch Institute. I hoard cf this
assignment when ho was transferred fren tho Robert Koch Institute
to the Hygiene Institute in Strasbourg. This became necessary be—
cruse those aaaipmonts were net only given tc the- peracn individually
but tc the entire institute crA when a person transferred, the
assignment was alsc tr-nsferrod to the institute. Obviously in tho
year 1943 he alsc r^coiv-d typhus r.ssignn^nt firm the Luftwaffe and,

1 think, at the atmo tie- he rajot hrve gotten himself cn influenza
assignaent. Hew over, I can not i\nenbor that because at no tine
did 1 ace r. report free hin cn influenza.

Q H-w was it pcssible thet ho could have research assignments
in the field cf hygiene without you gaining knowledge cf it as
tho consulting hygienist?

A Well, that io very nature!. The research assignments did
n-t crlg&nato fn.es the* modi eel inspectorate. Tho rcsoarchcrs askod
for these assignments cn their cwn initiative. That has already boon
explrincd here by witnesses end the precuduro illustrated. Owing to
regulations cf the Kor it became difficult for civilian institutes
to get raw materiel because civilian research work was completely
neglected at first end if anyone received priority on basis cf cn
order b> tho V.ohraacht only then could he receive raw material and
personnel. This situation changed when the Reich Research Council
was created which could oven use higher priority numbers and tho
result was that overybe y then under ver-xi tc get research assignments
fr re the Reich Research Council. In case of application for research
assignment the pccplc rho needed that assignment person*lly sked for
tr, m -r.d since there was no isBediato interest cn behalf cf the


625L


22 April-l!-DJl-l?-3-G~ -3 (Int. Ranlcr)
Court Sc. 1


Malicol Inspectorate in these things it was net necessary tc rsk a
specialist tc advise- on the matter. In aeny eases it v as a question
cf a n .re courtesy or. behalf of the Vchrnr.cht offices. I would
cctsjjr.ro it with r. similar situation as it prevails in the h cke-
fcllcr foundation. I wq3 speaking about the grants w'nich arc given
cut by the fccckofeller Institute. It is net n-cossary fer the
liedicrl Inspectorate to state that there is yellow fever in Africa
and that it is a good thing to produce typhus vcccino. consulting
physician neod n.t bo asked tc take part in th-sc things. Only in
1 ter y-ars the l;abit arose that cf any research assignments 1 was
also informed.

Q feu were .lust speaking -fa courtesy shown by the '..chrmrcht
iledical Services tc the civilian r-Sccichers, in order tc alleviate
their dlfficultis. But Professor Hoc. gen was a Luftwaffo officer.
Didn't he recoivj those ossipvicr.ts In his capacity as an /dr Ferco
officer?

A He. That can clearly be aoaa free the documents which
tho Prosecution was kind enough tc submit tut upon which it did net
ccaaont accordingly and, therefore, I ah uld like te dc it f r then.

I refer tc Document Beck XIII cf the Prosecution which is Document
He. 137, Exhibit 189. This is pegu 6 cf this document. In this
document Frefosser Hitagon, as tho direetcr ef tho Hygienic Institute
of the University applies t; the civilian superior cf this organi¬
zation, tho director cf tho University, to d-daro tho Hycicnic
Institute as an aracmcnt work, ns a reason he gives a list ef tho
numerous research assignments with which thw institute had been
entrusted. Naturally, it would have been ;f no importance to Imcw
what Haagon'3 assignments were in ids Luftwaffe position buVitwas
important for the positdor of tho institute ..ithin the University.

It can be quite clearly coca free this document, and Frefesser
Schrcodcr correctly udphosized it, that the duty, *-he r_search
activity, of iir. Haagen w s sca-thing which '-s c. rrie-d cn in his
civilian sphere cf activity.


22 April-M-DJG—12-4-Crcss (In*.. Raolcr)

Court He. 1

Q fes this conception rise represented by tho Medical Service
during the War?

-v Yes, the Prosecution in that case hes submitted the docu¬
ment which cevors the point. i7o are here concerned with the Dccu-
a-nt Mo. 297 which is Exhibit 316, Document Book XU in the Cernan
edition tc bo found cn page 112. Ve arc here concerned with the ccn-
dusicn of the yellow fever activity by Professor Haagen which soya
hero "the Inspectorate cf the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe asks.."
and then the next paragraph states "it is requested," however, tho
next paragraph says "tho Inspectorate asks, etc. to continue the
work." Whoever knows anything about military correspondence in
Germany, and I think t r.t cay be tho onso with a nen-soldi or, will
recognise very clearly that this is net a luit_r cf a superior
agency cf the Medical Services tc a little staff physician but that
w« are hero Concerned with a letter by the Medical Inspectorate tc
on independent organisation wh;.n cn«- cannot order about but to nhorc
one has tc sake requests. Considering tho German stylo of official
correspondence this is s cue thing that Is absolutely cl oar. In
military order it says - it is erdorod, you havo to dc this, you
have to dc th-t, execution of the report is U bo notified cn such
-mi such a date. This letter also shews clearly that in tho case
cf research ossigments tho Medical Inspectorate did net consider:-
Professor Haugen as a mbordinato.

THE PRESIDE?.-!: The Tribunal will new bo in recess until 1:30.

(k recess was taken until 1330 hours.)


22 Apr-.*.-! 3-15-1-1 21 y (Int. Brcwn)
Court No. I.


aft£b;o&:: sissio:;

(The Tribun-1 reconvened at 11:00 hours, 22 April 1?L7)

THE VARSHAL: The Tribunal i3 again in session.

®. HARDY: Hay it please Ycur Honor, after the completion of the

Rose case on agreement with defense and the Prosecution and if the

Tribunal desires, wo would like to present the defendants, Huff, Ton-

berg, and Vie Its in that order, that is put their cases on in that order,

and after the completion of the easo against Dr. belts then hear tho

case against the defendant Brack, basod on tho fact that tho cases of

Ruff, Rouborg and Vfelt* arc very similar, and it wouldn't interrupt tho

continuity of thought, and tho ovidonco then would bo more convenient

ror both the defense and tho ft-osccution, to be handlod in that rnnnor.

THE FRESIDS..7: Do I understand that is agroeablo to counsel for

tho dofonso? If so, that method of procedure r.lll bo satisfactory to

tho Tribunal.

(ERHARD RC63 - Resumed
DIRECT ELddH&TlON (Continued)

BY DR. FRITZ


Q Various witnesses havo ropeatoUly xmtionod Stabs rat of tho
Luftwaffo Graofo, who is allogcd to havo assisted Heagon in his work;
who is this nan and rhit did ho havo to do with Haagcn.*

A In the Luftwaffe, as in all branches of tho V»>rracht, thoro
soro so-c.allod oxport ccc.ando3. Those wore ofCic»s -•. tho University
clinics, in University Institutes, in .hich people fro* tho amod ser¬
vices were sent for technical and opoci -1 training for several years,
jf such oxport cor-.-andos for hygione, there wero three in tlw Luftwaffe,
ono in Graz, ono in Hoidelbor,; and one in Strrsbourg# Only in tho one
La Strasbourg was tho director of tho Institute also a reserve officer
traffo, but that was not of decisive importance. Tho cortando


t as well gone to another Ir-stitutc as in tho case of Graz


'V

and HeidolV-V^ , Stabsarzt Gracfe was such a nodical offioer, who had

bo^n detailed i$>i* export training in hygiene. In this trial the quos-

/ /

/


3254


22 Apr-u-i 3-15-2-! faloy (Int. Drown)
Court Ho. I.


tion is of importance, what tho legal standing of such a con.vending of¬
ficer was. Tho question has frequently boon decided on in German legal
proceedings, because tho act of detailing an officer has been a practice
for noru than a century, and thus tho question of legal responsibility
and other such questions have frequently been discussed in this conr.oct-
ion. I an ovon in the position to describe such a case in detail
which I experienced at the University of Heidelberg. I don»t want to
do that hero unloss tho Tribunal expressly requires it, but at any rato
tho question has been decided in Genian law to the effect that, tho de¬
tailed nodical officer is responsible to the Civil Institute, to tho
Director of tho Civilian Institute, and that tho Director is liablo with¬
in the framework of tho low for such errors ns arc comittod by tho de¬
tailed xdical officer in tho course of liis duties. I grant that tho
question could still bo disputed, but fit any rato it is eo laid down in
Goman law.

Q Now, after this discussion on tho legal aspects of it, I ask
you to state if you know how reports were nadti on thoso re so arch as¬
signments, tho content of tteso reports, when they were modo?

a Such a report was prescribed. What tho dates wore on which
Luftwaffo reports wure to bo aado I do not know, teenuao I ojvor received
a re so are h ossigneent froa tho Luftwaffo. In the Rose arc a Dcportnont
whore I had to report, reports wore given every six rxrtcr. Ha agon also
sent such reports in, for oxaaplo; on his yollon fovor and influenza
assignrionts, however, I saw no reports. In other words, his reports in
tho so fields wore certainly fra ;.tntary.

Q What were those reports?

Jiaagon was no b^tt^r and no worse than other scientists \n the
r.ittor of his reports. Lost scientists uaCu reports when they noodod
funds or when they wore told to do so. On such occasions Haagon sont
short inter in reports. Otherwise, he United hinself to sending fron
tho printed caterial about 2 reports, regarding his work, and calling
thons his reports.


G255


22 .'.pr-i-.' 3-15-3—' rloy (lot. Brora:)
Court !Io. I.


Q ..hat would generally be deduced from these inter In reports?

^ Not vary nuch free the interin r-porte. Ti)e assignment was re¬
iterated in it and there was a statement that work was being done, but
these interin reports were never very informative, because these were
not cotters that wore suitable for publication and therefore tho
scientists troro very reticent. On tho other hand, so far as I an infonaed,
there wr.s never ouch pressure that such reports should be made, because
if one kno-./s scientists, one knows very well that then ttey have found
something out, wbon thoy have discovered something, they will report on
their own initiative in order to receive recognition for their work, and
if thoy havo nado no discoveries it does nothing to' improve tho situation
if long reports are sent in on their failures. Scientific ros. xch is
not something like c factory wtorc you want a monthly report on product¬
ion. If no positive results are achiovtd that is too bad, that is a
short at a to no nt, but nobody gets very oxcited about that.

Q Fror your testimony one gets t'<v Impression then that Haagon'c
reports to tho odlcal Inspectorate r u ro ir-frequont, but the witness
Eyor states have that ho wrote reports for Purlin uvery threo nontho.

Can you clarify this contradiction?

First of all, tho impression that Ha agon's reports were infreq¬
uent in nuhor is entirely correct, and if :iss Eyor says here that sho
wrot-. reports evory threo months, than I don*t know where thoy vont to.
Thoy cort-inly dldn^t go to tho kidical Inspcctonto of tho Luftwaffe,
bvcause such an exe.apl-.rj' form of report ouId nave b. n absolutely
unique, are! I should not have forgotton it. Ho vould have bc.n tho
"~hite-Haired Boy of Report Sending." Tho corr:spondo;<ce with tho Roich
Research Council that w<_ have fc-_re seen docs not give the iraresaion
that those reports wore very froquor.s in nunbr, but if one looked at
the documents that have bci_n put in evidence hero regarding tlio various
duties and obligations that ho had, than you can explain Frauloin Eyer's
ttitude very roll, because Eaage-n was concerned in his research with
four entirely different things. First with the finistry of Education,


Gn5o


22 Apr-A- 2-15-ii-’ialoy (Int. 3rown)
Court 21b. I.


to.which his Institute was subordinate, and free irhich he received his
salary, and which paid his Institute and his assistants, and of course
he had to send his reports thither. Then ho received research assist¬
ance fron the Adical Inspectorate of the. Luftvaffe. Thirdly, he re¬
ceived rcav-rch asiignnents froc the Reich Research Council, and in pay-
cent for their financial assistance thoy wanted to sec a report now and
then, and finally his work was supported by tho SS, and so far as ono
can see fron tte docuawnts throe offices were concerned here, the
AhneiK-rbo, the Rcichsfuonror SS, and the VVHA. Thu3 in his scientific
work thcro was r. great nunb_r of offices with when hj was obliged to
correspond. Then in his capacity as consultant he had to turn in soni-
annual reports to the .Ur Fleet Physician, which were thon sent on to
tho Medical Inspectorate. Those .:er- reports with fix^d dates, and if
he dldn«t send then in on the date asrigrwd, there was trouble right
away. Thon thoro wore also epoci-1 reports on any official Journios
that ho nado. In rddition to those official reports ho had to turn in
accounts, ~rxl tiioro wero fixed dates for that also. All those oblige-
tions to report can bo soon clearly in tho docu.or.ts, and thuro is no
wondjr that thj secretary cones to tho conclusion that reports had to
bo sent off ovary throe conths, in vicr of this. For such a secretary
in such a provincial institute, Berlin is a groat big confused concept,

and wo hnvo already seen here Just how confused she was when eho callod

•

zo chief of the nodical inspectorate of tl» Luftaraffc, and confused
frofessor Rostock with Professor Zoirs.


62 r 7


22 *pril 47—A—ST—16-1-Moohan—Int: 3rcwn
Court Ho. 1


Suit t.*o ro ycir official relations with Hragon?

... Our cf icir.l rolatior.s in tho nilitary field r. ro
very dourly 3ot forth I ras consulting hygonist nnd
tropical hygenist with t* o radical chief cf tho Luft-
rnffo nnd fro:i 1S44 on wr.o nrt r.leno in tl is, but vrns
no f two. Horuor. wc.s tho c "suiting hygonist fer t! a
Air Floot Ih.ysicir.n Roich. I'.andlos r end Sebroodor'a
tostcacny have r.lrorxly provon this end affidavits lir.vo
r.is< done natr* tod that this position i plied no roint-
ionohip . f auboxxlinr.tirn rr superiority. I bed no
prw r to inauo c xdox a co fer no ho wr.e concerned end
I bed no dut; ht tr roport r. offioiol rnttara,

Me roe vor tho ftr cocut ion, by submitting Exhibits He 3.

12 nnd 15 , hr.o ;x.do it dear. ihoy cro ir. Doouuont
Bock Ho. 1 end they rro b . • a Ho a. 418 nnd 419«
i bo 80 rro tho tro or.vnir.r.tion - bloa in Luftwoffo
rosonreh. 1 do not laiow ;.f tho ribunr.l hr.o thoso

4

oh:x*ta befrro thorn at tho ceaont but I ciiould bo gr-to-
ful if tho facta thr.t I on rbcut tc atr.to will nubro-
quontly bo chochod on.

Ty nr. 10 is act down cn tho loft aldo of tho ohr.rt in
tho group, “Scior.co r.r.d Rororre! cf tl o Modical .cndoi.y
cf tho Miftwnffo." rrcfjsi-or is liatod as tho subor¬
dinate of e Air Floot Physician. ‘‘ is ri olo tr.blo cf
organise tier, is pro tty cloar an A ovoi*yeno wl c la-ows
how tc read euch a tr.blo of organ!zatl r. cm soo ^or-
fcctiy dourly thr.t a relationship cf subordination or
auporicrity is r.ot sot ’err. in suer, a table cf organ¬
isation.

I ::ust print out one p r -nt, nnnoly a soricus orror
ir. one cf thoso charts in connect! r. with the nara:s*cf
p rcfocror Eregon and Professor gucJcschnordt, In b th.

6256


,


22 .pril 47-.':—S’ —16-3-?'j©fcrn :Infc: 3rcm
Court Mo. 1

tables thovo is the notr.ti.n University cf Strnsa-
b- urj. I don't think wo need any oxport to ascertain
-• r ue that fcho University cf Strassbourc was not
suberdir. to to tho Sir ninistry and c ortainly uaj net
sub( rdinato tc tho nodical eVdof f tho luftwaffo.

Q, The Prosecution assorts you woro Hanson's si r-
lop; is that lncerroct, ycu say?

■'*. -os, tho Prceoc'.'tior. assortod tJ t ropcatodly but
the assumption is orr. not . aho

relations botween H.j.jor end nysolf war pcrfoctly
clc; Ply laid down, according to Goman or,”nn-

irr.ti'nal procoduro. Tho rooocutirn bcrc-s its nssur.pt-
ion rn tho a Tfidavit w: ich Profosse* Schrcodor sirred
and rf which ho has specifically eta tod hero how ho
wanted it to bo understood and thr t it did not hevo
tho lr.p rtanco th..t tho -rosocuticn ascribos tc it.

.. itr. Proeidont, in t; is ccr.noctiw, I should liko
to put ir. -iooc cur out i'c. b, which is r os 24 to
27 of Document Book Roso Mo. l. ibis will bo Rose
ixl ibit lTo» 2i. -his is ?xv fossor Dr. ^*anc Otto Lu&on-
bor^ors* eSi'L avit cf 2 February 1947. I should liko to
ror.d a short pc.ssr.~o fp.it, st.-rtin;? with pcra-pr.ph
2 on pr.rro ono f tl o d cxuiont.

‘At prosoi'.t I an a specialist for nervous disorder in
’tunich and erreultlns psych: tri t c-f tho Crtholic Youth
Wo If ore.

! ‘U? to 1941 1 verlrod in Vo Gordon ’syokictrlc
Research Institute, one of the : aisor-.'lL’rolra-Instit-
ut s, attr.ohod tc tho Dhivureity < f ’hinich. ia the Vasts
regarded no . a p lifcicclly unreliable, I had to leave
this institute in 1941; In J.:m ry 1.-41 I waff ca: led up
6 the German Luftwaffe, fc first assistent physic! .


6259


22 April <7-:.-ST-16-3-::ocbor-Int: 3rowh
Court Ho. 1


I rcr.rod until 19*14 with tho lodicnl Inspectorate of
tho 3oru.'A Luftwoffo in 3orIin r.s an oxpcrt on phychi-
r.tric quo etier.a, and then ir. suu:.r rf 1944 boenno
Co:mender of Instruct*cn Gr upa r.t tho Luftimffo Hodleal
Acr.doi.iy in Berlin, and 1 61:© seno tiao consulting
psychiatrist with tho Chiof cf tho Luftwnffo nodical
Sorvicoa, with tho rank of Oboratnrst. n

Ihor * cn uio no;:t P^-oO cf tho Docunor.t, I road undor
ito. 2:

“iho consulting apooicilste with tho Chief cf tho
Luftwoffo Htxlical Sorvicoa hod a purely consultative
function. H.o c nsuxting specialists vitth tho Air Floot
vroro nee aubeMmato to tho consulting apocir.liat with
tho Cllof cf tho Luftwoffo ••odicr.l Sorvicoa, but to tho
roapocti-'o ..ir .’loot piyaicir.n. ?h.oy roro hot obligod
to tako ordoro fr. .a tho consultant a with, tl.o Chiof of
tho Nodical Sorvicoa,

''TS.q porronal rolr.tit na botwocn Proforocr i>ao and
rr'fooaor Eaagon, who res can suit ant hyglonlst with
Air Tioot Physician iloich, woro, r.a far • a I con roaonbor
very bad, I thoroforo think it uclikoly that thoy workod
together cn a ociontific basis. I eat: also r.uonbor
thr.t Prafoaacr Rcro ropoc.todly said in uy proaonco tlvt
ho did net knew what Prefoserr Eo .an v e xoclly doing,
ho was r.»pta*ontly a.king no hoadw..y r.t ail with tho
production of a now typhus, vc.eeir.o, y

£hc-t will Conclude r.y ;vut tiens fr tt is Docuiijnt,
butt I shall return to tha r.st of it L\=or.

. Ye u explained y ur cfiicic.l ru.uti .a with r >r,
re.a yon; nor .. 11 y \ so _ lr.in y vr porspnj 1 roint-
i ns with bin?

. ,n-a ,r.i r.le.ti. r.s Vero cool, wo coro very

C260


22 - : .pz*i I 47-. -S- -IS—;-”_J:rr.-Infcr Ircvn
Court Kc. 1


different serta cf poreens; I ir.d erntaot with him
°nly ir. on cffici. 1 capacity. I r.ovor h.d an rut-
ri : t cc iLf lie t with hr. Hoegon. Externally, I had
perfectly normal roIr.tirnF with hia, but noitl-or :f
U3 had xa:oh d ubt about the inner conflict botwoon us.

I t r.lz it Hi cf Prrfosacr Kaagor. in tho aciontific
fiold that ho ccnco mod : ir.oclf acloiy wit}: ucvol-
tpnjr.t roaoarch during tho rcr, with now roaoarch
aasi-m onta, Inatord cf usinc i Ir indubitably -rent
kncwlcd^o in tho toehnical fiold in erd^r tr crr.con-
trnto on puroly jrcduc i r. prebioao. I looked upon
this as a niouso cf l ie onpnbiiitioa, bocnuco although
I was ccnvincod that lie scientific ^or.la roro yor-
foctly c'rroct, I wr.a alar Cvt'Vir.c-d tjv.t ho wrv.ld not
euccood In r. practical aolvti n duriny tl o nr. r,
boenuao oxporionco in ..11 tl cso prcblcna had ahrwn
th t tho pori d rf .lovolopnonttnok yonra. 11 an tho
l.cdicr.l Ir'e:.oct rr.to oribracod t; ie •> r.t :f view,

1th ugh it 3rd c influonco diroctly rn Dr. Bv. jon'c
v iho !'.odicr.l Inepoct. rato triod a join and again,
by .ivin; him new r.ccljr.umta, tc bo gin hi i cn
>r ductlrn, and alr-nya gave hia row naaumncoa, but
no civilian aphero wlcro tho ‘Iodicr.l Inapdctorato
c. v ;vc nc er.'ors er diroofcivoa, but f rcqnoat.

- r tho 3 cua son fee r • that you sc- in inf r-
ratim; vhy did yru dr tj, t?

I old ti.-t to oo :!ydtty, that yortninod to ny
office* If I forad rut nr.ytl i , rl ich r }

tc- -ssut.xj th t it v-.s n t yonc rally lr . wn, that should
bo brcugl t to the attention of thes o :ntcrostod and
tr t;1:c wore participating ir. the n. ttor.
actually what cy rioattati n ;r, the aattor r; s can


22 .pril :7-/.-S -16-5-Kc ohnn-In t : Br.vm
Court Bo, 1

bo saor. frrn &y report' r. fro Ceponh:.jcr. trip T/Jjon
I cc.i.unic.'.tcd ti is important ar.ttor tc tl:o Typhus
••oaonrcl Instlfcuto and specialists, with no rogr.rd
r.s t: whether or net t&oy w. ro LuTteaffo, .srny, cr
Civilian institutes in tbo Roichs !!inistry '-t tho
Interior, or Unlvorsity Clinics. I sent this rop'rt
tc nil tJ. ao who night bo intoroi tod it was in
thia wr.y thr.t Prefosa^r Krngon else rocoivod his
report.


6252


22 April 47-.WjC-17-l-Ccck (Int., Brcm & fttrr-.lor)
Court I


^ Tfhet cun you eg;' on tho bests of your -fficial ard otkor
knr.rlolgo about Prefossor Haagon'e typhus rosoarch?

.. First of all, ty sourcos; slnco tho Pr.socutlan has zatdo no
rosponsiblo for Dr. Eaagon's :/ork, I hx*ro nedo considerable effort
to escort-In precisely whet bo did do end I can r-r. give you infor-
nctian on Hurgon on the basis of tho following, soirees; On tho
braia of his publications; on tho bests of what i lar. through
prlvp.to ccnTors-tlcus with hin, and then from ay -a. ry of tho reports
ho oont to tho Luftuaffo, which, heweror, correspond Tory closely
to hi 3 publications; and thon fret: kboidccunonts put in ovidoneo
In this trial. You have to distinguish botwoen two sootions in
Dr. Haagen' s sclontiflc resoarch, first vhsn ho worked with
Oildonoistor at tho P.rbort Kxh Institute. Thoro 10 concornod
hirsolf with tho production and .ar.rufacturo of vacclnoo free virulont
vlrusos, which, hevorer, had boon killed. I shall not 41 Into on tho
results of hie work. Thoy are in part esntionoi In tho annual
reports of tho Robort Koch Instituto. Thor. Haugon bucaao a Profossor
In Sftrnssbcurg on tho 30 Ootobor, 1941. “his woo bofore tho quostion
r>xoso of tooting thoso raceinos at Buchommld bocauso so far as wo
oculd coo frm tho docuaonts na;, this aattor woe sot in ration only
in tho wlntor cat-stropho ;f 1941-1942, ncr did I oror hoar that
KOngen p-rticlpatod In anyway in thoso Buchonwnld onporinonte .and If
thoro la r-ention thoro of a vacclno according to Oillex-oistor and
"r.cgan, this 13 si sply .coant to doscrlbo tho aothed c-f yredcution,
but dcos not uoan that Ea gon aotu-lly had anything to -lc with It
hinsolf. i know nothing to tho of foci that :io gen vrrkod of tor 1942
In Strasbourg on typhus. I think that ho first f all ccncornod •
lilnoolf with tho construction f his lnstituto, which at tho boginnlng
wa3 not in a condition to bo worked in. At any rato I knew of no
positlTo results free that yoried. 2I ? w, Ha.-gon hoard Ding's rop-rt.

In tho discussion ho said, and others also said tho s-no thing, that
t-ejso Ding: orcorinonts clearly pro rod that with killed typfcus r-.ccinos

62*35


22 j-ril 47-JL-? '>-17-2-ccok (In?., Brown S: dor)

Court II >.so it


you could not achlovo nay anti-i nfoctious imunity froc typhus. qvis
probice: could only bo solvod through tho devolojrxjnt of tho living
avirulxmt vaceino, and In futuro on this principle ho carried on fcis
trorfc aft or 1943.

?. It night bo wall? Pr~fossor, If you statod in a clonr and
rriorctondablc fom tho difforonco botwoon tho so two typos of vnccino,
boc-.uso it soccis to :U3 that it Is of inpcrtanco in crdor to uniorstand
Ha-gon'o “orfe in Strasbourg.

A Yoc, that is f absolutely docisivo inportonco, ruid In crdor
to 4ujdorato:4 all of tho ficcuaonts It Is nlacst icpo3olblo to undor-
etand this -..-hole question with ut kucwlodgo of th- b«isi3 ropr>rt3 of
tho crycp mtswollor. Bio tostlrwny gi^on horo in this flold w«s givon
by porsosa who aro not specialists an* you cannot urdorst^iid th-.t
tostlnony at all b^cauao tho c ncopta aro so confuse! In thoir
toctlnony that at tho oi*l It la iijpocoiolo toll what tho witnosa was
talking about an! Hi-.t ho toast to say. Lot no thor. ot-rt with tho
oonoopta cf virus, virulont and a vlrulont, an1 vaceino. First in
ordor to clarify 1:partial tho quootioa of a vixulont, afd an aviru-
loi.t virus, I nrkod throo tinos that Pr'fossor Blanc bo callod as a
vitr.oss ‘.oro, :f..s is an intornr.ti nal or.port. Honoror, tho Tribunal
rofusod t!ilr appliocticn aril nan it mist bo satisfied with tho
toetlbon? of ono of tho dofonl-nts in this rattor. First cf all,

'jrlOrally th~ word "%*iruo" aoant any infectious org-nlcn. Ir.
r.odorn -vxiiclr.o tho c no opt of virus has boon lii.dt.xi to a special
gr up of tho mat nicro3ccpic sort jf organissc, which have a cx:up
of characteristics in cctc-n. Tho characteristics aro as follows:

Thoso orgonisns cannot '.-o soon with tho light ricrcscopo. consequently
thj tom "uitmvisiblo" r "uitrmlarcscopic organises". Turthomoro
t:-.33o organise* pass through a flit or through which, bnctoria cannot
pass, coasoquontly tho tom "filtoreblo" virus, and finally thoso
irganisns cannot -o brod in artificial -xti ia, although bactoria oan bo
so trod, re tho jrauc virus, so far as this trial is coneorood, thoro
belong tho following: Tho gems that causo hopatitis - opidonica,

6264


£2 April 47-A-?jC-17-3-Cook (Int., Brown & Xbeslor)

Ccurt H Caso 17

yollcr favor, md influorza. 7*-.a c-.so of tho corns th t cousj typhus
Is still in question. i>ny roscnrcMsts consldor then virus although
thoy -.jo niorcsccpl colly -.-1 cl bio, cad ether roso-jehists givo on
lutorsaxliato position botwoon bactoric erd virus. At my rr.to the
typhus gorss havo a spociol nasa. Thoy rjo called Riekottsia of tor
tho ARoricrji Rickotta and for this trial tho following riekottsia pro
important, rickotttsia prowczok, tho gam that C'usos opidonio typhus,
or louso typhus, and tho riekottsia rcsori or riekottsia surlna, which
eauso oudcrilc or rat typhus. it is not disputod that tho riekottsia
havo rani' cknroctoristies in ctaraen with tho virus.

1 Non what is a vaccine?

A Originally tho word ■vnocino" vqs only usod for tho vacclno
against stall pox. Than it was usod as a goo oral oxprosslcn for
living vaecliaa gonarally, that is vaccinos frau living goms, until
tho Iinblt has orison that vaccino is usod for anything that can bo
considorod a vacclno today. ;,t a:y rr.to a vaccino is always a
material that is dosignod for protoctlvo vaccination -.nl it is irt-
pooslblo co just oxchargo thj toitj vacclru and virus as it often
dono in tosticony horo In this court rooc. Tho oxcaplo us to how tho
tostinory ccn bo changed by this oxchongo is tho to St loony of tho
witnosa Olga 3.'or, during ''.or oroeo-oxw dn-tion by dofor.oo oounsol
tide ultnosn, as tho record shows, all of tho tlra speko of a living
typhus vaccino of Profosecr Hangon. Sho ox plained oxprossly t!\at as a
clork sho didn't know vary rxuch about tboro rattors but throughout hor
ontiro to3tiaony sho mintalnod this oxprocsion on "living vaccinos"
and cs a eocrotary of I-angon sho nnst havo writton this hundreds of
tinos, this being this min subject.


6255


22 riW-Dv'G-ie-l-Gr:s3 (Int. Brcwn)
C--urt Ho. 1


A (continued) During tho ro-exeminaticn at the end Hardy

put e very siaple short quosticn tc her, "You meant living virus,

didn't you?" The witness answered this question without any

question in the effiroativu end therefore, contradicted her entire

evidence; nanoly, whet before hart referred tc vaccinations, hr.d net

suddenly feeococ infections. So, 1 think it is quito justifiable

that finally after this trial has lasted for months it is being

clrrifiod what we arc talking About. Laymen end even a number of

physicirns nro still nixed up ab.ut vaccines and soma. This has

•

occurred hero in the dccuau^ts but .ict in such n fers. that it in

any wr.y frustrate? cur search for the truth and that is why 1 forego

explaining this concept - to shorten theso pr:ccedings. «t any rate,

with very rare exceptions, vaccine is ueod as a protoctiv va.ccin-

•

aticn as a. preventive scans, an’ a ecru:-, with very rare exceptions,
is used fer treatment after tho illness has already started.

Q VIhat kinds cf vr.ccinc s arc there?

A One distinguishes between two main gr-ups. There are
vaccines which ccao frea h. ctori r. Uxins and from chudcally chnr.god
toxoids. Tho voccino a;rinst scarlet fever, diphtheric, and gas
gangrene arc examples. In this trW the protective vaccination
Against diphtheria and gra gangr^o .are n^nticned. Tho second group,
tho vaccines frea surbific organisms thcasclvcs. They again can be
distinguished by subdividing into twe sub-groups. 1. A vcccinu
free dead morbific organisms. An example from the contents of this
trial - you have vaccines agcir.it chclera, against typhei i, end
para-typhoid and tho typhus vaccines according tc .eigl, Gildc-
c-istcr and Ha-gen frea c n ac a l longs and tho liver vaccine acccrding
to Ipsvn. Him second group arc vaccines free living ettenurtod
ncrbific organises. An exaalt frea tiis trial is tho vaccine
against small prx, against yellow fever, then the plague vaccines
with which Jr. rice* dealt. Then the Calmette vaccine against
Tuberculosis end the Kaagen vaccine against typhus. Finally, the


•:.?s6


22 rril-A-CJG-18-2-Gross (int. Brcnn)
Ccurt Ac. 1


typhus vaccine cf the Fronchacn Bler.c and Legres. As the last we
have the influenza vaccine.

Q Would you pi-asa explain the oepressiens virulent and
avirulent?

A The expressions rs the;' ”.ro used today cannot be derived
free the word virus as the smallest morbific organism, ns it is used
today. Th-so expressions crifln-.tu from eld tines where one U3ed
the word virus in order tc ’esicjtatc the infecticua organism. Virul-
enco is the capacity cf a nicrc-crgcnise, no natter whether virus or
bacteria, tc brine about illnesses. « strong virulence has he capa¬
city to bring about death or severe illnesses. A weak virulence has
the capacity tc bring about nil! or no symptoms at all. /.virulence
is the leek of capacity tc bring about any illness. One injot netc
that the expression virulence dees net say such in itsolf. If cno
wants tc bo c-rrcct cno rise has to nJ.l "virulence for son-thing cr
cth'.r." .. atr-in car. bo highly virulent for an aninal but completely
nvirulent for ft hunan boin<. 7:\e Prcsccuticn, fer example, in oxan-
inaticn cf the witness Gutzeit, had difficulties in believing his
testimony. Fren the fact that when infoctir.c with hepatitis virus
all ndco had died ho concluded that such hepatitic virus in the anno
way taist kill human beings. ihut is net the case at ell. For in¬
stance, in the fcasus Pasteur rebies vaccines viruicneo cf the
rabies virus woa increased to such on octait tint guinea pigs died
within fiv- days, whereas originally the death cnly ccmo nbcut after
three weeks tc two months. But, the increase cf the virulence as it
aff-ctod the rabbit is connected with th simultaneous attenuation
cf the virulence ns it affects the huuan body, which made it possible
that this sc-callel passage virus be used for vaccination cn e human
being. An example from this case: the typhus strain motel ska which
was supposed to have lest its virulence fer human acings according
to Ding's diary ir. Bucaonurid is highly virulent for the guinea pig
cccrding tc the statements contained ir. the Ding'article in tho‘


6267


22 ;.pril-;.-XG-13-3-Cross (Int. Ranler)
Court Sc. i


F-ricdic.nl fcr Hygiene. This is the fcotr.cto in Document 9 subaittcl
by -Irugcwsky. Cr.e has t. consider that naong experts one eft.n cadis
explanatory statements when • no would assume that experts would knew
t* t is boin._ scant. Hcturclly there ccnt3 about the danger of mis¬
understanding Whenever these kcuncnts have tc r e appraise*3 by laymen.
Considering all these v.'ccir.es one, in ndiiticn, has tc knew that
Hhenev-r lea' vaccines era beinp produced p-jlicul r value is attached
tc using virulent strains in order that those vaccines also contain
the V-antogoie - this is the abbreviation of virulent entogen*..
hher.ev<.r the export spc*i:s cf particularly str.nj virulent vaccines
one can bu sura that he ac^ns vrccinos fr-n killed but very virulent
C-rms, hut oven in the c-aso cf the physician who is net n specialist
-no cannot bu sure r.t all n is u^.ant in that Si>nso.

In the case of tho laymen ojk nra to ascertain exactly what it is ho
neens cnl, furtherr. ro, whether hia knowledge is sufficient in order
to be able tc iistingui h the; . two concepts very clecrly.

iflv. H.JOY: May it plc-asc ycur Honera, all this information
the defendant is giving us unquestioiu.bly is mr tori'! and is of
value to the Tribunal. But, inasmuch r.s it is oc technical 1 would
think it .!vio*>blc to hav. oho d of cnl ant write this ut in essay fern
and submit it tc the Tribunal i r . tho nay of an r.ffid %dt so that wo
can all use it to further a^vmte-c ~nd hevo it separate and apart
l’rra. being in the record. introducing it in that fom will

servo a Jual purpose f -lac saving the tint of iiscussing it here
if be will present it in such a for-:.

TKo Pi£SID3;l: It might be cure helpful tc the Tribunal if
th'-t pirn wore fcllc: I don’t knew hew much longer the witrfhss

intends t; testify cn that scientific matter.

IX5SE: I - uld have been finished in the tine Ur.

Hardy usud fcr his object! n. Saturelly I cn quite willing tc submit
a written peper cn that matter in enre Prosecution and the Tribunal
would icsire me tc dc sr. i'.cweVei*, 1 would bo grateful if 1 could


?268


22 «prii-«-DJG-l$-4-Grcs3 (Int. Easier)
Court liz. 1


finish this paragraph.

DR. FRITZ: Professor, it w. s y^ur intention tc explain sene
other concepts, for instance the concept of central r.hich plays a
considerable part in this* curt recn. That is, in case the hich
Tribunal would It sire yea tc rake e -rltten report on that it any be
better tc ilc so than tc trice acre tin. cf the Tribunal.

PROFESSOR i-0-Es If 1 include the cxplanati ns cf the concept
control I would Uke five ninutcc aero to iiacus3 it.

THE H-.ISIDE.T: Counsel, witness nay pr-cc-i in accordance
with the nannur in which they followed hero bofcrc.

PROFESSOR HOSE: il-y I ask whether it is desired that, in
aiditicn, I subcit these ci^lrrr.ticns in writing?

THE FRESmSfi: In the ease cf the Tribunal that will bo
unnecessary. The witness' statement is already in the record.

PROFESSOR ROJE: Yes, y.ur Honor.

THE PRESIDES: However, if counsel rni witness desire tc
prosent such r .*ritten str.tuaent and have it introduced cs a docu¬
ment they nay do sc.


G2G9


22ipril-A-AE-19-l-Kr rrow (Hoimalor)

Court I

TflTHBSS; 7/oli, Z was ju3t saying that it is very im¬
portant that, when examining c witness, one ascertains
whether he really understands thoso concepts end can
handlo then C3 they should bo handled. Generally, in
the easo of the layman and also in the caso of the phys¬
ician who had no specialist training one will arrive at
the result that ho rill not bo in r. position to riake
a clear strtenont-about these cor.copts. It is ray irapros-
sion that all the accusations raised against professor
Haagon originated mostly fror. this layman-like notion
that a living typhus virus is c terribly dangerous and
lothal raattor rithout it bocoraing clear to the layman
that an nvirulor.t typhus virus voccino is raontionod and
is not a raorblfio organism in tho ovory day sonso of tho
word. If at the end I dor.l with tho word "control" I
want to say that with that, in n nodical sonso, tho group
for comparison is noant rhoro tho cssonticl factor i3
lacking; nanely, the ono which is to bo cxamlnod in tho
group for oxporiconts. In order to knovr in detail v/hat
a control group actually constitutes, one ho3 to know
what tho subjoct of tho experiment is. Only then is ono
in a position to enswor tho question. Nov, if Frofossor
Schroodor onsworod to tho question of tho Tribunal "v/hat
a control group was" and 3aid that thoso nro tho pooplo
who wore not vaccinatod, this can only be explained by

hl3 lack of oxpwriorcc ir o.tj»orir.ontal rcsoarch work.

♦

Profossor schroodcr is an experienced clinical physician*
Ho is an uncontcstablo authority in the field of oroction
of hospitals in Germany. Ho was a loading men doaling with
nursing personnel, but ho .Just did not work in exporiraen*-
tal medicine. What control group actually constitutes or


22April-A-AE-19-2-Xarrow (Rrmmior )

Court I

what it car. contitutc I would like to illustrate by us¬
ing four cxanplos. In tho cc.so of typhus experiments,
that is, comparison experiment 3 in Buchonwald, the expor-
iaontcl groups woro those people who rcro treatod with
vaccines and eftorrsrds were Infected with a virulor.t
virus. Tho control group comprises those pcoplo who woro
not vaccinatod but merely infected. That is the oaso whoro
the explanation is corroct as glvon by professor Schroodor.
In tho ease of tho therapy experiments in 5uohcnv;ald, tho
mattor In ontiroly different. Tho experiments which Ding
in said to hr.vo carriod out with Putcr.ol and nothylono
blue v/oro such whore tho experimental group, as •.:cll as
the control group, • era not vaccinated. Tho experimental
group, recording to the cocunor.ts of tho prosecution, in
addition to the symptomatic treatment received treatment
with tho drugs th't rroro to ho oxamir.od. Tho control
group, on tho other hand, only got tho oustormory troat-
mont.

Hot:, a third oxannio - let us considor a nourishment
oxporlnont. -Thonevor the influence of a certain ono-sidod
neurlshront procedure Is to bo examined thu exporlmontal
persons aro thoso who 'ro getting doficiont nourishment.
Tho control group consists of thoso pcoplo who rccoi\*o
normal nourishment.

Fourthly, mother exauplo taxon from tho subject of

this trial. The experiments with tho apparatus for t£o

docontaminntion of water. The experimental persons aro
•

thoso who received tho wr.tor that was first poisonod and
thon decontaminate, and tho control groups comprised
those pooplc who rocoivod ordinary drinking water. In tho
case of this letter oxporirent, tho pcoplo in the control

6271


22 Apr i 1-A-AS-19-3-KT. rr ow (Rrmmlcr)

Court I

group arc those who are undoubtedly better off, and in
the ccso of tho nourishment experiments one can only
mr.hc a judgment whon knowing oxrctly rhr.t kind of nour-
islsaont they roro givon. In tho cr.so of the cxenplo I
mentioned, the control groups rould bo better off, end
rhon oxcnlning tho V/ohrmr.cht spocir.l rations tho oxpor-
Imcntrl subjocts arc bottor off sinco tho V/ohrmacht spoc-
ir.l rations cro much better than the normal rations givon
to pcoplo•

This brings ono to tho conclusion that ono.crm only
ooncludo something from tho -.:ord "control" rhon knowing
tho subjoct of the exporimout, Tho word itsolf can ona-
ily bo miointorprotod. 7/hr.t ti-o Vord "control" moans in
tho ociso of tho correspondence of "r.egon I 3hr.ll illus-
trato rhon I got to that point,

BY DR. FRITZj

Q. After this explanation of thoao basic oor.oopts I
shduld llko to ask you to doscribo tho vr.coino of prof¬
essor Haagon as far as thoy r.ro kr.orn to you according
to tho oourco which mentioned before,

A. I already referred briofly to tho first experiments
by Kaagon which had co a roault this vcccino Oildemoistcr-
Haagon. This is a vr.coino from highly virulont strains
which, oithor by boating or tl.o addition of chomlor.l
material,- wore killed. Since these vnccinos wore n*od-
ucod from oapocir.lly virulont strains and 3inco new!
strains rcrc always brod from tho blood of the ill per¬
sons there occurred currently the i-bor-tory infoctions
in these laboratories.

Q, in order to illustrato Haagon*c experiments would
yoti shortly describe what is understood by an ovirulcnt
living vaccine?


S272


22A?ril-A-AK-lS-4-Kr.rr:~ (P.arslcr)

Court I

A. 7/0XI, the basic discussion of any auoh vrccir.o
need not bo made by no in erdor not to toko up time, but
it rill ncroly to necessary for no to illustrato tho
historical dovolopnont of cvirulent vaccines. Tho work
of Eaagon cannot bo understood unloss one knows tho fun-
dr.nor.tr.l principlos upon v/Lioh it is built. Tho introduc¬
tion of tho avirulont vaccine fro- living gorr.a oo ns tit-

•

utos tho s&all pox vcccino. Its application is know by
evory fanily father rho has ohildron. Ho 1 crows that \:hon
tho baby is first vaccinated r. pussy crust develops at
this point whoro the vaccination was isado; that this
conditions ronains for a nunbor of days. Ho knows that
tho child doos not feel roll during that period; that it
ronlly is ill; and that, after a for: days, its condition
dovolops and ho goto fever. Pevor usually starts on tho
ninth or tonth day and can go up to thrity-ninc to forty
dogroo3. This original procoduro by Jennor was lmprovod
as timo progreasod. Tho reaction to vaccination i3 a
littlo wild or today, but .basioally tho progress has rexa-
cincd tho snno. How, wo x.-bo havo grown up and wore lator
again vaccinatod do not romoabor this oH prododuro boc-
nu30 tho rovr.ee ination takes a difforent courso 3inco at
that timo ono has already built xxp a basical imminity
which originates from the first vaccination. There i3
either no ronctior. at all or only r. littlo rod inflaruod
spot. it is vory r~ro that any fovor occurs. How, in.tho
case of Jennor's discovery wo. aro concerned with an ob¬
servation modo accidentally. This principle was U30d in
tho caso of tho pr.3teur rabies vaccine which I already
mentioned before when explaining tho soncopt viiuiar.co.
This is tho second cx.onplo in nodical history whore one


0273


22Apr±l—A-AK-19-E -Rnrrcr (Rarailcr)
Court l


finds a living cviruiont virus r.s vaccine. The third
stop raa the modem plague protection vaccination. This
constituted sons thing very significant bocauso the first
two examples I r® ntior.cd wore virus illnossos and in tho
caao of the plcguo this method r;r.s, for the first tiro,
transforrod to tho bacteria illnesses. The basionl dis-
oovory consisted of tho fact that Guinoa pigs could not
bo lnnunizcd with do-d vaccines no rr. ttcr how virulent
thooo strains wero beforo tboy v;oro killod. Tho Gorman
scholars, Roller and Otto, sucocoded in immunizing Guinea
pigs tA tfc avlrulont living plr.guo bacilli, sinco this
thought to uso living plnguo bacilli on humm boings
first was conaidorod to bo utopian, tho mattor vn3 drop-
pod. /.ftoncards, ..s I alroady mentioned yostorday, tho
groat American bacteriologist, strong, took up tho thought
ho got this strain from Otto and Kollor and then errriod
out thoso husrn oxporir.onts on tho innntos of Dilllblt,
This risk was axccosful. Tho strain was avlrulont not

A

only for animals but also for. hunan. boings. T horo woro
fovor roactions up to forty dogrooc but r.cvor did any
plnguo illnossos dovolop.


6274


22 ^ri3^CP-20-l-:.ulc7 (int. H--! er)

Court I

altogether 9X persons were Vaccinated in tnis scries of experiments
t:i t 13 with thesu living plague bacteria. Naturally, not all of
then wore people ccadeuned to death. Eh-t would have bo^n inpo^siblo.
and I don't know oven whether they were all ina-tco of a pcaituntiary.

It doesn't sey so In tnc paper. Tree what I xnow of iillibit, this is
a pltco csvd for u'oout thr^o or four thousand it--tee. Strong didn't
report about -ny s.rlcus incidents, but in spite of that there was
a great prejudice ^jcng expert circles -g.-iuot th_t procedure. Ia tho
year of 1911 whoa Strong conb_t*.td Plaguo ia .-.anohuria ho did not
dcro to aoply this procoodurw outside the ^n^ricor. controlled
torritcrios, although ht ulrc_dy n.tdo this discovery Greedy iu the

year 1906. It took acre th^n 20 yoars, un to the year of 1926,
until this prejudic. was overcccc, ev-n in expert circles, and tho
preoeduro Vai developed by Pre.xhnon -rl Eutchnon to an cxt.nt thet it
was uaod on nilliocs of feca.A ocings. Since two docados it io really
dealnatOd tho entire plague protecti:a v-eelnation. «s on exjaplo
froa this trial I oust Say that la tac p-per b- Strong, there is
no mention aado uoout the voluntary aspect of tho «g>erlueat ul sub¬
jects, or cv.n if nation hud been n-dc of tnut no person would h-vo
believed it. Tuio work originates free tho yo-r of 1905, _nd tho
custcci to havv. lca..tcs of penitentiaries to sign st-ten-cts regarding
their voluntary a_turo uppe-rs only a few yo.rs l..tvT, according to
^ncricon liter .ture. But let us revert to tho avirulont v-ccino.

Tho next ovirulcnt vaccine was tho f .nous Calmette v.-ccino -gainst

tuberculosis. Ihis consists of tho intr'duotlon -i living but aviralcnt

•

tuberculous taceili. It is r-th-r widoly sorted in jfcrcpc with
the exception of -C-oruany, ax. at the noacat orep.g .ad., is being
cairied on ia an eric a in order to introduce this vaccine there.

Iho nattor was sterpod in -iicrica baeoaso ia the c-so of ono of these
vaccinations th.ro h-d boon a terrible accident. 3io virulent culturo


S275


22 rilr-WP-20-2-4uiloy (1st. icier,'

Court I

vaa cist.jeon for the ..virulout culture -ad 70 children of then-- who
were v xcia ted with that strain died, -ltn.ugh this redly h.d
nothing to do witn the entire nrcccdurc, out w.n an error, a ncgligento
error in the 1 -bor.tcry, this accident created th -t prejudice.

- jext Is e virus illnoss, the development of the -virulent yollou
favor v.ccine, cn tho basis cf the work carried on by tho Rockefeller
Foundation in iicv York. In the ease of the first test of this
vaccine I happened to be an ex? riucntal subject uysolf, a voluntary
lot uo say. - VOW hero wo c ;vc tec -virulent typhus v,.rcino. Tho
first was u vaccine frou living -ttcau-tid uurinc rickctteiu. « Polish
and two French resc-rchers worked cn that prccoduro. using various
aotfcods, dost known is the v..cciao according to tee Director :f tho
Pasteur Institute at Mtrooeo; here th- witness jdith Scheldt testi¬
fied th„t oho enow of th .t procedure, but th..t it vat not jn liod bo-
causo of its d-ger usness. 3ut < 3 »par«atly th.ru are hy&ionists in
Franco who aro of a different opinion than this technical assistant,
bcccuso this v..ccln-tion was carriod out in r.orccco in aundrodi* of
thouaonds cf Casos on natives and tho vnite pcpul-tion. It is admitted
that this vaccin-t* on c.«n causo very high fever, but on .ccount of
the gront danger of typhus this is put u> with Just ..o vo agree that
cur children go tnrough fever reaction in the c.jo of vaccinations
against saollpox. Sils scior.tific dovclcjmeat as I described it, ns
I think only in a very short fora, is tho exit point of Huugoa's cclcu-
tlfic work. Haugen, according to alone's ex_^plo st.Jted with q
vacoino free living attenuated nurino rickottslc. He didn't uso
Blanc's technic, but he a" lied tn. Saco t.chnic, which alre.dj- h-s
proven iteclf in the living -virulent yollov f.,vcr vaccine, .-his is
tho technic cf the dry v-ccinos. ^ very complicated apparatus is
necessary, but they h .vo the advantage of bang aoro durable then
living v-ccino which aro produced according to u different procodur*..


6273-


22 ^rll-a-J?-2C-2-...(lit. Bailor)


Court I


Technically, it is of grojtvi'. difficulty to land uy cnduriico to
-ry liTlitg Vixciuc. the ox_uIu .tiot of such - dry vucciao frea
living uttccu_tcd ourlae virus shoved the s_so results when Eoagen
curried it out us v-s feuad it the cjo of dluac. ^ author of persons
suffered ac considerable increase of t*-g>er..turc, others hud to
suffer fever for u uuaber of days.


j


G277


22 April-..-J?- 2 l-l-k«.ehaa (Int. Hauler)

Court I

Professor, yea were Just speaking of tho ex:Cinution of dry
vocal no of H-^cC'b; vh..t do you aederst—id by cx-uination of YaCCinosT
a. Ia this c-8 0 , arc exclusively apeakiag about tho ox;«iin.»-
Clon of its tolor ice on hujioa beings, c<x.-p..t ability, and tho quostion
J to hew sovero by tho fever is ooaditior.ed by thio Vaccination,
in othor w^rds the severity of the v .cciao reaction, Tnis is the
point which is very decisive in the c..io of the living a-virulont
v..ccir.ee. In tho c i»o of these vaccines this question of ronction
ia very important, boc-uso if you u_vo a tolorablo vaccination reaction
it is euro th..t the protective effectiveness is also noro favor„blo.
s’hio is absolutely cle..r, according to g«n«ral expurior.ee. How and
again it is examined subsequently, but today one c-n say with cortnlnty
f JOB the outset. How tho v..ocihatlon reactions in the c..ou of acot
living vucol&os nro stronger than ia the Caso of the doud v.cclnoj but
ns I hnvo already said, tne iuuunity is uoro favorablo, tr.is is
taken into account, since this procedure is only polled in tho caso
of osrccielly sovoro illnesses. fl-.tur.-Lly the hygienist -• woll ns
tho ohynici.x prefers any v_ccino, vk.ich Causes re-xtlons, but it is
clonr tlx.t a condition, vhich Is only brought about by a sovoro
dlscaso d ngercus to lifo, can only bo brought about artif ic..lly, by
cortnin subsequent reactions, such ro_ctions as fever, hood- chcc,
etc., ono -mst always consider tho g^in. One _ust alw.iys consider
that this constitutes a protcctivu injoction arairst an infectious di-
50 ..so which is d-ngoroua to lifo.

X, -ould you slcje continue describing Haag-n's exporinuitst
a. Haugen _t first did not urrivv at xy othur results than
Blanc when conducting thv.su experiments. This is ta- situ.tion ns ono
c.x see it fro- cis r„;-.:rt to tha noicha hescarch Counsel, dated
21 January 194., indcr Dar .graph 2. ihi 1* Docuco»t Ho. 138. I no
afraid it mutt be an error, I think tr.is is contained in Document Bock


G273


22 ^rU-WP-23 -2 r.& *un (Int. er)


Court I

To. 12, P^rc 87. rfcla is also *-hc situation wnica I described vhon
I t-vo uy lecture la 3-ale on 17 Tebruaxy 1944. air. v.xcino vas
only used 1 - the caso of conditions where there w^s groat danger and
whore er. the otner hu=d it did not nutter If tr.c people nufforod
fevor for o f-w d^ya cad h-d to st;y in bed. Biring w^r tine, oao
cannot do th.t in the co.sc of tho troops who arc exuitted in the front
lino; ono cannot put u squ-4r.*n of bet-oers to bed Just bcc-uso
thoy wore voccinatod cg-lnat typhus. Zhereforo, Euagoa ondonvored to
find p. loathed which would alicvi-tc this Tuccinutioa rouctiou. Ho
first had Just ueant to »-ccin„to with - do„d v-cciao, for instcaco
tho vaccine of Oildtuoistox^-H- »goa und then voocia^to ag-in with
tho living avlrulont v-cclno. Ifcle thought wut ro-lly vexy logical,
nftor it hod proven itsolf that these d*-d vaccines influenced
tho course of tho illness very decisively. Henoe tno uneunption was
Justified th.t it would have - f .vor-ole influoaoo on th* vaccination
reaction with u living ..-virulent vuccino.

Hoy I ask wfcother I have explained tale point clo..rly; iu.turr.lly
tho gentlemen of tho fribun .1 aro not u&iuaintod wlti. tuis question
very veil, but Z think it is of decioivo inportunco.

fHS P.USIDS’T: I think the vitacts has cxplainod hlo idons
thw subject.

Witness, now uuch long.r vill your explanation on tr.is particular
branch rcqulroT

XEK VITIGSS: I bciicv*. that this would be a good point to
rccoso, bee rase after this b-sic -1 explanation I shall trra to tho
explanation of a nunb-r of individual documents, and vill tnen des¬
cribe whnt thosu docunor.ts actually aeon -ccording t" the explanations
which I have now given.

KK. E^-DT: Tour Honor, in hoping witc wfc_t I cu,.:ostod s*:o
40 uinutes age, if the defcedant still ho8 another half hour or sore


22 jpril-vi-JP-23-S-it*-ch^a (lat. R-O-ler)


Court I

tc coatinuo oa la this toctalc -1 iungu-gc, it 6 cO;b tc no tho
BUc" nation of ^ uffid-vlt would suit cur purposes -ocL aero
conveniently.

o.-_ “ It ovoji there bo coaaideru-'le nerlt

in th .t su r - 08 tlon. Counsel, how such furtner In the c j\ra<- of your
ox.;il nation of the witness, will these tochalc.1 e./plaa^.ioac oo
nroducod?

DR. : 3ITZ: Only one aoro question, I think. The defendant
Juat a ild Musolf tn_t uftcr -aving ...do these general at-toaents ho
will oacplula the Individual documents which ure -lao uujncsod to
Incriminate hlu.

HR. H*.SY: Bi.it be well -ad truo. Your Honor, but Just
40 minutes ago we -Curd we wero only going tc hoar this for fiv«
uinutes longer, and now we h..vc oe«.n listening to it slnco lu tiinutoa
to throe o*clock.

ZHH PHlSlDlLrrt If tne vltnocs is n u u-> 'ro-ching tn .t point
which offsets hit particular ease, X think the witness should bo
pomittod to testify or-lly in th-t letter.

Jho Trloun-1 will bo in recess until 9:30 morrow morning,

(Tho Tribunal recossod until 0930 Hours, 23 -pril, 1947),


6280


Court I


23 *pr hi- M - 1-1 - UQ - Foster (Jtelor)

Official Transcript of tro ..surican Military
Tribunal in tho wetter of the United States
of —.-ci-ica, against Karl Brandt, jt al,
defendants, sitting at Nurri>~rg, a^raany,
on 23 -pril 1SU7, 0930, *stice seals presiding.

THE — v S'r. t l,j Persons in. the court roon will please find thoir
scats*

Tho Honoroblo, the Judges of .military Tribunal 1.

Military Tribunal I is now in sossion. O c <i save tho Uni tod
States of .. -rica and this honorable Tribunal.

There will bo order in tie courtroom.

THE BiSSIDK.Tj 1j. Uarahal, you ascertain if tho defendants
are oil prosont in court.

THBM.J(SHaL: May it pLjaso your Honor, all dofondants aro
prosont in tho court.

THE PT'ESIDE.'Tj Tho Socrotory-Gonoral will note for tho record
the prosonco of all dofondants in court.

Counsel wvy procoed.

05HK»RD RC6E - Hcs\x-od

DIRECT EX.*QK.TI0N (Continues)

3Y DR. FRIT2 (Counsolfor tho Dofondont Rose )j

Q* Professor, yustorday you w„ro giving a de3cdption of tho
nodical basis of Dr. Haagon's work. T«'u already explained that
Professor riaagen was working on a r.ow living avirulont typhus
vaccino. Would you plo-.su, briofly, explain the connection botweon
hi3 plans and tho docuror.t which I ac going to discuss with you and
put into my next quosticn.

... I repeat vary shortly, I hxi described that in the case of

a living avirulent vaccine, »w are basically

events as occurred ir. a genuine infection and

expressions and phases used nust in many things

sooutir-as even bo tho saaa. It is naturally

layaen misunderstand those t-jnas, ar.d it is not*

all that the prosacutdor. also considers a nustoor of

6261


Court I


23 -*pr U7-1-2 - LJG - "os^-r (Raalar)


documents os being auspicious whili in reality they arc conpl-tcly
harmless.

Did you have thu desire to alleviate Hoogon's vaccination
reaction #»ich cut about fron aurine in his snail pox vaccine
rickettaia; did that havo anything to do with ycur correspondence
with Heagen?

*as, the letter refers to this question tfiich Mr. Hrrdy
could not understand when subrdttlng his documentary ovidonco and
about which ho wanted on explanation fro- re. This is document 122
to bo found in Document Book So. 12 on page 32. I think th"t I
should havo to read this lottor once core, considering it is signi¬
ficant, although it was already read once by the prosecution. I
draw your attention to tho date which is the 13th of December 19b3.

It says:

"Dear Hr. Kaogon.

Many thanks for ycur letter of the 6th of Decolor. I don't
think it is oxpediont that in addition to the application which
you have already redo, anothor special i^olication is oade to tho
SS Main office. I request that in tho case of getting the people
to bo vaccinated for your experiment that you requisition a corres¬
ponding nunfcor of persons for vaccination with the Copenhagen vaccino.
This has tho advantage, as also was shown in tho fiuchetwald experi¬
ments, th« t the testing of various vaccir.os simultaneously "1768
a clearer idea of their value than tho testing of one vaccine alono."

Then follows the end.

Q. Hen is it that this letter isn't*signed by you yoursolX’i

I cannot rorerber with cortainty that I dictated this letter,
but judging by its fora it is quite possible that it originates frea
ae. It was customary whenever l went on official trips and .-ay typists
hadn't finish-d their 1 ttors, that I left it to thorn tc sign then,
that is, in every case wh.re the let.er was net directed to any

superior agency. I thin!: th t this letter is dssolutcly genuine.

6262


Ccurt I

23 .fcpr U7-1-2 - LJG - Foster (RsbIot)


dccua&nts as being auspicious while in rjulity they are corpletoly
harmless.

Did you have tho desire to alleviate Haagen's vaccination
reaction tdiicfc cone about froa tairinc in his snail pox vaccine
rickettaia; did that have anything to do with ycur correspondence
with Haagen?

x os, tho lot tor refers to this question rtiich Ur. Hardy
could not under stand *icn subnitting his docurxmtary ovidonco and
about which ho wanted an explanation fro- re. This is doeuuent 122
to bo found in Docuaont Book Ho, 12 on pago 82. I think th-t I
should have to road this lottor once noro, considering it is signi¬
ficant, although it was already read once by the prosecution. I
draw your attention to tho date which ia tho 13th of Docoabor 19U3.

It says:

“Dear hr. Haagen.

Many thanks for ycur lottor of the 8th of Docoabor. I don't
think it io oxpodiont thet in addition to the application which
you have already nado, another special ^olication is mde to tho
S3 Main offico. I request that in tho ccse of getting the people
to bo vaccinated for your experiment that you requisition a corres¬
ponding nuebor of persons for vaccination with the Copenhagen vaccine.
This has tho advantage, as also was shown in tho Buchormald experi¬
ments, th.t the testing of various vaccines sisultinoously fives
a clearer idea of their value than the testing of one vaccine alone."

Then follows the end.

Q. Hew is it that this letter isn't’signed by you yoursolfv

u. I cannot ronerher with cortainty that I dictated this lottor,
but Judging "by its fern it is quite possible that it originates froa
ne. It was c us tor. ary whenever I went on official trips uni ay typists
hadn't finished their 1 tters, that I left it to tha= to sign then,
that is, in every case wh.ro the letter wes not directed to any

superior-agency, I think th t this letter is absolutely genuine.

6262


Court 1


•oster (Rinler)


23 April I»7-* - 1-3 - LOG


The contents of this letter fit into the connection of the sit¬
uation at that ti-H>, and it is quite clear to re. Professor Rangen,
as well as the five other agencies which are mentioned in the dis¬
tribution list, received the annex to ny report about uy trip to
Copenhagen and I naan the annex which refers to the Ips-n vaccino.

Rose dccuront 22, volume nurtoer 2, pages 15 to 19. He had then worked
with a dry vaccine frees living attenuated murine virus. Ho tried
to find acnci way in ordor to alleviate the vaccination reaction.

As 1 explained yost.rday, ho ir.tondod to do that by carrying out
preliminary vaccinations with a dead vaccine.

I nay j-phaalxo that this thought was not new at all. Thoso
experiments have already boon rado before in the oasa cf othor
living vaccines, ar.d the host known isethcd of that nature is tho
soro-vaccination which was introduced at the beginning of tho yellow
fever vaccination rhon ono had no hamloss yellow fever vaccinos
yet. Then, yollcw fovor sorua and vaccino was vaccinated simultan¬
eously. Since tno o.sd af 19U3 Haag on eerkod with a vaccine froa
marines, and tht can bo ouon froa his roport to the Reich Research
Counsol to which I pointed out yesterday, h must naturally have
been vory interested in the Copenhagen vaccino because that ono
was produced free dual nuri.w virus. Haagon at that tire obviously
had planned an exiuriumtol series wh-.re ho would sake provaccinations


with a nurber of dead vaccinos and would then be able to tost to
what extent thoy were in a position tc alleviate the reaction of


his living avirulont vaccine. Originally he only intended to uso
such vaccines for his pru-vec-inations which w„re already generally
applied with tho itahroocht.


In this letter ho pvt tho question and suggests to st-irt a


varies of ox t criner.ts with tho Copenhagen vacaina for the sarc pur¬
pose. In ry answer I obviously rclco suggestions to *ho cor.'mry and
object that ho should start a special scries of experiments for

that purpose. I say t -t it would be. far sore expedient to have these

6263


Court I

23 «»t U7-M - 1-i; - UQ - Kcetor (Raalcr)

s-.riaa running siaultcneoualy end ay indication to the Bochtmwald
vaccination is n nottor of course for the biologist, because in
Bucb.enwald the effectiveness of various vaccines upon the course
cf the illrvjss ras tested in tko css- of an infection with virulent
virus. Kaagen, on tho other hand, was dealing with the problem of
influencing the vaccination reaction with living avirulent vaccine.
The parallel aspect c£ those two testings running together was ovon
more dosircbli in tho case of fir/v.on, since Reagan 1 s vaccine was
still in tho stages cf dcvolopMnt, it had in no way boon standard¬
ised and ho couldn't have largo supplies.


626-.


Court So. 1

22 Apr *i7-M-2-l-IHX-Sarrow (Int. Eaoder)

•

Tou were Just discussing vaccinations end you described the.;
p3 infection* with attenuated living vaccines. Sut vo ere concerned with
infections on hu-cn beings In this trial end that constitutes one of tho
nain counts of the indictment.

A. Well, I described yesterday that the application of an avirulent
vaccina frOQ a biological ooint of view is a kind of infection but an
infection which can be controlled end vfaich i* not dangerous. As for the
legal aspect of any such lnfoctlon. you find the smallpox vaccination,
the yellow fov«r vaccination, end all other vaccinations which I hevo al¬
ready aentloned are lnfectlonc In the very t-ne sense but they gavo gone
outside this ethore of Juridical Judgocnt. So prosecutor would ontortaln
the thought today to z>V.< er^ accusations because of n smallnox vaccina¬
tion because he would undoubtedly make himself ridiculous. Tho tynhus
vaccination, on the othor hand, hasn't progressed that far as yet. I
adnlt that. Easgen in his vjrk In this field know of tho Tronchnen Blanc
and Lcgres and a number of othcre as prodocessors, and ho was In a r.ueh
safor ground In his work thrn Strong, for instance, when dovolooing his
plague vaccino. Strong said oxprossly In his rotort that ho was our-
orlsod at not finding any stronger reaction and not encountering any Inci¬
dents. Kargon, throughout the years, could always bast himself uoon
oxoorlencos which were available to hia, and X'n referring to oxocrioncos
which had boon made during tho last forty yoars, and. In addition, ho
could bnso himself on the technloue which had been developed, osoeelelly
In the production of virus vaccines. In addition, thore w PB his very
socclel oersonal exocrlcnce as a virus expert. All these were factors
which geve hin the assurance that any serious incidents could not occur.
Certainly, his procedure is not fully rioc as yet, but there U no doubt
that within four or five years it will he th«. generally applied orocoduro
in tho case of tyohus. If A-.ericens ere trying to follow that oroeodure,
too - such rs et the Rocky Kountoin Institute or the Hoskefellcr Insti¬
tute in Sow Tork - I a:; sure that this stage will be reached within a

ocriod of two years elroccy. In its present stage, however, it 1 b oossi-

5265


Court Bo. 1

23 Apr 47-4(-2-2-i£X-Karrov (1st. Eerier)


ble to find somebody vho would give an ex-*rt opinion end therein consider
this procedure e« being doubtful end thrt, I an sure, you vill find if
you take e surgeon an an expert in this field vho know* little about tho
ievolopcent of a typhus vaccination. If you vent to ererte any nartyre
in this procedure, this vill bo the lrst opportunity. In three years'
tine tho nubile vill no longer tolerate that. I can only say thrt
Obersterrt Kovrlrek, vho vac vitfc the Luftvrffe, has already dearly sug¬
gested that this French nrccedur^ be anilled generally in the Luftvpffe.
After this, hu vr.cclna.ted hi self and the ner.bers of tho Gerr.er. Amlstico
Coaalsslon In Morocco according to this procedure. Tho )4cdical Inspector
at that tir.e did not decide to introduce that oroced.ure because he still
considorod tho reactions to be too sevora considering tire of v«r. ^
sssuned that In peaectiro such reactions could perhaps be tolorated by
the troops but that that could not be done under conditions cf ver. Ac¬
cordingly, I sev no reason whatsoever to voice any oisglvings about tho
fact that hrofossor Eargon van dealing with a oroccdurs vhlch vr.s recog-
nltod and, to a considerable extent, vns already practically appllod.
Certainly, in aoro than a hundred thousand cases.

HR. HARDT: four Honor, the defendant has nov beer, on the stand over
tvo days. In.'s no.*nine ho is spending twenty ulnutos cor«ly aoprorchlng
the point shore he is trying to attack the integrity of this Tribunrl end.
acting in a nnnaer vhlch is not coorooriate hero, end I feel that the
defendant shoi*l<l ansver the ruertioas eskvd. of hln and not reive into
the cuesticn of whether x- not the Tribunal fcnov* this cree or whether or
not tho prosecution has weighed the facts in this case. That ie for tho
Tribunal to decide rr„ n tex *hi defendant to dccldo.

THL PilSIDidi- Vho vittesb should ensver thv oueotione aore directly
without so ouch diffusion in his anrvers. The witness ray file, re it
vrs stated yesterday, a supplemental affidavit to hie tcstii:ony, if he
dosires to do so, but this narticuler phase of the trial has lasted cuite
c while and I think the witness - ouestions should be a.sked hlc - nrepoun-


ded to tho witnoss which he can answer ..ore definitely and that the wit-

6265


Court So. 1

23 Aor 47-K-2-3-I3<-*:arr3V (lot. fiannlar)

",gi ahould endeavor to emver the nueatlcns a* directly ea ootalble.

%

I would aay further that counsel will here enple opoortunlty to
argue the ouestloos, both on the feet and on the lav. He nay fllo
brief* and eub.nlt oral argument to the Tribunal. ^ great deal of the
tine taken uo by the vltncaa la really a natter which can bo oroperly
argued to the Tribunal, frea the facta, by hla counael.

BY DR. FRITZ:

Q, Haakon toated the compatibility of hit vaccine on hur-rn being®.
Couldn't ho nacorteln that by teetia* It on miiala?

A. Tho orc-teatlng, where anl-ala are ooeolble, vat actually carried
out by Hnagen, aa can bo Been fro:: hi* recorte. Ho had olonty of anlnnlc
available. The decialvo ouoatlon aa to what the vaccination rorction la
on a human being can only be ascertained by boating It on a huoan being.

Q, Why didn't he teat It on hlnaolf or on hi* collaborate™ T
A. Thla la lnpoaaible for the aicple rcaeon that, in order to find
out what a vaccinctlcn reaction la, one need* a larger number of peraona.
In addition, the oeraona In hla environment wero alrordy vacclnrtod
arnlnat tyuhus and for the noat part had already OT'-crl«nccd tyohue thco-
aolvo* becouoo of tho work in the lcborrtorv

(*, Why did he havo to go into a concentration conn In order to
carry out hi* teat*?

A. The reaaona which caused Hcagon to go into a concentration cim

I don't know ainco I didn't dlacua* that natter with nia, but they aro

very obvioua. For one, there ere technical reasons which led hln to do

that, and then there arc ourely orcctical r^aaor.*. Whenever one did

carry out any auch teat vaccination*, one would carry It out on oereona

who would benefit noat in case they were aucceasful. The fret conniption

of Veotor Scrueny and .Uar.ce vea not at all aub^cct to tyohue danger at

that tine. The concentration cenpa, however, were definitely in danger.

The vltneeao* fren Krttveilor who teatlfled here, Sols end Granger*, tcld

us In detail that a typhus e-.ldonlc had broken out thert end that the

ctrscns who vero vaccinated by Haagcn definitely benefited from tfcia vec-

6267


Court So. 1

23 J cr 47-*i-2-4-iSM-Sarrov (1st. teller)


clsation. Sons of these persons fell 111 of tyohue end It le uoon that
that he be*ee hie essuaptlons in his report that the astl-infcctious
innunity had been proven. The witness Grangead enohnelxes. on rage 11-15
of the record, that the persons who had been vaccinated with other vac¬
cines in the ce=o had fallen ill to a considerable extont.

q, Row about the voluntary aspect during such test vaccinations?


6260


23 April 1947 -U-3-1-rX?- Hal ay (Baaalor)

Court So. 1

A. Since I never loaracd say details about Haag-n'a work, I
naturally cannot sc 7 whether hv asked those persons for their
pursdsoi^n. In itself it is retber probable that in en endangorod
•n too sphere -1 was the cr.ce in e the persons there -oold
uK 2 oubt-dl 7 volunteer to be vsccin'-ted '.gainst hyphus. It becooos,
however, clearly apperont froa the correspondence that the experimental
subjects were soeahow :r ottor designated. Obviously that can bo
explained by spying that one could n-t fren the* at art determine
hew strong the vaccination reaction would be. I personally would not
have cny misgivings in forcing p-oplu to submit to »»ch vaccination,
because in tho Goman Health Systca we ?x\, quite used to the
cc-apulsory appliortico of vaccinations of hua'.n beings, '..e h-vc
lugal crepulsion in tho caso -f smallpox vaccination. In the. case of
thj ’..'ehraacht we have the protective vaccinations against typhus,
cholera, and so forth, which ere compulsory on tho basis of a
directive, and wo have tho scaj thing on the basis of tho labor
service. Nobody could withdraw fr-o 'ey such vaccination by refusal.

Q. Is that also true abroad, thors coojxxlswy vaccinations
thoro?

A. The legislation of the various countries differ in thio fiel '.
Thoro oro states who have a certain crnccionce clause, but thoro
are other nations who kn.w of n rbsoluto legal compulsion for
vaccin'-ti on.

q. In ordor to xvvort once more to the Hr.agon vnccirx., ’id ho
actually carry out this series ef experiments, I noan tho series
of experiments which is oenti r.v«- in thj 1 -ttor which 7 JU h vo
road before?

A. «i9 for as I en inforoed, no. He never erm b ck to that
subject, and he revor sent a report about it.

H-w do you oxplain that?

A. Tho reason, according to tho documents available, oust be
the following: ..e knxi Iron tk- corevspondonco beUcen Range n - nd
Hirt that Haagen was r. t at -.11 satisfied with the health c >aSitions


23 April 15^7 -tt-3-2-PKP- Itl^y (Remler)

C-urt 1

jf hi a -xporlr*ntcl persona, and tlrt therefore his exporia-nts
■oro -clay-A. It also bocooes apparent from his public-' tior.s that
in the go.-.ntl-*> ho tod succeoded when carrying out his further work
to bring 'bout the alleviation .f the vcccin ti* reaction in the
case of the living avirulent veccirfc by keeping the dry vrccires ir.
store for a peri-d of two months. 3y applying tnia procedure ho
no longer had rny serious reactions. That, of cuirso, killed his
interest in the Copenhagen v'-ccin'ti-.n c zplctcly. Hocgcn then
continued to work. Ho used this method which had tocn aicccasful in
tto case of a cairiro riekettsir. and in th- case of tto roeattsia
prownzeki too. Vo produced a vaccine which wes produced along th0
subs method frets rioksttsia prowasoki. This vaccina too was tooted
as to its reaction on htStan b.ings, and by applying this series f
experiments ho realised a thought which ho expressed in tto
correspondence of December, 190, "nd discussed for the first
tine with 3ie in the cr.se of the nurin» vrocirvc. As one can sco fron
his piipcrs to was then ccrrying out double vaccinations. A number
of porsons wore only voccinptod with the dry vrccirv-s, *nd then
there was a control *r-up which wai v .ccincted with the doe-
vaccine, nxwol? the vnccirx, according to Gilder is tor "nd Haagon ,
and thon he usod his new dry vacrire froa living avirulent
prowozoki rickcttsia. Then ho only tried to alleviate the
vaccination reaction. to liadtod himself to a single infection of
the dead vnccire, whereas in the cose of a narenl protective vaccination
against infection one always errried out a vaccination which included
threo inactions. Since this dry vaccine wllch he used r.fterwftrus
had been produced from rickottsia pruwr.wki, to did not use this
Copenhagen vaccine for the purpose of prtvaccination, but the Jm* ’
vaccine, cccordirg to Gildoaeistor *nd Kaagon.

Q. I have another questixi inferring t; th- ctepl of Hiepen's

vaccines; I refer to tto document cf tto Prosecution JO. 123,

Prosecution inhibit 307. This is to be found on page 97 of Document

Book 23 . This letter is si.-ned by Professor Luxunburc-r, tto

6290


23 April 1947 -tt-»FSP- Slalny (RasnUr)

Court Bo. 1

oaaesnder of tho lecture group "Science and Research." Professor
Schroedor stated hero that you must havo hat! knowledge of this
letter, and that ycu had written tho draft. Is this statenont
correct, rnd I esk you to reply to this question as briefly as
possible?

A. It is corroct that I know of this setter. It is -nly

partially right ttet I on*, the draft of this letter. This paper

was submitted to mo fer ny attitude, and I still rcaosber it

today. Uy entiro description of Haakon's work is kneed upon tho

knowledge of this paper. Vo are hBro concerned with r. second

report, tut thoro was already a first report. At thr.t time I wrote

my attitude on this papor from aony points of view, rather I "rote

my attitude at that tim-, my opinion, which amounted to a number of

pages. It was deno in great detail since tho original import was so

short it did not all* me to gain a clear picture as to how tho

nctunl procooduro was carried out in tho individual series of

oxporisunts. Tho reason for this short publication was found in tho

regulations of her, which limited tho extent of any publication.

Unfortunately tho ooturmnder, Professor Luxonburger, did not take over

my explanations, since he as you probably to, was on opponent of any

long and detailed descriptions. On the other h~nd on th. basis of

ny report he wroto this short opinion, but thr.t did not mako tho

matter any olocrar and this is the tx.st ex mple .s to what the result

is, if you aro trying to abbr-viato these natters, especially since

the writer was a psychol gist and not an immunity researcher. In

tJw ease of this p".por we rrc concerned with n further stop ol Singe n.

This ti.nj h- su&gosts e pre-vaccination with his living a virulent

murine vaccine which he bed developed to such c point where it no

longer created any reactions. Afterwards he carried out a s-conri

vaccination with his dry vaccirte iron living avirulent prownsoki

rickcttsia, which paper descries terv ttr.t tho first vr.ccimtica had

no reactions, 2 nd that in the eras of the secood vaccination very

strong rcacticr.s occurred. Only a f u * of the persons who *cr~

5291


23 April 1947 ^- 3 -fc-?S?- Haloy (RrjaaLir)

Court Ho. 1

vncdtatcd tad no fovcr rt all. i£ost of thca experienced high fevor
which took a number of deys, arxi in the case of szsc of thorn
teipuratur-s wer.t up to 40 degrees. This ie e vory violent ruction,
which is only oqu’llcd by the plague vaccination ivnction, arid
as to its duration is oven a longer time in tta case of plague
vaccination reaction. At any rate this reecticn was pux*cly United t.o
fever and headaches, and tta characteristic ayaptca* of typhus woro
completely missing. Tbaro was no exanthea, there was no disturbance
of the heart and :*o cerebral symptoms. KoturrUy, there wore no
fataUties. The blood examination of the vaccinated person after a
period of a few weeks gtvu r. high typo of value in tlie case of
Woigol-Folix reaction. I de scribed this roacticn yvsterday. I t
was crrrlod out in the c :so of typhus illness and also after typhus
vaccin'-tions, ir.cludirv typhus vaccinations with d*ad vaccinas.

It doos not offer you any axe sure as to th> grade of immnity, but
at least is an indication that specific events occurred within tho
body. In the work the s-rua titer of the vrxcinaUd person are
compered to tho serum titer of a r-umber of sick persona, who naturally
foU ill in Natsxuilor within ttv. fme^-work of the typhus epidemic.


52S2


23 Aprii-M-DJG-^.-1-Jieeban (In*-. Ronier)
Court He. 1


It is enphesizei in this ptper that nc illness occurred among
the persons vaccinated, anc this, it was said, had proven thu entire
infectious isramity. The sorua Titer in the cast of the sick persons
wes ouch higher then in tho case cf theso persons vho had been
vaccinated. Objections to this paper refer tc tho following pointsj

First that the reaction was not described in the usual manner
by nverago fever charts, hut a mere statistical chart wee riven,
which could net easily lo surveyed.

Tho second ctjocticn is, that in this statistical chart the two
netheds used for vaccinations wore r.ot distinguished se that tho reader
could not soc exactly hew tho reaction wa. in using ono method and
what it was tc the ether.

Thirdly, it was cljested that of tho persons who had fallen ill
of typhus in this eexp opidosdc, no fever statements arc oado, but
only tho results cf the blocc jcaainj.tion are stated, and those nro
tho pocpl- that Luxwv.ur-'or in his paper here describes as control
groups.

Haagon, as far as 1 rcocafcer, answered to those ctjocti.ns in
tho following manner:

First, tho fever oouse in typhus was woll known. Ono could see
it any text bcok. It was net necessary for hia to repeat it cnco raoro
in his paper. In addition, tho fever charts of thoso sick persons wore
not at his dispose! because they wero net his experimental subjects,
but wore patients from camp whoro hu cnly carriod cut a blood oxandn-
aticn, and these two roasons ere. quite understandable.

Q hhat was tho fine! result of th.ae Hearer: experiments?

A Fer cnco ho emphasized that in the case of his vaccination

such high titer values according tc tho Wdfl Felix value react Jens

wore achieved, as wa3 not the cast in any other deni vaccine. Ho

further emphasized the irraini-y against infections, because his

vaccinated persons did net fell ill during the camp epidemic. Thirdly,

he said that his vaccine was net yet suitaLle fer practical application

629c


23 April-ll-0JG-t-2-Meth2n (Int. R-mIcr)

Court So. 1

because the vaccine reaction was still too strong.

Q t.hy did the medical Inspectorate cf the Luftwaffe a3k 'Jr.
Haaccn in the letter cf 29 August 19U on page 99 cf Document bepk
12, this is Dccuacr.t of the Prosecution AO-131, Schitit So. 309,
whether the typhus epidttdc ir. Netzweiler ras in any wey connected
with his vaccine experiments?

A This request ia based upon sy initiation; the work which I
Just described and the report t7 Kcagcn cf 21 June 19U regarding tho
Hatweilor epidemics were simultaneously available. I was suspicious:

In the caae of the development cf all vaccines Ircm living avirulent
Soros, the nain :,crry always is that the veeelnee in their application
on human beings wiU quickly renin tho virulentc they already lost.

This werry can always be ecen when discussing all those vaccines; that
was tho can with tho Jcr.ncr sanll pcx vaccine, ‘end wo have tho swnc
result with the nlaguo vaccine, recording tc Kollo, Otto and Strong.

’..o still discuss it today in tho case cf Calnottc veccino. I hrd
cxacily the sono worry in tho case cf this nuw typhus vaccino; and
when discussin c influenza vaccines for ir.stanco, I again expressed
that worry as cno can see recording to tho Document by Biding.

I therefore rtccncx-ndod that cno should ask whether this
epidemic started ns a result of the vaccinations and this one can
coo under Figure 3. This inquiry was dearly answered in the nc.gutivo
by i refc3scr Hniron, which can be scon in the next Document cn page 100,
Document He. 132, Exhibit Ho. 310 in Dccutmt Beck Hat 12.

Q New, i refesser Haagcn, in a further l.tter •'stwd 27 June
19 LU, addreasod tc Trcfcsecr Hirt, s-yc th t in a control greup for
further experiments illnesses arc tc be expected in ‘.ho case of «on-
vaccinated pers'.na. This is in the Dccuccnt beck 12 cn loo 96 of
Docuacrt Book 12, Dccu.ac.it 1^-127, Exhibit tic. j06; would ycu please
lock ct that letter end expi-in it tc tho TrT unal?

.. This letter by Haogen, in opinion, is thv only serious

Document contained in Haa cn's ccaplex. I must emphasize that I an

52S-T


23 ;^rll-M-EJG-^-3-lfcchan ;Int. Healer)
Court He. 1


in a rather difficult situ?.tier. hors. I have to explain 1-ttcra
written by ether people, letters which I have never seen before and
about the beck.Tcur.d cf which I have no knowledge at ell. In addition,

I cniy have a fraction cf this correspondence available and by nc
-.cans the entire correspondence.

Ha rb or, never reported about any such intuitions tc the J*oiic!l
Inspectorate cf the Luftwaffe, he n-.ver reported about the execution
cf any such exporir.er.t3. In this letter, addressed to Hirt, he thinks
for the first time to include ncn-vcccinetod central Teups in this
experiment.

I have tried to explain this letter in tho fcllcring way <;iving
due reservation tc whatever Haegon nay have t s y in this connection.
This Is an attempt on =& p~rt, because Heaven is not e -nd it is by
no conns an cscplrui'.ticn free ay ctm knowledge: Haagcn says xprwsaly
that he wrs planning this parallel .jrour* beccuso he wanted tc clearly
prove tho offsetivenoas of his vaccine against infections; he wants
to clearly establish that. Ho cbviously is cf the opinion that his
tarlior experiments hrvo net breu^t a dear pro-f. The e rlicr
experiments wore based upon the blood examination and tho exurdn^tien
of vaccinated pocplo who hrvt net fallen ill during tho epidaaic. This
assumption, frea a purely sciontifleal ’ point of view, is oLsclutoly
correct because those two feet* alone lid net constitute a elver proof,
although they had r largo dogroc cf probability or. their side.

One must r.aau-c then, ns long ns one dees net knvw tho real
plan of tho experiments, intended by Haugen, -nd \>e have- no dear
pirn cf the experiments, that he had tc tako into consideration, inso¬
far as the experience ho hoc. sc far, thrt ho woulo new succeed to apply
on .-.virulent living v-ccino without rny subsequent r.notions. .Iso that
this time ho wanted tc tost the 3ucco?3 cf his procedure by afterwards
infecting scneenc with virulent virus ns 31anc, Balthasar :n£ ethers lid,
enJ as it was c 1- tried out during typhus experiments in .mcrican prisons
during the war.

Q Did he net have to expect .any fatalities in ccriyin.j cut


such experiments?


6235


23 Aprll-tf-DJG-S-l-Ccck (In*. Easier)
Court Me. 1


A If a bungler would carry out such a series of cxperimtsit 3 ,
naturally, yes; but kg ere concerned with the test known vims re¬
search worker ir. Go many. In his lettor there are contained two
points, which enable the hygienist to juess what he planned to do
with this control group. It teccnos noticeable that this control
group, as ho callod it, cr parallel group, comprises fifty persons.

Mow wc knew frem the Buchunwald series of experiments that in the
case of infection control of typhus ten persons are sufficient. Even
Ding at the neat took twenty persons for his experiments. Therefore,
Hoager. oust have seme reason tc select a largo rrcup like that.

Secondly, it becomes noticeable that in this letter he cnly writes one
has to count on peoplo felling ill, ut in an infection controlled
with typhus fatalities are to be expected with a certainty. Haugen
says nothin; at all about that possibility. Considering the progress
of the typhus research at that time one has tc conclude with all pro¬
bability that Haugen was perhaps planning the following thing:

We knew that the dead vaccines gave no certain anti-infectious
immunity, but a very reliable mti-tcxcid ianunity. lhtroforc, on
the basis cf this lotter, cno can explain the experimental plcns by
considering thtt the 150 persons wore to be treatoi with this new
vaccino, whcru?s tho parallel group was to bo treated with a nunfcor of
old vaccinos, cf which it wes known already that thair cffectivunoss
was only limited. If in such an experimental series he was carrying
cut subsequent infocti:n with virulont viruses tho folloring wao tc
bo expected: No illnesses, or very few illnesses in this Group which
were treated with vaccine from iivir._ avimlent virusoc. On the cthur
hand illnesses in the r.cn attenuated form as they according to axp-r- ^
iunce so far when using deed viruses, that is exactly what is con¬
tained in this letter by :!aO£cn tc Hirt. ..s I said before, this is
merely on assumption end it is quite possible H'ogen intended something
different. This is net tho only possibility.

Q Did Heogon report this experimental pier, to the Medical

6296


23 xpril-M-!WG-5-3-C<xk (Int. Hauler)

Court Be. 1

Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe?

Me, he neither reported this ocpcriacr.til plan, ncr any

ether expcricentsi plan.

Q Hanger. is expressly 3 pc akin- of enc group that was net
v ccinetod?

That is correct. It says sc here, tut in tho case cf his
1 otters ens has tc take into consideration he is addressing lay-ten.

He is cbvicusl7 answering c questicn which was put tc his, namely,
whether illness could cccur, noscly end that scant, of course, a
deficiency in later, that he uses th» expression "non vaccinated
group" tewardo tho lajaon in order tc designate the pnrollol group
which has cnly cn anti-toxoid ioaunity is quite iaaginoablo. On the
ether hand, it is not inegirca' lo that he did net aontion the possi¬
bility cf fatdities as it would have been unavoidable if he was
actually infecting persons who wore net at all prctoctod.

Q Hew could -lr. Heaven plcn cr carry out any such oeporisenta
without tho knowlcdgo of approval of the Uediccl Inspectorate cf tho
Luftwaffo? Ho was on OLerstrbanrzt cf tho Reserve of the Luftweffo
and consulting Ky ionist with the .dr Flcot Reich?

« Yesterday, I have explainod the double pcsiticn cf Haagon
in detail and I naturally wouldn't w-nt to repeat that new, but I
woulu sorely like to point cut a nuaber cf facts which w<.ro net men¬
tioned yesterday. Hoa/.on, fer instance, a# an air force officer,
could net have been in a position to obtain os ailments from tho
Reich Research Council with cut th-. r.rxissicn cf his superiors. No
air force officer could carry cut independent nejetirtiens with tho
Roichofuehrer SS or any other SS agency, in particular, net at all
abcut his Luftwaffe activities. The director cf the Hygienic University
Instituto on the other hand was in a pcsiticn tc do that, and the
files and documents show clearly that Dr. Haa-en made full use of his
independence as a University Ircfcsscr. He received arnius fer the

direction and tho buildir.:; cf his instituto frem numerous agencies

5297


23 «prii--DJS-5-3-Cock (In-. Easier)
Court So. 1


which really are net inter-connected at all. Ke indcpendcntally
negotiated without a akin- anyone about experimental subjects by usi::r
use official channel Ahnoncrbo, an 1 th 31 the Rcichsfuchror SS. When¬
ever he deems it suitable he plays one agency against another. Hu
denania further merles firm the Reich Research Council with the in¬
dication he wculd return to the Luftwaffe if he did not receive that
money and another console he invites a Japanese Obcrstcbscrzt Kobey-
ashy in order to inspect his institute. Naturally, no nodical officer
wculd invito any foreign officor to inspect his medical institute
without reporting th:t to the medical inspectorate and rocoivin-
their approval. If one daoe not take into consideration the in¬
dependent position of Hrxujon as r. University pr:fcssor cno could
not possible understand the examination of Haugen ct Mctzwoilor.

4 Couldn't the Luftwaffe exorcise any influence cr. Kaajun's
work on the basis cf that research assignment?

.» Well, there wculd hevo fceun cno possibility, namely, tho
oodicol inspectorate could have transferred him. Thu result would
hove been a telegram from the director of the University to tho
lilnistor of Education, tc tho effect that Haogen ahculd finally bo
declared indisponsable, and cs director of the institute he was in¬
dispensable. ,'.ccc rding to official channels the Luftwaffe could
uxorciso nc influence on research assignments, that is by onior,
through official channels. The uodical inspectorate throughout tho
years had tried to persuade Ur. Kc&gen tc use tho atnics ihlch were
made available for the purpeso of producing vaccines. In spite of
that one did not succeed throughout the years tc brin hi-, to do that.
If any military subordination had existed there would have bocn 4
dear order ’♦'.ich »culd have had tc be carried cut. Thee-, wore no-
gotietiens which wuro carried cn throughout the years. I already
explained and the document 297 shews what the rod tone was, that is
. Bock Nc. 12 , pa;e 112 .

Q The medical inspectorate dii have tho possibility tc step'

629c


23 April-M-DJG-5-L-Cccic lint. Easier)

Court Ho. 1

those research assignments and by that exercise pressure cr. Heaven's
activities?

/v That, theoretically, of course, is possible, Hr. HcHaney
has aede sidlrr utterances horo and said that if Henson did not
receive any asro funds frer. the Hcich Roscarcl* Council he would have
ha* to stop his work, 'Hit if one assumes that cnc displays ijnoronoo
about scientific institutes in Germany and what the situation was.

If the Luftwaffe cculdn't pry, then an application was made tc the
Ruich Research Council, end if the Reich Research Council didn't
offor their assistance, ono cculd tum tc the fhnenerto, and if tho
Ahnoncrbc tcc rejoctod its rstistonco, cn« cculd tum tc the Eestora
allniatr;', tc lr. hcaoriiorj. There are cany acra possibilities. hho
knows Haa*on, knows rise he was r.ell aware cf all cf these ;,cssibilitiofl
~nd was explcitin,; thoa fer tho cxt-nsi.n and use cf his institute.

In ono point thore wrs only mo a { ;cncy which could n:t be circum¬
vented. Whenever ho wintod experimental subjects from concentration
camps he could net cmre o tc ,,et then nitheut Kinder 1 s approval,
not oven c nnections with Hitler r.uld have helped him there. Hannan's
channel to Hinder is easily roccjniiocblo from the dccununto. It
loads over Hirt *»csc official position is net known. Hirt is hero
boinj mentioned in tho docroos cf the hcichsfudirer. Of course, as
a Luftwaffe officer Hot.- on Ceuld net choose that channel. If as a
Luftwaffe cfficor ho would have marked in a concentration cany tho
negotiations would have had to be- carried cut ever the nodical
inspectorate, and examples rrc •'vailatlo as in the cass cf Ircfesscr
Hclalcchn.r and Kippko and wo also have tho natter cf the sea water
experiments.


6255


23 April U7-^.TD-6^L-Gross (Int. Ranler)

Court Ho, 1
•

Q Those possibilities which you have Just described, aren't
they in contradiction to a central steering of research work?

A ISaturally, tut this central steorlnc of nodical research
work in Gemary is a phenocenon which only cane to life ono and
one-half years after the "ar. Aa it really applies to the *ar bccccos
evident clearly froo tho do aments. The best cxanplo is Raschor.

After Raschor had brought tho luftraffo into contact with concentration
csnpa tdagivinrs arise with Profossor Hippko on tho basis of a report
ho rocoirod froo Jfolzlochncr end other persons. Hippko trios now to
transfor Raschor to another agency. Raschor who already belongs to
tho Gonoral—SS succoods in gotting hirsolf transferred to tho affon-
SS, and thon when tho Roichsarst-SS wants to take his under his wings
ho sots affiliations with the Ahnonorbo in order to retain tho diroot
channel to Hinslor. Tou find those skillful and calculating rosoarchors.
in the flics of any offico who carrlod on rosoarch at all, but not bocauso
thoso agoncios worked accordir* to a cccx»n plan but bocauso thoy naro
not coordinated and bocauso tho possibility existed to ploy ono against
tho other,

Q Didn't that bcccco known in tto courso of tho Or? oron't
attonpts on do to ronovo this faulty situation?

A You enn recopdso starts that wore rndo in that connoction,

but rooognition case nuch too lato and a succoso was not achiovod,

and that was cloarly doscribod by Profossor Rostock here. Thon you

havo the basic difficulty that any rosoarch work can, in reality,

novor bo oontrolly stoorod. Tto initiatlvo for a rosoarch is always

to bo found in tte Individual, in tho researcher hicsolf. This is a

natural law, and no political systen oan altor that. Evon in tho

sraallost circles ono Gains tho oxp-rlonco that an elder scientist

who knows so nothing about his work oannot easily bo steered by orders

and always wants to carry out his own idoas,

q i have another two questions with reference to the lottor

which we discussed this Doming, tho lottor fron Hr. Baapon to Kirt,

6cCC


23 April ii7-tt-^TD-6-2-Cross (Int. Busier)

Court JIo. 1

dated 27 Juno 19Ui, Docuaent of Prosecution ’C-J.27, page 9U of tho
English Document Book, 96 of the Gerran Dociraont Book. Did yew over
too* whether these exporinanta after they were planned w?ro actually
carried ou*?

A I said that noittor tho p lann i n g nor the execution evor
booano tarn, Fron the porlod of tios involved one can see tho
followingj Tho letter to Hirt is addressed 27 June 19UU. Fron Baagon*s
roport dated 21 Juno 19U* it boconoa apparent that tho typhua cpidcedc
in Hatzwoilor was still coin:; on then so that ho was not oven in a
position to vaccinato against influonza* Axy such epidordc has to stop
baforo ono can start any now vork. Tho witness Holl has testified horo
that no ono could either enter or loavo tho car-p at that tino. Even
if on tho 21 Jim 19UU tho last oaso of typhis had occurrod in
Hatzwoilor, -.fhich it is highly icprobablo. !<r. Grandjoon says tho
opidceiio lasted until Ally. Tho nornol quarantine in tho caso of
typhus lasts twonty-cight days.

HR. HARDTi !toy it pi oaso your Honors, a typical oxanplo is this
last quostion. This oould havo boon answerod with yos or no and tho
defendant spent throe or four alnutos ar .uing tho question vrhich
could troll bo included in ttoir closir*; or sumation. I think tho
Tribunal should su^ost ttat tho witness tostify rather than arguo.

THE PRESIDEffT: Tho point raised by Prosecution is woll takun.

Tho Tribunal has boon very patient of tho witness, but tho wltnoss
contimoe to arguo not tors instoad of answering directly and briefly.
Ths witness should bo advised that nattors of ar.gunent nay bo presontod
to tho Tribuml in iio tine by his counsel with tho assistanco of tho

witness. Arrunont prepared in proper brief basod on ovi-lonco i3 nuch

•

r»re offoctivo than arrurwnt free tho witness stand. Tho Tribunal
instructs the witness to answer the questions directly as possible
vi thout argunont. Counsol will ondoavor to propound his quoetion3 that
they nay bo so answered.

6301


23 April li7-iWiTD-6-3-Gro35 (Int. Ranlor)

Court Jfc* 1

Q Professor, you tear 1 whet the Tribunal has sai i. I ask you
to aot accordingly.

*

A I know personally that Professor Haag an in August 1914*,
has loft Strasbourg in order to find an evacuation spot, ?!r. Itoll
toatifiod to that^ too.

Q !tr. President, In that comoction I offor tho Roso Docunont
ffo- 28 rrhich is to be found in Rose Itocurcnt teok II on pages 62 to
67, I offor it as Ex h ibit Roso Mo. 30, This is an affidavit by tho
physician Dr. "ilteln Cor din, I should liko to road part of this
affidavit. I an roa ’Inc tho third paragraph on page ono of that
docunont.

"During tho war, i.o. sinco 1911, I wia a nodical officor
of tho roservo with tho Curran Luftwaffo. .«ft*jr having bom usod at
first as a nodical field officor I was assigned to tho Hygiene
Instituto of tho University Strasbourg in Fobruary 1911 for: fcyglonio
baotoriologic training. Haro I was alnost exclusively concornod with
work on hepatitis (nico pas sag os and demonstration of the vims in
nice organa) unior Profossor Haagon until tho Allied tr>ops occupiod
tho tovm on 23 Ncvcnbor 19U*.

"Boforo bain? dotaohod to Strasbourg, I was offioor for
spocial assi'Tnont with Luftwaffo physician ’tttto in Borlin-Dahlm
for about 6 months, Although during ry sorvico in Berlin I did not
noot Profossor Rose personally I ropoatodly hoard about hin in his
capacity as consultant ty-Ionia t of tho Luftwnffo Medical Inspoo-
torate, co that oven at that tino tho nano Roso noant sonothing to
no."

Thon I shall skip a fow paragraphs which are concornod with

*

hepatitis and on page 3 of tho document, on page 61* of tho docunont
book, I an continuing with the last but one paragraphi

"Although I ays elf was not concamed with typhus work I know

that Profossor Haag on worked on tho dovdopcicct of a typhus vaccine

fron living avirulont typtes organisns. It was also provided that

6302


23 April Ii7-iU.T3-6-U-Gross (Int. Raslor)

Ccurt So. 1

typhus vaccines should be produced ir. l*rgo7quantitles at the insti¬
tute, In order to sake this possible, constructional alterations at
the institute had alrealy been started.

"I also know that Professor Haagen vaccinated Inflates of tho
Katzwoilcr concentration carp with his new vaccine. I never hoard,
towevor, of Mn artificially infecting prisoners with typhus. At sore
later occasion Professor Kaagontold ao that typhus had boon carried
into tho concentration carp Jktstmiler fran outside by a transport of
prisoners and that subsequently a typhus o pi' oelo broke out in tho
carp. Ho eaphasizod that several casoa of death had occurred but that
none of tho oonvicta troated with his vaccine had oontractod tho
disoaso.

"Durin-. ny tino in Strasbourg I hoard that Profossor Haugen
formerly, i.o. boforo I c«r»*to Strasbourg, conducted oxporinontal
vaccinations with his influenza vaccino produced free: 11 vo woakonod
influenza virus, on port of tho staff, including tho physicians, of
a Strasbourg clinic. Tho porsore of tho clinic in epostion stood
theso vaccinations without any strong reactions.

"Sinco I sot Professor Kaogon only Siring ny tino in Pobart
Koch Instf tutoc I know, however, that ho collaborated with Profossor
QildjDfflsiar. I never hoard of any participation of Profossor Roso
in th'* iwphns research work at tho Robert Koch Inatituto. As far a3
I l.rvr.. ;*» rvv.a vu« sot nontionod in Strasbaur G , oithcr in connection

wir.h tba work of Profossor Haagcn.

•sewing to the air raids and tho approach of tho front Profossor
foagon dneo about tte niddlo of August 19UU directed his efforts
t.-irards a partial evacuation of his institute free Strasbourg *nd
travelled about in order to find an evacuation location. On 2$ August
or 1 September 19UA there was a phone order to start preparations for
tho evacuation of part of the institute. The telegraphic order arrived
on 5 Soptecfcer 19Ui.


6203


23 April U7-tW.TD-6-5-0rcss (Int. Smler)

Court No* 1

-On 25 September 19UU tto baUdlug of tto institute was
heavily danigod by bcrfcs. There woro U dead* Dr. Eckstein, Inspector
Itoyor, the laboratory assistant Schulze, and a youn 3 rdrl froa tJio
Research Dapartnent*

"On 16 October 19UU'Profossor Haakon returned to Strasbourg
for sovoral Jays. It was his last stay in Strasbourg. I do not
rtrxrlJcr tho exact date of his teparture. Fron August to 16 October
19UU, at any oaso. Professor Hoagon was absent froc Strasbourg
without interruption*

"It is completely out of tho question that exporir.cnts on
humans could stiU havo boon conduct*! in Katzwoiler or Schiraock
after tho above nontionod evacuation noasuros had boon started.

■During ny tine in Strasbourc I havo not soon Professor Roso
in that city.

"On tho basis of ny knarlodgo of Profossor Hoagon*s personality,
especially in consideration of his acbitlons, I think it oxtronoly
inprcbnblJ that ho could havo allowed Profossor Roso to obtain a
dooper inid nt into his research work."

Ir. is not rwcossary for za to road tho rost of that docunwnt

sinco it a-rC.r vi th a different aattor.

TV. BtTSCEffi Tho Tribunal will now bo in rocoss.


23April-M«K5J-9-l-4fcehan-(int.Von-Schon)-
Ccurt 1

THE ^-VRSriAL: Thu Tribunal is again in session.

DIRECT IXAMIHaTICN - Resumed.

BY DR. IRITZt

Q Professor, according to your testimony, you had no knew-
ledge of these plants of Professor hoagon and as far as you knew
r rofessor Hangon did not report these plans tc the iledical Inspec¬
torate of the Luftwaffe; assualng the hypcthetical ease that the plans
wieh Hnagon told Hirt were officially reported to the Luftwaffe by
Stagen; what would you hare done in tills case?

A If this plan had bocn reported to mu, I had seen anything
objectionable in it -end this formulation of tho letter would certain¬
ly have settled obj.cticnatio to mo-then I would have oppressed ay mis
givings to the -odical InsoeCtor and above all asked that th- state cf
affairs be cleared up. If it had then been discovered that qy misgi¬
vings were Justified, then the acdlcnl inspector would probably have
objected. But, as in the grippe Beetle; on which Biuling reported
landloser, after I had otoressed ay objections to influenza vaccina¬
tions, said:* V.ry well, the vaccination is to bo carried out, but
I don't wont these infections." That would probably havo boon the sno-.

Q Now, you had knowledge of the fact that Ur. “aagen, in his
capacity as director of the Kygenc institute, w.a rvigcciatlng indepen¬
dently with an SS agency about vaccinations in the concentration camps
this is shown by ycur letter of 13 December, 192*3, which is on page
62 of Document Book, 12, this is locuDont of tho prosecution No-122
Exhibit 296; didn't this taakc you wender?

A No., it did not make Be wonder at all. I havj said that
I kn.w what vaccine problem r. Haagen was working on, but th; t*was
a coaplctely-uncbj-ctablw natter. Th- fact that he was vaccinating
people in concentration ceap was no occasion for too to object, because
the concentration camps w_ro in no Bert danger than anyone else frets
typhus and that an So agency was ccapotcnt for the concentration camps.

I did not knew, but I as sun-d it.

6X5


23 April-U-GJ-9-2-Mc chan-(int.. Von Schrcn)-
Ccurt 1

When I dictated ry answer, I apparently quoted superficially
free Haagen's letter, experts later told cc that then, was no such of-
ficons SS “ain Office, SS Hauptomt, but obviously it was the JVKA
which was (scant, but I did not know these details. I aorcly repeated
what fasagon's 1 -ttcr must have said.

Q Professor, yesterday you told the tribunal that you were
active in ccobatting typhus, but that you had nothin to do with
typhus research, ycu referred tc your publications on typhus at va¬
rious points, but in 19fei; In Basle you held a big lecture about typhus
and calaria.

Mr. President, I have this lecture of the defendant Rose in
cy Document Bo~k 2, it is on pages 27 to 5U. This is Rcec Document
Nc.?5» which I submit as Rose Exhibit 31. I do net Intend to read
any of this, but I shculd nevertheless like to ask ‘refessor R>sc
to state wether anything was said here about typhus research?

A This lecture very clearly shews what qy own field of
work was. I gave \ general survoy of the state of the fight against
malaria and against typhus on 17 Fetruaxy 19l*li. I took theso two sub¬
jects together because through cy field of w^rk, threugh tho new DDT
preparations wore connected diseases theso v^ry different. If ono is
invited as a guest to locturo to a foreign socioty, then listeners
want to knew about all the results of th. work of the lecturer per¬
sonally, sc I gav„ this. This shews that I had nothing to do with the
development of vaccines. I dealt with this subject briefly. Nc werk
of sy associates or aysolf on this subject is mentioned, while in the
field of the development of DDT preparations, ay associates and ny own
Wv.rk are constantly que>tcd.

I dealt with vaccines on the basis of papers written by c-

thcr authors. l!crccv«_r, 2 gave exactly the sar* explanation as I giv„

new befera the. Iribumal; there is no essential diffrence betwoan

what I said three years age and what I 3ay on the witness stand.

In this connection, I refer to page 29, the third paragraph, until.

pago 32 the first paragraph. w f course, I do not intend to r^ad

62C5


23 April-M-GJ-9-3-fc«*d5.an-(int. Vcn Schrun)-
Court 1

tills, but cno can check up with this clc essay,
tc sco wether, I represented the sane p int cf view at that tin-
as I have represented the tribunal here. Specifically, I refer
to the first paragraph cn pa&c 32. In February cf 19loli I said that
vaccinations against typhus with attenuating living virus is still
a field for research and has net been satisfactorily settled yet.

Tfcat is the sentence wlch proves clearly that I had no knowledge of
what happen.d in the B„chomrald canp, in additi n to what I have repor¬
ted here.

Q Could this lecturo in Basle bo the sane one fer which the
SD wanted to institute proceedings against ycu as a traitor?

A Yes. That is the saco lecture, which I gave in Uay 19 Uj
in Ankara in nuch cure detail, and I was*>cakliy to Turkish nodical
officers on this subject fer soveral days. Free there ny lecture
reached Moscow, free Mc«C"w the Geman intelligent sorvlcc r cci-
vod knowlodgo of it, and since thes^ natters were ccnsidorei in-
p rtont in Rueotc, I was tc bo tried.

Q Was th< trial actually carried out?

A Bo, as HaaH:ser mi Sohreoder hav, U stifled hero, ny
superiors and ;refcsser Itnilcser protected nc.

Q Did you in ycur loeture deal with such new things that
cno could speak cf treason?

A The use cf D37 preparations in crabatting ^pidedcs was
quite now at that tiao. Boforo that lecture there was net a single ar¬
ticle in the literature of nil countries about the uso of DDT in ccb-
batting tpidcaicsjjvon the Swiss holders >f the patent ded not rea¬
lize the significance cf this preparation at that tine. The ^plu
scientists, a few days Later, send cy lecture to the internatlcnal
Red Cress, it was also sent tc At-rica, it was translated into trench

Q Then the SD was ri«;ht in its charge of treason?

A No, certainly not. The aedical profession lias the groat

privilege, even in tine cf th- wildest was hysteria .'f remaining

6307


23 Ap ril-M-GJ-9 ohon-( int . 7ca $ch:ai)-
Court X

neutral. Themilitary dee ter knoxs nc .iistincti.n between friend and
fco. I consider it a misleading slogan in medical research if one
specks cf research for the Wchrcochtj it is research in the inte¬
rest of the medicine, that is research in the interest cf all nan kind
Typhus docs not distinguish between soldier and civilian ar.d malaria
nosquitees do net distinguish between democrats and national socia¬
lists. The vnccin.3, which were tested in Buchcnwald were intended
fer the Ocrann medical pirsrmol, but they were also giv-n to the so-
viot medical personnel in prisoner cf w.r carps, oni beginning in
19U3 the medical- inspector of the Luftwaffe gave his instrueti.ns
for troop physicians, especially pointed cut the needs t the Soviet
pcrs'nnol, and orders they also m.rc to be vaccinated, alth-ugh we did
not have rv.arly enough vaccine t. vaccinate all f <ur ora non; tho
medical pors'nnol and deetors in Prisoner of "ar camps were cf
c urso in a greater danger, theref re they had pri'rity on vaccinations
boforc cur cwn soldiers. This same stanJp int was held in research.

If wo discovered s nothing. It was made public, an:' it was published
abroad without any c nsidorati^n wf Mother the military nodical
scrvico f same ether c vsrtry eight find therein a n-w roaeiy.

The medical service always remains neutral.


oC-06


23 April 1917 -21-10 -1-PKP- Co* (von Schoen)

Cjurt No. 1

DP.. FPJIZ: Mr. President, what th. defendant Rose Just stated
about the vaccination of Soviet prisoners of war is shown by Rose
docuoent No. 26, on pages 59-56 of Rose Document Book No. 2. I have
alrerdy submitted this document yesterday as Rose Exhibit No. 19.

On th. socjrd peso of this dosua>nt theiv is the figure 26 in the
Instructions for troop physicians. I should like to refer to tnis
paragraph witnout reading it. Tnis proved the correctness of what
Professor Rose has Just said. I have one aoro question about this
letter of tho 13 Dccoebor, 1913. V* document book 23, P*E° 82,
thet is Prosecution docuaont 122, Prosecution Exhibit 296, tr.o
letter to Professor feogen. Cannot this letter be interpreted to
mean tfr.t you r.w Oborstarzt gave hia, as Oborstabaarzt, an jr ^r?

A. During tho war in addresses 'no signatures we goner ally used
our ailitcry rank if we had any; to Dr. R*gcn, as well as to all
other experts I sent my reports about the Copenhagen irforn-tion.

He ittjuir-d fre* .iw in r. privato letter and r-ceivwd free no a
puraorcl answer without any file note, without any characteristic
of nn official letter. The correspondence would b'vu boon oxcctly
the s-mo if «r. Hnagon had not been in the Luftwaffo, and if
Gohoiarat Otto, a civilian 'Sui*y in Frankfurt, and Dr. Haas, frun
tho industrial Laborrtoxy, end -r. Eyer fr^n the M*y, had s>nt a
sioiL'r privato letter to nu. it was not an official letter.

ER. HtITZ: Hr. President, I ted intend. : to ask tho defendant
Rose various questions about tho testimony of witnesses, for oxfiaplo,
tho witness Edith Setaidt, the witn.ss Hixtz, testimony which theso
witnesses gr.vu . bout the “llegud experiments of Professor Kuagcn in
the concentration camp Natewoilor and Schiroek, and in th. interest
of hastening proceedings, and in erse th. ^ibunal agrees, I should
like to reserve th: right to present the expected answers of tho
defendant Rose to th; Tribunal in writing, and then I could conclude
the subject of Ha-.gcn and go on to cnLaria, which is tho final item

of the Prosecution

THE PRESIDE®: Koi. long will your acacdnation of the witness


23 April 1947 -tf-lD-2-H*- Cook (van Scfcocn)

Court Ho. 1

on tho aW in the eomoctioo of the testimony of these other
witnesses, how auch tin: would that toko?

DR. FRITZ: I would probably not finish this morning.

!&. HARDIs Would you have tho defense counsel state his
proposition agoint I don't think I board it dearly.

DR. FRITZ: I wanted to e* the defendant Rose a few questions
new dealing with tho test law of various witnesses, for cxaaplo,
th« witness Hirts and the witness Edith Schaidt, tho testimony of
these witnesses about the allccod experiaonts of Professor Haagon
in the concentration c aps Katawoiler and Schir^k, but I would be
willing in order to shorten tho proceedings to submit the statement

to tho Trlbunrl in writing.

THE PRESIDZi.T: Counsel, when could you suoait thrt written
steteount?

DR. FRITZ: Very scon, in r. days, I believe.

THE FRESIDEHT: Of course, counsel for tho Prosecution should
have an opportunity to oross-ex-.ainu the witness upon that ifcctMOttt.

!*. H«RDY: I eight add, your Honor, fra ay knowledge of the
tustiaony of the witness cxntion.d, that any points which tho
defendant would bring out would be in the way of an argument and
I think it aight be woll for hin to outnit the affidavit, and if ro
detorairw after we sco the affidavit, thr.t we want to cross ox-aine
on rny points thereafter we can recall hia to the etr-nd.

THE PRSSIDEHT: Ttet will be satisfactory. Counsel for . efenOnt
Rose ar.y oropr.ro ttet str.toosnt in writing and subait it to tho
Tribait 1 anl tn-. counsel os soon ao possible.

vmess:

Tho- Prosecutor .== quite right. It .rule uBs.ntlr.Uy bo ftn

oxpUnutl'n of tho tcrti-.r.y. Thero kb only jtv t*etml quostlm,

that .hotter tto vitnuS. Scorllt cnJ or InspoCtor uoycr of tho

Strasbourg instltuto uben I visited thu institute .,t StmsBbuurg

informal ~ in --ay «y thrt thuy hc< rny suspici.n of Prrfu.s.-r

th-.t to KB cmulcting rny ili-gnl uipurltonts, mi this fsotu-.l

6510


23 April 19C7 -M-iCk-3-PEP- Cook (von Schoun)
Court Ho* 1


question I oust answer with no, neither Miss Schsidt n:r Inspector
)L.'/bT acid a word to ce about that, although both of then would hove
hr.d on opportunity to do, osp^ciolly Inspector -i~yor, who talked
to nu for sno tizfc . H® was a rather experiencedanissl broolor, and
I us especially intorcstel in these natters because very enny
methods of breeding were used which were unfamiliar to boj and
durirg this convurar tion Professor n aas~ n was not pros-nt. Hr.

Moyer would have hsc* on opportunity, if ho had had any misgivings
about Hangun, to express them to so t th- tire, but ho did not do so.
BY DR. rRITZ:

Q. Now, I go on to tho final subjoct. Hor© Profess^* Rose is
charged with special responsibility, that is with atlnrin. In the
written indictment ft-^f-ss^r Rosu is not charged with apocial
responsibility, but the Pr-eecuti >n has charged tho defendant Rose
with special responsibility orally.

Would /ju first tell us Professor what your own profession 1 '1
connections with orlaria wore?

A. !!y first contact was involuntary as a prisoner of war In
Algeria in 1$15. I aysclf contracted eclaric. Thu oxiorn rooodios
wore not yet known, an! I suffered frv© malaria f-r several years.
This experience and tho cas^s among ny acquaintances arouse special
intoro3t in tho dosoasc. The first practical e*sos of that typo I
saw in ny years at Basle.

f.. Whon 'Id you begin to dor.1 with Malaria scientifically
yourse If?

A. When I was called to China in 1929, to a p'rt ,f China which is
in the sub-tropics. Malaria ianodlately bocr»c one of ay a-in duties.
The first assignment which I r«ceiVv.d was to c.«b*t " aalaria •
opideoic in c famine area. Then I holpe ’ introduce . synthetic
preparation, plnsaochin. Th^ -coin work in this field had already
beon done rt that time. Tr.en when ctebrins was introduced, which hr3
played r big role agein duritig this war, I worked froa the very
beginning in th- introducti-n J it. I worked out 2 f-ra of this


23 April 1947 -L-10-4-FKP- Cook (van Schoon)

Court Ho• 1

preparation together with an English doctor. I tested it l_r tho
first tiae at Sin._apc.rc.

Q. Did 70 U work on other questions besides tJr.t -f thu troetaont
of aalaria?

A. Coabating solaria also pL'ye * e ^rv-.t role in ay work. Papers
on the subject arc contained in ay list of public- tions, ini I clao
worked on the af-lorif. c-squito c rriors of anlaria, but I did not
publish anything while I was in China ixenus. I did not have anything
new and I :nly used known oothods.

Q. Did y:u stix’y specially in this field?

A. I attended r. course for sevoral aonths givon by the Par
Eastern Bureau, the section A hygiene A tho League of Nations
for senior nodical officers in tho Frr East. I viaito* the aain
nalaria areas in British Ualrya n! Java with the help of the Loaguo
of Motions ci»! I a»t a ruiaber -f leading or 1 st in scionticts of
tho Far East during this.


6312


23 ril-M-DJG-U-l-Cras3 (Int. von Schoen)

Court No. 1


Q Did ycu study selcrie baycnd that abroad?

« On all cf mgr study trips, which 3 mentioned, I always
devoted special attention to malaria, I visited institutes and ex¬
ports; and when I travelled in North .cnerica I also visited these
institutes. The two trepicsl nodical chairs which existed ir. America
at that tine I also visited.

Q Did ycu learn anythin-: about hunan experiments cn naV a rin
at that tine7

« Net in th- ssnaa cf this trial. I only visited institutes
then at rhich experimental oalarla research was carried cut concerning
therapeutic infection cf the ins’.ne. The aalcria experiments con¬
cerning which Dr. Servitius submitted documents here c’ vicusly *oro
started later.

Ci New, what ycu sew cn your trips nbcut m&lrrlc research,
did that influence ycu in ycur cwr. work in on}- wey?

 Of ccurso. That * s the purposo of sy trips. They were
study trips. ».h«xi I returned frea China to the Retert Koch Inotituto
and Bade a plan cf ry fUturo work, 1 listed experimental work cn
malaria. Up tc then I had aarely retd in literature about such
experimental work and new I wanted tc do ccoothina similar iii tho
Robert Koch Institute to what had been dene abroad.

Q V.hero do such institutes exist which deal with malaria
experiments on hunan heinrs?

I. Th-. bost kn:wn aro two .-aericcr* cncs I visited in Talla¬
hassee and Now York, end a very fsacos one is an =h lish one in
Horten. Then there is a French cne, and cne in Italy, Instituto
Superlcro di Sanita i-ublica, and another cno in Rumania supp*. rtod ty
tho League cf Nations. Those -re the nest important cn.s, 'ut there
arc ethers.

Q Men hew was ycur malaria »-rk in Gtmany i*. nc?

.. I think tho siuplost tfcinj would 5 o tc ref _r to Dccur-cnts

10, 11 anu 12, vfcich have alru'-dy teen sited tied, in hose Document

6312


23 April-M-DJG-ll—2-Grc 33 (int.* von Schcon)

Ccurt Nc. 1

Beck I. I do not, cf course, intend to raid everything that is acid
about malaria, but perhaps I any pcir.t cut briefly tc the Tribunal
where these things are to bo fcunl. In my werk reports many ether
tropical diseases are mentioned. In Document 10 thcro arc reports
about ay malaria wotfc~undor VII cn pages 5 cf the document, pr ;o 36
of the Document Bock - Experiments and arasitclcgy, malaria remedies,
malaria mosquitos. and this recs cn to pago 39. Then Document Nc. 11,
cn page Z.6, which is page 2 cf the document in tho lecture cf irefesser
Gildemeistcr at the reorganization cf tho Hebert Koch Institute my
malaria work is aenticnod rod, perhaps, I may quote here what he says
abcut the purpose cf this new beginning of malaria work. That is about
seven cr ei-ht lines down - he sp sks about ay cncphclos colony.

-Kith tho aid cf this oclcny it «as possible to ploce mosquito
sting infections for malaria treatment cf paralysis at the disposal
of psychiatric clinics, 00 th-t the necessity cf cultivating malaria
cultures cursolves in patients was avoided. Uoroever, by this mos¬
quito sing, a malaria reliably freo from syphilis cculd to placod at
tho disposal of internal sur.ical and children's clinics for tho
treatment of ncn-oyphilitic diseases."

Then in tho same revert cn pegs U , pago <3 cf the Document
Bock, tho culturo cf ay malaria strains is discussod. I may emphasize
that strain Rose, mentioned in this trial, is never mentioned in
this report. Ihcn dif jicstic examinations nro discussod, ux. eriments
cn artificial infocticn cf rxsquitos, artificial feeding of mosquitos,
then work with conserving rod culture -f malaria parasites, roi
invo3ti -r.ticns abcut enophole, with an elcctro-cdscrosccpo on sporo¬
zoites, then questions of malaria prophylaxis and colarin treatment.
Then malaria in resettlement, end finally, clinical werR on malaria
done by cnc of my essociates. That is all explained in Ictail, end
I should be grateful if that were examined carefully.

Then I go cn to Document 12, page bl of the Document Bock,
prv-o 1 cf this document. First it is said that the shipment cf infected

ar.cohcle3 has tc bo changed from mail shipment tc courier shipment.

6314


23 April—lf-DJG-U-3-Grc33 (Int. vcr. Schoea)

Ccurt Sc. 1


This show a that the shipment of infected anopheles w:s e nonaal thing
in cy department; it had such great oiuit that even such n technical
chanje is mentioned in the annual report. Than on paco 4 cf the
report, pare 64 cf the Document 5cck, the passages are reported cn,
the nunhor of patients infected, the nature cf the experimentrl sub¬
jects is mentioned - porrlytics, schizophrenics, and ether types cf
sick people. Clinics an’, ciher institutes arc mention «J with which
ay department collaborated. Then individual scientific observations
ero discussed. Then cn pa.:o 66 I cay refer to the second paracraph
free the end. It says that the wcric had to bu interrupted because
the eborswaldo sanatcriun was used as cn evacuation hospital. Tho
work was continued by the Luftwaffe fovor therapy section. This
point will ccao up for discussion later.

Then on vt£o 6?> I should like to pcint cut brlofly, whero
there is mention of human experiments of a jharmacologiccl nature
cn 22 persons. I want to soy risht new, »c that I don't havo to bo
asked separately, that thoso experimental subjects w«ro Luftweffc
soldiers. The tosts w«ro carried cut in Luftwaffe hospitals in Berlin
and Austria, by an assistant deev-r of tho Luftwaffe whe was writinf
hio doctor's thesis under no. The naxt pa.-es deal with clinical work
with mosquito b. Then work cn contact poison, that is DDT preparations.
Thin aero or less covers the malaria work in this document. Tbi.'su
three docum^its, ~t least cn tho negative side, shew that th<.ro was
no ccllabcraticn with i'rcfosscr Schilling. These reports mention a
number of 'lectors and agencies with which 1 lied collaborated in tho
field of malaria. Amsderf Institute was ncnticncd, B^rswalio Hes-
pi tel. Doctor Sager is mentioned, Dr. Siazkut is mentioned and Dr.
Hortens. There arc a number of other nerxs which you find there, but
the name of i refesser Sch i lli n g ycu will rvt find, although he wculd
have had to be mentioned juet like the others, if there had b*.en any
collaboration; because at the time when these rc-p rts weru written

and printed nc one had ima-inod bar Crimes trials.

5215


23 April-t-DJG-li-4-Grc se (Int. van Schcon)
Court No. 1


3 '..'ell new, these annuel reports show that you were in con¬
tact with r. large roaster cf insane asylics and clinics in this field
cf ycur werk. Did any individual institution play an ospvci-1 rcle?

" I worked above all with a_Saxcn psychiatrist who had a
special repu*sticn on fever therapy ameng psychiatrists. He is men¬
tioned in tho lii; bock by the discoverer of the practice, V.r;ncr-
Jaurek, end he always held c leading position in this field in
Germany. Then I « exited in an insane asylua near Berlin whore 1 had
an assistant of rsy cwn at the Insane Asylua. The other institutes
and clinics merely obtainod the aalarla fren co, mi rll they did
in return was to send me the case histories when the aalarla treat¬
ment cf tho patients was flnishod. Those wore alsc infocticns
for therapeutic purposos rind I evaluated tho case hiat:ri«s frea
point of view cf study of malaria.


23 April 47-*:-?jc-12-l-X a ?ra» (let.. Von Schoen)

Court I

^ Was your work interrupted by the war?

A This work was considerably interfered with by the war. The
insane asylixcs had to gi7a up rany beds for purposes of general
hospitals. Consequently, patients who wore uaier =y treatment,
ware suddenly transferred. jrorto than that, because of tho air
raids, cany big city hospitals had been evacuated altogether either
because they were destroyed by air raids or beoause sons were
ovaouat ed by way of precaution so that tfca helpless patients
would not be exposed to air raid3.

1 ACd What ;;ero tho consequences of those conditions .'or you?

A This finally lod to a cou: out ration of all ry work on one
institution, tho lnsano asylm at Pfoffonroio, whioh was tho sub¬
ject of tho caso of tho trosocutlon. Thoro is an affidavit on tho

a

subject.

1 '.'o will cce» back tc that lator.

Till you no-.; plooso do3crlbo your rolutiono with Profossor
Schilling?

A First, I should llko to cc:pha3i:o that this Is *rofocsor
Klaus schilling who was condosnod to doath at Dachau and has already
boon oxooutod, not profossor Viktor Schilling ’ho is also a t-.-oplcol
epocialist. The lattjr, Viktor Schilling, Is auntionod in tho roports
on thj mootings of tho consulting physicians, whilo Klaus Schilling
of thj Dachau or.porimnU novor attondod a consul tent sooting during
this war and had no allitory function during this war. as far a3 1
know, ho had no com-ectlon to tho Tohnsaoht at all during tfco war.

In any case, I cortainly novor loarnod anything of it.

I not Profossor schilling in 1922 when I bacaso on assistant ot
tho Robert Koch Institute. I would kavo Hko to work in his dojfartaont
of tropical aodlclno boenusa that lntorostod so, but thoro was no
position opon end nothing c-ra of it; but Schilling was ana of tho
oldor prof os so rs of tho Rotort Koch Institute who had worked with
Robort Koch hinsolf, and -.-o young nen had groat rospoct for hiu for
that reason.


6317


23 April 47-* :-?jg-i2-2-K arrow (Int,, VoaSchoon)

Court I

3 Soil, did you maintain your relations with Profossor Schilling?

X Kon I -;ont to ^ritzorland I oxchangod lottors with hip tron
ti=o to tino, and in lator yoars too, but that was vory rarely. My
aain connection in Borlin in tho fiold Of tropical nodicine wac
Profosaor Zioscan of tho jjnivorsity whoso auccossor at tho Univorsity
I bOCOEQ. .

Q Cion, at tho Cohort Koch Instituto you boccno Prof03sor
Schilling's auccossor. How did that ccere cbout?

A In 1936 Prof03cor Schilling rocohod tho logal ago limit and had
to retire. Ho would llkod to hare his sonior assistant bocomo his
auccossor, but Zior.cn, afcore all, spoko for l* rad tho Ministry docidod
in =y favor. Won there wore negotiations back cad forth for whllo
about tho coalitions, m 2 on tho 1st of Octobor, 1936, I formally
bococo his sue reason, tut throo days lator I wont on loavo. i rent
on a trip through Africa for ono yocr which i hare already rentlonod.
Durine this yoor Profoacor Schilling reprosontod aj. That is, in offoct,
nothing wca changed in tho dojertoont durine that yoor. Only on papor
had corditiona ehangod.

* troll, Tf.ot did Ur. Schilling work on?

A Professor Schilling, all his lifo, worked on protozoan
infoctiona. Abovo all, trypanozoan lnfoctlons, including slooping
sicknoas, and especially protozoa irrxmity. Protozoans, in fcontract
to bactoria and virus, are an leal 3 .

^ What did you know about Schilling's work?

A I probably road nost of his pa arc. in tho courrw of yoars

ho had dovolopod a thacry about protozoa 1 Train! ty which tha majority

of his follcw specialists in cosany and abroad rojoctod. But Schilling,

who was a vory suggostibio personality, had groat suocoss in Convincing

laymon of tha corroctaoas of hie opinions. 1 oxjtirioncoi this nhon I

*a3 in Tanganyika- Ha had, with tho support of tho Sngllsh Colonial

Ministry, attempted to immunizo cattlo against tho Tso-tso dlsoaso.

A 3pocialist, a director of tho votarlfiary administration, did not

fcoliovo in Schilling's success. Tho gorernor in Daressalam was

631c


23 April 47-K_?JC-12-3-tcrrcw (Iat., Yon Schoon)
Court I


dorir.itoly a fdlcwor of schilling. I oxporioncod tho somo thing
on tho cold Const wfcoro tho governor, who knew Schilling quite
woll, was a groat foll^ror of his idoas. But, scaug his collot^uos,
ho had acco who sharod his views but tho cajatity did not considor
thoc right, and I was arx>% this majority. I always rojoctod
Schilling's idoa about protozoa isnjnity.

But ho was ablo to work on in this fiaid although tho
cajority of hi3 colloaguoo rojoctod his idoas7

10*. HARDY! Your Honor, this lino of qusstionlng as to tho
Ratters concerning Schilling's wort flood to so to bo imatorial and
aro axtranoous rat tors. Tho dofondant is chargad *./lth having
collatoratod or asslstai Schilling in hi3 wort tt Dachau, and it
soons to no that tho examination of Roso could bo vor>* linitod and
it could follow tho lino of whothor or not ho werkoi with, collabo-
ratod with, or assisted in any way at tho oxporlnonts in Dachau.

Hie full explanations concerning technical natters of malaria aro
lavatorial ard I objoct.

TilZ rHSSIDZ.T: ‘."hat is tho objoct of this oxar-ination,
counsol? tfhat la it intordod to provo boforo this Tribunal?

DR. 5HITZ: Hr. Proaidout, I oust say In roapoct to tho

prosecutor's objoction to support tho chorgo3 tho prosocution has

suhaittod a f<*» dociconts, for oxtcplo, a docunont in which tho
%

troatsont of tho witnoss Ylowog in Dachas ia doscribod which ia
supposed to shew that Profossor Roeo was connected with tho
lnfoction of tho witnoss with malaria. Tho subjoct io not so
sinplo that odo can go right mod las ro3, but In view of tho diffi¬
culty of tho nattor I mist load up to it gradually.

THS PR33ID2:T: Sa=o of the nrolininory questions night bo
rolovant, but it soons to no you are pursuing than to a length
which i3 not onlightonlng tc tho Tribunal. You ray pro Good, but
try to formulate questions which aro relevant to tho iscuoc to bo


deteminod


6319


»APril 47-B-FJO-lZ-frtaa. | Iat ., /7oa schoon)


3Y Da. IHITZ:

% Som did Schilling carry out his r*2arla woric?

A I had already said that ho worked on questions of protozoa

isnunity. ifelaria is a protozoa disease. j a his last years at tho

Robert Koch Infltitoio, schilling did woric on protoctivo vaccinations

cfioinst solaria, together with his subordinates, schilling belonged

to tho Kalarla cosrdoaion of the Hygiene Section of tho League of

rations. He worfeod primarily on tho lnrano ir. tho custody sphoro

of therapoutio zolaria, but ho must have had volunteer experimental

subjects too because uhun schilling loft Berlin I had to continue

troa treat of o BBbar of oxporinoztal subjects of scMlH^s. They

woro gonorally medical students and intornoa.

q Thoro did Profoscor Schlllinc go oftor ho loft Berlin?

A As for as I recall, that w a s in 1938. Ho had convirood

hie Italian frionds of tho importance of protoctivo vaccination

aeilnst .xalaria, and tho Italian Covor:cont gave him tho opportunity

to work in on lnsar.o asylua in Florenco. Ho o alre glvon a financial

subsidy by tho Roich .'iinistry of tho Intorior.

Q r/hat do you yoursolf know about this werk?

A Schilling, at intorvals, cent reports from Italy to tho

Roich Miniotry of tho Intorior. Those work reports ware rascal on to

the Robort Koch Institute. I hod to write a cemont on than each

tine, ^at was always or. unploasant task tecauso I personally

considored Schilling.s ideas wrong. Unfortunately, I could not

oxplain why I hold this opinion, m all his reports, Schilling w a s

onthusiostic about tho results he had had up to that tire and in tho

r.ozt report car.o tho disappointed,:.ts, but '.o was Just as onthuasiastio

again about tho rew idoas which he hoi worked out, ovon if those

corcornod wore not much conviacod about its proc,octs, but according

to tho gazon»l principlo of froodas of rosoarck on! froerf® of sclonco

no one intorforod. Ko was allowed to coztinuo his work bocauso,

in tho sciontific rosoorch, progress consists of an individual proving

6320


23 iprll 47-4f-?jO-12-5-Korrr_' (Int., Ton Schoon)

Court I

whet ovoryono olso boo thought, up to that tiro, is wrong, ani tho
majority has toon wrong so of ton in tho history of scionco that ono
has bo coca vor7 tolar ant in that.

C3 PREIDBIP* Counsol, tho Tribunal now will bo in rocoss
until 1:30 o«clock.

(A .rocoss was token until 1330 hours*)


6321


Jr art 1 * 1*7

v rll 23-ifc-13-l-HD-Fo8ter-Hecisilcr.


«F7ZRNC0N SESSION

(The Tribunal reconvened at 1330 hours, 23 April 1947)

-HI .URSKaL: The Tribunal Is a^rIn In session.

~ GERHaRD ROSI-Resuaed
DIRECT EXAMINATION{Continued)

7rZ P-.25XD2!?: «s I informed counsel for the Defendant
Rose during the neon recess, the defendant will hrve this
afternoon within which to complete his testimony In his
.efenae In or.lof.. If the Defendant nose's testimony Is
not finished by the else of rdjournaent this afternoon,
thu defendant any be allowed to file -ffll vits to aupplo-
■or.t th t, but his testlnony In chief must be closed with
tlio sooslon this afternoon.

Counsel any proceed.

B- DR. FRITZ (Counsel for the Defendant nose):

%. Frofossor, after knowing everything about Dr.
Schillings work wore you convinced that his work was
carried out without cny objootlon b.lr.f raised, and upon
vhot was your conviction based?

n. I won quite convinced of that, and I had tho boat
opportunity of getting acquainted with his p ot. He had
boon working at the Robert M>ch Institute for 29 years.

His work methods there wore well—*.nown ynd were always
without any fault. Before that he hud teen Colonial
r.yalclan and from thr t period of tlso his work was always

unobjectionable. I, ayself, road the reoort about his

work with the Italian b overnzunt. This work Wf e carried

*r^N^nobJocti ;nable arnner, rg far as that beln e

.•o^oafent^f^<£^\the report. It was a matter of course that

the malaria g&Vcrlments, be experiments on human beings,

*

Without rcsortxi t to the cxperla. nt on hun-r. beings.

/ / 5322


3 curt 1

. i*ll ^3 -a-13-2-HD-?os ter-3aaler.

Ih^ro 1 b no ctn^r scientific method. In history you find
tn- t malaria ex c-rlcente were either carried out on
Insane p pple or on volunteers. The first period lasts
1220 to IS 21 when you hod the volunteers , and tlien
one found the malaria treatment of insane people and there
7° u f^ond a community of work between cararlolo e lets and
psychiatrists.

«v. How did It cone about that the work of Dr.
uohllllng wns Interrupted In Italy nd you went to
Dachau?

«. I con only toll you how I officially got to
-how about those letters. .'.y knowlv.d t e does not oover
Itself with the description cs It Is given In document
look number 4. -.‘hen . ; lvln._. my description I shall clearly
distinguish fria what I know from ny own personal know-
lfli.“ or.d what I know from hearsay. There was a rumor In
3 rlln 1 r, the year 1941 that Schilling hod difficulties
with the Italian government. In the fall or the winter of
1911 the physician with whoa I had workeu durlr,., the
rooattlo«..ent period a . .roaohud me cr. the following matter.
He sold that he was In Rone on an official trip accomp¬
anying rrofesaor Conti, rie said that the G rman ambassador
Introduced Schilling to Jr. Conti and schilling tr.en
tola Gontl about his wcr<c In the Italian Insane asylum.

He described his results cs very -cod end full of hope.
Conti was very enthusiastic ana then oecaue very excited ,
0V'_r the situation where such c well-known German scientist
could not find any pi ce in Germany. Conti then made
mr misea to Schilling. Ay confidential : t en t was a little
.ce tical and asked me w.not I thought bout Schillings
w rk. I voiced my misgivings about hie work, misgivings


Court 1

rii 25 -a- 1 3-3-K3-Foe t er-Haaler.

v.'ior. I co-Id not testify to here, end of which a number
of other tropical hygienists agreed with me.

Did you receive any official report about this

meeting?

No, Officially I heard nothing about these events.
I only found out thot the .'dnietry of the Interior had
sent o report to the nobert Koch Institute containing
a request by Jr. schilling tnnt he be furnished a new
laboratory and that he be e lv«n assistance,
e. «ni what happened to this request?

*. hrofeseur Glldeneistor telephoned ae, and In
a lte of y military work he a eked no to write an opinion.

Ho said tr.ot this was a very awkward situation, and that
Conti hod made promises, and was rather worried over the
fact th't his assistants wore not ns enthusiastic as he
was. He said he had no i-ea that Knowledge was ovallablo
in the Mlnlotry about Schilling's work for years. I than
wrote and asked tnnt this opinion be made available here
from the documents of the r-eich Ministry of the Interior.


Court 1

n rll 2&-A-14—l-HD-2fa loy-Hammier.

rtt that tine I studied this work very thoroughly. I read
through ell the malaria files of Schilling. I read through
his entire work regarding protosono Immunity, and subsequent¬
ly wrote this opinion I mentioned, which I 6«nt to the
/.inlstry of the Interior and vnlch contained five principal
*:ointo. Firstly, thrt from what huaan beings call a
jrct ctlve vaccination rgainst aalerla is impossible.
Secondly, in case this should be possible by ap jlyln^
Schillings netnod against oil expectations this would only
hrvo a theoretic 1 Donnln^, because practically this
method could not be carried out to any large extent. This
vr.o further explained in the third point to which I cannot
refer r.ow owing to lrck of tine. Thon I wrote that Schill¬
ing had worked on this problem for over 40 ye: ro, and
recording to general experience it was highly laprobablo
that a resd^roher who hod not found a solution within
•10 years would find it after having concluded his 70th
year. Finally, from the point of viow of "nr, I emphas¬
ized thrt even if Schilling's su t gostlon could have some
theoretical interest cno would use that there was a *tar
on and that material and personnol was scarce. Therefore
it could not be justi. led that arterial end personnol be
area available to nln. I think on very rare occasions is
anyone justified an objection to the oxtent I did at that
time, and at tho end of the opinion I wrote, and you must
see that when you fine* it, that was 30 years younger than
Schilling, an- it was c v_-ry unpleasant duty for me to *
write my unf vorable o-inlor. about the work of such a
well known tromlccl physician. I therefore nskeu that no
such opinion be asked from mo in the future, according
tc frau 31ock's testimony this opinion was then sent into
the >11 ni3try of the Interior.

6325


Court 1

n rll 23-~l£—3—KD-.4aloy-Hammier.

n. Did you Inter concern yourself with this setter?

«• I hrve beard now that there was a conference
about that subject In the ministry of the Interior, how¬
ever I did not .participate In that conference.

i. In this stage of the anttar was the thought
pronounced that Professor Schilling was going to execute
the exaclnf-.tions that were planned by his In a concentra¬
tion camp?

«. rtccordlr.j, to sy knowledge t.nere was no mention
of that node either orally or In writln =J nnd I learned
nothing further about the develop ont of this matter.

I therefore cnnr.ot any whether Schillings's description
con bo found in Document 356, Exhibit 125, which is to
be found in Document Boole ■«, page 6. I don't know
whether this description la correct. I only know about
t.ils short excerpt in ay opinion, which I already
mentioned. Coon whose request Schilling got Into contact
with Kinnler I do not know.

'.'hen did you ?1 n th»t Professor Schilling was
working lr. Dacx-.ru?

a. I onnr.ot sr.y that with any mount of certainty.
Probably when nembors of my department told mo that
Schlllln : had asked for cnochyles, nd that thle question
end teen e ranted, on tnls occasion I he ra for the first
time that In -spite of my opinion he bad received some
possibility to work, and he also carried out that work
at flechau.

i*ld you chon consider under what conditions
rnd on what circles of persons Schilling was carrying
out his experiments; It must have been clear to you that
he could only experiment on h arn beings; you su6t have

known that in your cancelty as n malarllo^lst?

6326


C-urt 1

... ril 23-«-14-3—iD-:*nloy-:iamaler.


«. That naturally was a natter of course. In the
co.so cf nclorla there Is no other experiment out the
cx.erlaont or. human beings, but slnco I was not to pnrtlcl-
30te I didn't think much rbout how he was proocedln b In
detail. I know that Schlllln e had worked for 40 years
In n unobjectionable way, and I hod no reason to nssumo
that he woul- change in or.y way. I therefore had to
assume that he wra either carrying y>ut caloric Injections
for therapeutical ro sons or that ho received the approval
of the experimental subjects, no it was the ccse bofore.

I thought also this was a mat or of course that he would
receive such neprval because of the mnleria experiments
th t were cnrrlod out throuthout the world up to the years
of 1S20 and 1921, which were carried out without nny
research or h vln^ any difficulty ln_gettln._ the experimental
subjects. In nd .ltlon the .document whloh wos submitted
by Dr. 3_rvntlus proved that hundreds of volunteers were
found in American prisons. Why should It bo nny dlfferont
In Geiiiany? This woe r. matter of courso, and I didn't
think noout this matter ns long ns It takes no to discuss
It hore. One after all nuat h-ve eomo reason In order to
Btrrt getting euo lclous. Whether cr not one can bo of
a different opinion as to thj voluntary n ture of such
Inmates is a dlfferont ohepter entirely; but that does not
only ref or to the voluntary spoct of Sc mint's experimen¬
tal subjects, tut It refers to the voluntary aspect, of
subjects In m^dic^l experiments generally. Now, If you
strrt crltlclzin.; that work lr. detail there Is v&ry much
you can say about It. «t any rate I had no knowled-e
under wha too ndit Ions or under whet prerequisites Schllllne.
was working at Dachau, and It constitutes a great

surprise to ue to learn from the documents In this trial

6327

♦


Court 1

« ril 23-a-I-j— i-fiD-teloy-Hacmler.


that Schilling alle c edly carried out experiments on
thousands of people, particularly since it was character¬
istic for r.ls previous work that he va6 only working with
fl®c. 11 numbers of people. So much so that the accusation
was reisvd against him by his opponents that his conclu¬
sions wore billt on an Insufficient basis.

Q. In that connection Schilling did not discuss hie
experimental -lane with you?

■a. No, tnoro was never any conversation about that.
He never corresponded with ae about it. In the ye r of
153? whon i took over his department we once nod n
discussion ’'-s to how 1 w-a to continue nit work. On that
occasion with due respect to his n c e and prestl Q e I told
hla that I woe of a different opinion In questions of
Potozono Immunity, end thnt I wouldn't continue the work
In the seme direction as r.e. Schlllln c know exactly that
I w"a nls scientific opponent In questions of malorla
immunity.

i. But occordinb to the tostl ony of the witness

Vlehwag he allegedly turned to you for advise wnon he hod
difficulty In breeding the mosquitos. In that case ho
actually turned to his opponent for advise?

a. “ell, I was not his oerson*1 enemy. I was only
o Dosing him basically In this or.e scientific question.

If one is of a different opinion in scientific questions

•

ne endeavors to ue particularly polite towards one
another, so that nls opposition In this one sphere would
not assume a personal character. I at no time had any
personal differences with Schilling. On this question of
mosquitoes and e-g6 and wltr. reference to advise other
view points play a part which h ve nothing at nil to do


Court 1

«-rll 23-«-l i-5-HD-krloy-Ramsa.er.


oy person. ecnillln- did not actually turn to mo, but
turned to ay osslatant. That of course does not chan -,0
my responsibility in the least, because x an naturally
responsible for everything my assistant did with or
without my knowledge. * always emphasized towards Gildeco-
lster that I wanted to remain the toaster at the Tropical
De-artmont during the war, and naturally I an fully
responsible for wh. tever has happened there. We are
concerned with the following things: Schilling had worked
with the Robert Koch Institute for 29 years. An assistant
was working at ny department who had boon his personal
assistant for 20 years, and whom I had taken over. It
was naturally very natural that he tumeu to her wr.enever
ho needed sono little technical help, that is the main
roaaon why ho turned to oy uepartsent. He Juot as well
could have turned to any other Institution in Germany,
because thero wore several other institutions from
whore ho oould got nolerla strains and oosqultoos.

DR. FRITZ: tfr. President, I havo an affidavit from
this assistant which Professor Rose mentioned, and it
can bo found in Rose Doouoont Book 3 on page 16 to 20.

I reheat this is Rose Document 35, which I offer ae Rose
Exhibit No. 32. I should like to start rending it from
• ra : rp-h 2, pfl 5 o 1. Wo arc concerned with the assistant,
Erna vor. Fnlkenhayn. I quote:


6329


23 ,.pri 1-w-DJG-i5-1-lf-ehan (Lit* Easier)

Ccurt No. 1

"At present I as an assistant at the Retort Koch Institute at
Pfaffcredo, near J&efclhausen (Thuringia).

"I was, as an assistant at the Robert Kcch Institute, a co-
werkor cf rrofessor Klaus Schilling fer nearly two dacedcs, l. e.
until he loft the institute cn reaching the rvtireacat age in 1937.

"I therefore knew that Professor Schilling worked fer decades
on the problem of protozoa Inainity. Ho especially rcrkoi cn the
irmunizaticn of the bovine tse-tse disease, end, when these efforts
did not trlnr forth a final aatisfnctciy rosult, he turned to the
ia.amity problems cf nclari* and c.ntinuod to work cn this subject
after being portioned off. The work was that node possible by the
aid cf the Italian xvmrccnt and later on, cf tho SS, and was per¬
formed outside tho Robert Koch Institute.

"I knew that rrofessor Rose, the bocaae Professor Schilling's
successor at the Robort Kcch Institute, had a very negative end
critical attitudo toward Professor Schillin gs inaunity experiments.
This opinion cf Professor Faso's was shcrod, tneng others, by tho old
and experienced scientist fer tropioel nodicino F. K. Klcino, a
former president cf the Robert Koch institute, who did not conceal
this attituio from irofoescr Scldlling.

"When Professor Schilling loft, I was taken over C3 cn assist¬
ant by Professor Rose and renained there as cno cf his assistants
until the dissolution cf tho tropical dcpnrtr ont at the end of 1943.
Therefore, I sloe knew of the work cf tho department under Prcfcsocr
Rose in tho years frea 1937 until it was dissolved and converted into
tho Department fer Fever Thurapy cf the Luftwaffe in the year cf 1943.
I continued ny work as ono cf Ircfoasor Rose's assistants* rise in tho
Department fer Fe-ver Therapy, until tho end of the wax.

"The Department fer Tropical <4e.licir.c never worked with typhus

virus, r.;r lid the Dcpcrtmvnt fer Fever Therapy. Professor Hose tcck

n_ irt.rcst ir. the typhus research of the Robert Koch Institute, >s

r ref css: r Gild—idstcr personally was ir. char-c cf the deportment,

6330


23 riI-.>DJG-15-2-Ucehar. (L-.t. Raaier)
-curl 2o. I


which at that tine was exclusively authorised tc carry cn typhus re-

■

search. Trcfcsscr Gildexeister kept the depertaont in absolute
sedusicn twin;- for cou thine tc the odetinc dancer cf infection.

For two nor- reasons I cor convinced that rrefesser Hcse had no knew-
lixJ e cf the work cf the typhus departa^nt: firstly, because the
relations between l refesser Gildcaoistcr end Irofosscr Rose were
rather strained ones, end secondly b.-cause thu cider scientists acre
that others wore always anxious not tc .coke their experinents public
knowlul.-o prematurely, end alr.ays instructed their assistants to this
effect.

"In 1943, iTcfossor uoso tccauo vice-president of tho Robert
Koch Institute. He, however, never wxocutod this offico, as he only
occasionally and at quito irroeular intervals, visited his own de¬
partment, the Department for Tropical -uxiicir.o, end that only in order
not tc bo oili;oi tc entirely rivo up the department and tc discon¬
tinue thv. research work. His military activity hod assumed too lar f *.o
o scope. I'rcfcssor Gildceuistur, wnc had no previous knowledge cf
irefess-r Rose's appointment as vico-prosidont, would certainly net
havo appreciated a close ccoporati;n with him either crin^ tc tho
aforcioonticnod strained relations between the two -cntlenun. Mian
.refuser Gillcnoistcr occasionally was absent, ho was deputized by
Professor Bcockor.

"In syrinj of 19/.2 irefesser Schilling asked xe for mosquito
•66* • He chose tc turn to me c«in£ tc cur len- tiao cooperation and
because he probably knew that i'rofessor iwsu was with the ’..chrmacht.

I sent him anopheles ej»s at that time, askud hia, hoover, to direct

• i

further requests tc iliss Lrn. c, whe was in charge cf the miaquito
cultures. I cniy knew that iiiss kn e, upon > ritten requests by i re¬
iser Schilling, sunt further acsquitces or aosquito o. t *s tc him.

I do net knew, however, either the dales cr the number cf the ccn-
si aments, tut I fcoliwve that they wen- all in 1942. i refesser
Schiilin,- did net rcccdvu further aaterial cf any kind fix.-, the

6331


23 ,.prll-..-DJ&-15-3 -ifc«han (Int. Hwlcr)

Ccurt Sc. 1

Department fcr Fever Therapy.

"I cniy knew that rrefesser Schi l ling, after receiving ay con¬
signment, wrete that tho oesquitccs were retting tlons «<*U. Th°
later correspondence went vie Hiss Lenga, and cn occasion of anch
new requests ircfosscr Sc h i l ling acy have askud fcr edviae regarding
the breedinr of mosquitoes.

"l.o supplied nosquitccs and a:acuitc c-gs also tc ether users
fcr broodin'. and teaching purposes. I recall fcr instance such a
deliVvry tc the .Ciiitary Nodical ,.ccd«ry in Schamhcratstrasso.

Further details arc net known tc a* as liiss Lan e was ccmpetent fcr
these setters. l*y savin task wr.s tc ccnduct current investigations
espociclly with regard tc the research cn coccir. 'nd cart cf Tro-
fossor hose's trem-teda research.

rofesser hose had nothin,; to do with individual ccnsi nn«r.ts
since malaria ind the supply cf ncsquitccs belonged to tho routine work
of the department. ..lsc, h>. was present toe soldcn, “nd often ho
could not uVen tc reached y telephone. Such deliveries were undo
on thu basis of hi -rcl order and under his official responsibility.
I informed him of thu delivery of acsquitcos t- .refesser Schilling
and I rise shewed him .rofosecr Schilling's letter. Ho consented.

"Tho malaria research cf irufosscr hose, starting frera tho timo
when ho Jcincd the hclort Kech Institute as a prefo3scr, was conducted
exclusively in cooperation with institutions fcr thu incanu and ether
hospitals to part of tho c.-c llcd therapeutic malaria work, tho
curative f-v r treatment. The potimts whe wore tc <- infoctud wore
selected y ether physicians. On* dopartffioftt supplied the infected
mosquitoes, eften performed the inf uc tier. else -:d wvduotod thc^ sul-
soquent malaria cases free the standpoint of aaloriolc y, while the
treatment cf th- patient remained in thu hands of the attending
physician.

"In addition, the assistant physicians conducted malaria experi-

m-jr.ts cn thcoshlves. Finally, in the <xurse -f y<-ars, all -r_;leytos

cf tho ejej artmunt, whe wero ir. contact with tho aalari- research w rk,

6332


23 «cril-t.-DJG*-l 5^-4-iIcehar. (Int. Esaler)
Ccurt Sc. 1


contracted the disease through unintmticnal laboratory infections.
These things can hardly be avoided in the course of such research werk.

"I knew that I ref ess cr hese cncc intentionally infected him¬
self with tiltcrciclle and subsequently suffered fro® a strong
ocslnuphilc reaction.

"i foff erode, 22 February 1947." (Si : ;ned) Enta ven Falkonheyn.

Then fellows the si nrture anl the certification.

Free this affidavit it beccaes apparent that you furnished
ursquitccs and aesquitoos o. js tc ether agencies; is there anything
else y-u have tc say in this c-incctic:-.?

A Well, bofere answerin. ycur question, I should like tc .make
scae r-.narks about this Docuouat Ko. 35. On 19 it says in the
third porc-raph that 1 rs infern-xt that Ixxfcsscr Schillir.- received
these nosquitces end that the iottor wr.s shown to ce, where ho says
that tho ncsquitccs waro got tine °-b alri.ht and that I then consented.
Idas Block, in her tostinc.iy hero, said sxauthin which sums to bo
in contradiction idth that stctcr.ix.t. She said that I was worried
about that and that 1 foreado further material being #vcn to Schilling
this is an ext -rr.ol contradiction, but it con easily be cloarod up.

Upon seeing Schillir.-.'o 1 otter and up*n hearing that ho had these
oosquitceo, I coull net very noil sent a letter tc hie -sking hia tc
send those ncsquitccs tack tc no. Sending these ccsquitces back and
forth, I on sure that not oeay would have r-sained alive nnd really
there was nc reason hero tc otart r. ’i r rcw. Insofar as that went, I
r.’reed with tho natter. The description as Ivan by Frau Block is
quite right teccuse at that tine we only had scarce personnel end the
calcrie requirur.onts ly diodes were i -.crcasinjly P 1 rcssively.
Furthermore =y department did curr_nt otperiaentol v.’crk on malaria and
we had Just started tc serk with EOT end an crorac-us nuQbor cf a-.cquit-
e as wore used in that connection. I was really very cnncyc-d that mos¬
quitoes were furnished for - purpose which I ccndidcrod to be useless.
That in it.self should ho a clarification of this ccntradicticn, none of

6333


23 ,.pril-.-DJG-1 5-5-^chcr. (Int. Haalcr)
Court He. 1


those ladies are telling cn untruth as both 1-di^.s arc actually
correct.

Q When ycu wore Just spoakir..' about the useless pur;,es«;, this
nu-ant. that the question Tihich Ircfesssr Schillin' tried to solve cculd
net be solved accordin' to ycur opinion?

That was cy eld opposition, naaely that I did not believe in
the possibility cf a protective vaccination against aclaria end what
I had r-ad in Schilling's request that ho wanted to continue this work
about protective vacci-iatioas in his new laboratory.

Well, let us new turn tc the question es tc whether I famish
any ncsquitces elsewhere; it was really the nerval task cf ray depart-
raent. You find it currently in tha yearly reports end a certain fund
had been mado reedy in order tc institute an c ency to which every
physician cculd turn who neodud cdoria acsquitocs. dl he had to do
was to write there and thon bo fumiehod with aolr-ria. This is why
wo hod Uiss ven Falkonhoyr.. V.o only paid her in erder to send
malaria tc clinics and varloia ether physicians. Naturally, ray do-
pcrtr.or.t was net the cdy source tCr solaria and mosquitoes. Tho
witness ViJivec said here expressly that irofessor Schilling had re¬
ceived ncsquitces frera a rtuaber cf other sources. That obviously was
tho consequence cf cy ponorrl directive, nearly that if Schiliinr if
ho wreto enco mere, nothin; »r« should be fumish.d tc Schilling
because w« needed these things ourselves. The result is quite dear,
he wrote to scaeonv else, end received his cr.tcrial.


23 April 15t7 CUk (R'ctaler)

Court Md. 1

Q. Did you s-rcl any malaria strains to Pr. f<_ss:r Schilling?

A. I don't kn» that person-Uy, but among the strains ..hich
w^re mentioned by Victor one originated frca my dep-rtacnt. Frca
my own kn.wlc ';.e I would answer this question in the negative, but
in the, Quantise you hrve ruccivod a report fr-a Miss v.n Palkenhnyr.
which is rut ccntninod in the affidavit to the effoct that at ono
tiao a malaria strain was furnished to Schilling, honco I knot
that since -iiss vac Pclkenhayn is s credible person I hevo to
answer th t question with "yes," but not of my 3,0 knowledge. I
think, however, this source is credible.

Q. How is it th-.t you d' not kn.w i ardari' strain was sent
away frx: yiur department?

A. 'ell, it is quite naturl. It c:n be teen fr a tho earlier
reports uf tho departments that currently crieri* strains and
mosquitoes wore fumishe- to • 11 sorts of pi'cos. This was an
every dry -ffair. N-turally ir. pence time I w uld n-vu learned -bout
that. Then I lookod <*t all of the letters and all of the requests
or I signed the consignment pap,r, r s:oothin.~ of that nature.

In war time that bec-ao impossible. Then thooo items wore h n'led
according tv tho gorwrr .1 'ir.ctive, after I gave them, and since I
never explicitly forbade anlarl-a str-ins to bo sent t.- Pr.fossor
Schilling, his applicative* was naturally fulfilled, because why,
after all, should Schilling be treated worse than any other physician
in Germany. ilobedy else had any misgivings in sending malaria
strains to Schilling, because th-- witness Viehwug testified here
ho was working with twelve different strains. Or*, of these strains
was bred by him person lly, rv ns, according to V.-n F: lkwnhayn'jj
testimony, originated from ay :cp rto-nt, and tho other ton he
recoived from different sources. « number of those sources wore
enumerate I by Viuhweg in his testimony.

Q. The witness Viebieg was sponking about a Rose culture with
widen ho himself was infected. Is that the culture which originated,
in y .ur .‘.vp -rtccnt?


23 April 19A7 -..-16-2-PKP- Cook (Rrsxilcr)

C urt K- i 1

«. No, certainly not. »t no tine did I allow qy ir-nc to bo siven
to any culture. I don't oven kzvjw * culture Rose in salvia
literature. Froa where it coa>s an- who gave it thr.t nans I -on't
know. It la iffprobeblo that Schilling w^uld have calle-f a culture
which he received free ny dcprrtaent, according to iiiss Von Falkonbayn'3
statement, it is improbable becaus- =Ai'rlolc_ists !o not do this.

Hy dapar taunt naturally fumishod this strain in the proper nannor
by givine the n-oabor of the passage -nd the number A the sr^up,
aa it nr.a usually done, ad is a rule the none is not altered
because otherwise tburo would be a terrific nix-up in literature if
you find this strain -ppuarir^ un cr different r.nnes. Naturally,
whenever such aftlaria atr'.ina were sent to clinics, one could
never know whet was soinc to hap.»n to it, because y:u find no
nalr.riole(,ist today who a biles by rules, liy imoloyues h^vo
r.scurtainul in insano csyluns in Berlin reportedly thr.t they
oncountored sr.lftria str-ins with unknown none a. Th'-t interestc us
very nuch and wo lookod. 't th, source m- found th-t it was a
woll-known strain, which th~ psychiatrist Just left un-naned, but
it really d.^sn't sake any difference whether the strain Rose
casw frea qy dupa rtaor.t .r ny ether. ..t any r te ho received
one strain froa ay doprrtaent and th.t suffices.

Q. Thu witnoss Vi-hwe • status that Pr.fussjr Schilling was re¬
ceiving aalnrin strains in bliod fore, -s well as in a.aquito forn.

Did you over furnish it in blood f ;rs?

ky lAbotatory n-ver furnished it La blood f re. V.u only sent out
infected laisquitoos. In the case f tranaoittrl f blood there is
always the darner thr.t the disease is stsult'no-usly transmitted, and.
since aost people who get oslaria tro.-tc-.nt also suffer from
synhilis, onu hr.3 to c-unt with th t possibility. In the case -f
tranamitt-1 of the aosquitoos, any such sicultane ms transmittal -f
syphilis is impossible, -nd I cuaranUed wh-n sending ay n^quitoes
thr.t I was only transmitting aal-ric and that th, infection would.

start "rv ‘ that the strains which I was Sendinr -ut were actually

6336


23 April 1947 -A-l^-3-PKF- Cook (R-rcltr)

Ccurt *o. 1

harmless. That is why such hospitals turned t„ ay dcpnrtac-nt, who
didn't want to treat people auffarin' from syphdlis with malaria,
who wanted to treat oth^r patients, and tho lehrascht hod ordered
in their service regulations ttet aalnria was to be gotten from no

when carrying out their post dipthcria w^rk.

I*. FRITZ: Hr. President, what tho defendant Rose just said can
be soen fraa Rosu document 38, which will find on Rose document
book No. 3. I already offered it as Rose Sxhibit No. 10 and on pages
51 are: 52 of the docinxnt book, you will find a directive for tho
treatment of post dipthcria par-lysis with induced malaria. On tho
preceding pages you will find the scientific foundation for those,
directives -nd -t tho one! on page 52 one n.ali 2 ca tho correctness
of Professor Rosj's statement ttr.t the furnishing of infected
Dosquitooo was a routine sitter in this dop-rtaunt >f tho Robort
K eh Institute. It says their, and I quote tho last paragraph:

"The dop-rtaont txr tropical diseases of th- Robert Koch
Institute is willing, in accordance with previous arrangement, to
pl-.c- t tho disposal of l.ohraacht hospit-ls, free of chargo, inf«ctod
mosquitoes froa thvir anOpholas col r\y. H would bo bost to employ a
curler for thoir trnnsportati.n."

Do you think it is possible, Professor, that tho strain Rose
mentioned. by Professor Viv-hwcg was given a different name in tho
hospitrls aumuwhoro olso?

That is naturr lly possible. On*, can ~xp«ct anything from r.
clinic.-1 study, they could do anything with s malaria strain.

Q. Did you gain any kn;wled_e about Professor Schillin's work
and results?

n. Since Schilling conclude' his w.rk in Italy I no 1-nger saw
a report by him and I nev.r hoard any one else who received any
reports. Thu first I hoar ' of it was Viehwo^'s t-stin.ny to tho
effect that Schilling sent a report to the Reichs'rzt SS Grawitz,
and I had no connection with Ur. Grawitz. *..o further heard thr.t such
rea-rts also were sent to Hianlcr.

6337


23 April 1947 -~-l6-4-PEP- (BwaaLaO

Court He. 1

Q. I think you already oentioned, Professor, ttat you wero
carrying on corespondent*. with Professor Schilling, or that you were
n.t it r.U carrying out toy correspondence with Professor Schilling
about his w ,rk. I did not understand you correctly.

*. No, I tad no correspondence with hia at -11 and this was
quite un.erstandablo because then, was no reason to do that. There
was n. reason for hia to discuss his oxporinor.tal plans with bo
since even if I did not work or. malaria protective vaccination I
was one of tho most important otpcriacntr.l solaria resoarchists
azvd un or such circuaatanooa -nc dees n.t carry >n any correspond¬
ence in this natter. No other solaria r-scarehista abroad or in
Gornr-ny t_ld .to wta.t pi-ns tboy hr. nor did I writo to then wtat my
current work was. ifhy of til people whoui. I do that with Profossor
Schilling?

Q. i.oron't you interested in the result A hia work?

A. “aturally I found mt -bout the r-sult A his w.rk after it tad
been concluded, becauso every scientist writes a paper on his work
which Is then printed -r lectured durin, a oaotlng an! in this
manner ne finds out about tta result A tta work.This is tho normal
way rs it applies to every scientific activity ,enemlly. This work
of Schillin; in Dacicu was r.ever published up to this a-awnt and
nothing can be sconebcut it in the files of th- Tribunal. ..lthoufj)

I om very intoroatod in Schilling's work, I ’on't know -nything about
it up tj this present time ,


..-ril 23-*»-BX-17 - 1-Sro S3 (Von Schoan)

Court He. 1

q Didn't you hear anything fra- any third ^ertius
about Schilling's activity end tho activity of his
collaborators at Dachau?

.» Only on ono oc'ocsion did X read an orticlo in tho
Journal of Tropical Modicino in the year 1944. This was
a nalaria papor writton by an author whoso ncco I do not
know and with who3o ooncopts I did not agroo. »<hilo it
is usually stated in tho ca3c of any such paper fra- whnt
clinic or instituto it originates or who tho Chief is who
•;uarentoos tho nuthontioity of tho cattor stotod, no such
indication was cado in this paper. 3inco I was rather
ir.torostod in thi3 rather poouliar conception statod in
thi 3 artiolo, I v-roto to thooditor of thu .n;)er. I was
on tho Coccittoo of that poriodioal and I asked for in¬
formation. I rocoivod ca answer that this can was a
collaborator of Claus Schilling end was Dr. Plcotnur who,
as I oan see frof. tho documents now, was Schilling's
first collaborator. U. to thot tine I had not known
Professor Plootner's nano at c 11. I hod not heard about
hit: because I had no oonnootions to Uachou and for that
reason knew noith«-r the nrtio of his first collaborator
nor tho nuno of any of his other collaborators.

q ..ftor you found out free whore thi3 work
oricinatod didn't you start corros. on donee with Professor
Schilling or Professor Plcetn.r?

.. .*hun I sow fra. tho re. ly the t this wa3 a
collaborator of Schilling I booar.o quito clear about tho
contents of tho work, ./ell, those were Just tho old opposi¬
tion, the old two schools of thought, and there wa3 no
purpose in corros.ondin* about it. It was dear free, the
outset that wc would never agr<* on tnnt subject.

1 Didn't you recognize fro., tho contents of this

6339


—pril 23-—-3K-l7-2-Gross (Int* Von Schoon)

Court No. 1

paper that it oano free ti:o S oh ill ins Institute?

.. Since I didn't know on what Schilling end his
collaborators were working with the exception of this
general idoa about ;rotootivc vaccinations I couldn't guess
it was Schilling free reading the . aper. This did not only
doal with 4 rotcotivo vaocination but was a aoro general
subject.

•» Mr. President, I hove succeodod in having Profossor
Roao's correspondence with the oditor of this negazino, I
have obtained it. I offer it as Document 30 - pages 3 and
•1 in Docunent Book III - I offer this as HoseExhibit No. 34.
I have Just handed tho original to tho Secretary General.
Thi3 shows that it is thooriginal letter free Profossor
Roao to Profossor D-. Roiohnow. *wid frou tho filos of tho
Institute tho carbon oopy of the answer thero. I al3o offer
tho procoding dec unant in tho Doounont Book, No. 29 as Roso
Exhibit No. 33. I bog your pardon, Mr. President, I r.ust
ohaago these two exhibit nunbors. Tho original letter
Roso Doounont No. 30 will be Exhibit No. 33, R 030 ^oouiunt
29 will bo 34. i'ho la3t aontioned doounont is the affidavit
of tho head of tho Institute for Ships and Tropionl
Diseases, detod 5 February 19*7, Professor Dr. Hauok. In
tho interest of savin tine I shall not road thi3 affidavit.
It shows that “03u "oounent No. 30 ocx.es fra. the filos of
this Institute and Profossor Dr. Nauck nade it available)
to no.

Professor wero you ^vor in Dachau yourself?

.. For tho first tine in ny lifo in May 1946 as on
-iiorican prisoner.

i ‘4 You have already said that you yoursolf worked La

tho field of oxporin_ntal nalnria rose arch. That is, no

doubt, quite generally known. Pl.aso tell tho Tribunal what

631-0


-pril 23-^-31C-17-3-Gross (Int* Von Scboon)
Court No. 1


you dealt with in this work and how this work was carried
out.

.. I should like to refer to Doounonts 10, 11, and 12.
This corning I already explained hero tho joints thoro
which deal with ny neloria work. ~l3o I 3hould like to
refer to Docunont No. 25 which also contions a considerable
portion of cy cnlr.ria work. I don't care to go into that
any further hare. «s far as wo working experimentally on
oxporiocntal subJeot3 ’.#0 worked exclusively with insono
and other sick persons whoro neloria infection was nocossary
for thorapoutic purposes. This can bo soon from tho annual
reports of tho Robert Koch Institute. Indication for
nalaria troatnont was givon by sono doctor in aono hospital
end wo doli7urod tho nalaria or wo adninistorod it as tho
affidavit of Hiss Von Palkonhayn doscrlbo3 it. ..s sho
dosoribos it it is quito oorroot.

c* Now in your lecturo you conti on an experiment of
Volpcrt'3 on hinsolf. That was at this socond nooting of
tho consulting ;hysician3. This report is contained in
Document of Prosecution No. 922, Prosocution Exhibit ‘*35.
That i3 tho docunont which I have reproduced in ny
Dcciiaont Book III for tho convenience of tho Tribunal and
tho annual ro. ort of this department also sponks of tho
sane oxporicont. -rfero experiments carried out in this
dopertr.ont by tho scientists on thor.solves and what woro
those oxporinents?

.. I havo wondered why tho Prosecution ha3 submitted

this lecture of nino. I don't know vjhat it has to do with

Schilling's experiments. I don't know that oven today

bocauso Prosecution has not explained it - ho3 merely

submitted tho docunont. out, since tho docunont has boon

sutnittod I have to say whet I know about it. During tho

631D.


~pril 23-«-s£-17-;-GrDSs (Int. Von Schoan)

Court No. 1.

\icx In view of tho extent of blood transfusions we ware
in tor os tod in tho question how long malaria gorns ronnin
clivo in hunen blood. So far up to throo weeks had boon
proved. Now wo ere looking for tho ext re no linit. Tho
oorlior oxporisent hed boon porfora-'d on paralytios of tho
neurological ward of tho Virchow hospital. When ny assist¬
ant Volport wan tod to work in the sane way on tho blood
sample ho found that fungi hed grown in this blood ns
foreign body, as conto: In at ion. Ho didn*t want to wait
throo nonths again and this test was very in./ortant bo-
onuso tho infoctiou3 natter of this accplo hsd boon proved
of tor throo wook3. On the other hand, howovor, ho oonsidor-
od it too dangorous to use such a sanplo contunin.Xod with
fungi Into insano persons end in otdor not to loso tho
oxporioont ho injootod tho stuff into his own thigh. Tho
rosult was quito 3ucoossful. Ho contracted nalaria. -n<l
that is now a classical ox. orisont booauoo no ono olso
hes proved that nalaria parasite onn live for 90 days
outsido tho hunnn body, --nothor assistant of nine porfornod
a sinilar oxporinont out that such oxporinents on our own
bodioa wero not noro frequent with us was that coat of tho
poop lo had contraotod nr. lari a by accident in tho laboratory
before they could yield tc such an cx.orinont and 3uch
infections were, of course, used in thorcpuutio ox; orir.cn ts
with drugs but those wore not nalaria oxperinents.


Court 1

April 23-HD-ie-l-Karrow-Von3chon.


In the course of my presentation of evidence there
has been mentioned repeatedly the Section for Fever
Therapy at Pfeffenrode. What hind of an institute was
that?

n . In the discussion of ay relations with Glldemeistcr
I mentioned the reasons why I and ny deportment wanted to
leave the Robert fcoch Institute. I su 0 -ested to Professor
Klppke, at thnt time, th-t a Luftwaffe Department for
Fever Therapy be established and thr t personnel and
equipment of my Institute bo trnasforred there. Frofcssor
Hlppko ncce^ted this suj-.estl-n and the department was
sot up at Pfr.ffenrode and other pooolo were assigned thoro
so that I had a total of twenty-five persona. Including
olx doctors and zoologists, and then the work was done on
the malaria treatment of the ln6nno. Wo, of course, nlso
took advantage of tnls for our mr.lnriologlcal work for,
although I had alwrys taken a ^reot donl of Interest In
thu thoropeutlc success with the Insane, for mo the
anlarln aide of tno wuola ti.ln_ was tne main thing. That
is quite understandable, of course.

q. Mr. President, I should like to submit another
affidavit by Profossor Dr. Luxenburner of 24th of Xp.roh,
1947. This Is Rose Document 47 in the sunplement, as
Exhibit No 35. It deals with the work of thu defendant
P.ose In the field of malaria. I shall not read It in

orr'.er to save time, but I ask tne Tribunal to take notice

A

of Its contents.

Your department at rfaffenrodo, at the boglnnin. of
Acrll, 1945, fell Into the hands of the Americans. What
did the occupation authorities feel ab:ut your experimen¬


tal work?


CO Tt 1

.i t'll 2o-rt-16—2-H3-Xa r row-Vbn 5chon.

a. By the surprise advance of the Americans In April
1945 ..uehlhausen In Thurln e la was occupied. Hfeffenrode
is near thcr, and It had to be assumed that the Institute
was also occupied by the eneay. At the time, I wps in
Berlin for a lecture on epidemic control. tfhen I ccme :
beck to Bad ~aribur e I tried, dor in.. tne ni b ht, to ^et into
ffnffenrode ir. order to give the personnel instructions os
t how they were tc beh vo, but I didn't succeed, I
c,-ld not Q et through the lines. Therefore, I wont back
to Kartbury and I rsked the Chief of Staff that 1 should
be sent to negotiate os a trueo bearer In order to no-o
tinte with the Americans about the surrender of this
,.o rtaent. The Chief of Strff refused ay offer bocruse
the nodical chief could not 'oc reached. He wes the one
wh: would h ve had to take the ros .onolblllty, and the
Chief of ct'iff did not wont thnt beenuse all negotiations
with tne onuny wore strictly forbidden and were subject to
severe penalty. I therefore wont to tnc coar/ndln., officer
Of the 3r:up Science and <V)Scarcn, who w a at Hnrzour^
at tr/it tl he too, rn. explained ay situation to him. That
w 8 Professor Luxonbur 0 er w..o wca a psychiatrist himself.

He hod xcro understanding for ay worries on- he took
tne responsibility of sl^nlng ny n Ileation.

i. hr. frosldont, I should ll/;e to rofer once mors
t Rose Document ^6. That Is In document Book 1 on
ic_os 2? to 2?, Rose Exhibit 29. That is the first
affidavit of rrofessor LujronAurger. d hove clroad: r#-d
tne first part - .e 2 of the document, the last para-
-rn-h. Ihrt 2s e 25 of tne Jocenent book. From there
n, Professor ~ux.nbur.er ex. la In 8 t..le tri of rr-fessor
nc.-e to the* »£. rice ns re c truce berrer. - h-d redly
Intended to road it, b-t ir. or^er to save t.me i sh*’ll


Court X ....

April 23-A-18-3-HD-Karrow-Von -chon.

not do so. I ask you to take judicial notice of it.

Then, how did you carry out the surrender of the

department to the nmer icons?

a. I went through the lines with tnls paper, south
of Rudolstadt, and I establish-! contact with the nm-rican
infantry. I ^anafecd to see the ^nerlcon staff, and finally
I wr.s allowed to negotiate with American cedical officers.
The negotiations lasted three days, b^causo the American
"uthorltles had to consult Eisenhower's headquarters, and
a c nsultln.. psychiatrist was sent out. Finally, a
vrltt.n instruction was a 0 reed upon which I wrote down
for atnbsarzt Blaurock who was -y representative at
Ffaffenrode. Ourln t thesw negotiations the la ortant
thing was that the trained aoeoiallztd p-raonoll were to
ho left there to take care of the Insane, because I had
six hundred patients under ay responsibility there, nlso
the -ru b su ply was to be srfe t uardod end the special
food rotes wore to be safeguarded which I had obtained
for my o-tlents from the Food --.ini a try. aIso, I wanted
to free ny perse.-.cl froa the conouleion of refusal which
oxlsts for every Vohrnncht neater who 1 -. oopturod, and
then A w-ntdl to avoid any records beln. destroyed because
there was « general order to destroy military records
so that they would not fall into the enooy's hands. There
was danger th t this order would simply be carried out
systematically and all the records of the department
would b- destroyed. * venteu to prevent that tnrou^
tnese ne„‘otl-.tlona.

Hr. ^resident, the correctness of this strtalent

of the defendant Rose is shown by Rose documents 31, 32,

end 33 in Rose Document Book 3. Document 31 is on page 5.

I offer it ae Exhibit 36. This is the affidavit of the

631x5


Court 1

April 23-A-18-4-HD-Karrow-Von 5chon.

-hyslclan, Or. Blaurock of IS February lS-i?. Rose document
32 Is th« following, one, which I offer as Hose Sxhlblt
37. This Is another affidavit of Dr. Blaurock, also
dated 19 February 1547. Tr.is document le on pa&es 6 and
7 of the Document Book, and Rose Document #33 on pa^es
9 to 10 I offer as Rose Ex .lblt #38. This Is the
certified copy of the surrender Instructions which tho
defendant Rose has Just spoken of for his Institute of
1 -faf f'inrode.

Did you ret .rn to the German aide after that?

A. That wra very important for mo. This action,
willed I had undertaken on =y own responsibility, deviated
considerably from all existing regulations. I had acted
Independently, without oruors, and, of courso, It was
absolutely oseontlal for to _ot back to the Gorman
side and rorort what I h. d dono, In order to either have
thu su ort of y suporlors for-, ny action or to take tho
o nsuquenoos, If ny action was not eporoved; and I
succeeded In ttut. I c ot brek through the lines. I
w„nt to onalow. I reported to rrofeasor Schrooder, and
then, subsequently, he e ovo fils approval to my ctlon.

Q. Do you know what happened to your department
after you loft?

*. I was Informed only by my former assistants. I
know only what they tolu mo, but I consider them so trust¬
worthy th t I c n r pent what tney .aid, especially tecausc
Of the n. re-a^nt that a h*»d reached In the negotiations.
First, thu ^me-rlc-ns plrcua t 16 department under special
supervision, In order tc prevent unauthorized persons
interfering, Then, it was repeatedly checked by American
medical authorities. Then r t -rou- of the CIC c me there

*nd looked through the files, and, ns c result, Issued

6316


Court 1.

n ril 23-A-18—5-HD-Karrow—Von Schon.


written Instructions to the department to continue In
the. work. I also know that on American Army i>octor with
the rank of Colonel made a written report after a thorough
cnecfcln t of the Institution and that, In this report, he
speaks favorably about the institute and about the work
"nd the way the institute wcb annoyed. I learned of the
contents of this report when, in the winter of 1945, I
was for the second time exaolnod by the Intolll-once
Service. a member of the «merlc n Intelll c ence Service
told me about this reoort.

Mr. President, to supoort the testimony of tho
def-ndnr.t Rose, I should like to submit Rose Document 34
in Rose Document Book 3, p-^e 11-15. I should like to
orfor It ns exhibit #39. This is -n affidavit of Colonel
-f the «ray of tho Jnlt_d otntos, Otto B. ochreudor, of
tho 13th of March, 1347.

Professor, A believe that there will not bo enough
time to road it. rerhaps you will iv, n brief explana¬
tion of this English document.

a. This dooament was originally primarily intended
as n hec' titls document. *8 supplement to the testimony
of Colonel cchrouder there is an excerpt wnlch American
agencies made of an rrtlcle about hepatitis opldemicn
which I wrote in June, 1945, in England; but since the
ch-r.^e of hepatitis epidealco has been droned I h ve no
interest in oln^ into this part of the affidavit. #


531:7


JZ rll-^vP-19-1-,. alcy (Is.t. 7on Schocn)

Court I

I refer to pa.\o 11 of the Document Book, which is o _£0 1 of dcciccat
34, to nuabors 1, 3 aid 4 in the affidavit. He. I .jives the personal
date of tno witness. ho.3 dcscriios the visit cf Colonel Schroudor
to tho dop.~fc-.ent at Pfafforcio, end ao. 4 cont_ins c brief personal
stnt.ur.t cf colonel Schroudor cbout r. y person,

Z. You discussed experimental nuluria research as Carried
on by you; did you also doal with protective v-ccination »;.inst

tl.’l nri(l|

a, I want t- tier it was tho experiment 2 . malaria research ns
curried oat by uo whoro I w..s responsible jv* had sccethin/: to 1 . 7 ,
and th- v^s ^ _o.jj in which this work was turned ovor whon tho
enou c i.o vhoro I v_s responsible, b'o records wore burned, no pationts
woro sent svay, the person in ch-r. o of tho cxoorii:cnta did not ran
r.tfcy but I 0 iw to it th.t :jy pationta wero t~koa Care of docontly. I
saw to it that ny p-tior.ts wer- t ken c_rc of decently. I saw to it
th„.t no dccur.out w.o destroyed Carelessly, and I ..ysolf wont throu/*
tho linos to seo to it, instead of running avoy. how I ji to bo
hold responsible for idiat scr.cbody ols- did, ovor whoa I had not tho
sli^tcst influence, cf whoso jotivity I know nothin.; whatever, and
who in his cr.tiro conduct was tho op-osito of what I did ^-sclf. I
w-iuld havo likod, if I h~d toon able to doscribo in noro dotnil tho
way in vdiich I worked, but tho irinunul has limited tno ti-io for
ny defoese, I did not work on protective vaccination a. -inst nalnria.

On the basis of work of other researchers I w^s convinced th..t th. t is

cn insoluble pr-olaj, and non. lly a research workor does not deal with

£

problems which ho co.\si.'ors Insoluble, ..ad 2 have rocordod this
point of view J>»ut protective veda-ti^n u-:_inst malaria in litero-
turo, I can p 'int out ou thw no.- .tiv* side tn_t I have excerpts of
ovoiythin.. th .t I s-id uoont — 1 -riu the mc-tin ;s of consulting

physicians, which I h^ve sua;ittcd to..t her.. Zhcrc is not a word ;bout

63 W


33 “ ril--JF-19-2-*i.ilcy (Int. von *chccn)

Oaoxt I

pr;toctivo v.xciautioa ...%inst _ol_ri_, and if I h.;d had a r.aa aay*hcro
viia conductod cxseriaonts about protective v^ccia_tioc on over a
ti.ousr.ad people I would ao douot oa one of those many ccc ..cions havo
odd a word aoout it. I hopo th_t ny opinion written ia tho year 1941
will turn up u^-ia. It i» in the hands of tho Mlit-ry Govoraaeat,
boc uso the records of tho session ia 29 Docoober of 1941 which was
sub: ctcd horc, c.co froa the sj:.o filoe. Ia tho scao filing cabinot
is ay ozpurt opinion. If tnoy want to fiad it they con; and then I
should like to ref or to ny iusle lecture cf 19 A, which hue boon
cube kitted here, Doc un oat 25, which s-ys oa p-,-0 39, and I quote -

■The rolo of dnv.s in Uuluriu eeobattisu;-■ P-:o 39. Docuaar.t 25,

Dooeuo.'.t 3ook 2, po.;o 39.

■rhu p.jt piuyod by dru.;s ia the fi,iit ug-inst malaria is uot
oxheusted by tho possibilities cnuior^tod. *lthou.H wo do not know
of a r..ccin_tica effwetivo acuiost malaria. and although it is unlikoly
that such will bo developed. ia view of tho aaturo of this protoson-
infcction, tho preventive treatment, tho oo-Cullod 'dru,: prophlnxis'
has nlrccd” ployed for scco dec ados, ia tho fi.;ht a:~iast uul_rin
apart si:.il..r to th t nljycd by v-ccla-tioa ia cjo* of buotoria and
viruo infections."

Th .t is not tho soooch of a uua who is conducting oxperiaonts on a
thrus-nd pooplo h*. a concentration caip on protoctivo Vaccination, vHion
he at lo .st knows ovorythia., aoout it, .a tho Prosecution sjys.

oov, cun you plcuso coi-.ent oa Professor Schilling's work

at Br.chont

Mk .*

Th_t is impossible at the i.onant, I -a accusod, Occnuao of
tais w;r<c, th-t is truo, out the only material waica I h-vo on it is
Document Book ^nd th- testimony of Uu witness Tiohwcj:. I do not
even know the wording of the testinoay of Professor Schilling in the
Dachm trial, .-lthou,-h I jjkd for a record of the tost loony, according

6319


33 (* at - vor * Schiea)

C-ort I

,0 the oaerieett novoprpcro. Schilling prepared a -«« —«* “* »

^ich i. cvil-ole to foreign Puerto, ufld I haoo not toon able to set
It yet either. fee .-..tend. ..-liable .0 for ore .0 innda.uate fro,
U.IUIW °f Tio«, *-t 1 . ot loot. = 000 , «cprc. ony
oplnlon or. ». nltho 1 » W«* *• 100 ".P-lblUty

fer then. I coo only point out one thin-, the .Unco. Ti*»X odd
horn that expert,-cr.tnl .-001000. of Schilling died boe.u.e ° f th0
SclTcr.cn'trontnoat of uulortn. I ...cold like to refer to S—»rt
aook ko.o 3. doconcn, 933. Jrcueutlon SUM* «. PUS- *>• «“
lecture by ue nt the Motlw of cocultinc phyelclac. I refer to
,olnt 3 .Sreatteaf. -t the end of thl. pnrn^rcoh It eye tee
foUo.l.vjl -tee troatnent of tertlonu dth neo.olTar.an. «■*

.uppree.c tn= vivo. Infection. Cut doc not euro tna, purn.ltola-
rtenlly. 1 . al.o ,0 be reject.- I eon « » . tn.t vn. n lecture
* c .tunercl Vttnicht uuetin - wbure 1 could only <*. « »~‘~
d tlcn for the Utfwnffo, If uy roetoendotlon .at oceonted. It
could be turned into a. order, -nd o. a rcult of «nl. .-emendation
«. treat.,on. of ualerla t.rtlana . 1 th eolmreon -a. oronioitod In
the left. Xf 0 ; end no. I * to bo held rcooclblo. I. a. the non
Mho had .,lver.cn trcutcu-ot for nolurtn prohlolted. oeeeu.e
sehlllln* hud the ^.fortune «en tro.tln,.- -.lorla patient. . 1 th
oolver.cn that .one of tt. died. Bat 1 .nould 1U. one. core to
coerce the hope that the precaution in .ubeittlah doeunont dock
d. nr.ul.od the flic of the Pochou trial -odd be undo -Tollable hero,
x Oh , e. nuld ro.ro elble for It. I allied In line to b. ..von the

to.th. ny of Semite: t. road. I h.« net ..on a MU «- - «
yet. 1 hope b.f ore too end of the trial I dll .ee tnc rcordo. nrd

then I dll perh^e oe able to eonre. uy rcpoclbUlty for diet U


ia it.


M. .no Prof o'.or Sehlllin Infers about your ualnrle «<H


Z3 ril-a-Jr-19—i—Mai oy Cat. von Schcca)

Ccurt I

f_r ..s I toov he wan not, ut least I told hiu nothing,
no probably rood wh-t I published. I assuaod that uy special Pu¬
blications were always seat hi., by the secretary, according to the
distribution list. I h-d a 7-en.r.d list of nohos. u-lurie worts woro
swnt to bo and bo, otc., out the reports of ths Vshxuaeht ucotings
Schilling pro j ably did not read bocause he did net bolong to tho
VohrJcc'at, and uy associate. Hiss von ralkcnhayn who corresponded with
hU, had express instructions act to tell hiu anything about our
wort, bo th..t there would be no gossio octween the l.borutorios, and
I acted no differently toward Schilling than toward uny other
uni aria research worker, ms tho annual reports of tho Hobort Kcch
Institute st tc I, of course, colluooratcd with quite u nuaber of
people, such us r.crtcns. Koenig and S-bcl concerning certain nalaria
drugs, and of course with these people I diseased the particular part
of uy work which we were doing in camon, and corresponded with then,
because w. h_d to collaborate; but of course I didn't toll thoso
pcoplo anythin- about tho other natters which or other associates
voro del. 1 , 1 ; .md in addition to those peculo thoro wore quite u nunbor
w.-.o ver. worldn. on Ualuri- rose rch experinent Jly, Schulouann, Sivoli
aiid those at tho Haoburg Iropic-l Institute. H.uoor, und so forth. I
did not exchange views with - sia-io one of those. 3»-t io tho g*-
nora cuatoa. If one exchanges opinion* with onos closest co^etitors,
thoro io always the d:-tger th.t ooth poo >lo vno ar© working on thtJ
oaic thins vill v«t tho 3 a-e idea, and afterwards if thoj- talked
about it the;- reuronch ouch other that one stele tho ido^ of tho
other; .-nd if cr.o is a little old^r and h-s a cortain amount of*
experience and Wants tc 00 on ,;ood tcrr.3 with his collca. -ucs, cr.o
know that the best thin,: i= net to talk about wort which is not
finished yet, but just about tac wort which has been completed.


Court 1

r 11 2Zr- n -20- 1-nD-He eh. e n-VonSc ho en.

Then your conduct toward Professor Schilling was
vjrctly the s ec aa toward your other colleagues?

a. *es, exactly the sane.

i*. How, do you feel responsible for the work of
-rofcaaor 3 chill Inc oecr use your department sent Professor
Soi'-illln mosquito e_ e 6 nd n aclrrlu strain?

«. Of course, I take full responsibility for the fact
that oy personnel sent tala Eaterlal to hln. It la out
of tho question thatiilss von Kalkenhcyn Is responsible,
that Is ay responsibility. Of course, I do not take any
responsibility ns to what another scientist doo6 with
mosquito eggs cn - solaria parasites which I h vo given
to nlc. Ay .uty rn- care la limited to t> lvln c auch
.unturial only to th* people, prlsnrlly doctors, whoa I
nuot assume, •>ccordir. c to customary proccuure, will use tho
.a turlnl or perly ■ n- not misuse It. It was the official
duty of oy department to do so. If for oxaoplo sooo
■:.‘ehrruDcht hospital, on the t sis of tho order of the
Chiof of the Wehro cht aodlcnl Service, wanted malaria
for malaria treatment of of uiptherln and asked mo for It,
Cave It to tnem without any dolny. I did not have tho
task to check vhother this hospital had the authority to
carry out aal^rla treatment, I had no supervision over
thoev hospltols. Supervisor, to see that only a qu-'llfloa
jt .n should carry out a-’larln trertaunt in the hospital was
un to the chief physician of the nosmltnl, and secondly of
the ••ehrmacht physician. They had to see to It that tne
regulations about the correct execution were observed,
and how was I su'posed to -o that as I sent malaria to all
sorts of people? Kow can I control fifty hospitals? The
number w s even ^renter, how can I ask whet they do with
m: larla? In thd same way. It vaa not zy -uty to ask what


Court 1.

A ~.r 11 25-»-2C—a-HO-iUehan-VonScnoer..


the uee of tne mosquito e~_a by rrofessor Schilling; but
t-w duty of the supervision ov.r tx;ls vor * belongc*. to the
-.oocla who hod given Schilling the e9al e nment and hade It
osalolc for hi a t- work. r.s f->r ns I Know today tn c was
tne responsibility of the hcichsartz 5S end niasler. What
allots .ancles .’c^ a uti.orlzeu, I do not know. In
any c-’so I hrd no official connections with either of
c«ae officea or with hr. Schlllin B . That I aa not alone
ir. ay opinion la ehovr. by tto feet that schilling naked
for materiel froc varloue forel c n end Gerarn institutes
and ; ot it, ua Vichweg a-id here, end he never had any
difficulties. Ala- Schilling to- hie own mosquito entohd
In- detail ond had bred hie own caloric atralne. ho was
in no way _o.;ondint on ay strain rnd the few aoaqulto eggo
he receive- from ay own ucp: rtsent. If tne fret ol
..avlng _lvon him seen notorial aeons responsibility for
their use oy hla* then all scientific cooperation must
■top. Tton no one con ^lva anythin, out of nio bonds. 1
h-Vc . 1 v r. much .:-r. dohenua tnlri a turn or 1 rl strains,
fir instance, cholera and -.1 L uo cultures, only on the
"rasls of n- ;llc tlor. by m >11 to people. I personally ..id
not know, only on the basis that I know the institute where
they worked on- kn«.w ttot it v-s rell-ble.

When seen requests wore - do, was it not s-iid for
*h't tur-ase the o tcri'l w>is needed?

«. no, tnot la not customary. Usually one .merely asks
for the ntcrl'1 and the ante-lnl is sent without-'further
lnq. lry; tto t la rn international custom.

i. Then could any doctor ask the Robert koch Institute
for :l~tuo cultures; is that it?

«. rl _ue cultures; no. In Germany there are certain

le-.cl regulations about -lague. Tber* ere only n few

6353


Co art 1

«-ril 23-«-:20-&--O-Heohrr.-Vcn5cfcGen.

Institutes -hct ore allowed to work with It, and they are
inown tc us. To legaly authorized Institutes one, of
course, sends them. 3ut, for example, If foreign
institutes a sic a- for plrgue cultures, as the Ho'oort
hoch Institute had the permission to work with plagues and
had such cultures, I would nave sent a plo u ue culture to a
forolgn country. In the accoapar.lng letter, I would
•perhaps have added to the sentence that I assuaod the
recipient would se*. to It that the le-^il regulations In
his country were observed, which I would not know. For
malaria strains there arc no such restrictions, they are
distributed internationally without any reservations,
and cortnlnly mosquito eg^a.

The witness Vlehweg sold for oxanplo that Schilling
werkod with the Madagascar strain, that was a well known
strain in literature. That was bred In Hortlan in
England by Colonel James.

3. Old you yourself ever _ot malaria strains from
abroad?

a. No.malaria strains. I always worked with malaria
strains w.ilch wo hca bred ourselves, but I know of a
number cf strains In (kronny which must hav* come from
abroad as this Is woll known in literature. I, myself,
ot from 'broad snails, vnlch carried diseases, ticks,
mosquito e :jL s, worm parlsltce, Infected cats, and plague
strains. In all cases they were sent to me without any
reservations on the :- rt of the sender. It was uy own
personal easiness In each case to got the n -rovcl for
Importing these t lngs from the authorized Governmental
authorities; and triers ore legal regulations about the
Importation of disease carriers and dangerous Insects


which my assistants*an- I had to observe. But the sender

635U


Ccjrt 1

A-ril 25-«-2C-4-HD-K3ehar.-v3nacaoen.

abrord had nothin^ to do with th»»t. I hod to see to It
that I could present the custca's office with approval
for introducln, these dan£erous things In Sernany. I
nssuae that is the or.so everywhere in the world.


6355


Court So. 1

'-c A-r *7-1-21-1-iSi-Ccc> (let. Ten Schoec)


BH. 5EII2: Mr. President. I have cevicted the direct examination
-f the defendant Sm«. I shcwld nc*» like to reservo the right, after
the cross-examination, to submit e fev more documents to the Tribunal.

VITUZSS: I beg ysur pardon, key about the doeunent Muehlens?

Dr.. FRITZ: I should like to offer that at the end, Prcfossor,
after the cross-examination. I vant to end my direct examination now.

-:L j ^ I SIM T; C.uasel nay offer the docunonte either tceorrow
coming or at the end of the examination, as he pleases.

Kr. HA3DT: I don't understand what Your Honor meant by offering
documents before cross examination.

TFi P&Z6I2EYT: Counsel for the defense said he had a fov nore
documents which he wmuld like to offer ct scco later date and I informed
counsol ho could offor those documents tomorrow morning or sons lator
date, and. I thought possibly counsel hod understood when I told hia tho
direct examination would be limited to this afternoon that night also
include tho offering of documents es exhibits. It did not includo thoso.

He can offor those tho first thing tomorrow morning if ho desires. Is
it understood, counsel?

IE. FRITZ: Yes, sir.

T:£ PaZSIDLPT: "ho Tribunal will now bo in rocoos until nine-thirty
toaorrow morning.

(At 1525 hours the Trlbunrl adjourned until 0930 hours, 24 Anril 1947.)


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 7
Target 3

Volume 18
Apr. 24-30, 1947


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. v* KARL BRANDT et al
VOLUME 18


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


24-30 April 1947 pp. 6357-6762


24 April -_7- ,, -S"-l-l-Frstcr-lr.t: Yen Sch cr
Crurt Nc. 1


Official Transcript of the Anerlcr n Military
Tribun.-.1 in tto if.tt cr rf tho United Str.tos
c f /-'.crier, agi inst Karl 3r. nit, ot al,
Xofondnts', sitting t Nurnberg, Gornony,
on 24 -pril 1947, C930, Justico Beals pro aiding.


TFS !*ARSHAL: ?ora. ns in tho court roa: will plor.ao
find their sc-.ts.

Tho Hon rr.blc, tho JuGgos cf Military Tribunal 1.

jfj.litr.ry Tribunal I io rrw in aoealrn. Oed cavo tho

Unitod Str.toa cf .Vrorlccn and t) is 1 rnurablo Tribunal.

TS.oro will bo exMor in tho oourtrocn.

i’ll: P'SSIy-h?: dr. Karsh *1, you r.acortair. if tho

dofon-anta r.ro all prosor.t in crurt.

u: HARSE..L; Kay it plor.ao yrur Honor, r.ll ‘ofon-

drnfce r.ro pro sor t in ti e ccurtrcon.

TEE PRESIDENT: Tho Socrotary-Gonoral will nc to for

tho record tho prosonco of all tho dofonrt. nts in court.

iO*o thuro my qu-ationa tc be propoundod to this

witnoao by any dofonao c ur.ool?

G2HHAID ROSE - Roaunod
CROSS EXA13 -.:Tion

BY DR. SERVATIUS (Coined for tlo Dofon’nnt Karl Brandt)
n. hitnors, can X consult y'U ..a an 0 xport on tho
field of opidonic roaoarch?

A. Per airiest two doer.‘.os Goman url foroign
nuthrritioe hr.vo consilorod r:o cn oxpert in this fiold
and ccnsultod nc, and you ern also ccnsidor no as an
oxport.

Is hepatitis r. fatal '.isor.so?

*■. You roan hop.-title opidouica?
d £i^i2&bt2Sac. ccnfcrru.no aa.

// A. Hopatlti'^opidcnica iteclf is not ccnaidorod
1 a dangerous diefcaso by hygionists. ‘>ut in all tl ose

M 6357


2*i April ,7-::-S-:-l-2-Fcator-Int ;
G'urt HO# 1


V-n Sch-. or.


things you r-ust ccnsiacr that on o asst give Justice
not rnly to tho hygionic but also to tho clinical
r.spoct# A> 'jive ycu cn oxrx^lo, tako tho comon cold.
Svoryono hero in tho ccurtroon nc d- ubt agroos t) at
tbr.fc ia not a dangerous disoaso, nevertheless, ovoryono
Itr.o-is thr t otitis nodir. try follow r. cold, lhis err.
bo cmplicatod by Meningitis, end tho porsen cm dio
of that, X Bonn primarily; but r.o cno will f r tint
roasen call the c' -rim cold a fatal disor.so. It thus
is pcssiblo in tho caao of hopr.tltis tlero r ay bo
sor.w ether coupllcr.ticna, but nr cno will call hepat¬
itis itsolf c. danger run disoaso bocauso c<£ that.

Q. ‘-itnoce, is tho eus ternary uxporlnoncnl roe. rch
with tho hopr.tltis virus connected with groat danger?

A. Thoro ia ac.no ur. torial on that. Th.ro aro throe
oxaaplos known in Oox-. any. Tlxporinonts with hopr.tltis
virus hr.vo bconcarriod out in Gcxr-tny by Eppingor,

Vogt, Esaor. arxl Lcako. '.To inoidonts ocourod. Xfco
oxporlnonts woro haroloss. ’^hat is vory littlo rx tor-
lr.l, but bundrods <f canoe, w: ich wculd norr;it us to
fern a :tuch ncro roliablo judgment, can bo found in
En-liah end Aooriccn litorr.turo. Up to todi.y thoro
hr.vo boon about hu'v.r. oxporirxmtc with hopr.tltis, a xv
thoro has not boon single incilont roiortod.

n. Witnois, can ycu inr,' ino oxporlnonts in tl is fiold
trt ich ond in do. th, rr wloro cn can oxpoct loath?

... I would not ox poet any doath in my such onpor-
iuont.

Q. I ask wl other you s an export cm i. agino such
oxporicxmts, what tho nature cf such oxpori-.onts would
bo?

A. Experi-Tonte with h.opatitic virus nc, I cannot


6558


24 April 47-::-ST7-l-3-Fostcr-Xnfc: Yen Schoon
Court l!o. 1

ixiagino thon.

'i. Witness, you know fron this trial that tho Hoi eh
H.ysician-SS Grr.nltz in e docuaont H0-110, Exhibit 187,
donends prisoners fron Hirtihr fer such oxpcrixaonta
and says that do;.th h'.a to bo oxpoctod. You will
rononbor that in en&thor dccunont , ilo-Oll, Exhibit
188, Hl'r.l-r node eight prisoner: who h--d boon ccndonnod
to doctb available. Can cno net ccncludo frer: tbia
that extraordinarily dangerous oxporinonts *./cro plannod
with thoso prise nor s?

a, I would not draw thr.t conclusion. I would c> naldor
tno poasibilitioc: oifckcr thr.t tho applicant did not
!now onough about tho rsattor, ant', sinco tho person
who wroto tho lottor w. s *'r. Orr.wita, who for yo.&rs
hid workod only with adainistr tivo r.r.ttors, that
possibility would bo quito reasonoblo, The other
explanation for no would bo that ho was very oxtronoly
caroful ;.nd, of courso, it in bottor when tboro is nood
to c v.rry out m experinont to prosont it as sorlous
isc dengorous th.n to undor-ostirs:.to tho danger. -n
oxagger. tion is bottor tl-an r. nininizinc of tho danger.
’.I t reasons w^ro followod in this caso, I do not know
cinco I aii not inf orriod; bout tho natter.

q. In connection with hepatitis rosoarch did you
ho: r the none of Professor Brandt?

i.. I nover lo:re the nar.o of Professor Br.rdt in this
connection.

Q. Did Professor T^and-t cv^r in any connoction do^irnd
that you conduct oxpcrincnt3 on hunmboings?

A. No. .Ion I at Prefossor Brandt tfcoro is tost loony
on thr.t; wo did not say anything about exporinonts on
hunan boings.


6359


-ix - I-’-'

.*t sS, i

Q Tfitness, a few questions on bacteriological warfare Si"ci
about 19U3 there was a working coorurcLty under the rone "Lightning
'-Tiitzableiter ), which dealt with the question of bio chard cal
».a;f-re« Do 7 °u '& thi3 working concunity?

A Ifay I ronaik that I krow it, but it did not doal with
bio chord cal warfare, but with defense against biological weapons.
That is what is also understood by tto torn "bacteria warfare," The
expression "bacteria warfare" is acre rostriotod in moaning;
biological waapons derote use of bactoria, virus, protozoans, gems
of all kinds, against human beings and animals, also tho uso of
insoct pests which ham plants or soods, clsstroy invests, potato
bugs, and similar thirds. That is called biological warfare; and tho
Comlttoo Blittabloitor doalt with thoso questions.

Q Now, tho next question, did they doal with offonsivo or
dofonsivo?

A Whoovar was dolcgatcd to this comlttoo had to signify by his
signature whon hj ontorod it that ho was awaro of a basic Fuehrer
Ordor, and this Fuohror Order road that it was prohibitod ovon to
study tho possibility of a offonsivo biological mrfaro. I nysolf
put ny signature to such a dccunont, and I belonged to thin
comlttoo until tho ond of tho War, I attondod tho last mooting,

I know, thorofore, thqt this Fuohror ordor was nevor repealed,

Q Now, Witness, boforo tho International Military Tribunals
hero Gcnoralarzt Schroibor was examined, and in contrast to you ho
said that such aggrossivo preparations woro nado?

A I consider that ono of tho most infamous lios which Mr,
Schroibor gave hero. At the tine »hon the nows cano over tho radio
I imadiatcly offered myself as a witness to tho International Mili¬
tary Tribunal, Mr, Schroibor rover belonged to tho Blitzableitor
comlttoo,

Q Gororalarzt Schroibor also said that experiments on human
beings woro conducted in this field; what do you think about that?


3660


A It is of course always difficult to give negative testinony.

I can, of course, not say no human being e xperiner.ts were conducted!
but I can testify for certainty that in the Blitsableiter Conaittee
experiments or. human beings were never discussed in this connection,
and that no such experiments on human boings were plamwd thoro®

1R. HARDYI May it pleaso Your Honor, at tho closo of the diroot
examination by t*» defense counsel for tho defendant Rose, Your
nor asked whether any of dofenso ecu ns el wished to cross--exnnino’
tho witness. Dr. Servatius now is crosc~:i::errfnlng defendant Rose, and
during tho course of tho cross-examination is bringing in now
material which was not covorod during tho direct examination® I object
to any further questioning along those linos concorni'ig something
other than what was brought out in direct oxzusinatioxu

DR. SERVATIUS: Mr. President, I did not intend to cross-oxnnino
the witness, but to question hia directly. If I did not havo tho
opportunity to quostion Mn now, I wcxild havo called hia as a witness,
but up to now it has boon tho rule that I can examine a dofondant as
a wit nos s, and only whon tho diroot examination is finished, if I on
not tho dofondant*s counsel, thon only can I ask him about quostions
of tho croa^-exoni nation. I bolievo that the so qiostions aro now
penaissablo to hin as a witnoss in dlroct*

THE PRESIDENT: It has been the proctico of tho Tribunal to allow
dofenso counsel to oxanino dofoniants after they havo finishod their
tostinony in chiof in their own behalf, as witness os for tho
different defendants, whoso ecu re cl do3iro to examine. Tho prosocution
has had tho saa privilege.

HP. HARDY: Your ftonor thon, whenovor a dofenso counsel othor than
tho particular dofonso counsel for tha defendant involvod, is
oxnrdning a dofondant, how can tho prosocution dotemino whether that
defense counsel is bringing tho defendant on the cross-examination or
whether he is using hin for his own witnoss, and thereby being
responsible for everything that defendant says.


21 .Vr-il ' ?->_WT->-3~3-*felcr (Tat., -/or. Schorn)
Ccuri :Jo« 1


IE FRESHEN!* By the questions which I propounded in this case,
ecu reel for Sari Brandt, says ho is examining the defendant for his
own witness*

JR. H&BESs At this tine?

THE PRESIDENTt Yes. Counsel nay proceed.

Q Witness, in the *©rk concerning biological warfare did
Professor Brandt play any role?

A Neither in the Blltaableiter Ccttittoo or outsido of this
cocnittoo did I hoar anything about Professor Karl Brandt in any cor>-
noction with biological .rarfaro.

Q Now, I hnvo a question on anothor subject, euthanasia and
insane asylunsj witness, you gave an affidavit, Docurvvr, tt>8?2,
Prosocution Exhibit 181, and you state tho followir* concerning the
dofondnnt Karl Brandti "Ho gavo no tho insane asylun in Thuringia,
and promised no ay pationts could remain in this institution." Did
Profossor Brandt havo tho right to disposo of such insnno asylums? —.
I can shew you this oxhibit.

A May I soo it? — I signed this affidavit in English. I boliovo
that I havo an adequato knowlodgo of tho English languago, so that I
can toko tho responsibility of signing affidavits in English. TThon I
signod this affidavit I nado a few changes in the original wording.
This is not rv testimony. It is an excerpt which tho Prosocution nado
of an interrogation. I had a leng oonvorsation with Hr. Dovrois about
thoso words "to put an ire are asylum at =y disposal." And I told Mr,
Dovrois in ry opinion this expression "put it at ry disposal" ncithor
covers tho rights which I obtainod in this transaction, nor reprosonts
corroctly tho function which Profossor Brandt exercised. Mr 0 Dovrois
vory stubbornly held to this expression "put at ny disposal," and ho
ended tho conversation by saying "ycu could put your pationts i»to
this institution." »yos,“ I said, "I oculd." And then ho said, "Than
the institution wa3 at your disposal", arxi that is what tho Erelish
noan3," and I signod it, and of courso I aefait that it was ray mistake


6362


2 h April U?-M-ATIfc-2-L-»ao7 (lr.t. von Schocn)

Court So. 1

to sign sons thing which I personally thought was incorrect. Now, also
I was i»t asked at the tire how I got tbo insane asylun of Pfaffenrodo.
The question which I was asked "What official connections did ycu
have with Professor Brandt?" I nontioned those two points first, that
I negotiated with hin about this institution, about the question of
fever therapy, and second that I askod hin for his help when I wanted
to got hotter food rations for rv pntiontsc I would have considered
nysclf terribly boring if in answer to this question I had givon a
long description of the technical proccdero of =y gotting the
institution. That was, of courso, a long a<taini9trati7o matter, in
which Profossor Brandt was not long or concomod^


6363


Court I


2U A_r U7-H - 3-1 - LJG - ^efcar. (vor. Schoen)

*. Witness, Professor 3randt thon bad no administrative or
supervisory authority over the insane asyluc?

A . I rv-ver knew of that. The state supervision over state

•

aaylitaa was up to the Ministry cf the Interior and the adninistrative
authority was no doubt in most coses with tho provincial authority.

In any case, with this institution that was the, case, and I had to
negotiate with the provincial administration in ifcrscburg.

Q. Witness, you war- Just speaking of tho food rations for
the invites of those insano asylums. Here d*_ring the trial you
have hoard that people wero allegedly allowed to starve to death,
this being a vursion of duthanosia. Did you negotiate with Profes¬
sor Brandt in any way about tho reduction of rations for thoso pa¬
tients; do you know that Frofossor Brandt advocated the starvation
cf thoso insane? You said in your affidavit that on the basis of
intervention of Frofossor Brandt, tho patients raceiv^d highor
food rations. What did Prafossor Brandt havo to do with this
natter?

A. You have asked as several questions. First of all, I
novor hoard that starvation rations were s«t ospocially for insane
ooylu-K. I had southing to do with insane asyluns bacauso I had
to supply tho malaria vaccine, which gave aa such taore contact with
the insane asylxo than tho nornal hygienist has. On those occasions
I novor learned th t ospocially low r-.tions were given to insano

*

persons anywhere.

This specific natter was the followings »ihon I started with
fever therapy at Pfaflcnroce, all the insano persons trere received
the norcal rations, that is tho rations of housewives, aothars, and
sysolf for exanple as an office worker, the saco rations that wo
receivad; these rations had been ospacinlly reduced at that tLao,
not for t.« insane but for tin entire lemon population, and I
"anted to carry out fever treatoent on ny insano people, and that
is an additional burden on the b cay; therefore, I wanted the higher


6264


Court I

21: Apr - iC - 3-2 - L-.’j - Meehan (von Schoeo)

rations for ry patients, which wero given in the general hospitals.
That was refused by the Provincial Food Office in Thuringia}
therefore, I aade another application to the food Tlnistry; and
sinco there were lnyrtn there, I was afraid they would not havo
enough understanding for the insane. I wrote to throe agencies
rnd asked for support. I wrote to the Eeichs Co-, dssioner Frcfos-
sor 3rardt; secondly, to ay Medical Inspectorate, a.id third to State
Secretary Conti. In each case I enclosed a draft of a letter, and
asked the gontloaon to send this draft as their Ictt-r to tho
Roic'ns Food «4nlstry, bocauso I hoped that if three cannons woro
shooting at the food Ministry, that they then would perhaps givo
ro these additional rations for ay six hundred patients and that
wes successful. However, that was a favor I was asking fron those
three gentleaen. I askod thee. to support ny nodical opinion, and
one could not conclude fron that that they had anything whatever
to qo with tho setting of food rations for insane asylum.

3* Witness, ono aore question. According to tho Prosocutlon
evidence that haa bean submitted hero, one could sssum fron 19h2
on all insane persona wore oxtemlnatod in the institutions; how
rany inaotos woro tlv.ro fron 19h2 on; were tfu.ro still insane
persons?

A. Of course insane persons wore still there in considerable *
nuj*or. I have of course no know cd^o of the figures; I only co¬
operated with institutions and I did not gain insight into tho actual
business of the institutions proper, but in Pfaffenrodo, for
example, it was as follows: In peace tiro Pfaffonrode had bods
for two thousand insane people, and at the beginning of 191*5 there
was a total cf h ,000 insane there, as the result of transfers,
because other insane asylums had to giv* up buds for evacuation
hospitals and similar purposes.

W. lo you knew tee nuab^r of the patients on band in tho
winter of 19bl-19U2 when Euthanasia was sto pod?


6565


Court I


21i - 3-3 - IX- - Meehan (von Schoen)

A. :.'o, I l-ncsw nothing about that.

0. *)o you have the iaprossi or. that blindly extern! nations
were carried out!

A * I had nothing to do with the execution of Euthanasia. I
can only say froc cy experience that the heads of the insane asyluas
did not talk about this subject at all, or only very reluctantly.

For oxczplQ, I can aonticn tho director of the Institute ^rnsdorf,
tnaro wore a f-w old schizophrenics who were under toy fever treat-
nont and the*/ were transferred. I oust assuaa today that they wore
included in tho Euthanasia program I attarpted to learn fro* him
to what institution they hod been sent, so that I could writo to
the director tnora and find out whether th*ro had been any reoccur-
ancos of nnlarie. :•;/ tr-atnont hod been very unsuccossful and
that was the final attempt, free a poychlatric point of Mow nothing
could be done for t:.o^o patients any lore. I was interested fro*
tno point of Mew of calaria; but I cculd not find out from air. Sagol
what was going on.

Q. Viitness, that was in 19U5?

A. »o, that was 19l»0.

I have no furth.r questions to the witness.

3f DR. ;SLTEx (Counsel for the Dufondant a :ndlosor.)

Frefeasor, in Document book 12, there is a Utter which
you ><rct\j to Professor Baagon on 9 June, l?h3, it is Docucnnt
h0-306, rrosocution Exhibit 296. This Ltur reads:

"Dour -a-. Hoagen: *jr b^st thanks for both your letters dated
U and 5 Juno and tho prompt execution of ry request. I have con-
pilod a proposal for tho Inspector, in which I enclosed your ,
original papers and requested hie to urge tho Chief cf the Hedioal
Service cf the hoar^icht to order the production of spotted fever
vaccine for all nohracht in the Eastern area..."

H.e rest of the letter is of no interest here.

Do you resceafcur this letter?


5366


Ctoitu X


21i Apr - 3-c - LOG - - J -oohan (von Schoen)


a. Hot in the sense that I know exactly that I wrote this
letter; but the whole aatt,r, too whole context I rcn_.ifc.ir clearly.

Q. fee basic question, you know that the Prosecution brings
this letter in connoction with the huj*m experiments at Natswolier;
tiir.t is the ox^eriaonts vfcich Professor Hoager. conducted in ffctz-
woiler on braa beings; does this lettei have anything to do -with
the r.scarch or experiments in Hatswoilcr as the Prosecution subnits
a. Ho, nothing at all.

Q. "hat was the context of your suggestion, or rather too
suggestion which you aado on the basis cf :^terial froc Hnagon?

A * Tho wholo sitter was as follows* Professor Schreibor
wanted to hav- a survey cf tho practicability of the v.rious pro-
codurus cf tho production of typhus vaccir.o fron an oconony point
of viowj that is, assuring that a factory is to produco vaccinoa
ovary aenth for one hundred thousand persons; how nuch material is
needed; how -xmy workers are iwedod* (a) If the Welgl lieu proce¬
dure is used, (o) if the vaccino is procucod according to the
OildoooisWr-Koagon -athod and (c) if a lung vaccine is producod,
etc.

Schroi'our had cskod sovural typhus uxp-rts about it, and ho
had caU-d » up am. said I should got hin tho infematien fron
tho bjftnaffo. Document Ho. 305, which is or. tho proceeding pago,

shows.....

<• Th *s is Prco^cuticn Exhibit 2?$.

A . "his shews tii. t Jr. Kangon gave -n tho corresponding in¬
formation. *'hia infer: .ation itself is not availnblo but only n
cor-.-oc.ion of it. ^cpor.ntly in tho first letter he had mado a.
inlstcice in tho figures and ho cnrrocts it now, and he give his
opinion cn tltaso questions; tfc t is merely his opinion on purely
technical matters of uroducticn. Hr. Schreib_r did net want to
rely on t.-.e opinion of a sin; lo aan, ho knew scientists, he knew
that every specialist.would uphold his cwr. procedure and call it


6367


Court I

ax Apr U 7-3-5 - L*C •foahan (von Scfcoen)

thb aost valuable. Ho.anted to CoWare what various people thought
of the different procodurcs. Tfao supplying of this purely technical
information has now boon connected with the rennwd suggestion to
lncroaso vaccine production to such an extent that all neabers of
tr.e WOhnacht at the eastern front could be vaccinated. That is
the context, tir.t is the meaning of this aatter.


c C-69


24 if.r-44-G3S—i-l-Cook (Int. 7on Schoes)
Court So. 1.


Q. .oil thon Schroiber askod for inforcation for cocparativo
determination of production costs end production naterial noodod for
oxtonsivo waccino production?

•i. -oil loss hbout cost than about the personnel and the
enter Id nccdod.

Q. -core was Schrolbor ct that tico?

“• Ho was chiof of tho training croup "C" la the acadony, I
bollovo tho deputy for opldonlc control with tho Holch Rosoarch
Council. I wouldn't ecy that for cortaln, tho dato Is tho 9 Juno
1943...

Q. It is doubtful whether ho already uas plonlpotontiary of tho
Roich Rosoarch Council?

I don't hnow tho dnto so woll.

Q. It was tho end of kay or tho boglnnl:^ of Juno when ho was
tflvon tho nsslgnswnt os plonlpotontiary for opidonlc control?

... It lo posslblo but I con soy nothing for cortaln.

q. This lottor dooo not go to Schrolbor, it coos to Haagon, and
it shows that you endo a suggestion to tho Chief of tho todical Sor-
vico of tho Luftwaffo, end that you asked his to pnes on this suggest¬
ion. Tho suggestion, which you Just nontlonod. that thoro ifcould bo
r. largo typhus vacclno drivo in tho 2nst; do you know personally
n'uothor your Chief, Qcacrolobcrstnbsnrrt Hippko did subr.lt that
su,. i.ostlcn?

... I car. only expross an nssuaption. In gcnoral I did not learn
that nfeothor such a thing w? s passed on I boence to know in two ways,
If thoro was any inquiry about it or if I got to sea tho records
later; I cannot rooonbor todny whothcr either of those two possibili¬
ties TT.s tho case horc. I would naauoo that it wont on, but I doji't
know.

Q. 3o you know vfcother any docision w».s roachod? You scy in
tho lottor: "I hope to succeed inthis cat cr." You sooted to bo
interested in it and I boliorc that if tho suggestion had boon

6369


24 ^jr-y-5SS-4-2-Coak (Ten Sefioon)
Court ye. 1 .


successful. If It ted been adopted, you would hr.vo been informed,
u'oro you?

toll in any case wo never ackloved the aim of producing
e n o u g h vaccine for the Sostorn front. I cannot remember any
specific answer in that connection.

''"ell then the results which can bo ascortainod ere first,
that this lottor had nothing to do with research, and, second, that
tho Chief of tho Vchrracht -odical Sorvico, was in no connection
ui*,h llrogcn and Uatzooilor, that is, so far as tho lottor is con¬
cerned,

*1 *h° Chief of the Vobm/cht hodical Sorvico had nothing to do
with instigating thio lottor. Information is givon to hie about
tochnlcnl production ccttors which ho did not ask for at all, and
bcnldos thoy hnd nothing to do with experiments.

0, Yes, that io chat I want to knort that this natorlal, iThlch
«ay tvrvo boon brought to tho attontion of tho '.’ohrcacht kodical Sor¬
vico, said nothing about rosoarch and nothing about Batswcilor, only
tho tochoical material cor comparison which you spoko of?

... Yos, and tho dato chows that too, Tho first experimental
vrccinntlons, which nro roportod ir. Strasbourg, aro supposed to
hr.vo trkon placo at tho ond of Lay or the beginning of Juno 1943 In
Schiruck. Thoro couldn't have boon any notorial on it yot.

q. I no interested only in facts, -hat you say is nn
explanation.

In docuccnt 305, it says for oxacplo that a lottor fron Kr,
Giroud is cnclosod. That is tho bond of tho corresponding dopart-
nent at tho Pastour Xnstituto in Paris, who gave information, that
I noed so and so cany rabbits per month, and I need so many
technical assistants and so and so many untrained workers. Thr.t has
nothing to do with exporiuonts.

Q. But that was fron Haagon to you. That was tho basis for what
you roportod tc Hnagon or ra.tkor to Hippie c.


«?■; 3—-1-o-C ock (7oa Sehocn)

3eurt 2c. 1.


A. Ye*. I tock theso thirst together aai wrote a covering lcttor
cz± sent it on.

%. Old you evor talk to Professor Hnndlosor about experiments
on boson beings of tho type which aro the subjoct of the chnrgoe
horo? _

<*• So,

Q. Or did you ovor have an opportunity to discuse exporioonts
rrith hit,, tint is typhus experiments with human boings?

• So, I bolioro Handlosor did not dioeuss typhus questions
uith oo ct nil, cortninly not oxperinonte. kbout dolouslng problons
Profoosor Hnndlosor did not consult do,

0. ‘.lion you wero in Buchonrold with Profossor E/ildeeolstor, did
you hr.vo an opportunity oftorwnrds to discuss it with Professor
Hnndlosor?

A. Senornloborobstobsrxst Hnndlosor was not yot tho Chiof of
tho “ohrnecht hcdlcal Sorrico ct that tiao, I had no opportunity to
ooo hia nnd I did not talk to hie abcut it.

Q. 7ollocing tho Bing locturo nt tho Uny nooting in 1943 whoro
you protostod, did you tnlk to Profoosor Enndlooor about tho ronson
for your protest and did you tnlk to hin about tho incldont at nil?

... To, I did not talk to Profossor Kmdlosor cbout it.

0. Did you talk to Profossor hnndlosor about rosoarch on
hepatitis opiio.-icn?

lio, I wro not working with hopatitls.

q. Did you tnlk to hie about solaria?

-*• I talked to Profossor Hnndlosor ropoatodly nbout snlnria.

r. Or in connection with tho oxporinents in Dachau with
Schilling.

-• Do, I knorr nothing nbout thoE myself. Those wore questions
of prophylaxis with tho troops, dosis of prophylnxis, and then
aalaria troateent, standard sethods of treat cent, tho tine when


6371


2f. ^r-*£-3SS-4-4-Cook (7on Sctooa)

Court Jo. 1.

* prophylaxis should bo!, the question of general treatment.

q- -oil. quo8tions -hlch wore Important for protective
vaccination and for tho carrying out of prophylaxis?

^ So. not vaccination. There i« no vaccination for nalnrin
prophylaxis, but drugs.

q. Did you talk to Handlesor about yollo- fever experiments!

•*. Ho.

q. Did you participate in the hepatitis discussion in Juno 1944
in Broslau?

. Ko.

o. ^hy not?

- I *ns not invited, red I -a. quite annoyed because I -osn't
invited. I -ould havu been glad to hoar -hat -ra reported there, but
apparently it -as only a snail group of purely hepatitis specialists,
and oinco I -r.s a general hygienist I -as not invited. I only learned
subsequently of this nooting. If I had learned about it beforehand I
would havo triod to got an invitation.

q. Do you kno-rr ufcoro Dr. Dooon -orkod on hepatitis rosearch?

•i. I loarnod sub.oquontly that ho -orkod at tho Robert Koch
Instituto, after ho had alrordy lofti and then Inter I hoard that ho
-as in Giocsoc, and at tone institute, but both of those facts I kno-
only fS-oo hearsay and not free oy o-n kno-lodgo. I did not see him
c.t tho Hobort Koch Instituto, and I did not visit bin at Glosson.

But you do know that Doaon -orkod at tho Robert Koch
Instituto undor Professor Giidoecistor on hepatitis?

• Vos, I hoard that.

5. -oil your hearing it -r.s such that you can call it knonlcdgo?

• Veil I considorod it quite crodiblo. If I -oro not under
or.tli I would slzply scy Down -orkod for Sildeocistor. but sinco I ca
undor oath I can only say I hoird that Docon -orkod for Gildoaoistor.


6372


24 ^rr-vl-OZS-5-1-Gross (Ton Schoon)
Court Jo. 1.


0. You worked at tho Scbcrt Koch Institute, too, didn't you?

~. Tos, I had cy deperteont there.

“• Thou this "hoaring" con bo evaluated ns noro important than
if someone simply- says, in ordinary lifo, *1 hoard that he workod at
sc and so".

~. Yes, certainly. Bosidoa thero is an affidavit from
Gcholnrat Lens, who is no? diroctor of tho Bobort Koch Inctltuto and
it says that Doheen did work thorc, and ho has sccess to chock up on
tho files.

C,. I h vo no coro questions to this witness. I thank you.

BY 2H. PH 12ILL* (Counsel for tho dofendant Rostock)i

Profosaor Eoso, you woro Vico*Prosidont of tho Bobort Koch
Institute of Berlin. 7as this instltuto undor tho Ministry of tho
Interior or was it at any tico under tho Connisoionor Conoral for
Hoalth and Modlcol Matters, end consequently undor tho dopartnont for
scienco and rosonrch?

— Tho instltuto, until 31 March 1942 was undor tho Prussian
Ministry of Intorlor. Froc 1 April 1942 on it was undor tho Boich
Ministry of Interior. But, of ccurco, it wns nevor undor tho
Comlssionor Soaornl.

C. Thon you novur had any ordors or instructions diroctly from
tho Cc-aissionor General for tho Bobort Koch Instltuto?

A. Mo. I nevor saw any such instructions,

Q. ’..ore you as Vico Prosidont of tho Bobort Koch Instltuto, or
cjj Consulting Ky-:ionict of tho Luftraffo, over undor Professor
Restock in his enprxity as Peon of tho Modical Faculty of tho Univer¬
sity of rorlin?

... I'o, of courso not. I had nothin; to do with Profosnor Ros¬
tech as Doan oxcopt in ny capacity as toachcr in tho Medical Faculty.
But, I mm also tcachor at tho Foroit,n Scienco Faculty. 2von ac in
tho University he had nothing to do and certainly with my Job outsido
of tho University. In practice I ncroly hod to sond hie nnoto every


6373


24 ax> r-il—j;S-5-2-Gr oss (7on Schoca)
Cjart Ho* 1.


six month* saying "I will hold a lccturo oa this subject end on such
and such days and at such cad such tines," ar.i, then the technical
correspondence which a Dear, has to exchoo^o with an instructor.

Ho had to hrvo ay tolcuhono number, ho had to have cy addroso, end
ho hrd to know cy porsonal data. too.

In any caso, this institute aai tho work which was dono there,
ho hrd no control of?

-• Ho. It is quito out of tho quostion.

Did you not fool it your duty os a scientist froa 1944 on
to report to Rostock as hood of tho Department of Scicnco and Ho¬
se ex eh — to givo reports about your rosoorch you hr.d plannod or
carried out?

... llo, I hrd enough to writo without that. I didn't rrlto to
anyone on ty own initiative.

C, Did Rostock over givo you any instructions or requests in
this connoction?

u, Ko. I novor rocoivod any such roquocts froo Profossor
Rostock*

Q, Thank you.

3Y OR. SLUTER (Counsol for the Defendants Blono end Ruff)«

«^* Profccsor Roso, tho dofondant Ruff, or rathor tho dofondent
fllo&s — I eust correct cysolf — ns you know, Is tho only dofondent
ul.oa tho Frosocution bring* into any connoction rith plnguo experi¬
ments. This assumption of the Frosocution, if I any rofrosh your
mcjsory Professor Roso, is based on the file noto of Profossor Xliobo,
chi eh you know, of tho 23 Pobrunry 1944 — Document 1309, Exhibit
326. I should like to reed to you tho passogo which rofors to
pleguo, to recall it to ycur oexory, Tho filo noto says:

"Profoseor 3lose is of tho opinion that abovo all a chock of our
vaccines, and particularly plnguo vaccine, is necessary. Corres¬
ponding oxporiccnts on human boings would havo to bo conductod."

hnd later it srysi "Professor 31o=o r.t tho ond askod whothor


6374


2i Jpr-24—3Z5-5-&-5r oaa (Ton Schocn)
Court So. l.


tho Chiof of tho Tehrsocht kodical Service of tho Inspectorate of
the Tehreocht enow that in Zuropens TurJeon 4,000 eases of plaguo
have eccurros.*

Jollowing this quotation — tho docusont of ?obruory 194-i —
tho Prooocutioa charged the defendant 31oco that ho was in bodo
connection with criminal oxperiror.to with plague which woro oithor
carried out or plannod. Sow, Professor, I Lnwu soon froo ycair Hot
of publications that you yoursolf wrote two papors on ploguo, Io
that tmo?

A. Too.

q. ~nd, fron a docucont in your Cocuncnt 2 ook I eoo that you
wore cont to tho Sothorlards Snst Indies and to Ewangsi to doal with
plrguo problocs. Is that truoY

h. Yos, that io true.

Thon I cay conoidor you an Internationally rocognizod oxport
in thio fiold and you will bo ab)o to giro so sore information on a
few points so tho Tribunal cry bo nblo to got r. picturo whothor
plrguo oxpericonts with which 31oso io charged rxo porciooiblo end
whon thoy aro considorod crininal?

Yos.

0. Dr. Hoso, can you toll co whothor according to nodical idons
ratal nodical or rosoarch practico throughout tho world it was generally
cuotccary in forcor docados that in producing plague vaccinos oxpor-
inonts on huccn bois;s woro carried out*

Yos. Ono cust distinguish botvocn two ticos. Tho firot
tico aiion plnguo vaccination ms carried out with killod bacilli.

That nr.8 ouito in the boginni:g of tho stud;- of vaccinos. Tho first
oxpericonts had tho character of exporinonts on husen boingo. - !l0 7
woro carried out by Euffgon in 3cebay. Cn tho basis of thoso expori-
nonts it was dovolopod to tho point that in tho futuro ono had only
to echo t osta of toloranco which cannot really be called exporinonts
nr. husnn boings any longer. SevcrtholcsB thorc was once a very

6375


2-1 ~pr-K-GiS-5-*-Gro6s (7on Sc toe-)

Court i!o« 1»

unfortunato incidont. During these tosts sixteen people diod of
tetanus. That is a well known thing historically. That was cor>-
truination of the vaccine. Sisco then thoro has boon a goncrnl ro-
gulr.tion th/ t vaccines have to bo tested beforehand for tetanus.

That io bocauso of this incidoat with tho plague vaccino. But thon
thoro cocos tho codora development of plnguo vacciaos which I have
alr eady had to coatica in doscriblng tho historical basis of tho work
cf Profossor Eoagon. That is tho development of vaccines froc living
cvirulont plaguo bacteria. Sinco tteso vacciaos have bonn introduced
if one bogins with tho production of thoso vacciaos an oxporicoat on
human boinga is always unavoidable. That was done for tho first tino
whoa tho proccduro was introducod by Dr. Strong wno 1/vyod tho
foundation for all this work. Then all this work was ropoated again
in tho 20s by Dr. Otton in Java. Tho roason was that this old system
of Strong and Otton had boon lost. Thoroforo tho whole thing had to
bo ropontod. *t tho sneo tino ho, indopoadontly of Otton, tho cano
oxporizonts woro carried out in kadagauenr,

Q. Profossor Roso, I as primarily lntorostod in tho following!
And that is tho roason why I go into this quostionsnd I nek you in
answering it to considor this purposo of clarification. Thooo oxpor-
inonts which Profossor Strong, I boliovo that ho is an «corican, and
other foroign scientists carrlod out, roports woro glvon in Journr.lo
by profossionnl Journals. Do you know which onos, primarily?

... American work was published in tho Philippine Journal of
Scicnco.

Q. Do you know, Profossor, what tho reputation of tils
Philippine Journal is, whothor in eacricn and Snglond it has a high
reputation and is road very euch or rhothor it is nn obscuro papor.
Pcrhr.pa you will common*. on that alweys remastering. Profossor'Roso,
what influonco thoso publications had on the dcvclopnont of nodical
othica, conception of profession of aedicino tho pcrcissibility or

illegality of such oxpcriconts on human beings?

6576


»


Court 1

«prll 24-H- '-1-HD-Korrow-Von 5chon.

That Is  very well known, very important paper.
Doctors of tropical aedlclno quite generally read it.

£apael' lly If they wor* in the Far East but, for exncple,
the paper has a representative In Gera- ny and It has a
representative In the States.

i. Then apparently it Is r very widespread Journal?

«. Well, what do you naan by widespread? as a
professional papor In professional circles yes. It Is
widespread. If you coapnro It with the circulation of a
dally newspaper, then it Is, of c :rso, restricted to a
very narrow ^roup.

Q. As fTOS I know, It Is read quite a lot In Goraony.
In any case, I hove noticed that oil the le3ues of this
Journal ore available even today in quite a nuoaor of
uiedlcnl societies and libraries. Do you know that?

a. Woll, we had It In our library In Berlin and
then a friend of olno, rro. essor Zlooonn In 3orlln, sub¬
scribed to it personally, but It was eno- b h for co that
It was In our library.

MR. KaRDY: Hay It siease Your Honor, It seuos to oe
tn^t uofensu counsel has 0 oro a bit far cflold. I
t.^lnk It ol L ht oe su_._ostcd that uefon6o counsel confine
lu8«lf to tr.o issues at trial here.

THE PRESIDENT: The questions of counsel are pertinent
to certain ertters before the Tribunal. He any proceed,
of course, confining hloself wltnln reasonable Halts as
to repetition ans so on.

DR. SaJTZR: Hr. President, I believe tnnt the #
Tribunal, In this rolnt wh.oh we are Just dealing with,
oust show a certain Indulgence to the dofonse.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal, counsel, overruled the
objection by the prosecution. You o~y proceed.


6377


Court 1

April 24-H- —2-K3-Earrov-Vor. Schon.


=Y DR. SA'JTSS:

Professor Ro6e, do you belie /e thrt a scientific
Journal of the significance and vlde-sDrecd import nee
f this Phil1 pine Journal had considerable Influence on
tne development of the conception of the nedlcal profession
In regard to sacn-ex?erlnents or. human oelnfes and still
exercises such Influence todey, -nd thr t the ti.lnga
printed in such serious Journals, If they are written by
Internationally recognized scientists, "re t lven s ecivl
;chnowled e nent end '-ccoenltion by the medic: 1 world?

«. It is, of course, clear thet important scientific
jo«rr.“ls, In p; rt, reproduce tr.e etr.lcs of the profession
and also Influence it. Th t is true.

%. Professor .-tose, yo.. Know the ublic tions of the
professor who., you Just mentioned. You vend t..eso
ublicatlor.e, and that c r. you tell us about whr.fi t. is
man writes c oout the quollt o. tr.e expar aer.tnl au Jeota?

A. In tne first paper on pi mue vrcclnea, nu  yo
Chat he beuan with crlaln>*ls condemned to derth nd toot
r.e continued the experiments on other persona. It le
not lr.Qlcated exnctly wh't tr.eae otnor persons were, but
according to the w..olo dl6cu68ion of the expex l.-cnCe one
c-n 8*une that l;.ey were Iso prisoners from Bllllblt
and that la liKoly also oeccuse from other words by him
one can see It re e ted th t he worked or. prisoners In
Bllllcit. «nd I rr ve some ino lea_e of my own on the
s i:ject because x dlscues:d this vnole mot ter with
Fillolno doctors wren I was Ir. the ISetherlrnd Indies to
study pl-gue conti*ol. I wrs with two Filipino d etove
o..d, of course, we discussed the fou.ndrtion of this

✓

v:ole work which erne from tne rfcill-.Mnee,

d. Professor .-iose, you a oxe of 31111b!t. Th* t le a


6378


Court 1

April 24-A—6—3-HD-Karrow-Yon Sc lion.


penitentiary, I believe Isn't It?

A. Yea, a penitentiary near rfanll".

Joes the author, this highly respected Professor
Strong, say anything about these experimental subjects
being volunteers, or is he silent on that subject?

a. The work on plague says nothing about It and even
If It sold so, no one would r.. ve believe It at that tine,
because to Inject llvln B plague baccllll, even If It went
off well, was criticized by experts and It was said that
It was too dangerous. Of course, o layman would not
volunteer for such things.

Does Dr. strong - I believe tnnt this Professor
Strong la the s me man whom you mentioned a few days ago?
a. Yes.

«nd you tola the Tribunal that you knew him
personally, I believe?
a. Yes.

^ Ihnt you Knew hlx re a a-r. of epeolnlly high
concootlon of his duty os n doctor. That Is the ease man?
A. Yes.

Does Professor otrong write anything about deaths
resulting from his experiments on prison ro?

a. Hot in th_ case of the plague experiments, but In
his Borl-Berl experiments he does.

Q. Those wore also experiments w.ilch Professor
Stron b carried out?

a. Yes, also in Bllliblt.

And how great w^s the percentage of doe the? ix>
you Know anythine cbout th~t?

a. In the berl-berl experiments, one out of twenty-


nine


6579


Court 1

April 2 4-.4-5-4-KD-£arrow—Von Sc non.

Q. Professor r-ose, we had this Philippine Journal
here. Ve still h ve It here. Ve hove looked through It
thoroughly and we have established - and I should like to
know whether you can confirm this - that this report of
Professor Strong, which you Just told ue about. In not
the only report of tr.ls type but that in almost every
Issue of this Journal there 1= a report on similar
experiments on human beings. Is that true?

a. Th't Is correct. Th~t Is one of the re-sons wny
the magazine had such great elnlflonnce oe cruse there
were very ma.-.y fundamental -lscoverles vhloh were announced
In It.

i. Do you remember, professor, how great the number
of experimental subjects In strong's experiments was?
how mrny people that h^ arid himself he used?

a. In the plague experiments, tnero were nine hundred,
and I don't remoeber the other t .ln t o veil enou u h to bo
able to give you figures. I, of cour e, was primarily
Interested in the plague work. If you still look .at the
Cermr.n medical veexly of 123?, there In tko Berlin -vedloal
Society, In the discussion, I roforred specifically to
this plague work of Strong's.

Do you also know iron this Journal, professor, that
for these experiments the Governor of the Philippines
expressly gave hie permission?

a. That Is said In the pr> ter, and that Is to be
assumed because strong was not the prison doctor.

Q. You say 3tr n c was a prison doctor?
a. No, I said he was not.

h. Do you believe, professor, that If Stron^ - that
even If Strong does not go into the question of Volunteer¬
ing, one can assume that the large number of nine hundred

6330


Court 1

rtprll 24-H-6-5-RD-K? rrow-7on Schon.

experimental subjects in the plcgue experiments alone
allowed the conclusion that these were all criminals
cunuemned to death. In the :'irst plrce, and second, that
they had all volunteered?

)G. HaRDY: Hay It please Your Honor, this material
concerning the experiments of Professor Strong Falls
right In the category of other material and experiments
In other countries. The Tribunal has ruled that this nay
be Introduced at a later time In the trl^l nd, at that
timo, the Tribunal will rule as to the admissibility of
such e.'ldence. It seems that the publication Is
available In the Philippine Journal and he Is msrely
quostionln a the defendant on whrt exists In this
publication. I think that may well be Introduced at a
l'*ter date and can be ruled on t that time and not tako
up tho time of the Tribunal now.

THE PRESIDENT: The SUg^ostlon of counsel for the
prosec-tlon Is well-taken. The or.ttor of the contonto
of t.;ls publication In tho Philippine Journal may be & one
Into pt seme li ter date durln e the trlcl w .en tho copies
mr.y be produced and all such publications onn be
considered at one time.

DR. SA’JTEn: .-ir. President, I .sk permission to
complete ay questions about the Philippine Journal. I
believe I h-ve only one or twe more questions -’nd then I
will be finished with the subject and then, ..r. President,
I do not want these questions about the Fhlll:pine Journal
to be thrown Into the whole e roup of t..lngs th -1 are t<j be
elimln*.ted or the one at t..e end cf the trial. I’m not
asking about t encrpl exrerlments In thw whole world, I'm
askln c specifically bout olngue cx -erlDente, and thut Is
because the defendant Blcme is the only one who Is


6231


Court 1 „ , ,

«prll 24 -K- 6 - 6 -HD-Kcrrov- /on scoon.


specifically charged with plague ex?erl_c-nts, and beoause
I as interested in determining whether Professor 31ooe
can be declared a criminal for plague experiments which
ne did not conduct wr.lle some foreigner, who had conducted
experiments, la not a criminal but is glori-lea. ±
believe this question has to be settled and tnerefore I
ash permission to deal with the one or two questions wnich
are still necessary to settle this a tt r.

JUDOS 3E3R1M0: Do you contend that tnis witness Knows
anything about these experiments other than la written in
this Journo 1 ? If it is simply a question or wh t le
contained in the Journal, the Tribunal must road it for
itself. You have been qb.-: 1 r 0 him whether no Knows what
1 s contained in the Journal nd if, in his opinion, the
language la such as to Justify the belle: concerning
whether these were or wero not volunteers. Whether in
the last essential If tney nro written I apprehend that
perhaps it is the function of this Triounnl to determine,
In the last analysis, whether or not the language is
susceptible of the interpretation tJu-t they wero or were
not volunteers.


6332


2-1 ^?r-^-GZS- 7 -l-ltclo 7 (Int.Fon Sckoon)

Court Ho. 1.

DS, SsJJZZRi The situation proviaoly inconnoction with thoso
plcguo experiments, the witness having talkod about is diffcront,
bocnnso os the one hand Profossor Hose knows the author, and tho
sciontist who conductod thoso experiments personally. So was in tho
Netherlands — India and in China hicaolf and studiod these quostiouc,
thr.t is, ho is an oxpert of tho Tory first lcnguago in this field, and
the second point is that Profossor Strong, who actually did porforn
such oxporiconts thr.t Blono is accusod.of, although ho did not por-
fors thoc, Professor Strong is an iatornationally rocognisod sciontiot
who acquirod spoolal rospoct in tho nodical w>rld for thoso ploguo
oxporiconts. I «= of tho opinion that wo Jurists oust bo grntoful
if an latornr.tionally rocognlxod authority liko Profossor Hoso err.

,,lw ua inf or oat ion obout thoso aodlcol quostlons, bocmiso ho had
nothing whatovor to do with thoso ploguo oxporiconts. For this
quostlon ho is ceroly an icpartlal oxpert, but I boliovo I hnvo only
two coro quostlons on that subjoct, and thon the ohaptor will bo
finiohod.

3Y THE PHESID?IT«

3 , Profossor Eoso, do you know of your own knowlodge whothor or
r.ot tho con usod for tho ploguo oxporiconts woro or woro not voluntoorsZ
I was not orosont eysclf at tho oxporiconts, but during my
investigation of plcguo in Java whoa I coopcratod and collaborated
with c. nuabor of Asiatic doctors, raoa; then Siacoso, Chinooc and two
Phillipiaos. Slnco wo woro lr-torostod In ploguo and sinco wo woro
studying tho probloe of living ploguo vaccino, of courso wo dis¬
cussed tho fouaiations of tho whole business vory thoroughly and two
of tho Phillipino doctors wore prosont, end I roaoebor ono convor-
oation when tho other Asiatic goatlococ attacked thoso oxporimonts
rathor violently and said that *r.s « typiccl oxcrplo of tho whito
race clausing tho ntivos, rad tho two Phillipinos who woro most intor-
ostod in this question they obaorved. they srid that oven if tho
experimental subjects had not all boon volunteers, and of courso thoro


6583


24 «pr-i£-GSS-7-2-iiilojr (Ton Schocn)
Court Fo. 1.


wore dlfforont opinions on that reject In kanllla, that thoy ns
Phllllpplno doctors who had known Strong, on the basis of this per¬
sonal knowlodgo, woro porfoctly conrincod that this was not a clsuso
of natives but a vory roliablo work In tho intorosts of tho pooplos of
Asiai not only tho Phlllippinos but tho Indians and Slanoso as woll,
oho noro cursing dr. Strong, Troc this cenvorsation I know what
Phllllpplno doctors thought about those oxporlnjnts. That Is tho
source of ey knowlodgo, but slnco wowjro working on nothing olso but
plcguo at tho tlcc, wo of courso discussod those sat tors in groat do-
tail, Strong's work was the basis on which wo did all our work. That
was In 1935 in 3aadong on Java.

Q. Thon it is gonorally understood In yrur profession that
Strong usod prison lnsntoo, is that corroctT

a. Yes.

Cj. And the opinion is dlvldsd In your profession ss to whothor
those prlsonors woro or woro not volunteers, is that corroetj

A. Yes. that was oxprossly said by tho Phllllpplno doctors, that
they did not bollovc that thoy woro voluntoers. Profossor Strong did
not always soy so. Uany of his papers soy nothing about It, but in
othors ho does calntcln It, but on tho spot tho pooplo did not bollovo
it. It is ofton tho caso in nodical works it says "thoso oro
voluntoers and — "

TH2 PRiSIDEini Counsol, was tho or.ttor of tho pro&osod inter¬
rogation covorod by tho onswore by tho witnoss to tho questions pro¬
pounded by the Tribunal?

DP.. S-UT3ti I havo only ono noro briof quostlon on this nr.ttor
of plrguo, ono singlo question on plcguo.

THX PBZSIDZEIi Procood to propound your question to tho witness.

3Y 33. S.JJTZR;

Professor Soso, one final question on tho problon of plr^uci
did you ovor hear that any authority in tho whole World, whothor tho
church or tho Gev-rnnoat or tho eodicol professional organi*ntlons


6384


2*1 ^r-tt-GZS-7-a-tfaloy (Ton Schoan)
Court 3o. 1.


or any one, objectod tc theeo roports of Strong csd ■idler scientists,
for cxasplo in tho Philllppino Journal, and called the so experiments
criminal, specifically whothor tho church, Christian or non-Christian,
protostont or Catholic, took this point of Tie*.

7H2 PEBSUEWE* Tho citnose say nnsrex that quostion yos or no.

I bog your pardon, unfortunatoly it is i^osslble. Vory ex¬
ceptionally thoro woro criticises, not of Strong specifically but of
other work which I know of, but on tho wholo I nevor hoard such
criticise, such criticise was always on oxcoption. I ns Tory sorry
that I could not obsorve your instruction.

C. Ono brief final question on another subjoct, only a correction.
It is ssco thing which tho Tribunal naked — a Tory briof quostion,
Professor. In tho oxaalnatior. of Profoosor Postock tho Tribunal askod
whothor infinity can bo ascortainod by blood tost, that is whothor an
oxporicont with hucan boinge is absolutely nocoasaryi did you under¬
stood tho quostion?

A. Yos.

q. Is that corroct?

a. In the diroct examination by Dr. 7ritx I have olrondy
nnoworod this quostion. I don't know whothor it osenpod your notico,
Dr. Sautor. I know you have a docusent, I bolioTO it is So. 24, which
you nratod tosubdt on tho subject.

DP^ SflDTSai Thon I have no core questions, kr. Prosidont.

TharSc you.

mz PH2SID22?!« Tho Tribunal till bo in rocoss for a fow
cinutos.

(Thereupon a rocoss was token)


6305


24 April 47-lfr.S«-3-l-MoohGn-Int: 3rown
Court Ho, 1


IKE MARSHALL: Ifco Tribunal is again in sossion.

TEE PHESID2HT: i '.ny othor quoetions to tho witness
on tho part of an dcfonso counsol?

3Y DR, ‘.•EISGERBER: (Counsol for Dofondont Siovcrs.)

<U Profossor, Document HO, 123, Exhibit 303 of tho
Prosocution, was the objoct of discussion yostorday
botwoon you and your counsol. This is tho lottor from
Profossor Haakon to Profossor Kirt of 9 May 1944 ,
regarding oxporinonts with a dry typhus vr.ccino; I shall
havo it put to you in caso you don't hr.vo it infront
of you?

A, Thank you, I havo tho ontiro Document 3ook Ho. 12
and hr.vo it opon to tho corroct pa go,

Q, Tlx> contents of this lottor woro litorally tho
contonts that Slovers sont on 19 ?!ay 1944 to tho Chiof
of tho 3S - './.V.H.A. and this lottor was put in by
tho Prosocution as Exhibit 304, Yostoriay you concornod
yoursoIf only with tho nodical importanco of this
lottor; now I ask you, sinco my cliont is not r. doctor
and has no nodical knowledge; can a lay-nan coo from
this lottcr that the vaccinations with tho vr.ccino
dovolopod by Haagon, oxcopt for a fevor ror.ction t’. :.t
lasts soiao tino, could hrvo any fatal or infoctious
of foots on t!o person innocul tod; can clay-nan soo
that from this lottor?

A. L-t no corruct this cno orror first of all, I did
not discuss tl is Document yostordey with Dr, Fritz,
tho Document disoueaod yertor y was Docunont No, 127.
Tho wholo question to which this letter rofers, hawovor,
I t;ont into at gro t length with Dr. Fritz,

Now, to answer your specific questions. A lr.y-nrn can,
in my opinion, not deduce such natters as you brought


fio86


24 -pril 47-M-ST8-2-Hoohan-Int: Brown
Court No. 1


forth fron this lottcr for tho sinplo ror.son th: t thoro
is nothing to that effect in tho lottor; how then
could a lcy-ann find anytl ing in thoro if tho export
could not.


6387


24 ..pril-ii-DJG—r-1—C ock (Int. orcrn)

Court Sc. 1

Q The defendant Sievera drew only the conclusion, fr:= what
Haagen said, that this ■ za a testin' of the vaccine, a protective
vrccinotion such as are riven -illlens cf tines in protecting against
all sorts of diseases. Can my chjecticr. V e raised tc that point cf
view cr could cr.c say hr else had tc teke something nice intc account?

A Nc, that is also ay conviction, end 1 ns tedoy still firnly
convinced that itor-gen verioed in a cczrplctOy irraproachr le v ay, and
neither free: riteoases ncr lrca documents have 1 b-cn able to find
anythin- th t ccntrr.ci.cts thrt. 1 atntod spocificclly yesterday that
only this dcc-cient 127 — if I had received this document, I shculd
havo hccoao suspicious ni would hnvc raked questions, lut th* t is
tho only cno frea which it could tc doluccd that he intended anythin*-,

that wr.s incorrect.

Then no laynan vac was not an expert ccul ’ iir.ve seaj that?

«* 1 don't even kno*. whether oievers saw thin letter, docu¬
ment 127; and, of course, it is ver; difficult fer - specialist tc
Judge "hot a lryaon si ht doducc free* s.n-thin; like thi3. .'.a r.
specialist cn<- Is el'ys inclined t. so- rv.tters uch .-ere sir.ply,
ml tc bulievo th t t .c-.uso c.»c understands cue's self th*t othcra
oust rlso unriurstrnd; 'ut vc eftu. find cut th't is r. very censider-
iblc rrcr. I consider it quite pensi le thrt even if Sicvcr3 had
seen this V. cuuc.it 127, nothin p-rUcularly vcul* w_ struck hla
in it.

'I .r.l if he only saw document 123 —

A There is nothin in it tl 11. Th^rc is cifly conticn cf
vaccines.

a.. aS02-31i»: do further questions.

THE rhSSIDarr: ..r- there -ny ether questions f this witness
fcy defense counsel?

If net, th-. rresocuticn ary crcss-axc.-air.u the r-itness.

cfxss 5XuT.:..nci:

6S38


2i April—-fr-DJG-9-2-CocfC (Int. Brown)

Court Ho. 1

BT ISL. lfcH.HET:

Q Frofcsscr, as an efficor in the medical service cf the
Luftwaffe, were ycu not ultinetely subordinated to the defendant
Handloser os Chief of the .'edical Services of the 'rfchraecht?

« I was subordinate te the nodical office of the Luftwaffe.

The Chief of the lfodic-1 Service of the hchnsccnt I did not regard cs
37 suporior officer, in the stmo way as I did rorard ay suporior in
the Luftwaffe.

A I don't car- whether you regarded him as your sup-ricr in
tho seas way. questicn was whether he was net ultimately your
superior as Chief of the licdicd Service of the l.ohmncht?

A No.

Q Ycu did not state such a thing tc au or. the 31 Octcbor 19A6?

A He, I certainly didn't say that. Ho cculd cok 00 for pro-

4

fossicnal export opinion, but that docs not mean he was my superior
officor by any means.

Q Wall was oithor Kippku cr Schroo.or your suporicr efficor?

.. Hlppke ani Schrcodor wero ay superiors.

Q And was H ndlosor tho sup-ricr cf Hippke mi Schroodcr?

A I pa r scientist but tut an export in .matters cf military
orc-iniinti. n, and after G.ncrrlarzt Hartlobon testified on these
questions, I as a scientist shculd prof-r not to enter upen this
field. I ’ clievu that „y cr.swors weul only causa confusion to tho
Whole questi:.! and wcul' n t tc the disccvory of the truth.

s Wo will lcavo that up tc the Tribunal to dccido. Did Hand-
loser havo any consulting physicians attached to his staff as Chief
of the .ledical Service cf tho Lohrraacht?

M

A He, he had nc consultants cf his own; sc far as I knew,
there was an ngroonont bet;:eon the chief of the Uo-iicol Service cf
the bohrmacht are! the Jodical Inspectorate of the throe branches of
the behnaacht tc the effect that professor Handle 3 -r ceuld call upon
for scientific consultations the consulting nodical officers of


tho three i ehrmacht branches


6589


Court So. 1

Zn Anr 47-K-10-l-2H<-Grosa (Int. Brown)


^ If Fandloser istued any general Instructions as Chiof of tho
*ellcal Services of the Vshmacht, y«i vould here been bound to follow
thoso instructions, would you not?

A. *ot instanco, ho issued a directive on the inception of the
aalarla prophylaxis. But here again I cannot testify whether that was a
binding order or whether that was simply a oroposcl. Ihet is a -uestion
of nilitrry subordination, regarding which I really cannot givu you any
inforaatlon. I know only that the date was fixed whon tho ralaria oro-
phylexis should begin in the Luftwaffe in rgreoaent with this nroposnl
by Profossor Kendloser. But that took placo so that all branchos of
the Vehroncht should be vorkia: simultaneously on this nattor and I do
know that is what haoDOncd. Sow, whether that hapoenod on tho basis of
an order or a voluntary agreement, that I cannot toll you. As n scien¬
tist I never concerned myself with these things and sinco they ore of
icportanco in this trial I vould consider it crrolese to say anything
about it.

v You also know that HanClosor ns Chief of tho nodical Sorvicos
of tho Vohrnacht controlled typhus vacclno oroduction for ell tho
branchos of the Vehmacht, don't you?

A. I do not know that ho controlled tho production but I do know
that ho had charge of the distribution of the vaccines to various
branencs of the Vehrmncht. But, boforo that, tho Arry Medical Incooc-
torate had had charge of that because before a chief of tho Hodical
Services of the behrnacht existed tho three medical chiefs ngroed volun¬
tarily that the At y, ns tho largest branch of the Vehrmcht, should
undertake this distribution because, since the voccino was very scarce,
all the branches of the Vehrmecht weru trying to get special'rights for
themselves with various fectorics that orcducod vaccines. Thus the
danger arose that someone who was particularly clever at this would got
a large amount and the branch that needed it most of ell, perhaps, but
vos not nuite so clever, vould get the short end of the stick. There¬
fore, et tho beginning of 19-.3 the three ncdicel inspectorates volunteri-

6350


Court So. 1

24 Apr 47--10-2-i3{-Gros (Brovn)


ly forced that the Ar^y Medical Inspectorate vas to do the distributing.
And, so far es I Jcaov, the Chief of the Medical Services of the Vefcmecht
carried on the sr.oe policy.

v A* I recall, in one of the letters to Heaven fren the Medical
Service of the Luftwaffe, I think it vas the letter vritton by Kant rad
vfcich you ad^lt having sor.e knowledge of, nention was nado that the pro¬
duction of typhus vaccine by Kaagen would have to be taken up with Hand-
loaer. Isn't thet right?

A. Yob, that is in the letter and that nay be traced back to that
old agreonont of the year 1942, because at that tine it was also agrood,
so far as I rcaor.bcr, that in case any branch of the Vehrnacht sot up ito
own production facilities tho Arny Medical Inspectorate should be lnfornsd
of this. Tho ropsoc for this noasuro was to prevont one branch fron pro¬
ducing; for itsolf one hundred thousand doses and still receiving its on-
tiro ouota. ns If it had no production of its own at nil. But, as I said,
thoso are rathor adainistra.tiv.o antlers, of which I heard incidentally.

Tor Instance, I knew that there vvro individual agroor-ents but I unfortu¬
nately do not know tho orocise text.

’v It is true, is it not, that after tho war with Bussla boron tho
typhus problo.-i bccor.o very acute?

A. Yes.

•v. Typhus vas not coa:on in Gorrjtzy. *tb it?

A. Bofore the >r.r there was no typhus in Gerooajr at all.

v And to neet this typhus problea you could do two things, couldn't
you? One vas eoebat lice with disinfectants such as Zyklon B, rnd the

other wq 6 to produce protectivo vaccines.

A. Yes.

v This Cocnittee vkicfc you were on with Dr. Peters wrs very nuch
interested in Zyklon 3, was it not?

A. It concerned itself with disinfectants in toto and that included
cleo the interest in Zyklon B. But Zyklon 3, naaely, prussic acid, vas
not a very 3orlaus probien in this aa.tter. At any rate, fron ny point of


6391


Court So. 1

24 Apr 47-n-10-3-a3i-Gros8 (1st, Brovn)


vlev, I vbb representative of the civilicn consumers end the civilian con-
■user8 received no orus6ic r.cid et ell. There were only el#rht firns thnt
vere pcrr.itted. Thoy had to oresent their recuoste for diBinfectonte ar.d
then recoivod their miote. So thet trussic ecid was the thin#: that could
to aottlcd no«t easily in this whole setter. It therefore did not oley
euch n lnr*e rolo. Of course, it did play en Important rolo ouroly in
the production ruostion, tut this vas not settled by the connittoo bo-
cnu 80 the cocuittec eisoly hnd to distribute thoso disinfectants and
che.iicnla which vere node available ty .-vein Group Cfconicnls for distri-
tution. And prussic acid is used not only as in insecticide tut Is also
very inportrnt in ::acuffcture. for example, in the production of un¬
breakable rflass prussic acid is used and otchin^ and tanning procodureo
.vnko use of prussic acid. And prussic acid is used in r,Triculture as nn
lnoticticldu, and all these natters vero decided hi^hor up. This vorkin,:
counlttec for insecticides recolved fros the vholc total rvnilatlo mount
of prussic ccid thnt an our.t of orussic acid that vas aado rvallatlo for
coubattirig of insect pests dangerous to hu-.an health. The agriculture
insect posts v«ro taker, care of ty another coonltteo and they rcceivod
er.cunte of prussic odd free cor.ovfcorc else; in other words, not oruoBlc
acid that ve controlled. And industry in its turn roccivcd its sharo.

Vas tho sane typo of prussic rcid used in insecticido control
ps in agriculture or nanufr.cturin#; uses?

A. Regarding the agriculture insect o*Gts I «r. not well infor-cd.
5ut, I should like to assuse that this is so because the nein chnractor-
istic of Zyklon B is that it contains nn agent that snells. Prussic acid
has no snell itself and when ve deni vith the insect ocstc dcivecrous to
huaan lives ve added this a,:eat that sucllod as e warning that thip vrb
prussic acid. Then this, of course, vns the sane point of vlev the
peoplo fighting e.:ricuiture insect Dcsts had, tecueo they vere Just pb
interested intelnc warned by the snoll as tho disinfectors, tut I can't
aey that for sure because I had nothing tc do vith cocbettin.* of pjricul-
turo insect pests.


6592


Court So. 1

24 ipr 47-tf-lC—i-LEM-Or os s (Int. Brovr.)


^ Scv the disinfectors, that is, the insect control oeoole, had
to obtain their oruteic acid free your coaolttee or through your connit-
tee, did they not?

The prussic acid vbs assigned to these elftht fires by the corsnit-

toe.


Court I

21* Apr 1*7-i - 11-1 - LJG - Karr aw (Int. Brown)

«. Now, would the extreme necessity for the large scale
production of typhus vaccines and the resultant experiments on
busan beings in concentration camps have arisen had not Germany
been engaged in a war?

A. That question cannot simply be answered with "yes" or "no 11 .
It is, on the whole, not very probably that without the war typhus
would have been introduced in the German carps,but it is not alto¬
gether without bounds of possibility because also, in tires of
peace, typhus has been introduced in individual cases fron tire to
tine and the primary danger in the camps is tho louse danger, and
infections with lice take place also in tioos of peace. Then, if
typhus is introduced into such a cusp that is infocted with lico,
a typhus epidenic can arise in poacetimo also, of course.

Q. But Oercvany had never experienced any difficulty with
typhus before tho war. Isn't that right?

a. Not for neny docados, no.

You stated that nine hundred persons were usod in Dr.
Strong's plague oxeriaents?

a. Yes, I t tt mr.b.r freu tho literature on thu subject.

'•*. unat is tho usual oortality in plague?

a. That depends on whether it is bubonic plague or lung post.
In one, nojely, bubonic plague, tho mortality can bo as high as
sixty or seventy per cont. It also can be lower. In lung post,
the mortality is just about one hundred.

j. How many poopli died in Dr. Strong's plague experiments?

A. According to what his roports say, none of then diod,
but this result could not have bean anticipated because this fcas
tno first tire th t anyone had attomted to innoculate living plaguo
virus into human boings, and Strong said in his first publication
in 1905 that he himself was surprised that no unpleasant incidents
occurred and that there was only this severe fever reaction. That
despite this unexpectedly favorablo outccrae of Strong's experiments


6594


Court I

-j«- UY- H-2 - LJG Karrcw (Int. Brown)

th« specialists had considerable misgivings about this procedure
can be 3een first of all froo literature where that is explicitly
stated; for example, two Snglishaon say th-t, contrary to expecta¬
tions, those experiments wont off well but nevertheless this process
cannot be used for general vaccination because there is always
the danger teat, through soce unexpected event, this strain again
bocoaes virulent. Moreover, free other works that Strong later
published it can bo soon that Guinea pigs and nonkeys that ho vac¬
cinated with this vaccine, diod, not of tho plague but of the toxic
affects of the vaccine. All tboso difficulties are the reason why
this onomously inportant discovery which Kollor and Otto t.udo in
1903, and Strong in 1905, has only boon generally applied, for all
practical purposes, sinco 1926. That is an indication of tho caro
and fear with which this wholo uattor was first approachod, and
Strong could not Know ahoad of tino that his oxpurirxmts would
turn out woll. I doscrlbod horo tho enoraous concern that Strong
folt during all theso tenths regarding tho fact that that night
happen which ovory specialist foarod, viz. that tho virus would
boo one virulent again. T hat is an onoraou s responsibility.

A. Bo that as it ay, nobody diod. That is a fact, isn't it?

• If anyono did dio, tho literature says nothing about it.
Thuro were mortalities only among tho nonkeys and Guinea pigs that
are nontior*.d in tho publication. If hurnn beings diod, thuro is
no aontion in tho publication. It is generally known, if thuro aro
serious accidents in 3uch oxporironts as this, they are nost roluct-
ant in making then public.

i. How, Professor,I have no wish to linit you but, as 1 under¬
stand it, you havo explained those things in considerable detail
during tho four days in which you have already tostifiud. If you
can givo a short answer to qy Question that is all I want. If I
want any further explanation I'll ask you for it.

Now, what is the normal death rate in beri-beri?


6395


Court I

2J* Apr U7-H - 11-3 - LJG - Sorrow (Brown)

a. That doponds on tho nodical care given. If the care is
good, the mortality is zoro, and if thoy have no nodical care at
all, then a lot of then die.

Q. Sixty to eightyper cent would probably die if they wero
not treated# Is that right?

A. Bori-buri lasts for many, axny aonths before a person dies
and you don't die in sixty days of bori-beri, that has to bo a
severe case.

Q. How any people did Strong use in his beri-berl experiments?
Is twenty-nine all you know about?

A. So far as I know free tho literature, the number was twonty-

nine.

Q. Soli, it says in tho literature that ho used only twonty-
nine. Is that right?

*. So far as I know, yos.

Q. and ono of those diod?

A. According to what tho literature says, ono of then diod.

Q. What is tho »rtality in typhus?

a. That varios onorrwusly. It depends on the epidemic. In
sorx» opidoaics the mortality is five, p-r cent. In general, you
count on a Mortality of twenty pur cont. In tho Sorbian-Albnnian
opidosdc in 1915| thoro was a mortality of seventy por cont, but
that mortality rate is so extraordinarily high that it is gonorally
assumed that probably, in reality, t ore w u re noro casos of typhus
than were actually reported on.

Q. ifoll, wo could take roughly fir- to thirty pjr cont as tho
nortality. Is that right?

«. A us, that is what tho text books generally say.

Q. imat was tho mortality in the ^uchonwald experiments,
Professor?

a. In the controlled cases in the experiments that I know of,


the .Mortality was thirty per cent.

6396


Court I

2k «pr L7-X - 11-k - LJG - Sorrow (Brown)

Q. among tne controls, you figured thrity per cent?

A. i'as. There were ten control parsons in the first group
of experiments, and of then, three died.

Q. I'hrz* died? Well, but I assu.« tiat you have read through
the Ding Diary and let us assume for the nosent that it is correct.
Didn't you say that they also used control persons in the four or
fivo other series of experiments.

a. In thee on trolled casos whore they were testing tl» vaccine,
tho general mortality was thirty per cent. But then there wore
these therapeutic experiments in which, according tc the Diary, blood
infections were undertaken and, in this case, tho Diary does mention
an unusually high mortality rate.

v *» Wo 11, profossor,for your information - we have figured out
fivo control Berios in the Ding Diary, and I moan by controls thoco
tiiat wore not treated with anything. The mortality ranges botwoon

e

fifty-four to one hundred per cont and averaged uighty-ono per cont.
Do you accept those figures as corroct? I soon, do you think that's
right?

Q. No, tint dees not correspond with tho impression I got
fron tho nunUrs in tho Diary, but I didn't calculate it so jro-
cisely as all that. I looked at tho individual experiments and it
is true that, for instance, in tb^so therapeutic exporirents Ding's
work aentions a mortality of scathing like fifty to fifty-fivo por
cont, and t.;on there is ono sorios that deals with blood infection
whore of twonty people I believe nineteen died.

Q. Lot no put it to you. Professor. Isn't it a fact that they
weren't dealing with epidemic typhus in Buchenwald, but with a super¬
typhus, developed from man to nan passage, which was r.uch acre
virulent and auch acre deadly than any typhus you could expect in
an epidemic?

a. That I cannot judge because I have no knowledge of the work
done in -uchenwald and can only refer to what Dirt's Diary says.


6597


Court I


21i Jkj* U7- ,r - 11-5 - LOG - Karrcw (Brown)

which I rogard as unreliable.

Q. Sell, if you regard it as reliable. Doctor.and if you
figure out the deaths among the untreated control persons and find
a nortality which averaged eighty-one per cent, won't you, as a
scientist and an expert on tropical diseases, concede thet they
had developed a highly virulent, something we night call a super-
typhus, in Buchonwaldt Isn't that right, Professor?

As a scientist I an accustomed to state my opinion on the
basis of reliablo doc urantation, and not on the basis of such
falsifications which aro producod for a special purpose.

Q. I can appreciate that you don't regard the document as
reliable, Professor, but we'll investigate tr.at a little later.
Pursuing the samo point which I havo been putting to you and in
reforonco to your answer about epidemic Jaundice, aro you proparod,
as an export, to state th'.t a nan to nan passage of an epidemic
Jaundice virus could not bring about a new disease which might bo
quite doadly?

A. I have no p-rsoncl experience in this since 1 never triod
out any such oxpori runts. I can only roly on what is said in
English and American lit-raturo whore 3uch passage frea nan to
nan was carried out in core than six hundred cases, and no increaso
in virulence was observed. Moroover, tho passage from nan to man
is tho normal fora of contagion in all infectious diseases which
is not transmitted by any intermediate agent. For instance, diph¬
theria is transmitted only from man to nan with no carrier, and
meningitis is tho sore. If a now meningitis epidemic breaks out,
then the nortality is, at the beginning, very high. It can be as
high, for instance, as fifty p*r cont in meningitis. Then, after
the epidomic has been in any one area for quite a while, the mortal¬
ity drops. This is a pretty general epideailogical law. That is
not truo only of meningitis, but of many other contagious diseases;
naooly, that the epidanic is" nor- dangerous at the beginning than
at tho end of its course.

6398


24 pr-k-GZS-12-l-lialoy (1st. 3roa)
Court 3b. 1.


0* -oil ero you suro that epldoalc Joaadlco ii transforrod with
out taj intorcediate area agent#, is that right! do you know how it
is transforrod?

t. m That is cy scientific conviction, which I also stntod during
ny interrogation in Lot era. ^n ezeorpt of it is boro as a docunor.t.

It soys thcro that wo on tho bases of our objoctlons wero convlncod
that hepatitis opidonic cot transclttod by a corrior, but that tho
infoction occurs diroctly fro» can to can. In caso this is ieportont
to you I could find you tho passage in tho docuoont. but porhapo oy
nontlon suffices,

Going back to tho typhus oxporioont as nn oxport, aro you pro-
parod to tell this Tribunal it sakes no dlfforonco in tho sovorlty of
dlsooso typhus if n era is infoctod by a bito of a louse in coapnriaon
to having two cubic contleotcrs of typhus infoctod blood injoctod
intravonously?

A. Cortninly. Tirst of nil thoro is a dlfforonco in tho amount
of tho infoetlng agent, and tho bass of tho lnfoctlng agont always
plays a groat rolo in any such infoctlous dlsonso.

Q. 'toll, whoa you have two cubic contlnotors of typhus Infoctod
blood injoctod into n eon's blood strora, eight not a sciontist oz-
pcct tho dlsoaso would bo so sovoro as to b rook down any protection?

A. One would have to hove ozporicacc in this rospoct. Thon ono
io vory much inclinod to ecko that assueptlon, nneoly that nn in¬
foction with two cubic contieotors of blood would cause ooro sorious
lllno3s than an lnjoction with scy ono-tonth of a contiootor of ln-
foctod blood. That is tho nssueptlon ono would have about this from
tho very beginning, but what tho courso of tho dosoasc roelly is,
that would havo to bo obsorvod.

q. «nd it would toko a sissiltnnoous bltii« froe nboit a Billion
lico to put two cubic contisoters of infoctod blood into « con,
wouldn't it, doctor?

I have never figured that out, koroovor tho concentration


6399


2-1 *pr-4t-G3S-i2-2-4ialoy (Bronx:)

Court Ho: X.

of the typhus virus in tho blood is not precisely known to bo. Tho
lico focaa contain tho virus in groat nuflfcore, whoroas inttfao blood
those virus is so spexsoly present that its presonco cannot ovon bo
proved with a eicroscopo, and to that oxtont the ncount of two ccs of
blood could not bo eoasurod with tho aeount of focos that c louso pro¬
duced, bocauso I assure you nrc roforrlng to that the louso* a bito
does not trnnscit typhus nt ell. Tho saliva of tho louso is not
infectious, but apparently you woro reforrine to tho lz^octious focos
of tho louso which thon gota into tho louso bito.

0, Profosaor, as I urdor st a nd it, you and tho co-dofondnnto,
rognrd tho oxporiconts of Strong with plc^uo, and bori-bori Involving
around 950 con with ono death, and tho oxporiconts of Blanc in Africa
whoro thcro wore no deaths, and tho •corlcan enleria oxporinonts
where thoro woro no deaths, as being quito a good procodont for tho
Buchonwnld oxpericents with doath around 290, with Schilling's
experiments, whoro anothor Tribunal has found ovor 400 casoo of donths,
oithor dlroctly or lndiroctly. or tho oxperUonts of Haegon whoro tho
truth boforo this Tribunal shows 50 donths. is that right?

You have reforrod to quito a nuabor of cr.sos which aro portly
absolutely not so. ?or instanco no proof hesboen givon yot that in

tho coso of Kongon*s exporiconts. (no transition, bocauso of

sound systoc).

Q. Ulll you ropoat your answer plooso. I got no translation.

UR. KcE-KET* If tho Tribunal ploasc, wo night take an adjourn¬
ment at this tiac, rad tho witness night hnvo tho intorBissionto con-
aldor his answer.

TH2 PHSSIT'TTi Tho Court will bo in recess until 1*30.

(Thereupon a rocoss was takon until 1*30 p.n.)


6400


Court So. 1

24 Aar 47-A-13-1-Z&-Fotter (1st. Von Scfacea;


ajtsbjhx* sissies

(Tho hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 24 April 1947.)

—HASSHAL: The Tribunal la again In aeaalon.

wC KAMT: Before continuing with croas examination, the orose-
cution re-meats that the Tribunal order at thla tine that Document N0-
lcta, which vaa narked ea Prosecution Exhibit 456 for Identification,
te Jade available to the defence counsel for Xerl Brandt, Dr. Servatiua.
I understand an order of the court la necessary to have the orlginel
exhibit recoved from the vault.

THI PRESIDENT: The Tribunal directs that the original of orosecu-
tion exhibit for prosecution's identification 456 bo brought Into tho
court - to exhibited to counsel for tho defendant Krrl Brandt.

GLHKA3D HOSE - Hesu-.cd
CROSS EXaHIKaTZOK (Continued)

71 .<R. KC KAHEY:


v recall tho a never I put to you before lunch. Mu you

oloaso answer.

A. Vhun the sound system broke down this norning, I Just said that
is tho nuontion which was put to oc sovcral assumptions aro wrong and I


.uot correct thea. Ycm said that in Professor Karlen's cxporlncnts 52
people died. In reality, that has not been proved, nor did any peoplo
dio nt ell thoro. It believe that I cennot go into detail on this ques¬
tion here since that would be an argument and I ves not permitted to do
that on diroct examination end I assume that I noy not do so in cross
oxanination either. You aleo said that in Professor Schilling's exnori-
-or.ts 300 people died. This aleo is untrue. Through your witness here
it was not a single person diod of caleria in Schilling's ex-

;-r;nA-i,

• iewe,* said thnt. He also said that seven oer-
»4ns died fray incidents in the course of treatment and errors in treat-
sent. It is true that*in Document Book 4 submitted by you the number 300


dv.id is given. Th^se .’are supposed to be in


ease connection with tho


orlaria expvricajjtu' I oust as suae that the court in Dachau had soce

'S'*


Court So* 1

Zi Apr 47-A-13-2-ZPX-?otter (let. Yon Schoen)


expert who expressed his opinion to that effect. I personally should
like to say that I vculd rather be a defendant here then give ny signa¬
ture as n court expert to a document certifying that 300 people supposed¬
ly died after a disease which, according to proof, 1 b not fatal like
malaria tertiane. And considering the sevoa dead in Schilling's exoerl-
cent, I should like to say that I personally should not like to be
responsible for sevsn derd - seven dead would be enough of a burdon for
no. A single person who died free cy negligence as a doctor would bo an
onornais burden on =y consclonco. I don't intend to mibblo about the
ai'.bcr of dead, I Just merely wanted to sake a correction.

And thon you gave figures from the Euchen^nlfi experiments. There
again thero are groat dlfferoncos botvc«r. the numbers of dead in the
expcrlnont orderod by higher government authorities, and tho experiments
which Dr. Ding apparently carried out on his own initiative, to Judgo
by his diary. After this correction of tho assumptions I coco to tho
answer.

You asked ue whether I considered tho indicated hunan exoorlDsnto
ns a precedent which Justified those experiments vfcich rro tho subjoct
of tho indictaont. I nay say that of ceurso ono can only ccnparo things
•-hich ore comparable. In ay direct oxaainaticn I did not give any
cxarrplas cf huryin experiments. I mentioned only two cases of fully per-
. iociblo oxocriuento whore I knew tho detcils, in order to explain what
tho aental burden on the doctor in chrrgo cf tho oxporiaent is, end what
his responsibility is. But if one waits to uso these experiments as a
comparison with those which aro the subject cf this trial, then in one
case such c comparison is actually possible. For example, if you tako

the berl-bori experiments of Professor Strong, a disease was lntention-

•

ally induced which involved severe suffering for tho cxarir.ental sub¬
jects and one death, in spite of careful nedicrl ettonticn. This deeth
vas, of course, not such a greet burdon on the person in charge of the
experiment since the person was already condemned to deeth as the paper
8ays. As fer es I con see, that would more or less correspond to the


6XZ


Court So. 1

24 Atr 47-A-13-3-£HM-rotter (1st. Von Schoen)

orcorisent of rrofessor Gotkiirdt. H e had 70 oxoerlnental subjects and
hid the aisfortune of heving three of then die. The other* had severe
illness. The aortality ve« about the sane, threo percent, cad lllnoB*
we* caused with all the subjects. If you tako rrofessor Hrugovslcy'e
aconite, then there is no cocparlson In the enables »*ich I centlonod,
tut one can coopare this execution with the poisoning of people condcnned
to death by ccrbcn tetrachloride. That has not been ouoted yet. I
have Intentionally not sectioned anything of the exoerLuente boeauso I
hnov the ruling of the Tribunal that they had to be discussod only lator.
3ut in thoso poisonings with carbon tetrachlorido, instead of hanging
the pooplo they wore poisoned with carbon tetrachloride, and insofar as
the poisoning was not fatal they vero hanged later and their livers
wore ovalued in order to establish the effect of the carbon tctrnchlo-
rido. That would bo a parallel to thie execution.

And if you want to take the Buchenwald passages, if you want to
havo a cooparison, I'd aontioned Adlor's oxocriaents where all tho ox-
oerlaontal subjects dlod.


2k April U7-^-»TI>-ll'-l-^ohan (Int. von Scfaoon)
Court No, 1


Oiw can only cocparo what is comparable. Sch i l lin g 1 s nal aria
experiments on prisoners can conpare only with the African nalaria
axperinanta on prisoners. Of courso, I cannot tall you in detail
Yrrn nany incidents occurred, I know that work was doro with nalaria
tertiana in particular and no one can die fron that in Amcricanany-
noro than in Dachau, How aany incidents occurred during treatment,

I do not know, but I do know that work was done in Arerica with
nalaria tropica too and since !'r, Simeons did not have ny Pfaffonrodo
tropica strains, which bonign and not fatal, but had the normal
tropical strains, it is hard to bdiove that thaso oxporinents went
off without ary casualties.

And now tho fa tali ties of typhus in the ocpori&jnts ordorod by the
German Oovomoont, one can of ccurso coc.aro tho fatalities only with
the typhus oxporinonts in American prisons, I cannot givo you tho
figuroa bocauso thoy hare not boon publishod yot nn' possibly thoy
will not bo publishod bocauso of tho mortality in thoso experiments.

It is gonorally known that such unploasant lncidonts, which aro a
tragody against tho porson-rosponsiblo for tho oxperinonts in tho
oyos of tho public, aro not ploasant and such oxporinents can bo mado
public only in a concoalod form. Does that answer your question?

Q 'fall, of courso, if one assunce as ycu do that tho proof of
tho Prosocution is althor falsified or non-jxisting and that no
deaths occurred or if any doaths occurred that thoy wero purely acci¬
dental, than of ccurso thoro is no point at all in talking about
comparison with experiments in other countries. The only conclusion
than is that tho Prosecution has no oaso and I subnit to you that tho
proof tho Prosocution has put in that 250 or r»ro people diod in
Puchcnwnld fron tho typhus experiment and 157 in tho experiments £hcr>-
selvos and 100 at least in tho experimental canp.

I Gutdt to you that the . itnoss Sclrddt has testified that peoplo


died in Haag on's experiments, irrespective of whether you believe it
and I further sutnit to you that another Tribunal has held innumerable


21* April 'eohan (Int. von Schoon)

Court So. 1

deaths occurred in Dachau.

I an asking you bow you can draw ary comparison, if you assume
too proof to noan anythin'; and if yew don't there is no reason for
Di putting the question to you. If you assume tho proof has sono
merit to it, hew can you testify from that stand how there is any coo-
carison between the experiments of Strong, where at loast one person
dod and the malaria oxporimants in Aaorloa whore nobo.-y died, otc, I
suggest to you that possibly tho difforenco in these sxparirxmts is
that ovin in a prison in tho Fhllliplne Iran's and ov^n in a prison
in /juries, tho prisoners have scco ri'-.hts. Thee* have rulativos, they
not only vote but can suo in the courts, as can the prisoners then-
sieves. If they aro nistroatod an a death is brouvht about they can
obtain rodress. I further jut to you that in the. concentration oaaps
in Ooxrany that th: relatives in oast cases, if they woro non-Gcroan
nationals, did not oven know whoro they woroj and if thoy died a
falsifio l doath cortificato was sent to tho relatives ar.i in nost casos
thoy woro rogardod by thoir inoarcorators as sub-harmn.

Not?, 'boon*t that factual difforenco indicate to you that perhaps
thooo axp-irinonts of Strong nro in no way cceiparablo to tho oxpori-
rxnto with which wo aro herewith concerned?

A First, I should liko to say that I havo not nontionod any
experiments on human bedrves which aro to bo compared with tho oxpari-
nante hero and I do not know why you ask about oxporinents in con¬
centration canps sinco you know, and tho prosocution in tho person of
'!r. Hardy has expressly aknitted that I not only objected to oxporinents
in concentration canps, but even on cxpariiionting on persons condcnnod
to doath. You don't a33U'n that sinco I protested apainst it in ,
HiTacr'3 tine, now when I an confronted by you, I un not Toinr to
change sides and begin to defend experiments in concentration canpsj
that is asking 3 llttlo too nuch. I said that before and that is ny
stand.


2h April .7D-ii.—3-Keohan (Int. von Sehoen)

Court So. 1


j fell very well, very well, then wo needn't spend ary nore tino
on Strong's experiments. Han are you ready to concede that the typhus
experiments in Buchersrald wore nothing but Border j as I have understood
ycur testimony that is the way you described it in the meeting in May
of 19U3j is that right?

A No, that Is a distortion of ry words. ,.t the netting in 19U3
I did not say that this was nurdor. I said that tteso woro serious
medical oxporlnents, which had had results of groat significance and
this part of ry 3tatcn.nts has boon printed and is available, but in
3 pito of this, on the basis of nodical ethics, I protested against tho
exocution of such oxperinonts and especially against the fact that
Oovornnont agencies assigned such an enormous and unboarablo burdon to
rxmbara of ty profession. That is whet I said. Tho fact that in
addition to tho oxpurinents roportod at the mooting of consulting
physicians, conditions sooood to havo prevailod or said to havo pro-
vailod at Buchonwald, according to tho toatinoiy of tho witno38os
horo. Neither I, nor any other participants in this mooting had any
knowlodgo, on tho contrary wo woro ropontodly assurod at that tiao that
tho subjocts woro porsona who had boon lot-ally condonnod to doath. In
apito of tho fact that this assurance was given at tho tine and thoro
aro raary livirv- witnesses who can tostify to it, novortholoss I pro¬
tested. *.1 though I alnit that for nary pcoplo • ho think differently
than I do, the fact ai',ht bo sufficient, tho fact that a person is
con'craned to death and they say, ,r oil the nan has to -Ho anyhow, thon
it does not nako ary difference if ho dies in a nodical experiment or
whether he is executed." But, as I say, I admit that other people can

have this point of view, I an not tho Pope whe sets up general ethics.

*

It is not ry opinion anti I expressed ry opinion at tho tine.

q Kerr Professor, did you or did you not tell Gildasaistor when

\

you talked about GUdooeister's experiments, "iTe sight as well set up
ti execution chamber hero at the Robert Koch Institute?"


2k .ipril ixT^.-ATD-Ui-Ji-i'^eban (Int. von Schoen)

Court Ho, 1

A Yos, that is exactly what I said and that aoant if people
condennod to decth are used for dangerous nedical experiner.tsj then
that is the sane thing as an execution, that would bo an execution
section in the Robert Xoch Institute if that rroro the general arrang ty¬
rant of the Govorar-ont and I did not think that was very desirable,

Q Did your witness Schni.it here before this court rocn, or not,
testify that as he understood your objection, you were objecting to
nwrdorj did he say that or didn*t he?

A Yos, Hr. ifcrcy, by clover questioning, succeeded in bringing
tho Tdtnoss to nako this statenant, but I nust know bettor what I
oxprosoly said and if I talked about taarder at tho tine, it was invented
for tho first tine by tho Prosocution hero,

Q Well, whatovor wo Invent, we now want you to ride ono harso or
the other. Lot us assuno for tho nonont, and I know it will tax you,
that Just a few of those oxporisonUil subjects wore not condennod to
loath and further let us assuno that ttoy woro not voluntoors and not
rushing forward and saying, "Yos, you can <~ivo rx> typhus." !fow, would
that constituto a nurder in your Judgnont if against his will ho was
subjootod to an infectious oxForiuont with typhus and ho died?

A That is a quostion of Judicial definition, I do not know of
a logal caso of death in a cvodical oxporirxnt ordered by tho Govomraont
and approved under tho laws. I do not consiior rysolf a legal export
30 that I cannot fiva such a definition,

Q V’oll, in any event, wo can at least condudo that you are not
preparod in ary ovont to dofond the Buchcnwald oxp rinents; is that
right?

A I objected to theso exporinan ta at th. tirxj and hero in ty
hroot oxaaLnation I sail! nh-.t I knew about the natives of the doctors
*o r6r^latod theso oxporisfcnts.

Q And if it is a fact that Hoar an killed 150 son in 19UL in
.'latzwoilor, you are also not prepared to defend those eithor?


6!/)7


2 li ;.pril L7->(Inti von Schoen)

Court Kc. 1

« I have already told ycu that in Haakon*s oxpcriaents nobody
died and that no proof has been - Avon tc tho Tribunal hero. I cannot
discuss that here* that would bo an ar-unent and 1 was not allowed to
rr osv;nt arguaenta dosing =y direct exarl nation, but I am quite willing
to explain it to you.

Than tho Witness tho aorphia-oator Edith Schnidt was asked whether
It was right that tte fifty died, she said she would net like to swear
to it and thus she took back her tostinony. If this testimony was-.truo
that fifty control persons died, bocauso sortrlity in typhus is 30£,
thor o would have to havo been 160 control personr, that would noon USO
oxForiacntal subjects and thon this would bo an exp-rinent of 600
parsons. And ycur two witnesses fron hatarollor, olthourh they roro
in tho coup, thv.y did not hear anythin about such cxperirw.nts. >5r.
Holl becaso very excited when you tried to say that he horird sonothing
about infection with typhia. Ho said, ••:*>, I did not soy anything
about typhia infections. I only said as injootions had boon ;/ivon a
typhus opidonic in tho canp break out scs_oti:io la tor." Tho witnoss
Oran!Joan said thcro was a typhis onidalo was in tho canp and tho
block with tho typhus pationta had boon oocplotoly shut off.


Court 1

April 24-rt-15-l-nB-Cooic-Von Schoen.

A. It Is nothln c to wonder at. Typhus wards are
shut off very carefully every where and he concluded from
that If tnis block was 6nut off that experiments were
being ccrrled out.

You and your defense counsel can reserve arguments
about the truth of tr.e witness Schmidt’s testimony at the
conclusion of the trial. I do not wish to take up any
of the Tribunal's time at this time in arguing about
whether or not you believe the testimony of the witness
Schmidt, and if not, why not.

a. I want to i void that. I sr.ia so twice but since
you Insist always on a statement is proved It Is not true.

I hod to answer it.

Herr Professor, now you are Intelligent enough
to know I out a nypotneltlcal question to you. I was ask¬
ing you to give certain assumptions rnd I was trying to
bring out in e clear Conner your attitude toward tnese
exnorlnents. Now you don't wnnt the court to bo
confused about how you feel r.bout on experiment, assum¬
ing certain f-cte, we understand you dispute certain of
tnese f cts, but be that as It may, it Is important for
Che Prosecution, the Tribunal and the defense to know
your attitude toward a given experiment, however, much
we may dispute the f'ets, but elncy you persist in
refusing to exhibit your attitude we will proceed.

A. You understand I h-vu no inclination to dlscuso
Hypothetical assumptions here about things with which I
am charged by you. I should prefer to discuss facts.
Discussions of hypothetical qu^atlons ore very Interesting,
but not In the situation In which I find myself at the
moment.


Court 1

April 24-A-15-2-HJ-Cook-Von Schoen.

ft. Let's go beck to the malaria experiments. What
contact did you have with Schilling In 1941?

a. Jarlng ay direct examination I testified tnat In
1.41 I sow reports about Schilling's malaria work In
Italy on behalf of the Italian government end with the
support of tne Reich Ministry of the Interior, and then
either at the end of 1941 or the beginning of 1942 I
gave on opinion, o written opinion on en application
which Professor Schilling hod sent to State Secretary
Conti, or rather to the .-wlcn .-.lnlstry of Interior. Then
I sow Professor Schilling in 1941 personally. I do not
believe, I am r.ot certain, whether he was In Irermany
again at that time, but I can't deny It with certainty
under oath, because "fter all that was six years ago.

ft. Did you supply him any arterial while he was
working In Italy?
a. No, nothing.

ft. Who was Fraullon Yon Falkonberg?
a. You mean Frauleln Yon V' lkonhayn?
ft. No, I mean Fraullen Von Falkenborg.
a. I don't know any Fraullen Von Falkonberg.
ft. You rrc euro you didn't supply Schilling with
any arterial In 1941?

a. I can't remember It. It might h- ve been done by
ay department without my knowledge. Tnen, of course, I
would take the responsibility for It, but I have not
le rned of It up until now. My assistants did not tell
me anything about It, If It happened. If you can prove*

It happened, I shall, of course, assume responsibility
for It, even If It was done without my knowledge.

ft. Well, It Is not terribly Important, but let's
let you have a look 't at Iiocument lio. 1756. In the mean-

6'SLO


Court 1

April 24-A-15-3-HD-0ook-Von Schoen.

time when did this Incident occur about your giving
materiel to Schilling, after he had set up his institute
at Dschau?

A. I beg your pardon, I didn't understand your ques¬
tion.

ft. When did you give Schilling material after he had
gone to Dachau?

A. I cannot give any information about that myself.

I have to depend on the testimony of ay assistant, Von
Falkenhayn, and my secretary Slock. -:y secretary Block
testified here th t it was the end of 1341, but I would
assume that she is mistaken about that, since Miss Von
Falkenhayn testified that this material was given in the
year 1942. I think the latter is more likely.

ft. Document No. 1756 will bo marked as Prosecution
Exhibit 486 for identification.

THE PRESIDENT: What Is that number?

MR. MCKnNEY: 406.

BY MR. MCKaNSY:

ft. Isn't ther a rraullcn Von Falkenberg mentioned in
this letter of jours to Schilling, dated 3 February, 1941?

A. No, in the German copy of the document whioh you
8howed to ae, it says rraullen Von Falkenhayn.

ft. That is a mistake then in the English translation.

A. Fraullon Von Falkenhayn was an assistant in my
department. She had formerly worked for Professor
Schilling. There la an affidavit from her. Since I
have this letter I can give you some lnformftlon about*
the matter. Professor Schilling wanted to have a
3erologlcal reaction in malaria, the so-called reaction
according to Henry, that 16 a reaction which is carried
out for the puprose of malaria diagnosis, as in the

6L11


Court 1

Acrll 24-A—15-4-HD-Cooic—VonSchoen.


antigen reaction. In this reaction the spleen of dead
oersor.e 19 used In the diet of malaria. Professor
Schilling acparently wrote to me to find out whether 1
cb head of the tropical medical department was in a
position to obtain e spleen from a corpse wnere the
patient had died of malaria. I answered saying that such
material would nardly ce available in Berlin, .malaria
was very rare in Berlin and consequently deetns from
mal'i la were also very rare. The only cases cf this
type occurred in insane asylums, in the treatment of
paralytics. It la well known that the first -work of
Vagner Jaureg* shows tnat in the course of m?Ierio treat¬
ment th»t porolyals ueatns ccc-r, Juot as de th occurs
following operations, and such a lerln deptr.s, of course,
occurred in Berlin insane asylums. As far ns I can
remember the matter my assistants contacted various
cotnologioal institutes in Berlin and asked in case such
an auto-sy occux'red there tnat the soleen should be pre¬
served so that it could be sent to Professor ©chilling.
This was what t.ls letter was about.

Did you ever supcly ony to him?
a. rtS far os I cor. recall in the course of several
months one or two such cases occurred and the mat.rl-.il
w■s sent to Schilling, out J can't say for certain today.

eil yo_ .re now qualifyin., "t least th. answer
you & 0 ve to my earlier question <e to whether you g ve nlm
any material ir. 1341, isn't that rlgi.t?

I beg your pardon. I d.dn't understand the •
question.

I say ©a now wish to qualify the answer you gave
me a f w moments before you saw the letter to the effect
t.'^t you n9d not given him any a terirl in 1341. fou now


6L12


Court 1

April 24-A-15-5—t^-Coofc-Von Schoen.

state you did in fret «ive elm aone after having seen the
letter.

A. Yes, I on 6orry. Hy attention was entirely
devoted to tne question of the malaria parasite strains
and mosquitoes, but the natter of negotiations between
Schilling and the pathological Institute in 3erlln, I
did not think of that.

Q. Let's go bock to what we were discussing. You
8toted that Although Frau Block, said that the malaria
eggs were supplied Schilling in the latter part of 1S41,
you think probrbly it was 19422

A. Yes, that is what I said. Perhaps I may correct
myself. When you speed of Haler in e bt> s you mean anopheles
eggs probably. There ore r.o malaria egoS.

Q. Yee that is right.

A. I cm inclined to agree that Von Falkenhhyn and
Block think differently. I think that Von r'alkenhayn was
right and that it woe In 1942.

Q. Did you know anythin,* about this before it was
sent?

A. I can't renember it. I don't believe so. ms fnr
as I renumber I was informed of it by Fraullen Von
F?.lkenhr.yn, in the mc-ntiae ->ftcr I w^s given a letter
from Professor Scnillln 0 th t the mosquitoes were
thriving in Jrchnu.

w. Did yo- thereafter issue orders tnnt no more
mr.tcrlol w-s to bo 6ent to Schilling, is that right?


Court I


2U Arp U7-A - 16-1 - LJQ - Gross (von Schoon)

a. I did not issue a pr.cisc order. I said since we ourselves
wore using so s&ny aosquitos I didn't want any store satorial to be
sent to ;ir. Schilling because I was not convinced of the scientific
value of his work. But, Fraulein von Falkenhayn in her testimony
says that there was farther correspondence with Fraulein Lango. I
have not boon able to find this correspondence and 1 can't clear
up the question completely. I have to roly fully on ry assistant
in this respect and I can't answer from my cwn knowledge. In our
first conversation on the subject whon I told you that Schilling
got onopholos eggs free us, which you didn't know at tho time, I
did not toll you that ho got a malaria strain from cy department.

I didn't know that at tho tiao. I loamod it just a short tin* ago
free Fraulein von Falkorhayn. That was not in tho affidavit.- Appar¬
ently she was afraid of seen misgivings and sent a letter to tlwt
effoct to =y lawyer. I m not so timid. I an not afraid to tell
you about it.

Q. In oth.r words you did supply a Rcso strain to Schilling?

A. Ho. As I said In diroct examination the Rose strain could
not oooo fraa cy dopartcont bocausa wo didn't have any strain with
tho naue Rose, "h-ro this strain with tho naro «ose coses free is
a puzzle to ro. I don't know of ary •‘ksu strain in malaria litora-
turo. But I don't think there is any point in quarreling about
this naro. fhe inf oration *ivcn by Frauloin von Falkorhayn,
which I believe fully, that a malaria strain is given - this is
quite sufficiont - and no difference whether it is called Rose or
whether a Greece strain, or whether sene other name.

Q. lour witness, Frau Block, testified you had no correspon¬
dence with Schilling in 19U2 and 1?L3, as I recall. Is that right?

A. That is what Frau Block said. I oysolf would not have boon
so definite in ry testimony if you asked oe the sare question. I
would say I can't answer that question definitely. I only know one
thing, that I never corresponded with Professor Schilling on tho


Court I


21* Apr L7-A - 16-2 - tJG - dross (von School)

subject of his work. Vihother Schilli n g and I ever exchanged letters
in those years I don't know since I don't have ay files and such
a rare correspondence as that - any Information about it, whether
he wrote a cortain letter five or six years ago - he says "I would
like to look that up in ny files." Unfortunately I cannot do so
but perhaps you would be kind enouh if you have copies of such a
letter to sake it available to as. You have cy files and they are
ouch aoro easily available to you than to -x>. for example, I an
trying to find cy cal aria opinion free the year 191*1. That was in
tho eoao filo cabinet fren *hich you got the racord of the typhus
meeting 29 December 191*1 in the l-inlstry of Interior.

Q. You ovuro3ti.j!\to tho Prosecution, Herr Profoasor, but wo
needn't dwell on that. Now, is your ocory good snough to tell us
how long you continued to furnish Schilling with material for his
Dachau experiments. You say th t so-iowhoro along in 191*2 you
told thorn not to sund ary noro. Aro you clear about it?

A. Yos, I think I can r.poabor rollably.

Q. Wall, when did this malaria strain go down?

A. I an sorry I can't hoar you.

4, '.»hon did you sond hin tho nalaria strain?
a. I don't know. FTaulein von Folkenhayn noroly told me that
tho nalarla strain was given to Schilling. I don't know whon. Sho
didn't mention that in her letter to Dr. Frits.

e. Lot's look at Document NO-1752. This will be narked as
Proaccution Exhibit 1*87 for identification. Suppose you read the
letter aloud. Professor?

A. "ft-of. Claus Schilling .

"Dachau, 1* Auil 19i2

"3K, Hospital for Inaatjs

"To Prof, Dr. Hose

"Berlin - Fohrerstrasse 2


"Robert Koch Institute


Court I


2h Apr U7-A-l6-3-LJO-Oro3S(VcnSchoon)

■Dear Colleagues

"I inoculated a person intracutaneous with Sporocoide3 fros
the salivary glands of a female anopheles you sent me. For the
second inoculation I do not have the Sporocoidos material becauso
I do not possess the "Strain Rose* in the anopheles yet. If you
should find it possible to send ca in the next days a few anopheles
Infected with "Strain Rose" (with the last consignment two out of
ten nosquitoos were infected) 1 wuld have the possibility of con¬
tinuing this experiront and I would naturally be v«ry thankful to
you for this now support of ~y work.

■*he nosquito breeding and the oxperinenta are proceeding
satisfactjrily, I css wording now on six tertiary strains. I rot»in
with hearty grootings and

"Beil Hitler l

"Yours truly

■signed - Claus Schilling"

Q. Schilling apparently thoxvght there was a "Strain Rose."

A. lea. Ihat is indicated by tho letter. That clears up
the oatter. Ho sust have renamed this strain which cure from ay
department and callod it Rcso. That is very unusual. Normally a
malariologist would not do that.

Q, Aro those your initials on tho bottom of this letter,

"L. g. P.O 17A"?

a. Yus that indicates that 13 days after tho letter was nailed,
12 days after it arrived at the •‘'obert Koch Institute, I saw it.
There is also the file note "Settled SVF. That is Erna von Falkon-
hayn on tho 17 April 19h2. I find that in spite of qy instructions
to the department frauloin von Falkenhayn still sent mosquitoes to
hor old boss although she denies it today but I should like to
emphasize that, of course, I az; responsible for what Fraulein von
Falkenhayn did oven if she didn't eell ae about it.

Q. Well, you saw the letter on tne 17 April 19U2. Did you


6L16


Court I


2h Apr U7-A - 16-4 - LJG-Grcss (Von Sc hoe n)

reaffirm your instructions that no nore material was to bo sent to
Schilling?

a. I can't tell you today. That is quite possible. It is
not oven cortain that I was in tae Hcbort Kcch Institute when I saw
the letter. It is nuch aoro likely that Mrs. Block brought this
letter to ny hone ttfiere such thiajs were generally settled. And,
fron the fact that it had been dealt with ten days before you seo
that such letters were opened by qy secretary.

Q. I thought wo would be a bit generous with Frau Block and
assume she hadn't s»,en the letter since she was so firs in the
testimony thv.t you hadn't corros.-onded with Schilling during thoso
years.

Did you evor send Schilling any atroparvus eggs?

A. Its. That is anoFhelos oggs which he got from us . As
a typo of anopheles ‘n ny laboratory I had anopholos oggs maculi-
ponis atroparvus.

61x17


24Aprii-l-AK-17-l-Karror(Von SchoJi)

Court I

q. Suppose I put docunont >lo. 1753 to you. This will
bo narked ns Prosecution Sxhibit 482 for identification.

This is another letter from Schilling. This ono is datod
a year later - 5 July 1943, ccknowlodging

"with appreciation tho rocoipt of you letter of 30
Juno and the consignment of antroparvus eggs."

I would also liko to diroct your attention, profossor,
to tho lost paragraph of tho lottor whore it says:

"Ploaso toll Frl. Lange, who apparently tokos caro
of her brood with groctor skill and bettor success than
tho prisoner August, ny boat thank® for her troubles."

Do you ronenber tho Christian nano of tho witness
Viowog?

A. No, I •an sorry I don*t rononbor tho nemo of this

non.

q. If you soerch tho rocord I think you will find
his forenano was August.

Nor, Dootor, apporontly thoy oonplotoly ignorod your
ordors of tho yoor provlous not to tend any noro nntorlnl
to Schilling. Apparently you had a change of hoart yoursolf.
Isn't that right?

A* I have olroady stated oxprcssly that my ordors not
to sor.d any noro material to Schilling noant that wo did
not have too much notorial oursolvo3. It did not mean that
I had any misgivings about tho nay in which Schilling was
carrying out his work. It is quito possiblo that when wo
again had plenty of mosquito oggs wo gavo sono to Schili

•

ling again. I an in a very difficult position. It is”dif¬
ficult for nc to testify anything from ny memory. You 300
hero again that this nettor was apporontly dealt with by
Prauloin Lange and Schilling himself rroto to no again.


6US


2 4 Ap r i 1 ~ A - A X- 17 - 2- Ka rr or (Vo n Soho n)

Court I

q. 7'cll, I didn't road it that way. Professor, The
first lino acknowledges of your lotter of June 30th.

A. 7/ell, then it's possiblo that I wrote to Schilling,
q. Frau Block suffered a bad r.encry about your cor.'
respondenco with Schilling in 1943 as veil as 1942, didn't
she?

A. ’/es, I am rather ostoniahod because one would as¬
sume that a secretrry rer.onbors such things bettor, but it,
of course, possible to mako .-.istakos if ono doesn't access
to tho fll&a• I hrvo told you Shat I cannot testify with
any certainty to tho details of such corrospondonco bec¬
ause I had too much corrospondonco,

q. 77o 11, isn't It possible you suppliod material to
him in 1944?

A. I considor that quito imyossiblo. V?e havo tho tes¬
timony of prauloln von Palkonhayn that tho Dopartmont for
Fovor Therepy novor guvo thos: any .notorial and, at that
tlrr.o, I did not have any offlco in Dorlin any longer, but
again I *sust roly #n prauloin von rnlkonhoyn«3 tostlmony.

I rtysolf was at pfnffonrodo onco a month at the most, and
I cnllod up onco or twice a long distanco.

q. I put in Dooumont RO. 1755. This will bo narked
prosocution Exhibit 489 for idontifioation. This is a
roply by you to Schilling, dated 27 July 1943. This lottor
sporks about shipping ogso to Schilling, doosn't it?

A. Yos, apparently. There mat havo boon plor.ty of
mosquito oggs so that rc oould givo up sorao of thorn.

Q. Thorc wasn't as big a shortago as you thought,
is that right?

DR. FRITZ: Hr. Prcsidont, I ask that tho photostat
bo shown to tho defondant Rcso. It is not impossiblo that

6Iil9


24April-;.-^K-17-3-Krrrorr (Von Schon)

Court I

thnt was writ ton by on rssistcr.co and initialed H R". Sin¬
ce I knot; the signature of Professor Roso, I think tho "R"
looks a little different, perhaps ho night bo shown tho
photostat.

Ti!E PRESIDEM?: LBt tho photostat bo shown to tho
witness.

T/ITJffiSS* I nust say I do not understand this signat¬
ure at all. 7/hcn I sigr.od a letter I sigr.od ny name, but
I don't think it's very important.

BY KR. UcHAKEYi

'll V/hon you wero shipping thoso eggs to Schilling in
Dachau it wn3 nftor tho tino you had hoard tho lecture by
Rnschor and Kolzloohncr In Octobor, 1942, in Kurnborg on
froozing, wean't it?

A. Tho datos of thoso lottors woro aftor Holzlouhr.or' s
locturo, yos. Hoizloohnor's lcoturo was in Octobor, 1942,
to my knowledge. But perhaps you might any what conclusions
you draw from that. Do you moan that Kolzloohncr and Schil¬
ling workod togothor? That ono could hnvo ooncludcd anything
from Kolzloohncr's work that would affect Schilling? Is that
you conclusion? That, of courso, would bo quito unjustifiod
I would bo glad if you would oxplain your ouostion.

3* Doctor, I den't think it is too strongo to say that
nan who had, at lonst, rocoivod from information about
how thoy carriod out experiments in Dachau, ovon though on
a differont subjoct, might raiso sono suspicion in nn evor-
Q 3° person's nind cbout Just rho tho oxporincntal subjects
~c.ro down thcro and hew they wero troated?

A. I know Ur. Schilling so rcnr.y yoars. I met him for
-he first tino in 1922, and I knew his roputation in inter¬
actional nodicino end thoro was not tho slightost occasion
-or to draw eny conclusions affooting professor Schilling's


24April-A-AK-17-4-Kcrrow(Von ScfcoH)

Court I

work from the cctivity of !!r. Kolzlochr.er who nevor told
no that ho had any connection -with Professor schilling's
work.

3# Havo you told tho Tribunal yet about your visit
to tho yatzreiler concentration car.p?

A. Noy that was not pos3iblo. I novor visitod tho
iratzr/oilor camp.

Q* sToll, as I recall, you told no on tho 31st of Oc¬
tober that you visited llatzwollor in connection with Hacg-
or.'s work in producing typhus vaccines. Is that correct?

A* That is absolutely Incox*roct. I novor told you
that I visitod professor Haogon*s hygiono instituto in
Strasbourg twico, but I novor visited tho Natzwoilor camp.

3* V.*hcn did you visit Strasbourg?

A. In Strasbourg as far ns I roromber I was in tho nid-
dlo of 1943, I can't givo tho dato of tho socond violt so
oxaotly. It was probably in 1944.

Q. Y/hnt about tho first visit?

A* Sinco I don't have tho actoriol on It I can't stato
tho dato exactly, prouloin Scheldt said it was in Juno or
July, but that is tho only indication thnt I hnvo. it is
vory difficult for mo to sot tho timo. in tho files which
aro nvailrblo to no horo thoro is nothing from ich I could
conoludo tho dnto of this visit. I noroly know thnt thoro
v/oro two visits to Strasbourg.

3 . Ono was in tho year 1943 and tho othor in tho yocr
1944? Is thnt right?

A. As for ns I can remonbor, yc3.

'.That was tho occasion of the first visit?

A. That was the discussion of whether Profossor Hnr.gon
w"s to rosumo tho function of a consulting hygienist bccauso
after he had bococe a. profossor at Strasbourg ho had stoppod


24Apri l-A-AX-17-5-Karrow (Von Schor.)

Court i

* •

ell activity for tho Luftwaffe. *./o had c shortage of hyg¬
ienists and whon I cad an official trip to Franco I was
given tho assignment to stop on tho way in Strasbourg end
talk to Professor Raegon about it - about whether ho wontod
to resuno working as a consulting hygionists in addition
to his other work. I havo alroady told about that in my

diroot examination..

* +

Q. And ho dooided to rosuno his work with tho Luft-
wnffo and you got an assignment of funds for him from tho
Luftwaffo, didn't you?

A. Ho doclerod himself willing to become a consulting
physician in addition to his othor work and he also spoko
of his wish to obtain a rosoaroh cssignmont, so f-r as I
know, ho did not havo any rosoarch assignnont about typhus
yothh wantod to have a new reoonrch assignment which moans
that ho wanted to hnvo moro nonoy. This resoaroh assignment
is montlonncd in ono lottor.

'..’oil, that is quito all right. I can romombor that.
You got an assignment of unds, didn«t you?

A. Ho, I did not havo any influonco on the lssuanco
of resoaroh assignments but, as tho lottor shows, Ur,

Haagon inquired of mo how tho negotiations about his res¬
earch cssignaont wore going on and I inquirod of tho Ins-
poctorcto and I told him how tho r.ogotirtior.3 woro.

6 122


a


24 Apr 47 --V-I8-1-FK?- Ualoy (von Scbocn)

Court So. 1

Q. I don't suppose that Haagen explained to 700 Just exactly how he
■ is going to conduct his research and what he was going to do
during the course of it?

n. :.'o, we discussed his position in general on the problem of
typhus research, and as I have already testified in direct ox-
niination, he explained to me that he did not consider the killed
vaccines effective enough and that ho wanted to work more for Berlin
along the linos of Sparrow-Blar.c-Le.xes, that is with livinc avirulont
vaccines, an! he workod on this line. I hivo already testified yesterday
as to what I know about this work.

Q. Did he toll you that h« was going to carry out infection
experiments to tost these vaccines?

A. That no intondod to c'rry out infection experiments 1 did not
know, but it was a natter it course that if he wantod to work with
living avirulont vaccines ho would have to perform toloranco oxporimonts,
because that is tho decisive experiment, if such a thini. oven developed
far enough by moans of animal experiments.

Q. )<o understand bo would how to vaccina to socoboo'y, but I am
putting the quostlon to you, if ho did not explain to you that after
ho vaccinated tho porson with either a dead vacclno or avirulont, that
he was foing to try to brinr cbout a typhus infection in tho vaccinated
porson to tast tho officacy of the vaccina itself?

... I did not knew that. I do know as I explained yesterday, that ho
was dunlin with rosoarch questions. Tho reaction to tho living avirulont
vaccines ho *antod to weaken by vaccination first with dead vaccines ^
and then performing a second vaccination with living avirulont vaccino.
Tho reason was to reduce the vaccine reaction.

Q. Doctor, is it not true that to produeo cr experiment with this
avirulont vnccire that Haagen noedud sooc new laboratory equipment?

I think you have already mentioned refrigeration.

... For tho so experiments he did not rvod any n-» equipment, there
were such small quantities. He was quite capable if managing that with
tho available oquipasnt, but he did need sore laboratory equipment for


as. ..?r LI -A-18-2-PK?- Ualoy (von Sehoen)

Court No. 1

tte production of vaccine. "The Medical Inspectorate of the Luftwaffo

repeatedly asked him for and they hoped that they would get their

own production place in that way. That meant installations for rabbit

cages, a temperature regulation, installations to maintain regular

temperatures, <wi humidity in the stalls, — air conditioning. That was

a very expensive thing, it cost several thousand marks, and the

purpose was the following: Haagen wanted to produce vaccine from

rabbit lungs, because he considered this tho most economical

proceoduro. For producing this vaccine or.e has to cruse inflanation of
tte lungs in tho rabbits with typhus. Those infl/aatione of tho lunge

can bo caused only if the r'tbits are kept at a certain temperature,

I boliovo that is 8 defines Celsius, and since this temperature is

not normally availablo, this air conditioning equipment was nooded

for tho mbbit ccgos. That had nothing to do with tho experiments.

Q. Did tho name Schuhaach??? c«an anything to you?

A. Yes, I have hoard that mao.

<*. You hoar<l it before you were a defendant in this case?

A. I cannot definitely remember it, but it is possible.

Q. You know it to bo a concentration crap?

... »s I said 1 cannot ruewnfcor it definitely whether I heard it at
all, ant’ of courso I do not kn.w whothor tho nc:x was oontionad in
connection with concentration camps.

W. ’..hen did you first learn that Haagen was conducting experiments

on concentration esep inmatos?

A. That Haagon was performing experiments on concentration caap
incr.tos? i ^ on it believe that even today, but that ho carried out
vaccination* in concentration camps, 1 knew that, '..hen 1 first learned

it I can't say today, probably in 1943-

C ; . Veil, you remember the letter in December 1943?

«. I certainly must have known it by then, because there I refer
to it.

C.. ‘oil, did you knew about this sordid occasion when Has en
had lg aon who had boon assigned to him die on transport?


6L2L


7M epril -i-lfi-3-PS?- Maloy (van Sc toe n)

Court “o. 1

A. I never loarrwd anything about that. I learned of that front to
fi^s, and I never knew that prisoners wore especially taken to
those concentration corps in order to be vaccinated.

C. 1 hat would you have done if you tod of knewn 'bout it;

Wouldn't ttot tovc given you an indication that maybe things wore not
so nice in the concentration oup, or aaybo proper care wasn't boing
taken of tto irmr.tcs in these oxperiny.nto?

A. If I ted learned anything about it I probably would tovo reacted
exactly as Haakon did, as can be proved by tto documents to wrote to

0

tto SS offico, that one cannot conduct any experiments of any con-
soquonces on such unfortunate people. Tto record is ir tto records
tore. If I tod learned about it I would probably tovo reacted in
exactly the sano way, porhaps nore violently.

Q. Veil, I should tovo hoped so.

•». I bog your pardon. I didn't understand you.

f.. I should havo hoped you would tovo reacted soc»,wto.t aoro
violently than Hargon apparently lid.

a. Thr.t is possible. Our temperaments are different.

C.. You recall Hiss Ejor testified Haagon sent reports every throo
n,ntto to tto liKlicl Inspector of tto Luftoofto, do you o^roo to ttot
testimony?

.t. I heard tto testimony. Yesterday in ay diroct exanitotion I
cocnented on it. If Ha* „n had reported overy throe months I
certainly wouldn't have forgotten it. I tod nr-ny thine* on ny mind
durin, tto war, but such an exemplary ocodition of reporting would
cortcinly have impressed itself on oy memory. It is quite out of the
question that tto Medical Inspectorate received a report from Hoogon
every 3 a»the, I acid yesterday that I consider Fraulein Eycr's
testimony quite credible because in view of the number of officos with
which toacen was in connection, and from which he received reports
there wore so many reports and recounts necessary ttet it is a marvel
that fraulein Eyer didn't say she had to write a report every month.

6b25


24 Apr 47 -A-18-4-ACP- Ifcloy (rcn Schocn)

Court Ko. 1

I explained with the aid of the documents whet obli^ticn to report
resulted from the documents oletw. You probebly haven't hod on
opportunity to read tho record yet, but ns soon as the record is ready
you will bo eblo to see that. I don't think there is any purpose in
holding up the proceedings with that any further.

Q. nn < you aro quite clear that Ifcagon never suggested to you that
ho was ~oin^ to carry out infection experiments with typhus after
v ccin'ticn?

«, That is not known to ne.

IS. UCKaNBY: Let's hrv» a look t Document l» 1059. This will be
narked as Prosecution Exhibit 490 for identification.

Q. Kow, sill you pler.se txed this letter al^ud in a loud and
rosonant voico?

a. Forhaps I may sec tho photostat.


24 opri l-WP-19-l-fcuriha (1st. von Schon)

Court I Case 1 (The nodical)

k. -ill you rc_d taw letter aloud, pleoSw?

a. (He-ding)

■2S vovoabwr 19-13 — jittered

■To Oberst rzt Professor -'r. Hose.

"Inspectorate of tao kcdic-1 Service of the Luftwaffe

■Si-ilov (Poet Cf f ice Zc9scr.-L.nd)

■Dc.j Kr. Rose:

■ehcloncd I ax sending you ta* rooort about our exooriuonts
with dohydrutwd totals v .ccino which I h i. arcoiscd you oovcr.l doye
ago. I intend to publish the finding, I h .vo written tfao report
-.lrc„dy ia c.aaiscript fora. I ask th .t, ft or h-vlng t^on reviowod,
it be euba tted to ti.e cocpctcnt authorities for tnelr -p^rov 1 of
it* public .tion in tbo «Zontr..lblatt fuer J jcteriologlo* (Cor.tr.l
Periodic. 1 for 3-ctoriolo^y).

■One hundred norsons frai a loc-1 concentration c.jq wore put
at n: diopoo 1 for iaaunisution and subsequent infection. Unfortun..toly
thvso puopl. worw in such a poor physic-l condition th_t eighteen of
tbua h d l.wady diid during trunsiort; tao rconiudor wir» lifcowiso
ia such b.d puysio -1 sa-po th .t they could not be unod for ir.oculution
mrpooeB. In tho tontine I h .vo requested 10J additional peroono iron
tho Sb fudn Office (H.unt.uit), wno, however, could be in uornal
p<v*sical and nutrition -1 condition, oo th-t the e-apuriuents era bo
curried out on autcriul wnica at It .st .r yrc..chos the pt slcal condi¬
tion of our soldiers.

■7Gi tho tine being wo wiU couccatr t. on an cpidcuic culturo
in the foru of - virus, which we h-vc received frou Giroud in thp
uo ntiao. This seals to be .. v-.ry good culture.

■With host rog..rds,

■Hail hitler l

■Tours —

■iUicloeure; one report."

“nd no signature.

i>.io is the natter which I discussed yosterdai*. Etc plan of
kr, H.-igwn to twst the innocul-tioa reactions to his living and


24 ^ril-W?-l9-2-Kurtfaft (Int. von Scaea)

Csurt I Case 1 (Kcdicnl/

_vlrolent dry vaccine by pre-vaccination with dc_d vaccine to weaken
tho reaction. That is the suae natter.

^ I thought you s_id about two aiaates 050 tnat you didn't
:;:ov of the incident where eighteen °f tho innate. put at Haogen's
die: ossl had. died during transport.

*. Yob, th-t's truo. that's wh-t I t_id, -ad I h-d forgotten
about it. I thought th.t I t .d learned it for the firot tine frou
the record*. If I h-d rubbered it, I would, of courSv, not hove
u*oos»d uysclf by denying it. >at n.w I boo tuio lottor. It io
obviously - c-rbon copy. I uuet ,issu-o th.t oa tr.c 29 th of r-ovujbcr
1943 tho taull w .s etill rather uc.rua. I aust -ssuao that I rocoivod
the lcttor. Sinco a report is ochtioned, which I was to dc_l with und
»*..3 ..jparoatly ono of Haugen's papers on his dry v-ccino, on *iich
ay imowlcdgo is bated and on account of which I c_n give any irf oxua-
tion horo at all as to Huron's exoorlutsto. rni* Knowledge goo* back
to these papers of hi*.

4. It would aopoar that in spite of your fiery uuncraont your
reaction w_e cvn Ks significant Won Huron's hin.clf doesn't it?

O. °inco I w_s not concerned in tno aattor, oinco it was
eouothing betweon Ha-on and the concentration Coup, there wra» no
reaction in this ease. If somebody else toll* no that ho ha* had
ir-ct contact with unites, then there io no occasion for uo to
interfere, sinco th .t it. Battled ootween tyo person* concerned.

I had. nothing to do with the concentr tion c..ros. I did not h-.vc to

c rry out jvy innoculations there.

•4. aod you iaslet th_t the word*, "ono hundred persons fron a

local concentration c^n wvro put .t ny di.uo._l for i^uunis-.tion^

.ind subsequent infection- really don't noon subsequent infection at
all but a subsequent isaunization?

a. "ith the living axd ..virulent dry vaccine, y-s.


6t*28


24 -orll-WP-1S-3-kurto.. (let. Ton Schon)

Cc--rt I Case 1 (the hcdical)

q. Veil, th.t is certaiily an icortical-to way of scying that,
isn't it!

a. this is corrwspoodoncc between experta, and they jcsow whet
it'c about.

q. You state yourself ta..t you -re still not sure exactly uhat
Hcjfivn did, ultnoug you were down th^ro in the uiddlo of 1943 and
got hin b.xk on the payroll of tee Luftw*ffo and you knew ho was
staying at the laboratory and 7<>u knew sows ^oing to work on
typhus vaccines, but you now sit bore and say you don't cr.ow
exactly %to..t be w„s doing.

a. Tes, th-t is true. I b-r„ given considerable inforoation
bout Haogen's work bore, end I b..vo gone to coasidorublo pains to
, ct th .t all together; but of course I Can't give you caaplcto
Inforuation, slnply bocaiss all tbosw experiments


24 April 47-A-STT-19*l.-«4!urSha-Infc: vca Schoofc
Court No. 1

wore rot under our 1 iroctlon and under our supervision,
'. Korr ^rofossor, tfco first fa.no tho question of
eubsoquont Infoction erne up was In a lottcr dafcod
1 ‘j-. 4 end you 3Font tho boat part of a day xr. tion-
nlizing “ subsoquor.t ln£oetlrn n as noaning sonotblng
entiroly different, th't it v s sinply a eubsoquont
vaccination, after tho nan had already boon vr.eein'tod
by tho load vaccino. How, if ycu woro told on tl.c "9th
of Hovoribor, 1943, that ho was going to c.arry out
iraauniration ..rd subsoquor.t infoctlon oxpjrir-onts,
you certainly would ha vo known as a nr.ttor of fact
what ho wr.c do inf, and you would not r.ood to specula to
on thi3 stand as you did yesterday. llio so words aro
entirely suocoptiblo to ti e : loaning tl .t tiny noan
oxactly what they say.

A. At fails stago of his oxporinonts Haagon- did
not havo a fully-dovolopc•’ vaccino yot, Ho was
working oxcluslvoly on tho problon of weakening tl:o
reaction to tl is living virulont vo ccir.o. That wan
fa o problcn that ho was dor.ling with at tho ond of
19-13 and tho boginning 1944. And ho was looking for
various not hods of acl loving tils.

n .. hat did ho noan in tho last paragraph when ho
says, ;, rcr tho ti-.o being, we will concontr .to on an
opidonio culturo ir. the forr: of a virus, which wo havo
rocoived fro:! Giroud in t*.o icnntirc"?

A. That .-.o ns that up to S;.t tii.o bo had rcrkod
with a :urine strain and that no \r for tho dovolopncnt
of tho dry vaccino he war.tod to uso a strain of rick-
ottsia prowaseki too.

r . m Toll, I now want to point out to you again that X
an having consider jIo difficulty ir construing tho word


24 - prii 47-/.-S“-19-2a-llart: a-Int: von Schools
Court lio. 1


!, lnfocticn" to ooan vaccination,

• • 'c B > 1 Qtlnit that unr.y of those docunonts are
rittor. in a confusing way, but I bclio vo that I can
rox.or.bor tho violo nattor ndoqur.toly onrugh that I
•enow what t3 o problon is. 3o vaccine was not dovcl-
opod so f ar that it could bo usod in vaccination
without roaction , and to doternir.c the offoct . There
wore strong fovor roactlcns rad tho problon was hov to
avoid this fovor reaction.

Q. rr oll, why call that infection?

•. ^h t is a ainilnr conflticn biologically, ;j.
injoctlcn of a living , a virulent vr.ccino, fron tho

biological point of view, is an lnfoction. This oxpross-

•

ion is usod often orough, but it ir an lnfoction which
ono C'n absolutely control.

-’-ml aftor rocoipt of this lottor you thon wroto

hin on tho 3rd of Eoconbor-nd this ie Docunont

NO-122, Exhibit 298, pago 79 of Book 12 — you sont
his. tlo Coponhagon vaccino, tho, didn't you, cart r.skod
hln to tost it in his oxporinontc on his concen¬
tration canp lnnatos, didn't you. Just as they did
in Buchonwald , as you put it?
i bog your pardon?

°.0 You sont hin tho Copenhagen vaccino aftor
rocoiving this lot;or of 29 Kovonbor and ashod hin
tc tost that in his oxporiitonta on concentration com
innates.

“• >.on this discussion of tho Copenhagen vaccino '
took placo Kangon was spocially intorost in it,
bocauso it was a nurino vaccino; and sinco ho could
not control fovor roaction with the nurinc vaccino,
yot, ho succoedod in that only at tho beginning of


24 April —: von Schoon
Court No. 1

1944 by storing tho vaccine for r. ccnsidorablo tino,

1 o ; f :.s no loncor intoru8tod in this Ccoonhason vaocino.
-*-t at the ond of 1943, when ho still hid tho sono
..ifficultica r.s 31anc with tho roactione with tho
living uurino vr.ee ino ho was considerably intorostod
in tlio CoponlmGon vr.ccino. *or it was tho only vaccina
fron rmrir.o virus available in Suropo at tho tino.

q. you sont it to } iu , told ! in to tost it just
liko t: 07 did in a corios of ox ori..onto in Buchorwnld,
didn't you?

I don't roi:oubor th: t.

o_. rtoll, you re: a r.bor nentioninG Buehcnwnld to
Ilr.acon in your lott-r of 3 Docoirbor 1943.

Oh, that's wl.-t you raon. Yus, I pointed it out
no a parallel, bocauro rovorr.1 vr.coinoa v/oro tosto d
in Buohcnv/r.ld for thoir of foot rrjr.inst infoction, and
sinco Kaacon in Strr.ssbourc wanted to t oat various
v< .ccinos for thoir reaction of foot.

Q. You sont that Coponhr. on vr.ccino to Buchonwald
also to bo tost eel?

A .

q. ;.3 I rocr.ll, your ritno sc, Frau Block, said
th.is Coponhv on vr.ccino idn*t go to Horton.

... Frr.u Block toatifiod that eho sent tho Copon-
hngon vaccine to various placer, ^h.o did not . or.tion
Professor ..s to Copenhagen vr.ccino, as far r.s

I ror.onbor, I rculd sc .y ray fro:.: jy own nonory that
I sent this vr.ccino only to Professor S c :.roibor.


2L «pril-»-GJ-20-l-Ccok-(int. von Schctn)-
Ccurt 1

Frau Blcmk has said that she apparently on ny instructions sent
this vaccine to various ether t.encies.

Dft. FRITZ: iIr. President, I must .:o back to document No.-1059
-r. hHaney Just said, *ftcr you received this letter and so forth.

If the Persecution wants to prove that _rc fesser ?-cse actually did recei¬
ve the letter, then I oust cfejact to the document, because, I h-ve loo-
!te-‘ at the photostat. It was obviously a carbon copy and has no natu¬
re. There is nc notificati-n that it w.s sent out tr received. It could
be a dr ■'ft of a letter wich was never sent.

UR. kCH..HLf: Iun'.orstanJ thj witness admit ted he received it, or
at least influentially..

DR. FRITZ: The defendant siid he ccul not rsoom'jor this letter.

>.ITNtSS: I merely ojprcssod the assumption that in view of the mail
conditions at the- time, the letter uust have reached me, assumin , cf
course, that it was caile:. But as I said, oven if it was sent I can
see nothin to object to in the c-ntents.

BY UK. kCHOCTt

Q Do you deny havin • receive' the letter?

A I can nicther admit it r deny it. In the case of all of theso
letters wich were sent iut years a .0 nebody can testify undvr oath that
he rccoivo'’ or wrote a certain letter, « man can jo that fer when a let¬
ter is a bi event, but not scoobody he has a lar.x correspondence an d
who has n. way today of censultln his cam fil s to see- wether these- let¬
ters arc there.

THE PEESIQFKT: Sc far the letter has merely been narkc-l for identi¬
fication. It has not yet been offarsd in evidence.

BY McKx.NET:

Q nt this cc.tin in Hay 19fa3 *cn yru cbjectci to the ^parc-
r.ents by Din , can we take it that the pars cos : -resent it this moctin
knew that the experiments had b„en carrie ut on concentration camp
inmates? .

“ Dr. Ding's lecture they certainly ccul' not c.-ncludc that.


6U33


2L />prll-vi-0J-20-2.-Cc;k-( int. yen Schoen)-

?. wr. :t extent darlnr ny protest I -;avc details abcut tho experioents
Z - n't re c a ab cr. Fren the testimony of one cf the witnesses, I can
>oy that I apparently ms net quite clear, *:ec-use 'rofosscr Schnoll
lr. his affidavit says when wt where wisperin to one canoth-r that they
r-i nt he ox crLr.e.nts in ccmcontraticn caaps, That is : si n that at least
this witness, ‘rofesser Schnoll, -iid net conclude that definitely fron
mat I s.i... What ccnclusi ns the other listenors -athorud fron that
iiacuooi a I cannot, of course, s y. Mo icubt all of then were iapixs-
3_l :y th_ assurance that the subjects wore criminals who hr- been con¬
vened t. -etth. This -esurance vis iron t th- osscaVly ©nee cere,
and criminals wh: ha- •-<.un en'-av.. t Vath arc n; t n naally inr-o-
tes f concentration can s. *h-.y hav. to tok. n to th- c-nccntr ti n
car^ r r..i tik. court prison rhero they they wait fer c.nflroation of
the vor ’ict, oc thit th- x .ri .;nst can he carriedcut. Honoo I w^uld
lcou-j# that u. Schnoll in hie assuspti n was an oxce. ti'n, an! that
the -:.j rity of the lie tenors did not believe thr.t tr.oy wore prisoners
•'n-. concentration cans; 'ut s Is; that is nerely an oasug^tlcn, bo-
caua< nc >.nu talked t~ ac cn this points, os tc details about expori-
-ents cn ,er3wns ccn’.uano’ tc oath. S-o. coplo - r-o' 5 with icy point
f lew, that ancshoulrt avoid such experiments, whilu ether >oplc
roi that fr a the ethical point of view that then, was no cbjocti n V
such -x -riji^nts.

4 f .u visit.- 3uch_nw:l n 17 iiarch 19u?, .rith Professor GllJc-
aoistcr, is that ri ht?

I cannot enfirn th- la to free ay wn knowledge. I took this
‘atf fr.-Q th- s -c. 11-d win Diary. I could deci le the tiao f ray presvn-
c >- at Euch-r.KOl nly fr a ein '3 - rfc, in s ouch as I can say in ix-
an' tc tlie f-.v r charts that at that tie© :f tn^ first visit I was in
Bijchtnwalri, tut what ay an. wtr.t : nth it was 2 cannot say tree*ay own
kn- wlctl e.

Q i.n ’ y u w w rc just La tker^. t s-tisfy year curie sity about
*.Vse i.r>ric.n s rhich Gil!ocsiti.r tad t If y-u abut, is that ri ht?

6»a3li


24 april-.*-JP-20-3-Cook (Int. voa So-on)

Coart I

I wouldn't call curiosity exactly. 2 :crc were various
ustlves. One Was tn-.t it I'-e tn«. invitation of cy superior who usiitod
tc convince ue that _y oojccticr.s were not justified; th^t the
o-jjoriuents were in .. peraissiblt for-; and taen there was u certain
>r'.feosionol interest; since such on espuriuent w u s tjcing plnco ony-
nov, I, us a hygienist, w..s interested in tku results. Store wc.ro
Various notivee.

<. Did you or Cildcocistcr -.osist Ding in any vey in carrying
out those cxperiucntsT

• k . Bid I understand ou correctly, whether I helped Cildaioistcr
or Dingt

Ho, whether you or Cilda-oistor holpod Ding?

^ "ing was not thcro at il, H. w„s sic. *c nod typhus and
•’.vs lu a hosolt.il oaivhero. Zn infecting the oriooners ho hod infec¬
ted hinsalf. Vhothor Clldaiolstcr, -o hlng's diary assorts, holpod
inf oct tho patients I don't know. I v„s not tnero. I did not even
know th t Cildu-ciotcr n„4 been in *ichcnv_ld boforo. a o didn't
toll no that. A t le..st I don't rei-c-ber it, and during the visit
unon I v*.s there nobody w-s infected at all. It vao at le ot two
voeks, o: three w. eke at tho -ost, aftvr the infection. Those >ooplo
*'oro • t the hoignt of their fever, flicra v_t nothing to bo i.ifoctod.
One co-old only go thro-v.h tho wards and look at tno clinic.-I picture
tho dlsoase of th». persons with severo eases in tho control cases,
and tho lighter c.iscs ts-ong those vaccinated. T hat is soucthing I
h..vo .are. d: described during the direct ex..:i ration, und -s the
o isio of ay ra-_rx, in 1943, -nd what I s.iid in zy lecture in 3?.olo
jt. 17 Fobru.jy, 19--*,, when I talked aoout “in.,'s experiments, and
-.id tr. t the clinic-1 impression is _uch stronger tfc_n tho statistics

expressed.

Z» bho escorted "ou ..round vhilu you wore in kuchonvild?


6


« ^ril-W?-20-4— Cook (Int. von achea)

Court I

«k.t vu* »a SS doctor, vfco as f_r -8 I receiver, hid tho
r_a/e of ua ob-rurzt, or a obersturnfuahrer ia tho So, th_t is tho
ac f„ct valcr. I believe I r«x.^b„r with a cort ;ia dogreo of cor-
t..iaty but th.t w_s only oac aceting with tho ua I w^b aot
very strongly impressed by this JJorsoa because tho doicnstr .tioa of
11 important data in tho experiment Jl building were aot performed
by doctors but by prisoners working ia the laboratory. Thiy ted * l11
of the charts -id tnc records of cli..ie-l cat-, _ad they explained
tho thin*, to no. Ike doctor hinsolf did a:>t participate ad I
sat at tho t-51c and lookod it the various records md then I said
tk..t it v_s very difficult to look at ts.cso 140 or IfO fever cherts
nad compare .11 of til®, aid over ai.^t these cation on uado up
averago curves for no, so th-t on tho next ..orniv one could ,.ct
a clc ror impression of tho courso of tnc experiment uhd tnc
prisoners who vero working there daionstr.tcd those things to us
egoin tco next'-oraing.


“ourt So. 1

2 -; Aar 47-A-21-l-IEX-GrC8e ( 1 st. Von Scheer.)


%• Did 70 a see Hovea vfclle yew verc there?

... Dr. Eovon has already asked ne ah exit that tut I cannot civo any
definite information. In any case vfaen I sew hin here for the firct
time in nr is on I did not recognize bin. I did not rono.-.ber hie nano
cither, And if one eees kr. Eovon, the general inpreesion ie that he la
e dark tyoc and ay recollection is more that this Obcrarrt vpa a nan
atout ay eizo. Eovon la ouite a tit shorter than I ar.d he vac not ao
definitely dark a* Hoven tut ho vre rathe? lighter. But I cannot eoy
for certain vhothor he had blue or trevn eyce; I an ouite ur.certa.ln. I
cannot oay anythin.; noeltivoly or negatively. I cannot tty with certain¬
ty that I did not boo Kr. Seven nor cm I toll you with cortalnty that

I renumber Bcoin.; Kr. Eovon. Hut that would probably bo tho croo vith

%

all tho people vhon I not a.t that tloo. I do raiontcr ono of tho ori-
oor.ors beenuso ho v*« oBPccially noticeablo. fcc vre Bcrothin,: of a
hunchback. Ho vac a rather intolli,:ont man and I talkod with hin a Ion*
ttno. I had tho coot to do vith hi".. Ho *ee probably tho inn vho knov
tho nott about all tho thln,:«. Ho vn> a prlsonor, not an SS nan.

TEt PHESIDE^T: ^ho “ritunol will bo in rcceto until 9:30 tonorrov.

(The Tri'.uaal adjournod until 0930 houri, 25 April 19-7.)


6137


25Ap


Court 1


'*¥ 7

riI-:'-.,K-l-l-?ost


tor(3rorn)


Official Trcnscriot of tho American
Military Tribunal in tho nrttor of tho
United Stages of Verier., against
Karl )rcndt, ct cl, defendants, sit¬
ting at rural'org, Goremy, on 25 An-'
rll 1947, 0930, Justico Beals orcsid-
ing.


r:-3 : ^iRSKAL: Persona in the court room rill ploaao
find their soots.

Tho Honorablo, tho Judges of Military Tribunal 1.
Military Tribunal 1 la now in sossior.. God save tho
- T;nitod States of America end this honorable Tribu¬
nal.

Thcro ••ill bo ordor in t:.o courtroon.
t::E ffiEblDSirrI Mr. Marshal, you ascertain if tho
defondant a r T o nil rreaor.t in tho court.

r * E -'-.RSHALi May it plorac your Honor, all the dof-
ondenta arc prcaont in tho court.

T:e 5? iSIDBf?: Tho Scoretnry-Ccoornl rill noto for
tho rooord tho proaonoo of all the defendants in court.
Counaol may procood.

P. : '. FHa.'SGHMAXHi (Coun30l for the Defendant Brack):
‘/1th tho agroonont of tho prosecution, Mr. Fresidont, i
nak tho permission that Viktor Brack bo freed from atten¬
ding this afternoons session booauso he must conduct prep¬
arations with rx for the ca.so which is coming up.

TKB PRESIDE.?: Do I uhdorstand that counsel aska
tho Defondant Brack bo excused from this afternoon ses¬
sion nftor tho rcccar?

FRCESOHK.JJH: Tea, ;:r. president.


: u P° n z *- n . j c-at of counsol for tha Def¬
endant Yiktqk Brook that he be o/jjusod from attondar.co
-ofore the Tribunal this afternoon thcro rill bo no rec¬
ess this. p^tc/noon. Do you -ear. tho rccoss this -lornirc,


0458


25&pr il-1 :-AE-l-2-Fostor (Bro-.i)
Court 1


or excused fron attondanco during tl.o afternoon's ses¬
sion?

DK. FRCSSCKlivHHi No, I asl: that tho Dofor.dant
oracle to cxcu30d fror. ti.is afternoon's 3CS3ior. so that
I can prepare his caso.

T>2 PRSSIDSliT: Upon request of counsel for Dcfonda..t
Brack that he be excused fron attendance before tlx; mb-
unal f or this aftornoor.'s session, tic request is "ran¬
ted. Bcfortfnnt Br-ck rac.y bo excused fron at tendance bof-
oro tho Tribunal this afternoon.

DR. FROESOHIUNKi Then *.;ith tho pc mission of tho proo-
ceutior. I should like to s :o a, furthor question could
tho president tell re rhothcr tho Tribunal has reccivod
my application I put in on tie 11th of April, conoornins
subniscion of tho record since I have so f: r rccoivod
no information upon that?

T."J5 IKESIDEl'T: Tho Tribunal has rccoivod tho roquost
of oounsol for tho Defendant Viktor Era ok, end the Trib¬
unal cShores to its fermor ruling, that tho stenographic
notes tfhich oounscl requests to oxnrdnc my not bo con¬
sulted by tho Defendant Brack or his counsel; but vrhen
tho Dcfor.dcnt “rack t-.kos tho stand, if in tho courso of
tho examination it should epporr necessary or proper that
tho so notes bo examined, the 'ribunnl r?ill thon rcoonsidor
tho request to dotomlno another or not tho notos thon
nay bo produced in court.

GEfUT.Jj) ROSE - Rosv.nod
GKOS3 KX.3 SAT20H (Continued)

BY HR. HCIL'JCY:

5 Hay it rl-"se the Tribunal.-Herr professor, going
back to your interpretation of tho to rd infection in


3*139


2 5Apri I-::-;.&-l~3-?03 ter (sroua)

Court 1

Hargon's letters, X would li!:~ to ask you if you didn't
testify toforo this Tribunal, with rospoct to tho tes¬
timony of tho witness S yor, that Lr. Eardy had indeed
done a ridiculous' thing chon ho pat tho question to her
•.bother aho hod r.ot meant avirulor.t typhus virus, rather
than a virulent typhus vaccine? And tfcon didn't you G o on
to say, after she had answered, that aho no ant a virulent
typhus virus? You stated uhrt before had referrod to vao-
oinatior.a had nor suddenly tcccrao infections, isn't that
exactly what you are trying to do now with tho word infoo-
tlon used by Hbrgont In.tor* or nooning rhet lt „ aya , you
ro.nt to toll tho Tribunal lt noon. vocolnotlon.T

"O, ?lr. groeocutor, I bo n 0 vo tho re is c rathor
substantial difforcnco. The - itness during her ©xeninat-
ion by tho prosecution o olx of r. ?.iving vaccine and al¬
ways usod the oxnx’ossion "vaocino". Thon at tho end she
wan ashod whether instord of.vaooino 3ho didn't neon
a virulent virus. And since she affirr.^d this queotio:;
this changed tho contonts of all her testimony. The in-
Jodtion of a living nvirulont virus is just ns nuoh an
Infoction ns the injection of n living virulent virus.

The difforcnco resides in the fact that one of then is an
infoctior. that can be controlled, namely, tho infoction
with avirulor.t virus thr.t is used as a vccclno. T/l.^roac,
when virulor.t virus is ir.jooted, the subscqvont develop¬
ments cannot be controlled but r.ro up to date. Of courso,

• ‘

excop ting tlx ease that the “crsor. concerned was vaccin-
ated ir. sonc way before boing injected with tho vir-alcr.t
vir-13. For ir.3tar.co, this l-r.pponcd in the experiments cf
Elr.nc and Balthasar "here they f^rst infected tho subjects
with a living avirulor.t virus which could be designated


6440


25 :.pri l-3-?o s t c r (Brora)

Court 1


as a rr.ccinr.tior., end then subsequently thoy infGctod
With c virulent strain tlx previously vaccinated persons
rhich did not frll ill bccau30 thoy believed the offoct3
of thoir rrcaincs wero cortrin onough thet thoy could un-
dortr.ko this infection rith virulont virus#


6iil •


25 April U7—! J-i.T3-2-l“C-aylord (Int. Ero-.ai)
Court Ho. 1


You will fired the s^rs procedure described by Vanterdlas ir.

Anorican literature, who tested Zinser's typhus vaccine, ie also first
injected the veccire are: afterwards infected with virulent virus in
order to test the degree of irvainity. You cannot compare a vaccine with
a virulent virus, but biologically speaking the icjoction of a living
avirulont vaccim is an infection, that can be soon fror. tha fact that
•hen you vaccinate against small-pox* that, too, is infection rith ca.;~
pox vaccine, and for ter. days after the s;aall—pox vaccination, you can
still extract that virus and troed it again fro- tho blood of tho person
vaccina tod, and indood t.he virus has actua.ly increased in intensity
in the subject's blood. This can be soon only in Stronr's experiaonto
who aftor the innoculation again extracted fren the tissuu of tho
axpcriiontal nnlnrvls. These erperlaant* wore tried out on animals nnd
not on human beings - as I say, extracted the virus from their blood
and broad t!wn again. In other -a>rds, there was an infection, although
it was not a typical ill nos s. Tho plague in tho normal fori did not
dovdop.

Q Profocsor, wo, I think, all understand, although wo don't have
tho status cf an export as you, that a vaccination with an avirulont
vaedrw brings about a sdnor infoction; but I just ranted to obsorvo
that you horated Mr. Har# rathor sevoroly for having confusod
"infootion" with "vaccination." That is the word you used, and I
submit to ycu that that is oxactly what you arc now doing with respect
to tte word “infection" U3ed by Btagenj and I further jxit to you that
tho talk of infoctlr" v.ith the fbccino is a bit of nonsense.

A I said bofore that first of nil I did not sake Hart* appear

*

ridiculous, but that I pointed out th t he had confused tho concepts
"virulent virus" and "avirulont livin- vaccine,’ and ted used tho one
for the other. These are too concepts that cannot bo interchanged;
rhereas, the expressions i: vaccinate" and "infect" can be exchanged
ith the avirulont virus; and ycu, yourself, said that ycu know that


6:42


25 April li7-H-ATO-2-2-aaylord (Int. =roim)

Court :*>. 1

the use of a virulent living vaccine is a for-: of infection.

Q '.ell, I think vre have perused this point far enough, Tlerr
Professor. I-et* a go ba* to your visit to Tuchenwald in March 19U2.

Did you talk to any of tho inaatos who were the subjects of those
experiments which you saw there?

A I cannot recall having talked with tho ojxoriaer.til subjects.
Meat of thou were seriously ill. T'* omporiaintal subjects woro
brought to no, one after tho other, who wore not sick, which I already
uontiorod. They had gono throurh their typhus sickness boforo being
sentenced in tho pro-trial jrison, but again I cannot recall that I
actually apoko with thoso fc.-o par-ons. So far ao I recall, I spoke v.lth
tto doctor in chargo and didn»t speak very: auch with hin olthor. I
sfoko, for tho nest part, rith tho prisoners who were working on this
••'hole Tutorial in tho laboratory. T!wt is tho way I ronchbor that visit
today,

Q So wo can assure that you didr.' t ask any of the subjocts if
they had voluntoorod or if they had been condocsvod to death; or if
they had boon condemod to death, for what crir.o? Is that right?

A I certainly did not conixot any such oonvorsation, or at nr.y
ratc, I cannot recall any.

Q 'hen did you first r.oot Idr*;?

A I cannot rorvr.bar ary personal conversation with Dr. Ding where
ra talked together. I certainly ;just havo s en Ding when ho road Ida
paper at tho consulfciiv- conference, and than it can bo ooen fron tho
^currents that Ding was prosmt at the dedication of tho Typhus Insti-
% “ a nt Lonber'j. Thoro is mention cf or. 'ffidal trip for that purpose,
"Jt: on this occasion, I read a paper on deicusing. This paper is *

' -ttioned in ry list of publications an ’ tsi3published ir. tho ^eich
Saalfch Paper. Since tho mzbre c those -ho i-articiratod in this typhus
inference at the occasion of the dedication of the institute was not
"rj' largo, perhaps 100 or 150, I aist really have seen Din>: on this
—'-sion, that is, if the - antry in the diary is correct; but I cannet

Ej


6-.43


25 April L7^~uT-2-3-<-a:'lord (1st. ^cwn)

Court No. 1

reacnber it and I certainly di r.it spoak cite hin thou.

Q And those are the only two personal contacts which you had
with Ding?

A Thoso arc tta only teo tirves in which I can reaswber having had
personal contact with Ding.

3 Did you erur correspond rite hia?

A I can recall no direct corrostondonoo nor any indirect corros-
pondonco through official channels with nine.

Q Nov/, Professor, I ea having so no difficulty with thoso entrios
in tho Ding Mary. On /ago 3? of Document Dook No. 12, with which I am
ouro ycu aro familiar, vo fin-! tho experimental oorics. That is, in
tho cr.tr/ for 9 August *1 £ 9 irj havo a description of tho rcsoaroh
sorloa No. II, In tho ctxirso of which 20 z rsons woro vaccinated with
tlv! vaedr.o cantxcusino, which was made available by Professor Noso,

«txj rocoivod it from Navy Dr. Professor Hugo fran ducharost. And on tho
next page, you will soo thr.t subsequently, all tho experimental perrons
woro infeotod With typfris, and t.'vat as a result cf tho experiment, four
persona diod. Now isn't it a fact that you rado this vaccina avniloblo
to Ding for that series of experiments?

A I havo already iiscussod this quostion in ay direct examination,
pointed out that thoso vith when Hin;; was corrcr-pondir^ on typhus
questions havo boon listed by two witnesses; narvly by Dr. Kej.on and
by >, Bal-.chev/ski, whoso tootiTon;' is to bo founJ in an affidavit,
either witness mentioned ry rouo aron;' thoso :1th .thorn Ding was
oorrosponding, but both witness os do n r.tion "r, Hugo as one of tho
persons with whom Ding was ir. correspondence. I also discussod this
".ouranian vaccine ir. :y direct examination. I can say nothing precise
dthor nor positive about this vaccine; namely, whether this vnccino
P^3cd through ry office durin: tho war 0 It is quite possible bsoauso

such typhus vaccines went via ry desk an’ I described in ry diroot
aa-lnatton just what I did with those vaccines 3


5444


25 -pr-Ci—ji'S-3-l-ciolBi (lat. Broon)

Court He. 1.


Q. Hhat did you do with this vaccine that you got froa Hugo?

Ihet is the important point right no*.

I have already said that I do not know for certain ohotbor
I over rccoivod tais vnccino froc Hugo at all. I am only orphasiso
tho font that Ding roported on tho testing of this vaccine nt tfco
Shlrd Consultin’ Conferonco. Consequently, I hed cy showdown with
tie. At that ti=o ho said nothing to tho offoct that this vcccino,
on tho tostin; which ho had reported, had originated with so. Ho
thou publishod a pnpor in the periodical for hygiono end infoctious
diseases, end in this pq>or, too, thoro io a report cn tho tostlng of
tho HuccaiPO vaccine. In thio paper a footnoto states, oxprossly,
tluvt ho had received a particular virus fro;- Prof. Cildenoistor. In
other words, ho is tolling his sources hero. In tho ceso of tho
Rupnnion vaccine ho soys nothin,: tc that offoct, and Dr. logon, too,
tootifiod boro that Die.; concornod cinsolf with our showdown in Sor-
lin when ho had roturnod to Buchonwaldj but hero, again, ho did not
try that ono of too tostod vnccinos hrd go no through cy hands.

q. Cot, Profossor, you aro talkia; all ixn vad tho point. I oa
not iatorcstod lnwhnt Kogon sold, or what ho sold at this Bcotinp. I
rn ashing you the quostiom Did you send this vaccine to Diet:, diroct-
ly or lndiroctlyT

A. I hr.vo alroaiy cnowored that queotion. I said that I carnofc
rractoor rt all, over bavin.; hrd such r. Rumanian vaccine in sy hmdo,
but that thoro is a possibility that I did.

q. *nd if thoro is a possibility that you had tho vacclno in
your hands, is it not also pcssiblc, *s it srys in tho Din; diary,
that you sent tho vrxeino to Din,* to bo tcctcd in Buchanr-ali?

... I think that is altogcthir itprooablo, since I had no
diroct contacts with Din; at all.

% Did you have my indiroct contacts with bin? ^*ftor all,
Profossor, wo ere talking about one of tho n--t fundamental issuos in
th cane. If you sent this vaccine to Lrugowsky, or directly to Dir.':,
-r ‘h-ou x. anybody olso, after yeu h tA boon in Buchonmld. in ~nxch


o445


25 iar-t-GZS—3-2-3iolsi (Brown)

Court Vo. 1.

192-1, I subnit to you thr.t you becrno a prxty to tho crice.

— Zinc of all, I told you that I dc -ot know whether or act
I over 1"4 this ?.uubc1cu vaccine. Vow, tc2dng tho hypot) oticnl enso
ta't I did hr.vo this vaccino, end hnndlod this vnccise r.s I hnr.dlod
rll - ~cr vaccines the* I had during tho courso of the war — nnaoly,
phased It on to other typhus roscarckors: new, I nover coat nay
mccinos to Diru-: ned, assunin^ thr.t one of thoso typhus resonreh non
fcrd connections with Sine*, nad pnssos on such n vaccine thr.t ho ro-
colvoo free no, thr.t doos not conn thr.t I provided tho lncor.tivo for
thr.t. All tho vaccines teetod in ?uchenwnld are, with very few
exceptions — wore produced, with few exceptio. > 3 , by other people —

0. That is all very true.

A — and you car.aot soke the canufacturere responsible for what
ia cubaoquently dono with these vaceinoo, h'or caa you cake people
responsible wh happened to haw tne vaccine in their hands, but who
had neither the Intontion, nor tee opportunity, to iaauo any asnign-
oents to Sr. Dine.

q. Vow, Professor, it depends on wl.at the poople know, who
supplied thoso vaccines, as to whether or cot *-.cy are roaponsiblo.
Zon, thare is no question about your knowledge. You w re In Buchon-
«mld. You ta - what was being done. So it theroforo beconoc quito
important to know what you did with this vaccine from P.ugo. Sow,
ia it possible you sont it to krugowsky, who you know tr bo tho
superior of Dit£?

A. I think that is highly isprobable. as I have said, I can¬
not rc.uorr.ber this whelo affair, and, Consequently, can only spank
of possibilities; but I put it one dccuacnt horc on tho losen vaccino,
and it can bo seen frea tho list cf — froa the distribution list —
rhafc sort of institutes I aont it on to, and neither hr. hrugowcky
nor Dr. Ting arc oentionod c-re.

q. *a I understand it, you don't exclude the possibility that
you sent this vaccino to krugowsky, ani Xrugovsky sor.t it to Ding?


64-15


25 Apr-”-SIS-c-2-51 oIsi (Brown)
Coart Ho. 1.


a. So, I just said that I consider that highly itprobablo.

Q. Sell, if you cent vaccine to Krugowsky, and ashed bin to
tost it. Just that did you think he would do with the vaccine, unless
he scut it to Bucfaesrald?

A. I reiterate, that I consider it highly inprobablo that I
sent it to hrugowaky; soreover, krugovsiy ras a hyglonlst, like the
r st of us.

?. 'Tell, the witness Trcu Sleek said you didn't cent anything
to lirugorsky. How credible is tor tosticony? Bo you think sho lo
Juct on probabilitloo too, or do you think she .u:oca what she is
talking about?

A. Prau Slock cortainly tostified to tho best of hew kno-.rlodgo
ns to what sho knew about ay corrospondcnco: and, of enuroo, it is very
valuable to no, what sho said, bocauso you ore asking do — after
my filoo have boon tnkon aniy froa cc after yoors rod years — that I
should give information about ovory lettor thrt I rccolvod or wroto
in the lest six yoors? teat that is not possible, porhiips ovon you
will grant. Particularly, in the caso of a xrn oho had to rrito vory
arny lottors. And, of courso, ay secretary's corroborating ovldonee
vrof very valunblo to ac, who s.lso rcaoaborod -hat sho had done dur¬
ing the four ycarc that sho wna osplrycd by aysolf, oo far as
corr spoudcnco was ccncornod. Tncro was corrospondcnco, of courso,
now rod then with krugowgkyi for ox/urplo, UrugowsOcy coacorncd him¬
self with publish!:* opidoaiolegicnl prediction.and I corresponded
with krugowsky onthc dovclopcont of a hot rdr dclousing tr.ching,
cal the detailing of nn ongincor who belonged to the lAiftcoffo, so
that ho could work on this for the Xoffoa-SS.

0

C. Tow, Profosscr, wo arc not dealing with any cisccllnnoous
corrcspocdoaco now: wo ore dealing with a very fundraontrl natter, —
rad with a cm mho had boon in Suchcnwald in Arrch 1942, and had scon
what had gono on, and with c sen who objected to Sing's experinonts
In hry 1943; and I should think that such a tan would bo pro tty clerx

6447


25 —i^-OZS—3—»-3i olsi (Bro-s)
Court 7o. 1.


in Ills own Bind about whether ho had over supplied on; voccinos to
the iairdor cccp of 3uchca=ald, I shouldn't think tfcoro wculd bo any
doubt in your Bind.

A. I be quite clear in sy Bind that here, in thig court, wo aro
not coacorncd with tho ton or fiftcon thousand lottcrs I wrote and
rccoivod during tr.o war, but tre concornod only with r. fov of tho
lottcra froa that great nuabor. This doos nothing to chongo the
fact that those few lotters aro only individual lottcrs froc tho vast
sacs of that correspondence, rad that ty caprcitioo of recollection
onbrrcc these letters to tho snuo oxtont, but to no greater cxtor.t,
than thoy ecbrrco tho other porhnps 14.S9S lottirs in which tho Tri¬
bunal ic not interested.

C. You car. .ot res ober -"fcother you were connected, directly or
indirectly, with tho typhus oxpcrincr.ts in Buchonaald — is that
•*nt you want to sny? Thr.t is soDOthi.g that olippod your raind?

A. I havo tostified to this at groat length. It took almost r.
half a day — needy, re to what I know about thoso typhus expo ri¬
se r.ts in 3uchensnld.

C. But you ha-* not tostifiod, ate you ctill do not tostify,
whether you sent this vrccino you got froa Bugo to Dirg, either
through J.rugorsky dlroctly or indirectly; you cvrdo t..c point; you
zry you can't rcacsbcr. I think, then, the Triounal err. take tho
statcconta froc tho Ding Dirry, that you did.

a. I cm only tell you that I do no; oven rcaccbor tho Bucharest
7accino itself. Direct correspondence -iti Ding is something that I
ronlly ern't resoeber. 3ut Z euct :<-co i_.tc consideration tho posoi-
bllity that you nro on the point of bringing vp sore let tor to the
effect chat Dr. Ding sont cc seen application — n reprint of a
paper of his.


34-18


25 3ZS--t-l-Sax.-pson (Int. Brorn)

Court ife. 1.


?. I soe.

i.. .tad whenever such a piece of correspondence turns up here,

I I'.-.-'c laid cyself open to you and hero tostifiod frlooly, and
of course such a possibility ns thrt dooo exist.

Bid you get a report free Ding7 I re iatorostod to hear
rbcv.t that. Sou contionod baring received soso sort of publication
froa Dings lot's hoar aboutdid you got one?

Vo, no, I Just said — I was c uoll known bacteriologist,
rxd may pooplo scat ao reprints of their publications. I really
can't sejr ray thing about this for suro; I would hr.ve to trko n look
through cy collection of reprints which ccnt« ia about ton to twenty
thousand individual prporn, and in tko cr.co of sue c roprlnts it is
often the caso that wo don't rord thoa ell boenuao oao doesn't hnvo
tho tiiio, but ono nicplj scat out a prop :.rod printed card ncknorlcdg-
iag receipt of the reprint, Thooo ore r.ll possibilities I hnvo to
teke into consideration, and consequently I brro to bo very circu.*-
epect in ny tcotinony hero in ordor not to lay cysolf opon on account
of soco stupid enttors for instnneo, sxjutionlng tho oxnaplo of my
ccrrconondonco with Schilling in 1941« I had tostifiod to tho boot
of ay aocory that I did not correspond directly with Schilling during
Lis stay in Italy, and the oxperiaont* that Schilling ccnductod in
Italy fu*o not a charge in tho indictcont, so that I ronlly had no
r .son t deny n corrcspoador.co with Schilling in Hioronco. How,
since I was bo incautious, so incousious cb to soy thnt I h-d no
correspondence with hi.u in 1941, you thoa produced n letter froa
Schilling's files Which was dr.tod 1941 j rau then after I !.nd seen
*• .is lot:or, I, of courso, rccrllcd tho affair. Dow, since thr.t nl-
rcr-v haepor.od to no onco that 1 conaittod r-ch rn error in Donory,

I . .vc bccono a little roro cautious gredually, cod I do cot deny wit.:
r.podictic certainty natters which arc thooroticnlly rosoiblo.

Profossor, you don't want to get so cautious now that you
* -it t.io possibility of having participated in our dor. How, ns I


25 .ipr-il— SE&-4 ■ 0 • Sia pson (3rorc)
Court Hoi 1.


understand your direct tostiaony —

~. "o, tflat possibility I do tot odrit.

3or, an I understand your direct testimony. you renoebor you
,ot the vaccine froc Rugej that you experinonted on y cur so If to sco
rhothcr it contained a living virus, and then you roturnod it to bin,

A. 5o, tent is a oisundorstnadlng. I str.tod that Z do rcco:ibor
for cortain that I received ono consignment of vaccir.o fro= ?.ugo,
but that m.e not the 3ucharost vrccino, and I rorer_bcr this consignment
of voodoo for suro bcctuso there woro a for oocularitios in this
oat tor. Hugo had asserted that there »ca a living virus ia.tnis
vaccine because tho rcactionc to the vaccine nro particularly
sorero on tho pooplo on c..os he testod it. Z loofcod x.t tho labol on
this vrccinc, and I ascortainol that this originated froc tr.o scao
institute whoso vaccino I had ucod tvo yv-'rs teforo to vr.ccinato tho
ncdlcal personnel vorlcing on tho rosot decent. liurcupon I gave ny-
self a double do so of this vnccino, and one that tnc reaction was a
porfoctly normal ono. Shen I sont tho vaccine to tho manufacturer trho
r. i ;ain tested it, and also roportod that the voceino *r.s pcrfoctly
nortiol. Or. the basis of thooo tro reports tho v: ccino wan again ;aado
avallablo for goooral uoo, but as I said, this was r.ot tho Bucharest
vrccino bocauao * havo put In o docusont noro, nrcoly, instructions
*.o the troop doctoro in tho Luftwrffo, saying thr t tho ^Bucharest
although t.is provod its efficacy in 3uchcnmld, rrvs not to bo usod
by tho Luftwaffe bocnuco tho results of this testing at Buchonmld
wero at that tiro not knorm to tho Luftrafic. -o bo suro, through
-ir,-;* a roport to the consulting conrcroncc, and through his publica¬
tion ir. the periodical for hygiene, ~c found cut about this testing,

: that thereafter thcro ms no reason for not using t: is vaccinoj
cut I do not kno* aucthcr or net it ms used in individual eases after
that; at an; raso, I found no directive to tart effect.

• . "ell, tor could you -ritu a loeter tolling tno nodical
o-.'iicorB in the Luftvaffo not to us-i tuu Bucharest vaccine, although


6450


25 r-JS-4-3-S*ea so n (3roTu)
Court Ko. 1.


it rr.s boing tooted in 5uchansal£. unless you fcnow it wr.s boing tostod
in Tuchonwald?

A. I rosonbor no such lotter.

koy bo I misunderstood ^ou; I thought that was Just wfcnt
you acid. -

Ho. no, I said Just the oppesito. If you understood that,
it mat bo r-n orror on tho port cif tho interprotor — stroago no thr.t
cry soon. I shall repent so this is perfectly- clonr. In ovilonco
is n docucont, namely, Diroctivo to Troop Doctors of tho Luftwoffo in
vfcic« ton difforont typhus vnccinos arc liotod and that aro por-
cisoiblo for uao in tho luftweffo. Tho Lueborost vicciao is not in¬
cluded la that list, and this list rr.s published a long tiro r^tor,
recording to Ding's Diary, tno testing of tnis Bucharest vncclao had

s

boon coacludod nad tho reports on it hnd boon sont to Eorlin. I
coacludo from this that when this diroctivc ttt.s issued, I could not
hero ic.ow of thin testing in Zuchonsr-ll boenuso tho tost lag in
3uchcnwold hnd prorod that the wnccino was n good ono, thr.t is to ony,
hrd 1 la 0 * thr.t *o hnd mother good vaccine on our hands, then I
should cortninly haw opoondod it to tho list ns i: 0 . 11.

How, how did it happen that Hugo, n lbvjr officor, would
send you typhus vccclr.c?

a, Th/vt is to bo oxplrinod by tho fact th.it tho Ploot Physician,
r.tgo, ora do tailed to the Luftrnffo for throO years by tho llary —
correction, two yenr 6 — uo wes consulting hyglonlst with the Air
?lcot 4, ond Air aloot 4 cororcd the southern area in the cast, which
ir.ciudod Rotatoria. aT tor Hugo's rolcasc tc the Luftwaffe had corao

to na ond, which I bcllovo wos nrouna 1944, Hugo mi dotollod to tho

*

f'sz^r and remained in fiousania.

Q. How, do you rocftll telling no in an interrogation on 31
“eto’oor 1946 that you gr.vo this vnocico, which you roccivod from Rugo,
to Sildoooictor?

Thr.t is quito possible thf.t we discussed thr t possibility


6451


25 Ap3 — paon (Srova)
Co-art "o. 1.


i- cs interrogation.

*• 2ut «> T you do not reneeber whether you got tho Suchnrost
VOGClBO at all?

A. I h>.vo said that I cannot tostify with cortninty on:that
nr.ttor. I faavo repeatodly said that thoro is a possibility; you
atr.tod to co as a fact at that tico that I had this 3uch/iroat vaccino,
ml thon I told you tho ways how I aont such vaccino on.to other pco-
plo, *out I aoat aaaurodly did act tell you of ay own Jcnowlodgo In
tlda Interrogation that I had rccoivod this Eousanlnn vaccino fron
Profooaor Hugo.

2j, Can you rc^o^bor ovor having aont n vaccine to krugowcky?

A. ho, I cannot rcccsbcr that.

3. And you ara ev.pportod in that by Irnu Slock in that
tottiaony?

Tea, I boliovo aho aald eono'hing to that effect.

Q. Tfoll, what about tho Copenhagen vaccino that you got; you
got that In 1944 — that' 8 only about tvo and a half yoara ago.

Do you — x

A. Tou arc ir. orror, kr. Proaocutor — 19<3. I rlroady put
ir. tho docucont coneornicg thia.

3. I retoebor, I rcconbcr.

a. That lo in a oupplcacntary docucont, Docuaont 46, Exhibit
.'o, 20 , nr.d nlao —

I roncabor, I roaorbor.

The document of tho Behring aor!:s in liar burg; both thcao
dccnnntB ccntioncl 24 Septorbor 154S as tho date, and tho dato of cy

report na« tho 29th of Sopto-tbor, lS4o. If I -‘jL not boon cblo to

40

get chald of thoso dccuronts, thon I really should not have been in a
position to toll you tho year in vhich thoso events occurred, but nerc
I J> hr.vo tho dccuccnta and do havr tho opportunity to rofresh cy
senary on the basis of thoso docuuenta.

^452


25 -fi)ril-K-JP-5-l-iarrcv (Ins. jrcvn)

Court I

l. > ell, let's loo* rt s tee other eziry inoie Din*; Diary vhioh
iiiVcss this. 2h*t Is on page 49 of she Prosecution Docuasnt hook vl2.
30 y0tt -®«fcer thut? j£e ejpcri_ent shat started on the eth of ; ;arch
19441 Jr.e first sentence is: ■guested oy Cberct^rzt of the Air
“ 5r,8 » ? ro -«o«or Hose, tho v 0 ccino Copennagen (ipsea-Uurine vaccine)."

a. Yes, I huve tnig entr; ccfore -o now and I h a ve also put
l “ the Qocunoats that r^er to this, including cy official report
in which there is coition of tso su.-e-»sion I hare in conn action with
tho Copenhagen Vaccine.

3* loll, do ycu coccorlo that thcro is U possibility that this
cstiy lo correct?

 Vos, if Li.ig is lure ivforring to ay official report end
referring to it u s a su^estion, then the en:r is co.-rcct, but I
oolieve tnat if an U-partial person r ado through this official
report he would not coo la it a sug-joetioa for orp.risonto on hucan
idneo. 3J«t io a question of interpretation.

'ell, did you ojad that rooort to nic? I tnought the tos-
tinenjr wan to tho effect tnat the CoponhutTin vaccine only went to
about four pooplc and neno of Wu four included either K.,. ^ vo or Ding
or ..rugowcky. now, are you suggesting tho possibility th..t you
did sond it to Dire??

«. ho, you're oospletely nisundorstood so. It io Just tho op-
penito th..t I wanted to s_y. Vhc rooort is avallaolo and tho list of
dittrijutcvs is In the list to when tuo rooort was sent, ifeishwr Ding
lor i.rvgovsky is ccntioncd in tn^t list. Coa»cq-.outl», you c-nnot
“• urstand nc to huvo Bald tn_s I sent this report to Ding.

1. bo, I didn't but Hunger, is not included in that list either,

■* I recall, is ho?

a. Your rocollwCti«.n h_n received you. Hu_g.-n is listed tn~ro
T his Strasbourg Institute. Let St Just find the document. Vais
i* Dccunent 22 . hxnibit 21 . She list of those to vfccc it vas


6453


25 ipril-K-JP-5—2-iI_*rov (Int. 3rcwn)


Ccurt I

distributed is 02 pages 18 und 19. liret, l-iobcrt Hoch lastituto,
attention: Professor Gildcncistcr; then, second, it tac state
Institute for jfcjKrinontol .he-ropy, Gcfaciur.it Otto; thirdly, Inatituto
for .'ypfaua uad Virus ?.eto«rcfa in Cracow, Professor -yer; fourth,
Hygiono Institute of tfao University of Str_eooure, Professor Snngon;
and then, nearing Institute for Typhus Itoscareh in Lenborg, -.*5;
uad oixtfa, jehrirg Vorks ia k-rburg on the Lufcn.

<. '-hut's tac <L.to of th^tt
a. 29th of September, 1943.

Z* 2id you later teed tals r^ccino to -ing or ..rjgovs^’ for
tooting in ducn-nw_ld?

Ho, I o.vc «lrc-dy testified acre that if I h i beer. esxod
about t<iis directly o.fort Ttm -»lock testified 2 saculd h^o o^ld
*'•» 1 I Q^d sent th_ wr.olo v.ccinc soiplc to Professor Schreibor.

3ut, in ti.o Buntiao, 7r..u dlocx a as testified n*ru and tr.is ntiounp-
tioa on ay p..rt incorrect .xd tfao oj-pleo tb_t c-xc i tub
Coponhegoo wtr« divided u p ir.to several 9 .rtc arf. sent to several
institutes. I considor it possible - 2 conoidor it likely that
Truu Block's testimony on this auttor is uore reliable th-4 aiuo
vrald nave been btOousd sfac n-d less to do than 2 did and was coa-
cornod especially wito tno suedleg off of such things, so it is
prob.-.ble th .t fl.r recollection of this is aoro precise tfa-n ciaoj,

7* roll, fcov c.m there ae jjr douot ibout it? ‘'on't you
h vo this document here v£ich .ells cx.xtly wa .t you did with tho
C<^>onh.vgon v.ccineT

-. I oog year pardon. 2 didn't \iitc undorct aid tho queotion •
e. -oil, I don't unuerot nd hov the-ro c be >iay question about
vna.t n opened tc tho Cooinn^en v.ccinc in the : .co of this docucont
tn .t von n_vc suouittedT

■. Inis dccuaeat st..tes vhat s:. -,-stion:. I s.dc ia connection
ita this Cope-nh . on vaccine-and with rog .rd to tac v_ccincs tr.cncclves


5*»54


25 ri l-it-J?-5-3-Z tt ov (Iat. irovn)

Court I

I sug >stod they bo used oa persons wao wero in especial danger.

These persons ia especial d-eger - people who vero in particular
danger of being infected with typhus - tcis w. s a generally current
technic 1 caprcscion .-id the nodical officers, ooth in tho civil
dJialstr..tiea ^nd ia tho ailitary codic-l s-rvico, were f siliar
with it, .uid it is used not only in connection with typhus but ia
connection with other diseases Uso. Tfcc phrase is used "p-rsonn
la cspcci 1 danger ", for on-.pie, only aovngt vorieors are vaccinated
or alnon or people where there is a particular pcstilcnco of rats
in tho ease of tho Veil Piosuso. Those people I have Just uoutioned
.ro ia especial danger .ind are consequently v.xcin_tod whereas other
pcoplo arc not.

%• Professor, let's not wander off the point. I .x not
lutoroetod in all of this, but do I 'understand you to say that a
sroplo of th* Copenhagen Vaccino w s scat to each ono of thoso son
in the distribution list, along with tne lettor?

a. iio, I don't belie-/* so bee ..us i the sanio couldn't hr.vo

m %

ceen 1 -rgc enough x*or th-t. Z reacaber it, tns ^jaouat was only
lnr/.o o.-.ou,h to suffice for one consignment. . ow, ?r..u Sled: has
said it * s divided into tnroo portions.

And who get the portions?

a. I don't riocnbsr precisely what ?r..u nlock testified to
~ •» effoct. I should have to lo^c it up ia the record.

• Vc knew th .t Ka..gcn got ono of the portions, don't wo?

a. Th .t I do not .<naw. It caiwot ee seen from t-'.e correspondence.
At -ay rate, he did cot ajco use of ^ is Copcah .gen vaccine or, ot*
lonst, never r-norted on it if he did. J>o there w„s only correspondence
-l o ouectioa vcothr t..is Copeoh :gcn vaccine vns to bo usod as a
?-*■'llol sories in th. exporisents tn.st were testing to alleviate tho
rc -ctior. of nie subjects to tne living afirulent v_c-lno. Ih.it


6455


25 ^>ril-*t-JP-5-4-i_rrw (lat. 3rown)

Court I

interested hie particularly because tats Copenhtgon v.xcinc was a
dead Vaccine free Burino virus and there woi no other such vaccine
in Sere ny, out Professor Haagen succeeded in Weakening this vaccine
«J th..t there was no reaction whatsoever _nd ho did so beforo carrying
oat ais series of exporinonts, and inis scant th,t he w.is no loagor
interested in tfco Coponh.gcn vucclnc and tnoro v..s no further corroo-
ooadoaco on tho subjoct. I h-vo attempted to inquiro of tho Institute
,.t Coponhag.ni whether he received ccnslg.cents of their v-xcino.

* t was denied. Tho Ccpcch gen Institute believes th».t tr.is v. ccino
was sont only to Danish and Wonro^ian doctors.

How, Prefossor, without pursuit this point ouch further,
how could you surest to Haagon tr. .t he c-rry out an exporinent with
tho Coponh^on Vaccluo unless you h.d soat nic a s xplc of tho Copenha¬
gen v.xcinoT

a. any tino ho wanted to ho could write a lottor to Copenhagen
ft.:d ash for a sample. ®o cortmlnly Knew of Ipsor. - ooth of tho- wero
research son in typhus, xd I .a quite sure that thoy oxcb.uvcO
r-prlatt of thoir scientific public .tions. Xr. f.ct, H.^cn hnd tho
chnnoo to visit Ipson porsonully b*c..uao ho w.s then consulting hy-
iioalst with tho «ir Fleet Aoich -ad Copcah .go.i fell within tho
Jurisdiction of th..t «ir Iloet r.olch. In othor words, if tnc aattor
Interested bin, k>. could .. .vo a ado -n offici.d trip to Ceponh.'gon
vithin tho fr sowarJc of his noxn 1 .xtivltics. no slaply would
k vo hod to apply for permission to go and tic a loo* ..t sec-othing
® thoro ad ho would have got permission.

v Well, con you t.ll the friounal wh .t Lap cnod to this
Coponh.^en v .eelno? I do-'t know aysclf. X n.vca't found out
vi 1 happened to it. You got it, out vho did you give it to?


5456


25 April-!HUG-6-l-Ualoy (Inti 3ro*n)

Court No. 1

A I said that before. IT I -. ore relying on ^y own awry
I should have saiu that *o cent the vaccine, the 'hole amount «f it
tc professor Schreit jr aic:.. i ith t:.c =kin report that I ..rote.

However, Frau Block corrected _y ctcrry in this natter to the extent %
of saying that the vaccine iw broken down into three portions which
wore sent to three office.,, inciudi . Professor Gildcmoister; but as
I said, I ant net in a position tc state tint of ny own knowledge. In
this -.hole examination -• fine ouraelvos in a nest unfortunate position
in that individual letters end individual conrignsints which were
simply single events in the ecura*- of an enormously extensive official
activity and wore rede the subject of inquiry, and nt are simply net
in a position to refer to our on files or other persons v.e worked

with. Of course it makes n jeer Impression if you ernnot five a

•

straight yes or r.e ons er to n point as important as this, and 3 m
quite clear about that, but th-t can be explained from the whole
position in 'rich i fir.d ^ elf. Per t>« years I have been in custody
with no pcoeae to any of ry Jiles, but you have «> riles. You got
theso letters frea Schilling fros v* own file c;blnut and you must

skirt i ^ Inu ..eve those documents.
You got th<- letters that you tie spuculneLig on the existence of hero
free «y filo, because rli of those lottois must have been in the
soicc drewor where the lo tors were wrote to no.

t 'iher ycu kne - ^ letters exist teo, don't you. Doctor;
it is not difficult to toll the truth. The difficult thing is to
tell just about half the ! ruth or r.onu at all, and hope to get by
with it. Nev, ycu very noil know whether you sc..t any cf this vaccine
to .xugowsfcy or Din.* to be tested -t Buchur. dd, just a3 well a* you
well rcatcher that LO yur.rs ego ycu ran over e man with on autocobile*
and killed his. arc net ceding with Kiscollancous letters, ho
ere dealinr with unique litters concerning nurdcr. 1 c. asking you
to tell the trith about C. If ycu rave any vaccfte to Mrugowaky and
Ding, Copenhagen or Buci.'rect vocsinc you would reuaaber it?


6457


25 April-K-DJG-6-2-iialoy (Ir.t. Brta r.)
Court Ho. 1


A To the best of x? knowledge I hr.ve snst cr<xi ell these
questions hero. I ncv^r run over anybody UO years ago with an autc-
mobile, but I grant you S hcuid probably remec.bor it had I done so,
and if I hi Idlled anyent two ycur 3 age I would certainly remember
that too} but corrcsponco.;ce on typhus vaccines that fell irithin the
framework of ay whole official activity I cannot reicoaber any noro
clearly than I can reeebar the othur 15,t>DD letters that I received
and sent, and in addition to that an cnonacus pile ol documents that
went through ay bonds everyday. You are asking soon hit too much of
mo. That I issued no orders for ouch.rr.sld end could r.ot issue any
order? for Buchcnvald in vi. of th- gtnorol situation, nd ny position,
that is clear.

'« Coruinly th t is clear, end it is ridiculous for you to
mnkc the statements, but i 1 - not c dear for ycur knowledge that
Buchcn-rld existed ard tint Di: *-u testing vaccines there and using
avirulant typhus to .feet"; >oj it is net so d«r ;ith that know¬
ledge whether you aent vaccin* a ’.here to be tested, and thcoo era the
qucstior.a I am dlrecti-v t u find gutting no answer. The Ding dicry
ooya you did nu.! iVr !.. -t v.: >o l : ! ratrnd y;ur testimony you
cdmlt the possibility . *. n.d it?

A lie, . c-rowly odd that I do net n It that possi¬

bility.

<J Yo« reecmb .1 he testimony of KogftG, Kogan testified that
ho remember /■ r; Ding got the letter, he didn't scy whether

from you or iir-eo*aky, • sting Copenhagen ycccino bv. Uctud in
3uchcnvald, .inu hu v: s vcr~ e;'-ted; rxjv how do you cxplcin the test-
Lmony of Kogan?

•

A I should reco .-end th t the rrcrccuticn reed through the

record of hogr.n* 3 toatincoy. Thi - ttcr it sot forth there ftoterlally

differently. Kogrn eaiu nothing to the effect that Ding had ever

received a letter frer ,c. Cn th.. contrary in discussing Ding's

correspondence he* purposes omitted necc. Moreover Kogcn said

6458


25 Apr!C—6->-w r iGy (Jot. 5r*n)
Court So. i


nothing to the effect that I hr.d riven the assignment that the Copen¬
hagen Vrccine be tested in 3uchwn»eld. He testified here that Ding
had expressed his satisfaction that c vaccine was to be tested to ay
eujrgcstion, a;id the text of this su -wsticn, •. hich ’ as directed neither
to Ding nor to . jugo- sky I hr*\: be-..- able to bring in here as a docu¬
ment. By accident or.o of th-. six t e:\i~s of that report could be found,
and I deny that that is a suggestion for human bci.ig experiments in
Buchenwold, but I do admit that - man like Ding, > he h: ted aw so
violently becouso of zy critic!sa of his vork, as Kogan here described
it, and hesitated to repent the chr.sing that Ding used to describe
mo, as I soy he- did scy that Din> *as gib - that he hed receiv.d a
vaccine to *hich I hrd dreen his attention as something pnrticul; rly
important.

c* It is the only important —

T't rHS&IDairrj Just c :oMcnt Counsel.

Iho Tribunal v.iil bo In recess.

(• hereupon a rc 'c o v.za taken.)


6459


25 April anids (Ir.t, Rftalax 1 )

Court Ho, 1

THE UAHS HAL: The Tribunal is again in session.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel aay proceed.

BY MR. KohANEi:

Q Horr Professor, did Mrucow3ky over request that you give him
vaccines for uso in typbis experiments?

A Ho.

Q Did you over discuss the question as to whether the louse
could bo infooted by a vaccinated typhus pationt with the dofendant
Mrugcwsky?

A That could bo possible. This question played an important role
in the discussion about the vaccines and their effectiveness for a
timo. Wo had somo old Polish observations available to the offcct
that if vaccinated porsons received typhus in spito of that vacci¬
nation, no further illnesseo oould bo transforrod by such porsons. It
Is possiblo throughout, sinco this question was of considerable im¬
portance, thet something like that oould wdl havo boon diacuasod by
oo and Urugov/sky. tfa talked a lot about that question.

Q Did 701 - ver negotiate v' s V, •<taywelgr concerning vaccinoa to
bo toatod in BuchcnrJdC

A No«

Q Let: t . - .

(!bo«. . - '•.ii'v’c.)

HR. : '~l ■ ^curor.t 1>-?.75U bo narkud as

Prosecution '.<•.>* . r. ;tr cation,

Q (Ccr.tlnui -err Frrfars •, rill you road this document
•aloud?

A "tygieno Institute of the raffen SSj Journal No. 795/1*2.

*

"Berlin V 1$, Kr.jsebcckstrcsse L3/hii} 16 llay 19U2.

"To the Oborfcldirat Professor Dr. Rose} Berlin JW, roohrorstrasse

2 .

"Robert Koch Institute.

6460


25 April li?-^TD-8-2-Oani2ls (lot. assies-)

Court No. 1


“Doar Professori

"The Reich Physician SS and Police has consented to the execution
of axperinents to test typhus vaccines. May I therefore ask you to let
no have the vaccines.

"The other question which ycu raised, as to whether the louse can
be infected by a typhus pationt vaccinated for protection, will also
bo dealt with. In principlo, this also has boon approved. Thoro arc,
howOTor, s till sooe difficulties at the accent about the practical
oxocution, sinco wo havo at present no facilltios for breeding lice
yet.

"Your suggestion to uso Clrr^c has boon passed on to tho Personnel
Deportaent of tho SS Jiodical Of/Vo. It will bo givon consideration
in duo couree.

"With King rogards, and Fell HitlorJ Your, IV. Hrugowsky,

SS Oborstunabannfuohrar."

Thorj is r. fcotnoto to i: . ttor, end I quote

"According to teliph-mlc i A»Ir> Dr, a nwky asks to bo oallod
by tolop : c»nj after F~ fair >»• 0.. •<-»- r ran. -n, D: . ’.V-jgowaky will
not yot jo ir. br\_r ir ' -Is c w. >, -« ir.forraod.

20 May 19h2 •*

It bocnn.i* oppiw., ,r. , v . t lotto- Vv.t Dr* Krugwreky oneo

informed - . v • ‘ v.i-S •- nr.*. 3S ana had consontod to tho

•.ostj-. o.' •• > :• v W’<.» *.j surd hin those vaccines,

hit w-: • ’ . : •? J. do rot cny ooro now.

Th.n • '■:•••• a', 1 « -ous lico being infected by typhus

patients vnccin-.t-fd Tor protection,

I admitted that apossibility exists, and I said th t this question
•13 at one tico discussed with do.

Tha final paragraph says that on.- of =y assistants had boon drafted
into the Waff on SS and that I ondoavored to havo hi- used in tho
Hygienic Service.


6461


2 f' -»>ril-H-J3-9-l-3iri;s (lat. ScfilorJ

6cart I

H err Professor, let's go to the foot-noto first. yh_t cro
the initials "3.L." at the ted of th^t foot-note /or? Isn't that
Iron Block?

9

Yes, th-t would be Frau Block; yes.

«od 7rai Block has been is touch with Dr. krugovsky. Sho
notes th^t Dr. Ding, who I suppose you will ,«dcIt is Dr. Ding, has
boca inforacd. la view of tnio note wo Can pretty well disregard tho
testimony of your witness Frau Block before this Tribunal can't wo
since sho tcstiflod of your witness Frau slock before this Tribunal,
can't wo, oinco she testified you h-4 not corresponded with i-rugowsky
didn't she?

A. Sho said tk .t sho could not rocolloct any correspondence
with hrugow.ky, but you will tvo froa tho docuneato fraa no which
you havo before you, th-t this correspondence in cffoct was of so
littlo ^ctont th.t it is quite understandable if she does not
rcucobcr it in dotuil. It is a result of uy express order th.it you
havo thoso docuncnts available. I ordered that in ny institute
•t Pftifforodo no documents should bo destroyed *ucdor any circiontancoo.

*°T° lB J vrlttco docuncnt -Tuilablu to tho effect th-t I g .vo such
order,

Horr ?rofCBtor , tois letter is in response to ono which
*’3U wroto to hrugowsky, isn't it?

a. Th-t's possiblo.

1. And in the letter taut you wroto to .;rugowaky you askod
fcL * to have tho -*ich_r^st vaccine tested in Buchonwald, didn't you?

*• I told you oeforo in great dot .il th .t I could not raact>-
oer this uattor about tho Bucharest vxcinc. If you h„ve a letter
fcoforc you about this u..ttcr Us would, of course, give no a
possibility to refresh uy nouory.

I should think t.vis luttor would refresh your aoaory, Eorr


6462


25 Arpil-H-J^-9-2-Hums (Int. Sailer)


Court I

Prof essor, particularly In view of the “lag diary, which fc -g aa

entry shortly following the d_te on tills letter whore Ding carrioe

out nis experiments with the Bucharest vaccine among others and

scyo in the diary th,t the Vaccine wj obtained free you; and

hru&ovsky in this lottor asked you to send hin the vaccinos which

•

you have nentioned in your previous letter, Thoro's really no doubt
about it, is thora, Profoesort

This possibly bee coos -pparent.

4. «od w^s tnls porsoa Osaschor (?) nontionod in tho lottor?
U_o ho to assist in Buchunwald?

a. Ho was to bo used in the Hygienic Sorvico. since ho
particularly de_lt with cntouological questions I -skul that ho
oho ild work on thoso questions there.

'i. You got a report frou *>ing, too, on those uxparlmonto
tooting tho Hucharcst vaccina, didn't you. Professor?

I C—uiot raaoeber that, and 1 already told you one that had
I received my such roport I would h..vo drawn tho conclusions free it;
and since I did not do th_t, I think it is improbably th .t I rocolvod
such n report.

Q. In view of this letter, doctor, do you want to go Kck and
Change your testimony about tho Caponhagu: vaccino? Didn't you also
su&gost those experiments, and didn't you also supply tho Copenhagen
v ccino for tho anoriuonts in cuchcnwJd?

a. Ho, I h„vo no intention to do that.

'«U i.oll, in th^t event I will ask tfc.t Document -,0-1106 bo
p.-.BBod up to you, and tnls will oo marked as Prosecution jmibit 492
-MT identification. - -ill you rc^i tcis lottor aloud pleaso?

a "Oborstarst Prof. Hose O.U., 2 Docaobcr 1943

To Standartcnfuohrer Dr. hrugowshy,

Head of the Hygiene Institute of the buffoa SS

64S3


25 ‘■prll-f.-JP-S-o-iums (Int. Staler)


Court I

3erlla-2ehleadorf 6
»pani*che «llec 10


Soar nr. krugovsicy:

at pros«.nt I have at ay disoos.J a nuaber of staples of a now uurino
7irua tynhus vacciao which w.j prepared fra- aico livora and proved
la anl nol co^oriacat* to be quantitatively a 1000 tine* uoro
cffcctivo th..n the vuccino prepared fra. aico lunge, to docido
whether thl* fir«t r_tc uuriae v.ccino should be used for protective
vaccination of huaan o»iags -g-iaat lico tyhpus it would bo dceirablo
to know if this v-cciao showed in y^ur and •Hng 1 * ortcriuontcl
armngaioat at Buchcr.wald an effect siail r to th-t of tho clocsic
virus v.ccir.es.

-ould you bo ablo to havo such an exp»-riucr.t.il oerica carried out?
Unfartua-.toly I could not reach you over tho phono. Considering tho
slownoss of post-1 cotu-unic-tiona I would bo grateful for an answor
by tclcphono. }& ambers, -11 of which go through tho s^o
switchboard. aro : derlia 278313

Sapid a mh - n go dcrllr. 09, Zocson 659

Luftw-f c Sxciungo 72, thor. you -sic for R.L.k.,

L. In.14

“lth best regards

Hoil Hitler
Tours
ROSS'

2 i 0 sigaaturo which you see on this photostatic copy is, in effect,
ay signature. It bccaios evidont frta this letter that I ..Iso
inf >rned krugowsJ^r about tho Copcah^ca vacciao wnich I did not
r&xcnbor up to this ooiat.


25 *yrll-fc-J?- 9 . 4 J urna (Zee. hollerJ
Court I

sd you iskec fciu to teat tec vaccina in aucfconvold, didn't

y^T

 This question is dc Jt vita here whether this vaccine can
bo tcatod ia nucfcenwald.

q. Do you aoo the aeuo ■Oia e " Litton at tho oottec of too
letter?

«. Yea, you can toe it .t tee cotton of tho p^o.
q. “ad it appe ,ra fch-t t-.e testimony aoc^n w^o very procioe,
wasn't it, boc-uso »n*, got covy :i this letter, didn't fact

a. Yea. "ln^'s utter jxa do not only refer to vy ucuor.vuduu
but ..lno to the correanondcr.co which VuB Ca’-ried on between uo and
hrufiowrtgr. Apparently it w..t then transferred to tho Huichaarat SS.

q. In the d .tc on this letter 2 Dwcoubor 1943 or Fcoru..ry 12,
19<3, xd I diroct your attention to tho recoipt ot.s.p on tho lottor
wi.lch ia 21 February 194*;?

a. The difference ootwoco tho two d .tea c-n bo tuplninod by tho
feet that consider .bio tioo had ©lapsed ufter tending uy letter and
..:e ti~© t.ii lottor reached hr. "in; during which tLoao agencies
dc lt with tr...t j .tter who had to decide upon tho ^iprov.A for •
Ccx.yins »* tx’eri..-r.to ca hu..j» o«.in*a.

q. bo -vx -..int .in th..t 2 Decuibor 19-.3 ia too correct dnto
tho lottor?

a. Cort-ialyJ th .t certainly ia the corroct date,
q. On the b.,sl8 of tho tvo letters which I h »v© exhibited to
}--u mu will concede th..t the Dindiary v«;b precisely .ccurnto in
vh.>.t it said, won't you?

a. Ho, ono c-n't conclude th_t Just like th..t, Ifco ordot to
C-r.-* out exm.riuer.t8 in auchenw.ild could not be issued by uo in any

q. Ih_t's very clear -


6465


25 ^fIl-X-JP-5-S-_-iras (1st. icier)

C <wxt I

-w Th..t vaccines w<_ro requested fr&a ac sects to btcaio ovi-
doat free one lcttor. I didn't remember it oal I still don't
roienter it now, but on tho oasis o: tcis letter ono has to consider
that fact proved. Ihen it also occcnos crident that I boro drew
tho attention of hr. Hru$ovs*y to this vaccina and th.t I ccntionod
a discussion dealing with human experiments regarding these v.-ccineo.

3 .

with the


-cd you suggested xd asked hit. to carry cut experiments
Copenhagen v_ccine in ouchcnvald, didn't you?


6466


25 April 47-!?-£--lO-lW.o s eo r* Id tt: Ramlor
Court No. 1

— I cm taking whether there is still apossibil:ty
to c: rry out such r. sorios of experiments. That is
quito undorstandr.blo, ccr.sidoring tho situation,
bocuuao ono can s^o fron my report of 29 Hay 3 . 943 ^
that this socnod to constitute a considorablo progross
on tho basis of experiments alroady nr.do on anlrar.ls.

It wa s known to no that such oxperimonts had oarlior
boon c arriod out, although I basically objoctod to
thoso oxp orimonts. Oils Inctitutioh had boon rot up
in G 0 ronny end was r. provod by tho Stato anl covered
by tho Stato. ..t that moment I was in a position
which perhaps corresponds to a lawyor who is, porhaps
a basical ooponont of oxocutior., or doath son tonco. On
occasion vhon he is dealing with loading mombors of
tho govornnont, or with Lawyers during public Congros-
sos or mootings, ho will do ovorything in his power to
maintain his opinion on tho subject ..nl havo it put
into offoct. If, howo vor, ho docs not succood, ho
stays in his profosclon, and in his onvironmont in
spito of this . Uhdor circum 3 tancos ho may perhaps ovon
bo forced to pronounco such a doath contoneo himsolf,
although ho ic basically opponent of that sot-up. This,
of courso, doos not go t f.ar in my oaso. I am only
in touch with such pooplc fro.- whom I as sumo that fchoy
somohovr aro incldod in the official cfccnnols of such
an institutions which I disapprove of basically .and
which I want to soo roi-x»vod. .

f;. Professor, 6 persons died in this experiment with
tho Coponha.gon vaccine, didn't they?

A. Yes. Th<.30 were 6 Persons who we-ro furnished by tho
fi c ich Criminal Polico Office through ordinary chrjinols
ra th °y * d '°°on dote mined by conpoeont agencies.


25 /. :ril 47-K-SW-10-2—Lossor-Int: Rmar.lor
Court Ko. 1

r .. Now, «?rofossor, do you want to so back now -.nd toll
U3 about tho confcronco in Loc-nbor 1941, viioro tho
doc. aion was reached to set up this institute at
3uchonwald?

«ro you roforrlng to the discussion of 29
Dcconbor 1941?

Q. Yes.

A. Woll what question do you wish me to roply to?

f l. I would liko for you to toll us about that confor¬
onco.

A. /oil, first this conforonce did not tako placo
discussing such c ntonts as you doscribo thorn. Socondly,
I hr.vo to say, with all certainty, that I did not
participate in any such coni'oroncc.

0* ^ut you knov/ about it , didn't you?

A. I know not} ing raoro about this conforonco of
29 Docombor 1941 fron my own ?:not;lodgo. In tho tnoantimo
I havo road tho rocord of this mooting of thrt da to. I
saw it horo. You submit tod it, and it boconuo uvidont
from it, too that I did not p rticipato in it, rnd also,
that a nunbor of othor pooplo who aro montionod in tho
rocord , did not participate in tho confcronco. 'Vhothor
at tho tir.’o when Gildornoistor discussed this problom
with no, in oarly 1942, ho had montionod this confor¬
onco to mo, * do not know nnynoro in dotail, I most
of all rononber tho fact t}*at ho 3aid at that tir.o that
thoso experiments origin.tod from Unaor Secretary of
Stato , Conti, and according to tho rocords of tho moot¬
ing, ho also did not participate. Obviously tho decision
for tho oxocution of thoso oxporinonts cano about somo-
how much lator, during a snallor confcronco. It is quito
logical such a conforonco rust havo taken placo; but


6468


25 April 47-!!-s~-13-o-Lossor-Int: Ram lor
Court :Io. 1


who participated in such a confcronco I do not know.

At ioast I cannot toll you th—t today, from ny own
knowlodgo. hethor Gildonoirtor at that tirao roportcd
any further do tails to >19 about that or concerning
that Conti h..d wado doc 1 si on, I do not know today
anyrior o .

MR. KcHaMEY: I havo no furthor quostions.


*


6469


25 April 17-tf-ATD-lO-la-Lesssr (Inti Racier)
Court ffo. 1


THE PRESIDENT: Any further oxani nation of the witness Mf
deforce counsel?

3E-DTHSC? S7-A.'1?IA?I0! I

BY DR* FRITZ: (Counsel for Defendant Rose)

Q Professor, the prosecutor askod you yesterday whether you
racorborod discussions which you had vith Profossor Holzfeoohncr
after the lccturo at 'Mrhbcrg at tho sc-called "Cold" Conforonco.
What did you loam from Hol.lojhnsr or. that occasion?

A This conversation, as 1 alroacfcr testified during zy diroct
examination, doalt mainly with tho psychological sido of any such
axporinent on huccn beings. Holslochner particularly emphasized
what a trcnondo'is cental burden it constituted for his to carry out
thoso physiological cocp.'rlr.cntc on human beings; ho emphasized
specially that as to the nental burden it constituted for tho man
carrying out tho oxporlnmt, it wjuld praotically mako no
difforonco vhothor tho subjocts wore oondccnod to death or not, and
that oven tho assurance af a pardon ir. case of a survival of tho
oxporisontc, as it had boon given ir. tho case of his experiments,
did not ohongo tho spiritual difficulties for tho physician. Ho
said that novor in his lifo would he want any such ordor again.

That was the r.air. cont.nts of this conversation,

Q During that conversation did Professor Holzlcohncr toll you
anything to tho effect that thoso oxparirijits wuro carried on in
Dachau?

A Oiring his lecturo, as far as I know, ho said nothing about
it. Afterwards, during tho conversation, I an sure ho did not
mention it becau3o there was no occasion for hin to do that. Wo wore
not talking about tiro and place or any details about thoso experi¬
ments , but re wore discussing tho ethical and psychological aspocts
of tho experiments on fcuran beings. There, of course it did not
natter, whether they wero carried out in Dachau or anywhere also.


25 April ij7-K»IT>-lC-2£-ic3S-r (I at

Court so* 1


Q Was Professor Schilling m e nt io n ed daring that conversation?

A Certainly not. Schilling had nothin whatsoever to do with
freezing experiments, and Holsloohner had nothing to do with malaria
experiments. Although today I certainly cannot give you an absolutely
certain testimony as to the contents of a conversation which took
placo 5 years age, I do not believe that anythin like that was
mentioned. It is highly inprobahlo that Schilling was mentioned
becauso tharo was no occasion for him to bo mentioned. He was carrying
out malaria experiments.

Q Yostorday, during cross-oxardnatlon, tho Prosecution submitted
a number of documents free which it bdcocos apparent that your
Tropical Medical Department at tho Robert Koch Institute was sending
Anopholoa oggs to Schilling. That was nothing now. This was known
to all tho participants in this trial. Tho only thing that I
noticod was tho Prcfossor Schilling apparently changod tho naco of
tho malaria strain which ho roooived from you to your naao. Can you
say anything noro in order to explain that fact?


6471


Court 1

April 25-M-rU-i loy^Sasaier.

A. This question of changing the name of t..ls strain
has already been clarified tr.rough this correspondence. I
said it was Highly improbable because it is In centrary to
the usages of malcrin experts, '.ut that does not alter the
fact that e malaria etreir. h. . been furnished by me and
tfcet is some thing that i have elready testified to earlier
on the basis of a report by Kiss Von FaDtenhoyn; whether
the strain was called "Rose" or whether it had the old
none "Greece,'' es it was colled ir. ay lrborn;ory really
plays no roll for tr.is trial, as to the question of
furnishing these cnopheles o 6 gs-

i. Oh, yoa, in this conduction I h ve mother question,
Professor; do you know to wnon else your deoartaent sent
ealoria and cosqulto strains?

A. Vo11, here 1 no in tno 6nco Tosltlon as in the
ot8c of ochi 11 lag's consignments. Naturally, many ouch
consl e naents were dlsp tohed by ay department urin e the
'ar, and in rost O-Ses I didn't hear anything • bout them.

If at ony tide I soy oorresoondonce, I n. turally oon't
r-oall it in detail. If I now eud .only hove to apeak
ut it I would h^>ve to turn to my collaborators in the
snmo way as then, -nd would hove to try to find out fron
them whnt consignments v -e dlsp toh.d, by what assistant,
and to whoa th^y were addressed. The situation was that
one tec hnical assistant wrs .xclusively working in the
dl30Ltch of such cor.8l 0 naento. Sho dealt with the malaria
consignment business, If you wr.nt to call it that way.
-Naturally, it Is clear tr.«t rn individual dlsp: tcn*ln the
framework of this entire business-does not creat any
o-rtlculrr '•ttontlon, mi reinins ir. ones memory. J4y
collaborators, my assistants, h've placed me into a very
owkward position here.. They testified that such consi&n-


6472


Court 1

April 25-M-l 1-12-2-HD-Knloy-Rnsmlei*.


acnts were only cade to aehillng ir. the year 1942. Another
assistant said that this -as done ir. the year 1941. ’ I
naturally relied upon these statements and then we found
out that In the year 1S43 another anopheles consignment
was sent to Professor Schilling. No rurally, this Is quite
possible. T:.ese really quite excusable, beoause the actual
assistant wno was working on this aalcrle consignment
buelr.esa could not be found up to tills date. She probably

would be tho first one to give exact statements as to the
period of time. However, the most essential points In
this connection are not tho dates, but the f eta.

Professor, hove you at 111 tho documents before you
wr.lch were introduced by the Prosec-tor yeatorday?

A. Oh, yes, I brought them along today.

Q. '4ould you lease be good enough to loo* at doounent
No. 1755, Whloh la r letter written cllo 6 cdly by you and
nddro8aed to Professor Schlllln_, dated 27 July 1943. I
already jointed out yoaterdoy tact your signature only
becomes noparent by on "R*. I now isk you to look c.t
p'ge 2 of th^c aodufflor.t.

A. Sxouse me. 1 think 1 misunderstood the number.

I Jnderstood 1756.

No, It Is 1755.

A. Thank you very much.

%. It says after your slgn r ture, and I quote
"Sonderfuehrer of the Luftvoffa Dr. £mmel with Consultant
Hygienist of the Hygiene Inspector Robert aooh Institute,
Tropical Medicine Department." i-oes that give you any
ulr.t of whether this letter originated from you or whether
we -re her. concerned with one of these customary measures
t./ter. wnen mnkln t the consl 0 nment of any such arterial?


6473


Court 1

April 25-.-;—ll-i2-3->J)-:L: loy-Haaalsr.


This er.tr. does not ^iva 20 any f urtfcer clue 3 . I
t that It is n cleor proof that in July 1345 oosaulto
vere sent to Dachau. Kov this wo? coi*riv& on in
uat j'l does r.ot b.coce apparent ires this letter. I don’t
raxombor t..eae various affaire r^prdlr.e, the vacation and
airplane.

W. ’-'hen discussing the document which was yesterday
introduced by the Prosecution, NO 1756, you tola the
tribunal that Professor Schilling wanted this spleen
torinl for the nenri reaction; is this a custocnry
reaction?

a. This la r. reaction vhlcr. 1. neoetsary for
diagnosis of onronic onlerls me vno introduced by the
risnch reaoonrcr.cr Henri, rnd It also bears his na/no. It
vta appll-d for a f„v years quite uenorrlly in all arleria
inflioted countries. It 1 j r r thbr cox-llcrtod question,
‘.b.r. it vno forgotten sonowhnt, because it did not live
J <• lte to expectations, tut a n uber of Institutes ore
3till a plyln c that not.od. Hov and n^nin it was aoiamaud
ay laboratory, but vo didn't carry out that reaction,
o ch requests onao too edioa, ~nd it vrsn't worth our
.'•tire effort.

In this decuaor.t tnere is a letter written by you
-0 rrofessor cchiHln^ 1 . w.-.lcn 2 lorla spleens are Bon
-loned; did I understand you ri e r.tly that you u,an by that
:il - aoleon of bodies of s.c-: p.rsona who died of xul-rla,

♦

rrA Chc 8n3le c1 *- noLi.r oueetlon; is it peraissiblo
■ J s cr. nuacn or e 'ns f roa corpses?

Let oe first deal wltn your first qu.stlon. a
■ " 1q soleen In that connection is the splaea of the
'coey in the case of r person who either died of
- • vi;- or who was suff^rinu, rros chronic calorie b t died


6474


Court 1

rt prll 26-j£-ll-12-4-HD-ji loy-He zzl^v.

of son*.- other disease. For instance, soaebody who died
5 n result of cancer but simultaneously vr.e Buffering
with chronic nclaria. This 1 b In answer to the first
ueet-on, whet c ocL'rls spleen was. The second question
whether It Is permissible to remove or t sna from o r.uanr.
corpse ..as been settled 1.gaily. The legal aspect concern¬
ing the corpses of the human being, p nd I think there is
rntner extensive legal literature on thrt subject, in¬
clude the following principles, which the pnyssclnn knows,
-nd thnt refers Co Gorman low. for lnetcnco, the heirs
do not grin my rl e ht to own th corcse of any deceased
e..raon. In other words, the interests of the heirs cannot
be damaged by any Inter: crcnoe with the corpse, further¬
more, ms f r os * Know it nr.a been eat’ bll.-hca legally In
ftoraany th t In the cusc of 0 a tops let oerri. d out by
...yslclons, parts of the corpaos ury be renov.-d for scion-
tlflo purposes. hen looIn at museums or potnologlcal
Institutes yo- will find that they alaout only oonolst of
e ch pro"arntions of organs which wore raaovva a-ruiv. a .cn
nutoosioe. If for lnstnnoe you voulc. visit a crloalnal
scientific museum, which you probably have dono in the
.ts 0 lawyer you will • leo note tJv t there re to
be found similar orop^r tiona w. lcr. are of Interest as to
erlain -1 1 -w, nd ceir. c pr^scrv u or exhibited tr.oro. I
bollcvs t:.- t glcll r las exist fci*oru. If not tr.e same.

-- Joriseny tnero were even r.gulst or.a to the effect in
‘h't runner one h-s to dual wit: zh* p -te of homcn
Cvr -6o, after they a re no lon,-er aued for scientific pur-
- • -n tiV.'t connection on ; vos .'.ot allowed to treat
.-'60 parts as w sto, fc -t It vet legally present d that
‘ f« a to ce burled In thoDruper manner even If the
- hliv corpse '•r.d .rave was no lor. : «.r hnovn. Those


6475


Court 1

Acrl 1 25-lt-ll-l2-6-KD-*jv IbyWfcoslcr.


roc ^ ‘ iuns
since it Is
nfi f P as I


ore Erinly inovn In prthologiccl Institute
lw*iya those vr.c re v-orkinc with corpses.
r«.iM 2 ber tnls sl ttcr rOb'T«iin t inlerin


I* 12

25 -?r-h-5ZS-ll-l&-Ur.lor (1st. Heeler)

Court Po. 1.

cplcons I gavo a dlroctivo tc ny essistnnt to tho effect that we
into contact with a nxeber of pathological institutes in 3crlin,
-id naked whether there wes a possibility to fulfill Dr. Schilling's
•rich.

Is tfccro another bottor known nodical rone tier, during which
organs froc husan corpses ploy • part?

... Yoo, there r-ro a nunbor of such ronctiens. The reaction
best !ruoo to tho Irycrjt is the se-cr.llcd Zassorix-n rorction, which in
the extinction of tho blood in the enso of syphilis, re rongont nr.
extract froc tho liver of newly born childron is used, who had died
ns a rosult of hereditary syphilis. TLoco livors cor.tr.incd the
syphilis gems tc tho sxu.o oxtont ns it is found in bnctoriologiccl
culture. There wo still institutes today --ho wo -orbing accord¬
ing to this original cothod of Professor “aooomrr, although in tho
ncnntlno, thlo proceduro has boon further dovolopod, end n nusber of
codifications of tnis original nottod oxiot during which extracts
fre organs of nnlnnls wo used for tho vory two purpose. Thoro aro
r. nuubor of other oxnnploa and tosts and oxwlnr.tlons whoro tho uso
of ports of hunur. corpoos is nocossrxy.

?, I hnvo moth or question to tho docunant which was intro¬
duced by tho Prosecution yostoriay, PO 1752j this io n lottor
rritfcui by Schilling to you, r.tod 4 *pril 1942, have you that docu-
ccat before you?

A, Yos, 1752.

Q, In the first rwr.-rnph Prof ssor Schilling rckod you to
sen', liiu unothor few infoctod nncphclos c j :s aid thoc going on you
s-y that ho could certainly be grateful to y^u for your renowed ^
au-roort of his work. *» 1-yncn would co..ciudo free that at local, that
you re re Inf or nod about Schilling's rers which ho was carrying out in
would this conception bo correct?

... i*o, cortiinly not. Obviously this w<-s tho ontire
coi-rconondonco which Professor Schilling had with co throughout


6477


25 —pr-h—SI'S-11 £ 12-2a-Lrloy (armlcr)
Court 1-Tc. 1.


those yc era, end it was fill submitted to the Tribunal. This entiro
corrcspondonco referred oxcluiivoly to tho Cw-3igaccr.t of cosquitos
o-’ a and this one ncleric at rein, nbout which it is *.'id expressly
tent in ~?ril 1942 it was oao of theso six strains with which Pro¬
fessor Schilling was corking. Shore oxistod no corrospondcnco ct ell
about Schilling's work. If cry such correspondence iind existed one
could have found it in feho anno files froc which theso lottorn also
originate. It is quito cloar what is uonnt by support in this lottcr.
It le tho feet that ho rocoived 10 cnopholos free ry laboratory end
that in the glands of two of theso anopheles, caloric protozoa could
bo feund, which Professor Schilling had been using for soao of hie
oxporicontc. On tho basis of this feet, nnnoly that ho got two
cosquitoea k-i soys that I was giving his support.

1 . I cust shortly refor to another docuccnt which is Docur-ant
1059, which is tho lottor by Professor Hcagon to you >.tod 29 Kov-
ocbor 1942. This is whet it says on cy copy, but I think it i=uot
bo 19 - 13 .

A. In tho original it wr.s 1943.

Q. I'or, Professor, I want to r.sk you socothing about tho
word "subsequent infoction" end Mr. McHnnoy didn't understand thin
tjj to r-onn activo subsequent infoctions. I really rent to put no
further quostions to you nbout that cr.ttor, bccauso I loernod thin
oc ruing that an effidavit cf cno of tho assistants of Professor
il'ngen, Prnuloin Orodol, has boon rocoivod hero, free which ono can
boo tho corroctnoss of tho description as you gave it. This affi-
. davit in going to be submitted to the Tribunal; but I hn^c mother
question to tisis docusont. The Prosecutor asked you nbout tho
significance of the cords "cpidcnic strain," — you find thrt -ord
1.. tl.o Inst pc-regrnph of this letter. Is this a str:--in with which
."-U can produce opidemes, or whet is the situation!

... I already yesterdey answered tho Prosecutor's question to the


effect ihat an opidcsic strain is a str.-ir. of rickottsic protozoa.


25 hpr^SS-ll t 13-3o-Mcl07 (Hauler)

Ccurt 1*0. i.

Iko ric’iotiiia protozoa is tea cause of lice typhus. The louse tophus
i. nodical litoraturo is usually not designated ns a louso typhus,
but 2ms the nano "epidemic typhus,■ or "classical typhus." Por thr.t
rcraou it is quite custosuuy to speak os' epidemic strnin wfconevor
speril:.- of the protozoa strnin. On tfco othor head the murine typhus
is ioc culled "Endemic typhus." Shis is n difference in terminology.
Che gore of endemic typhus, this nurino typhus, i* the rickottsir.
.-.urim. or tosori. In that connection you era, of course, speak of
Sn'.C-'-lc Hiclcottsic. Epidomics can cri.jinato from both of thoso typhus
kinds, -his document, horovor, confirms my statement. During my
direct cxnnlnrtlon I testifiod thr.t Professor Hnrgon rith his dry
vrccinco Bns nt first bo r It in,: with n vaccina from murine viruc in con¬
tinuation cf the Burk carried on by 31r.ee, and that only lntor ho
started to work vith the nothods ex. lei hod provor. thcssolvos vith
•.l ie nurino otrr.in, ard bogan to prcduco r. vr.ccino from n protozoa
strain* and End or ic strain. Ho lr.d to *rork on that for a for months
in tho laboratory, bocauso tnis strain first of -11 had to bo chr-ngod
lnt- an ovirulont strain ith tho holp of modern virus rosonreh.

:ho fact thr.t by applying tho methods and alleviation res the rooult
hv. 6c bo examined in tho examination of wiimals. Ef-rgor. in his rc-
-ortc loseribod this procedure in great detail. Only after having
.,-oso that fer Bit: animal experiments ho could go ono step further
an. try to find out hen tho compatibility of t..ic tc dry vaccine
nppliod to human beings.

v.. i.; last question in connection with Docunont SO 1186, *'hich
tlx* Prosocuttcr. introduced a little cnrllor —

1-3 ?r--E5IZ I>1: Counsel, before arooeundlns your quocti on —

II. Irlbuir.l rill trko its rccost until 130.

(Thereupon a recess bos taker, until 1:30 p.n.)


€479


25 April 1947 -w-13-i-.TP- Fester (Br»n)
C urt to. 1


«J7S?jeo;: rhssio:;

(The hearing reconvened at 1330 hears, 25 A.jril 17.)

THE ife&SfitaLs The Tribunal is again in scssien.

'1-7 It plor.so your H.nor, Defendant Brack h:vin* been excused, he
is r.» • bsont.

THE FRESIDEhT: The Socretcry-Oencral will note the absence jf the
Dtfond'nt Brcck, pursuant to excuse by tj*. Tribunal.

Counsel ar-y proceed.

G2HHJ© BODE - Resirvd
REDIRECT rXJRl.TIOH (Continued)

3Y DR. FRITZ:

Q. Professor, I h ve no l-.et question rocerdir. r. the document the
prosecution La at put in, y^ur letter rer rdinf th- experiments with the
(^pentagon vaccine. Crn y.u tell ae somethin- b-ut that? T\>11 ne
•.b.ut wfvt tho results were ^ tostirj this v ccir.j in Buchonuald.

"• Tho results of this experiment ns Set down in Dint's diary,
r.'jsoly, tho ascertainment that this vaccine which second superior to tho
lun;-; vaccine whon usod in r.nin&l oxporiccnts turned out to to uoo-
lota for uso with fcuana boir«8, that Is la tho Ding diary. That wr.s
tlx rcoult of tho oxporlnont. Tho practical consequences of tho
crxrioont woro that tho Ipsoa vaccine, tho introduction of which I
ba.1 onergoticully rocccoondcd In Sop test or 1943, was not Introduced.

"bat rao c vory ioportant decision for it this vueclno had boon
Introduced, which could bo produced tro raid a half tiros noro
copiously than tho lung vnccino, then there would bnvo boon cuch

vaccine available for pooplo in daagor. Today it
bo said for certri n hov erny hurra boings would
of using this useless voccino that I had
is no doubt that the nuchor of those deaths
higher, -»nd from tho point of vior of
a hygienist, — tho responsibility for thoso
a vaccine which I rccomcndcd, but which was


6S8C


25 ij>-.^-0iS-15-la-7o8tcr (Int. Srora)
Bourt So. X.


nevertheless usoloss, sua used, as I say, the rospoacibility
would llo heavior oa ao. Tor one thing, because the nudber of
porooac involved sould bo higher, higher than the responsibility
vlilch a coart nay sscribo to oe for having crp proved this oxper-
1 -ont on persons -ho had boon assigned to this experiment by tho
competent stato authority, as can bo soon fron tho docucents that
the prosecution has put in,

DR, raiTZi I fcavo no further quostions in tho rcdlroct
oxaninr.tion to put to this witnoss.


3-*81


Court So. 1

25 Apr 47-A-14-l--3M r eldt Cat. rr «)

-HI SISIBEn: Are thero any cucstions to be propounded to the
'•iineee by other defense counsel?

BY IE. SZETaSIOS (Counsel for defendrnt lerl Brendt):

v -itnesa, under examination by the prcsvcutlcn you mentioned on
experiment that was carried out In a foreign country on oeraane con-
decned to death, end you said that carbon tetrachloride vre the drug
used, ia that correct?

A. Yea, that vea cerbon tetrachloride. Thrt le e medicine which
la used frequently in the treat eat of hcckvwm.

<*. v itnesa, I hare one oueation here, ’ hr-t hrppona if cprbon
tetrachloride i* hepted?

a. You nuet not heat carbon tetrachloride. Carbon tctrrchlorido
la CCL 4 and if you brin^ that Into Jurtrpesitirr. with oxygen rr.d hent
It phosgene gaa, which it a polaor., ia created. Th-> tonicity of carbon
tetri chloride in practical uae recta on the fret that —

v Witness, I pa not interested in the dotpilo. You do aay thrt
nhoacono la creetod?

A. Yob, thrt ia generally known.

UR. SSaVATIUS: Bo further oucatlonc.

BY DB. FLL.U.ISG (Counsel for defendant krugovoloO:

% . Witness, the prosecution at the conclurion of the cross oxanlna
tion showed you Iccuacnt 1754 , which surprised you. “ill you plenac
take n look rt that document?

a. I don't hove the dccu-»nt here.

v Vfill you please take f elcac lock 11 this document. A largo
nutter of Krugo^aity'a luttore from the Hygionc Institute have be«n out
in evidence. ell of thoso lot tors hr.d at the lotterbend o rc: ®r-
'-.icc to tko letter thrt was boin- naovorod, or they bognn by saylag,

In manor to your letter of tho such cad such. Is there anything of
•*--t sort in this lottor?

... So, thcro ia no rcfcroxKo t a provi uo letter.


6482


26 hpr-GE

Court Tc, 1


(Iat. 3rcm)


S-14-la-i'c ldt

"boa you looked at tcis letter hero you, because it wrx
rddr ssed to you, assuxod that r. letter fros you cust hr.vo boon rhr.t
t-.is letter refers to. Jew if you look at this letter Bore cloccly
r- a you toll bo whether you rccerbcr for certain that you wrote r.
letter tc S-ru-owaky or Srnwitx-or acBoono olse to which this is tho
nssucr, or is it possible that, os ic other ensos, Gildoncistor or
Conti turnod to Growltz and that hrugowalgr answered the lottor or.
ordora fron Growlts?

... That is, of course, possible. In tho cross oxaainatior Z
otrtod that I did not rcnccbor those create, oai in particular Z
ctc.tod th-.t I did aot rcaoBbcr n- rit< t :ivcr. a su;;;cotion that this
lua.7 raceino should be tostod. It 1s, of coureo, possible that tho
qucotlon of this lux: vaccine was ao^otiatod between other offieoc
and that ..ru’cnafcy ns r. result of thoso diocussioas rccolvcd so&o
such asoi^n&oat.

la it not to uobo extont probohlo that you roro sot tho p or-
cono oho wroto tho lottor that procodod this cr.o, boenuso this letter
bo doviatod free tho fore that is usually prescribe' for allltary
lottoro?

... Korsally, if I should writo n lottor and rocolvo tn answer
tr it, then thu Bllltar; fore prescribes that thoro should bo a
r^forencc to what tnio is an answer to, and then the letter would bo
rjisnorod, so what you say is true.

?. ..lao• Docunont 1136 rr.s put in. That u-.n your letter to
hrucowsby. In tnis lottcr —

— I bo.: your pardon. I h-n : t h re tho letter.

P. I rx -TOin,i t. rood an oxocrpt fron it. In this letter it
Ptr.tosi ..non tho typhus vaccine free, pane lirors was boins coa- #
cilorod it would bo desirable to taww whether in tho oxpcrlacnts in
Suehenr aId thoro wero tho seno protective rosuite as roro obtained

free vaccinos frcGClascicol virus, ~ro you in a position to hero

•

such an expericental series earned out? Did you knew anything: coro


6*83


25 - --vh S-14-2ft-Joldt prorn)

Court 7o m 1.

procisoly about the orperirontB ir. Tuciorralfi, in particular Dixy's
subordination relationships ec far t.e tho typhus erpcrinents ir.
blcci -16 aro concerned?

~. So. Of that I Icccu nothin,;. That can also bo coon frou
tho lottor, bocausc I cc address iiv: nn inquiry about natters that I
luiow nothin.” about. If I had kncw ebvut then, I should not hnvo bed
to inquire.

Q« If this lettor was put in this aorning, do you kr.or -hethor
you received /m answer froc : rujowaky or rayono olao to this lottor
and uhat tho contonts of the merer wore?

... I car. recall no rnarcr and no corroapon'oacc ir. this
ar.ttcr. If thorp w-rc an answer it probably would have boon put in
cridonco hero,

?. In other words, on tho hauls of tho two docunonts put ir.
tills morning you can say nothin; about Dial’s position in the typbuo
OTpcrir.cnts or about Kru£orsky ! s pnrticip'tlon in thor..

h. There ia nothin; to bo aeon about that in thoco do cur. onto,
and Just what tho subordination relations woro in the SS. I nor or
know naything about, so I don't know it today.

S2. TLZAlSQi i'o furthor questions.

771 PHHSIIK-T* If tho re aro no i\irthcr quocticns on tho part
of the dofonso counsel the Prosecution nay cross oxen 1no as to
cr.ttoro which hc.vo boon tr-u^ht cut since tho clooo of *.hj cross
oxr.v.inrticn.

.-H. hch-d-TT: So further questions, 'four Honor.

T_h PSHSITHl^:: Counsel for Dofond'-nt Hes has no further
questions of the witness?

The witness Heso is cncuscd iron the witness stand end will
trio hia piece.

DH. 72XSZ: hr. President, I here r. /or dccuseonts to put in
th. t I hr.70 not yot put in. hay 1 d. so nor?


6io-i


25 —pr——iiS-1 J-ct>-?oldt (Prom)
Co-art lie, 1.


I rat in as further document frot Pose 3;cuucnt 2sell 2 r Docu-
cc::t 24, 5-oao Sxhibit 40, Pn«-c6 25 and 26 of this 3ocu»cxt Pock.
Phis la an affidavit cy 3r. Jriodrich Srurxke of Pchrunry 6. 1917,
Sir.co the Prosecution had dropped tho chnr.jo gainst P.oeo no for as
it coacerns yellow fover, this affidavit has protty well lost ito
lroorttnco for P-oso's coso, Hovovor, I holievc that tho affidavit
rill ho of value to tho Tribunal in its sorrch for the truth.

The Peach rill recall that Ur. kcHaaoy and tystlf had a controvoroy
rc,;r*rtlia : tho iii erprotation to he put on tho Gcrrrx rord 'Proho",
and hr, UcKraoy provod with a dic.iotr.ry thr.t it could naan hota
"si'n.ulo" and "cxporlaont 11 , l‘or I have brd uotner affidavit ^iven
to to hy tho nan who nado t..i s affidavit, rt.o certainly nuot hr.vo
known Juat what ho eoext, c-J ho cortiflco in tho last paragraph
thr.t rijoa ho spoko of h 71ru a Prehot* Lo me talking of virus
ocjinlee rxd not virus oxporiconts.


6135


Court 1

April 25-A-JIS-l5-1—3ro• s (let. 3rc«e)


SB. ?7.I7Zi I cos offer enothor docunonfc free Boso Socuaont IToo’:
III - Docaseat 41, "hi* will bo Bose exhibit 41. Sho docuscnt i3 on
p.-.^o C3, Chi* i* on affidavit on the part oi Dr. eildognrd Koorini'.
ShiB is tho wife of the ?rofo*sor Hr.crJu^ I ccdlod r.s a witness who
Lt.b nlr:cdy pointod out in his tee'.: cony that his rife woxX'jd for c.
ccrtriu length of ticc with ?rofwc.ior Bose ia tho Sobort Each Institute,
I do not wish to rend this docutm:-. 7rx& U^o.-iag horc explains rhr.t
Sr. Boso said to her reg ar ding tho ooe.tion of euthanasia.

As tho noat docuccnt I put Jr. 'rjvrt ouo in tho Socueor.t Pooh —
Document -i2. this rill be Ejco i’xhib* -12 and Je rn affidavit by
Ur. Schnidt - Ja>n;it of 27 January 1947 on pegos 84-6 of tho Soeu-
oor.t Boole, ".-is tea is c p.-r-ca who has Bnowr. Dr. Boso since 1922
and crlcoc str.tcev.rts rtrrvrding In. Peso's char net or. 3 shall, how-
ovor, not reed tho document,

I now offer ;ho next docuc-jat, Eoso Socuesnt J3, Boso Exhibit
43, pr.jo 86 of tho Dcconoat ioox. ?L5o in nn affidavit of tho Sviss
citison Sr. Pole- Pcicor of 12 Pobruniy !?•*? ca icj;o 86 - 87 of tho
Doe user, t book. Sr. Puinor also know* tho dofcrlnnt Sr. Hose. h-.viiv:
boon rith hie, in Cfclra. Sr. Poiatr is coroover c. Jer *ad .-ivos Sr,

Ecoo r. -ood chcxictcr roforonco. I shall dlspoeso nth reading tho
docuaont.

.o the no:t docuacat coixs B^3c Document J*J, the «oxt ono in
tho Document Book. Shis Trill bo Peso Sllibit 4V, This is a lottor
to ryscif fro= Professor Sruzpt free the ?:irian Institute of
Parasitology, IS Eorcebor 1946; uftlc*. conooru- tho profossional
qualities of Prefossor Sr. Eoso rjd tuis doormat —

ME. LcEaNTT: If tl.o SribU-fil plocao, I on : t think that tho
lottor is ia tho’ fora of re afxidmU. I interpose n forna.l ob¬
jection. I personally don't =ind sooing tho docuaont odrittod but
I rcloo tho objection bccauso I don't rant to soa cay prccodont
established with regards to letters of this typo nddrccsoi to


6485


25 pr—o-73S-l£— 2-Gross (3rown)

Court i?c. 1.

Defense counsel.

- -3 PSHSIDEj?; Counsel for the Prosecution is correct. This is
ccroly an unsworn-to lottor.

OB. ?3TI2x “hat is quito true, your Honor. Perhaps tho tri¬
bunal could care to look at tho original and thus essuro itself of
the authenticity of this letter.

?HESI22»*Ti That is not tho basic reason for the objection,
-ho lottor is nn ex perto stntcncat writ ton without any responsibility,
not under oath at all. -ad, if tho Tribunal vould adrit such letters
as this co would very likely bo swenpei citn lottora to persons
both fer tho prosecution and for tho dofo.vsc. If ccunsol for defend¬
ant desires to procure a verification or or th to this lottor it
cifht now bo admitted provisionally subject to lator on prcscntlrg
ooset: lag in propor fort, which would zuk c it -d-issiblo.

L... FSIIS; Thoa I shell folio- that proccdvxo, Ur. Prooidont.

Tho next nose Document, Docunont F.oso 16, on pr-;o 89 and 90 of tho
Document look I s.u*ll put in as 3cso Exhibit 15. Hero tho situation
is tho #uc as tho inuodintoly prccodia/: dccucont, to wit, tho
docuuoat is net sworn to. The difforonc., ho-ever, is that tho
lottor was addressed to tho Prosidont of “-r Criminals Court is.' was
sado avallablo to co by tho Secretary Oonoral,

T ’JZ FaZSIDZl.T; Tho frxt thr.t the lottor is dircctod to the
President of »or Criainals Court doos nit chcr#:o tho basic rttuntioa.
It is still a puroly ox par to str-toient in tho letter i-nd not made
under oath.

2%. 73I7Z; Then I shnli put t^is Iccuacat in for tho presont
airply for identification nnd thoa lntor prod to a srern certifi¬
cation. Herewith, kr. President, I have put in evidence ell the
documents in ay Oocusent 3ov> ri:.. the czeontioc of lumber 18 in
the Supplcccnt'ry Volur-o. 7. is is t;.o ver,- last dccunost. I don't
colicvo it is necessary for no to put i3 docuceat in in viow of tho
clsxzQ that tho Prosecution has dropped against tS> dcfocdcct Soso.


e »S7


25 Rpr~—lIS-15-C—Gros s (Irom)
Court i'c, 1 .


z:z PP-ZSIZZrT: Dccucont Book II. Document Zo. 27, I hr.vo not
arxked r.e rn oxhibit received.

Z'.. JEISSi I t h a nk you for bringing this to ny attention. Shis
•t .3 ra overslept oa =y part. This document I did not put la. Zo-.r-
ovor, I should liko to do bo» That is Rose Zocitcnt Eunber 27 end I
shall put it in as Hoso 2xhibit Vo. -16. This is cn affidavit by tho
University Profossor, Dr. Proas 3uochaer of 3 Larch 19-17, pages 57
to ol of tho Docuaont rook. I shall foro .70 rending the document
boenuso it concoras itsolf largely nlth tho question of hepatitis
opidcnica uir.ee too Prosocutioa has droppod its charge rgeinst Pro-
fooaor Hoso. Korever, oa pcv;o 6 C of t..c locu^r.t _ook, at tho ond of
tho docunont it ilso concerns itsolf tit:. Professor Roso's personality,
Ur, President, sy socrotir. points out to do tfci t I hnvo fr.ilcd
to ;iut in aaothor docucoat, to it, Docunont * 1 C ia Document Book III.
Hits is on affidavit by tho physiciia Ir. Karl Luollcns of 13
Pobru. ry 19-.7 Milch I offer in Roso SxLibit -17. It ia on peges 78 to
CO of tho Docunont Book. It concorns itsolf - 1 th rrofocsor Roso'n
criticiso, I shall not oothor to read this uocunont oithor. This*

I bollovo, is all tho Roso Documents and thin concludes cy proaoato-
tlon of tho Roso case. Horover, I should liko to resorve for syoolf
tho ri : ;ht to put ia a fov docunoata Later. For cznsplo, I re expect¬
ing cone froa England.

PRSSXD3S! -a ia other cccos, tin Tribunal rill roaorve the
councol for tho dofoadmt Soao the right tc offer tho documents ho
ary rccoivo at soco later tixn prior to the tiao that tho ovidonco ia
closed.

The defendant Roso h~viag rested his caso re rill nor cnll tho
enco of ti.o Unitod Stairs versus Ruff. Ron!or.:, r ^d Foltz.


25 ~or-*—GZS-16-i-£nrrow (Imt. 2rz~r.)
Court : T o. 1.


2?.. S-JJTZE (Dofcnso counsel for tho 'ofcalact Buff)i hr. Pro-
eidoct, it it ay intontion, first of all, to call Ir. Ruff to tho
stand. Thcroupon, I shall havo two witnesses to hear if they hr.ro
arrived lioro froc Berlin by ken day or Tuoslny. If tho witnesses do
not arrive, l h. w procurod affidavits fren thoso ritnoscos which I
olmll put in oviionco. I havo hnniod in a rcudi document -ook which
contains doeuconts 1 to 17. Then I hav^ four nunoxos to this - — r_:cx
1, with documents 18 end 19; —nnox 2, with document 20, *-nnax 3, with
document 21; and -mnox -1, rith two documents, Documents 22 and 23.

'Jita tho permission of the Tribunal, I should liko to call tho lo-
fondrnt Dr. Ruff to tho steed.

THE PfRoID'RTi Tho witness Ruff will trio tho rltnoso stand.

SUGPRIZD KUJ7, r. witnots, took the stand rad testified ns
follows*

JUT'GS SSBIEGi

Please hold up your ritht urnd am' bo sworn.

I swear by God, tho -Ini,pity and Cnnlsciont, that I will spock
tho puro truth and rill witnhold and add notaiv.:.

(Tho rltnoso rupcr.tod tfcc octh).

You nry sit down.

hH. H.Ju?Y» hay it please Vein- Honor, boforo Dr. Sautor bo^ino,
tho prosocution hra not yot rocoivcd Supplements 3 end -1 and, in
addition thoroto, I tu: not ccaro of tho fact thr.t re havo rocoirod
tho notico of tho two witnosaos to to collod by Dr. Sautor for tho
.'.ofendant Ruff. It may roll to that wo hr.vo and I tr.vo not rocoivol
thou yot, rnd I would ecroly like to know the nf-oo of tho two rit-
nonac3 ho intends to coll if thoy arrive froc -orlin.

DR. S.UT2R: I boliovc the Tribunal has the supplementary

•

volumes 1 and 2 since long. Iho volumes 3 and • will probably bo
ivon to tho prococution and tho Court on hcndiy.

IRR ?R23IDE.Ti Tho Tribunal has no supplement! ry document book.

DR. SJJT2R: Bore thoy ccco.


6 IS?


25 16-2-Zr-rroT: (Brcsn'

Court I*o. 1.


(Socuocat books vuro prescntod to tho Tribunal by tho Secretary
General).

tho two witnesses shoe I intoad to call, essuniag that thoy
*:ct hero fros Borlin, aro Dr. ?roita£ and Tonneister, but I nuch
doubt thether they rill set hore fron Berlin.

DlitSCT ZUAUsSIOU

3Y 2SJrcZRi

C. Dr. Huff, you ore forty yonrs eld?

?os.

0 . ••ro you tfxriodT

h. Yes.

c. Hrvo try children, n-^c -i and 8?

Yes.

0 . You studied cudie Inc, too«c ;o'ir degree, and woro then
ascistont at a University clinic but, horover, dad ret sot up your own
practico?

... Iht t is truo. Sever.

q. You oatorod tho oorvico of the Luftrnffo rod served not in
tho Lufttmffo but in tho Yersuchsnnstalt fuor Luftfrhrt. Perhaps you
can explain hor that cno about. When did you outer that institute!

. During ny study as a doctor I spoat ojr spare tico studying
aviation. Thnt is to ary, I flew as a spert — at firet, gliding*
and then cotorizod fli-t.t. Of courso, ac u student of BO&lciao rho
concerned hies If rid; sport <.vir.tion I. of ccurso, sac interested lr.
tho uodlcol questions that concern aviation. ’Jhun, after cy studies
sore conclu'od and I had taken cy doctor's cxjx. inaticn, I vr.s an
nsointcat at tho University clinic at Bonn. I berm to concern cy-
colf with the acdicnl questions of r.vioti;:: «ir. to experiment in tb.fc
field. Tho sork I did at Vert tine etc sainly concernod in ascertain¬
ing utothcr the clicatic conditions that one coots when oao clinbs
tc a hi^h altitude could be usod, in any wry, for the therapeutic
purnosos. -t the ond of tho year 1953, or.o of cy teachers, tho


5-190


25 -pr-w-(ES-16-3-*arroa (Bro^n)
Court -<*c« 1.


physicist ordinnrius at tho University of Zen:., roccnncndcd no to the
ZxjroriBontnl Station for -Tir.tioa as r. nodical consult tat. I accepted
this position in 193-i. In other words, since IS 3d and until the
collir.ec I was a physician in tho Xxrxrincntd Station for aviation.

You wero tho director of, this institute?

... lirst when I ccco to tho institute in 193-1 X was scientific
collaborator in the institute. I was tho firct and only todicel
collaborator lathis roscarch lnstituto, end was first asei^nod to
the Dconrtccnt for tho Investigation of Zochnical -cci-’ents. Zkua,
in tho first years of uy activities tr.orc, I concorcod ay self with
quoetloas of accidonts, worfcod on the nodical questions involves, <a1
si tic o this field to emo larger and l-.rgcr, 1 finally rrcoivoi a do¬
per teent and finally I built r tcdlcnl instituto with several
scientific collaborators.

0 , *:i\s this aviation todicino inotituto that you wore in chu-.qo
of — was tills a part of the Luftcr.ffo?

... Tbie DVL did not h-ve any lo*rd statue of its own. It was
one of nrny institutes that roro included ui.-cr tho tors. ■DVL", namely,
Dcutscho Vcrsuchs/iitolt fucr Luftfahrt. ~t tho ond of tho war thorc
vero about t^olvo or fourtoon such institutes rithla tho franerorlc
of the ZVL,

0. uhet ran tho arnaTia-: bocri of t.;c DVL?

... Zhe DVL res a ro ristorod association, founded by priv-.to
and novorncental scurcos, ir. order to conduct rccocrdt into the
scientific v nois for aviation. Ti-o association consisted of in¬
dividual industrial firns rad st-tc offices and officials. Tho
borvrl -f ranchers rac olcctcd fr^r tlis rtup of pooplc. I consist¬
ed r,;a.l;-. of private individuals, .f ;opresent- tivos cf individual *
iadustrirl flrns rho roro scab era of the association, and of repre¬
sentatives of other govoraaentnl institutes. Tho boi rd of zaz^'cro
of the ZYL deten-inod hen tho arganisatloi was to be cana-qod, and it
appointed the icstxtuco and dopartsoutai chiefs. Zhe ocnoeearot.


6191


(Brown)


ftt tfcr-t Sice, Cwcsiated of one scientist, -c Me were subordinated
four directors. Throe of those directors each had e group of
ocioatifio institutes uador hie, and the fosrth director rr .s in
charge of administration, construction, etc. In this group of in-
stituton they wore subordinate to tho individual diroctors. *y in¬
stitute uns tho one oatitlod ■Squipcont".

You were tho lcador of tnis lnstituto until Spring of 1915.

7 c ro you then professional -ctivo tborooftor, and if so, when end

•

• horc?

d. ?rox the Sprit - of 1915 until tuo -utuan of 1916 I mo ua-
ecployod. Tree Cctobor, 1915, to Scotcabor 19 i6, I ms scientific
collaborator of tho -cro-hodicnl Contor of t:.o United States .»ir
forces.

Z. uhr.t wno your position there. juat in gonernl?

... ky activities voro similar to tfccso that I or d undor tho

DVL.

0 , * cro hi.;h altitude oxporinonts carried on in this ..oro
Itodical Contor such as you pro r.ccusod of in tnis trial?

... I experimented in the fiold of hi'ii rltituio research and
r.loo carried out high altitudo oxperimonte in tho lor pressure
chenbor as I had done in ny institute and of which I no hero accused.

0 . Did you uao a low procouro cbacbcr such ns was used in
Dachau?

... Yob.

3. ?ow, what spocific teshs iidy <ur institute have? l*rcoly,
the institute of which you said provl.ucly that it hrd tho titlo
"~ir hcdicico Ir.etituto"?

... In goneral, this institute had tho Job of finding tho 0
ccdic -1 rad scioutific bases of aviation ar.i investigetiag tho
•onornl practical questions that confront aviation.


6-192


^pril 25-rt-3K-I7 k 18-l-~eehon (Inc. Heniclur)
Court No. 1


x In -'hat war was this institute or the D.V.L. sub¬
ordinate to the rtir Ministry?

A The D.V.L. received its instructions froa the Air
ministry until the end cf 19dl fron the so-called research
department of the Air Ministry and thee froa the research
director cf the Ministry. My institute, the Institute fer
Aviation Medicine, had c particular position with the D.V.L.
to the oxtor.t thut wo wore subordinate to tho Moiiocl
Inspectorate of tho Luftwaffe am*, hod to report tc it and
rocoivo orders frer. it. Howovor, the orders which wo did
roooivo fror. tho Logical Inspector. to concern-! only
toohnionl natters. In oth.r norCa, it wa3 not a reilitcry
subordination or oafinar.d.

-l ..no waa chief of tho -odior.l Inspectorate of tho
Luftwaffo ot that tino?

« «t that tine, Hlppko.

vi Tho saieo Hip )ho, who has of tun h-ro been uuntionod? .

a Yos.

Ci ./hat wore th- rolotions between your institute end
tho party; tho 33 end the 3 a one what were your relations
to tho N.S. Doctors Union?

A Tho Goruon Lxperin.ntal Institute for «vi&tior., us
well ns ny own Instituto, had no relations ut all to tho
party, to tho 33 or to any other j. arty rgoncy. Tho Instituto,
-3 I have already said her-, ha' been founded in tho year
1911, it was n rogisterel ;3Soci ties txrl had no affilia¬
tions to any party agoncics.

I, r.ysclf, t the end cf 1937, entered tho party 03 a
party candidate arid was finally nee opted in tue year 1938.

I did net belong to the 33, tho S« or to tho National
•Socialist Longue of Physicians.

< You were saying that you were accepted into the party


6493


«pril 25-^-32-17 & 18-2-2 loo non (Inc. Kauil^r)
Court No. 1


i;; the yo'.r cf 1933; did you tncn bocooo . rropor party
..-ob-r; did you roc-ivo the party n-nbership book; did
you roooivo tho usual obligations; wore you placed under
cuth, etc.?

« I said that in tho second half of 1937 I signed ay
application for party coabcrship and that in tho your of
193Q I we b actually accepted. I n-vor received a so-called
party book, r.or did I any obligation.

Q During tho subsequent period, did you hold any office
in tho party?

« No, I n vor ox-rciscd r.y offioo with tho party.

. Nr. President, in that connection I should liko to
offer an affidavit s Doouii.nt No. 2 in Doouaer.t Book Dr.

Huff and I shall give it exhibit No. 1, fluff exhibit No. 1.
This is rn affidavit by Nnginoer Otto r’uohs, given on 23
Dooor.bjr 1916 -nd certified and signed or. tho very anno day
boforo tho conpotont Bur go racist or. .J’tor tho cu3tcrsary
introduction, the wit nos 8 Otto Puch3 says, but at first
states that he was a deputy noebur or th~ Board of Directors
in tho (Screen 2xpjrlruntal Institute for aviation and then
he speaks about Dr. .*.uff:

"Dr. Jiugfriod Kuff, 03 chief of tha 'Institute for
»vi&tion Hodicino’ v»as also xaployod with tho D.V.L. -»s
far os I roaonix-r ha was ppointod to this posit!an b”
reoonaondation of Profo3sor Dolmen, ar.ongst others, who
was at that tii.e Chancellor of Soon University. This alone
chows that party politic ! cans! ;r*tion did not load tosDr.
Huffs sj.pointaant, but rclasiv^l; scientific considerations,
-ad ospoclolly the fact that he, us an enthusiastio and
extrunely gifted pilot, se^n>d tc b. particularly suited to
u.ilirstend tho problems, which arose during actual flights,
r.d to subait those tc scientific oxnainutica. I s v. and


6-i9-i


„pril 25—A-EK-17 it. 18-3-Hochan (lac. iinnnlnr)

Court No. 1

tclkbd to Dr. Hoff nlr.ost drily, unloss cither ho or I woro
travelling. His political op ini co is known to no woll
>nou3h to bo able to testify ebout it.

2. I would like to unphealze the following about Dr.
ituff'3 character end his general hunon qualities cs far oa
I was cblo to observe tfaoru:

q) His readiness to listen to all huuan troubles and
his ovor prosont wiilir.gnoss to help with advioo and action.
Ho always put in a good word for the accused in my kind of
disciplinary action, ->sp..ci lly in oonnootion with tho
often inconprohenaiolo sovoro sentences for violations of
flying discipline and or’.ar, but also in r.ettors peririning
to ofronsv-s gainst oivil laws. He tried to awoken huaan
uniorstending by explaining the psychological backgrounds
and by citing his own uxporior.oes. Kis attitude inprossod
no favorably c.:*l as u result wo frequently disou3sod tho
tiua of attaching a sootion for rviuticn ..sychology to his
institute. His kindly, frank nonn^r score?, by tho way, liot
to be on individual characteristic but a *juality possessed
by his entire fotiily.

Dr. Huff hud c very high conception of his nodical
culling. Ho don ended fren fcir^solf end his staff the . highoot
p-rsonal effort. I Know, for instance, that ho and his
colloaguj3 carried out tix. .ao3t dangerous aviation oxperi-
-nts, such as tho3a on aoceloration-arlur eico, sitting
personally at tho controls. Dr. ./io3hoofer wr.o .crticipatcd
with, liir. in those investigations, njt with -ccidor.tai do^th
during oa a of then.. In the st»uv way he repeatedly perforaod
exp or inonts on bias-11 in the c.ntrifugo and in the high-
-ltituio chccbor. During those expericcnts ha often racchod
thi iinic of onduxrncc and consciously accepted pcin and
physical disorders. This spirit, by the way, -id not reign


6495


-pril 25-~-3K-17 « 18-4-Uoohen (Int. Hammier)
Court No. 1


xoluoively amongst tho -cctors of the D.7.L. I know for
inscmoo, that Dr. Bonzingor of tho -irforcc Research Insti¬
tute Roe Min also conducted highly dan serous bxporia^nts on
hicsolf no or. experimental subject.

I nov-r noticed that Dr. Ruff wc3 possess^ of an unusual
or oven pathological ambition, which night have resulted in
his coting against his better conscience for reasons of
decoration or career. His siaplo, nodost, quiot demeanour,
his integrity, r.nl his dislike of meeting his superiors uoro
often then offioial necessity demanded, resulted in /.any
personal setbacks, for instmoo, his promotion to a professor¬
ship; but nevertheless this oausod no injury to his solf-
cenfido.nco which might .Vv; resulted in x desire to alter
his way cf life or to push ninsolf into the limelight.

For those mentioned rea3or.3 I c-nsidor it absolutely
if.possible for Dr. Ruff to h vo oanmitted a crime gainst tho
low and against humanity.

b) Dr. Huff sooned to me at no time so .nutwurod of
national socialistic idoolo.jy that l.e accoptod all dcor«.u3,
speeches and actions of tho government without criticism,
"either did ho rgroc with th.> brutal treatment of tho Jews,

.“.or with inhuman warfare, ns far as wo know about it. I
renoebor th« horror with which ho discussed tho destruction
of the ..arsuw Ghetto when rumors about this occurronca ronch-
wd hin. The ordor to kill prrcohuti3ts who bailed out and
-spocially Dr. Goobbois' malicious state;:•.-.it t,,.-.t oncsiy
'.lr-crows who bailed out, could no longer be protected fro
tho fury of tho population, which w s prcotioally an inoitc-
-.at to murder, he regarded as infamy .uito inc: x .patiblc with
the honor of a soldier, and he expressed hi::solf openly to
ti.'t Uffect. Ho also sharply criticized tho surprise dny-
- ‘3ht attack of German fighterplanos on Lander. - I ferg-t eh.


6*«56


..pril 25-*-.-3X-17 £ 18-5-2. r cofaea (1st. HcjrJ. r)
Ccurt Ro. 1


date - when crocus cad buses w~ro fired on. In contrast to
c.:i3 on returning from visits to the front, ho gave repented
oxsnplos of how tho ^.Iliod Command respected the Rod Cross,
contrary to propaganda statooonts."

I chink I shall akip tho noxt paragraph and I shall
c ncinuo with Paragraph 6. well, I don't think I hc70 to
road that either, it mainly repeats his political attitude
•and this also applies to Paragraph d. I ask you to tako
notice of those paragraphs and I will continue with Viguro
S.

"o) .*s far r.3 I know, Dr. Ruff was not in closo contact

with the S3. .x3 ho visa by nature gainst ell extremists, ho

could not very well agree with tho radical demands of this
organization. Ilo saw in tho racial doctrine, as did every
oqu anted nan, a orulo conclusion based on tho rental capacity
of thw masses, fra; insufficient soiontifio material, find
tliaroforo completely distorted; thoir attitude toward tho
churches, thoir system of supervision n spying, their
renal institutions {cor.centr ticn camps) and their political
intoloranoo were in contrast to his tolerant nature; r
rjspeot for the rights of tho individual, willingness to
listen to the opinions of oth.rs, cn! a d«!3iro to oxtend tho
scientific and human horizon were inborn in him.

"«5) I myself did not belong to the party ana its
Ranchos, noithar in actual fact nor in sympathy."

I don't think I havo to read tho last. ?,i_n follows
tho certification. .

In this connection, 11r. President, I offer to tho
•ribuncl as further evidence Ujcuncnt lio. •*, vi ich is to bo
f ;ur.d La Document voIuijj .tuff, which you will find on Pago
1- of tho Document 3bok. ?fci3 will bo H.„ibit iJo. 2. It is
affidavit of a certain ro-itc-ct called Hermann flrocncf,


6-*57


"pril 25 -xv-SiC-17 4: l8-6-i.'oohar. (Int. Racnler)
Court I» 0 . 1


•»ho frcti tho yoer 1928 until «pril of 1915 was a cjnbor of
'.t Institute. In other words, for seventeen years ho was
in a position to acquaint hinsoif with .the situation. I
:on*t have co road this affidavit in its entirety, but I
isjc you to take notico of it. I merely want to read tho
second paragraph under 2 and t.Jo la3t paragraph under figure
3. Under Figure 2 it says and I quote:

"It was well-known In the 5-r;:an rixpuriuontal Institute
for eviction that Dr. Huff oarried out * 3eri^3 of experi¬
ments in aviation nodiolr.e on his own parson. This was in
conformity with his own ideas and with the principles of
tho Institute, which laid down that, if any inport-u.t oxpori-
r.vnts were to be carried out on huunn beings, ho and his
colleaguos nust bo tho first to volunteor for such oxpori-
;;onts (aviation experiments, low pressure ohuibor experiments)."

I or. now going to rod tho last p m praph under Figuro 3:

'Or. huff naturally to k part in thusa dobatos as woll,
oxpro3sing hir.solf Just cs unreservedly -3 .11 the others
;n tho subject of the ot .to Lend orship. when for oxcmplu
tee subject of tho killing cf parcohutisfcj c no u; - I do
.-.ot know if such an order did exist - Dr. huff was strongly
;; jsud to such ji i‘.or. as being, in hi3 opinion, not only

- contradiction of the principles of docent warfare, but also
of tis sportsamiik- o.inions is m aviator.",

This affidavit is certified loo in tho proper way.

.•itnoss, on- wit::os3 who has testified her. , said that
:ou '^ ru not considered to bo noair. t-* for . professorship;

•3 that correot and what is the true Situation? I nercly
putting that question tc you because fra- vrrious sides

- have been informed that you were n cut.nority and ro-
ur.ce -1 authority in year special fi-.id?

'• I think that I received in 1935 lecturer assign-jont


6.98


«pril 25-A-BK-17 « 18-7-H-oh-n (Int. - g- anl-r)
Court So. 1


r-garding aviation matters it t:.o University of Sorlin.
During the winter songster, 1937 to 1938, I qualified us a
lecturer at the nodical Faculty of'the University of 3orlin
■nd luring the y>-ar of 1941 was releas ml frem the research
dopartuent of the aviation ministry or rather was suggested
r.s a research lecturer. Opinions hnd to bo expressed by two
or threo professors on this suggestion. In isy cas^ one was
Professor Ruin, who was and is todry tho physiologio .1 ex-
, rt r.t tho University of Go.toin - . and tho present rector
of that University. The other was Professor Strughold, who
wus at that time t'.o head of the aviation Mudical Institute
of Berlin and is at present orliuarius for physiology at
the University of Heidelberg cn: scientific collaborator
of tho .wro medic ino G^nt.-r, U.3. «r.;y -lrforoo. Tho
third wc3 rrofossor Knot he, at thrt tire Profossor for x-
ray at the University of Berlin and th« head of the iSxperi-
aontal and Luoturo ^ rt-.er.t of tho Luftwaffo. K.*v ho
is tho head of an x-ray dopartuont t I r* .*t that

tlao, I was not procotod to a profos3or3hip and in the year
194-1 I heard from the referendum for re3uuroh work in tho
..vintIon Ministry that the application, dated at thut
period had not boor, approved, because I was considered by
tho party ngoncy that had D-\,n asked, -s cony lately lack¬
ing party interest and party activities.' In the year of
19*5 another such request y»u 8 nauo by the aviation Dopart-
t, but booausc of tho eminent oollnpso nothing was do* .
v Hr. President, I fc'oeivoi tho qu&lificatioss
written at that tin- about i>r. naff froa the University
of Goettingen. These qualifications originate frae tho
Or iinarius for Physiology, Professor Dr. rf-ir., who is at
r.sent lecturer of the University at Go_ttir.gj.i. 1 off^r
*.Uis -s evidence cr.d it is to be found in tho Jccunont


CiSS


«pril 25-xi-3K-l7 -X 18-8-iIcohan (lac. Hammier)
Court No. 1


5cok Ruff, Document 5 on Paso 16 - Pesos IS to 19. This
opinion os Dr. Rein has his signature and is certified by
a notary:

”1 know all tho details of tho scientific accomplish¬
ments of Dr. nod. habil. Siegfried Ruff. Iiis work is
iistuinguishod by its objectivity and its reliability, and
is often highly original. Hj was unusually fortunate in
dueling with the problems of practise by modern scientific
methods, and thus vms ablo to achieve ;:any important results.
1 was convinced that ho was occplotv ly caster of the
secondary and basic sciences of his field of work, and that
ho constantly endeavored to toop up with thoir advances.

I or. convinced that, soiuntifically, Dr. rtuff i3 full of
promise; the intensity of his work shows on increasing
curve. I think that ho fully dosorvos tho title of
Profossor of research.•

There is a 30oond expert opinion oy this Dr. Rein,
director of the University of Ooottingcr., which can be found
on page 18 of thoDooucent 3cok and which is also • includod
in Exhibit 3. I a i. net going to road it beonuso it
cocforcs to the opinion writ ton in 19-11 and it noxoly rof jrs
co the three years that hevo elapsed, and is Just co favor¬
able as tho pr^coding o; in ion.

In thi3 connection, hr. Pro si dent, I on now offer¬
ing on offid vit by the previously ..intionod Dr. Strughold,
dated 28 J .unary 19*17, to be found in Deoun.nfc Volume Ruff,
Document 3, on pages 31 to 3*i. This affidavit was certified
in tho customer? manner by the competent officer of the
*.ir Nodical Center in Heidelberg, and I shall road it because
it is of special significoncc when judging oho Character
- Dr. Huff ar.d because this Professor Doctor Strughold is
xp~rt who has-not been equalled by anyoh- in Uorcany.


65CC


25-..-SX-17 & 18-9-Hoehan (Int. Bend r)

Court Mo. 1

MR. H-RDY: May it ploa30, Year Honor, I don't think
it is necessary for Dr. Sautcr to reed each end ovoryono of
thoso chcraotor reference affidavits, giving the background
of tho Defendant Ruff, into the record. Ho has road one
quito extensive affidavit, which I did not bother to object
to tho roadin 3 of boocuso I thought if ho road one, ho
night lot up and not road tho rest of then, but it appears
that Dr. Sr.utor intends to road or.ch and every ono of then.

I think ho enn well ask tho Tribunal to take notice of tho
affidavits without reading then horc.

DR. 3..U2XH: Mr. President, I would liko to follow this
suggestion, if tho rrosocution would ubido by s Jailor
principles, but up to the ;u>n-nt I have Rover experienced
it that in a case where tho prosucutlar. would have a nunbor
of incriminating witnoases, say ter., would or.y that I on
goinj* to road ono such statonont of the witness and I ask
you to take notice of th~ others. If ton prosooution
vjitnosse3 are available, I un suro oil t '.n of thou will
a roll up md give evidence. I ou of tho opinion, if I
havo 1C witnossos, who aro testifying on bohclf of ny
client, I should b; permitted to offer t.:o ovidonoo. I an
suro tho Tribunal will pornit tie to re 1 half of thou.

Mr. Prosido at, this roaeing of affidavits is 10 ticos

:;orc expodiont then bringing witness«s ever here .nd

*

quo3t oning ono ■ fter tho other, for one or two days. I
think I shall have only or.- witness wh«: I shall excfiino
hero and I think I will finish in a short period of tine.

I or* of tho on ini an that thus a affidavits arevory i::port-
ant for tho Judgmnt of the personality of the Defendant
Huff, because ho has cone into this trf- 1 in a very un¬
fortunate manor. During tie course of thu proc ocings,

I shall sutiiit quite a number of affidavits and I shall


6501


a:tI 1 25-«-3K-17 « 18-10-Moohcn (Int. P.tnolor)
Court No. 1


ask you to only take notice of then, but I shall ask to
road the r.ost important ones.

TH3 PHiSIDSNT: Tho Tribunal has Tory largely yielded
to the opinion of counsel a3 to what affidavits should
bo road end ;diot portions of the affidavits should bo
road and what should sinply bo subbitted in evidence,
when sulr-ictod to tho Tribunal for consideration. Of
course, oharactor witnesses testify only for tho
defendants; these affidavits, concerning tho character of
a defendant, cro not pcrticularly helpful when road into
the record. It is quite proper for counsel for tho
defendant to read striking paragraphs end important
portions of then, but those exhibits which aro in tho
rocord end ndnittod in evidence before the Tribunal, will
all bo considered and bo given tho sane consideration no
if thoy had boon roed in thoir entirety in tho rocord. In
sono ways it nay olnost be imagined they v/ill receive noro
attention, because in rending through n long rooord, ono
cones to lengthy affidavits, one night then gu back to
the Document books and road the affidavit, which i3
therein Centalnod. The Tribunal will, o it has before,
except ir. cases where t;. - privileges are abused, allow
counsel for tho defendants to use their b_3t juflgaunt
in reading off id .vits, or those portions of then, which
they desire to put into the r-cord. Thu affidavits, of
course, arc cf two classes; factual affidavits and
affidavits ns to character, and for tho factual affidavits
:.uch greater reasons -xists for tho rending of thoso
into the record and putting then before the Tribunal
than i3 true in the case cf character affidavits.

..t tho present we will loevo tho nutter to tho bust
judgment cf counsel as to hat affidavits, or portions of


6502


S prtI 25-
surt No.


-3K-17 fc 18-11-Meohan (Inti H.-rc&cr)
1


should bo road and what should sinply bo admitted
in evidence. Of course, counsel for all parties night
probably bo again reminded, they will bo called upon, to
urrtish trial briefs to the Tribunal, and in the trial
briefs they will oall attention to those portions of the
record, whether in the Document Book or in daily trans¬
cripts, on which they particularly deny; but actually in
a record of this length the Tribunal will roly very strong¬
ly on trial briefs, submitted by counsel.for the
respective defendants and in those briefs, auplo t
opportunity will be afforded, counsel to call attention,
and it will be tho.r duty to 30 do, and to call attontion
to those portions of the rooord, which they doun particul¬
arly portingt to their client's case. Counsel nay
proceed.

DP.: S.A7TKR: Thank you, Mr. x>resident.


65C3


25 -pr-~-02S-19-l-Cook (let. ?.ascl er)

Court Fo. 1.

DR. S*OT3Hx !<r. President, the affidavit with which I ca
doolirv* now bcccs to havo significance toeouse it's cuthor. Pro¬
fessor Strugkold, was in nnsoluto opposition to tho Rational
Sociclint regino, ns he says. furthernorc, k* studied in tho Uni tod
etr-.tos of -coricc for a cuthor of yours ohilo ho carried on his ro-
aoerch nork. I «• going to skip the introduction of this affidavit
in order to oblige tho Prosocution. For tho ear* reason I on r.ot
gola-; to road figure I. -hero it is explained wtr.t scientific achieve¬
ments tho defendant Ruff has show. 1 should only like to read one

soatouco in Piguro I. Horo it oays»

■It i. noteworthy that ho. Hr. Huff. carried out on hlnoolf all
Important o.trooo cxporlncnt. nod, prrtioulnrly that ho uadcrtoolc
hlnoolf daiworoui undortrilr,;. la aoroplnr.o». In tho orjto way, ho
also r-cno nltltudo orporicont. on hlnoolf, although that wc. not
prlncxily In hit own opoclnl .phono. -

*bl. ll nil I r= .jolng to road of I1.UXO I. Tho.o Mntonco. nro
Tory Important, boenuoo It hot boon .aid horo In tho court roon that
tho soot Important thin.; of any rooonrch work lo tho oxpcrlnont. of
tho rooonrehor on hlnoolf. t or., not ^olne to road tho prrnrrnph
about tho political attitude of Dr. Huff In »2 and 1 an onroly aohln-
tho (Tribunal to toko notion of It. It coaflrn. »lth tho explanation
V other nltnooooo. On tho other hand. I could llko to road tho
parasraph 3 .hero It onyo tho folloula; about tho pcr.onollty of tho
dofoniaat, 0 . a rooonrehor and prnctltionor. and 1 ouotc.

■Dr. Huff uao latent on Croatia; a coed oclontlflc reputation for
hi. Inotituto. There -re no .Ua. of an unhealthy nnbltlon to bo
noon la hln. Ho wn. unnoounln,;. friendly. very roady to help, and
took a throat latorc.t la tho nonbor. of hi. Inotituto. Ho wn. u>r^-
ovor rory oolf-tacrl-'lcin,. Ho carried out cU lnportant and
danfiorou experinont. on hicolf. I n p rtlculrr hi. hunorou. nccol-
cration experiment. aro ro.pen.lbl. for tho fact that hi. health
(circulation) nufforod connidorably. a fret which no, donon.tratod


6504


25 -nr-GSS-19-2-Cock (dossier)

Court &>. 1.

i.\ she past yoer by an oedese of the legs is tho evenings, which per¬
sisted for wooks at a tiro. In sunning up, I cca scy this: Dr.

Ruff is a scientist of extraordinary experimental talent and ingen¬
uity, who sado outstanding contributions to tho dovelopnent of air
travel, particularly in the sphere of high speod flying, and to re¬
search into the enuso of accidents. To c great extent, ho obtained
those results, especially in tho aircraft experiments which rero not
ninny* cocplotoly under control, by carrying out tho oxporisonts on
hinsolf. In oxpcriconts on others, ho would hardly htvo noglectod,
because of hfai own personal attitude, tho precautions which nodical
conscionco proscribe.■

3Y DR. S-UTZR*

q. Dr. Ruff, I no now going to continue and I will ask you tho
following* What ras tho cain activity of your institute, of which
you noro tho hood, -hat oxperiaonto woro carriod out in yair in-
stitutc?

.a I already sold fcoforo tho ontiro work of tho instituto

dovclopoi, on tho basis of tho kr.cwlodgo of tho cauro of air
accidents. In tho instituto insolf thoro woro throo main sphoros of
work, one wrs pure air accident scionco. Ibis included air nccidont
statistics froc n nodical point of viow, aul in tho socond sphero of
work, tho spocir.l questions of epooi in air flight was workod upon,
and in tho tnird sphoro of work there ware questions of high alti-
tui'.o, tho question of tho -provontion of neeidonts was in tho fore¬
ground.

She oxp«riaonts which woro carriod cut in tho spring of 19'12
at Dachau, rero they socothlng extraordinary, or did thoy fall within
tho every day practice of your institute? In that connection,.could
you perhaps give us a closor insight cm to tho extent of tho oxpor-
~~'> 4 acnts in your instituto.

-. -t first, I should like to answer ycur first quo6tion. Tho
c^.erioonts which woro carriod out with «y ipprovcl and ay permission


6£-05


25 -rr-^-S-lS-C-CooV (Boeder)

Court ITo. 1.

by =y collaborator Hoaborg at Dachau woro absolutely irithia the
framework of tho experimental work such as was carried out in our
own institute ppon oursolvos. To state the exeunt of nil tho
series of ojjerisoats vfcich we carriod out in tho course of tho go
con years would go cuch too far. Thoroforo, I should only like to
give you c few oxazplcs fron which ono can soo whr.t tho course of
our work wns. Jor instance, through cccident reports wo gnlaod
knowledge that during a certain period of time in s>ort aviation,
b'lidor aviation, a nuefcor of fatal accidents occurrod, toenuso tho
paoaongors in the pianos, rhon landing on tho ground, or rather
crash landing on the ground, roccivod scri-us lnjurioo, for instanco,
tho tdaring of tho livor and tho spleen, stcroch otc. U'ithln a short
period of tleo, anounting to perhaps six ccr.ths or nino nonths,
forty porsons diod. *o hod to oxplain how these accidents coso about
uu'. hon thoy could provontod. In order to do that it was
necessary to ostablish what strain tho stosoch could tnko froic tho
stomach bolt Vo which tho fllor is ottochod. Jo triod to ini tat o
such strokes ns thoy occurrod during flight to tho oxtont at which it
deerno unboarablo, that is until tho bolt tmo torn, and thon wo woro
in a position to stato tho Boons with tho holp of rfcicfc cuch in¬
juries could bo avoided.

(bring to thcoo experiments thoro wns prrcticnlly no nccidont
of that klr-1 in the subsequent period.

In onothor coper 1 .mental sorios wo had to clarify tho quostion
of how may uivoa a flior would be nblo to carry out from tho
tiodic;! point of view. o used an arcy diving piano whoro wo
carriod out cxporiconts oncuntia^ up to thirty dives a day. Tho
pilot on ti. jsc occasions was present, being the can in charge of* the
ozporlaont, and tho cxporicentcl subject , or* another experimental
subject was seated on the second scat. 'Jhilo too experimental
subject who sat in the co-pilot's scot changed with aoeccno olsc
after a cortain number of tosts, the pilot, as tho can in charge


65C6


(Hacnlor)


ci tliO oxporicont, and oxporixontnl subject, carried out all tosts.
-.11 together wo carried out 600 such divos in the ccurso of
Ireo nonths end cc only interrupted these experioonts whon wo
f^u:;l signs ci exhaustion of tho heart and blood circulation of
tho pilot.


25 —?r~-02S-20-l-Grosc (Scaler)
Court 'Jo. 1.


d, (Continued) — further experimental series was to dotornino
tho offoefc of vibrations and shakings on tho occupants cf a piano.

The no oxpcriEonls rare carried out pertly in the plnnc and pertly on
certain shaking tables. In tho case of those Titration oxporiconic
strong disturbances in tho nervous systoc bococo apparont which aro
registered by cortain methods. ky assistant .icohoefor found his
docth during one such experimental fli^t. This was not boenuso of
codicrl reasons but boenuso of a technical orror in tho fli-ht. —
Thon thcro was another oxpericontnl question concerning parachuto
Jumping up to r±nt spood tho unprctoctod faco of tho pilot is not
exposed to Injury. Thoso oxnericonte wore partly carriod out in tho
piano by tho oxporicontal subject going out into tho r.ir nftor a
cortain spood was roachod, oxposins tho faco to tho air curront, and
rftor that, by sono Deans, tho person was brought back into tho
plnno. In ensos of fcigji spools such experiments rvre carried out in
r. wind tunnel. *\xrin.; such oxporinento wo wont to 820 kllocotors
per hour spoods. «nd, in ordor to give ycu a^cc lion of what that
co-Jio, cro Crn say that with ovor eOO kiloaotors thoro is c wind
proocuro of ovor 3000 kilox-rots por one squnro ootcr. In ordor to
explain it n littlo bottor ono cay point out that a norcal coiling
in an offico building takes threo hundred to tnroo hundrod fifty
hiloo per oquero cotor. In the enso of this spood of tho wind, wi ich
corresponds to 3,000 kilograms per square ootcr, the air bocoooo
vor y hard. Svon :.:o smallest bits cf dust ontor tho skin as if thoy
wero projoctivos, and tho skin of tho faco bococes so worn and so
effected that after tho experiment sovcml cxporloontnl poroons had
their facos Civored vith blood on the pores of tho skin. — Thon
experiments wero enrriod out in ordor to ascertain what the shocks
ruro that a porson could stand after the oarcchutc had unfolded.
Turing thoso expcrimeale tho spine is Tory strongly Btrninod. -Iso
those cxporiccnts woro carriod out to the limits =f rhet was
neccssery for practical flying. Furthermore experiments wore


65C8


25 —pr-*^-6I3—20-2-Gros g (Rasaler)
Court *Jo. 1.


Cs-rriod out in tho question of utet would hnppon if in the prosouro
e:.bia of a piano — this is n cabin whero the crow of e str&to-
ephoric fli.jht piano rro bcin*; housed. This has the pressure which
corresponds to k out 300C extors end if this cabin suddenly should
leth boenuso of a ^un shot or boeanao of a window pnno broalcirv’,
tho people inside can exporionce an acceleration of altitudo cor>-
pared to 3 tc perhepe 15 thousand cotoro •rithin a poriod of tioo
of 1/10 of a see,-!. Sinco it was not at ell door whothor tho
huunn or.jnr.ion could stand it, to, in the saco way as othor nations,
c.'.Tried out such oxporieonts. — - further question which will
offoct uo lr.tor is tho quest! -n of parnchutir,: free, hi^h altitudos
which was dealt with by us in ncLf-oxpcrinor-tior.. I should liko
to liuit cyo If to thoso oxacplos, and I should only like to road
a nusbor of thoso oxporinont sorios just by nncla; their titlosi
Experiuent■ on the offocts of wertfin laughlag-G&o concontrationo,
which is a narcotic ,.ns: oxccinnticn of the dnoryfo of oars by
i: loci examination of tho resistance of tho hua-n spino against
chocks as occur whon plonoo era lnndii*;: cxaclantion of tho phy¬
siological baois wbor. building catapult scats: examination what
c-ffocts rosistncco at hifr altitudos otc. Tho nurbor of thoso
cxporiuontnl sorios could bo incroasod as dasirod.

q. hr. President, I should liko you to take :iotico of Docu¬
ment 19. It is to bo found in -ocuaont Volur-c Huff, Supolcnont
l*o. 1. This docucont will rocoiTo Huff Exhibit So. 5. This is a
compilation of tho publications of the dofootant, in which ho con¬
stantly roportod to tho public on tho oxporlixnts which wero
carried thr.u.;t, and on their results. I ask you to toko notice
of that document. — Dr. Huff, wo fcr.vo nlroady soon fron yc#r des¬
cription that all those experiments were caparontly cnrrlod out in
tho interest of aviation, is tnnt corroct, or wero other exper¬
iments carried outT


6509


25 —p^^-^-S-20-o-Gross (Harder)
Court Jo. 1.


... Fo. *11 these experiments were in tho intorost cf avia—
tic:., rati ns I said before they were mostly in tho interest of tho
prevention of accidents or tho dinunition of imag es in case of
accidents.

Q. Do you think you can sry that nil of thoso exporiooats were
actually nocossorj in tho interest of the aeronautics and personnel?

... !t is cy opinion that this wae so.

'. During those oxporiconts did thoro occur any fatal acci¬
dents sblch offoctod oithcr oxperinontal subjocts or tho pooplo in
charge of tho oxperlccnt or any assistants. I an particularly
reforrin,-; to tho hi.* altitudo oxporiconts such as thoy wore carried
on at Dachau in the year cf 19*12?

... In tho ontiro Ooraan ..viaticn Slodicinc, cl thou/* thousands
and thousands of oxporiconts woro carriod out, wo only had two
fatal casos. Ono occurrod in tho year of 1937 in tho Klcnlayno
rlioro ono aoro codlcal scientist whon carryln*; out nodical oxpor-
i»:nt3 in tho Dountains rocoivod his death locauso of an ico
a v:\lancho. This was not duo to his nodical oxporiconts. Tho no-
con! cooo of donth which occurrod in tho ontiro -vintlon iiodicino
i:. Gernany, was tho doath of ry assistant -iceohoofor.

% You have already contlonod.thrt, haven't you?

... Yos, I contlonod that toforo. Tho doath of this nan also
urn n.t due to codlcal conditions hut coroly due to a technical
error in tho plane.

q. Dr. huff, ir. tho affidavits read which it si already ro-
pcotodly ccntionod, you carried out all oxporiconts first upon
your no If, vhorc y:u ^-crc puttie; yourself at dinposrl r.s an oxper-
lcontal subject. During these experiments which you perfor^d
upon yourself, did you experiments any personal ncr-o cf health,
otc?

... '.'hen carrying out these tray divine fli.nts experiments.


6510


26 -pr-w-S”S-2C—4-Grcsa (Hazeler)
Court 7c. 1.


a erudition of exhaustion of heart and circulation nppoorod which
Sievor quite loft no. But it on the other hand is not particularly
dnr.-;orous.

IIS PHESIDEEi Counsel, at this tine tho Tribunal rill bo
in recess until Si30 Monday corr.ir.j.


Court Sc. 1

2c Aur 47-i;~l-l-40t-7oetor (Fct , Junior)


C-fficiei TreaBiript of the American Killtery
Tribunal is the :etter of the United States
of America against Her! Brandt, ct el,
defendantc, sitting at Iruombsrg, Gernany, on
23 Acril 1947, 0930, Justice Beeis presiding.

1BZ M.i?.SE*L: Persons in the courtroon will pieces find tholr oentc.
The Honorable, the Judges of .iilitary Tribune! I. -illltery Tribunal I
ia now in aeoaion. God aavo the United States of Ancrica end this hon¬
orable Tribunal. There will tc order in the ecurtrcao.

THZ PBiSiniT: .vr. her skill, you ascertain if the defendants are
fll present ir. court.

THI .•^ISHALi Itay it please Ycur Hcncr, all defendants we croocr.t
in tho court.

TBS PRlSIDEBTl The Secretary Gonoral will note for the record the
oroaor.ee of all defendants in court.

Counsel nay oroceod.

SXSOXXLXS? PIT? - Reauaed
r:?XC" ZXilUSAZlCy (Continued)

BY 2&. 3T.:T2 SjUJTIE (Ccuntul for the defendant Ruff):

'4» Dr. Ruff, I vculd liko to rcaind yau that you are still ur.dor
ootk. 3ef ire tho ai; cur meat vc diacuaaod the exporincr.ta which y'-u
generally perf'-ruod in your institute and it v^uld interest no new to
hoar aonething froa you an tc vfart extent yov. wero youraclf an oroerl-
aental subject, and I an not cnly Breaking rlcut the Dachau experiments
but all the otheri.


A. Tho experiments ia tit institute were rerf-racd ur-n =7' cellc-
boratore and upon myself in the ccae of 90 nr coat cf the orDerlner.tc.

In the case of certain exceriaents which were not carried out for rur-
r 7^vS? h tot in order to teach the crcvs which hed tc fir ir.
altitudfr>^£lditn van furnished to ua h7 the luftvcffc, and ve
carried cut high cAitudt exceriaeais with then in order to shew then

I

v hat effectc high fc^titudo has on human organisms. To i very alight ex¬
tent ve rlec jaed/ac cr the other members of the exoeri-cental institute
f^cj ctvi i r r.i cur asroerinants.


oi>12


Court So. 1

26 Anr 47-h-l-2-ZKWo6ter (1st. Hauler)


<i» All th^-se vara voluntary subjects, were they?

A. Yes, es far as this concerned excerizental research they were
voluntary people. However, the soldiers were dote lied by the ’’ohraacht
for these lecture excericoats.

v To you lenov vht-tfcer the detailing of soldiers cf the Vofcmecht
for tbOOo experiuontr vte in cry voy SC06thing eoeeiel or vhether that
is also the case with other netlcns vfco carried cut eviction rcooerch?

a. This is oustc-cry with all elr fircos because it has shown it¬
self that it is necessary tc soke the crcva acquainted vith hov high
altitude veuli effect then.

Q, Pr. Huff, could ycu estinate score xlnately vhat the ar.runt of
all the crooriaents vos vhich you carried cut during these yearn at
your institute?

A. Vo savor counted thoa, tut a superficial eotlarticn >.i that
oacunt v-uld c at It is sc con nine to twelve thousand.

Q» la that cose the au.ur.t of oxoeriaor.te carried -nit at Saefcau
vqo only very snail in coopariscn?

A. Yos.

q. Did you gcln any cerscnol advantages tocauOo of your nuaorouo
experiments upvn your .va terse ns?

A. lie, on the Contrary ay colic*.-rate re as veil as I had tc ray
-ur cvr. life insurance.

q. Tid ycu have any iisadv&ntefjoR >uc«Uaa rf these ortcrloonts on
yourself? I an thinking ia n-rticulcr a. cut disadvantages c: health.

A. I already said fridsy that ve hod no very eoricuo incidents in
the c-urse of these exccriacnts, and that ir. effect any lasting daaoges
t*. health did n-t .ccur.

?H. 7HI72 SAltSH: Kr. President, in this connection I should like
to ask you tc accept an affidavit which mainly deals with the general
acceet of those oaperioents. “his is P^eubont So-8 to te found In D.cu-
ncat ?xik Huff cn cages 27 to 3C. Ihis document origin* tes fr^u a physi-


ciur., Dr. L wcfclc, vho fron the veer of 195" on * a ncaber -f that

3*3


Court Ka* 1

25 Asr 47->.-1-3-23 :-7-os ter (1st. Remler)

Institute end personally participated in numerous arocri--.cr.te. Eo con-
flrsi usinly that ell tho experiments carried out by Pr. Huff vore et
first performed by hia es experiments upon himself, that is, Pr. Ruff,
end thrt his assistants in tjve institute were acting as v.luntary experi¬
mental subjects.

I ask you to take notice of tki6 document, end I should only like
to read e. fev excerpts cf a very impertunt nature cn page 2 . I shall
reud the puragraph before the last. Hvrc the witness soys fren his cvr.
experience, and I ouotei

"Tho danger of the different experimental conditions could never bo
settled ahead. *.e therefore always proceeded with the greatest possible
core and took til imaginable precmiti.no. The demands wore only increased
gradually. Vo w-rkod exclusively cn voluntary experimental ou^Jocts;

* never heard -f a single case when aaycae was induced to undergo cortaln
experiments or was f-rcod in any vny. Scno employees of the institute,
who fcnl an aversion t-vards certain experiments, did not, of courno,
have to tnkc port ir. them. I cannot remember any incidents worth men¬
tioning. Kinor complaint#, such os headaches, ovor-tlrodness, ar.d simi¬
lar complaints vv.ro observed occasionally. «“f courso, the rrlmun lJil
Hocero vn» the u^tt f^r all v„rk. There never was ever, the slightest
suspicion that any unscrupulous experiments ver* carrioi out cr any
atrocities committed."

I shall skip the next paragraph «nl I shall now rej*.' the lest para¬
graph. It soys;

"Tr. Ruff Shoved th* same courage and devotion to duty, in rosearch
duties, which ho van working on himself; he wns always the first tn
Undergo the dangers which, ct the beginning, c-uld never be calculated,
and. he always c.operated also as an cxrorimental cubject in the experi¬
ments cf ethers. As hosd -f the inrtitutc, Ir. Ruff always showed an
exemplary, liberal attitude. In that n.riod of intolerance end force,

->f e.iritual rape and suppression of individuality, he always appeared
t- mo :j be or. estimable representative of true humanity."


Court So. 1

26 A~r 47-X-l-^-ife:-Icstcr Cat* aanlcr)

Che witneis furthermore describes the liberal attitude of Dr. Buff,
he *ays at the end;

■I caaaot believe that r. Buff ever took pert in any ur.Bcrutulou
experiment* end I an convinced that if ever at that tine he cpnc acres*
atrooitie*, even in the research, he vculd have epaosed then with all
hio night. Furthermore, I never heard that Dr. Buff worked on ether
than voluntary exaorinental *utject6; I consider this eut -f the aut-Btior.
In viev -f hie whole attitude."

Thl* i* an affidavit and I ah-uld like you to take notice of it*
entire content. It we certified in the customary armor.


Court So* 1

2c Arr 47-fc-2-l-ES{-Ccck (Inti Reals?)


Tr.ors is another affidavit v*tfc s i m il a r nearing by e certain Prnr.B
Scholtar.

5FS PHIS:rise: What insber did you carign to this exhibit?

DE. SAOTRB: The exhibit which I have Just outfitted, or rather the
document which I huva Just reed, Dccuacr.t So. €, will receive tho exhibit
auator 6, Huff Do. 6.

Regarding tho general aspect if tho ero^rinents, the shyeicier. TV.

Schoi’jcr solus e gonercl stataaent. "his affidavit you ••’ill find in

document Ruff under Ho. 1, Exhibit Bo. 7. I ask ycu to take notice cf

this affld/vit in its entirety. I shall only road a few peregrarhs on

rages 2 and 3. This Doctor Scholar, fror. vfc.a this rffiduvlt originates,

Is a physician who ev Q r since 1936, thrt is, for e oeriod cf eight years,

had collaborated with Dr. Ruff, and had hrd occoeion to nckc his very

•

oi-so ocauaintanco. In his affidavit he rt first dcocri v cs tho entiro
attitude and. orifossi.nal conconti-n of Profess ,r Ruff, rad then ho Days
-a ergo 2 at the bottoa: "Thcoo do-.ando nndc on the cxoorinontnl rersono
vorc uncloasunt tc boor individually, Vat all —*

I don't think tho lr.tomretcrs have thcoo docuront books, Your
Honors*

:£HRFR£72£i 7h« intercrot' rs have the do«uvr.t bc;k.

XF2 rSISIDRltl: The translctlon did not cco«- threu/rh/first, doctor.
In. SaVTRR: I shall start once .".ere or. tegc 2 at tho v ottra <-f tho
prgo ar.d I auotul

"These derumds wre disagreeable, lut iut of all tho cr-erinonts

knjwn to nc, not oca person undergoing an oxteriuent suffered any kind

boldly injur;-’. I would cvrtiinly have noticed such eases because I

c-uld follcv those experiments frx: a medical p>ict of view, ry;d oloo I

was veil informed -f everything that ~cnt on in the Xedicel Section vf

*.:« Experimental Tnrtituto for aviation."

THE .-RR6IT1IT: Prom what part jf the exhibit ere ycu reeding?

Bn. SAUT-R: I-cucent So. 1 , cage 2, the :ott-r. of cage. I think

0

it is tho lest cercgrach. I think you win find it also in the Snglish


Court Sc. 1

25 Arr -.-7-k-2-2-£;-G.-Cc.ok (Inti Rosier)


dccunent beck. It starts:

’Is none of the cases described vet ery pere n ferced to undergo
ouch oxperinonts. All the experimental subjects I knew cana free anon#
the German clerks end assistants of the medical institute -f the Gornan
Experimental Institute for Aviation, and they wore all volunteers. I
repeatedly bcceue clearly conscious cf Tr. Buffs ecuto feel in# of nodi¬
cal responsibility towards the experiment*1 subjects and of the almost
exaggerated Caution with which he conducted these experiments in order
to avoid injury to health in every case.

”2r. Buff considered the healthy well-being of the ernerinental sub¬
jects entrusted to him ts tho surreje nedicil lav and he wjulc* rather
have ebetelnod fren the desired highest scientific knowledge than run
any risks regarding the health of these porcor.o."

This Is the end of the ouetation. 7ho vitnoss goo* on the dooorito
Tr. Buff's ection in individual cocos end I should only like t~ ouoto
o sentenco at the end of page ■, th> r.oxt to last oarograth. Kero the
vitnoss ooy 0 :

■the freouont experiments Tt. Buff uniervont in the c:uroe of
years , howoTor, lod to an irreparable heart injury which I ar.A othcro
who had known his vh„r. he in porfoct health uni had jtc<*rvod hiu
c:nstantly c:uld n-t f; il to notice. This heart defect ci«uocd us fro-
cu'.r.tly to ask his to take serv care of hissoIf, but wo c.uld not influ¬
ence his ncti.r.s at all. I vae n.ver of the impression that an ur.eatl-
olle urge for knowledge er r-rf :rj:l ambition sn.’.e hie rnursu* the txvori-
aonto to the utmcct limit of scientific posciMlltjr. Ctuelty or force
•-'•ards or. experimental subject arc to my mind quite inconceivable when
prssirg Judfpent on 3r. Buff's chi raster."

Bni cuoto. The affidavit is certified in th-. customary manner.

I have oao lest oueeti^n regarding ani-isl cxnerisentc.

IB. rliRTT: Tour E-ncre, it ceuss tc no that—. Eirct of all, I
can't understand vhnt the defence counsel is attempting to do here and I
“‘cu c* the Tribunal to eck him, regarding all cf the excerIntntcl work

5.-1?


Court Ec. I

2c Apr •i7-i'.-2-2-LrJ.-Cook <Iut. aalop)


vhich the defendant Ruff has vorked ca since he graduated frcra nodical
school. It vculd eecu to r.%. that the cxocriuente he conducted rt hie
Institute are not in issue here end the natheds ty vhich he conducted
thwa pro not et issue here. It valid -e ccouera.lo to t situation ‘-here
a nan vh_ has :etn driving the autoaohile for several year* finally
drives the autcootlle critically, and ve vculd have to diceucs every
trip ho took for ten years. I think all of this is lxatarlal, Your
Honors. I don't see vhy ve have t- gi any further unless counsel has
saie definite reason.

Tfi KiASIULiT: Counsel, vfcrt is the rotson, vhr.t is the nnteriality
of the proactive value vhioh these affidavits carry vith the chcrgeo
upon vhich the defendant is on trial?

I&. SaLTLR: Aec-rding to ny vclnion as to vhrt the Tribunal docr.s
cf inpcrtance, I think it is of i.mortance thet cno loarn that a defen¬
dant vho is accused, hov he vas carrying out his professional activities.
It io inpossl.le to coir, a clour end rolichU Picture about his charac¬
ter ar.i his entire activities if you nerely eor.flno yourself to the one
ur the two visits vhich he paid to Dachou. Sr thine ut all cun hu soon
frtn that. Iho possibility nust be giron to the defendant to Provo in
the c-ursc ,f nan y y errs ho vus active rs a r*.ssurchcr and oc c nebular
and vos particularly f- 11 -vine in th>ice .letters n consioncu.

I Bhnll cjt.0 lock to those natters in cy final rlea boca.use thin
is r.ot the tins to argue in detail. Pur thorn ore, nr. Prccidont, I hod
intended anyhow, rs I already otutvd, to nut only one nc<ro ouection
regarding thes. general aspects cf Tr. Ruffs cxcerinents, vhich can
to finished vith -no senUneo. I intended to ask hit—

SEL PRiSIHEH: Countol any croc und the Question to thojritnes*.

BY Sn. SAo'TRR:

v k’itnese, cno lest Question regarding these general problems.

Vry. did you apply the possibility cf the cxceriner.ts on enL-ulc to such
e e.oall de reo, and vhet is the- situation of aniol experiments ir. that
c.wcitl field cf aviation research?


Court So. 1

23 -ipr -.7-ii-2—V-iEX-C .ck Cat. Saalar)


A. In the entire evintlcn medicine end that not only in Germany
tut in all ithur nations, the use -f animals in crcerimentc is very
slight, and if one vculd estimate it '-no %'tuld arrive at tho figures of
30 tc 25 uercont. furthermore, these experiments hove to he uerfcrnel
ca human teirge tecous-j „th«.rviec masy cueationo could not to clarified
in any Cthcr vcy. Jr. flying I mentioned a series of exocria ntc during
vhich it ve* to te asccrtoinud vhat the 6t-oaeh car. stand in tho cose of
crash le-ndinga. Such experiments cannot te performed on cninala since
the tcdil7 construction -f animals is completely different than that of
human telega.

Q. Dr. huff, I ohould like no* t' pass to the charge which is
raised against you in this trial which concerns ycur prrticiw.tlor. in
high altitudo wrcerincate in Dachau, This is the only count under which
y-u rr*> indicted in the indictment. Thos«. experiments eo they vere per-
f'.rmod in tho Spring cf lS-;2 in tho lev trussur- chanters at Pt-chan -
were they earlier oerf-rmed iu ycur rerlin institute?


28 Apr 47 -M-3-1-F3P- Gr-ss (Rcmlur)

C-urt No. 1

«. Experiments regarding parachute dcsc-nt fr^a high a ltitudos
litre carried ut bof-r<- and after the Dachau oeperisunts at our
Institute in Berlin.

Q. '..-uld you briefly describe tv us what tho actual .aim of
such high altitude experiments with el* pressure chamber is?

A. Quite generally .no could sunoarizo thr-t in <ie sentence.

Thu sunso f those oxpcriiamts with a 1 * pressure chamber is to find
•ut the influence of high altitude n tho human or animal organise.

Q. loro such high altitude uxperio-nts with a lew pressure
chamber a spociolty i the German ,.ir F rco r wera they also kn wn
abroad?

«. Tli- low pressure chamber bol ngs to the experimental
oquipaont -f ovory nvi-tin institute. It is kn wn since the one!

f tho 1'st century and it is overywh,re applied inttho case of such
experiments.

Q. !.5uld you perhaps describe to us briefly h-« such a
1 .w pressure clr.eber is furnished an! upon what basic principles
tho experiments with it rsst?

«. The 1-w pressure chamber is a spaco It a which air can to
drawn with tho help f . tups. Through this dr wing out of air the
air pressuro in the ehonbur is being decreased in accordance with
tho conditions as they arise when an airplane ascends tJ high
altitudes. This speed f the asc«nt, that is to say tho a pood of tho
docreaae of pressuro, can bo rerualte by vontiles. In the caoo of
.ur exporioont in additi.n t- this actual low pressure chnmbor we
had a sec:™ 1 , very scr.ll 1 * pressure chamber f r oxperiaonts with
sudden dr.p in pressuro. Thu so experiments are c.-rriuJ ut in or:’or
to perform very spoecy “scents int- high altitudes. High altitude
asccnt3 as they ‘ccur in airplanes with so-called pressure cabins.

If such a piano is flying, say, at 1500 motors altitude and the
pressure cabin is damaged, tho passengers in that pressure cabin
go through an altitude asc-iit within -.no second ci-unting t 3 to
5 thousand actors. The descent with 1-w pressure chamber is effected

6520


23 A-r 47 -B-3-2-PKP- Gr.ss (Rcasler)
Ccnrt fc. 1


by letting in air fr-a the utside int the ctaabor through a v^ntilc.
Tten the pressure in the chamber is increased - and that w ul*. be in
accor'.rjice with the cer.diti n which prevails wb«n on airplmw
loseends from high altitudes.

Q* Dr. Ruff, in tbo c-urse .f this tri~l r,c repeatedly hoard
trr-t in the cat*, of thtse exp^rim-nts s—called altitude sickness
•ccurrod. I should n-w like you tj explain t. us what altitudo
sickness actually moans and in -hat way y ur ocpcrimjits took altitudo
sickness int consideration &.V oxpl itud it?

... Undor altitude sickr.-sa -nc un'erstrnds the .’cargos tr.
the health af a human being by r-as n f lack f oxygon. And, that
is also true in the case -f aniaals. Trv. express! >n altitude sickness
is ftwn r.d sunder stood. In the case >f oltitu e sickness we are n>t
rvally c^.ccrned with c sickness *:t this is a deficiency f the b : 'y
the o.v.-.o as thirst r hunger. In the case _f thirst thero in a
deficiency of rater. In thw cr.so of hunger there is a lack .f
n urishc-nt x fox’.. And, in the case f * ltitude sickness ol re is
lack of oxygen. It »ould oe best to explain altitudo sickness by
brlofly observing rhat hnppons to a human being when he seconds into
altitudes without a supply of oxygon. Let us assure a speed of
ascent of on© minute por t.nus'r.d meters. If such n huaan being is
observed cither in tho plane cr in the Ioj pressuro chamber ono finds
in tho first four ninutos, that is up to 4COO meters, that no change
has occurred in Ids body. The body is in a position to adjust
because of certain cor-pensitory provisions in his body for tho lick
of exygen. .-roc 40<X) meters upwrrds certain deficiencies occur which
can at first be found in the central nervous system. Inis occurs
in the foUwing manner: His senses ani his power of observation are
decreased. Far instance, a lr_rp which ay be burnir^ in that
space appears less bright to tho experimental subject than before.

Very high sounds rxe no longer heard. «s soon as altitudo increases

s

hie newer of thinkir.r arrf his memory are decreasing. His attention,

6521


28 Apr 47 -H-3-3-PSP- "roaa '(Rarlw)

Court No. 1

hia power of concentration, and his power to (carry out criticism
decreases as soon as altitude increases. His emotional life, too,
undergoes a strong change. In few cases we have a depression but in
nost cases we have an euphory which is the opposite of a depression
- an elated enotion. For that_reason because of the change of his
oaotions one often compares the effect of high altitude witht he
effect of alcoholism* In aviation medicine one often speaks of
the altitude drunkenness a nd in -he sane nay as alcohol reacts
differently on different people so doos leek of oxygen react differently.
One experimental subject becomes particularly activoarei overjoyed.

The other ono becomes tired and sleepy. This entire condition
davolopes gradually as the altitude increasesa nd becomes progrossivoly
more severe. In altitude of 75<X> to 8000 noters this condition goos
owr into canplote unconsciousnuss. This condition in high altitude
was already doscribod at the or.d of the last century by th.. Fronctaan
Dissanthier and used the followed condition: "In the case of
altitude a of 75CO actors the rigid condition which a person has to
undergo is surprising. 9edy nd aind becoew weaker and weaker anl
ttiat gradually and h'rdly recognizable. One experiences no pain -
on the contrary one feels -.n inner Joy. One no longer thinks of tho
dangerous condition. On. Ascends and ono is glad of U«, ascent."

Because Idgh altitude sickness brings - bout no unpleasant synptcc3,
such as for example, lack of oreath. It is particularly dangerous
for aviation, which ere here to warn the flyer that altitude sickness
is beginning nd thet means that he is not warned of danger.


uncon-


28 April U7-M- ATO-h-l-Karros (Int. va.-rler)

Court 2fo. 1

I irr.a Just sayinv that in altitudes of 7500 to 80CC ncfcurs,
sdousnoss appears. Shortly before unoonsciouanoss cats about, or„ finds
that there sli-ht and painless bitches in onc*s hand. Than a person^
consdousnoss disappears entirely. If on. then continues to ascent with
the plane, or the Ion ires sure chamber, one finds changes in tho
breathin' of this unconscious porson. Breathin'; bocor.^s irrg-ular. Ono
finds that thero are a fee breathin' aovcajnts followin'* o.uiddy upon
ono another, then a lengthy pause, then a : ;ain a few quick novoaor.ts,
and this is how it poos on. Sinultanoously with this sev.ro ohango of
broathin;, cranps occur in tho condition of this unconscious parson.
Because of those cranps, ono Boss a picture which can bo conparod with
a person who is aufforin:- frcti .an opiloptic attack or it nay correspond
to orrxps as they arc artificially o.auscd for therapeutic reasons, that
is, for troctaont, with thj .aid of insulin, or oardazol, or electrical
currant. In tho case or ell thoso conditions of ersnp - hi-ta altitudo
cranps, opiloptic cranps, or therapeutic ora apt - ah -..rson conoornod
do.s not notice anything. Ho hr.s lost Ms consdousr.yss.

I was Just sayin- that in an altitude of approximately ii,OOC
lujt.rs ono can so-, tho first sj-sptoas. For that roason, it is a regulation
in all states vhc carry on aviation that, starting fros that .altitude,
the passengers of airplanes would have to bo supplied artlfldally with
oxy jn. For that purposo, tho airplanes carry oxygon .quiprxnt. They
have bottles of oxygon, and this oxygon is introduced into tho
passengers of the piano through th- kidiun of broathin-. rasks.

nan on. desi nates the altitude which a huaan boin car. roach with¬
out oxygon oquijrunt as his suadt, one arrives at the altitude of 14,000
voters. In that case, it i3 presuppos .d that tf k sundt altitudo is ^on-
ddorod tho point whore no syuptcos * ill will occur y t. hor. breathing
°>YZcr.j the surrlt altitudo is increased to 12,000 or 15,000 no tors.
That is to say, if the hunar. bdn : is inhaling pure oxyren, ho car. ascond
$o x2,000 or 13,00 -aitudo without .aptoaa of illness. If

-ir. beyond that altivade, thoro develops, as the altitudo increases,

6523


28 April l;7-^WTO-L-2-EarroK (Int. Bagalur)
court :ro. 1

tho sano picture a3 or.’ can see startir. fro-: li,000 n_-tur3 without
♦ho aid of oxygon, Thi3 picture dovm.cps ir. tho sane sequence and ir.
tho sano nr.nr.or.

In aviation ono seldom 3oos that altitude sickness occurs in the

ca3o of an ascent. The altitude sickness usually begins when, for

scr.o reason, tJvi supply of oxygon is interrupted. If that case occurs

in any altitude, starting from 6,0CC soturs, tho altitude sickness vdll

occur after a certain poried of tdr.o. This period of tine which olcpsos

frc:i tl» point of interruption up to the beginning of tho altitude

sieknossis designated in aviation no did no ns 'tine reserve" • This is

tho period of tine which is still available to the person concerned in

order to ck> so::’thin: on his own initiative to defend hiusclf against

tho beginning of altitudo sickness. This so-called "ti.no ros^rvo" changes

as altitudo increases. The hi h r up this inddont occurs, tho shortor

•

bocoiios tho "tine rosorvo". In tho oaso of an altitudo of 8,000 rioters,
wo have approximately four dnutos' 'tlao reS-rvo". In the oaso of
12,000 . rs altitude, 10 have forty to fifty seconds, and in the case

if 20,000 rotors, .approxl-v.toly ton seconds.

If tho piano doscends after having joeperionood ol lo sickness,
creep* and broathin difficulties - thoso synptons disappear in tho
reverse soqunco th<y began. At first, tho cramps disappear, broathing
boeoKos noro regular, then the person cones slowly bade to consciousness,
and tho axporinentnl subjoat finally is a ain ablo to aot, Tho oxporl-
nor.tal subject is again cap-able tc act ir. an altitudo which can bo com¬
pared with tho altitude wnero air sickness started when tho plr.no
ascended. If, durin- an ascent, there ran uaoonsdeusnoss at 7,OX
utors altitude, and then tho person was brau*ht up to 12,000 paters
altitudo ir. this unccnsdcus condition, his awakenin' will .approximately
take place at 8,000 maters altitude durin the- descent, The inner rro-
: -.res - that is, «hat hap. ens within th bod;* of the human boin during
• ;h ascents and descents - is not guito known. It Is important that aft or
«: a7.-ak_rin- frar. altitude sickness almost imn.diately there i3 a full


28 April !i7-^^TD-i*-3-Jfcrrcr (let. Raailor)
Court So, 1


ability to act. !o ccreplaints of any sort exist, and exceptions fron this
rule "jo only thesa cases whors the lack of oxygen has lasted for a
considerable lan.;;th of tine. And the iwatorin" is similar to tho
awake rdn,'; frer. ar. anesthetic. That is, it takes fren one to tore hours.
But, contrary to '.ny awakenin’ ft-oa anesthetics, this awakordn has
enorolly no complaints for tho person and has no after effects.

A further fact which ryy be of saao importance! is that, during tho
ti:w of altitude sicknoss, the person concerned do os not rvrv.nbor what
happened. Exporis-ntal subjects often cannot state whuthor an experiment
was carried out or. the- - * or not. They state that they had a very light
foclin; of warmth, but that oth_r.riso nothin;: raich had happened.


23 ;.-v —5-1-Schveb (1st.

Court I


v* 3r. Soft, those difficult technic 1 questions you n_y n.ve
to ounltneot in one regard. How is it uossiblo, in tho .jirplnao
or ir. cue lov pressure ch_a'oer, tojcend to m _ltitudo of 20,000 notors
if, on .no otScr n_nd, you g *y th t in j» -ltitudo of, I think, K ,000
uotors, in sjite of th« introduction of o^wa, unconsciousness occurs?
2 nxn i.uostion dovs not s to ao clo .r to ac. ?orh„pB you co aid
cl rlfy it for u* l_yuen.

In thv .drpluao, the .scent to hoists of over 14.CCO utters
is possible only if tho .irplonc is ajuiped with tho so-called urescurc
cabin* In thwSv ureas -re cabins one t jccs .. so-c lied "prlv.,to eliuuto"
-Ion,; vit.*. hiu for ta« benefit of tno o.^s-a.^rs. &is lc a clia..to
ns one cop-rioncos it in an altitude of 3,000 alters. Only in this
anancr is it possible to fly hi ncr tn.a K.000 actors for .jjy length
of tlao,

Ir. the low-pressure chjaoer we o-n -seen! to ouen hoists by
inerc. oi.v: frea 12, WO or 13,000 uetors to 2C.OCO noters within a
ver short Mao, but th .t cm only oc done in t... low-prossuro ch.usbor.
i'hc period of tiuu h..o to be snort enough to f 11 within tr.e tiny
rooorvo, of v..icn I w..s suo^cia,. earlier. *h.t is, in tno c .bo of
20,0 J Uc-trs, it h^s to bo within tun seconds.

iir. .niff, did you often uerfora these oxicri-ents wnich
you just described tc us—Including ltitudo sickness, etc—U)or.

: ourself ? —>d I w.mt to .oh you: C-n you toll us fron your own ceperioa-
cc th ,t nvco Jtltudo sicknesses, tr.is unconsciousness, these cr. job,
Whic-. occur—are without any p„ia for th*. uspcriuental ouoject, .sod
do .:ot orir. _lon- with tho; e.y dis-dv ,at_ oouo fter^tffwets?

-a. “11 theso natters 'C'.icn I h-vc described by uo m a result

of personal experience on ay owe body.

-.lank you, Dr. ^uff. Chen Doctor, I sh.uld like to puss to
t .w crnericor.ts at Dachau wnich were Carried out in the spring of
19-12. hjn, for tee first tioe, w_j the thought ontert-ined to c_rry


26 ril-..-o*5-2-Schv-j (1st. P^dwr)

Court I

o’’.t -xoeri-.oate in concentr_tiou caipa? I you to t_ce into
consideration th .t _il the witnesses who t_atified up to Lais ao-
o«ut h-YC b - id usd or o-th th..t _s a rule such exooriaeutB v_ro not
p^rforus^l vita iec-t.s, especially not ia a coacoatr tioa c_ap.

a. Is _occaber 1941, ’’rof. holtz visits sso at uy institifcc. Vo
discuasod a f *v questions of -n -vl-tion-ccdi c .2 n_turo ia \t.ici. both
of UG V r- interested, -ad oa this occasioa also discussed the problcc
of s.via )cypl«. fret ai^ -ltltudcs. Prof, veltz h.A rccuivul c
report ..oout experiments which w- had p^rforacd ia regard to th..t
oubjwCt. Z\c report caorlsed .n«riueats for tfle ouriooc of saving
>ea>lo frou nigh—ltitudeg, up to altitudes of 12,OCO u-twro. wo
opoko aocut the continuation of theae exp^riucats which wo pluanod-~
a sedoud J rt of theso cx^rU-onts—and on th_t occasion Prof, '.oltt
au .-ated to uo to c.j.-y out this second part of the experiment on
i;« too .t E..ch_u,

too of nis assist -ntn, a cert-ln Dr. .--mchcr, had rwc-ivod ni.xacr«s
.•.> rov.l to perform hi,* ..ltitude cx^oria.nts at Dachau; to th..t it
would bo q ito oosaible to perform those experiments ;t D-chau.

Dr. roiff, you s-id the beginning of your aesotiations about
Bachutt at r;ed ia the yo-r 1941. ifc-t w..s Docaibcr 1941. I should
li'- to ruiind you th-t la the Prosecution Docuucat noo .o. II c
letter Vas suoaittod which ..t th..t .imc v^s Beat oy Dr. lurcher oa
clrc.d t..- fifteenth of t*# 1941 to tao aoichsfuohrer-SS. Thic
io Docuiie.it 1602-PS, eimibit of the Prosecution 44. I n this lottor,
w ich ori-ih*tcs f nn key 19-.1, n^scr.er writ.a, ,u-.d I quoto:

"rho ojporiaeatB are performed at the cxocrimeUt -1 at-tioj’fcr
-i.j:-altitudo research, nhd c..nr.ot bo c-rriod out on uomeuys, ns
was tno cnoo up to this Period of time, since there -re c.itirel- dif-
for-nt situ tions in the c..se of the uonJccy." Jr. hascher continues:
n l discussed these u_tters confident! _lly with the representative

552?


23 ril-..—J7-E-3-Sc£v_b (la.* Bonier)

Court I


of t - -lr Jloet Physician who is c-rryia oat mcse -xn.riaoiitr, end
h. ic else of tew opinion th-t she nrobloos in ' t u~stio~ c_n only oc
curried rut by performing oxp-ri-ents on huc^n Doings. B

r. .Inschor, in parentheses, aids: "as enoerineatal u-ter:al,
f.eolo-ci.ided people could also bo used."

Vow, I e- -t^ing you, Dr. feoff, vcwa la Decoder 1941 you wore
at first concerned with in. performance of ors-rlucnts in a concentra¬
tion cars, hud you then known of tne nrocoodiag negotiation# botwoea
Dr. Hnsohor end 2uich»fUchrwr-SoT -nd, in p .rticulur, h-d you not
knoua of that letter whica I Just mentioned, dated tne fifteenth of
Hr; 1941? Weren't you participating is tuos- negotiations, Doctor?

a. 5Mb letter, itself, und Us contents, I learned for tho
first tLic noro upon locking -t tnis docu-ont boo*:. During uy con¬
versation with Volt* in Decuioor 1941, he told uo, uowevor, that
clre.dy a few acaths earlier a cor/.rcr.ee hod tnKen pl~ce between
h-schcr and t.ie then <.odic. 1 Inspector, alp-ike; and th_t hip’ko
had ..lroody egreod to these u^?«riuaats in principle. From this
ran.rK, I could n .*/e, of cours., deduced th-t .h-r- r.ud been saao
nejoti.tiens '.ending curia, the proceeding months, b-.t I «cncw no
t.et lie noout thaj.

1 . -itaess, in the letter voicn I Just ..eationed, dated tho
fifteenth of s.-y, 1941, hascher writes to kii—Ur; and there is tho
follovi.jg sentence lr..r., and I quote: "^e oj^i.riaent-l subjects
could also dio."

Vow, on the other —d, ;*Oi _re telli.. us— and tn-t -160 o-conos
crnxu.t fr;- the affidavits cf Various witnesses— tm-t tho eo^ori-
no.to which -'ou w-re e.rryin. out eatl-lod no d-^er to life,
i W, i}r. "'iff, c_n you tell uo how this a;p-ro.it contradiction con bo
cl .rified, or Can you oorhaps tell us vhat ex^-rL.cn ts v.re scant
by Dr. nuscher in his letter of the fifto-nth of hoy, 1941. when ho
too* into c a aider., tl on the possibility of ;ac doatr. of expcriaont.J.

652S I


2c ~:ril——J?-5—•-scnvab (1st, n—-Ur)

C-urt I

subjects I

a. i didn't kaov -t th-t o i__ vh_.t experiments Archer was
intending, end I h_,d hod no knowledge of thut letter, ?or that
ronson I c .neot b.j tod.." what oxpe.-iucnts A*achcr was referring to
on t ia Oasis of tn.t lottor.

In ta-t c_.su, you still don't know tn..t today?

•*» i’o.

0,. During those ao^otictions vale., ou carried on with Prof,
t.'oltz end lut.r with Jr. Boschcr, did saschor uuko tho suggestion to
"on th.it foeblu-cindod people were also to Oe utud for those cx~
peri scats—-the s die su mention wnicn i6 contained in tho Utter of
tho fifteenth of Kj»", 1941? ’-h-t would your attitude huvoboca?

Or Wh.it w « your attitude to any such su.;,.estior.?

.W haocier *»Vt! lladO this su estion to uso fcoolo-uihdod ??0O-
plc for tneso uxo-rUeets; .md, s.enfroe. anorooriuont-l point of
vlow, it would hnvu been cntiiel. i^ ossicle for us to use feeble¬
minded jorsons for thccc experiuento.

*^rt

a. Duri.v tnOBw experiments Ww needed thw cooporutlos of tho
e::>ri c.it„L subjects. During the experiaw.it, tho oxp«riusnt-l
ribjoct ii.id to c-rr/ out reaoou-oU r—ctions, ..nfl thvSe are unitors
for vic.i f ecelo-uindcd peouU could not be used.


28.4? ril 47-Cv-«S-6-l-ko^han(H^jlor)

Court 1

.. Ur. Stiff, kr». Buschcr has stated in - lettor, which Was al¬
ready subnittcd hero, addressed to tho Hoichefuohrcr SS, dated 2-^
Pebruary 19-.2, contained in a Doc uneat of the Prosocution, page 59,
Docuaent it'o. 263, Exhibit 47, that Dr. sippico and Dr. Vaitt wore del¬
aying tho bogining of tho experiments eontiafioualy, although mippfco
cad ‘.'olea hnew tho icportonco of tho oxicrlnents. ?r_u Dr. Boschcr
continues: * la Doceabor of 1941, Dr. -cits got in touch witn tho
cholman of tho serial rosoarch institute at Berlin - *dle»shof rad
asked whether tho chief, Drs. .-biff -ad Renoorg could uaho tho uepori-
uoats with Dr. Roscher. Thoso two pcrscr.a inuodiatoly ugrcod and dol-
ivored tho low pressure chanbor and cone horo. Dhoro wao a conference
botvoon lixuchor, Ronborg aad Ruff ut Dachau. * <jro theso statements
correct, and I on referring particularly to the tiuo wh-ro Prau Dr.
haachor says tho first conforcnce took pl-co in Docoubor 19417
a Jo, saio of tho details are incorrect in that letter; howevor,
tncoo dctuilo aro of no special iuportanco. Por inst.-nco, I was novor
tho chief of tho Go man Institute for aviation, out Prau Basohor
possibly did not know theso things. It is correct that in Decoobor
of 19- 1 tho conference Just nontionod botwoen Professor Volta and I
took placo, and in the courso cf this conference Professor Uoltz
node tho su.-,,action to no toajry out th*. second part of our exports
onts for tho puiposo of saving pooplo from hi h hltitudo in Dachau.

Z whoro wore theso conferences with Professor.V^ltz hold?
a At uy institute in Berlin.

^ Did Professor bolts ccao to you in Berlin for tho particular
purposo of getting your cooperation concoraln.. thesu experinonts
with you that woro to bo carried out ia Dachau; or why was it Profes¬
sor uoltz eaoo to you?

a r'o. Professor tfpltx visitod no once orwico o yo-r. bo usually
discussed ociontific problems, and within tho f rja*>-work of theso con¬
versations touched upon tho question of saving people free hi ji alti¬
tude. Or. this occasion Professor ..oltz _-dc this suggestion to c.


28A-ril 47-6-2-’ -AK-J'oohcn(Ramier)

Court 1

'i. You scy that the fir.it su' cation for the execut¬
ion of experiments in concentration camps vos mode by
Professor Dr. '.oltz; ct any rate you rero approached
with it by hlr., end at that timo ; ou had .tnovm him for
somo ti-c?

A-Yob.

'I .'hat impression did ‘.'oltz'personality neke on you
at that time?

A I had known Frofeasor for any years. ;.a far na I
know, ho wr a ct thrt th e r.n Obcratabnrtz of tho Luft -
weffo, end he was "Iso the he ad of the testing station
for the offocta of high altitude or the Aviotion red-
ical ir.stitudo ct runick, both of ua belonged to tho
Luftwnffo. As c. sciontiat, profosaor ’.Volt* enjoyed tho
highest reputation within Aviation red ical '•nd also
within tho x-ray reserreh work. his orn ooiontifio
work, cs wo 11 r.a tho ork published by hio instituto,
ucro olwa; s considered to bo reliable. Ho had had con-
aidorablo practice in x-ray, whioh ahowod to whet cx-
tont ho was regerdedod by his potionts and fcia collocg-
oa. Tho relationship of our .nst_tuto3 toward ono cn-
othor was n friendly one, and 1 already mentioned that
he enno to visit r.c or.co or t ”100 a yocr. On tho othor
hand, whonovor I had an opportunity to do so, I visitod
him at his institute in I'unich, Therefore, 3 wca certain
on tho basis of my acquaint.- ;co rr.d knowing ./oltz, that
ho did not suggest anything to o at thrt tine where
he himself had any legal or othioel misgivings.

Dr. Ruff, -hen Frofossor T/cltn medo the sugges¬
tion with you, or did you ash him, what kind of exper¬
imental subjocts -ere to be used; of course it was
natural thct they were inmates, but what othor qual-


23/.pril 47-i:-AK~6-3-Keohan( Ramie r)

Court 1

✓

Ifications did they have to kavo and what did you discus-
in that regard with ProfC33or 7/eltz?

A Naturally, we discussod that point, rhich was pos¬
sibly the most important point c ring our conversation

* / •
aftor his initial suggestion. Professor V.'cltz told me

that wo woro concerned with professional criminals in
tho ease of theso experimental subjocts who could vol¬
unteer for thoso experiments.

h Did you agree to that suggestion immediately, or
did you voice any misgivings?

A 1 told Professor holts that I would have to tako
this patter under consideration, that I would furthor
discuss it with Dr. Romber;, who was in chnrgo of tho
experiments for tho ourposo of saving people from
hihg cltitudo, and that in ;-rticulir, I would hnvo to
discuss this nr.ttor wlttfl tho cdical Inspector Hippko.

‘l Tnnt furthor action did you tako in that nattor?

A Aftor Profossor oltxtdcpnrturo, oithor on tho
very acmo do: or tho next day, I dicussod this with
my collaborator. Dr. Romberg; and whon ho also agroed
to carry out thoso oxpcrir.onts, undor tho conditions
as stated by Vcltz, I visited tho nodical inspector
Hippko and nskvd him whotkor it woo truo that he had
already agrcod to theso oxporinonts in Dachau in prin¬
ciple. This he offirrod, nr.d I recoivod permission from
him to carry out thoso oxporlnonts on tho inmntos in
Dachau and to use a mobile lor yrcssuro chamber for
that nurposc, which belonged to tho ycdical Inspectorate,
but which at that time was with us at the experimental
institu'o.

1 Professor Hippke, who aftor all was your highest


28April 47-r- AK-6-4-?'cohaa(Ranlcr)

Court 1.

superior; didn't he discuss rith you what kind of ox-
porircntal subjocts you woro to use; did Professor
K ippko Imow who was to bo used and did you say anythin"
to hin about that?

A rrof033or Kippko told r.o on the occasion of this
conversation that we wc.ro here concerned with profos-
sional orininnl3, who wero in a position to volunteer
for those experiments and vho after tho experiments
woro to to rewarded in some orn by either scr.toncc or
comploto pardon.

o .'itnoss, why weren't thoso oxporiments performed'
in your Borlin Institute also instoad of goin to


Dachau?


2', ;./r .7- Cook (Int. At* ier)

Court .Vo* 1


A* In *v»t connection I havs o sp2ak at rone treat len-th. In
t'- 1 s.ri:. o: 15U1 we investi ited lew pressure chambers an-' <te>nstrat-
• o IY-. crews on the Western Front. During such exrerinents
..o -ber;. an' I participated# 7 used t-iat opporturdty of infornin , our-
cclvos at individual fi.hter units whether they ha C experienced any
edical if r icultieo. All of tho units complained that -he pilots were
not clear as to how they would have to act in the case of parachute
esc nto fren high altitudes. In ile or.nsn air force there was at that
: j nc ox;- 30 apparatus available for tho case of parachute descent.

Tlio crow feared that after their perachuts ha . unfolded, and they were
daocendin., that when landing on tho earth or in the water, Uwy would
. for altitude injuries or would drown, \c couldn’t help then
eti i -.it nu. 3tior. since wo hv no ox en ental basis for any information,
.if tor our return wo roporte ’ totftj oc’ical inspectorate about
• qu atien, an' wo received i .o order to carry out oxperi-juts for
tho . urpose of savin;, persons fro-: hi.h altitu^os. The- technical
progress of hii.h altitude flyin. had ranched the followin. stapes
7 i vhtcr pianos in lar.,o nuebors wore flying at tho front which wera
:v achin' tor. thousand to 11 thousand. Vilaaotor altitudes. Tht fighter
,linos of our onoaies, how vor, could reach higher altitu ’os. For that
r iron it r-.n worked with :uir. • ir. ill re:-*arch institwt ,s .:nd nil motor
factories to find a way to increaco chc M h altitu-io performance

r. . .>part froa those nomal planus which wore al Tly-
1 .; at die front, wo had a rocket fi it:r plane which vac rtilJ in its
ct . This was tho JfcsoerscHnic't 163. With that piano it
ossible to roash tor. to twelve thousand motors within a space of
t.c . a summit altitude of -Tut plane depended only upon ti

fuol ' dch V.io piano war carryir. . or jot propulsion is ooiaplotoly
height. rthonwre, 1 r or motors were being con-
’ met, larger planes won. be in- built which could reach altitudes

•»! f-rct 16 thousand esoters. On the basis of this s*.a c of toch-
1 - 'ai v Ivjent, there was tho energetic demand to clarify the

•ion of how human beings could x saved from hi t h altitudes up to

653-t


2 Apr ltf-’^;»-7-2-Cook (ini ftosHar)

Court 'o. 1.

‘ j- vit ro. The technical Sev alopna nt had rone beyond the results
obtained Ir. aviation aedicino; and as I said before, we had no radical
:-si s at all to effect any savin- fra: high altitude. In accordance
vi'-n the urgency of the problem, t'.is task ford-*.- savins fro~. high

r-ltitu ‘ec was divided into nmy st; os. At first, the qucsti-n of saving
fro- hi h altitude up to 12 kilo:*_tors was clarified; and thx3 was
consider. 1 to n the nost ur oat question, since wu already had a number
of planes already in action which would achieve that height. The expert -
rants for that purpose aero carrie * out -t our institute. Tha second
point which was to be clarified was to ascertain whethor escaping fran
20,000 raters height, with or without ojy^on, ia possible. As a sub¬
division to this question we .ud to olarify whether a vory sharp dccroase
in prossuro in a abort ti e can be tolerated by human beir. . r
inctance, Jumping the pressure from 12 to 20,000 naters. Thie queotion
'’ ilt with by us after tho export onts of 12,000 o.'torc, and wo

a

^xparlMSntoO upon ourselvoa. This problcn was sinultanoouoly workod

a nu»3er of othc: itutos. The actual bailing out oxpori.Donta

IT a 20,0 ors hoi^ht woi\. clarified at Dachau.- Subsequently the
of -.old had to bo cleared up in these heights. Thorc ai
tj .poraturos as low as cilnus $0 to -0 do;ro a. Those exporinontr wore .
also t*>x Q at our . r did cxporiDohtin n oureolvus.

hrouhout T.oso questions *c re conc-rned with urgent, practically
Important question for aviation. .if tar these uxperir-.nts tho technic Lins
-r - to be told what special s - a—uaxu equipment was to o eonctruct-
o ' . or'.r to s avt pcoplo r>.-. tho xvsjxctlvo altitudes, and tlicso

-x.-jri tits were to provide i basic in order to give directives to tho
cr- b as to hear to act duriiv tho oarachutc descent frees various .

1 Ititv e- .

D .. SiilT 3: I believe, Ir. President, you could rc-cocs hoft,
because tho efendant is evbarkin upon a now paragraph.

. SI^’T: Very' ell, the “nbunal rill be in recess.

( A short recess was taken)


25 .pril L?-':- 71—9—tw ( Ir.a. von Scboer.)

Court :fc. 1

7 i ..'•iSK.it Persona in th- court rose will pie-so find their so?.ts.

Tho Tribunal is a ,ain in soasicn.

-E '.rSirKjrr: itness nay pro coed.

’IT’.ESS' • before tha recess I was just doscribinp what reasons led to
die aperients about escauin fror. hi h altitudo. In order to bo able
to ana--jr all the questions rosultin iron this prcbloa affici mtly, tho
results would, of ceursu, have to be sufficiently "uarantoed. Thoro
coul not be -ny quostion of ccincid.nco or accidental result sinco,
otherai3c, the technical developments for tho apparatus would bo put
ir.v falsa channels, .vccirktttal results «uld result in directives
for the aviators which nicht bo false, and they ndr.ht load tc aecidonta,
von to fatal accidents. In order tc cafo*uard such results of oxpori-
: nts adequately, it is nocessary to oarry out experinents on a larco
r..u h tnrtoor of exporinontal subjects or to repeat the oxporinonts
on a s-.mllor roiabor of persons so often that accidental results aro
elinirctod in tho results. *t our institute, whin Welts ou ';oatod~to
no teat tho oxpirincntc should bo oarriod out in Dachau, thoro woro
orly five or six dcporinjntal subjects avilabln in the p. psons of m y
associates end nys-alf, but sinco Several other sorios of dxporlnonts
aro oin on at tho srro tino, thoso oxp.ri rental subjects were involved
in two or throo experiments at tho ssoo fciao in part an’’, woro at tho
limit of their capacities. ’'oroovar, wo had Just carried out a sorios
f on orir.,nts with suddon drop in rossuro, nd those nunorous increases
of altitude had r.do none of us adapt to those hji-'hta because, if cno
carries out nur-irous ascends in altitudo, tha body note used to tho
altitudo, It becOKoe noro resistant to altitudo and, of courso, 3uch
persons can no longer bo oor^idurod nor r.l subjocts. For us in the
iistituto it would, therefore, have boin possible only to carry out tho
jxperiaents three; h tho courso of iaany nor.thsj but ^ho task was vory
ur - mt. For this reason, I a ornd with Professor *elts» sutf-,-stion to
carry out the second part of the oxperdser.ts i zi Dachau.

5X Z r \m SAOTERt

6535 * • * ,


26 -.pril 7—'W.TD-^-2-Scrrfrr (Int. von Schcn)

Court ::-o. 1

‘ ithass, 1 oadarstand that a lar-er nunbar of axporl icntal subjects
s.re needed for these axperlnants, but would it not hive been easier,
perhaps, to take nodical students, or soldiors, or other volunteers, who
nijht have boor, hired for pay?

 before th. cxp.rixv.nts vq had repeatedly nttanpted to -et nodical
students, for exanplo, for experiments. That had not proved itself at
nil, specially .:hon tho experiments lasted for a considerable tine. The
nodical students, in ororal, could not devote enough tir.o to thoso
oxporinonts and, after two, throo or four oxporinents, thoy suddenly
stopped ccrdn-, or sorve ovomnontal re-ulr.Uon suddenly oallod then
-.vry to other quito different things - to work on the harvest, or to
carry out larro collections, or somethin-. like that. To got soldiors
Tor tho exporlxsonts was perhaps thoorotically possible. In practico,
l»w.jvur, it was snidi “\'o do not hnvo enough soldiors to ivo you
experimental subjects for your experiments. Tho soldiers havo other
t'.dn s to do. '.'o oannot lot then o for two or thruo months.•' To hiro
wlunteors was inpossiblo booauao in the tine of 19ii2, thoro ns no one
in Oonaaqjr In the a;;o roup any noro which to needed and in tho
physical constitution which wo noodod. .J1 those pooplo wore oithor in
thi nnry, or woro workin; at sc vithin- which, of course, tr.do it
ipossible for that: to bo available to us for any length of tine.

: Now, boforo I o over to your discussion with Dr. fhschor, I should
nice to nsk the Tribunal to take notico of a document which is in tho
r.t 3ook Ruff, Supplement 2, Docuaent '2C. It wiU bo "bchibit 08.
vxfcibit 3, Docun r.t 72C, Supplemental Book 2. This is nn affidavit of
■ Dr. In , Rolf Gchrocdter. This witness was an onrinoor by profession,
rrc the susxaer of 1910 on ho ns a technical officor in the luftwiffo.
That is, iurln; th. period of tho Dachau hi-;h altitude oxpcriiaonts. Ho
had to tost ths plar.03 and Invcati ,at 0 accidents. Ho is, therefore, a
'• ci'l export who can evaluate tho woossity of tha oxpnrin.-nt« undor-

R by Huff. rir. tho first part of hi3 affidavit, which I shall not
r i *hc .fitness first dascrihos his own mark and tho reasons for Ms

6537


«


23 ..aril Ji7-?^.TD-9-3-*vrTOir (Ini. von Schon)

-r-mrt 30. 1

.irr ir. export. Or. ;a-;a 2, in tho second paragraph* I should like to
road sort passages;

'Fror. tho activity as a tec hn i ca l officer, I can tIvo the fallowing
facts frora ny own knowledge about the stage reached in hi h altitude
Hying:

"Eurin; the ennpai n in Franco in 19W, the altitude raquirooonts of
t.a aircraft were still conr.‘r^tivol7 low. In the fall of 191*0, howovor,
thoy row by leaps and bounds. Tho fenations attonpted to outcltob oach
other to obtain a hotter attacking position. Tho altitude possibilities
tho planes wore fully utilised, -and fli hts wore of ton nado to an\
ttudo of 10 to 11 kUonotors. Now typos of aircraft, with higher /
-ltitudo rarv:os, woro doccndod. At thi3 ttoo, noat pilots had very
little knorflodco and exporionco concornin oorroct conduct in lii'jh
ltdtudos, and accidents nara caused by tho sli-htust carlossnoss or
defect. It was of considerable toper f nco that, through r. clarification
of tho probl aas involved in arachuting fron hoi-hts of up to 12 kilo-
:.urs, thi non at tho front woro able to rocaivo os3cntial instructions
about conduct while poracta 1 fron aircraft. ! t could bo soon, ov.?n at

that tino, that on incr^iso in apood and altitudo would bo technically
possibly ir. thu floor futuro. Tho Chiof of tha Vossurschnidt-Dovoloprumt
',fr: • ; that tine, Isold to a tour of tho front in Sprir.': 19U1,
pr-rdsod only a -radual isprovesaont of tho Mo 109 (that is, Mossnrschnidt
1T^:, but ho alroa'# talked about a ,,-roat loops in pro?roeo in now typos.


6533


28 i’riI~#-J?-1Q-1—Jl_<lcy (1st. Ton Scion)

Co -rt I, C.xa 1

lS-.l-'42 too filter aircraft he (..eaaersciniidt) 1S3
v_c tried out in action. It w„s a gnil single abater rocket
?l—to •'.r.ir.. liquid fuels vnicn gave a quit*. extraordinary perf or-iaiico
nlthou,n 1 tor, -fttr a long period of development, it gained no
vc t importance in action. Js- rocket engine v_5 independent of tho
•Cq.en from the air and thus -ltitudo hud „o significance in its poiw
: or..anco. *Jho u-xinua altitude w.ich could oo reached had practically
no liv.it except the Pilot's aoility to -/.dure sign ^ltitudeo. 2ho
cli-ioi-v,' need reachvd vith 170 ^a<.n ucr second, nearly ton times
t.-.u p-rfor-uuco of any other existing -irer^ft. altitudes of twelve
tc fourtoon fcilonetero wer- re_chvd in l.as than tnree alautos climb
-•4 is ocn« isat-nc-s .renter oltitudea up to 15.5 kilouetcro
were reached if the Hot cut o:; the engine a few seconds too l,.tc.

In new nircr.at models the demands of hi^ altitude fly in,. v-ro uct
b i.v t .11 a pr-a auru—cabins. Plano of t..ia kind wore n^do o* .til
fir.;a on. -d in tow dovclo-x.oat of a-v models, especially Junkers,
“onto el, *rsdo, alofcm Toao. u om- aeries of toe fi,.nt-r t;T>ea ho
109 Milch Were iu „ctlo.\ v-r_ _lso equipped vith proaaure-coblns.

■ 2 he us- of ur-a uro-c-oino In ..ctiondspendod on toe ot_ge
dev.lou.ent of th- high altitude engines. fhc .i.iinua ureoaure alti¬
tude of xi- engines, that la, tho altitude at Wales the angino still
d-v-lopcd it» full p-rfoiu.aice, v ji continuously increased. For
i st uco, ta- a^xinux presoure altitud- of tho ild 606 v_s 6 kilc.etcrsj
that of the ZLo 605 u3 w_a 8.5 kilo-et-rs; that of the Juno 213 Z v.u»

9 to 11 idlcuotera. iheao p-rforuancos w-ro reached by ue^ns of
i-.-iroycd sup-ren^r, -rs 1 -d-r vita sev-rj st H ;es and .;e-r boxes with
tvo to throe ;o.rs, Purth-rmorc, vttait turbine driv-B for the nfco
P'lnMO t'oro dcv-loped by ncinkol, Junkers, and 3W with a caxliua
-ar-SBUVo altitude of 11 to 1- kilcu-t-rs. Jae G-raon aoscorch In*-
titutc for *dr Transport is adlershof v_s dcv-loping -n engine for on


23 --ril-l.~e?-i:—3-Jl.jd.cy (Int. Ton Schon)
0 rt I , Cnao 1


.ltltu&o of 16 4ilcucters. oiace tr.e highest altitude a plana cm
re cl ii actually so-i kilometer* hoove the engine's Uaxiuun prcecurc
J.titud_, ItituduB of „-j rajdcatcl;* 20 icilo.ietcrB could bo ox.-ectod
in t .o coi_*3.j , ..tivwly Cv.r future.

"It v^e Jv^.-s of the -roatwst ii.uortar.co in avi-tion to fcuov
o ' 1 .o rose ic tae crew f ron any ,.iren -ltitudo. If altitudco of
.v; >rcxL- ..tcly 11 to 12 hilcueters arc exceeded, the d-n.,er for the
crow increases teraendcusly and vitn it tr.c i:.->ort..ncc of ccrrcc >o>-
din 8 fot and rcBcue devices. In J 9 -il tnc accolerat-d dov-lcyucnt
of -.i.£ altitude flying Burpussed witr.out douot the finding of
..vi .tio.u .iQdicine, voile norually avi-tion acdiciae should bo f:.r
he./, of t shales, bo ta^t tr.o pl.-nnino and const ruction of nev t:;>os
f -ircr.fi con b> o jed toon thie . cdlc-1 knowledge."

•hia affidavit in essence coafiius wr._t ihv defendant han nl-
re.dy s.id .nd ift tworn to before tne Competent authorities. I
s-c you to t he Judici -1 notice of the entiru contents.

3? ja. Sa~.il

i. «ow, Dr. 2»ff, I co-e nov to y:ur tolfcn with Dr. n..schor #

—'tcv y. ,i_d decided in principle to Carry out experiments in D.C.V.U,
t ere .a e conference between you, Volts, and 2t8Cher, in i.unich.
h.-.t v -b discussed, aid vu«i v.b _,-recd inon on t:..o occ..rion?

Lr, Eaibcr,:; and I went to ..".nich to bo. Prof. Volts. Vo
»:.t .it his institute; and on thie occasion Dr. anchor was aloo
oreBw’-t, a- w_b introduced to uc. o discuss.d tho experiments which
vc i.Vienuod to Ca ty out in D_chau. .-—scher on this occasion shoved
u# C. lettor free- tia..ler, Wi.icr. snowed t..„t ne was authorised to ?^r-
fr- hi a altitude eroeri-unts in D-chau, and that for this ’uyoso
criminals would be a..de aVaialblo, and that they would be ,viv.n an
onortunity to volunteer. Following t..eSe exoeriaeats they v. ro to
Je .ire.- sole ligfttenia,; of their nunishaw.it in scao for-.


* .s v_b the first ti-e you sav s..scccr?

Tvs, this was tue first :ia. I s-w _sch r. vas introduced


2- -- ril—i5-J10-3-^l^l ^7 (1st. 7oa Schon)

••art I, C sc 1

t: VO, : to kcobcrg and to uyself. aaa'Ow-rg did vat .sow hit, toon

cither.

.. “O v.* a otaorarzt in the Luftwaffe?

 ~‘J Was Cber-rzt, or u Stcbs-rzt in tac Luftwaffe.

Ifixut i-preaeion did Dr. r-asehcr ..aicc on you?

*- — * .ts at that ti..e an Ooerarzt or a otabt.jzt in tho Luft-
v. . e. he had _n _3ourcd but ooli£in£ and correct anpc-runco. Miring
convur«„tion with r.iu -t this discussion and on t.-.e followin , ho
showed a ':ood decree of Knowledge in _11 Uwdical fields. no told uo
ab. is work for oarl • diagnosis of cancer. fl « also told of tlio
nrcooduro which he h-d dovclcpcd for Svl.ction and testing of ra.t';o
finroro for unti-aircraft artillery. rij said th_t he had received tho
>.r ..eric Cross, becond Class, for t..is work, ho told about his
surgical training, and durin tho dircusslon of tho cxoeritiontc for
rooouc frou hi.-Ji altitude, no snowed in all questions in tho field of
aviation uedicinc vnich ca.:e -r> durin,-; tnio discussion a , rout doal
of undorst-idin, and ood insist, he /;.n no occ_sion for any
distrust of hin ch-r-cter.

4 . hip>ko had ..oaths before , iv.n huochar nen.itsion for >n-
)dri..cat-. on prisoners _v. no Cause for uis„ivia,.« in tnis rospoct.
Lipiko afl • .edic .1 Chief *r.ow hascher. a., r.-d an opportunity to
c ,;cult t.ie personal files and to Be. v.iut official and oersonallty
c. .racc-ristico i^sch-r u^d. It v_c „ a_t-.er of c-arso far ue that
She led.ic. >. Chief Wauld not -3.: ao to wort vith a -an if no h„d any
'-j.'cCtJ .ip t thin Lion's qualifications -s to character or personality,
horoover, iw.soher know "'rof. -clt:. he worked at ?rof. uoltz's

Instituto i.. , uaieh: .aid t..;e o,:ain could not ..iv_ ue tho iaprossion

*

t.v t Volts would ifer . e for collJoor^tion a nan wncu uo hUse f
c sidOVOd unreliable in an;.- w^-.

.. -iine8s, vh;. u_s another doctor called in; -nd if another
i ctor v ..8 accessary, wh; didn't you t_kc another doctor freo ;■ ur


23 -ortl-^'^TB-10—‘--Biohlcy (Iat. Voa Schoa)
. urt I, C-.8- 1


institute in wcriic? hy did you t_ho Sr. =nschcr? • '

a. *-o _ orcvnl for the c-rryin out of Si, a altitude oxoerl-
ucatc ..t l x.ci ' .a u lud o- a ,ivun to Dr. a-sch_r o- Hinoler «rnarostly
an t-:o basis of ao-o cccnocti as v.-.ica he h-d with the S3, which I
di. aot mow about ch-t tin a. no could sot v>r well bo oliuinutcd
ui co ho V-ia t.-.w cno f or v:.on ni—1-r n„d ,;iven the iwraisaion. A
second doctor was desirable i.. Cnrryia, out th- cx?eri~unts.

C nacquunt;-, it was - Gutter of course to no th_t Hnschor would
have to bo tne second doctor, moreover, he w_« * Stabtarzt in tho
Hu’tuo-fo and, so to n-ux, an expert in our fi.ld, daidnfi Saschcr
into the experiments h^d Oeon abroad upon in tne Oegianin. in a
diccunaioa with Dr. '.olts. -0 had agreed on collaboration betvoon
Dr. .aioor a.id Dr. iwschor, botvocn the ucltz institute end qy
inntit.-.ttf. Hippie*, too, h-d fra. the very be,; i rail a. intended this
coll..bor.:tiou # ?or uontho beforehand h« r.mi -,iven Hatcher a-nrovel
for t.io «tiocutloa of such experiments. Coaoequvr.tly, -s the situa¬
tion vat in opinion, the only peroon to o. considered at a second
doctor w.o -—ocher.

ow, to :«t into tao c_.o*hich vns hermetically sealed to tho

outside world, ; cu hud to fc-vo eoc.c permission fro- bclo SS nutho-

ritiec: it. vhot. did you negoci-to and wh-t was e rci*i upon and

ve..fi directives did you receive?

a. In the discussion in tn- -dtr institute, at vuich Prof.

cits, Dr. --.amber Dr. Eascher and I p-rtici?ated, it VaS agreed

•

t t—I baXiuve it V as or. the n-xt d~y—w. would go togothor to tnc
.e• ensf"anruni in ..union; there v- would settlv u few form-litios;

a.-: —ter v. .t ve would jo out tc tat concontr.tioa c^n D_ch-u,
order - discuss thw euncrimeatc vith tne camp can - nd . ai t. On the
-wit d. «e visited the iiaicnsfucRrun Si briefl; in i.unich. fhcro
e! e questions of the pans and the approval to enter tho c^p wero
discussed, sines p-sses to enter tne c—o ware not given by the c.up

35L2


2G ri 1—.«-J.-^-10-5—31 ul<l07 (I-1. Vos SehoaJ

Cart I, Case 1

cox.. am* a n t cut only b. tee l-.eichsfaofcrua,; SS; end after that wo
ve..t is a car of the ?cdch«fuchruafi Sc cut to tac Dachau cu-p.


2 Apr L ■.‘-ll-l-Galla. her (Int. vonSeboen)

Court :*o. 1

~v,r - .rien wo cut the caip coca nrian t ar.d discusser* wit;-, bin t'ne
.x.x-ri -.nts. He asked about . cir dan-orcusness. We told aim that so
far asit '.as humanely possible to jud^c one would r.ot have to cxp-ct
_it s, or any other dasnjjO . Sine ho rad no doubt bc-n oriented be¬
fore ham* about these cxp*rii<.nt s, h s-\ \\at he »ul-' ive us oxperi-
i-r.tal subjects, such as we needed i or our q risents; that ho woul ,
no loubt, bo able to <ive us a largu enough nurtoer, and that ho would do
hatever T3 necessary, tfo discussed with hia the question ol the
quarters sp to the experimental subjects, and said that durin thnt
tij'ic they should not bo allowed to work; that they had to liavo ,ood
constant observation, an to have is-.’leal observation. Vo inquired
about the food for the caap iniat.s in /moral at that time, ant* wo do-

• i'ud that the experimental subjects a xuld be r,iven ai'-'itio.ial rations,
s c j u aro ;_ivcn to every nonbor oftJu flying crews. Than wo discussed
tquality of the expert onud subjects, and the cacpconwandant also
told us that these poopl- were .r.loosional criminal*. Of course,

that thoy wen to bo fciven nn opportunity to voluntoor for these
rlvmts, and that Hlaolar would, no doubt, pardon those ixoplo
after the experiments, or ,lv-i tb. ro • o it- r a v. .ta .

*1. Dr. .luff, when you spok- of thor subjects, you have repeatedly
motioned tho quootion of the volunteering ol the experimental subjects,
au have told us that In nil o' those discussions you always c*e on ’od
tint these people had to bo volunteers, ihy, did you at that tire in
1. .2, lay so auch stress on tho Tact these experimental subjects woxv
in volunteers. has not that a nattor of course?

:.r. : air.ady describe fro.i 193’- on I worked almost exclusively
i x.*.rli its, and the r. t majority of *./_se export -nts wer- on human
u s. Thereby thousands of oxvits wero carried eud, and for all
jxxrirtnta only volun. sod on print 1 .

• * ority of thuso oxpt-rL -uts roru cxpftfci*unts by sy assistant and ay-
t U or: our cro persons. This as a Batter of course on h_ oru hand.

- . other hand, hewonr, in nr rny ol those earlier tests for


2 ’ ipr ii'i'— — H-2-GalIa h_r (Int. vonSchoon)

Coart . 1

r-ascns o: Lxporirx-nts it was absolutely essential that tl« subjects
- -- volunteers. II, or exaaplu, or._ carried out experients by

infoctlr._ the subject wit:-, soiiu- inuctious disease, then a^t^r tlx.
infection the course of the x_ .ri.Ajnt with the disease is co .pletoly
indopondent o- the export ntal subject hicsolf, and the cxa-rLcnt, or
t’w disease tak.s its course, which can of course, be influenced by the
xrcon in charge of the experiment by therapeutic neasurus, but it takes
its court topendent of the will of tho experimental subject.

In oxpurLtcnts such as ire carried out in our institute, ant*, such as
.-ora carried out in Daci-.au, tl*. person in char.; c of tho experiment is
*o -r.dor.t on th.. good will and coopcrati t he sxporiwntal subject,
rf it is not ..oseible to inwr-st -hj uxperia.ntul sublet in the

ri.-nt, it is quit^ in possible to at us.ful results. ”ho individual
v ines of the experir*;nt differ so strikingly, that it in not .osoiblo
t - oloar view of * -ual facts. In the caso of the oxpcriaionts
suah ns v.ua carried out in Dachau, oxpvri^nts for rescue fro™ hi;,h
altitudes, the oxporiajntr.l subject after havin, ovcrcoi*. t;w altitude
s'-ckn-ns, as a si. n that he ras c- -plotoly capable of actny- ay./tln, had
to .ull the ripcord of the parachuto* ’-’vithur he was ablu to do so, or
not, coul not b« decided by the parson in charge of the e xporixent,
'xcausa it -as Dart of tho oxurlccnt that the subject carry out ai

:iv„n before tho oxperiunt, after having overcome the altitude
siefcnosa* Just as a parachutist mist when he Jupps out at hi h altitudo,
n:: coon as hu coaus to again, whan ho walc-5 up fron unconsciousnosc,

. (use ull the ripcor tc open tho vrehuto.

oil, then, you ce.^ to Dachtu, arvl want int- caap. Had

\

you >iv r sa-n a concentration ca p bofora that?

A* Ho, that was tfc_ first ti t T was in a concentration ca
;. That did you see of th_ iistvlleticna in tho concentration
e.\ : , ir,., es tcislly of ab'iscs r^ vAilm in tha caap, or cri es
. it cod there, or this. * that - e i.-. p hearing about horu?

S5U5


26 Apr 1*7— -:3-ll-3-Galla hr (1st TonSchoon)

Court 1

After the talk with the caap eom-andant, which I have- just
''scribed took place in his ©fiucc, we went into the ca. p proper to look
.hj -loco where the Io'.t pressure c .labor was to be accommodated, and
:;_n wont to discuss again th- spot and the things neeossary to manipulate
th lo»r pressure chambers. The way tc this place, we had to .-ass tho
, an nt through a hi; open space, which had barracks on two sides,
u. - lie experimental subjects wer t o be housed in one of those barracks.

He looked at the rooms, and. ir. this -arrack, or the one that connects to
it, I Out not certain any .:oro, v.s the hospital of the caap. '7c also
hit the rooun at this hospital. . saw that the nodical installations
vjra not only very clean and orderly, out also were considerably better
in quality than the faciliti-s which a small district hospital in
G rainy ha l, for oxaaplo. .bother tho quantity of facilities, that is,
the fact whethor the facilities were big enough for thc:nunbcr of innatce
oi the concentration canp I could not JudgO at tho itae, an-’ I can not
;U’’toc'-t'. Since I don't know how runy inaates tho ciap h'd, tho
rfwle aaj-ip of which we aaw only a very a avail part was clean and in good
or'or. ue saw a shelter in one of the blocks which r.as also clean like

a ilitarj. barracks. Tio aim saw a uashrooa ot the disposal of tho

ten corresponded to tho do ends of hygiene in all r s. That
io Aoro or less what we saw at the concentration caap on this first
visit* .c, of course, saw nothin oi crises, or of anything llko that.

Q. In those discussions with h. SS officer of the Reichsfuehrung-

SS, wnich you B.ntionid vhon you tali.-d to tho canp commandant at
Dachau, did you hoar anythin;; from any other source os to why people
5 -r sent totho concentration caap, and what classes of prisoners were
tiv.rc?

A. 'ife know at that ti-ie that ir. tha concentration camps there were
• o ty.ws ot prisoners. TS! knew ttat on tho one hand th«.r. «crc
?ri liaals, and wo knew that on ti:_ other hand there were political prison-
r3. About other differentiations we krew nothing. On tha visit to
’“■W SOSE other categories wore tnti xd to us, which I don't

65*6


2- i.p? l;7-::-:^'-ll-L-GalIa her (lot. vcnScho^n)
Court Ko. 1

M&i&xr today.


'l* Die' you Lam at ttv. t you personally. Dr. Huff, hovr the
p-opLa Cu- a to the concentration cezzp, whether it was by dice
or’-r, or vhat facts or orders aasi .rvic’ people to tty. concentration


I

6&7


28 /.prfl-i;-<JJ-i2-X-CooIt-(inti Raanlor)-
Court So. 1

.. "0-3 known at that tin*., .s I say, that there wcr. cri-

ainnla in the concentration caaps, and it was also known that those were
ar-called ” £icherhedtsverwahrte,- people, under security custody, but
th.ru n-r. also criminals who had net y-t paid th_ penalty wh.ch was
dictated by tho Court.

These criminals, the a Sicherhcitsvenrohrtan * -nd part of
the prisoners and penitentiary inmates, is w> kn-w frm a newspaper
report, had been transferred to th- concentration camps at the beginning
nf the war* as far os I can recall the newspaper said that th.y would
be used for work in the war effort. Hew political prisoners got into a
concentration ennp wt; net known t a- in detail. It was unknown to
sany people at that time, whether it was aercl; .n th. basis of a police
rtler er decisl n cf th court, cr both, that was net dear, and as far
as I can see things new, there were probably various ways which these
people caao into the concentration camps.

Q Dr. Huff, a little while ago you said that there were
pr fessicn-1 criminals in Dachau and then you said that you were told
that they w w re "Sichcrh-itsverwahTtc-Verbrcchordo you knew what
that tern meant, what does it soon to you professional criminals and

^5icherheitsVerwahrte-V^rbreeh.r n ?

A In br ad -utlinc it wa» no doubt known that .very cno kn.w
h.t professional crinin Is n;ant and also what ''Sicherheit3Ve^wahrtc ,,
a.*.nt, then, and n w I understand by professional criminals, that these
criminals who h-.v. been rcp-,at-dly convicted, who have Served several
sj\tences, and now in their last c«nviction arc given a certain tom
t: s^rve nd sc called Sicherheitsverwahrun is pronounced. Under this
t-ra I understood that these people, after serving their sentences pro-
'-r, are n't freed but remain under sup.rvision, since the Court docs
• vt it can take tho responsibility of releasing these profes-

« a"l criminals into society.

Q And until you had this talk with the SS officer and the
i^ndant at “achau, at this tlae, did you yourself See the prisoners


25 April-M-GJ-12-2-Gc:k-(int. Render )-
C:«rt No. I

1 r. Dachau, md if so, xhat clothing did they iracr and what irisi nia?


A ' hv-n we visited the carp, we saw very few prisen-rs, cnly
Incividunl cnc&« *c wore tela that the prison_rs were Verkin?. Thu con¬
centration camp Dachau has a large bread factory,a porcelain factory
bi hurt arden fer nodical h-rbs and spicus, end also bi^ agricultu¬
ral concerns, and core cr less all innates of th_ carp were used fer
rark in these various enterprises. The prisoners when we saw in the
camp w re the stripud suit and they had insignia on their clothing. *Ye
sere t Id what the insi. nia meant, that a .^reen triangle meant a cri¬
minal, that a red trian.lt meant a political prisoner.

w On the basis of these a„re-ments and discussions which
y:u have described. Dr. Ruff, the lew pressure chasber, I believo it was
in February, 19li2, I believe was sent fr.m Berlin tc uachau, whe c^ve
the order for this?

A Well the DVL, the G-raan Research Association, for Aviation
1 ->ve the order far this transport. I asked the meter pe> 1 to five us
a driv-r for the transp rt of the chimb-r.

Q Did the- low pressure chamber go directly free B.rlin to
Dachau cr was it first sent tc kunich?

a Since t..c transport cf the low pressurv chamber was on the
autobahn the ehadb-.r was first sent to unich and since thi3 was a Luft-
vaffe Vehicle, it was t'’ be tum»d over to a member of thu LuftW^ffu.
kascher was net in "lchau t this tine. He was in Munich cr in Schcngau
If the driv_r had be directly free B.rlin tc Dachau they sdoht have ar¬
rived at an inconvenient tia-, p-zhape in the venin.: ,.and would have
had tc findsee- responsible p-is-n tc whcc they ceuld f.ive th- keys

nd the pipers. They could net .;c int the carp proper since th.y had

. •

have passes issued t them p-rsen-lly for that purp.se which could

h‘t be issued by the Camp Coo; and ant at "achau but only by the Rcichs-
•Uchrcr SS. In the discussion ;f .all of th-Se miner qu-stiens, when we
visited th- camp Ceemeandant at *>=chau he finally .sked us whether the
”iv_r knew at all what kinr of experiments wure going tc bo carried out.


23 c ?rH-£-3J-12-3-Cook-(int. Ranaler)-
C urt K-. 1

r. 1 r. s id, r.f caurs-, no, '-ad then he said h. wished that the chamber
w:uld be tum-d ever tc reach,r in Munich, since otherwise the drivers
night spr-.-.d runcra that incites cf tho crnc-ntraticn corns were be in.;
selected for service in the Luftwaffe'. For that reason the chamber
went first to llunich and was turned over to ^refesser oltx the'ra and
he turned it over te Raschur.

Q Witness, ycu cnee si n-d an affidavit, 18 October, 19h6,
which is indecun-nt book 2 cn pa - h6, ccuncnt Ii37, exhibit h2. In
this affidavit yaur atateconts Were f.rnul ted to this effect and I quote

" That is the lew pr.ssure cteaber was takoi to Dachau, I beg
y u parden, it was taken to Munich, inet-ad ~f directly te "acheu, so
that the drivers w-uld not find tut what the final destinati n was."

Is this 3taUcent as it is frrnul-.tcd her,, connected with
what . u have Just described, the order of the Ccaoandant at .achau?

A I have already said that in erde:’ tc avoid run,rs to
the effect that concentration canp innates w,re already beinf, selected
I r the Gcrann Luftwaffe, the casp Cennindant demanded that the cham¬
ber be turned Ver in kwiich.

Q This lew pressure chasbcr case tc hunich overland and
then tc “achau, who ten issu-d th- travel rders far this trip and who
supplied the fuel?

A The travel erd-rs for this trip, sine, it was a ailitary
v,hicl- wer- given by a oil .tiry authority at cur airfield. The DVL, the
-X rLa,nt 1 station f r aviatien, s a civilian aeency, could not is¬
sue such order* and .iv- such approval. Th- luftwaffc agency at the
-ir £i_ld filled cut th- trav,l -rd,rs aft_r consulting the neJical
Insp.ct rate, that is Hippke, since at this tine it wis already extre-
~»ly difficult t~ g-t approval fer such a len trip f r which'Di-sel
il ~'\a necessary as fu-1. Diesel ~il was ala st exclusively reserved
- r submarines and I beli-ve thi* trip cf th- lew pr.sr ir- chaabor un-
-r it's rwn power w-.s, ns far as I can r-call, the last axjor erip of
wchlow pr-ssur. chamber under it's own p w-r. Lat-.r it hid to b_ taken
7 r ilr-.d.


'6550


25 April-u-0 J-12-U-Cock-( int.. RatEler)-
C:urt Nc, 1

k Then lzt*-r did yen discuss anythin? with any cne about
the quality of the -xp^inental subjects, nr was nothing said
.bout that?

a Thu statement about the quality cf the cxpcriaontal sub¬
jects, that is that they w.-uld be prcfessic.nl criminals, that they
r uld bo allowed tc volunteer, and that they would pet sod_ reward cf
scfcc sert ter participation in the expwrinonts, wan ^ivc first by Pro¬
fessor eltz, nd second, ernfira.d by Hippk-, and, third by Hascher,
end fourth, by th^ C.acp Cc*oanhnt.

TIE PRESIDENT: Th- Tribunal will n r bw in recess ui til one-

thirty.

( Th^. Tribunal adjourned fer th_ no n r-c^ss)


'f«7 .

25 or-ril-arJr-13-l-^cstor (Iat. P oo l er)

Court I

oT.^asoca o-ijbica

(/'.a k~_ria. reconvened at 1330 hours, 28 --i>rll 1S47.)

—- -.SLaL: 2 -c .’riousol is -,\-in in cession.

EE. SI—>EJI—3 P-J57 Eosunod.

DI_*C: ^KlS-naJ (Continued)

ir sb. isi.-z

(Couno-1 for the defendant .c^f):

' 4 . Jeforc tee recoss you told us wh-t you fcaow Wore tho
Dachau .syori-.onts about the «xo^ri..cntJ. subjects, whether the/ wore
voluntary, whether they v v r- crininals, whether they received rewards.

I should li>ce to iu:ov vsioth-r si-il-r indications u„r. u-do to you
about tho quilt of th. experiment .1 subj-cts while tr.« exo-riionto
wv.ro continuing, th-t is, of tor tr.v.' aJ. ulroady started.

. Yes, also -ft.r th. Oefiinnla,; of jio experiments tnoso
i ctors wore confimod to ae. *hen aOiOor,. c-jo from E-chaU to J-rlin
frr t..o first tiua and ra>orted to no .Mat the ox.>orlncr.to, wo na¬
turally disc: a sod tho question wh^t experimental subjects wero pl.xod
ct our (■inooal, end on tnis occ.sion xaibor,; confin-ed to no tu,.t they
wore placed ct car disposal, and on this occasion -'oubor,- confirmed
so uo that they were all voluntary, .ndttut v. wor. there concerned
with c:iunals.

38. r.RITZ SaUi-its Kr. President, I had in ondod to quote two
testimonies of witnesses, the testiuony of SS-Ob.r .rup-cn-ruhror -olff,
who nas boon u.nticnod here raooatodly, and also the tostinony of
Profesoor doctor Hipuho, who also Vos mentioned on numerous occasions.
Originally I intended cjnsidorin,; t..o importance of tholr testimony,

So hc.j: thai personally on the witneso stand. Ir. the no-ntiuo, nowovor
*.'^Y^s<itno'«a 8 Were alrojiy no-rd orally ia tne nilch l'ribinnl
dawaTteiH'^kd-wore cross examined subsequently. 7or tr.at rc„e-a,

^ s \

I decided not td examine these witnesses here. If we »ould Oixcinc
t -.ec two rLtaoqses here it v»ld cost us op .roxi-.atsly ^ d- 0 ’ 6 , for


23 orJil-.*--?-13-3-?oattx (Iat. —oiler)

Court I

tbu * is exactly the loagta of tluo -coy t->od dowustoirc. fncrcforo,
r should acroly liJea tc quote excerpt# frao ta&ir testimony. I not
f -ola;: to do tn-t today because the eupplcu-ntal docasent ooo> in
Ulch theso two testiaonios are contained is not yet available to you,

3y taicrrcv uoraiag t.:ia supplemental book will oo uvailuolo to you
<t ad than I shall bo in a position to re-d excerpts frou thoso two
tcsti-ionioe,

\uU H-JOYi Your honors. I dr n't Jcoow vfcether def-isc counool
taowa the procoeduro nocassary, for the introduction of tho testimony
boforo tho .ribunU .-rxiocr II will only uocoosit..tc him rocoivin* a
copy of the record and Caving tho record certified to by the Secretary
Waoi-a of that tribunal, end tnen to request t::0 -rio-w-1 hero to
taJco Judicia notice thereof, -ad by doing •«>. - * oa,t ,c0 th0 ro, '* on
or necooaity for readin,, into the record here the to.ti-ony beforo
frlbuflul i Timber II. It uay oe done that •imply. I don't
wf.othor he is awj-o of that or not.

DIw 7.121 baW-hl *r. President, I have already ot-ted ta..t I
not cing to read this Ion., record in verb-tiu, out shall only
ouoto a few excerpts wnich *ncar to oo of particular importance. I
doi^ th_t in the interest of brevity of the proceeding and for
tw ca-c real on I forwent tho opportunity to er.^ino tho.o witnesses
Personally because tn-t would have cost us tf> -roxim-toly four A.'C'i.

Sto pros-c tion -probably wold not oo able to got any moro frai those
two witnesses in th.ir cross agination than the case downst-irs
in the Kilch .’ribunal. ’-hat I su^ated now is intended to accelerate

'roc codings.

HooJ : Tour honor. I -groe with Dr. Sautcr 10?,. IsUJ uoroly
tr in, to iafoxu ai~ th-t to have it certified to by the Secretary
of that tribunal will not delay us here when ho introduce it tomorrow.

_Counr-1, tr.w prosecuting attorney is correct


F5S3


28 .-?ril-j^?-lJ-S-7cBtcr (In*., .-x-lor)

Court I

if the Secret-will certify tnc entire testinoay of
tacso f j vitnesseg, tnis Jribunol vill t-Jco J a'dclol nctico cf
th_t testimony. It io tu-a -v-ilablo before tnts .Tiounol for both
parties anf c-a be referred to in argument. It will then be noced
b t *.o rjo ua c l in its ontlr-ty and counsel uoy coll attention in
uaont „.*l in nis orlef to those portions which ne do-us important
to his def-QSe. Of course, me evidence is alre^d; in tue transcript
foru. a'ho Sccrotary-Gmer-l will <ust certify th-t so .:ar.y pa£Oa
of tttO uLica.-jvohcd transcript -3 co the testimony of thoso witnescos
Jufore .ribanal II in tfc.t testiueny is before teis friounul for Ju¬
dicial notice, and the .‘rbunal vill t^c Judicial notice of that
testimony. "It acaas to -c th-t would -ccouplish crory puiposc th..t
counsel for the defendant huff, and the otr.er dofaidants whooo
dofenso vill be put in next, th„t that would unsvor over;' purpooo
that the defendants could desire.

ad. SX*'Z d-VlJi: Shank you, *.r. President. I oa in full a.%ro&-
nc.'.t with :■ on. "In th t connection I should liicc to read an oxcornt
fro. an .iff id vlt by —roert til sc now sics vhicc c be found in a.'cxv-
nor.t Boole huff, Ifccuuent ..0. 11 on p^;e -.5, .ad valcn was already sub¬
mitted to the n»S during tx.e c_0e e, -Inst tho So. Aio document
will receive the cxniblt ounotr 10. fhis aerbort ilocncvslco fron
wlioo t is effid-vit originates w.s „ Polish Cou-unist. ho wont to
Dechnti Concontr_tion C^--o -ftor having been sentenced previously to
oight years penitentiary oec-use of refusal to undergo military
service, me first iart of that affidavit is not important and I
ns.: ; cu moral- co tJeo notice of it.


6554


28 -?r 1 l-.r*-'?" 1 ---1- 3r o.« (lat. H-aler)

Court I

5, £;._* (Ccatiaaia,:) Ho bore epchco about nousing uad troat-
utt it .'.c received in DochaU and ho .ad he v.e vOl treated jn& «uito
aati.fioc* I Bhould ody lilco to re-d too tvo sa^ll p-r,;rohs at
tac ond of tao affidavit. I would lilco to re-d tnc- bconU»o t:»o. refer
to cspc.-iuoatB. ih« oao but the let pj-^r-ph, p-*c 4? of tho 5«sba
edition of toe document, rc-d»:

■r-.ria,. tnc vfcolo of uy stay ic I .a* no i-ut-ac*. of Idll-

ia; or nnltrontinc of prisoners, with the exc-ption of the ■ outh
education* iioa.uro. ordered by the Heich.fucaror-SS; tav#o wore
corpora peAlibuwat. *11 ca.o. of execution of .hooting or hnn/.ia'i,
of watch I hoard, wore Oa*od on court-uartid Verdicts.

■ I have never actually See-u condition. li*c those I saw in filn.
and rv.d abottt in the newspaper. -ftcr the capitdatioa. about ool-
.rontiioat i \ the froruun concentration c<£-ps. 2 fcnov, certainly,

ROO -t aodiod oxn-riaont. or. prisoner.. I had repeated flpportunitlo.
cf BpoJcin.* to prltoner, wno had presented thai.ulvc for tha.o
onoriuonto. I lenov nothin.: of cho nature of thv.o o«o~riaonto.
Pri.oner. who roport-d for tho.a experiment*. did bo, -• far a. I
fciow, voluntarily, .» in thi. va they could earn tneir own f ro. dc.;

and rehabilitation Vwll a. benefiting their dependent..*

Aio offid-vit la certified in tho proper way us I *uid beforo.

It originate. fro., a ’’oli.h Coauuni.t wno w a . in.eTnod -t Dachau for
q nv, .‘oor of 7 car*.

Dr. Buff, tho experiment. in Dachau then bo^an. '•hat order did you
have which -OeWitted you to .end your co-worXers to IXaohau, including

Dr. ?.Cuiber/;l

a. 3r. Haibcrg rccoivcd the order to d-rif;- tho auction

vnethuv* a protection of airplane pc.encor. Is possible at n hoi-ht
of 20 maietor. dtitudo. Tor th-t puno.o no*., to Carry out ocr-
tdn parachute experiments. 3> parachute eroeria^atc wo under nt-iad
exporiaent. whore u man who he Juaoed fro- tnc plane would f -U e. if

6555


2c ril—anJP- 14 -J>-Sr o 36 (Int. Healer)

Ccurt I


he w..sa't opening hie parachute. Vader 80 -c_llcd slow sinking cay>-
rinoats wc undorst_-.d exocrinents \aiica arc similar to conditions
vaoro a r.oct down to the ground when his parachute is opened.
D-xing thos. uxncriaonts noaberj; v j to puy uttontion to tho so-called

A

src-uobilloatlon which is the peculiar incident wnore tho huann ooing
uhen descending troL. high altitude regains hie full consciousness
t the point whor*. when _scending ho lost his consciousness. In tho
c.-.se of t. is ossignauat with waich Hou'oerg wont to D.cknu Ve v.r. co>*
corr.od with a very cle_rly United order to clarify u practical .ad
lhport.at question.

Q. Dr. Huff, during this trial wo are spujein.; of uodical

c3rjeri;'.oncu on hum: bangs. In othor words, :«-dic_l experiments
oa liuh.a ooi.vis. I would be v-ry interested to enow wactr.^r this
cr^.riuonts, ta- e :>crL.ont In an airplano, or o^urinents with tho
low pi.ssuro chaabor in order to >rotoct nooplo from high altitudo can
bo put on the §ai.o lord ns uodicul onpwrin-nts, ouch u« infectious
tcnorL.onts, etc., or wasn't there any o-clc-l difference *t.ic.. could
•ifiA *"C wf’ -ct ir. the legal evduation of tnoso Oinerinents7

n. If you liio you could divide uedied crjeri-onts into two

- .in rouos. On tho one hand you h-vu t..o „ctual clinlcd axoori~ants

V.: ch, for inst.-nce, onion,; infection exocri-oats, In iho caso of
t.’.-s.. clinic. 1 oxieri eats the -air. in ch..r^o of the ox-jorl«,cnt is not
rc.li;' close to tno actual course of tuc cxioriuonts or, at an;* r. to
v.r oadl oxtent . Ac physiological wqoerii.cnt on the other
a -- bo v.ach these eviction exoari^ents belong c-vc an ontirely
--r.it Oaoh. -hey ore performed on had thy p.rsons, do not bring;
- ;: "5 -vy illness and corcally r.sult in no d-iia..o to xalth of tho
or oven in the do-th of tno .ncperiacatd subject. It ir their
bo investigate the Bond physiologicd living conditions or to
; s*. -he -filiations governing those conditions. In order to cite

- Tt ~. simple oxauule one c-n find out vh_t the reaction of tho ic.rt


6556


28 — ?nl-jr-JI v -l4-3-.-ros# (Int. a^ul©r)
Court I


Is uiv*or aomal conditions for last nee, now th© heart reacts whoa
standing, w:-a lyine, after easy war*. etc. In order to stich to
taio oxfiolt one c-a also try to ascertain to what extent tho
hc.vrt oe burdonod with, for last .ace, physical activity, lor
such purposo I -ai th..t too exocriaental suojccts carry out
physical or.vrciso up to the tluc of exhaustion. -Urlag that tiao
I obeciv© ..11 the things wr.ich or© of o-rticul-r interest to no.

/-.rla suen burdening ©ro©ri..cats, os we coll it in uodicine, practi¬
cal qu-ati.-is often *>1^' - i-rticul-r nort. la order to st^' with
this c .vrole of the function of tho aoj-t tr.« )r_ctical questions which
will crop vq>, for instance, -re tho followm;;: to wh_t extent oaa
a huuan o-i.\ , giv-a certain nourishment —id -‘.tuning a curtain e,.o,
bo burdened. In our exaeriaents as v© earrlod then out in DaChou
It v.\a to o© ascertained whether t~is burdenia;, by n.. 7 ing a o©rncn
onxvchuto frou nigh „lti:ud©, rutaiacd with!a nonial reactions of a
hu^.a ooin« .nsd t..o pr^ctic.,1 qu.stioa is vheta©. tho huu-a p.rcon
vould cv-.oa fret, its ultit-ido eic.ci.co early or.ou,,h to carry out
io decision to unfold tnc p-r-chutv entirely. It is L-.-port-nt that
in t.in ri'155 of physiologic-1 ©xo.ri..oats c-n incro-s© this burdening
by fiORToos so that ocw carefully ©puro-ch©* the linit.tions of
’josBlbillty. *hc entire ox>©ri~tfnt is c nriod out within tho gphero
of aUVml. Contrary to ta© clinic -1 ©m©:i.jcn;e, for inst-no©,
infection cricriueats v;iich ur© always carri.d out in tho sohero cf tho

ubaorncl.


'<• Dr. Ijiff, I should liico to r©vert to tho ono but 1-st
question . >ut to ycu. I have just heard it v-s translated th_c oaberg
had h .'A tho >rdor to clarify tii ^roolo. at a hoi.fct of 25000 iecors.
Didn't I understand you to s_y th..t is order ro.d ta..t the problai
V B t; bo clarified at a hoi.-pt of 20000 actors?

a. Yes, that is correct. I s-id 20,000 neters.

-r. huff, on© d-y sc© ©X'>ri_cn;s were st Jted at Dachau;


6557


26 joril—rf-J3-14-4-CrroBs (Int. haulerJ
Court I

’-ore '0' "ourself In D_ch*.u durin,: taose exo-riaents and did you
urso.ially convince mrself how tues. —.--..riJeata wore Curried, out,
or u.'ji t.a .t not ’.ho cusof

a. i'.’.. t is correct, at one tiuo I vent to Dcchuu while tkccc
or»wri.tatt wcr. curried cn and I observed thei.

Do ou know when, uvproxiuatcly, tk..t v_a.

a. Yee, th^t vj durir«; the first veoks of these or: .rinento.

Unfortvn-.tcly j Ca a no longer ,ivc you tee exact date.

.» Den you tell us arproxlii-tely hcv Ion--; after the beciunine
of the cro-ri -onts you v.nt .hero, whether one v .r., 1-i d^o or a
uonth later,

I assuuo aoout ihre. Weeks later, I vent th-ro about throe
woars xftwr tac bcr.l&aiiv; cf the oxneri-ontn but as I said I can't
sjy exactly,

I fully uaderst_nd, Daria,-; . our personal experience in
Dcchuu v.en cu observed tkes- exo-ri-eots for tho first and last tine,
did OU .lto See tho i il-..t eO USed for theSe UUrjCBCS.

a. Yes,

Did you speak to these nccpl., I ec.n tho iaantos?

•w Tv-s, I did before and aftor the e»*erinuntc I spoko to thooo
in -.at os V : Participated in tno experi-entf which I personally sc.v.
and, in . dditioa I h..d tiuo, f rex. five to six hours, to novo aian&
tftoso iristnors, t'n_t wore used for tho wctoori.-.ontB .ad talked
to thoa abtut various .utters.


6558


26 /vpril- a-0 J-15-1—f. irmr-( ir.t. K»cnlcr)-


Court No. 1

5 Dr. Huff, did these persons waer any particular rod or •
.irotn tee*. and I mean the prisoners whe you saw when you rent to Da¬
chau? Lux-in. th_ «cperi_:ents*tn ycu yourself wore there did tho experi¬
mental subjects wear any badge? Did that coc„ to your notice?

A Th- experimental subjects ttfiich were used for cur expe¬
riments iTuro housed together at that experimental station. They all wore
- bad^e which was the same in the case of all them. It was the green bod-
belonging tc the criminal.

Q Did ycu find.out, through c, nv.rsaticn, for what crimes
these people had been incarcerated?

a Rcohere, as w.U .* nascher, told ao '.bout the crimes that
xcr* committed by these persons, and I think that the witness Neff, who
w;a examined here, raid somethin., about that. Today I only remember the
ease cf twe of these experimental subjects of whoa one was sentenced
because cf thoft and the other because of printing false money.

Q feu said that tho inmates who you saw were the green badge-
thc badge f r prefessi-n :1 criminals, erv-n't there any political priso¬
ners there who ordinarily rculd have had the red badge?

A These experimental subjects I saw all wore the some badi;cj
namely, the re^n square .

Q Lr. Ruff, did ycu entertain .nyntheughts when ycu wore in
Dachau as to whether people who you saw there were Germans or foreigners?
tfccther they were Aryan: or Jews? ..i.othor they were civilians or priso¬
ners cf war? I aa not askin' ycu wether yeu arc thinking about that to¬
day, but whether ycu thought about that it that tine or whether you lear¬
ned seme thin about it? I emphasize - at that tine.

A nt that time I cid net think about that point. That for the

•

r.oscn chat I did n:t know that any forui ne-rs were housed in any con¬
centration camps, net tc speak of prison, rs of war. That I only heard
hcr t during the trial - that there were any prisoners of rar in Dachau
or in any concentmti:r. caaps. I cannot rteenixr bavin roe in the news¬
paper bef'i-e this trial that any prisoners of war wt-rc in concentration


28 Apxil-A-GJ-l5-2-iterrow-(int. R-astltr)-
Court He. 1

c-=pa. rroo the ccovoraaticn I had with the inaetes burin.; ay stay in
Dachau I can say today, with certainty, that nom. of these incites spoke
any other lingu ro but tertian. Certainly, there was no experimental a
subject there who case free abroad, and if I reaenb-r correctly, Huff,
has also testified that these foreigners did not wear the bad; e of a
pr fessl nal crLuinal.

J Durin convcrsaticns with these people did you discuss the
quest! n ~i the voluntary nature? If ycu didn't discuss that question
expressly, what inpressicn did you Jain fraa these people as to that
aspect?

A I didn't discuss the question cf their voluntary nature
specifically because I had already known before the e D*.rin-nt3 started
that we were .T -in to use voluntary .•’ubjocts. Ly co-wcrkcr, Rcob-rg, on
the occasion of his first trip tc Berlin, told nc that they would be vo¬
luntary professional crLeln.ls and I therefore nad ne occasion to dis¬
cuss that question with then, however, I -sked one of these people -
since I was interested in that subject - how nany hid vrluntocrcd or ra¬
ther, hew nany had r<-? rtod fo r these ixooriocnts, .nd ho suid that this
nis a nu.-ab.-r of aixty-s-ven and that Stabs lrzt Raschcr had ton selected,
th« c.o roups -hich were suitable fir uir cxpericents.

Q itness, s ycu have s_id, you went to Dachau once after
the ecp.:ic.nt3 has started, leu observed th_a yourself and convinced
y-us elf cf their exacuti n. hy aid ycu do that? Could ^ou not roly upon
yur cc-verktr, Dr. Berfbr, -nd if so, *hy did ycu , o frea Berlin to
hunich in order tc observe the experiments?

« Dr. Renterg ws3 ay eldest ccllaboratcr. Ever since Jinua-
ry, 1938, he w.s a.n±_r of ry institute ;nd had engaged in particular
in nodical quest! ns >.ccurin' durin.: air accidents and durin altitude
c id.-nts. By rrd-r of th*. i^dical incorperite cf the Luftwaffe, he in-
v-3tif ated -11 air incidents - ;ir accidents burin th- years fr*= 1938
tc 19L0, and he ccapiled a very -xtensive rep rt cn these natters where
•'*- established that durin. aviaticn, air incidents occur cr th- reason


23 rt pril-A-3J-l5-3-Korrcw-(int. E==l-r.)-


Ccuxt He. 1


that cre-s were net infcrccd tncu.h about the peculiarities cf altitude
sickness. On the basis cf that report it ires ordered that ell crews of
airplanes whe had to fly in hi h altitudes had tc bo subjected cncc eve¬
ry two y .rs tc altitude sickness in order, by own experience and by ob-
3-rvin their friai-s, they would .?ct acquainted with altitude sickness.
Rambert had p.rfcrscd nu=_rcus experiments of various nature upon hin-
self in this sphere nf high altitude, fithin ay institute it was his task
to infrro youn ur collaborate: about altitude sickness. In other words,
he had tc tench cur y ur.g:r assistants and, in this oonner, he had to
per!era hi-jh altitude cncri.-a.nt3 r.last every day rn either as the aan
in char:. r f the exp-rLaents cr as the .xperinental subject. During 'll
thA.se cxperLi-nts I had c'.nsid.red Rcab.r.. as a careful and reliable
experimenter and physician. In spite cf that, hor.v.r, I went tc Dachau
personally in erd-r tc observe th .s_ experiments personally. ..henev.r
:ny .xp.risents w.ro carried out outside cur institute I was ir. th. habit
.f doing that and I aa ref.rring to wind tunnel o.p. risen ts at 9rounachwcig
and -ther experiment* at Pxchlin. T.ais visit tc tcchau had nothing at
all tc dc with ay .valuation of th^ reliability of Dr. • laocxr,, but it
T-jj in acccrd.nce with a principle to which I always adhered whenever
oc/.rln.nts wcr. carried out bey nd tfx liclte of cur institute.

Q Then the cip.riaentr at “achau, Dr. Ruff, *.rc not p.rfor-
a.d by ycurs.lf, but by tn co-dof.ne.nt, Dr. R.cb.r;, and by th. repeat¬
edly nenti-ned Dr. Roachur. "n-t -.ns the relati n of subordination? Jas
® p . R^nber* subordinate t Lr. “asch.r durin. these cx,*crinunts, -r was
Dr. Reseller sub rdinate t Dr, Racfc.rg? -.s thi3 question cf suberdim-
ti:n ever discuss.d cr, at any rate, Waat was y ur understanding?

* Durin those exp rim_nts we ..re ccnc.rn.d vrith scientific
collaboraticn. This had been a* rood upon. This, in -ffcct, means that
a.ith.r n. W03 subordinate to the -th.r. This scientific collaboration
- *-^c.n the representatives of various institut.-s is quite cus unary in
-•cl .nee. Dr. Rcec.r,-: was rcsp:r.3ible for th*. scientific part cf those
~-h altitude i.Txriaents bac .us. h. was the on- who taaa olr-ody in the

€ 5€1


28 . -pril-n-GJ-15-L-Karr~<r-(in', RMaaler)-
Sourt So. 1

-‘st cerri-d ut such ejqj.rin.-nta. “e w s the on. who Set u? th_ experi¬
mental plan and had n^at c'-perience in that record. Within the ccnccntra-
ti n co=p, th_ rv, 1: tic ns of sufcc rdina tl; n was different because :-asch-r

had had the appr'val for the p_rfonaance of th*-s. .xperinonts and thcr.-

*

for. was responsible to Hiaal.r. Renberg, on th_ ether hand, within the
carp was r.sp:nsibl. tc th- carp cccaandcr and to the SS legal system.
Th't was na special case, but evory person whe h. a entered the cencentra-
ticn camp had to acknowledge this fact by his signature b.fcn. given the
permission t~ vnt_r tnc camp. I had t- si^n such a paper when visitinj
the c ap. Every p.rsen had to obey ill the rders by the SS, while in
the c-anp, and c-rtainly hod n* ri£ht what sc ev.r to issue within the
carp. Dr. Ruff, in vari.us i :cuaento c ntained in the document Veluae
92 of the prosecution the expression can be found that Raach-r ms ettai-
Ud to th- bVL station at Dachau, D7L leaning 3-rnan cxp.riaental Insti¬
tute fer nviati:n. ?cr inctancr, I found that expression contained in
a flU notice of ws. Rascher, dated the 28th April, 191j2, Docuuent
26L, nd also in a Utter by the witness Vclf, directed tc Hippke,
addressed tc the 16th of April, 191,2, Dceuncnt # 318. On tho ether
h:nd, Reppke told no personally that ther was no branch in Dachau of
the D V . H-w about that situation?


6562


*pril 28-^-BK-16-l-3 :~iab (Int. Romclcr)
Court Ho. 1


.. I did not at all concern myself about R sch-r's being
detailed to these experiments, either before the experi¬
ments or durir .3 the experiments. Hascher did not belong
to ny institute, end his being dotuiled, thereforo, oould
not concern no. when the "experiments startod, Roscher
had belonged to t he institute of Prof. »«olts which had an
..',r Forco a ;oncy, and. if, os I - o from the docunonts,
thoro wore differences between ./oltz and H scher, R ec.'ier
tried to bo detailed to soma other ugoncy. In this con¬
nection, his wifo suggestod th..t ho bo detailed to tho
DVL at Dachau. ..'o suoh brunch aver oxi3tod. ..t no tirao
was there a branch of the D7L at Dachau or in any other
concentration oeap.

In the your 1942 there wa3 no brunch of tho DVL ut all,
with the exoeption of un institute for souplunes, which
was located nt Hamburg. Haschor, before tho oxporimont 3
and during the experiments when he was in Berlin, wus
not ovon dotailod to ray institute there. t!y institute
was c clviliun ogonoy to which ho could not possibly
have boon do tailed.

..h-never any soldier or officer was to work with us
temporarily as a 3 u.st this fact always presented
particular difficulties. wus then detailed to an
«ir Force agency, ar.d this agency in turn pernittod him
to work with us u3 q guest. Othorwiso, u detailing to a
branch at Dachau vras not po 33 iblc for two reasens; ono

reason boC-U30 no 3uch branch existed, and, seoondly, that

*

if ^ny such branch existed it would have lx.cn u civilian
agency.

In addition, if any such dotailinj had been carried out,
DVL would have had to h.vc been informed, and this report
iould have been sent back automaticully by our personnel


5563


..pril 28—.-BK-16-2-ScUwab (let. Henmlor)

Ccurt No. 1

department containing the indication that any such detail¬
ing was not possible from a military point of view.

In .'.ippko's letter of reply to *olff, which refers to
th- suggestion of tho detailing of Raschor to Dachau,
you find that Kip.-kc does not agroo to that suggestion;
but, ruthir, writes that Luftguu VII (..ir Ciau VII) would
carry out this request.

^ Dr. Ruff, whon did you gain knowledge that Dr.
Raschor's work with Rrof. Wcltz had teon terminated, and
that Reschor was once more p.rt of hi3 unit, whioh was
then located at Sohoaguu. •hen w.;s th..t? C-n you toll
us approximately?

.. .men I was at Daclwu -t th_t time I heard there woro
cert-in differonoos with aoltz ar.d Ruscher, and th„t
Raschor had been detailed away from that institute or
was to bo sont s.ir. y. Sinco this conoerncd internal
affairs of the institute I did not worry ubout it.

% Witness, there is a certain contradiction to be
found in the documents v/hioh uro uvuilublo hero. Tho
witness Hoff who was oxumlnod her*, has 3tatod on the 17th
of Dcocmber that ho knew with certainty that you woro in
Dachau once in order to look at these oxporiments. Ho
3cid that was on tile 22d of February, 1942, tho day of
his birthd .y. Dr. Romberg, your co-worker3, has made
an affidavit, inhibit 40, Document 476, wherein ho states
in paragraph five, and I quote: "I, Dr. Romberg, re-
nomber that Dr. Ruff at least visited Dachau twioo, on
which occasion he observed the L-xporiments."

How often wer. you ro -liy in Dachau in order to look
at th- experiments?

., For tho purpose of observing the experiments I wont
to Dachau anoe. In spite of that fact, however, both


,»pril 28-«-3K-16-3-Sohw2b (Inc. Hammier)

Court No. 1

testimonies arc correct when Hoff s ys that ho saw no in
Dachau on ono occasion when I locked at the experiments;
-nd -ionberg is also corroct whon he says that I was at
Dcohuu on two occasions.

On ono occasion I was thero before tho beginning of the

«•

exporinont in order to discuss then; and on the second
cina I wo3 there whilo these experiments ..ore going on.

; Dr. Huff, ut tho tine you were ir. D.ichuu in order to
.tt-nd th- wxperinonts personally - that was approximately
at the beginning of March, 1943 - what did Dr. Homborg
^nd Dr. Kosohor report to you about the progress up to
that timov ..’ere you told that the experiments had been
joing on according to progr.xi and without any incidents?

Or wore you told that there woro any incidents?

.» ..hilo I was in Dachau ut that tine Dr. Haschur and
Dr. itaaberg told -./hat exparinonts they had performed.
They said that the oxporinonts had boon joing on proporly
and they didn't tell ae about any ineidonts whioh may
have ocourrod.

w You said before that on t.iat ocoasicn you observed
tho experiments at Daohau. You discussed various matters
with the experimental subjects. Did you perhaps also
3peuk to the experimental subjects, asking them whothor
thoy knew anything of incidents which occurred, or
whether any damages to their health resulted during the
course of the experiments?

.. Naturally, I d id not ask the experimental subjects
about these natters; I only asked tho people in charge
tf tho experiments. I osiwd th- experimental subjects
only bow they felt aft.r th- experiments, etc. They
confirmed what I saw with my own eyes, namely, that
.part frau a cart-in tiredness alter tho experiments,
they stiff ero.A no complaints whatsoever.


6565


-.pril 26 -—-3K-16-4 -Schwab (In-. Rafcmlur)

Court I*o. 1

i ..hilo you waro personally presont in Dachau, what did
you loarn or whit could you establish about the amount of
tha experimental subjects, and whether tho semo subjoots
were us A for the experiments, or whether they changed
in tho case of tho respective experiments? Dr. Romberg'3
experiments didn't only take piece for a few day3, but
extended ovor a period of several wooks; what did you
loarn about that? h .t was tho amount? >'oro they tho
same ones or did they change?

I already said onut a group of experimental subjects
was housed ut this experimental station. It was planned
from the outset and it was in effect oarriod through
that these experimental persons wuro to bo available for
che ontiro series. The amount of theso experimental
subjoots ranged bet woo n ton to fiftcon persons.

„ Dr. Huff, , .«e know today on the basis of tho documents
which have been submitted that during the Daohau high-
iltitudo experiments - ;-.nd I am speaking quite gonerally -
fatalities ocourr^d. ./hon and in what nanner did you for
the first time hear about thuso fatalities?

.. Th *.t was n-/. roxicntely at th- end of ..pril, or tho
beginning of May. Dr. .tocibjrg o.mio to Berlin end re¬
ported to a. that Hasohor, in addition to our experiments
for tho purpose of protecting the p.oplo from high
altitudes, was performing other experiments, as ho suid,
upon orders of Himmler; and that one fatality occurred
during thos- ^xperiaunts of Raschor. Rasoher, os Romberg
reported to me, w;s carrying out an investigation about
the reaction of the heart during the so-culled •’prossuro
illness."

V ./hat kind of an illness is that?

* That is acro-c:;bolisE.

6556


I


„prtl 2S-«-BK-lo-5-Schwab (Int. Raaolor)

Court No. 1

-v noil, perhaps you could shortly describe that illnoss;
u3ing the Latin word or the Gorman word won't help us.

.. Those are complaints which occur - can occur - after
:n altitude of 10,000 or 11,000 motors, on the basis that

thoro is a lack of nitrogen. During such experiments a
fatality had occurred when for some time ho was at an
altitudo of botwoon 10,000 to 12,000 motors. Dr. Roraborg
roported to me that during that experiment the iloctro-
enrdiogram had roistered an irregularity. Ho werned
Hasoher that in offoct eftv-r a little tine an electro¬
cardiogram hed dropped down end the result Was doath of
the experimental subject. On tho basis of thi3 report
of Ronb-rg about this one case of death, wo had become
clear that wo would have to conclude our experiments us

quiokly as possible. Dr. Ronborg was only to concludo
th- vory urgent experiments which had to be perfornod.

During that time a film had to bo produoed about thoso

experiment a - ordered by Himlor on tho occasion of his

visit to Duohau. After this film had been concluded tho

chamber was to be removed fret* Dachau as quickly as

possible. The difficulty in concluding the oxporiments

pr-sented itself becauso one could neither tell Ru3chur

nor Himmler that the fatality which had occurred was

tho real reason.


«£c7


«:ril 28-*.-BK-17-l-i!eihon (Infc. Von Schoon)
Court Ho. 1


Ronbarg therefore was to use tho pretense that the
ohnobor was urgontly required at tho front, xpr that
purpose wo naturally needed the authority of our acdical
inspector, that was Hippke. In this Conner it was possible
to rcaovo the ohanbor treu Dachau; against Roschcr and
HiflBlor*s will it would not have been possible.

Do you bolievo that cg-inst the will of Raschor and
against the will of Hinnlor you could have rouovod tho
chenbor out of tho concentration canp at Dachau A all,

If you hadn't don- it through the trick you havo described?

» I don't buliovo I noad to go into that at all, that
neither Hoeburg or I would hr.vo beou in u position to act
a^olnst tho will of Kinr.ler and Rasohor to runovo any¬
thing out of tho coneontration ennp, end certainly not
the low prossuro chctibor.

^ It is true,. Dr. Ruff, that an any occasion you woro
told it would bo sabotage and treason if oxperinunts woro
prevented?

„ ./hen wo ronoved tho chanbor froa Dachau in this way
wo realized th-t it was not entirely without danger to
us. How dangerous it actually was, wo learned only lr.tur
baoausa it was said that Hitler had said in writing that
ho considered thos- who sabotaged such oxperinonts or
cttcr.pted to sabotage then were traitors.

I „ little while ago you told us that in addition to
the oxperinonts which Dr. Rooborg was to undertako
on your behalf that Dr. Rasohor was c trying out other
-xpcrinents on his own accord, and that there was one •
dv th in these other -xporincuts; now when you received
this nows fra: Dr. Ratborg you no doubt wondered how such
death was possible. I should like to know, on the
c-sis of tho description of Dr. Heaters, did it occur to


6568


April 26-A-B£-17-2-aeehan (Int. Von Schoen)

Court No. 1

you th,-.t in Dcohnu in those cxpcrin-nts Dr. Haschcr
carried out on his own accord a crime hod boon committed;
■.ill t wr.s your first reaction?

.. It never occurr-d to no that this was ft crime,
according to our experience, on the basis of thousands
of high altitude experiments, one did not need to oxpoct
death in thoso experiments under th- assumption th .t the
experiments were carried out properly; but, of course,
wo realized that somehow, by n unfortunate coincidence,
r dor.th could oocr. *.t that time already we could oxposo
our pLana crew at n height of 12,000 m-t-rs for fiftoon
oinutos in training. During thoso experiments wo nov^r
hr.d . death, nor sorlous incidents; but, nevertheless,
it did not ocour to mo at th- time that a orime had been
committed horo, I considered this an unfortunate coincid-
onooj.and it was my point of view that I sew no roason
co think that .<asch-r was carrying out experiments, which
waro d -ngorous or which had to result in doath.

4 N<*<, Dr. Huff, fivo yocrs hr.vo passed since thon;
now do you still bwliovo tod y f os you did then, that in
such high altitude experiments, when the people aro kept
\t a hDightjof 10,000 to 13,500 met-r3 for soao time,
th-t no do .ths c .n occur if tho experiments aro woll
prepared end properly carried out?

.. No, I am of a different opinion tod .y for tho follow¬
ing reason: In th- -m-rican ..irforcc, ns wolllus in the
Geraan airforce, thoso tests at 12,000 meters wore
carried out for training purposos with a very small
iiffer-noe in tho method. In thoso tests the u aorioun
..irforce, to which the soldiers wore ordered,just liko
in tho Gorman Luftwaffe, had sovornl deaths. The differ¬
ence botweon the tests in our Luftwaffe wd th- Am-ric -n


..pril 28--BK-17-3-4kohan (n-. Von Schoon)
Court No. i


airforce was merely that wc kept our crows at 12,000
a-t'-rs for fifteen minutes, and the ..merican airforce
kept their crows -t that altitude up to one hour; end
during those _xperin~nts for training purposes end not
for rosonroh purposes, thcro wero sovornl crsos of death,
.nd these do nth s ere described in r. paper which was
published. I personally had rn opportunity to tr.lk to
' sergeant or a corporal, who wns present .t two of
Chose experiments. Ho was in Heidelberg, whore I was
working, ..nd was in charge of the low pressuro chamber,
jid had worked with that forderly in the States. Ho
could not give ce my information about the aedicnl as¬
pects of what happened, he merely describe: the situa¬
tion to the effect that the experimental subject was
perfectly alright at 12,000 rotors, then suddenly fell
over and when the chrmb-r was brought down, tho person
wn.s dead. The cause for this sudden do.ath has not boon
clarified, they jo probably the result of the effect »
that a small gas bubble i3 formed in tho blood at this
altitude and this gas bubble reaches th« pvrt of the
brain which is between the brain prop-.r and the spinal
cord, the so-called nedull otlig t\, th *.t r. blood
vessel is clogged up there ..nd because of inadequate
circulation in thi3 port of tho brain, n sudden dor.th
is c .used.

That the c scs of dor.th which occurred to Dr. H .soh-r
in the presence of Dr. Romberg iworo accidents booamo ■
quite c 1» x to me in the course of this trial; for if
Tn t the witness Noff said here is true, that about
3-v^nty to eighty people lost their lives in thoso
s.xp_rktents, and that Dr. Romberg was present at only
of the experiments, then you well c ji understand,

6570


3 one


_->pril 28-.-.-3K-17—i-Ide-han (Int. Von Schoan)
Court No. 1


on the br.sis of this fact '.lone, that they were accidents
when Dr. Romberg was present, bocaus- Dr. Rcschor ob¬
viously had an inclination to conceal those experiments
free Romberg. I personally can see no reason if ho oon-
co.alod sovonty seven experiments, with doaths from him,
that ho should now lot him bo present at three.

.4 Dr. Ruff, wo havo reached the stage where you loan¬
ed that th- experiments La D chnu, the experiments which
Hascher carried out on his c*n accord, led to u death,
then you gavo instructions to stop the experiments -ad
to return the chamber to Berlin, that is where wo stopped.
In addition to this the instruction which you gave Dr.
Rcr.borg, did you do .anything else, for example, to avoid
independent action of Rnsoher or to prov-nt further
doaths, otc., what -Iso did you do?

^ I havo already said, wo hrd w.antod to 3ct tho
ohrmber b .ok from Daoh.au with tho explanation that it
was noodod urgently nt the front, we noodod tho oov-r
of tho Lodioa.l Inspootor Hippko. Therefore, whon Dr.
Renborg visited mo in Berlin and reported to me th..t a
ilu .th hud ocourrod, I tried to r-noh Hippke, but 1 was
not able to f ini him on that d .y because he was away on
a trip. Then Rcaberg went back to Daohr.u, but .after
'bout two days he c :nc back to Berlin again and brought
thu damaged mot.r from tho ohanbor, which the ..itnoss
Neff told about. Then ho remained in Berlin for
several days to h v- this apparatus repaired and wont ^
back to Dach.au. -fter that I had on opportunity to
t lk to Hip ko, and I told Hippke how fur we had O otton
with our experiments. I told him that this death had
occurred, and that it was my opinion that th- experi¬
ments had to bo brok-n off immediately, and that I


6571


«pill 28-*v-BK-l7-5^!~-hm (let. Vor. Scho-o)
Court No. 1


hr A already giv.n Reaberg instructions to stop the


exporinents as quickly c.s pcssiblo and got tho ch-cbor
out of Dachau. Hippk«- approved this idea, and he show
od no a tclo-prna fran -olf via iiilch to hin, in which
Haschor doaanded that tho ohanbor should stay there
two norc aonths. Hippko told no that ho wantod to
rofuso to leave tho chncbor there any lo.ngor, end
1 -tor ho did so.


5572


'■ Apr h 7- A— S-lS-l-Cock ( Von Scho-r.)
ourt Ho. 1

q. Do you know y-t, Dr. Ruff, what the date of this t:L,rn was?

A. Tta 12th of :cay.

The 12th of ’ey, c'ocicaant 3L3 A PS, Exhibit 62 of the Pros-cuticn
ir. docm-Jit ’;ook 2, pa u 83. 7h-n did you s.; Hip*-

A. .ftar :ix. ch.x-.b_r ves return-:’, I went to sc. Hip;::- a; sin in
tie b-;innin-_ of Jure. I tol* hta that •-* tad concluded our cxrcria-nts,
■•".b v- h.*d succeeded in ';cttins”tta chnnber out oi Dnetau, tli t oho
chx-bor ma beck in 3crlin, nd I told hin briefly shout then cults
of the uxperirunts, and vtat hr ' tap -red in tta xentlx. On this
occasion Hoppka showed n. anettar latter fra:-- Hess bj olff tlirouch
ilch to Hipnko op air., re’ ttat a tat-A ttat :11c h had already promised
,’oL'f t:,-t i .v- chaster would otac la Dachau two bo re uontfcs. Th-n
Hippko a aid the facta cak t la bueln.ss obsolete, the ci:..:'xr had

‘ t

already bo-n brought beck, and h~ wra to report fchia to ’llch.

If I understood you correctly, Dr. Ruff, do > n to a:y *

Vi t t . first visit which you p i' Hippko vas befor- t'.v. 20.iiay, 19h2,

-.b it the 12th Vny?

A. Yea, it wns before tii- 20 ry» Vl|2, probably about tik. 13th
or Uith.

q, Ant', tta second visit?

A. Ph - was t eh- bo • unu.

|. Lnni:., of Jure, 1?!.2? Too :re obviously ref rrin . to this
LI -r ol U June, 19k2, is t: t rijit?

A. Yes.

1. Dootssant 261, which - you. Is ttat ri ;.t?

A. T-s.

> ow, Dr. itufr, T wool Interested in on- thin.! Cin you
11 us : r- or less pr-cis-ly when -h- lc*.r pressure chnntar w a returned
. ; erlin. The rta.t-o.ntc 'e so for end tiv- aacirspti-nr di.'i.r, r<Jrt
”5U knew today ibcut this point?

A. I c unot ~_iv_ tta ex-ct date ev-n today wh_n tta experts--nta
a D chan Were finished. The; trur cert-inly finished be/.-r- tho 23 »V*

h 23rd Of :ay Ronber,, w s c^irtninl" V.c)


A573


B-13-e-Cock ( Von Scho-n)


2- Apr 17
C'urt Ac. 1

5 __n Iron a work book of :oy chi.f -chanic. Or. th. 2l or.:' 25 thy, 19':2,
urs a hell boy, m’ ontiw 23 lay th. -erk shop doliv.r.c*. to AosderA the
,xv!_l of = clock, -n' this clock rs us.d in ccnn.ction vrith the

fil: .c.ichas .--’a in ©adiau to ."k. titl-s. It was plant-: in as a
trick abet she in,, the pre r.ss ofttu during t&J experhunts. Fron these
f-cts I ota s ay today with certainty trt before th- 23 ny the -xp-ri-
r^r.ts in Dachau w.ro finished wC’the chaster was r.novc? fr- 'the
conc.ntrati.*n cosap,

3k. SATT-Tti *!r. Pr-si dent, this rork book of the. for.ur scchnr.ic
I r.c-iv.d y-sUr’-.y fr-' Berlin. I hrvo it here, if the court is inter-
cs'~e in it, I shall, of ctiu-s-, bj 1 to place it at Kw disposal
f tiv. Tribunal. Fron the vhol. -- n r in v.tiich this book is k..pt,
on. can sc. v.ry cl-orly th* t it r s not iado up Just nev -iva that this
.r.try wo not ad/od nov, but th t t 10 wo th. cri,.inrl ir.vhich the
mic :'-:a-ict.r, that is his u his wntri.s -t th t r-..

book wr.s to show hew ,rny hours ohlc Johnnie worked cv-ry day
til .r vrith his aosiot-nts. !l- elwys rites what work ws don.
in clot U, cud on ttexi ;it aide lu l-uts *!o«n fer each-by the nurab.r of
rk h urs m ’ ■ lcoth. r.- :• •- - ••aurs. I

-bfc. to pr.s.nt t. is buk earlier b-c vs. 1 did net rec.iv. it until
.si r’ry, -u’ bcsi\.s you will r.: bo ablo to do cueh ith th. book,
bic-us. it is in Goman, Th. - hole book would l irst have to tr nslat-
an-* th t raally isr.»t worth all of that ^rk, but ncv.rf.Kloss 1 con¬
s' hi- it i port ant that this bok, which I showed to th- defendant;
l.nt r.l . t, can be used .as -vi*.nc., bee use it has great value .as
:vld.nco to prove the truth of hat She defendant Ruff h s said lure
n*.r oath.

SiD&fFt Couns.1, what do you contend this book shews by
•r. fi uvi-Verciary natter? •

D3, S “ tii rt on tiu 2nd of

•V. , tf_ second day cf tlu 6th :rnth, tluro is ’n entry by this :ian
’ hL-ist.r, stationed at ^-lura-hcT, th t is the tOttWhoro Dr. Ruff
■* 5 , clu ur to be unloaded, 6-3/ hours ark, 1 hour ov.rti_. That
r r v 3 in cd'litioa tc what Dr. duff h e testified that this chaidxr.


6574


arrived


23 :.pr L7 -A-?3Mfl-3-Cock ( Vcr. School)

Court ::o. 1

s'-iicfc was not brought back to Berlin .y road, but by railroad,

:n the 2 of June in Ecrlin in Adlors-i!of, at*. was unload. d on that
■i-y. That on this dato, on latest, it arrived in Dorian. I neruly
vr.it to erevo at what tiuo tha chcabcr yra returned to Dorlin, because
it has b--n .assorted in aribthar conn^vti n, that far into Jiu» exteri-
-„ n to wer- carried out, lor which -hrff i^ht bu held responsible; and
t is work bo>*ik, of idiich cveryow cm s__ it is obviously- the ordinal,
-lao shorn on the 28 th ‘.ay, an entry: ’xe’wrg, fiLa clock, an-’ it says
it.s?" I ccn't i.- in- - -■ t -.--ns, -nd neither can !fr.
duff, -3-3A h.urc and 1-1/2 hours ov^rtia. This, in connection vdth
the teettwrv of r. RufI, shore c t or. the 23th this filu clock
was «x:’o .at the institute, which was to be use' for a fUavith this
low pressure chaabor. I • ant to prov- by a.'.ns of these entries that
cn tha 2 Jun_ 19L2 r.t th- 1'teSt, the chamber ws back in :-rlin, having
been br'U /.t back by ra.ilro- . Ch . it left Dachau perhaps two or throo
a _.c xti-t, and it errivod in Berlin cn the 2rt' of Juno. That is
th. work book and the work which it covers.

•R. ' .IDTi I wish counsel weald kindly translate the entry .a^ainj
re-/’ this entry again, doctar?

UR. S..ITH: First, what L consider important, tiwrt in an untry
23 by, 1912, ■ Ro- bar. fil" clock, mas,* I don't know hat that
r,s, "3-3/1; hauro, 1 - 1/2 hovrs ov rti rxv* under th. d te ol 2-S-U2,
th.r- ic an entry “Stati -n idlers->cf, dr bur unload' 1 o-3/ii heurs .and
1 h ur ov-rti-e."

V.. T ^iDY: Your Honors, I : • quite f“ liliar with the evidence and
I c-n't soo tho aateriality it. However, if Dr. Scutor wishes to mko
- 'ocu -nt certifying te these Vi cn-rieS, the twe extr-.cto ofth-
r- Lncl, I -.fill : ObJ Cti - ing introducod in evidence.

Tr: S D£.M: Ccuns.i, you ;v*a ' tile offer of the drosecutifto.

II' y.'u have the two entries y u aentioned copied mi* Certi i. 1 tn_y nay
sob ;tt_ ' in evidence without objection.

0 . SJJT31: Very well, thank you.


2i Apr U7 -A-3-13 -ii-COOfc (7on Scixxx)

Court So. 1

TE • .SnSST: I would su, -ct that the book itself be subaittod
to the ftrosocution for oxsuinatin, -.lien.* then to axsainc the bock !

in your T-s_.oc_, cr in the prvsonco of anybody shes you choose to

resign 6c, and then have tiv copies aado.

D?. # SAimSt I had hop-d, r. President, that the witn-oi;,

Foiil^ist-r, would be h-r- to dy and could be called as r. witn. ss
t^>y or tavjrrcw and explain his work book, but th_ witness was not
- >le to ^t Lave to c.ts- Ivro Xrc» crlin. Therv arc ccrt-in difCicult-
i.e, and concoqu-ntly I cannot call this witness, but I sir 11 Co what the
frvsi 'jnt sur. os tod.

r-iZ Pl.SID£tfr» Is Counsel fer the Prosecution willin’ to stipulate
now, that tile xecord nsr-ad in t'.v. evidence r.ay be omitted as correct
re ad in;,, tiv- tir e book which Couns-l had?


6576


20 iar-O-GES-19-l-GroM (Ton ScLooz)

Court To- 1.

U.. h_=DY« Count 1 for Prosecution is rilling to stipulnto thr.t,
yo-or Honor. Eocevnr, re oro not stipulating no to tho feet that ns ft
feet .nis chrabcr arrived in Berlin on the* date. Wo would stipulnto

that entries ero correct. Yes.

7 1 p&ZSIBSJIi /o uadorstiad the*. Hut, Counsol for Prosecution
is trilling to stipulate that thoso ontrios ore in the book ns rend
by countsol. Is that correct?

13. P.-PPYi Your Honor, duo to ny mobility to rwui tho Scriarx
lrnSOrgc I trould request that the interpreter here rord the sneo tiro
entries ns pointed out by Dr. Snutor, <ai that uill verify the
ontrios and tho translation thereof! nnd tl.cn I t.ill be villi*v; to

stipulnto.

IS PKSSIDIUTi ell, suppose thoentrios bo oxnnii.od nftor tho
rococo ti is afternoon rad the sat .or era bo uJtcn up in tho sornlsv;.
Tho intorprotor era oxcaino tho records then nth counsel for both
pi-rtioo, nnd then sonc stipulation era bo rcr.chod '-hen tlx Tribunal
opens tot-orroo Kornln*;.

3Y D S-.UTIHi

q. Dr. suff. yoctorda; I snowod you this .-ork book. Did you
rocc.nl .0 It with certainty a. tho .ora work hoot -tick — Prepared
h, year feroenn. yohl.ol.tor. at that ll« under your .uporwl.lon?

... Porhnpt 1 my flr.t echo a correction — not yo.tordny hut
tho Or# hoforo yo.tord.-y. lo.tcrd.-y *«. Sundry. Io., I know tho
too!.. That 1. tho work heck of cy foromn. ?ohlaol.tcr.

o. Io thr.t coaaoctloa then. kr. Pro.ldont I *ould Uko to a.
the Irlbuurl to take notice of an rffldr.vlt knttho. In Dcounont Rook
‘ Puff 6. P-XC 20 to 23. Ritltlt 10. *hl. Dr. knttho. hl.o worked
at tho In.tltutc *lck n. loaded h, ti.o dofoadaat Dr. Ruff, la
_prll 1933 ho already cot Dr. Ruff. a. a definite opponent of tho SS
nni then - I did not Intend to rord thl. documnt - hut ho do-
crlhod in Pchrucx, 1912 ho un. celled to tho Xn.ti.uto end ho .-y.
•hat i-nchcr .ay. .cm Tor., derogatory thine, aiout Ruff - that Ruff


5577


23 5D3-19-2-Gro6a ( Von Shoos)

Court ho. 1.


b-j ao ;>.tiosnl Socialist ( that he refused to ivo Snschor assistance,
t 2uff was sr.be tr.;i:v; tho wax effort, etc. lies I shall read on
pr.-o two at the botton — it saysi

"Iron these rocords (scys the witness Dr. kntthes) I noticod
that in the ozpcriccnts performed by Dr. Coshers no fatalities or
physienn damages had occurrod, that according to tho rocords all
experimental subjects :ot iwll evor these experiments and rocovorcd
boo::, ?urthor the records as woll es the oxolnraticns .;ivon by Dr.
aonborff showed that ho bus conducted hie experiments by employin' all
concoivr.blc pr-cr.utionrxy sersuros. Tho experimental subjects, so
2ochorr. oxplnincd to mo, had boon criminals condoanod to death who

u re lr.tor jx-rdonoi."

Then tho witness sporks about tho tiro of the return of the
chrnbor to Berlin and says — X read on pa/,o 3 thon, tho Inst two
r rrrrraphsi

«0:Oy at the tlco of my conversations with Dr. Kombor* did I also
lerxn that a low pressure chamber had coco back from Dachau, .ccord-
iruj to uy recollection, tho lo- pressure chmbcr cust have coco brxte .
to tho Institute in kay 1912. I cm r«r*bor tho date because after
the roturo of tho lor prossuro chnebor I rrm ordored by Dr. Huff
to toko a trip to Colo :no in order to procure spare parts. I «do
C..ic trip and on that occasion I ra. in py bote town of Bonn. That
was in the tice from 1 Juno to 10 Juno 1512 so that the lor pressure
chamber must have boon returned tc tho Institute in kny 1912."

I shall not reed tho last paragraph - it ooroly show, that Dr.
Suff took ^ interest in tho relative, of this witness in spite of
their Jatrish ancestry and that ho helped thorn. -nd this has boon
s:.’orn to by tho witness Dr. kntthes and certified.

. r. Huff, tho chamber creo back to Gorlin. Vbat happened thon

to this chcmbor?

I, ,tnj-ol In tho Bfl loiv:cr to no liked. Flr.t to to't
to, tad, since It to bo cbockod over end propr-rod fee non nso.


6573


EG (Von Sckoca)


- loa-or stey. as actually occurred ecs unpleasant boccuso this iadi-
C'.fcod t:-.t the cLasbor oca act ur.-.catly aoedod ns ro had iadientod,

Zhex actually la the noaths of Juao nnd July there was no use for the
chrdber. Only la -wrust tho Luftraffo T°u? turned up and took over
the c'rcior — rad the; took It away in -arrast.

a. I should like tho Court in this connection to trko notice of
r .a r^fldavit of Dr. Kcllcracana «hich io ia Huff Dccuaont Jook,

Document 1*4. That uill ho Hxhiblt 11.

*3 ?HHSID2i-ri Counsel, did I understand you to any Socunout 1-1T
I . S-U13H* Yob, Document So. 1-1, Dr. Kollcraaann, p*^® 5e,

Sxl-Ahlt 11 . I do not lntond to ror.d tho docuccnt — it coroly aupporta
tho atr.toucnt just Bade by the defeat Ruff that tho chmbcr vaa in
herliu rad not uaod for several contha, rlthou-h tho SS. na *c knou.
rc^crtodl; naked for uao of tho chacbor.

Sr. '-MSI, -h-n he vliltod Berlin t-t tho oni of *-rll or tho
bo-Sralaj Of hoy BoBborg told you of only ono dec*. — did you lr.tor

Icrrn of othor dooth, .-Jld froo uhoot

... In tho tlno hetoocr. Bonbonr'. roturn to 3rob.ru nnd tbo ro-
oovnl of tho cLnnbor Boebor : oollod ny up onoo or tuico In Berlin -
nld.t oven hnvo bo n throo tlxon. W .0 flr.t tine I inferred hiu thr.t
;.,V:o nvr.ro.od our plnn. I inferred Houbcr.t th.t Blppho hnd olrordy
rccoivcd n tclcrnc fror Brother for u.o -of tho chnrbor for n lo tt ;or
period, rod th, t Klppho intoned to di.ro;,roro tho cxtcn.lon rod in-
fort, me*. ..ion Bonbon crllod up «nl» ho told no thnt Bn.chor hrd
porforood further exporiront., nnd fror the telephone conversion I
could drrr tho conclu.lv.v thr.t .oxothln.; hrd hnpponcd rgmn durlat
thono cxporlncnti. hooter.; v. not nblo to s onythin.t xoro definite
on the telephone .inco rll telephone convorSiono «crc ehoehed on
ni Uo could net tell nc over tho t.lephone her the oxperinont hrd
vone off nod .hot hnd hr.pponod. But. froo tho conversion 1 could con¬
clude ooucthlK hnd br-ncoecd. -nd. I bollovo M s tho so
telephone conversion unoa Bonberd told no our oxeorlcont. -ore


6579


?: „ --S-lS-4-Grp>a (7cs Schocn)

Court VO. 1.

finished and said that Scschor bed approved bavli^ the chrxfcor returned.
^ thou on the ’’•'Bis of this talophono conversation I sent people to
jtac&ea to load the chnsbor on the railroad thcro. ..hen Soeber* emo
bra:: to Scrlin, ho reported to re that in the ncantino Bescher had hod
tee further deaths. Bo, Sector*, had been present at the experimental
station rhon the.e death, occurred. *s far ns otter deaths free Dr.chau
oxocriaont* wore conccrnod I never heard anythin* about thee; and, in
p-rticulrx, I re: lizod on tto basis of Soeber,- 1 . reports that the
donths had occurrod during axpericonts porfornod by Baseter on in¬
structions free hinder .

T, Without your volition?

... Uthout cy volition, end rtthout ny kaoule&p,

1 , 0 ., tho wttrx.a UoK who wo. omulncd here In Bocattor .poko
of ,1,0 Jonah, rtileh .uppo.odly occurred durln,; So.chor'. experiment,
chon Houbora wo. pro.ont. 314 you honr uaythlu: ohout that!

H„. I did not hear anythin: about that. I hoard ohout threo
400 th., and Oochor*; reported then to no. Shon Etcher wn. In 3orlln
to drew up the report ho didn't «-* n word to « about death., aor
about hi. oxporlnont. Which ,.o hod porfornod for alnn-lor at all.

5, Ur, Suff. yon aro .pcnhlK of oipwlcont. which Ra.chor
carried out without your hwlotjo and without your approval on hi.
ono initiative, -ppnrontly ho had .pedal order, fron Hinder. Bo
you have any Idea today whothor thoM orper leant, of ao.chor'. ho
did ou hi. own encord hrA anythin*; to do with tho problem which wan to
bo oolved throuii your orporiua*. In Dachau, thr.t U. the problor. of
ro.ouo hy parachute from Md> altitude, or from your conviction a. a
tpoclali.t, w-ro thc.o Indopondont experiment. of Ea.chor'. .owe-
thin: quite different?


6530


28 •oril-.r-v'P-20-l-fcarrow (la*.. Set on)

Court I

a. rroii the in.„r-odiato roerts vtiet ~,ch.r seat to airier,
v.-,ich I r^v aerc for tho first tine into docuucat book, oao thing is
clear; that .hese cncri eats huvo nothing to do with exporiaents
for roccAO fro- hign altitudes. that d-schcr wanted to clarify is
..ot quite cle.r to - e fro- these brief intermediate retorts, no
doubtless h.d attacked quite a number of questions, did a few ex-
p.riients each tiac, and then stored tnw exocriuents end taken up
BOiot-un.,’ different. In any case, insofar us oao can conclude frou
those intermediate reports, th«rc w-s in ao c-s- any ceqplotc series
of ojporiuents. fhcre are ut least three, four, perils five
•iroolaiB w. ica no tried to work oa - none of vetch he coitploted -
and It oocue to uo th..t theseoepori-eats werw aeroly orienting
oxocrUuhts and that he intended to clear uo these various proolaic
without longer series of c^>eri-.vats, -nd no doubt no alw^o wanted
to huvo tie low -orcosure ch-^oor in Pochu u Jrs-in for that purpose.

^ ..Itausa, you a:c coaviacod wh-n that in thav xperiu-nto
v-lch vor- c-viicd out with ; our anrwJ and with your cowled*® -
that io tho rwfiular ordorly osporiaents - there w«r« no doatho?

a. In those ero-riuonts for roscuc freu high -ltitudc I Know

that thor*. wero no deaths.

flio witness .off. wnen no was exai-inod hero in Doctubcr,
said that Hoschor once,by night, -H-GOdly performed oxporiuont* with
sixteen iinssians when Dr. harbor.; w u s not present, iho result w c .
tn..t, on t.io next horning, all of tho sixteen Hussion, were dead.

Vaoa did "Oh loiira of this .letter for the first timoT

a. I li^iracd of 1 for * flr#t ti * J ° vnca ti '° ' ,itnCBB * off
njfto tais stat-icat on too witness st .nd here.

^ Do vo really oclievo that in this case one co-ild cpojc of
nodical experiments or wn_t is our opinion tod-y, ec an expert,
about what -uscncr's iaieatioa could n-Vw bi-a in tills _ctioa?

a. la tlie low pressor^ ca^ioer, wnea it v-e in Dachau, tvelvo


£0 4?rtl-*S7?-20->Karrov (lut. Ton Schoa)
Court I


puoole cculd be wccaa-edattd at toe utuost. incrc was roao for twclvo
pooplc to sit zz the beachoa if tho people crovdcfi toi.othor. If ouo
uosiucs that too mo'o,r of sixteen Hussions is correct, thon there
Wafl 20t roc., for tnese eixtoea pooplo in the chamber. korcover, it
ia L.pcraiblo to perform on cor>criaent ainult-nocualy oa sixteen or
tvolvc ro oi-^it at too taze tluc. Jho cheobor hue throe windows,
i-vea if thore is a doctor at o-ch window, observing the esperiuont,
it would hardly bo pooaiblo for hiu to observe eixtoea peoplo at tho
s-oo tii.o wno oil bcca-c unconscious ia a V017 abort ti..o, have croups,
etc. It ia hardly poaaiblo. ky opinion a, too* with tn_t of tho
prosecution's -odicol espert that tr.it vat not on ox’crlhant u t all|
that this was no execution.

3, 'Jr, ;.uff, ia Dacu:cat 3 ooh 2, there J-o a auubor of photo¬
graphs concerning _ uoa who waa nobjected to scuo oxperiuonts in tho
eh0,1bor. Do ou ra:a.bcr these nhotogr<r>hs in Docunont Hook 2 ?

4. lea.

•i. Do * ou ooliovo th..t thero ia any ovid*-aco aa to what tho
typo of o^wrtJ«ats w..a dr ring \*iica then. pictures wore token?
mother those wore tho ri,-£tful oporlusats for your inutituto or
vaotnor t.iosc werw the independent cxocriuwnts of Dr. Haacnor for
HiiulerT

a. In the fom in vwich tno photo/Topha v^ro subaittvd in tho
docujoiu boo.c these nhotx:raphs anew acthia,- «itutever oxccnt that a
deed bod;- w_a dissected, "hoae pictures could bo roi any pathologi¬
cal institute and could bw autopsy. Dr. Alexander, tho prosccution'o
u«dic_l e;:'crt, v„o kind oajugh, hovovor, to giro uo - f-w bettor
ccnica of th^se pictures, oad ia taese good co>ios oao can soe very
plainly th-t in this brain autopsy - In tho bi f . vessels of the brein
tr.cre .«*o 10. e of less l-r^c -ir bubbles. Dho vessels, in part,
looked like strings of pe-rlc. Inis proves th-t thC 3 C dead pconlo
died either voce eurf-Cin.-; aftor diving, or diwd _fter lo-ving tho
30-c.lj.cd c.lsaoa, th-t is the air pressure cha.±~rs which -re usod


*532


28 -or il-»-JBH2*W-«arrcw (Int. Schon)

Court I

for t-orfc in vuicr, for inst_ncc, tfccn bridge pill ora ._ro But up, or
else t;.;.t t.icsw wcro deaths free hi.jfc altitude. tho latter is to
bo ..sgiv uc. in this cjbv, if one grants that tnoso pictures were actually
tnxca in Dachau. ossuning taca th-t those vor<. pooplo vho died freu
hi.>i altitude, t-en on the b-sis of tnts finding of tnc air bubbles
in the blood resacls, they uuat be Oecnlv ho died after u long st^y
-t altitude* of noro than at least 10,000 Uutwrs - probably uore
tann 12,00 ■ uofcnrs. rhesu .\-s bubol.s in tho olood vassals develop
„t thwso altitudes aoruall? -:ov«. 12,000 uetcrc - in the course of a
lon.or at.i at »h*so altitudes, since t:.«.sc ..as buoelvs n^ud u certain
ocric of ti~o to develop, at 12,000 voters, the tine is fivo, six,
seven, oi-dt or ten alnutes, this could not have xuppoacd tho
uxiorii.eats for rescue frou nigh altitude. In the*- altitude 033c-
riaonta, the wxperiuontal subjects, for cxa.plc, when bailing out
at IC',000 actors and fal'ia. on tne open parachutes - those pcoplo
were ,«t holnhts aoove 12,003 niters for three uinutes. This is
tr.w lon-ost tiho wnich the «x»..ri..«,ntal tubjocts rc.ainod at altitudes
higher than 12,003 actors, because, when Jumping fro- 20,003 and
21,000 uotors there w*.ro no parachute descents vitn the opon oar.chuto
out only tnreo falling experiments without tho par.ichutvs boing
oocaod, .uu in these exj.ri- vnts the ocivrlaental oubJvCts raxiinod
one hundred oedonds -t the ttudaou above 10,000 uotors. dne gas
bubbles ir. these pictures therefor., show, with tnc probability that
aordeio on certainty, th„t -.hose dea.hs could not h_vo occurred
in exocriiioats for rcscuo frou high altitude.

and you conclude, Dr. I-eaff, ta-t these filus which w.ru found
—on; Dr. ..aschcr's oapers and which w^r. tuicen into docuuont booh 0
v 2 , a, ”e noth!-, to do with your oxoeri..er.ts7

*. dhat is correct.

v. ' oil, -men the choi-b-r w-» returned to u-rlin. \>ho , uve the
order f or this — you or Dr. cippicc?


F503


28 2^-—4—Ziirrov (Int. Ton Scnoa)

Court I


I «eA told kcubets to see it th_t we ot tao ch<— oor cut of
toe c.-rj aa& tnen I hud Lea a-at down to loud it. ?or tho return
•.rjriort, .s well us for the trjosuort down there, Hiopko gave his
^nrovnl.

Z* -''o'-'i r. Huff, _s wu now know, on the 5th of *$>ril, 1942,

Dr. uuschor vroto to Hoichsfuchrer Sa Eite.ler. Ho aunt hi- an iatcr-
aedintu roiort - u secret report which you and Dr. -cnborg did not
• lfi°* ia 3ocuuont 1971^ - PS, Exhibit 49 of the prosecution,

now do you explain the f.xt tout, in tela rcoort which was uadc
oehind jut buck, the affair with toe sixteen do_d .OJssiuas is
aot evoa .entitned by huschcr to n -_a llko Hiu-l.r, because you
Know, Dr. :.uff, toie lntoiuodlatu report• ..enti n other dcutns, but
t.-.-so sixteen Hussions net -enti rood in t.ds reoort of hapeherj
la tola intemwdi-tc reuort Husetter s-oe-xs of cx^ri-onts,
nrd I believe tho f..ct that these sixteen Hut si-ns uro not uontlonod
sup or to tile noBU.^)tion of the Uvdic-1 exiort of too prosecution,
with which I agree, that these Hurstons w„re not the suoject of ur.
ojperlucat but wore oxecutod, end th-t it Wat not uontlonod for this
roeion.

? -Sl'/fflf: Counsel, the Tribunal will now be in recott until
9:30 o'clock tocorrow corning,

U -c-bs v*s *. :il 0930 ioass, ■( *>ait 1947)


«


£584


Court Ho. 1

m 7

Official Transcript of thv -=c-ric .n Kilit ry
Tribunal in th-- cntt-r of the United States
of —ricn -gainst Karl Brandt, ct al,
defendants, sitting at Nurnberg, Gorccny,
on 29 .vpril 194 7, 0930, Justice Beals
pr-siding.

THH U.J13H.X: Persons in tfc- court rocc will please
fin- their scats.

Tho Honorable, tho Judges of Military tribunal 1.
Military Tribunal I is now in session. Cod save
th.-Uni tod States of -aoric.a and this honorable Tribunal#
Thoro will b- order in the courtroom.

TIL. P.tioIDe-.T: Mr. Marshal, you asc-rtain if tho
dof-ndants arc all present in court.

THIS K..R3H..L: Kay it pie so Your Honor, .11 defendants
are prosont in tho court.

TliE HU23XDJNT: The oucrot.nry-Genornl will note for
tho r acord the presence of 11 defendants in court..

Counsel tt y prooeod.

D.t. JlJGF.tIJD aUFe - Hosunod.

DlitJCT (Continued)

BY Dli. F.tX?4 S.-UT-H (Counsel for the DOfond-nt Huff):

•«, Dr. Huff, you are still under outh tod..y. Yester¬
day, Dr. Huff, you were 3pcakinj of the Dachau hijh-
•.ltitudo -xporicents with which you _re charged. Tod_y
v/o coco to one final subject, that i3 the reports on
thuso various Dachau expariaents. «s wo h-vo heard, Dr.
Haschcr on the 5th of ~pril 1942 3 ont a secret report to
the Heichs fuehrer-So iiinal-r -- whioh i3 in Jocuc.nt book
2, docucent 1971 ..P3, Exhibit No. 49, page 62 in the Gera_n
ad 60 in the -Snjlish. It was read her- in the courtroou.
In this report - you r-n-cb-r this, Dr. Huff?

Yes.

3 uschur in tho first part describes the ox-

* - -

P- rfnent^ .ft^h ho car.-i-d out togeth-r -with Dr. Kocborg,
nd ho cbncVudys this with the s-ntonce, and I *,uotc:

/


*536


•oril 29-M-
Court No. 1


on acnoen;


: .»11 th- oxpcpiaoat l subjects recovered .ftcr - certain
*ice r.t 8 Kilometers r.nd regrined their consciousness jid
the nor an 1 functions of thoir senses. n In order to avoid
confusion, that refers to the experiments th .t were con¬
ducted together with rtoebors. In the second part of the
report Dr. Rasch-r describes the experiments which he per¬
formed alone i.nd ho writes, I ;uote: "Only continuous ex¬
periments above ten end : h'-lf kiloc~t~rs were fatal. The
third experiment of this type was so unusual that - since
I c rried out th-so cxporim-nt3 by myself, that is,
without Romberg - I celled in n doctor of the camp.
This was r>. continuous experiment without oxysen at a
height of 12 kilometers on 37 ye s old Jew. 11

Dr. Ruff, this 3eoret report of Dr. Ruschor alone seems

•

to be of special significance, therefore, I should liko
to csk you whoa did you 1j in of this seoret report of
Dr. Rasoher for the first tine? This is the o-crot
report of the 5th of -»pril 1942 which is sign-d by R anchor
-.Ion-.

.. I siw thi3 report for the first tine when it was
submitted by the prosecution h~re in the courtroom.

•i Dr. Huff, did you receive knowledge of the-so ex¬
periments of Dr. Hoscher conc-rning which he writes that
he carried then out -lone, th..t is, without Romberg, and
when he called in an 33 doctor ns a witness for n third
experiment? ‘When did you learn of these experiments?

.. ..t the same tir;- whan this report was submitted hero
in the courtrooa. Ir. the preliminary interrogations I
also did not hear anythin, about these ox;,erinunts.

•v <itne3s, according to your expert opinion, theso
experiments which Dr. Rascher carried out alone and which
led to f:t 1 results, did they have anything to dc with


6S86


•vpril 29-L-BK-l-3-?ostor (Int. Yon 3cho-n)

Court Ko. 1

your own experiments, that isj with the experiments which
you np proved which wore, iaoludod in the working program

for Dr. Reebor;; end which olono you desired in tho interest

of aviati on?

.. These oxporicent3 hr.v- nothin^ to do with tho experi¬
ments for rescue from hiah-\ltitudc, they h-vo no connec¬
tion with thea.

^ Dr. Ruff, do you know whether this secret report, or
interim report, by Dr. it --.scher of the 5th of .vpril 1942
was roooived by the Luftwaffe, espcci -.lly the Chief of
the Medic-.1 Inspector ..to for the Luftwaffe, FrofoBsor
Hippko? Did he talk to you -.bout it, or do you know any¬
thing clao about it?

.. I do not know th;.t :.ny Luftwaffe a^noy ever receiv¬
ed :his report. Hippke in particular never talked to no
about 3U0h experiments or about such a report. I should
think th..t if Hippko h d roooived such a report ho would
no doubt have 3aid something to me about it, sinoo ho
knew that at tho tino when Reseller was carrying out those
experiments in Dnohcu we, that is RoabcrG in this o so,
at the sano tio- enrriod out the experiments for roaouo
from hish altitude. I *..ould assunc that if Hippkc had
received such a report I would have heard somethin 3 about
it.

•C Then I have . fin'l question conc-rr.inG Rasohor's
s-cret report. Dr. *'uff, yesterday wj discussed the fact
that Dr. «ascher once in the even ins called for 16
Hussi-.ns, that he did socwthinG with those 16 Russians -
we don't know -what it was - and th-t on the next corning*
those 16 Russians wore dead, all of then. Yesterday you
*cli us that in that case there could have boon no question
of any medical or ay other typo of experiment. You re¬
call saying that?


6567


“?ril 29-~-BK-l-4-Foster (Ir.t. Vo-. Schoon)

Court No. 1

.. YoS.

Novi, it is noticeable that in this secret report
vihich -tosch-r aont to Himl-r fatal experiments ore
n-ntionod, that i3, exporioents which rfascher carri-d
cut alone, but that ho does not mention this affair
with tho 16 au33iuns r.t all. Can you givo us any expla¬
nation for thi3? How could this bo explained in your
opinion?

•• It is difficult to say why Reseller did not report
these deaths of those Russians, but I imagine that this
confirrs tho opinion of the prosecution's modioal export
which completely ujrues with mine, that in the case of
thoso Russians it was not an experiment but on execution.
Otherwise, I do not 3ce cny reason why Rasch-r in his
report to Hianior, in vihioh ho was constantly re porting
deaths, failed to roport thoso d-utha.

*i oitnoss, I shall then loevo this socrot report freu
Dr. Rasotu-r to Hiccl-r, and I ask you, was a report also
r-ado about the experiments which were Dado with your
approval t.nd with your knowludGo, of which you have know-
ledGc?

 Of oourse, wo reported on thoso oxporir.ent3 which
were performed by 2cr:bor3 in Dachau with ny approval
rnl sanction. Mu cade up r. very dctailod report. Honborg
end Rasch.r drew up thi3 roport togjth.r. This is tho
report of the 28th of July 1942 whieff is in document
book 2, document 402. This report was sent to my
superior agency in aviation medicine, that is Hippke, .
through Himmler and llilch, :.nd t least five or six
copies md probably even mor~, went to a number ol' agencies
of the aviation Ministry and ..viation Industry which need-,
•-d those results for the construction of rescue oquipmont


..pril 29-iI-BK-l-5-T os tor (Xnt i Tor. Schoon)
Court Ko. 1


rjid in tho construction of t lanes. It was the purposo
of thoso oxperinents to oroato notorial for rescue fren
hijh altitudes and consequently tho results had to bo
rddo aval lablo to tho agencies which needed tho iaforoa-


C r , ..pril U7-:'r-..TD-5-lX:-n33 (Int. von Scbor.)

-,urt !fc. 1

Q This report is writ tar. or. r. shoot of paper heads! "Gexaaar.
Stporinontcl Ins titat a far ..viation-4 It is si nod by Dr. "orbor-,

2 uff, and Rr.schcr, isn't it?

Ios.

Cl H-r.; iid it happen that you also si nod this report cl thou h ycu
troro present on only ono day St bho acporir.er.ts, that is only at a
relatively srvall part of the experiments, and althcu h ycu consoquor.tly
oauld say nothin from your err. observation about the :-ajority of
tho exparironts?

It is custo r.ry in sue'.: scientific reports that tho hoed of tho
Irsttltuto ocur.torai ns tho report vhich is drown up by tho persons who
actually performed tho *:rk. Tho head of tho Institute thus assur-.oa
co-responsibility for the inclusions dram fron tha r osulta cf tho
aqtorluonto, For the head of tho ZRst&tato is rosponsiblo to superior
r onoios, cr in : onbrftl scientific life, to ether scientists, that with
his mao ho confines tho sciar.tifio accuracy >f sodatos, who, it

is possible, no ono in tho scientific world Jr ansn superiors acy know,
he takes tho responsibility for it,

0 Is that tho ttwral euston in such sciontific work?

.. It is custc-r.ry in cuoh a report that the herd of the Institute
ocunt rsi ns. In publications that is dona by puttin* c hoc* over tho
Trertc "Fren tho Institute Co and So - head Hr, So and So". By putting
this hand above tho report tho head nf tho Institute assunofl c—
responsibility fcr the sciontific oontonts.

1 Thin report, which I rr.y porhnps call the official report, was
sent to a cumber of offices an l .'croons ifco voro inter os tod you said,

"lie 3or.t it rut? Did ycu do that years tOf or -S ' y u havo it ieno?

- As far as I car. recall wo 3or.t throo copies t; HtsaLer at his
r juost. Ono copy is hire in tho Drotsxnt 3c ck with tho ioc~r\anyi:v:
lettor. Tho ther reports, or. ihc basis of a distribution list sot up
by tho Aviation inis try, woro sent to f flees of the Aviation Mniiftry
aiv' j\«.iplo in industry. Hwy were t'ent eat by the office that had


•5590


-o .-.pi'll h7-'r-.- (I:It von Schon)

Court S3. 1

:d=y -raphed the report, thet ms the Central Office for scientific
loprrts in the Research ;..tinistrrtion jf tho Aviation : Inis try,

a Too said th-t -he report wa3 sont to HL-rtlor, anon ether people,

-j. if I era not ais taken it was addressed to the ReichsfUwhrer-SS.

A Xo3.

Q Dr. Ruff, S..! 70 U also report to Kirnler orally about the Dachau
axp.-rlnonts?

.. ’V associate Rc.-iser", tc-'othor with Raschor, xv-portod to Hi - tiler
rally, I believe that was in July 19i:2. On sea* lay ir. July Rcabir;
crilod no up and tol ’ no that Rase her war. in Berlin, and had told hin
that RL’iiljr had ordered an oral report. That wa* betwoon four and five
ir. tho aftorr.)on when I rocoivoi the call and in the cv.rir. • at 1 -ht tho
We ncntlorvm -lr jrv'y had to c to tho Fuehrers Headquarters by special
train, As tho Fro 3 ocuticr .*3 :ocu.:.rt shew itischor rado this report. "0
Sid art initiate it.

0 Dr. Ruff, wo know fror. tlx '’ccus^r.ts hi ah havo boor, subrlttod
’7 tho Prcsocutior., that on th 11 2 pt^iur 19 U 2 a filn was rhwm. in
tho ajich Aviation 2S.nl 3 try dor.lin- with tho Dachau hi;h altitudo
axporinonta. Tho lootura «liinli was intended at th aaaa tlse fron Field
V-.rshal ’tilth ws not rr.de, as \m hoard, bocauso ISloh 11 not appear,

Tho doV-ils ar» shown fron tho Docunont lx, Docur.mt Book II, '’a, 16} fi¬
le, Exldbit 73. oro you present at tho shvwir. - f tHa filn at tho
P.iiaU AViatJ.on ’.S.x.ictry, and rhat Mr! you Iw-r ar.l soo?

A I was T/A. present at the shorin' of thin filr.. As th» docuaante
ah v: t thLa filn oh>jf!r»< V.l i.v<u arr-tr-M at Raa'Ji.Tn so - utt‘<m by
13-rl .r with Id-Lrh UH*l quite a lsr.&er of l-vrpl Crva ‘Slohls >Cfi.n..,

I'd bo*,I. invited, but 7 rr-s not .arxr. tlx::.

• In y.ur official report, which y u als ?i nod which was drawn
aj. by Renbor- and Rr.sci-.jr, th:r > i3 no rvnticr. *f any fatal results of
ry oxporircr.tfl ir. Dachau, Vox:, o not- thu fell win -, Dr. Tuff h.m
‘iia rjpert m 3 drawn up and sont cut you dcubtloss alr..ay •■•arc asam
-at, r boUflvo, throat .-.tin had «rarx.d* Thn-r-rport-ravs -nothing about


65D1


*at. Hon can you explain this, an-’ why, when yu si-nod this report,
-id you rot object?


„ I knew that those deaths had rot ccrurrod ir. the experiments for
rescue frca hi h eltituios but ir. other experiments which !ta3chor carriod
out on orders from Hbaalor, There was hence no occasion to mention
thoso deaths in this report,

0 Them, if I understand you ocrroctiy, the of field report which
you also si r.od was to bo merely a scior.tifio presentation and ovnlu-
fetor, of tho oxporfr.or.ta which tad boon approved by you and in which
R:'ber" ha! partiedpatod, Cn the other tend, th. independent experiments
which Raschar oarrlad out socrotly wero none of y.ur buslnoss an’,
censoquontly had nothin t: do with ycur scientific paper. Therefore,
thoso thro*' doaths wore not mjr.ticno *, Old I understand yu ccrrootly?

A Too, that is c.rroct. I was net su.. osod tc knmr arythin about
t3io deaths which had occurred in Pmschorfa ccqx.ria.nts as far m
F t.schor was cone erne', Peoauso of tb: fact that Rcnbor ha' told no
about thoso deaths, Iio hr.4 viola toi his obii rtion to socrooy to which
ho si -rod his r.-:w boforo -.r.torln • tha concentration oarsp.

Q ?Iow, witness, lot us nssu-j that or. the basis cf Dr. RorJeor. *s
report, and p.rhaps after consultation with Rnscher, and on tho basis
of ycur knewlod o of all thoso circumst.ar.co3, you hr 1 ccmo to tho
conclusion that thoso throe dontte !r.d oocurrod hirin'- your own
experiments, that is, "urln the of Cicial oxp_rfr.cr.t3 in -hich br.
briber ; participated and of which you ha '. knowloi-o. If you had como
'■ this conclusion whr t rroul ’ you have ’one? ul. thoso t’iroo doaths
haro boar, emit tod ir. y -ir official report, or v ul.' you have son to it
-hat they Wiro nor.felonod if that had net boon d n. up tc that time? Thi3
i3 only a hypothetical question.

A It is a r.attor :f crurso that ir. such .a case tho ’.cafes waul ’, have
xm -icnti one i. Yostarday I 3pokc briefly about the experiences of
- rfcan scientists with axreriitmts at 12000 vters. Three ::\n, also
um afraid - which an bo:iA^t scientist uist tu't ho - t» report lh.\’e


6593


: o


nril 29-1--3X-3- 1-K..rrow (Int. Vcr. Sohoon)
;urt No. 1


.. Of course, if these deaths had be to listen or had had

to b- listed because stay bed ocouxrod during tho uipori-

ooats, I would have had to explain the reasons for the
,oaths to for as possible, but I would hove hod to Ust
theo no natter whether I would have jetton Into difficult¬
ies or not. Sat I do not buliovo there would have boon
any difficulty because our superior nuncios knew both
«cnborg end -ysolf and know that sueh deaths could net
ta vo occurred because of nogllvonoe or deliberately.

i Dr. Buff, you ere acquainted with those tines by ex¬
periences. You know Or. Kasoher personally. You can,

Cher fore. for:, sene Jud^nt of bin. and you heard of his
close relationship with Hlxiulor. Bo you believe, to tho
basis of year knowledge of Condition*, th.t Or. H sober
»as pursuing on, definite ah. by f.lllns to mention those
three deaths In the official report of tho 26th of July,
which you also signed, or do you believe th.t Dr. da.cher
could have said that In r. report to Hiunlor If it hod had

anything to do with the oxporlnonts?

.. rrx . the inter la report, to Hlrr.lor which * have here

It is quite clear th t Bnschor had no occasion to hoop toy
d.aths secret froa Kinulor. 1- deaths had occurred in eur
oxporlnonts, Kosohor would have had no reason to urge that
they be tolttod froa tho report. Tho report was first sent
to riinnlor for release, and, therefore, there was no oceo-

3ior. to conceal tho lo-tfcs.

Dr. Buff, you were always a serious and oonsoionaio*

research worker in the field of aviation nedicine. Y/i
have told us that yeur Dachau oxporlnonts were In tin

interest of technical process In the field of avistlto.

They were to clear up the question "In what way -a one
rsaenr. aviators, frto-groat altitudes in esses ci accidents?"


-o' - W< _rtw- -, •

Court No. 1

Th-t ?;r5 the problem which you were bo solve. Now, if
‘.oaths had occurred in .your own experiments, one if those
•deaths hod been ooncoalod in your ewa roport, must one not
g-.y that in lno cap lobe and f lsc report would distort the
\jfcolo problem of tit- development cf r-scuc apparatus and
would hive led it into quite wrong ohmnols; that you, r.s
the scientist responsible would hive influenced technic .1
dovolopoonto in r. tot lly wrong manner?

Of course, if is r. scientist, I had been willing to
ounce .1 doaths which actually occurred - th..t is, make c
f l3u report - I would h v- violated the nest primitive
principle of the roso-.roh worker that is^ tho one that ho
nust ropert tho results of his experiments correctly end
honestly. One forgives any soiontist for drawing fal3o
ojnolu3iona fr £. hi3 rosults, but one never forgivos a
scientist if, in his work, ho misrepresents his results
and would have been whr.t this would have mounted to. More¬
over, tho oonconling of ‘.oaths would, of course, havo
affected the whole tochnionl dovolopaont of rescue
apparatus. It would havo lirootod it into false chranols.
.ibh this ropert wo assumed the responsibility. \l* said
th-t to r. height of 20 kilometers rescue by p x chute is
possible under certain oirourustr.noos. If death .V d
occurred, such re sou- would not b- possible or, .t least,
would not be definitely possible. this roas'-n done,

1- was impossible for U3 to bo cblo or be lllowed to oon-
*conl le :ths.

. D.. rtuff, in your roport,yea drov, cert in conclusions
from tho results in order tv show, in thi3 way, \ihJi
technical science uad aviation can learn for tho future
Trea this report, fheso conclusions exo under ff4.in tho
r-; ;rt which I have just ro_'.. In t: C3c conclusions you


-pril 29-M-BIWi-3-£nrrow (lot. a^onpl
Court So. 1


*

deal with the problem of coll. That is the problon which i
is nddod tc the probl-n cf altitude and oLso ho- to bo
invest looted and solved. For this cold problon I now
refer you, Dr. Ruff, to the letter which the Inspector of
the Mcf.ioal Service of the.Luftweffo, Professor Hip ko,
sent to Hinder with the dr.to of the 10th cf October,

1942, after the Dachau altitude experiments wore finishod.
It is in Docuceat fi^ok 2 ^f the prosecution, jte89, .and it
says: - I quote in order to rocrll thi3 3entunco to your
memory because every word i3 inport:Jit here:

"The Dachau hi^h altitudo experiments rxo t sc us r. very
v lu .blo and important addition to our knowledge. Tho
fact that an altitude with so little oxygon c n be en¬
dured at all for aonc tine is rest cnoeurajins for future
rosoaroh.'*

Then 0 xsjs another sontonco, and Kippko writes:

■It is true that no conclusions 03 to tho prr.otico of
P_r-.chuting can be dravn*. for the tine ooirv; as a vory
inport .ant factor, that is 00 L*., has so fur not yet bo-n
6 Icon into consideration. It places an oxtrnor'incur y
-XCQ3S burden on tho entire body nd its vital movements
sc th t tho result Li actual prr.otico will vory likely
;ro-Aj bo far an re unfavorable than in tho present oxpori-
conts.“

••nd later cones th. sontonco:

'In the oor.ntino, t„o supplementary t :sks required now.."
that is apparently on the col problem, • have beon
bc^un."

Dr. Ruff, C3 a layman, I con not jud~o tho signific¬
ance this cold problem in connection with the hish
-ltitudo experiments and how it was solved. Perhaps you

1 explain no us what tho practical v :luo of your Dachau


6555


35SS Sohoen,


M3h altitude experiments was for the needs of eviction.

TfcC 15 ’ thS PrMUoU “». though the problem of tho
offeots of col; ha; not yot boon solve;.

“ Hip - k ° 15 ri£ht tls lottor. In tho effects of
oltit^o on the hucan organism, various factors play, a role
hot only tho reduction of pressure in general; net only
tho reduction of oxygen; but c!so cola. I„ the altitudes
in which our experiments took place, here in Central
nor ope we have an average annual temperature of about
Uinus 55 degrees - 55 bole* aero. This cold has to bo
oonsidore; in some way, but is the advantage of high
altitude experiments in tho low pressure chamber that
the individual factors of the effects of altitude can be
separated. That is, one always test, the effects of tho
lack of oxygon or the effects of the lack of oxygon and
the lowered pressure, and when one .knows tho effects of
those factors, then one can go « to tost tho third factor -

•h t is, cold. l n other branches of medicine one docs not,
■'or example, if one wants to study what happens if a human
Mag has nalnrin and cholera at the sane tine - I don't

Wl,0tl “ r th “ 13 - then one does not infect

Mr. at tho sane tiro with cholera an: malaria, but first,

’ U " tha n, if ho has survived that, with

'■-•••l°ra, in order to study tho Individual effects first,

tft0 “ °" U lar& « Mo »i*h a combination of

-Marie and cholera. I enphnslxe that that is a hypo-

^ U ° a ' 4a “* -‘ n - SJ “ is "ore in the high altitude
•'■ •rinents. One examines the affect of tho lowered air
- soo.-. first. Then one adds cold when cm knows the

aff ° 0tS - Tj “* 13 >= «« 4M. -ftor the end of
" i;0hC “ »•. *> eontlaucd the parachute oxoeri-

in our institute, addins tho factor of cold. One
~^-co about, the results. The cold air had no effects


6597


85-4I-32-3-5-K arrow (Inc. Y on Screen)
Court No. 1


or. tho rosults. Tha results woro exactly the snuo as
Without the cold.

Dr. Huff, your low pressure chncbcr, ns you tel- us
yostorficy, coco back to Berlin in Huy. On the End of
Juno it was unloaded there* Now, I should liku to
icaow - did you, in Berlin, to solve this problou - the
offoct of cold - p rfore t-ny further oxporicents and aid
you anko r. report on these oxporin-nts which had nothin-j

co do with the ones nontianod hero?

.. I have already said that wo porfornod extensive
expurinonts with oold. ..s is oustoaory, a report was
issued about these oxporiaonts too.

■* Do you have this report or was this report shown
to you in your interrogations?

.. No, it was not shown to ao, but I havo it in ny

oo3session.


6598


29 Apr L7-:.-:2W*-I-Mali.y (Von Schorr.)
Court Ho# 1


q. Dr. Raff, I =•-- your official r wt of July 19U2; I «fiH
ask ;oa one sore question. In this r«;ort experiments o.; th.-aselvts
by tha to persons in char Rasc'.xr and Roaberg, arc: d_scri'xd, and
considerable pain is describ-d which Rascher and Ro-b_r.- had to 8 , 'J£»r
in bio axporiaants which they perfor-d on thersc;lves. I recall thet the
Prosecutor at on- tiue read this pcss.v,e from the report -vS dr-'.; t a
conclusion ti.:t in the c-so of the _x.-xri__r.tnl sublets, t: t ir the
outsiders, torehcr had oceuruc. fhet in otxr ords, th-t outei-'o
-xperixntnl sublets, •hath-r f.x * wr- volunteers or not r- - .c
exactly t.ic o_x, a Isos w unb_ r - , 1 . pern, os Ronberg rut* ..ase‘ -r v-n
fxy ov-r-'-r.t.t on ta ss-lves. o.-, you. Dr. hrff, told us ..sUr-
day that in so call-d altitud sicloxse t -r- io no p*m r.t : 11; there
is u co scioustv-ou, on is t o b.co .ln„ unconsc.ove; lator

on i'c _ not knov fc’.y.t orv. vr.s line xcxcrs, ant -.ost exy.rl -r.tr1
av-. .etc .i v.. no ir . th th -u- -at ir* be-r. jxnor__d. Kist is

el o' tiu ,x.-ri -nt. Th^t is your d.or.ri tion, I

Sii-vu.

A. Y-e, th?t io ri*ht.

, will you pl-r.B- • do you expl.- this contrn-

dioti n; on t:u one brad Rrsc'ver mu’ RowJirs suff-r-d even terrible
p .. i. th- .xp-ricxnto on th- a-lv s; nn the otb-r hnc you t..ll us

i sltitud. sicka-sa feel practically aothxn .

A. hat I said y.st-rtV; or *rid-;. is tru-, th t in iltitudo
sioknuBB th.r. is prsctic 11 no .-in; nltitud- sickn.ss be ir.e UB-
natic-d by the parson concerned. - fw-ls nothing. In t'—tTo oelT-
axp-ri .nts Which I r-port.c' '.u. . t is is soa. thing quit . :'i- -rent,

P.’sc ,er HR'] ilombcr^ Vv.rc st » b tw«.n 12,00C 13,500 :*tors.

T-y ixr- breathing oxygen and c’ not su/f-r :ror altitude sickness.

:.i_; were completely ccrisci' a, b~c: o- I s-.id when br_ .chin., ynr-
ozygen the feeling of tn- huram xing, tV.t is the aiticud- up to which
In couplet_ly capabl- cl :cti n, is o_t..;_n 12, COO .. 1 ,?CC :.t-rs.
Tn th- altitude b-tw—n 1C,COO -nd 13,500 TV-tcrs, aprroxi rt-ly, it is
.e-s5i :l_ that in t:i-s_ pvorla vho rr- caqxLtely conscious th_r. ir


65SS


2 ? Apr !?- *J»«-4fele7 (Vor. Scho-n)

:ourt ::o. 1


pair., liwsu so-call-d fc_r.s_. This is th. result of -h_ cc tlrt throuji

_::_rr.l louring o' she. pressure within th. tissu_s O- th- or_n-

•

:s_ nitre ar. is r-lcr.3-d. This .»itro .r. collects within -h- tissue in
tiny but L_s. It extends th„ tiasu-s and. thus c.yus .2 pc-in. this pain
ray b- c 0 .upl.Ul 7 h-rd-ss, just about the S':a_ ns bnr.ly purc.pt ible
rtaau.e.-tic pain. It car. x. si il - ao 3tror._, rheuv tic pain, but a^ain
as in t.-fl- t; o cis.s .t . r.y bo c : ui~ uxUns ive. 3ut to ecus, this
pc.in it ie -...In n.c.Jrr/ that th- p-rsons conc-rn_d r. -1 r. .at this

lo for consid.rr.bX_ ti-_. In th.se &xj>jrin.ntc of to or Slid 1
RiBoh.r on thoas_Xrv.s, which aro d-scribod in this report, Ro ber, was
r .t 12 , XO ii.t-rs for 30 ninut-s in oxv. case, beforv the p*in st rt.d,
in the second. c a at 13, XC i_Ure for UO ninut-s. 0 ISC

a Rase her t:v_r. was ouch loss pcin, th- tiro v-s so r.uch shorter. This
bona a for their dordo r.quir.s considonbX- ti-.. IXstor-
-liy I pointed out OoV.r'l tli.c that Ji -man .aviation, -.0 •, .1 .e in
t. VniUd St Us Air Force, for ~xr pi., the ercups v .ich h v to fly
-.t hi h .altitudes ar- for tr.ainin: purpos-a k«-pt at 12 , o; :a_v.vs for
co.’. tiav.. Th.y -.xv. to beco - .acquainted with tlws. co ■ X.ints t this
ltitudu and they an- oxplai.v.d tb- c uaa, th_y .an. shor-n or told th-t
by ,olr. doitr. to 8,X0 ;_t_vc s-y tit . .in can b cn.rnlly bo dorw • .my
. ith. In th.no tr.ainin testa, fi.r-fon., it is accessary to !e_wp the
.rovps u;» thuru for co -_ ti .-.1 _ forrh- reason that th* bens*, docs
not occur until if Ur so - tfcfc. Another point, did Ho 6 _r and Tt-ocher
c rr out th_3. cxp-rL.x.nts which actually h'.d nothin, to 0 -it ! u .
-xp.ri^nts for r.scu-. froi hi..h altitude. It Is cuatoaaiy for 11
hi. h -ltitude .xperX-.nts in th- low cr.ssur- chamber that th- p.rron
L-. eh-r - of th.. oxp.rir._nt or a>:~. ot’ut doctor O o.? into the la■ •

. ;• aa- r chr vr with th- subj.ct and v tcus th. subj.ct durin t.w
:;_ri: • nts, that is j^jssitl- only to * h.i 3 ht of l?,?-" --UrB.

•..r than that the •_xp.rX’_nt-l subj.ct and the doctor suhUct to
r _ -Jh'.cts, and tbereior. 1 • no jwrpoa. in tafcin a

»a v; r.o that altitude. . How, ttix-r .abd Rasch.r perfar . 1 such


29 Apr U7-(Von Scho-n)
Court 32b « 1


_xp.rivr.ts Several tir-s a d\r between 1CjOX nd 13,500 vt-rs, and
_r inthv c ha; :tvr with s;»urcl diff-.rent cxperir.mtal subjects, end now
it me discovered th* t in the first cxpcrirvr.t ar.d every day tn_ doctor
hvi no pain. In the second oxperi nnt lathi saa, d-.y, he had c cc.rt~.in
ount of bonso in* if Jv.- perfoxavd a third experiment on tha o -c day
tJwn h- d.ht auff_r severely. Ifow, in or J .r to d,tcr-in_ the cause of
it, •..’Jvitlvr the ti-.u which ?/as sp_nt at the hi^h -ltitude is cumlatiuo
in its ..ff_ct or whottor the nu-.'xr of flights is th. c 1 : 3 -, these solf-
oXp.rirv.ntc showed that actually only the tL , th.. nnoimt o. ti;v spent
-t that altitude is important, The oxperi-vttal subjects th. 3-lVeS did
.ot suffer Buch p’.ln for two r.-aons: First of ell th.y w.r. ,v.ver .t
ouch an -ltitude so Ion.,, and in the a.cond place even if they had be-n
'here that long th.y had altitude sickn_ss and did not th.r.for. register
-ny pain,

1. Dr. huff, in ox*d^r to avoid a confusion about another point in

our r-port, I should like tc cL r up t'.v followings in your official

r port. on 23 July which you ai^rvd, in the uxp.ri untal sublets you

eiitx n_d cr. pa which wore observed; I understood correctly, Pr. Ruff,

i< I not, Iintorpret th. report correctly, if I assuoo thoSe v,\ro

•

-r 'pe Which occured durin^ the so-called altitude sicka-rc, it is whin

c rsens wore unconaciou3 nnd-h-n .he oxpcri^ntal subject feels

; c ..Ciirv;-, either during th tine cr Xtermrt's, if I urn’ .rsioo correctly?

A. Yos, that is correct. I said yesterday that theso crarpr, as

✓

oc.so of epilepsy and the cr ;» caused froa thcrap-udlc purposes,
se Cl-.-rys occur while t .. p rron is isjconscious, th t h_ is n.v r
• .re of '.:>eH and nev.r feels theij.

D U SACTT21: Jr. Rrasident, in Docuiwnt rook 2 tlv.r. ar. a ir iScr
c, ictures of n expertKnt-.l subject apparently suffering fro::: slit iuJ:
...S3, and the fros.cutor said -o:e or l,ss soncthin to this e,:.ct,

" -r.ly -look at tieSe aictur.r, then if a layaan c~n -hat

pain thus-, p-opl. :ust hav_ suffered. Appearance r CLdcptivo
’.i. case, and I talct the iiborty of suheittin,. 1 book, 1 or' inal

6V*1


■


29 Apr -7- -?S-Wi4*3>0Br (Von Scbo-n)
Court 3,* 1


-ich the defendant Dr. Ruf , t. ' * vita-ss wfco subrdtt_d -r. ''Si ic’~vit,
l-rof-ssor Stro^hold, wot-, ath pictures on page IUj. I should like
to hand this book up to you. tfould you pl-'.s_ look -t it, an-'. then I
?:--.ll’ t_ll you why I on sho».'in u y*u this hook.

Ti:. EiSHDEHTs Couns.l, In couns-1 f or .th. Prcs.cution scon this

book?


D .. SAOT-Rj 1 sn r.boui to ir- bin th- book. Your Honor.


do art 1

A ril 29-^-h-l--i3ehon-.iD-vor. 5c non


DA. Gentle sen; If one Ioo2c6 at these pictures

one m6 the imuression tat It must ze terrible pain,

V lor. tr.ase ceuyle are suffering; one may even h ve the
i .pre 3lvr. that these «r^experiments where the exper¬
imental subjects ere enduring such terrible tnlngs that
t .ey re bout to ale. In reality, any avl tlon export
will tell you that the excermentel subject picture here
felt nothing at all in these experiments. Thct is oume-
t/.in 0 that we as 1 y-men cannot understand, but it is
so. Look t tne L st olcture, gentlemen, you will see
c the left the Defendant Romberg In his normal condi¬
tion nd on the rl .at ou will se. him in c ol^no at
vor hi 0 A speed completely dlatortei; ho almost looks
lead. If, os o l^y-m. n, one loo/.s rt the picture one
a i'3 to oneself the f <ce of Romberg le so distorted thct
it c n never become o normal faoe a .air.. Kevei'tholeac
tie T*n fdlt nothing ir. the experiments and the girl,
w j we s 190 In the ncturo, wno was a loo so terribly
distorted momentarily d-rln& tne experiments, she did
r.ut fot-1 anything either. Vr.en the Defendant Romberg
Is on tne witness stsnd . nd has taKcn the orth, he can
- oce under oath wnetaer t.e felt anything during these
experiments or not.

Gentlemen, I am showing ou tnls bo -/, and neve s.iown
1 : t^ c e Frosec-tlon also because It Is n uracil c< 1
"lu co show xiov easily an experienced lay-man can
- :i~t sen on the basis of such Pictures. Perhaps lr.

* 1 connection I c n ash Dr. Ruff, who also participated
- c experiments cs an exoerlmer.tal subject.

Dr. Ruff, I discussed these pictures with you the
day: can you tell us as an ej-p;rt tnat these
riaentel subjects suffered no pain worth mentioning


66OS


Cu-irt l

April 2 -X-5f2- J-heeben-von Sc.'.on.


d-rln: .'..e exnerixent«, although tr.ey looh so terrible
1 n iM ree?

Tnet Is true jo Co the speeds described here,
jc C<v >So iclloxetere oar noar t..ere is no in worth
jentlonln.. It suat oe esnhasized of c arse t these
ae >le era co-oletaly oonolOJS.

Jr. i\j.'f, o^ra- pa ,oa cen also tell the irlo-nol
x t 860 nlcturee were tanen very briefly?

/». Iney were ta^en v..lle a olsr.e v.?6 in c power
dive. She person •.as loo/.ir.-, ov^r the roof of the cebin
f«nd the pic cares were t'ocen; that is tnecereon waa In
tn . o late a trees of air.

.. Or. Raff, row I cose to the conolus on of the
jJcoheu xporisents; I have a few slnor questions to css
•• •

RjvRiXf: ,t*iy It pleaso four .-.onor, these olctui'eo
V ioh e offered In ovi 40 r.ce In t..ls book refer to o
3 cod cast ond aa far so I oan cake oat have no ooui.oc-
t- •* wits hl©h 1 ticade -roerl xante.

-R. :«.‘T -R: .ir. Prcllont, the rroecc-tor is pro-

* ft n:{ • ulnst sor.ct in. t.. t w a never cleiaed. I did

r.. t :•«. / t / t those exoorlsents .uju anythin^ Co do with

•

* a - oh-a nl u n altitude experiments. I jjbsltted tne

aerely Co show you that exoorlxents can be
-ocepfcivo. «s a 1 y-.jar., one can es?use that soaeono
In c r dole a In bat In reallt. It Is n rxlese. It
v - for t la oarjosd tn t I aajnltt.ci t..ese Ictares.

I 1 r.-UiI-ilT: I ala not onderat'icd that counsel^

: -.3 dcfander.t of far-id the boot lr. evl-ente.

-R- - DX: It wee oy nderstrndin- he r.-a fr-h Che

r;g of Cne'defenat counsel. I object tv tne bo,.

6 b_ir.. iuostdrlel.


sen 4


• * •. n n


rt-ril 83-»-5-3-hJ-rteenan-von Scr.on.-
Court 1

-' £H-rlj£..T: Counsel, die. o- offer this ‘2004 In

evidence .r merel -eir.- it to illustrate the testimony
of fcns witness?

DA. iaJTiH: Only for tr.e letccr d rposc, only Co he
e:ie tc enow it to the witness.

3" DR. :n T •?.:

*• Dr. Raff, 70 a signed on of; la vit, I believe it
• e in Cvt-.her of S-* 5, Document .> 0 . ‘.3?, Prosecution
I /.i it By. 4?, this is in Joc-ment 3o Sc 2 on : -e 4o.

There Is ? sentence lr. t.ere, wmlcm w, e re d to you .y
the Fro-icutor and it reeds: “Personally, I vuj la consider
t'-ose exjeriments d-rm • sr-tlne cs iamoral. ■ ' 1 th

re i t c..ie s ntence, or. cne lOtn of December n^ro,

C..3 Prosecutor oold that in .is .oclnlor. it was quite
.T..-U.1 c.irt you, Dr. Ruff, oositlvol say in oar affi¬
davit c j. do not Cintider tne-e experiments id-oral,
-oceci-U; in war tico. low, I should 1 U* to /.now whet
aosr. :y t..is sentence so ti»t wron conclusion
lj .c drawn from It?

’.or. the Pros cutor showed au this affidavit,

>* lo_ Coy :.id formulated, the final sentence v: 1 t.ict I
c naidored these u.vjorlaonte ocrnissable lr. war-time,

: i* p^oce-tlsa I vo Id duolrre them specifically
or_. 2 i.iel or im torsi. I refused to si.n this euntur.ee
•. dlsaueslen fallowed, laetin 0 more t. n an .our.

-*c 5 .1 Since v.»d c im.ed repeatedly and I repeatedly
r . d to el 6 n. Finally, I declared ays. If will in- to
- m : is formal:- 1 ion. Sn. t is w C..13 sentence came *
t. .1 c 1 wr .te in t. is sentence v g my opinion a*-
cime and is eo _ven tome;*, imis a nter.ee refers
xlualraly to tr._ experi_ents, w..ich we e i-rfor-ea et

vicm cy _r.-vle-_e ena approval beca^s* ti.e lnterro. ■-

>r. * . * •


66«5


.■orii 2 5-4—-.D-.te~har.-von avan,

Court 1

before the effid vlt v s written, -ven today, I ara of
:-e -oir.i r. that - c. n stand up on t.-.ls oolnlon. ’-/hen
I ,i.r.id t..is 6 ntance, I w s .-ctln fc on the fssuaotlon
t.:~ •: tho. were important experiments, th-t the experi-
-c.-.ts wavs 3erforx«u_on professional crialnele, who had

v. iuatoarod and teat after surviving tho ex erlEonts,
t ese orixinale w eld be &iven Certain advantages. I
os uxo- that as far t a ay Jud t oent co-id deolde that
theeo oxoeriaen 9 woro not dan t erou6 '•nd tr.-'t w: a the
br6la for the sentence, iven today I can ecu nothin D

i moral in that. «t the tixe tho exborinents were carried
out, we were involved In a very serious war throughout
j^rxnny, day after day and nl 0 ht . fc«;r ni c ht, xer.,

w. aen rnd celldrud ond to expect to bo elllcd and
loesibly by the terrible aothod of burning to deotn and
millions of people h a to B lve up their lives .■ t tho
front, Neither tnen nor now cun 1 soo nnythinc immoral
in sin. a profess 1 n 1 crlxinol v;.o volunteers for such
ox:erlxdnts.

Dr. Ruff, if tho experiments wnlcn you approved,
th.-t is exoorlscr.ts to rescue plane crows from hi&h
altitude, wore properly preoar d ..nd properly carried
out, d-< you believe that three deaths or five deaths
w uld be :.o8c lblo?

«. l.o, that w uld h vv been quite impossible. It
is, of c rse, not ..ntiroly iujos^lblo that one ueuth

Id a ve cc uro: bv an infer tuna te accident or a cpeolal
vc -.xst'-noo, but with this one dc th the expovladfrts
1 .. .. ve coe- to an end, because tula one do. t.. would
v. s. ov.n t at frox t.;e height they were tritin^ olaee,

- o ilu. r.-ot count on certain rescue by paraoftute.


66^6


.loril 29-Ji-5-8-KD-keehan-von ochon.

Court 1

Dr. Raff, we know froa the oroceedln & s so far
z:st after the chaaber was returned to ierlin, nascher,
.'ulff, even hlanler oers nelly and also clevers were at
L ro£t .seine to _et the chamber back to weehau, but
t Is w -; fruetreted by the Luf .waffe; did yo- nave any-
t. in* to do with tnla; what was your attitude toward
this aaoirnd of the 53?


sew


29 *.ril-K-J?--€-l-31aklcy (Int. Von Schan)

Court I, Cose I

Am Yesterday I doscribed briefly th_t 2 taw two letters fr:©

Volff. Ibo first v.t a telegTon ia :a*y. 2to second v_s a letter fra:
.olff dated the beginning of June. Ia both Cases Eipnko agreed with ia.
*.-.nt aoscher Was not to get tho low Pleasure enjaoer bock to Dachau.

Of the l„ter letters which are in the docunenta hare I know nothing.

Onl" a fe" Rontha later I he-rd froe Ecfiberg tn^t Siavars nod called
his up and h.d -skod hii whether ho intended to p jrf ore new exp-riu onto
with -cocher -t Dachau, he, Sierera, hod gi*en the uoaignaent to
obtain end buy - oobilo low pressure chjsbcr for the SS. I reportod
taia f.vct to the medical Insp^ctor-te. to Dr. Bccke^-i reysong

I o^Uod hla uttoation to thia point -ad told ala th-t I considered
it oup .rfluo\ui for Dr. aaachor, who was etiU on tho Uiftwaffo then;
e\V.l If hOW.B to bo ..(lies-! -lSeWherO, he Should haVO ilio WOfl lOW
proenur- ch.abor, >.y attitudo tow-rd j»r. E-ccher'a vx>-rlnunts —

Jid thia led to the witcdr-wal of tno ch^ocr nni tho refusal to grant
f-rther cjii-riaontB-—wua th.t I did not any ioportant, urgent reason
to carry out experiaunts in which deaths could or h.d to occur. In
dditioa to tola -ttitudo toward* Kaacn^r'a exporinonte. there vac
another f.ctor for ae ueroonolly, which c-usod no not to collaborate
with a..Gcnor at -11 any core -cd not to c-rry out oxporinonto in u
concentration Ca~o at all.

.’lu.t W..8 boCaUBO of the ninor things, a cove all the fact that
•rin£ tho uroorinenta ia tho conccntr-tion c^ips ono wuo cc*plotoly in
the h.ndt* of tho can ccca and acta, E-achor or KinaUr; th..t ono had
t r.”.b'.rdia. te oneself to these pcoole; and th-t there vac painful
-.<'r_cy, no doubt -t the in^tig-tion cf Eascher, who wanted with
' secrecy to -void any results of these experiments turning V
Hcnoat ma .vxe being uentioaed. On tflO one b-nd, he -ad ninnlor
luo^adcd strict Secrecy; and, on tno otaer hand, he tried to havo
t.-.-bo results published. L-tor I -Iso le-med fra: n-sche-r tn_t ho
n_; Oe.it is own f ther to u oonsontr-tio.i c a-p, or, rather, th..t he

t.c n;out the f-ct tn .t r.e h-d seat his ovn father to a concentration


8


29 -'.ril-si-J?—S-3-ilokley ( Znt. Yon Sccca)
Co*?t I case 1


c.-sp. 2hi« Showed Bw tn_t tnia aon h_d qualities of a cbar-ctur
v :ch Bade it impossible for a. to work wito hia at U 1I.

-hcc, huff, you s-w to it th^t hoscfterwos not aolo to cn—
pori oat vita the low nrcssur. ciijibtr „t „11 any soro und for this
virpoao through the co-dof-ad-at jeckor-lrcyseng yo i confiscated all
-reduction i.i tais fiold for tho luftwaffo? !s th .t truo?

a. uo, tn..t is not quit. true. Z v^a not -do to do th-t. Z
v u s ole only to w„rn tho nedicol lessee tor..to and give tho suggestion
to atekor-rroyseng.

q. ^it 3eckoi^-?rcysecg did confiscate all tho production for
i.'.io iuroosc in order to furstrato >u.schar; is tn-t ;meT

a. VOS.

q. .'ow, vita.st, the witness buff, whoa wa h_v« Buntionod s-vorol
times, on the. 18th of joe ember stated here th-i a roaduately 180 to 200
prisoners h.d been used for the high -Ititude erp«rin«nts, a-id about
70 to o 0 of thua had died. K aff did not n-ke - distinction and was
.. ; ..ole to b<JCw a distinction between the orderly experiments in
v.'cl: .Isobar j, p-r tic ip-tod -ad the independent experiments of auschor
tf vr. cli "ou know nothing, . ow, Z -sm you, when did you leurn for tho
f'rst tiuo th .t 180 to 200 orisoners w-re uc^ and that no loss than 70

f

or ao loot tholr lives? You said yesterday ta-t only aoout twolvo
prisoners, between ten and fifteen, -ad always the same people, woro

used?

I nojrd those numbers for the first ti«o here during tho trial.

3 rin.-* tho interrof—tions Z did not Ov s these figures.

T.. Dr. 2uff, you told u« th .t you w^ro told th-t ine-ao people ^

’ vol intOeTs. Vow, let n» tjco the cthat someone, geeborg or
—•-a--r or _c:f or t..e c^.p coc and-nt, told you, "Vo d.n«t h-vc agf ve-
laatUeTs. .hey .are simply assigned.* -hat would ;m n-v. done t.iea ifaon
r-u m.u a.thing about tats trial? Vh-t attitude wool* you h-va taken
‘-<*1


2S ^ril-WP-5-3-31Jcl»y (1-t. 'on i*hon)
Court I Case 1


a. ea a v oil ns tod-y I would two refused to -ceopt thoso
-jrisoucra. I would two a ad to refuse th*. I hare »„id yosterdny
t.;. i id our experioenoa for rescue free high altitude v« vert dependent
on :..e .ctiv- cooperation of the sxperisentol subjects. Jkc exiori-
B-itol a ejects n«d tv be interested in tao «xperisents| otherwise, it
v..s possible to Curr- out the ezperiacnts properly. wen nn&sr
tno conditions prevailing -t the tine under the power of tr.e coc.:und_nt

s

or Li~»:lor I would r—vo been able to re-furc tnese er'Jerlnents without
eay personal daivj-r to cyself by sayisg, r »c c-nnot use involuntary
a -'ejecta. It Ca;' be all very well i ran tne lcg_i point of view, but
far thes- o^oerlsante We c-nnot use anyone except volunteers. Acso
eroc.'iacnto can bo p_rfor=cd only on volunteer#.■ 3xnt would h-vc boon
c; point of View at that tiao; -nd I still hold ,t.:ia cuco position
•.lay.

Q. 3r. Xuff, you told us yesterday th_t Jr. r.ocoarg hud had a
definite prograc to clarify an iaport«at question for the Lufivaffo
and t'n .t h_ hv. gon* to D.chu”. with tnls -vrogTun. our report of tho

?‘th of Col;’ 19-.2, the official report, which vu discussed oeforo,
o ... it c. iv tn w t tne Daci'.gu, cxurln-nts, that is, the c^ooriuonta
v.-.-ch o.'. aporWed, ware actually United to tne neCets^ axperiucntn,

*.; Is, ti. exoerioeats v..lch were necessary to cl-rify tnis problas
f’V t-.C LuftWaffe?

a. Hint is expressly ueatioaod several tine# ia tno r«r>ort.

S'- .e 2 of tne re ort it s-ys, I q otoj *1 c^d to dispense With
'• - lied cl nifis_tioa of purely scientific questions for tno tL-o bolng.»
r n ago 15 i; s»j*9, I quota; "Sinco tho slow sinxing txocriaentc
> - i ut oxygen h_d reached the liuit a:paTontly, oiahing oxoerL-ents wore
e i<-‘- .ut frvo ni,.he-r altitudes with oxygen.* On p-gu 15 it says, I
l to; * linkin', cheriaeats with even high-r altitudes were aot -'crf?r-
since ia pructico there is no nece-sit to us- the eoun p.-.r«*-
. ... s-jch .^titudes and «x»oso ones-lf to th* d~ager of frrolng.’


«Sin


29 ' G i -jlaklty (let. 7on Schcn)

Gcart I Case 1

On tee so=*j page, In the next par«igr_Qh, it soys , I quote:

■Jhroc falling oxn-rinents were begun _t 14,000 noters in order to
ar-id having too largo a nusbor of expcrinccts.■ On page 20 it cc^s,
• 2 xpcriscnto with explosive docctprossion without previous oxygon res¬
piration wuro not Curried out because we w.rc working on tho assunption
t.. .t in c .ebut the cneny pressure cabin pl-n-s can fly with on oight
kiloacter e.tuospher-. ■ Those quotati ;ns, I believe, show th..t tho
cxperlnents were liaitod to wh^t wj absolutely nee os a ary.

% Vitnoss, -off told us tn-t in i a all-god high altitude or-
p-rinont ono oxp-riaent .1 subject died and to .t then .at 10,000 notars
within the ch.aecr .a rotopsy was perfornod. Vnoi did you first
lycra of this ease?

/W I h«crd of this for the first tico when ifeff said th .t on
too vitneen stand.

2H3 ?:-S:r2.T: Couno-1, tho Tribunal will now be in rocoso.

(a recess was taken)


6611


29 April UWU»T3-9-l«?£loy (int. 2rown)

Grort Ho. 1

r-2 : A3SHiLi The Tribunal is again in session.

■ *  8h:ai -* finished in two or three r-Lnutos with the

iroct oxrinrtion. 7s be. vs only n few questions yet to put. Aside fron
t-a d h altitude Jcpori-xmts with tho low pressure chamber Dr. Raschor
c-.rrio • -nit nurercus other exparinents, for axmplo -.the ft-oozin - oxperi-

• - nt3 * lcw ^Twmturo csqwrinontj, 3 tc„ which lend to mry dacths
or te sorer a ! - o tc the subject's health* when and hor id you hoar of
Dr. Itaachar's furt'.iar exporlranta?

A I knar cnl i onto. I was e.t tho froozinp

f.r.r.co ihioh has Tr -ly bo here ir. ’Mmbor-, and

:iearl there Professor Holsloehnor's report. hen hcarin this report I
1 not :r - vo i^PT-salon that Dr. Holzlouhnur had had fatalitios in

hio o-; rl-cntj. Tbn ^operation rj such that cn_ would cortainly think
whon ho was s.^akin of fatalitios ho was spoakin :f Soonot fatalities.
It was known that Bolsloohnor had previously had a station to alloviato
soa -istross in too P'orth Son, and that ho ha-! conploto experience about
aoa distress there. On this occasicn I hoard of low tonpercturo ux?«ri-
" ,,t0 bcdr ' oarrWl oMt, that rdL-sior hoi toll Dascher to carry rut
frooainj oxr^rinonto was known to no previously bocauso whon Raschor and
" ior roporto l to Hiidor, TL-rOor ixmticnod this rtor to Raschor in

rtidpate in th. -• riaonts. At that
tl-o r^or- refused to do so on th_ rounds that ho ms not c epodaliat
— this fioli, Tho Institute had nover cone erne-' itself with sea distress
p-'lens, and what he xm turned frea this report to Hirlcr !?=rbor': tel*
no about this Mil asked ru in caso a request shruld bo iroctc ! to tha

that Berbers should participate in thoso aeportoofits, — I

* l * L ' ‘ ylf t0 " TOiI P^ciFatin; in than. Hsrovor, such a request

• r —Othcr-.-isc, I navor heard of or* other oxporluont of Raschor

boforo or after that.

o At tho free sir. conference ia 27 October 19h2 yea wore present?

YoS ' ^ «* Aviation IMcia) Conference. Thc-ro wore several

* n ovsn if T ' h under discussion fchoro — ; 3 not specifically


6612


29 „pril U7-H->.TD-P-2i=l-y (Int. Brcwn)
Caurt 1


c-ur fidravsrthelcss, we were coke ’ to attend those conferences, and
if ytq hr.' Ob a to wo pcrtidpctod in than.

Q In other *tcrds, you wore there only as an auditor?

A Yes.

Q Because you woro ordered to do so?

A Yes.

q Dr. Ruff, yau are also char o ’, dth conspiracy, in >thor words,
conspiracy with all the othor ^fondants, ani those you wore oado
cc-roaponsible for everythin that the other neobors di ’j for this
reason it would interest no to know what relationship you had with the
othor neObors in the dock, a n' what relationship fi i you hnvo dth tho
oxpirlnonta oarric l out by thj 'octars?

A “ofora I onno to Bimborw I know of the o-isfen.Lants personally
cnly Profossor ^chroo'arj Professor Rose vary sli htly, wo had soon oach
otlior c.aca or fcdc ; Dr. Rosier , of course; Dr. Bockor ’'ryson , ?ro-
f jfTor olt» an' Or. tehaafror. I not Dr. Schnoffcr in 19h5. T know by
av.o Professor Brandt, Pr.-fosscr Kanlosor an' Professor Rostoc':, also
Profoasor Odbhnrdt and Siovors, nrr 1 othorwiso no ono. Thu others I know
rt.dV.ior srsonally cr by nauo. I had ;r. fo a atonal relationships only
It*: Profossor Schroodor, Dr. Ronbcr , Dr. Booker Fraysoa and Profoaaor
:• in oxporinenta that are horo un’.cr eons! , on

-.c^unt of which tho othor tafon ‘-ants aro accusel, I hoar • horo in
dumber.'- - as I have alroay said, only tho froosirv" erporinonts, end in
>9h$ r tha be innin. of 19U6 when I saw a report I had occasion also to
"i: out about tho ’rinkin vr.tjr oxporlnonts. It is of course to bo
'•■ndarstoo .1 that I nay have hoard sonothin, at tho .n.I of tho war to tha
ffoat that «jX7 rin_nts were bdn- carried out to ask. sea Afr.t r . fiblo,
at I eannot recall that, however, only -f the oxpcrinsnts I heard of -*t
Ve ,nd of 19U5 or tho be innin of 19U6.

■1 Dr. Ruff, since yen are suonkin new of the ’xinkin' water experl

, I sh ulc like t_ iroct your attention t -not has n ait in

hce ir. this case, na ooly inutas fcetin on tho 19 -S "r.y


29 April l:7-:'r^n>-9-3-ifcloy (Int. Prcwr.)

Coart :>c. 1

19kk in Docuront Book 5, exhibit 132, Docu-^nt 177, those are inutes
of a noetir. in tha 'toich ..ir itLnistrv. 7hi Technical Office there fren
tho rest of tho distributors, it shews that a copy of theso r&nutos waa
senl to year Institute, at least it i3 so statoi, an* un’or the list of
those to when the odnutos wero to be sent tho Institute for ..vintion
"o 'idno, DVL, "orlin "larshof, is neutiono'. representative of your
Institute was not .-raaont at ths ccnfaronco of 19 "ay 19lw, that is to

* e soon fr-r. th: list of those present* However, cron' thoso prosont
un’or ’k>. Ik, Dnternrzt Dr* Schaeffor is rantiona 1. However, ho -'l-' not
bolon to y ur instituto, but t; tho sj-callo:! Luftfnhrtforsohm;.s
Instituto of tho Roich Air "inis try, in other werls, tho Instituto which
Professor Stru hoi! was in char e of, ’ ut Profoasor Strahol »s Instituto
ia net rr.or. these to v:hor. tho report is istrlbutoi, althou h a pro-

f os nor frer that instituto -.-ran pr^scht. ’to-., I shall bo intjrestj’. to kror:
whothor in 19kh, at ary rato ' -iforo thi on' of tho ’or, you saw thoso
idnutos of !!ay 19Ulij wore they breu ht to y:ur official r.ttontion?

.. I cnnr.'t recall this •.-jcur.ont, an! I txiiovo I shoul’ rarwribur
it ha’ toon brou ht to ry attontion. [broover I can't quito boo why this
r port, tho3o rdnutos shculhave boon cont to no, bocauso as I sai l
'oforo our Instituto novor concornod itself with ary of tho questions
involvo-t in sen istroso, in othor wor s, Uiey d ’ not concom thon-
f^olvo3 with "akin sea water potable.

T Did Professor Stra hold's Instituto concom itself with that?

 Yos, they i yea.

1 Di ' y-J not assure, "r. Buff, that tho nano of ycur Instituto

• included by r.cci lent in tho nano of those to which thoso imteo

:■ ‘is tribute’., bocauso year Instituto is .aliost i iontical in mru to
la'f<’3sor Stra tel'*s Instituto?

I consi ’or that c -3si ilo, but I .k not kivr-.

Dr* Ruf r , in the ©'•nrso f the trial wo have hoard of nunomus

^ §

rl c-nf roncos, for oxanplo the reuiar conferences of tho consulting
- r tho fahmacht r.®atin in St. Johann, 7 . -lin.


5 614


29 April 1*7-? -.73-9—.-: lilcy (Int. groan)
C>'jrt So. 1


Ifehlychen, and ao forth j i you yourself take part in such conferences,
or was your institute represented thoro?

1 I never took .art in tho conferences of the Consultinr Physicians,
sirxo I ns n.’t the consult in physician of any branch of the amy. Ify
oo-rorkora 'lac X’. not take art in any such conference, an! I did not
neatve tho reports freo toon.

Q Dr. luff, you know of tho oxporirvjnts in Dachau, I should like
t. knew now !i ’ you otoca-wiso in a concentration canp or a risen or
1 -, nitantiary, carry out oxpcxlnants with prisoners or articiKto in such
experiments?

A Koithar before or after tho Dachau uxpv.rinor.ta *id. I ca.rry out
axperL”. j nts in a c ncsntrr.tiai oaap or a .rison or penitentiary.

0 ';. S..UTER: !b aoro questions in too Xrcot oxnrdnation.

7 •, rRZSnE.’iT: Do any of the ofonso counsol iosiro to propound
questions to this witness?

D 1 '. ILLS i Dr. ill*, for *olta.

ST DR. ILLS i

1 Dr. Ruff, lot -\i ask a f an questions. To crainaro, Profosaor
‘ Its, lot no ask fl.rot f all that I .athurod fron ycur diroot axorl-
ratdon that you ha ’ knerm Professor ..'cat* possibly for a Ion • tiao, as
ciiijaaias y.u had -tutual respect an' os too r., an' tfxroforo you nay be
•- lo to stato that all your a. rooconts vvoro carrio! out in this respect
als?2

- I OS, I havo alror-V sai * that ’-hen rrofossor olts -n do this

- i ion th*t experiawnta be carried out in Dachau I hat! known hin for
'•-V years, and that I he ! no reason to supposo ho was proposin' nmr

. -isvints which he considered unathiool or a'-cut which, he hafl any

- 1 a3su^-.tions.

'• In r-k-r tv clarify this natter, tvaaoly tho natter of this

I should UJco you to dascriba briefly just what I on talk in. *

~' ri ' ^ro in Dcounant !*>-c37, o u6, :f too Goraan Docunont Book,

- 6 in the Dccu-r nt Book, ycu sai:* ‘I tullovo that Viol 13 tci nc in

*


6515


29 -’411 U7-'^.n>-3-5-fclo7 (In.. 3ror.)
Court ?fo. 1 »


I>3cc=bar ho wsnto’ no to carry out oxporin.r.t3 in the concentration ccnp
Dachcuj it Ktmlr' b3 troll if special is t3 in this fioli would holp in
r.haso oxo^rlrenta, qnd for this reason .'eltc .t in touch -.tith no. "That
is whet y?u sai I lr. this affidavitj non, in your ‘iroct axordnation you
scplnino this stats—nt by sayir, that the a. roc-rent km tho result of
a conversation that took place in ~1 '.arshof Berlin, io that corroot?


29 «pril-i.-Geh&D->(int. -r *n;-
C-urt Ho, 1

n y.s, that is c rr.ct. ih&n he visited B-rlin, Prafessr -dti
trld Rt that thr u-h Raschar and threu-h .cits' institute, -xp.rizk-nts
•v-r- t' b_ carried 'ut in Dachau, that Hippie. hac riven his aire_aent
in principle tr these CXa-ricents nenths Of,a, tut that these cxperin.nw
tfcu pl-nnin sta.c sir.ee they wore r. t ur-er.t :nd it wns
* cr thl3 reas r. r~ su ,-st.d that th. wxp.rln.nt* b_ carri.ri -ut In
D chcu

Q S », I hav. this further qu.sti.n, which a aii. r- f.rs t' y.-ur
affidavit; ycu alsc stated that Prefesser cits vr.s lnf.ra.d f the .x-
peric-r.ts b..in carried ut in Dachau .and wns ri-r.tated r.varSinc that;
o.w his atatea.nt c.uld be Blaunicrwtc d/what exactly did yeu o-nn by

that?

a That Burnt that itlts was inf-ra.d and iri.ntat.d abcut th.

; ' A nnin. f th.s. -xp .rin.nts, because ir w a his su .sti n that th.
experinents take place. He had th. ccnftr.ncc in Munich, w were in

sane tie. and discussed th- a&tter with the oaap c'.aaund.rj

•r. * uxtent bite As rlcntated cb ut .x/'.ric.nts in Dachau.

‘ ay n.xt quest! n; was .cits inf re.-i abcut th. cariyin cut f
th. cxp.rin_r.ts?

a I :* 1 : n t s *ak u ..Its abcut that.

J Ci,J y a *ivt his r Jin:l r«p rt?

" Jfc, n: r.p rt reached hin fr.n us.

W Ds you knew wheth-r ..Us r.ceivud such i r.p rt fro elsewhere?

* Of that I kr..w r. thin.,

* H. ardin th. hi h altitude expwlmnts, then, is • fila in exis-
t.nc.; > u kn n rtj.tn.r ..Its saw that file?

« K , I d: r.' t.

d C.m, u s.-y ch-ther ~cltz kn.c-r akaut thu f-tnllti.s?

“ ; cann a cay that f.r sur., f c urr., but 1 consider it inprabi-
- • -» nys:lf, t id hin n thir. ab ut that.

- "■* furth r qu.stl ns.

•• :ii\ : ( Counsel f r th- Tv‘.r. -af&cko-,r j S .n .)


6617


29 - -rii-. —JJ-1C-2—li,_han-( in t. =r *n)-
Ccurt H>-. 1

. Dr. /.uff, h'~ lor.- h_v. ycu kr. wn & cckc,r-:r-ys.n:.)-

.. Since 1938 r 1939, at that tin- Dr. E.ck-r-; xyseiu, was assis¬
tant it the luftfahrt .udisinisch- ?-rschur.~sinstitut ef the ,.ir iir.is-
tiy.

Th_n, nh.n urin, th_ hit did you -nt.r official rolati ns with

hin?

.v In the c urs- «-f 19L1.

Q On wh t ccasi n?

.v ~t th. b- innin, i 191x1, I *as rd.r-d by Hippk- of th- ^>dL-
cal Inspect r te, t visit 11 th. law pressur- chiab-rs in G-m:nyj
th.ro r-rc twenty-liv. cr c.r. <f then .nd then U subsnit 3 np rt vf
th- c nditlcn f the l:w pressure chaab-ra and -la t au est any
technical inpr v-a-nts that ah uld b- c .rrl cut -.r, th- lew pr-ssun.
charters. Then, in ecnnocticn with the r-p rt that th Heal Inspect -

rate rectiv-d, Dr. o_ck-r-*Tcys.n was .sai n t‘ carry ut. th.3e tech¬
nical iapr v-n-nt3 :n * it was n this cc si n that I r-.sua-c! official
relit! whip with 9_cfc -r— r,yr*-n...

•i Dr. Ruff, h ti It.- :i B;cker-.rt>»en hav- anythin. t -
with this re-av o-lin ?

.. This, I conn t t-11 y u, tut it nj quit- rhil. it 1 -.at; «-rc
thin a y_-.r.

Q I u Boy, in th-r w-rds, that *r f-ss-r -eck-r-frcysen fr.J
191:1 :r. hid t c.- with th- 1 w pr-ssur- chambers; new the a bile 1 w
r soup- char.b-r that na.used in Dachau, which pliys i considerable
r 1 in this tri^l <n th- Tribunal c ull r-rhaps b. f th- pini r. that
! -ck-r—r ys-n r.is i.-pr v*n t th use f th- cjinb-r in i>lchftu, p'.rti-
■n:t rly because y u said in y ur dir-ct .xanini i r. that this chJLr
• l.n . ' t th- ..ir inis try r.d th- Ludic.il Insp-ctor t*. hid rd-r-J
t. a?v f the ch-aivr in ‘-achau. C'r. , u pi-"- .11 th. Tribunal wheth-r

: -ct.r^fr-ysen ha' anythin t - rith the use f the Dachau chaab.rt

.. M , h- -id r..t. This was a new choabcr, rhich was sent t. us


j h- 2 -liv.ry fira on: We n u received r..ro s n th- H.dicil


>

29 «pril-1'.—JJ-10-3--1—h on-(int. Br-wn)-
C'urt He, 1

Insp_ctorate t 'build a few additional pieces f apparatus into the
1 rr pressure enaaber. Fer instance the tclcph n- syst.= that c rr-spends
t.the no you nave in an airplane, also wo had te install the oxygen
.quipoent. This was d :ne‘ by us, because we had th. specialists available
•h did it vun short f w;rks in .*ur airplanes. In rather w rds, the
chnnbcr was net b e in used in the nr-sol military way and fr that rea-
s n it was n.t set up wider 3ccker—Teystn- 's supervisi n.

Q Or- .itn-ss, n'w in this c nnecticn one other quest! n.

In y ur direct -xanin ticn by Dr S.autcr, y. u said that y.u had 'nly
sp-ken t Bcck.r-Freysvuv , I su?p s. at the _nd f 19li2,.about the fact
that hascher wantoi a 1 w pressure chmb»r f r his future cxp^rinx,nta
nd y u said that y u saw n necessity f:r suidin• such a chanter t
Dachau an y u said further that y u had warned bcck.r-Freysen; about
the S3 plan, t eta lew pressure chnaher fry uraolf, is that what
y.u said?

U XeS.

%

Q ™ 111 y u pl.asc tell th. Tribunal that °uckcr-*rcyBcn • said,

«hen y u nvo hin this wnmin ?

A Dr * ^ckvr-lr.yc.n said h. wruld . .t in tcuch with the firs. ..t
first h. .v s f the a a. uin. s I, li. o .id he n uld in t uch with
the fira zrs: see t it that th. firn a-.de its entire prrductl n available
nly to th- I^rtwaffe.

. This is ttk. fira ^.urtsen?

A YeS.

i Thank y u. New a further qo.sti n, Cr. Ruff -did you kn w the sc-
c::l1 ” Mudlcal Exp rienco re? rtc and when c.r. these rep.rts ^ntr ducod?

.. I kn.r f thee, t h,y w>r- issued a nthly by the tr :p >J. ct rs
..ith the f li- ht units ;ni they reported n anythin that *&s interesting |j

:r ~ :a ;viati -t P int f view. ..lien they wore- first introduced, I cann t
f-y, but r:urhly it ms durin- the first y^ors i th_ war.

; *nd - yeu ala kn r vh. r rked n these r.p.rts at the medical

I aspect: :T.t_?


6619


29 AoriI-4t-GJ-10-l»-ltcchaiiF-(int. Br~*n)-


Court Mo. 1

ft I ka n that Btckcr-rrcyscng did. I knew this because ire frequent¬
ly saw parts of these rep' rts md we received then whenever the r.parts
c:ul’ help us in solving any :f our own pr bices. F*r instance, in the
c .Se parachute Junps, thero-had been several fatalities because the elec¬
tric ccrd free the car phenes had beecos lodged ar und the neck f the
pers :n wha iras dropping and strangled hin. -<e had t* clear up Che ques-
ti n f h-* these accidents c.uld be prevented.

Q C ul J you -sticate hor aiony rep rts there acr. ever/ nenth?

A I shculJ say there r-re fr e tt f tfarao hundred,

Q Thank you. M r a quest! n rtgardin., hi.h altitude exporinenta-
ti n. Dr. Ruff, you r.ceivad rep rts n the c.rrccti ns, y u delivered
a lecture r^irfrdin.; the results -f thes. hi^h altitude ejq..rlncnts and
this rep rt was printed; when was this lecture .-nd wr.en was it published?

/. It is true that I delivered such s rep:rt in the ftCadcoy f r
..ir Research, n t directly ab ut these ejq^risv-nts but about tho general
questi n f tho p ssibility f savin, pe pie fr a hi h -ltitude, but in
this lecture the r suits I the Dachau exp-risants n.re alo discussed
and evaluate that nust have n in lato autuaa r -arly -inter cf 19D2,
r th- -nd cf I9h2; in ther - r s I not kn w the exact >te. «s ycu
s y, it n.a publish d, but I n t kn w the date f that public iti n
ither, it certainly sppears in *' Jahrtuch Ter Luftf.hrtf rschun ," I9h2

- 191 * 3 .

Q Thank yu. M--w, can yn als say rheth-r y u nenti he-’ th_ nuc.s
-f P. nb.r' ml Reseller in y.ur lecture?

•v ies, c-rt-inly.

Q D yni kn.* whether this rep rt n.nt t the medical Inspects rate?

« I had t sh*w this l.cture t the Medical Inspect rate, b« re X
d-livercd it, f r per r 1 a> aft raar , : c urse, sp-cial capi-a :f

the lecture wer^ s_nt t: the aeeical Insr.ct rate because that always
me the practice.

-i S- w, in y ur direct oxacdn :ti n, y u als r^nti ne ! the Mu raber,;
c nference an’, said afc rut it that there s.rc -any such -ae. ideal aviati


6620


29 «?ril-H—GJ-lC-f—-o.han-(int. Br-n)-
Crurt Sc . 1

conferences, I can aasuno that, yu, ycursclf, delivered naqy lectures
at mary such canfcrenc.s net nly at Kooxnberg?

A lea.

Q Did the lccturca.that were delivered at such conferences have
t'. be Bubcitu,:' t tho r~Gical inspect-rat- f r approval bef re they
Tf-re 'JeliTv-red?

A Sine., those r.^rc c-nfercncca 'n the .:cdic'.l Inspect rate itself,
it *28 n t necessary in this case t sublet th. entire ilroft of the lec¬
ture f _ r rypr vil bcf’re hand, either the nodical inspectorate asked:

“ C-n y u rend paper n such and such a then, r one applied t( de¬
liver i lecture hinself, ;ivin the titl- an. ,n.ral c ntents, but
n thin n-rc than that.

Q b'rcquently ym t. k part in '.iscussi ns at such c nler-nces;

I asounc new the n'tee n the diacussi no certainly uid n t have f
fce sufcnittei f r appr val?

... N , f curs. n-t bec'use the liscuosi n t k place •'nly
after tiic lecture.


6621


29 _ r-k-GSS-11-1-5lekloy (Int. 3 rrwc)

O'art J' # 1.


q. If'w, I'd llko t' discuss a d'cuaont with yu, Dr. Huff, sub¬
mitted by tho pr'soeuti'n. Jhis is Dccuoant Bd- 934, Exhibit Humber
45a. This was sub ait tod durieg Schr'odor*a cr'ss czncinati'n and ie
'-noequently is t ia a dr'uxcat bc'jc. This is o list 'f tho medical
resoerrh assignseats rf tho uXL. Chiof 'f the Uodiccl Servicos rf tho
..ir i'r'o and the rosearch administration 'f tho HDL and oBDL. Dr.

Be'Icor-Jroy sung i* Bontl'nod as the person wh' rrrkod 'a this. 1 give
tho d-'ucoat t' y'u.

I ns discussing this with y'u t'r tho f' Ilf wing roes'n« Tho ir'-
ao'uti'a put tho Hanson rosonrch assignment bof'ro Dr. Schrcodor in
this toy rt. Tho rop'rt is called -Secret'* and tho rr'oocutim dro*
r'n'lusi'ns fr-t it that oro disadvantage-us t- rr-f. Schr'odor and
3o'’-cr-Troysung. Dr. Sockor-yroysucg said t' no that tho list w\s n't
rnly inr-rroct nb-ut this print, tho Hnngon assignment w fta n't sc'rot,
ra\ that y'u r'uld als' find 'thor orr'rs in this d'fu&ont, namely,
regarding i^ints which y- u. Witness. f'uld clarify, rionso 1"* at
yn-o 3 'f this d'cuscnt. Humber IX. entitled --ir Medicine". and I
tnvto 4.i -Curroat cvduntl'a 'f air orcidont rop'rts fr-c tho
DOdirftl ylnt 'f View. (Secret) Research cb'Ut tho effort 'f undor-
.trosenro 'n tho tooth. DYL. Institute f'r -ir i-odiclno. Dr. Siogound
Huff.* la ether w'rds, y'u nrc sonti'acd as tho porsrn w'rklng 'n
this. Y u ace a sign there, on! thrt sign ooc-ns that this is an
assignment by the Ho.oareh Contor and n't by tho Medical Insecft'rnto.
Can y*u ..loose tell -os, Fitness, whether what is wt f'rth in this
list is c'rroctT

... stnt is said under k'int 4 is certainly wren*. Tho current
ovaluoti'n cf nor'-codical cccidont roperts was «'nothing that t' *
,1a'o after 1536. It was roacwod orcry year ani certainly was an
assignment made by the Medical Inspcetrrnto because it is n purely
rolical matter, kcrccor. it is a!.' vr'ng that this assignment was
sc'ret. Tho scci-oanud rep'rts thrt sore »do 'a tho basis -i tain
hSaigaacmt were ia port secret, namely, th'sc that c'ntrlncd sin. ly


6622


29 - r-*4-GZS-l 1-2-3 lolcley (3r<-wnj
G'urt V '. 1.


a"idcnt statistics, whore erory accident was listed, its cause, the
number 'i deaths, nueber 'f w'uadod. Ihoa ia the soernd part the
c»>-rion'os that c^uld ho doriwod free those act ideate wore listed;
end tlis part iu act secrot. It was the pur peso ' f this ropert,
which was printed in groo.t nunbors, that tho C'ntonto should bo nedo
avAllablo tc every pil't s' that ho cc uld brw why ac' ldonte hnpponod.

3, Bcr, Defter Buff, there is nenti'n nlsc ft tho offoct 't
mvlcr vjrossuro c Q tho pors'n's tooth.

„. That, tec, is s'roU.if« cfaich was net rt a nodical naturo.


glvoa by a tochnicol agoncy.

O. Did this assignnont h vo anything t< dc with tho current
ovnluntien 'f air nccidonts?

... He. I has n'thing tr dr with thin nsslgnocnt: it won an


ensigunont by itself.

q. In ether werda, this entry horc is folso in its ossonticl
p'iataT


Yen.

e, .looto 1"* ot ...lgnBonlt —her 5 and 7 In tho »rrw

Uit . lc{ do , V t. Sohtor JHot -IrpcrInert. •» tho —In. -do -n

py.i'ol .y.tc rurl h-o.l« '* * »Or* *" « S ' tol “'

T- So-rot- odI edoln tho a..l£»»t 1 . 1 stood t »-».

.hpt tbr.t I nontlnod hof-ro 1. -lMlo*. In rthor -rd.. thl.
r.a.ifinoont on. redo h, tho Uodithl loBr-o't-rato. truo1

... thr.t 1. Oghlh ore-ecu.. Ihl. 1. to «><«« n tho

K-, 1 . - f . porol* —I dcolooDCDt tod .« -*U-« b, tho re

scar'll loader ship ef the HU.

HCD .0 trio r. irrk rt «. 3. «tno... —ter 5 1# *■>
Dontl-noi hero, cod horc there ». a little rt» next V It. It U


,o rr, ctlghDCDt; and the little .«n thot it — »

5 UDDont rn the port -f tho re.oorth loader.. In rthor -rd..
, co c to- ore tho .« h..is«ott tot tore It *' to '°

n oaolctocht hr-tho U0d.ro! iD.P-trroto end the rthor tiro tir the


29 ~>r-M-GIS-lI-^-31ckloy (5r'*n)

C'urt K'. 1.


research leadership.

... log, the tw essignacats B^rcc w-rd f'r wrd.
q. Then again tfcoro is again a si at nice hero?

Yes, that is r.

Q. Few, take a lr-k at Susbor 7. I qurtci "The coxrying e U t 'f
sh''tlng-^ff prtco-urca, statically and in tho airplane, with tho
r cntrifugol scat and with pxrpulsien by pewdor. Socrot.■ Tho listlo
aiga is ciasing. That toons that tho. aasigwcont was su^pceodly undo
by the Nodical Inspwctcrato. Is that sel

_ This is certainly else orrmo'us. This is cortninly an
nsuignsont en tho part 'f tho rosoarch leadership* but asido fr'ic that
cistohe, thero is Heritor 'M horo. This was cortninly n't socrot,
bo'ouso this tust br.vo boon an Msignaont it'a tho yocr 19-M: and tho
w'rk r a centrifugal scats ms. as for as I kx-'W. never socrot. bo-
cur.so this wrx a now roscuo lnstrusont. fret the uso 'f which y'u
"uld draw n' dodttfti'ns cb'ut anythin,: olso cenrorning tofhnical
dovol'iWBcnts in nvir.ti'n* cal sr far as'no C'uld n't draw
dodu'tl ns fret tho uso 'f this roscuo or.torial cb'ut 'thor aattors
i.i tlio air in aviatl'n. thoy woro n't dcaigantoi ex secret.

q. In ether w'rds, *itoots. yeu ugroo ulth i-o that in tho few
acsl£BBOnts that I hare road te yeu here there are amber. ef orrero
nhieh cori'usly put in quo.tim the value ef this list a. a * lo?

~. Yes.


q. H'c, Dr. Ruff, as can bo seen fr-c this list, yeu and y'ur
institute rofolvod lexeo nueber -f re.certh nsolsnsent. fr-» tho
hodlmi Inwoct'r.to. W 'fton rton J'U «ro cnrrjlw rut thoto
oosi^ut. .ere r» ‘berthed rn by the hodiool In.j~trr.trt

... Ih rorryius -ut tho.o htslgesehts w. roro vt rhorhod rn r.t
nil in general, to frequently bed Ti.lt. fr-e e-co deore-teent rhief

-r tiler in tho iodised In.p«t-r-.«e: the hodic.-d Ineeentrr hlseolf.

*

-n these rrraM-n. eu reported hr. th.o crporiDonts .rre
elm*. and sh-.od In .hnt frrn the,- .ere beinh enrried rut. But .o


6624


29 — ir-ii—GZS-ll-4-51alclay (int. 3rrwn)
Ours S-. 1.


wore art ehockod 'n, Bather, we sicoly subnittod a rooc r t <-n the
''-Trying rut rf tho roscareh.

'as it cuatreary in research, Witness, if c research assignment
was issued tr carry cut any srrt cf checking?

Hoithcr with u* in ewiaticn a'r olsowhore wot that euntrnnry.
Frequently tho cf/ico that had issued tho assignment, and which usually
pr'vidod tho funds f'r tho research, asked fer a ropert at stotod inter¬
vals 'n tho w-rk boing d'noi but a pers- aol chock 'a tho werk did nrt
telco placo. -t least I dc orw knew of any aucu ecsos.

one last quooti n. Wes tho way in wnlch you should arhiovo
y'ur results proscribed t' ycu in any way?

... Tho way wnc In gonoral net proscribed. Zither tho assigneont
cpxo diroe ly fr'c tho Lodieal Inspectorate - r tho rosccrch loadorai.i,>s
and it n'notices Lapponod that tew tho oxporicent was t' bo curriod
cut woo suggested, but certainly it was a-t proscribed.

2>cw an'tnor last quosti'n. S' far os 1 kn’W at tho ond cf tho
Par y'u werkod In tho *orlol hodicol Contor in Hoidolborg f--r tho
-sort' an ~ir JVreo, and ycu worked in c'njuncti'n with Soekor-Froyoun',,
Con yu toll us whothor 3ockor-Froysoag betwoon oct'bor 1945 — wvujly,
when ho was hirod — and Soptoebor 1946. — ne&oly, tho tice ho mo
i: -ris-nod — cerriod 'ut danger'u» onporinonts 'n hiitsolf in tho
Hoidolborg ..oriol kodical Contor uoi whothor ho cr any cf hia
' 1leagues aufforod any hart because cf theso ex criconis?

... Thr.t is cerro't. Tegother with a cor tain Dr. Oauor cad cy-
calf, 3o'kor-iroysont carried 'ut exporicents 'n hirsolf. Those woro
c;* i*inonts in which ho stnyod fer a considerable length cf tico r.t
12,'vaa Eotors altitudo. _t that tino we did net kn'w what rosultp the
- ri'ruis had nrtaioYoc in this fiold: and wo had sororal very un¬
pleasant inridonts. ono '! 'ur colleagues, 3r. S^ucr, h/ul •• covoro
ais'Imrgo in tho knoo j'int, wr.s in tho h-spital fer sowcral wooks and
had v gc cj* crutches f'r throe ■raths. 3ut thoro wore nr 'Moo
- dor.th.

3?.. Tlrk: Thank y-u, n- furthor quooti'ns.


-pril 2 9-li-3K-12- 1-Gross (Int. 3rovm)

Court Ho. 1


BY Dri. VOjt.£iHK for ttonborg:

<- in your direct examination whoa you des¬

cribed tho Qgursc of ycur ocroor you spoke of tho
voricus sorts of experiments. Can you any that Dr,
koebors node experiments to tho saco extent end in tho
soco wey you did?

' k Yos, that is 3 0 . Dr. Ronborg was, os I said, ny

oldost collaborator end carried out thuso experiments
on

’ • * 6626


..pril 29-iI-BX-12-0-Gross (lafc. Brown)
Court No. 1


v

hinsclf os I 1 id.

~t Darin.; your fiiroot collaboration with hin could you
;vor say that ho didn't soon rcliablo to work on his own
initiative?

.. No. On the. contrary Roabors distinguished hinsclf
in all hi3 oxporiconts by his particular c^ro end 1 -’ci
particular reliability, ./ith no qualns at all I could
lot hie carry out any oxforin-nts as the responsible ux-
norinontcr. I had no occasion to warn hin in any way
about anything but ho oxporinontod with tho ^roatost of
ciroun3pocticn.

. In view now of tho possibility of Sivins pcin to tho
cxporinjntul subject I should like to know what tho
naturo wrs or thoso various oxporiconts that you nonticn-
od yesterday? .ihich was tho ono that was tho uost likely
to cause pain?

.. I believe that of all tho oxpcriccnts that wo over
carried out thoso woro subjootivoly tho nost unpleasant,


29 ..i?il-*-GId-12-2-Gr'ss (1st. Sr'i-sJ

C'wt : t '. i.

tlio u-Bt ,,nlnful, f'weniig rcsccrch inf the efforts 'f fid rad
-Xi ;cn. In those eraes, bef ro tiu real cx>ericont, tfco subject vat
sub jo'tod *. ter ■orcturca r.s 1 -w na 4"' f ontifcredc btsl'F sere f r
on li-ur -r trre. The subjects w re lightly clothed. These ex^or-
oontc were, ct looat f cc, the e'et ua.lor.ar.nt.

0. Y'u nro aconitines n'r 'f hi altitude ex cricenta?

~. Yea.

I era n't rofarri^f f hi.* altitude ex oriconta. but I
vr.c roferriw; t' ox^orinoats «u«L no y'u reforrod t yostordey.
Yo3tcrdry y'u listed a vh lo nueber of ox crixonta thr.t were n't
hi-* r.ltitudo ox .erk-onta but which roro nocossory for roaoarch inf
r.vlr.tl :i -rrblcca. H", I Wflt V ns* y'U whothor hi.-h nltitudo
or..oriconta were i/ro sinful then ether ox .oriconta you carried cut?

... He. :n cy direct oxMtianticn I ar.ld that the ^rcatost prt
-i the hitfh nltitudo c: oriconta ««ru c u/lotoly .x.ir.losa, wccly
nil tli'ao inwhich 'no ex orient oa r.i h altitude si'r.nosc.

% bra it ncccaarjy thr.t *.ho exaoricanta crxricd cut in
Dr/ hoi vithin the trmrte 'f yur x'&tx nil hrd t' lord f hi«h
r.ltitudo ai'fcnoas?

Yea. in nil 'nrea there wca altitude al'k&;st thr.t lnstod


f-r r. .-renter 'r shertor loc’th 'f tlno.


April 29-::-OX-12-4-Orc8 s (mt. Drown) sw
Court Ho. 1


You said that during altitude sickness tl e experi¬
mental subject feels no pain, is that so?

A. Yes. ite subject is unconscious nd foels no pain.

'I. Is the subject susceptible to pain up to the
noment when the sickness occurs, or is it possible that
the experimental subject up to that nonent is subject
to conditions that cause hin pain?

K . I describ'd th.e course that altitude sicknoss
takes, and I said at first that if the oxygon supply
is interrupted at a cortain altitude, then for a short
poriod of tine — and that poriod of time doponds on how
high tho subject is - the experimental subject is fully
c pabie of action. At th t nonent ho ip susoeptiblo of
fooling pain.

n .. Up to tho .:onont - please answer this quostion
•t.othor up to the nonent whor. high altitude sickness
occurs, tlo oxporisionts carried out in tho fr mowork
of your program in Dachau - co' ld causo pain to tl o
oxporir.ontal subjoct?

A. No.

r .. Purt! or, according to rhat you said ono would not
fool pain during altitude sicknoss. Is that truo?

• . Yes,

'• Could tho oxporlnontal subjoct suffer pain from
the nonent of waking up on?

. . fter the oxporinont. 1 subjoct regained conscious¬
ness it was possible for hin to suffer pain becaure ho
t a capable of action thon.

In tie Dachau experiments was there c« use for pain
- tl « experimental subject after regaining consciovsnoss?

"o, but after ho rogair.ed consciousness and was

6629


.. ril 29-K-SK-12-5-Gross (Int. Brown)
Court Ho. 1


d scendinj he ooul '. fool prcssuro on tho cor -runs.

4 .iss thoro suesoquont pr.in os c result cf those ex¬
periments?

He.

.• Do you rococber thot Dr. Hcaber 3 ct tho bosinnin^ of
the experiments cool: on olootrocurdiojram of oaoh expori-
nentcl subjoot, took one else durinj the oxporln-nt, end
c third oloctrooardiojrnu of ter tho experiments? Did
you know thot?

- Yos, I know th.t, because thot was nooossnry if wo
wonted to bo eblo to say in tho report Inter that thoro
tins no lost in; ’.notorious effect.

i These ulcctrcc rdicjroms thot wero taken threo titles _
on each experimental subject which authors took with ilia
to R.rlin-«ulurshof, did you see thou?

.. Yes.

. .ore you .irosont vhon they were ovaluntod?

.. -.3 for ;s I know, I was not.

Do you know, fro:. tti 3 evaluation that was under¬
taken, th.t no last in., harmful effeots were observod
t that time in tho case of the ox.eriu-ntol subjects?

.. Y 03 ; I id soo th- rosults of tho final evaluation.

A

i .«ho showod this to yotf?

.. Dr. aer.b.ra.

. In other viord3 yeu know oven at that tiue this and
Udn’t fin’, it out hero? *

.. Yes, that is 30 .

. How, r-sardin 3 the d -n ;erousnoss of those expori-

ats, cu I to buliavo that the cx;oriuents that are
• jjst linful aTo not also th~ most danjorous?

.. Yes, that is so. You hav. to distinjuish in such

--riu-nts betwoon subjcctiv- pain and tho danger. Hioso


e-30


—pril 29-L-5X-12-S-Gross (Int. Brown)

C uurt I*o. 1

can be tw quite different thirds.

4 Jroc all experiments ir. your experience that you
ilcscribed y.storlay which do you think oro too most
donsorcus?

.. I should 307 that exporiconts to ascertain the
infli*noo of flying with the person lyinc parallel
with tk. motion of the flijht, in which tho head is
toward tho outside, on th- contrii*upcl nachino. I
should say that is tho cost Cancerous ox’ all.

. You consider thet core dan porous than hi;*
oltitudo experiments?

.. I.i icnornl, yos.

; This ox;«r ic-nt that you ju3t described, was that
carried out in Dr.oheu?

.. Mo, ti oy w^ro cnrriul out by our institutes as
aolf-cx. -riuont3.

, I x spor.kin;; now only of hijh altitude oxpori-
nonts. Ploaso disro.-urd the othor experiments. In
your opinion, what is the coat daa-jorous exporinont
Chit you ovur carried out in a low .roosur- ohoeber?

.. The mc 3 t dangerous oxporicont within tho franowork
of our hi:;h cltitu'.o experiments ir.cludinj the Daohuu
oxporinoats - and I or. now rofcrrlnj to hi;* altitude
experiments - of all of thee I oensider most dangerous
tho ono ciceborG curried out on hinsoll' and which is
mentioned ir. the ru.ort. I did not knew this fro:, what
I know at t is tiuo but fra-, v/hat I learned since. I
ball eve in this u; erimant konborc oome close tc death.

:« .,'hnt is that experiment and why dc you oensider it
tho nest drnporous.

RcabuT 3 oxporinuxted on himself at 13,500 aeters.
in which he suffered severe x.erienccs of blinding,


..-ril 29-::-5K-!2-7-Gross (Int. Brown)

Court Ho. 1

ir-.lysis, etc., etc.

. 3ut, don’t you believe that the experiments nt tho
heijht of 20,000 uct-rs aro more dangerous?

.. Thu dr.n prcu3noss of hi ;h altitude experiments does
not do.on! exclusively on tho altitude but demands on
look of oxyjer. to which tho body is subjected. That is
to 3ay, I c n conduct experiments at 20,000 c-tor3 that

are relatively not dangercu3 an', or.rry out relatively
d ji -orous ox.-crir.onts at 13,000 motors. If in ono oaso,
at 20,000 riut-rs thv stay is v-ry brief, and in another
C030, at 13,000 motors, I lot tho p-rsen 3toy for . lone
timo.

; Beforu the bojinnia; of tho Dachau experiments it
was olorjr to you wh t sort of experiments wore to bo
carried out?

.. Yos.

0, Let ua take the evtre ;e experiment, auoh ns was
carried out in the f rand work of tho Dnoftuu experiments,
I-t us compare it to other hi ;h .ltitudo oxperiaonto
such a3 you were acoustoacd t carry out. woro tho
Dachau ^xporiuentn core dcurjorous than other hi.ph
altitude experiments you were accustomed to carry out?

- On the c.voru ;o they were certainly no core danjerous
than experiments we carried out at cur institute.

. .i'ero th-y mors ficn;erous than those carried out at
thu ..ero Medical Contor?

, ^ • ft

 i«c, an- particularly in view of ..resent ~x. erioncos

iaicw that the oxporimonte we carried out in Hoidolbcrc
..-To considerably more d.oi porous te life than the bail int;
out experiments.

. How ono other question, ~m I correct in saying that

r was a research assijnaanfc already in existence


~vril 29—1I-3K-12-8- Gross (Iat. Brown)
Court He. 1


when the Dachau experiments bc^on, and this assi^nuont
concerned rescue from Greet hoichts?

.. Yes, that is so.

* Is it also oorroct that you rocoivcd this assi^n-
nont fra. tho ..ir Ministry via Hippko and concerned
itsolf with rcsouo fro;, hi^h cltitudos?

.. Yes, that is true.

^ Is it further truo that you hud f.iroady onrriod
ut sorie3 of experiments to solve this problem?

.. Yos, that is so.

THB KffiSIBSNT: The Trib jit. 1 will bo in roccss until
1:30,

6633


<"• joxX Sb. 1

2S Apr 47-A-13—1-Z2i—Feeler (Tot Soh.es & iurtr)


Airyaooi slssiqt

(Tfco Trifocal rcc^nven.^ at 13C-0 htAirs, 29 April 1947.)

IEL .-AT-ST-AL: Che Tribunal Is again In session.

7R. SlaGFEILD d.U77 - Re«unci
C.-~>S3 -XA-ilSACIOS (Continued)

?Y r?-. VCr/iBlC (C'-unccl f-r the defendant eta \»Tgi)i

Q, Dr. fuff, of-ro the rce«;«8 »*c had stepoed at the stntcTor.t
that the Dachau exp^riients represented a cart .! th-so eroorinents vhlch
v.ire next -f the pr e.rtz. ef saving pceplo in high rltltudos, thet is tj
t'r.rt ■ of-rc the Dachau experi-.onts v e,;.»r. there *vrc in ytur insti¬
tute experiaents carried ut on the oucsti-n, ns v*ll ns su’senuont t?
th. Dachau cxpericents, a the •«& subject, is thr» c:rroct7
A. Chet io c.rrect.

Q. During the first c >af or cnees vith Eaaah.r v..» there rny ntnvion
t the effect that eTDeriJcntal *u Jeets sight di«?

A. Ir. the first discus*l:r.» -ith Rtschur vo sp.kc cf the danger
involved ir. the ext^ritent, red s this ccrsi a »«c -ell a later vhon
•i talk'd t< the cost Ces;utndeT at Dachau v» r inted *ut that in ur
-fir.ien, that is, in hur cr. judgixnt, J«stL* verc t- <: reported.

Q» during the- first e tf.rfinoc vith haschar did y.u think that ho
purely vented t prrtlcijv.tc in the lilgh altitude ex-erival*, jr
t uld y-u see fr.s his vhvlc ettited- thrt he v-ntol t ’ey >n4 that
i>rA .ekr exwrirvnt* f his ~n whethe r v. his <~a initiative ,r hy

xi> I.-j-'b .rd.ra?


At t'.ir discuss* a in micich end in t!.e dlsausci.ns a• ter-.-:«s

- v-rd vur said a v . ut cay .th«r fx-er'.KT..f which were ol:-!.!ic jr
t- te carried -ut. Ve discus«ei nerely the exoerincatc r rescue

■vv r;j^V.cr a.* at that list clr.j iy aecti n thrt he la tended

Y2

- ... r.i'a - t. te a leatur.r - i^. th- field high cltitude

Jls fr&i perrect!

^ v *' x - t is c rre»t.


P6.^4


C.urt Sc,. 1

29 Apr 47-A-13-2-iEi-Jc st er (Ton Schcen 4- hurts)


q. Did Batcher et thrt tint shev that, apart frco the hifch altitude
experincntt, he ale had t<. sake experiment* in order to la *>lc tt- vrito
hit thesis in this field?

A. I don't len jv anything s':out that. In oajr case, I do n - 1 recall
such stetoiionts on the pert .i Batcher in connection vith the discussion
in kunich a.t th* t tine.


6«S5


29 .-pril h 7-.TD-li^-Scrrow (Int, vor. Schon '>• Kurtz)

Court Jfo, 1

q -hor. 'i*’ you, 'or the first tiro, toll Rouborr- about cltz«

; rcooaiti .n?

Followin' "oltz« visit to ~ institute in Berlin - oithor on tho
s-_s ’ay or tho next lay,

C> mi you, r.t that tiro know that te ac h er was a : arbor of tho SS?

A Ho, I i ’ not know that when Dr, "extz was in Eorlin. I .'x>n*t
boliovo that I hear' anythin about Dr, Rnscher's bolon^inn to.tho SS.

q nio-n you fir*3t hoar that Raaoher ha ' toon ; ivon por.dardon
by Hippko tc nko hi h altitude export .onto at Dachau?

A At this first dscuaaion rith Professor oltz, Frofossor oltz
tol .cal Ins- -ctor Slppko, a few oonths boforo that,

t

hr. A already ivon his fun’nnental approval for such exporinonts in
Dachau,

q * cull it tfcoroforo bo c-m-ct to say that teacher both had tho
porsisaior. of Hippto V, carry out tho ox;~rin.r.ts an'. Kii taler's approval
to carry out tho oxporlnontc?

A Yos, that io correct,

q Do you boliov.j that teacher woul * have nado export .ents in
Dachau if th-t. D ,? L ha' not ;artici; tol?

YOs, I an ccnvincui of it,

q Do you boliovo that tho D7L woul.! havo naio oxparln .r.ts in Dachm
if 'anchor rfcul! not havo taken part at all?

A Tho quostion is not onsy to ansrror. Tho piv-r xjuisito for tho
larUdinidon ;r tha execution of thoso esportienta at Ha emu raa that

sotu on. hvl tho ;<>irdoaion to . orfora ouch oxporlnante in Dachau,an!

A

that wao R-ischor,

1 Lot zac put ry quostion a Aifforont way. !X> yc-u boliovo that tho
:’*L, even if it ha', mated tc, mux' ham boon in a osition to oarry out
oxperinonte in Dachau -..ithout Faschir?

A JJo, I consi !ar that ir.^cssillo,

1 Snt yea aro cf tho opinion that teschar, without tho DV1, roul !


-ctirOly havo -c’.o sue:: ox-.rLujnts?


29 April l/7-..-i.TT —1 - 2 -Karrow (Int. von 5chen ft Kurtz)

Court Jfc. 1

A I an convince! of that, 70 s.

q 3ut ?u know thzt Saschor did not possoss a low pros sure chanter.
Do you believe that Raschor's connections woul.! have boon sufficient to
obtain a lev/ .rcssuro charier?

I an convinced that if Rase!-, or had one to Horsier, and Hinder
had dotuarvled that a lew ;-rossura chamber bo pot at Mi -disposal, that
ho would have receive! it.

q Are you of the conviction that by yoore or Ronborr;*s Erasures
tho low prossuro charier was, in fact, renevod fron Dachau oerliur than
Raacher actually' inton lo * it to bo?

A Yos, I boliovo that that is prove * by the 'ocunonts wo havo
iwro too.

Q Do you also boliovo that tjy Rorfcor.'s prosonco in Dachau,
asohor was iwpj’-d in feis oxporiuants or, at loast, liidto’, an', up
to a certain point voa , revoltsby t'v t . rooonco?

A That i3, for u>* at loast, eLonr fron what '"u havo loaroc;’. in the
oourso of tho trial horj. Tho linos s I'off, for oxanplo, says that Raschor
.Iv/ays took a'.vnntc 0 of tho tino when TtojiLor- was not thoro - that ia,
in tho ovrnin - for Ms oxporLxmts. If Rafter* ha! not boon ro3ont,
ho woul-', no 'cubt, havo h tho t<hol j toy for such oxporinunts and woul.!,
no !eul)t, have carried out voro exp-irinonts then he actaally Sid.

q T>o yju a too with no in this idea that first of all Raschor would
bavo carric 1 out Ms export-aunts in Dachau evon without tho DVL, nn! that,
secondly, ho would havo boon loos interrupted in M 3 ox. sriaonts, and,
thirdly, that ho ccul * havo kept tho low . reesuro chamber as Ion; as ho
r '- “ r In’ it as nocosaary, or as Ion os HLr-dor ,*ovo hin Ms rtrrilss&n?

5 you bell.'vo that those idoas ar-.- correct?

A I an convinced, of it.

Hoir nan:-' oxpcrinor.tal subjects . 1 th roan tri.an ;l«s d you soo?

.. I can't ivo you tho ccact fi uro - ton to f if toon approximately.

Q Oi! ycu see whore those 3 : ople woTo ’ illetoi?


29 April L 7—r-—A 7D-1: ,-i-Knrrc (In*-, -.-or. Sc non ’■ Yurts)
Court f. T o. 1


A Yea, during the day tfct I was at Dachau I was practically all
tha tins at the loir pressure ohember or in the room adjacent to the
billet of these con.

Q And nil the experimental subjects whom you aqw on that occasion
were wearing a greer. triangle, is that oorrect?

A Yes, that is oorrect.

0 When did you, for the first time hear that Rasoher, apart from
those exporineats to rescue people from high altitudes, used the sane
low pressure chcabor, which was used for those experiments, without your
aad Romberg's knowledge, nr.ie experiments of a different kind?

A I hoard that for the first tine hen Romberg ease to Berlin and
reported the fttot to no, and I boliova on the sa=w occasion ho roportod
that a death had occurred#

1 You don't know r .hothor Romberg told you beforo the first fatality
occurrod?

A No, I don't rcomber that.

Q Do you regard it aspossiblo that Romberg talked to you about this
•*-nd that you night have forgotton it?

A That is possible#

T JJow, when you heard about the first fatality did you noiify
/•cur program to rescue people from high altitudes or did you leave it as
it was? Did you change it or shorten it?

A We shortenod it#

Q Did that not on dang nr tho result of the whole exporiner.t?

A No, the result was not endangered. Toe experiments were not
'•ortnn-d to that extent# io vonl.'. y dispense with a few idnor t


'' logs which were not essential#

'! -hat was ycur first roaetdon -her. you heard about the first

ffcVMity?

A -Jr reaction was that I cooplotely a;;raed with Ro=b»rg that our
-- ri-onts had to be concluded quickly so that v,e could prevent Rnscher's

nniny his -jcpcrir.cr.ts.


- *


6633


29 April U 7—A-ATD—Ia-4i—II ar row (Int. tor Schon i Sorts)
Court Ko. 1


Did you not cormcdvo the idea of desisting altogether from
further experiments?

A *e did think of that briefly.

Q And why did you give it up?

A Wo decided against it because, in tho first piece, our experl-
nonts vhich had already boon carried out would have boon in vri n, but,
saoonitLy, and especially because, by giving up our axporinents, >o would
not have prevented Raschor*s oxpariaonts. "hat wo were primarily
intorostod in wa , on tho on.; hand, to oocploto the oxporinonts but,
on tho other hand, to soo to it th t tho low pressure chaabor was
removed froa Dachauj but that was possible only by collating our
experiments so that *ro could say that tho oxporinonts for which tho
chamber was sont to Dachau aro conplotod, and wo also said tho ohanbur
is urgontly noodtdv Only in this way could wo oven think of gotting
tho chamber out of Dachau.

Q How was it thon not to interrupt tho oxourirknts rather than
choose tho other way?

A Would you ploasu repeat tho quoetdon? I didn't hear tho
boginning.

0 '.(hose idea was it to dotoralno not to interrupt the oxporinonts
but take tho othor rr.y? ./ould it not have b<wn possible to break off
tho experiments altogether?

fx I believe tint this idea originated with RoQborg. If I ren nbor
^rroctly, ay first reaction was that I sale: "All right, you aro in
rlir., rtxi Mill stay h^ro and to *11 stop thu axporinents."

n ' ould it have boor, possible at that time to break off the
i- puriaente and get back tho cumber?

A It would have b*>n possible sorely to break off tho experiments.
It would not have been possible to got tho chamber back.

I have no further questions.

I TRESIDSMT * Any further questions to thu witness on the - rt of
- counsel?


653S


29 April U7-A-ATD-lx.—S-j-^rroTr (Int. vor. Schon 'x Kurtz)
Court ‘Jo. 1


BY JUDGE SBBRZSBi

Q "itneaSf you have described in a general way the low prcssuro
chanbor and the experiments that you say wore carried out with this
chanbor. '"ill you please toll tho Tribunal just exactly what oquipaont
and raachinory is necessary for tho conduct of high altitude oxnorlnonts.

A Yostorday I said that the charier itself consists of a roon which
is soalad against pressure. Tho door of this chamber is constructed in
such a way that tho inside of tho charbor is soaled hornotioally against
tho air fron outsido. In tho ohcabor itsolf there are bonohos and tablos
to accosnodato the porson conducting tho axporiccnt and tho subjoct, and
also in tho oharbor, for oach porson, thoro is a supply of oxygon, Thoro
is a so-called "lur*; automt" - that is, a apparatus -.dich controls tho
.upply of oxygen to tho inriatos of tho chanbor In such a way that during
tho inspiration phaso cf broath, oxygen ia supplied and daring tho
expiration, no oxygon ia suppliod. This oontrol of tho supply of oxygon
goes through a tubo and is connoctod to tho aoak which tho innato of
tho ohaaber woars. Tho oxygon which ia supplied through this apparatus
cobcs fron a bottlo of conprcssod OQrgon - that i3, a stool contninor -
in which tho oxygon is urrfor high prossuro. This oxygon is supplied to
tho 'lure nutonat" through a thin tube. In tho chanbor thoro is also a
vr.lvo ao that tho exporia:ntor, who nay bo in tho changer too, will bo
ablo to start a doacant. ?Jo*r, tho chanbor ia connected by a sy3ten of
'"•beo with valves to a nunbor of punps - to on: or sovcml puispo — rind
' •“Mo punps punp the air out of the chanbor. Tho spood with which the air
is punpod out can bo rogulatod by a valvo which ia outsido tho chanbor
•t the controls. In tho charier, in general, there is also a rotor which
lvos approxinataly the altitude. Thero aro also sprays and nodidno for
r eviving tho subjocts in tho chanbor. In addition to the tubes leading to
f unps, thoro is another sy3taa of tubing which loads tc tho fresh air
o -aside. Tho other end of this tubo opens into the charier. Botroon tho
■ r ° - r -ds of this tubo there is a valvo rich one cor. opar. and cl os For


29 April li7-A-ATI>-Lii-6-Karrow (Int. von Schon u Kurtz)
Oourt llol 1


doscent, this valve is opened and air is introdicod into tho chamber.
This increases the pressure and this brings about idescent, Outside of
the ohanber, at tho controls, thevo is another al tine tor which consists
of tiio acrcury colurm vfcich ruasuros tho altitude ecactly. That is, tho
altitudo is not road directly, in gonorel, but tho prossuro in nd 111 -
no tors of Torcury which is Later calculated to what altitude this
indicates.


6641


29 -uDril-s-JP-lS-1-p..-loy (Int. Van Schoa)

Court I

3* '-ill you please explain to the STibunul the procodur* uhibh
-o; would use for conducting vfc..t you c_llcd explosive decompression
t-st; uow are the sea seated, caw ore they equipped, and what io too
precis, -.rcccdur. for such a tost?

ju If vc ct xt with the conditions of this mobile ch_abor uhich
w..s used at D.chau, th- big low pressure cn cb.r iteolf 1 b rather
.. big reo.- which has roan for 10 or pcrh^is as Sony -s 12 persons.

In this bi., chcsbar no. explosive docc^rcsslon teste c s. be c .rriod
out. lor such tests there ie is addition to the big chumoor a smell
chcob.r which c.ji hold two people at too most. *he two people cit on
shall beach facing e .eh other, iho shall ch^sber is oth.rviso equip¬
ped just lice the big on. io, h.ra^tic^lly sealed. It had windows
for observation. It n_s tol^hono cconunic.tions ad betv..n tho big
ad the ouflU eh aber is a very olg v.Jve with two openings of about
15 centimeter* diaoetcr each. la order to Carry cut such .in explicit
doc. iprcssion tost the big ch^abor is pumped out to a c.rtain J.titudo.
after this h.j been dene tncsubjcct oatero tho snail chmibor. Second¬
ing oa the exjoriuont no is .ith.r with or wit.-.out oxygon equipment.
Jhoro is a telephone, and tho subject goes into the ch.obor. *nd
not- in 3e.ch.-M the .jperiuents wcr. gonos Jly performed in thio way,
‘here is a slow ascent to 8 or 10,000 actors, generally with oxygen.
his altitude for beginning the experiment a efcosen because ia the
cilit.xy planes the crews wno normally fly in proosurc Cuoiao under
ores sure corresponding to 3,000 motors, h-vc instructions as soon
x to.ro is nay d-Jiger to reduce ta. pressure in their e-bins ao
•i-X it will corrosotad to 8,100 meters. Ih. uuroosc of this v.-.s
that tho crew should oo forced, cv.a b.f-rc tho ..cute danger existed,
t: v.so their osygea oquipneat because they could not fly at 8,000
..ocro vit.. rut oxygen, so th_t if something actually dot* hanpea the;*
h-.vc already their cxyg.a equipment oa. how, I c — o bade to our
.roj.ric.cnt. xhc subjects g: ~ slowly to eight t; tea thousand meters,


6642


29 a-.ril-WP-15-2-4iJ.3y (1st. Taa Schon)
Court I


they wero generally left there for c few minutes, bo that they would
ho given an opportunity to get rid of the g_* frui their bedios.

In the stomach there is civ ay a a little air or \-b that axpmide

0

when the altitude increases, and they were to get rid of this gas,

80 that it would not expand further at greater altitudo, j.d iator-

fore with or on thing. Iho bxc conditions exist in practice. Ihon

•

cauo the exooriaent proper, this cjqstrimcat consistod of two parts,
the ejplosivo decompression and tho follwoicg pai'nchutc Jump. That
follows tho explosive doccupreesioa to tno altitudo for a parachuto
Junp. a slow ascent to this altitude is not possiblo. I havo already

s. ;id that dbovo 13 or 14 thousand neters altitude sickness occurs.

If ono hod gono up tc'tncsc altitudo slcwsly ono would arrive at tho
desiros altitudo with an air sick subject that would not have corres¬
ponded to the conditions of practice. How, to get b-c< to our
oxporimont, the oxplooivo dcc.mprossien follows; this io brought

.bout in tho following way between the big chamber .md tho small

•

chcabcr, the big v « 1 tc is opened. fno air is suddenly dr-.wn from tho
smell cJw-hbor into the big chaibor. Iho pressure botwo.n these two
chambers w..s coordinated. Such sudden rises aro not possiblo with
pumps of normal dimensions. How, t.io cxaeri-catol subjects woro nt

t. .e altitudo for the beginning of tho uctu 1 experiment, and st.-rt
the p. rt of the experiment in which we 'ere interested.

how long did it t.i:c to dee ..press tho shall cnm.ber so
that the canroeslon in tho snail chtfibor would be the Same no it
v..c in tho largo chamber?

.o. about one second, cho actual sowed of this -vdjuptocat
on u t... valve is manipulated, but it would 4a about ono second.

Then when th .t occurred and t..o proosuros wero oqualicod

0

- u did t.-.is ca-plctc the experiment to simulate a p_rnchute ju^i

down to r. celling where a person could exist without the aid of

o-- .cn, end could simply got thoir breathing suostcncc free tno air

itself, vnss’fe that tho second phase f this experiment?

6643


35 jpril-iS-J?-15-3-ticloy (1st. Von Pch-n)
C^urt I


a. ^hut wag the experiment prwer. &c p_rt of the experiment
which we woro prin^irily interested ia there. After the altitude
for the oxicrincnt h^d been reached the subject rcooiaod for a fow
sue sods Qt this altitude. jhe purpose of this w_s to simulate as do-
soly as possible too conditions of pri^tico, because if thcro is such
explicit docc nrctaion within c plane it t jcea a cortain length of tine
before the crow uoxbors c ax Junp. Aftor a few socond3 of waiting at
this altitude the pressure in this snail chamber was increased. That
is the d~acont was broken, and the speed of this increase of pressure
vr* so regulated th_t it corresponded to the speed of fallin,, without
u pr.rcchuto, and ir. Other oxoorinonts it corresponded to tho spood
of falling with an opor. parachuto. bith this falling speed so ro-
„ul..tcd tho cha-.b«r doscondcd to tore actors, and that was tho cad
of t.ic oxoorl..i.nt. bhut wo wero interested in, in these experiments,
w .a to doter.iino whether and when the oxioriwont d subjcctc woro ablo
t ca «7 out order or instructions which hjl boon given oof ore too
exp-rl.. cut -f ter ov*. rowing .dtitudo siccnoos. Ih.it is a person in
-r. .ixplcao is told after such a tain,; happons to ;•••» toon to Jump
first. lou don't d- anything and wr.cn you come to without thee you
.hill tho rip cord of your parachute, fno Sauo thing v..s said to
the oxioriuont-d subjects, and after they o^o to after suffering
dtitudo sickness they uxmipulatod i lever wx.ich in tho experiment
roproseated the rip cord of tho parachute, ja manipulating tnis lever
too Oxjoriue.it w * ..ctually ended, aid thOn too ehetiber was brought
d vn to zero .et ora. 7tu,t actu lly h.d nothing to do with tho

0

experiment.


Court 1
Aorll z

v. srva the tls« that ou would embark on one of
...333 errerlmento until you considered the experiment
at -t. a.-A; w.u»t len 6 tn of time vo-l& bi required?

a. Taat differed 0 e ti -, i: defended on whether
c.ea: were alow ainxln. experiments, tn t le oxcorlaents'
C- ea iiilrte falling wits o parachute or free falling
c- :uri_&ut;-, w/.ion c..rroaoonded to r«-llin 0 witnoj^ a
'' reof.utb. Rosily, on* can e i; tno following. without
- in- too -rest * mistake; one c. n conclude for the

:\'l .In experiments: 10 seconds per 1,000 oetora; for
c. j sinking x>ei 5 nants ier 1,000 meters - one minute.

* :c] ievc t ot tn t la roc rate enough for t.-.cse conul-
’• ns, : t in thu tribunal of our r ort tnere is an
c?, °t c:y>rt of tl.T* tnot t..o cadi vidua 1 ejnorloenta

t 'Uk.

*• i ooild Tv collect tnen vast would be an ov.w. e
tlaa r ° r ;0 ^ ooanle :ion of on .xoloaiv. dvcompression
t^at fr..n tne ti.ee that the croorim.nt‘1 subject cct-
uclly too’/, lo sort ir. the email ca. nber until ou
carried tnrou«..i the assimilation of -enrea 3 -rlrcd smell
c-;ln nd t..e descent down to eero; w.ula t he event
-in ..tea, thirty or five minutes, wnot bn t.. of time
v Id i C t 'id? "

4 * For Qhe experiment, I would like to submit the
fl ur - f ^ Ciw* nliflest altitude 21, 0 G 0 .meters, rising

r =,o:o maters, in fe-tra* tvy or r wn •ninut.-'S, wel 0 r.t

»

cure s .mute,, tJvt makes o minutes. The other
to 2 l,oCC -store, on.* can ignore as far *-s time ie
--ncerned, tfcrt lu ebout one-teatk o. s con.d. ihan
aoenfc :roa 21 , 'C lot us ssy to 1 G, 0 asters Is

' Uv ~ t: '*° ? cCafil e.bperlauat is really finished normally
ero le no difficulty with the ear, it vo .Id take


S 6 i 5


Court 1

*?ril A-IS-2-r.J-iicchec-3rovn.


two or throe minutes; that would m?fcc a total or twolvc
or r irtoen minutes for the experiment.

v. Thor., /oj would say that from the time the experi¬
mental subject i' ctaally seated . las elf in th* cn: aber
until th. experiment was condluded it consu.aed somewhere
between twelve end fifteen minutes?
h. Thrt is about rl^ht, yes.

iow, durln all that period of tiae J understand
t.-ujc cert in observations were belr. c made by pnyolclcns,
tec. nlclons, resuarohers or attaches to regard Bohrln^
results, I suppose the p-l6e counts, cardlo.ram and
that sort o." thin_; la tnat correct?

That 13 ri B nt.

•w. To conduct sjcr an experiment, now I moan the

oxoloslv- decompression test; now many phyolclans,

technicians and ottachos were normally necessary to

m r.ijulatj the cftr.ob. r am the olr pressure and to

|

check and to tabulate the results?

a. For such an experiment, if I sr.ould c ivo the
minimum personnel, we ne dod o doctor to observe tne eubjoct
and one toonr.lclan to manipulate the ohaaber to take care
of tne pumps, to be In thf. mpcn’iu* room, ouc- The observing
doctor, if it wbs an «xperim.-,nt on the small chamber,
c.uld look from the window into the eh; axr • nd vitn his
loft h nd r ;.ul».te V«v. decent.

Then, you say th.t for t is explosive decompression
tout, the matter co-la satisfactorily be concluded with
one doctor nd one tecnnician; is tnat correct?
a. Ye3, that 16 the minimum.

In the tests you conducted how many dectoro,

*-c.'.nici na and attaches did you have?


Co rt 1

April 23-A~io-3-Hi3-.aeehan-5rovn.


There wore two doctors. Dr. Romberg and Dr.
Raschcr rnd also in c enaral another person who took caro
of the technical thlngh.

v. 'ere any tests concluded or 1 : unched to determine
the callln-. v.-.lcn a flier could attain without the use
of ory-en?

a. Ko, that w.-6 not done, but perhaps I itiay point
out one t lng; there i6 o great difference whether one
leaves r jerson for c abort time at a certain altitude
and determines whether ho could stand t..ls altitude with
or without oxygon, or whethor one leaves him for a lon 0
t me at tela altitude. The effect of thv. lack of oxy a en
spends on the strength of tnc oxy b on leek and also on
the length of tloe of the 1 ck.

From your study of the matter, con you say to
wh-C collln 0 r fllur c.n be expected to O o without oxygen
a nr still live?

a. Accordln c to our oxperlonce from -i CCO nhcrcaro
certain symptoms wltbdut oxy^er n.d ccxtain.'.j fr?m 5,000
or 5,000 meters it If. not Dbasibl*: c.> eto.id Vi? altitude
for very long time. • would net b. able to control

•als plane BjJ that t’lti? ox 7 0 or.- Tm ti?f. other

h->nd, vo know tht undo- othe cond 1 Slotd it is ”C.ry
-osslble at 6,000 sacers tj perform 3erlouo. revere wox-k
without oxy e en. Vo find these conditions in t..- case
of mountain climbers. It is known that the highest .

In the world ir. the r.lmelpyas h ve boe . cllacd without
-xy.cn, that would be e,000 meters. T..rt is because
tr.« body in such f slow escont as in the mountains can
dapt It-elf to the altitude. For ex f molo, tne number
-- red blood col' usclos, y..ich are very nece6s ry for
--V cn supply, is increased to mere than double in -enoral


Court 1

eprll 89-A-lo-4-HD-Meehan-arown.

aroa. Ono cannot answer t 16 c.uestlor. correctly In the
game form or in ? sense such as occurs In aviation where
It Is oenernlly considered that at about 5,GC0 or 3,000
maters it Is not possible to stay for nours. Tnct ono can
live ir. t is rltitude for r short period, this of course
varies do>endin- on the individual.

v. In these -xoerloents thrt wore conducted, cither
the explosive decompression tests or the slow iscentc,
wh-t op ortunity was there In either of those chambers
for so If escue by trv't I mean to say if the experimental
subject felt that ho v-a losing control of his mental or
'.bysic 1-.1 faculties wh t opportunity did he h-v_, other
th'n to sif,nr 1 to the man o'nipulntln tt the ch ibcr to bo
brou-nt down to noranl rltlcudo?


Court 1

April 2S-A-17-l-31eicldy-von Schon.


A. In eao.: of these chambers, in the small one as
vrell ea In thw 1 rg c one, there was within reach a valve
which on. could open to descend.

4. Just exactly where was t..is low pressure chamber
oo ted <r.a Installed In the Jachau concentration camp?

A. This mobile low pressure chamber-was standing,
on a road between two barracks. Ir. one of those barracks
was the shelter for the experimental subjects and the
workroom for the parson In ohargo of the experiment and
and the rest of the personnel.

Q. «hen you were ready to begin an exoerlment, who
produced the experimental subjects from dry to day? In
other words, how did those subjects who were housed In
the brrraoka know that at such and such a time there was
; oln & co be an experiment ana that they In particular had
boon selected for that experiment?

A. The subjects for our experlm_nt3 for rescue from
ni t h altitude were durln^ the whole course of experiments
in t. is room In tfa. tarrocks. They wore not fc;c ,, .,'»c from
aunuwnero whon ;he experiment was to be conducted, they
v re all there The person who was In choice ol them
w/16 the wlthe.'a .off who has tostlflv-d here.

•! <c> sand that; but how aid Hoff ^now that at
’ "X; hout e r.j was to product the experimental eu'oject

or 3, or C at th„ chamb.r Itself for the conduct of -»n
-xperlment? They simply couldn't guess It. rt

to go throu^i thw routine actually, I suppose, of mcxlnt,
-ch of the experimental subjects know that today, 29
« >'il, rt 1 3C hours he would be exacted to report some-
-re to somebody for 6oae sort of a test, wouldn't he?

• whpt was the routine for makin 0 ta*t a?n available?


Court 1

April 28-A-l ?—8-aD-Blakley-von demon.


a. Cr. th. day w..en I mys_if participated In these
x erimcnte I sow how t.'.ls hapoened. *ncre the recor- of
ox aricine was kept, It was-sot -own who wr-e available
or _xoeri.Ser.t9, that la, vhrt experimental subject had
hot boon In on experiment lr. th- ;aet few days. -if tor
-v r experiment tne subject had several days of cos leto
rest, ihr.t vos so that the results would not bo Influenced
V tk- person' - being subjected to too many o: them. It
vo>8 from the rom. Inin*, subjects tnat tn. -xperla-ntal
oubjecos could bo used. «s for as I recall, the wltno e
Huff erw a-ich peo .lo os coul.* bo usee and- ask-d them
•. on one of them w r.tod to be In n expurla.nt.that day.

A hen from the limited b roup Koff brought t. e or.o wno
wanted to bo In the experiment on that p rtlcular day.

She b r ' U P was often limited more nnu .tore every day; but
t the end nobody but one person was left w o -ad not
o rtlolcted; pnd that wrs .is turn that day.

*. Ordinarily how .--any experiments wore each of these
- n. rime jtal subjects required to undergo?

a. The subject participated In bout ten t v&nty
•« . >* htt i'o_.t;.or.

C .. w -t oeriod of tine?
v. ithe.

— of o large pressure ohnuber r.u r a n.«li

j*c. ,ov. wnlei: one of the o was jut In th. end
'-Cvcen -he two barracks?

a. 'iney we e oot.*. together In on- tract'..

ci t would .ou s-y were the ? oroxlmate lnaldc
-non* Ions of the largo low pressure chamber?

«. The bl c low pressure c;- :ber was bout ei c nc—
b , ther- \-r- two circles. Two c llr.drlcal ohr abera
o-.nt c c‘ ch ot..,r. use- o: t.iese circles ..rd e


6650


Court 1

April 29-A-17-3-KD-31akley-von 3chon.

Sir. act or of about two meters thirty, two meters twenty or
two Deters thirty.

4. How aany people could bo accomodated in the largo
Chamber If you wonted to conduct a mass experiment? Let
us assume for instance, I think you said that a person
ojuld go up to four thousand motors without the use of
oxygen; it n't tnat correct?

A. Yoe.

Lvt as assume that you wanted to determine tnat
foot. Kow many experimental subjects oould you have pl-ood
In the largo pressure chamber at one time?

\

A. The Luftwaffe hod, as far os I know, n maximum of
ton peroona in the big chamber. In cnon of these two
circles which I mentlon-d, of which the oh-.mber was comoos^d,
there would be mor- than 4 experimental subjects and one
doctor, let us sny, a total of t~n persons, dut if one
assumes that those ouople were to orowd togothor cloooly,
one would surely h vo boon abl». to seat twelve people in
the chamber.

To get Into that chamber were there two entrance
* c or Just one?

A. Only one door.

and thit pressure, if you 6tart at tero, I suppose
uld ordinarily start at what we ooll approximately
irto-n pounds to the square inch? ’Jo aid that 0 - correct?

A. Yc6, that is right, 760 alllmctors of mercury by
t}v other measurement. That is one atmosphere.

»• -f you were th.n to atleapt to take that pressure
duWn , for Instance, let us assume you wanted to take It
4own to 6000 meters, how long would it take to do it?

a. It Is possible to v ry this ascent to a certain
•—nt by the valves. Th_ normal s--oed of an ascent with


6651


Court 1

April 29-A-17-4-..J-Blok 1-y-von ochon.


vhioh we carried out such experiments was a thousand actors
o~r alnut-. This w. s f so to speak, the standard speed
because the altitude which can oe reaching without oxygon
depends to r certain extent upon the ascent. In ord-r to
be bl- to compare exoerlaents *t various institutes, the
.iedioal Inspectorate suggested that unless there were '•ny
sued?! clrcumat'necs on- should use this speed, a thousand
m-ters per minute.

Suppose you w-nted to test the chamber itself to
ooc if it was oD-rntlng properly; Vhot would be the minimum
time that you could tak- that chamber from scro to 6000
m-tors?

A. That depends on the construction of th- chnmb-r.

3ut to stick to this pr" ticulnr aobll. oh aber that we us-d
In woohnu, ror 6000 outers we would need about thru- minutes,
tnreo or four minutes, nry I add something about those
qu-otlons? This r-d b-ok which Jr. oaut-r handed to the
Tribunal h. s in it sketch of tnic mobile chamber.

TH£ PrtmoIo&.NT: Counsel for tne Prosecution may cross
xnralne.


Court 1

Arrll ?9—A-13—l-KD-Gross-5rovn.

CROSS EXAMINATION

3Y MR. HARDY:

W. Dr. Ruff, when were you first approached by
Dr. r^ltz?

A. December 1941.

Did Dr. 'eltz cone to visit you In Berlin?

a. Ho cane to orlln and visited sc In my institute.

ft. Whet did he say?

A. During tills visit wo discussed aero meulcal
questions among oth.r thln 6 s. H. had received our first
report on parnohuto descents from t ,roat heights .• nd wo
discussed this. I told nim how we wanted to oontlnuo
with those experiments. In oth.r words, whnt whoud bo tho
suound "art In this experimental serlos. And, th:.t la
In essence the subject of our conversation. Prof. Woltz
then suggest.d to me that the s-cond part of this
oxnerlmontcl aeries snould be carried out In Dnohau
on prisoners.

Professor’ Woltz sug fc e t.d to you that you should
carry out this r.sooroh on prisoners In Dachau concentra¬
tion camp. is that tno first time you heard of the plan?

a. Yes, that vos the first tine I hc~rd of that
project nd Professor Woltz made this su, -6 estion that
encre should be collaboration between Romberg ind Rnsoher,
oetwe^n his Institute and mine, and that wo should carry
out the experlnents.

‘.th-t do ;oe sup'.os. prompted Dr. Woltz visit to
you In Berlin?

a. ih.ro were many such visits. In th. first place
I oaid in my direct cx-nln tion that eltz throughout tho
.r.tirc .*ar erne to icy institute once or twice » year when
s In Berlin and had time to con. to the institute.

6653


Court 1

April 2S-A-lS-2-HD-Gros6-3rovn.


i. Prior to the time that you 'nd Romberg accepted
the invitation of Veltz, to your knowledge, hod Dr.

Rasober any experience in the field of hi d h altitude
research?

A. You moan Raseher and myself?

•

%. No, I will repeat. Prior to the tin*, that you
and Romberg entered the Dachau picture did Rasohor ever
h"vo any experience In hit-i altitude research work?

A. na6chor had been assigned to Vein’s institute
for 3uver"l months at this time ana certainly ho at least
had the opportunity to witness high altitude experiments
and to t'ku part In th^o. .'-oroov^r ns I could 6 o 0 from
conversations I had with Rasch-r from the tine I mot him
Rnschcr w* s perfectly acquainted with r^ro medical
problems.

». But, ctu lly riascher was more or less a beginner
in this typv, of reoonroh work, wasn’t hw?

A. Kow much ho had worked In this field I cannot
oay. I don’t ovon know It today but with us In the
Institute thw situation was that if •» new worker enmo
within throx. months he had oartlcip ted In low jrossure
work for at least one hundred tides nd had r very good
idea of what altitude problems were from his own personal
experience.

4. oil, now didn’t Dr. i.ltz consider it uoslr'ble
to have experts like your6.-lf •’nd Romberg assist Hnsch.r
in these exoerlments?

«. It is true that in this 0011 -borntion that Jfeltt
proposed ho said, amon c other things: "It la, of Course,

: fit IT you or Romberg take part in tne6e vxperiments
because Romb-rg had already carried out such parachute
decant experiments ar.d is, therefore, the man who has

- 6654


Court 1

April 2S-A-16-3-HD- -'X*oas-3rown.


carried out such experiments and knows about the whole
problem of rescue from high altitudes. - Yes, that is
correct.,

•ell, now during the course of Joltz's visit to
Berlin, the first visit, did you discuss rny of the
errr.ngmunts to be made at Dachau in the carrying out of
thoso oxperlm.nts?

A. So far as I can recollect today we probably
discussed the whole matter of carrying out thoso experi¬
ments bocaueo wo spoke about the first prt of the series
"nd the second p rt w?s identical 30 far as the carrying
out of the experiments at nigh altitudes. This was to
bo t higher altitudes.

Veil, now Dr. Ruff did you, when you first hoard
of the proposal of Dr. eltz to go to Dachau to nsolst
Raschwr and work upon concentration camp lnm tea, did you
h. vo any lmav-dlate misgivings about the situation?

j\. Perhaps I an make a correction in n detail lure.
In thli discussion it was not r.e if wu wore going ti
Dachau to support flcscher and assist Rascher but in this
ells Quasi n wo said that between Veltz's institute and
• urs there should bo collaboration. Now to mower your
question whether I had misgivings at that time. I had

a

no legal misgivings because I knew th~t the atat- official
w had approved these experiments wa6 Himalcr. Himmler
w-’o then in the klnlstry of the Interior. He v s Chief
f the P lice and the hlgheSt executive officer in the
otato. Therefore, I nr d r.o mls-lvlngs of legal nature,
it is in* thcr question, of course, from an ethical m.dlcal
point of view where the choice of carrying out experiments
' n prisoners was aumet. ing brand new to U6. So, I and
Dr. Romberg had to get used to this idea.


€€£S


Court 1

3S—a- 1£—4—HD—Gross—Brown.

«a I b-ve dread/ srld In ay direct .xoaln-itlon, we h-d
Heretofore orrrl '' d out those experla.nts on ourselves
-r.d now were being osiced to carry thex out >r. other
-arsons nd prisoners. Thut I nevertheless decided to
oarr- ,e<; these .xperiao.nts on prisoners w s detersinod
fur ite first or -11 by ch.. ur b .ncy of this matter and
seo- ndly ey ay knowledge of International literature
vnlc ssured ae th-t tnc attitude I .-.ad toward seen
experiments was repudl-tod new by Professional aodlcnl
as -ol ci na in foreign countries. ..or did tne Presto .uti
or onurc. _or n P rllnacnt In any foreign countries object
to o.ch »rojri t . n \l ■ 1 knew, *nd let ae say

th t .x Jcn-wled 3 e of these Intern- cl n-'l exo-rls-nts
ff'-rded ne the cert-lnty th*>t 1 was undertaking nothing
v.ic.r • uld nrve been orohibltwd in -noth.r part of the
v rld - r ’ ncth - r P rC brainy /-nd would h ve oe.n
egvrdod -'ll unethical. I explained this aiming thne
t-lo le still ay point of view th- t experiments on
u-lsoners, professional crialn-lo, If they are volunteers
nd lr they do not cndnn b er life, -.na If they • re offered
s-ou sort of roc expense for thea, I do not reg-rd It cs
lex. rol to carry out these experlaents.

4 . -ell, dla you sporu with Professor * eltz cb.ut
..»e d-plg-rs lnv lv.d In c-perlaentG i., this first ooot-
ln 0 in Berlin?

«. I drre a * • I dia but rt any r-'te we certainly
' - ke ?b ut In lr. nunlch.

e. ell. Sow prior to your trip to .vunlch, that la
di cel.- "fter your aeetln ; with Professor ieltz, did
u :er. re ;ort the f"Ct that you hr.d b en visited b
.-rof.se.r Wcltz nd that you h*>d been Invited to coll-bo-
r ‘ t0 witr " *? ls institute in the excerih.r.ts -1 Jachau t■>


■n


6656


Court 1

Aorll 29-A~lG-5-HD-oro88-3rown.


any one? In other words, report th-t lamedlately to
Hlppke?

Or. n dry tirt followed this conference. Of
curso, I don't know today whether one or two days lr.ter
after 1 h-d discussed this proposal with Romberg I wont
to “lppke nnd nlso discussed tills problem with klppke.

On this occasion I bee-ax; convinced thrt Kiopko had given
hie •oprov 1 In principle months ago for experiments in
Dachau and on this ooc sion 0 ot Blppke's approval for the
experiments and for the use of the low pressure chamber
for this.

'<• ns n n-itter of f-ct, "lppke h-d t-lkud to R-.scher
r.nd 'oltz prior to th. time ne visited you, that Is oltz
visited you, Isn't tfint right?

a. *ee, Hlppke told me th"t, rrmely that a few months
ago Rr.soher nnd Koppenhoff, I do not .-.now whether ’’oltz
took pert, nd a discussion with him In Munich bout the
question of high -ltitudo experiments.

Q. Hlppke nt th t tin. approved of the experiments,
didn't ho, rs planned?

A. -.‘hen I was with Hlppke he gave r.ls approval for
thoso experiments.

xi. Well, now then you croceedod to have n meeting
In Munich at Waltz's Institute. When did that meeting
take dI'co?

a. I can't remember th- t for sur. today but it was
In thu beginning of 1942.

<• -'ho was present at that meeting?

A. Present - Professor : eltz, Dr. Aasoher, Dr. Romberg
and myself.

i. T rsn't Dr. Lutz nnd Dr. Wendt there?


6657


Court 1

«?rll 29-A~18-6-HD-Gross-3rovn.


a. Dr6. Lutz end Wendt were r.ot present at this
discussion.

v. ‘<oll, now, dGn't I recall Dr. Lutz stating hero
th"t ou and Romberg visited the Institute in Munich and
upon ’rrlvil he net with you -t the 9amc time with Wendt
and th n ^oltz, Rnscher, Ronbwrg and yourself got to the
part of this discussion which would involve the work to
be done at the Dachau Concentration Comp. Thereupon
Lutz ~nd fendt were asked to larva the room. I believe
you will find that in the record of this- trial on pogo
579 end that is th. testimony of Lutz. Jell, now did you
talk to Lutz about these natters to nny extent at all
prior to the time Lutz woe coked to leave the room?

a. Of course, whan * wao there in Munich in the
Institute I also spote with Lutz.

*., bra Lutz rnd andt men who had done considerable
work on high •'ltitude research work with -nlnnls?

'• Of Lutz I know that he had don^ work in the
field of high •’ltltudo experimentation.

%. oil, then why would it be neoossary or wny was
it n-ccssary to ask Lutz, a nan who had had considerable
knowledge of high altitude research, to leave the room?

a. This request that Lutz should leave the room
was not known to me. I hoard his testimony here but with
the b*st will in the world I cannot recall that upon
this occasion Lutz wc6 sent from the room. Please keep
in mind that tide took place about five years ago and I
am quite willing to ~dnlt the possibility that soma such
'.ilng did happen. On tne other n nd I believe that Lutz's
failure to participate in this decussion is nothing so •
v r;- .unusual. «s I imagine that ip my institute , received
visitors, let us say Professor Wendt and Lutz, and wa had


6553


C-iurt 1

April 25-*v-18-7-HiD-Ciro8s-5ruvn.


s aot-iln^ to dleouss tr.cn * er.uuld hove thought 1C n
£«-CCjr ,* o urea to oqc ay collr. born tore who were In the
fnac rooa Co leave the roon. I thinfc thet Is so c orttcr
of o uraa th- t we wouldn't h-ve to do auch trIking
«.'o ut It.


6659


29 «oril-A-3JG-19-l-::rx:cK (Int. 3ro«i)
Court Ho. 1


Q Th t's very true, but we first must consider that whon th- wit¬
ness Lutz was here in this ccurt room he stated that he was ofier~d the
position that you had relative tc hascher at Dachau. In other words,
eltz had asked Lutz ec collaborate with iiascher at Dachau and Lutz arid
here cn the stand that he considered hiaself net ruthless enough to
conduct high altitude experiments cn burner. beings in concentration craps.
Th t is cn page 2&) cl the record. Dc you recall that?

a Yos f I r-ucoicr that testimony.

r, hell, tnkirv th:t into consider: ticn, it would appear that Lutz
would have had ac-.c interest in this particular conference, would he net,
hrd it not be-n dotoi-cincd by the members of this conference that they
waited it kept secret?

A It Beucs to Be that the opposite is the case. If this rettlly we#
the c- Be, ra ycu h~vo described it; namely, th t ’ eltz raked Lutz chord
of time tc carry on the ocpe'rlaenta and Lutz hero states that he didn't
feel hiaself ruthless enough to carry cut such experiments, then thoro
ccrtrlnly wouldn't have been *ny reason to scad Jud from the room.

i, '.oil, new, you apparently did not rgrat with the attitude that
Lutz exhibited hero before this Iribunrl when he stated, on page 302 of
the record, th"t he hi self would not have carried out such experiments
cn - ged, much leas on a human being.

« Jr. Prosecutor, 1 believe 1 have to correct you here. In the
G-men record of wh t the witness said - t le-st, ca I understood it -
he never testified that he wouldn't h-ve c ni-d cut such experiments,
even or. dog, Mich ■ i tc c - rrled cut cn huan beings. The witness did
net say that. The >dtr.o$s said he did not feel himself U b* robust
enough for such experiments.

«

q Yes, you will fir. th t. Doctor - I won't argua with ycu on that
joint... You will find th.t cn page 269 of the r-ccro - "robust" - and
you -..ill find, cn p. e 302, the expression I quoted to you. In addition,
t- that. Dr. * endt Iso refused to prrticip’to in these experiments. New,
inasmuch s ycu are cn expert in this field cf rcs-TCh, why do ycu

666 «


Court So. 1

2 S Anr 47-A-lS-2-iE.-&rrov (Br.v-)


suppose these two gentlemen, who »-er t also men of considerable refutation
in rho field of high altitude research, had such strenuous nisgivings
ibout cinducting experiments ft Dfchau?

A. Let mo point out first of ell that, at that time, I did not know
thet th-ew t«-’j gentlemen bed allegedly received an offer free Volt* to
carry out such experiments and had refused. I still doubt that. And I
bolUvw that the witness tesdt Mil, in the course of this week, testify
er. this matter. It it very herd for m« to cry vhy those men refused to
accept ’Jeltr's offer. Yesterday I described the flXoorimcr.tc that wo CM—
ried out on ourselves. I told you the conditions under Which T gave my
approval f^r these experiments in Seoheu rnd ! con try for myself that I
1j 4 neither legal nor c-r/1 misgivings about these experiments. As you
have seer, fr-e the tettlaon;/ of prosecution Mtnosio* hero -first Loib-
brandt-the physiclcn erh take the point ef view thr.l he repudiates nil
human experiments. that Is one point of view which averyone nust
resct. On the other hand, there arc physicians vho tmbrrce a dif¬
ferent c.int of view,

Q, Veil now, vhen was the low pressure chamber ordered down to
Z< chnuT

A. igniw I can't tell you the precise diy. It vet after the 12th
if February. I know that on the 12th of February the chamber Hit still
in Berlin rnd the chamber must have gone te Ecchtu after that daUj
roughly, at the end of the first half of February or the beginning of
the Second half of February,

Veil now, prior to the -rd-ring -f the low pressure chanter to
Dachau had you yourself been to the coacentn ti.n camp - that la, prior
to the time the low precsurc chrcber arrived?

A. Yes, I have already scid that after this discussion in "cits'e
institute - I believe on the next day - there wen c discussion in the
concentration cam? of Eachou with the camp commander.

q. ’her. did Beecher ar.d ?.»bcrg and yourself Select the volunteers
to be used in the experiments?


6661


Court Sc. 1

2 S pr 47-A-lS-o--£-K*rr:.v (Brown)


A. Seither Eccberg nor myself cheat those volunteers. Before Eca-
b^rg came down to Techau for these exoeriaents, of these siny persons
“he had applied Eatcher chose those wo vert suitable for our uurposee.

<* ' ell new, after the lev oressure chamber arrived in Dachau, did

the experiments begin immediately?

*• I can't say that for sure today. The witness S_ff testified thnt
cn the lfctfc of February, or perhaps on the 22r.d of February, if I renumber
ccrrootly, the experiments begun. It is elso possible that the first
oxuerloonts took olace on this dey. but the documents show that there ves
then a. pause of o considerable length of time because there were sono
difficulties with Emcher, and then, at the beginning of Kareh, tho ex-
oerlncnts roolly began. That is vhrt ! know on the basis of tho docu-
aents end Seff'o testimony. Cf =y own knowledge I don't know that.

Q, Veil now, tho volunUwrs were selected rfter tho orcosure chea-
ber had nrriyed at Dachau, is that right? In othor words, tho erpori-
aonts began sccje tiae e ft.r tho pressure chamber arrived? Sow, did they
then soloct the particular subjects to be used or eccoot the voluntooro
after the nrrivcl of the low orcssuro chamber?

A. I ccn't answer that in detail. I was not at lYchnu when tho
chamber arrived, nor v,s I there rt the beginning cf the cx-x-rioents.

Thus, I cannot answer that cuettion with urocisicn.

'ell, you have stated here that ycur reason for accenting this
invitation to participate in those experiments at Dachau v*.s because of
*.he fact that the subjects to be used v c re volunteers. Sow, didn't yeu
yourself, acting as a prudent oersen, ascertain the oxlstencc of a .rrouy
-f volunteers before ycu sent this chanter to D/.chau? Sumose you sent
the chamber all the vey tc Dachau and ycu couldn't got a volunteer, vfcich
Jbvloualy vns the cesc? Y-u sent the chaster tc Dachau before you oven
hti escertainod whether or not any one had volunteered for these e.-roari-
c-.r.ts, didn't you?

a. -hat is s j, yes. But the situation wrs that the c;csu commander
--Id ub during this discussion thet vt should have no difficult'* in find-

5662


Court So. 1

2 S A-r *7-A-19-4-i£K-Sarrow (Brown)

ing enough volunteers. He asked u*, nevertheless. to keen the nueber of
orisonera vhco vc should need to a ainlnun sleet he needed all the innatos
of the eerro for work.

Q, Uoll now, Toctor, you cpocrcntly received tho authorization free
Kipnkc prior to tho tine that ycu sent the ehreber to Dachau. Sow, this
ckasber was e cobile chaaber, was it net?

A. Yws, that Is so.

Q, "hat Is, the chaaber Itself wps counted onto a tractor?

A. Yos, that Is sc.

q. And It vr.s possible for the ehaaber to bo driven fron Berlin to
Dachau on tho Autobahn, I cresuac?

A. Yos.

Q, ’"ell now, you sent the chaaber first of ell to Munich to Voltx'o
Institute, is that correct?

A. Yos.

Why was the chaabvr sont to v cltz's Institute rathor than
haring been sont directly to Dachau?

A. !n ay direct ernainatioc I explained that yesterday. Tho chrn-
b«.r, on its vcy tc Drehau, went vlp .vunlch. During the dlscuoolon with
the ocap coraandcr In Drehau ~c talked about whoa the drivers should turn
to. The chraber belonged to the Luftwrffc red should ccrtrlr.ly be turned
over to a aecbor of the Luftwaffe. Moreover, we did not know when tho
chaaber w-juld rerch Dachau. It was winter, there «(.s cnov, so thet you
coulln 1 1 fcr«.o*i. when the chnaKr v-uld arrive. Saaehcr wt-.s not at
Dcchr.u but vr.s either In aunlch or Schengcu, and while we w.rw.discussing
these things the caap cocsrndir asked whether the drivers wv-re lnfcraoJ
what sort if exocriaonto weru to take ul;ce. Vo, of course, denied that
bccf.uoe It w,.£ nit our cue.: to tell the- drlvcro who t sort of eroeriaents
we were doing. And then the cocaasder said, "If that is tho case, then
I want that chamber to stay In .iunlcfc for the tlae being because, other¬
wise, the drivers will spread acea racers to the effect thet the ucoelo

to be chosen." ?or this reason, cn tho wish
6663


Court So. 1

2 S Apr 47-A-19-6-i&HCnrr ov (Brown)


of tk<- cenp Cou3«Rdcr, the chraber stayed In itunlch


6664


2S _ r-*—-GZS-20—2-< .al'y (Br'wnJ
C'Oi't jT' . 1.


-• It 13 cy r mini's th:.t c prise tor is altogether in a prsiti-n
t' v'luntoor ?<r an exjericoat. ?rrn tho purely legal p'int cf viow
s' fer r.s I ran judgo tie prise nor is ol t- & other in a pcslticn tr 'cxry
'ut logcl business, rcaacquoatly ho ran els' deride •'bother he is tr
orrtici >ato in ex. oxporiccnt rr art.

Q. Voll, then it is y'ur r pinion that a per s'-n, over, tfa'ugh in-
'rr'oratod 'an actually in tho direct sense ef tho wrd, vcluntcer i>r
a ucdi'al expert cent?

a. I «uc r f th t view, that b-*th r. prisrnor 'r a n'a-pris'nor ran
v'luateor t'r ox^rriconta.

0. If that be tho rase why was tho 'ricinnl status 't thoso nub-
Jo'ts t* bo used in tho high altitudo oxpcrinontn 'S any c- nsoquon'c? •

1». of rrurso, it is easier in oxporicoats V give rporrvnl if
tho subjects aro habitual criclnrvls and n't s'ao 'thcr noenlo rh' bo-
c "uso 'f their idc r-l'gy 'r p'litics sr v to 'thor roasrn nro boirw; kept
rin' nor. I ccrf c-urso 'f the r .lni'n that I tr. po routed t' carry
-ut oxioriconts 'n political prisenor if theso gontlocon v'luntoor.

3u; rc/.ar’ing tho possibility '{ carryi^ 'ut oxxjrinonta m political
prla-noro, thuro won n' discussion c n thet -censi'n r.t all. Thon
Volts Dado this prep^on! V cc and t'ld oo that Elp -ho hnd glvor. air.
lonalooi'a, I nakod wh- thoso pris'nors woro «-id he t'ld to that they
u r j habitual cricinals eh' hnd vr luntcorcd. Thus tho quootl n r&ot. or
•r n't uo eight oxocriaont 'a political -pris'sors novor caso up in
this "nnocti'n.

q. ~r.d it is y-ur "r.tonti'n that tho pore'es U6od at D.vrhau woi*o
t *aly subjects erndotned t' death, but else includod habitual 'rirr-
duals, that is uc-plo "ith in, 20 rr 20 years sontonro, is that right?

... The oxnoricontnl subjects which vero usod in 'ur oxocricon-s,
nancly tho 1^ dr 15 rh' rare always at the exocriaont&l stnti'n, rare
n't pors ns crndccncd t' death s' far as I knew, rather this was a
-r\: *f experimental subjocts *di' were under protective custody.

.rr, whr.t did y'tt r y'ur £T'U r . 'ffor these habitual rrloinnlo?

—. V'u ncan the roc--pease that thoy ah'uld rocoivo?


25 i?r-w-GZ3-3n-3-4failr 7 (3rrwn)
Crcxt . 1.


q. -os.

”o <fforad thaa athi:>j 'n 'ur ppjt. 7e had n' fusibility
'f d'ia^ ar. Wf.uao the rc"rpoc8c w-uld hr.vo t' be deterained by
the f;i'o that hed charge 'f thoso popple, n/eoly Hinder, tmly ho
r uld tf'cisc rccrepor.sc, cad so> tc It that It wr.s ,riven, rad as
tho nitnogs I-off horc has testified, ho pr-uisod thoso jcr p j 0 tart

9

r^tor tl.o experiments thoy w*uld be pnrd'aod.

•• h>w, lnr.scurh os y'u and R'liborc ^cro inv'lvod in those
om.crioontu, did y'U yuroolf c.-4:o nay r.ttccpt V investigate tho
atr.tus 'f a jria'nor after he hnd been subjoctod t- tho cx.icriw.ntc
in tlic high eltitudo rosoor'b r^rkt

— -ftor cr.rrying 'ut thoso ox.ioriconts rhon Paschor cnco t'
uo t turn in in * ini'n, no nskod hrv this bueiaotc 'i nrrd'nlnf'
pria'aor* was f'cln* clrn^, Kr.srhor said that ho hnd soon t' that,
rad thcrooftor ro did n't c'forn 'uxtolvcs v-ith thin nrttor. ber-.uso
th.t vr.o art rur J'b rad wr.s ft within -ur pewor. That was tho J'b
'f tho Rolf hsfuuhror SS,


6667


29 «pril-~-0J-21*l-»:^_h:n-(iat. 5rcrn)-

* —

Curt K-. 1

Q Of c ursc Richer never exhibited tc you the letter that he
r^ceived fr n Heinrich Himalcr statin that Rascher ha;'. th_ p wer
t iard n s,:ac cf these incases after they had -nee * ne thresh the
“ r riajrt# t- th - extent that they ha 2 died and if they c^ul have
been recallc'. tc lif- that th_ir sentences c ul! hav. been ccaaitted
t- life Lapris noent In the c ncentrati n carp; ’id h- call that t
yeur attention which was the 'ffer that these imates had?

n N-, I saw that letter here f r the first tin. an n- the D cu-
sento.

Q »ell, new, as I und.rstand it trra direct exaainati n, y.u

caintain that there are actually tw sets I experiments at Lcchau

in the field f hi’h altitu e research, nna-ly, these oxp-rinents 1 r

the benefit f th- Luftwaffe snd th 3e experiments f r th. benefit

cf the S5, c n’ucted a 1-ly by Rascher as r lore ; by Hirnl-r and the

•

experiments that Were c n ucte ’ by .-tuff and Renter..; i3 that c rrect?

i. l’es, that is true t the extent that n th. ,n- hand th.re
wen experiments in Ascent fr a hi h Ititude rn • -,n the oth.r hand,
as can be sc-n fr n the ’.cunents; there ms n t m _x?eri;xnt-l
series but sev-r- l sh rt -iks which Rascher carried cut n HLaal.r's
rders.

Q »n thrsa are the experiments *hcn death rccurcd; is that
rl ht, th- Rascher experiments, the SS cxp.ricents, cc t speak?

“ Fatalities -ccured in Raster's experiments an? in the
experiments c< nc.rnin . hi h altitude thcr. were n ne.

, men these fcntlnen fr a the c nc.ntr.ti n canp v lunte-red
fer th_ experiments, was i3 n-t clear t th se subjects that the y Were
t luntecrin { r the experiments te be conducted under the ui.ance f
Ruff an-* Re-Bbcr rather than th_ fatal -xp-.riiaents t be c nducted un¬
dr R .3ch.r independently?

 That r. s t.l' t th- p.r3i‘ns wh v .lunteorei individually for
the er^arL’aents that, f c urs-, I cann.t rep rt an tc ycu, because I
■ns n t pr.scnt; but what they w.re tl!r.s that these were hi h alti-


6668


29 Aprils-CWl-g-iu.chaMiiit. 9r:«n)-
C -urt 1

vu= cxpertmnnst and that 5C flr aa c w !ac „ > th ._ ac

" 1 J=n <- cr “= *•>“ "ember; »ent It Dachau, he told the

experimental subjects precisely Just .hat the nature of the experiments

*“ “ ^ subjects -rule be in p sltien

t- Participate in r. sensible nenner in these cxp.rinents, namely should
be able t= *at «C expected of th-n in the experiments. The experi¬
mental subjects that .c hod fer ueur experiments, cere Certainly tell
nt censiJcrsblo lcn.th Mist these experinensts had thei C eal an'
they cure nlsc certainly tel; that there - uli net be my serious Jan-
rcr as fatalities r ipath.

9 too last question aim thee lines; Dccfr. in the ceurse a
these experiments Mie determined -.ether er net the y lunte.r -a. a
V luntcer f r laschcr er f-r Ruff end Ember,;. In tther . rJs, then an
etperinental subject entered the prism chamber, was he ,lven a tap n
the .haul -er, . - . he t U yen are Eascher object, you are Ruff's expc-

riaentai subject, r di they wear Jerseys, me hayin- Se „ « and
tho :th.r Luftwaffe?

A 1 have alrca y sole that the experimental subjects, Mr parti¬
cipate ! in ur experiments, .ere kept p-mmently at ihi. cxpertncntel
block,thnt they .ere there- tfer u.h ut the sh 1 . peri participated
ib Oil the experiment, in hi h altitude .and that n thin,- happened la „

W ef th-a. I renenber the rttnesse.a Neff and Vie.e- te.tifiei an! both
f tnesa. c llabcratc. : with this.

9 Did y.u Check on the status f each, an cyeiycna f the experimen¬
tal subjects that .ere set aside, Ruff, Renter-, mi Raschcr otperiments,
finely 60 subjects.

 I i' Oat quite unierstani th. questi-n. #

9 r u have stated here that s me sixty expert mental subjects were

fct ^ - use; in the Ruff, Rmb.r ml Eascher expe-

riev-nts, after the c nclusi „ f the experiments, .1 y „ check
y u toll this Tribunal under -nth that mch ani ere*, .» .f 3lx _
’-x;«.riscntil sublets r-r, n * livin ?


6669


25 april--— jJ-SI-3— -^-chan-(int. ar'wn)-
C-urt X.. 1

 ^ believe there uust have been an c rr*r in translaei n. I i
n.t say that sixty pcrsrns wen. roserv. I firtbe Pajff, R cber : :n.' fta s-
cr.-r -x; -rir^r.ta, I sail that fr a a meber f afc-ut sixty f these
pris ners :.b ut tn~n r fit-wn w.rc eh sen, wh~ were c nstently ,,resent
at the experimental stati.n, ;s experiment. 1 subjects.

THL PRISIDmXT: Thu Tribunal will n'w b- in recess until 900 1

dele t:a rr;w a rnin ■.

( Thw Tribunal rccessci until 09,30 Heurs, 30 April, 15li7).


29 «?ril-..-OJ-21-3-^*-chan-(int. ar'wn)-
Ccurt Ho. 1

" ± believe there mist have bc^n in arirr in translati n« 1 i 1
n-t siy that slaty persons were nsur^l f rth. ftiff, R-cb.r: an.’ ftas-
ch - r a; .rlrxnts, I sail that fra i nuaber f ab-ut sixty -f these,
pris ntrs it ut thin or fit—n *vrc eh sen, who acre c nstr.ntly present
at thu experiaentd stati.n, : 3 expcriatnt-l subjects.

7HL ?RiSIIz:rr: The Tribunal will n-w b- in recess until 900 '
cl-ck t a rr;ir n-rnin •.

( The Tribunal rccessc! until 09,30 Hours, 30 „;>rU, 191:7).


30 Apr Li - Foster (3rcwr.)

Court I to. L


Official Transcript of the Asxriccn Military
Tribun:! in the iettcr of the Unite: States
of America against Karl 3r:ndt, et al,
defendants, sitting ..t Kurnoerg, Gerar-ny,
on 30 April 1947, 0930, Justice Beals pr-siding.

TH- IARSHAL: Pursers in the court rooa Kill ole-.sc find thior

seats.

The Honor'bio, the Judges of Military Tribunal I.

Military Tribunrl I is now in session. God saw. the United
States of Ar.eric.\ nd this honorable Tribunal!

Then, will bo ord-r in the- courtroom,

TH£ PRjSIb..;<:: Mr. Marshal, you ascertain if the defendants
arc all ore sent in cairt.

THE May it pleaaj your Honor, ell defendants cro

present in th- court.

THL HtlSXboHT: The Secretary-General Kill note for tto record
the presence of all defendants in court.

Counsel ssjr proceed.

Lfl.SISGRlI.lD RUFF - Resuaed
CROSS ^/dfliunoi.’ (Continued)

BY^R. HARDY:


C,. Dr. Ruff, continuing our discussion rug. rdins the subjects
used inth: e.npuricxnts at Dachau, you cair.taln that all subjects
used in the Racchor, RoatK-rg Ruff high-altitudo wxperiaients wore
voluntoors. ho told you th.se subjects were volunteers?

A. In .ay direct exnninrticn I said th‘t before tbo experiments
I was first told ..bout thus and then Hippkc corroborated‘this


stnteKent, JurLi.er.ioru, this was also corrobortt-d by Rnschcr in tho
discussion ir. Veits*s Institute, .‘.nd fourthly, it was ccrrobor'ted by


the c .zp com-T/Lr, nd fte-r the experiments began , when Roabox*
for th. lir3t tint to report to ao, he a^ir. corroborated
subjects wore volunteers.

n» h*t oi&Vr. Wultz have to do in’. Ms picture, did ho
scrticip to ir. tfcx Isolection of thj irurtes tc be us.d?


was


M71


30 Apr 47 -Yy-1-2 -Foster (Brown)
Court No. 1


A. I said during the discussion in 37 institute in 3eriin
Professor Veltz told ns whet sort of persons the experimental subjects
■ere, canely, that they were criminals, that they were volunteers.

I asked you a question, you car- answer it very briefly.

Did Dr. Volts participate in this selection of the inmates to be used
foe these experi-aants?

A. No.

Q. Did Professor Itippko participate?

A. No./

Q. Dr. Romberg, did he participate?

A. No.

Q. Then it is possible that those three gentlemen didn't knew
whether or net they wore volunteers, isn't that so?

A. Tteso throe gentleosn hod been told that thoso experimental
subjects were volunteers, moreover — whan Romberg came to Berlin-

Q. Who told th js?

A. Probably Rascher. 1 don't knew tho details.

Q. Thor. ycu -ctuslly don't know who told then that those subjocts
weru to bo voluntours?

A. That ie so, accopt for Romberg, because when Ronborg told
fi® thnt those people were volunteers he h-d already conducted oxnari-
norls in Dachau, 3 nd what ha told co was based on his o>rn inforrsttion.

Q. Now ycu have also told us that tho subjects us-d were
cither men condemned to tkath or habitual criminals in every instance,
'..hat do you consider to be an habitual criminal?

t%. I considor -?n habitual crliirel to ba a >rsonw ho by com¬
mitting Several crin-.s ios demonstrated that he is a r«.sidivist, in
other words, a criminal who is cond^rvid- by a regular court to bo #
k-?t in jail fer tho ge-no-al goed of society.

Q. Now 1 notice on page 89 of docurxnt book number 2 which is
th- report signed by P.uff, hcao.rg, and Rascher signed the draft
thereof, which is document !»-402, and on oage 14 of th- original
copy of tho t crticul r report, which is your re->ort, there is


6672


JO Apr 47 Poster (3roan)

Court No. 1

describe tfcoro th« conditions of an oxporii-flt, and just »bet happened
to one of the objects experimented upon, ho* he answered each question,
and so forth. In parenthesis you -ill note in that report that
this inaato is described "in civilian life a delicatessen dealer".

The Goman, I believe, should be translated to mean "delicatessen
owner", rather than dealer. No*, it is important, isn't it, to note,

Lr. P.uff, that the gentleaan used in this oxperLa.nl *as a dolicetoo-
s-r. dealer? Does that fit into th. franeuork of being a person who
is considered to be an habitual criminal?

A. I suo no contradiction between the fact that a can is on
the one hand an amer of a delicatessen and on the other hand an
habitual criminal. There is no contradiction there. It *e_as to no
that persona iron ev-ry profession or class of society can cocreit
criav-s and thus can becoo, habitual criminals. I r-caU to your
attention the prosecution wit r^oz VieWeg who was by profession a
worthy book binder, and yet h- had co-aittcd a long series of crimes
and is at the .cement under indictm»nt in B-mbcrg ior, I believe, 7
or 8 crines for abortion, for arrogating to hima.lf the title of
physicion, —major theft, fraud —

C(. o -.*on»t go into the category of Vie-w-g. I want to ask you
now why the words in parenthesis were found as they are in the report,
and why they Weren't set d<*n in the following Mnnr: In civilian
life "a professional criminal", th.t would h*.ve been more appropriate,
would it rot?

A. Bo, I don't iv.lieve so. Could you please give me the
precis page whore this is to be found?

On cage 14 oi tiw original copy. Page 2? of th> English.


6673


o? r 11- y- «K- 3-l-£arrow(Srown)

Court 1

Now, I can tell you about this. This Is the des¬
cription of an experiment In great detail. For every min¬
ute of the experiment there Is an Indication of what the
experimental subjeot Is'.doing, and It Is here stated
that the experimental subject. In the twelfth minute
after he reaches sea level, himself asks: "May I slice
something?". *nd, then, as an explanation of why a nan
should ask eonethlng as strange as that, there Is, In
parenthesis, the explanation of what he was In civilian
life; namely, a delicatessen dealer. The Indication that
he was of that profession explains why he asked If he
could slice something such as wurst or....

Q. (Interrupting) How will did you know this par¬
ticular mar., Doctor?

.u I personally didn't know him at all.

Q. You didn't know whether or not ho was Just a
delicatessen dealer who was perhaps put into the Dachau
concentration camp because ho was a Jew?

a. That I cannot tell you.

Q. Yet you wore willing to sign your name to a
report vhloh, very elaborately, describes what happens
to a human being and did not know who that particular
human being was, or what his status was in the Dachau
oonoentratlon camp?

a. In ay direct examination, I said already that
all the experimental subjects whom I saw when I was In
Dachau wore the green sign that meant they were habit¬
ual criminals, and that the peroona U 3 ed in our experim¬
ents were housed all together In one room. That, in ad¬
dition to this, I Inquired when I was in Dachau Just
what crimes these Individuals had committed and that I
found out that one of then was a counterfeiter, and

667-1


• T Oaprll 47-H-«iC-&-S--Car row (Brown)
Court 1


another wa3 a habitual cheater. Several such crimes
were named to no. That had to suffice for me. Moreover,
we had to depend on the use of whatever the executive
organ of the state made available to uo In the way of
habitual criminals for these experiments.

Q. Nov, what was the manner in which these crimin¬
als volunteered for the experiments?

’./hen the subjoots turned up for the experiments
you did not have the Impression at all that they were,
in any way, coerced to tako part in those experiments.
They participated In the experiments with interest; were,
for instance, interested in seeing what altltudo a person,
who Just concluded tho experiment before the ono thoy
wore to ta/ce part, in, had recovered consciousness, at
what height thoy had handled the paraohute. Thoy dis¬
cussed tho experiments among themselves; they would
talk shop: One would say: "I woke up at 7,000." Tho
other would say: "I woke up at 6,500." Tho entire at¬
titude In theoe experiments showed dearly that these
experimental subjects were r.ot only volunteers but were
participating in the experiments with personal Interest.

Q. I can quite agree with you that they wore tre¬
mendously .interested in what was happening in that
chambjr. I lm-iglno I would bo too if I were one of
these so-called "volunteers". 5ut, now I ask you again,
how did thoy volunteer?

a. 3y applying for the experiments.

Q,. Ye 11, did they call th obo men in and ask them
if they wanted to volunteer, or did tho men Just walk
up and say: "I want to go into that ohaaber and volun¬
teer for those experiments.■ How did it happen that thoy
volunteered? What was the particular surroundings of


6675


3Caprll 47-K-«iC-3— , VEarrow(Brown)

Court 1.

this volunteer business?

A. In my direct examination I have already explain¬
ed that a number of persons volunteered for those ex¬
periments and one of the prisoners told me that It was
approximately sixty. Of these sixty, the experimental
subjects were selected whose ago and physical condition
nado them good subjects for the experiments. These
experimental subjects were collooted In a room at tho
experimental station and, throughout tho entire throo
months vhloh the experiments lasted, thay atoyoi In this
room at the experimental station.

q. I have heard all that, Dootor.

I'm asxlng you again, and for iho third and last
time, how did thoy volunteer?

A Very simple question.

Do you know or don't you?

I'm sorry to say I don't understand the question.

Q. Well,then, In othor words, you don't know how
these men volunteered for this oxperiaent. You don't
know whether they went up and said to tho conoontratlon
camp commandant "Ploase, I want to take part In this ex¬
periment", or whether the concentration canp commandant
called them Into his office and said: "Gentlemen, do
you wish to volunteer for this experiment?" Kod did
thoy volunteer?

.t. So far as I know, during formations In the oa.p,

and there were two or three every day, theywere asked

0

to volunteer for the experiment.

t}. They were asked?

Am Yes.

Well, that's all you Know about it.

That's all I Know about It.


6676


^Oaprll 47— 4-Xarrow( Brown)

Court 1

q. You don’t Know whether the concentration camp
ooacandant, or Rascher, or whoever It cay have bean,
published a bulletin, and placed It on tho bulletin board
which said “Volunteers wanted*? Such a thing as that you’
ve nevor heard?

a. No, I never heard about.lt.

q. You do not Know whether theae non volunteered at
the point of a gun, do you?

A. I know for certain that they wcro not forced to
volunteer at the point of a gun. In oy direct examin¬
ation I have already explained....

Q. (Interrupting) Juat a moment, Doctor. How could
you know for certain If you weren't thero when the 80
lnaatoe were aelectod? You're pretty positive now. You
state for certain you don't know whether theae non wore
coerced or seduced or whatefer It nay be, or forcod into
theae experiments. You weren't there. You rosily don't
know, do you?

a. I have already explained In ny direct oxamlnat-'
Ion that, for the oxperlaenta we carrlod out for reaouo
for high altitudes, It was now possible to work with
persons who were not voluntoers since It was noaessary
that the exporlnontal subjects show original initiative,
that thoy should be interested In tho experiments. Others
wise, we should not have been able to obtain tho results
that wo did.

Q. Of course, that 13 argunentatlvo and wo will
leave that for argument lr. briefs. Doctor. Let's go on.

Now, after you had bad this meeting in Dachau and
It had been established that tho experiments were to
take place and the concentration camp commandant had of¬
fered to supply the electricity, etc., you then returned
to Berlin, Is that correct?


6677


rrpril -k7-M-«jC-3-&-Karrow(5rown)

Court 1

A. After tho discussion in Dachau, we went back to
Berlin, yes.

Q. When did you return to Dachau again?

«. Xa?

Q. Yes.

a. During tho first weeks of tho oxporlmoits.

Q. Now, experiments had boor, conducted botweon tho
tlco you left Dachau In tho first Instance and roturnod?
There had boon some experiments In that interval had
there not?

a. Yes, experiments had been carried on In that
Interval.

q. Did you receive reports dally or voakly, or in
what manner, fron Bombers during the course of theso
experiments?

A. At lrrogular Intervals I reoelvod reports from
Romberg.

q. -./ell now, what was Romborg's otatus here actually?
I havon* t got it clear yet. Romborg was your immediate
subordinate In your institute In Roriin, wasn't he?

A. Ho was one of my cc-worfcer* and was subordinate

to me.

Q. And he was still subordinate to you while he
j/as working with Raooher, was ho not?

A. That is so, yes.

Q. Are you willing to assume full responsibility
for any work that Romborg was engaged In?

a. I am ready to take the responsibility for ttoo
experiments that vor- approved by me; namely, tho exper¬
iments in rescue from great heights*

Q. Of course, as I understand it, anything that
Romberg did was approved by you, wasn't It?

Romberg wont to Daohau with a very specifically


6678


TOaprll 47-KeK.-2-6-£arrov( 3rown}
Court 1


sot down assignment; namely, to carry out experiments
in rescue from great heights and, of course, I must take
the responsibility for that assignment I gave to Romberg.

Q. Veil now .actually, what was the assignment that

you had given Ronborg vhon he left Berlin? Now, boar In

mind that you had experimented at groat length with this

thigh altitude business In your own lnstltuto In Berlin,

•

•and I Imagine that Dp. Bentlngor had dono tho same in
Rechlln, and thero had boon oxtonslve experimentation
along those linos. Now, what was tho purpose in setting
up Dachau? Was thero something now to be found or what
was It? What was tho instruction you gave Ronborg?

a. The experiments wo carried out in our own In¬
stitute were, as I hnvo already described, the first
part of several experimental series to clarify tho ques¬
tion of rescue from great heights. This first part, which
was car nod out by ourselves through experiments on our-
selvos, conoornod itself with rescue up to the heights
of 12 kilometers; nomoly, in altitudes in which already
many of our war planes flew. N 0 w, tho second part of
these experimental series concerned heights from 12 to
20 kilometers and, so far ns this particular series was
carried out in Dachau, it Included the experimental
testing of the question up to what holght a parachute
descent with or without oxygon, with puraohuto unfolded
or not can be carried out.

Q. Vfill, then, in brief, Dr.Ruff, tho series of
experiments which had been conducted in your institute
in Berlin went to a limit of 12,000 meters.

4. That is right.

Q. and then it was your express purpose to continue
on your research work at Dachau and'to Investigate the


•■0pnl 47-K-.»X-3-7-Karrow(Bpovn)

Court 1

situation in an altltudo from 12 , 000 , to 20,000 meters,
la that correct?

a. That's right.


30 April 47-::-S -3-l-?faloy(Int # Brown)
Court 2fc. 1


1 . './oil, why couldn't you h aye invoitigatod tho citur.tion
botwoon 12,000 end 20,000 . - tors in Berlin wi t’out going
to Dachau?

A, Wo could have dono that in 3crlin r.lso, I havo
r.lroi'jdy described, clroady tolu you rh t tho roe.sons
woro for ny proposing that tin second p:.rt aliould bo
carried out at Dachau.

Q. It wasn't boon uso cf tie f • ct your oo-workors or
yourtolf porhnpa wore obviously roluctant to try to go
up to such heights as you lind planned to put thooo prisoners
ct, was it?

A. No, tl..t wee net our ror.se n, been u so r.s I hr.vo
r.lroady told you in rsy croas-oxanir.. ticn, I had ..lroady
ccrditionod r. part of the eoc.nd half of tho oxporSr.onts
in cur own Institute nanoly thrt part which ir.volvod
uxploeivo docexpression. In :jy cros3-ox*v.irmticn I doccribod

fov of the oxpyrlnontal sorios which wo carr iod out In
tho courso of Iasi; 10 yoars t ny Institute. If I had
taken aero tine on t; at I jclicve this idu.. that >:o did
not want to subject curaolvos tc such oxperi:x!nts our-
solvoo would not havo be ,n bre-ught up at all,

V/oll, Doctor, thoro i3 ..vidonco hero in ti is ofu:o
rop« rt, end I will hositato a nonont for tho sake tf
clarity, wl.on I rofor tc your ropert that noans tho
report cr Kouborg and Raschor with rof■ ronco to tho two
rop< rts of Raschor; in your rup-rt. Document HO 402, thoro
ic ovidonco y.-ar cc-tnrkovs Rase! or r..' Renborg a
half h. artod attor.pt tc go abevo 12,000 iwtors, ar.d they
' cat to 12,500 cr 13,500 rioters. \s said in t: is ropc-rt
tJ'.oy stopped tho oxperiaonfts boc.auso >.£ tl:o intor.so n..in
fc ho*- oxporionccd, isn't thr.t so?


6681


30 -.orII 47-::-Sy-3-2-Uclcy-Iht: hr. wn
Ccurt IT-. 1


A* Wo, 15 Is not qirito so,

1. Didn't you s.-.y that in the report. Doctor?

A. I I ..•0 bi o rop-.rt hero

1. I rill ro:A It to you, Sector. It shews hero on
P‘-iO 91 rf tl o dr.glish the case of Rnschor ~nd Renborg nixI
th ore c::por ir.ont thoro, end# two-third a 'f tho way drwn tho
pego It atr.tos: ".'.t tho sano trio tl.ero wore nest sovoro
hondr.ohos r.s though tho skull woro being burst apart.

H-a pains boc.-j o continually r.oro iovoro, sc that at 1 st
tho disc ntinuunco of tho oxporlr.or.t bocano noccsa- ry."
v.’oll, now, didn't R. act or end Ronborg Iv.vo tc quit .ftor
they h d roc.ol ot! 12,500 rr 13,500 :<-tors, respectively?

A. That is a' , :-nl a "a in it isn't sc. Nor, I didn't
rudeo rjysolf quite clear about this yostord y, and consoq-
uontly I al.rulu liko tc ropoat it. Then ir .n oaaontial
illfforonco botTroon vl other tho ox orincntr.l subject stays
abovo 12,000 tcrc dor 100 soc-nds orf r 40 ninutoo lilto
in tl is c. so. D oio oxporU:onts cn tl ccisolvoa by Rorborg

Rr.ool or. h vo n thing tr 0© with the doacont oxporinonfca,
r.-ir.h s thoy wro enrriod out cn to oxporiconfcal subjects.

I explained vector— why tl oy c rrlod vt t!o:o oriont-.ti. r.
oxperinonts cn t’onsolvos .t all, tl at ic tc say ui on
tl oy wort wit! ti o oxporinontal subjects covor: 1 tinos a
ir. t! t chrxdcurth on of tor tl o scoond >r tf:ird aocor.t
th.oy felt pair, but r» t ir. tho first scont. In :thor words,

51 o pain incru. so with tho nunbor f scor.ts per day.
ana new in ahr t ascorealn wl ct or ti is pair. an so r
because tl oy 1 d n do several asconts, in othor words,
bocr.uso cf tho nunbor of ascor.tr rr whether J:o pain was
c..uso-l by a pretr ctod stay r.t sre: t heighto, thoroforo
tlf.se ex., on:.cr-tr woro undorttakonand thoy then laiow tint


6632


30 A pril Icy-(Ir.-. !3rrwn) 3-3-

Ccurt ¥.< . 1


t! o pain 11 -rise r could nrlao for th t ro; son. Those
oxjoriiio: ta ro ^onttrnoi*. in this roa rt in rnl r tc
cl JiTy contain sy-.ptens cn tho p: rt cf t: o oxporinor.t'l
eubjocta. T t ii tlo ro .sen why thoy ro nontlcnc'' hero,

•'-’1' tJ* \t is wly they v;oro o.ach c r.rric-;. out by P.o.seh r
rnl Heritor.-.It v/culd hvo -r.’.o no aor.so to curry rut thoso
cxnorii'.cnts on tlo actuallyoxperirental subjocts thonsolvoa,
boc.-uro firs'; f nil tho subjects thor.eolvoa folt no pain,
bocauso they i ODii.no-.' at tl to : ltitudo .. v ry brief tiiro
and eoc rndly-

'i. Just r. . iont. I l'j-po you appreciate I na r. vory
airhole person, -nr', it is 1 rd for ::o to ur.’.oratand o cno
of thoso thin. a. If yru rsnko W on briofor W on I cun undor-
atrnf. t: oa bottor. K on tho pvrprao rf t! is osporinont
*f HaaeJ or an’. Rr.:bor~ w r tr soo her leny thoy could stay
W oro; is tl ;.t what ycu nro tryinr; tr toll no, Just to
aoo l ow lrn*: t) cy could stay ..t that loi.iht; w.a it tho

ti. M Unit th .t thoy rroro trying to cvorccrao or wh t
tme it?

... He, t! cy if.n't want to fin! out hor lonj thoy could

st. -.y Woro, 12 oy sir-ply vruntod to r acortnin vhothor if ycu
stto.yod ..t that altitudo for ..lenj tino cno folt a ninilnr
errt of pr.in, sucl* r.s tlo pain tl o; folt v] on thoy had
ontorod p v r dry sovor..l tinoa in rt'.or tc obs^rvo tho
oxporinuntr.l subjects.

.. T! on it rr.'.a .. ti.no factor tlr.t was involved?

- . It »/ a t bo cleared vpW ctlcr tl o pain that tho
porplo conductin'; tlo oxporinonta folt .openled on tlo
nunber of asconta pur .lay or rhotlor tho lcnjfcl of tir.o
Wat t: c;- s;Mnt at tho \ltitUdo was currul fcivo in its
uffoct.


6683


30 April 47-1!—£h <-3-4—Hale y-(Int. 3rrwr.)
Court Nc. 1


Thon it did bocca© a problem tc ycu particular
re so .rcl ore just how Ior^; i. rum could ro-iain at that
nltitudo?

... He, tho time lii.it and experiments in rcacuo fron
Sov.t 1 oi^ts was pvrnanontly dofinitoly dotominod. 'hon
c. r.inn jumps fTr,n an irolr.no and doos net epon 1 i3 prra-
chuto ho falls ..bout r. t* ouaand notora in 10 seconds.

On tl.o othor hand, tho nfn who epona his prrachuto irmod-
ic.toly do a coni', a in tio oner, parachuto at tl.o rr.to of
porhapa cno thousand notora in cno ninuto. ihoso tino
limits i -vo boon ascertained in aviation practico, and thoro
was no roc.am to do any ohenglng of tl.o tio proportions.

f l. dnd fchon when thoro doc.t*. s occurrod in tho Rcachor
oxpcriaionts what causod tloso 'o. ths fron your knowlodyo
l oro? Probably ycu don't know bocauso you woion't thoro
wl on that oocurrod at Dachau, but fron your knowlod£jo
of tho documents what caucod thoro doathe?

... In tho c.:so of tio first f tality I hoard cf tl oro
is probably why I cr no one olso could tho c..uro cf d oath
for suro. Now fron what I knew today, nanoly whr.t I hr. vo
knovm sinco ld46, it is ;iy print of viow that this fatal¬
ity* occurrod boca 1130 tl.o subjoct stayod r.t a ^roc.t
hoigfct, frr too lone tluo, nauoly botwoor. 12,000 and 14,000
motors, bocauso cno cf sovoral srir.ll y.c bubblos fomod
in tho blood stroan end or.o of tho ,~as bubblos lod^od in
tho littio spaco botwoon tho spinal column and tho brain.

It thoro sto ed up an rtory and load to doatfc. I have *
c no to this cinclusion by analogy with tho accidents I
'xlcv: of that occurrod ir. tho atari can Air Forco, wj ich
ayain could bo traced bad: tc tho roascr..

Tl is air bnbblo ycu spoal: about, wl ..t would that bo
aro pro ci sol- called-; would tint liavc .-ny connection with


6684


30 -pril 47-;'-S--3-b-:L'.loy- (Int. Brown}
G-urt Ho. 1


tlJ.s oabclisn, would that bo ono cn:’. tl a sano thing you
arc roferring to now?

... B'-.t is tho smo thing, yes. Birt is r.lso tho s-.no
v.e prossuro drop aicknoss.

~. .I: t is pros euro drop sickness, would tint bo
cr.usod freu c.n rir oribolisn?

•\. Prossurc drop aicknoss doos not occur ns a rosult
of m air e.vbolisa. Ifco ccnvorso is clo cr.so. T/hon you
“ ro oufforing frrn prossuro drop sicknoss m r.ir or.belimu
c. n o r.risod, I .zi not quito suro wlothor I no.kb nysolf
clor.r cn tils.

• 32-.t is quito clo. a*. Hew, tUc p. rticul. r phononona
of a gr.s bubble m tho blood strom, yru sr.y perhaps lo
tho ecu so of c-.or.6h of tint first purson in t: o Rase’or
oxperinont; r.nyono would not bo r.blo to dotornino that
whon it l-.ppons, tlv.t you only lor.rnod over purled of
r. nuiibor cf yoe.rs of tor ycu had soon r. jiu-.bor i f otl.or
oxporiaonts, and tho t: ings th t 1 apponod in tho otl'or
oxperinonte, is tl:. t right?

... On t’o basis cf ono such individual fatality it was
certainly net pcssx’lo to dotoxriino tho crura. Only tho
repetition of sinilrr such do th.s would lead ono to tl.o
conclusion that tlv.t was tl.o c. uso of tho death. I should
li!:o to onph. sizo that ti ls ir only riy p»rS' nc.l opinion
tlu.t this Wf.s tl:o cr.uso of dor.th, awl I readily r. it that
tloy -eight have diod for othur causes. Kewovor, tl t is tho
only diagnosis I could find. *

‘toil, was t’is condition ycu havo oxplr.inod loro
at that ti.; o, vo ..ro gc ng back to tho Rr.se! or exorinont,
— at that fciiao vi..s It ao.uotl ing non, tho ccnditicn you
havo just dotor;:inod now to <x,rk~ps havo boon tho causo
f tl 0 ^ oc ‘- fct in ••an tl t-condition .? cv p. rod in


66€5


SO April 47-H-S ::-3-6-" .loy-Clnt. Brcwn)
Court Ho, 1


high altitude rosoarch sono thing now, in other worda
''.id It.sc] .r accidentally disccvor sonothing now, rnd not
lov't; r.bcut it?

R.achor didn*t discevor anything.


S*S5


C arc 1

April 3G-K-4-l-.-iD-Aeehar.-3rown.

a. Rrsohur did not discover anything,
x. Veil, how about clr embolism; did yoa always
c nslder the f-'ct of air embolism In connection with all
y ar oxpex*lmer.ts?

ft. With what experiments?

i. In the high altitude experiments.

a. You s.-'n rescue from great height?

*.. Yo8?

a. In those experiments about high altitude resouelng
we did not tnlce air lmboilsa Into cocount.

I sec. '.’ell, now Doctor, could you tell us Just
whet lr embolism Is, Vv.ry briefly so that myself and the
Tribunal will understand It and try to put It In lay¬
man's language for us, will you please?

a. Under tho expression clr embolism one under¬
stands the occlusion of a larger or a smaller blood
vessol through an air bubble or a gas bubble.

/oil, now, how can you r s a physician ascertain
suoh e state, such a condition; how is It possible to
’'scertaln whether or not a person Is suffering from air
embolism?

a. You p.scertaln this one the basis of the symptoms
that such air embolism causes. It depends entirely on
what organ* what tissue or whot p.rt of the body has
the *lr bubble# In It, and on that depends tho symptoms
because this air bubble prevents tho blood from,
circuit tin- In th. blood vessel In which It Is located. 4
Q. /hnt I am getting at is, can you diagnose It;
for Instance Is pain r, proof of air cabullsm?

ft. fi general -lr embolism docs not cause pain,
v. I Sue, well suppose you re looking at on. of
tho subjects; how c-n you determine whether or not they


6687


Court 1

April 3G-E-4-2-HD-Heohan-3r9vn.

are suffering from olr embolism; vhnt would be your way
to diagnose tr.la condition?

a. First, I should h-ve to suspect that some form
of /-ir oabollsm was present. I could only have this sus-
plclalr-n If there are some symtoms of deficiency, and on
the basis of these symptoms of deficiency, I can under
certain conditions form an impression of Khere the air
ombollsa is blockIn. off.

.... Than It Is most difficult. Is It not, to dlgnoso
air embolism on living nan?

A. To dl-gnose air embolism. If one diagnoses air
embolism, thrt of c urse 13 only dirgnosls of prob blllty
~nd conjectures In most cses.

4. Then, the only way you c n cctu lly ascertain
th~t air embolism existed would bo on a dead man by nn
autopsy r 3 R sober did by keeping a. d.ad man under
water etc.; that is the only way you c n determine If tho
state of air eabollso exists?

a. It Is uau-l in pathology th-t if you suspect
that th-ro Is an " lr embolism for instance, In the hu-.rt
or In the prracordls, you carry out the desseotlun of this
organ under water.

i. Let us look "t Rnschor's two reoort6, the flrot
one be In. on pa.g 60 of the ingllsh Document Book,

Document No. 2, which Is Jocument 1971-A PS. The first
page of the Document Is n covering letter. Dr. Ruff.

'hat I am trying to get you to do. Dr. Ruff, Is In the #
boat m-nnor you c n describe to the Tribunal this situa¬
tion of ^lr embolism, irv scuoh -s It is referred to In
Roscher's report. Rascher could prob-cly answer the
question bettor than you however, I went you to go over
this with U6. This Is the first report, under No. II,


Court 1

April 30-H-4-3-«^-heehan-Brown.

if ou .ill go down to the line, "The experiments conducted

•

by myself and Dr. fiosberg proved the following, 0 then
siip one, two, three ana the fourth p mgraoh under thnt
statement; do you h ve that? This will be under paragraph

2 in the report. -'hat i3 the trouble?-It is

under No. 2, ou will see the second paragraph starts out
with th- words, "The experiments conducted by myself and
Dr. Romberg proved the following:" Then if you will Jump
down to th fourth paragraph ardor this section, which

st ’i*ts out: "The third experiment of thi6 type took such
-n extraordinary course...." Do you hove thnt Doctor?
a. T-8, I h-’Ye.

... Kow, I want to read this to you. Doctor, and aeo
if you c n help us with this problem.

"The third experiment of this type took such r.n
extrr.ordln ry course that I called an :3 physician of the
camp as witness, since I hrd worked on those experiments
all by ayaolf. It was a continuous experiment without
oxygon at the height of 12 Km conducted on n 37 year old
Jew in good general condition. Breathing continued up to
30 minutes. After 4 minutes th*. experimental subjeot
began to perspire and to wiggle his head, after 5 minutes
cramps occured, between 6 *nd 10 minutes breathing
lncronsed in soeed and the V? exporia^nt , 'l subject became
unconsol ( Us; fr q 11 to 30 minutes breathing slowed down
to tare- breaths per minute, finally stopping altogether.

"Severest cy-nosls developed in butw^er. '’nd foam «
appeared at the mouth.

"At five mlnuc. interv Is electroc-'rdlo 0 rams from

3 le as were written, .^ftcr breatnlng had stopped,
dissection wc*6 started."

How, in this utopsy reoort it i's apparent that Dr.


6635


Court 1

«:ril 30-i4---4-E3---.cehan-3rown.


RsBChcr found this condition of embolism, inasmuch i a '.o
states fter his autopsy in the second o r*graph nd If
i v ill turn to the second per graph, under the "Autopsy
Report,“ he states:

"One hour aft.r breathing hou stopped, the spinal
m-rr •. was completely severed one the brcln removed.
Thereupon the notion of the auricle stopped for *.0 seconds.
It t. on renewed i a action comin s to a complete etantstlll
6 minutes later. * heavy sabrror.noia .deni". was found in
the brain. In the veins md "rteria of tn*. brain a
c •nsldorable quantity of air wrs discovered. Furthermore,
Oho bleed vessels In the heart and liver wore enormously
' batriiot-4 toy embolism. ■

Veil, now was that the only way t.vt Raecifer co-id
v. doterclnod that this subject was sufferln c from air
emb lisa v"s to perform an autopsy; he definitely found
that o.niltlon, you soe, doctor?

n. Yes, It is certainly true th*»t ne I and this
c ndltl.n in this autopsy.

*. .ell, now, this picture union we a vc to out
int evidence hero; Is it possible fore this picture of
the brain to diagnose Mr embolism; It -l^ht pernaps to.:

Cae light, cut you c’r. see some bub-lee in this lcturo,
so I ivvc hau it >.nl"r.od for your benefit to loo/, at.

Do -a perhaps see those ll^ht spots; w.uld that perhaps
bo air oab.llsa?

(The ole ter~ Is shown tc th- witness.) •

a. Yes, th't is ir c bollsm, but the discovery thrt
r ir is in those vessels doue cot mern th~c mo vessels are
rstruoted. These Mr bubbles n thw blood vessel or.n be
trosent wlt.v.ut t.-.eir lendln- to any disorders. •'« in v
" _ ^rimcntnl medicine, for ^xrmole, sh t an injection

669 «


Court 1

ril aO-:>-i_5-HD-lfechf*n-3rown.


i* -ir, lv.c us e y at IOC cubic css. cm be s~de into a
-1 • ~ vessel without the experlser.tol subject noticing
finyt. ln, et all. In other words, the effect of -lr In
Cr " * Jlcod fltr *°® depends entirely where th t olr 6 ets to.

• ’ - ld y° u fc^dly p-68 w*ck thrt photo 6 rnph? I

wane to eav It to the Tribunal, so th~t tr.oy can & et a
lcture of just what tnls condition is.

Tf.t FR., s IJ£i;T: will the S^cret^r. jcn-ral procure a
c py of Prosecution Document 3ouk 2 for the Tribunal?

ri- RjtRDY: This, fur honor, is an enl»*r G ed versl n
of wh*c - jrje rs in ^ouaent Book 2 end you con quite clearly
•-oo wh-fc Dr. Ruff h'8 p.lnted out.

:on, now, Dr. Ruff, on p 6 c ?6 of this ^cuaent 3ook,
w/.loh Is ftmoh.r's second rcoort, the report of Rnsoher
>ted 11 K-y, to the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6tn, the
j’-.. o r 3 rc*ph under No. 7. It starts at. “To find out
■bother cao severe -a;cicol • nd ?hyolc-l effects.- Do
h ve tact Doctor?

T.“-o -.H£b5: I h Ve paragraph 6 -nd 7, y„9.
ixoerloento ne Peruitln end.


*


66?1


Court I

30 Apr-; - 5_i _ LJG - cook (Brown)

5. Tins is paraph 6 under Sc. 7, and it starts out: “To
find out whether the sov.ro psychical and physical effects, as un .
tionud under So. 3, oro due to th. formation of csbolism, the follow¬
ing was done." Do you have, it now?

A. T.s, I hevo it.

H. it states here* "To find cut whether tho sov.ro psychical and
physical effects as mentioned under Ho. 3, arc due to the formation
of embolism, thu following was done." Kow bofrro wo go into that it
appears apparent that Dr. toaster doomed it necessary to conduct an
autopsy under w-. ter until.... in order to find out whether or notthis
oibolisn condition existed in this particular experimental person.

Sow his purpose in doing this, as it states, was to find out whether
or not this condition of uajolisr. was the c:u». for the sov.ro psychical
and physical effects, '.ioll now from your experionco since that tine
with the American authorities and ycur past experience, was Rascher
correct in purforalng an autopsy in ordor tofind out this condition,
or could it have been ascertained without such an autopsy.

a. It is not altogether oasy to answer that qu.stion. 1 think
the situation is • /.-hatter or not thore is a caso of air embolism,
ono con soy from the 3ynptor.s with protty groat certainty whether
crrbolisn is present, but fer a moro Certain answer C r an absolutely
certain answer, you have to carry cut an autopsy. For uxanple, if
iftor on operation, death occurs through .-holism, toon of course the
tutopsy is the first thing that absolutely dot^rainos for certain
tho causo of death.

• 'fell nowlct us road this: Rascher states:

"^ft.-r relative recuperation frc-i such a parachute descending
tost had taken place-, however before regaining of consciousness, sane
experimental persons were kopt under wat.r until they died, .fnon tho
skull and cavities of the breast and of the abdomen had boon opened
under wat.r, an enormous amount of air ertoolisa was found in the


Court I

30 -pr k - 5—2 - LJj - Cook (Brown)

Vessels of tho brain, the coronary vessels,and tho vessels of the
liver and tho intestines, etc.

“That proves that aar er±oliS”, sc for considered as absolutely
fatal, is not fatal at all, but that it is rcvjrsiblo, as shown by tho
return to noroal conditions of all cf the oth<-r experimental parsons.

■It was also proved by experiments that air erfjolisu occurs in
practically all vessels ovon while pure oxygen is being inhalod.

One exocrinental person was dc to breathe pure oxygon for two and
one-half hours boforo tho experiment started. «fter six ednutos at
a height cf 20 kiloaoters he died and at dissection also showed ample
air orbolisa as was tho caso in all oth^r experiments.

"*t suddon decreases in prossur-and subsequent lfnedi-to falls
to hoights whore breathing is possiblo no dcop reaching damages duo
to air oaboiisr- could bo not%.d, ?ha formation of air orbolisr. always
needs a certain amount of tiioo. n

Well now wv.ro you faciliar enough -.rith air eirbollsn to have boon
able to dotorrdno thin that Rasch-r iound, or do you "groo with what
Raschur str.tos h-ro?

a. No, I do not agree in ov.ry point at all with what taschor
says horo. Rnschvr says here that:

■That proves that air oabolisn, so far considered at absolutoly
fatal, is not fatal at all, but that it is reversible as shown by tho
Toturn to normal ccnditicns of all oth„r «xp.rleantal subjects."

Now this is a finding rhich Rascher cado on the basis of his
ignorance, and tho caso rcalJy is not air t-rbolisn. 1 said before
what tho of!acta of air ericiis.i are depends on when, tho embolism

is in tie body. If tho eobolisr is in the brain and in the vital

•

part of tho brain it can bo fatal* If that cmbolisra is located ir.
tho heart and in the neighborhood of the heart, it can also bo
fatal, because it interrupts tho onticr circulation of the blcod. If
it is located ir. the fatty tissue of the abdor^n that cuts off a
certain part of that tissue from hir'd irrigation, and then nocrosis


6693


3C »pr u7-*4C^5-lM:3ck (5r-wn)
Ccurt He. 1


davci.rs which is quite hemlcss. In -thcr wer's, it also d. penis n,
first, - 7r 1 r the SB lisa is, an: secondly, where it is located. n
few aicutos i' * I*saii that 1 hcf.ro Rischcr caic this disc very, a-
'•.ria.nts w„r. cirri.,’ rut in w.iich air was injected int the bl c 4
strcoa, ah it w a ar.c.rvei that uvan i,r... as-unts 1 air, such as
IOC cubie c-r.tli.t 4 ra c ul be aha rbetl by the exporioental subject with
r *' - r * cr * r •’ --.c t. hies elf at all. H-we ver, this exporiaent did r. t
pr vo that ICO cubic c.ntiaeters cf air in the tic <*. strewn are always
fcarslcss, because if that air reaches the ri ht places it will cause
ar. ech lisa so th:.t air car. e fatal.

4» New y u will nticc ir. the p r ra,h just abrv., six, th:t is
parvrath 5, but in the a se sectl r. cf the rep'rt R-anhcr sal.'.:

*' r th. f 11 win experia-nts Jewish prcfeSsl-nal criminals vrh
h- ccr-ltv. rar. pclluti r. were use'. The questi n f th- f.*matl n f
* li8B wac inv-stif;at.i in 10 cases, Sato cf th. oc^-.rlr. subjects
:od J»rir. a o r.time hi h altitude cx -rinar.tj f r instance, after
r>“half !i ar a, a hei h. : 12 kil JUtcrs, After th, skull h U been CpcOr
w-i ur. Wtt. r, nn anplc aa*un% rf .air eab.lisa was found in th- brain -o
» » fruo air in th- brain ventricle*. •

Toll n w it backs t. B* that r.aach-r di a .*r. t he ur.t ef expert, .
.tcntatl r. t *e to mice th, ecus- ~.i


CCV'4


3-' ~-r—i-r-OJ.3-5— lb—Cc ' > (3r'wn)

C urt i; . 1.

death ■ r the musos f'r those *'tJL iti'as 'f dr' pressure, dr' A . si'h-
acss -r hlxfc altitude si'haoss. tforc y*u C3 iatorostod i~ P-na'hor nos
ia rhothor 'r n't air oeb'liac w-.s the rouso 'f those thia-s, 'r iron that
paroly r. sido line r f Haa'hor's part?

— pf the ox.oriccnt* which wero horo dosrrited I know *nly nhot
ia in this ra.»'rt here cad a' core, cad I saw this ro..rrt for tho first
tiro vhon it rr.s ut ia o7idon<o ia this trial, Uhat Rcsfhcr'a idoaa
\roro nhut tho cx >ori=oats I d'c't kn'». J-r ua those result th t
he hsro sots forth w'txld nt have boea ontiroly uaiatorostin, of
"urao, but for all practical pyroses thoao results ployed a' r'lo
in tiiot no rurc d'lat, hoc nose aa I anid ia tho th'usnnds of ox ori-
EOtttB tlsr-t wo onrriod 'ut in Screen sodl'ino at au'h altitudoa 'a a 1-
diora 'r 'thora, ro newer had a fatality, s* that wo h;d nr rew n t'
lnqulro late tho rooa'ss f'r fatality,

Q. ‘..oil then any quoati'a about - "a'sraiiv air oaVlisa, did
n't c..» orr ir. tho oxporlrcntn that y'u .-ad S'tborg had any nuth'rity
var, did it? Shat I ne -cottiaf at hero, it npyOars to to that tho
or U-ir r-1 .-.sport of Sos'hAr's w-rk was hia strnaro desire t< find 'Ut
just tfu-.t air c-bvlisc did and whether r r n't ho "uld dotorcinn h'u
r. -or*-n was suffer ir.; fr'x it, cal r t naoquontly ho fcllloA thoao
po-.ilo, *r loft thrt u.« ia tho air lor,; on'Uc'h s- that they died, and
thoa ho cut'paled thv.c, and that oj^cara t- to t' bo a o r ico lr. it¬
self, rad it a..poars fr c y'ur testier ay y'u wore n't inv'lvol in
those cr.ttora. K-w ware y'u iatorostod in finding 'ut rhother 'r
r. t r.ir ocb'lisc was r zo 'f tho fausos f'r tho proaauro fall sickness?

That pressure fall sicknoss has a cothin* t' d' with tho
free si a 'f tho aitr'.jon fr-t tho blcod -r tissuo was ta'wr. very roll
r.t .livt tiso, Basohor's cxx>ricocis woro oil tc*othar unnofossary
t' os'-rtain foot, torouso it we* already known,

C, • ell c'w it secas t' so that in tho c-urs of those


6695


- ^..-^Z5-5-2b-C*r: : (3r-TTj
C-urt i* . 1.


ox .cric-n*. - tf.^ro r--ild be *.w< ^fcirv;a t' '' os id or, -no wruld be tho
altitude sicktesc ~,z • xaidcrod by lcr> <-f r X y ;;0Ci r.xd tho rthor
r uld be y'-ar s—'ailed :r33*urc ir'p si'knci-, shl^h *ruld be vhcro
t~o fuc'ti't ' Z rdr ecb'liac »u 2 i free ict- ,. 1 ny, i> did it r.j, err
ix tho o-urso 'f y'ur ox erixcxtr.ti'x that this *>rc«riro dr',j si
xose ur* 'r.'idoi by s'co*hi:v; ola" rr.ifcer thar. tho lre> r ' rxy-zcnl


6f9*


.Gapril 47—o-l—H-aX-Blakley (Brown)

Court I, Case 1

^ Pressure fall sickness has nothing to do vith
the lack of oxygen. I have already described during my
direct examination that there is a certain tone, namely,
the tone between 12 and It kilometers, or let*s say,

12 and 1*$ thousand kilometers; and In this altitude
there is no sickness among the passengers nor pilot
of a plane. That Is to say. If they are adequately
supplied with oxygen. 3 ut drop pressure fall diseases
can occur. In other words, this proves that pressure
falls have nothing to do with the oupply of oxygen.

That Is ar. entire different matter, pressure fall sick¬
ness occurs as a result of the general reduction of
the air pressure in which the person finds himself.

It is similar to the oyaptenn that occur when a
deep sea diver rises from a considerable depth and
does r.ot do so slowly enough; In othor words, tho
preoaure on him Is reduced. It la similar to the so-
called cal sen sickness. This Is tho samo sort of dis¬
ease that you notice with persons who have to work
In cal sons when they come from the cal son, which Is a
chamber under pressure. If they oome from It too rapidly
then they have similar symptoms as one flnd 3 In pressure
fall symptoms. But what I am saying now Is not something
that was learned from these experiments of Rascher's; It
Is something that has been known fer a long, long tin.

Q I sec•

THS ?R£ 3 ID£NT: Counsel, the Tribunal will now
be in recess.

(« recess was taxon. )


6S97


Ccurt So. 1

SC Apr 47-k-7-l-SBt-Gross (E«=ler)


THE ..ABSKAL: The Tribunal is egein in session.

BY «•.. FAr-PY:

Sow, Doctor, vo have about cconlete-d our discussion of this
business of cir eabolisa end I hove gathered free vfaat you have told ne
that in your e'^oeriaems on rescue free high altitudes you were not par¬
ticularly interested in collecting date on pressure drop sickness or air
eabolisa, v*re you?

A. That is correct.

Q. '•oil, nov did the problem of pressure drop sickness or air
enbolioa enter ft all into your research on rescues froa high altitude
at that tiae or later on after the Dachau work or during the course of
your tine rt the Aero i.edleil Center? Did this problca of ore*or.urc drop
sickness or air oebolisa enr enter Into ray of your research or. rescues
free high altitude?

A. Bcgerdiag the coaplex of Questions concerning it«clf with pro¬
tection froa high altitude this did not bother oc. After the Dachau
experiments I personally concerned aytvlf with pressure fall diseases.
This vus frea the year 1945 to 1946 at the Aero F.cdictl Centir at
Heidelberg.

bell, vi a there anything found in your cxoorlncr.ts or. rescue
froo high altitude thut could have contributed t: the problem of whether
or not pressure' drop sickness with eir eabolisa vr.e present lr. addition
to the oxygen lack? You understand the ouvstlon?

A. I don't understand ytu.

t*. I isk again, bps there anything found in ycur crocrlaer.te cr.
rescue fr-s high altitude that could have contributed to the problem of
whether «r not pressure drop sickness with eir eabolisa was present?

A. So, not rcelly. These exocriaents had had nothing to do with

the reason for the origination of this pressure fall disease.

Q, I sec. ’oil now, Doctor, in this Docuacct 402, which is on
page 82 of the English copy. Document 3ock II, tfcich is Exhibit So. 66.
For ycur convenience, Doctor, I hrve the original here t?:rt I win poos


6698


Court Ho. i

20 Apr 47-ft-7-2-iS'-0rc86 (Killer)


uo to you 8w thet ycu cun follow it better. Would you kindly keep it
in the order which it is now in. H 0 v. on the first cage there ecoears
there ycur signature. I, that correct? Is that ycur signature?

A. Tes, that is ay signature?

Q, Also the signature of Reeterg?

A. Yea, thet is correct.

C* The first cage is a corcr letter tc the r^cert itself, is it not?

A. Yes.

Q. Veil nov, how =any copies of this report did you sake in tho
first instance?

A. I cannot tell you that exactly as to tho mater. I cstiarto
that approxinately a doten of those resorts were sent, which would bom
a dotOn of those copies, but that is only c appro^i-rUon.

Q. Vhat did ycu do with the first, tho original copy? Tid you
koop that youroelf, the original report, and Just send out tho copies?

A. : os sure that one of these reports vrs kect by us.

Q. I sea. Veil, now I notice here that this report is oddreosed
to the a.ichsfuehrer-SS, Berlin, rr.d it states, "Inclosed w c submit copies
S "* 2 * 3 * or - d 4 oi thfc report on the oxoc-riaents cn rescue from high
eltitudo for your files." And your signature uopenre. Vull noy, you
-ere not connected with tho heichsfuthrtr-SS. Ycur cxoorloonts wore
oecoroto and aptrt free the Seichsfuchror-SS. Kov do you account for
cJdrcssing those rcoorte to hid

A. *hc acichsfuehrer-SS has deaendod that all reports /tout these
erjcrlaents would hrv* to go thr:ugh his. He w n s the arn in whese
sphere the cxpcrlnsnts v.re c:rrici cut end he wanted these reports to
he sent to his . t first.

Q. I see. ' ell now, Docior, this re-cort here doesn't contain
r of the information that is set forth in s»e of the Rrccher resorts.

?3r instance, the deaths, etc. How does that happen?

A. Because the fetalitiwS which cccurrci during the experioents of
=r seller had nothing ?: do with :ur experlajnt a - experiments for the


66S5


Court Bo. 1

JO Apr 47-.\-7-3-LH..-Cr_ss (Easier)


re6cue fr.s high altitude - and didn't occur there. As a result there
vps no reason to incorporate those deaths in that report.

Veil, ncv. Eascher had the deaths that vor c connected with
his research for air esbollsn end likewise that had nothing to do with
your particular ohrtc of the cr-xrlsents, did itT

A. The exocrisents vhich wrv carried out hy Basehcr for reason of
research in air eabclisa have nothing to do with the exporinonts carried
:ut for the purpose of rescue fro* high altltudo.

Q, Is that vhy you had no SentlJn of air csbolisn in your rcport7
That's why you didn't bring that factor up, isn't it, baeautc it had
nothing to dc with you and you hadn't heard about it?


67/v^


30 --pri— h7 TZ--S—1—(In*. Rsailer)

Court :fe. 1

 I said, (fazing ny diroct exarlnation, wtet I beard about Raschor'a
experiments fron Ronberg when a death occurred. Ho told nc that Raschor
wantod to taka notes of tho register of the electrocardiogram in tho
case of this pressure fall sickness. TThat I knm when this report was
corrpUad was, first, of all, that Raschor, In addition to our axperl-
raer.ta for the purpose of roscue fTcn high altitudo, was carrying out
other experiments and that, In the course of those oxporinonts which
Trero oarriad out by ord.r of 'liM'lor, deaths occurrod. As to tho nannor
of tho axporir.onts Raschor was carrying *hrou’ h, I only kntr.v that lio
was using tho electrocardiogram in tho oaso of those prossurc drop
sickness. This is all I know about thoso other uxparinents when com-
plllX ny report. In othor words, I know exactly that doatiis whioh
occurred *iring Hhochor's experiments had nothing tc do ^dth tho
(Dcpcrlnonts for tho vwrposo of rjscuo fron high altitudes. For that
reason, thoro was no ocoaslon tc incorporate those doath oasos in that
roport for two rooaonsi one, that they did not occur during our
oxporlnuntcj and, soooatly, tho other .ccporLuonto voro only known to
no in vary broad outlines and I only knew about a part of thoso
oxpariiaonts. Ycu can soo fror. Rnscher's intcroodiato reports that ho
had carriod out a nurfcor o' various oxporLuonts. For that roason, I
oculd not c;-.bnrk on tho idoo to incorporate ar^y thoughts t?iat Rasohor
•ay havo had, ?urinr’ tho oourso f his axporlnonts, in xsy roport.

1 ell then, all this rr.torial that Rrschor had oollocto l oon-
c or nix air onbolisr., since you didn't discuss it with hi.n, sflnco you

0

didn't know about it, had no kncrlodro about it at all at that tine,
until such ti:o as ycu rr.ro served with these docunjite in this case —
is that tho reason why this roport contained or r.ado no mention of *tho
lata concernin' tho facta that Raschor found in connection -A th thi3 air
erbolim business?

A Ho, this report, as it is stated here, is a report for tho
purpose of r.acuin people fro:- high altitudes. Tho additional experiments
of Rasch.r had nothing V do with theso oxpricents. 2vcn today, after


r7ni


3C -ipril h 7-:W.II>-8-2-Karrcrr (Int. Rgri.gr)
Court Ko. 1


these Irteruediato reports are available to as, I can still say that
those cocpcriaonts had nothing to do with the <np .rir.ents for the purposo
of roscuo fror: high altitudes, and that was the reason,

Q ;f«ll, Doctor, wo won't linger on this any longor. YFo .till go to
page 91 of your cwr. report. Obviously, you slipped up rtion you wrote
this. Pago 91 of the English which is page 16 of the original document.
Doctor, an'”, it '..111 bo tho last paragraph on page 16 of the oriilnal
document. Do you havo that?

A Yes,

Q ]faw, it starts off* "In spi-o of tho relatively largo mnbor of
cccporlnants, the actual cause of tho sovoro cental disturbances and
boi$’ functions (paralysis, blindness, etc,) attendant upon post—
hypoxardo t-.ili; ht still.,...,"

A list a nonent, Pago 16 of that report starts with a difforont
text.

T This is on the last pem^mph of tho jego - of 16 of tho report,

A Yos, thank you,

0 And I will start again*

0

"In spito of tho relatively large nudour of experiments, tho aotual

0

causa of the sovjra rental -Us turbo no a and body failures (paralysis,
blindness, etc.) attondant upon post—hypoxoric twilight still roinlns
somethin;; ef a ridcllo. It appeared of ton as though tho phonononn of
pressure trap sickness (aoxv<*Tbolisn) had oortined with tho results of
sovoro oxygon lack."

:faw, how ±L ’ you know that it " happen od often >as though tho
phononena of pressure drop sick nos3 had ©o:d>ine.i with tho results of
sovoro oxygen lack" had it not boon for tho faot that dr. Raschor,
dr. Rorbar-, and ' : r. Ruff had their hoad3 together in oach and every
or.o of those cxporir.onts?

A I didn't understand the question.

q 'Jell, first of all, the first sentence soys that "a largo uuhbor
- the oxp. rlnonts found the causo of the severe rental disturbances and


6?n2


30 April h7-^.T3-8-3"Karrow (ir.t, Rnrlor)

Court jfo# 1

body failures" end than you state in the last four - five words "tho
tedll-.ht still recoins soaething of a riddle." Sow, -didn't :•*. Rasohor
supply the answers to that riddle rt.an you go cn to state “It appears
often as th;u:h tho phonocona of prossuro drop sickness air
tRbolisa, had ooabined with the results of severe -.xy^en lack? 1
:iov t I ask you, how did you know air ccbclisra rithout Rascher's wo A?

A There is no nention of this air txbolisn. 1 note tho sontonoo
"It appeared often as though the phononona cf Frossuro drop sickness had
oonblnod with tho results of sevoro cxy;:on lack ’. This is entirely
different and has nothin'; to Co -ith what you hare Just said. You oannot
say, as I olroaty stated boforo, that prossuro top sicknoas anil ."as
onbolisri is tho aoce. I triad before to explain that, in tho oaso of
the prossuro top disease, f-.s r-l'olis*. can appoar. That, of course,
is not absolutely necessary and does r.-t fellow. * horofrora cur knowlodiio
or.no which onablod us to discuss this question as t: whothor air prossuro
sickness would play a part
the next pCf;o. On tte meet
and Ilaschor.


in thoso serious syrptc ns can bo soon cn
r*(TO o have t o cro oxperinonts by Ro.nborn


67«3


Court 1

April 30-K-9-l-HD-Haloy-Ra mol-r.

h. Just a moment, doctor.

DR. SaL'TSR: Mr. President, th. copy which la avail¬
able to the Prosecutor aust In some way be different to
tr.c original, which is before ae and which was also
available to tho defondant Ruff. The Counsel for the
Prosecution has ropoatodly read "pressure drop sickness,

<iir embolism, otc." He wrote that twice. In our original ,
however, theru is no work mentioned of "air" or "onbollso."
I should like to point that out to you at thla tiao so as
to avoid tho Prosecutor reading a text to the defendant,
which is probably Just an error on the prrt of tho
Prosecution. I want to state exprossly th^t in the German
oopy and the original there is no nontion of enbolism.

MK. HaRDY: That is correct, Your Honor. Tho English
contains the word in parenthesis "air embolism" and tho
Gorman origln-’l text does not. Vo will go on, Doctor.

ft. Nov, on page-

DR. SnliTER: Mr. President, if wh^t the Prosecutor
has Just srld is correot I ask that the Document Book bo
rectified accordingly. Socondly, it any be cxpodlcnt
to oxolain ct this accent how it is possible th-t an
oxpres3ion is introduced into a document wnlch lo not
contained in tho original, and it aiet of necessity mis-
lead any person reading that docuoont. I don't think that
this lo a tenable situation whore such nn eroneous
-xprossl'.n gets into a document which is avp liable to tho
Tribunal and upon which tho Tribunal has to base ltc
Judgment.

THE PRESIDENT: 5ev_rcl tl306 during the course of
this trial similar errors Imvo occurred and have been
disc v. red. These m-tters are rather serious and when
matters like this -re found, the document book, the


67*4


Court 1

April -2-HD-14 loy-3anmler


the ri-lnal end the copies ir. the possession of the
Tribunal should be corrected so they speak the truth -nd .
show c rrect translations of the original docunents.

These errors ere s erious end cnu6e a = rcnt deal of delcy
in the trial end r great cel of trouble for counsel and
for the TrlbJnrl. done of the errors ore apparently
Interpolations vhlbh nova bo v -n Inserted In the document,

'o; whoa or under what circumstances, of course, the
Tribunal is not -o. vised, but ny s ucn errors as this which
are f .and snould be lnv.odl toly corrected by propnrln Q
tho sheets, the nlctlogmphed snoots C"llin a tter.tlon to
the volume rnd page wnero the error Is found, vnd clao
the oorreot transition.

x. Wo11, now. Dr. Huff, Is pressure drop sickness
In -n •'Vor- Q c or standard German alctlon^ry defined os
air onbollac or vlco-verao?

a. No.

x. I 3 it coaaon to oay-

«. Ono hn3 to destln^ulsh there between two aottors,
firstly, pressure drop diseases rro used in the e-n^llsh
usa:e "8 bonso on- chokes, rnd then there is -moth.r
dcsl = n-tl,n "sir embolism." «lr embolism, however, does
not ~t "11 mean B ns ecfcollc. These rro two entirely
different expressions, nlr eaboll3s in the £n 0 llsn uso & u
ns Chat the complaints arise through the release of
nitrogen within ? person 1 a body. It isn't n v^ry oxa.ct
ao6ignatlcn. O'-s embolic in medicine and air embolism
'•re two entirely different matters.

<v. fall, now, will you explain to us how you found
th 0 It c-ce-red often cs though the ohenonema of pressure
drop sickness h*d combined the pressures of severe oxygen
lac.:?


6705


Court 1

April 30-&-9—3—HD— Kaloy* Ramaler


a. I sold that after these sentences It Is explained
how this conclusion could be drcwn. It was drawn ns a
result of the sdif-experinents by Rascher and Romberg,
then that exoerlmant pressure drop sickness-

Just a moment. It eppeers from the Raschcr-Romberg
experiment that they h d porfora-d on themselvos, is that
what you moon?

^ee, It says that In this regard observations are
important carried out upon the person. I will read In
this connection “the subjective acoounts made by tho
authors In two experiments each were Interesting." This
Is tho following sontonoe.

It says here It appears often now, In what other
experiments dlu It appear?

a. In the case of thesw drop experiments froa c. 15
kllonotor altitude during which these more severe symptoms
of altitude sickness npponred, nnd which arc explained
In detail In this report. It soomed ns If during thlo
cloknoss the Inok of oxygen and the pressure drop sickness
combined.

Q. Well, new, Iw«sh you would turn to p-be 95, which
w'-uld bo pege 22 of the ori B lnrl f and this Is section d,
th"t Is Roman numer-1 III entitled "Discussion of the
Results. n

a. Discussion of the Results.

- Do you h-vc that?

a. Yes.

Well, now, It says here “The descending experiments
without oxygen show that the limit for a safe escape with
cn open yrachate lies approximately at a Jumping altitude
or Kilometers. - That Is 42,700 fe~t. ’’Since In ci Jump
:r - 13 kilometers recovery of consciousness occurred only


6706


Court 1

A ril 3O-K-0-4-HD-k loy-Rammlor

1.6 iilometers." *r.d so one must always consider tho

possibility of iandlnc in an unconscious condition with
all the attendant dangers. Well, now, it is apparent that
you h'_ve decided tfc.t a a’cfe altitude is 13,000 netors,
is that oorrect?

a, Yes, 13,0-0; yo6, it is said here 13,000. The

conditions us they era entitled in this sentence, non-

oxygen and pressure drop 6lc/cncss, *lch morns a descent

when th- prrrohute was infolded, ~nd in th"»t connection

• • ‘

tho Unit w->s considered to be 13,000 net or. That is
corroct.

Q,. Did you -ctuclly sent non up tu an altitude higher
than 13,000 sotoro?

h. Yes, that is true——

*nd how do you Justify doing that; 13,000 nutero is
doterolned to be tho highest you can go and still bo safe?

n. firstly, the dotorainrtlon oi this save Unit was
only possible after the conclusion of the experiment. I
can only deteralno a limit if I notloo when ronchln B that
limit that I can go on no longer, and .after having concluded
8 me oxp»-rlaont8 subsequently which had genu beyond this
limit. Say that for practical conditions I xuuld hove to
consider that the limit lies at 13,000 meters. Tho
conditions which are vailed when wo lay down the limit of
13,000 meters wore only derived rft„r having experienced a
15,000 meter height. «fter those experiments I could o:y
th-’t ir. an altitude of 15,000 meters a flyer who has no
oxygon at his alsposal and whose parachute is unfolded at
15,000 meters cannot he saved without injuries, because when
landing on tho ground te is still unconscious end that when
landing on tho gr-und he could of necessity be injured or
ir. c^se of dropping into the water he would drown.


5707


30 April C-7-..-S -10-1-ItooL.vn-InC: Rmlor
C vrt 1


.. '..'oil, t! cn, y^u do r.grcc, in a^uch us yeti woro
nr.:, io to dctor.dno ‘oofere tic oxp.riz-onts strvrtf.d, just
hov l.igl c nnn could go up, but t*. oso woro cxtronoly
d.ngoroua; were tboy net, tho so oxporinonts?

A. Tl ooo uro two difforont nutters, tl o ignorrnco
whothor cno cun record to thoso Units cr net onl tho
dungor which rr.y bo incurred tlr*cugh tl o oxporinonts.

Tlioy l-.vo net* ing to do with cno cncthor. I should liko
to give ycu on ox-xiplo, I should liko to sauno if n hundn
being cun curry out ono hundrod kr.oo bonds, unlo33 I cun
oxpcrir.ont cn hin, I den't know. On tho othor l end, you
cannot nnintr.tr. tlx t I could any vAothor this is dengor-
ous or not, booauoo I don't know beforo bond if it is
poosiblo fer l.lu to curry out ono hundrod knoo bonds or
or not,

n .« -fould it net Ir.vo b,un then tho proper thing to
oxporinont first in any of tho things, which you sponk
of In t! o report, to oxporlnont on aniiials tc dotorriino
tho offoct tioro beforo having rusertod tc huir.n beings?

... : : turclly, wo nine porfornod cnlual oxporinonts,
but thoeo uni 1 orporlitonts cm only rcugl ly inforr. uo.

In t' is roport you find r. ccnp ricon n:do botvoon anl.-jr.l
oxporinonts, whicl woro or.rriod out by Lutr. .t tho
tnstituto rf Tfc.lt 2 end our oxporinonts and tJo rosults
of thoao tno cxp.ri lOntc dr net only diffcrcntir.to
tl onaelves 'Ton u ou.nit tive print cf viov, but nljo
fron r. qur.litr.tivo point cf •dew; tb t is tho nltitudo
w: ich you c n uoo by usin'; r.n Jiirw.l c n n-vor by tho
p - no , r * 8 y° u us ° «!'using hunr.n being, it c n bo
* i " hor r r lov.-.r, hero vo net only h vo ;u ntit. tiva
’ if.Vroncc m ti e oxporinonts, but wo found th t wo r.lso
. hd a qur lf-tctivo difforonce. In other words, tho rotation

6700


'


30 pi'll 4'r-H—Sw—10—2—2K'..clu-n-Int: Senior
Ccurt Hb. 1


cf tho r.ninr.l conducted oxporinonts v: s ontiroly differont
fr-i. tfcr.t cf experiments cn hur_.n boinsa.

Jurt .. rionont, you s..id th.-.t lutz . nd endt oxp.r5:ontod
on ontohla rtl you gaillbd ycur knowlodgo fron lutz -rd 7oru.lt;
Is tl* t rlgltj .nd tl.-.t is, why it w:.a net nocoss.-ry for
yru to oxyorii'unt on mninals; is tb. t wlv.fc you r.ro trying
to toll 210 ?

... No, p .rl r.pc 1 did not express nysolf clo. rly. .Ml I
sc.id| w s tl t r. proof ic to >o found, tl.;.t such oxpor-
inonts or-nnot bo o. mod out on rjiL'.ls, ir. t) is vory ar.no
Docunont, vhoro ti c rosulfcs of tho :Jiiraivl oxperinonts
crjTiod out by Lutz send ••on'.t ro ooin.- comp. ivd wit) tho
oxporiLont r on hunnn bolnga. 'Do results cf tJ o minal
oxp rmonts, cr.rriod cut by Lutz :.nd unit uuro net known
to ue when i/o oxocutod t) cco oxp^rL .onte r.nd this is so:io-
ti ir.j; w) ic! ir ctu..lly contained in tho ropert. Tl in only
c.-xic to our knc. lc *.;;o r.ftcr tho on! of the oxporlnonta.

A .. Hon, how rt< yru justify oxporinontlng on : - boinps

bof'-ru you ox : )cri:»ntod on rniiula; Luts c.rA 'ondt urod
r.nir:r.ln, you did net ovon to that far.

... I trr.a Just s.-.yin;- that n.\tur..lly wo v.-oro c.-rryin^ but
xperinunts cn minds bofrro tho o xcorimonts on hunnn
beings, in order te cl.-rify the trond tr. wl ich thoro
oxporinuni.3 would 1 ;vo te bo Joldod. Yostord..y, I tried
to explain t) r.t fc*. ero .vro ; nunbor cf quccti- ns which crop
up in tied!cino, especially ..vi.-.ti n uodicinc, w! icl cannot
b ; clarified by tie uao cf nninds. Do rosponslbility for
not bavin;: c Tried rut thoso exp.r.m-nts cn rninhls instond
f hunrn bein .s, I c n well . cur.o r r. scientist xxl s
. physic inn.

-• 3Ry I cc.ll it te tl . Tribunals ttonfcxrn on p .“o 96
cf t' o “nylis: Dccunont c ok, Kuff*a re ;crt ?t toe : "Unf : rt-


6709


30 April ':7-*:-£ -10-3-:5ootTJi-Int; Jirnl. r
Court Ho. 1

un .toly t* is r. ork v g ret vr.ilablc fcr us during tl:oao
oxporixicnta, so that so could net build up<-n tho v lur.blo
reev.lta contained in it and dorivod frii; nunoroua aninr.l
u; porinonte, or upon the-oxp.rionc.. of t! o authors. 1 '

Woll, Dr. *cuff, when did Rcr-borg first report t?o death
tc you?

'• Naturally, I c nnot sfcr.to today oxnotly, but I should
Bv'.y it v:.s in ^.pril.

’-jo!' cnybo cr April of l9-;n, is ti nt it?

... I did not S y anything of March, I spolco J-oro of April.

You c id lownat.-iro in nnavor to r. Donny that you
r.esunod it v. n in ?krch of 19£2; now o you r.sruno that
it nr ..s in Apri 1 r tier t: n ?! rch?

. . I.on aneworlng .’Ir. Donny's quostions, I never raid

March.

a. .'oil, new, v! on you roccivcd t? is roport fren Ronfoorg
: bout tho do tl of an inn to, jurt wi..t * id Romberg toll
you?

.. I ! ..vo trio to explain it cover 1 tines. l:enbcrg erne
to Berlin and roper to? to no that l;..ccl*or, by order
of Hinilor, v .s c.rrying out ot? cr oxp.rinonto thru ours
do signed for tiro roscuo rf ! igj* altitudo :u>d during tills
r.thor oxp.riront caso of death } ad occurod. Ho furt! or
c id. tl t .urine t! u oxparl icnts, v! ich Rase? or nr. s carrying
ut* , l o lit ton'.cd to study t3‘^ !e..rt in tl u oaso of prossuro
drop ricknocs.

Hon, vas tile tin first tirfcttv.t ycu ro all sod that

■ 11 novo actually two sots if oxporine tc going r. ; tho
3 -achor , Ruf." rrtd Re rib or g cx*> rimerte an. t!on tho Rr.schor
•periiier.ts 'rt ic: ho ‘id end eivol: ; when this roport was

'ortud, w s this tho first tv o ycu rorlisod ycu woro

*

.sc: or only in the Luftc.Xfo c;;v rinontc?


P r -in'- with


30 ..pri.1 47-:i-S:>-lO-4-:!ci.:-.^n-Iht: Rxnlor
Court i'c. I


... ‘fl-.on honberg .t th..t tt.o c...x> to "Berlin, I hoard as
far .s I know for tic first ti_*c that tl oro oxiatod at all,
in addition tc cur ox±xjrirx>ntc for tho protection f ren
:igl • Ititudo otl ar oxporiiior.ta, which woro carried out by
Rnschcr by order of Ilirxiler.

1. Wo 11 now, upon rcooivang tic roport fmn Ro;?)org about
tils thon what did you do?

I already stated wfc.t wo cor.3idorod -bout tlxo jr.ttor,
Wo crxio to tho conclusion t: t it would bo best tc concludo
tl.o oxpurioonta .a quickly ..a posaiblo. I h.d ropertod tl is
nr.ttor tc Hippko end *‘o:ibor{; roturr.od to Dachau in ord.,r
to concludo tho oxporiuuntc, subaoquontly tho chnnbor was
t.-kon froa Dachau,

Q. l/hilo wo *ro on tl.o point of tho chnnbor, you s tato
tl-.t tl o cl anbor n..s takon fron D .chau by rr.il ; thr.t
you lordod it on a railroad, in connection w ith tl.o book
wi ld*. Dr. S:\utor prosontod to you in diroct oxaiiinrtion and
that it took ocno oicl t l ours to lo.d tlo chnnbor; I
preauno it trok nearly oight hours tc unload tho chjjnbor.
Would it not l.cvo been or.sicr to lr d tho chanbor on a
truck ml rivo to Dorlin; was thoro r. gaaolino si ortago?

I did not got any answer.

2 ETERPRSTOR: I did not ccao throutf-..

31' :.R. H.JDY:

/ill you ct..rt a®.in ploaao.

... Fro:: tio Document , xi id', was suxiitted by Dr. Sauter
yestord..y frrit tho book of ny nochcnic, I said thoro is no
indication about tlo tiac, wlici, w s necessary for tlo
loading of tho low prossuro cljjibor, with tho oxcoption
th..t ny r:ocl anic Is A to worl: on a cortxin .* ..y for sc aony
’curs when uni- ding tlo cl _-ibor. Fro., tho so hours rf work,
no c;.nr.ott conclude tlo or.tiro .a-cunt of hours, which wore


6?11


30 April 47-II-S -l0-5-;:ocl m-Int: R.:nler

court no. i

nocoaaary for tl o logins *r unlo ding of that ch nior, Tko
tr .ncport back of this chsiibor by r..il actually -oaultod on
tic basis of t! o lack cf fuol. Ihoro wo woro not concerned
t/itl gasclir.o, but with diosol oil, As I alroody ar.id
during :iy diroct o::c-iin..tion, diosol oil was torribly
scarce in Gomo.ny ;.nd was oasontir.lly rosorvod for t'.'o
aubnurinos. It v .s h:poaciblo to rocoivo porsiiasion for a
Jo»irnoy frcn ltlmich to dcrlin and got the ccrroaponding
.jiount cf diosol oil for tl-.t purpc oo. That ia tl o roaaon
why tl .o cl : ubor w. a tronapertod by rail.

r . '/oil, nov; aftor tl.oao do.itha woro roportud to you, or
* ftor tl.is firat doath, did you order any stops to bo tr.kon
with roforonco tc R schor?

... I at:.tod tlr.t our oxperir.on te woro to bo concludod
r.a quickly ..a poasiblo and tl at wo triod to gut tho clianbor
out of D chru.

.. I sk you retain, did you tako any c topa . gainst
Tt.8cl.or?

"• Ho, I did not tako any stops ..gainot r.aacher. I could
not do tl at.

Kuro Is r. person wl o 1 -ad diod .«d you have r.ot dono
nytl ing about it; ia tlat right?

It is correct that a person died; it ir not ccrroct
tlat I did nothing ..bout it. I s..rr tl:..t this clanbor w£.3
roi.ovod fro:- Do.cl-.r, rl ich uoant that Rr.schor was doprivod
ci~ tl o opportunity of c. rr vng : nt futuro oxporinonts.

'.. Hew, did dc-.b^rr; report ny other loathe to you?

a. Yos, that is right.


6712


Z 3 Aprii 47-. jC-U-l-Cooh lint., 3asr.; or]
Court 1


1 'Jbari?

A A- I said already durint ay dlroct examination that during
tho time bleb o lapsed b jtwoon tho return of aasborg and tl;o final
rotnm of ao-.borg toBorlin, no woro ropoatodly ia tolopboaic contact
«Ith one aaot .ar. Luring ono of those tolophono coavor3atioa3, and
os far a I roxonbor tho last oao, Lr. Hasborg told -uo Haschor '.;as
carrying out further oxtorisants and ca that occasion ha indicatod
a oao thin had h-appanod again. Aftor his return to Berlin ho confivaod
cy assumption which I hoi during tho tolephor.a conversation a^id actually
told mo another two corsons hoi lost ;*.oir livas during thoso 3 anchor
experiments.

" Did you do anyth lag about that?

A ovo wot nothing for no to do. Tho ehambor at that tiuo
had alroad/ baoa removed from Dachau. Tho experiments had alroody
baoa conclude and ’-bon I imported this -a‘.tor to MippKo that tho
chamber la 1 boon returned, I at first told hln vorbally about tho
rooult of t a onporlsoats and ai -ho ssa time inforaod bis about
thoso fac 3.

“ ‘<os nacchor ctill In the LuftrraTfo at that tiaa?

A ^anchor at that tlno otill bolongod to the Luftwaffo. I
bolijvo t; at a that tir-e bo was trying to bo tranafovrod to thoSS.
?.a3aiior, forofaro, free o military uoint of vlou belonged to tho
Luftv.af.'a, out as it has bocaao ovid« t free a number of documents,
ho has b>on .ado avallablo to tlo S3 or rathar Kimlor.

3 Toll nc*i would you tell us Just what function tho oloctro-
cardio_ra sorvod?

A J a electrocardiogram aarv-v’. tho jurpor-o to :iastor ijg
oloctrical vibrations which occuiroJ la the hoart vheno7ar It is
active. 3ach . usclj ar_I every otluer tiosuo produces by 1; activity
on oluctrical cunont. la tho case of the hoart thia eur o., is
rathor o;rou and one easily succools in to lctoring this elect-.ical
current in tho hoart.


6713


30 April jc-li-2~Coo?. (I:?., Sailor)

Court I


^ TJoll no do you uso an oloctroeariio^xan oach tkto you aro

co&iluc :i.v ono of thoso hi^h oltitudo ozporLrouts?

A ! : o, I cannot assuor that quastion exactly, bull don't
toilova that la tho casa of all orr-orlnonts oloctrocardio. ranh
ro. la --ts 1 . 0 ra -.ado.

T/aa it u3od In tho hi Ji altitudo oxporinonts?

A Yos.

*1 Toll now, If Secborc •••'as usinc ho oloctrocardio^ran lr.
thuuj orporlconts, ho -n»s doin: that for tha borafit of tho Ta3chor,
"uff and ?.ocbory votk, wasn't h dt

A Ho usod tho 3 K C u ho no vo r It soo-_>d advisable to hint
whoa cor .-la. out aiaerluoats for tho 7Jrjx>so of roacuo froa hifih
altitudes. ANirt fra, usln., It during tho hlfih altitudo o=;orluonts,
ho ’iaod ;Iw 3 C la ordor to ouporviso and obsorvo tho ck po; lcor.tol
subjocts. 2 oforo tho 'oo 0 lnnlay of tho oxporlconts ho r-^lsiorod tho
heart of tho oxcorireatal subjects*

1 That Is ri^t. Lot's looh at Mr. Hcnbore's affidavit, which
is dooxnoat :ic 476, on rocu 2 of Docircont 3ook 2. This In ihj
para ra h l!o. 6 In tho affidavit, J'o. 6: "1 vltnoosod tho dooth of

throo of Dr. Racchor's hunan ox :orl:.o:ital subjects duri’v tho axporl-
-3ontn. .'ho first doath ocourod in tho lottor part of April, a:*i on
thlc -articular occasion I irj»r stul-.lnr tho oloctrocaidlo; .-•or', b"
usln. tha oxporlnontal subjects."

To-1-or- won ;-our subordinate, wasn't hd?


A -03, that is truo.

T. HATDT: To further ^-.options. Your Honors.

T12STJ2T: Is th.oro any rc-^iroct oxanlnatlou


by A oft


onso


counsol?


H3-DI- T. 3'-A 1"A TC:-


... • •


1 Dr. Ruff, I should lil:> o clarif: a nuntor of ■ ol.-.ta .:hlch
hava boon raised durin_ th_ caurro of your oxaninotia -..rich roquira


clai-ficatlon.


6714


.


JO April 47-;:-?jc-ll-3-Cook (Int., 2a.xJar)

Court 1

Cconsol -or tho Prosecution has npatod your tostinony ro-ariin .
tho voluntary aoturo or c':o oxporicontal subjects and ho statod that
according to your testimony sixty oxcorinontai subjects v.-oro soloctod at
Dachau, and I think ton or l'iftoan of tboso sixty voro actually us oi for
tho oxporlcujnts. In order not to allow any orronoouc opinion appoarin:

I snail ask you onco i-OTo. Did tea Can? Conxerdant or Dr. Haschor or
any one olsa sjloct a ,r up of sixty oxyorinor.tal subjects who woro
then to bo usod for o experiments, or is it rat.-or truo as you al¬
ready statod durin^ your diroct examination that this sjcup of
approximately sixty yore as voluntoorod and then, 2aschor, Hoff or any
ono also selected fra. i oeo sixty voluntoors thoso persons who xoro to
bo usod for thoco ccx-rUonts or. a oortain data? Ho u :.qb tho truo
situation?

A Already yost.rdayl haro triod to illuatrato that point.
According to ty Information sixty porsons all together volunto-rod. Of
thoso sixty pooplo, ap?roxi:atoly 12 ;:oro soloo.od, who, bocouco of
tholr health and physloial condition, caopliod with tho conditions which
uo noodod for our j~ orients* Thoso ton or twolvo or porlsontal aui>-
Jocto worn housed to w jtbor in tho oxporlnontal station throughout tho
ontiro loncth of tho ox vcrLoont. Thoso ton or twolvo 'arsons, aro tho
oxporlnantol subjects uoro for tho oxpori.«ont3 ad 1 Is ctotod in our
roport.

~ This, I thin!:, finally cloar up that ooint. Tho socond
corroction, Dr. Huff, v on doscribioL thoso axporl ontal subjects, you
r-yoatodly us^i the oppression ■’Sichorhoitevorwohru, pooplo in
protective custody, and you said that tboso wore irofocsion criminals
who bad boon placed into ot-ctlvo custody and for that reason uoro
sont to Pachau. I Iioard in tho :oeantino that this ox pros cion*

" sIcharhoit3vorwahrvr. ;* was in tho Hr. Lid sh trunslation ox pros rad as
protectivo custody, rho differonco is tho followia : Tho
"sichorhoItsvarwahninL 0 of which Dr. 2-jff »as s oil , according to
Cennan ia-, could only u usjd in tho care of -.ofossioxal cri m inal>
and • q; ordoroi by . j cr -t. Proto*-iro erstod: on tho ot .or bond,


6715


30 April 47-::-jjC-ll-4-Cook tint., 3x=lor)

Court I

which i- a Tor • slcrtlar oppression, although containing a difforont
coat oat, has nothin, :&ataoovor to do with justico or any court. It
was carried out roostly for political roason3, ccanlotily arbitrarily,
aal without any Justico or sontonco. Dr. 3uff , is it correct what I
Just told you?

A Yoo, it is trao.

« I -.ould nr., ilk- to roctify a furt .oi orror. At tho bOLiiv.in^
of tho trial a -..itnosn Lutz was hoard who at ora tiBO hod boon ocployod
at Profossor Foltz' offlco. Dr. Lutz at that t Liz statod ho was princi¬
pally oppoaod to oz'orL-ontal aubjocts bocauao ho wasn't robust
onou£fc, ho wasn't ro jh and strong onou&h. h'hon using this ozprossion
"robust? 1 undor quotation norhs, ho was askod what ho really noant by
it. Ao I soo fra t':o rocoid of tho 12 th of Doco.ibor, ho ropliod, a d
i quota:

"I should lilco" - and than a little '>auso, and tho sontonco
wasn't cocplctod. * .an tho witnoso continuos, and I quoto: "It
is ovon difficult to toko a dofc fo; oxporinont who ho r. a soulful look
in his oyos," on! of quote. 3o far tho toatinody of the witnosc Lutz,
who, I thin-': Is still today in tho Dachau concentration can? an on
old Austrian3C non, Dr. T.uff was told that Dr. Lutz's tostlaony road
as follows, anil quota: That is what I undorctood froc tho Goran
translation, i. was said that Lutz wouldn't oron carry out tho
oxporluonts on a do*. that "'uff had boon carr. ln, out on hunan bein.^.

I on 3uro that this ropotition of Dr. Lutz' tostinoay was orronoous,
aoi I should lit- to rectify that in orior to irovont tho dofondoht
Huff fror. bain, lie l.iizotod by an orronoous statxu»nt in tho record.


-716


Court 1

*prll 30-12-1—Blekley-Rattalcr

h. Or. Ruff, the question of whether animal experi¬
ments could hive been used instead of your experiments
was discussed; end you 6t ted that lr. tho ense of the
ti c h altitude oxp-rlnonts which you were to carry out the
use of -nisei experiments was often impossible. I an now
askin- you, Jr. Ruff, is it correct that during your
high -ltltudo oxperlnents—and I an In particular referring
to the altitude sickness v.-.lch plays a part—the essential
oolnt6 consist of the f ct that the cxperlmontnl subject,
fter awakening from unconsciousness, rc-ches out cbovo
his head and then pulls the lever of the par-chuto with
"11 hie strength, " turolly r gulnen-plb cnnr.ot be
trained sufficiently to cruse it to pull the lover of

the orr'chute ftor awakening. You will agree with mo

%

thoro, won't yeu.

«. This Is no doubt correct.

Jr. Ruff, upon a question by the proseoutor,
you said—or at least you snli wn-n he asked you—that
you didn't knew who exactly told y^u that these persons
at Dachau wore volunteers. That is, at any rate, how
your answer soundod, even though you may protost
against it at the nuaent. You were asked: " 'as Jr.

Romberg present? Does ha know it fr -a his own knowledgo?
Was ho there when theso poople were naked? You said, "No."
Then you were asked: "Was Hlppke there?" and you said
"No", rnd so forth, until at tho end it was that, "In
th«t case, you dun't know who exactly told you that*
these Dcople were volunteers." Then you answered, and I
quote: “That is corroct."

I believe that you really wanted to 6ay something
else because in addition to Dr. Romberg -nd Dr. Hip, ko
outlier people confirmed it to you that these persons were


6717


Court 1

April 30-M-l2-2-KD-Blpkley-Raa3ler.

v luntears. Who ware these other persons?

a. Prof. Weltz, fiascher, and the caap Commandant.

Welts, Rascher, end the cusp Command-nt. Rascher
~r.d In particular the caap Commandant were In fr.ct the
people who had personally spoken to the prisoners?

n. Xes.

... I have Just heard ttet in the question of this
dog there was another error; that the sound of the trans¬
lation was to the effect that tn*. Austrian S3 aan who is
now in Dachau, was t' hero Stated that he wouldn't
even kill a dog. There i3 no word of killing. Wo r.ro only
c ncorned with rn experiment on a little dog who looks
at one with n mournful expression in its eyes, that's all.

MRSaRDY: Your Honor, would you please advise
defense oaunsol to ask his quostlon rather than Just talk
to the witness? Ho hasn't asked a question yet in that
last remark.

DR. oaUTER: The Inst thing I said nrturally was no
quostlon. In th*t case Hr. Hardy is completely oorrect.

It w-’s merely a correction of an error in translation.
Naturally I cannot put that in the fora of o question; I
can only zr ko a statement.

MR HaRDY: Your Honor, any I aug 0 ost that those
corrections of translations could t^ke place after ho
finishes his redirect examination?

THE PRESIDENT: It night well be convenient if those
corrections were written out, typewritten, and handed*to
the Tribunal and to opposing counsel nt one tine.

BY DR. SaUTZR:

•c. Dr. Ruff, I should like to draw your attentl -n, to
“.nothor document end should like to a sk vou tv tell U6 how
ox otly you interpret that document; in other words, what


6718


Court 1

April 3C-H-l2-3-.-.D-31akley-Rasmler.


C' ncluslons you derive from it. This document can be
f uni in Document Volume Number II on Page 79. This
is - letter by Dr. Rmschor to the Reichsfuehrer SS. It is
toted the Uth of Kay 1942. If you will look •-1 the
seoond paragraph, you will find that it strrts with the
words, "tonight...* nd thoro you will find the sentence
rnd I quote: "Ko(and that means n certain Dr. Fnhrenknmp)
intends to report to you about his own opinion regarding
my he rt experiments."

THE PRESIDENT: Can you 0 lve us the page in the
English Document Book of this document?

THE INTERPRETER: This is found on P.- 6 c 74 of the
Document Boole Number II.

DR. Sa’JTER: Pn 0 e 74 of the English Document Book,
ooc nd p'^graph, middle of the second paragraph. "....

Ho intends to report to you about his own ooinlon regard¬
ing my honrt experiments Dr. rnhronk'’Cp gt ve to you
hims-lf. From our conversation (Dr. R-.scher's conversation),
I h~vo the lnprosBlon that a great field of work will opon
up to me yet."

BY DR. SaUTER:

Q. Dr. Ruff, if you now compare this quotation to
the Intermediate secr.t report which Rascher submitted to
the Reichsfuehrer Himmler before your official reports,
behind your back, won't you find a clear confirm?.tl n
that these experiments of which you ore now speaking to
us were specl'*l experiments of Ra.scher's and were always

%

actually claimed by him os beln 6 his own experiments,
havln 0 nothin^ at 11 to do with your exp rlments?

«. This letter, Document No. 220, which you Just
submitted to me, is the acco o-nylng 1 c ter to the
intermediate report dated the 11th of Kay. This is the


6?19


Court 1

April 30-K-l2-i-HD-Blaicley-Raaaa.er


secret intermediate report dated the 11 th of ;*ay and
addres-ed to Himmler. In -y opinion it becomes clearly
evident from the paragraph that In the case of these heart
experiments they are concerned with Rascher'e experiments;
■r.d it furthermore becomes evident from thnt paragraph
th-t Rr.scher intended to car«y out yet a large number of
experiments in order to clarify these questions. Of this
opportunity, h waver, he was deprived by the transport
of tho chamber bach to Berlin.

ft. How, a last question, Doctor. In nil the letters
which reached me end in all nffidnvlts which I hrvc
submitted to the Tribunal, you were described to us as a
particularly conscientious and onreful researcher and
a m-n filled with o love for truth. Dootor, within flvo
or six months, during which you irve boon in solitary
c r.finonont, you had sufficient opportunity to search your
conscience and to ask yourself whothor, during theso
Daohau experiments In which you were mlx«.d up in such nn
unfortunate manner, you noted Justifiably or whothor you
committed a mistake.

At the end, lector, I want to aok you .about this—
and d n't think now about tho end of tho trial but Just
fclvc me your answer as n man who loves the truth. Flcase
answer the question, if toda.y from the point of view of
your conscience you aro now Judging your acts nt that time,
if you yourself t-ko your conscience into account do you
f el today th t y u acted correctly, or is it your fooling
today that you committed crimes; that you committed an
earo 1 111 you please answer this and tell the Tribunal

r. neatly .-rid openly in thu conclusion of your ex-minatlon?

«. I can assure you that ever, after s erlous dallbara-
ti' n I have n free conscience. If I have mr.de a mistake,


*720


Co-r* 1

ncril 3C—A-12-5-riD-31ckley-Rannler.


It wr.e only perhaps thrt I gave ny approval to working
with a men like RnBchcr; but that Raschar was r criminal
I found out only efter tho war rnd chiefly during this
trial. In the year 1942 wnen those experiments took
olr.ee, I knew nothing of all that. Rrsoher to no nernt
the serious officer who never g ve any occcslon for
criticism; end If hie superior considered him to be a
scrlvualy-thinkinfc officer, I certslnly could not think
of Judging him as a criminal.

The conditions under which th- experiments were
carried out In Jachau on voluntary people, on professional
crloln-ls, In my opinion wore not obJectlon-blo; and
th-t is even my opinion today. Tho manner In which tho
experiments were cnrrlcd cut wae unobjoctlon-blc.

They woro carried out scientifically,. prop-rod
sclentlflo-lly; and they wore necessary. After all those
c ,nsidorrtlons I can ovon today any that ny conscience
ns r hunnn boln b nd as o rosoarchor Is free.

DR. SAUTER: Hr. President, I h-vc no further ques-
tl.no on the reoxnmlnrtlon of the defendant Ruff.

MR. HaRDY: Sour Honor, I hrve suae other questions
to put to this witness before he Is dlonl6sed from tho
strnd.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal will now be In recess
until 1:30 o'clock.

(« recess was taken untlll 1330 hours.)


6?21 •


30 ostcr (Ir.t. Brcvn)

Court No. 1


«T.Wi:C!i SESSION

The Iribun-1 r-convened ft 1330 hours, 30 April 1947.)
TIE HjtSHfL: The Tribum 1 is egdin in session.

BL. SIEtffRISD hUFr - hesiraod


l-Cl.OSS EX*HIN,.TIOK


BY ilk. H..RDY:


Q I>r. huff, in clcrificcticn of this translation, the werd "etro
cube liar:", you h vc implied Uv t r.«,rc-u-bolisa is not r. ccnsUnt f*. ture
of the condition Jenovn cs pressure drop sicknurs, also known ra de¬
compression caisson iserse, or tho bends. Ac , in fact it is net only
c constant fo: tur- 01 it, but in English it is rxturlly usui ns c
synenya. Hen I ul< like t shew y<.u end the Tribunal : standard
nedic'd dictionary, n uely, Del ns .Aerie; n Illustrctcd xiediccl Dic-
tionr.ry published by . B. S: nders in 1944, rn;* cn p. ge 21/, ycu find
that bends is • mu. f».r caisson diow.-s., • lsc fer r.ero-u-bolisa.

This n*kes the tr nslr lien cs set forth in the tnglish here perfectly
correct. In addition, caisson disease is defined '.n age 448 as, rn'l
It stetes, "it is due 1 c the release of bubbles of ''tucaphoric gesea
in the body." «* , this caisson disease is dao syncncaous with your
pressure ditty dise se, beth of which ere caused by decompression. Then
y^u. find dwdcuprosalcn defined on «cge 410 ef this svue dictionary,
which st-tes, "the reakvrl ^f pressure cr cc;:, reasicn force, pr.rticulr.rly
th.. slew ruacWl ef Tessure fix:- icep se. divers nd ccisscn workers
to prevent the ons-t ef bends."

Wow, Dr. huff, ve hrv_ here r. Gerstn dictionary —

/. Let ne say one thing -taut the, definition y. u Just read tc .u£.

1^'fe^pr^nsl• .t ion . .* th.'t definition v s h--rd c.rr^ctly, then the

\ V *>TTHa'I'i; th t ictiun-r;- i3 rltcgethvr rr..ig, bee-- us. noth the

'* V~>/

caisson diso-se*rn chv t.iwis do not rise if the pressure is gradually

\vA

rcis.d r rathorl li'.^rod. On th.. oth-r h r.', theso isv-ses -ccur il
the change .-‘i pjfcsur- is r-l.tivoly rrjid. For this ro-s-n there - re
^ °* " crissons^Tx^to b„ used, for inst.nce, -t whrt


30 ftDiil—r.-DvO—13“2—/aster (In t. Brown)
C url He. 1


reto the r r»-ssur- in the edssen is tc be reduced, rvaely, r. change cf
1-2 r.tocs h-r-s c*nnct be nr c in less thrn h:lf rn heur. In oth-r
worts, if the translation of the definition y u read wrs correct, then
th: t definition in the dictionary is vreng.

Q i.ell , new, here you find a Goman dicti n?ry wherein we have
narked this. I w .uld like to have ycu reed this rs a: rked. This is c.
stindcrd G-n-n dicticnrry, Beyer's, '..here it is u rked th-r* — I
hr ve it a rked for you, doctor, i.cule you read thrt definition,
pier 30 . hculd you rert thet r.lcud, pler.se.

A (Diction'ry Jt nded tc witness) "Cdsson dse-'so occurs in
persons who r.rc subject tc a high dr pr-saur-, werk-rs unier rir
pressure, rnd such people. (The 1 ws for the protection of torkers
should be referr-d tc, , gc 771.) The sudden pperrrncc of gases
absorbed by the blcc- J.t high.r th-n ncra/1 pressure whon tho pr-ssure
is suddenly reduced, lends tc obstructions rnd stoppages which cut off
parts of the b^dy frea bleed circulation. This is f tal in the br. in,
cruses hcaaorhcges in nose, staunch end sc- forth. Caspar c rise
rnour.tdn disersc, nd see rise profession 1 diseases in the sent
dictionary." This is i.eycr's Kcnvcrsa.tions L-xikcn of the year 1925.
i.t this tiue v-ry little w. s known rb.ut pressure fall dise/sc if rny-
thing -t 11. Here r.g'in the 3 ce dst-ke is a-de thrt has occasionally
been ardo here in the trirl. Here the crissun Iiscr.se, fer exr«plc, is
br:ught int- rel tier, with exuntain sickness. Now n. untrin sickness is
rn rltitudo sickness which r-sts on lock of oxygen, wheicr3 the edssen
uiswf.se, rrth-r th- synptcas th*t result fixe edssen disease, result
fren the change of pr-ssure. Hew, the cenfusien of those two terns in
this dictionary sh.ws that the editor ef this particular definition was
net n expert in this field.

Q all, n th.—se three dictien-rieS, th- twe 1 cdled tc y ur
attention sc f r, * shev th.t the pressure drop isc-.se, deccapr-asi.n
disecse, '.he ben’s, c.isscn dseaae end r-rc-- -.lisa, arc used int-r-
ch:nger.bly with each ther, don't they, the dictionaries do? However,

6725

*


30 ..pril-i-OJO-13—3-Fost^r (lot. 3n wn)
C-urt He. 1


y=u - ant-in th t these dictionaries -r» incorr-ct, is that right?

i. The dicttcarry tht I htvo h-rc befer- -x is-ccrtrinly net
correct, -nd I've lr-'dy tcld_you wh; t things ern be c-qparcd, iv*ncly,
pressure fr -11 dis^s-, ccisscn disease end the b-nos can b_ ccaprred
with one •’nether. They rrc 'ltcgethcr si=dl r. They erisc roughly
in the orac nrnn-r cnlj *dth the difference thrt the differences in
pressure in 'vi.-ti_n re leas thm cne atmosphere, because the pressure
cf zero Uiospherco i- r-rched cnly r.t the height of 400 kilcnxt.rs,
nnnely, where y u re ch the tct-J. v.-cuua of cuter space. In caisson
disease, cn the eth r h.*.v’, w-.rfc is dene unier s.^t circunstnnccs under
r. pressure of two, three or four rtcx'spn-r-s. In ether words, the
diffeTenco in pressure in caisson disease, cr in crisscn work, is iauch
gre ter th-n c differcnco in pressure th t is possible in r.viction.

That is th- rorsen >hy th- dpaptcas cf criss-n disease -re cere s-v-re
then the synptcos cf pleasure f. 11 fisc-se in vi-ti-n. But in prin-
ciplu ycu c-n equate these three diseases, n .idy, pressuro fell
•iscc.3e, bends and c.-iasen disease. But th-re is qurntit tive
differ ncc though the cruses <f thua rre by n 1 ' l-rg- th- srj&e.


Court I

30 - lii-1 - LJG - Gross (Brow)


(Continued) Sow what you cannot equate with these three
diseases is air «=bcli3= because, as I asid this morning, there is
ilr enrolls* not infroqiontly in the case of operations. ,.nd, this
uir e_ijolisa in tho case of operations can have nothing to do with
ary change of air pressure. In ot..-r words,this is something quite
different. Cn the other hand it is correct that in the disturbances
aft-r reduction of pressure air erfcoliss can occur. They do not
necessarily have to but the. nay. In othur words you cannot equate
caisson disease or prossuro fall disorders with air embolism.


Q. Wo 11, new was Dr. Rase.her, when he us-d air eabclisn, was ho


using it corroctly in ..is senso.

Vhen ho said - I don't kn t Just where ho said it if ho said
It - that an air aabclis:! had been discovered; then he actually had
found in tho hoart or in a blcod vussol greater or seller amounts of
air, and tnat is air oobollsa.

Q. "Oil, let us go on and g^t your opinion of this other defini¬
tion in another dictionary. This is Taber's Encyclopaedia .mdical
dictionary, and under bonds, on pejo B 20, records* "Bends (caisson
dlsvaso)" and then it st tes as fallows:


i-ain and weakness caused by increased atmospheric prossuro. This
brings about tho absorption of atoosphoric gases othor than oxygen,
particularly nitregon. Release of pressure roleaa-s this nitrogen
fra:, solution in tho blood and causes formation cf gas bubbles in
tho tissues. Troatcrnt: Itecorprossicn cr increased pressure reapplied
until nitrogen is rodissolved in tno bleed when gradual surtation cf
the pressure is induced."

THE t-rJ23IDHJ.7: Counsel, there tebe scw« trouble with the
translation.

:H. BROiK: I:u ar- goir.t ^uch to fast.

rLx.!DYs ,.e will repeat. "Fain and weakness caused by in¬
creased atmospheric pressure. This brings about the absorption ';>f
atmospheric gases other than oxygen, particularly nitrogen. Release

of pressure releases this nitrogen from solution in the blood and

6725


C-urt I

30 «p t-a - lii-2- LJG - Gross (Brown)

causes formation of gas bubbles in the tissues."


Then they hav. her. “Tra:.tafcnt: Deccrpressicn cr increased
pressure reapplied until nitrogen is redissolved in the blood when
gradual sustation of the"pressure is induced. 0

Kow, doesn't that convoy the sa-c thought that pressure drop
sickness, doco pression dis-asu, the beads, caisson disease, and
air e bells, are used interchangeably?

*• Now, first of all, if toe translation was correct I heard
the statement that raising of .rossuro causes molestation. That is
not soj it is the roduction cf pressure that can cause suffering,
because whon I rise up in tho air I do r..t raise Uw pressure but
1 lower it, and in caisson d.'s^oao difficulties do net arise whon
pressure is increased, naajoly whon pocplo go into the caisson but
syaptora occur whon the workers loavu ti» caisson. In other words,
whan tho pressure on thoa is reduced.

Q. Ti’oll, now let's go to tho next. The ar.cyclopaodlc iw.toricana
has a very elucidating paragraph .fritton by no luss a aan than Siaith
Sly ^.lfy. Now this here - 1 will read slowly for tlio benofit of the
translator - shows unmistakably that air ozbolisn is a constant foaturo
cf aoccnprossi jn dis^aso. This is on pago 150. Caisson disuaso is
a disorder popularly known as tho bonds, occurring aneng workers in
coiprossud air who are submitted t- a pressure .f two cr throe atmos¬
pheres, os aro tunnel workers. Tno synptma >f tho disease do not
appear while the vrrknan is under c. -prossion but core on after decom¬
pression when scce cinutes jr even hours have elapsod. 3 ympto:a wore
at first thought to bo duo to rechanical pressure, which by producing
changos in tho distribution of the blo_<i, caused congestion cl the
blood when pressure was removed. This, however, is contrary to tho
adaptability of bfluids tc pressure and dees not -’.gree with experi¬
mental avidonco. The gas e-.^oli theory is nn generally accepted.

•vC cording to thi: too cry, ol_>cd in co rpressed air absorbs an increased
a- unt ..i oxygen and nitr.gan, which under ermpressien is distributed


Court I

30 -\or-~ - lli-3- LJG Gross (Hrcro)

to the fluids of too various parts of the body. If now rapid decom¬
pression tokos place, bubbles -f gas fcrj in the bleed more ranidly
than the gas can be cist off by the lungs, and numerous capillary
enboii r_sult. These then cause pain in local regions, cither by di¬
rect or mechanical force, or by cutting off the local blocd supply,
‘hero ur.y bo core or loss gonoral pain involving two or three cr all
>f the extremities and scuetlros severe abd.-dnal pain with prostra¬
tion, Tfcich in rare cases results in unc. nsci usn-ss, collapse, and
death. T osu synpt. is aro due to the presence of spinal cord r
brain lesions - the results of the gas c.b-li in the blood vessels of
the control nerv.ua system. Vertigo with deafness and labyrinth
hon e r rhago are s ceti'ios present arid probably point tc embolism in
the labyrinth. Oypanca in the sonso f c nstrictian in tho chest
ar^ also s .jti .«s pr-Swnt but n t always fatal. The 'vat succossful
treatsnt Is that -f rec.aprvssi in with gradual doc mpression carried
m in a I'ochanicol air lock. This is now required by law in s .no
c.untrios. ttoophylactic i*asuros arc carried ut by caroful examina¬
tion of the workaon and tho elimination f th.so unfitted fir work in
C3;rpro33cd air. Predisposing faot rs are y uth or tco advanced ago,
alcoholism, .-rgonic disease, r fatness. He w men sh -uld bo givon
ah rt shifts and worker. should be carefully supervised. Fatigue is
also ft f ct r. Certain countries and states already have laws regu¬
lating shifts and pr viding for gradual doc^npressi n gaged according
to pressure urdorgcr.o, which oro the chief preventive measures."

H-w, can it not bo said in vi-w of th t that air oabollso can
*'• VQ otner causes, but caisson disease is always due to air erbolifcn?

... V rst :t all, since you spJco a little tec fast the transla¬
tion wa3 aomarhat fragasntatud. T.-* first part you r-.ad corroborates
"hat I said a little while age. In your th^r dicti onary y .u road
that caisson disease arrises thr ugh tho increase in pressure.

IKS PRESIDE!J: Witness, it appears t the Tribunal that these

rathor c. plicate and technical translations may r. t make the natter

clear to the witness. I think these definitions as r.ad by counsel

6727


C.urt I

30 kpp-lli-U - LOG - Gross (Brcorn!

ah uld bo carefully translated int Gorton and with the English
v.lu -s be sub mitted t c uns.l f r t» defense, s that he -nay study
tne_. and cake his answers - ,ro intelligent ani r:rt satisfactory to
all cincerrtjd.

5. H.-1DI: I will do that a later dote, Itar Honor. ,.t this
tire X ineroly wanted to point cut that it is consistently in no at
dictionaries a synonon.us torn.

THE . iSSIDEJ.T: Wo understand that, lie understand your position,
but the question ia whether or not the witness, having had these
translations read to hit only, whether he thoroughly understands the
definition and is Ccopetent to discuss then. ?hat cculd be done at
a later time with those carefully adc translations, with tho .nglish
dictionaries for examination b de.onse counsel, should be furnished
to the dofanse who nay be allowed to consider then and discuss thorn
later.

Q. h-ofos&or Rufi,thic report which is document N0-U02 — when
did you and .'-ceberg and Raseher write tii>.t report?

A. 1 didn't Tite this report at all. Tr.e report was written
by Rascher and Howbcrg. I sinply Signed it.

Q. When did you receive tho report, to sign it?

A. T.hen was it finished?

Q. V;ell, ur.at d.tcv Can you tell ,.e that? Do you know off-hand?
The report is dated 2d July 1^1,2.

a. The date ia a3 you said it — the date is on the report.

3. '‘hon in other -.oris, nuf: and Iceberg wrote this report and
then subi.at:od it to yo . Did you at any tine offer any suggestions
for tnis report?

A. lascnor and itevoberg wrete this report ar.d gave it to i-o to
bo countersigned.

3* Well, did you have arc* corrections or anyt;ing to say about

tno report, r did you first oi all ?_e a draft of the report

then have an opportunity to correct it? •

67 - 2 :


Court I

30 A. r-Iii-5 - LJG - Gros3 (=rcnm)

A. It is possible, but - can’t tell you that in detail today.
Jut, I have already said in -y direct examination that through ny
countersignature I took responsibility for the scientific deductions
set forth in this ropcrt. Tact is the rearing of sy signature.

At. even after having heard of the deaths at Dachau you were
still willing to associate your naaa with Fischer on this report?

A. he had to issue a report on these experiments in some form
or another, be had to report on what had been done there. That this
ruport was signed by the two workers that worked on the exparirents
is of course quite understandable, -nd .moreover it was regular proce¬
dure that the loader of the institute would h .ve to put his noma to
it also. Tn e fact that 2 tour .loseher had carried ov*. experiments
and had doatha did nothing to change this.

Q. rfoll, now as a result of this work. Dr. Romberg received a
xedal, didn't he — the War .;.rit Cross, I believe?


*


37C9


Court I

«prii 3G-A-HD-15—I—Harrow-Brown


«. «ftcr he visited Himmler in the Fuehrer^ Head-
tu rters, a few weeks or months lfter, he received the V.’-r
Merit Cross, Second Class.

•*. Did you also receive one?

*. No, I didn't.

.'ho recoxuer.deu Romberg for the Var Merit Cross'?
Did you recommend his?

A. No.

Q. Veil, wno recoa ended hln?

a, I neve seen from the documents that that on
Raocher'e suggestion, at looct, I think that's to be
found in a document; nomely, mlevers ac.de tnio recommenda¬
tion. I am not sure of that, but that seems to bo my
recollection.

4. It cu-ld h ve been Rascner, now ever, th»c
recommended him, couldn't It?

a. I oan't tell you.

However, you wore not recom ended for the War
Merit Cross t Himmler -- Just Romberg — Is that rl s ht?

A. No, I was not suggested for t'nat decoration.

There wes no reason to eltner, because If any one was to
be suggested for a dec»rotlor. toceuse of this experiment¬
al n It certainly wouldn't hrve bean I because I didn't
carry out those experiments. I was simply the Chief of
the Instltuto.

■v. Veil, suppose you nad not sent tnls low pressure »
chamber to Dachau how would the • have cerried out the
experiments?

«. I don't understand that question.

x,. Veil, If they didn't ve a low press Jr c..j::ber
Ir. Dachau then there wouldn't n; ve beer, any low pressure
experiments in ^ac.iau obviously.


Court X

«prll 3C-ft-15-2-nJ-Xarrov-3rovn.


x. The low press are chamber came from your institute ?

The low pressure chamber was the property of the
Medical Inspectorate an-, on Hlpcke's approval, was sent
t*- Dachau.

x. «nd it was Professor Veltz that request-d that the
low pressure chamber be brought to Dachau?
a. I didn't know that,
x. I'm asking you that.

n. I repent, I knew nut.in* to the effect that Prof.
Weltz had asked tnnc the low pressure chamber be taken to
Dachau.

x. ’ell, it actually was your low pressure chamber,
assigned to your institute, wasn't it, owned by the Luftwaffe?

a. No, that was not a low pressure chamber of our
institute. It hod Juat come from the fIra anu was to be
used in the Verauchsenstalt fucr Luftfahrt. It was to be
equlppod with the lr.ter-com system and so forth. It was
not actorlly assigned to our institute for U3e, but Just
so we could make those alterations in it.

Veil, who wo8 it e8sl e ned to? Vas it a now one
thee had Ju9t been built?

a. It was «< new chamber th^t had Just been manufact¬
ured by the firm, and which was sent to U6 at the institute
because we, or. the orders of the Medical Inspectorate, were
to put in the lr.ter-com system and the oxygen system. Ve,
in thi6 case, scans the Versucheanstalt fuer Luftfahrt,
which hod the experts and technicians who usually put this
same sort of equipment in air planes.

x. Veil now in summation, how did you happen to
become involved in these experiments at Dachau?

a. Ir. cy direct examination and in my cross-examina¬
tion b'.you this oornin & I said several times that in 1041,

3731


O' urt 1

April 2C-A-15-5— rU-&a rrc w— 3ro wn.

> i uC Jeceabsr, Professor Veit? visited ze In Berlin lr. cy
ln6tlta;e.

... Veil, .‘.ad it not been for Professor Veit? 1 visit
-u WvOld not r—ve ;,onu to ^ecnaa, is that rl 6 nt?

«. Tnat's possible yea.

..o farther s estlons, Your .-ionor.

THE P.t£PIuSKT: «r.y other questions of this witness
b. .'.efense c ur.sel in co r.octl^n with the cross—xaminetion?

DR. oa'JT iR: hr. President, It was ay mtenti n t
es> the defendant Huff a r.. o:cr of cuostions to clarify the
question of embolism, since the question hr s been ouraued
a stubbornly by thj prosecution; .xwe -or, I shall v: It co
see wh t clerlficptl-n of tnls point the prosecution later
submits and, for ny port, I shell sake the necessary
o» intar-clarlflcotlons and submit them to the Tribunal In
writing. I believe tnat woulu De setter, than If vo should
here discuss a proolea about v .lc.. lawyers, In effect,
oan-ot take any attitude. However, I s..oulu like to point
'•ut nj thin.. This oornln c the question, so far as I
a.lrplsod It, vas iivt whether the wora“embolisc" ©ould
bo transit tod by such and such a word, or whether It aeant
this or that, but what struez me as Important was cnat the
principal question that In s docuzont w.iere the word
"aabollsB - le not found the word ■ecoollso" lp edoed, and
th^t the Gerzar. translation Is elver, to us with the usual
certification that it is ? ve betlz copy. To that 1 § .

-bj.ctad to-ia.. I snail not Cfie any f .rther statements
r. t.-le subject, :u: snail sianly ask tnevitnesf Huff one
.r Gw- further questions.

i'-n. . nRD'I: I went to clarify to the Tribunal this

' sliulty thac Jr. Prater is tr; m_ to no re or less imply

that wo Btucu the word "«lr—zbcllss* In a document to

5732


Court 1

il 3C-«-i5-4-HJ-X£rrow-Brjvn.


create a confusion. I rave checked ud with the Translation
Division and the translator c: r-rently at that tine — she
isn't nere at this time - bat the Chief tojd ae that t.-.e
Translation Division, «en they co:e across such a word and
the n?ve two neamivs or another neor.in_, that they >:t
in parenthesis on alternative aeanln-, end this ..ere la
just another aeanln* or another translation for the word
in German. Thrt'a .icw the confusion arose. It waa not
put in to confuse the bench or to create an interference
as Or. cauter la tryin Q to out forth nore.

JUCOZ <4£3RING: hr. Hardy, when that expression appears
it has appeared in several of the documents - end when that
pope ra should not that fact be na-e apparent to the
Trib-nal?

MR. Ha ROY: Yea, it a.-.ould, Your honor. 3uc, at this
^«r«-ioulrr tine, It was not nede apparent to ce either,

Y ur honor, and 1 obviously went alcn* the eaae Ovuroe,
but not intentionally.

REDIRECT EXaaXNaTION

BY OR. BAUTSR:

Dr. Ruff, at the end of the cross-examination you were
asked by the pvoeoc-tor about your responsibility for the
defendant Dr. Romberg. iou were a..own Roaber e 's affidavit
of 1 boveaber 1046, -*5. This is in .document ?ook *2.

3 reads:

"I witness d the depth of t..ree of Dr. flasener's ^h-an

ex erlaental subjects durln fe the experiments. The first

:.eath occurred in :he letter pr.rt o; April. On this

•> rticular occasion I vee studyin the electrooaori.. repn

c. i hunrr. ex;erlner.tr 1 subject :he. neln 2 ) tested. After

the de. th uf this human experiment''! subject I raised

objections So Rascner and also informed nuff concerning

375."


Court i

«oril 3C-~-15-5-ED-Xarrov-3row;..


the setter, thereafter two other deaths occured on
different days lr. May. ■

You ware caked whether this Romberg was your co-worker
~nd whether ,-ou were his superior, and you answered these
questions in the offirmative. You were then rsked If you
ware resDonslble for wtv t rtonberg did end you 0 I 60 answered
that lr. the affirmative. Kow, toll ne what your point of
view previously was end what your point of view now Is with
regard to this question: Dr. Romberg received a very
precise workln B program froa you regarding what he was
to do with hasener. 0ut6lde cf this ork program, Dr.
ftacoher carried on experiments of his own behind your tack.
Kow, In the experiments that took plaoe according to the
program notnlng happened, but lo Racchor'o own experiments
something did. How, I want to ask you, In view of what you
wore char B ed with this corning, le It your point of view
that you responsibility for your co-worker, Dr. Romberg,
regarding the Dcohau experiments - speaking now entirely
In _en-rol- extends so far that you would consider yourself
responsible for cny possible cooperation by Rombor to in
Rascher's own experiments, or Is It your point of view
th t you knew nothing of these matters, that you didn't
approve these matters, and that, accordingly, you are not
reGponslblo for what JX>cberg did lr. that field? low, please
think about that and answer.

a. Dr. oauter, I believe.that Is a question which I,
as a physician, can ans-.-er only with great difficulty. I
believe that Is a purely le 6 al question. I personally do
not feel myself responsible which I neither requested, nor
approved or knew of, but, that nowever, is my personal
opinion and I believe the question Is e purely legal problem.

4. But, lr. your personal.^ojjir.lon, it Is a matter of


Court 1

--orII 30-.-i-I5-6-HJ-Karrow-Brown.


course to you that you are r.ot responsible for whac Romberg
did under tnose circumstances?

a. Yes, that is ay personal opinion.

v. Nov, ir. this question or responsibility I snoulfi
like to brin^ up something else, Jr. Ruff. You signed the
one raoort of-loially which •’'cxberg and hascher drew up.

You oo-signed this report, and you told us this morning
that yo-- thus undertook a certain responsibility for this
reoort. I believe you said the» uu took the responsibility
for this reiort. I believe you snid thny you too* the
responsibility for th.- scientific evaluation of the results
of those experiments.

a. I said that I thereby undertook the responsibility
fur the scientific conclusions that vero drawn from the
experiments described in tno report, the theories that the
two workers pursued wnen they drew their conclusions from
the experiments. I said thot I agreed with those thoorles
and, to that extent, also personally take over the respon¬
sibility for that.


67c 5


30 April—A-DJG-lfc-l—'fclo;: (Int. 3rcwn)
Court Me. 1


Q In other words, you undertake the responsibility for the
correct evaluation?

A Yos. ,

Q I asi: you this t--cause you wore the ch.ef of an Institution.

Is it your point of view thct by cosign ng this report, which two
other researchers worked out, you thus teko t,ie responsibility for the
experiments th-usjlvcs? In ether words that oy cc-signi.is this report
you take co-rosyonsibility for the exp-rin-nt.-, fer any irrcgulatitios
that night havo taken pl.-co durin,. the ocpiri ents, or any hem that
might have been done?

A I don't know, but I don't hulio/o that ay stature to this
report can be construed to ey taking responsibility for the experiments.
Ev«iy aciontist knows >ho reads such r. report, if the chief of the
Institution has co-signtd, cv«ry scientist knows that the Chief of
the Institution was net present at oi.ch experiment and himself carried
out tho experiments. Thct is a aettor of ccurac*

Q New, c l/*at question. It was pr.vicusl; so id that Dr. lux.toorg
had received the rr ..erit Cross, 2d Class. Tho Judgos probably havo
no idea whet sort of c docorrt on this is. It could bo a vexy high
decoration or ccul«' be a very low on*.. Plccao toll ne, is it correct
that this is the low-st class cf decoration that exists in Germany,
the very lowest decoration one could receivo?

That is true p.s of the year 19 U2, yes.

U’.. No further questions.

DR. «ILLS: ’ille fer Waltz.

BY Eft. • ILLE:

9

Q Dr. Ruff, you said cn a question from the Frc3=cutor that without

a visit from Professor ..dtz to you in Berlin it was inconceivable to

you that the Dachau experiments would have taken place; I believe to

have undcrstccd the meaning of your answer, but I don't want a false

picture to be crested here. :.cw, let me ask you, you will agree with'

ne thct it was a matter cf your own decision that or. Dr. Welts' suggestion

5736


30 AprU-A-OJG-16-a-haloy (lot. Broun)
Court no. 1


ycu arranged that the experiments in Dachau should be carried cut?

•• I neve described already several times how these experiments
came to bo carried cut. Dr. Kelts wes not zy superior. He visited
at as chief of the mnich Institute in ay institute, -.c discussed
scientific questions and cane to speck of the question of rescue from
greet altitudes, and on this occasion Dr. \cltz suggested that the
second half of these oiperimcnts should be carried out at Dachau in
cooperation with ."teacher. 1 boliovo that this d: rifles the question
ycu eskod.

DR. ' ILLS: But it was vur; imrertmt to me thet 1 should heir
this once rgain in vie* of the question the Prosecut * put to ycu.

Dit. VCR’ERK: Verwerd for Romberg. 1 have two or thr-o questions.
BY DR. VOKHtK:

Q Do you believe. Dr. Ruff, that during the timo the chamber was
in Dachau, Reeberg undertook other experiments than those on tho
question of rescue from gr.~t oltitudcs?

k I consider thrt to be cut of the question.

Q toy I assume thrt it is your fim conviction that during hin
stay in Dachau henberg cr.ly took part in experiments which ccncorned
thenselves with r-scuc from high altitudes?

a I esauao thrt to be practically certain.

*» Dr. huff, c;n ycu t^ll ue who issued Rouburg authority for his
tnvd orders when Ro.b*.rg went l: Dachau?

i. . hen an offician tri; was to be undertaken the person who wanto<l
to carry cut this official trip filled cut the travel orders, then I
signed them for ay Inr-tstuto, ard then th>.y went tc the arncg.JK.nt of
the jcperimer.tal Institute fer ,.viaticn and they approved the trip.

q In this case then sc far as the Institute was concerned these
travel orders bore your signature and then were passed on?

k YeS.

DR. USGB-ii SR: *cisgerbor for Sievers.

Your Honor, I should like to ask one or two questions concerning

C757


30 i.pril--D,fG-l6-3-4feloy (Infc. 3r,n)
Court 36. i


the relations between Luff and Si overs.

Q The Prosecutor has repeatedly pictured Siovers as a person
r-spcnsiblc fer the. execution of a number of experiments such p.s aro
here the subject of the charge. ..aong these uxyoriments ere ir.cj.udcd
the experiments hero designated as high altitude experiments, the
planning rnd execution of which arc known tc you. Now, I should like
to find out the folio*ing: Did Siov-rs have anything to do with tho
planning and execution cf the experiments which were carried out in
Dachau so far as you know?

k I knew no thins of that. Sc far os I can recall I never heard
Siovers nrac only alter the ex.:crLrxatr were concluded, roughlj at
tho tiao when this report, Dccur.nt A02 was compiled in Berlin. Thore-
toforc X I nano Sievors at all so far as I cm recollect.

In ry opinion h- can hv. had nothing to do with the planning cf those
experiments and certainly not with the carrying out of then.

r i Did Sievera have anything to do with Biking the lew pressure
chanter available?

A Mo, cortainly not.

'i Do you knew whether Stovers had .anything to dc with the ohcioo
of Dr. Hnocher as the person in charge of the experiments?

a 1 never heard anything tc that effect, ncr cam I imagine that
that cry have been so.

Q Did Sievers h ve anything tc dc with the evaluation of the notes
tht.t were taken during the cxporlacots or with the preparation cf the
reports cn the oeperi: ents?

■* This report the t .3 tc iK f uni in Document AC2 here w s com¬
piled in my Institute in Berlin on the b*sis cf the minutes of tho
experiments. », Siev rs was cortcini; not present i-hcr. the evaluation
f these notes w~s undertaken, bee use until 1 ro'ched Kumberg horc I
did not knew Siovers t ell. consequently, he could not have been in
=y institute, in i .rlin.

Q I again then would ccodude^thct the high altitude ocp.rinents


20 npril-..-DJG-l6-4- t?loy (Int. 3rcvr.)
Court lie« 1


were carried out without Silvers having tc appear rt : 11?

n I hr.vo no rt sen tc r ssine the ccr.trr.ry.

DR. .SISG^BSri: He further questions.

THE PhB5IDB<T: .jc there pt. y further questions tc be propounded
tc this witness?

The -.itness Huff ;--y be excused froa the strnd nnd resune his plr.ee,

Dh. SaUTJ.: Ur. President, there ore r. nunb-r of decun aits which
I should like to subait to you vhich iirvw so for not been submitted.

The first, 1 hove cn rffidr.vit contained in Document Bod: Huff, Docu¬
ment t • 3, to be found cn pr.gc 10 to 11. Ihis ’ ill receive Exhibit Mo.
12. This is x-n Affidrvit ando b; a certain <.d->lf Vess — who from
the ye^r 1937 until 19 U* hod work.d with Dr. Irnff rith scao interrupt¬
ions, nnd for thet rocscn is well requrinto-S with his personality nod
the entire situation. I should like to ;sk you to tnkc nctico cf tho
contents of thrt rffiJrvit nnd I shell only rend the 1 . st end the ono
before the lost p-r^gr-ph cn pr3e 2 of the decucnt.


675S


Court Sc. 1

20 Apr 47-A-17-1-RHh-*teefcan (Rosier)


I ouott. Dr. Uieshofer was a collaborator of Dr. Ruff:

' iflshofer, vho was a very close friend of nice, told se is
1&42 cr 19*3 that experiments vere carried out at Dachau behind Dr.

Ruff's back and without his consont. Dr. h’icshofar was very indignant
abjut It but he himself had no detailed information on the subject.

“I have always known And esteemed Dr. Ruff as an upright and decent
nan. Lr. huff proved to be an excellent and careful physician when
carrying out experiments with so in low pressure chambera. I never

felt that any experiment wuo badly orcp«r:d, scientifically or techni¬
cally, considering the seriousness A ehu oitua;icn. I cannot imagine
that Dr. Ruff risked human lives in Dachau in a frivol us and unscrupu¬
lous Banner, when Bakin,; Axneriaents in aviation medicine."

Sc, for the ouotation. I ask yen to take notice of the r«set of
the contents. This affidavit lo signed in the proper cannor and certi¬
fied.

As th'i next docuccnt Z should like to sutoit i-hibit Ho. 13, Docu¬
ment No. 7, which is the document to bo found or. r«u;tn 24 to 26 in
Djeunent Book Ruff. This is an affidavit by a certain Dr. Haas Georg
Clamann. This witness was on Oberrcgieningsscdizinalrat at the Aviation
medical RoStarch Institute and therofore a high nodical official in the
Luftvaffo. I uls, ask you to take notice of the contents cf that affi¬
davit. Tho witness sent ions that he al^ayr held Tr. Ruff's character
in high estots and soys that ho only heard tht best about hie in his
capacity as a humcc being as 11 a? a scientist. Frcrn the affidavit
itsolf Z should like t- read the foil'.vie# paragraph and I quote:

"As for ac the investigations carried ut ir. Berlin by 7r. £i Qf,-
fried Ruff are known to me, the jvurvfceising majority were carried out
by him and his cvlloborat-rs as self-experiments.

■Further volunteers were recruited fer ercerioonto only because
the nueber of his collaborators was no longer sufficient owing to the
urgency of the investigations.

"Dr. Ruff shoved a high secsc^of responsibility in the investigation


Court So. 1

C-C Apr 47-A-17-2-a5t'»8sh«n (Easier)


uzjI ntr/cr dosandsd e.n o: his colleagues than if hiasolf.

"la view of this experience, it arrears to ce to be cut of tho
ouoBti-c that Er. Huff should have carried out exocrircntc vfcich consti¬
tuted crises eeaiut husanity."

This affidavit, which I Just read, io certified in the proper sar.ner.
The r.oxt dtcuacnt will receive Exhibit No. 14, Stuff Exhibit No. 14,
ar.d it la t. be fcur.d in Eocuaent Book Buff as 'Jo. 10 on rages 36 on.

It is ar. affidavit sadc by the universit • lecturer Tr. Cttc Gau^-r, doted
23 January 1947. This affidavit to: is «wrn to and certified in the
proper aanr^r. I attach particular importance t this affidavit because
ito uuthor, Er. ?tto Gautr, was cot :aly a collniorut : of Fr. huff for
a long ported vf years but als*. because this Ir. Otto Gsuer is now in
the United States active in the cane cacacity ao a researcher ne before
in Go nanny. For that mason Tr. Gau«-r has a very rarticular emert
knowledge of the nattors involved hero. In tho first rart of his affi¬
davit the witness describes the defendant Ruffs p.rsonality and I shall
not read all that in detail. This is as brilliant a characterisation of
Tr. Ruffe character os vac rode by oil the ether witnesses.

rii. HARE Y: Your Honor, night I ack coined that this rotation or.
tho back by Er. karx has to do «-ith tho authenticity of the signature
of tho affiant, if it vao rad; at the tare tine, or later h-ro In Nuern¬
berg. There is n; Jurat on this d^cusent; it ccroly ccntoins the narc
cf Er. :.arx, who toys, "The authenticity of tho cignsturo arrears to bo
correct." E;es that hatcon to b, a Jurat, or what right it be?

TR. SAVTii: .May I clarify that point, :*r. President? Counsel Er.
.-.arx, a; you know, is reor.. seating a defendant here. Tr. Harr ut that
tine, with sy approval, w^ct t. hoidelborg ar.d there t'.ck this affidavit
fr.a Er. louer, which I lad arranged f-r with Ir. Jaucr Drivioucly. Er.
••arx, if I ax net ristakon, had simul tare cusly obtained on affidavit
f->r the purpose of his own client, which I do not know. Naturally, I
iii net rakv. this social trip to E-idelbcrg, tut asked Tr. Harr to
Jbtaic this. affidavit for re. _ ?4 _


Court So. 1

30 Apr 47-A-17-3-HE.-*t«fcan (Ran ier)


I'S. HARDY: Grafted, Your Honor, the defense counsel has authority
of the Tribunal to administer an oath and to certify a signature, but I
merely want to knew if Dr. ..erx certified that the signature vas correct
and saw Sr. Geucr sign it.

15.. SAjTRR: Ur. lari vent to Heidelberg for that very purpose. He
went there in order to obtain an affidavit for his client end for me from
Dr. Gauer. That is the reason why neither I nor any other notary could
moke this certification, but Pr. Marx who was oreser.t when the signature
was given.

HARDY: I have no objection to this document. I only wanted to
know if it wnc executed In Heidelberg.

IHX PRIcXBRHT: The Jurat signed by Dr. I.orx contains no date, no
place, nor docs It contain a certificate that the witness was sworn. It
simply says, "Thu authenticity of tho above slgnaturs'U^hcroby certi¬
fied." As counsel says, no olaco, no dote or any affidovit dolivorod.

DR. SAITHR: This deficiency of form, which obviously lr duo to u
mistake by Dr. Karr, I shall rectify In the future and ! shall too to
it that tho date and place of this certificate oro added by Dr. Marx.

T: wall, counsel may croceed with the locumont now.

XR. HARDY: Your Honor, inasmuch as Dr. Snuter is willing to toatlfy
that Dr. Marx signed this affidavit in Heidelberg and it is merely a
mistake in form, I win not protest it and it won't bo nocoosary for him
t. do that work.

Iri frxSXI&g: The counsel f -r the defendant nay crocked.

DR. SAU7RR: Thank you very much.

This witness, endowed with ececial Qualifications, Dr. Gau^r stales
In this affidavit, which he mad- immediately before his dccarture for
the United States, a number of matters referring to the Oerccnallty of
Dr. Ruff, I shall skip the first part since it entirely conforms with
statements cade in the other affidavits, referring to Dr. Huff's charac¬
ter. I shall oucte from peg*. 3, the center of the cage. Inis is to be

found on cage 37 of the German document book volume:

6742


Court So. 1

20 Apr 47-A-17-4-I2:-»Mjehaa (Easier)


“In many dccenc of experiments I had the jpeortunity to learn vith
vha». extreme caution and sense of responsibility Huff carried out the
experiments. Eis supreme principle vb& sever is any '-a;-' tc endanger the
excerinentel subject. I nev^r"experienced an experiment is vhich Huff
carried or. the strain longer than vns necessary for the s-luticn of a
certain problem. In Buff's published '*or5e (Aviation Kedicinc 3, 225,
(1939)), Monegraphy cf German Aviation .lediclne (ir. print), there ar-
freouent references to the i act fruit he refrained frocn adding the
strain after a certain srobles had been solved. Erccrisonte vith very
groat strain and experiments of vhich the conecoucncce could r.ct be
issaedlatoly foreseen Ruff carried -ut cu bias elf first, cr. nrincirlo.

It is aloo characteristic that iuff, afttr a rebuilding of the eroori-
nental installation or. the large husan contrifug* alvays insisted on
serving nc ar. exu-iriaentai subject himself for the first test. This
attltudo created unlimited c^nfidtcco in Ruff tmong his eacloycec and
among cost cf his closes* cclleborat >rs, vhc alvays oloccd theroe-lvoo
at hie disposal for psychically and physical extraordinarily exacting
croortssonts. It *00 due to Ruff's cxocrlonce end cautiir. that out of
ull hit nuaor-uc.oxcorlsontal flights ar.c dangerour experiments, as
far as I teno*% r. t one serious accident occurred. To sue up, it con
theref re be stated that Ruff is a highly rrualified oclcntift, vho is
distinguished by 0 pertlcular sense of responsibility.

"With regard t the experiments carried ~-ut in Dachau, vhich ore
the b.sic of tho indictment against Ruff, I think It highly improbable,
for purely objective as v-.ll and aa for pere nal roas r.s, that any
Initiative cane from Ruff ir. this respect, but I presume that it cano
from the technical side (Technical Office, ESh). As for as I kr.:v,
high altitude experiments v-re tcc far on the margin of his real field
of interests. His vh;le attecti.r., as has already bc.n stated, vas
centered on the problems of high speed flying and crtarault installa¬
tions, the building of vhich he had 4c accomplish in the face of c-vcr-
lncr easing difficulties. I cresum. that Raiff called to these


Court Si. 1

3C Apr 47-A-17-5-i£k-j' t ehe= (hauler)


Dachau exo-. rise nos buceuso ho vas the ncdical scientist %fc© wa6 beet

acouaintcd with the devel -rsvnt of tha stratosphere and rocket aircraft.

As the vh-lo preblea of rescue free 6trat.sphere aircraft vae a very

•

ececial science, a short explanation. is giver., as far ae seens necessary
to Judge- the exo^riaents jz vfcich the indietaent 1 b baaed.

"The oroblen of rescue fros stratosphere aircraft.

■laportar.ee -ar attached in Goroany nuch earlier than in other
countries to the devclopcott of rocket propelled aircraft, which can
fly at heights of between 10 cr.d 20 ks. therefore the rescue of air¬
crew* during accidents at such a great height becaat ar. urgent aviation
nedicinc problea. Cfcsso orobJeas, which firet Kcnse urgent with tho
development of the He 163 r-cket fighter, retain a great practical
inportanco aloo for tho future, insofar ae the dovelouaent of long dis¬
tance alrcroft for passenger and .-jcds transport win urcbably culcinuto
ir. tho const ruction .f large stratos-herc clcr.es in tho net toe dictunt
futuro.


5744


Court 1

a ;rll 3C—^-18-1-HD-Cook-Ha—ler.

"In stratosphere planes th_- crew is in an airtight
cabin, the so-called pressure body In vnich tr.e atmospheric
conditions necessary for like, such as normal atmospheric
pressure, nor or. 1 temperature and oxygon concentration, ore
artificially maintained. Outside the cabin the atmos¬
pheric pressure 16 so low, that is, the air so thin, chat
n. hums n being could live. If the wall of the c; bin is
damaged, the artificially maintained pressure bursts away,
and the crew finds Itself with listening speed In c
vacuum corresponding to the eltltude Of the flight. Anglo-
Saxon *vU tion medicine created for this proceas the very
pertinent oxpressior. “E-plosive Decompression*. In this
way tno crew Is oxrosed to double danger.

"Firstly, owln 6 to the sudden decrease In pressure
the 0 as-fllled cavities of the body exp nd with lightening
speed. Theoretically, there is a danger that the tissues
racy tear and other mech nlcally cor.dltl r.ed disturbances
may uoour; also the ecer t onco of geo bubbles from the
body f.'lldo la to be feared, which may cause circulation
dloordera, p« raly3ls symptono and necrosis.

"Secondly, the acute lack of oxygen caused by the
cabin beln 6 no longer air tight, effects after tno so-
called reserve Interval, high altitude sickness, which
finally, If the lack of oxygen continues for too lon B , leads
to death by paralysis of the respiratory and clrcul tior.
centers. Rescue from the stratosphere Is only possible
by immediate descent Into lower, non-d.-ngerou6 air layers.
The question f rises here whether the = peed of the pilot's
descent with an open parachute or the speed of the body
falling unimpeded with a closed par-chute Is sufficient
to enable the crew to pass sufficiently rapidly through

the danger 6chere and to reach the non-dan^erous air layers.

6? 45


Court 1

joril 3C-n-18—3-HD-Cook-Rasssler.

The aviation physician whose task It is to clarify the
iroblem of rescue from great helgnts, has therefore two
questions to answer;

"Firstly, -ro human beings able to endure explosive
decompression?

“Secondly, If so. Is there a possibility of surviving
the lock of oxygen after leavln. the , plane l ?

"The first question has 'teen eckled since 1530 In
different Institutes by self-experiments. n

Now there follow a number of t.iblec which I merely
ask you to read ir.d I continue rordlr.g the affidavit
after those t bios r.nd I quote again:

“The results wore favorable. In p rtlculcr, the moot
modern investigation by H.X. Sweeney showed that the ro-
o1stance of the human body la unexpectedly hl u h a alnot
the action of exploclve decompression.

"In contract to the numerous investigations on
explosive decompression, the only report about which I
know on the subject of rescue from altitudes rbovo 12,000
la the DVL report by Romberg and ft schor which forms the
basl3 of the Indictment. The enormous experimental
expenditure which wes mn-e to clarify the effect of
dec .impress Ion or. the human body, and which Involved a
considerable risk for the experimental subject, only has a
real practical er.se If the ser.or.d -uestion rinds •» re. 1
practical solution. If wo do not wish to stop half way,
corresponding experiments ore categorically aided oy
tho above named result."

I shall skip the next para e ramh. The witness said,
ea it wps stated before, that ar.lmal experimentation Is
Insufficient, and on page 7 you have the results of the


experiments he made, and 1 quote:

6746


Court 1

«?rll 3G-«-l-.—3-HD-Cook-rlaxmler.

"ihe experiments were made in connection with self-
experiments on the possibility of rescue from maximum
altitudes of 12,(XC x, carried out by Romberg. The first
experiment in the series of experiments yielded an extra¬
ordinarily important result. i>uring the Jump with an open
parachute, the so-called descent experiment, from 12,000
meters consciousness is lost after 1 minute 10 seconds.

Aft r descending for a further 3 minutes, the experimental
subject awakens and is fully capable of action t ar.
altitude of 8.3 km.

"This is surprising insofar as progressively severe
-l.h altitude sickness develops if he experimental subject
is exposed to tnis altitude for -4-1/2 minutes. The oroceso
of the so-callod' , pre-mobilisotion" w ic.. was observed by
previous authors by indication with descent experiments
from altitudes lowor than 12 km., apparently plays an
important and beneficial role at higher altitudes. Its
mechanism has not yet been ox lolned. On tho baclo of
this extraordinarily favorable result, the strain was
increased step by step lr. the following experiments. This
procedure is usual in experimental aodiol..e. The experi¬
ments were flnall stopped “because in practice there ic
no necessity whatsoever to save oneself from even greator
altitudes with an opor. pi-rachute." Ho death occurred.

"The extraordinarily long periods of unconsciousness
are in themselves no proof of a particularly reckless ^
method of experimenting. An experienced altitude research
worker is able to Judge tnc actual condition of the ex¬
perimental subject from the state cf breathing and the
activity of the heart, and lr.ca-e of a life-endangering
disturbance to stop the experiment by increasing the pressure

End administering oxy 0 en. The observer 4nov6 that Romberg

6747


Court 1

«:rii 30-rt-18-2-HD-Cook-RasaBler,


The aviation physician whose task It Is to clarify the
problem of rescue from great heights, has therefore two
questions to answer;

“Firstly, ro human beings eble to endure explosive
decompression?

“Secondly, if so, is there a oossibillty of surviving
the lack of oxygen after leavin. the 'plane 1 ?

“The first qu-stlon has been eckled since 193? in
different institutes by self-experiments.“

Now there follow a number of tables which I aeroly
ask you to read and I continue rc dlr. s the affidavit
after thece t bles nd I quoco a*eln:

"The results wore favorable. In p:rtlculrr, the most
modern Investigation by H.K. Sweeney shoved that the re¬
sistance of tho huoer. body is unexpectedly hi t h against
the action of explosive decompression.

"In contract to the numerous investigations on
explosive decompression, the only report obout which I
xnov on the oubject of rescue fi'on altitudes rbovo 12*000
is tho DVL repoi’t by Romberg and R; scher wr.lch forms the
basis of tho indictment. The enormous experimental
expenditure which vc6 muuc to clarify the effect of
decompression on tr.<‘ human body, and which involved a
considerable risk for the exp;ria3r.tal subject, only has a
real practical cns~ if tne ser.ond question finds a reel
practical solution. If we do not wish to stop half way,
corresponding experiments are categorically aided t>y
the above named result."

I shall skip the next paragraoh. The witness said,
as it was stated before, t:.at animal experimentation is
insufficient, and on psge 7 you have the results of the

experiments he made, and I quote:

G746


Court 1

*-rll 3 C-A- 16 —2-HD-Cock-Rannler.

The aviation physician whose task It Is to clarify the
oroblea of rescue fron great heights, has therefore two
questions to answer;

"Firstly, ro fcuoan beings able to endure explosive
decompression?

"Secondly, if so, is there a possibility of surviving
the lack of oxygen after leaving the 'plane 1 ?

“The first question has been eckled since 1935 In
different lnotltut.-s by sclf-experlmento."

Now there follow a number of tobies which I merely
ask you to read nnu I contlnu-j re ding, the affidavit
after thece t blc3 and I quote age'ln:

"The results were fcvorable. In particular, the moat
codorn Investigation by K.K. Sweeney shoved that the re¬
sistance of the bar. body la unexpectedly hl b h against
the action of explosive decompression.

"In contract to the r.usjrcus lnv.otlgntlono on
explosive decompression, the only report obout which I
know on the subject of rescue from altitudes rbovc 12,000
Is the DVL report by Romberg and Rrscher which forms tr.c
basis of the indictment. The enormous experimental
expenditure which vc6 maue to clarify the effect of
decompression on the human tody, ar.u which involved a
considerable risk for the exp:rlmental subject, only has o
real practical er.6, if tr.c ser.or.d question finds a reel
practical solution. If we do r.ot wish to stop half way,
corresponding experiments are categorically aided by
the above named result."

I shall skip the next paragraph. The witness said,
as It was stated before, that animal experimentation is
insufficient, and on page 7 you have the results of the
experiments he made, and I'quotes^


Court 1

April 3C-A-18-5-KD-Cook-Hammier.


DR. cA'JT£R: In this connection the witness says.

I repeat, this to be found on page 42, page 8 of this
affidavit, -ecauae the prosecution contends these experi-
aent6 cause special pain:

“If the air pressure is decreased, the concentration
of oxygen in the sir whloh i: inhaled, correspondingly de¬
creases. The oxygen absorption by the lungs is finally so
alight, that the combustion oroccsa in the cells can no
longer properly take olace r.d the vital functions must
cease. At first, the complicated work of the central
nervous system is discontinued. First of oil spontaneous,
and self-control abate, changes of fcelln b similar to
thoso ocouripb under lchollc intoxication take place.

Then follow ousculcar weakness, sleep and jnconsclousnoos.

In the final ot/i 6 e of the high, altitude sickness the
respiratory and circulatory centers ’ire pars lysed os by an
over-dose of narcosis. In the Initial stage of unconscious¬
ness frequent cramps of various klndo can bo observed.
Jnvoluntery contractions of the frolal muscles, leading
to grimaces, weeclng, learning, etc. any also occur.

These phor.omean which may make a ghastly Impression on
peo ;le who know noth.ng about aviation medicine, take
t..olr course subjectively without any kind of trouble. The
danger cf high altitude sicuness is especially based on
the fact tnat it causes only few impressive symptoms,

-bove all neither pair, nor heavy breathing. It was for
..ust this harmlessness of the ey ptoms that the doctors of
all nations had to make the greatest efforts to convince
tne air crewe by appropriate instruction of tne d-nger -nd
malignity of the hi.h altltuae disease.

■Occasionally, especially during longer spells in high


altitudes, oains in the joints r.d wind troubles may occur.

6749


Court 1

April 30-A-1S-o-HD-Co ok-Ramxler,


But they probably did not play an essential role in the ex¬
periment put forward, since from the considerable lack
of oxygen wnich was induced, unconsciousness resulted
after rn aver ge of 30 seconds:

"To sum up:

"Firstly, the question of rescue from extremely hi^h
altitudes constitutes a problem of the utmost ixportar.ee
for .'Viation medicine. The experiments yielded unexpected
results which were of importance for technical development.

"Secondly, experiments with animals yield no o.uar.tita-
tlvely binding values.

"Thirdly, the experiments were carried out on a
scientific basis. The experiments were discontinued after
a certain nractlcal aim had beer, attained. No casualties
ensued.

"Fourthly, the cabjective troubles during experiments
with low press .re chamber in high altitudes without
oxygon ero Bll 0 ht."


G7?0


Court I, Case 1

33 A.-T-A - 19-1 - LJG - Blakley - (Rainier)

witness in the last paragraph £oos on to explain Ruff's
tilf «x r ort.u,.its and the self experiments of his collaborators; and
he points out ti-t Dr. Ruff always subjected hims.lf first to very
dangerous exporisfcnts arc then tr.o voluntary collaborate*! of his in¬
stitute. This affidavit is certified in the proper manner.

I offer as the next document an affidavit by a dentist, Dr. Freitas,
as Huff Exhibit Humber 15. This is to be found in Document Book Ruff,
Document Huiier 15, page 57. 'his is an affidavit of Dr. Walter
Freitag, dated the 2.xi f January, lh7, which was certified in the
proper manner on the 30th of Janu .xy, 191*"..

Dr. Froitog, froc June 1939, 1th sc :e small interruptions, up
to tho year of 19u5, was a collaoorator of Dr. Ruff in the latter's
institute. He participated personally in a number of experiments
and he knows the work of the institute very well. In the affidavit,
which I will not read in detail, ho describes his impression of Dr.
?.uff«s ‘ersonality, his demeanor during the experiments, and similar
matters. I will ask you to take notice of that affidavit; and I
shall dispense with reading it since by and largo it conforms complete¬
ly with observations which other witnesses have made of Dr. Ruff's
personality and his behavior.

An a further document I ofier to you under Exhibit Ruff Humber
16, in Document Book •"•■off, pa?e 63, Document Humber 16, an affidavit
by a woman, franc* von Guaita. She is a German national. I beg your
pardon, 'four Honor, this is not on page 63 but, rather, on page 52.

THE RESIDENT: Vf.at is tho nub or cf this document?

DR. Document Huber 13; and I gave it the exhibit puaber

16 . I repeat, on pa^e 52 of the Document Book, Document .‘hnber 13,
Exhibit Ruff Saber 16 , and affidavit by a wonan called Franca von
Guaita. This affidavit is signed in the proper manner on the 27th
of January 191*7. This iirs. Guaita gsts into this matter because she
was the head of the *il» Department in the DVL, of which Dr. Ruff's
institute was a part.


6751


Court I, Case 1

30 lor-A - 19-2 - IX - 31akley (Rsa -ler)

In this capacity she dealt with Dr. Ruff's experiments and often
was present during the execution of such experiments. I shall con¬
fine myself to reading from the 3rd paragraph on page 1 where it says,
and I quotei

"During all the experiments which I filmed, I ascertained that i
Dr. Ruff ard his collaborators exposed themselves first to known as
well as unknown dangers. His medical colleagues, as well a3 colleagues
free other research institutes of the Gorman Experimental Institute
for Aviation, volunteered as subjects for those experiments, especially
during t.io war; and thus a groat many persons took part in dives,
among thorn, I nyseli, Several tic-js, to operate the film camera.

Dr. Ruff himself as pilot took part in all div«.s which affected health,
whereas we took part only once a day."

Then the last par.-graph of this affidavit reads i

"Thus I know Dr. Ruff only as a ran rho fought to save other
poople's lives; and I considor it entirely out of thoquestion that ho
over laid violent hands on aryoody."

I as 1 ', you to take notice .f tho rest of tho contents of this
affidavit.

As Exhibit Ruff Number 1?, I offer Document Number 12 in Docu¬
ment Book Ruff — I ropont. Document Number 12 in Document 3ook Ruff,
on page li9 of the German text. This is an affidavit of Dr. Friodrich
Kipp, which I am not going to reed. I shall merely ask you to take
notice cf the contents. This Dr. Kipp for four years, from the year
19U2 until lie end of 19u5, wa3 a scientific collaborator of Dr. Ruff.

He also confirmed the point that Dr. Ruff basically was performing
all tho experiments himself as self experiments and then used his
collaborators as volunteer subjects. He says that Ruff was vary hard
oi himsjlf but just as considerate and careful towards his collabora¬
tors. He cays r.e was a ros3archer who was very considerate and con¬
scious of his responsibility.

I should also like tc ask you to take notice of the next document,

6752


30 Apr-A -*19-3 - IX - Blakley (Raaaler)

tofcor 16 in Dccuoent Book Huff, on page 63 of the Genas text.

I = giving this Exhibit tote Buff tober 18 . This is the affidavit
by xaster riechasic Pohimeister, the very same master mechanic
froc she® this work diary originated which I yesterday submitted to
the defendant Ruff. I ask you to take notice of this affidavit, which

is certified in the proper way.

The witness PchLaoistor free /ebruoxy 1937 until April 19io,
that is, over a period of eight years, was a cc-worker with the
physician Dr. Ruff. As a master r-ochanic he had a special position
of confidence. Hu described the detailed experiments as they wore
carried out. He goes on .to elucidate tho part ^ich Ruff played during
these experimentsj and I shall confine myself to a paragraph at tho

end of tho first cogs where it says:

"Tho principlo tasks of tho institute were primarily the exami¬
nation of the afflictions of tho human body caused by any action re¬
sulting free aerial activity. Of the approximately ten male collabo¬
rators of tho section, those who w.ro moat tirelessly experimented
upon wore Dr. Ruff, ^yaolf, and Dr. ..iushofer, who crashed during a
test flight. In this respect, hoover, tho first placo goes without
any doubt to Dr. Ruff, who always was tho first to try out on him¬
self without any personal considerations all the newest experiments.
Moreover, his evaluations wore always of the highest quality; for
lutinco, those in connection with tho offects of centrifugal force,
iihon divos and curves rare carried out in tho Junker 97, ho, as a reg¬
ular pilot, was the one who was always exposed, while we as experi¬
mental subjects, took our turns respectively. In good Hying woathor,
far instance, there was alaost continuous activity in the air during
ahich twelve diving aid flattening out operations were generally
carried out by each individual flight. As already mentioned, however,
Ruff always occupied the pilot's seat and flew with each one of us.
Operations of this nature have bo-n sufficiently recorded both in
pictures and documents. On :'^ny occasions I completely lost conscious¬
ness during t-.^se currilinuar flights. Ruff often suffered free


Court I, Case i

30 Apr-1 - 19-u - LJG - Blakley (Haanler)

ocular disturbances and severe headaches in the evening."

The witness go-a on to describe too difficult experiments in
which Huff was always tho first, to participate. In particular, he
describes the participation of Huff in the high altitude experiments
with lew pressure chenb-r, of cold going down to minus 15 degrees.

"non ho concludes his affidavit on his last page with the words? "For
ten years all of us in the Institute for Aviation Medicine volunteered
for ni l oxp-rirwnts, and primarily our chtof as alr.ady mentioned;
and wo all did it only in tho interests of health and to protect the
lives of others, without receiving any compensation or other roward.

1(0 all considered this as understood. Once General Udot gave my
chief and bo an extra wa-k of furlough. That v.as all. Therefore,
with regard to previous chi-f Dr. Ruff, I can only say the best
with a cloar consciunco. And notoing is more applicable to him than
the inscription on a cup which ho once ;ot for ellder flying instruc¬
tion which r-ads? "Tho doud is silont." This was Karl Fohlmoistor's
testimony'i aworn to in tho proper nannor.

Tha next docui.xmt is tho Docaacnt Number 17, to bo found in
Document 9ock Ruff on pago 67 of the Gorman text. This will roceivo
Exhibit Hixabor 19. This is an excerpt froc a journal — I think it
is oitJjr English or n African journal. I have the original avail¬
able hero.

H. HARDY: Your Honor, tho next document which Dr. Sauto-r is
offurf.r^ in .vidence is an article in a journal, "Tne Lanclet", dated
Doc ember 7, 19U6, 19li6; tha articlo written by Kenneth Mollonby, a
ran who sr.t her.. in tho first row, an observer of this trial for
s-Vur-l weeks. It is aroly his opinion. This is a moral issue of
this tri J., erhaps an opinion o. judfpp-nt in his behalf, or.o which
wis not drawn at the timo of toe axp.rimcnts but on-, drawn now; and
I de^ it inadmissible in avidanco and object to its admission.

THE rSZSIDEKT: While, Counsel, some aatters contained in this


proposed exhibit sight bo proper matters of argument if counsel for


Court I, Case 1

30 Apr-A - 19-5 - L-JS - Blakley (Hasnler)

the defor-so is desirous of so using then, I do not sec that this is
properly ad-dssiblu ns an .ahibit. It contains no evidentiary matter.


6755


Csort So. 1 , »

30 Apr 47-A-2C-l-lHi.-Groe* (r-a=lwD


au SJ.-JOE: Hr. Praaidant. In thi. ax can be of a difforoM
opinion rogerding nary IM. *- *— «» that I hardly »uh-

.U»d any excerpt. fro. Utata-- 1= thi. o««. to«v.r. I nad. ao
MW That. hacau.. ,hl. article 1. a J«™1 or lg ln«». fro. a
Mn hita.lt talon*. to th. Trcolcal Hygl.na Inatitut. in London; I
* „ thot h. i. « exoert of high... >W I - — * * 16 “

“ho ha. Bain tal tad a certain .taunt of objac.lxity in -oh ~h-
J.C. that for. th. .uh'.ct of thi. triad. Hoover. I .tall .hid. h,
vour action and I .h.u revert to thi. ..ttor in n, final odea W
, .tall shot* yon “hat th. condition of unohj.otional nhy.ician. on th.
Anglo-Saxon .id. on th... .xo.rin.nt.- ! .tall oorrchor.t. that in ny

final plea.

next d'.eunor.t, Tour Honor, vhich I - going to .uhnit to you
.an ho found in Sunod.con, Ho. d to Lccun.nt Booh Buff. It hour. Boou-
sent Ho. 16 o, thi. tupol.ncntal volunc and .ill ft* orhihit Ho. 16.

Thi. i. .n affidavit hy dlplca. angineor M» -tat L...or, vho for
aight far. a oo-vorh.r at th. inatitut. of Dr. Huff. Thi. affi¬
davit va. avorn to and ...titled in th. oropor «y. I «" k ” ul "

notio. of it. .ntir. cont.xt and I .hall only rend p«. i of thi. .ffi-

davit, tho erntor of tho page. a» 4 lt r ‘ , * ,d8:

■T thought it particularly or.loovvrthy that Dr.. Huff and Honhorg

carried out all exo.rln.nt. on thotaalvoa hot or. they »«•»- * h “ “
other per .on. 0 Tuluntaerad. The « <«rlta out hy 3r. Huff «r.d
». Hostarg. ». -oil .. tho.. Of th. other Hhg'.ini.u of th. «>■“
hxperlnental Inatitut. for Aviation. hax. oontrihut.d to^rd. the
■ -lutlon of W prohlon. of .xl.tlon ncdlcln.. th. greater *• of
vhloh. until 1966 had no, ho.n fixed ar.d thereby nany flying aocidont.,
carticularly ,ho.o due to high altitude un.on.olou.ne... -0 .xoiained,
"111 oxp.rlnonts oarried out at the ord.r of the tan». lxo.ri-
ncntal Inatitut. for Aviation “tro =ad. vlth ntr.cn. -»» had xolun-
tccrei."

a. v-itrace go., on to dccritaln detail that th.


C.urt Sc. 1

20 Apr 47-X-20-2-lHH-Grc.es (Hazier)

seth-d developed by Baserer end Ecaberg was, as he said, ea ioaense con¬
tribution fer the decrease f death resulting iruz high altitudes.
Aec.rdlng to his experience also, he said, the erocrisents involved no
laager whatsoever, and he gees on to say that he was read” at any tine
tj subject hiaself to any such exoerinents under the leadership of Er.
Euff. He g-.es on to describe the extraordinary care which Ere. Rascher
and Eoaberg shoved towards ell exoericcntal subjects.

As a further document I an g-ing to subsit an affidavit of General
of the SS lari Volff. This is to bo found in Suprlecent III, taken in
London on 21 Bovcr.bor 194o and sv:rn to and certified in the nr oner way
in Suernberg on 27 ;^rch 1947.

The record .f this affidavit w a s subaitted to you oo a d.cuacnt
aalnly bocauee the vitnesa, without hiaself having participated in the
Dochau erceriaonts in any ‘vy, car. testify coarl.tely objectively about
tho quality of ths exnsricental subjects. I as not going to read tho
affidavit in detail. Ke first orpleina tht research spleen of Roichs-
fuohror-SS Hiasler and then ho goes on to say that the initiator of
thoso oroorizents at Dachau was Er. Raschcr - the aontal originator of
these exocrizonts. And then he speaks about the Quality of the experi-
scntol subjects. That is on page 3 of the original, first paragraph.

I auoto:

"In order to clarify and t- stop such occidonts in tho future a
nuaber of junior csbcrs of the Luftwoffo had volunteered with their
own person f<-r experizents. Bov, he said, sccetise ego Er. Rascher had
hfd the idea to use volunteering inzatoB of concentration cpzpb ir.rtcad
of the valuable aesbtre of the Luftwaffe -hick could be assigned to
better tasks. Of course, fov.rs v.uld have te be granted t- these
insetes as a ccecenseticn, after about a dozen cxaerlscnts, for instance,
release free curt-dy ar.d front asaignsent. Ho, Hisclcr, he said, had
gladly accepted this suggest! n -f Hr. Raechcr and had granted pereis-
sicn tc carry it out. he continued that he wee very such interested in
these oxocriaonts and therefore that he thought it very inc-rtant that


Court S3. 1 N

30 jL-r 47-A-20-3-S£H-Gr o s = (.-^cltr)


I witness the eroerlnent ^ w*re going to see, in order to he able to
talk ab-ut It tc the Fuehrer at a suitable occasion. And that is vhat
I did. She fuehrer v a8 Tory glad about it. As far as I renenber. the
eh.rt report I gave hi= also 'resulted later on in the release and- front
assigreont of these icaates.

•Therefore, EiKler vas altogether rcsoonsible for asking oossible
the execution A the exoerieeds in the concentration ca=t>e. vhile Dr.
Rascker vas the executive h*ad."

I think that I can skip the next paragraph; then tho vitnose saye:

"Right after the arrival of Hinder in the c-tccntration cans
JJachau Dr. Kasch^r started with his exporicents. AVout ten prisoners
vero standing in front of their barrack. Shay looked ouitc detached
and ,no after the other they cllsbed willingly into the low ureosurc
chonber which vos built into an autoaobllo. Lack exoerinont took only
a few ninutes, in accordance with the height that was imitated and with
the n-rnal falling soced of the hucor. body.

"After they had loft the low proscuro chador. it took tho oriecncrs
only about tv. dnutc* until, lying on a blanket on tho floor of tho
torracko, they had rec-vored fren thu short endurance test. Aftor that,
in tho knowledge of who, th7 hod Just achieved, they became actually
confiding. Sons A then v v re politicol oris oners; they were all rightly
and lawfully declared t- be unworthy for nilitary service because of a
strong crialnal record (thieves ar.d ouch).

"They eaphatically assured Hinder in ny croeenco that in this nan-
n«r. after a recuect to get a chance to prove their value at the front
had been rejected, they at least nadc a voluntary, nodest contribution
for (lemony with their ov* peraon. and that thereby they wanted to nrovo
their good will -hick really existed. Ihcreuccn Hinnlor crcdscd then
to use his influence with the Fuehrer to obtain their release and the
front ascigment they -anted. It results, for instance, free the letter
of Dr. hascher to Dr. Brandt of 2C.7.42 that Kinder, In fulfillment of
his crcxice, decided on 14.7.42 really that the rrlscncr Sobcta and two


Ccurt So. 1

30 Apr 47-A-20-4-Lr>.-0rC66 (?aelcr)


other co-prisoners -\ri to he released fr.c the concentration ca=p and
transferred to the trial ur.lt (Sevaehrungstrupoe) Tirlewanger'.

•Ead these guinea olges teen invcluntary, then Fimalcr, In view of
the Inhuman treatments vfalch In that case vould really have taken nlaco,
c-uld never have r/forded tc take the risk of these pecplc going °vor
to the enooj* during a ccefcat assignment of this ' 3)1 r leva agar' unit.

"As for as X recollect, I have gained no knowledge from Kinder
or from any other sources of the fact that later on lov pressure txnorl-
sents, for Instance, were cirried cut or. lrcatcs on a non-voluntary
basis."

The further statements of the vltnwss show the aane trend and I do
not Intend to go into thee in detail.


G759

• t


Court 1

April 30-A-21 - 1-HD-Karrov-Ramaler.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, what number of exhibit do you
aasl c n to this document?

DR. 3AJT2R: I beg your pardon.

THE PRESIDENT: What Exhibit nuabor did you assign
c la doc-cent?

DR. caJTZR: The testlaor.y of Volf has Exhibit #20.

I then have a number of aocuaor.ta which have not yet
returned from the Translating 3rcr.cn ar.d I shall submit
them at o later date. *con e those is the extract of the
pen-. 1 record a .out our vltness Vieweg. If you rosenber,
this is the witness who didn’t know whether, excepting one
sentence, he had previously suffered any othor sentences.

In the meantime, I heve received his criminal record and
I found confirmed what I had assumed from the 6tart; namely
th. t the witness alrendy oefor.* h d suffered seven sentences.
Including one of five years' pen1tontItry. This is one of
tnose acoplu who are now c oln c around Che country claiming
to be political prisoners, and who offered himself hero
m this trial as witnesses. I 8^11 submit this criminal
record to the Tribunal.

MR. K-.RDY: Your honor, as I understand it now, Dr.
oauter nos one more bo k thet book Is Book That

Is the one wo haven't received.

THE PRESIDENT: Tnat is my understanding.

wR. KnRDY: «r.d tncr. now, lr. Document Book 2, ho
has ar. affidavit under "Ruff Publications", or is it
supplement •#.? Does h« intend to Introduce that? I
haven’t given It nr. ex/.lblt number yet.

DR. 3AJTER: I have already done that during the course
of che exasin'tlon of the defendant Ruff. I think this is

Exhibit £8 If I'm not mistaken. Yes, I tr.ink it is *56.

6760


Court 1

April. 3C-A-21-2-.iD-Xarrow-Racmlor.

MR. -ARDY: 2io. 8 is another one. That is the affidavit
of ochroeder. This one here has not been introduced yet.
JU^CZ 323RIKG: Counsel for the prosecution Is

referring to .r-....

:<H KaRDY (Interrupting): Document 19.

JIDGZ o£9RIKG: Document 5, I think, counsel.

HR HaRJY: I have missed It then. Thank you Your Honor.
DR. oAJTiR: Mr. President, this brings ae to the end
of the submission of ay documents, and I furth r mate the
application which I have lready made In tho past that we
carry out her- a practical experiment, usln^, a low pressure
ohamber, in order to convince ours^lveo here how such an
experiment, U8ln e a low pressure chonber, In oreder to
c.nvlr.ee ourselves hero how such an experiment is ucln^
carried through rnd vnat Its effects are. In Holdlberg,
not too f■ r from ncrc, there is such p. lew pressure chamber.
Tho defendant Or. Ruf; and other defondants have already
worked in this law pressure chamber. This nobilo low
preasur chamber, located In Heidelberg, con be brought to
Hamburg without any difflc-lty. Sodj ouch experiment
onn be e rried out in a courtyard of the Palace of Justice
and it will considerably make the Tribunal's tosks eaelor
If lc c. n convince it 60 lf about such an experiment. /Je
h ve a number of experts who con be in charge of that
ex -rlment. There is . n «merlcan medical center at
Heidelberg where a number of experts are located. Tho
defendants Ruff nd Romber 5 are abullable for this
-xperL-ent and are ready to subject themselves to it. I
b ve ecelved a number of telegraphic offeres from a
dozen former collaborators of Dr. Ruff that they would be
to make themselves cvoilable here as experimental
subjects. Among th^m is this witness Mrs. Gualtr wno,


Court 1

April 30-A-2X-3—H^-Xarrov-Raciler.


earlier in her capacity aa film director, had participated
in these experiments. I should like to consider this my
application for having such or. experiment performed here
and than. Gentlemen of the Tribunal, you will convince
youraelvee that, in case these experiments are planned
and executed in a scientific manner, they are harmless and
non-d'ingerous and not dp inful to cn extent that r ny one of
us persons here in the court room could subject ourselves
to any such experiments.

JUDOZ 3EBRING: Counsel, i3 the experiment you propose
the ono you soy that -r. Hoff :orformed? Thrt one or one
of Dr. .ascher porforaod? ‘./hlch one you propose to snow
ho re?

DR. =aUT£R: Dr. Ruff's experiments, the exprlmento
that Dr. ruff nas performed, "no experiments of Rascher
do not concern us.

MR. KnRDY: Your Honor, it is my understanding that
the Tribunal has ruled on thi6 once.

THE FREilDEIiT: The Tribunal neo ruled on this point,
donyin e the application or do for tho defendant Ruff, and
the Tribunal is of the oaae view. The application is denlod.

Tho Tribunal will now recess until S:30 o'dock tomorrow

morning.

(a recess was taker, until 0930 hours, 1 May 1947).


6762


MICROCOPY


ROLL
