EEBTS

THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

The Pre-Socratic 
Philosophers

A Companion to Diels, Fragmente der V orsokratiker

by

Kathleen Freeman

D.Litt., Lecturer in Greek at the 
University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire 
Author of The Work and Life of Solon, etc.

Oxford - Basil Blackwell 
1946

FIRST PUBLISHED 1946

To 
LILIANE M. C. CLOPET

Av yao rap7y piraavOpotin, 
trepeoti Kal pidoTtexvin

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN IN THE CITY OF OXFORD 
AT THE ALDEN PRESS

CONTENTS

The chapters are numbered as in the Fifth Edition of Diels, 
Fragmente der Vorsokratiker. The numbers in parentheses 
are those of the Fourth Edition

PREFACE 1X

INTRODUCTION xl 
A. BEGINNINGS

I. Cosmological Poetry of early times I

1 (66) Orpheus I

2 (67) Musaeus 19

3 (68) Epimenides 26

II. Astronomical Poetry of the sixth century 32

4 (68a) Hesiod 32

5 (69) Phocus 33

6 (70) Cleostratus 34

III. Early Cosmological and Gnomic Prose 36

7 (71) Pherecydes 36

8 (72) Theagenes 41

9 (73) Acusilaus 41

10 (73a) The Seven Sages 44

B. THE PHILOSOPHERS OF THE SIXTH AND 
FIFTH CENTURIES

11 (1) Thales 49 
12 ( 2) Anaximander 55 
13 ( 3) Anaximenes 64 
14 (4) Pythagoras 73 
15 ( 5) Cercops 83 
16 ( 6) Petron 84 
17 ( 7) Bro(n)tinus 84 
18 ( 8) Hippasus 84 
19 ( 9) Calliphon and Democedes 87 
20 (10) Parm(en)iscus 88 
21 (11) Xenophanes 88 
22 (12) Heracleitus 104 
23 (13) Epicharmus 132 
24 (14) Alcmaeon 135

V1

25 18 
26 "3 
27 (17 
28 (18) 
29 (19) 
30 (20) 
31 (21) 
32 (22) 
33 (23) 
34 (24)

35 (242)

36 (25)

37 (25a)

38 (26) 
39 (27) 
40 (28) 
41 (29) 
42 (30) 
43 (31) 
44. (32) 
45 (33) 
46 (34) 
47 (35)

48 (35a)

49 (36) 
50 (37) 
51 (38) 
52 (39) 
53 (40)

54 (41) 
55 (42) 
56 (43) 
57 (44) 
58 (45)

CONTENTS

Iccus

Paron

Ameinias |

Parmenides

Zeno

Melissus

Empedocles

Menestor

Xuthus

Boidas

Thrasyalces

Ion of Chios

Damon

| of Samos

Phaleas and Hippodamus

Polycleitus

Oenopides

Hippocrates of Chios. Aeschylus

Theodorus

Philolaus

Eurytus 'Empedocles

Menestor

Xuthus

Boidas

Thrasyalces

Ion of Chios

Damon

| of Samos

Phaleas and Hippodamus

Polycleitus

Oenopides

Hippocrates of Chios. Aeschylus

Theodorus

Philolaus

Eurytus '

Archippus. Lysis. Opsimus

Archytas

Occelus (Ocellus)

Timaeus

Hicetas

Ecphantus

Xenophilus

Diocles, Echecrates, Polymnastus, 
Phanton, Arion

Prorus, Amyclas, Cleinias

Damon and Phintias

Simus, Myonides, Euphranor

Lycon

The Pythagorean School 
A. Iamblichus’ Catalogue 
B. Anonymous Pythagoreans 
C. Allegorical Precepts 
D. Extracts from Aristoxenus 
E. Pythagoreans in Middle

Comedy

139 
140 
140 
140 
153 
164 
172 
204 
205 
205 
206 
206 
207 
209 
211 
214 
215 
217 
219 
220 
2.92 
233 
233 
239 
240 
241 
241 
241

24.2 
2.4.2 
242 
243 
243

24.4 
245 
254 
256

260

CONTENTS Vil 
59 (46) Anaxagoras 261 
60 (47) Archelaus 276 
61 (48) Metrodorus of Lampsacus 277 
62 (49) Cleidamus 278 
63 (50) Idaeus 279 
64 (51) Diogenes of Apollonia 279 
65 (52) Cratylus 284 
66 (53) Antisthenes the Heracleitean 285 
67 (54) Leucippus 285 
68 (55) Democritus 289 
69 (56) Nessas 326 
70 (57) Metrodorus of Chios 327 
71 (58) Diogenes of Smyrna 330 
72 (59) Anaxarchus 330 
73 (60) Hecataeus of Abdera 333 
74. (61) Apollodorus (of Cyzicus) R36 
75 (62) Nausiphanes 335 
76 (63) Diotimus 337 
77 (64) Bion of Abdera 337 
78 (65) Bolus 337 
C. THE OLDER SOPHISTS 
79 (73b) ‘Sophist’: Name and Concept 341 
80 (74) Protagoras 343 
81 (75) Xentades 353 
82 (76) Gorgias 353 
83 Lycophron 368 
84 (77) Prodicus 370 
85 (78) Thrasymachus 375 
86 (79) Hippias 381 
87 (80) Antiphon the Sophist 391 
88 (81) Critias 405 
89 (82) The Anonymous Writer quoted by 
Tamblichus 414 
90 (83) Twofold Arguments 417 
LIST OF AUTHORITIES 427

INDEX 465

u

PREFACEINDEX 465

u

PREFACE

Tue work done by the pre-Socratic philosophers can be only 
imperfectly appreciated from histories and summaries unless 
these are accompanied, almost from the outset, by a study of 
the sources of our information. For this, every student goes 
to the admirable collection of Diels. Here, arranged in 
chronological order, are the names of every man who is known, 
or thought, to have contributed anything to the progress of 
knowledge, from Orpheus to the Sophists; and under each 
name are given, first, statements in ancient writers about the 
life and opinions of the thinker in question, and second, the 
remaining fragments, if any, of his own works. A study of this 
material will dispel many misunderstandings, and all doubts 
as to whether the subject is worth the time and labour it 
demands.

But of those students who are willing to take the trouble to 
study the sources, many have not the time to read all the 
material collected in Diels. Even those who have the time 
would usually be glad of some guidance at first; for of the 
fragments of a man’s work which happen to survive, not all 
are of equal importance, while the tradition about his life and 
work varies still more greatly in value and is often conflicting. 
The object of this Companion is to offer such guidance. It 1s 
the fruit of a number of years’ experience of reading Early 
Greek Philosophy with university students; and its plan has 
developed out of an acquaintance with their needs.The chapters follow the arrangement adopted by Diels: 
first what is known of the life, then of the teaching, of each 
thinker is summarized. Every statement is supported by an 
exact reference, either to the thinker’s own words or to some 
exponent of his views; anything conjectural or controversial 1s 
designated as such. In a word, the author wishes to lead the 
student constantly to the sources, by offering him no statement 
which he cannot verify, and no opinion the basis of which he 
cannot examine with ease. A List of Authorities will help 
him to assess the value of conflicting testimony.

It was originally intended, for the convenience of the reader, 
to place in the right-hand margin all references to Diels and

1x

x PREFACE

other sources; but this in present circumstances was not 
possible. References to sources have therefore been placed 
together at the foot of the page, above the footnotes proper. 
The footnotes are of two kinds: quotations or comments 
directly concerning a reference; and quotations or comments 
on some point in the text itself. To distinguish these, the 
following system has been adopted:

Letters: * > ° Reference to source.

Letters followed by number #:#1%:¢: Comment on such 
reference.

Numbers: 14 * Comment or = not directly con- 
cerned with reference.Letters: * > ° Reference to source.

Letters followed by number #:#1%:¢: Comment on such 
reference.

Numbers: 14 * Comment or = not directly con- 
cerned with reference.

All Greek quotations have been kept out of the text, because 
the author wishes the book to be oe also to those without a 
knowledge of Greek; where quotations were necessary, or 
variant readings had to be discussed, these have been given in 
footnotes. Controversial points also have been kept to foot- 
notes as far as possible, in order not to disturb the exposition 
of the main theme. For the benefit of non-classical students, 
pronunciation has been indicated in the List of Authorities 
and the Index by the use of a circumflex over long vowels; 
in the text, this use has been confined to the first appearance 
of less usual proper names, and to words transliterated from 
Greek.

References, unless it is otherwise stated, are to Diels, Frag- 
mente der Vorsokratiker, Fifth Edition, edited by Walther 
Kranz (Berlin, 1934-8). References are to number of chapter, 
division of chapter, number of quotation: e.g. 22B1o = Hera- 
cleitus, Fragments, No. 10. When the reference is to the 
subject of the chapter, the first (chapter) number is omitted: 
e.g. the above reference if occurring in the chapter on Hera- 
cleitus appears simply as Bro.

The author thanks Dr. Geoffrey Percival, who read the 
ver and made many valuable suggestions; and Miss

. Elaine Davies, m.a., who gave help in the preparation of 
the Index.

KATHLEEN FREEMAN

INTRODUCTION

Tue problem of Knowledge, as it presented itself to the 
originators of the scientific study of the universe, is clearly 
stated by Aristotle in the First Book of the Mesaphysics:INTRODUCTION

Tue problem of Knowledge, as it presented itself to the 
originators of the scientific study of the universe, is clearly 
stated by Aristotle in the First Book of the Mesaphysics:

That from which all particular things derive their 
existence, that from which they originally come into 
existence and into which they finally lose their existence — 
the substance remaining unchanged underneath, though 
subjected to changes of form — this they posit as ‘ele- 
ment’ and ‘origin’ of particular things; and therefore they 
believe that nothing is either created or destroyed, since 
‘essential nature’, in this sense of the term, continues ever 
to be preserved.

i

This assumption that behind the changing phenomena pre- 
sented by the universe to our senses there lies a reality which 
is unchanging, and that the pursuit of true knowledge consists 
in seeking out this reality, is the basic axiom of metaphysics. 
From Thales onward, all inquiry into the nature of phenomena 
tended towards one end: the answer to the question, What 1s 
‘the nature of the Whole? that is, What is the nature of the 
reality behind phenomena? For Aristotle, and therefore for us 
also, science and metaphysics begin together with Thales, the 
first man known to have attempted an answer to this question, 
and therefore the first man known to have posed it.

The nature of the answer depends on the way in which the 
question is understood. To the pioneer, What is the Whole? 
meant primarily, What is the material universe? — our earth 
with its phenomena, the heavens and their phenomena. These 
things are not understandable in pee because they 
change; therefore all explanation of them must go back to an 
unchanging underlying substance, which is material, like the 
Cosmos which is created from it.

Metaphysics always seeks a One—one reality behind 
eres to discover which is to have knowledge. The

onian thinkers assumed that their material substrate must beMetaphysics always seeks a One—one reality behind 
eres to discover which is to have knowledge. The

onian thinkers assumed that their material substrate must be

One. For Thales, this was Water; for Anaximander, an inde-

terminate substance called the Boundless; for Anaximenes, 
xl

Xi1 INTRODUCTION

Vapour; for Heracleitus, Fire. Pythagoras believed Number 
to co the unifying element, though he postulated a duality in 
the material universe; while Heracleitus, in opposition to him, 
saw in Logos or Law the One that is the governing principle, 
to know which is the only wisdom. Parmenides and his fol- 
lowers in pointing out the difficulties of believing that the One 
has the attributes of matter, were driven by their own logic 
into denying the reality of the universe of sense-perception. 
There followed the pluralist systems of Empedocles and Anaxa- 
goras, evolved in an effort to ‘save phenomena’. Theattempt to 
explain the material universe in terms of a material substrate 
reached its culmination in the Atomic Theory of Leucippus 
and Democritus. But no pluralist system could ever be satis- 
factory to metaphysics.

The study of sense-perception and the mechanism of the 
organs of sense had always tended towards a disbelief in their 
trustworthiness; this led to the agnosticism of the Sophists, and 
for a time the very faith in the possibility of knowledge was 
threatened. But the One demanded by metaphysics was re- 
asserted by Socrates, who in the realm of ethics made the 
General Definition the object of knowledge. This was applied 
by Plato to the whole realm of existence in his Theory of Forms, 
which is the final attempt to solve the problem as stated by 
Hellenic genius; in his metaphysical system is gathered up and 
harmonized the whole of the work of his predecessors. This 
solution was partly clarified and restated, partly criticized and 
emended, by Aristotle, who on the strength of a clear-cut meta-hysic was able to set almost all the arts and sciences on a sure 
logical basis. After Aristotle, interest in science and meta- 
physics, except as contributing to ethics and psychology, de- 
clined; and all work after him by the Greeks and by the 
Romans is derivative, a restatement or reapplication of pre- 
viously-formulated views. Thus ends the long train of inquiry 
that begins for us with Thales.

The earlier editions of The Fragments of the Pre-Socratics be- 
gan with Thales as the first of the philosophers; but in the 
present edition, the philosophers are preceded by a section de- 
voted to teachers and thinkers whose views, though not con- 
tributing directly to science and metaphysics, nevertheless had 
an influence on philosophic thought. This section in the earlier 
editions formed, together with the work of the Sophists, a

INTRODUCTION Xiii

supplement at the end. It has been removed to the beginning 
in accordance with a wish expressed by Diels himself in his 
Foreword to the Fourth Edition (1922). The book is therefore 
now divided as follows:

A. Beginnings 
I. Cosmological poetry of early times 
II. Astronomical poetry of the Sixth Century 
III. Early cosmological and gnomic Prose

B. The Fragments of the philosophers of the Sixth and 
Fifth Centuries (and immediate successors)

C. The older Sophists | 
The editor of the Fifth Edition, explaining this change ofB. The Fragments of the philosophers of the Sixth and 
Fifth Centuries (and immediate successors)

C. The older Sophists | 
The editor of the Fifth Edition, explaining this change of

order, points out that Diels had in mind an arrangement accord- 
ing to connection of thought rather than —— to chrono- 
logy. Under the heading ‘Cosmological poetry of early times’ 
there are to be found, for instance, not only Orpheus and 
Musaeus, but also later teachers in whose views Diels traced 
something of the old Orphic spirit. So too with the title of the 
whole book: ‘Pre-Socratics’ se be understood not in the 
strictly chronological sense, since it is made to include contem- 
poraries of Socrates, and even some who survived him; but as 
meaning all those whose thought is pre- or non-Socratic.

The book therefore now has the unity desired by Diels: it 
begins with what may be called, in the sense defined above, 
pre-philosophic thought, and it ends with the teaching of the 
older, non-Socratic Sophists. In between come the meta- 
physical scientists of the fifth and fourth centuries, from 
Thales to Democritus and his immediate followers.

A. BEGINNINGS

I. COSMOLOGICAL POETRY OF EARLY TIMES 
II, ASTRONOMICAL POETRY OF THE SIXTH CENTURY

III. EARLY COSMOLOGICAL AND GNOMIC PROSE

A. BEGINNINGS

I. COSMOLOGICAL POETRY OF EARLY TIMES 
I, ORPHEUS 
Orpuevs! lived probably in Turacz, in pre-Homeric times.III. EARLY COSMOLOGICAL AND GNOMIC PROSE

A. BEGINNINGS

I. COSMOLOGICAL POETRY OF EARLY TIMES 
I, ORPHEUS 
Orpuevs! lived probably in Turacz, in pre-Homeric times.

It was believed by Aristotle* that Orpheus never existed; 
but to all other ancient writers he was a real person, though 
living in remote antiquity. Most of them believed that he lived 
several generations before Homer: the period ‘eleven genera- 
tions before the Trojan War’ was sometimes specified, but it 
was added that Orpheus himself had lived for nine or eleven 
generations.” Herodotus put forward the opinion, in opposi- 
tion to others, that Orpheus was later than Homer or Hesiod ;° 
this was perhaps based on the belief that the Orphic poems 
were post-Homeric. He placed Orpheus as his own prede- 
cessor by not more than four hundred years. The usual 
modern view is that Orpheus was pre-Homeric, but that even 
the carliest poems are later than both Homer and Hesiod, 
possibly as late as the sixth century B.c. The earliest reference 
to Orpheus in extant literature is the fragment ‘famous 
Orpheus’ from the poet Ibycus, of the sixth century.‘ It is just 
possible that a fragment of Alcaeus (seventh century) refers to 
Orpheus; but it is so much mutilated that the restoration of the 
name Orpheus 1s highly uncertain.°

Orpheus ts said to have been born at Leibethra in Pieria, the 
district round Mt. Olympus;! this district in classical times 
was part of Macedonia, but was originally Thracian. As in later 
times the Thracians were not regarded as true Hellenes, where-

a Cic. De Nat. Deor. 1, 107. (O.F. test. 13)

bAr; As cAgs d Aza e A2 f Ar

el Alcaeus, frg. 80, Diehl, Anth. Lyr. 1, 4, p. 129 (papyrus frg.). Even Diehl, who 
formerly proposed the restoration, now seems to wish to abandon it.bAr; As cAgs d Aza e A2 f Ar

el Alcaeus, frg. 80, Diehl, Anth. Lyr. 1, 4, p. 129 (papyrus frg.). Even Diehl, who 
formerly proposed the restoration, now seems to wish to abandon it.

1 For a complete collection of Orphic fragments and references, see O. Kern, Orphi- 
corum Fragmenta. Diels confines himself to the earliest references and earliest attested 
fragments, or those in which he discerns the ‘old Orphic’ stratum. When a passage 
referred to in this chapter is not given by Diels, the reference in Kern (O.F. Orphicorum

Fragmenta) is supplied. For a full discussion, see W. K. C. Guthrie, Orpheus and Greek 
Religion (1935); Jane Harrison, Prolegomena to Greek Religion, chs. IX-X11 (1908).

2 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

as Orpheus was so regarded, it 1s thought that he may have 
migrated to Thrace from the south (Boeotia) or the north. This 
idea is supported by a pictorial representation of Orpheus in the 
underworld by Polygnétus, described by Pausanias, in which 
Orpheus’ dress is Hellenic, not Thracian; and by representa- 
tions in vase-paintings, in which Orpheus is depicted as a 
Hellene, and his listeners as Thracians.*

His parentage is given as divine: his mother was the Muse 
Calliope, his father sometimes Apollo, but usually Oeagrus,” a 
Thracian wine-god, who was himself descended from Atlas.° 
Orpheus was said to have been a pupil of Linus, whose violent 
death was lamented in the harvest-songs called after him.®Of his life, nothing is told except legends. The suggestion 
that he visited Egypt in search of knowledge® can probably be 
discounted. He was said to have sailed with the Argonauts on 
their quest, acting as coxswain, as well as musical magician and 
religious guide; the first mention of this story in extant litera- 
ture is by Pindar.*‘: Euripides brought Orpheus into his play 
Hypsipyle, which dealt with the Lemnian episode of the Argon- 
autic voyage;® Orpheus there acts as coxswain, and later as 
guardian in Thrace of Jason’s children by Hypsipyle. He is 
depicted as religious singer in the 4rgonautica,” an epic poem 
by Apollonius Rhodius written about 240 B.c.; and in an 
anonymous poem called Orpheus, written in the fourth century 
A.D., as well as in other Orphic writings.’ Earlier than the 
literary references is a sculptured representation of Orpheus 
with the ship 4rgo, found at Delphi,’ said to be of the sixth 
century B.C.

The other legend told of Orpheus’ life was his descent to 
the underworld. The earliest known reference to this is the 
painting by Polygnotus (fifth century s.c.) described by 
Pausanias (second century 4.p.),* where no mention is made 
of Eurydice. Euripides! and Plato™ both refer to the story of 
his descent to recover his wife, but do not mention her name;

a Guthrie, p. 45, Plate 6; Harrison, Prol. p. 458

b Schol. ad Pind. Pyth. IV, 177; Pind. frg. 139 (O.F. testt. 22, 23)

c Ar d Hom. J. XVIII, 570

€ Diod. I, 23; I, 96; IV, 25 (O.F. testt. 95-97)

£ Pyth. IV, 177 (O.F. test. 78) & Aga; Agb hO.F. 29 i Ar

J Guthrie, Plate 2 k Ag 1 A6 mAr4

f! An Argonautica by ‘Orpheus of Croton’, said to be a contémporary and associate

of Peisistratus, is mentioned by Suidas s.v. Orpheus (Diels, 1A1). This is probably a 
confusion with Onomacritus.

BEGINNINGS 3

a contemporary relief (about 400 B.c.) shows Orpheus and his

wife with Hermes.* The elegiac poet Hermesianax called herBEGINNINGS 3

a contemporary relief (about 400 B.c.) shows Orpheus and his

wife with Hermes.* The elegiac poet Hermesianax called her

Agriope;> and the first mention of her name in literature is in

the Lament for Bion (first century B.c.).° The Romans were

the first to elaborate the story (Vergil, Ovid and others);* the

models they used were probably Alexandrian, and are lost. The

essence of the story was the descent, the charming of the gods

of the underworld by Orpheus with his music, the release of 
his wife, and his breaking of the condition imposed on him not: 
to look back at her until they had safely reached the upper

regions. The superstition against looking back is as te

primitive, and shows that the story was old. By this means,

Orpheus obtained first-hand knowledge of the underworld, and

was able to pass it on to his followers.

After the loss of Eurydice, Orpheus lived as a recluse; the 
later story was that he thereafter preferred the company of 
men.° The story of his death was variously given. Some said 
that he committed suicide; Pausanias records this, but says it 
is untrue.* Others said that he was the victim of a thunderbolt.® 
But the usual story was that he was torn to pieces by the 
Maenads, the female worshippers of Dionysus, either because 
he worshipped Apollo,® or because he scorned them in some 
way.’ '1 Later, when the attacks of the philosophers on anthro-

omorphism began, Orpheus was said to have been thus pun- 
ished for speaking ill of the gods.) He was buried at Dion in 
Macedonia; and his alleged tomb was seen by Pausanias. Later 
authorities said that his head was borne down the river Hebrus 
to Lesbos, where it was buried.

a Guthrie, Plate 3 bO.F. test. 61 cO.F. test. 62

d Verg. Georg. IV, 453; Cul. 268-295; Ov. Met. X, 1 (O.F. test. 62)

¢ Phanocles ap. Stob. Ecl. IV, 20, 47; Ov. Met. X, 83 (O.F. test. 77)

f Paus. IX, 30, 4, sg. (O.F. testt. 116, 120)

& Paus. 1. c.; Diog. L.1, 5 (O.F. testt. 123, 125)¢ Phanocles ap. Stob. Ecl. IV, 20, 47; Ov. Met. X, 83 (O.F. test. 77)

f Paus. IX, 30, 4, sg. (O.F. testt. 116, 120)

& Paus. 1. c.; Diog. L.1, 5 (O.F. testt. 123, 125)

b Aeschyl. Bassarae (O.F. testt. 45, 113.) i Conon, fab. 45. (O.F. test. 115.)

j A14b; cp. Xenophanes, 21Brr

k Phanocles (O.F. test. 77) Verg. Georg. IV, 523; Ov. Met. XI, 50; Hygin. Astron.

II, 7; Philostr. Heroic. V, 3. (O.F. testt. 131-135); Lucian adv. indoct. 109 (O.F. test. 
118)

i* Guthrie, pp. 32-35; p. 61. Harrison, pp. 462 s¢q.

1 It is unlikely that the ‘looking back’ was invented by the Alexandrians, though 
there were other versions of the story, some alleging that Orpheus was successful 
(Guthrie, p. 31). The explanation attributed to Phaedrus in Plato’s Sympostum is 
meant to be a playful departure from the usual story: Orpheus was given a phantom, 
not the real woman, because of his cowardly attempt to get into Hades alive, instead of 
dying for love as Alcestis did. (Symp. 179D; Diels, rA14)

-

4 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS-

4 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Writings. In the fifth and fourth centuries B.c., there existed 
a collection of hexametric? poems known as Orphic, which were 
the accepted authority of those who followed the Orphic way 
of life, and were by them attributed to Orpheus himself. Plato 
several times quotes lines from this collection ;* he refers in the 
Republic to a “mass of books of Musaeus and Orpheus’,> and 
in the Laws to the hymns of Thamyris and Orpheus,¢ while in 
the Jon he groups Orpheus with Musaeus and Homer as the 
source of inspiration of epic poets and elocutionists.4 Euripides 
in the Hippo/ytus makes Theseus speak of the ‘turgid outpour- 
ings of many treatises’, which have led his son to follow 
Orpheus and adopt the Bacchic religion.e Alexis, the fourth 
century comic poet, depicting Linus offering a choice of books 
to Heracles, mentions ‘Orpheus, Hesiod, tragedies, Choerilus, 
Homer, Epicharmus’.f Aristotle did not believe that the poems 
were by Orpheus; he speaks of the ‘so-called Orphic epic’,* and 
Philoponus (seventh century a.p.) commenting on this expres- 
sion, says that in the De Philosophia (now lost) Aristotle directly 
stated his opinion that the poems were not by Orpheus. 
Philoponus adds his own view that the doctrines were put into 
epic verse by Onomacritus.i Aristotle when quoting the Orphic 
cosmological doctrines attributes them to ‘the sheglogot’,! 
‘the ancient poets’,* ‘those who first theorized about the gods’.!Nothing 1s known of any ancient Orphic writings except a 
reference in the A/cestis of Euripides to certain “Thracian tab- 
lets’ which ‘the voice of Orpheus had inscribed’ with pharma- 
ceutical lore. The Scholiast, commenting on the passage, says 
that there exist on Mt. Haemus certain writings of Orpheus on 
tablets." There is also a reference, not mentioning Orpheus by 
name, in the pseudo-Platonic Axiochus,° where it is said that the 
fate of the soul in Hades is described on certain bronze tablets 
which two seers had brought to Delos from the land of the 
Hyperboreans. This is the only evidence for any ancient Orphic 
writings. Aelian (second century a.p.) gave the chief reason 
against believing in them: at the time when Orpheus is said 
to have lived, the Thracians knew nothing about writing.?

; ; ¢ B6a dArqa e A8 
f Athen. IV, 164b, c. (O.F. test. 220) & Broa; Birr b Bri i Bri 
j Bg; Met. 100049; 1091434 k Met. rog1b4 1 Bro mAz7 
nO.F. test. 82 ° 3714 P Br

' Orpheus was sometimes credited with the invention of the hexameter; see below, 
P- 409.

BEGINNINGS 5

It came therefore to be believed that Orpheus taught, but 
left no writings, and that the epic poetry attributed to him was 
written in the sixth century B.c. by Onomacritus. Onomacritus 
was banished from Athens by Hipparchus for inserting some- 
thing of his own into an oracle* of Musaeus when entrusted 
with the editing of his poems. It may have been Aristotle who 
first suggested, in the lost De Philosophia, that Onomacritus 
also wrote the so-called Orphic epic poems. By the time when 
the Orphic writings began to be ae a quoted by Christian and 
Neo-Platonist writers, the theory of the authorship of Onoma- 
critus was accepted by many.>It is believed, however, that the Orphic literature current in 
the time of the Neo-Platonists (third century a.p.), and quoted 
by them as the authority for Orphic doctrines, was a collection 
of writings of different periods and varying outlook, something 
like that of the Bible. The earliest of these were composed in 
the sixth century by Onomacritus from genuine Orphic tradi- 
tion; the latest which have survived, namely the Voyage of the 
Argonauts, and the Hymns to various deities, cannot have been 
put together in their present form until the beginning of the 
Christian era, and are probably to be dated some time between 
the second and fourth centuries a,b.

The Neo-Platonists quote the Orphic poems in their defence 
against Christianity, because Plato used poems which he be- 
lieved to be Orphic. It is believed that in the collection of 
writings which they used there were several versions, each of 
which gave a slightly different account of the origin of the 
universe, of gods and men, and perhaps of the correct way of 
life, with the rewards and punishments attached thereto. Three 
principal versions are recognized by modern scholars; all three 
are mentioned by the Neo-Platonist Damascius (fifth-sixth cen- 
turies A.D.). These are:

1. Rhapsodiae, epic lays, said by Damascius to give the usual 
Orphic theology.c These are mentioned also in Suidas’ list, as 
‘sacred discourses in twenty-four lays’,4 though he attributes 
this work to Theognetus the Thessalian (unknown) or Cercops 
the Pythagorean. This is now referred to as the Rhapsodic 
Theogony. It is the version usually quoted by ancient authori- 
ties, but was not the one used by Plato, and is therefore some-

a Hdt. VII, 6 (O.F. test. 182) 
¢ Diels, ch. 15; Cic. De Nat. Deor. I, 38; 107

6 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

times thought to have been composed after he wrote; this 
question cannot at present be decided.*

2. An Orphic Theogony given by Aristotle’s pupil 
Eudemus.* .6 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

times thought to have been composed after he wrote; this 
question cannot at present be decided.*

2. An Orphic Theogony given by Aristotle’s pupil 
Eudemus.* .

3. An Orphic Theogony ‘according to Hieronymus and 
Hellanicus’.> 
Other versions were: a Theogony put into the mouth of 
Orpheus by Apollonius Rhodius in his Argonautica ;° an Orphic 
Theogony quoted by Alexander of Aphrodisias;¢ and a Theo- 
gony in Clement of Rome,¢ not specified as Orphic, but 
belonging to the same school of thought.

A long list of Orphic works is given in Suidas‘ (tenth cen- 
tury A.D.); but most of these are there attributed to other 
authors. They are:

Triagmoi, attributed to the tragic poet Ion,® in which there 
was said to be a chapter called Sacred Vestments, or Cosmic Invo- 
cations.» The title Triagmoi apparently referred to ‘the Orphic 
tripod of three elements, earth, water, fire’, referred to by 
Ausonius® and Galen;: the latter said that this doctrine was 
given by Onomacritus in his Orphic poems.

The Sacred Discourses, already discussed,* usually identified 
with the Rhapsodiae.

Oracles and Rites, attributed to Onomacritus.

Aids to Salvation, ascribed to Timocles of Syracuse or Per- 
sinus of Miletus; both the work and these writers are otherwise 
unknown.

Mixing-bow/ls, ascribed to Zopyrusi of Heracleia; and The 
Robe* and The Net,' also ascribed to Zopyrus, or to Brontinus 
the Pythagorean. The Net referred to is the net of the body, 
so called in Orphic literature.* To Brontinus was also ascribed 
a Physica, otherwise unknown.

Enthronement of the Mother, and Bacchic Rites, ascribed to 
Nicias of Elea, of whom nothing else is known. ‘Enthrone- 
ment’ was part of the rite of initiation practised by the Cory- 
bantes, the worshippers of Rhea or Cybele; the person to be¢ B16 dO.F. 107, 108, 111 eO.F. 55, 56 fAr 
6 Diels,ch.36 526,74 i H.Ph.18(O.F. test.1g1) 4 Also by Clem. Alex. Arb 
kcp. 7Arr1, B2 (Pherecydes) Ara  ™ Diels, ch. 17,4 2 Broa (Aristot.) 
* Guthrie, p. 78, says that the date of the Theogony is bound to be one of compilation 
rather than composition, so that the importance of the question is considerably reduced.

> The reading is doubtful; some take the latter title as a gloss. 
* Above, p. 5.

BEGINNINGS 7

initiated was seated on a high chair, and the celebrants danced 
round him in aring.* The title therefore apparently means ‘the 
enthronement-ceremonies as practised by the worshippers of 
the Great Mother’. Connected, perhaps identical with, this 
was a treatise on Corybantic Rites, quoted by the late Orphic 
poem Argonautica.

A Descent into Hades, ascribed to Herodicus of Perinthus,® 
or to Cercops the Pythagorean,* or to the unknown Prodicus of 
Samos.4

Other treatises were: an Astronomy or Astrology, otherwise 
unknown; Sacrificial Rites, doubtless giving rules for bloodless 
sacrifices; Divination by means of sand; Divination by means of 
eggs;* on Temple-building (otherwise unknown); On the girding 
on of Sacred Robes; and On Stones, said to contain a chapter on 
the carving of precious stones entitled The Eighty Stones; a 
version of this work, of late date, survives. It treats of the pro- 
perties of stones, precious and ordinary, and their uses in 
divination. The Orphic Hymns are also mentioned in Suidas’ 
list, and a Theogony in 1200 verses, perhaps one of those ver- 
sions which differed from the Rhapsodiae. There was also an 
Orphic Word-book, doubtless a glossary of the special terms 
used in the cult, some of which were strange because of their 
allegorical usage, others because of their antiquity; this also 
was said to have been in verse.Such was the list of works finally classed as Orphic writings, 
though it was known in early times that many of them were the 
works of Pythagoreans and other writers. Herodotus said of 
the so-called “Orphic and Bacchic rites’ that they were actually 
‘Egyptian and Pythagorean’;¢ and Ion of Chios said that Pytha- 
goras himself attributed some of his writings to Orpheus.‘ 
Others, as has been said, regarded the earliest epics as the 
work of Onomacritus.¢ The original Hymns were thought to

a Plato, Euthyd. 277d; Dio Chrys. XII, 33 bAr ¢ Diels, ch. 15 
dArb e As f Aib & Ar; Br 
1 *Auyoxotria MSS, emend. ’Aypooxotria«. This would be divination by observing the 
movements of sand in a vessel, like éAgrtopavteta, divination by observing the move- 
ments of barley-grains (Iambl. Myst. III, 17; Phrynichus the grammarian, Praep. 
Soph. p. 91B; Pollux, VII, 188; Hesychius s.v.). Nothing else is known of divination 
by means of sand. Other suggested emendations are: &yvooxotria, divination by means 
of lambs; dotpocKoTia (stars); évepooxotia (winds). 
2 Nothing is known of this except from Suidas svv. Orpheus, Hermagoras; but 
the importance of the egg in Orphic cosmology indicates interest in hatching; and this 
type of divination was probably concerned with the latter. (cp. Cic. De Diwin.).

8 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

have been composed by Orpheus, and written down, with 
emendations, by Musaeus.* There were also other writers 
named Orpheus: to one, of Croton, said to be a contemporary 
and associate of Peisistratus, were attributed two epic poems: 
an Argonautica,: and The Twelve-year Cycle (probably astro- 
logical);® to another, Orpheus of Camarina, an epic Descent 
into Hades.» These namesakes are probably inventions.Orpheus was the son of a Muse, and the servant of Apollo;° 
he was also a teacher of the religion of Dionysus.‘ In classical 
times he was regarded as the sweet singer, whose voice and 
music could lead all creatures as if by magic,* who could tame 
the savage beasts of this world, and the dread powers of the 
next.£ He was also regarded as the teacher aa prophet, the 
revealer and interpreter of the secret mysteries :® the origin and 
nature of the gods, the right means of approaching them, the 
correct conduct for man in this world and the next, the rules 
by which the soul can attain to, or return to, its blissful home. 
His teaching was a blend of Asiatic and Hellenic: his music 
was magical in its effect, and like other wizards from the East, 
he taught incantations which could be used by his disciples.® 
But in his acceptance of the religion of Dionysus, which had 
come to Thrace from Asia through Phrygia, he transmuted it 
to suit the Hellenic spirit, taming its more savage elements, 
and making of it an instrument for the training and guidance 
of the soul. It is sometimes thought that the legend of his 
death at the hands of the Maenads shows that he himself 
suffered for his attempt to oppose the more frenzied aspects of 
the Bacchic religion. The blend which he achieved was ac- 
cepted by Greece, and Apollo and Dionysus were reconciled, 
as at Delphi. But the whole of his teachings, which were com- 
plicated in theory and demanded considerable effort in prac- 
tice, were adopted by a minority only; these called themselves 
Orphics, small sects whose deity was Dionysus, but who 
worshipped him in a special way. They had ministers 
who performed ceremonies of purification for those who 
required it; these were still active in fourth-century Athens:

a Brisa; Béa bAI ¢ Aro; Brga d A8 
e A3; Agb; A1za; Béa; Plat. Protag. 3154 t A6

® Aro; Arr; Ars; Broa

1 See above, p. 2, note f!.

BEGINNINGS 9a Brisa; Béa bAI ¢ Aro; Brga d A8 
e A3; Agb; A1za; Béa; Plat. Protag. 3154 t A6

® Aro; Arr; Ars; Broa

1 See above, p. 2, note f!.

BEGINNINGS 9

Theophrastus’ ‘Superstitious Man’ goes to them once a month, 
with his wife and children. These ministers had as their 
authority the collection of sacred books comprising the Orphic 
bible.

Orphic Doctrine. Several versions of the Orphic Theogony 
existed; the usual was said to be that given in the Rhapsodiae, 
or epic lays.» This began with Chronos (Time) as the first 
principle. There were differences on this point: the version 
quoted by Eudemus* made Night the first principle; and that 
of Hieronymus and Hellanicus began with water, from which 
was formed slime or mud (later to solidify into Earth) from 
which Chronos was born. Chronos was a monster, a serpent 
with heads of a bull and lion, and the face of a god between. 
He was also called Heracles. With him was Necessity, or 
Adrasteia, the law of destiny, which grasps the whole universe 
and binds it together.4

From Chronos were born Aether, Chaos and Erebus: or as 
the Rhapsodies put it, Aether, and a great yawning gulf, and 
darkness over all. Chronos then shapes an Egg in the Aether; 
this Egg splits, and Phanés emerges.e Another version sug- 
gested that the two halves of the Egg went to form Heaven 
and Earth; others likened the shell to the outer sphere of the 
heavens, with the aether taking the place of the skin.e The 
fertile Egg was sometimes called the Bright Robe, or the 
Cloud.Phanes, the Bright One, or Light, is the first-born (Prévo- 
gonos) of the gods, in the usual Theogony. He is the creator of 
our universe and all that it contains. He has golden wings on 
his shoulders, and is a composite being having both sexes and 
a two-fold body. The version of Hieronymus and Hellanicus 
gives him bulls’ heads attached to his sides, and on his head 
a serpent changing into the shapes of all kinds of animals: 
that is, he has within himself the power to create all manner of 
animals, male and female. His other names or epithets are: 
Zeus, Dionysus, Eros, Pan, Métis (Intellect), Erikepaios.¢ Of 
these, the first five can be given to him only in virtue of his 
being the creator of these and all gods; for in all theogonies, 
they are descended from him. The last epithet, Erikepaios, 
is a non-Greek, probably Oriental name, the meaning of 
which is uncertain; the usual interpretation was ‘power’,

a Ar6 b Br2 ¢ B12; Bg d Br3 e Br2 f Bi2

IO THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

though ‘giver of life’ is suggested by the Byzantine John 
Malalas.*: *2a Ar6 b Br2 ¢ B12; Bg d Br3 e Br2 f Bi2

IO THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

though ‘giver of life’ is suggested by the Byzantine John 
Malalas.*: *2

Phanes bore a daughter, Night, his opposite and partner. 
These two again united, to produce Gaia and Ouranos (Earth 
and Heaven), who united to produce three daughters, the 
Fates, Clotho, Lachesis and Atropos, and six sons, the hun- 
dred-armed giants, Cottos, Gyges and Briareds, and the 
Cyclopes Brontés (Thunder), Steropés (Lightning) and Argés. 
Ouranos, learning that he was destined to be overthrown by 
his sons, cast them into Tartarus; whereat Gaia, angered, pro- 
duced the Titans,» Cronos, Rhea, Oceanos, Téthys and the 
rest. Cronos obtained the supremacy, mutilated his father 
Ouranos, married his sister Rhea, and, when children were 
born to them, swallowed them to prevent their succeeding him 
in power. Zeus was saved from this fate by Rhea, who sent 
him to Crete, and gave Ouranos a stone to swallow instead of 
the new-born baby. Zeus was looked after by the Kourétes, 
and on coming to manhood he swallowed Phanes, thus assimi- 
= his power, and becoming ‘beginning, middle and end 
of all’.cZeus then arranges the rest of the universe, but not without 
opposition. He first marries Rhea, who has now become 
Demeter; a daughter, Koré-Persephoné,4 is born to them. 
This daughter was violated by her father Zeus, and bore 
Dionysus; the baby was enticed away from his guardians the 
Kourétes by the Titans, who lured him with toys and then tore 
him to pieces and ate his flesh.c For this crime Zeus destroyed 
the Titans, hurling at them the thunderbolt and lightning, 
which had been given to him by the Cyclopesf whom he had 
released from Tartarus. He restored the child Dionysus to 
life, and this new Dionysus became the Orphic god. He is 
thrice-born, having existed already in the person of Phanes, 
as the child of Koré (sometimes called Dionysus Zagreus), and 
as the god restored to life. From the ashes of the Titans Zeus 
made Man, who has thus a two-fold nature: the sinful, in-

a Joann. Mal. Chronogr. IV, 89, p. 74 Dind. (O.F. 65) b B13 
ao Terpander, frg. 1. cp. A12a (O.F. 21, 21a, 168) d Brsa e O.F. 34 
16 
a! Guthrie, pp. 97-100. The epithet Erikepaios is not mentioned in older literature; 
the only evidence for its existence before the Christian era was discovered recently in 
a papyrus, where it is given as Irekepaigos (B23). An altar inscribed ‘to Dionysus 
Erikepaios’ was discovered in Lydia in 1909.

BEGINNINGS II

herited from the Titans, and the divine, derived from Dionysus 
whose flesh they had eaten.

Thus the six generations® of gods are complete: Chronos, 
with Aether and its counterpart Chaos; Phanes (Light) with 
his counterpart Night; Ouranos and his wife Gaia; Cronos and 
Rhea; Zeus and Persephone; Dionysus.A comparison of the Orphic story with other versions of 
Greek mythology — for instance, with the other story of the 
birth of Dionysus from Semele, shows that Orphism adapted 
or emended existing legends, or selected the version which 
best suited its ideas; this can be seen by comparing the Orphic 
theogony with that of Hesiod. Characteristic features of the 
Orphic story, such as Chronos, the fertile Egg, Phanes, 
Dionysus and the Titans, which are absent from Hesiod’s 
version, are essential to the point of view about the origin of 
things, the nature of god and man, and the necessity of living 
the Orphic life.*

The Orphics also used the story of the abduction of Perse- 
phone by Hades, and the subsequent search for her by 
Demeter; of this too they had their own version, which differed 
in some particulars from that given by Homer in the Hymn 
to Demeter, and from that current at Eleusis.* A papyrus of 
the second century B.c. has been found which gives a para- 
phrase of a version attributed to Orpheus;° it corresponds with 
the Orphic version given by Clement of Alexandria,# and with 
the version used by Euripides in the Chorus of the Helena. 
In the Homeric version, Persephone was in Sicily when she was 
abducted ; the Orphicversion placesherin Eleusis. Intheformer, 
it was the sun-god who told Demeter what had happened to her 
daughter; she set off in search of Koré, and reached Eleusis, 
where she was entertained by the king and queen, Celeus and 
Metaneira. In the latter, she was already at Eleusis, staying in 
the house of a poor man Dysaules and his wife Baubo; their sons 
Triptolemus and Euboules brought her the news. The story

a O.F. 220-221 b Br 
¢ Brsa; O.F. 49 d Protrept. I. 17, 13 20, 1 59g. (O.F. 50, 52) © 1301 599.

1 Different authorities give these differently: Diels gives Chronos, the Egg, Phanes, 
Ouranos and Gaia, Zeus and Persephone, Dionysus. Guthrie omits Chronos, and gives 
Phanes, Night, Ouranos, Cronos, Zeus, Dionysus.2 For a comparison between the Orphic Theogony and that of Hesiod, see Guthrie, 
pp. 83, 84. He thinks that ‘Orphism was an artificial product of sixth century Athens,

using primitive myths to express a religious idea’ (p. 129). 
> Guthrie, p. 133 599.

12 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

of Demeter’s attempt to make the infant son of her hosts 
immortal by anointing him with ambrosia and laying him in 
the fire, and of the frustration of this attempt by the mother, 
whose terror made the goddess reveal herself, was common to 
both versions. In the Homeric poem, the princess Iambé 
persuaded the goddess to cheer herself by drinking the cheese- 
drink (kykeé”); in the Orphic version, it was Baubo who by an 
indecent exhibition of her body made Demeter laugh and drink 
kykeén. The title of the poem dealing with the Demeter-Koré 
story was The Descent® (into Hades).

The reasons for the Orphic variations of this story can onl 
be surmised; but its meaning for Orphics was bound up with 
their beliefs about the meaning of life and death, and the 
underworld. Demeter was not only an ancient chthonian god- 
dess, but also the giver of corn, as Dionysus was the giver of 
wine, and able to create new life in the spring, after the 
apparent death of things in winter. The gift of corn meant 
also an advance in human civilization, and Demeter was a 
giver of law; in this aspect too she may have appealed to the 
Orphics,* who believed that Justice was enthroned beside 
Zeus.4The Orphic theogony 1s parodied by Aristophanes in the 
Birds:* in the beginning were Chaos and Night, black Erebus 
and broad Tartarus; there was no earth, air or heavens. In the 
infinite hollows of Erebus, the dark-winged Night bore a 
wind-egg, from which Eros sprang, with golden wings on his 
shoulders, like the whirlwind. He, uniting with dark, misty 
Chaos in broad Tartarus, hatched the birds... Before, there 
was no race of immortals, until Love mingled all things to- 
gether; by this intermingling, Heaven and Ocean, Earth and 
gods were created. The parody cannot of course be used as 
evidence for Orphic beliefs, for Aristophanes chooses what is 
apt to his theme, and he is satirizing philosophy as well as the 
Theogony; but the allusions to Chaos, Night, Erebus, Tar- 
tarus, the Egg, and golden-winged Eros (Phanes) would be 
familiar to his audience from the Orphic poems. He does not 
mention Chronos, but begins with Chaos, Night, Erebus and 
Tartarus; and it is Night, not Chronos, who produces the Egg 
from which Eros (Phanes) springs; his version is therefore

a Bisa b Broa; Ar ¢ Brs dBr4 
© 693 599. (Ar2)

BEGINNINGS 13

halfway between that of the Rhapsodies and of Eudemus. It 
may be purely his own, designed to suit his theme.a Bisa b Broa; Ar ¢ Brs dBr4 
© 693 599. (Ar2)

BEGINNINGS 13

halfway between that of the Rhapsodies and of Eudemus. It 
may be purely his own, designed to suit his theme.

The version given by Apollonius Rhodius in his Argonautica® 
has distinctive features. Orpheus, says the poet, sang that in 
the past earth, heaven and sea were fitted together in one 
form, and were then separated by destructive Hate; the stars, 
moon and paths of the sun have their places fixed for ever in 
the aether, asa sign. The mountains rose up, the singing rivers 
with their nymphs, and all the animals came into being. 
Ophion and Eurynomé, daughter of Ocean, first occupied the 
seat of power on snowy Olympus; he was compelled by force 
to yield up his office to Cronos, she to Rhea, and they fell into 
the waves of Ocean. Cronos and Rhea ruled for a while over 
the Titans, while Zeus was yet a child living in the Dictaean 
cave, and before the earth-born Cyclopes had forged for him 
the thunderbolt and lightning which are the weapons of his 
power. In this version, the names Ophion and Eurynome as 
the earliest rulers of Olympus are unusual. Ophion is a 
serpent-god like Chronos and in part Phanes; he appears to 
come from Phoenicia.» Eurynome, his wife, was known to 
Homer and Hesiod as a daughter of Oceanus and Tethys.: 
Ophion was one of the Titans; Eurynome also was sometimes 
so described.4 Apollonius therefore takes up the story of the 
theogony at the point where the younger Titans have tempor- 
arily seized the power from their parents Cronos and Rhea, 
and are about to be overthrown by Zeus.Different versions of the story laid emphasis on different 
stages of the theogony. Chronos is sometimes described as a 
winged monster,* sometimes treated as an abstraction (‘age- 
less’, ‘great’, ‘of deathless counsels’),f or omitted altogether, 
according to whether oriental or Hellenic ideas prevail. Some- 
times Night was regarded as the real generator of all things, 
and a deity so powerful that even Zeus feared to offend her.¢ 
Others, including the Peripatetics, thought that the real work 
of creation in the Orphic scheme began with Ocean and 
Tethys, who were the originators of marriage, and produced 
the other gods; this suited those who derived everything from

a B16 b Pherecydes in Euseb. Praep. Ev. 1. ro. 
¢ Il, XVIII. 398; Hes. Theog. 358 d Callim. frg. 66 ¢ B13 
£ B13; Procl. in Rempubl. Il. 138. 8. (O.F. 66) & Bg; Biz h Bz

' Guthrie, p. 85.

14 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

water.» The usual Orphic scheme, however, seems to have 
given the title of First Creator to Phanes, the bi-sexual product 
of the Egg, the partner and counterpart of Night, the original. 
Eros, the first Light in the original Darkness. All theogonies 
agreed that in the end Zeus overcame all opposition, and ruled 
with the strength of the thunder and lightning, attended by 
Justice.From this theogony and cosmogony followed a theory re- 
garding the nature of man, and his destiny. In the Orphic 
system, the soul was sharply distinguished from the body; the 
body, the Titanic element,> was at best a prison, at worst a 
tomb,° ¢? for the soul; other metaphors for it were a garment, 4 
a net, a fortress.£. The soul, the divine or Dionysiac element, 
enters the body by inhalation from the Whole, being borne 
along by the winds. The object of life for the Orphic 1s to 
tend the divine element, and keep the body as pure as possible 
until the time comes when the soul is finally set free. The 
Orphic religion offered to its adherents first a revelation of the 
true nature of things, including the destiny of the soul, and 
second, rules for the attainment of its goal.

The attachment of the soul to a body was believed to be 
a punishment for past sin, in another life, or perhaps for the 
‘original sin’ of the human race: the tasting of the flesh of 
Dionysus by the Titans, from whom men sprung. As the body 
with its appetites is the source of evil, the Orphic must be an 
ascetic; he must not eat animal flesh,» or partake in any form 
of bloodshed, including animal sacrifice.! Other taboos existed, 
the reason for which 1s not known: for instance, the Orphic, 
like the Egyptian, was forbidden to take wool into temples or 
to be buried in woollen garments.) Though the body was an 
evil, the Orphic was not allowed to commit suicide; to do this 
was to desert one’s post.

The soul must stay with a body until it has paid the penalty 
imposed for the original offence. It is probable that in the 
Orphic system, as in the Pythagorean, the doctrine of rein-

® Bro b Plato, Leg. 7o1c c B3 d Ar e Broa 
f B3 & Brr h A8; Eur. frg. 472 (Nauck); Plato, Leg. 782c 1Arr 
JAs k 44Br5® Bro b Plato, Leg. 7o1c c B3 d Ar e Broa 
f B3 & Brr h A8; Eur. frg. 472 (Nauck); Plato, Leg. 782c 1Arr 
JAs k 44Br5

¢! Plato implies that the idea odpa ofa was not Orphic: Cratylus 400b, c. Prob- 
ably this idea was found in some version with which he was not acquainted. See 
Philolaus, Diels, 44B14; and cp. below, p. 231, note ’.

BEGINNINGS 1§

carnation was taught: a cycle of lives was required for purifica- 
tion. This doctrine is nowhere attributed to Orpheus, but the 
language in which it is described by Plato (in the Phaedrus,* 
Phaedo,® Gorgias,e Meno* and Republic*), by Pindar in the 
Second Olympian Ode, by Empedocles in the Katharmot, and 
by Herodotus, ft often suggests the Orphic terminology. 
During its life on earth, the soul, if in a human body, must 
observe the rules of diet and the rest, and submit to initiation, 
which included regular purificatory ceremonies under the 
supervision of a priest.¢ What these were is not known; it was 
sometimes complained that they were merely formal, and that

rescriptions for salvation could even be bought:* these would 
2 derived from the Orphic books on ceremonial, such as 
the Sacrificial Rites. Probably, like the mystery religions, 
the Orphics offered some kind of communal worship, which 
included prayers, hymns,! sacrifice (non-animal) and a repre- 
sentation of the outstanding events in the Orphic myth- 
ology, such as the death of Dionysus, and the abduction of 
Persephone. !If this way of life was faithfully observed, the initiate could 
hope for everlasting happiness in the next world, when he 
would be released from the body, and would join the company 
of the blessed. Those who lived a life of impurity and crime 
would be everlastingly punished, being plunged into mud, or 
given some endless task such as the filling of sieves.i The con- 
ception of the happy state seems sometimes to have been 
materialistic, a contrast to the ascetic life demanded here 
below: Adeimantus in the Republic accused ‘Musaeus and his 
son’* of making out the good life to be nothing but feasting 
and everlasting drunkenness.« The soul’s final abode seems 
to have been described as a kind of Isles of the Blest! where 
the saints lived together in a blissful, carefree state, like gods™

@243e sq. b rrob sqq. © §23a sgq. d 81a sqq. e 614b sqq.

f II. 123 &Ax16 h Plat. Rep. 364b i Brsa

JB4; cp. Plat. Gorg. 493a; Phaed. 69c, and Olympiod. ad Joc. (O.F. 235); Paus. X, 
31. 9 59g.

k 363c (B4) 1 Arga; Pind. Ol. II, 62 s9q. m Emped. 31B146, 147

f! Hdt. wrongly attributes the origin of the theory to Egypt, and says that there are 
some Greeks, whom he will not name, who have borrowed it.

1 Guthrie, p. 202 sg. The Bacchic ceremonial of initiation observed at Athens in the 
fourth century B.C. is described inimically by Demosthenes De Cor. 1293 259-260.

2 See below, p. 20. The reference is to the Orphic sect, as Plutarch observed (Comp. 
Cim. Luc. 2).

16 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

—a description open to materialistic as well as allegorical 
interpretation. *16 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

—a description open to materialistic as well as allegorical 
interpretation. *

The soul, on leaving the body for the last time, did not at 
once arrive at its destination. There was a journey to be made 
in the underworld also, and for this too the Orphic religion 
offered exact rules to its initiates. Information regarding these 
rules is principally derived from a number of gold plates: #1 
discovered in tombs in Italy and Crete; the oldest, those from 
South Italy, belong to the fourth century B.c., while the latest, 
from Crete, may be anything from the second century B.c. to 
the second century a.p. in date. They were designed to be 
worn or carried by the dead person, and are inscribed with 
hexameter verses (interspersed with a few short formulae in 
prose) giving exact directions regarding the route to be taken 
and the replies to be made to those who guard the way.

The soul is told that it will come to two springs beside the 
halls of Zeus, one on the left, which it must avoid (this is Lethe, 
the water of forgetfulness, to be drunk only by souls that have 
to return to the other world again), one on the right, which it 
must drink: this is Memory. Beside it are guards, to whom 
the soul must proclaim its divine lineage, saying “I am the 
child of Earth and starry Heaven (Ouranos), and my race is 
heavenly. [ am parched with thirst. Give me cold water from 
the pool of Memory’. The guards will give the soul water 
from the divine spring, and henceforth he will reign with the 
other heroes.°Before its final apotheosis, the soul, going to the right 
through the holy groves and meadows, at last stands before 
Persephone, Queen of the Underworld, and other gods, in- 
cluding Hades (euphemistically called Euklés, the far-famed) 
and a deity called Euboulos, perhaps Zeus or Dionysus. He 
(or she) voices a claim to return to their blessed race, to which 
he originally belonged, but from which he was banished ‘by 
Fate’, when he and the other immortals were overcome by the 
thunderbolt and lightning-flash (that is, when the crime of the 
Titans was punished by Zeus). He claims now to come before

a Br7-19a b Plat. Rep. 620a ¢ B17; Brya

a! For a reproduction and critical examination, see Harrison, Prolegomena, Appendix 
by Gilbert Murray; for a translation, Guthrie, pp. 172-173.

' It is probable that the residence in Elysium was not equivalent to Heaven, but was

the final resting-place in the last stage of the journey, before the Apotheosis. Guthrie, 
pp. 184-185.

BEGINNINGS 17the final resting-place in the last stage of the journey, before the Apotheosis. Guthrie, 
pp. 184-185.

BEGINNINGS 17

them ‘pure, from the pure’, and supplicates Persephone that 
she may be kind and send him to the abod&s ofthe pure: he 
has ‘flown out from the circle’ (that is, escaped from the cycle 
of reincarnation), ‘stepped on to the crown with swift feet’ 
(that is, probably, won the prize of victory), and ‘slipped into 
the bosom of the Mistress, Queen of the Underworld’ (that is, 
come down below Earth to Hades). The answer, if all is well, 
is an invitation to the soul to approach and be made a god 
instead of a mortal.* One of the plates bids him rejoice at this 
experience which he has never before undergone.» The re- 
curring formula, ‘I have fallen as a kid-into milk’, is inter- 
preted to mean that the soul has reached an abundance of 
what it desires; but it seems rather to refer to some magic 
Reeder of rejuvenation or restoration, such as that practised 
upon Pelias by his daughters on Medea’s advice; this may have 
been dramatically represented in the Orphic ceremony of 
Initiation, and may have formed part of the story of the 
resurrection of Dionysus. The Orphic initiate, like Dionysus, 
has been restored after the severance of body and soul.

One of the tabletss found in South Italy, though largely 
unintelligible, contains a list of names of deities, and a refer- 
ence to a seven-day fast; it appears to be a charm concerned 
with healing.?The inner rites of the Orphic religion were secret except to 
initiates, like those of the other mystery-religions, though some 
of the literature was open to all. The Orphics assisted the 
preservation of their secrets by the use of a highly allegorical 
vocabulary, which would be plain to initiates, but for others 
would need an interpreter.4 Later, glossaries appeared: 
Clement of Alexandria gives a selection of strange terms from 
a poem on Orpheus by the Alexandrian scholar Epigenes;° 
these are concerned with ploughing, sowing, and the seasons.

A papyrus of the third century B.c.,f though much muti- 
lated, appears to contain directions for some kind of mystery- 
rites, possibly Orphic. There are references to ‘paying for the 
sins of the fathers’ (that is, the Titans), to Demeter, Rhea, and 
the armed Kourétes, and to the sacrifice and eating of a goat

® Br8-r19a bB2o c Bar d Pind. Ol. II, 93-94 © Baz

1 Gilbert Murray in Harrison, Prolegomena, pp. 664-666. Diels attempted a recon- 
struction in hexameter verse, and called it (without justification) a Hymn to Demeter. 
Cc

f

18 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

and a bull (which is Bacchic, but not Orphic). No uninitiated 
is to look on. Gods, including Euboulos and Phanes Ireke-

aigos, are called upon, the last as saviour. The toys by which 
Seen was beguiled to his doom are mentioned: top, rattle, 
dice-bones, mirror.aigos, are called upon, the last as saviour. The toys by which 
Seen was beguiled to his doom are mentioned: top, rattle, 
dice-bones, mirror.

The debt of Greek philosophy to Orphism cannot be 
measured because of the uncertainty regarding the date of 
composition of the Orphic writings. It can, however, be said 
that there was considerable interaction. Thales derived all 
from water, as the early myths derived them from Ocean; 
Anaximander derived life from the original mud, Anaximenes 
thought of the soul as breath and air. Pythagoras and Empe- 
docles taught metempsychosis, and the latter preached a life 
of abstinence from animal flesh and bloodshed. All envisaged 
the beginning of our universe as a Chaos in which all things 
were mixed together; Empedocles made Love and Hate the 
creative forces in his cosmogony. Xenophanes and Heracleitus 
attacked all religions, including Orphism: Xenophanes’ criti- 
cism was directed primarily against their doctrines regarding 
the gods, Heracleitus’ against their teaching on the next 
world. Others, like the Sophists, used the Orphic writings in 
their eclectic schemes:.

Plato and Aristotle also were familiar with these writings: 
Plato was temperamentally more in sympathy with their out- 
look’ than Aristotle, and frequently quotes lines from the 
Orphic poems, though he tends to speak rather of ‘the ancient 
theologians’ than of Orpheus or the Orphics. The doctrine of 
metempsychosis suited his theory of azamnésis, and it has been 
suggested that his contempt for the body and for the world of 
sense-perception was not uninfluenced by the Orphic view of 
life as an exile from bliss and a penance, and the body as the 
source of impurity.’ Aristotle regarded the Orphic poems as 
much later than they purported to be; but he was interested 
in them, and sometimes compared their views on the origin of 
things with those of the scientific philosophers.

aAr3;86B6 »bB8 
1 Guthrie, p. 157.

BEGINNINGS 19

2. MUSAEUSaAr3;86B6 »bB8 
1 Guthrie, p. 157.

BEGINNINGS 19

2. MUSAEUS

Musagvs,? said to be of ATHENS, was thought to have lived in 
pre-Homeric times.

Musaeus is a more shadowy figure than Orpheus. The 
Athenians of the fifth century B.c. claimed him as a fellow- 
citizen,* and his Athenian origin was generally accepted in 
later times,” when he was regarded as a member of the family 
of the Eumolpidae,* and resident at Eleusis.4 Occasionally, 
however, he was said to have come to Athens from Thrace;*:¢! 
this was merely a concrete way of expressing his close connec- 
tion with Orpheus.

His mother was always said to be the Moon (Seléné, Méné), § 
she being the patron of all magic. His father’s name was 
usually given as Antiphémus® (Antiophemus in epic verse)* or 
Eumolpus,' both of which express prowess in song. Some 
authorities gave a genealogical table going back for several 
generations. The Scholiast on Sophocles’ Oedipus Coloneus 
gave Musaeus’ ancestors as Eumolpus I, Keryx (‘Herald’), 
Eumolpus II, Antiphemus; the list in Suidas was: Kerkyon, 
Ecphantus (‘Revealer’), Euphemus, Antiphemus. The names 
have a fictitious sound, and all that can be said of them is that 
the authority who gave the former list was chiefly concerned 
to include Musaeus in the priestly Athenian clans of the 
Eumolpidae and the Kérykes; whereas the second derived 
him from a more mythical and chthonian ancestor, the cruel 
monster Kerkyon,* who was tyrant at Eleusis, and who put to 
death his daughter Alopé and all strangers whom he overthrew 
in wrestling, until he himself was slain by Theseus. Another

2. Pe? - e Ara; Strab. 471.17 
1; A2, A6;A7; 1Bs & Ar; Aja bh Bir; Orph. Avy. 308 (O.F. 168)

i Aq; Anth. Pal. VII, 615 j At

e! Paus. I, 38, 2. makes his ancestor Eumolpus come from Thrace.

1 Kern, O.F. test?. 166-172.i Aq; Anth. Pal. VII, 615 j At

e! Paus. I, 38, 2. makes his ancestor Eumolpus come from Thrace.

1 Kern, O.F. test?. 166-172.

2 There is no need to alter the name to Kpéxov or Kpdxwv, as some German com- 
mentators have done, on the ground of its unsuitability (Pauly-Wissowa s.v. Musaeus, 
Vol. XVI, 1, p. 759). It is more likely that the name Kepxvwv, which symbolizes the 
resistance of Eleusis to the synoecism of Theseus, was later smoothed away into Kfipu§. 
Kepxwcov (xépxos) is the ‘tailed monster’, the original serpent-deity of Eleusis, and the 
story embodies a wish to make Musaeus descend (through several oracular priests) from 
the autochthonous owner.

20 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

tradition connected Musaeus with the royal house of Athens, 
through Métion (‘prudent in counsel’), a son or grandson of 
Erechtheus, and Steropé (‘Lightning-flash’).*

The name of Musazeus’ wife is only once even suggested: 
some surmised that the inscription on a grave-pillar found at 
Eleusis, ‘This is the tomb of Déiopé’, referred to Musaeus’ 
wife; but others said that she was the mother of Triptolemus.> 
Hermesianax, the elegiac poet of Colophon, who lived in the 
time of Alexander, mentions a certain Antiopé, priestess of 
Demeter, whom Musaeus had celebrated in his poems;° he 
does not say that she was the wife of Musaeus, however. 
The names, in any case, are merely suitable inventions.

The son of Musaeus was usually said to be Eumolpus.¢ 
He was thought to have taken over the work of his father 
at Eleusis: to have published his father’s poems,*® to have 
revealed to the worshippers the rites taught by his father, and 
to have become the first priest of the Mysteries. §The period at which Musaeus lived was generally supposed 
to be that of Orpheus; he was usually described as the pupil,¢ 
sometimes even as the son,+ of Orpheus, though another 
tradition made him the elder.) The Marmor Parium placed 
his son Eumolpus in the reign of Erechtheus,i thereby 
equating him with the Eumolpus, son of Poseidon and Gé, 
who came to Eleusis from Thrace, and was slain in battle by 
Erechtheus;* but other authorities preferred to regard the 
Thracian Eumolpus as an ancestor of Musaeus, and to make 
Musaeus live at a time when Eleusis and Athens had com- 
posed their strife. Some placed Musaeus in the reign of 
Cecrops II,! the son of Erechtheus, the fifth king before 
Menestheus who was in command of the Athenian contingent 
at Troy. Another contemporary of Musaeus was Heracles, 
who visited Eleusis and took part in the Mysteries when 
Musaeus was in charge.™ All these attempts at dating are as 
confused and vague as the Attic legendary monarchy to which 
they attach themselves; if Musaeus existed, he introduced to 
Athens and Eleusis the mystery-religion called Orphic, and 
this took place in prehistoric times, during the period when 
Eleusis, though attached to Athens, had not yet relinquished 
all attempts at independence; he played his part in defining

aAro bA3 ec A2 4Ar;A3a  ¢A8;cp.: 
ee % i Ax i A8 k Strab. VIII. 383

BEGINNINGS 21

the functions of that religious community, and so helped to 
clarify its relations with the governing state. No more than 
this can be said, and even this is highly conjectural.BEGINNINGS 21

the functions of that religious community, and so helped to 
clarify its relations with the governing state. No more than 
this can be said, and even this is highly conjectural.

The Athenians cherished the memory of Musaeus. His 
portrait was to be seen in Pausanias’ day in the Art Gallery 
of the Propylaeum on the Acropolis;* and his grave was 
pointed out on the Hill of the Muses near by,> though some 
said he was buried nearer the sea, at Phaleron.* The earliest 
extant reference to him as an Athenian is that of Euripides in 
the Rhesus;4 Sophocles in a play now lost spoke of him as an 
interpreter of oracles.e Later, books were written about him 
and about the poems which went under his name, in the fourth 
century B.c., by Herodorus of Heracleiaf (who wrote a mono- 
graph on Orpheus and Musaeus) by Glaucus of Rhegium,® by 
Aristoxenus (the musician and pupil of Aristotle, writer of 
Memoirs of Praxidamas, an earlier writer on music),* by Andron 
(probably of Teos, who wrote on Family Relationships): and by 
Philochorus.i His oracles were mentioned by Herodotus, « 
and the poems attributed to him are referred to by Plato and 
Aristotle;! but quotations are few, and references are mostly 
by late grammarians.Writings. The list of writings attributed to Musaeus is much 
shorter than that of Orpheus. He is sometimes credited, like 
Orpheus, with the discovery of letters; and also (by Demo- 
critus)* with the invention of the hexameter, whereas Critias 
attributed this to Orpheus himself.° Tradition liked to place 
his poems, with those of Orpheus, long before Homer and 
Hesiod;? but as with Orpheus, it was later suspected that 
most of the poems were written by Onomacritus in the time 
of the Peisistratidae.1 This view perhaps originated with the 
story told by Herodotus, that Onomacritus was caught by the 
dithyrambic poet Lasus of Hermione inserting an oracle into 
the poems of Musaeus, which he had been employed by the 
Peisistratidae to edit. Aristotle speaks of ‘the poems said to 
be by Musaeus’* when quoting a line; and later it became 
Customary to refer to them in this way.t Pausanias states

aAs b Paus. I, 25, 7 ec Anth. Pal. VII, 615 = 4945 (1A10) 
¢ A6 (frg. 1012) frAr3a 8 Ara h Ara i Aja j A6 
k Bzoa; Bar 1rBs; 1B4; 2B3 m Aro; cp. O.F. test. 123 _ 2 68B16

° 88B3 PA8 QAs r Bzoa s B3

22 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

categorically (doubtless quoting an earlier authority) that none 
of the poems is certainly by Musaeus except the Hymn to 
Demeter written for the Lycomidae.* Others, however, be- 
lieved so strongly in the authenticity of the poems that they 
traced lines in Homer and Hesiod to the poems of Musaeus, 
on the assumption that likenesses meant borrowing by the 
former from the latter;> in particular, this view was held by 
Gorgias. Another view was that Orpheus inspired and 
composed the poems, Musaeus wrote them down with a few 
emendations,? and Eumolpus his son published them.e Some 
of the poems were attributed to Eumolpus himself. ‘The titles of works attributed to Musaeus were: a Theogony 
and a Sphere (the authority says he composed these first,® 
poems of these names being also attributed to Orpheus); a 
Titanomachia (the Scholiast’s Titanographia is probably an 
error)" perhaps in several lays (this was however sometimes 
excluded from the poems attributed to Musaeus);i Eumolpia, 
an epic poem of which nothing 1s known;/ a Hymn to Demeter 
written for the Lycomidae (the only genuine work, according 
to Pausanias);* a Hymn to Dionysus;! a number of oracles; 
a book of magic cures for diseases;" and Admonitions, an epic 
poem written for his son.°_ Eugamon of Cyrene, an epic poet 
of the sixth century B.c., incorporated into his poem Te/egonia 
a book on the Thesprotians (in whose territory the oracle of 
Dodona was situated) which was said to have been borrowed 
entire from Musaeus.?

Doctrines. Musaeus was considered to be, as his name 
implies, a servant of the Muses, or as the poet Hermesianax 
calls him, “Steward of the Graces’.1 He was the ‘pupil’ of 
Orpheus, that is, he represented the coming of Orphism to 
Athens, and its settlement at Eleusis beside the great mystery- 
cult of Demeter and Koré. Orpheus was said to have addressed 
his first poem, called Crater, to Musaeus,t and Musaeus is 
often addressed directly in the Orphic poems.* He revealed 
the rites — absolutions, initiations, purifications — taught by 
Orpheus; but he did not himself originate any of these doc-

b Ba; By C 82B25 4d Broa e Ag {Br2; 1B4 
hBr iBr4 i) Art; Brr k As; B2o 1 Broa

; Bar; B22; rArr NrArr ° Ar; cp. Isocr. Necocl. 3 P B6 
rAZ 8 O.F. 245; cp. test. 168

BEGINNINGS 23

trines: his teaching was ‘in all things an imitation of Orpheus’.® 
He was, like Orpheus, a sweet singer, and believed that ‘the 
greatest joy for mortals was to sing’;> hence he was credited 
with having composed special hymns. He was a giver of 
oracles,° a healer, endowed with magic powers.¢The poems belonging to the Orphic corpus which were 
attributed specially to Musaeus were for the most part a re- 
telling of ancient legends in accordance with Orphic beliefs. 
An attempt to relate him to philosophy was made by saying 
that he taught that all things are derived from a One, and are 
disintegrated back into it;f but this meant no more than that 
the Orphics envisaged the state preceding creation as a void in 
which darkness and confusion prevailed. One authority 
(Philodemus) says that the poems attributed to Musaeus gave 
a pair, Tartarus and Night, as the source of all things; ‘the 
author of the Titanomachia’, whom he envisages as someone 
other than Musaeus, said that all things came from Aether.® 
Little else is known about his supposed cosmological views; 
there are one or two references to the constellations and other 
meteorological phenomena, but they appear to belong rather 
to mythology." The remark that shooting stars are borne up 
from Ocean, quenched in Aether, seems to be a counterblast 
to the usual view; the idea is that they are quenched in a 
brighter light, as the light of the other stars fades before the sun.

Aristotle quotes a line from the Musaean poems which 
seems to embody a variant theory on the World-Egg: the 
eagle lays three eggs, of which it hatches two.': it If this is in- 
tended as an analogy, it differs from the usual Orphic theory 
of a single World-Egg from which the double-natured Phanes 
is hatched; but as the context of the line is lost, it is difficult 
to conjecture what its exact significance may have been.

a Paus. X, 7, 2 b Aristot. Pol. 1339b21 c¢ A6 dyArr eAsa Paus. X, 7, 2 b Aristot. Pol. 1339b21 c¢ A6 dyArr eAs

i} 85 tpla pév thkter, SUo 5° exAdrres, tv & GAeyizer. The line as it stands means: ‘[the 
eagle] who (masc.!) lays three eggs, hatches two, and cares for one’. From the context 
in which Aristotle quotes it, the required meaning seems to be: ‘who hatches two, and 
gets rid of (or neglects) one.’ The line is quoted also by Plutarch, Martius XXXVI, 
with dAuPéger instead of &Acyizer. The word seems therefore to be corrupt. D’Arcy 
Thompson (The Works of Aristotle Translated, Vol. IV, Historia Animalium 563a, 
Note 4) aptly draws attention to a passage in the Egyptian writer Horapollon, ui, 99, 
where it is said that the hawk (lépa€) lays three eggs, but hatches out only one, and 
breaks the others. Perhaps this is the myth that lies behind the Musaean line, which 
may have been misquoted or misunderstood by Aristotle.

24 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

The Musaean poems retold a number of myths dealing with 
the births of gods and the founding of states. Zeus when 
born was handed by Rhea to Themis, who gave him to 
Amalthea, who possessed a goat, the daughter of Helios; the 
goat reared Zeus in the caves of Crete, where she had been 
hidden because of her fearsome appearance, which offended 
the gods of Cronos’ day. When Zeus grew up and wished to 
make war on the Titans, he had no weapons; obeying an oracle, 
he took the goat’s skin, because it was invulnerable and of 
terrifying appearance, having the face of a Gorgon upon it. 
He made another skin for the goat, whom he dowered with 
immortality and set in the heavens as a constellation. He 
himself thus won the epithet “Aegis-bearing’.®Of the birth of Athene, Musaeus said that Palaemon, not 
Hephaestus, split open the head of Zeus.* Triptolemus, the 
Eleusinian hero, was of divine origin, the son of Ocean and 
Earth.c Hecate, goddess of the underworld, was the daughter 
of Asteria and Perses, to whom Zeus gave Asteria after he had 
discarded her.4 Argos, the four-eyed giant, begat four Aethio- 
pian kings by Kelain6é, daughter of Atlas. Méelité, from 
whom the Attic deme derived its name, was a daughter of 
Apollo.! There were two generations of Muses, the elder in 
the time of Cronos, the younger sprung from Zeus and 
Mnemosyne. The Hyades, nurses of Dionysus, were so- 
called after their brother Hyas, whom they lamented when he 
was killed in hunting; they were five in number, and the seven 
Pleiades were their sisters, daughters of Ocean and Aethra.*

The Musaean poems discussed the founding of Thebes, to 
the site of which Cadmus was guided by a heifer. In the Hymn 
to Demeter for the Lycomidae, it was told how Kaukon son of 
Kelainos son of Phlyos took the rites of the Great Goddesses 
from Eleusis to Andania in Messenia during the reign of 
Polykaon and his wife Messene.! Phlyos son of Gé was pro- 
bably the eponymous hero of Phlya,: the Attic deme where 
the Benet family had a sanctuary or place of initiation, and 
‘eer ps over rites at which they sang hymns to Eros attri-

uted to Orpheus and Pamphés/ as well as the Hymn to

a B8 b Br2 ¢ Bro 4 B16 ¢ Br3 £Bo 
hBr8 i B2o j Paus. IX, 27, 30 (O.F. 304, 305) 
' For the mystery-cult at Phlya, and the Lycomidae, see Harrison, Proleg. pp. 640 
19-; Guthrie, Orpheus, pp. 123-124.

BEGINNINGS 25

Demeter attributed to Musaeus. The origin of the Delphic 
oracle was also narrated: it was originally shared by Poseidon 
and Gé; the latter spoke directly, the former through his 
minister Pyrk6n.#Demeter attributed to Musaeus. The origin of the Delphic 
oracle was also narrated: it was originally shared by Poseidon 
and Gé; the latter spoke directly, the former through his 
minister Pyrk6n.#

The eschatology outlined in the poems attributed to 
Musaeus and his son was, according to Blato, more hedonistic 
than that of Homer and Hesiod. The Musaean poems offered 
as rewards to the just a ‘symposium of the saints’ in Hades, a 
kind of everlasting drunkenness, while they plunged the 
wicked into mud, or made them carry water in a sieve.» No 
moral precepts survive from these poems; those who believed 
that Homer borrowed from Musaeus pointed to the descrip- 
tion of the generations of men in both epics;* but whereas 
Homer was thinking of the short-lived nature of man, the 
Orphic poems seem to have stressed the fact that though one 
generation dies, another always arises. Homer’s vivid line, 
‘the woodcutter excels by oat rather than force’,4 is quoted 
as derived from the colourless Musaean line ‘art is ever 
superior to strength’.° Hesiod’s lines from the lost Me/ampous, 
that it is sweet to learn the sure criterion of ills and blessings 
which the immortals have established for mortals, was said to 
have been taken from Musaeus entire; the reverse is of course 
the truth.

There are hints that the poems of Musaeus dealt with the 
magic properties of plants, for healing and other purposes. 
They mentioned (like Hesiod) the plant tripolium, a kind of 
star-wort, as a panacea if dug up at night;® and also the 
arkeuthos, a thorny bush sacred to Apollo, used by Medea to 
charm the dragon. The latter reference shows that an 
Argonautica was sometimes attributed to Musaeus.Musaeus as a giver of oracles was classed with Orpheus, ' 
the Sibyl, Bakis the Boeotian seer, and others. Herodotus 
mentions Musaeus as one who had prophesied concerning 
the battle of Salamis, but prefers to quote the exact words 
of the otherwise unknown Lysistratus.i Pausanias quotes a 
Musaean oracle which, he says, people apply to the disaster 
of Aegospotami; but the lines quoted are vague.*

aBrr bAsa c Bs; Id. VI, 146-149 d JJ. XXIII. 315 
{By & Brg h Bz i Plat. Protag. 316d (O.F. test. 92, and ch. 35) 
j Bar a

26 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

3. EPIMENIDES

EPIMENIDES of Crete (Phaestus or Cnossus): date uncertain, 
but he probably lived in the late sixth and early fifth centuries 
B.C.26 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

3. EPIMENIDES

EPIMENIDES of Crete (Phaestus or Cnossus): date uncertain, 
but he probably lived in the late sixth and early fifth centuries 
B.C.

The existence of Epimenides has been doubted ; the miracu- 
lous stories told about him, and the different testimony re- 
garding the period in which he lived, have led some to suppose 
him a fiction. Aristotle,s Plutarch? and Suidas> follow the 
tradition that he visited Athens some time before Solon’s 
archonship to assist in purifying the city from the Cylonian 
pollution. Plato says that he came to Athens ten years before 
the Persian invasion, at the command of the Delphic oracle; 
the purpose of the visit is not stated, but he performed certain 
religious ceremonies, acting under the orders of the Pythia.° 
The testimony of Plato is thought to have weight because it is 
put into the mouth of the Cretan, Epimenides’ fellow- 
countryman, in the Laws; and elsewhere in the same dialogue 
Epimenides is mentioned in a list of ancient and legendary 
figures — Daedalus, Orpheus, Palamedes, Marsyas, Olympus, 
Amphion —as having been born ‘only yesterday’.4 Diogenes 
Laertius preserves a combination of both stories, to which he 
adds another anachronistic statement: that it was Nicias son of 
Niceratus who was sent to bring Epimenides from Crete. The 
purpose of the visit was the performance of a purification after 
a plague, which Epimenides declared to have been caused by 
the Cylonian crime. To this Diogenes adds a date: the forty- 
sixth Olympiad, that is, 596-593 B.c. His authorities are given 
as Plutarch, Theopompus, Sosibius and others, and he men- 
tions as evidence of Epimenides’ visit certain ‘nameless altars’ 
still to be seen throughout Attica.e Suidas gives the date of 
Epimenides’ birth as the thirtieth Olympiad, and the date of 
the purification as the forty-fourth Olympiad (604-601 B.c.).! 
Eusebius gives 594 or 597 B.c. as the date of the purification.Thus it was disputed in antiquity whether Epimenides 
visited Athens before Solon’s legislation, in about 600 B.c., or 
during Solon’s legislation in 594 B.c., or before the Persian 
Wars, in 500 B.c., or after the plague during the Pelopon- 
nesian War, in about 428 B.c. It seems probable that the visit

e Ar f A2

BEGINNINGS 27

took place in connection with the first disturbance over the 
Cylonian pollution, as Aristotle and Plutarch say, at a time 
when the superstitious fears aroused by the murder of Cylon’s 
supporters were at their height. The purification probably 
took place after the trial of the Alcmaeonidae instigated by 
Solon; it may have been suggested by Solon, who may have 
met Epimenides on his travels. In later times, whenever a 
similar situation arose, the Cylonian pollution was resusci- 
tated, and with it the réle of Epimenides; that is to say, ten 
years before the Persian invasion, when Athens was in the 
same disturbed state as during the Megarian War a century 
earlier, and when, it seems, a plague broke out;? and again 
during the early years of the Peloponnesian War, when the 
great plague raged and Attica was devastated by the enemy. 
It is possible that on the last occasion Nicias was entrusted 
with some purificatory mission on the lines which tradition 
ascribed to Epimenides; he may even have been sent to Crete 
to appeal to Epimenides’ shrine. So too, in the years of poli- 
tical unrest following the expulsion of the Peisistratids, 
Epimenides may have been invoked in connection with the 
legislation of Cleisthenes, just as he was originally believed to 
have assisted Solon. The Cylonian pollution was revived at 
this time by the Spartan king Cleomenes; and it was being 
used as a means for keeping the Alcmaeonid family in exile. 
Thus the original visit, if it occurred, probably took place 
about 600 B.c., and the stories of later visits are a confusion 
with later occasions when similar purifications were made.Epimenides was credited witha very long life; Xenophanes of 
Colophon gave his age at deathas 1 54 years;> Phlegon, who wrote 
a book on longevity, gave it as 157 years;° and the Cretans as 
299 years. The object was doubtless to make his life long 
enough to include all the purifications attributed to him, as 
well as to enhance his reputation as a wizard.

The stories of his life are nearly all miraculous. He is said 
to have slept for over fifty years in a cave,? though rationalists 
said that he merely absented himself in order to do research on 
herbalism.e He was able to do without food and drink:f some 
said that the Nymphs provided him with a special food. He

aC.1.A.i. 475 — barBzo Ar Qrir dAr §109; A8

28 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

could leave and return to his body when he wished.* When 
founding a sanctuary to the Nymphs, he heard a voice from 
heaven bidding him dedicate it not to the Nymphs but to 
Zeus.» His body when he died was found to be tattooed with 
letters ;° 1t was preserved by the Spartans in accordance with 
an oracle.t The Cretans later sacrificed to him as to a god, 
because of his prophetic powers.°Epimenides was sometimes numbered among the Seven 
Sages, in place of Periander;' but his “wisdom’ belonged, as 
Plutarch says, to the sphere of the mystery-religions. The 
Cretans called him Kowrés, thus associating him with the 
Dionysiac cult, and said that his mother was a nymph; he 
worshipped the Nymphs and was cared for by them. He was 
also connected with the Eumenides: some thought that he 
had founded the shrine of the Semnae on the Athenian 
Areopagus,® and others attributed to him the famous stones 
of Hybris and Anaideta used by defendant and prosecutor 
before the Areopagus Court. Like Orpheus, however, he 
also served the Olympian deities: he founded an altar to Zeus, 
and it was the Delphic oracle which summoned him to Athens 
and directed his purifications there. He was therefore not an 
independent worker, but a famous representative of Orphism 
whose home was in Crete, and who drew on the ancient 
traditions of Cnossus and Phaestus and Mount Ida for his 
magic lore, as well as on the cults of Zeus, Dionysus and the 
Nymphs established there. The legend of his sleeping in a 
cave suggests prolonged absences when he frequented the 
Dictaean cave pursuing religious exercises and magicallore. He 
was said to have claimed at Athens that he had had no human 
teacher, but that his teacher was a long sleep and dream, in 
which he had consorted with gods, Truth and Justice; this, 
and the legend that he could leave and return to his body at 
will,i suggest that he practised the trance-state. His concern 
with fasting and an ascetic diet was also Orphic; he seems to 
have discovered new ways of doing without food, and that 
certain foods were specially efficacious in staving off hunger 
and thirst;* hence the story that he received a special food 
from the Nymphs. Certain herbs were also purificatory.* He

aAz bAr §115 ¢ A2 dArx 4115 e Al 
7 x hA7 i Br j A2 
5; A6; Ax §§rr2, 114

BEGINNINGS 29aAz bAr §115 ¢ A2 dArx 4115 e Al 
7 x hA7 i Br j A2 
5; A6; Ax §§rr2, 114

BEGINNINGS 29

believed in metempsychosis: he called himself Aeacus, and 
claimed to have lived many lives.

According to the authorities used by Diogenes Laertius, 
Epimenides in his purificatory ceremonies relied chiefly on 
animal sacrifice and the founding of shrines; there is also a 
suggestion that he advocated human sacrifice.’ Plutarch, 
however, says that his rites were all of a civilizing and restrain- 
ing tendency: that he paid particular attention to removing the 
barbaric element from funeral ceremonies, to which the women 
were specially addicted; and that these activities greatly helped 
Solon by preparing the way for his legislation. He also em- 
ployed incantations.4 For these activities he was offered large 
rewards by the Athenians, but he refused all recompense 
except a branch of the sacred olive.¢

He was also credited with a number of oracles. To the 
Athenians he prophesied the coming and defeat of the Per- 
sians;8 and on seeing the headland of Munychia, he declared 
that the Athenians did not know what ills it would cause them, 
or they would destroy it with their teeth.» To the Cretans or 
the Spartans he prophesied a defeat of the Spartans by the 
pee at Orchomenus; nothing further is known of this. 
Aristotle, however, says that Epimenides did not give oracles 
about the future, but confined himself to explaining obscurities 
of the past.iA number of epic poems were ascribed to Epimenides. 
Suidas says that he wrote much in epic verse; but he gives no 
list. Diogenes Laertius’ list mentions a Theogony, apparently 
including an Origin of the Kouretes and Korybantes, in 5,000 
lines; a poem on the building of Argo and the voyage of Jason, 
in 6,500 lines; a poem on Minos and re, spony 8 in 4,000 
lines; and a prose work on Sacrifices and the Cretan Constitution. 
It is clear therefore that there was a tendency to attribute to 
Epimenides certain Orphic writings, especially all those which 
had any connection with the cult in Crete.

The existing fragments attributed to Epimenides appear to 
belong mostly to a theogony like that attributed to Musaeus, 
and thought to have been composed in the time of Onoma- 
critus. This poem gave an Orphic cosmogony: there were two

30 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

original existences, Air and Night, from which was created 
Tartarus; from these sprang two Titans, who by their union30 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

original existences, Air and Night, from which was created 
Tartarus; from these sprang two Titans, who by their union

roduced the Egg.* It offered certain variant versions of the 
near connected with the Titan Typhé6,> the Harpies (whom 
it identified with the Hesperides),° Styx,¢ the Eumenidese and 
others. It dealt with the story of Endymion (the moon being 
of interest to Orphic theologians) and depicted him as one who 
like Ixion had been punished by Zeus for an attempt upon 
Hera.! The legend of Epimenides’ own long sleep may have 
been derived from this poem. To Epimenides is also ascribed 
a pair of verses in which like Musaeus he claims to be of the 
race of the fair-tressed moon, from which the Nemean lion fell: 
this is connected with the legend of Heracles.¢ There were 
also verses referring to the Oedipus legend,* to Oenomaus,i to 
Callist6,i to the legends of the Golden Fleece, ** the island of 
Rhodes, !: 11 and the Delphic Omphalos: Epimenides was quoted 
as saying of the last that there was no such thing as the centre 
of earth or sea, and that the story of the meeting of the eagles 
was false.There was also extant a prose work on Cretan affairs 
attributed to Epimenides, but actually of later date; this was 
used with other authorities by Diodorus in his Fifth Book.* 
He may also have used those portions of the Theogony which 
dealt particularly with Cretan legends,' as also did Aratus: for 
instance, the story of the goat which suckled Zeus when he 
was hidden in the cave on Mount Ida,° and of Aigokerés, the 
son of Pan and the goat, and therefore the foster-brother of 
Zeus.? Aigokerés helped Zeus in his war against the Titans, 
by discovering a sea-shell horn the sound of which put them 
to flight; this sound was called ‘panic’ because Pan was the 
father of Aigokerés. Zeus on assuming power set Aigokerés 
and his mother in tHe heavens.? Likewise, Zeus placed his 
attendant nurses in the Arctic circle, having changed them 
into bears, and himself into a serpent, when warring against

aBs b B8 ¢ By; Bg; cp. 9Bs d B6 e Brg { Bra; cp. 9B26

& B2 hBrs iBr7 j Bxr6 k Br2; Br3 1Br8 mBrr

n B20 © Bar P B24

k! 11 Both these are sun-legends. Aceétes is the son of Helios, Rhodos or Rhodé 
(Rhodes) became the wife of Helios. There is also a desire to bring oriental magic to 
Greece: Helios bequeathed to his two sons, Aeétes and Aléeus, Ephyra a district of 
Corinth, and Asopus a district of Arcadia, respectively. See Pauly-Wissowa s.v. 
Aietes, Vol. I, p. 943.

1 These are katastérismoi; see p. 33 below.

BEGINNINGS 31

Cronos;* this is a Cretan story, and 1s an attempt to link Crete 
with Arcadia. The two nurses of Zeus in Crete were named 
Kynosoura and Heliké, which are also the names of two peaks 
in Arcadia; the link is the cult of Pan; who with his twin 
brother Arkas was the son of Zeus and Callisto.» Another part 
of the poem dealt with the seduction of Ariadne by Dionysus, 
and his gift to her of a crown made of gold and Indian jewels, 
by which she was deceived; later, Dionysus placed the crown 
in the heavens.°The most famous reference to Epimenides is that in St. 
Paul’s letter to Titus :4 ‘One of the Cretans, their own prophet, 
said of them, ‘The Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy 
stomachs’’.’ Paul does not name Epimenides; but Clement of 
Alexandria, quoting his words, says that the seventh Wise 
Man in the list of Seven Sages was by some given as Periander 
of Corinth, by others as Anacharsis of Scythia, and by others 
as Epimenides of Crete, ‘who is mentioned by the Apostle 
Paul in his letter to Titus’.¢

A late (sixth century a.p.) Byzantine writer, Joannes Lau- 
rentius Lydus, attributed to ‘followers of Epimenides’ the 
view that the Dioscuri were male and female, equivalent to 
Time the Monad, and Nature the Dyad, from which spring 
the creative numbers.‘ The explanation is of course Neo- 
Pythagorean, or Neo-Platonist; but the original novel idea that 
the twins were male and female probably occurred in the 
Epimenidean Theogony.

a B22; B23 b Br6 c B25 d].12 eBr

32 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

I], ASTRONOMICAL POETRY OF THE SIXTH 
CENTURY

4. HESIOD

Hesrop of Ascra in Boeotia flourished probably in the eighth 
century B.c., perhaps earlier.: The author of the poem here 
ascribed to him wrote probably in the sixth century B.c.4. HESIOD

Hesrop of Ascra in Boeotia flourished probably in the eighth 
century B.c., perhaps earlier.: The author of the poem here 
ascribed to him wrote probably in the sixth century B.c.

Apart from his Theogony, and Works and Days, another poem 
called Astronomia or Astrologia was sometimes attributed to 
Hesiod by ancient authors. Plutarch names Hesiod with 
Eudoxus and Thales as having written on astronomy in verse 
before Aristarchus and others;* but this may refer to the 
Works and Days, in which the correct seasons for farming 
operations are guided by the rising and setting of constella- 
tions.’ Similarly Callimachus’ epigram on Aratus, in which 
he says that the latter imitated Hesiod, may refer to the Works 
and Days. Athenaeus, however, quoting an earlier authority 
(Asclepiades of Myrleia in Bithynia, who lived in the second 
or first century B.c.) mentions a poem called Astronomia 
ascribed to Hesiod, and quotes from it three fragments on the 
Pleiades.4 So too Pliny, saying that an Astrologia exists under 
Hesiod’s name, quotes the author’s opinion on the time of the 
morning setting of the Pleiades as opposed to that of Thales; 
and the Scholiast on Aratus, speaking of ‘Hesiod’s book on 
the Stars’, quotes some lines on the Hyades.f These quota- 
tions do not occur in the Works and Days or the Theogony. The 
poem from which they are taken is lost, and was formerly 
thought to have been an Alexandrian composition, as this was 
the epoch during which the myths of the changing of people 
into stars became popular; but others place the poem in the 
sixth century B.c., possibly before Thales, on the ground that 
the time given for the setting of the Pleiades, at the autumnal 
equinox, as quoted by Pliny, could no longer have been put 
forward as correct in Alexandrian times. *

aA3 bv W. and D., 383 sqq. © A2; cp. Ar 4 Br; Ba; B3 
1 See Pauly-Wissowa, s.v. Hesiod, Vol. VIII, pp. 1173-77.aA3 bv W. and D., 383 sqq. © A2; cp. Ar 4 Br; Ba; B3 
1 See Pauly-Wissowa, s.v. Hesiod, Vol. VIII, pp. 1173-77.

* ibid. Vol. VIII, p. 1223, cp. T. A. Sinclair, Hesiod: W 
noes to lines 383-86. » Cp » Hestod: Works and Days, pp. 41, 42;

BEGINNINGS . - 33

Of the quotations or summaries derived from the supposed 
Hesiodic poem, some are meteorological, concerned with the 
times of the rising and setting of the Pleiades; others are 
mythological, dealing with the personification and naming of 
the Hyades;* the legends connected with Callisto, Zeus, their 
son Arkas or Bodétes, and the changing of the mother into the 
constellation of the Great Bear;> the story of Orion and the 
Scorpion;° of Orion and his attempt to bridge the Straits of 
Messene;4 and his metamorphosis into the constellation, of 
which there seem to have been two versions.¢ The meteoro- 
logical fragments are too brief to be of value. The mytho- 
logical fragment in the Scholiast, the summaries of the Arkas 
and Orion legends made by the unknown author of the 
Katastérismoi,' and the story of Orion given by Diodorus, all 
obviously come from a poem in which Orphic influence was 
paramount. The legend of Callisto, Pan and Arkas belongs 
to that stratum of belief,‘ and the story of Orion and the 
Scorpion is given, in one version, a Cretan setting.¢ The 
Pleiades and Hyades were also of special interest to Orphic 
mythology.* It is therefore likely that the poem attributed to 
Hesiod was a work belonging to the sixth-century Onoma- 
critean cycle, of no interest to astronomy, but concerned only 
with mystical legends regarding the origins of the constellations.

5. PHOCUS 
Puocus of Samos: date unknown.

Phocus of Samos was thought by some to have written the 
Nautical Astronomy which others ascribed to Thales.i This 
work was in verse.i Nothing is known of its contents.Phocus of Samos was thought by some to have written the 
Nautical Astronomy which others ascribed to Thales.i This 
work was in verse.i Nothing is known of its contents.

Wrongly attributed to the great Alexandrian astronomer Eratosthenes (third 
century B.C.). The title means “The (stories of) establishment of persons among the 
stars’.

34 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

6. CLEOSTRATUS 
Cieostratus of Tenepos lived in the sixth century B.c.

Cleostratus, a native of Tenedos,* wrote an astronomical 
work called Astrologia> or Phaenomena.< A connection between 
Thales and Cleostratus was indicated by the tradition that 
Thales died in Tenedos:4 Cleostratus was probably regarded 
as Thales’ successor if not pupil in astronomy.

Although the references to Cleostratus are meagre, they 
have aroused considerable controversy. Two lines of his poem 
are quoted by the Scholiast on the Rhesus of Euripides,* to- 
gether with the views of Parmeniscus;? but the two lines are 
not complete, and throw no light on the passage in the Rhesus 
which they purport to explain; so that a line has been inserted 
between them* to make up for these deficiencies. Moreover, 
Parmeniscus’ explanation of the passage in the Rhesus appears 
to be wrong. It is therefore difficult to gather what exactly the 
lines of Cleostratus really meant.* A reference by Pliny is also 
obscure. f

a Ar; A2;A3a;A4; Br; B2; B4 bA4 cA3 d11A8 e Br f B2

1 Grammarian and commentator on astronomical references in literature. Lived 
between Aratus (flor. c. 270 B.C.) and Hyginus (flor. reign of Augustus).

? Diels, following Boll.1 Grammarian and commentator on astronomical references in literature. Lived 
between Aratus (flor. c. 270 B.C.) and Hyginus (flor. reign of Augustus).

? Diels, following Boll.

> The controversy has arisen over the meaning of the term mpd ta onuela. Com- 
menting on Rhesus 528, the Scholiast gives Parmeniscus as saying that it meant ‘the first 
parts (uolpas) of the Scorpion—since this was what they were called by the ancient 
scientists—because Bodtes begins to set at the same time as they do’. The mutilated 
fragment of Cleostratus, in which tea ta onueta are not mentioned, then follows in support 
of this view. Diels following Boll has therefore inserted a line between the two quoted, 
giving the sense: ‘When [he] remains visible for 83 days, the Guardian of the Bear 
(i.e. Bodtes), then the ‘first signs’’ (1rpéta onueta) of Scorpion fall into the sea at dawn.’ 
The tpéta onueiax are then taken to mean either the ‘first stars’ of the zodiacal constel- 
lation Scorpio to sink below the horizon; or the “first degrees’ of Scorpio regarded as a 
zodiacal division, i.e. 30° of the ecliptic.There is however no warrant for supposing that 1p&ta onpeta was used by Euripides 
in either of these technical senses, or that the phrase even had any reference to Scorpio; if 
it had, Euripides’ astronomy, or rather that of the soldiers in the play, was at fault. In 
Euripides, the phrase merely means ‘the stars which rose at the beginning of the night, 
and are now setting’ (Paley, ad loc.), that is, as the Scholiast himself says, the stars 
which marked for the soldiers the beginning of their watch. The information given by 
Parmeniscus that pata onuela was used by ‘the ancients’ (i.e. presumably, ancient 
scientists) with particular reference to the ‘first points’ or ‘first degrees’ of Scorpio, even 
if correct, is here irrelevant; and since the lines of Cleostratus he quotes in illustration do 
not contain the words, we have only Parmeniscus’ warrant for believing that Cleo- 
stratus used them as he says. The passage in Pliny referring to Cleostratus in which the 
words signa and prima are used, unfortunately is so obscure as to throw no light on

BEGINNINGS 35

All, therefore, that can certainly be said about the work of 
Cleostratus is that it followed on that of the Milesian scientists: 
his place is after Anaximander, who is said to have discovered 
the obliquity of the ecliptic, the zodiacal path. Cleostratus 
then ‘explained the signs in it, beginning with the Ram and 
the Archer’, >: dealing also with the rising and setting of Scor- 
pio. He was the first to mention the constellation of the Kids. 
He also was the first to suggest a period of eight years (oksae- 
téris) as a great year, or cycle containing an exact number of 
days, lunar months and solar years, a discovery generally 
attributed to Eudoxus of Cnidus. Cleostratus taught Meton 
the Athenian, who substituted for the eight-year cycle a more 
accurate cycle of nineteen years.°Tt has been argued by modern scholars: that both the 
division of the ecliptic into the zodiacal twelve signs, and the 
eight-year cycle, were derived from Babylon, and that Cleo- 
stratus merely introduced these into Greece. Pliny’s diction is 
vague, and may mean either that Cleostratus ‘understood’ the 
signs as used by the Babylonian astronomers and transmitted 
them to Greece, or that he was the first to make this use of the 
constellations as marking the sun’s path. An eight-year cycle 
is said to have been in use in Babylon between 528 and so05 
B.C., probably in the time of Cleostratus.* But that Cleo- 
stratus did not merely transmit Babylonian calculations, but 
like Thales and the other Milesians used them for his own 
scientific ends, seems probable; and we have the testimony of 
Theophrastus? that Cleostratus made his own astronomical 
observations ‘from Mount Ida’. 7

; c Ar d Ar 
H. Rackham, Pliny, N.H. II, 31 (Loeb).

1 E.g. Fotheringham op. cit. (opposed by Webb); Heath of. cit.

? Heath op. cit., p. xvii.

> This must be Ida in the Troad. Theophrastus’ expression KAséotperros tv Tevé5cp 
air tis "lSns has led some to think that he used Mt. Ida, seen from Tenedos, as a 
static point in relation to which he could observe the movements of the sun (Fothering- 
ham, }.H.S. XXXIX, p. 168). But the other examples, e.g. Dozivds ’A@thvnow and Tod 
AuxeBntrot show that Theophrastus means that Cleostratus though living on Tenedos 
conducted observations from Ida.

| Cleostratus. See the lengthy discussion between J. K. Fotheringham 
and E. J. Webb in 7.H.S. XXXIX (1919) 164 599.3 XLI (1921) 70 sqg.3 XLV (1925) 
78 s9q.; the succinct account s.v. Kleostratus by W. Kroll] in Pauly-Wissowa, Suppl. IV. 
P. 912; and the remarks of Heath, Greek Astronomy (1932), pp. XIV, Xix.

36 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

III. EARLY COSMOLOGICAL AND GNOMIC 
PROSE

‘7, PHERECYDES OF SYROS36 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

III. EARLY COSMOLOGICAL AND GNOMIC 
PROSE

‘7, PHERECYDES OF SYROS

Puerecypes of Syros:- date uncertain: he may have lived in 
the seventh century, or the middle of the sixth century B.c.

Tradition regarding the date at which Pherecydes of Syros 
lived is contradictory. Some placed him in the time of the 
Seven Sages, that is, in the latter half of the seventh century ;* 
of these, some said that he was a pupil of Pittacus (whose prime 
of life is given as 612 B.c.),> others that he took the side of 
Ephesus in the war against the Magnesians, that is, in the 
middle of the seventh century. Others, however, made him 
the teacher of Pythagoras, and placed his prime of life in the 
middle of the sixth century: Eusebius gives an exact date, the 
fifty-ninth Olympiad (554-1 B.c.)4 and Cicero, following this 
tradition, says that Pherecydes flourished in the reign of 
Servius Tullius (578-535 B.c.).© Diogenes Laertius records both 
traditions, apparently without realizing their inconsistency.‘It seems probable that the earlier date is correct. The late 
date appears to have grown out of a desire to connect Phere- 
cydes with Pythagoras: the similarity between certain of their 
doctrines made it natural to suggest that Pythagoras was 
Pherecydes’ pupil, and the date was probably altered to make 
this possible. This may have been helped also by a confusion 
between Pythagoras the philosopher, and Pythagoras the 
tyrant of Ephesus, in whose time Pherecydes probably lived, 
that is, in the middle of the seventh century. The connection 
between Ephesus and Syros was probably intimate: both were 
colonized by Athenians in legendary times, Ephesus by 
Androclus son of Codrus,+ and Syros by an otherwise un- 
known Hippomedon.: The island may at one time have been 
a bone of contention between Ephesus and Samos: one of the 
few recorded facts about Syros is that it was ‘betrayed’ by one 
Killikon into the possession of Samos, though no date is 
assigned to- this event;! and the wars between Ephesus and

b Ar §116 © Ar §§117, 1x8 dArza; Ar §r2ar e As 
All 
» 649

BEGINNINGS 37

Samos were matter for legend.* Pherecydes, according to the 
tradition placing him in the seventh century, sided with 
Ephesus (where he was then living) in their war against the 
Magnesians, and was buried by the Ephesians in territory 
conquered from the Magnesians.® It is thus probable that his 
name was connected in some way with Pythagoras tyrant of 
Ephesus, and this may have helped the growth of a legend 
connecting him with Pythagoras of Samos,The only anecdote told of their connection is that of the 
death of Pherecydes. According to this, Pherecydes was wast- 
ing away with pheiriasis (pediculosis, louse-disease) on the 
island of Delos; Pythagoras journeyed thither, tended him as 
a son would a father, and buried him there.c The anecdotists, 
however, were uncertain when this happened: some placed it 
at the time of Pythagoras’ residence in Croton, and even caused 
the plot against the Pythagoreans to take place during Pytha- 
goras’ absence with Pherecydes;4 others, aware of the dis- 
crepancy in time, said that Pherecydes died before Pythagoras 
migrated from Samos.* Other traditions regarding Phere- 
cydes’ death were current, one being that he flung himself 
from the Corycian rock at Delphi.‘ It seems more likely that 
the tradition which showed his tomb in a district conquered 
by Ephesus from Magnesia, a tomb revered later by genera- 
tions of Ephesians, is correct, and that therefore Pherecydes 
lived in the seventh century. Andron of Ephesus, writing of 
Pythagoras, tried to bridge the difficulties by saying that there 
were two men called Pherecydes, both of Syros: an astronomer, 
and a theologian who taught Pythagoras; but Eratosthenes 
rightly denied this.¢ The only other Pherecydes known to 
fame was the Athenian genealogist, who lived in the first half 
of the fifth century B.c.*

Nothing is known of the life of Pherecydes. He was said to 
have had no teacher, but to have taught himself from the 
secret books of the Phoenicians:' this may have originated 
from Eumelus’ story of the descent of the Phoenicians on to 
the island of Syrié, in the Odyssey,i Syrié being identified with 
Syros. He travelled, lived in Samos and Ephesus, visited 
Messene, Olympia, Sparta, Delphi.« He corresponded with

a Paus. VII, 2, 8 bAr §§ 117, 118 ¢ Ar §118; Ag 
AN

» 493 5qq-

38 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSa Paus. VII, 2, 8 bAr §§ 117, 118 ¢ Ar §118; Ag 
AN

» 493 5qq-

38 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Thales,* whose fame he endeavoured to rival.» >: He was 
credited with having prophesied a shipwreck, an earthquake, 
the capture of a city; but Andron said that these prophecies 
were the work of Pythagoras, and were falsely attributed to 
Pherecydes by Theopompus.°

Pherecydes is classed with Pythagoras and Thales as among 
the first of the Greeks to philosophize about things heavenly 
and divine.4 He was also thought to have been the first to 
write in prose.e His book was preserved in antiquity; it was 
called Heptamychos, the Seven-Chambered (Cosmos), or Theo- 
crasia, the Divine Mingling, or Theogoniat (the Theologia in ten 
books spoken of by Suidas as a separate work is probably the 
same, unless it is a confusion with the work of Pherecydes of 
Athens); the book professed to deal with the divine origin of 
the universe. It was written in an Ionian dialect,® and in an 
enigmatic or allegorizing style.

Pherecydes, in spite of attempts to connect him with 
Thales and Pythagoras, was not an astronomer; he wrote an 
allegory of creation, beginning with the sentence, ‘“Zas (Zeus), 
Chronos (Time) and Chthonié always existed; but Chthonié 
acquired the name Gé (Earth) because Zas gives her Earth as 
a (wedding) present’. 'The wedding of Zas and Chthonié 1s described in detail in 
a recently-discovered passage,i of which only a sentence 
quoted by Clement of Alexandria had been known before the 
discoveries of papyri by Grenfell and Hunt at Oxyrhynchus. 
This is the only considerable fragment of Pherecydes’ work ex- 
tant, and it gives a good idea of his style. For Zas before his 
wedding houses many and great are prepared, and furnished 
with all that 1s necessary, including servants. The wedding is 
then celebrated. Three days after the marriage, Zas makes a 
robe, large and fair, and on it he embroiders Earth and Ogenos 
(Okeanos) and the palace of Ogenos ... In making this gift to 
Chthonié, he addresses her as his wife, saying, ‘In my desire 
that your marriage (with me) should exist, I honour you with 
this gift’. This, the author notes, was the origin of the first 
‘unveiling ceremony’, when the bride exchanged her maiden

a Ar §r21 b A2 c A6 d rrArrs Ar §116 ef 
f A2 € Bro; Br bh Ai2 i Br j B2 
b! Thales’ prime of life is given as 585 B.C., so that this too may be an anachronism.

BEGINNINGS 39

veil for her husband’s wedding-gift. The reply of Chthonié 
on receiving the robe is then given; but here the papyrus 
breaks off.BEGINNINGS 39

veil for her husband’s wedding-gift. The reply of Chthonié 
on receiving the robe is then given; but here the papyrus 
breaks off.

Such then was Pherecydes’ allegory of creation. Commen- 
tators note that Zas, Chronos and Chthonié are the three 
primary elements, that 1s, Fire, Aether or the Sun, the creative 
element; Earth, the subject or material on which he works; 
Chronos, Time, that in which the things created exist.* 
Chronos, however, was sometimes thought to be a person also, 
from whose seed sprang fire, breath and water;! these, divided 
into five compartments, gave rise to a vast array of other gods: 
the five-fold division was called Pentemychos or Pentecosmos. 
Some commentators identified Chronos with Cronos, but 
whether this was said by Pherecydes or is a theory of his inter- 
preters is not clear. The stages of the allegory seem to be as 
they are given by Maximus of .Tyre:> first Zeus the original 
creator, with Chthonié and Chronos;* nothing then existed 
but a state of flux called Chaos, afterwards equated with the 
Water of Thales.¢ Then came the union of Zeus and Chthonié, 
and the creation of an Earth and an Ocean-stream,® the Robe, 
with Tartarus below; Zeus as creator changes into Eros in 
order to bring warring elements into harmony in a Cosmos.§ 
From the seed of Zeus (who is also Cronos) arise the warring 
elements, fire, breath, water; or as Pherecydes allegorizes, the 
race of Titans led by the giant-serpent Ophioneus.* The two 
armies, one led by Zeus-Cronos, the other by Ophioneus, con- 
front each other; there are challenges and combats, and a pact 
is made that whichever army is driven into Ogenos (Ocean) 
shall have lost the battle. Thus the Titans are expelled from 
the upper regions to Tartarus below, and Zeus-Cronos 
(Saturn) is crowned king; that is, he banishes the forces of 
lawlessness to the underworld and establishes the reign of law 
in the Cosmos. The realm of Tartarus is guarded by the 
Harpies and Whirlwind, daughters of Boreas, and any offend- 
ing deities are exiled there.:Besides the Robe, the physical appearance of the varied 
world created by Zeus, there appears another symbol more

a Ag bAri c AZ d Bra e B2 f By, & B3 h By

i Ba i Bs

Some suggest that the creation of the inorganic elements from the seed of Chronos is 
opposed to the creation of the gods by Zeus turned Eros.. See Fritz in Pauly-Wissowa 
s.v. Pherecydes (Mythograph) XTX, i, 2031.

40 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

difficult to interpret: the “Winged Oak’ or ‘Tree’.* It has been 
suggested that this is the upright of the loom on which the 
Robe is woven, or that it is the mast of a ship, the ship being 
the earth which floats on water as Thales says; but in the ab- 
sence of the context, the inquiry is fruitless. Other scraps of 
information about Pherecydes’ doctrine are equally difficult to 
fit into an intelligible whole: interpreters saw in them what they 
wished: Phoenician, Babylonian and Egyptian mythology,» as 
well as the later doctrines of the physical philosophers.The influence of Orphism on Pherecydes 1s clear from his 
reference to the Titans and the Robe. He professed to have 
knowledge of the names,° language and life* of the gods. He 
taught the doctrine of metempsychosis:‘ some credited him 
with having been the first to do so, or as Cicero puts it, having 
been the first to say that the souls of men are immortal.? These 
also said that he was the first to describe the nature and origin 
of the gods; they evidently regarded him as belonging to 
legendary times, like Orpheus and Musaeus. He described 
the births and deaths of the soul in allegorical language, speak- 
ing of ‘hollows, pits, caves, doors and gates’.» The Cosmos 
itself was a cave, and the universe was divided into first five, i 
then seven ‘chambers’, hence the title of his book, Hepsamy- 
chos.i) The exact topography of the soul’s journeys according to 
Pherecydes can only be conjectured; probably the features of 
the underworld were given an allegorical meaning.* His 
teachings were often confused with those of Pythagoras; in 
fact, Pythagoras’ fame seems to have swallowed up that of 
Pherecydes, though supporters of Pherecydes tried to vindi- 
cate his originality.! His allegorical description of the warring 
elements was thought to have influenced Heracleitus,™ while 
those who place Pherecydes 1n the sixth century believe that 
his work was influenced by Anaximander. His allegory of the 
cosmic ‘chambers’ may have suggested Plato’s metaphor of 
the cave; their styles were sometimes compared, Plato’s being 
said to be less enigmatic than that of Pherecydes.*

Aristotle ranks Pherecydes as one of the ‘mixed’ theologians, 
that is, one who did not state his views entirely in mythical 
form; he notes that like the Magi, Pherecydes identifies his 
original creative force (Zeus) with the highest good.°

@Bz:Arr bBa;rrArr ¢Br1;Bg 4GAr§r119;Br2_ ¢ Br3za’_ ss £ B8 cp. ch. 14,8 
As h B6 i A8 j A2 k By 1A6 m Bg

BEGINNINGS. 41@Bz:Arr bBa;rrArr ¢Br1;Bg 4GAr§r119;Br2_ ¢ Br3za’_ ss £ B8 cp. ch. 14,8 
As h B6 i A8 j A2 k By 1A6 m Bg

BEGINNINGS. 41

It is clear that the work of Pherecydes was confined to an 
allegorizing account of creation; he contributed nothing to 
science. A Héliotropion (that is, a point which, seen from 
another fixed point, marked the rising of the sun on the longest 
day of the year, and round which the sun’s risings seemed to 
revolve) said to have been used by Pherecydes was preserved 
on the island of Syros; but this tradition probably arose from 
the lines in the Odyssey* regarding Syrié. He made no scien- 
tific observations himself, but used the theories beginning to 
be evolved by the predecessors of Thales» to give a new mean- 
ing to old stories.

8. THEAGENES

THEAGENES of RueEcium lived in the time of Cambyses* (529- 
522 B.C.)

Theagenes was the first scholar known to have applied the 
allegorical method of interpretation to Homer. Influenced by 
the Ionian theory of Opposites, he explained the disputes of 
the gods as representing the opposition of the elements or of 
qualities: fire-water, hot-cold, light-heavy. Fire is symbolized 
by Apollo, Helios, Hephaestus; water by Poseidon and 
Scamander; the moon by Artemis; air by Hera; and soon. So 
too with abstract qualities: Athene represents wisdom, Ares 
folly, Aphrodite desire, Hermes reason.4 Besides beginning 
this type of literary criticism, he appears also to have written 
about Homer’s origin and epoch,° and to have been one of the 
earliest to undertake linguistic and grammatical criticism.

9. ACUSILAUS 
Acusiaus of Arcos lived probably in the sixth century B.c.

Acusilaus was sometimes included in the list of the Seven 
Sages.¢ He wrote a prose work on the origins of gods and men, 
called Genealogies,» in at least three books.) This work appa- 
rently survived until Hadrian’s day, when the scholar Sabinus 
wrote a monograph on Acusilaus among others.) Some re-» XV, 404 b rzBr, line ¢ cy d 2 ex fia 
“1 h A2 i B32; B28 j As

42 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

garded the book attributed to Acusilaus as forged.* Its claim 
to special knowledge of divine origins led some to say that he 
had copied it from bronze tablets found by his father when 
digging near his home;? but it bore likenesses to other works 
of a similar nature, especially Hesiod, so that others accused 
Acusilaus (and Eumelus) of having transcribed the poems of 
Hesiod into prose, and published the result as their own work.° 
The extracts which survive show that the correspondence of 
the views of Acusilaus with those of Hesiod was frequent,‘ 
though not invariable.¢

The work of Acusilaus was of little or, no importance to 
philosophy; it belongs rather to literary criticism. He some- 
times echoes, sometimes emends or expands, the versions of 
legends given by his predecessors. He agrees with Hesiod in 
making Chaos the primary existence,‘ but whereas Hesiod de- 
rives Eros from the union of Chaos and Earth, Acusilaus 
causes Chaos to divide into two, Erebus the male principle, 
Night the female, and Eros to spring from their union, as well 
as Aether and Métis.® & |

The origin of monsters such as the male and female Titans,* 
hundred-armed giants, Cerberus, Typho and others: was dis- 
cussed, and their battles with Zeus recounted. Zeus flung 
them into Tartarus;i from the blood of Typho sprang all 
creatures that sting.* Apollo also was threatened with this 
penalty, but was saved by the prayers of Leto and made to 
serve a human being, Admetus, instead.! Others slain by Zeus 
were Asclepius, whose mother Corénis,® like Semele, was 
burnt in the fire by a god (Apollo);° Actaeon, who attempted 
to woo Semele; and Kaineus, changed from woman to man, 
made invulnerable, and then slain on the orders of Zeus by 
the Centaurs.?The legend of Heracles was also discussed ;4 his labours, his 
death on the funeral pyre;' he and not the Harpies slew the 
winged brothers Zétés and Calais according to Acusilaus.* The

aA3 bA2 cAqg 4Bz2; B6; Bro; Br2; B23; B25; B30 9 & Ba; B3; Bra; B33

f Br & Br h Bg i B6 i B7; Bga; Bob; cp. 7B5 «B37 1! Bio

m Bg n B39 © Pind. Pyth. III P B4oa qa Brs r Boc 8 Big

& Plato in the Sympostum makes Phaedrus say (with a vagueness perhaps deliberate) 
that Acusilaus agrees with Hesiod in making ‘these two, Earth and Eros’ come into being 
after Chaos; this is merely part of the argument that Eros is one of the oldest of the 
deities. (Bz: Symp. 178B). The Scholiast on Theocritus says that Acusilaus made Eros 
the son of Night and Aether (B3).

BEGINNINGS 43

voyage of the Argonauts belongs in part to the same legend: 
the story of Phrixus was examined,* and the Fleece itself was 
said to have been not golden but dyed purple by the sea,> a 
touch of rationalization such as is not found os in the re- 
maining fragments. The Trojan War was analysed, and a new 
explanation given for its outbreak: Aphrodite, having learnt by 
an oracle that the sons of Anchises would rule the Trojans after 
the fall of the house of Priam, united with Anchises, and then 
arranged the abduction of Helen in order to bring about the 
defeat of Troy, though she pretended to aid. The offspring 
of Menelaus and Helen were discussed ;4 and various incidents 
of the war, such as the winning of Eurypylus to the Trojan 
cause by a bribe to his mother.e The colonization of Ithaca,‘ 
the origin of the Phaeacians,* and of the Homeridae,* appear 
to have been mentioned in annotation of Homer.A special interest seems to be displayed in legends about the 
winds: the Harpies, who, fe agrees with Epimenides, guard 
the apples of the Hesperidae,i Zetes and Calais,) Boreas and 
Oreithyia;* Acusilaus agrees with Hesiod that there are three chief 
winds, Boreas, Notos and Zephyr.! River-legends also were speci- 
ally dealt with: Asopus,™ Achelous." The story of the Flood, 
and the part played by Deucalion and Pyrrha, was recounted °° it 
took place during the reign of Phoréneus at Argos. Acusilaus 
paid particular attention to legends connected with his native 
Argos and the Peloponnese: the legends of Phor6éreus,? Argos, 
Pelasgus,1 Mycéneus,' were discussed, and the cult of Hera 
was given special importance; the madness of the daughters of 
Proetus of Argos was ascribed to their having set themselves 
above the statue of Hera, not to their having neglected the 
rites of Dionysus.* The story of Iot likewise belongs to the 
vengeance of Hera. Endymion* was a wooer of Hera according 
to one version,” though this is not ascribed to Acusilaus. The 
legend of Proteus, Phorcys and the Kabeiroiv belongs in part 
to the Argonaut cycle; Phorcys, according to Acusilaus, was 
also the father of Scylla, by Hecate.*

Very few actual quotations from Acusilaus survive: the 
longest is that on Kaineus, preserved in a papyrus found at

a Bas b B2g c¢ B31; B32 d B17 e B34 f B36 6 B28 5 Baz 
i Bs; 3Bg j Brg k B35 1 B30; Hes. Theog. 870 m B18 n Bar 
° B33; B38 P B2o q Birr; Br3 r B24 8 Br4 t Br2 u B26 
V Schol. a@ Theocr. III, 49 w B8; B4o x B27

4.4 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Oxyrhynchus.* The majority of the references are annotations 
of scholars on other writers. Disjointed as these are, they 
nevertheless reveal that Acusilaus was interested in the legends 
as such, and not in any philosophical or allegorical interpreta- 
tion of them.

IO, THE SEVEN SAGES

Tue Seven Saces lived in the latter half of the seventh, and 
the early sixth, centuries B.c.IO, THE SEVEN SAGES

Tue Seven Saces lived in the latter half of the seventh, and 
the early sixth, centuries B.c.

The so-called Seven Sages represented the practical wisdom 
of early Greece: they were, as Dicaearchus said, not philoso- 
phers or sages, but men of shrewd intelligence, concerned with 
the administration of public affairs.» > The names in the list 
varied: the earliest list is that of Plato in the Protagorass — 
Thales, Pittacus, Bias, Solon, Cleobulus, Myson, Chilon, 
where for the usually-included Periander the almost unknown 
Myson is substituted, doubtless because of Plato’s hatred of

ranny. Diogenes Laertius gives Thales, Solon, Periander, 
Cleobulus, Chilon, Bias, Pittacus, saying that others add Ana- 
charsis, Myson, Pherecydes, Epimenides, and some even 
Peisistratus.4 Many other names were suggested for inclusion 
by local patriotism or political bias; a further list is given by 
Diogenes | 4ertius collected from various authors, and amount- 
ing to twenty-three names. Of these, four were universally 
agreed upon: Thales, Bias, Pittacus, Solon; the rest could be 
chosen according to taste.°

Round the Wise Men a considerable body of stories grew 
up, based on a desire to bring them into contact with one an- 
other and cause their wisdom to be displayed. Apart from the 
meetings of individuals, they were said to have met in a body 
by invitation of Cypselus, or Periander, or Croesus, and to 
have held conferences at Panionium and Delphi.‘ The meeting 
at Corinth under the patronage of Periander was made the sub- 
ject of a dialogue by Plutarch. The best-known story told of 
them is that of the golden tripod drawn out of the sea by fisher-

a B4goa (Ox. Pap. XIII, No. 1611, pp. 127 599.) br §4o ¢ 2 (Protag. 343D)

4 Diog. L. Prooem. 13 ey §42 £1 §40a B4goa (Ox. Pap. XIII, No. 1611, pp. 127 599.) br §4o ¢ 2 (Protag. 343D)

4 Diog. L. Prooem. 13 ey §42 £1 §40

b! Thales was a philosopher; but as a member of the college, he is treated merely as a 
sage, and his maxims are indistinguishable from those of the others. He was credited 
_ also with political interests and influence (11A4).

BEGINNINGS

men ; its ownership was disputed, and the Delphic oracle ' 
consulted said ‘Give it to the wisest’. After being sent to the 
Wise Men in turn, it was given back to Apollo at Delphi or 
elsewhere. The story had many versions, and there seems to 
have been a mass of literature about it.) #1 
On their visit to Delphi they were said to have offered up

to Apollo the first-fruits of their wisdom: the two maxims 
‘Know thyself’ and ‘Nothing too much’, which were then in- 
scribed on the porch of his temple there. These maxims were 
doubtless the work of the Delphic priesthood; but in later 
times, when the Sages were thought of as a college embodying 
the highest wisdom of sixth-century Greece, it became the 
custom to attribute to them all wise sayings. Sometimes the 
different maxims were assigned to particular authors: Solon, 
whose moderation was his most striking characteristic, was 
credited with the invention of ‘Nothing too much’. » ‘Know thy- 
self’ was attributed to the Spartan Chilon, orto Thales.c Itseems 
likely that the story of their symposium at Delphi owes its origin 
to adesire to make them the authors of the temple maxims.Plato described the wisdom attributed to the Sages as ‘brief 
memorable phrases’, and ‘Laconian brevity of speech’.4 Sto- 
baeus in his Anthology gives a collection of these sayings? 
made by Demetrius of Phalerum, under the names of Cleobu- 
lus, Solon, Chilon, Thales, Pittacus, Bias, and Periander. They 
lay stress on the moral virtues of self-control, honesty, indus- 
try, truthfulness, obedience to the laws, respect towards 
parents; and on common sense in general. The collection does 
little to reflect the known character and work of each of the 
supposed authors: the maxims of Solon differ little from those 
of Pittacus or Thales or Periander; Periander is even credited 
with the saying that ‘democracy is better than dictatorship’. 
They were intended as a practical guide to life for the prudent 
man and good citizen; that the two Delphic maxims acquired 
an importance for philosophy was due to the work of Socrates, 
who developed ‘Know thyself’ into ‘Virtue is Knowledge’, and 
of Plato and Aristotle, who developed ‘Nothing too much’ into 
the doctrine of the Mean.

a Diog. L. I, 28 b Br Cy1; cp. 11Ar §40 dz € 26

al Freeman, Work and Life of Solon, pp. 195, 196.

1 The oldest collection of the sayings (without the names of the Sages) is to be found

on a stone tablet probably intended for school use, of the third century B.C. (Ditten- 
berger, Sylloge inscr. gr. III, n. 1268).

B. THE FRAGMENTS 
OF THE PHILOSOPHERS OF THE SIXTH AND 
FIFTH CENTURIES (AND IMMEDIATE 
SUCCESSORS)

B. THE FRAGMENTS 
OF THE PHILOSOPHERS OF THE SIXTH AND 
FIFTH CENTURIES (AND IMMEDIATE 
SUCCESSORS)

II, THALES 
Tua.es of Miretus was in his prime about 585 B.c. |

The chief sources of information concerning his life and 
work are:II, THALES 
Tua.es of Miretus was in his prime about 585 B.c. |

The chief sources of information concerning his life and 
work are:

(4) Herodotus, who records his prediction of the eclipse of 
‘the sun that put an end to the war between the Lydians and the 
Medes;? his advice to the Ionian cities to found a federal state 
with headquarters at Teos;> his theory that the flooding of the 
Nile was due to the blowing back of the waters at the mouth 
by the Etesian winds;¢ and the tradition (disbelieved by Hero- 
dotus) that he enabled Croesus to transport his army across the 
river Halys by diverting the stream.4 
(6) Aristotle, who in the Metaphysics calls him the founder 
of philosophy, and records his doctrine that the primary sub- 
stance is water; in the de Caelo, that the earth floats on water;! 
in the de Anima, that all things are full of gods — the magnet 
has life, since it can move iron;® in the Politics, that tradition 
ascribed to him a money-making trick, the corner in olive- 
presses." a 
(c) Plato, who tells the anecdote of his falling into a well 
while studying the stars;! and quotes his saying, ‘All things 
are full of gods’, but without giving hisname.i 
(d@) Doxographers. There is a Life of Thales in Diogenes 
Laertius; a paragraph in Suidas; statements in Simplicius, 
Aétius, Proclus, Galen and others; a succinct summary by the 
scholiast on Plato’s Republic. These state that he was a distin- 
guished astronomer and mathematician: for example, that he 
a c Ar d e Ai2 fAr &A22 
= one vee oe : A22 : 
z 49

50 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

knew the true cause of eclipses of the sun;* that he first dis- 
covered the constellation Little Bear;> that he introduced 
geometry from Egypt into Greece,* having assimilated practical 
propositions such as how to measure the distance of a ship at 
sea, and the height of a pyramid by its shadow; and having 
also arrived at some abstract theorems concerning triangles 
and circles.°Whether Thales himself set down his views in writing is not 
known, and was not known in antiquity. Some said that he left 
nothing; others that he wrote a work on Nautical Astronomy;! 
others ascribed to him a work or pair of works Ox the Solstice 
and Ox the Equinox; others a book on First Causes.¢ The work 
called Nautical Astronomy so doubtfully ascribed to him was in 
verse; others ascribed it to Phocus the Samian.: A passage in 
Galen purports to quote roughly a sentence from the Second 
Book of the work called Ox First Causes, which ends with a 
reference to the First Book: “Water is the substrate, and all 
things are derived from it; the manner has already been 
described by me in Book One.’i But another tradition stated 
that Anaximander was the first of the Greeks known to have 
been so bold as to publish a written work on Nature.* Aristotle, 
when describing Thales’ views, gives no reference, and not 
knowing the reasons given by Thales for choosing water as the 
substrate, he supplies his own conjecture.! Therefore either 
Thales wrote nothing, or his works did not long survive.

We can accept the unanimous testimony that Thales was 
the first of the philosophers; but much discussion has arisen 
over the exact nature of his originality. The sources tell us that 
he learnt geometry from the Egyptians, and was, like his suc- 
cessors, ‘a pupil of the Egyptians and Chaldeans’.™ Thus he 
evidently owed much to others in the two sciences in which he 
was distinguished. The question is, was the material collected 
by the Babylonians and Egyptians in any way scientifically 
arranged or analysed already; or was it a record of data and 
practical rules only? Nothing has so far come to light to prove 
that the Babylonian collection was anything more than a record

“of phenomena made for religious purposes; or that Egyptian

a A3; Arza b Ar §23; Aja; A3 ce Arr a Azr; At §26 
e Ar §24; A2o f£ At §23; Br 8 Ar §23 ° O&Br; Az i Ar §23 
iB; k 12A7 1Ar2“of phenomena made for religious purposes; or that Egyptian

a A3; Arza b Ar §23; Aja; A3 ce Arr a Azr; At §26 
e Ar §24; A2o f£ At §23; Br 8 Ar §23 ° O&Br; Az i Ar §23 
iB; k 12A7 1Ar2

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 51

geometry was anything more than certain equations and in- 
structions for measuring land and laying out buildings, There- 
fore the’view stands firm that Thales and his group, while using 
these data, introduced the scientific way of arranging them, 
drawing from them generalizations, which could in turn be 
usefully applied.*

This does not mean, however, that the particular discoveries 
in these sciences attributed to Thales were really his. For in- 
stance, that he knew the true theory of solar eclipses® is almost 
certainly wrong, for his successor Anaximander, who must 
have associated with him, held a complex and fantastic theory* 
that must have fallen before the correct one. Thales foretold 
an eclipse, as he could do by studying the Babylonian records, 
and therefore the explanation of the phenomenon was attributed 
to him.

It does not mean, either, that his science was entirely ‘pure’, 
that is, non-utilitarian. Why should it be? Whether scientific 
theory can accompany or grow out of practical purpose de- 
pends on the nature of the purpose. That of Thales, it is clear, 
was the assistance of navigation and husbandry, by means of a 
study of climate, or more widely, a study of celestial pheno- 
mena. This is shown, for example, in the title of the book 
ascribed to him — Nautical Astronomy; in the tradition that he 
discovered the constellation Little Bear;¢ and perhaps in the 
anecdote about the corner in olive-presses,* the success of

which depended on the ability to forecast a good olive harvest. |which depended on the ability to forecast a good olive harvest. |

The anecdote, as Aristotle remarks, really describes a financial 
device of general application, which became attached to the 
name of Thales because of his reputation for wisdom; but its 
nature probably points to Thales’ known interests as a meteoro- 
logist. Further, he was interested in the rise and fall of the Nile, 
on which the Egyptian harvests depended, and in the possible 
effect of seasonal winds on it.f Tradition suggested that he 
wrote on the Equinox and the Solstice, times at which the 
weather phenomena are striking; and that he studied the 
Hyades,® stars famous for issuing in rainy weather. These 
studies — meteorology and physical geography—predominated 
at Miletus, which was famous for its exploring and colonizing 
seamen, and which later produced the geographer Hecataeus.

a Arr bA3; Arz7 c See p. 61 d Ax §23; A3 © Aro; Ar §26

6

§2 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Some ancient writers* were content to call Thales simply the 
first of the scientists; but scholars of the Aristotelian school 
were well aware that though his was the first name connected 
with scientific research, he had had many predecessors, but 
had put them all in the shade by his superior ability.Aristotle himself has given Thales the title of ‘the founder of 
this kind of philosophy’, that is, of the kind that poses and 
seeks to answer the question “What is the reality behind pheno- 
mena?’ It is in this that his originality lies. He chose as his 
substrate Water, one of the four substances then believed to be 
elements, for he believed that the substrate was One, not 
several; and it did not occur to him, or to his successors in 
Miletus, that the substrate could be other than material. 
Aristotle conjectures as his reasons for this choice that he saw 
the essential part played by water in nourishing life, so that the 
hot element could come from it, since what is alive has heat; 
water is also the essence of seeds. Modern scholars such as 
Burnet? have suggested that Aristotle was mistaken in this con- 
jecture, because the science of biology had not become pre- 
eminent in Thales’ day, as later it did; and that since Thales 
was clearly interested in climate, his choice of water was 
governed by this study: he saw the transformations which 
water underwent into solid ice, and also into mist and vapour; 
the latter to the early scientists was Air, and therefore of the 
same composition as wind, breath, life. On a point where 
Aristotle had to fall back upon conjecture, nothing can be 
affirmed with certainty; but there are reasons for thinking that 
Aristotle’s conjecture is the more likely: one is that biology 
was undoubtedly keenly studied in the Milesian School, for 
Anaximander, Thales’ successor, had some striking views on 
the origin of life, among which was the theory that all living 
creatures arose from the moist element.? This theory was, in 
Anaximander’s teaching, developed in a remarkable way; it is 
therefore not unlikely that the idea originated with Thales. 
Again, Thales was interested in the flooding of the Nile, a strik- 
ing instance of the effect of water on germination; it may well 
have seemed to him that the water actually germinated the life. 
Aristotle’s view is therefore to be preferred.Aristotle further suggestse that Thales may have been influ-

1 Early Gk. Phil. Edn. 4, pp. 48-9.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 53

enced by mythology, which makes Ocean and Tethys the first 
parents of all,things; there was also a suggestion that he found 
this idea in Egyptian mythology.

It is not known whether he dealt with the problem of change; 
that 1s, whether he tried to explain the process by which all 
things are derived from water. There is a suggestion that he 
spoke of processes such as mixing,> but this is clearly because 
no explanation known to be his survived.

He did attempt a cosmology: he said that the earth floated on 
water.° Cosmology, though it always accompanies these early 
speculations, is not metaphysics; it is an attempt to explain the 
relations between earth, the other heavenly bodies, and space. 
Thales, Aristotle says, chose water to support the earth because 
things like wood and so on can float in water but not in air; he 
should have applied the same reasoning to the supporting water.4 
Again it is suggested that he was influenced by Egyptian 
mythology.© Seneca has it from some unknown source that 
Thales thought that Earth floated about like a ship, and that it 
is the tossing about on the water we feel when there is an earth- 
quake; however, he thinks this explanation ‘inept’.f It is 
possible that Thales thought of the earth as growing in the 
water: growth depends on moisture, and all things are nourished 
by that of which they are composed. This again would show a 
biological leaning.‘All things are full of gods.’"* This phrase, which seems to 
be a quotation, is given by Plato as well as Aristotle, though in 
the former not under Thales’ name. From Aristotle we learn 
that he said that the magnet had life, or soul, since it could 
move iron; therefore he thought that life or soul was that which 
made things move. (He was credited with the idea, often ex- 
pressed by later philosophers, that the soul is in its essence ever 
in motion and self-moving.)! Elsewhere it is said that he de- 
rived this view from studying amber as well as the magnet./ If 
so, then he must have experimented, for amber becomes active 
only when rubbed with certain materials. It has been thought 
odd that he should posit ‘life’ in all inanimate objects on the 
strength of the magnet, which was a unique manifestation; but 
if he treated amber and got the same manifestation, it may be 
that he thought that all objects had the same power if one knew

® At; cp.

£Ar3 BAIS hA22  iAzza;2gAr2 Jj Ar §24; A3; below, p. 385

$4 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

how to evoke it; and that he therefore thought that the whole 
Cosmos was a living thing, nourished by the life-giving water 
of which it was composed, and that each particular object in 
it was likewise alive. He was called by some an atheist; but 
tradition shows him to be a pantheist, seeing the life-force, 
which he equated with the divine, in the Whole and in every

art. It is rash to denude him of this idea on the ground that 
ee thinkers also held it; and it accords well with the interest 
in life and growth that Aristotle ascribes to him.art. It is rash to denude him of this idea on the ground that 
ee thinkers also held it; and it accords well with the interest 
in life and growth that Aristotle ascribes to him.

The anecdotes about his feats, though not to be accepted 
too readily, go on the whole to show that tradition regarded 
him as a man of great practical ability. He was, it is true, one 
of the Seven Sages; he figures in the tripod-saga,* and legend 
has gathered about his name, as about those of the others. Still, 
these legends may retain some faint imprint of the character of 
the man to whom tradition attached them; those of Thales are 
not the same as those of Solon or Bias, and they have an internal — 
consistency or similarity. There is only one story which shows 
him in the réle of unpractical dreamer: that of his falling into 
the well, brilliantly told by Plato in the Theaetetus,» and less 
agreeably by Hermippus;¢ this looks like an Athenian story of 
Periclean date, for it was then that the ordinary man began 
despising philosophers as absent-minded and unbusiness-like. 
The story of Thales’ coup in the business world, the corner in 
olive-presses,4 had as its moral ‘that a philosopher can make 
money if he likes, but is otherwise engaged’; this looks as if it 
were invented by the other side. Even Herodotus believed 
that Croesus took his army over the existing bridges of the 
river Halys and did not need the help of Thales.e But true or 
not, the stories fill out the picture of him as a man of practical 
as well as speculative ability; and the story that he advised the 
lonians to band together into a nation shows that he was re- 
garded as a leader of political as well as scientific thought. He 
was also said to have favoured an alliance with Cyrus rather

than Croesus, and so to have saved Miletus.!than Croesus, and so to have saved Miletus.!

In the saga of the Seven Sages, he was accorded the réle of 
defender of celibacy and childlessness,* as opposed to Solon’ 
who upheld the joys of marriage and family life; Solon was said 
to have visited him at Miletus, when Thales played a trick on

(© Ar§34 4 Aro; Ar §26 e A6

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 55

him. to prove his point. The sayings attributed to him in 
Diogenes Laertius and Stobaeus are not authentic.» He is said 
to have died in old age, of heat, thirst and the pressure of the 
crowd when watching an athletic contest. His prime of life 
was fixed by chronologers at 585 B.c.,,the date of the eclipse, 
and the date of his death, as was customary, about forty years 
later. The date of his birth was usually fixed at forty years be- 
fore the prime (a man’s prime being reckoned as forty years of 
age); but in Diogenes Laertius,¢ quoting Apollodorus, Thales’ 
birth is placed in 640 B.c., and his death, at the age of seventy- 
eight, in the 58th Olympiad (548-5), so that there is a mistake 
either in the report or in the text; probably in the former, as 
the writer immediately adds that Sosicrates gave Thales’ age as 
ninety when he died. Diogenes Laertius is full of blunders; 
there can be no doubt that what was intended was 6265 B.c., 
forty years before the eclipse. All these dates are equally arti- 
ficial, being based on the ‘prime’ at forty years of age which 
was fixed arbitrarily by Alexandrian chronologists at the most 
outstanding or easily-dated event in a man’s life.

12. ANAXIMANDER 
ANAXIMANDER of Mi erus was in his prime about 560 B.c.12. ANAXIMANDER 
ANAXIMANDER of Mi erus was in his prime about 560 B.c.

The chief sources are Aristotle; and the doxographers, who 
several times directly quote Theophrastus. The Life in Dio- 
genes Laertius is short and incomplete, and lacks the usual 
anecdotes. Anaximander’s views are therefore reported in the 
language of the Peripatetic School, whereas the only surviving 
sentence definitely quoted as his 1s worded poetically, as the 
reporter observes.

There seems little doubt that he left writings. The titles 
given in Suidase are of little value; but in Simplicius, drawing 
on Theophrastus, a sentence purporting to be his actual words

is quoted. There was a tradition that he was the first Greek 
to venture to publish his scientific views in writing.®

He is called ‘pupil’, ‘associate’, ‘successor’ of Thales; and 
there can be no doubt that his speculations carry on those of 
Thales, sometimes developing them (as for instance the theory

a Plut. Sol. VI b Ar §35;3 ch. 10, 38 ¢ Ar §37; A2; A7 d Ag; Br 
e A2 f Ag; Br 6 AY hA2; A4; A6; Ag; Aro; Arr;.

SALAR JENS LISRARY

$6 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

that life came from the moist element), sometimes intended as 
corrections and improvements on them. The Milesian scien- 
tists carried on their work all through the sixth century until 
the destruction of their city in 494 B.c.; Anaximander was the 
most outstanding of his, generation. His prime of life is there- 
fore given by the Alexandrian chronologists,* in default of any 
more striking event, as twenty-five years after that of Thales, 
and about twenty-five years before that of Anaximenes.

He said that the primary substance was not any one of the 
Four Elements, but ‘some different kind of substance’, which 
he called the Apeiroz,> the Non-Limited; he appears to have 
had to invent a name for his new concept.°This concept, unlike Thales’ choice of a substrate, seems to 
have been arrived at logically; for though the Non-Limited was 
material and therefore perceptible, it was removed from our 
perceptions by being out of reach. Moreover, it was put for- 
ward as an emendation of Thales’ view. Anaximander con- 
ceived of the Four Elements as pairs of opposite qualities, 
Hot-Cold, Wet-Dry; and therefore he postulated a primary 
substance from which these pairs could be derived: something 
in which they were all mixed together, and which therefore had 
not the quality of any one of them. Thus the Non-Limited was 
neutral in quality,4 a logical idea arrived at from what must 
have been a new conception of the Four Elements as pairs of 
opposites; for if this idea had existed before, Thales could not 
have chosen as his substrate one of the four.

It is said that he also thought of it as unlimited in quantity,° 
the reason given being that there must be a perpetual supply of 
material for fresh creation. He believed that there were an un- 
limited number of universes,‘ and that the process as a whole 
never ceased.® Aristotle, while pointing out that the concept 
af infinity must he admitted, and that the source of creation

must be infinite, nevertheless attacked the concept of a cor- 
poreal infinite,‘ and refuted the idea that 1t was necessary in 
order that creation should not cease.i It is possible that 
Anaximander was not clear upon this point; or that he assumed 
the supply of matter to be inexhaustible, though not necessarily

; Ag; Aga; Arr; Arg; Ar6; Br Ss eae 
» Ara; Arg; Ar7; Aga # Ag; Aro; Art; Ar4;Ar7z7 = 8 Ars; Ba; B3 
= iA1r6 jArs

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 57; Ag; Aga; Arr; Arg; Ar6; Br Ss eae 
» Ara; Arg; Ar7; Aga # Ag; Aro; Art; Ar4;Ar7z7 = 8 Ars; Ba; B3 
= iA1r6 jArs

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 57

infinite in extent. At any rate, unlimited quantity was not 
necessary to his scheme, since what was created returned ulti- 
mately to the source; he says this in the sentence? attributed 
to him, where it is seen to be an essential part of his scheme, 
having a moral sanction even in the physical world.

Another logical reason for having as substrate something 
that is over and above®. »+ the Four Elements and not any one of 
them seems to have been that a difficulty was felt in having a 
substrate that itself was constantly changing, like Thales’ 
Water. It could be said of the Non-Limited that it was eternal 
and indestructible,° and did not change as a whole when giving 
birth to a Cosmos;4 its quality remained the same. This was 
of course unsatisfactory and superficial in the light of later 
thought, but it was a step forward in the search for an un- 
changing reality behind phenomena.It 1s not known whether Thales suggested the process by 
which other things are derived from Water; perhaps he did not 
think an explanation necessary. If not, then Anaximander is 
original in this also. His explanation was that the Opposites 
‘separated out’ from the Non-Limited;* the doxographers say 
that the cause of the separating-out was ‘the Everlasting 
Motion’. This latter term is not explained, and may not have 
been Anaximander’s; the power of movement shown in the 
periodic separating-out of the Opposites to form a Cosmos was 
inherent in his substrate. But the former term, ‘separating- 
out’, was probably his; it is a descriptive and metaphorical 
term, not a definition, so that its exact meaning for Anaxi- 
mander is not definable. He may have meant that the Oppo- 
sites, in leaving the mixture which held them all neutralized, 
became articulated, separated off into pairs of antagonists; or 
— and this is supported by one of the doxographic accounts of 
the cosmogony® — that a piece of the Non-Limited broke away 
from the Whole whenever a Cosmos was created. It may even

1+ {mis being the Everlast-

49 b Ar6 c¢ B33; Ars dAg; Ar e Ag; Aro; Ar6 
9; Arr; Ar2; Ar7 g Aro h Aro

bl +8 trap& rk otoryeta: Aristotle, Phys. 204b.

h! dyoxuxroupivey tavrav ataév [Plut.] Strom. 2.

! Sreipov definitely means unlimited in quantity as well as quality in the doxographers. 
Simplicius uses &épiorov to mean indefiniteness of quality as opposed to &teipov, when 
speaking of Anaximenes (13A5). He took both Anaximander and Anaximenes to 
mean that their substrates were unlimited in ‘size’ © ~~

58 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS58 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

ing Motion’, and threw off pieces as it revolved, an idea later 
to become familiar. The latter explanation, though perhaps 
crediting Anaximander with less bolinias and insight than the 
former, seems more in accordance with the evidence. His cos- 
mogony of course shows a process of articulation ; but probably 
the term ‘separating-out’ (it is sometimes given as ‘separating- 
off’)* refers only to the original breaking away of a piece from 
the Non-Limited.

There is no corresponding term for the return of the Oppo- 
sites to the Non-Limited:; it seems therefore from this and from 
his rather elaborate cosmogony that he was more interested in 
the process of Becoming than in the reverse process that meant 
the destruction of a Cosmos. The latter was an essential part 
of his scheme; but if he cared more about genesis than about 
the reverse, it may be true that he regarded the Non-Limited as 
necessarily infinite in quantity, so that Becoming should not 
cease, and overlooked the fact that such a supposition was logi- 
cally unnecessary. The return of the Opposites to the Non- 
Limited was thought of by him not as a means of replenishing 
the supply, but as a means whereby their mutual strife and 
encroachments could be readjusted.» Their differences were 
again merged in neutrality.Anaximander’s cosmogony was as follows: at the creation 
of this universe, there broke off from the Non-Limited a piece 
capable of generating the pair of Opposites Hot-Cold. From 
this the rest of the articulation followed. There is only one 
report® ©? of this initial step, but it 1s drawn from Theophrastus ; 
and it is this passage that also states that the mixture revolved. 
The view therefore that ‘separating-off’ (as it is here called) 
merely means the breaking off of the necessary piece rests on 
good authority. This passage also throws light on the nature 
of the Non-Limited; for it becomes clear that the Opposites 
Hot-Cold are regarded as the original pair from which the 
others of which we know are derived. The Non-Limited there- 
fore might be said to be a mixture in which Hot-Cold are held

. b Br; Ag ¢ Aro 
Cl +d x tod diSlou yovipov Seppo te kal wuxpot. The use of 1d shows that this was 
the piece necessary to the creation of a Cosmos: there could not be, to start with, a 
piece containing some other pair of Opposites. Guthrie (Orpheus and Greek Religion, 
PP. 223-4) suggests a possible parallel between 1d yévipov and the Orphic Egg; but he is 
fully aware that ‘it was in reaction against the mythologists that they [the early scientists] 
put forward their own systems’.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 59

together in neutralization; it must therefore be a kind of mean 
between them, as when hot water is mixed with cold. It is not 
a mixture of everything, not even a mixture of other opposites 
independent of Hot-Cold.The portion separated off then differentiates into Hot and 
Cold, the Hot embracing the Cold in a ring, as the bark grows 
round the tree.2)21 This Cold by then consisted of a layer of Air, 
and inside it was the Earth. At first this so-called Earth was 
all Wet, but by the action of the Hot drawing up the moisture, 
it had gradually been dried; the Wet which remained in the 
hollows of the earth is the sea. It is still being evaporated, and 
some day all will be Dry.c Thus there came into being four 
rings: Hot (Fire), Cold (Air), Wet (Water), Dry (Earth), the 
ring of water being broken.

Meanwhile, the outer ring of Fire had also been disintegrat- 
ing.¢ The result was three inner rings of Fire, going round 
the Earth like the circumferences or felloes of wheels, with the 
Earth as their common centre. These rings were that of the 
sun,® that of the moon,‘ and that of the stars.2 We cannot see 
the whole of the rings because they are each enclosed in a casing 
of air. The sun-ring is the farthest away; it has one aperture, 
through which the sun appears, this aperture being borne 
round as the wheel turns. The moon-ring comes next, it too 
having one aperture. The star-wheel comes nearest, having 
many small apertures. The respective distances of the wheels 
from us are implied in the statement that the sun-ring 1s twenty- 
eight» 51 times the size of the earth, the moon-ring nineteen 
times;ithatis, 27+1and 18+1 express sun plus earth-ring, and 
moon plus earth-ring, respectively. The actual aperture in the 
sun-ring, through which we see what we call the sun, is equal 
in size to the earth.i These rings lie slant-wise relatively to the 
plane of the earth, «1 and their rotatory motion was started in 
the beginning by the Fire evaporating the Wet surrounding 
the earth, and so giving rise to winds.!}

@ Aro b Aro ¢ A27 d Aro e A2r f A22 & Arr; Ars

hA2r = iAaz j Aar k A22 1 A27@ Aro b Aro ¢ A27 d Aro e A2r f A22 & Arr; Ars

hA2r = iAaz j Aar k A22 1 A27

a! The doxographer calls this a ‘sphere’, but if the metaphor of bark growing round a 
tree is to be given a meaning—and it is more likely to be Anaximander’s than oatpa 
which is a Pythagorean idea — then a ring of Fire rather than a hollow globe must be 
intended. Presumably a ring of bark as seen in section in a felled tree or log is the 
source of the simile. Anaximander'ss Earth was not spherical.

bh} Elsewhere the same authority (Aétius) gives this as 27 times.

&* (of the moon-ring) relnevov Aofbv, Gotten exetvov (the su

60 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Anaximander expressed this cosmogony by means of meta- 
phors which later were sometimes misconstrued. His concen- 
tric rings of air enclosing fire he likened to the hollow felloe* 
(circumference) of a wheel; and the aperture through which the 
sun is seen — the only one in its own ring — he called a breath- 
ing-hole, and likened it to the nozzle of a bellows.» >: The 
modern equivalent is the inner tube of a pneumatic tyre with 
its valve. The same applied exactly to the moon-ring.c The 
same applied also to the star-ring, except that it had many of the 
‘pipe-like passages’ or breathing-holes.? This vivid and original 
conception was however later misinterpreted by some, as we 
see in the tradition preserved by Achilles the Byzantian.* Here 
Anaximander is represented as saying that the sun 1s wheel- 
shaped, for as a wheel has a hollow zave, and the spokes extend 
from it to the circumference, so the light of the sun is sent out 
in rays from a hollow centre. At this point the reporter fails to 
fit in the metaphor of the bellows, and therefore disingenuously 
adds it as the opinion of some other thinkers. The source df the 
confusion was the use of the term ‘circle’? to mean a ring going 
round the earth; this was mistaken to mean the sun’s round 
disc.A difficulty arises over the starry ring. In one authority 
(Hippolytus)‘ the star-ring is described as single, just like that 
of the sun and that of the moon; a little farther on, the same 
doxographer speaks of many such rings. In Aétuus is the state- 
ment that ‘the stars’ are carried round each by the ring on 
which it stands. Anaximander is credited with distinguishing 
between the fixed stars and the planets; and it certainly seems 
necessary, if his scheme was to cover the obvious phenomena, 
that he should suppose at least one ring that did not turn for 
the apparently fixed stars, and another ring or rings that did 
turn for the planets. The movements of the constellations, too, 
do not seem to fit the ring-theory very well, especially of those

that, like Ursa Major and Minor, revolve round an axis in the 
heavens, instead of appearing to revolve round the earth.* But

sabia Saas ~ sae d Arr e A2r fArr §4 8 Ar8

b! éxrvor;: “breathing-out-hole’ is more accurate; it is metaphorical for the streaming- 
forth of the heat and light. There was no corresponding in-breathing.

* «ixdos. The word tpoxés (wheel) is more frequent.

* Burnet (EGP* p. 66, p. 69) thinks that the earth also rotated in Anaximander’s

system. But the reading and meaning of the fragment of Eudemus (A26), on which 
this view is based, are uncertain,

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 61system. But the reading and meaning of the fragment of Eudemus (A26), on which 
this view is based, are uncertain,

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 61

tradition preserves nothing further on this point; it records 
only that Anaximander calculated the size and distance of the 
heavenly bodies.* Perhaps the difficulty about the star-ring or 
rings accounts for the fact that no size relative to that of the 
earth is given for such a ring, as it is for the sun- and moon- 
rings. He said that the sun-ring was 28 times (27+1), the 
moon-ring 19 times (18+1) that of earth; modern scholars on 
this analogy have suggested nine as the number for the star- 
ring. But this is a guess; perhaps Anaximander could not give 
one measurement, because the star-ring was not one but many.

One account of the stars says that they were ‘pads of air, 
wheel-shaped, full of fire, breathing out flames at a certain 
point through mouths’.’ One 1s at first tempted to see in this an 
explanation of the planets: that they were free to move, whereas 
the star-ring, for instance the Galaxy, was stationary. But we 
have the report that each ‘star’ stood on its own ring and moved 
with it:¢ this surely refers to the planets. It seems then that we 
have here the same mistaken tradition as in Achilles :% 41 a star- 
wheel is taken to mean a wheel-shaped star, just as the sun-ring 
was taken to mean the wheel-shaped sun.

The explanation of celestial phenomena was completed by a 
theory of eclipses;* and of the phases of the moon.‘ These, he 
thought, were due to the occasional or periodic stopping-up of 
the breathing-holes in the rings; the air, that is, closed up the 
hole through which the fire shone.In the centre of the system of rings was the earth. It was 
cylindrical or columnar in shape, with a height of one-third of 
its width.¢ We live on one surface, and there is another under- 
neath. The earth held the central position, and could not leave 
it, not because anything supported it, but because it was under 
a necessity to remain in the middle. This ‘necessity’ is not ex- 
plained; it may have been imposed by the evolution of earth 
inside all the rings. These views are clearly meant as an emenda- 
tion of Thales’ theory that the earth was supported by water. It

is wrong, however, to deduce as some modern scholars do that 
Anaximander conceived of the universe as having no absolute

c Arg 
° £aal DBD ZALUG Lhd dg Sd BHY 
d! See p. 60; also p. 6 e. The word translated ‘pads of air’ in the quotation above is 
maAtpara. The words mfAnois, mAotota, are used by the doxographers when, 
describing the work of Anaximenes. Perhaps here we have a transference of terms from 
Anaximenes back to Anaximander.

62 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

up-and-down, because he placed nothing under the earth to 
support it. On the contrary, the columnar form he attributed 
to the earth shows that he saw it as standing uprighr in the 
Cosmos; and so too does his view that we live on the upper 
surface; there was an under surface, but it was a mere antipodes. 
The earth cannot fall ‘down’ because it is not allowed to move 
away from the centre; but there is a ‘down’ for it to fall, if it 
were allowed.This cosmology was filled out with attempted explanations 
of all the other meteorological phenomena discussed then and 
later by almost all scientists. Thunder, lightning and winds 
were all caused by the air: air was shut up in a thick cloud, and 
burst out with violence; the breakage of the cloud.caused the 
noise of thunder, and the rift gave the appearance of a flash in 
contrast with the surrounding blackness of the cloud. Winds 
were caused when the lighter particles of air (mist) were sepa- 
rated off from it, and moved about having collected together;> 
rain came from the steam given up from the earth under the 
influence of the sun.* Eclipses (as has been said) of the sun and 
moon were caused by the complete stopping of the breathing- 
holes; the phases of the moon were due to the same cause 
operating gradually and regularly.¢ This opening and closing 
of the valves was connected (how, is not stated) with the re- 
volving of the respective rings.¢ An explanation of earth- 
quakes is also attributed to him.

Anaximander put forward some remarkable views on bio- 
logy; here his work seems to join on to that of Thales. He said 
that all living creatures arose from the moist element as it was 
evaporated by the sun.‘ These primitive creatures, having 
come into being in the moist element, were covered with prickly 
wrappings,® &*butas they grew older they climbed out on to the 
drier part; their wrappings broke off, and they survived only a 
short time.* Mankind, therefore, was originally like a fish; or 
to put it differently, these fish-like creatures contained within 
themselves human beings, to which, by bursting asunder, they 
subsequently gave birth.) The reason for thinking that man 
was originally born from creatures of a different species 1s that 
whereas other animals soon find food for themselves, man 1s the

\rr b A24; Arr ce Art d Arr; A2r; A22 e A22 
Arr Xo & Kao ® Ars \ Arr %6 
 ghorls dxovdubtor, ghords==the inner bark of trees.\rr b A24; Arr ce Art d Arr; A2r; A22 e A22 
Arr Xo & Kao ® Ars \ Arr %6 
 ghorls dxovdubtor, ghords==the inner bark of trees.

, OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 63

only one that requires a long period of suckling; so that if he 
had been so made originally, he could not have survived.® 
Hence in the beginning another creature must have nurtured 
the human foetus until it was old enough to look after itself.»

Anaximander’s scientific attainments included two practical 
discoveries. He introduced to Greece the Gnomon,* a sun- 
instrument for measuring the time, the seasons and so on; this, 
Herodotus says, was taken over by the Greeks from the Baby- 
lonians, so that perhaps Anaximander made some notable im- 
provement in it. He also produced the first map of the known 
world, which was afterwards used and revised by Hecataeus.4No description of the return of a Cosmos to the Unlimited 
survives. That it does so return we know from the only remain- 
ing sentence® of his works, where it is said that particular 
things are bound by the law of necessity to return to that from 
which they took their origin; there they will make reparation 
and pay penalty for their injustice to one another, according to 
the arrangement of time. We know, too, that in our Cosmos 
this process is going on; for the moist element is being dried 
up by the hot, and some day all will be dry.f Creation means 
differentiation of opposites, which are then in a state of strife 
with each other; now one, now the other gets the upper hand. 
When in due time they return to the source, all these differences 
will be merged in the impartial whole. This seems to imply a 
moral force governing the universe, at work in non-human and 
in inanimate as well as in human nature; but there 1s nowhere 
else any hint that Anaximander conceived such a force. The 
Peripatetic School liked to compare Anaximander’s Unlimited 
with Anaxagoras’ original mixture of Seeds; if they had found 
in his work anything equivalent to Anaxagoras’ Mind, they 
would have seized upon it. It seems more likely that Anaxi- 
mander was trying to express the relation of the Opposites, and 
their final dissolution in the Non-Limited in terms of a more 
familiar concept, that of human justice; that 1s to say, that he 
was using a metaphor, as he was fond of doing, to explain a 
difficult and, it seems, original idea: his new view of the ele- 
ments as pairs of Opposites. It is even further from the truth 
to suppose, on the strength of a word omitted in the Aldine 
Simplicius but found in the manuscripts, that Anaximander

a Ato b Aro c Ai Ag d Ar; A6 e Br; Ag

64 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSa Ato b Aro c Ai Ag d Ar; A6 e Br; Ag

64 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

conceived of a mystic sin committed by the universe in being 
articulated at all.1 There is, in fact, no reason to suppose that 
Anaximander was foisting a moral explanation on to his cosmo- 
logy; there is no evidence that he was interested 1n ethics. The 
only statement attributed to him about the Soul is that it was 
‘air-like’,* and in this his name is coupled with Anaximenes, 
Anaxagoras and Archelaus.

I3. ANAXIMENES

ANAXIMENES of Mitetus is said to have been in his prime about 
546 B.c.,> the date of the fall of Sardis. This is an arbitrary 
estimate of Apollodorus. We know only that he was third in 
the succession of leaders of the Milesian school, and that his 
work must have been done before 494 B.c., when Miletus was 
destroyed, since he is not heard of as being in exile.

The references in Aristotle are very few and brief: in the 
Metaphysics,° that Air is the substrate; in the Meteorology, that 
the sun goes round, not under the earth, and ‘sets’ behind the 
northern heights;4 elsewhere in the same book, the cause of 
earthquakes.°

Theophrastus must have given Anaximenes more attention, 
for the doxographers, Simplicius, Aétius and Hippolytus are 
full, interesting and mostly in agreement. The Plutarchian 
Stromateis has a paragraph.‘ Plutarch describes the process 
of condensation and rarefaction, the breathing-experiment 
and Aristotle’s refutation of the deduction drawn from it;? in 
this he quotes at least one word? as Anaximenes’ own. The 
Life in Diogenes Laertius is very brief. Suidas quotes no 
opinions. !

Anaximenes certainly wrote a book, the style of which is said 
to have been ‘simple and unextravagant Ionic’.i One whole 
sentence has survived.«

He is said to have been the pupil and associate of Anaxi- 
mander,! and is undoubtedly partly using, partly combating or 
a A29 b Ar; A2; A7 §9 c A4 dAr4 e A2r f A6 6 Br

h Ar i Az j Ax k B2 1A1; Az; As; Ag; Aro; Argah Ar i Az j Ax k B2 1A1; Az; As; Ag; Aro; Arga

1 Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, Vol. 1, p. 55. The word &Adndois was omitted in the

Aldine Sim plicius. 
7 5, ‘slack’.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 65

emending his results. He appears to have kept more closely to 
meteorology than his predecessors; no mathematical specula- 
tions or practical inventions are attributed to him.: The bio- 
logical interest is also absent, except in so far as breathing is 
concerned; so too is any ethical doctrine, and his attitude to- 
wards religion seems to have been antagonistic. No personality 
emerges; we seem to have in him the pure scientist, confining 
himself to one branch of science, and reaching through this 
and this only a conclusion about the Whole. His concentration 
did not spoil his work; his cosmology is not inferior to that of 
his predecessors, except that one or two of his guesses were less 
fortunate than Anaximander’s; but Anaximander also made 
fantastic guesses. The important thing about these guesses 
(that is, hypotheses going beyond what the evidence warranted) 
is not only their actual proximity to the correct explanation 
since discovered, but also the principle involved: the effort to 
arrange the observed data in an intelligible scheme, based on a 
cause-and-effect relationship between them. This principle is 
at work in the mistakes of these men no less than in their suc- 
cesses; and it is present in the work of Anaximenes no less than 
in that of Anaximander. Moreover, as a metaphysician he cer- 
tainly gained by his concentration.He chose as his substrate Air (Vapour). As the doxo- 
grapher says, there is a distinction between what 1s unlimited 
in extent, and what 1s undefined in quality.» Anaximenes chose 
a Non-Limited in quantity but not in quality;° the distinction 
between the two sorts of quantity, number and extent, had not 
yet arisen. He took over Anaximander’s idea of a Non-Limited 
in quantity, and restored to it a definite quality, calling it Air.4

Air is one of the Four Elements; how then could Anaxi- 
menes, after the work of Anaximander, return to one of these? 
He was enabled to do so by what is really the central point, the 
One, in his metaphysics, and that is the process or principle of 
change. He was the first to see the importance of defining this 
principle; and he offered as his description of it, not a metaphor 
like “separating-off’, but a direct statement of a law. This was 
the principle of rarefaction and condensation.® *!

2A4;A5;A6;A7;A8;A9;B2 bAs cA6 dAg e€As;A6;A7;A8; Br 
e! Rarefaction and condensation: pavétns, pdvwois, c&patwois; auKvdtns, TUKVwoTS, 
mAnots. The verbs are: &paiotota, S1ayeioban, muKvoUotai, MAoVobal, cuviotactal.

1 Except that the Gnomon and sun-clock elsewhere attributed to Anaximander are 
by Pliny given to Anaximenes (A142).

66 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS1 Except that the Gnomon and sun-clock elsewhere attributed to Anaximander are 
by Pliny given to Anaximenes (A142).

66 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

This principle, though he required two words to describe it, 
is one — difference of density; so that it is better than Anaxi- 
mander’s in that it works both ways. Also, it is a quantitative 
difference; it was essential to the progress of science that the 
importance of quantitative differences in determining quality 
should be realized. The other so-called elements were derived 
from Air by this process: Air when rarefied became Fire, and 
when condensed, wind, then cloud, then water, then earth, and 
lastly stones. He recognized, therefore, a connection between 
density and temperature. Thus the barriers not only between 
the elements but also between the Opposites were broken down; 
for they were shown to be the same substance more diffused or 
more tightly packed.» It will be noticed that the next step is to 
speak of particles thus diffused or compressed, but there is no 
record of his having done so.By this principle, then, the substances are arranged in a scale 
according to density, and this gives rise to Hot and Cold;¢ the 
Cold has subdivisions, vaporous, liquid and solid. Between 
Hot and Cold stands Air, in which they both merge, where the 
balance is equal, where indeed as one doxographer says, Air- 
Rarefied (the Hot) or Air-Condensed (the Cold) ‘returns to its 
own nature’. It might be asked why, if the only difference 
between these forms is one of density, Air should be regarded 
as ultimate, any more than the others. If Fire 1s rarefied Air, 
Air may be equally well described as condensed Fire. This 1s 
the logical outcome of Anaximenes’ law. But he did not see it 
so. He was dominated by the idea of the Opposites, Hot and 
Cold, which he had accepted from Anaximander; and he saw 
his arrangement of the forms of matter not as a scale stretching 
to infinity in both directions, but as a scale limited in each 
direction, having ends and therefore capable of being bisected. 
His Hot is Absolute Hot, and his Cold Absolute Cold. The 
Hot end is the end beyond which the process of rarefaction 
cannot go, and the Cold end that beyond which condensation 
cannot go.

He was also trying to work out a connection between motion 
and change of form. The Air, he said, is in constant motion; 
if it were not, the changes it undergoes would not take place.¢ 
It appears that he believed it to have in itself this power of 
movement,! that is, the power of rarefying and condensing; he,

aAs; A7 b A8 cA7 §3 d A8 e Az §2; As f A6

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 67aAs; A7 b A8 cA7 §3 d A8 e Az §2; As f A6

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 67

like Anaximander, does not suggest a First Cause of motion. 
Nor does he suggest why the substrate should sometimes 
pg emma ea condense. In the particular phenomena of 
the Cosmos, the cause of motion remained obscure; the move- 
ment of the winds was ascribed to ‘some unknown impulse to 
flow’.2)*? He went some way towards suggesting a connection 
between rarefaction and mobility: on the Cold side of the scale 
we have first winds (mobile vapour), then clouds (less mobile 
vapour), then water, which is less mobile than cloud but more 
mobile than earth; and so on. On the Hot side of the scale 
there is Fire, which no doubt he regarded as the most mobile 
of all. Air might be expected to stand half-way between the 
Hot and the Cold in respect of mobility; but it seems that 
winds, the first result of the condensing of Air, are also a 
quickening-up of it.» However, this difficulty resolves itself 
when we recognize a distinction between mobility, that is 
internal motion, and movement in a mass, relative to external 
things. Airis ‘most equable’: ©? in its motion; when winds arise, 
a portion condenses and is propelled swiftly; the internal 
mobility of the ‘mass’ of wind need not be so great as that of the 
Air, which throughout its whole corpus is constantly in 
motion. ;Swiftness of motion in the mass, relative to external things, 
was connected by him with temperature; he says of the sun 
that it is earth, but gets its burning power from the swiftness 
of its movement, which makes it very hot.¢ Further, he 
wished to equate rarefaction with increase in temperature, and 
condensation with decrease in temperature; he illustrated this 
by taking the proverbial “blowing hot and cold’, and suggesting 
that when we breathe with the lips contracted, the current of 
air is cold, whereas when we expel the breath through wide- 
open mouth, it is warm.® Aristotle dismissed this as ‘the man’s 
ignorance; for when we breathe out with open mouth, we 
breathe the heat from our own insides, but when we blow with 
contracted lips, it is not our own breath but the air before the 
mouth which we propel, and that 1s cold’.

This brings us to another reason which supported his choice 
of Air as substrate, a reason similar to that which caused

a Arg b Ay §7 ¢ A7 §2 d A6 e Br f Br 
a dyn til dyveote (Galen). 
C4,

68 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Thales to choose Water: namely, its ie er for the main- 
tenance of life. At this period, Air was identified with Breath, 
and so with Life or Soul.: The above illustration, although he 
drew a wrong conclusion from it, shows that he was interested 
in breathing; and in the remaining sentence of his book he 
says that just as our soul, being Air, holds us together, so do 
Breath and Air encompass the whole Cosmos.? He did not say 
that the Cosmos breathed; but his analogy seems to show that 
he thought of Air as not only encompassing the Cosmos, but 
also running through it and connecting it. There was outside 
the Cosmos a boundless supply of Air for it to draw upon, 
just as our bodies draw upon the Air outside.Ultimate Air, the substrate, was invisible; it became visible 
‘by the Hot and the Cold and the Wet and the Moving’.® The 
question suggests itself, did he think that it was present in our 
Cosmos in an invisible form, that is, did he suspect the exis- 
tence of ‘atmospheric air’? This seems unlikely. What is 
meant is probably that from the outside Air, which is invisible 
and in constant motion, our Cosmos draws its supply for 
creation; but that the Air thus taken in changes its form, that 
is, assumes forms visible, perceptible to us, by rarefaction and 
condensation. This assumption of perceptible forms is what 1s 
meant by Becoming. In its ‘equable’ form Air cannot be per- 
ceived; but when it rarefies to Hot, or condenses to Cold or 
still further to Wet, and when a portion thus rarefied or con- 
densed is given separate and distinct motion, then it can be 
said to have ‘come into being’ out of the substrate, and to have 
become visible to us in our world.

Having thus thought out his substrate and his process, he 
went on to apply them consistently throughout the whole 
range of phenomena. The first step was the condensation of a 
portion of Air;* this was his substitution for Anaximander’s 
separating-out, but he does not explain how it arises. It 
follows that the Cold, not the Hot, is the first to appear; that 
is, the Earth came into being before the heavenly bodies in 
our Cosmos. It is to be noticed that in the cosmogony the 
condensation of Air to form Earth appears to be direct, and 
the stages of Vapour and Water are omitted. This first con- 
densation was therefore intense.

2 c A6 
1 tveGpa. &nut, to breathe. wuyt, Life or Soul.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 692 c A6 
1 tveGpa. &nut, to breathe. wuyt, Life or Soul.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 69

The resultant body was flat,* like a table-top or a lid,» and 
thus was able to ‘ride’ on the air below it. Its flatness gave it 
resistance, ©? so that it did not ‘cut’ the supporting air. This air 
did not give way under the pressure of the earth because 
there was nowhere for it to go.4 These views are clearly 
intended as a correction of Anaximander’s; the view of Thales 
is preferred, with Air in the place of Water, and with the 
addition of the reason why the supporting substance did not 
itself need support. It was necessary to add this, for Thales 
had pointed out that things can float in water but not on air.° 
The illustration ascribed to Anaximenes was the resistance 
offered: by flat bodies to the wind: they are ‘hard to move’ for 
this reason, and the same principle is at work in the buoying 
up of the earth from underneath by air.f Aristotle quotes this 
without comment; but in Anaximenes’ Cosmos, with its abso- 
lute up-and-down, it does not seem apt. A flat body, present- 
ing a surface to the wind, is easy, not hard to move, unless it 
is otherwise fixed; and moreover the earth is represented as 
pressing down upon the air that supports it, not being blown 
against by it. Elsewhere the heavenly bodies are said to float 
in air for the same reason as Earth, namely because of their 
flatness ;& but they, it is clear, cannot be called ‘hard to move’, 
for they can even be blown out of their courses by winds.? 
They do, it is true, present a surface to a wind blowing later- 
ally, or in other words, they are placed on edge, as it were, in 
relation to the disc of the earth, and this keeps them afloat 
‘like leaves’.i But this is not the same thing as the downward- 
bearing earth; nor can it be said of the heavenly bodies that 
their flat surfaces offer resistance that makes them ‘hard to 
move’. So that either Anaximenes’ illustration was confused, 
or there has been a fusion, one concerned with earth, another 
concerned with the heavenly bodies, and Aristotle has repro- 
duced it. It is hard to believe that Aristotle, usually so quick 
to find fault, did not see the difficulty; if he did, he did not 
think it worth comment.The sun, moon and stars have their origin from the earth.: 
Mist rises from the earth, and is in its turn rarefied to Fire; that 
is to say, after the initial condensation of Ultimate Air, there

c A2o d A20 e r1rAr4 f A20 
hArs iAr4; Ars 1 A6; A7 §5 
(Aristotle),

79 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

is a reverse process of rarefaction; why or how this comes 
about is not stated. From this Fire, riding freely in the vaulted 
space, the heavenly bodies are formed. The sun can therefore 
be said to be earth; but it gets its heat from the swiftness of 
its motion.* This implies that the sun would condense and 
cool down if it ceased to move; apparently Anaximenes 
thought that the sun moved faster than the moon, that is, the 
sun made daily the revolution that the moon made monthly. 
These bodies are all flat like leaves;> or, according to another 
simile, they are like paintings, that is, are in two dimensions 
only.¢ °1

The moon is said to be ‘made of fire’;4 some credited him 
with the discovery that the moon gets its light from the sun, 
but this does not accord at all with the rest of his cosmology, 
and must be dismissed. The moon in Anaximenes’ system 
seems to be just like the other heavenly bodies, a piece of earth 
rarefied to fire, flat, floating about, moving less swiftly than 
the sun and therefore not so hot, nearer to earth than the 
stars and therefore appearing to us bigger than they. No 
explanation of lunar phases is recorded.

He definitely distinguished between stars and planets; he 
spoke of ‘stars fixed like nails in the crystalline vault’, and 
stars which are ‘fiery leaves, like pictures’.e-*! There are also 
among them certain earthy bodies which are invisible;‘ that 
is, bodies which, like the visible stars, were originally rarefied 
from earth but have lost their heat and have condensed again 
to their former nature. These ‘are carried along with the stars, 
in the starry region’. It has been suggested that he used

d A16 e Ar4 £A7§s;d A16 e Ar4 £A7§s;

vai Ta Gotoa TH KovotahAceBel. Evior| — 
elvar TUpiva Goren guoypaphyata (Aetius). Burnet (EGP4, p. 77, n. 4) comparing 
Plato, Timaeus 55c (where Bicgwypapdv is used of the Creator's diagrams) takes 
zmypaprara to refer to the arrangement of the constellations. But the whole phrase 
disallows this: ‘fiery leaves, like paintings’. Anaximenes’ leaves ride freely in air, and 
can even be diverted by meeting condensed air; therefore 3ypaprpara cannot refer to 
a fixed arrangement here, unless it be written after the first half of the sentence, which 
Burnet rejects (see below, note &!). The only other likeness between the leaves and 
paintings is their flatness: Anaximenes is at pains to take away as far as possible the 
thickness of the bodies of our Cosmos, as is shown by his making the earth a flat disc 
instead of a cylinder. 
e? Burnet (EGP*, p. 77, n. 4) rejects the first half because it does not fit his view that 
Anaximenes like Anaximander made the earth rotate in its own plane. I prefer with 
Diels to doubt tv01, and ascribe the whole to Anaximenes.

fr

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 71

these to account for eclipses? and phases of the moon. In that 
case ‘the starry regions’ must nt principally to the region 
occupied by the sun and moon,? since they are thought by 
Anaximenes to be nearer to us than the other heavenly bodies. 
The reason why the stars give no heat is their distance from 
the earth. This last statement is again a correction of Anaxi- 
mander, who placed the star-region nearest.Thus the sun, moon, planets and dark bodies float like 
leaves in the heavens. The cause of their motion is not stated, 
though it was affected by their meeting with condensed air.> 
Their normal courses are not under the earth, as Anaximander 
said, byt round it, ‘as a cap turns on the head’;° it is a lateral 
motion like that of a millstone.t When they disappear, they 
go ‘behind the higher parts of the earth’. The sun is hidden 
at night because the earth is ‘high towards the north’. The 
meaning of this is uncertain: either there are highlands in the 
north behind which the sun sets at night; or (and this seems 
more likely) Anaximenes was again emending Anaximander: 
whereas Anaximander had given his earth’s surface the hori- 
zontal position and made the rings lie slantwise with regard 
to it so as to pass under the earth, Anaximenes preferred to 
think of the heavenly bodies moving in the horizontal plane, 
and the earth lying in another plane with regard to it, that is, 
tilted up at the north; so that the sun sets behind the uptilted 
curve when he disappears in the west; and reappears on the 
other side. It is also suggested that the distance of the sun 
from us becomes greater as he gets nearer the setting-point;® 
this is perhaps meant to account for the decrease in his 
heating power at evening and morning. If this is what is 
meant, then the disc of the earth does not float ‘flat’ on the 
supporting air, as if on water, but 1s buoyed up at the northern 
side. Anaximander conceived of the Cosmos as having two 
corresponding halves, one above the earth-cylinder, one be- 
low; but Anaximenes seems to have preferred a hemisphere.

In one place it is stated that he regarded the heavens as the

a A7 §6 bArs c Ay §6; Ara d Ar2 e A7 §6 fArs 
&8A7§6

1 EGPS, p. 78.In one place it is stated that he regarded the heavens as the

a A7 §6 bArs c Ay §6; Ara d Ar2 e A7 §6 fArs 
&8A7§6

1 EGPS, p. 78.

2 kotépes, dota are sometimes used of the heavenly bodies in general. For instance, 
Aétius (Ars) says that ‘the stars’ (14 &otpa) are diverted so as to turn in their courses by 
meeting with condensed and resistant air; this is thought to refer to the solstices, and 
not to any diversion of the stars (Burnet, EGP‘, p. 76, n. 3).

72 THE PRE=SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

outermost periphery of the earth;* this would mean that the 
‘crystalline vault’ rested on the edge of the disc, something like 
a meat-cover on a dish; but this is impossible if the sun goes 
behind the earth’s tilt at night, for he has to pass between the 
earth’s periphery and the crystalline vault. That this last 
expression is literally meant must be accepted, unless we reject 
the statement that there were stars ‘fixed like nails’ in it; but 
it is difficult to see how so striking a simile came to be attached 
to Anaximenes and to no one else if he did not say it. He 
seems to have thought of the fixed stars as the furthest away, 
that is, actually stuck in the dome of the heavens. We are not 
told of what this dome was made, nor how it came to be.

He referred all other climatic phenomena to change of den- 
sity. Winds and clouds are easily accounted for: winds are the 
first result of a condensation of air, which in this process is 
somehow propelled and given motion.» The origin of the 
accelerated motion is obscure; Galen marks this obscurity in 
recording the tradition: “They are borne along violently and 
swiftly by some unknown impulse, as birds fly.’* The clouds 
are the next stage in the condensation;? and the next stage 
again is the ‘squeezing out’ of rain. Hail is produced when 
the drops in their fall from the clouds are frozen.f Snow is 
produced when there is an admixture of air with the water 
that freezes.®Lightning, earthquakes and the rainbow require rather 
more complicated explanation; but all is done by means of air 
and density. His theory of earthquakes is given by Aristotle: 
the earth is cracked by being drenched and also by being 
dried, and these disintegrations cause shocks; water and heat 
are the causes, hence earthquakes occur usually in seasons of 
heavy rain, or seasons of drought.» Lightning is due to the 
cleaving of the clouds by the force of the winds; the effect is 
the same as that which we observe when the sea flashes as it is 
cloven by the oar-blade.! The rainbow occurs when the sun’s 
rays fall on air condensed to a thick black cloud, so that they 
cannot penetrate, and collect there; the part in front of the 
sun is red in appearance, being burnt by the sun’s rays, while 
the rest is dark, being more under the dominance of moisture. 
A rainbow is sometimes made by the moon, but less often,

aA PADS cArg SAVY ft Ans An tA ANY 
gAiy b Azz; A7 §8 i Ar7z; Ay §&8

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 73

because it is not constantly full moon, and because the moon’s 
light is weaker than the sun’s.?

Anaximenes believed our world to be perishable; there was 
always a Cosmos in existence, but not always the same one; it 
changed in the course of certain cycles of time.»

The gods, like everything else, were derived from Air;° or, 
as Cicero puts it, Air itself is God.¢ Particular gods are to be 
derived from Air; the air is not made by divinity, but the 
reverse.© These statements, according to Aétius,‘ mean much 
the same as Thales’ view that all things are full of gods: they 
refer to the powers inherent in elements and bodies, as for 
instance powers of motion. But Air, being Breath, is also 
Life and therefore Soul.¢

14. PYTHAGORAS 
PytTuacoras of Samos was in his prime about 530 B.c.14. PYTHAGORAS 
PytTuacoras of Samos was in his prime about 530 B.c.

There are references to Pythagoras in Xenophanes,* 
Heracleitus,i Empedocles,i Ion of Chios.* Herodotus dis- 
cusses the alleged connection of Salmoxis with Pythagoras.! 
Plato, who mentions him only once by name, speaks of the 
strong personal attachment of the disciples to the master, 
from whom the Pythagorean way of life originated. Isocrates 
refers to Pythagoras’ debt to Egypt." Aristotle wrote a book, 
now lost, on the Pythagoreans, in which episodes from the 
Pythagoras-legend were related.° In Aristotle’s extant works 
there are only two references to Pythagoras himself;? else- 
where he speaks of the Pythagoreans. Lives by Porphyry, 
Iamblichus and Diogenes Laertius are preserved; these are 
compiled from various sources, the earliest of which are 
Aristoxenus? of Tarentum, a pupil of Aristotle and author of 
a book on Pythagoras and Pythagoreanism; Dicaearchus of 
Messene, also a pupil of Aristotle and a close friend of Theo- 
phrastus; and Timaeus the historian of Sicily.

That Pythagoras himself left no writings was widely 
believed in antiquity. Further, it was believed that one of the 
a Ar8; A7 §8 bArr cA § d Aro e Aro (Augustine)

f Aro; cp. 11A23 8. A22: A23; Ba h 21By7 i 22B4o; 81; 129 
YuBrig *46B2,4 $2 Bro DA 27 Py 
493 35 85 12 T 175 18

74 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSf Aro; cp. 11A23 8. A22: A23; Ba h 21By7 i 22B4o; 81; 129 
YuBrig *46B2,4 $2 Bro DA 27 Py 
493 35 85 12 T 175 18

74 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

rules imposed on his disciples was that of secrecy,* the betrayal 
of any of his doctrines being punished by excommunication. 
According to some, this secrecy was observed with marvellous 
strictness, and no account of Pythagorean doctrine was avail- 
able till the time of Plato, when Philolaus the Pythagorean, 
owing to pressure of poverty, wrote an account in three 
books, which were bought from him at Plato’s instigation by 
Dion of Syracuse.’ Others believed that the knowledge of 
their geometrical theories began to leak out in Pythagoras’ 
lifetime through betrayal by members, or other causes; 
Hippasus was said to have been excommunicated for such a 
betrayal,¢ and also to have written a book on their ritual with 
the express object of bringing discredit on Pythagoras.4

We are also told that Pythagoras was very difficult of 
access, and taught his most advanced doctrines to a select 
group only (the Students),' while there was an outer circle 
(the Auditors)? who were allowed to hear only the rough out- 
lines or heads of the teachings, without exact explanations.° 
As an example of his exclusiveness, we hear that he refused to 
admit Cylon, a rich and powerful noble, to the School, on the 
grounds of his bad character, and that Cylon therefore became 
a bitter enemy of the Order and the cause of its overthrow in 
Croton.f The disciples were taught by word of mouth, and 
always appealed to the spoken Word of the master; yet even so 
almost nothing is quoted as the actual words of Pythagoras.The strong tradition that he wrote nothing was sometirhes 
challenged by the appearance of books alleged to be by 
Pythagoras. These could generally be assigned to early mem- 
bers of the School: Hippasus the apostate, Lysis the fugitive to 
Thebes, and one Aston of Croton are names mentioned.® 
Those who believed in the authorship of Pythagoras quoted a 
sentence from one of the treatises: ‘By the air 1 breathe, by the 
water | drink, I shall never sustain blame for the following

to ‘scream’ as follows: “Pythagoras son of Mnesarchus prac- 
tised inquiry most of all men. And picking out from these 
treatises he claimed as his own and as wisdom what was a mere

d 19 §7 € ch. 18 (Hippasus) 2 f 16 8 19 §7 a 
1 of patnuerixol. 
2 of dxoveperixol,

@ 17; 8a §19; 4 b 173; cp. ch. 44 (Philolaus) Ar © ch. 18 (Hippasus) 4 
19 §6

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 75

accumulation of learning, an art of deceit.”*»*1 The sentence 
alleged to be Pythagoras’ own is obviously a formula used by 
authors who wished, when writing a book which laid claim to 
knowledge, to repudiate responsibility and so avert criticism 
and Nemesis. The fragment alleged to be Heracleitean looks 
suspicious, and in any case means no more than that Pytha- 
goras was eclectic: he used certain writings from which he 
made a wisdom which he claimed as his own. The two 
alleged quotations look as though they are meant to illustrate 
the hostility of Heracleitus rather than the authorship of 
Pythagoras; but Diogenes Laertius, who quotes them, takes 
the Heracleitean sentence to mean that Pythagoras himself 
wrote treatises. Such a late and confused report cannot shake 
the tradition that Pythagoras left no writings.

Another tradition was that Pythagoras wrote some works 
which he attributed to Orpheus.’ ‘This appears merely to 
reflect an opinion that some of the Orphic writings were by 
Pythagoras; it may also be meant as a refutation of the charge 
of plagiarism.The rule of secrecy has been thought to be a later invention, 
designed to explain why there is no record of Pythagorean 
philosophy before Philolaus. Similarly, the distinction of 
grades within the Order has been regarded as ‘designed to 
explain how there came to be two widely different sets of 
people, each calling themselves the disciples of Pythagoras, in 
the fifth and fourth centuries 3.c.’.°. The later Students 
(Mathematikot) did not even recognize the right of the Audi- 
tors (Akousmatikot) to be called Pythagoreans.? Some therefore 
maintained that the Auditors were those who ‘listened’ on the 
fringe of the circle; others that they did not derive from 
Pythagoras at all, but from Hippasus.e Again, it has been 
thought that the ‘silence’ was kept only with regard to the 
religious tenets, and that the scientific doctrines were not

a Ch. 18 (Hippasus) 2 e Ch. 18 (Hippasus) 2

a! Tlu@aydpas Munodpyou lotopinu foxnoey dvépmtov uddiota wévtav Kal 
TauTas Tas cuyypapds Erroitjcato tavTOU copinv, ToAUpabeiny, KaKoTexvinv. This fragment 
has passed through many vicissitudes in the hands of scholars: Diels condemned it as a 
forgery; Zeller deleted tattas tas ovyypapds; Kranz has come round to the view that it is 
genuine (see Diels, Vors. p. 181, note); Burnet also accepted it in his 4th Edn. (EGP, 
p. 134). The probability is that it is a garbled quotation, used to illustrate the 
point of the story and imperfectly remembered out of a general recollection of Hera- 
cleitus’ known hostility and his admission of Pythagoras’ learning (22B4o).

76 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

secret. But Hippasus was said to have been expelled for be- 
traying a mathematical doctrine as wall as the religious tenets. 
The silence therefore, if it was a rule of secrecy, applred to 
both sides of the doctrine.If the rule of secrecy existed, it was not kept, for Heracleitus 
apparently knew of Pythagoras as a scientist, not a religious 
teacher: he said that Pythagoras had abundance of learning 
which did not teach him intelligence, and classed him with 
Xenophanes and Hecataeus.2 Herodotus also spoke of him as 
‘not the weakest of the sophists’,> at a time when ‘sophist’ 
referred to rational speculation. Empedocles 1s said to have 
written verses in praise of Pythagoras as a man of very great 
knowledge.* Heracleitus is thought to have derived his infor- 
mation from Hippasus.‘ As for the religious tenets, they were 
said to have been the first to become known ;* and Xenophanes, 
who was contemporary with Pythagoras, knew that he taught 
transmigration.‘ Since, therefore, Pythagoras became at once 
famous as both religious and scientific teacher, we have either 
to disbelieve in the ‘silence’ as a rule of secrecy;' or to regard 
the promulgation of the doctrines outside the School as due to 
betrayal. The latter view accords best with what we know, and 
is not inherently unlikely. It is even probable that the mathe- 
matical doctrines were regarded as more secret than the re- 
ligious ;? for the former were original, whereas the doctrine of 
transmigration was not.® The hostility of Heracleitus also can 
best be accounted for by the supposition that he obtained his 
information from a hostile source. The two later branches of 
Pythagoreanism cannot be traced to the two grades within the 
school; the Auditors were not said to have been debarred from 
mathematical instruction, but merely to have been taught its 
outlines;2 and doubtless all members had to observe the rules 
of the Order. If later there developed two groups, one which 
continued the scientific research and the other which dropped 
it, this was due to natural inclination and ability, not to any 
distinction imposed by Pythagoras himself. 
We have, then, the founder of a School, partly scientiic, 
partly religious; but of his own beliefs and teachings, froma 22B4o b2; cp. ch. 79 © 31Br29 d Ch. 18 (Hippasus) ra ¢ 8a §1

f21B7  &1 4&Ch. 18 (Hippasus) 2 ; :

* Burnet finally accepted the view that the ‘silence’ was disciplinary only, EGP¢, 
P. 95, Nn. 1.

* The actual practices, however, may well have been on a different footing.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 77

which his followers must have drawn their inspiration, we know 
hardly anything. Almost all is conjecture, based on the later 
development of the School, which does not come to light until 
over a century later, but which is dealt with very fully and in 
many places by Aristotle; and on elements in the doctrines of 
subsequent philosophers which can be traced to no other source.

The accounts given of his life can be summarized as follows: 
he was a Samian, the son of Mnesarchus? (though later a tradi- 
tion arose that he was non-Greek by birth),> and left Samos 
because he was at variance with the dictatorship of Polycrates. 
He 1s said to have visited Egypt and Babylon, where he learnt 
his mathematical and mystical theories respectively ;* this story 
sometimes took the form that he was captured by Cambyses 
while in Egypt and taken to Babylon. These travels probably 
represent elements in his teaching. He was a friend of Phere- 
cydes, and buried him when he died in Delos.‘ He settled in 
Croton in South Italy, and founded a school there, partly scien- 
tific, partly religious. When some aristocratic exiles from 
Sybaris took refuge in Croton, Pythagoras advised the people 
of Croton to protect them and accept war with Sybaris. Croton 
was victorious; and henceforth ‘Pythagoras and his party be- 
came the governing class there.After some years there arose a movement against this olli- 
garchy, under the leadership of Cylon, a rich and powerful 
noble whom Pythagoras had offended. Before this movement 
came to a head, Pythagoras retired to Metapontium, where he 
died. His disciples who remained in Croton were eventually 
the victims of a plot of Cylon and his party: they were surprised 
in council at the house of Milo the athlete, and burnt alive, all 
except two, Archippus and Lysis the Tarentines, the former of 
whom retired to his native city Tarentum, the latter to Greece, 
first to Achaea, then to Thebes, where he became the tutor of 
Epamein6éndas. The disciples who were not at Croton, and so 
escaped the massacre, gathered together at Rhegium, and 
carried on the pursuits of their Order; but did not again acquire

political powers After the death of Pythagoras, the people of 
Metapontium consecrated his house as a temple of Demeter, 
and called the street Musaean.

2258 b8 © 4; 8; 9; ch. 58 (Pyth. Sch.) 3 
d Ch. 7 (Pherecydes) Ar; see p. 37 e 16 £13

78 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS2258 b8 © 4; 8; 9; ch. 58 (Pyth. Sch.) 3 
d Ch. 7 (Pherecydes) Ar; see p. 37 e 16 £13

78 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Of this account, several points are doubtful: his travels; the 
date and fact of his retirement to Metapontium; the date of the 
massacre at Croton.: As time went by, legends of a miraculous 
nature began to surround his name; some of these were related 
in Aristotle’s book on the Pythagoreans. They are of the kind 
usually attaching themselves to sages and religious teachers: 
Pythagoras when crossing a river heard a supernatural voice 
bidding him ‘Hail!’; he was once seen in two places at the same 
time; at Olympia he allowed the spectators to see that he had a 
golden thigh, showing that he was Midas reincarnated. He 
could charm animals: a bear, an eagle, a poisonous snake which 
he killed by biting it. He posed as being of more than mortal 
nature; and ‘though at first he confined his labours to mathe- 
matics and numbers, later he did not abstain from the miracle- 
working of Pherecydes’.s Orphic doctrine was apt to have this 
effect on the mind even of scientists: we shall see it appearing 
again in the character and work of Empedocles.His chief religious doctrine seems to ‘have been that of the 
transmigration of souls. Herodotus, describing this doctrine, 
says mistakenly that it is Egyptian,» >! and that certain Greeks 
whom he could name, but will not, have appropriated it; thus 
he does not ascribe it to Pythagoras. Elsewhere* he quotes 
the tradition that Salmoxis, who taught the immortality of the 
soul to the Thracians, was a one-time slave of Pythagoras, 
though he himself believes Salmoxis to be much earlier than 
Pythagoras; this, however, does not prove that Herodotus 
believed Pythagoras to have taught transmigration, for 
Salmoxis is said by him to have taught, not transmigration 
but translation to a blessed life for himself and his disciples. 
Heracleides Ponticus? gave in full the tradition that Pytha- 
goras believed himself to have inhabited the bodies of other 
earlier men: Aethalides the son of Hermes, Euphorbus the 
Trojan, Hermotimus the prophet of Clazomenae, Pyrrhos a 
Delian fisherman, and then Pythagoras. From the way in 
which this story is told, it might seem rather that Pythagoras

gS ee Raat wea, tes, eh toes, acres Sete val, Cuts Ree vee

through these migrations; for Aethalides the beginner of the

ay by c2 d

b! In Egyptian eschatology life on this earth is a short period of preparation for a 
complicated life in another world; there is no return.

" This cannot have taken place during Pythagoras’ lifetime if Lysis, the tutor of 
Epameinondas, escaped from it; see below, p. 233, note!.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 79" This cannot have taken place during Pythagoras’ lifetime if Lysis, the tutor of 
Epameinondas, escaped from it; see below, p. 233, note!.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 79

line received the gift of ‘keeping his remembrance of events, 
both in life and in death’ as a privilege from his divine father; 
he had been offered his choice of any gift except immortality, 
and this remembrance was what he chose; the transmigration 
seems to have been a special device to make this possible. 
But the belief that Pythagoras extended transmigration to 
others is supported by the verses in Xenophanes® said to refer 
to Pythagoras; here the subject is said to have stopped some- 
one from beating a,dog, because he recognized the voice of a 
friend in its howls; and though Pythagoras’ name is not men- 
tioned in the verses, it is unlikely that tradition could be 
mistaken in saying that they refer to him. In any case, the 
ascription to Pythagoras shows that he was regarded as the 
exponent of this idea. The followers of Pythagoras believed 
that transmigration was common to all, for they tried to work 
out the exact numerical cycle for man; they did, however, 
base their calculations on what Pythagoras had said of his own 
transmigrations when they gave the cycle as the cube of 6 
(216 years). Perhaps the special distinction of Pythagoras’ 
soul’s career was that it had been so long on the human plane; 
and that it possessed memory of previous planes at every stage 
in its career, Euphorbus remembering that he had been 
Aethalides and received the gift, Hermotimus remembering 
his life as Euphorbus, and so on, until Pythagoras who re- 
membered all, so that he recognized the shield of Menelaus 
(who had wounded Euphorbus) hung up in the temple of 
Apollo of the Branchidae.Together with this goes a way of life, which in his disciples 
turns out to be an asceticism based on, not a rational anti- 
hedonism, but a system of taboos. The only taboos ascribed 
directly to Pythagoras are connected with sacrifice and food.° 
The sacrifice of living creatures was forbidden except for 
blood-purification, according to some; but opinions differed. 
Others said that he allowed the sacrifice of cocks, kids and 
sucking-pigs, but not lambs; and he is reported to have him- 
self offered the sacrifice of a bulld when he discovered his

famous theorem. The’ same divergence is found concerning

his food taboos: some say he forbade the eating of animal flesh

altogether, others (Aristoxenus) that he allowed it, excepting

only the ploughing-ox and the ram; Aristotle himself said that 
a Ch. 21 (Xenoph.) B7 bg cg d Ch. 58 (Pyth. Sch.) Brg

80 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

the Pythagoreans abstained from certain parts only, such as 
the womb and the heart. Those who believed that he com- 
pletely prohibited a meat diet sometimes added that he forbade 
association with cooks and hunters as being blood-polluted; 
but Aristoxenus in his opposition went to the other extreme 
and declared that Pythagoras himself was accustomed to eat 
‘very small pigs and tender kids’. It is clear that there was keen 
controversy in later times as to the orthodox Pythagorean 
teaching; all that can be safely conjectured 1s that there was 
a prohibition of some kind concerning the killing of animals 
either for sacrifice or for food, and that this was closely con- 
nected, as always, with the transmigration-theory. Some said 
that he taught that all living creatures were akin.?Again, Pythagoras was said to have forbidden the eating 
of beans; but this too was hotly contested by Aristoxenus, who 
said that Pythagoras not only allowed beans, but honoured 
them above all forms of pulse as being purgative and laxative.> 
It is clear that Aristoxenus 1s combating something non- 
rational which he does not care to ascribe to Pythagoras, and 
substituting the opposite rational view; but from all we know 
of Pythagoreanism, we can certainly decide in favour of the 
taboo; Empedocles also has it in his Katharmot.*. + Many other 
such taboos are found at work in the later school, one of which, 
namely abstention from the wearing of woollen clothing at 
religious ceremonies, is said by Herodotus to have been 
borrowed from Egypt.4

The religious part of Pythagoras’ teaching was no doubt 
only one of the most conspicuous movements in a great reli- 
gious revival in Greece during the sixth century; ritual from 
Babylon, Egypt, Asia Minor, Thrace, as well as more primi- 
tive and savage beliefs, entered into it, as well as the older 
chthonian religion of Greece which had never died out, and 
which, at a time of danger to Greece from the invader, took on 
new life and with many foreign accretions canalized itself in 
the different Mysteries, Orphic, Dionysian, Eleusinian. The 
orthodox state religions, the worship of the Olympian deities, 
were interested in the present; the non-Olympian rather in

the past (a Golden Age) and the future (an after-life with

a8a bg ¢ Ch. 31 (Emped.) Brat dy 
¢! The bean-taboo was supposed to have asymbolic and sexual meaning. See under 
31Br4r.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES oea8a bg ¢ Ch. 31 (Emped.) Brat dy 
¢! The bean-taboo was supposed to have asymbolic and sexual meaning. See under 
31Br4r.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES oe

rewards and punishments). The chief ‘mystic’ deities were 
Demeter, Persephone, Pluto; Dionysus with Orpheus as his 
prophet; the Erinyes; and Hermes who belonged to both 
realms. The worship of these deities was gaining ground at 
this time, and had already secured an important place side by 
side with Olympian theology in the religion of States. Theo- 
logians such as Pherecydes had worked out cosmogonies and 
eschatologies to correspond. That this movement was as 
strong in the west — Sicily and South Italy —as at Athens or 
in Asia Minor is clear from Pindar.

Where Pythagoras stands in all this is impossible to say; 
he is a scientist who does not apply the usual scientific ration- 
alism to ethics, and whose interest in transmigration and taboos 
makes him a part of the religious movement. His house when 
he died was said to have been dedicated to Demeter; and his 
soul, he claimed, had originally been in the body of a son of 
Hermes.: Aristoxenus said that he took the majority of his 
ethical doctrines from the Pythian priestess Themistocleia;* 
Aristotle that the people of Croton called him Apollo Hyper- 
boreios.» These statements, true or false, at least go to prove 
what common sense suggests, namely that Pythagoras in 
founding his new way of Irfe was eclectic, and chose the best 
out of all the many ideas that came before him. His system 
was meant fully to occupy the rational faculty, but not less to 
satisfy the non-rational faculties of the soul in a way that 
ordinary philosophical and logical ethics could not do.Of the vast mass of work done by the later Pythagoreans — 
the mathematical theorems, the work on the mechanics of 
sound, the application of geometrical principles to the 
arrangement of the Cosmos and astronomy —it is impossible 
to say how much was Pythagoras’ work or. what exactly 
originated under his leadership. We find his disciples busy 
with all these things, and that they have a dualistic cosmology 
in connection with which a table of ten pairs of opposites had 
been drawn up. They must have taken their inspiration from 
Pythagoras; but what he said and did was uncertain even in 
antiquity. It is, however, hard to believe that the leading 
principles which guided them were not his.

a b 
. There was eceties reason for this: Hermes was identified with the Egyptian Thoth, 
who was credited with the invention of Number as well as writing (58Bz).

82 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

First, the great concept of Number as the First Principle 
must surely go back to the Master. Benn? has advanced 
against this the argument that if Pythagoras had suggested 
such a unifying force, Heracleitus would not have passed it 
over. However, if Pythagoras wrote nothing, Heracleitus 
doubtless received an incomplete report of his teaching; it is 
possible that he did not grasp the significance of the idea in 
the form that it reached him. The concept of Numbers and 
their relationships or ‘harmonies’¢ as the elements of all things 
seems far more like the idea of a single great mind than the 
cumulative result of the researches of many disciples in differ- 
ent parts of Greece. This theory must have stimulated the 
wide-ranging research of the later school.The theory of opposites? in its dualistic form also probably 
goes back to him; apart from initial probability, Benn? has 
suggested that it was this failure to understand the oneness of 
the opposites that made Heracleitus so hostile to him. Further, 
Burnet® believes that the scheme attacked by Parmenides in 
his Way of Opinion can best be accounted for as the work of 
Pythagoras; and this scheme is dualistic. However this may 
be, it seems likely that so fundamental a principle was the 
work of one mind and not of a group, and that it was itself 
directly derived from the study of the properties of Number.!

The theorem that the square on the hypotenuse of a right- 
angled triangle is equal to the sum of the squares on the other 
two sides is attributed to Pythagoras; also the construction 
of the five regular solids; and the discovery of the irrational or 
incommensurable.* Some said that he was the first to identify 
the morning and evening star.i One of his biographies quotes 
the tradition that he could Aear the harmony of the spheres as 
they moved, that 1s, the harmony as a whole, which we ordinary 
mortals cannot hear.i He is also said to have coined the word 
‘philosophy’.* *

It is stated that Pythagoras’ studies of Mathematics had a 
great influence on the way of life which he indicated as the

as8Bi5 > Greek Philosophers, p.13 © 58Br5 4 Greek Philosophers, pp. 13, 14

h 6a; ch. 18 (Hippasus) 4; ch. 44 (Philolaus) Ars i Ch. 28 (Parmenides) At

i 31Br2g k s8Brs5

k? The use of the term padtjuata to designate what we call Mathematics is thought to 
go back to the Pythagoreans. Heath, Greek Mathematics, p. 11.

* For a list of the opposites see below, p. 248 (58Bs5).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 8 3* For a list of the opposites see below, p. 248 (58Bs5).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 8 3

best. This would mean that the advanced study of Number 
has a bearing on conduct: it both reveals and explains the 
essence of Virtue (since Number is the essence of everything), 
and it leads men to contemplation and the higher life. About 
Pythagoras himself we are told only that ‘he transferred his 
geometrical philosophy to the devising of a liberal education’,* 
and this itself may be merely conjecture. But the idea seized 
firm hold of the scientific division of the later school, who 
even assigned the virtues to different integers;> and we see in 
Plato how the study of mathematics was regarded as a moral 
as well as an intellectual training; so that this again was no 
doubt one of the great and fruitful ideas bequeathed by the 
Master himself.

Pythagoras addressed himself to women as well as to men, 
and women were from the first admitted to the School.e One 
or two of these became renowned; Iamblichus’¢ list contains 
the names of seventeen women, taken from all over Greece, 
as compared with two hundred and eighteen men. There was 
a theoretical distinction between male and female per se: in the 
Table of Opposites,¢ Female stands on the left side along with 
Darkness, Evil, the Unlimited and the rest. Yet there was no 
rule of celibacy, as in the system of Empedocles; and Pytha- 
goras himself is said to have married.‘

15-20. OLDER PYTHAGOREANS 
15. CERCOPS

To this member of the Pythagorean School were attributed 
several of the poems sometimes assigned to Orpheus, whom 
Aristotle believed to have written nothing. The titles included 
a Descent into Hades and a Holy Discourses in twenty-four 
cantos.

& 6a > s8B4 © 8a §19 a s8A (Pyth. Sch.) € 58Bs5 
f Ch. 17 (Brontinus) 1

84 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

16. PETRON& 6a > s8B4 © 8a §19 a s8A (Pyth. Sch.) € 58Bs5 
f Ch. 17 (Brontinus) 1

84 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

16. PETRON

Perron of Himera wrote a small pamphlet in which geo- 
metrical ideas were applied to the universe. There were, he 
thought, one hundred and eighty-three worlds arranged in the 
form of a triangle, sixty along each side and one at each 
corner. These were all in contact, and moved round steadily 
‘as in a choric dance’. This appears to have been his own 
original idea, and it looks as if he were applying some theo 
_of points in a line to the whole arrangement of worlds; but by 
Plutarch’s time it was not known if the book survived, and 
Petron’s explanation was lost.

17. BRO(N)TINUS

Brotinus or Brontinus of Merapontium (or Croton) was 
connected with Pythagoras by some marriage tie. Some said 
that Brontinus hada daughter Theané who married Pythagoras, 
others that Theano was Brontinus’ wife and a pupil of Pytha- 
goras; others again that Brontinus’ wife was called Deinénéd, 
a highly-gifted woman and a member of the School.

Brontinus was said to have written several works, the names 
of which, such as Physics; Mind and Intellect; and a work in 
the Orphic corpus called The Robe, do not give much clue to 
their contents.

Alcmaeon the physiologist addressed his book to Brontinus 
and two others.°

18. HIPPASUS

Hrppasus of Merapontivum (or Croton, or Sybaris) was said 
to have been expelled from the Pythagorean School for betray- 
ing the secrets, both religious and mathematical; after his 
expulsion a tombstone was erected to him as if he were dead. 
A legend arose that his impiety was punished by death at sea.

ar Pass © 25 24Br d 4

* &rpya teqndvtas (Tous ndcyous| darren tv yooeig. Cp. 444.16 (Philolaus), p. 225 below; 
 64A17 (Diogenes of Apollonia), p. 281 below; and Plato, Epinomts 98:

ropsiav 88 Kal xopelav trévtev xopév KaAAlotny Kal wsyoAotipserrecTtatny yopevovTa.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 85ropsiav 88 Kal xopelav trévtev xopév KaAAlotny Kal wsyoAotipserrecTtatny yopevovTa.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 85

Some said that he wrote nothing; others that he wrote a 
book called The Mystical Doctrine, with the purpose of bringing 
discredit on Pythagoras;> others that he published in writing 
certain mathematical discoveries. Later Pythagoreans asserted 
that permission was given to an impoverished member of the 
School to make money out of publishing the geometrical 
knowledge;* but this appears to refer to Philolaus. Some 
attributed to Hippasus the founding of the branch of the 
School called Akousmatikoi, who were thought to be the 
successors of the Pythagorean outer ring of pupils, those not 
initiated into the advanced doctrines.4

The. question of Hippasus’ apostasy is closely bound up 
with the tradition that there existed in the early School a rule 
of secrecy concerning both the mathematical and the religious 
doctrines; this has already been discussed in connection with 
Pythagoras.¢ Similar betrayals by other disciples are implied; 
but the name of Hippasus stood out, since he gained a reputa- 
tion outside the School for mathematical knowledge, claiming 
as his own several discoveries which the Pythagoreans alleged 
to be the work of the Master. There was also a tradition that 
Hippasus’ insubordination was political: that he headed a 
democratic movement against the Pythagorean rule, and thus 
originated a schism which was taken advantage of by Cylon 
and others.*It is possible that Hippasus gathered round him some 
Akousmatikoi or disciples of his own. He ts alleged to have 
taught them that Number is the ‘First Pattern of World- 
Creation’, and the ‘discerning Instrument of God the Crea- 
tor’; but these may be later Pythagorean phrases ascribed to 
him. One of the discoveries said to have been betrayed 1s ‘the 
construction of the sphere from the twelve pentagons’, and 
‘the construction of the dodecahedron, one of the five so-called 
solid figures, in the sphere’,i that 1s, the knowledge how to 
construct from pentagons a dodecahedron, and the inscrib- 
ability of the latter in a sphere, with the finding of its centre.* 
It has been thought that Hippasus may have been the dis- 
coverer of the construction of the pentagon and dodecahedron, 
and that Pythagorean jealousy on behalf of the Master

*4 by c 4 da © PP: 14 $44. 4 & 4 =s 
Vir }

4 
1 See Heath, Greek Mathematics, pp. 65; 158-162,

86 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

accounts for the condemnation of Hippasus as its appropriator 
and betrayer;! but this is only conjecture. “The construction 
of the cosmic figures’ (that is, the cube, pyramid, octahedron, 
eicosahedron and dodecahedron) is elsewhere attributed to 
Pythagoras himself,» >+ and there would have been no reason for 
Pythagorean ‘jealousy’ of Hippasus for merely extending 
the knowledge of geometry unless there had been also in- 
subordination to the Master on his part.The other revelation which was said to have led to his ex- 
communication was the discovery of the irrational or incom- 
mensurable.* This too was ordinarily attributed to Pythagoras 
himself ;4 it may well have been thought to be of fundamental 
importance, and its betrayal a sin against the sect, on its first 
discovery. The discovery of the pentagon, which gave the key 
to the construction of the fifth ‘cosmic solid’, the solid that 
represented in Pythagorean cosmogony the universe itself, also 
may well have been thought worth keeping secret at first; the 
‘triple interwoven triangle, the pentagon’ (that is, the star 
pentagon) was used by the Pythagoreans as a symbol of 
recognition between the members, and was called by them 
Health.e «1 This shows its originally sacred character, and is 
added evidence of the existence of a rule of secrecy that 
covered mathematics as well as religious observances.

To Hippasus 1s also ascribed research into the mechanics 
of sound; he is credited with several experiments on this sub- 
ject. He took discs of equal diameters and differing thickness, 
and established a relation between the thickness of the discs 
and the notes they gave out when struck.‘ He also took 
vessels containing different proportions of liquid, and again 
established a relationship between the volume unoccupied by 
liquid and the note given out by the vessel when struck.¢ 
That is, he discovered, or perhaps developed, the idea of the 
dependence of musical intervals on numerical ratios. He is

; Ch. 14 (Pyth.) 6a b44gArs C4 d Ch. 14 (Pyth.) 6a

g; Ch. 14 (Pyth.) 6a b44gArs C4 d Ch. 14 (Pyth.) 6a

g

b! Heath, Greek Mathematics, p. 159: ‘Pythagoras, seeing that there are 5 solid figures, 
which are also called the mathematical figures, says that the earth arose from the cube, 
fire from the pyramid, air from the octahedron, water from the icosahedron, and the 
sphere of the universe from the dodecahedron.’ This comes from Aétius, who is drawing 
on Theophrastus, who may be getting it out of the Timaeus and be concluding too 
hastily that “here too Pkato Pythagorizes’; cp. Timaeus 53c-55¢.

el 7b., p. 161.

1 1b., p. 160.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 87

said to have studied the three ‘means’, arithmetic, geometric 
and ‘subcontrary’,* *+ known in Pythagoras’ time, and to have 
collaborated with Archytas in changing the name of the last 
to ‘harmonic’.>

The name of Hippasus is coupled with that of Heracleitus 
as a Monist who believed that Fire was the substrate;° that is, 
Heracleitus is said to have followed Hippasus in this. Hip- 
pasus’ views are not separately given, and no doubt belong to 
the cosmology of the Pythagorean School.

19, CALLIPHON and DEMOCEDES

CaLLIPHON was said to have been originally a Cnidian ‘priest 
of Asclepius’;4 he appears to have migrated to Croton and to 
have become a member of Pythagoras’ School. Pythagoras is 
said to have taken over from him into his own philosophy 
certain alien ideas; the story is told that after Calliphon’s death 
Pythagoras declared that Calliphon’s soul was his constant 
companion, and had enjoined on him the following rules: not 
to go over a place where an ass has crouched; to abstain from 
thirst-provoking drinks; and to refrain from all blasphemy. 
These ideas are said by Josephus on the authority of Her- 
mippus to have been taken over from the Thracians and the 
Jews.°Democepes was the son of Calliphon, and the most distin- 
guished medical practitioner of his time. He was the leader 
of the Crotonian school of medicine at a time when this 
school was foremost in Greece. He left Croton owing sto a 
quarrel with his father, and went first to Aegina, where in one 
year he easily surpassed the other physicians there, although 
he lacked all proper instruments and equipment. In the 
second year the Aeginetans employed him as State Physician; 
but the Athenians offered him a higher fee and obtained his 
services. Polycrates of Samos finally obtained him by offering 
a yet higher fee. Eventually he found himself called upon to 
cure Dareius of a serious illness, and being successful was 
rewarded with great wealth;# it is said also that he cured 
ars brs © 73839; 22A5 d2 e 2 fr; 2c gr 
a! Otrevavtia. See Heath, Greek Mathematics, pp. 85, 86.

88 THE PRE-SOCGRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Atossa the wife of Dareius of a complaint of the breast.* 
Being allowed to go home on leave, he did not return, even 
when sent for by the messengers of Dareius, but remained in 
Croton and married the daughter of Milo the athlete.® 
Nothing survives of his medical teaching except an anec- 
dote that seems to show that he had a theory regarding the 
connection between the decay of physical and mental powers.°

20. PARM(EN)ISCUS

Parmiscus or Parmeniscus of Merarontium. Nothing is 
known of this early Pythagorean except an anecdote preserved 
in Delian tradition, that having descended into the cave of 
Trophonius at Delphi he was unable to laugh on his return. 
He questioned the Delphic oracle and was given an ambigu- 
ous answer telling him to visit ‘Mother’. He went home, but 
found no cure for his complaint. Chancing to visit Delos, he 
went while sight-seeing to look at the statue of Leto, Apollo’s 
mother; but finding it to be nothing but an ugly wooden 
image, he suddenly broke into a laugh at the sight, and thus 
the Delphic oracle was substantiated.A list of temple offerings to Artemis at Delos includes ‘a 
silver bowl dedicated by Parmiscus’. His name is given in 
Jamblichus’ list, and in Diogenes Laertius is the statement 
that Xenophanes was ‘bought’ (apparently rescued from 
slavery) by Parmiscus and Orestades, another Pythagorean.°

Diels points out that this is a ‘reduplication’ from Diogenes’ 
Life of Plato.

21. XENOPHANES 
XENOPHANES of CoLoPHoN was in his prime about 530 B.c.

He states in a poem! that his travels began when he was 
twenty-five years old, so that if he left Colophon when it was 
captured by Persia in 545.8.c., he was born about 570 and

a 2a b 2a, b,c; x C3 d3 e2 f B22 
* Vorsokr. footnote to ch. 2x (Xenophanes) Ax (p. 114, 1. 10).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 89

his prime of life was about 530. Diogenes Laertius, probably 
following Apollodorus, says 540-37;* the statement of Apollo- 
dorus on Xenophanes’ date has been confused or misunder- 
stood by Clement when quoting it.> Timaeus the Sicilian 
historian° said that Xenophanes was a contemporary of Hiero 
of Syracuse (who reigned 478-467 B.c.) and of Epicharmus 
(whose prime was 486 B.c.). Xenophanes is mentioned among 
the Longaevals as having lived to be ninety-one.? He was still 
writing at the age of ninety-two, on his own testimony.® He 
therefore did not die until about 460 B.c.Xenophanes was a native of Colophon, and the son of 
Dexios or Dexinos. A tradition stated that he had no teacher, 
but there was also an attempt to link him up with other names, 
such as Anaximander.‘ As he left home at the age of twenty- 
five, his education must have been interrupted; but not before 
he had acquired the Ionian scientific outlook that made him 
observe and classify interesting phenomena during his travels. 
Some say that he took part in the founding of Elea by the 
Phocaeans in about 540 B.c., and taught there; but from his 
own words, that he had been ‘tossed about Greece’ for sixty- 
seven years,® it seems unlikely that he settled anywhere for 
long. He spent time at several Sicilian cities, Zancle and 
Catane being named;+ he also visited Syracuse, where he saw 
the famous quarries;: Lipara, where the volcanic fires inter- 
ested him;i Malta, where he saw fossils;* and possibly Paros,! 
though it is possible that he saw a fossil in a block of Parian 
stone without actually going there. Some spoke of his visiting 
Egypt, but there is no good evidence for this, and the story 
told in that connection by Plutarch is given by Aristotle as one 
of Xenophanes’ bons mots to the citizens of Flea." He men- 
tions the Aethiopians and Thracians," but he could have 
learnt of their religions without contact with them, for he 
clearly made a study of religions. His travels seem to have 
been all in the west, unless the words ‘over the land of Greece’° 
imply wider wanderings. There is no reason to suppose that 
he did not visit Elea; it is only his settlement there which 
conflicts with his own words. He is said to have given public 
recitations of his poems;? so that this may account for his

aAr b A8 c A& d A6 e B22 f Ar & B22 
bAr i A33 ji A48 kA33 1A33 mAr3 
n B16 ° B22 PAr

go THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSaAr b A8 c A& d A6 e B22 f Ar & B22 
bAr i A33 ji A48 kA33 1A33 mAr3 
n B16 ° B22 PAr

go THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

ceaseless journeyings: he was a travelling rhapsodist, and made 
his living in that way. He was still active in this profession 
at the age of ninety-two.

Xenophanes wrote his views in verse only; he used elegiacs 
and hexameters. Diogenes Laertius mentions iambics, but if 
these existed, none has survived. Diogenes Laertius also 
credits him with two thousand hexameters on the founding of 
Colophon and the colonization of Elea;> but the surviving 
fragments are all expositions of Xenophanes’ opinions.He was as famous for his satirical attacks on the poets and 
philosophers as for his philosophical views. His attacks on 
Homer and. Hesiod were thought by some to be inconsistent, 
since he wrote in verse himself,* and to be due to personal 
jealousy; he was accused of attacking the dead. His admirers 
appear to have retorted that Homer was himself the first 
satirist.£ —This element in Xenophanes’ work doubtless con- 
tributed to his success as a public reciter of his own poems; 
but there is no sign in what is left of them to show that he used 
satire to play to the gallery. The sincerity and disinterestedness 
of his strictures on Homer and Hesiod cannot be doubted; 
and no evidence remains to uphold the statement in Proclus® 
(drawn from Plutarch) that Xenophanes ‘published monstrous 
lampoons against all poets and philosophers, on account of a 
mean spite against the philosophers and poets of his own day’. 
The only personal attack on a contemporary seems to have 
been that on Simonides, whom he lampooned as a miser.* 
There are also four elegiac lines attacking 1n a mock-heroic 
manner a poet who showed his meanness by exchanging a 
present of a kid’s ham for a whole leg of beef;' this too 
probably refers to Simonides, though he is not named by the 
citer. There was probably a personal feud between these two, 
to which one or both of them gave public utterance. Simonides 
spent the latter part of his life at the court of Hiero in Syracuse, 
where Kenophanes probably encountered him. On the other 
hand, he is said to have admired Thales for having predicted 
eclipses and other phenomena.) There is also a fragment 
which refers to Pythagoras and his doctrine of transmigration,

aAr bdbdAr ¢ Ar; A2o d Ar e Arr; Arg fA23

h B2r i B6 j Brg 
* Burnet (EGP, p. 115) rejects this too lightly. If Xenophanes was not a professional

thapsodist, why did he complain of the excessive reward of the athlete ‘who is not 
deserving like me’? (Bz). :

8 A22thapsodist, why did he complain of the excessive reward of the athlete ‘who is not 
deserving like me’? (Bz). :

8 A22

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES gI

but it does not reveal Xenophanes’ own attitude, whether 
serious or satirical.*

Xenophanes’ condemnatory poems earned for him later the 
title of Sillographer, and also the interest of the chief of 
lampoonists, Timon of Phlits,> the disciple of the Sceptic 
Pyrrho of Elis,* in the early third century. Sextus says 
that Timon frequently praised Xenophanes; but the frag- 
ments of Timon’s poems in which Xenophanes figures are 
satirical,

Xenophanes’ interest was deeply engaged by both science 
and religion; but it is difficult to find what exactly is the 
unifying principle in his work, whence perhaps he shares with 
Pythagoras the censure of Heracleitus.4 He gave the impulse 
to a new movement in philosophy, and to the founding of a 
school — the Eleatics— which pursued one of his lines of 
thought; yet it is hard to say what part of the Eleatic doctrine 
is his. Fortunately, however, important fragments of his own 
writings survive.The doxographers, in trying to give a clear report of his 
tenets, found contradictions in their authorities. For instance, 
Simplicius, writing of Melissus, Parmenides and Xenophanes, 
gives an account of Xenophanes which he says is based on 
Theophrastus; 1n Theophrastus he found it stated that 
Xenophanes had said that “God’ or “The One’ was neither 
bounded nor boundless, neither in motion nor at rest;® in 
Nicolaus of Damascus that it was bounded and motionless; 
in Alexander of Aphrodisias that it was bounded and sphert- 
cal.¢ Another instance occurs in connection with Xenophanes’ 
alleged opinion that the earth extends downward to infinity: 
Simplicius says that he could not find any clue as to what 
Xenophanes really said, because he himself had not met with 
the verses of Xenophanes that dealt with this point, and neither 
Aristotle nor the lines of Empedocles quoted by Aristotle 
were sufficiently clear. 5: Another instance is: some said that 
Xenophanes made Earth the material cause or substrate, thus 
using up the only one of the Four Elements not hitherto so

‘By = PD A35 _ © 72A2; cp. below, pp. 330-1 d 22B4o0 e A3r §2

hi Burnet was wrong in saying that Simplicius said that he had not seen the poems

(EGP, p. 114; note, p. 117 EGP, p. 126). Simplicius said only that he had not seen

any verses dealing with this point: tols Zevopévous Erect tols Tepl ToUTOU [s Bremen 
This implies rather that he had seen other parts of the poems.

92 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSany verses dealing with this point: tols Zevopévous Erect tols Tepl ToUTOU [s Bremen 
This implies rather that he had seen other parts of the poems.

92 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

used; but (says Galen) they misinterpreted him; such a 
statement nowhere appears in Xenophanes’ own writings, and 
if it had it would have been given in Theophrastus’ epitome.* 
Another striking contradiction in the authorities concerns the 
power of God. Xenophanes says that God rules and is the 
most powerful; and so he was reported by some.°* But in 
the Plutarchian Stromateis it is stated that Xenophanes 
denied that there was any leadership among the gods, fot it is 
not right that any one of the gods should have despotic 
rule.?These points will be discussed later; here they are brought 
together to show that the doxographers, in attempting to 
systematize Xenophanes’ views, were often at a loss. The 
general explanation of this 1s that Xenophanes was a poet, and, 
like Heracleitus, threw out fruitful ideas which he did not 
always trouble to work out in detail or to support with cogent 
intellectual argument. The working out and verification by 
reason was done by Parmenides and Melissus, and much that 
they evolved has been foisted on to Xenophanes.* If we com- 
pare the language of the doxographers first with the poems of 
Xenophanes and then with those of Parmenides, we can see 
clearly that the process has been to refer back the systematic 
thought of Parmenides to the man whose ideas helped to in- 
spire him. The extreme example of this is the late, possibly 
Peripatetic, essay entitled On Melissus, Xenophanes and Gorgias 
(if indeed the middle portion does refer to Xenophanes, which 
has been doubted). It ascribes to him a complicated and 
wholly Eleatic reasoning in support of a number of contra- 
dictory predicates about Being, and proceeds to show the flaws 
in this reasoning. This mistaken ascription of Eleatic thought 
to Xenophanes probably owes its origin to Aristotle and Theo- 
phrastus; they explained Xenophanes in the light of the later 
Eleatic school 1n order to bring out his significance for meta- 
physical philosophy, and this was misunderstood by their 
pupils and successors.

Aristotle, and after him Theophrastus, quite definitely 
placed Xenophanes outside the Eleatic school, as its uncon- 
‘scious, not deliberate founder. Aristotle thought nothing of 
Xenophanes as a thinker; he places him exactly where we

@ A36; cp. A32; A33 b B23; Bas ¢ A31 §3 d A32 
eeg A °° 7 9° 7°

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 93@ A36; cp. A32; A33 b B23; Bas ¢ A31 §3 d A32 
eeg A °° 7 9° 7°

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 93

should expect from the fragments of the poems we possess. 
He says in the Metaphysics,» ‘Parmenides, it seems, treated of 
the conceptual One, Melissus of the material One; that is why 
the former makes it limited, the latter unlimited. But Xeno- 
phanes, who was the originator of this attempt to reduce things 
to a One (Parmenides being alleged to be his pupil) gave no 
clear account, and does not appear to have touched upon 
either of these kinds of existences, but directing his gaze to the 
whole heavens he says that God and the One are identical. 
These, therefore, as I have said, can be dismissed for the pur- 
poses of our present inquiry, and two of them indeed alto- 
gether, because of a certain crudity, namely Xenophanes and 
Melissus’.» And elsewhere he includes Xenophanes in an 
even more cutting censure, saying, ‘Some have said that the 
downward extent of the earth is infinite, being rooted in the 
Boundless as Xenophanes says; their motive was to save‘ 
themselves the trouble of looking for the right explanation’. 
Similarly Theophrastus,* copying his master, attributes to 
Xenophanes the view that Being is One; but ‘admits’ (as Sim- 
plicius puts it) that Xenophanes’ views do not really belong toa 
record of scientific and metaphysical inquiry.Xenophanes met with better appreciation in another quarter: 
his attacks on the legends about the gods as narrated by the 
poets, especially Homer and Hesiod, had an effect quite as 
far-reaching, both on poetry and on philosophy, as the meta- 
physical doctrines he seems almost'accidentally to have fathered. 
His contemporary Epicharmus, the comic dramatist of Syra- 
cuse, was keenly interested in the thought of his day, and intro- 
duced obvious references to Xenophanes into his plays. One 
of the fragments of Epicharmus is an imitation, perhaps 
parody, of Xenophanes’ view that each creature makes its god 
in its own image; another looks like a retort to Xenophanes’ 
famous lines about God: “He sees as a whole, thinks as a whole, 
hears as a whole.’® ¢! Epicharmus wrote : “Mind alone sees, mind 
alone hears; all else is deaf and blind.’!: t Epicharmus and Xeno- 
phanes were said to have been at variance, and Epicharmus to 
have said insulting things about Xenophanes;® but this is an

b Ag7 ¢ A3r §2 d 23Bs e B24 f23Br2 
' Alex. Aphrod. ad Aristot. Met. rotoa. See Norwood, Greek Comedy, p. 86

23B12: vols dpi Kal vots dxover  T&AAG Koper Kal

94 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

invention, based ona remark in Aristotle’s Metaphysics *1 which 
implies that Epicharmus said against Xenophanes, ‘He speaks 
truly, but improperly’. This appears to mean that Epicharmus 
agreed with Xenophanes’ views (probably about the gods) but 
objected in some way to his manner of expressing them. And 
the two fragments quoted above show no hostility, not even 
necessarily disagreement.Another poet whom Xenophanes seems to have influenced 
by these views is Pindar; they may easily have met in Syracuse. 
Pindar in his First Olympian Ode, addressed to Hiero of Syra- 
cuse in 472 B.c., writes an apologia for his art, declaring him- 
self to be the right kind of poet — truthful, and saying no evil 
of the gods; in retelling the story of Tantalus, he repudiates 
the idea that the gods can be cannibals, and says he speaks in 
opposition to his predecessors in poetry. Pindar’s claim to be 
truthful and pure, as opposed to the epic poets, may have been 
called forth by the strictures of Xenophanes, not on himself 
but on poetry. Again, Xenophanes censures excessive adula- 
tion of athletic prowess; Pindar tries to prove himself justified 
in extolling the Games. Pindar’s frequent anxiety to refute 
censure may arise from a wish to satisfy the requirements of 
Xenophanes and his admirers. ?

Later, Euripides directly imitated Xenophanes in the Heracles 
and the 4utolycus.° By this time the need for the purification of 
mythology had become a commonplace of discussion ; Euripides 
made it the driving force of several of his plays, and put speeches 
about it into the mouths of his characters. *

For the influence of this side of Xenophanes’ work on 
philosophy, we need only point to the Second and Third Books 
of Plato’s Republic, where the poets are subjected to expurga- 
tion according to the canon of a conception of God as One, 
Indivisible, Unalterable and wholly Good. So closely does 
Plato follow the lines laid down by Xenophanes that his pro- 
cedure is to take first ‘the Deity’, and then ‘the gods, daemons

aArs b B2 ¢ 21 (Xen.) C

al §1d elxdtas pév Aéyousiv, ox cAnOi 5% Afyouoiv’ ottTw ydp dpudtre: W&AAOv eltrelv 4 
dotrep *Emixapyos els Zevopcvnv. Met. ro10a. See Diels’ note, quoting Gomperz, who 
attributed to Epicharmus the phrase elxdross piv otx Epa 165’, KAN’ GAadiws Epa, and 
connected it with the religious teaching of Xenophanes.1 Pind. OJ. I, 36: ot: & dv&pl pdpev soixds dul Scapdveov Karé&. pelov yap altia.

2 See for example Iph. Taur. 386 sqq., taking the same story as Pind. OJ. I. The 
speech ends: otSéva yap olpor Saipdveov slvar koxdv.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 95

and heroes’, just as Xenophanes says, ‘There is one God, 
among gods and men the greatest’. It may be added that one 
of the fragments depicts a scene something like Plato’s City of 
Pigs.»

The views by which Xenophanes influenced the metaphysical 
side of philosophy are two: on the nature of the deity; and on 
the nature of knowledge. |

Of the first, he said that God is One, among gods and men 
the greatest;* that he sees, thinks and hears with the whole of 
him; that he governs all by means of mind, without toil;¢ that 
he remains always in one place and does not move, for it does 
not beseem him to change his position from time to time.‘This is not in itself a contribution to metaphysics, as Theo- 
phrastus observed ; and it was the attempts to expound it in a 
metaphysical way that led to the contradictions already men- 
tioned. Metaphysics, given this ‘God’ who is One, wishes to 
know more about him: he is not the only god, as is seen from 
Xenophanes’ own words. Is he the whole universe? What is 
his relation to the visible universe? If he is the Whole and 
contains the parts, how can he be said to be ‘greatest’? If he 
rules, he must have something to rule over; such a predication 
implies that he is not the whole. Xenophanes says that he 1s 
‘the greatest’, and ‘governs all by the thought of his mind’; one 
authority says that Xenophanes said that there was no ruler- 
ship among the gods, for it is not right that any of them should 
play the despot. (The explanation of this is that Xenophanes 
meant that God was not a ruler in the anthropomorphic sense: 
not a prince or tyrant.) Further, metaphysicians asked, 1s this 
God bounded or infinite? We are told that he sees and hears 
‘with the whole of him’; has he therefore a shape? If so, 1s it 
circular like Parmenides’ Being? None of these questions 
finds an answer in Xenophanes; they were not even thought of 
or raised by him.

The idea of Xenophanes on the nature of the deity must be 
looked at in quite another way: as the result of his attack on the 
anthropomorphism of the poets. His view of God is not an 
abstract and metaphysical concept; it is the direct attempt to 
replace features which he disliked in the poets’ conception of 
the deity. His own concept of God, therefore, is relative to the 
concept he was trying to displace. Man conceives God after

rcp. §5

96 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSrcp. §5

96 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

his own image; therefore Man has many gods, the product of 
different nations, different minds. These gods have the charac- 
teristics of their inventors — clothes, bodies, a voice, like all 
mortals;* particular features according to the race that con- 
ceives them: Aethiopian gods are black and: snub-nosed, 
Thracian = have red hair and grey eyes.» They even have 
the sins of mortals, according to Homer and Hesiod.* By this 
method every creature that has powers of expression can invent 
and describe his own deity according to his kind. Lions, horses, 
oxen lack this power of expression; they have no hands and 
cannot depict, otherwise they too would have their deities, 
made like themselves.* 41 Man, who has the power of expression, 
can describe his deities at will; we see the result in Homer and 
Hesiod, who are the instructors of all.e No wonder that the 
worship paid to the gods is all wrong; the sacrifice and prayer 
are offered as to a divinity, but the ritual implies that its object 
is human; for example, the lamentation at Elea for Leucothea, 
and of the Egyptians for Osiris.‘

The method of conceiving God has been wrong; a new con- 
cept must be substituted, purged of all human elements. God 
must be thought of as having complete power (not as a human 
king has power); freedom from human limitations — absolute 
moral goodness, unrestricted knowledge (that is, unlimited 
perception and intelligence); and stability in his condition of 
being the best. By this method we arrive at a concept of a God 
who is really greater than Man, the greatest thing in the uni- 
verse. Thus regarded, as a relative concept, Xenophanes’ God 
becomes intelligible. It is only when the test of the absolute — 
the metaphysical demand — is made on him that he dissolves 
into contradictions.It is worth while to point out that Xenophanes’ personal 
aspirations must have gone into the composition of his deity.* 
It may be that this affords an explanation of the fragment: ‘He 
always remains in the same place, moving not at all, and it is 
not proper for him to change his position from time to time.’s

d! cp. Rupert Brooke's poem Heaven.

* The influence of the thinker’s own psychological make-up on his conception of the 
Cosmos and its laws has not yet been sufficiently studied in connection with the early 
Greek thinkers. If the term God is used, we may be sure that subjective factors play a 
large part in the concept; God is an ideal, but a human and also a personal ideal. 
cp. the Fire of Heracleitus, and the Nous of .

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 97%

Gomperz observed the significance of the word ‘proper’; he 
commented: “We cannot help smiling at the sight of the stout 
assailant of anthropomorphism made the victim of an anthro- 
pomorphic attack,’ But it is possible that Gomperz partly mis- 
took the analogy. The point is perhaps not, as he says, ‘that 
the chief of the gods must not hurry officiously to and fro like 
an obsequious serving-man; he must cultivate the majestic in- 
activity of a King on his throne’. It is rather that God, being a 
King, is not a traveller to be tossed about hither and thither as 
Xenophanes was;* he has rest and stability, which Xenophanes 
must sometimes have longed for. As God has bodily rest, so 
too he has not the toil of the intellect; his perception is un- 
limited, and the power of his mind untrammelled.> But Man 
has to seek knowledge by long labour. The way of the 
thinker, like the way of the traveller, is sometimes toilsome; 
God is endowed with ease.The God of Xenophanes, then, is made up of these two in- 
gredients: the intellectual concept of a deity stripped of ob- 
viously human qualities, and the thinker’s desire for greater 
intellectual power and freedom from wanderings. Xenophanes’ 
God is therefore still anthropomorphic, as being described from 
a human standpoint; but his God is better than the thieving 
adulterous gods of Olympian theology because he represents 
a human ideal which we know by experiment and experience 
to be an advance. Also, he is better because of the attempt 
made to purge him of particularity, such as nationality, and to 
make him universal.

Did Xenophanes claim to do more? Did he claim objective 
reality for his deity? This brings us to the second point: his 
views on the nature of knowledge. In two fragments? he 
denies the possibility of absolute and objective knowledge: no 
man born ever has known or ever will know the truth about 
the gods or any of the other things discussed by Xenophanes; 
for even if he happened to hit exactly upon the absolute truth, 
‘he himself cannot know that he has done so; ‘for in all things’ 
_(or, ‘to all men’) ‘only Opinion is decreed’, that is, it has been 
decreed that only conjecture is possible. ‘Here then let these 
Opinions stand — in resemblance to the reality.’ It is this doc- 
trine which led some? to say that Xenophanes was the first to

« BS b Bas c Bxr8 d B34; B35 e B35 
1 Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, Vol. I, p. 159.

98 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS« BS b Bas c Bxr8 d B34; B35 e B35 
1 Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, Vol. I, p. 159.

98 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

state that the Whole is unintelligible, a crude and misleading 
way of paraphrasing him. It is clear, however, that Xeno- 
phanes was well aware of the difficulties that later were to lead 
to the agnosticism of the Sophists. He did nevertheless believe 
in, or rather did not question, the existence of an absolute 
truth, and claimed that his opinions resembled it. He could not 
claim to have stated the absolute truth about the deity or any- 
thing else, for he knew of no means by which to judge if he had; 
but his views were not intended to be regarded as subjective, 
and he put forward his concept of God as that proper to Man, 
not merely to Xenophanes, and as being similar to the truth. 
Further than that he does not go in the search for the criterion 
of knowledge.That he speaks of ‘gods’ as well as one God has aroused 
great discussion among modern interpreters, who want to 
place him in the category of either monotheist or polytheist. 
But the question of how there can be one god and many gods 
was not difficult for Xenophanes, because he was not thinking 
in terms of the One and the Many, as the Eleatics were. 
Xenophanes did not work it out because he did not arrive at 
the question; it was enough for him to say that the _ in its 
fullness and completeness was one, and then to speak of ‘gods’ 
or subdivisions of the divine power. That he meant by ‘God’ 
the whole material universe that we see, and by ‘gods’ other 
manifestations, reducing them to special natural phenomena, 
seems unlikely. He did equate Iris to the rainbow,* a very 
easy identification; and he said that the Dioskourol, the lights 
seen on ships, were ignited clouds.» He may have treated the 
sun- and moon-deities in the same way, since he regarded these 
bodies as passing clouds constantly renewed. We have a verse° 
in which he explains the title of the sun, Hyperion, as meaning 
‘the ene who goes above’; and he spoke contemptuously of the 
moon as ‘redundant’.4 But it does not necessarily follow that 
he disbelieved in the existence of Apollo and Artemis in the 
sense of divine forces ruling in these spheres, whose powers 
were delegated to them from the supreme power. He would 
wish to strip them of obvious human attributes, and especially 
of anything shameful, as he did in the case of the supreme 
deity ; but not necessarily to reduce them to natural phenomena. 
Further, the One God had perception in all his parts, and

a B32 bA39 c B31 d Ag2

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 99a B32 bA39 c B31 d Ag2

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 99

governed all things by means of Mind; this could not be said 
of the visible universe. Again, in his poem®* describing the 
orderly and decent ritual that is a fitting worship for the gods, 
he says that God must be hymned with reverent strains and 
pure words; he objects to stories of Titans, Giants and Cen- 
taurs and their warfare and strife, because they are figments 
and there is no use in them; but ‘ever to pay heed to the gods, 
that is good’. These are not the words Me a man to whom the 
gods were natural phenomena.

His ethics, in so far as we have any record of them, are the 
a Greek Sophrosyne. Orderly religious festivals;* no

runkenness?* (perhaps he censured the Dionysiac orgies; he

refers to them);> a way of life that is a mean between asceticism 
and Oriental luxury ;°* censure of excessive adulation of athletic 
prowess, because bodily skill is inferior to mental ability and 
because athletics bring no advantage to the community. There 
is a hint that he objected to dice-playing;* he also disliked 
avarice and meanness. f

He tells a story about Pythagoras, that he once stopped a 
man from beating a dog, because he recognized its voice as that 
of a friend’s soul.¢ It has been suggested that this is told 
satirically, but there is nothing in the diction to prove this, and 
it was not so regarded by those who quoted it. It may equally 
well have been told in sympathy or impartially.The cosmology of Xenophanes is not, like that of the Ionians, 
an application of a metaphysical theory to the visible world; the 
doxographers, trying to treat it as such, fell into difficulties. 
They begin by describing a First Cause, which 1s the One, this 
being (though they do not say so) Xenophanes’ God. They give 
to the One the metaphysical and Eleatically-expressed attri- 
butes corresponding to what Xenophanes said of his God,? 
getting pelea in contradictions. When they go on to look 
for a cosmology, they find Xenophanes talking about earth and 
water: ‘everything comes from earth and goes back to earth’ ;' 
‘we are all produced from a combination of earth and water’ ;} 
‘all creatures that come into being and exist are earth and 
water’.« Hence Theodoret, quoting Aétius, complains that

a Br b Br7 c¢ B22; B3 d Ba e Ar6 f B21; B6 8 By

b Ar; A3zr; A323 A333 A35;A36;A49 = 1 Bay = 1 B33, & Bag

1 Burnet, EGP4, pp. 127-9, takes the opposite view, and dismisses the use of “the 
language of polytheism in his elegies’ as being ‘only what we should expect’.

100 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

whereas Xenophanes said that the Whole was one, circular and 
limited, not begotten but eternal and wholly immobile, he ‘for- 
got these theories and turned round and said that everything 
came from earth’;* and he then quotes the line, ‘everything 
comes from earth and goes back to earth’. Now we have the 
weighty testimony of Aristotle in the Mezaphysics> that none of 
the early physicists gave Earth as the primary substance. We 
must therefore believe that the significance of the above line 
has been misunderstood by the doxographers, in their desire 
to get a metaphysical theory out of what Xenophanes says; and 
that the fact 1s that he was commenting on the phenomena he 
saw around him on the physical plane, and is not suggesting 
that Earth is the substrate.

His cosmology was as follows:His cosmology was as follows:

There is the earth and the vault of heaven; the earth 1s 
boundless and not surrounded on all sides by air or by the 
heavens.* The only limit is that on top at our feet; downwards 
the earth goes to infinity.4 These are Xenophanes’ own words; 
so too, it appears, is the expression that the earth is ‘rooted in 
infinity’ quoted by Aristotle.e This statement purported to 
explain why the earth stays in position, and was apparently 
meant as a correction of the views of Thales and Anaximander; 
it called forth from Aristotle the scornful comment that it 
saved its adherents the trouble of finding out the real cause. 
Simplicius tried to defend Xenophanes from the censure of 
Aristotle, and also Empedocles,! by suggesting that not the 
earth itself but that into which it descended was what Xeno- 
phanes meant to describe as infinite; but Simplicius had not 
seen Xenophanes’ own words, as he admits, and was relying 
on the ambiguity of the term® &: in Empedocles’ verses which 
Aristotle quotes. Xenophanes’ own words! can mean nothing 
other than that the Earth itself goes down infinitely far in its 
under side; with the help of Aristotle’s quotation we see that 
Xenophanes thinks of the earth as anchored by infinitely long 
roots. Xenophanes was acquainted with the work of Thales; 
perhaps he felt that 1f the earth floated on water as Thales said, 
it would move about. It is possible that Xenophanes thought 
that the earth was rooted in water like an island. Pindar des-

qB28  ¢ Ag7 f 31B39 
& A47; 31B39 h B28 i Brg

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES '§ IOIqB28  ¢ Ag7 f 31B39 
& A47; 31B39 h B28 i Brg

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES '§ IOI

cribed the island of Rhodes as ‘growing up from the bed of 
the sea’,* and as ‘blossoming forth from the salt waters’;> per- 
haps Xenophanes had used such an analogy when speaking of 
earth, and Pindar got the idea from him. The rising of the 
islands of Rhodes and Delos from the waves would impress 
Xenophanes; and would be the kind of phenomena that would 
tally with his other observations on the cycle of creation: first: 
the earth from the moist mixture, then the wearing away of 
earth into the waters again. That he used the physical history 
of these islands to illustrate a theory of the destructibility of 
the world seems likely. There exists a treatise (attributed to 
Philo) Ox the Indestructibility of the World,* in which Theo- 
orcad summary of the arguments on the other side is given.

‘here can be little doubt that those of Xenophanes are in- 
cluded; and in this passage the rise of Delos and Rhodes is 
referred to, and Pindar’s verses on Delos are quoted. Thus that 
Xenophanes used this piece of knowledge is almost certain, and 
itis possible that Pindar got it from him. It is also possible that 
Xenophanes carried the analogy further, and regarded our 
earth as having arisen from the waters like those islands; as 
being now rooted in them; and as fated ultimately to perish 
back into them again.

As there is no limit to the earth underneath, and it is not 
surrounded by air and the vault of heaven, it follows that the 
heavenly bodies do not travel round it. There are many suns 
and moons, passing over.the different zones of the earth and 
never returning; new ones come along all the time.4‘The heavenly bodies have their origin from the earth; the 
stars, suns and moons are made up of clouds, that is, of moist 
exhalations which are ignited (he does not say how).°, The stars 
are lit up at night like coals, and quenched in the day-time.! 
The moon likewise is a condensed and ignited cloud, its light 
being its own; its monthly phases are due to quenchings and 
ignitions.s So too the sun; it is an accumulation of smaller 
fires, the fires formed from moist exhalations, and is new every 
day.* Similarly with comets, shooting stars and meteors, and 
lightning: all are accumulations and movements of clouds.’ 
The changes of the sun are all quenchings.ij The quenchings 
seem quite arbitrary: the sun goes out when it comes to a part 
20/1. VII,62 bid, 69 © Dox.Gr.p. 486 4A33;Aqgra €A32;A33;A38; A4o

8 A43 b Ago; Azz; A33 Aga; Ags J.

I0O2 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

of the earth not inhabited by man;* this doubtless 1s because 
the object of its existence is to be useful to man and other 
living creatures; he points out that while the sun is thus useful, 
the moon is a superfluous adjunct.» The sun, or rather suns, 
really go off into infinity, but they appear to go in a circle ‘be- 
cause of the distance’;¢ that is, he had observed that parallel 
lines appear to converge, or perhaps that objects such as ships 
disappear below the horizon. The rainbow ts also an ignited 
cloud, though men call it Iris and personify it.4These quenchings and ignitings are inadequate enough even 
when their cause is left arbitrary; but the task of arranging these 
opinions becomes absurd when we read in Aétius that the sua 
is the cause of the exhalations which result in the clouds, which 
when ignited become the heavenly bodies.e Perhaps Xeno- 
phanes did not actually say this; in the fragment on which 
Aétius (very naturally) bases this statement, there is no men- 
tion of heat; it merely says that the sea is the source of water 
and winds and clouds. Xenophanes does say that ‘the sun goes 
above (hence his name Hyperion) and warms the earth’,® but 
he does not say that the sun is the original cause of the exhala- 
tions from which the suns themselves are produced. He leaves 
the cause unexplained.

Living creatures, including Man, are the product of a mix- 
ture of earth and water." This universe together with its in- 
habitants came out of mud;? the universe was formerly all mud, 
and it will some day become all mud again, because the earth 
will all be carried down to the sea. Then the human race and 
this universe will perish and a beginning of becoming will be 
made again. Thus there are many worlds, all perishable, suc- 
ceeding one another; and this arising from and return to mud 
is the cause of change in them all.i

These opinions seem to have been based on some original 
and accurate observations: the study of the percolation of 
water, and its effect on land; and the observation of fossils. He 
had also noticed phosphorescence, and studied volcanic fire.

Water trickles through the earth, and that is why the sea 
becomes salt, because of the products brought to it by the

£ B30 & B31

1 cp. Pind. Ol. VIL, where he tells how the Sun-god (‘YrrepioviBas, 1, 39), as he travel-

led above, noted the island of Rhodes below the surface of the sea. 
2 This is derived from Anaximander, see above, p. 62.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 103led above, noted the island of Rhodes below the surface of the sea. 
2 This is derived from Anaximander, see above, p. 62.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 103

water that feeds it;* we see the water dripping from the walls 
of caves.» The water wears away the land at present, but 
formerly the water and earth were mixed (mud) because the 
shells of sea-animals are found far inland and among moun- 
tains; also he had observed the ‘imprint’?! of a fish and of seals 
in the quarries of Syracuse, of a sardine* in the middle of a 
piece of Parian marble, and “flat prints’¢ of all kinds of marine 
creatures at Malta. Then there followed a process of drying; 
the prints were dried in the mud.* He surmises from this that 
the opposite process is now taking place: the water is wearing 
away the land, bringing down its products to the sea, and so one 
day it will become mud again. This circularity of process is a 
favourite idea with the Greeks, and 1s accepted by Xenophanes 
since his observations seemed to confirm it.

The possibility of the ignition of clouds, which plays such 
an important part in his cosmology, seems to have been con- 
firmed for him by the observation of the Dioskouroi, the ‘star- 
like apparitions on ships’, which he said were cloudy matter 
shining because of some kind of motion.“ 41 Here we havea hint 
of the cause of the ignitions; motion. This being so, it is easy 
to explain comets, meteors and shooting stars, as well as the 
other heavenly bodies. The fiery cloud above the crater of 
volcanoes also seemed to him to lend support to this view; he 
had seen the volcanic fires on Lipara,® ¢1 and he must have been 
familiar with Etna.*7 ; d A39 e Ags 
d! Anaximenes had said that the cause of the sun’s heat was the swiftness of its motion; 
see p. 67. The view that the heavenly bodies are ignited clouds is in fact taken from 
Anaximenes, who said that they were “condensed air’, which at this time means the same 
thing. 
o! He noted that it had once ‘suffered eclipse’ (éxArmelv) for sixteen years, and had

returned in the seventeenth year. It is clear that he was using it to illustrate his theme 
of the ignitions and quenchings of heavenly bodies.

2 ‘seals’ (pwxdsv). This was emended by Gomperz to ouxév (seaweeds) on the ground 
that the former involves a palaeontological impossibility. See n. 3 below.

3 ‘sardine’ (&un). This was proposed by Gronovius for &&@vn (laurel), the MS. reading. 
It is possible that Xenophanes observed vegetable as well as animal fossils, and that the 
MS. reading should be retained. Pompecki states that the testimony about Syracuse 
(fish and seals) and Malta are completely credible, but that neither ‘laurel’ nor ‘sardine’ 
is possible at Paros; he therefore reads Pharos (Lessina on the Dalmatian coast) where 
fossil fish are found in abundance. See Diels, Vors. note, Vol. I, p. 123.

* ep. Pindar’s description of Etna, Pyth. I, 20 sgqg. Motapol 8’ c&pépaicw piv trpoxéovTs 
dov Katrvol al@av’. There was an eruption of Etnain Ol. 76, 1. (476 B.C.) according to 
‘Thucydides IIL, 116 (see Christ on Pind. Pythk. I). This Xenophanes may have eeen.

O04 THE PRE=-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

These few observations at one end of'the scale, and the new 
concept of God at the other, are the valuable parts of Xeno- 
phanes’ work. The gi to connect all into one scheme was 
beyond his powers. The logical sifting of the concept of God, 
its connection with the One, and the derivation of the visible 
universe from it, were beyond his intentions; to him, the ques- 
tion in its metaphysical form did not arise.

22. HERACLEITUS 
Heracueitus of Epuesus was in his prime about 500 B.c.22. HERACLEITUS 
Heracueitus of Epuesus was in his prime about 500 B.c.

There is no reason to doubt the traditional date for his prime 
of life: the sixty-ninth Olympiad, that 1s, 504-so1 B.c.? But 
since this is, as usual, merely a rough guess, it serves to place 
him a generation later than Pythagoras and Xenophanes, 
whose views he opposes,’ and a generation earlier than Par- 
menides, who in turn opposes the views of Heracleitus. Tradi- 
tion states that he died at the age of sixty.°

The tradition regarding his life and death is most unsatis- 
factory, for it is all obviously an attempt to dramatize his writ- 
ings. From these, one thing emerged clearly for the anec- 
dotists: his ‘pride’, as they called it; that is, his low opinion of 
his fellows. Thus we get a number of anecdotes based on this 
idea: he refused to take part in politics, because he disapproved 
of the Ephesian constitution, and retired, first to the temple of 
Artemis, then to the mountains, where he ate grass.e He pre- 
ferred to play knuckle-bones in the temple with the children, 
rather than be a politician. He withdrew from his position of 
Basileus, an office hereditary in his family and carrying with it 
certain public marks of honour,‘ in favour of his brother. He 
had no teacher (though some wished to cosinect him with Hip- 
pasus, others with Xenophanes) but learnt everything by self- 
investigation.» Though contemptuous of his fellow-citizens, he 
was not more partial to others: he refused with scorn an invita- 
tion from King Dareius to visit his court;! and even preferred 
unpopularity at home to life at Athens.i These tales are clearly 
baat on his character as it emerges from his writings: his

b B4o c Ar §3 d Ar §: e Ar §§2,3  =fAz2 
a i Ar $12; A3 j Ar §15

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES

many expressions of contempt for others, his condemnation of 
the Ephesians for their eens of Hermodorus, his views on 
tyranny and so forth.OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES

many expressions of contempt for others, his condemnation of 
the Ephesians for their eens of Hermodorus, his views on 
tyranny and so forth.

The tales of his death are likewise obvious inventions: he 
retired to the mountains and ate grass, so that he contracted 
‘dropsy. The doctors were unable, when challenged, to cure 
him; so he plastered himself with dung and hoped that the 
moisture would be steamed out of him by the heat. Neverthe- 
less, he died. There were variants of this absurd story: some 
said that he was eaten by dogs; others that he was cured, and 
died of another complaint. But its obvious basis is Hera- 
cleitus’ own view that heat is life and water is death, with which 
is combined his remark that ‘corpses are more fit to be thrown 
out than dung’;° the rest is achieved by the anecdotist’s desire 
to show arrogance coming to an evil end.

Aristotle tells an anecdote of Heracleitus’ being visited by 
friends who found him warming himself by the stove; he bade 
them come in and not be afraid, for there were gods here also.4 
The moral of the story for Aristotle is that one must not allow 
anything to put one off in biological research, as everything has 
its share in nature and beauty; but the anecdotist was clearly 
thinking of Heracleitus’ views on Fire, and attributing to him 
the saying elsewhere attached to Thales and his experiments 
with the magnet and amber.¢Lastly, there is a story that he helped the Ephesians in their 
war against Persia, by indicating that success depended on 
their sacrificing for a time their luxurious way of living. This 
he did by means of a symbolic act: he mixed before the assem- 
bled people a barley-drink, and thus convinced them without 
a word.! This story is based on his prayer that the Ephesians 
might never cease to be wealthy in order that their wickedness 
might be detected,® and his use of the analogy of the cheese- 
drink;* it is one of the many such stories which exhibit wise 
men helping their states in time of war, for example Thales 
and Pythagoras.

Thus we can be certain of nothing in his life, which seems 
to have been devoted to thought, and not to have included even 
any travels. He was probably an aristocrat by birth, and as he 
lived at Ephesus, not at Miletus, his originality was not tem-

b Ar §5 ¢ Bg6 d Ag e rAr §24;

106 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

pered by too close contact with fellow-workers. The rest is 
unknown.

He is said to have written one book, that was divided into 
three parts: metaphysical, political and theological ;* one gram- 
marian, Diodotus, absurdly maintained that the book was not 
anywhere concerned with metaphysics, but really with politics, 
the parts about nature being introduced for the sake of analogy !® 
It is unlikely that the division into three — was the work of 
Heracleitus; the subject-matter is too closely interwoven for 
that. But some such attempt may have been made by a later, 
perhaps Alexandrian editor.What most impressed commentators was the obscurity of 
his exposition. They accepted this as being the fault of Hera- 
cleitus, not of his readers, and were apt to round off their para- 
phrases with a complaint that ‘he expounds nothing clearly’.« 
Aristotle (and others copying him) attributed this to the punc- 
tuation and the lack of connecting particles.4 Others accused 
Heracleitus of having done it deliberately, in order that the 
book should be tackled only by men of ability, and should not 
be taken too cheaply by the common herd,° just as Solon was 
accused after his own day of having written his legal code ob- 
scurely, to provide work for his new jury-courts. Even Theo- 
phrastus foolishly suggested that Heracleitus had written his 
work incompletely in places, ‘through spleen’.f It was, how- 
ever, admitted by others that he sometimes expressed himself 
with brilliant clarity, so that even the most stupid could easily 
understand and experience an uplifting of the soul; but, they 
added, the brevity and difficulty of interpretation are un- 
paralleled.¢

This universal complaint is embodied in a story that Euri- 
pides once lent the book to Socrates; and when he asked 
Socrates what he had thought of it, the latter replied: ‘Splendid, 
what | have understood; also, I believe, what | haven’t under- 
stood — except that it needs a Delian diver.» Others attributed 
this mot to one Crates, who first brought the book to Greece. i

_ The truth is, of course, that Heracleitus though not de- 
liberately concealing his meaning, used a pungent oracular 
style, partly because he admired it, partly because he could not

[5 CAr§8 dAg © Ar §6 fAr1§6 8 Ar hy

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 107[5 CAr§8 dAg © Ar §6 fAr1§6 8 Ar hy

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 107

do otherwise. The profundity, yet to him obviousness, of the 
truths he wished to expound could not be expressed in an 
other way. Further, believing as he did that mankind are dull 
and stupid, he wished to arrest attention; but his paradoxes aim 
at startling men into recognition of the truth, not at creating an 
effect of rhetorical skill; and this is why later imitations of 
him are so irritating. His admiration of the Sibyl and of the 
Pythian Oracle shows that he was conscious of the nature of 
his own instrument: ‘The Sibyl’, he said, ‘with raving lips, 
uttering her unlaughing, unadorned unincensed message, 
reaches out with her voice through a thousand years with the 
help of the god’, and, ‘the lord whose oracle is at Delphi 
neither speaks nor conceals, but indicates’.» These are surely 
his own models that he is praising. But he detested rhetorical 
trickery, and is said to have referred to some unknown rhetori- 
cian as ‘the prince of quibblers’.«

His epithet Skoteinos, the Obscure, is first found in the 
Aristotelian treatise de Mundo;4 it is quoted by Suidas as if it 
had been attached to him as a nickname during his lifetime.¢ 
It was probably only one of many such epithets earned by his 
book. Timon the lampooner applied a whole string to him: 
‘the Crower, iy eee Riddler Heracleitus.’! He 1s said to

have deposited the book as an offering at the temple of Artemis 
in Ephesus.¢have deposited the book as an offering at the temple of Artemis 
in Ephesus.¢

The doxographical tradition about Heracleitus 1s unsatis- 
factory. Summarizers tried to treat him on the lines of the 
previous Ionian philosophers, the scientists of Miletus, and 
dealt chiefly with his cosmology. This cosmology was not 
clear-cut and objective, like those of the three lonian Monists 
there was in it an element of symbolism, and an abstractness 
that made it applicable to far more than the material universe. 
Thus, where it seemed to show gaps, it offered itself to the 
imposition of the reader’s own views: the Stoics, for instance, 
imposed on it their own idea of a World-Conflagration.»

Again, Heracleitus was an artist as well as a scientist; and 
therefore, though his style with its metaphors, its suggestive 
brevity, its antitheses and general uncompromisingness, per- 
fectly conveyed his meaning, it was naturally full of puzzles for 
the paraphraser. The scientific or physical content could be

a Bo2 b B93 cB8r 4Bro ¢Ara £Ar§6 8 Ar §6 hAro

108 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

extracted and isolated; but the essential teaching that 1s Hera- 
cleitean — the most valuable part — was necessarily left behind.108 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

extracted and isolated; but the essential teaching that 1s Hera- 
cleitean — the most valuable part — was necessarily left behind.

The isolation of the ‘scientific content was done as well as 
could be expected by the writer of the summary in Diogenes 
Laertius.* Diels believes this to rest on what he calls the 
Vetusta Placita, an epitome based directly on Theophrastus. 
Theophrastus doubtless derived his views from Aristotle, who 
sums up the work of Heracleitus with his usual brilliant 
brevity in the Mesaphysics.» Plato was deeply read in Hera- 
cleitus, and in the Theaetetus¢ gives a brilliant satirical picture 
of contemporary Heracleiteans. He was particularly impressed 
by Heracleitus’ doctrines of Flux and Relativity, but does not 
discuss his detailed cosmogony, so that this isolation of the 
scientific content goes back to Aristotle. But Heracleitus was 
the kind of thinker who could be understood better by a Plato 
than by an Aristotle: hence the unsatisfactoriness of the doxo- 
i tradition. :

ortunately, however, over one hundred and twenty ex- 
tracts from Heracleitus’ book survive: the wording was such 
that it impressed itself and demanded quotation, especially 
when summarizing failed. The form and matter are insepar- 
able, and the whole can never be exactly paraphrased. It is 
above all things necessary to go to the original in order to 
grasp Heracleitus’ thought.The arrangement of the surviving fragments is a matter of 
conjecture; they can be roughly grouped according to subject- 
matter, and this is what is attempted by editors, though much 
is left to individual predilection. There is no certainty that any 
of these arrangements is that of Heracleitus’ book; the surviv- 
ing sentences are quoted by various ancient writers for various 
reasons, and the connecting links are lost. If then the original 
was difficult of interpretation to ancient readers, our own muti- 
lated version is very much more so; this must be read and re- 
read many times in order to obtain even a dim conception of 
the whole.

The result of the abstraction of his scientific and metaphysi- 
cal doctrine by the summarizers is as follows:

a Ar §§7-11 bAS ;

' It is wrong to state as Burnet does (EGP‘, p. 132m.) that Diels ‘has given up all 
attempt to arrange the fragments according to subject’. Burnet prefers the arrangement 
of Bywater, which he uses for his translation.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES I09

He said that the material substrate was Fire; and one of the 
ways in which he uses it‘is exactly that of the other Ionian 
Monists with their substrates: real material Fire was the ulti- 
mate matter out of which all things come and into which all 
things return.* It is able to undergo transformations, and so to 
produce the other substances Air, Water and Earth.

The process by which these transformations occur, and their 
cause, appear in the summarizers as a rather confused restate- 
ment, with some additions and divergences, of the processes 
thought out by Anaximander and Anaximenes. Particular 
things come out of Fire, and are destroyed back into it; their 
coming into being is ‘in accordance with fate’.>The details of the cosmogony as described by Heracleitus 
led the paraphrasers to use the Anaximenian terms Rarefaction 
and Condensation; Aristotle does this in the Metaphysics. But 
there is no trace of this in the fragments, and it is probable that 
these terms were engrafted on to Heracleitus’ scheme at this 
point because the paraphrasers could find no scientific technical 
term there. The only such term that is newis Exhalation,® 4! and 
this is so frequently repeated in the summaries that it probably 
was the word they found in Heracleitus’ own writings. This 
word refers to what Heracleitus calls ‘the upward path’, that by 
which particular existences return to Fire. There is no corre- 
sponding term for the ‘downward path’, that by which other 
substances are created from Fire. Thus it appears that, just 
as Anaximander was more interested in the process of Becom- 
ing, and so gave only the term Separation Out or Off, so Hera- 
cleitus was more interested in the process of Passing Away, and 
so gave only the term Exhalation. His whole attitude to life, 
and the effect he had on later thinkers, tends to confirm this 
view; his attention was upon the so-called destructive forces of 
War and Strife, and he certainly laid such great stress on the 
return to Fire that the Stoics saw in it their World-Conflagra- 
tion,*¢? and the Christian fathers their Hell-Fire.!:

a Ar §§7,8;A5 > Ar §§7,8;A8  ¢ As; cp. Ar §8 
di eae The word literally meansa rising-up of vapour or smoke. Exhalation, 
hough not accurate, is used in default of a single term that would be exact. 
i

fl Cp. Epist. ad Diognetum, ch. VIII: “H tous xevous kal Anpdbers Exelveov Adyous éroBexg

T&v d&iotriotwv pirocdquv, dv of pév tives Up Epaoay elvan tov Oedv (ol péAAouver xwprticev

autol, Toto KaAoto: Gedv) of 58 U5cop, of BE GAO TI Tév oTorXElev Tav Extiopeveoy UT Geo. 
* Burnet disagrees. EGP4, p. 151, n. 2.

IIO THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSautol, Toto KaAoto: Gedv) of 58 U5cop, of BE GAO TI Tév oTorXElev Tav Extiopeveoy UT Geo. 
* Burnet disagrees. EGP4, p. 151, n. 2.

IIO THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

The difficulty felt by commentators comes out well in the 
epitome preserved in Siaten Laertius:* “His detailed doc- 
trines are as follows: that Fire is the Element, and that all 
things are “an exchange of Fire”, coming into being by rarefac- 
tion and condensation. But he expounds nothing clearly.’ 
Here we see that the term used by Heracleitus — Exchange — 
to cover both sides of the process of Coming-into-Being and 
Passing-Away, was not felt to be sufficient, and the terms 
familiarized by Anaximenes, rarefaction and condensation, 
were therefore inserted as a kind of gloss at this point. “Ex- 
change’ was not a concrete, scientific term, but metaphorical; 
Heracleitus’ own words were: ‘All things are an Exchange? 
for Fire, and Fire for all things, just as goods for gold and gold 
for goods.’> It did not help the paraphrasers that Heracleitus, 
unlike Anaximander, knew that he was using a metaphor and 
did so deliberately; perhaps they were unaware of this. Nor 
was there any help to be gained at this point by Heracleitus’ 
direct description of the process: ‘This ordered universe, the 
same for all, has been created by no one either god or man, but 
was always and is and shall be ever-living Fire, kindled in mea- 
sure and quenched in measure.’* To say that the process con- 
sisted of kindling and quenching was merely another way of 
saying that the substrate was Fire. They looked ahead, there- 
fore, to the details of the cosmogony, and found there a process 
of Becoming that could be covered by the term Condensation ; 
and so they used it. The blank was the more striking because 
he said that nobody did the quenching and kindling: it was, 1s 
and ever shall be by a fixed law.Coming then to the details of the cosmogony, they found 
themselves able to summarize more clearly Heracleitus’ views.4 
Fire changes to the other three substances in much the same 
way as Anaximenes’ Air had done. Fire condenses and be- 
comes Water, Water condenses and becomes Earth; this is the 
Downward Path. Earth rarefies to Water, Water rarefies into 
Exhalations, some bright and akin to Fire, some dark and akin 
to moisture. The bright exhalations, collecting in places, form 
the stars, sun and moon; the dark, moist exhalations have the 
function (no doubt among others) of clogging and thickening 
the space above the earth, so that fiery bodies near the earth,

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES Iil

such as the moon, shine less brightly than the more distant 
fire of the sun, which is out of their range. This is the Upward 
Path, the final stage of which is the complete return to Fire, 
which means the destruction of the particular universe.Two comments may be made on this: first, that the change 
from Fire direct to Water is startling. Perhaps Heracleitus 
was able to conceive it on the analogy of the quenching of fire 
by water. We have, however, a fragment which suggests his 
explanation: “The changes of Fire are first of all, Sea; but of 
this Sea, half is Earth and half Fiery-Cloud.’* That is, Fire 
does directly become Water, but this Water is such that it 
holds combined in itself the more condensed form Earth with 
the more rarefied form Fiery-Cloud. Secondly, in this scheme 
the creation of the particular existences of our universe takes 
place on the Upward Path, after the bottom-most point of the 
Downward Path has been reached, and Sea and Earth have 
been created. The Fiery-Cloud, however, really belongs to 
the Upward Path, though it makes its appearance earlier; the 
Downward Path is simply Sea, Earth (Air is omitted); the 
Fiery-Cloud and the Exhalations are the effect of Fire on 
Water. Again we see that it is the Upward Path, the move- 
ment back to Fire, that interests Heracleitus; he gives to it the 
detailed work of the creation of the particular universe, no less 
than its destruction.

He deals with meteorological phenomena in a very arbitrary 
manner, if the summarizers report him correctly. The sun, 
moon and stars are portions of fire in bowls, and their eclipses 
and the phases of the moon are due to the turning of the out- 
side of their bowls towards us.» >: The fire which forms them ts 
due to the exhalations from earth and sea; of these there are 
two sorts, the bright and the dark, and the bright collect in the 
bowls.¢ He does not explain the nature of the encircling dome 
(the summarizer complains) nor anything further about the 
bowls. Everything else is due to Exhalation. The bright 
exhalation burning in the sun-bowl makes day, the dark. ex- 
halation getting the upper hand makes night; similarly the

ee b Ax §10; Ar2 ¢ Ax §9; Arz; Ar2ee b Ax §10; Ar2 ¢ Ax §9; Arz; Ar2

Perhaps this idea was based on observation of the crescent moon, which at his

ne es ee ey

ROP pe wee cen See Mepe pe eg *J heel ~ | ete ee ee ee a, ee ee Oe yee eT! Org é ~ d » y td . 
‘Mov Kal oedtyny &veo otpepoutve Tdv oxapdy, ‘when their bowls turn up, and cp. Ara: 
doe Td piv Koldov dveo ylyvectan, Td Sé kuptov Ké&roo Trpds Thy huetépav Syiv. Aristotle Uses, 
as well as oxaposiSij, bréxuptov, which seems to mean ‘curved underneath, like a bowl’.

IlI2 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

temporary superiority of the bright exhalation makes summer, 
the return of the moist dark exhalation makes winter; and so 
on. Night and day, the months, the seasons, rain and winds, 
are all due to Exhalation.» It must be mentioned that this 
opposition of light and dark, as if Dark were a tangible thing, 
a form of moisture, is due to the influence of Pythagoras and 
his development of the Anaximandrian theory of Opposites.

The commentators attribute to Heracleitus also what had 
already been said by Anaximenes: that the reason why the stars

ive less light and heat than the sun and moon 1s that they are 
-farther off.» That he did say this is made probable by the 
existence of a phrase in his own words: ‘If there were no sun, 
it would be night so far as depends on the rest of the stars.’° 
The moon is nearer the earth than the sun; but she passes 
through a less pure region, and so the sun, situated in a trans-

arent, unadulterated quarter, is able to give more heat and 
ficht.4 There is also a hint of some ‘commensurability’?! in his 
distance from us; but this may be a transferred suggestion from 
Pythagoreanism.It is astonishing to find that Heracleitus, while realizing that 
distance decreases heating and lighting power, seems to ignore 
the fact that it decreases apparent size. The commentators 
attribute to him the opinion that ‘the sun is the same size that 
he appears to be’,¢ basing this on his own words, that the sun’s 
size is ‘the breadth of a man’s foot’.!

It follows from the fact that the sun is a fiery exhalation, 
that he is ‘not only new every day, but always continuously 
new’,€ that is, the sun, being fire, exemplifies par excellence the 
Law of Flux. In him is also exemplified the Law of Justice, 
that 1s, of Measure and Fair Exchange, which runs through all 
the universe: “The Sun will refuse to overstep his measure; if 
he does not, the Furies, the attendants of Right, will track him 
out.» The sun in his turn can be regarded as presiding over, 
as well as creating, the changes of the seasons to which all pro- 
ductivity is due: he watches these, and acts as umpire in de- 
fining their limits, so that to him too is entrusted the work of 
seeing that justice is done and measure observed.! Perhaps 
this accounts for the expression which Aristotle attributes to

a Ar §§10, 115 cp. Arg b Ar §10 © Bgg d Ar §10; Ar2 e Ar §7 
‘Bz; §B6 bBo, i Broo 
1 ouppetpov dq” Andy Exaiv Bidotnya (Ar §10).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 113

Heracleitus about the sun: ‘an intelligent kindling, made of 
(vapour) from the sea.’* It is ota in keeping with Hera- 
cleitus’ views about the nature of Fire and its connection with 
life and intelligence, soul and mind, that he should regard the 
great giver of heat to the earth, the sun, as having a life and 
intelligence of its own. At least it conforms to Measure, and 
creates it.He had apparently nothing detailed to say about Earth.» 
He discussed astronomical questions in some detail: we have 
an obscure fragment mentioning the Bear, as ‘the limit of 
morning and evening’, and saying that ‘opposite the Bear is the 
boundary of Zeus Aithrios’.* ©: This probably refers to Thales’ 
discovery regarding the Little Bear; Heracleitus considered 
Thales to be the first astronomer.? He does elsewhere, accord- 
ing to a scholiast, give the title strologos, which means 
Astronomer, to Homer;* but the quotation which follows, if it 
was really that given by Heracleitus, would show that he meant 
‘astrologer’. This however was probably a late addition; it is 
impossible that Heracleitus could have used the word in any 
other meaning than that of ‘astronomer’. His granting the 
title to Homer is an unexpected compliment, since elsewhere 
he blames him for ignorance.

When, governed by the law of Fate, our Cosmos is thus 
brought into being, the existing arrangement 1s maintained by 
the ‘strife’ or ‘tension’ of the Opposites.¢ While particular 
things exist, they do so in virtue of the locking of the opposites 
in their strife.2 Thus there are two processes: there is the 
interlocking of the opposites at a certain stage in their contest, 
and the particular object so created continues in existence as 
long as this tension is maintained. This he likens to the tension 
of the bow and the lyre,’ i1 and speaks of it as a “harmony’.} 
There is also a pulling of the whole gradually in one direction: 
at the present stage, in the direction of Fire, to which all must

aAr2 bAr §rr ¢ Br20 d B38 e Bros £ B56; Az2; cp. B,?

8 Ax §7; A8 h Ar §8 i Bsr j B8; Bsr

¢! Kranz (Vors. p. 177, n.) explains this as meaning that the North Star divideseast and 
west, and opposite it is the zenith of the Sun (Zeus Aithrios), a boundary which he must 
not pass.¢! Kranz (Vors. p. 177, n.) explains this as meaning that the North Star divideseast and 
west, and opposite it is the zenith of the Sun (Zeus Aithrios), a boundary which he must 
not pass.

i! I take this as referring to the co-existence of opposites in the same object. The bow- 
string and lyre-string are alike in that, to be effective, they must have a certain tension; 
there is an unseen strife going on between the two ends or extremes. If either end ‘wins’,

the bow- or lyre-string as such ceases to exist. See Guthrie, Orpheus and Greek Religion, 
PP. 229-30.

II4¢ THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

finally return. This movement is likened to the flowing of a 
river. A man can be said both to step and not-step into the 
same river,> for as he steps in, fresh waters ever flow upon him.° 
Or it can be expressed by saying that one cannot step twice into 
the same river.4 There is, in short, no fixed object called ‘a 
river’ for him to step into; there are only ever-flowing, ever- 
changing waters. So it is with us, and with the particular ob- 
jects of our world: we are and are not;° they also are never the 
same, but always changing, so that we can never lay hold of 
any definite thing because it changes as we touch it.Thus there are two senses of the word ‘existence’: there 1s 
existence as we know it, our articulated universe, perceptible to 
our senses and capable of maintaining our life. This is merely a 
necessary phase in a great cyclic process which goes on for 
ever. Existence in this sense depends upon strife — the tension 
of opposites; and therefore it can truly be said that ‘Strife is 
necessary to existence’,® and that “War is the father of all and 
the king of all’. It is, in fact, by a paradox, the producer of 
harmony, since the fairest harmony is made out of differing 
elements.‘ The strife of opposites means their coming to- 
gether, and out of this, harmony is created,i because there is a 
kind of balance or fair exchange preserved between them. One 
can therefore say, ‘Right is Strife’, and that “War’ is all-per- 
vading and immanent in all things.* There is also the existence 
of the Whole: there is the Eternal Fire, containing in itself the 
principle of change, according to a cycle fixed by Fate;! and 
at the same time providing the substance with which the 
change works. Fire, the substrate, 1s also intelligent in some 
sense. ™1 But when it gets the mastery —or to put it in another 
way, when on the Upward Path our universe draws towards the 
Fire to which it is returning — that will be the death of our 
particular Cosmos." One can also call that Peace, and Stillness, 
as opposed to Strife and Movement.° One can also call it a 
‘judgement’, an ending of conflict: ‘Fire having come upon all 
things, will judge and seize.’

Heracleitus, then, took up the problem of Change and

j Bro 
k B80 1As; A8 m B64 n B76 © Ar §8; cp. Aé P B66 
fl cp. J. E.R. McDonagh, The Universe Through Medicine (1940) p. 34: ‘It is 
only the behaviour of activity which is observable, never the product itself.’ 
m1 +& 6 mévta oloxize: Kipauvos. This is generally taken to mean the primal Fire.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES I1§OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES I1§

stated it in its extremest form. ‘Everything is on the move’;® #1 
that is, particular existence as we know it is on the move. 
Nothing, not even the most stable-seeming and solid substance, 
is really at rest. It has the double movement: the oscillation of 
the opposites within itself, and the movement of the Whole, 
either towards or away from the source. Such is ‘existence’, and 
such is ‘change’. We cannot, then, kvow anything about par- 
ticular objects; when we examine them, they dissolve into a 
part of the process of change. The more closely we look — and 
we have to look closely, for “Nature loves to hide’,» — the more 
completely does this resolution into motion become apparent. 
The supposed clear-cut limits of things melt, and a quality 
changes into its opposite under our eyes:°¢ its nature comes and 
goes, that is, it possesses no nature, no essence that remains; 
and therefore nothing about which there can be knowledge. 
There 1s nothing, in any particular object, to know.If, however, Heracleitus is to be counted a metaphysician 
and not a nihilist in philosophy, there must be something, 
some one unchanging reality to which he directs us. This can- 
not be, as it was for the Milesians, his material substrate; for 
Fire itself changes, and of its essential nature. It is actually no 
more at rest than the Cosmos born from it, for the process of 
change is perpetual. Aristotle even states that Heracleitus 
said that Fire too had once upon a time come into being.® Is it 
then perhaps the eternal process of change that 1s the unchang- 
ing element in his system? This would not be of much help, for 
we should be confined to acknowledging this and then giving 
up all attempt at further investigation. Knowledge in any real 
sense would still be impossible, and obviously Heracleitus did 
not think this, as his own speculations prove. We should want 
to knowalso, what is the relation between the process of change, 
and Fire? Do they co-exist as material and force, and have we 
thus a duality? Or is the necessity to change one of the attri- 
butes of Fire, and are they aspects of the same thing?

Happily, if Heracleitus has stated the problem in its most 
paradoxical and startling form, he has stated the answer with 
equal force and insistence. It is as follows:

There is something, above both the process and the sub- 
strate, which unites them: this is the Logos. He says: ‘Wis-

@ A6 (Plato) b Br23 © B88; Bor; Br26 d Aro e Aro 
al.

116 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

dom is one—to understand the Reasoned Purpose which 
steers all things through all things,’* and “Not me, but the 
Logos: first listen to shat, and agree that “All things are One”’ 
is Wisdom’.»dom is one—to understand the Reasoned Purpose which 
steers all things through all things,’* and “Not me, but the 
Logos: first listen to shat, and agree that “All things are One”’ 
is Wisdom’.»

This Logos is not merely the process of change; it is the 
orderly process of change. The Everlasting Fire is kindled ix 
measure and quenched in measure,° and it is this Measure, by 
which the process and its material are ruled, that makes our 
world intelligible. This is the true One in Heracleitus’ system; 
it is the only thing that persists in change, and it 1s present 
everywhere. It governs at the head, and works in every part 
and at every stage. When at the head, it is ‘willing and un- 
willing to be called by the name of Zeus’ ;4 that is, it is divine, 
and the true godhead; he speaks of it as ‘that which never sets’, 
and asks “Who shall escape it?’® Men in speaking of ‘Zeus’ are 
feebly aiming at a conception of it, but the personified deity 
they succeed in conceiving is not adequate. The Logos 1s not 
an arbitrary creator, but a Law, the source of all that is intelli- 
gible. It works in the primal fire, and arranges the order of the 
Upward and Downward Paths, and the ‘measure’ of their re- 
current cycle,‘ for they are ‘one and the same’ since the pro- 
cess 1s cyclical and endless. In the creation of our Cosmos, it 
arranges the tension of the opposites, their harmony, their 
changes; it maintains the balance in every particular object, so 
long as that particular ‘exists’. For instance, ‘the sun will not 
overstep his measure’;* his oscillation, his orbit, is fixed for 
him within certain limits so long as he exists. The sea too ‘is 
poured away and measured according to the same Logos as 
existed before Earth was’.i Law governs all creatures likewise: 
he speaks of them as ‘driven to pasture by a blow’) j1 as if Law 
for them were as actively cogent as the blow of the shepherd 
driving his flocks. It is also in ourselves, and by means of it 
we know, in so far as we acquire knowledge.Heracleitus never speaks of this Logos as a material thing;

a Bar b Bso © B30 d B32 e B16 f A8 & B6o

h Bo, i B3r j Brz

j! trav tprretov TANy ij véuetou. cp. Plato, Critias 109B (the gods drive us as a shepherd 
his flocks).

1 To Heracleitus is attributed by Aétius the idea that the ‘Great Year’ or cycle was 
10800 years (A13). He also is said to have reckoned a generation as 30 years, the shortest

time in which a man could become a grandfather (Arg). Thus the Great Year = 30 x 360, 
i.e. the cycle of the particular soul makes one day in the Great Year (see Burnet, EGP,

pp. 156-58).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 117

when he describes it, it 1s as something knowable, that is, as a 
Law. He does not, however, separate it from his substrate 
Fire; he says ‘the Thunderbolt steers all things’, so that we can 
say, with Hippolytus, that the Fire is ‘intelligent’, that is, that 
Wisdom is a property of the Fire. But it is not ‘in’ the Fire in a 
material sense; it is the Law in the nature of the Fire, and the 
movements of the Fire are subject to it. The Logos is nowhere 
described as material in the way in which Empedocles’ Love 
and Hate, or Anaxagoras’ Mind, are described. It is this to 
which the paraphrasers refer when they speak of the process as 
being ‘in accordance with Fate’. It is no use asking where the 
Logos comes from; it 7s, 1n the true sense; it is ultimate and 
fixed, and the highest wisdom is to know it. It is presupposed 
and pre-determined.On this rests the whole of Heracleitus’ epistemology. The 
senses are untrustworthy witnesses, though some are more 
trustworthy than others. The two chief are sight and hearing;> 
sight is more accurate than hearing,° but sight also is liable to 
error.? Neither is any use ‘if the soul be barbarian’,¢ that is, 
ignorant and untrained. Smell is more limited: ‘If everything 
turned to smoke, the nose would discriminate.’ He connected 
smell with breathing, and therefore with life: by this path we 
draw in sustenance from the surrounding life or fire, a vital 
heat which nourishes our own portion of life or fire; it 1s the 
one thing left to us in sleep,® and it seems that ‘souls smell in 
Hades’ — that is, they draw in the savour of earthly exhala- 
tions, as the gods are supposed to draw in the savour of offer- 
ings. But the nose cannot, any more than the eyes or ears, pass 
judgements. The senses are ‘paths’! or ‘ways’ by which we get 
our impressions of particulars, so that we are better off when 
awake than when asleep, because in sleep all but the path of 
breathing are closed; when awake, we peep out through our 
senses, aS it were through postern-gates, but when we are 
asleep, our intellect is severed from its environment,’ and re- 
tains its connection merely by the breathing-function, which is 
likened to the soul’s root in what surrounds it.i Further, since 
our environment, like ourselves, contains a portion of the

a B64 b Bss ¢ Brora d B46 € Bro7 f By & Ar6 
h Bo8 i Ar6 §§ 129-30

1 trépo1. 
2

118 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSa B64 b Bss ¢ Brora d B46 € Bro7 f By & Ar6 
h Bo8 i Ar6 §§ 129-30

1 trépo1. 
2

118 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Logos,* when awake we take in with our sense-impressions the 
Logos as well, and it is there if the Mind can recognize it; but 
when we are asleep we are cut off, except for breathing, so that 
we are Cut off from the Logos as well. He likened the mind toa 
coal, which when brought near the fire, glows “by exchange’,? 
but when separated, grows dull. So too with the portion of 
Fire in ourselves: when separate, it is ‘almost without intelli- 
gence’,* but when connected by all its ‘paths’ to the surround- 
ing world, it grows like the Whole, informed with Logos.> 
Sleep is a kind of death in life, just as mortal life touches always 
on sleep.* In waking, we share in a world common to all; in 
sleep, each turns to a separate world of his own,‘ and this 
means illusion.¢ We are still ‘workers and fellow-workers in 
the happenings of the universe’, but this goes on in spite of 
ourselves and without our knowledge.

The senses, therefore, are necessary to us in our search for 
wisdom; but they cannot give us anything more than fleeting 
impressions, the apprehension of the changing world around 
us. The Logos or Law that governs the change can be 
apprehended only by the mind. A seeker after wisdom must 
investigate many particular things,* and for this he needs 
sense-perception; but this ‘knowledge of many things’ will not 
in itself give wisdom;} only the co-ordinating soul can do that. 
Again, the individual soul can learn by looking into itself; he 
says, ‘I searched into myself’, ‘for the Law is there in part, and 
everybody has a share of the intelligence that can see it.j- 51 But 
in itself and apart, it is nothing; it is of use only when it is an 
active part of the whole wisdom.«Wisdom, then, is something apart from particular impres- 
sions and particular opinions. It is one, and it follows that it 
must be known in its wholeness. It also follows that this is, 
strictly speaking, impossible for Man.! The Logos itself, even

130 © B26 d B89 © Ar6 § 134 f Brs 
& B35 h Bgo i Bror j Br13; Br16 k Ba; cp. Br14; Ar6 §§ 126, 4 
1 B78 
i1 This cannot mean, as some summarizers (Ar §5) took it, that he ‘learnt everything 
from himself’. He may have had no teacher, but he believed in objective study (B35) 
not in the mere contemplation of his own soul, nor in abstract reasoning as Parmenides 
did. 
j! In Br16 (and in Brr2) Diels read gpovetv as in Brz3. Kranz returns to the MSS.

cwopove;r. 
ler’ &AAolwaiv. 
2,

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES IIg

as it alone 1s knowable, is alone able to know in the fullest 
sense. All that we can do is to use the portion of the Logos — 
that is, our divine, non-mortal element — that is in us, in order 
to lay hold of the Logos as it is partially exhibited to us in our 
limited environment.*He constantly terms the Logos and the one Wisdom ‘the 
Common Factor’.»» > This means ‘that of which a portion is in 
everything’. It has nothing to do with consensus of opinion. 
He speaks of human intelligence as ‘common to all’,¢ that is, 
that of which every human being has a portion. Wisdom is 
there if we can grasp it; intelligence is ours to grasp it with, 
if we can use it. When he says that ‘though the Logos is 
common, the majority live as if they had their own private 
wisdom’,‘ he does not mean, as the commentators (Sextus for 
instance) sometimes rather misleadingly express it, that only 
‘what seems to all’ is true, and ‘what seems to one isolated 
ad is false.e On the contrary, ‘the majority’ are wrong, 
iving as they do by the senses only; and ‘to me, one man, if 
he be the best, 1s worth ten thousand’.é Only the few are good; 
the majority are bad." Wisdom, though there for all to see, is 
not recognized;: nor is it easy, but demands that one search 
diligently and ‘expect the unexpected’;i that is, faith is re- 
quired, as well as industry, to make one persist in the hard 
search. The seeker after knowledge will be like one seeking 
gold: he will examine much and find little, but the little will 
be precious;* the unseen Harmony 1s better than the visible,! 
and Nature likes to hide. The discovery will always be one 
thing — the apprehension of the Logos. In this sense, Wis- 
dom, though ‘common’, that is, immanent in all things, 1s also 
‘severed’,®, "1 and apart: it is different in kind from any know- 
ledge, opinion or perception, just as its object, the Logos, is 
different.

Men do not readily accept truth, though it is there to see, 
and in everything they encounter. The ‘mob’ stuff themselves 
like cattle, and care for nothing but to live and die, or rather 
rest, and procreate children who will live as they have lived, 
and die as they have died.P Immortality — ever-flowing fame®Ar6§131 bB2 ¢Brr3 Bz ¢&Ar16§131 ~~‘ B17; Brg; Bzg; By2 
& Bag b Bro i Br7; By2 j Brg k B22 1Bs4

n Br08 0 B29 P B2o 
bi re |

I20 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

among men — which is the chief incentive of the best, means 
nothing to the common herd.* They live like men asleep,® on 
the side nearer death, not on the side nearer life. What of 
those who do care for Truth, or might do so? Those who can 
and ought to learn are very difficult to teach: they are slow of 
intelligence, both before they hear and when they hear for the 
first time; the truth about the Logos seems strange to them 
as if they had never encountered it,* and they might as well 
be deaf or not present.t They are also hindered by their in- 
credulity,* and by their clinging to tradition: we must not be 
‘children of our parents’! merely, if we want to learn. The 
latter attitude leads to a hostility to every new idea: dogs bark 
at everything they do not recognize. Such people are also 
apt to prefer to the truth mere opinions, which are ‘children’s 
toys’;" and therefore to trust to false teachers, of which there 
are legion, of various kinds. They are willing to take as their 
teacher the mob and those who appeal to the mob; for they 
have no intelligence with which to distinguish the few good 
from the many bad.i‘As for those who profess to teach: there are first of all the 
poets. They are hopelessly astray: they describe their 1m- 
pressions of our world, and leave out the main theme, the 
Logos, the Hidden Harmony, the Law of Opposites, and of 
existence through Strife. Homer, who was thought the wisest 
of the Greeks, was deceived, like the majority, by appear- 
ances.ij He did not know that Strife is essential; he uttered a 
prayer that it should perish from among mankind.* Hesiod, 
learned though he was,! and esteemed as a sage,™ did not 
understand the unity of Day and Night, else how could he 
have made Day the child of Night? They are one." Archi- 
lochus did no better; they all deserve to be dismissed with 
ignominy,° for offering mere short-sighted opinions instead of 
truth. It is a great mistake to use the poets and story-writers 
as evidence on matters not known, it 1s “offering the wntrost- 
worthy as authorities on the uncertain’,? to quote Polybius’ 
phrase, which is perhaps that of Heracleitus. A proof of the 
oa pd lack of intelligence is that they accept any popular

ard as teacher and leader.?

@ Bzg b Br; B73 ¢ Br; B17; B72 d B34 © Brg; B86 f B74 
& Bo7 bh B70 i Brog 1 Bs6 k A22 1 B4o m Bs7 
2 Bs7; cp. Br06 © B42 P A23 qa Brog

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 121ard as teacher and leader.?

@ Bzg b Br; B73 ¢ Br; B17; B72 d B34 © Brg; B86 f B74 
& Bo7 bh B70 i Brog 1 Bs6 k A22 1 B4o m Bs7 
2 Bs7; cp. Br06 © B42 P A23 qa Brog

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 121

Then there are the religious teachers: they too are worth- 
less,+ and their rites are positively harmful,* when not merely 
foolish.» They teach men to chatter to idols, to take part in 
obscenity, intemperance and unrestraint. The so-called 
Mysteries, the rites of Bacchants, Maenads, wizards and 
initiates, are unholy revelations.* If the followers of Dionysus 
knew the Logos, they would know that their deity is another 
form of Death (Hades),4 for indulgence is death to the soul.¢ 
They use the name of Dionysus to cloak what would other- 
wise be utterly shameful — the obscene phallic hymn.‘ Puri- 
fication likewise is a farce: they try to cleanse blood-guilt by 
defiling themselves with blood, as though a man were to 
wash himself by stepping into mud.® &: Prayer, when addressed 
to images, 1s like trying to hold conversation with a house; 
and anyhow, it is not good for men to get what they want. 
Moreover, the religious teachers know nothing of what they 
profess to know —the next world; there await men after 
death such things as they do not dream of.i Clement tells us 
that Heracleitus threatens the followers of the various mys- 
teries and Bacchanal rites with hell-fire !«There was, however, one kind of supernatural manifesta- 
tion of which Heracleitus approved: oracular responses. He 
speaks in the highest terms both of the Delphic Oracle! and 
of the Sibyl.= He believed, therefore, in prophecy, and that 
suitable instruments could be used by divine powers to make 
known the future." It seems likely that he regarded himself 
as a teacher of this kind, and found the oracular utterance best 
suited for what he wished to express. Respect for the Delphic 
Oracle became a tradition in philosophic thought; and it per- 
sisted at a time when belief in Delphi was waning, and attacks 
on it were becoming fierce. Socrates professed implicit trust 
in the god, though Euripides’ Joz shows how far scepticism 
had gone by the end of the fifth century; and Plato still gives

me 
aBrs e B77 {Brg & Bs 
i Brio i Bay k Br4 1 Bg2 m B93 n A20

g! Jamblichus quotes H. assaying that certain rites (probably Dionysiac) are means 
of healing and strengthening the soul (B68). This seems a misunderstanding of Brs. 
Iambl. also quotes H. as saying that sacrifice rarely comes from the completely purified

B69).

, — to find an Orphic basis for the beliefs of Heracleitus have ended in failure. 
See Adam, Religious Teachers of Greece, pp. 237-9; and Guthrie on Macchioro 
(Orpheus and Greek Religion, pp. 224-231).

I22 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSI22 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Thirdly, there are the philosophic and scientific teachers. 
They may know a great deal, but they lack the one thing 
needful — the Logos — and so their knowledge does not attain 
to Wisdom. This is true of Pythagoras, Xenophanes and 
Hecataeus.* They have missed the fact of the Tension of 
Opposites and their Harmony;> Heracleitus has never, of 
those whose systems he has heard, found one man who has 
arrived at the truth that Wisdom is a thing ‘apart’ from 
everything.© No one, however renowned, has attained to sure 
knowledge; their knowledge is mere ‘opinion’.4 Justice will 
overtake those who manufacture and testify to what 1s false.¢ 
We must not make random conjectures about things of the 
highest importance. Heracleitus has a rather grudging word 
of praise for Bias of Priene, one of the Seven Sages: he was 
‘better than the others’. Bias won this commendation appar- 
ently because of his saying ‘The majority of men are bad’, 
which Heracleitus quotes elsewhere.®

There is one fragment which reads like:a fierce attack on 
surgeons,* but which, taken in its context, might imply that 
doctors in hurting do good. Heracleitus, however, evidently 
preferred to look at it the other way: that their remedies are as 
bad as the disease. He says, illustrating the thesis that all 
things are relative, ‘Good and bad are the same: for example, 
physicians, when they cut, burn and torture the sick, demand 
a fee though they do not deserve it, for they are producing 
what is the same — benefit and ill’. The commentators show 
Heracleitus as definitely hostile to physicians, both by attri- 
buting to him letters enlarging on this point of view, and by 
attaching to him anecdotes in which he refuses medical aid.All these would-be teachers and leaders, therefore, fail 
because they have not the requisite grasp of the one wisdom, 
the truth. Heracleitus himself has found it, but can scarcely 
get anyone to listen to him. This claim, which was naturally 
taken by others as arrogance, was not really so; he abhorred 
conceit, which he likened to the frenzied disease of epilepsy,! 
and was well aware that ‘the wisest of mortals, when com- 
pared with God, will seem an ape in wisdom, beauty, and all 
other qualities’.« Conceit means trusting in one’s own par-

® Bro4; cp. ch. 10 te Seven Sages) 331 bBs% 1 Aras Ar yy 
B46

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 123

ticular wisdom and knowledge as Pythagoras did, and that is 
an art of mischief. Heracleitus’ wisdom is not his own, but 
‘that which 1s common’; and it is not he who speaks but the 
Logos through him. One of his finest utterances was the 
famous ‘Listen not to me but to the Logos... .’»“Wisdom is One.’ This is the clue to all understanding, 
and once it has been grasped, the wise man will cleave to it; it 
is the mark of a fool to be excited at every new theory.° The 
One = is sufficient, and can be applied throughout the 
whole of creation. At the head of things is Fire, always in 
motion, the motion being according to Measure. In its fiery 
form it is Life; and all down the scale of creation, that which 
approaches the fiery form is nearest to life. It has within itself 
the power of passing through a cycle of change, the downward 
and upward paths, in the course of which our particular 
world is produced. In the latter, the existence we perceive is 
a harmony of opposites. The movement of the Fire 1s imitated _ 
in every particular thing, which has its own strife and oscilla- 
tion. The oscillation towards Fire is life in the absolute sense, 
the oscillation towards moist is death; but existence in the 
relative sense is due to the combination of the two in this state 
of balance within limits. Therefore a thing and its opposite 
are the same, only at different stages of oscillation. He runs 
through lists of opposites — day and night, winter and sum- 
mer, war and peace, satiety and hunger;¢ and says that God 1s 
all of these. Fire itself is ‘need and satiety’, according to 
whether it is articulating itself into a Cosmos or taking back 
creation into itself.¢ Nomenclature is nothing: men call these 
things by what name they please, as objects change into one 
another in the same way that fire changes when it is mixed 
with incense.f The bow, he puns, is called ‘life’, but 1t works 
death. 81 The fuller’s screw does two opposite kinds of move- 
ment at the same time: straight and crooked (that 1s, the 
spiral, up and round), showing that straight and crooked are 
‘the same’, The upward and downward paths are really one 
and the same: they form a circle, and in the circumference of 
the circle end and beginning are merged.i All the qualities. Beo, Bs'7, Bro, B&8 © B6s

124 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS.. Beo, Bs'7, Bro, B&8 © B6s

124 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS.

we give to things are relative only: good and bad, just and 
unjust, pure and impure. Sea-water is life-giving to fish, fatal 
to men.* Pigs find pleasure in mud and dirt, a thing improper 
for a man.’ Birds bathe themselves in dust and ashes.* To 
donkeys, straw is preferable to gold;4 oxen are happy when 
they find vetch to eat, but man needs something other than 
physical satisfaction to make up happiness.* To the Godhead, 
everything is fair, good and just; it is only human beings who 
find some things wrong, others right.‘ Beauty, pleasure, vir- 
tue, everything seen through mortal eyes has this relativity; 
the process of life and death, becoming and passing away, 
itself can be looked at in these two ways. For instance, the 
return to Fire is a return to Life, but it is death to particular 
existence. The coming from Fire is a receding from Life, but 
it means the creation of life for us and our world. One thing 
‘lives’ the death of another: Fire ‘lives’ the death of Air, Air 
‘lives’ the death of Fire, and so on;® so that one can even say 
‘Life and Death are the same’,® the immortal mortal, and the 
mortal immortal, as the everlasting cycle pursues its course, 
and one thing changes into another. Life becomes death, 
waking becomes sleeping, young becomes old;i cold grows 
hot, hot grows cold, wet dries, and the parched is moistened.* 
There 1s no dividing line between them; they change into one 
another, and that is destruction and creation. There 1s no 
other. The ‘mortal is immortal, and the immortal mortal’. 
The Whole and the Divided; the congruous and the not- 
congruous; the harmonious and the discordant: these are pairs 
indissolubly linked, and a One is made up of all the parts, 
and all the parts come from a One.! This being so, it follows 
that we can know them only in relation to one another. Pairs 
of opposites must be considered together, as one; we experi- 
ence this in our sensations, when disease makes health pleasant, 
hunger satisfaction, and labour rest.™ So with all the pairs: 
the human race would not have known what the name ‘Justice’ 
meant, if there had been no evil with which to compare it. 
All is a matter of relativity and comparison; the study of 
particulars is the study of ever-changing relationships, and the 
‘measure’ in accordance with which they change. This is the 
Logos, the only wisdom; and its application to all that we8 B62; B76; cp. B77 
‘Bro =m Byzr = B23

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES

perceive is the only method that gives knowledge of any worth 
or significance.

Heracleitus explains the soul as an exhalation of Fire. Its 
genesis is part of the Upward Path: the body is produced on 
the Downward Path towards moisture, and the soul is ‘ex- 
haled’, reaching up again towards the Fire from which it has 
come.* The genesis of the human creature therefore is a 
replica of that of the Cosmos, and the soul’s flow towards Fire 
is likened to the flowing river.» (Plotinus quotes Heracleitus 
as saying that the Fire ‘rests from change’, and that it is 
laborious for it to toil for and be ruled by the same master;° 
this describes its fate on entering into and while inhabiting the 
body.) It is this reaching upward that makes the soul intelli- 
gent; it has its own Logos, which ‘increases itself’. If the 
soul does not strive upward, it approaches moisture, and risks 
quenching. The chief cause of this is pleasure — self-indul- 
gence. “The dry soul is the wisest and best,’* he says; and 
expressing this in terms of the metaphor of an exchange, ‘It 
is hard to fight against desire; whatever it wishes, it buys at 
the price of soul’.f No wonder that drunkenness has so 
deplorable an effect; it lowers the vital flame, soaking and 
quenching it, and we become foolish — helpless as one led by 
a child, and no longer able to conceal our folly.¢ Wealth too 
is apt to bring out the worst in men, hence his prayer that the 
Ephesians might never lose their wealth. On this is probably 
based the anecdote about his object-lesson to the Ephesians 
on abstemiousness in time of war.iIt is our duty, therefore, to be self-restrained in all things 
and to cultivate the vital, thinking part which we all share. 
Cultivating it means keeping in contact, so far as we can, with 
the universal Intelligence which surrounds us, and resisting 
pleasure, which is death. ‘It is pleasure —or rather death — 
to souls to become wet.’i We can and ought to examine 
ourselves and the Logos that is in us;* the Logos of the soul 
is so deep that we can never find out its limits, however hard 
we try,! as Heracleitus had done. We are not all endowed

alike; this is implied in all his criticisms, and in the saying 
that ‘character for a human being is destiny’. But we all have 
[2 c B84a, b qd Brrs5 eBr18 {B85

h Braga i A3b 1 B77; B36 
1 B45 m Bror

126 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

a share of the essential thing, intelligence;* and therefore we 
can link ourselves up to the universal Intelligence and follow 
its ways in word and deed. This is the highest virtue;? wis- 
dom means speaking the truth and acting according to the law 
of Nature, with understanding.» The best to which we can 
attain is childish in comparison with divinity;* but to fail to 
understand and obey this law is to lapse into, on the physical 
plane, death; on the psychological plane, ignorance, self- 
indulgence, the quenching of intellect and the loss of virtue. 
The fal of the soul into pleasure 1s like the downward path of 
creation towards water and earth.? If we allow our souls to go 
uncultivated, then our eyes and ears are of no use to us, for we 
cannot interpret their message.* We might as well be deaf or 
absent when we hear the truth; and indeed, most men live as 
if they were asleep and dreaming.® Effort, such as death in 
battle, will be rewarded.* It is better to die fighting than to 
die of disease. i .As for the soul’s fate after death, it is not certain how his 
beliefs fit together. The soul leaves the body, which then 
becomes ‘more to be cast out than dung’,i- 51 and therefore not 
deserving of any further attention, burial rites, offerings at the 
tomb and the like. If it is absorbed into the primal Fire or 
World Soul,* it is difficult to see how it can continue to exist 
as a separate personality; yet he clearly taught that it did, and 
was subject to rewards and punishments. Not those described 
by the mystic religions, but something quite different, awaits 
the soul after death.! Gods, as well as men, reward death in 
battle; but punishment awaits those who propagate false 
doctrines." In one place he seems to accept a Homeric Hades 
in which souls live a dim existence with only a sense of smell 
left.c It is clear however that he believed in a judgement for 
the soul, and therefore its continued existence, at any rate for 
a time, after it had left the body. He is said by one late 
authority to have compared it, when in the body, to a spider in

aBrr3 b Brr2 © B79 d B36; B77 ¢ Bro7 f B34

h B24; Bas i Br36 j Bog6 k Ar7; B66 1 B27 m B24; Bas

n B28; cp. Br4 © Bo8

j! This disposes of Hippolytus’ attempt to father on Heracleitus a doctrine of physical 
resurrection (B63).

1 Clement, contrasting H. with Anaxagoras (A21) declares that H. made Well-Being 
(evaptotnois) the end and aim of life, not Abstract Thought (€ewpia), that is, credits 
H. with a nascent hedonism. All H.’s teaching contradicts this.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 127

its web, who whenever any part is injured, at once rushes to 
repair the damage.* The body is its home for the time being, 
and it can exist apart, although it is an ‘exhalation’.its web, who whenever any part is injured, at once rushes to 
repair the damage.* The body is its home for the time being, 
and it can exist apart, although it is an ‘exhalation’.

Politics in practice disgusted Heracleitus; their tendency to 
be dominated by the fallacious opinions of the many resulted 
in the sacrifice of the best men to mob-prejudice, as for 
example Hermodorus, in his own city, Ephesus.» The 
Ephesians would have done better to hang themselves every 
man, and leave their city to the management of boys. But he 
had at least one general political theory to offer, based on his 
doctrine of the universe, and that was: ‘The people should 
fight to defend the law as for a citadel’,* since human laws, 
however imperfect, draw their life from the one divine law.4 
He therefore believed in the connection between natural law 
and human law that was later to be challenged by the Sophists. 
He was an aristocrat, perhaps even a monarchist in theory, 
if the best man could be found.‘ But he had the Hellenic 
detestation of tyranny: ‘Arrogance must be quenched sooner 
than a fire:’® We are to serve the law, not a despot. It 1s 
strange to find him using the metaphor of ‘quenching’ in a 
good sense. It may not be too fanciful to read into his thought 
the implicit idea that whereas the will-to-pleasure is of the 
downward path, the will-to-power is of the upward movement, 
the fiery, and becomes dangerous only when it has overstepped 
its measures.This brings out what at first sight seems a contradiction in 
his system. If Heracleitus believed in the Measure, the Mean, 
how could it be part of the plan, the Logos, that all should 
return to Fire? Surely such a consummation means that the 
strife has ended in a victory or tyranny of Fire, and that would 
be ‘unjust’, for ‘justice is strife.» The answer is that it would 
be relatively unjust, that is, relatively to the existence of our 
particular universe, which must perish when ‘Fire comes upon 
and lays hold of all things’.i But it would not be so in the 
absolute sense, because the everlasting existence of our unl- 
verse is not essential, not part of the plan. It is ‘destroyed’, 
but this means only that it is taken up into the Whole, the 
primal Fire, where the law of Change in Measure still holds 
good and always will, for itis governed by the unchanged Logos

cBa, 4Brrq ¢Bgg £B33 8 B43 2 B80 1 B66

128 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

The influence of Heracleitus on all subsequent philosophy 
cannot be over-estimated. In metaphysics, he was the fore- 
runner of the attempt to find the connection between the One 
and the Many, Reality and Change; he stressed Change, but 
‘gue to unity in a reality that thinks and can be thought.n psychology, he laid the basis of an epistemology that set 
the mind up as judge over sense-impressions, and connected 
it with universal Mind. He distinguished between true know- 
ledge and opinion. In ethics, he expounded an anti-hedonism 
which sought the best life in the use of intellect; he left 
pleasure and intellect opposed, and it was left for Plato and 
Aristotle to bring out the connection between the impulse to 
pleasure and the impulse to happiness, which led to the goal 
of Abstract Thought (Theoria). In politics, he stressed Law, 
and the connection between human and divine law. His con- 
tributions to scientific data seem to have been negligible; his 
real contribution to knowledge is his great hypothesis and its 
application. In this he resembles Plato, as also in his combina- 
tion of artistic and intellectual gifts. Plato regarded him as, 
the exponent of the theory ‘All is change’, and gave him no 
credit for having suggested a fundamental unity in the Logos. 
But this was because, to Plato, he stood in direct contrast to 
Parmenides.

HERACLEITUS. FRAGMENTS CLASSIFIED AS FALSE 
OR DOUBTFUL IN DIELS

126a, This is an example of mystical mathematics, believed to be derived 
from some Alexandrian Pythagorean via Poseidonius: the Num- 
ber Seven is ‘collected together’, that is, found in a unity, in the 
Moon, and is ‘dissevered’, that is, found as separate units, in the 
constellations of the Bears; the meaning of this being that 
the moon has seven phases, and the Bears have seven stars. It is 
rejected on linguistic grounds as well as on its non-Heracleitean 
content.

126b. ‘This is a very doubtful restoration of an anonymous scholiast on 
Plato’s Theaetetus, and appears to be concerned with flux and 
change. It refers to Epicharmus, who in his views on Change is 
said to have been following this quotation from an author whose 
name begins Hera—; the rest of the word is lost, and has been

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 129OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 129

restored to ‘Heracleitus’. This is probable, but the fragment is too 
mutilated to be of any value.

127. . ‘If gods, why lament them? If they be lamented, cease to regard 
them as gods.’ ‘This saying is thrice quoted by Plutarch, who 
attributed it to Xenophanes, to whose thought it certainly belongs. 
Heracleitus castigated certain religious rites, but not the anthropo- 
morphic nature of the gods. The authority is late and obscure.

128. This is an inferior form of B5; sense and language are debased by 
the same late authority (Aristocritus) as in B127.

129. ‘This attack on Pythagoras, quoted by Diogenes Laertius, has been 
already discussed. See p. 75, note #1.

130. ‘It is not fitting to be so comic that you yourself appear comic.’ 
(From a collection of Latin Christian praverbs.) Diels compares 
this with Plato, Sympos. 189b, where Aristophanes says: ‘Don’t 
watch me! I’m afraid of what I’m about to say — not that it may 
be comic, but that it may be ridiculous.’ It is however possible 
that Plato was quoting a well-known mot without mentioning the 
author. It is equally possible that the opposition of ‘comic’ and 
‘ridiculous’ was proverbial and not invented by Heracleitus. ~

131. ‘Conceit is the hindrance of progress.’ (trpoxotrfjs €yxoTrtv) “This 
is a rather futile play on words, based on B46. ‘The authority is 
late (collection of proverbs); and Stobaeus attributed the saying to 
Bion the Stoic.

132-135. From collections of proverbs: 132 is un-Heracleitean; 133 ts 
a mere cliché; 134, 135 are Platonic.

136. ‘Souls killed in battle are purer than those who die from disease.’ 
From a scholiast on Epictetus; based on B24. “The sense is 
Heracleitean.

137. eivappéva may be Heracleitean: cp. 22A8.

138. Epigram against Life: attributed by Stobaeus to Poseidippus.

139. An astrological forgery of the Byzantine era, based perhaps on 
B24.137. eivappéva may be Heracleitean: cp. 22A8.

138. Epigram against Life: attributed by Stobaeus to Poseidippus.

139. An astrological forgery of the Byzantine era, based perhaps on 
B24.

A doubtful fragment is B124, in which Theophrastus attributes to 
Heracleitus the words: ‘The fairest universe is but a dust-heap scattered 
anyhow.’ ‘This is inconsistent with Heracleitus’ views on ordered change, 
and sounds more like the expression of some Democritean or Epicurean 
Atomist.

B125, also from Theophrastus, is generally accepted with the insertion 
of pr. ‘The cheese-drink separates if it be [not] stirred.” ‘This again 
seems more like the metaphor of an Atomist: to Heracleitus the Upward

130 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

and Downward Paths might be cyclic, but they were not equivalent to 
the Vortex. The phrase is, however, referred to as Heracleitean in the 
imitation by Lucian (see below, p. 131).

B52. This also suggests the inconsistent notion of a blind chance in 
the universe; as quoted by Hippolytus it reads: “Time is a child playing 
draughts. ‘The kingship belongs to a child.’ Lucian quotes this too in 
his imitation, but without the last phrase, and with the word ‘dividing’ 
added. ‘The corresponding word is generally inserted, so that the whole 
reads: “Time is a child playing draughts, bringing together, taking 
asunder.”! A few lines above he makes Heracleitus pity mankind because 
‘everything is mixed up in the cheese-drink . . . going round and chang- 
ing, in the sport of time’.Heracleitus was not a glorifier of children. To him the child was as 
inferior to the adult as man is to the deity (B79). He compares a drunken 
man to one guided by a child (B117): that is to say, the Logos is quenched 
in him and he is left to the governance of folly. When Heracleitus told 
the Ephesians that they should hang themselves and delegate the city to 
boys, he meant that even boys could not do worse than they had done. 
He speaks of ‘human opinions’ as ‘children’s toys’ (B70). “This reduces 
to absurdity the suggestion of Macchioro (see Guthrie, Orpheus and 
Greek Religion, p. 228) that the words ‘the kingship belongs to a child’ 
may be an acceptance by Heracleitus of the Orphic story of the giving of 
the kingdom to the child Dionysus by his father Zeus. “The fragment 
means, as Lucian takes it, that the cosmic game is being played by an 
Immature, unintelligent Fate who moves the pieces at random. If there- 
fore it is by Heracleitus (as seems likely) it was given a false stress by 
being lifted out of its context. Heracleitus’ system, owing to the stress 
he laid on change, seemed even to Plato to offer little foothold for know- 
ledge; and Heracleitus’ insistence on the Logos was not sufficient to 
counteract an impression of unintelligibility, and so of random govern- 
ment of the universe, as is seen in Lucian’s satire.

C. IMITATION

1. The long extract quoted by Diels from the pseudo-Hippocratic writ- 
' ngs has been taken too seriously by critics as a source of Heracleitean 
doctrine.* It is actually neither Hippocratic nor Heracleitean. It 
cannot have been written by anyone with a practising knowledge of 
medicine, and is the kind of writing based on unsupported theory that 
1 Hippolytus: aldv Trals toti tralgeov, TeTtevoov * TraiBds 4 PaciAnin. Lucian: Ti yap 6 
alov totiv; — HP. Tlats trafgev, treocevwv (ouppepdpevos) Siapepdpevos. 
2 See Burnet EGP‘, p. 150, and p. 145, notes. He makes the mistake of assuming aconsolidated ‘Heracleitean School’ like that of the Eleatics, etc. This is disposed of by 
Plato, Theaetet. 179E sqq.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 131

led Hippocrates to attack the influence of philosophy on medicine in | 
his treatise On Anctent Medicine. It is the work of some rhetorical 
essayist of the sophistic school; and though containing imitation of 
Heracleitean doctrine, it 1s also embellished with phrases from the 
Eleatics, Empedocles, Anaxagoras and the Pythagoreans. The matter 
is worthless, the manner obscure, full of false analogy and verbal anti- 
theses. It is not worth reading except asa curiosity of rhetorical writing.

. This is an expanded version of the doctrine of Relativity applied to 
food: food means that which has the power to feed, otherwise it is 
food in name only. In food and in medicine, goodness and badness are 
relative to the particular case. This idea, and the forcedly obscure 
style, are intended to be Heracleitean; the imitators do not seem to 
have: noticed that Heracleitus does not use meaningless antitheses. 
His brevity is real, not faked. This is rather better than the preceding 
extract, but not by Hippocrates or any practising doctor.!

. Surviving fragments of a poem by Scythinus of Tos, a fourth-century 
poet who tried to put Heracleitus into iambic verse, as is mentioned 
by Diog. L. (22A1 16). ‘The first fragment refers to the sun as a 
plectrum held by Apollo, an idea elsewhere attributed to Cleanthes, 
The second refers to Time: “The last and first of all things, which 
has everything in itself and is and 1s not one. . . To-morrow is yester- 
day and yesterday to-morrow.” ‘This was quoted by Stobaeus in prose; 
the version in Diels is a restoration into iambic verse by Wilamowitz.. Cleanthes, Hymn to Zeus. ‘The whole universe obeys Zeus, who 
wields the ‘two-edged fiery everlasting thunderbolt’, and with this 
‘directs the Common Logos which traverses all things, mingling with 
the greater and smaller fires’. This adds nothing new, and empties 
out the original meaning by personification.

. Lucian stages an interview between himself and Heracleitus, in which 
the latter laments man’s fate because of ‘the conflagration and the 
destruction of the Whole’, and because ‘Nothing is stable’, and 
‘pleasure not-pleasure, knowledge not-knowledge, great small, up 
down, are the same, circulating and being exchanged in the sport of 
Time’. Time is a child playing draughts, men are mortal gods, gods 
are mortal men. The author accuses Heracleitus of riddling, like 
Apollo; and Heracleitus replies that he cares nothing for his fellows. 
The author suggests that if this is so no sensible man will buy his 
book; Heracleitus replies: ‘I bid all from boyhood lament, those who 
buy and those who don’t buy.’ The author’s comment is: “This 
disease is not far removed from Melancholia.’

Lucian’s clever satire represents the view of Heracleitus held by 
the average man.

1 See W. H. S. Jones, Hippocrates, Vol. I (Loeb), Introd., pp. XXiV-XXVI.

132 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

The later history of Heracleitus’ thought is best exhibited by Plato, 
who has several passages directly referring to those who professed Hera~- 
cleitean views. Of these, the first and second given below are not in 
Diels Vors. The third, omitted in earlier editions, has been added in 
Edn. 5 (22A10).1. Theaetetus 179E-180C. Theodorus is here made to complain that 
one cannot discuss Heracleitean doctrines with those at Ephesus who 
profess to be adepts, because none of them ever studies the argument, but 
‘pulls out some little enigmatic phrase from his quiver and shoots it off 
at you... You will never get any further with any of them; nor do they 
with one another. They take good care never to let anything stand firm 
either in argument or in their own minds, thinking, I suppose, that that 
would mean a state of rest, which they are utterly at war with, and which 
they have banished to the best of their ability’. He denies that these are 
disciples forming a regular school: they ‘spring up here and there on their 
own, wherever they happen to catch their inspiration’.

This passage is a brilliant parody of Heracleiteanism as Plato saw it. 
These men are ‘at war’ with logical stability, and have banished it from 
their thought as Homer wished to banish strife from among men, a senti- 
ment which earned him Heracleitus’ censure. It is also a proof that no 
organized or recognized school of Heracleiteans existed in Plato’s time, 
but only individuals who copy his tricks of expression, and have no agreed 
basis of doctrine.

2. Cratylus 412D. Socrates, seeking Justice, discusses the primal Fire 
of the Heracleiteans, which ‘penetrating and burning through all things 
governs them’, When asked what this is, some tell you that it Is the sun; 
another laughs this to scorh and asks (since this is the governor of the 
universe) if you think Justice ceases at sunset; he suggests Fire. Another 
says it is not Fire itself, but the heat in the fire.

This well illustrates the lack of agreement described in the Theaetetus.

3. Sophist 242E (22Ar10). Here the teachings of Heracleitus are 
referred to under the title of “The Ionian Muse’, and contrasted with 
those of Empedocles, “The Sicilian Muse’.

23. EPICHARMUS3. Sophist 242E (22Ar10). Here the teachings of Heracleitus are 
referred to under the title of “The Ionian Muse’, and contrasted with 
those of Empedocles, “The Sicilian Muse’.

23. EPICHARMUS

E,PICHARMUS of Syracusz lived and worked at Syracuse under

the tyrants Gelo* and Hiero> (485-467 B.c.). He is said to

have survived to the age of ninety,° or even longer.

_ His birthplace was variously given as Cos, Samos, Crastos

in Sicily, Megara Hyblaea, Syracuse.4 He appears to have 
eAr DAS; A4 ¢ A3

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 133

worked first in Megara Hyblaea, and then to have migrated 
to Syracuse during the reign of Gelo, probably when Megara 
Hyblaea was destroyed by Gelo in 483 B.c.

For an examination of the value of the philosophical frag- 
ments, see the note at the end of this section.

Epicharmus, one of the originators of comedy, has no 
claim to be considered a philosopher. He is said to have 
attended Pythagorean lectures as an ‘exoteric’ student, though 
he did not join the inner fellowship, and to have expressed 
Pythagorean doctrines in his comedies, disguising them be- 
cause of the tyranny of Hiero;* but the surviving fragments 
of Epicharmus do not exhibit Pythagorean doctrine (the frag- 
ment quoted by Clement of Alexandria is clearly a very poor 
forgery), nor is there any reason to believe that the expression 
of philosophical views was dangerous under Hiero’s régime. 
He 1s also said to have been at variance with Xenophanes, 
and two at least of the fragments appear to refer to Xeno- 
phanes’ views;* but such references do not constitute Epi- 
charmus a philosopher.Alcimus, a Sicilian rhetorician of about 300 B.c., wrote a 
book the object of which was to prove that Plato had borrowed 
from and even paraphrased Epicharmus;? but the passages 
quoted in support of this thesis are either not relevant, that 1s, 
do not express Platonic views, or are forgeries.1 One passage, 
which may be genuine, refers to the Heracleitean doctrine of 
flux;* and Plutarch says that it was from Epicharmus that the 
Sophists derived certain typical arguments based on the theory 
of change, such as that a man who has borrowed money in the 
past does not owe it in the present because he has become a 
different person meanwhile; and a guest invited yesterday to 
dinner is uninvited when he arrives to-day, for he has changed. 
This obviously points to a use of philosophical theories to 
produce a comic situation, as in the Clouds. Plato in the 
Theaetetus ranks Epicharmus with Homer as a poet who 
supports the theory that ‘nothing is, but everything be- 
comes’. This, coming from Plato, and in its context, means 
no more than that neither Flomer nor ~ 5° >

* A4; cp. B6s b Bs6 © Bs; Br2. See earlier, pp. 93, 94 d Br-B6 
¢ B2 f B2 8 A6 
1 On this whole subject, see G. Norwood, Greek Comedy, pp. 87 599.

134 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

thought the matter out. A scholiast, ser aarp on this 
passage, says that Epicharmus made comedy out of the doc- 
trine of flux by bringing on the scene 2 man who repudiates 
a contract on the ground that he is no longer the person who 
made it; he is thrashed by the claimant, but when the latter 
‘is summoned, he in turn pleads that he is not the same man 
as the one who committed the assault.*

Examination of the sources therefore shows that Epichar- 
mus had no philosophical doctrine, Pythagorean or otherwise, 
to expound, but used the current interest in philosophical 
siemiletiek along with other material for his comedies.

THE PHILOSOPHICAL FRAGMENTS ATTRIBUTED TO 
EPICHARMUSTHE PHILOSOPHICAL FRAGMENTS ATTRIBUTED TO 
EPICHARMUS

All the fragments quoted in Diels are doubtful.

1. Br-B7. Alcimus, Against Amyntas. Asexplained above, this pamphlet 
was written to prove the absurd theory that Plato plagiarized from 
Epicharmus. All the quotations are doubtful, and Nos. 3, 6, and 7 
almost certainly spurious.

2. B8-B46. Axiopistus, Maxims (noted as spurious by Athenaeus, Aro); 
and B47-B54, the translation by Ennius based on this collection. 
This appears to be a collection of snippets made in the fourth century, 
purporting to be taken from Epicharmus’ plays. Some of them by 
their form appear to be genuine (e.g. B10, B12, B13, where the force 
of expression seems Epicharmic, and Bg, B29, B31, B37, where the 
dialogue form has been retained). Others (e.g. B19, B36, B37) have 
good authority (Xenophon, Aristotle); and in others the content goes 
back to the sixth and fifth centuries (e.g. Bg, B12, B52: Xenophanes; 
B17, B48: Heracleitus; B53: Anaximenes); but the collection as a 
whole was known in antiquity to be spurious. It has been surmised 
that the book was prefaced by a passage (Diels, I, p. 193; Hibeh 
Papyrus) explaining its usefulness in all circumstances, and boasting 
that the author Epicharmus, having been accused of inability to be 
brief, has hereby proved that he possesses this gift likewise.

3 Bs5. Axiopistus, Canon. A forgery by the same writer, of which 
nothing is known (Aro).

. = - = e ed . J Wes 
a contemporary of Alcibiades (Athen. XII, 535); he wrote a feeble

poem embodying Pythagorean and Heraclei dane aecee 
buted it to Epicharmus, Seen cone een anaraentl

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 135

5. ck iste ote A medical poem, probably a forgery of the later 
ythagorean School.

6. B63. Cookery. May be an extract from, or identical with, Chetron.

7. B64. Epigram. ‘Thought to be attributed to Epicharmus on account 
of Bo.

8. B65. Antenor. A book referred to by Plutarch, otherwise unknown,

24. ALCMAEON7. B64. Epigram. ‘Thought to be attributed to Epicharmus on account 
of Bo.

8. B65. Antenor. A book referred to by Plutarch, otherwise unknown,

24. ALCMAEON

AtcMaAEon of CroTon was a young man in the old age of 
Pythagoras :* that is, he was in his prime at the beginning of 
the fifth century B.c. 
He wrote a book, a few sentences of which have survived, 
and dedicated it to three Pythagoreans, Brontinus, Leon and 
Bathyllus.» Some said that he was the first to write a book on 
Natural Science.¢ He attracted the attention of Plato and 
Aristotle, and his work on sense-perception was recorded by

Theophrastus.

The school of medicine at Croton was the earliest in Greece, 
the floruit of Hippocrates being about 420 B.c. The former’s 
most distinguished member was Alcmaeon, and to it belonged 
also the adventurous Democedes.4 Alcmaeon may or may not 
have been a Pythagorean; Aristotle comments on the likeness 
of their opinions on the opposites, but does not profess to 
know who borrowed from whom. There must have been 
mutual influence; more than that, we cannot say.

Alcmaeon certainly did valuable service to philosophy. In 
medicine, which was his main interest, he did valuable research 
on the question most vital to the progress of epistemology and 
psychology — the nature of sense-perception ; his work was the 
basis for that of Empedocles and Democritus. He also made

a generalization on the nature of health that was to have far- 
reaching influence. He speculated on the usual questions of 
natural phenomena. From the little we know of his work, it 
seems toa have been full of interesting observations and 
suggestions.

One of his main principles was a theory of Opposites, 
described by Aristotle in the Metaphysics,£ and compared with

®A3 OB: cAr;Az 4Seeabove,p.87 °¢A3

THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSOne of his main principles was a theory of Opposites, 
described by Aristotle in the Metaphysics,£ and compared with

®A3 OB: cAr;Az 4Seeabove,p.87 °¢A3

THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

that of the Pythagoreans. Alcmaeon’s words were: ‘the 
a of things human are two.’* He then named various 
pairs of opposites such as white-black, sweet-bitter, good-bad, 
great-small, throwing them out, as Aristotle says, at random; 
the Pythagorean school also believed in the opposites, but 
drew up a definite list of ten pairs.

It seems likely that the theory of opposites goes back to 
Pythagoras himself,» that is, the bare theory that existence is 
made up of opposites. How far he worked it out we cannot 
say; but it seems likely that his followers worked out the idea 
definitely and numerically because their interests were philoso- 
phical, whereas Alcmaeon, taking the same idea, applied it to 
the make-up of the human organism; and that was why his 
list of opposites was more ‘at random’ than theirs. Their list 
of opposites was: Limit-Unlimited, odd-even, one-many, 
right-left, male-female, rest-motion, light-darkness, good-bad, 
square-oblong, straight-curved; that is, it was an attempt to 
cover the whole of creation, and to give a list that should 
embrace the attributes of Space and bodies in space (number, 
shape, position, behaviour) and of human beings (physical and 
ethical attributes). But Alcmaeon, thinking in terms of the 
human body, gave a list of the many opposite qualities dis- 
tinguished by the senses. Aristotle when blaming him for not 
limiting and defining them speaks from the metaphysical point 
of view; but Alcmaeon’s criterion was not metaphysical, it was 
physiological. He was a physiologist fruitfully using a meta- 
physical idea.This comes out clearly in the fragment which explains his 
view of health and disease: the essential of health is the ‘equal 
rule’ (Jsonomia, the equality of democracy) of the functions! — 
moist-dry, cold-hot, bitter-sweet, and the rest; the dominance 
(Monarchia) of one or the other among these 1s the cause of 
disease.© That is, the ‘moving cause’ is excess of heat or cold, 
and so on; the material cause 1s the superfluity or deficiency of 
nourishment; the parts affected in the body are the marrow, 
the blood and the brain. There are also external causes, such 
as environment, wounds and so‘forth. Health is the propor- 
tioned combination of qualities.44: This idea seems more

aA3; Ar b See above, p. 82 c Ba d By 
dl thy Gyetav Tv oUppetpov Té&v Troy Kpdorv. 
1 |

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 137

Heracleitean than Pythagorean; the opposites are connected 
by a harmony, not left as a duality. .

His detailed work on the nature of the senses was based on 
experiment; tradition records that he was the first to ‘dare to 
undertake the excision of an eye’.* This clearly refers to a 
surgical operation on a human subject; and he profited by this 
opportunity, and doubtless also by dissection, to examine the 
eye and the brain.

He said that hearing was due to the hollowness of the ears, 
in which the air echoes as in hollow vessels;> he seems to have 
thought that the ears drew in air, for Aristotle points out that 
the organ of hearing does not breathe: Alcmaeon was wrong 
in saying that goats breathe through their ears.¢ Smell is due 
to the drawing of the air in through the nose to the brain.é 
The tongue distinguishes tastes; being warm, soft and wet, it 
melts them by its heat, and separates them according to their 
fineness and softness* — that is, density and texture. He had 
nothing to say about touch,‘ though his remarks on taste seem 
to border on reducing it in part to touch.His most detailed work was done on the eye. He examined 
its structure by dissection: the eye itself is enclosed in certain 
transparent membranes, and it is connected with the brain by 
two ‘light-bearing paths’ which join behind the forehead. 
That these paths (the optic nerves) join, he showed by dissec- 
tion, and supported his view by the observation that the eyes 
move together, not separately. The eye sees by the water and 
fire in it: the fire is a constituent of the eye — the eye when 
struck a blow sees light; the water comes from the brain: the 
paths bring ‘natural moisture’ from the brain to the eyeballs, 
and this carries back to the brain the fire or light which 
shines before the eyes.®

The seat of sensations is the brain. This contains the 
‘governing faculty’,» and here all sensations are ‘somehow 
fitted together’. The brain receives contributions from the 
ears, eyes, nose and the rest through the different paths; and 
therefore if the brain shifts from its position in the head, it 1s 
incapacitated, because it blocks up the paths.i This power of 
the brain to synthesize sensations makes it also the seat of 
thought: the storing up of perceptions gives memory and

@ Aro bAs; A6 c Ay d As; A8 e As; Ag PAS 
€ As; Ato

138 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS@ Aro bAs; A6 c Ay d As; A8 e As; Ag PAS 
€ As; Ato

138 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

belief, and when these are stabilized, you get knowledge, as 
Socrates says in the Phaedo.* This last idea is found in the 
treatise of Hippocrates on Epilepsy: ‘for as long as the brain 
is in a state of rest (absence of movement), for just so long the 
man thinks.’»> Whether this is to be attributed to Alcmaeon 
entire is not certain; it does not seem to accord very well with 
his views on the soul as being in everlasting motion; but he 
regarded the brain as the place where the sensations were 
received and arranged, and saw intelligence as something 
more than sensation, so Theophrastus says, contrasting him 
with Empedocles.* On this view, he distinguished Man from 
the other animals, in that, as he himself said, ‘he alone under- 
stands (ouvina, ‘puts-together’), whereas the other creatures 
have sense-perception without understanding’.4

This view of the importance of the brain led him to say in 
his investigations on the foetus that the head is the first part to 
be developed; but he admitted to knowing nothing definite 
about it, because one could not see what went on.e He 
investigated the process of reproduction as far as possible, and 
held views on gestation! and sex-determination.® In studying 
gestation, he examined birds’ eggs, a method which in recent 
times has yielded the most important results. He was of the 
school that believed the offspring to come from the female 
ovum, as opposed to those who thought it came from the 
male spermatozoon;' it was not until comparatively recent 
times that it was proved that the ovum and spermatozoon are 
two cells which coalesce to form the new cell of the embryo. 
In this connection he studied the cause of the sterility of 
mules.!A few remarks on natural phenomena are preserved; they 
are not important, and appear to be a reproduction of the 
views of the Ionians. He held Heracleitean views about the 
sun: it was flat, or in a bowl.* He observed the movements of 
the planets.! He believed that the heavenly bodies were ever- 
lasting, and had everlasting motion as a property.™ His belief 
about the human soul appears to be based on these astrono- 
mical observations rather than on his physiological researches; 
the connection is not clear. He is reported.to have said that 
the soul was immortal because it is in everlasting motion, and

a Arr bArr cAxc

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 139

thus resembles the other everlasting things — the sun, moon, 
stars and whole heavens.* This does not fit the view expressed 
by Socrates when he mentions Alcmaeon’s theory that the 
brain is the seat of knowledge, knowledge being obtained 
from sense-perception when the latter is held stable by the 
brain. But there is no clue as to whether Alcmaeon connected 
the thinking-faculty with the soul, or how. It has been sug- 
gested! that when Alcmaeon speaks of a motion of the soul, 
he is referring to the mystical Pythagorean view put into the 
mouth of Timaeus by Plato, that the soul has circles revolving 
in it just as the heavens and the heavenly bodies do; and that 
this explains Alcmaeon’s remark that the reason why men die 
is because they are unable to ‘join the beginning to the end’. 
That is, Man, unlike the heavenly bodies, cannot achieve the 
full circle, the secret of perpetual motion.Alcmaeon’s importance lies in his beginning the physio- 
logical investigation of sense-perception, and thus laying the 
foundation of the physiological study of the organs of human 
knowledge. This was soon to become an important branch of 
epistemology: we cannot depend on our knowledge as objec- 
tive; we must investigate the subject that knows. Alcmaeon 
himself did not believe in absolute and objective knowledge 
for Man; he held with Xenophanes that certain knowledge of 
things both imperceptible and mortal could be attained only 
by the gods, and human beings could offer only conjecture.° 
On the other hand, he based such knowledge as we have on 
sense-perception, and did not sever the two as did the Eleatic 
School.

25. ICCUS

Iccus, a Pythagorean, was a gymnast and physician of Taren- 
tum, whose abstemiousness became proverbial.

aAr2; Ar bBa ¢ Br 
Diy oe y pe agg: Burnet suggests that Alemeeon was the author of this 
view; but it is more likely that he took it over from his Pythagorean friends.

140 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

26. PARON

Paron, a Pythagorean, was remembered solely for a on mot 
uttered in reply to someone (perhaps Simonides) who said that 
Time was Wisdom. Paron replied that Time was Ignorance, 
because it makes us forget.

27, AMEINIAS

Amernias, a Pythagorean, ‘poor but worthy’, was one of the 
teachers of Parmenides.*

28. PARMENIDES 
PaRMENIDES Of ELEA was in his prime about 475 B.c.

His floruit is placed by Diogenes Laertius in 504-501 B.c.> 
But he visited Athens and met Socrates when the latter was 
still very young, and he himself was about sixty-five years old;° 
so that if Socrates was about twenty, the meeting took place 
about 450 B.c., making Parmenides’ floruit 475 B.c.All commentary and tradition is based on Parmenides’ own 
poem, which was still in existence, though rare, in the time of 
Simplicius,4 a thousand years after it was written. Plato’s 
dialogue Parmenides undoubtedly represents an actual meeting, 
but the views attributed therein to Parmenides cannot be re-- 
garded as the report of a conversation; they represent rather 
a criticism by Plato of his own theory from the Eleatic point 
of view, with which he was anxious to reconcile it.

He wrote his views in verse; this at first sight seems strange, 
because of the difficulty of the subject-matter, which does not 
seem to go easily into verse.® It is unlikely that he was follow- 
ing the lead of Xenophanes, who apparently was by profession 
a bard. Plutarch suggests‘ that he among others used metre 
and the dignity of the epic style ‘like a carriage’, borrowing 
them from poetry in order to avoid the flatness of prose. This

€ See A18 for Proclus’ comment — {Ars

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES I4I€ See A18 for Proclus’ comment — {Ars

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES I4I

implies that Parmenides thought his subject-matter lacking in 
interest, so that it needed the dressing of metre and metaphor 
to make it acceptable. The probability is rather that he used 
the epic form because it seemed to him the only worthy 
vehicle for a doctrine which he regarded as a divine revelation. 
He puts the initial revelation and the subsequent exposition 
into the mouth of a goddess; she welcomes him to the realm 
of light in the Prologue, and throughout the rest of the poem, 
instructs him in the ways of truth and falsehood, addressing 
him directly and speaking of the doctrines he is not to accept 
as ‘the opinions of mortals’. It is also possible that Parmenides 
believed the verse-form to be a good medium of instruction 
for minds younger and less mature than his own: for instance, 
his pupil Zeno, who was twenty-five years younger than him- 
self, and became the official defender of his doctrine. It is not 
unnatural to suppose that he was trained by Parmenides to 
this end, and that the writing in metre was a device of the 
teacher to impress difficult and unfamiliar ideas. But it is the 
epic form, not the metre in itself, that is important, as express- 
ing Parmenides’ own attitude of reverence towards the truth, 
and his exaltation at his discovery of it; the metre followed as 
a matter of course.The poem is divided into three parts: the Prologue, the 
Way of Truth, and the Way of Opinion. The relation of the 
Way of Opinion to the Way of Truth in Parmenides’ thought 
was discussed even in antiquity. Did he mean any credence to 
be given to the Way of Opinion? The goddess instructing 
him says distinctly that it is false, a.statement of the opinions 
of mortals, and bids him keep away from that sort of inquiry.* 
Why then did he trouble to set it forth at such length, and 
depict the goddess as telling him to ‘give ear to the deceptive 
ordering of my words’? ‘In order’, she tells him, ‘that no 
mortal may surpass thee in knowledge.’ That is, he is arming 
his hearer, as discovery of the truth has armed him, against 
the current body of doctrine, so that he may be able to refute 
it. If this be accepted, we have to agree that no part of the 
Way of Opinion is Parmenides’ own belief, and pass on to the 
further question, whose belief is it? Burnet, by a process of 
elimination and by comparison with the later Pythagorean

a Br, v. 30; B8, v. 50; By, v. 2 bB8, v. 5

142 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

doctrine, maintains that it 1s the Pythagorean system: Par- 
menides warns his hearer against two sets of false doctrine;* 
the latter appears to be Heracleiteanism, the former is there- 
fore Pythagoreanism, and we know that Parmenides had a 
Pythagorean teacher.» This would further account for his 
having troubled to set it out in full, since Pythagorean teaching 
was at that time oral, and no authoritative written account was 
available.However, Aristotle in the Meraphysicse expresses the view 
that the Way of Truth represents Parmenides’ conviction of 
the logical necessity, but that the Way of Opinion gives the 
result of his being compelled to.accommodate himself to the 
visible universe; so that he offered on the one hand the logical 
One, on the other hand a dualistic explanation of the Many of 
sense-perception, deriving them from Hot-Cold. Thus Aris- 
totle and other commentators attribute some of the views 
expressed in the Way of Opinion to Parmenides himself, and 
he gets credit for scientific discoveries such as that the morning 
and evening star are the same,‘ and that the moon’s light is 
derived from the sun,¢ as well as for theories of sense-percep- 
tion and knowledge.‘ Simplicius, who wrote a careful com- 
mentary on the poem with many quotations, and who appears 
to have had the whole before him, took it in this sense: not as 
absolutely false, but only as being the results of sense-percep- 
tion as opposed to pure reason.®

If it could be shown that any of the views in the Way of 
Opinion were new, this second explanation would have force; 
but of the ‘discoveries’ mentioned above, the first two are 
attributed also to Pythagoras, and the last has a marked 
resemblance to Alcmaeon; so that in the face of Parmenides’ 
own words, we should have to dismiss Aristotle’s view. But it 
gains support from Parmenides’ own Prologue. There he 
explains how he was led to the gates of truth in a car driven by 
certain maidens, and these means of transport, according to the 
ingenious interpretation preserved by Sextus, are none other 
than the organs of sense. And though when he arrives he 
turns his back on these deceptive organs, yet there is no doubt 
that he came thus far by means of them. Therefore does he 
himself not admit that something is due to them? This some-

® B6, vv.3,4 PAr ¢Azq FAgoa *Agz 1A46 6 A3z4; cp. Ar §22 
‘ Burnet, EGP‘, pp. 184 sqq.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 143® B6, vv.3,4 PAr ¢Azq FAgoa *Agz 1A46 6 A3z4; cp. Ar §22 
‘ Burnet, EGP‘, pp. 184 sqq.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 143

thing would be a description of the results obtained by relying 
on them — that is to say, opinions.

If, then, the Prologue is to be taken as representing Par- 
menides’ own progress, the Way of Opinion is something 
more than an objective description of the views held by another 
school, and always disbelieved by him. It must be rather the 
best and most plausible scheme that could be erected by relying 
on sense-perception — its final word on the matter; it must 
contain, not only Pythagoreanism — though that is doubtless 
the main ingredient, as it was in Parmenides’ education — but 
the best-established of all the views held by earlier philoso- 
phers, as selected by Parmenides. That it was such an eclectic 
account seems likely from the few remains: for instance, there 
is a description of ‘crowns’ which appears to refer to the rings 
of Anaximander ;* * there is a polemic against ‘ignorant people’ 
who speak of a ‘reversible path’,>» >: which seems to refer to 
Heracleitus and his followers; there were passages on sense- 
perception,* on the physiological ‘mixture’ from which intelli- 
gence is derived, 41 and on sex-determination,* which seem to 
refer to Alcmaeon and his school; and there occurs the word 
‘rooted-in-water’,‘. {1 which seems to refer to Thales. The main 
idea of the cosmology, the duality of fire, brightness, rarity, 
lightness of weight, and darkness, density, heaviness, appears 
to be Pythagorean; but the great mistake as Parmenides saw 
it, that of thinking that Not-Being could exist, was common 
to all his predecessors, and the structure reared on this assump- 
tion was contributed to by all of them.Cornford,* however, believes that the two Ways from which 
the hearer is warned® are not two systems of contemporary 
philosophy but two modes of thought: The Way of Not- 
Being, and the Way of Mortals, that is, the Way in which 
both Being and Not-Being are postulated. The former 1s 
utterly unthinkable; the latter, like Plato’s Doxa, though not 
truth, has some claim to attention as accounting for the un-

VV. 7-9 Cc A46 d Br6é e Br7; B18; A533; As4

a! Burnet EGP‘, p. 188, suggests that this is Anaximander’s theory adopted by 
Pythagoras.

bl tadlvtpotros KéAEUBOS. d! xp&ons. £1 ySatdpizov.

1¥, M. Cornford, Parmenides’ Two Ways. Classical Quarterly, Vol. XXVII, pp. 
97-r1t (1933); cp. A. H. Coxon, The Philosophy of Parmenides, Classical Quarterly, 
Vol. XXVIII, pp. 134-144 (1934):

144 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

deniable existence, for mortals, of a world of sense-perception. 
Parmenides, while denying the possibility of bridging the gulf 
between Logic and the material of sense-perception, neverthe- 
less puts forward the account in the Way of Opinion as a 
second chapter, not the logical truth, nor yet an alternative 
scheme to be rejected, but a fable or plausible story, perhaps 
better than those of other thinkers who believed their fables 
to be true. It is therefore his own construction, as Aristotle 
thought, not a catalogue of erroneous theories.If this is correct, then Parmenides’ strictures on others who 
have offered their fables as an explanation of the visible uni- 
verse are surely exaggerated: he says that helplessness guides 
the wandering thought in their breasts, so that they are borne 
along stupefied like men deaf and blind — uncritical herds, 
who hold that It Is and It Is Not are the same.* This surely 
means that they are wrong in their whole endeavour, not 
merely in giving objective validity to their speculations. 
Heracleitus, Alcmaeon and Xenophanes had already expressed 
doubts as to the validity of the data of sense-perception; if 
Parmenides meant no more than this, he was falling into the 
same error as those he castigates in attempting to give a 
coherent account of phenomena. Again, Cornford’s explana- 
tion makes it even less understandable why Parmenides should 
have troubled to write the Way of Opinion; to invent an 
account of a system which you know has no objective validity 
is merely to add to the body of false doctrine, whereas to 
record existing opinion does at least serve a purpose, that of 
arming the hearer against it. Parmenides differs from his 
predecessors in that he is not merely agnostic about the 
validity of sense-perception ; he insists that it cannot give truth. 
Again, there was surely no need to warn his hearers expressly 
against believing that Not-Being Is as a way of thought; this 
was not a mode of thought adopted by anyone, and it was a 
danger not in itself, but only because it was implied in all 
previous systems, no person held or could hold it as a separate 
philosophy. Again, Parmenides was surely (to adapt a phrase 
of Coxon’s)® ‘too fine a thinker’ to suggest that one fable

a B6 b Op. cit., p. 135

1 j,¢, at this date: later, the extreme of nihilism was reached by Xeniades of Corinth 
(ch. 81, p. 353 below); but he is post-Democritean. Others did not go so far: cp.

aoe of Chios (ch. 70, pp. 327-9 below) and Gorgias (ch. 82, PP. 353 599. 
ow).aoe of Chios (ch. 70, pp. 327-9 below) and Gorgias (ch. 82, PP. 353 599. 
ow).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 145

could be ‘better’ than another in a realm where xo standard of 
truth existed to make comparison possible. Again, if his 
pupils had understood him to mean that the explanation of 
the visible universe, though it could have no truth, was worth 
making, they would have followed this hint and continued this 
line of inquiry; but the work of Zeno was directed solely 
towards defending the doctrine of Pure Being, and they seem 
to have taken no interest in scientific research, Again, if 
Aristotle was right, and Parmenides made any concession 
whatsoever to the world of phenomena, why did his views 
seem so absurd to his contemporaries? Zeno’s defence was 
against those who poked fun*: *1 at Parmenides, and he under- 
took to show that an acceptance of the Many produced results 
just as laughable as those derived from Parmenides’ principle of 
the One. This proves that down to the time of Plato, nobody 
gave Parmenides any credit for having in any way accommo- 
dated himself to the visible world; they would not have found 
his results absurd if he had kept them to the realm of logic 
and had not insisted that they must be accepted against all the 
evidence of the senses. We are entitled to believe that the 
doubt as to Parmenides’ meaning did not arise until the time 
of Aristotle, who was always hostile to abstract concepts that 
did not accord with experience, and who preferred to credit 
Parmenides with views more in harmony with his own; where- 
as Plato, whose interest lay in the abstract, was ready to accept 
Parmenides’ views at their most uncompromising. __We cannot go so far as to say that Parmenides never 
believed in the doctrines he describes; he may at some time 
have believed in some of them. But certainly when he wrote 
his poem he absolutely rejected them. We can however think 
that the scheme he puts forward was such that he himself 
might have believed in it if he had not laid hold of the truth 
that made all such speculations null and void, and set for his 
mind that barrier which that one and only truth enjoined upon 
him not to pass —the absolute prohibition against believing

in any of the results of sense-perception, and against using the 
methods of experience and experiment.

To sum up: on the one hand, the Way of Opinion is utterly 
false, fiot the views of Parmenides; but on the other hand, it

146 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

was such that had he accommodated himself to phenomena, 
he would have had to believe. This, while not assigning any 
of the views on sensibles to Parmenides, makes allowance for 
a Parmenidean arrangement of these rejected views, and gives 
them a broader meaning as representing the last word of sense- 
perception, an eclectic account of its contributions. The 
attack on the perceptions, then, is not a mere polemic against 
a particular school or schools, but a denial of the total results 
of this method. These results he sets before his pupil in all 
their completeness and plausibility, so that he may be fully 
armed against them.

Parmenides’ own contribution must therefore be limited to 
the Prologue, and the Way of Truth.Parmenides’ own contribution must therefore be limited to 
the Prologue, and the Way of Truth.

The Prologue,? in an allegorical way, states his new method. 
Sextus says that the horses which bore him and set him on the 
‘famous road of the goddess’ were the irrational impulses of 
his soul which drew him into the pursuit of philosophy. The 
means of transport were the senses: the car, the axle of which 
gave out a note like a pipe as its two wheels turned on each 
side, represents hearing, the wheels being the ears! The 
Daughters of the Sun, who had left the halls of Night and who 
drove the car towards the light, pushing aside their veils, are, 
Sextus says, the eyes. The car reaches the ‘gates of the paths 
of Day and Night’, and Justice who guards them with twin 
keys. The maidens with gentle words tactfully persuade her to 
throw open the gates; a great opening is disclosed, and the car 
and its passengers go straight through. When they get inside, 
Parmenides is at once met and welcomed by the goddess.

It would be interesting to know what became of the car and 
the maidens, but we are not told. If they represent the senses 
and it is they who take him into the realm of certain knowledge, 
where do they leave him? How far does he acknowledge their 
aid? They are still there when the goddess speaks; she men- 
tions the horses and the drivers. But after welcoming Par- 
menides (whom she addresses as ‘Youth|’,»» > showing that the 
revelation came to him early in life) and saying that it is ‘no 
evil fate’ which has brought him here to a place far beyond the 
journeyings of men, she tells him of the two ways, Maat of

eBr b Br, v. 6

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 147eBr b Br, v. 6

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 147

Truth and that of Opinion. She forbids him to take the latter 
way: he is not to be forced into it by ‘custom with its manifold 
experience, not to use the undiscerning eye, the echoing ear, 
or the tongue, but to judge by Reason (Logos), learning frém 
her’.*: #1 The senses, then, seem to be used and then rejected in 
the light of a revelation coming from Mind, which is indepen- 
dent of them. Henceforth, everything is to be judged by this 
Mind; and its first command is to reject the material of sense- 
experience. This is the method; the gap in it is not discussed, 
apparently not realized, and it formed the problem for Par- 
menides’ successors.

Following this one path, then, we get the Way of Truth. 
The results which we arrive at are definite and logically worked 
out. The intellect is the criterion, and what it can think, 
exists; what it cannot think, does not exist. The mind cannot 
conceive Not-Being; therefore Not-Being does not exist.> 
Being is the only possible object of thought.

If Being is, the consequences are that it does not come into 
being, does not pass away, is whole, and is motionless.°

It does not come into being, because it alone exists, and if it 
came into being, it would have to come from somewhere. It 
cannot have come from Not-Being, for that is ex Aypothesi un- 
thinkable. And what necessity could there have been to cause 
it to come into being at one time rather than another? There- 
fore it is absolutely bound to be, utterly and now; there can be 
no ‘beforehand’ for what is, and no ‘afterwards’. Therefore 
Becoming and Destruction (and with them Time itself) are 
done away with (‘quenched’).¢It is whole, and without parts and indivisible, because there 
is no ‘more’ or ‘less’ of it in one direction than in another; there 
is no Not-Being to prevent it from holding together (that is, to 
divide it into parts), for all is full of Being, and Being is in con- 
tact with Being. Thus it is whole and continuous.°

a By b B2 c B8, vv. 3,4 d B8, vv. 5-21 € B8, vv. 22-25

a1 These lines, quoted by Sextus as part of the Prologue and given in Vors. edn. 4 
at the end of Br, are transferred in Vors. edn. 5 to B7.

‘ Whether Being itself thinks and is intelligent depends on the interpretation of the 
line (B3) 7d yap avtd voetv totiv te Kad elven. If we read totiv, as apparently Clement 
who quotes it did, then Being is identified with thinking (so Diels). If we read totw 
as Burnet following Zeller does, then ‘that which it is possible to think, and that 
which is, are identical’, and the words mean that Being is the only object of thought, as 
Parmenides says in the negative form in Bz: otte y&p dv yvolns Td ye uh bov (od yap 
cvvotév) obts ppdoans.

148 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

It is motionless, for the same reason that it is without be- 
ginning and without end. It stays fixed in one place (since 
there is no Not-Being into which it can move).*

It is limited, or rather it is not without limit; >+ for it lacks 
nothing. If it were without limit, it would be in need of every- 
thing. This surprising sentence, the paradox of the Parmeni- 
dean Being, is dismissed thus in two lines.* This attribute is 
not among those promised in the general statement with which 
the passage begins. ¢2

Since Being is limited in form, it must have the shape of a 
sphere. ‘It must be equidistant in all directions from its centre, 
for it cannot be ‘more’ or ‘less’ in any direction, since there 1s no 
Not-Being at any point to stop it from extending outwards 
equally in all directions.°

This ends the Way of Truth.This ends the Way of Truth.

Such is the result of the logical method. The utmost has 
been done to present a Being robbed of all sensible qualities 
and functions. These qualities and functions, he says, Becom- 
ing and Passing-Away, Being and Not-Being, change of posi- 
tion, change of colour, are merely words, names given arbit- 
rarily by men,‘ representing things not conceivable by the 
mind, and therefore not to be stated in words as if they were 
conceivable.

The flaw in the system is quite clear to us. It lies just at the 
point which he hurries over: the assigning of a limit to Being. 
Aristotle goes over this point in the Physics :®

The Whole is that which lacks nothing, for example, a whole man or 
a whole box; as with particulars, so with the general: it is that from which 
nothing is absent. “That which has deficiency on the outside, that is, lacks 
shape, is not complete. A thing which is whole and perfect must be 
absolutely the same or very near it; but nothing is perfect which has not 
an end (te/os); (that is, nothing can be the same unless it has reached a goal 
or limit of perfection). But an ‘end’ is a limit. “Therefore Parmenides 
was more correct than Melissus in saying that the Whole was limited.

This fills out, though in Aristotelian language, the idea of Par-

@ B8, vv. 26-31 b BS, v. 32 c BS, vv. 32, 33 d B8, vv. 3, 4 
© B8, vv. 42-49 f BS, vv. 38-41 8 A27

. appears to refer to its being indestructible, that is, to repeat dvcb\sdpov in 
the line above, unless we emend with Brandis to o¥8’ dridectow and regard this as 
meaning the same as otx éreAgirntov.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 149

menides, and we see that the answer was not that of Melissus — 
to take away the limit, and so make Being lacking in another 
way.OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 149

menides, and we see that the answer was not that of Melissus — 
to take away the limit, and so make Being lacking in another 
way.

Aristotle remarks that the Eleatics conceived of no existence 
other than the corporeal, yet realized that there must be an un- 
changing reality such as they describe if knowledge and thought 
are to be possible.* They therefore denied the validity of sense- 
perception, and postulating a corporeal reality denuded of 
sensible qualities, arrived at asurd. ‘The answer had to go much 
deeper, and still along Parmenidean lines: it required the still 
further denuding of Being of sensible qualities — the denial of 
its corporeality, the conception of Being as not extended in 
Space at all, the rejection of ‘full space’ as well as ‘empty space’, 
or as we say, the concept of non-material existence. Oneness 
and corporeality are seen to be incompatible, so that, as Burnet 
says, philosophy had either to cease to be monistic, or cease to 
be corporealist.> It had to cease to be monistic, at any rate 
ostensibly, for a time; but this it could not do for long, since 
the whole search of metaphysics is for a One; and it could not 
do so at all except in appearance, for even in the theories of the 
pluralists who follow, the One can be traced as an implication 
or tendency. But Parmenides and his school had worked out 
the full results of the demand of reason, that Not-Being shall 
not be said to be, so that there was nothing to do but to go 
back to sense-experience and be materialistic. However, the 
challenge that all results thus obtained were merely Opinion 
not authorized by reason had now to be faced. Thinkers could 
not begin with an apologetic statement that nothing can be 
known for certain, and proceed to explain phenomena, as 
Xenophanes and Alcmaeon had done. The nature of know- 
ledge itself was soon to come up for analysis.All that can be done with the Way of Opinion 1s on the one 
hand to treat it as the absolute opposite of all that Parmenides’ 
axiom forced him to believe, the illusion against which he 1s 
fortifying his pupil; and on the other hand, to assign the differ- 
ent opinions to their probable origins, while watching closely 
for anything to which Parmenides himself seems particularly 
drawn. In the incomplete state of the poem, with the few frag-

ments we possess, even with the supplement of the sum- 
marizers, neither of these methods can be carried out very 
a Aas bEGP*%, p. 180

ISO THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

fruitfully; they would be difficult even if we had the whole 
oem.ISO THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

fruitfully; they would be difficult even if we had the whole 
oem.

The scheme deals with the whole array of philosophical and 
scientific discovery. At the top stand the two First Causes: Fire, 
lightness, rarity, and Darkness, heaviness, density. These are 
equal in function and extent, dhd they are all that there 1s.* 
Particulars come into being from their admixture. Explana- 
tions follow as to the nature and movement of the heavenly 
bodies ;> these are not preserved in detail, but we are told that 
there is a limited vault of heaven inside which the sun, moon 
and stars move.° These First Causes appear to be at prom esc 
The heavenly bodies are explained by means of concentric 
‘wreaths’, the narrowest filled with fire, and those surrounding 
them with night, and in the midst of these rushes fire; in the 
middle is the goddess who steers all things.4 This is supple- 
mented by a passage in Aétius,* who says that some of the 
rings were of the rare element, others of the dense, and others 
mixed of light and darkness. There is a solid enclosure like a 
wall, and inside this a fiery wreath; in the centre of them all 
there is solid again, with a fiery wreath inside it. This gives the 
vault of heaven and the earth with central fire, a theory attri- 
buted to the Pythagoreans.f ,The sun, moon and stars belong 
to the mixed rings. This seems to be Anaximander’s theory of 
the wheel-like circles, possibly as adopted by Pythagoras. We 
find another Anaximandrian view in connection with the earth: 
that it stays in the centre because it is equidistant from every- 
thing else, there being no reason why it should move in any 
direction.» —The moon shines with light borrowed from the sun. : 
The air is separated off or evaporated from the earth, the sun 
and the Milky Way are breathings from the fire; the moon is a 
mixture of air and fire.i The sun and moon were separated off 
from the Milky Way, which owes its colour to its being a mix- 
ture of ‘dense’ and ‘rare’; the sun has broken off from the rarer 
‘ge which is hot, the moon from the denser which is cold.ere we seem to have some development of Anaximenes and 
Heracleitus. Hesperus and Phosphorus are the same: Pytha- 
goras is credited by Parmenides with this discovery.! The 
earth is rooted in water: this is Thales. These views are not

a Bg b Bio; Br ¢ Bro d Bi2 © A37 f Ass 
& Burnet, EGP‘, p. 188 hAs, iBra; Brs; Ag 1}A37 
as Ar §23 m Brsa

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES Ig

all consistent; Parmenides may have stated conflicting views 
for the benefit of his pupil.OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES Ig

all consistent; Parmenides may have stated conflicting views 
for the benefit of his pupil.

Lastly come explanations of organic life — the origins of man 
(‘from the Sun’, or ‘from slime’?);* #1 sex-determination;> the 
difference between the sexes, due to admixture of hot and cold, 
and subject to variations according to the direction taken by 
the spermatozoon.* This was in contradiction to the view ex- 
pressed by Alcmaeon, that the ovum was the essential factor.4 
There are also theories of sense-perception, providing a physio- 
logical explanation of mind. Mind is the product of the mixin 
of qualities in the body.¢ The mixing is of the hot and the cold, 
and when the hot preponderates, intelligence functions, and 
the more so, the better, because it knows its like. Perception 
and mind are thus identified. The more the cold preponder- 
ates, the less is perception. Still, apparently some perception 
is possible even then: the corpse cannot perceive light, heat 
and sound, but is aware of cold and silence.f. The reduced per- 
ception of sleep and old age is due to the advance of the cold 
element. The idea of a crasis or balanced mixture seems to be 
Alcmaeon’s, but that intelligence depends on excess and not on 
a balance is contrary to his view; as Theophrastus points out 
(wrongly assigning these views to Parmenides himself) it is not 
explained what happens if there is equality of mixture, but only 
if there be excess of heat or cold.» To Alcmaeon excess was 
disease. Here too we may have conflicting views expressed, 
or we may have theories in part like Alcmaeon’s, that 1s, part 
of the current physiological explanations of sense-perception 
and knowledge, but differing from his in detail, perhaps 
opposed to his, like the theory of sex-determination, and that 
of sight. iIn this connection we find also the theory of the reproductive 
Erosi which is prominent in Empedocles, and is now coming 
into philosophy from mythology (Hesiod). Elsewhere is the 
statement that the goddess who 1s in the middle of the concen- 
tric circles brings male and female together. If she is Hestia, 
the central fire,! has she any connection with Eros, or have we 
here again conflicting views? It is impossible to say. She is

& Ar §22 b B17; B18; As3 CAs2;Asg 424Ar3 e B16 f A46

& Aséa, b h A46 i A47; A48 ij Br3 k Br2 1 A44

a! Diog. L. The MSS. read é€ *Afou, but in Frobenius’ edn. this was emended to 
&€ lAvos, and a modern scholar (Ziegler) has suggested & tnAov.

I§2 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

‘the deity who steers all things’ ;* this, in the language of philo- 
sophical symbolism, is the Law of Fate, or necessity, which is 
the ultimate cause of all creation, and Eros, her first product, ° 
is the original impulse of attraction of like to unlike, made 
prominent in the system of Empedocles.

Such, then, were the opinions and inquiries from which the 
Ce was to,restrain his mind. The pike of Opinion shows that

armenides was conversant with all philosophical and scientific 
doctrine. The mistake of attributing these various opinions to 
himself led commentators to describe him as the pupil not only 
of the Pythagorean Ameinias,‘ but also of Anaximander (ac- 
cording to Theophrastus) and of Xenophanes;° and as having 
taught Anaximenes.f Some claimed that though he ‘heard’ 
Xenophanes, it was not Xenophanes but Ameinias who set him 
on the philosophic path.¢ The probability is that he pursued 
knowledge in the usual ‘empirical’ way, and believed much of 
what he heard, until his great inspiration about the One be- 
came dominant; this process may have been hastened by his 
meeting with Xenophanes.Whatever may be thought of the purpose of Plato’s Par- 
menides, one thing stands out clearly: the deep and genuine 
admiration that Plato held for the uncompromising defender 
of the One as the unchanging object of knowledge against the 
advocates of the Many of sense-perception. His tributes in the 
Theaetetus® and the Sophisti are not qualified by the tinge of 
irony usual to him; and even if it be true, as Taylor suggests, } 
that the latter part of the Parmenides is a jeu d’esprit designed 
to show that Eleatic methods such as Zeno’s could wreck the 
Eleatic no less than the Platonic theory of reality, yet never- 
theless Plato in his efforts to reconcile the demands of logic 
with those of sense-perception never for one moment forgot the 
Parmenidean desiderata. Plato gives one the impression that, 
like Parmenides, he would rather have sacrificed the sense- 
perceptions to intellect than the reverse, if he had had to choose 
between them; and that he respected the Eleatic point of view 
in a way which placed its founder outside the range of the

irony and even scorn with which he visited, for instance, the 
followers of Heracleitus and Empedocles.

@ Bra, v. 3 b B8, v. 30; A37 CBr3) 4 Ar S213; cp. A e

.A4 Ar § 2"; A2 
1A3  BAr§2r 1 183E 1 217C (both in Diels Ay) me 
1A. E. Taylor, The Parmenides of Plato, Introduction.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 153

29. ZENO 
ZENO of Evga was in his prime about 450 B.c.

The tradition conveying his thought, though incomplete on 
some points, is particularly clear, not only because his own 
writings existed, but because Aristotle dealt at some length 
with the problems he raised, and all later commentators take 
their matter from Aristotle.Zeno was undoubtedly a pupil of Parmenides. We have it 
on Plato’s authority that they visited Athens together when 
Zeno was about forty years of age, and Socrates still very 
young; so that if we assume Socrates to have been about 
twenty, this places the, visit, and Zeno’s prime of life, in about 
450 B.c. They stayed at the house of Pythodorus in the Cera- 
meicus quarter outside the city wall; and there Zeno gave read- 
ings from his book to the many who came to hear.» He made an 
impression by his handsome presence as well as by his writings. 
His death was notable: he formed a plot against the tyrant 
Nearchus of Elea, but was discovered, and subjected to torture; 
he refused to reveal the names of his fellow-conspirators, and 
died indomitable.* Many anecdotes were based on this event, 
exemplifying his cleverness and courage. Some say he ‘re- 
vealed’ the names of the tyrant’s own friends as the conspira- 
tors. The favourite story was that rather than betray his friends, 
he bit out his tongue and spat it at the tyrant. Another story 
granted him revenge by making him bite off the tyrant’s ear 
or even nose.

Plato makes him say that the book which he read aloud to 
the Athenian company was written when he was young and 
contentious, and published without his consent; it was a de- 
fence of Parmenides’ theory of Being.e It had a new method: 
instead of attempting a direct refutation of the opponents’ posi- 
tion, Zeno undertook to show that if their postulate, the exis-

results which follow logically can be ridiculed more easily than 
Parmenides’ position.£. Zeno worked out forty of these deduc- 
tions; they are given a special name, Epicheirémata, ‘Attacks’;

Alt bArr; Ar3 ¢ Ar §26 d Ar §27; A6; A7; A8; Ag

I1§4 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSAlt bArr; Ar3 ¢ Ar §26 d Ar §27; A6; A7; A8; Ag

I1§4 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

one may call them reductiones ad absurdum. This piece of work 
earned for him from Aristotle the title of founder of dialectic.* 
It appears to be a mistake to suppose that they were written in 
dialogue form; Aristotle speaks in one passage of ‘the answerer 
and Zeno the questioner’, but elsewhere is quoted as giving 
another name (Alexamenos) as the first writer of dialogues, in 
contradiction to those who said it was Zeno.* Nothing in the 
reports of his opinions, or in the quotations from his book, 
supports the view that they were in dialogue form; rather they 
seem to be in the form of a set of logical deductions from a 
given premise. Burnet plausibly suggests that the “Zeno the 
questioner’ of Aristotle’s paragraph is a personage from a 
dialogue written by someone else.4

This special kind of criticism seems to have been Zeno’s only 
work; no trace of a positive theory can be found in him, except 
a few jumbled cosmological remarks in Diogenes Laertius 
which might belong to anyone.* The theory behind his initial 
attempts must have been that of Parmenides; but some of his 
destructive reasonings seem to apply equally to Parmenidean 
conclusions. Whether this was because his criticism extended, 
leaving him to abandon the assumptions which he began by 
supporting, or whether he was not aware of this development 
and remained always in his own view a disciple of Parmenides, 
is difficult to determine. At any rate, his original contribution 
was his method, by which paradoxes were brought to light and 
posed ready for future thinkers; he did not formulate any con- 
structive scheme. His main attack was certainly directed 
against pluralism in general, and certain Pythagorean concepts 
in particular.

His method, then, is to take his opponents’ postulate and 
work out from it a pair of contradictory conclusions.His method, then, is to take his opponents’ postulate and 
work out from it a pair of contradictory conclusions.

First he takes the assumption shat things are a many. We 
have one reductio of this proposition quoted in full by Simpli- 
cius.f The contradictory conclusions are that they must be (1) 
finite; (2) infinite in number.

(1) ‘If things are a Many, they must be the number they 
are, neither more nor less. If they are the number they are, 
"?, will be finite in number,’

2) ‘If things are a Many, then they are infinite in number; 
for there are always other things in between them, and again

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES I655

others between those; and thus they are infinite in number.’ 
This latter half was called by Aristotle the argument from 
dichotomy.

Another reductio based on the same hypothesis, that things are 
a Many, undertook to show another pair of contradictory con- 
clusions, that things must be (1) infinitely small; (2) infinitely

reat:

: ‘If things are a many, they must be a number of units. These 
units may be either with magnitude, or without magnitude.

(1) If they are without magnitude (that is, without size, 
thickness or bulk) then such a unit if added to any other thing 
will not make it larger. For nothing can gain in magnitude by 
the addition of that which has no magnitude. And so it follows 
at once that that which was added was nothing .. . (Here pro- 
bably followed a similar statement about subtraction.) So that 
if the object is not decreased by the subtraction of the unit, it is 
clear that the thing added was nothing, and the thing sub- 
tracted was nothing.» That is, everything is infinitely small, so 
small as to have no magnitude.(2) If the many things are units with magnitude, that is, if 
the unit is something (having size and thickness) then it must 
have a definite size and thickness, and each part of it must be a 
definite distance from each other part. And if you take one 
such part, the same argument applies: it will have a definite 
size, and therefore parts, and each part will be a certain distance 
from each other part. And so on ad infinitum, by the argument 
from dichotomy, by which things are infinitely divisible. There 
can never be a subdivision so small that it cannot be redivided, 
that is, so small that it will not have a “‘one part” and “another 
part’’, ¢1 whose relations to each other can be stated in terms of 
the distance between them. Thus you get an infinite number 
of things each having magnitude, and this infinite number of 
magnitudes added together make up infinite sizes. Thus things

commentators were puzzled as to whether *

One or the Many that Zeno was attacking in this argument. 
The answer seems to be that he was attacking the Many as 
such, but that he was not attacking the One as such; he was 
attacking the One regarded as something from which the Many

@ B2; Br b B2 ¢ Br (p. 2553 1, 20) d Br 
Cl gtepov irpds Etepov.

156 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS@ B2; Br b B2 ¢ Br (p. 2553 1, 20) d Br 
Cl gtepov irpds Etepov.

156 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

could be derived, and the concepts of the One necessary to 
make this possible. These concepts of the One appear to be 
Pythagorean: that is, the concept of the One as a unit, and the 
assumption that there are many of these units, by the addition 
together of which things are made. If you take as your unit the 
indivisible (atomon) in order to have something ultimate, then 
you are starting with something that is really nothing, for if it 
is indivisible it has no size, extension, bulk; and therefore by 
adding together such units, since they are ‘nothing’ the result 
you obtain is ‘nothing’. You cannot get ‘size’ by adding to- 
gether things that have no size, even if you take an infinity of 
them. If however you take as your unit a something, then that 
something has size, and is therefore infinitely divisible, so that 
you start with something of infinite magnitude already, and by 
adding together such units you can get nothing but infinite 
quantities; you cannot get definite size. So that in either case 
the introduction of the idea that there are many such units is 
useless; you really get nothing from multiplication but what 
you started with. If you start with zero, you get zero; if you 
start with infinity, you get infinity. You are not helped by 
setting an arbitrary limit to your number of units; your multi- 
plier may be a definite number, but still you do not get a 
definite size as your answer; zero and infinity, whatever they 
are multiplied with, give zero and infinity.

Now Zeno’s attack was on the idea of the Many, that is, ofNow Zeno’s attack was on the idea of the Many, that is, of

multiplication; and we see from the above that multiplication 
in itself is useless. One can put it equally well by saying that 
addition is useless; for multiplication is addition. It 1s useless 
because you are bound to start with either a Nothing or an 
\nfinite, and by its means you get only what you start with, 
either a Nothing or an Infinite. The question is, did he realize 
that the difficulty is not solved by the rejection of the concept 
of multiplication? Or was he satisfied with reducing to ab- 
surdity the Pythagorean view that by the addition or multi- 
plication of units you can get the Many of the universe, with 
their finite shapes, sizes, quantities,-measurements? And did 
he then, having shown the uselessness of multiplication, rest 
satisfied with the Parmenidean One, which simply exists, and 
has no Many, no multiplication, in it? Did he not apply his 
theory of dichotomy to the Parmenidean Being, which was 
susceptible to it, since it had size and sadist

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIESOF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES

There is one statement, quoted in a Peripatetic essay, that 
night be thought to be a defence of the Parmenidean Being:* 
‘According to Zeno’s argument, there must be a magnitude 
which is without parts (that is, indivisible) because it is impos- 
sible to traverse an infinite number of positions in succession 
in a finite time; a thing which has parts has a half, and the mov- 
ing body must necessarily reach the half-way first,’ and so on. 
It would always get to the half, and never to the end. Therefore 
if it is to get to the end, there must be a magnitude that is 
indivisible. But this is part of Zeno’s arguments on motion, 
and he 1s proving the Parmenidean thesis that motion is impos- 
sible; he takes the hypothesis that there is motion, and under- 
takes to show its contradictions. The statement that there is a 
magnitude that is without parts is therefore merely one of the 
contradictory conclusions based on this hypothesis, and not 
what Zeno is setting out to prove. That is to say, it is not a 
defence of the Parmenidean Being. We cannot therefore use 
this passage as evidence that he remitted his thorough-going 
faw of dichotomy in Parmenides’ favour.

Moreover, there is one statement which if authentic shows 
that he did reach a position of agnosticism about Being. Eude- 
mus says:> “They say that Zeno said that if anyone would give 
him an account of the exact nature of the One, he would be 
able to describe the Many.’ And Seneca saw this when he said,° 
‘If Iam to accept Parmenides, there is nothing except the One; 
if Zeno, that there is no One, even’. Thus Zeno reached a 
position of nihilism as complete as and more rigidly maintained 
than that of the Sophists.

The trouble, indeed, lies not in the multiplication of the 
Unit, ot in the Unit self. The One, conceived as havingThe trouble, indeed, lies not in the multiplication of the 
Unit, ot in the Unit self. The One, conceived as having

extent, even if it be postulated as for ever One, is really a Many, 
the law of dichotomy pulverizes it, and to infinity. Yet if the 
One has no extent, what is it? Nothing, Zeno says ;¢ he plainly 
does not conceive of any existence other than corporeal. We 
have to supplement, ‘Nothing corporeal’. He will then ask us, 
how can anything corporeal come out of it? We then have two 
ways open to us: we can say, ‘It does not’, and rank ourselves 
with those who insist that all perception is illusion, thereby 
giving up all right to seek for or offer any contribution to 
knowledge; or we can say ‘It does’, and when we are asked

1§f8 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

‘How?’, refer the questioner to Plato and the theory of Partici- 
pation. But it is probable that to Zeno this would have seemed 
a mere metaphor and an evasion.1§f8 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

‘How?’, refer the questioner to Plato and the theory of Partici- 
pation. But it is probable that to Zeno this would have seemed 
a mere metaphor and an evasion.

We have spoken throughout of the Unit, and not of the 
Point, because Zeno’s attacks clearly refer to Being, and be- 
cause he does not himself mention, in the fragments we have, 
the Point. Aristotle and others, however, saw that the Being or 
Unit that he was attacking was actually the Point;* and in his 
arguments we see that he is thinking of points and lines. The 
Point which ‘is something’, that is, has magnitude, and from 
which things are made up by addition, is the Pythagorean point, 
which is a spatial unit, and has extension in space.» The Point 
which has no extension and is therefore ‘nothing’, is no doubt a 
mathematical concept which was at that time being suggested 
as a way out of the difficulty posed by dichotomy, by those who 
saw it. The first way out of a difficulty of this kind, that is, 
when your hypothesis leads you to a contradictory conclusion, 
is to take the opposite hypothesis, just as Melissus thought to 
get rid of the contradiction in Parmenides’ Being by removing’ 
what seemed to be the cause of the trouble, that Being is Finite, 
and supplying the opposite, that Being is Infinite. Similarly 
there were some who said that the Point had no magnitude. 
Zeno’s answer was, then how do you get a line from it? If the 
point is zero, what mathematical device is going to give you 
from it a line of « inches long? It has been said that Zeno’s 
greatest title to remembrance 1s that he was the first to grasp 
clearly the mathematical view of the point as position without 
magnitude. But this seems to give him too much credit. His 
attitude was not as positive as that. He never said ‘a point is 
that which has no magnitude’. Rather, he showed that sf it has 
no magnitude, you are reduced to an aporia if you try to account 
for existence by means of it. And he certainly did not say that 
it was position without magnitude; when he deals with the 
point as position, as in his arguments on motion, he speaks of 
Pythagorean points, which have not only extension but bulk, 
and calls them ‘bulks’,* ¢! where we have to think of a moving‘A point is that which has position but no magnitude.’ 
Herein lies the answer to one of his puzzles. He says that that

23 58B38

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES

which has no magnitude is nothing; we say that it is something 
in virtue of having, not magnitude but position. What does 
‘position’ mean? It is a relative concept, meaning distance, 
measurable and finite distance, from some other thing or 
things. All that can be said about a point is its distance from, 
that 1s, its relation to, something else. The straight line is the 
shortest distance between two points. Hence there are an 
infinite number of positions, that is, possible distances between 
one extremity and the other, but not an infinite number of 
lengths added together. Point A exists only in so far as it has a 
relation to Point B, B being any other fixed point. It is not a 
thing in itself, but only one term in a relation. Hence the line 
is not made up from the point; to speak of a point implies the 
existence of a line, and so on. Making up lines from points,

Sand reducing lines to points, is not dealing in two kinds of

BNOVAeS ONC av Iws dumSand reducing lines to points, is not dealing in two kinds of

BNOVAeS ONC av Iws dum

existence, one absolute and one particular; both are particular 
and interdependent existences, and are meaningless apart from 
each other. There is nothing absolute about the point; and so 
though it is not zero, it is not ultimate Being either. You can 
take the point and derive the line from it; but what you have 
done is to state one particular in terms of another, not to 
derive the particular from the universal; and though you 
have got your particular, you have no more than what you 
started with; for you started with that which was finite and 
relative in virtue of its having position. Given something finite 
and relative, you can always derive other finites and relatives 
from it; but the difficulty is to find a true absolute and derive 
relatives from that. Neither the Pythagorean point, nor the 
true mathematical point, will do; Zeno saw this, but he did not 
see that the reason why the latter will not do is not because it 1s 
‘nothing’ (corporeal), but because it is ‘something’ (particular 
and relative).

Such then were the results he obtained by applying his 
method to the concept of the Many. He devised similar argu- 
_ on the implications of multiplicity — space, motion, 
sound.

Everything is in Space. By this we must mean that it is in 
something. But if Space is something, then Space itself is in 
something, and so on ad infinitum.

160 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

The opposite half of this Epichetréma, that Space is nothing, 
is not given, no doubt as being obviously absurd — the pro- 
position ‘Everything is in nothing’ being meaningless.The opposite half of this Epichetréma, that Space is nothing, 
is not given, no doubt as being obviously absurd — the pro- 
position ‘Everything is in nothing’ being meaningless.

The answer to this dilemma was seen clearly by the commen- 
tators. Eudemus comments that Zeno 1s using the term ‘space’ 
(tétros) in the sense of ‘place’ (1d 1roW); and the ‘place’ of a body 
is simply the limit of the body (aépas).* That is to say, just as 
we saw that ‘position’ is not a thing in itself, and yet is some- 
thing, that is, one term in a relation, so too ‘place’ is not a thing 
in itself, nor is it nothing, but it is a relative term, a property of 
the body which is said, by a confusion of language, to occupy 
the space. The body is not ‘in’ the space as one box is in an- 
other; the space is the outer boundary of the body, and 
nothing can be said of it that is not relative to that body. 
Aristotle tackles the problem in the same way, but shows a 
different aspect:> if you say that a space A is in a space B, you 
do not mean that space A is in the same space as space B. You 
are bringing in a new term, space B, and saying that space A 
is in space B. That is to say, space A per se can be expressed 
only in relation to the solid of which it is the plane boundary; 
it has no existence of its own, no existence except as being the 
enclosure of the solid. You can say therefore that the solid is 
in space A, but not that space A is in anything per se. If you 
want to say that space A is in something, you have to bring in 
this something as a new term space B, and then A can be ex- 
pressed as having a relation to space B, But space B is ex hypo- 
thest bound to be different from space A, and not the same 
space. Thus, to say that space A is ‘in’ something in Zeno’s 
sense 1s meaningless. Space A is neither ‘nothing’, nor “some- 
thing in itself’, but only ‘something’ in relation to that of which 
it is the boundary. This is probably an argument against the 
Pythagorean Void, as having existence in itself, and against the 
whole Pythagorean concept of Space as something which goes 
into the making of particulars. But as in the case of the Unit, 
it directs the attention to the nature of Space itself, and pushes 
the inquiry onwards towards the view that Space is merely an 
attribute of body, the two terms being correlates. Since their 
existence is relative and interdependent, you cannot make one 
out of the other. You can only express either in terms of the 
other. Eudemus also comments on the possibility of non-“OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES I6I!1

spatial existence, by naming existences which cannot be ex- 
ae in terms of space, but are, as we say, ‘abstract’, such as 
ealth, Courage and the like.

The arguments on Motion, Aristotle tells us, were four.>

The first dealt with the impossibility of traversing a given’ 
length. (All four problems deal with motion in a straight line, 
from point to point.) You cannot traverse a given length, be- 
cause your length is divisible into two, and you must reach the 
half-way position before you reach the end; thus you are left 
with sone. length, also divisible into two, and must reach the 
half of that first, and so on-ad infinitum. ‘The line is infinitely 
divisible into two, so that you go on infinitely traversing halves 
and never reach the other extremity of the line.

This is another application of dichotomy, the infinite divisi- 
bility of the line. The answer is usually expressed by saying 
that there is a difference between infinite divisibility and infinite 
length, or any other quantity. Any finite length is infinitely 
divisible by any factor, but it does not cease to be finite. As 
Gomperz says,! mathematicians assure us that the infinite series 
$+3+4+% ... actually reaches the finite quantity 1, though 
it does not exceed it. Similarly +xo+ Woo... reaches, 
though it does not exceed, the finite quantity 4, and the general 
formula 3+A+3+% ... OC=the finite quantity =; Is true.This relation between infinity and finitude is surprising, put 
in that way. But here again the real crux of the matter 1s the 
nature of motion. Motion, like the point and the place, is not 
a something-in-itself; it has no existence except as a term in a 
relation. When we say a thing moves, we mean that it passes 
through a series of relations to something fixed; when we say it 
moves towards a point A, we mean that it passes through an 
infinite series of relations to point A. When we say that it 
moves from a point B, we mean that it passes through an 
infinite series of relations to point B. If we are given only one 
point, A or B, then the infinite series of relations will give 
infinite lengths in straight lines. But if we are given two fixed 
points, A and B, then what we are given is already a relation, 
and that is where the finitude comes in. Motion by the shortest 
way between two fixed points means the presence of a third 
term C, and this C has to pass through a// the possibilities of

1 Greek Thinkers, Vol. 1, p. 197.

162 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

the relationship between itself and AB, and not the few arbi- 
trarily determined by dividing AB by 2, or 10, or any other 
number. To say that C always does the half of the distance 
that remains is to choose an arbitrary series of relationships of 
C to AB and place C successively at those. So that if you say 
that C never reaches B by this method, you are only showing 
that C’s behaviour under these arbitrarily chosen conditions 1s 
not motion from A to B; you have not proved that motion from 
A to B is impossible.Another way in which Zeno used to put this puzzle was to 
say that motion was impossible because it was impossible to 
pass through an infinity of positions in a finite time. Aristotle 
refuted this by showing that again he uses infinity in two senses 
—infinite divisibility and infinite length. Time is infinitely 
divisible in the same way as the line; the line is finite in length 
in the same way as the given time. So that the infinitely 
divisible line is traversed in infinitely divisible time, and the 
finite length of space in the finite length of time.?

The second argument was that of Achilles and the tortoise.> 
If the tortoise be given a start, Achilles cannot catch up with it; 
for while he runs that distance, the tortoise will have got 
further, and so on. Aristotle remarks that this is the same 
argument as that of dichotomy, except that the division 1s not 
necessarily bisection. The given length (the length of the 
whole race from start to meeting-point) is determined by the 
finite quantity of the start given by Achilles to the tortoise, 
and the ratio of their velocity. If Achilles runs ten times as 
fast as the tortoise, he gives him 9 units start in every 10, or 
ty in every 1. If he gives him a start of 1, he catches him up 
in 1$. The infinite series w+xbo+ Woo... OC does not ex- 
ceed $, a finite quantity. It is the same problem of the differ- 
ence between infinite divisibility and infinite length. Achilles 
does not catch the tortoise at any of the points in the infinite 
series ty, té7, and so on; but he catches him outside that 
series, at the $. A body in motion does not pass only through 
a series of positions determined by the arbitrary division of the 
length into tenths, but through all the possible positions.

The third problem, that of the moving arrow,° is based on 
the same argument. Nothing can ever get anywhere, if it has

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 163The third problem, that of the moving arrow,° is based on 
the same argument. Nothing can ever get anywhere, if it has

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 163

to pass through an infinite number of positions in a finite time; 
the length (the arrow) is in the same case as the point.

The fourth* compares three sets of solids (Syxo1), one set (A) 
at rest, one (B) moving in one direction, another (C) in the 
opposite direction, at equal speed. It shows that the time taken 
by the moving solids to reach points equidistant from their 
extremities is both 1 and 2 —as Aristotle says, according as you 
measure their velocity by each other, or by those at rest. The 
points in B and C pass each other twice as quickly as they pass 
those in A, or any solid in C has passed twice as many solids in 
B as in A, in any given instant of time. Therefore passage from 
point, to point does not correspond with any given instant of 
time. This seems to indicate the infinite divisibility of time as 
well as of space.

He also said that motion was impossible because ‘the thing 
that moves must move either in the place where it is or the 
place where it 1s not’, and both are impossible. To be ‘in’ a 
place implies position, rest; nothing can happen to a thing ina 
place where it is not; therefore motion is impossible. This joins 
on to the argument about space and place: space is not some- 
thing containing the object; it is only a property of the object, 
its outline or boundary. When the body moves, it takes its 
‘space’ along with it.Lastly, there is the argument on sound. A grain of millet 
falling makes no sound; how can a bushel therefore make a 
sound?* This needs an inquiry into sense-perception. When 
the grain falls, the effect is 1; when a thousand grains fall, the 
effect is 1000; but it does not follow that we perceive the 1, 
though we perceive the 1000. The range of sense-perception 
is circumscribed; what we call sound is all that comes within 
those limits; but that the effect is there, though we do not per- 
ceive it, can be registered by instruments of greater range than 
the human ear.

a A28 _

1 Heath (Greek Mathematics, Vol. I, p. 282) regards it as ‘incredible’ that Zeno 
should have made this mistake; and he goes some way (though not all the way) towards 
Bertrand Russell’s view that Zeno has been grossly misunderstood and that his argu- 
ments contain mathematical truths rediscovered only in modern times. (Russell, 
Principles of Mathematics, Vol. 1.) But Zeno’s arguments must be regarded in relation 
to what he believed himself to be proving; and his position in the sphere of knowledge 
must be assessed in relation to all his known work, not only to his arguments on motion.

For instance, it can scarcely be claimed that the argument on the falling grain of millet 
contains any ‘immeasurably subtle and profound’ theory regarding sound.

164 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSFor instance, it can scarcely be claimed that the argument on the falling grain of millet 
contains any ‘immeasurably subtle and profound’ theory regarding sound.

164 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Such was Zeno’s attack on plurality and its deductions. If 
you postulate the One as ultimate, you have to call all pheno- 
mena illusions. But if in order to ‘save phenomena’ you intro- 
duce plurality into your ultimate cause, you are still unable to 
explain phenomena. Points with magnitude will not do, 
neither will points without magnitude. You are starting with 
something relative, and cannot ‘explain’ anything by means of 
it, At the best, you are only describing properties and relations 
between phenomena, not referring them to an absolute. You 
cannot make things by adding together a number of units with 
or without magnitude; the one gives infinity, the other zero. 
So you cannot get motion by such an addition; your motion 
will either be infinitely great or nothing. To get motion, you 
have to take something fixed to start with; then yaqur ‘explana- 
tion’ of motion is merely a description of it as a series of infinite 
relations to that fixed thing. It 1s nothing in itself. Whatever 
you Ses dissolves into a relationship, that is, into a ‘nothing 
in itself’.

30. MELISSUS 
Metissus of Samos was in his prime about 440 B.c.®

Though Melissus is said to have associated with Parmen- 
ides,» there is no evidence in support of this statement, which 
may have arisen from the acceptance of Parmenides’ views by 
Melissus. Nothing is known of him except that he commanded 
the Samian fleet which defeated the Athenians in 440 B.c., a 
defeat soon afterwards avenged by Pericles. This fact caused 
the chronographer Apollodorus to fix the floruit of Melissus as 
the 84th Olympiad, 444/41 B.c.?

_ Some fragments of his poem On Being® survive, and a tradi-

tion deriving from Aristotle._ Some fragments of his poem On Being® survive, and a tradi-

tion deriving from Aristotle.

Melissus accepted the basic axiom of Parmenides, that Not- 
Being is not, though this is not the form in which he prefers to 
use it. He does use it, however; it stands at the head of Sim- 
plicius’ summary of his views in the form ‘If nothing exists,

d Ar; Az

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 166

what could be said of itas of something existing?’,*) *1 and is re- 
ferred back to in his other arguments. But the axiom he prefers 
to use is the corollary, ‘that it is impossible for “something” to 
come into being out of “nothing” ’.» >:

He accepts all but one of the Parmenidean conclusions from 
the axiom that Not-Being is not, and denies that the One can 
come into being or pass away, or change, or move, or have any 
sort of multiplicity or divisibility. He restates the steps of the 
arguments several times in a slightly different way from Par- 
menides. He makes several additions; and in one instance he 
corrects Parmenides.

His most careful work was done on the concept of Limit. 
He saw clearly by the light of the Parmenidean theory that 
Limit implies Not-Being. Considering limit in the temporal 
sense, he restated the proposition that Being is everlasting, 
without beginning and without end. If Being had a beginning, 
that is, a coming into being, it can only have come from Not- 
Being; but nothing can come out of Not-Being, which is 
nothing. A beginning implies an end; since Being has no 
beginning, it has no end either. Therefore it was, 1s and ever 
shall be; it is everlasting.¢ He does not put Being outside Time 
altogether; he calls it infinite in time.The weak spot in this argument seems at first sight to be the 
assumption that beginning implies end, and coming into being 
implies passing away; or as he puts it, that which comes into 
being must have an end, because it must cease to come into 
being at some time.* But Melissus was well aware of the Par- 
menidean argument, that Being cannot pass away because it 
would have to pass away into Not-Being, which does not exist; 
in his arguments on Change, he states this in the form that if 
Being alters, then what was before must pass away, and what 
Was not must come into being.’ And the derivative of this is

stated in his arguments on motion, Where Being cannot move 
because there is no empty space for it to move into.¢ He must 
therefore have been clear about this. Apparently however he 
laid himself open to Aristotle’s attack by trying to state the

a Vors. 1, p. 268; 1, 15 b Br c Br d B2 e B2 f By §2

5 B7 97; 57 910; AS a

®1 Paraphrase by Simplicius. This was formerly regarded as Melissus’ own words, 
but is now generally accepted as being a summary. Burnet (EGP%, p. 321) believes 
this opening sentence to be a quotation.

b1 oUSay& dv yévorto ovbav ex ynSevds: ex nihilo nihil fit.

166 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

argument in a logically fallacious form: after proving that 
Being cannot have come-into-being, because it would have to 
come-into-being either from Being or from Not-Being, and 
both are impossible, he said that what has come into being has 
a beginning and an end, therefore what has not come into being 
has no beginning or end, which is a fallacy; and then he based 
his conclusion that Being, which has not come into being, has 
no beginning or end, on the fallacy.* This is unfortunate, 
since it is not necessary to his proof.Considering Limit in the spatial sense, he made the correc- 
tion of Parmenides’ theory for which he is chiefly famous; we 
have the fragment in which he says, ‘Just as Being is forever, 
so it must be infinite in magnitude’.» The obvious reason for 
this, that if Being is limited it must be limited by Not-Being, 
which is ex Aypothesi impossible, is not stated; but it seems 
clear from his other remarks on spatial Limit that this is what 
he meant, and that he was not merely transferring his argu- 
ments on temporal Limit to spatial Limit. The concept of 
Limit, directly you apply it to Being, either spatially or tem- 
poral'y> brings in Not-Being; therefore Being is infinite in space 
as well as in time. Here again, he did not succeed in placing 
Being outside space and spatial conditions; at least, few nowa- 
days are willing to give him credit for this, though there 1s a 
fragment quoted by Simplicius which does expressly deny the 
corporeality of Being. It says:¢ ‘If (Being) exists, it must be 
One; and if it is One, it must be Not-Body. If it had thickness, 
it would have parts, and would no longer be one.’ Everywhere 
else the Being of Melissus, like that of Parmenides, is talked 
of as spatially extended: when he says that it has no boundary, 
he means that it is infinitely extended, not that it has no exten- 
sion in space. This fragment, then, is quite isolated from the 
rest of his work; Simplicius quotes it as a proof that Melissus 
regarded Being as incorporeal, but Aristotle ignores it, saying 
that whereas Parmenides’ Being was ‘intellectual’, Melissus’ 
Being was ‘material’.4. 41

We have therefore two courses: to reject it outright, or to 
explain it away. There is no reason for doing the former except 
that it does not fit in with his other views on Being; but the

attempts at explanation are very unsatisfactory. One way out 
a Aro bB; 
‘and |

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES’ 167attempts at explanation are very unsatisfactory. One way out 
a Aro bB; 
‘and |

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES’ 167

is to say that since he uses the word ‘thickness’,*:*" he is referring 
to the third dimension only; but this is no help, since elsewhere 
his Being has third dimensional extension, just like Parmen- 
ides’ sphere, and all space is filled with it. Another way is to 
say that it is a hypothetical case, not applying to the One, but 
to some other existence; Burnet suggests the Pythagorean 
spatial unit, or point.» The full argument would then run: 
‘The Unit, if it exists, must be one; but if it is one, it cannot 
have body; if it had bulk, it would have parts, and so not be 
one (that is, not a unit, because divisible). Therefore the unit 
or point does not exist,’ and Burnet points out that it closely 
resembles an argument of Zeno’s. But the argument of Zeno, 
part of an Epicheiréma, postulates: ‘Unless Being has size, it 
does not exist’,° whereas the argument of Melissus, if correctly 
quoted, is: ‘If Being has size, it cannot be One.’ The latter does 
seem to lead directly to a criticism of the Parmenidean One, in 
whatever context it was evolved. Gomperz,! while agreeing 
that the fragment is contradictory to the rest of Melissus’ 
thought, credits him with a vague desire ‘to free his omni- 
present and completely blissful universal Being from every 
trace of gross materialism’. But he does not tell us why Melis- 
sus should think it gross to have extension in space, nor why, if 
Melissus had this anxiety to free Being from grossness, he did 
not do so on all occasions.It is difficult to see how Melissus, if he realized that a thing 
which has bulk or body has parts and 1s therefore not a true 
unit, did not also realize that the Eleatic Being, having spatial 
characteristics, was in exactly the same case. Moreover we 
have already4 seen reason to believe that Zeno’s arguments 
eventually led him to a position of agnosticism about even the 
Parmenidean One. We can therefore accept the fragment 
under discussion, and even revert to the interpretation of Sim- 
plicius, without giving Melissus credit for an anachronistic 
conception of non-material existence: for though the expression 
and the idea, ‘non-corporeal’,* °! may have been impossible to 
him, the criticism which led up to these was not, even if its 
implications were not fully realized. Aristotle’s remark that

a Bg bEGP’, p. 327 © 29B1r a Above, pp. 157-158 & Bg

8! aréxos.

€1 égcparov, Simplicius’ word: not the same thing as the expression odya pr Exetv,

attributed to Melissus. 
1 Greek Thinkers, I, p. 190.

168 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Parmenides’ Being is ‘intellectual’, and Melissus’ Being 
‘material’ can be taken as true in the sense that Melissus 
realized and admitted the corporeality of the Eleatic One, in his 
efforts to get past the surd in Parmenides’ logical concept.Still considering Limit, Melissus restates the proposition 
that Being is One: ‘if it is not One, it will be bounded with 
reference to something else,’* and ‘if it exists, it must be one; 
if it were two, these could not be boundless, but would be 
bounded with regard to each other’.» This is based, not on the 
Parmenidean argument, but on his own conclusion that Being 
must be boundless. He could have repeated the argument of 
Parmenides, that Being is undifferentiated because, if it is 
differentiated, Not-Being is brought in — one part can be dis- 
tinguished from another part only by saying that it és mot that 
part; if you have two Beings, one Being is mot the other, and 
vice versa. But Melissus preferred to use his own conclusion 
as to the boundlessness of Being; so that he was evidently aware 
that he had made an important contribution therein.

He restates the impossibility of Change, in Parmenidean 
terms; if Being alters, then necessarily it is not all alike, but 
what was before must pass away, and what was not must come 
into being. Then, moved by the cogency of this argument, he 
adds the striking phrase: ‘If Being were to become different by a 
single hair in ten thousand years, it would all perish in the whole 
of time.’* Admit change in ever so slight a degree, and you give 
away the whole of existence. It cannot change, and it cannot 
alter its arrangement; the latter would mean that the previous 
arrangement had perished, and a non-existent arrangement had 
come into being. Thus since there is neither destruction nor 
creation nor alteration, there can be no change of arrangement.4He adds under the head of changelessness a sub-division 
which does not come into the calculations of Parmenides: that 
of Pleasure-Pain. ‘Being does not feel pain. If it did, it could 
not be completely; for an object which felt pain could not de 
continuously, nor has it the same power as that which is sound. 
Nor could it remain the same, if it felt pain; for it would feel 
pain through the subtraction or addition of something, and 
would no longer be the same. Nor could that which is sound 
feel pain; for the sound, and that which is, would perish, and 
that which is not would come into being. The same argument

a Bs

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 169

applies to grief as to pain.”* Here again, as elsewhere, he does 
not place Being outside sensation, but gives it changeless sensa- 
tion. It is as if he wished Being to have all known attributes, 
including life, so that it should not lack anything; but he raises 
these attributes to infinity, and when he speaks of Being, 
although he uses the words of Parmenides, he envisages some- 
thing quite different — something at least on the way to Aris- 
totle’s Unmoved Movent. It is noticeable that what he opposes 
to pain is not pleasure, but the sound or healthy; >: and he 
identifies the state of soundness with Being. Thus pain, physi- 
cal and mental, disease and so on, have no real existence. They 
are of the particular world of sensation, which is an illusion. 
This shows an interest, quite foreign to Parmenides and Zeno, 
in the living organism. It is perhaps an indication that Melis- 
sus was not under the direct influence of the Eleatics, but 
studied their thought from their writings and applied it more 
widely than they.He reaffirms the Eleatic doctrine that Being is motionless 
because there is no empty space for it to move into;° he is very 
clear on this point, and goes on to the corollary that rarefaction 
and condensation of Being are equally impossible.4 This 1s 
directed against the Ionians. He gives a definition of fullness: 
the test of fullness is whether a thing has or has not room in 
itself to take in anything more; if it has, it is not full.e Thus a 
thing is full when it has no empty space in it; and therefore if 
it is full, no movement is possible‘ (inside it). Moreover, that 
which is rarefied is further from being full than that which 1s 
condensed. As Parmenides said, ‘Allis full of Being’. Melis- 
sus also denies the divisibility of Being, saying that if Being 1s 
divided, it moves; and if it were to move, it would not de.i

Lastly, he has an argument obviously directed against 
pluralist systems that were now being put forward in opposi- 
tion to the Eleatic denial of phenomena. He regards himself 
as having given the proof that Being is One, and puts forward 
this argument as a ‘further indication’ only: it starts with the 
famous dictum, ‘If things were a Many, they would have to be 
of the same nature as I affirm the One to be’). This is some- 
times regarded as a remarkable anticipation of the Atomic

2 Bz §§ 4-6 b By §§ 4, 5 ¢ By §7 d By §8 ¢ By §9 f By §10 
& By §8 h 28B8, v. 24 i Bro j BS §2 
bi.

170 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS2 Bz §§ 4-6 b By §§ 4, 5 ¢ By §7 d By §8 ¢ By §9 f By §10 
& By §8 h 28B8, v. 24 i Bro j BS §2 
bi.

170 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Theory.* But Melissus does not mean that if he is given a 
Many each unit of which is like his One, he will accept it; he 
means that Being, if it is to be knowable, that is, real, must be 
like the Eleatic One — unchanging, motionless, and so on; and 
that such conditions are impossible unless Being 1s One. The 
Atomic Theory is in absolute opposition to Melissus’ funda- 
mental proposition; empty space is postulated, the atoms move 
and are rearranged, and are entirely unlike the Eleatic One 
except that they are changeless in quality, and as Melissus 
says, they cannot be like it decause they are many.The argument he uses is interesting.» The theory that 
Being is Many is used to account for the visible world; people 
cannot bring themselves to call sensibles an illusion, and so 
they affirm the reliability of the senses and say that their per- 
ceptions are real. Hence earth, air, fire, water, iron and gold, 
all substances, are real; so too are qualities, black and white, 
dead and alive. But the senses give us not only perceptions of 
objects; they give us perceptions of change in these objects. 
They tell us that hot becomes cold, and cold hot, hard becomes 
soft and soft hard, the living dies and again is produced from 
the not-living. That which was and that which is do not 
remain the same, but even the hardest substances, such as 
iron, are destroyed by friction, and similarly with gold and 
stone; also, earth and stone can come into being from water. 
So that what the senses give us is not a real thing, but a thing 
in process of change, which therefore cannot be known. Thus 
we have to give up our belief in the validity of the senses; for 
if they give us what is real, they must give us perceptions that 
do not change, of things that are what they are, so that we can 
know them. For ‘nothing is stronger than that which really 
exists’. Change means that what is perishes, and what is not 
comes into being. Therefore since the senses give us percep- 
tion of what changes, that is, of what is not real, we must also 
reject their testimony when they tell us that things are a Many. 
We see Melissus, here as elsewhere, cogently applying the

Eleatic doctrine to the particular theories of all other philo- 
sophers, both to Ionian Monism, and to the new Pluralism. 
Melissus met with severe attack: from the critics, especially

a Burnet, EGP, p. 328. b BS © B8 §

1 Not from Plato, who thoucht hi ‘ . 
180E; 183E. » who thought him worthy to be named with Parmenides, Theaet.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 171a Burnet, EGP, p. 328. b BS © B8 §

1 Not from Plato, who thoucht hi ‘ . 
180E; 183E. » who thought him worthy to be named with Parmenides, Theaet.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 171

Aristotle, who pointed out the logical fallacy in his argument 
on the infinity of Being,* and also stated that his whole position 
rested on one untenable hypothesis.» The careful writer of the 
essay On Melissus, Xenophanes and Gorgias* took his points one 
by one and suggested refutations; the most interesting point 
he makes 1s that the basic proposition of Melissus that nothing 
comes from nothing is itself a generalization based on percep- 
tion, and there is no reason why we should accept the validity 
of the percepts that are the basis of this induction and deny all 
the rest. If anything, he says, the opinion that things are a 
many and that they move is more credible than that nothing 
comes from nothing.‘ This really does go to the root of the 
Eleatic inconsistency, as we saw when considering the pro- 
logue to Parmenides’ poem:* you cannot use the senses up to 
a certain stage and then turn round and deny them; this is 
suicidal. The writer of the essay goes on to grant to Melissus 
his axiom that nothing comes from nothing for purposes of 
argument, and to show that even so the results he obtains do 
not necessarily follow.‘ For instance, granted that something 
exists to start with, cannot other existences be derived from 
this by a circular process, one thing coming out of another to 
infinity, without anything coming into being out of nothing- 
ness? He suggests that the solution of Empedocles, four 
eternal substances giving rise to perishable particulars, is 
perfectly possible,» or indeed those of Anaximander and 
Anaximenes,i one substrate from which all particulars are 
derived by a stated process, or that of Democritus:i all these 
satisfy Melissus’ proposition that nothing can come out of 
nothing; but he is rather unfairly and cs Sag isolating 
this proposition from the whole Eleatic position, of which for 
Melissus it was but a part. Similarly the essayist argues 
against the conclusion that Being is motionless:* first, some 
people do not agree that there is no Void (Hesiod), secondly, 
those who do are yet able to conceive of motion — Empedocles 
and Anaxagoras allow things to move, not into a space, but 
from one to another; thirdly, what about changes of quality, 
such as changes of colour or taste? That is a ‘motion’, but it 
does not require empty space!a@Aro bAZ cAs d As, ch. 1 §12 e Above, p. 147 f As, ch. 2' 
& ibid. §3 h jhid. §6 i ibid. §10 Jibid.§11 = K ibid. §§ 25 599.

I72 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

31. EMPEDOCLES 
EMPEDOCLEs of Acracas was in his prime about 450 B.c.

The dates of his birth and death are not known. He is said 
to have visited Thurii soon after its foundation, so that he was 
alive in 444 B.c.* The attempt to make him a combatant on 
the Syracusan side against Athens in 415 is stigmatized as 
‘complete ignorance’ by Apollodorus,’ who says that by then 
he was either dead or in extreme old age, and that the latter 
does not seem likely, as Aristotle says Empedocles died aged 
only sixty. Others give the age as seventy-seven, and yet 
others extend it to ninety-nine. Theophrastus said that 
Empedocles was born ‘not long after Anaxagoras’? and 
Aristotle spoke of Anaxagoras as ‘earlier in age, later in works’ 
than Empedocles.* His prime can therefore be placed at about 
450 B.C.!The character and life of Empedocles, as well as his opin- 
ions, attracted much attention. In the long account of 
Diogenes Laertius, many authorities are quoted, including 
Timaeus (six times), Aristotle (six times), Hermippus (three 
times), Theophrastus, Neanthes, Satyrus and others. Aris- 
totle frequently discusses his scientific views, and Theo- 
phrastus wrote a long critical account of his views on sense- 
perception.® The references in Plato are fewer and more brief; 
yet he touched upon the outstanding points in Empedocles’ 
doctrines: the elements," Love and Strife,i the ‘passages’ of 
sense-perception,) the part played by Chance;* and he was 
deeply interested in the doctrine of transmigration, as can be 
seen from the myth in the PAaedrus.! Plutarch found much 
that was curious to quote from Empedocles; and the latter’s 
religious views made him interesting to the Christian Fathers. 
But although he has been fairly Fm treated by summarizers, 
the chief source of information is of course the hundred and 
fifty surviving fragments of his two poems, On Nature and 
Katharmoi (Purifications).

Of the external details of his life, little is known. His family 
was noble; his grandfather Empedocles won an Olympic

®Ar§s2 0 PAr§s2 Ar §523 48 73,74 9 AX © AG 
&A86

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 173

victory in 496 B.c.,* and was apparently well known. Some 
transferred the Olympic victory to Empedocles the philoso- 
pher, and made it the occasion for an anecdote on Empedocles’ 
refusal to sacrifice living animals: on his victory, it was said, 
he sacrificed a bull made of barley and honey,» or alternatively, 
expensive unguents like myrrh and frankincense; but this is 
an obvious invention based on his poems.* His father’s name 
was variously given, but was generally agreed to be Meton.4It is clear from his poems that he owed some of his doctrines 
to the Eleatics. He is therefore said to have studied under 
Parmenides or Xenophanes,° and to have borrowed from them 
the idea of writing his views in verse. His poems show also 
that he was steeped in Pythagoreanism; tradition declares his 
teacher to have been Pythagoras’ own son, Télaugés.£ The 
tendency to discuss which teaching came first® reflects a doubt 
as to which interest, natural science or religion, predominated 
with Empedocles. The story further was current that Empe- 
docles (like Hippasus, with whose name he was sometimes 
connected) was banned from the Pythagorean teachings for 
having published them in his poems;! but this accusation 1s 
made about too many persons to be easily credited. Timaeus, 
the authority quoted, actually couples Plato’s name with that 
of Empedocles in this charge,i and in Neanthes’ account 
Empedocles’ offence is made the occasion for a new Pytha- 
gorean law, not to share their teachings with any verse-writer !* 
The splendid tribute paid to Pythagoras by Empedocles!: !+ is 
not that of a man deliberately breaking the rule of a sect to 
which he owes so much.

Apart from stories of his death, there seems to be only one 
thread of anecdote that is not an obvious expansion of some- 
thing in his own poems: this thread is the political. He 1s 
credited with strong democratic sympathies: he composed 
civil strife at Acragas, and prevented the setting up of a 
tyranny, persuading the citizens:to choose democratic govern- 
ment;™ he disbanded an oligarchic association called the Ten 
Thousand ;" he was himself offered the monarchy and declined

“oe 533 Az © Ax §§ 55, 56; A2 
5) 56;A2;A8 €Ar§s6 bAr§ss i Ar §§54,55 JAr $54

BAN oat ete ae wee feted aM Neneareiered to Barmenideny 
but this, as Kranz remarks, is unthinkable: the last line is a reference to Pythagoras 
many lives.

174 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSBAN oat ete ae wee feted aM Neneareiered to Barmenideny 
but this, as Kranz remarks, is unthinkable: the last line is a reference to Pythagoras 
many lives.

174 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

it, being of independent character and averse from taking 
offices This last event was mentioned by Aristotle and also 
by Timaeus, who preserved an odd story of a dinner-party 
where Empedocles first detected signs of a desire for the 
tyranny in his host, and nipped them in the bud. He also 
expressed his democratic feelings in a practical way, by dis- 
tributing some of his wealth in the form of dowries to women 
of poor family.c These activities brought on him the enmity 
of the opposite party, who resisted his return to Acragas from 
one of his journeys, so that he went off to the Peloponnese, 
and, some said, died there.4

This on the face of it might be thought to reflect a genuine 
tradition about Empedocles’ activities, as it seems to be 
independent of his poems. But looked at more closely, it can 
be shown to have a closer connection with the poems than is 
generally assumed. True, there is no evidence of democratic 
leanings or political interests in either of the surviving poems; 
on the contrary, Empedocles’ character as there revealed ill 
accords with the réle of a popular leader. This discrepancy 
is noted by Timaeus.e Empedocles shows an aristocratic bias 
in classing princes with seers, physicians and bards as being 
nearest to the divine.‘ But the Prooemium to his religious poem 
is addressed to the citizens of Acragas, whom he calls ‘friends’ ; 
he lays stress on the honour paid to him by a//.e This declara- 
tion of popularity may have been taken by some to prove a 
democratic bias, whereas it suggests rather that Empedocles 
belonged to no party, and relied for his fame solely on the 
benefits he conferred on mankind through his knowledge of 
science, especially medicine.When this is realized, the stories connected with Empe- 
docles’ supposed political activities are seen to be no more 
probable than the stories of his miracles. The tale told by 
Timaeus®: +? of his entry into politics, which, it was alleged, was 
inaugurated by his causing the execution of two of his fellow- 
citizens, is surely unthinkable: one of Empedocles’ strongest 
religious beliefs was that there could be no greater sin than 
the shedding of blood, even of animals; it is this crime that 
has caused divine spirits to be cast out of heaven and to

3, 64 
-

bt Regarded by Burnet as one of the ‘obviously genuine traditions’. EGP4, p.1

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 1753, 64 
-

bt Regarded by Burnet as one of the ‘obviously genuine traditions’. EGP4, p.1

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 175

wander through the long cycle of earthly existence,* and it is 
such a crime that brings: Empedocles himself on to the earth. 
If Empedocles believed that this was the punishment for a 
crime committed by him long ago in another existence, surely 
he would have been the last person to perpetrate it on earth; 
nor if he had been conscious of having caused anyone’s death, 
could he have spoken as he did in these verses. Again, the 
story that he gave dowries to poor women surely arose from 
his claim that men and women honour him equally wherever 
he goes. Again, the story of his exile is probably an invention 
based partly on his own references to himself as an exile from 
bliss,° and, partly on a desire to refute the slander that he 
committed suicide by jumping into Etna; it is Timaeus, 
opposing this legend, who insists that Empedocles went off 
to the Peloponnese and died there,4 and Timaeus was probably 
driven to inventing this exile to account for the mystery 
enveloping Empedocles’ end and place of burial. Finally, in 
the poem obviously written at the height of his fame and 
popularity — a fame which had spread far beyond the bounds 
of his native city, and which made him welcome wherever he 
went — he claims not social or political leadership, but the 
reverence paid to a physician and a seer.* His promises to his 
pupil likewise contain no reference to political power, but only 
to the control of nature by means of science;‘ and he has the 
typical philosopher’s attitude towards the ‘miserable trifles’ 
with which ordinary men busy themselves.®The other anecdotes are easily traced to the poems. His 
passionate belief that knowledge would give control over 
nature® was coarsened into an alleged claim of magic powers, 
or even that he had been seen practising wizardry.: He told 
his pupil Pausanias that science would give him power to 
check the force of destructive winds and conduct them back 
again:i this was combined with the knowledge of his exper- 
ments on the nature of atmospheric air, which led to his 
‘torturing of bladders and wine-skins’,* and was developed 
into the absurd story of how he taught the — to check 
the Etesian gales by stretching bags made of asses’ skins on 
the tops of the hills. This, we are told, gained him the title of

aBrirs b Bria, v. 8 ¢ Bris; Br18; Brrg d Ar §71 
e Bri2 f Brio & Brrr b Brrr 
Y Ar §s9 VBruit * Ch. g9 (Anax.) A68

176 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

“Wind-checker’.*» #2 Pausanias was likewise to be able to create 
rain after drought, and vice versa: this became the story that 
Empedocles once checked a cloud-burst.» Control over water- 
supply was combined with medical skill tn the story that he 
cured a plague for the people of Selinus by diverting two good 
streams into their river, the water of which was polluted.© He 
declared to Pausanias, ‘You shall restore the life of a dead man 
back from Hades’;4 this inevitably became a story of how he 
brought back to life a woman who had been dead for thirty 
days.¢ He said, ‘I go about among you as an immortal god, 
no longer a mortal’.f This led to the story of his appearing to 
the people of Selinus while they were celebrating the new 
river he had given them; and how they received him with 
prayer and obeisance.¢ Accounts of his pompous dress and 
manner must be referred to the same source.®The stories of his death were manifold: he hanged himself 
from a high crag; or he was drowned at sea; or he broke his 
thigh falling out of a wagon when on a journey.! But the 
favourite story was that of his having leapt into the crater of 
Etna, in order to disappear without trace and so leave behind 
the impression that he was a god. The story seems to owe its 
origin to a hostile school of biographers, who were combating 
the story of his admirers that he had passed bodily into the 
company of the immortals at his death, as he suggested in his 
poem that he was about to do.i Disciples, working on this 
hint, invented the usual concrete occasion: he had held a 
sacrifice after the raising of the dead woman, and he and his 
friends spent the night on the spot. Next day he had dis- 
appeared. Slaves when questioned testified to having heard a 
great voice call ‘Empedocles!’ and having seen a light in the 
heavens. Pausanias after a perfunctory search announced a 
miracle, and declared a ac worthy of divine honours.* 
Such exaggeration caused those hostile to Empedocles’ 
memory to allege that he leapt into Etna to give colour to this 
idea.! Asked, doubtless by the pro-Empedoclean party, how 
they knew, they retorted that Empedocles had been accus-

@ Ar §60; A2; A3;.

© Ar §61; cp. §69 f Brr2 & Ar §70 bh Ar §§70; 73; A2; Ar8

i Ax §§73, 74 j Br46 k Ar §67 1 Ar §69; 70; Az; Ar6

a1 Wind-laying was a recognized art in some states: there were official ‘Wind-lullers’

at Corinth, and perhaps at Athens; at Titane in Sicyon a ritual with incantations was 
performed once a year. See Farnell, Cults of the Greek States, Vol. V, pp. 416, 417.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 197OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 197

tomed to wear sandals of bronze, and one of these had been 
cast up later by the fire. Timaeus combated these rumours 
point by point;* but nevertheless the absurd version persisted, 
and was quoted as historical by Horace; it has held the field 
ever since.» The age of Empedocles’ death was given by 
Aristotle as sixty; by others as seventy-seven, and others as 
ninety-nine, doubtless in order to make it possible for 
Empedocles to take part in some event thought appropriate 
to his talents.

To sum up: we know no definite facts about the life of 
Empedocles, as all anecdotes are embroideries on remarks, 
often misunderstood, in his own poems. All that we know of 
his life, character and work must be derived from the sur- 
viving fragments, especially the apostrophes to his pupil,¢ and 
the address to his fellow-citizens.e These show him as a man 
interested only in natural science, especially medicine,: and in 
a certain religious doctrine; who scorned the everyday affairs 
of men; and who believed that knowledge would give power 
over nature, while purity as he conceived it would lead straight 
to apotheosis and heavenly bliss. He attained to great fame, 
being admired by his fellow-citizens, with whom he was on 
very friendly terms,* and also by inhabitants of other cities, 
He travelled to some extent, but whether he ever left Sicily 
is uncertain. On his travels, he was particularly welcome 
because of his medical knowledge,‘ which led many to regard

a Ar §7r bAr6 C Ar §§73, 74 «= 4 Br-3; Brri; Brr2 e Brr2

1 Skill in music is suggested by the anecdote relating how he soothed Pausanias, his 
future disciple, when the latter was about to kill the man who had murdered his father. 
This is not borne out by the remaining fragments, and being related by Iamblichus 
may arise from a wish to show yet another student of Pythagoreanism practising music 
as a therapeutic agent.? There is no warrant for believing otherwise: Frg. 112 cannot be taken as ironical, 
or as contrasting the Acragantines with other cities, without mutilating the text. The 
anecdote in which E. is reported as saying that ‘the people of Acragas live luxuriously 
as if they are to die to-morrow, but they equip their houses as if they are to live to 
eternity’ (Ar §63) seems an attempt to make him another Heracleitus, and cannot be 
believed in the face of Frg. 112.

’ Tradition credits him with visits to Olympia (Ar §66; A1z1); and to Athens during 
the plague (A3). The latter is of course impossible: if E. had been there in 429, Plato 
could hardly have failed to mention it in connection with Gorgias. The former is made 
less likely by the existence of a tradition that the Katharmoi were recited at Olympia 
(Ar §63; A3; Azz) which looks like an earlier attempt to connect him with that place. 
The poem would be most unsuitable for recitation at a gathering in honour of Olympian 
Zeus. The stories told about the alleged visit are legendary.

* He may have been the head of a medical school or coterie at Acragas: we hear also 
of a medical rival named Acron (A3; Ar §65).

178 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

him as a seer, or even as a god. His death occurred away from 
Acragas, the place and manner of it being unknown.178 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

him as a seer, or even as a god. His death occurred away from 
Acragas, the place and manner of it being unknown.

As for his character, the verses which drew on him the 
scorn even of ancient writers, as a btaggart,* have been grossly 
misunderstood. It is true that he promises his pupil control 
over natural forces, even over life and death, as a reward for study 
accompanied by ‘good will and faultless care’,> but this is no 
more than the expression of a passionate belief in the ability of 
science to accomplish all things, and beside it must be set his 
warning to his pupil that the powers of man’s mind are 
limited, and the whole truth not attainable by him.e His poem 
may end with an uprush of optimism; but it begins with a 
solemn prayer to be preserved from the madness of those who 
claim to know more than is proper to man, and who by speak- 
ing more than is right in their presumption, lay claim to the 
topmost throne of wisdom.4 The claim that he was honoured 
like a god¢ in the cities he passed through has been coupled 
with his belief that he was about to return to his lost godhead, 
and taken to mean that he regarded himself as a divinity 
walking on earth. This too is a travesty of his meaning.? The 
first passage is spoken rather in gratitude to those who paid 
him such great honour than in praise of himself; and the latter 
claim is a part of his general religious theory, not a purely 
personal claim. He is equally outspoken about his original 
sin, which caused him like others to fall from heaven, and is 
merely stating that he believes himself, after having passed 
through the cycle of existences fixed by Necessity, to be near- 
ing the end of his journey.é

The fragments we possess are from two books, Oz Nature, 
in two parts, and Purifications. Originally these were said to 
run to a total of five thousand lines.» We hear also of a treatise

c B2 d B3 
; r ete. h Ar §y7c B2 d B3 
; r ete. h Ar §y7

1 It has been assisted by the words dovrep fora, formerly taken to mean ‘as becomes 
me’. (Diels: wie es mir zusteht; Burnet, perhaps accepting the too-easy variant reading 
owe: ‘as is meet’.) Kranz, following Fraenkel, declares that the former cannot mean’ 
‘as becomes me’, and translates: so wie ich ihnen ditnke (so wie es gexiemt), t.e. ‘which is 
how I appear to them’ (or, reading fome, ‘as is becoming’). I accept the reading 
dorrep orca, and the meaning as being ‘I am honoured as a god by all, which is the way 
they see me’. Of course E., believing himself to be near his apotheosis, did not quarrel 
with this view of himself; but this rendering rescues the poem from being a piece of 
mere bombast, and transfers the emphasis to Empedocles’ own kindly feelings towards 
those who treated him thus.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 179OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 179

on Medicine in prose,* as well as tragedies written in youth, 
and other poems, including a Coming of Xerxes, and a Pro- 
oemium to Apollo.».>: His florid Sicilian style drew on him the 
criticism of Aristotle, who said he had nothing in common 
with Homer except metre, and was in fact not a poet but a 
scientist;° and in another passage, that his poetry is a very 
unsuitable vehicle for expressing scientific views,’ because of 
its ambiguity. In the Rhetoric, Aristotle classes Empedocles 
as one of those who use poetry when they have nothing to say 
but are pretending to say something: the intention is to 
deceive, as with oracles. In the Metaphysicse he quotes as 
absurd the expression ‘the sea is the sweat of earth’, pointing 
out that it is poetically admissible, but scientifically valueless. 
Nevertheless, he recognized Empedocles’ natural gifts of 
expression, and dubbed him, in the Sophist, the inventor of 
Rhetoric, as Zeno was of Dialectic.£ This, in later writers, 
became the statement that he was ‘the first rhetorician’, was an 
excellent orator, wrote oratorical treatises, and was the teacher 
of Gorgias, or even Teisias.®

Empedocles in his poem has a few incidental remarks on 
his method of exposition. He quotes the proverb that ‘it is 
good to repeat twice over what is right’, and proclaims his 
intention not to touch on heads merely, but to follow one line 
of reasoning to the end.i He points out in one place that he 1s 
returning on the path of his song, developing theme from 
theme in an orderly manner.i His love of metaphor and 
strange epithets and high-sounding proper names is obvious 
from the remaining fragments; these peculiarities were some- 
times criticized, sometimes defended.« The wholly-admiring 
ae of Lucretius applies both to his scientific and poetic 
gifts, !The poem On Nature was addressed to his pupil Pausanias, 
that on the Purifications to the citizens of Acragas. Acragas 
was the home of an intensive cult of Demeter and Persephone; 
eschatological doctrines flourished there, as we see from 
Pindar.= There can be no doubt that Empedocles’ views,

i 2 At at Meatenied T= vasl? 58 © A22 d Azs 3 -. ee 
'As; Ar §57; Arg ® Ar §58; Az; Arg h B25 i B24 1 B35 
k B6o; B148-51 1 A2r m Pyth. XII

b! Said to have been destroyed by asister, or a daughter, the Prooemium accidentally, 
the Persian poem purposely because it was unfinished. ae 
1 Cp. the complete misunderstanding of Aristotle's views in Diog. L (Ar $57).

180 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

whatever they owed to Pythagoras and others, are rooted deep 
in the soil of his native city, which was a colony from Gela, 
founded in 580 8.c., with an admixture of citizens from 
Rhodes.

Two apophthegms are quoted which seem to have no 
original in the existing fragments. The first is as follows: to a 
man who said ‘I cannot find anyone wise’, Empedocles replied: 
‘Naturally. The man who seeks a wise man must himself first 
be wise.’* This seems to be an illustration of Empedocles’ 
doctrine that like is perceived by like. Another illustration of 
the principle of ‘like to like’, twice quoted by Aristotle, was 
a story that Empedocles, when asked why a certain dog 
always chose to sleep on the same tile, replied that the dog 
possessed something which was ‘like to the tile’.»> But in what 
this likeness was supposed to consist, Aristotle does not 
mention.

The fragments, taken by themselves, afford what must be 
a fairly comprehensive account of his beliefs. Opinions differ 
as to their order; the arrangement of Diels is as coherent as 
any.!The fragments, taken by themselves, afford what must be 
a fairly comprehensive account of his beliefs. Opinions differ 
as to their order; the arrangement of Diels is as coherent as 
any.!

The poem On Nature opens with an address to Pausanias,° °? 
and there follows a statement of the unavoidable limitation of 
human knowledge, for two reasons: the weakness of the 
instruments, and the circumscribed experience of the indivi- 
dual. The senses are feeble, the intelligence at the mercy of 
circumstance; life is short, and each man sees only what 
happens to come before him, so that he grasps the part and 
thinks it is the whole. Pausanias himself, however, since he 
has withdrawn himself here, shall learn as much as, though no 
more than, the human mind can attain.4

Next Empedocles calls on the gods to preserve him from 
the madness of presumption, and on the Muse to keep his 
lips pure, telling only what it is lawful for men to hear: she 
cannat (like some mortals) be deceived by ambition into saying 
more than 1s right. He then grves one criterion for examining

a A20 b Azoa (new to Diels, sth Edn.) ce Br d Ba

¢t Probably preceded by something else (now lost) such as “Not to others do I impart 
cic pei but do how hear, Pausanias’, or an invocation to the Muses. Cp. Diels,

1 It was finally accepted by Burnet EGP‘, who formerly used that of Stein. The 
arrangements of Karsten, Stein and Bignone are given in Diels Edn. s.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES I811 It was finally accepted by Burnet EGP‘, who formerly used that of Stein. The 
arrangements of Karsten, Stein and Bignone are given in Diels Edn. s.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES I81

the evidence of the senses: the contribution of each sense must 
be compared with and checked by those of the others, and 
each must be given equal credence.?:2: He calls the senses ‘the 
paths by which we get knowledge’. Mistrust of their betters 
is a mark of inferiors; but Pausanias is to accept the trust- 
worthy dicta of Empedocles’ Muse, digesting its Logos in his 
inward parts.> The next fragment is an exhortation to secrecy 
in the Pythagorean manner;° but whether it should come here, 
or what kind of secrecy is meant, we are not able to say.

He then lays down the four primary substances, or ‘roots 
of things’. He calls them by mythological names: shining 
Zeus,.life-bearing Hera, Aidoneus, and tearful Nestis.¢ This 
led commentators to say that he said the Elements were gods.° 
They were also in doubt as to which name applied to which 
element:: Nestis was obviously Water, but was Aidoneus 
Earth or Air, Hera Earth or Air, Zeus Air or Fire?! Aétius 
is probably recording the correct interpretation, that is, that 
Zeus and Hera are Fire and Air (Aether), reigning as they do 
in the heavens, and that Aidoneus, god of the underworld, is 
Earth. Aidoneus’ association with Demeter and Persephone, so 
closely related to earth, makes this almost certain; and he 
would then be coupled with the to us unknown Nestis, pro- 
bably a local water-goddess, as a lower deity. The names were 
of little importance to Empedocles: elsewhere he calls Fire 
Hephaestus.These four elements were uncreated. Between them they 
account for all the substances we know. Nothing in this 
perishable world has any essential nature, nor has it any end in 
death; there is only mixing and separation. ‘Nature’ is a term 
applied to things by man.‘ it When the elements are mixed to 
form a man, a plant or a bird, this they call Becoming; when

2B3;cp.Br14 Db By cBs 4B6 e A323; A4o £A33; Ar §76; A23 
& B96; Bo8 h By i B8 
21 The earlier part of this is an attack on some person or persons. It contains Parmeni-

dean echoes, e.g. the Muse who drives her ‘well-reined car’ from the realm of Piety. 
The theory of sense-perception is directly opposed to that of Heracleitus (22B55, ro1a; 
see p. 117).

ee ising to Plutarch and all commentators, here meant ‘birth’. Burnet 
finds good authority in Aristotle for taking it here to mean ‘substance’, i.e. essential 
nature. EGP‘, p. 205, note 4. See Aristot. Met. IV, 4. ro1g ar.

1 The reason for the confusion was that he called Hera epéofios, ‘life-bearing’, an 
epithet elsewhere confined to earth and corn, but not necessarily in Empedocles, whose 
use of epithets tended to be original (see B4) though he could also use them conven- 
tionally when he chose (Bro). For a different view, see Burnet EGP%, p. 229, note 3.

182 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS182 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

the elements separate, they call this Death. This 1s a wrong 
way of speaking, but Empedocles himself follows the custom 
and calls it so.s Nevertheless, to believe in Becoming and 
Passing Away as an actuality is silly:> nothing can come from 
nothing, and whatever is cannot be destroyed. The Eleatic 
demand is thus satisfied. The Eleatics were equally right in 
saying that there is no Void.4 This theory applies equally to 
human life: what we call ‘life’ is not ‘existence’, nor 1s death 
‘destruction’; life is merely a period in which things are joined 
together to make a human being, and death is merely a disso- 
lution of this compound, since nothing can be annihilated.¢ 
To this description of the Four Elements the summarizers 
add little.£ Aristotle points out that Empedocles added Earth 
to the other three;£ but he ranges Fire against the group Air- 
Water-Earth, attributing this grouping to Empedocles.* 
They are not assigned special spheres, but move about and 
take each other’s places.i They are, internally, atomic in 
structure, that is, composed of tiny particles, which are 
divisible but never actually to be divided.i The elements mix, 
not by running through each other, but by the juxtaposition 
of these tiny particles;* new substances are formed from the 
combination of these as when iron rust, brass, calamine and 
copperas are pounded together in an inseparable mixture.! 
Some accepted the doctrine that the elements, themselves un- 
changing and eternal, lost their identity when mixed together ;™ 
others doubted if this process could account for true, that is, 
qualitative change." Aristotle, describing Empedocles’ views 
on the formation of flesh, bones and the like, censures him for 
not seeing that it is not the elements but the Logos of their 
admixture that makes things what they are.° 
Next we come to the other two original Causes, Philia and 
Neikos (Love and Hate). They likewise are everlasting, and 
boundless time shall never be emptied of that pair’? To 
describe them fully involves a description of their functions, 
the processes by which so-called creation is begun, and its 
products scattered again. The fragment describing this is themost important that survives; it comes from the first book of 
his scientific poem.4

Se ie f A28-A44 
_ A36; A37 1A3s5 =

°A78 PBr6

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 183

Love and Hate are classed with Earth, Air, Fire and Water: 
Hate is apart from them, equal in weight in all directions,* 41 and 
Love is in them, equal in length and breadth. The puipil must 
pay special attention to Love: it is the same thing as that 
which is implanted in mortal limbs, the cause of kindly 
thoughts that make for harmony, and named Joy and Aphro- 
dite; Empedocles claims that he is the only man to have 
identified her in these various activities.» It 1s to be noticed 
that from his description Love is not merely physiological; her 
province is the psychological as well, and though for him 
these two, as appears later, formed ultimately one class, never- 
theless he makes it clear that the manifestations of Love are 
in thought and feeling as well as in bodily attraction. He does 
not describe Hate in the same positive way, but goes on to say 
that the two have each a distinct character, and are equal in 
power; they rule in turn.¢ Plato pointed out that the forces of 
attraction and repulsion are present in Heracleitus’ scheme 
also, but that with him they work simultaneously, whereas 
with Empedocles they work alternately.4 The Four Roots are, 
like the two Forces, everlasting; all six together form the 
Whole, and are not destroyed, nor is there anything beside 
them. For this he gives the Eleatic proof.¢

The beginning and end of this fragment‘ describe the 
double process due to the alternate rule of the pair. At one 
end of the course things are a One, being mixed together 
completely by Love; at the other end, things are a Many, that 
is, the four elements, separated by Hate. The Becoming andinroad of Love, and again during the inroad of Hate. So that 
from one point of view there is change and ‘destruction’, that 
is, in so far as the elements are always being worked upon so 
as to come together or separate; from another point of view, 
there is no change and no destruction, in that the circular 
process never ceases. The process is unchanging. But we

@ B17, vv. 18-20 b Bry, vv. 21-26 ¢ Br7, vv. 27-29 d A28

€ B17, vv. 30-33 f vv. 1-13, 34-35

@1 Reading with Sextus, d&réAavtov d&évtn. There seems no reason for altering 
the reading to ixéorp and translating ‘equal in weight to each’, nor for taking v. 20 
to mean that Love is ‘equal in length and breadth’ to each of the others, What is 
meant is that Hate, a force conceived as corporeal, is homogeneous in mass when it 
collects outside the Sphere; whereas Love, inside, is coextensive with the Sphere. Later 
(v. 27) he tells us that they are all equal to one another.

1 Hence @iAdtns, not “Epus. ‘Appovic is also used (cp. Br8).

184 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS 
e

have more than changelessness of process: the elements them- 
selves never change their nature, but merely run through one 
another and produce different things at different times while 
themselves remaining unchanged. This fragment shows 
Empedocles trying to mediate between Eleaticism and pheno- 
mena, and taking a force observed at work in the world as his 
unifying principle. The corporeality of the forces is notable: 
weight, length and breadth are assigned to them; and as 
Aristotle pointed out,* in one sense they are moving causes, or 
forces, in another, material causes as being part of the mixture. 
The absence of Void is also notable: without Void, it is hard 
to see how things could ever begin to move, much less ‘run 
through one another’.The poem then goes on to particularize: all things, animate 
and inanimate, are thus produced, even the ‘mass of mortal 
limbs’.e When the limbs come together under the influence of 
Love, they form a body, and human life reaches its acme; then 
Hate separates them again, and they wander apart ‘on the 
shore of the sea of life’.¢ So it is with everything else — plants, 
fish, animals and birds, the heavenly bodies, even the gods 
themselves. The elements alone exist; the substances remain 
the same, the combinations alter: so great is the power of 
Mixture to change them.*® He illustrates the power of Mix- 
ture by the analogy of painting — the mixing of colours and 
the portrayal of all shapes and forms by means of them.! 
Love, though able to unite even those things which are most 
hostile, that is, most amenable to the commands of Strife, 
nevertheless begins by uniting things most adapted for mix- 
ture; and so the first mortal objects to be created from the 
four elements are the Sun, the Earth, the Sky and the Sea, the 
parts of which are inwardly harmonious.¢ The more that 
substances differ in origin, mixture and form, the more un- 
willing they are to unite, because of the working of Hate in 
them, to which they owe their origin.» Aristotle remarked 
that there is a sense in which Love separates and Hate unites: 
Love separates the four elements, that is, destroys their internal 
unity in making the world, and Hate brings them together 
again into four parcels.’ This is of course true: it is the 
business of Love to unite all things, including those most

@ Met. Aro, 1073b3 bBzar ¢Bzo 4Bao 
& Baz h B22 1 A397

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 186@ Met. Aro, 1073b3 bBzar ¢Bzo 4Bao 
& Baz h B22 1 A397

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 186

hostile to one another, in a complete mixture; and to do this, 
she has to separate particles of like substances, because, as 
Empedocles believes, like naturally cleaves to like. This 
natural attraction of like to like is not by him regarded as a 
separate force, but as something depending simply on the 
character of each element, as Burnet saw. And though this 
operates only when Hate is gaining ground, yet Love has to 
take account of it, and she does so by first uniting substances 
most adapted for mixture, her action being gradual.

Next is a description of the state of affairs when Love is in 
the ascendant. There is no differentiation in the mass; all the 
substances are ‘fixed together in the close covering’ of Love, 
which he here calls Harmonia. The result is the ‘rounded 
Sphere, exulting in its circular solitude’. #1 Hate is completely 
excluded; as he expresses it, ‘there is no strife nor unseemly 
conflict in its limbs’.» >: The Sphere actually has no limbs — no 
arms, legs, or reproductive organs;° Simplicius, quoting this, 
says that Empedocles called it ‘god’, and in the Katharmoi is 
a fragment part of which describes God in the same terms. It 
is like the circular Being of Parmenides, with the addition of 
feeling made by Melissus. Empedocles, however, while 
accepting the Eleatic concept, declares that it is not the ulti- 
mate and sole reality, but only one end of an alternating 
process. A metaphor describes the effect produced: it is as 
when milk is coagulated and ‘fixed’ by rennet.¢ Another 
metaphor is of a man ‘cementing’ barley-meal with water,° and 
another that of the potter mixing earth with water and harden- 
ing with fire.!We then learn what happens when the return of Hate ts 
due. There is a movement in the Sphere: ‘all the limbs of the 
god began to tremble in turn.’ This happened when “Hate 
had grown big within its limbs, and rushed up in the course 
of time to claim his rights, time which alternates for them, 
being fixed by a broad oath’. These two fragments present a

B27 b Baya ¢ B29; cp. B134 d B33 © B34 f B73 & B3r 
B30

a1 The quotations on the nature of the Sphere have become confused: another versiqn 
preceded this line with ‘But he was equal in all directions, and utterly without end’ (in 
time, presumably). .

bi This frg. was quoted by Plutarch as referring to the philosophic man. It was 
ascribed to Empedocles by Wilamowitz, and applied to the Sphere. 
1 EGP‘, p. 233.

186 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

difficulty: we have been told that Hate was utterly excluded 
from the limbs of the Sphere; now, it seems, Hate has been 
growing within all the time, and when the moment comes, he 
stirs, causing all the limbs of the Sphere to tremble. These 
expressions may be metaphorical; but they seem rather ae 
as they suggest an entirely different picture from that of a 
circular Sphere without limbs, from which Hate is excluded.* 
The mention of a ‘broad oath’, not otherwise explained, brings 
in another Cause, a ghost of the Design which he elsewhere 
denies. For this he was criticized by Aristotle.>The stage at which Hate is in the ascendant, if he described 
it, is not preserved; but we are told in detail of the return of 
Love.* It appears that a circular motion has been set up — 
how, is not said. The Sphere was at rest;4 hence this motion 
must have been begun by Hate, the ‘trembling’ in the Sphere 
being the precursor of the vortex. Again there is great difhi- 
culty in envisaging the process: Hate falls down ‘to the 
bottommost depth of the whirl’,e and Love gets into the 
middle; presumably Love was entirely excluded before, and 
by ‘the bottommost depth’ we are to understand the outside. 
All through the description, Hate is moving out, until it 
reaches the outermost boundary of the mixture.‘ The process 
is gradual: Hate slowly receded to the ‘outermost limit of the 
circle’, while an ‘immortal kindly rush of blameless Love’ is 
entering in. The end is complete mixture or coagulation again; 
but meanwhile all the innumerable combinations which are the 
things of the perishable world are produced, ‘a marvel to behold’.®

It is not, however, possible for Empedocles to describe in 
very great detail the world thus created by Love; for the 
world in which we live is that created by the inroad of Hate, 
that is, the articulation of a world from a coagulated mass, not 
the combination of things from four parcels of opposites.» 
He said, according to Aristotle, that the world as ruled by 
Love was like our present world, which owes its origin to the 
other process, the return of Hate.i Other summaries of this 
part of the poemi add nothing to the material of the fragments;

a B35, v. 10; B36 b B30 © B35 d A38 e B35, vv. 3, 4

£ B35, v. 10; B36 &§ B35, v.17 h Ag2 i Ag2

J A28-33;.A37-42;A45;A52;A78

1 The vortex may have arisen later, after the first separation had been begun; one sum-

marizer says that it was started by the chance pressure of fire at some point of the mass; 
but he adds no further explanation (A30).

fo4s¥Rtwa SNP av tes GUAM E A,marizer says that it was started by the chance pressure of fire at some point of the mass; 
but he adds no further explanation (A30).

fo4s¥Rtwa SNP av tes GUAM E A,

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES’ 187

but some of the comments are interesting. He was the first, 
Aristotle says, to distinguish a double cause of motion, acting 
oppositely, in place of one;* in later writers, this becomes the 
‘alternating sway’ in which each destroys the world of the 
other.» The mixing and separation, says Aristotle, in turn are 
brought about by Necessity (4nzanké);° this is the ‘broad oath’ 
that decides the time when the motion is to begin. In the 
interval, things are at rest. Aétius states that Philia and 
Neikos together make up this Ananké.4 Lastly, Aristotle 
commented on Empedocles’ obvious preference for Love, a 
preference which comes out everywhere in the language he 
uses about the pair. Love is no mere impersonal force; it is 
kindly, blameless,¢ the cause of Joy and Harmony,! whereas 
Hate, though mighty,® is baneful," and its commands are 
grievous.' It is the mixture only, Aristotle remarks, which 
Empedocles praises;) and if one follows his intention, not his 
inadequate expression, it is clear that Love is the cause of 
everything good, Hate of everything bad; and Empedocles 
must be given credit for having been the first to offer a cause 
of good and evil.« Elsewhere Aristotle asks, is Love the cause 
of a chance admixture or of a proportioned combination? Is 
she the Logos, or something over and above it?! Empedocles 
contradicts himself on this score, speaking as if chance en-

‘ counters of substances brought together by Love were sufh-‘ counters of substances brought together by Love were sufh-

cient to account for all forms, and yet calling Love the author 
of harmony, and choosing the metaphor of the painter mixing 
colours according to harmony or proportion.™ 
Then follows a cosmogony. His description of the creation 
of our world is not preserved; and isolated quotations are 
often difficult to set in their context. For a detailed account 
we have to refer to the summarizers, whose chief source seems 
to have been Theophrastus." They begin with the Mixture, 
that is, the Sphere under Love, and agree that in the revolution 
that was set up, Air was first separated off, then Fire, which 
hardened the Air; then came Earth, and Water was squeezed 
out of the Earth. The outermost circle is therefore glazed 
Air; inside this is a revolving sphere, one half of which is F ire, 
roducing Day, the other half Air and a little Fire, producing 
Night. For Ate as an element he uses the word Aether (Fiery 
bAs2 ¢ A38 d Ags ¢ B3s { Biz, vv. 23,24 & B30 
+19 i Bez JAgo — a 7 ; :

188 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS188 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Air); Air, or Moist Vapour, is exhaled from the sea® *? after the 
four elements have been separated out. Then follows the 
creation of the heavenly bodies. There is only one universe at 
a time, but this is not the whole: merely a small part of the 
mixture. The rest is inactive matter.» Creation, once started, 
is a matter of chance: no god took part in it.¢ Aristotle 
uotes a line of Empedocles to illustrate the part played by 
hance even at this stage: ‘For so (the Aether) chanced to be 
running at the time, though often differently’,4 and we learn 
from Aristotle’s comment that Empedocles made the Aether 
flow upward, and then settle down upon Earth,° in the crea- 
tion he was describing. Fire also rose upward,‘ apparently 
because there was nowhere else for it to go; and because it 
was driven by the pressure of the Air.¢ 
The basic visible substances which make up our universe 
— sun, earth, sea and sky — which have internal homogeneity,+ 
come from the elements,‘ and that is why they are reluctant to 
mix. Very few of Empedocles’ own utterances about the 
heavenly bodies and all that goes with their study have been 
preserved; and even those which have been preserved are 
often mere epithets or phrases, throwing little light on his 
scheme. He speaks of the sun, and the ‘immortal bodies 
bathed in heat and bright radiance’, meaning by the latter the 
heavenly bodies, and by the former the original sun from ° 
which they get their light.i In the Sphere coagulated by Love, 
the ‘swift limbs’ of the Sun and the ‘shaggy might’ of Earth 
are not articulated.* The sunlight 1s collected together, and 
circles round the heavens.! The sun is ‘sharp-shooting’, the 
moon ‘kindly’;™ the sun and moon both go round the earth.® 
The moon ‘gazes at’ the sun,° and gets her light from him.? 
The moon’s orbit is close to earth, as the nave of a wheel circles 
round the goal.2 Eclipses are caused by the moon’s passage 
between earth and sun.‘ Night, ‘lonely, blind-eyed’, is caused 
by the earth’s coming in front of the rays of the sun.s» 1 The; bA47 ¢ A48 d Bs3 © Bs4 f Bsr; Bs4 g.

| B22 1 B38 j Bar k B27 1 Bar m B4o n B44; Bas

° B47 P B43 qa B46 r B42; Bag § B48; cp. Ajo

a! The distinction he drew between at6sjp, bright Air, and dp, moist Vapour, was 
not always preserved in the summaries, e.g. Ps.-Plut. Strom. (A30). The Ionic words 
Gupicdiiver and mAnOfiven are used for Exhalation and Condensation (A49).

8! This takes place when the fiery hemisphere is on the ‘under’ side and throws the 
earth’s shadow ‘upwards’.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES’ 1898! This takes place when the fiery hemisphere is on the ‘under’ side and throws the 
earth’s shadow ‘upwards’.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES’ 189

‘depths’ of the earth are not infinite: this is a foolish opinion 
which has dropped forth from the lips of many: who have seen 
but a little of the whole. Many fires burn beneath the surface 
of the earth.» Sea is the sweat of earth.* Salt was solidified by 
the sun’s rays.? Iris brings from the sea the wind or a mighty 
rain-storm.® These scraps are all that remain of his own words. 
The summarizers, however, describe his meteorological 
views in some detail. The sun, they tell us, is a reflection of 
the fiery vault from the surface of the earth; 1 its movement 
follows that of the fiery hemisphere. The reflected sun is the 
same size as the earth. The vault of heaven is solid, being air 
hardened to a crystalline consistency by fire.» Its height is less 
than its width, the universe being shaped like an egg (lying on 
its side); the sun follows its outermost boundary.i The sun 
is prevented by the sphere enclosing him from going straight 
on, and is turned by the ‘tropic’ circles.i The rapid motion of 
the outer vault keeps the earth in the middle.« The light 
which is given off from the fiery hemisphere is an emanation 
consisting of tiny particles, leaping off from its source at a 
tremendous speed; the motion is so swift as to be invisible to 
us.! The moon is air collected together like a cloud, and 
solidified by fire. It gets its light from the sun.™ It is not a 
sphere, but lentil-shaped, or disc-shaped® (so that 1t appears 
round at the half-month, but turns sideways at the waxing and 
waning). It 1s twice as far from the sun as from the earth.° 
The moon, therefore, is in the region of earth, which is ‘full of 
ills’; the region beyond the moon is purer.P The moon is the 
cause of eclipses of the sun.2 The stars are of fiery material, 
a portion of which was enclosed by Air and carried with itself 
during the first separation. The fixed stars are tied to the 
crystal vault, the planets are free.s All these things were 
created by chance.t: t3 
Earth collected in the middle of the universe." The sea was@ B39 b Bs2 © Bss d Bs6 e€Bso f A56 _

1 Aso JAs8 k A67 1As7 m A6o; cp. Ass n A6o o A6r

PA62 GAsg 1TAs3 §$A5q *tAQ8 u A4g; A67

£1 Burnet pointed out that the account in Aétius contains anerror, that of saying that 
the fiery hemisphere was ‘opposite’ its own reflexion. The reflexion from earth can only 
be back on to the fiery hemisphere, since this is ‘above’ when it is day. EGP%, p. 238.

t! Plato, Leg. X. 889B. He appears to be describing creation during the inrush of 
Love, i.e. combination of objects by chance contacts, not separation from the original

mass as in our world. 
1 Xenophanes was one of these. See p. 100.

I9O0 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSmass as in our world. 
1 Xenophanes was one of these. See p. 100.

I9O0 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

heated out of it by the sun, hence the expression ‘the sea is 
the sweat of earth’. Any wet thus collected on the outside 
was driven into sunken places by winds.» Even after the 
creation of earth and sea, the elements still moved about at 
random, sometimes fire getting the mastery and burning all 
up, sometimes the watery influx overflowing and washing 
over. ©? Winter is explained as the mastery of Air which is 
driven in a-condensed form into the upper region; summer 
comes when Fire gets the upper hand and drives the Air into 
the under region. The ‘slant-wise’ motion of winds is due 
to the opposite motions of the airy and fiery hemispheres.* ¢: 
Lightning is caused by the separation of light out of a cloud, 
which has held a portion shut up within itself.f. § Hot springs 
are caused by the fires within the earth.* Stones, rocks and 
crags likewise were formed inside the earth, by heat, and were 
later borne aloft. Before leaving inanimate nature, it remains 
to add that he explained the quality of the magnet by the 
effluences from the magnet and the iron, which fit each other. ! 
This seems to be due to the working of Love, not Hate, Love 
being to some extent still active in our world, though it is 
losing ground. The earth itself 1s said to have been shaped by 
Love, which mixed it with water and hardened it with fire, 
presumably after the preliminary separation. 3 
Next comes the creation of living organisms — animals andplants — and the discussion of allied questions such as growth 
and reproduction. Again, a coherent account cannot be drawn 
from the remaining fragments. The creation of animals, birds, 
fish, plants and the rest, in all their varied forms, is due solely 
to mixing: when the elements come together, that is Birth; 
when they separate, that is Death.« The still-continuing com- 
petition between Love and Hate is thus obvious in mortal 
bodies.! The order of creation was first trees, then animals ™ 
trees, the first of living things to be created, arose before the

a A66 b A66 c A66 d A6s © A64 ;

& A68 h A6g 1 A8g j B73 k Bg; B71 1 B20

m Azo; cp. B21; B23

¢! But probably this too belongs to the period of creation from the separate elements, 
and describes what happened before Love had succeeded in achieving a better mixture.

¢! Olympiod. tz Meteor. A. 13, 102, says ‘earthy and fiery’, no doubt mistakenly.

{1 This is Aristotle’s statement; it accords better with Empedocles’ general theory of 
creation by separation than does the account of Aétius, that lightning is caused by the

impact of light on a cloud (A63). This was the usual view. Empedocles seems to have 
been original in suggesting that the lightning was engendered in the cloud.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES IQ!impact of light on a cloud (A63). This was the usual view. Empedocles seems to have 
been original in suggesting that the lightning was engendered in the cloud.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES IQ!

universe had completely separated out, or ‘before day and 
night were divided’.* The manner of creation of animals 
presents some difficulty, as some of the fragments are quoted 
as referring to the régime of Love, others to that of our own 
world. Under the former head come the lines: ‘many fore- 
heads without necks sprang forth, arms wandered bereft of 
shoulders, eyes strayed about alone, lacking brows’,> and: ‘as 
divinity mixed more and more with divinity, these things fell 
together as each chanced, and different creatures were con- 
tinuously produced’;¢ also: ‘creatures facing both ways, with 
double face and breast, cattle-kind with men’s heads, and 
conversely, men-kind with heads of cattle’, of mixed sex, both 
male and female in one.¢ These, then, were the first attempts 
of Love to bring things together after the régime of Hate. In 
his Second Book Empedocles described the opposite process, 
the creation of whole forms from the earth, mixtures of earth 
and water; these were driven upward by the fire in the earth, 
striving to reach its like (under the impulse of Hate). These 
whole forms had not yet any separate limbs or separate sex; 
they became men and women as the process of separating out 
(under Hate) continued.e Empedocles appears to have sug- 
gested that sexual desire was a yearning of the separated 
bodies to become one again as before, and as recollection 
(Anamnésis) prompted; this foreshadows the theory attributed 
by Plato to Aristophanes in the Symposium.! Aétius, outlining 
four stages of creation,® appears to be describing the whole 
cyclic process, not the creation in our world only, though he 
himself does not seem to be aware of this. He pri that plants 
and animals as originally created were made up of incongruous 
parts; the second created forms had their limbs ‘grown to- 
gether’, the third were ‘whole forms’, and the fourth were no 
longer made out of homogeneous elements, but were repro- 
duced from one ariother in various ways. The first two stages 
are clearly those described in Fragments 57, 58 and 59; and 
the third and fourth those described in Fragment 62.1 The 
oe separated into groups according to the element pre-ominating in their composition, those with most water seek- 
ing the watery element, those with most fire flying upward into 
‘Azo b Boy; cp. Bs8 © Bsg d B61; cp. B6o; : (Orpheus) Br3

~~ p, B63 f B64, oie 
‘See Burnet, EGP‘, p. 242 594

I92 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS~~ p, B63 f B64, oie 
‘See Burnet, EGP‘, p. 242 594

I92 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

the air, the heaviest sinking on to earth and so on.* An 
exception occurs in the case of some aquatic animals, in which 
Fire predominates: these take to the water to counteract their 
natural excess of heat (an example of like seeking unlike).* 
Flesh consists of an equal mixture of all four elements; sinews 
are made of fire and earth mixed with twice the quantity of 
water, nails are sinews cooled at the tips by contact with air, 
bones are composed of two parts each of water and earth to 
four of fire, these parts being mixed together inside the earth.° 
Empedocles himself says that bones were ‘fitted together by 
the cementing of harmony’,4 which as Aristotle says is an 
admission that their admixture has a law, and is not due to 
chance.e The tendency of the fiery element 1s to rise and the 
earthy element to sink, each seeking its like; but in some the 
rarer portion is inside and the denser outside, as in turtles and 
shell-fish.£ Hair, leaves, scales and feathers are the same,® but 
they have developed in different ways, and where the develop- 
ment helps survival, it is retained. For instance, the hedge- 
hog’s hair has developed into sharp-pointed quills, and other 
animals have other weapons. The spine with its vertebrae 
was the result of an accidental turning of the neck and breaking 
it.i Thus purpose is eliminated. 
The general rule of growth for all living organisms is that 
like nurtures like: fire increases fire, earth increases earth, air 
increases air.i In particular, living creaturesneed heat; they grow 
by its presence. They also need moisture, and diminish and 
perish by lack of either of these constituents (Hot and Moist).* 
In the past, the men were giants, in comparison with whom 
present-day men are like babes.! Fish™ are nourished by water, 
but not the briny sea: there is sweet water, not perceptible to all, 
in the sea, and this nourishes the fish." The proof of the presence 
of fresh water in the sea was to lower a wax vessel empty on tothe surface of the sea, and leave it fora day and a night. When 
drawn up, it will be full of fresh water.° ©!

0! A nparent! A 37 | * A77 1A77 ™B74;B72 2 A66 ° A66 
Em PP rently it was not realized that the water so obtained came from the atmosphere. 
oe Peover. view was adop ted by Democritus, Aristotle and Theophrastus; the

ea is attributed to Aristotle, but may well originate with Empedocles. 
id make te Ear py he a By eee a nl at Lois 
: » the fis the ani . os 
exteriors (B75), the eye (B86, B8 7, Bgs), the acts CB, Tinea eee ne

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH C/ENTURIES 193OF SIXTH AND FIFTH C/ENTURIES 193

Another fragment, apparently relating to nourishment, says 
that ‘sweet seized upon sweet, bitter rushed to bitter, sour 
moved towards sour, and hot settled upon hot’.s This pro- 
bably refers to growth in plants. Empedocles was the first to 
show a special interest in botany. He believed that trees were 
the first of created things, and either retained the combination 
of male and female sex which was a characteristic of animals 
as well at the beginning of the régime of Hate, or divided into 
male and female.» They grew by raising themselves out of the 
ground, as the heat in the earth® sought the heat in the 
heavenly vault above. The difference in their quality depends 
on the earth out of which they spring: it is not the vine that 
accounts for the quality of the wine,! but the nurturing base,4 
since growth is addition of what is homogeneous. The roots 
are wholly increased by earth with its mixture of water; but 
the shoots (branches) owe their growth to the Aether.¢ 
(Aristotle pointed out that this is wrong: the whole plant ts 
really of one substance and has one creative cause.) They also 
take in moisture from the environment, and the amount they 
can hold determines whether they are evergreen or deciduous. 
The fruits are the ‘excess’ left over from the water and fire in 
the plants, like excrement. Some, however, owe their origin 
to sexual reproduction: Empedocles calls the olive ‘egg- 
bearing’, a metaphor which Aristotle commends,* as showing 
that seeds, like eggs, have a nutritive and a reproductive part. 
It may be that in speaking of fruits which were the ‘excess’ of 
what plants live on, he was thinking of succulent fruits such 
as the apple and pomegranate,i which also contained seeds. 
There can be little doubt that Empedocles’ theory of growth

theory of ‘seeds’.theory of ‘seeds’.

His general theory of reproduction is that living organisms 
are generated when heat and moisture undergo a kind of 
corruption./:j1 In human beings, Love still working in the 
world brings the sexes together, desire being aroused in them 
through sight.* The child, before conception, is partly in the

®Bgo > Ayo ¢ Azo d Azo e Azo f Ayo; B77; B78  & Azo 
hBy7g iB8 iA76 *B64 
J! Since digestion also was to him a kind of corruption, there seems to be some con-

nection in his mind between excretion and generation (A77). 
1 Wine is water which has been putrefied in the wood (B81). The kinship of water 
and wine is shown in that they will mix, whereas oil and water will not (Bgr).

9]

(194 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

man, partly in the woman.* Its sex is decided according to the 
part of the womb into which the seed falls: if into the warmer 
part, the result is a male, if into the colder, a female,® and this 
accounts for the distinctive characteristics of males, such as 
colouring, growth of hair and superior strength.* (Aristotle 
criticizes this as ‘too easy-going’, as it fails to account for the 
organic difference between males and females.)¢ Some com- 
mentators thought that the womb had a hot side (the right) 
and a cold side (the left), but Aristotle says that the tempera- 
ture depends on the menstrual flow, according to whether it is 
hot or cold, older or more recent.e Others say that as Empe- 
docles thought sex-differentiation depended on temperature, 
the first males were born in the east and south, the first 
females in the north.£. Empedocles connected the menstrual 
flow with the phases of the moon, without allowing for 
irregularities.®Difference of temperature also determines the question of 
resemblance:5 if both the parents’ seed is equally hot, a male 
like the father is born; if the seed of both is equally cold, a 
female like the mother. If the father’s seed is the hotter, a 
boy with his mother’s features is born; if the mother’s seed is 
the hotter, a girl with her father’s features. If children are 
born which are like other people and not the parents, they are 
formed by the imagination of the mother. Twins and triplets 
are formed through superfluity of semen, their sex depending 
on the temperature of that quarter of the womb to which each 
goes. Monsters may arise from a superfluity of semen, a 
deficiency, a disturbance of its motion, a separation into parts 
or a diversion.! Likewise, for sterility or inability to repro- 
duce, as in mules, he seems to have suggested several causes: 
the position or shape of the womb, preventing the arrival or 
acceptance of the semen;/ and the nature of the semen, which, 
though soft, combines to produce a hard substance, as when 
brass 1s mixed with tin.

Gestation of the embryo takes place through two vein-like 
and two artery-like vessels attached to the liver.! On the tenth 
day of the eighth month the blood becomes ‘a white putrefac- 
tion’, that is, milk.=™! The heart is the first organ to be articu-

& B63 b B65; cp. B66 c B67 d A8: ¢ A&81 f A8r § A80 
h A&r 1 A8r J}A82 kk Bo2 1A79 ™ B68 
m1 Aristotle commented that ‘Empedocleseither was wrong or used a bad metaphor".

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 19§OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 19§

lated. Articulation is begun on the thirty-sixth day, completed 
by the forty-ninth day;* males, however, form more quickly 
than females.» The child is enveloped in a caul, which 
Empedocles called a ‘sheep-skin’.© There are two times of 
birth: the seventh and ninth months;¢ the reason for this goes 
back to the beginning of the world. The ‘day’ was then much 
longer, being equivalent to what is now ten months (doubtless 
because of the slow revolution of the sphere); then it grew 
shorter, and became the length of what is now seven months. 
Thus children, really the products of a day, retain this charac- 
teristic of the cosmic nature.°Breathing begins after birth. Its origin was as follows: the 
watery substance round the child was got rid of, and there 
was an influx of outer air into the open spaces of the body; 
then the innate heat, by its impulse outward, drove out the air, 
causing expiration of breath; air flowed back again to take the 
place of the air expelled. Thus the process was started.! 
Respiration as it now occurs is caused by the reciprocal motion 
of blood and air in the body: breathing takes place through 
pores as well as nostrils; the blood, flowing to the surface of 
the body through tubes, drives out air; when the blood flows 
back, the air follows after. In the long fragment explaining 
this, Empedocles gives as illustration the water-clock.é This 
was a vessel open at the top, and pierced with small holes at 
the bottom. If, says Empedocles, a girl places her hand over 
the top, and dips the pierced end into water, the water will 
not enter, because the air within repels it; but if she removes 
her hand, instantly the water rushes in. (This illustrates how 
the blood keeps out the air from the body.) Again, if there 1s 
water in the vessel, and she places her hand on the top, the 
water does not flow out, because no air can get in; when she 
lets go, the water flows out, and air flows in. (This is to 
illustrate how air rushes in when the blood recedes.)® ®! All 
things have a share of breathing; and of smell. i

® A83; Ars3a b A83 ¢ Bo d B69; A83 eA7s fAr74

&§ Broo; A74 h Broo i Bro2

hi There seems to be some confusion here: the blood recedes, and air follows it; but 
the water in the vessel flows out, and air rushes in. Doubtless this is what has caused the 
variant readings, todyoto (the pipe, or entrance) and, less common, #Puolo (the surface 
pierced with holes). Burnet reads the former; but since the girl is said to have her hand 
over the pipe, this could not illustrate the retention of the water by the pressure of the 
outer air.196 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Blood, thus intimately connected by Empedocles with. 
breathing, and so with life, was also considered by him to be 
the medium of thought: he speaks of ‘the heart, nourished in 
the sea of blood which courses in two opposite directions’ (that 
is, ebbs and flows); ‘this is the place where is found for the 
most part what men call thought, for the blood around the 
heart is thought in mankind.’* Blood was also the cause of 
milk, by the putrefaction-theory.’ And another form of blood 
was tears and sweat,° which are produced when the blood 1s 
agitated, like the whey of milk.4 It is the temporary and 
relative separation of heat from the blood that causes sleep, 
and the complete cooling that causes death.* *! Aristotle’s 
criticism of ‘those who say the soul is blood’! may refer to 
Empedocles’ theory, as does the question in Plato’s list 
‘Whether we think with the blood?’ The degree of intelli- 
gence depends on the composition of the blood. Neverthe- 
less, all things have their share of intelligence and thought,! 
even plants.i Critics pointed out that he equates intelligence 
and the soul;* and that if death means a disintegration of the 
elements, the soul and body die together;! but the whole of 
his religious doctrine declares the continued existence of the 
soul. He discussed dreams, saying that they depended on the 
nature of the dreamer:™ and madness, of which he distin- 
guished two sorts, one due to a purgation of the mind, the 
other to its separation from the body through a physical or 
emotional cause."The soul is divine, and those who keep it pure are divine 
also.0 Even that which is divine, however, has a material 
composition: the ‘long-lived gods highest in honour’ are 
made, like everything else, by a mixing of the elements.P No 
god took part in creation;% the elements and forces are prior 
to the gods." Apparently, though he does not say so, they 
perish when Hate is completely in the ascendant; he calls 
them here ‘long-lived’, not ‘immortal’,: and he states that

a Bros b B68 c Ag d A78 © A&s fA 8 A776 
h Ag7; A&86 S§10, 113 Bro6 i Br10; Bro2; Ag6 j Ayo k Ag6 
1A8s5 m Bro8 n Ag8 ° A32 P Bar; B23 q A4g7 
r A4o

¢? Aétius. Further on he says that death is the separation of all the elements from 
which man is composed, sleep the separation of the fiery element only. This is surely a 
mistake: the separation of all the elements is the stage after death, that is, corruption.

1 But see Br47.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 197

under the régime of Love there were no gods except Aphro- 
dite. Love and Hate are called ‘daemons’, and Aristotle 
took him to mean that all the elements are ‘gods’,* though one 
might have thought that this idea arose through his having 
given them the names of divinities. He calls his Sphere 
‘god’, in his scientific poem;4 and though he speaks of ‘limbs’ 
in one place, carefully explains elsewhere that it has no limbs. 
In his religious poem he states that God cannot be seen or 
touched;* he has no mortal shape, but is pure mind.‘ This, 
the position of Xenophanes, does not seem to have been 
completely reconciled by Empedocles with his physical theory 
of the universe. Hippolytus in his statement that Empedocles 
said that there are many divine spirits, which dwell and move 
below the earth, seems to be thinking of the fires below the 
earth, and to be confusing Empedocles with Heracleitus, 
whose general theory about fire he goes on to attribute to 
Empedocles.®His investigations into the nature of sense-perception were 
detailed, and attracted much attention. His general view was 
that in spite of their limited powers* we must accept their data 
as valid, but each must be trusted equally. The way to arrive 
at the truth is to compare the data of each sense.' His explana- 
tion of their functioning was the same for all: each has ‘paths’ 
into which the appropriate percept fits, and the percepts of one 
cannot enter the ‘paths’ of another.) All objects give off, 
effluences.* It is a case of ‘like to like’,! and in this he differed 
from Heracleitus and Anaxagoras, whose theory was that 
perception occurs between ‘like and unlike’, but who were 
unable to give an explanation of all the senses.™

Though regarding all the senses as of equal value, he 
nevertheless paid most attention to sight. The structure of the 
eye he explained as being like that of a lantern: the inside (the 
pupil) is fire, and this is enclosed in delicate membranes, 
which are pierced everywhere with passages. The fire of 
the eye can pass through these paths, just as the light of the 
lantern can pass through the lantern-plates." Thus far the 
analogy of the lantern holds; but no further, for the pupil, he 
tells us, is surrounded by water, which, however, cannot

@ Br28 bAsg | CAso 4B31;B2zg ¢Br33 ! Br34 & A3t 
h Br i Ba j A86 (Theophrastus de sensu) §7 B89 
1 Bro7; Brog m A8z §1 n B84

198 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS@ Br28 bAsg | CAso 4B31;B2zg ¢Br33 ! Br34 & A3t 
h Br i Ba j A86 (Theophrastus de sensu) §7 B89 
1 Bro7; Brog m A8z §1 n B84

198 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

escape through the passages a8 does the fire, being finer.* 
The ‘mild fire’ of the eye also has a small admixture of earth.> 
Thus the theory of ‘like to like’ holds here: we see earth by 
means of earth, water by means of water, bright air by means 
of bright air, and fire by means of fire; Love by means of 
Love, and Hate by means of Hate.e Theophrastus adds to 
this that the fire-passages are the ones through which we dis- 
tinguish white, the water-pores black,4 and asks how in that 
case we see mixed colours.* Aristotle’s criticism of the theory 
is that Empedocles speaks sometimes as if sight were due to 
the fire in the eye shining out, and sometimes as if emanations 
from objects entered the pores of the eyes.‘It seems clear that Empedocles was trying to explain the 
fact that we see objects at a distance, whereas smell, sound, 
taste and touch take place through penetration or contact. 
Differences in ability to see he explains by differences of ad- 
mixture in the organ. Too much fire in the eye means a better 
ability to see by night than by day, since the fire of the day 
adds to the excess. This is true of some animals. Theophras- 
tus criticizes this view severely. Aristotle suggested that if the 
eye were made of fire, all creatures would see in the dark; the 
eye, he says, is not made of fire but of water, and Empedocles 
is equally wrong in saying that grey eyes have more fire, black 
eyes more water, so that grey eyes see badly by day, black eyes 
by night, through lack of fire and water respectively.) Em- 
pedocles maintained that the best condition was a mixture, and 
the best mixture was an equal amount of fire and water.*¥ He 
explained the transparency of air, water and other substances 
by the presence of numerous passages so small as to be in- 
visible.’ Reflections are caused by an accumulation of efflu- 
ences on the surface of the mirroring object; these are densified 
by the fire which separates off from the mirror and carries with 
it the air lying in front, together with the efuences.™ He noted 
that one vision was produced by the two eyes," but his explana- 
tion 1s not preserved. The composition of the eyes is due to 
Love,° though Chance plays a part.

_ ae i.e wa hearing is easy: the ear, a “fleshy shoot’,® 
; € alr 1S set in motion outside; it then enters

a B84 b B85 © Brog d A82 § : 
7; cp. Bog; Agr © A82 §1 
! B84; Ago &§ A82 §8 h Bos i Agr Mae EAS: 48 al As 
™A88;Broga 1 Bg ° B86; B87 = P B&s a Bgg

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 199

the ear and strikes it* like the bell-clapper. Theophrastus 
remarks that he leaves unexplained how we hear this internal 
sound.»OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 199

the ear and strikes it* like the bell-clapper. Theophrastus 
remarks that he leaves unexplained how we hear this internal 
sound.»

Smell arises from respiration. Particles flow from bodies, 
and are taken in with the air we breathe; this is why when 
breathing becomes difficult, there is also inability to smell, as 
in those with colds.e The scent left behind in the tracks of 
animals are actual portions of their bodies.£ Smell flows most 
from fine light bodies.«

On taste and touch he has nothing particular to add to the 
general theory that sensation arises from a fitting-in to the 
passages. He remarked on the tastelessness of water, and ex- 
plained that it had in itself the different sorts of tastes, but 
these were imperceptible because of smallness.

Pleasure-pain is classed with the percepts: pleasure is 
caused by like meeting like, pain by the meeting of opposites. i 
This, Theophrastus remarks, makes pleasure and perception 
go together, and fails to account for the fact that perception is 
often accompanied by pain.* The theory was elaborated in 
relation to desire, which he said arises from deficiency (as in 
the case of food), that 1s, the need of like for like; in its satis- 
faction, pleasure arises. Pain arises from the hostility of things 
of different composition.!He likewise classes intelligence with perception by saying 
that it depends on the recognition of each element by its like.™ 
Hence we think chiefly with the blood, because in it the ele- 
ments are best mixed together. Those in whom the elements 
(of the blood) are mixed in equal quantity and in similar 
quality, not in too small or too large particles, are the most 
intelligent and have the most exact perceptions; those in whom 
the opposite obtains are the least intelligent. Those in whom 
the elements are in a too rarefied mixture are sluggish and slow; 
those in whom they are closely-packed and broken up small 
are quick in motion, attempting many things and completing 
few, because of the rapid flow of the blood. Those in whom the 
intermediate mixture exists in any single part are gifted in that 
part; that is why some are good orators, others craftsmen, be- 
cause in some the right admixture is in the hands, in others in

ae ee d A82 §o9 e Aga 
—BAB2§900— FT Age J A82 §9; Broz

~ fay fg 4204 v¥ enue

J 
f Brox 8 A82 §9; §§21, 22 | 
» 27

200 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

the tongue. So it is with the other abilities.» This mechanical 
theory of genius was stigmatized by Theophrastus as absurd: 
it is not the tongue or the hands, or the admixture of blood in 
them, that make for the ability of these parts; it is the person 
who has control of the organ.>Theophrastus, having criticized in detail the general theory 
of effluences and paths, as well as its particular applications, 
concludes his essay by saying that ‘Empedocles seems to be in 
error on many points’. This is true; but it should not detract 
from our admiration of the detailed observation and compre- 
hensive thought which went into the making of the scheme. 
Empedocles was one of those philosophers criticized in the 
Hippocratic treatise On Ancient Medicine as having maintained 
that to practise medicine you must know the whole man.‘ It is 
apparent that to him knowledge of any department of science 
depended on knowledge of the whole universe.The Katharmoi(Purifications) treatsof the universe in its relation 
toman. It is addressed primarily to the citizens of Acragas, from 
one who believed himself to have special knowledge! to commu- 
nicate: he begins by describing the divine honour in which he 
is held wherever he goes; all flock to him, some hoping to hear 
oracles, some desiring medical help.e He does not, however, 
think it remarkable that he thus surpasses ‘mortal, perishable 
men’;f he knows that truth is in what he says, though men are 
incredulous and antagonistic through envy.é He then explains 
how by an ‘oracle of Necessity, an ancient decree of the gods, 
eternal and sealed fast with broad oaths’, when one of the 
daemons who are allotted long life pollutes his hands with 
bloodshed, or has followed the lead of Hate and sworn a false 
oath, he must wander apart from the company of the blessed 
for thirty thousand seasons, being born into various mortal 
shapes and changing one hard life for another. The elements 
in turn reject him. Empedocles is one of these, a fugitive from 
heaven and a wanderer, because he once trusted to insensate 
Hate.s This important fragment shows that Empedocles be- 
lieved in a select class of human beings who passed through 
this cycle of fall, punishment and return, and did not assign it 
to the whole of the human race.

I b A82 §24 © A82 §24 d Ayr ¢ Brr2 f Brr3

ABrrs

Much of this was undoubtedly Orphic; cp. Chapter 1 (Orpheus) above, P- 9 599s

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 201I b A82 §24 © A82 §24 d Ayr ¢ Brr2 f Brr3

ABrrs

Much of this was undoubtedly Orphic; cp. Chapter 1 (Orpheus) above, P- 9 599s

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 201

He enumerates his own incarnations, as boy, girl, bush, 
bird and fish,* and refers to his weeping and wailing when 
newly-born and seeing ‘the unfamiliar land’.» Great was the 
honour, and deep the happiness from which he was exiled.° 
Next follow fragments of descriptions of the exiled soul’s 
journey to earth. A ‘roofed cavern’¢ is menttoned, and the ‘joy- 
less land where dwell Murder, Wrath, and tribes of other 
Dooms, wasting Diseases, Corruptions and works of Dissolu- 
tion,! roaming over the meadow of Disaster in the darkness’.¢ 
There is also a land where opposites dwell, such as ‘the Earth- 
Mother and the Sunshine-nymph, bloody Discord and Har- 
mony with her serious mien, the Speech-nymph and the nymph 
of Delay, lovely Truth and dark-haired Uncertainty; Birth 
and Decay, Sleep and Waking, Movement and Immobility, 
richly-crowned Majesty and Meanness, Silence and Speech’.! 
It seems that these represent the diversity of fates awaiting us 
in life. There is one* who dispenses life and death,® and there 
is a female spirit who ‘clothes the soul in the strange garment 
of the flesh’. Mortals are born with pain and travail, into a 
state of existence that is ‘direly unblessed’.i The best of them 
become, in the animal kingdom, lions, and in the tree-kingdom, 
laurels, the tree of Apollo.;Then follows a description of the world as it was under the 
régime of Love. There was no God of War, no Battle-din, not 
even Zeus, Cronos and Poseidon, but only Aphrodite.* She 
was worshipped with pious gifts — painted animals and per- 
fumes, myrrh and frankincense, and libations of honey. The 
altar did not run with blood of bulls, for there was no greater 
pollution among men than to eat the limbs of animals from 
whom they had reft the life.! All creatures, animals and birds, 
were friendly towards men, and affection glowed between 
them.”

Empedocles invokes the Muse Calliopeia to help him in his 
exposition of ‘a good theory about the gods’.2 Divine wisdom 
means happiness; an uncertain opinion about the gods means 
misery. We cannot bring God near so as to see and touch him,

d Br20 e Braz 
k Br28

n Br31 © Br32

! Ipya te Sevoté. The translation is Bignone’s. Diels and Burnet took it to mean 
‘floods’, which ill suits the context.

2 The subject of this verse is unknown. Wilamowitz suggests Geouds or vopos.

202 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS2 The subject of this verse is unknown. Wilamowitz suggests Geouds or vopos.

202 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

the usual ‘highroad of Persuasion leading into the minds of 
men’.* He has no mortal limbs: no arms, feet, knees or sexual 
organs, but is Mind and only Mind, darting through the uni- 
verse with his swift thoughts.» >: He ought not to be served with 
animal sacrifice: this is the law for all, and obtains everywhere 
throughout the universe.e Animal-sacrifice is murder and 
cannibalism ;4 it may be the slaughter of son by father, or father 
by son, mother by her own children, and the devouring of their 
flesh.* It is better to perish than to sin by eating of this unholy 
feast. The leaves of the laurel, and the bean, must also be 
avoided.® Such sins of eating debar the soul from happiness or 
rest.» If they have been committed, one must confess them! 
and repent,j washing the hands in water from five springs,* and 
fasting.! Those who keep themselves pure throughout shall 
becdme prophets, singers, physicians and princes while still on 
earth, and after that shall resume their lost divinity.™ Hence- 
forth they shall share the hearth and table of the other immor- 
tals, freed from the lot of men’s griefs, safe from hurt.™ ™2A comparison between the poem Ox Nature and the Puri- 
fications suggests the question : how far did Empedocles believe 
in his often-expressed theory of Chance as affecting creation, 
and how far in the government of the universe by an intellectual 
or moral force? He assigns much to Chance: at the creation, 
the aether chanced to rush a certain way;° creatures and objects 
are created by chance contact; and even a complicated struc- 
ture like the eye, though fashioned by Love, chanced to be made 
as it was.1 The spine was produced by a chance turning of the 
neck; intelligence is given to all ‘by the will of Chance’,* in 
that the rarest things fal together.t Plato regards him as having 
given neither intelligence nor deity nor ‘skill’ (Techné) any 
part in creation, but only ‘Chance and Nature’.s But others 
discern the working of design and intelligent purpose in his 
scheme: Aristotle suggests that Love is really the cause, not of 
chance but of designed mixture;” and commentators point out 
that the survival of the creatures created by chance depended

® Br33 b B134; cp. B29 ¢ Br3s5 a4 Br+6: f 
; 36; Br38 e Br B139 
Eu ae "ee, et SBryg Bigg Bras 
147 . Pp - 
‘ Bro3 a Ags re Bs7-61; Brg q B&s t Boz * Broz 
* This is said to apply to the Godhead, and t i i i 
object of E.'s worship (Ax §57; Az 3). i a aaa i 
n! These promises are Orphic: are ahnwa an +2 on

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 203

upon a reason, that is, their capacity for self-preservation.* A 
law of proportion governed the formation of bones, -as Em-

edocles himself admits by his use of the word Harmony; and 
his analogy of the painter mixing colours likewise contains 
references to ‘intelligence’ and ‘harmony’ or proportion, though 
apparently he is concerned only to show the infinite variety of 
results obtainable by mixing.°There is, however, a law behind even the elements and 
forces. This is dnanké, Necessity, the ‘Broad Oath’ by which 
even the alternating rule of Love and Hate is fixed,4 and which 
decrees the exile of those who sin against heaven and its laws. 
Some thought that Necessity could be reduced to the pair Love 
and Hate added together;‘ but it was usually recognized that 
Necessity must be considered a cause behind the causes, that 
is, a kind of predetermined plan or Fate. But there is opposi- 
tion even to the iron rule of Fate: the Grace (Charis), he says, 
loathes intolerable Necessity.»

The Katharmoi brings out even more clearly the moral signi- 
ficance of Love and Hate: it was by following ‘mad Hate’ that 
Empedocles fell from bliss;i and Love (Aphrodite) was the 
only goddess existing in the Golden Age.i

EMPEDOCLES. NOTES ON DOUBTFUL FRAGMENTS

Frgs. 77, 78. “Trees that retain their leaves and fruit in abundance all 
the year round in the air’ (or, according to the Air, i.e. how it is mixed). 
This is referred by Wilamowitz and Karsten to the Katharmot, as being 
concerned, not with botany but with the ideal trees of the Land of the 
Blest.

Frgs. 131-134, on the nature of the gods, are referred by Bignone to 
the poem On Nature.

Frgs. 148-150. ‘Earth that envelops mortals’, said to refer to the 
body, ‘Cloud-escorting Air’, ‘Full-blooded liver’: quoted by Plutarch to 
show that Empedocles does not use epithets merely for the sake of fine

writing, but in order to bring out the exact nature or function of some- 
thing. |

Frg. 152. ‘Old age, the evening of life; evening, the old age of the 
day.’ A similar metaphor is said to be in Empedocles.

' Bor b B96 c B23 d B30; cp. Ags e Bris f Ags 
& A323 cp. 1 (Orpheus) B13 bh Br16 i Brrg j Br28

204 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Frg. 153. Baubo:! nurse of Demeter, used by Empedocles to mean 
Belly. :

Frg. 154. A passage from Plutarch, On Eating Flesh, may contain 
a quotation from Empedocles.

C.Frg. 153. Baubo:! nurse of Demeter, used by Empedocles to mean 
Belly. :

Frg. 154. A passage from Plutarch, On Eating Flesh, may contain 
a quotation from Empedocles.

C.

The myth in the Phaedrus of Plato describes a theory of transmi- 
gration which contains obvious echoes of Empedocles; but the theory 
is reshaped to illustrate Plato’s own views.

32. MENESTOR

Menesror of Sysaris was in his prime about the middle of

the fifth century.

Menestor is named in Jamblichus’ list among the Pytha- 
goreans of Sybaris;? the only other writer who mentions him is 
Theophrastus, who records and sometimes criticizes some of 
his opinions. He devoted himself to botany, and was regarded 
by Theophrastus as one of the ‘ancient scientists’,> but appears 
to be later than Empedocles, since he is said to have followed 
Empedocles in certain of his views.°

He began an investigation into the constitution of plants, 
and the causes of their bearing or not bearing fruit;‘ their 
different times of sprouting and fruiting ;° the shedding or not 
shedding of their leaves;‘ their ability to tolerate their environ- 
ment, climate and soil;® their effect on, or usefulness to, man, 
as for example their taste, and their suitability for burning.i 
All these qualities he referred to the ratio of Hot and Cold (or 
Wet) in their admixture. He can thus be said to have begun 
an application of the Pythagorean theory of Opposites to 
botany. Like Alcmaeon in the physiological sphere, he be- 
lieved in right mixture,j both in the plant itself and in its rela- 
tion to environment: ‘hot’ plants grow best in water, or rather, 
plants designed to grow in water have been given a naturally

2r  Py 5 §§,6 8458s 8 4s5§7 0 =0 5 $78 5536

133587 = I 5 95

1 Baubo was of particular interest to Orphic mythology: cp. Ch. 1 (Orpheus) 
Brisa, and above, pp. 11, 12.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 205133587 = I 5 95

1 Baubo was of particular interest to Orphic mythology: cp. Ch. 1 (Orpheus) 
Brisa, and above, pp. 11, 12.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 205

‘hot’ constitution, so that they are not destroyed by ‘excess’.* 
This too explains why water-plants make the best kindling.>

He supported his views by examples,* which included the 
mulberry, laurel, juniper, fir, cedar, reed, rush and ivy. He 
believed the ivy to be the ‘hottest’ in composition: its heat pre- 
vents not only the loss of its leaves, but also snow from remain- 
ing on them;4 ivy makes the best tinder-wood;¢ its internal 
heat is what makes it twist and wind;! and its fruits are among 
the early-ripening.§

His belief that plants with hot composition seek by nature 
to grow in water! was said to be an application of Empedocles’ 
similar views regarding animals, for example, fish.i Menestor 
appears to have referred also to the process of Sepsis (dissolu- 
tion) as giving rise to Taste by resolving the plant-juice into its 
component parts;i this too can be traced to Empedocles, who 
regarded digestion,* the coagulation of milk,! and the fermenta- 
tion of wine™ as forms of Sepsis.

33. XUTHUS 
XutTuus, a Pythagorean, is named in Iamblichus'’ list.

He 1s mentioned by Aristotle and Simplicius as having sug- 
gested that the Whole moves with a wave-like motion.

This was offered as a solution of the dilemma (a) that there 
must be motion, because of the existence of condensation and 
rarefaction; (4) that there cannot be motion unless there 1s 
Void, as the Eleatics say. Xuthus, accepting the Eleatic posi- 
tion that there is no Void, suggested that even so a wave-like 
motion is possible, as the sea by means of its waves is able to 
expand and overflow the shore.

34. BOIDAS34. BOIDAS

Nothing is known of Borpas except that Diphilus, a lampooner, 
wrote a whole poem attacking him, and that no personal enmity 
resulted. Boidas is mentioned by the Scholiast on the Clouds in 
support of the argument that no personal enmity existed be- 
tween Socrates and Aristophanes.

25h bs§ 8 5 §7 609586 333a FS 86 8 5 h7 BS $5 
j7 Kk 31A77 1 31 B68 m 31B8r

206 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

3§. THRASYALCES 
Turasyatces of Tuasos was one of ‘the early philosophers’.

He was a meteorologist, who believed that the rising of the 
Nile was due to summer rains; and that there were two chief

winds, the North and the South.

36. ION OF CHIOS

Ion of Curos was active between 452 and 421 B.c. His first 
tragedy was produced in 452;* and a reference to him in Aris- 
tophanes’ Peace proves that he had died before 421.»

He was a voluminous writer of tragedies, lyrics and other 
poems;° he also wrote a philosophical work in prose called 
Triagmos (Triad) or Triagmoi. As a poet he was very successful, 
but was later regarded as polished and elegant rather than 
inspired.* The fragments of his dramatic works contain nothing 
of philosophical interest. '

As a philosopher, he believed in the number Three: the 
elements are three, neither more nor less, namely fire, earth, 
air; the virtue of every particular creature is threefold — in- 
telligence, strength, luck.¢ Luck, though very different from 
wisdom, yet does a great many things like it.»

lon entertained an admiration for Pythagoras: he stated that 
Pythagoras had written verses which he ascribed to Orpheus;! 
and in some lines eulogizing Pherecydes, he praised Pytha- 
= as a penetrating judge of men’s characters.j It is there- 
ore probable that Ion’s belief in the number three was derived 
from the Pythagoreans.One meteorological observation is preserved: the moon is 
made partly of transparent glass-like material, partly of non- 
radiant material.* A doubtful fragment suggests an applica- 
tion of the triad-theory to music. !

®Az3 ».A2 © A2;A3 4 A2; Aj © Ay £A6; Br & Br 
bB; iBz iBs kA,  IBe - 
5

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES

37. DAMON

Damon (or Damonides), son of Damonides, an Athenian of 
the deme Oa,* was in his prime about 460 B.c.?

Damon is said by Plato to have been the pupil of Aga- 
thocles,> from whom Pindar also received instruction in music; 
others said his teacher was Lamprocles, the pupil of Aga- 
thocles, and that Agathocles was a pupil of the Pythagorean 
Pythocleides, who gave instruction in ‘solemn music’.¢

Damon’s most important pupil was Pericles, over whom he 
is said to have acquired great influence, instructing him not 
only in music but also in politics ;4 it was Damon, for instance, 
who was credited with having advised Pericles to make pay- 
ments to jurors out of the public treasury. The story as 
related by Aristotle clearly emanates from the enemies of 
Pericles and his friends: the motive ascribed to Pericles for 
his democratic measure is that of outshining the wealthy and 
lavish Cimon, and to Damon is ascribed the cynical advice, 
‘Since your private means are insufficient, give the people 
what already belongs to them’. The anti-Periclean party was 
able to secure the ostracism of Damon; a potsherd bearing the 
name ‘Damon son of Damonides’ has actually been discovered 
in Athens. The date of the ostracism is conjectured as being 
about 446 B.c.

It is likely that Damon returned after his ten years’ exile: 
Plato’s Alcibiades is made to say that Pericles is associating 
with Damon ‘still, at his age’.» Damon is also said to have 
taught Socrates;! and to have associated with Prodicus, whose 
studies in synonyms interested him.The outstanding feature of his teaching was the important 
part he assigned to music in the training of character, and 
therefore in the making of good citizens. He believed that 
the practice of music — singing or playing the harp — could 
not only arouse or allay different emotions,* but also inculcate

1 Burnet, EGP*, Pp. 255, 0. 2.

208 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

all the virtues — courage, self-restraint, and even justice.* The 
quality of song and dance will leave its mark on the soul, for 
good or evil;> and new characteristics can be created, or latent 
ones brought out, not only in the young but also in adults, by 
appropriate harmonies.°

Music, therefore, is essential not only to a liberal education,4 
but also to the common weal: he went so far as to say that no 
innovation in musical fashion is possible without a resulting 
change in the most important political institutions.* Plato 
records this opinion in the Republic: Socrates is depicted as in 
full agreement with it, and Adeimantus is made to add that 
through music ‘lawlessness creeps in unawares’ in the guise of 
amusement, and after corrupting manners proceeds to under- 
mine contracts, laws and constitutions, until it overturns 
everything, public and private.£ These views doubtless 
represent the teaching of Damon and his pupils.

A longer passage in the Republic, in which details are 
purposely left vague by Plato, hints at Damon’s analysis of 
the components of music, such as rhythm, foot, short and long 
syllable: to all these, both singly and in combination, he gave 
a moral value. A good education will banish those elements 
which are akin to vice and excess, and will retain those akin to 
virtue and order. Plato clearly approved of Damon’s teaching; 
he makes the general Laches commend Damon to Nicias as 
a teacher not only of music, but of every other subject that is 
worthy of pursuit by young boys.Philodemus the Epicurean, a contemporary of Cicero, in his 
treatise on Musici implies that Damon incorporated his doc- 
trines in an Areopagitikos,1 or speech purporting to be delivered 
to the Areopagus. But there is no other reference to anything 
written by Damon, and the teaching summarized in the 
Republic is quoted as remembered from a lecture. The state- 
ment in the pseudo-Plutarchian essay on music that Damon 
was the inventor of the ‘relaxed Lydian’ mode,i can hardly be 
true;* this mode was stigmatized by Plato as ‘effeminate and 
convivial’, and Damon was a believer in the Dorian mode, the 
mode of restraint and manly endurance.

a Bs b A6 c¢ By d B2 e Bro f Rep. 424C 8 400A (Bg) 
bh A2 i Ba i Bs k AS

1 Diels-Kranz refers all summaries of Damon’s teachings to this supposed tract.

? For a discussion, see Pauly-Wissowa, Vol. IV, Part II, under Damon. The author,

von Jan, believes that Damon was a practical as well as a philosophical musician.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 209

38. HIPPON

Hipron of Samos flourished during the middle of the fifth 
century B.c.

Hippon, a Pythagorean, is named in lamblichus’ list with 
Melissus and others as a Samian;* but he is elsewhere said to 
have been of Metapontium,> or Rhegium,¢ or Croton.4 This 
points fo his having been born, like Pythagoras, at Samos, and 
having migrated to the south of Italy, where he practised 
medicine with the Pythagorean groups there. The date of his 
prime of life is not expressly stated, but he was satirized by 
Cratinus the comic poet in his Panoptue,* written some time 
between 470 and 420 B.c.;! and he criticized the opinions of 
Empedocles;‘ so that he was active during the middle of the 
fifth century.

He published his views in several books;® but he cannot 
have been very well known, since there is a doubt even about 
his name, which was sometimes given as Hipponax.He published his views in several books;® but he cannot 
have been very well known, since there is a doubt even about 
his name, which was sometimes given as Hipponax.

Hippon is dismissed by Aristotle in the Metaphysics as un- 
worthy of inclusion among those who gave Water as the 
substrate, “because of the inferiority of his intellect’.i: it He is 
grouped with Thales,i so that there seems to be no reason for 
the statement that he did not specify whether by ‘the Moist’ he 
meant Water or Air.* He said that Fire, or the Hot, was 
generated from Water, but subsequently overcame its begetter 
and so created the universe.! Some therefore assumed that 
Hippon regarded the pair of opposites, Hot and Moist, as the 
elements,™ a position in accord with Pythagoreanism; but there 
seems to be no doubt that he meant to place Water first, setting 
a higher value on conclusions based on his own observation 
than on the Table of Opposites.

He derived the life-principle, or soul, from Water or the 
cold element, as opposed to those who derived it from Fire or

_ _ bAr; Ar6 c¢ Ar; A3;A5; Bs dArr e A2 
® Arr h Arg 1A7 jA7;Aqg kK A6 1A3 mA3;As5 
i! Christ in his edn. of the Metaphysics (Teubner 1886) regards this sentence as a 
marginal gloss. 
1 Cratinus: prob. 490-420 B.C. If Aristoph., Nab. 94-97, is imitated from Cratinus’ 
Panoptae, the latter must be earlier than 423 B.C.

210 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS210 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

the Hot; both sides called in ‘etymology’ to aid their views. * 
His reasons for choosing water were biological: in particular, 
that the semen, from which life is developed, is moist.» The 
moist principle is the cause of perception, as well as of life: old 
men are dried up, and the soles of the feet are without sensa- 
tion.* *? Excess or deficiency of moisture is also the cause of 
disease; but he did not specify which diseases arise from 
which conditions.4 43 
His biological studies cover the usual subjects, but show 
traces of work on original lines. He was particularly interested 
in the processes of reproduction, and made a study of the 
semen: he believed that its quality (concentrated or fluid) 
determines the sex of the offspring ;° and that it flows from the 
marrow. He had apparently done experiments on animals 
which seemed to him to prove the latter point.f. Females eject 
semen no less than males; but as this falls outside the womb, 
it does not generate.¢ He studied the period of gestation, and 
seems to suggest that the normal period for birth is really the 
seventh month, since everything for us runs in sevens; just as 
we lose our teeth at the age of seven, but this process can last 
-till the tenth year, so too birth can take place in the tenth 
month also. He thought that there must be in the womb some 
protuberance like the breast, through which the unborn child 
draws nourishment.: He also discussed the formation of 
twins.i He followed Alcmaeon in thinking that the brain is 
the seat of the mind,* and criticized Empedocles’ view that 
the life-principle is the blood.'! He studied the action of the 
heart, and was of opinion that it depended on the action of 
water, which checks the pericardial heat and prevents it from 
getting the upper hand.™ 
It is thus clear that his views are in direct opposition to 
those of Heracleitus, to whom the moist principle is death; 
and it seems that we have here a trace of a violent controvers 
between Heracleitus and the Pythagorean medical ase 
a Ato; A3 b A3; A1os 31A4 C Aut qd Au © Av {Ai 
PA, BAG tA? JAB KA Ay 14rAq  ™@ Ato 
@* Hippon: yoy and wuxpds; Heracleitus: 3%v and zelv. 
©! That is, when they are dried and hardened by use: dry, calloused skin is without 
a" The theory that all disease can be d : f in 
ie tissues (hydraemia or anhydraemia) veite a Hina poner by JE R. Mc-Wonagh, F.R.C.S.; sec his interesting The ys 4 
The Nature of Disease, Vol. 1 (1 on, hig: el Through Medicine (1940), 2”

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 211

The lines in the Clouds which satirize certain scientists who 
teach that ‘the sky is a stove and we are the coals’, is said by 
the scholiast to be imitated from a similar passage in Cratinus, 
and to refer to Hippon. This must be a mistake; it probably 
arises out of a confusion between Hippon and Hippasus.?

Hippon was regarded as an atheist, both by his contem- 
poraries and by later ages: Cratinus called him irreverent,* 
and the name ‘atheist’ became attached to him,> apparently 
because of his very materialistic outlook: he made Water the 
only cause of things, and believed that nothing exists except 
what is perceptible. Clement names him among a number of 
philosophers who were given, without deserving it, the name 
of atheist.4

Only one fragment of his writings survives, quoted by a 
scholiast on Homer: Homer says that all rivers, seas, springs 
and wells have their source in Ocean, and Hippon among 
others supports this view, saying that all drinking water comes 
from the sea, because the sea is deeper than our wells; the 
assumption being that water rises from a lower toa higher level.

Hippon also studied botany; he said that certain attributes 
like floriferousness, fruitfulness, deciduousness and_ their 
opposites depend on situation and climate; but every plant if 
neglected becomes wild, and if cultivated improves. Theo- 
phrastus combats the latter statement, saying that whereas 
every plant if neglected deteriorates and becomes wild, the 
reverse, that everything improves by cultivation, 1s not true.°

39. PHALEAS AND HIPPODAMUS

Puaceas of CHALCEDON: exact date unknown. 
Hippopamus of Mietus: active during the middle of the

fifth century B.c.

Both these men are given a place in Aristotle’s Politics as 
having contributed something to political theory.fifth century B.c.

Both these men are given a place in Aristotle’s Politics as 
having contributed something to political theory.

Phaleas would not otherwise be known: he 1s said by 
Aristotle! to have been the first to put forward the idea of 
equal division of property.

®A2 b Ao; A6; B2; B3 cAs d4A8 e Arg fAr (Pol. B7. 12.66a) 
1 Pascal, Studi ital. 14, 97. Diels’ suggestion that only the position of the coals in the 
stove and not their material is meant, is surely absurd.

212 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

His scheme, designed to prevent civil strife, referred only 
to equal division of land, and did not deal with other forms of. 
property such as slaves, cattle, money. He recognized that 
this, though easy for a new settlement, was difficult for an old- 
established State, and suggested that the quickest way of attain- 
ing equality was that the rich should give and the ee receive 
dowries. The citizens were also to enjoy equality of education.

Aristotle, while considering Phaleas’ idea worthy of men- 
tion, shows that its author had not grasped the difficulties. 
For example, he did not decide what was the proper size of 
each share in itself; nor did he allow for the owners’ having 
different numbers of children. He also failed to see that 
property cannot be treated purely as an internal matter by each 
State, but must be considered in the light of foreign relations, 
especially war. Further, he did not specify what form the 
education of the citizen was to take; and in general failed to 
allow for human ambition and greed.Hippodamus was a native of Miletus,* but lived in Athens, 
and also migrated to the Athenian colony of Thurii.> He was 
the inventor of an entirely new system of town-planning, 
called by Aristotle ‘the modern or Hippodamian method’;¢ 
that of wide straight streets crossing each other at right-angles, 
in place of the old-fashioned narrow crooked streets. His 
greatest work was the planning of the Peiraeus as a residential 
and commercial district (under Pericles); this was a natural 
sequence to its having been made safe by fortification, and 
Aristotle notes that the scheme, though an improvement from 
the point of view of comfort and convenience, was disadvan- 
tageous from a military point of view. This shows that the 
Athenians thought that the Peiraeus was impregnable. The 
market-place of the new suburb was called after the architect, 
‘the Hippodamian (4gora)’;* and his arrangement became 
proverbial as “Hippodamus’s partition’! {t 1s con 
eee aes wee was Kus eeweCn aie ite oi re naeeiecdenee —--—

the Thirty Years’ Peace of 446-445 B.C.; traces of streets 
which cross at right-angles have been found in the Peiraeus 
itself, and also on the peninsula of Acté and the hill of Muny- 
chia. There have also been found a number of inscribed 
* 15 334 b3 2 d2 c4 fs 
* See Pauly-Wissowa, s.v. Hippodamus.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 213

boundary-stones; and it has been suggested that ‘Hippo- 
damus’s partition’ refers to his drawing of the boundaries 
between the different districts of the harbour-region.boundary-stones; and it has been suggested that ‘Hippo- 
damus’s partition’ refers to his drawing of the boundaries 
between the different districts of the harbour-region.

He subsequently migrated to the Athenian colony of 
Thuru,* probably in 444 B.c., to assist in the laying-out of the 
new town. There was a tradition, mentioned by Strabo, that 
he was called in to plan the new city of Rhodes when in 
408 B.c. the inhabitants of Ialysus, Lindus and Cameirus 
decided to combine;> if this is true, he must have been about 
seventy years old at the time, probably older. Aristophanes in 
the Kuights refers to ‘Hippodamus’s son’,* and the scholiast 
says that this was Archeptolemus of Agrylé, the politician; 
and that he had a house on the Peiraeus which he ‘gave up to 
the State’. The scholiast speaks of Hippodamus as the man 
who first ‘combined’ the Peiraeus in the time of the Persian 
Wars, and says that his native State was variously given as 
Thurit, Samos and Miletus.4 The date is probably mistaken; 
but there is no need to doubt that Archeptolemus was Hippo- 
damus’s son; and this gives us 475 B.c. as the latest possible 
date of Hippodamus’s birth. It also suggests that Hippo- 
damus was granted Athenian citizenship, since his son had a 
political career.

Hippodamus’s eccentricity of dress made an impression on 
the Athenians. Aristotle says that he wore long hair and 
valuable jewellery, but his clothes were of the meanest ‘even in 
summer’. Perhaps he had picked up these fashions in Thur, 
and returned to Athens later: the ‘Thurian seers’ are satirized 
by Aristophanes in the Clouds, among the ‘sophists, quacks, 
beringed and long-haired idlers’;* and elsewhere we learn that 
the Thurians wore their hair long like Spartans.‘ Aristotle 
says that Hippodamus wished to be learned in the whole of 
natural science, so that the Athenians may have regarded him 
as one of the Sophists.¢ The lexicographers call him a meteoro-logist.® 
a3 3 © Eq. 327 d4 e Nub. 332 f Philostr. V. Ap. 3, 15 
8 x

"1 Pauly-Wissowa, s.v. Hippodamus. The Knights was produced in 425-424 B.C. Arch- 
eptolemus must have been at least thirty to be engaged in politics: probably older. There- 
fore Hippodamus must have been born not later than 475 B.C. But even if we place his 
birth during the Persian Wars, say in 485 B.C., he would still have been under 80 at the 
foundation of the new Rhodes, and could have planned and even supervised it. Callias, 
son of Hipponicus, went to Sparta as an envoy at eighty, to quote only one instance of 
vigorous old age.

214 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

It was however as an amateur political theorist that he inter- 
ested Aristotle: he was the first man not actively engaged in 
politics to attempt to frame an ideal constitution. His provi- 
sions were: the best number for the population of a city-state 
was ten thousand males, divided into three classes — artisans, 
farmers, soldiers. The land also was to be divided into three: 
sacred, for the provision of religious dues; public, for the 
maintenance of the army; private, to be cultivated by the 
farmers. The legal code likewise was to be divided into three: 
assault, damage, homicide. There was to be a central court of 
appeal, composed of elderly men chosen by election. The 
verdict of the ordinary courts was not to be given by voting 
for absolute acquittal or condemnation, but each juryman was 
to have a tablet on which he recorded his decision on each 
separate charge. Magistrates were to be chosen by election, 
and were to have jurisdiction in matters concerning the State, 
foreigners and orphans.It is obvious that the suggestions concerning jurisdiction 
owed their origin to his critical observation of the Athenian 
legal system. The insistence on the number three in his ideal 
constitution gave rise to the supposition that he was a Pytha- 
gorean, or even a Samian? like Pythagoras; he was said to have 
dedicated a book Ox Virtue to Theano, the wife of Pythagoras ;> 
and a passage from a book Ox Political Constitution purporting 
to be by Hippodamus was quoted.* The latter is now generally 
regarded as a Neo-Pythagorean forgery based on the informa- 
tion given by Aristotle in the Politics.

40. POLYCLEITUS

Potyc.zitus of Arcos was active during the latter half of the 
ith century. )

Polycleitus of Argos (perhaps originally of Sicyon)* was 
recognized by his contemporaries,¢ no a than by later genera- 
tions, as supreme in the art of sculpture, particularly of the 
pene form. He wrote a treatise called the Canon,! in which

e stated his guiding aesthetic principle: that physical beauty

a4 > Suid. s.7. Theano a Stob. IV, 1 (Diels P. 390, B.) d Az

e Aw. na vow

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 2196

depends upon the correct relation of the parts of the body to 
one another.* This theory, acceptable to both medicine and 
philosophy, was given concrete expression by him in a statue 
which was also called the Canon, and which was resorted to by 
later artists as the final word on the symmetry of the human 
form.>Of his treatise, two sentences survive: one, that the right 
result comes by small stages, ‘through many numbers’,* is 
quoted by Philo the Engineer to explain why artists sometimes 
go wrong without knowing where, and seems to be based, like 
his theory of symmetry, on the Pythagorean doctrine of Num- 
ber. The other sentence,? quoted twice by Plutarch, embodies 
a proverbial expression, the exact meaning of which is not 
certain: but the most likely rendering is: ‘The artist’s work 
reaches its most difficult stage when the modelling clay is 
within a nail’s breadth’ of what he wishes to represent.

41. OENOPIDES

Oenopipes of Cuios was active during the latter half of the 
fifth century:

Testimony regarding Oenopides’ date varies: some said that 
he was a little younger than Anaxagoras,° others that he was 
known towards the end of the Peloponnesian War.‘ Nothing 
is known of his life. He was said, like other scientists, to have 
visited Egypt;® and there is a hint that he taught at one time 
in Athens. His name is frequently mentioned with that of 
Pythagoras; but it seems unlikely that he was a Pythagorean, 
since he was accused of stealing Pythagoras’s ideas. Only one 
story has attached itself to him: seeing an uneducated youth 
who possessed a large number of books, he said: “Not with the 
(book-) box, but with the heart.’!

He was a mathematician and astronomer, apparently study- 
ing mathematics principally with a view to astronomy.) He 
studied the sun’s orbit, and was said by Eudemus to have dis- 
covered the Zodiac; others said that he stole this idea from 
Pythagoras, others that he learnt of the obliquity of the sun's

2 A3 b Az; cp. Ael. V. H. xiv, 8; and Cic. Brut. 86 c B2 d Br 
ey f ta By hy 1 4 J 33

216 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS2 A3 b Az; cp. Ael. V. H. xiv, 8; and Cic. Brut. 86 c B2 d Br 
ey f ta By hy 1 4 J 33

216 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

orbit from the Egyptian priests.« He believed that the sun 
had originally followed the Milky Way, but had later given it 
up for the zodiacal path, another idea borrowed from the 
a and apparently found originally in mytho- 
ooy,>, ba

He said that the length of the Great Year (that is, the num- 
ber of years it takes for astronomical phenomena to repeat 
themselves) was fifty-nine years, and he set up a tablet at 
Olympia recording this opinion, in which he was in agreement 
with Pythagoras.* He reckoned the solar year as 365 days and 
‘a fifty-ninth part of twenty-two days’,4 41 that is, nearly nine 
hours.

His mathematical discoveries are said to have included two 
problems: “To draw a straight line perpendicular to a given 
straight line of unlimited length, from a given point outside 
it’;° and ‘At a given point in a given straight line, to make an 
angle equal to a given angle’.f A line of mathematicians 
followed his tradition.®

He had an ingenious though mistaken theory on the flooding 
of the Nile in summer: the waters below the earth are hot in 
winter, cold in summer; this can be seen from deep wells, the 
water of which is cool in the hot season, but remains unfrozen 
in winter. The Nile waters therefore diminish in winter, owing 
to the heat below, but in summer, when this cause is not 
operating, they fill their channel without hindrance.4 It is 
perhaps permissible to conjecture that the observation of deep 
wells 0 been suggested to him by his compatriot Hippon.

He said that Fire and Air are the elements;! and the Stoics 
found in him a warrant for the belief that the World-Soul is

God.«

473 cp. 12A¢5 bio fg dg a E : 
uclid, Props. 12, Probl. 7) 
Are ars Propn. 23, Probl. 9) 6 1233 hry 3 38Br , yP kG

eas seal of the Zodiac was also attributed to Cleostratus. See Chapter 6,God.«

473 cp. 12A¢5 bio fg dg a E : 
uclid, Props. 12, Probl. 7) 
Are ars Propn. 23, Probl. 9) 6 1233 hry 3 38Br , yP kG

eas seal of the Zodiac was also attributed to Cleostratus. See Chapter 6,

4 Modern astronomy reckons it as 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes, 46 seconds.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 217

42. HIPPOCRATES OF CHIOS. AESCHYLUS

Hippocrates of Cuios flourished during the latter half of the 
fifth century. 
AESCHYLUs was his pupil.

Hippocrates of Chios is spoken of as the successor in 
geometrical studies of Oenopides, and the contemporary of 
Theodorus, Plato’s teacher. This places his prime about the 
year 430 B.c. That he was a generation earlier than Plato is 
also suggested by the legends surrounding the problem of the 
duplication of the cube, namely that this first arose as a mere 
problem of stage scenery; then came Hippocrates’ formula; 
then it became the ‘Delian problem’ when the people of Delos 
asked their oracle how to stop an epidemic, and being told to 
double the altar of Apollo without altering its form (a cube), 
applied to the Academy for help.»

Hippocrates was at first engaged in commerce, but suffered 
a loss of his fortune, and took up geometry. Some said that he 
was cheated of his money by Byzantine customs-collectors, a 
story repeated by Aristotle* to show that a man stupid in some 
respects can be able in others: in other words, that theoretical 
and ‘getup ability do not always go together, a favourite 
moral with Greek anecdotists. A more highly-coloured version 
was that he was robbed by pirates, and came to Athens to seek 
redress; but the law’s delays gave him time to attend philoso- 
phical lectures, which was the beginning of his career as a 
geometer.4 This story arises from the desire to preach that 
an apparent disaster can turn out to be the greatest of 
blessings.He was accused of having betrayed Pythagorean secrets; 
but this charge was made against so many that it carries little 
weight, especially as a different version was that one of the 
Pythagoreans had been given permission to teach geometry so 
that he could repair a loss of fortune. There is no need to 
suppose even that Hippocrates was a Pythagorean, though of 
course he knew their mathematical and astronomical work.'

@1 b Eratosth. Epist. ad Ptol. C2 d2 
e Jambl. V.P. 88 (Diels, Vors. ch. 18 (Hippasus) 4) fs

220 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

He was principally eminent as a mathematician; but these 
studies were applied by him to astronomy and music. In the 
Theaetetus he is depicted as having given a demonstration on 
square roots: he showed that the square roots of certain num- 
bers are incommensurable, starting with 3 and 5, and taking 
each number until he reached 17. He then divided numbers 
into two classes, according to whether they could or could not 
be produced by the multiplication of equal numbers; the for- 
mer he called ‘square’ numbers, the latter ‘oblong’, comparing 
them to square and oblong rectangles. He pursued this dis- 
tinction into solid geometry.®

44. PHILOLAUS

Puito.aus of TARENTUM was active in the latter half of the

fifth century.44. PHILOLAUS

Puito.aus of TARENTUM was active in the latter half of the

fifth century.

Philolaus was a Pythagorean of Southern Italy. He 1s 
usually called a Tarentine,>® but it is not known whether he 
was a native of Tarentum or merely settled there later as a 
member of the Pythagorean group. His teacher was Lysis, 
one of the two who escaped the massacre at Croton.* Tradi- 
tion sometimes made Philolaus a coeval of Lysis, and fellow- 
refugee from Croton ;¢ but this is unlikely. The probability is 
that he was brought up with the Pythagoreans who escaped 
the results of Croton, and received instruction when young 
from ee Lysis then migrated to Thebes and became the 
tutor of Epameinondas.: Lysis died and was buried there, and 
eventually Philolaus migrated to Thebes, perhaps, as tradition 
said, to do homage to Lysis’ tomb, but more probably by invita- 
tion from the Thebans. He had taught Simmias and Cebes, 
the young Thebans of the Phaedo, but had left Thebes before 
the date at which they are depicted as speaking (399 B.c.).°

He apparently returned to Italy, probably to Tarentum. 
Archytas, who became ruler of Tarentum, was his pupil,‘ and 
there was a tradition that Philolaus was put to death for aiming 
at tyranny ® this no doubt arose from his connection with

Archytas. The last generation of Pythagoreans included a 
ao (Theaet. 14.5¢ 599.) bA3; Ag; Aga; A6

i Butaess oan lacs fA3 8 Ax

see above, P- 78, note ', and below, P- 233, note !,

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 221i Butaess oan lacs fA3 8 Ax

see above, P- 78, note ', and below, P- 233, note !,

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 221

number of Philolaus’ pupils. Aristoxenus, himself a Taren- 
tine, knew some of these: Xenophilus of Chalcidice, and four 
men from Phlifis— Phanton, Echecrates, Diocles and Poly- 
mnastus.* Apollodorus mentions Democritus among the associ- 
ates of Philolaus.» Some said that Plato, when he went on his 
travels at the age of twenty-eight, heard Philolaus lecture;* but 
the various traditions regarding the way that Plato acquired 
the Pythagorean books imply that he did not meet Philolaus.

Philolaus was said to have written one book, which was the 
first account of Pythagoreanism.* There is no suggestion that 
he was excommunicated from the brotherhood for so doing; on 
the contrary, he may have been the member who was given 
permission to repair his damaged fortunes by this means.‘ 
According to one account, Plato bought this book from Philo- 
laus’ relatives for a large sum, and copied out his Timaeus from 
it;* another version was that Plato got this knowledge orally 
from a young pupil of Philolaus who had been arrested by 
Dionysius” bodyguard. Yet another version said that Plato 
sent to Dion in Sicily a request to buy ‘three Pythagorean 
books’ from Philolaus. These three books were much talked- 
of. They were ascribed to Pythagoras; they were given titles; 
their different portions were assigned to various other Pytha- 
goreans — Hippasus, Philolaus’ teacher Lysis, and others.' In 
later times, a work called The Bacchae was ascribed to Philo- 
laus;i whether this is another name for the ‘one book’ ascribed 
to him by Diogenes Laertius, or a different work, 1s uncertain.It seems clear, however, that Philolaus did commit Pytha- 
gorean doctrine to writing, and that it was from his book or 
books that Plato derived his intimate knowledge of Pythagorean 
thought. The writings continued in the possession of the Acad- 
emy, and Speusippus, who succeeded Plato as head of the school, 
was able to put together a ‘neat monograph’ entitled Ox the 
Pythagorean Numbers, which was mostly drawn from Philolaus.«

Whether the fragments quoted by late authorities as being 
from Philolaus’ book are genuine has been much discussed. 
The opinions of modern scholars have ranged from acceptance 
to rejection of them all. I have therefore thought it best to

a b A2 cAg d Ar © A8; 14 (Pyth.) 1' 
f 14 (Pyth.) 17 & Ar; A8 h Ar; 14 (Pyth.) 17 i r4 (Pyth.) 19 
J Br7-19) = kK Ar3 — ;

1 The reasons for suspecting forgery are given in Burnet, EGP*‘, pp. 279 599.

222 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

summarize first the tradition regarding Philolaus’ doctrines, 
and second the contents of the disputed fragments.

Tradition credits Philolaus with having a the Pytha- 
gorean doctrine of Number, both mathematical and mystical. 
Firstly, the universe is a composition of opposites, namely the 
Limit and the Unlimited,* so that geometry, which studies 
this subject, is the basis of all science.» The most perfect 
number is the Decad, or Principle of Ten-ness: it is most akin 
to nature, so that all men, whatever their nationality, instinc- 
tively go thus far in their counting;° and it has arithmetical‘properties which distinguish it. For instance, it is the first to 
‘contain’ the same number of primes and composites. 41 
Again, it is the sum of the first four numbers 1, 2, 3, 4 (which 
the Pythagoreans called the Tetractys, and used as their greatest 
oath).¢ This being so, the Decad contains in itself the nature 
of point, line, plane and solid; for the point 1s ‘one’, the line 1s 
‘two’, the triangle (the first plane figure) is ‘three’, and the 
pyramid or tetrahedron (the first solid) is four. Again, to take 
the pyramid: it has four plane surfaces, six edges, which again 
gives the number ten. One thus finds the Decad at the basis of 
geometry; and the latter half of Speusippus’ book on Pythagorean 
Numbers was devoted to an explanation of its properties.

The first half of Speusippus’ book dealt with ‘linear poly- 
gons, all the plane and solid figures, and the five figures which 
are assigned to the cosmic elements, their individual charac- 
teristics and relations to one another’. The ‘five figures’ are 
the cube, pyramid (tetrahedron), octahedron, eicosahedron and 
dodecahedron; and the ‘cosmic elements’ are Earth, Fire, Air 
and Water. The theory that the Earth-atom is a cube, the 
Fire-atom a pyramid, the Water-atom an _ eicosahedron, 
the Air-atom an octahedron, and that the dodecahedron is the 
figure enclosing the whole Cosmos, is expounded in detail in 
Plato’s Timaeus;® but it is ascribed by Aétius (drawing on 
Theophrastus) to Pythagoras himself; and one of the disputed 
fragments of Philolaus hints at it.! The question therefore 
arises, did Plato borrow this from the Pythagoreans, or did he

aAg b Aza c Ar : : d ‘e

pepe 8 Ax3 (p. 400, ers re ite Dae - aad a

That is, the series of numbers ending with ten contains an equal number of primes

(1, 2) 35 55 7) and composites (45 6, 8 : . o8 ; 
8,9, 10). This appears to be the earliest distinction 
between prime and composite numbers. (Heath, Gh Maths, Vol. I, p. 72.)(1, 2) 35 55 7) and composites (45 6, 8 : . o8 ; 
8,9, 10). This appears to be the earliest distinction 
between prime and composite numbers. (Heath, Gh Maths, Vol. I, p. 72.)

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 223

invent it, and was its later ascription to Pythagoras or Philolaus 
merely an attempt to substantiate the absurd idea‘ that the 
Timaeus was a transcription of the mysterious Pythagorean 
books? The Pythagoreans doubtless knew of the five regular 
solids, though they may not have perfected the construction of 
the octahedron and eicosahedron, which were said to have been 
first ‘discovered’ by Theaetetus.* They were also interested in 
the-Four Elements, on which attention had been focussed by 
Empedocles. It is therefore possible that Plato was taking over 
a Pythagorean suggestion, and that he may have found this in 
Philolaus’ book; but by using it as he does, namely to explain 
how one element can ‘change’ into another, he lifts it out of the 
realm of Pythagoreanism into the Platonic scheme.

On the other hand, the theory in the Timaeus certainly looks 
like a correction of Democritus, who gave his atoms various 
shapes chosen at random, whereas Plato would restrict these 
shapes — for reasons which he explains — to the five regular 
solids; and though this is put into the mouth of Timaeus, who 
speaks authoritatively, the view that Timaeus is expressing the 
doctrines of fifth-century Pythagoreanism cannot be said to 
have been proved;? so that it is possible that the connection 
between the particles of the Four Elements and the Five Solids 
may have been suggested first by Plato.* This question cannot 
be further discussed here; and Philolaus’ part, if any, in 
transmitting such a theory or its ingredients must therefore be 
left undetermined.We are also told that Philolaus’ view of the cube as the 
‘geometrical harmony’ led to the adoption of the term ‘har- 
monic mean’ by the Pythagoreans. The cube has 12 edges, 
8 angles, and 6 faces; and 8 is the mean between 12 and 6 
according to the harmonic proportion. Thus since every cube, 
itself a ‘harmony’ of three equal sides multiplied, exhibits this 
type of proportion, the latter was called “harmonic’.?: +

@ Schol. zz Eucl. XIIL bA2, .

b! The change of name to ‘harmonic’ from ‘sub-contrary’ is elsewhere attributed to 
Hippasus and Archytas. For a description of the three ‘means’, see under Archytas, 
ch. 47, pp. 235-36; also Heath, Gé. Maths., Vol. I, p. 85.

1 See Cornford, Plato’s Cosmology (Introd.) p. 3.

2 Cornford, Plato’s Cosmology, Preface, pp. viii sgg., refuting A. E. Taylor. Cp. 
Burnet EGP‘, pp. 279 599. , 
3 If the ee nudes @iaies to see the depths to which, in modern times, anti- 
Platonic misrepresentation can go, let him consult Hogben, Mathematics for the

Million, pp. 22 599.

"224 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

A mass of mystical lore on numbers was also transmitted by 
Philolaus. The Tetractys,* the triangle formed from the first 
four numbers, not only served as the Pythagorean oath, but 
was also the ‘first principle of health’. It oe the perfect 
number Ten; and this number can be called Faith itself, 
because in it we have sure grounds for faith in the world of 
existing things. Thus it could be called Memory by those who 
give this title to the Monad.? After one_passes Four, which 
expresses the Solid in mathematics, other mystical equations 
are reached: the number Five gives rise to Quality and Colour, 
Six gives the Life-Principle, Seven gives Intelligence, Health 
and Light, Eight gives Love, Friendship, Cleverness and 
Purpose.®It seems that all were not agreed about these equations: 
elsewhere, Ten is said to give the Health-Principle; and obvi- 
ously no very strict rules could be drawn up in a matter so 
controversial, unless the Master himself had spoken. It is 
therefore possible that Pythagoras is not responsible for these 
elaborations of the theory that everything has its natural Num- 
ber; and this is borne out by a passage in Proclus, in which 
we are told that ‘the Pythagoreans’ dedicated different angles 
to different gods: Philolaus, for example, consecrated the angle 
of the triangle to some deities, the angle of the quadrangle to 
others; and that the same angle was assigned to different gods, 
and different angles to the same god, according to their differ- 
ent properties. He dedicated the angle of the triangle to four 
gods: Cones, Hades, Ares and Dionysus, because Cronos 
governs Wet-Cold, Ares Fire, Hades life below Earth (and so 
Earth) and Dionysus the Wet-Hot (wine). The angle of the 
quadrangle he dedicates to Rhea, Demeter and Hestia, and 
that of the dodecahedron to Zeus, as enclosing them all.* © 
Another authority says that Philolaus assigned semicircles to 
the Dioskouroi, the triangle to Athena, the quadrangle to

aw b Ar2 c Arg 
©! Procl. in Eucl. p. 130, 8. If this passage really gives pre-Platonic Pythagorean 
thought, it is the source of Plato's ‘atomic’ theory: for the triangle (as Plato explains in 
Timaeus) gives the construction of the 5 solids; the elements, being composed o} West, 
can be resolved into triangles, which accounts for their being able to ‘change’ into one 
another. But its resemblance to Timacus makes it suspect. 
That is, the Monad was usually called Memory, but the Decad, which gives @

steady basis for our knowledge, is equally deserving of the title.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 225steady basis for our knowledge, is equally deserving of the title.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 225

Hermes; and going still further in subdivision, different angles 
of the quadrangle to Rhea, Hera and so on respectively. Again, 
Plutarch, drawing on Eudoxus, says they gave the angle of the 
triangle to Hades, Dionysus, Ares (not seeing the connection 
between this and the theory of the elements and regular solids, 
he leaves out Cronos); the angle of the quadrangle to Rhea, 
Aphrodite, Demeter, Hestia, Hera; the dodecahedron to Zeus; 
and (a new member) the 56-sided figure (Hekkaipenteconta- 
sek to Typho.*

Philolaus was also credited with transmitting the Pytha- 
gorean cosmology.’ >: This remarkable scheme places Fire in 
the middle of the universe, like a hearth, and therefore in the 
most sacred position, ‘the House of Zeus, the Mother of the 
Gods, the altar, binding-force and measure of Nature’. In this 
central Fire resides the governing principle, placed there by 
God the Creator.*.*: On the outside (uppermost region) of 
the universe, forming a periphery, is another Fire; but the 
central Fire is the orig sal ORE: Round it circle, as in a choric 
dance, ten divine bodies: starting on the outside of the sphere, 
we have the circle of the fixed stars, then the five planets, then 
the sun, then the moon, then the earth, and lastly, between 
earth and the central fire, a body called Antichthon, Counter- 
Earth. This body travels ‘opposite’ Earth, that is, between it 
and the central fire; it is inhabited, but the two races never see 
each other because the face of Earth is always turned ‘out- 
ward’, that is, away from the central fire and towards the other 
planets.The peripheral region, where are the elements in -their 
purity, he called Olympus; the regions containing the five 
planets, the sun and the moon, he called Cosmos; and the 
region below the moon, in which Earth moves — the region of 
change — he called Heavens. Knowledge is concerned with 
the regions of the upper bodies, those beyond earth, where all 
is order; virtue is concerned with the world of change, where 
all is disorder. The Earth, accompanied always by Counter-

Earth, circles round the central fire in the same direction as the 
rig ~ FALVZ Ea ~ anay Oo me 
| Aristotle ascribes it to ‘the so-called Pythagoreans,’ Aétius (drawing on Theo- 
phrastus) to Philolaus. ee 
c! This sentence from Aétius is puzzling: “The ruling principle is the midmost fire, 
which the Creator placed beneath the (sphere) of the Whole lske a keel. (tpdtrews Sixnv). 
It is difficult to reconcile the idea of a keel placed beneath a ship with that of a central 
fire round which everything revolves. Cp. B12; and below, p. 231, note '.

Q

226 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSQ

226 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

sun and moon, but in a different plane.* The sun is transparent 
like a lens, receiving the rays from the (outer) universe, and 
transmitting their light and heat to us, so that there are two 
‘suns’, the fiery element of the heavens (that is, the periphery 
or outer Aether) and the fiery lens; or perhaps one should 
speak of the rays disseminated by this lens as the ‘sun’ we see, 
making yet a third, an ‘image of an image’.®»> The moon 
looks earth-like because it is inhabited all over, like our earth, 
with animals and plants bigger and more beautiful than ours: 
the animals on the moon are fifteen times stronger than those 
on earth because they suffer no loss by excretion; and the 
moon-day is fifteen times longer than the earth-day, that is, the 
moon enjoys the light of the sun for exactly half the time it 
takes to revolve round the central fire (a lunar month), whereas 
Earth (with Counter-Earth) is revolving round the Central 
Fire once every twenty-four hours.* °: The sun takes a solar 
year, and the planets take each their appointed times; the circle 
of the fixed stars scarcely moves at all.

The solar year, according to Philolaus, is 3644 days. The 
Great Year, at which all astronomical phenomena begin to 
repeat themselves, he reckoned at §9 years, with 21 inter-calary 
months.‘ This is a variation on the figures given by Oenopides, 
made apparently in order to make the number of months 
in the Great Year equal the cube of 9.* The credit for being 
the first to say that the Earth revolved was sometimes given to 
Philolaus ;¢ the view was not shared by all Pythagoreans, some 
of whom thought that Earth did not move.

This cosmological system is an endeavour to fit the observedThis cosmological system is an endeavour to fit the observed

a A2r b Arg; and Achill. Isag. in Phaen., Diels, Dox. Gr., pp. 349, 350 
© A22 d A22 e Ar f Aar 
b! The meaning of this passage has been much discussed. See Heath, Aristarchus, 
pp. 116 599. 
¢! Athenaeus IT, 15 records a further conjecture regarding the inhabitants of the moon: 
that the women are oviparous. This comes originally from the same source, for the 
watement idllows that the ofegring are 1 times the size of ourvelves, Diels, Vors. 1, 
Pp. 404, n. 
* See Heath, Aristarchus, pp. 103 s9q., for a discussion of the motion of the fixed stars 
ge ar coe scheme. 
cath, Aristarchus, p. 102: 59 years with 21 inter months = 729, which=9’3 
oe 294 days to a month, the solar year then worth days. Ocnopides gave the 
rane solar year a 365 (+a fraction, #8) which makes the number of months in a 
car=730. Philolaus apparently subtracted 1 from this figure to get the desired

c be f , ° ‘ e . pres 
by ie » - was obliged to give his solar year only 3644 days. This was first no "~~

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 227c be f , ° ‘ e . pres 
by ie » - was obliged to give his solar year only 3644 days. This was first no "~~

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 227

phenomena of the skies into a perfect mathematical scheme, 
according to Pythagorean ideas. Its most interesting feature, 
in the light of modern knowledge, is its removal of the earth 
from the centre of the system, and the giving of that place to 
the Central Fire, round which the earth revolves. But the 
Central Fire is not identified with the sun, and does not even 
supply the sun with its light and heat; and though, like Hera- 
cleitus’ Fire, it is the seat of the government of the universe, it 
seems otherwise otiose, especially to the inhabitants of Earth, 
from whom it is screened by Counter-Earth. Again, the 
insertion of Counter-Earth puzzled ancient commentators: 
Aristotle says in one place that this was done merely to 
bring the number of the orbits to the perfect number Ten.? 
Elsewhere he suggests that Counter-Earth was inserted to 
explain the comparative frequency of lunar eclipses;> but since 
Counter-Earth revolves nearest the Central Fire and is always 
‘opposite’ Earth, this seems unnecessary. A more plausible 
explanation 1s perhaps that Counter-Earth was invented to 
screen Earth from the Central Fire; also, it may have been 
asked why we do not see the Central Fire, or even its rays 
passing us into the farther heavens. The answer to the first 
question may have been that there are no inhabitants on that 
side of Earth; but the answer to the second can only have been 
that there was something in between ourselves and the Central 
Fire. In short, one arbitrary assumption may have led to 
another. But the theory of Counter-Earth as a separate body, 
and of the Central Fire itself, was felt to be unsatisfactory even 
by members of the Pythagorean school: there were some, 
whom Simplicius says represent a more genuine doctrine than 
that criticized by Aristotle, who did away with both by saying 
that the Central Fire was at the centre of the earth, whence it 
gives life to all and warms that part which has cooled down. 
The name ‘Counter-Earth’ they gave to the moon, which they 
also called ‘The Earth in the Aether’.* It follows that these 
had to account for day and night, not by a diurnal revolution 
of Earth round a Central Fire, but by a rotation of Earth on 
its axis. This theory was actually reached, and is associated 
with the names of Ecphantus and Hicetas.*® 58B4; cp. 58B37 b 58B36 © 58B37 
4 Chs. 50 and 51, p. 241 below

228 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Philolaus experimented also on the relation of Number and 
Sound. A late authority (Boethius)* credits him with an 
attempt to divide the tone in music according to a mathema- 
tical scheme: he treated the tone as represented by the cube of 
the first odd number, that is, 27 (3*), and then divided it into 
two slightly unequal parts; the part less than half he called 
Apotomé, and the part greater than half he called Déesis, and 
the difference between them he called Comma. These divisions 
were supported by arbitrary analogies with geometry; but they 
show that he recognized the existence of “semi’-tones of un- 
equal value, and attempted to relate them numerically. It 1s 
also clear that he recognized, and gave fixed values to, certain 
intervals which are less than the semitone. He called the 
intervals ‘excesses’, a mathematical term much used by the 
Pythagoreans.® ©}

His physiological views were:‘ the body is made of the hot 
element only; it has no admixture of cold until after its birth, 
when it breathes in air, and expels it, thus cooling itself. 
Disease is due to bile, blood and phlegm. Phlegm 1s a hot 
element, not cold, as others said, but the cause of fever. Bile 
does not reside in the liver, but is a ‘fluid of the flesh’;* it 
hardly exists at all, or is useless. Blood is congested when the 
flesh 1s compressed within, rarefied when the vessels are dis- 
tended. These remarks, though they do not carry the science 
of medicine any further, are based on observation of certain 
diseases or injuries.The fragments attributed to Philolaus are, with one excep- 
tion,‘ quoted by late authorities, principally Stobaeus, who 
mentions a book On the Cosmos, and another called Bacchae. 
Proclus on Euclid also mentions the Bacchae. There are also 
quotations in the mathematical writers: the Pythagorean 
Nicomachus of Gerasa (c. A.D. 100) and Iamblichus’ commen- 
tary on his book; Theo of Smyrna (c. a.p. 125); and in the 
work called Divine Properties of Numbers,* of unknown author- 
ship. These fragments are all in the Doric dialect, and there- 
fore in Philolaus’ native tongue, if he was a native of Tarentum;

: a b B6 ¢ A2s; cp. Ch. 46, 4 (below, p. 233) d A27 e A28 
I

cl,

1 He was perhaps trying to make this term cover pus as well as phlegm. 
? He appears to be referring to lymph.

* Geodoyoupevar dpiOuntixfis. See Heath, Gk. Maths., Vol. I, p. 97.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 229* Geodoyoupevar dpiOuntixfis. See Heath, Gk. Maths., Vol. I, p. 97.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 229

but it has been made the chief ground for doubting their 
genuineness, by those who reject them all, the argument being 
that until the time of the Peloponnesian War, Ionic was the 
dialect of science and philosophy. Another argument is that 
there is nothing in Plato or Aristotle to suggest that Philolaus 
contributed anything important to Pythagorean science; Aris- 
totle in particular almost always speaks of ‘the Pythagoreans’, 
or ‘the so-called Pythagoreans’. Nevertheless, it is not im- 
possible that Philolaus was a Tarentine, and chose to write his 
views in ‘common Doric’ instead of ‘common Ionic’, perhaps 
because he wished to reach a different audience; whatever may 
have happened afterwards, there is no need to suppose that he 
wrote for Athenians. Aristotle’s silence proves nothing, since 
he regarded Pythagorean doctrine as the work of a group, and 
may have treated Philolaus’ account as being on the whole a 
record rather than an original work; he does in one place quote 
Philolaus’ own words. The fragments themselves are clearly 
and simply written, and in places (like the summaries) show 
a divergence from the general Pythagorean point of view that 
would surely have been avoided by a forger.

Fragment 16, from the Eudemian Ethics of Aristotle, 1s 
generally accepted; Fragment 20 is regarded as doubtful be- 
cause it exalts the number Seven to the place which Philolaus 
elsewhere gives to Ten. Fragment 21 is generally rejected as 
post-Platonic and borrowed from Timaeus.According to Diogenes Laertius, the first sentence of 
Philolaus’ book Ox the Cosmos or On Nature stated that every- 
thing was a conjunction of That-Which-Limits and the 
Without-Limit, both the whole. universe and all things it con- 
tained.* A proof of this (quoted by Stobaeus) followed: logic- 
ally, things must be made of That-Which-Limits, or the 
Without-Limit, or both. They cannot all be Limiting, or all 
Without-Limit (presumably because the existence of the 
Limiting implies something else on which it impresses Limit; 
and on the other hand, if everything were Unlimited, nothing 
with form would exist); so that they must be made up of both 
factors: That-Which-Limits (the Form) and That-Which-is- 
Limited (Material). This is borne out by observation: things

a Br 
1 Burnet, EGP*, pp. 277 599:

230 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

made up from that which makes Limit are themselves 
Limit-making; things made up from the Without-Limit are 
without-limit; and things made up of a mixture partake of both 
qualities.» There could be no beginning of knowledge if all 
were Without-Limit (formless). Everything that is known has 
Number; nothing can be understood without it.° (It 1s to be 
noticed that this differs from the usual Pythagorean doctrine 
that everything is Number.) Numbers are of three kinds (not 
two): the Odd, the Even, and the Odd-Even? (that 1s, those

even numbers of which the halves are odd, such as ten). 7even numbers of which the halves are odd, such as ten). 7

The essential nature of things is eternal; nature, to be fully 
understood, requires divine, not human, intelligence. In fact 
it would be impossible for us to understand anything that 
exists unless underlying it there were the essential nature of 
things, those things from which the whole universe took its 
rise, that is, things giving Limit and things without Limit. 
These elements are unlike and unrelated, and could not be 
made into an ordered whole without the agency of Harmony, 
which came into being for this purpose and fulfilled the task 
of fitting together things that are unlike and unrelated.¢

So much for the general scheme of things. The remaining 
fragments deal with particular spheres of knowledge. A frag- 
ment on music gives the component parts of the octave: the 
octave contains the major fourth and the major fifth.: The fifth 
is greater than the fourth by a tone. The ratio of the lengths 
of the strings giving out the notes of these intervals is: Octave, 
1:23; Fourth, 3 : 4; Fifth, 2: 3. The octave consists of 5 tones 
and 2 semitones, the fifth of 3 whole tones and 1 semitone, the 
fourth of 2 tones and 1 semitone.!

There follow some observations on particular numbers. 
The Monad, or Principle of One-ness, is the first number 
fitted together (it was regarded as being both odd and even). 
It is placed at the centre of the Sphere and is called the Hearth.® 
It is the first principle of everything.» But the number Ten is 
the most perfect; without it everything would be uncertain

a Bz b B3 c By a Bs ¢ B6; Bio f B6

& By bh BS

1 These were the only intervals less than the octave which the Greeks recognized as 
consonant: to them the intervals of the major third and the sixth were dissonant. 
(Reinach, La Musique Grecque, gives a clear account of the elements of Greek music.)

ovAAaft = major fourth (later S14 tecocpov). 
&:’ 6€e1iv= major fifth (later Sic tévte).ovAAaft = major fourth (later S14 tecocpov). 
&:’ 6€e1iv= major fifth (later Sic tévte).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 231

and obscure.* There follows a remarkable panegyric on the 
nature of Number, as Leader and Teacher of everyone in what- 
ever is doubtful or unknown. Without it, nothing could be 
known, either in itself or in its relationship to other things; but 
since it exists, the man who fits it into his soul can perceive 
everything as knowable, whether divine or human, in whatever 
craft or art. The nature of Number, that is, Harmony (the 
fitting-together of things according to numerical systems) is 
incapable of admitting anything false; falsehood and Envy 
belong to the Without-Limit, the Unintelligible, the Irra- 
tional. No falsehood can breathe upon Number; for falsehood 
is thé enemy of nature, and truth is close kin to the family of 
Number.?

A brief fragment refers to the ‘five elements of the Sphere’: 
Fire, Water, Earth and Air in the Sphere, and the vehicle? of 
the Sphere as,the fifth. There is here no mention of the five 
regular solids, with which they were equated, so that the quota- 
tion if genuine is incomplete. A physiological fragment 
analyses the four elements of the Rational Animal as Brain (the 
seat of Mind), Heart (the seat of feelings and soul), navel, and 
organs of generation. The brain is peculiar to man, the heart 
is proper to animals, the navel (corresponding to roots) proper 
to plant-life, and the organs of reproduction to all, since all 
things grow from seed.4

Lastly come ethics. Clement quotes Philolaus as preaching 
the ancient doctrine of transmigration — that the soul has been 
enclosed in its body, as in a tomb,? for sins in a past life.e A 
corollary to this was the view that so long as we are in the body, 
we are bound to stay there as in a prison, and not try to escape: 
that is, suicide is a sin.f Cebes in the Phaedo claims to have 
heard this from Philolaus himself. Aristotle attributes to@ Bix; cp. Ar3 b Brr ¢Br2;cp.Ar7 4Br3 eBrg f Bis

1 Saxds. The word means the hull of a ship; it has been disputed, but the emend- 
ation to dAxdés (‘envelope’) is even less satisfactory. (Wilam.-Moell., Platon, Vol. II, 
p- 91). It is difficult to see how the metaphor of a ship can fit the Pythagorean scheme; 
one can hardly agree with Diels that the Aether encloses the Cosmos as a merchant- 
vessel encloses its cargo; this would mean that the Central Fire was in the hold. Cp. 
Pp. 225 above.

2 &pa aio: no doubt a common Pythagorean proverb, quoted by Plato in the 
Gorgias, together with the saying that the soul is a jar because of its credulity and re- 
ceptivity (qi@os: m@avés) and a sieve (Kéoxivov) because of its insatiability. Plato says 
he got this from a witty Sicilian or Italian; so that this may refer to Philolaus or 
Archytas. Cp. Chapter I, pp. 14, 15 above.

232 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Philolaus the saying that we have certain thoughts (Logoi) 
which are stronger than ourselves.*

Of the three references to the book called Bacchae, the first 
states that the world is one, and that it began to evolve from 
the middle outward, the ‘upward’ being correspondent to the 
‘downward’.> This describes the circular system as if it had a 
top and a bottom. The second reference concerned the sun, 
but is lost;* and the third classes the book among those which 
explain the nature of,God by means of mathematical figures.¢ 
Beside the cosmogony can perhaps be set the reference in 
Aétius, where he says that Philolaus says the destruction of the 
universe comes about from two causes: fire rushing from the 
sky, or water from the moon, the air having been poured out 
by the revolution. These three elements supply the ‘nurturing 
exhalations’ of the Cosmos, but can apparently cause destruc- 
tion if any one gets the upper hand.¢

45. EURYTUS45. EURYTUS

Eurytus of SourHern tary: about 400 B.c. He was a pupil 
of Philolaus and, like his master, was assigned to several cities: 
Croton, Metapontium, Tarentum.!

Theophrastus, and an unknown commentator on Aristotle, ¢ 
have preserved Eurytus’ contribution to Pythagorean thought: 
he interpreted the doctrine that Things are Numbers to mean 
that shapes are delimited by points. This theory was applied by 
others to metaphysical concepts: for instance, the soul is said 
to come from One, and Space (or the Void) from Two. Again, 
it was applied to mathematical forms: the triangle was Three, 
the quadrangle Four, and so on. Beyond that, they did not go. 
Eurytus, however, continued the process, assigning specific 
numbers to Man, Horse, and other particular existences of the 
animal and vegetable kingdoms. The number composing Man 
was assumed to be 250; that of Plant, 360.

He demonstrated his theory in a graphic way, by means of 
coloured pebbles which he used to stick on to a wall smeared 
with plaster, and so represent the form of Man or Plant with

the number of ‘units’ which he said composed them. 
THe PB SB SC Rig CA FiyepaaAgands = 843

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES ° 233

The crudity of this interpretation needs no comment; but it 
was at least an attempt to understand the Pythagorean theory 
of Number as the material element, and shows how little this 
could convey to the weaker members. Yet Eurytus is classed 
with Philolaus as one of the men who taught the last generation 
of Pythagoreans.*

46. ARCHIPPUS. LYSIS. OPSIMUS 
Arcuippus and Lysis of Tarentum:? middle of fifth century. 
Opsimus of RuEciuMm:* contemporary, or a generation later.

Archippus and Lysis are named by Jamblichus as the only 
two who escaped from Croton.? Archippus went back to his 
native town Tarentum, Lysis through hatred of oligarchical 
government crossed to Thebes, where he became the teacher 
of Epameinondas.! Here he died.e He was at some time the 
teacher of Philolaus.Lysis was sometimes credited with having written books 
ascribed to Pythagoras. He said that the Number composing 
God was inexpressible; but Opsimus held the opposing view 
that God could be expressed by the number One. The ‘proof’ 
of this was: God is that by which ‘the greatest of the numbers’ 
exceeds the nearest approaching number. Ten is the ‘greatest’ 
number (in importance and power), Nine is the nearest to it, 
therefore God 1s the number One.» Nothing else is known of 
Opsimus. The opinions of Archippus are unrecorded.

4.7. ARCHYTAS 
Arcuytas of Tarentum: first half of fourth century.

Archytas was a contemporary of Plato. A letter written by 
Plato to him survives, ‘ as well as a forged letter from Archytas 
to Plato. His Life was written by Aristoxenus of Tarentum,!

Bue aoe bs Cg d 1; 14 (Pyth.) 16; cp. 
f 44Ara B 3 hy i As; A6 j Ag; Ar 
1 See above, p. 78, note !. Either the massacre at Croton took place after the death 
of Pythag., or there is confusion between this Lysis and the Lysis who taught 
Epameinondas. The latter is credited by Diog. L. with a letter to Hipparchus, who 
wrote on Democritus: see below, p. 325.

234 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

whose father Spintharus knew Archytas well;* and Aristotle 
wrote a work in three books on his philosophy. All other 
writers draw on these sources, so that the tradition regarding 
him is exceptionally sound. The titles of numerous writings 
are ascribed to him;> some of these are spurious, others doubt- 
ful; but he certainly wrote a work on Mathematical Science, and 
on Harmony;° and very probably also one on Mechanics.4 Three 
fairly long fragments survive, as well as his construction and 
proof for the a of two mean proportionals. The frag- 
ments are written in literary Doric.Archytas, a Pythagorean, pupil of Philolaus, was equally 
distinguished in scientific thought and in practical life. He 
was for many years elected general of Tarentum, under the 
democratic constitution which ordinarily allowed this office to | 
be held for one year only; and during his term of office he was 
never defeated.* His authority was accepted not only in Taren- 
tum, but over a confederacy of Greeks in Magna Graecia;‘ and 
he was able to negotiate with rulers as powerful as Dionysius 
of Syracuse.é The powers allotted to him by his fellow- 
countrymen were autocratic;5 but there is no record of his ever 
having abused them; on the contrary, all the anecdotes told of 
him exhibit his justice, kindness and self-restraint.i His love 
of children was proverbial: “Archytas’ rattle’ was a mechanical 
toy invented by him to give children an outlet for their 
energies,i and this may have been the purpose of the wooden 
dove he made which flew.* His reputation with the Romans 
was legendary, as is shown by the reference to him in Horace’s 
Ode.! In Aristoxenus’ Life he was depicted as debating with 
the hedonist philosopher Polyarchus; this served Cicero as a 
basis for a tirade against m daa put into the mouth of 
Cato, and purporting to be an ‘old speech’ of Archytas 
which Cato had learnt when as a young man he was staying 
in Tarentum.™

Plato on his travels visited and established a friendship with 
Archytas. It was Archytas who persuaded him to visit Diony- 
sius, much against Plato’s own judgement, for the second time 
in 360 8.c.; and Archytas was obliged to intervene and save 
Plato when the latter’s life was endangered."

49; A2 ¢ Br 4 By; cp. Ar © Ar f A2 
1 Ar; A7; A8; Ag; Ar1;Ar2;As Jj Aro; A2; cp. A8

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES49; A2 ¢ Br 4 By; cp. Ar © Ar f A2 
1 Ar; A7; A8; Ag; Ar1;Ar2;As Jj Aro; A2; cp. A8

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES

' Archytas’ achievements in mathematics were even more re- 
markable than his successasa general and ruler. Inthe first place, 
he had to the full the Pythagorean belief in the efficacy of Number 
to explain everything correctly: it is not surprising, he says, that 
mathematicians alone can give a true judgement on all natural 
phenomena, both generally and severally. They have provided 
us with a correct account of the speed of the heavenly bodies, 
their risings and settings, as well as of (plane) geometry, arith- 
metic, spherical geometry, and music.* This shows that Archy- 
tas recognized the mathematical subjects mentioned by Plato in 
the Repubdlic,®.»: though Plato adds solid geometry to the list.His views on Calculation, or Arithmetic, are suggested in 
an incomplete fragment from a book entitled Studies: he set 
this science far above all others, and even above geometry, as 
being able to treat problems still more clearly and to furnish 
proofs and deal with the Forms.* *: That is, Arithmetic goes 
back to first principles, the essential nature of numbers them- 
selves. In particular, he discussed the nature of the Monad, 
and defined it as partaking of the nature of both odd and even, 
because when added to an odd number, it made that number 
even, and when added to an even number, made it odd. He 
was also said to have written on the Decad.* The passage in 
which he clearly states the definitions of the three kinds of pro- 
gression—arithmetical, geometric and harmonic—is preserved: 
the arithmetical mean occurs when three terms are so related 
that the first exceeds the second by the same amount as the 
second exceeds the third (for example, 6, 4 and 2); the geo- 
metric mean, when the first is to the second as the second 1s 
to the third (for example, 2, 4 and 8); and the harmonic mean, 
when ‘by whatever part of itself the first exceeds the second, 
the second exceeds the third by the same part of the third’, for 
example, 6, 4 and 3, when 6 —4=2, 4—3=1, and 2 :6=1 : 3. 
These definitions occur in his work on Music, and are given as 
a preliminary to that study, not to arithmetic.‘ ‘1 He also stated 
and proved the proposition that there can be no number which

ar eBs fB2 
See Heath, Gé. Maths., Vol. I, pp. 11-13. 
c! The word used is etn. This probably means the ‘forms’ of Number, i.e. the 
Odd and the Even; it is so used by Philolaus, 44Bs. 
f1 The harmonic mean was so called because its terms gave the numerical ratios of the 
three principal musical intervals: 6 : 3 = 2:1 (the octave), 6:4 = 3:2 (the fifth), and 
4:3 = the fourth.

236 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS236 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

is a geometric mean between two numbers in the ratio 
n:n+1.% 1 Archytas’ proof cites as already known several 
propositions which occur in slightly different forms in Euclid’s 
Book VII; Archytas therefore must have had access to some 
handbook on the Elements of Mathematics similar to that of 
Euclid, and used by Euclid in compiling his own book.

In geometry, Archytas worked out a brilliant construction 
in three dimensions by which two mean proportionals between 
two given lines could be found. The construction and its 
i 4 are given in full by Eutocius.» Archytas’ construction 
required a circle, a half-cylinder erected on half this circle at 
right angles to it, a térus generated by the revolution of a semi- 
circle, and a right cone generated by the revolution of a triangle 
round a point. The curves described by these figures intersect 
in such a way as to give the required two mean proportionals.

. D

AB, AC are the given lines, to which it is required to find two mean proportionals 
x and y, i.e. two lines such that AB: x=x:y=y: AC.

On AC as diameter, a circle is described, with AB as its chord.

The semicircle on AC, revolving with one end fixed at A, at right angles to the 
plane of the circle ABCE, produces the curved solid known as the torus.

A half-cylinder is generated on the semicircle ABC by a line moving at right 
angles to the plane of ABC. The revolving torus, passing through the half-cylinder, 
gives a curve.

Then the triangle ACD is described, CD being the tangent at C, and AD the 
result of producing AB to meet this tangent at D.

The triangle ACD is then made to revolve round AC, thus generating a right cone 
with apex at A. The resulting surface will cut the curve formed by the half-cylinder 
and the torus; and if the point of intersection be called P, AP will be x, the first of 
the required mean proportionals.

The revolving triangle ACD will at the moment of intersection when P is found,The revolving triangle ACD will at the moment of intersection when P is found,

also intersect the circumference of the circle at a point which be M. The 
line AM will be Jy» the second of the tw Pe ee ey called M. 
Thus AB: AP=AP: AM=/*" vo mean proportionals.

4! For translation and explanation, see Heath, Gé. Maths., Vol. 1, p. 215.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 237

A proof is then given.

This construction solved for the first time the problem of 
the duplication of the cube; for as Hippocrates of Chios had 
pointed out, the duplication of the cube depended on the find- 
ing of two mean proportionals between two lines one of which 
should be twice the length of the other; and Archytas’ solution 
applied to two straight lines of any length.

Other solutions were afterwards evolved, but none more 
brilliant; it was the conception of a three-dimensional figure 
with moving lines generating planes, and moving planes 
generating solids, which caused it to be said of Archytas that 
he originated the science of mathematical mechanics.* Plu- 
tarch records the statement that Plato censured this and other 
such solutions as having recourse to the visible, instead of 
relying on pure reason; but this seems to be an assumption 
based on the Repudlic,s where Plato condemns the ad hoc way 
of studying astronomy, and to have no more warrant than the 
statement in Diogenes Laertius, that Plato credited Archytas 
with having discovered the (duplication of the) cube.4 Plato 
does not mention Archytas in this connection, or refer to him 
by name, except in the Seventh Letter.In connection with spherical geometry must be mentioned 
his remarkable argument regarding infinity. The problem was: 
‘If I had reached the outside (of the universe), say the heaven 
of the fixed stars, could I stretch my hand or my stick out- 
wards, or not?’ He concluded that at any point it was always 
absurd to answer No; so that, no matter whether what is be- 
yond at each stage be body or space, there must be extension 
to infinity.° He thus for the first time gave a reasoned proof 
in support of the theory of Melissus as opposed to that of 
Zeno.

He was said to have paid more attention to the study of 
music than any of the Pythagoreans, f applying his mathemat- 
cal knowledge to the theory of sound. In general, he held that 
no sound is produced without the striking of one thing on 
another. Now there are numerous sounds which are outside 
the range of our natural perception, because of the weakness of 
the impact producing them, or the distance of the subject from

- » c VII, 528B d Ar e¢ Az4 f Ar6 
; For seep dagen and translation (English) see Heath, Gk. Maths., Vol. I, 
Pp. 246-93,(German) Diels, Yors. I, pp. 425-7:

238 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS- » c VII, 528B d Ar e¢ Az4 f Ar6 
; For seep dagen and translation (English) see Heath, Gk. Maths., Vol. I, 
Pp. 246-93,(German) Diels, Yors. I, pp. 425-7:

238 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

the source of the sound,? or even because the sound is too loud.* 
Difference in pitch is due to the rate of motion communicated 
to the air by the blow: rapid motion gives high pitch, slower 
motion gives lower pitch. In support of this, he gave several 
illustrations: the human voice, the note of the reed and the 
flute, the sound of the drum used in das ae ceremonies.* In 
particular, he worked out the numerical ratios to 
to the intervals between the notes of the tetrachord* for three 
different types of scale: the enharmonic, the chromatic, and the 
diatonic.>»»1 Archytas wrote much on music, recording not only 
his own calculations, but those of other Pythagoreans: an ex- 
ample of the latter’s work in experimenting arithmetically with 
the numerical ratios corresponding to octave, fourth and fifth, 
is quoted from Archytas by Porphyry,* but does not seem to 
have much point in comparison with Archytas’ own careful 
and well-directed investigations.

He touched on biology with an inquiry into the reason why all 
the parts, other than the main organs, of plants (stem, shoot) and 
animals (arms, legs, trunk) are rounded, not triangular or poly- 
gonal ;¢ and with an inquiry into the nature of sight. The former 
heexplained by means of his theory of motion: the most natural 
type of motion is that according to ‘equal proportion’ (as for 
instance when a triangle revolves on its central axis and generates 
a cone) and this alone returns on itself, generating rounded sur- 
faces.* In hisexplanation of the latter, he differed from Plato, who 
thought that the rays from our eyes mixed and united with the 
outer light to produce images, whereas Archytas thought that the 
visual rays alone were effective, without assistance from outside.a Br; Arga,cp.B6 > Ar6 CcArz dA2aza ¢ Aas

b! These intervals are given in full in Diels, Yors. Vol. I, p-428. The series of intervals 
of the Greek tetrachord is: in the diatonic scale, tone, tone, semitone; in the chromatic 
scale, minor third, semitone, semitone; in the enharmonic, major third, quarter-tone, 
quarter-tone. The last, which owed its origin to the flute, enjoyed a great vogue during 
the fifth century and temporarily ousted the diatonic, but fell into discredit in the fourth 
century. The chromatic scale originated with stringed instruments. See Reinach, La 
Musique Grecque, pp. 15 599.

1 The answer to Zeno’s puzzle of the millet-seed. See above, p. 163.

* The reason why we cannot hear the music of the spheres. See below, p. 253, and 
above, p. 82.

> A tetrachord is a series of four notes (or half an octave) between the first and last of 
which the interval is a major fourth, e.g. from E to A. See above, p. 230.

* The idea was probably suggested by the growth of the tree-trunk in rings from the 
centre outward; the human trunk is thought to grow outward in layers in the same way. 
There is also an analogy with the Pythagorean evolution of the universe from the centre 
outward in circles.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES

He touched on metaphysics in defining the cause of anything 
as twofold; material and active.» Eudemus suggests that his 
use of the word ‘cause’ for certain mathematical concepts such 
as the Great-Small, Equal-Unequal, Odd-Even, was better 
than that of Plato’s classification of them as forms of ‘motion’, 
which is absurd.>A passage in Archytas’ own words, from his book on Mathe- 
matics,° strongly recalls Plato: he says that all knowledge is 
acquired in one of two ways, either by learning it from others, 
or by discovering it for oneself. He adds that the thing learnt 
from another is alien, but the thing discovered by one’s own 
efforts is individual; further, that discovery without research 
is difficult and rare, discovery with research easy, but impossible 
unless one understands the right method of investigation.

There follows a passage in rhythmic oratorical prose in which 
Reasoning is extolled as a force towards social amelioration: it 
checks strife, increases harmony, gives equality and justice, and 
banishes greed. Rich give to poor, poor receive from rich, ina 
desire to achieve this ‘equality’ or fairness. A correct ‘calcula- 
tion’ of consequences prevents the commission of crime.@

It will be observed that in all Archytas’ enthusiasm for the 
manifold wonders wrought by Number, there is no hint of any 
religious or magical admixture such as is attributed to Philolaus 
and others. The rational attributes of Number and Harmony 
are sufficiently wonderful in themselves; hence his belief that 
in education literature should be subordinated to music.°

48. OCCELUS 
Occetus (or OceLtus) of Lucania: date uncertain.

Occelus is mentioned in Iamblichus’ list. He appears to have 
been one of a family of Lucanians: who took up Pythagorean- 
ism,‘ and the only indication of his date is the tradition (for 
which the only warrant is in the forged letter from Archytas to 
Plato) that Archytas visited his descendants.® &'

Det Baie c B3 d B3 eArgb fr 8&4

8! Lucian (pro Lapsu I, 729) for the purposes of his fiction makes Occelus and Archy- 
tas contemporaries of Pythagoras.

1 The Lucanians were not highly esteemed by the Greeks: Isocr. VIII, 50; Dion. Hal. 
Demosth., 17.

240 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS1 The Lucanians were not highly esteemed by the Greeks: Isocr. VIII, 50; Dion. Hal. 
Demosth., 17.

240 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Titles of several works were ascribed to him: Ox the Nature 
of the Whole, On Law, Kingship and Piety.» Stobaeus quotes 
rom the treatise Ox the Nature of the Whole, attributing it to 
Occelus; but these passages are now regarded as a forgery. > 
Occelus is said by late writers to have demonstrated (with 
pi hie ee and others) that the world and the human race were 
eternal ;° but Sextus couples his name with Aristotle’s as believ- 
ing that the universe was created out of the five figures ;4 and 
Joannes Lydus, purporting to quote Occelus’ own words, 
credits him with ‘the Triad first constructed beginning, middle 
and end.’

We must therefore conclude that Occelus was a member of 
the school who lived somewhat distant from the city centres, 
and wrote for his own people;¢ that he probably was concerned 
merely to pass on Pythagorean doctrines, and originated 
nothing; and that his writings, though the memory of them 
lingered, were lost before it was thought worth while to forge 
others under his name in Roman times.

49. TIMAEUS 
Timaeus of [ratian Locri.

There is no evidence for the existence of Timaeus except 
Plato’s dialogue of that name. He is there described as of good 
family, rich, and having held the highest offices in his city; 
and as one who had made a special study of astronomy. The 
fact that such a man left no mark on political or philosophical 
history is now regarded as ground for believing that Plato 
invented the character.* The treatise On the Soul of the Uni- 
verse and Nature, ascribed to Timaeus, is a forgery of the first 
century 4.D., derived from Plato’s dialogue.

83543536 bz ©2533; Stob. Eel. 1, 20 d 3a € Ch. 49 (Timaeus) 3

fy (Tim. 20A)

b1 The passages (not given in Diels) can be found in Pauly-Wissowa, Real-Encycl. s.v. 
Okellos (Vol. XVII. ii, pp. 2362-2380).fy (Tim. 20A)

b1 The passages (not given in Diels) can be found in Pauly-Wissowa, Real-Encycl. s.v. 
Okellos (Vol. XVII. ii, pp. 2362-2380).

1 The question has been minutely discussed by German scholars: Harder, Neue Phil. 
Unters. 1 (1926); Theiler, Gnomon, II (1926); Beutler, Pauly-Wissowa, XVIL., ii (1937).

? See Cornford, Plato’s Cosmology, pp. 2, 3-

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 241

50. HICETAS 
Hicertas of Syracuse: date unknown.

His theory is preserved by Cicero, drawing on Theophras- 
tus. He was a Pythagorean, and held that the whole heavens, 
with sun, moon, and stars, stand still; the egrth alone moves, 
revolving with great rapidity on its axis, thus creating the same 
appearance as if the earth stood still. He apparently accepted 
the Pythagorean belief in Counter-Earth;® we are not told how 
he fitted it in with his revolution-theory, but probably he was 
one of those who gave this title to the moon.

SI. ECPHANTUS 
EcpHantTus of Syracuse: date uncertain.

Ecphantus, like Hicetas, believed that the earth revolves on 
its own axis,° towards the east, and that this, not a change in 
its position in space, accounts for the phenomena of the skies.‘ 
He was a Pythagorean;° he held views which, reported by late 
writers,‘ sound like those of Anaxagoras and the Atomists: 
the primary bodies are indivisible, and have three differences 
— size, shape and force — from which perceptible objects arise. 
They move not by their weight or by impact, but by a divine 
energy which he called Mind and Soul, or Purpose. There is 
only one universe.&

§2. XENOPHILUS 
XENOPHILUus of Cuatcipice: first half of fourth century.

Xenophilus was one of the last of the Pythagoreans whom 
Aristoxenus knew.» He was said to have lived to the age of 
over a hundred and five, at Athens, without experiencing any 
physical disability, and to have died with his intellectual 
powers still at their best.! He specialized in music, and was 
one of Aristoxenus’ teachers.@r bz cy ayy Cass frz23qg 8133 Bayz 42 343 
1 See p. 227 above.

242 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

$3. DIOCLES, ECHECRATES, POLYMNASTUS, PHANTONy ARION

These men were inhabitants of Phlids, where they consti- 
tuted a Pythagorean ‘cell’ at the beginning of the fourth 
century. They were pupils of Philolaus and Eurytus.”

Echecrates, who was connected also with Tarentum,* was 
a speaker in Plato’s Phaedo, and is there made to refer to the 
Pythagorean? doctrine that the soul is a harmony.°

$4. PRORUS, AMYCLAS, CLEINIAS

Prorus of Cyrene, Amycias, and Cremnias of TARENTUM 
were latter-day Pythagoreans.

' Aristoxenus is the authority for the existence of these men, 
and the little that is known of them.

Cleinias was the best known. It is said that he went to 
Cyrene from Tarentum in order to help Prérus (who had lost 
his property in a civil strife), merely on hearing that Prorus 
was a Pythagorean. His name was coupled with that of 
Amyclas (otherwise unknown) as having prevented Plato from 
burning the books of Democritus ;£ and two anecdotes are told 
of him, one illustrating the belief that the music of the lyre 
soothes anger," the other showing an un-Pythagorean hatred of 
women. !

Forged writings on arithmetic in the name of Prorus and 
Cleinias were in circulation in later times.!

55. DAMON AND PHINTIAS

Damon and Puintias of Syracuse lived in the reign of

Dionysius the Younger (367-56 B.c.).

Their story, like that of Cleinias and Amyclas, was said to 
have been told by Dionysius the Younger to illustrate the 
strength of Pythagorean friendship: Phintias, condemned to

c 8A, 1. 26 4 44A23 e 4 (Phaed. 88D) 
: ha 16

& 2 i ¢

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES . 243c 8A, 1. 26 4 44A23 e 4 (Phaed. 88D) 
: ha 16

& 2 i ¢

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES . 243

death for ig ae treason, is able to produce a friend willing to 
stand surety for him while he arranges his affairs; and himself 
duly returns at the appointed time to undergo sentence. They 
are released by Dionysius, who had devised the scheme to test 
them; but refuse to admit him into their friendship.*

§6. SIMUS, MYONIDES, EUPHRANOR

Simus of Poszrponza: fourth century. 
Myonrpes and EupHRANoR.

Simus was accused of having stolen and put forward as his 
own certain Pythagorean discoveries, including that of one of 
the seven ‘means’ or kinds of proportion.» >!

Myonides and Euphranor were said to have brought the 
number of ‘means’ from six up to ten.© Euphranor was, like 
many other Pythagoreans, a skilled flute-player.¢

57. LYCON 
Lycon (or Lycus) of Tarentum: late fourth century.

Lycon is credited with a book on the Pythagorean life.° 
Tradition also connects him with Iasos‘.in Caria, so that he 
may have gone to Tarentum for instruction, and written the 
book for his own people. oe

His writings seem to have been concerned chiefly with diet. 
He stated that Pythagoras’ diet was moderate; and he men- 
tioned a certain kind of lettuce well known as an anti-aphrodi- 
s1ac.& a

He is named by Aristocles, the Peripatetic (who lived in the

a cp. Ch. 54; and 58D7 §§235 599. b2 C3 d 44A7 €3

‘3 8 2; cp. 5 a

b1 Diels argues that the testimony regarding these three shows the rivalry existing in 
the Pythagorean school during the fourth century: Pythagoras had known only three 
types of progression (arithmetic, geometric, harmonic); Hippasus and Archytas added 
three more; and the last generation, Myonides and Euphranor, discovered another four. 
The discovery of Simus was denied to him by jealous fellow-workers (Diels, Vors. I, 
p- 445; Heath, Gk. Maths., pp. 86, 87).

244 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS244 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

third century a.p. and is quoted by Eusebius) as having re- 
tailed several absurd stories about Aristotle,* one of which 
speaks of Aristotle’s departure to Chalcis (in 322 B.c.); Lycon 
was therefore one of the last of those who called themselves 
Pythagoreans.®

§8. PYTHAGOREAN SCHOOL

A. lamblichus’ Catalogue

Iamblichus (fourth century a.p.) wrote an account of Pytha- 
goreanism in ten books. The first book, a Life of Pythagoras 
and his school, contains a list of all Pythagoreans known by 
name, and their native cities. There were naturally many 
others whose names remained unknown. The total number of 
names was 218 men, 17 women, as follows:

MEN: Croton 29 
Metapontium 38

Acragas 1 (Empedocles)

Elea 1 (Parmenides) 
Tarentum 43 
Sybaris 12 
Carthage 4 
Paros 10 
(Italian) Locri 10 
(Italian) Poseidonia 7 
Lucania 4 
(Italian) Dardania I 
Argos 6 
Laconia 3 
“Hyperborea’ I 
Rhegium 12 
Syracuse 3 
Samos 6 
Caulonia 5 
Phlius 4 
Sicyon 4 
Cyrene 4 
Cyzicus 4

d4

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 245

Catane 
Corinth 
Etruria

Athens 
Pontus

i)

— 4 Pt he

WOMEN: Croton 
Lucania 
Sparta 
Metapontium 
Arcadia 
Tarentum 
Phlius 
Sybaris 
Laconia

Argos

Ow eH Ne S&S NNW

i)

From this list it will be seen that the cult remained attached 
to South Italy, in spite of the débacle at Croton. Aristotle 
sometimes calls them ‘the Italian group, the so-called Pytha- 
goreans ,* and Iamblichus in his Pythagorean Life says that the 
Pythagorean training caused Italy to be filled with philoso- 
phers, poets and statesmen, so that thanks to Pythagoras it 
was called ‘Great Hellas’> (Magna Graecia).

B. Anonymous PythagoreansB. Anonymous Pythagoreans

The chief authority for the opinions of the Pythagoreans 1s 
Aristotle. Plato, though he was the first to bring back definite 
information on Pythagorean teaching from Italy to Athens, and 
was obviously steeped in Pythagorean thought, wove their 
theories into his own system and did not expound them 
separately. Aristotle, however, took great pains to understand 
and assess the value of the Pythagorean contribution. He 
wrote a special book Ox the Pythagoreans, but this, strangely, 
did not survive, though much of the later writing on Pytha- 
goreanism must have been based on it. Apart from this, 
Aristotle wrote at length on particular points of Pythagorean 
doctrine in the Metaphysics, and there are references in 
De Caelo, Physics, Ethics, Politics, Posterior Analytics, and 
Problems.

® 58B8; 58B375 42, 5; 65, 35 31B136 b 58D §166

246 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

The Peripatetic School pursued Aristotle’s interest in the 
Pythagoreans. Of his — s, Aristoxenus of Tarentum wrote 
on the Pythagorean Life, as well as on Music, his special sub- 
ject; he was well qualified to record the development of the 
Pythagorean studies, since he was personally acquainted with 
the contemporary members of the School, and his father Spin- 
tharus knew the previous generation. Theophrastus wrote on 
Pythagorean metaphysics, and Eudemus on their theories of 
number and harmony. Almost all other accounts are found in 
late writers: the Neo-Platonists, Porphyry (third century a.p.), 
Iamblichus (fourth century a.p.), Proclus (fifth century a.p.), 
Simplicius (sixth century a.p.), as well as in the compilers of 
collections, Diogenes Laertius, Stobaeus (fifth century a.p.), 
and the lexicographers.Aristotle, having devoted a separate book to an account of 
Pythagoreanism, mentions elsewhere particular points only, 
which he wishes to criticize. When these passages are col- 
lected together,: variant opinions among the Pythagoreans 
themselves emerge, and it 1s not possible to gather either to 
what groups, or what times, these differences are to be assigned. 
Further, it is not always clear what the authors of the view 
Aristotle happens to be criticizing actually said; this has to be 
gathered from his remarks, and even then we do not know if 
he has stated their case fairly; in fact, it is sometimes greatly to 
be suspected that he did not. These considerations make the 
task of setting out a consistent scheme as ‘Pythagorean’ diffi- 
cult; but the following outline emerges fairly clearly:

They said that the essential nature of things was due to 
Number. This, to some of them, meant that things are made 
up of numbers 1n the same way as a man is made up of flesh 
and bone, or a statue of bronze or wood.* To others, it meant 
that the nature of a perceptible thing depends on its ‘number’. 
This latter statement was taken in two ways: either that 
everything had a particular number which belonged to it and 
explained it® (for example, the triangle’s number is ‘three’), in 
which case one can say that the thing ‘imitates’ or is a copy of

245 55 85 93 103 135 22325 45 83 22527 — 
On these passages, see the admirable notes in W. D. Ross’ edn. of Aristotle, 
Metaphysics.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 247

the number;*: ** or that its nature could be expressed by a 
ratio (for instance, mead is ‘three and three’ because it consists 
of three parts of honey to three of water).>the number;*: ** or that its nature could be expressed by a 
ratio (for instance, mead is ‘three and three’ because it consists 
of three parts of honey to three of water).>

These three views are all criticized by Aristotle. He attacks 
the first position by saying that it does not explain how size 
and weight came into being;° the second position by saying 
that the equations between things and numbers are superficial 
and dependent upon chance correspondences rather than on 
any laws;4 and the third position by saying that the ratios in 
which things are mixed do not suffice to explain them, because 
the nature of the mixture depends on the nature of the original 
ingredients (which remains unexplained) much more than on 
the ratio in which they are added to one another.

It is abundantly clear that many, perhaps the majority, of 
Pythagoreans maintained that things are made of numbers as 
of a material.‘ £1 The question therefore arises, what sort of 
thing did they take these numbers to be?s Aristotle is not 
always able to answer this question; and he says in one passage 
that the Pythagoreans themselves could not say." But the 
basic theory was that the original Number was the Monad, i 
or Principle of Oneness, which is equivalent to Limit; in other 
words, they envisaged a dot, or point, which was the most 
elementary form that could be imposed on an empty space. 
The Space —.the Unlimited as they called 1t — always existed, 
and is therefore an element like the Monad.i When the 
Monad came into existence, it limited the nearest part of the 
Unlimited.« This Monad is sometimes called the Odd, and 
sometimes given the attributes of both Odd and Even, the 
former because unlike any even number it cannot be divided 
(into integral numbers), and the latter because when added to 
an odd number, it makes that number even, and when added 
to an even number, makes it odd. (Aristotle remarks that they 
are mistaken in saying that the Monad cannot be divided; ina 12 baz Cg; 10; 38 d 8; 27 e 27 £g E22 h 26

19; 10 j 28; 29 k 26

a! Ross (Aristotle, Metaphysics, Vol. 1, p. 163) suggests that Cornford’s view (in Class. Q. 
XVI, 143) is right, viz. that the 6th Century Pythagoreans thought that things 
‘imitate’ numbers, i.e. that their external sensible form is modelled on their inner 
numerical nature, whereas the sth Century Pythagoreans thought that Number is the 
very stuff of which things are made.

f! Aristot. Metaph. As. 987a9, says that this was their individual contribution to 
metaphysics, or rather, the theory that the elements are the Limited and the Unlimited; 
from which Number comes.

248 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

imposing it on Space, like a dot, they have given it dimensions, 
and anything that has size is divisible.)*248 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

imposing it on Space, like a dot, they have given it dimensions, 
and anything that has size is divisible.)*

Side by side with the Monad, there exists the Dyad, or 
Principle of Twoness.” This principle is inherent in the exis- 
tence of space, or the Unlimited;° it can be thought of as the 
possibility of repetition, so that the Monad, when multiplied 
In space, gives rise to Two and so to all the other numbers. 
Since it is Space that contributes this possibility, Space and the 
Principle of Twoness were often equated in the Pythagorean 
system, and the latter was called the ‘Infinite Dyad’,4 because 
once the principle of repeating or multiplying monads 1s 
recognized, this process can go on to infinity, taking place in 
infinite space. The Dyad was also equated with the principle 
of Evenness of number, an even number being one that can be 
divided equally into two; and this was another reason adduced 
by some for calling the Dyad ‘infinite’, because the process of 
dividing by two can go on to infinity. We thus have the 
elements: the Unlimited, equated with the Dyad and the Even; 
and the Limited, equated with the Monad andthe Odd. It must 
however be added that the Pythagoreans sometimes forgot 
that they had equated the Principle of Twoness with Space 
itself, and spoke more naturally of Twoness as derived from 
Oneness,‘ seeing Two as two Ones with Space in between; or 
again, as two points joined by a line.®Thus at the beginning we have a series of opposites neces- 
sary to account for the visible world. (Aristotle says that the 
Pythagoreans envisaged no other sort of reality except that 
which 1s perceptible.)» These opposites were added to by 
different thinkers; and a table of ten pairs was drawn up, by 
whom or at what time Aristotle does not know. They were: 
Limit-Unlimited, Odd-Even, One-Many, Right-Left, Male- 
Female, Rest-Motion, Straight-Curved, Light-Darkness, 
Good-Bad, Square-Oblong. Aristotle, while refusing these 
the title of elements in any sense of the word, admits at the 
end of the Metaphysics that there is a kind of relationship 
between ideas such as ‘straight’, ‘good’, ‘equal’, ‘white’, and

@10 = Bb gs 13314; 15 C1a (Vors. 1, p.449,1,2) 4 raz 143 15 © 28; 2

£26 25 4522; cp. Aristot. Metaph. N3, 1090420 is

1 Some Pythagoreans denied a place to Good as a First Principle, because the 
developed thing is ‘better’ than that from which it springs; but Aristotle replies that the 
germ itself has to come from previous developed creatures. See Ross, Metaph. 11, p. 381 
(note on 1072b, 30-34).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 249OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 249

so on.* A separate explanation of the classification of Square 
on the side of the Monad and Oblong on the side of the Dyad 
or Plurality, is given: in this, the figure known as the Gndmén 
is used,” >: to show that the presence of the Even gives to 
things the element of inequality, whereas the Odd gives 
equality. Aristotle also criticizes the concept of infinity as an 
element; he says that it is merely a characteristic of certain 
things, not a constituent: for example, the Air may be infinite, 
but it is not composed of ‘infinity’.° 
How did the Pythagoreans envisage the construction of 
things out of these numbers? Given corporeal monads in space, 
they appear to have conceived of them as moving, and thus 
building up other entities, not by coagulation, as the atoms 
coagulated in the void, but by traversing space and plotting 
out diiterent forms.4 From the Monad and the Dyad (Space) 
come the numbers, from the numbers come the ‘marks’ (points 
envisaged as dots), from the dots come lines, from lines come 
plane surfaces, from surfaces come solids, and from solids the 
perceptible elements, fire, water, earth, air (which they thought 
of as made up of particles with the shapes of pyramid, eicosa- 
hedron, cube, octahedron respectively).1_ This shows that they 
clearly recognized the formation of figures by the movement of 
other figures, as for example it is recognized in Archytas’ 
theorem? that a line at right angles to a plane surface and 
moving in a circle describes a cylinder. But they spoke as if 
these Timits of body, such as surface, line, point, monad’, were 
all substances,® because they thought that bodies were made out 
of them. For this, Aristotle criticized them; and also for 
a 27; cp. 7; 6 b 28 C29 dita © 233 24 
b! Heath, Gk. Maths., I, p. 77. The Gnomon is two lines, or series of points arranged 
in a right angle, particularly if placed round the right angle of another figure. Hence | 
if the Monad be taken, and a Gnomon arranged round it, this will always be anotherodd number, and always give a square; but if a Gnomon be arranged round the Dyad, 
the result will always be an even number forming an oblong.

Monad 
and 
Square

1 See above, p. 222. 2 See above, p. 236.

THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

having assumed the existence of motion, an essential to their 
scheme, without having explained how it came about, especi- 
ally as they had postulated elements from which motion could 
never be created or originated.*

This conception of creation was carried out by them in their 
cosmology.’ The Central Fire, which was given that position 
because it is the ‘best’ position, and because Fire 1s more 
precious than Earth,° is equivalent to the Monad; it ts the 
source of creation and government. The Void, or Unlimited, 
is a formless mass of air or vapour. Gradually the One ‘intro- 
duces shape and limit into it, working from within outwards. 
The drawing-in (of the Unlimited by the Limiting) is further 
described as breathing, and the wind or void so drawn in 1s 
said to keep the units apart’.t.¢1_ From this process are de- 
rived Earth (with Counter-Earth), the planets, sun and moon, 
and the fixed stars; and everything they contain.Having thus obtained a universe of perceptibles, the Pytha- 
goreans endeavoured to explain it in. deal by means of the 
principle of Number. Their researches must have followed 
different lines in different places; but in the course of their 
investigations they discovered many striking analogies be- 
tween numbers and things, and also many properties of 
numbers themselves which proved to be the foundation of the 
sciences of arithmetic and geometry. The three particular 
propositions attributed to them which were incorporated by 
Euclid are: that the angles of a triangle are together equal to 
two right angles;* that the square on the hypotenuse of a 
right-angled triangle 1s equal to the sum of the squares on the 
other two sides; ft and the method of application of areas, by 
which a parallelogram of any shape could be transformed into 
another with the same angle and equal area but with one side 
of any given length.® &:

They discovered, apparently quite early, the relation be- 
tween the notes of an octave and the lengths of the strings 
producing them, namely that (provided the strings are of the

@ 223 5 (Vors. I, p. 453, ll. 18, 19). b 22 C 37 d 26; 30 © 21 
f 19 8 20 
d! Ross, Metaph. Vol. II, p. 483, note on rogta, 15-18. 
f! Attributed to Pythagoras himeelf. 
8! Proclus, drawing on Eudemus, gives along explanatory note on this method, which 
Heath describes as ‘one of the most powerful methods on which Greek geometry relied’. 
>and translation in The Thirteen Books of Euclid, 1, P- 343:

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 251OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 251

same substance and tension) the consonances (or ‘symphonies’ 
as they called them), that is, the octave, the major fifth, and 
the major fourth, are produced by strings the lengths of which 
have the ratios 1:2, 3 :2, and 4 : 3 respectively ;* and they pur- 
sued these studies into great detail.» The work of Archytas 
shows that the leaders advanced the discoveries regarding 
ratios of different kinds, or ‘means’ as they called them; and 
also the study of higher geometry.These successes led to the most thorough going application 
of the theory that ‘all things are numbers’; and this was inter- 
preted in some quarters to mean that an actual number could 
be found which would explain every particular substance, 
shape or even abstract quality. Some of these identifications 
are obvious: for example, that the Line is Two, the Triangle 
Three, the Pyramid Four, because these are the numbers of 
the points or fies which delimit them. They also noticed that 
certain natural events, such as the periods of the sun and moon, 
the seasons, the crises of certain illnesses, the phases of human 
development, the number of stars in certain constellations, 
were connected with certain numbers;° and they tried to 
analyse substances such as fire and water, which they regarded 
as the first to be created, into certain formulae, though without 
great success. Aristotle criticizes these efforts on various 
grounds, such as that the recurrence of a number like seven 
(seven Pleiads, seven against Thebes, teeth falling out at the 
seventh year in human beings, and so on) is due to different 
causes, and has no particular connection; and also that their 
formulae do not account for difference of substances, for if the 
only difference between, say, fire and water is that fire 1s equal 
to 2X5xX3xX7, and water is equal to 4x5x7, then fire 1s 
merely water multiplied by 6; in other words, number is not 
sufficient to explain the difference between them, and, in fact, 
they had to assume that different things could come under the 
same number, which is impossible under their scheme.°Other more or less superficial ‘likenesses’ are mentioned by 
Aristotle, such as that the letters of the alphabet and the notes 
of the flute are the same in number (twenty-four), and this is 
the ‘number’ of the universe as a whole. Again, they identified 
the Central Fire with One, the Earth with Two, the Sun with 
Seven and so on.* Another identification was that of the Soul

® 44B6; cp. 58B18 b 47A16 C2527 . 427 © 27 ‘

252 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

with Four,* which was also the Principle of Health. Marriage, 
Justice and Injustice, Right Moment, Mixture, Opinion, 
Courage, were assigned not only special numbers, but also 
special places in the universe, a theory which completely 
puzzled Aristotle and led him to ask if they were not thinking 
of some other kind of number than that out of which they 
made the (visible) heavens,» or else constructing out of Num- 
ber some kind of bodies other than those we perceive.° Even 
Number itself was given a special number which perfectly 
expressed its nature, namely the Decad, or Principle of Ten, 
the special properties of which interested them greatly: for 
instance, that it is the sum of the first four integers.4 Threeness 
had special virtues: it stood for beginning, middle and end.¢ 
Nine seemed expressive of Harmony, as representing the three 
consonances.!: '!

Their meteorology has already been described, as it is by 
some attributed to Philolaus. Aristotle finds fault with it in 
general because it is not sufficiently governed by observation, 
but forces the facts to suit the numerical theories when neces- 
sary.£ As an instance of this, he mentions the body called 
Counter-Earth, revolving once a day between Earth and the 
Central Fire, and says that they inserted it for the sake of 
bringing the number of the heavenly orbits up to ten.* Else- 
where he says that it was introduced to account for eclipses 
of the moon, which are more frequent than eclipses of the 
sun.’There is a Right and a Left in the heavens; Aristotle 
criticizes them for not recognizing other directions such as 
Up-Down, Before-Behind; but Simplicius says they did recog- 
nize these, and that they equated them to Good-Bad, as Aris- 
totle himself had said in his book on Pythagoreanism.i They 
place Man in the upper hemisphere of earth (that is, facing 
outward towards the heavens, not inward towards the Central 
Fire); but Aristotle says that this does not suit our observa- 
tions.*.*: They discussed the Milky Way, which some of 
them said was the orbit once followed by the sun (as embodied

@r5 b2234 © Met.N3.1090a20 ©4153 16; 44A13; 44Ar1 (see p. 222 above)

Cry £138 6&4 (ors. I, Pp. 452; ll. 9 599.) ha;37 136;37a 339 kK 
‘? Octave, fourth and fifth, i.e. #, 4, $3 and 24+344=9.

\" See Heath, Aristarchus, pp. 241-2, and Ross, The Works of Aristotle Translated, 
jVol. LA, note on De Caelo, 28 sb.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 253

in the myth of Phaéthon), or else the path of a star; but others 
said it was the reflection of the sun on the sky.*

Not only are the heavens a harmony;> they actually make 
music. The rates at which the heavenly bodies travel cause 
them each to give out a sound; these sounds form a series 
related to one another like the notes of a scale, that is, a har- 
mony.* °: The notes are related to the intervals between the 
bodies and the speed at which they travel, but we are not told 
how. The reason why we do not hear the sounds is that we 
have always been accustomed to hear them.Time was explained as the movement of the Whole.é 
Different bodies make different kinds of time: they called 
the Earth a star, as being one of the instruments of time, 
since by its movement it creates day and night.e Others 
explained time as the Sphere itself, because everything is in 
time, and also in the Sphere —a ‘proof’ which Aristotle dis- 
misses as too naive for discussion.‘ As time is the movement 
of the Sphere, it eventually repeats itself¢ (such cycles forming 
a Great Year).

The soul also is a harmony; this was sometimes modified 
to ‘has harmony’,® that is, is a mixture of parts having an 
ascertainable ratio to one another. By the theory of metem- 
psychosis, the soul can enter any body.' The curious belief was 
attributed to them by Aristotle that the motes of the sunbeam 
are Soul, that is, are alive, because they are constantly on the 
move, even when there is no wind;/ so that they believed the 
air to be ‘full of souls’, which affect our dreams and send omens 
of health and sickness, not only to us but to animals.*« They 
believed that animals were nourished by smell.!

Aristotle in the Metaphysics," speaking of the genesis of the 
visible world from the Monad, states that the Pythagoreans 
could not say how the Monad was itself constituted, whether 
‘from plane surfaces, or from ‘‘colour’’, or from seed, or con-

ie a 
stituents they fail to describe’. The word ‘colour’ is the Pytha- 
gorean special term for surface;" so that the whole sentence 
probably represents Pythagorean doctrine. The mention of 
a37b;cp.ch.41,10 %4(19) °35 433 &37 £33 834 Bar 
i 39 igo Kura (Vors.1, p. 451, 15 3) 143 -™26 (Met. 1ogia) 42 
cl} This theory must have passed through several stages, since the Pythagoreans 
recognized only 7 notes to the scale (Heptachord) and there were eventually 10 bodies.

For a full discussion, see Heath, Aristarchus, pp. 105 59g.

254 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSFor a full discussion, see Heath, Aristarchus, pp. 105 59g.

254 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

‘seed’ in connection with the Monad therefore shows that they 
tried to use the Monad as an explanation of the generation of 
life as well as of numbers,’ and points the way to the more 
elaborate theory of Anaxagoras.

C. Allegorical Precepts

The method of teaching by allegorical precepts no doubt 
goes back to Pythagoras himself, for the disciples are said to 
have kept all that ‘He’ said as divine; and not to have tried to 
originate any new maxims, but to regard as the highest in 
wisdom those who had acquired the greatest number of these 
sayings.*

Iamblichus explains that these were divided into three cate- 
gories: What is so-and-so? What is most so-and-so? and What 
is to be done and not done? These are undemonstrable and 
without explanation; they are meant to be accepted and acted 
upon, not discussed.

Examples of the first class are:

What are the Isles of the Blest? Sun and Moon. 
What is the Delphic Oracle? The Tetractys. 
' What is the abode of the Sirens? Harmony.

These are obvious rationalizations of myths; others, quoted by 
Porphyry and Aelian,® seem to belong to this category, but to 
approach more nearly to mere metaphor, such as that the 
Pleiad is the lyre of the Muses, and the planets are the hounds 
of Persephone. Aristotle says that ‘the Pythagoreans’ ex- 
plained thunder as designed to terrify those in Tartarus;° and 
elsewhere it is recorded that they explained the sound of the 
beaten gong as the voice of a demon imprisoned in the bronze.*

Examples of the second type of question and answer are:

What is holiest? Mallow leaf.

What is most beautiful? Harmony.

What ts the truest saying? That men are wicked.

What is the wisest? Number; and the next wisest, the 
man who gives names to things.

a 4 (§82) b2 Cx d2What is most beautiful? Harmony.

What ts the truest saying? That men are wicked.

What is the wisest? Number; and the next wisest, the 
man who gives names to things.

a 4 (§82) b2 Cx d2

* Ross explains it differently: (Metaph. II, p. 484): ‘His reference to seed probably 
implies that some Pythagoreans thought of the generation of numbers as akin to that 
of living things.”

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES

Iamblichus pointed out that this type of ‘wisdom’ is earlier 
than Pythagoras, and is the same as that of the Seven Sages.*

The third category, consisting of Commands and Prohibi- 
tions, contains the most interesting material. Though the 
Pythagoreans were content to accept them without question, 
later writers busied themselves with interpretations. Anaxi- 
mander the Younger of Miletus (405-359 3.c.) wrote an 
Exegesis of Pythagorean Allegorical Sayings.»

Examples of his work are:

‘Do not step across the beam of a balance,’ meaning ‘Do 
not be greedy.’

‘Do not receive swallows into your house,’ meaning ‘Do 
not admit chatterers.’ |

‘Do not poke the fire with a sword,’ meaning ‘Do not 
irritate an angry man.’

The Commands and Prohibitions, however, seem to be 
nearer to ritual and magic than these rather superficial explana- 
tions allow. Many of them directly concern ceremonial, for 
instance:

‘Sacrifice unshod.’¢

‘Do not turn aside when going to a religious ceremony.@

‘Do not eat holy fish.’*

‘Do not sacrifice a white cock.’!

‘Sacrifice only those animals into which man’s soul cannot 
enter.’£

‘Do not eat beans.’*

‘Do not eat birth, growth, beginning, end’, that 1s, certain 
parts associated with these processes. '

Others are nearer to personal magic, such as:

‘Shoe the right foot first.’}

‘Do not speak without a light’ (in the dark)."

‘Do not pick up what has fallen.”!

‘Do not break bread.’™ . 
‘Do not have intercourse with a woman wearing gold.”‘Shoe the right foot first.’}

‘Do not speak without a light’ (in the dark)."

‘Do not pick up what has fallen.”!

‘Do not break bread.’™ . 
‘Do not have intercourse with a woman wearing gold.”

There were apparently lengthy provisions regarding the 
ritual to be observed in all cases.° Respect for the deity was

a4 (§83) b6 c 16 dirs © 3; 6 £3512 818 bh 33 6

THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

inculcated: the image of the deity must not be worn on a ring, 
for this might lead to sacrilege.*

These rules seem far distant in spirit from the splendid 
achievements of the mathematicians. One can only, assume 
that, severed from its intellectual partner, the religious ‘way of 
life’ degenerated into a set of practices for which little reason 
except tradition could be found, and which were therefore 
liable to accretion and distortion. To sift the genuine precepts 
of Pythagoras from the later additions, and to conjecture their 
original meaning, was even in ancient times a thankless task. 
It 1s perhaps wiser to leave them ‘undemonstrable and unex-

plained’.

D. Extracts from the ‘Pythagorean Declarations’ and the 
‘Pythagorean Life’ of Aristoxenus

These are preserved mainly in Iamblichus’ Pythagorean 
Life. There are also extracts in Stobaeus, sometimes in part 
the same as those of lamblichus, and in Diogenes Laertius. 
They form a consistent account of a way of life which, though 
it may have been ‘rationalized’ from Aristotle onward, never- 
theless in essentials must go back to Pythagoras, as the author 
claims.The main outline is as follows: the Pythagoreans honoured 
chiefly music, medicine, divination; and silence, obedience, 
listening. Their medicine dealt chiefly with diet: proportions 
of food, drink, rest, and composition of medicines; they 
specialized in the treatment of wounds, but preferred the 
application of medicaments to surgery or cauterization. They 
believed that music, and poetry-readings, were a great aid to 
health, if correctly used.» They employed medicine as a 
catharsis of the body, music of the soul.¢

In education they set a very high value on memory, which 
they trained by exercise: a Pythagorean did not rise from his 
bed until he had recollected in their exact order the events of 
the preceding day. It was thanks to this memory-training that 
Italy produced so many poets, philosophers and statesmen, and 
became called ‘Great Hellas’, exporting these to Greece Proper.¢

The service of God was inculcated. Man’s unruly nature

_ b 1 §§163-4 © 1 ad fin. di, yysuq-e 
i discussion, see Boehm, de Symbolis Pythagoreis (Berlin, 1905).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 257

needs control, therefore he must serve God, and under God, 
his parents and the law. Nothing is worse than anarchy; 
therefore custom should not be lightly set aside, even for the 
sake of reform.* But rulers must be humane as well as expert, 
so that subjects can be not only obedient but devoted. The 
ruler must always be some one person or thing, namely that 
most worthy of honour, whether in thought, or action, in the 
household, the State or the army. Nothing can be right if the 
ruling factor is wrong. Government must be by consent; only 
voluntary effort reaches its goal.»Education must be suited to the several distinct periods of 
development of the human being: children must learn letters 
and such subjects, young men the laws of the State, adult men 
active life and public service, old men theoretical knowledge, 
judgement, counsel.¢ Correct behaviour towards others is 
taught from childhood; this differs according to age, relation- 
ship, standing.t The division of education into categories 
according to age must not be too rigid: the education of the 
boy must anticipate to some extent that of the youth, and of 
the youth that of the adult, otherwise the well-trained child 
will throw over all discipline when he comes to manhood. The 
most difficult period is adolescence, which unites the faults of 
childhood and manhood — frivolity, and strong passions. This 
age needs most attention; but at no age can a man be left to 
do as he pleases; he must always have someone or something 
to obey, because whatever is neglected degenerates.°

The body must be kept to a uniform condition — not some- 
times fat, sometimes thin, which shows an irregular life. So 
too the temperament must be uniformly cheerful, not some- 
times elated, sometimes depressed. All emotional disturbance 
was deprecated; rage or grief was avoided,* or if that was 
impossible, not acted upon. The Pythagorean, if seized with 
rage, retired into solitude and tried to cure it as he would an 
illness; he did not punish a slave, or admonish a free man, 
while still angry, but waited for the return of reason. A story 
told of Archytas, by Spintharus the father of Aristoxenus, who 
told many stories about Archytas, illustrates this point.’

Pleasure in particular must be guarded against; physical

ad 
~ 25 354 ~ 5 yysoeeus ot 5s Adee es a 
1 By the system known to Euripides as Preacclimatization (mpoevSnuelv) and

ascribed to Anaxagoras. See p. 264 below.

258 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSad 
~ 25 354 ~ 5 yysoeeus ot 5s Adee es a 
1 By the system known to Euripides as Preacclimatization (mpoevSnuelv) and

ascribed to Anaxagoras. See p. 264 below.

258 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

desire is an urge of the soul, for what is natural (such as the 
satisfaction of hunger) or for what is superfluous.: The 
satisfaction of the former is allowable, of the latter, not: desire 
for unnecessary food, clothes, bedding, houses and all luxury- 
objects goes on to infinity if once allowed its own way. The 
young must be taught from birth to desire only the necessary, 
and repudiate vain desires. Medicine tells us that every par- 
ticular food has a particular effect; we see at a glance that wine 
taken moderately brings cheerfulness, but over-indulged in, 
causes madness and ill-behaviour; but the effect of the different 
foods — the choice of which, as of their preparation, is infinite 
— is not so easily discerned, except by the expert, who should 
be allowed to choose for us. This knowledge has always 
belonged to medicine.* Wrong desire takes three shapes: lack 
of ‘form’, that is, the desire itself is vulgar or base; lack of 
proportion, that is, it is too violent or too long-sustained; and 
inopportuneness, that is, it occurs at the wrong time, or 
towards the wrong object.® 
The question of procreation of children is very important. 
Insufficient attention is given to the breeding of human beings, 
whereas the dog-breeder or bird-fancier takes great care to get 
the right conditions. Sexual intercourse should not be begun 
too young; the education of children must keep them pre- 
occupied with other things until the right time, which for a 
boy is not before twenty. Boys and girls alike must be reared 
in hard work, exercise and endurance of the right kind, and 
given the diet proper to a hard-working, abstemious life. 
When the right period is reached, there must still be great 
moderation; this must be induced by teaching the boy that 
st Nay fitness and indulgence cannot go together. 
he general Hellenic laws of consanguinity and decency 
were approved of by the Pythagoreans, namely that inter- 
course with mother, daughter, or sister, or in a temple or 
public place, was forbidden. They added that births which 
were ‘contrary to nature’, or brought about by rape, must be 
destroyed. Intercourse must have as its object the breeding of 
children; and this must be undertaken only by those who have 
lived and are living a healthy life. Every forethought must beShown by the hotuare parents for the welfare of the child that is

ag b 8 (ad fin.) 
1 The basis of Epicurean hedonism.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 289

to be; most people have children in the reckless, improvident 
way that animals do; and our lack of care in this regard is the 
chief cause of human badness.*

A very high value is set on true friendship. For this, the 
Pythagoreans were famous. A member will do anything for 
another member, even if he has never seen him, and he lives 
at the other end of the earth; this feeling is handed down over 
many generations. Illustrations of Pythagorean friendship are 
the stories of Damon and Phintias,> Cleinias and Prorus,* and 
others. Such friendship demands that all rivalry, desire, 
anger and other causes of disagreement shall be excluded; the 
attitude must be that of a father to his children.e No hurts or 
wounds must be inflicted; and this is achieved if there be a 
knowledge of how to give way and to control anger, on both 
sides, and especially on the part of the younger or otherwise 
inferior in station. In return, elders must admonish only with 
the greatest regard for the words they use; and they must allow 
solicitude and friendliness to appear in what they advise. This 
alone makes admonition both seemly and beneficial.‘Rules for the preservation of true friendship are: Never 
destroy trust in friendship, either in jest or in earnest. Never 
repudiate a friend because of his worldly misfortune: the 
only justification is incorrigible wickedness. Never willingly 
assume an enmity against anyone not wholly bad, but if you 
do so, stand to it bravely in the conflict, unless the adver- 
sary changes his ways. Fight not with words, but with action. 
The enemy has a claim to regard, if he fights as human being 
to human being. Never be the cause of a quarrel. In friend- 
ship, let all rules be carefully defined and observed, so that no 
association is treated lightly, but rather with respect, agreement 
and due arrangement, and no unworthy emotion such as desire 
or rage is kindled.* Rivalry was discouraged by the ascription 
of all discoveries to Pythagoras; and this was done, except in 
rare cases.

True love of beauty has as its object good conduct and the 
pursuit of knowledge, not objects used in daily life, as the 
common herd believes. '

In spite of the rule of harmony, chance exists. But chance, 
too, has a divine and a natural side. The divine sort is that by

ag b Ch. ¢ Ch. 54 d s8D7 © 6 fg &9 
2 h 6 iro

260 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

which a kind of breath from the Divine drives certain mortals 
towards the better or the worse, so that they are obviously 
lucky or unlucky. The natural kind is that by which some 
are born beautiful or clever, while others are the opposite, so 
that some succeed in all their aims, while others fail «

E. Pythagoreans in Middle ComedyE. Pythagoreans in Middle Comedy

The Pythagoreans did not escape the attentions of the 
comic playwrights. Cratinus (¢. 490-20 B.c.) wrote a play 
called The She-Pythagorean, and another called The Tarentines; 
and these subjects were taken up later by Alexis, the most 
prolific writer of Middle Comedy (c. 390-287 B.c.). Other 
fourth-century writers who mentioned them were: Aristophon, 
who wrote a play called The Pythagorist, Mnesimachus in 
Alcmaeon, and Antiphanes in Recollections.

The surviving quotation from Cratinus is comparatively 
inoffensive: it pokes fun merely at Pythagorean powers of 
debate, and their strange jargon of ‘Opposites, Limits, Equiva- 
lents, fallacies, quantums’, which they use in a way ‘bursting 
with brains’. But when Middle Comedy takes over the sub- 
ject, the jokes become coarser: the Pythagoreans, like other 
philosophers, are accused of being dirty, lousy, ill-dressed, 
unshod and hypocritical. Their way of life seemed gloomy to 
the worldlings, with its ‘shortage of food, cold silence, lack of 
baths’.»» >: Their frugal diet, with its ban on meat and wine, 
was sneered at as ‘prison-fare’; water, black bread, lettuce, 
dried figs, olive-cake and cheese are mentioned, as well as 
spinach gathered from the river-bed; but it is confidently 
asserted that the dirt, rough garment and lack of food were 
merely an excuse to cloak their poverty, and not obligatory: 
‘put in front of them fish or meat’, says a character in The 
Pythagorist of Aristophon, ‘and they'll gobble it up and their 
fingers too, or may I be hanged —a decad of times!’* Their 
refusal to eat ‘living’ food also comes in for comment.#

Theocritus in the Fourteenth Idyll* (the date of which is 
after 269 B.c.) brings in a ‘Pythagorist’ from Athens, pallid

a1 by C2 dx; 3 els 
b! Alexis, Frg. 370. Norwood paraphrases: ‘No dinner, no soap, no fire, no conversa- 
tion, no bath.’ (Gk. Comedy, p. 47).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 261a1 by C2 dx; 3 els 
b! Alexis, Frg. 370. Norwood paraphrases: ‘No dinner, no soap, no fire, no conversa- 
tion, no bath.’ (Gk. Comedy, p. 47).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 261

and barefoot; the language strongly recalls that used of the 
‘thinkers’ in the C/ouds.*.*1 The scholiast remarks that the 
real Pythagoreans took every care of the body, and distin- 
guishes them from the ‘Pythagorists’, an inferior class who 
followed a mean and dirty régime. He is of course mistaken 
in taking the designation ‘Pythagorist’ seriously; this was 
merely a contemptuous word coined by the comic writers for 
the whole sect. The comic writers no more distinguished 
between the best and the worst members, the scientists and 
the cranks, than Aristophanes did between Socrates and the 
lowest of the Sophists.

59. ANAXAGORAS 
ANaxacoras of CLAZOMENAE was in his prime about 460 B.c.

That Anaxagoras was a native of Clazomenae is universally 
agreed. The date of his birth is given as 500 B.c., and he 1s 
said to have come to Athens at the age of twenty.” He was 
already, as his meteorological theories show, strongly in- 
fluenced by the Milesian school, especially by Anaximenes; 
he is said by some to have been Anaximenes’ pupil,° but it 
seems more likely that he received this instruction at second- 
hand, when refugees from Miletus in 494 B.c. spread over 
Tonia.

Anaxagoras died at Lampsacus in 428, having been exiled 
from Athens a few years before.t There were divergent 
opinions regarding these dates: the archonship-date of his 
arrival at Athens was sometimes given as Callias (456 B.C.), in 
mistake for Calliades* (480 B.c.); and the date of his death was 
given as 460 B.c., the year of an eclipse which he foretold.‘ It 
was also said that he lived at Athens for thirty years,® which, 
if the date 480 be accepted for his arrival, would make his 
departure take place in 450. This seems too early: there 1s a 
strong tradition that the attack on Anaxagoras which led toav. 103 b Ar §7; A4 ¢ Ay; Ax §6; Az d Ar §7; A3; Ag2 §13

a! Theocr. XIV, 5: Mudayoprctés, doy pds KévuTrd8ytos. Clouds, 103: Tous oxpidvtas 
tous d&vuTroSsjtovs |

262 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

his exile was an incident in the political drive against Pericles 
just before the Peloponnesian War. The dating of his exile in 
4.50 B.C.! seems to be due to a confusion between his case and 
that of Damon, another of Pericles’ teachers, who was ostra- 
cized in the middle of the century. The word ‘ostracism’ 1s 
used once of Anaxagoras;* but this method cannot have been 
applied to him, because he was not an Athenian citizen. 
Those who thought that he was ‘ostracized’ around 450 B.c. 
arranged for his recall, no doubt in order to satisfy the tradition 
that he was in Athens at a later date: for instance, according to 
the Marmor Parium, he was still there in 442 B.c., the year in 
which Euripides won the prize for tragedy for the first time.” 
The only other date mentioned in his life is that of the fall of 
a meteoric stone at Aegospotami in 468-7 or 467-6, which he 
is said to have foretold.°

It would seem that the date 480 s.c. for his arrival at Athens 
is open to suspicion. One might conjecture that he first came 
into prominence in 468-7 B.c., in connection with the meteoric 
stones which fell at that date and caused a great sensation; 
that Pericles then heard of him and invited him to Athens, as 
he did other men at this period, for instance Cephalus the father 
of the orator Lysias; that Anaxagoras came between 465 and 
460 B.c. and lived there for thirty years, ? until his exile between 
435 and 430. His powerful influence on the Periclean circle, 
including Euripides, would then be more readily explained.The reason why he left Clazomenae is not recorded. This 
town had been reduced by the Persians during the Ionian 
revolt, so that his family may have left to avoid Persian rule.* 
There is a tradition that he was of good family, but relin- 
quished his property because of a complete lack of interest in

; © Arr

‘ Burnet EGP‘ accepts the date 450; he points out that Plato never makes Socrates 
meet Anaxagoras, but says he read his book, whereas if Anaxagoras had been in Athens, 
Socrates could have discussed the point with him. But Socrates is supposed to have 
read A.’s book in his youth; perhaps A. would not then have been willing to receive

him. He did not receive Democritus, tradition says (68A1 §36; 68Bs). 
' oe ‘thirty years’ may be invented by analogy with Cephalus. Lysias, c. Eratosth. 
» 4.

* Burnet suggests that Anax. was in the Persian army, basing this conjecture on the 
expression of Apollodorus that A. was 20 years old xaré thy tot Zépfou SidPaow, and 
inferring that A. must have been with Xerxes on this occasion (EGP‘, p. 254, n. 1). 
This assumption seems groundless: the ‘crossing of Xerxes’ was a convenient date, and 
reer nothing as to A.’s participation, apart from other obvious reasons for dismissing 
this idea.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 263

worldly affairs;* but this merely expresses the average Athen- 
ian’s view of him as a crank.» He may have travelled for a 
time.° He then came to Athens, and lived as a resident alien, 
studying and writing, and mixing with a select circle only: 
His chief pupil and protector was Pericles ;4 he also had a great 
influence on Euripides,¢ and on Archelaus;! but with Demo- 
critus he had some quarrel.#After thirty years of undisturbed residence, he was im- 
peached by Diopeithes," or, some said, by Cleon,‘ or by 
Thucydides the politician. The charge was impiety: in 
particular the statement that the sun and moon were material 
bodies, not deities. There were various accounts of the result: 
the best tradition seems to be that he went into voluntary exile, 
or was sent away by Pericles, before he could be brought to 
trial; some added that he was condemned to death in absence. 
Others stated that he was brought to trial, defended by 
Pericles, and fined five talents as well as exiled; others that he 
was condemned to death, but released before execution through 
Pericles’ pleading, and exiled; others that he suffered a long 
imprisonment before the trial, and when brought to trial was 
in so pitiable a state that he was acquitted. The stories of a trial 
seem to be an embroidery of the facts, and perhaps an endeavour 
to bring Anaxagoras’ fate into relation with that of Socrates.

He then left Athens and retired to Lampsacus, where he 
taught until his death a few years later.! His dying request, 
that the children should be given an annual holiday in the 
month of his death, was observed by the magistrates ;™ and he 
was also honoured after his death by the dedication of an altar 
to him.2 The custom of the children’s holiday at. Lampsacus 
was maintained for many years; and later his native city Clazo- 
menae assumed his portrait as the type of their coinage.°

His lack of interest in worldly things, and concentration on 
his astronomical studies, were an object of wonder to some 
anecdotists; he was credited with the belief that abstract 
thought and the freedom which it brings comprise happiness.? 
His fortitude over personal bereavement was embodied in 
several stories; the detachment he thus reached was said to(Ar §6; Ar3; Ajr b Azo cAro 4Ars5; Aj2 e A7; A2oa, b, c; 
£Ay7;A26;A62 8&8 68Bs5 h Ar6 i Ar §12; Azo Jj Ar §12 
17; Ar8; cp. Ar §12, A3 1 Ar §14; A3 m Ar §14 
| A23; A24; Ar §15 © A27 P A30; A2g

264 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

have been the result of a special kind of spiritual exercise called 
Preacclimatization,* which interested Euripides. His charac- 
ter, as well as his metaphysical views, earned him the nickname 
Nous; and his sobriety of manner was by some exaggerated 
into an inability to laugh or even smile.* He was perhaps car1- 
catured on the comic stage.4 He evidently made a number of 
enemies; Aristotle mentions Sosibius as a rival;° and his atti- 
tude towards divination may easily have annoyed seers like 
Lampon.‘ There is also a suggestion that he incurred the 
el of Democritus, who was forty years his junior, because 
he failed to receive him.®

The forecasts attributed to Anaxagoras are meant to be 
illustrations of the power of science as opposed to divination.

Anaxagoras is classed with those who wrote only one book: 
it was said to have been well-written, and its views expressed 
clearly and boldly.i It was in some respects the first of its kind,* 
and it enjoyed such popularity that it was available in a cheap 
form: by the end of the fifth century it was on sale in the 
Orchestra at Athens for one drachma,! and its contents were 
generally known. Suggestions of other works are not con- 
firmed by the existing fragments. He may have embodied in 
his book some remarks on perspective; this had been the sub- 
ject of a commentary by Agatharchus, who had ‘mounted’ a 
play of Aeschylus,™ and it must have attracted the attention of 
philosophers because of its bearing on illusion and sense-per- 
ception. The book of problems called The Noose is thought to 
be the work of another Anaxagoras; and the treatise on the 
squaring of the circle which some said he wrote in prison is 
probably an invention.® ™}Of the surviving fragments of his work, almost all are quoted 
by Simplicius, and apparently from the First Book only. 
Though at first sight clear, they contain several ambiguities, 
especially of terminology, and have aroused much controversy 
both in ancient and modern times.?

f A16 ; 
au A37 } At! 
ee ea m A39 B A40; --,-

nm’ Cp. Plut. De Exilio 607f; and Burnet EGP‘, p. 257, note 5.

1 The following account owes much both to Burnet EGP‘, and to F. M. Cor nford, 
Anaxagoras Theory of Matter, Classical Quarterly, 1930; an acceptance of the inter- 
sila of the latter seems to me necessary to an understanding of A.’s metaphysic-

p- also C. Bailey, Epicurus and the Atomists.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 265

There are two chief factors in Anaxagoras’ system: Mind 
and Matter.* The former is described clearly and unambigu- 
ously, within the limits of his terminology; the latter bristles 
with difficulties.

The Parmenidean proposition that there is no Void, or Not- 
Being, is accepted ;> and the further proposition that nothing 
can come out of nothing.* This latter proposition is expanded: 
the Greek notions of “coming into being’ and ‘passing away’ 
are mistaken, and for them should be substituted ‘mixing to- 
gether’ and ‘separation’.4 Further, there is no changing of one 
thing into another: only combination and separation of their 
constituents. So far, these are the views of Empedocles, 
adopted in order to explain the visible world while not denying 
the logic of Parmenides. But Anaxagoras offered a different 
theory, which was to account both for the diversity of things in 
our world, and also for the apparent change of one thing into 
another, whether this change took place in inorganic matter, 
or organic matter (growth).The elements from which all substances are made (that is, 
simple substances like gold)? are particles infinite in smallness, 
and therefore imperceptible except in coagulation.e A sub- 
stance like gold can be infinitely sub-divided,‘ and the result 
however small will be a particle of gold. The Fire, Earth, Air 
and Water of Empedocles are not themselves elements, but are 
each made of innumerable coagulated particles of Fire, Earth, 
Air and Water, and other simple substances. Even among. 
these particles, that is, of gold or earth, no two are exactly 
alike; they are similar because a certain quality predominates 
in each of them, so that in coagulation they take on a particular 
appearance.» In organic substances, there are two factors: 
growth and nutrition. The germ of an animal, or of a plant, 
must contain all the ingredients of the developed product, the 
animal: flesh, bone, veins, sinews, hair, nails, and perhaps 
feathers and horns; or the plant: wood, leaves, fruit; or else it 
must acquire them from the particular nutriment, bread or 
water (or whatever it may be) since nothing can come from 
nothing.) So that, to make up the composite animal, the germ

“ : © : bh By i A4s "j A46; Ags; Bro 
£144; D3 £4433 41 ; 
: Composite inorganic substances are not specifically mentioned; he must have known 
of them, e.g. electrum (a mixture of gold and silver), bronze (copper and tin), and 
thought them too obvious to require explanation.

266 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS266 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

of Bread (that is, corn), itself composite, is added to the animal- 
germ, and the result is a separation-out or articulation of the 
various ‘simple’ organic substances bone, hair, flesh and the 
rest. He seems to have given the name ‘seeds’ to all the particles 
of what he considered simple substances, organic or inorganic, 
transferring the natural term from the former to the latter. The 
particles of such substances are called by Aristotle Homoio- 
meré; it seems that Anaxagoras did not use this term. His 
‘seeds’ are the infinitely small particles, alike but not exactly 
alike, which when coagulated give a ‘simple’ substance like 
flesh, hair, bone; gold. What we call a ‘seed’, of an animal or 
plant, must already be composite, containing the particles of 
all the substances which subsequently develop from it.

The elementary particles are alike, but not exactly alike.® 
Yet each contains a portion of everything.» This puzzling 
statement used to be taken to mean, not only that bread if 
analysed would be found to contain bits of bone, flesh, hair and 
so on, but that a// substances if analysed would be found to 
contain bits of all other substances. This would reduce Anaxa- 
goras’ metaphysic to absurdity, for he would merely have 
postulated in the sphere of the elements the same diversity as 
is found in our world, without explaining either. But it is clear 
from the fragments that by ‘things’ in this connection he means 
‘qualities’, and is endeavouring also to express the relative 
nature of qualities. For instance, everything ‘contains a por- 
.tion of’ great and small,° that is, it can never be called abso- 
lutely ‘small’, but only ‘smaller’ or ‘greater’ than this or that 
other thing. He applied this reasoning to all the qualities: the 
range hot-cold, light-dark, wet-dry; in fact, to all perceptibles, 
‘ntiniing shapes, colours, tastes. So that in one sense theparticles themselves ‘contain’ these qualities, and each con- 
tains all of them; but no two are alike, because though each 
particle contains a portion of wet-dry, hot-cold, and the rest, 
the proportion of wet-dry, hot-cold, and the rest, is different 
in sia case.@ Therefore the particles or ultimate ‘seeds’ are 
infinitely infinite, both in number and in individuality.

These particles are indestructible and unchanging, and their

slpaaheee never varies,‘ that is, they never become less than 
n ne in number. The opposites which go to make up 4 
quality cannot exist alone; each must always be relative, that

* Ba B6; A443 Ags c B; 4 Biz e Ags { Bs

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 267

is, in combination with its opposite; there is no ‘greatest’ or 
‘least’, only ‘greater’, which implies ‘smaller’, and cannot exist 
without it, or ‘lesser’ which implies ‘greater’.2 The Opposites 
cannot be severed as if with an axe, so that the ‘things’ making 
up any elemental particle cannot themselves be dissected, and 
cannot therefore be regarded as elements. Anaxagoras also 
applied this reasoning to the category heavy-light, and to 
colours — white-black® — saying that where one was, the 
other must be, and giving as a proof the apparent change of 
‘black’ water into white snow and vice versa.So much for Matter. The other factor was Mind, which 
was. quite apart from Matter, and ‘contained’ no ‘portion’ of 
anything,° that is, had no perceptible or material qualities. He 
proceeds to describe it as the finest and purest of all things: the 
term ‘finest’ suggests matter, but as he uses a superlative he is 
obviously trying to describe something quite outside the 
material category dense-rare, for in that range there is no 
‘rarest’ but only ‘rarer’. The ‘purity’ of Mind lies in its not 
being mixed with anything, but being apart. This gives it 
complete knowledge of matter, as well as complete power over 
it, which would be impossible except from a position of inde- 
pendence.’ It 1s the source of motion and of life.¢

The cosmogony ts as follows: there was a period before the 
creation of the Cosmos, in which ‘all things were together’, 
that is to say, the infinite number of infinitely diverse particles 
were mixed and motionless.‘ This mixture had the predom1-. 
nating character of Air and Aether® (which he equates with 
Fire)® because the particles in which the Air-qualities and 
Aether-qualities predominated were more numerous and larger 
than the rest; in fact, both were infinite in quantity.) But though 
all other qualities were present, that is, particles in which other 
qualities predominated, they were not numerous enough to 
affect the mass, and could not be perceived because of their 
smallness. i

Then, in some unexplained way, at an uns ecified time and 
for no specified reason, Mind, separating off from the Whole,* 
set up a circular motion at one point; this was at first local, but 
it gradually spread and still is spreading.’ Air and Aether 
separated off from the mass; that is to say, the particles in

®B6 bBro ¢Br2 @Br2 © Agr; Br2;Ar1§98 ! Br; Ba;. 
6Ar bA73 iBr ijJBqg *Bx3 1 Br2

2968 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS®B6 bBro ¢Br2 @Br2 © Agr; Br2;Ar1§98 ! Br; Ba;. 
6Ar bA73 iBr ijJBqg *Bx3 1 Br2

2968 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

which the qualities hot, rare, dry predominated separated from 
those in which cold, dense, moist predominated.* There is of 
course no complete separation of hot-cold and the rest, because 
the particles on the cold side still have their portion of hot, 
that is to say, they are not absolutely cold — there 1s no such 
thing — but colder.> Every hot particle is different from every 
other hot particle by the degree of heat in 1t; and so on.The a ae hot, rare, dry particles separated off to the 
outer part of the revolving mass; and the cold, dense, moist 
settled inside.* The force that separated them off was speed — 
a speed far greater than anything we know.? From the latter, 
when separated off, Earth solidifies; for water separates from 
the clouds, and earth separates from the water.* The earth 1s 
flat, and floats on air.£ From the earth, stones are solidified by 
the cold, and as the rotatory motion continues, they are flung 
outward towards the Aether. Then they are carried round 
with it, and become the sun, moon and stars, together with 
other unseen bodies;* so that sun, moon and stars are not 
in the places in which they were created, for they are stony 
and heavy, and shine by reflection of the Aether.' In fact, the 
sky is made of stones held together by the swiftness of the 
revolution, and if this were relaxed, they would fall down.: 
This theory was a development of that of Anaximenes, and 
was substantiated for Anaxagoras by his knowledge of the fall 
of a large meteoric stone.* When the sun, which is therefore 
a red-hot mass larger than the Peloponnese,! is in position in 
the sky, it begins to vaporize the water which lies on the flat 
earth, and the part left behind is the sea.™ The heat of the stars 
is not felt because they are farther away, and inhabit a colder 
region." The moon also is a stone, but gets its light from the 
sun,° and is the cause of eclipses of the sun.P_ Eclipses of the 
moon are due to interposition of the earth between it and the 
sun, or sometimes to the lower, invisible bodies.1 —The moon, 
like the earth, is flat, with mountains, plains and ravines, and 
even rivers and houses.' It has life: the Nemean lion fell 
from it.*

Animals were created by the fall of ‘seed’ from heaven to

d Bg e B16 f£ Ag2 §3; A88

116 h Ag2 §6 i Ar2;A71 j} Ax §12 k Aro; Ar | 
| Ar §8; Az; A3; Arg; Azoa; A353 Ag2 §7 m Ar §8 n Ag2 | 
oBr8; A76 P Ag2 §8 q A42 §9 tAd Bg e B16 f£ Ag2 §3; A88

116 h Ag2 §6 i Ar2;A71 j} Ax §12 k Aro; Ar | 
| Ar §8; Az; A3; Arg; Azoa; A353 Ag2 §7 m Ar §8 n Ag2 | 
oBr8; A76 P Ag2 §8 q A42 §9 tA

8 A77; cp. 3B2 (above, p. 30)

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 269

earth, and afterwards by reproduction.* The seeds of plants 
were likewise in the air, and were washed down by rain on to 
the ground, where they took root, and became ‘living things 
attached to the ground’. Plants have sensation, and feel grief 
(and pleasure), a sign of the former being the fall of their 
leaves in winter.° They have, in fact, a portion of Mind in 
them, for though Mind itself is mixed with nothing, it is in 
some things, that is, those which have life.4 Yet this does not 
mean that all living things have intelligence, or even all human 
beings; they may have it and not use it, or have it only in its 
non-intellectual form, as a kinetic force.®Such is the story, in outline, of the creation of the Cosmos. 
It was not always fully understood; but the theory of the Seeds 
or Homoiomeré was recognized by Aristotle as an original 
attempt to solve the problem of existence, if one could dis- 
entangle what Anaxagoras meant.‘ The belief, however, that 
food contains animal organic material like blood was challenged 
by medical men like Galen, who pertinently asked whether the 
blood was not rather manufactured in the body. The theory 
of Mind as the creative force, or moving cause, met with more 
criticism: it was a promising suggestion, like that of a sober 
man among random babblers, Aristotle thought; but it was a 
pity that having dragged Mind in to start the cosmic revolu- 
tion, he no longer used it as an intelligent creator or ‘arranger’ 
of the Cosmos, but explained the rest of creation 1n a mechan- 
istic way. The promise with which Anaxagoras’ book began 
was therefore not fulfilled, according to both Plato and Aris- 
totle.! But Anaxagoras would have been able to defend himself 
from this criticism: he expressly says that Mind not only 
started the creative ‘eddy’, but is responsible for what is and 
what shall be.i Its rule continues,* because the creative de- 
velopment continues on the lines originally laid down. Mind 
itself is eternal, existing both outside the Cosmos and inside it, 
in the surrounding region and in the part ‘separated off’;! and 
its rule is extending further. When once things are started off 
according to an intelligent law, the rest follows automatically, 
and there is no need for Mind to interfere further. ‘It under- 
stands and has power over all things, and that makes it divine.”

ie . cArirz7 ‘4Ag9; Bri € Aroo; Arora 
fA 61 6 Aro4 hAs8 i Aaz7; As9; A57 j Br2 
Br4 m Br2 n A48; A4g; cp. Ass

270 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSie . cArirz7 ‘4Ag9; Bri € Aroo; Arora 
fA 61 6 Aro4 hAs8 i Aaz7; As9; A57 j Br2 
Br4 m Br2 n A48; A4g; cp. Ass

270 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

He filled out the details of the Cosmos with explanations of 
all phenomena which interested the scientists of his day. He 
was fully aware that neither sun, moon or stars were living 
creatures or anything else but material objects; and he knew 
that whereas the sun and stars shone with their own light, that 
of the moon was borrowed.* His reason for describing the sun 
as ‘bigger than the Peloponnese’ was doubtless his belief that 
meteoric stones fell from a whirling mass of stones in the sky, 
and that of these the sun was the largest: it was his way of 
describing a stone enormously larger than the one he had 
actually seen. The sun’s tropic was explained by air-resistance: 
the sun itself drives air along with it, and it is itself retarded and 
turned back by it.» The stars which originally moved ‘round’, 
later took an inclination ;° or as others put it, the Cosmos took 
an automatic slant after the creation of animals, perhaps in 
order that some parts might be uninhabited, others inhabited, 
according to climate and temperature.‘ All stars are carried 
from east to west,* and move under the earth. The Milky 
Way is produced by the light of stars which are in earth’s 
shadow when the sun passes below the earth, so that their 
light shows up and is not quelled by the sun’s rays.®

Comets are a concatenation of planets." Shooting stars are 
broken off from the aether-like sparks, and are immediatelyComets are a concatenation of planets." Shooting stars are 
broken off from the aether-like sparks, and are immediately

uenched.' The phases of the moon are caused by the sun, 
rom which it gets its light; he wrote on this subject, as on 
eclipses, in some detail, and was the first to deal with it 
thoroughly and clearly,i though his views were based on the 
work of his predecessors.* The progress of sun and moon is 
connected,! and this is the reason for the regularity of the 
moon’s phases; but though he gave a true explanation of 
eclipses of sun and moon, he felt unable to dispense with the 
assumption that there were lower bodies travelling between 
Earth and Aether, which accounted for some of the eclipses.™ 
The moon, like the sun, has its ‘tropic’, or point at which it 
seems to turn in its path; this also is accounted for by air-

resistance, but the moon is less able than the sun to resist the

accummlation of cold, and so it ‘turns’ in its path more fre- 
quently than the sun.

$9 . © Ar $9 d A6y ¢A78 
A81; A83;A1§9 |! A832; 
A7s ™Agz§

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 271

The flat earth is maintained in the middle by the force of 
the eddy going on round it, the same force that originally 
caused it to settle in the middle, as large bodies do in a whirl- 
pool of liquid or eddy of air. It can, however, be disturbed 
when the air which buoys it up on the under side rises through 
heat, and impinges on it, causing it to ‘toss’ like a ship on the 
sea;> the result is an earthquake. The heat below the earth 
which causes earthquakes acts in a way similar to that which 
breaks through the clouds above us and produces thunder and 
lightning.°Wind and ysain are explained by the movements of air 
through its being heated and cooled.4 Clouds and snow are 
explained in the same way as by Anaximenes.® Hail is caused 
by the squeezing out of moisture from a dense cloud: the drops 
are frozen and rounded during their descent.f. The condensa- 
tion of the cloud is caused by its being driven up by the refrac- 
tion of the sun’s rays from the earth, into a colder region; 
hence hail often occurs in summer, and in hot places. The 
movements of air greatly interested Anaxagoras: his experi- 
ments with the water-clock, elaborating those of Empedocles,¢ 
proved that atmospheric air was a real substance; and he added 
to this the observation that air rises in the heat, by watching 
motes dancing. He thought that the air actually sizzled as it 
rose, making hearing 2 night easier than by day. Lightning 
and thunder were explained as the descent of fire from the 
upper aether: the flash as it comes through the clouds 1s light- 
ning, the sound of its quenching is thunder. Other more 
violent phenomena depend upon the quantity of fire which 
descends, The rainbow is the reflection of the sun’s rays from 
a thick cloud.

The saltness of the sea was explained af the percolation of 
water through the earth, which contains salt (salt and soda, for 
instance, are mined from the earth);* this process 1s helped by 
evaporation.! The flooding of the Nile in summer is due to 
the melting of snow in the Aethiopian mountains: the correct 
explanation has now become established, in spite of its dis-

missal by Herodotus.”

' A88; cp. Ag2 §3 > A89; Ag2 §12; At §9 read er sae a 
© A8s5; 13A7; 13Ar7 (p. 72 above) 5 : He 
i A84; cp. Ar §9 j A86; Brg go 
ge, §4 m Agr; A42 §5

272 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS' A88; cp. Ag2 §3 > A89; Ag2 §12; At §9 read er sae a 
© A8s5; 13A7; 13Ar7 (p. 72 above) 5 : He 
i A84; cp. Ar §9 j A86; Brg go 
ge, §4 m Agr; A42 §5

272 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Animal-life and plant-life arise in the first instance from 
seeds containing hot and cold and earthy, and afterwards from 
one another. The males then produce the seed, the females 
the breeding-ground.>. >: There is alsoa Pythagorean suggestion 
that ‘males come from the right, females from the left’, and 
this is taken by some to mean that males are generated on the 
right-hand side of the womb, females on the left. He sug- 
gested that in some animals and birds (the crow, ibis and 
weazel are named) copulation took place by the mouth, an idea 
which is ridiculed by Aristotle. Like earth, the mother 1s the 
source of food, and food is administered to the embryo by the 
umbilical cord.e The brain is first developed, for all the senses 
derive from it.£. The disposition of the limbs is caused by the 
aetherial fire inside.®

In birds’ eggs, the white is the embryo’s food: he called it 
‘birds’ milk’, thus likening it to the food provided for animal 
young.5

All things breathe, even sea-creatures. Oysters and fish 
blow out water from their gills and breathe in air which is in 
their mouths, so that there is no vacuum. i

A plant is a living thing attached to the ground.) Their 
food-principle is earth, and for the generation of their fruits, 
the sun; so that the sun is the father, the earth the mother.* 
They have intelligence, and feel grief and pleasure. The proof 
of this, that they shed their leaves in winter, seems to ignore 
the non-deciduous trees.Man, he thought, acquired intelligence because he had 
hands. Aristotle combats this idea, and says that hands were 
given to Man as tools, because he had intelligence.' But 
Anaxagoras believed that the brain developed first in the em- 
bryo.™ There is a story of his dissection of a ram’s head to 
prove that the reason for its having only one horn was a mal- 
formation of the brain." He studied the pathology of disease; 
he believed that the worst human diseases were due to an excess 
of bile, which escapes into the lungs and veins.°

The following is, according to Theophrastus, his theory of

@Arr3; Arr7; Ar §9; Ag2 §12 b Aio7 © Aro7; Ar §9

€ Aro £ A108 & A1og h B22 iArrs j Arr16

1Aroz ™Aro8 %Ar16 Aros

1 Censorinus’ statement (Ar1r) that children inherit the appearance of the parent

who contributed most seed is wrongly attributed to Anaxagoras, according to whom 
only the father contributed seed (A107).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 273who contributed most seed is wrongly attributed to Anaxagoras, according to whom 
only the father contributed seed (A107).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 273

sense-perception : sense-perception occurs through the meeting 
of opposites.* Sight is due to an image or reflection of the pupil 
of the eye, but the reflection does not show up against a colour 
like that of the eye, but against a different colour. For most 
hi the ‘like’ colour ts night (most eyes being dark) the ‘un- 
ike’ is day, so that they see better by day than by night, 
though there are exceptions. Further, the light itself is a con- 
tributory cause of the ‘reflection’; a colour always shows up 
best on its contrasting colour. A similar explanation is offered 
for touch and taste: hot and cold, sweet and bitter, are not 
recognized by their likes, but by their opposites, because of a 
lack in each instance. All of these things are present in us, but 
there can be a shortage of one or the other. Smell accompanies 
breathing, hearing is due to a sound penetrating to the brain, 
for sound is produced by moving air. Voice, for instance, is 
produced when breath collides with ‘solid’, that is, compressed 
air, which is turned back like an echo, and reaches the ears of 
the hearers.»

All perception is accompanied by pain, for unlikes when 
they meet cause distress. This becomes clear through the 
duration, or the excess, of the sensation: bright colours and 
loud sounds give pain, and we cannot bear them for long.The larger the animal, the greater the powers of perception: 
the animals with large clear bright eyes see farthest, those with 
small eyes have the nearest sight. So too with hearing: the 
larger animals hear the furthest sounds, the smaller hear those 
near at hand. The same applies to smell: air smells most when 
heated and rarefied, but the larger animals are able to take in 
dense air as well as rare, whereas the small ones get only the 
rare air from which the smell has been scattered and weakened.

Sense-perception, however, cannot judge of exact truth: 
it cannot, for instance, discern a gradual change of colour,‘ or 
the presence of the opposite colour such as black in white.° 
‘But the senses are not entirely misleading; their evidence must 
be used in order to arrive at the truth: to see the invisible, we 
must use the visible. Cicero was wrong in including Anaxa- 
goras in the list of agnostics,é though he thought that certain 
things could not be grasped by us, for instance, the infinite 
number of the particles which separate off from the Whole;

b Ar06 ¢ Bar; Ag6

274 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Mind alone knows everything. All living things, even plants, 
have a share of Mind, though as a reasoning factor it is not 
present even in all human beings,* or is perhaps not used.» 
Whereas animals have the advantage over man in strength and 
swiftness, man is superior to them in ‘experience, memory, 
wisdom and skill’. To his pupils Anaxagoras said that things 
would be to them as they supposed,4 meaning apparently that 
their grasp of reality would depend on the intellectual equip- 
ment they could bring to bear upon it, and that this in its turn 
depended on their natural endowment — their ‘composition’.He equated the ‘soul’ with life;* it is that which causes 
motion in the organism, just as Mind did in the Whole.‘ It 
has two forms, the moving and the knowing. It is unlikely 
that he said it was air, as Anaximenes did,» and certain that he 
did not say it was immortal,» except in so far as it was part of 
the universal life-force, Mind. The particular consciousness 
ceases to exist when the soul leaves the body; i the period before 
birth teaches us about death, and so does sleep, though sleep 
is purely physical, due to weariness,* and does not involve the 
temporary departure of the soul from the body, as some have 
thought.

There was a suggestion in Favorinus that Anaxagoras was 
interested in Homeric studies, especially in the ethical content 
of the poems; and that he influenced Metrodorus of Lampsa- 
cus, who studied the scientific content.! Nothing else is known 
of this; it may have been a hobby of Anaxagoras’ retirement.

Anaxagoras appears to have believed that our Cosmos is not 
the only such universe created by Mind: there have been other 
separatings-out, which have produced men and all other crea- 
tures that have life; and the men possess inhabited cities and 
artificial works just like ours; they also have sun, moon and the 
rest, just as we have, and the earth produces many diverse 
things for their use." His choice of tenses, as Simplicius re- 
marks, shows that these worlds are regarded as contemporary

with ours. Mind started other rotatory motions in the mixture,

apparently simultaneous with 
developments elsewhere.®

* Atoo » Arora © Baia 4 A28; ep. 28B16 By fA99 
§ Arora » Ag; 1 A103 §A34 k A103

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 275

60. ARCHELAUS 
ARCHELAUS of ATHENS was in his prime about 450 B.c.* Atoo » Arora © Baia 4 A28; ep. 28B16 By fA99 
§ Arora » Ag; 1 A103 §A34 k A103

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 275

60. ARCHELAUS 
ARCHELAUS of ATHENS was in his prime about 450 B.c.

Archelaus was an Athenian,? apparently of Milesian ori- 
gin,” the son of Apollodorus, and pupil of Anaxagoras.° He is 
said to have been the first to bring Ionian physical speculation 
to Athens,‘ a distinction which in fact belongs to Anaxagoras; 
but the statement can be taken to mean that he first gave regu- 
lar instruction,in the subject which he had learnt from Anaxa- 
goras. It was he who taught Socrates this subject, the value of 
which Socrates is said both by Xenophon and Plato to have 
denied. Archelaus is said to have lived with Socrates for many 
years, and to have reformed his character, which was somewhat 
wild in youth, as well as made a philosopher of him. The asso- 
ciation began in Socrates’ seventeenth year, and included a 
visit to Samos; but we are not told how it ended.° It is possible 
that this account is in part an invention, on the analogy of 
Socrates’ reforming influence on Alcibiades: there were some 
who wished to prove that there had been a time when Socrates 
himself had needed reforming. Physical speculation is said to 
have ceased at Athens with Archelaus, for his pupil Socrates 
went over entirely to ethical philosophy,‘ a study which Arche- 
laus also had pursued along with physical science. Archelaus 
left Athens with his master, for he is said to have succeeded 
Anaxagoras as head of the school founded by the latter at 
Lampsacus.}

Archelaus is credited with a prose work on physical science, 
called Physiologia, of which only one sentence of four words 
survives.! He is also said to have written an elegiac poem of 
condolence for Cimon son of Miltiades, on the death of his 
wife the Thracian princess Hégésipyla.iIn general, his views were much like those of Anaxagoras, 
though he tried to introduce original features into his cosmo- 
gony, and other details.* His elements were the same; the 
Homoiomeré or Homoiomereiai, particles of matter infinite

; 1; A2 
33 At §16; Az; As; A7 f Ar §16 
i Euseb. P.E. p. 504, c3; Aro i B2 j Br

276 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

in number, differing in kind, and eternal. They produce 
everything by mixing and separation, and the first result of 
this 1s the separation of Hot and Cold, which some commenta- 
tors say he regarded as the ‘causes of Becoming’,” or even as 
elements.° The Hot was in motion, the Cold was motionless.4 
Other commentators suggest that he gave Air as the substrate, 
from which Fire and Earth separated by rarefaction and con- 
densation;° or that he said that all things came from Earth. 
There can be no doubt, however, that he began with the 
Homoiomeré, or seeds, and the initial division into Hot and 
Cold, following Anaxagoras from beginning to end. The only 
original feature at this stage appears to be his statement that 
Mind was not the creator of the universe, though it is a part 
of the divinity,# and that it was not ‘apart’, as Anaxagoras said, 
but itself contained some of the mixture." He thus removed 
Mind from its position as moving cause, and preferred to 
regard the motion which caused the creation of the Cosmos 
as being due to ‘heat and innate life’.1 Like Anaxagoras, he 
believed that there were numerous universes, one being formed 
with every rotatory movement set up in the mass of particles.His cosmogony is as follows:* after the separation of Hot 
and Cold, water liquefied out of the latter and flowed into the 
middle, where being ‘burnt up’, it turned into air and earth: 
the former rose, the latter fell. This was the cause of the 
creation of Earth, which lay motionless in the middle, being 
only a very small part of the whole. Round it flowed water, and 
the whole was dominated by air. From this (the earth, or per- 
haps the air: the reading is uncertain) came the material of the 
stars, of which the biggest is the sun, the next biggest the 
moon, while the stars differ in size. The heavens then took on 
a slant; and the sun gave light on the earth, clarified the air, 
and dried the land. The earth was at first a lake; it was not 
flat as Anaxagoras thought, but concave, the proof of this being 
that the sun does not rise and set at the same time for everyone, 
which it would do if the earth were flat.

His explanations of storms and earthquakes seem to be 
similar to those of Anaxagoras. He likened the thunderstorm 
to the effect produced by the plunging of a red-hot stone into 
cold water;! and he added to Anaxagoras’ explanation of earth-

@As5;A4§1; Aro ——P Ar §16 c Ag d Ag §2 © Ay f Ag 
, — ag Ar $y 1 Ar6

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 277

quakes by saying that the air impinging on the under side of 
the earth’s surface is trying to find room, and rushes through 
narrow passages. Hence, he said, earthquakes are preceded by 
a calm, for the force which stirs up winds is detained in the 
region below.®

The only surviving sentence of Archelaus’ scientific work 
gives the reason for his belief that the earth is motionless: it 
occupies the coldest region, and so ‘coldness is its bond’.»The only surviving sentence of Archelaus’ scientific work 
gives the reason for his belief that the earth is motionless: it 
occupies the coldest region, and so ‘coldness is its bond’.»

His biological views* differ from those of Anaxagoras, and 
appear to go back to Anaximander. He says nothing of seeds 
which fell from heaven, generating the first life, but states that 
the earth was heated underneath, and from the slime animals 
were generated. This slime provided their food at first, like 
mother’s milk, and this was their only diet, the same for all. 
They were short-lived. Later they reproduced from one 
another. Human beings were separated off from the others, 
and they proceeded to develop civilization: rulers, laws, arts, 
cities and so on. Mind is implanted in all things that have life. 
Every animal, no less than Man, uses intelligence, some more 
slowly, others more quickly.

Of his ethical views, nothing is preserved, though he 1s 
credited with the sophistic theory that good and bad exist not 
by nature but by convention.4

61. METRODORUS OF LAMPSACUS

Merropvorus of Lampsacus lived in the second half of the 
fifth century B.c.

-Metrodorus of Lampsacus, a friend and follower of Anaxa- 
goras, applied physical theories to the interpretation of Homer,° 
following on a line suggested by Anaxagoras.‘

He interpreted all Homer’s personages, both human and 
divine, as allegorical representations of natural substances, or 
arrangements of the elements:* Agamemnon, Achilles, Helen 
and Paris were Aether, the Sun (Fire), Earth and Air respec- 
tively, and Hector the moon. He likewise dealt with the 
deities, saying that Zeus, Hera, Athene and the rest were not

a Ar6a b Ba © Ag §s5; Ar §§16, 17 d Ar §16; Az 
€ Cp. ch. 8 (Theagenes) f 2 & 3 h4

278 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

at all what their worshippers imagined.* The lesser deities, 
Demeter, Dionysus and Apollo, were said to represent parts 
of the body: liver, spleen and gall.»278 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

at all what their worshippers imagined.* The lesser deities, 
Demeter, Dionysus and Apollo, were said to represent parts 
of the body: liver, spleen and gall.»

He may also have busied himself with Homeric grammar.® °:

62. CLEIDAMUS

Cierpamus: birthplace and period not recorded; but his work 
shows that he belongs to the fifth century B.c.

It is clear that Cleidamus belongs to the fifth century, since 
Theophrastus deals with his views between those of Anaxa- 
goras and Diogenes. There is no ground for identifying him 
with the Atthidographer of the same name.

Of his meteorological speculations, the only relic is a con- 
jecture that lightning is an appearance only, as when at night 
the sea is struck with a rod and gives out a (phosphorescent) 
flash.4 This is reminiscent of Anaximenes, who likened it to 
the cleaving of the sea with an oar-blade.¢

His views on sense-perception ‘ were original in some respects: 
he said that the eyes possessed vision merely because they were 
transparent. Similarly ears, nose and tongue perceive because 
they admit the object of perception: the tongue can taste and feel 
because it is porous. The rest of the body feels only hot, wet and 
their opposites. Of the senses, only the ears do not distinguish 
between sensations but send these to the Mind; he does not 
place Mind in control of everything, as Anaxagoras did.Plants are made up of the same substance as animals; the 
colder and more turbid they are, the further they diverge from 
the animal. Growth is related to the seasons: cold things 
sprout in summer, hot things in winter." These generalizations 
were a prelude to practical husbandry. The best time for sow- 
ing is February, at the rising of the Pleiads, because rain will 
fall a week later. To leave sowing till the spring equinox is 
dangerous, because by then the earth is wet, heavy and steamy, 
and in texture like badly-woven wool.! Excess of water is the 
cause of various plant diseases, such as running to leaf in vines, 
and fungoid blight on figs and olives.3

az bg e500 Ot 3Ar73 1347 £2 8&3 Bae is 56 
¢1 This has been thought so unlikely that ‘Metrodorus’ has been emended to ‘Zeno- 
dorus’ by Horn (Vors. II, p. 49, note).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 279

63. IDAEUS

Ipazus of Himera: date unknown. He is thought to have been 
a contemporary of Anaxagoras.

Idaeus is named by Sextus with Anaximenes, Diogenes and 
Archelaus, as one who said that Air was the elemental sub- 
stance. It has been thought? that he was the originator of the 
theory mentioned several times by Aristotle, that the substrate 
is something rarer than water and denser than air (or perhaps, 
denser than fire and rarer than air), from which things are 
created by rarefaction and condensation. The author of this 
theory was not known in antiquity: some identified the inter- 
mediary substance with the Non-limited of Anaximander; but 
it was pointed out that Anaximander spoke of ‘separating-out’ 
only, not of rarefaction and condensation. Others ascribed the 
theory of an intermediary substance to Diogenes of Apollonia.*

64. DIOGENES OF APOLLONIA

Diocenrs of Apottonta lived in the latter half of the fifth 
century.64. DIOGENES OF APOLLONIA

Diocenrs of Apottonta lived in the latter half of the fifth 
century.

Diogenes’ birthplace was probably Apollonia on the Black 
Sea, a colony of Miletus, not Apollonia in Crete, as some 
thought.» >: He is said to have been a pupil of Anaximenes, 
but this is impossible, as Diogenes lived much later: he 1s called 
a contemporary of Anaxagoras,° but it is clear from his writings 
that he was one of the last of those who pursued Ionian

philosophy.‘ Nothing else is known of his life.

Diogenes wrote a number of works. The longest surviving 
work was that Oz Natural Science, from which the quotations 
are derived ; this work was known to Simplicius. He also wrote, 
and mentioned in his main work, other separate treatises, on 
Meteorology, and on the Nature of Man; and an attack on the 
Natural Scientists, whom he called sophists.°

b1 See Burriet, EGP‘, p. 352, note 3. 
1 see Diels, Vors. II, p. 51, 1. 4

280 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

His magnum opus began with a plain statement of what he 
considered to be the proper way to write such a treatise: the 
starting-point should be from some incontrovertible proposi-

tion, and the style should be simple and dignified.*

His work was considered to be mainly eclectic, from Anaxi- 
menes, Anaxagoras, Leucippus and others;® but his vision of 
Air as the explanation of all phenomena, organic and inorganic, 
and his clear, vigorous expression, give his views originality 
and a new force. His biological theories were based on careful 
anatomical study, especially of the veins and arteries.He took as his substrate Air, giving as his reasons first, its 
importance to life: men and animals live by breathing, that is, 
by taking in air; and when it leaves them, they die.* Air is 
therefore life and intelligence in men and animals; it is in 
everything, and there is nothing which has no share in it, 
though the share differs in every instance.t Moreover, Air 1s 
most easily able to change its character: it can be hot or cold, 
wet or dry, more or less mobile, different in taste and colour.° 
It is therefore the elementary form of matter from which all . 
things are derived. There must be one elementary form, 
otherwise change and variety would be impossible; things 
cannot change one into the other, but as they have various 
forms, clearly there must be one substrate which adopts these 
differences. Aristotle commends this reasoning. Further, 
Air contains, or holds in its mixture, Intelligence, otherwise 
things would not be arranged according to measure: the 
balance of winter and summer, night and day, rain, wind and 
fine weather, show that all is designed for the best,» and this is 
the work of Air, which guides and governs? all things. In 
short, Air is God. i

In inanimate creation, then, Air is the substrate, that from 
which everything is made, as Anaximenes said.i (Diogenes 
cannot have been, as Nicolaus of Damascus said, the author of 
the theory that the element is an intermediary substance be- 
tween Fire and Air.)* It is boundless in extent and quantity, 
everlasting and imperishable. Its changes produce innumer- 
able perishable worlds.! Change is brought about by motion,

5 : e Bs f B2 BAZ h B3; Aa; A8 
' Bs i Bs; Ar; A4; As; A6; A7 k Ag; As 1 A6; Aro 
a, a Heracleitean word (22B41, cp. Parmenides, 28B12, 1, 3).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 2815 : e Bs f B2 BAZ h B3; Aa; A8 
' Bs i Bs; Ar; A4; As; A6; A7 k Ag; As 1 A6; Aro 
a, a Heracleitean word (22B41, cp. Parmenides, 28B12, 1, 3).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 281

which is due to the presence of Intelligence, the Life-force, in 
the mixture; motion produces changes of ‘density, and when- 
ever there is an accumulation of the Dense, an earth is formed, 
and all its accompaniments.*His cosmology was much like that of Anaxagoras. He said 
that the world is ‘round’, that is, apparently, a circular disc 
which settles out of the revolution in the centre of things, and 
is fixed there.» It rests on air, and can be moved by it, the 
result being an earthquake.* The sun, moon and stars, how- 
ever, are not red-hot stones, as Anaxagoras had said, but are 
made of a pumice-like, that is, porous material, and the fire 
they appear to give out is really that of the outer Aether passing 
through them:‘ he spoke of the stars as the breathing-holes of 
the universe.®: «1 The moon, he thought, does not get its light 
from the sun, but like the sun, is a pumice-like body suffused 
with fire from outside.£ The sun is quenched by cold falling 
on the heat: that is, apparently, eclipses are caused by the 
intervention of something between the sun and the aetherial 
rays.€ Nevertheless, in spite of this retrograde explanation of 
eclipses, he retained in his system the invisible dark bodies, or 
stones, postulated by Anaximenes* and Anaxagoras:' these are 
the meteoric stones, which often fall on to the earth and are 
quenched, ‘like the stony star which fell at Aegospotam1’.i 
Perhaps they are to be thought of as circulating between the 
sun’s orbit and the outer aether. The sea is a relic of the 
original wet element: parts of it were evaporated by the sun, 
and from this arose ‘breaths’, currents of air which set the sun 
and moon in motion in a kind of choric dance.* The process, 
as Anaximander said, is still going on, and one day all will be 
dry.! The sea is salt because the sun draws up the ‘sweet’, that 
is, the fresh water, and the residue is salty." Thunder is caused 
by the collision of air with a cloud; if it is accompanied by 
lightning, then that which collides with the cloud is fire."He had an ingenious, though mistaken, theory concerning 
the flooding of the Nile in summer. He thought that it was a 
compensatory process, due to the heat of the Egyptian summer. 
The sun draws up moisture, but the earth cannot be allowed to

aA6; Ar DAr ¢ Ar6a: cp. 59A89 d Ar2; Ar3; Ar4 © Arz 
fAr4 8 Axr3 br13A7 §s5 i s9A42 §6; 59A77 j Azz; cp. 
k Ar7;cp. ch. 16 (Petron), p. 84 above 1A)

©! S:anrvods, more accurate than Anaximander’s :

282 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS©! S:anrvods, more accurate than Anaximander’s :

282 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

get too dry, and so it has ‘perforations’, which give it the power 
of suction, just as oil in a lamp flows to the burning part. 
Thus Egypt is enabled to attract to itself an increase of water 
in the Nile, to compensate for what is lost by evaporation. This 
law of compensation is also illustrated by the Black Sea, the 
waters of which always flow in one direction, into the lower 
sea, and are not subject, as other seas are, to alternating tides.* 
The creation of life is not described; but in all animals the 
life-force is the same: air, warmer than that outside us, but 
cooler than that near the sun. This temperature is not the 
same for any of the animals, nor even among individual men, 
but differs to an extent hardly noticeable, which however 
accounts for the many kinds of animals, and their differences 
of form, way of life, and intelligence.’ The opposite principle 
to Air is Fluid,* ©: which is the denser form of the element, 
and in animals means a lesser power of perception and under- 
standing. This fluid the animals breathe in with the air from 
the ground, and they also eat wetter food.’ If it be asked why 
birds, which breathe purer air, have less intelligence than Man, 
the answer is that their bodies are so constituted that the 
breath, that is, air, does not pass right through them, but stays 
in the intestines. Hence they have rapid digestion but little 
thought.* Fish appear to live on water, but this is because 
there is air in the water. Aristotle asks why do they die in air? 
Diogenes was reduced to postulating an excess of air.! 
Diogenes agreed with Anaxagoras and Archelaus that when 
earth and its animals were created the Cosmos automatically 
took on a slant, apparently because it was better for life that 
this should be so. 
His book then proceeded to give detailed biological explana- 
tions, from which it is clear that his interests were largely 
medical. He discussed the nature of the semen, and described 
it as the ‘foam’ of the blood,* that ‘is, a manifestation of the 
presence of air, the life-principle, throughout the whole body, 
in the blood.‘ The father, not the mother, provides the off-~The embryo is reared in the womb, being fed by

of cup-like vessels at the entrance to the womb (that 1s, 
not through the umbilical cord).* He also apparently opposed

: = aasy yaqy 018; AZ3; C1 dArg §44 © Arg S44 
fA31 8 Art; 59467; 60A4 §4 b BG; ee i B6 : §Aaz7

CE fanehen

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 283

the current medical opinion that the male is formed sooner, 
and moves earlier, than the female. The baby is born without 
breath, but warm. Contact with the cold outer air causes this 
air to be drawn into the lungs.»

The blood in the veins 1s everywhere accompanied by air. 
If the air is driven towards the chest and stomach, sleep ensues; 
if all the air leaves the blood-vessels, the result is death.c The 
system of the blood-vessels is carefully described.‘Air, being the life-principle, is responsible for sense-per- 
ception® in all its forms. Like is recognized by like. Smell, 
drawn in through the nose, meets air of similar density round 
the brain; the nearer the approach to similarity between the 
outer air, the smell, and the air round the brain, the keener the 
sense of smell; he calls the similarity ‘symmetry’. Hearing is 
caused by the stirring of the air in the ears by that outside, so 
that it penetrates to the brain. Seeing is caused by the reflec- 
tion of things on the pupil, and this, mixed with outer air, 
gives the percept. Taste is due to the sponge-like texture (rare 
and soft) of the tongue, which draws up savours to the brain. 
The tongue is also the best judge of pleasure, and the best 
indication of sickness. He describes the kind of organs that 
give the keenest smell, hearing and sight. He has nothing to 
say about touch. Thus all perception is attributed to the inner 
air, which is reached by the outer air in different forms. 
Pleasure and pain also are attributed to the amount of air mixed 
with the blood, which makes it lighter and more mobile, or 
denser and more sluggish. Rarefied air in the veins makes for 
high spirits and health. Memory and emotion are attributed 
to the movements of air in the body. Thought 1s due to pure 
dry air; and lack of intelligence is due to the presence of fluid, 
which hinders the movement of the intelligent air.

The best means of diagnosing health in man is by means of 
the tongue; but in other animals, their state of health is best 
revealed by their colour,‘ which shows the prevailing ‘humour’ 
of the body. Diogenes and his contemporaries were criticized 
by Galen and his school for neglecting other symptoms in the 
excess of importance they attributed to outward appearance.®

Plants are generated on land when water putrefies and takes 
on an admixture of air.» They themselves, not being hollow,

a Bg; cp. A26 bA28 ¢ A2g d me ree 
o a a ~ «A as 3Plants are generated on land when water putrefies and takes 
on an admixture of air.» They themselves, not being hollow,

a Bg; cp. A26 bA28 ¢ A2g d me ree 
o a a ~ «A as 3

284 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

are unable to take in air, and so have no intelligence.* In this 
Diogenes diverged from Anaxagoras.>

Thus Air is elementary matter, life, intelligence, and God, 
the soul of the universe. Diogenes is said to have praised 
Homer for believing that Zeus is Air.c The passage in the 
Clouds* which represents Socrates in his basket drawing intelli- 
gence from the pure upper air, away from the earth which 
drags towards itself the moisture of the mind, appears to 
satirize the views of Diogenes; and there is a passage in the 
comic poet Philemon which well expresses Diogenes’ theory 
of the all-importance and ubiquity of Air.e Diogenes’ views 
had a great influence on the Hippocratic school: in Hippo- 
crates’ essay On the Sacred Disease, there is a passage which 
states that the brain is the ruling factor because it is the inter- 
preter of what comes in from the air.f. The essay On Breathing 
contains a passage on the importance of air to life, which re- 
peats the argument that water contains air because fish live in 
it,8 thus connecting the essay with Diogenes.

The power of the magnet is attributed to its ability to draw 
out ‘fluid’ from the iron.

65. CRATYLUS

Craty.us of ATuEns lived in the latter half of the fifth century 
B.C.

Cratylus was the younger contemporary of Socrates, and the 
associate and teacher of Plato.65. CRATYLUS

Craty.us of ATuEns lived in the latter half of the fifth century 
B.C.

Cratylus was the younger contemporary of Socrates, and the 
associate and teacher of Plato.

He was a Heracleitean, and expounded the Heracleitean 
doctrine that all perceptible things are in process of change, so 
that knowledge of them is impossible; he appears to have been 
responsible for Plato’s one-sided conception of Heracleitus’ 
views.' He carried this doctrine to absurd lengths: since it was 
not possible to say anything true of anything, he gave up 
speech, and contented himself with moving his finger only.3 
He even considered gestures and inarticulate sounds, such as 
hisses, more suitable as a teaching medium than words, because

the former are known symbols indicating what is not known. 
b 5QAIIZ _ A8 7 d Cr o 225 99) eC4 
3 4

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 286

He criticized Heracleitus’ saying that ‘one cannot step 
twice into the same river’ as not going far enough: one cannot 
step into the same river even once.» He is represented in 
Plato’s yen Cratylus as maintaining that it is impossible to 
say what is false, because one cannot utter ‘what is not’, and 
as holding the view that everything has by nature a name be- 
longing to it, which is for Greek and barbarian the same, and 
not the name given to it by any one people.°

66. ANTISTHENES THE HERACLEITEAN 
ANTISTHENES of Epuesvus: date not recorded.

Antisthenes is named by Diogenes Laertius as a follower 
of Heracleitus.4 ‘Heracleiteans’ are satirized by Plato in the 
Theaetetus,e where they are said to favour the doctrine that 
perception and knowledge are the same, but to be unable to 
uphold it by rational arguments, preferring to imitate their 
master by shooting out oracular sayings and then retiring. In 
the literature of the Peripatetic school they are mentioned as 
believing that stones and earth come from fresh water dried and 
solidified; and that the sun is an ‘exhalation’ from the sea.!67. LEUCIPPUS

Leucippus, probably of Axppfra, was in his prime about 
430 B.C.

Leucippus is the most shadowy figure of early Greek philo- 
sophy. Nothing whatever is known of his life. His birthplace 
was variously given as Abdera, Elea, Melos or Miletus,® 
according to the schools of thought with which he was con- 
nected; and he was said to have studied under Zeno or Melis- 
sus.2 Even in antiquity his existence was doubted sometimes ;' 
but Aristotle often named him, with or without Democritus; 
and as Aristotle had special opportunities of knowing the truth 
about the philosophical school of Abdera, we can accept his

@22Bg1 bg Cg dyz22Ar§1r5 ¢€3(Theaet.: __. 
& Ax §30; As; A8; Ar2;A33 = Ar §30; A4; A5; Aro i A2

286 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

view that Leucippus existed and that Democritus was his 
associate.* From the accounts given by Aristotle, it seems clear 
that Leucippus was the inventor of the ane Se Atoms, and 
that this was taken over and elaborated by Democritus, the 
popularity of whose writings caused them to oust those of his 
teacher.

Leucippus was credited with a book, called The Great World- 
Order, from which Democritus derived the terminology and 
basic doctrines of his own book. The two were sometimes con- 
fused.» From another monograph, or perhaps a chapter of his 
W orld-Order, entitled On Mind, one quotation survives.* His 
views were adopted by Diogenes of Apollonia,‘ and by Epi- 
curus,® though the latter apparently was one of those who 
denied his existence. ‘1

His name is usually coupled with that of Democritus, and 
is then usually (though not always)s mentioned first. He 1s 
mentioned separately by Aristotle, Simplicius (drawing on 
Theophrastus), Aétius, Hippolytus and others. An Abderite 
school is mentioned by Simplicius and Aétius.*Leucippus was evidently, therefore, the originator of the 
atomic theory, which was intended to provide a final solution 
to the problems bequeathed by his predecessors on Being and 
Not-Being, Becoming and Passing-Away, Change, Motion, and 
the validity of sense-perception. It was designed in such a 
way as to solve the difficulties of the Milesians, to satisfy the 
propositions of the Eleatic school, and to incorporate what 
was valuable in the work of Empedocles and Anaxagoras.

The theory was as follows: there are two ultimate kinds of 
existence, which may be called the Full and the Empty, 
equivalent to Being and Not-Being.' The existence of Not- 
Being in this sense is therefore postulated, in opposition to the 
Eleatic school: it is literally that in which there is nothing. 
Moreover, Being is not One, but consists of an infinite number 
of bodies, of infinite shapes, and in constant motion, so small 
as to be invisible.i These bodies are also so small that they 
cannot be divided, and are therefore given the name asoma, 
things which cannot be cut.* The cause of their constant

: : _. _3;A28 (Aristot.) 
; i A6; A7; A8; Aro; Ar2 }A7;A8;A9;A10 *A13;Ar4 
£1 See Burnet EGP‘, p. 330, note 2; Bailey, The Greek Atomists and Epicurus, p. 66,

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 287

motion is not explained; it is merely stated that they move 
about of necessity in the infinite void, apparently at random 
and in all directions.*OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 287

motion is not explained; it is merely stated that they move 
about of necessity in the infinite void, apparently at random 
and in all directions.*

The atoms cannot themselves be affected, since they are 
incapable of division or alteration, that is, of penetration by the 
Empty, which divides things.> They differ from one another 
only in shape.° What the various shapes were is not specified: 
they were innumerable.‘ It is said that the sphere was assigned 
to fire-atoms,* but apparently further distinctions were left to 
Democritus to work out. Thus moving, they come into con- 
tact, and if suitable shapes collide, they become ‘entangled’ and 
form a moving mass. They can then be said to differ also in 
position and arrangement, relatively to one another.¢ From 
these differences, and the amount of Emptiness included in the 
coagulation, all perceptible differences between things are 
derived. If one factor only is changed, such as arrangement, a 
different substance is obtained: witness the fact that a tragedy 
and a comedy are composed of the same letters of the alphabet.»

As the atoms are in constant motion, thereis constant change, 
coming-into-being and passing-away, as they unite and sepa- 
rate.’ Thus as the Empty Space is infinite, and also the number 
of atoms, there are innumerable universes, formed by their 
concurrence.) Such a formation is a matter of chance: the 
Cosmos is not alive, nor governed by foresight or design, but 
is put together through the coagulation of atoms driven by 
some non-intelligent natural cause.* It follows that truth is 
an appearance only; what we think we see is change, difference, 
oppositeness; what actually takes place is an alteration, not of 
substance, but of combination and arrangement of atoms and 
space, !The creation of a Cosmos takes place in the following way: 
many atoms of differing shapes separate off from the infinite 
mass and come together in a great empty space. Here, having 
collected, they form an eddy, that is, they begin to move round 
in a circle. As they jostle together in this revolution, like goes 
to like: the light atoms fly outwards, the rest stay together. 
Of the latter, certain hook-shaped atoms, being interlocked, 
form a kind of outer skin, globe-shaped, enclosing the rest;

@A6; Ars; Ar16; Ar8; Arg b Ar4; A7 c A6; A8 
- Arr "8 A6; A7; Ag; Ar4; Ars; Ar §30 h Ag

288 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

this is the sky. In the centre are the bodies borne there, and 
now cleaving together, except for some which fly outward and 
are retained by the outer skin, which keeps whatever touches 
it; these are the heavenly bodies. All is now revolving round 
the central mass, which is the material from which earth is 
made. The motion caused the drying up of this mass, and 
the squeezing out of the water, so that earth and sea were 
separated.*The rest of Leucippus’ cosmology is incompletely pre- 
served. He thought that the sun’s orbit is outermost, that of 
the moon nearest the earth, and those of the other stars be- 
tween these. The earth, in the centre, is shaped like a flat 
drum or tambourine,° and itself revolves. The account of the 
heavenly bodies in Diogenes Laertius is confused: the stars, 
he says, are conglomerations of atoms flung off from the central 
earth-and-water mass; these are dried and made fiery by the 
swiftness of their motion.‘ It is hard to reconcile this with the 
atomic theory, which assigns a definite shape to fire-atoms. 
Still more difficult is the statement that the sun is set on fire 
‘by the stars’;* that the moon has ‘little share of fire’ is more 
consistent.© The sun is seldom eclipsed, and the moon oftener, 
because of the different sizes of their orbits. The apparent 
obliquity of the sun’s orbit is due to the tilting of the earth at 
one end: in the north, the air is colder and denser, and there- 
fore better able to support the earth; in the south, where the 
air is finer, the edge of the tambourine sinks down.‘ Thunder 
is caused by the bursting out of fire caught in a thick cloud.

Sense-perception is a physical affair, due to emanations from 
objects. Vision, like the reflections in mirrors, is due to the 
reception of the emanation by a subject capable of retaining it: 
in the case of vision, by the pupil of the eye.! Small changes of 
colour are due to the addition of atoms invisible through 
smallness.i Thus sense-perception as we know it is unreal, a 
matter of opinion, ‘by convention’, not reality, since nothing 
is real except the atoms and emptiness.* Change is as much a 
matter of imagination as the bent appearance of an oar under 
water. !

The life-principle is fire, that is, a collection of spherical

Art §§30-33; Aro; A24 bAr §33 ¢ Ar §30; A26; cp. 59A88

~~” ( §§32-33 © Ar §33 f Ar §33; A27 & A2zs5 
1A33

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 289Art §§30-33; Aro; A24 bAr §33 ¢ Ar §30; A26; cp. 59A88

~~” ( §§32-33 © Ar §33 f Ar §33; A27 & A2zs5 
1A33

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 289

atoms, chosen because of their powers of penetration, and of 
moving others while themselves in motion. This process is 
assisted by breathing: moving particles are drawn in from 
outside, and they also prevent what is coagulated in the animal 
from dispersing.* Sleep and death are physical, being due to 
the partial or excessive separating-off of the finer particles.» 
He discussed certain biological phenomena such as procreation 
and sex-determination, but not in any detail.¢

The only actual words of Leucippus that survive are taken 
from the chapter Ox Mind: ‘Nothing happens at random, all 
happens out of reason or by necessity."4 No such guiding pur- 
pose can be discerned in the scheme attributed to him; and in 
fact it seemed to the ancients that he assigned everything to 
chance.e He may have believed that the infinite movements 
of the atoms and their chance coagulation were themselves due 
to the ultimate Mind; or else this remark, as well as the chapter 
or treatise On Mind, may be wrongly attributed to him instead ' 
of to some follower of Anaxagoras. So far as our authorities 
go, there was no place whatever for Mind in Leucippus’ 
scheme; in fact, there was a strenuous effort to eliminate all 
but atoms, space and motion. *

68. DEMOCRITUS 
Democritus of ABpErRa was in his prime about 420 B.c.

Democritus is said to have written in his book, called the 
Lesser World-Order, that he was forty years younger than 
Anaxagoras; his prime of life is therefore placed at 420 B.c., 
and the date of his birth given as 460 B.c.f Others placed his 
birth earlier, either in the same year as, or a year before, that 
of Socrates (470-69);8 others earlier still, in 500 or 494 B.C.,” 
and were obliged to extend his life to ninety or a hundred years, 
or even more, so that he could be made to live through ord B2 
eer . 45 AS 
i As (Diodorus), 90 years; A4; Ax §39, 100 years; A6, 104 years; Ar §43, 109 years 
1 Cp. Burnet, EGP‘, p. 340. Accepting the frg. (Bz) as genuine, he thinks that 
Leucippus did not assign creation to Chance, but was mistakenly supposed to have 
done so because he left motion unexplained.

290 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

beyond the fifth century. The dates given for his death range 
from 404 B.C. to 359.°

e was a native of Abdera in Thrace; this is generally 
agreed, though once Miletus? is given as his birthplace; this 
belongs to the tradition that placed his birth in 494 B.c., the 
date of the fall of Miletus, and can, like the date, be dismissed. 
Of his childhood, it is stated that he received instruction from 
certain Chaldean Magi:¢ these had been left behind in Demo- 
critus’ father’s house by Xerxes, when he stayed at Abdera on 
his retreat from Greece in 480 B.c. That Xerxes stayed at 
Abdera is corroborated by Herodotus ;4 but whether the Per- 
sian overseers left behind were Magi, and stayed long enough 
to instruct Democritus, remains doubtful. (The tradition is 
one of the reasons why some chronologists have placed his 
birth so early in the century.) The probability is that as the 
Persians under Xerxes used Abdera as a halting-place on their 
line of retreat, the town had retained Persian connections; and 
that Democritus as a child heard tales of Babylonian learning.

When he was old enough he took his share of his father’s 
property in money, and set off on his travels, leaving his two 
elder brothers to manage the estate; he travelled to Babylon 
to learn from the Chaldean Magi, to Egypt to learn from the 
priests, and, according to some, to India to learn from the 
Naked Sages, and to Aethiopia; he also visited Athens, but did 
not make himself known to anyone.‘That he travelled widely need not be doubted; but the story 
of the division of the patrimony appears to be based on some 
remarks of his in a treatise on Economics, on the desirability 
of dividing one’s estate among one’s children as soon as 
possible. The extent of his travels cannot be determined; but 
the strong tradition that he was one of the most widely- 
travelled of the philosophers, which is at the back of all the 
accumulated details, can be accepted. It led in later times to 
the fathering on Democritus of a quantity of magic lite

embodying the occult lore that he was supposed to 
acquired in Egypt and Chaldaea. That he visited Athens !5

Supported by a sentence from his own writings: ‘I came to 
Athens, but no one knew me.’ Demetrius of Magnesia, who

7 © Ar $34; Az d VIII, 120; VII, 109 
Sie $355 Az; Ara; Ar3; A16; Ago; B116; Bz99

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 291

quotes the sentence, says that Democritus’ reason for remaining 
unknown was a contempt for fame; and that he knew Socrates, 
but Socrates did not know him. If this is true, Democritus’ 
visit to Athens took place in later life, when he was famous, 
and not during his youthful travels. Demetrius of Phalerum, 
however, in his Defence of Socrates, said that Democritus never 
visited Athens ;* this was apparently in order to defend Socrates 
against some charge of having treated Democritus coldly. 
There was a story current that Democritus was hostile to 
Anaxagoras because Anaxagoras did not ‘receive’ him or 
admit him into his society;> this story may have been applied 
to Socrates also. It seems best to assume that Democritus did 
visit Athens, but that Demetrius, though an Athenian, could 
find no one who knew of his passage. That Democritus lived 
in Athens for a long time® is most unlikely. The stories of his 
hostility to Anaxagoras are no doubt invented to account for 
his criticism of Anaxagoras’ views.Clement of Alexandria, commenting on Democritus’ travels 
in the East and Egypt, quotes a sentence in which Democritus 
declares that he has travelled more widely than any other man 
of his time, has seen the most climes and countries, and has 
heard the greatest number of learned men; that no one has 
surpassed him in the composition of treatises with proofs, not 
even the geometers of Egypt, with whom he spent five years.* *1 
This is coupled with the assertion that Democritus not only 
learnt from the Magi and priests, but also wrote under his own 
name a book of Babylonian ethics which he had copied from 
the Pillar of Akikaros.: On linguistic and other grounds this 
fragment is now generally regarded as spurious, belonging to 
the mass of forged literature which was later issued under 
Democritus’ name because of his legendary reputation as one 
steeped in the lore of Babylon and Egypt.?

On his return he was obliged to live poorly. There was a

a2* ¥/ --- 335 C Art

~t donaptae, ‘rope-fasteners’, applied to Egyptian geometers.

: planes Chaldean sage, oe sigs began to reach Greece during the seis 
century B.C. and after. Theophrastus wrote a dialogue *Axixapos (Diog. Ly: se e 
sage is mentioned in the Book of Tobit, ch. 1, 22, as prime minister to King a 
haddon (Sarchedonus) at Nineveh, and nephew to Tobit. Strabo gives him in a ne 
of seers as ‘Axatkapos, interpreter to the inhabitants of the kingdom of Bosporus. Hee 
Aramaic version of his sayings was found in fragmentary form in papyr! discovered a 
gare Re 3 $99.) where the whole question of the forged writings is discussed.

292 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

legend that he was liable to some form of penalty for having 
spent his patrimony, but that either heor his relatives read aloud 
his work on the World-Order to his accusers or judges, and 
they assessed it at as high a value as or higher than the huge 
sum he was said to have spent.*Of the rest of his life, nothing is known, not even where he 
met Leucippus. Among those who studied under him are 
mentioned Hippocrates (though some said that Democritus’ 
pupil was Metrodorus of Chios, who taught Hippocrates), 
and Protagoras, whom he rescued from menial work, and made 
first his secretary and then his pupil.© °: A similar story is 
told of his ransoming Diagoras of Melos from the slavery into 
which he had been sold in 411 B.c. on the capture of Melos by 
Alcibiades, and likewise making him his pupil.4

He spent his life, therefore, teaching and writing, and had 
no other history. It was sometimes said that he held office at 
Abdera,* as the Pythagoreans had done at Croton; but the 
main tradition makes him rather a philosopher of the type of 
Anaxagoras, one who gave up all affairs, public and private, 
for research.‘ He did, however, write a shrewd and detailed 
work on politics; but he is also quoted as saying that it is shame- 
ful to pursue public affairs to the detriment of one’s own busi- 
ness. Other anecdotes illustrate the value of the scientist to 
the State, for example, how Democritus saved the people of 
Abdera from famine, or saved the harvest for them by fore- 
casting a violent rainstorm.' A story similar to that attached 
to Thalesi attributed to Democritus a corner in olive-oil.* It 
is said that his investigations into the nature of apparitions led 
him to spend time among the tombs.! His attitude towards his 
fellows later caused the epithet Ge/asinos (‘Laugher’) to be at- 
tached to him, as one who laughed at the folly of human beings 
in their pursuit of foolish desires.™

There was a confused tradition that he deliberately blinded 
himself by gazing at the sun’s reflection, because sight impedes 
the action of the mind;" Plutarch rightly dismissed this foolish 
story,° which is quite out of keeping with Democritus’ work. 
The stories of his death are contradictory: Lucretius furthereda Ar §§39, 40; §36; B Oc b Ar §42; Az; Aro ¢ Ag d Aroa e A2

f Ar §36; Ars; A169 & B80 h Arg i Arg J xrrAro k Ary 
ier §38 ™A2;A21;A4go 2 A22; A23; A2s5; cp. A26 (the Christian version) 
o f\2

c1 This story must be rejected on chronological grounds; see below, pp. 343-4.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 293

a tradition that he committed suicide when he felt his mental 
powers failing;* but other anecdotes say that he tried to pro- 
long his life, and give the recipe (smelling hot bread, smelling 
honey). These stories are a projection of his investigation into 
the nature of qualities such as hot-cold, sweet-bitter,* and of 
sense-perception, and need not be believed.

Writings. A large body of written work was produced at 
Abdera, during and after Democritus’ time; it was realized in 
antiquity that not all the works bearing Democritus’ name 
were by him. These writings were examined and arranged by 
the Alexandrian scholars, and the dialect was studied. Calli- 
machus prepared a Table of Democritean Vocabulary and Syntax, 
and Hegesianax wrote a book on his stylet The work of the 
Alexandrians was later used by the Romans: Thrasyllus in the 
time of Tiberius prepared an arrangement of the works of 
Democritus and his school in tetralogies,* according to subject- 
matter: Ethics (Tetralogies I and IT), Natural Science (III to 
VI), Mathematics (VII to IX), Music (X and XI), and Tech- 
nical Works (XII and XIII); besides these, there was a list of 
works under the title Causes, and also a list of works given 
separately by some among Democritus’ treatises.The works on Ethics included a treatise On Pythagoras, 
and On the Philosophical Nature, as well as on Courage and 
Imperturbability, and On the Next World. Natural Science 
embraced Cosmology and Astronomy, Psychology and Sense- 
Perception, Logic, Problems, and Criticisms (of past theories). 
Mathematics included Geometry and Numbers, as well as 
certain geographical dnd astronomical calculations. Music 
included Rhythm and Harmony, Poetry and Phraseology; 
there was a treatise on Homeric Diction. The technical works 
dealt with Medicine, Agriculture, Drawing and Painting, and 
-even Military Tactics. The treatises grouped under the head- 
ing Causes investigated the causes of various phenomena, 
celestial and meteorological, botanical, biological and geo- 
logical; fire, sound, and many other things. Among the 
treatises which Thrasyllus says are given separately by some 1s 
grouped a number seleeang to the lore of Egypt and Babylon; 
these are nowadays regarded as suspect. Thrasyllus adds that 
all other titles ascribed to Democritus are either compilations

9; Ar §42

294 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

from his works, or are admittedly spurious,* thus showing that 
a considerable body of doubtful works existed. There were 
some who believed that the only works actually by Democritus 
were his book or books on the System of the Universe — the 
W orld-Order — and certain letters.>

The book called World-Order (Diakosmos) is given by 
Thrasyllus under Tetralogy III, as two works, one called the 
‘Great World-Order’, the other the ‘Small’. Thrasyllus adds 
that the school of Theophrastus believes the Great World- 
Order to be the work of Leucippus, while the Small World- 
Order is the work of Democritus, based upon Leucippus’ work. 
This is generally accepted.°Commentaries on Democritus’ books were numerous. The 
Peripatetic school devoted particular attention to him; Aris- 
totle wrote a work On Democritus, and Problems from Democritus 
in two books; Theophrastus wrote On Democritus, and Ox the 
Astronomy of Democritus Plato never referred to him: this 
gave rise to a story that Plato wished to burn all the books of 
Democritus that he could collect, but was -restrained by 
Amyclas and Cleinias the Pythagoreans.° Other works were 
written in criticism of Democritus’ views, by another of 
Aristotle’s pupils, Heracleides of Pontus; by Epicurus and his 
pupil Metrodorus; and by the Stoics Cleanthes and Sphaerus.‘ 
The criticism of Democritus by Epicurus® is particularly 
astonishing since he owed his entire scientific system, and 
much of his ethics, to Democritus. But the claim to complete 
originality was one of Epicurus’ obsessions; a much truer 
estimate was that of Hermippus, who said that the discovery 
of Democritus’ writings changed Epicurus from a school- 
master into a devotee of philosophy.»

Democritus was able to clothe his scientific material in a 
literary style. Cicero says that his style had rhythm, like that 
of Plato, and that he was more poetical than the comic poets. 
Though, like Heracleitus, he had a gift for epigram, unlike 
Heracleitus he was never obscure. Dionysius of Halicarnassus 
also ranks Democritus with Plato and Aristotle as belonging 
to the ‘middle style’.

Of his works, over three hundred quotations or alleged 
quotations have survived. Of these, a few can be assigned to

*A33 (end) =>A3r =¢ Bab; Bs;cp.Az2  4A34 = Ar§3g9 0 £A34 
&Diog. L.,X.8 bAs2 i A34

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 295*A33 (end) =>A3r =¢ Bab; Bs;cp.Az2  4A34 = Ar§3g9 0 £A34 
&Diog. L.,X.8 bAs2 i A34

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 295

the books given as Democritean by Thrasyllus; but the 
majority come from unspecified works. There is also a large 
collection of Gudémae, pithy phrases mostly of a practical 
ethical turn, ascribed to “‘Democrates’, but usually believed to 
be by Democritus. Finally, there are the fragments which 
purport to come from works by Democritus revealing the 
magic lore of the East or of Egypt.

Fragments which can be assigned to titles given in the tetralogical 
system of Thrasyllus. |t must be remembered that the writings 
listed by Thrasyllus are probably those of the complete body of 
writings of the Democritean school which Callimachus found in 
existerice; they are therefore genuine only in the sense that they 
belong to the genuine Abderite writings of the fifth and fourth 
centuries, as opposed to Alexandrian and later forgeries. They 
are therefore not necessarily by Democritus himself. Even the 
titles of the works from which quotations are made often vary.From the First Tetralogy (On Pythagoras, On the Philosophic 
Character, On the Next World, On Tritogeny or the threefold 
nature of all human things) only a few actual words survive,* 
and the meaning even of these is uncertain. Some said that 
the book Ox the Next World was one of the two which he read 
to the jury on his trial for spending his patrimony;’ but 
others mention only the World-Order. His book On Pytha- 
goras is thought to have been appreciative, as he was said to 
have been a great admirer of Pythagoras, and to have ‘taken 
everything’ from him, and even, by some who ignored chrono- 
logy, to have been his pupil. The book Ox the Next World 
seems, judging by the references to it in Proclus and Philo- 
demus, to have been concerned with death rather than Hades: 
Proclus says that the book discussed the problem of those who 
appear to be dead and come to life again;* Philodemus that 
Democritus, writing on death, discussed the physical pheno- 
menon of corruption, and drew a moral therefrom: that beauty 
and strength must be reduced to the same material elements as 
all other flesh, and that it is foolish to be grieved at the thought 
of a poor tomb, or to attempt to evade the thought of one’s 
death by such devices as postponing making a will.c The 
Tritogencia dwelt on the favourite theme of the number Three: 
the epithet Tritogeneia, applied to Athene, was interpreted to

¢ Ar §38 d Br e Bra

296 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

mean ‘threefold creator’, because from wisdom arise three 
things: sound thought, sound speech, and right action.*¢ Ar §38 d Br e Bra

296 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

mean ‘threefold creator’, because from wisdom arise three 
things: sound thought, sound speech, and right action.*

From the Second Tetralogy there are more remains. The 
books On Courage and On the Horn of Amaltheia remain mere 
titles; but the book Ox Contentment of Spirit (Euthymia) was 
one of the most quoted, though the title is not given. There 
was also perhaps a book on Well-Being (Euesté) which was lost; 
or this may have been an alternative title to that On Content- 
ment. A work called Ethical Notes is also mentioned. Many of 
the ethical quotations from unspecified books, and perhaps 
some of the apophthegms, came from these works.>The next four tetralogies contain the works on Natural 
Science, that is, the bulk of the Democritean theories of World- 
Order, and the nature of man. In the Third Tetralogy, the 
first work listed is the Great World-Order, generally believed 
to be the work of Leucippus; the second work was the Sma// 
W orld-Order, believed to be Democritus’ own work based on 
that of Leucippus. No actual words from the latter survive, 
though the phrase stigmatized as bombastic by Sextus, ‘the 
following things I declare concerning the Whole’,* has been 
thought to be its beginning. It was in this book that Demo- 
critus gave his own age as forty years younger than Anaxa- 
goras, and the date at which he wrote the book as 730 years 
after the fall of Troy.: It contained an attack on the views of 
Anaxagoras, whom he accused of not being original, but 
expressing opinions derived from ancient sources. Many 
extant summaries and some quotations probably coming from 
this work, though the title is not mentioned, survive; and it is 
believed that the contents can be gathered even more fully 
from summaries and commentaries based on the work of 
Hecataeus of Abdera, who in the time of Alexander wrote a 
full account of Democritus’ teachings. The chief passages 
thought to be derived from Hecataeus are those in Diodorus® 
and Diogenes Laertius, in the Byzantine Tzetzes’ notes on 
Hesiod,‘ and possibly in the Christian writer Joannes Katra- 
rios’ dialogue Hermippus.¢ From these one may gather that 
the work described the change from chaos to cosmos, the 
creation of our universe, the generation of animals and lastly

a DZ ~ pza-D4a ~ WLU5 “wD eBs, 1 f Bs, 3 & Bs, 2 
1 The era he used is not known. Burnet, EGP‘, p. 331, note 1 (where there is a 
misprint: 750 for 730).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 297a DZ ~ pza-D4a ~ WLU5 “wD eBs, 1 f Bs, 3 & Bs, 2 
1 The era he used is not known. Burnet, EGP‘, p. 331, note 1 (where there is a 
misprint: 750 for 730).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 297

man, the growth of human society from the primitive life of 
early man, the discovery of fire and the arts. With these may 
be compared the theories of Lucretius, as well as those of his 
master Epicurus. The other books of the Third Tetralogy, 
On Cosmography, and On the Planets, obviously either belong 
to, or amplify, the World-Order.*

The Fourth Tetralogy listed two books On Nature: the first 
On the Nature of the Universe, the second On the Nature of Man; 
these too appear to be either parts of, or amplifications of, the 
World-Order. The third work, On Mind, and the fourth, On 
Perception, were sometimes grouped together as one psycho- 
logical work.

The Fifth Tetralogy contained separate treatises on Tastes, 
Colours and Forms;° and it was in the last-named work that 
Democritus stated his theory of knowledge.

In the Sixth Tetralogy were grouped the works Oz Appari- 
tions, On Logic, On Proofs (or Supporting Arguments) and On 
Difficult Questions. These dealt with the problem of knowledge 
and its relation to perception, and on the method of scientific 
thought.°

The Seventh Tetralogy contained mathematical works: a 
treatise on different methods of conceiving geometry, with 
special reference to the circle and the sphere; others Oz 
Geometry itself, and special geometrical problems; and one Ox 
Numbers. No specific quotations remain.The Eighth Tetralogy contained a work in two books on 
Disproportionate Lines and Solids; a treatise On Projections, that 
is, methods of representing a sphere on a plane surface; an 
astronomical Calendar, called The Great Year, or Astronomy; 
and a work of uncertain title, Contest by (?) Water-clock, possibly 
dealing with methods of measuring time.f Theophrastus wrote 
a treatise On the ‘Astronomy’ of Democritus, and Democritus’ 
Calendar was used by subsequent compilers of calendars, such 
as Eudoxus in the later fourth century, Geminus* (or the 
author of the astronomical treatise of the first century B.c. 
which bears his name), the astronomer and geographer Claudius 
Ptolemaeus of Alexandria in the second century a.p., and 
the Byzantine Joannes Lydus in the sixth century a.p.®

@ Bsa, Bsb b Bsc-Bsf cBsg-Bsi dB6-B8a eB8b-Brra 
f Brrp-Br4a 8 Br4 : 
1 Writer of a Calendar used by Proclus. Date uncertain; perhaps first century B.C.

298 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

The Ninth Tetralogy contained four descriptive works, 
doubtless with charts and diagrams, Oz the Heavens, On the 
Earth, On the Pole, and On Light-Rays. It is said that Demo- 
critus was one of the many who wrote a Voyage Round the 
World, but that he made the world rectangular instead of 
round.* No specific quotation from these works survives.

_ The Tenth Tetralogy contained works On Rhythm and 
Harmony, On Poetry, On the Beauty of Words, and On Euphoni- 
ous and Discordant Letters.”

The Eleventh Tetralogy contained works Oz Homer, On 
Correctness of Diction, On Song; and a Vocabulary. Few direct 
quotations survive, though Democritus’ views on literature, 
diction and nomenclature were often referred to.°The Twelfth Tetralogy deals with medicine: there are works 
On Prognosis, On Diet, On Medical Method, and Causes of 
Seasonable and Unseasonable Things.t No direct quotation sur- 
vives. The work of Hippocrates Ox Diet, far hoa acknow- 
ledging any debt to Democritus, says that previous treatises on 
this subject are inadequate, and that his own work is written 
expressly to fill a want.° Certain manuscripts purporting to be 
the Prognostic of Democritus survive, but are thought to be 
based on a Hippocratic forgery.!

The Thirteenth Tetralogy gives a work On Agriculture, 
which was known to Varro and Columella; a work Ox Painting; 
and two treatises On Military Tactics and Fighting with Arms. 
The two military works are thought to be by a different Demo- 
critus, a historian who according to Suidas wrote two books on 
Tactics, as well as a work On the Fews.8

Not included in the Tetralogies, but grouped under the 
title of Causes were nine works dealing with the causes of par- 
ticular phenomena in the heavens, in the air, and on the earth; 
fire; sounds; seeds, plants and fruits; animals (in three books); 
the magnet; and various other phenomena. Finally there was 
a group of works separately listed by some as belonging to 
Democritus’ memoranda: On the Sacred Writings of Babylon; 
On the Sacred Writings of Meroé (in Aethiopia); Circumnaviga- 
tion of Ocean; On Research, Chaldean Theory; Phrygian Theory; 
On Fever and Coughing, Legal Causes; and Problems. Their 
genuineness is suspect because they were listed separately; and

a Br4b-Brsb Senet ‘ © Brsc d B26b-B26e © B26c 
26

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 299

what is known of their contents increases the suspicion. This 
question will be discussed later.*a Br4b-Brsb Senet ‘ © Brsc d B26b-B26e © B26c 
26

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 299

what is known of their contents increases the suspicion. This 
question will be discussed later.*

The set of Maxims (Gnémae) attributed to Democritus is 
given in a collection called Maxims of Democrates. Stobaeus in 
compiling his anthology quotes Maxims of Democritus, many 
of which are the same as those of the ‘Democrates’ collection; 
it 1s therefore believed that “Democrates’ is a corruption or a 
later attribution, due to the discovery by Byzantine scholars of 
the existence of one Democrates of Aphidna in Attica, who 
wrote on agriculture in the fourth century B.c.

Metaphysic. The principal authorities for Democritus’ meta- 
physical and cosmological opinions are Aristotle and his school; 
it has often been pointed out that as Aristotle’s native town 
Stageira was not far distant from Abdera, he had a good 
opportunity of learning Abderite views. Aristotle singled out 
Democritus for special commendation, as having gone deeper 
than others, including Plato, in discussing such problems as 
change, and as having not only grappled with all problems, 
but touched on a new scientific method, dependent on the 
concept of the Formal Cause.* He was also (says Plutarch) 
willing, like Aristotle himself, to renounce without fuss or 
irritation views formerly held and found to be mistaken.!In his book On Democritus, Aristotle gave a detailed ac- 
count of his metaphysical system; extracts from the book are 
given by Simplicius. Democritus, like Leucippus, believed 
that all phenomena could be explained by combinations of 
atoms and space. The atoms are infinite in number, and so 
small as to be imperceptible by us; space is of infinite extent. 
The atoms are Substance, Fullness, Being; space is Emptiness, 
Nothingness, the Unbounded. Though the atoms are so 
small, they are nevertheless of different sizes and shapes; they 
can also differ in arrangement and position relative to each 
other.°

Democritus, by saying that the atoms were ‘infinite in size 
and number’,! appears to have misled some into thinking that 
he meant that some of them were very large; 1t was sometimes 
said that Democritus differed from Epicurus on this point,

a Below, pp. 323 599. b B35-Brr5 apts ate 
© A3 7 (Simpl. quoting Aristotle On Democritus); A38; A4o; A43;A44; A45; A46

300 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

namely that while Epicurus thought that all the atoms were so 
small as to be imperceptible, Democritus thought that there. 
were also some very large atoms,* and even that it was possible 
to have an atom as big as a universe.» It seems more likely that 
Democritus, while stating this as a logical possibility, believed 
in the imperceptibility of the atoms, and that ‘infinite in size’ 
means ‘infinitely small’, since the dea of Simplicius is 
explicit on this point,° and the authority for stating that he 
said that there actually were very large atoms is late.4.4: 
Even if Democritus said that there were an infinite number of 
sizes, that is, that no two atoms were the same size, they could 
still all be imperceptibly small.Their shapes also were infinite in number: no two were 
alike. He gave a few examples: rough and smooth, angular 
and curved, and so on.‘ These are the only differences be- 
tween them: size and shape. No one atom can come from 
another? (one cannot come from two, nor two from one);' they 
are, by hypothesis, the result of a division carried to the last 
possible stage.i They cannot in themselves be affected or 
changed; they do not get ‘hot or cold’, or ‘wet or dry’, still less 
change from black to white, or undergo any of the changes 
experienced by sense-perception.« They possess, however, the 
power of motion; and this brings the second element, empty 
space, into play, both as that in which the atoms move, and as 
entering into the composition of bodies.

The atoms move in empty space; and thus they can be said 
to differ in two further respects, which Democritus called 
tt and ‘contact’, and Aristotle translated as ‘position’ and

: These differences are not, like shape and size, 
intrinsic, but are brought about by their relation to one an- 
other. The original cause and nature of their motion 1s not 
explained; it is a kind of strife,-™1 a being carried along at 
random," and it had no beginning, but existed by immutable 
law from eternity.° It was sometimes alleged that Democritus 
said that the atoms had no power of motion, but are moved ‘by 
a blow’? But it is obvious that there could have been no

bDAg7 cA dA e f 
i Ag j AAS; Aga, Agab nae apie Pere trt 
nA43 °A56;A39; A66 P A4y |

a1 Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria (third cent bius. Cp. 
Bailey, The Greek Atomists and pea p. Bee ury A.D.) quoted by Eusebius. ©p

m' otacidgew suggests orders, ‘intestinal strife’.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 301

collisions among the atoms unless they were originally in 
motion. This contradiction is bound up with the contradictory 
statements regarding his theories on weight.collisions among the atoms unless they were originally in 
motion. This contradiction is bound up with the contradictory 
statements regarding his theories on weight.

Aristotle says that Democritus did attribute weight to the 
atoms, and that this was the cause of their motion; their weight 
differed according to their size.* Others expressly state that 
Democritus said that the atoms have no weight, but ‘move 
through collision’ in infinite space; and that whereas Demo- 
critus gave the atoms only two intrinsic differences, size and 
shape, it was Epicurus who added the third, weight.» The 
reason why the argument arose, and why it was felt necessary 
by. someone to add weight to the primary bodies, is clear: it 
was in order to explain the cause of motion, left unexplained 
by the original author of the scheme. In Epicurus’ system, the 
motion of the atoms became ‘up and down’, owing to the 
introduction of weight, and the notorious ‘swerve’ had to be 
arbitrarily introduced in order to bring the atoms together.° 
It seems likely, in view of these conflicting statements, that 
Aristotle was using ‘Democritus’ here to mean the Demo- 
critean school; and that the introduction of weight was due to 
a later development. At any rate, even if Democritus at any 
time came to think that the atoms had ‘weight’, he cannot have 
meant by this what the school of Epicurus meant, namely that 
they moved ‘up and down’ in the void; for he obviously de- 
scribes them as moving in all directions at random, and as 
being ‘scattered about’.4 By ‘weight’ he must have meant 
‘force of impact’, that is, the bigger the atom, the heavier the 
blow it could give when colliding with another.* But the 
original cause of its motion leading up to the impact remains 
unexplained, and merely fixed by necessity.’ ‘There is a sug- 
gestion that Democritus thought that ‘weight’ in the sense of 
rising and falling was an appearance only: that he was thinking, 
not of any ‘up and down’ in the void itself, but of the tendency 
by which bulkier particles seek the centre of a vortex, while the 
less bulky are extruded and ‘appear to rise’.s This is quite 
different from the Epicurean ‘up and down’ in parallel lines, 
which necessitated the swerve, though Epicurus is said to have 
adopted Democritus’ views on weight also;" but Epicurus by 
his own tenets had no need to accept any one out of several2As8;A60 bA47 CASI; Aso = 4 Br68; As7; As8 © A47

302 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

scientific explanations,* even when they were mutually exclu- 
sive; and the probability is that the idea of the swerve was not 
his own either, but was borrowed from the later Democritean 
school.

The atoms, moving in space, collide, and the variety of their 
shapes causes them to cleave together, or ‘become entangled’.> 
Every such conglomeration is different from every other, 
because of the differences in the atoms composing them.* A 
conglomeration persists until or unless some stronger impact 
scatters it.4 Thus is caused all change, coming into being, 
passing away, growth and decay: the atoms do not change, 
and have no power to ‘act’ or ‘experience’; they merely collide, 
combine, mingle and separate.° Change of substance is merely 
change of place, as Aristotle puts it.

Once the atoms have collided, an eddy or vortex is set up.® 
This brings into play the principle ‘Like seeks Like’, to which 
Democritus seems to have given new importance, and which 
he seems to have illustrated with new examples, such as the 
gregariousness of birds, the sorting of similar grains in a sieve, 
and similar stones on the sea-shore.» He went so far as to say 
— and in this he was unique — that only likes can affect or be 
affected by one another, and if unlikes appear to do so, it is in 
so far as they are like.i The whirling conglomeration thus 
becomes a cosmos or ordered world, by the separation of its 
components into groups of similars. This was the manner of 
the creation of our world, and of innumerable others which 
arose in infinite space.There are an infinite number of worlds; and all differ from 
one another, in size and other respects. Some have no sun or 
moon, others have them, but larger than ours, or more numer- 
ous. Their spacing in the void is also different: in some parts 
there are more worlds, in others less. Some are growing, some 
are at their prime, others perishing; some are being created, 
some being dissolved. Some are without animals, plants or any 
moisture. A world has reached its prime when it can no longer 
take in anything from outside; and its final destruction comes 
about by collision.* The worlds are, of course, the same in 
essential composition, being formed out of the same elements,

bA37; A43; A4g; As7 : es 
f Ass 8 B167; A67; A83 bh B164; A38 
1 A63. jA43 ;

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 303

atoms and space;* but they cannot be the same in all particu- 
lars (as Cicero mistakenly said).» They differ because the 
numbers, sizes and shapes of atoms composing them are not 
and never can be the same.

It follows then that there are two grades of existence, or 
reality. One, consisting of the atoms and space, is impercep- 
tible; the atoms have no quality except size and shape, and 
are too small to be perceived; the other, comprising all the 
experiences of our sense-perception, colour, smell, sound, 
temperature and so on, is brought about only by the combina- 
tion of atoms and space, and is therefore less fundamentally 
real than the elements. Colour, taste and the rest are so called 
‘by custom’; only atoms and void exist ‘in reality’.© There is 
no such thing as absolute change of one thing into another; 
there are certain appearances assumed by atoms and space in 
combination, and called by us ‘man’, ‘plant’, ‘fire’, ‘water’, and 
so forth.4The question whether Democritus’ metaphysic assigned 
everything to chance was much debated; it was generally 
agreed that though he appeared to make chance supreme, this 
was not really true. There appear to be three stages in his 
creation: the first, fixed by necessity or unchanging law, is the 
immutable nature of the elements, atoms and space, and the 
‘natural compulsion’ which makes the atoms move in space;° 
this is the very essence of things, their ‘nature’ or potentiality, 
which is fundamental. Democritus was criticized for giving 
no further explanation, but simply stating that this was so; he 
himself, however, believed that the fundamental nature of 
atoms and space neither needed to be nor could be explained. 
The second stage was the collision of atoms, and consequent 
coagulation; this, the original formation of each cosmos, seems 
to be assigned to chance;» but it was a ‘chance’ arising out of 
the essential nature of things.: Finally, in explaining the 
details of the cosmos, he returned to the laws of cause and 
effect, and design.

In an effort to make his meaning clear, Democritus used 
new terms. The atoms were the Full or Solid, as opposed to 
Space, the Empty;* he invented the term Den, from Méden

aie ie . © Ar §45 
f A39; A66; Br68 & A6s h A68 i Azo; A6g9; A67; cp. Br76 
j A68 k Aga; A4s; A46

304 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS |

(‘Aught’ and ‘Naught’) to express substance, and said that 
‘The Aught had no more reality than the Naught’, that is, 
Space is as real as Substance.* It seems possible that he called 
the atoms ‘Ideas’, that is, ‘particular forms’.>Cosmology and Meteorology. The principle of the ‘Vortex’, 
which causes like to join like, applies to our universe. The fire- 
atoms fly to the outside;* they are round and smooth,‘ and 
very small,* so that they are able to move most easily; the larger 
atoms seek the centre. The earth was created before the 
heavenly bodies. Then came the moon, then the sun, then the 
fixed stars. The different planets have different heights,‘ that 
is, distances from the centre of their cosmos. The sun and 
moon broke off from the central conglomeration, and were at 
first earthy in substance, lacking heat or brightness; the sun- 
disc increased in size, and ‘took fire to itself’, presumably 
from the outer ring of firé-atoms. It is, in fact, as Anaxagoras 
said, a molten mass or fiery stone.» The moon, likewise of 
earthy substance, takes its light from the sun;! the earthy 
nature of the moon is shown by the shadows thrown by its 
hills; it has glens and valleys also.i The stars too are stones.*As regards their relative positions, the moon is nearest the 
earth, then the sun, then the stars. This is given as the reason 
why the sun appears to move more slowly than the signs of the 
Zodiac, and so to be caught up with them and to pass through 
them in the opposite direction: the sun is nearer the earth than 
these constellations, and so is carried round more slowly, 
because the motion is swifter in proportion as one is further 
from the centre of the vortex, that is, from the earth.!) 11 This 
applies even more strongly to the moon, which is nearest of 
all to the earth. Of the stars, the fixed stars come ‘first’ (says 
Aétius, apparently meaning ‘furthest from the centre’, that 1s, 
reckoning from the outside), then the planets, and then the 
sun, the evening star and the moon.” It will be noticed that in 
these views Democritus differed from Leucippus, who said 
that the moon’s orbit was nearest the earth, the sun’s furthest, 
and the stars between the two." Democritus leaves only the 
evening star in the intermediate position.

; bAs7; B167 ¢ Aror; cp. Ar §44 d Aro2 e A6oa 
8 A39 hA87; 59A72 i A8ga 1 Ago; cp. 59477 
; 1A88 mAR6 n 67At §33 
11 Lucretius. See Loeb trg. and note ad loc. by W. H. D. Rouse.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 305

The Milky Way received special mention. When the sun 
at night goes below earth, those stars which are above the 
earth and are in the sun’s rays‘cannot be seen because the sun’s 
light outshines their own; but those on which the shadow of 
the earth falls can be seen by their own light; these form the 
Milky Way. These stars are very numerous, and owing to 
their distance from the earth, they seem to us to be one, as 
when grains of salt are thickly sprinkled. Comets he ex- 
plained as an appearance due to the conjunction of planets: 
when the planets are near one another they give the appear- 
ance of touching and being one star, the so-called comet.’ In 
both these explanations Democritus followed Anaxagoras.The earth was originally in motion, while still small and 
light; but as it grew heavier and heavier by the accumulation 
of more material, it finally came to rest.* It had a flat upper 
surface which was not circular but elliptical, the length being 
half the width; in the ‘middle’, that is, apparently, between 
the upper and lower surfaces, it was hollow. Early in its 
development it became tilted in one direction, that is, towards 
the south, as the enclosing envelope was weaker there and gave 
it less support; this tilt has remained, because the northward 
parts are still unmixed, whereas the southward parts have 
accumulated a quantity of fruits and other growth, which make 
the earth heavier on the southerly side.* Thus he accounts for 
the inclination of the earth’s axis.

Other meteorological and geological phenomena are dis- 
cussed: thunder, lightning and thunderbolts are explained as 
due to unequal admixture of particles, causing violent move- 
ments of or within clouds.£ Thunder and lightning occur 
simultaneously, though we sense them separately because sight 
is quicker than hearing.¢ Wind occurs when many atoms are 
gathered together in a small space, calm when few atoms are 
spread out over a large space; he gave as an analogy the jostling 
of a crowd.» Earthquakes are caused by the gathering of water 
in the hollows of the earth: as the water accumulates, the spaces 
cannot hold it all and it beats against the enclosing earth, 
causing it to move.: The saltness of the sea is due to the same 
cause as accumulation of salt on land: like atoms have sought 
like and coagulated.i The process is assisted by evaporation:

; cp.

306 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS; cp.

306 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

he thought that the sea was becoming less and less, and would 
finally dry up altogether. The source of the Nile is in the 
biggest mountains of the world, which are in Aethiopia;> its 
water is derived from clouds, which are vaporized from the 
northern snows of the earth in the summer solstice; these are 
carried south, and gather there, below Egypt. The Etesian 
winds cause them to dissolve into violent rain-storms, which 
fill the lakes and the river Nile. Another suggestion attributed 
to Democritus was that the Nile drew its flood-waters from the 
southern ocean; the whiteness of the water is accounted for by 
the length of the journey, and its unusual taste by its being 
boiled on the way.°

The Calendar already mentioned contained many meteoro- 
logical observations, Blcieaons of the length of the seasons, 
prevailing winds, periods of calm, rain and storm, and their 
connection with the rising and setting of the constellations, 
and with the solstices and equinoxes.4 :

Biology. Democritus followed Anaximander and others in 
thinking that the animals, including man, were spontaneously 
generated from the primeval slime.¢ Like worms, men came 
out of the earth without creation and without purpose.‘ Their 
later development by procreation is due to a natural law im- 
planted in all animals; but whereas in animals this, as well as 
the after-care of the offspring with all its work and worry, is a 
mere instinct, man has also an acquired idea that children 
should be profitable to him. The act of coition he compared 
to a mild attack of epilepsy: it is a collision, like that of the 
atoms, resulting in the creation of man from man, animal from 
animal. There is a suggestion that just as the cause is a kind 
of disease, the result is also evil.The function of procreation was closely studied. The 
potentiality of the seed, its power to grow, is a material thing, 
as well as its substance;! for it is ‘breath’, and breath, life or 
soul, like heat, is composed of the round smooth particles, 
the volatile fire-atoms.i The substance of the seed is a com- 
position, made up of the most important parts of the body: 
bones, flesh, sinews.*¥ The female is not merely a receptacle, 
but also gives forth seed:! collision of seeds is the cause of

*Aroo PAgg;cp. 59491 cAgg 4Bi4 ¢&Ar39;Bs  fAr39 
& B278 h B32 i Argo j Aror k Arar 1 Ar4a2

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 307

creation in the organic world, as collision of atoms in the in- 
organic. The sex of the offspring is determined in the womb; 
it depends, not on temperature, but on whether the seed from 
male or female predominates.* A similar reason accounts for 
resemblance to either parent.*

The embryo is anchored in the womb by the navel cord; it 
is nourished through the mouth, by sucking certain fleshy 
protuberances, and hence when born it seeks the breast. It 
remains in the womb in order that its limbs may be moulded 
on the model of its mother’s. Aristotle reports these views as 
mistaken, and gives the correct explanation.» He also gives as 
mistaken Democritus’ view that the outer limbs of the embryo 
are. articulated first, the inner organs later. Others quote 
Democritus as saying that the abdomen and head — the parts 
containing most empty space — are first formed.°The reason why some animals, such as pig, dog and hare, 
are polygonous, whereas others, such as man and lion, are not, 
is that the former have several wombs, the latter normally only 
one, The offspring of the polygonous animals are generated 
not in one but in several couplings (this was corrected by 
Hippocrates, who pointed out that they are usually born on 
the same day).4 The mule, an artificial product due to man’s 
interference, is barren because the womb and its passages are 
unfitted to receive seed. Democritus thought that the idea of 
producing mules was suggested to man by the chance connec- 
tion of a horse with a donkey, and mentioned as a proof of its 
unnaturalness the Libyan donkey, which is very large, and is 
used for breeding with mares; but it is necessary to shear the 
manes of the mares, for if they have their ‘glory’ they will not 
tolerate the donkey as a mate.‘ He discussed the reason why 
man and some animals practise intercourse in secret;® the 
causes of freaks and miscarriages; and the effect of castration 
on growth.i Freaks were due to a collision of seeds entering 
the womb at different times; this is also the cause of the varying 
colours of hens’ eggs. Miscarriages are due to an expansion 
of the womb through heat, and therefore occur during the 
south winds. Castrated bulls have long, fine, twisted horns and 
flattened foreheads.

The growth of teeth,* horns, !and quills;™ the spider’s ability

aArg3 bAr4as CAras 4Arst eArst;Ar4g fArsr &Arsoa 
bh A146 i Ars2 jArsg kAra7 1Ars3-5 ™Arso

308 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSThe growth of teeth,* horns, !and quills;™ the spider’s ability

aArg3 bAr4as CAras 4Arst eArst;Ar4g fArsr &Arsoa 
bh A146 i Ars2 jArsg kAra7 1Ars3-5 ™Arso

308 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

to weave a web;®* the part played by water in maintaining the 
life of fish’ and amphibians;° the ‘wave-like’ locomotion of 
caterpillars;4 the bones of the eagle;* the crowing of cocks 
before daylight;‘ the owl’s ability to see at night;® the lion’s 
open eyes when born and when asleep: all these things were 
discussed by Democritus in what must have been a valuable 
work on biology, used, though critically, by Aristotle in the 
compilation of his own treatises. In general, Democritus be- 
lieved that animal instinct is a truer guide than man’s appetite: 
the animal knows how much it needs, man does not.! Further, 
we are the pupils of the animals in the most important arts: 
spinning, building, singing.3 |

The phenomena of death and decay were also studied.*¥ The 
death of the body is not instantaneous: the nails and hair still 
grow.! Corpses, therefore, still have some life, and therefore 
some perception, at first.™ Cases of apparent resuscitation of 
corpses, however, can be explained away as fainting-attacks 
caused by a blow or a wound." Democritus is said to have 
advocated mummification — the preservation of the corpse in 
honey — rather than cremation.°

Of his medical works, only a few fragments remain, though 
he is said to have written on Prognosis, Diet and Régime;? 
and on particular diseases such as fever.1 He discussed sleep, 
saying that insomnia is due to wrong diet;™ and that daytime 
sleep is a sign of ill-health.s In general he believed that the 
body, if opened, would be found to be a storehouse of ills and 
sufferings;t but that the power to attain health lies within us, 
depending as it does on the control of appetite."Of his botanical works, nothing remains except the title 
Seeds, Plants and Fruits,’ which was a separate treatise in the 
group called Causes; and a passage quoted by Theophrastus 
for refutation, in which Democritus argued that plants with 
straight stems have a shorter life than those with crooked 
stems, because the former afford a freer passage for nourish-

ment, while in the latter the strength goes into the roots." 
\n Geology, he held the view that stones, being made from 
atoms which have ‘life’, have the power within: themselves tO

~Arso 0 PArssa © C Arssb 
h ; fecha > B126 ¢ B22 {Arcs 6 A157 
aes i Bro8 J) Brs54 k Bra 1 A160 maT n Br 
I P Beene: B2o09; Bzro @ Ars9; Bagof r B2og s B22 
Bite 4 B234 VYA33 wAr62

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 399

take on certain forms: the internal heat, and the jostling it 
causes, shapes the stone ‘as the hammer of the smith shapes 
the axe and the saw’. The magnet’s power to 4ttract iron is 
due to affinity of atoms: the magnet sends out ‘efluences’ of 
its own atoms, which penetrate the iron and drive out the iron- 
atoms; these then return to the magnet, moving the iron with 
them. It was objected that this explanation did not cover the 
ane of amber to attract chaff and other substances unlike 
itself.?Sense-perception. The chief interest of Democritus in the 
physiological and psychological sphere was concentrated on 
his investigation of sense-perception; and a considerable part 
of this work survives. With it was closely bound up his theory 
of knowledge, which depended on his metaphysical position. 
Since only atoms and space have absolute unchanging exis- 
tence,° only knowledge of them can be real; but since the 
atoms are removed from perception, it follows that only the 
intellectual concept of atoms and space 1s genuine knowledge;° 
all else, all that is communicated by the senses, is an appear- 
ance. This does not mean that it is an illusion; the appearance 
of things we perceive — man, plant and the rest — is produced 
by the combination of atoms, and their apparent change is 
likewise due to movements of atoms.‘ To understand this 1s 
knowledge; and to use the correct terms about it, instead of the 
habitual ones, is truth.

There are therefore two grades of knowledge, the genuine 
and the bastard.» There is the intellectual understanding of 
the atoms and their movements in and combinations with 
space; and there is the evidence afforded by the senses. There 
is no such thing as colour; but the atoms which have no 
quality create the appearance of qualities.! Sweet, hot-cold, 
colour, are notions accepted ‘by custom’; only atoms and space 
exist ‘in reality’.) But this must not lead us into denying all 
reality to perception. The perceptions can truly say to the 
intellect, if it condemns them: ‘You get your evidence from us, 
and our downfall is your overthrow’.* Thought depends on 
perception. !

a A164 b Ar6s ¢ Ago; Ax $45 d Brr; Brr7 eAsg £A57; A58

& B26; B26a bh Bri i Ar24; A125 j Bg; Br25 k Br25 
1 Aro7; Arro; Arry

310 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSa A164 b Ar6s ¢ Ago; Ax $45 d Brr; Brr7 eAsg £A57; A58

& B26; B26a bh Bri i Ar24; A125 j Bg; Br25 k Br25 
1 Aro7; Arro; Arry

310 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

It sometimes seemed as if Democritus said that perception 
was truth: that all percepts were equally valid, as Protagoras 
taught;* but’ apparently Demourais disclaimed this attitude, 
and like Plato, expressly refuted it.» He often suggests that 
‘man is severed from reality’;* that we know — really, 
but merely receive chance impressions as individuals;? and 
that it is impossible to understand individual things.* But his 
whole metaphysical position as well as his detailed work on 
sense-perception prove that these sayings were intended to 
apply rather to the ordinary run of men who accept their 1m- 
pressions as valid, and not to the scientist who has grasped the 
nature of atoms and space. For the latter there is a criterion, 
the validity of which extends into the moral world: the good 
and true are the same for all, though the pleasant differs for 
different persons.‘ For the scientist, chance and intelligence 
are not at war,® and to seek the causes of things is supremely 
worth while.» Such knowledge is not acquired by trying to 
understand everything, which merely leads to ignorance of 
everything; it 1s a knowledge of essentials. Being akin to 
nature, it has power to shape a man, 3 to teach him the technique 
of right living, and the production of good things.!Democritus, therefore, believing that the way to truth lay 
through sense-perception rightly understood, elaborated a 
theory of sense-perception by which the various grades of 
reality could be measured. In the first place, perception is a 
corporeal entity,™ caused by the actual movements of atoms in 
space, and atoms combined with space, and their effect on the 
organs which receive them. Secondly, the whole body takes 
part in the process of thinking,® which is ‘the same as’, that is, 
inseparable from, perception.° Thirdly, all percepts are ‘true’,? 
in the sense that they are all due to actual events; they are 
different to healthy animals and ourselves, and different at 
different times to the same person, but this is due to the differ- 
ences in the receiving organs; the cause of the percept remains 
a reality, and in that sense all percepts are ‘equal’, and one set 
is not more real than another.? Fourthly, though we recognize 
only five senses, there are more, both in man and the non- 
rational animals, and in the gods. The senses, in fact, exceed

®Arr3; Aror; Atos; Arr2 bArry4 © BG d By € B8; Bio f B6g 
€Br1g =Brr8 iBr6g 4333 *Br72;Br73;Br8r1 !Br82 ™Aroga 
n A1o7 © Aros PArr33Ar14 «=. 9 Arr2; cp. A163 tT Arr6

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 311

the percepts, but they escape notice because there are no per- 
cepts to fit them.* Fifthly, Democritus, like the majority of 
the natural scientists, reduced all perception to touch — 
absurdly, Aristotle says.A full and critical account of Democritus’ views on sense- 
perception is preserved by Theophrastus.c The recognized 
percepts are sight, hearing, taste, smell, touch, the last includ- 
ing the sensations of hard and soft, hot and cold, heavy and 
light. Of these, he paid the greatest attention to sight, on 
which his theory was original. He believed that all objects 
constantly give off material images of themselves, which are 
impressed on the air between the object and the eye, as on wax. 
This impression is then reflected back to the eye, into which it 
enters, and is communicated to the rest of the body. The best 
type of eye is that which admits the images easily.4 Theo- 
phrastus had no difficulty in criticizing this theory: for 
instance, if the image is stamped on the air in front of the 
object, how is it we do not see it in reverse? What happens 
when several things are seen in the same place? How do we 
see one another, past the surrounding images? Why do we 
not see ourselves? Though Democritus tries to account for 
everything, for instance the connection between distance and 
size, he leaves much to be explained.* Aristotle remarked that 
it was odd that Democritus did not wonder why the eye alone, 
of objects that receive reflections, has the power to see; and 
also that Democritus was wrong in saying that if the inter- 
vening space were empty, we would see correctly even if an 
ant were in the sky.®Colour in itself does not exist, for the atoms and space are 
colourless; but their combinations take on colour through 
differences in the shape, arrangement and position of the 
atoms.» There are four primary colours: white, black, red, 
yellow; all others are made by combining these.) White 1s 
identified with the smooth, that is, with whatever is not 
shadow-forming. Bright white is made of shapes ‘like the 
inside surface of shells’; powdery white of circular atoms 
arranged in groups of two set slantingly with regard to each 
other. Black is made up of rough uneven particles which cast 
shadows and are difficult to penetrate. Red is made up of the

f Arar 6 Ar22 h A123; A124; A1zs ~ i Ar25; Ar35 §73

312 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

same kind of atoms as fire, but larger: things grow red when 
heated. Yellow is made from solid and emptiness combined, 
the colour arising out of position and arrangement. All other 
colours are made by admixture: gold and bronze from white 
and red, purple from white and black and red; different greens 
from black and yellow, purple and blue, or yellow and purple; 
and so on. The colours are innumerable, according to the 
quantities mixed.®It is clear from this summary that Democritus had experi- 
mented considerably with the mixing of colours. He endea- 
vours to explain, not only the colours, but the reasons why we 
find some, such as purple and gold, more pleasing than others.” 
Since he makes purple from white and black and red, and 
makes green from black and yellow, it is clear that black to 
him means also a dark blue; so that his primary colours are 
white, red, yellow and blue-black. Theophrastus complains 
that his explanations are inconsistent, and do not fit the facts: 
why should yellow be the only colour dependent on admixture 
of atoms and space, instead of on shapes of atoms? Why should 
white be equated with smoothness and transparency, and black 
with roughness? Many smooth things look black, and rough 
things white; and circular things can cast shadows as well as 
any other shapes. How does his explanation of black account 
for shadow, which is an interception of light? Why does he 
not make his primary colours opposites? Why are some 
colours simple, others compound? Again, much remains to 
be explained, though Theophrastus admits the difficulty of the 
subject.°

Hearing differs from sight in that the organ of hearing 
receives the percept direct, whereas in sight there is a double 
process. (He cannot have said, as one late authority gives it, 
that hearing merely receives, whereas sight goes out to meet 
its object, for this is inconsistent with Theophrastus’ clear 
explanation that the eye receives a reflection of the image im- 
pressed on the intervening air.) Sound is corporeal; it enters 
throughout the whole body, but especially through the ears, 
which are like vessels designed to collect and retain it in 
motion.® Sound is produced by a breaking-up of the air into 
bodies of similar shape by the impact of the sound-particles;

§§73-8; A126 bAr35 §§76, 77 ¢ Ar3s §§79-82 
d Ar2z6a © A127; A135 §55

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 313§§73-8; A126 bAr35 §§76, 77 ¢ Ar3s §§79-82 
d Ar2z6a © A127; A135 §55

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 313

and the two then revolve together in an admixture. He 
describes the kind of ear best suited to hearing: the cavity 
must be large and dry and all passages clear. Theophrastus 
objects to the idea, peculiar to Democritus, that sound enters 
throughout the whole body, and is also distributed throughout 
the body from the ears: this is a mistaken attempt to explain 
why the rest of the body is affected by sound; even if the body 
has concurrent sensation, this does not prove that it hears. It 
reacts similarly in the case of the other senses, and not only the 
senses, but also the mind.>

Taste depends on the shapes of the component atoms: sharp 
is composed of angular small fine particles with penetrative 
power; sweet 1s composed of circular atoms; and so on. In 
each of the tastes, sweet, bitter, sharp, salt, astringent, there is 
an admixture of particles of all shapes; but the prevailing shape 
gives the taste.° Again, the condition of the recipient can 
cause a difference in taste, or even cause the same percept to 
produce an opposite result. Theophrastus, while commending 
the greater thoroughness and consistency of his application of 
his theory to taste, objects that it does not account for change, 
nor forthe different effect of the same object at different times 
or on different subjects. If taste depends on atomic shape, the 
same object should always produce the same effect, for round 
is round to all creatures at all times.© Democritus has nothing 
special to say regarding the organ of taste.! —

He had nothing special to say about smell, except that it 1s 
caused by what is fine flowing off from what is heavy. But its 
nature, and what it is that causes the experience, he does not 
say, important though this is, Theophrastus remarks.®As for the percepts of touch: heavy and light depend 
directly on atomic composition. If the atoms are separated, 
their weight depends on their size, but in compounds the 
lighter body is that containing the most space, the heavier 
that containing the least.» Hence a small bulk is often heavier 
than a large bulk, for example, grass than wool.! Similarly 
with hard and soft: the dense is hard, the rare is soft. There 
are also differences of arrangement, which affect the relations 
between heavy-light and hard-soft: iron is harder, but lead is

aAr28 bArI35 §57 © Ar29; A135 §§ 65-7 d A130; A135 §67 
© A135 §69; Ar31; A132; A134 £Ar33 6 A135 §82 
hAr35 §61 i A6o

314 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

heavier. This is because iron is unevenly packed: it has more 
space as a whole, but it is densely packed in certain — 
whereas lead contains less space but has it more evenly dis- 
tributed.* The sensation of hot-cold depends on atomic shape.>

Thus the sensations themselves can be graded, according to 
whether they depend on composition or arrangement of atoms 
and space, or on the shapes and sizes of the atoms. They are 
‘real’ in that they have a corporeal cause; they are ‘appearance’ 
in that they are not what they seem to the experiencing subject, 
and give rise to different experiences in differently-constituted 
subjects.His psychology was an extension of his theory of sense- 
perception. The soul and the mind are the same.° The mind 
or soul is made of smooth round fire-atoms,4 and has power of 
motion owing to the smallness of its particles, it being their 
nature never to remain still.e The soul is a body within the 
body; by its own motion it moves the body, just as Daedalus 
was able to make a wooden statue of Aphrodite move by 
pouring molten silver into it.¢ The soul is twofold: it consists 
of the reasoning part resident in the bosom,' and the unreason- 
ing part scattered throughout the body; but nevertheléts it can 
be said to be indivisible, for its substance is the same, and 
thought is the same as feeling.» Thought occurs when the 
admixture of soul is correctly proportioned throughout the 
body: if one becomes too hot or too:cold, one’s thinking 
alters.' The maintenance of life depends on breathing because 
inhalation prevents the exit of the soul-particles; death is the 
exit of these particles from the body,) so that the soul perishes 
with the body,* though corpses retain some of the life-principle 
for a time, and everything has a share in some sort of soul.! 
He does not explain why all must die, and why death comes 
when it does, being natural in old age and unnatural when by 
violence.”

Cicero complained that Democritus gave various opinions 
on the nature of divinity: sometimes he said that the gods were 
the visions we see, often deceptive or injurious, sometimes the

nature that produces these, sometimes the principle of Mind

* A135 §62 > A135 §§63,68 © Aror; Ar §44; Artz 4 At $44; A102; A106

fyi: f Aroga 8 A104; A103 h Atos; Ato7 1 A135 $58

106 k Arog 1A m A106

. According to Aétius, who elsewhere says (A ns like Plato and 
Hippocrates placed the ruling faculty in the aa peer

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 315106 k Arog 1A m A106

. According to Aétius, who elsewhere says (A ns like Plato and 
Hippocrates placed the ruling faculty in the aa peer

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 315

in the universe or in ourselves.* He seems, however, to have 
believed in a divinity of a corporeal kind, made of fire-atoms, 
like the soul in ourselves;> the reason for the belief in gods is 
that there are certain visions,* some beneficent, some harmful, 
which visit men, especially in dreams;4 these visions are real, 
and not easily destroyed, but not immortal.¢ Belief in gods 
was supported by fear of the forces of nature — thunder, 
eclipses and the rest‘ — and by gratitude for good gifts, which 
led men to pray to a supposed omnipotent creator.s The 
names given to the gods are attempts to represent them 
vocally. Prayer, however, is useless: the power to attain gifts 
such as health lies in oneself, and prayer to idols is most use- 
less of all, for though they are bedecked with raiment and 
jewellery they have no heart.i He does, however, in his 
ethical writings sometimes suggest that the gods care about 
virtue,* and are the dispensers of what is good, not what is 
bad, man’s folly being responsible for the latter.! It follows 
that if the gods are visions present in the air, they must also 
impinge on the animals, so that they too have the concept of 
divinity." There is no divine creator; all is due to natural 
causes; and it is hard to see Democritus’ gods as other than 
otiose. His system does not require their help; but the belief 
in them has to be accounted for; and as all percepts have some 
foundation in reality, and men undoubtedly see dreams and 
visions of the gods, the gods must have corporeal existence, 
though they are not creative or immortal. He believed that 
dreams in general were emanations from bodies, especially 
living bodies; and that therefore they are subject to material 
laws: for instance, they are less trustworthy in autumn, owing 
to the disturbance of the gir at that time.° Some visions are 
wilfully emanated by persons wishing to injure another.° He 
is said to have believed in divination,? and to have prayed to 
meet with only propitious visions.9Ethics. His ethical position was that happiness is the goal; 
his terms for happiness were numerous, and serve as defin1- 
tions. It is, in the first place, a property of the soul," and does 
not dwell in flocks of cattle or gold; the soul is the dwelling-

. ° 6 £A75

aA74 bA74 cA77;A78 4 Ar36; A137 e B16

6 A75; B30 h Br42 i Ba34 jBrgs Barz 1Br7g =6™A79 
. n A88 oA77 PAr138 498166 tr Br70

316 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

lace of good and evil fortune,* and is responsible for even 
bodily health,’ because its function is to supervise a right 
technique of living, and above all to discriminate between 
pleasures and desires. Pleasure and its opposite are the 
criterion of advantage;° but in order to obtain pleasure and 
pain, knowledge is necessary: evil can come out of good, if 
one does not know how to use certain things aright. There is 
in the soul a Logos, which will, if exercised, accustom it to 
derive its pleasure from within.°If this discrimination of pleasures be rightly carried out, a 
state of mind is attained which he calls Well-Being, or Cheer- 
fulness, or sometimes negatively, Freedom from Disturbance, 
Freedom from Alarm, Freedom from Wonder.‘ £1 This is the 
best condition for man; and it is attained only by effort. There 
are many rules given for the attainment and preservation of 
the happy state, but all in the last resort depend upon know- 
ledge. Fear and superstition, derived from mistaken views on 
nature and divinity, and on the after-life, must be eliminated: 
the fear of death often derives from the fear of an after-life,» 
and this leads to a foolish desire for long life, even when life is 
not enjoyed.i Old age is, physically, a general deprivation: all 
the organs are present, but they all lack something.i Never- 
theless, the flower of old age is moderation, as strength and 
beauty are the blessings of youth; and if the life has been well- 
spent, old age is preferable to youth, for the old man has had 
youth, but the young man does not know whether he will 
reach old age: the perfected good is better than the uncertain 
future.« Thus in spite of the advantages of youth, the happiness 
of Well-Being is more germane to age, provided that foolish 
regrets and mistaken fears are elinginated by right thinking. 
But the chief necessity, if one is to achieve well-being, is to 
do nothing to excess. To overstep due measure makes the 
most pleasant things unpleasant,! while moderation multiplies 
pleasures and magnifies pleasure." The animals are wiser than 
Man in this regard as in others: they know how much they 
need, and their self-control is instinctive." Man’s bodily needs 
— F c Ba; B188; Br89 4B1r73; Br72; B31 
f A167; A168; A169; Ar §45 & Br82 h Br99; B2z97 
ie B206; B2oo; B2or j B296 k B295; B2o2 1 B233 m Barr 
9 ’

f1 His favourite terms were evGuula and eveotd. Others given ate d&rapaéia, : 
, and even ovppetpla and é&ppovia.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 317f1 His favourite terms were evGuula and eveotd. Others given ate d&rapaéia, : 
, and even ovppetpla and é&ppovia.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 317

are available to all without trouble; things acquired with 
trouble are desired not by the body but by the ill-regulated 
mind.* Enjoyment derived from (excessive) eating, drinking 
and love-making is brief, and the painful consequences are 
many; moreover the desire is no sooner satisfied than it recurs.” 
In attaining such pleasures, men sacrifice health, and then pray 
to the gods to restore it, not knowing that the attainment of 
health depends on themselves.° Moderate enjoyment is neces- 
sary to happiness: the life without festivity is a long road 
without an inn,‘ and expenditure at the right time has its vir- 
tue, as well as fasting and thrift; but the secret of happiness 
lies in judging the right time.°The right-minded man, therefore, practises moderation 
above all things; and in choosing between pleasant things, he 
remembers that the rarest afford the greatest pleasure; and 
that the contemplation of beautiful works gives most pleasure 
of all.¢ He avoids foolish hopes, though not all hope is denied 
him: the hopes of the rightly-trained are preferable to the 
acquired wealth of the ignorant.! He avoids envy: to attain 
to a cheerful calm, one must not let the mind dwell on the 
fortune of those considered fortunate because of riches. Envy 
leads to restless activity and the risk of breaking the law.i He 
avoids the passion for excessive wealth, which while unsatisfied is 
more painful than poverty: the greater the passion, the greater 
the need it creates.* He avoids covetousness,! and miserliness: 
misers, like bees, behave as if they were going to live for ever.™ 
He avoids bellicosity: in planning to hurt an enemy, one loses 
sight of one’s own advantage." He avoids controversies with 
wranglers and word-twisters.° He does not take pleasure in 
the misfortunes of his neighbours, for this shows ignorance of 
the fact that fate is common to all; the man who has his own 
causes for joy does not need such false enjoyment.?, He bows 
to the inevitable conditions of life:2 if sorrow befalls him, he 
conquers uncontrollable grief by means of intelligence;* if he 
is poor, he learns to enjoy what he has, by moderating his 
desires;* if he has to work, he tries to avoid work unaccom- 
panied by success or the hope of success;t but he remembers

a B223; B284; B285; B286 b B235 © B234 d B230 e B229

f B232 € B194; B207 h B292 i Bi8s5 j Brox k B2rg

« ! Baz2 m B227 n B237 © Brso P B283 q B289 t B290 
8 B291; B284; B231; Ba24 t B243

318 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSf B232 € B194; B207 h B292 i Bi8s5 j Brox k B2rg

« ! Baz2 m B227 n B237 © Brso P B283 q B289 t B290 
8 B291; B284; B231; Ba24 t B243

318 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

that even continuous toil grows easier with custom.* If his 
work is voluntary and therefore pleasant,” he limits its scope: 
it militates against well-being to take on too many activities, 
public or private, that is, to go beyond one’s powers.° :

The virtues of courage and justice are also necessary to well- 
being (though Democritus has less to say about these). Cour- 
age is displayed not only in overcoming enemies but in 
mastering pleasures: some men who have ruled cities have 
béen enslaved by women.‘ Courage is the source of action, 
though chance is arbiter of the result. Forgetfulness of one’s 
own sufferings breeds boldness.£ Courage minimizes disas- 
ters.¢ But of course the task of the right-minded man is to 
eliminate all unnecessary fears, so that courage is much reduced 
in importance, and becomes subsidiary to Moderation. Of 
justice he says that its prize is confident judgement and freedom 
from fear; the end of injustice is fear of disaster. Even the 
hope of evil gains must be avoided;‘ and wealth derived from 
evil activity makes disgrace more conspicuous.) In general, 
the doing of good works makes for happiness; the unjust man, 
he who neglects his duty, is full of care.* These virtues are 
based on knowledge: a man who acts rightly through intelli- 
gence and knowledge becomes brave and upright.!

Virtue brings peace of mind, crime brings fear; but this is 
not the reason for practising virtue. One must look not to the 
opinion of the world, but to oneself; one must not be more 
ready to do wrong if no one will know than if all will know. 
One’s own opinion must stand as a law in one’s own soul, 
forbidding wrong-doing.= This conscience can be cultivated 
by early education.Education. Education is a discipline in prosperity, a refuge 
in adversity." It must be begun young: wisdom is not the

aromatic fruit of time, but of early education acting on 
natural endowment.° It is not easy: success in educating one’s 
children means strife and care, failure means grief beyond all 
others.P Nevertheless, it can be done without great expense, 
and the result is to build round them a fortification and a 
safeguard, both for themselves and their possessions.t The

® Baar b Bago ¢ B3 4d Bara; B236 © B269 { Br96 
& B213 bh Bais 1 B221; B20 ) B218 k Br74 1 B18 
™ B264; B244; Brs2 2 Br80 ° B183 P B275 9 B280

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 319

chief factor is example: the self-control of the father teaches 
the children,* and constant bad company increases badness of 
character.’ But some qualities in parents lead to the opposite 
in children, for instance, excessive thrift.© The best way is to 
let one’s children practise the handling of property by sharing 
it out among them, while keeping an eye on them to see that 
they do nothing foolish: this makes them thrifty and eager to 
earn, and arouses mutual competition.4 The worst training 
for youth is frivolity: for it breeds those pleasures from which 
evil comes. The best training is work, which is necessary for 
letters, music and gymnastics; and above all the co-ordination 
of all these, that is, reverence.It seems that in the old controversy regarding the blessings 
of marriage and family life as opposed to single life, Demo- 
critus took the view of Thales, that to have children of one’s 
own is a mistake, and that adoption is preferable to procreation. 
But he seems to have taken this view not so much because of 
the misfortunes and grief that may arise because of their loss, 
as because of the danger of having bad children. The risk 1s 
great, the harvest rare and meagre. In adoption, one can 
choose as one wishes. He does, however, suggest that man 
is less wise than the animals in that he expects a reward for 
bringing up his offspring, whereas they do it by instinct and 
without hope of gain.’ Of women, he said that they are quicker 
than men in malignity;/ that their adornment is lack of 
garrulity, as well as sparing adornment;* and that to be ruled 
by a woman is the uttermost outrage for a man.!

Politics. In education, persuasion and the inculcation of 
good habit, leading to right thinking, is the method advised. 
The wise man will not need laws or compulsion, but will live 
freely = while the man who is prevented from crime merely by 
law will tend to sin in secret.2 As, however, men if left to act 
as they please will harm one another, laws are a necessity to a 
civilized community.° The law wishes to improve men’s lives, 
and it is able to do so when they are willing to accept its 
benefits, for it shows to those who obey it their own particular 
virtue? The aim of the law is to create unity of outlook and

a B208 bBr84 ¢ B228 d B279 e Br78 f Br79 
&B276;cp.Ar7o 5 B277 iB27g8 3 B273 k B274; Br1ro 
lBrrr-™Arx66 = 9 Br8r Bagg — P B48

320 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSa B208 bBr84 ¢ B228 d B279 e Br78 f Br79 
&B276;cp.Ar7o 5 B277 iB27g8 3 B273 k B274; Br1ro 
lBrrr-™Arx66 = 9 Br8r Bagg — P B48

320 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

aims within the State; on this, the greatest undertakings, 
including wars, depend.* Envy, the cause of strife, must be 
eliminated ;> civil war brings disaster on both conquerors and 
conquered.* The good of the community must be placed first; 
private quarrels and the amassing of power must not be pur- 
sued beyond this, as the well-run State 1s the strongest protec- 
tion, and if it is safe, all is safe, whereas if it is lost, all is lost.4 
So too, general distress is harder than that of individuals, for 
there remains no hope of assistance.°The law exists not only to prevent wrong-doing, but to 
punish it. The punishment of crime is a part of justice, the 
neglect of it is injustice.‘ It is therefore important that the 
law be administered by trustworthy magistrates. Magistrates 
cannot be made perfect by law, for change of position alters 
everybody; nevertheless, legislators must envisage the faultless 
magistrate, and protect him by some means from falling under 
the control of those whom he convicts of wrong-doing.® #1 The 
appointment of worthy magistrates is a proof of justice and 
virtue; when base men enter on office, the less worthy they 
are, the more neglectful — filled with folly and recklessness. ' 
Good men should not let their private affairs suffer from 
neglect, though neglect of public affairs will bring an ill 
reputation.i As with the individual, so with those who have 
any office in the State: the law in their own soul must keep 
them from wrong-doing, rather than public opinion. Thus, 
anyone who acquits a criminal deserving death, exile, im- 
prisonment or any other punishment, does wrong, whether he 
acts for the sake of a bribe, or from personal inclination, and 
will carry the burden on his conscience.* The mistakes of men 
in office are remembered rather than their successes, and this 
is right: just as he who returns a deposit deserves no praise,

a B250 b Brox © B249 d B252 © B287 f B26 & B266

h B263 i B254 ) B253 k B262; B264a B250 b Brox © B249 d B252 © B287 f B26 & B266

h B263 i B254 ) B253 k B262; B264

&! Diels takes tovs &pxovtas as the object of &&ixetv, and translates: “There is no 
means of protecting magistrates from hurt.’ He then can make nothing of the next 
sentence, and has to suppose a lacuna between +év and ainév. Taking tots &pyovtas as 
the subject of &&ixelv, I translate this and the following sentence as it stands: ‘There 
is no means under the present constitution by which magistrates can be prevented from 
wrong-doing, however good they may be. For it is not likely for anyone else, [any 
more] than for oneself, that he will show himself the same man in different circum- 
stances,’ that is, power changes men. Diels’ insertion would read: ‘It is not right that a 
magistrate should be answerable to others than himself, or that after his year of office 
he should be controlled by others’ (who would avenge themselves on him).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 321

while he who does not deserves punishment, so with the 
magistrate; he was elected to do well, not to do badly.*

It follows that, for the protection of the community, any- 
thing that does harm must be killed; the man who does this 
does a service in any Community, and is worthier than he who 
does not; the laws must exempt him from all penalty.° This 
applies to both animals and men: an enemy of the State should 
be put to death according to ancestral law, unless a special 
prohibition — sacred law, treaty or oath — forbids it.4) 4: 
Anyone killing a brigand or pirate is exempt from punishment, 
whether it be done with his own hand, or by instigation, or by 
vote.© Intelligence should avert injustice, but only stupidity 
would fail to avenge it when committed.!Dealing with economics, Democritus states the general rule 
that poverty and wealth are relative terms: poverty means lack, 
wealth means superfluity,® so that if one’s desires are not great, 
a little will seem much, for small appetite makes poverty 
equivalent to wealth. Money wisely used is beneficial to the 
community, leading to generosity and public service; foolishly 
used, it is a burden, that of maintaining all and sundry. 
Extravagance is to property what canker is to the body.j But 
if the rich and influential can bring themselves to lend to the 
poor and help them, herein lies pity, an end to isolation, 
friendliness, mutual aid, unity.among the citizens, and other 
blessings such as no man can enumerate.* Nevertheless, 
poverty under democracy is as preferable to so-called pros- 
perity under autocracy, as freedom is to slavery.! He was not 
in favour of communally-held property, even within the family; 
he wished fathers to divide their property among their children 
in order to stimulate thrift, industry and competition, on the 
grounds that the income from communally-held property gives 
less pleasure, the expenditure less pain. He was in favour of 
voluntary generosity and mutual aid, together with the control 
of individual desires and the curbing of individual ambition 
with a view to the good of the whole: or as his proverb has it, 
“The shared fish has no bones’.®) "2 ,

4 B265 b Bz58 c Bas7 d Basg e B260 f Br93 & B283

h B284; B28s5; B286 iB282 %jiB281 kB2ass !Basr ™B27q9 OBrst

d! Democritus thus takes cognizance of sacred laws protecting even dangerous 
animals, such as the crocodile in Egypt.

n! J.e, one man takes the upper, another the lower portion of the fish, leaving the 
bones in between. Equal sharing does away with friction over ‘mine’ and ‘thine’.

Y

322 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSY

322 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Within the State, the family is the most important unit. 
He gives directions for its right regulation, the management 
of its property, the education of the children. While recog- 
nizing that the founding of a family is instinctive for ordinary 
men, he believed that the philosopher would do well to avoid 
it; so too, while recognizing to the full the importance of the 
State, he envisaged for the philosopher a wider horizon: to a 
wise man, the whole world is open, and the native land of a 
good soul is the whole universe.2) The hardships of travel 
abroad teach self-sufficiency: bread and bed are the sweetest 
cures for hunger and fatigue.

The system he advocates is democracy, with election of 
magistrates, and obedience to the law. Freedom of speech is 
the sign of freedom; but the danger lies in discerning the right 
occasion :° truth, not wordiness, should be the rule.4 Good 
oratory cannot obscure bad actions, nor can good actions be 
vitiated by blasphemous words.* The assignment of praise and 
blame are important; to do this wrongly is easy, but reveals a 
corrupt character.f Oaths must be kept; bad men, when they 
escape, break the oaths they made in time of stress.¢ Loyalty, 
not flattery forged by fear, must be encouraged.» He accepted - 
the institution of slavery, saying that slaves should be used as 
parts of the body, each for his own function.‘ He praised the 
art of statesmanship,? according to Plutarch, as the greatest of 
all, and urged that it should be learnt thoroughly, and its toils 
pursued, for it is the source of great and glorious blessings to 
mankind. iOf the remaining works attributed to him, only a few 
scattered fragments remain. In his work Ox Poetry he praised 
Homer as inspired,* and said that whatever the poet writes 
with inspiration and sacred spirit is beautiful ;! Cicero extended 
this into: “Democritus, like Plato, says that there is no poetry 
without madness." Music, Democritus said, is the youngest 
of the arts, arising not from necessity but from superfluity. 
We learn singing from the birds, swan and nightingale.° On 
Farming, he is said to have discussed the best aspect for vine- 
yards, the unsuitability of walls as boundaries for an estate, the

®B247 9b B2460—¢ B226 4 Bazg) & Br77_—S sf Brg2 = 8 B239— 8 B268 
1 B27 1 Brs7 k Bar 1Bx8 m B17; cp. Plato, Phaedr. 245A

! The saying ‘Rule belongs naturally to the stronger’ is probably not his; if it is, it 
has been torn from its context (B267).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 323

spontaneous generation of bees.* On Mathematics, he posed 
the a ‘If a cone 1s intersected parallel to its base, are the 
circles equal or unequal?’ If the circles are equal, the cone is a 
cylinder; if not, it has a series of minute steps.> /He described 
the sphere as a kind of angle: for if that which is bent is an 
angle, then that which is bent wholly in upon itself is a com- 
pletefangle.c He experimented on the shape of flames, saying 
that they are pyramidal because of the cooling at the tip.¢Forged Writings. \n later times, owing to Democritus’ 
prestige and his known travels in the East and Egypt, his 
name was attached to a number of writings of magical and un- 
scientific outlook. One of the authors of such works was 
Béluse of Mendé in the Nile Delta, called by Suidas Bolus- 
Democritus,‘ and described as a medical writer; according to 
Columella, his work entitled Manual Operations was falsely 
ascribed to Democritus.é Pliny accepted the work as by Demo- 
critus,® but Aulus Gellius attacked him for so doing, and said 
that Democritus’ illustrious name was being misused by those 
who attached it to works so unworthy of him.' Other works 
by Bolus were entitled Potent Natural Products, and On Sym- 
pathetic and Antipathetic Substances: these were sometimes cor- 
rectly attributed to him,} sometimes to Democritus.« It was 
believed by some, principally Pliny, that Democritus was the 
chief exponent of the magic art, as Hippocrates was‘of medi- 
cine, and that he derived this lore from the secret teachings 
and writings of priests and Magi.

Pliny mentions as the chief names in the history of magic, 
Zoroaster and Osthanes (Ostanes), the latter having accom- 
panied Xerxes on his campaign against Greece and sowed the 
seeds of this art wherever he travelled; he induced in the people 
of Greece a rage for this kind of knowledge,! which was pur- 
sued by the great men of all times; Pythagoras, Empedocles, 
Democritus and Plato travelled in search of it, and practised 
it in secret. Denial of Democritus’ authorship of these works, 
Pliny says, is vain. This tradition persisted to the end of 
classical antiquity, linking Democritus to the literature of 
alchemy. Syncellus (eighth century a.p.) speaks of Democritus

a B27; B28 bBrg5 ¢ Brssa dA73 e See Ch. 78 below 
f B300, 1 & B300, 3 h B300, 6 i B300, 7 j B300, 4 
k B300, 3 1 Bz00, 13

324 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSa B27; B28 bBrg5 ¢ Brssa dA73 e See Ch. 78 below 
f B300, 1 & B300, 3 h B300, 6 i B300, 7 j B300, 4 
k B300, 3 1 Bz00, 13

324 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

of Abdera as initiated by ‘Ostanes the Mede’ in Egypt, when 
the latter was sent by the Kings of Persia to control the re- 
ligious life of Egypt in the cok of Memphis; Democritus, he 
says, wrote on Gold, Silver and Precious Stones, that is, their 
transmutation from other substances.* A lost work entitled 
The Physics and Mystics of Democritus gave a detailed account of 
the alleged initiation, and of alchemistic lore.” ;

The works of Bolus and other writers in this tradition con- 
tained magical recipes for curing disease (in men and animals) 
and madness; peculiar properties of certain herbs; transmuta- 
tion of substances. Examples of magical cures are: for murrain 
in sheep, dig a ditch on the threshold of the fold, bury there a 
live sheep with this disease, and allow the rest of the flock to 
cross over the place. To get rid of caterpillars: let a woman 
in menstruation walk, barefoot and with her hair down, three 
times round one altar; the insects will fall off and die.¢ A mad- 
man is cured by hanging a leather amulet round his neck;°* a 
mad elephant by seeing aram ;‘ snakebite is cured by playing the 
the flute.¢ Galen says that some of the magical prescriptions are 
disgusting and wicked, some forbidden by law, and he quotes 
Xenocrates (first century a.p.)of Aphrodisias in Ciliciaas having 
described diseases cured by eating the human brain, flesh or liver, 
or by drinking a potion made of human bones, skin oreven blood.» 
Pliny attributes the origin of these horrors to Ostanes, and says 
that ther@ exist commentaries of Democritus saying that the

bones from the head of a criminal are more beneficial for some 
complaints, for others those of a friend and guest.*bones from the head of a criminal are more beneficial for some 
complaints, for others those of a friend and guest.*

The alchemistic writings sometimes attributed to Demo- 
critus were also said to have been derived from ‘the great 
Ostanes’, and to have been embodied in four books On Dyeing.’

K-writing On Dyeing by Bolus also existed, but seems to have 
been a purely chemical work. According to Seneca, the colour- 
ing of stones in imitation of precious stones was a flourishing 
industry, and a lucrative fraud./ This is different from the 
claim actually to change the metals and stones, for instance,

how to make gold from cadmia stone and other substances,

and what marvels come ab ; anne 
: out from lin 
which was what D om heating and interming!ing ;

emocritus was alleged to have learnt from

@ B300, 16 b B300, 15-18

f B30, 5 © B300,3 4 B30, 3 = ® Boo, £2

*B300,7 = 8 B300, 13a «st Bgoo, 17 
1 B300, 14

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 325

Ostanes.* The motto of the Magi was: ‘Nature delights in 
nature, nature controls nature, nature conquers nature.’®

In the British Museum is a papyrus of the third century a.p. 
containing a series of ‘Jocular Prescriptions of Democritus’. 
The first prescription gives a recipe for making bronze look like 
gold; others are practical jokes, hints about food, aphrodisiac 
recipes, and so on.*° A fourth century magical papyrus gives 
a means of prophesying whether a sick man will live or die.4

The Corpus of Democritean Guémae found in a Codex now 
in Paris contains some sayings attributed to Democritus else- 
where; but others are platitudinous and might have been said 
by anyone, like many of those included in the Guémae of 
‘Democrates’.e Among the sayings elsewhere attributed to 
Democritus are echoes of Heracleitus,‘ Socrates* and others; 
and some of those listed in the Corpus of Democritean Gudémae 
are shortened forms of genuine quotations.References to Democritus and his opinions are found in a 
fragment of The Foster-Brothers, a comedy by the Athenian 
Damoxenus, where his views on diet and health are satirized ;5 
in the forged “Letters of Hippocrates’, which are believed to 
be a compilation of the time of Tiberius, written by someone 
who knew some of the writings of Hippocrates, but nothing of 
those of Democritus;‘ and in a book Oz Cheerfulness, said by. 
Stobaeus to be by Hipparchus the Pythagorean.) The “Hip-

ocratic Letters’ tell a story of how the Abderites apply to 
acca to cure Democritus of his madness and his 
laughter at mankind; Hippocrates after conversations with 
Democritus is convinced that Democritus alone has the wis- 
dom and sanity which is taken by the rest of the world for mad- 
ness. A long description of man’s physical structure 1s put into 
the mouth of Democritus, who is shown as dissecting animals 
to find out where the bile lodges. His views on cosmology, on 
perception and visions, and on the folly of mankind are also 
touched upon. The passage from Hipparchus gives instruction 
on how to attain to imperturbability and retain it under various

afflictions such as loss of money, or of children, and the like. 
¢ B35-Birs

d B300, 20 
a B300, 18 b B300, 17 © B300, 19 300, 
f Bé4; BOs; Bg8; Broga; B236; B304 & B45; B83 hCr i C2-C6 1C7

326 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Originality. Democritus was often accused of plagiarism. 
His debt to Leucippus was obvious,* and he is said to have 
admired Pythagoras and borrowed from him extensively.» He 
is also said to have adopted several of Anaxagoras’ meteoro- 
logical explanations,° in spite of the alleged quarrel between 
them, and although Democritus accused Anaxagoras of 
plagiarism from ancient sages.? Some brought a similar charge 
against Democritus, saying that the atomic theory was the 
work of a Phoenician named Méchus who lived before the 
Trojan War.°Influence. Democritus was ignored by Plato and jeered at 
by the Academy;! yet his theory of knowledge, with its dis- 
tinction between reality and appearance, was the forerunner of 
the more elaborate theory of Plato. The interest he aroused in 
Aristotle and his school is evident from their careful and 
critical summaries of his opinions. Epicurus, at first calling 
himself a Democritean and praising Democritus as having been 
the first to touch upon true knowledge, obviously owed the 
whole scientific basis of his teaching to Democritus, and also 
the germ of his hedonist theory; he later came to think of him- 
self as entirely original, and violently repudiated all debts to 
others, including even Democritus.®

69. NESSAS

Nessas of Curios lived in the late fifth and early fourth cen- 
turies B.C.

Nessas was said to have been a pupil of Democritus, and to 
have taught Metrodorus, or perhaps to have studied with 
Metrodorus under Democritus." He is generally said to have 
been a native of Chios.

Nothing 1s left of his writings except a metrical comment on 
Homer,'! and an etymological comment on Hermes’ title 
Diaktoros as meaning ‘Conductor of souls’. i

_ AL 938 © AQT; AQ2; cp. 59A80-1 TAT §§34, 35 
f£A8r 8 As1; Ags2; As3; A74; A773; Arzo hAr;A2 i Br 
1 Diels: the name Nessas suggests that he came not from Chios but from Abdera,

in the neighbourhood of which the river Nessos or Nestos flows into the sea. Possibly 
Nessas went to Chios from there, to teach Metrodorus (Vors. II. p. 230, n).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 327

70. METRODORUS OF CHIOS

Metrovorvs of Curos lived at some time during the fourth 
century B.c,OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 327

70. METRODORUS OF CHIOS

Metrovorvs of Curos lived at some time during the fourth 
century B.c,

Metrodorus was the son of the well-known Chian statesman 
Theocritus, the contemporary of Theopompus and opponent 
of Alexander. Theocritus was himself a pupil of one Metro- 
dorus, who like Theopompus had studied under Isocrates® 
when the latter opened his school in Chios after the end of 
the Peloponnesian War; so that Metrodorus the philosopher 
appears to have been named after his father’s teacher. Some 
say that Metrodorus studied under Democritus himself; but 
others, with more probability, say that he learnt Democritus’ 
teaching from the obscure Nessas.> Metrodorus’ pupil was 
Diogenes of Smyrna, the teacher of Anaxarchus. Some wished 
to connect him directly with Epicurus,° but the latter seems to 
have studied Democritean doctrine from Democritus’ own 
writings,? and from Nausiphanes of Teos, whom he reviles.°

Metrodorus’ father was the leader of the anti-Macedonian, 
democratic party in Chios, in opposition to the party headed by 
Theopompus. Yet no trace of political interests can be found 
in the references to Metrodorus’ views; he seems to have occu- 
pied himself solely with physical science and epistemology, his 
views on which he set out in a book Oz Nature. A work on the 
origins and customs of Ionia, written by a Metrodorus, was 
mentioned by Plutarch; but it is not known if the author was 
the same Metrodorus. Another work, ‘on Trojan matters’, 
expressly attributed to Metrodorus of Chios, is concerned with 
Homeric criticism. There may be a confusion with Metro- 
dorus of Lampsacus,* but since Democritus was interested in 
this subject, he may have influenced his pupils and their 
followers.23 >, >4 h ep. ch. 61 | 
1 Theocritus, father of Metrodorus, was put to death in the reign of Antigonus 
Gonatas, that is, between 323 and 301 B.C.; he was therefore probably born between 
400 and 380 B.C. His son therefore cannot have been born much before 380 B.C., and 
may have been born considerably later. Hence it is unlikely that he was a pupil of 
Democritus, the latest date for whose death is given as 359 B.C. It is much more pro- 
bable that Democritus’ doctrines were brought to Chios by Nessas.

THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

It:is stated that Metrodorus in his book On Nature began 
by a complete denial of all possibility of knowledge: ‘I deny 
that we know whether we know anything or nothing; I deny 
that we know even whether knowing or not knowing exist, 
nor in general whether anything exists or not.’* He added fur- 
ther: ‘Everything exists which anyone thinks.’* He therefore 
went further than the most nihilistic of the Sophists, who must 
have influenced him, though this is not stated. It appears that 
he took Democritus’ theory of knowledge to mean that things 
are known by appearance only, and that we cannot know any- 
thing exactly, as our perceptions cannot give us exact know- 
ledge of anything, though we believe they can. There is no 
sign that he accepted Democritus’ theory of the two sorts of 
knowledge, ‘real’ and ‘bastard’. He did, however, rob even his 
own theory of any pretension to validity by saying that we can- 
not know even whether we know or do not know.° He was 
grouped with Anaxarchus and Monimus as one of those who 
had done away with the criteria of knowledge;4 and his views 
were said to have ‘given a bad start to’ Pyrrho.°Since these were his own words, the attribution to him of 
Parmenidean theories on Being, that it is eternal, boundless 
and motionless,‘ must be mistaken. It is also strange to hear 
from Theophrastus that Metrodorus gives the elements as 
practically the same as those of Democritus, that is, the Full 
and the Empty, Being and Not-Being, though (Theophrastus 
adds) in other respects he has a method of his own.® It is pro- 
bable that like all who deny the existence of reality and know- 
ledge, he was compelled to leave this position and deal with the 
world of sense-perception, in order not to be reduced to silence. 
He 1s said to have accepted the Democritean view regarding 
the existence of innumerable worlds: infinite causes give 
infinite results, and it would be as silly to suppose that there is 
only one world in infinite space as to think of only one ear of 
corn growing on a great plain. Each revolution among the 
innumerable atoms causes a world.‘ Outside the world as well 
as in it is empty space, which exists just as much as atoms, 
and is not merely ‘place’ :i that is, it can enter into the composi- 
tion of things. This too was taken from Leucippus and 
Democritus.

h. 69 (Nessas)2 
f

e Br; 72A2 A4 &A3; A2 h A6 iA7  jA8 k 67A20

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 329.h. 69 (Nessas)2 
f

e Br; 72A2 A4 &A3; A2 h A6 iA7  jA8 k 67A20

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 329.

The other opinions attributed to him are all concerned with 
natural phenomena: the sun, the moon, the stars, thunder and 
lightning, clouds, the rainbow, winds, the sea, earthquakes, 
He thought that the fixed stars, like the moon, were lit up by 
the sun,* and that the Milky Way was the mark of the sun’s 
passage.” Shooting stars were sparks caused by the collision of 
the clouds drawn up by the sun.° Thunder and lightning are 
due to a collision between wind and a condensed cloud. The 
rainbow is the sun’s light falling on a condensed cloud.4 Winds 
are watery anhalations due to the sun’s heat. The sea is salt 
because it trickles through earth, and takes to itself part of the 
solid substance through which it passes, like something perco- 
lating through ashes.! The earth is the sediment or ‘dregs’ of 
the original watery mixture, as the sun is of the air.¢ Earth- 
quakes are caused when the air enclosed in the caves under the 
earth is struck by air from above; he compares the phenomenon 
with the percussion set up when someone sings into a hollow 
jar, and says that a solid substance like earth cannot move of 
itself but must be moved from without. His comparison of 
the sun to a ‘sediment’ of the air can perhaps be elucidated 
from the rather obscure and uncertain passage attributing to 
him views like those of Heracleitus:i that the sun is constantly 
being quenched and ignited. Air condenses and causes cloud, 
and then water, and this descends upon the sun, quenching it; 
then the water is again rarefied and ignited. During the forma- 
tion of the Cosmos, this process apparently went on until the 
fiery nature of the sun overcame the watery vapour round it, 
the stars being formed from portions of this ‘bright water’, 
that is, ignited clouds; but the process goes on to some extent, 
and the quenchings and ignitings, he thinks, cause night and 
day, and all eclipses.; cp. Ad; Ar6 
€A18

330 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

71. DIOGENES OF SMYRNA 
Diocenrs of Smyrna lived in the fourth century B.c.

Nothing is known of Diogenes of Smyrna except that he 
was a pupil of Metrodorus,* and taught Anaxarchus.> His 
opinions are said to have been the same as those of Protagoras.° 
As he was sometimes said to be of Cyrene, it may be that he 
migrated there from Smyrna.

72. ANAXARCHUS

AnaxarcHus of ABDERA was in his prime about 340 B.c., 
and was active throughout the reign of Alexander.

Anaxarchus was said to have studied under Diogenes of 
Smyrna, the pupil of Metrodorus of Chios;4 it is odd that if 
he was a native of Abdera he should have to go abroad to 
learn Democritean doctrines. The date of his prime of life is 
given by Diogenes Laertius as the 110th Olympiad® (340-37 
B.C.), but he is known principally through his association with 
Alexander, whom he accompanied on his campaigns. He was 
said to have incurred the enmity of Nicocreon, tyrant of 
Cyprian Salamis; after the death of Alexander, Nicocreon, 
getting Anaxarchus into his power, put him to death by 
pounding him in a mortar; his defiant words to the tyrant were 
proverbial.! ‘tHe was nicknamed Exudaimontkos, some said 
because of his serene temper,® others, probably more correctly, 
because he gave Happiness as the goal of lifes One of his 
pupils was Pyrrho of Elis, who accompanied him on his 
travels with Alexander, and met the Magi, and the Naked 
Philosophers of India; Pyrrho, however, afterwards severed 
his connection with his master because he came to disapprove of 
the latter’s attendance on royalty. The chief lesson Pyrrho 
learnt from Anaxarchus was impassivity,i which he passed 
on to his own pupil Nausiphanes, the teacher of Epicurus.

Tt artigos tov “Avatdpyou SuAaKov, "Avdfapyov 8’ ov srigons: ‘You can crush not 
Anaxarchus but his husk.’ @uAaxos, the husk of a grain-seed, is also the word for the

orienta] ‘trousers’.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 331orienta] ‘trousers’.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 331

He is classed with Zeno and Pyrrho as a sceptic,* and with 
Monimus as one of those who did away with the criteria of 
knowledge, in that he likened reality to painting, and to the 
visions of sleep and madness.» Almost all the stories told of 
him are concerned with his association with Alexander; but 
he also wrote a book On Monarchy; two quotations survive, 
but neither of them deals with the subject indicated by the 
title. Both quotations have a Democritean ring. The first 
takes Democritus’ theory that things are neither good nor bad 
in themselves but must be correctly used if one is to gain 
advantage from them, and applies it to learning: much learning 
can help or harm him who has it, but all depends on knowing 
the right time, that is, when and in what company to utter it.° 
The other says that it is hard to collect money, but harder still 
to keep it safe,? and recalls Democritus’ advice to fathers. °Opinions differed regarding his influence on Alexander: 
some said that he checked the King’s arrogance, others that he 
pandered to it. He was accused by some of having taught 
Alexander that a king is above the law because he is the author 
of justice, when Alexander was suffering from remorse after 
his murder of Cleitus: this soothed the King’s mind, but 
harmed his character.£ This school of thought also accused 
Anaxarchus of encouraging Alexander to expect the obeisance 
from his subjects, while the Macedonians, with their spokes- 
man Callisthenes, opposed it.¢ Another story was that he 
encouraged Alexander to demand the heads of other satraps 
and rulers,» whereas Alexander was always inclined to mercy. 
Others asserted that Anaxarchus derided Alexander’s desire 
for divinity, pointing to his dependence on a dose of medicine 
when he was ill,‘ or to the ‘blood, not ichor’ that flowed from 
his wounds; but Plutarch said that the latter remark was 
Alexander’s own.) The technique of Anaxarchus, it was said, 
in handling Alexander was to mix sweet with bitter: some 
blame, followed by praise.* When he instructed Alexander in 
the Democritean theory of innumerable worlds, Alexander 
wept because he had not yet conquered this one:! a variation on 
the familiar story.

There is a hint that Anaxarchus too, like other disciples of 
Democritus, was interested in Homer: Alexander’s revised

c Br d Bo As & AG 
8 i Ax §60; A4 k AT

332 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

edition of Homer, which he carried with him and subsequently 
kept in a casket taken from the Persian treasury, was studied 
by him and annotated with the help of Callisthenes, Anaxarchus 
and their circles.* *It seems likely that after the death of Alexander, Anaxarchus 
settled in Cyprus. The story of his death by order of the 
revengeful tyrant may be true, though it has suspicious 
features: for instance, the favourite story of the philosopher 
who bites out his tongue and spits it at the tyrant 1s applied to 
Anaxarchus also.® Clearchus of Soloi, one of Aristotle’s 
pupils, in his Lives wrote of Anaxarchus (whom he may have 
known) as living in licentious luxury, with a beautiful naked 
girl to act as his cup-bearer, and a cook who wore sleeves and a 
mask to prevent his sweat and breath from contaminating the 
bread he was kneading.* His love of comfort was contrasted 
with the austerity of Callisthenes.t Timon, who wrote a 
lampoon on him, spoke of his bold and stubborn (or perhaps 
crazy)! spirit, unabashed, ready to rush in any direction; 
knowledge made him miserable, but his nature, pleasure- 
smitten, drew him back.* Timon spent some time at Elis as a 
pupil of Pyrrho, who had been for a while a follower of 
Anaxarchus, so that he may have heard of Anaxarchus from 
someone who knew him intimately but disapproved of him 
in some respects; nevertheless, the impression given by Timon 
does not accord with other accounts, in which Anaxarchus is 
credited with having taught Pyrrho imperturbability. It is 
likely that Anaxarchus’ attachment to the court of Alexander 
made enemies for him among those who envied him his 
position, or who disapproved of a philosopher’s associating 
with monarchs.

aBr2 b Ar §59; cp. 29Ar §27 CAg dAj € Aro

a! This was the ‘casket-copy’, the work of Aristotle. Plut. Alex. VIII.

Teppevés or éypavés (probably the latter: ‘rash spirit, crazy to rush off in any 
direction with shameless violence’).

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 333

73. HECATAEUS OF ABDERA

Hecatazus of Aspera lived at the end of the fourth and 
beginning of the third centuries g.c. (under Alexander and 
Ptolemy Lagos).OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 333

73. HECATAEUS OF ABDERA

Hecatazus of Aspera lived at the end of the fourth and 
beginning of the third centuries g.c. (under Alexander and 
Ptolemy Lagos).

Hecataeus was said to have been originally a native of Teos, 
but to have migrated with others of his fellow-citizens to 
Abdera in order to escape the harshness of Persian rule;* this 
must have been shortly before Alexander overthrew the 
Persian power in Asia Minor at the battle of the Granicus in 
333 B.C.

He was a pupil of Pyrrho,” and gave self-sufficiency as the 
goal of life.e He was credited with books On the Hyperboreans 
and Ox the Philosophy of the Egyptians. A work On the Jews 
attributed to him and quoted by Josephus, was regarded as a 
forgery even in antiquity.4 Diodorus, who also quoted from 
this book, was accused by Photius of giving a false account of 
Jewish laws and customs which he fathered upon ‘Hecataeus 
of Miletus’; doubtless Photius meant Hecataeus of Abdera, 
as the two were often confused.°

His book Ox the Hyperboreans described an island ‘not 
smaller than Sicily’, lying in the northern ocean, ‘off the 
Celtic land’, and still inhabited in his day by a branch of the 
people called Hyperboreans. The island is fertile, with an 
excellent climate, and able to produce two crops a year. The 
moon, being only a short distance away, is clearly visible from 
it, and its mountains can be seen. The islanders are ruled by a 
hereditary aristocracy, the family of the Boreadae, who trace 
their descent from Boreas. They worship Apollo, who is said 
to visit the island every eighteen years, bringing fine weather, 
in which he himself revels, playing the harp and dancing all 
night long from the spring equinox to the rising of the Pleiads. ’ 
The name of the island is Helixoia (Twisted Island), and it 1s 
said to be ‘beyond the river Karambyka’ ; the islanders are named 
Karambykae from the river.® .The location of these places can hardly be discussed, as the

a A2 bA3 CAA d B16 €Br3 
Bs; B3 & Br

334 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

story of the Hyperboreans is almost entirely mythical,? going 
back to Hesiod and the Homeric Hymns. There is no reason 
to suppose that Hecataeus based his information on anything 
more tangible than travellers’ tales, though he speaks of the 
Northern Ocean as called Amalchios, that is, ‘frozen’ in the 
language of the natives,* and gives the names of the three 
branches of the Hyperborean people as though he had personal 
knowledge of them. But his preference for the marvellous 
is shown by Pliny’s classing his book on the Hyperboreans 
with that of Amometus on the equally mythical Attacori of 
Central Asia, and by his mention of ‘the city Cimmeris’, which 
like Theopompus’ Meropis and Plato’s Atlantis was fabulous 
territory.° °? :

His book On the Philosophy of the Egyptians was used by 
Diodorus in his account of Egyptian customs; it dealt with the 
whole theology of the Egyptians, the derivation of the world 
from Isis and Osiris, and the relationship of the deities to the 
heavenly bodies and the elements;4 with the Egyptian worship 
of animals, which Hecataeus described as a riddling way of 
speaking of their deities in the form of beetle, serpent and so 
on;¢ with the titles of the deities, such as Ammon, which he 
says is a word used for summoning persons, and so used for 
calling upon their premier god; with the customs of the 
priesthood at Heliopolis, where wine is not allowed in the 
temple;® with the greatness of Egyptian Thebes;" and with 
the worship of Zeus at other centres.+ Itis highly probable that 
Hecataeus like Diodorus used the work of Manetho, his 
contemporary, who was the first Egyptian to give in Greek an 
account of the doctrines and history of his country, based upon 
first hand knowledge.

a B2 bBy ¢ Br d By; Br2 © B6; Br3 {Bs

§ Br h Br3; Broa B2 bBy ¢ Br d By; Br2 © B6; Br3 {Bs

§ Br h Br3; Bro

¢! Cary and Warmington, The Ancient Extlorers, p. 247, note 40.

1 Cary and Warmington, The Ancient Explorers, p. 198: ‘They (the Hyperboreans) 
were probably put at one time in Thrace, but were pushed farther north in legend as 
exploration failed to show them ... Many like Herodotus knew that the whole story 
about them was a fable.” Pape, Wérterbuch der Griechischen Eigennamen, s.v.KapayBixai, 
suggests that the river is the Eider, and the island one of those off Jutland; but Pliny 
VI, 13, 14, places the river in Asia in the land of the Arimphaei, i.e. probably the Dvina, 
flowing into the White Sea.

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 335

74. APOLLODORUS 
ApoLLoporus of Cyzicus: date unknown.

Apollodorus is said to have been a follower of Democritus, 
and to have given ‘pleasure of the mind’ as the goal.» 22 He 
was interested in the marvellous, and was said to have added 
to the list given in the Manual Operations (the magical treatise 
attributed to Democritus) the sensitive plant, Mimosa asperata.» 
He declared that Democritus had associated with Philolaus 
the Pythagorean.°

75. NAUSIPHANES 
NausIpHANEs of T£os lived in the time of Alexander, and after.

Nausiphanes was a follower of Democritus.4 His actual 
teacher was Pyrrho.* Later he set up a school in Teos, and 
practised Pyrrho’s painstaking method of dealing with ques- 
tions in detail, while working out a mode of expression of his 
own.! He taught a combination of science and rhetoric, the 
former based not only on Leucippus and Democritus, but also 
on Anaxagoras and Empedocles, whose works he used to read 
aloud and expound. He was particularly interested in 
mathematics and logic. He wrote a work on method, called 
The Tripod, in which he set forth the view that the men of, 
science will also excel at the art of persuasion.His chief interest lies in the fact that Epicurus for a time 
was a student of his," along with other ‘dissolute lads’, and 
singled Nausiphanes out for special obloquy in his tirades 
against all to whom he might be thought to have owed any of 
his doctrines.‘ Epicurus called him the Jelly-fish because of his 
obtuseness.i Otherscornful epithets were ‘pedagogue’, * ‘ignor- 
amus’, ‘cheat’, and ‘prostitute’, and there was a description of 
his ‘travail to bring forth from his lips the professional bombast’ 
only fit for slaves, and his displays of ecstasy which earned

ay b3 C2 d Ar €A3; Az f A2 & Ay

hAr; A2; Ag i As; A8 j Az

a! Yuyaywyla. Clement gives the name as Apollodotus of Cyzicus, but it is generally 
assumed that Apollodorus is meant.

1 &iSdoxcAos used contemptuously; no other similar usage is known. Possibly the 
word is corrupt.

336 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Epicurus’ contempt.* Epicurus also accused him of ‘energetic 
hair-splitting’ in his commentaries on Anaxagoras and 
Empedocles, and sums him up as ‘a bad man, skilled in things 
by which one cannot attain to wisdom’.> This is merely 
another example of Epicurus’ repudiation of his predecessors ; 
and as in the other cases, he owed something to the man whom 
he reviled. It was said that he derived his own book on 
method, the Canon, from Nausiphanes’ Tripod.The title of this book apparently referred to the three 
criteria of knowledge said by Diotimus to have been suggested 
by Democritus.* A summary of part of the work was preserved 
by Philodemus in his Rhetoric: the theme is that the man of 
science has the capacity for rhetoric also, even if he does not 
practise itt —The source of his power is his knowledge of the 
facts, so that he could pass on his own convictions not only to 
his pupils but to any race of people. Having a knowledge of 
the facts, he is able to lead his audience where he wishes, 
because he can tell them what is to their advantage, which 1s 
what they wish to hear. The scientist has command of the best 
diction also: not that created by vain imagination and con- 
vention, but that based on the nature of things.* He also has 
command of logic, without which knowledge is impossible, 
and is best qualified to practise the art, indispensable to a 
statesman in a democracy or monarchy or any other constitu- 
tion, of calculation of the future based on the known facts. 
The man who employs the continuous discourse will be best 
able to employ the dialectic method and vice versa,‘ because 
both depend on an accurate judgement of how to lead pupils 
from the known to the unknown;® that is, they depend upon 
a knowledge of the Democritean ‘right time’ and ‘right 
measure’ in speaking.

Nausiphanes gave as the goal of life a kind of ‘imperturba- 
bility.’ '1 He was also among those who interpreted Democri- 
tus’ theory of knowledge as meaning that among apparent 
existences nothing is more real than unreal. Nothing else 
seems to be known of his teaching.*a Ag b Az € 68Arrr; Ch. 76; cp. 68Brb; 68Bz qd Br €cp. 68A57 
fep. Plato, Protag. 334€, 3394 & Bz h 68B225; 68B226 i B3 
1] éxarandAngta. cp. C. Bailey, The Greek Atomists and Epicurus, p. 218. 
1C. Bailey, op. cit., several times (pp. 129, 289, 311) suggests that it may have been 
Nausiphanes who introduced the notion that the atoms had weight; but this appears to

OF SIXTH AND FIFTH CENTURIES 337 
76. DIOTIMUS 
Driotimus of Tyre, exact date unknown.

Diotimus of Tyre was a follower of Democritus.*:*: He had 
little claim to originality, as faras can be seen from the few refer- 
ences to his views. He referred to Democritus’ three criteria of 
knowledge, namely, for grasping the unknown, the known: for 
scientific inquiry, the mind; for choice and avoidance, the feel- 
ings.» He also put forward the same views as Metrodorus and 
Straton.° His term for the goal of life was ‘complete attainment 
of what is good’, 4: a definition of Democritus’ Well-being.

He is probably not to be identified with the Stoic philoso- 
pher of the same name who forged fifty letters in support of a 
charge of profligacy against Epicurus.® ¢?

77, BION OF ABDERA

Bron of Appera probably lived at the end of the fourth century 
B.C.?

Bion of Abdera was a follower of Democritus. He wrote in 
Attic as well as Ionic Greek. He was reputed to be a mathe- 
matician and astronomer. All that remains of his work is a 
classification of the four winds, in which he 1s bracketed with 
Aristotle and Timosthenes;‘ and a statement that there were 
certain regions where during six months night reigned, and 
during the other six months, day.®

78. BOLUS 
Botus of Menpe lived in the third century B.c.

Bolus was a native of Mende in the Nile Delta. He was 
called a Pythagorean, and possibly a Democritean also, by

ay b 3; 68Airr Cy d2 € Diog. L. X, 3; cp. Athen. XIII, 611b

{2 BrBolus was a native of Mende in the Nile Delta. He was 
called a Pythagorean, and possibly a Democritean also, by

ay b 3; 68Airr Cy d2 € Diog. L. X, 3; cp. Athen. XIII, 611b

{2 Br

a1 The reading Anuoxplteios is an emendation of Diels from the MS Aidxprtos; but that 
Diotimus was a follower of Democritus is established otherwise from the little that is

known of his views.

d! waytilsia Tov cyobdv. 7 
€1 See Smith, Dict. Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, s.v. Diotimus, where

the Stoic Diotimus is regarded as the author of the goal TravttAsia tay bh -~O* 
1 Pauly-Wissowa, Vol. III, p. 486.

338 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Suidas.*}*1_ The list of his works includes two which were 
often ascribed to Democritus: On Potent Natural Products, a 
book on marvellous remedies; and On Antipathetic and Sym- 
pathetic Substances. Others were On Marvels, On Stones 
according to their Elements (a work of alchemistic tendency), 
On Signs issuing from Sun, Moon, North Star and Rainbow 
(probably on divination), and on Aids to Research derived from 
Reading. The Manual Operations, ascribed to Democritus but 
now thought to be by Bolus, was a work dealing with opera- 
tions of a marvellous kind, as opposed to the ‘potent natural 
products’, in which the magical cures are wrought by the 
power of the plant or other natural substance. Callimachus in 
his Table of Democritus and his Vocabulary listed Bolus as a 
forger of Democritean writings.

Extracts from Bolus are found in Pliny, and traces in other 
authors such as Plutarch and Aelian. Apollonius in his book of 
Marvels says that Bolus quoted Theophrastus Ox Plants 
regarding the plant wormwood (adbsinthium), which was 
alleged to act as a preventive against ‘bile-disease’ in the sheep 
of the Pontus, who ate it. Doubtless the bitterness of the plant 
was thought to counteract the bitterness associated with the 
disease. .A certain Oros of Mende is mentioned in Aétius® as the 
inventor of a ‘remedy of nine ingredients’. This ‘Oros’ may 
be Bolus himself, or perhaps an associate or disciple. Bolus 
has no part in the history of philosophy or of scientific medi- 
cine, though his remedies were discussed by pharmacologists 
and physicians such as Xenocrates of Aphrodisias, Crateuas, 
Dioscorides and Galen, and passed into the works of Arabic 
writers such as Avicenna. It is also considered by some that 
the books on Husbandry attributed to Democritus were by 
Bolus; these were quoted by Columella, sometimes under the 
name of Democritus, sometimes under that of Bolus.’

#68B300, 1 bXV, 27

a1 In one place Suidas calls him Bolos-Demokritos, so that he may have borne the 
double name, perhaps because he published books under the name of Democritus. 
Diels emended ‘Demokritos’ to ‘Demokriteios’ (Vol. II, p. 212), on the strength of his 
being called Bé&Aos 4 Anuoxpitetos by Apollonius. See pp. 323 qq. above.

‘See Pauly-Wissowa s.v. Bolos, and the works of Wellmann and Kroll cited by Diels 
Vors. ch. 78 (Bolus).

C. THE OLDER SOPHISTS

C. THE OLDER SOPHISTS

79. NAME AND CONCEPT

Unper the heading of “The Older Sophists’ are grouped 
Protagoras, Gorgias, Prodicus, Thrasymachus, Hippias, Anti- 
phon, Critias, These men were active during the latter part of 
the fifth and early part of the fourth centuries B.c.

The name sophistés originally meant ‘skilled craftsman’, 
‘expert’; it was used by Pindar* of poets, by Aeschylus’ and 
Euripides® of musicians, by Herodotus‘ of seers, and by 
Plato® of the Creator of the universe. It continued always to 
be used in this sense as well as in its later derived meaning; it 
is applied by Aelian, writing in the second century a.p., to 
‘those skilled in horsecraft’.!Similarly it was used in a good sense to mean ‘wise’. Hero- 
dotus® called the Seven Sages sophistai, and in this he was 
followed by Aristotle," Demosthenes and Isocrates.i Hero- 
dotus* also gave this title to Pythagoras, and Hippocrates! 
ee it to the natural philosophers. Plato used it of the 
alleged ‘wise men’ of Crete and Sparta, in pretended respect.™ 
Again, this usage persisted: Arrian® has it of the Brahmans, 
Dionysius of Halicarnassus° has it of Isocrates and Plato.

As with sophos, so too with sophistés, the meaning ‘clever, 
smart’, was also found. Aeschylus uses sophistés several times 
thus in the Prometheus,’ when characters are made to speak 
sneeringly, for instance Kratos to Hephaestus, Hermes to 
Prometheus. So too Sophocles? and Euripides."

The specialized use of the word to mean ‘professional 
teacher’ came into use at the end of the fifth century, when the

a Isth. V, 28 b Fry. 314 © Rhes. 924 dq TI, 49 © Republ. 
f N.A. XIII, 9; cp. XI, 1 & I, 29 h Frg. 5 i LXI, so 
iXV,235 KIV,95 !Vet. Med.20 ™ Protag. 342B 
n Anab. VI, 16, § © Comp. 25 P 623 944 
a Frg. 101; Frg.g05 = * Hippol. 921

341

342 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS341

342 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

activities of the famous travelling teachers, Protagoras, 
Gorgias and the rest, became conspicuous. Xenophon’s 
definition of them clearly shows why they were regarded with 
disapproval by many: “They call “‘sophists’’ those who offer 
wisdom for sale in return for money to all comers.’* The chief 
source of disapproval was Socrates and all his admirers, 
especially Plato; and the objection to the Sophist was that he 
professed to teach ‘wisdom’, which cannot be taught, and 
accepted a fee for this. The case against the Sophists and all 
their works was powerfully developed by Plato; and it is to 
his influence primarily that the ill-repute into which the name 
and profession fell must be ascribed,® for he brought out clearly 
the quarrel between rhetoric or the art of persuasion, which 
was their principal subject of instruction, and philosophy, 
which aimed at the discovery of truth by means of discussion 
based on sound method, and not at a verbal victory; and he 
constantly animadverted upon their commercial-mindedness, 
calling them ‘paid hunters of the young and rich’, and traffic- 
kers in learning.© Xenophon declares that the name ‘sophist’ 
was considered disgraceful by right-minded men; and Plato 
makes a young man blush at the idea that he is preparing 
himself for the career of a Sophist.c. Demosthenes complains 
that Aeschines has called him ‘sophist’ as a term of abuse: a 
charlatan or clever rogue.‘ Aristotle sums up the teaching of 
Socrates and Plato by defining the Sophist’s art as ‘the appear- 
ance of wisdom, not the reality’, and the Sophist as one who 
makes money from this unreal appearance.®

Nevertheless, the name retained some dignity, and was in 
use in Roman Imperial times as a professional title; it was 
frequently found in epitaphs, and was applied to professors of 
rhetoric and prose writers such as Aelian and Philostratus.?a Mem. I, 6, 13 b Ch. 79, 13 79, 2 © 79, 2 (Plato, Soph. 231D) 
q Gyn. XTIL, 8 © Profag. 312A; cp. Meno 90B 599. f XVIII, 276

B79, 3 (Soph. EL. 1652) 
\ See Liddell and Geant (Rewined Edin, 1g ap) £0. cogettg, 4.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 343

80. PROTAGORAS

Protacoras of ABDERA lived in the latter half of the fifth 
century B.C.

Protagoras was undoubtedly a native of Abdera, as Plato 
says,* though a connection with Teos is also indicated.»

The date of his birth and death are disputed. Plato says 
that he died aged nearly seventy, having spent forty years in 
the exercise of his profession ;° and though his life was extended 
to ninety years by some authorities, Plato’s testimony must be 
preferred. Apollodorus, who accepts Plato’s statement that 
Protagoras died aged seventy, gives his prime of life as the 
84th Olympiad,° that is, 444-41 B.c.; the year 444 is doubt- 
less intended, since there was a tradition that Protagoras had 
helped the Thurian colonists with their new constitution.! If 
this be correct, then Protagoras was born about 484 B.c. and 
died in 414. But there is also a tradition that he was arraigned 
for impiety by one of the Four Hundred, and met his death 
soon afterwards;® according to this, therefore, he died in 411 
B.c., was born in 481, and his prime of life is the last year of 
the 84th Olympiad, 441 B.c.Another factor, however, must be taken into consideration, 
namely the date of the scene of Plato’s dialogue Protagoras. In 
this dialogue Protagoras is made to speak of himself as elderly. 
He has spent many years at his profession, he says, and the 
sum of his years is considerable; he is old enough to be the 
father of any of those present. Now since the company 
includes the sons of Pericles, who died in 429 B.c., it is gener- 
ally thought that the scene of the dialogue is laid just before 
the outbreak of the Peloponnesian War, in about 432 B.c.; 
and this fits what is said about the ages of the others present, 
Socrates, Alcibiades, Agathon. But if Protagoras was born in 
484 or 481, this would make him only fifty-two or forty-nine 
at the time of the dialogue, which does not agree with his 
remarks about himself; at that age it would have been 1m- 
possible or unlikely that he could have been the father of 
Socrates, then thirty-seven, or that he would so have described 
himself. The other possible dates for the scene of the

a b Ax §«0 c A8 d Ar § € Ar §56

Protag. 309C es saree, 55

344 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSa b Ax §«0 c A8 d Ar § € Ar §56

Protag. 309C es saree, 55

344 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

dialogue (and therefore for Protagoras’ second visit to Athens) 
are either between 423 and 421 B.c., as Athenaeus suggests, 
or in 419 B.c.* Athenaeus gets his date from the fact that the 
Fiatterers of Eupolis, showing Protagoras in town, was 
produced in 421 B.c.; and he suggests that Plato is guilty of an 
anachronism in introducing the sons of Pericles, who had 
died eight years before. The date 419 B.c. is suggested by a 
remark of Plato himself in the dialogue, that the Wild Men 
of Pherecrates had been produced ‘last year’; this play was 
actually produced in 420 B.c. These later dates, 423-19 B.c., 
would better suit what Protagoras says of his own age: he 
would then be over sixty. But they would not do away with 
the interval between himself and Socrates, and would also 
throw out the ages of the rest of the party: for instance, 
Agathon, who is described as still a boy; in 432 B.c. he was 
about sixteen, but in 423, aged twenty-five, he would not be 
so regarded.

It seems best therefore to regard the Protagoras as set in 
about 432 B.c., and to accept the main features — the presence 
of Paralus and Xanthippus, the fact that Pericles is mentioned 
as still alive, the relative ages of the other characters —as 
genuine, and the allusion to the Wi/d Men of Pherecrates as an 
anachronism. Possibly Protagoras visited Athens a third time 
round 421 B.c., the visit referred to in The Flatterers, and this 
was the reason for Plato’s mistake. But if 432 B.c. be the right 
daté for this second visit, and if Protagoras could really speak 
of himself as old enough to be Socrates’ father, he must have 
been born before 484 B.c.; 490 would be nearer the correct date.This date finds support in the story that Protagoras was 
educated by the Magi who were in attendance on Xerxes in 
480 B.c.° But if it is correct, then Protagoras cannot have been 
alive in 411 B.c. to be accused by one of the Four Hundred 
(that is, of course, if we accept Plato’s statement that he died 
aged nearly seventy); and he cannot have been the pupil of 
Democritus, for Democritus was not born until about 460 
B.c., and we are expressly told that Protagoras began his 
professional career at the age of thirty. In fact, the story of his 
relationship to Democritus must fall to the ground in any case, 
unless Protagoras was not born until about 470 B.c. at the 
earliest; and this contradicts all that Plato says of him.

4 Arr b Aa tr

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 345

Life. Two stories of his early life were current: one that his 
father was one of the wealthiest citizens of Abdera, who 
entertained Xerxes on his invasion of Greece, and obtained 
from the King the rare privilege of instruction for his son by 
the Magi who accompanied Xerxes.* Philostratus, quoting 
the story, suggests that Protagoras borrowed his agnosticism 
from the Magi; nevertheless, there is not the slightest trace 
of their influence on his known work. The other story is that 
Protagoras spent the first part of his life as a labourer, a 
carrier of wood, and was rescued from this menial work by 
Democritus, who, struck by the orderly way in which he was 
binding some faggots, made him his secretary and trained him 
in letters and in philosophy.” The source of this story was 
Epicurus; but as has been shown, it must be rejected on 
chronological grounds. Plato, commenting on the huge 
fortune made by Protagoras, does not hint at such lowly 
beginnings. It has been thought that the story arose because 
Protagoras invented the porter’s shoulder-pad.°

Nothing, therefore, is known of Protagoras’ early years, nor 
of his relationship with Democritus and the other Abderite 
philosophers. :Nothing, therefore, is known of Protagoras’ early years, nor 
of his relationship with Democritus and the other Abderite 
philosophers. :

At the age of thirty, he embarked on a professional careeras a 
teacher. Hetravelled about Greece giving instruction for money, 
and is made to sayin the Profagoras that he was the first to declare 
himself openly in this réle.4 His fees were high,®* ¢? but the 
pupil was not obliged to pay them if at the end of the course 
he did not think the instruction worth the money; he could 
instead take an oath before a priest and pay the sum of money 
he declared to have been deserved.‘ Protagoras amassed a very 
large fortune during his forty years of teaching.®

Of his travels, it is known that he visited Athens several 
times, the first time perhaps in or just before 444 B.c.,. when 
the colony to Thurii was setting out; the second time probably 
in about 432 B.c., just before the Peloponnesian War, the

a Az §t b 68A9; 80Ar §53; A3; A4; B3 © Ax §53 AAs; Az §4

e Ar §52; A3 f A6 8 A8

e! That he charged roo minae, as Diogenes Laertius and Hesychius record, seems 
unlikely. Prodicus charged 50 drachmae for his advanced course on correct diction 
(84A11),and Hippias, who boasted that he had made more money than any two Sophists, 
including Protagoras, claimed to have made 150 minae altogether on a lecturing tour 
in Sicily, a sum which astonished his fellow-citizens (86A7; sce below, p. 382). Taking

the silver drachma as = about one dollar, so dr. = £10, 100 minae = £2,000, 150 
minae = £3,000.

346 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSthe silver drachma as = about one dollar, so dr. = £10, 100 minae = £2,000, 150 
minae = £3,000.

346 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

occasion described in Plato’s dialogue; and possibly a third 
time in about 422 or 421 B.c. Later, he also visited Sicily, 
where he was in great repute when Hippias was a young man; 
this may not of course have been his only visit. In Athens, he 
was recéived by Pericles, with whom he discussed legal 
questions;* and he is said to have read his speeches to audi- 
ences in private houses and gymnasia; the house of Euripides 
is mentioned, and also the Lyceum.* On his later visit or visits 
he stayed, together with other Sophists, at the house of the 
wealthy Callias.There is a legend that the beginning of his book On the 
Gods offended religious sentiment at Athens, and that he was 
accused and condemned (either after a trial or by vote without 
trial) to banishment from all Athenian territory, while all copies 
of his book were called in and burnt in the market-place.4 
The name of his accuser was given by some as Pythodorus, 
son of Polyzélus, one of the Four Hundred;° but Aristotle was 
said to have given another name, Euathlus, and Euathlus is 
said elsewhere to have been a pupil of Protagoras with whom 
he had a dispute over his fees. Others placed the burning of 
the books in 444-41 B.c.€ The legend proceeded to relate 
how Protagoras, expelled by the Athenians, fleeing from main- 
land to islands, and hunted by the Athenian triremes scattered 
over every sea, was drowned while sailing in a small yacht, 
bound, some said, for Sicily. The story, however, is completely 
contradicted by Plato’s incontrovertible testimony that Pro- 
tagoras ‘died when nearly seventy, having spent forty years in 
the exercise of his profession, and in all that time down to the 
present day has never ceased to enjoy his high repute’. We 
know nothing of where Protagoras died, or how; but that his 
end was not violent, and that he was never attacked or punished 
by the Athenians, is certain. The dispute with Euathlus over 
fees may be genuine, and may have given rise to the whole 
story ; this may also account for the defence put into Protagoras’ 
mouth in Plato’s dialogue, that pupils were allowed to pay 
what they stated on oath to be a fair return. i

Writings. The most famous of Protagoras’ theories, that 
‘Man is the measure of all things, of the things that are, that

'Ag => Aro CAr§s4 9 Ar §3; At §52; A33 Artz; A230 8 Ad 
f Ar §56; Aq; B6 8 Ad h Az §3 i A6

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 347'Ag => Aro CAr§s4 9 Ar §3; At §52; A33 Artz; A230 8 Ad 
f Ar §56; Aq; B6 8 Ad h Az §3 i A6

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 347

they are, of the things that are not, that they are not’, formed 
the opening sentence of his book entitled, according to Plato, 
Truth, according to Sextus, Refutatory Arguments. The open- 
ing phrase of his book Oz the Gods, which was said to have 
earned him expulsion from Athens, is also preserved: ‘With 
regard to the gods, I cannot know whether they exist or do 
not exist, nor what they are like in form; for the factors pre- 
venting knowledge are many: the obscurity of the subject, and 
the shortness of human life.’> Two sentences on education are 
preserved from a work entitled The Great Argument. A book 
On Being is also mentioned: Porphyry, who claimed to have 
read it and to have memorized passages, says that Plato bor- 
rowed its arguments.° A similar accusation against Plato is 
made regarding a work of Protagoras entitled Contradictory 
Arguments: it was said that the beginning of the Republic was 
taken from it.? Ofa long list of other works given in Diogenes 
Laertius,® one, On Mathematics, may be genuine: Aristotle in 
the Metaphysics mentions Protagoras’ arguments against the 
geometers.‘ The other titles probably refer to extracts from 
his other works, selected for discussion or mention by Plato, 
and do not represent separate treatises. On Wrestling, for 
instance, is derived from Plato’s reference to Protagoras’ views 
on wrestling and the other arts, mentioned in the Sophist.é 
On the Original Social Structure doubtless is derived from the 
myth attributed to Protagoras in Plato’s Protagoras (though of 
course this in its turn is probably taken or imitated from an 
actual passage in one of Protagoras’ books). It was these 
Platonic parodies that probably gave rise to the accusation of 
plagiarism. Some of the titles of Diogenes Laertius, however, 
may refer to a collection of disputations on famous topics 
(communes loci) written as models to exhibit Protagoras’ 
theories on rhetorical technique; Ox Ambition, On Virtues, On 
the Errors of Mankind, On Constitution, could all come under 
this head. So too could the Tria/ concerning Fees, which might 
be a model speech such as those later written by Antiphon; 
there is a hint that Protagoras, like Antiphon, was interested in 
the question of legal responsibility in cases of accidental death. ' 
The title The Art of Eristics probably refers to one of the works 
on rhetoric, the Contradictory Arguments, which was said to bec¢ B2 a Bs © Ax §54 ft gf 
& B8 h B6 i Aro

348 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

in two books.* An exhortatory work’ may perhaps be identi- 
fied with that on education, called elsewhere the Great Argu- 
ment. He was also credited, like Democritus, with a work On 
the Underworld;» but his agnostic views make this unlikely.

Teachings. Protagoras himself claimed to be an educator of 
the young, according to Plato. The instruction he offered was 
not technical, like that of Hippias and others, to which he was 
opposed; it was practical, its aim being to fit the student for 
the conduct of his own affairs and those of the State.c He 
believed that education should begin young, and that not only 
ability but intensive training was required :* 41 education does 
not take root in the soul unless one goes deep.° The civic 
virtues can be taught, and are taught by constant correction 
from childhood upward; the punishment inflicted by the 
laws has education, not revenge, as its object.£ Men all are 
endowed with the qualities which make life in a community 
possible — a sense of reverence and a sense of right — and it is 
to these that the educator appeals. If any lack these qualities, 
they are sub-human and must be put to death like pests,® as 
Democritus also said.The actual instruction by which Protagoras claimed to 
achieve these ends, however, included no special branch of 
knowledge; these were debarred by his theory of knowledge, 
which was summed up in the phrase “Man is the measure of all 
things, of the things that are, that they are, of the things that 
are not, that they are not’.' This is generally taken to mean 
that each individual’s perceptions are immediately true for him 
at any given moment, and that there is no means of deciding 
which of several opinions about the same thing is the true one; 
there is no such thing as ‘truer’, though there is such a thing as 
‘better’.i He was led to this conclusion by observing that 
material objects are continuously changing, and that the 
person perceiving them also changes according to his own 
age, bodily condition and so on. All the appearances of matter 
are ‘true’, for they are all inherent in matter; but the person 
perceiving them seizes on that aspect which his condition

f Protag. 323E eC h 68B257; 68B258 
i Br; Ar3; Ar4; Ars; A16; Arg; Azza j Azra 
d! &oxnois, a word of which he appears to have been fond; cp. Protag.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 349

enables him to perceive, and on no other.* If he is well, the 
wind feels warm to him; if ill, it feels cold; that is, it is warm 
to one, cold to another, and no question of ‘truth’ arises,’ This 
reduces all ‘knowledge’ to sensation, as Plato saw;° and in fact 
— away with any possibility of stable knowledge of anyThe phrase was also taken to mean that objects do not exist 
except while someone is perceiving them; and this seems better 
to fit the actual words, ‘Man’ then being taken to mean ‘Man- 
kind’, not ‘individual man’, All things which appear to Man 
to exist, do exist; all things which appear to no man to exist, 
do not even exist.4 This theory also is discussed by Plato and 
Aristotle, and led the former to exclaim that he did not see why 
Protagoras made Man the criterion of existence rather than 
Pig or Baboon or any other creature with perception.® There 
is no doubt that Protagoras held both these views, namely that 
things exist only while some human being is perceiving them, 
and that the percepts of all individuals are equally real.: Are 
the two views incompatible? Not necessarily so; but the 
remarks of Sextus,‘ that men take hold only of the aspects of 
matter which their condition enables them to seize, seem to 
show a contradiction in Protagoras’ thought; for the aspects of 
a material object which are not being perceived by anyone 
cannot, on his own showing, exist; and in fact, as Aristotle 
remarks, his denial of the existence of percepts which are not 
being perceived means a denial of potentiality, as if one said 
that a man is not a builder except when he 1s actually building. 
This position, which Aristotle attributes to the Megarian 
school,? he calls absurd.®

The assertion that all percepts are equally true led Protagoras 
to deny the Law of Contradictories, which rules that the same 
attribute cannot at the same time both belong and not belong 
to the same subject in the same respect. Protagoras asserted 
that there are two contradictory propositions on every matter,

a Arg b Br; Aristotle, Met. 1062b © Theaet. 151E sqq.; Br

d Ara; Ar6; Ary e Br (Theaet. 161C) f Ar, 8 Artza Arg b Br; Aristotle, Met. 1062b © Theaet. 151E sqq.; Br

d Ara; Ar6; Ary e Br (Theaet. 161C) f Ar, 8 Artz

1 Yet in the Protagoras he is depicted as refusing to define ‘the Good’ as that which is 
useful to mankind, because there are things that are of no use to man (food, medicine, 
etc.) but useful to horses and other animals; so that he seems sometimes to have acknow- 
ledged that the percepts of animals have a right to recognition; in fact, that they some- 
times conflict with ours is one of the reasons why the theory that all percepts are true 
was evolved, according to Aristotle (Met. 1009b). ie anit

2 Protagoras was credited with a work On the Art of the Eristic School. (Ar |

THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS2 Protagoras was credited with a work On the Art of the Eristic School. (Ar |

THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

and made this the subject of a treatise in two books.* Aristotle 
in the Metaphysics,» putting forward the Law of Contradiction 
as axiomatic, refutes Protagoras’ view, saying that the axiom Is 
in direct conflict with his theory that all opinions are equally 
true. He explains how this theory arose, and how it is equiva- 
lent to saying that the same thing both is and is not, its ground 
being the identification of reality with the sensible world. The 
refutation lies in recognizing that thought and knowledge are 
concerned, not with sensibles, but with their “essence’,! which is 
their reality, and about which only one of two contradictory 
statements can be true. If all contradictory statements about 
the same thing were true, all things would be one and indis- 
tinguishable: a man is a ship, and not a ship, if anyone chooses 
to assert either proposition about him.* Another favourite 
argument against Protagoras’ view was the so-called ‘recoil’, 
which was said to have been used by Democritus, as well as by 
Plato, in refutation of Protagoras. If every opinion is true, 
then if the opinion that every opinion is not true occurs to 
anyone, the thesis falls to the ground.‘ It is clear that although 
Aristotle sometimes writes as if Protagoras derived his theory 
of knowledge from Democritus,® the latter’s own views on 
knowledge are opposed to those of Protagoras. ‘His theory of knowledge, therefore, led him to disparage 
the sciences; the instruction which he gave was a study, not of 
truth, but of opinions, and of the means of influencing opinions, 
the art of persuasion, or rhetoric. He claimed that though all 
opinions were equally true, some were more desirable than 
others, more sound or healthy; the work of the teacher or 
orator is to instil into the individual or the State good opinions 
instead of bad,® and his wisdom is that of the doctor or farmer. 
Health is not more ‘real’ than illness; yet it is better. This was 
Protagoras’ claim at its highest; at its lowest it seemed to be 
concerned merely with the technique of persuasion, that is, 
how to make the weaker cause appear the stronger," or how 
to argue that each of two contradictory statements are equally 
true or false.i He set, therefore, a high value on the power of 
words,} and gave his pupils a thorough grounding in all

a Bs; Ar §55 b yooga-1o11b © Arg (Met. 1007b); cp. Met. 1062b 
4 Ars; Aig € Met. roogbiz f 68B156; 68B69 8 Azra 
4 B6b; Az1; C2 i Béa; Ar $51; Br2z J Brz .

' Plato's (Sa, Aristotle's 4 +i fv elven.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS' Plato's (Sa, Aristotle's 4 +i fv elven.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS

branches of oratory and the ancillary studies such as grammar,* 
correctness of diction,” and the analysis of poetry.° He divided 
speech into several modes; some said, into four modes: prayer, 
question, answer, command; others said, into seven modes: 
narration, question, answer, command, report, prayer, invita- 
tion, which he said were the foundations of speech. He first 
defined certain ‘divisions of time’;* this is taken by some to 
mean the tenses of the verb, but it more probably refers to the 
divisions of a speech, and is connected with his exposition of 
the importance of knowing ‘the right time’ to employ the 
devices of persuasion.* He wrote rhetorical demonstrations 
on set themes, showing that two contradictory positions can 
be defended; these were eristic rather than logical, and as 
Aristotle says, though the attempt was plausible in appearance, 
its results were false, and its technique belonged to no science, 
but only to the arts of rhetoric and disputation,® relying on 
verbal tricks, not on syllogistic proof or attention to real 
meaning.* Though in the Protagoras he is shown as one who 
claims to be able not only to make fine long speeches but also 
to give brief answers,‘ he is also shown as failing notably when 
invited by Socrates to use the question-and-answer method.His contributions to any particular branch of knowledge 
were, as might be expected, negligible. In psychology, he held 
that the soul did not exist apart from the perceptions;) and 
that as such it resided in the breast, as Empedocles thought.* 
In ethics, he held that the social virtues of reverence and justice 
were common to all human beings.! His ideal of conduct was 
the Democritean imperturbability;: he commended Pericles 
for his behaviour on the death of his two sons.™ His views on 
the gods were purely agnostic: he did not say that there were 
no gods, but merely that he could not say whether they existed 
or not, or what they were like."

His attitude to mathematics, as to the other sciences, was 
hostile and contemptuous;° in his attacks on geometers, he 
used to say that the tangent touched the circle not at a point 
but along a line.P_ This remark seems to be part of his view that 
all appearances are valid: he merely appealed to the visible

2 A27;A28;C3 > A26; A24 ©Az5;A29;A30 4 Ar §§53, 543 Azg

e Ar §52 f Ar §53; Bs; B6 & A2t h Ar §§52, 53 1 A7

i Ax §51 k Ar §51; 31Bros 1Cr m Bg

n Ba; A2z3; Ax §52; Az §2; A3; Ag; Arz © As (Protag. 318D) P By 
1 His terms for this seem to have been ev&{in, etrrotuin, aveduvin.

352 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

circle, and rejected the notion of circle as defined by the 
mathematician. The remark is therefore of no interest to 
mathematics.352 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

circle, and rejected the notion of circle as defined by the 
mathematician. The remark is therefore of no interest to 
mathematics.

The theory of knowledge put forward by Protagoras helped 
Plato to formulate his own theory of a reality beyond per- 
ception. The dialogue Prosagoras deals rather with Protagoras 
as teacher and orator, and gives a brilliantly satirical sketch of 
his personality; the myth,* and the other speeches put into 
Protagoras’ mouth are close imitations of his style, and prob- 
ably of actual passages in his writings. The passage in the 
Protagoras in which a poem of Simonides is analysed? 1s meant 
as a parody of Protagoras’ method; the similar passage in the 
First Book of the Repudlic® is probably likewise derived from 
Protagoras, and may account for some of the accusations of 
plagiarism against Plato.4 The theory of knowledge is examined 
in the Theaetetus,® and touched upon in the Cratylus;! the 
agnosticism regarding the gods is also mentioned in the 
Theaetetus. Plato frequently refers to Protagoras’ educational 
and rhetorical theories, his denial of the Law of Contradictor- 
ies,» his insistence on correctness of diction: and the study of 
the poets,) his large fees, his love of admiration, his fame. 
Gomperz* maintained that the portraits of Protagoras in the 
Protagoras and Theaetetus were not consistent: that the former 
is intended as a historical portrait, the latter only as a dramaztis 
persona, a mouthpiece of views that were Cyrenaic rather than 
Protagorean, since the dogmatism of the Protagoras ill accords 
with the phenomenalism of the Theaezezus. But this is precisely 
Plato’s complaint against Protagoras: that holding the view 
that truth cannot be discovered, he nevertheless took money 
for teaching; the greater his power to impress his hearers, 
therefore, the greater the harm he could do to the cause of 
philosophy. Both Plato and Aristotle took Protagoras seri- 
ously as a thinker, and went to the trouble of refuting his 
views at length.Traces of his influence are found elsewhere, notably in the 
Clouds, where Aristophanes brings on to the stage the Stronger 
and Weaker Causes,* and also satirizes grammatical instruc-

aCr b Protag. 339A-347A © 331E sqq. qd Bs © 166D sg. 
£ 385E & 162D h Euthydem. 286B i Phaedr. 267C; Crat. 391B, C 
J Protag. 338E k C2

1 See Ross, Aristotle’s Metaphysics, note on 998a3 (Vol. I, p. 232). 
? Greek Thinkers, I, pp. 457 599.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 353

tion." Euripides also may have felt his influence: a passage in 
the Bacchae> is thought, from its terminology, to refer to 
Protagoras’ religious agnosticism; and a passage in the 
Supplices® may echo his views on education.

8 I. XENIADES 
XENIADES of CoRINTH: date unknown.

Xeniades is mentioned by Sextus Empiricus only, who 
apparently derived his knowledge of him from Democritus. 
Xeniades took up a position of complete nihilism: everything 
is false, both appearances and opinions; everything that comes 
into being does so out of Not-Being and is dissolved again into 
Not-Being.

Sextus twice compares his position with that of Xenophanes; 
but the latter said, not that all is false, but that we cannot know 
the truth for certain, even if we find it,? thereby implying that 
truth exists; whereas Xeniades’ position seems to be taken up 
in an effort to reach the extreme of scepticism, and is of course 
self-destructive.

82. GORGIAS

Gororias of Lzontin1 was active during the latter half of the 
fifth century B.c.82. GORGIAS

Gororias of Lzontin1 was active during the latter half of the 
fifth century B.c.

Gorgias was a native of Leontini; his father’s name was 
Charmantides.* The date of his birth was not known, but he 
was no longer young when he came to Athens in 427 B.c. on 
an embassy from his native city.‘ Plato represents him as still 
active in 399 B.c.€ Other dates are mentioned in connection 
with him: he was ‘placed’ by Porphyry in the 80th Olympiad 
(460-57 B.c.) according to Suidas, who adds, ‘but he must be 
considered older than this’,s showing that he took it as the 
date of birth; it may, however, be meant as the date of Gorgias’

‘C3 b r99 sq. (C4) © 9x3 599. d 21B34; 21B35 
©®A2;A7 Ar §3 6 A&a h A2

354 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS‘C3 b r99 sq. (C4) © 9x3 599. d 21B34; 21B35 
©®A2;A7 Ar §3 6 A&a h A2

354 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

prime of life, making the date of his birth 500 B.c.; this would 
make him seventy-three years of age when he visited Athens 
on the embassy. He is said to have published his treatise 
On Nature in the 84th Olympiad* (444-41 B.c.), but this date 
is always suspect, 444 B.c. being that of the founding of Thurn, 
and a favourite year with chronologists. Gorgias’ statue was 
said to have been set up in gold at Delphi in about 420 B.c.° 
Plato implies that he was active in 399 B.c., for he makes 
Socrates mention him in the Apology as a living teacher, as well 
as Hippias and Prodicus.* Pausanias suggests that he was still 
able to rival younger men at an even later date: he mentions a 
competition between Gorgias and the rhetorician Polycrates, 
in which the former was successful, and so supplanted the 
latter in the favour of the tyrant Jason of Pherae? (who reigned 
from about 380 to 370 B.c.). Tradition credits Gorgias with a 
very long life: he is said to have lived to be over a hundred 
years old — some said, one hundred and nine —in full pos- 
session of his faculties. Isocrates, who was Gorgias’ pupil, 
corroborates the belief that he lived longer than any of the 
other Sophists.‘ It therefore seems likely that he was born soon 
after 480 B.c., and lived wellinto the fourth century. This accords 
with the testimony in the Plutarchian Lives of the Orators that 
Gorgias was a little younger than Antiphon, who was born 
during the Second Persian War® (in 480 B.c.).Little is known of his early education. He is said to have 
been a pupil of Empedocles,® whose scientific theories he sub- 
sequently taught,’ and whom he saw ‘practising magic’.! 
Gorgias’ brother Herodicus was a well-known physician,* so 
that it seems likely that they studied medicine and physical 
science together under Empedocles or one of his pupils. 
Gorgias must have been prominent in his own city to have been 
entrusted with the leadership of the embassy to Athens in 427 
B.c.;' but his great reputation in Greece Proper seems to have 
dated from his success when on that embassy.

His speech on that occasion astonished the Athenian 
Ecclesia by its unfamiliar style;™ his success was not only with 
the mob, but with the leaders, intellectual and political." He 
was opposed by the venerable Teisias, who spoke for Syracuse;

a Aro b Ay; A8 e Aga d Ay e Ar §6; Az; A7; Aro; Ar2; Ar3 
f Ar8 8A6 4 Az; A3; Aro i Bs ji A3 k A2; Aza 
1 Ay m A4 n Ar §3

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 355

but the latter, the author of one of the first text-books of 
rhetoric, was no match for Gorgias. The alliance with Leontini 
was accepted by Athens at the price of enmity with Syracuse; 
and thereafter Gorgias was in great demand both as a public 
speaker and as a teacher of rhetoric.Though he visited Athens and displayed his gifts there, his 
time seems to have been passed chiefly in Thessaly,” especially 
at Larissa, where the ruling family of the Aleuadae were patrons 
of culture.*.°: But he never settled down in any one city, pre- 
ferring to be free from all ties, public and private.4 The 
Thessalians were wealthy, since the national industry of horse- 
breeding was very profitable; and they were prepared to pay 
the high fees Gorgias demanded. Among his Thessalian 
pupils, Plato mentions Aristippus and his friend Meno.* 
Aristippus, one of the Aleuadae (not to be confused with 
Aristippus of Cyrene, the disciple of Socrates), was famed for 
his horsemanship;‘ he was a great friend of Cyrus the Younger, 
and obtained from him a force of four thousand men and six 
months’ pay for these, in order to crush a revolt in Thessaly.¢ 
When the time came for his expedition, Cyrus obtained from 
Aristippus the use of this mercenary army, and the leadership 
was given by Aristippus to Meno.

Meno, the character of Plato’s dialogue Mezo, also appears 
in Xenophon’s Anabasis. He accompanied Cyrus’ expedition, 
but after the battle of Cunaxa he behaved treacherously to- 
wards the Greeks. Xenophon® paints him as a complete 
scoundrel, and regards his miserable end as well deserved: he 
was completely lacking in principle, an adept at deceit and 
perjury. Plato’s portrait contains no such traits; the faults he 
implies in Meno are trivial, and he thought it worth while to 
make Socrates discuss Virtue with him. Meno in Plato’s dia- 
logue professes the greatest admiration for Gorgias as a teacher 
of rhetoric who made no claim to teach virtue. '

Another pupil of Gorgias was Proxenus the Boeotian, the

a Ay bAI8 ¢ Arg d Arg e Arg f Athen. XII, 534B

& Xen. Anab, I, i, 10 h Xen. Anab. Il, vi, 21 sgq.3 cp. Diod. XIV, 19, 27

i A2rAnother pupil of Gorgias was Proxenus the Boeotian, the

a Ay bAI8 ¢ Arg d Arg e Arg f Athen. XII, 534B

& Xen. Anab, I, i, 10 h Xen. Anab. Il, vi, 21 sgq.3 cp. Diod. XIV, 19, 27

i A2r

c1 It was they who gave Pindar his first commission: Pyth. X, for Hippocleas (or 
Hippocles) of Larissa, in 502 B.C. Plato, Meno 70A, B, (Arg), implies that their 
reputation for culture was recent: mpd tod piv .. . p” lami] te Kal TwAowTe, viv BE... 
Kal étri copi¢.

1 The inconsistency has often been discussed. See Thompson, Meno, Introduction, 
Pp. XV-xXx.

356 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

friend of Xenophon, who accompanied Cyrus’ expedition 
and was one of Tissaphernes’ victims. It was his ambition 
to shine in public life that made him engage Gorgias as 
his teacher.* He proceeded straight from these studies to 
his military command. He was a man of complete integrity, 
the very opposite of Meno, according to Xenophon; but he 
lacked the strength of character to command any but men of 
good character.?The greatest of Gorgias’ Athenian pupils was Isocrates,° 
who owed to him many of his stylistic devices; it was said that 
the figure of Gorgias looking at an astronomical globe was 
sculptured on Isocrates’ tombstone.* Gorgias knew Socrates, ° 
and was admired by Thucydides,‘ Pericles and Aspasia, 
Critias and Alcibiades; Pericles, Critias and Thucydides all 
owed something of their style to him. Agathon the dramatist 
imitated Gorgias’ diction in his iambics®: &1 as well as in his 
rhetorical style, of which Plato gives a parody in the Symposium: 
Agathon’s speech reminds Socrates so much of Gorgias that he 
fears a ‘Gorgias-head’ will appear and petrify him into silence.® 
Socrates himself is portrayed by Xenophon as mimicking 
Gorgias.! Of Socrates’ disciples, Aeschines the elder is said to 
have imitated Gorgias in the beginning of a speech perhaps 
intended for a Thessalian audience;i 3! and Apollodorus of 
Phaleron is depicted in Plato’s Symposium as making a pun in 
the Gorgian nranner.* Pupils from other cities included Polus 
of Acragas,' the respondent of Plato’s dialogue Gorgias, who 
is ridiculed also in the Phaedrus™ for using certain technical 
terms for figures of speech; and Alcidamas of Elaea," whose 
pompous style and excessive use of poetical diction is criticized 
_by Aristotle, and whose Essay on Death was admired by 
Cicero.? Alcidamas is said to have taken over Gorgias’ school, 
presumably at Athens, where he (Alcidamas) was in residence 
from 432 to 411 B.C.

But Gorgias’ success aroused envy also; he was attacked by

aAs b Xen. Anad, Il, vi, 17 59g. © Ar2; A16; A32 d Ar7 
€ Plat. Meno 71C; and Gorgias. f 84A9 & Ar §3; A3s5 hCr 
i C2 jAz5 - <KCr 1 Az ™ 267B (80A26) n A2 
© Rhet. III, 3, 8; cp. Dion. Hal. de Isaeo 19 P Tusc. I, 48 qa A2

&1 Imitation of Gorgias’ style brought a new verb into the language: yopyidge, 
Philostr. V.S. 1, 9,3. Philostratus says that in Thessaly it was equivalent to pntopevav. 
Ep. 73 (A35).&1 Imitation of Gorgias’ style brought a new verb into the language: yopyidge, 
Philostr. V.S. 1, 9,3. Philostratus says that in Thessaly it was equivalent to pntopevav. 
Ep. 73 (A35).

j! On Thargelia, the.famous beauty of Miletus, one of whose fourteen husbands was 
Antiochus, King of All Thessaly (86B4). See below, p. 384.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 357

Socrates’ friend Chaerephon with his customary vehemence,* 
but apparently came off best in the encounter.” Antisthenes, 
who before he came under the influence of Socrates had studied 
under Gorgias, wrote an attack on the latter called Archelaus.° 
Aristophanes lampooned Gorgias and a pupil called Philip 
(otherwise unknown) in The Farmers (425 B.c.), The Wasps 
(422 B.c.) and The Birds (414 B.c.).4 There was a professional 
hostility between Gorgias and Prodicus of Ceos.¢ An accusa- 
tion was current that Gorgias among others plagiarized from 
the historian Melesagoras (or Amelesagoras) of Chalcedon;! 
probably this was derived from Thrasymachus, a rival of 
Gorgias and native of Chalcedon. Gorgias is said to have 
read Plato’s Gorgias aloud to his friends, and to have remarked, 
‘What a clever satirist Plato is!’ +

His public appearances included a demonstration in the 
Athenian theatre, when he invited the audience to ‘attack’ him 
with any questions they wished; his courage evoked great 
admiration.‘ He was invited to Delphi to give an oratorical 
display, and speaking from the altar aroused such enthusiasm 
that his statue was set up in the temple in gold;/ this was in 
about 420 B.c. Apparently he himself paid for the statue out 
of his gains; Cicero remarks that it was solid gold, not gold- 
plated.« He was also invited to Olympia, where he delivered 
an address on Hellenic unity.! At Athens he was invited on 
one occasion to deliver the funeral oration on those killed in the 
war, a great honour for a non-Athenian.Gorgias remained unmarried. A story 1s told by Plutarch 
regarding his funeral oration, that Melanthius the tragic poet, 
after hearing it, said: ‘He advises us on unity, but cannot 
preserve unity between himself, his wife and his maid.’ But 
the testimony of Isocrates must take precedence, namely that 
Gorgias never married or had children, thus avoiding a heavy 
and continuous charge on his income." He 1s said to have 
charged the highest fees,°. °!and he too made vast sums of money

a Plat. Apol. 20E sqq. b Aza; cp. Plat. Gorg. 447A 599. ¢A33 dAca

© Az4; 80A26 fA33 & A30; A323; Bra; 85Ar2 h Arisa i Ara

JAr§4 kKAy;A8 1Ar§4;A7 ™B8a 2Ar8 © A2; Ad §2; 80A5

h! W. H. Thompson, Gorgias, Introd. p. xvi, suggests that this applies rather to the 
second portion, the portrait of Polus, than to that of Gorgias. But the point of the 
story is Gorgias’ equable temper and generosity to a critic. - :

©1 :90 minae is the figure mentioned, as for Protagoras; but this is unlikely. See

above, p. 345, note.

368 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

— more, Isocrates says, than anyone he remembers; but in 
spite of this, and in spite of his freedom from commitments, he 
left only a comparatively small fortune.* After a long life of 
travel and professional activity, and an old age free from the 
usual disabilities, he died aged over a hundred years. His 
statue was erected at Olympia by his great-nephew ag 
the grandson of his sister:> this 1s another proof that he left no 
direct descendants. The inscription belonging to this statue 
was discovered at Olympia in 1876, and shows that Eumolpus 
had been one of Gorgias’ pupils; it adds to the dedication a 
defence of Gorgias for having put up his own statue at Delphi, 
saying that the statue was the reward of virtue, not a display of 
wealth.°Writings. Gorgias is credited with one of the earliest text- 
books of Rhetoric;4 this seems to have owed something to 
Teisias.©. The Handbook, however, does not seem to have 
contained a scientific exposition of the rules of the art; Aristotle 
complains that all those who professed to give a rhetorical 
education taught not by rules but by making their pupils 
memorize speeches.‘ Dionysius says that Gorgias nowhere 
explains the rules of ‘right time’, any more than the rest of the 
writers on rhetoric: he first attempted the subject, but said 
little worth mentioning. The book, like that of Teisias, dealt 
with the important subject of Probability,» and doubtless con- 
tained various practical hints for dealing with opponents. }

He also wrote a treatise On Being, or On Nature, a long 
extract from which is preserved by Sextus.i This is sometimes 
said to have been an early work, published around 444 B.c.* 
It is Gorgias’ sole claim to be considered a philosopher. His 
epideictic speeches included the Pythian oration, of which 
nothing 1s preserved;! the Olympian oration, from which a few 
sentences survive,™ and the main theme of which is described 
by Philostratus;" the Athenian Funeral Oration, also described 
by Philostratus,° of which a short continuous passage survives,? 
as well as a few isolated phrases; and possibly the Excomium to

the Lfeats,* which seems to have been written for public

delivery, doubtless at Olympia. There survive also large frag- 
. AT ¢ AB dA

3 
3 b8oA26 iBr2 iB, “kB2 Bg © By; BS; B8a 
meee C At $5 P B6 a Bsa; Bsb -

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 359

ments of two of his speeches written as exercises, probably as 
models for pupils, the Excomium on Helen* and the Defence of 
Palamedes.» Dionysius of Halicarnassus, writing in the first 
century B.c., says that he has come across no forensic speeches 
of Gorgias, and only a few political speeches and exercises, the 
the majority being epideictic.¢The essay On Being. The long extract’ from the essay Ox 
Being (or On Nature) is Gorgias’ only known incursion into 
philosophy. The divisions of the argument are as follows:

I. Nothing exists. 
a. Not-Being does not exist. 
b. Being does not exist. 
i. as everlasting. 
11, as created. 
111, as both. 
iv. as One. 
v. as Many. 
c. A mixture of Being and Not-Being does not exist.

II. If anything exists, it is incomprehensible. 
III. If it 1s comprehensible, it is incommunicable.

I. Under the first heading, that Nothing Exists, he argues as 
follows: if anything exists, 1t must be either Being or Not- 
Being, or both Being and Not-Being; then he disproves these 
three propositions in turn, in the Eleatic manner.

a. It cannot be Not-Being, for Not-Being does not exist; if it 
did, it would be at the same time Being and Not-Being, which 
1s impossible.

5, It cannot be Being, for Being does not exist. Under this 
subdivision is another triple subdivision: if Being exists, it 
must be either everlasting, or created, or both; and he disproves 
these three propositions :

i. It cannot be everlasting ; if it were, it would have no begin- 
ning, and therefore would be boundless; if it is boundless, 
then it has no position, for if it had position it would be con- 
tained in something, and so would be no longer boundless; for

that which contains is greater than that which is contained,

and nothing is greater than the boundless. It cannot be con-

tained by itself, for then the thing containing and the thin 
a Bri b Bria c B6 d B3

360 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

contained would be the same, and Being would become two 
things — both position and body — which is absurd. Hence if 
Being is everlasting, it is boundless; if boundless, it has no 
position (‘is nowhere’); if without position, it does not exist.

ii. Similarly, Being cannot be created; if it were, it must 
come from something, either Being or Not-Being, both of 
which are impossible.ii. Similarly, Being cannot be created; if it were, it must 
come from something, either Being or Not-Being, both of 
which are impossible.

iii, Similarly, Being cannot be both everlasting and created, 
since they are opposite. Therefore Being does not exist.

He adds the further proof that if Being existed it would 
have to be either One or Many.

iv. It cannot be One, because if it exists it has size, and is 
therefore infinitely divisible; at least it is three-fold, having 
length, breadth and depth.

v. Itcannot be Many, because the Many is made up of an 
addition of Ones, so that since the One does not exist, the 
Many do not exist either.

c. Lastly, a mixture of Being and Not-Being is impossible. 
Therefore since Being does not exist, nothing exists; and the 
first proposition 1s proved.

II. The second proposition, that if anything exists it can- 
not be comprehended by Man, is dealt with in a different way. 
Hé states that if the concepts of the mind are not realities, 
reality cannot be thought: if the thing thought is white, then 
white is thought about; if the thing thought is non-existent, 
then non-existence is thought about; this is equivalent to say- 
ing that ‘existence, reality, 1s not thought about, cannot be 
thought’. Many things thought about are not realities: we 
can conceive of a chariot running on the sea, or a winged man. 
Also, since things seen are the objects of sight, and things 
heard are the objects of hearing, and we accept as real things 
seen without their also being heard, and vice versa; so we would 
have to accept things thought without their being seen or 
heard; but this would mean believing in things like the chariot 
racing on the sea. Therefore reality is not the object of thought, 
and cannot be comprehended by it. Pure mind, as opposed to 
sense-perception, or even as an equally valid criterion, isa myth.III. The third proposition is that if anything is comprehen- 
sible, it is incommunicable. The things which exist are per-

ceptibles; the objects of sight are apprehended by sight, the

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 361

objects of hearing by hearing, and there is no interchange; so 
that these sense-perceptions cannot ‘communicate with one 
another. Further, that with which we communicate is speech, 
and speech is not the same thing as the things which exist, 
the perceptibles; so that we communicate not the things which 
exist, but only speech; just as that which is seen cannot be- 
come that which is heard, so our speech cannot be equated 
with that which exists, since it is outside us. Further, speech is 
composed from the percepts which we receive from without, 
that 1s, from perceptibles; so that it is not speech which com- 
municates perceptibles, but perceptibles which create speech. 
Further, speech can never exactly represent perceptibles, since 
it is different from them, and perceptibles are apprehended 
each by the one kind of organ, speech by another. Hence, 
since the objects of sight cannot be presented to any organ but 
sight, and the different sense-organs cannot give their informa- 
tion to one another, similarly speech cannot give any informa- 
tion about perceptibles. Therefore if anything exists and is 
comprehended, it is incommunicable.An epitome and criticism of this thesis was also given by the 
Peripatetic writer of the treatise On Melissus, Xenophanes and 
Gorgias. Whether it was meant as a serious contribution to 
philosophy, or whether it was a rhetorical exercise, in the Eleatic 
manner, may be doubted. Some? have thought that it had a 
serious purpose: that it was modelled on Zeno’s defence of 
Parmenides, and was an attack on the Eleatics by means of 
their own weapons, in defence of Gorgias’ teacher Empedocles. 
It seems doubtful, however, whether Gorgias was concerned to 
defend anybody. Zeno took the proposition of the opponents 
of Parmenides, that the Many exists, and showed that contra- 
dictory conclusions follow; but Gorgias’ thesis does not pursue 
the analogous method, which would have been to take the 
proposition that the One only exists, show the contradictory 
conclusions that follow, and so support Empedocles’ pluralism. * 
He undertakes to prove not only that Being does not exist, but 
also that Not-Being does not exist; and his demonstration that 
the senses cannot intercommunicate is anti-Empedoclean, for 
Empedocles said that the senses should be used as a check on

1 £.g. Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, Vol. I, pp. 487 599. 
2Cp. Enc. Hel. 21: tBouryonvy ypa&yat tov Adyov ‘Edtvns uiv tykcuiov, epdov 58 
Tralyviov.

362 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS1 £.g. Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, Vol. I, pp. 487 599. 
2Cp. Enc. Hel. 21: tBouryonvy ypa&yat tov Adyov ‘Edtvns uiv tykcuiov, epdov 58 
Tralyviov.

362 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

one another.* Gorgias appears rather to be making away with 
every hypothesis that could suggest itself to a philosopher; 
and it is possible that in writing this treatise he had no more 
serious purpose than in writing his other exercises, namely to 
show that he could write in any style he chose. It is notable 
that Plato nowhere refers to Gorgias’ nihilist views, though he 
devoted seriousattention to those of Protagoras; he treats Gorgias 
throughout as a rhetorician, not as a philosopher. Aristotle, 
however, took Gorgias’ views more seriously, and wrote a mono- 
graph (not extant) against them;> and it was by the Peripatetic 
school that the treatise On Being was preserved. Isocrates men- 
tions Gorgias as having the hardihood to declare that nothing 
exists, as opposed to the Eleatics, Parmenides and Melissus.°

Sextus speaks of the essay On Being and On Nature as one; 
but it is possible that the latter was a separate work on physical 
science. If so, it may have been here that Gorgias expressed 
the views, derived from Empedocles, on colour, which Plato 
mentions in the Meno.?Other works. The Olympian oration, as Philostratus says, 
dealt with the greatest of political themes: Gorgias preached 
the unity of Hellas, and the need for a concerted attack on the 
barbarians, that 1s, Persia. The prizes of war were to be, not 
each other’s cities, but the territory of the barbarians. The 
speech began with praise of the organizers of the festival.‘ In 
support of the argument he declared that the projected struggle 
required two virtues, courage and wisdom: courage to resist 
danger, wisdom to ‘read the riddle’.- =! The Funeral Oration 
at Athens, however, contained nothing about Hellenic unity, 
since he was speaking to Athenians, who desired empire; but 
it stressed their past glories in the victories of the Persian 
Wars.» A passage in praise of the dead is preserved; it is full 
of Gorgian antitheses.' The influence of Gorgias’ panhellen- 
ism on Isocrates is obvious.

The genuineness of the Excomium on Helen was at one time

«. V, 253; B43 ¢ Br dq By © Ar \&4

i By & BS h Ax §5; Bsb i B6 
8! Clem. Strom. I, 51. MS. alviyua. Diels emend. mAlyya: ‘to recognize the right 
way to tackle the situation.’ In 85A4, which he guotes for comparison, katamAyhoet 18

also an emendation (Aristoph. Frg. 198; xe Oxford Texted. Hall and Geldart), though 
the noun and verb are found elsewhere. Liddell and Scott (1940 edn.) 5.0. 1

copa and -

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 363also an emendation (Aristoph. Frg. 198; xe Oxford Texted. Hall and Geldart), though 
the noun and verb are found elsewhere. Liddell and Scott (1940 edn.) 5.0. 1

copa and -

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 363

doubted because of the existence of Isocrates’ exercise on the 
same theme,* in which both Gorgias and Protagoras are men- 
tioned ;” it is now generally accepted as the work of Gorgias. 
An attempt has been made to date it by comparison with the 
Troades and Helen of Euripides: one writer* has placed it be- 
tween the two plays, in 414 B.c.; others* consider that it pre- 
cedes the Troades also; so that no certain date has been arrived 
at. The Excomium is, as Isocrates says, a defence, not a eulogy.° 
It contains an encomium on Speech as the strongest means of 
compulsion — by persuasion — ‘which achieves the most 
divine results by means of the smallest and least visible sub- 
stance’,4 as if speech were a very subtle material force passing 
from the persuader to the persuaded, something like Empe- 
docles’ Love and Hate. The importance of praising and cen- 
suring the right things is emphasized.°

The Defence of Palamedes is more in the style of a forensic 
oration; it has striking resemblances to Plato’s Apology; for 
example, the warning to the imaginary jury that they will bring 
dishonour on themselves by condemning an innocent man.! 
The panhellenic point of view is prominent throughout; and 
there is a portrait of Palamedes as the well-disposed citizen.® 
The loss of ‘credit’ is said to be greater than the loss of money 
or country." An imitation of the phraseology of the Law of 
Contradiction appears, showing that Gorgias was interested in 
the logical studies of the day.’ i!None of his political speeches survives. A reference to 
Cimoni may have occurred in the Funeral Oration, being prob- 
ably part of the eulogy of the Athenian glory in the Persian 
Wars. No forensic speeches were known; but the Helen and 
the Palamedes, especially the latter, were forensic in tone, and 
we hear of a pupil called Philip who was defeated in the 
Athenian jury-court.* Gorgias appears, however, to have had 
a low opinion of forensic oratory, comparing the speakers to 
frogs because they ‘talk to the water-clock’.! :

b 1b. §3 ©X. §&r4 ABrr §8; A26 e Brix §1; cp. 
_363 ep. Apol. 30C &Bria §31 h Bria §21 
jBzo kAga 1 B30 
i! xaltor més xpi) dvBpl To1ovTe MoTevev, SoTIs TOV awToV Adyov Atywv TIpes TOUS auTOUS 
avdpas mpl t&v avrév ta evavtucbtata Ayes; cp. Plato, Republ. 436E, where the Law of 
Contradiction is stated. 
1 Preuss, de Eur. Hel., Leipzig, 191t. 
2 E.g. Pohlenz, Nachr. @. Gott. Ges. d.W., 1920, p. 166.

364 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS364 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Gorgias’ chief interest was in epideictic oratory: he was 
regarded by many as the father of this art, just as Aeschylus 
was the father of tragedy; that is, although he had predecessors 
such as Corax and Teisias of Syracuse, and others still earlier, 
his many contributions to the rhetorical technique entitled him 
to be regarded as its real founder,* or at least as one who 
resuscitated it when it had been neglected and forgotten in 
Greece Proper.» He himself had a great gift of impromptu 
oratory,° as well as an original style and poetical vocabulary ;¢ 
he believed that he could teach much of this art to others.° His 
own gift included a readiness of wit which emboldened him to 
offer himself to the crowd for questioning; he claimed to be 
able to answer any question. This power also, namely the 
ability to answer questions with confidence and dignity, he 
professed to be able to teach." But in his view, the great impor- 
tance of Rhetoric lay in its power to persuade: it was the 
‘artificer of persuasion’, and its whole authority was exercised 
by means of words.i Words are its only concern, persuasion 
is its only goal.* The orator can speak best on all subjects.* 
He will of course generally use his power for good, as when 
Gorgias, visiting the sick in company with his brother and 
other doctors, often succeeded, where they had failed, in per- 
suading the patient to submit to a painful operation.' But the 
orator can ‘make big look small and small big’ by the power of 
speech,™ and it is his function to be able to glorify something 
by praise and attack it again by vituperation." This art was to 
be learnt by practice, and Gorgias composed his eulogies and 
denunciations as examples for the guidance of his pupils.® °1 
He claimed, like Protagoras, to bé able to say a thing in the 
fewest possible words, and also to beable to talk at any length ;P 
this drew on him the censure of Prodicus, who said that there 
was only one length for a speech — the right one.9A large number of technical terms are given for figures of 
speech which he introduced or popularized. One of his rules 
was ‘the grand manner for the grand theme’; this to him meant 
poetical diction and astyle ornamented with constant antitheses, 
assonance, analogy, apostrophe, allegory, hypallage, exact

d A2g © A2r f Ata 
j A2yz k A26 1 A22 
| 80A.26 n A25 ° A2s5 P A2o0 q 80A26 r Ar §2

©! Communes loci. See above, p. 347.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 365

verbal balance of clauses, similar endings, repetition, meta- 
phor, puns.* His technique was intended to shock and sur- 
prise; hence the importance of approach, ‘attack’, paradox, 
employment of detached phrases, transposition.» >: His 
diction was at times not far removed from dithyramb. He also 
taught breathing, and the declamation of a whole sentence in a 
single breath.* ©These novel tactics astonished the Athenians, accustomed as 
they were to the more austere style of Attic oratory. At first 
his gifts won him success and boundless admiration, and he 
influenced all, from highest to lowest. Gradually, however, as 
their novelty wore off, his tricks of speech came to be regarded 
as tiresome and absurd (Diodorus),? vulgar and overloaded 
(Dionysius),4 appealing only to the uneducated (Aristotle),° or 
to boys (Dionysius, Athanasius).‘ His metaphors in particular 
came to be ridiculed. In his Funeral Oration he had called 
vultures ‘living tombs’, ‘and referred to Xerxes as ‘the Persian 
Zeus’. He addressed a swallow as ‘shocking Philomel!’* He 
described public affairs as ‘pallid, tremulous and anaemic’. ' 
His unusual compounds were censured by Aristotle,j though 
the latter sometimes implies that his methods were effective — 
his direct openings,* and his manner of varying the eulogistic 
passages of his epideictic orations.! His chief fault was his lack 
of restraint in the use of all these figures of speech ;™ he had no 
sense of what was fitting to the occasion." This is exemplified 
in all the extant remains of his compositions, especially in the 
Athenian Funeral Oration.°

His method of teaching rhetoric by making pupils memorize 
speeches was censured by Aristotle as speedy but unscientific: 
it was as if a teacher of shoemaking gave the pupil a large 
number of shoes instead of instructing him in the technique.? 
Aristotle preserves a useful hint given by Gorgias on how to 
control audiences: “The seriousness of one’s opponents must 
be quelled by laughter, their laughter by seriousness.’? Plato's 
complaint against him, as against the other orators, that they

a A2; A3; Arg; A30; A313 A32; A35; Bsa; B6; C1; 84A9g > Ar §2; A2;.

c Ar §2 d Ay e A29 f A323; Bsa & Bsa hA23 i Br6

jArs  k Bro 1Bry7 =™A32 «1 Bsa;B6 °B6 PB 9 @ Bra

b! tpooPoAn, Spur, TapabofoAoyla, dméctacis, UTrépPaots.c Ar §2 d Ay e A29 f A323; Bsa & Bsa hA23 i Br6

jArs  k Bro 1Bry7 =™A32 «1 Bsa;B6 °B6 PB 9 @ Bra

b! tpooPoAn, Spur, TapabofoAoyla, dméctacis, UTrépPaots.

¢! Liddell and Scott (1940) s.v. tveUpc.

1 Balance of clauses: waplowois (Tépioa); cp. lodkwAa. (Az; A4); one of his favourite 
devices. The pun is called toa Aye in Symp. 185C.

366 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

cared nothing for truth but only for appearance, and that they 
had no real subject to teach, 1s expressed 1n the Gorgias, where 
Rhetoric is called an art of flattery, akin to cookery, when the 
cook has no knowledge of the value of food, but cares only to 
serve it up in a form pleasing to the appetite.* As in the 
Protagoras, the Gorgias contains many parodies of the style of 
Gorgias and his pupils.‘ In spite of the supposed disclaimer 
of Gorgias recorded by Athenaeus,® the opinions on Rhetoric 
attributed to him by Plato are probably genuine. The praise 
of philosophy attributed to him in a collection of sayings® can 
hardly be genuine; neither can the view given as his in a 
Graeco-Syrian collection, that ‘the beauty of what is hidden 
cannot be expressed in words’.¢ Gorgias’ belief in the sur- 
passing power of words is expressed by himself in the Encomium 
on Helen,* which fully bears out Plato’s representation of his 
views. !The only scientific theories attributed to him are entirely 
derivative. He taught the Empedoclean theory of colour, that 
it was a kind of effluence from shapes, fitting the paths of sight, 
and so perceptible.? Socrates in the Mezo stigmatizes this as a 
‘high-flown answer’,® though he himself treated the question of 
colour on the same lines in the Theaetetus and the Timaeus.' 
Gorgias seems to have contributed nothing to the theory, un- 
less perhaps he applied it to the explanation of the power of a 
bright surface, such as glass or metal, to reflect heat rays and 
cause combustion ;/ but probably this too is derivative, being a 
record of one of Empedocles’ experiments. These views may 
have been found in an early treatise on physical science writte 
when he was still under the influence of his teacher, and before 
he had given himself up to oratory. One writer attributes to 
him Anaxagoras’ theory that the sun is a molten mass;* this 
would imply a continued interest in physical science, and a 
knowledge of Athenian thought before his visit there; for 
Anaxagoras was exiled from Athens between 450 and 430 B.c. 
But the lateness of the authority (Sopater, in the fifth century 
A.D.) forbids any attempt to draw conclusions from this state- 
ment; the attribution 1s more probably mistaken. A metaphysi-

® Gorg. 462D sqq. b soge ©B29 B28 © Brr §8 £ Gorg. 452D 
& Bs h 153D; 156B-E i4gsD i Bs k B31 
1 E.g. the encomiastic (448C). This short passage is full of Gorgian tropes: & té&v

Eutteipidsv eptrelpws, AAO: GAAwy GAAws; and éyrreipia piv ydp trout Tov aldva tpdv 
Topeveo@ar KaTd& téxvny, creipla 68 Kare Ty nv.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 367

cal statement attributed to him, that Being is invisible because 
it does not succeed in appearing, and appearance is feeble be- 
cause it does not attain to Being,* cannot be reconciled with the 
nihilism of his essay on Being, and if genuine, must have come 
from another work.He was not greatly interested in ethics. His pupil Meno is 
represented by Plato as saying that one of the reasons for his 
admiration of Gorgias is that Gorgias never professed to teach 
virtue, and laughed at others who did; he claimed only to make 
his pupils skilled speakers.» Meno therefore refuses to say 
what Gorgias thought virtue was;° and he himself, when 
asked for a definition, gives a list of the various virtues, those 
of a man, a woman, aslave, a child.4 This is of course criticized 
by Socrates; but Aristotle prefers Gorgias’ enumeration of the 
virtues to Socrates’ general definition.® Gorgias’ ideal of 
virtue for a man can be found in his own words in the Defence of 
Palamedes;! of women, he said that a woman’s reputation, not 
her looks, should be well-known. He appears to have set a 
high value on friendship: Plutarch reproves him for saying 
that it is justifiable to do wrong in the endeavour to help a 
friend.» He attributed his great age and unimpaired faculties 
to his moderation.

His fondness for poetical diction suggests a love of the poets. 
He is reported to have called Tragedy a form of deception in 
which the deceiver is more honourable than the deceived, and 
the deceived wiser than the non-deceived, the former because 
he makes a promise and fulfils it, the latter because he grasps 
the unperceived more easily through the enjoyment of words. ! 
Nothing is left of any literary criticism except a remark on 
Aeschylus’ Seven Against Thebes, that it is ‘full of Ares’;* this 
was quoted by Aristophanes in the Frogs.! He is also said to 
have traced Homer’s descent not from Orpheus but from 
Musaeus.™

&@ B26 b Aart c¢ By d Brg e Br8 f Bria §32 
& B22 h Bar i Arr; A1r2; Ar3 j B23 
k B24 1 ro21 m Bas

368 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

83. LYCOPHRON

Lycopuron ‘the Sophist’: birthplace unknown; lived probably 
in the first half of the fourth century B.c.368 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

83. LYCOPHRON

Lycopuron ‘the Sophist’: birthplace unknown; lived probably 
in the first half of the fourth century B.c.

Lycophron is mentioned several times by Aristotle; his 
nationality and exact date are unknown, but it is clear from 
Aristotle’s references to him in the Rhetoric that he was, like 
Alcidamas, a Sophist of the school of Gorgias. He was also 
interested in metaphysics, physical science and politics. . He is 
sometimes called ‘the Sophist’ by Aristotle (and by Aristotle’s 
editor Alexander of Aphrodisias) doubtless to distinguish him 
from Lycophron of Pherae.?

In metaphysics, he was interested in the question of unity, 
and the relationship between matter and form: Aristotle 
mentions Plato’s term ‘participation’, and says that others, 
including Lycophron, call it ‘association’,* and define know- 
ledge as ‘the association between the act of knowing and the 
soul’. The same argument applies to this, Aristotle says, as to 
the definition of life as the ‘synthesis’ or ‘connexion’ between 
body and soul: soul and body are essentially a unity, and so too 
are matter and form, so that it is absurd to search for terms 
describing the relationship between them.*? The commentator 
Alexander defends Lycophron’s definition, saying that if he 
had been asked what was the cause of the unity between know- 
ledge and the soul, Lycophron would have said ‘their associa- 
tion’.®

Lycophron’s attempt to solve the metaphysical question 
raised by predication was equally superficial. The problem, 
raised by the Eleatics and Heracleitus, and stated by Plato in 
the Sophist,* was whether the application of epithets to a subject 
makes that subject no longer a unity but a conglomeration of

ay ba © 251Bay ba © 251B

1 Lycophron of Pherae was the son of Jason and brother of Thebe, wife of Alex- 
ander tyrant of Pherae; he murdered Alexander with the help of his sister and two 
brothers Tisiphonus and Peitholaus. Lycophron and Peitholaus surrendered to Philip of 
Macedon in 352 8.c. Lycophron of Pherae and Lycophron the Sophist were confused by 
earlier editors, as they are both mentioned in Aristot. Rhetoric III, Lycophron the 
Sophist in 1405b and 1406a, Lycophron of Pherae in 1410a. The mistake persists in 
Ross, Aristotle’s Metaphysics, 1045b10, note ad loc. (Vol. II, p. 239).

2 cuvovola instead of pébeEts. 
> Ross, Aristot. Met. 1045b12-16 note (Vol. II, p. 239)

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 369

many things: does ‘the man is white, tall, good’, and so forth, 
make the unity, man, into a plurality, whiteness, tallness, good- 
ness and the rest? Lycophron and others thought to have 
solved the difficulty by getting rid of the verb ‘is’, and sub- 
stituting the perfect passive of the verb ‘to whiten’, and so on.*#!

In the Politics, Aristotle attacks his view that the law is 
merely a covenant, a ‘guarantee of mutual justice’ between men, 
instead of being, as it ought to be, a means of making the citi- 
zens good and just. Unless the State regards its laws as an 
educational force, it is merely an alliance of individuals, and the 
only difference between different States will be their locality. 
The likeness between the views of Lycophron and those put 
forward by Glaucon in the Repud/ic,” that law is a social com- 
pact ‘not to harm or be harmed’, is obvious. A more original 
point of view is attributed to Lycophron on the subject of high 
birth: contrasting it with other good things, he said, ‘Its beauty 
is uncertain; its dignity a matter of words’, that is, its high 
position is based only on opinion, whereas in reality the low- 
born are no different from the high-born.°In rhetoric, he is grouped with Gorgias and Alcidamas. He 
provides examples of frigid diction: compound words, as in 
‘the varying-featured heaven of the mighty-peaked earth’, and 
‘the narrow-channelled shore’;4 and strange or obsolete 
epithets such as “Xerxes, monstrous man’, and ‘Sciron the 
ravager’.°

He also followed the plan of Gorgias when writing eulogies, 
of avoiding monotony by extending the praise to subjects other 
than that laid down: for instance, when asked to speak in praise 
of the lyre, he passed rapidly from the instrument to the constella- 
tion called the Lyre, 4nd so succeeded in improvising a long 
and eloquent oration.‘ Aristotle commends this device, as 
taught by Gorgias and employed by Isocrates.¢ Elsewhere 
Aristotle gives a better example of the usefulness of the device 
when the subject is difficult: a speaker asked to praise the dog 
(held in low esteem in Greece) would include in his eulogy the 
constellation (Seirius) or Pan, who, as Pindar says, was called

‘the hound of the Great Goddess’ by all the Olymptans.®

a2 b 359A ¢ 4; Plut. de Nobil. 18 d 5; cp. 82Brs5 © 5; cp. 82Bsa 
f 6; Aristot. Top. 174b32; cp. 82Br7 & Aristot. Ret. 1418a29 59g.

bh Aristot. Rhet. 1401a15; Pindar, Frg. 96

41 AcAevKwTar instead of Asuxds tor.

BB

370 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

84. PRODICUS 
Propicus of Czos lived in the latter half of the fifth century B.c.

The dates of Prodicus’ life are nowhere given; he is depicted 
as famous and sought after in Plato’s Protagoras, the dramatic 
date of which is probably about 432 B.c.1 He is mentioned in 
the Clouds* (423 B.c.) and the Birds” (414 B.c.), and he was still 
active in 399 B.c. when Socrates was put to death.*° The sug- 
gestion in Suidas and others that Prodicus also was put to death 
for corrupting the youth is due to a confusion with 'Socrates, 
and the alleged law of Ceos commanding those over sixty years 
old to drink hemlock.*He was a native of the town of Joulis in Ceos, and came fre- 
quently to Athens on public business as a delegate from Ceos.¢ 
Plato in the Hippias Maior mentions an occasion on which 
‘Prodicus addressed the Boulé and made a very favourable 
impression; he also gave private displays of oratory, and 
attaching to himself the young and wealthy as pupils, made 
large sums of money.® Like Gorgias and Hippias, he travelled 
from city to city in the exercise of this profession; when at 
Athens, he was, like the other Sophists, entertained at the 
houses of the wealthiest men, such as Callias, who was eager to 
learn from him and willing to pay. Socrates himself paid to 
hear Prodicus,® though he could afford only the one-drachma 
course; the full course in terminology cost fifty drachmas, and 
this was the one most sought after. His charges however seem 
moderate compared with the fee of one hundred minas said to 
have been asked by Protagoras and Gorgias.* Socrates also 
used to send to Prodicus any young men*for whom he felt that 
he himself could do nothing. :

Among those listening to Prodicus at Callias’ house were 
Agathon and Pausanias.i Other pupils of his were said to have 
been Euripides,* Isocrates,' Theramenes,™ Thrasymachus.* 
There was a tradition (preserved by Philostratus) that he 
taught Xenophon; but this 1s based on a story that Xenophon 
was once a prisoner of war in Boeotia: in his desire to hear

@ 360 (As) b 690-2 CAs; Ar 4A3 e A3 fA2;Bgo 8 Aga 
bh Arr; A18 i Aja j A2 k A8 1A’ m A6 2 Aab © Ara 
1 See above, pp. 343-44.

2 See below, p. 374. 
3 See above, p. 345, note

THE OLDER SOPHISTS R71@ 360 (As) b 690-2 CAs; Ar 4A3 e A3 fA2;Bgo 8 Aga 
bh Arr; A18 i Aja j A2 k A8 1A’ m A6 2 Aab © Ara 
1 See above, pp. 343-44.

2 See below, p. 374. 
3 See above, p. 345, note

THE OLDER SOPHISTS R71

Prodicus, he obtained his release on parole by giving a security 
for his person. Nothing is known of this imprisonment; it is 
probably connected with the chronologically impossible story 
that Xenophon fought at Delium in 424 B.c.,1 and is therefore 
to be rejected. It is however both possible and likely that 
Xenophon heard Prodicus at Athens at some time. The story 
of Xenophon’s imprisonment in Boeotia is probably part of 
another version of the story that Socrates saved him in that 
battle; and his supposed eagerness to hear Prodicus is based on 
the fact that he preserved a long extract from one of Prodicus’ 
works.

Plato’s portrait of Prodicus in the Protagoras, still in bed when 
the others are walking in the colonnade, and wrapped up in 
many coverlets,* gave rise to a tradition that he was pleasure- 
loving ;> just as Plato’s mention of his deep voice reverberating 
through the emptied store-room of Callias’ house, and the 
difficulty that Socrates, standing outside, had in hearing this 
‘man of divine inspiration and universal wisdom’,* was later 
interpreted to mean that Prodicus as a public speaker was 
difficult to hear.°

Prodicus is most frequently mentioned by Plato, doubtless 
from personal knowledge, though he did not think it worth 
while to use him as a principal character in any dialogue. 
Almost all Plato’s references are concerned with Prodicus’ 
teaching of ‘correct terminology’. This is mentioned also by 
Aristotle. Xenophon in the Memorabilia has preserved a version 
(for which apparently he did not wish to claim verbal accuracy) * 
of one of Prodicus’ pieces written for display, the Choice of 
Heracles ;*) ++ this was also referred to by Plato in the Sympostum.°

a A2 b Ara ¢ Ara d B2 e Bra A2 b Ara ¢ Ara d B2 e Br

di! The title *Wpat given by the Scholiast on Aristophanes may be a later addition, 
as Diels suggests, like the Moca: of Herodotus. It may indicate that the Heracles- 
allegory was one of a collection.

1 If Xenophon fought at Delium, he must have been born in about 444 B.C., and 
therefore was over 40 years old when he took part in the expedition of Cyrus in 4o1 B.C. 
But he implies (Anad. VI, iv, 25) that he was not over 30, i.e. was born about 430 B.C. 
The Delium-story was that Socrates saved Xenophon in the battle (Strabo, 403; Diog. 
L. Xenophon). This is a confusion with Plato’s testimony that Socrates saved Alcibiades 
at Potidaea; and that at Delium, Socrates retreating with Laches showed the greater 
presence of mind (Sympos. 220E sqq.). Another suggestion is that Xenophon was cap- 
tured when he Boeotians took Oropus in 412 B.c. (Thuc. VIII, 60).

2 Mem. II, i, 21 (Socrates): S5é Tas Akywv, doa tyd pénwnun. This, though dramatic- 
ally appropriate to Socrates, who posed as having a bad memory (Protag. 334C), also 
excuses Xenophon from having to quote exactly.

THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

It was an exercise in speaking on a set theme, probably meant 
as a guide to pupils, es he, like Protagoras and Gorgias, also 
used this method.* Besides this he was credited with a book 
On Nature, or On the Nature of Man, containing scientific and 
medical views; it is not known whether his opinions on the 
gods were set out in this book or in a separate treatise. Aristo- 
phanes in his jokes against Prodicus treats him as a ‘meteoro- 
sophist’. Prodicus seems to have described Sophists as occupy- 
ing a half-way position between the philosopher and the 
statesman, and so combining the virtues of both.”Plato gives many examples of Prodicus’ teaching of ‘correct 
terminology’. He endeavoured, first, to distinguish between 
words in common use which were usually treated as synonyms 
or nearly so, and to give each of them a distinct and different 
meaning.®° Sometimes the distinctions drawn were justifiable 
and useful, sometimes interesting and important (as the 
distinction between ‘the fearless’ and ‘the brave’ in the 
Laches),4 sometimes of little importance,* sometimes misleading 
(as the example given by Aristotle of Prodicus’ alleged division 
of pleasures into three), when the terms used really are differ- 
ent names for the same thing. Prodicus applied this ‘craft’ to 
discussions of the poets and their exact meaning: Plato shows 
him at work on Simonides® and Hesiod. Such, according to 
Socrates, was the teaching given in the fifty-drachma course, 
which he says in the Cratylus he could not afford and so did not 
master ;‘ but elsewhere, in the Charmides, he says he has heard 
Prodicus drawing countless such distinctions between words.’ 
Prodicus was not alone in teaching this subject: Protagoras also 
taught it, and so apparently did Damon, but Prodicus was the 
best of the Sophists at this branch.*

He also applied his craft to the terminology of science: an 
example is quoted with disapproval by Galen, in which Prodi- 
cus wished to apply the term ‘phlegm’?! (generally used of the 
cold ‘humour’ of the body) to the hot humour, on the strength 
of a fancied etymology, and to provide a new term for the cold 
humour. Whether any of these attempts were more successful

@ Aro b B6 © Ar3; Ars; A16; Ar7; Ar8 7 
f Aig & Ar4 bh Ar8 i Arr j Ar8 k Ar7 1 By 
1 pAtyua was connected with gdtyew by Philolaus (44A27), and with pdeyyévn by 
Democritus (68A159), as they considered that ‘the cold humour’ was the principal

cause of fever. Whether they owed this point to Prodicus or he to them cannot be 
determined, since they were all contemporaries.cause of fever. Whether they owed this point to Prodicus or he to them cannot be 
determined, since they were all contemporaries.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 373

than the one quoted, we do not know; but it seems likely that 
Prodicus’ work had in general considerable influence, attracting 
attention to the necessity of establishing an accurate termino- 
logy in scientific discussion and writing. Plato’s references to 
Prodicus, though tinged with irony, are not wholly disparag- 
ing; and Thucydides is said to have admired his exactitude of 
diction.*

Prodicus, like Gorgias and Protagoras, also taught rhetoric 
by means of the model discourse on a set theme (communis 
focus)» He also gave general hints, though he is not credited 
with having written a text-book. He said, in opposition to 
Gorgias, that the proper length of a speech was neither very 
long nor very short, but moderate. He used, when his 
hearers were nodding, to stimulate them by throwing in some- 
thing unexpected.? His Heracles-parable, written for public 
delivery, was preserved by Xenophon from memory only, and 
Xenophon makes Socrates say that Prodicus adorned the 
speech with more magnificent diction, so that his style cannot 
be altogether judged from the extract given.* In it, Virtue 
and Vice in the form of women appear before the young Heracles 
and advocate their respective ways of life. It was said that the 
parable was in great repute at Thebes, and still more so at 
Sparta, because of its educational value for the young. !From this, it seems that his ethical position was conventional : 
he advocated a life of honourable toil rather than pleasure. 
A saying of his is recorded by Stobaeus that desire when 
doubled is love, love when doubled is madness. He 1s also 
credited with having preached that the goodness of things such 
as wealth is relative to their users; this fact, noted by Democri- 
tus, was held by the Sophists to prove that good and bad are 
themselves relative, as opposed to the theory of Plato and his 
followers that absolute good exists. i

Of his views on natural science nothing remains. Even the 
title of his book is doubtful: Cicero calls it On the Nature of 
Things,i Galen On the Nature of Man.* Aristophanes treats 
him as one who wrote on cosmology,! but the only certain 
reference, that to the term ‘phlegm’, suggests medical interests.™ 
He did, however, write on the nature of the gods: he said that

®Ag b Aro 
.f Philostr. V.S, Praef. (Diels, Vors. II, p. 309 note) & By h 68B172-3 
i Ch. go, t iB; k Ba 1 As; cp. Bro m Ba; cp. Brr

374 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS®Ag b Aro 
.f Philostr. V.S, Praef. (Diels, Vors. II, p. 309 note) & By h 68B172-3 
i Ch. go, t iB; k Ba 1 As; cp. Bro m Ba; cp. Brr

374 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

things which are useful to man, such as the heavenly bodies, 
rivers, springs, food, wine and so forth, came to be _— as 
divine; bread is called Demeter, wine Dionysus, water Poseidon, 
Fire Hephaestus; he compares this with the Egyptian worship 
of the Nile.* All man’s practice of religious rites and mysteries 
is concerned with the benefits of cultivation.» This reduction 
of divinities to natural phenomena is found also in Democritus 
(though he does not forget to account for the feeling of awe, as 
well as that of gratitude, towards the gods),* and seems to be 
derived from him, for his pupil Diagoras of Melos was the 
most prominent of the ‘atheists’ and is said to have been 
expelled from Athens in 411 8.c. for his attacks on religion and 
especially on the Eleusinian Mysteries.¢ This method was 
taken over by the Cyrenaic school; its chief exponents were 
Euhemerus and Theodorus at the end of the fourth century, 
and Persaeus the Stoic in the first half of the third century B.c.

In the dialogue Axtochus falsely attributed to Plato, Prodicus 
appears as a grasping Sophist who teaches nothing without a 
fee, and as giving an address in which he said things about life 
so derogatory that Socrates was ready to die away.* He is also 
depicted as uttering the Epicurean argument that death is not 
to be dreaded because it is the concern neither of the living nor 
of the dead.‘ It is thought that the dialogue, which 1s a mixture 
of later, especially Cyrenaic and Epicurean doctrine, attributes 
this attack on life and indifferent attitude towards death to 
Prodicus because he was a native of Ceos, where there was said 
to be a law enacting that all those over sixty years of age must 
drink hemlock.®The rivalry between Prodicus and Gorgias* has been 
already mentioned.: Nothing is known of the quarrel between 
Prodicus and Anaxagoras mentioned by Athenaeus;' some 
have emended ‘Anaxagoras’ to ‘Protagoras’ on the ground that 
Prodicus and Protagoras were both professed experts in 
correct diction, and therefore rivals; but a meeting between 
Prodicus and Anaxagoras is not impossible, and as Prodicus 
was also interested in natural science, some controversy may 
have arisen of which no record is preserved.

® cp. 73B7 §3 > Bs © 68A75; 68B30 a Bs ¢ Bo 
t Axioch. 369B; Epicurus Zp. III, 125 8 Strab. X, 486; cp. Menand. Frg.

h Azo; 80A26; 82A24- oS

1 Above, p. 357.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 375

85. THRASYMACHUS

TurasyMacuus of CHALCEDON was active in the latter half of

the fifth century B.c.

Little is known of Thrasymachus apart from his work. He 
was a native of Chalcedon, a colony of Megara. He travelled 
in the exercise of his profession, and spent much time in 
Athens and in Thessaly. He eventually returned to his native 
city, and died there: his tomb was seen some two centuries 
later by Neoptolemus of Paros, who recorded its inscription in 
his book of epitaphs.* There was a tradition, touched upon by 
Juvenal, that his death was unhappy; but nothing further is 
known of this. The Scholiast, probably guessing, says that he 
hanged himself. Nothing else is known of his life. He is 
regarded by Aristotle as the rhetorical heir to Teisias, but it 
does not follow that he was actually the pupil of Teisias.c He

‘influenced most of his contemporaries, but it is not certain 
which of them he actually taught, except Cleitophon the son of 
Aristonymus, of whom nothing is known except from Plato.¢‘influenced most of his contemporaries, but it is not certain 
which of them he actually taught, except Cleitophon the son of 
Aristonymus, of whom nothing is known except from Plato.¢

He left a large number of writings, which were still extant 
in Cicero’s day.e Chief among these was a work called the 
Great Text-book, '. f+ the title probably implying the existence ofan 
abridged edition. There wasalsoabook of Subjects for Oratory,® ©+ 
which doubtless contained examples or model speeches on set 
themes (communes loci). Among his own examples we hear of 
deliberative or public speeches,"»5* and essays written in jest, 
like the He/en of Gorgias. + Dionysius of Halicarnassus says that 
Thrasymachus left no forensic speeches; but he did not neglect 
the technique of forensic oratory, for he wrote a book of ex- 
amples of oratory designed to arouse compassion in a jury.) A 
book of Procemia is also mentioned.* There was also a collec- 
tion called Preponderances, on the analogy of Protagoras’ 
Refutations.'.11. From the passage in Plutarch in which this

a A8 bA ¢ A2;cp. Ar 4 Republ. 328B; 340B; and Cleitophon. 
¢Cic. Orat.17g .£B3;Ar 8 Ar bAr;Br iAr iBs kBs !By7 
£1 MeydAn Téxvn.

&! *Agopual dntopixal,

ht gyyBoudcutixol (Adyor); SnunyopiKkol Adyo: (probably the same).

il gotyvia, Cp. 82Brr §21.

11 *Ymepp&AAovtes (Adyor); cp. Protag. KataPdAdovtes (80Br).

374 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSht gyyBoudcutixol (Adyor); SnunyopiKkol Adyo: (probably the same).

il gotyvia, Cp. 82Brr §21.

11 *Ymepp&AAovtes (Adyor); cp. Protag. KataPdAdovtes (80Br).

374 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

things which are useful to man, such as the heavenly bodies, 
rivers, springs, food, wine and so forth, came to be — as 
divine; bread is called Demeter, wine Dionysus, water Poseidon, 
Fire Hephaestus; he compares this with the Egyptian worship 
of the Nile.* All man’s practice of religious rites and mysteries 
is concerned with the benefits of cultivation.® This reduction 
of divinities to natural phenomena is found also in Democritus 
(though he does not forget to account for the feeling of awe, as 
well as that of gratitude, towards the gods),° and seems to be 
derived from him, for his pupil Diagoras of Melos was the 
most prominent of the catheiets and is said to have been 
expelled from Athens in 411 B.c. for his attacks on religion and 
especially on the Eleusinian Mysteries. This method was 
taken over by the Cyrenaic school; its chief exponents were 
Euhemerus and Theodorus at the end of the fourth century, 
and Persaeus the Stoic in the first half of the third century B.c.

In the dialogue Axiochus falsely attributed to Plato, Prodicus 
appears as a grasping Sophist who teaches nothing without a 
fee, and as giving an address in which he said things about life 
so derogatory that Socrates was ready to die away.° He is also 
depicted as uttering the Epicurean argument that death 1s not 
to be dreaded because it is the concern neither of the living nor 
of the dead.‘ It is thought that the dialogue, which 1s a mixture 
of later, especially Cyrenaic and Epicurean doctrine, attributes 
this attack on life and indifferent attitude towards death to 
Prodicus because he was a native of Ceos, where there was said 
to be a law enacting that all those over sixty years of age must 
drink hemlock.®The rivalry between Prodicus and Gorgias* has been 
already mentioned.! Nothing is known of the quarrel between 
Prodicus and Anaxagoras mentioned by Athenaeus;' some 
have emended ‘Anaxagoras’ to ‘Protagoras’ on the ground that 
Prodicus and Protagoras were both professed experts in 
correct diction, and therefore rivals; but a meeting between 
Prodicus and Anaxagoras is not impossible, and as Prodicus 
was also interested in natural science, some controversy may 
have arisen of which no record is preserved.

® cp. 73B7 §3 > Bs © 68A75; 68B30 q Bs © Bg 
f Axtoch. 369B; Epicurus Ep. III, 125 8 Strab. X, 486; cp. Menand. Frg.

h A20; 80A26; 82A24- —

1 Above, p. 357.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS

85. THRASYMACHUS

THRasyMacuus of CHALCEDON was active in the latter half of

the fifth century B.c.

Little is known of Thrasymachus apart from his work. He 
was a native of Chalcedon, a colony of Megara. He travelled 
in the exercise of his profession, and spent much time in 
Athens and in Thessaly. He eventually returned to his native 
city, and died there: his tomb was seen some two centuries 
later by Neoptolemus of Paros, who recorded its inscription in 
his book of epitaphs.* There was a tradition, touched upon by 
Juvenal, that his death was unhappy; but nothing further is 
known of this. The Scholiast, probably guessing, says that he 
hanged himself.» Nothing else is known of his life. He is 
regarded by Aristotle as the rhetorical heir to Teisias, but it 
does not follow that he was actually the pupil of Teisias.c He 
‘influenced most of his contemporaries, but it is not certain 
which of them he actually taught, except Cleitophon the son of 
Aristonymus, of whom nothing is known except from Plato.4He left a large number of writings, which were still extant 
in Cicero’s day. Chief among these was a work called the 
Great Text-book, *:‘: the title probably implying the existence of an 
abridged edition. There wasalsoa book of Subjects for Oratory,®: ©} 
which doubtless contained examples or model speeches on set 
themes (communes loci). Among his own examples we hear of 
deliberative or public speeches,®*! and essays written in jest, 
like the He/en of Gorgias.i.#t Dionysius of Halicarnassus says that 
Thrasymachus left no forensic speeches; but he did not neglect 
the technique of forensic oratory, for he wrote a book of ex- 
amples of oratory designed to arouse compassion in a jury.) A 
book of Provemia is also mentioned.* There was also a collec- 
tion called Preponderances, on the analogy of Protagoras’ 
Refutations.':\1, From the passage in Plutarch in which this

a A8 bA? ¢ A2;cp. Ar d Republ. 328B; 340B; and Clettophon. 
© Cic. Orat.175 .£B3;Ar & Ar bAr;Br iAr iBs KBs ! By

gi s . . . .

h1 gypBoudeutixol (Adyor); SnunyopiKol Adyor (probably the same). 
il ratyvic. Cp. 82Brr §21.

11 ‘YqrepBdAAovtes (Adyo1); cp. Protag. KaroPdAdovtes (80Br).

376 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

collection is mentioned (together with the Topics of Aristotle) 
it appears that it consisted of a collection of subjects for com- 
parison, designed to show how the superiority of certain 
persons or things could be demonstrated to an audience. 
Whether any of these separate titles are not those of separate 
works but of chapters of the Great Text-book cannot usefully be 
discussed.One long example of his style is preserved by Dionysius* 
from one of his ‘public orations’; it is quoted as an example of 
style, but its subject is Athenian internal politics during the 
Peloponnesian War, and it has the air of a speech meant to be 
taken seriously, not used merely as a model by pupils. Diony- 
sius, however, says that Thrasymachus left no actual delibera- 
tive or forensic speeches, but was given up to technical 
instruction and speeches for display; and as Thrasymachus 
was not an Athenian, he could not have addressed the Ecclesia 
or the Boulé on matters of internal politics. It seems likely, 
therefore, that the speech was a model written for pupils, but 
that the sentiments it expresses were such as would be popular 
with the type of pupil who came to Thrasymachus. In this 
sense it may have been a political manifesto for the oligarchical 
party, as has been suggested; but probably not in the sense 
that it expressed Thrasymachus’ own views as a member of 
the party. This piece must have been written at some time 
before 403 B.c., when the democracy was finally restored. 
Another speech having contemporary affairs as its subject was 
called On Behalf of the People of Larissa. The theme was an 
appeal to other States, probably those of the Peloponnese, to 
ally themselves with the Thessalians against Archelaus of 
Macedonia, who reigned from 413 to 399 B.c. Only a sentence 
of Thrasymachus’ speech survives ;> but the facts were used by 
Herodes Atticus, writing in the second century a.v., in his 
oration On the Constitution, and from this the trend of Thrasy- 
machus’ speech can be gathered.The work of Thrasymachus was primarily concerned with 
the technique of Rhetoric. He is credited by Theophrastus 
with having originated the style called by Dionysius the 
‘middle diction’, half-way between the ‘austere’ and the ‘plain’, 
the chief virtue of which is that it condenses the thought and 
expresses it tersely.° This virtue is particularly necessary to

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 377THE OLDER SOPHISTS 377

forensic oratory; and although Thrasymachus did not write 
forensic speeches for actual clients, as Antiphon and Lysias did, 
he trained pupils for this as well as for the other types,* and 
greatly influenced actual practitioners. Dionysius, writing of 
his similarity to Lysias, is doubtful which influenced the other, 
and is inclined to put Lysias first;> in this he was mistaken, for 
Lysias did not enter the arena until he accused Eratosthenes 
in 403 B.c. of the judicial murder of his brother Polemarchus;: 
whereas Thrasymachus was already well known, and referred 
to by Aristophanes among the ‘advocates’, in 427 B.c.° 
Thrasymachus not only practised a pure diction; he was 
adept at the handling of period and colon,4 and he experi- 
mented inthe use of rhythm, especially the Paean (—uuu, 
UuU—), being the originator of the study of the rhythms used in 
prose, though Aristotle complains that neither he nor his suc- 
cessors defined the exact use of suchrhythms.*® °? In this Thrasy- 
machus greatly influenced Isocrates, who took up and developed 
the art practically, as Dionysius says, perfecting it so far as the 
orators are concerned; and Plato, who perfected it among the 
philosophers. It is notable that the long fragment of Thrasy- 
machus which Dionysius quotes is free from hiatus (a feature 
of Isocrates’ writing also), and contains both paeans and 
cretics (—u—), the cretic being the foot of which the paean is a 
resolution.€ His vocabulary, though it avoided the sensational, 
was also original where this could be effective; and he was 
included among the orators whose works were the subject 
of later word-books.‘ it One of his metaphors is quoted by 
Aristotle, and shows that he had a sharp tongue, as also his 
portrait in the Republic reveals. One of his anecdotes 1s quoted 
by Athenaeus, of Timocreon the poet of Rhodes in one of his 
most bellicose moods.« Thrasymachus also used the literary 
allusion: the surviving sentence of his 5 ae For the People of 
Larissa is an echo of a line from Euripides’ Telephuas.! 
Thrasymachus excelled in the art of playing upon the 
a Ax3 bA3 c Ay d Ar e Arr f Br; Ar2 
& Cic. De Orat. 183, 193; Orat.215 %A4; Artz iArg IAs KBq ! Bz 
el Aristot. Rset. 1409a2. Aristotle says that Thrasymachus and his successors ‘used 
the paean but could not say what it was’. This must mean that they could not say 
exactly what its place was in prose, not that they did not know what the actual foot was, 
which is unthinkable. 
il E.g. the Vocabulary from the works of Demosthenes, Thucydides, Isaeus,Isocrates, Thrasymachus and other orators, by Vestinus, a sophist of Ioulis in Ceos, who 
epitomized the Lexicon of Pamphilus,

378 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

feelings of the audience.* His special treatise giving examples 
of the method of arousing pity> endeavoured to reduce this 
part of forensic oratory to a science. Such methods were 
deprecated by Socrates at his trial,°.*! and satirized by Plato 
in the Phaedrus, where he expressly refers to ‘the might of the 
Chalcedonian’, which has mastered the oratory that laments old 
age and poverty.?:4: Plato legislates against such ‘improper 
entreaties and womanish lamentations’ in the Laws.° Thrasy- 
machus also gave examples of the method of arousing anger 
and then lulling it again; and of causing and settling dissen- 
sions.‘ £1 This was of value to political orators: Pericles himself 
is said to have mastered the art of checking the Athenians in 
over-confidence and heartening them in their depression.® 
The technique of stimulating the various emotions is described 
by Aristotle in the Second Book of the Rhetoric, which must 
have owed something to Thrasymachus. It was Theophrastus, 
Aristotle’s pupil, who credited Thrasymachus with having 
originated the ‘middle diction’, so that obviously Thrasy- 
machus interested the Peripatetic school.In concentrating on the effect of technique in swaying the 
emotions, Thrasymachus was led to pay special attention to the 
divisions of the speech where such effects could be used 
particularly: the introduction and the peroration. He wrote a 
set of model Prooemia;> and some have thought that the 
‘Compassion’ speeches were epilogues, since the appeal to 
pity is most frequent at the end of a speech. This supposition 
is unnecessary : the appeal to pity could occur in the body of the 
speech, and the model passages were doubtless designed for all 
possible contingencies. The book on Appeals to Compassion 
did, however, contain a few directions on the art of delivery, 
recognized as part of the technique of acting. !1 Quintilian 
says that Thrasymachus believed that delivery belonged to 
nature, not to art;) this is obviously a misreading of Aristotle, 
who immediately after mentioning Thrasymachus adds that a

@ 80B6 DBs © Apol. 35B; 38D d B6 © 949B f B6

8 Thuc. IT, 65, 9 h Bs i Bs j III, iii, 4

C! Bewe Spduara (Apol. 35B).

d! Cp. Phaedr. 272A: tswodoyla. 267C sqg. (B6) is also a parody of Thrasy- 
machus’ style.

£1 “Cause dissension’: S:aPédAew. cp. Plato, Republ. 498C: ut SidPadre, fv 8 tyes, tpt 
Kal Opacvpayov dot: glAous yeyovértas.

it Aristot. Rhet. III, i, 7 (14044): f troxpitixh; Lat. actio.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 3°79it Aristot. Rhet. III, i, 7 (14044): f troxpitixh; Lat. actio.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 3°79

talent for acting (of which delivery is a part) is natural, and not 
much dependent upon art, but that in so far as it is connected 
with speaking, it is subject to artistic rules.» Prooemia, 
whether deliberative or forensic, were concerned rather with 
creating in the hearer a frame of mind favourable to the speaker 
than with appealing to the stronger emotions; Aristotle says 
that those who lay down definite rules for the contents of 
prooemia or indeed the other parts of the speech, are going 
outside the scope of their art.» He himself defines the scope of 
the D salah both deliberative, epideictic and forensic; but 
he does not mention Thrasymachus in this connection, though 
he quotes Gorgias and others.° The long extract quoted by 
Dionysius is a prooemium:‘ it shows the speaker affecting 
unwillingness to speak, because of his youth and modesty, but 
driven to it by a serious state of affairs. The only other 
excerpt from a prooemium is the anecdote on Timocreon, 
which is comic in effect.°

Dionysius’ judgement on his technique was that he was 
clever, original and effective; able to use the style and diction 
the occasion demanded, but somewhat lacking in force.‘ 
Philostratus passes an adverse judgement on the technique of 
Thrasymachus and others like him who professed the art of 
rhetoric. But Plato, who knew Thrasymachus personally, 
does not underestimate him: he draws a powerful picture of his 
vehemence in the Republic» and speaks in the Phaedrus 
expressly of his force.i According to Aristotle, Herodicus 
(presumably Gorgias’ brother the physician) called Thrasy- 
machus ‘ever bold in fight’, as his name signified. 3As for his opinions: the most famous is his declaration in the 
Republic, that Justice is the advantage of the stronger, and his 
‘violent defence of this thesis. Plato undoubtedly means this 
portrait to be accepted as genuine, and to imply that Thrasy- 
machus was stating his own opinions. Thrasymachus, however, 
did not always maintain the same views about justice: in an un- 
specified speech quoted by Hermeias, the Christian commentator 
on Plato, he said ‘something like this: that the gods do not see 
the affairs of men, otherwise they would not have overlooked 
Justice, the greatest of the blessings possessed by man, yet one 
which we see mankind not using’.* This implies a more

a Rhet. III, i, 7 (r404a) =» Rhet. I, i, 9 (1354) © Rhet. III, xiv (1414b) sqq. 
aBr °B4 'Br; Artz €Bya 2 Aro iB6 3A6 «BB

380 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

idealistic view of justice, but as its context is not known, and 
the wording admittedly is not exact, it cannot carry much 
weight against the evidence of the Republic. In the latter 
Thrasymachus’ views are typically those of the Sophists,* who 
did not believe in absolute values; in the quotation para- 
phrased by Hermeias, the praise of justice is merely part of a 
proof that the gods are indifferent to human affairs.

That his teachings on justice were famous is clear from the 
dialogue Cleitophon,: in which Cleitophon is depicted as 
attacking Socrates on the ground that while urging men to care 
for their souls rather than their bodies, that is, pursue justice 
and not wealth, he does not explain to them what justice is and 
how they can attain it. Therefore Cleitophon will betake 
himself to Thrasymachus and others who can and will give 
this instruction. To this indictment the Repud/ic, in which 
Cleitophon again makes a brief appearance,» is a complete‘Thrasymachus was interested in politics also; but whether 
the views expressed in his speeches were his own, or those of 
the pupils for whom he catered, is uncertain. The long frag- 
ment of the speech on Athenian internal politics during the 
Peloponnesian War* purports to be spoken by a young man 
who advocates the policy of the oligarchic party, namely a 
return to the ‘ancestral constitution’,* as the only solution of 
the internal strife which 1s weakening Athens in the midst of a 
dangerous war. This constitution was called a limited demo- 
cracy, and said to be that of Solon and Cleisthenes.¢ One of 
its watchwords was ‘concord’.* In the speech On Behalf of the 
People of Larissa, the Larisseans are made to say (echoing a 
line of Euripides): ‘Shall we who are Greeks serve Archelaus 
who is a barbarian?’* thus excluding the Macedonians from

a Cp. Gorg. 483D (Callicles speaking); Laws 715A (Ihe Athenian speaking)

b 328B; 340A c By qd Isocr. VII, 16 599. e Bz

1 The genuineness of this dialogue has often been questioned, but is now generally 
accepted. It may be the beginning of a dialogue left unfinished because abandoned for 
the Republic, or it may be a statement of the case against the Socratic view of justice (as

seen by critics) which served as a prelude to the Republic. Friedlander oddly thinks

(with Dammler and others) that the First Book of the Republic is a separate dialogue,

which should be called Thrasymachus: he uses the Cleitophon as an argument in favour

of this view, saying that it links on to the First Book and j f the Republic. 
(Die Platonische Schriften, P- 50, note 1.) i ial a = 
: t) wérrpios woArtale.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 381of this view, saying that it links on to the First Book and j f the Republic. 
(Die Platonische Schriften, P- 50, note 1.) i ial a = 
: t) wérrpios woArtale.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 381

the true Hellenic race; others who advocated Hellenic unity — 
Gorgias and Isocrates — preferred to point to Persia as the 
barbarian nation. Lastly, in the Great Text-book he mentioned 
the alliance of Chios with the Athenians at the outbreak of the 
Peloponnesian War, which led the Athenians to link the 
Chians with themselves in their prayers at all public sacrifices.* 
This custom was still in vogue in 414 B.c. (when Aristophanes 
produced the Birds),»>+ in spite of the mistrust in which the 
Athenians had held the Chians for at least ten years before;° 
but in 412 B.c., when Chios led the revolt against Athens and 
suffered devastation, the practice must have been discontinued. 
Thrasymachus’ reference to this event therefore probably 
dates the Text-book considerably before 412.

Cicero groups Thrasymachus with Prodicus and Protagoras 
as having both spoken and written on natural science;‘ but 
nothing that remains supports the idea that Thrasymachus had 
any interests except the technique of rhetoric, and politics.

86. HIPPIAS

Hippias of Exis was active in the second half of the fifth 
century B.C.

Hippias was undoubtedly a native of Elis; he was sometimes 
confused with Hippias of Thasos, who lived at the same time 
and was put to death by the Thirty Tyrants;* or even, in the 
Christian era, with Hippias son of Peisistratus.f Like Prodicus, 
he is a character in Plato’s Protagoras, the dramatic date of 
which is probably about 432 B.c.;! and he is mentioned in the 
Apology, with Prodicus and Gorgias, so that he was active in 
399 8.c.6 Beyond this nothing is known of his date. He was 
much younger than Protagoras;5 and he lived to old age.’

a B3; ..t b Aristoph. Av. 878-80 ¢ Thue. IV, 51

d re ae ee XID eee f Ars es A4 unk A7 i Az &a B3; ..t b Aristoph. Av. 878-80 ¢ Thue. IV, 51

d re ae ee XID eee f Ars es A4 unk A7 i Az &

b1 — §:S6van NepeAoxoxxuyloiow vylerav Kal cwtnplav, avroto: Kal Xiorot.

U ols.

ie Seok ee at Teaayeaciiss the Great Text-book says the same as Theo- 
pompus in the Twelfth Book of his PAilppics, and quotes Theopompus (Frg. 115): 
Ol S& TOAAO! TOU Tatra mpérrev érrelXov, Kal Trepl éxelveov Kal opdv avrév ttroictvto, Kal 
omivSovtes etl tats Gvoins tals SnpoteAtciv noyovto Tols Gols Xlois SiSéver té&vabc Kal

» aurols. @ 
' See above, pp. 343-4

382 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

His teacher, called Hegesidamus by Suidas,* is otherwise 
unknown. His widowed daughter (some said wife) married 
Isocrates. His third son, Aphareus, became a tragic poet, 
active in the middle of the fourth century.Most of the data concerning Hippias are derived from 
Plato’s dialogues, especially the Hippias Maior; this is closely 
followed by Philostratus.c Hippias was a native of Elis, and 
therefore was naturally active at Olympia;* like Prodicus, 
he was frequently sent on embassies for his native city, visiting 
Athens, Sicily,* and above all Sparta, where he was particu- 
larly popular.‘ At Athens he was received as an honoured 
guest at the house of the wealthy Callias; Plato depicts him 
with his own group of admirers, including Eryximachus, 
Phaedrus, Andron and a number of non-Athenians.é It was 
said that Antisthenes introduced Callias to both Prodicus and 
Hippias.* Plato also depicts him as engaged to give a demon- 
stration of oratory at Athens ‘in the school of Pheidostratus, at. 
the requestof Eudicus the sonof Apemantus’;': !tandas boasting 
in the market-place of a visit to Olympia.j He claimed, 
according to Plato, to have made more money than any two 
other Sophists; in Sicily he made more than Protagoras, and 
from one small town, Inycus, collected twenty minas in fees.*: *+ 
At Sparta he made nothing, for though they like listening to 
him, they do not pay to be educated, that is, changed: change 
is against the law in Sparta. !

Various writings are ascribed to him, of which almost 
nothing survives. He used to go to Olympia armed with 
material of every sort, epics, tragedies, dithyrambs, and 
speeches for display. One of the last was the Trojan Speech 
(wrongly thought by Philostratus to have been a dialogue) 
in which Nestor was depicted as describing for the benefit of 
Neoptolemus by what pursuits a young man can gain a good 
reputation ;° nothing of this survives. There is a reference to a 
treatise called Co//ectton, but whether this was a collection of

famous women, or famous personages, or remarkable stories, 
cannot be determined? He also compiled a list of Olympic 
victors; Mis was thought by Plutarch to be of ittle value,"famous women, or famous personages, or remarkable stories, 
cannot be determined? He also compiled a list of Olympic 
victors; Mis was thought by Plutarch to be of ittle value,"

SAr PAR, SAa SAB; Araj;A2§7 SA7;Aa§6 1 A6 € Protag. 315%

1 Hipp. Mai. 2838, C; 284C i m a par ig one cee sare

1! These persons are otherwise unkn 
k1 See above, P- 345, note ¢!, =

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 383

though Hippias might be thought to have been very favourably 
placed for collecting these data. Of the treatise Nomenclature 
of Tribes nothing but the title survives; it may be derived 
from the Hippias Maior.» He was employed by the people of 
Messina in Sicily to write the elegiac verses for the bronze 
statues which they dedicated at Olympia in memory of the 
boys’ chorus drowned on the voyage to Rhegium; the statues, 
like the inscription, were the work of a local artist.c Lastly, 
Hippias may have written a mathematical treatise on the 
properties of the guadratrix,* :

Hippias was highly gifted. He had a remarkable natural 
memory, being able to remember fifty names at one hearing ;4 
and he alsoaided his memory by means of a scheme which he 
taught to others.* *: His special subjects were mathematics and 
astronomy; he was also interested in the elements of speech, 
letters, syllables, rhythm, and harmony.‘ Some said that he 
also spoke on painting and sculpture.é For the Spartans, who 
were not interested in natural science or the arts of speech, he 
learnt ‘archaeology’, the early history of families, the human 
race and its settlements, and the foundation of city-states.) 
In his discourse he strove to be original; he cultivated a 
copious, natural style, which although not thin, yet never had 
recourse to a poetical vocabulary. iBesides his immense learning, he also practised the crafts, 
apparently because of a belief that the proper goal for the 
individual man was self-sufficiency: he once visited Olympia 
wearing and carrying only things that he himself had made — 
a ring, a seal, an oil-can and scraper, shoes, tunic, cloak and 
elaborate Persian girdle. i

The originality aimed at by Hippias in his speeches was 
the result of eclecticism: he claimed to have put together the 
most important and homogeneous sayings of his predecessors 
Orpheus and Musaeus, Homer and Hesiod, and the prose- 
writers, into a new and varied discourse.* His study of the 
poets resulted in some minute emendations of Homer, depend- 
ing on a changed accent, and having as their object the rescuing

d Arr; Ara; Az §x 
a B2 b Art (Vors. II, p. 329, 1. 2) ¢ Bx ; ; 
¢ Asa; cp. ch. go, 9 f Ari; Ar4; Az §1 & A2 §2 b Arr; Ar§3 
i Az §8 j Ax2 k B6 - eu 
et Later, more credulous ages believed that these prodigious memories were 
result of drugs (A16).

1 Heath, Greek Mathematics I, p. 226; see below, pp. 385-8.

384 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS1 Heath, Greek Mathematics I, p. 226; see below, pp. 385-8.

384 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

of Homer from the charge of having put a false statement into 
the mouth of Zeus, and of saying something incredible.* *} 
He also derived from legend and the poets much of his 
‘archaeological’ lore: the continents Asia and Europe are 
named after the daughters of Ocean; the stepmother of 
Phrixus was named Gorgépis (not Demodice as in the legend 
Pindar used);° there was an Ephyra at Elis as well as the 
Ephyra mentioned by Pindar;? Lycurgus was a warrior as well 
as a statesman ;° these facts may have come from the Collection, 
or from the Nomenclature of Tribes, though their origin is not 
specified. The only fact actually attributed to the Nomen- 
clature is that Hippias (as well as an unknown writer Atro- 
metus) said that there was a tribe called Spartoi.£ The Collec- 
tion, whatever its nature, contained an account of Thargelia 
of Miletus, who flourished in the time of Dareius and was 
famed for her beauty, charm and wisdom. She married four- 
teen times, and imbued all her husbands with pro-Persian 
sentiments; her influence on politics through these influential 
men served as a paradigm for Aspasia, so Plutarch says.¢ The 
interest in Thargelia was perhaps stimulated by a desire to 
please Aspasia, also a Milesian; but it may sometimes have had 
a Thessalian audience in view, since one of Thargelia’s 
husbands was the Thessalian king Antiochus.» 5}

a B2o b Bg ¢ Br4 qd Brs e Br f B2 
& Plut. Pericl. XXIV; Suid. s.v. Thargelia; Philostr. Ep. 73; Athen. 608f 
haw. A.u.a B2o b Bg ¢ Br4 qd Brs e Br f B2 
& Plut. Pericl. XXIV; Suid. s.v. Thargelia; Philostr. Ep. 73; Athen. 608f 
haw. A.u.

a! Aristotle, Poet. 1461a21. ‘hese emendations are ascribed by Aristotle to Hippias 
of Thasos, of whom nothing is known except that he was put to death by the Thirty 
(Lys. XIII, 54); but Plato in the Hipptas Mator (A11) especially mentions Hippias of 
Elis’ minute studies in ‘letters, syllables, rhythms and harmonies’, so that Aristotle’s 
examples probably belong to him. Aristotle gives the same two examples in Soph. El. 4, 
166br, but without mentioning Hippias: the Scholiast here supplies ‘of Thasos’ from 
the Poetics.

The ‘solutions’ were as follows: 1. Hippias, reading Bidoyev 84 of etyos dpecdar 
(‘we give to him the winning of glory’, instead of our MSS. Tpoecor 58 «hbSe’ Epfirrran 
Il. 11, 15) wished to change this to: SiSéyev &€ of (Si8dpev = SiSopévan, infinitive for 
imperative) making Zeus command the Dream to give the glory, instead of himself 
uttering a false statement. 2. 76 uev of xatamiberat 6uBpy (//. XXIII, 328), of a tree-

stump that “does not rot in the rain’. Hippias changed ov to ov, ‘a part of it rots in the

rain’, as making the statement credible. See Aristotle, Poetics, ed. W. Hamilton Fyfe

(Loeb), pp. 106-7. ; ens 
DS Sa Doove, p. sebn. Wiamownz, Platon V\, P. 25, HOA, Tits teat Ne wae 
Socratic owed his knowledge of Thargelia to Hippias, not to Gorgras. He says nsi- 
B4, given by Diels as the words of Hippias, cannot be genuine: etpamnyav used tra

tively is a later soleciam. Hippias, however, sometimes used dialect words (Bro) and 
perhaps un-Attic constructions also.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 385tively is a later soleciam. Hippias, however, sometimes used dialect words (Bro) and 
perhaps un-Attic constructions also.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 385

Hippias did not confine his Homeric studies merely to 
words and accents; he discussed the characters of the lliad, 
saying that Achilles was the bravest, Nestor the wisest, and 
Odysseus the most resourceful of those who went to Troy. He 
pointed out that whereas later poets call ‘tyrants’ the kings 
before the Trojan Wars, Homer does not know this word, 
using ‘king’ even for the impious Echetus:® ‘tyrant’ came into 
use at about the time of Archilochus.* He also speculated on 
the birthplace of Homer, assigning this honour to Cyme.¢

Of his astronomy, nothing is left except that, with Phere- 
cydes, he said that the Hyades were seven in number.* This 
is probably derived from a historical account of past scientific 
discoveries: he is said to have recorded that Thales gave even 
inanimate objects a soul, on the strength of his observations 
of the magnet and of amber.‘ He also recorded the history of 
mathematics; he mentioned the otherwise unknown Mamer- 
cus, brother of Stesichorus the poet, as having won fame as a 
geometer.® This scientific history might have been thought, 
from Plato’s evidence,» to be merely a rhetorical work in 
which the scientists who were Hippias’ special interest were 
eulogized as were legendary heroes, kings and the like by 
other orators; but there is one discovery attributed to Hippias 
which differentiates him from all the other Sophists and places 
him in the ranks of the scientific discoverers, namely the 
invention of the guadratrix.The ascription of this discovery to Hippias rests on two 
references in Proclus’ Commentary on Euclid. In one of these 
Proclus, giving the various methods of trisecting a rectilinear 
angle, says that some have done this by means of the guadra- 
trices of Hippias and Nicomedes;: ‘1 in the other, giving the 
mathematicians who have used different sorts of curves, he 
mentions the giadratrices of Hippias.}.i+ Proclus does not 
expressly say that this was Hippias of Elis; and some therefore 
have postulated another Hippias, the name being common.* 
But Proclus, earlier in his Commentary, did mention ‘Hippias of

aAro Od. XVIII,85 ¢Bg 4Br8 ¢Br3;2Br18 £ By; above, p. 53 
§ Br2 h Hipp. Mat. 281C; 282A i Bar j Procl. Eucl. I, 356, 6-12 
i! Other Beikode the conchoidal curves of Nicomedes; and the spirals of Archi- 
Procl. in Eucl. I, 272, 1-12). 
aye well as the conchoids of Nines and the spirals of Perseus. 
1 E.g. Wilamowitz, who says simply that the ascription of mathematical discoveries 
to the Sophist Hippias is obviously arbitrary (Platon, I, p. 133, note 3).

ce

‘386 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Elis’ as having recorded the mathematical fame of Mamercus;* 
and if he had meant a different Hippias in the two later 
a he would have made this clear by a designation. It is 
therefore safe to ascribe to Hippias the discovery of the 
guadratrix. Nothing can be argued from the silence of other 
writers.

The curve called guadratrix is described as follows:

Let ABCD be a square.

Let a quadrant AEC of a circle with centre at D be described in 
ABCD.

Let it be supposed that the side AB moves towards and parallel to DC 
(taking up positions A’B’, A’”B” ...)

And let it be supposed that the radius of the circle moves from AD 
to DC simultaneously (taking up positions DE, DE’ . . .)

Then the moving radius AD and the moving side AB will intersect 
at a series of points, F, F’...

The path AFF’F’ of this moving point of intersection 1s the 
quadratrix.Then the moving radius AD and the moving side AB will intersect 
at a series of points, F, F’...

The path AFF’F’ of this moving point of intersection 1s the 
quadratrix.

The curve could be used for the solution of two problems 
which greatly exercised early mathematicians :' the trisection of 
any given angle (and its division according to any ratio); and 
the squaring of the circle. The question whether Hippias 
himself used it for either or both of these solutions is disputed.

First the trisecting of angles: Proclus though crediting 
Hippias with the discovery of the guadratrix says that ‘others’ 
have used the guadratrices of Hippias and Nicomedes for the 
trisection of angles;> and it has a thought that this means

a Br2 b Bar

1 £.g. Pappus and Iamblichus, who do not mention Hippias in their accounts of the 
squaring of the circle by means of the guadratrix. Pappus IV, pp. 250, 33—252, 33 
Iamblichus ap. Simpl. in Categ. p. 192, 19-24K., 64B 13-18 Br.; and Diog. L. who 
ascribes to Archytas, not to Hippias, the first solution (of a geometrical problem) 
depending on movement; the quadratrix requires the supposition of moving lines. For 
plausible explanations of these omissions see Pauly-Wissowa s.v. Hippias VIII, 1707 sq.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 387

that Hippias did not do so. This is unlikely: if Hippias 
discovered the peculiar properties of the guadratrix, as Proclus 
says, 1ts most obvious property is its use for the trisection of 
angles; and Proclus means that Hippias and Nicomedes are the 
originators of this method, not that they did not use it them- 
selves. It can therefore be plausibly inferred that Hippias used 
his curve for the trisection of angles.

The method of trisecting angles (or dividing them by any 
ratio) by means of the guadratrix is as follows:The method of trisecting angles (or dividing them by any 
ratio) by means of the guadratrix is as follows:

D G F" Cc 
If ABCD is a square, and AFF’F” the quadratrix, 
Let F be a point on the guadratrix. 
From F let FG be drawn parallel to AD, meeting DC at G. 
Divide FG in the required ratio at H. 
Draw HF’ parallel to DC to meet the guadratrix in F’. 
Join DF, DF’. 
The resulting angles FDF’, F’DC are in the ratio of FH to HG. 
Thus the angle FDC can be trisected or divided in any given ratio 
by means of the guadratrix.

Second, the squaring of the circle: the name given to the 
curve! implies that this was its primary purpose; but whether 
it was so named by Hippias and therefore so used by him is not 
known. Some think it unlikely that he did so use it because he 
is not mentioned by any authority among those who found 
solutions to this problem: Pappus and Iamblichus ascribe the 
squaring of the circle by means of the guadratrix to Deinos- 
tratus and Nicomedes. Others suggest that he discovered this 
use but was unable to furnish it with an exact proof: that this 
was first done by Deinostratus, a pupil of Eudoxus the dis- 
coverer of the proof ‘by exhaustion’; and that therefore no 
credit was given to Hippias for his solution. It seems likely 
therefore that Hippias was aware of the value of the guadratrix

1 tetpayevigouga (B21).

388 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

towards squaring the circle, but was unable to work out the 
method and proof with sufficient exactitude. *

The squaring of the circle by means of the guadratrix was as 
follows:

A B

B’

D FY c¢

If ABCD is a square, AIC the quadrant, and AFF” the quadratrix 
meeting DC at the point F’,

Then the quadrant AIC is to the side AD as AD is to DF’.

Thus the quadrant AIC being the third term in a proportion of 
which the other two terms are straight lines, can be expressed as a 
straight line.Thus the quadrant AIC being the third term in a proportion of 
which the other two terms are straight lines, can be expressed as a 
straight line.

A rectangle constructed on AIC thus reduced to a straight line, with 
the diameter of the circle (i.e. 2AD) as its other side is equal to the 
circle with the radius AD, since

4 
From this rectangle a square of equal area can be constructed; and 
the given circle is squared.

The objections to the method of finding the guadratrix, on 
which these solutions are based, were clearly seen in antiquity. ?

Social Ethics. According to Plato in the Protagoras, Hippias 
strongly supported the theory that Nature and Law are 
opposed: that Law is a tyrant over mankind and forces men in 
many ways contrary to nature.* In the dispute between Pro- 
tagoras and Socrates over the method of conducting the dis- 
cussion, Hippias is shown as an advocate of compromise and 
arbitration.* Plutarch preserves some remarks of his on envy: 
there are two sorts, one right, one wrong: the right kind 1s that 
felt towards bad men who are honoured, the wrong kind that 
felt towards the good. Envious people have double sufferings:

aCr 
1 See Pauly-Wissowa s.v. Hippias; Heath, Greek Mathematics, I, pp. 225-30.

* By Sporus, quoted in Pappus, IV, pp. 252, 26—254, 22. See Heath, Greek Mathe- 
matics, 1, 229-30.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 389

for their own troubles and for the good fortune of others.* 
These remarks may have been part of a speech On Calumny 
which began from the proverb ‘Calumny is a dread thing’: it is 
the weapon of the envious, and steals friendship, best of 
possessions, yet there is no legal penalty against it, so that it is 
worse than open injury.>

44

The unwillingness of some modern scholars to credit 
Hippias with an exact and valuable mathematical discovery is 
due to the influence of Plato’s portraits of Hippias in the two 
dialogues named after him, and in the Protagoras, as well as 
Xenophon’s portrait of him in the Memorabilia. Plato un- 
doubtedly writes of Hippias, as of the other Sophists, from 
personal knowledge; and to him nearly all our information is 
due. He grants to Hippias a vast amount of knowledge, 
especially in arithmetic, geometry, astronomy and language;° 
sie ord interest in politics? and law® is also brought out, as 
well as his ability to discourse on Homer and the other poets. ¢: ‘+ 
But this knowledge is entirely discounted by the satire with 
which everything about Hippias is invested, satire which is 
even more pungent and continuous than in the portraits of 
Gorgias, Protagoras and Prodicus. Huppias, according to 
Plato, has in common with the other Sophists, and perhaps to 
a greater degree, the qualities of vanity, boastfulness and 
acquisitiveness. He claims, like Protagoras, to be able to make 
his hearers better;# and he can not only answer any question 
so that no one can refute him, he can teach others to do so." 
Questions like ‘What is the nature of beauty?’ seem to him 
absurdly easy;i and even when he has been confounded by 
Socrates’ dialectic, he is still confident that he could find the 
correct answer if given time to reflect, a claim which draws 
from Socrates the exclamation ‘Don’t boast!’i He is accus- 
tomed to answering questions ex cathedra,* on scientific subjects 
in which he is expert and need fear no contradiction. He 1s 
also used, like Gorgias, to speaking on any subject at the 
oratorical competitions at Olympia, where he boasts that he

a b © Hipp. Min. 266C sqg. 4% Hipp. Mai.296A © 20. :

f Rp. Prarie. disp. Med 283, E h iP 36k, 289D i 1b,:

j 1b. 295A k Protag. 315Ca b © Hipp. Min. 266C sqg. 4% Hipp. Mai.296A © 20. :

f Rp. Prarie. disp. Med 283, E h iP 36k, 289D i 1b,:

j 1b. 295A k Protag. 315C

f1 The conversation of Hippias Minor takes place immediately after the lecture at the

school of Pheidostratus, to which Hippias had invited Socrates in the Hippias Masor 
286B, C. There is no sound reason for doubting the authenticity of the former dialogue.

390 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

has never met his match; and though he also expressly claims 
to answer any question and therefore will not shrink from 
Socrates’ questions,* he prefers public speaking to dialectic.® 
His vanity about his — appearance is as great as his 
pride in his intellectual achievements; Socrates calls him ‘the 
handsome’ as well as ‘the wise’,° and comments on his fine 
clothes and shoes.‘ It is clear that when he went to Olympia 
wearing and carrying only things that he himself had made, 
these were no rough and ready products of the amateur crafts- 
man, the principal object of admiration being a copy of a 
richly-wrought Persian girdle.* His idea of ‘the beautiful’ is at 
first entirely materialistic: it is ‘a beautiful maiden’,! ‘gold’,¢ 
or other means of adornment. Above all he is proud of his 
ability to make money by his talents: he boasts that he is in this 
respect greater than the reverend Protagoras,* and that if anyone 
could have extracted money from the Spartans, it is himself. iIn all these qualities he is strongly contrasted by Plato with 
Socrates: his magnificence with Socrates’ plainness, his riches 
with Socrates’ poverty, his boastfulness with Socrates’ ironic 
humility. But he is completely insensitive to irony. He treats 
Socrates with kindly condescension, even when the emptiness 
of his claims to wisdom have been almost brutall : saan 
strated; and he accepts Socrates’ most ironical ieee apa in 
all good faith and with complacency.) Yet his answers to 
‘ Socrates’ questions are more crassly foolish than those of any 
other of the Sophists except perhaps Euthydemus and Diony- 
sodorus. His mentality approximates rather to that of the 
rhapsodist Ion than to that of Protagoras and Thrasymachus.

In the Protagoras, though Hippias is satirized on his first 
appearance, he nowhere displays the qualities of the two 
Eippias dialogues; he is given the réle of mediator between 
Protagoras and Socrates, and appears in an amiable light.

It is not clear whether Xenophon’s portrait in the Memora- 
bilia 1s based on personal knowledge or on hearsay and on 
Plato’s dialogues; the latter seems more likely.!:11 The dis-

= Hipp. Min. 363C, 364A > Hipp. Mai. 304A, B C7b,.281A 44h, 291A

© Hipp. Min. 368B,C =f Hipp. Mat. 287E 8 ib. 289E = 1b.282D =i tb. 284C

i E.g. Hipp. Mai. 286A; 300D =k Protag. 337C sqq. (C1) 1 Xen. Mem. IV, iv, 5

11 His opening is reminiscent of that of the Hippias Maior: 8: xpévou yap d&qixduevos 
& “Irtrlas "AGHvaze (Mem.); das Bik xpdvou Auty xerrfipas els tas "Abtyvas (Hipp. Mai.). Xeno- 
phon says: olSa 8 tote attév [Socrates] Kol pds tdv ‘Itemiov . . . Sicdey@ivra, thus 
implying that he was not himself present at this conversation.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 391THE OLDER SOPHISTS 391

cussion is on law, divine and human; Hippias is shown con- 
versing amicably with Socrates, and both asking and answering 
questions; it is Socrates who makes the only long speech on 
this occasion. Hippias is shown finally as agreeing that the 
distinction between justice and law does not exist: whereas in 
the Protagoras he is the exponent of the theory that nature and 
law are opposed. There is little irony in Kenophon’s portrait 
compared with the Platonic dialogues; Hippias’ desire to be 
original is contrasted with Socrates’ concern for the simple 
truth; but the vain, arrogant, learned yet stupid man of the 
Hippias-dialogues has disappeared.

It is impossible to analyse how much truth there is in 
Plato’s portrait, and how much personal prejudice, since there 
is no standard of comparison. It can only be pointed out that 
this was the impression made by Hippias on Plato; and that 
Plato, detesting his general outlook and profession, gave him 
no credit whatsoever for any solid scientific achievements, 
thereby apparently doing him some injustice. ?

87. ANTIPHON THE SOPHIST

AwnT1PpHON, believed to be of ATHENS, and to have lived in the

latter half of the fifth century B.c.

The first question that arises over Antiphon is his identity. 
He is confused by ancient authorities with Antiphon the 
orator, and to a lesser extent with Antiphon the tragedian; it 
has even been disputed that Antiphon the Sophist and Anti- 
phon the orator were different persons. However, it is now 
generally agreed that the latter two were different persons :* 
Antiphon the orator came from Rhamnus in Attica and wrote 
the forensic speeches for cases of homicide; he was also a

a A2a A2

1A good case can be made out for the suggestion that the essay De Arte in the 
Hippocratic collection was written by one of the disciples of Hippias against Plato. The 
essay defends the existence of things seen and perceived, using the word «ln of their 
real essences, and defends also the sciences that seek fresh discoveries in the world of 
reality. To disparage such discoveries is not a proof of superior knowledge but of 
malevolence (87B1). The author is particularly concerned to defend the art of medicine, 
in which Hippias himself does not seem to have been interested; but the general argu- 
ment is such as he might have used in defence of his mathematical discoveries. cp. 
W.H. S. Jones, Hippocrates, Vol. II (Loeb), who suggests Hippias himself as the author.

392 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

politician and leader of the oligarchic party, and was put to 
death for his part in the oligarchic revolution of 411 B.c. 
Antiphon the Sophist was a seer, interpreter of dreams, and 
author of a book called Truth as well as other essays.* His 
origin is not known. He is sometimes called Athenian, but 
this may be through confusion with Antiphon the orator, who, 
however, is usually called ‘the Rhamnusian’, perhaps to dis- 
tinguish him from the Sophist. The third Antiphon, the 
writer of tragedies, lived at Syracuse in the first half of the 
fourth century and wrote tragedies both independently and in 
collaboration with Dionysius tyrant of Syracuse. He is 
confused sometimes with the orator, sometimes with the 
seer.”The judgement of Hermogenes (writing in the second 
century A.D.), that the orator and the Sophist are two different 
persons, is based on considerations of style: that of the murder- 
speeches is so different from that of the essay on Truth and the 
other speeches attributed to the Sophist that he tends to believe 
that the same man could not have written both. A reference to 
‘Antiphon the Rhamnusian’ as the teacher of Socrates* makes 
him waver, apparently because he thinks that Socrates would 
have preferred a Sophist to a writer of forensic speeches as his 
teacher; he also has heard that Thucydides was the pupil of 
‘the Rhamnusian’, yet notes that Thucydides’ style is nearer to 
that of Truth than to that of the murder-speeches. Nevertheless 
the great difference between the forensic speeches and Truth 
prevails; and he remarks that even if there was only one man 
who wrote all these works, the difference between the two 
groups of works is so great that each group would have to 
be dealt with separately.¢

It is now believed, on the strength of Thucydides’ glowing 
testimony to the orator,° that the latter was his teacher; any 
resemblance of Thucydides’ style to that of Truth is better 
explained by his general interest in rhetoric. Moreover, 
Thucydides’ notice goes far to prove that Antiphon the orator 
and Antiphon the Sophist were different persons: Thucydides 
mentions only political and forensic activities and says nothing 
about divination. It may be argued that Thucydides’ silence 
comes of a lack of interest in or disapproval of mantic profes-

a Ar b A6; Az ¢ Plat. Menex. 236A d Az 
e¢ Thuc. VIII, 68

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 393

sions; but if this were so, he would not have gone out of his 
way to praise Antiphon so unreservedly.a Ar b A6; Az ¢ Plat. Menex. 236A d Az 
e¢ Thuc. VIII, 68

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 393

sions; but if this were so, he would not have gone out of his 
way to praise Antiphon so unreservedly.

One further problem of identity remains: was the Antiphon 
called ‘the Sophist’, who argues with Socrates in Xenophon’s 
Memorabilia, the Antiphon who wrote Truth, or Antiphon of 
Rhamnus the orator, or Antiphon the tragedian, or none of these? 
This question was already debated in antiquity : one thesis appar- 
ently identified him with the tragedian.* The opinions attri- 
buted to him in the Memorabilia might belong to any Sophist. 
His rebuke to Socrates for not entering practical politics? has 
suggested to some modern writers! Antiphon the orator; and 
the title ‘Sophist’ could have been applied to the latter as a 
teacher of rhetoric. Fortunately, however, this question is 
decided by the testimony of Aristotle in his lost book Ox 
Poerry’: he says (in a fragment preserved by Diogenes Laer- 
tius) that two rivals of Socrates were Antilochus of Lemnos 
and Antiphon the Seer. This important fragment also estab- 
lishes the separate identity of the orator and the seer: Aristotle 
could never have referred to the famous lawyer and political 
teacher simply as a diviner. Again, it makes probable the 
conjecture that Antiphon the seer was also an Athenian, as he is 
called by Suidas in two separate notices ;¢ if he had not been an 
Athenian, Aristotle would have given his nationality as well as 
that of Antilochus. It is probable that the orator’s deme-name 
is usually given to distinguish him from a fellow-Athenian, the 
seer, who was perhaps a townsman.The following account, therefore, is based on the belief that 
AntipKon the Sophist is distinct from the orator and from the 
tragedian; and that the writings of the Sophist were distin- 
guished from those of the orator by their difference of subject- 
matter and style.? The teacher of Thucydides® and Socrates‘ 
was Antiphon the orator; the opponent of Socrates in the 
Memorabilia was Antiphon the seer.

Life. Antiphon, an Athenian, was a rhetorician, seer and 
interpreter of dreams.¢ Nothing is known of his life. It is

a Aa bA3 §15 CAs d Ar e A2 f Menex. 236A

6 Ar; Az

1 £.g. Gomperz, who thought that the orator and the Sophist were identical.

2 For a discussion and literature, see Pauly-Wissowa, Suppl. IV, s.v. Antiphon, pp. 33 
sqq.; where, however, sufficient weight is not given to the frg. of Aristotle cited above

(As; Aristotle Frg. 75).

394 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

agp that in early life he set up at Corinth as a mental healer: 
is interest in rhetoric led him to believe that freedom from 
grief could be achieved if the patient would tell the cause of his 
trouble and submit to treatment by the soothing power of 
words.? Later, however, considering this ‘art’ beneath him, he 
turned to rhetoric.* Apart from this, the only account that can 
be given of him concerns his writings and opinions.Writings. His principal work was called Truth, like that of 
Protagoras; the title On Truth, sometimes given, is the less 
likely. It is meant to suggest an interpretation of the nature of 
reality as opposed to appearances, and was probably suggested 
by Parmenides’ Way of Truth. This work of Antiphon’s was 
in two or more books, of which a number of fragments remain, 
quoted by other writers; and two extracts recently discovered 
in a papyrus at Oxyrhynchus. Besides this major work, he 
wrote a rhetorical essay or speech meant for display Ox 
Concord; and another called The Statesman or Discourse on the 
State.» Also attributed to him are a work Ox the Interpretation 
of Dreams ;° and an Arts of Rhetoric (thought, even in antiquity, 
not to be genuine).4 A separate treatise, The Art of Freedom 
from Pain,* is ascribed to the orator, probably by mistake for 
the seer. A few fragments survive from The Statesman and On 
Concord; of the rest there is no trace. The notice in Suidas‘ 
describes Antiphon the seer as an epic writer also; but there 
is no reference to this in any other writer, and it is probably a 
confused recollection of Antiphon the tragedian. A work by 
Glaucus of Rhegium On the Ancient Poets and Musicians was 
ascribed to ‘Antiphon of Rhamnus’; perhaps the ascription 
meant was to Antiphon the seer, or the tragedian.®

Hermogenes describes Antiphon’s style as not at all suited 
to politics, but pompous and dogmatic, aiming at a grandiose 
effect and tending towards obscurity; he is careful in compo- 
sition, and rejoices in rhetorical turns of speech, but lacks 
characterization and the stamp of truth; while even his 
cleverness is apparent, not real. These criticisms seem not 
altogether just: the surviving fragments show originality, 
continuity of thought, and clarity, and their rhetorical phrasing2®A6 8 PA2 ¢ Ar d B3 e A6é fAr & A6 
* This is conjecture. The ‘cure by confession’ is attributed to Antiphon the Rham- 
nusian, the orator. But there is a strong probability that it was the work of the seer.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 395

is not so obtrusive as that of Gorgias. He had, however, a 
strong tendency to use poetical and archaic, especially Ionic 
words: Suidas records that Antiphon the seer was called the 
Word-Cook.* His penchant for Ionic forms rather than Attic 
may account for the later belief that he was an epic poet.

‘Truth.’ The first book of Truth apparently began by 
expounding a metaphysical position derived from the Eleatic 
school: all things are really one, and separate objects do not 
exist either for the senses or the mind, however far they may 
range.>»»1 Experiences such as smell, sight, and the rest merely 
seem to happen, but do not really do so.* Even time is not a 
thing but a thought, that is, a means of measurement.? Mind 
leads the body in i hag health and disease depend on 
mind.* It should therefore not be left unequipped.‘ God lacks 
nothing and receives no increment; he is infinite and without 
needs.®

In spite of this fundamental unity, however, there exists a 
world of sense-perception which can be studied and in which 
some things are nearer to reality than others. The real nature 
of an object such as a bed, for instance, is its original material, 
not the form imposed upon it: if you buried the bed, and the 
rotting wood conceived the power of growth, what would 
come up would not be a bed, but timber; therefore the timber 
is more real than its accidental form, since the nature of the 
former persists, and the latter disappears.» The importance 
of material is again emphasized in a quotation which says that 
Nature if stripped of her resources would have arranged many 
excellent things badly. 'The second book appears to have described the present 
prevailing arrangement,) that is, the world of sense-perception 
which does not really exist but only seems to do so, as opposed 
to the ‘everlasting unchangingness’.*.*t Little remains of this 
cosmology; but a chaos was described, in which things were 
unarranged or not yet separated out, and there followed an

aAr bBr ¢ Bs; B4; B6-B8;cp.B4z 4Bg ¢B2 £83 &€ Bro; Burr

h Brg; cp. Plato, Republ. 597A sqq. (the ‘three beds’). 3 Br4 1 B23 * Baz

bi! This fragment from Galen's commentary on Hippocrates is very corrupt in the 
only existing MS. Diels believes that it was preceded by the explanation that ‘for the 
Logos all is one’. The general Eleatic sense is decided by Galen's introductory remarks 
that Critias and Antiphon oppose Mind to Sense-perception (88B40).

K! Qgisotd, a word coined on the analogy of Democritus’ stot.

390 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSK! Qgisotd, a word coined on the analogy of Democritus’ stot.

390 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

‘atrangement’,* ** produced by an ‘eddy’.® He discussed the 
heavenly bodies: the sun is a fire which feeds on the damp air 
round the earth, and its risings and settings are caused by the 
varying prevalence of the fiery and damp elements.* The moon 
has its own light, but the rays of the sun strike upon it and 
cause the parts round it to be dimmed, as a weaker light 
always dims a stronger.¢ This explains its phases; it also 
happens with the other stars.4 For eclipses of the moon, since 
he had given the moon its own light he was forced to go back 
to the crude Heracleitean theory of the turning bowls.¢ Hail 
is caused by the compression of rain-drops through contrary 
winds. Earthquakes are caused by (internal) fires,? which 
burn and melt the earth, causing it to wrinkle and quiver: an 
observation derived from volcanic eruptions. Sea, as Empe- 
docles said, is a kind of sweat,i that is, the first damp evapor- 
ated from the original mixture by the Hot. The moisture 
thus separated off collected together and is called sea; its 
saltness 1s caused by its being heated, as happens with sweat. } 
Of the rest of the second book nothing is left but a single word 
quoted by a lexicographer, showing that Antiphon probably 
went on to discuss biology: he used the word ‘hide’ for human 
skin.* Other isolated words thus quoted may perhaps be 
assigned to the same book, and show that he dealt with the 
embryo, and abortion;! and possibly with diet and health,™ 
though the reference to stupefacients™ may belong to the 
treatise on Freedom from Pain. From the remaining few words 
not even the subject under discussion can be gathered; it isossible that the reference to the tempering of bronze and 
iron," and to creatures ‘good at getting a living’,° may be part 
of a description of the evolution of the arts by early man, but 
it is not certain even whether these words occur in Truth.

Whether Antiphon’s attempt to square the circle belongs to 
Truth or was the subject of a separate thesis cannot be ascer- 
tained. It is referred to by Aristotle in illustration of his point 
that not all mistaken propositions call for disproof, but only 
those in which the author, starting from sound first principles,

@ B24; Baga b Bas © B26 ad Baz © B28; 22A12; :

f Bag & Cp. 31B52 bh B30; B3r i B32; cp. 31By55

J B32; cp. s9Ago; 64A17 = B33, 1 B36; B38 = B34 * Bago

is Empedoclean:

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 397

commits an error of reasoning.* Antiphon’s construction is 
described in full by Simplicius and Themistius. |is Empedoclean:

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 397

commits an error of reasoning.* Antiphon’s construction is 
described in full by Simplicius and Themistius. |

A rectilinear figure such as a square (ABCD) is described 
within a circle. On each of its sides an isosceles triangle is 
described by bisecting the given side (AB) and erecting at the 
point of bisection (EF) a perpendicular line intersecting the 
circumference of the circle (at F). The. triangle AFB thus 
occupying a section of the circle can be similarly treated by the 
creation of triangles on its sides. Thus the space between the 
circumference of the circle and the sides of the polygon 
grows less and less until it is negligible, and the area of the 
polygon is equal to that of the circle. The same process 
can be carried out by using any other convenient rectilineal 
figure such as an isosceles triangle instead of the original 
square, and proceeding in the same way by describing isosceles 
triangles on its sides. It is obvious that this solution ignores 
‘entirely the real difficulty of the problem. The describing of 
triangles within the-circle can go on ad infinitum, but the sides 
of the polygon so formed will never exactly coincide with 
the circumference of the circle. Antiphon was not a geometer, 
and his answer was therefore worthless.

The long fragments from the Oxyrhynchus papyrus? (third 
century a.D.) come from Truth, a sentence from the first 
passage being already known from Harpocration.° The foun- 
dations of human society are now under discussion. The 
definition of Justice as obedience to the laws of the State 
(which is maintained by Socrates in conversation with Hippias 
in Xenophon’s Memorabilia)‘ is examined, and it is maintained 
that the laws of the State are artificially imposed restrictions 
which are often directly opposed to the laws of nature. The

a Br3 b B44 C su, Gye d IV, iv, 13

398 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSa Br3 b B44 C su, Gye d IV, iv, 13

398 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

laws of the State should be obeyed before witnesses; but when 
one is alone, one should obey the edicts of Nature. The 
difference between the edicts of Law and of Nature is that 
the former are arrived at by agreement, the latter by inevitable 
growth; disobedience to the former is punished only if de- 
tected by their guardians, but disobedience to the fatter is 
sen He | equally whether one is alone or in company. The 
penalty depends on no man’s opinion, but follows in the nature 
of things. The majority of acts decreed to be just according to 
law are contrary to nature: there is legislation concerning what 
the eyes, ears, tongue must and must not see, hear, speak; 
what the hands must and must not do, where the feet must and 
must not go. But the prohibitions of law are no more in 
conformity with nature than their commands. Life and death 
belong to nature; life comes from what 1s advantageous, death 
from what is disadvantageous; but the advantages afforded 
by the laws are chains upon nature, whereas those that come 
from nature are free. True reasoning shows that the things 
which give pain do not benefit nature more than the things 
which give pleasure; the truly advantageous must not harm, 
but must benefit. Examples are then given to show that what 
is naturally advantageous is often opposed to the demands of 
law: for instance, the laws approve of those who act in self- 
defence and not in aggression; of those who care for their 
parents, even though the latter have treated them ill; and of 
those who permit others to swear an oath, and do not them- 
selves swear.! Such behaviour however is opposed to nature: 
such acts offer the possibility of an unnecessary increase of 
suffering and decrease of pleasure. If the man who accommo- 
dated himself to these provisions received support from the 
laws, and the man who opposed them were penalized, obedi- 
ence to the laws might not be without profit; but as things are, 
the law is not strong enough to help the sufferer and restrain 
the doer and, moreover, when the two come before the courts 
of justice, they are in the same position: the sufferer has to 
convince the court that he has suffered, and it is equally open to 
the defendant to deny the offence, so that the issue depends upon 
their relative ability to persuade, that is, on rhetorical technique.1 That is, who allow a case to be settled by accepting an oath sworn by the opposite 
party. See Aristot. Rhet. I, xv, 27 (13774); and Bonner and Smith, Administration of 
Fustice from Homer to Aristotle, Vol. U1, pp. 146 sqg. (evidentiary oath).

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 399

_ After a few illegible lines the arguments proceed: those of 
high birth are honoured, those of low birth are not. This is a 
barbarian attitude: we are all made by nature the same in 
every way, so that all can recognize the natural necessaries of 
life, and these are open to all to procure; in these respects there 
is no difference between barbarian and Greek. We all breathe 
into the air through mouth and nostrils... . Here the manu- 
script breaks off.

Another extract in a different handwriting appears to come 
from the same book.**! This attacks another aspect of legal 
justice, namely the giving of true evidence, thought to be just 
and useful in men’s dealings with one another. This however 
(he argues) is not just; for justice requires that one shall not 
wrong anyone who has done one no wrong. But a witness, 
even if truthful, is bound to ‘wrong’ a man who has not wronged 
him: his evidence may cause its object to be condemned, and 
lose his money or his life. This ‘wrong’ is then returned; for 
the man who has been condemned will hate the witness who 
caused his condemnation by giving truthful evidence; and the 
witness is wronged, not only by this hatred, but by the necessity 
he is under to be on his guard against the other man for the rest 
of his life. Similarly, to pass judgement, and to arbitrate, are 
not just; for some are helped, but some are harmed, that is, 
some are not wronged, but others are. So that if it is just to 
wrong someone who has not wronged you, the law is just; if 
not, the law is not just. Either both are just or both unjust.The obvious fallacy lies in the equating of ‘harming’ 
someone with ‘wronging’ him, and shows Antiphon’s affinity 
with the other Sophists, especially Hippzias.+

The second work attributed to Antiphon, the discourse Oz 
Concord, is highly praised by Philostratus, for its brilliant 
apophthegms, dignified exposition and fluentstyle.’ The subject 
was a favourite with both philosophers and politicians during 
the late fifth and early fourth centuries. Democritus said that 
concord alone makes possible all great activities, including 
war ;° in the C/eitophon* concord is praised as the only true and 
real form of friendship, that is, the concord dependent not on

a b c 68B d 409E

Brestepen Reta a Peasy: book on 784 sean of she difereat handwriting and 
arrangement; but this is of less weight than the obvious connection of subject-matter and

argument. Several hands may have been employed in simultaneous copying. 
1 Cp. Xen. Mem. IV, iv; Plato, Hippias Mator; Protag. 337 C-D 599.

400 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSargument. Several hands may have been employed in simultaneous copying. 
1 Cp. Xen. Mem. IV, iv; Plato, Hippias Mator; Protag. 337 C-D 599.

400 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

similarity of opinion but on knowledge of the truth, which 1s 
the basis of all the sciences, including medicine. In the 
Memorabilia* Socrates says that everywhere in Greece there 
is a law that the citizen shall preserve concord, not in matters 
of taste such as drama, music and poetry, but in obedience to 
the laws, since the prosperity of the State, as of the home, 
depends on such concord. The ideal of concord was used both 
by the Athenian democracy and its critics. It was the proposed 
subject of an Assembly called to settle the differences between 
the oligarchical government and the Patriots in 411 B.c.” It 
was the theme of the oligarchical discourse written by Thrasy- 
machus:;¢ and it was also one of the watchwords of the restored 
democracy of 403 B.c.4 Later, Isocrates extolled it as the 
great virtue of the ‘ancestral constitution’ of Solon and Cleis- 
thenes, welding together all classes in the State, especially the 
rich and poor.* Aristotle stresses the political importance of 
concord in the Erhics, where it is shown that if friendship is 
present in a community there is no need of justice, so that 
lawgivers try to promote concord and banish faction. A 
passage in Iamblichus preserved by Stobaeus® likens unity of 
purpose in the individual to concord in the home or the State, 
and a divided purpose to political faction.It is against this background that the fragments of Anti- 
phon’s essay must be interpreted. The order in which they 
should be arranged is conjectural, but the essay seems to have 
begun with some general considerations on the nature of man, 
who is said to be the divinest of the animals. A survey of 
human civilization may have followed, with reference to the 
different ways of life of different tribes.i ‘1 Life in general is 
described as open to many complaints: it has nothing remark- 
able, great or noble, but all is petty, feeble, brief and mingled

with sorrow.) i: It is like a day-long watch, when having

aIV,iv,16 %Thuc.VIII,93 ¢85Br 4 Andoc.de Myst. 140; Lys. XVIII, 17

© Areop. VII, 31-5 £ Nic. Eth. 1155 a22 & B4gga; Stob. II, 33, 15 h B48

i B45; B46; Baz =) Bs

i1 Names of tribes: Shadowfeet, Longheads, Dwellers Underground (Troglodytes). 
Hippias wrote a book On the Nomenclature of Tribes (86Bz); there may be some con- 
nection.

j} This may not come from the essay On Concord; the address & poxdpie suggests a 
dialogue. The fragments or words definitely attributed to On Concord are: B45-48; 
63; 65; 67-71. Frgs. 49-62 and 64, preserved by Stobaeus and the lexicographers, are 
assigned to the same book with probability because of their subject-matter. B66, ‘the care 
of old age is like the care of children’, is assigned by Clement to Antiphon the orator.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 401THE OLDER SOPHISTS 401

looked upon the light we yield our post to the next generation.* 
It is therefore important to live life well: there are some who 
do not live the present life, but prepare with great diligence as 
if they were going to live another life; meanwhile their time 
runs out and is gone.” But you cannot, if you make a mistake 
in life, go back and change it as if you were changing a move 
in a game of draughts.° The most important thing for man- 
kind is education: if the beginning is right, so probably will 
the end be. We sow as we reap; a good education in a young 
person is like a crop which flourishes throughout his life and 
cannot be destroyed by adversity.4

The business of education is to teach concord, external and 
internal. Nothing is worse for mankind than anarchy; there- 
fore our ancestors instilled obedience into their children, so 
that when they grew up they might not be carried away by the 
great change of circumstance.* The right surroundings must 
be provided: one’s character becomes like that with which one 
spends the greater part of the day.‘ The true order of things 
must be explained: when people learn it, they listen.®

The chief cause of dissension 1s inequality of wealth. There- 
fore the rich must be encouraged to help their neighbours. 
-Miserliness when it is the result of hard work and suffering 
is understandable; saving is then a kind of pleasure, and 
spending as painful as tearing off one’s own flesh.' But unless 
money is used, one might as well not possess it: a man who 
refused to lend money to a neighbour, but buried it, was 
robbed; the neighbour told him to give up fretting and bury a 
stone there instead, since he would be none the worse off. iThe greatest cause of concord is friendship; friends, there- 
fore, should be carefully chosen. Real friends should be 
recognized as such, not admirers of one’s wealth and flatterers 
of one’s good fortune.* Friendships should be preserved: 
young friendships are close, but old friendships are closer.'

The attainment of inner concord, which means unity of 
purpose, is important for the individual. To hesitate where 
there is no place for hesitation™ is wrong. Fear is the great 
cause of hesitation: the coward is bold in speech concerning 
absent and future dangers, but hesitant when confronted with 
the fact. Sickness, as the proverb says, is a holiday for

b ‘ ¢ Be2 ad B6o e B6r £ B62 & B63 
neeerr  aae Me j Bsa kKB6s 'Beg =Bss B56 
DD

402 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

cowards: they need not then go into action.* But there are 
times when fear“is salutary, for instance if a man is setting out 
to harm his neighbour. Fear means hesitation, and hesitation 
gives an interval in which often his mind 1s deterred from its 
desires. He may realize that the deed once done is irrevocable, 
and that he may suffer retribution. Hopes are sometimes 
bad counsellors, leading men to disaster and a fate which they 
had thought to impose on others. The prudent man, and the 
best judge of prudence in others, is he who fortifies his soul 
against immediate pleasure and conquers himself: to choose 
immediate gratification is to prefer the worse to the better.” 
Moreover, true inner orderliness of soul cannot be achieved 
by one who has not desired or touched what is base and bad, 
for his good conduct is not the result of a victory over 
anything.°As for concord in the home, Antiphon seems to think that 
this is impossible even in the most favourable circumstances. 
Marriage in itself is a “conflict’;* if the woman turns out to be 
incompatible, the disaster is irreparable. Divorce means the 
loss of valuable friends; and it is hard, when thinking to 
acquire pleasure, to bring home pain. If, however, the wife is 
compatible, no pleasure can be greater; but the pleasure itself. 
is the possible source of pain. Pleasures do not come alone, 
but are attended by griefs and troubles. Further, all great 
pleasures, prizes and honours which God has given to men 
depend necessarily on great exertions. Marriage is like acquir- 
ing a second body in addition to one’s own, which must be 
looked after, whereas one’s own body is trouble enough 
already. Further, if children are born, then all is full of care, 
the youthful spring goes out of the mind, and the countenance 
changes.¢

Nothing more is left of Ox Concord except a few words 
preserved by the lexicographers.° The relics of the Statesman 
are very meagre. There are references to ‘disobedience to 
authority’, f ‘a facility for combination’,® to extravagance, which 
he called ‘breakfasting away one’s own or one’s friends’ 
property’," and to the evils of a reputation for tippling. !

No direct quotation survives from the Interpretation of

4 Bs7 > Bs8 ° Bsg 4 Bag ¢ B67-B71 £ Br2 6 B74 
h B73 i B76

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 4.03No direct quotation survives from the Interpretation of

4 Bs7 > Bs8 ° Bsg 4 Bag ¢ B67-B71 £ Br2 6 B74 
h B73 i B76

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 4.03

Dreams; we gather from Cicero that Antiphon’s book was the 
basis of those by later authors, such as the Stoic Chrysippus, 
and later, Antipater.: A mass of trivial dreams was collected, 
and rules for their interpretation were laid down; by ‘inter- 
pretation’ was meant the determination of their prophetic 
significance; they are regarded as minor oracles.* This 
interpretation, it was argued, is a science, and does not 
depend upon inspiration: the interpreter is to the dream or the 
oracle as the commentator is to a poem;? the mantic art is 
merely ‘the conjecture of a sensible man’.*: °: The actual inter- 
pretations, however, were open to the criticism that they were 
arbitrary; and Antiphon’s claim to distinction in this art 
seems to have been rather that he rejected the obvious inter- 
pretation for one more recondite, or even opposite. A com- 
petitor at Olympia dreams that he is driving a four-horse 
chariot; the ‘obvious’ interpretation is that he will win, but 
Antiphon would say that he will lose, because ‘four run before 
him’. Another competitor dreams that he was turned into an 
eagle; the ‘obvious’ interpretation says that he will win, be- 
cause the eagle’s flight is fastest, but Antiphon says that he 
will lose, because the eagle pursues other birds and so always 
comes last.t To dream of a cuttle-fish means escape, because 
of the ‘ink’ it uses to cover its flight; Antiphon dealt with this 
dream, but whether he gave it this interpretation 1s not stated.° 
He could sometimes give a rationalistic interpretation, if the 
jest about the hungry sow whose owner dreamt that it had 
eaten its litter is really his. He also dealt with bodily signs, 
such as the twitching of the eyelids, as omens; there is a hint 
that some of this lore was derived from Egypt.®- Nothing is left of the treatise on the Art of Freedom from 
Pain, if it existed. It purported to give rules for the treatment 
of mental distress on the analogy of those given by medicine

— say ~ my c Ag d B80 e B78 f A8 & Bra

c1 The author of the definition is given as Antiphon the tragedian, but was probably 
Antiphon the seer.

! Chrysippus, born 280 B.c. at Soloi in Cilicia, was the son of Apollonius of Tarsus. 
Though not the founder of Stoicism, he was the first to establish its doctrines on a sound 
basis. Antipater, born 144 B.C., was a native of Tarsus, disciple of Diogenes and teacher 
of Panaetius, He wrote two books on divination, attempting to prove the truth of this 
science from the benevolence of the deity, and maintaining that dreams were intimations 
of the future. The opposite view had been clearly stated by Aristotle in a short treatise 
On Divination by means of Dreams. Cicero’s prolix book Ox Divination contains many 
examples of alleged prophetic dreams.

404 THE PRE«“SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

for the sick; the patient was first of all relieved by speaking of 
his sorrow, and then ‘treated’ with consoling words, the 
technique being considered a branch of rhetoric. This pro- 
fession was adopted by Antiphon in his youth, but later 
abandoned for rhetoric in the wider sense.* *! |

A number of words and phrases are attributed to ‘Anti- 
phon’ by the lexicographers; some are ordinary Attic words 
which could have been used by the orator,® others are poetical 
or Ionic words which ‘abs belong to the seer.* It 1s 
possible, however, that some of the poetical words may have 
come from the tragedian. |The portrait of ‘Antiphon the Sophist’ in the Memorabilia 
is a colourless caricature of a typical opponent of Socrates. 
He tries to rob Socrates of his disciples by pointing out 
Socrates’ poverty-stricken way of life, and calling him a 
teacher of misery. Socrates replies that by not taking fees he is 
at liberty to talk to whom he pleases; his way of life is healthier 
than a more luxurious régime; and whereas Antiphon thinks 
that happiness depends on lavish expenditure, he thinks that 
the man nearest to the divine needs least. Antiphon attacks 
Socrates for charging no fees, because this proves that the 
knowledge he purveys is worth nothing: Socrates is honest but 
not wise. Socrates replies that an exchange of money can make 
a good thing bad, as when beauty is prostituted; he prefers to 
make friends of the gifted, and to share any treasures of know- 
ledge he may discover. Antiphon asks Socrates why he thinks 
it right to make politicians of others while not practising 
politics himself; Socrates replies that it is better to train a large 
number of others to be good politicians than himself to become 
one. The conversation has nothing to do with the real Anti- 
— and sheds no light on his views. It seems probable that

enophon had never met Antiphon or read his works, but had 
merely heard of him as one of the rivals of Socrates in the 
education of the young men of Athens.

a A6 b £.g. B84; B88; Boo; Broz; Br03; B107; Brog; Brro

¢ E.g, B85; B89; Bos; B97; B104; Br16 d I, vi, 1 599.

a1 A6: here there is confusion by the authorities with Antiphon the orator and 
Antiphon the tragedian; but the seer must certainly be understood; see above, p. 393.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 405

88. CRITIAS

Critias of Aruens lived from between 460-50 B.c. to 
4.03 B.C.THE OLDER SOPHISTS 405

88. CRITIAS

Critias of Aruens lived from between 460-50 B.c. to 
4.03 B.C.

Critias was a great-grandson of Drépides, the friend and 
relative of Solon.* * He was related to Plato, whose mother 
Perictioné was his first cousin. The date of his birth was not 
known; but he was a friend and contemporary of Alcibiades 
(born about 450) and was present with him in the scene de- 
picted in the Protagoras.» He was therefore probably born 
between 460 and 450 B.c. He was killed in May 403 B.c. 
while fighting against Thrasybulus’ party at Munychia.°

Critias came of a great and wealthy family,4 and had the 
best available education. Plato gives a glimpse of him as a ten- 
year-old boy listening to the legends of Athenian greatness 
related by his grandfather Critias, then aged about ninety. We 
also hear that he had a talent for playing the flute, which he 
cultivated perhaps in imitation of the Spartans, and in which he 
acquired, like Callias, a reputation.e When a young man he 
associated with Socrates; Xenophon, a hostile witness, says 
that like Alcibiades he did so merely to attain to superiority 
over his companions and train himself for a political career; 
when he had achieved this, he deserted Socrates. Socrates 
during their association tried to check his evil tendencies, and 
earned Critias’ hatred by his censure of Critias’ relationship

a A3; Az b 316A; 336D, E ¢ Ar2; Ar d Plat. Charm. 157E

e A3

a1 Not the brother as Diogenes L. says. Diog. L. also mistakenly gives Glaucon I as 
Critias’ brother, not, as Plato records, his uncle.

Dropides 
Critias I 
| | 
Callaeschrus . Glaucon I 
| ah 
Critias II Charmides Perictione = Ariston

| 
Bis Potone

406 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERSDropides 
Critias I 
| | 
Callaeschrus . Glaucon I 
| ah 
Critias II Charmides Perictione = Ariston

| 
Bis Potone

406 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

with Euthydemus.: This hatred found vent when Critias 
came into power in 403 B.c. and was appointed with Charicles 
to the task of remaking the laws; he then promulgated a decree 
forbidding the teaching of rhetoric, which was aimed at pre- 
venting Socrates from conversing with the young men of 
Athens.* These statements of Xenophon find no support in 
Plato’s representations of the conversations between Critias 
and Socrates, though that of the Charmides is marked by some 
sophistic acerbity. It is unlikely that Plato’s tenderness to- 
wards a relative would outweigh his attachment to Socrates: 
he would not have used Critias as a vehicle for the myths of 
the Timaeus and Critias if Critias had been violently hostile to 
Socrates.Like Alcibiades, Critias was involved in the affair of the 
Hermae: he was one of those denounced by Diocleides, and 
saved by the confession of Andocides, whose father Leégoras 
was Critias’ first cousin. Whether Critias went into exile on 
this occasion as well as later is not known. He was in Athens 
in 411 B.c., and was a leader of the pro-Spartan wing of the 
oligarchical government, which was active in fortifying 
Fétoneia at the mouth of the Peiraeus.» Nevertheless he did 
not lose the confidence of the people: after the fall of the Four 
Hundred it was he who proposed the resolution that the corpse 
of Phrynichus, the oligarchical leader murdered in 411 B.c., 
should be tried for treason, and if condemned thrown over the 
border. The reason for Critias’ vengeance on the dead 
Phrynichus was doubtless the latter’s hostility to Alcibiades,¢ 
for whose return Critias was working; Alcibiades’ recall was 
proposed by Critias immediately after the fall of the Four 
Hundred, and during the rule of the Five Thousand, in 411 
B.c.;° but Alcibiades did not actually return till 407. When in 
the same year he was again exiled, Critias also was banished by 
a vote of the Ecclesia,‘ on the proposal of the popular leader 
Cleophon, who quoted against him some verses of Solon

a@Ag >A6;cp. Thuc. VIII,g0 Az 4 Thuc. VIII, 48, 4; 50 599.3 54) 3 
SANGO cia gags rere 
* Xenophon’s attack may have been a counterblast to Plato's portrait of Socrates in 
the Charmides; cp. 155D. Socrates is here represented as almost overcome by the 
physical charms of Charmides, who was Critias’ cousin and ward, being the son of 
Glaucon I and the brother of Plato’s mother Perictione. If this were taken literally by

a “ would lead to charges which Xenophon in his apologia would be anxious to

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 407a “ would lead to charges which Xenophon in his apologia would be anxious to

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 407

written for his grandfather Critias, bidding him obey his father: 
this advice, said the orator, proved that the family had always 
been lawless.* Critias went to Thessaly, where he engaged in 
intrigues: Xenophon says that he there mixed with lawless 
men,” and (in a speech attributed to Theramenes) that he 
joined with one Prometheus in an attempt to set up democracy 
in Thessaly, arming the serfs against their masters.°.¢: His 
stay in Thessaly seems to have caused a deterioration in his 
character; at any rate he came back under the amnesty of 404 
B.C. thirsting for revenge against the people who had sent him 
into exile, and a complete oligarch so far as the Athenian 
democracy was concerned. His known pro-Spartan sentiments 
caused him to be chosen as one of the five ‘ephors’ appointed as 
conveners of the citizens, leaders of the oligarchs and oppon- 
ents of the democracy. These chose phylarchs? for the Tribes, 
and controlled the choice of all other officials, thus achieving 
complete domination of public affairs.¢When the Thirty were elected, and Critias and Charicles 
were appointed to revise the constitution and recodify the 
laws,° Critias gave free rein to his desire for revenge. Opposed 
by Theramenes in his demands for wholesale executions,‘ he 
denounced him before the Boulé; Theramenes drank the 
hemlock.? The Thirty, led by Critias, then plunged into a 
course of bloodshed and tyranny; they even pursued those 
whom they had driven into exile, by threatening with Spartan 
arms all cities which received them.? After Thrasybulus’ coup 
at Phyle, Critias and the rest of the Thirty, feeling insecure at 
Athens, seized Eleusis by a trick and prepared it as a strong- 
hold. Thrasybulus then effected his landing at Peiraeus and 
retired to Munychia. The oligarchical forces attacked from 
Athens; in the struggle Critias, with another of the Thirty, 
Hippomachus, his cousin Charmides: (now one of the ten 
archons) and about seventy of their followers, were killed. 
Critias’ friends set up a tomb on which Oligarchy was repre- 
sented as holding a torch and setting fire to Democracy; the

a : ~aio GArr @AgzsAg fFAro Ar ; 
AS £14 “al 3 , 
c1 Other authorities, unable to believe that the Athenian oligarch would help 
democracy elsewhere, said that he worked to make the Thessalian oligarchies more 
ive. (Ar=Philostratus V.S. I, 16.) »

aT Oraty SH Shuckburgh, Lystas, Orationes XVI, note ad boc. (XII, 43).

2 His last gesture, ‘This for the fair Critias’, recalls Critias’ interest in the: game 
Cottabos (Xen. Hell. Il, iti, 56; Ba).

408 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

inscription read: ‘This is the monument of good men, who 
checked for a time the accursed Athenian democracy from its 
violence.’* The authority does not state where the monument 
was erected. ?inscription read: ‘This is the monument of good men, who 
checked for a time the accursed Athenian democracy from its 
violence.’* The authority does not state where the monument 
was erected. ?

The career, and with it the work, of Critias quickly fell into 
oblivion: by the time of Aristotle, Critias was only a name to 
the majority.» Hatred of the Thirty obscured all else; and 
Critias was held up to execration by later writers (who based 
their accounts on those of Xenophon and Lysias) as the greatest 
villain who had ever lived. His corruption was sometimes 
attributed to the Thessalians, against whom Xenophon had a 
special grudge;* and sometimes to Socrates. The portraits of 
Critias by Plato, however, do not bear out those of Xenophon 
in the Memorabilia and the He/lenica. Bearing in mind Plato’s 
relationship to Critias, and his anti-democratic views, never- 
theless one can hardly believe that he would have regarded 
Critias so leniently if he had been the bloodthirsty tyrant 
depicted by Xenophon.* The truth about Critias’ character 
can best be gathered from the remains of his writings.

Writings., Critias wrote a considerable number of works in 
verse and prose. His verse works included a poem in hexa- 
meters on the poets ;¢ elegiacs on inventions,* on Constitutions, ' 
and other subjects; experimental verses consisting of a dactylic 
hexameter followed by an iambic trimeter line;* and plays. 
He also wrote in prose on Constitutions;' and his other prose 
works included Conversations,i in two books; Aphorisms,* in 
several books; Preludes to Public Orations;' a treatise on the 
Nature of Love, or The Virtues;s™ and other speeches or essays 
which were extant till the second century a.p. but are now lost.

His style was greatly praised by later writers on rhetoric; 
he aimed at a lofty and authoritative manner, like Antiphon the 
Sophist," but was purer in diction and clearer in arrangement;

> Ax, line rz qd Br e Bo f B6: A22 
\"> Ax, line rz qd Br e Bo f B6: A22 
\"

2 D542 = AQ; Cp. 5460; 547; Bsr

' ‘The story may be based on the saying attributed to Dionysius, tyrant of Syracuse, 
that ‘tyranny is a fine tomb’ (Isocr. Archidamus 45). It was used of Critias also by 
yeti a him by saying that he had at least died nobly (Philostr. V.S. I, 163

1, line 28).

* Cp. his portrait of Meno, Anab. II, vi, 21 in quite uns d by Plato. 
See p. 355 above. a ie has, PE ae

> See pp. 405-6 above.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 409

he aimed at directness rather than dramatic effect such as an 
affectation of honesty, simplicity and so forth, and avoided the 
appearance of a too obvious care.» He owed to Gorgias his 
grandeur,’ and to Antiphon the orator his exactitude in argu- 
ment;° but his felicity of expression was his own. Like Lysias, 
he tended to use the speech customary in his time;4 and he was 
regarded as one of the canons of pure Attic dialect, though 
actually he used a judicious mixture, thereby enhancing his use 
of Attic. He was somewhat lacking in force, but had the 
sweetness and smoothness of a zephyr, Philostratus says. ! 
Though his writings fell into oblivion, so that their authorship 
was disputed, they found their admirers, from time to time: 
Herodes Atticus singled Critias out for special admiration, 
and rescued his works from neglect.®

Few of the extant fragments of his writings have any interest 
for philosophy. Of his poem in hexameters on the poets, some 
lines survive in praise of Anacreon,* who had been a friend of 
his grandfather Critias,' and had praised the family in hisems.j Anacreon is praised as the poet of pleasure, of love 
and feasting. Critias may also have written a prose work of 
literary criticism: a passage survives in which he censures the 
poet Archilochus for having given himself away as the son of a 
slave, poor, quarrelsome, an adulterer and a coward.* Critias 
also wrote on Homer, saying that he was not the son of a 
mortal but miraculously begotten by a river-god.! Of his 
elegiacs, one poem described the inventions attributed to the 
various people and cities: to Sicily the game Cottabos and the 
wagon, to Thessaly the throne, to Miletus and Chios the bed, 
to Tyre the goblet of gold and all household utensils of bronze, 
to Thebes the chariot-seat, to Caria the merchant ship, to 
Athens the potter’s wheel and its products." To Orpheus is 
ascribed the invention of the dactylic hexameter.*. Another 
poem written partly in elegiacs was his congratulatory address 
to Alcibiades on his restoration in 407 B.c.; in part of this poem 
the hexameters were replaced by iambics, as ‘Alcibiades’ could 
not be written in the dactylic metre.c In this poem Critias 
proudly claimed to be the author of the proposal to invite 
Alcibiades to return.”

@ Azt h Br 1Az  JPlato, Charmrs7E  * B44 
m B2 n B3 © B4 P Bs

410 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS@ Azt h Br 1Az  JPlato, Charmrs7E  * B44 
m B2 n B3 © B4 P Bs

410 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Perhaps his best-known poem was the Constitutions in Verse, 
which finally came to be considered the only work he had 
written.* The only surviving fragments come from the Coz- 
stitution of the Spartans, and describe the abstemiousness of 
the 5 ghee in wine-drinking, as opposed to the heavy drink- 
ing of other peoples such as the Lydians. The Spartans do not 
pledge each other, passing the cup along to the right, but 
drink only what is before a thus they preserve health and 
property, while enjoying moderate good cheer.> The saying 
‘Nothing too much’ is attributed to the Spartan Chilon;° and 
it is suggested that virtue comes from habit rather than char- 
acter.4 ‘The corresponding prose work on Constitutions \ike- 
wise praises the Spartan way of drinking as opposed to the 
_Chian and Thasian, the Attic and the Thessalian.e In this 
work Spartan ways are eulogized, from their system of physical 
training for men and women, which produces the best children, 
down to the smallest details of their daily life: Spartan shoes 
are the best, their cloaks the most comfortable to wear, their 
soldier’s drinking-cup the most suitable, with its rim to catch 
impurities ;* Spartan household furniture is compared with the 
beds and tables of Miletus, Chios and Rhéneia." The ancient 
Spartan ‘tong-dance’ is described.! He also gives an account 
of the precautions taken by the Spartiates against the Helots, 
of whom they live in constant fear: nowhere is there a greater 
gulf between slave and free than at Sparta.i Whether this is a 
criticism, or is meant to illustrate Spartan mastery, is not clear. 
One other quotation from the prose Constitutions concerns the 
Thessalians: they are the richest of the Greeks in their clothes 
and way of life, and so were responsible for the Persian 
invasion, as the Persians coveted their wealth.* In a passage 
in the verse Constitutions, he expresses a wish for ‘the wealth - 
of the Scopadae, the magnanimity of Cimon, the victories of; : & Srarta’§, 41

The prose Constitutions, besides those on Spartaand Thessaly,

a A22 b B6 c By d Bo e B33 { B32 © B34

h Bas i B36; Athen. XIV, 629d J B37 k B31 1 BS

1! Scopadae: a noble Thessalian family, opponents of the Aleuadae. Almost the 
whole family was killed in 515 8.c. by the falling of the roof of their veting hall; 
Simonides who was present escaped, and wrote a dirge on this disaster (Frg. 32). A 
descendant of a survivor, Scopas the Younger, lived in the late fifth century {Ael. 7”.H. 
XII, 1). Arcesilas of Sparta: famous for victories in the chariot-gege 40 ~~ 
(Thuc. V, 50, 4; 76, 33 VEIT, 39, 2. Plut. Cim. X. Paus. VI, 2). |

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 411

included one on Athens.* Of this no specific quotation survives, 
though a number of scattered references to Athenian states- 
men may have come from this work. Cimon is again praised 
for having persuaded the Athenian people to send help to 
Sparta after the earthquake in 468 8.c., when the democratic 
leader Ephialtes took the opposite view that they should let 
their enemy remain in the dust. Other leaders such as 
Themistocles and Cleon are said to have entered politics with 
little or nothing, and amassed large fortunes while in power.° 
He may also have described the numerous trades plied in the 
Athenian market-place: dealers in clothes,‘ lyre-strings, ¢ brass, 
iron, vegetables, cheese, emetics, tow, wool, incense, roots, 
silphium, green-groceries, utensils, pots, drugs, weapons, 
pictures, birds; perfumiers,® seal-ring carvers,» hair-net 
makers,! seed-gatherers, seedsmen;i the fish-market.« The 
Athenian jury-system! seems to have been discussed, and 
other features of the busy city life.™ doubtless as opposed to 
Spartan simplicity.Four plays formerly attributed to Euripides — a trilogy and 
a satyric play —are now attributed to Critias.: The first 
three — Tennés, Rhadamanthys, Peirithtos — were stigmatized 
as spurious (that is, not by Euripides) in an anonymous Life 
of Euripides ;* and Athenaeus, quoting aline from the Peirithoos, 
speaks of ‘the author, whether Critias the tyrant or Euripides’.° 
The satyric play, Sisyphus, was attributed to Critias by Sextus, 
and to Euripides by Aétius.? On these grounds, as well as on 
grounds of style, it is considered that this tetralogy was in all 
probability the work of Critias, although those who quote 
fragments from these plays usually attribute them to Euripides.

Tennes was the eponymous hero of Tenedos;* nothing 
remains of the play except the single line: ‘Alas! Nothing 1s 
just in the present generation.’4 .

Of the Rhadamanthys only one fragment of importance 
survives: the speaker (probably Rhadamanthys) says that men 
have many desires, some for high birth, some for money, some 
for the gift of persuading others to evil courses; but that his

, c d : cp. B6s; B38 e B6 
fae en pues Pee B69 i ae Des’ U Bes Ber 
m B72; B73 n Bro oBr7 P B25 4 Brr; Br2 
1 Wilamowitz, N. Fahrbuch, 11 (1908) 57; Analecta Euripidea, p. 166 599.5 Hermes 62

1927) 291 59g. 
Z G. Norwood, Greek Tragedy, pp. 29, 30-

412 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

own wish is for glory.» *1 The end of the hypothesis of this 
play has been recovered from a papyrus found at Oxyrhyn- 
chus.>412 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

own wish is for glory.» *1 The end of the hypothesis of this 
play has been recovered from a papyrus found at Oxyrhyn- 
chus.>

Of the Petrithoos a portion of the Prologue, and of an episode, 
have been recovered from Oxyrhynchus papyri. The Prologue 
concerns Peirithoos’ father Ixion, his sin and punishment;? the 
episode gives a conversation between Theseus and Heracles.° 
The fragments quoted by ancient authors include a remark- 
able passage on Time — ‘unwearying, full, with everflowing 
stream, self-begetting’—and the Twin Bears with swiftly- 
moving wings, who guard the Pole of Atlas.¢ Another passage 
apostrophizes the Creator: ‘self-made, who hast woven the 
nature of all things in the aetherial whirl, round whom light, 
and dusky shimmering night, and the innumerable throng of 
the stars, for ever dance’.* Other fragments give a conversa- 
tion between Aeacus and Heracles in Hades;! and several 
truisms, on Fortune ally of the prudent,’ on honour,! on life, } 
and on the good character, which 1s stronger than law in that 
it cannot be overthrown by any orator. }

The longest and most interesting fragment comes from the 
Sisyphus: this gives a purely rationalistic explanation of the 
origin of religion, which he places after the origin of Justice and 
Law; Law could prevent only crimes done openly; religion was 
devised to check those done in secret, and was invented 
by a wise and clever man, who dragged in Divinity, saying 
that there was a God, immortal, omniscient, and caring about 
virtue. This man declared that the gods dwell in the heavens, 
whence come lightning and thunder, where are the stars, ‘the 
beautiful embroidery of Time the skilled craftsman’, and the 
sun and the rain, thus surrounding them with awe. By im- 
parting fears to mankind and establishing a deity with sound 
argument and in a suitable abode, he quenched lawlessness 
among men.*From unspecified dramas a few fragments remain on Time, ! 
Conceit, a comparison between rich stupidity and wise 
poverty as companions in the house," and the mistake of grati-

®Brs =» Diels Vors. II, p.425 © Bra; Vors. pp. 425-6 4Br8 =e Brg 
{B16 € Bax Ss B B2zo— i B2z)s«3 B22 ~—s K Bas; cp. Xen. Mem. I, iv, 18 
1 B26 m B28 2 B2zg

a! Eur, Frg. 865: ‘Fame shows the good man even in the hollows of the earth’, has

been attributed by Welcher to the Petrithoos (B24). 
1 Cp. Hom. Il. XIV, 317 599.3; Pind. Pyth. Il; Aesch. Zum. 441, 718.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 413

fying one’s friends’ desires, thus giving immediate pleasure but 
earning future enmity.*

From the Aphorisms and the Conversations, several quotations 
remain, showing that Critias emphasized the opposition be- 
tween Mind and the sense-perceptions.’ From a treatise on 
Love, or the Virtues, comes a description of irritability of 
temper; a from this book also comes the remark that 
beauty of form in men is the feminine, in women the opposite.° 
From an unspecified prose book comes a sentiment of extreme 
pessimism: nothing is certain except that having been born we 
die, and that in our lives we cannot escape from folly.4 In 
the Charmides the definition of Moderation as ‘minding one’s 
own business’ is attributed to Critias, who is most unwilling 
to admit to the authorship.¢ .

Critias is said to have accepted the view that the soul is 
blood: perception is most germane to the soul, and arises from 
the nature of the blood. In this he was probably following 
Empedocles. !Critias is said to have accepted the view that the soul is 
blood: perception is most germane to the soul, and arises from 
the nature of the blood. In this he was probably following 
Empedocles. !

The impression of Critias gained from his writings? is that 
he was a man of the world, with conventional aristocratic ideas 
on high birth, wealth, honour; that he himself had a lively 
enjoyment of the good things of life, and was more interested 
in objects than in theories. His admiration of Spartan modera- 
tion, and his detestation of self-indulgence, especially drunken- 
ness, was due rather to his love of physical perfection and 
mental alertness than to any abstract interest in the virtues. 
He had considerable gifts as a poet, but the epigram recorded 
by Proclus, that he was called ‘an amateur among philosophers, 
a philosopher among amateurs’® is borne out by all that remains 
of his work, and also by the portraits in Plato. Critias’ later 
degeneration into a tyrant was the fruit of his dislike of the 
Athenian democracy, of which he saw the worst side, and of his 
desire to avenge the insult of banishment.

a B27 b B39; B4o ¢ B48 d Bag e Bara; Charm. 161B; 162A

f A233 31Bios, 3 & A3; Procl. I, 70, 20 sqq. .

1 There is little warrant for Boeckh’s theory that the pseudo-Xenophontic treatise De 
Republ. Ath. is by Critias (B71); or that Critias was & TAaiKwvos tpaottis, who wrote 
verses in praise of ‘the sons of Ariston’ (Glaucon and Adeimantus, Plato’s brothers, 
Critias’ cousins), Plato, Repub. 368A.

414 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

89. THE ANONYMOUS WRITER QUOTED BY IAMBLICHUS414 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

89. THE ANONYMOUS WRITER QUOTED BY IAMBLICHUS

In Iamblichus’ essay Protrepticus (Exhortation to Philosophy) 
a long extract is quoted from an ethical-political essay believed 
to belong to the period of the Peloponnesian War. Though 
the style is literary Attic, and the questions discussed are those 
common in intellectual circles of the era of the Sophists, the 
essay cannot be assigned to any author. It has little merit, 
being trite, laboured and lacking in any touch of inspiration 
or originality. It reads like the careful essay of a student, and 
falls far below the standard, both literary and philosophical, of 
any of the known writers of the day. The following is a brief 
summary of its contents:

I. p. 95, 13. Success in any sphere (wisdom, courage, 
eloquence, virtue) depends on several factors: first, natural 
endowment, which is a matter of chance; and others which are 
within our control, namely, desire for the good, industry, and 
early start and long pursuit of the chosen subject. If any of 
these is absent, complete success is impossible; if all are 
present, nothing is out of reach.

2. p. 96, 1. The early start and assiduous effort are 
necessary because fame can only be built up over a long time. 
Time breeds in others confidence in one, and overcomes their 
envy. Men do not accord praise readily, but in the end can be 
forced by the compulsion of facts to praise even against their 
will; they cease to wonder if a man is really what he seems, or 
is merely pursuing reputation and deceiving them. Rhetoric 
can be mastered in a short time from a teacher; but the virtue 
built up of many acts cannot be brought to its goal if begun 
late or briefly practised; it 1s achieved by long association, by

refraining from all evil deeds, works, and ways, and by practis- 
‘ng the reverse over along period. Further, men do not readily 
accept eminence suddenly acquired, either in wealth, wisdom 
or Cour age.3. p- 97, 16. If anyone achieve his object, he must use his 
success for good and lawful purposes; if he uses it for unjust 
ao it becomes a curse. If he does the former, he will

come completely good, but if the latter, completely bad. 
He who desires complete virtue must study by what theory 
and practice he can attain it; he will then be most useful to the

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 41§

most people. Liberality with money has its disadvantages: 
either one must collect the money again and so do harm; or if 
one does not, one becomes poor, for itis not possible to accumu- 
late enough to go round. But support given to the laws and 
justice has no such consequences: this is what unites States 
and men, and it is a gift that does not fail.

' 4. p. 98, 17, Self-control must be practised assiduously; 
one can achieve this by being superior to money, the great 
corruptor, and lavish of one’s soul in the pursuit of justice and 
virtue. Most men are uncontrolled in these two respects, 
for the following reasons: they love their soul, for that is life, 
so they are sparing of their soul. They love money, because of 
their fears, of disease, old age, sudden losses; not so much 
losses inflicted by law, for these can be guarded against, but 
losses due to fires, the deaths of slaves and cattle, and other 
mishaps to body, soul or property. Other reasons for the 
desire to make money are: ambitions, emulations, and the 
desire for positions of power, to the attainment of which 
money contributes. But the truly good man seeks reputation 
not by means of extraneous adornment but by his own virtue.

5. p- 99, 18. Love of life might be excused if a man by 
avoiding death at the hands of another could be ageless and 
immortal. But since life if prolonged leads to old age, that 1s, 
an inferior state, not immortality, it is great ignorance and the 
habit of thinking and desiring what is bad to prefer this state 
coupled with dishonour rather than immortal fame. _6. p. 100, 5. Further, one must not seek aggrandizement, 
nor must strength if used for aggrandisement be regarded as 
virtue, while obedience to law is considered cowardice. Such 
a notion is the source of all that is opposed to the good. Men 
cannot live as individuals ; they are united through necessity ; and 
when they are in communities, they cannot live in lawlessness, 
for this would be worse than separate existence. Hence law 
and justice are men’s rulers, and this can never be changed, 
being fixed by natural laws. If a man were so constituted that 
he were immune from wounds and disease, and were a super- 
man unconquerable in body and soul, one might think perhaps 
that his power for aggrandizement would be sufficient; but 
this would be a mistake. Even such a man could be preserved 
only by alying himself with justice and law, and using his 
power for these and auxiliary ends; for the whole human race

416 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

would unite in enmity against such a character because of their 
own obedience to law; and their mass would prove superior to 
him and would conquer him.

7. p. 101, 11. It is necessary to study the advantages of 
obedience to law, and the disadvantages of lawlessness. The 
advantages of the former are: mutual trust, which leads to the 
sharing of property, so that even a small amount suffices, 
whereas without it even a large amount will not. Prosperity 
and adversity are assisted by law: the former can be enjoyed 
without disturbance, the latter aided by the more fortunate. 
Time, under law, is unproductive of intrigues, productive of 
works necessary to life. Men are freed from the most un- 
pleasant thoughts, and endowed with the most pleasant, for 
intrigues give the former, creative work the latter. They can 
g° to sleep without fear, and wake up likewise, with thoughtsee from anxiety, ready for the work of the day, and lightening 
their labours with optimistic thoughts. War, producer of the 
greatest evils, bringing disaster and slavery, is undertaken 
rather by the lawless than by the law-abiding. The opposite 1s 
true of lawlessness: men busy themselves with intrigues, not 
work; they hoard money through mistrust and do not share it, 
so that scarcity prevails. Prosperity is insecure, adversity is 
increased, External war and internal strife arise, the latter 
through continual intrigues and counter-intrigues. Awake, 
one’s thoughts are unpleasant; sleep and waking alike are full 
of fears. Tyranny, that great evil, arises from lawlessness. 
Some wrongly believe that men are deprived of their freedom 
not by their own fault but by the power of the established 
tyrant; monarch and tyrant are established through lawless- 
ness and aggrandizement. This comes about when all men 
have turned their hands to evil; men cannot live without laws 
and justice, and when these fail, the government falls into the 
hands of one man. How else could the rule of one man come 
about if law, which is the advantage of the people, were not 
expelled? A man who would rob the people of their law would 
have to be made of iron, if he, being one, were to succeed 
against so many; but being flesh and like other men, he could 
not do so. Only by establishing the opposite (to law, that is, 
lawlessness) can he become sole ruler. And so his very genesis 
escapes the notice of some men.

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 417

QO. TWOFOLD ARGUMENTS (DEBATES)THE OLDER SOPHISTS 417

QO. TWOFOLD ARGUMENTS (DEBATES)

Tus work has no title or author’s name; its date is after the 
end of the Peloponnesian War, as the author implies.* ®1 It is 
written in a literary Doric, the exact provenance of which is not 
known,’ and is an exercise in demonstrating that there are two 
sides to every question, as Protagoras taught.» The author 
shows little originality, and appears to be repeating arguments 
and examples used by others, especially Heracleitus, Protagoras 
and Plato. A mnemonic theory, doubtless that of Hippias, is 
recommended.°* Examples of national customs are derived from 
Herodotus. : The work is superficial and casuistic, an example 
of the kind of instruction for which the Sophists became 
notorious and were satirized by Aristophanes and Plato.

1. The first chapter applies the method of the twofold 
argument to good and bad.? Some say that they are different, 
others that they are the same,‘ differing only in relation to the 
subject and the occasion.

The latter proposition is taken first: examples are given, 
showing that good and bad are relative terms. Certain things 
such as food, drink,® sexual intercourse, are bad for those that 
are sick, good for the healthy when they need them. Self- 
indulgence is bad for the self-indulgent, but good for the trades- 
man. Death, disease, shipwreck are ills for those who suffer 
them, but good for the undertaker, doctor, shipbuilder, In 
contests, athletic, musical and warlike, victory is a good for 
the victor, an ill for the vanquished.

The opposite proposition is that good and bad are different 
in fact as in name. They cannot be the same, because then to 
do good to parents would be to do ill; to do ill to enemies 
would be to do good; the King of Persia would be no better off 
than beggars. Food, drink, sexual intercourse would be both 
good and bad for the sick, and so on. In this section the ques-

21§8 » 80Bé6a fg d 22B58 © cp. 22B6121§8 » 80Bé6a fg d 22B58 © cp. 22B61

a! Not necessarily as early as 400 B.C., the date accepted by Diels. The reading is 
doubtful; but the most probable conjecture is t& vedytera; this would mean ‘I give the 
most recent example first’, not necessarily that ‘the most recent example’ had only just 
occurred. It is hard to believe that the work was not written after the publication of 
Protagoras, Meno, Phaedo, Phaedrus and Theaetetus, all of which, whatever their exact 
date, are later than 399 B.C.

1 Diels points to the otherwise unknown ending -etvm for the dat. plur. mase. 
2 Tepl c&yaddd Kal KaKdd.

EE

418 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

tion-and-answer method is used, and the argument finished 
inconclusively: the speaker says ‘I do not say what good is; I 
am merely trying to prove that they are not the same’.

2. The second ‘twofold argument’ deals with good and bad 
in the sense of honourable and dishonourable.t The two 
propositions are as before: that they are different; and that 
they are the same.2. The second ‘twofold argument’ deals with good and bad 
in the sense of honourable and dishonourable.t The two 
propositions are as before: that they are different; and that 
they are the same.

The second proposition is taken first; and the relativity of 
what is honourable is shown by examples. It is right for a 
beautiful boy to gratify a lover, but not a non-lover.* Women 
may bathe indoors but not in the pa/aistra; men may bathe in 
public also. Sexual intercourse in private is right, in public 
wrong; men and women may have intercourse with their 
married partners, but not with others. It is right for a woman 
to adorn herself with cosmetics and jewellery, wrong for a man. 
To treat friends well is right, to treat enemies well 1s wrong; 
to kill friends and fellow-citizens is wrong, to kill enemies is 
right. Different States and peoples have different ideas of 
what is honourable and shameful: Spartan girls may exercise 
stripped, Ionian girls may not; Spartans need not learn music 
and letters,¢ Ionians should understand all these things. 
Thessalians may catch and train horses, or catch, kill, flay and 
cut up oxen; in Sicily this is the work of slaves. Macedonian 
girls are allowed to have lovers before marriage but not after- 
wards; for (true) Greeks both are wrong. For Thracian girls, 
tattooing 1s an adornment;? for other peoples, it is a punish- 
ment for crime. The Scythian thinks it right, having killed an 
enemy, to scalp him and carry the scalp in front of his horse; he 
covers the skull with gold or silver and uses it as a drinking- 
cup;° Greeks would not enter under the same roof with one 
who had done such things. The Massagetae cut up and eat 
their parents;‘ 1f a Greek did this, he would be put to death. 
Persians think it right for men to adorn themselves like women ; 
and to have intercourse with daughter, mother or sister; 
Greeks think this unlawful. Lydians marry girls who have 
been prostitutes; no Greek would do so. In Egypt the men 
weave and work wool; in Greece the women. In Egypt they 
knead clay with the hands, bread with the feet.! Finally, if4 cp. Phatdr. 230E sqg. cp. Meno 71E ¢Butcp.88A1s 4 Hdt. V, 6 
€ Han. W 9 04, Qs 4 Fad. 1, 216 zg Hake. 4 94 bh Hdt. +o + ma ares - 
1 Tepl ward xed :

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 419

one bade all men collect into a heap all the things which each 
group thinks wrong, and again bade them pick out from the 
heap everything that any group thinks right, nothing would be 
left over. The argument ends with a verse quotation: nothing 
is absolutely right or wrong, but the occasion decides; so that 
honourable and dishonourable are the same.

The opposite argument, that they are different, is as follows: 
whoever says that right and wrong are the same must admit 
that if ever he has done anything right, it was also wrong. A 
handsome man is also ugly, a white man is also black. It is 
right to honour the gods, and also wrong, right for a woman to 
adorn herself, also wrong. In Sparta it‘is right and wrong for 
the girls to strip for exercise, and so on. Finally, if all things 
considered wrong were collected into a heap, and men were 
ordered to take away what they thought right, all things thus 
taken away would be right for those who took them. The 
wrong things will not become right, any more than if one 
brought a horse or sheep or ox one would take away something 
different. If one brought gold or silver one would not take 
away brass or lead. So, in place of the ‘wrong’ one brought, 
one would take a ‘right’; the right and wrong things would not 
become the same thereby. To call in the evidence of poetry 
is no argument: poets write to give enjoyment, not truth.

3. The third ‘twofold argument’ deals with right and wrong 
in the sense of just and unjust. It 1s maintained that they are 
different, and that they are the same.3. The third ‘twofold argument’ deals with right and wrong 
in the sense of just and unjust. It 1s maintained that they are 
different, and that they are the same.

First, the proof that they are the same: lying and deceit are 
right towards enemies in time of war; it 1s right to deceive 
parents who refuse medicine, by putting it into their food. 
Violence towards and theft from relatives and friends is right 
if one of them is about to attack you with a sword. You may 
break into the house of a citizen, if your father is imprisoned 
there and is in danger of his life. Perjury is right towards 
enemies. Temple-robbery may be justified if Greece 1s in 
danger and money is needed to save her from the barbarian 
invader : this applies only to the temples which are the common 
property of Hellas — Delphi and Olympia—not to those 
which belong to individual States. To kill one’s nearest and 
dearest may be right, as in the cases of Orestes and Alcmaeon, 
acting under orders from the oracle. In the arts, whoever best

1 Tepl Sixaios Kal Bix. cp. 22Br02.

420 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

deceives in tragedy and painting is the best artist. Quotations 
from Cleobulina and Aeschylus are added, showing that lying, 
deceit and theft may be right. Hence just and unjust (or 
honest and dishonest) are the same, varying according to 
circumstance.

The opposite argument, that they are different, is as before: 
if they are the same, then to do what is right is to do what is 
wrong, and vice versa; a just man is also unjust, and a criminal 
worthy of death for his crimes has done righteous deeds; to 
steal the enemy’s goods is both right and wrong. Justice and 
injustice do not enter into the arts. Poetry cannot be used in 
evidence, being written for pleasure, not truth.

4. The fourth ‘twofold argument’ deals with true and false: 
that they are the same, and that they are different.4. The fourth ‘twofold argument’ deals with true and false: 
that they are the same, and that they are different.

First, that they are the same: the same story is true or false 
according to whether it corresponds with the facts. An accusa- 
tion of temple-robbery may be true or false; so too the state- 
ment for the defence. If all present make the same statement, 
‘I am an initiate’, it is true for one only, who actually is 
initiated. So that the same words when falsehood is present are 
false, and when truth is present are true (just as a person is the 
same whether boy, youth, man or old man).

The opposite argument, that they are different, is: if those 
who maintain that true and false are the same are asked whether 
their own argument is true or false, and if they reply ‘false’, 
then they admit that true and false are different; if they say 
‘true’, then by their own hypothesis the same argument is also 
false. A true piece of evidence is also false, a truthful man is a 
liar. According to them, if the things stated have actually 
happened, the story is true; if not, it is false. But the jury are 
examining, not the events (for they were not present) but the 
stories told of the events; so that the stories themselves differ 
according to whether truth or falsehood is mingled with them. 
(So the true and false tale are different.)

5. The fifth ‘twofold argument’ is that madmen and sane, 
wise and ignorant, say and do the same things; and that they 
do not.

On the former proposition: Both give the same names to

Youngs. earth, man, horse, fire, and the rest. They do the same 
_ things: sit, eat, drink, lie down. All things are and are not:* 
® 22B49a

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 421

the same thing is bigger and smaller,* more and less, heavier 
and lighter; a talent is heavier than a mina, lighter than two 
talents. The same man is alive and not alive; things here are 
not in Libya; and so on.The — proposition: it is not true that mad and sane, 
wise and ignorant, do and say the same things. Madness 
differs from sanity, wisdom from ignorance; this is clear from 
their actions. So that if these actions are the same, the wise 
are mad and the mad are wise and all is confusion. The wise 
say what they say on the right occasion, the mad say the same 
things on the wrong occasion; this small point alters every- 
thing. As proof that a very small change can make a great 
difference, examples are given of a change of accent or quantity 
in a word, or a transposition of letters, making a great difference 
in the meaning. If anything be added or subtracted, as when 
one takes 1 from 10, or adds 1 to 10, the difference is even 
greater. So that the qualification ‘on the right occasion’ makes 
all the difference between the sayings and doings of mad and 
sane, wise and ignorant. As for the argument that the same 
man both is and is not: the question to ask is, does this relate 
to the part or the whole? They are not the same.

6. On wisdom and virtue: can they be taught?

The theory that wisdom and virtue cannot be taught or 
learnt is neither new nor true.” The twofold arguments are 
as follows:

Affirmative: wisdom and virtue cannot be taught or learnt. 
First: if you give something to someone, you cannot have it. 
Second: if it were teachable, there would be teachers, as of 
music.° Third: the wise men of Greece would have taught 
their friends the same art. Fourth: some have studied under 
professional teachers (Sophists) and not been improved. Fifth: 
many who have not had teachers have proved meritorious.Negative: the first argument is foolish; teachers do actually 
teach letters and music and yet retain their own knowledge. 
Second: what else do the Sophists teach if not wisdom and 
virtue?? Anaxagoras and Pythagoras have their disciples. 
Third: Polycleitus taught his son sculpture. If anyone has 
failed to impart his knowledge, this proves nothing, but if any- 
one has succeeded, this proves that the subject 1s teachable.

a cp. Plat. Phaed. 102B-D bcp. Plat. Protag. 319A s¢q.3 Meno 87B sqq. 
© Meno, 89E sqq. d Meno 91B

422 THE PRE-SOCRATIC PHILOSOPHERS

Fourth: many who study letters do not learn. Fifth: natural 
endowment makes it possible for some who have had no 
teacher to pick up knowledge readily elsewhere, perhaps from 
father or mother. One can pick up knowledge such as the names 
of things without knowing who was one’s teacher; a Greek 
child reared in Persia will speak Persian, and if brought to 
Greece, will speak Greek.

The speaker on the negative side ends: “This 1s my argu- 
ment, beginning, end and middle. I do not say that virtue and 
wisdom are teachable, but only that the arguments advanced do 
not satisfy me.’

7. On lot: should all offices be awarded by lot, as some of the 
democratic orators say?7. On lot: should all offices be awarded by lot, as some of the 
democratic orators say?

Only the negative side is given. The opponent is asked, 
Why do you not assign tasks to your slaves by lot, and let the 
driver cook and the cook drive? Why do we not compel 
smiths, cobblers, carpenters to follow the trade decreed by lot? 
In competitions, why is the flautist not compelled to play the 
harp, the harpist to play the flute; in war, the archers and 
hoplites to be cavalry and vice versa; so that all will be doing 
what they neither understand nor are able to do? The other 
side say that the lot is beneficial and democratic; this 1s not so. 
There are men in the State who are hostile to democracy and 
will overthrow the People if the lot so falls. The People itself 
should choose those loyal to it, and select suitable men as 
generals, magistrates and so on.

8. Proposition: it belongs to the same man and the same 
art to be able to converse in the brief style,* and understand the 
truth about affairs; to pass correct judgement; to be a public 
speaker; to understand the art of rhetoric; and to teach con- 
cerning the nature and origin of the universe.

Only the affirmative arguments are given, and these are 
somewhat disconnected. First, the man who understands the 
nature of the universe will be able to give correct teaching and 
advise the community best on everything. Second, he who 
understands rhetoric will know how to speak correctly on

everything; for if anyone is to speak well, he must speak on 
what he Knows, therefore he will know about everything, He 
knows the arts of all kinds of speech, and these cover a} exist- 
ing things. Further, he who wishes to speak correctly must 
® Protag. 334E 599. bcp. 75 Ba; see above, p. 336

THE OLDER SOPHISTS 423THE OLDER SOPHISTS 423

understand the matters on which he speaks, and must correctly 
instruct the community to do what is good, and prevent them 
from doing what is bad. Knowing the correct course, he will 
also know the opposite; for the latter belongs to the same 
section of the whole, and he will always do the proper thing in 
regard to the same necessity if he is called upon. If he knows 
how to play the flute, he will always be able to do so if required. 
Further, the man who is to pass correct judgement must under- 
stand what is just; he will also know the opposite. He must 
also know all the laws; if he does not understand public affairs, 
he will not know the laws. The man who understands music 
knows the laws of music; he who does not know music will not 
know its laws either.

Further, whoever knows the truth about affairs knows 
everything; and so he can converse briefly, and if necessary 
give answers to questions; on everything; therefore he must 
know everything.

9g. On memory. The greatest and finest discovery is 
memory, useful for everything, for knowledge and for life. 
The following are the rules for memorizing:

First, attend closely: the mind will thus penetrate the subject 
and perceive better.

Second, practise what you hear. Listening often to the same 
things and repeating them causes what you have learnt to pass 
as a whole into the memory.

Third, if you hear anything new, associate it with what you 
know. The names ‘Chrysippus’ and ‘Pyrilampés’ can be 
remembered by associating them with their component parts.? 
Activities can be associated with their patron gods or heroes: 
courage with Ares and Achilles, bronze-working with Hephaes- 
tus, cowardice with Epeius. ...

The manuscript here breaks off.

1 Xpuormmos with Xpueds and frrros, MupiAdurns with wip and Adprrev.

LIST OF AUTHORITIES

LIST OF AUTHORITIES

‘ontains, with a few exceptioThe manuscript here breaks off.

1 Xpuormmos with Xpueds and frrros, MupiAdurns with wip and Adprrev.

LIST OF AUTHORITIES

LIST OF AUTHORITIES

‘ontains, with a few exceptio

acr v orsokratiker, Stellenregister, Vol 
writer gives, where possible, his plac. 2. v..,.. 
his principal works.

AcuILtfs Statius or Tarius, of Byzantium, 2nd or 3rd century A.D 
Wrote On the Sphere, of which a fragment called Introduction 
(Isagégé) to the ‘Phaenomena’ of Aratus is preserved. (Not to be 
confused with Achilles Tatius of Alexandria, 5th century a.p., 
novelist.)

AELIAN (CLaupius AELIANus, ‘Sophista’), born at Praeneste in Italy, 
lived and taught rhetoric at Rome, 2nd century a.p. Wrote in 
Greek. Two works are preserved: Varia Historia, a collection 
of anecdotes taken from other writers often without acknow- 
ledgment; and De Animalium Natura, also a compilation from 
other writers, but with observations of his own.

Agius Prométus of Alexandria, date uncertain; wrote medical works.

Aétius (Medicus) born at Amida in Mesopotamia, lived at end of 5th 
or beginning of 6th century a.p. Wrote sixteen books on 
Medicine, a valuable and critical compilation from many 
medical writers now lost.

Aétrus the Doxographer, author of a philosophical compilation men- 
tioned by Theodoret; date later than the 4th century B.c. (See 
Diels, Doxographi Graect, and Burnet, £.G.P.‘, pp. 34-5.)

AcaTHEMERUs, probably early 3rd century a.p. Wrote an Outline of 
Geography, (extant) a compilation from Ptolemy and other geo- 
graphical writers.

Axikaros (AKICHAROS, ACHAIKAROS), Chaldean sage, mentioned in 
Book of Tobit and by Strabo; subject of dialogue (lost) by ‘Theo- 
phrastus. His sayings began to reach Greece in 4th century B.c. 
An Aramaic version of these was discovered at Elephantiné in 
1912.ABertus Maanus of Cologne, 13th century 4.p. Scholastic philosopher, 
teacher of Thomas Aquinas. Wrote paraphrases of all the works 
of Aristotle. Had considerable knowledge of the sciences, and 
wove together Aristotelian, Arabian, Jewish, Neo-Platonic and 
Augustinian teachings.

Atcipamas of Elaea in Aeolis (Asia Minor). Greek rhetorician, pupil 
of Gorgias, lived in Athens between 432 and 411 B.C. :

Axcimus, flor. c. 300 8.C., probably of Sicily, author of a work Against 
Amyntas, quoted by Diog. L., who called him the most distin- 
guished of all Greek rhetoricians.

427

428 LIST OF AUTHORITIES

ALEXANDER OF AgToiia, Greek poet and grammarian, lived under 
Ptolemy Philadelphus at Alexandria (285-47 B.c.).

ALEXANDER of Aphrodisias in Caria, end of 2nd and early 3rd centuries 
a.D. Surnamed Exégétés because of his fame as an interpreter of 
Aristotle.

ALEXANDER Cornéf.ius, surnamed Polyhistér (‘very learned’), Greek 
writer living in Rome, Ist century B.c., contemporary of Sulla. 
Famed for great learning and voluminous writing on history and 
geography. Probably the author of a work called Successtons of the 
Philosophers, on the handing down of philosophical teachings; 
and also a treatise on the Pythagoreans.

ALEXANDER of Myndus in Caria, date uncertain; wrote on zoology, and 
perhaps a work on Myths.

Aexis, Athenian comic poet, 4th century B.c.; uncle and tutor of 
Menander.

ALExIs or ALEXINUS, mentioned by Athenaeus as author of a treatise 
On Self-Suffictency; otherwise unknown.

Amerpsias, Athenian comic poet, 5th century B.c., contemporary of 
Aristophanes.

AmmiAnus Marcettinus, Greek by birth, Roman soldier, 4th century 
a.D. Wrote in Latin a history of Rome from 96 a.D. to 378 a.D., 
preserving important material.

Ammoénius, son of Hermeias, 5th-6th centuries a.p., studied at Athens 
under Proclus; teacher of Simplicius. Wrote Greek commentaries 
on Plato, Ptolemy and Aristotle, most of which are lost.Ammoénius, son of Hermeias, 5th-6th centuries a.p., studied at Athens 
under Proclus; teacher of Simplicius. Wrote Greek commentaries 
on Plato, Ptolemy and Aristotle, most of which are lost.

AnaTOLius of Alexandria, Bishop of Laodicea, 3rd century a.p., author 
of a work on Arithmetic, fragments of which are preserved.

AnarTo ius, Vindontus, of Berytus, 4th-5th centuries a.p. Author of a 
compilation on Agriculture, in twelve books; from this a By- 
zantine editor of the roth century built up a compilation in twenty 
books, which has come down to us under the title Geopontca.

ANAXIMANDER the Younger of Miletus, lived in the time of Artaxerxes 
II, first half of 4th century B.c.; historian; wrote Exegeses of 
Pythagorean Allegorical Precepts (lost). On this was baseda similar 
work by Androcydes, a physician of the time of Alexander the 
Great, called On the Pythagorean Allegorical Precepts, which in 
turn was used by Diogenes L., Demetrius Byz., Nicomedes and 
others.

Anpocipés, one of the Ten Attic Orators; 5th century B.c.

Anpr6n of Ephesus, date uncertain; wrote a work on the Seven Sages, 
perhaps entitled The Tripod.

of Teos or Halicarnassus, date uncertain; earlier than the 2nd 
century 4.D.; Greek historian; wrote Famtly Relationships. 
N, author of a work on the history of Attica; probably not the

Athenian orator attacked by Demosthenes.

LIST OF AUTHORITIES 429

ANTAGORAS of Rhodes, 3rd century B.c., wrote an epic poem Thebais, 
and epigrams quoted by Diog. L.Athenian orator attacked by Demosthenes.

LIST OF AUTHORITIES 429

ANTAGORAS of Rhodes, 3rd century B.c., wrote an epic poem Thebais, 
and epigrams quoted by Diog. L.

ANTHOLOGIA Patatina, an Anthology compiled by Constantinus 
Cephalas (probably roth century a.p.) under the Byzantine 
Emperor Constantinus Porphyrogenitus; nothing is known of the 
author. ‘The MS. was discovered in 1601 by the French scholar 
Saumaise (Salmasius) in the Library of the Electors Palatine at 
Heidelberg, and with the rest of the Library was later removed 
to the Vatican. This Anthology, which was the first since that 
of Meleager to draw on new sources, superseded on its discovery 
the Anthology of Maximus Planudes, the most complete known 
before that time.

Anticonus of Carystus, 3rd century 3.c., wrote Historiae Mirabiles, 
anecdotes in Greek taken from other writers.

ANTIPATER of ‘Tarsus, 2nd century B.c. Stoic philosopher, lived at * 
Athens. Disciple of Diogenes of Babylon, and teacher of 
Panaetius. Wrote books Oz the Gods; On Divination; and On 
Superstition.

AnTIPHANES, Athenian comic poet, 4th century B.c.

ANTISTHENES of Rhodes, flor. c. 200 B.c., wrote a History of his own 
times, praised by Polybius.

Anténtus ‘Melissa’, Greek monk, date uncertain: may be 8th or 12th 
century A.D. Compiled /oct communes, sentences on virtues and 
vices, from the early Christian fathers, printed at end of early 
editions of Stobaeus.

Apo.tiopérus of Athens, Greek grammarian, 2nd century B.c. Wrote 
Chronica, a chronicle in iambic verse dealing with history from 
the fall of Troy to his own time (143 B.c.). May also have been 
the author of Bibsiotheca, a valuable account (extant) of the 
legends of Greece beginning with the origin of the gods and 
ending with the time of Theseus. t

Aroxiéntus ‘Dyscolus’, grammarian, taught at Alexandria and Rome, 
and century a.p. Was the first to reduce grammar to a 
system. )Aroxiéntus ‘Dyscolus’, grammarian, taught at Alexandria and Rome, 
and century a.p. Was the first to reduce grammar to a 
system. )

Apo.iénius Rhodius, poet and grammarian, lived at Alexandria and at 
Rhodes in the 3rd century B.c.; wrote epic poem Argonautica.

Apotiénius Tyanensis, of Tydna in Cappadocia, born just before the 
Christian era; Pythagorean philosopher. His Life was written 
by Philostratus.

Apot.énius, author of an extant Historiae Miraliles; otherwise un- 
known.

Aputfitus of Madaura in Africa, born c. 114 4.D. Besides the Meta- 
morphoseis or Golden Ass, his extant works include: Apologia 
sive de Magia, a defence on a charge of using charms; de Dog- 
mate Platonis; de Mundo, translation of the work once ascribed

430 LIST OF AUTHORITIES

to Aristotle; and an Anthology of extracts collected by another 
from Apuleius’ works.

ArAtus of Soloi in Cilicia, for. 270 B.c., spent the latter part of his life at 
the court of Antigonus Gonatas, King of Macedonia. Wrote two 
astronomical poems entitled Phaenomena and Diosémeia.

ARrcHETimus of Syracuse, wrote on the interview of Thales and other 
Sages with Cypselus of Corinth, at which he was present accord- 
ing to Diog. L.

ArcuiLocuus of Paros, ¢. 720-676 B.c., lyric poet famous especially 
for his satiric iambics,

ARCHIMEDEs of Syracuse, born 287 B.c., most famous of ancient mathe- 
maticians and inventors; a number of his works survive. 
ArisTeas of Cyprus, 3rd century B.c.; was an official at the court of 
Ptolemy Philadelphus (285-247 B.c.). To him is ascribed a 
Letter describing the circumstances of the translation of the

Septuagint at Alexandria.

Aristipfs, P. Agtrus, Greek rhetorician, born 117 4.p. Studied under 
Herodes Atticus at Athens; finally settled in Smyrna. Extant 
works: fifty-five Orations, and two treatises on Rhetoric.

ArisTipfs QuINTILIANUs, probably Ist century a.D., wrote a valuable 
work on Music.ArisTipfs QuINTILIANUs, probably Ist century a.D., wrote a valuable 
work on Music.

AristToc.fs of Messene, probably early 3rd century a.p. Peripatetic 
philosopher. Fragments of his work on Philosophy are preserved 
by Eusebius.

ARIsTOCRITUS, 5th century a.D.; member of the Manichean sect; 
author of a work in Greek entitled Theosophia.

ArisTOn of Chios, 3rd century B.c. Stoic philosopher, contemporary 
of Epicurus. Probably author of Life of Epicurus and Life of 
Heracleitus (though there are several others of the same name).

ARISTOPHANES, Athenian comic poet; latter half of 5th and early 4th 
cehturies B.C.

ARISTOPHANEs of Byzantium, 3rd century B.c., librarian at Alexandria 
under Ptolemy II and Ptolemy III. Critic and scholar. Was 
chiefly occupied with new editions of the Greek poets, but also 
published a new edition of Plato, and writings on Aristotle 
including an abridged version of Aristotle’s De Natura Animal- 
ium. His writings are preserved in fragments only.

ArisTropHén, Athenian comic poet (Middle Comedy); nothing of his 
work survives except titles and a few fragments.

ARISTOTLE, 384-322 B.C., born at Stageira in Chalcidicé; studied under 
Plato at Athens, 367-347 B.c. Travelled to the Troad; lived 
there and at Mitylene. Became tutor to Alexander the Great; 
returned to Athens c. 335 B.c. Founded the Peripatetic School. 
Wrote works on Logic, mathematics, physics (inorganic nature),

psychology, biology, metaphysics, ethics, politics, poetry and

LIST OF AUTHORITIES 431

rhetoric. The First Book of his Metaphysics is the chief authority 
for the views of his predecessors in philosophy from ‘Thales 
onward, apart from their own writings.

ArisToxenus of Tarentum, latter half of 4th century s.c. Peripatetic 
philosopher and musician; wrote numerous works on music, 
philosophy and history; of these, his Elements of Harmony is 
extant, and there are fragments of works on Pythagoras; wrote 
also Memars of Praxidamas.Arius Didymus of Alexandria, 1st century B.c.-Ist century 4.D.; teacher 
of Augustus and friend of Maecenas; wrote on philosophy. 
His works survive in extracts only, two of which are found in 
Stobaeus, and others in Eusebius and Clement.

ARMENIDAS, date unknown, wrote a work on Thebes.

ARNOBIUs, native of Africa, end of 3rd and beginning of 4th centuries 
A.D. Wrote Adversus Gentes (Against the Pagans), a vindication 
of Christianity against polytheism, one of the best sources of 
information for ancient religion.

ARRIAN, native of Bithynia, end of 1st and first half of 2nd centuries a.p. 
Friend and admirer of Epictetus, whose lectures he published at 
Athens in eight books, of which four are extant, as also an 
Encheiridion (Practical Handbook) of the teachings of Epictetus. 
Arrian’s most important work was his 4nabasis, an account of the 
Asiatic campaigns of Alexander, valuable for its accuracy as well 
as its clear Xenophontic style.

ARTEMIDORUs, native of Ephesus, called Daldianus from his mother’s 
birthplace of Daldis in Lydia. Lived at Rome under Antoninus 
Pius and Marcus Aurelius (138-180 a.p.). Wrote a work 
Onetrocritica, On the Interpretation of Dreams (extant); its object 
is to prove that the future is revealed by dreams, but it contains 
valuable information on custom and ritual. He is not to be con- 
fused with Artemidorus the geographer, also of Ephesus, flor. c. 
100 B.C,

Asciépiapgs of Myrleia in Bithynia, 2nd or Ist century B.c.; perhaps 
pupil of Apollonius Rhodius; wrote various works of literary 
criticism and history. ;

Asius of Samos, early Greek poet, flor. c. 700 B.C.

Aspastus, flor. c. 80 a.D. Wrote commentaries on most of the works of 
Aristotle; part of that on the Nscomachean Ethics is extant.

Aruanastius (Saint) of Alexandria, 4th century 4.p.; Bishop of Alex- 
andria; author of numerous ecclesiastical tracts, especially against 
the Arians; also of commentaries on the Scriptures.Aruanastius (Saint) of Alexandria, 4th century 4.p.; Bishop of Alex- 
andria; author of numerous ecclesiastical tracts, especially against 
the Arians; also of commentaries on the Scriptures.

Arufnagus of Naucratis in Egypt, earlier half of 3rd century A.D. 
Lived at Alexandria and Rome. Extant work: Detpnosophistae 
(Scholars? Banquet), a collection of quotations and anecdotes, 
with discussions on every known subject.

LIST OF AUTHORITIES

Atufitnazus, contemporary of Archimedes (born 287 38.¢.). Wrote On 
Engines of War (extant), addressed to Marcellus, conqueror of 
Syracuse.

ATHENAGORAS, 2nd century A.D., Athenian philosopher converted to 
Christianity; wrote in defence of Christian doctrine as opposed 
to paganism. |

Arufnopérus of Tarsus, surnamed Cananites from Cana in Cilicia, the 
birthplace of his father. Pupil of Poseidonius at Rhodes. Lived 
at Rome under Augustus (29 B.c.-14 A.D.) Stoic philosopher; 
wrote works On Study and Education; on the Peripatetics; and 
against the Categories of Aristotle; none of these is extant.

AvucusTINnus (SAINT AUGUSTINE), 354~430 4.D. Chief work, De Criuitate 
Dei, a defence of Christianity against the polytheistic cults; and 
an autobiographical work, Confesstons.

Autus GgLtius, see GELLIUS.

Avusontus of Bordeaux, 4th century a.p. Gallic Latin poet and rhetori- 
clan; wrote epigrams, poems, letters, etc.

Avifnus, Latin poet, later 4th century a.p. Wrote descriptive poetry, 
including Descriptio Orlis Terrae; Ora Maritima; Aratea 
Phaenomena and Aratea Prognostica, a paraphrase of the two 
works of Aratus, in hexameter verse.

Axropistus of Locris or Sicyon, date uncertain, wrote poems entitled 
Maxims and Canon, falsely attributed to Epicharmus.

Baccuetvs of Tanagra in Boeotia, 3rd century B.c., one of the earliest 
commentators on the writings of Hippocrates; only fragments 
remain.Baccuetvs of Tanagra in Boeotia, 3rd century B.c., one of the earliest 
commentators on the writings of Hippocrates; only fragments 
remain.

Bo£ruivs, native of Rome, 5th-6th centuries a.D., statesman and author. 
Chief work De Consolatione Philosophtae; translated into Latin 
many of the Greek philosophers, especially Aristotle, with com- 
mentaries; also wrote works on mathematics and music.

Cag.ius AuRE£LIANUs, native of Numidia, probably 4th century a.p.; 
wrote in Latin medical works, of which are extant De Morbis 
Acutis and De Morbis Chrontcis.

CALLIMACHUS, 3rd century B.c. Scholar and poet, librarian at Alex-

_ andria under Ptolemy Philadelphus and Ptolemy Euergetes

(285-222 B.C.).

Ceprénvs, late Byzantine writer, author of a historical work beginning 
with the creation of the world and going down to 1057 a.p.

Cexsus, lived at Rome, probably under Augustus and Tiberius (29 B.c.- 
37 A.D.). Wrote De Medicina (extant).

Censorinus, 3rd century a.D. Wrote De Die Natali (composed 238 a.p.) 
on the life of man, and methods of calculating time.

Cuatcipius, probably sth century a.p., author of a translation into 
Latin of Plato’s Timaeus, with commentary.

LIST OF AUTHORITIES 4.33

CHAMAELEON of Heracleia on the Black Sea; latter half of 4th century 
B.C.; pupil of Aristotle; wrote treatises on Greek literature and 
philosophy, which survive in fragments only.

Cuar6npas of Catana, date uncertain, probably 6th century 8.c.; drew 
up codes of law for his own and other Chalcidian cities of Sicily 
and Italy.

Curysippus, born at Soli in Cilicia, 280 3.c., died 207 B.c.3 Stoic 
philosopher. His many writings have not survived, but he was one 
of the founders of the Stoic School.

Crcrro, M. Tuttius, 106-43 B.c. Roman statesman, orator and writer.

CrauprAnus Mamertus, 5th century a.p.; presbyter at Vienne in Gaul; 
friend of Sidonius. Chief work (extant): De 4nima, an attempt to 
refute the theory that all things, including the soul, are material.CLEaNTHEs, born at Assos in the Troad, c. 300 B.c., died ¢. 220 B.c. 
Stoic philosopher, pupil of Crates and Zeno at Athens. His 
Hymn to Zeus is extant.

Crearcnus of Soloi, latter half of 4th century B.c.; pupil of Aristotle; 
wrote numerous treatises on art, science and philosophy, and in 
particular on Plato, including an Encomium, and commentaries 
on Timaeus and on the mathematical parts of the Republic; also 
Lives, a biographical work in at least eight books.

CLEMENS, surnamed Alexandrinus, 2nd-3rd centuries a.p., lived most 
of his life at Alexandria, but may have been born at Athens. At 
first pursued philosophy, but was converted to Christianity. 
Chief extant works: Paedagogus (The Teacher); Protrepticus, a 
hortatory address to the Greeks; Stromateis (Miscellantes); and 
Quis Dives Salvetur?

# Creoptiin&, daughter of Cleobulus of Lindus in Rhodes, one of the

Sages; his floruit is c. 580 B.c. She composed riddles.

Cieénipés, date and place unknown; wrote a musical treatise called 
Introduction to Harmony, sometimes ascribed to Euclid.

C.épr1us Tuscus, Ist century B.c.-Ist century A.D. (reign of Augustus). 
Author of a Farmers’ Calendar, preserved in a much-enlarged 
version in Joannes Lydus, De Ostentis.

CoLuMELLa of Gades in Spain, Ist century 4.D.; lived mostly at Rome. 
Extant works: De Re Rustica, and De Arboribus.

Corntrus, L. Annagus, born in Libya, lived at Rome, Ist century A.D. 
Stoic philosopher; became the teacher and friend of the satiric 
poet Persius; wrote commentary on the Categortes of Aristotle, 
and other philosophical and literary works (mostly lost), including 
a Hellenic Theology. His only extant work is On the Nature of 
the Gods. |

Cratfs, Athenian comic poet, middle 5th century B.c. .

Crateuas, probably rst century B.c., Greek physician and herbalist, 
mentioned by Galen as an eminent writer on Materia Medica.

NOVHVS ONNL YBVIVS SYMw

FF

434 LIST OF AUTHORITIESCrateuas, probably rst century B.c., Greek physician and herbalist, 
mentioned by Galen as an eminent writer on Materia Medica.

NOVHVS ONNL YBVIVS SYMw

FF

434 LIST OF AUTHORITIES

Crarinus, senior, 519-422 B.c. Chief poet of Old Comedy at Athens, 
and rival of Aristophanes.

Cratinus, junior, 4th century B.c., Athenian poet of Middle Comedy.

Crorén, unknown author of a work Catacolumbétés (The Diver) in 
which it was stated that a certain Crates first brought the book of 
Heracleitus to Greece Proper.

Curtius (QO. Curtius Rurus), Ist century a.p. Roman historian of 
Alexander the Great; his work On'the Exploits of Alexander was 
in ten books, of which the first two are lost.

Cyprian, native of Africa, 3rd century A.p.; convert to Christianity; 
Bishop of Carthage. Wrote many learned treatises against 
paganism, and on Christian faith and doctrines.

Cyrittus, Bishop of Alexandria, early half of 5th century a.p.; wrote 
polemical works on Christian doctrine, including a work Against 
Fultan (the Apostate) in ten books; and commentaries on the 
Scriptures. Many of these are extant.

Daimacuus of Plataea, latter half of 4th century B.c.; wrote a work on 
India (lost).

Damascius the Syrian, native of Damascus, born c. 480 4.p.; teacher of 
Neo-Platonic philosophy at Athens early 6th century a.p. 
Extant work: Problems and Solutions concerning First Principles.

Damastés of Sigeum, early half of 5th century B.c., contemporary of 
Herodotus and Hellanicus; Greek historian. His works are lost.

DamiAnus (Hétiopérus Damranus) of Larissa, lived later than Euclid; 
wrote short work on The Hypotheses of Optics, taken mostly from 
the Optics of Euclid.

Dam6n of Cyrene, date uncertain, wrote On the Philosophers.

Damoxenvs, Athenian comic poet of the New Comedy.Dam6n of Cyrene, date uncertain, wrote On the Philosophers.

Damoxenvs, Athenian comic poet of the New Comedy.

Davip of Nerken, Armenian philosopher, end of 5th and beginning of 
6th centuries a.p.; studied at Athens; wrote commentaries in 
Greek on Plato and Aristotle; that on the Categories of Aristotle, 
and also one on the Isagégé of Porphyry, are extant.

DeinostTRaTus, 4th century 8.c., pupil of Eudoxus. Geometer. Said to 
have discovered proof of squaring the circle by means of the 
quadratrix.

Démérrivs of Byzantium, probably 1st century B.c.; Peripatetic philoso- 
pher, wrote On Poetry and On the Poets. (Not the same as 
Demetrius of Byzantium the historian, 3rd century B.c.)

Démétrrivs Cuxiérus, author of a work on botany quoted by the 
Scholiast on Nicander, Thertaca (q.v.).

Lacén (‘the Spartan’), perhaps 3rd century B.c.; Epi- 
curean philosopher. Probably author of a philosophical work 
found at Herculaneum, entitled Investigation (Diaita) of Certain

Questions; the MS. ts indecipherable.

LIST OF AUTHORITIES 435

Démérrivs of Magnésia, 1st century B.c., contemporary of Cicero; 
Greek scholar; wrote On Concord, and On Poets and Historians 
of the same name, a critical work which has not survived, but 
which was often quoted.

Démérrius Puavféreus (of Phalérusin Attica), 4th century B.C.,statesman, 
orator, philosopher and poet. Pupil of Theophrastus. Governed 
Athens from 317-307 B.c.; went into exile to Alexandria under 
Ptolemy Lagi (Soter). Most of his writings have perished; extant: 
On Elocution (though this is thought by some not to be his).

Démérarius of Scepsis in the Troad, early half of 3rd century B.c., con- 
temporary of Aristarchus of Samos; Greek scholar. Wrote a 
commentary on the Catalogue in I/iad IT.

Démérrius of Troezen, Greek scholar quoted by Athenaeus and Diog. 
L. Date unknown. Wrote a treatise Against the Sophists.

DémostuEnfs, Athenian statesman and orator, 385-322 B.C.Démérrius of Troezen, Greek scholar quoted by Athenaeus and Diog. 
L. Date unknown. Wrote a treatise Against the Sophists.

DémostuEnfs, Athenian statesman and orator, 385-322 B.C.

Dercy.uip£s, probably ist century a.p, Wrote commentary (lost) on 
Plato’s works (including Timaeus), and helped to divide these into 
Tetralogies; see also under THRASYLLUS.

Dracoras of Melos, latter half of 5th century B.c.; pupil of Democritus. 
Philosopher and poet, surnamed Atheist because of his attacks on 
the popular religion, especially the Eleusinian Mysteries. A work 
called Phrygian Conversations ( Logot) was ascribed to him.

DicagzarcHus of Messina in Sicily, 4th century B.c.; philosopher, 
geographer and historian. Pupil of Aristotle and Theophrastus; 
spent most of his life in Greece Proper, especially in the Pelo- 
ponnese. Wrote many works, surviving in fragments only; his 
chief work was a comprehensive study of Greek history called 
The Life of Hellas.

Dipymus of Alexandria, Ist century B.c, and Ist century A.D.; contem- 
porary of Cicero and Augustus; scholar and literary critic. 
Wrote commentaries on Homer, Pindar, Sophocles, the Attic 
orators, etc., and is a source of information for later scholiasts 
and lexicographers. His treaties, said to number four thousand, 
have all perished.

Dipymus, a Pythagorean mentioned by Porphyry as having written on 
the Pythagorean Theory of Numbers.

Dipymus of Alexandria, perhaps 3rd century 4.D., wrote on Agriculture.

Din6n, 4th century B.c., wrote a History of Persia; was the father of 
Cleitarchus, who accompanied Alexandria the Great on his 
campaigns and wrote their history. Both father and son were 
said to have been over-credulous.

D16 Curysosromus, born at Prusa in Bithynia, about 50 .D.j lived at 
Rome under Trajan. Greek historian and Sophist. Extant: 
about eighty ‘orations’, or essays in oratorical form on political,

moral and philosophical subjects.

436 LIST OF AUTHORITIESmoral and philosophical subjects.

436 LIST OF AUTHORITIES

Diocrfs of Carystus in Euboea, 4th century B.c. Physician; wrote 
several medical works, surviving only in quotations by Galen and 
others.

Diopdrvus Sicuus, of Agyrium in Sicily; 1st century B.c. and Ist 
century A.D., contemporary of Cicero and Augustus; lived at 
Rome. Wrote in Greek a history of the world in forty books, 
from legendary times to his own day; of this, Books 1-5, and 
11-20 are extant. The rest are lost except for quotations. “The 
work is uncritical, but preserves valuable material.

Diopérvus of Ephesus, author of a work on Anaximander; otherwise 
unknown.

Droporvus wrote a commentary on Heracleitus; may have been Diodotus 
of Sidon, a Peripatetic philosopher mentioned by Strabo. 
Diocenfs Laértius, of Laérte in Cilicia, probably 2nd century a.D. 
Compiler of Lives of the Philosophers. The material is valuable, 
but the compilation is without plan or critical judgment, and 1s

full of inaccuracies.

Diocenés of Ocnoanda. Epicurean philosopher; became known 
through an inscription found at Oenoanda in Cabalia (Asia 
Minor) in 1884, giving extracts from the works of Epicurus.

Dromépé&s, probably 4th or 5th century a.p., Latin grammarian; extant 
work, On Oratory, on the Parts of a Speech, and on Metres.

Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, 3rd century a.p. Wrote a work On 
Promises, of which two extracts are extant. Fragments of his 
work Against Sabellius are preserved by Athanasius and Basilius, 
and of that On Nature by Eusebius in his Praeparatio Evangelica. 
An Art of Rhetoric is sometimes wrongly ascribed to him.

Dionysius of Halicarnassus, 1st century B.c. Lived in Rome. Wrote in 
Greek a History of Rome, still partly extant, and many works of 
criticism. He is the foremost literary critic of antiquity; but his 
work as a historian was rhetorical rather than scientific. A work 
On Music attributed to him may be that of a later writer of the 
same name and place.Dionysius Peri£G£rés, probably flor. c. 300 a.p. Wrote a Description 
(Pertegesis) of the World in hexameters, the material being pro- 
bably taken from Eratosthenes; this is extant.

Dionysius the Younger, tyrant of Syracuse, 4th century B.c. Wrote a 
treatise On The Poems of Epicharmus.

Dioscoripfs Pedacius or Pedanius, of Anazarba in Cilicia, probably 
2nd century a.p. Extant: Materia Medica in five books, for a 
long time the standard work on this subject; it is of a high level

the glossographer, 2nd century a.p,. Edited the works of

Hippocrates; his emendatio j i 
ns are mentioned, sometimes with 
disapproval, by Galen, f

LIST OF AUTHORITIES 437

Dipuixvs, probably early half of sth century B.C., predecessor of Eupolis 
and Aristophanes; wrote scurrilous lampoons in iambics; also a 
poem called Theséis. (Not to be confused with Diphilus the 
writer of New Comedy, contemporary of Menander.)

Déstanzs, probably a Cretan, earlier than the 1st century B.c. Wrote 
(perhaps at Alexandria) a work on Crete, mentioned by Diodorus 
and Athenaeus.

Douris of Samos, 3rd century B.c., ruler and historian. His works, 
which included a History of Greece from 370 3.c. onwards, 
have perished. His accuracy was questioned in antiquity.

Eveysis or Eleusis, author of a work On Achilles; otherwise unknown. 
t1as, Christian Neo-Platonist of whom nothing appears to be known 
except that he wrote a commentary on the Categories of Aristotle, 
and Prolegomena to the Isagégé of Porphyry.

Ewnnius, born in Calabria, 239 B.c.; Latin poet. Chief work, Annales, a 
History of Rome in hexameters; he also wrote tragedies, and a 
philosophical poem called Epicharmus.

Epuorus of Cyme in Aeolis, lived from c. 400-333 B.c. Greek historian, 
pupil of Isocrates; was the first to attempt a World History, which 
has perished except for quotations. He was impartial and con- 
scientious, but did not always use the best authorities; his work 
was much used by Diodorus Siculus and others.Ericrétus of Hieropolis in Phrygia, 1st-2nd centuries a.p. Stoic 
philosopher. ‘Taught at Rome, and later in Epirus. He left no 
writings. His pupil Arrian compiled an Encheiridion (Manual) 
from his discourses, and also preserved his lectures 1n eight books, 
of which four are extant (Dissertationes).

Epictrus, 342-270 B.c. Founder of the School of Hedonist philosophy 
named after him. His writings are lost except for four letters and 
the Ruling Principles embodying his chief precepts. Only 
fragments of his most important work, On Nature, survive.

Epricengs, grammarian of Alexandria, wrote on the poems of Orpheus, 
assigning the different parts to Pythagorean authors such as 
Cecrops and Brontinus; he may have been contemporary with 
Callimachus. .

EprPHantus, Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus, born in Palestine, 1st half 
of 4th century a.p. Wrote on the Christian faith, and against 
heresies.

EraTosTHEnfs of Cyrene, 276-196 B.c.; librarian at Alexandria under 
Ptolemy Euergetes and Ptolemy Epiphanes. Wrote on all 
branches of knowledge: history, philosophy, grammar and the 
sciences. His chief work was a treatise on Geography much used 
by Strabo. He also wrote two poems on astroromical subjects, 
His writings survive in fragments only.

4.38 LIST OF AUTHORITIES

s, Ist century A.D.; Greek grammarian orphysician in the reign 
of Nero (4.D. 54-68). Wrote a Hippocratic lexicon still extant. 
EryMoLocicum Genuinum, the oldest of the Etymologies, or gram- 
matical encyclopaedias, of late Byzantine times; a compilation 
of the late roth or early 11th century a.pD., existing in two MSS.

(See Pauly-Wissowa, VI, 812.)

EtryMoLocicum GuDIANUM, originally compiled in the second half of 
the 11th century a.p.; used other sources than those of the 
Etymologicum Genuinum.

Etrymo.ocicum Macnum, compilation of the 12th century A.p.; place 
of origin unknown, perhaps Athos.Etrymo.ocicum Macnum, compilation of the 12th century A.p.; place 
of origin unknown, perhaps Athos.

Etymotocicum Orr6nis, compilation ascribed to Orién, scholar of 
probably the 5th century a.p., who taught at Caesarea and 
Alexandria; his Lexicon was used by later compilers.

Evantués of Miletus, historian mentioned by Diog. L., otherwise 
unknown.

Eucreipfs (Eucip), lived at Alexandria under Ptolemy I (323-285 B.c.). 
Platonic philosopher and mathematician. Wrote numerous 
mathematical works, of which the following are extant: Elements; 
Data; Sectio Canonis (Division of the Scale); and Phaenomena, a 
work on astronomy.

Eupémus of Rhodes, 4th century B.c., pupil of Aristotle, edited many of 
Aristotle’s works; the Eudemian Ethics is probably his summary of 
a course of Aristotle’s lectures earlier than the Nicomachean 
Ethics. He also wrote on Physics, Mathematics and other sub- 
jects, closely following and perhaps summarising Aristotle’s works,

Eupoxus of Cnidus, 4th century B.c.; son of Aeschines; astronomer, 
geometer, physician and legislator. Wrote works on astronomy 
and geometry, now lost; his astronomical work Phaenomena 
formed the material for the poem of Aratus.

Evénus of Paros, gnomic elegiac poet; there were two of this name, one a 
contemporary of Socrates.

EucamMén (or Eucamm6dn) of Cyrene, 6th century B.c., epic poet, wrote 
a continuation of the Odyssey called Telegonia (lost), an account 
of which is preserved in Proclus’ Chrestomathia.

Evunfmerus, probably of Messene, latter half of 4th century B.c. Lived 
in Macedonia at court of Cassander. Wrote a Sacred History in 
9 books, said to be based on a voyage down the Red Sea. The 
book gave rationalistic explanations of myths, and was used by 
Diodorus and others; translated into Latin by Ennius. It 
popularized this method of treatment, called Euhemerism.

_ Sbalcis in Exhoea, grammarian and poet, ard century 
B.C.; lived at Athens, and went to Syria and became librarian of_ Sbalcis in Exhoea, grammarian and poet, ard century 
B.C.; lived at Athens, and went to Syria and became librarian of

Antiochus the Great. Wrote many works in 
on history and mythology. . ——e

LIST OF AUTHORITIES 4.39

Evpo is, latter half of 5th century B.c.; Athenian poet of Old Comedy.

Euripipés, 480-406 B.c.

Eusesius, born in Palestine, c. 264 4.p.; Bishop of Caesarea, 315 A.D.; 
general and ecclesiastical historian. Principal works extant: 
Chronicon or Chronica (discovered entire in 1818), an account of 
ancient history with synchronological tables; Praeparatio 
Evangelica, a collection of facts and quotations from ancient 
writers; Demonstratio Evangelica and Ecclestastical History; 
Against Marcellus (Bishop of Ancyra), and Against Hierocles 
(who advised Diocletian to begin his persecution); and a review 
of the Life of Apollonius of Tyana by Philostratus (¢.v.).

Eustatuius, native of Constantinople, latter half of 12th century a.D.; 
Archbishop of ‘Thessalonica. Wrote learned commentary on the 
Ihad and Odyssey, consisting mostly of extracts from earlier 
Alexandrian commentators now lost; and a commentary on 
Dionysius Periegetes (g.v.).

Eustratius, of Constantinople and Nicaea, 11th-12th centuries A.D. 
Lived under Alexius I Comnenus (1081-1118 a.p.). Wrote 
commentaries in part extant on Aristotle, Nécomachean Ethics and 
Posterior Analytics.

Evutocius of Ascalon in Palestine, middle of 6th century a.p. Com- 
mentator on Archimedes, and on Apollonius of Perga the mathe- 
matician (3rd century B.c.).

Favorinus of Arles in Gaul, first half of 2nd century a.p. (reign of 
Hadrian, 117-138 a.p.). Philosopher and Sophist, friend of 
Plutarch. His works, written in Greek, on history, philosophy 
and literature, are lost except for quotations.Festus, Sextus Pompetus, probably 2nd century a.p. Roman scholar 
and lexicographer. Compiled a dictionary (extant) of Latin 
words and phrases, abridged from the great lexicon of M. Verrius 
Flaccus, which has perished.

Fuicentius, Fasirus Prancrapés, c. 480-550 a.D. Latin grammarian; 
wrote works of little value, of which are extant a collection of 
legends; a glossary of obsolete words and phrases; a universal 
history; and an allegorical exposition of the contents of Vergil’s 
poems.

Gaénus, Crauprus (GALEN) born at Pergamum, 130 .D.} lived 
mostly at Rome. He is the most important medical writer of 
antiquity, except Hippocrates. His extant writings acknow- 
ledged as genuine number over eighty, and various spurious 
works have attached themselves to his name.

Geis, Autus, of Rome, 2nd century a.p. Latin scholar. Wrote 
Noctes Atticae, a miscellany of extracts frotn Greek and Roman 
writers, with occasional comments.

440 LIST OF AUTHORITIES

Geminus of Rhodes, probably 1st century 8.c. An extant work called 
Introduction (Isagégé) to Astronomy is attributed to him.

GENETHLIUS, native of Patrae in Palestine, late 3rd or early 4th century 
A.D.; taught at Athens; distinguished for learning; died aged 28. 
Author of a work on Dialects; of rhetorical Exercises; and 
panegyric orations. Was confused by ancient scholars with his 
contemporary the orator Menander of Laodicea.

Georatus Pisides (the Pisidian), 7th century a.p. Keeper of the Rolls at 
St. Sophia in Constantinople. Wrote works, mostly historical, in 
iambic verse. His extant works include an account of the 
expedition of the Emperor Heraclius against Persia; and a 
Hexaémeron or Story of the Creation.

Graucus of Rhegium, 5th-4th centuries B.c., contemporary of Demo- 
critus; wrote an account of the ancient poets and musicians; and 
commentaries on Empedocles and Democritus. His work was 
sometimes ascribed to Antiphon the orator.Grécorius of Corinth, surnamed Pardus; probably early half of 12th 
century a.p. Archbishop of Corinth. Wrote On Dialects; a 
commentary on Hermogenes’ Methodus; and other grammatical 
and chronological works.

Harpocratién, Valerius, of Alexandria, probably 2nd century a.p. 
Greek lexicographer. His Glossary to the Ten Attic Orators ts 
extant; it contains explanations of legal and political terms, and 
accounts of persons and things referred to by the orators, and is of 
the highest value.

Hecataeus of Miletus, 6th-5th centuries B.c.; early Greek historian and 
geographer. Wrote a Description (Pertodos or Pertegests) of the 
world; and Genealogiae or Historiae, Greek legends and tradi- 
tions. He corrected the map of the world drawn by Anaximander.

Hicfsranax of Troas, date unknown. Wrote glossaries on Democritus, 
and on the poets.

Hétropérus of Athens, probably middle of 2nd century B.c. Surnamed 
Periegetes; wrote description of the works of art onthe Acropolis, 
which was one of the sources of Pliny’s account of Greek art.

Héxiopérus of Em’sa in Syria, latter half of 4th century a.p. Wrote a 
romance, entitled ethiopica; later became Bishop of ‘Tricca in 
Thessaly.

Hevranicus of Mytilene in Lesbos, 5th century B.c.; Greek historian 
and geographer. Wrote many historical works, called Troica, 
Aeolica, Persica, etc.; and also an important chronological work 
called The Priestesses of Hera, giving dates compiled from the 
temple records at Argos. This, one of the earliest attempts to 
establish dates, was used by Thucydides and others.

x, middle of 2nd century a.p.; Greek scholar. Taught

LIST OF AUTHORITIES 44.1

Greek to the Emperor Verus at Rome. Wrote a valuable Enchier- 
tdion [Manual] on Metres, which is extant; and a treatise on 
the Antiphon of Xenophon’s Memorabilia (i.e. Antiphon the 
Sophist), said to have been plagiarized from a work (lost) by 
Adrastus the Peripatetic (2nd century a.p.).Hfracrerpfs Lembus, born at Callatis; 2nd century 3.c.; lived at 
Oxyrhynchus and Alexandria; statesman and historian. Wrote a 
History in thirty-seven books, and biographical works (lost).

Hfracrerpés Ponticus, born at Heracleia in Pontus, 4th century B.c. 
Pupil of Platoand Aristotle. Wrote works on philosophy, mathe- 
matics, politics, etc., of which only fragmentssurvive. A work On 
Constitutions was attributed to him, but its authorship is doubtful.

Héracvertus (or Heracleides), probably 1st century a.p.; Greek scholar. 
Wrote a work (extant) called Homeric Allegories, a defence of 
Homer against Plato and Epicurus, and allegorical interpretation.

HERENNIUS PHILO, sometimes called Byblius (of Byblos in Phoenicia) 
lived at Rome, latter half of 1st and early 2nd centuries a.p. 
(Nero to Hadrian). Wrote in Greek many rhetorical and 
historical works, including a treatise on the Jews.

Hermarcuus of Mytilene, 3rd century B.c., rhetorician, probably 
studied under Democritus; became disciple of Epicurus, who 
bequeathed to him his Garden at Athens. Only titles of his 
works survive. ‘They included treatises on Empedocles, and 
against Plato and Aristotle.

Hermés ‘T’rismeGistus, the Egyptian Hermes, i.e. Thoth, source of all 
knowledge, to whom the Neo-Platonists ascribed many of their 
own writings; these were composed mostly in the 4th century 
A.D. from earlier sources. A number of them are extant, includ- 
ing the dialogue Poemander, on the origin and nature of the 
world, God, the human soul, etc.; and Coeranides, an alphabetical

handbook of the magical and medicinal properties of stones, plants 
and animals (probably compiled from oriental sources).

Herméstanax of Colophon, 4th century B.c. (under Alexander the 
Great), elegiac poet; wrote an elegiac poem surviving in quota- 
tions only, of love stories addressed to his mistress Leontion.Herméstanax of Colophon, 4th century B.c. (under Alexander the 
Great), elegiac poet; wrote an elegiac poem surviving in quota- 
tions only, of love stories addressed to his mistress Leontion.

Hermeras, latter half of 2nd century a.p., Greek Christian writer; extant 
works, Irrisus Gentilium Philosophorum (Disparagement of Pagan 
Philosophers); and a commentary on Plato’s Phaedrus.

Hermrippus of Smyrna, latter half of 3rd century 3.c.; philosopher, 
disciple of Callimachus of Alexandria. Wrote Lives of the 
philosophers, sophists, orators, historians and poets, much used by 
later writers.

HERMIPPUS SEU DE ASTROLOGLA: title of a work (discovered and pub- 
lished in 1830) copied by Joannes Katrarios or Katrares, late 
Byzantine scribe. The work is in dialogue form, and is a de-

442 LIST OF AUTHORITIES

fence, from a Christian standpoint, of astrology from the attacks 
of other Christians.

Hermocengfs of Tarsus, latter half of 2nd century 4.p. (reign of Marcus 
Aurelius, 161-180 a.p.), Greek rhetorician. Five of his works 
are extant: Stasets, a Manual for orators in civil cases; De 
Inventione, rules for composing speeches; De Formrs or De Idets 
Oratorts, on the forms of oratorical style; De Apto et Sollerts 
Genere Dicendi Methodus, application of the rules of style; and 
Practical Exercises in the use of models. ‘There was also a com- 
mentary (now lost) on Demosthenes.

Hfropfs Arricus, of Marathon in Attica, born early 2nd century a.p. 
Greek rhetorician; taught at Athens and Rome; amongst his 
pupils were the Emperors Marcus Aurelius and Verus. Wrote 
numerous works, now lost. An extant Republic is ascribed to him, 
but its authorship is uncertain.HfroprAnus, Ag tus, of Alexandria, latter half of 2nd century .p. 
(reign of M. Aurelius, 161-180 a.p.); son of Apollonius 
Dyscolus (q.v.). Lived at Rome; taught the Emperor Marcus 
Aurelius, to whom he dedicated his work on grammar, prosody 
and etymology, an epitome of which is extant. His other works 
have perished except for fragments. He was very highly regarded 
in antiquity.

Héropicus of Babylon, 2nd century B.c., succeeded Cratés of Mallus 
the founder of the Pergamene School of grammar, and like 
Crates, wrote in opposition to Aristarchus of Samothrace. of the 
Alexandrian School; works lost.

Héropérus of Heracleia in Pontus, probably latter half of 5th or early 
4th century B.c. Wrote a work on the legend of Heracles, with | 
geographical and historical information; also a treatise on 
Orpheus and Musaeus.

Hfroportus of Halicarnassus, 5th century B.c. Historian of the Persian 
Wars.

of Alexandria, 3rd century B.c., mathematician and engineer, 
famous for his mechanical inventions. Wrote works on these 
subjects; only titles and fragments survive. 
3, unknown writer on mythology; probably not the same as 
Herophilus of Chalcedon, the physician (4th-3rd_ centuries B.c.), 
who settled in Alexandria under Ptolemy Soter.

H£siop, born at Ascra in Boeotia, 8th century B.c. Epic poet.

Hfsycuius of Alexandria, probably 4th century A.p., Greek lexico- 
grapher. His dictionary is based on that of Diogenianus, and on 
the writings of other Alexandrians such as Aristarchus. He was 
a pagan; notes on Christian subjects are by a later hand. The 
work is one of the most important sources of knowledge of the 
Greek language and literature.

LIST OF AUTHORITIES 443

Hésycuivus of Miletus, 6th century a.p.; his works included an Onoma- 
tologos, which seems to have been a summary of Diogenes 
Laertius’ Lives of the Philosophers. He also wrote a universal 
history, and an account of the origins of Constantinople.Hizrocrfs, lived at Alexandria, middle of 5th century a.p.; Neo-Platonist 
philosopher. Extant work: a commentary on the so-called Golden 
Verses of Pythagoras, and an account of his philosophy.

Hizrénymus (Saint Jerome), native of Stridon (Dalmatia-Pannonia), 
4th and early 5th centuries a.p. Besides his translation of the 
Bible into Latin, he wrote letters, treatises, and commentaries 
on the Scriptures; he also translated the Chrontcon of Eusebius 
(q.v.) from Greek into Latin, and brought it down to 378 a.p.

Hizr6énymus of Egypt. Mentioned by Josephus (37 a.p.-c. 135 A.D.), 
otherwise unknown. Wrote a Phoentctan Archaeology.

Hizrénymus of Rhodes, 4th-3rd centuries B.c., disciple of Aristotle; 
philosopher quoted by Cicero. Wrote philosophical treatises, 
historical notes, and letters.

Hime_rius of Prusa in Bithynia, 4th century A.p.; studied and taught 
rhetoric at Athens. Twenty-four of his Orations are extant; 
of the rest, there survive extracts from thirty-six, and fragments of 
eleven.

HIPPaRCHUs, writer on Democritus, quoted by Diog. L.; which of the 
writers of this name he was, is unknown.

Hippasus the Spartan, date unknown; wrote a Spartan Constitution 
mentioned in Diog. L.

Hipposortvus, time and place unknown, is quoted by Diog. L. Wrote a 
work on the philosophic Schools; and an account of the philosophers.

Hrprocrarés of Cés, §th-4th centuries B.c. Physician, and founder of 
the School of Medicine at Cos. Wrote many works on medicine, 
practical and theoretical; other works, written by his followers, 
were attributed to him.

Hippotytus, Greek ecclesiastical writer, lived at Rome, 3rd century 
a.p. Among his works was a Refutatto omnium Haerestum 
(Against All Herestes).

Hisposus, Scholiast, annotated Chalcidius’ Commentary on Plato’s 
Timaeus.

Horace (Q. Horarius Fraccus), 65-8 B.c.Hisposus, Scholiast, annotated Chalcidius’ Commentary on Plato’s 
Timaeus.

Horace (Q. Horarius Fraccus), 65-8 B.c.

Hérapoii6n of Phaenebythis in Egypt, 4th-5th centuries a.p., Greek 
grammarian. ‘Taught first at Alexandria, then at Constantinople 
(reign of Theodosius, 378-395 a.D.). Wrote commentaries on 
Sophocles, Alcaeus and Homer, and a work entitled Tementka, 
On Sacred Precincts. Under the name of Horapollon is also 
extant a work entitled Hieroglyphics, purporting to be a Greek 
translation by one Philippus from Egyptian, explaining the

hieroglyphic writings.

444 LIST OF AUTHORITIES

Hyctnus, Roman writer; author of two extant works: Fabularum Liber, 
a book of myths and genealogies; and Poetscon Astronomicon, an 
account of the constellations and their myths. He may be the 
same as C.. Julius Hyginus, a native of Spain, Latin grammarian 
living at Rome in the reign of Augustus (29 B.c.-14 A.D.); or 
he may be another Hyginus who lived in the 2nd century a.p.

HyPEREIDES, 4th century B.c., one of the Ten Attic Orators, whose 
speeches are preserved i in extracts and quotations only.HyPEREIDES, 4th century B.c., one of the Ten Attic Orators, whose 
speeches are preserved i in extracts and quotations only.

Tamsuicuus of Chalcis in Coelé-Syria, 4th century a.p., Neo-Platonist 
philosopher; wrote a work in ten books (of which five are extant) 
entitled On the Philosophy of Pythagoras. ‘The first book, a 
Life of Pythagoras and members of his School, is an uncritical 
compilation from earlier works; the second (Protreptsko: Logot) 
is an introduction to the study of Plato; the third (De Communi 
Mathematica Scientia) contains fragments of the works of earlier 
Pythagoreans; the fourth was entitled Ox the ‘Introduction to 
Mathematics’ of Nicomachus; the fifth and sixth are lost; the 
seventh, on the religious significance of the science of Number, 
is extant. The eighth, ninth and tenth are lost: they dealt with 
music, geometry and the sphere. He also wrote De Mdysterus 
(extant), a defence of Egyptian and Chaldaean religion, some- 
times regarded as spurious. Stobaeus preserves a fragment of 
a treatise De Anima, and of an epistle on Concord.

Isycus of Rhegium, 6th century 8.c., Greek lyric poet; lived at Samos in 
the reign of Polycrates.

IrfNazus, probably native of Smyrna; 2nd century a.p. Bishop of 
Lyons in Gaul. Chief work: Adversus Haereses, written origin- 
ally in Greek but surviving only in a Latin version, except for a 
few fragments.

Isrpérvus Hispalensis, Bishop of Seville, 6th-7th centuries a.p. Spanish 
ecclesiastic, noted for his learning and eloquence. His most import- 
ant work was his Etymologtae, an Encyclopaedia of existing 
knowledge.

Isocratés, 4th century B.c. Attic orator and essayist. “Iwenty-one of 
his Orations survive.

Draconus, author of an allegorical interpretation of Hesiod’s 
Theogony; and a commentary on Hermogenes (¢.v.). Which of 
this name he was is uncertain.

Jéannés Katrarios, see under HERMIPPUS SEU DE ASTROLOGIA.Jéannés Katrarios, see under HERMIPPUS SEU DE ASTROLOGIA.

Jéannés Laurentivs Lypuvs, born in Lydia, 490 4.p., lived at Con- 
stantinople. Wrote De Mensibus, a historical commentary on the 
Roman calendar, festivals, etc. (extant in summaries); De 
Ostentis, on Signs and Portents; and On the Roman Magistracies,

LIST OF AUTHORITIES 445

Mata as, native of Antioch, lived at Byzantium; date after 
Justinian (a.p. 526-565). Wrote History of the World, dealing 
especially with the reign of Justinian and his immediate prede- 
cessors; uncritical but useful for information preserved.

JOannés ‘Philoponus’ (the Industrious), of Alexandria, 7th century a.p. 
Among his extant writings are commentaries on Aristotle (De 
Anima, De Generatione et Corruptione, De Generatione Animal- 
ium, Physics, Metaphysics, Analytics). His industry was prodigious, 
but his critical powers weak.

Jéannés Siculus, of Sicily, 9th century 4.p., author of a Greek Chronicon, 
from the Creation to 866 a.p.

JSannés- TzetTzes, of Constantinople, 12th century a.p., Greek 
grammarian, learned but vain. Of his many works there survive 
two verse compositions: J/aca, in hexameters, and Chiltades, 
consisting of unconnected narratives from legend and history. 
This is valuable for the material it preserves: it has 12,661 lines, 
and was divided arbitrarily by its first editor Nicolas Gerbelius 
into books of 1000 lines, without reference to sense; hence the 
title Chiliades. There are also a Theogony; an iambic poem on the 
education of children; and versified treatises on metre, on Pin- 
daric metre, on the I/tad, etc., all of little worth.Jésfpuus Favius, born at Jerusalem, 37 4.D., died at Rome aged about 
98. Wrote a History of the Fewish War (66 a.v.); Fewish 
Antiquities, an account of Jewish history from the Creation to 66 
A.D.; Against Apion, a reply to the treatise of the Greek gram- 
marian Apion directed against the antiquity of the Jewish race; 
To the Maccabees, i.e. those who can endure in the spirit of the 
Maccabees, an account of the martyrdom of a priest Eleazar and 
others in the persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes; and an 
Autobiography.

Juxranus, Fravius Crauptus (‘the Apostate’), Emperor of Rome, 361- 
363 a.p. Extant works: Letters; Orations; The Caesars, or The 
Banquet; Misopégén (the Beard-Hater). His Letters were 
intended for publication, and deal with the history of his 
times. :

Juuius Arricanus, a Libyan, 3rd century a.p.; lived at Emmaeus in 
Palestine, and at Alexandria. One of the most learned of the 
early Christian writers. Wrote a Chronicle in five books, from the 
Creation to 221 A.D.; this is lost, but part of it is given by Eusebius 
in his Chronicon, and fragments are preserved by other writers.

JUVENAL, early 2nd century a.pD.; Roman satiric poet.

KATRARIOS, See under HERMIPPUS SEU DE ASTROLOGIA.

_ 
LapeErius, Decimus, Roman egues, ¢. 107-43 B.C.; writer of mimes.

446 LIST OF AUTHORITIES

Lactrantius, born probably in Italy, studied in Africa, settled at Nico- 
medeia in Asia Minor; 3rd-4th centuries a.p.; Latin rhetorician 
and teacher, converted to Christianity. Chief extant works: 
Divinae Institutiones, an attack on paganism and introduction to 
Christianity; De Ira Det, pamphlet directed against the Epicur- 
eans; De Opificio Dei, on the wisdom of God as revealed in the 
creation of man and the soul.

Laurentius Lypus, see JoANNgES Lybus.Laurentius Lypus, see JoANNgES Lybus.

LzsBOnax, place and date uncertain, probably 1st century 4.p.; Greek 
grammarian; wrote a work (extant) On Grammatical Figures, 
useful for its preservation of material. (Probably not the same as 
Lesbonax of Mitylene, author of three extant orations.)

Lisantus, born at Antioch on the Orontes, 4th century a.p. Studied at 
Athens. ‘Taught Greek rhetoric at Constantinople and Nico- 
medeia. Of his works, there are extant orations, letters, and a 
Life of Demosthenes.

Losén of Argos, date uncertain, wrote a work on the Poets, mentioned 
by Diog. L.

Loncinus, probably of Athens, 3rd century a.p. Greek philosopher and 
grammarian. Opened a School at Athens; later went to Palmyra 
in Syria. The treatise On the Sublime attributed to him Is now 
thought to be the work of an earlier writer.

Lucian, born at Samosata in Syria, 2nd century a.p. Greek rhetorician 
and satirical writer. Eighty-two works ascribed to him are 
extant, but some are spurious. Of the genuine works, the most 
important are the Dialogues, some of which satirize Greek

. philosophy and religion, while others are sketches of contem- 
porary manners; there are also rhetorical and biographical pieces, 
romances and poems. Verae Historiae is a burlesque adventure- 
story. Macrobi contains stories of men who lived to a great age; 
its authenticity is doubtful.

Lucrétrus, Roman poet, 1st century B.c. His De Rerum Natura, poem 
in hexameter verse, expounds the doctrines of Epicurus and the 
Atomic School.

Lycopnrd6n of Chalcis in Euboea, 3rd century s.c. Greek scholar and 
poet, lived at Alexandria under Ptolemy Philadelphus (285-247 
B.c.). Of his works, only his Cassandra or Alexander is extant, 
a versified recital of legendary history beginning with Troy and 
ending with Alexander the Great. He also wrote, in connection 
with the arrangement of the comic poets in the Library at 
Alexandria, an essay On Comedy.Lycurcus of Athens, 4th century B.c.; Attic orator and statesman. 
Disciple of Plato and Isocrates, supporter of Demosthenes. Of 
his orations, only that Against Lebcratés (delivered 332 8.c.) 
survives.

LIST OF AUTHORITIES 44.7

L¥sras, Attic orator, c. 459, or 444 B.c.-368 B.c. Thirty-four forensic 
orations are extant, three incomplete; of these five are probably 
spurious. His speeches are of the highest value for the political 
and social history of Athens of his time.

Macrosivs, Greek by birth, place of origin unknown; 4th-5th centuries 
A.D. Grammarian; wrote in Latin. Extant works: Saturnalia 
Conuivia, a series of dissertations on history and mythology, in 
form an imitation of Plato’s Symposium; Commentarius ex 
Cicerone in Somnium Sctpionis, a Neo-Platonist tract based on a 
discussion of the Dream of Scipio in Cicero, De Republica, 
Book VI; and De Differentia et Soctetatibus Graeci et Latini 
Verbs, which survives in an abridged form.

Maeanprius (or Leanprius) of Miletus, date uncertain, wrote a work 
called Parangelma, a kind of alphabetical guide; and a History 
of Miletus.

Mac6, a Carthaginian of uncertain date (earlier than 150 B.c.); wrote 
a work on Agriculture in the Punic language, in twenty-eight 
books; this was translated into Latin by order of the Senate after 
the destruction of Carthage in 146 B.c.; it was later translated in 
an abridged form into Greek. It was highly valued and much 
quoted by Roman writers on agriculture such as Varro and 
Columella.

Ma tatas, see JOANNES Maratas.

Ma ttius THeopérus of Rome, 4th century a.D., contemporary of St. 
Augustine. Wrote a Latin work De Rerum Natura (extant); 
and a work on Metre (lost).Ma tatas, see JOANNES Maratas.

Ma ttius THeopérus of Rome, 4th century a.D., contemporary of St. 
Augustine. Wrote a Latin work De Rerum Natura (extant); 
and a work on Metre (lost).

Manetué, an Egyptian, native of Sebennytus and priest of Heliopolis, 
4th-3rd centuries B.c. (reign of Ptolemy I and Ptolemy IT, 
323-247 B.c.). Wrote in Greek a History of Egypt, of great 
value, and an account of Egyptian religious doctrine entitled 
Epitome of Physics; these survive only in extracts. A work 
entitled Apotelesmatika, an astrological poem (extant) ascribed to 
Manetho, is now considered to be of later date (5th century .p.).

Mani ius, name given in Latin MSS. to the author of 4stronomica, poem 
on astrology and astronomy written in the reign of Tiberius 
(14-37 A.D.).

Marcettinus, unknown author of a valuable biography of and com- 
mentary on Thucydides (extant), incorporating all previous 
research; used by Suidas and others.

Marce.tinus, AMMIANUS, see AMMIANUS.

Marcus Auré.ius Antoninus, Emperor of Rome, 161-180 4.D., called 
‘the Philosopher’; followed the Stoic School. He left a book of 
Meditations, moral precepts extracted from the works of others 
and reflections of his own, in Greek.

448 LIST OF AUTHORITIES

Marmor Parvum, an inscription discovered in the early 17th century in 
Smyrna and brought to England (now in Oxford), giving dates 
from earliest times. Dates are reckoned by the number of years 
that had elapsed before the archonship of Diognetus, 264-263 B.c. 
The authority for the chronology of the Parian Marble is 
probably Phanias of Eresos, a pupil of Aristotle. (Corpus Inscr. 
Graec. 11. 2374; Miller, Frag. Hist. Gr. i. §35-590. See Sandys, 
Ath. Pol. p. §2, note.)

Martianus or Marcianus CapgE.ta, probably of Carthage (Colony), 
end of 5th century a.p. Author of a compilation of prose and 
verse, forming an Encyclopaedia of knowledge of the arts and 
sciences, The material is ill-arranged, but sometimes valuable. ‘The; work was popular in the Middle Ages as a manual of education.

Maximus Piantépés of Constantinople, early half of 14th century a.p. 
Learned monk, scholar, rhetorician and theologian. Compiled 
the latest of the Greek Anthologies, an abridgement of the earlier 
(10th century) Anthology of Constantinus Cephalas (nthologta 
Palatina, q.v.). He also wrote grammatical works and transla- 
tions, and a Life of Aesop with a collection of his fables.

Maximus ‘Trius, of Tyre, 2nd century a.p. (period of the Antonines 
and Commodus), Greek rhetorician and Platonic philosopher. 
Lived in Greece, and visited Rome. His only extant work is his 
Discourses (Dissertationes or Sermones), consisting of forty-one 
essays on philosophical subjects.

Me tampts, probably of Alexandria, 3rd century B.c.; Greek writer 
under Ptolemy Philadelphus (285-247 B.c.). Extant works: 
Divinatio ex Palpitatione (Divination through Heart-beats) and 
De Naevis Oleacis in Corpore, on Body-Moles; these are of no 
value except as curiosities.

Merantuius of Athens, latter half of 5th century B.c.; tragic poet 
satirized by Aristophanes and others. He also wrote elegies; 
those on Cimén and Polygnétus are quoted as his by Plutarch, 
though it is possible that the tragic poet eeclaneiiue was not the 
same as the elegiac poet.

MENANDER, 342-291 B.c. Chief poet of New Gael

MeENANDER the rhetorician, see GENETHLIUS.

Men6n, pupil of Aristotle; author of a compilation on Medicine, found 
in a papyrus now in London.

Merropérus, native of Lampsacus or Athens, 3rd century B.c. Disciple 
and friend of Epicurus. His works have survived in quotations onlv,

Micnatt AkominaTos, born 1140 in Phrygia; educated at Constan- 
tinople; author of homilies, orations, letters and poems.

Micnuazr Grycas, 12th century a.p.; author of a World Chronicle, 
from the Creation to the death of Alexius Comnenus (1118 
A.D.), as well as theological works, and letters.

LIST OF AUTHORITIES 449Micnuazr Grycas, 12th century a.p.; author of a World Chronicle, 
from the Creation to the death of Alexius Comnenus (1118 
A.D.), as well as theological works, and letters.

LIST OF AUTHORITIES 449

Minyé&s, unknown historian, quoted by Diog. L.

Mimnermvs, probably of Smyrna, latter half of 7th century s.c. Elegiac 
poet; his works survive in fragments only.

Minucius Férrx, Marcus, of Rome, 3rd century a.p.; lawyer.

: Wrote a dialogue Octavius, in defence of Christianity.

Mnésimacuvs, probably of Athens, 4th century s.c. Poet of Middle 
Comedy, quoted by Athenaeus.

Morris, surnamed Atticista, Greek grammarian of the time of Hadrian 
(117-138 a.p.). Extant work: ttic Diction, a comparison of 
Attic with other Greek dialects.

Moscui6n, place of origin unknown; poet of late tragedy (period of 
Alexander of Pherae, 369-367 B.c.). Fragments of his plays are 
preserved by Stobaeus.

Mosénius Rurus, C., born in Etruria, son of a Roman eques; 1st century 
A.D. Stoic philosopher; wrote philosophical works, which survive 
in fragments only. :

MyrénrAnus, of Amastris in Paphlagonia, date uncertain; author of a 
work in Greek called Historical Similarities, quoted by Diog. L.

NeganTHés of Cyzicus, 3rd century B.c.; wrote historical and philo- 
sophical works, including Mematrs of King Attalus of Pergamum; 
Hellenica; Pythagorica. These survive in quotations only.

Nemesius, Bishop of Emésa in Syria, 4th-5th centuries a.p.; Christian 
philosopher. Wrote a Greek treatise De Natura Hominis, which 
shows considerable medical kftowledge as well as philosophical 
acumen.

NeopTo.emus of Paros, 3rd century B.c., collected and published a book 
of Epitaphs.NeopTo.emus of Paros, 3rd century B.c., collected and published a book 
of Epitaphs.

Nepés, Cornfxius, probably native of Verona, Ist century B.C.-Ist 
century a.p. Contemporary of Cicero and Catullus; died during 
reign of Augustus. His works are lost, except for extracts; 
they included De Viris Ilustribus, comparative lives of Romans 
and foreigners; Chronica, an epitome of world history; and Lives 
of Cicero and Cato.

NeprTuna_ius, author of a short treatise on magic methods of healing, 
etc. The original goes back to the 2nd century a.p. (Ps.- 
Democritus-Bolus); the existing tract is a Byzantine epitome.

NICANDER, native of Claros near Colophon in Ionia; 2nd century 8.c.; 
Greek poet, grammarian and physician; succeeded his father as 
priest of Apollo of Claros. ‘Two poems are extant: Thértaca, on 
venomous animals and the wounds they inflict; and Alextphar- 
maca, on poisons and their antidotes.

NicasicraTfs, place and time uncertain; writer on Democritus men- 
tioned by Philodemus.

Nico.aus Damascfnus, native of Damascus, Ist century B.C.~Ist

GG

~

450 LIST OF AUTHORITIES

century 4.D. (time of Herod the Great and Augustus). He wrote 
an Autobiography, in part extant; a World History; a Life of 
Augustus; commentaries on Aristotle; and other philosophical 
works, as well as tragedies and comedies.

Nficomacuus, son of Aristotle; was himself a philosopher and wrote 
works which are lost. The Necomachean Ethics of Aristotle was 
named after him.

Nicomacnus Gerasenus, of Gerasa in Arabia, Ist century 4.p. Wrote a 
Life of Pythagoras (lost), and works on arithmetic and music, 
two of which are extant.

Nicomépgs, latter half of 3rd century B.c. Geometer; inventor of the 
conchoid curve.

Nonnus Abbas, unknown commentator on the works of Gregorius 
Nazianzen, Bishop of Constantinople 380-390 a.p.; probably 
lived in Palestine in the 6th century a.p.Nonnus Abbas, unknown commentator on the works of Gregorius 
Nazianzen, Bishop of Constantinople 380-390 a.p.; probably 
lived in Palestine in the 6th century a.p.

Numénius of Apamea in Syria, 2nd century a.p.; Pythagorean and 
Platonic philosopher. He endeavoured to trace the doctrines of 
Plato back to Pythagoras, and to compare them with those of the 
Jews, Magi, Egyptians and Brahmins. His writings are lost, 
but are much quoted by Eusebius and others.

Otympropérus of Alexandria, 6th century a.p.; Neo-Platonic philo- 
sopher. Wrote commentaries on Platoand Aristotle. His Life of 
Plato is extant, and also his notes on Gorgias, Philébus, Phaedo, 
and Alabtades 1, and on *Aristotle’s Meteérologica.

Otympropérus, unknown author of a work On the Philosopher’s Stone; 
may be the same as the historian Olympiodorus who lived at some 
time after Constantine (306-337 a.p.). (Not the same as the 
preceding.)

Orisasius, born in Asia Minor, at Sardis or Pergamum; 4th century 
A.D.; Greek medical writer. Extant works: Collecta Medicinalia, 
a compilation of medical extracts from other writers; a Synopsis of 
this work; and Euporista (De Facile Parabilibus), on drugs in 
common use. The two latter were intended as manuals for the 
practice of medicine. A Commentary on the Aphorisms of 
Hippocrates which goes under the name of Omibasius is not 
his.

Oricenfs (OricEN) of Alexandria, 2nd-3rd centuries a.p., Greek 
Christian writer, pupil of Clement of Alexandria. His works 
included editions of the Old Testament in Hebrew; exegetical 
works, including notes, commentaries and sermons; letters; a 
work De Principus (On First Principles); and a work in eight 
books, Contra Celsum, a defence of Christianity against the 
attacks of Celsus, an Eptcurean. 
of Thebes, 5th century a.p.; Greek grammarian. His Lexicon

LIST OF AUTHORITIES

is extant; it was used by the compilers of the Etymologicum 
Magnum.LIST OF AUTHORITIES

is extant; it was used by the compilers of the Etymologicum 
Magnum.

Osranés or OstHanfs, the Mede, 5th century B.c. Said to have accom 
panied Xerxes to Greece. Quoted by later Greek writers on 
magical remedies.

Ovip (P. Ovipius Naso), 43 8.c.-18 a.p.; Roman poet.

Pacuymerfs, Georaius, of Constantinople, 13th-14th centuries .p. 
(c. 1242-1310). Extant works: Historia Byzantina, a History 
of the Emperors Michael and Andronicus Palaeologus, a valuable 
work; and summaries of the philosophy of Aristotle. An Auto- 
biography in verse is lost.

PaLAEPHATUS, author of De Incredtbilibus, On Incredible Tales; 
probably an Alexandrian of the 3rd century B.c., but this is 
uncertain. His book (in Greek) gave rationalistic explanations of 
myths, after the style of Euhemerus (4th-3rd centuries B.c.). 
The existing version is an abridgement of a much larger work 
which is lost.

Pattapius, Rutitius Taurus AEMILIANUS,.Latin writer, 4th century 
A.D.; author of an extant treatise De Re Rustica, derived largely 
from Columella.

PAMPHILE, place of origin Epidaurus (Suidas) or Egypt (Photius); 
woman historian of the 1st century 4.p. (reign of Nero, 54-68 
A.D.). Compiled a historical Miscellany.

PaMPHILUs of Alexandria, probably 1st century a.p.; author of a 
Lexicon used by Hesychius and others.

PanaETius of Rhodes, 2nd century B.c.; Stoic philosopher, pupil of 
Crates at Pergamum, and of Diogenes of Babylon at Athens. 
Went to Rome and became the friend of Scipio Africanus; 
succeeded to the headship of the Stoic School at Athens. Chief 
work (lost) On oral Obligation, from which Cicero took the 
greater part of his De Officits.

Panyasis of Halicarnassus, 5th century B.c.; Greek epic poet, relative of 
Herodotus. His poems included Heraclea, on the labours of 
Heracles; and Jontca, on the history of the Ionian colonies; these 
survive in fragments only; in Alexandrian times he was ranked 
with Homer and Hesiod.Pappus of Alexandria, 4th century a.p. Geometer. His AZathematical 
Collections survives in part.

PaRMENISCUS, probably 2nd century B.c.; grammarian and commentator 
on Aratus, quoted by Hyginus, by Scholiasts on Homer and 
Euripides, and by lexicographers.

Pausanias, perhaps of Lydia, 2nd century a.p. (reigns of Antoninus 
Pius and Marcus Aurelius). Wrote Itinerary of Greece containing 
much antiquarian and mythological lore.

LIST OF AUTHORITIES

Persagus, native of Citium in Cyprus, 3rd century 8.c. Stoic philosopher, 
pupil of Zeno; lived at court of Antigonus Gonatas (277-239 B.C.).

Persgus, date and place unknown; probably 3rd century B.c. Known 
only from references in Proclus, as discoverer of spiric sections.

Pretrénius, surnamed Arbiter, of Rome, Ist century a.p. (reign of 
Nero); wrote a Satyricon, satirical adventure-story in prose and 
verse, depicting the vices of the age; of its twenty books, parts of 
Books XV and XVI are extant, including the Supper of Trimal- 
chio.

Puanias of Eresos in Lesbos, 4th century B.c.; pupil of Aristotle and 
friend of ‘Theophrastus. Wrote many works (all lost) including a 
Prytaneis Erestot, a Chronicle of Eresos, quoted by later writers; 
see also under Marmor PariuM.

PHanocuigs, Greek elegiac poet, latter half of 4th century B.c.; wrote 
poem entitled Erétés (Loves), of which a fragment survives.

PHanopicus, place and time uncertain; wrote De/taca, a history of Delos.

PHERECY Dés of Leros and Athens, early half of 5th century B.c. Chief 
work: history of Attic mythology and antiquities, surviving in 
fragments only. |

PuitémOn, native of Soloi in Cilicia, lived at Athens, 4th century B.c.; 
poet of New Comedy.

Puitrppus Comicus, place and date unknown, writer of comedies.

Puixippus of Opus in Locris, 4th century B.c., pupil of Plato. Edited 
Plato’s Laws, dividing it into twelve books, and adding the 
thirteenth (Epznomis).Puixippus of Opus in Locris, 4th century B.c., pupil of Plato. Edited 
Plato’s Laws, dividing it into twelve books, and adding the 
thirteenth (Epznomis).

Puit6 Jupagus (the Jew), of Alexandria, Ist century B.C.-Ist century 
A.D. Wrote commentaries on the books of Moses; endeavoured to 
prove that the truths of Greek philosophy were derived from the 
teachings of Moses; influenced the Gnostics and Neo-Platonists.

Puit6 Bysiius SANCHUNIATHON, a writer named Philo, of Byblos in 
Phoenicia, who translated into Greek the writings of an ancient 
Phoenician named Sanchuniathon, at some time before Por- 
phyry (3rd century a.p.). The work concerned Phoenician 
mythology. Of this translation Eusebius gives the Preface and

_ extracts, which he took from Porphyry. This Philo has by some 
been identified with Herennius Philo (¢.v.), who also was called 
Byblius; but the identification is probably mistaken.

Pu1Lt6 Mechanicus, of Byzantium, 2nd century B.c., wrote a work on 
military engineering, of which the fourth and fifth books are 
extant. To him is also attributed a work On the Seven Wonders 
of the World.

Puirocnorus of Athens, 3rd century B.c. Wrote an /tthis or history 
of Attica, much quoted by later scholars.

Puitop&mus of Gadara in Palestine, 1st century B.c.; Greek Epicurean

philosopher and poet; lived at Rome in the time of Cicero. Wrote

LIST OF AUTHORITIES

epigrams (included in the Greek Anthology), and prose works on 
ethical subjects such as piety (De Pietate), anger (De Ira), death 
(De Morte), flattery (De Adulatione). A treatise of his On Music 
was discovered at Herculaneum.

PuiLoponus, see JOANNf£s PHILOPONUS. :

PurLosrratus, Fiavius, of Athens, 2nd-3rd centuries a.D.; studied and 
taught at Athens. Extant works: Life of Apollonius of Tyana; 
Lives of the Sophists; Herotca, an account in dialogue form of the 
heroes of the Trojan War; Imagines, an account of certain paint- 
ings; and a collection of seventy-three Epistles, mostly love-letters.Puitoxenus of Sidon, annotator of the Odyssey, quoted by Eustathius 
(12th century a.D.).

PuitOmenus, place unknown; date, in or before the 4th century 4.D.; 
Greek physician and medical writer. His works are lost except 
for numerous quotations in Aétius and others.

Puvecon of Trallés in Lydia, 1st-2nd centuries a.p. (reign of Hadrian, 
117-138 a.p.). Extant works: On Marvellous Events; and 
Macrobit, On men who lived to a great age. His other works 
included O/ymptades, history of the Olympiads from Ol. 1 (776 
B.C.) to Ol. 229 (137 4.p.). A Life of Hadrian, written by the 
Emperor, was published under Phlegon’s name.

Puétius of Constantinople, gth century a.p., elected Patriarch in 858 
A.D. Extant works: Myriobilion seu Bibiotheca, a review of Greek 
literature containing extracts from 280 volumes; and a Lexicon 
(imperfectly preserved). He was a scholar of immense learning 
and excellent judgement.

Purynicuvs, an Arabian or Bithynian, 2nd century 4.p. (under Marcus 
Aurelius and Commodus). His great work was Praeparatio 
Sophistica in thirty-seven books, of which an extract 1s preserved. 
He also compiled a Lexicon of Attic words and phrases.

Pinpar of Thebes, 6th-5th centuries B.c. His great Epinician Odes 
preserve many legends or forms of legends otherwise not 
known.

PisanDER of Cameirus in Rhodes, 7th century B.c. Wrote Heraclea, a 
poem on the exploits of Heracles.

PranOpés, see Maximus Prantpfés.

Prato, 428-347 B.c. Friend and disciple of Socrates. Founder of the 
Academic School at Athens. His works, in dialogue form, cover 
the whole field of knowledge and offer solutions of the problems 
discussed by the pre-Socratic philosophers.

Prato Comicus, of Athens, 428-389 B.c.; poet of Old Comedy.

Puny (C. Plinius Secundus) the Elder, of Rome, 23-79 4.D. Author 
of Historia Naturalis, a collection of 20,000 matters of import- 
ance relating to the sciences, drawn from 100 selected guthors, 
together with his own comments.

4.54 LIST OF AUTHORITIES4.54 LIST OF AUTHORITIES

Prérinus, born at Lycopolis in Egypt, later lived at Rome; founder of 
the Neo-Platonic system of thought. Friend of Porphyry. 
Wrote a work in fifty-four books, which Porphyry divided into 
Enneads or groups of nine; this recorded the subject-matter of

_their discussions, and other teachings.

Prurarcu of Chaeronea in Boeotia, 1st-2nd centuries a.p. Extant 
works: Parallel Lives of forty-six Greeks and Romans; and 
Moralia, essays on ethical, critical and historical subjects.

Po..ux, Julius, of Naucratis.in Egypt, 2nd century a.p.; Greek scholar 
and teacher, appointed by the Emperor Commodus (a.p. 180- 
192) to the Chair of Rhetoric at Athens. His only surviving 
work, Onomastikon, a lexicon in 10 books, is of great value as 
preserving much information which would otherwise have been 
lost.

Potyarnus of Macedonia, 2nd century a.p. Extant work: On Strata- 
gems, on the technique of warfare, with anecdotes of well-known 
men; the book is of little historical worth.

Porysius of Megalopolis in Arcadia, 2nd century B.c. Wrote a History 
in forty books, of which the first five, and extracts from the rest, 
survive. The History began at 264 B.c. (the First Punic War), 
and ended at 146 B.c. (the fall of Corinth); it is of the highest 
value, containing original material and personal information 
collected with diligence and accuracy.

Porpuyrié, Pompénius, 3rd or 4th century a.D.; commentator on 
Horace. Neo-Platonist philosopher.Porpuyrié, Pompénius, 3rd or 4th century a.D.; commentator on 
Horace. Neo-Platonist philosopher.

Porpuyrius (PorPHyRy), probably of Tyre, 233-305 4.p. Studied under 
Origen at Caesarea; settled at Rome and became pupil of Plotinus; 
moved to Sicily where he wrote a treatise against the Christian 
religion, in fifteen books; this was destroyed by order of the 
Emperor Theodosius (378-395 4.D.). His extant works include 
a Life of Pythagoras and a Life of Plotinus; a Commentary on 
the Categortes of Aristotle; a Commentary on the Harmonica of 
Ptolemy; Scholia on the Idad; a treatise De Antro Nympharum, 
on the Cave of the Nymphs in the Odyssey, an allegorical inter- 
pretation; and a portion of a treatise De Styge, on the Styx.

Posgrpippus of Alexandria, 3rd century B.c.; writer of epigrams, some 
of which were included in the Garland of Meleager, and the 
Greek Anthology.

Poserpdén1us of Apamia in Syria, 2nd-1st centuries B.c.; studied at 
Kahens under Panarivas, verted at Rhodes, where he became 
Wate of - See wai finally moved to Rome. He wrote a 
rge number of works on phil raph 
pei, ae divination, eeamiiar: ns fe. of Chien Ie Aad 
=e knowledge; these survive in fragments only. 
* \aesarea in Mauretania, 6th century a.p.; Latin gram-

LIST OF AUTHORITIES 456

marian. His extant- works include: Commentarit Grammatic in 
eighteen books, which became the standard work on Latin 
grammar; treatises on grammar, metre, accents, and weights and 
measures; De Sideribus, in verse; and a translation of the Periegesis 
of Dionysius.

Prosus, Vaterius, of Bérytus in Phoenicia, Ist century a.p. (reign of 
Nero). Published annotated editions of Lucretius, Vergil, 
Horace and Perstus.

Procius of Byzantium, §th century a.p.; Neo-Platonic philosopher. 
Studied at Alexandria and Athens. Extant wholly or in part are 
his commentaries on the dialogues of Plato (Timaeus, Cratylus, 
Parmenides, Republic); on Hesiod’s Works and Days; and on 
Euclid, Book I.Psetius, Michael Constantius (The Younger), of Constantinople, 
1020-1105 a.D.; taught philosophy, rhetoric and dialectics. 
Wrote prose and poetry on various subjects, including philosophy, 
mathematics, law, ethics, history, etc. Among his works are: 
De Omnifaria Doctrina; and an essay De Lapidum Virtutibus, 
on the properties of precious stones.

PTOLEMAEUs, Ciauptus, ofAlexandria, 2nd century A.D.; wrote a work 
on Astronomy, usually known by its Arabic name /magest; 
Tetrabiblus, on Astrology; a Geography of the World in eight 
books, a catalogue of places with their longitude and latitude; a 
Canon of Rulers, giving a list of Assyrian, Persian, Greek and 
Roman rulers; and other astronomical works.

QuintitrAnus, M. Fasrus (QUINTILIAN), born in Spain, 35 4.p.; educated 
at Rome. Author of the Institutio Oratoria, a treatise on rhetorical 
education in twelve books, with much excellent literary criticism.

Rurus of Ephesus, 1st-2nd centuries a.D. (reign of Trajan, 98-117 a.D.); 
Greek physician. His treatise De Appellationibus Partium 
Corporis Human, on the naming of the parts of the human body, 
is extant, as well as essays On the Kidneys and On Purgatives.

SaBiNuS, end of Ist century A.D.; physician and commentator on Hippo- 
crates, quoted by Galen and others.

SaBinus, 2nd century A.D.; lived at Rome under Hadrian (4.p. 117-138); 
wrote a work on Rhetoric in 4 books, and Commentaries on 
Acusilaus, Thucydides and others.

Satyrus, perhaps of Alexandria, 3rd century B.c. (reign of Ptolemy 
Philopator, 222-205 B.c.); Peripatetic philosopher and historian. 
Wrote a collection of biographies, including Lives of Philip and 
Demosthenes.

Scyrax of Caryander in Caria, 6th-5th centuries B.c.; early explorer. 
Was sent by Dareius Hystaspes (521-485 B.c.) to explore the

456 LIST OF AUTHORITIESScyrax of Caryander in Caria, 6th-5th centuries B.c.; early explorer. 
Was sent by Dareius Hystaspes (521-485 B.c.) to explore the

456 LIST OF AUTHORITIES

course of the River Indus (Hdt. IV. 44). A work entitled 
Periplis or Voyage Round (the inhabited coasts of Europe, Asia 
and Libya), is extant under the name of Scylax, but was written 
later, probably in the first half of the 4th century B.c.

Scymnus of Chios, date uncertain. Wrote a Pertegesis or description of 
the earth, in prose.

Scyruinus of Teos, probably 4th century B.c. He turned the 
writings of Heracleitus into iambic verse, of which an extract is 
preserved by Stobaeus. /

SeLeucus of Alexandria, date uncertain; Greek grammarian, taught at 
Rome. Wrote commentaries on the poets, especially Homer, as 
well as grammatical and other treatises,

SEmMonipEs of Amorgos, 7th century B.c.; iambic poet. A fragment 
satirizing women survives.

SEmus, probably of Delos, date uncertain; Greek grammarian. Wrote 
historical works, including De/taca.

Seneca, ANNAEUS, (Rhetor), born at Corduba about 61 B.c. Lived 
partly in Spain, partly at Rome. Extant works: Controverstae 
(five books out of ten); and Suasortae, rhetorical exercises on 
imaginary questions.

Seneca, L. Annatus (PAilosophus), son of Seneca the rhetorician; born 
probably a few years B.c.; wrote numerous essays on ethical 
questions, many of which are extant; /pocolocyntésts, a satire on 
the Emperor Claudius; Quaestiones Naturales, a collection of 
facts concerning natural phenomena, taken from other writers, 
with moral comments; tragedies; and Epsstolae ad Luctlium, one 
hundred and twenty-four moral discourses in the form of letters.

Serinus Sammonicus, lived at Rome, early half of 3rd century a.p.; 
scholar renowned for his learning. Extant: De Medicina Praecepta 
Saluberrima (Medical Prescriptions), a hexameter poem on 
natural history and the healing art, containing information from 
the best authorities mixed up with superstitions.Servius Maurus HonorAtus, 4th century a.p. Lived at Rome. Chief 
works, a commentary on Vergil, and other grammatical treatises. 
The original commentary has come down to us with additions by 
later scholars.

Sextus Empiricus, place of origin unknown; 3rd century A.D., con- 
temporary of Galen; Greek physician and Sceptic philosopher. 
Extant works: Pyrrhontae Hypotypéses (Outlines of the Pyr- 
rhonic Philosophy), an account of the doctrines of the Sceptic 
School; and Adversus Mathematicos, an attack on positive 
philosophy: science, logic and ethics.

Siponius Apo.iinAris, born at Lyons, 5th century a.p.; visited Rome. 
Latin poet. Extant works: twenty-four Carmina, and nine books

of Letters on politics, literature and private topics,

: LIST OF AUTHORITIES 457

native of Calatia in Campania, 2nd century 8.c.; writer on 
Roman and Sicilian history.

Srmmz6n SETH or SétHus, of Constantinople, 11th century a.p.; Greek 
medical writer. Extant works: Catalogue of Foods fit for human 
consumption; Compendium of scientific and philosophical 
doctrines; treatises on Medicine, and on the senses of smell, taste 
and touch; and a Greek version of the Fables of Bidpai (Coronar- 
ius et Vestigator), a work said to have been brought from India by 
Perzoé, physician to Chosroés I of Persia (531-579 a.D.). 
(Hipptatricus), probably of Athens, 5th century B.c.; writer on 
horses, quoted by Xenophon, De Re Equestri.

of Ceos, born 556 B.c.; lyric poet.

SIMPLICIUS, native of Cilicia, 6th century a.p.; Neo-Platonist philosopher. 
Took refuge at the Court of King Chosroés of Persia (531-579 
A.D.) from the persecution of Justinian. Extant works: comment- 
aries on the Categories, De Caelo, Physica Auscultatio (Physics), 
and De Anima of Aristotle.

SoLinus, C. Jutius, probably 3rd century a.p. Wrote Collectanea 
Rerum Memorabilium, which was later (6th century) revised and 
called Polyhistor, a geographical compendium.SoLinus, C. Jutius, probably 3rd century a.p. Wrote Collectanea 
Rerum Memorabilium, which was later (6th century) revised and 
called Polyhistor, a geographical compendium.

SoLén of Athens, Archon 594 B.c.; statesman, lawgiver and poet.

S6paTer of Apamea or Alexandria, 5th century a.p. Rhetorician and 
teacher. Wrote a commentary on Hermogenes; Pro/egomena to 
Aristeides; and a series of rhetorical exercises.

SOPHOCLEs, 495-406 B.C.

SORANUS, date and place uncertain; author of a work on Gynaecology; 
he may be Soranus of Ephesus the Younger, who lived at some 
time later than the first half of the 2nd century a.p.

Séstapfs, unknown author of a collection of Sayings of the Seven 
Sages.

SOsrBIUS of Sparta, 3rd century B.c.; lived at Alexandria (reign of 
Ptolemy Philadelphus (285-247 38.c.)); Greek grammarian; 
wrote historical and chronological works.

Séstcratés of Rhodes, 2nd century a.p.; historical and philosophical 
writer quoted by Diog. L.; author of a work called The Succession 
(Diadoché) of the Philosophers, and probably of a History of 
Crete.

Sé116Nn of Alexandria, 3rd century B.c.; wrote a Diadochat (Successtons 
of the Philosophers).

Sé716n of Alexandria, 1st century a.p.; Stoic philosopher. Wrote a 
treatise De Ira.

Speusippus of Athens, 4th century B.c., nephew of Plato. Succeeded 
Plato as head of the Academy. Wrote works (lost) in support of 
Plato’s doctrines; on the Philosophers; and on Pythagorean 
Numbers.

458 LIST OF AUTHORITIES~ a

SpHazERus, probably native of the Bosphorus country; lived at Alex- 
andria, 4th-3rd centuries B.c. (reigns of Ptolemy I and Ptolemy IT 
(323-247 B.c.)); Stoic philosopher, pupil of Zeno. Wrote philo- 
sophical works on the Atomic Theory; on Heracleitus; and on 
various topics such as sense-perception, politics, divination and 
ethics; these are lost.Statius, P. Papinrus, lived at Rome, 1st century a.p. Extant works: 
Silvae, collection of occasional poems; Thebats and Achillets, two 
epic poems on the Seven Against Thebes and on Achilles.

STEPHANUS Byzantius, of Constantinople, probably 4th century a.p. 
Wrote Ethnica, a geographical lexicon preserved in an epitome 
made in the reign of Justinian IT (527-565 a.p.)

StTésrmBrotTos of Thasos, 5th century B.c.; rhapsodist and historian. 
Wrote works on Homer; on the Mysteries; and on historical 
subjects. He was praised by Plato and Xenophon, and quoted by 
Plutarch.

StopaEus, J&annés, probably native of Stobi in Macedonia; date un- 
certain: later than Hieroclés of Alexandria (middle 5th century 
A.D.) whom he quotes. Author of a valuable collection of extracts 
from Greek writers; this is extant in two parts: Eclogae Phystcae, 
Dialecticae et Ethicae, and Florilegtum or Sermones.

STRABO of Amasis in Pontus, c. 54. B.C.-24 a.D. His work Geographica 
is extant, a historical geography of great value.

Suztonits (C. Suzronrus TRANQUILLUS), Ist-2nd centuries a.p.; Roman 
historian, for a time private secretary to the Emperor Hadrian 
(117-138 a.D.). Extant works: Vitae Duodecim Caesarum, Lives 
of the Emperors from Julius Caesar to Domitian; De Idlustribus 
Grammatics; De Claris Rhetoribus; and Livesof Terence, Horace, 
Lucan and the Elder Pliny. A lost work was Prata (Meadow), 
a Miscellany of facts on natural history, antiquities, etc.

Surpas: a Greek Lexicon under this name is extant; nothing is known of 
its author. He was probably a Byzantine of the 1oth century 
A.D. The work is ill-arranged, but valuable material is pre- 
served In it.

Symmacuus, QO. AuRELIus, educated in Gaul, lived in Italy and Africa, 
latter half of 4th century a.p.; scholar, statesman and orator. 
Extant works: Epistles in ten books; and Novem Orationum 
Fragmenta, parts of nine orations, first published in 1815. He 
also wrote verse.Syncettus, Gegorcius, of Constantinople, 8th-gth centuries a.D. 
Author of a Chronography giving principal events from Adam to 
the accession of Diocletian, 284 a.p. He intended to bring the 
work down to 800 a.p., but died before he could do so (806 4.D.);

it was completed by his friend Theophanés, who brought it down 
to813.4.p. Syncellus transcribed in part the Chronicon of Eusebius.

LIST OF AUTHORITIES 459

SYNESIUS, native of Cyrene; 4th-5th centuries a.p.; Greek philosopher, 
scholar, orator and poet; studied at Alexandria under Hypatia. 
At first followed Neo-Platonism, but was later converted to 
Christianity and became Bishop of Ptolemais in Libya. His 
extant works include: Dion, an account of his devotion to philo- 
sophy; On Monarchy, addressed to the Emperor Arcadius; 
Aegyptius, stve De Providentia, an indictment of the morals of the 
time in the form of the legend of Osirisand Typhon; De Insomniis, 
On Dreams; as well as letters, orations, homilies and hymns.

SYRIANUS, native of Alexandria; 4th-5th centuries a.p.; studied at 
Athens under Plutarchus the Neo-Platonist, and succeeded him 
as head of that School; taught Proclus. He wrote commentaries 
on the works of Aristotle; that on the Metaphysics is extant, as 
well as a commentary on the Stasets of Hermogenes (q.v.); and 
a treatise On the Ideas.

TaTIANus, native of Assyria; 2nd century a.p.; philosopher and teacher 
of rhetoric, later converted to Christianity by Justin Martyr. 
His extant work (in Greek) is Oratto adversus Graecos, an 
admonitory address to the Greeks reproving them for their 
contempt for the opinions of non-Hellenes. His other works 
survive in fragments only.

TeExés, place of origin possibly Alexandria; 4th-3rd centuries B.c.; 
Greek Socratic philosopher. Wrote dialogues, quoted by 
Stobaeus, on ethical subjects.TeExés, place of origin possibly Alexandria; 4th-3rd centuries B.c.; 
Greek Socratic philosopher. Wrote dialogues, quoted by 
Stobaeus, on ethical subjects.

‘TERPANDROS (T‘ERPANDER) of Lesbos, Greek lyric poet; 7th century 
B.c. Lived at Sparta; introduced a new type of music. A few 
fragments of his lyrics survive.

TERTULLIANUS (TERTULLIAN), native of Carthage; 2nd-3rd centuries 
A.D.; Christian writer, who seceded from the Roman Church 
and joined the heretical sect called Montanists; wrote works 
before and after his secession, many of which are extant. The 
De Anima and De Corona Militis were written after his secession; 
the period at which he wrote his 4pologia, a general defence of 
Christianity, and 4d Nattones, an attack on the persecutors of 
the Christians, is not known.

Tuemistius of Paphlagonia; 4th century a.D.; lived at Constantinople 
and Rome; Greek philosopher and rhetorician, friend of Gregorius 
Nazianzen. Of his thirty-six Political Orations, thirty-four are 
extant in the original, and one in a Latin version; they deal with 
current events. He also wrote philosophical works, including a 
commentary on all the books of Aristotle, with paraphrases of the 
Physics, Analytics, Categories and others.

Tue6 of Smyrna; early 2nd century a.p. (reign of Hadrian, 117-138 
A.D.); Platonic philosopher, astronomer and mathematician.

460 LIST OF AUTHORITIES

Extant work, Mathematical Aids to the Understanding of Plato, 
in two books, one on arithmetic, one on music.

Tueocritus of Cés or Syracuse, early half of 3rd century B.c.; Greek 
bucolic poet. Lived at Alexandria in the reign of Ptolemy II 
(285-247 B.c.) and at Syracuse in the reign of Hiero II 
(270-216 B.C.).

Tueocritus of Chios, latter half of 4th century B.c. (reign of Alexander 
the Great, 336-323 B.c.). Rhetorician and epigrammatist. 
Wrote Sententiae, maxims or witty sayings; and Epistulae de 
Rebus Mirabilibus. A History of Libya is also attributed to 
him.Tueopdrétus, native of Antioch; 5th century a.p.; Greek ecclesiastic 
and scholar. Wrote commentaries on the books of the Old 
Testament, and on the Epistles of Paul; a valuable Ecclestastical 
History: Religiosa Historia, containing the Lives of thirty hermits; 
tracts against heresies; Graecorum affectionum Curatio (A Remedy 
for the Ills of Greece), a defence and exposition of Christian 
doctrine; ten Orations on Providence; and other Orations, 
homilies and letters.

Tueopérus of Cyrene (‘the Atheist’), 4th-3rd centuries B.c., pupil of 
Aristippus the Younger. Lived also at Athens (under Demetrius 
Phalereus) and at Alexandria (under Ptolemy Lagi, 323-285 
B.c.). Wrote a book On the Gods (lost).

Priscus or Priscranus, of Constantinople; 4th century 
A.D.; physician. Extant work (Latin): Res Medicae, on general 
medical practice and treatment.

Propromus, Greek monk, 12th century a.p. Wrote works 
in prose and verse, many of which are extant; these include 
Galeomyomachia, the Battle of the Cats and Mice, in imitation of 
the Homeric Batrachomyomachia; a \ove-story in verse; and 
Epigrammata, poetical summaries of the Scriptures.

Tueocnis of Megara, 6th century B.c.; elegiac poet.

Tueocnéstus of Constantinople; early half of gth century a.p.; 
grammarian. Author of a work on prosody, partly based on that 
of Herodianus (q.v.).

THeopnitus of Antioch; latter half of 2nd century a.p. Was converted 
to Christianity, and became Bishop of Antioch, ¢.170 a.p. Wrote 
a Defence (extant) of the Christian faith, in the form of a Letter

to Autolycus (his friend); and commentaries on the Scriptures. 
THEopurastus, of Eresos in Lesbos; 4th century B.c.; pupil and friend 
of Aristotle, whom he succeeded as head of the Peripatetic School 
at Athens. Diogenes Laertius gives a list of his writings. His 
chief works (extant) were Historia Plantarum, and De Causts 
Plantarum, on botany; and Characters; other works survive in;fragments only, e.g. De Sensu, De Odoribus, De Vertigine (On

LIST OF AUTHORITIES 461

Faintness), De Igne, De Petris; Metaphysics and other ethical and 
philosophical treatises. The work De Signis, on Meteorology, 
ascribed to him, is now thought to be spurious.

‘THEoPHYLACTUs of Contantinople, 7th century a.p. Extant works: 
History of the Emperor Maurice (582-602 a.p.); Quaestiones 
Physicae, on the nature of animals, especially Man; and eighty- 
five Letters.

THeopompus of Chios, 4th century B.c.; pupil of Isocrates; Greek 
historian and rhetorician. His works survive in fragments only: 
History of Greece, a continuation of that of Thucydides from 411 
to 394 B.c.; Philtppica, History of Philip of Macedon, 360-336 
B.c.; and Orations written for display.

‘THRASYLLUS of Mendes and Alexandria; astrologer to Tiberius (14-27 
A.D.)3; also Platonic scholar and mathematician. Probably with 
Dercyllides divided Plato’s works into Tetralogies; and was 
credited with a similar division of the works of Democritus. 
Wrote on Platonic and Pythagorean philosophy, and on music; 
a work of his on astrology survives in a Byzantine epitome.

Tuuctpipés of Athens, 5th century 8.c.; historian of the Peloponnesian 
War.

Timagus of Tauromenium in Sicily; c. 352-256 B.c.; son of Andro- 
machus, tyrant of Tauromenium. Wrote a History of Sicily 
from earliest times to 264 B.c., which survives in fragments only. 
He collected materials with care, but his reliability was disputed 
by Polybius, who began his own History at 264 B.c.

Tim6n of Phlids, 3rd century B.c.; studied philosophy under Pyrrho of 
Elis and Stilpo of Megara (Sceptic School). Visited various 
cities, and lived for a time at Athens. Wrote Si//o:, hexameter 
verses in three books, of which the latter two are in the form of 
a dialogue between the poet and Xenophanes; the work ts a 
satirical account of the doctrines of all philosophers.Timortueus of Miletus, 446-357 B.c.; musician and dithyrambic poet. 
His works survive in fragments only; the title of one of his dithy- 
rambs was Persae.

Timotneus of Rhodes, 3rd century B.c., admiral of the fleet of Ptolemy 
Philadelphus (285-247 3.c.). Wrote a work on Harbours in 10 
books, copied by Eratosthenes and quoted by Strabo and others.

TimorTueEus of Gaza, latter half of 5th century 4.p. (reign of Emperor 
Anastasius, 491-518 a.p.); Greek grammarian. Wrote a poem 
in epic verse, on the quadrupeds of India, Arabia, Libya and 
Egypt, and on strange birds and serpents; and a tragedy Chrys- 
argyros of which nothing survives.

Trypuén of Alexandria, Ist century B.c.-Ist century A.D. (reign of 
Augustus, 29 B.C.-I14 A.D.); grammarian and poet.

Tzetzis, see JOANNES —

462 LIST OF AUTHORITIES

Vaterius Maximus of Rome, Ist century .D. (reign of Tiberius, 14-27 
a.D.). Compiler of De Factis Dictisque Memorabiltbus, historical 
anecdotes, of which an abridged version survives.

Varro, M. Terentius, 116-28 B.c.; Roman scholar and writer. His 
erudition was famous. Of his works, two only are extant: De Re 
Rustica; and De Lingua Latina, originally in twenty books of 
which six (Books V-X) survive. He also wrote biographies, 
philosophical and scientific works; and Saturae, didactic composi- 
tions in verse and prose on various subjects, of which only frag- 
ments remain.

Vercit (P. Vercitrus Maro), 70-19 B.C.

Vestinus of Ioulis in Ceos, date uncertain; grammarian, Epitomized 
the Lexicon of Pamphilus (1st century a.D.).

VinpicrAnus of Rome, 4th century a.p.; physician to the Emperor 
Valentinianus I (364-375 A.p.); tutor to Theodorus Priscus 
(g.v.). He was a Christian, and was praised by St. Augustine, 
whom he met in Africa. Wrote a Latin hexameter poem on 
medicinal substances.

Vitruvius Pollio, M., of Rome, latter half of 1st century B.c.; architect. 
His De Architectura is extant.

Xantuus wrote On Empedocles; otherwise unknown.Vitruvius Pollio, M., of Rome, latter half of 1st century B.c.; architect. 
His De Architectura is extant.

Xantuus wrote On Empedocles; otherwise unknown.

XenocraTés of Aphrodisias in Cilicia, 1st century a.p. Medical writer 
quoted by Galen.

XENoPHON of Athens, 5th-4th centuries B.c.; disciple of Socrates; 
historian and essayist. Extant works: Anabasis; Hellentca; 
Cyropaedeaa; Memorabilia Socratis; and other essays and dialogues 
such as Economicus and Sympostum. The Constitution of Athens 
ascribed to him is by an older writer, but the Constitution of

Sparta may be his.

Zacuarias Scholasticus, 6th century a.p.; Greek Christian writer. 
Studied at Alexandria; became Bishop of Mitylene in Lesbos. 
Extant work: /mmontus, a dialogue held with a pupil Ammonius, 
refuting the Platonic doctrine of the eternity of the universe, as 
contrary to the Christian faith; and a treatise refuting the 
Manichean heresy. He also wrote commentaries on Aristotle 
(lost). 
vem native of Citium in Cyprus; 3rd century B.c.; settled in 
Athens and founded the Stoic School. Wrote numerous works, 
which have not survived, but were incorporated in the works of 
later Stoics.

of Heraclea, date unknown F , "

by Clemens Ale. Suidas and oes eee me

(ZARATHUSTRA), date uncertain; founder or reformer of

LIST OF AUTHORITIES 463

Magian religion; first mentioned in Greek literature by Plato 
(4lctb. 122a). Spurious writings under his name were later cur- 
rent in the time of Pliny, 1st century A.p., possibly earlier. A 
collection of forged oracles is extant.

Zésimus, probably lived at Constantinople, 5th century a.p. (reign of 
Theodosius II, 408-450 a.p.). Wrote a History of the Roman 
Empire (extant), from its beginning to 410 A.D., largely compiled 
from the works of previous historians; he was not a Christian, and 
therefore attacked the crimes of the Christian Emperors, especially 
Constantine.Z6simus of Ascalon in Gaza, 5th-6th centuries .p. (reign of Anastasius, 
419-518 a.p.). Wrote Lives of the orators, including Demos- 
thenes, Lysias and Isocrates.

Zésimus the alchemist, of Panopolis in Egypt, probably early 4th 
century A.D.; author of a compilation of earlier works on alchemy.

i SALAK Slee 4 mp fan rts

INDEX

INDEX

Asp&ra, Abderite, 285-6, 290, 292-3, 
295-6, 299) 324-5 330, 3332 337» 3432 
345

Academy, 217, 221, 326

Achaea, 77

Acheldéus, R., 43

Achillés, 277, 385, 423

Achillés and the tortoise, 162

Achillés Byz., 60-1, 226n.

Acragas, 172, 174, 177N., 178-9, 200, 
2445 356

Acron, 177n.

Acropolis (Athens), 21

Actaeén, 42

Acté, 212

Acfsilaus, 41-4

Adeimantus, 15, 208, 413n.

Admétus, 42

Adrasteia, see Necessity

Aeacus, 29

Aegina, 87

Aegis, 24

Aegospotami, 25, 262, 281

Aelian, 4, 215.) 254, 338, 341-2

Aeschinés Orator, 342

Aeschinés Socraticus, 356

Aeschylus (dramatist), 3n., 264, 341, 364, 
367, 412N., 420

Aeschylus (philosopher), 217, 219

Aethalidés, 78-9

Aethér, Aetherial, 11, 23, 39, 42, 181, 
187-8, 193, 202, 226-7, 231n., 267-8, 
270-2, 277, 281, 412

Aethér (proper name), 9, 11

Aethiopia, Aethiopian, 24, 89, 96, 271, 
290, 298

Acthra, 24

Aétius, 49, 59n., 60, 62, 70N., 71N., 73, 
86n., 89, 99, 102, 116n., 150, 181, 
189n., 190N., I9I, 196N., 222, 225N.» 
286, 304, 314N., 338, 411.

After-life, 4, 15-18, 40, 80, 121, 126, 316

Agamemn6n, 217

Agatharchus, 264

Agathoclés (musician), 207

Agathén, 343-4, 356, 370

Agnostic, Agnosticism, xii, 98, 144, 1575 
167, 273, 283, 328, 345, 348, 351-3

Agriculture, 17, 51, 278, 293, 298-9, 322, 
338

Agriopé (Eurydice), 3

Aidéneus, 181

Aigokerés, 30

Air, atmospheric, 68, 175, 195, 271

Air ¢lement), see Element

Akikaros, 291

Akousmatikoi, 74-5, 85

Alcaeus, 1

Alcéstis, 3

Alcéstis (Euripides), 4

Alchemy, 324-5, 338

Alcibiadés, 134, 207, 275, 292, 343, 356, 
3710., 405-6, 409 °

Alcidamas, 356, 368-9

Alcimus, 133-4

Alcmaeén (hero), 419Alcaeus, 1

Alcéstis, 3

Alcéstis (Euripides), 4

Alchemy, 324-5, 338

Alcibiadés, 134, 207, 275, 292, 343, 356, 
3710., 405-6, 409 °

Alcidamas, 356, 368-9

Alcimus, 133-4

Alcmaeén (hero), 419

Alcmaeén (physician), 84, 135-9, 142-4, 
149, 151, 204, 210

Alcmaeonid, 27

Aleuadae, 355, 410

Alexamenos, 154

Alexander Aphrodisiensis, 6, 91, 368

Alexander the Great, 20, 296, 330-3, 335

Alexandrian, 3, 17, 31-2, 330.) 55, 128, 
293, 297, 300n.

Alexis Comicus, 4, 260

Allegorical interpretation of Homer, 415 
277-8

Allegorical Precepts (Pythagorean), 254-6

Allegory, 7, 17; 39-41, 44, 146, 364, 
371N., 373

Allegory of creation, 38-41

Aléeus, 30n.

Alopé, 19

Amalchios, 334

Amaltheia, 24, 296

Ameinias, 140, 152

Ammén, 334

Amémétus, 334

Amphién, 26

Amfcelas, 242, 294

Anabasts (Xenophon), 355

Anacharsis, 31, 44

Anacre6n, 409

Anaideia, Stone of, 28

Anamnbsis, 18, 191

467

468

Ananké, 187, 203

Anaxagoras, xii, 63-4, 96n., 117, 126n., 
13ly I7I-2) 193) 197) 215, 241) 2545 
261-74, 275-6, 278-83, 289, 291-2, 296, 
394-5, 326, 335-6, 366, 374, 421

Anaxagorean, 396n.

Anaxarchus, 327-8, 330-2

Anaximander, xi, 18, 35, 40, 50-2, 55-64, 
65-71, 89, 100, 102N., 109-10, 112, 
143, 150, 152, 17%, 277, 279, 281, 306

Anaximander Junior, 255

Anaximenés, xi, 18, 56, 57n., 61n., 64-73, 
103N., 109-10, 112, 134, 1§0, 152, 171, 
261, 268, 271, 274, 278-81

Anchisés, 43

Ancient Medicine, On (Hippocrates), 131, 
200

Andania, 24

Andocides, 400n., 406

Androclus, 36

Andrén (of Athens), 382

Andr6n (of Ephesus), 37-8

Andrén (of Teos), 21

Anhalation, see Exhalation

Anténér (Epicharmus), 135

Anthropomorphism, 3, 95-8, 129

Antichth6n, see Counter-Earth

Antigonus Gonatas, 327n.

Antihedonism, 79, 128

Antilochus of Lemnos, 393

Antiochus, King of Thessaly, 356, 384

Antiopé, 20

Antipater of Tarsus, 403

Antiphanés, 260

Antiphémus, 19

Antiphén Orator, 347) 354 377> 391-2» 
394, 409

Antiph6én Sophistes, 341, 391-404, 408Antiochus, King of Thessaly, 356, 384

Antiopé, 20

Antipater of Tarsus, 403

Antiphanés, 260

Antiphémus, 19

Antiphén Orator, 347) 354 377> 391-2» 
394, 409

Antiph6én Sophistes, 341, 391-404, 408

Antiphén Tragicus, 391-2, 394) 4030. 
404

Antisthenés Cynicus, 357, 382

Antisthenés the Heracleitean, 285

Aphareus (son of Hippias of Elis), 382

Aphidna, 299

Aphrodisias, 6, 324, 338, 368

Aphrodité, 41, 43, 183, 197, 201, 203, 334

Apollo, 25 31 8, 24-5) 41-2, 45» 79» 81, 88, 
98, 131) 179) 201-2, 217, 278) 333

Apollodérus Chronicus, 55, 89, 164, 221,

Apollodérus (father of ArchelAus), 275 
Apollodérus of Cyzicus, 335 
Apollodérus of Phaléron, 356 
Apollénia (Crete), 279

INDEX

Apollénia (Pontus), 279

Apollénius (author of Historiae Mira- 
biles), 338

Apollénius Rhodius, 2, 6, 13

Apology (Plato), 354, 363, 381

Apothedsis, 16, 177, 178n., 202

Arabic, 338

Aramaic, 2910,

Ar&tus, 30, 32

Arcadia, Arcadian, 29, 30n., 31, 245

Arcesilas of Sparta, 410, 411n.

Archaeology, 383-4

Archeldus (Antisthenes), 357

ArchelAus of Athens, 64, 263, 275-7, 279, 
282

Archelaus of Macedonia, 376, 380

Archeptolemus, 213

Archer, The (Sign of Zodiac), 35

Archilochus, 120, 385, 409

Archimédés, 38 5n.

Archippus, 77, 233

Arch#tas, 87, 220, 223n., 231n., 233-9, 
243M.» 249) 251, 257, 386

Arctic Circle, 30

Areopagus, 28, 208

Ar€s, 41, 224-5, 367) 423

Argés (Cyclops), ro

Argé, 2, 29

Argonautica (Apollonius Rhodius), 2, 6, 
13

Argonautica (Musaeus), 25

Argonautica (Orpheus), 7

Argonautica (Orpheus of Croton), 2n., 8

Argonauts, 2, 43

Argos (city-State), 43, 214, 244-5

Argos (giant), 24

Ariadné, 31

Arimphaei, 334n.

Ari6n of Phiids, 242

Aristarchus, 32

Aristippus of Cyréné, 355

Aristippus of Thessaly, 355

Aristocritus, 129

Arist6n, sons of, 413n.

Aristophanes, 12, 129, 191, 205-6, 209n., 
2II, 213, 260-1, 352, 357, 362n., 367, 
370, 371D-» 373, 377s 38l> 417

Aristophén, 260Aristocritus, 129

Arist6n, sons of, 413n.

Aristophanes, 12, 129, 191, 205-6, 209n., 
2II, 213, 260-1, 352, 357, 362n., 367, 
370, 371D-» 373, 377s 38l> 417

Aristophén, 260

Aristotle, xi, xii, 1, 4-6, 18, 21, 26-7, 29, 
40, 45, 49, 52-6, 64, 69, 72-35 77-9, 83, 
89, 91-4, 100, 105-6, 108, IfIn., 112, 
IES, 128, 134-7, 142, Tggrg, °°°°* 
153-5, 158, 160-7, 169, 171-2 
177, 179-85, r81n., 182, 184,

INDEX

190N., 192-4, 196-8, 202, 205, 207, 
209, 211-14, 217-18, 2256N., 227, 229, 
232, 234, 240, 244-9, 251-4, 256, 264, 
266, 269, 272, 279-80, 282, 285-6, 294, 
299, 301-2, 307-8, 311, 332, 337, 
341-2, 346-7, 349-52, 356, 358, 362, 
365, 367-9, 371-2, 375-9, 384N., 393, 
396, 400, 403n., 408

Aristoxenus, 21, 73, 79-81, 221, 233-4, 
241-2, 246, 256-60

Arkas, 31, 33

Arrian, 341

Artemis, 41, 88, 98, 104-5

Asclépiadés of Myrleia, 32

Asclépius, 42, 87

Ascra (Boeotia), 32

Asia, 8, 334n., 384

Asia, Central, 334

Asia Minor, 80-1, 333

Asépus (district of Arcadia), 3on.

Asépus, R., 43

Aspasia, 356, 384

Asteria, 24

Astén of Crotén, 74

Astrology, 8, 129

Astronomy, 32-5, 49, 113, 138, 215-17, 
219-20, 226, 240, 263, 293, 297, 3372 
383, 385, 389

Athanasius, 365

Atheist, 54, 211, 374

Athénaeus, 4n., 32, 134, 226n., 344, 366, 
377s 41%

Athéné, 24, 41, 224, 277, 295

Athens, Athenian, 5, 8, 15n., 19-22, 26-9, 
35-6, 38, 54, 87, 104, 140, 153, 164, 
172, 176N.,179N., 201, ZI-1 5, 217,229, 
241, 245, 261-4, 275, 285, 290-1, 325; 
344-7) 353-8, 362, 365-6, 370-1, 374-6, 
378, 380-2, 391-3, 405-9, 41

Athenian Constitution (ps.- Xenophon), 
413

Atlantis, 334

Atlas, 2, 24, 412

Atomic structure of matter (Empedocles), 
182, 189, 199

Atomic Theory (Leucippus and Demo- 
critus), x1i, 169-70, 286-9, 299-304

‘Atomic’ Theory (Plato), 222, 223, 224n.

Atomist, 129, 241

Atomon (‘indivisible’), 156, 286

Atoms, 175, 222-3, 249, 286-9, 299-304, 
305-15, 328

Atossa, 88

Atrometus, 384

469

Atropos, 10

Attacori, 334Atomist, 129, 241

Atomon (‘indivisible’), 156, 286

Atoms, 175, 222-3, 249, 286-9, 299-304, 
305-15, 328

Atossa, 88

Atrometus, 384

469

Atropos, 10

Attacori, 334

ALUC, 245 27) 299, 337 3840-5 395s 404» 
409) 410, 414

Aulus Gellius, 323

Ausonius, 6

Autolycus (Euripides), 94

Avicenna, 338

Axiochus (ps.-Plato), 4, 374

Axiopistus, 134

BABYLON, 35, 77, 80, 193, 198, 290-1

Babylonian, 40, 51, 63, 290-1

Bacchae (Euripides), 353

Bacchae (attributed to Philoldus), 221, 
228, 232

Bacchanal, Bacchants, Bacchic, 4, 6-8, 
1gn., 18, 121

Bailey, C., 264n., 286n., 300n., 336n.

Bakis, 25

Bassarae (Aeschylus), 3n.

Bathyllus (Pythagorean), 135

Baubé, 11, 204, 204n.

Bears (constellations), 33, 34.) 50-1, 60, 
113, 128, 412

Beauty, 122, 124, 214-15, 259, 295; 
316-17, 322, 366, 369, 384, 389-90, 
404, 412-13

Benn, A. W., 82

Bias of Priéné, 44-5, 54, 122

Bignone, E., 180n., 201n., 203

Biology, 52, 62, 99-100, 102-3, 105, 138, 
I§I, 190 S9., 210, 238, 272, 277, 280, 
282-3, 289, 297-8, 306-8, 396

Bién, Lament for, 3

Bién of Abdera, 337

Bién the Stoic, 129

Birds, 12, 72, 124, 138, 181, 184, 190, 
2OI, 272, 282, 302, 308, 322

Birds (Aristophanes), 12, 357, 370 38%

Bithynia, 32

Black Sea, see Pontus

Blood, 121, 136, 194-6, 199-200, 210, 
228, 269, 280, 282-3, 324, 413

Blood-pollution, 14, 80, 121, 174-5, 
200-1

Boeckh, A., 413n.

Boedtia, Boeotian, 2, 25, 32) 3552 370-2

Boéthius, 228

Boidas, 205

Bolus, 323-4, 337-8

Bonner, R. J., and Smith, G., 398n.

Bodtes, 33, 34n.

Boreas, 39, 43, 333

470°

Bosporus, 291

Botany, 193, 204-5, 211, 293, 298, 308

Boundless, see Elements

Brain, 136-9, 210, 231, 272-3, 283-4, 314n.

Breath, Breathing, 18, 39, 52, 64-5, 67-8, 
73. 117-18, 137, 150, 195-6, 199, 228, 
2§0, 260, 272-3, 280-4, 289, 306, 314, 
365, 399

Breathing-holes (Anaximander), 60-2; 
(Diogenés of Apollonia), 281

British Museum, 325

Brontés (Cyclops), 10

Brontinus, 6, 84, 135

Brooke, Rupert, 96Breathing-holes (Anaximander), 60-2; 
(Diogenés of Apollonia), 281

British Museum, 325

Brontés (Cyclops), 10

Brontinus, 6, 84, 135

Brooke, Rupert, 96

Burnet, J., 52, 60n., 7on., 71n., 75§N.; 
76n., 82,91N., 99N., 108n., r09Nn., 116N., 
13OM., 139N., 141, 147D., 149) 154, 
r65n., 167, 174n., 178n., 181n., 185, 
189n., 1I95N., 201n., 221n., 229N., 
262n., 264n., 289n.

Bywater, I., 108

Byzantian, Byzantine, 10, 31, 129, 2175 
296-7

CADMUS, 24

Calais, 42-3

Callias (son of Hipponicus), 213n., 346, 
370-1, 382

Calliclés (in Gorgias), 380n.

Callimachus, 13n., 32, 293, 295, 338

Calliopé, 2

Calliopeia, 201

Calliph6n, 87

Callisthenés, 331-2

Callist6, 30-1, 33

Camarina, 8

Cameirus, 213

Caria, 243, 409

Carthage, 244

Cary, M., and Warmington, E., 334n.

Catané, 89, 245

Cato, 234

Caulénia, 244

Cebés, 220, 231

Cecrops II, 20

Celeus, 11

Celibacy, 54, 83

Celtic, 333

Censorinus, 272n.

Centaurs, 42, 99

Ceos, 370, 374, 3770.

Cephalus, 262

Cerameicus, 153 
Cerberus, 42

INDEX

Cercéps (Pythagorean), 5, 7, 83

Chaerephén, 357

Chalcédén, 211, 3575 375 378

Chalcidicé, 221, 241

Chalcis, 244

Chaldean, 50, 290, z91n., 298

Chance, 172, 186n., 187-9, 191-2, 198, 
202) 247, 259, 287, 300-1, 303, 3075 
310, 318, 414

Change, xi, 53, 57, 65-6, 101-2, 110, 114- 
16, 118, 123-5) 127-30, 132-3, 148, 165; 
168, 170-1, 181-4, 208, 223, 225, 265, 
273, 280-1, 284-8, 296, 299-300, 
302-3, 309, 324, 348, 382, 395s 401-2, 
421

Chaos (proper name), 9, 11

Chaos, 12, 18, 39, 42, 296, 395

Chariclés, 406

Charis, 203

Charmidés, 406n., 4097

Charmidés (Plato), 372, 405n., 406, 409n., 
413

Cheese-drink, see Kykeén

Cheirén (poem), 135

Chil6n, 44-5, 410

Chios, Chian, 73, 144, 206, 215, 217, 219, 
2375 292, 326-7, 330, 381, 409-10

Choerilus, 4

‘Choric Dance’ (of heavenly bodies), 84, 
225, 281, 412

Christian, 109, 129, 172, 292N., 296

Chronos, 9, 11) 13, 39

Chrysippus, 403, 423

Chrysogonus, 134

Chthonian, 12, 19, 80

Chthonié, 38-9‘Choric Dance’ (of heavenly bodies), 84, 
225, 281, 412

Christian, 109, 129, 172, 292N., 296

Chronos, 9, 11) 13, 39

Chrysippus, 403, 423

Chrysogonus, 134

Chthonian, 12, 19, 80

Chthonié, 38-9

Cicero, 1n., 5n., 36, 40, 73, 208, 21§n., 
234) 241, 273, 294) 314, 322, 356, 357» 
373» 375) 377N- 381, 403

Cilicia, 324, 403n.

Cimmeris, 334

Cim6n, son of Miltiadés, 207, 275, 410-11

Clazomenae, 78, 261-3

Cleanthés, 131, 294

Clearchus of Soloi, 332

Cleidamus, 278-9

Cleinias, 242, 259, 294

Cleisthenés, 27, 380, 400

Cleitophén, 375

Cleitoph6n (Plato), 375n., 380

Cleitus, 331 ;

Clement of Alexandria, 6n., 11,17) 3% 38, 
89, 121, 126n., 133 
29%> 3350., 362n., g00n.

INDEX

Clement of Rome, 6

Cleobfillina, 420

Cleobfllus, 44-5

Cleomenés, King of Sparta, 27

Cleén, 263, 411

Cleophén, 406

Cleostratus, 34-5, 216n.

Cléthé, 10

Clouds (Aristophanes), 133, 205, 209n., 
211, 213, 261, 284n., 352, 370

Cnidus, 35, 87

Cnéssus, 26, 28

Codrus, 36

Colophén, 20, 27, 88-9

Colour, 171, 224, 253, 266, 273, 283, 
288, 297, 303, 309, 311-12, 324, 362, 
366

Columella, 298, 338

Comets, 103, 219, 270, 305

Communes loct, 347, 3640.) 3732 375

Conchoidal curves, 38 5n.

Concord (political), 380, 394, 399-402

Condensation and rarefaction, 64-70, 
109-10, 169, 188, 205, 271, 276, 279- 
80, 329

Conén (fabulist), 3n.

Constellations, 23-4, 30-3, 34N-» 35, 50, 
60, 128, 251, 304, 306, 369

Convention (as opposed to reality), 277, 
288, 303, 309, 336, 397-9

Corax, 364

Corinth, 30n., 31, 44, 144, 176N., 245, 
353» 394

Cornford, F. M., 143-4, 223n., 247, 264n.

Corénis, 42

Corybantes, 6-7

Corycian rock, 37

Cés, 132

Cosmogony (Orphic), ro, 18, 29; (Anaxi- 
mander), 57-61; (Heracleitus), 109-11; 
(Empedocles), 187 sgq.3 (Philolaus), 
232; (Pythagorean), 250; (Anaxa- 
goras), 267-9; (Archelaus), 275-6, 296; 
(Democritus), 302Cosmology (Musaeus), 23; (Thales), 53; 
(Pythagoras), 81, 87; (Xenophanes), 
99-153; (Heracleitus), 107, 122; (Par- 
menides), 143; (Zeno), 154; (Philolaus), 
225-7; (Diogenes of Apollonia), 281; 
(Leucippus), 288-9; (Democritus), 293, 
299, 304, 325; (Prodicus), 373; (Anti- 
phon), 395

Cottabos, 407M.) 409

Cottos (giant), 10

471

Counter-Earth (Antichthén), 225-7, 241, 
250, 252

Coxon, A. H., 143n., 144

Crastos (Sicily), 132

Cratés (Heracleitean), 106

Crateuas, 338

Cratinus, 209, 211, 260

Cratylus, 132, 284-5

Cratylus (Plato), 14n., 352, 372

Crete, Cretan, 16, 24, 26-31, 279, 341

Critias, 21, 341, 356, 405-13

Critias senior, 405, 407, 409

Critias (Plato), 116n., 406

Croesus, 44, 49; 54

Cronos, 10-11, 13, 24) 31, 39, 201, 224-5

Crotén, 2n., 8, 37, 74, 77-8, 81, 84, 87-8, 
1352 209, 220, 232-3, 244-5, 292

Cube, duplication of, 217-19, 237

Cunaxa, 355

Custom, see Convention

Cybelé, 6

Cycléps, ro, 13

Cylén of Athens, 27

Cylén of Croton, 74, 77, 85

Cylénian pollution, 26-7

Cymé, 385

Cypria, 330

Cyprus, 332

Cypselus, 44

Cyréné, Cyrenaic, 22, 242, 244) 330, 352» 
355» 374

Cyrus (elder), 54 :

Cyrus (younger), 355-6, 371n.

Cyzicus, 244

DAEDALUS, 26, 314

Damascus, 5, 91, 280

Damén of Athens, 207-8, 372

Damén of Syracuse, 242-3, 259, 262

Damoxenus (comicus), 325

Dardania, 244

Dareius (elder), 87-8, 104, 384

De Anima (Aristotle), 49

De Caelo (Aristotle), 49, 245

De Mundo (Aristotle), 107

Death, 118, 121, 123-6, 129, 176, 181, 
190, 196, 201, 274, 280, 283, 289, 295; 
308, 314, 316, 374) 398, 415» 417

Death-penalty, 320-1, 420

Decad, see Number Ten

Deinénéd, 84

Deinostratus, 387

Déiopé, 20

Délium, battle of, 371

472 
Délos, Delian, 4, 37, 77, 78, 88, tor, 106,

217 
Delphi, Delphic, 2» 8, 25-6, 28, 3°05 37> 
44-5, 88, 107, 12%, 254, 354, 357-8)

41

Delphic Oracle, see Oracle

Démétér, 10-12, 17, 20-2, 24-5) 77, 81; 
179, 181, 204, 224-5, 278, 374

Démétrius of Magnesia, 290

Démétrius of Phaléron, 45, 2941

Delphic Oracle, see Oracle

Démétér, 10-12, 17, 20-2, 24-5) 77, 81; 
179, 181, 204, 224-5, 278, 374

Démétrius of Magnesia, 290

Démétrius of Phaléron, 45, 29

Démocédés, 87-8, 135

Démocratés of Aphidna, 299

*Démocratés’ (probably Democritus), 
295, 299) 325

Démocritus, xii, Xili, 21, 129, 235) 171, 
1920.) 233N., 242, 262N., 263-4, 285-75 
289-326, 327-8, 331, 335-8, 345, 
348, 350-2) 3532 3720+) 37374) 395D-s 
399

Démodicé, 384

Démosthenés, 1 5n.

Den (Democritus), 303

Density, 66, 72, 143, 150, 267-8, 279, 
281-3, 313-14 ;

Design, 186, 202, 287, 303

Deucalion, 43

Dexius (Dexinus), 89

Diagoras of Melos, 292, 374

Dialectic, 153, 179, 336, 389-90

Dicaearchus, 44, 73

Dichotomy, 155, 161-2

Dictaean Cave, 13, 28

Diehl, E., in.

Dio Chrysostom, 7n.

Diocleidés, 406

Dioclés (Pythagorean), 242

Diodérus, 2n., 30-3, 289n., 296) 333-45 
365

Diodotus, 106

Diogenés Laértius, 3n., 26, 29, 36; 445 495 
55> 64, 73> 75> 88, 108, 110, 129, 
13%, 140, 154, 172, 221) 229, 233n., 
237, 246, 256, 288, 296, 330, 345n., 
347s 393» 4052.

Diogenés of Apollonia, 84n., 278, 279- 
84, 286

Diogenés of Smyrna, 327, 330, 403n.

Diognétus, Epistle to, 109n.

Didn of Syracuse, 74, 221

Dion (place in Macedonia), 3

Dionysiac, Dionysian, 28, 80, 99, 121n.

Dionysius Alexandrinus, 300n.

Dionysius Halicarnassensis, 294, 341, 
356n., 358-9, 365, 375-6, 377, 379

INDEX

Dionysius Periégétés, 36n.

Dionysius the Elder of Syracuse, 234, 
392, 408n.

Dionysius the Younger of Syracuse, 242-3

Dionysodérus, 390

Dionysus, 3, 8-18, 22, 24, 28, 31, 43, 82; 
I2Iy 130, 224-5, 278, 374

Diopeithés, 263

Dioscoridés, 338

Dioskouroi, 98, 103, 224

Diottmus of Tyre, 336, 337

Diphilus, 205

Divination, 7, 264, 315, 392-3, 404N.

Dédéna, 22

Dorian Mode, 208

Doric dialect, 228-9, 234) 417

Downward Path, see Path

Dreams, Dreaming, 28, 126, 196, 253, 
315» 384N., 392-4, 402-3

Drédpides, 405

Dvina, R., 3340.

Dyad, see Number Two

Dysaulés, 11Doric dialect, 228-9, 234) 417

Downward Path, see Path

Dreams, Dreaming, 28, 126, 196, 253, 
315» 384N., 392-4, 402-3

Drédpides, 405

Dvina, R., 3340.

Dyad, see Number Two

Dysaulés, 11

EaRTH (cosmology), 12, 40) 49) 53» 59° 
62, 64, 68-72, go-t, 93, 99-102, I10- 
Il, 113, 116, 150, 184, 187-90, 225-7, 
241, 250-3, 268, 270-2, 276, 281-2, 
288, 298, 304-6, 329, 396

Earth (element), see Element

Earth (mythology), 9-12, 17, 24-5 30 
38-40, 42, 201

Earthquake, 38, 53, 62, 64, 72,271, 276-7, 
281, 305, 329, 396

Ecclésia, 376, 406

Echecratés, 221, 242

Echetus, 385

Eclipses, 49-51, 55, 61-2) 71, QO, 1X1, 
188-9, 227, 252, 261, 268, 270-1, 281, 
288, 315, 329, 396

Economics, 290, 321-2

Ecphantus, 19, 227, 241

Eddy, see Vortex

Education, 208, 212, 239, 256-9, 318-19, 
322, 347-8, 352-45 358, 369, 373» 382, 
401, 404-5

Eétoneia, 406

Effiuence Say emectieigi 197-200

Eee, World (Orphic), 9, 12, 14) 239 30, 
gon. |.

Egypt, Egyptian, 2, 7, 14, 40, g0-8) $35 
73» 77-8, 80, 89, 96, 225, 282, ago-t, 
re 306; 32104 323-45 333-he 3740 403»

INDEX

Eider, R., 334n. 
Elaea, 356 
Elea, 6, 89-90, 96, 140, 244, 285

Eleatic, Eleaticism, 91-2, 98-9, 1300.5.

133, 139, 140599.) 153-71, 173, 182-5; 
250, 359, 361-2, 368, 395n.

Element: Air, 18, 65-73, 109-10, 124, 
181-3, 187-92, 206, 209, 216, 231, 249, 
265, 267, 274, 276-8, 280-4

Element: Boundless (Apeiron), xi, 56-65, 
279

Element: Earth, 66, 91, 99-103, 109, 
181-3, 187-8, 191-2, 206, 231, 250, 
265, 272, 276-7

Element: Fire, xii, 39, 41, 66-7, 70, 87, 
96n., 105, 109-11, 113-18, 123-7, 1325 
150, 181-3, 187 S99.) 206, 209-10, 216, 
225-6, 228, 231, 250, 265, 267, 276-7, 
279-80

Element: Water, xi, 14, 18, 39, 49-50, 
§2-5) §7, 62-3, 66, 68-9, 99, 109-11, 
181-3, 187-92, 209-11, 231, 265, 
282 ;

Elements, xi, 41, 63, 66, 225, 230-2, 
247-50, 276-7, 303, 328, 334, 396Element: Water, xi, 14, 18, 39, 49-50, 
§2-5) §7, 62-3, 66, 68-9, 99, 109-11, 
181-3, 187-92, 209-11, 231, 265, 
282 ;

Elements, xi, 41, 63, 66, 225, 230-2, 
247-50, 276-7, 303, 328, 334, 396

Elements (Anaxagoras, Archelaus), 265-7, 
275; (cosmic), 222; (Empedocles), 18, 
172, 181-5, 188, 190-2, 196-200, 
203; (Five, Philolaus), 231; (Four), 
56 $99-) 91, 171, 181 5$9q., 222-5, 265; 
(Numbers, see Number); (of speech), 
383; (Three, Ion of Chios), 206; 
(Three, Orphic), 6; (Three, Phere- 
cydes), 39; (Warring), 39-40

Elements (Mathematics), 218, 236

Elephantiné, 291n.

Eleusis, Eleusinian, 11, 19-20, 24, 80, 
374» 407

Elis, QI 330) 332, 381-2, 384-6

Elysium, 15, 16n.

Empedoclés, xii, 15, 18, 73, 78, 80, 91; 
TOO, IL7y 13I-2, 135) 138, L§i-2y ITT, 
172-204, 205, 209, 271, 323, 335-5, 
35%s 354, 361-3, 366, 396, 413

Endymidn, 30, 43

Ennius, 134

Enthronement-ceremonies, 6-7

Epameinéndas, 77, 78n., 220, 233

Epeius, 423

Ephesus, Ephesian, 36-7, 104-5, 125) 127, 
130, 132, 285

Ephialtés, 41

Ephyra, 30n., 384

Epicharmus, 4, 89, 93-4, 128, 132-5

473

Epicheirémata (Zeno), 153-64, 167

Epictétus, 129

Epicurean, 129, 208, 374

Epicirus, 286, 294, 297, 299-301, 326-7, 
330y 335-7) 345, 3470.

Epigenés, 17

Epimenidés, 26-31, 43-4

Epinomis (Plato), 84n.

Epistemology (Xenophanes), 95, 97-8; 
(Heracleitus), 117-23, 128; (Alc- 
maeon), 135, 139; (Parmenides), 1423 
(Empedocles), 180-1, 197 sqq.; (Archy- 
tas), 239; (Anaxagoras), 273-4; (Craty- 
lus), 284-5; (Democritus), 297, 309-14, 
326; (Metrodorus of Chios), 327-8; 
(Anaxarchus), 331; (Nausiphanes), 
336; (Diotimus), 337; (Protagoras), 
348-51; (Xeniades), 353; (Gorgias), 
359-61; (Lycophron), 368

Equinox, 32, 50-1, 278, 306, 333

Eratosthenés of Cyrene, 33n., 37, 217n.

Eratosthenés (one of Thirty Tyrants), 
377

Erebus, 9, 12, 42

Erechtheus, 20

Erikepaios, 9, 10

Erinyes, 81

Erés, 9, 12, 14, 24) 39) 42, 151-2

Eryximachus, 382

Esar-haddon, King, 291n.Eratosthenés (one of Thirty Tyrants), 
377

Erebus, 9, 12, 42

Erechtheus, 20

Erikepaios, 9, 10

Erinyes, 81

Erés, 9, 12, 14, 24) 39) 42, 151-2

Eryximachus, 382

Esar-haddon, King, 291n.

Eschatology (Orphic), 2-4, 8, 125 15-173 
(Musaeus), 25; (Pherecydes), 40; (Py- 
thagoras), 78-9; (Heracleitus), 126; 
(Empedocles), 179, 201; (Democritus), 
293, 295, 316, 348

Etésian Winds, 49, 175, 306

Ethics, xii, 64, 81, 83, 99, 125, 128, 231, 
274) 275, 2775 291, 293-45 296, 315-18, 
3511 367, 3732 388, 400-1, 414599. -

Ethics, Eudemian, 229

Ethics, Nicomachean, 245, 400

Etna, 103, 175-6

Etruria, 245 |

Euvathlus, 346

Euboulés, 11

Euboulos, 16, 18

Euclid, 216n., 218, 228, 236, 250, 385

Eudémus, 6, 9, 13, 60n., 157, 160, 215,» 
218, 239, 246, 250n.

Eudoxus, 32, 35) 225, 297» 387

Euvesté, 296, 316n., 395n- ’

Eugamén, 22

Euhémerue, 374

Euklés (Hades), 16

474

Eumélus, 42

Eumélus (Odyssey), 37

Eumenides, 28, 30

Eumenides (Aeschylus), 412n.

Eumolpidae, 19

Eumolpus (Attic legend), 19, 20, 22

Eumolpus (great-nephew of Gorgias), 358

Euphémus, 19

Euphorbus, 78-9

Euphranér, 243

Eupolis comicus, 344

Euripidés, 2, 4, 11, 14M.) 21, 34) 94, 106, 
121, 257N., 262-4, 341, 346, 352, 363, 
370, 3775 380, 411, 412N.

Europe, 384

Eurydicé, 2, 3

Eurynomé, 13

Eurypylos, 43

Eurytus, 232-3, 242

Eusebius, 13n., 26, 36, 244, 275n., 300N.

Eustathius, 36n.

Euthydémus, 390, 406

Euthydémus (Plato), 352n.

Euthymia, 296, 316n.

Eutocius, 236

Exhalation, 101-2, 109-12, 117, 125, 1273 
188, 219, 232, 285, 329

FARMERS, THE (Aristophanes), 357

Farnell, L. R., 176n.

Fasting, 17, 28, 202, 317

Fate, 16, 109, 113-14, 117, 130, 146, 152, 
203, 317

Fates, Whe, 10

Favorinus, 274

Female, 31, 42, 33, 136, 151, 193-5, 201, 
210, 226n., 272, 282-3, 306-7

Fire, see Element

Fire, Central, 150-1, 225-7, 231, 250-2

Fish, 62, 124, 184, 190, 192, 201, 205, 
255, 282, 284, 321

Five regular solids, 82, 85-6, 222-3, 224n., 
231%, 240, 249

Five Thousand, The (Athens), 406Fire, Central, 150-1, 225-7, 231, 250-2

Fish, 62, 124, 184, 190, 192, 201, 205, 
255, 282, 284, 321

Five regular solids, 82, 85-6, 222-3, 224n., 
231%, 240, 249

Five Thousand, The (Athens), 406

Flatters, The (Eupolis), 344

Flood, The, 43

Flux (Heracleitus), 108, 112, 133-4

Formal Cause, 299

Forms (Archytas), 235

Forms (Democritus), 304

Forms, Theory-of (Plato), xii

Fossils, 89, 102-3

Foster-brothers, The (Damoxenus), 325

Fotheringham, J. K., 35n.

INDEX

Four Hundred, The, 343-4, 346, 406 
Frogs (Aristophanes), 367 
Fyfe, W. H., 384n.

Gal, GB, 10-11, 20, 24-5

Galaxy, see Milky Way

Galen, 6, 49-50, 67n., 72, 92, 269, 283, 
324, 338, 372-3, 395n. 
la, 180

Geld, 132-3

Geminus of Rhodes, 297

General Definition (Socrates), xii

Geology, 308

Geometry, 50-1, 81-4, 217-18, 222-5, 
228, 235-7) 250-1, 291, 293, 2975 347» 
351, 385, 389, 397

Gerasa, 228

Giants, 99

Glaucén I (grandfather of Pilato), 
405-6nn.

Glaucén II (brother of Plato), 369, 413n.

Glaucus, 21

Gném6n (geometrical figure), 249

Gnémén (sun-instrument), 63, 65n.

God, 73, 85, 91-100, 104, 116, 122-4, 
185, 197, 201-2, 216, 225, 232-3, 280, 
284, 395, 402, 412

Gods (Orphic), 9 599., 18, 24, 28, 40, 
41-2; (Thales), 49, 53; (Anaximenes), 
73; (Xenophanes), 92-9, 104; (Hera- 
cleitus), 100, 105,117,129; (Alcmaeon), 
139; (Empedocles), 180-1, 184-5, 188, 
196-7, 201, 203; (Philolaus), 224-5; 
(Metrodorus of Lampsacus), 277-8; 
(Democritus), 310, 314-15, 317; (Heca- 
taeus of Abdera), 333-4; (Protagoras), 
346-7, 351-2; (Prodicus), 372-4, 379- 
80; (Critias), 412; (Anon. Sophist), 
419 423

Gold Plates (Orphic), 16-17

Golden Age, 203

Golden Fleece, 30, 43

Golden Tripod, see Tripod

Gomperz, Th., 64, 94n.; 97, 103M. 161, 
167, 352, 361n., 393n.

Gorgias, 22, 144n., 19771.) 199) 342-2, 
353-67, 368-70, 373-5» 379, 381, 384N., 
389, 395» 409

Gorgias (Plato), 15, 231n., 356-7, 366, 
380n,

Gorgon, 24

Gorgépis, 384

Granicus, battle of, 333

Great Goddess, 24, 369

INDEX

Great Mother, 7Gorgias (Plato), 15, 231n., 356-7, 366, 
380n,

Gorgon, 24

Gorgépis, 384

Granicus, battle of, 333

Great Goddess, 24, 369

INDEX

Great Mother, 7

Great Year, 35, 116n., 216, 226, 253, 297

Grenfell and Hunt, 38,

Guthrie, W. K. C., 1-3nn., 6n., ron., 
IgN., 24N., 58N., 113N., I21N., 130

HApDE£S, 3n., 4, 11, 12, 16, 25, 83, 117, 
121, 126, 176, 224-5) 295

Hadrian, 41

Haemus, Mt., 4

Hail, 72, 271, 396

Halicarnassus, 294, 359

Halys, R., 54

Harmony, 82, 113-14, 116, 119-20, 122-4, 
137, 183-5, 187, 192, 201, 203, 208, 
223, 230-1, 234, 239) 242, 246, 254-5, 
259, 298, 384n.

Harpies, 30, 39, 42, 43

Harpocratién, 397

Harrison, Jane, 1-3n., 16n., 24n.

Hate (Empedocles), see Love and Hate

Hate (Orphic), 13

Hearing, 117, 137, 146, 163, 198-9, 273, 
278, 283, 305, 312-13, 361

Heath, Sir Thomas, 35n., 85-7nn., 163n., 
218-19nn., 222n., 228n., 236-7nn., 
249-50nN., 253n.

Hebrus, R., 3

Hecataeus of Abdera, 296, 333-4

Hecataeus of Miletus, 51, 63, 76, 122, 333

Hecaté, 24, 43

Hector, 277

Hedonism, Hedonist, 
126N., 234, 258n., 326

Hégésianax, 293

Hégésidamus, 382

Hégésipyla, 275

Helen, 43, 277

Helen (Euripides), 11, 363

Helen, Encomium on (Gorgias), 359, 362-3, 
366, 375

Heliké, 31

Héliopolis, 334

Hélios, 30n., 41

Hékotropion, 41

Helixoia, 333

Hell-Fire, 109, 121

Hellanicus, 6, 9

* Hellenes, Hellenic, 1,12, 8, 13

Hellénica (Xenophon), 408

Helots, 410

Hephaestus, 24, 41, 181, 341, 374) 423

Heptamychos, 38, 40

Héra, 30, 41, 43, 181, 225, 277

Hedonistic, 25,

475

Héracleia, 6, 21

Héracleides Ponticus, 78, 294

Héracleitean, 284, 396

Héracleitus, xii, 18, 40, 73-6, 82, 87, 91-2, 
96n., 104-32, 133-4, 137-8, 142-4, 150, 
1§2, 177M. 181n., 197, 210, 280n., 
284-5, 2945 3255 329, 368, 417

Héraclés, 4, 9, 20, 30, 42, 371, 373) 412

Héraclés (Euripides), 94

Héraclés, Choice of (Prodicus), 317-22

Hermae, 406

Hermeias, 379-80

Hermés, 3, 41, 78, 81, 225, 326, 341

Hermésianax, 3, 20, 22

Hermioné, 21

Hermippus, 54, 87, 172) 294Héraclés, Choice of (Prodicus), 317-22

Hermae, 406

Hermeias, 379-80

Hermés, 3, 41, 78, 81, 225, 326, 341

Hermésianax, 3, 20, 22

Hermioné, 21

Hermippus, 54, 87, 172) 294

Hermodérus of Ephesus, 105, 127

Hermogenés, 392, 394

Hermotimus, 78-9

Hérédés Atticus, 379, 409

Hérodicus of Perinthus, 7

Hérodicus (physician), 354, 379

Hérodérus, 21

Hérodotus, 1, 5n.) 7, 15, 21) 25,49, 54, 635 
73, 78, 80, 271, 290, 334M.» 341, 
371n., 417, 418n.

Hésiod, 1, 4, 11, 13, 21, 22, 25) 32-3) 42, 
a4 93, 96, 120, 151, 171, 296, 334) 372» 
393

Hesperidae, 30, 43

Hesperus (Evening Star), 82, 150

Hestia, 151, 224-5

Hésychius, 345n.

Hibeh Papyrus, 134

Hicetas, 227, 241

Hierd, 89-90; 94, 132-3

Hierénymus, 6, 9

Himera, 84, 279

Hipparchus (Peisistratid), 5

Hipparchus (Pythagorean), 233n., 325

Hippasus, 74-6, 84-7, 104, 173, 211; 
221, 223N., 2430.

Hippias of Elis, 341, 3450-5 346, 348) 354 
370, 381-91, 397, 399, 400N., 417

Hippias of Thasos, 381, 384n.

Hippias (Peisistratid), 381

Hippias Maior (Plato), 370, 382-3, 384n., 
389, 390 3992.

Hippias Minor (Plato), 389, 390

Hippocleas (or Hippoclés), 355n.

Hippocratés of Chios, 217-19, 237

Hippocratés of Cos, 131, 135, 138, 284, 
292, 298, 307, 314.) 323, 325, 341s 
395n.-

476

Hippocratic, 130, 200, 391n.

Hippodamus, 211-14

Hippolytus (of Rome), 60, 64, 117, 126n.; 
130, 197, 286 ;

Hippolytus (Euripides), 4

Hippomédés, 36

Hippén, 209-11, 216

Homer, 1, 4) £1, 13) 21) 22, 25) 41, 435 
90, 93) 96, 113, 120, 132-3, 179, 211, 
274, 277-8, 284, 298, 322, 326, 3315 
332» 367, 383-5, 389, 409, 412n.

Homeric, 126, 293, 334, 385

Homeridae, 43

Homotomeré, 266-9, 275-6

Horace, 177, 234

Hérapollén, 23n.

Husbandry, see Agriculture

Hyades, 24, 32-3, 35, 51) 385

Hyas, 24

Huheys, Stone of, 28

lomer), 11

Hymn to Demeter (Musaeus), 24-5

Hymn to Zeus (Cleanthes), 131

Hyperboreans, 4, 333-4

Hyperboreia, 244

Hyperién, 98, 102

as 1 ee a4 > |Hyas, 24

Huheys, Stone of, 28

lomer), 11

Hymn to Demeter (Musaeus), 24-5

Hymn to Zeus (Cleanthes), 131

Hyperboreans, 4, 333-4

Hyperboreia, 244

Hyperién, 98, 102

as 1 ee a4 > |

213 
m., 73, 88, rain., r77N., 
204-5, 209, 217N., 228, 239, 244, 246, 
254-6, 386n., 387, 400, 414 
Iamblichus, Anonymous Writer quoted 
by, 414-16 
Iamblichus’ Catalogue, 244-5 
Tasos (Caria), 243 
Ibycus, 1 
Iccus, 139 
Ida, Mt. (Crete), 28, 30 
Ida, Mt. (Troad), 35 
Idaeus, 279 
Ideas, 304 (see also Forms) 
Imperturbability, 293, 316, 325 332, 
336, 351 
India, Indian, 31, 290, 330 
1d, 43 
Ién of Chios (tragic poet), 6-7, 73, 206 
Ién, Rhapsodist, 390 
Ién (Euripides), 121 
Ié (Plato), 4 
Ionian, xi, 38, 41, 49, 54, 89, 107, 109, 
132, 338, 169, 170, 275, 279, 327, 418

INDEX

Ionian Revolt, 262

Tonic dialect, 38, 64, 188n., 229, 337» 395s 
404

Ioulis, 370, 377N.

Irekepaigos, ron., 18

Iris, 98, 102, 189

Irrational (Incommensurable), 82, 86, 
220, 231

Isaeus, 377N.

Isis, 334

Isles of the Blest, 15, 203, 254

Isocratés, 73, 327, 341) 354s 356-8, 362-3, 
369-70, 377, 381, 400, 408

Italy, Italian, 16, 17, 77, 81, 209, 220, 
23IN., 232, 239-40, 244-56

Ithaca, 43

Ixién, 30, 412

JAN, VON, 208n. 
Jason (hero), 2, 29 
Jason of Pherae, 354, 368n. 
Jews, 87, 298, 333 
Jéannés Katrarios, 296 
Jéannés Lydus, 31, 240, 297 
Jéannés Malalas, ro 
Jones, W. H. S., 131n., 3grn. 
Jéséphus, 87, 333 
(2, 14, 28, 63-4, 112, 122, 126, 
Ba sD RSHD SYP OwYD © HPP ODI WTF AF

320, 331, 3515 359, 379-80, 391) 397-9»

Juvenal, 375

KABEIRO!, 43

Kaineus, 42-3

Karambyka, R., 333

Katastérismos, 300., 33

Katharmat (Empedocles), 15, 80, 172, 
177N., 178-9, 185, 200-3

Katrarios, Joannes, 296

Kauk6n, 24

Kelain6é, Kelainos, 24

Kern, O., 1n.

Kerkydn, 19

Kérykés, 19

Kids, see Hyades

Killikén, 36

Knights (Aristophanes), 213

Koré, see Persephone

Korybantes, 6-7

Kourés, Kourétes, 10, 17, 28-9

Kroll, W.,5 3n.

INDEX

Kykedn (C heese-drink), 12, 105, 129-30 
Kynosoura, 31Killikén, 36

Knights (Aristophanes), 213

Koré, see Persephone

Korybantes, 6-7

Kourés, Kourétes, 10, 17, 28-9

Kroll, W.,5 3n.

INDEX

Kykedn (C heese-drink), 12, 105, 129-30 
Kynosoura, 31

Lachés (Plato), 208, 372

Lachesis, ro

Lacénia, Laconian, 45, 244-5

Lampén, 264

Lamproclés, 207

Lampsacus, 261, 263, 274-5, 277) 327

Larissa, 355, 376-7, 380

Lasus of Hermioné, 21

Law of Contradictories, 349-50, 352, 363

Laws (Plato), 4, 14n.,26, r89n., 378, 380n.

Leibéthra, 1

Lemnos, Lemnian, 2, 393

Ledgoras, 406.

Leén (Pythagorean), 135

Leontini, 353, 355

Lesbos, 3

Léthé, 16

Lété, 42, 88

Letter (Plato), Seventh, 237

“Letters of Hippocrates’, 325

Leucippus, xii, 280, 285-9, 294-6, 299, 
404 326, 328, 335

Leucothea, 96

Libyan, 307

Lindus, 213

Linus, 2, 4

Lipara, 89, 103

Loeri, Italian, 240, 244

Logot (Philolaus), 232

Logos (Heracleitus), xii, 115-25, 127-8, 
130-13 (Parmenides), 147; (Empe- 
docles), 181-2, 187; (Democritus), 316,

3950.

Love and Hate (Empedocles), 18, 117, 
172, 182-98, 200-1, 203, 363

Lucania, 239, 244-5

Lucian, 3n., 130-1, 239n.

Lucrétius, 179, 297, 304n.

Lunes, 218

Lyceum, 346

Lycomidae, 22, 24

Lycbén, 243-4

Lycophr6n of Pherae, 368

Lycophrén the Sophist, 368-9

Lydian Mode, 208

Lydians, 49, 410, 418

Lydus, see Joannes Lydus

Lyre (constellation), 369

Lfsias, 262, 377, 381n., 400N., 408-9

sa a a Sea Thy 77, 78.5 22048,

477

MAccuyroro, V., 121N., 130

Macedonia, Macedonians, 1, 3, 331, 376, 
380

Maenads, 3, 8, 121

Magi, 40, 290-1, 323, 325, 330) 344-5

Magic, 2, 8, 17, 19, 22-3, 25, 28, 175) 239, 
255s 2955 323-5» 335 337-8) 354

Magna Graecia, 234, 245, 256

Magnésia, Magnesians, 36-7, 290

ee 49» 53) 105, 190, 284, 298, 309; 
355

Malalas, see Joannes Malalas

Malta, 89, 103

Mamercus, 385-6

Manethd, 334

Marmor Parium, 20, 262

Marsyas, 26

Massagetae, 418

Mathematics, 44, 76, 78, 81-5, 128, 215- 
20, 222-7, 232, 235-9, 246-54, 256, 
293) 323» 3357 337% 3472 351-25 383, 
385-8, 391N.

Mathematikot, 74-5Marsyas, 26

Massagetae, 418

Mathematics, 44, 76, 78, 81-5, 128, 215- 
20, 222-7, 232, 235-9, 246-54, 256, 
293) 323» 3357 337% 3472 351-25 383, 
385-8, 391N.

Mathematikot, 74-5

Maximus of Tyre, 39

McDonagh, J. E. R., 114n., 210n.

Mean (Aristotle), 45

Mean, Harmonic, 87, 223, 235, 243M.

Mean Proportionals (Ratios), 87, 219, 
235-72 243, 251

Medea (Médeia), 17, 25

Medes, 49, 324

Medicine, 87-8, 122, 130-1, 135-9, 174-73 
179, 200, 209N., 210, 215, 228, 256-8, 
269, 272, 283, 298, 308, 323-4, 331, 
338, 354 3722 3737 391N-, 400, 403-4

Megara Hyblaea, 132-3

Megara, Megarian, 27, 349) 375

Melampés (Hesiod), 25

Melanthius, 357

Melésagoras, 357

Melissus, 91-3, 148-9, 158, 164-71, 185, 
209, 237, 285, 362

Melissus, Xenophanes, Gorgias, On, 92, 
171, 36%

Melité, 24

Mélos, 285, 292) 374

Memorabilia (Xenophon), 371, 389-90, 
393> 397, 400, 404, 408

Memory, 79, 137) 224_ 274, 283» 358, 
355, 3710.) 373 383. 417» 423

Memphis, 324

Mendé, 323, 337-8

Menelaus, 79

Menestheus, 20

4.78

Menestér, 204-5

Menexenus (Plato), 392n.

Mené, 355-6, 367, 408

Mené (Plato), 15, 335, 342N., 355-6nn., 
362, 366, 417-18nn., 421N.

Mercury (planet), 219

Meropis, 334

Messéné (legendary), 24

Messéné (Peloponnese), 37

Messéné, Messina (Sicily), 33, 73, 383

Messénia, 24

Metaneira, rr

Metaphysics (Aristotle), 4n., 49, 64, 93-4, 
100, 108-9, 135, 142, 179) 209, 245; 
246-7nn., 248, 253, 254N., 347, 3490. 
350

Metapontium, 77-8, 84, 88, 209, 2325 
244-5

Metempsychésis, 18, 29, 40, 253

Meteorology, 23, 33, 51, 65, 111, 189, 
206, 213, 252, 261, 278-9, 293, 298,

304-5

Meteorology (Aristotle), 64

Meteors, Meteoric stones, 101, 103, 262, 
268, 270, 281

Méti6n, 20

Métis, 9, 42

Metén (Athenian), 35

Metén (father of Empedocles), 173

Métrodérus (Epicurean), 294

Métrodérus of Chios, 144n., 292, 326, 
327-9, 33% 337

Métrodérus of Lampsacus, 274, 277-8

Midas, 78

Milesian School, 49-73Metén (father of Empedocles), 173

Métrodérus (Epicurean), 294

Métrodérus of Chios, 144n., 292, 326, 
327-9, 33% 337

Métrodérus of Lampsacus, 274, 277-8

Midas, 78

Milesian School, 49-73

Milétus, Milesian, 6, 35, 49, 51-2, 54-6, 
645 105, 107, 116, 211-13, 255,261,275; 
279, 285, 290, 333, 384, 409, 410

Milk, 194, 196, 205, 272, 277

Milky Way; 61, 150, 216, 219, 252, ane 
395» 329

Milé the Athlete, 77, 88

Mimosa asperata, 335

Mind, 63, 93, 95> 99, 113, 118, 128, 147, 
15K, 197, 202, 231, 241, 264-5, 267-9, 
274, 276-8, 289, 292, 297, 314, 360, 
395» 433

Minés, 29

Mnémosyné, 24

Mnésarchus father of Pythagoras), 74, 77

Mnésimachus, 260

Méchus, 326

Monad, see Number One

Monimus, 328, 331

INDEX

Moon, 13, 19, 30) 59-62, 69-73, 98, 102-2» 
I1O-12, 128, 139) 142, 150, 188-9, 1945. 
206, 225-7, 232, 241, 250-2, 254, 268, 
270, 276-7, 281, 288, 302, 304, 3295 
338, 396

Moon, phases of, 70-1, 111, 189, 194) 2515 
270, 396

Motion, 53, 57-8, 66-8, 70-3, 91, 95-7» 
103, IT4-15, 123) 138-9, 148, 157-9, 
161-5, 169-71, 186-7, 198, 205, 226, 
236-9, 241, 249-50, 267-8, 274, 276, 
280-1, 283, 286-9, 300-5, 312-14

Munychia, 29, 212, 405, 407

Murray, Gilbert, 16, r7n.

Musaean, 77

Musaeus, xili, 4, 5, 8, 15, 19-25, 29, 30 
40, 367, 383

Muse, Muses, 2, 8, 22, 24, 132, 180-1, 
201, 254

Muses, Hill of (Athens), 21

Music (Orpheus), 2, 8; (Musaeus), 19, 235 
(Pythagoras), 86, 177; (Empedocles), 
177n.; (Ion of Chios), 206; (Damon), 
207-8; (Theodorus), 220; (Philolaus), 
230; (Archytas), 235, 237-9; (Other 
Pythagoreans), 241-2, 252-3, 2565 
(Democritus), 293, 298, 319, 3225 
(Sophists), 341, 394, 400, 421-3

Mycéneus, 43

Mydnides, 243

Mys6n, 44

Mysteries, 20, 80, 121, 374

NAKED SAGES, 290, 330

Nausiphanés, 327, 330, 335-6

Navigation, 51

Neanthés, 172-3

Nearchus of Elea, 153

Necessity, 9, 63, 152, 178, 187, 200, 203» 
289, 301, 303) 415

Nemean Lion, 30, 268

Neo-Platonist, 5, 31, 246

Neoptolemus of Paros, 375

Neoptolemus, son of Achilles, 382Nearchus of Elea, 153

Necessity, 9, 63, 152, 178, 187, 200, 203» 
289, 301, 303) 415

Nemean Lion, 30, 268

Neo-Platonist, 5, 31, 246

Neoptolemus of Paros, 375

Neoptolemus, son of Achilles, 382

Neo-Pythagorean, 31, 214

Nessas, 326-7 328n.

Néstis, 181

Nestor, 382, 385

Nicias (Athenian), 26, 27, 208

Nicias of Elea, 6

Nicocreén, tyrant of Salamis, 330

Nicol4us of Damascus, 91, 280

Nicomachus of Gerasa, 228

Nicomédés (mathematician), 385-7

INDEX

Night (allegory), 146

Night (cosmology), 71-2, 111-12, 120, 
123) 1§0, 187-8, 19%) 253, 273, 280, 
395» 329) 337) 412

Night (mythology), 9-12, 14) 23» 30, 42

Nihilism, Nihilist, 115, 144n., 157, 328, 
353» 358-62, 367

Nile, 49, 50, 52, 206, 216, 271, 281-2, 306, 
3232 337» 374

Nineveh, 291n.

Nomenclature, 123, 285, 298, 371-35 383-4

Norwood, G., 133n., 260n., 41 1N.

Not-Being, 143-4, 147-9, 165-6, 265, 328, 
3532 359-61

Notos, 43

Nous, 96n., 264-5, 267-9, 274

Number, xit, 31, 78, 81n., 82-3, 85, 154- 
64, 215, 220, 222, 228-9, 232-3, 235; 
239, 246-54, 293, 297

Number One (Monad), 31, 222, 230; 
232-5) 247-50, 253-4

Number Two (Dyad), 31, 222, 232, 
248-9, 251

Number Three (Triad), 206, 214, 222, 
232, 240, 246-7, 251-2, 295-6, 335-75 
372

Number Four, 222, 224, 232, 251-2

Number Five, 224

Number Six, 224

Number Seven, 128, 224, 229, 251

Number Eight, 224

Number Nine, 233, 252

Number Ten (Decad), 222, 224, 227, 
229-31, 233, 235, 252

Nymphs, 27-8

Oa (deme), 207

Occelus, 239-40

Ocean, 10, 12, 13, 18, 23-4) 39) $3) 201

Ocean, Northern, 334

Odysseus, 385

Odyssey, 37, 41 
agrus, 2

Oedipds, 30

Ocdipis Coloneus (Sophocles), 19

Oenomaus, 30

Oenopidés, 215-16, 217, 219, 226

Ogenos (Okeanos), 38-9

Oktaetéris (eight-year cycle), 35

Olympia, 37, 78, 172-3, 177n., 216, 
357-8, 362, 382, 383, 389-90, 403, 
410D., 419

Olympian (gods), 80, 97, 369

Olympiodérus, 1 5n., rgon.

479

Olympus (legendary), 26

Olympus, Mt., 1, 13, 225

Omphalos (Delphi), 30Olympian (gods), 80, 97, 369

Olympiodérus, 1 5n., rgon.

479

Olympus (legendary), 26

Olympus, Mt., 1, 13, 225

Omphalos (Delphi), 30

One, One and Many, 23, 52, 65, 91-5) 98- 
100, 104, 116, 123-4, 128, 136, 183, 
286, 359-60, 361, 395

One and Many, Eleatic (Parmenides), 
142, 145, 148, 1523 (Zeno), 154-93 
(Melissus), 164-713; (Gorgias), 359-62

Onomacritus, 2n., 4-7, 21, 33

Ophién, 13

Ophioneus, 39

Opposite Arguments, 417 59q.

Opposites, 41, 56-64, 66, 81-3, 112-14, 
116, 120, 123-4, 135-6, 142-3, 204, 209, 
222, 248, 260, 266-7, 273, 278, 312

Opposites, Table of, Pythagorean, 81-3, 
136, 209, 248

Opsimus, 233 i.

Oracle, Delphic, 25-6, 28, 45, 88, 107, 
121, 254, 419

Oracle, oracles, 28, 43, 179, 200, 217, 403

Oracles (Epimenides), 29

Oracles (Musaeus), 21-3

Orchomenus, 29

Oreithyia, 43

Orestadés, 88

Orestés, 419

Oridén, 33

Ordpus, 3710.

Orus, 338

Orpheus, ix, xiii, 1-18, 19-26, 28, 40, 75, 
81, 83, 206, 367, 383, 409

Orpheus of Camarina, 8

Orpheus of Crotén, 2n., 8

Orphic, Orphism, xin, 1-25, 28-30, 33, 
40, 58n., 75, 78, 80, 84, 121N., 130, 
200N., 202N., 204n.

Osiris, 96, 334

Ostanés ov Osthanés, 323-5

Ouranos, 10, 11, 16

Ovid, 3n.

Oxyrhynchus, 38, 44, 394, 397) 412

PAEAN, 377

Palaemén, 24

Palamédés, 26

Palamédés, Defence of (Gorgias), 359» 
363, 367

Paley, F. A., 34n. .

Pamphilus, 377n.

Pamphéds, 24

Pan, 9, 30-1, 33 369

Panaetius, .

480

Panionium, 44

Panoptae (Cratinus), 209

Pappus, 386n., 387, 388n.

Paralus, 344

Paris (France), 325

Paris (Homer), 277

Parmenidean, 156-7, 165, 167-8, 181n.

Parmenidés, xii, 82, 91-3, 95, 118n., 128, 
140-52, 157-8, 164-9, 170n., 173, 185, 
265, 328, 361-2, 394

Parmenidés (Plato), 140, 152

Parmeniscus (grammarian), 34

Parmeniscus (Pythagorean), 88

Pardén, 140

Paros, Parian, 89, 103, 244, 375

Participation (Plato’s theory of), 158, 368

Path, Upward and Downward, 109, 111, 
114, 116, 123-7, 129-30

Pausanias (author of Itinerary), 2, 3) 2%»

22, 354Paros, Parian, 89, 103, 244, 375

Participation (Plato’s theory of), 158, 368

Path, Upward and Downward, 109, 111, 
114, 116, 123-7, 129-30

Pausanias (author of Itinerary), 2, 3) 2%»

22, 354

Pausanias (disciple of Empedocles), 175-7, 
179-81

Pausanias (in Plato's Protagoras), 370

Peace (Aristophanes), 206

Peiraeus, 212-13, 406-7

Petrithoos (Critias), 411-12

Peisistratids, 21, 27

Peisistratus, 2n., 8, 44, 381

Pelasgus, 43

Pelias, 17

Peloponnese, 43, 174-5, 268, 270, 376

Peloponnesian War, 26-7, 215, 229, 262, 
327, 343» 345, 376, 380-1, 414, 417

Pentemychos, 39

Periander, 28, 31, 44-5

Periclean, 54

Periclés, 164, 207, 212, 262-3; 343-4) 3515 
356, 378

Perictioné, 405, 406n.

Perinthus, 7

Peripatetic, 13, §5, 63, 92) 157) 243» 246, 
285, 294, 361-2, 378

Persaeus, 374

Perseus (mathematician), 38 5n.

Persephoné, 10-12, 15-17, 81, 179, 181, 
254

Persés, 24

Persia, Persian, 88, 105, 262, 290, 324, 
332-3, 362, 365, 381, 383-4, 390, 410, 
417, 422

Persian Invasion, 26-7

Persian Wars, 213, 354, 362-3

Th. 4...

INDEXPersés, 24

Persia, Persian, 88, 105, 262, 290, 324, 
332-3, 362, 365, 381, 383-4, 390, 410, 
417, 422

Persian Invasion, 26-7

Persian Wars, 213, 354, 362-3

Th. 4...

INDEX

Phaeacians, 43 
Phaedé (Plato), 15, 138, 220, 231, 242, 
417n., 4190. 
Phaedrus, 3n., 42n., 382 
Phaedrus (Plato), 15, 204, 322n., 352n., 
356, 378-9, 4170., 418n. 
Phaestos, 26, 28 
Phaéthén, 253 
Phaleas, 211-12 
Phaléron, 21 
Phanés, 9-14, 18, 23 
Phanoclés, 3n. 
Phantdon, 221, 242 
Pherae, 354, 368 
Pherecratés, 344 
Pherec}dés of Athens, 37 
Pherec}dés of Syros, 6n., 130., 36-41, 44, 
77-8, 206, 385 
Philémén comicus, 284 
Philip of Macedon, 368n. 
Philip, pupil of Gorgias, 357, 363 
Philé Judaeus, 101 
Philé Mechanicus, 215 
Philochorus, 21 
Philodémus, 23, 208, 295, 336 
Philolaus, 14n., 74-5, 220-32, 234, 2350; 
242, 252, 335, 372n. 
Philoponus, 4 
Philostratus, 3n., 342, 345, 356n., 358, 
362, 373M, 379 382, 399, 408n., 409 
Phintias, 242-3, 259 
Phieg6n, 27 
Phlids, 91, 221, 242, 244-5 
Phlya, 24 
Phlyos, 24 
Phdcaeans, 89 
Phécus of Samos, 33, 50 
Phoenician, 13, 37, 40, 326 
Phorcys, 43 
Phor6neus, 43 
Phésphorus (Morning Star), 82, 150 
Photius, 333 
Phrixus, 43, 384 
Phrygian, 8, 298 
Phrynichus, 7n., 406 
Phylé, 407 
Physics (Aristotle), 148, 245 
Pieria, 1 
Pillar of Akikaros, 291 
Pindar, 2, 15,81, 94; 100-1, 1020.) 1032. 
179+ 341s 3550-5 369, 384, 412n. 
Pate s 
larism, 75, 333 26 2 
Plague, 26-7 59 333-4) 320, 347; 3$3 387

INDEX

Plague, Great (Athens), 27, 177n.

Planets, 60-1, 70-1, 138, 189, 219, 225-6, 
259 254) 270, 297, 304-5

Plants, 25, 184, 190, 193, 201-2, 204-5, 
21I,y 226, 231-3, 238, 243, 269, 272, 
se 278, 283, 298, 302-3, 308, 335, 
33Planets, 60-1, 70-1, 138, 189, 219, 225-6, 
259 254) 270, 297, 304-5

Plants, 25, 184, 190, 193, 201-2, 204-5, 
21I,y 226, 231-3, 238, 243, 269, 272, 
se 278, 283, 298, 302-3, 308, 335, 
33

Plato, xii, 2-5, 7-8nn., 14n., 18, 21, 25-6, 
4O, 42N.y 44-5) 49) 537-4. 70N-y 73-4, 
84n., 86, 88, 94-5, 108, r16n., 121, 
128-9, 132-5, 139-40; 143, 145, 152-3, 
158, £70n., 172-3, 177N., 183, 189n., 
IQI, 196, 202, 204, 207-8, 217, 219-20, 
222-3, 224M., 229, 231, 233-5, 237» 
239-40, 242, 245, 262n., 269, 275, 
284-5, 294, 299, 310, 314N., 322-3, 326, 
334, 341-50, 352-7, 389-91, 392N., 
399N., 405-6, 408, 413, 417

Pleasure, 124-6, 128, 169, 199, 257, 268, 
283, 310, 316-19, 332, 335, 373, 398; 
401-2, 409, 413, 416, 420

Pleasure-Pain, 168-9, 199, 283, 316

Pleiades, 24, 32-3, 251, 254, 278, 333

Pliny, 32, 34-5, 65N., 323-4) 334, 338

Plétinus, 125

Plutarch, 15n., 26-7, 29, 32, 44, 64, 84, 
89-95, 129, 133, 135, 140, 172, 181Nn., 
185N., 203-4, 208, 215, 225, 237, 264n., 
292, 299, 322, 33%, 332M.» 338, 354, 
357» 367, 375, 382, 384, 388

Pluté, 8x

Poems (Orphic), 4-5, 16, 18; (Musaeus), 
21-43 (Epimenides), 29; (Hesiod), 32-3; 
(Cleostratus), 35; (Xenophanes), 88 
$qq.; (Parmenides), 140-52, 171; (Em- 
pedocles), 173-204; (Ion of Chios), 206; 
(Critias), 408-10

Poetics (Aristotle), 384n.

Poetry, 94, 140, 179, 293s 322, 351, 400, 
419-20

Point, Points, 84, 158-9, 161-2, 164, 167, 
222, 232, 247-9; 251

Pole, 298, 412

Polemarchus, 377

Politics, 44, 54, 85, 104, 106, 127-8, 173-5; 
207-8, 211-14, 234, 240, 257, 292; 
319-22, 335; 354) 359, 352-3, 368-9, 376, 
378, 380-1, 389, 392-4) 397-400, 404, 
405-8, 411, 414 59g.

Politics (Aristotle), 49, 211-14, 245, 369

Politicus (Plato), 219

Pélus, 356, 357n.

Polyarchus, 234

Polybius, 120

ql

481

Polycleitus, 214-15, 421

Polycratés of Samos, 77, 87

Polycratés Rhétér, 354

Polygnétus, 2

PolymnAstus, 221, 242

Polyzélus, 346

Pontus, 245, 282, 294, 338

Porphyry, 73, 238, 245-6, 254, 347, 353

Poseidippus, 29Polycratés of Samos, 77, 87

Polycratés Rhétér, 354

Polygnétus, 2

PolymnAstus, 221, 242

Polyzélus, 346

Pontus, 245, 282, 294, 338

Porphyry, 73, 238, 245-6, 254, 347, 353

Poseidippus, 29

Poseidén, 20, 25, 41, 201, 374

Poseidénia, 243-4

Poseidénius, 128

Posterior Analytics, 245

Potidaea, 371n.

Prayer, 15, 105, 120-1, 125, 315) 317

Preacclimatization, 257n., 264

Praxidamas, Memoirs of (Aristoxenus), 21

Priam, 43

Priéné, 122

Probability (rhetoric), 358

Problems (Aristotle), 245

Proclus, 13n., 49, 90, 140N., 219N., 224, 
228, 246, 250N., 295, 297N., 385-7;

413 
Prodicus of Ceos, 207, 341, 3452-) 3545 
357s 364, 370-4, 381-2, 389 
Prodicus of Samos, 7 
Proetus, 43 
Prologue (Parmenides), 141-3, 146, 147n. 
Prométheus (Aeschylus), 341 
Prométheus (of Thessaly), 407 
Proportionals, see Mean Proportionals 
Propylaeum, 21 
Prérus, 242, 259 
Prétagoras, 292, 316, 330, 341-2, 343-53, 
357N., 362-45 372-4, 381, 388-90, 394,

417 
Prétagoras (Plato), 8n., 336n., 341-2nn., 
343-7» 3480.) 349N., 351-2, 366, 370-1, 
381-2, 388-91, 399N., 405, 4r7N., 
421-2nn. 
Proteus, 43 
Proxenus, 355-6 
Psychology, 14, 128, 135) 293» 297» 309s 
314, 351 
Ptolemaeus, Claudius, 297 
Punishment, see Rewards and Punish- 
ments 
Purification, 15, 22) 26-7, 79) 172, | 
178-9, 185, 200-2 
Pyrk6n, 25 
Pyrrha, 43 , 
Pyrrhé of Elis, 91, 328, 330-3» 335 
Pyrrhos of Délos, 78

482

Pythagoras of Samos, xii, 18, 36-8, 40, 
73-83, 84-7, 104-5, I12, 122-3, 129, 
136, 142) 150, 173, 180, 206, 209, 214- 
16, 222-4, 233) 2390.) 240, 243, 2455 
250N., 254-6, 293, 295, 323, 326, 341, 
421

Pythagoras, tyrant of Ephesus, 36-7

Pythagorean, 5-7, 14, 59n., 73-88, 128, 
13%, 133-7) 139-43) 152, 156, 158-60,

167, 173, 177, 181, 204-5, 207, 209, 
214-17) 219-29) 231-5) 237-44, 261, 
292 294) 325) 335» 337

Pythagorean School, 244-61

P$thagorists, 260-1

Pythia, 26

Pythian, 81, 107, 358

Py¥thocleides (musician), 207

Pythodérus, 153, 346

QUADRATRIX, 383, 385-8 
Quintilian, 378

RackHaM, H., 35n.Pythagorean School, 244-61

P$thagorists, 260-1

Pythia, 26

Pythian, 81, 107, 358

Py¥thocleides (musician), 207

Pythodérus, 153, 346

QUADRATRIX, 383, 385-8 
Quintilian, 378

RackHaM, H., 35n.

Rain, 51, 62, 72, 112, 176, 269, 271, 278, 
280, 292, 306, 396, 412

Rainbow, 72, 98, 102, 271, 329, 338

Ram (zodiac), 35

Rarefaction, see Condensation and Rare- 
faction

Reinach, Th., 230n., 238n.

Reincarnation, 14-15, 17 (see also Trans- 
migration, Metempsychosis)

Relativity, 108, 122-4, 131, 159 599-, 266-8

Religion (Orphic), 2, 14, 18; (Musaeus), 
20-2, 28; (Babylonian), 50; (Anaxi- 
menes), 65; (Pythagoras), 75-6, 80-1, 
84-5; (Xenophanes), 89, 95-9; (Hera- 
cleitus), 121, 126, 129; (Empedocles), 
172-3) 177-8, 196; (Philolaus), 231-2; 
238, 239; (Pythagorean School), 256; 
(Protagoras), 346-7, 353; (Prodicus), 
3745; (Critias), 412

Reproduction, 39, 138, 151, 193-4, 210, 
231, 2§4N., 258, 268-9, 272, 277, 282, 
289, 306-7

Republic (Plato), 4, 151 49) 94-51 208; 235, 
237) 3410.5 347-52, 369, 3750.» 3775 
378n., 379-80

Revolution, see Rotation and Revolution

Rewards and Punishments (after death), 
§, 80-1, 126, 200, 412; (by the State), 
320-1, 348

Rhadamanthys, 29, 411

INDEX

Rhadamanthys (Critias), 411

Rhamnus, Rhamnusian, 391-2, 394

Rhapsédiae (Orphic), 5-7, 9, 13

Rhea, 6, 10-11, 13, 17) 24) 224-5

Rhégium, 21, 41, 77) 209, 233» 244, 383

Rhéneia (Aegean island), 410

Rhésus (Euripides), 21, 34, 34.10.

Rhetoric, Rhetorical, 107, 131,179, 335-65 
342, 347) 350-2, 355-6, 357-9, 362-7, 
369-70, 372-3, 375-82, 385» 393-4, 398, 
404, 406, 408, 414, 422-3

Rhetoric (Aristotle), 179, 368, 3772-» 3785 
3790., 398n.

Rhodes, 30, 101, ro2n., 180, 243, 377

Right Time (Kasros), 252, 258, 317, 322, 
331, 336, 351, 358, 421

Rings of Anaximander, 59-61, 143, 150

Robe, The (Orphic), 84

Robe, The (Pherecydes), 38-40

Rome, Romans, 3, 6, 234, 240, 293, 342

*Roots’ (Empedocles), 181, 183

Ross, W. D., 246-8nn., 250n., 252Nn., 
254N., 352N., 368n.Robe, The (Orphic), 84

Robe, The (Pherecydes), 38-40

Rome, Romans, 3, 6, 234, 240, 293, 342

*Roots’ (Empedocles), 181, 183

Ross, W. D., 246-8nn., 250n., 252Nn., 
254N., 352N., 368n.

Rotation and Revolution, 57-9, 187, 195, 
226-7, 241, 252, 267-9, 274, 276, 281, 
287-8, 301-2, 304, 313, 328

Rouse, W. H. D., 304n.

Russell, Bertrand, 163n.

SaBINUS (2nd century A.D.), 41

Sacrifice (animal), 14, 17-18, 29, 79-80, 
96, 173-4, 201-2, 255; (non-animal), 
1§, 173, 201-2; (human), 29

Salamis, battle of, 25

Salamis (Cyprus), 330

Salméxis, 73, 78

Samos, Samian, 7, 36-7, 50, 73) 77» 87> 
132, 164, 209, 213-14, 244, 275

Sarchedonus, see Esar-haddon

Sardis, 64

Saturn, 39

Satyrus, 172

Scamander, R., 41

Sceptic, Scepticism, 91, 33%) 353

Scirén, 369

Scopadae, 410

Scorpion (constellation), 33, 34. 35

Sculpture, 214-15

Scylla, 43

Scythia, Scythian, 31, 418

Scythinus of Teos, 131

Sea, 13, 30, 59, 101-2, KIT, 113, 146, 124, 
179, 184, 188-go, 192, 211, 268, 271, 
278, 281, 285, 288, 305-6, 329, 396

INDEXScylla, 43

Scythia, Scythian, 31, 418

Scythinus of Teos, 131

Sea, 13, 30, 59, 101-2, KIT, 113, 146, 124, 
179, 184, 188-go, 192, 211, 268, 271, 
278, 281, 285, 288, 305-6, 329, 396

INDEX

Seasons, 32, 63, 112, 123, 190, 269, 271-2, 
278, 280, 306 
Seed, animal, see Reproduction 
Seed, plant, 52, 193, 266, 272, 298, 
308 
Seeds (elements) (Pythagoreans), 253-4; 
(Anaxagoras), 63, 193, 265-9, 273, 
275-73; (Democritus), 306-7 
Seirius, 369 
Seléné, 19 
Seltnus, 176 
Semelé, 11, 42 
Semnae, 28 ‘ 
Seneca, L. Annaeus, 53, 157, 324 
Sense-perception, xi, xii, 18, 117-18, 124, 
126, 128, 135-9, 142-6, 151-2, 163, 
170-2, 180-1, 197-200, 210-11, 238, 248, 
264, 269, 272-4, 278, 283, 288, 293, 
297 300, 303, 308-15, 325, 328, 348- 
§1, 360-1 
Separating-off, Separating-out, 57-9, 65, 
68, 109, 187-8, 191, 266-8, 273, 274, 
276, 279, 287, 289, 395 
Servius Tullius, 36 
Seven Against Thebes (Aeschylus), 367 
Seven, Number, see Number 
Seven Sages, 28, 31, 36, 41, 44-5, 54, 
122, 255 
Sex-determination, 138, rst, 194, 210, 
272, 289, 307 
Sextus Empftricus, 91, 119, 142, 146, 
147.) 183N., 240, 279, 296, 347) 3495 
353» 358, 362, 411 
Shooting stars, 23, 101, 103, 329 
Sibyl, 25, 107, 121 
Sicily, Sicilian, 11, 73, 81, 89, 132-3, 177; 
179, 22%, 231M.» 333) 345-6, 382-3, 
409, 418 
Sicy6n, 176n., 214, 244 
Sight, 117, 137, 193, 197-8, 238, 273, 283, 
292, 305, 311-12, 360, 366, 395 
Simmias and Cebés, 220 
Simdnides, 90, 140, 352, 372, 410N. 
Simplicius, 49, 55, 57) 63-45 91) 93» 140; 
142, 154, 164, 165n., 167, 185, 205, 
.218, 227, 246, 252, 264, 279, 286, 299, 
300, 397 
Stmus, 243 
Sinclair, T. A., 32n. 
Sirens, 254 
Stsyphus (Critias), 411-32 
Sleep, 27-8, 30, 117-18, 120, 124, 126, 
ae 196, 201, 274, 283, 289, 308, 331; 
41

483

Smell, 117, 126, 137, 195, 198-9, 253, 
273, 278, 283, 293, 303, 311, 313 395

Smyrna, 228, 330

Snow, 72, 271, 306483

Smell, 117, 126, 137, 195, 198-9, 253, 
273, 278, 283, 293, 303, 311, 313 395

Smyrna, 228, 330

Snow, 72, 271, 306

Sécratés, xii, X11, 45, 106, 121, 132, 138- 
40, 153, 205, 207-8, 261, 262n., 263, 
275, 284, 289, 291, 325, 342-4) 351» 
354-72 367, 370-2, 378, 380, 388-93, 
400, 404-6, 408

Soloi, 332, 403n.

Sol6én, 26-7, 29, 44-5) 54, 106, 380, 400, 
405-6

Solstice, 50-1, 306

Sépater, 366

Sophist (Aristotle), 179

Sophist (Plato), 132, 152, 219, 342n., 368

Sophistic, 131, 277

Sophists (Sages), 76

Sophists, The, ix, xii, xili, 18, 98, 127, 
133) 157, 213, 261, 279, 328, 341-423

Sophoclés, 19, 21, 341

Séphrosyné, 99

Sésibius, 26, 264

Sésicratés, 55

Soul, 8, 14-17, 18, 40, 53, 64, 68, 73, 78-9, 
81, 87, 99, 113, IL7J, 21, 125-7, 129, 
138-9, 196, 201, 208, 231, 241-2, 253, 
256, 258, 274, 288, 314-6, 368, 385, 
402, 413

Soul, World, 216, 284

Sound, 81, 86, 163, 199, 228, 237-8, 250- 
51, 298, 303, 312-13

Space, 53, 70, 136, 149, 159-63, 165-7, 
169, 233, 237, 241, 247-9, 287, 289, 
299-305, 309-15, 328

Sparta, Spartan, 27-9, 37, 213, 2455 3415 
3732 382-3, 405-7, 410-11, 413, 418-19

Spartiates, 410

Spartoi, 384

Speusippus, 221-2

Sphaerus, 294

Spintharus, 234, 246, 267

Spiral, 123, 385n.

Sporus, 388n.

Squaring the circle, 218, 264, 386-8, 
396-7

Stageira, 299

Star-pentagon, 86

Stars, 13, 34-5» 492 59-61, 69-70, 72, 82, 
IOI, LIO-12, 128, 139, 142, 150, 189, 
225-6, 237, 241, 250-1, 253, 268, 270, 
276, 281, 288, 304-5, 329, 338, 399, 
412

Steropé, 29

484

Steropés (Cyclops), 10

Stésichorus, 385

Stobaeus, 45, 55, 129, £31, 214N., 228-9, 
240, 246, 256, 325, 373: 400

Stoic, 109, 129, 216, 294, 337) 374s 
403

Strabé, 213, 291n.

Strat6n, 337

Strife (Heracleitus), 109, 113-14, 120, 132; 
(Democritus), 300

Strémateis (Clem. Alex.), 362n.

Strémateis (Plutarch), 57n., 64, 92

Styx, 30

Substrate, xi, xii, 52, 56-7, 64-73, 87, 91, 
100, 109-10, II4-15, IL7, LTT, 209-10, 
276, 279-80

Suicide, 3, 7n.. 14) 175-6, 2315 293s 375Strémateis (Plutarch), 57n., 64, 92

Styx, 30

Substrate, xi, xii, 52, 56-7, 64-73, 87, 91, 
100, 109-10, II4-15, IL7, LTT, 209-10, 
276, 279-80

Suicide, 3, 7n.. 14) 175-6, 2315 293s 375

Suidas, 5, 6, 26, 29, 38, 49, 55, 64, 107, 
214N., 298, 3235 338M.» 353, 370, 382, 
384n., 393-5

Sun, 11, 13, 23) 35) 3941s §9-62, 64, 67, 
69-73, 98, 101-2, 110-13, 116, 131-2, 
138-9, 142, 150-1, 184, 188-9, 215-16, 
21Q, 225-7, 232, 241, 250-4, 268, 270-1, 
276-7, 281, 285, 288, 292, 302, 304-5, 
329, 338, 366, 396, 412

Supplicés (Euripides), 353

“Swerve” (Epicurus), 301-2

Sybaris, 77, 84, 204, 244-5

Symposium (Plato), 3n.,42n., 129, 191, 356, 
365., 371

Syncellus, 323

Syracuse, 6, 74, 89-90, 93-4, 103, 132-3 
172) 234, 241-2, 244, 354, 364, 392

Syrian, 366

Syrié (island in Odyssey), 37, 41

Syros, 36-7, 41

TABOOS, 14, 79-81, 87

Tannery, P., 226n.

Tarentum, Tarentine, 73, 77, 139, 220-1, 
228-9, 232-4, 242-6

Tarsus, 403

Tartarus, 10, 12, 23, 30, 39, 425 254

Taste, 137, 171, 198-9, 204-5, 266, 273, 
278, 283, 297, 303, 311, 313

Taylor, A. E., 152, 223n.

Teisias, 179, 354, 358) 364, 375

Télaugés (son of Pythagoras), 173

Télephus (Euripides), 377

Temperature, 67, 194, 282, 303, 307

Tenedos, 34, 351.) 411

Tenants (Critias), 411

Teos, 21, 49, 13%, 327, 333» 3359 343

INDEX

Terpander, ron.

Téthys, 10, 13, 53

Tetractys, 222, 224) 254

Tetralogies of Thrasyllus (Democritus), 
293 599.

Thalés, xi, xii, xiii, 32-5, 38-41, 44-5, 49- 
55, 56-7, 61-2, 68-9, 73, 90) 100, 105; 
113, 143) 1§0, 292, 319, 385

Thamyris, 4

Thargélia, 356n., 384

Thasos, Thasian, 206, 381, 384n., 410

Theaetétus, 223

Theaetétus (Plato), 54, 108, 128, 132-3, 
152, L7ON.» 219-20, 285, 349M.» 352» 
366, 4r7N.

Theagenés of Rhégium, 41, 277n.

Theané, 84, 214

Theé of Smyrna, 228

Theocritus (bucolic poet), 43n., 260-1

Theocritus (father of Métrodérus), 3270.

Theod6rus of Cyréné, 219-20Theagenés of Rhégium, 41, 277n.

Theané, 84, 214

Theé of Smyrna, 228

Theocritus (bucolic poet), 43n., 260-1

Theocritus (father of Métrodérus), 3270.

Theod6rus of Cyréné, 219-20

Theogony (Orpheus), 5-7, 9-14; (Mus- 
aeus), 22-5; (Epimenides), 29-31; 
(Hesiod), 32; (Pherecydes), 38-40

Theology (Orphic), 5; (Xenophanes), 
95-9, 106

Theophrastus, 9, 35, 55, 58, 64, 73, 86n., 
91-3, 95, Ot, 104, 108, £29, 135; 
138, Igt-2, 172, 187, 192N., 198-200, 
20g, ZIT, 222, 225N.y 232, 241, 246, 
272-4, 278, 286, z91n., 294, 297, 308, 
3U1-14, 328, 378

Theopompus, 26, 38, 327, 3345 381n.

Theory, Atomic, see Atomic Theory

Theory of Forms (Ideas), see Forms

Théramenés, 370, 407

Théseus, 4, 19, 412

Thesprétians, 22

Thessaly, Thessalian, 5, 355-6, 375-6, 
384, 407-10, 418

Thirty Tyrants, The, 381, 384, 407-8

Thompson, D'Arcy, 23n.

Thompson, W. H., 355n., 3570.

Thath, 81n.

Thrace, Thracian, 1, 2, 4, 8, 19, 20, 78, 
80, 87, 89, 96, 275, 290, 344N.

Thrasyalcés, 206

Thrasybflus, 405, 407

Thrasyllus, 293-5

Thrasymachus, 341, 357, 370, 375-81, 
399, 400

Thucydidés (historian), 103n., 356, 373 
377N., 381n., 392-3, 406N., 4410,

Thucydidés (politician), 263

INDEX

Thunder and lightning, 10, 14, 16, 20, 
62, 72, 190, 254, 271, 276, 278, 281, 
288, 305, 315, 329

Tharii, 172, 212-13, 3439 345 354

Tiberius, 293, 325

Ttmaeus (of Italian Locri), 139, 223, 240

Timaeus of Sicily (historian), 73, 89, 
172-5, 177

Timaeus (Plato), 7on., 86n., 221-3, 224n., 
229, 240, 366, 406

Time, 31, 39, 63, 130-1, 147, 162-3, 
165-6, 185, 253, 412, 414, 416

Time (mythology), see Chronos

Time, Right, see Right Time

Timoclés of Syracuse, 6

Timocre6n of Rhodes, 377, 379

Timén of Phlifs (lampoonist), 91, 107, 
332

Timosthenés, 337

Tissaphernés, 356

Titan, Titanic, 10, 11, 13-14, 16-17, 24, 
30, 39-40, 42, 99

Titanomachia (Musaeus), 22-3

Titus, Epistle to, 31

Tobit, Book of, 291n.

Térus, 236

Touch, 137, 198-9, 273, 283, 311%) 313Titan, Titanic, 10, 11, 13-14, 16-17, 24, 
30, 39-40, 42, 99

Titanomachia (Musaeus), 22-3

Titus, Epistle to, 31

Tobit, Book of, 291n.

Térus, 236

Touch, 137, 198-9, 273, 283, 311%) 313

Transmigration, 76, 78-80, 90, 99, 172, 
174-5, 178, 200-4, 231

Triad, see Number Three

Triagmos or Triagmoi (Ion of Chios), 6, 
206

Tripod, Golden, 44-5, 54

Triptolemus, 11, 20, 24

Trisection of angles, 386-7

Tritogeneia, 295

Tréadés (Euripides), 363

Troglodytes, 40o0n.

Trophénius, 88

Troy, Trojan, 1, 20, 43, 78, 88, 296, 
326-7, 382, 385

Truth, 28, 94, 97-8, 107, 119-20, 122, 
126, 128, 141-8, 197, 200-1, 231, 273, 
287, 309-10, 322, 342, 348-50, 352, 
366, 391, 394, 400, 403N., 419-23

Truth (Antiphon), 392, 394 599-

Truth (Protagoras), 347, 394

Typhéd, 30, 42, 225

Tyre, 39. 337» 409

Tzetzés, Jéannés, 296

UPWARD PATH, see Path 
Ursa Major and Minor, see Bears

485

VAPOUR, 66-7, 109n., 329

Vapour (=Air, element), xii, 65, 68, 188, 
250

Varro, 298

Vergil, 3

Vestinus of Ioulis, 377n.

Vetusta Placita, 108

Void, 23, 160, 171, 182, 184, 205, 232, 
249-50, 265, 287, 299, 301-2

Volcanoes, 89, 102-3, 396

Vortex, 130, 186, 269, 271, 287, 301-2, 
34; 395

Wasps (Aristophanes), 357

Water, see Element

Water-clock, 195, 297, 363

Wavelike motion, 205, 308

Way of Opinion (Parmenides), 82, 141-5, 
147, 149, 152

Way of Truth (Parmenides), 141, 146-7

Webb, E. J., 35n.

Weight, 183-4, 247, 301, 313-14, 336n.

Well-being (Democritus), 296, 316, 337

White Sea, 334n.

Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, U. von, 131, 
185n., 201n., 203, 231n., 384-5nn., 
41In.

Wild Men, The (Pherecrates), 344

Winds, 15, 39, 42-3, 59, 62, 67, 69, 72, 
102, 112, 175-6, 189-90, 206, 250, 253; 
271, 277, 280, 305-6, 329, 337

Winged Oak (Pherecydes), 40

Women, 3n., 29, 83-4, 174-5) 242) 255, 
258, 260, 318-19, 324, 367, 373, 382, 
402, 413, 418

Works and Days (Hesiod), 32

World-Conflagration, 107, 109

World-Egg (Orphic), see EggWomen, 3n., 29, 83-4, 174-5) 242) 255, 
258, 260, 318-19, 324, 367, 373, 382, 
402, 413, 418

Works and Days (Hesiod), 32

World-Conflagration, 107, 109

World-Egg (Orphic), see Egg

World-Order, Great and Small (Leucip- , 
pus and Democritus), 289, 292, 294-7

XANTHIPPUS, 344

Xenitadés, 144n., 353

Xenocratés, 324, 338

Xenophanés, 3n., 18, 27, 73) 76) 79 88- 
104, 122, 129, 13374) 139, 140, 149, 
155, 173, 189N., 197, 353

Xenophilus of Chalcidicé, 221, 241

Xenoph6n, 134, 214N., 275, 342, 355-65 
371s 3732 389-90 393» 3979 3990-404-8

oe 179) 262N., 290, 323, 344-5» 365, 
369

XOthus (Pythagorean), 205

486 INDEX

Year, GREAT, see Great Year Zétés, 42-3

Zeus, 9-14, 16, 24, 28, 30-1, 335 38-40, 42, 
ZAGREUS (Dionysus), 10 116, 130-1, 1771.) 181, 2OL, 224-5) 2775 
Zanclé, 89 284, 3345 365, 384 
ZAs (Zeus), 38, 39 Zeus Aithrios, 113

Zénd of Elea, 141, 145, 152, 153-64, Zéddiac, 34n., 35, 215-16, 304 
167, 169, 179, 237, 238N., 285, 331,361 Zopyrus, 6 
Zephyr, 43 Zéroaster, 323