Hrfsp^'^'^^^

// K)CL~

STUDY NO. I02-EL-55/2-79

ANALYSIS OF REPORTS OF 
UNIDENTIFIED AERIAL OBJECTS

PROJECT NO. 10073 
5 MAY 1955

£ > c s

g" c£> ^ m

< > ~n S

£ I I Z

■^ £ - -•

-T> tv ^.

"" t* 2.

(Pin

- . a

>

o >

« 3-

ives 
6112

,.-**. u,v r:

S*'; !

V" : , {" '"'.'1 ;

; 1

o 
o

-£■

/■

Copy No.

K^

'CD

O 
Co

ro

CO

1

>

^

SPECIAL REPORT NO. 14

ANALYSIS OF REPORTS OF 
UNIDENTIFIED AERIAL OBJECTS

PROJECT NO. 10073

5 MAY 1955

^T,\\

^

No copyright material is contained in this publication.

O

CD 
CO

ro

CD

K

r

: M?

A

d 
^^^

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

SUMMARY '.....• vii

1

INTRODUCTION 1

ORIGIN AND NATURE OF DATA 3

REDUCTION OF DATA TO MECHANIZED COMPUTATION FORM 4

Questionnaire 4

Coding System and Work Sheet 6

Identification of Working Papers 7

Evaluation of Individual Reports 10

ANALYSIS OF THE DATA 14

Frequency and Percentage Distributions by Characteristics 14

Graphical Presentation . 16

Advanced Study of the Data 16

Position of the Sun Relative to the Observer 16

Statistical Chi Square Test . ■ . 60

The "Flying Saucer" Model 76

CONCLUSIONS . 94

APPENDIX A. TABULATION OF FREQUENCY AND PERCENTAGE

DISTRIBUTIONS BY CHARACTERISTICS . 95

APPENDIX B., WORKING PAPER FORMS . ' 255

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Figure 1 Frequency of Sightings by Year foT Object, Unit, and All Sightings. , 17

Figure 2 Distribution of Evaluations of Object, Unit, and All Sightings for All Years 18

Figure 3 Distribution of Object Sightings by Evaluation for All Years With Comparisons

of Each Year for Each Evaluation Group 19

Figure 4 Distribution of Object Sightings by Evaluation for All Years and Each Year . . 20

Figure 5 Distribution of Object Sightings by Evaluation Within Months for All Years . . . .... . . . 21

Figure 6 Distribution of Object Sightings by Certain and Doubtful Evaluations for

All Years and Each Year 22

Figure 7 Frequency of Object Sightings and Unknown Object Evaluations by

Months, 1947-1952 23All Years and Each Year 22

Figure 7 Frequency of Object Sightings and Unknown Object Evaluations by

Months, 1947-1952 23

Figure 8 Distribution of Object Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups With

Evaluation Distributions for Each Group 24

Figure 9 Distribution of Object Sightings Among the Four. Sighting Reliability

Groups for All Years and Each Year 25

Figure 10 Distribution of All Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, Segregated 
by Military and Civilian Observers, With Evaluation Distribution

for Each Segregation 26

Figure 11 Distribution of Object Sightings by Reported Colors of Object(s) With

Evaluation Distribution for Each Color Group 27

Figure 12 Distribution of Object Sightings by Number of Objects Seen per Sighting.

With Evaluation Distribution for Each Group ■...-... 28

Figure 13 Distribution of Object Sightings by Duration of Sighting With Evaluation

Distribution for Each Duration Group . , 29

111

mm

mmmmmmqm**^

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 
(Continued)

P*KC

Figure 14 Distribution of Object Sightings by Months Among the Eight Duration

Groups for All Years 30

Figure 15 Distribution of Object Sightings by Shape of Object(s) Reported With

Evaluation Distribution for Each Shape Group -31

i 
Figure 16 Distribution of Object Sightings by Reported Speed of Object{s) With

Evaluation Distribution for Each Speed Group 32

Figure 17 Distribution of All Sightings by Observer Location for All Years and Each Year 33

Figure IS Comparison of Known and Unknown Object Sightings by Color, 1947-1952 . 34

Figure 19 Comparison of Known and Unknown Object Sightings by Number of Objects

per Sighting, 1947-1952 35

Figure 20 Comparison of Known and Unknown Object Sightings by Speed, 1947-1952 36

Figure 21 Comparison of Known and Unknown Object Sightings by Duration, 1947-1952 , 37

Figure 22 Comparison of Known and Unknown Object Sightings by Shape, 1947-1952 38Figure 21 Comparison of Known and Unknown Object Sightings by Duration, 1947-1952 , 37

Figure 22 Comparison of Known and Unknown Object Sightings by Shape, 1947-1952 38

Figure 23 Comparison of Known and Unknown Object Sightings by Light Brightness, 1947-1952 39

Figure 24

Comparison of Monthly Distribution of Object Sightings Evaluated as Astronomical 
Versus Total Object Sightings Less Astronomical

Figure 25 
Figure 26 
Figure 27 
Figure 28 
Figure 29 
Figure 30 
Figure 31 
Figure 32 
Figure 33 
Figure 34 
Figure 35 
Figure 36 
Figure 37

Comparison of Monthly Distribution of Object Sightings Evaluated as Aircraft 
Versus Total Object Sightings Less Aircraft ..........

Comparison of Monthly Distribution of Object Sightings Evaluated as Balloon 
Versus Total Object Sightings Less Balloon. ..........

Comparison of Monthly Distribution of Object Sightings Evaluated as Insufficient 
Information Versus Total Object Sightings Less Insufficient Information .

Comparison of Monthly Distribution of Object Sightings Evaluated as Other 
Versus Total Object Sightings Less Other : ,

Comparison of Monthly Distribution of Object Sightings Evaluated as Unknown 
Versus Total Object Sightings Less Unknown

Characteristics Profiles of Object Sightings by Total Sample,- Known Evaluations, 
, and Individual Known Evaluations, With Unknown Evaluations Superimposed .

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

Frequency of Object, _Unit, and All Sightings Within the U. S. , 1947-1952, by 
Subdivisions of One Degree of Latitude and Longitude . 47

Distribution of Object Sightings by Evaluation for the Twelve Regional Areas of 
the U. S., With the Strategic Areas Located

Comparison of Evaluation of Object Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the 
Central East Region

Comparison of Evaluation of Object Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the 
Central Midwest Region '

Comparison of Evaluation of Object Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the 
Central Farwest RegionComparison of Evaluation of Object Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the 
Central Farwest Region

Comparison of Evaluation of Object Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the 
South Midwest Region

48

49

50

51

52

Comparison of Evaluation of Object Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the 
South West Region .......: 53

t

IV

p^^w^wiiiiiiiiiiii^

r..,^v'*'V-Vi- , 7'C> , ?»' ! ...! ~ t*V-V?„ J ^.*^*rtB^|.H,i(itflK«^B^IO.Vri^»>

i: *

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS l

{Continued)

Page

Figure 38 Comparison of Evaluation of Object Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the

South Far-west Region 54

Figure 39 Diagram of a Celestial Sphere 56

Figure 40 Frequency of Object Sightings by Angle of Elevation of the Sun, Intervals

of 10 Degrees of Angle • .57

Figure 41 Frequency of Object Sightings by Local Sun Time, Intervals of One Hour 59

Table I Object Sightings . 60

Table II Chi Square Test of Knowns Versus Unknowns on the Basis of Color ; 62

Table III Chi Square Test of Knowns Versus Unknowns on the Basis of Number 63

Table IV Chi Square Test of Knowns Versus Unknowns on the Basis of Shape 64

Table V Chi Square Test of Knowns Versus Unknowns on the Basis of Duration of Observation 65

Table VI Chi Square Test of Knowns Versus Unknowns on the Basis of Speed b6

Table VII Chi Square Test of Knowns Versus Unknowns on the Basis of Light Brightness ........ 67

Table VIII Chi Square Test of Revised Knowns Versus Unknowns on the Basis of Color 70

Table IX Chi Square Test of Revised Knowns Versus Unknowns on the Basis of Number ,71

Table X Chi Square Test of Revised Knowns' Versus Unknowns on the Basis of Shape ....', 72

Table XI Chi Square Test of Revised Knowns Versus Unknowns on the Basis of

Duration of Observation 73

Table XII Chi Square Test of Revised Knowns Versus Unknowns on the Basis of Speed 74

Table XIII Chi Square Test of Revised Knowns Versus Unknowns on the Basis of Light Brightness 75

v and. vi

^^^*nr3^^^

IKUa,

«■

SUMMARYTable XIII Chi Square Test of Revised Knowns Versus Unknowns on the Basis of Light Brightness 75

v and. vi

^^^*nr3^^^

IKUa,

«■

SUMMARY

Reports of unidentified aerial 6bjects (popularly termed "fly

ing

saucers" or "flying discs", have been received by the U. S. Air Force 
since mid- 1947 from many and diverse sources. Although there was no 
evidence that the unexplained reports of unidentified objects constituted 
a threat to the security of the U. S. , the Air Force determined that all 
reports of unidentified aerial objects should be investigated and evaluated 
to determine if "flying saucers" represented technological developments 
not known to this country.

In order to discover any pertinent trends or patterns inherent in the 
data, and to evaluate or explain any trends or patterns found, appropriate 
methods of reducing these data from reports of unidentified aerial objects 
to a form amenable to scientific appraisalwere employed. In general, the 
original data upon which this study was based consisted of impressions and 
interpretations of apparently unexplainable events, and seldom contained 
reliable measurements of physical attributes. This subjectivity of the data 
presented a major limitation to the drawing of significant conclusions, but 
did not invalidate the application of scientific methods of study. .

■m

^gi

The reports received by the U. S. Air Force on unidentified aerial 
objects were reduced to IBM punched-card abstracts of the data by means 
of logically developed forms and standardized evaluation procedures. 
Evaluation of sighting reports, a crucial step in the preparation of the data 
for statistical, treatment, consisted of an appraisal of the reports and the 
subsequent categorizing of the object or objects described in each report. 
A detailed description of this phase of the study stresses the careful 
attempt to maintain complete objectivity and consistency.Analysis of the refined and evaluated data derived from the original 
reports of sightings comprised ( 1) a systematic attempt to ferret out any 
distinguishing characteristics inherent in the data or any of their segments, 
(2) a concentrated study of any trends or patterns found, and (3) an attempt 
to determine the probability that any of the UNKNOWNS represent obser- 
vations of a class, or classes, of "flying saucers".

The first step in the analysis of the data revealed the existence of 
certain apparent similarities between cases of objects definitely identified 
and those not identified. Statistical methods of testing were applied which 
indicated a low probability that these apparent similarities were signifi- 
cant. An attempt to determine the probability that any of the UNKNOWNS 
represent observations of a. class, or classes, of "flying saucers" neces- 
sitated a thorough re -examination and re-evaluation of cases of objects not 
originally identified; this led to the conclusion that the probability was very 
small. v

vn

:^fXI

*£>■%*.

Therefore, on the basis of this evaluation of the information, it is 
considered to be highly improbable that reports of unidentified aerial 
objects examined in this study represent observations of technological 
'developments outside of the range of present-day scientific knowledge. It 
is emphasized that there was a complete lack of any valid ev idenc e con- 
sisting of playsical matter in any case of a reported unidentified aerial 
object.

Vlll

INTRODUCTIONVlll

INTRODUCTION

In June, 1947, Kenneth Arnold, a Boise, Idaho, businessman and 
private pilot, publicly reported the now-famous sighting of a chainlike 
formation of disc- shaped objects near Mount Rainier, Washington. Result- 
ing newspaper publicity of this incident caught the public interest, and, 
shortly thereafter, a rash of reports of unidentified aerial objects spawned 
the term "flying saucers". During the years since 1947, many reports of 
unidentified aerial objects have been received by the Air Force from many 
and diverse sources.

m

The unfortunate term "flying saucer", or "flying disc", because of 
its widespread and indiscriminate use, requires definition. Many defini- 
tions have been offered, one of the best being that originated by Dr. J. 
Allen Hynek, Director of the Emerson McMillin Observatory of The Ohio 
State University, who has taken a scientific interest in the problem of 
unidentified aerial objects since 1949. Dr. Hynek' s definition of the term 
is "any aerial phenomenon or sighting that remains unexplained to the 
viewer at least long enough for him> to write a report about it"(*). Dr. Hynek, 
elaborating on his definition, says, "Each flying saucer, so defined, has 
associated with it a probable lifetime. It wanders in the field of public in- 
spection like an electron in a field of ions, until 'captured* by an explana- 
tion which puts an end to its existence as a 'flying saucer' "(I).This definition would be applicable to any and all of the sightings 
which remained unidentified throughout this study. However, the term 
"flying saucers" shall be used hereafter in this report to mean a novel, 
airborne phenomenon, a manifestation that is not a part of or readily ex- 
plainable by the fund of scientific knowledge known to be possessed by the 
Free World. This would include such items as natural p henomena that are 
not yet completely understood, p sychn lngirvpl p henome na, or intruder air- 
craft of a type that may be possessed by some source in large enough 
numbers so that more than one independent mission may have been flown 
and reported. Thus, these phenomena are of the type' which should have 
been observed and reported more than once.

Since 1947, public interest in the subject of unidentified aerial objects 
fluctuated more or less within reasonable limits until the summer of 1952, 
when the frequency of reports of sightings reached a peak, possibly stimu- 
lated by severai'articles on the subject in leading popular magazines.

$■

Early in 1952, the Air. Force's cumulative study and analysis of 
reported sightings indicated that the majority of reports could be accounted 
for as misinterpretations of known objects (such'as meteors, balloons, or 
aircraft), a few as the result of mild hysteria, and a very few as the result 
of unfamiliar meteorological phenomena and light aberrations. However,

(1) Hynek, J.. A., "Unusual Aerial Phenomena", Journal of the Optical Society of America, 43 (4), 
pp 311 -314, April, 1953.

1

■ f

£•(1) Hynek, J.. A., "Unusual Aerial Phenomena", Journal of the Optical Society of America, 43 (4), 
pp 311 -314, April, 1953.

1

■ f

£•

a significant number of fairly complete reports by reliable observers re- 
mained unexplained. Although no evidence existed that unexplained reports 
of sightings constituted a physical threat to the security of the U, S. , in 
March, 1952, the Air Force decided that all reports of unidentified 
aerial objects should be investigated and evaluated to determine if "flying 
saucers" represented technological developments not known to this country.

k

I.

Originally, the problem involved the preparation and analysis of about 
1,300 reports accumulated by the Air Force between 1947 and the end of 
March, 1952. During the course of the work, the number of reports sub- 
mitted for analysis and evaluation more than tripled, the result of the un- 
precedented increase in observations during 1952. Accordingly, this study 
is based on a number of reports considered to be large enough for a pre- 
l iminary s tatistical analy_sis, approximately 4, 000 reports.This study was undertaken primarily to categorize the available 
reports of sightings and to determine the probability that any of the reports 
of unidentified aerial objects represented observations of "flying saucers". 
With full cognizance of the quality of the data available for study, yet with 
an awareness of the proportions this subject has assumed at times in the 
public mind, this work was undertaken with all the seriousness accorded 
to a straightforward scientific investigation. In order to establish the 
probability that any of the reports of unidentified aerial objects represented 
observations of "flying saucers", it was necessary to make an attempt to 
answer the question "What is a 'flying saucer' ? ". However, it must be 
emphasized that this was only incidental to the primary purpose of the 
study, the determination of the probability that any of the reports of un- 
identified aerial objects represented observations of "flying saucers", as 
defined on Page 1. a

The basic technique for this study consisted of reducing the available 
data to a form suitable for mechanical manipulation, a prerequisite for the 
application of preliminary statistical methods. One of International 
Business Machine Corporation 1 s systems was chosen as the best available 
mechanical equipment.

The reduction of data contained in sighting reports into a form suit- 
able for transfer to IBM punched cards was extremely difficult^and time 
consuming.

For this study a panel of consultants was formed, consisting of both 
experts within and outside ATIC. During the course of the work, guidance 
and advice were received from the panel. The professional experience 
available from the panel covered major scientific fields arid numerous 
specialized fields.

All records and working papers of this study have been carefully 
preserved in an orderly fashion suitable for ready reference. These

"vAll records and working papers of this study have been carefully 
preserved in an orderly fashion suitable for ready reference. These

"v

records include condensations of all individual sighting reports, and the 
IBM cards used in various phases of the study.

ORIGIN AND NATURE OF DATA

Reports of sightings were received by the U. S. Air Force from a 
representative, cross section of the population of the U. S. , and varied 
widely in completeness and quality. Included were reports from reputable 
scientists, housewives, farmers, students, and technically trained mem- 
bers of the Armed Forces. Reports varied in, length from a few sentences 
stating that a ."flying saucer" had been sighted, to those containing thou- 
sands of words, including description, speculation, and advice on how to 
handle the "problem, of the 'flying saucers' ". Some reports were of high 
quality, conservative, and as complete as the observer could make them; 
a few originated from people confined to mental institutions. A critical 
examination of the reports revealed, however, that a high percentage of 
them was submitted by serious people, mystified by what they had seen and 
motivated by patriotic responsibility.

Three principal sources of reports were noted in the preliminary 
review of the data. The bulk of the data arrived at ATIC through regular 
military channels, from June, 1947, until the middle of 1952.

A second type of data consisted of letters reporting sightings sent by 
civilian observers directly to ATIC. Most of these direct communications 
were dated subsequent to April 30, 1952, and are believed to be the result 
of a suggestion by a popular magazine that future reports be directed to the 
Air Technical Intelligence Center. As could be expected, a large number 
of letters was received following this publicity.A third type of data was that contained in questionnaire forms com- 
pleted by the observer himself. A questionnaire form, developed during 
the course of this study, was mailed by ATIC to a s_elected group of writers 
of direct letters with the request that the form be completed and returned. 
Approximately 1,000 responses were received by ATIC.

In general, the data were subjective, consisting of qu alified estimates 
of physical characteristics rather than of precise measurements. Further- 
more, most of the reports were not reduced to written form immediately. 
The time between sighting and report varied from one day to several years. 
Both of these factors introduced an element of doubt concerning the validity 
of the original data, and increased its subjectivity. This was intensified by 
the recognized inability of the average individual to estimate speeds, dis- 
tances, and sizes of objects in the air with any degree of accuracy. In 
spite of these limitations, methods of statistical analysis of such reports in 
sufficiently large groups are valid. The danger lies in the possibility of

■■■%

.$

forgetting the subjectivity of the data at the time that conclusions are 
drawn from the analysis. It must be emphasized, again and again, that any 
conclusions' contained in this report are based NOT on facts, but on what 
many observers thought and esti mate d the, true facts to be.Altogether, the data for this study consisted of approximately 4, 000 
reports of sightings of unidentified aerial objects. The majority were re- 
ceived through military channels or in the form of observer-completed 
questionnaires; a few were accepted in the form of direct letters from un- 
questionably reliable sources. Sightings made between June, 1947, and 
December, 1952, were considered for this study. Sightings alleged to have 
occurred prior to 1947 were not considered, since they were not reported 
to official sources until after public interest in "flying saucers" had been 
stimulated by the popular press.

REDUCTION OF DATA TO MECHANIZED COMPUTATION FORM

As received by the Air Technical Intelligence Center, the sighting 
reports were not in a form suitable for even a quasi- scientific study. A 
preliminary review of the data indicated the need for standardized interro- 
gation procedures and supplemental forms for the reduction of currently 
held and subsequently acquired data to a form amenable to scientific 
appraisal.

The plan for reduction of the data to usable form consisted of a pro- 
gram of development comprising four major steps: (1) a systematic listing 
of the factors necessary to evaluate the observer and his report, and to 
identify the unknown object observed; (2) a standard scheme for the trans- 
fer of data to a mechanized computation system; (3) an orderly means of 
relating the original data to all subsequent forms ; and (4) a consistent pro- 
cedure for the identification of the phenomenon described by the original 
data.

Questionnaire

The first reports received by ATIC varied widely in completeness 
and quality. Air Force Letter 200-5VW and Air Force Form 112(*) were 
attempts to fix responsibility for and improve the quality of the reports of 
sightings. To coordinate past efforts and to provide standardization for the(1) A modified Air Force Form 112 lists pertinent questions to be answered in regard to an unidentified -dbject 
sighting.

(2) Air Force Letter 200-5 places responsibility with the Air Force for the investigation, repotting, and 
analysis of unidentified aerial objects. This letter is dated 29 April 1952.

future, it was imperative to develop a questionnaire form listing the factors 
necessary for evaluation of the observer and his report, and identification 
of the unknown objects. In addition, it was decided that such a questionnaire 
should be designed to serve as an interrogator' s guide, and as a form for 
-the observer himself to complete when personal interrogation was not possi- 
ble or practicable.

p-j

Ideally, a questionnaire for the purposes required should contain 
questions pertaining to all technical details considered to be essential for 
the statistical approach, and should serve to obtain a maximum of informa- 
tion from the average individual who had made a sighting in the past or 
would be likely to be reporting sightings in the future. Besides these dis- 
crete facts, an integrated written description of a sighting would be re- 
quired, thus enabling the reported facts of the sighting to be corroborated. 
Also, a narrative d escrip tion might allow subtle questions to be answered 
concerning the observer 1 s ability, such as indirect questions that would 
reveal his reasoning ability, suggestibility, and general mental attitude. 
As a whole, then, the information contained in a questionnaire should make 
possible the classification and evaluation of the sighting, the rating of the 
observer, the probability of accuracy of reported facts, and the identifica- 
tion of what was reported by the observer as unidentified.During the course of this project, th ree questionnaire forms were 
developed, each intended to be an improved revision of the one preceding. 
The improvements were suggested and confirmed by members of the panel 
of consultants connected with this project.

The original form was evolved by the panel of consultants as their 
first work on this project. It was intended to allow the start of the reduc- 
tion of reports to discrete data, and was immediately subjected to exten- 
sive review and revision by the panel. The revised {second) form was 
subjected to a trial test before adoption. ATIC sent a copy to observers 
reporting sightings, with the request that the form be completed and re- 
turned. Of the first 300 questionnaires returned during July and August, 
1952, 168 were analyzed by a consulting psychologist. On the basis of this 
analysis, plus the experience gained in working with past reports, the final 
form of the questionnaire — the U. S. Air Force Technical Information 
Sheet — was evolved. Copies of the three forms of the questionnaire, in 
the order of their development, are shown as Exhibits Bl, B2, and B3 in 
Appendix B.

I

In order to implement the transcription of data from past sighting 
reports, each succeeding form was put to use as soon as it was developed 
and approved. Accordingly, experience was obtained with, each form in 
relation to past data, an important factor in the improvement of the quality 
and completeness of the later reports included in this study.

5

Coding System and Work Sheet

I

t

The reduction of non-numerical data to numerical form is mandatory 
in the machine handling of data. Thus, the selection of the IBM punched- 
card system for analysis of data forced the adoption nf a master coding 
plan. Since it ■was impracticable to transfer detailed data of an exact

nature from the questionnaire to the IBM card, an intermediate transfer 1

form, coordinated -with the master code, was necessary.nature from the questionnaire to the IBM card, an intermediate transfer 1

form, coordinated -with the master code, was necessary.

The master coding plan was evolved during the early stages of the "~ [

preliminary analysis of data, and was reviewed by the panel of consultants 
before use. It was recognized that this system of coding would be the 
heart of the analysis, that is, the completeness of the facility for trans- 
lation of data could make or break the study. Accordingly, ey_e_xy conc^iv- 
a ble fa ctor that might influence the identification of unidentified aerial j

objects u was_ included, t oget her with a wide range of variations within each 
factor. The original coding system (with minor corrections) was used 
throughout the translation of the original data with marked success. A copy |

of this system, called CODES, is enclosed as Exhibit B4, Appendix B.

To facilitate the preparation of the punched-card abstract, an inter- 
mediate form, called the WORK SHEET (later, the CARD BIBLE) was 
developed. Referenced to both the data from the questionnaire and the sys- 
tem of report identification, the WORK SHEET permitted an orderly 
transcription of data simultaneously by several people. In conjunction 
with the CODES, the WORK SHEET was used during the reduction of the 
original data to code form necessary for transfer to punched cards. A 
sample is included as Exhibit B5, Appendix B.After the analysis was under way, it became apparent that the me- 
chanics of machine processing could be improved by incorporating in the 
IBM card system group classifications of certain factors requiring more 
than one column for discrete expression. In addition, the inclusion of 
certain data relating to the evaluation and bearing of the sun with respect 
to the observer was considered necessary. Finally, a critical examination 
of certain segments of the data indicated the need for the definition of a 
new factor relating to the maneuvers of the object or 1 objects sighted. 
Prior to the start of the analytical study, it had been assumed that a com- 
bination 6f stated factors "would, by inference, define the. maneuver pattern.

All these additions have been incorporated in a revised set of CODES 
and CARD BIBLE that are illustrated as Exhibits B6 and B7, Appendix B. 
However, at the time that the maneuver factor was determined to be criti- 
cal, it was physically impracticable to make the required definitions and 
re-evaluate the original data. Therefore, no code for maneuverability has 
been included in the CODES, CARD BIBLE, or IBM cards.

/v

&

Identification of Working Papers

The actualjr eduction of d.ata to IBM £Ujici^ejdj^cjard form presented a 
problem of mass transfer of figures by several workers. Recognizing that 
an orderly system of relating the original data to the questionnaire, the 
WORK SHEET, and the IBM card was imperative, a scheme of SERIAL 
NUMBERS was developed to answer this need.The first data consisted of a series of letter-file folders identified by 
the year and location of the sighting or sightings they contained. The num- 
ber of reports of sightings in a single folder varied from 1 to over 20. 
Under these conditions, there was a great possibility for incorrect tran- 
scription of data, duplication of transcription, or misplacement of inter- 
mediate forms. Further, it was considered desirable to relate all sightings 
of the same object or objects to one another. The concept of a four-digit 
serial number (major), followed by a two-digit subserial number (minor), 
was adequate to fulfill these requirements.

To expedite handling of the data, temporary serial numbers were 
assigned until each report had been evaluated and the phenomenon had been 
placed in a category of identification. The use of temporary serial num- 
bers permitted the consolidation of duplicate reports from apparently 
diverse sources, such as a teletype message and an Air Force, Form 112. 
However, this consolidation was made ONLY when it could be proved con- 
clusively that the sources of the two documents were one and the same. 
Factors of the observer's location, date and time of observation, descrip- 
tion of the phenomenon, and finally, the name of the observer were con- 
sidered. In this manner, the assignment of major serial and minor sub- 
serial numbers in continuous series was made only to the reports accepted 
for the statistical study. It is believed that the reports accepted represent 
unique and unduplicated instances of sightings.

In the establishment of the serial-number system, it was necessary 
to define certain terms, so that a standard interpretation could be achieved. 
The terms and corresponding definitions were:

OBSERVER — Any witness reporting to a proper authority that 
he had seen unidentified aerial objects.

W

SIGHTINGOBSERVER — Any witness reporting to a proper authority that 
he had seen unidentified aerial objects.

W

SIGHTING

— The report or g£oup of reports of the same 
observecJ^phenomenon that remained unidenti- 
fied to the observer or observers, at least 
until reported.

SINGLE OBSERVATION - A SIGHTING consisting of a single

report from (1) one OBSERVER with no knowledge 
of additional OBSERVERS of the same phenom- 
enon, or (2) a group of witnesses of the same 
phenomenon, each cognizant of the others. The 
witness who made the report is called a SINGLE 
OBSERVER.

MULTIPLE OBSERVATION -A SIGHTING consisting of

several reports from OBSERVERS of the same 
phenomenon who were cognizant of each other. 
The witnesses who made reports are called 
MULTIPLE OBSERVERS.

ALL SIGHTINGS — (1) The group of reports consisting of one 
report for each OBSERVER, including both 
SINGLE and MULTIPLE OBSERVERS. (2) The 
questionnaire, work sheet, and IBM card 
representing the report from each OBSERVER — 
in other words, the representation of each report 
accepted for the statistical study.

UNIT SIGHTINGS - ( I) The group of reports consisting of one 
report for each SIGHTING, including all the 
reports of SINGLE OBSERVATIONS and the one 
most representative report from each MULTIPLE 
OBSERVATION. (2) The questionnaire, work 
sheet, and IBM card representing the report for 
each SIGHTING accepted for the statistical study.

A major serial number (four digits) was assigned to each sighting, 
segregating the year of occurrence by selection of limits for each year, as 
follows:

< 1

0001 to 0500 
0501 to 1000 
1001 to 1500 
1501 to 2000 
2001 to 2500 
2501 to 4900

reserved for 1947

reserved for 1948

reserved for 1949

reserved for 1950

reserved for 1951

reserved for 19520001 to 0500 
0501 to 1000 
1001 to 1500 
1501 to 2000 
2001 to 2500 
2501 to 4900

reserved for 1947

reserved for 1948

reserved for 1949

reserved for 1950

reserved for 1951

reserved for 1952

While this scheme would serve to identify any individual sighting , identifi- 
cation of each report and its subsequent forms was necessary. The minor 
subserial numbers (two digits) fulfilled this requirement. For all SINGLE 
OBSERVATIONS, a major serial number followed by two (2) zeros, for 
example, 2759.00, was sufficient identification. For MULTIPLE OBSER- 
VATIONS, the major serial number followed by a series of two-digit num- 
bers ranging from 00 to 99 was used to identify the individual reports. In 
general, the most complete report from the most reliable observer of that

8

mm

¥

*9

•

MULTIPLE OBSERVATION was identified with the . 00 subserial number. 
As an example, a MULTIPLE OBSERVATION consisting of six sighting 
reports would have the following serial numbers:

»

1132.00 representing the best report and observer

1132.01 representing an additional observer

1132.02 representing an additional observer

1132.03 representing an additional observer

1132.04 representing an additional observer

1132.05 representing an additional observer

During the course of the transcription of the data to machine card 
form, it became obvious that certain reports could have been independent 
observations of the same phenomenon. So, if the presentation of an 
analysis based on one report for each sighting was valid (the concept of 
UNIT SIGHTINGS), a presentation of an analysis based on one report for 
each phenomenon should be .valid also. Further, the examination of data 
relating to the actual number of phenomena was considered to be the proper 
basis for assessing the probability of technological developments outside 
the range of present-day scientific knowledge. Therefore, a designation of 
OBJECT SIGHTINGS was established, with the following definition:OBJECT SIGHTING - (1) The group ofreports consisting of 
one report for each phenomenon. (2) The 
questionnaire, work sheet, and IBM card 
representing a report for each phenomenon 
accepted for the statistical study.

In brief review, ALL SIGHTINGS refer to all reports , UNIT SIGHTINGS 
refer to actual sighting s, and OBJECT SIGHTINGS refer to the assumed 
number of phenomena .

It must be recognized that the process of identifying OBJECT 
SIGHTINGS was deductive, while that for UNIT SIGHTINGS was definitive. 
A conservative approach was adopted in the determination of OBJECT 
SIGHTINGS, using the factors of date and time of observations, location 
of observers, duration of observations, and range, bearing, track direc- 
tion, and identification of the phenomena. Any error of selection of OBJECT 
SIGHTINGS will tend to be in the direction of reducing the actual number of 
phenomena observed (several instances of UNIT SIGHTINGS that might be 
one OBJECT SIGHTING were noted, but the evidence was not conclusive 
enough to justify consolidation of the reports).

Following the determination of OBJECT SIGHTINGS, a series of 
serial numbers, called the INCIDENT SERIAL NUMBERS, was established 
to facilitate any future study of a specific object sighting. Each reported 
sighting that relates to an OBJECT SIGHTING received the same incident 
serial number, a four-digit code paralleling the major serial number 
series.

^=0

N>-

— : ' i 3^=0

N>-

— : ' i 3

For machine manipulation, it was desirable to be able to select the 
sample of cards {all reports, all sightings, or all phenomena) to be in- 
cluded in a particular study. The concept of a SIGHTING IDENTIFICATION 
NUMBER was evolved to fill this desire. Using one column of the IBM 
card, and the correlated working papers, the code for this function was 
developed. Multiple punching eliminated the need to use several columns 
for discrete expression of the variations., Selection of the proper number 
in this column thus permitted selection of the desired sample of cards.

Evaluation of Individual Reports

EjtaJi4a_£ioji of sighting reports was recognized as a crucial step in the 
preparation of data for statistical treatment; inconsistent evaluations would 
have invalidated any conclusions to be derived from this study. A method 
of evaluation was, therefore, determined simultaneously with the develop- 
ment of the questionnaire, the coding system, and the work sheet. It is 
emphasized that all phases of evaluation, even including the tedious prep- 
aration of the original data for statistical treatment, were entrusted only 
to selected, specially qualified scientists and engineers. ,

Evaluation consisted of a standardized procedure to be followed for; 
( 1) the deduction of discrete facts, from data which depended on human im- 
pressions rather than scientific measurements, (2) the rating of the ob- 
server and his report as determined from available information, and (3) the 
determination of the probable identification of the phenomenon observed. 
Categories of identification, established upon the basis of previous experi- 
ence, were as follows:

Balloon

Astronomical

Aircraft

Light phenomenon

Birds

Clouds, dust, etc.

Insufficient information

Psychological manifestations

Unknown

Other

p 
iBalloon

Astronomical

Aircraft

Light phenomenon

Birds

Clouds, dust, etc.

Insufficient information

Psychological manifestations

Unknown

Other

p 
i

The first step in evaluation, the deduction of discrete facts from 
subjective data, required certain calculations based on the information 
available in the sighting report. An example was the finding of the approxi- 
mate angular velocity and acceleration of the object or objects sighted. 
Care was taken during this phase of the work to insure against ^.he deduc- 
tion of discrete facts not warranted by the original data. Thus, even 
though there was a complete lack of any valid evidence consisting of

10

. y -

physical matter in any case of a reported unidentified aerial object, this 
was not assumed to be prima facie evidence that "flying saucers" did not 
exist. I

In those cases in which an attempt to reduce the information to a 
factual level failed completely, the report was eliminated from further con- 
sideration, and thus not included in the statistical analysis. About 800 
reports of sightings were eliminated or rejected in this manner. Most of 
these reports were rejected because they were extremely nebulpjis; the 
rest were rejected because they contained highly coniHcJing statements.

The second step in evaluation, the rating of the observer and his 
report, logically followed the first step, the reduction of the data to usable 
form. Ratings were assigned on the basis of the following factors of in- 
formation, 'considered in relation to one another:

(1) The exgexience of the observer, deduced from his 
occupation, age, and training;

(Z) The consistency among the separate portions of the 
description of the sighting;

(3) The general quality and compljeteness of the report;

(4) Consideration of the observer ' s fact-reporting ability 
and attitude, as disclosed by his manner of describing 
the sighting. •

•(3) The general quality and compljeteness of the report;

(4) Consideration of the observer ' s fact-reporting ability 
and attitude, as disclosed by his manner of describing 
the sighting. •

•

In cases in which insufficient information was available to make a judgment 
of the observer or report, none was made, but the r epor t was accepted for 
the statistical study.

The third step in the process of evaluation, the attempted identifica- 
tion of the object or objects sighted, was done twice, fir_g£_by the individual 
who made the transcription of the data (the preliminary identification), and 
later (the final identification) by a conference of four persons, two repre- 
sentatives from ATIC and two from the pa nel of consultants. Although 
representatives of ATIC participated in making. the final identifications, it 
must be emphasized that any previous identification of a sighting made by 
ATIC was not introduced or referred to in any way.

In the coding system, the choices provided for final identifications 
were based on ATIC s previous experience in analysis of the data. They 
had found that the majqHty of sightings could be classified as mis interpre - 
tat ion s of common objects or natural phenomena. Accordingly, categories 
for objects most frequently present in the air were provided. Balloons, . : 
aircraft, astronomical bodies (such as meteors), birds, and clouds or dust 
were recognized as major categories. The less frequent, but common 
objects, such as kites, fireworks, flares, rockets, contrails, and

1111

meteorological phenomena like small tornadoes, were collected into a 
category called OTHER. A separate category for the uncommon natural 
phenomena associated with light reflections or refractions, such as mirages, 
sun dogs, inversion-layer images, and distortions caused by airborne ice, 
was established with the title of LIGHT PHENOMENON. Categories for 
INSUFFICIENT INFORMATION, PSYCHOLOGICAL MANIFESTATIONS, and 
UNKNOWN were provided for the sightings that could not be fitted into the 
preceding identifications. An explanation of their use follows:

INSUFFICIENT INFORMATION - This identification category

was assigned to a report -when, upon final con- 
sideration, there was some es-S-eji£iaJLiterri of 
inf ormatiorv rnis sin g, or there was enough 
doubt about what data were available to disallow 
identification as a common object or some 
natural phenomenon. It is emphasized that this 
category of identification was not used as a 
convenient way to dispose of what might be 
called "poor unknowns", but as a category for 
reports that, perhaps, could have been one of 
several known objects or natural phenomena. 
No reports identified as INSUFFICIENT INFORMA- 
TION contain authenticated facts or impressions 
concerning the sighting that would prevent its 
being identified as a known olbject or phenomenon;

PSYCHOLOGICAL MANIFESTATIONS - This identification

category was assigned to a report when, 
although it was well established that the ob- 
server had seen something, it was also 
obvious that the description of the sighting 
had been overdrawn. Religious fanaticism, a 
desire for publicity, or an over-active imagi- 
nation were the most common mental ai*£X- 
r atio ns causing this type of report;

UNKNOWN — This designation in the identification code was

assigned to those reports of sightings wherein 
the description of the object and its maneuvers 
could not be fitted to the pa tter n of anyjcnown 
object or phenomenon.assigned to those reports of sightings wherein 
the description of the object and its maneuvers 
could not be fitted to the pa tter n of anyjcnown 
object or phenomenon.

For the purposes of this study, two groups of identifications were 
recognized, the KNOWNS (including all identification categories except the 
UNKNOWNS) and the UNKNOWNS. .

All possible identifications provided in the code system, except 
INSUFFICIENT INFORMATION and UNKNOWN, could be assigned accord- 
ing to two degrees of certainty, designated "Certain" and "Doubtful".

12

■I

9

i

A "Certain" identification indicated a minimum amount of doubt regarding 
the validity of the evaluation. By "rule-of-thumb" reasoning, the proba- 
bility of the identification being correct was better than 95 per cent. A 
"Doubtful" identification indicated that the choice was less positive, but 
that there was a better than even chance of being correct.

It is emphasized again that, as was true for other phases of evalua- 
tion, preliminary and final identification was entrusted only to scientists 
and engineers who, in addition to their broad scientific background, had 
received instruction, where necessary, in specialized subjects. The panel 
of consultants provided background information for this instruction. Many 
of the cases representing unusual features or maneuvers were submitted to 
and discussed with various members of the panel of consultants prior to the 
final identification.

Consistency in the application of the knowledge necessary for making 
identifications was maintained by frequent collaboration among the person- 
nel involved, and systematic spot checks of the work. In addition to the 
general fund of knowledge required to identify satisfactorily a reported 
unidentified aerial object, an attempt was made to corr elat e s pecific data 
such as fl ight pla ns of ajxcxaf.t, re cord s of balloojuneieasjes, we ather con - 
d ition s, and an a stronomica l almanac with the reported sighting.The procedure followed in making final identifications deserves ex- 
planation because of the importance assumed by the identification as a basis 
for statistical treatment. As was mentioned, a conference of four qualified 
persons, two from ATIC and two from the panel of consultants, decided 
upon the final identification for each sighting report. This work "was done 
at ATIC, periodically, as reports became ready.

During an identification conference, each sighting report- was first 
studied, from the original data, by one person. If that person arrived at a 
decision, it was checked against the preliminary identification; if the two 
identifications were the same, the report was appropriately marked and 
considered finished. If the two identifications did not agree, the report 
was considered later by everyone participating in the conference until a 
group decision could be made.

If an evaluator was unable to categorize the report as one of the 
common objects or as a natural phenomenon, and his opinion was that the 
sighting should be recorded as UNKNOWN, a group decision was also re- 
quired on that report before it was considered finished. A group decision 
was necessary on all reports finally recorded as UNKNOWN, regardless of 
what the preliminary identification had been. In cases where a group 
decision was not made within a reasonable time, the report was put aside 
and later submitted to certain members of the panel of consultants for their 
opinions. If, after this, disagreement continued to exist, the report of the 
sighting was identified as UNKNOWN.

13

Mi

Upon completion of final identifications, all data were transferred to 
IBM cards, preparatory to analysis.

ANALYSIS OF THE DATA13

Mi

Upon completion of final identifications, all data were transferred to 
IBM cards, preparatory to analysis.

ANALYSIS OF THE DATA

Broadly stated, the problem at this point consisted of the judicious 
application of scientific methods of categorizing and analyzing the sub- 
jective data in reports of sightings of unidentified aerial objects. It was 
recognized that an approach to this problem could best be made by a sys- 
tematic sorting and tabulation program to give frequency and percentage •*- 
distributions of the important characteristics of sightings. A suggestion 
that an attempt be made to anticipate all questions that might be asked in 
the future about a sighting or a group of sightings, and to provide answers, 
was rejected. The systematic approach also made it possible to develop 
a detailed reference manual of the attributes of the sightings included in 
this study.

Thus, at the beginning of the analysis, a detailed plan was developed 
for sorting, counting, and tabulating the information from the punched-card 
abstracts of reports of sightings. It was believed at the time, and later 
substantiated, that the results of the program for sorting and tabulating 
would serve as a guide for the more sophisticated treatment involving 
statistical methods.

Also, it was anticipated that any patterns or trends that might be 
found could be subjected to concentrated study in the hope of discovering 
significant information relating to the characteristics of "flying saucers". 
Further, it was believed that these trends could serve as certain of the 
criteria of validity for any concepts (models) developed in the attempt to 
discover a class of "flying saucers".The three parts of this study (1) the sorting and tabulation program, 
(2) the advanced study of the results of that program, and (3) the investiga- 
tion of the possibility of conceiving a model of a "flying saucer" from 
descriptions reported, are discussed in sections entitled "Frequency and 
Percentage Distributions by Characteristics", "Advanced Study of the Data",

and "The 'Flying Saucer' Model".

\ '

Frequency and Percentage Distributions by Characteristics

The original conception of this study assumed the availability of 
sufficient data to describe adequately the physical appearance, maneuver 
characteristics, range, direction, and probable path of the object or 
objects observed. However, familiarity with the data, acquired during the

14

f

IP

translation and transcription from reports to punched cards, indicated that 
there ■would be relatively few specific variables or factors that would yield 
meaningful correlation studies. Either the original data were too subjec- 
tive, or the incompleteness of the original reports would seriously reduce 
the sample of a specific variable.

Preliminary tabulations of various sortings substantiated the im- 
possibility of deriving statistical results from certain variables, such as 
movement of the observer during,the sighting, sound, shape parameter, 
size, angular velocity and acceleration, appearance and disappearance 
bearing, initial and final elevation, altitude, and orientation of the object. 
The statistically usable variables presented in this study include the date, 
time, location, duratioa, reliability, and method of observation of the 
sighting, and the physical attributes of number, color, speed, shape, light 
brightness, and identification of the objects sighted.The presentation of frequency and percentage distributions of any of 
the variables must be interpreted in the light of the sample of incidents 
represented. For example, the analysis of the reported colors of the 
objects sighted, based on ALL. SIGHTINGS, could lead to misrepresenta- 
tion of the distribution of the reported color of the objects, because of the 
multiplicity of reports on some of the phenomena. On the other hand, the 
percentage distribution of the light brightness reported by each observer 
is more likely to be„correct than a distribution based on one report for 
each phenomenon. To assure that the most nearly correct presentation 
was made, and to avoid the possibility of failure to uncover any pattern or 
trend inherent in the data, the variables were studied on five different 
bases or samples. These samples, and their numerical relation to each 
other, were as follows:

ALL SIGHTINGS (all reports) 
UNIT SIGHTINGS, all observers 
UNIT SIGHTINGS, single observer 
UNIT SIGHTINGS, multiple observers 
OBJECT SIGHTINGS

3, 201 cards 
2, 554 cards 
2, 232 cards 
322 cards 
2, 199 cards

The preliminary tabulations indicated that the samples based on UNIT 
SIGHTINGS, single observer, and UNIT SIGHTINGS, multiple observers, 
would not add materially to this study. Accordingly, although the fre- 
quency distributions were recorded and are available for study, they are 
not presented in this report. , >

The bases of ALL SIGHTINGS, UNIT SIGHTINGS (referring to all 
observers), and OBJECT SIGHTINGS are presented in Appendix A as 
Tables Al through A240. A critical study of these tabulations reveals that 
there is no apparent change in the distribution of any variable from one 
basis to another, and that no marked patterns or trends exist in any sample,

h *■

15

G raphical Presentationh *■

15

G raphical Presentation

Graphical representation of the important information contained in 
the tables is presented in Figures 1 through 38. These figures present the 
distributions of the important variables only by the total number of cases' 
in each identification category, since no significant differences were found 
between the distributions of "Certain" and "Doubtful" identifications of 
objects with respect to the variables. A chronological study 1 of these 
figures will afford a broad picture of the tabulated information, without the 
necessity of a detailed study of the tables.

A critical examination of the figures will show that no trends, patterns, 
or correlations are to be found, with the exception of Figures 18 through 30. 
The apparent similarity of the distributions shown by these mirror graphs, 
Figures 18 through 23, was tested by statistical methods which showed that 
there „was a low probability that the distributions of the KNOWNS and 
UNKNOWNS by these characteristics were the same. These tests and their ' 
interpretation are discussed in the following section. For purposes of this 
study, the strategic areas, shown in Figures 32 through 38, and Tables 
A223 through A 240, Appendix A, were designated on the basis of concen- 
tration of reports of OBJECT SIGHTINGS in an area. No other interpre- 
tation of the tables or remaining charts was deemed necessary.

Advanced Study of the Data

It was recognized that the lack of any patte-rns or trends, as shown by 
the tabulations and graphs, provided an insecure basis for drawing definite

conclusions. Accordingly, shortly before the sorting and tabulation pro- 
gram was concluded, a program of study of the data was developed to 
utilize statistical and other mathematical methods, which could lead to a 
more concrete interpretation of the problem.

Position of the Sun Relative to the ObserverPosition of the Sun Relative to the Observer

The first thing that was done was to calculate the angle of elevation of 
the sun above the horizon and its bearing from true north as seen by the 
observer at the time of each sighting. With this information, it could then 
be determined whether there was a possibility that the reported object 
could have been illuminated by light from the sun. In addition, it could be 
determined whether an object could be a mock sun { sun dog) or whether 
there was a possibility of specular reflection from an aircraft at the posi- 
tion of the object, which would give the appearance of a "flying disc".

A program of computation was set up and carried out to obtain the 
angle of elevation and the bearing of the sun for each sighting. All informa- 
tion needed for this calculation was available on the deck of IBM cards.

<r

16

f

N I952, 
1501 = 
68.3%

Vl952\ 
\1722=\ " 
\67.4%\

, N I9£ 
\2(

)I8=\ 
>30%\

J 94 8

3/

117* 
_3^7%y 205 *

g 7 -° AI948 /

H327 c *-^6.o <

79=,

36/v!2£8/ 
%/ 143 =

6.5%,

^1949,

186 = 
8.5%

J949,

.236 = 
,9.2%

J949,

\395 
12.3%

1950,

169 = 
7.7%

J95Q,

209= 
8.27J

X I95I,

.1950,

137= 
5.4«

306=, 
9.6 4

,^951, 
160 = 
5.0%

^

W"V

*ri®.

*i»

Object sightings 
2199 =100%

All sightings 
3201 = 100%

Unit sightings 
2554=100%

FIGURE I FREQUENCY OF SIGHTINGS BY YEAR FOR OBJECT, 
UNIT, AND ALL SIGHTINGS

A-7479

17

Object sightings 
2199=100%

All sightings 
3201 = 100%

t

Unit sightings 
2554= 100%

FIGURE 2 DISTRIBUTION OF EVALUATIONS OF OBJECT, 
UNIT, AND ALL SIGHTINGS FOR ALL YEARS

A-7480

*

18

*w

*

I

?■'•

f

FIGURE 3. DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY EVALU- 
ATION FOR ALL YEARS WITH COMPARISONS OF 
EACH YEAR FOR EACH EVALUATION GROUP

A-7401

19

O

100

No. of object sightings 
2199 79

143

(86

169

121

1501

c

u

0)

Q.

100

All years

1952

FIGURE 4 DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY EVALUATION FOR ALL YEARS AND EACH YEAR

A-7 4 82

^^sspssagjigj

'SS^^ft'^^f^^^.143

(86

169

121

1501

c

u

0)

Q.

100

All years

1952

FIGURE 4 DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY EVALUATION FOR ALL YEARS AND EACH YEAR

A-7 4 82

^^sspssagjigj

'SS^^ft'^^f^^^.

Stp^-sS^^'

ro

No. of object sightings

70 55 83 127

183 638 407 166 125 1 0,6 1 05

100

Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct

Nov Dec

FIGURE 5 DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY EVALUATION WITHIN MONTHS FOR ALL YEARS

A-7483

y*J > 'y»^^j^Tr^p^:n*'i^*^^.*-y>r/^".-^^;w ^ t M^

^^P^^^^yf

mmmmm.

mm^mmmmmm?

30

20

10

10

30

20 10

Certain

Per Cent

20

30

< ■ 1 —

1 1

Astronomical

— i

1 : 1

All years

1

ZL

1947

i

^

1948 |

i

1949

I

i

1950

l

i

195 1

1

i

1952

I

1

Aircraft

All years

1947

i ■

1

1948

i

1949

1

1950

I

195 1

l

1952

1

i

Ball

jons

1

l

All years

1947

■ -

19 48

i

1

194 9

I

1,

1

1950

1

1

195 1

1

195 2

\

Insuf.

info, 
own

1

All years

i

1947

i

19 46

1

1949

I

1950

i .

195 1

i

195 2

Unkn

1

All years

■ -

1947

1

1948

l

1949

1

1950

1

195 1

1

1952

■— '

on

ler

All years

I

19 47

Zl

1948

1

i

1949

<

1

1950

i

195 1

i

1

1952

i" i

•

m

_ _i _ •

10 20

Doubtful

30

FIGURE 6 DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY CERTAIN AND

DOUBTFUL EVALUATIONS FOR ALL YEARS AND EACH YEAR

A-74 8 4 
22

v

mmm-m

im^iMM

^^p

*^i^Orf , iil^Ll^KJJja

^^

en

"tn 50-

o

E

-f — i — i — r~l — l — l — n — n — rp n i — n i n r~i ill '. i i r~i n n — i ui i \ i i s i i i i rrrn — m i t— i — m — i i 1 1 i I l ' i l 1 l l l I 1

JFMAMJJAS.ONo|jFM*MJJASONO|jFM*lllJJASONDjjFM4HJJ4SOHO|j'FMAMJjaSONo|jrMAHJJ*SO»IO

1947 1946 "1949 1950 1951 1952

V '

FIGURE 7 FREQUENCY OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS AND UNKNOWN OBJECT EVALUATIONS BY MONTHS, 
1947-1952 c-7485

Insuf. info. 
9 = 4.2 %

FIGURE 8 DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY SIGHTING

RELIABILITY GROUPS WITH EVALUATION DISTRIBUTIONS 
FOR EACH GROUP

A-7486

24

.■■.iS&SPQF-Vif

; <^; ■■ "^-SSie^Kif iSff%^.ivg#^

#

m

100FIGURE 8 DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY SIGHTING

RELIABILITY GROUPS WITH EVALUATION DISTRIBUTIONS 
FOR EACH GROUP

A-7486

24

.■■.iS&SPQF-Vif

; <^; ■■ "^-SSie^Kif iSff%^.ivg#^

#

m

100

No. of object sightings 
2199 79

43

186

169

12!

1501

90h 
80-

70

„_ 60-

c

^ 50l~

0)

40

30-

20

10

Excellent

Good

Doubtful

Poor

\

v

'

-"•

\ 
\

\

>

All years

1947

(946

1949

1950

1951

1952

-

100 
90

80

70

60

50

- 40

- 30 
-20

- 10

FIGURE 9 DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SI.GHTINGS AMONG THE FOUR SIGHTING RELIABILITY 
GROUPS FOR ALL YEARS AND EACH YEAR

A-74 87

^MftM^Mii

.0>

Excellent

Good

Doubtful

Poor

FIGURE 10 DISTRIBUTION OF ALL SIGHTINGS BY SIGHTING RELIABILITY GROUPS. SEGREGATED BY 
-_-_- MILITARY' AND CIVILIAN OBSERVERS W/TH EVALUATION DISTRIBUTION FOR EACH

SEGREGATION a-7488

le^ife^Sfc.

*I

100 
90

*

80 
70

c 
CL

40-

30

20-

10

Insuf. 
— info. —

Unknown

Balloon

Aircraft

re^3

V

White 
23.5%

Metallic 
17.7%

Not 
stated 
12.3 %

Orange Red

10.0%

8.1%

Other 
28.4%

100

90

80

70

60 ^

c

Q)

50 ^ 
Q. 
40

30

20

-\ 10

FIGURE II DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY REPORTED COLORS 
OF OBJECT® WITH EVALUATION DISTRIBUTION FOR EACH 
COLOR GROUP

f A-74S9

27

m

;(:**r-W<

FIGURE 12 DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY NUMBER OF

OBJECTS SEEN PER SIGHTING WITH EVALUATION DISTRI 
BUTION FOR EACH GROUP

A -74 90

28

Astronomical

o

*<£(?; ..s>r

<ri:%k$

<0

c

0)

O 
Q.

100- 
90- 
80" 
7 0; 
60" 
50 
40 
3 0- 
20-

10" 
0.

Not 
stated 
24.9%

0ver30mir 
7.8%

6-30min 
17.1%

61 sec-

5min

16.7%

31-60 sec 
6-8 %

1 1-30 sec 
8.5 %

6-iu sec 
S, I %

5 sec or

less 
13.0%

oAstronomical>

S\\\\\\\\\\\^

mini

Aircraft

V////A

Balloon^

■///////.

"1 I ! 1 1

1 I 1

Insuf. info.

Whe|<X-

-- Unknown)—

- II! 1- 1

*^

Duration

(0

20

T"

v>

%2l

30 40 50 60 70

Evaluations in Per Cent

100mini

Aircraft

V////A

Balloon^

■///////.

"1 I ! 1 1

1 I 1

Insuf. info.

Whe|<X-

-- Unknown)—

- II! 1- 1

*^

Duration

(0

20

T"

v>

%2l

30 40 50 60 70

Evaluations in Per Cent

100

FIGURE 13 DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY DURATION OF SIGHTING WITH EVALUATION 
DISTRIBUTION FOR EACH DURATION GROUP

A- 7491

MteMMi

■■Ml

M^

Ol

O

100

No. of object sightings

70 55 83 127 1^ 9

c

CO

o 
a»

O

4- 
C

o

a 
o

UJ

4)

a

a

90

60-

70

60

50

40

30

20 
10

M 
O

I

^

Not 
stated

\

50min

6-30 
min

/•

6 1 sec

to

5 min

tt=to

sec

5 sec 
and 
less

\

-.*.

(

/■

f

t

j/f

—

,

i£2.

\

,

>

v

*_

£2&_

A 
V

/

i£7

\

166

.

125.

'» ^_*'

106. 'P5

»'/

,'i

/

I

Jan

Feb

Mar Apr fV'May June July

1

Aug

Sept Oct

Nov Oec

^

100 
90 
60 
70

60

c 
a>

a. 
40

30

20

10

FIGURE 14 DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY MONTHS AMONG THE EIGHT DURATION 
GROUPS FOR ALL YEARS ' * . a- 7492

w

ffl

^mMi-m^S

...pJ_.-JJ.itf.-..,

100-

90- 
80-

70- 
60

Flome

Lenticular conica """"^-T^ — 
or teardrop ""*-

Q.

40-

30-

20-

10-

Not

stored

Other

oir croft \ N N.

Qircrqft

Elliptical

Shape

40 -50 60

Evaluation in Per Cent

100

FIGURE 15 DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY SHAPE OF OBJECTS) REPORTED WITH 
EVALUATION DISTRIBUTION FOR EACH SHAPE , GROUP

A- 7493

•Mamatm

r

mmm

fcriirffi-lt^A'S--: .'-

wmmmmmm

^wpw^^

H :

100-

90- 
80-

70"

60- 
c- 
<■> 50-

ro

01

Q.

40-

3.0-

4 t

20"

10-

0-

Over 
40Omph 
24.9%

100-400 
mph

10.9%

Less than 
100 mph 
ft? »/»

Stationary 
1 3.7%

Aircraft

/Balloon/ Insuf. info.

//

Speed

Unknown

H_-_

y////.

.

10

20

30 . 40 50 60

Evaluation in Per Cent

FIGURE 16 DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY REPORTED SPEED OF 0BJECT(S) WITH

EVALUATION DISTRIBUTION FOR EACH SPEED GROUP

A-7494

100

BffiSSsfHi.-'.'if- it?

Mit$&$$f?t.i<:*<lj

i«t*Si!iiSESCaK»iaaisieaaaiV

^j^

<w

100

"S 90

o

£ 60

(0

c

No. of all sighting 
3201

70

£ 60 
_ 50

< 
wo

«- 40

% 30A-7494

100

BffiSSsfHi.-'.'if- it?

Mit$&$$f?t.i<:*<lj

i«t*Si!iiSESCaK»iaaisieaaaiV

^j^

<w

100

"S 90

o

£ 60

(0

c

No. of all sighting 
3201

70

£ 60 
_ 50

< 
wo

«- 40

% 30

« 20 
a.

10

117

205

164

306

60

2018

0)

4-

o

Location

not 
stated

.

•

/

• 
f

.<*■

\ 
\ 
\ 
\

\

-

\ 
\

V

\ 
\

\ . 
\ 
>

*

1

/ 
/

I

I 
f 
1 
1 
1 
1 
t

i 
/

f 
f

t

\

\

S 
\ 
\

>

\

\ \> 
\ ' 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\

•

/

—

Outdoors

-

-

— .

■

_

mm

<

-

•

L ,

In bldg.

/

/

•

V 
\ 
\

\

>

-

—

In plane

—

In car

All years

1947

1948

1949

1950

1951

t

1952

100 
9 
80 
70 
60 
50

40

3

20

10

FIGURE 17 DISTRIBUTION OF ALL SIGHTINGS BY OBSERVER LOCATION FOR ALL YEARS AND 
EACH YEAR

U

iy^^^^^^^y^WF^r-'

^^^^^^^^

Ol

3d

Total Less Unknown 
Per Cent

25 20 15 10 5

_J I I 1 L_

4 ■

Unknown 
Per Cent

5

•

10

i

15 
i

20

i

25 30 
i i t

White

-

Metallic

Not stated

t.

Orange

V

Red

.

Other

■>

FIGURE 18 COMPARISON OF KNOWN AND UNKNOWN OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY COLOR, 1947-1952

A-7496

rttfi

i.'i^jhi.'^ fctVuiki fsi. -_i

NM

Pi

m

01

Total Less Unknown 
Per Cent

80 70 60- 50 40 30 20 10 
1 ' ■ I l -J l l_

i *.

OnY

Two

Three

to 
ten

Eleven

or 
more

Not stated

Unknown 
Per Cent

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 
_l I I J i i- i i

FIGURE 19 COMPARISON OF KNOWN AND UNKNOWN. OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY NUMBER OF 
OBJECTS PER SIGHTING, 1947-1952

A-7497

(

~^ : :- ' T^fg-PPP

^m

Ok

"7

I I

Total Less Unknown 
Per Cent

40 35 30 25 20 (5 10 5

_J I I I I I L.

5 10

Stationary

Less than 
100 rnprt

100 to 400 
mph

More than 
400 mph

Meteor-like 
Not stated

Unknown 
Per Cent

15 20 25 30 35 40 
J _L I I l L_

FIGURE 20 COMPARISON OF KNOWN AND UNKNOWN OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY SPEED, ^947-1952

\ A-7491

MSI

i .. n.iiji. H'LMVa W*ftJ»JJiJ*SWW»M«l*IWlWflai#|j&fMWgSi^^

^S^a**"^!

M

mmmmmmm

^

30

Total Less Unknown

Per Cent

25

20

_l_

15

10 
_j

5

5 seconds 
or less

6-10 
seconds

11-30 
seconds

31-60 
seconds^S^a**"^!

M

mmmmmmm

^

30

Total Less Unknown

Per Cent

25

20

_l_

15

10 
_j

5

5 seconds 
or less

6-10 
seconds

11-30 
seconds

31-60 
seconds

61 seconds 
5 minutes

6-30 
minutes

More than 
30 minutes

Not stated

5

j_

10

_L_

Unknown 
Per Cent

15

20

_L_

25

_L_

30

_JL_

FIGURE 21 COMPARISON OF KNOWN AND UNKNOWN OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY DURATION , 1947-1952

A- 74 99

/"

mm

MM

'"{■■' ;-^r L -' ^338^5

Total Less Unknown

Per Cent

50 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 
l I i_l i I i I i i i_

CO

Elliptical

Rocket

and 
aircraft

Meteor or 
comet

Lenticular,

conical or

teardrop

Flame

Other shapes

Not stated

5

Unknown

Per Cent

10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 
_J I I 1_ L__l I 11,

***

FIGURE 22 COMPARISON OF KNOWN AND UNKNOWN OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY SHAPE, 1947- 1952

_ A- 75 00

m

"■":-""'39p!^i** t

-jtSttftiusjIfti -

^

Total Less Unknown

Oi

60

Per Cent

50

40

30 
i

20

10

Sunlight on 
mirror or 
aluminum

Sunlight on 
plaster, 
stone or soil

Brighter 
than moon

Like moon

Duller 
than moon

Not stated

Unknown 
Per Cent

10 20

30

40

50

_L_

I

60

_J__

FIGURE 23 COMPARISON OF KNOWN AND UNKNOWN OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY LIGHT BRIGHTNESS, 
1947-1952

A-7S0I

m*mmm

Total Less Astronomical:

Astronomical

40

30

Per Cent 
20

10

*?.*: !

o

€ 
Z

c

> ' 10

Per Cent 
20

30

4<

i

January

February 
March 
April .

_l

May

June

July

August

/

September

October

November

i

1

December

FIGURE 24 COMPARISON OF MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS EVALUATED AS 
FIGURE ^ R0NQM|CAL VER s US TOTAL OBJECT SIGHTINGS LESS ASTRONOMICAL

A-7502

/

:I ::p!-s^£|

T ''><*M*> «W.Ji..l -Pli" WM^mpp

5^&&&*i-£iiAi^^ ?.-* ; : _,«.. ii.-;:-^Se!i-

9

#

40

Total Less Aircraft 
PerCent

30 20 10 
i i i

10 
1

Aircraft 
Per Cent

20

\

30

i

40

i

( j—

January

February

March

> 
April

May

June

July

August

September

. October 
November 
December

■

.

,30 20 10 
i i i

10 
1

Aircraft 
Per Cent

20

\

30

i

40

i

( j—

January

February

March

> 
April

May

June

July

August

September

. October 
November 
December

■

.

,

FIGURE 25 COMPARISON OF MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS EVALUATED AS 
AIRCRAFT VERSUS TOTAL OBJECT SIGHTINGS LESS AIRCRAFT

A-T303

M*^i

i^i^M

MM

m

■HHHIH

Total Less Balloon

40

30 
> i

Per Cent 
20

10

L

r

■

.

January 
February J

March _J 
April L|

May

June

July 
August 
September 
October 
November 
December |

10

Balloon 
Per Cent 
20

30

40

FIGURE 26 COMPARISON OF MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS EVALUATED 
AS BALLOON VERSUS TOTAL OBJECT SIGHTINGS LESS BALLOON

A-7 3 04

^^uiiyil^^M

w

Hj&iifSHiiiiii,-,. - jv:;35si«l ; :^..-i.i-;~ii*fir:!iiL« -^t.i.L, liifcaaik-; v * . ulfiliKiiJ

:%to«$riikHHIttMK

£

Total Less Insufficient Information

Insufficient Information

40

30

Per Cent 
20

10

10

i

Per Cent

20

i

30

i

40 
i

.

c

■ . .

January

February

March

April

M5y

June

: Ju*y

August 
September 
_ October 
November 
December

f

,

t

f

*

FIGURE 27 COMPARISON OF MONTHLY DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS EVALUATED AS 
INSUFFICIENT INFORMATION VERSUS TOTAL OBJECT SIGHTINGS LESS INSUFFI- 
CIENT INFORMATION

A-7503

a ^ HMM|

in

Total Less Other 
Per Cent

a 
»

K)

. 30

i

20

(0

i

c

•

January 
February

March

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

December

10

_L_

Other 
Per Cent

20

»

30

40

FIGURE 28 COMPARISON OF MONTHLY' DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS EVALUATED AS 
OTHER VERSUS TOTAL OBJECT SIGHTINGS LESS OTHER

fc-75 06

'SB

"$i!$i$

\

40

^

Total Less Unknown

30

Per Cent

20

»

to

Unknown 
Per Cent

■i

N

FIGURE 29 COMPARISON OF MONTHLY DISTENTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS. EVALUATED AS 
FIGURE 29 COM^ ^^ .^ ^^ S(GHTINGS LESS UNKN0WN

A-750T

K

MH

■MM

FIGURE 30 CHARACTERISTICS PROFILES OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BYA-750T

K

MH

■MM

FIGURE 30 CHARACTERISTICS PROFILES OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY

TOTAL SAMPLE, KNOWN EVALUATIONS, AND INDIVIDUAL KNOWN 
EVALUATIONS, WITH UNKNOWN EVALUATIONS SUPERIMPOSED

B-7508

46

^H'm&y-™-

jj^

-J

FIGURE 31 FREQUENCY OF OBJECT, UNIT, AND ALL SIGHTINGS WITHIN THE UNITED STATES 1947-1952, BY SUBDIVISIONS 
OF ONE DEGREE OF LATITUDE AND LONGITUDE

wmmmmmm.

00

FIGURE 32 DISTRIBUTION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY EVALUATION FOR THE TWELVE REGIONAL 
AREAS OF THE UNITED STATES, WITH THE STRATEGIC AREAS LOCATED (STRATEGIC 
AREAS WERE DETERMINED ON THE BASIS OF CONCENTRATION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS)

tm

^Bfe

#^*!

gj^^^gfr^iffSKlSaffigiSSfiKife*."

juiuimi

^^

F1G URE 33 COMPARE OF EVALUATE OF BJ |CT S.GHTINGS .N THE STRATEGICS OF THE

CENTRAL EAST REGION ![

I?

f

■M

WP

1

o

FIGURE 34 COMPARISON OF EVALUATION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS IN THE STRATEGIC AREAS OF 
THE CENTRAL MIDWEST REGION B - 7 5i2

V

%

■:•■'

r

>■ -s-

m

WW

&

FIGURE 35 COMPARISON OF EVALUATION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS 
IN THE STRATEGIC AREAS OF THE CENTRAL FARWEST REGION

B-7513

51

A

FIGURE 36 COMPARISON OF EVALUATION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS IN THE STRATEGIC AREAS 
OF THE SOUTH MIDWgST REGION

B-75F4

m

*&W$^^^i&^&? J*;**

;r^jia*fcK»c*i?^>-i

m

m&

r^w£<«<3£$$%^&i!3%&jri$ s-" flsSSS?

,i. J ..i|P||. ■■'J-'fllW, •; -J *|»

Jg

FIGURE 37 COMPARISON OF EVALUATION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS IN THE STRATEGIC AREAS OF 
THE SOUTH WEST REGION A ' D

iM

MMtt

FIGURE 38 COMPARISON OF EVALUATION OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS IN

THE STRATEGIC AREAS OF THE SOUTH FARWEST REGION

B-7516

54

fe\.

is

Cv;,,

This information consisted of:

(1) Time and date of observation in Greenwich Civil Time

(2) Latitude and longitude of the observer at the time of 
observation.

Figure 39 shows a celestial sphere on which Z_ represents the ob- 
server* s zenith, js represents the sun, and N represents the north celestial 
pole.Figure 39 shows a celestial sphere on which Z_ represents the ob- 
server* s zenith, js represents the sun, and N represents the north celestial 
pole.

Using the date and time of the observation, the longitude and declina- 
tion (S) of the sun were obtained from an ephemeris of the sun and corrected 
for the equation of time. The difference between the longitudes of the sun 
and the observer was taken, and_called the hour angle (HA on Figure 39).

Then, using the declination of the sun (S), the latitude of the observer 
(lat), and the hour angle ( HA ), the angle ( ZS ) between the observer's zenith 
and the sun can be calculated from the law of cosines of spherical trigo- 
nometry. Thus, cos Z~S - cos (90 - lat) cos (90 - S) + sin (90 - lat) sin 
(90 - S) cos (HA).

Since the angle ZS is measured from the observer's zenith, the angle 
of elevation of the sun above the horizon for daytime sightings was found by 
taking 90 - ZS. When the sun was below the horizon, the angle of depres- 
sion of the sun below the horizon was found by taking ZS - 90. .

Having found the angle ZS , the bearing of the sun (angle B) was ob- 
tained from the formula:

sin

SSL

sin

IHAJ

f^ sin (90 - S) sin (ZS)

All of the above calculations were made with IBM equipment. Sines, 
cosines, and^heir inverses were obtained from a deck of 9,000 IBM cards 
on which seven-place Peter 1 s tables of the sines, cosines, and tangents of 
angles had been punched for each 0.01 of a degree from to 90 degrees.

itit

Upon completion of these calculations, the cards representing OBJECT 
SIGHTINGS were sorted on the sign of the sine of the bearing angle. This 
separated the cards into two groups: (1) sightings which occurred between 
noon and midnight, for which the sine of the bearing angle was positive; and 
(2) sightings between midnight and noon, for which the sine of the bearing 
angle was negative. Then each of these groups 'was sorted into groups for 
intervals of 10° in angle of elevation of the sun from -90° to +90°. A count 
was made of the number of cards in each group and from this a histogram 
was constructed (Figure 40) . The UNKNOWN OBJECT SIGHTINGS were 
then sorted out, counted in the same manner, and a histogram was made 
(again see Figure 40).

i

■;*©&■.■

55

ijBffi ^u/j p n yr ft*^V-*'^V-^^\*:£K^ .■ •

Equator

Horizon

O

FIGURE 39 DIAGRAM OF A CELESTIAL SPHERE

A-7339

56

:*;■" -wir •>■'■*-■.

^§^ S"*^ :,-. iit^^l'Jii=J^ <-'iri^J^^'-^L J ^£ i ^L^.-_il>12i;^ - ■- -^ ^ ' "^

$

(A

<75

+-

o

o

Q) 
.O

E

3

300 
275 
250 
225 - 
200

ITS- 
ISO

m- 125

100 
75 
50 
25

-90

All object sightings

Unknown object sightings

Sunjset

TttJ , I^^MrnTTTTiS

fc»- m>^ 1 W*

+ 30 +60 +90 +60 +30

Angle of Elevation of The Sun

-30

-60

-90

r,

FIGURE 40 FREQUENCY OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY ANGLE OF ELEVATION OF THE SUN, INTERVALS 
OF 10 DEGREES OF ANGLE

A-7536

1

M^

■■m

mm^m

The following points should be carefully noted about these histograms:

(1) The negligible number of sightings when the sun is within 
10° of the zenith and nadir (angle of elevation of the sun = 
±90°) of the observer is due to the fact that the southern- 
most latitude of the U. S. is greater than the declination 
of , the sun at the summer solstice, so that it would be im- 
possible for the sun to reach the zenith $r nadir of any 
observer in the U. S. (where most of the sightings were 
made).(2) The time of day at which a particular angle of elevation 
of the sun occurs does not remain fixed but varies from 
day to day. Consider, for example, the variation in 
sunrise and sunset times over the course of a year.

Thus, there are only two inferences to be made from this histogram: 
(l) the high peak of sightings soon after sunset, and (2) the lack of increase 
in the UNKNOWNS relative to the KNOWNS near either sunset or sunrise. 
This would seem to discount the possibility that atmospheric phenomena 
such as mock suns were the primary cause of the unknown reports, since 
such phenomena usually occur when the sun is near the horizon.

i

The Local Sun Time was computed as a step in the calculation of the 
angle of elevation of the sun. It is related to the hour angle by the equation: 
Local Sun Time (L.S.T.) = HA/15 + 12.00, where L. S. T. is in hours and 
HA in degrees.

The cards were grouped on the basis of L.S.T. in intervals of one 
hour, and the number .of cards in each interval was counted. Again the 
UNKNOWNS were sorted out and similarly treated. Histograms were con- 
structed with the results of these tabulations of OBJECT SIGHTINGS 
(Figure 41). Here, again, there is a peak in the early evening hours.

The cards were then broken up into seven groups on the basis of the 
angle of elevation of the sun, as follows:

Group 1 — Daylight sightings for which the sun was more than 
10° above the horizon.

Group 2 — Sunset sightings for which the sun was between 0° 
and 10" above the horizon.

Group 3 — Sunset sightings for which the sun was between 0° 
and 10° below the horizon.

Group 4 — Evening sightings for which the sun was between 
10° and 40° below the horizon.

1

58

*

..,. ■■--"-fTTMhat

#

01

(0

o> 22 5

55

+- 
u

O

E

3

0300

0600

1800

2100

Midnight

2400

0900 1200 1500

Local Sun Time

FIGURE 41 FREQUENCY OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY LOCAL SUN TIME , INTERVALS OF ONE HOUR

A-7537

jr-^tr^t'^'^y,55

+- 
u

O

E

3

0300

0600

1800

2100

Midnight

2400

0900 1200 1500

Local Sun Time

FIGURE 41 FREQUENCY OF OBJECT SIGHTINGS BY LOCAL SUN TIME , INTERVALS OF ONE HOUR

A-7537

jr-^tr^t'^'^y,

Group 5 — Night sightings for which the sun was more than 10' 
below the horizon and which were not included in 
Group 4.

Group 6 — Sunrise sightings for which the sun was between 0° 
and 10° below the horizon.

Group 7 — Sunrise sightings for which the sun was between 0° 
and 10° above the horizon.

These group numbers were punched on the cards and incorporated 
into the coding system. The number of OBJECT SIGHTINGS in each group 
for each identification was then tabulated and is given in Table I.

TABLE I OBJECT SIGHTINGS

A:

tigle of Elevation G

roup

Identification

1

2

3 ,

4

5

6

7

Balloon

156

17

28

83

40

2

Astronomical

52

6

43

236

118

9

6

Aircraft

187

23

49

144

60

5

2

Light phenomena

8

2

4

25

7

Insufficient information

72

12

26

76

28

2

UNKNOWN

134

14

25

150

86

6

7

Other

64

8

12 *

50

36

3

7

Total

673

82

187

764

375

25

24

According to this table, a large majority of the KNOWN OBJECT 
SIGHTINGS in Group 1 {343 out of 467) were either aircraft or balloons. In 
Groups 4 and 5 combined, a large majority (681 out of 899) were either 
balloons, aircraft, or astronomical. Accordingly, a re-evaluation of the 
UNKNOWNS in these three groups was planned with the objective of deter- 
mining which of the UNKNOWNS in Group 1 might possibly be aircraft or 
balloons and which of the UNKNOWNS in Groups 4 and 5 might possibly be 
balloons, aircraft, or astronomical objects. More will be said of this 
project later.

Statistical Chi Square Test

In the meantime, mirror graphs had been constructed from the fre- 
quency tabulations which seemed to show that, when the KNOWNS (total less 
UNKNOWNS) and the UNKNOWNS were grouped according to one of six 
characteristics, the percentage of KNOWNS and the percentage of i.'3

60

^f^ft* i*?y^'; 1 -

K- ?

UNKNOWNS in each characteristic group showed the same general trend. 
In other words, on the basis of these graphs, it looked as though there was 
a good possibility that the UNKNOWNS were no different from the KNOWNS, 
at least in the aggregate.; It was decided to investigate this by the use of a 
statistical procedure called the "Chi Square Test".

The Chi Square Test is a statistical test of the likelihood that two 
distributions come from the same population, that is, it gives the proba- 
bility that there is no difference in the make-up of the two distributions 
being measured.

The method is outlined as follows:

( 1) Adjust the distributions by multiplying the KNOWNS in each 
characteristic group by the ratio of the total number of 
UNKNOWNS to the total number of KNOWNS. {The Chi 
Square Test is applicable only to distributions which have 
the same total number of elements.)

(2) Take the difference between the number of UNKNOWNS and

the adjusted number of KNOWNS in each characteristic 
jroup.

(3) Square the remainder from Step 2.

(4) Divide the result of Step 3 by the corresponding number of 
adjusted KNOWNS.

™

This is the chi square for the particular group. Summing the indi- 
vidual chi squares over the groups of a characteristic gives the chi square 
for that characteristic This number is then compared with a table of the 
distribution of chi square which can be found in many texts on elementary 
statistics.

It will be noted that chi square is tabulated in terms of degrees of 
freedom which in this case is one less than the number of groups of sight- 
ings for each characteristic.It will be noted that chi square is tabulated in terms of degrees of 
freedom which in this case is one less than the number of groups of sight- 
ings for each characteristic.

The tabulations of KNOWNS and UNKNOWNS against the six char- 
acteristics and the Chi Square Test as it was applied are shown in Tables 
II through VII. In each case, the number of degrees of freedom is given, 
as is the value of chi squares corresponding to probabilities of 5 per cent 
and 1 per cent that two distributions with this number of degrees of freedom 
come from the same population.- Since the greater the value of chi square 
the smaller the probability of homogeneity of two distributions, a calculated 
value of chi square greater than either the 5 per cent or 1 per cent values 
will indicate a probability less than 5 per cent or 1 per cent, respectively, 
that the two distributions are homogeneous* The term homogeneity is used " 
here to indicate that two distributions could have come from the same 
population.

'61

I'

i*-.

mmmm

mtmmm

TABLE II

CHI SQUARE TEST OF KNOWNS VERSUS 
UNKNOWNS ON THE BASIS OF COLOR

Degrees of freedom

8

5% 
1%

15. 5 
20. 1

62

£ 
%■

Color

White

Metallic

Not stated

Orange

Red

Yellow

Green

Blue

Other

Total

Number of

KNOWNS

Adjusted 
Number of 
KNOWNS (K)

Number of 
UNKNOWNS (n)

XZ '2 
K

405 x

100

112

1.44

313

77

76

0.01

209

51

62

2. 37

172

42

49

1. 17

146

36

33

0. 25

128

31

31

130

32

14

10. 13

67

17

26

4.76

195

48

31

6.02

1765

434

434

26. 15

m

-j£.(*_: ~~-

TABLE HI

CHI SQUARE TEST OF KNOWNS VERSUS 
UNKNOWNS ON THE BASIS OF NUMBER

Number of

Adjusted

X*

Objects Per

Number of

Number of

Number of

(K-n)2

Sighting

KNOWNS

KNOWNS (K)

UNKNOWNS (n)

K

1

1339

329

2

159

39

3-10

185

46

1 1 or more

41

10

Not stated

41

10

Total

1765

434

297

37

70

25

5

434

3. 11

0. 10

12. 52

22. 50

2. 50

40.73

#

Degrees of freedom

5% 
1%

9.5 
13. 3

63

a

TABLE IV185

46

1 1 or more

41

10

Not stated

41

10

Total

1765

434

297

37

70

25

5

434

3. 11

0. 10

12. 52

22. 50

2. 50

40.73

#

Degrees of freedom

5% 
1%

9.5 
13. 3

63

a

TABLE IV

CHI SQUARE TEST OF KNOWNS VERSUS 
UNKNOWNS ON THE BASIS OF SHAPE

Shape

Adjusted 
Number of Number of 
KNOWNS KNOWNS (K)

Number of 
UNKNOWNS (n)

K

Elliptical

838^

206

Rocket and aircraft

80

20

Meteor or comet

55

14

Teardrop, lenticular,

103

25

or conical

Flame

96

24

Other

193

47

Not stated

400

98

Total

1765

434

195' 
33 
4 
22

10

54

116

434

0.59 
8.45

7. 14 
0.36

8. 17 
1.04 
3.30

29.05

Degrees of freedom

5% 
1%

12.6 
16.8

64

i.

TABLE V

CHI SQUARE TEST OF KNOWNS VERSUS UNKNOWNS 
ON THE BASIS OF DURATION OF OBSERVATION

Adjusted

*\

Duration of

Number of

Number of

Number

oi

(K-n) 2

Observation

KNOWNS

KNOWNS (K)

UNKNOWNS

(n)

K

5 sec or less

259^

64

27

21.39

6-10 sec

92

23

21

0. 17

11-30 sec

153

38

33

0.66

31-60 sec

108

26

42

9.85

61 sec-5 min

269'

66

99

16. 50

6-30 min

305

75

71

0.21

Over 30 min

135

33

37 l

0.48

Not stated

444

109

104

0.23

Total

1765

434

434

49.49-

#

Degrees of freedom

5% 
1%

14. 1 
18. 5

65

/

V W * * WttyW"* ^ *^ "■?*-

TABLE VI

CHI SQUARE TEST OF KNOWNS VERSUS 
UNKNOWNS ON THE BASIS OF SPEED

S peed

Number of 
KNOWNS

Adjusted 
Number of 
KNOWNS (K)

Number of (K-n) 2

UNKNOWNS (n) K

Stationary

249

61

Less than 100 mph

154

38

100 to 400 mph.

181

45

Over 400 mph

403^

99

Meteor-like

83

20

Not stated

695

171

Total

1765

434

53 
26 
58

145 
16

136

434

1.05 
3.79 
3.76 
21:37 
0.80 
7. 16

37. 93

Degrees of freedom

5% 
1%

11. I 
15. 1

66

'.■•*•»««'■.-*»'•■■ )f -: : 3H^Sw

TABLE VII

CHI SQUARE TEST OF KNOWNS VERSUS UNKNOWNS 
ON THE BASIS OF LIGHT BRIGHTNESS

Light Brightness

Number of 
KNOWNS

Adjusted

Number of Number of

KNOWNS (K) UNKNOWNS (n)

x 2 ,

(K-

.n)'

K

0.

82

2.

19

0.

47

o.

55

1.

47

0.

35Light Brightness

Number of 
KNOWNS

Adjusted

Number of Number of

KNOWNS (K) UNKNOWNS (n)

x 2 ,

(K-

.n)'

K

0.

82

2.

19

0.

47

o.

55

1.

47

0.

35

Sunlight on mirror

47.

11

Sunlight on aluminum

151

37

Sunlight on plaster,

76

19

stone 3 or soil

Brighter than moon

273 -

67

Like moon or duller

68

17

than moon

■*

Not stated

1150

283

Total

1765

434

14 
28 
16

61 
22

293

434

5.85

#

Degrees of freedom

5% 
1%

11. 1 
15. 1

67

P-V*^*»r*!.t?'ii*^V ^*~- -

In five of the six cases, the probability is less than 1 per cent that 
the distributions are the same, In the sixth case, Light Brightness, the 
classifications are too nebulous to be of real value. However, these tests 
do not necessarily mean that the UNKNOWNS are primarily "flying saucers" 
and not aircraft, balloons, or other known objects or natural phenomena. 
The UNKNOWNS might still be unidentified KNOWNS if either of the follow- 
ing cases occurred:

(1) The characteristics which were observed for the UNKNOWNS 
were different from those observed for the KNOWNS because 
of the psychological make-up of the observer or because of 
atmospheric distortion. This assumes the distribution of 
objects in KNOWNS and UNKNOWNS is the same.

(2) The UNKNOWNS may be known objects in different propor- 
tions than the group identified as KNOWNS. (That is, a 
greater percentage of the UNKNOWNS could be aircraft 
than the percentage of aircraft in the identified KNOWNS.)

The second case is the more probable one. In this connection, it is 
interesting to note the factors which contributed to a large chi square 
result in the tests made above:

(1) Color

The major contribution to chi square in color is from the 
color green. There is a large excess of green sightings 
among the KNOW^NS over the UNKNOWNS. Of the 130 
known objects in this classification, 98 are astronomical, 
and are due mostly to the green fireballs reported from 
the Southwest U, S.

(2) Number(2) Number

The large chi square is due to a greater proportion of 
UNKNOWNS in the multiple object classification. Apparently 
these are harder to identify.

(3) Shape

In this case, there is a higher percentage of UNKNOWNS 
in the rocket-aircraft-shape classification. These might 
be familiar objects for which unusual maneuvers were 
reported. ■ .

There is a higher percentage of KNOWNS in the flame 
and in the meteor- or cornet-shape category, which in 
both cases appears to result mainly from excesses of 
astronomical sightings.

■ #l

68

^

£&.'.'-■

(4) Duration of observation

Here there is an excess of KNOWNS in the less-than- 
5- second group. Again, the majority of KNOWNS in 
this group are astronomical. The greater proportion 
of UNKNOWNS in the 31- to 60-second and 61-second 
to 5-minute groups cannot be explained.

(5) Speed

The major contribution to chi square for this char- 
acteristic is due to a large excess of UNKNOWNS in 
the over 400-mph class. It can be assumed that some 
of the excessive speeds are inaccuracies in estimates 
by observers. However, some radar sightings, which 
are practically impossible to identify, show objects 
with speeds of 1, 000 to 2, 000 mph and over, and these 
reports account for a nUmber of these UNKNOWNS.

(6) Light brightness ', .

Since this chi square was not significant, it is not 
necessary to discuss it here. y

■ Mi'

#(6) Light brightness ', .

Since this chi square was not significant, it is not 
necessary to discuss it here. y

■ Mi'

#

An examination of these\discrepancies thus brings up a very interest- 
ing point. In every case for which there is a significant excess of KNOWNS 
over UNKNOWNS, the excess can be attributed to an excess of identifiable 
astronomical phenomena. This would seem to lead to the conclusion that 
astronomical phenomena are easy to identify and there are very few left in 
the UNKNOWNS. Accordingly, the astronomical object sightings were 
deleted from the KNOWN object sightings and the Chi Square Test was again 
applied. The results are shown in Tables VIII through XIII, where in this 
case the KNOWNS do not contain astronomical sightings.

It will be noted that some groups were combined when the adjusted 
number of KNOWNS was ten or less, except for the case for which the 
number of objects per sighting was the characteristic studied. These were 
borderline cases, and no good combination of groups existed.

It is apparent that the deletion of astronomical sightings gives a better 
fit, although the decision is not clear cut, since for two cases (light bright- 
ness and speed), the chi square increased. However, it can again be pointed 
out that the reporting of these two characteristics is highly subjective and is 
open to question. The estimation of speed is especially open to question 
because of the impossibility of accurately determining it visually.

69

TABLE VIII

CHI SQUARE TEST OF REVISED KNOWNS VERSUS 
UNKNOWNS ON THE BASIS OF COLOR

Color

Number of 
KNOWNS

Adjusted 
Number of 
KNOWNS (K)

Number of

White

281

Metallic

298

Not stated

189

Orange

117

Red

92

Yellow

90

Green

32

Blue

29

Other

158

Total

1286

95 
101 
64 
39 
31 
30 
11 
10 
53

434

(K-n) ;

\TOWN

S(n)

K

112

3.04

76

6. 19

62

0.06

49

2. 56

33

0.13

31

0.03

14

0.82

26\ 
3l|

0.57

■si

434

13.40

Degrees of freedom

5% 
1%

14. 1

18. 5

70434

(K-n) ;

\TOWN

S(n)

K

112

3.04

76

6. 19

62

0.06

49

2. 56

33

0.13

31

0.03

14

0.82

26\ 
3l|

0.57

■si

434

13.40

Degrees of freedom

5% 
1%

14. 1

18. 5

70

■fcl 
M

i

TABLE IX

CHI SQUARE TEST OF REVISED KNOWNS VERSUS 
UNKNOWNS ON THE BASIS OF NUMBER

Number of 
Objects Per 
Sighting

Number of 
KNOWNS

Adjusted

Number of 
KNOWNS (K)

Number of 
UNKNOWNS (n)

X2,

K

1

913

308

2

142

48

3-10

168

57

11 or more

34

11

Not stated

29

10

Total

1286

434

297 
37 
70

25 
5

434

0.39 
2. 52 
2.96 
15.36 
2. 50

23. 73

•

Degrees of freedom

5% 
1%

9,5 
13.3

71

m

■• • "•WWhsl**^.!'* 1 up

TABLE X

CHI SQUARE TEST OF REVISED KNOWNS VERSUS 
UNKNOWNS ON THE BASIS OF SHAPE

Adjusted

x 2 ,

Number

of

Number of

Number of

(K-n) 2

Shape

KNOWNS

KNOWNS (K)

UNKNOWNS (n)

K

Elliptical

632

213

195

1. 52

Rocket or aircraft

72

24

33

3. 3.7

Meteor or comet

9

3

4 \

1.32

Flame

47

16

10.1.

Teardrop, lenticular,

79

27

22

0.93

or .conical

Other

151

51

54

1.76

Not stated

296

100

116

2. 56

Total

1286

434

434

11.46

Degrees of freedom

5% 
1%

11.1 
15. 1

72

m-

TABLE XI

CHI SQUARE TEST OF REVISED KNOWNS VERSUS UNKNOWNS 
ON THE BASIS OF DURATION OF OBSERVATION

Adjusted

x 2 ,

Duration of

Number

of

Number of

Number of

(K-n) 2

Observation

KNOWNS

KNOWNS (K)

UNKNOWNS (n)

K

5 sec or less

92

31

27

0. 52

6-10 sec

47

16

21

1. 56

11-30 sec

118

40

33

1. 23

31-60 sec

92

31

42

3.90

61 sec-5 min

252

85

99

2. 31

6 min-30 min

259

87

71

2.94

Over 30 min

91

31

37

1. 16

Not stated

335

113 .

104

0. 72

Total

1286

434

434

14.34

^w

Degrees of freedom

5% 
1%

14. 1

18. 5

r U

73

mm

w^mm^mmmmwm

TABLE XH

CHI SQUARE TEST OF REVISED KNOWNS VERSUS 
UNKNOWNS ON THE BASIS OF SPEED

Adjusted

X %

Number of

Number

of

Number of

(K-n) 2

Speed

KNOWNS

KNOWNS

(K)

UNKNOWNS (n)

K

Stationary-

196

66

53

2. 56

Less than 100 mph

128

43

26 !

6.72Adjusted

X %

Number of

Number

of

Number of

(K-n) 2

Speed

KNOWNS

KNOWNS

(K)

UNKNOWNS (n)

K

Stationary-

196

66

53

2. 56

Less than 100 mph

128

43

26 !

6.72

100 to 400 mph

156

53

58

0.47

Over 400 mph

291

98

145"!

28.54

Meteor-like

24

8

16}

Not stated

491

166

136

5.42

Total

1286

434

434

43.71

Degrees of freedom

5% 
1%

9.5 
13.3

fc.

74

i±_

.

Ka^*, , ^^ , ^g»**H***rw"t*^y;'?'w?^^

TABLE XIII

CHI SQUARE TEST OF REVISED KNOWNS VERSUS 
UNKNOWNS ON THE BASIS OF LIGHT BRIGHTNESS

I

h/i

#

Light Brightness

Number of 
KNOWNS

Adjusted

Number of Number of

KNOWNS (K) UNKNOWNS (n)

Sunlight on mirror 
Sunlight on aluminum 
Sunlight on plaster,

stone, or soil 
Brighter than moon 
Like moon or duller

than moon 
Not stated

Total

Degrees of freedom

24

8

136

46

63

21

143

48

42

15

878

296

1286

434

14 
28 
16

61 
22

293 
434

X 2 ,.

K

2.67 
1. 19

3. 52 
3.27

0.03 
10. 68

5% 
1%

9.5 
13.3

75

Another interesting aspect of these new tests is that there are only 
two large discrepancies in all of the groups. These are for the 11 or more 
groups in the classification by number of objects per sighting and for the 
over-400-mph and meteor-like group for the classification by speed. The 
first was relatively unchanged by deletion of the astronomical sightings 
principally because of the concentration of sightings in the single-object 
category. The second was slightly increased by the removal of the astro- 
nomical sightings from the meteor-like classification. However, the main 
discrepancy, that of the excess of UNKNOWNS in the over-400-mph class, 
was little changed.

The results of these tests are inconclusive since they neither confirm 
nor deny that the UNKNOWNS are primarily unidentified KNOWNS, although 
they do indicate that relatively few of the UNKNOWNS are actually astro- 
nomical phenomena.It was decided that this process would not be carried to its logical 
conclusion (that is, the determination of a linear combination of KNQWNS 
that would give a negligible chi square when compared with the UNKNOWNS), 
since it was felt that the inaccuracies in the reports would give a distorted 
and meaningless result.

The "Flying Saucer" Model

The importance of the problem dictated a second approach, should the 
statistical results prove inconclusive. It was decided that an attempt 
Would be made to describe the physical appearance, flight characteristics, 
and other attributes (that is, construct a model) of a class or classes of 
"flying saucers".

Preparatory to this attempt, a re-evaluation of the UNKNOWNS was 
necessary. This re-evaluation was accomplished by a panel composed only 
of persons previously associated "with the work. Using all the UNKNOWNS 
reports available at ATIC, the panel made a careful study of the reports for 
the UNKNOWN SIGHTINGS in angle-of-sun-elevation Groups 1, 2, 3, 6, and 
7 — those groups for which the sun was either above the horizon or less than 
10° in elevation below the horizon.

This study had two purposes. The first was to determine, with 
additional information such as the angle of elevation of the sun, how many . 
of the UNKNOWNS might be ascribed to known phenomena. The second was 
to obtain those UNKNOWNS which were described in sufficient detail that 
they might be used to construct a model or models of "flying saucers".

It was decided to put any of the UNKNOWNS which might be known 
phenomena into a "possible KNOWN" category to denote the slightly lower 
confidence level which could be ascribed to these new evaluations. The

76

Ik76

Ik

UNKNOWNS with sufficiently detailed description would be called "good 
UNKNOWNS", while the remainder would simply be called UNKNOWNS. 
One hundred sixty-four folders of a total of 186 OBJECT SIGHTINGS in 
Groups 1, 2, 3, 6, and 7 were examined, There were 18 possible aircraft, 
20 possible balloons, 7 good UNKNOWNS, 100 UNKNOWNS, and }19 others 
which were identified is being possible KNOWNS of various types. It is 
interesting to note that two of these ■were established as mock suns on the 
basis of the angle of sun elevation and the sun bearing angle, together with 
the direction of the object from the observer. In addition, the UNKNOWNS 
in angle-of~sun»elevation Groups 4 and 5 (nighttime sightings) were scanned 
with no attempt at identification, but to find any possible "good UNKNOWNS", 
There were five sightings that could be put into this category.

Of the UNKNOWNS, there were approximately 20 sightings that were 
observed in such a way that they should have been recognized easily if they 
had been familiar objects, that is, there was little possibility that their 
shapes, as seen, could have been distorted sufficiently by one cause or 
another to render them unrecognizable. There were a very few that would 
have been identified as guided missiles or rockets, but that were not so 
identified because of the geographical location in which they were seen.

All of the remaining UNKNOWNS were classified as such solely be- 
cause they were reported to have performed maneuvers that could not be 
ascribed to any known objects. In these cases, the shape might have been 
unrecognizable also, but it was felt that this was because of distortion and 
distance, or' because of darkness.

##

This is a very important point. To put it differently, if these 
UNKNOWNS, which represent all but about 40 of the UNKNOWN SIGHTINGS, 
were reported to have performed maneuvers which could be ascribed to 
known phenomena, they -would probably have been identified as KNOWNS. 
With the exception of some radar sightings, all of these maneuvers were 
observed visually. The possibilities for inaccuracies are great because 
of the inability of an observer to estimate visually size, distance, and 
speed.

: Si'-'v

Reports of sightings by radar usually were of high-speed objects, 
some at extremely high altitudes. Some were identified as UNKNOWNS 
because there was no object to be seen visually at the point indicated by the 
radar set. It cannot be said wrtti any assurance what these radar sightings 
mean, but the most logical explanation is that they are ground targets re- 
flected by an atmospheric temperature inversion layer. The validity of this 
statement cannot be established. It is felt that radar sightings in this study 
are of no significance whatsoever unless a visual sighting of the object also 
is made.

Taken in conjunction with the Chi Square Tests discussed earlier, 
the results of the re-evaluation of reports identified as UNKNOWN 
SIGHTINGS would seem to indicate that the majority of them could easily

77

have been familiar objects. However, the resolution of this question with 
any degree of certainty appears to be impossible.

Thus, out of the 434 OBJECT SIGHTINGS that were identified as, , 
UNKNOWNS by the data reduction process, there were only 12 that were 
described with, sufficient detail that they could be used in an attempt to 
derive a model of a ''flying saucer". The following is a summary of the 12 
good UNKNOWN SIGHTINGS:

Case I (Serial 0573.00)Case I (Serial 0573.00)

Two men employed by a rug-cleaning firm were driving across a 
bridge at 0955 hours on July 29, 1948, when they saw an object glide across 
the road a few hundred feet in front of them. It was shiny and metallic in 
construction, about 6 to 8 feet long and 2 feet wide. It was in a flat glide 
path at an altitude of about 30 feet and in a moderate turn to the left. It was 
seen for only a few seconds and apparently went down in a wooded area, 
although no trace of it was found.

I-I/2' x2'

-These are round cups which protrude

Case II (Serial 4508.00)

A naval aviation student, his wife, and several others were at a 
drive-in movie from 2115 to 2240 hours on April 20, 1952, during which 
time they saw several groups of objects fly over. There were from two to 
nine objects in a group and there were about 20 groups. The groups of

78

objects flew in a straight line except for some changes in direction 
accomplished in a manner like any standard aircraft turn.

The objects were shaped like conventional aircraft. The unaccount- 
able feature of the objects was that each had a red glow surrounding it and 
was glowing itself, although it was a cloudless night.

Light glow

§

Case HI (Serial 2013.00, 2014.00, and 2014.01)Light glow

§

Case HI (Serial 2013.00, 2014.00, and 2014.01)

Two tower operators sighted a light over a city airport at 2020 hours 
on January 20, 1951, Since a commercial plane was taking off at this 
time, the pilots were asked to investigate this light. They observed it at 
2026 hours. According to them, it flew abreast of them at a greater 
radius as they made their climbing turn, during which time it blinked some 
<— tights which looked like running lights. While the observing plane was still 
in its climbing turn, the object made a turn toward the plane and flew across 
its nose. As the two men turned their heads to watch it, it instantly 
appeared on their other side flying in the same direction as they were 
flying, and then in 2 or 3 seconds it slipped under them, and they did not 
see it again. Total time of the observation was not stated. In appearance, 
it was like an airplane with a cigar-shaped body and straight wings, some- 
what larger than a B-29. No engine nacelles were observed on the wings.

79

■-a

w

;y r t ^Jt^i^ptoj'^!^;^..;,-,

\

Case IV (Serial 4599.00)

A part-time farmer and a hired hand were curing tobacco at midnight 
on Jul y 1 9; 1952, whe n they looked up and saw two cigar-shaped objects.

One hovered while the other moved to the east and came back, at which

- .■ i. - ■

time both ascended until out of sight. Duration of observation was 3 to 4 
minutes. Both had an exhaust at one end, and neither had projections of any 
kind. It was stated that they appeared to be transparent and illuminated 
from the inside.

'i

Exhaust

:S&

80

^>

Case V (Serial 0565. 00 to 0565. 03)'i

Exhaust

:S&

80

^>

Case V (Serial 0565. 00 to 0565. 03)

i 
A pilot and copilot were flying a DC-3 at 0340 hours on July 24, 1948, 
when they saw an object coming toward them. It passed to the right and 
slightly above them, at which time it went into a ste^p climb and w?s lost 
from sight in some clouds. Duration of the observation was about 10 
seqonds. One passenger was able to catch a flash of light as the object 
passed. The object seemed powered by rocket or jet motors shooting a 
trail of fire some 50 feet to the rear of the object. The object had no wings 
or other protrusion and had two rows of lighted windows.

t,;.s

#

Cockpit 
windshield?.

Pilot

: M

w

km

Nf

Windows with 
white light

#«mneft»HKW

Black

Copilot

81

^mm

mm

^m^mm

|BBI ^ fl J | j || l^^/ii | W ffl^»n«i*gt»^^

i

s

I

Case VI (Serial 4822. 00)

An instrument technician, while driving from a large city toward an 
Air Force base on December. 22, 1952, saw an object from his car at 1930 
hours. He stopped his car to watch it. It suddenly moved up toward the 
zenith in spurts from right to left at an angle of about 45°. It then moved 
off in level flight at a high rate of speed, during which maneuver it appeared 
white most of the time, but apparently rolled three times showing a red 
side. About halfway through its roll it showed no light at all. It finally 
assumed a position to the south of the planet Jupiter at a high altitude, at 
which position it darted back and forth, left and right alternately. Total 
time of the observation was 15 minutes. Apparently, the observer just 
stopped watching the object.

I

I

No light

Deep red

82

v>

j_

Case VU (Serial 2728. 00)

I

fc;f 'I

I

No light

Deep red

82

v>

j_

Case VU (Serial 2728. 00)

I

fc;f '

A Flight Sergeant saw an object over an Air Force base in Korea at 
0842 hours on June 6, 1952, The object flew in a series of spinning and 
tumbling actions. It was on an erratic course, first flying level, then 
stopping momentarily, shooting straight up, flying level and again tumbling, 
then changing course and disappearing into the sun. It reappeared and was 
seen flying back and forth across the sun. At one time an F-86 passed 
between the observer and the object. He pointed it out to another man who 
saw it as it maneuvered near the sun.

^P'

^9

Black lines evenly spaced

Proportion 7 to 1

(Dimensions are as 
shown in observer's 
original drawing)

83

mmmmmmm

mm

|^WW^^^^5^^»??I^ffWT^^!P^^^5*

S^Wn^flW****^^?.'-^^''"

Case VIII (Serial 0576.00)

An electrician was standing by the bathroom window of his home, 
facing west, at 0825 hours on July 31, t 1948, when he first sighted an object. 
He ran to his kitchen where he pointed out the object to his wife. Total 
time in sight was approximately 10 seconds, during which the object flew 
on a straight and level course from horizon to horizon, west to east.

I

Noted shadow

20'

(Ratio approx. 3:1)

84

w r -

Case IX (Serial 0066.00)I

Noted shadow

20'

(Ratio approx. 3:1)

84

w r -

Case IX (Serial 0066.00)

A farmer and his two sons, aged 8 and 10, were at his fishing camp 
on August 13, 1947. At about 1300 hours, he went to look for the boys, 
having sent them to the river for some tape from his boat. He noticed an 
object some 300 feet away, 75 feet above the ground. He saw it against 
the background of the canyon wall which was 400 feet high at this point. It 
was hedge hopping, following the contour of the ground, was sky blue, 
about 20 feet in diameter and 10 feet thick, and had pods on the side from 
which flames were shooting out. It made a swishing sound. The observer 
stated that the trees were highly agitated by the craft as it passed over. 
His two sons also observed the object. No one saw the object for more 
than a few seconds.

Side

view

•

m

End view

85

wmmm

Case X (Serial 1119. 00)

An employee in the supersonic Laboratory of an aeronautical lab- 
oratory and some other employees of this lab, were by a river, 2-l/2 
miles from its mouth, when they saw an object. The time was about 1700 
hours on May 24, 1949. The object was reflecting sunlight when observed 
by naked eye. However, he then looked at it with 8-power binoculars, at 
which time there was no glare. (Did glasses have filter?) It was of 
metallic construction and was seen with good enough resolution to show 
that the skin was dirty. It moved off in horizontal flight at a gradually in- 
creasing rate of speed, until it seemed to approach the speed of a jet 
before it disappeared. No propulsion was apparent. Time of observation 
was 2- 1/2 to 3 minutes.

^Something equivalent 
to a patch

Smoother in 
front

Direction 
of motion

Rough and wrinkled 
in rear

'Surface appeared dirty 
and spotty in color

86

Case XI (Serial 1550.00)

Ei^Something equivalent 
to a patch

Smoother in 
front

Direction 
of motion

Rough and wrinkled 
in rear

'Surface appeared dirty 
and spotty in color

86

Case XI (Serial 1550.00)

Ei

On March 20, 1950, a Reserve Air Force Captain and an airlines 
Captain were flying a commercial airlines flight. At 21:26, the airline 
Captain directed the attention of the Reserve Air Force Captain to an object 
which apparently was flying at high speed, approaching the airliner from 
the south on a north heading. The Reserve Air Force Captain focused his 
attention on the object. Both crew members watched it as it passed in front 
of them and went out of sight to the right. The observation, which lasted 
about 25 to 35 seconds, occurred about 15 miles north of a medium-sized 
city. When the object passed in front of the airliner, it was not more than 
l/2 mile distant and at an altitude of about 1000 feet higher than the airliner.The object appeared to be circular, with a diameter of approximately 
100 feet and with a vertical height considerably less than the diameter, 
giving the object a disc-like shape. In the top center was a light which was 
blinking at an estimated 3 flashes per second. This light was so brilliant 
that it would have been impossible to look at it continuously had it not been 
blinking. This light could be seen only when the object was approaching 
and after it had passed the airliner. When the object passed in front of the 
observers, the bottom side was visible. The bottom side appeared to have 
9 to 12 symmetrical oval or circular portholes located in a circle approxi- 
mately 3/4 of the distance from the center to the outer edge. Through these 
portholes carne a soft purple light about the shade of aircraft fluorescent 
lights. The object was traveling in a straight line without spinning. Con- 
sidering the visibility, the length of time the object was in sight, and the 
distance from the object, the Reserve Air Force Captain estimates the 
speed to be in excess of 1000 mph.

#

87

' '■ .-■ • . ■ .-." £.■■.-.', ■rwJfrL.-;:.«,

muni

t^ftj-:*^',' L-ivt . m »;■■!• V. .

Flashing light

Portholes*

88

K>

P*

r" ..&

i;

I

R~

Case XII (Serial 3601.00)

R-

1

| , At 0535 on the morning of August 25, 1952, a musician for a radio

station was driving to work from" his home when he noticed an object 
, |j hovering about 10 feet above a field near the road along which he wasstation was driving to work from" his home when he noticed an object 
, |j hovering about 10 feet above a field near the road along which he was

driving. As he came abreast of the object, he stopped his car and got out 
to watch. Having an artificial leg, he could not leave the road, since the 
surrounding terrain was rough. However, he was within about 100 yards 
of it at the point he was standing on the road. The object was not absolutely 
still, but seemed to rock slightly as it hovered. When he turned off the 
motor of his car, he could hear a deep throbbing sound coming from the 
object. As he got out of the car, the object began a vertical ascent with a 
sound similar to "a large covey of quail starting to fly at one time". The 
object ascended vertically through broken clouds until out of sight. His 
view was not obscured by clouds. The observer states that the vegetation 
was blown about by the object when it was near the ground.

Description of the object is as follows:

It was about 75 feet long, 45 feet wide, and 15 feet thick, shaped like 
two oval meat platters placed together. It was a dull aluminum color, and 
had a smooth surface. A medium-blue, continuous light shone through the 
one window in the front. section. The head and shoulders of one man, sitting 
motionless, facing the forward edge of the object, were visible. In the 
||| midsection of the object were several windows extending from the top to the

rear edge of the object; the midsection of the ship had a blue light which 
gradually changed to different shades. There was a large amount of activity 
and movement in the midsection that could not be identified as either human 
or mechanical, although it did not have a regular pattern of movement. 
There were no windows, doors or portholes, vents, seams, etc., visible 
to the observer in the rear section of the object or under the object (viewed 
Jfe at time of ascent). Another identifiable feature was a series of propellers6 to 12 inches in diameter spaced closely together along the outer edge of 
the object. These propellers were mounted on a bracket so that they 
revolved in a horizontal plane along the edge of the object. The propellers 
were revolving at a high rate of speed.

Investigation of the area soon afterward showed some evidence of 
vegetation being blown around. An examination of grass and soil samples 
taken indicated nothing unusual. Reliability of the observer was considered 
good. ,

89

20* to 25» 
height

Approximately 
75' long

K

£

P

!

90

4

i

These 12 sightings can be classed into four categories on the basis of 
their shapes, as follows:

(1) Propeller shape - Case 1

(2) Aircraft shape — Cases II and III

(3) Cigar shape — Cases IV and V

(4) Elliptical or disc shape — Cases VI to XII

The criterion for choosing the above sightings was that their descrip-^ 
tions were given in enough detail to permit diagrams of the objects to be 
drawn. It might be noted here that in all but one of these cases (Case XI) 
the observer had already drawn a diagram of what he had seen.

The objective of this section of the study was the conceiving of a 
model, or models. The requirement that the description be detailed is an 
important one, and was the easiest to determine in the re-evaluation pro- 
gram. However, a good model ought to satisfy the following conditions as 
well:

V

m

(1) The general shape of the object and the maneuvers it 
performed should fit the reports of many of the UNKNOWNS

and thus explain them.

i

(2) The observer and the report should be reliable.

(3) The report should contain elements which should have 
been observed with accuracy, and which eliminate the 
possibility that the sighting could be ascribed to a 
familiar object or to a known natural phenomenon.

(4) The model should be derived from two or more good 
UNKNOWNS between which there is no essential conflict.(4) The model should be derived from two or more good 
UNKNOWNS between which there is no essential conflict.

It canj ae shown th at. .it-Is ...not possible to deduce a model from the 1.2. 
cases that will satisfy all of these conditions. The following case-by-case 
discussion of the 12 good UNKNOWNS will illustrate this point:

(1) Case I does not satisfy Conditions 1 and 4. The reported 
shape of this object is not duplicated in any of the other 
UNKNOWNS.

(2) Case II does not satisfy Conditions 1 and 3. There are 
very few UNKNOWNS in the aircraft shape classification. 
In addition, the unusual characteristic of this sighting

(i. e. , the red glow) could have been reflection of the 
lights of Flint from the objects if they were either birds 
or aircraft.

91

tV : -

(3) Case III does not satisfy Condition 1. It also does not 
satisfy Condition 4 when Case II is eliminated as a 
good UNKNOWN.

(4) Case IV does not satisfy Conditions 1 or 2. There are 
few cigar-shaped or rocket- shaped objects reported in 
the literature. In addition, this observer is not con- 
sidered to be well-qualified technically.

(5) Case V does not satisfy Condition 1. It also does not 
satisfy Condition 4 when Case IV is eliminated as a 
good UNKNOWN.

It might be argued here that many of the UNKNOWNS might actually 
have shapes similar to these good UNKNOWNS, It will be noted, however, 
that each of these five cases does not satisfy one of the other three condi- 
tions.(6) Case VI does not satisfy Condition 2. In the description 
of the object, it was stated that at certain times there 
was no light seen from the object. Apparently, the 
"band of no light", as diagrammed by the observer, was 
an attempt to explain this. However, if the object were 
constructed as shown in the diagram, light should have 
been seen at all times. Because of this conflict the 
drawing is not considered reliable, and without the draw- 
ing, there is not enough detail in the description to make 
it useful for this study.

(7) Case VII violates Conditions 1 and 4. Although the shape 
is disc-like, the maneuvers performed by the object are 
unique both among the UNKNOWNS and among the good 
UNKNOWNS.

Cases VIII to XII satisfy Conditions 1 through 3, but they do not 
satisfy Condition 4. The features which make them different from each 
other are as follows:

(8) Case VIII. The object is smooth, with no protrusions 
or other details.

(9) Case IX. The object had rocket or jet pods on each 
side that were shooting out flames.

f

(10) Case X. The object had a fin or rudder.

(11) Case XI. The object had a series of portholes, or 
windows, on its under side.

92

■«,,,,,. «.*.. ,,,

I ■-)

(12) Case XII. The object had windows in its top and front 
and its top midsection. It also had a set of propellers 
around its waist.

It is not possible, therefore, to derive a verified model of a "flying 
saucer" from the data that have been gathered to date. This point is im- 
portant enough to emphasize. Out of about 4, 000 people who said they saw 
a "flying saucer", sufficiently detailed descriptions were given in only 12 
cases. Having culled the cream of the crop, it is still impossible to develop 
a picture of what a "flying saucer" is.

In addition to this study of the good UNKNOWNS, an attempt was made 
to find groups of UNKNOWNS for which the observed characteristics were 
the same. No such groups were found.In addition to this study of the good UNKNOWNS, an attempt was made 
to find groups of UNKNOWNS for which the observed characteristics were 
the same. No such groups were found.

On the basis of this evidence, therefore, there is a low probability 
that any of the UNKNOWNS represent observations of a class of "flying 
saucers". It may be that some reports represent observations of not one 
but several classes of objects that might have been "flying saucers"; 
however, the lack of evidence to confirm even one class would seem to make 
| this possibility remote. It is pointed out that some of the cases of KNOWNS,

before identification, appeared fully as bizarre as any of the 12 cases of 
good UNKNOWNS, and, in fact, would have been placed in the class of good 
UNKNOWNS had it not been possible to establish their identity.

<jt

#

This is, of course, contrary to the bulk of the publicity that has been 
given to this problem.- The reason for the nature of this publicity was

/■J clearly brought out during the re-evaluation study. It i s a definite. fact th at

:-f! upon reading a^Xeyi.rjejiDXJts^,_Jiie_rj£aiie^

| .saucers" are real and are some form of sinister contrivance. This reaction

is independent of the training of the reader or of his attitude toward the 
problem prior to the initial contact. It is unfortunate that practically all of 
the articles, books, and news stories dealing with the phenomenon of the 
"flying saucer" were written by men who were in this category, that is, 
men who had read only a few selected reports. This is accentuated by the 
fact that, as a rule, only the more lu r id - s o un dj.n g reports are cited in these 
publications. Were it not for this common psychological tendency to be 
captivated by the mysterious, it is possible that no problem of this nature 
would exist.The reaction, mentioned above, that after reading a few reports., the 
reader is convinced that "flying saucers" are real and are some form of 
sinister contrivance, is very misleading. As more and more of the reports 
are read, the feeling that "saucers" are r-e-al fades, and is replaced by a 
feeling of skepticism regarding their existence. The reader eventually 
reaches a point of saturation, after which the reports contain no new infor- 
mation at all and are no longer of any interest. This feeling of surfeit was 
universal among the personnel who worked on this project, and continually 
necessitated a conscious effort on their part to remain objective.

93

&k

CONCLUSIONS

It can never be absolutely proven that "flying saucers" do not exist. 
This would be true if the data obtained were to include complete scientific 
measurements of the attributes of each sighting, as well as complete and 
detailed descriptions of the objects sighted. It might be possible to demon- 
strate the existence of "flying saucers" with data of this type, IF they were 
to exist.

i

Although the reports considered in this study usually did not contain 
scientific measurements of the attributes of each sighting, it was possible 
to establish certain valid conclusions by the application of statistical 
methods in the treatment of the data. Scientifically evaluated^nd ^arranged, 
the data as ajwhoje did .not show any marked patterns or trends. The in- 
accuracies inherent in this type of data, in addition to the incompleteness of 
a large proportion, of the reports, may have obscured any patterns or trends 
that otherwise would have been evident. This absence of indicative relation- 
ships necessitated an exhaustive study of selected facets of the data in order 
to draw any valid conclusions.A critical examination of the distributions of the important char- 
acteristics of sightings, plus an intensive study of the sightings evaluated 
as UNKNOWN, led to the conclusion that a combination of factors, prin- 
cipally the reported maneuvers of the objects and the unavailability of 
supplemental data such as aircraft flight plans or balloon-launching records, 
resulted in the failure to identify as KNOJ^NS most of the reports of objects 
classified as UNKNOWNS.

An intensive study, aimed at finding a verified example of a "flying 
saucer" or at deriving a verified model or models of "flying saucers" (as 
defined on Page 1), led to the conclusion that neither goal could be attained 
using the present data.

It is emphasized that there was a complete lack of any valid evidence 
consisting of physical matter in any case of a reported unidentified aerial 
object.

Thus, the probability that any of the UNKNOWNS considered in this 
study are "flying saucers" is concluded to be extremely small, since the 
most complete and reliable reports from the present data, when isolated 
and studied, conclusively failed to reveal even a rough model, and since 
the data as a whole failed to reveal any marked patterns or trends.

Therefore, on the basis of this evaluation of the information, it is 
considered to be highly improbable that any of the reports of unidentified 
aerial objects examined in this study represent observations of technologi- 
cal developments outside the range of present-day scientific knowledge.

94

$

APPENDIX A

y

TABULATIONS OF FREQUENCY AND PERCENTAGE 
DISTRIBUTIONS BY CHARACTERISTICS

#

95 and 96

■^^ftj^!*^!^to(^

1

j

^^^^

INDEX OF TABLES

Table Al. Evaluation of All Sightings by Years 107

Table A2. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Years . . i 107

Table A3. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Yeirs . ■ ' 108

Table A4. Evaluation of All Sightings by Month of Year, All Years 109

iTable A2. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Years . . i 107

Table A3. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Yeirs . ■ ' 108

Table A4. Evaluation of All Sightings by Month of Year, All Years 109

i

Table A5. Evaluation of All Sightings by Month of Year, 1947 110

Table A6. Evaluation of All Sightings by Month of Year, 1948 Ill

Table A7. Evaluation of All Sightings by Month of Year, 1949 \ . . . H2

Table A8. Evaluation of All Sightings by Month of Year, 1950 113

Table A9. Evaluation of All Sightings by Month of Year, 1951 114

Table A10. Evaluation of All Sightings by Month of Year, 1952 115

Table All. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Month of Year, All Years 116

Table A1Z. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Month of Year, 1947 117

Table A 13. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Month of Year, 1948 118

Table A 14. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Month of Year, 1949 '. 119

Table A15. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Month of Year, 1950 120

Table Al6. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Month of Year, 1951 121

Table A17. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Month of Year, 1952 . . . . 122

Table A18. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Month of Year, All Years . 123

Table A19. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Month of Year, 1947 1Z4

Table A20. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Month of Year, 1948 .....,.' 125

Table A21. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Mouth of Year, 1949 126

Table A22. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Month of Year, 1950 127

Table A23. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Month of Year, 1951 128

Table A24. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Month of Year, 1952 129

Table A25. Evaluation of All Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, All Years 130

Table A26. Evaluation of All Sightings by Sighting Reliability Croups, 1947 130

Table A27. Evaluation of All Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1948 130

Table A 28. Evaluation of All Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1949 130Table A27. Evaluation of All Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1948 130

Table A 28. Evaluation of All Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1949 130

Table A29. Evaluation of All Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1950 131

Table A30. Evaluation of All Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1951 . '. 131

Table A31. Evaluation of All Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1952 131

Table A32. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, All Years 132

Table A33. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1947. 132

97

INDEX OF TABLES 
(Continued)

Pa K e

Table A 34. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1948 132

Table A36. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1949 . 132

Table A36. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1950. 133

Table A37. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1951 133

Table A38. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1952 133

Table A39. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, All Years 134"

Table A40. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1947 134

Table A4i. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1948 134

Table A42. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1949 134

Table A43. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1950 . 135

Table A44. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1951 135

Table A45. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Sighting Reliability Groups, 1952 . , 135

Table A46. Evaluation of All' Sightings for AH Years by Sighting Reliability Groups,

Military Observers 136

Table A47. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Sighting Reliability Groups,

Civilian Observers 136

Table A48. Evaluation of All Sightings for 1947 by Sighting Reliability Groups,

Military Observers .... . .. ........ . . .. . .' 136Civilian Observers 136

Table A48. Evaluation of All Sightings for 1947 by Sighting Reliability Groups,

Military Observers .... . .. ........ . . .. . .' 136

Table A49. Evaluation of All Sightings for 1947 by Sighting Reliability Groups,

Civilian Observers . . - . . . . . 136

Table A50. Evaluation of All Sightings for 1948 by Sighting Reliability Groups,

Military Observers . 137

Table A51. Evaluation of All Sightings for 1948 by Sighting Reliability Groups,

Civilian Observers 137

Table A52. Evaluation of All Sightings for 1949 by Sighting Reliability Groups,

Military Observers 137

Table A53. Evaluation of All Sightings for 1949 by Sighting Reliability Groups,

Civilian Observers , 137

Table A 54. Evaluation of All Sightings for 1950 by Sighting Reliability Groups,

Military Observers 138

Table A55. Evaluation of All Sightings for 1950 by Sighting Reliability Groups,

Civilian Observers 138

Table A56. Evaluation of All Sightings for 1951 by Sighting Reliability Groups,

Military Observers 138

Table A57. Evaluation of All Sightings for 1951 by Sighting Reliability Groups,

Civilian Observers 138

Table ASS. Evaluation of All Sightings for 1952 by Sighting Reliability Groups,

Military Observers 139

i

98

:W^

t

V.

^4. 
IF 7

#

INDEX OF TABLES 
(Continued)

Page

Table A59. Evaluation of All Sightings for 1952 by Sighting Reliability Groups,

Civilian Observers , 139

Table A60. Reported Colors of Objects Sighted by Y ears, AU Sightings s HO

Table A61. Reported Colors of Objects Sighted by Years, Unit Sightings HO

Table A62. Reported Colors of Objects Sighted by Years, Object Sightings HO

Table A63. Evaluation of AU Sightings for AU Years by Colors Reported 141

Table A64. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for AU Years by Colors Reported H2

Table A65. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported H3

Table A66. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting,

One Object H4Table A65. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported H3

Table A66. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting,

One Object H4

Table A67. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting,

Two Objects ..,.,.; H4

Table A6S. Evaluation of AU Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting,

Three to Ten Objects . , H5

Table A69. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting,

Eleven or More Objects •.....- HS

Table A70. Evaluation of AU Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting,

Number of Objects Not Stated . . . 146

Table A71. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for AU Years by Number of Objects per Sighting,

One Object 147

Table A72. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting,

Two Objects . 147

Table A73. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting,

Three to Ten Objects 148

Table A74. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting,

Eleven or More Objects .....'..... 148

Table A75. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting,

Number of Objects Not Stated ... 149

Table A76. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting,

One Object . 150

Table A77. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting,

Two Objects . 150

Table A78. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting,

Three to Ten Objects 151

Table A79. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting,

Eleven or More Objects : . . . . . 151

Table A80. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting,

Number of Objects Not Stated . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152

Table A81. Evaluation of AU Sightings by Duration of Sighting, All Years 153Number of Objects Not Stated . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152

Table A81. Evaluation of AU Sightings by Duration of Sighting, All Years 153

Table A82, Evaluation of AU Sightings by Duration of Sighting, 1947 I53

99

u^mmmm.

vmmmnmww-m ' -

INDEX OF TABLES 
(Continued)

Table A83. Evaluation of All Sightings by Duration of Sighting, 1948

Table A84. Evaluation of All Sightings by Duration of Sighting, 1949

Table A85. Evaluation of All Sightings by Duration of Sighting, 1950

Table A 86. Evaluation of All Sightings by Duration of Sighting, 1951'

Table A87. Evaluation of All Sightings by Duration of Sighting, 1952

Table ASS, Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Duration of Sighting, All Years ....

Table A89. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Duration of Sighting, 1947

Table A90. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Duration of Sighting, 1948

Table A9l. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Duration of Sighting, 1949

Table A92. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Duration of Sighting, 1950

Table A93. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Duration of Sighting, 1951 ,

Table A94. Evaluation of Unit Sightings by Duration of Sighting, 1952

Table A95. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Duration of Sighting, All Years ....

Table A96. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Duration of Sighting, 1947

Table A9 7. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Duration of Sighting, 1948 .

Table A 98. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Duration of Sighting, 1949 .. . . .

Table A99. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Duration of Sighting, 1950 . . .

Table A100. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Duration of Sightings, 1951. . . . .

Table A101. Evaluation of Object Sightings by Duration of Sighting, 1952 L

Table A102. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months 
of Year, Five Seconds or Less

Table A103. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years/by Duration of Sighting for Months 
of Year, Six to Ten Seconds . ,Table A103. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years/by Duration of Sighting for Months 
of Year, Six to Ten Seconds . ,

Table A 104. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months 
of Year, Eleven to Thirty Seconds

Table A105. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months 
of Year, Thirty One to Sixty Seconds .

Table A 106. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months 
of Year,- Sixty One Seconds to Five Minutes

Table A107. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months 
of Year, Six to Thirty Minutes •

Table A108. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months 
of Year, Over Thirty Minutes

Table A 109. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months 
of Year, Duration Not Stated ..'

154

154 
155 
155 
156

157;

157 
158 
158 
159 
159 
160 
161 
161 
162 
162 
163 
163 
164

165

166

167'

168

169

170

171

172

100

; ll

^t^e^BtttftL^CrSvi^Fft" :"._ ■

INDEX OF TABLES

{ Continued)

Page

l;j

; ■ 
I

I:

^W

Table AUO. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months

of Year, Five Seconds or Less ■ , , 173

Table Alll. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months

of Year, Six to Ten Seconds 174

Table A 112. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months

of Year, Eleven to Thirty Seconds 175

Table A113. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months

of Year, Thirty One to Sixty Second 176

Table Al 14. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months ;

of Year, Sixty 'One Seconds to Five Minutes . . .;*,'. . , 177

Table A115. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months

of Year, Six to Thirty Minutes 178of Year, Sixty 'One Seconds to Five Minutes . . .;*,'. . , 177

Table A115. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months

of Year, Six to Thirty Minutes 178

Table A 116. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months

of Year, Over Thirty Minutes 179

Table A 117. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months

of Year, Duration Not Stated . 180

Table A 118. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months

of Year, Five Seconds or Less ......' 181

Table A119. Evaluation, of Object Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months

of Year, Six to Ten Seconds ; 182

Table A120, Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months

of Year, Eleven to Thirty Seconds ..'...... 183

Table A121. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months

of Year, Thirty One to Sixty Seconds 184

Table A122, Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months

of Year, Sixty One Seconds to Five Minutes ■. 185

Table A123. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months

of Year, Six to Thirty Minutes . ■ 186

Table A 124. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months

of Year, Over Thirty Minutes 187

Table. A125. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Duration of Sighting for Months

of Year, Duration Not Stated 188

Table A 126. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Elliptical 189

Table A 127. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Rocket and Aircraft ...... 189

Table A 128. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Meteor or Comet ....... 190

Table A129. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Lenticular, Conical,

or Teardrop 190Table A129. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Lenticular, Conical,

or Teardrop 190

Table A 130. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Flame ........... 191

Table A131. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Other Shapes 191

Table A132. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Shape. of Object, Shape Not Stated ........ 192

101

i

m:

INDEX OF TABLES 
(Continued)

Page

Table A 133. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Elliptical 193

Table A134. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Rocket and Aircraft 193

Table A135, Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Meteor or Comet 194

Table A 136. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Lenticular,

Conical, or Teardrop 194

Table A137. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Flame , 195

Table A 138. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Other Shapes 195

TaKlte A 1 : 39. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Shape Not Stated 196

Table A 140. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Shape, of Object, Elliptical 197

Table A141. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Rocket and Aircraft 197

Table A 142. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Meteor or Comet 198

Table A 143. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Lenticular,

Conical, or Teardrop 198

Table A 144. Evaluation of Object Sigbtings for All Years by Shape of Object, Flame 199

Table A145. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Other Shapes . . . . . . . . 199

Table A146. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Shape Not Stated 200

Table A147. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Reported Speeds of Objects, Stationary 201Table A146. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Shape of Object, Shape Not Stated 200

Table A147. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Reported Speeds of Objects, Stationary 201

Table A148. Evaluation of All Sightings for Ail Years by Reported Speeds of Objects, Less

Than One Hundred Miles per Hour ..:.,.. 201

Table A149. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Reported Speeds of Objects, One

Hundred to Four Hundred Miles per Hour 202

Table A150. Evaluation of AH Sightings for AH Years by Reported Speeds of Objects, Over

Four Hundred Miles per Hour 202

Table Al 51. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Reported Speeds of Objects,

Meteor-Like Speeds 203

Table A152. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Reported Speeds of Objects,

Speed Not Stated 203

Table A 153, Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Reported Speeds of Objects, Stationary . ." ... 204

Table A154. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Reported Speeds of Objects, Less. Than

One Hundred Miles per Hour ' 204

Table A155. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Reported Speeds of Objects, One Hundred

to Four Hundred Miles per Hour 205

Table A!56. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Reported Speeds of Objects, Over

Four Hundred Miles per Hour 205

Table A 157. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Reported Speeds of Objects,

Meteor-Like Speeds . ........ ..... . ... 206

Table A 1 58. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Reported Speeds of Objects,

Speed Not Stated 20b

102

laa^^vj

INDEX OF TABLES

(Continued) ,

Pa S e 
Table A159. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Reported Speeds of Objects, Stationary 207

Table A160. Evaluation of Object Sightings for AH Years by Reported Speeds of Objects, Less

Than One Hundred Miles per Hour 207

Table A161. Elevation of Object Sightings for All Years by Reported Speeds of Objects, One

Hundred to Four Hundred Miles per Hour 208Than One Hundred Miles per Hour 207

Table A161. Elevation of Object Sightings for All Years by Reported Speeds of Objects, One

Hundred to Four Hundred Miles per Hour 208

Table A 1 62. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Reported Speeds of Objects, Over

Four Hundred Miles per Hour 208

Table A163. Evaluation of Object Sightings for AU Years by Reported Speeds of Objects,

Meteor-Like Speeds ^ . 209

Table A164. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Reported Speeds of Objects,

Speed Not Stated 209

Table A165. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Light Brightness 210

Table A166, Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Light Brightness 211

Table A 167. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Light Brightness . 2 12

Table A168. Location of Observers During Sighting by Months for All Sightings, All Years ........ 213

Table A169. Location of Observers During Sighting by Months for All Sightings, 1947 214

Table A170. Location of Observers During Sighting by Months for All Sightings, 1948 215

Table A171. Location of Observers During Sighting by Months for All Sightings, 1949 ... . . ... . 216

Table A172. Location of Observers During Sighting by Months for AU Sightings, 1950 217

Table A173. Location of Observer During Sighting by Months for All Sightings, 1951 218

Table A174. Location of Observers During Sighting by Months for All Sightings, 1952 . . . 219

Table A175. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, White or Glowing White Objects . 220

Table A176. Evaluation of All Sightings for AH Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Metallic Objects 2Z0

Table A177. Evaluation of Ail Sightings for AU Years by Colors Reported" for Duration

of Sighting, Object Color Not Stated .... 221

Table A178. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Orange or Glowing Orange Objects 221of Sighting, Object Color Not Stated .... 221

Table A178. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Orange or Glowing Orange Objects 221

Table A179. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Red or Glowing Red Objects 222

Table A180. Evaluation of All Sightings for AH Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Green or Glowing Green Objects 222

Table A181. Evaluation of AU Sightings for AU Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Yellow or Glowing Yellow Objects 223

Table A182. Evaluation of AU Sightings for AU Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, -Objects of Other Colors . 223

Table A183. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, White or Glowing White Objects ". 2Z4

103

^.^^yv^ltybjw.

■**/< +>J.-V.i:^frf.1,

f

INDEX OF TABLES 
(Continued)

Pngo

I

%.

Table A184. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported lor Duration

of Sighting, Metallic Objects ' 224

Table A185. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Object Color Not Stated 225

Table A186. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Orange or Glowing Orange Objects -. 225

Table A187. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Red or Globing Red Objects 226

Table A188. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for Ail Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Green or Glowing Green Objects 226

Table A189. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Yellow or Glowing Yellow Objects 227

Table A190. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Objects of Other Colors 227

Table A191, Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Durationof Sighting, Objects of Other Colors 227

Table A191, Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, White or Glowing White Objects 228

Table A192. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Metallic Objects 228

Table.A193. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Object Color Not Stated '.,,.' 229

Table A194. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Orange or Glowing Orange Objects 229

Table A195. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Red or Glowing Red rObjects „> 230

Table A196. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Green or Glowing Green Objects. . . . * . ■ . . . . . 230

Table A197. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Yellow or Glowing Yellow Objects 231

Table A198. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Colors Reported for Duration

of Sighting, Objects of Other Colors , 231

Table A199. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting

for Duration of Sighting, One Object 232

Table A200. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting

for. Duration of Sighting, Two Objects Z32

Table A201. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting

for Duration of Sighting, Three to Ten Objects 233

Table A202. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting

for Duration of Sighting, Eleven or More Objects 233

Table A203. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting

for Duration of Sighting, Number of Objects Not Stated . 234

Table A204. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting

for Duration of Sighting, One Object 23 5for Duration of Sighting, Number of Objects Not Stated . 234

Table A204. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting

for Duration of Sighting, One Object 23 5

Table A20S. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting

for Duration of Sighting, Two Objects 235

104

';

•

INDEX OF TABLES 
(Continued)

P a S e

Table A206. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting

for Duration of Sighting, Three to Ten Objects ' 236

Table A207. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting

for Duration of Sighting, Eleven or More Objects 236

' i

Table A208. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting

for Duration of Sighting, Number of Objects Not Stated ......". 237

Table A209. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting

for Duration of Sighting, One Object 238

Table A210. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting

for Duration of Sighting, Two Objects 238

Table A211. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting

for Duration of Sighting, Three to Ten Objects 239

Table A212. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting

for Duration of Sighting, Eleven or More Objects ■ 239

Table A213. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Number of Objects per Sighting -

for Duration of Sighting, Number of Objects Not Stated 240

Table A214. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by Geographic Location 241

Table A215. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by Geographic Location 241

Table A2 16. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by Geographic Location ' . . 242

Table A2 17. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by North American Location . 243

Table A218. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by North American Location . 243Table A2 17. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by North American Location . 243

Table A218. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All Years by North American Location . 243

Table A219. Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by North American Location . 244

Table A220. Evaluation of All Sightings for All Years by United States Regional Location . 245

Table A221. Evaluation of Unit Sightings for All,Years by United States-Regional Location 246

Table A222.' Evaluation of Object Sightings for All Years by United States Regional Location 247

Table A223, Evaluation of All Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the Central East Region 248

Table A224. Evaluation of All Sightings in the Strategic Areas, of the Central Midwest Region . ... . . . 248

Table A225. Evaluation of All Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the Central Farwest Region ....... 248

Table A226. Evaluation of All Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the South Midwest Region 249

Table A227. Evaluation of All Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the SouJrtTVest Region 249

Table A228. Evaluation of All Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the South Farwest Region 249

Table A229. Evaluation of Unit Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the Central East Region 250

Table A230. Evaluation of Unit Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the Central Midwest Region 250

Table A231. Evaluation of Unit Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the Central Farwest Region . * ..... 250

Table A232. Evaluation of Unit Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the South Midwest Region 2 ^1

10 5

mm

INDEX OF TABLES 
(Continued)

Table A233. Evaluation of Unit Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the South West Region

Table A234. Evaluation of Unit Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the South Far-west Region

Table A235. Evaluation of Object Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the Central East Region

Table A236. Evaluation of Object Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the Central Midwest RegionTable A235. Evaluation of Object Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the Central East Region

Table A236. Evaluation of Object Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the Central Midwest Region

Table A237. Evaluation of Object Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the Central Far-west Region

Table A238. Evaluation of Object Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the South Midwest Region .

Table A239. Evaluation of Object Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the South West Region ., .

Table A240. Evaluation of Object Sightings in the Strategic Areas of the South Farwest Region .

Par

251 
251 
252

252 
252

2S3 
253 
253

f

106

ftelA- /}/'

£'mj. ^ tfr/<Prt /?£ "_~ ~* &.i" Sj&#r/ft6S <?</ ¥£/?#i

A/7. _&#4$

Certain

/9VT

j*yj .

>ei Cent

/**'?

Evaluation

Number

Certain"

.JLL

If?

?ei Cent 
"Doubtful : "Total

Number

Percent

>rtan~

Number 
Doubtful

Total 
.St.

Nufnbti

PeiCoii

Csrtatn

Doubtful

Total

Doubltut

Total

Certarn

Doubltrjl

Total

Cerum

/'■£,

Doubtful Total

Ifi L'Z:

Certain

Jk.

.11.. 
p

doubt Mi Total

JZZ-22iL.

C«tarn

00

Doubtful

/ ^

?->.-?■

Ui 
I'l"

TotJ 
*l '' '

yy

0- Balloon

270

/ft?

.7L.. jl

rf

l*

.JUL

"''f 2£

*> '/

1-Astronomical

476.

341

jiff

UlA

Pi •>

:'.■■> '

'■*■''

$

4')

174

:-*iicdm

264

2SS

r.yz

// /

*?

<7

4

rr

-Jj

r~

/7>

£-

?■'

7 a

:£

/£>L~

3-Lignt Pbenom.

ti-

24

44.

(.0

-J-J-i

2

£■'

iZ

f.7

M /■"

st

£,

_$_

f#

JL2.

2C

4-Birds

lt

/o

??

0i

/' ?'

/>*

&

(-'

10

-JLO

///'

c

?

t;

f.s

!"•

i'

/

s

//

Pi

S-CI«Hb, Oust, etc.

/f.

73

IT

Pi'

££'

if

^

£'

7'

OjA

/:>'

7//>

c>

<-■

-JUL

pa

_a\

V

• <#

£-U-

p;j

C'f

tlnjunit .Into.

29$

c

2* a

<f.Z

PP\ 9 3

*?.'

/L

/* /'

00

* 2

7?

/'

s %■

<??

~?k\

?(>

* /

CO

■

7-Psydn logical

?t

//>

J$

77.

0.3\ /*

?

*?

*

? c

f.7

±:s

7

7?

/

&■;

(■',''

/ c

3

3

£>■'

r> ':

jLZ

J- Unknown

l,$?

<?

74?

?'*

1

0\ ;-'.;

zs

//

rf

f"9

f)0

27B

s**-

JU

■ r* S*?t

//>

J$

77.

0.3\ /*

?

*?

*

? c

f.7

±:s

7

7?

/

&■;

(■',''

/ c

3

3

£>■'

r> ':

jLZ

J- Unknown

l,$?

<?

74?

?'*

1

0\ ;-'.;

zs

//

rf

f"9

f)0

27B

s**-

JU

■ r* S*

Gi-

,?;■

*&

a

si

/£J_

P .'

/*■'-"

J-OftP

lit

3*

/tf?

ft

/■ / 1 ^ 6

u^.

(J

trf

jiA

iP.i)

rtfi

V

s

_i?

< °

," "

^ r

UL.

/t

-"J

•" /'

ri

Toll!

2100

90/

770'

/f> 9

2 ? /\^i f .

.12*

/Z

77"

7?S ft.*

fed

///

i'(

'■JT

I' 5

.7<

/O'i

■231

'it'

?f?

*f<-

*■';■<?

jVU

/?£#

/?*_/

/9s C

Eialuation

Huroer

Per Cent

Number

Percent

humtiei

Pw Cent

Number

Pet Cat

Certain

Ooubtlu

Total

Certarn

Ooubthill Tstal

Certain

Doubtful

Toial

Certain

Ooubtlui

Total

:erUm

Doubtful

Jjrtalj

Certain

Doubtful Total

Ceitain

Ooubttul Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

D-Balloon

S3

*>

ty

MJl

Z.3

/u

70

V

/I

£.2

?f

$1

J£L

Jl<7

J?-?/

9.1

?./

W

1-Aslnrnmical

i'f

*£

7¥

1UL

#2.

24.2-

ZS

.. '7.

<7p

/£&:

«?(t

U2-

2£C

/20

w

/Z.9

/,.£>

/$<?

2-Aircraft

.f

/£

,<r¥

72.1

<79

m

74-

z

f/

A2J2.

?e

/f.O

1*0

HZ

4tt.

a.<7

J££-

71?

.___.

w_^^.

3-LijM Pbenom.

t>

/■'

?

aa

a.a

f?(?

Z

/

r

/■?

7>7

s.o

ILL

/?

1?

.12-

aS

5/

Birds

..P

/'

o.a

#■#

<?p

<?

/

./

0O

fl7

Pf

/3

f

ft

lu'

fi-S

r-s

5-Clouds, Oust, etc.

—4L

/.»

/'

J2J1

<?:£>

a/?

(?

77

/?

^&0.

(?■<>

1?.0

/Z

/J

7.S

at.

-<ZJ^

/"

frlnsuffic. Inf^.

¥f

:?

■¥*

fte

00

fa-?

/</

.-.(P..

/</

.L7.

0.0

17

./&&■

a

/U

H

DO

i'i

T-PsycKolo(ica)

4

3

^

I.S

fl-Q

/.j

/

/

z

.&7.

0-7

7f

. 2(*

7

n

/?

c?

/■t

t-UnkiHMi

. 7l_

"7/

7/

nz

jm.

?fZ

ffZ

.-tL

&

&£

ae

ns

4SS

&

4fr

23 -i\ 00

Zf-6-

9-Othei

_Z-

<f

*'

2 3

Z 3

<7.£

s

7

£.0

ao

f#

LZ

£0

$6-

?.Z\ AO

<*

Total

?n

f>T

30^

U-3

tff

//?&■

/IS

_/2

(L0

Mo.

200

m

MiO

fft wt

72<A2~/,

/c#

[_

7%/3i.£< /? £ £-t//?£i/#rt<?# &r ///y/r s/&/sr//i/p.s #</ ¥£<*/?$

%

Al-L ¥&*<es

/?<77

/Wt

/?- aTotal

?n

f>T

30^

U-3

tff

//?&■

/IS

_/2

(L0

Mo.

200

m

MiO

fft wt

72<A2~/,

/c#

[_

7%/3i.£< /? £ £-t//?£i/#rt<?# &r ///y/r s/&/sr//i/p.s #</ ¥£<*/?$

%

Al-L ¥&*<es

/?<77

/Wt

/?- a

E^atuatron

Number

Pel Cent

Number

Percent

fiurrter

Percent

Nunbei

Per Cent

Certain

Dnbthi

Total

Certain

Doutitfu

Total

Certain

Doublnil

Total

Certain

Doubly

Total

Ctftain.

Doobtnil

TOUI

Certain

Doobttul

[Total

Certain

Doutittul Total

CtrUifi

rrJoutrHul

Total

(•-Balloon

2Zf

/s7

Sff

JU.

*r

eft

_JL

a

7

J7l\

AQ

i*

UJ7

10

£4

7i

/.U

fi 7

-Zrd- -/.

(4

JJ:.

32 i

.JLL. 
J(?

&■#

l-AstrowMical

372

fsi,

{■1?

ISO

{O.O

250

JJ-

?

71

TlA.

n

*7,f

Z£f\

71

SS

■Jlli

uUu

lif

74

go

fW

4f.l

2-Aircratt

?.?i

fi<7

$?.f

//■¥

f.Z

ft-l

2

2

4

2,1

f-i

U

/?

4

11

r^r

Z2..4

/S

/z

to

/?.?

]-Li|fil Pfienon.

3t

2/

si

13

flt

It

_£-

P

7.

2.1

/>/>

7.1

2

-?

s

/i

20

ts

_£ ^

6>

fi

fi£\

4- Birds

IS

;o

23

0,5

OM

6-f

a

£>

6.0

ft.p

fi.fl

%

2

£

-JJL

AJ^—^

IS

Z

/

3

a.i

<■</

A

S-Clouds, -Dust, etc

3

7

10

JLL\

fl-3

e-4

£>

/?

/1

0-0

fi.O

f)Q

&

a^

OP

O.p O.o

3?

£>

fi

77>

/IP

f 1

S-lnsultic. Info.

Hi/.

2i/

iOZ

(U>

/pi.

/2s

t?

?L

/1<7

00

(74

17

17

LLL^

jg^

(11

O

??

UiJL

fo

140

7-Piycholojital

- r £

f

VS

t.f

#<7

/■f

.J^

Z

f

3.1

71

f.l

f

/?

/

^JJ

L£0

07

3

O

?

i3

jLo_

<3

fJ-Unknoiai

ML

V97

JMa

0O

iff

z<L

a

24

Wf

00

wr

. /*

/?

/ft

10 i

^./L\

/O.P

J2-

O

1?

,1-0

fi.O

f¥J

9-0 ber

92,

Z7

i£g_

A±

(.*

«f

/&

&

/6

/iS

<?(?

%K

4

1

,-/

2M-

4L

li-

' h

O

(>

2 =>'

<?P

7 s

J?-L

Total

Ittl

7/7

l*W

P-t

21/

100.

t>il

/l

11

Hi

/2<7

w

n

ft

ff!

&4.1

?£J

fer

/</o

f*>

2U

£Z^L

/CO

\; Si

/?5-0

/??/

/?G£

■

Evaluation

Nrabei

Percent

Numbei

Per Ceol

Nunbei

Per Ceol

Number

Pet Cent

Ceitain

Doubtful

Total

Cerlam

Doubtful; Total

Certain

Doubtful2U

£Z^L

/CO

\; Si

/?5-0

/??/

/?G£

■

Evaluation

Nrabei

Percent

Numbei

Per Ceol

Nunbei

Per Ceol

Number

Pet Cent

Ceitain

Doubtful

Total

Cerlam

Doubtful; Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubttul

Total

>rl»n

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cerbin

Ooubttul

Total

Ceitam

Doubtbl

Tot 4

0- Balloon

2Z

£~

77

/As-

Z.V\/2.f

_^L

3

/t

JJt.

2.2

it

77,Z

/?(?

2fS

tc

7J

111

1-AstronoBiral

42,

■/f

£0

2PJ

if J 2Z7

£/

/¥

35

/J.3

/P. 2

25.5

2l£

/of

m

/3f

i J

lot

2-Airciaft

3£>

(/

<//

/4.2

.5 J

/ft

-7J-

$

2¥

//7

5-X

77J

2/1

79$

40i

12. S

//J

ttf

3-Lijtit Phejnn.

P

t?

_&o_

(?0

ao

-Z\-

/

3

/J

7

1.2

2L

'7

13

JJ-

1.0

7?

4-Biids

_£_

7>

/?<?

0,J

0/7

7

/

0.0

0-7

07

9

5

79

0J

07

at

S-Cloitds, Dust, etc

■■

O

<?

0.cA

^15^

00

_^L

&J

<?J

00

3

7

10

JLL

&¥

pt>

frimuftit kit).

U

2&

i$4\

#.(?\/&-4

/</

/4

ML

7>0

/0 2

/S4

tff

JA.

00

U

7-Psyctnloiical

z.

2,

/■0

J2JPA

/■#

/

/ ■

2

77 7

7>-f

7-¥

2£,

4

n

J£-

<?-3

ft

(rUnkmun

42

Vt,

777/

0.0

70./

-IL

37

2£7

?■£>

777

*44

?4f

20.0

0.0

ZO,P

MOiii

6

s

//

i.t

J,>7.

fl

_i_

r

^Tt

$0

f.S

S2

/(,

it

JO

0.9

I?

Total

770

3?

20f

p.4

J7J

(00-

Ml\

t!

at

4fJ

77?. 4

uff.

/2M

m

Itfl

ft 7

tit

/CO

107

j?itj.£- /?S £?$9(.(//}7-/o# ^rr ifgjzer- s/GM r//vGs

tfv t-Jg^VeT

/Jil V£A*S

tff-r

_ //^/ . .

//<//

Entuatna

Pa Cent

Kuobei

PeiCmt

NuabH

Pet Cent

NMKf

PeiCcI

Cdlin

DnHbl

Total

Certain

Doubttul

TotaT

Intain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouStM

Tslal

:«i»n

Doubttul

Total

CdlMi)

Doubtnil

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Cortao

DbuUM

Tola 
70

0-BaHOM

M£

/f^

?ff

9</

1,0

M

_X

7

X2-

00

t?

/I

70

a

M-

to

tf-T-

UL

^

/3

^J-

1-Astma»at

S1<7

?0f

¥lt

iLs\

f-s

2/J

i

g

ti

10. 1

/CI

20 Z

2*

2t

ft

4$

/{..I

Hi

2f

Sf

n4

ISA.

27?

4*-'

2-Aiiaatt

&s\

209

W

ttj>

r*

UB

_^

z

¥

t.6

IfUL

^

/3

^J-

1-Astma»at

S1<7

?0f

¥lt

iLs\

f-s

2/J

i

g

ti

10. 1

/CI

20 Z

2*

2t

ft

4$

/{..I

Hi

2f

Sf

n4

ISA.

27?

4*-'

2-Aiiaatt

&s\

209

W

ttj>

r*

UB

_^

z

¥

t.6

If

<-t>

js:

/

'9

Me

2i

VJ

/£

/J

70

77

6,4

U.'

MitfitPtwma.

$6

//

tff

jJ.

oi

$■1

_£-

0>

2.

■?-1?

00

?.e

. z

J

s

JJL

7.1.

JS

A0

/?0

00

4-Birui

-&\

/0

it-

ASL

00

/O

^?

e

0.0

00

00

2

J

i?"

jjL

-J-L

IS

£.

—A

/

/■f

0*

(i

frClowtS, Dint, etc.

__£

?

tf

jU-

03

*<t

f?

s>

-M-

fi-0

oi>

.a

00

-££.

00

_Jl_

—JL.

00

00

00

frksuflic. life.

2fe-

2<te

Ml

00

//?9

j£-

t>

t2-

/S.1

fi-P

/**■

fj?

f

JL±

00

//■?

-2*

25

/J-f

40

///

7-Pi)id»k>(icel

JSL

f

&

JJ,

0-4

to

_S-

2

f

tf

1S

£3

J

/

*7

00

07

J

S

,.&

00

/i

Mhbaouei

41£

#/

111

00

tt-1

2Z

&

It

*P\

00

iff

-j£L

0>

/*

/Si

00

t0 f

it

2t

///

00

t'f

Wthai

ts

ZV

(0f

Jt

n

5

//

(t

/??

fl-o

ft?

_JL

7

/{

\ U -

-43-

71

uL

v-J-

i,

^£i_

0.0

ft

Total

/sis

/.*

?J19

ITU

279

«#■

j£

■■/*■

ft

&li

tsi.

100-

JL

&0

Ht?

iSe

3S.0 too.

//i,

JL0.

/$6

62 7

?7t

m.

/?<■#

7?£T/ 1

/0.G2,

....

Evaluation

Nuaber

Pel Cent

■ H<mtm

PbCbiI

Nueter

PetCeet

Nuabn

PnCsit

Certain

Dotibtful

Total

Certain

D«it>t1u

Total

Main

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

ToW

;«tam

Doubttul

Tout

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certan

Doditb

Total

Cerlao | Dotibthl

Tot.l

u-Mtoon

9/

¥

si

/2.4

-f.4

dt

-X

f

//

ii.

?,$

/•'

i^i.

//.?

Zt'

?9

?£

/ft

tAstronoaiol

4S

<¥

79

4t

&1

22-'

4

rf

30

m.

Kb

&■$

'77

ft

?/.i

,/,47

6(

f/f

Z-A>ccnlt

-££_

f

.7/

/10

<r.3

ill

if

A

it

,?.</

*0

/?¥

/?3

'?£

W

/?9

U-7

?<7,l

3-U0IFIWM.

_£_

0t>

aO

&Q

t

/

l

0.9

<?S

U

2S

W

.7?

.Li-

0f

2,i

4-Bi*

—72s

00

60

0.0

/

. f

0.0

0$

at

$

s

/J

as

0Z

08

VCtowb, Dwl. «tt

o

&

10

00

0.0

~g~

<P

0.0

0-6

00

__£j

7

f0

0Z 0*

0J/

l

0.9

<?S

U

2S

W

.7?

.Li-

0f

2,i

4-Bi*

—72s

00

60

0.0

/

. f

0.0

0$

at

$

s

/J

as

0Z

08

VCtowb, Dwl. «tt

o

&

10

00

0.0

~g~

<P

0.0

0-6

00

__£j

7

f0

0Z 0*

0J

Maaiffic. Wo,

%

H

Ml

at?

M2

if

M

ill

0.O

f/6

/<(

■*fi

ff

00

ff

Wsyctetoiical

t

z

*z

■At

72-

7

/

t,

0i

0t

/.i

2Z

4

J7

ML.

04

2.1

S-IWuhm

fl

a

rf

2?0

0.<?

210

JL

&

27.3

0.0

2fJ

/0f\

?0S

mH

00

70.Z

Mttwt '

i

r

f

is

7*

SJ

_£.

/

*g

00

£1?

S7

//

is

s.f

0f

¥f

ToW

m

30

/if

ttl

ttf

100-

J£

2L

/it

fit

ZM

IO0.

toj£

¥?£■

e&t

7((t

2?<?

m-

I

%

108

— j«

Pill

T#4££ A*

&X#Z&47~/#/V <?/: /f££ f / 6 //?-//*- &S

j£S/L-

A>0A>rJt

-jZL if***' , fot ¥&*&

^TAWAfty

F f**f?t>AtTY

_ AlArc*

Arffit.

Evanbo*

Nuaber

Pa Cent

Nuater

Per Coil

Umbel

PkCwI

m-tei

PerCcnt

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

Cert**

Doubtful

Total

lerWn

DouMM

ToM

Certan

Doubtful

Total

:ert*n

Doubtful

Total

Ctrtai

DwHIul

ToUl

Ortjm

OnibUul

ToUl

Cabin

3 f

DoubMnl

TaH

'S-o

f\.p

»> Balnea

5

3

€

3d

7-7

**

t

7*

77

o. o

97

^

7*

70

?.£

M ax 7

3

10

l-Aatnnoaial

-2f

46

75

2/3

as

SS.I

n

16.

33

it.1

/7.;

3«

3/

;c?

**!

'3.7

it.O 111

S2

f

Lf

2C S

t.s

Aircraft

6

3

9

99

22

6i

f s

>1

17

*?

J& 2 -L

7

3

i3. f

f,2

It.}

23

8

3t

it i

t-.e

3-Litfit Phono*.

t-9

9.9

0.0

■

Q

1.0

■».'

00

o,0

O.o

0.0

i

I

OS

o.O

o.5

4-BinfJ

0-0

o-t

00

0.0

p*

.■5"

o

s

3.0

i.O

*

1

r

1.9

9.5

?.$

VCIarts, am, etc.

o

J2JL

A

90

09

«■*

MO_

,

;

0.0

Oi

i.i

i

~v~y

0.0

frboriHc. Mb.

9

9

S-9

oo

i-T

13

1-3

tt.i

O.o

JM

72

■22

I77i

00

n.i

21

2i

130

o.s

j i.o

7-Pj)rt*!k>|ia<

2

3

/■S

o.o

is

6.9

O-O

\~J~Q

(?

6

9.0

0.0

0.0

?

2

i e

S.D

1.0

MHm"

70

U

f<r.5

oo

"■1

IC

'6

n-2

0-6

UTJ

2?

if

>?.S

0.0

/?.f

r;

S7

H.S

0.9

w.

Mtto

9

1

10

a

97

7-3

g

Q

B

2.C

09

u

)

n

18

o.c

/0.2

/0J

2

2

10i e

S.D

1.0

MHm"

70

U

f<r.5

oo

"■1

IC

'6

n-2

0-6

UTJ

2?

if

>?.S

0.0

/?.f

r;

S7

H.S

0.9

w.

Mtto

9

1

10

a

97

7-3

g

Q

B

2.C

09

u

)

n

18

o.c

/0.2

/0J

2

2

10

0.0

i.O

ToM

83

S3

ite

a.c

lt.9

wa-

72

21

f3

Ifl

27t

no.

m

*?

>ti

70.5

?%i

fOO-

»t

It

.'00

its

ids

/fit.

■ 3

A?Ar

J~VA>

f

\T v i-Y

Av6VST

EotMtjon

Nuba

Percent

Nunbn

PefCont

Nwbef

PhCbiI

Heabn

Per Cent

Certain

OouttM

Total

Certain

Doobtlul

Total

CerbiA

Doublhl

Total

Certain

DooMM

Tola

Certain

Dorbtlul

_roWj

Certain

DwbHul

Total

Certan

Oovtltn

Tola

Certan

OaiWIut

Tola

0**I0«

2*

5

^f

/2't

21

if.,

36

I

13

IS. $

?l

lf.1

160

SS

tss

10.8

s.r

i£7

It

If

8i

J-i

$■*

i*t

Mltrsniicll

J8

/O

38

14. if

S2

It. i

29

2}

S3

17,1

let

12.1

I'L

rs

171

12. S

Sf

l#9

SI

70

t2)

ml

u v

23 i

NUrmft

25

IS

¥0

tlfi\

7.7

70- i

So

)i

<f3

13.7

i.7

Iff

I3Z

ts

33i

!*.?>

/*'$

?f.»

S2

si

/47

I0.S

IB

294

]4J>JilPkeaM.

3

3

C

l.S

*-f

3.0

i

3

V

Oi

/,?

1-7

H

V

18

IS

6-1

'■?

7

7

"t

i 1

/ 3

It

4-Birds

3

Z

o.f

1.0

1.0

e_

•

O.C

0.0

M

1

3

7

0-1-

0- 3

9-7

6.0

7-P

5-Clouh, Dcst etc.

S

8

JLL

t-fi

"■!

-U.

9.0

<i.°

t\

1

i

0.¥

A t

f

l

1

00

2

»■?

S-lnninc. tob.

22

O

21

i/.3

9.1

//.3

?<

t

is

II. 9

0.0

tto

98

9

89

f.S

0.

?f

IS

is

8 L

t.O

Si

7-Pqdakiiicil

1

q-0

0.'

<!•'

C

9

(.

i.t

t.t

14.

f

1

if

1-0

10

2.0

19

1

l<

1 ?

1

2..I

MMmom

a

it

H.L

Off

184

17

17

2rf

CO

204

m

t.*S

710

0-0

2J.0

/it

"t

71$

0.

11.9

(Other

f

r

13

t.L

*■■(

O.j

8

1

9

if

of

ir

¥0

l

•91

v.i

0.1

<t.t

//

7

i 8

11

i. i

yf

T«l

/a

39

m

it.f

zaf

/OH

<$2

16

m

7T.9

29-3

itf.

703

314

tl?

7S-7

its

If'A

D£

>fr

m

a j

3c. S

/oo.

«

Serrey^B*-/?

0t rejr^A

.

fJev^-fifSX

J?jrcjr*<fi

r*~#.

EvalutjM

Nunber

Per Cert

hater

PaCait

Hvaber

Pa Cent

NuabHitf.

703

314

tl?

7S-7

its

If'A

D£

>fr

m

a j

3c. S

/oo.

«

Serrey^B*-/?

0t rejr^A

.

fJev^-fifSX

J?jrcjr*<fi

r*~#.

EvalutjM

Nunber

Per Cert

hater

PaCait

Hvaber

Pa Cent

NuabH

Pet Cent

Certain

Ooobttu

Total

Certain

OcaMki

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Totol

Catatt

DoubtM

TotK

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certan

Ooubthi

Tola

Certan

OouWrul

Toia

O-Baloon

6

/ H

20

2.9

t-i

f-£

it

21

57

$1

/<?■}

i*i

5

10

23

H\

II. ft

'1.0

+

7

/(,

!<t

1-2

¥■{■

l*AisnnBaical

31

w

H2

IH-B

r,2

10.0

HO

2/

if

21.8

10. f

31.7

3S

7f

57

111

17-7

Ho

ll

if

£1

!*■*.

>t S

3*5 
OC

Mirerjtt

14

37

u

ci

I7-&

jy.j

II

n

2.8

5.7

t.f

"t.i

U

16

27

C7

IS

Jt.S

13\

J t

76

7.1

8l

l-LietitPhnoa.

I

A

3

O.S

10

if

1

H

5

OS

?■/

2i

3

/

14

1,8

o.i

rt

1

/

t-t

4-Krfc

i

1

3

OS

1.0

l-S

r

2

7

2-6

10

^

0-

o.t

00

«o

Oi

o.o

o.o

MloudJ. D»1. etc

9

/

f

9.0

o.5

Q-5

a

I

/

0.9

4.5

0-5

?

8

o.o

v.f

*■?

o.o 
St.

0.0 
OP

ft

frlnsnlfiCL hifD.

20

9

20

11.

OJ

1*

12

12

(1

0-

C3

_JL

9

£2.

Q-Q

Hf

9

6

f

J-PircWopca

1

C

3

If

0-0

'■9

i

1}

1

OS

o.o

4-5

J

Q

l

JLi.

6.0

e-6

H

<?

V

3 1.

0.0

2.1

■MHnwai

St

Si

Hi

0.0

7t-7

n

3'

18-7

0-0

187

17

32

/IS.

of

lf<

HO

90

3*4

0.0

?J.$

Mtbei

9

3

It

±£

if

5.S

3

/

9-

/■t

0$

2.1

H

y

J±

t.t

X?

9

7

S9

HO

O.O

r.y

Total

lit

7*

J/4

U-7

J3.J

mo.

/is

07

m

*&l

3*.f

/fiO.

fl

12

uf

Si./

Hit

/*/.

Hb

S2

U8

V.o

/fit.

.&!■'■■.

Si

.V

109

.

rjgt-f AiT

£efr£i'/9r>'0'v

£>S

4*

i- ?/6Hrj/y<i

i"

^

fi/0/vr/i'

^

</£*£

_ ^J'^'J'

JasSu ri/ti

&F/3jevA /ev_.

££fl/teW

s^^^tl

EvtllMliM

Numbs

Per Cent

NUMKI

Pet Cot

MumHei

PnCsit

Nmbtf

PerCmt

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cabin

Omiblfu

lotal

Certain

Oodbttul

Tolll

Certain

DovUhil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

certain

JfejMM

Tot*)

Certjm

CoutitM

TotalPnCsit

Nmbtf

PerCmt

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cabin

Omiblfu

lotal

Certain

Oodbttul

Tolll

Certain

DovUhil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

certain

JfejMM

Tot*)

Certjm

CoutitM

Total

CerUrn

OubHul

Total

0- Balloon

1

1-Aitnwaical

~

I-Aircoft

/

^

->i

V s

/

^

/

N

J-LiJhtPtWM.

5:

:^S

^S-

55

Mil*

/

^

^

A

^

&

nV

Wlwrti;u«sl,eti

7

N

V

y

S-lmatric kilcr. ,

$>

l>

^

t\

7-Pjydeloficjl

, 1

$

/

A^

^

s

^

S-Unfun*

V

\

^

SOtnej

Total

AlfitY

.TtSA/f

J'ot.y'

Ave^rr

Evaluation

Numtwi

Pel Cent

Number

PnrCot

Nuabet

P« Cent

■JWbH

P« Cat

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

_ToW|

Certain

DwMM

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doublfvl

Total

Certao

Doublta

Total

Certain

Daibtfcl

Total

0- Balloon

/

e

1

I?

a?

?7

£

£

//r

M

A9,f

t>

P

0.0

0.6

0.0

1-Astnmnial

1

1

aa

7-r

7-1

s

s

<?

9.1

SJ sat

6

1

7

??S

(..7*16

2-Aircnlt

V

^

2

c

X

'*4

Q,t

/s:o

' 7L

Z-

0.0

7.6

M

0.fi

ff.t

0.0

3-Liett Pltanooi.

^

O

/>.£>

a*

foe

1

Q

r

/.$

0.0

/,1

*,6

^0JL

JLo_

4-Btnb

^

/?

(?

p.0

to

fi-e

P

t>

0.6

fi#

A<?

d

O

p

0.0

0.0

60

5-Clowfj, Oust. etc.

"s

£_

D

o

p.o

<?,}

Q.fi

o

60

0.0

0.0

_&&_

0.6

6,0

6-lnsifHc. hto.

'

3

Q

3

21./

oj)

79,1

f

r

/v.r

-£JL

/*S

p

(?

f

/2S

6.0

as

7-Pjftholofical

^

J

e

1

1.7

3P

7,7

O

Z-

jt

&d

JLL

1.6

a

4°

0.0

0,»

t-UnknoM ^

^

^

4

k

30.1

46

Sfr?

12.

12 Mf

9A

2t.f

?

7

H3.1

-Ji4-6if

MWlH

I

t

7.7

ao

1?

t£>

O

(6

?t,l

0.0

29 t

9

6,0

&-0

00

Total

U

1

O

133

7.7

no.

+i

7

ss-

#7.3

aJ

16$,

tT

/

/6

Ul

U

W

Se-PT^M B £r/?

0rT<

?&£■#■

A/ore/* &&*?

Pecss-r&F/T

Evaluation

Nmba

Pet Cent

tarter

PeiCail

Notcjef

Pel Cat

Numbef

PeiCmi

Certain

Dountti

Total

Certain

Donbtto

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoublU

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OouMM

Total

Certaio

DoubthNotcjef

Pel Cat

Numbef

PeiCmi

Certain

Dountti

Total

Certain

Donbtto

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoublU

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OouMM

Total

Certaio

Doubth

Total

Ctitain

Doubltul

TolH

D-Balloon

£

<?

M

ft.O

p.o

<?

A 6

/.l

to

o

0]0

0.0

0.0

f

6/>

A0

op

L-Astnnoaical

1

f?

7

fC7

Q-fl

ft?

/#

2

/ft

73.7

Ar

W2

t

1

z

332

33.5

*6.6

*r

,T

M4

00

!W>

2~Airaan

O

(7

00

60

o.i

■

(7.6

at

?.?

o

6.0

9,0

o,C

o

AO

_££

oo

3-U(ht Plum.

o

c?

1?

ae

0,4

no

(?

/?

&0

0,0

Pa

t

1

33,3

0.Q

1?3

o

as

0O

OB

t-Btnts

H?

p.p

flj

0,6

fi

04

it*

oJ>

<?

M

P.t>

W

<2-

0.0

-M.

SP

J-Clwds, Oust. etc.

<?

<?

t.o

t./P

o,o

e

f

o

0.6

0,9

A6

o

6

00

OS

6.0

6

O

0>6

-£0.

00

6-lnsufflc. Info.

1

/?

/

(£.7

ff.fi

/A?

e

p

A0

W

0,0

6

0.0

?•#

6,»

O

e

A6

.06.

GO

'■Pjyttolopcal

f

/

it<7

A0

{6,7

f

Q

1

S3

ae

frr

o

ft

£>.!>

P(l

Off

o

o.t

a.&

M

S-Unknowi

-1

,-y

SP.9

0.0

too

JL

?

/ar

f>,f

rt.f

a

0.0

0.6

0.0

6

,

0.0

ao

fr

3-0thec

o

^

0.17

no

0,6

0.6

4P

AO

£>

6.D

PJ

AP

ao

-AL

0.0

Total

£

*

to,t

_ 0.0

/#,

12.

A.

'?

ifs

'P.f

m

2-

J

J

&.1

JZ1

t<#.

s~

6

s

/60J>

J2^o,

foO,

I

Ltf

110

m

J^^iT /?£

£.v#l y*f?0/v .

0f

ACi. 5/&Aff//V<Z S

m

K/t/VT?/

0f V£./Jt

/fff

S ' '

TV-f^/FJ

/

/V<fvw**V

•Mj/T'Cfi' _

Arsr'i-

£<*■*»

Number

Per Cat

timber

Per Cent

nWf

Percent

Nw*«

Pei Cart

Certain

OoubUul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tots

:«<ai>

OouMbi

Total

Certain

DouBtta!

ToW

lertain

Doubtful

Tolll

Certain

OoubUul

ToW

Certain

OwHIul

Tibl

CertjB

On«tM

Tom

iBolloon

^?

0,0

00

4'

P

0.0

0,0

0.0

^0J?

",o

e,»

—A

^

JH

0,0

//./

1-Attnmtici)

10

-?

a

i?S

tt,7

st,X

?

z

<f

72jS XX.*

{0*0

.2

z

AJJ 0.0

*>.-*

-JL-

f

6

JQJ_\

Av/.f

?¥*'

2-Aircnft

r?

0.0

0,0

9,0

..0

0>

r

0.0

0.0

00

. 0,0.

0,6

o.o

. 2

7

l.t,7.10

-?

a

i?S

tt,7

st,X

?

z

<f

72jS XX.*

{0*0

.2

z

AJJ 0.0

*>.-*

-JL-

f

6

JQJ_\

Av/.f

?¥*'

2-Aircnft

r?

0.0

0,0

9,0

..0

0>

r

0.0

0.0

00

. 0,0.

0,6

o.o

. 2

7

l.t,7.

0,t

/f.7

J-Lifhl PImml

<?

40-

o,o

0,0

..6

&

ft

_&£

0P

0.0

~4&

0,0

0,0

^0.

o

^J2J.

0.0

0,0

4-Bif*

~JL^

<?

o.d

0,P

0,0

— ^

ft

A&.

00

0,0

0.0

0.0

0.0

. t

0>

1

S-.6

0,0

f.S

S-ClBKb, DM tic.

£>

0.0

0.0

0,0

0.0

(1.0

0D

c

a.o

0,0

0.0

.0

o

Q

0*

an

<%o

UounicM.

2-

fl

2.

j&£

0.0

12 f

O

o

0.0

£>.£>

0.o

1-

7

2.2.Z

#0

?x.x

1

p

1

S:t>

0.0

<r.A

7.pqrd»lo|ical

'.0

0,0

0,6

p

0.0

0,O

0.0

ft

0.0

0,6

f>0

-D

0.0

0,0

0.0

Mjrinoaa

e>.o

0,0

00

a

0.&

00

0C

/

/

///

0,t

J/./

-7

o

3

(6.7

0,0

fi.7

XlKw

/

f

0.0

fa

(1.

e

CD

0O

0,0

#

f

0.6

IKS'

m-i'

D

Q_

AS

Q.0

0,0

TOM

.<2

H-

/<?

ir.p

?fio

(00

_Z

2-

?

7ZS <*-V

/to.

J~

*

?

*AT

JW.i.

m,

l£-

r 7~

'1

rti

*m

/06.

:-'§■

-

///f./

J~OA/£~

J vt-y

Ao 60 sr

Eyilgilion

Nunbct

Per Cent

Number

Per Cat

Nuiter

Percent

Hu»tw

P» Cent

Ctrtiin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Daudtful

ToUl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ddublful

ToW

Certain

DoubMul

Tola!

Certain

DogbtM

To«

Cotan

Dcubttu

Total

Certain

OwMM

ToU

D«^foan

0.0

0.0

P,P

3

J

£U.

0,0

5?,°

_4i

/

6"

OOa

2J

Uf

2.

?

0.0

/-/ 2

ifz

Mtbamictl

__/-

1

2

%t

9,1

(L7.

^JL

0.0

04

f

7

n

1&2,

?■?,/. 31 1,

_A.

2

f

/X.2

./S-2

Tiiy

2-Alreofl

/

/

f

0-0

11

_£j

0>.0

0,Q

0.0

_JL

2

7

LLli

*"/

fZf

1

/

2

<f.l

f.f

193.

Hi|ht PlNrm.

-&\

?

?

-jS£

ZZS

2?.?

3

J

.0.-0

sy.p

5fi-P

./..

/

.2,6.

0.0

?,r

-^H

£

0.0

0.L

0/r

4-KnH

/

/

Ja

9,1

%(

_e_

o

.&0

o-o

04

1

/

^M.

7,b

?,k

_0

Q

(1

JLO

0.0

0.0

Wlo«dj;IXB^«k.

0.0

0.0

6.0

„J2-

Q

0.O

ff.O

0b

O.D

0.0

0,0

_JL

0.0

£.6

O.J>

S-lHBtfic. hb.

3

3

A?

O.t

7-7,-i

J2JL

0,P

00

QJ>

0.0

Op

1

17,b

?,k

_0

Q

(1

JLO

0.0

0.0

Wlo«dj;IXB^«k.

0.0

0.0

6.0

„J2-

Q

0.O

ff.O

0b

O.D

0.0

0,0

_JL

0.0

£.6

O.J>

S-lHBtfic. hb.

3

3

A?

O.t

7-7,-i

J2JL

0,P

00

QJ>

0.0

Op

1

1

1.1

0.0

fl

?-pirtJ»io«itji

P-

fp

0.0

S.9

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

0,0

(i.O

u

.4 .

0,0

. 0,0

*0

r-f?

D-Untmoii

_ /

a

1

9.1

0.0

1,1

o

o

0.O

C*0

<?■{?

u~

It

ASJ

i.D

&,*

.0

P

0.0

0.0 \

Mttw

p

p

0-P

*,0

0-8

e>

-&JL

0.0

0,0

_JL

1

J.£

0.0

?.i

_jl_

X-

7

40

/f.x

Total

6

r

!(

m.

W7+

100.

s

J

6

f00

F0,o

m

M

/J

3f

U7

35?

m.

M-

7

//

3M

6?.l> '00.

•

S £TP r-z-M jr/Trf-

<Dt ret ?£■&

ASpt/er^i&F/?

£?£~£jr/f&esr

Evaluation

Number

PerCett '

Number

PerCsit

Number

Per Cent

Nun be)

Per Cwt

Certain

Dolititfu

Total

Certain

Dcubttol

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtbl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Turn

Certain

Ooulitful

Total

Certain

DnMnil

Total

V-Balloon

?

3

0,0

J7S

S7.S

r

f

if

li.7

30,0

H7

/

r

6

S,o

P-SIO

Zoo

^Z.

3.

7.1

.0,0

-21

3?2

1-Astnnw'ial

P

/

I

0.0

v>r

IJJ

/

3

J4

3.S

J2JL.

11.3

7

i

t

3f,o

*0

mo

__^,

' f

//

7,/

Z+itenn

1

/

X

QJL

/2,S-

,7,T.O

>

f

T,- 5 " 1

3,?

H-

t

26.0

0.0

Ut

^

J

/

0,0

3,4

l(

3-U(M Ptiamn.

0.0

0,0

0,0

t

Q

1

13

1?

?l

-A

p

Q

0.0

6,0

QD

o

ft

0.0

0,0

0.0

*-Bir*

_j2j

■

t.0

0.0

0,0

>

1

z

3.3

■?,3

't/l

tf 1

Q<0

0,0

0,0

0.0

0.0

0.0

S-Cloudx, Out, etc.

SJh

0.0

0.P

0,0

0,0

t.o

*»,0

0.0

04

IP

O

0.0

o.o

*,Q

(■tnsuffic hfo.

_4_

0.f>

0,0

0.0

£

(?

WL

0.0

£SkS.

I

/

SIP

QQ

•r.o

3

0-

■3

l&iZ

CO

'0.7

^Ptjrdukifical

_L

I

OJL

0,D

/2„r

.JUl

(?,0

0.0

Q

<?

-M.

1.6

no

_JL.t\

0,0

00

B-UnloHMi

_&_

6

AD.

0.0

',0

2

7.

L7

0,0

(■7

o.t

0,0

0.0

^L

f

ZX.I

tZ.O

7J.I.

Mthei

J_

1

0.0

a s

t?S

JUL

00

00

1

/

s-,o

$i

^^

7

7.f

<t

7/

Total

J=^

f

1

#7o

7S10

/60,

11.

/,?AD.

0.0

',0

2

7.

L7

0,0

(■7

o.t

0,0

0.0

^L

f

ZX.I

tZ.O

7J.I.

Mthei

J_

1

0.0

a s

t?S

JUL

00

00

1

/

s-,o

$i

^^

7

7.f

<t

7/

Total

J=^

f

1

#7o

7S10

/60,

11.

/,?

30

SLZ

M?

100,

1*

6

X.0

7A0

3i-o

/o>.

/s-

'0

*T

6<i.3

3S-.7

700,

111

.7g&^ Jf./-

£r/?2.i's?}7i!>/y 0/* fat s/c //p -/ /)/o s #y MffA/w t?s? ¥£/?*

s?#f

t

JjiJo/i/fr

/^ £■&,!> VA/rt

/ty^V^/V

^pffft-

1

Hueiber

PetCent

number

Percent

Number

Percent

NwrMr

FnCait

Certain

Doubtful

Tnlal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

certain

Doubtttrl

To&r

Certain

DdAttuI

Total

;«i»™

Ooubrful

Total

Certiin

OwMful

lobl

Certeni

D«tttol

Tsw

CertiM

Ow*nui

ToU

O-BjIIom

/

/

.0.0

a;

/■7

-Jt

AL/K?

0.0

•X23

i!

O

00

00

0.0

_JJ

/

Jf.l

0.0

3.1

1-AKnnaial

S

?rf>

3-tf-

JAZ

ro. t

(7.0

3

7

MJ

((.?

i&Jsr.t

-i

n

JS

/?,3

2ta

T.l?

30

I

US

fit

1./

est

^AiRnn

it

/

S

-JJL

1.7

1'S

1

J_J,

M

D.0

o

t

G

jm.

*Q

IS-lt

3

6

3

f,9

O.o

-LS

3-UeMPtwwi.

(?

0.0

£.f

e.e

_£j

o

0,0

ao

i,0

<?

c

0,0

fi.e>

o,o

O

06

ao

-JLi-

4-Blrte

(?

0.0

D,Q

0,O

£>

Q

06

0.0

0,0

%

It

7.7

0>Q

77

a

OQ.

0.0

0.0

S-ClnrdJ, Oust, etc.

~0

o

0.0

0,0 J.0

'0.0

0.0

<?,<?

-JL-

0.0

Ze

Aft

o

P

10

Co

0.0

rUfsufllt Wo.

i>

o

o

-$j}\

d.D 0.0

1

c

1

S,(,

O.O

fr,f

-L.

O

6

it.C

ao

//,(

s~

r

/»-6

6,»

fib

7-Psjctolo(i e^

p

0.0

ao

O.O

.0

0.

0,9

o.o

p.o

r>

Prfi

to

fit?

&

c

0-6

0,0

OJ

smuumn

-1%.

p

12.

MX

0.0

2P.1

J

I

$6

0.0

,U

_*_

6

('■(•

Up

IU

_2L

?

/0.f

$0

t**if

Mtn«r

£•

o

s~

_ts

60

f>?

1

<?

_L_

££

0,0

f,6

. 0.

o

0.0

*0

/?/?

a

£>

.&&..

Ao

0.9

Total |

23L

32-

SJ

&1

5-q.X

t**,

JL.

7

JSL.

til

&.1

/ti>

22.

If

s-?.

£Xit

36-6

'0/?,

HjL

f

*7

P-.1

s-l

f0O.

AfAt

J~i/A/f

J~!/H.f

At/ gjjj r

EnlrutiM

Number

Per Cent

Number

Pa Cent

Nunbei

Percent

NllKbH

PeiCait

Cerbin

Doubtful

Totel

Certain£Xit

36-6

'0/?,

HjL

f

*7

P-.1

s-l

f0O.

AfAt

J~i/A/f

J~!/H.f

At/ gjjj r

EnlrutiM

Number

Per Cent

Number

Pa Cent

Nunbei

Percent

NllKbH

PeiCait

Cerbin

Doubtful

Totel

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dnrbtnil

Total

Certain

DnMM

total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OoubtM

Total

Certain

OduUHu

Total

Certain

DntMri

Totil

0-SjilODn

^

V

F

4,1

,2.2

ffil

1

/

M

0,0

V

_J_

/

SO

0-0

,f f "

D

o\o

0.0

0,0

1-Astnimicil

7

vT

IH

MIL

///

If. t

■r

f

to

2&H

?t>.o

ait

-A

7

7

JO.

3Sio

VP

1

?r

*(

t.1

fi?3

61,2

Z*Aircrtft

6

$

9

'W

6,7

740

.. j,.

!

3.

iU>

*f!0

1.0

r

r

0.0

..ASP.

X.o

I

to

X

b.f

77 7.

M7

J-lijdtPheren,

£V

1

0.0

f,0

0.fl

6

p

o

..tj>

tit

O.o

-&.

<?

<?.(?

o.o

<?,<?

<?

e?

£>.t

0.0

M

4-Srds

O

AQ.

/?,Q

r.o

D

-MX

-JLO-

-&£-

(

i

O.0

s:o

T.0

c

o

4,0

P-fl

,1P

SK;iOvrJ$, Dust, etc.

£>

40

0.0

o,<?

P

Q m t>

ip.O

o.o

&

6

at

0.0

OP

£>

0.0

(1.6

0.0

G'lRSvfrlc, kifo.

ft

Q

a

*M

6.o

ti^

X

X.

7if>

ap

<-°

_x

■0

7

ts.o

0.0

/r,0

2

C

2

3.7

e,p

l.f

7.Ps,xW0|i(al

O

O,0

00

P.O

1

/

V

0,0

tl*

0-*

do

0,0

2

2

7-f

00

3f

rVlhAnom

£

$

J££.

ao

/j.j

f

r

3Z£

0,0

?^.f?

2

2

(0.0

4.0.

(6.0

/

f

t'1

0.0

/■?

Mlfcer

Jiii

0,0

a.Q

1

_i

t\P

&e

M>0

/

1

Sl0

P.O

f.O

(0

<o

0.0

'0.0

p.0

Total

36

f

4T

ten

?e,o

/op,

if

(

*r

7t.B

Vfr

(to.

-3.

/3

zp

sr.fi

fs;o /ol

7

Jt£L

?*

J3S

<fc.s

700

u

J> rr£-rf $£~/r

fer&j'&f?

A/o f/^/^jSVif

Dtcf-Atffr/r

Evtlualion

Niartcr _

PerCait

(tHiiber

Per Cent

Nuraber

Per Cent

Nurnbcr '

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certairi

Doubtful

Total

certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0-ealloon

/

O

/

32r3

0.0

?5".?

0.6

O,0

0.0

3

3

0.0

ir

l'

4

it

t*A

' C.O

m.%

1'AsuWKHOicat

0,0Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0-ealloon

/

O

/

32r3

0.0

?5".?

0.6

O,0

0.0

3

3

0.0

ir

l'

4

it

t*A

' C.O

m.%

1'AsuWKHOicat

0,0

0.0

oo

2

it

6

IT.U

?cf

4(.l

f

70

2'

20.6

a i.i

Mf

%

s~

7

Zct

fir

JT-1

2-MfCraH

. P

a

■0

0.0

00

0.0

1

1

2 .

1,7

Z?

t?><1

<r

5-

0.0

lf-7

(f,7

&

ff

pi. 2

0.0

12 J.

KicttlPbtx*.

o

rV

0,n

0.0

f?

0,0

0.0

0,0

_0A

o

0,0

O-P

<>.&

—J2-,

0-0

i,0

0.0

t-Birdj

o

.0.0

f.o

0-0

0.

?

0.0

-&Q-

. 00

e-0

0,0

0.0

f.O

a*

Klwdi, Oust, etc.

a

0.0

fl.lt

0.P

7?

-£JL

0,0

0f>

V

. O,0

0.6

O.o

0.0

00

0.0

Mnatric Into.

Z

Q

2

ti.7

0.0

*7

2

7

JUi.

CO

Ct,7t

(

,

1

2 -1

C,9

i,9

t

0>

i

7.7

o.o

7,7

^Psycholojical

£>

J.P

0.0

°-Q

0.0

7>-0

Sux

o

6

o.o

p,f

a

o

0.0

Q,o

CO

S-Unknorm

,

.0.0

0.0

c,P t

3

1

93.1

—£JL

H-l

UL-

#■

MB

00

firf

6

f

212.

Q.P

22,2

Muter

-^2-

0.0

CO

fl.fi

Q

0.0

0.0

0.p

*,0

op

0.0

3

?

U.i

00

/1, 7

ToW

3

J

/OS-0

0.0

foo.

T

r

13

6*S

?is

/*><>,

a

2Z

3¥

?5T3

6#,7

/00,

23-

r

27

f/S

/ff

/'»,

m-

112

**4^3£M--'»i*'

Tfttl* #?

£jtf<-J{£j2£> /r <?f /?£l S/6#r/#6S #S MV7& 0f Y^ff .

/?s&„

Ji4A//J/3tl/

F£S#L>/}£V

MA£C#

/}S*/L

Emiabon

Nonbd

Per Cent

Nartet

Percent

Nuaber

PerCenl

Hunter

PefCal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cotan

Doubttul

Total

Jertain

Doubtful

ToM

Certain

OouCtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouMful

Total

Certain

Owbthl

Total

Ceitiin

Dwbnul

Toti

^Balloon

G>

<7.A

o,a

. d.H

3

3

ri

ai

%\

JLi

3

/*

#.J

n

&

J

■ tf.

/

5H

.JUL

3M

l-Mnmaial

?

£

;s

su.

1*3

«.Y

3_

4

7

q.i

a.\

>|A

qH

4

9

».,

6.a

111

_i

~~ly

H

jM

.bt>

/3'?

Mitoatt

2

2

/*.$

0,0

/..5 6

£

ism

Ob

itt

^

V

f(f

Jt>7

Mu

W

_^.

6

£

m31

JLAl*3

^Litflt PtWOIi.

{>

«.o

tvfl

0.0

ft

0.6

d.&

d.o

4

,A0

^MJ

6J>

^

. .0

&

At

ad

At

4-Birts2

2

/*.$

0,0

/..5 6

£

ism

Ob

itt

^

V

f(f

Jt>7

Mu

W

_^.

6

£

m31

JLAl*3

^Litflt PtWOIi.

{>

«.o

tvfl

0.0

ft

0.6

d.&

d.o

4

,A0

^MJ

6J>

^

. .0

&

At

ad

At

4-Birts

..a

t>

0.0

«0

O.D

to

a

0J>

46

O.0

O

tt

a&

fib

d

b

&

-JLL

tyb

Ad

S-Cloutfa, Dust, etc.

&

p

6.9

0.0

0.0

8

o

0,0

*a

&0

0J>

6.0

o,h

6

d

6

0.6 01

o.b

C-NnilTic M>.

/

t

/

S.3.

0.5

5 3

/'

o

II

311

Aft

3?3

/3

13

m

d.o

{?■!

_£

?

37.4

at>

m

7-Psjthotttical

fi.D.

*-t>

o.O

6

o

0.6

^

<U

O

6

C&

0.6

d-d

/

/

3.4

aa

.w

HWunwi

X

6

2.

ia,6.

O.0

J*.S

?

3

il

AA

<M

J?

1$

xo£

a.d

itf

<?

6

9

l\0

6.t>

^1/

KHfw

1

6

/

S.2

0.4

i3

_A

o

3

JL1

*.*

<U

<3

V

H

a-o

JUL

$■(>

a

A

o.o

0.0

^>.i

Total |

l±

5

/?

224

04.3

/OrV

J2_

H

5.?

ffl

u.l

)««•

61

//

Zl

SS2

\i^3 m.

^L

613.

\to.o

06 m.

•

/^rf</

Ju/je

Ju i-y

flv&Lisr

Enloaliwi

HvnbH

Pet Cent

Himbei

Pace*

Number

Percent

HunibP

PerCorl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dnubtlu

Tolal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:ertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

TOW

Cert*™

DouLtfu

Total

Certain

paibttul

Total

D-BHIoon

3

a

J

K.»

6i

/f>.C

3

5

*4I

J4

7M

/

6

i

J&L

06

Mi.

JL

a-

9J

a. A

u

1'AXnMiat

J.

a.

y

(6.A

/d.6

14$

6

6.6

si

o.i

7

7

212.

-AA.23A

/

I

7

-M.

jy.ttft

Miftnft

6

o

a

a.d

fid

4.6

$

a

6

a.c

Ai

d.$

¥

t

_5- til

J£kX>1

y

' f

j

MO

¥.1

pi. 4

J-Li|)itFtiiB«L

a

6

o

0.6

a.d

a. 6

6

6

to

ffd

£6

a

4

06

a. 6

■0.6

o

6

' A*

0.0

6.6

*-Bli*

e>

6

~M

0.d

Oi

3

&

6

M

fl.d

M

4

6

6

00

A 6

0.6

d

6

6

di\

uLt

6.*

o^ClowJi, But, etc.

c

a

JA

t.i

4t>

A

a

at

09

0.6

d

6

fid

0.6

0.6

6

6

3

OJ

00

f.i

t-lnoMic. kh.

J-

4

2.

/A.d

AO

/a. 6

6

6

S.6

dd

0.6

7

7

7-1Z

0,6 19.2.

Z

J-

$J

0.6

t9

7-Psythok|ical

c

6

1A

0.6

OJ

A

6

6

6.6

M

to

6

^

6.60.6

6

6

3

OJ

00

f.i

t-lnoMic. kh.

J-

4

2.

/A.d

AO

/a. 6

6

6

S.6

dd

0.6

7

7

7-1Z

0,6 19.2.

Z

J-

$J

0.6

t9

7-Psythok|ical

c

6

1A

0.6

OJ

A

6

6

6.6

M

to

6

^

6.6

0.8

OJ

c

fi

6

0.6

" 0.3

A 6

t-IMaon

T

r

mL

Ad

>M.6

?

d

a.

111

ad

tft

V

6

_£^/

_M#-2

ST

/

f

32J

0.6 V.4

MDih

S

3

d.t

f5i

t£d

d

C

J. 6

M

to

d

0.0

0.6

0.*

/

/

</6

0.6

#6

-

Total

J£

J-

&

K6

&6

fdd.

_£

7

/M6

4.d

/M

22.

/

&?£"?

VZtOt.

/T

?

AS

72-^^.0 /tO.

#

SBPj-£H8s Ji

Oeraaee.

MotrE^taeK

D^:(e M/l^e

Evaliialm

Nnaba

PerCent

Nuntier

Per Cent

Nuntn

Per Cent-

Humbti

Pel Cent

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doattful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

DouWful

Total

O-Ballooo

-6.

6

6.0

6.0

6.6

)

/

/6J

OP

fO. 6

6

2

X

iJ

ff

£7

.*

^

i

6.6

i^

\f.H

1-Astmraw'cat

4

f

Sfr

6.6

VS

t

1

J

/6-0

/4.6

26-6

6

i.6

0.6

6.6

/i

?

n

m\

7X.i

tfH

MimaM

X

6

J*

tf.H

6.6

l$M

A

f

J

6.6

/A a

/t>,6

X

f

/0

f.7

&?

</3J

/

d

/

3.1

-JUL

IX

3-Lifbt Phema.

6

a

z>

0.0

6.6

00

6

o

6

6.6

a. 6

6.6

o

4

66

0.6

6.4

6

6

4

-0J>

-JLL

6.0

t-Blnti

Oj

e

<J>

M

64

06

6

6

c

6-6

0.0

0.0

.

d

d.6

0.6

S.i

4

6

-LL

-JLM

an

Mloods. Dttst, etc

o

0.6

6.0

OX

6

6

6.6

0.0

0.0

6

06

0-0

6.6

6

6.6

!UL

o.t

6-lnsuffic Bfc.

3

?

ILL

4.6

f3.l

6.6

0-6

0.0

1

6

/

V3

OJ

V-*

J

6

/

3.2

6.0

3.1

7-Piytoolopcai

6.6

tio

o.o

6

a

4

6.C

6-0

6-0

c

6

0.6

0.6

0.6

3

4

3

9.7

^M.

n

ttlnlomn

3

p

3

23J.

6J

\Z.I

k

$

66. C

01>

(tO.O

?

S9.1

0.0

It. J

2

4

£■

6.5

UUL-L5

Wbiei

O

OJ

6A

6.d

#

6.6

Afl

0.0

1

d

/

¥3

0.6

i-3

/

J

3.1

LJLA

3.2.

Total

/3

'3

m.o

0.6

m.

9

z

/6

UA

£4.0

/66.

J3

fO

Z3

%5

MS.3

/id.

2.0

n

3/

MS

35.5

lib.

113

mi.

r/igf

%6.d

#

6.6

Afl

0.0

1

d

/

¥3

0.6

i-3

/

J

3.1

LJLA

3.2.

Total

/3

'3

m.o

0.6

m.

9

z

/6

UA

£4.0

/66.

J3

fO

Z3

%5

MS.3

/id.

2.0

n

3/

MS

35.5

lib.

113

mi.

r/igf

%

Ax..

V-

..ai... 
__i.

— t 
O 1

£ 
.5

J- 
..„. 
.<2

..'.4 
_

**■ »• L/Xl -?.i.^./:'

—

£l£&J:t?-4r70/V

<&

/S_^

s/6A>r//y<;i

#y

/?£?/lT/f

_3^ S_rv_Jirf

/<?_r/

j

F£8/ec¥)Av

M#<et&

AM/t.

tnC<nt

Nortei

PKCmt

Number

PeiCenl

NMbw

PerCsil

._■_. 
__ 
__.•_

OouMtul

( 7f

Tot*1

-Plain

Oo.t~tuS

TaUl

Cer_i

Do_Hul

ToW

>rt»n.

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dou-Msil

Total

COtMl

Owttfcl Tatal

Cd-in

O00MM

t«h

«■?

a

r 1

*<7

oJ>

4.1

-

a

CO

40

A0

£>

O

OO

fl.O

Oi3

./?_?

7.-*

**-5

__-

2.

2

W

/3-3

tf-3

_J_

1

«-.

IU

IL1

S<*

6

(3.i)

_____

_._

7.4

3

?

_4_

?a?>io/>

O

1

1

0.0

.47

/>•?

O

1

333

0.0

33-^

A-5

0J5

6

6

A0

o2>

oi>

0,

6-b

0.0

0.<J

___^

C

<?

-.0

_6__

0.0

r ..M

0_

6

O

0.0

_-__4

oft

r>

6

fi,6

0.0

rM

_i

<5.fi

©.rt

CO

A0

_

AA

0.0

_

00

0.0

0.0

a

c

0.-

. ,o-o

o.O

^«5

6

__.

O.d

J.D

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

2

rt

2.

_i.7

o.oU.1

<J.0

a

£

6

0J>

0.0

0.6

0\

6.0

_Z>

CO

O

OjD

0.6

<?._

.??/

7

A

7

<M-7

____!

4i-1

3

<?

3

50.0

Ot>S0J>

6

. .p.

AS

____,

-O.O

Q.O

Ad

3-?

J.

J>

2

133

__&_

tfj

6

a. a

Co

Qj>

O

(?

0-0

AO

0.0

7___

-3.9.6

Hi.

J&

5

#

U7

333

m.

_4_

X

6

W/7

13.3 m-

3

_?

IOJ.C

a.o

ItO- .

p

. . _ /%«/. ' .

jtfve

-V-i/

Ac/oc/sr

Nu«t-*i

P«C_t

NuoWf

Pet Cent

NuHwt

PaCmt

NHta

Ptf'Cal

Evaluation 
O-Ballwi

Cert?in [ I'i' c*;-.

Trial

Certain

Ooubtftil

Total

Ctitam

DOUDIfUl

Total

Certain

DnHM

Total

.trtain

Doubtful

Total

Cotain

DooWd

TaW

Cat™

OMbttj Total

Cata-

DoaHM

Total

""'"c3

7

y_t_>

fi-O

4_>-*P

tO

AS

Afi

a*

6

_•

c

0.0

Q& JiA

i

1

2

5^>

so

IU

l-AsLtooAiul

?-*l,tllft

r>

A2

-&A

(?.()

_.o

AO

04

1

2

3

It.)

__a.3i3

_.£

f).6 6.0

ij .1

17

y_t_>

fi-O

4_>-*P

tO

AS

Afi

a*

6

_•

c

0.0

Q& JiA

i

1

2

5^>

so

IU

l-AsLtooAiul

?-*l,tllft

r>

A2

-&A

(?.()

_.o

AO

04

1

2

3

It.)

__a.3i3

_.£

f).6 6.0

ij .1

1

^j-i

___a

?^.i>

1

1

lop'.*

_»

<O0,6

I

(3

\

U.]

Oil

II)

/

1

fi.O A 4

f>4

1-L»(M Mnn».

5-ClcoJi, Dull, ete 
S-liaflic. Wo.

_.._Ji„._4_I

<>-3

-__JL

p.t>

d

oi

^^

6.1

(3

-?

0^?

.-0

O.0

2

1

,?

;ao

5.0

i$.0

Ad

^d

a

a.i

AP

0-0

J>

f?

<J,i

«_.

Q.C

.

AO

0.0

6.0

00

____.

___d

tf.a

___i

c

0.(

c-r>

ot

_1

&

a«i

4-fl

0.0

<J

0.0

6.0

0.0

CJ.

1

y.

0.0

Afl

a.a

■

Ctf

p.<o

Q.l

6

lO

0.0

o.e

0-J

3

3

\$o

___i_/5.-5

J- Psycho tojital

0-*

____

(?.0

6

0_

04

04

1

1

Afl

■IU

J 11

*5

ft

00

AS

6.0

o-UnkMwi

1

ia.o

(50

«>-P

A^

f)£

0.0

3

£1

3

33.3

0.0

83?

l<=

O

ffi

EO.O

0.6

<y0.0

J-Qtft«

h °\

0.0

0-0

AO

■

<)._>

ci

0.0

i

<?

1

ll.l

a,e>

\W

1

O

1

5.0

0.1

£.0

Totil

4

..-.__

5

$0,0

M.O

too.

1

1

100.0

OJ)

tot.

6

3

. <T

__1

33-3

\Q0.

___

X

2Q

90.0

/04

)06\

1-A__0.%r + Ht3l

J-LijrlPhfiiD-n.

l-Cleuds. Qusi, E 
tlns-ffic. info.

tUnb»K.i

... ,_i \ .... 
-> ■

,_> - _.

- °'. . 
„_.£.[..

■> j

■ - - j ' 1 - ■

Til!.

SaPreiBcx

Oc7pg£-X

AtargMge*

pjidSMgeA

PwCent

' Number

Per Carl

«-r*er

Percent

Niraiber

PerCait

1* ij Toli

__i

Ooubtni!

Total

Certain

Doutitrlil

Total

Certain

OnjbMol

Total

Certain

Dwbtful

Total

Certain

OmitrtM

Total

Certain

Oo-t>M

Total

Certain

DaiHtuI

Total

I 1

fxi

2

»

X

7.1

60

7-1

&

/

/

AC

&

tf

?!

.

91

0.0

9.1

. , 4

tt.7

^

iff-"?

<?

1

/£>

n-l

u

M-1

s

n

4-l.A

ft*

714

2.

1

3

Jg.Z

9t

10.3

O' i

0$

H

4

Z

6

hi

11

M4

1

6

2

111

$.0

u?

4

1

3C4-

0.0

tt*

.--•I 6

0.0

0.0

00

1

0.6

ot

o.c

O.O

0,0

0.0

6

0.0

0.0

0.0

*

0-0

A0

0.0

6

r>

a a

0.0

0-0

6

r>

0.0

0$

0.0

0.0

bo-

0.0

£r 6

0.0

il-t

0.0

Q

6

00

Ai

o.n

O.D

OD.--•I 6

0.0

0.0

00

1

0.6

ot

o.c

O.O

0,0

0.0

6

0.0

0.0

0.0

*

0-0

A0

0.0

6

r>

a a

0.0

0-0

6

r>

0.0

0$

0.0

0.0

bo-

0.0

£r 6

0.0

il-t

0.0

Q

6

00

Ai

o.n

O.D

OD

6.0

0.0

ot

9./

14

<?■ Z

a

0.0

0.0]

0.0

1

6

1

JA

0.0

59

i

I

9. J

OJO

C\ &

t>.0

AD

"6-f>

0.0

0.0

0.6

b

&

LM

00

6.0

i

I.

U

66

*' ■ 9

ity&

A°

ofrPc

9

(j

9

SJ.

0.0

UJ

0.0

0.0

6.0

I

1

9J

O-o

lid

0-li

HI

1

/

3.L

o-t

u

6

0.0

0.0

0.0

CO

dd

OA

■m

s.y

100.

M

3

zp

W.3

10.1

100.

n

£

/7

{#■7

3S-3

166.

JO

1

//

f/.9

3-1

160.

114

[wi»*fr*J»*^i> • .J. •

■•jr.!

m

r $

-r<t4i* *'&

£r#t.</4r/a/y /?f foe s&#r/-jytf &L~£zs2<k£&. <2£i <^jS^,

#£-2^

Jf)wvAe.</

f£g*t/4g</

Mrt£<!*'

/tfig/L

EvH«Do«

Numta

PuCent

Number

PeiCSIt

Number

Percent

Nuriiei

Pacat

Certain

Onbllul

Totil

Certain

Doubtfu!

TstH

:«rtiin

Doubtful

ToW

CerWn

Doubttid

ToW

>rtnn

Doubtful

Tout

Certain

Doubtful

Tsui

Certain

DaiMlui

Totll

Catiiri

Doutthil

Tot*

'o-Ballaen

/

a

1

_i2

_-*M

t7

.

<J

1

_£i

Of

$1

3

1

4

II. 1

31

ms

3

3

i

*7

^*1

rf

l.Attamnal

4

4

fl

JA.»

a*V7

«•■*

4

1

J -

na.

*i

J 7?

J

1

3-1. M

.V)

J*

f

19

/7.5

i).<J

M

2'Atrcflft

d

6.0

0.*

0.0

2.

2

4

/)./

Ih 1

tt3

3

2

5

II. 1

14

/«

.IS

9

«

s

7.9

pa4

>Li(M Ptino*.

£5

^

0.0

.A*

$.0

<3

bJO

4.0

C4

(J

rt

0.0

■ 0.0

^

1

1

/.a

ft*

/.5

4-Bir*

d

rt

0.0

_M

rt./J

..A

(7

6.t

0,t

pt>

1

d

1

3.7

D.fl

3-7

3

1

4

A.T

|.0

3f

J-ClouiB, Oust etc.

J

(7

0.0

„4£ W

d

-M

0J>

6.0

6

<

J

OH

31

J-7

a

6

O-O

/)•*

ft-fi

G-lnwfTic, tab.

fl.

ft

At

0.0

W

\

f?

i

<i

4>-t

3-1

1

rt

1

3.7

M

37

V*

0,

1*

S.7

^3.0

<n

7-PtyeMoticat

2

(?

A

131

0.0

/,$?

6

'0

0.6

Q.b

0.0

6

6

0.0

0.0

fl.0

)

1

/.A

(7-d

|.0

t-IMunn

1

f?

,2

133

Ad

t?3

5

5

?l.$

M

J7r?

4

<J

4

I4S

ot

**

38

^

3t-T

0.6

.»-i

MHtir

£

&

^131

0.0

/,$?

6

'0

0.6

Q.b

0.0

6

6

0.0

0.0

fl.0

)

1

/.A

(7-d

|.0

t-IMunn

1

f?

,2

133

Ad

t?3

5

5

?l.$

M

J7r?

4

<J

4

I4S

ot

**

38

^

3t-T

0.6

.»-i

MHtir

£

&

^

13.3

d.&

/33

2.

2

///

a&

Ill

/

<1

IP

.?.!

33Z

37*3

Z

a

2

'■?

(1-0

ia

ToW ,

y 1 /

4

tf

13*

-&1

y<w.

J5

3

)8

93.3

ill

loo-

14-

13

2-7

51-9

^■X

/OO.

11

12-

103

Sf?4

l|.6

/oo-

3

Ma*

Ji/Af£

Jist,V

AlZ&UST

Enlvalan

Numbei

Pei Cent

Hunter

Per Cent

Nuater

Pa Cent

Niinbei

Per Cot '

Certain

iOnjbMu_

Tobt

Cfltiin

Doublfu

ToW'

Certain

Ooudttul

ToW

CerUin

_OrjabHl»lj

ToW

^ertiiii

DNbHul

Total

Certiin

Oouttkl

TsW

Certan

DHtbth

ToW

Certiin

Doubtiil

ToW

D-eniocn

J<

4

11

3\

3.?

/'»

x\.

£

21

|1S

3.4

/W

31

&

yn

11.1

^

/f-2

^t

4J

_il

«...

/^3

rt.4

1-AsUWMical

)fc

X

(if

1*2

I.«

|bi

&

/7

4]

iM

7.7

,133

9f

3*

/33

111

41

no

43

ii

tf

|d.?

*<^

n^

2-Aiicnlt

n

1*-

fl

1 5.0

|6.t

J5i

ii

/i

?f?

14^

_Ji

Hi

M

??

2-U

IU

il-3

m

<h5

43

9?

H-4

/A?

2?

]-Li|ht nioon.

3

6

?

27

6.0

a.T

I

tf

I

fl.i

6A

U

/i.

4

/t

(.5

■5

a-*

5

(i

II

1.3

/.5

4-fcnli

£>

0.0

0.0

^

i>

<?.tf

OA

o&

4

I

5

•5

J

.£

(?

6

0.0

l?-rO

tfd

S-CloudS, OulL HL

a

3

.7.1.

0.0

7-'

_£

^

Al

on

4

1

5

.5

.1

.i

d

1

1

on

•3

.3

o-liUulllC. kilo.

c

6

^=2

(5.0

S3

M

7&

il-'f]

A.0

t(4

7.J

c

7^

1.0

AO

w

35

35

n

<)0

ff*

7-PsrcMeiieal

o

oxi

O.A

0,0

^a

t

13

01

23

t

I

;s

1.1

■?

2-6

a

1

<1

a.o

3

a-3

t-IMunW

_iO

310

(7-7

o.o

m

33

33

Iff

<*

11$

U3

yt3

jei

fl.fi

JO.r?

13

"r?

m

0.6

*J.4

MlhB

"l

1

10

^a

fl.S

*i

^L

\

7

14

o.h

W

-2L

1

2X

i.7

■ 1

el?

S

5

14

Zl

y-3

34

Tort

.14

11

112

m

/i.?

\00.

J40

36

17*

79i

?&4

IM.

513

/SI

7?^

75.?

»1

/M

3.74

1X3

3^7 £9.7

3/3

too.

*'$

m

I:

l9

r

. Ssprgrieejt

OdTose/e

A/0f£Mlg£je.

£>B£GM/£E4.

NuaMI.14

11

112

m

/i.?

\00.

J40

36

17*

79i

?&4

IM.

513

/SI

7?^

75.?

»1

/M

3.74

1X3

3^7 £9.7

3/3

too.

*'$

m

I:

l9

r

. Ssprgrieejt

OdTose/e

A/0f£Mlg£je.

£>B£GM/£E4.

NuaMI

Pel Cent

Nunber

Per Carl

*1(*H

Per Cent

Nomtw

Percent

Eralulton

Certain

Dajbrfu

Tobl

CerWn

Ctmbthl

Totil

Certiin

Doobttol

ToW

Certain

Qnibtiul

ToW

Certain

Doubttol

ToW

CerWn

DolAltil

ToW

CerWn

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0-BKItw

.4

//

IS

2.5

^

W

^

/2

2t?

■$\

i?l

A/.8

z

7

II

u

134

rf*

b

3

3

At

+ (.

W

1-Aitmamcal

?2

/?t

If*

/5

/<5

z3

IMA

Hfi

26D

5

9

(3

n.i

m

Jf.4

//

1

26

U-7

/3i

yc^

Z-Aircnfl

Z5J

itf

H

£Z

»A

4$

5

r 7 ?

./r?

5&

n-.l

fo

3

J

t

.+.i

ti

V

I

13

&

J£

nl

u.z

3-Ut*tP»a«*.

/

2

3

_i

/■?

\-i

.5

4

4

66

41

43

2.

;

3

3.0

I-)

45

1

1

f.i

a.d

1.5

4-Buds

y

2.

3

■6

/•A

j*

4

/

^

+2

i-i

Sti-

6

(j

C

CO

. M

OjO

6

6

a.d

4.&

DM

S-Cloudi. D»sr. He.

^

/

1

A.a

^^

■A*«

/

/

o.O

/./

ll

?

?

a

M

us

6

0J

0.4

0.6

rrlnjutfic. tiro.

/^

£>

12

7.*

66

7.4

4

^

-t

4 3

da

+3

4

d

4

u

0.0

to

3

3

f.i

^

4.L

T-Ptytholoircal

/

, &

I

o.&

d-d

^.^

^

<9

ad

0.&

#jO

1

1

it

AO

\*

6

6

0.0

0.6

O.0

a-UMnnn

42

42

2Sft

£>M

^.«?

/4

<J

^t

IS. z

d$

62

J?

'1

&f\

to

tfA-

22

d

1*

S34

p.d

33.4

MthB

£

2

3

J/L

13.

W

2-

/

3

■z.2

/■I

33

Z

2

3d

u

3^J

3\

d

3

*t

t<>

4*

ToW

?f

^5

l6Z

6U

J?1

/A).

SO

"4Z

72

n*

&L

m

39

^

61

S0_

+3.3

m-

4-/

is

it

&l

371

166.

115

r??gi£ /?//

-&&A4&ZJ&&-.

<?r 4>/i/,r s/GA>r_s/t/&s dJL am^xv ^ •/£/>£

-&K yefies.

S

Javm /? Y

FtftPVAtr

/^fA/rcx-

A/**'*-

Evaluation

Nunibo

p«c«n

Nunbet

Percent

rhixtm

Pel Cent

Nonbcf

Pit Cat

Certain

OouMM Total

Certain

DtnlWfut[ Tlltll

pertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

:ert»n

DnibHul

Total

Oittln

Dwmttil

Total

Cat»n

OoiHnil

Tol»T

CabinNonbcf

Pit Cat

Certain

OouMM Total

Certain

DtnlWfut[ Tlltll

pertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

:ert»n

DnibHul

Total

Oittln

Dwmttil

Total

Cat»n

OoiHnil

Tol»T

Cabin

Doubtful

Torn

Q- Balloon

-2.

2

5

9.1

? J

£.J

7

O

7

H-1

O.o

lo. f

i

2

10

7S

>1

1.1

7

3 It

t.f

H

7-o

! 1-AatflXMMMCal

2/

/8

3t

111

11- i

VJ.7

II

/?

24

ni

235

1QJ

JS.

n

27

IU

II. 2

m

Q&

3

21

19.)

21

so. y

MuKUfl

_X_

3

?

73

3 8

/.-'

_J_

5

11

it?

18

/fi.7

n

i

ft

111

£>■$

/7-7

J2X

7

3/

li-7

If

?/. /

3-Uflll Pnewm.

ao

0.0

c.o

O.Q

0.0

OJL

0.0

to

/

f

SL2,

O.Q

e.i

(-Birds

Qt

a . p

09

6

Co

0.0

0.0

3

1-8

0.0

2-8

~~^P

1

i

lA.

9-1

3.f

S-Cleodi, Dint, etc.

0-0

_M

M

0.0

0.0

0.0

.1

/

0.0

Of

t-1

■0

o.o

CO

S.o

trlosaflic. till.

Tl

8

ICO

*■*

/CO

3

3

t-7

DO

V.7

IS

t*

tt.o

o.o

11,0

Ql

1\

ti.s

if.f

7-Psrdnlo|ial

2

2,

35

SO

35

0-0

0.9

J

9

0.0

O.Q

0-0

7

%

JJL

O.o

ff

tlMuun

H

II

'3.8

c.o

/3.S

?

Q

?

111

o.o

111

n

11

159

o.o

Hf

JU

IX

tn

0-6

af.6

Mew

5"

I

c

(.1

/i

7-5

7

7

i>1

o.o

i».9

_L

/?

/?

01

ni

tit.t

2

i

ii

S.0

t-H

T.U ■

r*

7<t\ SO

70-0

jo. p

/09.

1±

20

if

(,?.%

3A3

jot.

11

It

167

U.H

3J.(

I9t.

1X9

19

>ti

90. 1

If

J 00.

A/a r

Tl/AsjT.

Totr

Avaps7~

\

Nunbef

Pel Cent

Numtwf

Pa Cent

Nuatet

Percent

Nwter

Pet Cat

Enluilwn

Ccrtwi

DoubM

Total

Ctrtam

DduMfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Calan

Doustnri

Total

;eftaig

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Catjin

DMibtb

Total

Certain

Don MM

Total

0-Mloon

/9

J

23

12.0

3.}

15. 1

29

tf

JS

IH.f

10

HA

n.

?v

> ye

II f

C.l

m

if

#2

Si

_J£

7.4-

ft/

1-Aibnnaical

?3

<*"

31

15.1

53

70C

Q{

-?/

^6

lit

/</.?

32.8

/Of

^y

ivt

'3-9

si

Iff

m

£f

II 1

msl t&-.y

24-A

2<Aiicnlt

l±„

/i"

J3

11.0

/ff.o

710

io

/J

t)

Iff

i:f

714

104

*/

i*i

/?•?

IO.S

PW

if70C

Q{

-?/

^6

lit

/</.?

32.8

/Of

^y

ivt

'3-9

si

Iff

m

£f

II 1

msl t&-.y

24-A

2<Aiicnlt

l±„

/i"

J3

11.0

/ff.o

710

io

/J

t)

Iff

i:f

714

104

*/

i*i

/?•?

IO.S

PW

if

10

iL

AL7.

ff 19.3.

1-Lichl PhSB«.

3

?

J

7.0

M

1-3

/

/

2.

0.S

0.5

10

/¥

¥

IB

1.8

as

u

7

7

If

-M.

U

r,i

4-Biidi

(7

"J.

2

0.0

/ 3

/ 3

P

O-O

0.0

0.0

3

3

&

Q.V

o.f

^L o

6.0

o:6

0.O

S-Cloudi, Dusl. He

7

1

/.i

O.O

/•3

d

<?

0.0

0.0

0-0

1

!

i

0-1

0-1

.1

\

i

-M.

0-Z

P. 3.

frtnuffic hta.

22

(?

2?

mi

<?.ii

/¥7

31'

21

11-9

tl-1

11

6

61

10-5

o.o

It-S

HI

IX

-lit

A0

'9-1

r-pqrdlabfUl

_<>

(?

00

O.ii

i).o

<

i

3.0

O.Q

3.0

_1_

»

17

1.2

1.0

n

10

/

n

-JJk

D7.

Z.H

t-UnblaMI

'1,3

13

15.}

i?.0

/r.3

3J

n

jp.f

00

IW

tf(.

fft

18.8

o.o

18. i

87

$7

JjJt

0.6

lf-4

9-OtlMt

7-

■2

1

T\7

1-3

£.0

7

f

8

3.5

Q.S

y.n

It

1

3t

Xn

0.1

3.8 //

5

IL

J..4

/./

?,r

Tatit

II&

3V

ISO

775

11.1

100.

'ff

42

n\

m

79-f

no

S8S

/fo

77J

7SS

2*5

Itl.

?tl

/f*

IWW.t

ssrj.

M.

Sfrr em £>£■/?

Ocy-^S'^-^

A/nt/FM #S/?

l?£-c e st & £~j?:

Enlwlnn

Hunbei

PtfCot

Nunktwi

. PerCmt

Nuobei

PeiCeul

Nmbtf

Pel Cat

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

□ou*>Hu

Total

Certain

Doubttiil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Donblhl

Tobl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dndiltu

Total

Certain

OoubHUI

Total

O-Bdleoii

t

^

/f

J.I

rf;?

f.?

?

' 5

20

-££

1.Z

/!.£■

-^H

/?

17

A 2

/!?.£>

/*a

IZ

JL1

ff

If

I-A]tmMial

10

//

<M

/*J

^T7

,£/.3

iJ2_

/f

«6

/*#

/£,?

7>.}

?5

'f

^

Jfig

/r$

3£f

79

23

sz

2L8:

ts:>

10.1

2-Aiicnfl

J'J-

11

4*

63

/HI

^.?

/ *

/■f

?5

-/S.1

tt-2-

(7,0

tl

/

/f

f.Z

(,?

/ST?

e

12

If

il

?■¥

If*

3-Liflil Ftmrn.

/

1

3

6.S

fp

A^

/

V

i

0.7

17

3,tf

.3

/

t

ZS

M

S.J

i

O

t

0.8

0.0

OS

4-Bir*

/

7

3

as-

1-0

/^

Q

*

f

/#

■i-H-

}.?

9

D

(I

0*12

If

il

?■¥

If*

3-Liflil Ftmrn.

/

1

3

6.S

fp

A^

/

V

i

0.7

17

3,tf

.3

/

t

ZS

M

S.J

i

O

t

0.8

0.0

OS

4-Bir*

/

7

3

as-

1-0

/^

Q

*

f

/#

■i-H-

}.?

9

D

(I

0*

0.0

#£

c

6

CO

00

0.0

5-Clauds. Out <tc

(?

1

»

as

(>s

^•f

/

1

0.0

*7

C?

7

1

04

/•7

17

O

<?

0.0

Q.O

0-0

S-lnjultic tilt.

J?*

?«

(OM

flft

j^a

10

p

10

it

e#

' ft

7

■0

?

r.y

(1-0

^8

q

a

1

1.1

o.o

1\

'■PiTtholotical

3

1

M

M

/■♦5

/

(?

1

07

0.0

0-7

/

/

0Q

O-O

M

z

a

2

IS

o.o

Iff

O-IMoiomi

4"?

*7

Ml

pp

S#,7

1/

<3

y

Ml

P.P

S-li

■23

,25

/?JL

0.0

lf.%

*J

2.3

ig.l

0.0

19 1

MthB

_1

3

//

-Ail

{■(>

£0

1

/

*

Zd

P.7

?,7

*l

*

33

O-O

3.3

g

-JL—

8

63

o.o

63

Trtrf

/2f

C3

/fl

fn

3&*

/M

?3

5"?

M7

iJi3

3{.7

/M

11

11

/JQ

4S79

34.X

/M

86.

tl

177

£77

323

100.

116

3*'<V-<'-:,: ; .-.* F .>::.

Tft4 l

£■

*VZ

£y#£.i///r/0A/ as

£/A//r

S/6//r//T6S

<*f

/L>t?/t/rts

r-v

.. y£4&

/?V7

j >

3Af/J*A<,

/9vdi*i>*./8y

/#?/?£<</

A fi/e /i

EvalmliM

Nuober

Pel Cent

Number

PeiCuil

Ninftet

Per Coil

Niinbei

P«C«t

Certain

QovbtflL

Total

Certain

DouDtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubrM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoutiWu

Total

Certain

On MM

Total

D-Ulook

lAitnnoaiul

2-Aircraft

,K

1

*,

JLieM Plum.

.

) t

^

-^^

^5

i l

4-Biids

3

r

J

^v

^

^

WloudJ, Dull, «c

^

S-

V

y

St

frlniiilfit. Info.

l\

v

\

ft

^

\fc

f-PtytlBlojic*

>

^

, K

V

^

S- Unburn

1

I3l^:

\

WOier

a

TM

"'

fef<

A7w v

.Tuvr

JTt/i

f

,4u4i>sr

EWJttbQn

Percent

Number

Pet Cent

Hunger

PerCnt

Htm bet

Per Cant '

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Totjl

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain

OouMJj

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtim

Total

Certain

Ooubtlul

Total

Certain

talMful

Total

O-Batltm

/

IP

i

7.7

*.f»

7\7

c

6

iXO

0.6

I2J

0.0

0.0

t>*Certain

OouMJj

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtim

Total

Certain

Ooubtlul

Total

Certain

talMful

Total

O-Batltm

/

IP

i

7.7

*.f»

7\7

c

6

iXO

0.6

I2J

0.0

0.0

t>*

1-AltBfloa.ial

/

1

t.o

7-7

7.7

7

3

$

4-3

U

IU

Q

1

3

18-7

%)

27.3

Z-Aircraft

■s

2

%

IS-H

*U

)}.$

2

a

0.0

H.2

9.3

9

U

ff.f

0.9

3-Litjrt Pfteaeai

<

N

(J

9

CO

M

t»

i

/

1.7

9.0

1*1

6

!)

0.0

0.(1

o.o

•-Bin*.

^

9

1?

Q.Q

M

0.0

o.o

Q.D

0.0

9

O.fi

o.o

■0.0

S-doudt, Dint, etc.

-s

Jl:

1?

0>0

M

0.0

0.0

3.0

0-6

0.0

CO

frUautlic, orb.

r\ *

3

3

m

0.0

ih)

(,

i

IU

<?•<>

t$.o

7

X

>9A

9.0

IS. 1

7-Pj)«*>lo|i<al

\^

V

/

1

\n

<M

7.7

1

X

0*0

¥.5

t.3

Q.O

OJ

0,6

frUntan*

\

*

4

J0.9

(?•"

30.B

9

f

IU

CO

>U

(.

(,

S%5

a.9

m

WOW

1

1

7.7

r?-^

7-7

tS

IS

3?. 6

o.o

$H

6.6

OJ

OJ

W

.

12

1

t3

W.J

7.7"

/">.

39

7

«6

m

IS-X

tot.

to

1

n

111

il

106.

u

•

Sepr-jrMsr*

cr/iffsT

/Ya vfss*r/r

J7*rc*-s-r?£-/r

E*iluu«i

km\m

PerCaat

Mwfer

Per Cat

Water

PerCenl

Nuaber

Per Coil

Certain

DHitthi

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Tobj

Certaw

Ooobtlut

Total

Ctrtiin

DoubtW

ToW

Certain

Doobtfiil

Total

Certain

Ooubtlul

Total

Certain

Dotitittu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tola!

O-IUIon

0.0

0.6

0,0

u

OJ

t.o

Jhi

0.0

6 J

P

90

o.o

ae

l-Ann»«ial -

1

f

«,n

0.0

ten

_L_

3

10

015

ii.H

U.I

■ 1

I

X

33.3

33.3

UM

X

S

mo

Q.O

/0O.Q

tiAircntt

JL.

CO

0.0

o.s

V

o.o

0.9

0.0

0'

OJ

Q.o

OJ

6jo

Q.O

0.0

Kijiil Pinna.

Q

o.o

o.o

Q.0

Q

OJ

9-9

if

\

\

3W

o.o

m

0.<3

0.0

o.o

t-Biroi

t.o

o.o

0-0

t.o

t.0

U

0.^

Q.9

OJ

O.o

OS

?.o

KloudJ, Dml, etc.

0_i

Q.O

o.o

0-0

o.o

0.0

06

Q

9

o.o

0-0

o.o

9

9.0

■OJ

0.9

Mimilfic. Wn

,

1

IC.1

c.o

i(,n

0.0

0.0

6.0

d

0.0

O.o

9.0

J_

I

i.O

0-0

Q.I)

;-Plycrolojical

1

Q

1

ten

o.o

lO-l

J_\

6

1

7.7

6.0

7-7

Q

o.p

o.o

0.0

o.o

0.0■OJ

0.9

Mimilfic. Wn

,

1

IC.1

c.o

i(,n

0.0

0.0

6.0

d

0.0

O.o

9.0

J_

I

i.O

0-0

Q.I)

;-Plycrolojical

1

Q

1

ten

o.o

lO-l

J_\

6

1

7.7

6.0

7-7

Q

o.p

o.o

0.0

o.o

0.0

0.9

8-Unlinovi

.?

J

50.0

o.o

f0:O

1

2

&*.

o.o

tSf

0-0

Q.O

Of

Q

0-0

oo

Mther

_j(L-

o.o

0.0

0.0

OJ

O.S

(l-t

0,o

OJ

o.o

Q

OJ

0-fl

9.0

TcM

c

£

160$

0.0 18°-

u

1

/ 3

BU

IS.H

140.

2

I

3

U-1

313

/OS.

D

5

mo

OJ

/oo.

117

%r.

^db-

mmmmmmmmmmGmmmmmmmm

WPSPR!?

WW

*»&.£ A/1

£/4t.v4_r/0/i/ £>f (£ki£L &£2/rjA&3. £f to0/isr# 0* yar/f*

J tf*

TAMl"i/?r

/^tf/rvA/rr .

A^/k/^

A*"/?/*-

EmutKni

Umber

PerCent

Nunbei

Per Cenl

Niirbn

P«fC«t

NawriKi

PeiCBtt

Cntitii

DoatlM

Tom

Certain

Doubtful

TDM

Certain

Doubtful

Tob*

c«t*>

Dountlul

Total

;«taa

DsiAlfut

Total

Certain

ttwMM

Total

Ccrbin

Dnittkil

Total

Catam

Oogbttal

Tot»l

:l> Balloon

<7

tf

M

o.o

o.o

Q

o.s

o.t

9.0

0:P

o.o

ev

z

<?

2

30.9

OJ

JS.Q

■•Aiinnorairal

c

5

9

tf.O

21.0

nu

3

I

S

OO-O

HO J

w

4

2

11.7

0.0

OU

-JL

7

7

u

20.P

n.o

^-Aircraft

Q

c

o.o

0.0

0.0

0.0

Q.O.

o.<?

(.6

o.p

0.0

-}

3

39. C

0.0

3t.O

IJ-LijM Pnpom.

3.9

OJ

t-e

D

O.t

o.O.

?.0

u

U

M>

Q

0.0

Q.O

0.0

Il-Birto

__£_

P

p

0.0

P-0

o.o

jLL.

<?.o

P.0

. J

it

M

aft

1

&.

1

19.0

0.9

'HO

>ClwdJ, Dial, tit

_!i_

?

OJ

0.1}

Q.O

8

.0

0£]

e>-0

00

. .a

V

9.0

f>,0

4

Q.O

0.0

friosurrrt tore.

iy

2

11.7

OJ

/fi7

JL

j£

o.p

04

2

%

72.2

u

*»,*

/

1

11.6

0-1

(O.t

7PjjdBk)rai

At

0.0

0.0

°

. Ufi

ap

17.6

U

t-«

0.6

Q

4

•-0

H

o.t

HttaM

ly

if

0.0

&e

$.0

i

r?

fi.C

o^p

6iQ

1

I

til

0,0

ll,i

1

1

11.0

t.t

)9.0

MM**

i?

/

1

.t&&

S.i

$.3

a

8

O.t

&P

0/>

y

¥

0,0

w.v

*WA

4

S.o

fj

0.0

ToW

8

y

'■<

an

33- 3

iQQ.

3

2

5

MS.

VQJ

m-

s

V

f

ff.£

m

in

8

2

/O

%C

79.0

/<$,

'

&4S

J~i>A/ £-

J~(Ji.f

_ <4ffiHsr-

E»»lut«n

NlHOBy

¥

0,0

w.v

*WA

4

S.o

fj

0.0

ToW

8

y

'■<

an

33- 3

iQQ.

3

2

5

MS.

VQJ

m-

s

V

f

ff.£

m

in

8

2

/O

%C

79.0

/<$,

'

&4S

J~i>A/ £-

J~(Ji.f

_ <4ffiHsr-

E»»lut«n

NlHOB

pr cm

Nun*tr

Pes Coil

flllttHI

Per Cent

Nina bar

PerCent

Certiin

DoM

Total

Cntain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubllul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tola!

Certain

DoobttJl

Telal

Certain

DouMfu

Total

Certain

OwbHul

Total

0>BHI«n

D.S

0.0

0.0

1

c

7

X.1

00

U.l

H

/

5*

fUS

3.7

lg.5

2

2

O.S

19.0

2*0

1-AstionMicat

1

t

7

li.Q

/o.o

20 J

Q

_J_

0.0

Q.O

o.o

*i

V

2

If. 8

/¥■» If. 6

n

2

f

10.0

no

HO J

2-Ainran

1

9

t

it.o

<).o

/O.O

M.

o.o

H

2

b

Ib.d

7*

in

1

l

a

10.6

li.t

10.0

}-Li|M PlMKW.

, <)

2

i.t

20.0

11.0

t

ff

0.0

9.0

00

(

I

3.7

0.0

3.7

Q

OJ

t.o

O.t

i- Birds

.0

I

/

9.0

10.9

/OJ

' t

0.0

0.0

0.0

i

1

o.t

3-7

\i

o.s

Of

Q.O

Klowli, Oust, tic

P

6

0.0

0.0

0.0

1

/

33.1

0.0

Ti.3

9

«

O.t

O.t

0.0

00

0.0

OJ

(■hwlfic. hfo.

■h

9

3

3&0

M

30. C

_a

I)

0.0

0.0

M

O.I

II

O.S

i

1

too

00

10.0

7-Psjdnlo|<c*l

u

0*

O.O

9

0.0

0,0

«■*

9

<?

0.0

0;O

0.0

Of

0.0

t.t

g^UMinom

/

■o

/

/O.O

to

16.O

ao

o.o

O.t

■s

a

s

if. 5

t.t

tf.5

t

<J

0.0

00

o.t

WOW

0.0

fl«

0.0

t.o

0.0

0.0

1

V

1

1.7

0.9

f-7

1

1

0.0

tt.o

16.0

■ TM

<,

f

to

CQ.o

m

J 00.

3

1

109.0

OJ-

IH.

w

e

27

704

2U

w.

¥

C

1

<to.o

ao

(tl.

-

s*

pr^-^r^s-Jf

&

T0/9£Sr'

/(/e> vr*i sf^jr

J^^c^-ASff/T

Enlmtmi

Kinttf

Pa cm

Nuntcr

Pen Coil

Nuatier

PerCent

Hunter

■ Per Canl

Cntain

Dolltft

Total

Certain

Ooabtta

Total

Certain

Doubttal

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Cwrbthj

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0-MIOM

Q

X

*

0.0

m

n 3

3

'i

&

no

If. 9

30.0

/

2

3

r.r

JIJ

/7.7

2

z

M

0.0

83

J-Aitnuiot

1

1

■0.0Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Cwrbthj

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0-MIOM

Q

X

*

0.0

m

n 3

3

'i

&

no

If. 9

30.0

/

2

3

r.r

JIJ

/7.7

2

z

M

0.0

83

J-Aitnuiot

1

1

■0.0

tin

ici

;

3

if

S.Q

ISA

70.0

1

I

8

HI J

s-f

vp

£

1

Izl

33- 3

W.6

Z-Aiittalt

1

/

an

0.0

<L'l

/

1

s.o

0.0

f.o

+

H

2J.5

0.0

134

1

i

OJ

*?

*,*-

3-Lit*t tomm.

ft

o.t

0-0

0.0

/

9

1

S.Q

0,0

$.0

OJ

u

0.1

9

JLL

o-o

9,0

4-Binb

ff

Ml

u

8.0

;

1

1

S.Q

f.O

/O.O

Q

0.0

o-t

9.0

9

■U

¥

0.P

5-CI«Kll, Oust, ric.

BJ>

J.S

6-t

Q

t.o

0,0

0.0

0.0

0,0

CO

O.t

o.o

0.0

6-htsiffic. H*>.

i

d

U

U.o

0.6

V

$

V

20.0

0.0

2Q.9

1

1

M\

0.0

s.f

3

a

3

17.5

so

/2.S

I-PtydBlofial

1

6

1

111

o.t

if. 7

c

9.0

Q.O

0.0

0...

04

04

OJ

9

0.0

(I J

4.°

»IHM

Q

i>

to

0.0

O.t

1

1

/o.o

1-0

10.0

Q

0.0

10

»J

JL

,0

2J.o

0.0

2JT.C

HXkcr

1

J

CO

ICl

tt-1

t>

OJ

0.0

0.0

I

1

S.1

0,0

s.i

JL

2

t->

O.o

t.3

ToW

3k

H

33.3

nn

IOC.

13

1

70

6S.0

15.0

190.

IH

3

f7

m

I7.&

too.

JS

f

■2 H

£24

17-5

(to.

118

r /?fr e . 4/< L

£//9i^4?7aAf fc _ */A//r zz&A'rT /i/as 4</ urnr* <?P V£ /94

/?y?

..1

■%

■\

%

■:-\

% ■

I

.7~fiJL/L/J

[/pk

Total

^ET^frv^pr

/fjftf /TA*

Ap/r/i-

En'oatwi

Number

PeiCenl

Number

Per C»t

Nvntxr

Pet Cent

Number

Pei Cent

Certain

Doubtful

lJOtJl_

Certain

Ootitthl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doutlttiil

Total

;ertaut

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Balloon

/

/

0.0

S.t\ S.6

2

2

/*J

M

lU

O.O

O.O

CO

/

«

/

f.3

0.0

-f-3

l-titmvaiai

;?

£

U.I

33.} 4H4

2

6

9

Ay. 3

tZf

57.2

7

II

'S

m\

3$ $

ill

7

1

8

3i9

J. 3

n>

f-Aircratl

.^

1

S

22-1

S.C

2 78

1

1

7./

0.0

V

2

7

t-s

0.9

™^L

6

X

19.5

OJ

10.5

3-L>4>( Phenoo.

o.e

°J

0.0

f

OJ

°-0

O.l

0.0

0,0

Ji

Q

P

9.§

t.t

OJ

4-Birds

a

af-Aircratl

.^

1

S

22-1

S.C

2 78

1

1

7./

0.0

V

2

7

t-s

0.9

™^L

6

X

19.5

OJ

10.5

3-L>4>( Phenoo.

o.e

°J

0.0

f

OJ

°-0

O.l

0.0

0,0

Ji

Q

P

9.§

t.t

OJ

4-Birds

a

a

0-0

o.o

6.0

U

0.0

CO

2

■ 2

t.s

0.0

Al

ZE

0.0

0.0

S-Cloudj. &Kl ttt

J

6

9

QJ

o.o

6-0

_fl_

1

Q.O

fl.o

Q.t

9

O.e

QJ

t.O

0.0

0.0

0.0

S-tmuflit kik).

(7

0.0

o,7\ i.o

/

/

U

fl.O

7-t

4

i

11*1

9.0

n-i

f

5

~y.y

o.o

26.1

'-Pvclakiiol

<?

D.O

o.o\ 0.O

Q.0

O-O

0,0

f

9

SJ

0.$

JLL

it

O.o

Off

i-lkHuum

3

fl

3

/C-l

o.o

/S-y

t

n

I

7.1

u

7.1

.<

J

tt-J

0.0

U.i

3

3

IS.S

0-0

is -a

«»l«r

/

I

*■(,

0.0

•sc

1

I

n-i

o.e

7-1

6

O.o

0.0

Jhl

6.9

O.O

00

, Total

/o

8

18

5S.I

m

/ft.

8

&

if

Sl\

n.1

/Of.

20

II

3/

it*

35.5

ISO.

^

i

n

m

S3

100.

SfA*

J~^A/£r

"sFut.r

j4l/SP3T

Evaluation

Number

Per Cent

Number

PefCent

Niieiier

Pel Cent

, . Mullet

Pel Colt

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certaia

Oubthit

Total

Certain

Dootjttul

Total

Main

Doubtful

Total

Cettxn DouUttu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Uloon

V

/

*

I0.Q

zs

m

/

/

SI

00

f-r

/

e

/

6-2

0.0

C.7

9

Q

0.9

6-0

OJ

1-Aiugngaical

. ?

y

£.

n-s

10.0

2.7.5

/

3

H

s-.f

/7i

ns

D

5

5"

o.e

31.2

V.I

i

3

3/

2.C

ft.T

7f.S

?-Aircrirt

V

3

7

ia.9

7.3

n-6

/

1

2

s.l

*-7

n.»

3

3

9.0

ii.%

m

/

2

3

7-C

S.I

7-7

J-U|M Pinion.

(?

o.o

O-O

0-0

d

Q

t

44

0,0

0.0

Q

0.0

t.O

u

<?

9

0.0

O.o

9.9

IBiiih

e

(J

0-0

0-0

0.0

JA

<).<>

0$

I

1

jj\

i.2

£■2

c.o

0.0

o.o

5-Cldudt, Dust Ac

O.O

CO

0.6

9

0.0

0.0

0:0

1

J

0.0

9.t

0.0

9

9

o.o

OJ

0.0

S-lmutfic kifo.

/'

, Q_

II

27.S

0-0

azs

2

Q

%■

If. 9

0.0

m

3

ff

3

111

<).0

19.$

7

2

y 1

0.0

6.t

/•PsjrcnnloficaJ

(7

0.0

0.0

00

1

.0

1

S.f

0.0

■s.f

9

a

0.0

0.0

O.Q

2

&

%

U

0-0

S-l

UlnhKum

i,

<Tazs

2

Q

%■

If. 9

0.0

m

3

ff

3

111

<).0

19.$

7

2

y 1

0.0

6.t

/•PsjrcnnloficaJ

(7

0.0

0.0

00

1

.0

1

S.f

0.0

■s.f

9

a

0.0

0.0

O.Q

2

&

%

U

0-0

S-l

UlnhKum

i,

<T

s.

15.0

o.o

is.o

6

i

35-3

0.9

15.1

Z

Z

11*

00

ns

1

Q

1

Z-i

0.0

2-0

9-Oltlei '

<l

0.0

0.0

0.9

1

P

1

LL

o-o

s.f

U_

.

l

JJ.

e t

£.1

■

Q

0.9

0.0

1.9

Total

37

8 W

%i

20.0

M.

IT

*

n

7SS

ZiS

/to.

7

f

/s

4 '3. 8

ti.i

/it.

7

32

39

17-1

hj

100.

j

SerrrE-ASfS/?

d)cre>£'E-/?

A/et/£-S4jr£r/r

Z?M-0£ /*£■£-/?

1

Nombei

Per Cent

Ntimbec

PaCent

Hunter

Pei Cent ■

■ Number

Per Cent

Evaluation

Certain

Doubtfu

_Tolalj

Certain

Doobtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Donbttul

Total

Certain

Doubttu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

D-BalloM

/

■0

/

33.1,

0.0

33.3

0.0

04

0.0

Q

/

7

6-9

■i-7

6.1

/

Ll

0.0

C-l

l-Astmnwical

_JL

04

9.0

Q.t

1

J

9

II. f

■fte

4W

H

7

//

2LI

1L7

ni

2

4"

C

13.3

Ul

no

i-Aircraft

_L

0.0

It

6J3

1

/

%

II. 1

It.l

in

/

/

JA.

CI

a

4

Q

1

/J.3

0.0

/?.3

]'Li|ti| Pbenooi.

_JL\

9

0.0

tf-fl

$..0

Q

Q.o

q.o

U

00

9 J

o.o

6

CO

O-O

0.0

t-Biidj

n

0.

OJ

0.0

0.0

0.0

9.9

OJ)

0.0

OJ

0.0

Q

0.0

o-o

0.0

S-CI«rti, Dust, e)c

D.Q

Qt

0.0

0.6

0.0

Of

Q

$

0.0

(19

0-0

0.0

0-9

0.0

frlnsuffit rife.

1

-2

u.n

3 -a

a.-)

X

X

n.l

OJ

32?

_M

0.O

0.0

/

9

1

6.1

o-o

i-t

'•Psycholojical

Q.0

0.0

u

g

Q.O

0-0

0.0

Q

M

1.0

0.0

0.0

(1-0

0-0

t-UnknoHi

0.0

0.0

00

i

1

ll-l

OJ

III

2

X

M.

0.0

iu

3

9

3

ZO.O

QJ

21-9

^Otbei

0.0

o.O

0.0

6

6

0.0

O-O

0.0

o.c

0.6

00

2

H

13-3

0.0

119

Total

3

3-

100-0

9-0

0.

^1

H

1

55.0

m

100-

(0

1

15

Hi J

60.0

199.

70_

H-

/5

73-3

26-7

M

m

£r

119

m^

r/fdi £ #/6

MmAJiair^/iu

or i//i//r st& «r/n/6S #</ tert/i/nj #<= </£*£

/?£■<?

I100-0

9-0

0.

^1

H

1

55.0

m

100-

(0

1

15

Hi J

60.0

199.

70_

H-

/5

73-3

26-7

M

m

£r

119

m^

r/fdi £ #/6

MmAJiair^/iu

or i//i//r st& «r/n/6S #</ tert/i/nj #<= </£*£

/?£■<?

I

L 75 J jv.^*'.r-

.. f£*/£v/)#y

Mtf&s

Arrii-

1

Mwntei

Per Cent

Numbei Jj

Pet Cent

Nu»ce!

Per Cent

IMKf

PbCwI

EnlMtm

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DowMIUl j To 111

Cer&in

DouMtuI

_ToUt,

Certain

Doudltul

Ton)

;ertan

Doubtful

_ToUI_|

Certain

Dwblful

ToW

Coma

DoaMkri

Total

imXun

Dwftttul

Toll 1

'^Balloon _

<?

o.o

~0.Q\ QQ

3

3

07

0.0

tin

_£.

/

£

tt.s

2-1

tt-2

/

/

s.-b

0.6

S.3

■ _ 
lAiliMoatal

/

3

if

P-0

'$■» '9.9

2

9

6

Ii-I

11.2

35.3

H

4-

10.$

04

10.8

v-

N-

iTV

t.o

y.l

IWkucttH

■^

C

1

&5

o.o

n-s

^Jk

*f

111

0.0

27-7

7

H

//

at

199

11.1

4-

*

%\

0.0

V.I

Hi|M Pnenom.

<?

4

a

O.O

6.0

O.Q

Q.0

4.0

O.O

Q

</

eJ

o.t

0.0

._

4

e.o

Q.0

o.o

*-an*

_jL

a

9

9.0

o.O

o.o

0.0

QJt

to

M

o.o

06

OJ

J-Clowh, Out etc

fl

CO

Q

Q

a

0.0

(1.0

0.0

9

o.(

0.0

0.

9

0.0

0.0

0.0

-

Hnjuffit Mb.

c

()

i

il

Q-Q\C1

1

Q

/

St,

O.Q

U

9

S

2U

0.0

Oi-C

3

(!■

3

(S.0

. OS

is-B

I-PifdBlefieaf

i?

?

0.0

OH \

Q

O.O

O.Q

O.Q

SL

$

t>

O.O

6.0

f.t

t

UL

J-.3

o-o

S3

t-lMomi

.*

/

Ll

UjL\

i-2

X

X

t/f

o.o

IU

y.

e

n

103

i.O

lh9

L

6

c

3f.C

OP

1*4

*Oo*

/

l

i 2

1.1

2

Ji

//./

0-0

///

t

H

0.0

10.8

19.9

d

0.0

o.o

0.0

Total

O

3

10

8/1

/**]

ffl-

J±

f

t#

17.% 12.7

tot.

2g

1

37

75.1

W

mo.

/f

/f loO.O

o.o

tot

^

A/A

y

Jl/A/C

yi . TuLy

/)v$vs7~

f

Nmtbn

P«Cwt

NumbH

Percent

Nu«»er Pet Cent

HlRbH

Per Cm!

; C'luilnn

Certain

[ Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoooMull Total

Certain

Doutiful

Total

Certain

DoubBlH

ToM

Certain

DoootfoF

Total

Certain

Doubty

Total

Certain

Otolith

Total

Certain

DsubMil

ToW

iff- BH loon

t

/

/f 3

0.0

/*3

¥

H

m

oo

an

/

,

4-J

O.t

t.8Certain

DoubBlH

ToM

Certain

DoootfoF

Total

Certain

Doubty

Total

Certain

Otolith

Total

Certain

DsubMil

ToW

iff- BH loon

t

/

/f 3

0.0

/*3

¥

H

m

oo

an

/

,

4-J

O.t

t.8

-L

7

8.1

(?.i? 9.1

1 l-*ilrwtmicil

. _/

/V.3

\H.-h

2ff.t

o

tt-Q

o.o

o.t

7

Q

7

23.3

0.0

A1-3

/

i

7

4.}

It.}

WH

tMiicnfl

, .Q

c

o.t

i'.f

fl f

Q

QA

o.o

0.0

U

1

5

ir.o

4.3

&8

A

t

s

lit

4.3

-aj-7

l ~ " ~ 
;}-L>o>l Plwo*.

~JL

o

CO

■&*

(J.0

(

-M

o.o

CO

9

O.Q

CO

1.0

6.0

0.0

00

*-B<ntt

c

^JL

9.0

JJ]

0-0

_0

6

J2£

0.0

0.0

Q

0.0

o-o

O-O

.

O.o

0.0

o.tf

KWs, Dusl. Ht

n

6

:■•£

J2il

(?J

Q

3

CO

0.0

t.o

Q

«

0.0

0.0

o.O

0.0

0.0

0,0

frlnsiHic kilo.

•\ °

2

2M

O.O

??<;

_JL

i

J£l

o.t

o.o

-*.

H

if JO

0.0

if.9

2

*

8.7

0.0

9-1

I-Pqrdnlopcal

ti\

&

CJ

£>.;!

0.0

o

p

0.0

OS

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

M

0.0

'rWntaw"!

i\ o

1

/f3

0.0

h.$

-x

■3.

a.i

o.o

3,3.1

..4

9

19.0

Q.0

if. 9

_£.

t

Zi-I

O.Q

li.)

jMthei

j\ 1

/

6.0

fra

Hi

MA

o.o

0-9

9

0.0

0.0

0.0

_J

6

/

4.Z

0.0

4.3

|-

f

Totd

£i~P

7

md

35./,! /<?f.

c

(,

yoT

0J

m.

70

1 .

2/

ff-'i

9.8

/OS.

~T$

1

2$

6f.6

30. t

100.

f

SrfreMff/T 1

-jO-crjz-A

£-fi

J/?t>f-/^r£-s?

~ ~

£>

fir £Af '&■£'/?

j

Nuieber

Per Ceil

Hu.ntwr

PerCent '

Nunber

Percent

Nunter

Pet Cent

, Evaluation

Certain

DtwbHlr

Total

Certain

Douttfu

Total

Certain

Ooubttnl

Total

Certain

Dajbtnil

Total

Cerbin" 1

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouMtol

Total

Certain

Doooltu

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

1- — 
jo-rMlcon

_x

00

O.O

O-o

1

C

1

IQ.O

0.0

10.D

7

2

13. 3

0.1

/AJ

1

.H

C

JA

-Ten

15A

' l-Ailiwenical

_J1

5

m

■9.9

n.s

J

1

7.

MA

iti'O

10-0

CO

0.0

9-9

9

3

ft

37.5

n.s

5 °-0

!!-*iro>tt

c

1

is.i

O-o

ffi.f

JJ

1

i

ZaS

iO.i

IH

1

tf

C

(3-2

stq

ffO.O

1

I

4Z

0,0 %i

1

J-Li(ht Plienoa.

_i_

Q-0

Q.Q

do

_JL

a

-M

!?•«

0-1

e9

3

ft

37.5

n.s

5 °-0

!!-*iro>tt

c

1

is.i

O-o

ffi.f

JJ

1

i

ZaS

iO.i

IH

1

tf

C

(3-2

stq

ffO.O

1

I

4Z

0,0 %i

1

J-Li(ht Plienoa.

_i_

Q-0

Q.Q

do

_JL

a

-M

!?•«

0-1

e

Q.t

0.0

<?■&

c

a

0.0

0.0

O.t

4-Brnls

0-0

Q.0

$.d

(L

c

0.0

fl-0

On

Q

c

0.0

o-O

O.Q

O-O

0.0

O.o

S-Cloudi; Dust etc

j

0.0

9-0

o-o

J2A

O-O

D.G

r.

c

0.0

0.0

90

A.O

o-o

o.O

t-lnailhb ktlo.

3

3

Oil

O.Q

13 -1

0.0

0.0

04

t

/

£■7

0.0

i.7\

1

t

t-2

0.0

K2

'-Psycrnloiial

CO

0.0

0.0

a

OJI

0,0

«0

0.0

0.0

00

J.

t

1

1-2

0.0

W

t-unton*!

3

$

71)

3.0

13-1

c

S0.Q

Q.Q

i>0.0

s

'

5 1

J?. 3

0.0

3-3.3

2

X

9-S

0.0

«-3

WII111

a

JJ-

CO

O.d

■

JJ.

0.0

0.0

1

/

CI

o.O

i,?

1

i>

1.1

0.0

H.%

Total

A

/3

(tft-O

O.Q

cO.

gj

/o

\1SA

1Q.D

109.

II

H

■/«■

2±3

2C.1

/ot.

n

1

1*

70.2

tf-1

in.

120

\

'Ay&lr KSs_^:'

m.

r/>8L£ #/i,

GMt-yA Wy 4* mt S/t£s /r//Z6S £<f tod/VfH <2E^C£d£-

J2£J-

Taajv^ j?r

/flcS/?#A*r

/^/>/?cM

_ /4f>."'4r .

Enlaatmi

Number

Pet Call

tlmiDer

PerCent

Numbei

Percent

Nurtfl

Per Cent

Ccrtun

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

Certain

Doobttul

TOW

>rle«

DoubtM

Total

pertain

Oovbthil

ToW

Cotain

Doubt tul

Totll

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0. Balloon

2

/

jO. •>

jtf

IS.S

/

<?

/

II- 1

o.s

///

9

o 0.9

W

0.0

9

9 J

9.6

Q.0

lAstiMoaial

L,

1

3

JJ

^£

&*

2

a

q.t

?;.2

a 17

JL

t

fL

ll.t

a,i

23M

On

0.0

2-Ainraft

_ d

1

(t

0.0

'P.5

IBS

SL.

5

3

9.1

3J3

m

i

I

«.<r

nn

/cl

"n

I

J3-3

9.9

33 f 3

J-Liitit Phenon.

£_

0.0

0-"

oJ

o

4*

S>0

O-o

_2_

0.9

.0.C

U

, Q.

6J

iO

9J

4-Birds

—C

■

0.0

J.O

oJ

6

41

O.Q

OJ

t

0-0

C.C

0.9

U

M

M

S-Clmdi, Dust tic

c

<5.0,

a.Q

o.Q

<?

'JL

9.0

ao

a

0.0

8-1

04

-M

OJ

C.C

Olnsuttic. Wo.

£

s

5<r.3

0.0

U-$

-JL

<r

M

O.O

OJ

6

&

ox

£6

a.Q

_2.

2

UJ

U

C(*l

r'-Pirdstoficif

'c

<5.0,

a.Q

o.Q

<?

'JL

9.0

ao

a

0.0

8-1

04

-M

OJ

C.C

Olnsuttic. Wo.

£

s

5<r.3

0.0

U-$

-JL

<r

M

O.O

OJ

6

&

ox

£6

a.Q

_2.

2

UJ

U

C(*l

r'-Pirdstoficif

'

tf.dj

.0:0 _

0.0

9

c

Ma

O.O

04

>0

c

o

. OS

CO

o.c

Q

OJ

Q.S

OJ

t-UnknoM

J

s

^,3

JiiL.

2 c,3>

J

1

IP

OJ

if J

O-

3

fJ.O

0-0

He

.

9

Q.e

Ofi

Q.0

S-Otfiet

/

1

AJ

Q-0

r.3

7

I

2U

0.9

si. i

II

Q.t)

1$

to

' c

Q

.Mi

0.0

to

Toll)

57

s

11

o"J

'J.-i

/<J0-

¥

S

1

W#

5U

Nl

1

%

6

an

33.3

/0.

3

3

tm.Q

to

ISQ^

1

May

J~V/VF

Jl>t-S .

^i/ji VS 7~

1

Number

Per Cent

Niinber

Percent

Nunbet

Pel Cent

Hunber

PerCent

Evaluation

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful' Totll

Certain

Doubltul

ToUl

Certain

Dniblhll

Total

Detain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cetbin

Ooubtfa

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0-BjIIow

2

?

W

o.t

WJ

i

If

('.9

O.Q

&

JiL

ap

C.0

/

1

1

M

*J

/LB

1-Astmonical

^

■s

L.C

o.o

0.0

J

c.t

q.o

an

f

7

3

JLL

m

33-3

Q

c

Q.t O.C

0.1

?Aiicil(t

^L

<?

1

2ILH

OS

?U

1

i

Ml

0.9

M

^L

/

IIJ

op

Ihl

/

1

5-1

0.S

S-f

3Li|lit Ptienrw.

_J2_

B.t

99

OJ

a

,\0

Q.Q

CO

Q

Q

1.0

0.)

0.t

1

/

3

II. $

J?

n.i

4-SinJi

,*^i

v

1

1

CO

?0.j]i>.t

Jl

c

c

0.0

Q J

df

o

OJ

Q.9

U

t.Q

OJ

M

^Clouds, Oust, etc.

c

yj

C.J' \i.iJ

0\

0.

M.

0.0

<?.«

9

U

0.0

to

Q

Q

Q.0

QJ

9,0

{■Inluftic, Info.

f

</.''

t?y ! oJ

~l

n

MJ

<t-Q

9,6

9

^

O.i?

o.t

o.Q

5

9

3

n.(,

Q.0

n.6

I-P»rchorO|ical

a

o.o \ :,o^.o

^F

0.0

0.0

0.C

t

V

Q.0

u.l

\U

OJ

OJ

0.0

(fUnkno«

I

1

; ; cc

i'P

Mo

i

JLO

9.0

<j.l

_J_

3

Ji3

OJ

JJ-3

1

?

HiA

O.Q

fl-7

MftH

Q\

u

o.Q

H

00

OJ

«.»

^L

;

<U

$J

n-t

1

/

U.

0.0

S1

Total

3J

I 1 5-

m

29.Q

(HO.

1

1

31

9 J

m

T

3

i

U.1

35.3

tie.

/■S

n

1?

9P.2

It. 6

Ho.

5£T/>r*r*f#£'tf'

<?c re e*#

A^o is cs*t jSVSV^

J?jre/:/*£/?S?n-t

1

/

U.

0.0

S1

Total

3J

I 1 5-

m

29.Q

(HO.

1

1

31

9 J

m

T

3

i

U.1

35.3

tie.

/■S

n

1?

9P.2

It. 6

Ho.

5£T/>r*r*f#£'tf'

<?c re e*#

A^o is cs*t jSVSV^

J?jre/:/*£/?S?

Evaluation

Nuiiwf

Pa Cent

Number

PerCent

Nuaber

Pel Cent

NunbH

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouMh

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

tjouHtm

TutH

Certain"

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

D-Balloon

/

1

£1

0.6

5.f

/

/

t.%

ao

1.2

/

1

Ml

6-1

CI

/

/

"77

Q.6

?./

Mstmoaital

7

1

3

11.9

S-7

nj

L

S

7

no

1.2

212

~T

4

n

50.

X.o

TS.Q

. 7.

1

1

M3*

1.1

27-3

2-Aiiaaft

J~

1

s.f

Q.0

S-f

1

1

■ri*

M

*3

HO

l

%

tit

0-0

IU

4

*t

U-<+

OJ

H-4

JLijftt Ptimm

OJ

0.0

o.O

OJ

0.0

OS

Q

JJ,

OJ

0-0

O

SUA

Sj

o.O

«- Birds

a

0.0

ao

r,

6

0.0

0.9

0.0

a

1J\

a j

OJ

9-0

0.0

O.O

5-Cltmas, ftm, etc.

Q

a

e

00

o.;

O.O

9

0.0

0.0

fi.Q

Q

9J\

0.0

t).Q

A

d

OJ

CO

Q.0

(■tiuuHic Into.

_2_

i

it -9

CO

11,9

r

0.1

(!■<?

o.f)

/

Q

1

T$

0.6

("2

J_

1

*?.i

O.0

1-1

7.Psyclu logical

Q

O.Q

OJ

o.O

'

OJ

OJ

■ 0.0

JL

0.0

■ 0.Q

0.9

J_

1

7.1

0.0

%/

frUnkoioMn

8

9

m.

o.O

Hi <

1

1-

37.5

§.0

V-t

6

J^L

M

o.o

I

1

9./

00

1-1

Mlb«

<

'0

1

Jit

CO

11.2

I

1

?-3

O.Q

1.2

Q

0-9

0.0

9.3

n

CO

O.0

Q.0

Total

■IG

/ \n.

7t/

sr

IQQ.

V

3

M

ns

H. s

i«S.

11

-*

/ei

WB

31.7

tot.

to

1

It

70?

u

100.

121

TA&LE

4/7 £lf4iiOfr/0A/

/?r t//v/r S/6h'r//i/6s £</ Mf/i/m /?f Vest /f&iz*

,Ta

*/uAJ?r- J

■^^fi

*>p J *j?r'

//*#<?*'

J/*F?/L

EYHmtw

Hunter

PtiCent

Nuaber

Percent

Number

PnCnt

Nmtwr

■ PttCat

CH1»"

Doubtful

Totll

Ceitun

Doubtful ToUl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:«i»ii

Doubtful

ToM

^(rtJin

Doubtful

Total

Certxn

ooubthl

Totll

Catiio

Ooubthl

Totir t«t«jL

DnAthl

ToW

"■Saltan

/

^

/

*.7

ff.o

'•I

1

/

5.f

(7.0

r-c

?

1Doubtful

Total

:«i»ii

Doubtful

ToM

^(rtJin

Doubtful

Total

Certxn

ooubthl

Totll

Catiio

Ooubthl

Totir t«t«jL

DnAthl

ToW

"■Saltan

/

^

/

*.7

ff.o

'•I

1

/

5.f

(7.0

r-c

?

1

^

/J.S

HI

_M

3

J

6

J. 3

^

i-C

Msimnoaial

4

t

i

^

2£7

tt.f

*

1

5"

3J.2

5\tf

27.8

. /.

/

HI

9.0

JL1

IS 6

IS

li.S

0)1

lc-5

J-Aiicrlft

C

<?

0-0

0.0

Z.

X

4

//•/

//■»

22.1

.j

Z

j-

U-3

9.i

US

../i

7

e

\«\t

77

02-0

>Ll|M PtlSIM.

o

e

tf.c

U

fij

$

e

0.C?

(>.?

O.o

0.0

0.0

0.0

/-

/>

1

II

0.0

I.I

t-Binb

jr

Q

i?

0.0

0.0

9 J

c

<?

M

0.0

0-9

/

1?

f

JLX

0.1

t.-k 3

/

*

7.1

It

k.t*

S-Clouos, Dint, tic

i>

C

(It

10

0J

-,£~

£>

J^

M'

CO

t

I

0.0

f.2

t.1

_ 9.

0.0

00

o.o

t-buafhc. «►>.

c

c

<P

0.9

0^

O.Q

_L

P

/

r,&

Q.O

sa

/

/

HI

OJ

1-1

10

10

it-

O.Q

II. o

J-pTfdohrci

*

<?

A

iil

9

a i

£>

o

0,0

0.0

0.0

Q.t

0-9

0.0

(

o

L /•/

Q.O

J. 1

MMxa

*

o

£

'3.3

0.0

a?

s

,r

21.9

Q.O

21$

4-

{>

H

/(,.-)

00

ti-l

3*

3a

?5.2

4-9

1S-7

MMMr

X

(0

X

O 3

O.t

111

_ J £

£>

2.

//./

Q.O

n-i

/

£

7

V.2-

25.0

31?

?

2.

2.1

09

t-1

TOM

/J

4

IS

7J.3

Itf

/ot.

ML

3

/€

"**!

16.7

141.

Mi

IP

04-

5Si

mi

in0.

&Q

II 7 J

$7.1

/HI

196.

Af/tr

.77/A^£T

•.Tlti. Y

AM6MiJ~

Enhntn

Humbn

Per Cent

Nvnbet

Pel Cent

Nunoer

Pei Cent

Numbs

PelCtnl

CertMH

Douftttul

Total

Certao

Dorfstfa

Totll

Certain

Doublful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToU

Certun

Doubtful

Tolal

Ctfl»n

Douotful

Total

Certain

Doubltu

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Totll

D-Ulooii

//

*

/S

/7.J

f J

17.0

-2/

f

2 7

n.o

3-7

li-1

Sff

#7

m

n-i

7.2

If H

-JL

31

75^

m

It. 7

V-K

MUmnial

/*-

«t

/£.

2-3

18-1

JUf

n

hi

if -7

IQ.i

35.5

<?fl

30

no

'3.1

Hi

/f.3

u/

SS

&C

Jhi

7.2

18-1

I-JUnnll

/j-

/x

7^

/J. if

/3-^

27.3

Xi

IX

ic

ti-l

7$

m

f?

7?

no

LaJL

II -1

2f.f

41

J#

75

it. i

9-1

3 IIQ.i

35.5

<?fl

30

no

'3.1

Hi

/f.3

u/

SS

&C

Jhi

7.2

18-1

I-JUnnll

/j-

/x

7^

/J. if

/3-^

27.3

Xi

IX

ic

ti-l

7$

m

f?

7?

no

LaJL

II -1

2f.f

41

J#

75

it. i

9-1

3 I

J-LifhlPtao..

3

/

3

3*

<? . *

if

. /

o

1

JL£

o.t

.t,

a

V-

a

jA.

(l(r

l.t

_j:

6

/'

i-t

ll

t-Birti

/?

<?

CO

i7.0

0.0

J.'O

Q.0

i.D

j

/

•H

o.s

01

0-1

2

90

OJ

0.0

Kionds, Dnt «t

2

<?

^

11

o.o

71

JL

&

o.o

Q.Q

o.t

i

1

X

0.2

0- 1

0-t

p

1

1

AL

0-3

0.3

(-tanirk, kto.

i

/?

C

±&.

Q.O

CS

ft

P

if

111

<?■()

1/7

a

CB 10.1

.91

W.+

12-

3*

9.1

oo

1-1

J-Pjytfc*rul

£

(?

tf

CO

0.0

O.O

t-

P

t

1.5

0-0

i-S

?

r

/«

f.t

0.8

31

— £j

/

1

2-3

O.-i

1 (,

(■Uttaoai

/V

^

it

/S.I

0.0

n.f

M

26

IC-I

o.o

U.I

/*>

123

n.$

9-9

if- 2

(7

47

IT. 2

Q.Q

if- 2

MOW

7

/

8

\£&

l-l

1-1

s

1

£

3-/

D.i

n

//

i

11

i.l

0.1

If

f

4-

n

2-6

l-l

37

Totll

^f

'7

Kf

JS.H

21. <*

lit.

as

36

ttl

71i

73-t

100.

wt

U2

65%

7S.3

IV. 7

/to.

W

HO

3¥1

~m

%5

it0.

SffT^-SfFJ-/?

0cT0&£-/?

/ 4/t>f£Tj~f6'J?/?

JT^-ctrsu-trsr

EvtluatM

Percent

fjoooor

Percent

NUatwf

Percent

WnOer

Per Cent

Cwtjrn

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doabtto

ToW

Cntaii.

Doobtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DtK*t1U

Total

Certain

Doubtful

|_ToW_

Certain

DooHhl

Total

KM loon

4

It

IS

2-1

7?

/A 2

3

1

n

tf.2

12-7

ti-9

JL

f

JO

3-1

IH-I

/i'.S

£.

z

0-0

M-2

1.1

Mstnmiical

3-3-

?

31

iS.O

•V

2/.I

JO

°t

'ft

Itl

121

21%

r

s

'9

f.3

f.J

t».C

~r

7

1 C

i8.7

ih ■ c

n.i

f-Ai icrafl

1

31

*(?

£.,

^/

77-1

If

//

/5

ZC

if. 5

2fJ

.J?

J

Si

J.<

1/2

. /.

If

12

7-1

72?

75.0

1-LittilPWPO.L

L

X

3

Jul

'■7*

'■/

.0

it-

V

S-i

S.t,

_^^

/

3

3.7

>-?

s.t

—L

1

21

0.0

7/

4-Binb

L

£

3

Q-li

/-v

?•/

1

■I

2

I ¥

If

2.9

<L

00

<?J

0.0

o

0.6

O.Q

0-0

WIokoX Oust, etc3

Jul

'■7*

'■/

.0

it-

V

S-i

S.t,

_^^

/

3

3.7

>-?

s.t

—L

1

21

0.0

7/

4-Binb

L

£

3

Q-li

/-v

?•/

1

■I

2

I ¥

If

2.9

<L

00

<?J

0.0

o

0.6

O.Q

0-0

WIokoX Oust, etc

. .'£

1

/

o.o

<?-7

tf-'

1

1

0-0

\-h

/•»

..<?

X

2.

JLL

5,7

3-7

a\

(2

Off

0.(1

O.Q

fronffic. Wo.

.. '12-

■'$

'?

£1

<?-rJ

*2

...Jl

*

5. ft

0.0

f.O

— ^L

4

7-t

0.(5

7-f

" y

1

6.2

o e

iZ

f-Pirdolorcal

/

JL2

tf.f?-

1

0\

JJLi

0.9

O.Q

. . L

I

l-l

^.i?

/■?

&

0-6

00

0.0

»IMmo«

33

■ 3J

72 V

<7.tf

2Jf

/I

II

iss

0.0

/s-i

f*

p

1 I

2U

00

3f.t

.//.

0>

It

2lf

o.O

17 -f

MHw

e

2

8

JLL

;■*

s.s

JZ-

(

' 3

2.9

If

HA

X

1

3.7

OS

3.1

3

£>

3

4.2

00

i-7

ToMI

T7

*8

y//7

w$

it s

ISO.

35

36

71

H1.1

n -7

Hi.

35

11

ty

iW

3S-Z

tot.

78

20

H

r^3

U7

0.

I

1Z2

■a.^

it.

rMtc jtf

£V4i.i/#f?eii/_ _<s>fi <P£j&er Sf&n.T//v<is g</ mpa/w #* y&^/s Ait-_>/££ ej-

'J^ASfjify - ■

— - 1 ' '

A/ A*

f M

6f/?/i-

Etntiaatig*

Per Cm

NiMbti

PtfCent

Number

Per Cent

trnlKi

PerCent

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OooMtut

Total

Certain

Doubtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DwMful

Total

Certain

rjtubiW

Total

0- Bel tan

J

J

5"

_±L

2.1

71

i

' P

i

/"f ao

to.9

/

z

(0

n

?■<•

il.t)

7 ±

?

fj

1-6

1.1

l-fetmmcai

/J*

''tf

$>

21*

.11 -J

Hi

a

3.3

lo.o V-8

11.9

/^

/0

?-3-

f* 5

/zo

H-5

J7

7

J?2

Is.o

741

17- V

3-A.iruafl

_.-£

J

1

8i>

<+,■}

'3.1

r

j-

/0

f.i

11

ff.'l

(

7

'S

u

fit

ito

AO

7

27

isn

s.s

3/. 3

J-Li|hl Phona,

<7

ft

a.o

0>J>

Qi

o

o

o

no

(?.(?

0.0

^

act

0.0

0.0

/

/

0.0

_jQ±

o.e

t-Krds

<?

0>.D

0-0

Zi>

A

&

<?

/}J>

0.0

06

3

3

U

&>

3-C

3

/

¥

74

Q.k 3.1

5-Clondj, Owl, tic

<?

o

O.O

Q.e

0.i

P

o

CO

0,£>

fit

/

1

00

t-t

17

__£

P

O

0.0

—££.

Ao

Hmflic hit.

S

r

HM

Q.p

//•*

3

o

3

f.506

3

3

U

&>

3-C

3

/

¥

74

Q.k 3.1

5-Clondj, Owl, tic

<?

o

O.O

Q.e

0.i

P

o

CO

0,£>

fit

/

1

00

t-t

17

__£

P

O

0.0

—££.

Ao

Hmflic hit.

S

r

HM

Q.p

//•*

3

o

3

f.5

fie

ss

/o

'S

11.0

AC

11.0

*t

O

*/

/(■5

40.

H*

^Ptytanteiiaf'

2.

tf

*

2.1

a

J i

o

&

0,6

Q.O

0i

a

ao

0.0

0.0

%

O

l

1.6.

r 0.0

76

1-IMmm

1

rO

f

U-1

0£

'ii

i

(

10.1

0M

tf.1

/3

II

ts-i

0.0

(f-7

31

9

37

10.7

0.5

30.1

K»»

S

/

f

7.1

i-i

s.s

_J_

^

7

12-1

D4

/7.1

/

8.

9

t-7

rc

W.%

A

Z-

1 6

0.0

J. &

ToW

Uf

Ai

70

(,8b

V.l

Mil-

If

/?

rr

tf.l

30. 1

ltd.

St

±1

1.1

t£.J

Zi.l

itt.

m

/3

M

9fg

10.2

n«.

A/*r

J~UA/£~

\7lsLy

J 4v<Zt/5 7'

Evilvilnn

Numbet

Per Cent

Number

PaCent

Hunter

Percent

Number

Per Coil

Certain

Dnibtfu

Total

Certain

Doubttu

TotJl_

Certain

Doublful

Total

Certain

Ooubttul

Total

Certain

OoubKul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cerlan

pouMfu

Total

Certain

Doubtlul

Total

t-Mloon

/?

J

20

a 2

I'i

it.i

J?

jr

33

!$.3

27

ff.O

7m-

&

//S

fU

e-t

IP.i

39

3?

7S

■J.t

u

nx

Mtstnmeical

AZ

«<

2?

n-i

HI

us

J2±

/?

31

/t°

9 3

1/3

S*

3?

ft

11

i.c

IS. I

$3

#S

??

ICQ

//./

2 f-7

?-*imjfl

JJL

/^

30

n.i

IQI

313

Jg

'*-

**

fi-3

Ci.

?>°l

in

72.

/t6

If. 7

113

-26.0

&

3S-

?i

/!■*

f.i

?Q.\

3-Lifbl Ptnma.

3

.Z

r

23

it

3?

/

/

2.

O.f

OS

1.0

to

tt

//

70

o.i

76

6

6

12

t-5

IS

3J

4- [Ms

■ X

2.

CO

1 C

}■<■

0.

o

/>

4a

(%0

&t>

3

J

/-

0.5

0.5

1.0

■ O

O

O.o

,0-0

M

Klowb, Dust, etc

2.

2

hi

0.0

P

o

ao

ao

00

/

t

3.

0-2

0.1

61

A

(

—00,

0-7

0.2

t-limiffic. hh.

/(,

i

/6

IX*

_jm.

fti

J.X

AX

11.9

0j

17-0

74

P

7*

iu

0J

IU

UP

tf0

t.B

e.p

ft

wsytJuHficai

f?'

Q

0.0

QO

/?e

~7

O

6

%3

e.e

3.3

%

%

ft

13

A3

U

/P

1

//

7$

0:1

7-7

vtlHWOM

tf

^

If

"t.O

e.e

/to

33

33

19.6

0.6

(9.0

i?)

O

(*l

Mt.B

e.p

ft

wsytJuHficai

f?'

Q

0.0

QO

/?e

~7

O

6

%3

e.e

3.3

%

%

ft

13

A3

U

/P

1

//

7$

0:1

7-7

vtlHWOM

tf

^

If

"t.O

e.e

/to

33

33

19.6

0.6

(9.0

i?)

O

(*l

M

0.P

HO

?f

79

IM

A0

H ■*

Wth*i

/

2-

f

t-1

i-t

6 3

7

/

t

18

OS

*3

7-tf

I

?f

rs

0.2

1.0

if

s

if

7.7

/■?

3.1

TiU

w

>f

ttf

193

2/-1

/CO.

jti7

36

/rs

913

/t-7

m-

#70

Uf

€3%

7J.7

Itf

lfi/1.

Z7S

/3Z tf-S7

11.6.

3ZV\

/».

Sf i P7-£*s4#£jS'

(3c ro/?£-f?

A/j "£■**&■ £S7

J^£- ££rjW &■<£-/?

EvaluOtwi

Number

PefCent

Nurnbei

Per Cent

Numter

Percent

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Doubttu

Total

Cabin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DrjublruJ

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToUl

Certain

Doubtlul

Total

CerUin

Doublfu

Total

Certain

Doibtlul

Total

0. Balloon

£

/.Z

(?

3.L

1-1

10 B

ft

/X

2.0

Cf

u

'Co

r

?

/<*

HI

8.S

/J.?

t

f

//

s.l

4*

/o.S

l-Astmnornca!

/r

7

7-7

16.9

S.H

/i-2

>r

tK

S3

n.9

M.f

2 ft

3-/

/T

It

It -9

(H.x

n.t

/?

ft

W

m

IS. 1

12.3

2-Airaitt

/.?

27

HS

12

'1.3

2.1.1

1

//

?»

7-2

e.B

II. o

//

f

'7

/»■<(

S.7

H.l

7

//

If

tf.7

i9.i

m

3-LiJtit Plienon.

/

.Z

,?

t ic

1-7

1.9

/

2.

7

OS

u

Z-f

3

1

H-

2-9

Q.I

3.7

/

O

i

1.0

O.O

l-.O

4- Birds

/

JZ

3

« (,

1.7

1-8

2

?■

H

■i.c

1-0

3.?

o

fi.C

<?■(>

0i

8

{?

0.0

0.0

(?.D

S-Cltwdi. Oust etc.

/

(

o.o

0.(

O.i

/>

1

/

?,0

Of?

0.$

d

1

z

0.6

A?

1.1

.

<0

0.0

0.0

0.0

frlnsutlic. Wo.

n

(7

fl

JUL

<r.e

//*

/o

f

/O

M.

00

i \o

7

7

■ i.C

OJ

i-t

'9

<?

0t0

$.c

7-PirtMoircal

3

&

3

/.?

#.0

1-9

!

/

M.

fi.p

o.8

1

/

Q.I

0.0

0-1

h

z

11

0.0

/■*

»Unkn>M' '

fz

1$,3

a?

2S.3

\?£>

?e

H9

6.0

IV. t

J-t

T-i

/f»

0.0

ft. 8

?.z

?Z*

71.

£P

y.o

*0*er

/

2

10

W

1-1

CO

■ 2-

1

J

U

0-?

2<f

H-

#

^J

0.0

3.8

f

r

7.L

0P

7.6

Tom

///

rj-

166

«.?

33./

100.

7f

47

i?J-

17. HT-i

/f»

0.0

ft. 8

?.z

?Z*

71.

£P

y.o

*0*er

/

2

10

W

1-1

CO

■ 2-

1

J

U

0-?

2<f

H-

#

^J

0.0

3.8

f

r

7.L

0P

7.6

Tom

///

rj-

166

«.?

33./

100.

7f

47

i?J-

17. H

31-£

/to.

73

3?

(06

<-H

3/-I

id.

75

3JL

f04~

67,5

3Q-S

/DO.

1Z3

B^^^^ffi

!i^*^!"^»fffl'Wr^1^'T?*i f M^!!.^^^*J!RPW^1^M

mmmmmmmm

f^mmmm

*

i

i

rA£i.e Aj$ £MLt/4r//2A/

£>f

0*J£-Cf

s/6#r//t/r. <

rfV

S7£>/l/rs?

<?/^ </,?,**

'?*r

• /

1

J* A/ VA/fr . . _ .

/~£&*?Mf?/

/*Ct«w

^P/T/i.

[

Nuabei

PeiOnt

Nuirtur

PferCnt

Hnnbn

Percent

Number

PhCbiI

Emlaitn)"

Certain

Douotnjl

row

C«(t*.-

QmMhit, ToW

CerBin

r»Wtil

Total

Cert**

DouMM

Tour

>riain

Dovblftd

Total

Certain

Dnibtlul Tola!

Certain

DoubtW

Total

Certain

DHHM

Tola)

lo-amm

. • \

MsUwoinal

1

X

'j-Aitctatl

'

J

V

rV^

1

3^

^1

l-LijUt Ptwom.

^

^

^

iX

t-Bitto

^

,

^ l

>^1

A

IK

S-Cloudl. Dusk etc.

■"

S:

\

^

,)

tlnufhc. bife-

•v^

1

\<t

i

_fc^

t\ ■

7 PirdBtajK*

1

tV

5^

_-J^_

^oV

XT

»IMM«

V

■ 1 ■ -

1

^

s

V

KMnei

I

i

ToM

L,

i

,

Si/Ay

J~u*/£-

J~f*y

._ . . . /fe<k V3r~

I ■

Number

P«C»I

Ninon

Pe/Cenl

r*r«tff

Per CM

Percent

, Equation

Certain

Doubttiill Total

Certain

Doubllui

' Tolal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

;«1aiii

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Douutfu

Total

Certain

OntWW

Total

0- Sallow

f*

/

7.7

((

7-7

_£

6

ISO

o.i

ISO

Q

6.0

S.O

tj.d

1-Aitmomcai

■ 1

/

0.0

7-7

7-7

_x

3

S

5.0 V.S

17.$

1

\

-x

10.

ltd

70.9

!?-iimHI

A

N

2

7

ff.tf-

0.0

M

tf

2

7

9.6

5--P

S.O

Q

10

p.0

0.1}

>Littil Phenoa.

S

I

<7

(?

a

0.0

0.0

(

1

7.6

0.0

3.5

M

6.0

6b

4-6ltdJ

i

A

^

6

<?

AiL

0.0

£>.6

(?

9-9

0.6

9.0

CO

-JM.

ftr

: S-Clouds. Dust, tic

i

>;

2

i>

CO

0.0

0,o

o.o

0.0

0.0

6

00

94

t.ff

iMnailtic. mh.

" '"""■" ^

3

l)

3

2l>

W

23.1

£>

t?

c

is.o

o.o

ft*

3

p

2

lo.O

£>■£>

sue-JM.

ftr

: S-Clouds. Dust, tic

i

>;

2

i>

CO

0.0

0,o

o.o

0.0

0.0

6

00

94

t.ff

iMnailtic. mh.

" '"""■" ^

3

l)

3

2l>

W

23.1

£>

t?

c

is.o

o.o

ft*

3

p

2

lo.O

£>■£>

sue

;i-Piydala|iul

?

I

.0

)

7-7

O.C

17

. 7

1

0*

s.o

5-'

0.0

M

U

8-tlntjttis

^

V

¥

H

3**

0.0

3t.$

-I

P

f

ty.0

&,£>

W-o

6

(,

t<>. 8

{).&

(ftO

Mtte

/

/

-£l

6.0

7 7

-J±

ft

TS.o

00

is*

o.o

M

DO

ToM

.

n

./.

n

W3

7-7

/to.

n

7

w

m

S7-SW

f

1

to

1?.?

19.0 (CO-

r ■ ■" 
i

-5 F/'t £-/**£&?

Pe7-af£~*t>

AZtS^-ASf^A-

j&^c^sif^sr

1

Ntwbn

Pa Cent

Hlnnber

Per Cot

Nrntei

PerCent

Nuaber

Percent

Evaluation

Certaie

Doubthi

Total

Certain

OwbHul

ToUl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DnbtM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoublM

Total

Ctrtan

Doubthi

Total

Certain

DuubrM

mi

t Balloon

'3

CO

<t-t

0-t

0.0\

0.0

00

(7

0.0

U

O.e

Of

0Q

1-AtbHMical

1

I

39.Q

t.t

1QQ

1

a

3

ti-7

53.3

SO-9

1

l

a

$3.3

33.3

6bA

?

7

tool

O.Q

19 O.O

Mifcraft

a

QQ

10

00

00

0.0

6.0

o

0.0

O.Q

0.0

0.0

0-q

tJ

}-Li(nl Phaaa.

-~-0

0.!

M

99

s-s

o-O

*f)

_L

1

Wb

04

33.3

00

At

_0.Q

0.6

i-Birds

0-1

I s

0.0

1

o

9.0

0-0

m

e

r?

p

SO

0.0

06

a

&

c.o

cu>

5-ClooOj, OKt. etc

.Q

4.0

9-0

o.g

o

ao

0.0

o.o

V

p

AD

0-0

<?■<>

. o

£>

6.0

0.0

0.0

tlnsultic kto.

1

1

5 '90

(?■(>

20

p

o.o

*t>

9«

£>

(?

0.P

0.0

<?■<?

J

a

■ O.0

00

00

IPjYCinloral

_S.

t

lo-i

O.o

190

i

f

H7

O.O

ft.f

0.

<?

(?

0,0

fop

flfi

9

o

&

0.0

0.0

■ 0,0

S-Unlmijim

2

p

1

Ho:o

Hb

?

!>

2

Hi

£>.?

33. J

o

p

at

/>P

0,0

&_

&

0,fl

(1.0

SJBMt

_4j2

oo

0.0

a

a

Q.S

0.9

0.0

e

P

10.

<?P

po

&

Q

O

w

0.0

■*0

Total

s

5

/etc

0-0

ISO

H

1

C

Ul

33.3

J60

1

t

■3

U-7

313

/SO.

1

X

noo

0.0

I/O.

124

r m e A ie

-gS/MiMZf?*' <of aa-ietr s/6tfr/jt/6s 4? /? <p / yr# ^y le aa.

'9Vf~

Tjm/L>AA?r

/Ctrtrffi/Atrr0-0

ISO

H

1

C

Ul

33.3

J60

1

t

■3

U-7

313

/SO.

1

X

noo

0.0

I/O.

124

r m e A ie

-gS/MiMZf?*' <of aa-ietr s/6tfr/jt/6s 4? /? <p / yr# ^y le aa.

'9Vf~

Tjm/L>AA?r

/Ctrtrffi/Atrr

/Va(?

cm

A^/f/i-

EvoIwIma

Number

Per Call

Nuaon

Per Cat

*rt*B

P«Ce«t

NmMr

PtrCart

pertan

DwMtuI

Tobt

C«1»»

DouMfai

ToW Cabin

oomxM

ToW

Cemin

DaiMtiil

ToW

^ertao

DoubtM

ToW

Orbin

Dw 1*1

Total

Cntoin

DmiWIuI

Tobl

Ctrtnt

DmMM

Tot!)

WM9*

c

r

0.0

0-0

00

<?

&

^

TF

0.0

•e

<>■

J^

^.tf

^.i?

■2

i?

%

&4>

0.0

J.0.0

1-Ainwaaical

4

3

7

40.0

W.t

io.o

,?

?j

5"

6Q.D

4S.im.o

2

<?

2

?**

*J>

?M

-3

J.

00

J90

ZO,f

I-AuciM

0.0

00

M

P

£?

0.0

00

AC

<?

<?

(M

t.6

to

3

3

J0.&

0-0

AW

3-Li|M PMm.

rf?

■ <7

o

. rt*

4.0

-M

f

c>

e.t

60

^-£>

D

<J

£1

.0£

O.O

0,0

n

0.&

0.0

0-P

«-Bt«b

i?

■ (?

0.6

0.0

O.D

r

f

.r.o

CO

<?

6.0

.AP.

6.0

1

<3

\

M&.

0.0

t&g-

J-Cloudi, Dust, etc.

<7

17

/rJ

__$.e

.jSJL

<?

O

<?

OL

..J.-i

<?■*>

<?

0j

/J)

QJ>

o

O

pt

0.0

s.o

t-lnsuflit **.

?

p

2

19.6

0.0

[ZllA

6

1

o.o

CO

04

2

f?

2

YStr

.04

Hi

1

ff

1

fro

0.0

/QJO

7-PiydBtofiol

17

J

QO

o.o

{JUL

£

.GJC 0"

o.o

. j?

<?

<?

0.0

d/>

(i-0

0&

M

i.e>

l-IMHHK

C

/?

0.6

t.o

O.O

4*

£0

0.0

/

c

1

tt.v

at

W

I

(

/O.O

M

><>■£>

ua«

' 1

/

t4.o fad

<&

0.0

*fi

7

2,

69

?f.O

716

c

e.o

04

Ai>

.

ToW

&

*

/c?

60.6

#0.0

lot>.

3

2

S

£04

#0.0 w.

r

a

7

7 ). 1

Ui'dO.

f

?-

10

TOP

Jtt.0

&0.

AfA,

y

. Ttj/i/tr

-

Jisi-r

Al/6&5 7~

EMlualm

Nunbei

PhCoiI

Nufltef

Percent

MMAcr

PtrCart

ItoabH

PeiCait

Certiin

y Doutttul

Tot»

Ctitun

DwbHul

Total

Ctrtlin

DwoUul

T«W

Otm

OortrW

T«tH

Certain

DouHhl

ToW

Certain

OuMM

Total

Catan

Doubt*!

Total

CertM

Cmbrlul

iYoW_

0-Mloon

V

J

0.t

0,0

A0

2

Z

til

p.o

an

X

\

1

23

Jt.l u.s

Q

7-

2

A?

JLOJ)

J&JL

1-Aitranoftteal

/

i

1

16.0Certain

OuMM

Total

Catan

Doubt*!

Total

CertM

Cmbrlul

iYoW_

0-Mloon

V

J

0.t

0,0

A0

2

Z

til

p.o

an

X

\

1

23

Jt.l u.s

Q

7-

2

A?

JLOJ)

J&JL

1-Aitranoftteal

/

i

1

16.0

/P-0

MO

9.0

o'.o

£>Q

IT

4

7

lU

ft..7

fl f 1

2.

A.

H

2-D.O

-ZOJL

Jt£-£.

|2<Aircntt

1

1

IM.

fit

%4

9

0-0

0J>

14

1

b

/{..I

S.-i

3?/}

J

i

Z

J0£

_jeK6

£Ms

tS^Lijhl ftimon.

i)

X

6.0

ze-e

so.c

C

f

1

0.0

7J-3

33.3

t

Q

/

-H>ll-

—6°

V*

~-£B.

04

. P.O

>Birti

if

1

1

O.C

/l-O

'0-0

<?

<a>

6.0

0.0

0.Q

f

1

0.0

—SU

t?

£>

0.0

QJL 0J.

S-CtoiKhiDiiitrtt

c

Afi

0,o

0.0

a

o

0.0

6,0

AQ

9

O.o

r.o

*4

p

0.0

0.0

00

6-lniulric. tufa.

3

c

3

Si.0

CP

34-0

0.0

&

no

a

p

Q

o.o

ao

ft)

1

(?

f

/O,0

a.p

10.0

7Pr(tholotiot

Q

!?.?

Q.Q

f.O

to

0,0

()£

a

do

0.0

0.0

Q

0-.0

AO

P.e

VMUtm

1

1

SD.Q

0-ft

/tP

p

6.0

fit?

(t,0

_£

s

70.S

AD

#>■?

.

<?

Q

04

CO

O.o

♦fflhd

o

■

CO

04

0P

0.0

AO

t-0

/

Q

i

IhZ

04

Vi-2

1

/

0.0

(0.0

J/LP

_

fttd

t,

1

/0

6e.9

4*4

(00-

7.

I

1

(i.7

?**

/00.

JC

it

It

HI

J33

IH-

JL

c

to

ttf.6

6P,t>

m

j

^Vr^/V^f/-

(Pcnn

p&jt

A' i i>L'£y*f&£'jr

.... .-.Jr^e*'***'*-*- .

j

Maabe

PaCari

PaCait

■Mw

Pa Call

hatha

PaCait

Evaluation

Certaiii

DouMfut

Total

Carla'o

Doubtlal

ToW

CerbJo

Oounthl

ToW

Cabio

0<aMU

TeW

Certain

Doamtjl

Total

Ctitan

DoaWul

Total

Catao

Doubt*

Total

Ccrtaia

DcabtM

ToM

V-tUlDM

1

7

_^£i

73.3

JSJ

3

7

t,

JS.6

a*

J0.0

/

3

3

s.i

Jl$

!7.1

?

H

/!■*

o.o

/0S

l-AAonaical

i

I

OJO

/f-7

ft- 7

1

3

H

s.o

fio

~2&e.

7

(

«

41.7

Jf

m

2

*

L

/>s

W

3/, 6

I-AilCiaA

t

Q

I

/il

P.B

/(■}>

1

Q

t

6.0

o.o

5-P

*t

H

n.s

0,0

ns

o

!

I

Q-0

S3

S,3

J-Lifht Poaaa.

Li

<?

o

OS

cp

04

1

(

s.o

Ofl

$.0

9

9.0

f? c

o.o

_JL

o

O

00

0.4

0.0

«-BirtJ

<}

c

■0.0

0.0

(>.0

1

. /

%

s.o

i.o

*0>0

o

0,A

0.0o

!

I

Q-0

S3

S,3

J-Lifht Poaaa.

Li

<?

o

OS

cp

04

1

(

s.o

Ofl

$.0

9

9.0

f? c

o.o

_JL

o

O

00

0.4

0.0

«-BirtJ

<}

c

■0.0

0.0

(>.0

1

. /

%

s.o

i.o

*0>0

o

0,A

0.0

ff-Q

o

0.6

te

00

S-Cloudi, (M, etc.

fr

0.0

J.l

0.0

P

a

0.0

9-0

0.0

0.0

Q.O

0.0

/>

o

0.0

0.6

00

6-lnsiflic aia.

Q

o

0.0

0,0

6.0

M

v

Zo.o

(?,ff

Zfi.t>

\

i

f.f

£6

if

A

p

u

li.%

00

'fti

7-Psrthilo|icai

J

f

/u

M

/i.7

0.D

0<?

0.0

0.6

0.0

fl.C

o

0.0

P.D

M

(VUOblOMI

f.O

0.0

0-0

0.

Q

u.a

at

its?

p

0.0

fy

e.e

&

s

1iS>

-£e

**3

MOW

)

/

w

/fl

16?

6

0.0

00

0-0

I

1

Ll

0.0

S.9

2

%

te.f

0.0 1

I0£

Total

7

H

c

33.3

U.1

/SO.

n

7

%t>

tf.Q

ISO

/OP;

7S\

3

n

m

n.i

tii.

J±.

J-

ft

pi

&.1 f*h

1Z5

•^smmmsm.

wmrm*mmr

^I^RRIWJPB^E!

rMie J 2 J

_£rjL(/ J 4r/a/t> 0s &*j££r s/&//T/fir<is *•/ Mp/vr/f pf VSJ4-

'fvf ,

Jami/a/??-

../^k&ftL'A&y- ,

JZt/rcf _

. j4f*/r/£-

EnlaatiM

Muter

Per Cm)

Huft«

PerCent

Nuaber

Percent

NUHbCI

Pa Ceil

GotM

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoeMtit

Total

Certain

DeabtM

Tool

Certain

Doubtful

Tim

"xtlMt

Doubtful

Total

Cabin

DnMkil

ToH

CcrMn

DhMM

Tom

Cotain

Dotbttal

Tom

Bat loom

C

/

!

0.0

il

*7

?

X

/te

M

m

d

(7

0.0

0.0

0.0

/

e

/

ra

9.0

Sli

<l-*,sMttmtai

*»

f

7

/?s

3/. a

«7

2

^

t

in.

3£.t

Su

1

1

/J

31. t

K9

(9.%

_£_

1

7

U3

J.C

S$.1

MlKlrfl

4

/

S"

5J.

6?

3/3

/

1

li

90

i.t

.A.

Q

3

io.S

It

19.%

1

Q

3

11 t

0.6

fll

J-UiM PtwM.

/?

Q_

(0

0.ff

10

<V

o.

Hi.

M

&-D

e>

P

ai

J-CU

M

_e_

Q.Q

fio

0-0

4-BnA ■

^

a

0£

en

Af>

£>

AO

&£

0.0

7

Q

3

i*J

w)

16-5

9.6

CO

0.0

S-Ctaidi, Dull, etc

^

(?

fit

-M.

*V

Q

0J>

Q.Q

m

d

ao

00

O.P

<?

M

0-t>

st>

Unwrlic Into.

-J

o

O.Q

-M.

0.0

;

1

7.1

0,0

it

1

/

S.3

fo

J.3

f

«•

Si 8

a*

in

7-Pijdoloiical

tf

'

0-0

D.P

<?.«

P

w

0.0

At

c

o

0,0

0-4

t?.f

Q.

fi<?

M

0-t>

st>

Unwrlic Into.

-J

o

O.Q

-M.

0.0

;

1

7.1

0,0

it

1

/

S.3

fo

J.3

f

«•

Si 8

a*

in

7-Pijdoloiical

tf

'

0-0

D.P

<?.«

P

w

0.0

At

c

o

0,0

0-4

t?.f

Q.

fi

>

6.6

fit)

0.0

t-Uotaunr.

2

p

3

Z£l

_M-I24

.A

0.6

0.0

/>.(/

/

i

5:3

1?J>

S3

3

j

HI

At

til

>0««r

/

/

*.;

s.f

»5<a

1

/

*/

0.0

<?/

6

U

90

o.&

Q

{?

P

o.o

AO

o.O

V

ToM '

?

7

/&

5T-2

93%

/«.

7

4

//

6U

3i +

/9>.

10

1

/?

m

■fT^ltli

n

1

/s

iv.t

i.c

/10.

y^r-

\TiSAfir

3~t/A r . _

s4l/4 ?S7~

EtiluHoo

Nwlxr

PnCenl

Number

PerCent

Nurtw

PerCent

NiBbei

PerCent

Ccitan

Pointful

Tottl

Certain

Doubllu

1 Total

Certain

DoubtW

Total

Certain

Doubttll!

Total

:erttin

Doubtful

Total

CerHo

DHbtJul

TdW

Certan

Dwtjrtj

Total

Certain

Donbttil

Total

t-Balooi

f

^

n.»

0.0

>3.t

/

1

£3

9.0

Si

/

2j

1-

LI

If

il

M

o.t

0.0

I-AtMiHial

6

z

1?

701

<■?

m

/

3

¥

11

2S.0

33.3

V

1

0.0

Qt.7

2(1

i

lh

n

*-<?

C4.9

Cfo

2-Aircnn

.4

7

7

/■3-S

Ifci

iti.\

f

/

t

S.l,

$J

/a

3

3

0.0

1f-0

30.0

1

X

3

4.0

Bo

I1J

Hi#l Phono*.

0.6

6»

04

&

Q

0.0

0.6

0.0

"

9

0.0

AO

0.0

p

90

0.6

0.0

4-Bildt

z5

■ fi.o

9-0

OS

0.0

O.Q

M

1

l

o.s

CI

tl

O

c?

0.1

00

0.6

i-Ciooft Dwt fie.

^

0.0

0.0

Q $

P

O

D.D

O.D

p>

Q

0.0

10

9.0

9

0.0

0-9

0.0

C-tmllic. ub.

5

J

ni

/?J

nx

?

3

lil

6LP

in

3

O

3

2>.0

QD

20.0

2

X.

10

AS>

10

M>qcMa|iol

<?

#

£>.0

f.t

to

!

<?

/

S.l

0.0

&

u

CO

9.0

Z

9

X

$.0

0.0

9J

»IMhm

r

r

n.7

ftp

17-1

t

<?

7

8.3

(?£

9.3

1

(?

(f

/3.3

J>.D

/J.3

t

/

4.0

Gt>

9 J

KMter

^7

<p

0.0

0.0

9.0

-J-

1

Ml

O.Q

t-s

t

I

4-7

0.0

67

or

6.0

0.0

Totd

j*

f

^r

81&

m

106.

8

i

1*

an

33.5

M.

7

a

T

nj

m

(tt.

7

I?

<?s

29.0

?Zl

100.

Z'Ffr ****£-&

(7r r*> &£-*>

ASoirj***

^-w

j&e>:****£-/r

Enlutiw

Mmber

Per Ce*t

Nunoer

Per Cent

Nw*er81&

m

106.

8

i

1*

an

33.5

M.

7

a

T

nj

m

(tt.

7

I?

<?s

29.0

?Zl

100.

Z'Ffr ****£-&

(7r r*> &£-*>

ASoirj***

^-w

j&e>:****£-/r

Enlutiw

Mmber

Per Ce*t

Nunoer

Per Cent

Nw*er

PerCent

Nuaber

PaCent

Certaia

Dogbtfu

Total

Certain

Donor*!

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doibtni

Total

Certain

Oaibtful

Total

Certain

Ooobtnjl

Total

Certain

Doubttu

Total

Certaia

DoubrM

Total

0-Bjlloon

/

/

3X3

o.e

37.5

Q

0.0-

Q.O

90

7

/

Q.0

is

£J

/

O

/

LI

0.0

il

1-Attmuaicai

4

<7

6.0

O.Q

0.9

1

1

¥

//./

m

Hi

u

¥

r?

n.-b

3 j. 3

cu

Q

¥

C

/3-3

?«'<r

3?f

2-Airaaft

0.0

0.0

00

1

{

7,

Ill

l>. 1

21-2

t

1

0.0

*3

0.1

Z

2

n. 3

O.o

J?.?,

KittlrVm*.

0.0

9

0.0

0.9

0.0

0.0

9

0:9

9.Q

0.0

6

6-0

e-t>

9-i

♦•Br*

0.0

O.O

0.0

Pi

D

0.0

to

9.0

__ o\

0.0

0.0

0.0

O

O

Ao

0.0

JXO

Kheft Oni. «tt

(ja

0.0

0.0

#.t>

0.0

qa

9

0.0

ao

00

O

60

0.e

0.D

•■bawlic. brio.

1

(?

1

til

M

til

1

X

11.1

at

Ul

O

0-0

04

0:0

J

t

CI

0.0

♦■7

7-Pietlnkitial

Q

0.0

0.0

o-t

c

0.9

0.0

90

9

9.0

0.0

9.Q

O

1.0

do

0-f

olMman

r>

0.9

00

O-O

. 1.

/

HI

0,0

if. 1

-Jl.

%

u.i

Ap

HI

_x

•?

21.0

&p

1i. 9

Wow

9

CO

0.9

to

0.0

CO

Q.&

0.0

0.o

00

7

e?

13.3

*fi

133

Total

3

3

Me

0.0

/0P.

-£.

*

?

fU

*t>l

atj-

6

6

/2

r<?0

fOO

M.

It

f

/5

111

?i-l

loo.

S

126

ite-

L

r/?4iir #2Z £-f&±//4in>{?/y e?f a/U££ZL V6#7W6 s tffj &0/vr# . <?f V^/^ 4^£j g -

JrA*> (/<*/??

Ar&ffOA/Plr

' Aft&c/s

Ap./pij^

Cnfwtion

Nwbet

P«f Cent

Number

Per Chi)

Nunbet

P«C»t

Hunter

Pa cm

Certain

OwMtal

Total

Certwi

Doubtful, Total Certjin,

OouMMj

ToW

Certain

OouMM

Total

;itlnn

DmiffiU

Total

Certain

OuHftll

Tom

Ctrtnn

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OotitXfal

i.j"

D-aniiwi

12

<>

IT

0.1 I "V

2

e

7

iS.it

0,0

IS. 9

5

/

C

o.l

Xt

3/5

}

e

/

77

6.0

1-AiiimMiol

J"

?

1

MS

23.t\t/t Z

3

s

tSSDoubtful

Total

Certain

OotitXfal

i.j"

D-aniiwi

12

<>

IT

0.1 I "V

2

e

7

iS.it

0,0

IS. 9

5

/

C

o.l

Xt

3/5

}

e

/

77

6.0

1-AiiimMiol

J"

?

1

MS

23.t\t/t Z

3

s

tSS

n.i

?t.S

4

f

ttl

O.Q

'*3

t

e

/

77

00

7.1

2-Anoin

")

ft

%

11SL

t-0

at

1

3

iS4

0.9

tu

•J

4

7

UL1

ii-3

7S.0

2

o

1

it- 1

AO '* s

J-Li|W PtiBtcm.

i?

r

ac

A^

O.l

J?

(1

a?

£.0

W

6

Q

0J?

0.0

flfi

J-8

<?.<r

0.0

••Onto

?

e

0.0

<?•(>

St

-££.

0.0

ac

t>

M

CO

o.t

'

Q

0.1

0.0

6A

S-ClondJ. Dust, etc

fi

c

O.O

£0

-j&S.

?

p

iBy

a.o

0.0

.act

0.1

OJ

0.0

o.o

0*

frhisiflit. Into.

t.

a

i

71

_ ^0

12J, )

l

-ZtZ,

0,0

1-7

&

rf

k

2Lt

0.0

i\f

-}

o

3

M±

QC 3/.*

7-Pirtteto(icit

(7

C

■ p

9.0

0.0

\Tg

4

<9

JLH

0,0

?.o

p

^M.

$.t>

M

1

/

7./

04

7/

Mataana

1

i

7-7

£>,&

7-7

I

1

77

*P

7-7

u

If-

Ml

#t>

in

i

a

6,

ffl-f

AO

fl.f

Wilwi

J

a

i

1Z

0.0

JJ.

2

.. C

3

ts*

O.P

If.t-

-JL

t

t

JLA

It

3-L

JLL

.S-Q

0.0

Total

>P

3

n

W

111

Ifg.

10

?

) 3

7£9

?3-/

in.

22

L

0$

llh

m

m.

JJL

ft

If/.C

9 lot).

SfA,

i77jase~

J~ul.y

Ai->6 vs?~

Evaluilwn

Nnnon

PerCwt

Nintef

PoCsit

Nui*b

Patent

NuMH

Pti Cent

CcrUm

Doubtful

Tohi

Certain

Doubthil

Total

Certain

Dwbthjl

Total

CefU«

DarWul

ToU

;ertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

rDoubtKa

Total

Certain

Doubthl

ToW

Certain

Doubthil

Total

O-Miomi

c

/

/^.3

(7.^

m

4

¥

a '.7

9.*

tt/i

_x

(

£7

o.t

<■!

1

o

1

(0.0

o.o

(9.0

t-Aitmunicif

1

f

7

'y.3

■^3

28-C

Q

9

Ad

(>■(?

o.O

JL

9

/

i-7

t 0.0

<-7

(

4

J

S.Q

29. Q

2U

1-MinaH

JL

9

00

f

0-1

<?

O.0

0.0

o!)

9

1

5

217

\JO.

p.1

¥

1

s

2P.t

50

no

HiMPtrsna.

(!

a

?.«

t?.'

0.9

0.0

0.0

9.)

9.0

of

0.9

P

Q

f-t

0.0

o-o

t-Birdi

(?

ae

CO

o.o

JL

o

Q

JJ.

A0

ff.0

__£

9.0

nr

ft

Q.

Q

O.e

0-'

(>.0

KIcwU. OM, etc

■J>

c

00

0.0

0.6

zl

P

C

to

ac

040.0

9.)

9.0

of

0.9

P

Q

f-t

0.0

o-o

t-Birdi

(?

ae

CO

o.o

JL

o

Q

JJ.

A0

ff.0

__£

9.0

nr

ft

Q.

Q

O.e

0-'

(>.0

KIcwU. OM, etc

■J>

c

00

0.0

0.6

zl

P

C

to

ac

04

<?

t?

P.O

0,0

Q.Q

o

Q

04

OJO

0.0

S-limflic Wo.

1

<?

3

m

■4>4

m

o

P

O.O

0,0

U

*1

6

t

ia

-0£2iJ.

3.

?

/o.O

..AP /'■'

IPqtMoiiol

r

0J3

e>4

P£

J&

0.0

9,1

. £

9

9

0.0

, o.o

o.t

0.4

o.o

0.0

t-UnlKov

/

f

HZ

<W

fa

a

3l

33-1

*6

VI

4

f

Ml

J>.& 1*1

5"

<?

5

IS.t

0.0 K.I

MMher

Q

i

t

6.0

*fi

/f3

Q

t

B-t

OP

i-i

- 9-

P

Q

o:o

S.Q

la

/ t

I

S.O

0.0

s.o

Total

J

2

7

7/4

n.<>

/tt.

i

Q

&

1'n.s

9.1

0-

11.

I

15

fjj

&1

/to.

If-

r

to

7Xi

ISfflD^

1

^Sfi/P7~/r/^JT^-/P

0c rofr/^j?

._. . JJe.ift

r^s'C/f

P*-C£-S~t&£S?

!■

Htiaber

Per Can

Nuatei

PnC«t

Nwiwr

PeiCent

rbiaba

PerCent

Evateahon

Certain

Doubtful

Tobl

Certain

Dogblfcl

Tola!

Certain

OoMfal

Total

Ccrtau

DntMful

Total

Cntarn

DouMful

Total

Ccrtaia

Poubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtb

Total

Certain

Dgibtfal

TdM

D-Ball«Ki

£»0

9-Q

O.t

/

I

/o.o

0.0

19.9

2

*

-x

IL1

0.0

ftf

2

3

s

JIS

PC

3?.-?

l-Astrwomical

r

o

5

WS

o.o

3H.S

/

i

X

n.*

19.9

Wt

' o

Q

O.Q

Q-{

0/

H

?

I

m

11$

3tt

Z-AHcrafl

a

o

1

tS:?

t-t

ti-H

1

!

O.t

ff.O

/t.O

_£_

1

9

IB

ti-7

334

t

1?

1

JLL

UL0_

J.f

3-Lr|f)l FOSHra.

1)

0-0

1-f

6

do

00

00

o.o

0.0

9-0

Q

0.0

0,0

0.0

«-Birrlt

()

JJ

6.0

0-0

o-o

a.O

00

Q

p

to

to

fro

o

ojf

_M

^d£.

J-Cloudi, Omt etc

£_

,1

\)

ae

0.0

0-0

a

&Q

CO

0-0

Q

6-0

ao

O.O

e

c

0.0.

0.0

#■<>

t-liuuflic Wo.

3

#

$

23.1

<?.<?

HI

.. o

f?

■ Q

Qt

ae

ffJH

L

i

8.s

ae

1*3

;

1

j-.?

60

39

?-P»irc«BlO(icjl

o

9.0

$0

$.9

9

00

0.0

0-9

G

o.o

6,0

Q.0

/

Q

I

if

Ae

3?

8-umouXi

3

1

23/

<?<(>

2l.\

c

£-

/,

Coo

3f?

iU

7 1

9

m

ni

s?

P

1

JLL

oJ

/f$

Mlther

ft

Q9

o.t

0.0

9

^9.0

$0

$.9

9

00

0.0

0-9

G

o.o

6,0

Q.0

/

Q

I

if

Ae

3?

8-umouXi

3

1

23/

<?<(>

2l.\

c

£-

/,

Coo

3f?

iU

7 1

9

m

ni

s?

P

1

JLL

oJ

/f$

Mlther

ft

Q9

o.t

0.0

9

^

u

0.0

O.O

!

o

/

9.1

i4>

s.i

}

■o

I

S.f

"■<?

s?

Tout

'3

D

n

M.O

o.o

in.

?

3

JO

ho

20. g

m

JO,

i

n

Sz.i

W

ISO.

/i

6

n

70. C

?M no.

*i

127

TZJL* A2S

^Wii/Ar/V/V a>f &?j£<?r s/d>A?rs#4f 4? firtp p tfs /?r <S£^/>&

/f^L.

Xf/t tsA-/?Y

^trx/tVA/?*- .

A?J/?cM

Ar/ft-

Enlanon

Per Cell

Number

Per Coil

Number

PerCeirt

mtm

PeiCeirt

Ctrtam

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Doubltul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

lettiin

Doubtful

Totil

Certain

Deubttil

ToW

Ccftatn

DmibtW

ToW

Certain

DMblW

Tom

ft anion

3

/

3

Id

Si

/*7

/

/

If!

0.0

///

Q

a>

o.o

Co

/■0

f

P

tc

0.6

&

I l-Aitnrcnical

.'

?

3

St

/I.I

'(■7

P

2

•2-

0,0

111

fil.7

/

1

'z

10.1

/(.?

nv

d

0:0

0J

0.0

MkiKurt

1

1

J.ft

//.(

(//

3

.?'

o-t

333

33,3

1

t

0.0

/t-7

/t-7

i

/

J5.j

0-0

33.3

J-li(M pMno*.

<?

^

£>.<

-0-0

0-0

t>

CO

o.o

W

~J0

0.0

00

w

O

0£

do

0J>

4-Birts

/>

1?

£W

04

■ 0,p

o

(?

ao

_J2£

fit

a

00\

tx>

010

■

6.0

04

0.0

S-Clwte. OuH. ele.

c

P

p

J.J

C-U

0-6

a

' (?

o

M

0.0

Q.O

Q

-M

0.6

0J>

Q

Q.O

00

&e

Unaflit Ufa.

<

£.

5

273

o.o

m

0,0

0,0

/O

6

o

ox>

<Z4

40

«

O

7

&7

Oo

(£■7

JPtidWloJiai

. _ft

Q

0.0

fl.D

S.C

Q

_M.

-JL1

~QJ\

6.0

0.0

00

(7

d

fit

00

00

lUntjm

.■z

H

20t

C.o\ ?17

1

1

ILL

0,0

/A/

3

o

3

fQ.9

0.0

SflO

/I

Q

a.6

00

0.0

KM*

/

e

1

s c

'■« S.i

■2

/}

•Z

ni

0.0

&•}

00

0.0

0.0

do

0.0

6.0

Tom

-■3

5

n

111

219

iqo.

*

i

f

m

tt.CM.

4

z

L

a-i

11.1

/et.

3

3

/ft.}

0.0

fit.

1

M*r

.71 J A

{f

\Tis£-r

s4tS£CJs7-

|

Hunbtr

PerCent

Number

PeiCent

Ninelwr

PerCent

NnbH

PerCent

j FivalwtHn

Certirn

OniUful

Total

Certaina-i

11.1

/et.

3

3

/ft.}

0.0

fit.

1

M*r

.71 J A

{f

\Tis£-r

s4tS£CJs7-

|

Hunbtr

PerCent

Number

PeiCent

Ninelwr

PerCent

NnbH

PerCent

j FivalwtHn

Certirn

OniUful

Total

Certain

Dnjbtfulf Total

Certain

Ootibtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubthi

Total

Certain

D00IM1I

Total

|H-fMloon

/

t?

/

?ro

flfi

?■&

c

0,6

&

0.0

e

6

P- 6

9-0

&.Q

/

/

z

t. 2

62

I2.U

IMitnmaiut

«j>

f-0

04

0.6

0~P

06

1

7

3

£L

ir.o

375

_JL

60

Ac

O.0>

Ij-Awtoft

_L

Q

/

?r.o

0.0

?r-e

1

/

/Of.o

6,t>

mo

i

1

n£

6-6

tu

/

6

/

£-1

*.£>£?■

l3-Li|MP»nnM.

If

Cj

0.0

0O

0.0

r?

c

00

QA

0,(t

0.0

0.0

0J>

/

1

z

Cl

/2

/Z4

!«-Birts

/

1

0.6

?r.a

zs:p

ip

(?

OS

0.Q

o.e

e.t

ho

0.e

O

00

<30

ad

U-Clnids, Dull, etc

r

fij\

6.0

0>X

c

£>

{10

0.0

0.0

6

M

6.0

0fi

ao\

0.6

p.o

S-lnaffiC mfi.

«?

0.C

t.c

0.6

/

0.(i

G*

0.Q

t>

-Ml

ao

M

3

3

m

J0

/t.f

;-Pvrttalotiul

■

r

0.0

0-6

0,6

d?

<J

6.0

00

'Oft

t

t

co

/2,J

(*.r

a

0.0

0.0

6.0

gVlimonm

1

/

JS--0

M.

?s.o

p

<?

6

0.6

0,0

0.0

2

<?

2

Qf.O

fo

25:0

7

7

f39

&t>

#3.?

Mtruw

0.0

0.0

0.0

1?

_M

0,0

6.0

1

I

)?S

O.O

}ZS

/

/

x?

0.0

6.X

TeM

3

/

i

75.0

Jf.o

JQt

1

1

itn

6.1

m-

S

3

9

tiS

J7.S/64.

JSL

2

/I

97.S

n-s

/<?$.

j

S£-f r JTJ* f?FJ?

£?/: ra J?£~J7>

A/fiu £-/*&£&

/Z&S/rj^jp

£TA-

j

Numlw

Per Cent

Nun<*r

PeiCent

Number

.Percent

(timber

Per Call

Evaluation

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DHbtt«l

Tola!

Cntain

Dwbthil

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dmbth

Total

Certain

DaubtJul

ToW

O-Balloori

A

c

1

£1

a 6

<?

f

/

S-3

OIC

S-3

/

/

0-0

f-3

8.3

/

/

/0.O

O.o

/<>,<?

l-Aitmatical

2

/

1

H.Z

n

U-t

<

1

6

?£-i

S3

3U

4

f

9

33.3

330

a-i

2

f

3

J0.0

//j»

304

?-Airuart

J_

1

C7f

/

S-3

OIC

S-3

/

/

0-0

f-3

8.3

/

/

/0.O

O.o

/<>,<?

l-Aitmatical

2

/

1

H.Z

n

U-t

<

1

6

?£-i

S3

3U

4

f

9

33.3

330

a-i

2

f

3

J0.0

//j»

304

?-Airuart

J_

1

C7

0.0

6.?

t

9

y.i

6.6

n>

1

Q

2

/C7

Of

to

3

3

304

0.0

&<P

3'Li(hl Pbeno".

C

(1

0.0

0-0

0.0

Q

a J

0.0

0.0

(■>

i.e

0.0

0.0

C

0.0

00

0.0

14-Birih

c

Q

Q.Q

Q.O

0.O

0,0

0.6

9.9

f?

00

6.0

0,0

0>

<p

00

0-0

&0

Is-Clouds, Dusl etc

o-

<0.O

6.0

60

O

M

0.0

6-6

00

0.0

dO

O

0.6

0.0

W

jfrlnauttic. Into.

2

%

/3l

p-O

13.3

0.0

£0

0,O

1

f

r.i

0,0

ft?

1

f

/O.0

0,0

to,6

: ''PiycMoiical

Q

6

0.9

0.6

Q.O

Q

e

O.Q_

6-0

0.0

-L

6

i.o

00

?■<?

t

(?

1

/O.0

0.0

(6,0

IfXInknoMi

(,

£

i

0.0

$0

HO,o

2

/)

8

tf.l

4P

#?.l

6-0

fif>

00

1

1

(O.O

0.0

Joj.

<M>tJlel

s

*-

2

/3.3

0.0

//.J

<L

0.0

OP

0.0

0.0

fit

fo

p

0.0

pjQ

10,0

Total

I±

I

/«

93-3

Cl

/to;

U-

I

/f

m

tf-3

/St

JL

5-

n

S3.3

f/7

{36:

J_

I

/o

qao

/0>6

/66.

■**3

128

i&&±£-, g^y

£&?li//?7?0/i/ 0s <?£J£47 S/&#r//V4S S{ AtrtprH £>? ¥£ /?£;

/?*2<

1

T-ia/ua /f r . . _

.. ..■£ £Jt #!/'+ tr

/^A*?/?

Arfi-/*

!

Nuiita

PeiCenl

Number

Pet Cent

Number

Per Cent

Numbet

Percent

Evaluation

Certain T Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

TOW

Certain

Doubt Nl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoobIM

Total

Certain

Doubthii

Total

Certain

Doubtlul

Totd

'0- Billon

/

<r

/

7 7

0. 7-7

J

1?

/

s±

0.0

ft

3

/

H

13.0

9-3

m

•3

z

5"

1.7

7-4

tf./

l-As1ivnMiial

7

•j

b

23./

?3./|^.;

4 1

/

S

ns

!-f

nt

_i_

t

9 3

9.0

*j

12

n

iq.c

_£4,

/«<

7-rWraft

_ (?.

<?

ft

M

C*j fl.d

2

?

f

il*

If -9

1U

3

?r

s

PI

$1

w

/Z

7

(1

m.i

?.f ni

>LiJit Pherwm.

2

o

p

<rv

^ djj

£

i?

. C

i-0

J4

<2f>

o

no

£0

<?.Q

t

1

/■2

0.0

/■^

I-Bir*

c

?

17

' <a*

&g _<?.£

^

<?

,.Q-0

fit

fa

I

P

I

70

6.07

(1

m.i

?.f ni

>LiJit Pherwm.

2

o

p

<rv

^ djj

£

i?

. C

i-0

J4

<2f>

o

no

£0

<?.Q

t

1

/■2

0.0

/■^

I-Bir*

c

?

17

' <a*

&g _<?.£

^

<?

,.Q-0

fit

fa

I

P

I

70

6.0

*i-3

2

i

3>

Irt

1.7

u

S-Cloirrh, Oust, tie.

X

rs

f

^

CD

ct

. Q

-0

M

o.p

u

_£

!

I

0,0

4-3

W

&D

0-0

o.p

f> Inutile into.

<?

n

O

0.e>\ 6,i

I

1

31

6.0

St

I

O

i

H-\

OP

M

/o

C>

10

/3-1

0.0

n-i

7-Ptjcholo|ieal

-i

,?■

2.

/£?

Calf*

1

,;

£0

at?

M

o

a

o

0,6

D.O

ff

I

d

\

1.7

U)

/■?

t-tMdnn

2

£7

■%

.•5*

-JJb 'H

H

Q

v

ill

04

135

1

I?

H

17- tf

M

(7-H

29

o

2f

Km

6-0

»■*

S-Ottr

" i

<?

%

JUL

o.o

ISA

2

.?

111

t>.P

P*

I

r

C

±1

a/7

1U

1

Z

Zj

0-0

■?f

Total

/0

3

f'i

7(.1

o3-t 1 00,

UL

1

/7

m

no

fit.

11

f

53

&Q.f

W

/*/•

73-

10

ex

m

a '-a

//c

t/tr

' .Tl>4/£:

J~v±r

Av<s tss r

Number

PerCent

Number

Per Cent

Number

PeiCoit

Nuiibei

Per Cm!

1 Evaluilnn

Certain ] Ooubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful' T« 3 I

Certain

Doubtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:enain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubllril

Total

Certain

Doubttt

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

jO-BallOM

//

1

/I

n.i

-)B

to

no

r

7S

M

-3-f

M

if

fO

/Of

11-9

7,S

jff

36

36

7Z

II -0 I/O

22.0

ll-Ailmmnicai

,. -;1

~n

n

ni

3-5

7(1

SL

n

3f

ffl

*.g

3-3,0

57

?5"

1 C

9.5

9 7

m

I*

22

CO

in

C-l

in

!;-Aircia(|

1L

'9

?'

n.i

j11

H(,

if

ii.

IS

til

7-1

nc

-QL

&tf-

Iff

'$.f

II -J

its

40

3/

7/

A3

tr

It. 8

;3-Li(hl Ptiemm.

3

ff

's

3.8

o.o

yf

i

p

1

C7

0.0

Q-1

//

9

is-

11

0.7

7.8

S

S

19

Af

1-5

3-0

4- Birds

P

0.6

</o

o.O

. D.

p

p

do

M

W>

1

/

H

Qi,

O.Q

Q-t

P

I'D

Ao

Ac

: 5-CI«irh, Oust, rlt

a

f

/

.%.$

&<>

?1

j2_

9

0.0

0.9

fre

/

/

%

9.7

0.2

n

D

*

1

ad

1.3

e-i

frlnyitfic VM

6 -if

6

JLi

to

7i

17

n-

/IS

ao

/if

Jl

e

tl

/A*

ao

ii -i

10

4

1°

9.1

fi.fi.

f-2.%.$

&<>

?1

j2_

9

0.0

0.9

fre

/

/

%

9.7

0.2

n

D

*

1

ad

1.3

e-i

frlnyitfic VM

6 -if

6

JLi

to

7i

17

n-

/IS

ao

/if

Jl

e

tl

/A*

ao

ii -i

10

4

1°

9.1

fi.fi.

f-2

-7>pj|rcholo{ieal

:

/./>

0.6

fit

*

7*

a-7

Q.0

2.7

f

s

n

_A1

0-1

3*

A

1

%

2-5

0.3

1-9

B-Unknow

/O

fl

tt

m

&st>

>in

•u

(?

%

in

ae>

nt

in

£

m

197

ae

191

£Q

£>

(0

/8¥

fi^>

lt-1

HWei

{■

f

7

70

/.3

19

tr

i

£

3-y

01

91

//

t

i*

A/

0.1

2-3

9

V

/3

2.6

1-2

H.S

Total

£3

■/£

11

111

?«3

IOQ,

/IS

30

■at

311

U3

(H-

sis

191

ru

737

1C1

/ff.

226

I0O Sit

(%3

3P.7

ftf.

i 
i

"Sf/^r^** * £"■*?■

<2r fa#£-J?>

A/ 6 tSC-M &£-,*?•

' ^SiflT^^f/P

1

Numbs

Percent

Number

Pet Cent

Nurobtr

Pet Cent

Nuratci

Per Cent

Evaluation

Certain

Doubttu

Total

Certain

Dnbttu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tola!

Certain

Doubtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Ball oon

¥

/o

H

7.2

S-t

11^

3

f

n

JLI

193

191

z

s

7

90

n.n

dp

2

■3,

0.0

H-9

fB

t-Astnownical

tO

' 7

11

T7

ft

PI

(.

9

19

f.S

m

ill.

_JL

s

f(i

it.o

IU

2 o'.O

6

S

II

N-3

ill

1$*

I-Arrtrafl

J

■37

3f

■ZX

2{.t

nt

%

?

1%

#f

19 1

(?i

J

3

U

64

I2<l

1

/o

II

2.9

13.8

m

3-Liftil PnanrL

_ /

">

3

oj

/■I

H-*

%

%

to

J.S

3.3

2.

1

1

9o

2.0

(It

_L

&

t

2-t

6,f

X-9

«-BirrJs

/

7

3

9

l-t,

2. if

A

)

%

It

1 c

3i

.0

(2

o

0.0

OX)

6,0

o

p

(?

00

00

O.T>

o-Clouds, Dosi. etc

2

I

1

J>,0

o.ft

9.9

C

l

I

0.6

l-L

(■(,

6

2

z

9--I

4.t>

#■0

o

(?

P

0.0

0,0

P.Q

S-lnsuflic. tnta.

1)

fi

II-

9.1

t.?

B.f

H

t

ii

at>

a

*f

(?

t

JJL

ao

9-9

3

3

7.1

o.p

7.1

' 7<Psycl»loncal

t

1

0.2

0.0

O.g

6

0.0

0,9

OJ

_J_

I

2-0

<w

Z*

O

9.0

0-0

00

B-Unlmoflffl

-il

It

ir.o.

60

2S.D

tl

P

il

19.0

ap

It.Q

I?

IS

30.0

1X0

30.6

_LL

12

il' 7<Psycl»loncal

t

1

0.2

0.0

O.g

6

0.0

0,9

OJ

_J_

I

2-0

<w

Z*

O

9.0

0-0

00

B-Unlmoflffl

-il

It

ir.o.

60

2S.D

tl

P

il

19.0

ap

It.Q

I?

IS

30.0

1X0

30.6

_LL

12

il

2(2

&p

1£-3

Mtti«

6

1

7

<t.S

9-t

S:(,

a

l

1

Tj

/■(

ii

_A_

I?

3

9.0

fip

1-0

.A.

P

3

77

0,0

77

Tiw

79

?0

/29

£9.1

4t.3

m

10

V

il

H2

fo.S

lot.

T>9

Ii

fo

en

w

109.

2s

tl

9Z

n$

¥0.^

Iff.

129

b"?

f»£l-

j -?ri

tfAi l'.4 r//j/i/

X»JT'

.f££. . ..

$/&#J'/A[6 $ .

£&

■SASA^-V^tf

/?&i. ?/?#/£. /ry

?0t>/>

i /to. v&rf/es

1

-J

"u.'.er^^-*' 7 *

£ 0C>n

l?£>vffrPiSJ-

f^&f/r

f

Nunbei

OoutHiP'toiiT

PerCtfi 
Certain ! Doubtful

Number

Pet Coil

nurtm

PeiCent

Hu*«

P«C«l

Enlgitwn

Total

ZeiUin

Doubtful

Total

Cartam

IWrttM

Tntal

;«u™

Oo*ttS

Total

Cobin

OwMfcl

Ttmi

Certain

DatHM

Total

CHtam

Ooobttnl

Tola*

!f> Balloon

._ii

\/9

^4

till /M

_il

lil

f*

1.1

//J

too

90

If*

?7

n

ftl

*7

AY

7S

~*7l

_^

/^

lAilnxamical

.A0 
.3,1

?. 71^3

J^-

-M£-

J&

tff

/'■?

sfi

Mi

(39

If'

/Si

JO-L

Z.2

63

tt

/Pi

/?V

/so

,?<«

7-aiichk

//

^2, /fcf

^C

/#

3/S

-JX

10. f

tw

/if

fZS 391 12.1

JO.f vS

//

&

77

t?

£o.

>Ll|M PtunOH.

^

a

?

-£•»

Of,

J2-

~J-

19

01

o.i

hi

IS

J£

*0

(2

1.7,

1-1

*"

S

i.t

-JLCL

t-Bnits

>C!«ifa. Dust. (It

rt

A?

-0L

fit,

J

T

9

-6JL

0-1

pi

UA.

3

/r

of

■4.J

/-/

3

f

1

6?

6-R

oi

e>0

(to

r

JO-

/I

*L

t.f

/■i

¥

3

—L

0-1

64

«

6

a

to

0.0

<»■(?

G- Inutile. Oils.

rtf

*&

A2l

^

JSl

_1L

p.o

%t

/So

J&

M

~Al

U

/tS

/#

JZ£

-M-,

/?-<£

7-Pijd«>«>|ical

.*

a

(7

0/1

0.o\ 0.6

_L.

__jL

y

0$

01

St

6

37

u

^lL

Zt

-11

I

n

2.7

o.C

?-^

ItMum

/*/

c

/dr*

<.a

Aol'Sf.l

£1Z

e

\J/3 3/L<t

64

si-i

34

3(* /?.£.

i.6

M

9i

t>

%

m3

$4

AM

KMhei

tf

I a

/?

sJi.tfA sj

sz.

//

a

4*

10

M

J&

-M-

-M.

\2

0.9

H

_jL

tf

si

PL

-2J^

^

Total

*tf

"12

.W 1

3?.izo.t64

si-i

34

3(* /?.£.

i.6

M

9i

t>

%

m3

$4

AM

KMhei

tf

I a

/?

sJi.tfA sj

sz.

//

a

4*

10

M

J&

-M-

-M.

\2

0.9

H

_jL

tf

si

PL

-2J^

^

Total

*tf

"12

.W 1

3?.izo.t

too.

SSL

*/£ /^tf

70S

ns

/00.

906

2fS

ftffM

VI

lop,

191

/*?

HS

Ki

.j-A

/i>«?.

T/)/fc£ £2£

^Mt-f//iT/0 /i/ Jf OAA */6Kr/*<iS _ .£?/ _X'Cl£r/«/£_

.S?et./s?s?/£/fy

■/r-'C*

6je£>t//>s

/f^r

£*cn

'T

Gpob

J^bofTFot-

Fba/?

, Evaluation

Nimbet

Tctal

PsfCrat

Cwtaiii

NmsWf

PbCwI

HunBer

PefCenl

Ninbtt

PnCait

Cntvn

[Doubtful

Certain

DouMtulT Total

Doubttul

Total

Certain

DcuUTuI

Tola!

Oertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OoubHul

Total

Certain]

Doobth

Total

Certain

noubtiji

Total

9-Ballow

/

/

J,l

t-6

J-\

/

6

/

?■*

SO

24

3

,r

p-fl

-£l

_&

e

..7

JL1

P.0

m

l-Aslnnonical

3

?

/fs

t-0

#t

. ?

/

//

19.9

f/.t

10J

J£-

/

70

2S&

11

-S^

^L

_20

M

AM

7-Aircutt

_/L

1

,x

61

^J2l

/<?.£

/

/

3

s.s

zt

<a

^

J&.

0jD

(>J>

4

a

0.6

tfi

00

3-Lt(M Plisna.

£J

00

_M.

o o

-0ZL

<?.e

04

—L

t

/

13

CO

2-2

p

_6fi_

fl-0

t>0

4-Birds

..._(?.

i>

£>.&

Ao

#0

(0

a

ff

t>

-M.

PQ

AO

/>

a

-&JX

00

00

Klomfi. Onsl. elt

0-

d

0-6

-Ail

0.6

(7

10

04

0.0

<?

$.6

01>

0.0

A

0.0

fl-fl

-0ji

6-lwiiltic. tob.

f

o

?

?/o

M

J/0

3

X

6<,

<?.(>

£L

-?

3

yy

OJ

.ML. 6

a

1

-£%

t*0

A',1

T-Ps)ttob|iol

6

00

. M

04

/

1

6.0

3.S

94

z

1

?

JLt

2-3

t-Unknon

b

o

6

V-6

LO-J]

M

I'

$

//

14J

6-0

MS

f

#

9

300

04

304

3

. $

ULZ.

00

tn

9-0(iH

J

Q

J

JS&.

r &&

(£.%

9

1

19-i

04

(99

1

9

/<fs 04 M'S

ft

a

a. o

flO

<?.(>

Total

It

1

if

9*8

Zjjl

/M.

la

£

K

m

til

10.

J>

S

YJ

s£L

//./ a*

t1

<?

17

/'O,

00

(CO-

rattie A2.7

<£Mi.t>0r/#A/

dp /tt-i. s/6*>r7Ar£s ay -r/ts/TsWc. /e£-£//9#/£/ry

1

G#£>l/S>S .

;?&#

"

£T*C£~/-J-£'A'r

Q O £>P

J^offr/^n^-

Phes?

Evaluation

Certain

NuMcr

PeiCenl

Numb«

Pet Cart<£Mi.t>0r/#A/

dp /tt-i. s/6*>r7Ar£s ay -r/ts/TsWc. /e£-£//9#/£/ry

1

G#£>l/S>S .

;?&#

"

£T*C£~/-J-£'A'r

Q O £>P

J^offr/^n^-

Phes?

Evaluation

Certain

NuMcr

PeiCenl

Numb«

Pet Cart

Nurttr

PnCenl

Nub bet

Pei Cent

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ocutittul

Totlt

Certain

Ooubllul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certaio

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dwbtfg

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

D-eatioon

3

3

/

-%X

?1

/U

-X

JL

J7

/3JI

//-?

PSO

L

/0

/£

At

<?J

/P/

/

JJ

J-0

04

1-AsUmHiiicil

9

,r

/r7

3?.3_

^/5.f

<O0

/?

7

eV

ML

#,S

Pff

/S

3L

ft

rf£

%S

VI

/

/

A

faO

(94

3fl0

?-Aiienfi

3

#

-?

#■1

/><0

13

3

n.

5

1m

0-0

Yf

_z_

S

if

9?

i-1

/u

-JL

A

4? 4

0-0

304)

3-Litfit Pbean.

00

6.6

■3,

L_

1

2-9

l-$

Yf

_x

if

JLO.

y't

ff

0-6

0.0 
0.0

4-einb

/

f

<.?

?*

/

_^-2-

■?

/S

?■?

f-t

^L

/

te

0.0

f.O

0>

&0

o./>

VCIntU, Dait. etc

O

0.0

6-6

At

_JL

ft

JA

0-0

04)

^Jl

6

6.6

Q-b

fltf

~£

OJ

0,0

Ofi

S-HMffic. tlt>.

<?

aj>

p.o

0*0

2

e

,3

39

0.0

*1

*?

4

/U

P#

/U

J

0,

3

■30,6

0.0

30J

T-Psytkolotiol

(?

O

a. a

0<?

00

/

(

IS

\ 0J0

I*

00

0,0

0J>

0J>

0,4

00

IVtaum

s

a

S

36.9

0.0

30, ¥

J±

o

ff

2<?£

<?4

3<f4

c

A

f.g

(7,0

■f-n 7

-A

4?

A

30.0

0J

M,fl

Mtfur

(7

o

0.0

0,0

0.0

S

2

£■

y-i

*1

7-3

i

C

0.0

S$

ff?

L

/

/0.O

W.

Total

ft

%

s?

u.7

1*4

/*0.

it

30

a

76.1,

ft-9

fOO.

-£L

-SL

M

4&

MS

(00.

9

t

/0

900

.m/t<-£ .rf2i?

£'Wt-!//?r/i?/v #r /?*-i s/&#r //v6s tfy , ^-/ t r.V7'^Vtr /?£<L//9tf/e.try

6e0u/>s .

sf*?

JTvcjt/.t-jr/vT-

£ sax?

/^eugT^e//.

f^ea/r

Evaluation

Ba*bd

PetCsit

NinabM

PnCenl

Nuaber'

Per Cent

Nnmbcf

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certan

Doubtful

Total

2«t)in

Doubt tut

Total

Certain

Dotatithd

Total

Certain

Doubtbl

Total

Certain

DHibtral

Total

Certain

Doubtbl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

<7Certan

Doubtful

Total

2«t)in

Doubt tut

Total

Certain

Dotatithd

Total

Certain

Doubtbl

Total

Certain

DHibtral

Total

Certain

Doubtbl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

<7

■0

M

00

t/4

lT

— =£-

7

M

^■7

ft

J<L

5

rt

^l

is

tf

/

■

/

-Jl

't-0

n

]-*JtB(l»lQl

/

f

fc

■37-i

731

¥f-C

_1

^2L

3?

JU

%7

ftt

J&-

,f?

/6Cn

US

H3,

.ttf

^

3<j

,f,r

/9-0

Zft

as

2-AiIcratt

^

/

M

04)

it-i

if

F

/f

M

f09

ft-1

-jO.

ti

11

9.1

*-1

K.1

-Z

1

s

49

(■1

6-fl

J-MW Ptmoa

0.0

a./}

0.0

a

0/)

0.0

0-0

a

0J

0.0.

0,6

ri

6/>

#o

04

Mir*

/

/

/>.0

*9

o-9

a

00

00

00

__£

¥,

-JA

0,0

3-0

-A\

■afi

<•?#

00

J-CIOMh, Dust, etc

00

00

0.0

, O

Qg.

00

0.0

6

0^0

4/>

«<0

d

-o

~0Jl

0(1

0.0

f,mtlic M>.

/)/>

/M

04

(>

6

£

*■/

0.0

If

#

&

2/

H

'J

Mf

-JL

?

Ml

'4

M7,

^PTrcbBtOf^cat

D

a.o

0.0

0.0

a

0-0

0O

0.6

&

0.0

0.0

04

_J1

3

_2£

*■*

^c

Ufateow

9

9

2fi?

0-0

Zf.?

r

a

K

10-2

vo

/0$

3/

3/

/0.j

M

M

JL

/*

JM

*■/)

3(9

wm»

f

<

IM

6.0

m

a

06

6.0

0jO

i

1

h$

00

/J

-1

if

2

J,C

00

X(

Total

26.

f

IS

J£

J?S-7

m.

*L

J&

n

??.f

a*

/0.

121

77

M

M.

nf

(00,

Jt

10

ti

£&

&1

(00.

130

,1

7A£l

£ 429 /Fy^i.i/^rf/9/V _ #/=

/?*.<- _5/6//7//i/&s #</ st/r,sjr/A/a #£*.//}<?/<. tr? .

'

6<e&s/i>i .

/J>£*&

£x££Li.EA>T

1

(£#£?/>

£>£>v£rf6>i.

j%>t?#

Ertwtwi

Number

Per Ceil

H umbel

Percent

Number

Pa Cent

Nunber

Per Cent

Cntan

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtlul

Total

:«gm

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Attain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

OniMful

Tolai

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

#

4

-JJ,

4f?

f-2

3

3

T.I

0,0

?.'

1?

r

1.3

W.i

**l

l\.l

%

?

to

-JH

7,7

i*M

+ l-A.4tnnoiAial

7

7

If

lU.i

-LiiJ-

JU.-.&

t

M,

sy<)

13. 1

47.1

12

t

2.0-

i.r

t.f

IU

16

?

IZ

_iii

2,7

(If

z-Aiittin

if-

1

r

_ (2 ^2JL

MZJ.

_£_

r?

to

-JH

7,7

i*M

+ l-A.4tnnoiAial

7

7

If

lU.i

-LiiJ-

JU.-.&

t

M,

sy<)

13. 1

47.1

12

t

2.0-

i.r

t.f

IU

16

?

IZ

_iii

2,7

(If

z-Aiittin

if-

1

r

_ (2 ^2JL

MZJ.

_£_

r

ii

/t.z

f.r

l\,7

17

f

~lL

11.1

_ 1.3

?','

12

t?

/S

li.fi

6.0

(«,{>

£t,lfAt Phenoii,

9

-J&

0.0

^£

6.0

o.o

e,Q

6.0

0.6

(?,t>

a

__ &&\

P.C

',0

4-a<iA

O

ao

e.o

fl.t

e>

e

o.C

o.c

W

. ?.

.0.

__£-

-Ma

°.i

w

^

t>

4.0-

Ofl

e<o

S-Cloodi, Dial, lie.

r?

o.o

e-e

~&2.

<?

-££.

0.0

o.f

^JL.

J

p.e

Cl>

*>t

J.t>

M

.?.e

frlosuflic Wo.

u

fl

ft-

-tte

fi,0

%f.

1

I

A 7

0.0

/.?

*r

Q

ir 2R3

0,0

2PJ

/<?

'9

2T.J

0.0

j-fj

7-Piycta1«|i<il

6

p

—&&.

e,<r

JZ-Z.

_£_,

0.0

0.0

e,o

0.

e,o

0.0

fit

f

tt

£3

0,(\

?,J

l-lMumn

21

1?

f-l

fit

0,6

M-l

-Z2-.

ii

Zt.3

to

W,3

ij.

ZZ

17,1

o.t>

at

l£

It

zi,3

fit

21.3..

*0*»

1

1?

1

ij>

ffl

2..P

1

j

4

1.7

rj

{,,%

3

V

7

2.lt

,?,2

S,6

2

f

*

2.7

fij>

*,7

Total

w

f

Uf

Pi

ii,3

is*-

#J

If

-57

7A3

27.I

{lt>.

?r

*6

l&

7t.1

Ml

/to,

7/

H-

?f

Jlttl

S-3

(°<L.

726L£

430

£*>4d,i//9r/0/i/

*?s

s?£i.

S/<s,# r//i/6> s

4<s

js-/i?*/rysSG

/(>£-£-//4sg/i..rrti

(ueevss

/?£Y

£jfe£L£A> 7"

6 00 3

£>0i/g7-/;£sc

/b<P#

Eyjlultiwi

ttumbet

Pet Cent

Number

Per Cent

Hunter

PetCent

Number

PerCont

Certain

Doutttu

Total

Certain

Doubtfull Total

Ctrtain

Doublnil

Total

Certain

DouUM

Total

Certain

Ootibthl

Total

Certain

DaubtM

Total

Certain

Oovbthi

Total

Certain Doubtlul

Total

O-Ballooii

/

/

■^i"

tj *r

s-

/

(>

J2.Z

X*

ASM

2.

7.

*

3i1

,%H

.if I 2.

1

3

.¥,7.

. 2*

7.0

t-Aitaononcal

-7

2.

r

ftj

Ji-L

^7.?

13

J -1

/rT

_y.?

/*•*

M,1

J

f

7

■5A

(,1

Jld.

i

(,

1 ■?

JOJL

\JJLA

■Z%0

I-Aircnrft

.?

(

it

ft.?

c..f

^7<>

7

7

a >

6,0

t?J

?■

ft

i

-M-

i.H

JiA

it

1

7

-2*3.

7.0

/{,3

3-Ltfht Ptanon.

<?

Q

6J>

0.0

e,t>

0\

e

0,6

0,01 ■?

JOJL

\JJLA

■Z%0

I-Aircnrft

.?

(

it

ft.?

c..f

^7<>

7

7

a >

6,0

t?J

?■

ft

i

-M-

i.H

JiA

it

1

7

-2*3.

7.0

/{,3

3-Ltfht Ptanon.

<?

Q

6J>

0.0

e,t>

0\

e

0,6

0,0

<>■<>

2

1

3

J*

—Ml]

SJ

ft

&p

. 6.0

e.0

t-Brnfs

o

P

I7.C

0.*

W

t

(

0.0

3r,H

>H

-

e.o.

—QJ-

0J&

a

[_0

2,0

0.0

-&&_

S-ClowJj, Dmt etc

a

a.o

o,0

fi,o

£>

t

0.0

0.0

P.0

Q

fj

W

.6.0.

^M.

AO

0.0

Unaiffir. Into,

o

o

P

J.0

A a

o,P

£>

At

<?,»

f.e

9

t>

9

ir.s

*J

^■j

T

p

s

l/.t

f.6

/f,(

7-PtitM0|ical

a

P

j>.t>

A/>

0<Q

1 4

fi.O

0,Q

e> t o

1

1

2.

.1.7

1,7

3.*

£.£

0.0

~JJL

(■UMmaM

7

s

7

jtr.f

0.0

3%i

t

f

Xl.l

0,0

H/,t

Uf

?-T

U-3.1

fi.O

U3.I

if

ft is.i

0.6

*s~,t

Mthet

/

■1

_£L£

0.0

T,f

J9

p

0.9

e-Q

0,0

7.

A

7 f H

0,9

ru

9

Q

_jT.

■('•(

.JiO.

/',£

Total

ir

3

i$

fi.3

(a

tw,

3jl

>

w

M

>7.l

lOo.

Hi

IP-

n

yp

2.0.7

ML.

33

<Q

V

76.8

J». * 16$.

r/zM-e 4e/

£rt4£.t/4r/a/t/

<?<?

s9£^

S/-6WT-OU& S

/$r

jrs<r*/7y*/<:

£&*. /rfsS/t. /rv

a£0#/*s , /?s£.

£l(d£LL£A/r

Geae

Deo".

?Tf#£.

/%>e£

Evaluation

ftunber

Percent

Nurftei

Per Cent

Nuiroet

Percent

Number

Pel Cent

Certain

Doubthi

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ortain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouMtuI

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

0-BMloon

11

IS

?*

_£7

f7

li.tf

.77.

S2.

1*1

1.7

(,i

/ft?

.41

40

121

%t>

7,S

ttt

3f

M

si

a.i

11

rt.i

t'AMronomical

t?

1

?r

JAJL.

W

ltd

1.19

so

(to

I3.f

H, 3

?o.a

101

??

iu

/P,2,

*8

/f,0

?0

?f

[ r?

f.i

f,#

fa?

2-Airciaft

2J_

>f

ft

J(,i

T,f

Mill

«z

?H

17k

fo.l

11,9

77 ?■

M2.

70t>

%{2.

JiLL

JA£

ZU

21

77-

ft

if

7A

jl£.

3-Li|til flienoo.

Z

3,

1.Z

0,0

1,?

7

(T

If]

"■?'

1,6

/•I

IX

f

3-1

!.(,

f,2-

*.$

r

s

.Ji2.

£0

t-7

a-flirdi

_££j

-2JL

e,»

_JL

L

fi-

O, 5"

0, <

P,i

J

,7if

7A

jl£.

3-Li|til flienoo.

Z

3,

1.Z

0,0

1,?

7

(T

If]

"■?'

1,6

/•I

IX

f

3-1

!.(,

f,2-

*.$

r

s

.Ji2.

£0

t-7

a-flirdi

_££j

-2JL

e,»

_JL

L

fi-

O, 5"

0, <

P,i

J

,7

to

A?

O.U-

t<3

2.

1

3

-0J-

0.3

).f>

S-CIoihIs, Dust, etc

_££,

<?

M

f

to

ll

1.0

rW

? ?

if

7

7

^

aif-

W

£>

/?

0.P

fi,P

0.0

6-Hsulfic, hfo.

ii

' fl

if

A?

0.0

?,r

21-

HI

3.8

6.0

2 A

?1

If

>1

dt/3.

—&JL

(6.3

a

P

(1

-3&k

0,0

' 3-0.0

7-Pifclalri(ical

O

e.t>

Ob

o,«

2

z.

0.3

—CJL

0.3

IX

tj-

21

-Z3.

«,r

ZS

6

' ,1

1

-2JI

t.l

3.1

BMJntowei.

AO

(?

(0

\2LL

CO

3i,ti

^.aff

6

22f

7r.1

fa

rirT.fi

J3-D

lip

jsh.

P,0

ir (.

U7

U7

/£?.

U

>r.r

S-Otrm

7

7

1*.3

<?,<>

H,i

31

£

37

)-1

Off

*f. 7

27

,7

?-f

3.5

0.3

M

17-

12.

0.o\

*/

#<[

100.

Total

I3B

tf

It 3

US

ZIS

no.

Ml

?ll

7U

VM

17.1

m

W\

7.1*

7 a

7U

2f.fi

Ik,

XI7-

_ZJ^

216

714

2M

131

If

Z2fe^

<?

sL?2 .

£V4i. (/A T/0A/

o fat/PS

/9

?/*

s/&//r//i//i<;

*£—

•S/C*/T//)/G

.. /?£C/4/?/i_

try

!

£/C££-L £ AT

6000

jp&prfrfi/t-

/be*

f~' ""

i Evaluation

Muntier

f^W CBlt

Nkmber

Per Cent

NultKr

i

'*i cm

Nuiggef

PttCenl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoutlrW; Total

Sertatn

DoubtM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:trt»n

Doobtful

Total

Certain

OouMtil

Tolal

Ortair

DoobHul

Tolal

Certam

Dcutltul

Toti

■ 
Id- Balloon

/9

//

&

S£

„^£

tf-3

-IL

ft

/f7

ft

*t

/£$

ft

t4 /40

tf

-f.i

/¥"f

47

^f

*?

its

t<7

t**

1-AsMonomicjl

47

P>

rt/

tif

u&Z-

?U

j41L

n

?t#

/t.e

ff

2L.4 723

u

20!

/fi

It

^?y

?£

<?/

t*f

i4o

/^f

ttf

2-AircilH

,25

/f

4t

m?

*f

J£2.

0t

f4

H

/ft

/&.$

ts

20t

//5

ff

2//

(7 J

//■<?

sTf /

a

fi"

9/

w.t

^.2

ltt>

J-Lii*1 Phew".

2,

7.

.M

. 00

/0

f

ff

At

/.p

2/

tf

72,

1?

t-r

/.S

fi?

£

__£_

O.J

rf^t*

0-9

4-e«n$

2

4

0.0

-&L

fit

f

4

f

0.1,

£>.*

^AL.

4

S

—t

fff

■AS

(■o

f.

iJ-Lii*1 Phew".

2,

7.

.M

. 00

/0

f

ff

At

/.p

2/

tf

72,

1?

t-r

/.S

fi?

£

__£_

O.J

rf^t*

0-9

4-e«n$

2

4

0.0

-&L

fit

f

4

f

0.1,

£>.*

^AL.

4

S

—t

fff

■AS

(■o

f.

i

J

s.<J

0Z

a, 6

S-Clouds, Dust. etc

a

D

0.0

-&&

00

2

_r

7

J?.l

0t,

JX.

f

.£

J

0/

*#&

0.1

/}

0.0

fio

&e

tiourtic, tit).

//>

//>

4/

0.0

*(

*f

&.

ff

3.2

0.0

-LL

ttf

/if

/ft

#■<?

ni

103

Q

l&L

AL

0.0

{?■*■

7'Psydnloficil

fl

so

00

0-0

3

/

V

0.3.\

*J

A¥

2(

... i

2f

n

0?

SO

fi-

z.

//

2J,

t?S

74

»IMmm

7<L

(?

n

J/3

0.0-

■H-3

2/2-

<v«t

27.?

0.0

243

(U

L. 0.

ty>.

/!■?

tf.o

(19

ts

(?

./y, jSS.

fl-0

/f.*

MHir

/3

/i

S?

-M,

<r?

Si

9

V?

ft

7-4~

5/

27

9

-J&.

to

(-0

W#

/{.

i/>

.ZL

?.<?

f-f

4-9

Total

iSk.

ft

243

n*.

1XS-

/00

£l2L

250

tf{

f/J

tn

m

AH

2?£

fet i/i

??■¥

ffl?

401

fff

53L

U1

1S.Z

/oa

r/?gce * jy

~MLi//fr/0/i/

-<2£. &4UZ. s/a//r//!/d. s &?_ j/cmt/'SC #G<./s?£/t./riS

&e0vfs

'f?7

£■ jt£B i-t-eA,r

T^

6000

P/?frfrf ft.

/%£>* .

EfiliiaiHKi

Nunbtf

Per Cent

Numbti .

PerCoit

Niiniei

PerCent

Mute

PeiCnt

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubitu

Tolal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouhtM

Tolal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoKbtful

Total

Certain

DouWii

Total

Certain

Onbttut

Total

0- Balloon

.. /

^7

/

&9

00

*f

(

/

J.4

fiff,

4f

s

f

S.L

00

XI

£

a

2.

/t.S

r^r?

/i.S

lAjtmMBiol

_X

^?

?

/U

00

/7.6

<r

4

9

/f.z

/S.?

J/.P

_t

V

19

2£,1

ft- 4

■??■/

i.

s_

1

its'

00

/2-S

Mirco*

-L

/

2,

6.9

g-t

US

/

i

z.

££

r.f

if

0.0

fi.6

fl-0

0.0

00

00

J-Lifjitftinwi.

0.

**

0.O

0,0

0-0

/

-JL

/

j.t

0,0

.t-Y

/

(7

/

t.9

0.0

*-t

0.0

0-0

0.0

t&njj

^

O

00

0.0

0.0

/}

0.0

as

0./>

00

00

OQ

iZ.

&

0.0

00

00

S-CI«ads, Oust, etc.

/?

fi

0.0

0.0

00

<?

0.0

00

00

ff

ff

0.0

AQ

P

0.0

00

/?P

tlnuNic kilo.

2,

^

z

ttJ

PQ

t/1

2,0.0

0.0

/}

0.0

as

0./>

00

00

OQ

iZ.

&

0.0

00

00

S-CI«ads, Oust, etc.

/?

fi

0.0

0.0

00

<?

0.0

00

00

ff

ff

0.0

AQ

P

0.0

00

/?P

tlnuNic kilo.

2,

^

z

ttJ

PQ

t/1

2,

- ^n

7,

J 9

0,0

If

2.

1,

s.f

00

£-7

&

f.

*?■$■

0\D

?7f

7-Ptvclstiitical

&

J?£

0-0

ftp

/_

/

0.0

f.4

f-f

2.

/

1

Zf

f-t

S.L

/

f

L.2,

0.9

/..z

WWmwai

4.

it

SS-3

p.p

If 3

1

7

Z4./

00

if./

t

9

2S.1

0.0

15. f

£

?,

tl^£.a.o

/£.€

Htktr

*

3

/f.i

00

ill

b

t

Ml.

as

W

V

4

//.j/ 0.0

//■4

3

s

/t.f

fl-0

tt.f

THal

/J.

(

17

94/

s-t

w

23

i.

-25-

ftt

U>.f

/00.

SO

&

?f

mi

/4S

m

/i

a

W-p

100.

r/tg/./?

AS4

£■///) /.(//} 770 A/

f??

00//f

s/af/r/At/s

s

Si/ $~/aMr/-v0

je££./A/g/£/r<S

swat's

/?#g

■^'taet.t.mA/r

/

<Sa&0

d2?{/&7-/ : 4>l.

/%><?*

Evaluation

Nu>bei

Percent

NimWr

Percent

Nuaber

PerCent

HltBbH

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Oouottul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain

OoubtM

Total

Certain

Oouuthj

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

4> r

L

3

1&0

*0

Pi- 6

4

-r

//

//.f

z$

2/t

^

?

t0

S.I

**

flf

_J_

0-

0.0

0-0

0.0

l-Aitmnaical

T

4

//

2S.0

70.0

&.0

/0

t

t$

/U

9-f

29.4

/0

/i

?(,

us

2/.t

?£'

/

Z

s

/2-S

MP

Sf,s

2-Aiiaati

. 2,

2,

J O.o

00

/0D

3

s

£.?

0.0

$?

9

V

/?

/2.Z

<r.4

?7J

/

a

/

!2.<Z

0.O

/2.S

3-Liftil Pnenw.

Q_

0.0

00

0,0

2

1

3

3>9

?-0

<t

2,

2.

0.0

2-7

2.7

0.0

0.0

0.0

•■SirtJ

f£j

f

■/

0.0

£0

f.0

/

2,

,?

2.0

?9

*f

/

/

ttf

0-0

/■¥

0.0

00

ao

S-Clouiis, turn. «ic 
frlnartic trio.

0.0

0,0

fl-V

0.0

0,0

00

Q_

00

0.0

0-P

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

0-0

0/?

2

2,

SI

0,0

f,.f

/S

<2_

/S

17- i

0t>

lU

2.

2

2S.0

00

2S.0

APsydvlorJcal

S

0.0

00

00

/

/

2.0

0.0

f-0

fl

0.0

0,f>

<?a

0.0

0.0

O.O

t-llnliMn

3

/5.0

0-1/

/f

9

?

/f.t.

0,0

/ft

s

s

4/

0.0/S

17- i

0t>

lU

2.

2

2S.0

00

2S.0

APsydvlorJcal

S

0.0

00

00

/

/

2.0

0.0

f-0

fl

0.0

0,f>

<?a

0.0

0.0

O.O

t-llnliMn

3

/5.0

0-1/

/f

9

?

/f.t.

0,0

/ft

s

s

4/

0.0

f-f

/

(

a.s

0.0

/2.S

MOw

0.0

0-0

0-0

3

/

•

jU-

?0

if

6

i,

p.0

X,'

ft

/

/

#.£

00

/2.&

Total

-M-

i-

?(?

70.0

ZO.Q

/m

M.

ff

.ft

72.L

£*</

w.

1L

12

74

£6.$

4ft

/a?.

6

2-

f

7^.0

2f.0

m

■T/tS<.£ J?S

£i/#t.u3r/00/ os

js/i/ir

T/r, j/r//b/is

#</

_5V<3v</.7>.-V[?

/?^*- /rt/f/c /r</

<i>£c?6'/ a J

/fV?

^teetLE/t/r

£&&*>

/Pdc&rsz&t.

J%>0£

Evaloatnl

nuabet

Per Coil

ftumbei

Per Cent

Hurabei

Per Cenl

;.jM*er

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

"ertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

lertain

DoubtM

Tola!

Certain

Dnibthil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

» Balloon

0.0

a

00

4

2

t

71

T.$

//f

^£

4

?l

0-0

€.1

S

/

/

tf

It

f^

l'Aitromaial

S~

7

/2.

26.0

9s.0

iPP

/

7,2

23

/,9

ft- 3

4f-Z

/7

?./

3f

22J

2f,3

ff?

//

?0

47

/2.Z.

ff.S

47./

2-Aiicrjfl

/

/

SO

0-0

SO

f

6

/(

9.1

/f-6

211

7

/

ft

9/

(3

/04

£~

S

Z0

S7

4-7

a 4

>Liejrl PtWHOL

0ft

a

0.0

0-0

0-6

0.0

0-0

0.0

0,0

077

4-Binb

/

t

O.o

?0

<?.0

0.0

0.0

0-0

2

2

1-4-.

0-0

2-t

0.0

0.0

0,0

5- Clouds, Oust, etc

/?

J2,0

OP

0.0

0.0

0.0

4£

0-0

f}0

0.0

0,0

0.0

fj tusjrflic tab.

r?

00

<? f?

00

4

//

17

00

7.7

/2

//

22. f

0.0

2S.</

//

//

/?.£

j2JL-

72.6

7-P*ldBknii3l

/}

00

OP

0-f>

a

0.0

0-0

0-0

J24.

0>-0

0,0

3

s

Z.4

/?■<>

ff

tHlM

■«"

">

4S.0

-0JL

ft.o

X

O

j?

hjL

0,0

rf-4

i

t

f$

<f0

*f

/4

'¥

/*-./

0-0

7i-7

MfM

/

/

50

0-0

f-Q

0.0

0.0

00

/

/

/-3

00

/,3

V

4

4i

0,0

Y,i

Total

/Z

f

&?

(,00

f/O0

/00.

it'

?0

&

421

&1

{00

SS-

22*

77

i/f

21 C

£g£_

s-/

St

?7

Sgi

47.4-

706.

132

j%A£.£ #J£ £Mi.i/srsa#>

.-?*

/SA//r <r/0># 774*6 £4

4i

0,0

Y,i

Total

/Z

f

&?

(,00

f/O0

/00.

it'

?0

&

421

&1

{00

SS-

22*

77

i/f

21 C

£g£_

s-/

St

?7

Sgi

47.4-

706.

132

j%A£.£ #J£ £Mi.i/srsa#>

.-?*

/SA//r <r/0># 774*6 £

#y jr/^Vr/V^

/CG

l.f /)#/t-/fv

6een//°s:

AlS6>

£*<!Ei.t.£. < vT

/

&ac>£>

Dci/ar? 0i-

/Z0*

Nunber

PerCwt

Number Percent

Nvaner

Per Cent

Number

PefCtnt

i Elation

Collin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Totll

Certain

DouMhil

Total

Certain

Doubtfnl

TOM

:«rtan

Omtlfri

Totil

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubUol

Total

Certlin

DouMful

Totri

'^Balloon

4

^

4'

//♦I

0.0

///

3

_i s^

0.0

0i

t

' t

g

A.1

*•

ML

_£,

J

it

Ml.

ft

M

J-Astofnftteal

6

i <*

(/

17. t

/43

f/4

4£l

f

XL

$13

A4t4t.l

f

&

AA.2

/pf

2f.0

AZ

/

ft

Wf\

/«

rf£

2-Aittran

/>

/

3

5-7

2.9

tl

T'

4

-L&-

//./

74

IIS

S^

2-

7

/if

?•¥

Jl9 /■}

*

?(

1&£^

¥.i

•iff

3-Li|M Pheno*.

jO-0.

0.0

0./)

—AL

00

0.0

0$

00

00

JL/L

/?

J&l

0.0

IPC

»-8<r4»

4p\

0.0. 00

0,0

0.0

00

_&.

0J>A

0.0

A/LB.

0:0

.0-0\

00

S-CPowH Dust, tic.

t7

0.0

0.0- 0.0

0*

_ 0>.

00

0*0.

00

. t?

jZM\

0,0

32j2_

<?

0.0

0.0

00

frlnnflic. brio.

4

4

4

//■¥

0.oyj 4

A

-J-

(J

00

f?

4

4

to.Z

00

10. t

t?

/7

£o.$

00

20. £

7-PirdBloral

(?

0.0

0.0 D.£>

„j2-

-JL

00

0.0

00

0.0

0-0

J/0

?

z

2.</

0.0

f.Y

frIMrmrn

■j 2,

/«

341

0,0\34.2

,'0

a

!0.

/f.s\

0°

tf.$

_*e

{.

aa.z.

0.0

&*

/f

/f

fa,?

0.0

/£■?

WW*

/

/

J?f-

~/Z&>

2.?

/

s

_£

/■?

A'.i.

7t

A

A

2

2.7

/■/

f4

S

/

4/

S-.L

At

4$

Total

Sf

t

&

tt.1

*7-t

/0?

39

/s-

s4

1t.t

2f.t

W

oi

f

37

767

t&

M^

rt

f

is

ft*

j£J-m^

77>4L£

41?

£/AL0AftajV

0f

i/4//r

S/6,A>r,A/&S

#y -sViCoy

T/t/S

/?&<L /A/S/i.

'r<£

a<e0i>/ f s ,9s/ _ _

1

£r£Et-t.eA'r

<£ooo

/favsrff*.

/%0*

1

Numbs

PHCent

Hunter

Pet cm

Huiaaei

Percent

Number

PerCenl

i Eviliittuo

Certim

OHibVui

Total

Certain/?&<L /A/S/i.

'r<£

a<e0i>/ f s ,9s/ _ _

1

£r£Et-t.eA'r

<£ooo

/favsrff*.

/%0*

1

Numbs

PHCent

Hunter

Pet cm

Huiaaei

Percent

Number

PerCenl

i Eviliittuo

Certim

OHibVui

Total

Certain

Ooublfull Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DooDtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cotain

Doubltn

Total

Certain

Ooobtful

Total

tO-Balloon

iL.

ff

/

5?

JL£

*■?

-jL

/

$

///

It

If J

^

£

_j£

4?

43

U

£

Z *f

.0.0

<f

1-AtbMOiaicJI

?

f-

S

ML

//■f

?f.<r

/a.

T 7

//,

1TJ

/{.'

Wf

f

?

^

/..V

_AJtl2J

y

-£-

£J-

tfs

r^rVr

?-AitoJft

s

/

</

/f.L

a.t

23J

7

a

7

tt.¥

00

ft-l

2

</

/*

43

-I*

l?f

. v

.f

-Z.

tfl

fl

($9

3-Lifhi PlUmH.

fl

ao

o.a

$o

/?

0.0

0-0

0.0

■2.

/

3

M.

£U-~

(t-3

. £?.

_J2-

-J2£-

0.0

0,0

«-&!*

/?

0.1)

<t.i>

0.0

a

/

/

0.0

ft

1.1

a

<?

&£>

-4J21

0,0

_J2_

-0,0

0-0

n

S-Cloall, Dull Re.

/?

a

D.O

D.6

$,&

_^_

fi

0.0

PP

00

<0

/?

/?

0.0

a.0.

0.0

£>

_0_

j£g-

00

0,0

6-lltturtic htk

,0>

<L0

ff.a

6.6

0.0

0.0

00

£

f

/f.0

00

/f.0

£

_A.

fc.Z

P-0

/*■?■

fPsydBtaiiul

. 4h

■0

<?

-&J2.

o.a

&Q

&

<0

0.6

0(>

0,Q

/

/

& 2.S

2./

42

0.0

0-0

00

l-Ulbnn

(?

(■

3*3

0.0

?f-3

_ r

_^CL-

r

/t.4

#0

(M

J£-

<?

/£'

~M0

#0

SV.6

_J^

?

&.i

00

0.3

MHhcr

./

/

Sf

0.b

*?

0.0

<?-0

0.0

^

7:

4?

a?

ft

r

£■

/3.ff .0.0

/*■*

Totll

w

2

'7

$14.

./U

m

30

6

3i

&±

47

W

ft

ft

J&-

7H

2 ?.?/(*>.

ISA

Z

1Z.

nt

2/.L

/0D.

7a <Si.£ sfsr £~fAi-UAT/0A/ 0& (jA/rr s/&pr//vs,s jSV j" v^rW,? /eEt./A/S/i./T'/

6et?t/fs J9S-2.

£*££l_t,ETA/r

' &0PJ

/?6>i/&rJ cl t/t-

-^£

Evaluabon

Hunter

Percent

Number

Percent

NnntH

Percent

Nnnbn

Per Coil

Certain

Doubtful

JoUl

0/

Certain

Dutiful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouUM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtlu

Total

Certain

Oouttfiil

Tow

0-BiloM

//

/0

120/

Certain

Dutiful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouUM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtlu

Total

Certain

Oouttfiil

Tow

0-BiloM

//

/0

12

f*

#.f

AX

f*

///

/0-J

A.,6

/?■/

^£C

f^

f(/

t1

Zf

rtf

3/

ts

-*"£

MA.

/.?

no

1-Astmoaical

/7

?<

4.7

i>

ft 7

U

</?

ft'

/<?/

6/

?t-7

Z3

f7-

//(>

11. $

*/

'7¥

46

71

72,

AiT.0

t-S

?3.3

f-Aircralt

/&

/$

?/

//■9

(f-l

ts.i

1Z-

71/

fifi

//■I

tt-4

71.S

fl.

ft

/go

/4s

/3.f

2$f

3/

2(

ft

A0.A

i-t

t7/>

Hi|bt Pbenn.

2.

£

/?

0-0

/.£T

7

1

(?

//

/.I

23

/2-

f

zt

At

fi*

S-1

0-

At

0>.0

/.A

4-Binb

#0

0,0

0-0

v

—-£-\

£

01

02

fit

. I

J

A,

0f.

fir

/■0

JL

A

,?

07

0.3

A-o

S-Clonds. Oust, etc

0.1?

0(?

0-0

£.

f

7

0.3

?z

//

/

?,

3

0.2

0-3

0.0

0.0

0.0

0-0

frlnwffic. tilb.

4

■4

3.0

00

3.0

K>

—£-\

f<?

S.f

00

?/

74

a

74

//.7

0-0

//./

6/

a

4>/

'/f.9

0.0

lt-f

JP^ClBlsgKJl

fl

0.0

0.0

00

Z.

2

0.3

<?■<?

0?

U£j

f

f,tf

2.2

0i

3.4

6

7,

/

2.0

0-7

2-7

9-UntoOMi

44

44

ILL

00

f?J

/7(

iff

U.3

0.0

K-3

-JjL

*t

/?./.

00

/n

43

43

/4.A

00

A4-A

Wl»lM

f

F-1

f-?.

If.

</.0

fit

4-S

'1

2.

7/

30

0.3

33

f

9

0.0

2 9

29

TolU

/0/

33

/jy

ft. 7

2<i/&

/IPO

4fa

iff

iff

ft 4

2?.£

AM

</3i

/?&,

t*¥

63

310

A00.

22Z

%0

303

ns

2 A. 2

/Off.

133

_r/}jL£ tULt-

Pel Cent

S/f,,* r//)/r,s $_Y. St<.-. Hrt*G /? ££ / /)/3 >£- I TY_

.ffigi.& #&& £i/,ti.L>/)r//)/V s?/? 0*j£-d7- Zt& XT/ fifCS &V SlCt/r/s/G *>£±/S}/3/i-irV

&ie0i// ! >s

;?</?

£'x{£<.i.£-vr

^7

&£>&/>

£}0&>4Tf^l,

j?<p##

Evaluation

Number

Ptr Cenl

CtrUm

Number

Percent

Hunter

Per Cat

Nmoef

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

iDwblful 1 Tclal

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToM

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DraAHut

Total

Certain

Donbtlii

Total

Certain

Ckubttjl

Total.

X

C

)

JU

.-JALSL

/

O

/

J£

0.6Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToM

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DraAHut

Total

Certain

Donbtlii

Total

Certain

Ckubttjl

Total.

X

C

)

JU

.-JALSL

/

O

/

J£

0.6

*i'

3

_1

M

0.0

Ml

2

^

731

0.6

m

l-Astronomical

_^lZ„

O

2

f

6,

?■'

H-J

*7A

?

i

7

AX 7

ffAlfJD

/

a

/

i-7 a.A

u

'?-*irai(l

/

/

2

/

&

Si

U

?/f

e.h

it. 6

n

JUL,

CO

00

3-Ligfil Ptienom.

£>

— ^1

o

4

t.Os.b

/

/

.*£.

fi.Q

h

/

f

3J.

0.D

Si

a

a

~M\

0,0

0.0

• Birds

if'l 6

06

01

do

o.o

g-6

6

i>

aj

o.i

H

-A

<?

JlA

n.f)

Oft

i S-Clouds, Oust, etc

. j2_

a

<?

JUL

0.0

t-6

f>

if

0-0

0.0

en

6

6

6,0

04

M

a

d

0.(\

o

a h

tFMnsuftic tflto.

jZJ tf 1

J?

1M,

a. a

/y.1

?

fi.

U

0-ft

fV

-z

<?

Z

_(.

■

C

ia-Q

'/O/l

'f-Psytbofcfical

^L *

i

jut

oo

#d

/

/

00

Yf

YJ

J

/

_^3

-Li

%(.

loj

./

9

/

i-7

0,0

hi

6-linknOMl

..rj 71

£

3S-7.

0.6

%s,1

7

7

-3/.1

0-f

,1/ J?

t

(>

? n.C

ttJ 31. L

X

«

/1.3

6

*H

J-Ottur

_3I_^i_^

Ul

fi.O

fi-3

A

•?

IU

(?,(>

7,7

_l

Y

#1

0.0

lii

^3.

[S

2Q&

0,0

JP0

n

Total

~a?!

\LML

m

11

/ao.

lb

6

SA

70.7

*73

l*0i

^L

5

^L

87

M

m

J*

/$ M.0

<?.o

too,

■fjj£k.

£

#4 1

£MAVj<ll7(lA/

!■?£.

£us.j^iu:

s/6,ur//v^s

#Y

S'€aJ7-/*/G

je<=i~fi4g/c /

ry

6eat//°s

/9<fZ

i

£x££i.t-e:A/f~

j.

6&#£>

£?#&*.

irfisc

/%>&#

i -

Number

Per Cent

Number

per Cenl

Itumber

PerCent

Hnmbei

Ptr Cent

. Evaiuation

Certain

Dotibtto

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Tolal

Certain

OoobtM

Total

Certain

Ooublful

Tolal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubttu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

[0-BalloHi

/

/

?

.£1

<?

tt-t

G

f

II

j£k

' '0-1

??r

jT

7\

9

JJ\

67

14-S

__ ^

if

#

-£Jl

00

r?r\

; l-Astrononical

£

1

9

1X'1

rf-i

(1?

f

¥

n

4.7

JM

11.0

9

ft

21

tf.9

1fi(>

Vl

/

J>

?

f*-r

££■#

37S

!2-Aiki>M

P-

■ 3

M.

0.6

(/;1

?

3

^Z

ff-0

(»%

it

y00

r?r\

; l-Astrononical

£

1

9

1X'1

rf-i

(1?

f

¥

n

4.7

JM

11.0

9

ft

21

tf.9

1fi(>

Vl

/

J>

?

f*-r

££■#

37S

!2-Aiki>M

P-

■ 3

M.

0.6

(/;1

?

3

^Z

ff-0

(»%

it

y

M

p-i

£■1

ft.i

/

0>

/

as

0-0

i*S

3-Ligrit Ptienon.

O

a

r>

0-0

i>0

<f-ti

_^2L,

/

$

M

2-i

m

A

A

6-d

s-i

tf

d>

^

6.0

00

0-ft

'.♦•8m*

~JL

I

i

JL&

6?

61

/

1

3

M.

1-1

^

L

/

H

1

so

If

£>

A

a

-&JL

0,6

O-o

5-Cloods, Dust, ric

0-0

0-(\

0-0

a

/)/)

e.f

G-b

M

6(1

t-ff

d

AA

04

0.0

fc-rnwffic. Into.

p-6

00

CO

2.

*?

y.i

t>ti

f-2

s

/-3

itc

fi-fl

iM

iZ

e

Z

££2_

0.0

ZS70

JPiyclBlojitai

^JZ

0J

fi-0

OS

/

0>

/

*-L

CD

?■)

6.0

■0-0

04

<?

<?

0>

og_

0-0

0,0

oVuninw

_1

~~a.

?

iH

00

l7.£

%

r?

s

OQ

til

■}

1

13-

6.0

tf

/

o

/

/J.r

0.0

l*S

MBwr

■ o

o

6

0.6

0-0

00

^s

/

y

(A

S-(

*M

6

6

0.6

U

u

_jL

r?

/

/2~r

04

/*s

ToUt

a

s'

J7-

J2i

?tf

(co.

jy:

rt

n

m

rti

m,

HO

3<?

VO

£U

LJZ<i

(09.

6

-?

«f

74.0

Jto

/*>,

7 <<} 8<-£ rf ¥Z

£//}i~i//!T/a/L/

Jf £>J$J££r <?fA.Hr//V£,S 4</ S/Ca/t-.'^^ /C£^//9/?/i./7</

&££?£//*£

/?■<??

£.X££C C£A/f

&0CSO

Dai/tfr-fisi.

/&#/?

Entuabcn

Nuabcr

Percent

Nnobei

PerCtnl

Niinber

. Per Cwt

Number

Percent

Ortan

Doubttul

Total

Cwlan

Doubrtrll Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certaia

Doujtfull Total

;ertairi

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ceita in

Doubtful

Total

O-Balum

_a_

a

CUL

a,d \.0.a

JL

/

r

Mf

A1

13-5

_£

6

/

Jd

o.o

n

-A

/

i

it

r-f

,ry

l-Asimmaical

s

</

9

&£.

0%S

fa 9

U.

/5

(1

s?

1S.I

M-t

/2

M

17

70.7

2S,9

Hf,

//

.71

V

Mf

1/Y

1u

^■Aircraft

. ./

Q

(

M.

jL4-

yf

/

V

js'J

/^-?

\1't

1

/

s

&l

i-7

m

_s£|

X

(0

£■?

/1. 6

>Li|M PhenH.

/

a

ML

Pfl

(?-i\

—L

6

'MA

~4.A

0-6

Z2

#

HL

00

0-f)

to

00

AJi.

I-Birrjj

_^_

/

/

Ml

s:f

f.f

a

0JL

Of

00

2

/

z

M

0-0&l

i-7

m

_s£|

X

(0

£■?

/1. 6

>Li|M PhenH.

/

a

ML

Pfl

(?-i\

—L

6

'MA

~4.A

0-6

Z2

#

HL

00

0-f)

to

00

AJi.

I-Birrjj

_^_

/

/

Ml

s:f

f.f

a

0JL

Of

00

2

/

z

M

0-0

\i

Q

6

0.0

0.0

Ofl

S-Ctooifi, Oust. etc.

_^J

Ml

0.6

0-0

t

JUL

0.f)

o.o

a

0.6

0-0

ol

t0

04

6,6

ftrft

t-anaflit Mo.

Z2

Q

tW 1

a j

H

J&

5

f.f

p.t)

t\

21

6

73

&f

(1-rt

7?H

_±

9

/3X

0$

!7-l

7-Pijdekiral

_^z

a

^

j2£\

A.0

H,

_jL

a.Q

0.d

6.t

6

0-6

CO

"4

3

.?

Yf

00

t-t

tVIMnnn

£j

o

■■/

mi

0.0

zf.y

JL

<!

i

M

^0.A

\6.%

^.

J>

JJL

o-o

S,7 t

(0

10

/3J

<?><)

hf

Mom

_Zl

S-9

6J

4

p

0£

JU.

0(1

/

1

JJL

0-n

/•/

_jL

f

M

00

,<:/

i

■ /

7.*.

^*

/■

/;

704

n1

1*6.

JL

W

37

m

.<tl

MO,

n it

Sti

m

m

/a.

U

1.1

7f

M.

m

Iso.

134

52&j!f j? <&

£i>0*P4_rs0Ar &f . ^S-JSdr s/c^r/zu&s /?</ S/caft/^/g £>£■£./<<* 'g/*_j.r</

&#<?{;/>* /?£-&

r '" "

£ it ese.tr /t/r

6000

Q£?</grf&>t

Pt?&/e

(Wnbn

Pet Cent

Number

Percent

rVumlwi

Per C«l

Nm*«

PnCoit

CnfoitKM

Cert*'

DouOtful

Total

CertJn

Doubfnil. Total ;«lam

tbuMfm

Total

Certain

ooomm

ToM

:«Uin

OwMbIj

Total

Certatn

Dmbtrul

Tolil

Certfin twuttiul

TMal

Cstjm

DniMtid

Tot*

'0. Balloon

*

*/

I2.S

o.o us

?

<?

3

19

0.0

7.f

f

/

c

ill 3.3

?0.?

f

3

/i

n.o

*■)

I7#

1-AsliMpaical

3

f

<?

9.9

iLM

?sQ

f

^

/3

23J_

/o.S

3*2

if

</

9

/.7.3

/J.3

?f-'

T

/

/o

li.O

If

Il~f

2-AiicttO

2

/

J

6.2

±L

f-3

£

^

'J. /*• 8

it.S

36.3

S

$

Jl.7

O.o

/t-7

9

Y

/ ^

i3. O

58

12- 9

3-Lt|tit Ptmw.

Q

0,0

o.o

0.0

..Q

O.o

. O.o

6

Q.O

0.0

CO

-2-~i

p

JL°~

0.9

00

4-B>«ta

£>

Q

o.o

SL-Q-

ao

c

4?

0.0

-A±>

0.0

9

J2J2. O.O

0.0

G*

<>

0.

O. Q

0.0

S-Owto, Duit, etc.

Q.O

jlQ

00

<?

<?

JLSL

: ?, « <?■$

JL-

Q

0.0

9.0

*■«

£>

O. If

00

0Q

t-lmffic. M.

H

(3

H

'IS

CLO [ US

r 1

/

JJt.

_iU-

?■*

¥■

H

/J. 3

O.O

^3

a

<? j

/5Q.O

jlQ

00

<?

<?

JLSL

: ?, « <?■$

JL-

Q

0.0

9.0

*■«

£>

O. If

00

0Q

t-lmffic. M.

H

(3

H

'IS

CLO [ US

r 1

/

JJt.

_iU-

?■*

¥■

H

/J. 3

O.O

^3

a

<? j

/5

ILL.

0.0

2<7

I-Ptrdnlorat

(?

Q.O

o.o' Q.O

■i9

Jul

-iU.

P-C

0.0

0.0

«.(J

2

3

^JL

0.0

3-f

tVUnMMI

n

n

31-S

_£^0JJ7-S

9

7

JOJ

0.0

?,?-7

JC

S

it!

0-0

tin

_^LI

n

19-9

0.0

H.9

MtHor

i

i

.7./

JUL

3J

1

I

1

2M

XL

5.3

/

1

I

J.J

J.J

(,.(,

3

1

q

J£A-

it

5.2

Total

2i

c

37

91.2

i9.8,iq0.

71

f

J#

7fe.3 73 J

too.

7H-

6

30-

IB

20.Q

no.

£1

9

CI

810

n.o

190.

r/tuz 4-?*

£frfLf/}T~/t7A/

of. &g*j£er x/&(/r//v6 s /?</ ^ig^t/^/g #/=L//3/s/c/re

%

6£06>/*z

/fs-/ _

£X.C£lLe/vT

' <3&&£>

£><?tssrft/L

/?£>€?#

Enlnlan

Nimtm

P« C(dl .

hUTibel

PeCtfrt

Hurtet

P«rC«t

Ngaber

PttCmt

Ceittm

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OaibtM

Total

:ertaio

Doootlol

Total

Cntaia

OouHtM

Total

Catan

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DaiMM

Total

H-Uloon

V

O

/

77

0.0

7.7

^

/

5

m

3J

/J.6

2

2

*i

4.S

¥.8

t.6

1

1

u

0.0

3-9

1-AsliMwical

X]

5

?

i£±

/S9

30. B

/*

f

IH

3ia

y?-5

U7

/

3

v

J.f

7-1

IS-

3

s

8

JJ.

I ¥-7

?:•?

7-AirtJjft

TJ

/

V

21)

_2J,

?ftS

^£_

C

it?

0-rJ

/?.?

J

5

JL±

i.f

H.9

J£_

1

c

JLS

S-9

Jf.7

1-LifHlPlMoM.

J^ 1

<7

0.0

JL°\

r?0

a

O

JiA

7.0

«.o

_l_

1

2

2^L

;.y

±8-

Q

p

(1.0

(I «

0.0

4-ainb

,fl_,

(7

o.a

l±0

0.0

(7

1

t

? /

^■/

Q

p

CO

9-9

O.O

_e_

O.o

o.o

0.0

KlomH. bsl, ilc

O

(7

o'.«

0.0

0.0

£1

0.0

O.O

fl.O

O

(?

00

Q.O

JJl

JLt

0-0

0»

frkniWic. hto.

-fi-

. O

0.0

JLL

o.e

-0JL

0.0

0.0

J^

9

lf.9

0.6

11.Q 6

c

/-?,£

o.o

lit

T-PijrcMtlicM

ll

<J

P

_OJ

o.e

o.s

0-0

*•»

0.0

t

i

11

?.H 2.H

t.d

O.o

0.0

9.1

MMrnomn

4

¥

J 0-0

0><>

308

&

(,

/?,«

9.0

/?.?

/s

/5

3S.7

DO 3J.1

9

$

15.5

o.O

Jll

MWMr

r?

O

ff.»

Ml

0,0

&o.e

o.s

0-0

*•»

0.0

t

i

11

?.H 2.H

t.d

O.o

0.0

9.1

MMrnomn

4

¥

J 0-0

0><>

308

&

(,

/?,«

9.0

/?.?

/s

/5

3S.7

DO 3J.1

9

$

15.5

o.O

Jll

MWMr

r?

O

ff.»

Ml

0,0

&

0-0

0.0

0.0

X

2

t.8

9.Q

<4.8

S

5

iH.l 0.0

■IH.l

.

TutJt

TO 1

3

/J

7<?

22-l\iOB.

?G

c

32

m

tt-T

/fl^.

32

fo

^2

7 £.2

23.8

100.

71 7

-39

7t.9

204

ISO,

■1

It.

#

fA$±=- ^*5" ££vstL£//}T/0/l/ rt/= /9sSJ££T X/6#r/AI6S t? </ S/Ca/T/'SG. /?£_<Lj /}<$ /<.ff y

GZoi/fs /fez.

1

£ /cee.t-E/i'7'

& 0t>£>

^ptPtSfr'/rta-

Pad?*

1

Number

Pet Cent

NuirtKt

Per Cent

Nunttl

PerCent

Number

PerCsr^''

. Cvaluattoo

Certain

Doutthil

Total

Certail

Oodithil

Total

Certain

OouUtul

Total

Certain

Dorbtlul

Total

Certain

OoribHul

Total

Certain

Dourjthll

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doiutnrl

Total

O-BUlow

1.0

7

11

Jil

f.8

;y.;

ii

37

IOX

1L1

«-y

/7A

57

5/

/Pf

j2

U

/*?

/f

IB

37

8)

7.7

it.g

l-Aitranor»rcjl

14

;

70

Jhj~

f.<?

!il

77

,3 7

HH

JU

tf.^

ff7

<?

e?rf

<?^

L!Lx\

9.6

li.O

2/

22

93

2.J

1-9

/8.1

?-A P ,cril(

'6

/?

79

JUl

10.fi

J--

(J^

&6

1 vt

JL1

^/■r

■fl-l

££

*/

/^7

JM

H.l

2?S

71

ft

H9

9.8

i-t

'U

t"

3-Li(i>t Ptwna.

X

£?

X

jUJ

0.i»

1 1

2:

8

m

1.0

i.f

2.9

iJJ

<$

1$

zu\

If

3-2

_5L

O

i

7.)

0.0

!■/

i-Buds

JL~

0.0

0,0

0.0

3

/

H

0.5

0.JJ

-7

J_

^

C

0-5

0-i

to

^2-

l

3

.0-9

0.9

1 3

5-CltwOs, Drill, etc

0.0

Q.O

0.0

2

5

1

JLi

0?

r^

/

S

3

eu

0-9

(,

O

-Jbl

Q.O

0-0

t^ksuKic. kin.

-3-i

- -5

T?

_fl-0.

2-r

1?

O

n

33

00

33

7/

£»

7/

US

O.o

n.s

SS

SS

211

Q.O

211

J-PsrcHflojiot

Q

Q

o.P

« (?

f "

1

O

2

£d.

i).0

tf.3

ZZ_

4*

;/

JLffl

01

3-7

JL-

2

9

1.&,

O.f

3-S

S-Unknom

7

ta

Ji^

9

.K»

irt

(iH

21A

0J>

2tf-i<

69

i?

if

/j.j

Q.O

J3.2

39

Q

38

ii-2

0.0

ib-Z

Kl»«

7

Z3

0.0

J-*

2$

5

30

¥-3

of

52

y_2.

2

n

jL4

o-9

3-8

JL

7

7S-Unknom

7

ta

Ji^

9

.K»

irt

(iH

21A

0J>

2tf-i<

69

i?

if

/j.j

Q.O

J3.2

39

Q

38

ii-2

0.0

ib-Z

Kl»«

7

Z3

0.0

J-*

2$

5

30

¥-3

of

52

y_2.

2

n

jL4

o-9

3-8

JL

7

7

0-^

3.0

3.0

. ..

Tola!

2JL

26

/20

7^.3

1/.7

00-

12}

/S7

500

■7U

27<t

/(M.

?f/

f7S

5156

m

309

ISO-

ill

6&

13$

7 If

HI

190.

135

pw

-^^j-.'SV'iwiviriWia.i'S" -.

JMAM^^J^.

£M <-l / l *r f t>/iL 0£_ ^P.4

>JtZUA>6S. £££ d^._„ _ .¥€A£1 *'? sSf.^//y-/^/G

f/r^

£ *> 47 £ristfi.i/*}r/0/V /?/=■ ALi. S/&S/r//V<^S FOfi s4LL VSrfgz #</ 3-/<SM7-s^£

fcc/tfa/L/r 1 / &#£>&/>* c /1//L//I/1/ 00 set !/£££

£jri.'£t-i.£ii'r

(Sefaa

/?£>/j<grf&L-

/%>/?#

Certain

Number

Pa Cent 
DoobttufTotal

Certain

Number

PbCbiI

Hunter

PrrCent

NmnbH

PtrCwil

Evaluation

Douortu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain

Doublful

Tolal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ceflan

Doubtlu

ToW

Oftain

Doibtful

Total

0- Balloon

t.

■ f

,7

**

</

'/0ft

f~/

-M.

&

-M

fir

/¥¥

il

57

(*f

^A.

a./

/I.? ft.

/</

'M

M

,?7 /It

(•Atvononical

//

//

itf

tf/

..■6&

?(.?

Iff

£3

tu

Ml

?.s

2¥¥

/if

fr

fW

/3.B

/0.2,

Ma </< ¥z>

~gf

I/. 7

//.0

tlj

Mlireufl

/•

6

^

//<

5S

ffj

fS

13

m

Jl>£

//./

H.l

/3/

/'3

w

/¥.#

tlJ

&.r

¥n

Z0

*o

10,4

s;z

K(,

3'Ugbt Ptienom.

2

£

/?

0.0

f-f

Y

/

//

ai

f-3

2.0

/¥

/I

27

-AS

/.</

3-f

?

3

J2L.

00

0$

t-Bii*

«?

^V

. A0

' 00

/

_ 2

3

az

*¥

0-t

7

3

/!?

ai

-Al.

//

?

/

3

j££.

03

fi?

Klooils, Outl etc

<?

0.0

.00

00

/

9

/0

-jZZ.

U

/■*

z

Z

¥

-<?-2

02,

0¥

a

0.0

00

00

fHnsurfrt. Info.

9

f

f-f

£0

ft

■ tf

. .P.,

/?

.f¥

00

ft

/n

/?2,

40

0.0

rt/

M

tf

£L£

0.0

7t0

JPtyctalojical

00

0.0

00

3

/

¥

as

a?.

07

it

S

26,

JLt

0.£

Jl.

/¥

/

/?

3f

0.0

,f?

9-Unlutow

j/

J{

tf.S

££.

iff

;2 7

/2f

Jill

<?(?

m

ILL

//S

/2,/

0-0

/t-/

44

6b

jf.2.

03

(£s

J-OBlCf

3

r

*-f

4.0

f-f07

it

S

26,

JLt

0.£

Jl.

/¥

/

/?

3f

0.0

,f?

9-Unlutow

j/

J{

tf.S

££.

iff

;2 7

/2f

Jill

<?(?

m

ILL

//S

/2,/

0-0

/t-/

44

6b

jf.2.

03

(£s

J-OBlCf

3

r

*-f

4.0

f-f

f¥

—A.

20

t£

/■/

u

_£>

f

f¥

^J.

/0

3S

}f

2

S0

2./

0S

2-L

Total

22,

2Z

/«V

m

U*.

/%>.

m

JJo

$s£

tf-t

$* 'J

/00.

63L

*?7

?33

AM

st- if eo.

30$

f0

m

119

2/./

/00.

r/l/!L

£

/?#?

gMLi/jr/0/v

£>f

s?i-t

s/&#r//vc s

^?0#

/?#7

<?y

S/GA/T/sSG ^.

jesi-z^a/t. /rv

&£g<j/ o s .. M/L/r/>je</ -04 ' *&#&£/?$

1 
1

£ xdE-i-LSA/r-

&£>£>£>

tfpestfT/^&i-

/?0&je

1

i

Numbef

PwCent

Number

Per Cml

Number

PerCent

Nimbei

Per Coit

Evaluation

Certain

Doubtlu

Total

Ctrtatn

DoubHu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain

Doublful

Tola!

Certain

Doublful

Tolal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ctrtan

Doubtfy

Tolal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Balloon

/

/

//./

0.0

#t

d

0.0

0.0

#&

■/

/

2£A

00

250

%

t

50.(1

00

,<*tf

1-Astnwniital

^

^

MA

0(7

???*

J

/

_2/

0-0

?■/

/

7

OCT

ISO

l£-0

-££.

0-0

M

?-*ncuft

/

/

?,

///

//■/

?.??

■ a

J&L

fi0

#0>

~£\

00

00

00

I?

00

00

00

,3-LiifilPtiewa.

<?

0a

#0

00

1

JjL

0-0

P

O

0.0

00

00

—£-\

00

00

00

|<-6inji

_0\

00

00

0.0

a\

j£j£

0,0

0.0

__g-

00

00

00

^0_

00

00

00

IS-ClouHls. Dust, etc

J&L

0-0

00

00

f?0

00

-JL

0-0

00

00

0.0

00

00

jfrlitsatfiL Info.

j?

JL0

00

00

.. /

I

Uj

0-0~

?■(

P0

0(?

00

2

?,

$8,0

00

SP.C

I'-PiyclnHopejl

0a

0-0

0.0

t0.0

0tf

0.0

/

1

J2j2.

&.0

26.0

J2&.

00

00

HJnto»«n

3

O

J

333

O.0

ft?

s-

5

¥ss

00>

4srs

/

/

250

00

2$a

a

0.0

00

0.0

W>lli«

/

/

"//./

00

//./

3

J

2f3

0.0

27-2

o

00

00

0.0

o

£0

00

0.

total

s.

/

f

HI.

0- '

m

1/

a

/0£>.t.

0.0

/00.

Z-

z.

4

M£-

00-0

/00\

_iL

4

M0

0.0

w

r***

£

#¥<?

£mii//ir/0/u

0S

/)n

s/d,//r/A^as

F0£

' /947

4f

zSf &/(/?-/*' G00

0.

total

s.

/

f

HI.

0- '

m

1/

a

/0£>.t.

0.0

/00.

Z-

z.

4

M£-

00-0

/00\

_iL

4

M0

0.0

w

r***

£

#¥<?

£mii//ir/0/u

0S

/)n

s/d,//r/A^as

F0£

' /947

4f

zSf &/(/?-/*' G

/?£L/#0/i./rY & ttfiJ/tJ , ■ f/v/L/a/0 0?/3 $££ t/£#S

^j-e^i-i^st'r

0?6>0£>

00£->e r^ v-

^004

E<aliulK»

ftiiaber

Per Coil

Certiin

Number

PeiCenl

Number

Percent

Number

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtlul| Total

Doubtful

Total

CettJin

Doubtful

Total

>rt*n

Doubtful

Total

Certain

.Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0-BatltMi

_&.

00

0.6}\aO

■/

P

f

-jte-

as

¥0

I

_

Z

j¥1

0.0

¥9

-j2-

J&A

0.0

0.0

l-Astnnonical

/

/

(0-0

0.0

/00

&

. ¥

ft?

240.

/6.0

¥0-0

/&

_ .r

ff

%0

7 s

¥&■?

_^_

(<

&£.

0.0

¥*■&

2'Aiictatt

-J01

_0j2.

-4JL

00

/

i'

1

-&L

¥-0

tf<?

UL

JtiL

00

00

0.0

0#

00

Unfit Pfcwa.

j2£.

0.0

00

.

-M

00

00

/

tf

J£-

#0

/■¥

0.0

00

00

«-Budi

■

jZ0

00

0,0

f)

/?

00

0>A

0.(?

-JL

0>

00

fi-0

00

_j2_

£0_

00

00

S-ClocdJ. Dust, etc

£_

0J>.

AAA

0.0

■0

/>

00

0><?

/?<?

!?

0}

0.0

0.0

0.0

£0.

00

0-0

6-Uttutlic Wo.

<r

¥

im.

^0JZ\

¥0.0

J

/

A£

a?

40

1

j

z

4t

0.0

¥f

_<¥

¥

&?

00

,W

;Ptj dolor oi

'

AS\

00

00

_^

. /

/

0.0

¥0

¥0

■2.

0>

2,

«.9

00

V?

/

j

^iz.

00

7"?

1-tMraiM

3^

\1

30O

00

?ac

—L

fa

M&

0<?

{¥0

-L-

f

at

#0

V?.5

1

/5^

00

t^¥

MB*

2s

2

1/7.0

0.0

20.6

_J_

L

4

/At

00

f6-0^

^L

7

///

fie

tff

-JL

00

00

00

/3

Tom

/0

/0

$J.C

0.0

100.

/?

i.

?z

fU

if.0

/00.

3t

s

//

til

£JL

/#>

/3

Z00.0

0.0

100,

136

_jS£L_. #<-<- ... $/&#r//VAS.- fit?£ /4VX rfo' ■ S/qyVr/^/G.

/egt- /#&/*./ r<s

6*&c

J/*.^

/?/i./r/9#y

t^/fiee^/Ps

1

£*<-!£ ..- ;"-*/'

iiiP&O

*ertarn

£>aM>jJ rn/t.

fb#*

t"""

NlMKr

~7 ;n

Per Cent 
CeriarTjiitoubttui' Total

Number

Pic Cm

Kumber

Pet Cent

Numtief

^oti^

PaCoil

i Enhutnn

Stttaifi1

£*<-!£ ..- ;"-*/'

iiiP&O

*ertarn

£>aM>jJ rn/t.

fb#*

t"""

NlMKr

~7 ;n

Per Cent 
CeriarTjiitoubttui' Total

Number

Pic Cm

Kumber

Pet Cent

Numtief

^oti^

PaCoil

i Enhutnn

Stttaifi

DoubtM

MW

Certain 
ill

Doubtful

Total

Doubtful

ToUt

Certain

Ooubtful

T*W

Ctitiin

OouWhil

Certain

Doubtliri

Total

0- Balloon

¥&0

....^U.A2. 
20A&0.0

'_X

-.//-

z 1

I

J 7

i"

/0.S

^££

*^

A.

«:?

J2JL-

^•^

J2JL

0-0

1-JkllmAMial

it_

r 9

/^

//*

2

2

-/

/0$

/i3^ i>/<?

—2~\

_JL

0.0

ff-ff

2- Aircraft

2.

2

-2JL 0010A

-U-

2

-£0.M.. 
.JJ^'01.

£

/

1*

&.i

^J*

7^^

f

-L-

2e.0

ai>

1f,0

3-L»|M Phfnom.

-JL

_i£.

1— ^

/

/

0.0

.^

',£.?

JL

^JL

_JL

J2JLs

0.0

0.0

4-BHdJ

S-Cloudi, Oust etc.

£L

__X

/

00

U\ 07

_J

/

2

£<L

~JJ

72

. /

/

e.,i

~2J2-

5TJ 7

-JL

^jL^

_JL_

0>0>

0.0

^.0

_&_

j?0 o.£>\ 0.0

67

.. ^. ^

-A0

^

^JL

_^j

^

A.0

0.0

^*?

V

_£_

0.0

0-0

00

frlMiflit hfo.

£L

v~&\

0x—2^ £0

0\A\

r?r?

2^

_XJ

-2

/AS

0-0

/??#■

f

_£_

00.0

0.0

60.0

7-PiYdnloral

~J2\

_ji_

\0O

y JU2\l2&

-&4

-&

00

00

I?(C

~4-\

/?

0.6

<O-0

^*!)

2L_

<?,0

0.0

0,0

1-Unluwrn

Z\

LuZ-

£

///

JZ0UU

_£_

0.0

0.0

^

£7

■0.0

-£1L

^

/

a

A

2S-.0

(7-0

&■*

*0«ht

—®-\

r Jl-

*>

.r^| 0#\00

z

_2,

f./

-JL0

,7V

/?

0.0

0.0

i^rf

f^

__£.

&£.

0-0

0<?

j '

Total

~7b4 s , /?

W*

3l3'jO0.

22

£

1? TlA-Jl-iLm..

/*-

-^L.

-X

iU

Si$

ZiiW

-jL

^L*L

/0S>-4

#0

/#>,

rjgL

£

#$'

Ei/fic t/tfr/piU

0f

'- /H.L

£/6Kr//V£S

FP4.

__ /£V/

&y. .

r/e^Tws

ie£-L//i??/<-(r</ 6^<f« j c/*st./A& agsaft/g^s

£?.f<?&± ~ ^/i- r

&&£>&

>(?0£>tfrs : 6'{.

/?<?£>/€

Numtwf 
Certain j Doubtful] Total

Per Cert!

NU'nber

Pet Cent

ftunber

PdCent

Hum on

Per Coil

i E¥aluati«n

Ctlam L Doubtful; TolJl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

" 'i 
//

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouMtol

Total

Certain

DDUiltfU

Total

Certain

DoubHBt

ToW

.0-eaHow

t

\ 2\ JCertain

Doubtful

Total

" 'i 
//

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouMtol

Total

Certain

DDUiltfU

Total

Certain

DoubHBt

ToW

.0-eaHow

t

\ 2\ J

MIL 
M

2,

JJL

/2-S

2?$

OIL

-l£- 2?

<// fJ

04/

_<2 
L

^2

0.0

00

[l-HHmnWiieal

J ~T

J is

/S.&

&&.

Wl

/

I

£r

/i>7

nf

'l-AiitnH

]

JUL

0.0

00

2

So

0!>

$0

.jL

¥

g

4t

¥J

1L

L

1

&.1 0.0

fW

,3-Lt(htPli«on.

u4—S-

00

J2

t>

00

/},!>

0O

-JL

/

0.0

<fj

AL

0.0

0.0

00

ABU*

„-£i-j2-.

/

/

-j&£

?.£

ZS

0.

0>

t?

,00

04

\j20

_JL

00

0~0

<?0

S-Clarfl. Dust etc.

-0-

0.0

0.0

0.0

A0

0-0

0-0

^2-.

—4-

0:0

0,0

00

00

0.0

0.0

frlntulfic. hh.

~iL

r 0^jL

0.0

0.0

£0

2

£

F.0

00

5.0

/Z

fr

/</J

0.0

St

/

/i<? 00 U.7

1 7-Piythob|iul

'

00

\JLa\

00

/J

/

2$

00

7£

00

00

4£.

_JL

_&£

0/7

/?(?

*-tinltnd«

J

s

ft*

#JL,

?$.$

jiL

/</

&./>

00

fro

&

*./

00

-1L

/

/

J£l

0.0

/i}

MUttr

^

a

JL0^

r JUL.

0.0

/

z

J

2.S

£.0

/• s

A

6

00

7'

^J^

J

P

/

/i.7

dO f/L7

1

1

TOM

ZH

f

-£-

<££

IJ.S-/0&

2L.

-4-

fo

&SO

SS-.0

/£>?,

Jl-

¥*

&£

fit

/00

*

f

4

213

M

/00.

W4l£.. £$2^

SMLl/AT/0/V £/= _ ALL _ S/g//r/fi/CS

FOt /? < /? £{/ J /GA/7-/*S<£

'^H

/f£i.//}g/i

try

Z/e.<Pc//°s

A7/i./r/9£t/

0>/?SL?£0££S

1

& ;££■£-.<-£&!!-

/?<Pt?jD

/P#v

tfr^/st.

S°<?f*

\

Kurnber

Per Cent

NurrAer

Pel Cent

dumber

Percent

Number

Pet Cent

Evaluation

Ceitaio

[tobtlu_

Total

Certain

Ooubthi

Total

Certain

Dooblfu!

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttu

Total

Certain

DnlMtal

Total

0-BaUoon

(?

Mi

fl.0

<?0

2.

/

s

03

f.S

<if

4f

0O

f-f

ZJl

/

^X

0-0

33

1-Astrooomcal

I

,?

s

JLL

/f.r

tff

2.

?■(,

1L

J2J?

££JL

f' 6

' 2V

3/

55

ML

m

W-f

1\

If

21

J00

we

70.0

?-*ricraft 
3-Liehl PhrmiL

JL

JttZ

00

00

s

Z

i.

E

2.tf\

ts

9-1

s

-?

t»-0

9,0

10.0

_JL_

Jlo

0.0\2.

?■(,

1L

J2J?

££JL

f' 6

' 2V

3/

55

ML

m

W-f

1\

If

21

J00

we

70.0

?-*ricraft 
3-Liehl PhrmiL

JL

JttZ

00

00

s

Z

i.

E

2.tf\

ts

9-1

s

-?

t»-0

9,0

10.0

_JL_

Jlo

0.0\

00

_i?

0.0

-J2JL

0O

_£_

JUL

0.0

fl.0

^JL

JJL

0.0

0.0

4-BJfds •

a

/

/

00

s.f

f-f

J?^

0-0

00

00

0.0

0-0

^JL

JUL

0.0

00

5-Ctouds, Oust. etc.

-Jh

AS.

00

M

.

JM\

00

00

J2A

0.p

0.0

_Jh

0.0

00

0-0

trliuutlic. Info.

- &\

A&.

00

0-0

_jL

V

/M\

0-0

(0

— 4-A

4

0?

00

¥f

_JL\

Jl*.

0O

0.0

7-PsrclBki|ical

■ tf

J2JL

0.0

0.0

<?

J£0

0<?

0O

0.0

0.0

0-0

J12.

00

0.6

8-Unrmlan

c

H

I£2A

0.0

W-2

t

£

50

0.0

<(?

9

t

0.0

00

J/.O

_a i

<r

JiJL\

0.0

6 7

Mlttiei

sr

^A.

_J_^

2££JJL.

ff.f

0.0

00

0-0

<L

O

2

£.tf

00

2.4

^JL

0.0

0.0

0.0

Total

/3

¥

ff

llAiTs

m

&

S0

¥0

2S.0

75:0

ms.

j&L

V33L.

ft

0.1

te :/

(50-

12

tf

30

000

10J>

fffir

"1"

Ta&A£ -:4J?Z

EWU//)rt0A/

a?

get s/&//r//v(ks

^0£ .

t?</9

rff

s/ e/Vwv'i;

#EL- //3tf tL /

t<s 6<ee?it/>s j £/f//-/*/v 6>gs£i?S£:ies

J

£*/!£<-<-£ iv ZL

(S&00

/PiOt/S-T-^^i-

/&#'£

Nurabtr

PerCent

H umbel

Per Cenl

Numbw

Per Cent

Sumter

Per Cent

Emuatno

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Doubtful! Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

lertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Toy

Certain

Doustnit

Total

Certain

Drmbthl

Total

JO. Balloon

-^2,

JlA

-&&0JL

3

f

¥

£L

*-f

//.7

_x

f

f

ZD

?.£"

7.s

_JL

JUL

00

; I-Aitnnoaiol

*

*r

//

ISX

f7t\U/

/

f0

//

iX

2f{

'??■?

2S

id

5/

If. 2

7,1-3

</j.s

^LL

/(

//

mL

10 </

tf<f4.

2-*iiciift

V

V

22A^

0.0\2.22

.J-

f

(/

a/.

/4?

???

_x

-ILJ

M

ft.S

f-2

2/7

L

/

2

AS

/.t

77*

JLifJit Plunoa.

-M

0.0

-0JHA0

JLO

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.t

^A.

.0,0

00

0.6

«-Bnih

_^J

^

j2A

_JL4L&£-

0.0

fl.0

00

^JL

¥

IS

0.0

/■■-?

__£.

_££_

00

0.0

5-Cloudl. Duit, etc

~JL

f?

0.0

-A&,

\JL0

fi*

^A.

00JLO

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.t

^A.

.0,0

00

0.6

«-Bnih

_^J

^

j2A

_JL4L&£-

0.0

fl.0

00

^JL

¥

IS

0.0

/■■-?

__£.

_££_

00

0.0

5-Cloudl. Duit, etc

~JL

f?

0.0

-A&,

\JL0

fi*

^A.

00

00

P.0

_^0_

0.0

0.0

00

J2JL

00

00

frutuffic tnfo.

<9

00

..J>

z

s-f

0.0

fi.9

JJU

/f

rf.i

0.0

/Y-2

-4-

f

-&Z

0.0

/&.?

7 f jycnotapcJl

££

_£JT&0.

0~

0,0

00

_J?

0.0

00

0.0

^L.

ft

J

S.i

0.0

*■&

t-UrrtanMi

S

,f

?i?

_A£,

+ r

i

b

0-0

00

//0

js2

/2

M.0

0.0

/#./>

JJ-

(9

/?

24./

0,0

Mt

WHw

-J_

J0A

0.0

0-0

y^^

~j~

/

0S

0.6

0-S

J

S

^4-

0.0

*£■

"■ "

ToW

/t

5

-UL

&i

jr-t

/00-

J£.\

f(e

j¥

£*o

</f.e

/eo.

&-

4%

120

tf.o

3ff.O

100.

</2>

&

sY

UL

22.t

/#•

137

fe : '

. r# Ai£. &££-

£/ r *lV#7 /0A/_

0/=_ s)£ t- S/6/Y7//I/ZS ^0£ J_ "/?£■£ > /3 V £ /6/j7~/s*6

.Number

*'£ s. j /> $ / l / ns

GX0VS a

/V/^/ r/4*y

6>.

\

/.'i'it iT

Per Coil

&0&O

.... &0.vjIt /-e

rf?&'<?

1

"foul

Nirnibci

Per Cenl

Srtin"

Number

Per Cenl

Certain

Number

titS

F

'erCoil

(variation

Cerlaui

Doubtful

Certain"! Doubthjl fowl

Certain

Doubtful

Tab!

Certain

Doubtful

Tola!

DouMful

Total 
/0

V

Certain

0.0

DouHlul

Totll

Catain

DcuDthl

Total

O-BjIIom

.f

J 
-Iff.

£■£. 
it/.

_£0

as ■?/?

£>

/

JTJ

-&Z.-2*

f

ft

121

/

£.

?>f

Mfl

l-A»liQnoinical

i,

4

S0

/^

33J

fj«

3

200

o

2

#1

/?,fl

ft?

J-Ai (Craft

jL

&

fit?

00

_^_

4

£

#?/ a A

200

Y

£9

2

^&-

tf?

-&£,

1-Liflht Plwnow.

1 £

\_u2-

JZA.

ao

0.0

/?

,00 0.0 0.0

-J?J

a.

^JL

JUL

0.0

00

^_

00

:.0.0

0.O

4-Bnte

b-Ctmidj, Dust etc

L f

JUL 
J24

-&&--0d-

^J0-

fi

-&£-

0,0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0,0

a

00

0.0

0.0

00

j0£

ft

J?J2-

0.0

0.0

_j?

0.0

0.0

60

00

0.0

0.0

frlnsuftic. htb.

/

^

/

St

j2£.

/

3.3

r?.e

f-3

~£

Zr

Y.</

0.0

w

&

f.

t.r

00

H*

7-Piydelepal

a

.*S>I..

J?0.

£0\ 00

^<a

0-

0,0

0.0

0.0

^J

0_

0.0

0.0

00

<?

0\

00

0.0

0,0

t-UnUoiM/

^

/

St

j2£.

/

3.3

r?.e

f-3

~£

Zr

Y.</

0.0

w

&

f.

t.r

00

H*

7-Piydelepal

a

.*S>I..

J?0.

£0\ 00

^<a

0-

0,0

0.0

0.0

^J

0_

0.0

0.0

00

<?

0\

00

0.0

0,0

t-UnUoiM

{<f\ £?\ ff.

33.

do

5? 2

j*

3

/0.0

fff.fi

fc

J£-

333

00

fts

S

f

ff.r

0.0

??.r

Mttw

^AiM~i-

3L£^

,t<

~J2.

s

J

00

10.0

tf.0

z

J

£L

JJL

'6 7

0J

t

fl

/

?f

00

/ /

\ZJ-\-

Toll)

£$

..4/..

i^

f/tl

jIjl]

V00

^

/s

30

SL7&-3 W

.ZL *

4J^£MJ

'?$

/00

/J?

LIZ

//

p?

1'

rap.

f#£i.E /i 5~&

£f/}iy/f !70A' 0f />£*- S/t f f/r/sycs *?£ , /f&.c?.

.#?

Sy£/(/rs*/<£

fcLs/tsji./

r-¥

6*0<//>S ,

f/t//t,/S/V

a4s£<et/<£/es

£ .t£g

i.^SA/r

0?t?0f>

Pav4-m-c

■ —

&<?&£

Ctrtain

Nv^bet 
Ooubttul: Total

Pel Cent

Nraitei

Pa Cent

NuiKiei

PwCent

KuntlH

PerCent

. Evaluation

Certain

OniOttu

rfotaT

Certain

OouWMI

Total

Certain

DoubIM

Total

;erta«n

Doubtful

ToUl

Certain

Oouolful

Total

Certain

Ooulitlu

Total

Certain Doubtful

■Tolil

*e»uo«i

/

I & L

ft

W

*t

2-

2.

t.f

AP

*■,?

9

_JL../S.

//.£

^L.

/r^-itf

f

/

/

//.£

(£>

/JJ

l-Aitnnmiu>

/

^jx~jL

.££

/7,i

13.S

-M-,

£

/!-'

£[£a

t-9

40

f

_z.

//

-JJ-

1&*L

*tl

$

2*

/0

/J./

J.S

40

J.Aiiciart 
,3-Liflil Plwnom.

_^

'\ ,T

its

,*■?

ZM

zZ

f

f

/l$.

.fi

tf"?

/7

g

^^

2/.$

6.0

7U

S0

0>

/0

4.J

0.0

/0-0

^J2\~JL

_ 00

00

00

~J2\

j%L

00

0*0

-0

.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0P

l«-e>nts

„/2l^J?_

-A3

0.0

0.0

—£.

■ 0"

J2JL

0.0

&0

.0

^^J

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

#0

S-Onids, Out, «{.

0\ 0\ o

00

0-0

-uZ.

0>0

00

00

..0

— ^-1

■

AS.

JUL.

0.0

00

0.0

00

f

XnaKic Wo.

0.0

tfl

-Jl

'(?

0.0

00

fit

.23.

0\

23

tu

.0.P.

tf*t

■/T

fj

zu

0-0

ztt

7-PsYclnlo|itil

M£\

00

0-0

-4.

0.0

00

0.0

. 0.

&.

0.0

MP

00

V

4

i.C

A0

6(t

t-Unknomi

A 0\ </-

ns

0.0

?s*

s.

tf

?

&&

00

ft-p

?

1

£4-

..0a ?.0

//

f/

/?.0

0.0

tf.0

Wftei

0\ 0\

^0

0.0

00

-^L

t /

S?00

0.0

. 0.

&.

0.0

MP

00

V

4

i.C

A0

6(t

t-Unknomi

A 0\ </-

ns

0.0

?s*

s.

tf

?

&&

00

ft-p

?

1

£4-

..0a ?.0

//

f/

/?.0

0.0

tf.0

Wftei

0\ 0\

^0

0.0

00

-^L

t /

S?

<?,0

?£

. /

/

2.

-A*.

/.S

&A /_

/

u

#0

f-i

\

.. .

Total

/? | J\ / 7-

1£$\

£?.s*

/00

£&

J

it

m.

/0J

/0a

40

//

ft

\&1

2J./

{00

Sf

J

i/

f£/

M

/ee.

TAl?i.£

#£-£, £04^0/1 r/0/t/ d?S AL^ Z/6H7-/A/6S F0& /9£?

/00 3-/aA/rss/c

tec/ />0/{./r>/ &/e0&//>s , *t/t-/r#gv 0gie-*if£*S

i

£ ' xCsi-i^enfr

<$&£>£>

/?£? i/S T*fi-

Fooe

i

Nimber

Per Cent

Hintwr

PerCent

' Hunger

' Per Cent

dumper

Pet Cent

, Evaluation

Certain

Ooubttul

ToUl

Certain

DodHbl

T-mal

Certain

Doubthl

TotK

Certain

DouMful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouBtfu

Total

Certain

OoublU

Total

D-Balloon

/

/

JU.

00

7-S

_£

r

//-/

¥3

iff. 7

/

/

t

jLl

¥J

u

/

/

&

jYJ

M fit

t-Aitrononitcal

/

/

£.

ZJ-

■?>/

0/.Z

—L

0.

//

424

ft

0?*

/

/

£■

j£l

■¥■/

u

2-

/

J

m

Y.f

/Yt

?-Anciart 
Hr(t*t Phenon.

. ^£j

#

J

2idC

00

?/-9

_£.

/?

-/

/Z4\

0.0

t&

/

/

%

4J-

Y?

u

. jZ

,f

£

l£^

/Y.3

23 ■(

JL.

0-

JLtL

0-0

0:0

0>

fl.0

0-0

00

t

f

\M-

Y.t

43

AJL

JUL

JLO.

4-Biift

-JL

0-8

0-0

_&

/

/

0.0

<(3

43

_£_

0.0

0#

fro

■

ML

p. 6

tlfi

S-Cloutfs. Dint. He

0.0

0-0

00

/>

00

0-0

0-fl

J2£-,

0.0

fii>

0>

J2JL

0,0

0.0

frlnsutfici Ink.

0-0

0.O

0fi

p.l?

00

00

Z

?.

ZT

00

ft 7

^-j2^

JUL

0.0

<lO

7-Ps>cDolotica<

00

0.0

r>

a

0.0

0.0

0fl

J7.0

00

00

~JL

£J-

0.0-

JLtL

aVlMJiHM

_Z1

7

2f.>i

00

z/.tf

2

■

f.

2.7

0.0

ft-f

/I

/£,

0?.Z

0-0

tf-Z

9

f>

9

Y14,

0.0

Wf

Mtfier

/

!

r.f

0-0

r.t

0.O

0.0

00

£

2,

tf

0.0

£7

_^

(?

2

9.4

0.0

<*.?

T(W

iT

1

/</

fUL

?■*

!0Q.

JL

/

13

2U.

f1#

(00

JL.

V-

?3

%2-6>

/7-¥

/S0-

./*t

<?

?,/

iu.

13. S

ton.

■r#4LG

457

£//}Li/Ar/0A/

S?P2,

tf

0.0

£7

_^

(?

2

9.4

0.0

<*.?

T(W

iT

1

/</

fUL

?■*

!0Q.

JL

/

13

2U.

f1#

(00

JL.

V-

?3

%2-6>

/7-¥

/S0-

./*t

<?

?,/

iu.

13. S

ton.

■r#4LG

457

£//}Li/Ar/0A/

S?P

: Aii-

Sl&f£T/A/<kJi

/"^ff_

/9S-/

a

y

£/£fiJTSs*/<Zr_

*>£t- /Ag/1. /r V &lC00/ : 'S . e/0/L/AAS £>4S£kf£/ez

m t

Number

S fCStt-GA/ r

&00O

/?a0#rrv*-

/?£?&/?

Evaliytwt

PeiCoi!

Number

PerCent

Kunber

Pet Cenl

Number

Percent

Certain

bouolful

ToUl

Certain

Ooutptfiil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

jmj

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doublfu]

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

f> Balloon

£1L

00

0.0

/

/

J£-

0,0

fit

_U-

/

Z

2£-

t>f

a

/

/

j££

0-0

is

l'Astnnofiiol

1<

/

3

spo

254

f£0

~z

,f

/

21. 1

ti.7

It?

-M.

^

f

5J-

$.6

4*

•

<

f

/?. 2,

£2-7

Ya.f

J-Aircraft

(I

/

'

JUL

?$.0

15$

/

'

3

ft.,7

00

fi-7

/

J

J

^zS-

u

//■$

^

ff

$.{

0.0

93

J-LljM PtWML

■fl

^J-

Jkl

7}-0

00

^JL

0.0

00

M

_x

2-

-aZ.

00

0.7

f?

0.0

0,0

0.0

t-BirrU

A

^JL

j2l0

0j

0.0

JLP

00

0,0

fl

0.0

0-0

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

i-Cloudi. Dual. etc.

_JL

&0-\

0.0

0.0

dJL

0.0

#0

p

0.0

ftO

a0

0.0

0.0

00

(.muff it rah.

0~

Jj2\

0,0

0,0

JLS

0-0

0.0

00

-L-

f

%>.p

0,6

0.0

£

(7

0-

1.7.7

/>0

22J

7Pjjclok>(icai

■?

n

M-0

0.0

0-0

^J-

c

0J

00

(10

^L.

/

Z

-Zl

t-9

*3

00

0.0

0,l>

H**»«

i 1 ?

^JL

Ml

0(1

I?/?

-J-

Q

7

2iL

0.0

ffl

fi

(3

Ml

fl.0

%z

- i*

4,

«/■

0-0

93

♦otnei

/?

JUL

0-17

0.0

J2JL

i9-0

(!.Q

^JLr

jm

0.0

0-0

3

3

1 3./.

0.0

t3,t

, w

1

&

~JZ.

SJ$

iP-0

M

/£

J

#

&J

*M

(00,

21-

■f

3f

77.1

&.r

w.

/7

f

£-2,

77.3

22:1

/<&.

138

$»**.£■ A*Z GVJi.t/Jr/0/V £/? /i£t- S/&#r//V6S /=0* /?£>& /iV jr;£A/7~;SG.

: *£(./

j#s<L/r<y 6*?0#*zr , M/c/rj^y asseeezes

1

£ L£a<- l S/U t

&0e?p

fip<&rft/t-

/?OS£

\

Nwnber

»((C«I

Number

Per Coil

Number

Per Cwl

Nomtfi: *£(./

j#s<L/r<y 6*?0#*zr , M/c/rj^y asseeezes

1

£ L£a<- l S/U t

&0e?p

fip<&rft/t-

/?OS£

\

Nwnber

»((C«I

Number

Per Coil

Number

Per Cwl

Nomtfi

Pw Cent

EiJllUlKHt

Cert* it

""Ooubttul

pToUl

Certain

DoublM Tolll

>tain

DOuHhgl

Total

C«tain

Doubtful

Total

;erlain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dniblfgl

Total

Certain

DouHtol

Total

Certain

Dcmbttul

Total

O-fMloon

f

7

&

t-f

£.fi rt-S

■*¥

2f

M^.

u

/&*

jif

/?

tf

/Af

?.</ m

/0.

$

//

6fS

//.4> 2£7

l-Astignomcil

r*

z±

'9

?■</

&.i

/i.i

S3

i-2-

Vf

/.0 s.t

#f

37

$

Y*

/?*

jiLk.

?.7S

//

Z

/J

f£T

?.t

tM

Miiaafi

.?/

/£

J?

f%0>

/a 3

2ff

i£^

ZX

,?-?

£.$

7-1

at

Jt,

f0

ft

M s.z

*(£

..s.

,f

£

€?

</.J

u

J-Ll|t>| PhBBtl.

f?

/•)

0.0

0.0

00

s

/

¥

at

0f

//

/

/

0.<

0?

0>.f

±

*#

-A£-

2f

«B«iJj

r?

0-0

.df>;

M

3 ,

f?

J

at

00

#t

ZfZ

V

2/

#0

Zf

a

0.0

^24.

0,a

VClMids, Dull etc

..<?-.

(?

0-0

-£$-

f).f>

f

f

f

lL

0r

fi

2s

/

s

/.0

0*

/.*

n

0.0

_££,

M-.0-

frliuulfic. kite.

2

2

f-7

&a

1-7

zn

X

Al

0,0

2/

$

P

?

4l

00

Sp

?

-J-

/2.f

.0>0

af

J-Psictekifial

o

at?

0.2

0.0

a

0.0

0,0

0.f>

0.

?

00

0.0

0.0

2,

2,

-0J1

if

f-f

S-IMmm

vt

</&

' ?f?-9

0-0

&?

Aft

a

f¥s

#9

00

nt

•T/

fJ

2?.£

<?,0

2M

/0

& dJ

*0

/</■?

9-Otho

£

L

?f

0.0

s-f

.43

2,

2?

{.0

0.<

i.z

//

/?

ft

S.7

#0

.*,?

/0

. /$.

M

MS

/</.f

Total

fo

_1Zj

ft 7

ft?

a./

m-

w.

ft

tf2>

m

2/7

m.

/S4

&

'?£-

tci

/f.3

/&>■

j£l

£.•?"

p

i</3

3Sf

0t>..

r46t.E /?&9 £^/n.0/ir/0/v &? all S/AAtr/A/zs tag. ,t&2.

/S^ JSGA/r/sSG.

"k£-<- /##/l/ty &£0e/f0s . n/i//L/j9# tss'se^pgies

!

£*<!&<. LtriA/T

6>G>0/>

Pat//3/~S£'i-

/&&<€

1

NonWr

Percent

Number

Percent

Numrjfl

PerOatl

Nuaber

P«Cai(

Evalualion

Certaio

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Ooubttul

Total

Certain

OoiMW

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

TotalNumrjfl

PerOatl

Nuaber

P«Cai(

Evalualion

Certaio

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Ooubttul

Total

Certain

OoiMW

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DnMl

Total

Certain

Doobttal

Total

id-Balloon

J

¥

7

/.£

ft

&2.

&

4S

*£

/M

&t

/&./

^

^

r^

Z0

is

M3

2S

(3

tf

&4_ £■?

/it

1 l*A*trtOM«ical

6,

0*

4

fZ/

00

(2(

£7

2S

H

fit

6f

Wf

72-

3f

f0f

JZA £.0

'?■*

fJ

Zf

n

SJ

S0.2* f£.0

b-AireoB

-6-\

¥

/0

/?./

??

M

*7

U

(23

a?

/(J

&<>

J£

?0>

tiff

f£j

/if- 7

3J.6 2C

'f

YS

ff.S

*.? /9.9

,3-Lirtil PheMM.

2,

a

&

#1

<w

¥1

</

/t

/.<?

t-7

a, r

//

f

&

ft.

ft

&

?

s

f.3

&0 i?

i«-BnA

<£j

0S

00

0-0

/

/

P

0.2

0.i

0?

s

f

£

0*

/■f>

/.£

2

/

r

flf

#y

f?

S-Cloudv Diisl. etc

/).0

#0

0.O

/

?

10

.J.P.

?.2

24

1.

2

/

0.J

fl?

rt.i

a

0.0

0.0

0-0

'o^fnsuffic Jnlv.

Z

t

#3

ftp

4*

/</

a

«/

f.</

0-0

$<?

1/

&

//

/2J

JL&A

/1..3

£2

p

*??,

2f.0

0.0

??0

7-Pt|rcholo|ical

.0.

00

flp

pt

Z

p

Z

j&£

0?

0<

ft

<f

tp

f.f

0,7

3.S

ft

f

7

£7

/></

?(

frtlntntn

/g

<?

tf

JM

00

fit

fe

fc

^a

ff.6

407

£1

67

//.7

$0

,f.7

3?

<?

ff

fi>,<f 0.0

fi-V

Mlliet

L

/

22.

00

?-t

If

4

(&

l£A

/■P

J*

ff

2*

(S

iJ.

flJ

J.f

&

P

00

a 9

0-9

Total

Jf

$

¥4

fit

tt:f

/(&

#7Z

/St

4(0

H.3

m

/0a.

ZZL

/tf

&£

bte

,r/-r

M.

Jit

jSX.

2&

UL

n f

/0O,

%

139

^^IJtyfgjgJB P ^ .^^ ^ffy^jwiMj

I

#■

^Z-f ^^

<?£/&/? 7/30

<?&/L/?jes

7?f

(?/?J££TS

Sj6//r£o

&// ¥£/?£$

<9/?jaer s/& h r//t/6 s

$i.<. </£;/>(

., i/f?? -

- /f4&

/?49

- 7?

4T0

l95/_

/9&4-

%(/Mfi££

&*tc*r

Mattel

%*(*£*,

KumsA

%tdfm

$k/Hg££

!a^fe£

4m3£&,

feefttof

t^m&A.

fkedtr

ikiU£C£:

fafor

&/'tirT.i. (ft 6<-(>tv"t6 h/tttre

5,7

23 5

22

2 4 3

2s-

/7.5

4/J

23./

44

30

27

2Z--3

3^6

23.7

AtT-rfii/i*

Jg9

'7-7

20

25.3

2?

20. J

34

/f.3

36

2/3

22

/$2

^J

/a^.fafor

&/'tirT.i. (ft 6<-(>tv"t6 h/tttre

5,7

23 5

22

2 4 3

2s-

/7.5

4/J

23./

44

30

27

2Z--3

3^6

23.7

AtT-rfii/i*

Jg9

'7-7

20

25.3

2?

20. J

34

/f.3

36

2/3

22

/$2

^J

/a^.

fsLtue A,0r Sr/irep

27'

/2?

s£A

23.S

2/

/4.7

//

-23LJL-

3/

/f-3

- 2Z

/3.Z.

. /60

J0J 1 -

/%**/,£ p£ GtOuj/ffi, &>*>»i!.£

r, 2f

..10.0,

. j*

3.S

t/2,

/4

2 t

5

f.0

/2

9.9

rfc

//■S

&tf .<?£: Gftfi/VG &*>

■ 79

.?/

j

.?,/

i

54

r9

/0.2-

/&

9.S-

6

5:0

t27

?JS

toeee/v a£ /Smt^tA/n G?££*/

/44

6.6

0.0

.ti-

U

2/

Ml-

£

-4Z-

. f.

S-.F

M

*4

li/^ur 6i.Of T^Ot-OK fi,e>r JCtoffut/

/si

&.?'

<4

5J

ro

f.0

/Z

../>■*

#

4.7

£~

*'/

//*

Z£

7EU.Gu, &£ (eiOU/JA* (* y£LLOfrt

is 9

7.Z

3

Xt

9

£..?

t2.

6.5

X

47-

7

£Tg

/2P

#.#

0Ct/£ (W &*.0M*tAfC St-t/£

93

4Z

Z

2.5

5

3. &

£-

-2Z

6.

3.6

r

<r.?

/,?.

4/.<?

iif>ix ft f?i0v/*iQ- &mc

57

2.i

4

*J

I

42,

5

2-7

5~

3.0

<s

3.3

33

2.2

Lit.nr (si-oM jNPir£jtMt#*re(ot.st

7

03

o

P.O..

2,

/■/

#0

,

0.0

__z_

at

*

/?3

l/,6i.er at 6idw/ii>& 4/,^er

■r

0.Z-

04?

o

0.0

00

/ ,

-j2-k—

/

af ■

S

02

Gt-Oi^,**, 0tf*</

5

0.1

Q_

0.0

00

. /

D.£-

/

0.0

at?

3

.ai

Turitc

Cl 9 9

100

79

/<?£>.

/</S

700.

/M

/00

/tf

/00.

w

/<pa

/£0/

/0P.

140

frfg/c

/?/*# fsmrrej ^/^. c a? /M j/r<?rs st&t/r/ra

.&.

y^/?*?s

*>£/.

s/&//rs/i/&s

'

d"

t/EJtS

/f<7f

/&*

/?49

7950

/fj5/ _

/f-0-2

ffiote'te.

A&£*!\

/i/t/Mjd

fofo

f/i/M/IEt feeHeM-

Alt/Me* &e&*r

fawlfi

Sf^2L Bfa4S£/L dt&fi*

Mffltu £*&*''

fa/H/r£ /}$ fy/./?p//>'6 L/ffirt

7?S

24Z

it

23.9

4f

12-

t4

21 &'

72

?3.3

33

2gg

4fd.

24.6.

Mfrd^i.,/?

3^/9

/7.Z

2S

20 S

36

/7t

60

/s.z.

67

26Z

26

/6,3

322

/3 2

(^Lo/e. A/i/r Srsfren

</*i.

/*£•

30

-2*J-

-3/

/s /

J>f

—13-

6'

'99

.30-

/si

2£0

/2-4

C2 t e4/i/£ r £ (?*Ci&i>//ir6 6h/*/*&.

' ft*

?3

i

3.1

3/

10. Z

24

.6/.

7

23

/7

/#6

223

//£>

/es #£ ^/Ad &4

2ss

7?

7

60-2*J-

-3/

/s /

J>f

—13-

6'

'99

.30-

/si

2£0

/2-4

C2 t e4/i/£ r £ (?*Ci&i>//ir6 6h/*/*&.

' ft*

?3

i

3.1

3/

10. Z

24

.6/.

7

23

/7

/#6

223

//£>

/es #£ ^/Ad &4

2ss

7?

7

60

/</

i,g

37

?-4

27

8 J

/0

4-3

/S3

7-2

(}£££*/ tin (li.au»A>£> (5-flrtf/f

22</

70

/

0.9

s<s'

fs

¥

/£.Z

/I

■4.2-

7

44

/24

U

//6/lT&iW i '&£>* A/}T /(A/MM

2/9

i.S

3

43

/*

/.s

/?

4.2

/5

V?

f?

^.0

/3i

f.9

Yzitot^ L>/t 6ia&/A/i* t/gt.i-01^

10S

t.f

8

4i

/&

... 3J?

23

3Z

/

2 f

7/

6-9

/43

72

$i(/£ &£ i?i£»^/,/*,L. A«f

f/S

4.0

4

34

f

3?

21

3:3

//

3./,

2

£~.0

93

4<L

&/t£ir &f 6i^i^'^o A't-fd*

if

2.1

4

?■*

7

£¥

S

2.0

&

20

&

373

34.

/?

(■&*? C 1 -^ h&?r£f*mvAr*- Q*.at

/3

0.f

. 00.

2

t.0

5'

/3

L>

0.0

/

. 0.i>_

Z

0-3

j/y^j.£r r}<L 6<-ou/,a>6. l/imar

$

0.3

0-0

0.O

00

3

/■0

/

0-&>

/

0.2,

fri-Out/ATC &##</

/

0.3

0.0

0.o

/

02

.. /.

0-3_

2-

/■3

4

02,

TbrAi.

no/

/0O.

.-"7

t00

205

t00.

393

!00.

306>

/4<?, .

tt?

/0^.

£4?

/00.

7~/?£li3 At./ /

fif/^if/

r£0-

/£2.<0/>3 0>/7 /9£j/?/>r3 S/6//r^/?

7?Y

Vs^/es .

0/V/T

s/&/7r//t><2> S

- y -

Ai 4t

'/f/ti

/947

/943

/9.

f 9

/2*0 . _

/3S-/

/f£t2.

ty,JM/t££

&t&«,r

§li/M4££

&&*t

NtJMtet.

fkefar

flLimzi.

fo&jjr

$,//<{££■*

&£&*,!

fywiite-

fee&M

/l/l/toitft feefiA)

h/S//T£ ,■>£ 6t,t?Lu/4G MttfC

&10

2.39

27

tft

2(,

/7.0

57

34.2'.

50

23.9

^3

24 /

¥'7

£4.2.

MEr/>t.t.,i

42Z.

/i.if.

22.

2237

30

tU

37

/5.7

40

/9. f

20-

/g-2

2t>#

/5.L

(?6t.e£. a-er £rar£0

313

/2-7

22,

22.7

23

/50

2C

40

42,

2A'

23

/£J

t?9

77.0

;3(?j<>*64 t>e 6iafi,<v& {fe/i/U6e

253

9/9

3

3/

/£>

/0.&

j£

76

£

2-?

/4

/0£

,96

/•./■

4k# 0£ ($LB,*iJlrr, tf£0

203

7.9

</

4/

9

<9

22

9-7

2/

/00.

7,

/•*

/40

f(:

Gesetr jxe <Si.0ui*<i /Zee^t

t75

A.9-

I

1-0

/3~

,9f

2£

(/.0

70

St

7

£./-

//&

2.7

i/At/t £lou/ < '0i0£ a,nr A&euA.

77S

7.0

¥

4-7

/0

45-

/3

559-7

2/

/00.

7,

/•*

/40

f(:

Gesetr jxe <Si.0ui*<i /Zee^t

t75

A.9-

I

1-0

/3~

,9f

2£

(/.0

70

St

7

£./-

//&

2.7

i/At/t £lou/ < '0i0£ a,nr A&euA.

77S

7.0

¥

4-7

/0

45-

/3

55

.//..

4J

4

5/

..4£f.

-7.7

Yrt.t0uj t?g Gi.0u?'fli6 j£<J-t?t"

'&S

7.2

7

f2

/p

6.0-

/L

43

4

*<r

%*

S.g

/3S

7JS

Ollre /if /i{.oa>jflf. 4 J <-V£

/2/

47

3

jt

£,

■rf

//

4.7

//

5.3

f

S.S

#2

4.1

3i.a<?r /jf tsi-Buj^aic £i-Ad*:

sf

2-3

■ /

*t

&

39

4

2-s

'&

2.9

4

-'2#

33

7-9

LibHT <Si.lfjJ /fi,MT£t»>A>A/E LOift.

,'0

0.4

0P

2,

> 
/.3

- 2,

0?

0.0

/

.0.7

£-

0.-t

!/i,->i. 'jrr ■ 0£ <Z*.z>u,/A'& l/;/>i,er

7

03

2

0.0

P

0.0

.

00

2,

t.O

/

3? 7

<7

07.2,

&lPw</i/(> 0>Pav

b

0.2

_ A.0. .

40

/

0-4

J

7?S

0.0

</

0.2

7.JT/H.

255 4

teX>-

?7

/00.

433

t20.

23t>

/00.

2of

/00__

-7?7

700.

-JJZ21-

/00

i&^j^

ii :

:aai.

£~i/#± is /tr/esi/ /?/=- Ai.L Sf 6fr?/4'6 -f &2£-jt£L V£~4/?S

JgJt-

* ?<?/. #es

/etrteier^j?

\

forjiS

'fCsil

~W/I/T£ c/f Quwinz \//tfir£-

frffTAiL/C Cot-cff A/or Sfrirfjp

X

•jmrjer 
"CeitVtn T DcubEh i T__ f ola 1

Number

Per Cwt

s Number

P* Cent

nmbci

PsCmt

Evaluation

Certain

Ooublful Total

Cerlain

Ocubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

; titan

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubt lul

ToUl

OiUin

0ouW(u1

Total

CwtJin

0»*rM

Total

O-Ballmn

Wo

_1&

64*

■7/

\_f,(p 14-0 77 £3

_ ZA 4 .+ 79 5?

//?

3-/

/•l

M-21

_^£^ r _

l-o

^

IT

1-AllionOflllcal

LSi

/<??

.aa =l£j

_<J

//

-LL

.32

J13.

a. s

JLk

4/

/S"

^2

I.?

«^^

1.1

Mlpcratt

J£±

Lii£

69 /34

JLA

^

4-a /*/

J&

^fe

JL2

*3

JX

47

^9

Jt£

/•3

tf.r

14

3-U|MPtl«noi«.

-3A

^4

■**

ro

ak /.r

3

L

//

jfij

-£1

A4

3

5"

r

Ad

C.4

-d£

ff

/

I

tf.O

d,/

0.1

4-Buto

11

10

39

At,

A3J A9,

6

r_J,

f

^.a

i.\

A3

3

L

4

JLL

<>.\

d.i

7

1

_i

A«

rl-/

0.3

S-Ctogiti. Dull etc.

-JX

n\ as

ft*

jb+ij-t

3

4.

7

j?j

JLL

_A3

3

£1

3

M

D-0

JLl

4

.^10

39

At,

A3J A9,

6

r_J,

f

^.a

i.\

A3

3

L

4

JLL

<>.\

d.i

7

1

_i

A«

rl-/

0.3

S-Ctogiti. Dull etc.

-JX

n\ as

ft*

jb+ij-t

3

4.

7

j?j

JLL

_A3

3

£1

3

M

D-0

JLl

4

.^

_^I

A,0

a.\

frliuarT'C. Wb.

—AJ&t

7-3

^ .ffj^.3

4T?

<?

$*

-^1

\J^L

/7

rf

A

St 1.1 0.6

JU

7fr

7f 3.4 i?.^

4,4

7-P*>cnolOfical

^M

^ML

4?

M

0.3 ;.*

H

^JL

II

Al

6.0 A3

9

. .P

9

AH

64

63

?

b

«"

_M

fl,D

fi.3

1-lMlMMI

JUI

*n

■V-*

A^a'-*"

m

<L

177

s$

-Adl

s.s

M*5

C -M

3*

fi,£>

33-

//3

//3

3.5 AO

3,*

MHJw

pTi

zi"

/47

).*

yj +.4

n

&

W

MA

\j.o

w

^

^J2.

■?■*

0%

CO

JZ1

fa

&\

4?

7-3

0.0

A3

Tom

13^

?ol

3W/

V-1

nvm..

*wl

431

V s

fru

1*

:H.a 4/r

i?l

W)

\h.\

41

}1.Z

3(8

&z

lit

jm:

3.1

l%.b

1

£/f/*W^V>P HAWASS C'KMSf

/?£<? £/? £uw*$- FfP

£/&£■# &! Gmm/V6 &/?£-£#

Li&Hr GijWj Cm/I /Y/r/fvoitsA/

r

HumW

Per Cent

Nlimbei

Pei Cent

Nuutti

PetCent ■

Nunber

PeiCnt

Evalujljon

Certain

Ooabttol

Total

Certain

Ooubttul] Total

Ceriain

Ooublrul

Total

Certain

Doibtlul

Total

Certain

Doobthil

Total

Certain

Ooubttul

Total

Cotaifi

Doubthi

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-BHIoon

/ff

z?

_iU

d.3

M

It.

/'

2£

d.e

03

AI

-J}

2

o\

AO

61

is

/4

*?

6-S

**\

6.H

1'Aitnwinical

■M

?/

Tf*

-M

l-t>

U

^t

*1

?*

JL&

/ff

£1

??

/*7

_£2^ ■»•/

W

4?

Ik

r>f

JA

c/

2.6

b-Ancutt

33

?/

6t

1-0

\.o

30

_24.

It

44

-4%

nh

M

13

7

/r*

O.J

fij

OJ 2L

n

.f^

/jr

A.%

It

;3-Liilil Pluno*.

<*

/0

0.1

0.0

0.3

_JL

a

3

lu\

o\

A.*

SO

«

2

^2

00

6.1

4

4

y

64

6.1

6-3

:«-Birds

^

/

3

0.1

a.)

04

_1L

tf

fi.a

60

6.9

_^j

«

.ASh

1.0

fiC

/

/

OJ>

41

0.1

,'S-CJoodi, Dust, (It

^^£

£

ft

0-D

d.6

6.Q

JL

l

1

.41

01

H

_fi

V

e>

.41

e.o

_M

a

/

3

-&L

A/

0J

6-lnsuffic. Inlo.

'4-^

10

.M

oj

d.b

-±X

o

n

Jl£

0.0

6$

-^

o

/a

-^

(10

A*

=^

IS

_a&

6'ff

AT

; J-PtjreJttloiicJl

f £>.41

01

H

_fi

V

e>

.41

e.o

_M

a

/

3

-&L

A/

0J

6-lnsuffic. Inlo.

'4-^

10

.M

oj

d.b

-±X

o

n

Jl£

0.0

6$

-^

o

/a

-^

(10

A*

=^

IS

_a&

6'ff

AT

; J-PtjreJttloiicJl

f £>

7

A3j (?.tf

t>-l

^Jl

3

Ul

6.0

f>-t

Q

a

-^?

04

6.0

/

e

/

JLL

AJ>

6.1

[l-UnJinOMi

^4—^

41

3./ AO

*.f

-&\

:

#•/

r-Lk

6-0

u

30

Q

30

_£SJ

0*

0-1

3/

3/

JiO

6.0

1.6

iMBei

Z2SZj^

/*

6.L

s.&

6-b

Mi

/^

uS.

Q.Q

64

_±

O

4

-A/

M

M.

^

J

J&

60

0.Z

Total

za<f

74J

a?rl

\tt

.13.

M

vm

to

2&

lM.

M%

7.?

IS

to*

234

"sJl

34

%'

\sj

n

Jill

A3.

l.t

t-T

•

1 —

yit-U^ itt Qi.ifV/i

«T Yfii-etv

&j-i/£~ aff £&wa/4

&.</£■

&L*C/( 0tf GtewxS &J-ACK

Lt£HT Guni, 3MP£ J 7"£#MMilT'*C<il.t'tr

\~

Numbet

PetCent

Number

PerCenl

Nunber

PerCenl

Number

Percent

, EvaiualroA

Cert*"

OMibrfc'l

Tota!

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoiittuJ

Total

Certain

_0»Uha,

Tola)

Certain

J(o*ful

Total

Cntairij

JtauWIul

Tola]

Certain

Doutilfu 1

Total

Certain

DmbHul

Total

jO-Balloon

Jl

1

37

Ai

63

61

^

/

If

Ai

tit

6-3

s

7

fi

-M,

0.1

64

/

6

/

4/

04

A/

tl-Astmnomttal

JR.

a/

AO

/il

-A3

1-1

^£

A*

73

jl

fit

7.1

_L_

a

3

A/1

Q-l

Aa

-Jl

S

s

0.0

A4

A^

?Anciat1

-JL

JH, 
3.

^2.

6.S 
a a

JJ 
S3

/t7

yp

Ho

lh

93

fit

JA.

?r

SO

-*^1

6.1

6b

3

t

4

.Ml

<J/

A 2

3-t.ig»t ftwioai.

_Jj

f

~&A

0.O

o.t

^

(7

a

_^fil

6.0

6.0

1

1

2

0.1

_A3. 
CO

!«-Birti

1

. 2.

3

^di

£>.t

0A

£>

D

D.0

6.0

A*

—^

/

t

-Ml

6.1

0-1

6

<>

0.0

1

b-Clowls. Ouil. etc.

6

- -1

/

1A

61

a.i

JL,

3

?

t.t

A.

*>./

-JL

3

3

-M

OJ

A/

O

r>

iJD

ifrlnjuttie. hh.

Ii

^

/^

6.5

0-0 OS

-*\

4

<U

6.0

/u

JL

6

1$

-6X

O.o

63

D

o

6J>

A* 1

r0-«

?-Psytrw logical

1

^

Z

6.1

r M>

fit

-Z,

(?

2.

M,

f>0

A/

4

4

SJJ

6-0

fi,{

o

64

r1.^

AO

B-Unkncx)

V>

. ."2.

43

A3 
A3

r AA

/3

Jli

o

34

t.l

0.6

/-/

_J2,

D

/ar0-«

?-Psytrw logical

1

^

Z

6.1

r M>

fit

-Z,

(?

2.

M,

f>0

A/

4

4

SJJ

6-0

fi,{

o

64

r1.^

AO

B-Unkncx)

V>

. ."2.

43

A3 
A3

r AA

/3

Jli

o

34

t.l

0.6

/-/

_J2,

D

/a

J&

6J>

M

_JL

o

/

-JJ-

^.r?

a.\

WlUltr

£

ci r

6.6

A3

n.

n

•z.

J±

/>■/)

6-1

1

D

z

ju\

6.0

A/

A

o

£»

_AJ2

(?.i?

60

T - -

torn

Hi

*nlitt

4-7

.JblA*

m

37

/4^

J3.

/.I

tf

Mi

2\

*7

JA

M

A;

&

-P

13

_^3

a.i

A4

\/m£r off C^ojswg V/ci-gT

£i-OVV//V£ £/?*4y

Minbn

Per Cent

Kunber

Per Cent

Number

Pet Cent

Nuaibei

Per Cent

Evaluation

5^3

Doubtful

Total

Certain

^oubllul; Total

Certain

Doubltul

Total

Certain | Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ceit»n

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

_J?

_J-

/

6o

^■IAJ>

/

6

/

All 64

6.\

I-Aslronomical

I

a

Ai

<?.Oj 61

-A

/

1

A A 6.1

0.1

2-Aiiciafl

J

_J_

4

J.L

6.1^ jo.

X\

I

All a.o

a-i

3-Lijht Phenon,

r>

JA

6.0 6.0

a

/

1

o.d a.i

6.1

t-Birds

a-Cloutts. Dust. He.

i

i

I

O-o

0.0] i.t>

-JL

6

• A 6-0

h-o

f>

6.0

4.0. 6,0

*

Ad fi.0

A.0

(■hairlfic kt>-

&

o

J)&

fij)

6o

' oA <?J)

w

r-PtrdBlotjal

o

B.L

fi.b

-JX

t>

&

AA 6.0

6.0

H**no«n

i

fit

0* tJ

V

4

■All 6.0

6.\

MOW

_fi.

4-2

o.t>

At

-JL

Ad 6.1

6.0

■

■

Tout

J

3

t

6*

0.V

L Al

%

1M-JLL

C3

i I

141

f/teie

77647

£fA*-i//?r/{?A/

0/:

07^/T

j>

/astr/M

s- /^a*" ^^^ y&sf/fs *?v

€0£0<es /e^ra^r*:/} .. _

Thr*.

c_

W^/rfc* &j>tr/#6 \fosrz~

Mjtaj-^/c

Z'aittf Mr SrAr£~&

Embalm

dumber

P*r Cent

Nunbei

PerCenl

Numbw

Ph Ctnt

Nunbei

P« Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Tutal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tow

Certain

Doubtful

Totn

:ertain

iDaubtrul

Total

Certjm

OouMlul

ToW

CtfUin

Daibtlul

Totll

Certain

Douotlul

Tola

IV Balloon

221

/r/

57f

?.?

SI

m

^IL

fP

///

2* A/

4S

/i -

Jtf

^7

-ZJ"

/.J

3g

xi\

2/

*f

i.l

0.1

fit

l-Astrmoaia!

393

j?«

*3?CtfUin

Daibtlul

Totll

Certain

Douotlul

Tola

IV Balloon

221

/r/

57f

?.?

SI

m

^IL

fP

///

2* A/

4S

/i -

Jtf

^7

-ZJ"

/.J

3g

xi\

2/

*f

i.l

0.1

fit

l-Astrmoaia!

393

j?«

*3?

ff.O

7 o.o

2S.0

13

07

706

i.(>

2.6

0.2

r

7

/7

^3

0.<h

0.7

-23

U

3?

Of

0.6

IS

I-AilCMlt

ZfZ.

^jj"

?X7

ft.V

1.2-

Mi

J£l

f?

A?7

Jd_

2,1

U>0

r*

#

/#2

3.?

Z.I

SS

32

/£

Ut

1.3

0.6

1.1

3-Li|M Phenon.

32-

^/

K?

</.3

0.1

z.l

3

r

//

JL

' S3

*¥

j-

^

7

i.l

O.X 0.3

'

/

1

0.0

0.1 0.1

I-Binb

/J

A?

*?

Ma

0.4

0.7

4

2

/

02

0.1

03

_x

/

^

OJ

0,1

0-2

#

/

r

0.2

0.1

03

S-Clouds. Outt. etc

3

7

70

0.1

0.3

e>.V

7

?

f

0,1

0.1

0.2

/

^

/

0.1

0.0

O.i

t

£>

/

0.1

0.0

0,i

frluuffic. Mb,

t"

<?

2(1

MX

0.0

7A.X

s-ti

^

-M

6.9

Z.I

.4££.

^

^

liil

_M\

u

?0

t?

70

2.7

AO

Z?

7-PtrdBlofial

34

7

4S~

l-f

oq

t.f

%

J-

/<?

O.J

0,1

O-if

r

/

7

0.3

O.I

Q.V-

6

o

/

0.2

0.0

0.2

H**»nii

it? 2

<?

Mf?

J?5

0.0

it.S

/ff

/i/

s.t

0.0

57/

JrV

<j?

rv

3.3

O.fi

3.3

7/

7/

J±

P.0

Zt

9-OBltr

J2_

2<Z

!Z0

3.i

).t

47

f?

/

J?/?

0.7

O.I

at

/r

£

-?/

06

p. y- at

21

£

?S

f.l

0.2.

i.)

Total |/f/7

7/7

Urt

77.?

m

700. UZ3

/f?

•/<!?

tH

Z3-Z3.?

^/J-

/07

402

J2J

&.Z

MS

2Jt.

6/

J2T

/0.3

U

!%7

OfiUMtr Jff b^K>A/£ {2?A#£ IT

.. /f^> 0/?£ltrt//A>/}. /?£■£,

TpfZFiA' a/? Of^M/ASS 0/?F£/V

L/$A>r £fen/ } f?££offA/&r/jt/6WM

Cnlgilion

NimbH

PhChiI

Nuit«

Per Cent

Nqrter

P«C«il

Nmber

Pel Cent

Certain

Owbttul

Total

Crrtain

DouoHu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfut

ToM

certain

DoubHul

Total

Certain

Oouttful

Total

Certain

Doutitfi

Total

Certain

DoubHul

Total

0-BHIooii

/6

70

H

u

M

/J

/3

/0

23

0.5-

O.U

O.f

.?

3

~o7

CO

Q.f

74

/S

24

OS

O.tf

A?

l-Aib«nuical

Jt£-

2?

0€

u

/.'

2.7

SS

21

?/

2.t

0.1

It

32-

?o

/JZ2

2.0

2J

M7

37

9

#0

l#

O.U

f.f/J

/3

/0

23

0.5-

O.U

O.f

.?

3

~o7

CO

Q.f

74

/S

24

OS

O.tf

A?

l-Aib«nuical

Jt£-

2?

0€

u

/.'

2.7

SS

21

?/

2.t

0.1

It

32-

?o

/JZ2

2.0

2J

M7

37

9

#0

l#

O.U

f.f

7-*ircrift

22

26

4f

AL

10

/.?

23

7?

40

Jl

0,7

/.£

7

1

/7

0.3

O.U

0.7

J./

as

U0

o.f

1,0

i.T

3-Ll|M PIibm*.

70

V

7$

0.4

OV

A 9

7

2

J

0,1

CI

0.2

2-

■

2.

01

0.0

O.I

U

2

OJ-

OJ

0.3

VBirdt

2

/

7

01

0.1

O.X

0>

O

0?

0.Q

0,0

00

&

0.0

0.0

0J>

J

I

0-6

0,1

0.7

floods, Omt. etc.

0.0

0-l>

0.0

7

7

0.0

0.f

O.f

00

00

OJ

a

/

!

0.0

01

07

frliuuNic Into.

/f

7f

0.7

0.0-

0.7

11.

7?

0,7

oo

07

-Jl

o

1

att-

0.0

0-4

^JL

0>

20

0.?

0£

0-1

FPsyctuloiiol

r

J

f

0.2\

01

0.1

S

S

0.1

o.o

0,f

0>

QO

0,0

OO

o>

/

7

0.0

0.1

OJ

MjiUaMm

ss

ro-

2.2

0.0

Z-2

35~

$sr

JJL

0.0

M

ff

/?

0.7

0.0

0.7

J.U

OW

0.9

0.0

0.9

Mthtt

_ 7.

r

ll

0.4-

0.3

0.7

_z_

2

?

0-3

0!

04

.?

/

f

'0.1

0/

01

5"

r

01-

0.0

0,?.

•

Tata

7?7

76

z&

~Z?

3.0

%i

/so

SJ

243

11

X.i

7-9

fr

ft

77S

3.7

3.1

6?

£1.

iff 77?

S.l

I't

1.0

Yfutiv />/? £?£.

<>&,&& 7£LU>IV

£*;//& afi & aiv/aiA ^£t/£^

/?zAf# a/? £z#iV/Af£ JZ.jt/ir

/y^^/^W/TM^ff- &a»

Evaluation

Nunbef

PwCenl

Numbet

PerCenl

Number -

PerCenl

Number

Pel Cent

Certain

Doubttul! Tola!

Certain

Ootibtlul

Total

Certain

Oouotful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubHul

Tom

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Oouuttu

Total

Certain

Drabtful

Total

O-BalltKKi

n

9

20

07

0.4

//

-JL

/

^T

0.2

0.7

43

r

?

72-

02

03

OS

7

0>

/

01

0,0

0.7

l-A&tnmofliical

3*

;7

S7

1.3

f.7

Z0

774

/£

&

7.7

■00

JL1

7

<0

7

0.7

0.0

0.}

2

0L

0.0

01

0.7

7-Aircrart

J*2_

/£

3f

O.f

0.1,

/S

/£>

7

Yf

0,11

0.0-

OS

72-

7

/?

OS

0.3

04

-J.

/

f7

OJ

0,1

0.2

JLijht Pitevii.

7

2-

f

0.3

0.1

M

/

0>

/

0.1

00

0.1

0)

0,0

0.0

0.0

7

/

2-

01/£

3f

O.f

0.1,

/S

/£>

7

Yf

0,11

0.0-

OS

72-

7

/?

OS

0.3

04

-J.

/

f7

OJ

0,1

0.2

JLijht Pitevii.

7

2-

f

0.3

0.1

M

/

0>

/

0.1

00

0.1

0)

0,0

0.0

0.0

7

/

2-

01

0.1

62

a- Birds

(0

2-

2

0.0

■ 0.1

0.1

O

0>

o.o

o.o

0.0

7

7

^M.

a/

0.1

0>

ao

0.0

0.0

5-Clouitt. Oust, etc

7

7

-MA

0J

ffj

&

0>

0.0

00

0.6

_£_

7

7

O.O

at

0-7

0.0

o.o

0-6

0-lnstiHic. Mo.

JS.

/S

a.(,

0.0

0.i

.£.

J

0.1

00

0,1

70

7#

0,4

0.0

0.4

<0.

6.0

0.0

0.0

*?.Pjvcnolonc»l

■2

2-

0-7

0.0

0/

7

I

JZ-

0.1

07

0.1

3

7

¥-

0.7

p./

O.X

07

0.0

0.0

tXQ

B- unburn

U

^

06

a

0.0

7.4

2?

0>

0-7

1,1

0.0

f.)

9

0"

7

At

CO

00-

-jL

7

O.I

0-0

A!

W)««r

3

2

OJ

0J

0.X

2

2-

0.1

o.o

0.1

2-

01

0.0

0.7

04

0>

0>

00

0.0

0.6

Tola)

UO

4-T,

/fs

£3

i.9.

7.2

\M_

2?

72./

S7_

i.l

47

40

/?

Sf

7.0

07

2-3

<L

70

02

0.2

0.4

Y/at-er /:■*? b^ turns k/tttrr

0?/-4&/j/s &sAy

Evaluation

Mmb«

Per Cml

Number

Pel Coil

Nurcbei

Per Coil

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Doobtkl

Tolal

Certain

Doubthi

Tolal

Certain

Doublhl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:ertan

DoubHul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

iD> Balloon

/

/

0.0

0.1

6.1

/

/

OJ

00

0.1

I-Ajtronomiol

7

0}

/

01

00 Oil

0?

7

7

0.0

OJ

OJ

'2-Anciaft

02-

7

J

0.1

01

6.2

7

7

OJ

o.o

o.f

3-LitM PficMn. .

o

0-0

0.0

0.0

0T>

7

7

0-0

01

OJ

4-BiroJ 
5-Clniils, DM. etc

<?

7

r

0.0

0.1

0.1

0<

(7

0>

0-0

O.o

0.6

0.6

0.0

OO

0>

0>

00

00

0.0

t-lniuNic.. Wo.

P

00

0.0

oc

0>

0?

07

0-0

0.0

0.0

7-Piycholop<H

O

00

0O\

0.0

-j2-

07

0.0

0,0

0$

■VjJnknoMi

L

o

7

0,7

0.0

0/

^Z.

0.

<0-

OJ

0.0

0.1

*0tJw

0'

0.0

00

0.0

07

£

0.0

0.0

0.0

Total

JhA

3

7

O.z

0f

03

JL

?~

07

M,

0.7

0.2

142

rs)4/.e /?**.$- ^i//}t/j*r/JA/ &r <?£J£CT sy<i//r//i/G r

ra<. .

s9ij- y£TA<es

&</0.1

*0tJw

0'

0.0

00

0.0

07

£

0.0

0.0

0.0

Total

JhA

3

7

O.z

0f

03

JL

?~

07

M,

0.7

0.2

142

rs)4/.e /?**.$- ^i//}t/j*r/JA/ &r <?£J£CT sy<i//r//i/G r

ra<. .

s9ij- y£TA<es

&</

.. /•/2^&j>s S/rStPsertr^

\

72>72

^ ..... ...

W#/TF 0/?£m>MA/£ W/f/T£

Mftauj/1

£ ou>/? wr, 'sTATrP

\

Numb*

PerCffl

Huntm

P« Call

rlunbei

PnCoit

Mmrtm

PhCmI

OUnhon

CtfUin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OgebMil

lJoW-

:ertain

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

DNOtftll

Total

*tda*

Doubtful

Tttlt

Cntiin

OiwMfit

TotX

CBttoj

OoiMbl

Total

Certaiij

DMStfill

Total

0- Silicon

U7

7te

37f

J?4

0.0

tm

S*

2/J~

707

2.S

2,0

*r

^L

7-1

1(7

JS

1.3

It

JUt

76

ii-0

/J

t>.7

/.9

l-ajtmaial

2.?V

.W.S-

^7?

t2.S

9.S Zf.f

66

sr

t*t

M.

U

r.6

7

f

/$■

t3

0,lf

0,7

//

-2-

2-£>

OS

M

0-f

2-Aiicult

2t5

,20 f «-74<

a/

TS

V.6

*v

H

rr\

/.?

2.0

Id

M2

S~?

/17

3.9

24

6.3

J2f

/£

V?

A3

0-7

2.0

J-Li(H Phana.

30

/«-

**'

IdL

at

2-2

_A-

?

/O

iv~

o.z

M-

3

4

7

w

o.z

O.J

P

OJ>

ao

ao

••Bird]

/2

/*>

22

as

OS

70

-JL

2-

T^

&l

0.3

3

>

f

0J

G-t

0.2

zn

/

J-

0.1

0.1

6.3

S-Clowts. Doit. etc.

J

7

/<?

o.i

0.3

0.1/

~jL

3

4

OIL

At

0.2.

/

/

'0J

0.0

OJ

/

/

0.1

o.&

0-1

frlettflic. tola.

2M0

^0

/$.?

6.0

70S

at

ft

2.7.

o.O

22

3V

jr

1.7

ao

17

6?-

£>

^z.

1,1

0.7>

M

7-Pjrc*ak)(ical

3f

f

^

1,6

0.U-

2.0

z

2

70>

M

O.I

OS

&

/

7

A»

0.1

ts

£

<?

<r

0.3

0.0

0.3

t-amwin

?J#

&

^Jf

111

^M

'%7

J/X

f/2

J.I

0.0

£J

76

o

76-

3.5

60

35

62-

#

S2L

M.

p.o

2.S

9-01W

ST

-ZJL

00f

Jd.

IJ

r.ff

/£

/

'7

0.7

o,\

OS

/£.

4-

/f

U

0-2

o.$

26

S~

V

u

02.

J.<i

TO*

>-r*r

\£^A

-z/^

72.1

Bis

/00,

350

762

&?

~%T

7.U-

2X5 21/

n

3tf

m

4W

17,7 £Z4

V7 2-7J

W.1

2,1

12.3

£££&££- j.->Jl£MW/0t£Cm#££.

&£> £># tjUiVMA /?£■£?

/?ff£FA/ 0ff £jU»V/#4 £pE?A

L&itr £&>*(. £nt6f? •jterJ&mM

EyalmtaA

CSiin"

^l"0«2X5 21/

n

3tf

m

4W

17,7 £Z4

V7 2-7J

W.1

2,1

12.3

£££&££- j.->Jl£MW/0t£Cm#££.

&£> £># tjUiVMA /?£■£?

/?ff£FA/ 0ff £jU»V/#4 £pE?A

L&itr £&>*(. £nt6f? •jterJ&mM

EyalmtaA

CSiin"

^l"0«

PbCoiI

Number

Pa Coil

Nraia

Per Cad

Hoabo J .

Pa Cent

Dwbnuir Total

C«1ai»

DoiitNul! Total

Certain

OruUtuI

Total

Certain

Daibtfut

Total

;trtain

Doobtlul

Total

Certain

OouWM

Total

Certain

DonbHu

Total

Certain

DouUM

TeW

0-eal>ni

/r

L/£_

2f

0.7

OS

12

JX.

7

22

AS

&tt

/.t>

3

O

$

OJ

O.0

M.

M

^

2L2.

04

00

ID

MstranoiBical

30

25

ST

/,*

I.I

2S

2S

7*

S+

JZ

0.7

Z1

U3\

rs f?

M\

ZS

AS

2S

f

34-

/.I

fi.if

If

2-Airenft

12-

22-\ ft

OS

1,0

J.f

A2-

/4-

JZ

1,0

O.i

74

?

7

/*

0.3

0.3

u

JL

?2

yo

o.f

hO

IS

3-Li(M PktnM.

;o

A 70

(.5

0.6

OS

/

7-

2 
->

OJ

c-l

02

2-

a

AL

O.0

OJ

if-

J2

£

02.

07

ft- 3

4-Bi(*

/

' \ 2,

a

7./

0.2

jO\

0?

0>

_m

0.0

OO

0>

-M\

0J>

17.0

__o\

7

r

00 \

OJ

OJ

tCloaiU, OBlrtt.

t\e> \&

0.0

7.0

OJ

0>

/

7

D.o

OJ

O.l

P

o>

JA

0.0

00

7

7

J2JL

OJ

OJ

C-lnartnc. Ufa.

/7 <?\/7

~m

Ao

0.1

M-

7%

0,9

ao

03

?

f

o.v

o.p

M2./

-v

1.0

OJ

1.0

7-PqrdMtfical

4-

3

7

&£

^7

0.3

3

0>

3

6.1

0.0

OJ

O

M.

0.0

m

7

/

0.0

OJ

0J

tUnlnoM

J±l

&

■#?

2.7-

P.0

2.2

33<-

. a

33

JJL

0.0

AS

{*

74-

0.6

0.0

0.6

2.1

^/

t,P

0.0

l.o

HMM

-1-

7

/6

O.U

03\

0.7

7

J2-

f

fiZ

OJ

M

3

J

f-

M.

0.1

0.2

f

o>

s~

07-

O.O

0-2

■

i

Total

H2-

ft

7-2}

7.8

3,f \/0.{

/SS~

tut

If

6.1

2.0

?./

?/

S3

77ty

3-7

2.1

t,s

70%

M?

/S2

M

2.0

£f

•

! ~ - ■

fe£U>p &J?£l-pWM£ Ytncuw

/3{0£'. *f £lJ>WAV£ Jf2.0£r .

&ZA0/( 0/?£zji?/#f/%UI04' 7j0#T £jJW.lJi/M70fi&JJVJ7r£Qia,

Evalulm

Knber

Po.CM

Nuaber

Per Coal

Nuober

Pa Cent

lumber

PerCnt

Certain J rjoubtjal

Total

Certsii

Doibtkl

Total

Certain

Doabthl

Total

CertaiB

DnMnrl

Total

Certain

Doobtful

Total

CertainPo.CM

Nuaber

Per Coal

Nuober

Pa Cent

lumber

PerCnt

Certain J rjoubtjal

Total

Certsii

Doibtkl

Total

Certain

Doabthl

Total

CertaiB

DnMnrl

Total

Certain

Doobtful

Total

Certain

Bo*thi

Total

Certain

Doobtfc

Total

Certfs

Ooirirjil

Total

»■ Balloon

//

•z

2-P

0.7

M

/.'

3

/

77

A/

OJ

0.2

-^

/

72L

0.2

03

AS

/

0>

/

U

00

0./

1-AftronoaMcal

24

/q-

3*

jJ.

06

77

21

/o

3Z

1.3

OS

7,f

_J_

77

7

0,1

00

OJ

02

0.0

0.0

0.0

?-*utiirt

22-

/f

36

7.0

0.7,

l,(>

<Z

9

77

0.4

0.4

04

IJ2

7

t

0.S

0.3

OS

2-

/

3

OJ

OJ

0-2

,3*Lj|*i Pnmom.

r

/

6

O.Z

&/

0-7

' 7

0>

7

OJ

0j

OJ

07

0>

01

00

0.0

00

-A

/

,2-

OJ

0.1

$-7

!*.Binh

0>

^

JL

O.0

0.1

O.f

O.O

00

00

O

/

f

J£_

o.f

oj-

72

0.0

0.0

OC

Is-Clowls. Ouil etc.

/

/

J&

OJ

OJ

0.0

(>£

0.0

72

7

7

0,0

0-1

QJ

p\

o>

00

0,0

0.0

jfrlnairTic tiro.

ML\

2>

'-T*

M.

0.0

OS

J

o>

3

0/

00

Of

70

70

OS

00

£S

0>

_M.

00

0.0

7-Psircholotlal

2-

0?

Z-

OJ

0.0

of

_/.

/

3-

JJ

0/

O.T-

3

/

+

a)

0.7

02

tO

72

e.O

0.0

0.0

i-iwkjww

17

0?

37

hU-

0.0

/,#

26

27-

1.2

0.t

7.2

7

0>

7

0-3

00

7.3

_M

O

7

OJ

(20

f>7

^Othei

3

2-

S~

Of

OJ

0.2-

2

p

7

O.I

0.6

0.1

O

2

X

M

OJ

07

_M\

0>

0.0

0.0

0.0

Total

7J2-

#3.

7Sf

S.3

hi

7.2.

22*

21

93

3.3

1.0

#.?-

3?

7?

$7

1.7

0-9

1.6

~T

**■

7

02-

fll

d.3

i

¥/0£irr 0>/r (skews/} l/zet-er

(iJ.0W/{& @A'Ay

■

rtMbcf

PaCnt

(barter

PerCcnt

rfcimtM

Percent

rtaoer

Percent

' Evaliatni

Certain

Doobtlul

Total

Certain

D01MA1I

Total

;eruin

DoubtM

Total

Certain

Doobthd

Total

:ertain

Dwkjttui

Total

Certain

DmitWil

Total

Certain

Daibthl

Total

Cabin

Ooubthl

Total

0-SjIIom

0>

02

00

0.0

0.0

/

/

Oi

00

0./

, l-Astionowcal

_L

O

7

OJ

00

0.1

7

/

0.0

A/

0-7

2-Aircratt

_J_

7

<£

of

OJ

02

-Jl

£7

/

OJ

0.0

OJ

J-LilW FlwnoaL

0.0

0.0

00

/

/

0.002

00

0.0

0.0

/

/

Oi

00

0./

, l-Astionowcal

_L

O

7

OJ

00

0.1

7

/

0.0

A/

0-7

2-Aircratt

_J_

7

<£

of

OJ

02

-Jl

£7

/

OJ

0.0

OJ

J-LilW FlwnoaL

0.0

0.0

00

/

/

0.0

OJ

0.f

4-Birits

7

7

M.

At

OJ

0?

0>

0.0

0.0

00

5-Cloodi, Dul. etc.

_£

00

M

0.0

0?

DJL

0.0

0.0

frmwRic. Mo.

tx

O

0>

w

mo

0.0

7/

0.0

do

0.0

f-PsytMefjGil

iJL

£7

0>

0.0

0.0

CO

7?

0.0

$0

0.0

1-lMuma

J

0>

/

0-1

ao

OJ

__/.

/

OJ

0.0

#■*

*C*m

c-

07

0.0

0.0

ap

<?

£>

0-0

0.0

0.0

*

Total

3

X

7~

~0J

OJ

0,2

3

<£

S~

0.7

0/

02-

-

143

7/}*tt.£~

<?f.6

S*:4/.£//fi

70 A>

__*&"

/9U

J*/«

^tfr?

_ jic

V'tfdjfJi tfv

. , .... . /l/t/*tg£A

<ptfj£ers t>eM

s/6//r//y<£ .

<?&£ <iP/?J£^7 _ ...

da. Vs.tjes

/ivy

/?¥■$

'etCwt

/?^?

E«*uahon

footer

PH Cttt

nnbcl

Per Ceil

Number

Certain

9.o

chSTiT

Nunbei

PaCwt

C«taii

OmiMuI

Total

Cemrt

Doubtful

Tom

Certain

Douttti

Tot*

Certain

Dountful

Total

:«1«n

Doteitui

Toll) , 
3<f-

OouHfsl

ToW

DoubtM

Total

Coain

DwHM

ToW

: »■ Billow

^.S

/t-7

375

TS

i.f

/$.(,

r

o

•S

7.0

o.c

7.0

/S

Vi?

//<*-

^e4 /¥-

5"

^

¥.3

/■S

s-t

i l-Aitorswcal

* *6

3//

7W

/?./

/2.9

3/.o

Z9

£

3S

?o$

t.f-

*T.Z

.3iL

njy-

C$

zc.3

X0.3

«ai

<ff

SZ$

i=tz

-3X

3<f.<f-

S7.(

Mirciafl

,227

/97

<C2¥

f.t-

FZ

/?■*■

£>

X

X

O.O

zB

?$

JL

S,

' +

s.f-

_ M,

**

-?*■

/£

VO

If,

3.7

/f.3

Hie»t Plum*.

/9

1/

30

0.8

a.r

A3

2

o

e

e.t

O.O

Z.t

/

/

Z

0(,

Ok.

/■Z

<?

O

o

ao

a.o

&o

«-Bu*

/

l

Z

6.1

O.I

o.Z

o

e

0.0

CO

o.o

/

1

Z

e>.$,

6.<o

^

<s

o

a

a.o

0.0

O.O

S-Clovrji, Dial, tit

?

IZ

Zt

Of

OS

0.9

o

o

O.O

o.o

o.o

o

O.O

a.o

O.O

o

o

o

o.o

O.O

o.o

friwoltic. **.

Z/f

o

ZsS-

s?

oo

t.f

s-

5"

2^

o.o

7.0

/<L

o

/6

?.<k

o.o

?■&

zz.

a

z ?.

6.S

0.O

fe.f

;-PndBV)fat

Sf

o

3<£

/■+

O.O

/■¥

z

o

Z.

s.g

o.o

e.t

o

0.

o

a.o

o.o

o.o

f

O

/o

ZsS-

s?

oo

t.f

s-

5"

2^

o.o

7.0

/<L

o

/6

?.<k

o.o

?■&

zz.

a

z ?.

6.S

0.O

fe.f

;-PndBV)fat

Sf

o

3<£

/■+

O.O

/■¥

z

o

Z.

s.g

o.o

e.t

o

0.

o

a.o

o.o

o.o

f

O

/

0.3

O.O

3

i-IMueM

<t£3

o

?£3

/9.Z

<So

/9.Z

/Z

o

JM_

/£&

o.o

/(..f

Z3

o

*3

f?.X

d>.o

m.

to

Y-o

t£3

a.o

/i.3

MM

9?

o

99

f.f

oo

f<

V

S

/t.J

o.o

H.3

3

o

g

W

o.o

r <£i

/o

/o

-ZL

a.o

3./

Total

/73/

6 79

ZffiC

7t.B

zt.z

/oo.

<-3

8

7/

tg.l

//.3

/CO.

m.

~Zo\

til

W

ss:?

/<*}.

ft?

/<ts

3e?-

SSTS

*t.7

too.

/9S~0

/9S-/

yfs-e

ETatuation

Nunbct

Per Coil

Nunoer

PerCoit

Ninon

Per Coil

Mnbs

PeiCeat

Certxn

OoubMu

Total

C«U«a

Doublhi

Total

Certain

Omtltul

Total

Certan

OouMM

Total

Certain

Cnbtnil

Total

Certain

OaMM

Total

Certain

Doutjlki

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Mloon

30

7

37

If.t

es

/v*

/O

4-

^51

7-Y

Z.J

/£?3

*£

/<%

*«C

/o>.6

77

//.$

l-A]tnnwical

^

2T

71

/J-/

9t

Ztf

zs

/¥-

37

St.?

/O. 3

Z7.^

*•&

/Of

3Y+

/*.S

7(

*Zl

!-*iro»H

zz-

/3

35-

F.6

St

Z3.7

/S

7

zz

t/.a

s-./

tc.t

JS1\

/ST?

3/f jas_

/0-1

etj

3 Li(it nam.

a

6£>

ao

ao

2

/

3

/.r

O.I

z<

-^

1

.??

to

o.C

/&

t-Binb

c

o

O

ao

O.o

o-6

o

a

ao

O.O

<t.o

o

o

o

o.o

oo

o.o

5-Clouds, Wst, <tt

O

o

a

ao

Q.O

0.0

o

o

0.0

.0.0

o?

_?_

te

■e/

0-<>

0?

rt

Mnwnit kilo. .

W

Q

W

JIA

o.o

17.1

/o

^£°.

7.f

ao

7*

/ft

a

m

f/

Q.O

?■>

7Pirti»io|itn

?

o

V-

/.<*

o.o

!•<*

z

c

z.

t.T

6.6

t.r

zr

e>

4S -

/■7

O.O

t-7

t-unknoMi

S3

o

f3

Se.%

a.o

zo.%

^

a

^.?

§f.<e

O.C

3 t.f*

z?s

o

?K

MO

a.o

XOt)

9-0ttL«

/o

/O

3?

o.o

3.1

£-

o

s:

3.7

<xo

37

Sg

a

si

¥.6

o.o

V&

ToM

ZOf

f-s

<"«■¥

M.3

t7-7

tOO.

/t°

si

/?t

20.9

(?.(

too.

tots

3?T

/?s?

72.9

Z7.I

toa.

■

f/)ji £ #6? ew*. i/#-<

r t<?#

t?A #i£ ?/&#r<

'/V6$ fa* /9^u.

V£-4£S <t?V

pt/wfz/e.

0,

s - 0dJ££TS #?*M.3

t7-7

tOO.

/t°

si

/?t

20.9

(?.(

too.

tots

3?T

/?s?

72.9

Z7.I

toa.

■

f/)ji £ #6? ew*. i/#-<

r t<?#

t?A #i£ ?/&#r<

'/V6$ fa* /9^u.

V£-4£S <t?V

pt/wfz/e.

0,

s - 0dJ££TS #?*

> s/6.^r//i/<i

r-*t/i? e?/3J^<£7s

#u. Vejf/es

/?*7

/?«#

/?<t?

Evaluatnn

Nuuoet

PerCnt

Himbei

PeiCenl

Nurtier

Percent

Number

Percent

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

On* mi

Total

Certain

DouMil

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain

Doubttol

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doibttul

Total

D-BaHim

^Z

Zt

¥-3

to

l<°

/S-.to

o

O

O.O

t>0

OO

/

/

e

i-7

tf-7

/S.<f

«

O

e

/O.O

OO

/O.C

l-AjbtKHWICll

. t.z.

/3

es

fr.f

f-1

*f

Z

Z

f-

set

zsz

<Pf#

Z

/

3

/S.S

6.7

ze.o

s

f

/o

3 O.o

ZOO

so.c

2-Aiiaalt

S~3

¥■*

?(>

l?.3

I5.C

3V?

f\

o

1

ii.i

00

(/•'

_3j

O

3

zo.o

oo

Z0O

e

<+

&

/O.O

Z0.O

30.0

3-Lift>t ntnm.

f

Z

&

1£l

0-1

ZJ

o

o

O-O

o.o

o.o

/

O

1

6 7

O.O

4.7

o

o

o

0.0

o.o

a

*-Binh

o

o

ao

to

c.o

o

o

o

oo

ao

o.o

O

o

O

O.O

O.0

O.0

o

o

a

AO

o.o

O-O

S-Cloudi, Quit, etc.

. z

/

3

0-7

o.f-

/■(

o

o

o

O.o

o.O

Od>

o_j

o

o.o

ao

o.o

o

o

D

O.i

o.o

OO

S-lrqufljc kfo.

/?

o

/?

±3.

Q.O

<•?

o

o

o

a.o

ao

a.o

o

a.o

o.o

oo

o

o

Q.O

o.O

0.0

7-Ps|rcinlo|ial

f

o

■f

!■¥■

d.0

/.¥

o

e?

oo

o.o

0.o

<z>

o

o.o

a.o

o.o

O

o

o

O.o

O.0

o-Unknom

£><*

o

e>f

Z3.3

O-O

?J3

z

o

z.

SS.Z

O.0

zzz

z

s

i '3.3

o.o

/3.3

z:

o

z.

/o.o

GO

too

MUiti

/•s:

<f>

/S~

.£!£

0,O

•*■¥

z.

o

<■

zzi.

o.o

ZZZ

_£.

a

<f-

3*J\

o.a

56-7

eP

o

' o

O.o

o.o

<a.o

Total

/fs

so

27 S

?o.f

£?■/

too.

7

z

?

77-?

ZZZ

IQO.

/3

z

AT

g£.7

/#?

/oo.

'Z

f?

zO

60.O

tfiOO

/oo.

<J

;?s°

/?s-f

JTS-^

Evatuaton

huoow

PerCett

Nunbn

PerCent

ftuitber

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Certain

Ooubtful

Total

Certan

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouUIuI

Total

Certain

Ocuttrd<J

;?s°

/?s-f

JTS-^

Evatuaton

huoow

PerCett

Nunbn

PerCent

ftuitber

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Certain

Ooubtful

Total

Certan

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouUIuI

Total

Certain

Ocuttrd

Total

/Cftgiii

Ocwblful

Total

Certain

Doublnil

Tolal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Balloon

/

O

/

JT3

O.O

S-3

o

G

O.0

o.o

OO

/j?

ZO

3- IT

£7

97

/!.¥

l-Aitnmncal

o

O

O

OO

ao

OO

o

c

O.0

OO

a.o

s

c

3

/■O

e.f

3.f

2-A.iraatt

6

/

7

3f.<£>

S3

36.?

o

o

OO

ao

o.o

J&-

38

77

/?.%

/S.f

3S.2

J-LieW Phemm.

o

DO

0£>

O.O

o

o

ao

O.0

o.o

3

Z

S

J^L

/■0

zr-f

♦•Bind

o

. o

o

O-O

O.O

0.0

o

O

o.o

ao

oo

_o.

o

O

t».0

a.o

a.o

S-Cloudi, OiBt, etc.

o

o

o

OO

o.o

AO

o

o

o

ao

o&

0.0)

z

/

3

/.a

o.sr

AT

frlrttaflic Wo.

i

o

f

•T-3

OO

S3

o

o

CO

O.0

ao

'«

o-

/?

s.7

OO

si

7*Psydailo|ical

o

o

o

OO

0.0

O.O

o

o

o.o

oo

O.o

-£.

D

¥■

t.f

O.O

/-I

*Ui*tm

7

o

f

i-7-H

0.0

w.f

¥-

o

f

SOO

ao

800

.££

O

¥S~

z/-7

o.o

sf-7

V»m

/

a

i

!r-3

ao

S3

/

<i

t

S0J3

o&

ZO.o

—Z.

O

7

3*

0.0

3.1-

Total

/s

/

/?

m

S3

/oo.

vT

o

s

Leo.*

ao

/OO.

f¥6

(,7

Z-07

£7&

32*

/Of.

144

rrffte j#6g &f/!£i//iT/a/i/ 0? /Pi i- s/&tf7-//isd.f;

/?£?#

4L4.

V^stes _

sy

w*?*?i!:/Z <?* /Ptfj^tri />&£ s~/6s/r/A/£ -r///?^ 70 r&/v _ e9#j£drs

rfiL fest*;

/?<£ 7

/?<*?

/9Y?

Enfwhoii

Maitar

Per Cart

Nulber

Per Cent

Nunber

Percent

Mmbcf

PerCHit

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cirtjw

Doubtful

Total

;«t>m

Doutty

Total

Cntaiii

Doubtful

Telal

;(rt»n

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToUl

CbHuT

Doubtful

Total

CHtam

Duuhtfol

T<U

"■Balloon

/4"

/0

?r

£A\

ft

/<*

/

O

t

40

#0

**\

/

e>

/

£.7

00

<i./

O

&

00

00

00

I'Astnnaial

7

tz

tf

££a

s.v

stf

O

O

0.0

0O

$0

z

2

#0

as

t?3

S

Z

JJL

00

7.1

!-*IKUtt

(,7

3f

fOS

dX\

fii.

2f.<7

/

O

/

&L

00

#0

3

3

20.0

0.0

200

/

?

/*>00

00

I'Astnnaial

7

tz

tf

££a

s.v

stf

O

O

0.0

0O

$0

z

2

#0

as

t?3

S

Z

JJL

00

7.1

!-*IKUtt

(,7

3f

fOS

dX\

fii.

2f.<7

/

O

/

&L

00

#0

3

3

20.0

0.0

200

/

?

/*>

fS

3#r

tt£

J-L>(h| Pnmon.

f

(O

if

ft

*.t

ft

O

O

00

0O

00

4C

f

00

ur

a- 7

a

a

a

00

00

0.0

4-Bii<b

4

*

ft

//

U

tf

£>

O

a

00

0O

0.0

/

s

3

i-X.

/**

20.0

O

/

/

J&\

f.f

ft

S-Clouds. Dust, etc

a

Ml

0.0

0-0

~o\

O

0JL

0.0

00

O

0.0

00

00

-£0}

00

00

trlnsoltic. tats.

_£L

f-Z

//S 0.0

//.g

~M

a

7

££0

00

2$.0

c>

&

O

0.0

00

00

7

7

*Lf

0.0

t*-r

7-Pijciulotical

/

u-

s

4J.

t-f

f-V

/

/

00

40

¥0

O

0.0

0.0

00

/

/

I.'t

0.0

Jr.g

t-Utom*.

•<?■?

/<t>8

&S

£JL

303

f

?

2L&

0O

?t,0

z.

O

2

as

00

/J3

■S

S~

/M

0.0

t?:ir

MBW

Z3

z

ZS

i.¥

dt

f0

4

6

240

0.0

2</£>

<o

O

00

#0

0.0

O

O

0.0

00

00

Total

Z73

Vf-

3-57

ILL

t?.e /op.

•zv-

1

ss

fio

4(0

/O0-

7

?

75

&£

S3.3

fCK>.

1^

/o

&&

*/*

XfS

/00

W-

1 m

/9S-0

/?jy

/9-s-.a

E«alwinii

Nunbei

Pa Cent

Numbet

Per Cent

rtu*ei

PsCnt

Nnbs

Pa Cat

Cntain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certim

Doubtful

Total

C atari

DoubtM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cotaio

Oouti*<u

Total

Cdtan

Dnbtful

Total

O-Wlooo

Z

O

2

£L_

0.0

/'

O

O

0.0

0.0

0.0

//

/O

e/

4L

47.0

£4

t-Attmnnieal

O

O

O

M-

00

00

z

■3

5"

/g.2

£Z3

&*

3

7

/&

/■z

J.g

40

7-AirulR

f/

I

fZ

£$±

f.6

¥lf

f

C

/

9/

00

f- f

SO

zs

7X

/9S

//../

W

3-i.ifbl FKnoa.

O

£>

O

00

0/?

0.0

Je,

O

0.0

0.0

00

¥■

&

/O

/£.

I*/

*0

t-Biidi

O

O

c

d0

fifi

00

O

Q

0.0

00

00~

&■

J -

/o

2.0

2.0

40

b-Clomli. Dusf, dc

c

O

C

00

0.0

00

£>

O

00

0.0

00

O

0.0

0.0> 0.0

HnaiBic. k>h.

<£-

O

f

d3

0.0

tf,-*

/

O

/

f J

00

ft

Z3

O

S3

?'

00

tJ

?-Pjytfofo|icat

a

O

0.0

00

0.0

O

^00

0.0

00

3

3

00

/200

£>

O

00

0.0

00

O

0.0

0.0> 0.0

HnaiBic. k>h.

<£-

O

f

d3

0.0

tf,-*

/

O

/

f J

00

ft

Z3

O

S3

?'

00

tJ

?-Pjytfofo|icat

a

O

0.0

00

0.0

O

^00

0.0

00

3

3

00

/2

/.z

S-UnknoKO

2

O

?

21b

00

0i

3

O

3

??.3

0-0

4tJ

J«L

O

8/ 3U

0.0

&t

9-OOitf

/

/

e

St.

Si

f-t

f

O

1

t f -

0*

?'

/s

/

/€>

ff

0.*/

4 J

-

Total

.£■6

2

28

UJL

SL

/00.

t

3

if

7*7

273

/00

t?z

6,0

z$3ft.i.

£2.S

700.

r/?<gL

£■ S)£9

£t4tc0Ary£)/u

0>fi

rft-t-

SmsST/tedS

f0*

S/fZ*..-

_¥£*&

/?</

A>(/M0££ 0F tfgj^drs />£/e 5/&#r//V6 £££0€/V 04 Atafe 0>4J£crs

1

1

flit (/£/?**

/9¥^7

09^9

/?<T9

\

tnuntw

PeiCait

Number

Pet Cent

Nuuber

PerCent

tkjiabH

Pel Cent

; Evaluation

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Douttthil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dwotful

Total

Certain

OsuUM

Total

Certaio

DoubtM

lT^L

O-Ballooo

/

/

Z

/./

//

21

O

£>

O

00

00

0t)

O

O

O

0.0

00

00

O

O

O

00

■0.0

00

[]-Asinnomcal

7

<£

/I

fZ

</<Z

//.i

O

O

O

0.0

00

00

O

(

(

0.0

f£.0

£s.a

O

O

O

0.0

0.0

00

|?-*IICIltt

3

£

?

St

£.3

?■*

D

d

O

00

00

0.0

/

O

/

2S.O

00

2*0

c

7

(

J0JL

0.6

fr

;3-LntitPtie«* ■

3

O

3

f.Z

00

1.2

a

O

O

0.0

0.0

00

a

O

a

00

00

Ct#

O

O

0.0

0.0

00

4-Bir*

£>

t

7

t-3

1/

f¥

<?~!

O

O

0.0

00

0.0

O

&0

00

0.0

e-

O

V-

222.

0.0

tf't

5-Cloods, Dust, ett

O

O

0.0

0,0

00

O

00

0.0

00

.

O

00

00

00

O

0.0

00

00

(rlnaiHit. mfo.

/{

//

m

0.0

//■0

O

O

0.0

0.0

00

/

O

/

2S-0

/££-

?$.o

s

O

s

2JJ.

0.0

2$S

ICfUWapai

3

f

^

sz

/■/

¥3

f

/

%

/t.S

/2,£

25.0

/

O

/

25.0

0.0

2S.0

/

O

/

-&L

0.0

S£

o-Uokinwi

«l

V-Z

Wl

00

W-2-

-S"

s-

£■2.5

0.0

tf.6

a

0.0

0.0

_£j0^

&

O

G

333

00

i3.3

♦Otfiti

S

/

6

53

/./

64

f

f

/is

00

/24

O

a

00

0.0

0.0

/

O

f

Si,

0.0

56

Total

21

/V

?SWl

00

W-2-

-S"

s-

£■2.5

0.0

tf.6

a

0.0

0.0

_£j0^

&

O

G

333

00

i3.3

♦Otfiti

S

/

6

53

/./

64

f

f

/is

00

/24

O

a

00

0.0

0.0

/

O

f

Si,

0.0

56

Total

21

/V

?S

&J.

M?

/a?.

7

f

?

&.Z.

(2.5

/ea.

3

/

■f

f£.0

is.

/O0.

n

/

/r

m

?i> /sw

m

n

■mi

/7S~o

/7.SS

/7S~^.

Evaluation

Muaber

PetCant

Matter

PefCoil

Nuafter

PerCent

Nunber

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouWfot

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certaia

Doubtful

Total

Balloon

O

O

O

O-O

0.O

0.0

_£>

O

O

0.O

0.0

00

/

/

S

6?

/■?

jr/

> 1-Aiiromrwcal

/

O

f

s°.c

O.O

So.o

a

O

O

A0

00

00

G>

5

9

mJL

£2

tfs

Z-Air«af(

O

O

a

O.O

o.c

£>,o

_o.

O

0.0

00

0.0

Z

S~

7

3/

M

/2.0

J-LietitPrienn.

O

O

O.O

CO

0.0

O

a

O

0.0

0.0

00

3

O

3

s.z

0.0

ft

4-BiriB

c

O

a./>

0.0

d>.<)

a

/

/

0.0

fA0

0.0

S

O

Z

3V

0.0

fl

5-Cloudv Dial, etc

O

0.0

0.0

0.0

O

0.0

0,0

0-0

O

O

O

0.0

00

0.0

S-tnuffic. kfo.

o\

O

0.0

o.a

0.0

/

/

200

0.0

200

¥

O

<t

L-f

0.0

f-f

I-PsydBtofial

<D

O

0.0

0.0

00

O

0.0

0.0

00

O

O

O

00

00

00

S-Uninnei

/

O

/

s~oo

0.O

5-00

z

z

ij0.0

0.0

40.0

Z.Z

O

z?

Vt.3

00

ftf

S-Onc

O

0.0

0.0

O.O

^_C

r

2&0

0.0

200

2

t

3

JT£

-7-7

s-f

Total

z.

O

2

lt>oc

00

foa.

^

t.

<r

$00

20.0

/00.

J^

/o

S%

ft*

(7- £

m

145

yx/rL? s??*? ^//?s-&4r/c>ri/

<!/=

^^__

S'^M •/&<££

.-fez _

/t£

c

<z!£-/tg.

i. ..-..j£JL

/vi/MdE/e. &£ a/sjsers />em s/&t/r/A/c. . #vtfg£z a? £?gj£er* juc

'

/?***" 7

sfW

/?^?

Evaluation

Numbs

PeiCwi

Number

Per Can

Number

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

_Total_j

Certain

Doubtful

TrfW

Ceit»i»

Doubtful

Total

CtrlaiJ

Doubtful

Total

>rt3«l

DouMM

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Cettiin

Doubt M

Tobi

CBtam 1 Doubtful

a.o O.O

Tom

6.0_Total_j

Certain

Doubtful

TrfW

Ceit»i»

Doubtful

Total

CtrlaiJ

Doubtful

Total

>rt3«l

DouMM

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Cettiin

Doubt M

Tobi

CBtam 1 Doubtful

a.o O.O

Tom

6.0

D-Sallooi *

^

/

•T

e 3

/.(>

?•?

/

O

/

«£

#<?

SS*> O

o

O

0O

\£.o

AO

O

O

O

l-Aatmnomial

/^

/

tf

*/■*?

/■<•

£.?.¥

_^L

O

/

w.o

££>

3SJL

/

/

0.O

2S.O rS£

Z.

O

Z.

Zt-H.

CO

00

00

I-Aircfjfl

<L

<t

?

^3

£.3

/^<:

o

O

o.o

<2£>

0£>

c

o

o

e.o

_o L o\

£>.C O

O

e>

a.O

3-Litfit Phenoil.

Z

/

3

_*£

/.&,

f7

o

o

O

-£^

_#_0,

0° __Qj

t

<P0

zs.c 2?.o

O

O

.J2JL 
0.0

.-SZ9. 
00

t-Birds

&

a

6

-_2£

O.O

?v

o

o

o

^Oj

__00,

O.o

o

.

o

a.o

AO

a.o

O

O

Moods, Oust etc

f

o

/

/6

o.o

A6

o

Oi?

3S

4.0

o

o

CO

O.O

0.0

O

O

0.0

0.0

o.o

tUnftic. Mo.

1/

//

/7-2

o.o , 7 z

z

a

•2.

#o.o

Z^5j

SO.O

-e

o

£

50,0

O.O

50.C

z.

a

z

CO

38.Q

T-PsydDfopal

/

/

JJt.

0.0

/-6

_^

o

o

ao

CO

00

o

o

o

ao

ao

a.o

O.O

o.c

O.O

llttnoat

/z

/3

/S-7

O.O

/!t7

<2

o

o

Q.O

AO

Q.O

o

o

o

do

O.o

0.O

3

3

f-z%

0.0

fe.s

»tfce>

e.

o

2.

-?JL

ao

jv

o

—Q-A

O

O.O

o.o

O.o

o

e>

£>

ao

ao

a.o

O

a

0.0

a.o

ac

TOW

S7

7

6+

Sf?

ft- J

/0t>.

V-

JL.

/OCX.

ao

/CO.

z

2

U£_

Sao $~d>.o

/ee.

7'

O

7

/64.0

0.0

/AO.

sfS-o

/?*SY

S9S--Z

Evaluation

Number

Per Coil

Number

P«C«nt

Number

frrCent

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total.

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ouubtfu

Total

Cerlain

DoubtSit

Total

t-BXIwn

O

O

O

O.O

O.O

0JS

<D

O

O

O.o

O.O

0.0

.JL

/

J£_

7-0

_£i3J

7.3

l-Astnnoaial

Z.

O

2.

66.7

0.0

£4.7

O

O

O

00

0.O

0.O

_T A

O

J_

so3

0.0

2*1

?-Alrcraft

O

O

o.a

CO

0*>

C

/

/

ao

3*3

3*3

<{

s

7

9.%

_Z^£J

/<-3

3-Li0it Ftienoo.

6

O

O

a.o

O.O

0.6

C

d>

O

0.0

o.€>O

O

O

00

0.O

0.O

_T A

O

J_

so3

0.0

2*1

?-Alrcraft

O

O

o.a

CO

0*>

C

/

/

ao

3*3

3*3

<{

s

7

9.%

_Z^£J

/<-3

3-Li0it Ftienoo.

6

O

O

a.o

O.O

0.6

C

d>

O

0.0

o.€>

Q.O

Z

a

2.

*:7

0.0

f-1

4-Binfa

_0_i

O

O

~7o1

0.0

Ofi

O

O

O

OjO

0,0

0.6

-~&

^£^lf°

a.o j<f..

5-Cloudi, Oust, Etc

O

O

O

a.0

cxo

6.0

O

O

O

a-o

0.0

AO

/

/

23

e.O

2.3

G-lrugRic. kifc.

O

O

O

0,0

dxo

ao

-K.

O

z.

U7

a.o

tf6.7

3

3

7.0

O.O

7.0

7-PsCdlclo{iaJ

O

O

O

0.6

ao

d-0

O

O

a

exo

0.0

0.O

f

/

23

0.0

2.3

D-llnltonn

O

O

O

a.o

a.o

O.0

O

O

0.6

0.0

<xa

_JL

9

ZaU

0.0

2J>.?

hosier

J

c

/

33.3

0.0

333

O

O

O-O

0.0

0.0

/

/

Z3

ex>

a-3

'

Totil

3

3

{0Q£

P-O

/e>o.

2

/

3

667

?3L3

/0O.

3<t

¥

*3

9".7

9.3 foo.

146

$

J^A&^f

^?7

^3/^Az/

4770/1/

0A=

/J/l/fT-

</S//r//t/(SS

*/?£

££L-

' c

'if/?!

ff

<fi

s

-♦^/-f/

<?/? £>4*>££rs *&£ S/&#r/A/£ . 0/p0~

e?4J£c?

Aia ^r/

/9V7 .

stVt

/?*?

EBtaB-

PerCent

Ntmber

Per Coil

Number

PbChiI

Nuntti

P«C«I

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain,

Doubflul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tot* 1

Ctrtairl

Doubtful

Tow

>r(jin

Doubtful

Total

Ccttiin

DoubtM

TOW

CMiin

Ooubrtil

Total

Cabin

DoaUM

Total

u-Sefouuu

-L&L

/r?-?

It*

-11

4-*

/i.J

£■

5

M.

00

/2,

/0

2.2.

97

g./

as

-42-

J

/J

Jl£

/.&

f-0

lAttmaical

Mli

??^

^

/?.¥

/At

30. Z

-^L

t

23

tf.t

/Of

&t

27

23

70

2/Z

<Z6

4w

2g

7£.

/W

K.i

*//-3

&£

Mrreraft .

It?

I*^

?*v?

-%£

&3

/gz

_£_

2

2-

0.0

Jf

f£

9

^

/3

t3

S.2

/06

/s

4

£/

?/

,f,f

/(■¥

J-LuJtPkaasa.

J.1

/^

*?

/e>

a*

A*

2.

t

it

00

3$

/

/

0S

00

0$

0.0.

0.0

00

Mirfe

. J_

/

z

0/

/

fit-

- £? \

_£

00

<?■(?

00

. /.

/

2.

0Z 0g

M.

--£-

.0.

££__

0.0

0.O

tCtaoXOrrtlttt.

J

7

/*?

at

04

a*

. ^ $.0.

0-0

#0

.

0.O.

00

0O

rf..

&&-

00

0.0

^MicM.

3tt.

<?

^

?£■

00

t-F

. S.

r>

S U_

00

ft

/</

V0Z 0g

M.

--£-

.0.

££__

0.0

0.O

tCtaoXOrrtlttt.

J

7

/*?

at

04

a*

. ^ $.0.

0-0

#0

.

0.O.

00

0O

rf..

&&-

00

0.0

^MicM.

3tt.

<?

^

?£■

00

t-F

. S.

r>

S U_

00

ft

/</

V

JfJ.

.40

//J

J-L

2/

//.</

00

W

^Ptrtfabojical

2?

.?

«

/■£

0.2,

<7

2.

t,

i.e

0.0

?$

J

00

0.0

00

U

_j2.

/

e.g

00

0.f

MM*

33t

ftf

/7.t

00

(?*■

//

-LL

/fS

00

{? J

;<r

/&

/2./

0.0

/2-/

-&-

' a

/?

/a s

0-0

0.3

*Ctm

«/

22

^

3/

/./

<{*■

_^L

i

its

#0

'23

3

¥

•7

11

2.2

&t

£

S

9.1

00

2-7

Total

flfiftf

*»

/?{?

7/2,

St.t

m

<tt-

z

.s-i

%,o /</.<?

£20_

M.

&

a*/

w

??? m

£L

f£ t€¥

& g

4-2

/no-

/f£0

/?£/

/?*£*

EllllUllHI

Nunotf

PeCenl

Nimber

Percent

Nunttr

PerCent

NuHber

Pet Cent

CnUin

Doubtful

Tom

C«Hin

Doubtful

ToUl

Ccrciiii

Doubtful

Totf

Certain

Doubtful

TOW

:«tlifi

DooMful

Total

Certain

OouMful

Total

CerUin

Ooubtful

ToU

Certain

Dot MM

Total

&BHI«H

-#-

3

.zf

//.0

f-f

/f?

f

3

,i.

X£

?.i

tff.3

/fs-

J&3L

2Lt

/0Z.

?./

/tff?

tMveaiai

■M-

f$

?7

22.7

#■<

33.2.

J4-.

//

31

/ff/

fV

fU

22J-A

f*

S/f.

/Z&

7.<?

fffl

MiRR

uS^

f

7./

/a£

f.i

&7

J?-

?

?z

/If

40

/at

/33

/3S

M&lAS

/a?.

2/.0

3-U^Ptao.

_JL

.a&

00

0O

2,

z 1

J

L7

0?

?./,

'f

f

23

//

0.7.

ft

4-Binh

.0.

#

jji

00

0-0

.4.

£>

/2.0

0-0

00

0>_

0>

00

0.0.

0-0

Kkxdj,D»ji,«»t.

O

00

0.0

00

.-£.

8,4.

0-0

00

3

,r

/a

f>Z

at

0-t

t^lwniCr iifv.

4/

it

/2.Z

0.0

fZ. Z

/0

/0

S-£

00

$.&

///

///.

ft?

/10

£1

IfiltWoiiai

&L

&

/■Z

00

/■*

/

/

i.

£?\

&?

/$

£4

2,

2£

/S

0.2

10

\W*m

3</

a

Jf

/tg

0.0

/ff

sz

?z

tf.3

0.0

zr$

i?X

J2JL

/#"

00

($0

HMNt

J

f

f

/.7

r-s

4o

s

f

j£l

0-0

ft

.36..

//

£&

*•?

/./

4o

r

TOM

m.

u

/ft*

79/

20.9

m

X

S3

ft

mi

/U

/0O.

?0S

fsf

/2Ci

7/(,

2S.V/00.

#

ra/?L£ £72, ^*tei.e/jtr//>/vJ

f

f

/.7

r-s

4o

s

f

j£l

0-0

ft

.36..

//

£&

*•?

/./

4o

r

TOM

m.

u

/ft*

79/

20.9

m

X

S3

ft

mi

/U

/0O.

?0S

fsf

/2Ci

7/(,

2S.V/00.

#

ra/?L£ £72, ^*tei.e/jtr//>/v

0f //A//r S/S,S/T//l/<i.<l S0*. 4L£. </£#£* *?y

/1/0MAGA 0/1=

0gj£<irs /*>£*

s/6s/r//i/£ j 7"/v0 e?#j£-£rs

#u. </e*,ts

/Wt

/??*'

/?</?

EnJUtn

Number

PnCsrl

Umber

PerCent

Nunber

PerCent

Nwtw

PerCent

Certain

Doubttu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ceitain

Doubtful

Total

Certaia

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtfa

Total

Certain

Dwbtful

Total

D-Balloon •

/?

//

31

If

ft

&.?

00

0.0

0-0

/

/

M&

00\

/0.6

/

/

JU-

0,0

T,'

1-AsuHonical

7

;2,

(?

It

ft

ff

/

2,

3

dj_

2$.L

W

/

/

£00

pj

/0-6

J

¥'

7

2k4.

2ft

£06

2-AlimK

-/P

JS

$0

f?.2

/?f

v.t

—*—\

1

di

0.0

/{3

_^

10

3

300

#0

30c

2

7.

/

rf.3

/</■!

2tt

3-Liffit Ptama.

V

2

L

/ft

0?

?t

£0

0.0

0-O

/

/'

/0O

0-0

/0d

—02-

00

00

0-0

4-Binh

— <2h

0.0

0-<?

0.0

#0

0.0

6>0

00

00

0-0

0>

AS.

00-

0.0

S-Ckwd.DteHelt

O

00

0-0

0-0

0.0

0.0

0./:

.00

00

00

-4.

<?

0.0

00

00

t-)nanlc Mt

-t$-

t?

S.f

0.0\

f-r

0.0

0.#

/?■&

0?

00

0.0

00

-0

0>

0.0

0.0

00

7Piyca>l<>|ical

J

/

V

jjL

0.4"

/■?

0,0

0.0

00

0>

00

00

0.0

£>

0.0

0.0

0.0

vmmm

<//

y/

/ff

00

/f.S

/

/

dz

0.0

/</-3

00

0.0

0O

£

Z

Jf/J.

00

"/■3

Mtter

10

3

/?

JO.

<y

t-0

2

?,

1.U

00

fU

/

3

4

/00

?O0

i/b-6

0\

00

00

0-0

. Tom

dl£.

fl

&f

£i£

3jy

/m

5"

2

7-

1L*J.

if.t

W

+

3

10

f0.0

30.0

//»

S

r.

/¥

Ft/

:&f-

/00,

/??o

/95S

/?£2.

EvallHtKKI

HUIPOM

Percent

N inter

Percent

Nuatw

PerCent

Numbu

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtful

Total

Jertain

Ooubtlui

Total ,

Certain

Doubtful

Total

>rtaiii

Doubtfin

ToUl

Certain

Doubtful

ToU

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Bjlloon

__/,

/Certain

Ooubtful

Total

Jertain

Ooubtlui

Total ,

Certain

Doubtful

Total

>rtaiii

Doubtfin

ToUl

Certain

Doubtful

ToU

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Bjlloon

__/,

/

/0Q

00

10-0

_jL

00

0.0

0.0

/6>

tr

ff

9./

tr

/g.f

l-Astrenomical

—^

J23l

00

0-0

<?

0.0

0.0

0.0

£

^

F

/J

■,rs

<f.s

7-Aifciafl

_£

f

5

¥00

/0(?

sai>

0.0

0-0

0.0

32-

3l?

b>?

W3

£0.0

3S.3

J-Llltlt Ptianon.

00

00

00

00

0.0

00

f

2

&

lit.

//

*-t

4-Bnas

-J^

0.0

0.0

00

&0-+

0-0

6>e

0,0

00

00

5-Cloodi. Dint, tit

(?

00

0.0

0.0

0£\

0.0

0.p

a

0>

0.0

00

00

fr-lnwflic Ma.

/

/

/0.0

0/?

J0J2-

/7

r?

00.

0.0

00

/*

/?

/0.J

0-0

/0J

T-Pirdvlofical

-JL

00

00

00

_£L

_00\

0>-0

0.a

3

/

4

'J

0.6.

2.3

t-lMnrra

z

/)

£

20.0

00

200

/

/

500

/20

S0O

3;?

&

20.0

0.0

?#0

KHVm

/

f

10.0

0.0

/00

/

/

St>.£>

0.0

606

f

<?

&

2.9

40

1?

/0

Total

f

/

?00

/0.0

/00.

2

2.

'0Cte>

00

'00.

1(4

U

//?

fat

3</-t

/CO.

i.: ; 3K:

1.47

E

-^V/-£- /'/^ Fi/#t{/Ar/e?A' 0f 0/ls/7* S/fr//T//l/6,i

<?04L-. £*■<*

Ygs/es /=? v

M*46£*-

0f jgjeers ?>£<e s/6.//r/*'<.

ffy-Sfe t/> -t£a/ <0gj££rs

r "

#U j

/M/fjti

. ./?¥?

/9VS

/tY9

I

Number

Pel Cent

Number

Pel Cent

Number

Tom"

P« C«l '

Number

Pet Cent

| EvatsUion

C*rt»»

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total Certain

Doubtful

Toba

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

>tta»n

Doubtful

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

loBillooo

/¥

?

7J

¥9

a

.fV /

__/

**

00

¥*

. /

Z_

9/

0.8

?■/

C^

J

£0

?.£>

0^

- l-Aitronwcol

S~

/z.

^

J%

«*

JtJL

a

00

0.0

00

_^L

1,

2.

J2JL.

/g.Z

Ml

f

^,

/

*0

<?■<?

5 6

' J-Aimrxft

s</

27

if/

dj\

t»

tt.il

{

J

49

J?0^

n

2,

2^

tf.2.

0.0

t&t

/

~~r\

¥

£X

ft-7

22.3

>li|fit Phenoin.

4

r'rfj-

77

A*.

.

00

lsv¥

&(?

^

Z-

_^2.

0.0

Jf.i

/u

<?

0~0

f0>

04

4-B>*

$..

?

,-?■

it

?x

ILLJ?0^

n

2,

2^

tf.2.

0.0

t&t

/

~~r\

¥

£X

ft-7

22.3

>li|fit Phenoin.

4

r'rfj-

77

A*.

.

00

lsv¥

&(?

^

Z-

_^2.

0.0

Jf.i

/u

<?

0~0

f0>

04

4-B>*

$..

?

,-?■

it

?x

ILL

t?

-0

40

J2£^

0.0

—^

z

J 9J

JLA.

tp

<?

L.

/

S>J?..£L.t,

£6

J-Cuwoj, Dust. elt

0\

_j2.

0.0

0-O

\JL0

.0

£0.

0£-\

00

£.0

^&.

fit?

<?

—^

g£-i

0-0

00

frfnsafNc Wo,

ff

a

f 9

/*1

ae>

//./

r

S 23.2

-£JLa

m

<¥

0?

-J0-

&?

(Z0

<?#

■A

<Z

, 6 U*

0£>

32 3

7-Pivtnofeficai:

/

J

V

0</

//

/4

/

/

#0

¥r

¥>

„j2-

£0

<?.<?

0.0

/

-£\

/

S-i

0.4

Si

•■lMaon

fg

£.

ft

274

0.0

2U

f

7

J?J

-4A-

ft?

/

/

fj

J2£-

?■/

S~

0]

_^L.

m

/?■<?

S?f

»0«l«

(4

2,

/t

0*.

fi7

6.3

ft

o

l_£_

fftL

-J0..0-

ZU

—0.

^0,

£0.

0.0 00

c?

00

0.0

Total

M

i9 \2i*

7*$

*/.z.

/00.

20

/

If-

t£2

49 "*

f

' i

//

¥£4&S

/00

/¥

Y-j

/i

?72

221

/tt>.

/<?*0

/?£-/

/9£2-

Evaluation

HmlH

pBCmt

Hunbtt

PaCsit

Nurtwi

P«Cent

NUbH

Per Cent

Certkin

Doubtful

Total

Celiin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttii

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

TOW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

D-Mtoon

2.

2

9/

P0

9/

a

a

40

00

00

/0

f

*f

¥.9-

¥¥

t-3

1-AtUonoinical

jZj2.

0>0

00

/

V

¥

/00

?0,0

¥00

*

7

/0

/*■

*¥

ft 9

?-Aircutt

X

/

f

&f

4*

?0?

_Z-

a

/

/0.0^

0.0

/0-0

V/

ff

4^20.2

y/S

3/.S

2-UfHtPtitnom.

...a

f?

<?0

#<?

/no

0.0

00

-&£.

</

s£

-M.

2-0

S.0

£■.0

4- Si nil

&

O.O

00

P.0>

. j9.

(?

0-0

00

0.0

-A

6

~S-

2.0

20T

¥s

S-Oouili, Oust, He

00

0.0

0.0

-j2^

(?

0a

0.0

00

00

0.0

0.0

6-imuftic. hlu.

/

(?

/

/&Z

0.0

/**

/

a

/

/O.0

00

/0.P

2S

si

(f.3

0£>

■//.J

7-PlyttolO[iul

/?

'(?

00

t>0

0,0

00

0.0

0.0

£

2,

00

/■0

to

S-Unlowai

<•

<?

r

M.f

00

22?

J

3

200

0-0

f&0

Zf

S7

l£o

/5.0

it. t

WOlB

/

(

p

t/S

¥.s-

/0

/

&

c

f0.0

00/?

'(?

00

t>0

0,0

00

0.0

0.0

£

2,

00

/■0

to

S-Unlowai

<•

<?

r

M.f

00

22?

J

3

200

0-0

f&0

Zf

S7

l£o

/5.0

it. t

WOlB

/

(

p

t/S

¥.s-

/0

/

&

c

f0.0

00

/0-e

£

/

9

,r,f

0S

¥s

ToM

P

I

it

fe 9.

?J

/00.

-4-

S

/p

?00

30-0

/0£

/S0

fi2

20!f2f 2L./

/*>?•

fj£££ 2?t4/ £r/»/.///>r/a/V

0F fV/r s^ssr/M^ r

£0/e s?t.L ¥£#*?

&?

/!/£/*<!£££

0&

0j2J&t*Ts jf£A */&#r/A'& j £"/L£ua/U 0te. Sf*>£G i?4J££rs

1

dt-L </&*<S

/**•

/7

seiSf ...

/9¥9

f

. Nwiaei

PerCent

Ikmbef

PtfCoil

Number

Percent

Nunbn

Pet Cent,

Evaluation

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certalo

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Toy

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoiAtibil

Total

Certain

Doulitfuf

Total

Certain

Ooibttul

Total

0- Balloon

' /

/

2

/.J

/..?

2 J,

00

0.0

00

0.0

00

0/?

0.0

0.0

0r>

1-MbowiicJl

¥

¥

g

£/

rs

%>■ 2

a

0/0

00

<?<?

:.

I,

/

0,0

2F.0

?£.0

0>

0./2

0-0

00

?-A«cult

M

6

?

JS

f.d,

{/■4

00

00

00

_'/

<7

/

2£e

2.0

2S.0

-£.

/

/

0.0

?>7

77

J-Liffit Pfiarm.

1

/?

J

J.g

00

Ji

0.0

00

0.<2

.0-0

00

0.O

00

00

0-0

t-Sinh

¥

{

S

5./

f.3

^

<?

0.0

(20

0,O

r>

O

0.V

00

0.0

_^

C0

z\

1££

00

/4.^

S-Clwdl. Dust, fit

6.0

0.0

0.0

O.O

00

_a_

0.0

0.0

0O

O

■

0.0

0-0

0.0

f*-lnjuffic. bib.

/0

t0

Jt-1

/?•/

0.O

00

0-0

. /.

/

26.0

<?0

2^0

_jL

<0

S

.&J

0.0

20 f

I-Pjytnoloiiai

J

/

/

St

A-2

&/

/

{

2;

J2.B

(? *

fto

/

/

26.0

0.0

2&0

^J-

/

<?.■?

77

t-Unlown

92.

?Z

V0.S

00

¥(>*>

&

£!£.

00

67-S

_j2_

,0,0.

0.0

0-0

¥

0'

to.?

0-0

,?0.ff.

M»er

£

/

£>

13

A3

fir

/

./

/2.5

00

0$

0.0

0.0

0-P

/

/

f.r

0.0

7-7

Total

frS

tf

79

12. i

/7 7

m

7

/

t

%£.

'*-S

zoo.

J

/

¥

7£0

9£0

/pp.

-&-

/j

a

$2^

77

<£&-

/PS

/?*:/

/fS-2-

Evaluation

Nunber

PerCent

llmrbei

Percent

Nuoifl

PerCent

NUBbH

PerCent

Certain

OoubttuT

iTotjl^

Certain'*-S

zoo.

J

/

¥

7£0

9£0

/pp.

-&-

/j

a

$2^

77

<£&-

/PS

/?*:/

/fS-2-

Evaluation

Nunber

PerCent

llmrbei

Percent

Nuoifl

PerCent

NUBbH

PerCent

Certain

OoubttuT

iTotjl^

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Zettain

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;ertain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

Onibtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

0- Balloon

00

00

0.0

"7 1

0.O

0.0

00

/

/

2.

2/

2 J

4*

Mslnnoaial

/

/

92-0 \

0.0

S00

0.0

00

0.0

f

S

£

£.¥

&J

/2.g

Wrrualt

.0.0

.00.

0-e

. .0

0.0

0-0

0.0

2.

&

7

</.3

2gJt-

«/■?

3-Licnt Pnont

AG

0.0

0.0

00

00

0-(7

?

J

A.0

0.0

H

• Birds

<0

.00

00

00

a

/

/

da

20-0

P-0

2.

2

£l

O.0

¥.J

S-Cioodi, oat, etc.

00

^J?

00

0.0

00

00

0.0

0.0

00

frbnffic. Mo.

0.0

00

00

/

/

2J2JL

0-0

200

0-

¥

JJL

0.0

.&

JPrvdBtopai

O

J2.-0.

00 at?

O

0.0

00

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

•VIMnmt

/

/

&£.

00

sop

7-

2.

¥0.0.

0-0

?0.0

20

40

•&.€•

00

¥2-6

Hum

0.0

-£Le~

0.0

/

/

0J2.D

0,0

?0.0\

Z>

/

3

</.3

1'

64

Total

2

2,

/OQi

a0

{00.

¥

/

&

&-0

&0

m

IZ

/0

¥7

1t7

2/*

(00,

148

m

K8(pip!rt!Hi!* , >'

. -fA4i£- /Pfs- £^(./j/tr/0/y tf/z /Jsv/r */£jS7-//v6.z £0* ^^ v*^£$ /ey

A>w/2e£ 0^ <?sje£r* />e£ s/&,H r /i>& . vwtfet 0* c/sja^rs /uer sr-^r£P

fai. &*/>$

/?Sr

/f^r

/?</?

Eiatuahon

NtuiLw

PnCait

N under

P« Cent

Nombet

PtiCnt

Nmbet

Pet Cent

C*tan

Doubtful

jour

Certain

DoeNnil

TOUI

Seitain

DouMlul

TotJl

Collin

DoubtM

Total

:«tain

OouWhil

Total

Certain

DovUnil

Total

Certan

DouUM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Sallow

4

/

<T

1*

/$

■f./

/

/ 2SJL

0,0

ft,fl

/?

<?

6.0

0.0

00

0>

£?

/?

0.0

0.0

01.0

l-Aitnnoaictl

V

/

^

&£

/g

273

__£.

0\

/

2fQ

0.r>

ne

0>

/

/

0.0

&.0 0S.O

2.

G

z

MJ,

00

%?,(•

Miiaoft

__.£

•

7

SV

7?

/27

-j£

.0

00

00

00

/?

f?

0.0

00

0.0

0>

(?

0.0

0<?

00

>Li|M Piano*.

J>,

/

^

St

/i

frf

/?

0,0

00/

/

0.0

&.0 0S.O

2.

G

z

MJ,

00

%?,(•

Miiaoft

__.£

•

7

SV

7?

/27

-j£

.0

00

00

00

/?

f?

0.0

00

0.0

0>

(?

0.0

0<?

00

>Li|M Piano*.

J>,

/

^

St

/i

frf

/?

0,0

00

0-0

.-&

/

/

J&2.

2SO

&o

a

(?

/?

0,0

0.0

00

«-6ir*

J"

<?

./

£V

0,0

£4

P

tf

00

0.0

00

<?

#

All

00

00

6>

d

0.0

00

CO

VCIwdi, Dial, tie.

.0

r<?

£0

a<?

00

/?

{?

(7

00

00

00

(?

0.0

aa

00

a

0>

t?

•00^

0.0

0.0

t-kuffit Mb.

-UL,

<S>

//

&0\

00

£00

£

0>

2.

$00

0-0

S0.0

-£.

<?

£

00

£0.0

5fr0

.X.

0?

f.

£g.t

0-0

*!*■

7-PtrrMofial

Zj?a

/

/

00

/i

AS

0>

a

00

00

(?0

0>

(9

(?

0.0

00

00

.0

0>

0£>

0.0

ao

1-1M«m

g

^

tf

/</£

#0

W>

00

0.0

00

a

0.0

0.O

00

s

0>

J

4LI

00

VA?

Mfe*

2

<?

Z

JJl.

0.0

f.6

0°

0-(?

0.O

00

<?

aa

0.0

0.0

0>

(?

0.0

no

00

Total

ft

^

56

fee

/</>>

/0a.

S

4?

/ope>

0.0

/00

2

£

</

ib.0

S0.0 /0&_

r

f

/000

0-0

we.

/<?£&

/fsy

/<PS2s

Evaluation

Nunta

Percent

Ntinbti

Percent

Nuater

Percent

Nintn

Percent

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tobl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certio

DouMtW

Tutu

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OouHM

Total

Certain

DtoUW

Total

Cert*

Doobtful

Tola!

O-Balloon

/?

/?

00

00

00

&

a.0

0-0

0O

J

/

/

&1.

S.9

#■7

l-AUnrmiol

—£,

^

£

ikL

<?.(?

(ri-7

a

40

0.0

0.0

9

9

2£$

0.0

2L£

Miicraft

JL

^

00

0-0

00

P

/

/

0.0

??3

U3

*

J

£■

£&-

i.i /?.&

KqW Ptwoa.

(J?

00

00

00

-JL

0J>

0-0

0.0

?/

£■

£9

aa

*.?

♦-Biroi

— ^

,?

0.0

00

00

_a.

a

J2JL

00

00

J

0>

J?

2JL

A a

ti

S-CtoaH, Oust, etc.

<?

jia

00

00

__£,

■

0.0

(00

0-0

<?

0>

c

&0.

00

&p.

(rlnaffic. Wo,

a

^

00

00

0.0

&

?

bLZ

0.0

/r(+7

?

J

u.

0.0

*.g

T-Psycholofical

0.0

00

4.0

r?.0

00

/

/

/Z/L

£9

*■*

HJntaoon

^JL

pa

0.0

00

-&&

00

00

S

j

jst-L

0.0

Mz.

MMiH

/

/

SIS

0,0

fS.3

7?

00

00

00

J

■0

/ j'.*u.

0.0

*.g

T-Psycholofical

0.0

00

4.0

r?.0

00

/

/

/Z/L

£9

*■*

HJntaoon

^JL

pa

0.0

00

-&&

00

00

S

j

jst-L

0.0

Mz.

MMiH

/

/

SIS

0,0

fS.3

7?

00

00

00

J

■0

/ j'.*

#a

2.9

Tool

J

J

/wo

m

2?

/

_?

(67

fss

/00.

2*

£"

& m

/df

m

m

■4

149

r4gi.£ #7*

fi

&H-0/U'/i?Ji'

<?f

0#.l

ecT

5/GMr/MGS

/=-<P<

At.i.

v&Aes

try

'</&i<?£/( #*

0/2J££TS f£X S/Gtfr//1/C 3V£ 0>#J£C7- '

1

_jfaiy>L...

/9</r

Wt .

/?*?

Entuation

Number

Pet Cent

rtunbei

Pet Cent

Nuntwr

Pet Cent

Huntwi

PhCctI

Certain

doubtful

'"Totfi

Certain 
.0$

Doubtful

Total

;tlUin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Attain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OouMhil

ToUl

Certain

Ooubtlul

Total

Coum

Doubtful

Tom

CKWlooe

rf(t

/r<>f

iff*

a*

— £

. O

f

///

0.0

/fl

-M-

/0

20

jB

St

a w

-J2.

2.

/A

-&&

/■V

t3

l-htniwmal

/flf

y*i

/$.z

/0- 9

U/

— A

I S3

/St.

J33

2t.f

Z£

(9

Y*/

M1+

/6-S

3i.2

-Z2~

T£

fr

I&S-

&S

<?/.(.

?-Aircrjtt

/TV

fY*

r/7

/0,i,

g 7

/?*

. j

_ 2,

I

0.0

rfV, V.</

•

A?

78 3? /A3

-U£-i

/.

?,/

/0.J

¥/

/</.</

3-Li(M Wienom

'Z,

/

N

/e

£></

(.*

^±

^_j2_

1

#<}

£0

M.

, /

e?

/

43-

0-0

09

__^

0.0

00

-0J0-.

«-BilC5 
VCfMdi, Dull, tic

/

/

t-

j£L

a A

0Z

0.

J00

0.0

ao

/

J

2

0?

0?

t*f

.

d?

0.0

{?■/?

( 7-0

y

/

/0

j&&

^n4-&t—0

a

at

0.0

j2JI

a

<z?

0.0

0>0

00

_ ^.

10

a

0.0

/?0

00

G-lnnlTic. Wo.

/<*/

£•

/if

Ml

,90

03

<

a

t

//./

0.0

n.i

/</

V

/1.1

00

tt>2

U£^

<?

/i

//.t?

0.0

//.0

T-PsvcMoiical

9.i

?

57

-J4-

{0.2

/■?

2

o

2,

sv

0.0

4£

_^2_

<0

0,0

0.0

_2_

£>

/

a 7.

0>p

07

MMJB*

££Z-

f?

7*7

2211

0.0

/ft.*

/0

a

(/?

£21

0.0

ZZL-lsL

<?

/V

/2-2

00

/2Z

-l£A

<?

/s

/e>.s

0,0

/03

»0Bip

$7,

r'r?

7*

3$

/./

¥i

A

. .#

i,

/33

-M.

ILL

3

?

7

It.

3S

&■ f

. &

IT

?</

0.0

sy

Total

/J20__

«W

4 &

7/4

13$

/0(Z

V

? <fc ff.t

/JL"*

77

3*

U4/e>.s

0,0

/03

»0Bip

$7,

r'r?

7*

3$

/./

¥i

A

. .#

i,

/33

-M.

ILL

3

?

7

It.

3S

&■ f

. &

IT

?</

0.0

sy

Total

/J20__

«W

4 &

7/4

13$

/0(Z

V

? <fc ff.t

/JL"*

77

3*

U4

*££.

S3 6

{0K

MX

60

/¥*

m.

Y/-3

/00.

/&&■■

/?S/

/?S-2r

EnillUlMWl

Numbti

Pel Call

Numbei

PttCenl

NlHtff

Pr Cent

Nrnabtt

PerC»t

CerUm

Ooobthil

Total

Ctitaii

Doubtful

ToUl

Certain

Doubtful

Tola!

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

CerHifi

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doublfu

Total

Certain

Dwtttul

u rolai_

0-SjII««

-J2.

' </

t&

04-

f-f

/S.S

-g-

s

//

r-t

*9

/0.7

/2<

fa

2/6

MS-

S3

ft.f

l-Astnnomcal

9¥

^

3f

W-

/0/>

if./

jS

ft

itf

rf.7

t(?1

z&$

/*«

■72 236 /<7/

70

2/./

Z-Ancran

jsL

7

2,(

/0.O

S--0

/S.O

-vL

£

ZO

/3.1

If

m

72.2, /fl?

2</0

//.Z

/0.f

2Z£>

J-Li|ht Plu»«.

0.0

00

oo

/

/

?,

/0

/0

7&

//

t

_lt

/■*■

06.

/-t

4-Biids

^

c

00

#0

0.0

*>

V

f

0.0

0-0

00

*

(?

00

06>

tf-0

S-Clouds, Dnl. HC.

_j2.

O

-J2JL

0.0

0.0

—^

C?

■

00

00

00

_f.

7

/0

0-1

0.4

0?

(■lasatlic. tab.

2.1

/£&

00

/s.i>

o

to

ft

00

9*

Ml.

a

£&3-

?■*

00

?■*

7-PtrcMagiat

2.

2

/■*

0>0

/■</

/

/

z

/.0

/■0

£0

~Z1

2

2*

f.0\

0-2.

22

t-UnkiHin

3/

J2-I

2-2. t

27

27

26?

0.0

7&.S

£*2£tL

e?

200

/W

00

/?.{

MtJlB

3

2

$

2.1

*■¥

3.S

y

V

£f

?0

J.f

-3£

,fi

j*!L

33

/'

V¥

Total

//3

27

/'/O

ioi

ft.S

m

M.

/*

/0Z

?*.¥

n.t

/j».

m.

3//

/0t?7/S 2Z0.

/ae-

rftSLE ' £77

&t7/n. t/#r/<0A/

<£^

<04J£Td r

S/6f/r?W6S

/^K? ACL

</£r/?SS

#r

t/l/M6£& af

asjsers ?£*

7/6t/f//)/6 7~W<? 0>_#J££7S

70r/>c

/9</7

'/9</g

f9^f

EvaluiMn

Nmtw .

Pa Cent

Nurobet

Pa Cent

Nuetei

Total

Pa Cent

Numbs!

fer Cent

Certain

Owbtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToUl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

l-BJIooa

'7Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToUl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

l-BJIooa

'7

Y

Jl

//

f/

/*?

0.0

0.0

i?-0

/

/

///

00

//./

L

O

/

7-7

'0.0

77

I'Astranopical

it

//

/7

//

*0

f.f

/

2

J

/V.3

2g.&

479

-0

a

^2^

00

0.0

-^A

?

J

23/

MJ\

Vi-Z

3-Aiicnfl

&-

3/

7/

20?

/S.g

fl*

__/,

/?

/

43

00

43

3

f?

s

m,

00

3? 3

2.

2.

/s:v /f-jt^.j

J-U("l PlwnooL

4

?,

i.

1.0

/<?

30

0.0

0(P

ao

c

'

//.j

00

//■/

^a.

iO

00

0.0

0t

••Blios

Q

0.0

00

p

ao

00

Pa

a

jz^\

0P

no

rt

<?

00

/?.#

00

S-Clwos. 0»H etc

(7

00

00

00

0>

0.0

0.0

00

.

j2j2\

00

00

<r

t?

00

00

0!0

tlnwffic kh.

//

_tL

SL

00

?.z

0>

a

a

0.0

0-0

f).o

_

- e7

JW

0,0

00

_o

—£.

00

-A#

00

I-Psrthoknial

_/

/

/■S

0Z

2.0

/?

(?-0

__£_

JUL

0,0

00

_J2-

'(?

00

0.0

0-0

J-Unlmow

■*7

17

Til

00

ff-9

/

/

Ml.

00

//j"

,0£\

<?-0

00

Z

2.

/*"/

0.0

/£-.#

♦flUlH

/

?

(Z>

dA

/■$

/, /

£

0>

7.

2t-&

00

fft

/

3

/

£L

333

W4>

Z>

00

00

10.0

Total

/34

<*2

'ft

til

SU

/a>

5"

I

7

71-0

m

iso.

&

3

t

M,1

333

/eo.

_l_

e

_/£

£{■<

3f.S

/ao.

/2f0

/r&

/9S-2,

£ valuation

tlunber

Pei Cont

Nuaber

Per Ceil

Nunber

PeiCent

Number

PwCent

Certain

Doubtful

[3°^

Certain

DouWuI

Total

Certain

Ooubllul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

_Totalj

Certain

(Xwbtfiit

Total

0- Balloon

/

0/.

/

M0.

00

/0.0

£>

0.0

0.0

0-0

/*7

/-/

/rf

*0

90

/ftfo

1-Astromatcil

/?

-&J0

0-0

0.0

02.

00

00

0.O

2

&

$

/-?

,??

&2

J-Aiiaatt

</

/

_^£

gao_

M-0

W£>

<2_

/?

0-0\

0-0

00

30

?J

tf

/fj

/£/

?7£

>L'^» Pfnma.

1?

0.0

0.0

0.0

i2.

O

£-#A

P.0

0-0

3\

1

5"

/.?

f-3

12

4-0irds .

_JL

0-3

0-0

0.0

■a a

0-0

0.0

00

00

5-Clwdl, Dust, etc0-0\

0-0

00

30

?J

tf

/fj

/£/

?7£

>L'^» Pfnma.

1?

0.0

0.0

0.0

i2.

O

£-#A

P.0

0-0

3\

1

5"

/.?

f-3

12

4-0irds .

_JL

0-3

0-0

0.0

■a a

0-0

0.0

00

00

5-Clwdl, Dust, etc

(7

o

j£

0>0

r>

<?

J2J0.

0.O

0.0

0.^

00

fi.o

frmnitln. ato.

/

/

JO-O

00

/0.O

0-0

0.0

0-0

/7

/7

/A0

0>.0

//■0

7-Prrttrloroi

0/

00

00

0>.P

0>

0.0

00

0-O

S

/

V

/■9

00

IS

t-Unhraw

?s

o

z

20.0

00

70/>

/

o

/

eo.o

00

£0.0

J/

3/

200

0-0

20-n

'

WD*

/

. /..

iO-P.

0-0

/ao

/■

/

90

0.0

$0-0

</

¥■

2.C

0.0

2C

T«

t

/

J0-

Ma

/0-O

/00..

fr

z

mo

00

/00,

W

&

/■3S

£7/

SZf

/0O-

c

150

\

r/)Al£

#-ni

^t/ALti/lZjaAL

0S

zZ^LAF/^T- S/6A/rZA/&S

fi?* #£t

</j?rf#S

sty

WAfgSit

<s>/=

0aj£ r crs A j&£

s/t&/sr/&6 . ■/'//££'& r~&

/asr/tv tftfj^rCfS

!

Tar/n-

/9V7 _ _. _

. ./40S

/9V9

!

*?»

Per Cent

hl'Ulth"

Per Cent

Number

PnCeol

Numbfi

PhCbI

Evaluation

Certain ■ Coubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful, Total

;ntam

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Xlaih

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouHlul

Total

Oitii i)

Doitthil

Total

Certain (Doubtful

Totaj

O-Balloon

-M2-,

7

'/

3l_

/ 7 j /.. *

/

<3

/

£14

00

&t

.-J-

/

?./

0.0

t/

<?

0.0

0.0

0-0

1-Asl mount cal

5"

/i

f/

2.0

■ *V i-7

0.

' (?

0.0.

00

0.0

.

2

?,

,0:0.

/f.2.

ft 2

,/..

/

ii.7

0-0

6-7

Mircr«ft

„£*,

27

?/

/f.0

/*<* itf^

/

/

Zi

0.0

£T.C

2

C

2

/t-2

0.1?

/ii

. (..

J

y

/..r 2a0

&;?

J-Li|M Ptiwom.

V

$

^

/.(,

3/

</-7

f?

0.0

00

0-0

. £>.

2,

2

00

/X-t

/?.i

.J?.

0.0.

0.0

00

4-Birfc

■S"

f

//

2.0

2/

</

" /^

0.O

00

00

/

2.

,r

9./

/2.Z

2/,J

. 0^

/

/

0.0

*•?

6-7

S-Clouds, Duil tie

a

<?

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

06 0.0

00

0-

J2JL.

0,0-

0.0

frlniulTit bin.

S</

f

t¥

/.is

0.0

/IS

£-

<

27.8

00

27,1

0.0

0<P

0.0

£~

S

ns

0.0

f?l

7-Ptida»fial

/

j

V

a.i/

/■2

f&

/

/

0.0

$.<.

5.L

_£_

0.0

0-0

/

/

470,0-

0.0

frlniulTit bin.

S</

f

t¥

/.is

0.0

/IS

£-

<

27.8

00

27,1

0.0

0<P

0.0

£~

S

ns

0.0

f?l

7-Ptida»fial

/

j

V

a.i/

/■2

f&

/

/

0.0

$.<.

5.L

_£_

0.0

0-0

/

/

47

0.0

*■?

»Uhkrnwi

-J0

70

27.4

0.0.

??■*'

7

a

/

a.f

00

7ff

;

/

?./

00

?,/

S

^

20.0 0.0

Ma

»0«ie>

/-?

? r

/f

s:/

0.t

*r

_?

0.

f

/t,.7~

00

/$.?

-CL

J2J2.

0-0

0a

0.0

00

00

Tom

/if

t>1

2&

r*7

UJ~

(GO-

'7

/

ft

Hrf

&&

/oo.

s-

4,

'/

&.s

sVs

/Wt

//

¥

/£

ff.3

267

/<?<?

./t5Q

(<??/

/ a £-2~

Evalualion

Hufflbei

PnCtnt

Number

Pb Cent

Number

PeiCent

limber

PctCnt

Certain

DsubHul

Total

Certain

Ooublfu

Total

Certain

Ooubthil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tola!

Certain

Doubtnil

Total

Certain

MM

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Dotittlul

Total

o-etilow

z

2

/f.S

^r?

>f-$

00

0,0

0.0

&

?

/3

3.2

it!

7-0

1-AJttoMnial

00

00

00

/

,f

</

/0.O

30.0

VfltO

3

7

W

/.£

3g

S.f

Mircialt

_4_

/

6

2£0

4.1

&3

/

ZJ-

/

/0.0

0-0

/D.O

*?

23

40

20.0

/?■¥

S?*

13-LijM Ptwniin.

Q

0.0

0(?

&.<?

0.0

0.0

00

f

6

/0

22

3.2

*4

,4-Bndi

0.0

00

0-6

0.0

0(?

_£

f

f

2.2

2.7

¥-7

S-Cloodi. Dust, rtt

0.0

OO

flO

0-

0.0

fl.0

00

a>

00

C-0

0.0

.frllButttC Hit).

2-

2

/2.5

f?-l?

ti-s

/

/

10. D

0.0

fO-6

2/

2/

//.3

0.0

H-3

7-PtyclulO(ical

a

P

0.0

0-0

0.0

/?

a

O

00

0.0

0<>

<?

Z

2

0.0

/./

ft

HtNuiow

£■

$

I/. 1

0.P

1/2

3

3

30.0

0.0

foe

5/

£T

sf

27$

0.0

27$

WJUnt

/

/

2

£.3

&.1

/lb

/

/

10.0

00

/0,0

2

/

/

4.3

0?

v.g

Total

/¥

2

/&

MS

l2.i

too-

-X

3

to

mo

Jp.fi

/OS,

/3</

sf

/ge

72$

2f$

t?o

7#3L£ 4 79 £ML0JT/0/>/ <?S e2l?J£-ar

S/ayh/7-//f0S /?£>*

Sit

x-?*?a?s #y

/VM4£4

0S 04J£dfS /*££ 5/6#r//V6 £££ 0&/I/

0*

/?0££ 0>jt?j£<>rs

r

■T~0r/)L

/?</?

/<?</?

/?4/9

I

NumbH

Per Cent

number

PnCeat

Numbet

Percent

NumbH

Per Cent

ErtJuaJjofl

Certain

Omiflu

Tot*0S 04J£dfS /*££ 5/6#r//V6 £££ 0&/I/

0*

/?0££ 0>jt?j£<>rs

r

■T~0r/)L

/?</?

/<?</?

/?4/9

I

NumbH

Per Cent

number

PnCeat

Numbet

Percent

NumbH

Per Cent

ErtJuaJjofl

Certain

Omiflu

Tot*

Certain

Doubrful

Tub)

Certain

amMftji

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

cwert.

Doubtful

Total

Certain

fjouotttil

Total

Certain

Doubtfu:

Total

Certain

Doubtnil

Total

O-Balloon

/

/

2

/■s-

/.S

30

0.0

r^r-7

W

_£_

ao

0.0

O.O 
?S,0

0,0

0.0

0.0

I-Astrammical

V

f

7

&./

¥s-

/0 6

/?

0.0

0-0

00

/

/

0.0

2S-0

£2.

J2.0-

0.0_

0.0 
/l.S

00

?-Aircuft

3.

4

$

30

?/■

/ze

0.0

0.0

00

/

*J

/

25:0

0.0

25.0

/

/

3-Lijbl Ptlenoll.

S

3

<£s

00

«s

00

0.0

0.0

.0

0.0

00

0-0

-0-0]

0.0

♦-Birds

J

f

4

0.5

/.&

4-0

0.0

0ft

AQ

0.0

00

00

2.

<?

2

2S.O

00

2S.0

5-Cloud5, Dust, etc

0.0

0-0

0-0

■0

0:0

0.0

00

-JL

0S?

0-0

ao

^

-0-0.

00

00

t-lniurric kih.

f

$

/2/

00

/2J

O

'

0.0

0.0

00

/

/

2S-0

00

2&0

2.

P

7,

2£-^

0.0

2.^0

7-Piydnlo|icat

3

/

¥

</.£

/■£

6.0

/

(

Z

/4.7

ft.?

?L4

/

/

2S.0

00

ts/>

/

0>

/

/2£

0.O

/*■£ 
(ft

S-Uiiknow

25

2$

S7.9

0.0

272

V

¥

u.,7

0-0

i/e-7

_i2.

f?

0.0

00

00

/

/

lLS_

0-0

Mltfiti

V

f

£

£,./

/$

7C

0.0

00

0-0

_j2.

0.0

0.0

0.o

/

/

-U£-

ao

as

Tot^

£3

(3

&1,

S0.3

#■7

/OP-

5

/

6.

83.1

&.f

/OS.

3

/

tf

7so

2Z.D

/oa

7

'/

t

S7.S

/7<S

'00.

/f£& ... .

/9 s-/

/f£^2^

Evatulion

Hun Her

PerCrxt

Huober

Pet Cent

Number

PerCent

Nunber

Percent

Certain

Doublful

Jotalj

Certaii

Doubtkil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubthil

Tolat

Attain

Doubtful

Total

Cerbin

Ooubthil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Balloon

0.0

0-0

0.0

.

0.0

0.0

0.0

_ /

/

t

sjL

/V

4t

l-Aslranwnial

/

/

O7.0

0.0

*0-0

ao

0-0

00

3

2>

s

71

¥.9

12-2

2-Aucratt

00

O.0

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

/

$■

i

*.</

/2Z

'</&

"

>Li|bt PtMnon

0.00.0

0.0

_ /

/

t

sjL

/V

4t

l-Aslranwnial

/

/

O7.0

0.0

*0-0

ao

0-0

00

3

2>

s

71

¥.9

12-2

2-Aucratt

00

O.0

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

/

$■

i

*.</

/2Z

'</&

"

>Li|bt PtMnon

0.0

0.0

00

__2j

—0-\

0-0

0.0

0.0

__J\

3

7.2

0.O

7.3

4- Birds

P

_— 4L

-0J0

0$

0. O

/

t

0.0

$0-0

#>4

/

/

2.//

0-0

2.</

J-Cloudi, DibI. etc

9

00

0-0

_^

_<g_

jm

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

6-btsjffic brio.

a_

0.0

OO

/

/

20.0

0.0

20.0

</

4

9.2

0.0

?J

JPljdnlopal

e\

0.0

00

0O

0>

0.0

O0

S)0

-0

0.0

0<0

0.0

•MJMmtnm

/

/

50-0

00

£0.()

Z

.

2,

&J0

^ejL

</0o

'7

/t

<//.$

0.0

«/.$

VM*

0.0

0.0

0-0

/ .

I

200

0-0

fo.o

2,

/

3

44

*■¥

7J

/

T-

-2-

4

foap

0.0

'0Q.

//

/

£~

too

%>0

/oo.

22

9

v/

1Z.0

22.0

(00.

151

^ijtiT^Ti*^^**!* 1 !!?!""^^^^?"*^^ .-■v.[.»r»mi.

■T/?aL£ #fo £ML///t-r/<i?/* <?<r iPfJecr s/f,/tr/A/6S ^0* /?*.<- ite^s Jc

?

MM6

fjt 0f 0#J&£7S />£* */&#7-//y&. ty/%££A & J>fJ£drf 4S0r Z77?7&

1

,4it JfeM^

/<?</T

/?Sf

/?V?

I

_

Pel Cent

Portent

Nintrtr

Percent

rttnHet

PciCat

CtilutHn

CtftMl

Dubthl

ToUl

Certtn

DoubHul

ToW

:eitan

DouMfM

Total

Certain

DoofcrW

Total

;nt*n

ttxJbtM

Total

Cabin

DwMM

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

T«W

Certain

DoqMM

Total

'fr Billow

J"

/

/

is

2-2

87

/

/

m

00

a*

. ^

00

00

00

0.

P

00

0-0

0C

l-AslMoaiol

//

/

?2

2tf

t-l

7*7

__OL

P

00

0-0

00

J

/

/

0.0

?£-0

2S.fi

A

2,

4/O.0

0-0

We

'Mi refill

£l

?

6

AS

fr

«?■$

P

0J>

0.0

00

__£.

_0

0.0 0.0

0.0

0.0

00

OP

1-LitfK FtmM.

2.

^

3

</3

?.?.

if

<?

(?

0.0

00

00

_^

/

7

00

?S,0\

foe

/?

00

P

0.(1

llhrtJs

_J

^

3

is

0.0

*■£

(7

j^.

00

00

' '0>

0.0

0,0

0.0

0.0

0-0

00

S-CIojUj, Dm. tic

-<2.

r?

00

f?0

00

0.0

Ac

0.2

0j?_

10.0

OO

0.0

PQ

frltaorlic »*>.

//

,?

//

23.f

0.0

23f

2,

,

2*

ii.7

#.0

it?

. £■

2, 60/

0.0

EO-O

2.

Z

¥p-0

0.0

Vo-9

7-PsydBlofjal

_jg_

/

/

0-0

?200

0.0

Ac

0.2

0j?_

10.0

OO

0.0

PQ

frltaorlic »*>.

//

,?

//

23.f

0.0

23f

2,

,

2*

ii.7

#.0

it?

. £■

2, 60/

0.0

EO-O

2.

Z

¥p-0

0.0

Vo-9

7-PsydBlofjal

_jg_

/

/

0-0

?2

2.2

£0

00

0,0

0.0

00

<?

0.0

00

00

llNum

5"

T

>t>9

0.0

(0-9

&

0.O

p. a

<?P

<?

0. 00

0£>

/

J

/

200..

00

?0fi

*«»•>

2

^

2

j/.i

<?■{?

Y.J

0.0

0,0

0.0

0-0

0-0

00

0~

f?

00

0O

0.0

Tool

J&L

1?

&

tyo

(.?■&

/oo.

S

J

/0*0

0.0

W.

2

2,

f

5o6

S6.0

loo.

S

&

S- /0O.0

0.0

fOfh

/?£Z>

/?<?/

/9<2.

Nonber

Pa Cent

Hunter

Per Cat

MvMxr

Per Cat

Mioibn

FerCoit

1 Ivalinlw

Certain

Doubttul

Trial

Certain

Dm**!

Total

Certain

Onirtlul

ToW

Colai*

DoMM

Trial

Certain

DtaWut

Total

Certain

DoMM

Total

Certain

Oodittul

Total

Certain

UOUtrlM

Tout

[[KBWoon

f?

0.0

0.0

0,0

j££

00

^

f

s

<f.^r

JZ

9,7

jl-Asironomicil

■/2

0.0

00

0,0

££\

0.0

0-0

_/

ft

?

2?0

0.0

2f.0

il-Auctin

J7

/?

00

00

0.O

4JL

0.0

00

?

2

&

97

i$

162

,J-Lnh[ Prienom.

t>

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

ft, r-)

2.

2

LS

0.0

£.S

*-e»iii

0.0,

0.0

0O

#

<?■

O

0.0

0-0

0.(7

s

3

f-7

0.0

f-7

S-Ciouds, Ousl, etc

i0

0.0

00

00

<?

QJL

00

0-tP

0>

0.0

_££_

0.0

Mnatffic. toh.

.0

<?

00

00

0.0

2/

&

i.

>PB.O

00

'&>■&

J

J

9-7

0.0

11

. 7-PsychDlo|icil

.0

(?

0.0

00

00

<9

0.O

0-0

0.0

—0

/

/

00

S.Z 3.2

tUnkium

(f

00

00

&0

.0.0

0.0

0.0

</

/

/2.f

0-0

/2f

»«.„

/

/

/00.0

(10

/00.O

<?

00

0,0

/

/

£Z

0.0

3.2

Tom

/

/

/00.O

0.0

/6P-

2.

2-

fO0.0

00

/00,

JL

¥

S/

#7J /2f

t00.

■■*

15Z

Tfclf ffg/

-£jtf£.i tor/ 0/Y

^e__j^V;/ s/cs/rs/y as

V fiirt/9.r/0&T~ .. g^ s-j& s /rf/v6

t

Ac,

i

'/£SS*

S SfCeitm A<*P ££?$

It -/O $£C0A/t!>

//- 30 S fee VPS

3/- 6& S£ct*tpS

Enlaatw

•arabR

Pb Can

Nunber

Per Cent

Number

PuCmt

CcrtaiA

Nimbci

PeiCsnl

Ctrtam

DouMM

Tsui

Ctrtkfl

Doubtful ( Total

Certain

DouMW

Total

Certain

Doubtful3/- 6& S£ct*tpS

Enlaatw

•arabR

Pb Can

Nunber

Per Cent

Number

PuCmt

CcrtaiA

Nimbci

PeiCsnl

Ctrtam

DouMM

Tsui

Ctrtkfl

Doubtful ( Total

Certain

DouMW

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Aetata

Doubtful

Mil

Ortiin

ONbttul

TetH

QwHbi

Total

'20

Cc<lBin

OouMhU

Total

0- Bel lean

7

7

fO

orh

/.<J

23

i

5

8

/5

J P

f.B

-2J

/z

tf

u

1-t

7.1

7

tf

*•£

/■<t

19.7

1-AXmMial

/#J

'*?

nt.

TTf

VI

cu

4>y

;?£

71

«3

>*.$

<ti.l

JT

t 7

(1

n.<*

a

33.8

'5

19

Hi

?r

-TT

f • '

17.9

Mirnart

as

*t?

5£

C*

Ci

i:$

m

if

*(i

/*.*

*v

72 g

tt

ie

SI

n.t

n.t

V.0

If

71

(9?

■//■^

31.1

^Llpt nWOA.

Ol

J

4-

15

i.S

1

i

k

J

«.**

2,H

3

i

2

3

JU. °-t

11

X

f

O.O

/ o

1.6

«-Biro»

1

V

6

Ul

AJL

it-

i

i

2

0.<

o.o

17

i

i

?

Mj

o.t

Q.f

6

L..

7

3-1

(?. 5

IX

S-Cladl, Dot. (tc

I

/

Z

/>a

0-2.

Of

<7

9

0.

0.0

O.O

00

t

?

O.O

0.9

6.9

P

10

CO

0.0

MaariTitM).

ft

tf

7 6

f.3

<f

t.

1

5". 4

0.0

U

H

/6

CO

t

CO

11

/3

c 6

0.0

6C

^pqctereiicaj

2

1

«-S

Do

05

fl

a

0.0

0.0

0.0

?

;

<?

LI

1 1

3.0

2

Q

2

1.0

no

1.0

tlMM*

17

Q

3f

t.i

o.o

8<t

3'

»l

19.6

0.0

13 i

T6

Q

ftf

1l.)

0.9

3/<J

r.i

<i

V.l

o,o

HI

Wt»

iD

3

/I

13

0.7

3.0

3

X

1-7

0.0

hi

f

7

it-

If

h*

t.3

7

\ZL

S

1.5 J

lO

25

Total

7*7

>u

tn

m

H3S\

no.

//r

si

,61

H7

31. t

//».

'83

82

2iS

(T.I

so.-)

/BO.

t<,8

*e

194

IS- 5

7¥S

/to..

6/ J>&cM£>s —Syty/JVi/rfZ

£ -f& /y/wrss

frf/t 30 Af/*>?r**

Wer srjtne-p

Enlulin

Niinbn

PeiCem

AHjKf

PtfCoit

»■*«

PeiC«t

NuatCf

PttCait

Ceitaiii

Ooubttul

Total

Ctrtain

Ooublhi

Total

Certain

OwMlul

ToW

CstM

OooMM

Total

MtJin

OoobHiil

Total

Certain

OoubtM

Total

Cntaio

DoodHu

Total

Certain

DaiHtil

Total

0-uiou

<f

"i-5

108

'2.2

I 5

m

.J2

,#f

tft

<$.£■

//

2i.O

*z

a

S¥

/if

*J

li.7

n

3^

ff

L.I

1.9

10. 7

1-AlMMicX

/(

/*

11

7-3

l.l

s.iDoodHu

Total

Certain

DaiHtil

Total

0-uiou

<f

"i-5

108

'2.2

I 5

m

.J2

,#f

tft

<$.£■

//

2i.O

*z

a

S¥

/if

*J

li.7

n

3^

ff

L.I

1.9

10. 7

1-AlMMicX

/(

/*

11

7-3

l.l

s.i

Y*

P

64

8.7

3.2

II f

Jl

n

iv-

HI

(.8

w

m

f3

130

til

ft. f

37

NAiicnfl

77

(J/

m

/J.-J

I7.t>

n 3

fS

A3

!fii>

8-7

/7.Q

70.3

/J

t s

7&

S-2

i.o

ft. J

_l±

ff

111

9-7

18

/S.7

VLiiWPtwom.

~r

*

a

l-U

US

7?

.JS

(,

it

7.8

t. 1

7.9

i

7

3

Of

9-6

I A

s

1

7

».c

9.1

t.$

t-Bir*

i

i

0.7

0.0.

07

&

f

(

0.0

0.2

0.7

JL

J

1.1 o.o

1.7

■s

X

7

0.C

t,2

0.2

^av«b D«l, tic

i

7

6

0.2

it

10

•■?

J

,<

0.6

o.t

}.0

fi-

6

if

t.c

00

10

3

1

9

o.t

0-)

0.5

frkaillic. Wo.

**

^

kf

12.

o.o

81

<?7

1?

~i.t*

0.0

7<f

ts

IS

£.0

0-0

C.t

m

'?1

IC.g

o.o

it.2

7-Pqrdalotial

_£L

?

1

in

o-S

).?

//

//

l.i

0.6

7/

r

1

JO

01*

7. >t

8

?

/'

6.7

».»

I.I

9-lMgttM

/*/

^

'ft

?■>.(.

0.0

1U

/If

tf?

n.&

0.0

03. t

Ml

f

(0

id

0-f

7ti

171

177

70S

o.o

70.B

MMhd

/?

3-

32

37

0.6.

¥■3

■it.

?

H

3.0

1.1

V-7

II.

3

3

f.2

i-7

£f

IV

6

f(7

5.2

0.7

f <t

TotH

no

VJ«

m

77!

21-7

/to-

la

#*

f?7

70.*

11.1

/"a.

Iff

So

w

79.1

70.)

/Of.

tJi.

187

$52

7$.)

U9

(00.

•

7^rf/^ ^ /^

£MLMT/0&

£?/*

an

.</aS#r//v6.s

/?</

JwJry/3/v <ZF

s/tSs/rz/yd, '

tf4Z.

*

■ -

S~S&0#Pl #JM

L.CSS

6-/£>

//-f& tee was

S/-S6 .fecc/i/JJ

EhIujIkXi

Hwtn

Pa cm

imm

PnCat

Nwbti

Percent

Hunter

Percent

Cfltaia

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooitjlh

Total

Certaia

DoubHu

Total

Certain

DooatM

Total

Certaio

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoiAttul

Tom

Certain

Doutillu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

t-eannm

O.t

0.9

/>

O

DO

a>

to

/

t

CI

0.0

C7

&

0.0

0.0

0.0

1-Astnnmic*l

f

I

>e

m

91

P.I

6

A.

X

?510

2sp

/m

4

If-

no

on

75.0

X

(

3

25.0

l?.S

J7S-

?-Aiicritt 
Hi(ht PUbbh.

_C^

a'

i.'t

0.*

fit

t>

6>CI

0.0

C7

&

0.0

0.0

0.0

1-Astnnmic*l

f

I

>e

m

91

P.I

6

A.

X

?510

2sp

/m

4

If-

no

on

75.0

X

(

3

25.0

l?.S

J7S-

?-Aiicritt 
Hi(ht PUbbh.

_C^

a'

i.'t

0.*

fit

t>

6>

#0

0.0

00

i

' 1

o.o

t-X

U

~&

1

;

o.o

17-S

17-5

S

o.o

Q.9

o-O

£>

O

00

ao

0#

t.o

1.0

o.o

o

0.0

o.i

CO

4-Binb

t.o

t.0

Q-9

&

P

/>£>

01

#.£>

ZJL

0.0

OQ

9.0

d

0.0

0.0

0.0

5-CI«Kti, but. etc

Q

o 1

9.0

U

00

p

&

SO

w

#0

-0

Oft

00

0.0

a

/P

HP

09

IP

frrrcBilfic klo.

00

0.0

00

D

(?-

00

/?/>

00

■2

Q

3

it*

u

/75

£>

a

/)

0.0

0.0

o.o

7Psrckta(iGlf

t.o

0.0

9.0

p

o

' OL

00

p.o

9

1

/

0.0

CI

C2

a

4

o.o

0-0

O.o

tlMna

0.0

HO

o.o

_JL

c

€>

Q0

PO

0.0

I

£

37.S

t.o

175

?

So.o

D.0

io.o

Mthet

i

I

l.t

00

1.1

o

iP

6.0

o.o

ao

1

t

C?

6.0

6.7

/?

0.0

o.fl

00

Tola!

ii)

I

If

?t.1

1-t

IN.

6

2-

r

Jr.p

2S.&

w.

If

2

'(>

87.5

H6

lot.

(p

£

%

7S.0

7S.9

)Oi,

Ii

£/S^M£>S — S~J7/Jwr£S

£- tc tfiitures. .

.Z?.k£A—

x £0-£?Mi?4>Z£*

$BT Stateo

Etaluabo*

Paaitet-

Kb Cant

Nuaibei

Percent

Noabn

Pet Ctnl

Number

Pel Cent

Certain

Dwtitfiil

Total

Certaio

Oormttil

Total

;ertiin

Doobttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doutrthd

ToW

Certain

Oouttlut

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DnfapVil

Total

O-Salloon

-2

J.

70.6

o.o

w

a

fi

<?

o.o

O'fl

0.0

_£

^

L±

0.0

(■B

l-AitranBtal

a

<?

60

O.O

o.o

J

,<?■

O.o

o.o

O.O

//

</

At

■/9C-

f.$

1S-4-

}-AiKiatt

a

6

Off 
It

0.0 
00

so

<3

0-0

a.t

o.O

^s.

if

s

JJL

00

3-4

3-LllM PtKBM.

/

/O.o

<o

O-O

o.o

0.0

■M

/

/

i.l

■00

/•7

Minh

a

a

6

M

0,0

0.0

fJ

<'.■

0.0

1.0

0.0

'

\Zl

o

<?

o.t

0(1

0-0

K^owb. Oat. etc.

00

O.i

o.o

6

Si

t

t.0

0.0

0.0

i

C\

a

6

0.0

00

0.0

tRBctfic. Mo.

^

Z

70.0

O.o

tf.O

i

O

■i

(0.0

19

C0.O

v .

Z3

7

n.f

(10

fl.f

7-pTfdkDbpcfi

?

o>

00

o.o

j

A

0.0

0.1O.i

o.o

6

Si

t

t.0

0.0

0.0

i

C\

a

6

0.0

00

0.0

tRBctfic. Mo.

^

Z

70.0

O.o

tf.O

i

O

■i

(0.0

19

C0.O

v .

Z3

7

n.f

(10

fl.f

7-pTfdkDbpcfi

?

o>

00

o.o

j

A

0.0

0.1

0.0

\

1

/

y

i.l

1-1

1.8

%-O-katm

s

</

h '9.0

00

ifOO

~?

O

3

no

00

ifi.O

AX

r>

s*

70.3

00

[21^L

*&m

/

/

/O.O

0.0

/t.o

#

o

&

0.0

Q.9

o.o

-&.

a

/9

??.7

CO

73.7

Total

/o

/#

loO.

00

ISO-

S

r

MO

0.0

ftO.

SI

-&

%5

$.$

JOQ

153

&

jmu, __2&£-

e MtLtfivr/ipA/

/?^ J<LJ. S/q j */T//>'6S rfif /Jl ffA '?-/£>/& t?S SS^ /iT/A/^

1

J

" SFCCA/J7S A/ff leu

ifVtf S&CCH05*'

//- f<Z> f^coA/aji

y/ —&o £££0.v#i,

r ■ ■■

nun bet

Per Coil

Nuinbei

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Nimbd

Per Cent

Evaluation

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

Cert* it

Odutntfui j Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cfllao

Doubtful

Totrl

:«i»n

Doubtful

Totil

Certain

Doubt Kil

Totil

Certain

Ooubttil

Total

Cabin

Doubtful

Told

o-eniMd

/

-?

-?

1?

5?

1$

d

/

/

o.O

f.c

s-.L

' . T

«

'o.o

a~r

til

D

a

a

0.0

Of

o.«

l-Ailmnonicat

6

/f

/7

nc

nt

rpfi

-±

-2

£

XXX

///

S3.?

<?

/

/

o.o

0.*

n

4

o

to

a?

o.o

i-Amiaft

-^

Q

j?

Si

0.0

r-t

<?

o\

SO

0.0

0-0

/

/)

/

fJ

00

f.s

3

5

L6.0

3-tight Phenom.

/

/

19

OJ

7?

y

</

o.o

n?

m

<?

/

•

OJ

n

?i

si

o

a

s.o

I-Bii*

/

/

??

9

Jf.f

a

a

o.s

■ o.?

7.0

&

0>

a

0.1

Q.O

0.0

a

o.o

Mr,

Q.O

0.9

VClwdt, Oral, etc.

<0

a

A

00

0.0 A

jV

<o

8-0

Q.0

0.0

01

$

erf

00

QJ

~£-.

#_

o

Q.O

0*

0,0

Unsflic. tifc.

_^2.

#

r.t

OJ

r.f

JJ-

6

/

sT\

0.0

r.c

/

' a

/

f-3

00

9.%

/

J

/

09.0

o9

w

7-Pircngfeftcal

.a.

r?

<?

90

0.0

<?*»

a

d

0/1

0.6

0.0

07

£?

<3

o.s

SP

oJ

&

a

#

O.fi

fJ

OJ

l-UNma

7

7

70- C.

■?«

_£

d

£

713

op

;3.7

&"

o

J

HIl

O.O

H'.l

#

a

a

O..0

9.0

>J

MHlw

a

/

V

IS

j?7

^JL

d

0.0

6J

00

ri

/

/

Q.i

n

to

/

o

/

20.O

0,0

290

Tglil

2£>

/f7

70- C.

■?«

_£

d

£

713

op

;3.7

&"

o

J

HIl

O.O

H'.l

#

a

a

O..0

9.0

>J

MHlw

a

/

V

IS

j?7

^JL

d

0.0

6J

00

ri

/

/

Q.i

n

to

/

o

/

20.O

0,0

290

Tglil

2£>

/f

/*

iff. 9

V/.l

/V*.

7L

-Zji.

*(■)

30.1

too.

7

•*-'/«

m

tn

/OS,

4\UL

j~

IM

0.V

m.

i

€/ SetoHPS -— S'/tf/A/vrsj

6 — JO Sf/wm

ti?lst?# 3# /W'/l/jO-fJ

/Vt/T .*>T*r^z?

Enlntion

Ktanber

PerCal

Nwibei

PerCem

hhinber

Pei Cent

Number

Pet Celt

Ortiil

DoubM

Total

CertM

Ontthl

Total

:«Uin

Doubtful

Tom

Certan

Doubttul

Tola!

:eit«n

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

a-bllom

y

¥

6

Cl

un

m

4

^

$

/■3.0

21.1

3*7

^J

£

50.0

o.o

roj

£

6

/A

7.0

V

W.9

l-Astnuiical *

/

^

-3

ML

133

700

_JL

/

%

3o.f

*■■*

Ml

zZ

<?

i

33.3

0*

33-^J

/v ^? 3C «-3

2S.L

HI f

;-Autian

3

/

/

20.Q

Cl

3£-7

r

/

2

V-3

1.1

e.6

/

c

'/

Al

OJ

£3

_£

1

9

5.8

J.S

7-3

J-Li(hl Ptienm.

o

a

0.0

9 J

v.O

/

. 6

/

4.3

o.t

^3

4

Of

tJ>

Q.O

S\

/

/

0.0

t.1

f.-2

I-BiiiH

a

<?

0.6

U

o.O

J

I

0.9

M

9.3

a

o

j

Of

O.O

9.0

_L

*

3

i.-x

3-3

J.5

S-Clwos. Dust, tit

4>

a

OJ

0.0

&

a

06

0.9

9.0

_£

a

d

o.s

OJ

o.s

<?\

C

0.0

00

O.o

S-manit nib.

JZ.

<R

/M

0.0

/3.3

/

/

ft

09

V3

^

a

0.0

10

Q.Q

JL

J

//

118

0.0

ti.g

7-PtrdBloiicH

o

(7

6.6

OJ

0.0

a

6

O.O

Ofi

It

/

/

9-i

00

6.3

^

6

0.0

OJ

o.o

MMaia

t

/

il

o.o

0-1

*

#

U

0.<3

0-fi

<?

t.t

0.9

0.0

_x.

■t

f-3

O.O

f.3

MWw

&

rt

a

0.0

OJ

00

&

A

£

M.

8.1

11

*

4

0.0

ijs

<fj

_i

</

1

*.€

f-7

f.2

[

l.til

.jL

7

tf

na

w

lot.

IL

/0

23

«.5

HIS

100.

M.

'*

■/ou

0-0

/at.

£2.

\i*

H

«.?

Ml

100

rme #r£_

£/4iv/>r/0A/ t?r ~#£i~ s/6#rs/ir~fis /?</' a#te/)r/0A/ af s/<5&r//V£.

/?<??

s

1

5" Se ce/v#s A/vf

J.&J

&-/P se-to/ypj

//-?£ Jetre/rfs

3/-££ S£-tlt#p5

1

Nwba

PeiCnt

Nufflba100

rme #r£_

£/4iv/>r/0A/ t?r ~#£i~ s/6#rs/ir~fis /?</' a#te/)r/0A/ af s/<5&r//V£.

/?<??

s

1

5" Se ce/v#s A/vf

J.&J

&-/P se-to/ypj

//-?£ Jetre/rfs

3/-££ S£-tlt#p5

1

Nwba

PeiCnt

Nufflba

Pel Cent

NurtMf

Pel Cent

Number

Pel Cent

j Enalujlnn *

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtk

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoiMhl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

OtUkm

a

a

r>

o.o

OJ

0.0

^

(P

0.0

00

CO

/J

c?

^

OJ

0.0

OJ

O

0.0

Q.O

0.0

I'Aitnmonical

/j

%z

?s

11. H

no

nt

Z 1

6

<o

0.0

M1.1

V29

U-

£

^-?

10.0

io.t

Cf.O

-?

}

It

10.-}

'It

/f1

2-Aitcrift

a

V

V

o.o

\9

%-i

a

/

/

°.f

1.1

7-1

ji

<7

J

to.o

0-0

iS.O

. 7,

(?

7

no

OJ

If. 9

3-Li(ht Phenoa.

a

a

90

0.0

t.t

a

(7

M

0.0

o.o

<?

£)

e.f

0.0

0.0

C

10

J.t

1)1

t-Brnb

a

/

/

0.0

1.0

1.0

-^

<?

/

7/

0.6

!■!

4

/

p/

o.o

o-i

?

/?

J

10.1

6.0

in

S-Cfoudi, Dait, etc

{i

o

OJ

tj

0.9

a

<3

a

0.0

90

OJ

<3

<?

a

f.o

o.o

o.O

a.

(0

P

0Q

00

OJ

frlnsuffic bib.

-^

t

</

3.?

Q.O

H

/

/

7.)

9t>

1.1

/_

4

/

JA

SJ

SJ

L

o

1

It

o.o

3. (>

7-Pifcholo|iial

s

a

<f

O.o

0.0

OJ

' d

d

o,

OJ

0-0

9.0

J

d

<?

Q.O

0.0

OJ

o

0.0

00

9J

b-UnhiBW

/

a

/

1-0

o.o

1.0

_x

V

m

Q.O

m

S\

4

5~

QS.O

o.g

0.0 
OJ

25.0 
OJ

/3

U-1

OJ

hCt

9-0 Iba

£>

o

0.0

0.0

00

/

1.1

O.O

i.i

j

a

a

p

0.0

0.0

o.O

Total

/;

/at

■/a

m

/00.

-t

7

ML

50.0

iO.O

lOO.

4-

4

j<?

7 0.0

3P.I

100.

J^L

/

M

IC.k

3C

/0O.

6/SfCtMPs — S'Afj/fvrFS

f-Jj0 Af/wrrj

OvFt? 300 srs*vr^5

/l/er Sr^r.ejp

EvalualuHi

Nurnoer

Per Cent

Number

PerCenl

Nurtier

P« Cent

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Doubltu

Total

Certain

Doubthi

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Daibthl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

'Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubthi

Total

Certain

Doubtful

TotalDoubltu

Total

Certain

Doubthi

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Daibthl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

'Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubthi

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

'7

/

/P

23.1

It

tf.3

X

It

£

l.t

9.1

/J -3

P

O

0.0

0.0

0.0

r

Q

s-

3.f

c

3.1

l-Aitiwomi»t

-

5"

7

5.1

fM

IIS

6~

6

/J. 3

Q.O

13--}

3

1

H-

m

r-f

ti-5

#z

10

77-

324

zm

st.z.

7-Airuatt

7

~2_

f

'It

f-3

OJ

337 
0.0

5

13

't

II. 1

m

to.o

(

I

OJ

?.<}

r.f

fo

9

/r

7.3

3.f

II .7

3-Li|fit Ftinooi.

0.0

P

0>

OJ

0.0

OJ

P

0.0

o J

o.o

o.s

OJ

9

4-BiifS

c

r

0.0

»■#

O.O

o

o.o

■0.1

o

P

0.0

o.o

i.i

p

p

O.o

t

5-Cloud!, Oisl. etc.

o.

ft

to

. u

OJ

1

0.0

0.0

• A

P

Q.O

0.0

o.o

00

e.o

00

o-lnulfic. bib.

.„_£

6

J19

o.o

IS-2

Z

7

*#

OJ

#4-

1

Q

!

5.1

0.9

n

26

*0

i5.6

o.o

l*c

7-Psycholii|iuJ

.. JL.

o.O

o.o

Q.O

/

1

7-1

0.0

1-2

0.0

OJ

o.t

I

9

2

U

9 J

9C

B-tJiuaioiin

C

T

in

OJ

ua

//

rf

2t¥

o.o

lit

6

Q

6

35.3

0.6

353

//

//

3-6,

O.o

WJthel

/

1

2C

0.0

u

/

/

-il

0.9

3.2

r

| £_

r

Tu-

■0.0

2#

.J

p

?

3-3

o.o

2.3

~2V3

ICO,

Total

30

%

if

w

21.1

100.

?1

n

ur

612

n.s

J 00.

/r

X

17

rn

l/.S

/SO.

93

3T

M

17.1

I

154

•

r/ttif dgz" ■£ r Mi.i//fry/p/t/

0>S

tin

s/6/yr//i'6S

tf</

rf/sjesryp/j/

<&.

_</s->//r//*6.

■ f*&

-^

_f 3FCO/VJS AW / :.«"« .

6-/0

3 £<-£*■& 7/-3P JfCOtf&S

?/

-<fj Ss cusps

Number

Percent

Nwnbei

Per Cent

^Ni/mber

PaCdit

Nwrtti

Ph Cent

1 Evaluation.

Cttlun

OouMtul

Total

Ctrtwi

Doubtful

i Tolal

-ttU«i

(ftubtful

Tottl

Cctlain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Owidlftil

Total

Ctrt»n

OOllbtlUl

Total

Cotim

DniUtut

Total

Cabin

OosdHuI

Tot*

'O.fJalloOn

/

/

0,0

0.0

mp

. Q,

p

0.0

9

00

O

/

/

0.0

♦ 5

¥.8

/

O

/

/P.0

0.0

/0.O

: l-Ailranomcal

f?

$

2P

Jlf.P

3a.s>

00.C

__£

2

3

>n

2M

nv

-k-

/

7

Qg.i

«.>i3.»

2./

/

0,0

0.0

mp

. Q,

p

0.0

9

00

O

/

/

0.0

♦ 5

¥.8

/

O

/

/P.0

0.0

/0.O

: l-Ailranomcal

f?

$

2P

Jlf.P

3a.s>

00.C

__£

2

3

>n

2M

nv

-k-

/

7

Qg.i

«.>i3.»

2.

2 0.0 2-00

^.a-6

7-Aiiciafl

1

/

#-.e

00

0.0

~J-

P

*

ni

0.0

m

i~ 2

7

11.2

t.i

3J 3

,.„- 2 1

X

?M

^£L£-2J*0

)-Li|>itPlwo«.

O

-JM

P. O O-D

P

^

0.6

o.o

0.0

P

<?

O.o

0.0

0.0

. .P.

o

P4

-M£.

0.fi

t-BiidJ

o

P

0.e

0.0

P.O

r

CL

0,1)

at

<u

<2

P

0.0

9.0

Q.Q

~2

a

04

0.6

0.0

fcCloudi, Dust, elc

p

At

r.o

0-0

P

__£_

0.0

0-9

u

...6

P

o.o

0.6

0«

o

a .

i>.0

00

o.o

t-tiftufht. Mo.

-7

" p

X

. gj

010,

<So

. .Q 0>

f)

OJ

<19

it

J

P

f

t.t

~HJ\

1-t

n

p

_n^

0.0

6JL

O.O

7-Ptydnlo|iOl

r

p

c>j

a.o

0.0

a

■ P

0'

0.9

u

0>

0.0

Off

t.e

a

_<2-

04

O.0

0.0

(.(Mown

f

p

/

./hP

-£JL

U.0

D

P

«.o

0.0

to

S

70

r

n.s

0.0

73. f

u-

r>

■ H;

If 0,0

06

J£&£

*0t*p

c

p

0J

S.0

P.O

P

0.*

0.0

u

6

P

'0.0

Q.S)

0.0

/

o

_j_

fs.o

fi.d

/fio

.

Ml |

/?

tT

?s

0T.C

3JJ

(PC

^L.

*

7

n*

7U

/It- >7

H-

z/

919

no

I6t.

f

X

'&

?(>.0

P-0'0

S00,

4/.

^£-0£A/r^ — jr.^jv0r^is i

6~~yP /J/M&TSS

6

VS/f

yp /*/A/£ir£S

A/or Sr,*r£c

E«algit«n

Number

Pet C*nt

Nuinoer

Per Cot

Kumber

PerCent

Kusiger'

'

PnCoil

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Oovbttul

Tolal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooiibttul

Total

Certain

Douiilrg

Total

Certain

DoubHul

Tola!

0- Balloon

s-

/

(

It

/$

/n

yj

f7

3/7

CI

MM

9

P

^H

J?. 6

0O

&*

J-- /

4

HM

JC

5.1

Mitnnmical

4-

p

V

7/

o.o

i-i

*

P

t+

£.7

O.O

cn

.?

/

3

f.o

0,$

12.0

?e

//

3/

tf-l

IO.%10.tf

z-AiKon

~7

I

f

as

i-S

\*-l

3

<i

7

U

a

tl.l

r

r

0.0

20.0

■?c.o

n

3

Zo

(in

Vi

If.i

3-Lifhl Ptienoffl.

10

P

o.o

OJ

?■*

Q\

P

0.0

o.o

o.t

o

p

Ox>

O.o

00

&

0>

O

o.o

o.o

o.o

a-Bjdis

P

o\*-l

3

<i

7

U

a

tl.l

r

r

0.0

20.0

■?c.o

n

3

Zo

(in

Vi

If.i

3-Lifhl Ptienoffl.

10

P

o.o

OJ

?■*

Q\

P

0.0

o.o

o.t

o

p

Ox>

O.o

00

&

0>

O

o.o

o.o

o.o

a-Bjdis

P

o

0.6

BO

t.e

P

&

0.0

0.0

t.l

o

0-0

0. (

<>0

0.0

01

s.o

S-Clouds, Ousl etc

P

O.O

0.6

Q..0

P\

o.t

0.6

G.O

p

a

P

0.0

O.O

0£>

p

6

0.0

0.0

o.o

tVlnaltic hlb.

(f

P

/r

lit

0.0

ii.g

.3

r>

3

S.B

04

5,t

. M

P>

a-

/t.0

\0

/6.0

^.tf

p

*H

33.J-

o.o

23f

7-Psyclal>ticil

>

P

/

JJ-

(1.0

l-S

7i

p

3

s.o

0.0

f.o

4

&

0.0

0.0

<?.o

0.0

O.o

o.o

tunlooirn

/6

P

/£

!#.£■

0.0

1U

x*

p

•U

U.l

0.0

U-i

?

■ /?

r

0&A

0A

2t>,o

/f

1*

n.(,

o.o

n.t

MBit!

.?

7

6>

W

r.f

19.%

J

i

^

Ml

5.0

01

(?

0>

0j

0.0

°4

2-

7-

7

7-0

Of

1-1

Total

ri

r

r*

91.}

9.9

100.

#t

//

£0

9M

18.1

100.

J±

/

^r 76.0 At.o

/D0,

U

//

/02

m

/S7

100.

r/f£L£ £££_

Jfs/

&' **'

£'£,A>r/A/&< £</ /9/AeJT,0A/ /jy=-_ S/S//Z://V6„

J> JfCO/fPS /jW /.£35

£~-/0 JVr^/W

//'S0> sssavjzs

3>/-jf<0> 5£S0*0J

Evaluation

Number

Percent

Hunbei

Per Cent

Hunber

PerCent

Nunber

PeiCenl

Certain

DDUbthl

Total

Certain

Doubtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain

Doubtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Don MM

Total

0-Batloon

i

0,6

0.0

t.o

<?

0.0

O.O

0.0

/

d

I-

1.1

P.a

f.l

0.0

0.d

0.0

l-Ajbonmical

ir

2

IX

m

I/.8

70- C

f

/

r

ffe.o

fZ.S

*7.t

CI

P

UH

■ . 0.0

3CV

J?

/

/

to

££0.

?0,Q

;-Aiicr>n

J_

p

/

S-f

0.0

if

/

P

t

(2.S

0,0

/J,!

3

3

n-i

09

3 7.3

?

• I

if

60J

Z0.0

$00

3-Li(l\t PhenoK.

o

0>

GO

0.0

o.t

P

p

0.6

0.0

O.O

p

0.0

0.0

01

t.o

0'

4-Birtlj

p

P

o

to

o-o

<IQ

P

#

0.6

0.O

P.O

a

}

/

0.0

<?■'

%l

P

0M

0.6

0,0

s-ctowis, am. etc.

p

O.t

0.0

■o.t

a.

O.O

01

0.0

o.O

O.i

ft

0.

-0£.

0.0

0.0

6-lnsuHic. Mo.

p

9.0

0.0

t.(l

f.O<IQ

P

#

0.6

0.O

P.O

a

}

/

0.0

<?■'

%l

P

0M

0.6

0,0

s-ctowis, am. etc.

p

O.t

0.0

■o.t

a.

O.O

01

0.0

o.O

O.i

ft

0.

-0£.

0.0

0.0

6-lnsuHic. Mo.

p

9.0

0.0

t.(l

f.O

0.0

0.0

p

a

o.o

0.0

OJ

0.t>

p.o

p.0

IPiytrototiiat

P

P

0.0

0.0

1.1

p

0.6

o.o

0.0

■

o

U

t.t

Oi

ft

D.O

0.0

0.6

1-Unbnw

V

r

4

ns

0.0

11.5

_2=,

<?

t

2?,C

0.0

f.S-,0

z

X

18.X

.9.'

i9-2

-JLt\

0.0

0.0

*Odwr

p

P

s.o

0.0

to

d

p

p. a

0.0

P.0

o.o

o.o

o.Q

Q_

p

00

<0.0

0.0

'

ToU

/r

j

(7

m

//J

JQQ.

7

/

?

17J

/J.*

/O0.

/t>

/

f/

f0.9

f.f

We.

3

2.

J-

60.0

UP.0

/00

t

m

// ' SjTC£A/j?J — f^fcyprfS

£-JP Af/Asvrfrs .

001/trff 3£> /*//i/p-r£Ts

A/or States'

Evaluation

HoBto

Pn Cent

Hunber

PerCent

Humbei

Pei Cent

rntmbei

Pet Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtnil

Total

Certain

_0w*Hull

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtnil

Total

Certain

Doubtlul

Total

A-Balloon

A

f

3

7-7

3.g

J/.S

>

• P

?-

£3

o.o

S3

/

P

I

/2.S-

J.P

^r

#

7

CG

*.f

n.s

l-AiliDnpaical

f

(

1.0

?-2

u

3

I

V

as

HA

IL-1

I

/

2.

/2.<T

S0.0

tr.o

3

00

73

*-f

>Cf

3/.1

?Ancijrt

*-> 
•>

1

tf

//-5

3,S

IS. 3

X

f

6

9-1

til

25.o

. /...

P

/

/J.sr

J.0

/?.f

2

7

U

■3. "3

1.1

{,-(,

HigH torn*.

>

/

o.o

3.S

If

_L

/

42

o.o

H-1

(2

o.o

0.0

0.0

/

P

/

'■t

0.Q

>.c

(-Birds

P

p

t.o

to

o.o

JL

P

O.o

oo

9J

o

Af

00

0.0

o.o

0.0

».t

S-Oouilj, Out. dc.

n

0.0

o.o

U

. .0

s.o

Q.O

t.O

0.0

M

40

f>

Q.0

0.(1

i.O

frtrouffic. Wo.

i

P

/

rs

\i

I

/

1.2

0.0

1-t

2^

z

^,<\

0.0

?s*

yp\

/P

It-U-

(10

H-1

7 Ptrctnlopal

/

A

0.0

3-8

it

P

p.

Q.O

04

0.0

__La

0.0

00

./

'■ /

It

0.0 ■

It

l-tlnbm«i

/?

r

15

So.O

x 0.o

} i.O

y

P

7

an

0.0

in

.. ^

P

*

35,0

00

2Zo

.2A

- P

?Z

X.i

0.o

Hi

MMiar

-^

o

?■

77

60

7-1

,?0.0

__La

0.0

00

./

'■ /

It

0.0 ■

It

l-tlnbm«i

/?

r

15

So.O

x 0.o

} i.O

y

P

7

an

0.0

in

.. ^

P

*

35,0

00

2Zo

.2A

- P

?Z

X.i

0.o

Hi

MMiar

-^

o

?■

77

60

7-1

,?

Q

3

17 5

4.0

/J.S

P

p

0.0

0.0

0°

3

O

J

f-.f

0.0

f-i

Total

2.1

r

*6

t0. 9

/f.l

/SO.

JL

f~

M

m

70.9

100.

7

/

r

•??.$

as

700.

46

75~

67

7*4

7t.lt

/0O,

155

) .7v j '\i^*s-js™?*v«>.'*(.r i iy^^f¥'Fr

mm/mmmm

agijc- ^ gf ^Ml.£/Ar//2>A I -

fr

rftt

&6 #r/#6S.

rfs /?/je*r/0/l/

e?f

SsSAsS/s&a

tfs-z

1 -

T $ ££ c#ps At//? Mess £-/0 sete/trs

/t-30 Sf£i>ff£>J

-J/- tiff Sectitos

1

nmlm

PetColt

(lUBOW

Fa Cent

ffclftgef

PeiCcal

NwntWf

PbChH

Evaluation

Cert»n

Doubtful [ Total

Certain

DmiMfcl Tom

Eefttio

Doubtful

loU

Cirtan

Doubt™

Total

:«tao

Doubtful

Total

Ccttno

DoobtM

Total

Cntaiii

DoubtKll

Total

Cstaia

OMbttal

Total

>3.i

0- Billow

/

f 6

OH

7 (7! 7*

J

U

7

t.7

Si

i-3

n

1

/¥

5-7

99

I.i

$

//

If

sjj

y?

l-Aitigiwical

>/a\

_M

I 74

Wt

~2H$±*

Zl

fr

¥M

151

n.v iri

J-6

f

1 s

ill

,+r

/Hi?

/?

-~£a

(5

i.i

?■£.

19.7

2-AncuH

711

2~'l

w

it

f8

in

/?

i?

■31

17.0

IU

QU

?-H

31

&&

if)

'78

3(1

■211

10 **

n.\

it.i

Zl.t

i -

:>\jt* Ptienon.

L

3

04-

02

n

1

a

1

4

o.»

9 >

/

1

X

5

o.i

1.9

c

*

X

0. 6

l-H

If

4-Biub

i

7|

tf

°H

H

i-t

1

1

0.0

09

9

/

t

0.5

0.0

OS

3\

/

¥

1-1

0-7

3.0

S-Clwft. Dial, etc.

t

/

3

01

Oil 2

p

0,

o,

0.0

0.0

0-0

£>

2-

a

Q.C

i.i

I)

t>

O

fi

Of

~l~o\

0.0

S-Umllic, Mb.

/i

Y>

//

Ml

'•']_££

7

P

7

(1

0.9

CI

If

e>

ii

S.9

0.0

«?

1/

f>

it

11

0.0

7. r

I-psyctiolofical

1

r

3

99

lo\ 0%

c

o

(10

O.d

0-0

S

7-

7

J-7

ii

u

z

o

z

l-l*

0.0

1-9

t-UnkMM

JL.£

£>

S^

10 &

'O-qVq.I

>1

£>_>

I *

no

o.fl

n.>

?3

P

33

ns

0,0

ITS

J/d

¥*

08. t

0.0

ip.t

4-OD*

1

■7

/ f

3.7

oi\*i

1

n

1

Of

0.0

O*

If

f

12

7.2

ts

i-S

1

JJL.£

£>

S^

10 &

'O-qVq.I

>1

£>_>

I *

no

o.fl

n.>

?3

P

33

ns

0,0

ITS

J/d

¥*

08. t

0.0

ip.t

4-OD*

1

■7

/ f

3.7

oi\*i

1

n

1

Of

0.0

O*

If

f

12

7.2

ts

i-S

1

J

3

_fiJ.

\.H

?■/

Total

1 70

Z*l*Jf£.

iff

Hi

ISS.

79

H

//JZ

715

bit?

IP«.

lit

£4

ffS "A

W

lOt

9?

¥1

/#0

70.7

SU M.

£/ Sjt^ca/ps — £~At/jwrFS

f-34 AfWTFJ

t?v£~sr 30 s*/,vur&j

M r ST*r£-0

NunbP

PBCent

Nmtiei

Pet Cent

Nuriiei

Pa Cent

NuoibH

Pel Cent

j Enlvatnn

CotaiiT

iDniiiW

Total

Certain

Dwdtnii' Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doibtlut

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OouWfal

Total

Certain

DoutitM

Total

Certain

DoaMfol

Total

ju-BalloHi

-A&

3/C

£*

n-i

-it

V.6.

*o

-ff

in

/fTj

./?■?

2U

Ai

(7-

3?

1*4

Zlli

m

3r

?*

57

u

r.3

m

|l-Aslmw<>Kil

'/

f

I \

i.i

731

3-3

23

/r

??

i^.

*■/

to-}

-Z7.

iq

H)

WH

"TT|

ii.i

^

H

61

o.i

3-*

15.1

J-Airciift

■ >";

*f-

m

if. 7

/£#

V.I

yj'

iff

13

ili.

//■/

>9-l

If

i

20

ft

H.9

lO.l

_JtZ - 3&

8*

it. 5

8-1

M.I

Z-Ufit Ptiana.

<

?

i

1.1

«.8

IS

/J"

4

'?

3^-

!(,

S.I

_ /

z-

3

as

JJ-J

u

3

1

H

01

0.1

Of

:*-B»4j

/

r

i

0-1

t. c

0.3

i?

o

O.f?

O.O

0.0

... 3

o

3

IG

9.0

Ii

If

O

H

1.0

o.o

I.B

S-Cloods, Oust, etc

/

7

8

«i

'■f

1-1

__i!

. i

5

0.2

9S

i-1

u.

o

*

1.1

00

11

3

1

t+

_07

0.7

t-9

^tlnunic. Inh,

IS

■

10

J. CI

0.0

5.0

^t

p

3f

7.2

7 8

9

o

8

H.Z

Q.t

■*.J

7/

fi

11

ill

0.0

ill

J-Ps»tl»to|icjl

Ii

3

1

hi

0.9

If

V

7

11

DO

f.9

f

1

4

11

OS 1t

*~\

t

3

OS

0.2

01

t.untonM

ft'

191

77.8

0.0

n&

??

p

77

20.2

o.o

?P8

J&

o

tTS

sa. 3

0.0

19.1

/fit

I0L

75.5

0.1

5U

««m

JX

ff

1%

3.3

0.6

1 3

/r

y

/f

1.0

I.I

1.1

9

1

1/

V.3

It

J7

(1

/

to

¥.6

0.2

f.B

Total

m

HI

3*3

est?

III

196..

2^7

//3

J7<?

£9.S

10. s

166.

IH

41

IZ7

m

211

ISt,

738 7f

t/Zd

m

11%

too.

156/f

1.0

I.I

1.1

9

1

1/

V.3

It

J7

(1

/

to

¥.6

0.2

f.B

Total

m

HI

3*3

est?

III

196..

2^7

//3

J7<?

£9.S

10. s

166.

IH

41

IZ7

m

211

ISt,

738 7f

t/Zd

m

11%

too.

156

jae/.r /) ft? £t/#f. //^r/i?/p tfr /S/tz/r S/r,#r//v6s &y ai/jp/tr/a/i/ a>/r s/^^rz-v^

^/i /-r^y

-

SSeccfi/rs AA/a //so

6- /{? -S>c- *> *vps

// - jr

}f- i-fiur* S/ '- &0 sr mvc ■>

Evaluation

Numoet

PnCwt

Number

Pel Ccnl

Numbn

Pet C»t

Humbei

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubllur

Toy

Certain

Dmfctiul

Total

lertafl

DoubMul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cerum

Doubt nil

Total

Cataid

Doubtful

CI

// ,6

D-Billoon

J

J"

A*

^y

fin-

-?,3

3

t+

1

*A

%i

fj

—A

/0

-Jl\

.-?^3

Si LI

I

/(?

-J2-

■£L

1-Astnnoniol

/^/

r^rf

rVr 7

%u

Zf-S

tt f

-1L

Z3

Sf

3L7 no

?17

jf

'4

-£*

/111

.AlLzsl.

f¥

(

J2

JLL

</9/%J

Mfruafl

S3

,2/

ftf

~£S

(■■5

r?.r>

Xo

//

1/

i<(.t 1.121.1

-j2£

33

fMt %

JL/a

v.t

?/

2Z

S3

jSA.

/1<31..<

Hignt Pfierroit.

J-

,Z

,/

6,6

t.L

/.,?

i

2

1

-At

lb

■t.l

i

1

J

tl 1

_&J

f.fl

P

Z

3

-2JL

/•?

t-A

I-Binfs

3-

*

y

6-0.

/■/

/ r

1

/

/>.a

-&l

<f,7

L

1

. *

04

Z>f IJ

0-

/

L

_ii

dC

Y7

5-Cloudj, Out, «lc

/

V

6.6

rf1

<<,"

e

o

JlA.

Jll\

fl.P

z

..?

ac

\JJ-

fi?

6

t>

-Ml.

l^JL

Ad

Miwiflic kits.

_/?

' <?

/?

<.l

•■'

/„■?

~H

o.

$

SSL

-AL

SI

a

-J.t\

1*?

ML

7.3

i(

&

/I

M-

-&&,

a

7-Pficholofial

1

a

,7

a£

f^^

rM*

<!

JUL

_££]

/l,0

-^l'- *

7

zl\

^iS

U

A

2

-JJl

as

t-A

frlMmwi

31

<?

1/

JJ.

«*rf

(T7

M.

*f

jM

JLL

ttt

3S

6

xi

af

AA

l-ff

Ul

ys

2U

a. 6

xt. .4

^0«i«

-A.

J

tz

*■<

fit

7.3

2

p

f

/■s

i>.6

l.£

r /

//

21

**

S.I

3

2

.<

/.?

t*

l.fl

Total

Ill

Iff-

L JW

£Z±

m

100-

fv

ft

/3f

6Z6.

#//'*.

W-

tf

3J> tfj 3< ?

N,

MJ.

</s

J&WL

ML

m

£/$&-ec//ns ~&~/tf//rom

£ '- SO. M/A/vrEs '

, 0V£/T ?fl S*/HL>f£l/.?

t*

l.fl

Total

Ill

Iff-

L JW

£Z±

m

100-

fv

ft

/3f

6Z6.

#//'*.

W-

tf

3J> tfj 3< ?

N,

MJ.

</s

J&WL

ML

m

£/$&-ec//ns ~&~/tf//rom

£ '- SO. M/A/vrEs '

, 0V£/T ?fl S*/HL>f£l

jrfffj 5?*f£/7

evaluation

■ Nuober

PerCent

Number

Pet Cent

Nunbei

PtiCent

Number

Per Celt

Certain

Dountltil

Total

Certain

DniHM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tool

Certain

Dniotrul

Total

Origin

Oouotful

Total

Certain

Omibfful

Total

Certani

Ooutittu

Total

Certain

Ooublfuli

Total

O-galloHi

«

W

ff

/u

?.f

73S

67

#r

/U

//.?

fal

U.6

3S-

IX

fl

'Zt

an.?

~~r}

25

76

2Z

-J3XIL?

f-Astronotiical

<r

/?

7-1

Z.0

I?

r.%

-U,

>r

f?

It './

u

ff-1

33

tf

f?

MJt

mf.f

ft

// /a

JL*.

-&1VLJ

2-Ailcntt

St

54

I/O

n%

n.3

ZJ,l

uo

iw

#f

f-s

l&S

?t.4

(0

ID

&

.a

fJM.7

?z

Jr

f/4

Ml.

5.1 IC . £

3-LI(ht Phonn.

7

if

I't

JJ.

/,t>

2,?

tf

6

j/

4.L

f.f

fo

1

J

%

a.<

A<

(0

r

*

7

-M

A3

(/

t-Biras

1

O

f

i>.%

6.0

0,1

i

f

04

<?J,

4-3

2

-7

it

r A6

/■/}

^j

__^\

'f

-M\

61

JL&

S-Clouds, Oust, etc.

Q

?

1

0.0

0.7

'.7

)

)

-?

fil

*1

6 J

L

t

M.

u

n.f

/

a

'/

M

a. o

M

bVlnsutiic kiro.

:36

30

7.<i-

(?0

7^-

.At

K(,

M

69

{?■(,

-JL

//

,<i

^AL

f-6

fjp

£>

f%6

S?.7

6 >■*

tf-7

7-PsycholO|ical

r

4

?

AZ

M

2&

_J.

9

^2±

(f./f

*■(

S

I

<c

JJ

_JLL

10

__t

-2.

M

f-A.

M

/■f

t-llnknow

/67

W

tell

^0

21U-

-X£

£>

?t

JA1

H

wf

-MZ

17

253.

a.o

nf

izt

/*/

//.v

0.6

/S"/

Umm

us.

3

H

3.7

0-7

M#

JUL

(

?(

u

t.o-

s:t>

?

3

(1

</./

/f

f-6

3f

r

■ft

f. 1 ,

0-8

c/

™*

m

'?■[

^cas

\m

A?>9

/0ft.

?>£2

It K

mi

Ms

Mi

/M

tia

.Jt

/??

71?

&Z M.

Ui

;3JSsr

7tJ

Jaf

tQd.

TASL£

AW

/r i fj£a?7'/jZV ..

0r //A//7- S/6/V7-/A/GS /?'/ tit/Srfr/ajS />/? £-/<S.f/r/A/G.

/?sr

y

r

5 s e.co>*e>s on

L£SS

6 ~/fl £EY04'PS

// - S& s£ rO«/PS

S/-&0 S£rt>A/05

EwltuBon

Hunber

Per Cent

NiDtei

Percent0r //A//7- S/6/V7-/A/GS /?'/ tit/Srfr/ajS />/? £-/<S.f/r/A/G.

/?sr

y

r

5 s e.co>*e>s on

L£SS

6 ~/fl £EY04'PS

// - S& s£ rO«/PS

S/-&0 S£rt>A/05

EwltuBon

Hunber

Per Cent

NiDtei

Percent

Number

PerCenl

Number

Percent

Certain

Doebttul

Total

Certain

Dwotru

Trial

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain

Oeulrttu

Total

Ctrlwn

Dnj&ttu! J Total

O-Balloon

O

&

A

Ad

a.t>

■44

6

0A

rfO

M

/

' £>

/

-M.

/>-0

7J

/i

O

6

0.6

Of

AC

1-Asfiwnmleal

&

/

7

%.s

/J{

1U

—2\

-2

f

££\

fa. 4

//p.O

_^t

7

Ill

/?■<>

U*

/

/

X

/fl

Jf.37t £>

Z-Aitcraft

a

o

o

flfl

M

A

Q\

O

6

£10

<>./}

fl-a

I

■ /

JUL

1.1

1.f

8

/

1

0.6

Mil

t<{Z

3-Listil Prieoom.

Jjji]

fi

M

a&

0-t)

(L

a

MA

0.0

t?6

o^

P

d

JZ6_

J.0

A 6

f>

0.0

6.0

a.o

4-Biris

£_

<?

fi-0

0Jt>

fro

^A

0-6

OJ>

Z3

c

o

-*£

oo

0-6

o

40

0.0

0.0

Kloufls, Dust, etc.

C

d

dO

od

fld

a

O

$

a.d

0.0

a.'d

a

dJ>

fi.O

■04

&

p

0.0

0.0

G-imuttic kilo.

dt)

a.o

6,0

_

.JUL

M

M

2.

4

/</")

/)■$

If -3

£>

6

0.0

0.0

0.0

7-Pqrdvlocical

o

<>

o

<?4

06

0.6

e

a

' M

(7

0.0

o

J

/

-0-0

7.\

7/

a

d

o.o

0-.O

6.0

t-Unknun

p

<?A

<?.o

<7-0

—JL

&

44

<?.t

0.6

£■

p

3

3£?

4.6

w

J!

£>

/

f7/

\0.a

41 1

MDier

L

/

134

6.6

as

L &

0d

0.6

06

t

/

7/

t?.6

1.1

—ZL

O

a

0-0

.ML

4.Q

Total

-JL

/

f

m

MS

<>#</.

tz

<x

u

$6.0

S0-6

/6d.

12-

-?

/u

Ml

t?3

toe.

_i_

J

7

76 ?

MA-

(06-

1

^7 SfCOf/pS — £^W0T£-J

i

~SO At/A/l/r^r)

/>>'£ H 10 S-f/AttTtl

4/eT £>-*

?/- V.

EvaliatHia

Number

Per Cent

CerShT

Number

Pet Cent

Number

PerCenl

Niindier

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ooublhl

Total

Calain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doutjtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doublful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tot at

O-Balloon

J-

-?

2?.Q

(J0

2l&

3Total

Ooublhl

Total

Calain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doutjtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doublful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tot at

O-Balloon

J-

-?

2?.Q

(J0

2l&

3

06

-AJL.

0.0

Jf-

f

Z£

0.0

■7S

1-AstnnniHl

O

O

t)

A6

0.0

t)-0

1?

O

6

'■A

-OJL-

<?■{}

7

4L

//

112,

I s

76,7

Z-AirciaH

O

0.0

0.0

0.6

(1

OA

ax>

00

7

-?

ZH

d-6

\t

3-Lijhl Phenon.

. . L

/

L&\

6.0

43

6

#0

0.6

o.o

Jl,

)

a

/

-A2J

0.0

/■?

4-Birds

' •

p

01)

0.0

0.0

Q

a.o

0.0

0-6

i

r

c

0.6

0.6

0.0

5-Clsuds, Dust, etc

_£

p

a

00

0.6

0.0

t>

/>

6

0-6

ad

0-0

^

A

r>

6

-&0a

0.2

0>.O

trlnsrffic. Wo.

7\

f>

. /

>j£l_

0.0

/f3

_7

2.

£0.4

0,0

fofl

i,

7

r>

7

/T.J?

00

rfj

1. Psyiho nsjicil

. r

o

0.0

0.0

0.0

6

t(\

tl-6

0i>

1

3

/

i

^7

It

'?■(>

tWkam

2\

«?,

2ZC

6-0

J%<*

X

D

z,

&,0

. 0.0

fo.o

ft

/?

//

MS\

0-0

zo%

Mher

1

/

"/■3

04

Hi

O

0.0

.6.0

0.0

>3

* '3

2</.S

6.6

?Af

Total

_z

?

m.o

P.*

/at.

f

¥-

tO0A

/oO.

.it

6

rj

MA

?,•/

/60.

157

^

rMi.

£ d?<? £T//?L/y^r/^Z.

c?f

<ytf/r

S/&»T//^S<

..jFS. 4

Oj&g.

31&24-. 0^ S/£>MZm£,

/?V/T

J~ S^^C\-pi A MP J-£si

<£■ /0 Sff OAJFl

//—. 30 secedes

3/—£.0 Sir f «/PJ

Evolution

Number

Per Cent

(Umbei

Per C»l

Number

Pet cm

Nunbet

PeiCenl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

c<n*n

Ooubtful

Total

Certain

Ooublful

Total

Certain

Owbtful

Total

leftain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoaHUul

Total

Certain

Doubllul

Total

/3

Certain

Q.Q

Doubtful

~i?.T

Total 
1.0

0- Balloon

/

P

/

Vo

06

#.0

/

-L

i .6

1-1

7.1

t>

-?

^2.

0.0

MJ

m

d

1-AsbtiMial

r

f

H

20.0

W

57.0

V

2

_JL

2lk

lt*>

*;.?

o

1

_Z

0.0

tf-l

/I)

a

Q_

&

JJ\

o,o

0.0

2-Aiman

7-

O

j

!■*

*-f)

s.t

o.t

0.0

OD

' t

—L~iLL

0.0

II. t

>

ft

-JL^s&o

00

ro.o

1-LilM Pimm.

1

/

<f.6

o,o

1.0

z

_x

Q.O

/M

"*-3

£>

P

Q.O

0.9

0.1

6

d

l?J

o.o

o.t

4-BirtS

}

p

/

tf.6*-f)

s.t

o.t

0.0

OD

' t

—L~iLL

0.0

II. t

>

ft

-JL^s&o

00

ro.o

1-LilM Pimm.

1

/

<f.6

o,o

1.0

z

_x

Q.O

/M

"*-3

£>

P

Q.O

0.9

0.1

6

d

l?J

o.o

o.t

4-BirtS

}

p

/

tf.6

tt.a

p

_4_

-H

4.9

to

/?

O

Q.O

o.t

a.o

o

t>

a

04

4*

0?

S-CtouO, Oust, etc

n

■ o

6

0.0

Q.Q

p.

c>

d

_&_

oJ

Q.O

o.O

c>

#

0.0

0.0

0.0

o.O

0.0

o.o

v-umflK. Mi.

^

f>

J?

!-6

0,9

8.0

t

fl

/

7/1

0.0

7.1

(

~L

tu

0.0

ii. i

/

O

/

JSO

Q.O

45.0

7-PirdBlO|iOt

C

o

6

M.

<?t

0.0

o

-&*-

o.o

0.0

0.0

{>

<?

o.O

0.0

o.d

o

o

a

4-°

04

0.9

t-tMaoMi

u

r

i

/6/>

0.0

i&a

4-

c>

i

QU

o.o

3$6

3

€>

3

Mf

0.0

33.3

£>

o

P°

W

o.o

MWW

c

1

(

a.O

to

t.Q

^l

o.t

0.0

CO

t

-1-

0.9

/I.I

/'■/

L

i>

/

2S-6

M

IS. 9

Total

/C

1

Af

tf*

JC.6

100.

9 /

tyrti

K?

100.

^L

f

S-

K6

Wf\

/to.

^s

6

U /otf.a

0.0

100.

Q ' S^CCA/PS —SM/A/I/TJTJ

£—3<9 -*-rrA/V7 &s

0\/e/? 3 '# s4rJUf> £ 5

■ 4^> r 5rA7£^

Evaluation

Kumbei

Per Cent

Number

PerCenl

Number

Pet Cent

Hunter

PwCait

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doebtfut

Total

Certain

Douttful

Total

Certain

Dwbtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cettain

Dwbtful

Total

D-eailQM

f

f

<z

//./

//■/

?tt

/

H

.<"

6.7

U-7

nt

^

<^

if

Sd0

o.t

sv.«

J

2.

7

7.7

3.1'

/0.$

1-i.ttnnnical

1

/

<2

//./

l/J

m

q

/

jsq

0.0

2C1

?

4

a-

3^1

< 3?-3

/o

f$Jf

/i'J

111

38. S"

Mirerift

?

o

1

3J.3

0.0

JJ-J

f

1

Z

£.7

C.7

m

/

I

A*>

9-9

81

f

J

t

11

■ .1

/0.B

1.5

MiantPlxnoa.

o

P

O.t

to

0.0

/

f>

/

C7

0.0

11

£?

a

Q

0.6

OJ

o.t

/

-(-

0.9

hi

•■Bii*

P

0.0

At

0.0

'

1

/

Q.0

i*7

CI

^^

lAA

0.0

v.n

1

O.

%

f.f

3./!

«■(,

S-Clourb, fjBSt, «n

(f

a

0.0

0.0

0.0

__A

o

Ot

0.0

0.9

c

d

0.6

0.0

o.t

6

Q.O

0\ 0.

frbmhlc Mh.

1

p

I,

if./

00

//.>

1

o

/

C-7

0.9

6-1

#

r>.6

O.t

O.Qf.f

3./!

«■(,

S-Clourb, fjBSt, «n

(f

a

0.0

0.0

0.0

__A

o

Ot

0.0

0.9

c

d

0.6

0.0

o.t

6

Q.O

0\ 0.

frbmhlc Mh.

1

p

I,

if./

00

//.>

1

o

/

C-7

0.9

6-1

#

r>.6

O.t

O.Q

fp

D

ML

ttt

0-9'

/$■*/

7-PjydOrotiol

d

4

o.O

Off

0.0

&

ip

1}

0.0

0.0

0. s

/

(

7-3

o.o.

8Z

#

_JL

0.0

0.0

P.J?

HhbM

I

O

-, r

/U

0.0

11. 1

o

o

0.0

0.0

0.9

,0

<?

0,0

oj

00

a

£>

_x

M

0.0

C-7.

MDwi j

o

o.t

0.0

Of

■0

f

/

o.a

(7

1,7

6

, /i

o.o

o.O

0.0

_2.

4-

_Z

'a

CI

I0.g

(

Total \.

^L

A

?

nr

27.X

160.

1

7

/s

fX3

VC.7

199.

/A

a

M

/06.6

0.6

m-

31

3J

«"5«

ys.s

/00.

r/>(?L£ rff/ £tyL£/A

t/0*/ a/r //Mr s-/(Z#7-s/Vgs #v &£//?* r/&/v t?/? s-/&sfr//t/($

/?4?

£*S0t.0/V£'5 //A/17 2.FSS

fr—/^ Sftict/CS

// ^30 S£-C £>*f£>5

£/ — £& jh-cossj'5

Evaluatiu

Ncnher

Percent

Hofflber

Percent

Nuntjer

Percent

Number

PerCait

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doobtti

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToU

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttu

Total

Ortaio

Doubtful

Total

O-Balloon

P

/?

d

A0

0.0

0.0

O

£>

fl

O.O

04

0.0

G

6

00

o.o

0.9

Z2

£>

9

a.e

0.9

Q.O

1-AitnnMical

£

<r/

fa

9.1

th

Sf.f

I?

Zt

A

O.t

2U

m

3

3

(,

30.0

tfiO

£0.9

Z2

O

T

x.£o

0.9

75. (

2-Aiicraft

C

3.

A

0.0

2 1

3-1

o

1

/

o.o

14. %

19.1

2

P

a

£0.6

r.Q

70.9

A

P

A

/C.7

O.t

a-i

3-Lijht Ptenoii.

c

O

e.i

0-1

6.0

/>

Q^

(J

t,0

9.0

•i

0.6

90

o.t

#

*

0.0

O-O

0.9

4-Biidi

p

/

(

0.9

fj

l-H

(2

C>

ft

0.0

9

09

e>

0,0

00

9.9

^

-?

fC.:7.

0.0

til

S-ClMrti, Oasl, dc

fl

<P

0.0

fj

0.0

e>

11

0.0

09

/>

D

6

0.0

00

0.0

&

P

\9.0

Q.O

0-9

tlnsiftic. kib.

u

/O

</

<t

so

f.8

1

a

/

/</*,

S.9

'f-3

/

f>

/

1011

0,0

199

/

t?

/

-11.

00

$.%

T-PsYc)iolP(ical

p

£>

o.t

u

0.0

a

£>

0.0

6.9

0.9

0.0

00

99

o

6

0.0

0-0

0.0

t-Unknonri

op

oj>f.8

1

a

/

/</*,

S.9

'f-3

/

f>

/

1011

0,0

199

/

t?

/

-11.

00

$.%

T-PsYc)iolP(ical

p

£>

o.t

u

0.0

a

£>

0.0

6.9

0.9

0.0

00

99

o

6

0.0

0-0

0.0

t-Unknonri

op

oj>

to

z.

o

2

:?/ {,

0.0

Uk

/

P

/

ft.0

0-0

19.9

y.

^

/

23A.

0-9

33.3

Mttin

O

r>

fi

o.o

0.D

o.o

!

a

/

Jf.3

Q.O

/<f.3

<5>

&

0.0

OM

0.0

d

00

0.0

9.9

Total

/A

s?

Si

HA

K.I

169.

~T

1

*?

17 \

¥1.7

Itl

^L

1

/D

7/>J>

v.a

IU.

/a

a

fM.O

fi-0

190.

6/S&C&VPS — S'stf/A/UTfS

O — J^ Sl/A/UT E 5

^« -f 3

/3 AfS/KisTSS

.4/0 r Ssjrtra

Evaivauoi

raabei

Pel Cent

Niabn

Percent

Nunbei

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Certain

Doubttal

TOUI

Certan

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

>rtain

DoobtJul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

CtTtain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

4

/

7

23Z

1.1

#?

.2-

^_

/

X.Z

9-1

IU

a

d

Q.O

Q.Q

0.0

X

6

%

%3.

0,0.

l.f

l-Astrwmial

£>

y

/

0.0

IH.%

If.%

■3

?

I2S

0.9

m

3

/

y

37A

f.l

ICH

/<>

//

W

xl.i

/f-Y

If. 5

2-Aifttatl

5

J>

in

IU

ii

/li

3

1

4

i?6

/?-5

2So

/

/

00

<?/

f.l

%

3

1/

//>.<

z.<?

)t.$

J-Li(W Prmo«.

O

. 4

0.9

o.t

0-0

6

■6

Off

Q.f

0.0

o

0.0

0.0

0.6

a

<?(/

o.o

0.0

t-Birds

p

fi

o.9

Of

0.0

f>

</.o

q.Q

0.0

e>

o

/>

0.0

0.0

O.O

6

Q.0

0.0

9.0

S-aowti. Oust, etc.

/)

6

0.9

0.0

0.0

6

0.0

to-

fO

o

o

a

o.o

0.9

9.9

d

ft

<>

Q.O

9-0

0,(7

tma«t1<c Mi.

c

(,

on

0.0

m

J?

<

an

n

1

p

/

9./

O.O

f./

n

f1

JZL

U

72*

7-PirdBbpcal

o

o.o

1.9

00

/

/

JU

0O

*.*

o

d

0.0

0.0

9.0

A

*

^LL

0.9

U

t-IMnon

i

P

4

/</<

0.0

tf.%

_2

7

j?U

Q.O

If.Z

-JL

i

%±

.0.6

Zi.1

J±

//

ttS

0.0

14.%

WHb*

/

ft

/

M

0.P

3-7

/

. f

jU,

0.0

H.l

^L

r

*■(

0.0

f.l

A

J

Z(,

o.O

*U

Te<-

Z6

7

J7

nil

?<>r9

loo.

J2.

*

-2./

1U

3 A a

no.

S

A

V^J

9/ J

/Z2

/it.

&\

n

76

n. b

&.*ft

/

M

0.P

3-7

/

. f

jU,

0.0

H.l

^L

r

*■(

0.0

f.l

A

J

Z(,

o.O

*U

Te<-

Z6

7

J7

nil

?<>r9

loo.

J2.

*

-2./

1U

3 A a

no.

S

A

V^J

9/ J

/Z2

/it.

&\

n

76

n. b

&.*

it}.

158

V'

X

T-ML e 4?& £ 0.4^/9 r/0/y

0S

/M//r

s/a/sr/zy^s

_ y<7 j^/Wr/a/i, ar

$/£ //T/yyo

i

/?rc

?

J J'Sjrtwffi jia>0 /.£*S

070 $J£C0j>V03

/7~3/> S ^C O/Vtrs

sj-60 S]£-cca>j?s

Huaber

PerCent

Number

Per Coil

Nunoer

PnCent

. Numbei

Pel Cent

1 Evaluation

Certs"

OoubHul

Total

Certain

DouMlul

ToW

Certain

DwMM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

tatain

Dotttful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

!o-Balloon

/

i

3.6

0.6 S.6

0.0

00

0.0

/

_jL

00

0-2

d2

~3L

J

///

00

//■/

J l-Astronoinical

70

r

IS

SAB

0S.0

7.T.0

^_L

-Z.

3

fir

37.3 raj

UL

/

JZ_

373 6.2-03?

2-

2

o.0 m.2 ±33

'Z-Airctltt

/

/

S£

0.0

s-,0

3

^J-^60

00

5~0.fi

*

2-

_£_

2SA&.S-3ZS

-J~

V

2-2*2

0.07^.2.

J-Li(tit Ptiewn.

00

0.0

00

C-0

0.0

00

0"

_Jl

0.0

0-0

0.0

0.6

0.0

00

4-BMds

6

0.6

00

00

0.6

0.0

0.fi

-62-

<0

u£-

0.0

0.0

0.0

-JL

f?

£0

06

0.0

tClouds, Oust, etc

p.f

0.0

06

O

00

0.0

00

-£-

00

0-fi

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

frlnsuflic. Into.

JL

2

6M.

0-6

70.0

00

0.0

00

/

_J_

-£Z

0.0

60

0.0

0.0

0.0

'•Psycho logical

0.0

0.0

60

0.0

0.0

00

-03

0.0

0.0

.0

0>

0-$

00

00

OUntjnan

7

6

36

A6

ffl

_t2-

0.0

0.0

00,

/

7

-£X

Ad

rO

3

J?

13->,

-££3*3

S-Othr

6

00

0.0

a0

0.0

0.0

0.6

-J2.

-01

00

00

/

/

<t\

00

//./

\

/00

Total

/0

3

2-0

Z£l

££0

700.

-JL

2\

<0

S6.7

33.3

m

U-

*>

U za Z50

/00

JZ_

A-

r

7n

#&

6/ S&ce/H?? - Sy^/Afi/nes

£-30 A?//vt/rtt

00t/£-f? 30 Afsjyt/rjsrs

yVcr Srxr*-0

Evaluitnn

Nufiber

Percent

NmnbH

Per Cent

Niimber

PerCent

rltintei

Per Cat

Certain

Doubthl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Douttnil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

CertainEvaluitnn

Nufiber

Percent

NmnbH

Per Cent

Niimber

PerCent

rltintei

Per Cat

Certain

Doubthl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Douttnil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Douttta

Total

Certain

Daitttul

Tola!

D-BalloM

/¥■

/

J"

///

2t

a?

_x

2-

//

03J

■«"/

-2&2

J

J

Z73

0.0Z7.3

_JL

/

r

076

/.#

70

1-Astnnii>ical

^

&

//./

/P,0

f/.f

__Z-

0-

s-j

0J

s:(

0.

/

J

/3.X

?./

0-73

J7

7

ut

33.6

9.7

173

2-Aircrafl

M

/

f

//./

Zf

/!-?

3

3

/

_m

7.7

ft*

^

0L

_&£

tf.Z

/£?

/3

3

M

/a/

4.2

22,1

Higllt FDenoa.

P

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-OL

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

■00

«-Binb

P

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.D

0.0

00

0>

O

0.0

0.6

0.0

-J2.

0>

&

0.0

0.0

00

Wloirtj, Oust etc

00

00

0.6

0.0

0,0

0.0

0>

0>

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

OlrraMic Inn).

3

3

%3\

0.0\

%?

-J-

3

31

0.0

7,7

_L

/

ff

00

fj

/{

M

2*.2

&&

Z2.2

7-Psycf»[o{icat

f

(P

/

M.

0.0

?.f

_L

a

/

2J.

#0

u

/?

S.0

0.0

0.0

0?

O

0.0

0,0 0,0

9-Unknono

/.?

/i*

36J

0.0

31/

/3

/J

33.3

0.0

31.3

X

#

2- /ZZ

0.0

fix

J__

0?

f ■

>Z.S

0.6

/23

Mftei

X

3-

5~

«

13

/?■?

_L

2.

3

2.4

3~>f

7,7

0.0

0.0

00

£.

A

^

X.f

0.6

7.?

-

*

Total

3 /

_T

3£

Ud.

/3f

/00

3X.

7

?1

UJ.

m

/00 t

-JL

3

// 7J.7 3.7.3

m

4/

//

72

f« 7

/3.3

700

Z23L£

#9,?

£H/4L£S/LT/0/tf

_ &

'/A//r

£(6Hr/A7Gs

_ #v 00*/9r/0>4/

07

S/0//r/A/c

_ /7s-/ . _

s

I

S^JS&ce*^ sHift? ^-&*j

J-/?

£s-£*//0>S

//~3^ <S&cotu?s

3/-SO S^cof/fs

1

Nunber

PerCttt

Nunbn

PerCml

Number

PerCent

Nun bet

Per Cat

Evalualun

Certain

Doubtful

Tobl

Certain

Doubtb

Total

Certaiji

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubthl

Total

O-Balloon

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0>

0J

0)0

0,0

^

0-

.0,0.

0.P

0.0

1-Astnnamical

$

0.

/0

FJ3Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubthl

Total

O-Balloon

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0>

0J

0)0

0,0

^

0-

.0,0.

0.P

0.0

1-Astnnamical

$

0.

/0

FJ3

f3.3

€04

3

3

30.0

0.0

3P0

3

3

szs 1

0.0

ns

/

/

-£&-

£0.0

M0-

?-Aiiciatt

/

0'

/-

67

0.0

6?

7

/

//,7

0.0

767

■3

0>

3

77.S

0.6

373

3

/

¥

60.6

£0-0

10-0

3- Light Ptienom.

0.0

0.0

0.O

_j2-

0.6

0.0

0.0

d

6.0

0.0

0.0

0.6

6.0

6.t>

4-Biids

0.0

0.0

00

0.6

0.0

0.0

/

/

0.0

/J2.S

/2-S

0.6

0.0

0.0

S-Clouds. Dust etc.

04

0.0

0.6

0>

0.6

0.0

0.0

0.6

0,6

0.0

-M.

0.6

6.0

t-lrtwHic Uto.

£>

0.C

00

0J

#

-0

£0-

0.0

0.0

a

O

0A

00

0-0

00

6.6.

6.0

7-Piycnolotical

0>

O

0.6

0.0

0.0

3L

0.0

0-0

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

0,6

S-Unkmoi

#■

#■

24.?

f,0

M?

^L

z-

2£1

0.0

J?3

_JL

/

'23

0.6

773

-jL

0.P

0.0

0.0

Wither

0.0

0.0

00

0>

0.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

6.0

0-0

0-0

0P

0-0

Total

13-

£.

/r

Wl

733

700

6

/J00

0.0

000.

7

/

7

373

/2S

70A

j?

JL

S

ML

UP.6

/P0.

67Ss?Cfiws - 3~A7/#t/r*5

6-30 M/rvrtt

017/r/? 30/^//v0rAs

_ .3Ve7 StAT^jp

Evjluiwi

fsnoer

Per Cent

Ninber

PerCent

Number

Per Cent

Nunbei

PerCent

Certain

DouWil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Sertaio

Doubtful

Total

C0U|>

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoutJlful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

fr Balloon

P-

/

?

_2Z

&3

73-0

2.

2

JJ.

0,0

Z?

/

/

/2S

0.6

/2S

u-

2.

7.2

M/

62.3

l-Ailronoaical

0>

f

/

0.6

U3

#3

_i

(

y

I3±

&1

ns

/

/

2.

/2S

/2.r

7S:0

?

JT

(/

07

76.3

22. t,

7-Airciatt

3

/

^

/3.0

#■?

77^

2.

4-

4

JJ-

77-^

H-l

/

/

/2.S

3.0

/23

5-

2

4-

u.f

W

12

J-Ligrit Ptienoa.

/

/

0.0

#3

A3

/

/

Jh±

0.0

4-3

3U\

0.6

0.6

/

/

2.0

0.0

2.6

4-Birds

'

c?

00

0.6

0.6

0,6

0.6

0.0

0-6

00

0.0

67

0.6

6.0

0-0

5-Clouds, Dust, etc

0.6

0.0

6.0

J7.6

0.0

0.60.0

#3

A3

/

/

Jh±

0.0

4-3

3U\

0.6

0.6

/

/

2.0

0.0

2.6

4-Birds

'

c?

00

0.6

0.6

0,6

0.6

0.0

0-6

00

0.0

67

0.6

6.0

0-0

5-Clouds, Dust, etc

0.6

0.0

6.0

J7.6

0.0

0.6

o

0.6

0.0

0.6

-J2-

0.0

6.6

0J

FrlnuHic bio,

/

/

43

00

#3

_J_

O

/

J£3.

0.0

#3

2-

X

xr.6

0.6

7S16

/£-

60

703

6-0

20,(6

7-PsycfDk>|iol

-32

/

/

0.0

*/

4-3

-&

£0

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.6

00

/

/

2.6

6.6

XD

t-IMrvn

-00

/0>

V35

6.6

\U3.*

-6-

/

Ud.

0-6

76 J

2

7

zs-.o

6.6

2f.t

73

63

te£

6.0

?6.s

KWw

X

2

SJ

0.0

f.?

-3.

3

110

0.0

/3.0

-M

06

6.0

3

■0

3

0/

0.0

6./

Total

/f

r

J-3

7t.3

7J.7

700.

ZZj

r

23

7f.3

7J.7

700,

7

/

?

nsr

72.S

/66,

3Z

/Z

#■?

7S73

US

706,

159

W^-T 49?. &ML0AT/0/I/

. .J?/- .

wr

3/4,

ffTfA

'05

ssy £Me/?rs0A/ 0s

&6//TY/VG

/tS-2,

1

S'S&COfip? Ajyj? /*5S.

6~70 S&ctAvi

/f-3# Sfcmps

3/~60 Sect* 'ps

EntmW)

Per Cent

Umber

PetCent

Nunoef

PetCent

Number

PerCenl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;«taii

Dsubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;ettaio

Douttlul

Total

Certain

POUWIUt

Total

Certain

OoutKfgl

Total

Catainj

Ombtful

Total

!n3alloo«

;

. r

6

MS.

43

2$

3

3

6

31

3./

^2

_JL

7

JL

xs

43

6-f

%

70

/f

~~Z2

71

A0.2-

l-Aitwoaica!

tt

3U-

&0

€y.3

&r

S/kf

2S

as ///

26S/X3

4/.f

?-3 f

2£/M\

r,6

/%?

/0

V

/#

7.9

11

'//./

rr-Aifcrin

/?

2./

#e

Z.7

?J

tl3

1L

70

26

l£l

/0.Z

Z0S

30

&

*0(Ma

/f.0

m

22

20

V2

77.3

73,f

33.0

3-Lifht Pltem*

/

t.

3

at

09

/■¥

^L

O

A

/.0

0.0

/,0

/

/

2.

M

0.6

f-i

P

2-

. 2- 0,0

/.6

/■6

4-Birdi

/

3

4

0s

/•¥

AS

0.

A

A

0.0

/.o

/.£>

/

0>

■/

0.6

0.0

0.£

3

/

.£-.

2. ^

0f

3,2.

j-Cloiib, Oust, etc.

&

/

/

0.0

AS

OS

A

0.D

00

0>.p.

O

.z.

.2

#,0

/.7- /.2

0?

\A

0.0

00

A.0

frlttatlic Into.

il.

//

5.0

0.4

&

6

£>

6

u

0.0

4,1

ML.

//

S.f

\ At

rf-rf

9

A

J-

7,7

6.0&

/

/

0.0

AS

OS

A

0.D

00

0>.p.

O

.z.

.2

#,0

/.7- /.2

0?

\A

0.0

00

A.0

frlttatlic Into.

il.

//

5.0

0.4

&

6

£>

6

u

0.0

4,1

ML.

//

S.f

\ At

rf-rf

9

A

J-

7,7

6.0

7,7

T-PsrcMloiical

z

2.

0.9

0.0

0?

7)

A

0./)

0.0

O.0

_£

/

^6L

3/

0>.6

V?

Z-

£>

X

u

A.6

A6

l-Ul*MMI

3-2.

72

LO.0

O.0

/fie

JL

a

tte

0.0

te.3

AZ.

ZLtt.£

00

/6-X

3X

XL

?s-t

06

7-3.?

Mfttr ,

Z

7~

/0

.12.

04

U

-L

A

/

/,$

0.0

M

4

r

\-2-

0>f

3./

r.4

/

2-

3

Af

t-6

?.0

, Total

/$-/

0?

Z'f

£%.1

3/J

/0.

1L

2-?

ff

70.it

tt£

/0P,

/0*

j?

u/

65--1

3U2

m

17

39

726

6f.fi

37-0

700.

f/S&ewps- SW/Avrtt

{-30 .M/Mrss

Pt/j?ft 30 /ty//wr£i

A7#r SrATirt?

Evaluation

Nunbtf

Ph Cent

Number

Percent

(tote

PnCflit

Numbs

PtrCent

Certain

Doubtful

Totrt

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubttu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Toa

Certain

Dtoubtfnl

Total

0-BalloM

J7.0

30

76

/3-2

/7,f

2£A,

S-3

37

?0

m

//<?

-z-jy

£*

^

37

UJ

7,7

21S 3)

20

3-7

-21

sir

///s

l-Astjurmical

3

T

70

1,0

?,!

3,1

22-

ty

36

7,0

fat

//#

23

/3

36

/M

u

732.

u

/3

3?

Z3.&

3,f

Z7.3-

2'Aiicritt

ftl

fr

f3

/ax

763

30-7

3f

S3

6¥

ji

fM

^0.2

J_

7

/?

5:2

4>J

SZ

41

27

6?

a. 2

7.1

2&.C

J-LiltuPtwnm.

6

3

?

2.0

1,0

3.0

/3

6

/?

M

f-f

10

/

2-

3

0.(

/■?

J£.

1

/

£

0.f

0.3

f.z

4-Birtj

/

7

6.3

0.0

0.3

0.0

0.0

0j>

-Z-

O

2

).3

0.0

/•J

/

/

0.3

0.0

0.3

S-ClMHUtoHtlc

O

3

3

0.0

/.0

Ao

_L

A

2.

0.3

03

U

/

/

0.6

0.o

Al

/

A

/

0.3

O.O

0-3

MMUtlic. Info.

/t

At

J3L

0.0

$?

£2.

0>

z?

JA

0.0

£0

7

7

/AS 0.0

ur j7o

20.3

0.C20.3

7-Psyclulufieal

u-

3

7

73

7.0

2-3

T.

7

JUL

0.0

2>z

.JL

/

s*

2J

0t

3Z

z

/

3

0.

0.9

t-UAMMI

77

O

??

2*4

0.0

MJf

st

SI

/u

0.0

It4

2L

3?

2X2

Aoir.z 73

73 2/2

0.0

2'-2u-

3

7

73

7.0

2-3

T.

7

JUL

0.0

2>z

.JL

/

s*

2J

0t

3Z

z

/

3

0.

0.9

t-UAMMI

77

O

??

2*4

0.0

MJf

st

SI

/u

0.0

It4

2L

3?

2X2

Aoir.z 73

73 2/2

0.0

2'-2

MthM

7

7

1.0

AV

3.0

/0

3

/3

:?««

0,1

*ht

7

J

70

ar

/.9

U

A2

/

A3

■?s

0.3 3.?

Tort

24/

702-

303

a.3

33.7

/00.

242

?4

3/6

70.3

H7

/0S,

//7

3f

/S3

7£S 7JK.S- /00. tt/

63

itiq

P. 7

7T.3 700

160

I

%■:■

.'.sry^f ^ -7rav* n** 1

pr'-^!?*.vr'?n ; :.;? yflB-^ifflHfT^-.fl^-f SP j(, m ^.t™-^,' .

WW

?a&<f /f/r

,g>>»4 e/^r/^4/ 0jc tPrf ^^T 5/6.*/7~/a /6 $ &S/ £> #,(> /* r/0A/ as ?/6s/r/#e .

4U

Y£<4£S

<T Sfco/vP* 4/VD £?5s

6~/0 S&?/V6>S

//~3# J*£-£e/rt>j

31-40 'Sica/re

Evolution

NunbN

Per Cent

Number Per Cent

Nunbct

Pb Cent

Nimbei

PetCent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubthil

Total

Certain

Doubthil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

Dtrtsin

Doubtful Total

Certain Doubtful

Total

Certain

OniMfol

Total

C«tam

Ooubtlul

Total

O-Wloon

J"

J'

f

-JA

1.1

A7

-z

f

£ A

1,1

?J-i73

.T

r

/4

^Zl4JL

^J-

_5.

?

/if

^2

CO

i?.o

1-AitiMMiial

jiiz.

#0

/<7

3 a*

HJ>

5#v

Ml.

/?

¥3 23J>

/U

nf

*f

//

?r

/*J ^^

/y.f

9

7

//

_^i2

i-7

ffi-7

I-Aiiuaft .

«

M

#?

1.7

?.' ^

j*

?

X-7/S-.f

1.0

%3'f

36

3/

£7

/f?

/t-7

3^Ci?

3a

/?

Of

-2^

11.1

32?

3-LJHlt PtlOHL

_<i

-t

f

0.7.

ofi

/?

/

■?

J

0-1

f.S

X.7

—4

/

2.

^/

/a

•?

Z-

^d^

rt

1.5

4-Binta

-a.

^

r

Al

l-f

a/

4

/

/

O.o

0.1

M

/

/

X

./■ .i-

/-^

_J_

/

f JLl

,7

?•#

frCuMf, Oust, tit

/

/

A&.

0.%

^

<*

0-0

0.0

o.o

4 a

.*

^LJJLJJ-

/,/

<?

a.c

<?■<>

§■0

t-HMtic M>.

/.r

£J

tr

-£•*

/>.&

s:z

/

t

7,1

00

?.'

/f

/r

/I

4

«/

JjL.

(5

//

73

04>

7.3

7*PSfdvlojical

-i

2

*7

O.O

p-y

6

p.t

0.0

**>

_^

J

6

-?J

//

*-»

*

^

X-

/.J

#o

/■3

HMMMt

*7

3-7

Si

c*

n

3.1

P-Z

/Si"

6.0

/?.$

JM

a

33

/^

^Y)

/^7

J*

<?

U?. MO

oo

2SJ

WJ«B

__2_

3

17-

%.\p-y

6

p.t

0.0

**>

_^

J

6

-?J

//

*-»

*

^

X-

/.J

#o

/■3

HMMMt

*7

3-7

Si

c*

n

3.1

P-Z

/Si"

6.0

/?.$

JM

a

33

/^

^Y)

/^7

J*

<?

U?. MO

oo

2SJ

WJ«B

__2_

3

17-

%.\

J.O

fki

JL

z.

/•'

0.0

l-f

<f

r

/&

i-7

*7

^

3

<^

sr

m"

/*i

33

.

Tom

/»"»

iff-

m

n.i

tel

m

-Zi

If

//3

su

31.0

/CO.

m

te/f&&.1

«.3

/ort

JM

YO

M3

7J3

•*?

f4&.

1

€J Sz-ccwpJ — 5~M/A/er£5

6-30 M/wrei-

£>vfK 30 /f/Ati?r£5

z¥e>r SrAr&p

Evaluation

Number

Pet Cenl

Huuttl

PetCent

Nuniier

Pet Cat

NiinbH

Percent

Certain

Doobthil

Tobl

Certain

Ooobtfu

Total

Certain

Ooubttiil

Total

Certain

Dovbtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtlul

Total

Certain

Doilbtfu

Total

Certain

OajMful

Total

0- Balloon

^L

1<

nt

Ml

f.f

&1

SI

17

/P/

/U

///

^?

Af

/^?

^/

10

r.o

*?.!

fs

&

f3

7.2

1 C

////

Mitnaonical

-£j

//

n

Me-

f-P

ttf

'3/

/^

r*K

1*.

^f

^,2

J&

/^

#U-

/<*

Qlisj

la

{?

/fit

i(.%

<ZC

/f.f

!-*iruaH

s^

ff

/et

lt 1

/*?

XJi

■&

77

7r

/O.I

?J

/^.7

?

ff

17

*A

1.7

%9

a>

V

7#

ms. cj m

Might PlumoL

■— ^

3

7

JJl

6f

M

JX.

r

/f

91

/'.I

3:0

/

3.

3

0.1,

U

' AS

-5T

'z

t

D.f

t>J

J,/

4-Binta

/

/

o.?

0-9

0.3

/

/

6.6

(??

0:3

-jZ,

z.

1.2

60

Az

J

3

if

t>-1

tS

Of

Mloods, DXijI, dt

^JL

4

3

M.

0,%

<?,*

■r

/

^_

A J

^>,3

04

~M

f

J>A

i.Q

U

/

/

0.3,

df!

££-

frlnsiftic tab.

^6\

^

2-6

JA

so

7.1

1A

?2.

?..f

ft .6

a*

ft

/P

S4

SO

£i

J^ jzy.

22JI

M

<^t

T-Psyitnloiical

«T

y

f

Z3\

/■I

&

_z

<?

f

^2,1

$.<>

M

-A

z

_£_

All

0_^A

3f

-fi^J

.?

m

LS

0,1

/■i

8-Unkww

f?

'o

??

&i

t-a

m

7/

^/

%r

0.9

itt

w

37 z/.S a. d

PS

ffl

b

A?# ZZO

t.a

/f,£>

MWlei

M

/

zr

JA

ft?>

4.1

/T

<r

^>

32

y.1

&

Zl

3

(f

y.r

hi

JJL

IS

6 3V-

<&

0\1

if- 2.

Total

U2.

/te

14t

IlH

ss.%

/k

Z74

/-7^

?%

m

«/

/M

£L

¥(

Ttxj^

Sl.%

ZW. i&z.

///

SVXzr

JA

ft?>

4.1

/T

<r

^>

32

y.1

&

Zl

3

(f

y.r

hi

JJL

IS

6 3V-

<&

0\1

if- 2.

Total

U2.

/te

14t

IlH

ss.%

/k

Z74

/-7^

?%

m

«/

/M

£L

¥(

Ttxj^

Sl.%

ZW. i&z.

///

SVX

7%7

*°-2

m

-r/>4i.

sr ^#to

£}//>/. i/A rs 0/1/

<w

tfgjeer

3T/<S //r//t/& £

#if

0^,4770/1/ ^

&&AT/A/6.

/?£7

1 '

/

i" SfteivP} 4wp J-snj

6-/0 S^co/r&S

//'3<? JEC?tf£>J

£/- 60 SfceA/rJ

Evaluation

Numtei

PwC«t

Ninber

"Per Cent

Number

PbCoiI

Number

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

rjMbtlu

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certarn

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouMu

Total

Certain

DouMnil

Total

O-Balloon

j2

■ />

-J£

M

00

a

^

M

0.0

00

/

/

?*

0,0

f>3

/>

•0

0.0

0J>

o.t>

l-Aitfonomical

^Jt

/

#

60.P

?J.0

mi>

s

*?

3

33.3

ee.7\

/00.0

/

/

%3

to

1.3

/

/

SJL

/f7

/(■?

J-AifC.-ait

6

n

(?

0.0

th»

&£>

a

f?

ID

0.0

0.D

a

r

/

0.0

1.3

?3

. a

/

/

0.0

u,7

Z<-7

3-Utht Ptienon.

O

o.s

0.0

.0.0

a

0.0

0.0

0.O

<0

.6.0

0.0

Op

a

/>

0./)

0.0

0.0

'Biids

*4

§p

0(0

0.0

0.0

0.0

a

/$

04

OJ

6-0

fto

0.0

S-Clouds, Oust, etc

t?

0.0

00

0.0

O

o.c

t$

0,0

J.0

0,0

0.6

6

0.0

fit)

0.0

eVlnsuflic. Into,

ft

-JL

to

flO

0>

0.0

0.0

O.O

«2

z.

/&.

0-0

/£.?

^jL

-M

0.0

Ro

7-Psytl»l0|ical

6

P

^JM

0,6

0.0

0.0

0.0

0-0

Cr

/

z

0.0

?3

63

0>

0.0

0-4

0,0

8-UnkiWMi

-J2-

(7

^Ai

OP

ex>

6

(?

0.0

O.o

0.0

«5"

' 4

jT-

ttl

CO

Ml

~t

tf-

i£Z

0.0

6C7

Mjttr

/_

/

Mt

0.O

MO

0.0

<&t>

Z>J

/

/

*3

0J

%s

£>

-QJL

00

bP

Total

4

1

r

0.0

MO

ZOO.

/

£~

.?

J33

fa -7

/00,

10

z

/S?

S3.3

Af-7

zoo.

If

A-

6

(6.7 T3.3

/00,

'■>%■

6/ $£-COA/PS—JTM/MtJT£3

£-30 /^///ycr^s

(3i/£rtj> 3# Afs/iss/r^

A/tr SK4rjr&

—

Evaluatioo

Nunbei

PetCent

Nunbei

PerCent

Number

Pel Cent

rhiobei

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtnjl

Tntal

Certain

Doubtful(3i/£rtj> 3# Afs/iss/r^

A/tr SK4rjr&

—

Evaluatioo

Nunbei

PetCent

Nunbei

PerCent

Number

Pel Cent

rhiobei

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtnjl

Tntal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Douotful

Total

Certain

Ooubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

poubthl

Total

O-Gallwo

2

2

J32A

/>.S

*f4

a

rt

0.0

00

0,0

^X

/f

4-

-XI

0.0

9-3

l-Astnmoaial

—CL

fl

f?

-M

0.0

6,0

(O

(It

•0

o.t>

0.0

o.»

*

<z

7

_g£

93

{(•3

I-Hiiciatt

(?

0.0]

00

O.Q

..0.

O.O

0.0

O-fr

—A

.

JL.

/?

0.0

14.7

3-Li(ht Plxwa

/

ft

/

M

0-0

/??

ML

a

(?

0-0

Z>.0

J.p

~/~

I

z

-<3JL

#■!>

?•$

4-Siids

0.0

0J

Q-0

..0 .

p

JhO

04

0,0

k-

-££.

P.0

0./>

S-Clwds. Dust, etc.

d

0?

d.i

0-0

O.Q

0-0

04

0-0

^

p

00

00

0.0

6-lnHiffrc, Into.

-A

/

/V.3

O.0

(43

JL

.2-

4&

60

tis.7

M-

7

/a

cf.0

Z0.3

7-Piydnlo|ial

__q\

6.0

Co

0.O

a

■

0.0

0.0

0.0

\ V

3

/

*Z

-JLa

Z.3

9.3

MWmom

_jL

£

ZU

0.0

*U

z

Z

333

0:0

73.3

V.

Jo.

/*>

331

0,0

223

*Othe>

/

r

iu-3

0.0

Af.S

0.0

O.Q

do

_1

f

/fa

0,0

fid

Told

7

7

'MIL

0.0

100.

3

3

Z0B4)

0.0

/00.

3Z

r

93

221

r/4

1*0,

161

Sfc±-f ... .-LIZ- ...gfjii- iL ,

.tjjSA'- -

#<*■

.0*

'j.efr <r;& l >/r//L>

__ 4

v /»-/>s)r/a/i/

#e _j2a^^.c

\

3 Ss^r/i/aj J<yc 0.£si

6 
6

'-/# 5 £^CAs^> 5

7 7-370 JV-VV*

ciCent

3J'J# StClMDJ

|

_tn_ervCE._D.r_u Tntal

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

SrtarT

Number 
Doubtful

F

Number

PwCwl

Evaluation

Certain

4/1

J_Z 
i.i

Doubltul Totji

l. __;._,_

Doubt r_l

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

Toll)

Cilia*

Doubtful

Total

Certain'

Doubtlut

Total

Cabin

Doubtful

-Jo

Total

"JO

jr> Balloon

/ <s

>

11". 
/

/

/

0,6

7J

. V

=0

U-

i>.&

??-2

^z-J

__^

^

l-Astunomreal

____

—J

__?

/

jT

.__£

7.7

39.}

7

7

P. 6

}/./

//./

e>

a

/>

O.o

00

0.0

*2-Aircrifl

__

1.7

a

00

0.0

0.0

___

7

//./

0.0

///

_^.. O

2??-2

^z-J

__^

^

l-Astunomreal

____

—J

__?

/

jT

.__£

7.7

39.}

7

7

P. 6

}/./

//./

e>

a

/>

O.o

00

0.0

*2-Aircrifl

__

1.7

a

00

0.0

0.0

___

7

//./

0.0

///

_^.. O

2

50-d

0.0

n.fi

J- Light Phwiort.

HJ

___..

-?

2

0.0 70</

A?

____-

7?

M

CO

M

a

<?

#

0.0

00

0>.O

4-Bilds

S-Go-ds, Dust, etc. 
frlnaiBit. mta. 
7-Psjchnl__—l

-._/-

3;

01

/

i-l

00

/*/

7>

0,0

f.o

0-0

. 0.

?.6

0.$

£.0

a

a

0.0

00

o.o

_j2.

.X.

JLl

00

0J

■0.0

____,

a

'7?

___,

00

0.0

^A

6

t<0

D.O

0,0

.a

a

fa

00

0.6

17

7

7

p\

00

7<7

/

a

/

(f.t

-M.

fit

SL

a

/

jr.e

0.0

2s,0

0.0

71

0>

cTo

0.0

p-o

j

a

0.6

0.0

0f

a

P

0-o

00

0j)

tUnlvwiin

fl

*'

fi.O

00

13.0

_$_.

___L

vH

0-0

?&<?

___2

3

?X3

h.'o

323

a

a

0H

0-0

Ai

»0the<

(1

/

/

00

4J

#3

0.0

do

0.0

___.

/

/

p,o

tf>t

thl

/

/

jr.*

0.0

?£,!>

"

^d

Tole>

/, —

__£_.

_.£_

lit

/on.

J-

4

/3

6fA

vt

0.

r

#

-X

*r-i

M.U

w.

_£_

</

m.s

0.0

W0

j 6/ ,r,",W» '— tS'/V/A-i'TfS

0>~3£- Af/tftsr^s

/0UjS/f 30 s~///yi/r£5

A/or 5TAT/ZP

1 Number

Per Cent

Certain

Number

Per Cent

Number

Pel Cent

Number

Pet Cent

j Evaluation 
jO-Billeon

CciLiin

DoufctfiH Tfllal

Certain

Doubltu

Total

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ocublhil

Toy

uHtain

Doubtdil

_r»W|

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubthil

To(a.

.J

/

u

^z

///

&J.

/

__/

$-

_4Z

t(.7

&{

-ft

_4L

TO,-

0.0

£m ^

A

7

JL2

**>

th?

ll-Aslr&nofflittl

/

2

/!./

/'.!

22. J.

-X

4

HL1

0-0

M7

^J.

f)

7

•Wn 0-0

33.?

If

/3

-?/

/ll

2t.%

3J;ih

3

6

3

33.3

0.0

33.3

^L

/

2-

{■7

*7

/M

—L

/

(/.I

00

ML

.r

■%

^aj

i?

13.1

3-U(Ht Phamrn.

a

fl

0.0

0.0

00

/

/■

L7

0>£

0.7

.. 0>

6

0.0

0-0

0,0

/

/

0.0

f>b

(.6

1-DirdS

..-H

_4

10

fio

0.0

o\

/

/

0.0

0.7

0.7

^A

C

JLO

p,o

O.0

/

-t

?

U-k

,"?=?

#-f

5-Cltuds, Dusl, etc

,<u

Zd

Al

0.0

0.0

.Jl6

0.0

0-0

0,0

/

/

0.0

f>b

(.6

1-DirdS

..-H

_4

10

fio

0.0

o\

/

/

0.0

0.7

0.7

^A

C

JLO

p,o

O.0

/

-t

?

U-k

,"?=?

#-f

5-Cltuds, Dusl, etc

,<u

Zd

Al

0.0

0.0

.Jl

Jtil

0.0

00

:a

0.0

00

00

0.6

0.0

flJ

tln&uflic. Into.

/

>■/■/

O.o

//-/

—/-

/

07

0-0

(7

-jt

d

/>

j£0_ 0,0

-M.

/a

O

sp

dAJi

0.0

/04

'■Psycboloptal

d

r

~XS

■ D.O

0-O

a

P

0.0

00

&•»

/

/

ILL

0,0

JhL

c

a

.0

0.0

0-0

0.0

8*Un>*oiMi

■ JL

6

1

,/•/

0-0

ll-l

a

P

1A.

00

00

^d.

fi

Id*

0-0

00

/

a

LC

00

0.1

MtflH

O

Ml

CO

0.0

/

1

fi-ff

t?

£7

jZA

0.6

'0,0

3

¥

7

t?

0-Cr

//r

Total

_£.

.z

?

m.

-#.3

lot.

J

7

/S

m

l£.7

'M

-1-

0>

? w.o

00

100.

30

X5T

0>/

<?.o

Y/.0

/00

■OMt£ ft.9f

£JJ)LU£T££A/

r?r

iPSjjFey _

_-/_.at" /a/ a s

gy Mse^r/a/)/

<?r

_'/6A'/V/?'S

f S Set A/ P.

/?#?

s 4fzc> /^ss

-/0 ^Sjztt'A'ps

/7~3 <0 JjFt. e/v^s

37-0O S Ft C A/PS

Eviluation

Number

Pm Cent

Number

PeiCsit

Number

Percent

Number

Per Cent

CiTtiinTbaubtfu

Tctal

\ 0>

Certan

Doiblfu

Total

Certain

Doublftjl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtto

Total

Certain

OcublM

Total

0- Balloon

l-Astrtnanical

Z-Aiioaft

3-Lijht Phcnom r

4- Bird

S-Clouflj, .-st, etc.

__?

00

00

a

0>

u

16

0.0

£>

____?

0.0

0.0

0JO

' 0,0

00

f\-3#

//.^

7_-

w 1

ft?

J

?-

10

0.1 1

tu

13

r

_L_a

V.$

rrs

t->

a

0-

jg:j

00

m

0\—A.

X.

a

4/?

0-3

/

/

0.0

/tt-.S

W.3

-__S:

2-

_3JL

0,0

12.2

___

rf

3-

JlL

0.0

/t.2.

°\~t

.„.^.L.___

/

2

0.0

0.0

00

6

0M

00

O.D

0>

00

.

0-0

_j_.

0.0 
0.0

0.0

itx

0.0

•?/■

t~l

6

r

0.0

0.0

fa

0>

0.0

0.0

0.0

<__

Jt-

Ma

CO

11

■0.0

0.0

d>

0.C

0,0

0.0

_JL

_

P

0.0

0J

0.0

0-0

0,0

w

'frlnsjffic. Ir.fe.

00

Ur3

/

__,

6

./

42-

0.0

/«5

/

d

/

ILL

0.0

//.!

/

/

9/

. 00

tt

7-Psythological

7

JJL

■ 00

u

a

a

JJL

0J0.0

_JL

_

P

0.0

0J

0.0

0-0

0,0

w

'frlnsjffic. Ir.fe.

00

Ur3

/

__,

6

./

42-

0.0

/«5

/

d

/

ILL

0.0

//.!

/

/

9/

. 00

tt

7-Psythological

7

JJL

■ 00

u

a

a

JJL

0J

0-0

0>

JJL

0.0

£0

0.9

0.0

00

6- Unknown 
Wittier

___ 
OJ

AO

00

t%

0>-

■2lk

O.C

03. L

/

6

/

I7LL

O.O

//./

r

<¥-

ic.i

0.0

3L#

M

0.0

7

6

/

O.O

lb!

?

JLL

0,t>

.0

0.0

0.0

_____

____

Total

U ",;"D7/"

//

Ml

n\

m

/

_L

7

SU

w

M

__L

3

?

Ul

?H

100.

//

//

/__£

0.0

000.

!^ ■ ■

\-j -.j

-J —

S~. h

'/A?* r^-j

t>-^0' A/z/vi. r£- s

0?V£TK 30 Af/Aft,T£rS

/Va r SrA.r~££?

i

Nuntei

Per Cent

Number

Pel Cent f

Number

Per Cent

Number

PetCent

tfcaluation |~C^it»in

[O^ubtfu]

Total

Certain

Doubtful [ Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tot-

r>3allcr»

.•-

___>..

__Z3

o.o\xzi

___,

2

*

___2

/0.0

0L0.0

0>

-ML

0-0

3

6

,?

JUL

00

0,i

1-Ast«nwi~!

, -r_.

fkiyu

$

3

J0.0

0.0

/f.0

1

3

fZJ

00

■Jpl

7S

?

M

zz.1

/¥■!

311

7'Aiiciatt

1

L^Z

,-r

____ 
ilk

4,/\U,7

____

3

frO

/ro

30,0

__L

7

7

zm

(ft-3

M3

r.

3

7/

12.1

%1

77S

>Li(M PhowTi. 
4 -Birds

5-CtoudJ. Quit, etc 
S-lnsilHlC Into.

7>

_L

_M

0.0\ 0-0

_____

___

■0.0

0.0

0-0

O

00

■ 0.0

Afi

0.

t.O

0.0

00

7>

QX

m 00

O

_J.O

00

00

___.

O

0>

0.0

0J

0.0

c>

6

0.0

00

00

7I

O

Ad

0,0 
0-0

ao

0?

0.0

0.0

0.0

O

___2

0.0

0.0

7)

M

0.0

0-0

J2_

3

(3.6

7

a

/

SO

00

F.0

7

f)

7

m.3

0.0

774:5

/.*

1

7sT

33.3

0.O

m

7-Prjcrolojrial

a

6

00

JLO]0£

-04

6

/

?.e

0-P

3.0

6

00

0.0

6.0

_j.

-0

0-

\i

0.0

3.2

_-Unkj»w a .

V

H

/f-0

CToXJ^

_fc

4

M£

0.0

0J.O

/

'

170.3

0.0

M3

_

O

/

.?■{

0,0

fJ

S-OBiei

/

!

jLI

0.0

HS

/

fro

0.0

f.C

7

7

0ik3

0.0

ttkj

-4

2-

3.J.

1-0

U

Jr

. Total

17

_c

2J

212.

Ml

(P0

/sr4

M£

0.0

0J.O

/

'

170.3

0.0

M3

_

O

/

.?■{

0,0

fJ

S-OBiei

/

!

jLI

0.0

HS

/

fro

0.0

f.C

7

7

0ik3

0.0

ttkj

-4

2-

3.J.

1-0

U

Jr

. Total

17

_c

2J

212.

Ml

(P0

/sr

_r

&

H.o

?j:a

700.

6

/

7

m

703

I0P.

n_

/J2~

0,'i

W.o

7f,o

7M

162

■£$£££_ rf?9 .

£~i//fL///?r ?<P./{/ /?/=■ sP/SJ/tdr s/c,r r'4/6s <jrV; /?v{ /9r/£?/y e?f S ^//r/^&

/fee

£~ S£~CCHPi AW J-£si

0-/O SetoHei

//'JO SfcfAf&J

y /- ££) Sfcca'ps

Evatoition

■umber

Per Cent

Ninbtt

Per Coil

Ninabef

Pel Cent

Numbfit

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ceitain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Jertan

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ccitain

Doubttol

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Billon

/

/

-01

AC

a

/*

4

M

0,0 0-C

-JL

/ /

0.0/0 -4

/fi.O

/

J

1

JLL

Jio

///

Mstimmal

6

t

(0

fro

Stf

M

/

<

3

2&LI4A

75-.li

-?

—&\

2 ^>6

fi&

O0.6

^

-?

„.<z

ao

22 D &2

?-Aiicie«

/

(1

1

67

0.0

a

/

(?

1

ziA\

6.0

2?,0

_£

*

r U0 33. d

W.P

-A

<7

. ^ H 1

0,0

&2

1-LifM Ptienom.

a

o.o

(?-t>

00

f>

r?

od

IP

0.0

d

d

0.6

0-o

O.0

-A,

O

e>Q

^Al

10

4<B«di

a

d

0.0

0J

oo

a

<?

06

06

m

_£

AO

PJ

Afi

o

d

#

t?-0

Id

OJ

5-Cloudj, Oust, etc.

o

0.0

0.0

o.o

_^

rt

ffj

^M.

tie

a

_<2

<?

AC

OJ

0.0

a

(?

o

0.0

to

AO

t-lniutfit Into.

-*

X.

M

fro

133

_^±

0>

no

0-0

04

/

_£.

1

/a.0

OP

//?t

a

O

M

-JJ-

do

7-Pijd»k>|iral

d

0.6

od

01

d>

a

p

-M

ao

00

o

0f>

O.0

_£±

o

Q,o

-JZL

OJ

«.Unkmw

/

1

SL

o,o

(.7

_&

a

. GO.

OJ

10

/ a

/ /a.o

04

/ty

_jZJ_

o

7

&S

-MS

?i3

3-Oflio

6

p

O.O

0.6

$-0

J

a

6

J&

0.0

Q.D

6

D

00

M

P-0

_Z- ^

I

In

-M.

n/

/

Total

n

¥

/s

?A1

&4

M

5

2

¥

J2&.

ma m.

7

i

/a

7o.O

3O0

/0.

7

7

S-

n?

2Zl

m

S/SseoMRs- J'yfy/i'fr^s-

£~3£ Af/Mvrfs

3\Z£-ft 33 Af,ASt>r£T

/Ycr SrArjrc

Evaluation

Nuitber

Pel Cent

Nymbw

Percent

Nuircjet¥

J2&.

ma m.

7

i

/a

7o.O

3O0

/0.

7

7

S-

n?

2Zl

m

S/SseoMRs- J'yfy/i'fr^s-

£~3£ Af/Mvrfs

3\Z£-ft 33 Af,ASt>r£T

/Ycr SrArjrc

Evaluation

Nuitber

Pel Cent

Nymbw

Percent

Nuircjet

Pel Cent

NiimbH

PetCent

Ctitain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dnblful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Dttbtful

Total

H-Ballooa

12

r

n$

' JJ

/?.(

_J_

^

/o

3?^

*■<>

nt

_i

3

jij

0,0

J5J

~J-

a

»

JLt

ffO

7.4-

1-Aslnnoiiiical

3

■d

j

9.1

*0

n

-?

2

f.(,

0,0

F.t

-A

/

3

j*j

!'•(

M3

9

^ /»

f6.7

f 1

7L0

;-Ai(«ifi

3

/

H

9.*

7.1

j2$

3

3

$

.&.S

%3

u.y

_a_

6

-j±

O,0

0.0

- ?

3

'2 , ( .1

<{■>

J7-3

3-Li(h| pmnon.

d

o

&

O,0

ao

00

^A

d

.A?

fi,0

00

_£L

AO

0.0

0.0

o

0-0

<?r>

0.0

4-Binfe

o

, d

Q

O.O

0.0

0.0

a

ao

0.0

0.0

_4_

O

_*s

o.o

0.0

o

#0

Oo

0.0

S-Clovds. Oust, etc.

d

<?

' ojy

0.0

01

_£,

£>

.M

0.0

0,0

a

0\

O

0.0

to

AO

Zl

c

#

(p. a

0.fi

S.0

6-lnsuflie. fnfo.

-3

o

J

9.9

o.o

u

rK

3

ti

(7-0

13

t

ILL

0.0

///

^v.

/>

/H-

&?

oo

n?

7-Psycf»lo|ial

/

a

/

JA

0-0

11

y

A

I

JZJ.

O.O

ZJ

o

O

M

0-0

0.0

a

(?.0

00

o.o

H-Unknaw

/S

S3

H&.1

UA}

/s

d

ti

30. 0,

O.0

?0.{

A

* 222

0.0

77.1

-X

9

'm

0(1

iH?

9-OOiu

A

/

3

AJ?

7.1

n

/

-?

3

J.t

\fJ

U

£>

if

<?.0

P.0

_*2.

a

2~

<!■?

7.7

Total

71

3

&

to.&

If

M

m.

7

%

U4

(9.1

(HO.

8

1

r

m

/a

/M

^

8

sffffl

ds

It9.

r/t(?L£

4 /#a

^^ci/A-r/a/f

<?F

*z>tfsj?dr

r/&/zr/A/as

.^v -J?#&/?_r/#/i;

fr

St&//r/A/6.

/9s-!

£ ~ Sfco/vps sts*p /jrm

^~/f 5£-C0AV?S

//-3# S^~£t?A/£>3

3 ' /- 6<2 J?£~CWC>J

Evaluation

Numbo

Per Cent

Number

Pet Cent

Niuiber

Pet Coil

Nurnber

Pel Cent

Crtrtam

Ooubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtju

Tobl

Certain

Doubttul

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

TotalPet Cent

Niuiber

Pet Coil

Nurnber

Pel Cent

Crtrtam

Ooubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtju

Tobl

Certain

Doubttul

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certaii

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

Oh

O.i

0.0

d

OO

QO

00

a

6fi.

OjP

OjO

_

o

OJ)

0.0

0.0

1-Astnmoiiiol

3"

^

7

m

/&.1

Sf.f

J

JL

20,0

OP

OP

M.9 
20.0

2

a

2.

?5.3

0.0

3M

-

/

1

00

70.0

•20.Q

2-Airciatt

/

i

/'

0.0

t.l

/

/

~Z

<?

2

y>3.

OjO

33,3

-2-

\

H

feOA

104

BOO

3-LifJit Pbemw.

^

o

0.0

0.(5

AO

tf?

o

(XO

OP

6.0

a

O

_£2

0.0

OO

-jL

»

0.0

00

OO

<-Bi«k

0>

as

00

0.0

. a

a

0>

00

o<>

06

o

/

/

Off

HI

101

o

e

0.0

00?

00

S-CloutJs. Oust. etc.

a

o

t.o

0.0

OD

_ .0

00

OP

OP

o

a

£>

M

00

9.9

a

o

0.0

0.0

0.0

6-lnsuflie. bib.

a

(0

M

00

04

_o

e.

JH

OjO

04?

a

9-0

0jO

U

n

^

OO

00

0.0

7-Psrcl»lo(ical

^

o

P

^u

10

00

.XL

0.0

0.0

00

a

a

10

CO

9.9

_£_

-M

00

0.0

O-Untnow

_z:

if

2131

0.(1

331

_*L

o

^

Ma

0.0

{0.0

_x

a

/

A7

0-0

/f-1

_J_

0)

eZ

0.0

0.0

Ultber

_£.

QO

0.0

OS)

.4.

a

0>

J£

CO

0.0

a

o

0.0

op

9-9

p

0.0

M

6.0

Tola!

10

2

-0*

S3.3

fr?

mi

L_L

S

MO

00

m.

<r

i

6

m

ft -7

{&.

3

A

s~

to.o.

^o-o

0-

'4'.;

t : -i.

0/ Ofcm£"s -■ S~ Af;.wr£~s

6 -3 £ /ty/A/tsr£S

l^lSfS? 3/7 Af/A/f?-&J

A^r- Srjrtij?

Evaluation

taobei

Pel Cent

Number

Pel Cent

Number

Per Cent

Number

P«Cmt

CnUn

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

>lan

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

ft- Balloon

Jt

/

3

~9Cf

u

11.1

-2.

a

2-

7o3

ofi

ics

/

6

/

Ml

CO

lf.l

__j:

J

r

6.S

*3

/tf

1-MtrorKHnial

/

/

0.6

ft

n

5

/

4

i£l

5VJ

V.i

/

s

2-

J</-3

ff.i

ItL

_ji

rV

//

JJl

n-i

23. f

?-Aircnft

3

(

H

/£!

■I'll

n. \

-A.

3

rCO

lf.l

__j:

J

r

6.S

*3

/tf

1-MtrorKHnial

/

/

0.6

ft

n

5

/

4

i£l

5VJ

V.i

/

s

2-

J</-3

ff.i

ItL

_ji

rV

//

JJl

n-i

23. f

?-Aircnft

3

(

H

/£!

■I'll

n. \

-A.

3

r

jE\

/s'7

M.3

^y

/

(<f-b

0.0

tt-l

^

/

3

vs

Jl-Q-

C S

3-Light pnanaL

. a

/

/

M.

M

i-i

00

0.0

Ofi

o

o

06

0.0

0.0

/

/

-^Z

0.0

Ll

4-Biirh

o

o

0.0

0.0

Ql

6

a

0.0

0.0

06

o

06

00

Off

o

6

0.0

o.o

40

S-Cloudj, Dust. etc.

o

0.0

0.0

09

-0L

0>

6.0

OO

0.0

a

OP

OO

0.0

_j2_

0.0

60

OO

G-lnsuffic tofo.

/

I

jLI

0.0

H-1

^L

0.

/

SJ.

06

r.7

_^

<p

£

^L

0.0

1J.&

^4-

l{?

2A2Z

0.0

*A7

7-Psidioloiical

/

/

0.0

*■{

n

0.0

0.0

0.0

90

10

OJ

-J-

O

/

.*..a.

60

fi

t-Uuaann

t

?

111

06

w

^t

4

2/.I

0.0

■71.1

.<<

/

/f3

$6

/if. 3

Jl

/3

Zl.l

0.0

?n

Mtbei

JL

A-

?s

0.0

n

3

o

?

M

0.0

W

4

■0.0

0.0

0.0

-*Z.

?-

</.3

0.6

f-3

Total .

it

s

J./

&L

03,1

M

/£

¥

'?

m

XSJ

let.

£

1

7

K.7

/ft

joe.

3f

//.

?£

%J

03.9

if 9.

163

i^^B^ ^S

et » #^ff ilT *i »»i a)«1a!V . *^ .i fru »! iV^

J~A£LJr 4/0/ £-i//ii.t//9r/0A/

OF ...

Mjeer

S/tZA/ry&tss

#Y

/?£/;e/?r//2/V

&f

s/&#r//f<s

/tffS

f $F£*/V£>S AMZ> <<LF3S

«^-/i? S/rttz/ps

/f-30 5fc0A>ps

3/-/.d ■Srce/vtx

Emotion

nabtr

PeCnt

ftueoei

Pet Cent

Kuatw

Pel Cent

Nwtei

Per Cent

CtltMl

OoAttal

Total

Certain

DooMtel

Total

; slain

DeuUtU

ToB

Certain

DMbttia

Total

Certain

DouMhil

Total

Ctftwi

DootMil

Total

Cwtaii

DoybUul

TotH

Cattan

Ombttil

Total

frBillooa

/

iT

f

^j:

_*Z.£2

*

7

r

J$.<i' 1.1

tf.3

~x

6

10

Jf

fa

;.q

_i

7

'ff

JU,

11

ft!

1-tatnmaictl

M

.^

?*

m

/qs». o

/*

/* 3"

ISA. IVJ

37. c

n

f

Sti

/I*

,-frt

a\

_JL

1

10

CI

i.t, en

?-*iicnn

X

•itf

3#

^£

>/e.f

207

-&.

*

**

Jf.S

?.92f-7

^L

33

Si

30.0

Ma

W»

Si

/7

38

(h% hj

33U

HifMPIwwa.

/

.7

r

.5 1

hi

A*

Zl

(0

(

/A

0.0

i-1

f

f

z

^1

.-?

j*t

-?X

•itf

3#

^£

>/e.f

207

-&.

*

**

Jf.S

?.92f-7

^L

33

Si

30.0

Ma

W»

Si

/7

38

(h% hj

33U

HifMPIwwa.

/

.7

r

.5 1

hi

A*

Zl

(0

(

/A

0.0

i-1

f

f

z

^1

.-?

j*t

-?

I

$$

n

/■7

t.|Ma

/

^?

v

T

/.6i

3 J

6

/

/

tJ

13

ft

/

/

.7

0$

.7

a

/

J

-ML

}

tQ

S-Cloeds. (hit, etc.

/

/

#i»

SOS

6

4-0

4

0-6

*

%

6.6

/.+

lA

..a.

6

07

<7.0

4-»

frkttvffic brio.

9

tf

i

Jil

0.0

*-f

_£.

a

t

Mr

o.»

M

-&i

a

11

u

1-\

*

d

9

-2L

po

18

r*HydfeR0Ql

2

rf

i

M

0.0

/./

A

d

iJ

OA

i.t

_x

f

s~

'■?

o.l

hi

-z

6

t

J±

0.6

f.l

tUUaoM

{9

rf

ft

/a%

0.0

/«•»

J3_

d

n

K4

*•/

(i.t

M

32

/<)

Qt

HI

-M

a

31

no

o.D

y.e

Httf

H

.?

fO

Y.i

/■{

^.*

U,

6

i

/-?

1.9

/2

_y

/

2f

*f

£0

/

J?

3

0,9

(.1

7 1

Total

133

*\/

m

&J_

SU

/W?

S7

Z*

nf

l6J2f.£

m

1L

*?

/V6t£o

MO

Iff.

21

**//S

»Yas!6

Iti.

A/( r Srjr£-p

£/SfC0A//?s —jT/fs/yvrfs

£-30 /W//vt/rss

/Ovff? 3# A/t#tfr*s

Pa Cent

Wader

Pei Cent

KuKiet

Pet Cent

Per Ceil

Evaluation

Ctttai*

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OoaMtjt

Total

Certain

Total

Ctftaie

Total

Certain

Total

Certain

Total

Certain

Cvobth Total

Certain

On Htol

Total

(HUTm

3&

fZ

10

/St-UkiSX

J2.

Jo.

so

mMk

213

M

-^

33

Z£&

JA

2li ^9 / £ HQ

&

a

hx_

Uttmeaical

2>S.

8

41.

JU

JJ.

-dL

Mi

11

£1

j.?lt4

JL

^3 .3.3

m.

31

1U 2</

£J£

JLl^J-

// 3

Mlieoft

m

?.<ss

l£lA

£M

■^2

U

MZ

fS/f.t

t-£

jjl

££

JV

III

31

z-f gz:

ML

JJ.

uc

j^ient

£-*

/!-&

?y

-A

£

iB

«

JJL

&t

Al.

M.

oJ

t.f

s

JJ.

OJ i-l

«il*

jL-A.

/

QlJLl

Jl

3.0

9t

X-—JL

2.

/.¥

!.<+

J.

-L

£L

0.0

94

frclooox Dmt, etc

6.1

M.

LL

/

/

M

jjL

o.s

JL

Jj-

00

0. i

M

J2J.

M.

Q.k

6-lnwtlic. tab.

It

IX

u

0.9

C<l

&

2¥

u

0.0

i£

£1

4-3

Al

AL

23$ Of

23^

Tt

7-FiytMofical

2-J

ML

JJL

m~i

£dJil.

n

l~A

23.

o.n

t.c

£^Z

jll

JJL

*t

it

2&

e.e

*ri

OA

e.o

/it

J3It

IX

u

0.9

C<l

&

2¥

u

0.0

i£

£1

4-3

Al

AL

23$ Of

23^

Tt

7-FiytMofical

2-J

ML

JJL

m~i

£dJil.

n

l~A

23.

o.n

t.c

£^Z

jll

JJL

*t

it

2&

e.e

*ri

OA

e.o

/it

J3

Jl£&

0.0

ax

£3.

i*.

&1

U.

?24

Mfter

31

UL

M

/£.

JJ.

aZ

H.1

3.J±

&_

JU

lL

M-^L

JL

J&

JL±

M

201

m

18

Total

m

%fum

m

3ZJ\.

/&:

77

s£mi

21%

tit

Ml

m\

211

t».

TJi

so

\2M.

teAl/i.?

/00.

\

\

t

I

I

■via

M

164

sfe,:

n 
i

f 4 fefi A /0Z e^i.t/^r/0/t/ 0F..JU. £l&a2&&S_ £&£^£dJ, ££&££ ^ -4<&4IJ£4/t'.. f fr&tfr/d/G.

J^C*

*/0/t*r<vs

0f

</£/9*

^/vs

Jeep/ft?

r

Of.

z ess

t/AjHMfV

f£a*t>#*y

At^tett

/?/>*>!■

Enloituii

Nunbei

Pa Cent

Number

Percent

Number

Pel Cent

HuMbei

Per Cent

entail

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

Doubltul

T.61

Certain

Doubtful

Tola

Jertaifi

Doubltul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

r> Balloon

<?

o

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

00

e>

0^

00

0.0 0.0

/

/

£&

0>0

£■*

l-JLstnxioaial

S

.?/

26

/if./

p.0

U7

S

«s

iO

&4 s4*

ffif

4

X

/t

Ms

5S.P

tts

ff

('

A//

00

6/./

2-Airciatl

<?

0.0

'00

0,0

o

0.0

-JUl-OJL

_£

i>^>

-QJL

0-0

£

-?

&■/

0-0

s/./

3-Li04 Phono*.

£

tf

00

0-0

#■0

-J2-

0.n

0.0

0,0

.0.0.

0.0.

■ 0-0

J?

-J0JL

0,0

00

Mil*

r?

<3

00

0-0

£

4>

00

0.0

00

&

&o

00

0-0

/

/

00

&4>

£-.6

5-ClowJJ, Out. tic

£?

O

0.0

at?

ao

P

0.0

0.0

0<?

&

0.0

0.0

00

a

^gjz.

#0

0-0

tliunflic. brio.

<?

O

no

0.0

0,0

e?

J2A

0.0

0.0

/

<?

7

1.3

-£0-

>■*

/

/

.$.tt-^

00

-f li

7-PirdBlb|ial

/

(

33

#■0

3.3

-£-

c

0.0

0.0

00

a

a0

0.0

00

a

<?-0 0,0

frurtinowi

2

i>

z

£.7

00.

6-/

o

0.0

0.0.

0.0

.2.

__j£_

j

i.S

0.0

f*

2.

2.

'/•/

#/?

///

t-Oltwr

o

/

/

00

r- ■**

33

/

/

JLL

(?■<?

?./

& #0

-MJL

0-0

O

00

.0

0.0

ToW

f?

■52

30

2L7

fSJ

/&.

S

<o

// fr.s_

ste

/Ot>.

r

%

/0>

t&.o

£0.0

/00.2.

'/•/

#/?

///

t-Oltwr

o

/

/

00

r- ■**

33

/

/

JLL

(?■<?

?./

& #0

-MJL

0-0

O

00

.0

0.0

ToW

f?

■52

30

2L7

fSJ

/&.

S

<o

// fr.s_

ste

/Ot>.

r

%

/0>

t&.o

£0.0

/00.

n

/

/<r

ftf?

*-4

/00.

v^V

Jc/At£

Jl/t.V

/0&&0sr

Etalualion

Huinber

Per Cent

Number

PerCent

Numbel

PerCnt

NvmbH

Per Cail

Certain

Doubltul

Total

Certain

Ooubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubltul

Total

Certain

Dnibthil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0-BaHooo

O

0.0

0.0

0.0

/

/

3.7

O.O

3.7

/

£,

3

Of

tf

t-f

J &

0.O

?.$

f«

1-Astnnogiical

A

f

1

2£-.o

rt.4

tr.i

/'

11

/S

37.0

zf.Ct

W.6

3f

£V

$S

&J.1

21.0

Sbi

/IT

¥0

S-S\

ft4 </&.&

i?9

2-AirctlA

£-

/

0,

tot

4.t

2¥9

S

/

¥■

//J

3.7

f?.$

//

'?

^3

/0.I

//.0

?! I

3

t

//

ss

93

m

3-Lichl Ptioon.

O

ao

0-0

0-0

a.o

o.0

AC

/

1

ff.f

0.0

0?

/

J

00

It

ii,

4-Bil*

P

0.0

0-0

0.0

O

0.6

O.0

0.o

' /

fi

J

0.f

n

t-7

0\

a.o

0.0

0.O

5-Cloud^ Dust, etc.

<

c

/

£l.

00

4f

AO

G.O

0.0

1

t

0.0

Of

9

0.0

0.0

0.0

6-lnsirlic tib.

J

3

/2.S

0.0

12.$

J

•0

3

it/

0.0

tft

£

Z

/i

a.o

ta

£.

_e_

£

70

6.0

70

T-PsycholagicSI

<7

O

0.0

00

0.0

O0

00

0.0

.0.

on

0.0

0.0

/

' 'o.

/

1.9,

0.0

a

S-UMlOOMI

£

Z

ft

0.0

$.2

AO

O.O

O.O

/2.

f*

f/.O

0.O

//£>

d

a

$,

7.0

0.0

70

Mthei

3

3

/f.S

0.0

tf.$

/

/

3.7

£>.&

3.7

1

IS

r-i

0.0

/■$■

2

/

3

2.3

/.!>

?z

Total

Z0

¥■

Zf

ft.3

/£,7

/Off.

/%

f

Z7

4<r.7

33.3

fob.

$8

<H

/0?

iZ4

tft.

wo.

33

S3x

8<a

3*4/

UC

tec-

ijfi

#

Ill

S£:s>*-e**&££L

&raf££

A/0*£*r/?££

/?*??&*?&?■£

Evalualiori

Number

PeiCent

Number

Percent

Number

PeiCent

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Drubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tow

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubtfulPeiCent

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Drubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tow

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

D-BUioon

_£_

(?

0.0

AO

O.O

£

<■

_^£j

s:t>

$£.

00

0.0

0,0

0.

-032.

00

0.0

I'Astronaiiial

'P

/

td

57,1

4t

M

/7

. i

B3

&i

It, 7

(,S9

7

rt

2L/

24./

4Z3

174

/£

f?<

zf

40.0

40-0

$0.6

Z-Aiicraft

/

0.

3

4tg

— n

rfs

/

3

<t

1SL

*''

til

2.

i

3

6.9

f.At

/0.3

13.0

00

00

J-U(tit Phnoa.

f

O.d

0.0

O.O

/

J

£0.

fif

2-t

/

/

3<7

00

??

00

0,0

0.0

t-Birds

0.0

0-0

00

/

/

2

UL

U

ffi

0.0

00

0.0

00

fi.0

0,0

5-Clowte, prat, etc.

<!>

0.0

AO

00

00

00

0.0

a

0.0

0-0

00

00

00

0-0

frUiHiltic hb.

Z

Z

M.

00

?t

/

/

22

00

If

o

0.0

0-0

00

00

0.0

f>0

r-Piycholoficjl

0.\

4>

o

0.0

0.0

0.0

&

0.0

f>0

0.0

O

0.0

0-0

00

O

0.0

ftp

00

S-UntoBW

—2.

2.

15.

00

?■$

J

3

4.2

0-0

f.S

3

3

/0.3

0.0

/0?

6

£

20.0

0.0

2o.o

MttlB

0.

/

(

0.0

</■*

Vf

0.O

00

0,0

/

■f

3.4

0-0

?■¥

0.0

019

ft-0

Total

/7

¥

Zf

Ua

tf.p

tea

Z3

/3

34>

(,?.f

,»•/

00.

f<t

/s-

Z7

W3

£&

/&?.

/*?

/z

3°

too

4>e

/O0.

m

165

■'.31

Em

mmmmmmmmm

m

*<r»tnjjp H ^ ^ ^ ^ » Jp»w>. a ,

rAAie /?/0f £H//?±i/A7-/0/i/

OF

JlL S/^jr/zi/Gs

F0t

fa

i. v^Mf <gy 0^/9r/0ji/

0S

£/<Stfr//i/&

F&t tet?/vr//s & </&/?£> . s/x ro ^eas s£~a&/i/j3

</*/VlJA*</

. f£<tjei/f4</

... . M/t/ee*

/?f#s<.

Evaluation

NumlMi

Per Cert

Number

per Cent

Number

PerCenl

Nunber

Per Cent

cm«»

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubtfuL

Tom

Set tarn

Doubtful

Toul

Certain

DoriMtuI

T«M

>rt*n

DoubtM

jota.

Certain

Dmiblral

Total

Certain

DouMful

_ToW,

Cotjm

Doubtfut

Total

O-Sillooi

(?

<?

O.O

0-0

0.0

.

f

,.00

00 00

0.0

^3L

#0

CO

AO

CO

l-Aslnmaial

/

^

<c

//./

*£6

M-1

/

/

mo

0.0

MO

/

/

ti?

0.0

//,-7

£

£__ToW,

Cotjm

Doubtfut

Total

O-Sillooi

(?

<?

O.O

0-0

0.0

.

f

,.00

00 00

0.0

^3L

#0

CO

AO

CO

l-Aslnmaial

/

^

<c

//./

*£6

M-1

/

/

mo

0.0

MO

/

/

ti?

0.0

//,-7

£

£_

2

/£l

O.O

t?.Z

I-Airaift

/

/

O.O

//■>

Kt

. 0.

ae

00

00

/

'

/

M.7

£0.

'*■?

_^

/

$■

2U,

?J

W*

J-LijMPtxniHi.

/?

,?

O.O

O.O

O.O

^P

00

00

ff0

00

o.o

/9

e.o

ao

0.0

4-Birdx

—£

<SP

0.0

0.0

a.o

(?

<?

JL£.

-££.

00

—JL.

/

//,■/

-J2A&L

O.O

ao

O.O

S-Ciooaj, Dost. etc.

<i?

OO

ao

ao

a

.gJL

00

0-0

0.0

&0.-.O2-

^0j

0.0

0.0

O.O

■VlnnlTic, »*>.

/

*?

/

//./

0.0

{/■>

<?

do

00

Op

V

W 0.0

0.0

/

/

9-/

0.0

9/

7-Pt^bfiai-

' <?

^

0.0

OO

O.O

,?

00

uO0-

0.0

(7

0.0

00

tie

__£J

O.O

aG

O.C

lUraman/

tf?

/

fit

O.O

?/./

&

{?

SJ24-

J£2-

00

3

3

60.A

0.O, SO 6

J

a

J

37. i

a.e>

as

HMw

<?

^

0.0

0.0

ao

00

.££-

0.0

£>

00

J&L

0.0

0\

00

OO

i>.0

Total

3

^

/

&3

M-7

/DO-

. /

/

/ooo

00

m

6

t

/OOP

00

/oe.

/O

/

//

m

t-f

/OO

W4</

Jt/A

b£

J?t/

/?£>6&fr

Efilidtion

Number

Percent

Numter

Percent

Kumier

Per Cat

Number

Percent

Certiie

OMlbtnl

Total

Certain

Doerjttul

Total

Certain

Doublfut

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Oonrbtfu

Total

Certain

Dnbtful

Total

O-Bjlloofi

/

/

f.s

0.0

f.S

/

/

0.0

00

f.P

/

/

y-/

0.0

?f

a

¥

/

5.0

n.e

its

1-Astnmiaical

J

S

ISO

0.0

&o

J

?

W

£JL

T<rP

&0

AT

4

•20

P/.J

/U

1$?

J

r

(,

9.4

H

/ft

2-AirniK

£

/

3

ti.f

f.S

tso

J

J

/SA.

0.0

/SO

£

<

//

rfl

/2,l

2M

X

V

/2>

2£.0.

n.e

31 e

HietitPtiaiOB.

/

/

o.o

U

ft

I

3

0.0

($■<?

/0O

6.0

0.0

C.O

. L

/

3./

0.0

,?/

t-Binh

.0

0.0

aa

o.a

a

o

J2IL

00

/>.(?

(7

0.0

O.C

£J

1-P

_ O.0

00

S-CloudJ, 0«t, etc.

_^

0.0

&o

0.0

^£_

/10

00

ao

O.O

00

D.t

O

0.0

f>0

00

S-lrtaiHic, Bib.

2

2

*■/

o.o

xr.0

0.0

aa

o.a

a

o

J2IL

00

/>.(?

(7

0.0

O.C

£J

1-P

_ O.0

00

S-CloudJ, 0«t, etc.

_^

0.0

&o

0.0

^£_

/10

00

ao

O.O

00

D.t

O

0.0

f>0

00

S-lrtaiHic, Bib.

2

2

*■/

o.o

xr

__£

ff

2

J0JL

_j&£_

/0P

/

/

24

0.0

It

2.

?,

&.$

00

fj

7Plfclelg(icil

0.0

6.6

O.O

o

-&2\

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0_

0,0

0.O

r>UnkMMi

£

4

*7

o.o

fit

/

/

~££

00

Sp

7

7

ft/

04

Iti

4

$

/#.?

0.0

tf.f

Mllief

O.O

O.O

0.0

_<2_

0.0

0.0

0-0

I

.

/

JjA

0.0

24

/

J./

00

,?/

Total

<£>

2.

/&

ff.3

A4-

/OP-

/0

/&

20

^0.i>

0*0.0

w.

30

//

V/

fS.2.

2i.$

/so.

2/

//

?2>

{,£./,

Htf

m

3£-/>r*M3e*

/skrt>*

?££

/L/evG*f/i£/e

^tf^Hif^fitr

Evaluation

Nunber

Pet Cent

Nuntwt

PtiCent

Humbes

PuCwt

Huflbei

Percent

Certain

Dovbtni

Total

Certain

Doubtfulj Total

Certain

Doublfut

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tnai

Certain

Doobthi

Total

Certain

OmWrul

Total

O-Bjli™

/

/

0.0

/0.0

/0,0

-/?

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

0-0

0.0

0>

0.0

00

00

l-Aslnmnial

£

/

J

fi>0

/$.0

teo

/0

?

/3

ii_.7

20-0

%7

J

/

V

</z9

M?

f/2

/

£

3

??.i

M-7

/00.C

?-Airtralt

jL

2.

2,

0.0

?0.0

200

00

0P

oc

<?

00

{?

0.0

0-0

0,0

Mijht Pnnmi.

0.0

0.0

0O

JUL

oo

00

0.0

0.0

0.O

/?

a

0.0

0<?

0./7

♦-Birds

/

t

00

/0.0

/OP

j2#.

00

00

0>

0,0

0-0

00

0!

0.0

0/?

P.f>

5-Clouds, Dasl, etc

f?

0.0

0-0

00

JU2A

(?0

00

(?

0.0

0.0

o.o

0>

/?

0.0>

0-0

O.O

Unsulfic Iflrfl.

00

00

0l\

0,0

00

'00

(?

0.0

00

00

0>

O.O

0r?

0-0

T-PsyCl»lo(icaJ

00>

0.0

(?o

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

00

00

.

0.0

0.0

0.0

t-UfllOMMI

./

\?

&£L

0.0

?0.0

£

2.

/n

00

/I!

3

3

&.f

0,0

H

0.0

0.0

£XD

t-Other

0>

0.0

0-0.

00

0.0

00

0.0

/?

ao

00

00

a

(7

0.0

0<?

ao

Total

S

£

/(?

5$0

£00

/O0

^7i

3

//r

$00

20

too.

6

/

7

is. 7

/</-J

(00-

/

2

3

37.2

6&.7

/0t.

166

I0>

0.0

0-0.

00

0.0

00

0.0

/?

ao

00

00

a

(7

0.0

0<?

ao

Total

S

£

/(?

5$0

£00

/O0

^7i

3

//r

$00

20

too.

6

/

7

is. 7

/</-J

(00-

/

2

3

37.2

6&.7

/0t.

166

I

JTfgLS A/04 FVALl/AT/0/1/ OF ALL SZ&Zi'r/A/G.'S

FO? ALt

V£/>a

fj- 4<S 0MAT/0/V

rf^

5/6/

*rwt

FOfi M<0AsTA>S 0F $f£/}# .

£t-£lf<SAt

to 77f//ery

S£a04/0s

Jd/kt/***'

/^!^V

A?*££A>

^/it/£

Evaluate*

husbei

Pa Cent

NMber

Pet Cent

NuMX)

Per Cent

Nvntei

PdCmt

C«(Uin

DosbAll

Total

Cert* ii

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Donbtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Jatain

Doubtlul

Total

Certain

OmittM ToW

Cabin

Ojwtttiil

Total

Certain

DouWtuI

TotH

awiiwi

(?

^

0.0

O.o

ao

O.O

0.0

Oo

-^

/

/

.0.0

4J

4J

/?

<?

a

£.<?

a#

0?

1-Aitmoaical

y

/

J-

$0.0

/O.O

5».6

/

/

8fO

0.0

ZS.O

/

/

JUL

JU^

M

_2L

/

2

fl3

ti

Z&L

>-A««art

^

o

0.0

P.O

0.0

/

/

?s.o

c.c

ZS.0

-_L-

/

.££-

.JUL

6 3

_X

£

s

m

f-2

fit

Mifht Plwma.

^

o

o.o

a. a

0.o

O.o

o.o

0.6

-£->

a

(W

JUL

ftp

-£-\

/

<&_

00

41

'.•Birds

&

,7

o.o

e.a

0.0

<?

O.O

0.O

O.O

-&A

a

0.0

0.J

<3(?

Y

/-

s.g

a#

4(

S-ClowlJ, Owl (tc.

^

o.'o

0.O

o.o

oo

O.O

04

~^n

o

4£_

££.

do

#

{7

0.0

0P

0,0

frlimttit Mi.

/

f?

/

/O.0

o.o

/O.O

£>

0.O

O.O

O.O

<?

0.0

0.0

a<?

0.0

0.0

00

7-Plrc»l0|iCil

O

<7

o

ot>

O.O

O.O

e.o

O.O

O.O

.

#0

#0

ao

--£-

00

ft?

0-0

t-Unkjaw

S

^

*

fCO

O.O

<te.e

2

Z

goo

o.o

5o.o

J

3

/f?

<?0

/t7

f

#

J-

?sf

0.0

tig

Mow

<?

6.0

O.O

04

<?

0.0

a.0

O.O

/

f

/a

4J

fLZ

6i$

/

<?

/

.¥1

0.0

$g

Tout

?

/

(4

?o.a

J 0.0

/Oo.

V-

&

¥

/ec.t

O.O

106,

_£.

//

/£>

s/.s

it.1

/#$■

/E

3

-?/

fSf

tf-3

m-

M*0

Jl/A/£

Jvz.</

/?U6orr

Evaluation

HunDer

Pa Colt

Kumbet

Pa Cent

Nuabei

Pn Cent

NonbH Pet Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

T««W

Certain

Doubtful

TotalHunDer

Pa Colt

Kumbet

Pa Cent

Nuabei

Pn Cent

NonbH Pet Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

T««W

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtful

Total

Certsn

Ooulttul

Total

Certain

Dnbtfnl

Totat

0- Balloon

/

/

Z

S.J

.*,?

fcl

/

/?

/

^

40

S-i

zz

ir

?

~M

se

f-t

a

/

/

CO

zs

Z.S

I-Aitmmmiui

2.

-e

M5.

/?■<>

(D.S

/

J

¥

Sli,

M-7

Z2?

J3_\

I

/6

MX

?j

rf{>

6-

t

JZ

/s.o

/s.o

30-Q

Z a Aiiciafl

4

/

•?

2U

f-3

sty

s-

£>

' T

w

//•'

?ff

Jlj

tf

?6

/f.g

/Sffl

f?J.

6

V

/o

/s.o

fO.O

ZS-C

3-Li(M Ptionn.

/

/

0J>.

SJ

63

M.

$0

0.0

—^

'/}.0

_a.c 0j?

/

/

O.O

0.0

o.O

t-flinjj

/

/

0.0

53

<?■?

£JL

0-0

0,0

„j2

d>

0.0

00

0.0

0.O

O.O

o.o

S-Cloudi, Busl, etc

a

e-0

ao

0.O

0.0

a0

ae

/>

£>

a0

00 00

ffljS

O.O

ao

tlnaltic. ■)(■>.

4

y-

2/.L

00

2i './

3

3

/i-7\

#0

#-T

s

S

I-S

0.0

JJ.

I

z

?■*

O.O

7-S

J-P>rctoh)|ical

a

JJL

0.0

fie>

jzA

00

00

^L

X

7

-44

S3

JU

0.0

O.O

00

•/Unlmran

J"

3

&$_

0<?

&$

s

3

/&■■?

0.0

*7

■4-

/?

20.9

0^

20.f rf

/<£

3S.0

O.O

3FO

«tHM

/

/

S3

0,0

U

.

0.0

0-0

0.0

/

/

/./

/>0

//

o.o

0.0

AO

Total

/s

V-

/?

&L

2/./

&

/3

s

/*

f2t

m

/00-

62

£?

?/

£f.2

j/J

/00.

Z*

/2

¥C

res

£7 5"

/to,

&sreM#££

/2itZ>tf£*

A/0CE*t4£je

^i-/«Be

Enluatim

Nuaba

Pee Cent

Number

Pei C«t

Huntra

PaCent

Nun bet

PnCait

Certiie

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubt*

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

CqUki

OtubtM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtful

Total

Cotin

Doutitni

TotalJ

Certain

Doibtful

Tot*

B-Mloon

fl

2,

z.

0.0

//.-?

/2.S

/

/

«•/

00

n'

#

a.o

oo

o.a

2

^

£0\

&L1/IS.1I

1-Aitnnoniial

I

/

2

17

w

/3.0

<L

/

7

tfZJ

2./

$0.0

*.

2

SO£

O.O

S~o.o

3

3

23/

00

23/

MMrccjft

_£

.3

7

&7

2JLQ.

#7

/_

£

,?

*1

/</-3

2/.</

2.

2

SOU

a. a

S-o.O

/

<f

s-I

/

2

17

w

/3.0

<L

/

7

tfZJ

2./

$0.0

*.

2

SO£

O.O

S~o.o

3

3

23/

00

23/

MMrccjft

_£

.3

7

&7

2JLQ.

#7

/_

£

,?

*1

/</-3

2/.</

2.

2

SOU

a. a

S-o.O

/

<f

s-

2.2

so.g

2Z.S

3-Li|hl Pbenui.

ft

ML

_0j2]

00

0.

•

&

M,

0.0

flo

0.O

o.a

o.o

O

0.0

0.0

00

4-Birfs

o

.££}

00

(20

o

0J2

00

f!0

<?

O.O

O.o

o.o

0.0

00

00

^-Clouds, Dint, etc

/

/

0.0

6-7

•V

/

/

0.0

*,/

ff

O

o.o

o.o

0.O

00

0.0

(?-0

(■Insiilfic Wo.

t

£

/1. 3

0.0

(1-3

/

/

7-/

00

fj

a

r?

0.0

0.O

o.o

03

0.0.

JUL

'00

JPsjtloloral

/

1

A/

0-0

*■/

p

0.0

00

00

&

o.o

O.o

AO

O

0-0

0.0

0.0

eXMnoa*

0.0

0.0

00

/

f

7-t

0.0

7S

<p

0"

O

a.o

a>. a

o.o

2

-e

2£iL

00 &.¥

Mttw

O

00

00

00

o

0.0

00

#0

a

K>

AO

0.0

o.O

J

a

/

22

0.0

77

Total

%

7

/s-

S3?

&7

I0O

/O

f

IV

7/. 4

tU

/£»■

*f-

O

f

/OtU)

s.o

/O0~

JL

6

/3

S39

&/

/cv.

m

167

?#/?/.£: 4/0F

Fi/*///* rs£ /l/ ^=- #(.i. S/&^r//l/^S . J?0X> /9U.. </£/?#£ SV JiV/)770/t/ 0£ s/6//r/*/ 6

/?0£.

Af#4/r#s

0>^ .

-Z£££^

r^/jerf

£>/!/£

7~0

^S/JLZX—

^t&AZ&S

t

v //(#£?/}#(/

^efjei/Mi/

6f££jL4L

tff/f/i

EvafmhM

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Nurter

Pet Cart

Certain.

DouMM

Totll

Certan

Doubtful

Total

:«Uin

OoubtW

Tot*

Certain

DoubtM

Total

;man

Donbtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cotain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

fruitful

mi

0-B*llo»

a

(^

do

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

/

/

-M

-j££

^/

^0,

£j

/

JJL

^

4e

l*AStlMI04niCel

p

r?

0.0

0,0

00

0.

M/l r

0,0

0.0

■

0.0~

00 00

/

■ /

■¥■*

0-0

4*

Mirtralt

t?

0.0

0.0

0.0

/

2-

3

20,0 ¥0-0

M.0

_^

4

?IS 0~-0

?f3

/

/

2

¥£

¥*

ff

3-Li|HI Pheno*.

a

(?

0.0

0-0

a#

. j2.

JZO.

00

0.0

. 0.

J?

0.0

0.0

00

.0

A

0.0

0-0

0O

I-Birti

.

/?

<?

0.0

ap

0.0

i?

0.0 00

0,0

-A

4

ill

^JL,

33-3

/

¥.$

0.0

¥■*

S-Clwot, Dust, tic.

0.0

0.0

(>0

00

0.0

00

_j£_

00. 0.

J?

0.0

0.0

00

.0

A

0.0

0-0

0O

I-Birti

.

/?

<?

0.0

ap

0.0

i?

0.0 00

0,0

-A

4

ill

^JL,

33-3

/

¥.$

0.0

¥■*

S-Clwot, Dust, tic.

0.0

0.0

(>0

00

0.0

00

_j£_

00

j2£_j2JL

^-0- 0+0. 0d3 J2,<2.

UnsifliC Ink).

<?

0.0

<?(?

00

a

0.0

0-0

00

-JL

0.0

JLO.

At?

_^

t?

2

f/

-J2j0

?.f

M'aiUAbficel

0.0

0.0

(?0

0.0

ac

^0-

JL£.

-&&.

0.0

_^

00

a<? a?

»U*IWM

47

4

/00.A

0,0

we

/

...a

/

20.0

0o

20c

z

I

&A

-&L

s-r

J£\

sf

0-£

-&J2A

*$■*■

9-0th«i

a<?

0.0

■0.f?

/

/

£00

0.0

200

a

/

/

&L

g?.

xs

^2.

7?

.

00

MJZ^

0.0

■■

Total |

y

4

/tyo

0.0

/oo.

3

2

tr

t,0.O

00

/0D.

UL-

/

/Z

&JL

t?

/&>.

2d

2

21

P?

9./

/00.

I

/V^4/

Ji/A/£

Julv

-J?(&^>sr

|

NumWl

Pe»C»t

rlunbei

Percent

Nuttier

Percent

Muntret

Percent

Evaluation

Certain

OtwMWI

Total

Certain

Donhtfii

Total

Certain

talbUut

Total

Certain

DooHM

Total

Certain

DoiMtii)

Total

Certain

DovbUul

Tola!

Certain

OwAKiil

Total Certain

Doutrtil

Total

5- Balloon

00

0.0

<?

a.

00

00

0,0

£~

2.

7

/0.O

40

tf.0

_^

-/

_r. /.^

/0£

/jy

]-AitmaMical

s

/

4/

ns

///

<W

'0

0.0

0.0

(90

_£.

2,

&f

00

40

J

/

.6.

1?

ff

/i/

2-AuctJfl

JL.

? r

0.22

00

m

f

&

f

*f.3

222

$££

rf

/Z

2£

M.0

Me

40.0

3

£

s

f-9

S ?

nt

3-Li(ht Phonn.

~0

0C\

00

00

£

0.0

0.0

a<?

.0

/

/

00

2.0

f.o

/

/

$0

2.6.

2.1

4-Binh

0.a

0,0

00

0>

e?

0.0

GO

Q0~

— ^

g?

/

2.0

0-P

f,0

00

00

0.0

S-C1«4s. Oust. etc.

0.0

0-0

00

...0

_^2-

J2.0.

00

<?■/?

.0.

&0

0(?

0.0

_JL

_J2-

0.0

00

00

frtauNic. Mo.

0.O

&(?

rt>0

/

/

/(■i

00

///

J

S

i>0

AP

tf.fl

5"

_j2_

£■

n*

0.0

lf.f.

7-Pfythokirtjt

(?

0.0

e<?

O0

a

00

00

00

_j0_

0.0

0.0

0.0

2-

_iZ_

2.

5,3

00

Jb.1

•viMonwi

J

S

m

00

3r?

2

&

Z2Z

$<?

2ZZ

/0

S0

20.0

00

fA0\

jsL

/</

3LS

0.0

fU

M«1H

00

0(7

00

#

/

/

00

■d'

//■/

-.0.

04

0.0

0.00.0

0.0

2-

_iZ_

2.

5,3

00

Jb.1

•viMonwi

J

S

m

00

3r?

2

&

Z2Z

$<?

2ZZ

/0

S0

20.0

00

fA0\

jsL

/</

3LS

0.0

fU

M«1H

00

0(7

00

#

/

/

00

■d'

//■/

-.0.

04

0.0

0.0

. 0.

S2-

_j2_

00

0<9 ■

0.0

Total

Z

/

-J-

&f

//■/

/an

6

S

-J-

m.

n?

/pa

S£

/£

£T0

7#0

f00

/pg>.

2$

/0

.££

217

2<l.?

/00.

5£.ST£/>*S£-*

fleroje*

/i/0tf£M#££ .

/?e££fi}/3££

Evaluation

Nwber

PerCerrt

Nontier

Per Cent

Huiroer

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubthl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OauttSil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooolitju

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

l>-Balls«

/

/

00

//

7-7

/

/

/0.0

0.0

/0.O

r

/

^JL

vW

f0.d

/

^

3

<?

/0.£

/ft

l-Asbmnical

2

/

.?

*■¥

f-7

22.f

£

2r

200

0.0

$0.0

$

£

0.0

400

4?6

_£

,?

S

70.4

/£.$

2&.S

2-a.ircraN

J

/

</

211

17

fat

2.

2.

20.0

0-0

?0-0

/

/

M0\

0-0

f0p

5

2,

7

2iJ

Ml^

fli

I-Lifhl Phena.

.0

00

17

_ a.

0.0

0.0

00

(2.0

&0

0-0

0*

<?

0.0

00

00

l-flinti

/

/

7-1

0.0

00

00

^J2\

00

00

7/

a

00

-J?JL

5-Cloodj, Hut, dc

00

0<>

0.0

0_

0.0

0,0

00

£>

00

00

00

_J?

frlnsoffic Mb.

/

{

1-1

0,P

77

0.0

00

ft-0

/

/

2QJ2.

0.0

20.O

..-£.

P

0.0

ao

no

M>i)fcMo(ical

ao

00

00

a

6.0

0.0

00

_g_

00.

00

00

fi

0>

0.0

00

00

(■Unknoan

S

s

fSA

0.0

23.1

s-

S

50.0

00

%>.0

_<g_

-00

00

00

2~

2.

/e>f

' 0.0 /0.£

Mther

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

0-0

00

0}

0.0

0.0

0.0

2,

ML

00

/0.£

Total

-JL

4

/I

tf.Z

30 i

J0O

/0

70

/mo

0.0

W.

2

3

?

400

600

700.

72

-I.

-JSL

».I

/00

168

frijfofrVfr H II a If r> O'V-J^* J1» i -

/^fe„f ^/at

^MLbJ>r/0A/ 0* J{£. £/GM7 - /JI/^S P0 < e #4 -1- Ve/f ^S /?</ ai/Mr/rttf #f S/6//T/A/6

fat

fr0/itr*s

<?F

Mr A* .

s/Jcrtf 0/i/£ s&CiibvPs

T0

&l/£ rt//Vvr£S

J/}A,tJ*/ev

£&/t£t/Ag</

A?/}*£tf

/)/>*/{.

Enrntw

Nouieer

Percent

KU.OM jfat

fr0/itr*s

<?F

Mr A* .

s/Jcrtf 0/i/£ s&CiibvPs

T0

&l/£ rt//Vvr£S

J/}A,tJ*/ev

£&/t£t/Ag</

A?/}*£tf

/)/>*/{.

Enrntw

Nouieer

Percent

KU.OM j

Per Cent

Niinbet

pticm

HkHatMl

Pa Cart

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

lertarti

DouMful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tola!

Crt*in

OoibMil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

/

/

.2

7.1

7-7 /e.7

/

j£

o.o

4*

^^.

2

JLL

ao

//■/

^

Z

Id-

0.O

*?

1-Attmoaicif

s

^

^

23,1

0.0

'??■*

2.

7,

o.o

7.1

U

—&A

d.6

0.O

a.o

/

/

7,

£-9

Z?

£g

2-Airctaft

2

/

3

M

77

Hf

2.

7.

IX

o.o

$3

_x

2

/0

&4

//./

££.$

^L

2.

/(?

Sf.S

$?

Zf.¥

3-LitM Pbrnoa.

r?

^

0.0

AO

0C

<£>

<7

6.0

0.0

a. a

p

0>

O.O

0.0

ao

<?

0.4

d.o

00

I-Biids

J

^

^7

0.0

AO

0.0

a

(?

a.O

o.o

&c

_£.

O.O

0.O

CO

/

t

JJ.

a. a

*-t

J-Cloods, Dust etc.

r?

<?

0.0

0.0

0.0

MA

0.0

a.o

/j

/

o.o

r,b

t.t>

/)

0.C

00

a.o

r>lnsiflic. Ma.

/

r?

/

71

ch

7.7

/z

/7,

ZM

0.0

&P-0

_j£

_i2_

6.0

0.0

4*

£■

J£L

o.o

rf-7

7-PsrdOloiical

rf?

6.0

O.O

0.0

0,

O.o

e.o

0.C

__j2L

<?

CO

00

AG

/

/

13-

0.O

??

8-IMvkim

J

^?

3

23. t

6.0

tit

4

t

At

0.0

47

2

2.

JLL

OA

// t

/2

/^

&s_

0.O

3SS

MHiet

/

<?

/

77

6.0

77

s

,?

tie

o.o

a?

t>

3

2

0.0

ti-7

#■7

/

/

J.f

O.O

2?

Total

;/

£

/■/

Mi

#</

(00.

22.

z

&f.

3L2.

?■*

w

J£-

4>

7S

iU.

S33

/0O.

3/

3

ft

9/1 &g

(00.

M/t</

Jt//ve

JcscV

^/y^prr

Evaluation

Hunter

PerCem

Nunter

Ps Col

NwtttT

Percent

rtwlH

Percent

Certain

Ooublfu

Total

Cwtain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Ooublftil

ToW

Cotain

Doubdul

Total

:eit9in

Doubtfu

TotWJ

Certain

OvubtJul

Total

CtrtaB

Dot**

Total

certain

Dabtfal

Total

O-Balloon

-t

7.

//

24t

St

z?7

^

/

7

/f.3

3-2

22.$

2Z

/t

3£.

/ie

u

£2/

/0

/2,

22

t3.€

(trl

2f7

tAstnmnical

a

2-

2,

0.O

ft

S--4

/

&■Total

certain

Dabtfal

Total

O-Balloon

-t

7.

//

24t

St

z?7

^

/

7

/f.3

3-2

22.$

2Z

/t

3£.

/ie

u

£2/

/0

/2,

22

t3.€

(trl

2f7

tAstnmnical

a

2-

2,

0.O

ft

S--4

/

&■

3

12

f.Z

9-7

/

3

4/

0(>

it

f.t

/

/

£

J^L

7t

7 $

J^Arrcrafl

jjL

4

/0

it? 4

t£,7.

2U

£-

</

f

4*

/t.f

no

J£-

76

¥6

t*4

?■$

tf.Z

/Z

¥

_^L

JUl

&t

2/.i

J-Liftil Ptienom.

0-

0O

a.o

0.0

0.0\

0.0

0.0

f\

7

7

17

at,

43

/?

3

3

0.O

t/

4f

(-Birds

0,

00

oo

0.0

60

O.O

0.0

—A

<?

O

0.0

ao

ao

/?

0.0

a.o

0.0

S-Clcads, Oust dc.

£

<?

D.O

a.o

0.0

f?

&-

OO

0.0

. /

,/

At

d.o

pi,

0>

p

0.0

00

0.0

S-lngrific Info.

_*L

a

/

/0.2

6.0

fO.1

O

0.0

O.O

0.0

^4-

lit.

U

0.0

f.C

3

f?

3

Al.

0.0

4*

7-Psvcanlocicat

6.0

o.o

00

6.6

O.o

0.0

2

3

0-

JJ.

/.$

to

2.

/

3

_2iZ. /</

4/

(■Untanai

7

7

111

O.O

(I?

t

¥

\is.$

O.O

&t

jtL

0>

¥d

tu

0.0

m

£3

£>

23

ILL

a.o

3/./

MBw

J

3

tt

o.o

g.l

_5L

(?

V

[ill

O.O

tz-f

_j£

^t.l'L

0.0

gs

2

2

^1

a.o

77

Total

1

27.

(0

3 7

73.0

270

/M

ML

-A

3/

%4

%2.{,

/OP-

/Zi,

37

/£ 3

17.3

22.7

/Otf-

ST3

2/

?4 1/- 1,

27.it/a9

3e/>r£t<>A££

fPoreaeie

/Var&ft/ieie

/&£-<!£ /4tg£A

Evaluatim

Nun OH

Percent

Nuba

Per Cat

Noobcr

Pur Cent

Muraber

Percent

Certain

Dubthii

Total

Certain

Doubtai

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certai*

Doublol

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubth

Total

Certain

Dmbtful

ToW

0-flilooci

3

^

t

i..<

/3£>

n.f

z

t

7

LI

W0

2L7

^

/?

2

&L

O.O

/S3

er

/

i

2/. 7

&

21-

l-Astronoaical

L.

/

2,

21

2.Z

ty

£■

2

6.0

i-7

i-7

/

/

Z

7.7

6-7

tf¥

S-

/

1

XI.

4-3

tf.o

I-Aircntt

Z--

/i.

ft

£L

HI

Hf

3

5"

7

10.

/(.7

21,1

/?

0.0

O.O

O.O

/

&

7-3 
0.O

2t7

Zt.0

3-Li(til Ftan,

0.

0.0

0.0

ao

0.0

0.0

0.0

J-

/

(,■7

0.0

(,■7

d.O

0.0

4-Birrh

- 0-

00

0.0

ff.a

#

00HI

Hf

3

5"

7

10.

/(.7

21,1

/?

0.0

O.O

O.O

/

&

7-3 
0.O

2t7

Zt.0

3-Li(til Ftan,

0.

0.0

0.0

ao

0.0

0.0

0.0

J-

/

(,■7

0.0

(,■7

d.O

0.0

4-Birrh

- 0-

00

0.0

ff.a

#

00

0.0

0.0

d.o

ao

00

0.0

a.o

o.o

5-Clouds, Dust, etc.

o.<$

0.0

o.a

a

0.0

0.0

o-c

<7

£

&

CQ.

t0-0

40-0

<?

00

0.0

a.o

Mnaitfic itfo.

/

(

22

0.0

2.2

7r

2,

Jj-

O-G

(.f

_JL

ao

0.0

0.0

2

2

XI.

a.o

£7

7-PirdaHi|ical

ao

O.O

OO

00

a.o

6.0

_jL

0.0

0.0

o-e

0.0

0.0

0.0

frUntamn

'i

/ft

37. s

60

wt

?

9

3t>.0

a.o

300

4

</

liJ

00

7(7

&

O

&

?li

o.o

27,./

♦OthM

6.0

0.0

AO

f

7

/

3.3

0.0

3.3

7?

0.0

0.0

a.o

10

<o

ao

0.0

O.O

•

Total

23

23

4t>

£0-0

50-0

MO.

*7

/3

30

SL1

4?3

m

-L-

7

fs-

533

4-7

f0O.

J&-

~^7-

23

&k

£0V

/£>#■

169

*■*■ r

f£M£. fi/07

j£&2M^

Per Ceil

_j£Md£vMyL

tfurttttr

Per Cent

.IZSd&L

HumMf

Per Coil

Amu

Pb Cw(

Evaluation

0-3dir«n

1- Astronomical

Doubtful

Total

Certain : Doubihl

Ha^SLL

Cutain

&1_

3_

Daubtful

Tout

CBllin DwAttul

^£

&£.

M.

ToM

ertain Doubtful

Total

CatomTrnirbtlul

2sjl

jL

^t

MS.

20.0\

Total

Certain

£1

^JL

OoubUul Total

Certain Doubtful [Total

J?Jh

j2jZ.

3L£^

3s.2.

00

I£J^

-j£.

&2\

M-

iLZ

MH

j2&.

LiuL

£_2£o_

Ml.

SJL

2- Aircraft

LlL

s.f

LZZ

&&.

M.

&1-Z.

*J-

HL

&JL

_£

jL

2£o

&SL.

2S.0

3-Littt Phenom.

JL

M.

£JL

&0-

2.&L

0.0

J3JL

JL

OS,

&JL

j2£

JUL

J2JL

£2JL

•.•Bints

0JL

J2JL

JUL

an

MJL

JLQ.

JZ

M.

0.0

&JL

j2JL

j2jl

0.0

^Clouds, Dust, etc.

4JL

J2jL

JL0.

M.

j2s2-

jM.

££_

J2JL

&2-^

0.0

JUL

00

fMnsuffic rift.

jZ.

-J2.

m.

0J>

4JI

&£.

££_

££_

4JL

JUL

&JL

JtJ.

J2£.

MJ-

7-Pi]rdotO|ieH

£.?

Ail

SJL

&jl

JL0.

m.

JL

00

JUL

M.

JL

£&.

JL&.

&£.

5-lnknowi

j£

jL

UL

0.0

Us.

iLjL

jte.

/LL

UI_

0.0

$21.

^L

%jl

0-0 St&.

Miner

£l

££.

£L

2SJL

&£.

?<r.o

/ '

&2_

AJL

J^

_£.

&L

£0.

0jl

Tolal

I*

J2.M.

JL

£&.

JL&.

&£.

5-lnknowi

j£

jL

UL

0.0

Us.

iLjL

jte.

/LL

UI_

0.0

$21.

^L

%jl

0-0 St&.

Miner

£l

££.

£L

2SJL

&£.

?<r.o

/ '

&2_

AJL

J^

_£.

&L

£0.

0jl

Tolal

I*

J2.

£Ll

Ldlim

lA

iil

&£

m.

/?\it?A

UM

m.

J*.

ZiX

ff.7\ £.3 \w

Mj9<f

Jf/A>£

Ji/W

dr<s&rr

Evatualion

Numbn

PwCeflt

Number

PerCenl

Nunber

PaCenl

HunLn

PerCenl

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doublful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain"

Dulth Tilat

Certain

Doubtfut

Total

0-Ball«n ■

f

£■

//

&£

py

324

/3

,f

/i

30.2

7-«

tfZ

Z£

fV

M-/S.&.

//.S

3(.(

//

/J

30

/gJ

/?.£>

12J

I-Aslmnomicaf

s

/

4

12

tf

If-f

1

f?

2.

M

<?<?

€7

—2-

</

//.

*7

33

f.0

-f

2.

10

u

f,1.

/0i

;-Aircraft

s

£.

f

rf7

F?

20.1

-_X.

f

»

Mi

T<>

t$J

/&

it

2S

/3./

U

If. 7

4

/?

13

u

/ZS

2<f. 7

3-Lighl Ptia»m.

-^1

£>

f

UL

<?<?

ft

Z^

/

//

(?■(?

23

J

^

$

?$

. /,<>

f-t

-^

/

JL%

0.0

</■!

4-eiids

-0

a

/?

0.Q

0.0

P-Q

-_^-.

_^2_

o:o

f?j?

0.0

.0

■;0

&

0,t?

~JUi

n /?

#\

. ?

(?

J2JL (2.0

{20

5-C1«irts, Oust, etc

/

/?

/

JJL.

M

19

a

/?

P

0-0

0.(7

0/7

f

a

—&.

00

^2JL

no

/

/

ao

(J

(■/

frlnaillic, aib.

s

a

3

it

fr?

ft

s

<?

J

M.

(?.0

■1<9

/£

?

/L

w

00

at

^L

<,

M

a#

(o-4-

7-PsjrchoJoaicat

_^e2-

(?

JM\

Cl0

a o

_jL

4

3J_

/J<?

f.3

/

<?

/

0g

aa-ai

_2

z

22

0.0

2-2.

rXIntunaai

_^_

2-

~&l

&(?

sf

f

C7

f

&>9

0.0

20?

ZZ

/?

02.

/ffi

00

f%.i>

/i

'iZ

JLL

0.f>

ta.9

MUM

/

z.

r

M-

s f

(f

&

f?

&

0./>

ao

#/?

_jL

/

S

3.3

a-i

</./

sL

■T

4*

(■/

<;//

Total

*/

7

sV

fbL

20.U

/PO-

37

(,

<ff

Uf

/f.f

/OS.

Ij.

0f

S22.fS.-3

23?

//».

si

3V

?3

6M

u.(.

'W-

feSruMtftr/L

£km<r££.

A/0V& **#&£

,?£■/?<=/&?£*

Evaluation -

Nomter

Per Cent

Nanber

Pa Cat

Ntrafter

PerCnt

Nunoar

Percent

Certain0f

S22.fS.-3

23?

//».

si

3V

?3

6M

u.(.

'W-

feSruMtftr/L

£km<r££.

A/0V& **#&£

,?£■/?<=/&?£*

Evaluation -

Nomter

Per Cent

Nanber

Pa Cat

Ntrafter

PerCnt

Nunoar

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

T(*al

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Duubtful

Total

Certain

Duibtlul

Total

Certain

Doubthn

Total

Certain

DolMl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

J

2,

5-

t&0

&■

//,■?

2.

£

■/

tf

2U

us

2

/

?

-4J-

2/7

m

JL

/

3

g.O

«o

/Z.C

l-Astmnoroital

2,

2,

00

4-7

tr1

y

2-

3

te

?■/

Hi.

3

3

£

M.

W

lM

S-

f

6

z»o

<£0

z*kc

?-Air<raf(

/

f

■9

3.3

n-7

?po

_^/_

£

?

■te

?{

1-S.t-

f

?

j24-

2s.o

2SO

/L

2

3

f-.o

F-O

/Z.O

1-Li(bt Pbenoni.

/

/

2,

3.3

S.3

Mt

/

2,

3

</.$

f-f

/u

/

{

2

3.1

3./

6-2

S

/

#o

CO

to

(-Birds

. 0.

a

00

fl0

Oft

<?

/

/

00

4S

¥.4

ML

00

fl-0

-JL.

PO

£t.O

0.0

5*C lauds. Dust, etc

_ 0.

'(?

a0

■00

0>P

/?

a

00

0.0

0.0

0>

Z2&.

0,0

ftp

—£■

6.0

O.O

o.o

frhisitfit. kilo.

~i.

o

f

t&.0

fl0

tf.0

/

.

/

0.S-

0.0

{*

. /_

ft

/

AL

0.0

3/

£

Z

1.6

CO

<g.o

r-Psycfefo|ital

JM.

0(?

00

<?

0>

r>

ac

00

0.0

0>

00

r?,0\

0,0

. /.

/

t-.O

O.0

*o

%.\tttasrm

~£.

<?

7

23.3

(?-0

ft?

3

a

3

/M

(l.fl

*t

-*~\

4

tf.7

#0

/?7

/

<?

2

3?A

a.o

3Z0

9-orjiet

/

/

2

M.

3-3

U

&

3.0

0.0

0.0

0>

j2JL

aft

fl#

/

/

~*a l

o.o

i-.o

Total

/{,

rf

30

$3.3

^-7

/PS.

f

/3

22

Wt

5?./

/ty

/?

Jt

32,

4M.

rt*

/m

2/

</

25

Sto

/6.C

/oa.

m

170

7»tfZ^ /^/S 1 /

EMCiMTt04f af j9£.L

S/&MTrt&S

rae /fit.

yeses 4v /js^r/a/!/ w f/tssr/vti

Foe Ata/vrtfs or ?£#£■ . 0//£& yfr/#rv M/A/ares

J/)VHXJ>£U

. £S4£//A*i/

Met//

Jam

Evaluation

ruins _j

Percent

Nuibei

, Percent

Nuercr

PctCmt

Naitwi

Percent

Catan

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;«tain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

DoalM

ToW

^itaia

DoeMfnl

Total

Certain

OouMlul

TaW

OrtainNuibei

, Percent

Nuercr

PctCmt

Naitwi

Percent

Catan

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;«tain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

DoalM

ToW

^itaia

DoeMfnl

Total

Certain

OouMlul

TaW

Ortain

DwHW

Total

Certain

OiwbHvl

Tolri

0- Balloon

/

<?

/

/A.0 0>-0

/&.G

/

/

£t>4>

o.o

S&0

/

7

3g.f

O.A

5W?

J

3

/if

6.0

(11

l-nstnnoaicai

/

_/

2

/e>.e

/e.o

2«LO

/

<?

/

$&o

O.O

$6.b

/

/

J-.6

O.0

S.&.

2

4>

*

/2.9

a.o

/2S

J-AiitlUt'

Z>

a

o.o

o.o

ao

O

00

0.0

O.O

O.o

O.C

0.0

^

z

£

0.0

/?■?

(2S

3-Li JM PtKKm,

/?

0.O

oo

*0

O

0O

00

00

-0

AO

O.O

to

<?

<}

a.O

ao

0.0

1-B.lfc

o

oe

0.0

0.0

O

00

O.0

O.O

. 4.

O.O

O.O

0.0

-0

O

ao

6.0

0.C

a-CMs, Dmt, lie

J

e

o

0.0

&o

aa

4

O

«.e>

a.0

CO

a

ao

O.O

0.0

<?

0.0

0.0

0.6

frktarrlic. tab.

'

jp

00

0.0

o.o

a

O

OiO

0.0

0.0

CO

O.0

o.o

-jL

a

¥■

2£,0

0.0

2S.O

7-Pxjtnolofical

a

O.O

O.O

o.o

_0

O

AC

0.0

00

£>

at>

O.O

tf.O

. a

a

a

0.0

06

AO

f-IMUMi

£

2

Zo.O

&o

ze>.o

<o

O

0£>

e-o

AO

/#

<?

/o

S2T.&

0.4

SS.6

s

(2.

s

l/.g

0O

S/.$

KM*

^

,T

sac

A.0

50.0

O

A.0

0.0

ae>

0.0

O.O

a.o

a

CO

0.O

a.o

ToW

?

(

/0

<2&.o

SAO

A**

3-

■J.

/etst

'a.0

(<*o.

18.

/$

rao.6

0.0

/»e.

/?

->~

/6

$7,5

rt.*

/0t>.

J

A?/)V

J/JAf£

./if

<-</

faf.asr

Entualion

Nmba

PnCait

Pei Celt

Neater

Percent

Nuclei

Per Cent

Certain

OotalM

ToW

Certain

Dnutttt

Total

Certain

DnMfcl

Total

Certain

Doibtnit

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubtW

Total

Certain

DotbUi

Total

Certain

Dmbtfal

Total

D-Bailwt

O

0.0

O.O

0.0

9

£

f

m

u

?7JS

JiL

f

zt

/¥.$

?•/

«/y

^

.?

f

///

£i /L7

1-Astnoaicil

P

/

(

0.0

'/■/

f/i

s-

_

3"

M?

0.0

&>.t

/2,

<

t7

/ZZ

S>.{

<1- 3

/

/

/r

/</.$

/2-.f.

17.7

^Ai^oln

0.0

a.o

0.0

*

i_

AL

0.0

f.f

6

g

ff

£/

11.

d*

1

s

6

f.t.

S-L

tt-2-

3-LirMPbma.

(?

O

0.0

0.0

O.0

O

0.0/2,

<

t7

/ZZ

S>.{

<1- 3

/

/

/r

/</.$

/2-.f.

17.7

^Ai^oln

0.0

a.o

0.0

*

i_

AL

0.0

f.f

6

g

ff

£/

11.

d*

1

s

6

f.t.

S-L

tt-2-

3-LirMPbma.

(?

O

0.0

0.0

O.0

O

0.0

CO

0.0

/

/

/■0

0.0

{.0

/

(

0.0

f-9

f.f

*-Bink

a

.00

0.0

0.0

O

0.0

o.o

0.0

AO

0O

0.O

...0

0_

n

0.0

a.o

O.O

tCloadXCamett.

A

p

(,

U.1

0.0

U-1

CO

0.0

0.0

a.o

O.O

0.O

0.0

O.o

0.0

6-(nsi(lic kh.

(?

0.0

o-o

040

O

a.o

0,0

AO

_x

2

S.2.

O.o

gt

£

0_

z

*f

CO

*7

?-Pirttnlopcil

OjS

0J0

0,0

a.0

0.0

0.O

/

/

Z

/.0

{■0

?0

£

z

S.1

0.0

17

rUntaHin

a.o

0.0

O.0

*

7

m

0.0

ifl

J/

3f

zU

0.0

S/.i.

/£

/r

2?.g

0<O

71/

MtlKI

/

/

u

//./

fit

&2

7

V

J&

0.0

42

Ik.

¥

4/

0.0

</'

¥

f

O.O

?■</

U

Total

JZ-

2

?

nt

22.2.

^00.

22.

7.

2?

tLL

$J

m

77

2-/

?8

7M

2/4

/a>-

36

/8

s¥

W

JL1

ML~

|

te*?rfA4g£/e

•

/Ot-rafn

Ar0l/£/*?/?£je.

/?£t£At4/?£

I ■

' Nuaber

PerCetfl

Nunto*Sf

Per Cant

Nuestr

Percent

Nmbe)

Per Cat

Evaluation

Certain

DwibttnJ

Total

Certain

DoabHu

Total

Cert*n

Douothil

Total

Certain

DouHtuI

Total

Certain

Doubthl

Total

Certain

DoobtJul

Total

Certain

Dtmtitlu

Total

Certain

DtUbtftll

Total

O-Baloon

Z

z

0*>

«<■■*

i.3

7

>?

A3

&.&

/sJ

ZU

/■

/

O.O

4&

4*

/9

O

00

00

0.O

l-Astieawical

S

/

4

M

f-f

/2.4

/

/

£3

0.0

6-3

J

£

5"

a*

f.s

2D*

/

/

■z.

JLl

//■ t

22.2

?-fiiujtt

&

</

i

&.*

rt-5

US

/

/

O.o

5.2

$3

Z

f

a

41,

m

2S.0

.0

0.0

ao

e.e

3-Uftit Phanoa.

/

/

0£>

jj

J"

c

0.0

0.0

00

0>.o

ao

0.0

—0J

O.O

0.0

0.0

(-Birds

—*-\

J

S./

0.0

S /

2.

-2.

JM.

00

f0.5

ao

0.0

0.0

0.0

e.a

O-O

S-Clonds, Oust, etc

P

0.0

00

aa

O

a.o

00

00

/

/

0.0

¥.£

fc

-^2-

00

0.0

O-o

6-lnairlic, inlo.

?.

f?

?

i-3

a-0

b*

0.O

0.0

0.0

2.

2

£3

0.O

u

0>

0.0

0.0

0.O

7-PsytlDlofial

/

/

3 1

a.o

S.J

O

0.O

0.0

0.0

/

/

4.1

000.0

¥.£

fc

-^2-

00

0.0

O-o

6-lnairlic, inlo.

?.

f?

?

i-3

a-0

b*

0.O

0.0

0.0

2.

2

£3

0.O

u

0>

0.0

0.0

0.O

7-PsytlDlofial

/

/

3 1

a.o

S.J

O

0.O

0.0

0.0

/

/

4.1

00

</■*

2

2

22X

00

222.

•>IMu»M

/-^

*f

M.1

00

i/S-7

_jL

<£

21. /

ao

2/-/

7

7

242

0.0

2f.2

4f

<?

¥

4M O-O

44V

Mltlier

/.

J

s./

O.O

3/

/

/

00

£.3

£1

_J_

/

4.Z

0.0

4.3

/

0>

/

//./

0.0

//./

Total

££

%

3Z

75-0

26t>

100-

M.

,5"

/?

13.7

21.3

too'-

/T

?

z«

&2£

f/S

/sp.

8-

/

.?-

m

//./

(00.

J

X71

!^;

■■',<*.!> T.-ir -**^

•™^*#" r '+"rt-)>*"i^*V!"'''t p ' ■trt*i:>Pu-»'.!||Vl*31*f T ;iC ■',

^w^wsasfWfpfjipBss!

r^ ft £. i//gy.

£MLVar/04 / 0* *t-t- s/a//r//v6s soe all (Bfty ^ i/vf/tr/at/ #r s^ ^r ^ e.

I

f&e

from'r'fs

0>f.

ye**..

00/f#r/aA/

wr

Sr79f£:0

J/?A/i/S£</

££*jef*j>v

/*?*<*

f"

j#S*/£

Evaluation

Njmtw

Per Cent

Hunter

PerCoit

Nuaoer

Pel Cent

Nmon

Pa Cent

Certain

Ooubtful

*>tat

Certain

Doubtful

Totil Warrant

DoubtM

ToW

Cabin

Doubtful

Tom

>1«H

Doubtful

Totil

Ctrtain

OoubMil

Total

Oftaia

Datbtlul

Total

Certain

Doutthl

TotK

0. Balloon

-j2J

/

/

0d~

f-1

73

/

¥■

Ml-OjZ.

//4

_£l

</■

02

0.0

11

/

a

J

/£

I. t

4i

1-Ailranoniical

-J-

'f

■«7

20.9

¥/■?

ti :t

X

f

76

2~3.6 2i.$

W

.71

//

S3

/is /t.fssA/

*?

^

30

iir

97

<jf.0

?-*HCIjH

~2A

<?

£

*?

0.0

4LL

$

/

0>

&LL

*■?

i/.t

If

/

//

fi.3

</.L

<(-?

6

G

9.7

0P

97

3-LigM Ptienom.

<?

(3

0.0

00

a.o

O

&0

00

00

_a

O

0.0

JUl 0.0

a

0.0

0.0

0.0

I-Birdi

<?

<?

JL0.

dr?

no

P

J?,d

0.

a<?

0J>

0.<?

/

/

/./,

00

/.£

S-Cluidj, Oust, elc

r?

o

0.0

0.0

a.Q

JUL

00

00

00

0.0

0.0

o

f).0

0.0

0.0

S-tnntlic. til).

£

r?

&

&L

(?.(?

//.{.

/

I

?■?

0-0

2-9

a/

Sf

S2-3

0.0

S2*

/Z

/&

,9.3

0<>

tf>*

7-Psydnle|ial

a

J2J-

(?<->

0.0

o

00

00

0,0

.0

a

0.0

0.0

00

/

/

At

00

/■£

IIMwomI

6

(?

Cn

Jlt

00

/s?/

I

?■?

0-0

2-9

a/

Sf

S2-3

0.0

S2*

/Z

/&

,9.3

0<>

tf>*

7-Psydnle|ial

a

J2J-

(?<->

0.0

o

00

00

0,0

.0

a

0.0

0.0

00

/

/

At

00

/■£

IIMwomI

6

(?

Cn

Jlt

00

/s?

7

7

20. &

0, (7

%?.(,

s

3

</.(,

J7.0

*t

t

<0

?

/</.*

0.0

'¥■0

WWwt

2

(?

2

-41

00

dl.

C

0.0

0i?

0.0

3

3

0.0

JU-

¥l

a

0.0

0.0

0.0

Tom

\&

/?

¥3

££l

W£

zoo-

*S

f

3?

Wk

21$

100.

V2

77

6>r

fit

2LI ip&.

s¥

K

e>z

H/

"1

/&{>■

I

tf/>0

J&>/l/£

J&x-t/

/##4ps?

Evalufthon

Numbet

PeiCent

Nurgbet

PerCenl

Hinttf

Pet Cent

Kuaber

Pa Coil

Certain

Doubtful

Total

CertJin

Cmiorful

Tatar

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Itrtairt

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dnditni

Total

Cntatn

Doubtful

Total

D-Stlloon

#

^

-IjL

0O

10

— t-

£.

7

rt.e

0.0

tt.f

29

//

<£0

//</

iff

&1

5

•

r

4.S

,?fi

f-i

l-Astronomical

/<

2-

t3

22.t>

#0

2k P

.1.

J

/0

il£

<;.</

tf-t

29

w

3?

//4

^?

/s3

t

rf

/r

£.£,

77

/*■?

2-AiKHtt

JL

S

7

-A&

X0

Hi?

zz

/

s-

JLL

/>$

g.f

JZ-

/9

Sf

tt.e

14

tf-f

//

/.?

Z*

t0.L

n.t

tlj

3-Uiht Phnooi.

. 0>

/

/

<?P.

?■<?

?e>

_j£j

n

00

00

J

3

JAj.

00

/.*

2j

z

/9

00

t?

4-einh

, a.

/

/

0.0

2.0

f.0

p

/>

£>

J&0.

$0

0,0

2.

/

3

o.i

0,4

(•l

/?

a

0.0

0.9

Ofl

S-Cloudv Dtist, (tc

00-i

00

0.0

_j£_

0.0

0.0

0P

J

3

/z.

00

(-2

£?

£>

0.0

0,fl

0.0

frEnnffic. tafo.

6

Q

S2.0

00

/to

/J

/3

23.1

0.0

23.2

<//

¥f

/&./

00

fr-l

'?

/T

,2.3

00

/?. 3

7-P)yeholo|icil

o

0.0

00

0,0

t

Z

XA.

0.0

,U

/

2-

3

&</

0t

(l

/

0_

/

A0

00

/■0

r>Unlo»«n .

-JZ-

n

#/.<?

0.0

Me

/?

O

'7

S0-3

0.0

30?

</S

*ft

it.t

O.Q

/?.(

29

SJ

2T9

0.0

2tf

MOW :

/

/

(L0

2.0

20

J.

j?

JJt-

00

M

?</

s¥-

J4

0.0

?.</

Z

/

3

'■?

(.0

2-9

Totat

4L

9

SO

Hi

/f.0

/OO.

£1

?-

-S-6

?2.f

1>t

/0Q.

Z(2

<&

ZSS

tst

*?

/00.

78

26MOW :

/

/

(L0

2.0

20

J.

j?

JJt-

00

M

?</

s¥-

J4

0.0

?.</

Z

/

3

'■?

(.0

2-9

Totat

4L

9

SO

Hi

/f.0

/OO.

£1

?-

-S-6

?2.f

1>t

/0Q.

Z(2

<&

ZSS

tst

*?

/00.

78

26

fP¥ fSO 2S.9

100-

te/>r£ r /'?4'££

0?<zra^&c

/Mare site*

fee/z/v/fe^.

Evaluation

Nunber

Per Cent

ftunner

PtrCait

hunger

Percent

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtfti

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubW

Total

Certain

Deubttil

Total

0-Ballo«n

c>

00

O.O

f>. f'

J

/

7

00

Z7

l*.t

/

f

/0

0/

47

70$

/

/

Z

?■?<

/»*

^/

J-AstroMHUicsJ

/0

?

/?

231

7-0

300

J

7

/0

6.4

/f.2.

2/.?

f

6

/$■

7f.7

0.5

3/.i

6

//

77

710

23?

3i.f

2-Aiicult

/

/

2

2.3

23

j.l,

3

/

•7

C.0

f7

ifl

'. <T

0,

7

/0-4

¥.2

/4(.

4

/

s-

17

2.Z

tP-t

3-LijW Pbanos.

(7\

£>

0.0

0.0

0-0

_ 0\

/

7

0-0

g.2

0.0

0.O

00

/?

o

0.0

00

0.0

4-Birds

0_

C>

0.0

z

^L

0.0

00

00

-J0.

00

0/}

00

B-Clouils, Dujf. etc

0_

{9

Cf

00

' 0.0\

'

e

0,0

0,0

00

0-

/

7

JUL

2-f

2/

0/}

0.0

0-0

S-lnaiffic tit).

9

?

209

0.0

Mf

7

7

J&l

(?P

/«*

<?

¥■

t.s

0-0

?*

£

5

/0.9

00

{0?

7-Psytboloiiut

J

/

f.3

~0JL

7-2

__£_

/

2.2-

(l-P

1-2

- #A

f?

0.0

0-0

0,0

/

/

2-2,

$0

2.2

^UnkiKMi

/.(

//

ZZL

0,0

7S.I,

9

a

7

20.0

Pfl

•20-0

9

?

ft.1

0.0

/it

Z2,

/a

20/

0-0

U-7

MrjiB

&

/

7

rf.0

7 3

II,. 3

Z

z

V.s

{> ft

</■?

Z-

2.

£z.

00

4J

-£

<7

*

S.1

0-0

#7

Total

39

s

<f3

tt.f

Vt

{DO-

30

/&

<x>

(g.Z

3¥4

too-

30

/S

*s

f ,2.<7

37.0

/OS-

33

/3

¥6

7/i

232.

/oa

4

172

2Ml£. &A£-

£ffli, (//>r/0/i/ 0t z//e/r sr/6*>rf/vGs \F0* /}l~l W4* *_ m 00*jrr/0/v 0f sr&vrM t,

rat

M0/vr*s

i

9F

S4TA

<e ,

f£

S£d€?/VfiS

r^-

<L^SS

<_/^/v y^>e v

fe4*uA*</

M/itcti

/JfitfL

Enrufbon

' Number

Pa Cent

Nunbei

Pel Coil

Number

Pel Centrat

M0/vr*s

i

9F

S4TA

<e ,

f£

S£d€?/VfiS

r^-

<L^SS

<_/^/v y^>e v

fe4*uA*</

M/itcti

/JfitfL

Enrufbon

' Number

Pa Cent

Nunbei

Pel Coil

Number

Pel Cent

Nwabei

PwCart

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DwMlul

Total lerov*

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Jertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DaattlW

Total

Certain

OouWful

Total

Cubit*

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

/>

-&J2.

00

jgj2

0.0

O.O

00

00

-JJL

00

/

^

, /

ts

-&£-.

$J

MiiakmioI

J

9

J2

foo

-&&£-

MJl

1

&

9

3C.0

(0.0

fO.C

¥

{,

/O

Z3.3

&>■&

ffS

.&..

c

jtf.0

J.0 5D.0

2-Hirctift

O

0.0

00

J2J2.

t.o

0.0

CO

0.0

JLSL

0.0

/

/

z?

Jl&\

&*

RiiM Pee™.

a

&4

00

jZ£

0.0

ta£j

0.0

0.0

0.0

O-O

0/7

0.0.

0,0

t-Sitfc

0.0

A0

JM.

$

0.0

a.o

0O

■

o

0.0

0.0 0.0

/

/

0.0

*3

ZJ

S-Cloudi, Oust, etc

0.0

O.0i

JZjI

O

0.0

a.o

JO

.&

o

0.0

JL&-

-&£L

.0.

0.0

00

'0,0

Himittit Mb.

0.0

00

j&£

<?

0.6

O.0

ao

/

/

*s

0.0

-XL

£_

/

SI

0.0

L?

7-PiyoMeftcal

r

/

&f

e-e

Lcz

o

Oo

£>.0

a.o

/?

o

0.0

0.0

00

. 0-

0.0

-Has

a (?

pUmnmim

/

/

6.*

{?.<?

f &f

0.*

0.0

0,a

V

/?

/

ft

XL

2

z

/If

-J20-*

fa?

Wo*

/

/

00

4-7

■££■

/

1

/O.O

<t.O

/P.Q

0.0

0.0

*£0

o

0.0

0.O

0-0

Total

s

/o

is-

?S3

U-f

/0&

■¥■

&

/o

<H>.0

6o.o

160.

Q>

6

/z

60.0

£0.0 r0ff.

rt

/

/Z

tt-1

is

(00.

M#v

JM£

Jucv

decvsT

■ Evaluation

Number

Pel Cent

Nuabet

Pet-Cent

Nunow

Percent

Nniber

Per Catt

CeiUin

Doubttol

Total

CMaia

Doobtlul

ToUl

Ctfbin

Doubttul

Total

Certain

doubttul

Total

;«tain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OoubtM

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Toli

t-Balton

a

o.D

0.0

o.O

/

^

/

M

0.O

Jf/

/

2

-?

/-/

2.2

13

^

s

3

0.0

*f

tf

I-Astnmaicaj

f

2.

7

&J

IP-?

.ftf

//?

i?

/?

M0

Zf&

Ui

M

/f

S¥-

If./

(?■$

S&.

/I

r<

¥S

/{,.?

MS-L23

Miicnft

_JL

/

s~

2/./

f.f

#.f

?

/

¥■

//■/

37

Mi

s

f

/7*f

tf

I-Astnmaicaj

f

2.

7

&J

IP-?

.ftf

//?

i?

/?

M0

Zf&

Ui

M

/f

S¥-

If./

(?■$

S&.

/I

r<

¥S

/{,.?

MS-L23

Miicnft

_JL

/

s~

2/./

f.f

#.f

?

/

¥■

//■/

37

Mi

s

f

/7

//

?■$

/I*

?

/

9

3.9

M-

Mf

J-Lil*t ftwwn

0^

0.0

00

dXO

o

0.0

0.0

00

/

/

/./

o.o

/■/

/

/

00

_^£_

/.J

4-Bii*

o

0.O

0.0

a.O

O.O

AO

0.0

/

&■

3

//

22.

13

0.0

£X0

0O

tCloudt, Oust *•

o

0.0

0.0

4.0

00

00

0.O

0^

/

/

O.O

//

/./

O

a.o

0.0

0£>

Mnuflic tih

2

3

/S-t

0-O

/£?

.*£.

3

dd.

a.o

/'■!

2-

Z

2-2

00

2.Z

/,

&

f,t

0.0

tf

'•Piydioloiital.

O

0.0

0.0

ao

O.O

O.0

0.0

o

0.0

00

0-a

_ /

/

/■3

0.0

/■I

tllnanini

2.

Z.

/0.$

0.O

/ff-9

O.o

0.O

0.0

f

7

AL

o.O

tft

-Jl.

&

n

0.O

?f

Mttiei

Z

&

2

/0.S

0.0

/05

/

/

f.f

0.O

3 7

2.

Z

22

a.o

t*

?.

J

3

2.&

t-3

t?

Tom

J6

3

ff

Ml

/S.f

/00.

/S

f

Z7

M-i

Jf.3

/OP-

to

32

?z

6SZ

m

/DO.

3/

¥4,

77

</0.2

0J

/W

X£/>T-^/^!/f£/t

Oero

f£< . . ....

/l/etse&ae*

/?£■<?£**&&#

Etaluation

Nunbei

P«CerA

Number

Pa Cent

Nunber

Pei Cent

Nunbei

Per Ceil

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

oouotfa:

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certam

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Cbubtni

Total

Certain

DAbtnil

Total

9- Balloon

a.o

AO

CO

a

at>

0JO

OA

/>

0.0

0.0

0.O

a

0.O

0.0

0.O

l-Asbonofllical

//

/

/%.

SS.C

S-.°

6.6.1

a

£

/7

10?

/</J

7

7

rf

112

33.3

U.&

//

f

zo

Wf

ML

Us

2-Mlcrift

/

2

3

so

J^O

/S4

i

3

¥

^Jl

A

/

3

9.S

4t

/¥■!

0J0

O.0

0.0

3-LieJil Ptienoau

a.o

a.&

a. a

/}

r

(

00

?*■

•M

/

t?

/

ML

0.0

#t

o

a.0

O.0

0.0

t-Biids

a.o

o.d>

AO

/

/

Z

Jte

?4

fi.

0>

O

0.O

0.0

o.o

0>

o

0.O

0.0

00

5-Clomtt. Dial, etc

a

o

^O0l

o.o

0.O

o

0jO

O.O

C.0

o

0.0

0.O

0.0

(?

o

0.0

O.0 0.0

6-lnuittic. hfo.

2

z

(O.G

O.0

/o.a

/

/

li

O.O

I.C

~0~d

0.0

<ao

a

oo

0.O

0.0

00

5-Clomtt. Dial, etc

a

o

^O0l

o.o

0.O

o

0jO

O.O

C.0

o

0.0

0.O

0.0

(?

o

0.0

O.0 0.0

6-lnuittic. hfo.

2

z

(O.G

O.0

/o.a

/

/

li

O.O

I.C

~0~d

0.0

<ao

a

o

0.0

00

AO

7-Plych)lopi3t

o

a&

O.O

o.o

0.0

0.0

0O

0*

0.0

O-O

ao

0.O

j^L

00

HJnJmowi

2.

z

/«&

O.O

/ox

?

a

3

(&?

0O

w7

2.

£>

2

M.

0.O

?■$

j>

3

/f.0

0.O

/f.0

9-ODiti

/

/

6.

So

so

O

P

O.0

OO

010

/

/

M.

0.O

#S

<yo

CL0

0.O

-

Total

/&,

7*

zo

So.0

20,0

/oa.

/%

/0

zs

W/

SS--7

/op.

/3

2

Zl

iLl

31/

/0O.

^£

f

Z.3

60f

3f./

/00.

173

~

r*/ii.£ A.///

£-i/fi4,L/jr f 04/ as. us//r s/&#r/A/&s /&# al/. #£#£_$ jjv_ j?//& ? r/0A/ a? s/6#r/v6

^0<

w/yrs/s op

&?** .

S/X

70

-im*/

3£C0/V0S

1

Ja/1/a

f e ¥

i

f^/gfiMjit/

&/>££//

rffX/L

1

T

Numb*!

Pet Cent

Number

PeiCent

Number

Pet Colt

PerCent

j CnluilHin

Certain

DOubttuI

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubttul

Total

Catam

Doubtful

Total

;«t*n

DooMM

Total

Certain

OnibtM

Total

Certain

Dmbtfel

Total

CertiKi

Owibttiil

ToW

0- Balloon

/?

o.o

OO

0.0

o

O.O

o.o

O.O

o

O.O

0.0

O.O

>

O

O.O

0.0

o.o

1-Aslnjnmi'QI

/

/

z

ZOO

ZO-0

<Hi.t

_/_

/

/66X.

a.o

toot

/

/

zoo

O.O

ZO.e

*

2

zz.z

o.o

zz.z

:».icn«

/

/

0.0

zo.o

26.6

. .0

c

0.0

oo

o.o

/

/

Zoo

o.o

Z0,°

4.

/

3

XZ.2

l(. 1

•33.-3

3-U(h| Pntnon.

a

0.0

o.o

o.O

.. a

o

o.o

o.o

oo

o

O.0

o.o

o.o

O

o.o

o.o

O.C

4-Btlds

O.O

0.0

O.O

o

oa

o.o

oo

o

0.O

o.o

oo

&

ao

o.O

o.o

5-Clwidv Dust, etc

a

o

ao

ao

O.0

o

do

o.o

O.o

o.o

o.o

O.O

O

O.o

o.o

0.O

6- Inutile Mb.

./

/

ZO.o\

o.o

sao

a

o

Oo

o.o

0-0

o

o.o

ao

0.0

/

/

//./

o.c

/(■I

f-Psrdalopcal

/?

o.o

O.o

o.o

_£_

a

6.0

o.o

00

0.0

oo

0.O

a

o.o

o.o

o.o

l-Unknown

/

/

ZOO

o.o

zo.o

_^

o

SO

o.o

o.o

f

<?

3

60.0

o.O

60C

..J.

3

33J

0.0

-333

J-Otfw

a

o.o

OO

o.o

_j2_.

O

0.O

oo

o.o6.0

o.o

00

0.0

oo

0.O

a

o.o

o.o

o.o

l-Unknown

/

/

ZOO

o.o

zo.o

_^

o

SO

o.o

o.o

f

<?

3

60.0

o.O

60C

..J.

3

33J

0.0

-333

J-Otfw

a

o.o

OO

o.o

_j2_.

O

0.O

oo

o.o

/J

o

O.o

oo

OP

..0

o

o.o

o.o

0.0

Tot*

3

z

s

60,o

¥4°

/60.

/

O

/

100.0

o.o

100.

s

C

S

/ooo

o.o

/30.

S

/

?■

ya?

II. 1

too.

,.., . ......tf/ty.

J</(/e

Jjji.1./

dy&OST

Evaluation

Hvntter

Pel Cent

Nuntm

Pet Cent

Nuafaf

Pet Cot

NmbK

Pet Cent

Certiio

Dnbttul

Total

Certain

DoubHu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certato

DouUM

Total

Certain

DtWHM Total

Certain

Doubttol

Total

9-Sallogo

f

' (7

/'

/'o.O

0.0

/O.o

/

/

<T£

0.0

F-6

/

/

f.9

0#

t;f

#

J

3

O.0 4

///

(/f

1-Astimwiial

z

£

30.0

O.0

zoo

?

7

/O

a. 7

m

fs.L

&

£

ZO

40.0

fit

tf J

2

J

6

//J.

///

'(??

?-A»ctjft

J\

/

2

/O.O

/O.O

saO

?

3

/L-7

0.0

ft-1

Z

J>

?

ds

g.i

12f

f

J

//

tf.t

///

40-7

3-Li(M Ptinoio.

/

/

o.o

/0<O

/OjO

0..

/_

/?

/

O.o

S.C

54

O

oo

a.o

0O

/

0_

/

J.?

O.0

?■?

«-Sints

t?

0.0

0.0

0.6

a

(P.O

<0.O

0.O

_jZ.

O.o

00

0.0

(7

a

0.O

o£>

o.a

S-Clowls, Bust, »c

0.0

e>0

o.o

_-0_

o

O.O

&o

O.0

o

0O

CO

0.O

o

O.0

o.&

ao

Knfflflit Into.

z

2

zo.o

_&0\

SOjO

£

z

///

do

//./

^L_

/

-Zt

0.0

f-t

/

/

1.7

o.o

s.7 
o.o

7-Piycholotlul

&

4>

O

ao

o.o

OlO

.0

o

&M

o.o

00

o

0.O

o.o

00

G

O.O

o.o

f-Unkwal

£

2

Sfi.O

0.0

Z0.O

_l_

/

sc

oo

<Zi

r

/?

*£

//</

0.0

/W

*

V-

/¥.€

a.o

/¥$

KHIm

o.o

0.0

O0

o

oo

0.£>

O.O

/

/

*f

0.0

z?

/

/

3.7

o.o

*■?

Total

7

Z "

/o

goo

zoo

/oo.

/0

?

/?

fte

<W¥

(OO.

Ok.

f

^5"

W-3.

2&7

ZOO.-

/*"

9

Z7

K7

32-3 /Oo.

|

S£Prg*4#e£

0<r0ite£. . .

fi/ot/S **#£*.

Oec<z/"?tf&/2.

f

Number

Pa Cent

Nmbei

PnCent

Nurt«

Pel Cent

Httftbet

P«Cent

Evaluation

Certain

Donbth

Total

Certain

DoubHuK7

32-3 /Oo.

|

S£Prg*4#e£

0<r0ite£. . .

fi/ot/S **#£*.

Oec<z/"?tf&/2.

f

Number

Pa Cent

Nmbei

PnCent

Nurt«

Pel Cent

Httftbet

P«Cent

Evaluation

Certain

Donbth

Total

Certain

DoubHu

Tola!

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doabtful

Total

Ceftip

DootiHu

Total

Certain

Doubtful | Total

O-Balloon

_JL

/

/

0.0

/o.o

/0.O

0.C

O.O

a.O

(?

O

0.O

0.O

O.O

~:0.

0jO

OO

00

1-Astnoonical

2

f

J*

ZQ.0

J0JL

30.O

zz

s

7

Wt

33 3

77.7

S

3

75X7

o.o

7S.0

2.

-€

0O

fOO.O /oo.c

2-Aiicialt

J7

f.

^

O.O

po.

ZO.O

_0

a

ao

O.O

oo

_j0_

f.O

OO

o.o

_£L

a

oo

o.o

GO

3-Lieht Phaua.

. /

o.o

0.O

O.O

-£.

0.0

O.O

o.O

J0

0.O

OO

0.0

o

0.O

0.0X0.0

4-Binls

o.o

&-0

/0.O

o

0:0

O.O

O.0

_i2.

O

CO

O.O

O.0

/?

o

O.O

0.0

0.O

S-Clouds, Dust, etc

_£_

<9

&

o.o

O.O

oo

_J2_

O

a.o

0.0

ao

a

O

O.0

O.o

o.o

_JL

o

O.O

0.0

O.O

frlniuflic. tab.

o

{?

O

o.o

0.0

o.c

o

o

O.S

o.o

ao

a

OO

oo

a.o

_JL

a

ao

0.0

0.0

7-p^rcholO|icil

f?

o

o.o

0.0

0.O

/?

o

O.o

o.o

ao

O

0.O

0.0

O.O

0.0

Co

0O

S-Unknoin

S

.?

36.0

O.O

300

2.

z

zsz

oo

aaz

/

/

ZS.o

oo

zs.o

o

o.o

0.0

O.O

9-0thef

_M-

o

o.o

0.0

O.O

o

0.0

o.o

o.o

0.0

o.o

0.O

o

O.0

0.0

O.0

Total

5

,v

/o

6~0,t

So.0

/oo.

6>

3

?

66.7

33.3

/oo.

<t

O

<£

/OO/)

0.0

/oo.

2.

z

o.o

/oe.o

/OO.

174

sgrftg #/&

£V/}t.t/#rrO/i/ tSF V /vsr S/&#T/A>6S &?*> Alt. V£S£S £tf p£>*rff<04'- ^ S/6*r/A/C

F0£

Wt/rrts

0f

V£S* .

£££?£/*

r<?

_Zfo£TfL

^££0/1/05

jAA/VA£i/

f£££v/}j?t/

tytea//

J?/0/e./i.

Enltahon

Number

Pet Cent

Ninber

Per Cent

ffunber

Per Cent

Number

PerCent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouMM

Total

Certain

DouotM

Total

;ertain

Doobtfot

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

r> Balloon

' ^

/>.£>

60 00

0.0

0,0

0.0

/

/DouMM

Total

Certain

DouotM

Total

;ertain

Doobtfot

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

r> Balloon

' ^

/>.£>

60 00

0.0

0,0

0.0

/

/

0.0

ft

?■'

0.0.

00

0.0

I l-Aitrormial

•

/

4

4 7

77. 7

fff

/

S0.O

0.0

sp-e

/0

0.0

00

00

1

■ /

£

11-7

L-7

333

J-Aweraft

<?

00

'00

00

. /

(

50.0

00

£0.£>

/

/

XL

00

ft

£

2

4

/?2

(3-S

%(■

J-Lrtfrt Phono.

f?

00

0.0

00

r-7

0.0

0,0

06

-J?-

0.0

0,0

010

/

f

L.7

0,0

•V

4-Birtl

(?

0.0

0.0

#0

00

00

00

0.0

00

00

/

t

_L2\

00

6-7

S-CIoihM, Dust, etc

/

^

/

76.7

00

f/..7

00

00

00

a

00

00

00

0.0

00

00

6-tnsufftt Mb.

<7

0o

00 0.0

40

0,0

00

0.0

00

00

00

/7.0

00

7-PtycMoiiat

r?

0,0

0.0

00

£0

0,0

00

0.0

00

0O

0,0

0,0

00

t-Untwim

r?

00

00 00

£>

(?

00

00

00

Z

$

JlA

00

tf.Z

3

f

WO

00

200

W»«r

r?

0.0

0,0

00

00

0,0

00

■ /

4>

<r

f>

?/$

i3,i

/

/

7,7

07?

6?

Total

s

/

£

t£3

JM

m.

2

£

lOao

0.0

/am

-H

■7

f

*•

(,3-t

j£>0.

/Z

3

/*

100

$00

702

M/K/

Ju

0£

Jt/Z^ 1/

$i/6(j£r

Edlgition

Number

Percent

Number

Percent

Hunter

PerCent

Numbet

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Dovblfu

Total

Certain

Oooolful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouMfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tout

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

DmMftll

Tula!

O-Bailott

/

/

J2

Lf

4/

//v

/

rf

/

s ?

00

£?

3

J

i.

¥./

4/

0t

a

/

/

0.0

■f 9

79

l*AstnMnicat

/

t

7*7

0.0

L-7

/

?r

-?

Z.I

<!?

'7-7

/a

?-

/Z

/f.4

7,7

/6-T-

£

£

f2-

f?./

7?-'

3/t

Z-Airenrft

2.

7

3

/J3

4-/

SP.o

:T

£

7

19*/

/f-t

y7-2

.XfA

/*

3/

203

7-I- i-

<0f

6

<7

/0

/7./

77 S

i$.&

3-Lilht Plume.

0.0

0,0

0.0

0.0

0,0

00

.J0.

0.0

0.0

0.0

/

/

0.0

2f

*.f

4- Birds

/

/

0.0

47

6-7

0.(7

0-0

0,<?

.IP.

f?

00

00

0,0

/?

0>

0-0

00

00

S-Clawds, (hst, etc

00

00

00

-j2-

00

00

00

0.00,0

00

.J0.

0.0

0.0

0.0

/

/

0.0

2f

*.f

4- Birds

/

/

0.0

47

6-7

0.(7

0-0

0,<?

.IP.

f?

00

00

0,0

/?

0>

0-0

00

00

S-Clawds, (hst, etc

00

00

00

-j2-

00

00

00

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

00

00

frlnwlfic. hto.

<7

f

§LT

ao

U?

S

S

/7.C

00

/?{>

3

3

</./

00

4(

. &

6>

f

0.7

00

*7

7-Psycboroficat

0.0

00

n0

00

0-0

00

4

2.

£

<</

2-7

S.I

. J2

0.0

00

OO

rMtnknoun

3

3

WL

00

We

3

S

/7.&

00

/?{•

/£?

/0

%>.3

00

143

?

9

00-7

00

7*3

Wt»«

7

/

A. 7

00

/r?

0.0

00

/

/

W

00

/■</

0.0

00

00

Totet

7t

J

f*

fd&

30.0

/a>.

/3

4

(7

fi.6

??s

/Off-

0-/

Z3

7?

U9

Sf.f

w-

23

/A

s*

<L£J P/.3

/oo-

f£/>r£Mfiex

t9tT0,gF£.

A t fot/&/i4j3£<e

/>e<*£wtf£/e.

Evaluation

Number

Percent

Nnaber

PerCenl

Nunbei

PerCent

Number

PerCent

Certain

Dountfu

Total

Certain

Doublta)

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dntbtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cerlain

Doubtfu

Toy

Certain

Doubtlul

Total

0-Balloon

^?

^

>,

0.0

77-3

n&

0.O

0.0

0.0

0./}

0.0

00

. 0.

^

^

0.0

7(r7

&./.

l-Astnnoniol -

/

/

7.

L7

if

114

£

/

&

0.7

fj

?0t>

Z

0>

£

sap

00

GOO

3

3

2£~.0

00

20.0

2-A.ircraH

_^

3

7

7L.7

10ft

#/

/

z

3

Z3

Ht-7

no

~2^

■

7,'

50.0

0.0

SQO

/

3

V

#3

2S.0

33J

3- Light Phenon.

'0

0.0

00

00

a

0.0

00

00

0.0

0-0

0.0

0.0

0.0

4-Birds

(?

0.0

00

0,0

O

0.0

0.0

00

f?.0

00

00

0,0!

00

0.0

5-Clouds, Dust. etc.

/

/

#0

7.- 7

67

/

/

QO

t.f

?3

07

00

0O

00

O

0.0

0-0

0,0

6-lnsutfic Into.

2.

2.

733

00

siS

c.

/

£3

00

a

00

0-0

00

0>

.0./?

00

0-0

7-PiyclBloiim

t-jniuuim

/

7

<*/

00

(t-7

00

0.0

00

-0

0.0

00

0fi

O

<0

0.0

00

00

0.0

00

00

/

f

Z.1

00

t*

0.O

0.0

0.0

£

2.

76.7

00

7L-7

WtJiei

0,0

G0

0.0

00

00

00

(P

0.0

0.0

0J

/

/

£3

X3

Total

t

7

/!?

53.3

4&.f

W-

-£-

4

ft-

UJ

J?.f

m

^L

¥

0OL000

/

f

Z.1

00

t*

0.O

0.0

0.0

£

2.

76.7

00

7L-7

WtJiei

0,0

G0

0.0

00

00

00

(P

0.0

0.0

0J

/

/

£3

X3

Total

t

7

/!?

53.3

4&.f

W-

-£-

4

ft-

UJ

J?.f

m

^L

¥

0OL0

0.0

700.

7

£~

/&

51*

^A

W-

I

.75

mmmmmtmmmK^

WPHWPWP

n»p

7?3i£ dS/3.

£js#£.it#r/<? /i/ &f y/M/r £/G/frr/V6S f<?£ all teJgs /?f /?^^r/0/v 0t </&//r/(uc

f&f

*t0A/r/ss

&

J^eAj^^.

r/v/erv 0a/£ tt?

S/rry'

s&aaA/as

J/H//J/I Pi/

££4s£44£4L 1_

tfd/ettf

/?/*/?/<.

Enttation

Number

Per Cent

Ninter

percent

Number

PerCent

Numtw

Percent

Cert**

DoubHul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cwtain

Doubttol

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cwtairi

Doirbtfol

Total

Ccitiin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0-8all«i

0.0

00

00

-J0.J&

0.0

0O

/

/

/</.s

00

/<fj

/

/

00

4-*

6.3

1-AsUmMiol

0.0

•00

00

. .0.

-0.

AH.

0.0

£0.

00

00

0.0

/

/

i.S

0.0

£■?

2-Airuart

(?

0.0

0-0

00

/

& J

M0

¥00

MO

/

/

/¥*

0.0

rf.J

/

/

f.

3

6.3

/2.C.

3-Li(M Prison.

0.0

00

00

.0.

00.

00

0.0

J

00

00

00

0.0

00

00

4-Binb

0.0

00

00

a

0.0

0.0

0.0

S

S

41.9 />.£>

42f

/

/

A. 3

00

i-3

S-Ctourjj, Oust, elc

.j2

00

00

00

a

00

00

J2A

0.O

0,0

0.0

'

00

00

0,0

o-Hiwrlic. Wo.

00

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

<0

0.0

0.0

00

2.

2

at

00

/2-4

7-Prftrolofiat

Q

00

00

0.O

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0n

00>

00

S-Unknnn

1

(

[00 C

1 (1.0

(C&O

/

/

200

00

400

/

/

Jltl

0.0

/1.3

9

9

0CZ

0,0

?£.Z

MM*

a

a

0.0

£>C

0.0

/

/

200

00

?A9

/

/

00

/¥s

/4*

J?.0>

0.<p

00

[ w-

/

/

mo

0.C

/w.

3"

£ £T

600 000 (00

6

/

7

t&7

tf*

/oo.

/¥

z

//,

S7.S

/2.S

(OO.

Av/

J#A)>£*

J{/CL/

/2#6 ^sr

Evaluation

Ninnber

■ Per Cent

Number

percent

Nunber

Percent

Hurater

PerCent

Certain

Don Mini

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;«tain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouMfut

TtW

CertainNunber

Percent

Hurater

PerCent

Certain

Don Mini

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;«tain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouMfut

TtW

Certain

Doubtful

TotH

Certain

Doubtful

Totd

0-BHtoan

a

<0

0.0

r?

0.0

00

0.0

£~

^

T

/a&

0S

H?

/

V

&

J?/

//.<

/&

l-Ajtrononical

J

r?

3

*M

00

#3

00

0,0

0.0

/

f

?./

00

2J

s

.?

&

*•

*f

/fj

i-Airoatt

A.

(9

2

ML

0,0

2g.l,

3

P,

£

#.?

?00

ft*

/2

/£

■2?

2&S

2£$

5/0

J

2,

&

9.4

A?

(S.7

3-Li|M Pnerm.

.

0.0

0,0

00

00

00

0.0

/

< /

00

2/

2./

J

/

0.0

.?./ '

,7/

4-Birds

00

(?,<?

00

0j2

Vy?

00

/

/

2/

0(2

2-f

0.0

0.(0

00

S-CIWd% nut, t(C

00

00

0.0

0,

0.0

00

00

<?

0>

0.0

0.0

00

0>

001

00

(?0

C-lnaffic. Into.

0.0

0.0

00

V

00

0-0

00

3

J

£.S

00

M

_JL

•

/2.4

0O

/?.?

T-PsreMofial

0.0

0.0

00

0,0

0.0

00

00

00

00

2.

2.

03

•fto

03

o-Urftaimn

2,

£

Sf.i,

0.0

UL

2,

2,

2f,0

r?.<?

tee

/0

(0

2/3

00

2/2

9

f

22/

010

2t/

9-0ther

P

0.0

00

0.0

/

/

0.0

(*-$

/t-S

0.0

00

<20

^■0.

0,0>

0.0

Totil

7

/

/aoo

00

1&0.

£

3

?

i2S

??0

/OP.

f£

/s

¥7

if./

3/f

/M

22

/0

22

6*7.

3/3

le®

f£/?r&A*/f£je

/9<°r0#&*

. /Ua# /?*?#£/£

/P/Fd-e/^/eeg.

Evaluation

Number

Per Cent

Nunber

Per Cant

Nunber

Pet Cent

Number

PerCent

Certain

Doubtful

Tola!

Certain

Doubttu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tot*

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doibttul

Total

O-Ulun

/

/

00

?7

7-7

/

/

d3

0,0

4s

/

/

0.0

200

?00

/

/

2

ri- 1

4-7

/3.(/

(■Astronomical

t

/

f

;>'.<A

f-7

?<■?/

0.

£

2U

00

m

/)

#

f.

0.0

400

&o

-£.

2,

/

/f-3

/J. 3

2t>t

2-Aircrift

-.?.

/

y

21/

?7

3flf

/

/

4.3

00

///

/

f

fee

0.0

200

-J.

Z-

£■

$00

(f-3

33.3

3-LigM Phono*.

0.0>

00

0.0

0.0

00

00

00

/?.?

00

00

0.0

0.0

♦-Bints

/

/2-Aircrift

-.?.

/

y

21/

?7

3flf

/

/

4.3

00

///

/

f

fee

0.0

200

-J.

Z-

£■

$00

(f-3

33.3

3-LigM Phono*.

0.0>

00

0.0

0.0

00

00

00

/?.?

00

00

0.0

0.0

♦-Bints

/

/

fi.0

-17

7?

n

00

00

0.O

0.0

00

0,0

^

0.0

00

00

S-Cbuds. Oust. etc.

f?

0./)

0.0

/10

00

0.0

0a

a0

0-0

00

0.0

0-0

0O

t-lnsilfic Info.

/

'/

17

0.0

?-7

00

0.0

00

/

/

40.0

0.0

20.0

0O

0.0

00

7-Psytl»lo|ical

_4_

0.0

0,0

0-0

00

00

.

o

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

00

0.O

S-UnkMMi

Ljl

J

21/

0>.0

l?l

3

s

m

gJL

</£.$

0.O

0.0

0.0

£

2

/3.S

0.0

/3-3

M)BiM

a.

'

A/?

00

0.0

/?

00

0.0

00

0.0

().0

00

2

z

/33

00

/?.?

Total

f

•

/?

tfZ

3o$

0a

-Z~

J

/#<?■&

00

w.

z

J

4

40.0

60 o

/m

/0

5

/s

M.-7

333

/OO.

176

AJ

K^ ^ ' ^■^■^f^^Thr*'*;

i-"K •■■*,!; t-JttyHAt)^'

W^V^*

77»A*T #//# £V/9Ll/j?nCW OF

/ssi/rr </&f/T~//v&s

- Aae Jt.L </£#<es s<7 0r£/?na/v

as s/<z#r/i/6

Foe. A*eto/ri*s 0/*' &£**. s//r? t?Aff seea/i/as ra fri/£ Af/vc/re*

Jj9 /!/</#£</

^ J/r/;A>/><S

As>/?/2£A>

. . . d*ex/t-

EmabM

Hbflbfl

PeiCoM

Nun*er

Pel Cent

m*m

Pes Cert

NuBbei

Pet Cent

Cuta'n

Doubtful

Totil

Certain

Doubtful

Total :«tain

DooMM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

>rtan

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ceitain

Doubtful

T.t»l

Cabin,

DMbUul

Total

o- Billow

/

^

2.

.100.

^(?

20J2-

/

/

9/

00

ft

/

'

£L

0-0

?■/

£

0>

z

JZJL

O.O

7.7

l-AjInngaieal

2

^

it

2&0

/&?

£&&.

/

/

JJL

$?

?./

a

£1L

0.0

0.0

0>

a.o

O.O

0.O

Z-Aiictan

_ £_

/

3

2#<2

10.0

30.0

?

S

Al

0,0

ft*.

2*

&>

?■

ilk

fit

u<t

f

&

9

^L

7.1

st/i.

Hi|M Ptienoia.

»*.

<?

^

00

P-0

0.0

o

0-0 00

00

&

££

0.0

00

-0L

£>

CO

O.O

O.O

t-Biffe

j?

a

<?

.£&

<?0

a£>

do.

00

00

&

00 00

#0

/

<P

/

?.J

O.O

*g

5-doodj, Dnsl, etc.

/

i?

0J?.

0,0

0,0

a

00

0.&S

,00

/

f

40.

t.t

f.t

<0

O

0.0

O.O

0.0

(■Intuflle. Wo.

. /.

/

(0.0

0-0

/0.0do.

00

00

&

00 00

#0

/

<P

/

?.J

O.O

*g

5-doodj, Dnsl, etc.

/

i?

0J?.

0,0

0,0

a

00

0.&S

,00

/

f

40.

t.t

f.t

<0

O

0.0

O.O

0.0

(■Intuflle. Wo.

. /.

/

(0.0

0-0

/0.0

Z

5

ft*

00

ftl

0.0

0-0

00

'S

3

//.<?

O.O

t/*

APiydrjleiical

£?

#0

00

0.0

a

0.0

00

0.0

40

00

00

/

■0

r

ft

0.O

ft

»U*mn

_ /_.

/

700

£0

/00

.f

3

ill.

00

If*

2,

s

/f.t

#0

/g.t

<7

9"

246.

<f.s

3¥-i

HlKw

/

/

(0.0

00

/00

£

is

a*-

0.0

/f.i

J

.?

£4L

??s

2f.7

-Z-

/

-££\

0.0

f.$

ToW

-X

2,

S0

MS.

20.0

{00

to

/

'/

Mi

-U-

/00.

S

6

//

mts^L

m

Z¥

S

ZQ,

ILL

7-7 *»■

#sy

Jo/ue

J/;t. V . .

/?C6&S7'

Ealutm

Hvnibet

PsCent

Number

P«| Cat

Nuotwt

Pa Cent

H«»tjB

Pet Colt

C(rt»«

CKObthjl

TOW

Ceitain

DhDHu

Total

Certain

Ooobtfui

ToM

Certain

DouMM

Total

lotan

DopoHul

Total

Ceitain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubthl

Total

Ceitain

DwttM

Total

MWIwb

fi

2.

7

/?.J

**<

*&$

^

/

r

Ml

*4

^//

/*

/¥

3 S

flt¥

set

?S,0

/0

/?;

zs

/4/.?

77- 1

T7f

1-Mnnoaial

-0l

&

z

ao\

6.4

*■*

/

^

3

S</

*•?

/0.3

/

/

s

¥

M_

2.S

J.I

/

/

2

AS-

/■?

y.o

I4iaaH

J

4

?

£2.

ff?

ifo

?

^

?

17.1

/J. 2

.1(0

20

//

3¥

t£L

/Pt

75.?

-^

f

/<{

/£t\

£0

20.9

M.itfitPkaa>.

QO

0.O

00

<?

10

O

o.o

0.O

O.O

i

/

7

4*

flf

S3

^J2.

J

3

0.O

tig-

¥*

(■Binb

a

0.0

o.O

0O

O.O

0.O

O.0

^j2.

_^£j

a.o

0.0

0>

<7

o

0.0

a.O

o.o

Mlou*, Doit, etc.

o

O.0

0O

0.0

-JZ

0>

O

O.O

0.O

0.O

/?

o

_0O\

o.o

O.O

.P.

#

a

ao

o.o

0-Q

WnaUfic. MX

J-

'¥■

/2.9

O.O

tij

0.O

6.C

a.o

/S

/y

?.g

0.O

U

■*

3

4?

o.o

«*'

T-Pqidntofial

o

O.O

0.0 t

4?4>

#

£*,

ce

0.0

z

J

J- /.*

?•■?

,?f

Z

./

3

10

AS"

v.*

t-IMm*

&

0>

tf.3

O.O

43

7

0>

7

WJ

0.O

2$/

?3

33

?K0

o.o

2S-0

/*

yg

26.9 o.o

74?

Mfter

2

z.

£.$

0.0

(*<?

^S

3

/#.?

O.O

/0S

J

3

2-1

o.O

7.3

Z

z.

40

o.O

S.0

Totlt&

0>

tf.3

O.O

43

7

0>

7

WJ

0.O

2$/

?3

33

?K0

o.o

2S-0

/*

yg

26.9 o.o

74?

Mfter

2

z.

£.$

0.0

(*<?

^S

3

/#.?

O.O

/0S

J

3

2-1

o.O

7.3

Z

z.

40

o.O

S.0

Totlt

2/

to

3/

M

%-2

m

zz

7

*?

fej

Ht

/oa

SI

35"

/32 fat

U.4

/M

S]

xr

67

&r-7

MS

/vs.

M

§

$g/>r&te/$££.

/3pr0#£M.

/t//?p£'S4S£*2-

2)&CGA4/?££

Eoahiation

Percent

Nonbet

Pet Caul

(Met

PttCent

Niuttw

PnCail

CertH

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooabtti!

Tola)

bertain"

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoUbtM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DnibHul

l Total

Certain

Doubthl

Total

Certain

DuHful

Tola!

HMIooo

J

<

S

JL

&f

ZZ2-

£

/

e

X£

/jsrf

//•/

2.

2

2£0

0.0

2£0

^

/

3

///

f<£

/A 7

l-Ajtnmaicai

/

/

Z

£J

2$

£■(,

?,

z

0.0

77

77

-J-

/

7ZA.

00

/?■*

/

£

0-.C

s,c

0.2.

:-Aircialt

/

72-

/3

2S

S3.3

UJ

3

<r

2

0.4L

/?Z

30.7

-.0.

O

0.0

0.0

00

_^_

</

s-

?.L

22.2

217

J-Lieat Pkevel

/?

o

ao

0.0

o.o

o

ao

6£>

0O

. /

7

12£

0.0

/?■£

O

0.0

0.O

00

t-Bitol

P

0.O

o.o

O.0

a

o.O

0.O

O-O

.

O

J00

00

00

a

0.0

0.0

o.o

J-Clowds, Dnt. etc

.

f?

o

oc

6.o

0.0

c>

o.O

O.O

o.o

- 0-

0,

Z.

0.0

2£0

?$c

_j2__

O

O.O

o.o

O.O

Hnatttt. Wo.

./

r>

/

U

0.O

2J

-L-

.^2 ,

=<.

4k

,O.0

n

_JL

jZS.

f?0

00

_2z_

z

//•A

O.O

///

J-Pjirtooloral

0O

O.0

O.0

3l

0.O

O.O

O0

0.0

00

-J2-.

O.O

O.o

ao

t-IMmw

fl,

/S.

7S-S

o.o

333

_J_

?

Ml

o.o

70*

_x

2.

2£JL

00

75.0

&

O

&

333

ao

333

MUiet

. .0

o

0.O

0.0

O.O

/

/

31

o.o

37

- .0

O

0.0

00

00

o

0.O

O.O

O.o

Total

/?

/?

3i>

£&£_

50O

/pp.

/s

//

26

sf7

¥2.3

/0a

(c,

Z

8

2M.

7S.0

/00-

fz

6

12

H7

333

/oe-

177

^^^^w^^^^s^^^^t^m^^^SfSet^^Ht^^t.

ft ^■^B'=*?|M>.-;:'?*=fy t :'\:

^"^^S^-A^pR^^'ry**^*.. .

Evaluation

0- Bailee*

ml

I-Aircialt

J-UjM Prunoa.

i-e»ds

7-ML& 4M£L.

5-CJouds, Dust, (It

frlnsurlic. Wo.

T-PifdBbtial

(-IMmw

►Other^"^^S^-A^pR^^'ry**^*.. .

Evaluation

0- Bailee*

ml

I-Aircialt

J-UjM Prunoa.

i-e»ds

7-ML& 4M£L.

5-CJouds, Dust, (It

frlnsurlic. Wo.

T-PifdBbtial

(-IMmw

►Other

Total

£r#Lt/Ar-/0/v at ///i//r s/k#7-//i'6s r/xr 0*./. v^/f<es M 0M?JnoA/ a? f/6#r/*/t

J#&4/}£4

Certain

4

fZ

Doubtful

/?

Per Cat

£L

M_

dj_

0.O

o.o

0.0

0.0

ZL

2U

£L

mm

Doubtful

JLL

ao

-U-

o.o

ao

a.o

oo

0.0

o.o

ao

Total

Certain

IU.

2/4

ZUL

0.0

0.0

0.0

ao

£L

2?i

J^L

m. w° \ ?

f£ £££//ttf y

Doubtful

J2.

Total

Percent

Certain Doubtful

273

&.

0-0 /t£JLL

0.0

0.0

&£

0.0

M.

tf±

%ZJL

z I tt\3i.t\/r.£

-d&

AtL

J&L

£&.

££.

0.0

£jL

_0£-

J24_

Certain

2JS_

U.

#0

M.

&0_

A£

&£.

III.

gj_

Mfied//

Number

JZ.

DoublM

jZ

JL

J2-

Total

O

/z.

Pet Cent

Certain

SJ

M.

ZJ.

0.6

0.0

ao

o.o

o.o

&*.

m

Doubtful

?.$

O.O

/&.?

0.0

o.a

pa

o.o

O.o

O.o J. 3

Ml.

Total

/£6

33

Z&

a.o

0.0

<0.6

0.0

O.O

M.

/00.

/#/>*'£

Number

Certain

Jl.

-£.

#/.* 6

/£

Doubtful

-j£.

0>

Total

O

O

/S

PerCent

Certain

&A-

/*.<* £0

ML

0.0

ao

ao

Z7

Oo.

46-1

O.O

ma

Doubtful

ao

o.o

0.0

0.0

00

go

o.o

O.o

O.0

4°.

Tote!

O.O

7&L

mt

O.O

ao

0.0

Z2L

0.0

4kZ

<a.o

/00.

\

:

M#</

J*/**

Jc/*-tS

^aac/fr

Evaluation

Nunber

Pet Cent

Number

Per Cnt

Number

Pei Cent

NutHjer

PerCent

Certain

Doubtful

Total j

Certain

Doubtkl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooibtful

Total

Certain

DotibHul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dwfathl

Total

Certain

Douitnil

Total

0- Balloon

v

£

?

M/

6?

?/0

■r

r

/O

/£.?

?/

i7.fi

£</

/&

S6 ?£J

/0.0

?ae

/7

/J

3D

/f.4

rf.fSM

l-Aaoonoaieal

f-

/

s

i.9

,?Y

/0J

?-

&

z

sS

O.O

*f

■A

A

//

*f

32

P

__^

/o

ft

7.3

#•*

2-Aiicraft

t

z

jr

/0J

£f

tn

s-

f

p

as

f/

21 i.

/£

%

e*

tf-3

£.7

700

A

// /7

/.?

fl£>

If*

J-Liflil Pbenoa.

s

0>

3

/0S

O.O

&3

/

?

/

2.7

ao

17

T

&

S

?t

f.7

4.Z

*t

z

jr

/0J

£f

tn

s-

f

p

as

f/

21 i.

/£

%

e*

tf-3

£.7

700

A

// /7

/.?

fl£>

If*

J-Liflil Pbenoa.

s

0>

3

/0S

O.O

&3

/

?

/

2.7

ao

17

T

&

S

?t

f.7

4.Z

*

¥-

4.£

ao

ft

4-Birds

o

0.O

a.o

0.O

o

o

O.0

00

0.0

O

0.0

O.o

a.o

0.O

00

a.o

S-Clouds, oast, etc.

/

/

2</

o.o

.?*

&

(9

o

ao

0O

0.0

O

O.o

O.O

0.0

O

/

/

O.O

/./

//

frrnnffit Wo.

J»

3

/as

o.o

/0 2

3

£>

3

gJ

0.0

1/

/£

/<&

/*■?

O.O

AU

6

<o

6

69

a.6

< f

7-Psydolojical

^

<?

O

ao

0.0

0.0

V

V

/09

0.0

fit

/

/

fi.f

O.O

dS

?.

Z

23

0.0

t?

t-IMiem

2,

e

£.1

o.o

at

9

J

243

0.0

&f.3

£2.

zs

/%-3

04>'/g.S

Z2,

/Z

/If

00

fit

►Other

/

Z

3

.M

it

/0.3

.

a

o.o

0.0

0£>

¥

/

s-

3.3

01

#/

</

/

,r

4./,

//

5 7

Total

zs

7

Zf

?£.}

H/

/&>.

3f

&

37

m.

/{.i-

/&>■

12.

Z7

/zo

tt$

22.4

/0O.

Sy

zs

t?7

iff

372

fW

I.

I

%

$£/>r&My#/r£.

/?t.r0*££

A/0V&A94&1Z.

fi££.&A*<>!&£

Evaluation

NuBbn

Per Cent

Nunber

PerCent

Nuaber

Per Cent

Nunber

PerCent

Certain

Dnibtfu

Tobl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doobttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dtubttul

Total

0-Batloon

J*

^

5"

*•/

£

at?

100

10-0

f.

s

&

£7

#4

0U

£■

/

3

JJL

¥.0

170

1-Astjunoncal

?.

2

/}.0

«*•/

A.7

£_

2.

3

5.0

/0.0

{?.0

2.

?

£-

tf

/?fi

2/-7

.5"

-/

6

MjI

4.0

24.0

Z-Aiicraft 
3-Lijht Phenea.

/

r

9

Z3

26.7

?0fl

/

Z

3

s:0

(0

f<T.(>

7

3

o.O

/f.0

/to

/

?,

3

470

t-0

/20

' /

/

z

33

3.3

{«{,

/

&

,■?

S.O

/00

/£0

/

/

s

42

S3

U

/

Of

/

4.0

0.0

40

4-Birti

00

0.0

0-fi>

/

/

0,0

5.0

S.0

a.O

0-0

<0.0

S?

tO

O

0.0

4-0

0.0

5-Cloudl. Owl, etc

0.0

00

0f>

O

0.0

00

0.0

0.

0.0

0O

CO

0.0

0-0

0.0

HuuHic max

f

3

M.t>

00

/0,6

/

/

5:0

0.0

*.0

/

/

4.3

0.0

4.3

2,

<o

z

#■0

0.0

€.00.0

4-0

0.0

5-Cloudl. Owl, etc

0.0

00

0f>

O

0.0

00

0.0

0.

0.0

0O

CO

0.0

0-0

0.0

HuuHic max

f

3

M.t>

00

/0,6

/

/

5:0

0.0

*.0

/

/

4.3

0.0

4.3

2,

<o

z

#■0

0.0

€.0

T-Piycholo(ical

a

0.0

0.0

O.O

O

O

00

0.0

00

0.0

O.O

O.O

/

<p

I

4.0

00

'f.0

e-llnloutn

7

7

23J

0.0

73 J

3

3

/£0

0.0

#■0

6

<k

tLi

0.0

2L./

?

e>

%

?2.0

0.0

320

mother

/

/

B

f.S

3J

U

O

0.0

/7.0

0-0

-JZ.

ao

O.O

O.O

/

0>

/

0.0

0,0

4.0

Tolal

/£

/+

so

47- /

n7

/£2^

7

/3

zo

3*r.p

60.0

100.

/Z

//

Z3

fit

47$

/00.

2/

9-

zs

Mo

/{.■#

/00

178

-

hli\'.*.*y.>:-*>:i-.. ■<'.■■:■'}

T»ttL£ A /ft. #M i.t/ <f T -,04/ 0f Wr */&*r/A/&S fMAU. V£*£S #</ at/MT/M 0f S/6Hrt*/G .

jA/JkUA/tjA

f£jt*isA/ty

/ISA/e s.s/

JW-A

Enlmboa

Certain

Doubtful

TOW

PerCent

Certain

DouMtuI

Total

lertain

Doubtful Tool

PwCent

Pet Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;«tain

Doubtful

Totil

Certain

Doubtful

Totil

Certain

Douttbl

Total

PeiCent

Certain

DouMM

Tom

Q. Ballon

-Z

2£0 0.0

2£&

J.

.&.

A

2M-&0-

4j?.0

mo

0.0 0.0

^L

33.3

£&.

33.3

l-Attawmicil

-L

2$0 &.0

&&

L&e.

J2J2.

, 50-0

-£.

Ml

00

2-0.0

■g

22. i.

&£.

22.2

Mlioetl

&LL

A4,

0J2.

J2.

0.0

J2JL

A23L

£JL

£&.

&0.

J-

&A.

//. I

//.

J-Littrt Fhnm.

A2JL

-OJL

4J2.

£LOj2.

MJL

££.

0J0.

&J2-

&£L

&&

_2_0.

£0.

I-Birea

J2_^

&J2-

J2_0

A/3.

a

&J2.J2JL

&3L

J2.

JL

£JL

&£L

o_a.

-O.

£J2L

A£

A0

VCloorh, Dot, tte.

£UL

210.

A__2_

J2.

04.

AO.

&3L

&£.

£JL

OJL

4JL

J2JL

0-£-

frhmflit. M.

jL

&3L

£JL

&£.

&&.

AO_

0JL

J2L

&£.

&£_

OIL

A

ILL

0.0

//■/

T'PtyttokiiJol

££

A£

££.

&£

£JL

&£.

JL

&LL

&£.

06

_££

££.

00

Kwn

&&.

£0.

&4.

00

£JL

a0

_£.

Je.

^0.0 0,0

#0.0

2tl

j0£_

22 i

W**

tfO

£JL

&0

0.0

JW-

0.P

g.o_

a.o

0.0.

/2_0.

0.0

£0.

ToUt

iL

75.0

i£0

m

A00A0.0Y00.

£\0P6

0.0

/00.

X

2AM3L

ILL

J00

te/tv

Jc/4

<U-?

, Jt/e. f

. 4#&

&t7j0£_

22 i

W**

tfO

£JL

&0

0.0

JW-

0.P

g.o_

a.o

0.0.

/2_0.

0.0

£0.

ToUt

iL

75.0

i£0

m

A00A0.0Y00.

£\0P6

0.0

/00.

X

2AM3L

ILL

J00

te/tv

Jc/4

<U-?

, Jt/e. f

. 4#&

&t7

Evaluation

Hmbn

P« Cent

Numter

PoCeol

. Mbnber

Pet Cent

Number

Pa Call

Certain

Ooutttnl

Total

Certain

Doubtlu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DotibtfiH

Total

Dertam

DoubHul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubthi Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

» Bellow

<?

.0.0.

00

00

_ /

? f

f

fs:o

/0.0

4r.t>

/£

4f JL

/9-0 6.3

2G3

^

J>

9

JSJ

79

?!?

lAltmnniicat

/

{

J.0

n?

m

S

2s:0

fi-0

26.0

g

V

ft

/2-1

£.3

(fO

5"

&

/J

ASM

/*?

JV'*

t-Mlaatt ,

__£2_

a

ML

00

fi0

2,

H

1&&

00

/A0

s

</

/

Mi

/ f .3

///

- / 
2,

/

J

6 ■*

2.6

7?

M.ift>t Phmn.

.0

j2£

0-0

as?

^JL

0.0

0.0

0,0

/_

a

/

At,

00

/■*>

<?

/

A

$0

26.

2-i.

VBii*

- j3 -\

Q

AA

00

0-O

-£.

£&

00

00

_ /p.

ft

0.0

0.0>

00

/?

a

0.0

00

0.0

•rCloudt. Oust etc.

/

(?

/

MX

0,0

3X3

—0L

/?

00

0,(0

00

-J2.

£2

ft

0.0

00

0.0

G>

a .

0.0

0.0

(•Imuffic Mb.

—4L

tf

&£.

0.0

0.0

_0.

0.0

00

00

S

<?

f

2-9

0.0

7f

/

/

26.

0.0

2.6

T-CsycMheical

a

00

0.0

00

00

00

a0

/

/

£

At,

A6>

31

2.

2.

S3

0-0

!>.?

Vtotonm

a

&<?

00>

0.0

S

-T

/*0

0.0

'£0

,'X

d

2g.£.

0.0

2U

,7

o>

7 Ag.S

0.0

fits

MOW

__/_

/

#3

0.0

?X3

/

/

S.0

00

S.0

.-£

0>

%

$Z

00

ZZ

/?

a>

£

0.0

0.3

S-3

Total

£

/

J

Md>

?ff

)M

ML

4

20

904

/0.0

'(#<

£-0

/3

is

f%4.

20. &

100.

2tt

/3

is &t

J^Z

A0O.

SssrSAtfeie.

Atkrof&At-

AApf^AtrfSje.

/)£■££?/*?#££.

Evaluation

Nmba

Percent

Nuntei

PerCent

Hudter

PerCent

Xambt!

Percent

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Ooubttu

Total

Certain

Doutthl

Total

Certain

.Doubtful

Totat

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Oouuttu

Total

Certain

Doultfu!

Total

D-BallDon

^•

£-

£0_

■0Ooubttu

Total

Certain

Doutthl

Total

Certain

.Doubtful

Totat

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Oouuttu

Total

Certain

Doultfu!

Total

D-BallDon

^•

£-

£0_

■0

$.£>

_?,

/

•

300

A00

ffl0

/?

a>

0.0

00

0.0

_^?

A?

0A2

0-0

00

1-Astnnoaical

^

/

/

Ji0

¥.0

/U

/

/

/0\a

0.0

,'00

f

%>

S~

2_VL

At*

?2J

./

/

£

333

333

AfA,£.

7-AjlCIJtt

z-

P.

/

Ma

W

/&0

—01

0.0

00

00

/

2,

J

AL

Af3

&0

0.0

0.0

0.0

3-LijW Plieniw.

A

/

10.

¥-0

M0

_£_

£±0.

0.0

0A?

0.0

frA?

0.0

0.0

0.0

0,0

t-BinJj

_^__2_

A?

/

1*.

0.0

V.0

A

/

/<2.0

00

(0-0

f?

0.A)

0-0

0,0

<0

0-0

0.0

A>,0

5-Clrjuds, Dost, etc.

.-0

00

00

00

010

0.f>

0.0

_0

'0

'

O.A)

O.0

0,0

s?

Al.0

do

0.0

trlnsutfrc Me.

&

z

£0

0.0

?.0

00

00

00

2-

2,

/33

00

A33

(?

Ail.

•00

0.0

I-Psycholoiical

A

A?

I

#0

00

¥.0

00

0.0

A

AP

A

&■?

00

t?

0>

00

00

00

(■Unrtnowi

9

<?

t

&0

00

3C-0

3

•J 7

30.0

A?0

30.0

2

S

20.e

00

20O

a.0

0,0

00

mother

/

1

Jit

00

J*

A

/

00

/00

/20

J

A

u

0.0

i./

A

A

12.3

0.0

3S3

Total

.At

A?

2?

/fflo

00

/02

g

2.

/0

200

200

/0a

AA

V

{$

?3.3

26. f

/?a

2.

A

j?

i*£

33-S

/00.

179

:

*r

tMl£-

407 .

£tr*Li//}rsav a=- ///i//r s/6*r/jVGS aM-^Mi- - V£/t£S_j£iL j^/<f/fj^2^ 0>r^s£/t£//M&

rot

v&i/fHs

0f

</£*£

/>f&*r/0/v

#0T

srsfr£0

Ja/yuAAt/

f<S?£ £//**(/

.A?/?ie<?4

/??***. '

Evaluation

femfKr

Per Cent

Hunter

Percent

ftuu>r

Pa Cent

ttMtber

Per Cat

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

CHtain

Doubtful

Total

:«t»n

Dubrhil

ToUl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ccrtva

OdiUfUl

Total

Cataiii

Dodlttjl

Tot*

0- Ballon*

^

i?

0.0

tf£>

00

2.

(?

I

tf

0.0

P

3

_?

u

00

4-t

/

#

s

Z</

tfg

?z

l-HsOormial

7

ir*

/?

M.0

34.6

$20

_^

If

fi

a.z

&■¥

*#

if

i

/4

/f.t

/J. 6

3/f

f

2,

//

l/.s

/J

112.

I-AiKUft

-2*\

^

ftf

0.0

P

3

_?

u

00

4-t

/

#

s

Z</

tfg

?z

l-HsOormial

7

ir*

/?

M.0

34.6

$20

_^

If

fi

a.z

&■¥

*#

if

i

/4

/f.t

/J. 6

3/f

f

2,

//

l/.s

/J

112.

I-AiKUft

-2*\

^

f

-UL

a<?

f.o

J

/

4

/f.s

<4?

/*/

£

3

?

/J.&.

it

i0S\

6

. e.

Mf.J

00

fi/S

3-Lifht Phewm.

r?

0.0

0.0

CO

s?

0.0

0.0

a<?

0.0

00

0(0

:<?

a

00

0.0

00

«-Bir&

o

&0

00

0.0

0,0

0(p

0.0

0.0

0-0

0-0

sL-

a>

/

*■¥

0.0

*■¥

S-Clouds, Dust, etc.

/}

0.0

00

ao

s>

z?

HA

0.0

0.0

<P>

J24-

a/?

00

jSjI-

0,0

00

(rlnaffit Mb.

jr

?

P0

00

20,0

./.

/

££.

0.0

tf*

/</

/V

3/J

0.0

J/.S

/£■

/*

2Ui

/P-0

#*•

J-Plyttokniol

OJ2-

0.0

0,0

a

a

m.

0,0

00

_JL

0J

00

00

/

/

JdL

0-0

14

A-IWOWM

3

3

/20

0.0

/?e>

,3_

a

3

&4

0-0

/36

/

/

&

0.0

$■*

#

^_L

{90

0-0

/f.0

»0«wr

z

2

M.

0.0

go

. a

0>

<?

0.0

0.0

0-0

-0.

.?

3

0.6

6-t

a

0.0

0.0

00

ToW

-IX-

t.

25

&0

24.0

/sp.

/3

-X-

22

*fj

¥0?

m

32

t*>

44

fi-l

2/!3

w.

3g

</

4Z

f0.£-

s*.

/£>/>

M*t/ .

Jes/U&

v/fr/.

IS

,y$Cfi tss r~

Enlualnii

Hunbet

PoCent

NimUr

PtrCent

ftnlxr

Percent

NunbH

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

ToUl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;ertain

rmUful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0-MIdot

-f

J

XL

00

SJ

4

i.

/LL

0,0

AtS

2/

//

Si

S2.2 £-.2

a?

jr

./

j?

s;i

,■?*"

9-3

1-Aslnxnaiiial

/0

&

/£

at

?.(>

stf

3

?.

5-

JuL

44

//■/

2?

7

34

/2.1

3.3

/f-0

^

1t

(4

70

f.2

//fit

J-'Atraifl

_£.

¥

f

gj

//■/

ttt

-A

J

?

XX

2.2

f/0

2?

/f

</z

/I?

7/

/$■?

/0

?

tf

/f.L

$./

/9-7

}-Li(ht PIibm.

/

/

0.0

f-f

If

a

<1

0/?

00

0.0

.3

3

JiL

0.0

/■4

2,

z

2S

00

2 3

4-Birij

(2

V

/

0.0

*t

f-f

<?

<?

0.0

a<?

0,0

/

/

Z 0.£T

0S

/0

__£_

0.0

00

0.0

5-ClwntI. Oust, etc

0.0

0.0

0.0

__z2.

rt

&J0-

00

0.0

",/,JiL

0.0

/■4

2,

z

2S

00

2 3

4-Birij

(2

V

/

0.0

*t

f-f

<?

<?

0.0

a<?

0,0

/

/

Z 0.£T

0S

/0

__£_

0.0

00

0.0

5-ClwntI. Oust, etc

0.0

0.0

0.0

__z2.

rt

&J0-

00

0.0

",/,

J 0.S

0.0

0.5

&

0.0

0.0

0.0

frlftsolfic. tihh

(,

ir

/i.7

'00

a- 7

/2,

/2,

2L1

0.0

2^7

IF

32

/?■?

/?■?

./?...

<?

ft

22-/

00

22J

^Psycti:l0|ica<

0.0

00

(io

2,

(2

2,

¥.«

0.0

«</

/

4

3

#f

0.? /.4

/

{?

/

/.£

00

/.Z

OuVauntn

i

i

/t..7

0.0

/6-T

/3

a

/t

ifi

0.0

U9

te

^££

&s

J2J2-&L

£2

(?

22

&.£

00

2S.C

J-ODier

0.0

00

00

2,

(7

I

Y-i

00

44

/6

/t,

7?

.0.0 €S

2,

/

3

2?

/2

3JT

Tort

IS

f

36

471

12. Z

/00-

Jfr

3

¥*

UX

6 7

f0&

m

3L

2/ 1 $$.0 17.0

/0P.

Al.

uX-

u

71?

22./

W.

. Xgj?f&M4££.

/?<i7Z>*££

4/&{/£/<4ig&&.

/)jSC/£*7S£:<.

. Evttoafion

Hinrw

Percent

Womrjer

PerCenl

NuwVer

Per Car!

Hunter

PeiCail

Certain

Doublfnl

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ceftain

Dniitfui

Total

Certain

DouMfut

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Totat

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Billow

/?

0.0

0-0

^

/

2

f7

?•/

■rf.*

/

7

1

2*

/?>*

mo

/

/

2

4t

3.4

6-f

1-Asbwnaiital

/#

_3_

/3

212

74

&2

?J

^

$

51Z.

tl'

22$

7

f

//

(£5-

/0.0

27-2

/i

f

/3

20.7

24/

m

IMiain

/

/

2.

2J

23

4l

3

,f

>

Ma

g.£

/fZ

s

2

7

/If

<0

/?■*

Z-

/

S

A-9

s-4

/0.3

HJeht Ptianoi.

/?

_&-

££_

00

0-0

y

/

ao

■?.f

2?

S)

0.0

00

0}

0>

0.0

0.0

0.0

4-Binb

—/L.

0.0

00

0O

JLd

00

00

0.0

an

0.0

sy

J2J?

00

0.0

S-Cloets.llwt.etc. 1

&

0.O

0-0

ho

S3

0.0

no

0-0

tf

0.0

00

@0

0>

0,0

0.0

00

frfiuutn'c trio.

9

f

20?

0.0

2<P?.

6

i

LZ-L

00

/?./

3

3

f.f

ao

7*

<s~

&

SZ2

0-0

/f.2

7-PSri*>l0(ical

f

/

/

LL

0-0

2-3

/

SJ

/

M-

0,0

2f

a

J2SL

a#

0.0

/

/?

/

zsL

00

>-f

HJrtaoim

//

//

SS.b

ao

2££

8

£>

%

2ZJ.

00

22?

9

f

22 S

0>.O

22.60-0

/f.2

7-PSri*>l0(ical

f

/

/

LL

0-0

2-3

/

SJ

/

M-

0,0

2f

a

J2SL

a#

0.0

/

/?

/

zsL

00

>-f

HJrtaoim

//

//

SS.b

ao

2££

8

£>

%

2ZJ.

00

22?

9

f

22 S

0>.O

22.6

2,

0>

Z

*.f

00

£■?

MHier

i,

/

7

W.0

f-3

//,-■!

&

O

2

*~-7

0.0

f-7

2.

-2

£0

0.0

■f.0

3

0>

3

/03^

00

/0-3

'

Total

Jg

5

43

mt

tu

W

J4

//

3S-

(,$(,

3/V

/00.

JX

/3

40

m

??■£

/00.

00

9

2?

£90

3/0

m

I)

•i

180

TMdtS a)//S

J/JAtM/ty

AssuMey

MAetrt

Jm

/£

CnhaliM

Certain

ONbM

Toll!

Per Cent

Certain

PwttlUI

Total Certain

PwMlul Totaj

Percent

Number

Certain Doubtful

ToteT

lerttin

Doubtful Total

Percent

Certain Doubtful Tolil

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Per Coil

Certain

DwiMM

Total

UWIo«

JL

0J0.

JL0

&£.

jL

0J2.

\&0.

00

J2&

J&2.0JL

_Z

-jZ

/

M.

0JL

9/

l-Airnnaicel

JL

±

JL

#2

643

m.

Jlt

££<,_

Ul

.£.

SL-JL-

2U

£££.

ZZZ.

2£S\

410-

£££

:-*iicnH

.0

00

££.

£0.

JL

04.

jZjZ.

00

JZ

a

&L

/2j2_

OjI

-£.

_Z,

JU

4JL

£L

>U0lt

J2.

£&.

£d.

££.

JL

aa.

00

00

JL

aa.

/&L

££_

d£_

MJL

a a

VBinh

UZ-J2.

££.

&£-

oxl

OiL

J2*L

&£.

£4.

OJL

00

/

&0

SI.

£A

Klouits, Dint, etc

(20_

0.0

d£-

0j2.jZ#.

OJL

J2.

00

/2JL

J0H

JZ-

£JL

JUL

0.0

frliaifllt Mo.

£JL

.0LL4J2.

£-.-jL

££.

j2j2.

££.

tLL

0JL

ILL

JL

JLL

4JL

?./

7-PttclDtoflat

ZL

£2.

7-/

&L

j2jL\

A&

-JZ,

Jt\

0101

#0

s2jL

JL

JL

£&.

4j2_

££.

(VtMonvi

-Z

£L

Jl&-

1/

02.

J20.

0.Q

-J-

LLL

JUL

//■/

&Z

J2JL

J&l

♦OBwr

/

aa.

XL

u.

MjL

<2JL

iU.

a&

££.

OJZ

A&

44.

OJl

2

Total

/&

#L

&.&

&iAie&

<L

4y4\51S.b

/oa

'jLl

^L

\sm

&.&

MS.

/0

ZL

&£

M.

/00.

1

/*!*•/'

Jffl

Vf

JpLW

/?c6(tfr

Evaluation

Hu«tw

Per Cent

Number

Percent

PirCant

Nntm

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubrM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dmibttul

Total

Certain

Dmbtfai

TotalNntm

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubrM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dmibttul

Total

Certain

Dmbtfai

Total

Certain

DaittM

Total

t-Ballew

rf?

0.0

0.0

0-0

/

/

l£

00

f-o

/

Z

J

/.J

/•rf

4*

.?

S

0-4 J?0

<■/}

1-AMmMical

&

^

f

29.4

//.f?

0?,

/0

7

'/

400

$80

Mo

22.

/£

?7

&.£>

*f-/

&/,

//

20

SI

UL $$-3 &z*>

Z^itnft

_£

/

r

23<£

iff

2f¥

J

s

/to

£(?

/Z0

7

f

/6

9?

ftj

2U

S

6

9

£0

tfi-0

/So

3-U4it Piano*.

f?

0.0

0,0

0.0

0.0

a<?

$0

/

/

/.4 00

(■¥

JL

/

/

0.0

/■?

/■ 7

4-Bi*

00

aa

0.0

A

0/>

&0

0,0

/

4

S

/■¥

It

41

J0.

4j2-

00

0.0

Klwo>, Dun, «tt

e

/p

0J0

00

00

#

0.0

00

00

/

/

40

/¥

/■V

{>

0.0.

00

00

tlimflic. Hh.

/

o

f

£9

fi0

f?

3

•

s

/2.o

0.0

{2-0

*.

2

z.g

00

1?

<r

f>

s

JtS^-AO-

6 7

J-PsyttohJiicat

a

o

0.0

00

0,0

&

{?

00

ft?

0-0

d/L

00

00

/

/

7g

0-0

f-7

t-Uaknoam

&

%

//.S

0-0

Mf

_j2.

a

1?

££_

&0

ao

4

6

t.f

00

f.£

6

4.

/0.0

rt0

/0.0

another

&

2.

//.*

00

//■f

/

/

0.0

(70

4.0

_JL

£

t-*

00

*X

2

/

3

S3

/■/

*.0

Tolal

-JL

J

-#-

m

/?<<>

/00.

JL.

_X

2?

7*0

Z$0

w

4U

n

7/

£?&

fat

/W.

si

3/

&0

S2

&/.?

/?£>,

^9

S~&/>r£M££ie.

£>dT0f€*.

A/£>i/est/se<e

Dsee&it&fi.

Evaloatun

Mtnatei

Percent

Nauber

Percent

Nt'*ff

Percent

thinber

PnCsit

Certain

DobbMil

ToW

Certain

Deaabfjul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooobtfal

Total

Certain

Oouttftri

Total

Certain

DoBbttol

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

DuHtol

Total

r>Bal«Wi

P

aa

00

00

j9

££

A0

0.0

-£

£g-

0.0>

0.0

/?.0

0J?

00

l-Astfononio!

/

t

/f

3Z3

w$

Sft

-X

V

?3.t

00

&3

_L

if

ff

£Lf

%-7

Sf.f

S-

?

'f

#4

</2./

$?*

Z-Aircraft

_/_

?

y

4*.

ft*

//,.?

?s

■f

XI

tt-7

?$.P

__£.

/

f

/S:3

t-7

20.O

-J2-

0.0.

0O

0-0

3-LiDil Pham.

/

- T

0.0

ft_L

if

ff

£Lf

%-7

Sf.f

S-

?

'f

#4

</2./

$?*

Z-Aircraft

_/_

?

y

4*.

ft*

//,.?

?s

■f

XI

tt-7

?$.P

__£.

/

f

/S:3

t-7

20.O

-J2-

0.0.

0O

0-0

3-LiDil Pham.

/

- T

0.0

ft

4z

.

<0

0.0

0-0

0,0

.. /

/

44-

0-0

6 7

P

0JZ

00

0,0

4-Binh

/

/

f.

¥*

#1

w

. /Z.

0.0

#0

0.0

_

0.0

0-0

0,0

<?

00.

/9,0

0-0

Scowls, Oust, etc

.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

fl0

00

_£_

m.

0<?

0-0

0,0.

00

0.0

Miiuflic Uro.

, /

f

</.z

00

#2

Z

z

/<L?

00

/*•/

_£-

00

00"

0-0

—<2^

00

00

00

7-PiycnoIotical

00

0.0

00

.

4JL

00

0.0

-J2-

0.0

00

0-0

-JL.

<?

.00

00

0-0

WJotooim

S

s

/2.S

0.0

/2.4

Z

2/

fc.7

0<?

ti-7

-*£.

0?

Z

/3-S

00

/i.3

~^H

—0-1

2,

tiL^

<0.0

/0Z

MtkB

00

0.0

00

/

/

00

£3

?-3

-c.

/

-6=3-

00

i-7

£0-

00

{20

Tout

jaL

(0

$¥

ff.Z

40.?

/06,

JL

■f

&

7£o

2£o

{ggi.

~#r

&

/*

&Z-

///

/m

JL-

g

/?

£ZX

42./

/00.

'S3

181

.

3

3#jfLE

4// 9

ei/ALi/Ar/0/v

a*

0&

Utf/i

>-r j

'/<*<*

r <A/f-

$ &

9* ,

It/.

V£Ai

e,<

4v

/fi/je/>7 /£>/i/ of s/a

Hr/Ase,

sa& SttZ&rtfs

Or ifcj* x/X T0 T?A/

S£ca/i/£>s

■

Jt?/UM£V

feet?

&£#£.

Ma***

/?S*/l

Evaluilnn

Kwbet

Pet Cent

PeiCsit

Nuabei

PetCtnt

NanBei

Pet Colt

Certain

Doubtful

Tout

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouMM

Total

Ma

Doubtha

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certaia

Doubtful

ToDI

Cabin

DouHnil

Toll

Balloon

£?

/?

0.0

00

00

Q2-

00

00

.0

0.0

0.0

00

_^J

£0

00

00

I'AslmiHial

/

/

00

?*.0

«?<<?

./.

/

m&

MO-

/CVP

/

/

2£f> 0.0

4S.O

2,

2.

2&e>

00

&-o

2-Airerift

/

/

0,0

te.o

2&0

_J2\

j20\

0-0

00

0.0..

00

0.0

/J

/

z-

tie

t2-t

2$c>

S-LiftrtPhm

rf?

<?

AiL

00

00

0J2A

0.0

0.0

00

00

60

H2

d?

0-0

00

0.0

4-BinH

r?

^

fle

0.0

00

00

0.0

0-0

-JL

0.0

00

00

0<i>

00

00

S-ClMitt. DM, lie.

^?

00

0.0

00

a

00

0.0.

00

_£.

0.0

?.#

0.0

#

0>

0.0

00

01

t-lmffic Mi.d?

0-0

00

0.0

4-BinH

r?

^

fle

0.0

00

00

0.0

0-0

-JL

0.0

00

00

0<i>

00

00

S-ClMitt. DM, lie.

^?

00

0.0

00

a

00

0.0.

00

_£.

0.0

?.#

0.0

#

0>

0.0

00

01

t-lmffic Mi.

/

r?

f

2S0

00

2S.0

o

£0.

0.0

00

r?

00

00

0.0

/

/

rt.z

aa

/if

T-Psgrttulojical

<S?

00

00

00

&

00

0.0

00

0.0

00

00

_^_

£?

(?

00

00

#&

mmnwn

/

<S?

/

2.5$

00

24.

o

<0

j£2

j2&_

0.0

3

3

76*

0.0

tfo

j

0>

J?

%e

00

3?£

*-0«w

^

00

00

0.0

a

ri

J2&.

00

0.0

££.

00

00

—j2_

d?

f?

00i

00

0(?

ToM

£

2-

¥

£2£

fQ<?

m

•/

/

/0t>0

00 f O0.

jL

4*

/ape 0.0

/00

.7

/

f

fz?

/is

/00.

M/9_y

J/jaj£

JottS

;#//(£ &S7-

Enlaition

Hupnba

Pet Cert

Numtwf

Pa Coil

nntier

' Ptftonl

HanbH

Pel Cent

Certjin

Doubtful

Total

Certs"

OoobHu

Total

Certain

Doabllul

Tt4H

Certain

OenUIUI

TBtH

Certain

Doabtlnl

Total

Certain

DcwUM

Total

Ceitan

Oovbtdi

Total

Certain

fotlnil

ToM

O-Mlogn

. .1

/

0L£-

00

/I*

/

/

S9

00

*,?

00

0-0

00,

—0-

.?

3

00

t/*

//«■

1-AsWnaiial

£

£

254-

0.0

2fo

3

4-

f

/U

3Z.3

&.f

t

(

/£■

313

2*2

&.S

~L-

f

4t

//.*?.

//<

£?. £>

J^irenft

/

/

2,

/26

/2-6

4S.0

S

J

/U

00

m

_£_

£

7 /*£ M

24?

f

^

/0

3t>.$

?7

3f.£

5-Li|Ht Pneaon.

...

/

/

0.0

/$.S

ft.s

/

/

010.

f.f

*t

00

00

00

./

/

S.g

0^

3-1?

4-6inb

...0

J0>0.

0.0

a.0

o

00

00

010

00

00

00

0.0

0-0

00

5-Clowb, Oust, etc.

0.0

0.0

0.0

.-0.

00

0-0

00

_£_

0.0

00

00

—0-

0!

00

00

0O

6-lnaiflic hb.

2.

z

fc.0

00

Zfe

a

£,

££.

00

//./

_/_

. 1-

ir

00

S7

/

/?

_/

SS.

0f?

??

7-PjytWopal

00

00

00

0.0

00

«f?f?

-0-

00

00

00

12JL

0.0

0.J0

S-Unbnw

00

00

0-P

/

/

f.9

0.0>

£-.9

J

S

//./

00

///

4/

4

/£/

0,0

/<■*

um*

0.0

0<3

00

00

010

0.0

/

/

J17

00

??

./

/

32

00

f,K

TflW

6

£

f

tf£J?

ft.0

ffi

/0

f

-4-

*zt

4T.2.

/00.

d-

$

SE

Z?.? 2 fa

/0a.

a

ft

Utyz4/

4

/£/

0,0

/<■*

um*

0.0

0<3

00

00

010

0.0

/

/

J17

00

??

./

/

32

00

f,K

TflW

6

£

f

tf£J?

ft.0

ffi

/0

f

-4-

*zt

4T.2.

/00.

d-

$

SE

Z?.? 2 fa

/0a.

a

ft

Utyz

30.2

M

TePTeMSC/e.

Oeroffr*.

AfyfJi; *4 &££.

0>£r<t/EJ^*<T£. _

Evolution

Niuittwr

PnCent

Mtnoef

Pet Cant

Nuntjet

Pet Cent

Nraber

Pet Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtni

Total

Certain

Doabtful

Total

Certain

Chubttul

Toti

Certain

Onittful

Total

Certain

OoubUwt

Total

Certain

Doutitfoi

Total

Certain

DcubtfuE

[Total

0-e^loon

/

/

0.0

If!

(tJ

00

0-0

0(0

^

00

00

00

<p

0.0

00

0.0

1-Asnwoaiat

2

2.

2Zt

00

722

/

2

?

fro

40,0

60-0

2

2,

£6.7

00

4£-f

/

/

a0

/#00

We

2-AilciJH

4,

z

00

211

22Z

00}

00

00

00

00

00

J00.

00

00

3-Liftit nienon.

at?

00

0.0

P

00

00

f?0

00

00

00

0.0

00

00

4-Binb

/

/

00

///

tt/

/

0.0

00

00

<7

00

0.0

0.0

#0

00

00

S-CloinJs, Dust, etc.

a

00

0-0

00

00

00

00

00

00

00

a

0.0

(7-0

0O

tlnailtic. tiki.

00

0,0

00

O

0.O

00

00

00

00

00

~j2.

to

0.0

0.0

0a

7-P^pchgloiiol

0.0

00

00

32

00

00

C?

0.0

00

00

-J2-

00

0.0

£0,

(.Unfaiow

3

f

?*S

0.0

33?

2,

2,

jbo

0-0

<?00

/

/

Ul

0.0

?3?

e

r?

J20L

00

00

WWier

0.0

ftfl

00

0B

00

00

00

00

00

0.0

O0

00

Tow

&

J

9.

5 St*

W-f

/oo.

3

z

f

&a.

4*0

/oo.

3

S

WO

0.0

m

/

/

0.0

{0H0

m

i>

182

^R5T*^«*7

T#£t.£

/}/&}

£Mi. t/* r/0M or

04L/£dr

snz#r//t/s j^ae

rfu.

</£/?£* rfv 01/je^r/av

0f

S/6,HZ//t/jG,

rat Af0A/r#i 0^ </£/?£ -£■£-£. f£ Af 77? W/^r*' i. S£e£7/lfi).i

iJtiflrVAMV

fG£S&>sfje</

* Afs?/es/y

_ s4s>#/£.

Evaluation

NMtei

Pa Cant

Hunter'

Percent

Number

Percent

Number

PhCoiI

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DOUbttll

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certa'n

Doubtful

Total

Attain

Doubtful

Total

Ccftain

Onibtkil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dntlal

Total

0-BJitOoa

a0

00Certain

DOUbttll

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certa'n

Doubtful

Total

Attain

Doubtful

Total

Ccftain

Onibtkil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dntlal

Total

0-BJitOoa

a0

00

0.0

00)

00

00

/

/

.0.0

M£

^<=

■0

0.0

0.0 00

l-AstnutaiCal

9.

&L1

0.0

417

/

/

£00

0.0

#0.0

0.0

JZ0-

00

7.

/

■ 3

212-

9.1

m

J-Aiiantt

0.0

_0J1-J?£.

A

1

m& 0.0

f&e

A

A

A0.0

J2JL

me

/

2

2

JJ-

JlL

2?J

3-LiGlit Phonoa,

(?

(?

0.0

. 02?

00

00

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

0-0

/

0>

/

JJ-.

00

f.A

Wii* '

a

00

-££.

ap

00

00

00

0.0

0.0

00

/

/

9.1

0.0

r.'

S-CJomto, Dal. etc.

00

a<o

00

0.0

00

00

0.0

0.0

0,0

4JL,

-A2

a&

S-ltallic. tit).

/

/

22.3

0.0

23?

„0

0.0

00

00

^£L

00

#0

0,0

A>

00_

00

<a<?

?-Pipaolofi(al

<?

0.0

0.0

0,0

_i2_

0.0

0,0

0.0

-J?

O

00

JZ0

0.0

J^

00

00

1-ltuuiuM

a

0.0

0.0

00

-2L

0.0

00

0,0

2

2

200.

0.0

WO

2

?.

Alii

,#0

A?2

*-OTler

a

0.0

0.0

<O0

\

0/?

$0

00

/

f

A,

/0.0

500

601

/

_jZ_

' A

9./.

.te-

?/

Total

2

?

/00£>

00

/00

£

£ V00M

0.0>

/00.

f

6.

t*'

?0.0

&0.0 m

*r

^

ft

227

rn

/oe.

H<*V

Ji/A/S

Jc/i.i/

rf&& otr

Evaluation

Numoer

PefCenl

Nuc*er

PoCent

HtHKbor

PaCal

MimbH

Per Ceil

Certain

DMibtni

Total

Ctrtain

Doubtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtlul

ToUl

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ocubtlu

Total

Certain

OcuMM

ToM

O-Mloon

/

/

£t

00

rff/

/

/

f.f

0-0

£f

3

?

&

4(t

¥t

9£.

/

/

GJ>-

.to

.f.0

l-Aitnmwical

/.

/

X3

0.0

//

/

£

/

£.9

//.g

/$7

£

/

If

9.7

/■t

//■S

6

*r

//

/&£

fit

?31

2-Aifcnfl

/

/

f.

*f

u

&&

£-

2

/

&.4

/At

tf.Z

/¥

/f

Z9

226

02

tf.z

&

?

9

/££

f-l

27S

Hi(M PhH»m.

0.0

0.0

00

' a

a

00

00

00

a

0.

010

0.0

00

/

/

&£-

JQ

30

4-Bints

/

/

00

$$

$3

<9

f?

aa

00

00

00 aa

00

.0.

0J

0.0

00

S-CloucH, Dint, ett

0.0

00

0.0

-^0.

6>0.0

0.0

00

' a

a

00

00

00

a

0.

010

0.0

00

/

/

&£-

JQ

30

4-Bints

/

/

00

$$

$3

<9

f?

aa

00

00

00 aa

00

.0.

0J

0.0

00

S-CloucH, Dint, ett

0.0

00

0.0

-^0.

6>

0.0

00

00

o

00

00

00

a

0J.

<t-0

00

S-IIBUtliC. tltt,

V

4

ML

00

&$

J

a

'4

/?&,

(20

/T.&

2.

2,

2£

00

f.Z

Z

&

&J

tf-0

£A

7-Ps»choto|itat

00

00

00

a

00

00

00

J

2*

's

K$

,?2

f.0

c

0.0

fl.0

40

5-mikmmn

2r

&,

47

0.<0

ft?

'.?

I

/?£,

00

/f.i

12.

/Jl

/?■¥

00

At</

?

9 2?3

M

zr?

Wlthei

/

/

M

00

?J

0.0

00

00

t

/

/A.

00

A-6

0>

a0

AO

00

Total

2,

tP

it?

J&.

/00.

y£

<t

-4-

a. s

23?

/0G

&..

2(-

i,±

L&'

fS.f

/00.

23

/0

SS

l*T

SOS

/00.

Xk.Hv

1 ^

S'epr&fiue*

A?dr00£<-

AA sir &**<?£&

S>£d&A*#£-£-

Evaluation

Huiatwr

Percent

Nvaber

Percent

Nuiljer

Percent

Nurnber

PeiCeil

Certain

Doubthi

Tobl

Certain

DoatirJul

Total

Certain

Dot* Mill

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certan

Duufaffu

Total

Certiia

Damn

Total

0- Balloon

.-0.

?.

2

00

y.r

/-?*/

~00

00

00

0~

00

0.0

00

fl

'&

£

00

9.U

22±

l-Asbwnniol

A

/

00

tr

7/

f.

A

/

4±Z

AAA

PJ

9

z

000

00

SAC

/

. 0.

/

AA.f

#0

//.A

2-Aircrart

_j£

J

7

2tA

2A</

£00

/

&

/

//■A

MX

$r.3

2

9,

£0.0

00

£0O

.?

J

0.0

2p

2fJ

0,0

3-Lifbt PIhkm-

£>

00

0.0

00

/J

00

00

00

00

00

00

<1

m.

$0

t- Birds

fl

00

00

00

00

00

00

00

00

00

A?

gJL

W

0,0

S-CI«Kls, Dust, etc.

y

/

00

?A

7J

A

f

00

ff.f

f/.i

00

00

00

(P

0.0

00

00

S-lnKlttic. tlb.

&

fr

tf.3

40

A#S

/

A

//■A

00

((■'

00

0.0

00

0.0.

/},!)

0-0

;-Psytholo|iol

/

<?

/

7/

00

7./

00

0-0

00

00

0.0

00

.00.

M

00

t-Unlooan

00

0.0

00

/

A

//./

00

///

0.0

00

00

2

2r

22.1

60

122.2

Mttier

00

40

00

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

0.O

A-

(

//J

/A A

Total

1

7

/¥

500

ST0.0

/0O.

S~

¥

?

S?6

MS00

0.0

00

/

A

//./

00

///

0.0

00

00

2

2r

22.1

60

122.2

Mttier

00

40

00

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

0.O

A-

(

//J

/A A

Total

1

7

/¥

500

ST0.0

/0O.

S~

¥

?

S?6

MS

AW-

J-

¥

/00.0

0.0

/00

^L

£

f

#A.<A

Z£l

/00.

■■'■Si

183

m

' : fi.fl' 1 *l! la<fl ij^i^i^a>^^+yi^*i%i->^re^ fy»<ni;tw!ff^r"-;-fr' r -^*. ' >v'f '-i-i-* •~#*''zr*X , -f:<- y ^ t >r- t^^T^^-n-:-..*. -•■'■" " : . )■ ^

TTftfe-g /f tf/L

ey4i_t/Ar?a/i/ 0a /O/Ujsr/tT xf&#r//»r,z ra£ situ. </£/tes 4? /?4##t/0/i/ /?s? s/&#r/ /vt.

rat. f*BA/m< #s &£//& m/err ,34^ 7-0 j/jr* X£t00>as0s

J/f/V0/?4</

feft'V/?**'

A?t9<e<:tf

Js*'

Enlntjoii

Certaia Doubtful Tolal

Percent

Certain Doubtful Total

CoubtW ToUl

Per CM

Certain

OouMful

Total

Jertaia

Doabtful

Total

PerCeort

Per Coil

Certain

DntMil

Total

Certain

Total

Certaia

Tot*

D-BHIota

jM.

jM

/XL

JL

04

00

0.0

/4t

0.0

Ml.

/

0.0

1L

SA.

1-AltnMicat

j2.

&L

J2JL

<2j2

-Jt

0.0

0.0

0<O

0.0

00

0.0

O.O

0.0

O.O

Z-Aiioatl

O.JU2.

J2JL

j2jL

J,

sto

40.0

60.6

/</.*

0.0

&L

0.0

U_

g.3

mj*i

JL

££.

jM.

£j2_

JL

jZ.

0.0

0O

0O

0.0

04

00

-JL

0.0

0.0

0x0

4-Binjj

££

J3JZ

£0

OP

0.0

0)0

Ml

0.0

<&?

0.O

00

O.O

S-ctaKb, Oust, etc.

M&

00

00

-J2-

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.O

0.0

Wwflit tot).

_£

0.0

J2/L

00 \

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

00

o&

&2_

00

/£J

7'Pi|rda<of>til

-_£

0.0

0jL

OJ2.

00

0.0

0.0

OJ>

0O

00

0.O

0.O

0.0

fl>£>&

££_(£££.

Z0.0

0.0

Z0J3

/j/S

0O

/v(s

_£

r

66.7

0.0

u.:

Mtm

JL

0JL

00

00

ZOO

M.

ZO.O

*>■* /**

Ms

0.0

0.O

00

Total

//gj

£J2-

/00.

&Q0,

</o.o

/00,

c

JL

fs.fWf ve&

/CD

/2

U3_

&jl

/as.

M#</

./0A/£

J0L</

j4#6&rr

Evaluation

Nunber

Pet Cent

Nonber

Pet Cent

Noa»tf -

Percent

Hntef

Per Cat

Certain

DoubUul

Total

Certain

Ooubtnil

Total

Certain

DoubHal

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

DoubHul

Total

Ccrtiin

DoeHbl

Total

Ctrbie

Ooobtlu

Total

Certaia

Dm MMPer Cat

Certain

DoubUul

Total

Certain

Ooubtnil

Total

Certain

DoubHal

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

DoubHul

Total

Ccrtiin

DoeHbl

Total

Ctrbie

Ooobtlu

Total

Certaia

Dm MM

To«

O-Ballow

O

00

O.O

00

0.0

0.0

0O

r

&

7

//./

4<//ss

^

s

3/

/ij

/S.I

l-Aibwoaical

2

£>

2

3Z3

0.O

■33,3

O

0.0

00

0.O

/

/

£&.

6>0

2.2

S

?

6

f.S

f.¥

/ft

2-Aircntt

2.

Z

jy.3

0.0

333

S

?,

£~

%£

&0

#£

JL.

/0

zz

&.?

2**-

W-9

^L

2

G~

fj/

6.3

/£••/

3-Li(titPti(Bom.

&

O.O

0.0

00

a

0,0

0.0

0O

/

/

0.0

2.2

2.2.

.0

/

/

O.O

Jr*/

3/

4-Bii*

O

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

/

/

z.&

0.0

2.2

-O

0.0

00

0:0

JCIiwJs, Oust, etc

,?

O

0.0

a.0

0.O

.-£..

0.0

00

<00

CK0

O.O

ao

J?

0.0

0.0

0X0

S-lnaffib tub.

(?

0.0

0.0

0.O

0.0

0<3

0.0

J

3

6.7

0.0

4 7

</

<?

+

/2.ST

a.0

/2.S

WsycMofical

O

0.0

£10

0.O

O

0.0

0.0

0.0

0>.O

6.0

0.0

.£.

Z

4. J

0.0

4,1

Wnkwui

z.

\s

33.3

0.0

333

f.

z

2£e>

a.<0

&.o

/0

S0

222.

0.0

ZZ*

?

9

2f/

00

22/

Wther

O

0.0

0.0

&0

/

/

0.0

/ff

/?■$

(9

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

a.0

0.0

Total

&

&

/09.»

0.-0

/0O.

S

3

s*

iz$

jr.*

/00.

3S

/s

4S

7//

2f.9foo.

see

/o

32 a-r

-SJ'.-f /00.

S^Pr^M/ps*

/3<2r0>g£<e

/t/0r£-/Ltg*/e

/}£<££WS^4

Evaluation

Nuaibei

PerCcnt

Hwaber

Per Cent

Hunber

Percent

Nvpbcr

PerCait

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooattfi

Total

Certaia

Duubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoabtfuJ

Total

Certain

Doobtlu

Total

Certaia

Dm btmi

Total

0-MIom

/

/

0:0

?7

77

/

/

?oJ

0.0

26.0

0.O

O.O

ao

./.

/

-Z.

£1.

rO

/&i>

1-Astmoiiical

2.

/

3

/iT4\

?7

It/

/£

O.O

0.0

do

2,

z.

0.0

£0.0

wo

./.

/

z

i.3

?*

/U

J-Ainnft

S

/

</-

21/

r-7

fa?

/

/

za.o

0.0

20.&

/

/

2S.0

0.0

?£0

s

/

¥■

2?o

21

333

3-Lijtil PnenoSL

.

(?

0.0

00

0.0

(?

0.0

0.0

0.a

ff.O

00

0.0

/9

<0

0.0

OjO

00J-Ainnft

S

/

</-

21/

r-7

fa?

/

/

za.o

0.0

20.&

/

/

2S.0

0.0

?£0

s

/

¥■

2?o

21

333

3-Lijtil PnenoSL

.

(?

0.0

00

0.0

(?

0.0

0.0

0.a

ff.O

00

0.0

/9

<0

0.0

OjO

00

t/Binh

(

/

0.0

77

?7

/?

00

0.0

0.0

O

00

0.0

0.0

I?

0.0

O.O

020

5-Clouds. Dust, etc.

.

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

a.O

0>

O.O

0.0

0.0

O

<0

0.O

a.0

a.o

gVlnsillic. Xto.

/

/

77

0.0

77

0.0

0.0?

0.0

-J-

-J.J2—

/

2*0

0.0

2S.0

a.£>

0.0

0.0

7-Pqicla)lot>cai

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

0.O

AO

0>

0J>

0.0

00

d?

0.0

0.0

0.0

t-Untnowi

J

O

3

23/

0.0

23/

3

3

£00

a-o

6,aa

<0

0.0

00

0.0

Z.

z

//..7

0.0

/t>-7

MttlB

O

O

0.0

00

00

<?

00

00

a.o

<0

0>0

0.0

0.0

2.

z

/A.7

0.0

te?

'

Total

f

9

/S

M.Z

30$

/£>0.

s-

O

s

/OQO

a-o

/oO.

■s

&

</■

50.0

5-0.0

/OO.

9

3

/£

7S-0

24.P

/00-

184

vn&Le " 4/t.z ^t/ALMr/0'V & -0/?>j£s.t s/&Wrs/v£s j?ae /?u i/&j*>s sy ^s/fr/tf/r

' a* _£s&&rM<>6.

Pa£ M0/vrMs 0& <S£*/e. s/ir</ 0/u£ seecx/as -70 f/i/e M/jvt/r&s

J4flfU0it t/

/^zget/a&v

A?*£df/

/)?*

'£■

Eolation

Umber

percent

Nuaibei

Per Cenl

Number

Per Cent

Nim**f

Per Cut

Certain

Dwibttlll

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:«t3ifi

Doubtful

TIM

Certain

DeUMtut

Tot*

itrtirn

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OoUMfcl

Total

Certain

Oouttlol

Total

Certain

Ooiftthll

Total

O-Balloan

/

/

£

Ma

/00

m

/

/

/00

0,0

700

/

/

//./

0.0

//./

£

4

77

<?J0.

77

l-Astnmaiical

2.

£

200

0.0

&>0

/

/

00

/0.0

700

0\

J0.0.

.00.0.0

..0.

&0

^0.0J0

Mittnft

f

/

■-,•?

200

M(?

Me

/

/

/00

0.0

/00

2

?.

4 222

22.2

Wf,

r

2

,f

&.9

7.7

?</.£

3-LijMPtrtM«.

^

<?

0.0

0.0

00

00 00

0-0

_0

0.0

J2J2~

0.0

0.0

&£L

0.0

♦•Biros '

<?

#.a

00

0,0

<?

01.0

00

00

o

0.0

0.0

0,0

/

■ /

S.g

0.0

3-f

S-Cloudv Dust tic.

_c\

<?

0.0

rtt?

<?-0

0.0

0.0

<00

<0

/

/

00

JL7_

///

0>.0>

0.0

00

(-tannic Kb.

/

/

70.0

a.p

;0d

-£.

t

20.600

00

o

0.0

0.0

0,0

/

■ /

S.g

0.0

3-f

S-Cloudv Dust tic.

_c\

<?

0.0

rtt?

<?-0

0.0

0.0

<00

<0

/

/

00

JL7_

///

0>.0>

0.0

00

(-tannic Kb.

/

/

70.0

a.p

;0d

-£.

t

20.6

0.O

20.P

_&.

-&.

00

<0.d>

0>0

s

s

MS

-^2J3.

//■£

7-Piyetalofial

o

0.0

0.0

0-0

0.0

. O.J2

00

a

00

0(0

00

/

/

f.r

0.0

zr

Mmwwn

/

/

/a<?

00

/£>£>

J

f

f00

rta

20.0

£.

LkZ

722

j2\&-

2?. 2

f

f

jT<£

JZIZ.

m

J-Othei

/

/

/0.4

0.0

/&£)

..£.

2

20p

00

200

a

/

/

<20>

//./

W

. /.

/

4?

0.0

?$

Totil

r

2

/#

mo

200

w

-$-

/

/e>

fee

/00 /00

5

V

I

5S.C

44- </ /ffo.

2</

2

24

n*

^~z7

/&#.

M*</

JVA/G

... ... J0tr</

/4//6&tr

Enlution

NumtW

PwCenl

Nuntm

Per Cent

Nurter

Pa Cent

HuallH

Percent

Certain

OotlMfcll

Total

Certain

DoutatUI

ToUI.

Certain

Dwblnil

TOUI

Certiin

DoubHut

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OgubttU

Total

Certain

Ooutthl

Total

Cf*?.

Dojttfcl

Total

0-BjIIoob

^

/

f

2$-0

^

2f.t

/,

/

/

2/4

.?.(■

2£.e

/?

f0

2?

M9

gf

23.7

/0

/f'

22

/f-L.

/g.7 34.3

1-AttnuMical

/

/

0.0

<^

4z

- /

t?.

s

3i

/,/

W?

z

2

0.0

A<2

/■2

—jL

/

7

/.&

^^

*?■

t-Aiicnlt

S

?

$

/9.S

20J

3?3

&

</

g

rf.3

/</.J

2XL

/f

&

S0

/<f

/0.&

21.3

-U2-

/

rt

15L i.i

2/. 8

3-U0II FOenoa.

0.0

0,0

00

0.0

do

00

S

/

£

£L

a.9\

&3

.

2

2

a.o

s./

3/

♦•Binlt

00

00

00

0.0

00

0(7

0.0

0,0.0-0

&0.

0-0

0.0

5-ClooHs, Dwlete.

0.0

0,0

00

.-&>

0.0

0,0

a#

a

0.0

4,0

(?0

tf.O

00

00

(■Iiaotlit. tifk

/

/

#2,

00

¥•*

00

0-0

ad

/Z.

/£

;#$

0.0

/0H

S

s

d7

0.0

4-7

7-P^rdKlotical

00

ft0

00

-j2-

0.0

0.0

00

Z,

j>

s

/.2

2.6.

«f

0,

/

?

3/

/■&

47

B-Unknaw

t

4

2£.D

0.0

2£0

/

?

2£C

0-0

2S.0

29

2f

2£.y

00

2$4

/^

/*

2£0

00

?£0

MWiet

/

/

44.

0.0

¥.z

.J.

,t

/0.1

0.0

/0?

J

i?

s

?.&

0.0

Zt

2,

2

£/ 00

#■/

Total

^

7

*f

70.f\2?.2

'00,

2f

7

2f0-0

2S.0

29

2f

2£.y

00

2$4

/^

/*

2£0

00

?£0

MWiet

/

/

44.

0.0

¥.z

.J.

,t

/0.1

0.0

/0?

J

i?

s

?.&

0.0

Zt

2,

2

£/ 00

#■/

Total

^

7

*f

70.f\2?.2

'00,

2f

7

2f

7S0

25.0

/00

1&.

t?

//</

7*4 2</.£.

/00.

&L

C0

6«

tf.S

J/. 2

/0G

#

Sgfirstose*'

^Ptr^iSa/g. .

A/0t/£M/2irA

Z?£d£ M££j£

EviiuJtion

Nuntcr

PerCent

Number

Percent

Number

Percent

Number

PerCent

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

OMtjthi

Total

Certain

DooMful

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Jotalj

Certain

Douttrtil

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Balloon

_^£

' s

t

u

/¥l?

22.9

2,

¥

(,

2.7

tff

26.. f

£

2

2SP

0,0

2S.0

£

/

J

//.?

f.f

ft 7

1-AstmnMical

/

/

2

*9

f;t

&s

2,

2

0.0

g -7

17

/

(?

/

/2J

0,0

,7S

P

/

/

0>0

*;t

*.?

Z-Airuift

-L-

f?.

/3

IS-

Z/-3

*7/

3

3

&

/3,0

At-0

2CZ.

0>

0.0

0.0

0,0

__r

y

?

*<f

23.!?

if 4

]-U|ht Ptienon.

<7

o.&

0-0

no

0.0

0-0

0.0

/

/

/2.*\

00

/?■•?

<?

0-P

0.0

0-0

4-Binte

_<2_

o.0

0-0

0.0

fl

0.Q

0-0

00

0.0

0,0\

0-0

#

<?.0

0-0

0-0

S-Clouos, Oust, etc

,-7

0.0

0O

O

\j0J2i

0.0

■ z

7.

00

25.0

&e

/?

0.P

0,0

fr-lnsuftic aifi).

/

t

7.9

ao

i.f

/

/

43

0.0

#*

00

(70

0.0

2

Z

tf-f

0-0

,/.*

7-Psycholopcai

0.0

0.0

Q0

0.0

r?-0

0.(7

0>

0.0

0.0

00

-A

<0

<?.{0

0-0

0.0

t-Unknow

//

//

s/4

ao

3/4

7

7

J?04

&■(?

ta4

£

z

2S0

0.0

?$.0

J

(0

6

3S.3

t?.*?

3£3

Mthei

_0_

0.0

00

0.0

/

/

</.3

00

¥■3

0.0

0.0

0\

0.0

00

00

Tola!

U£

tr

3S

wm

*m

/00.

lZ

?

Z3

to?

?9./

m

6

—2-

g

??-0

?*,{>

/0P-

//

A

-tf-

6><7.7

3s.s

/00

185

frgL?

A s2f

£Mt./Jj>r/0iV

iW

/2£^/z£r s/&//r/A/as Fat #/.l

tests *r at;

<<PATt

/W

#F SM

iMTfif

*

/^? M0A/r#s &fi </£J£

s/jt- to r*///er7

/*4ra/isr£s

J*/Wjt£</

/?££££/*& </

M/tAd*

_ y^/V/'-i

Evaluation

hunger

PeiCsit

Number

Percent

Number

PeiCent

Nm£«

PeiCenl/W

#F SM

iMTfif

*

/^? M0A/r#s &fi </£J£

s/jt- to r*///er7

/*4ra/isr£s

J*/Wjt£</

/?££££/*& </

M/tAd*

_ y^/V/'-i

Evaluation

hunger

PeiCsit

Number

Percent

Number

PeiCent

Nm£«

PeiCenl

Certain

OouDHul

Total

Certain

Ootiliu!

Total

Sertarn

Doubtful

Tool

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Attain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooobtbl

Total

Ctfftin

DHbthl

Total

O-Balloi

/

/

^

7.7

h

W

&

2

£50

<?a

ZS.0

/

/

£ 0.0

/0.0

m

0.0

00

00

1-Asinmical

J

<?

-?

23./

&(?

23./

/

<9

/

/2.f

0.0

/i.s

/

C>

/

/0-0

-0£L

f00

z

t

/£4 0.0

/s:?

2-Aircnfl

2

/

_?

/*0

7?

23/

2,

t.

0.0

2f-0

Z£0

I

2.

f

/00

£0.0

S0O

s

j 30?

00

30g

J-Lijfil Ptienon.

f?

.0,0

00

00

a

40

&0

0.0

a

0.0

00

00

00

0.0

00

WJii*

O

i?

&o

00

0.0

a

'

0.0

00

00

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

S-Cloudi, Diet, etc

£J1

<?<?

O0

.0

<?

00

0.O

0.0

0>

0.a

.&£.

00

_0_

00

.00

00

frlnsoflic tin.

o

f?

ao

00

00

0.0

00

00

ao

.£&.

0.0

y

/

f-7

0.0

?.f

/-rijfCJBMfictI

/

/

7.7

0-0

f.7

e>

n

£JL

00

00

0-0

00

00

00

00 00

8-Unkno«n

j

r

22/

0-0

22/

.0.

a

&&.

0,0

00

j»

^2

P0

0.0

fae

a

6

&z

00

&.&

Mow

/

/

7.7

00

f-7

.J

,f

ffS

00

n$

. 0.

£_

/

#0

70-0.

(00

J?.

0.0

00

0f>

ToW

//

2-

a

tft

&</

/%>.

&

2

f

t&

??0

/00-

&

V

/0

i0.0

</00 /00

/3

,£L

/aaa

00.

/00.

. &.&<£

JaA/a

JOi-</

dP60{r

Evaluation

Nuiibtr

Pel Coit

Number

Per Cent

. Nur*«

Percent

NnbK

PerCenl

Certaii

Ouibttul

Total

Certain

Doubttulj Total

Certain

Ooubtful

Total

Certain

DouHhl

Total

Certain

DDdbthil

Total

Certain

OouKM

Total

Certain

Dwblhi

Total

Certain

Doobttol

Total

O-Balloen

1

z

f

&9

7.7

#4

-X

2,

?

20.L

s?

2i.S

2/

//

SI

/Z6

M£.

m

/7

/O

??

2/. 3

/2J£ 3S.S

1-Aitwioaiul

£.

/

4

77

S.g

/Af

£

z.

£.9

00

&?

iT

y

9 4.7

S7

*4

?

Z

/0

0.0

?.£

tf.s

2-Aiicnft

J

/

V

//.£

JtS

/£3

_£2/

//

SI

/Z6

M£.

m

/7

/O

??

2/. 3

/2J£ 3S.S

1-Aitwioaiul

£.

/

4

77

S.g

/Af

£

z.

£.9

00

&?

iT

y

9 4.7

S7

*4

?

Z

/0

0.0

?.£

tf.s

2-Aiicnft

J

/

V

//.£

JtS

/£3

_£

J

7

//7

$f

20.6

/f

#

2S

tf-0

7*

2/.f

&

/0

/&

ft?

/2.S 200

J-Lighl Phenoa.

J

J

//.*

j2£-\

0*

/

/

ZL

ft0

2?

J

Z

f

zg

'■?

¥7

S

3

f.g

0.0

31!

t-Birtj

0.0

00

00

/£

0.0

00

00

0.0

00.

00

__£_

0.O

0^0 0.0

S-Clgudsv Out, etc

J

/

J.f

Q0

,ff

0\

0.0

00

00

a

00

0.0 0.0

/

/

0.0

/ 3

/I

t-lnsvlfic I*'

z

£

77

ao

77

2.

.. a

2.

£T9

00

*?

/*

/r

/<i(0 no ?</0

__6_

s f

7.S-

0.0

7.S

7-Psytl»lo|iul

A

0.0

0.0

00

<7

J

t.y

00

g.S

/

/

0.9

00

0?

2 r

2

2-5

00

f<

frUolouw

/

/

J.t

00

?f

9

a

f

26.5

OP

2&.Z

/7

//

/s-.f

0.0

/*9

/0

/0

/2£ 00

/2.g

Mlkei

/

2,

3

f.g

77

,/s-

/

00

0.0

00

-jL

/

3*

*7

0?

*t

f

/

.f

£0

A3

£2

Total

20

6-

ZL

74?

23./

/m

-V-

f

ft

?S3

/47

f00.

XJ.

&*

/Of

m.

2^3

/00.

££>

*/

S0

70.0

30.0

/00.

%

fepT3/*i0/r£

(?£ra4£6-

A/0/r£MJ3£-O.

/Mee/vas^e.

Evaluation

Nimbet

Pa Cent

Hiaiter

PerCent

Number

Percent

Noiber

Percent

Certaii

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dantn

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoiMhil

Total

O-Balloon

3

7

</

/££,

*v

(?■/

4

rf.

00

.?? 3

33.%

2

s

5"

££.

/</-3

23%

2.

/

J

-ZL

KZ

{?■£

1' Astronomical

a

?.

f.

0.0

f.f

t-'

/

?.

,?

Si,

//■/

0e-7

2

f

*"

?.*

#/.3

12 i

4/

/

<

J&.7

¥2

20.1

Z-Aittialt ■ '

/

V

<

</.*

tf.2.

27./

/

/

2,

£.6

t-i

//.Z

J

,f

0.0

/4.3

m

/

t.

3

4.Z

?2

I?-*

J.Lijtil Phenoa.

L

/

2.

4*

<Ztr

?0

/

/

2

£.1*

$.&>

02

/

/

2,

¥?

tr

9.L

/

/

</2

0-0

¥-z

4-BinU

0.0

0.0

00

/

' /

0.0

4-i,

S.(.

0-

0J0-

00

00

0.0

0,0

00

■rCloud^ Dost, etc

a

0.0

00

00

00

00

00?0

/

/

2

£.1*

$.&>

02

/

/

2,

¥?

tr

9.L

/

/

</2

0-0

¥-z

4-BinU

0.0

0.0

00

/

' /

0.0

4-i,

S.(.

0-

0J0-

00

00

0.0

0,0

00

■rCloud^ Dost, etc

a

0.0

00

00

00

00

00

00

00

00

0.0

0.0

00

frlnsiiHic Ufa.

7s

2,

M.

00

f

/

/

S.i

0-0

S.<,

. /

/

*e

00

V?

2,

Z

2.2

c?0

$.2

7-PsyclulOEical

a

00

00

0.(7

00

00

00

0.0

00

00

/

/

j£2

e20

¥*

i-UnkjioMi

&

/,

275

0.0

??.2

3

J

/6.7

0.0

76-7

V

a

>r

23. t

tf#

237

2

$

23.3

0.0

33.2

Munr

/

/

4*

0.0

4*

00

fi.0

00

0.

iZ£L

00

0.0

/

t

</Z

00

¥2

Total

-4-

/

ZZ

&A6

?*Y

/£>0.

-X-

//

//

m

if.t

/00

//

/0

M

£2.4

47*

700.

20

¥

z?

#3.3

ti-7

/P0

%

186

r

^ftiSpESp*^7*^v^^P^*

f4fi/,£ /?/2</

£^jfi.£//fr/o/u 0f <0£j£er

s/s,#r/A/<ss fat>

/?U.

</£J*£

#y

0vjes*T/rM/ op syd&r/A/tZ

fae. Ma/vTHr a? y&9# 07£ta -r////ery *f//Vi/r£s

^//?Alt//l£</

_ ?£■/!/?&#£</

M*£M

/3/*#/l

EialarbM

number

Pa Cm

NmLkj

PerCent

Nonber

Pet Cent

Nurnbei

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:wtain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

/

<?

/

32l

0,0

223

/

/

%?0

0.0

F0P

£

£

&0

00

B&.0

J"

s

222

0.0

223

I t-Aitnmtial

/

/

0.0

??■?

223

/

/ *00

J).0 S0.0

/

a

/

2$0

0.0

2S.0

2.

7

22.2

0.0

22.2

2-Auciitt

00

00

00

.0.

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

'

/

/

0.0

//-/

(/■ f

3*Lt|M Pttenop.

^

0.0

00

00

0-0

fi0

0-0

0.0

00

00

0.0

0.0

0,0

'-Gilds

^

00

00

00

#0

0,0

0,0

00

0.0

00

00

0.0

00

S-Ctowb, Out, elc

^

00

0-0

00

0.0

0.0

00

_^

00

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

0-0

Mnrlfic. hfe.

0.0

0-0

00

a

. 0.

0-0

00

_*2-

0.0

00

#0

/

/

//./

.j?, P.

///

7Pjydnl«|ial

a

00

0.0

00

a

00

0.0

0-0

0.0

0.0 00

fi>

0.0

00

00

rflMnow

00

0-0

00

.£>

__£_

00

.0,0

00

/

/

2S.0

00.

25.0

. £

Z

22.Z0.0

00

#0

/

/

//./

.j?, P.

///

7Pjydnl«|ial

a

00

0.0

00

a

00

0.0

0-0

0.0

0.0 00

fi>

0.0

00

00

rflMnow

00

0-0

00

.£>

__£_

00

.0,0

00

/

/

2S.0

00.

25.0

. £

Z

22.Z

0.0 22.t

»0fte«

_ /

/

333

6*0

&3

<?

__£_

0.0

0-0

00

0.0

00

#0

r?

00

0.0

0.0

Tola)

2s

/

3

&z

&3

/C0.

2

2-

/(foP

0-0

/00.

jsL

<f /0R6

0.0

/(&,

f

/

J

ttf

//./

/oa

%

MA</

Ji/Ai£

J (/£.</

/?0&0ST

Efahalnn

Nintw

. P«Coil

Number

PerCent

rtumbtf

Pet Cent

Number

Per Cat

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doontful

Total

Certain

Dwditfu

Total

Certain

OoubHul

Total

0-Ballooa

0.O

0-0

0-0

6

Z

/

27$

/2.£

50.0

?

^

//

/4<0

$0

22

r£

J

9

/&2.

#.*

2$I

l-Astnooaicat

0.0

00

a0

_J_

4/

25.0

0.0

2S0

6

</

/0

/t.0

t-0

20.0

f

^

/3

/g.9

St-l

3--J

Miioafl

0.0

00

00

2-

2.

/?.?

P-0

/2.S

f.

^

&■

#0

t.0

/2J

P.

/

3

*</

2.7

$■/

M.ifht Phoma.

0>

0.0

0.0

00

.00

0-0

00

{

0_

/

f..0

00

2M

/

/

00

7f

2-7

t-Binb

00

00

00

0.0

0.0

00

<?

0.0

00

&£_

0.0

00

00

S-Cloudi, Dust, etc.

/

/

'ZO.O

00

P0O

__g_

0.0

0O

00

00

00

0.0

—0-

00

00

00

S-flraiffic. bio.

_j2_

00

/20

00

0.0

00

0,0

*

V

H0

00

g.0

/

/

2 7

00

Z-7

/■PtycnDH |i cm

a

0.0

00

00

a

0.0

0.0

00

/

/

t

2.0

Z0

4&

2-

2.

*/

00

*7

KWmom

0.0

00

0.0

/

/

£.3

0,0

$3

/</

a

/</

2f-0

00

2i0

^

^^J&2r

00

/6.Z

Miner

/

/

50

00

S0.O

/

/

&.3

0.O

<>2

2.

4,

J£

00

Me,

Z

z

00

fS

*4

-. '

Tort

Z

z

ime.

00

'00

^

2,

ft

Zf.iT

(2.5

100.

■V

/j

S0

rf0

2&0

/00.

If

/? S7 64. 'f

3S./

/00

fE/>r*S*4£££

fyroste*.

A/0e/£/44££.

/Oeee/f/rfed.

EvaluUM

Nenber

PerCent

Nunber

Per Cent

Nunber

PerCent

Number

PerCmt

Certain

DouoHul

Total

Certain

Da* Hul

Total

Certain

Doubttul

total

Certain

Doubt**

Total/Oeee/f/rfed.

EvaluUM

Nenber

PerCent

Nunber

Per Cent

Nunber

PerCent

Number

PerCmt

Certain

DouoHul

Total

Certain

Da* Hul

Total

Certain

Doubttul

total

Certain

Doubt**

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DOIBtflll

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doibtnil

Total

D-Balloon

2,

2.

00

g.1

fi-7

J

/

y

300

/0.0

yfre

0.0

00

00

/0

0.0

00

0-0

l-RSl»rMia{

~?

f

J

/30

^3

/f.3

/

/

/0.0

00

f0^

3

2^

f

23./

/**'

38.S

/

/

2,

323

ff-f

t*-l

2-AiicnR

2

2*

</

Z.1

l?-7

ft*

0.a

00

f).{?

/

/

7.7

00

77

0/7

0-0

00

3-Lithl PtienHL

f

/

0t0

V?

¥3

0.0

00

00

<?

0/7

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

00

4-Biros

/

/

#S

00

#3

/

/

J0.0

00

'0.0

0.0

00

00

0}

0.0

00

00

S-Cfoud!, Dust, etc.

0J\

0.0

0.0

00

00

0-0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0,0

00

E-blsuffiL hfo.

z.

Z>

X.7

0-0

f7

'

0.0

00

0.0

£

2,

/&.?

00

/ST.?

0.0

00

0-0

7-Ps)njBlopcJl

/

/

43

0-0

?*

00

0-0

0-0

/

/

77

0-0

7-7

00

0.0

0.0

(■IMuiom

7

7

304

0-0

?<M

3

_J?

3

30.c

0-0

%?,0

3

f

23J

0.0

&./

0.0

00

0.0

Mflier

/

/

<t.3

0.0

«3

/

/

0.0

/0.0

/0.0

/

/

77

00

77

/

/

332

0,0

23?

Total

/7

4>

a?

7f?

26J

/00.

^-

2,

/0

20.6

20.0

/0O.

//

Z

/s

5V/,

/*■</

/m.

^

/

s

0A7

33.3

/0o.

m

187

&'■

2

%LU49r/0/v 0F £>3J£&r ^/6//rM/0S _^a«?

Mt

jreAfS.

ay jva&jfr/av c& f/6/vr/4/6

K.

V0A/™< /?? v£A<e _, £>//f#rs£>*/ A/er S7??r£0

Jfl/bt/acJ

J^£€<vj«/

MAlttH

AfiUlL

EvaMkn

MMbH

PwCenl

Nuneer

Pet Cat

Nonbei

PeiCent

WnHer

Pa Cat

Certain

bwbitii

Total

Certain

Oonbttal

Tula!

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:«t»(i

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DMbtfiil

Total

CerDio

Ombtful

Tolal

Certain

OoustM

Total

0-aallm

J

0.0

0.0

ftp

• 2.

£

//.J

00

//./

3

3

?.£. 0.0

rt

/_

/

^

4ZA/

*4

1-A$tnngnial

—^

<•

{/

273

tf-f

%>0

.J.

4.

,0

M.£

ts.s

&Z

/

<

/2

220,

/4?

W-3

6

2.

?

ft.2-

r-V

2/. 6

Z-Aircratt£

//.J

00

//./

3

3

?.£. 0.0

rt

/_

/

^

4ZA/

*4

1-A$tnngnial

—^

<•

{/

273

tf-f

%>0

.J.

4.

,0

M.£

ts.s

&Z

/

<

/2

220,

/4?

W-3

6

2.

?

ft.2-

r-V

2/. 6

Z-Aircratt

z

2,

ft

00

t'

2.

/

J ft./

Si.

fc7

3

3

4,

g.L

W.t

tf-t

h

t,

/i-2. 0.0

/£l

3-LieM FMm.

. ^.

(?

0.0

00

00

4

0.0

0-0

K(?

.0

A0

0.0

0.O

0\

1^.0 00 '

0.0

«■*«»

r?

_&£.

0-0

0.0

o

00

,0,0.

{?■{?

/>

0.0

3UL

#■0

/_

a

/

22-

0.0

2 7

5-Cloudi, Oust, tic

o

tf

J2J2

00

0.0

^JL

0-0

0.0

n.n

_Q

a.

At?

0.0

fi.O

/>

P

0.0

0-6>

{?•<?

frbsaffic Mb.

s~

r?

3

US

0-0

tf7

—L

/

36

fl.6

£■£

J0

/0

?u

OP £H

./&

0>

ft

J2?

&t?

&■?

7.pjvt»ok|in<

c

00

0-0

0.0

-&.

O

0(0

.0.0

0-0

. Q.

0.0

n-c>

fro

. A.

6

/

2?

0.0

2-7

B-U*MM

2,

O

2.

? f

0O

f.7

_£j

D

2.

tt-t

at?

f/t

. <r.

o

t

*■?

ao

*■?

^x

7

/*.9

00

/??

s-oaw

2

2.

?./

0-0

ft

O

0.0

fit?

0.0

3

V 3

00

St

ft

o

at?

00

0.0

TOM

J%-

<r

22

77 J

£2.7

m

//

7

/ff-l

Sf-f

/00.

2<?

//

fstU.

*■¥

w.

J*L

S

tf

ft 9

£S

/&>■

Mm

4ifA/£

Junt

fiuaUlT .

Evaluation

Hunber

PhCbiI

Ninobtr

Percent

%•>«

Percent

rtnber

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

; stain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dovbtlii

Total

Certain

Dogbtkl

Total

Certain

DoaMful

Total

D-Balloon

2-

2,

<r.9

00

?■?

A

{■

/eg

<4P

/£.%

2a

f

?f

/2.3

£■£■

t,7,f

T^

3

f?

AJ^

#0

/07

Astronomical

/0

2-

/2

& t

ff;9

%s

/

d?

t

2/.

00

2-L

f

/

6

/?

f.4 3.7

f-s

_£-,

5"

^

2.7

6-7

U

2-Aircult

J

¥

7

g.f

tt-1

206

¥

5-

/&■£

2,L

tSJ

2/

/2

2*

/t0

zS

20.^

?

f

ft*

/i-o

f.3

2t3

3-Li(t>t Pliann.

/

/

00

f.,f

?•?

0.0

0'0

0.0

S

3

/■?

0.0

'•?

2.

2.

J3L

•0.0

?..?

♦-BirtJ

o

/

/

0.0

*-.f

2?

<?

0-0

/?<(?

0.0

/_

/

2,

0.&

0-t

/<2

j0<&

0.0

0.0

^Clouds, Dust «tt

D

0£>

t?,t?

0-0

-JZ0.0

0'0

0.0

S

3

/■?

0.0

'•?

2.

2.

J3L

•0.0

?..?

♦-BirtJ

o

/

/

0.0

*-.f

2?

<?

0-0

/?<(?

0.0

/_

/

2,

0.&

0-t

/<2

j0<&

0.0

0.0

^Clouds, Dust «tt

D

0£>

t?,t?

0-0

-JZ

/>

0.0

0.0

/

/

0b

<0J>

0L

-Ji.

V

00

00

0.0

S-UiBlflic *ik>.

6

&

ilk

0.0

tU

/2.

t?

/Z,

?/./.

0(?

3/.i

_££

_

?*

2/6.

<?J?

2/.t>

/9

ff

&3

0.6

2S3

7-Psydwloficil

Q

JZ£

0t?

0.0

£

■ ■ „£?

2,

C.J

00

S3

/

2

3

(H.

AT,

/■$

/

/

> '?

0.0

/.3

8-Ur*no«n

5-

5"

tf?

00

t¥7

/0

'0

2iS

00

2tf

f0

30

/fe

0J>

//<

-t£-

ff-

2£3

0.0

2S3

>Ot»et

o

o

£4-

00

0-0

2~

a

4,

Z3

0.0

S3

//

{?

/t

LS

0.0

1-9

2.

/

3

ftf-

f-J

ff

t

Total

2.4

1

&

7LZ.

23.4

too.

Sf

/

S$

ti&

at

/00.

/?2.

30

/C2

&■£

tf$ (00-

It.

/{>

jm

7*7

2/3

/ao.

I

S^f»1

r^Mge*.

Perosefi.

A/oi/etosefL

DlSC£

**#£&

Evaluation

Nunbet

Percent

Minder

PaCent

Nuitei

Percent

Ifenbei

Percent

Certain

DMibtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain

Doubttol

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

It-Balleon

A0_

0.0

0,0

2.

/

3

£.4

?.z

97

_^L

4

7

2.1 i

/£$

ff4

__/__

/

£.0

0-0

*0

l-Aitronnical

if

J

9

/JT.g

ri

??.7

2-

6

t

1.4

4</

26*

7

V

ft

tid.

/O.S

tft

2.

r

£~

//>0

/60

2Z0

2-A< rcraft

j\

/

2,

26

2-tr

<2

2.

2,

/

Al

i-4

/f.0

<"

?.

7

/f.2

3.3

/u

2.

/

3

M0\

<0

/3.0

3-LiltilPtlnML

,

'

00

0.0

O.0

0.0

0.0

00

0,

/?

0.6

0.0

0-0

0>

0.0

00

00

4-Birds •

__J2_

<9

0.0

2U1-

-j2-a

0_

gJl

~0J2_

0.0

/?

_ 0>

0.0

0-f?

0.0

<0

JL0

0-0

0-0

S^louds, Dust, etc.

,0

0j2-

0-0

0-f?

a

0.0

0.O

0e

<i?

00

0.0

0-0

-J0-

0.0 0.0

0,O

frlnsuffrc hlb.

-X

f

21?.

00

2?7

&

6

/Z4

00

/f.4

3

3

23-

0.0

7f

s~

-s-

2f-0\

(P-0

2S-0

7-Piycniik>(iol

^jL

t

2J-

0.0

i-&

/

a

i

f.2.

0.0

tz

£>

£

J2&

0-0

00

/

/frlnsuffrc hlb.

-X

f

21?.

00

2?7

&

6

/Z4

00

/f.4

3

3

23-

0.0

7f

s~

-s-

2f-0\

(P-0

2S-0

7-Piycniik>(iol

^jL

t

2J-

0.0

i-&

/

a

i

f.2.

0.0

tz

£>

£

J2&

0-0

00

/

/

00

0f?

e.0

a-UnknoM

/0

//>

2i3

t?-0

263

- $

,f

2S3

0.O

2&Z

r

/?

f

2/0

0O

U0

2.

0>

2s

j£0.

<?■<?

t0.0

*flth«

&

/

7

,53

2/.

tf?

/

t

?&

0.0

*7.

21

£>

2,

S3

0.0

^

3

3

/3.0

0.0

/S.0

Total

Sf

<

3 f

fi.f

/?.2

tt?0.

tZZ

f

31

7/3>

2f.0

/00.

2&

/2-

si

an

3/L

'00

/&

•

20

90-0

20.2

/0#

188

TBAl.£ A/2.6 £l/4Lt/fir/0Af

/?f /!(./,_

S/6J/r/A/<lS

f/?*

/?LL

!/£/>£$

4¥ SAW PS <0P /?/fJ£S.T- fLC//?r/C/?6

4±i i/£Me

/*</■?

/f*f

■ /f*f

Evaluation

Numtiei

PttCent

Numbei

Per Cent

Number

Pei Cent

Number

PwCenl

Certain

Doubtful

TaH)

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DooMMI

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Oonbttil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Toti

frBalloon

75 9

t/0

U?

v?

-Xi-

ffi

_■£

*'

19

#0

ff

/0

/A

2A

&.t

^Z

St. 9

£

z

t

j75"

JZ 47

I-Astronomical

/7<?

7^7

StJ?

///

j£j2-.

?/x

./■£

4

' ft

2/.*/

7-7

&*

A

7S

j¥

/7.t

/.9. if 3d

/I

tf

ML

//.cA

376

We-

Mitttaft

/£/

•V/

2Z2.

// 9

~JLL

ifi

7

/

2.

jjL

t-i

Si,

6

- f ?

6

6.5^

aa

6*

,3

f

V-

7.S &Z

ft -7

K'|"l Plumm.

/i

/?

33

'■/

-AJL

t.z

£,

4,

3-6

<?0

St

a

A

A

at?

*V

£f

a

<?

2 00.

#e?

<?<?

ienij

/<?

V

rV

0.7

4J

70

<?.

a

(?

00

A<?

00

A

7

/

<?£>

//

//

ZL

&

V

21

0<?

?■?

S-Cloudi, Oust, etc

3

V

7

A2

A3

as

—&.

&

j2j2.

A#

&A

a

/?,£>

^£

#■£>

£>

c

_ap £>.#

pa

(■rnwifit tib.

/34

o

/*</

tt

OP £!

i

ft

mi

a&

tP-t

r

A

7

**

a&

r-s

/9

1L-

,/t«p

0.0

//.£>

7-Psydaltiial

/7

f

2*

//

~4JL

H

2,

?.

{

34.

s £

ft

/

A

/

//

~J2J>\

//

2.

9

z

/.i.

0.0

' z

MMmiin.

r

33/

o

33/

2/.Z

&£

7/t

f

(?

f

/L7

ao

tt.t

/e?

A

/<?

/£>.?

.iStff/7

f

2*

//

~4JL

H

2,

?.

{

34.

s £

ft

/

A

/

//

~J2J>\

//

2.

9

z

/.i.

0.0

' z

MMmiin.

r

33/

o

33/

2/.Z

&£

7/t

f

(?

f

/L7

ao

tt.t

/e?

A

/<?

/£>.?

.iStff

MX

3/

3/

'L?

?-£>

'//

Mow

¥^

/a

ft

2?

t>-7

s.s

~&

A

/2>

J/. 4

A A

tff\

A

&

</

J>Z

s-i

Yf

J

a

_=£J

A7\

0-0

f-7

Totat

/eft

?d

if/7

707

29.3

fM

j7±

7

££

$u

7?f

{00.

rs.

•/.

f?

SSfVY./

/<?o.

-H-

Z*>-

JfL

s¥.t

jfof

/&Q

#

/f&

/9£T/

/fjTS

Evaluation

Numbef

PftCent

Nurnber

Pet Cent

Hunter

PerCent

Number

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfiil

Tola)

Certain

Doublnil

Total

Cetta'a

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Orwbtrul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Omjuttil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

D-IWIom

/g

£

U>

/IS

/■S"

tff

r

/

i

0-f

t,t

ff./

.■/A

■ f0

Us

//.3

g.9

70.2

1-Ajtnnaical

/S

7

?P

9.6

?2

/#g

_A

2,

//

/9.6

tf-J

?i?

//a

55

/i*

Mg

*Y a 2,

;.Ain;rltl

/,?

Z-

/■f

///

/■<

1H

¥

/

£

27

22,

f0f

/&

/Z$

2?0

/j{0

22^

26. 6.

Kiftlt Ftienoti.

£>

<?

O

$0

- j2 ^ 2 i

(?.r>

/

/

jQJL

2 2

2-2

-&

/<

2*

/y

JJ-

?■'£

t-Biios

<?

<?

0.0

^Mjl

PQ

a.

/

/

0-0.

?2

2Z

6

z

t

&t.

j£2-

<?.t

5-Clixids, Dust. etc.

t?

&

&(?

--£,

(?

£>0

£>.£>

p.o

I

¥

7

AS

0</

0,7

6-lnsutlic. Into.

S3

o

33

2^

U2J2.

*tv

_s

(?

V

2.?

00

£7

^

a

<£</ 0P

&<f

7 Psychotoiiul

_jC

O

4

3.0

OP

?<>

/

/

(?■<?

22.

2.2

X

£

(3

t?2

ar

/■/

8-Untnow

36

ft

2/.6

-£>£-

%(,

rt

<7

37a

0.0

720

22S

22g

22£ 0.0

22.4

Mfttf

3

t>

£■

2.Z

/ <

17

-^L

a

V

£20

0>0

£>0

22

6

ff

2.2

<it

ft

Tot-

ft 2,

/3

/3£

&¥

?.t

JOD.

It.

7

¥*■

WJ,

/£.i

W.

?/3

30/

/&¥

?03

297

/00.

3

<ASL£

J) /If

£I/#L

///I T/0 A/

0/^

^S_LL-

s/<$#r//i/ c

s

^0/* A£t.

ye/hes

3</ S&/}/>£ ^ _£>/3J£e

r

£0a/<£t ma a

f£t{/?fT

All VeAXi

/f<S7 _

j

_ A&/

s

/f<Z9

Evaluation

Nimrber -

Pa Can

Number

Per Carl0/^

^S_LL-

s/<$#r//i/ c

s

^0/* A£t.

ye/hes

3</ S&/}/>£ ^ _£>/3J£e

r

£0a/<£t ma a

f£t{/?fT

All VeAXi

/f<S7 _

j

_ A&/

s

/f<Z9

Evaluation

Nimrber -

Pa Can

Number

Per Carl

liunber

PerCent

Brumber

Percent

Certain

Doibttul

Tonl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Oofjttul

Total

Certain

Doibtfii

Total

Certain

DMltltfUl

Total

Certain

DolrbtHI

Total

CcrtaiTi

Doobtfu

Total

Certain

|_DouMfu£

Total

0-Ballooo

3

3

I

2-0

3

¥0

(?

O

ao

P.Q

A-0

A

f

/

A.A

f/

7/

_^

A

/

.££

0.0

A 2

1-Aitmumical

s

/C

2.0

2 7

/0f

/3./,

O.

(7

a

.&£-.

A<?

OO

a

7,

&

/20

/¥3

/fa

JLa

&7

2-Ai rcratt

£/

Iff

*9

/■/*

/f.0

?3.3

a

. i2J

A0

<9,/?

n,o

s

/

4>

&7

7-f

tf.f

-2c

7

3

7&£

t-z

'/f.'7

Kqfil Phentm.

. 2,

Zj

3

/■3

07

2.0

a

■ i?

J2J2\

no

0,0

A

A.0

<?■#

00

—^\

<p

A

a.0

U2£-

e-Birrb

a.

£,

l?.£P

a#

0<?

a

(7

,A£\

A-0

fr A

0\

V

0.0

(70

J.0

£>

00

X^JS^

00

S-Ciourf j. Oust etc

/

/

00

7

&7

A

A

/30

A<2

ff-A

f?

aa

Ao

aA

A

j2j2_

r-LA&\

A0

Hnsstfic hto.

_ ££j

/0

&f

0.0

U

.0

A

j£&

At>

/?■#

/

a

/

7./

A-A

?>'

?.

_^2. 
A

2-

/2S

/,;£

S7A

7'Piyclvlo(ial

7

£?

7

V2

<?(?

*t

^2

jO£

A.p

0-0

A

00

AA

a A

/

/

(, .2.

e-Unrowin

^ f

V3

29S

r7£?

2? 3

£

C

/Mi

A./?

/(%>/>

3

3

2/.*/

0.0

2/?

4

t-

fZf

^2^

WBher

7

/

»

Yf

07

£5

jp

fl

jSJZ

/7.0

0.0

■ /

A

/

7/

00

2/

-JL.

<?

A

0.0

^2

0.0

Total

97

$0

^7-

ii.0

3^0

/00.

L

^

£

7Af&

v _gJL

/M-

- /A

L4-

4

7/.<A

Zf.t.

700-

Ml.

¥

/J

M&

AS.O/00.

/9AA

/9*/

/4S-2-

Evaluation

Nuntiei

Per Cent-

■ Njunber

Percent

Number

Per Cent

Number

PerCent

Certain

Ooublfui

Total

Certain

□oubttul

Total

Certain

_DoubtMj

Total

Certain

DoubrM

Total

^ertam

Dounrnii 1 Total

Certain

Ooubttul

Total

Certain

Ooobtnil

Total

Certain!

Ooubttul

Total

0< Balloon

/

A

/

7.7

AP

77\

A

7

/

A.0

4Z

«f

/

/!"*

/S

f-f

uDoubrM

Total

^ertam

Dounrnii 1 Total

Certain

Ooubttul

Total

Certain

Ooobtnil

Total

Certain!

Ooubttul

Total

0< Balloon

/

A

/

7.7

AP

77\

A

7

/

A.0

4Z

«f

/

/!"*

/S

f-f

u

1-Astronoiiical

/

fr

/

77

¥£&

s '7?\

A

/

</f?

AP

{?

?

, . jt.

7

zc

i-<

97

S-AlltlJtt

0>0

A A

jS^0.

_s_.

47

>

2!.f

/<?-0

#4

/

X -L2.

37

77-7

29. i,

•70,-?

J-Li(ht Pmnon,

00

#.fl

-&£.

. /2

J?, A

00

00

^tZ

/

3

2.C

7-3

39

4-Bitdj

A

A

0.0

A*

0.0

A

0.0

00

0.0

A>

A0

P.0

0.0

l-Clwds, Dust, etc.

C

.^0

A-<?

0.0

A

£0

.a.o'

00

A

/

/

eo

f-S

7 3

S-lnntlic kilo.

/_

A

/

7.7

A0

,7 7

A,

2

9*

At?

9A

_j£

0>

/

5.1

9-0

£.2

7-Pj)ct»k>pal '

A

j£J2.

<?A

<?.0

.A.

A

A0

0.0

0.0

t.

A

*<

7%

00

rt

a-UnknoMi

3

j?

3

2LL

A0

2Z7

7

7

37-i

0-0

??■?

/r

A

/^

23.9

00

27.9

Klttur

/:.

A

/

7.1

A-0

7-7

/

0_

7

jU

AC

¥■*

-JfL

7

A"

AZ

A3

£,£

Total

-I-

6

/.3

S3?

</A2

/0&

/£>

5-

2/

fo2.

21S

7m

4/£

J/

7?

4&

VA3

/00

189

TTT**"**V "***"*'

''/f^f /rVZ-S'

. E.\/ALVj9tt&/l'

0F

AIL f/6//T/A/tiS

f0>*

*£<.

Y£-#*S

i

£? SM*J*£

#s Usurer

/?&7-£0j{' (?<?

. fa/f^r . . ... .

/)<■<- fa?*!

/*/r

, . /?ff

/<?</?

Emtaatta

Muter

Per Coil

Nueftei

PhCoiI

Number

Percent

frontier

Pet Cent

Certain

DooHtuI

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

;eibui

Doubtful

Tot*

Colin | Doubtful

ToW

;«t*n

Doubtful

Totil

Certain

ootbtiui

TOW

Certain

DoebtM

Total

Certain

DooMM

Total

r> Ballon

-£

•

Mi.

J>-0

^>

_^£.

00

0-0

00

^2.

0.0

0.0

0.0

_j2

0.0

#0

(9.0

t-AsHMMiOl

*g

ft

f S

*'■{

%..£

77.-7

2,

2

/00.1 .0. /004

-JSL

\f

/3

f/2

sot> S/.2.

X

£~

/

Z£.0

&?.£

M*

JAltcflfl

2,

z

V

Xa

2-/

dJL

—^

0.0\

/7.0>\0.0

0.0

0.0

00

-dj2^

0.0

0.0

J-Li(M Phew*.

. .0

(

/

j2jh

/./

/./

-,0

0.0 .0.0

0>-0

.0

0>

0.0

0.0

00

0,0

0(0

0#

I-Binfs

/

/

<&-

1/

/./

. o\

00

0<?

0.0

A£.

00.

&.o

/

■ /

00

/2,f-dj2^

0.0

0.0

J-Li(M Phew*.

. .0

(

/

j2jh

/./

/./

-,0

0.0 .0.0

0>-0

.0

0>

0.0

0.0

00

0,0

0(0

0#

I-Binfs

/

/

<&-

1/

/./

. o\

00

0<?

0.0

A£.

00.

&.o

/

■ /

00

/2,f

/?■£

5-Ctwds, hat, etc.

£>

/

/

00

/./

/./

_ 0.

J&2

£0.

00

.

£,

J2J2^

j£0-

0-4

<0.0

00

04?

6-lnwrrit Mt.

2.

2.

-?./

| 0,0 \

2.1

0J

0.0

00

-J2-.

00

-00-

00

£>

00

#0

00

7-Pifchtorat

<?

0.6

0.A

&0

0:0

. 0*p-

<?.(>

.0

0.0

00

0.6

~JL

__£>

0.0

0-0

0.0

t-lMwoin

f

r

J^L

0-0 f.S

00

a0

ao

_^_

y

/#,$

0. /ZS

~M

££-

00

00

>0ftr

<p

0.0

0C?

0r<

.0 0.0

-I0J2.

0-0

O

_&£.

00

f>.p

j>

0.0

00

0.0

T«W |

&s

36

f¥

l&/

SJ?

/0t>.

2

& '0a i

00

/C0

f

?

u

£0*

£&,£>

SOP,

t

<i

¥

2£0

fc0

/00

/?s-£>

/fs~/

/?*&■

Enliatioa

HntH

PhCsi!

t*U**1

PdCenl

Hinriiei

PdCent

•iaber

Pet Coil

Certain

DuHu

Total

Certain

Doobtlu

Total

Certain

Dmtitnil

Total

Ccrtati

Ooubtrut

Total

:«tain

DeaMful

Total

Certain

OougtW

Total

Certain

Doubdu

Total

Certain

Dabthl Total

0-BHIooa

/

ff

/

00

#0

?A0

AA.

0.0

00

J

J"

47

0.0

•417

l-*itnmiat

. /.

(1

f

&.0

60

*0,o

/

/

f,

40.0

50.0

/00-C

37

ff

^/

sf.X /tl

75.0

Js

I-Aircnh

-JL,

0a

&<?

40

/I

0.0

0.0

00

X

&

/

SJ

SJ

6-2

3>Li|h| Flnoa.

.0.

.64

fit

0!0

-A

0>

jZP

0.0

a<?

_^.

/

/

0.0

U

/£■

t-Birts

a$

!»0

0.0

a

P

0>

03

00

A0

_j£_

'

0.0

00

00

5-Clouds, Oat etc

ad

tf<?

f?0

. a

0.0

&0

00

0\

/

/

0.0

/■<L

/■(■

tllBUlflt. tib.

&£.

0.0

00

a.

jzA

0.0

00

Z

.0

2.

-£/

00

f./

!-PsycBilo|ical

e

0.0

0.0

00

j^2

00

00

00

0.0

A0

" '"

S-UDkmin

^jZ.

&&.

40

00

J>

0.

££.

0.0

00

£■

£■

ft

0-0

ft

Mfter

a

'0

0.0

#0

00

£>

'<40

0.0

0.0

0,tf

0.0

0.0

Total

2

£

<W*

#6

/00.

£

/

&

tao

50.0

m

4$-

&

^L

ZLi.

4*4

/M,

-fAgte #/2f

£t/ALOAr/0/U

0^

J>LL

^i/vr/^s

Pi?*

jtLL

</£**<:'0

0.0

#0

00

£>

'<40

0.0

0.0

0,tf

0.0

0.0

Total

2

£

<W*

#6

/00.

£

/

&

tao

50.0

m

4$-

&

^L

ZLi.

4*4

/M,

-fAgte #/2f

£t/ALOAr/0/U

0^

J>LL

^i/vr/^s

Pi?*

jtLL

</£**<:

4¥ ?»/>/>& 0jcr 0&J?i>T~ *-£A/r/ee/l<9t- 004trCs9l. <?/£ 7*&/9£0/e0fi

flu. </£,*&

•/4V7

/f^S

/0</?

E«lml»(t

ttoabH

PerCeat

Nwter

PtfCent

Wrnber

Per Cat

Niratw

Percent

Certain

MUM

Total

Certain

Oeetnol

Total

Certain

Doubtliil

Total

Certain

DoitbUul

Total

C«Uinj

OooWul

Total

Certain

DounUiil

Total

Cerbin

rjoubtni

Tntal

Certain

Dontthjl

ToW

O-Balloon

At.

<

*f

/g.0

■ *t

2/.i.

<0

j^(2-

00

0.0

~A

/

J

/£2

9-f

2fJ

/

/

SS.3

0-0

533

1-AltMMitll

y

?f

£9

si

ttt

/

/

00

$1

#3

12

/

3lA

60

%</

?,

^

00

/I.3

/3.3

J-Aiiuatt

zZ-

/I

-?/

/0S

/0.f

20.1

£>

10.0

0/?

00

-£JL\

0-0

0.0

-A.

<

,<

£,G

13.3

5??

Hi(U Phoioa.

0_

{

/

£ii2-

ai.

0.&

e>

00

00

00

00\

0-0

00

0\

0./?

0.O

0.0

t-Bints

L.

/,

z

0^.

01,

/.£

.

/?

00

0-0

00

/

/

?f

00

?■/

■ 6\

0.0

0-r?

&o

Klouds, ftm etc.

4

/

JUL

25-

2.g

00

00

00

Q_

0'

0.0.

0.0

0.0

_£j2.

00

0.0

frlrtsutfic. Wb.

/S

(*

M\

00

?■*

/

<2L

J

??J

fl0

313

_J2_

-J2-

0.0

0.D

0.0

_a.

£>.0

3d?

0.0

7-Psirclnto(ical

-J-

/

y.z

0.0

2£

__£_

0.0

4/7

0/0

.

J2JL

po

0.0

0>

01?

S) G>

S-Unknow

fz.

sz

2*

01)

203

£T

u— 0—

0.0

tfr

_X

?,

tit

00

/f.l

0O

00

0.0

MBIB

</

/

4

0(-

S /

2.

2,

J&J.

0.0

/6.Y

/

?./

fl.0

fJ

a

0.0

0.0

0.0

Total

tj(,

4i

frt

fe

2&.L

zee

(/

/

/2s

iU-

£*

/00

/0

/

//

m

f/

rot.

f

- x.

&

5Z3

_<r

/0t>.

/9f0

/fS-/

/<?.f^

-

Eotiatnn

Unto

PerCait

Itunber

PwCent

Irmbtr

Percent

Nmbef

Percent

Certain

DnMul

Total

Certain

Ooublful

Total

Dcrtain

Doubtful

Total

Ceityn

Doubtliil

Total

;«1jtn

DouMfoI

Total

Certain

Doirbthjl

Total

Certain

DoTbikil

Total

Certain

OouWiil

Total

O-Balloon

-Z.

/

t

ML

fjOoublful

Total

Dcrtain

Doubtful

Total

Ceityn

Doubtliil

Total

;«1jtn

DouMfoI

Total

Certain

Doirbthjl

Total

Certain

DoTbikil

Total

Certain

OouWiil

Total

O-Balloon

-Z.

/

t

ML

fj

2£b

P

£

2

2.

m

00

ff-4

/f

J

/*

/?9

S.0

#,?

1-fatnnmital

&

2,

0JL

M-7

/i.y

^

2.

00

ff-&

2U

/P

7

'7

9.9

<r$

fc-8

2-Aircrift

J

O

J

25.0

0-0

2£0

£?

0.0

0-0

-4ft

//

Z*

/1 9

,4*9

*v$

J-Litft Ptwffln.

M.

0,0

00>

0O

-0-Q.

0.O

/

/

0.0

/■*

Ao

t-Bints

i>

i?

00

00

0,0

J>

0J>

fin

0-0

r

{

0.0

/.0

/0

S-Clovth, Out. etc.

/}

&£.

<20

00

4

_-0_

J0-0

00

00

y

4

00

4*

S-0

frKbflic. Wo.

/

/

g?

(20

£?

_g^

2

2U

0.O

2&*

f

i

ff

0t>

fit

7-Pqc*aki|icaI

_^2.

00

0-0

00

a_

.

0.0

0.0

0.O

_j£

¥

jU

0.0

?.0

t-IMmcn

s

Q_

s

Wl

<2-0

2S.0

/

0_

/

*£l

P-0

/tf.f

2/

■?/

tot

0.0

*0-i

Wtner

0!C

0!0

0,0

3

■

0.0

00

00

/

/

2,

/•0

/.0

20

I

' Total

?

3 i /.Z

&JL

2£0

w.

*

2-

^X-

7/-4

2$ '.4

fOO.

JZl

■£t

/0/

tu.

277

f00,

190

jfa/tL£

A/?*?

£*/} L 04 T /£>/!/

a*? .

rfit-

JVtf^//Cfii.

f->>

e All 9

£.£££.

ifY

SS/rf/>£' 0/^ £?&J£~C7~ ^/t/i?

d±<- Jk/t#f_ _ .

79V?

' /ttf

/?4t

Evil nation

NuinJw

PerCent

Nunber

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Nmfee)

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certai

Ooubttul

Total

Ceftain

Doubt (at

Tela!

Cotain

Doubtful

Total

Dertara

Qoubtlul

Total

Certain

DuiMM

Total

Certain

DoaMUl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

J

f

C

7.7

/. 7

S-f

7

/

S3i

#0

?■?!

U2,

~a^

00

00

0.0

00

fi0

1-Astioionial

£f

•/

/t>t

&S

IS-.S

.<tv

2 a

_X

ni

7?-0

te>7

7

f

77

#2.

23.*

W

?

£t

/a'

/f.J *■?</

/«v

J-Airciett

/f

/r?

?>?

70.9

S.f

77*6

. a.

.0..

.0.00

00

00

.0.

7

7

0.0

-£3.

£■?

_jl_

/

sr

g.£~

//

Z0.&.

3-b(ti| Pbenoin.

/

r?

/

0.7.

00. #t

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

00

00

<?

00

00

0.0

*-8irih

(?

/

/

7?,0

Jk&-^

0$

0>.0

/?£>

06

0.0

0.0

0fl0.0

-£3.

£■?

_jl_

/

sr

g.£~

//

Z0.&.

3-b(ti| Pbenoin.

/

r?

/

0.7.

00. #t

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

00

00

<?

00

00

0.0

*-8irih

(?

/

/

7?,0

Jk&-^

0$

0>.0

/?£>

06

0.0

0.0

0fl

0-0

0,0

00

S-CKwdi, Oust, Mt

r?

o

0.0

-£J\

TlO

-

£j£.

0.0>

00

0.0

~7l£.

00

-JL

O-

Mj2~

00

0~0

tlimitlic. hto.

J»

3

/■r

a.o

/■/

-J2-

M.

0.0

00

0>

0.0

,0-.Q

0.O

.. &

£

4-3

(00

¥*

7-Pjrtr»lofictl

2.

2.

/./

*?.a

/■/

_JL.

00

#0

0>0

..0.

80.

0,o

0.(7

a

00

0-0

j2jZ

t-UnkiMMi

4

f*

/a?

0.0-

/&?

_j2_

V 00

4<?

0le?

..1.

7

^s.f

.0,?.

£f

*

£

/0&

0.0

/0.i

S-Ottw

g

f

71

4i

XX

7.*

2

_£_

V 00

00

00

4

V

00

2?.£

2**

0.0

0?0

00

TMJI

if

*3

iff

4X8

?&j.

/#?.

.?

r

HF

/(#& £0

/00.

g

f

^z~

ES

*■?? m

ML

s?

V7

#></

s-f.i

/£&.

#

/?S0

/<?$■/

/9dT2,

Ettlmtioo

Nunber

PerCent

Humbft

Per Cat

*ii*«

PeiCent

Nom bee

Pet Cent

Certain

Doubthil

Total

Certain

Douotful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doabttul

Total

;«taior

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubtUI

Total

CerWii

Doubthi

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

D-Wlwii

o

(?

00

00

/

JZtiL

00

00

?.

3

0-

2.S

?0

fr-0

1-kjmnonicat

f<

f

y

&4j

tft>

fi.s

r

¥

d?

ft-?

sft

2?

/

*sr

?S. 7

£4

¥zz

2'Auoaft

2.

Z

//.*

0.0

tit

,.r.

t

/4s

0-0

/rT?

f3r,

. <£. 2£>

t¥*

?.6

?4./

3-Li(ntPti(nM.

0]

~l

£.0

00

0-0

,

0.0

0-0

0.0

/

QJ\

/

A 9,

00

/.£■

4-Binis

. 0.

0l0>

00

0,0

.0

. 0.

a

0.0

00

00

, <?,

/

/

0.0

/.&

/-Z

5-Ctaats, Dust, etc

.0.

00>

0.0

00

-^2.

0.0

0-0

0.0

G,

—JZ.

00

00>

0.0

(-tasoffic tad. -

0-0

0!0

00

0.0

#<?

00

.. r

__j2J

, /r

6Zl

0.0 f^

^P)fcM0(IC>l

0-0

0-0

00

•

4U2\

0.0

#0

£

Cj

2. ?¥

00^

2.0

frunknom

/

/

£?

\_j£0_

*?

2.

2

2£je\

_&£_

2U

■ f

' -0-\

?

/atf

0.0/0.8

Mtthtf

a

0.0

0.0

00

0>

y££l

0.0

00

. f

7

?

?<(>

AiL

/0$

Total

ul

3

uz-

$u

'/U

/00.

-£

S

-?■

zu.

^.f/

£?

\_j£0_

*?

2.

2

2£je\

_&£_

2U

■ f

' -0-\

?

/atf

0.0/0.8

Mtthtf

a

0.0

0.0

00

0>

y££l

0.0

00

. f

7

?

?<(>

AiL

/0$

Total

ul

3

uz-

$u

'/U

/00.

-£

S

-?■

zu.

^.f

/0O.

43

20

JJ.

r£?4«i

/<%>

fA8L£

4/3/

et/#/-wr/0A/

.0/=

s9LL

S/&rVTVM6S

fa/?

At-t.

</ej/es

#y, 5#AP£

OP &J4J.&&T

0rff£4 s#/}f&s

/III Vz/ies

/?4? - -

/

Jf<4£ _

- /9<f*

Evaluation

Nunbei

Percent

Number

Percent

Nm*er

PaCeril

Nunba

Per Cent

Certain

Omatnil

_ToBjj

Certain

Dcuolhil

Total

Certain

Doubthil

Total

Certain

OouoM

Total

Certain

eoubM

Total

Certain

Dotibtfu!

Total

Certain

iDortltfU

Tetal

Certain

Ooibtnjl

Total

D-Bafleon

S0\

' ft

?s

{#■</

£f

//fi

0>

-&0^

0.0

00

-,&

£

M-

00

f

/

s

/

2.4

7.7

?*■

Msinmojnical

4f

?.f

•?/

tS.f

M^

2/. ?

J

2.

T

&1a

zu

■p.f

£■

3

*

9./

/ft

%■?

.jtj-

y

//

JA0

94

4#*'

2-AJitraH

JV

sr

72.

(f-t

/0.A

22.0

d>

0J0

00

00

/

r

4

4sr

/££

/f.Z

$-

2.

/

//.?

4S

ti-7

3-Li(til Phenui.

-A

4

?

/.?,

/■&

*f

00

00

00

/

/

.00.

4*

4*

..0

0.0

00

00

4-BiidJ -

2.

2-

4

0li

a j,

/■!■■

0>

0>

00

(7.0

0.0

/

/

2.

J£

4£

?.0

Q

0.0\

00

00

S-Clouds, Dusl, etc

S

S

7

/■■?■

a?

2./

00

00

0-0

00

00

00

.0

0.0

00

00

t-lnsiHic. Into.

£*

2f

74.

0.0

ft*

. O

a

00

00

00

4

4

/?.Z

0.0

tf-2

£

-f

/1. 9

0.0

//?

7-P$ycholo|ical

i

i

if

JL0-.

/?

a

00

0-0

0.0

J0

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

00

00

u-Unknowi

0i.

&6

'mi

-j2j2-

20.2

£

2,

2i.i

00

n(.

z

Z

?/

00

ft

~71

g

/90

00

J££-

9-Othei

?

7

/£

fj

~£jL

4$

00

. 00

{20

f.

/,

J0£-

ft

9-'

/

d>

/

-UL

0.0

2-f

Total

Z3f

u

32?

10L

2?-4

/00.

f

2.

-f

?w

2g.&

/00-

/£

f0

Z2,

**S

4=-Z

/00

3?

?

//&

ft&

2/,<f

/<%>.

7?S0 . .

/?$■/ . _ ..

/?S-2*

Evaluahtm

Nuirtei

PerCent

Number

PerCent

Huaber

Per Cent

Numbei

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Boubtful

Total

Certain

DooWtil2/,<f

/<%>.

7?S0 . .

/?$■/ . _ ..

/?S-2*

Evaluahtm

Nuirtei

PerCent

Number

PerCent

Huaber

Per Cent

Numbei

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Boubtful

Total

Certain

DooWtil

Total

Certain

Doubthil

Total

Certain

Dovbtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ocmbitul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

r

2,

9

JO-

H

u*

'}

3

tit

0,0

/U

2/

f/

sf

/0.4

73

t$l

l-Astronomicail

^

—r

■ /

24-

7/

tt,.L

/

J

4

47*

At 4

/ft

20

ft

S3

/0-</

t.$

(7.1

I-Aiiciatl

r

$

(T

£0.

ff-f

Jp-9

^

/

f

&L

J*

727

2t

2Z

¥*

70?

77-6

£?.?

J-Liajit Pheno«.

o

J2&.

00

00

.-0

.. . Q.

0/0

0o

00

^jL

S

7

2t

{£■

?/

4-BHits

0'

o

00

00

00

0.0

0,0

0.0

t

/

2,

0-S

0?

7<?

i-Clouds, Dost, etc.

iP

00

0O

00

~-jSJ

&&\

0-0

0.0

_j£

J

7

£.f

it

*-7

tloHitftt Mo.

&

fO

S

//.?

00

/(■?

2.

2.

r-'

00

Z'

f

.

?

¥-2

00

4-7

7-Pirduloi>cal

A£.

0-0

0.0

a

j20\

00

0.0

i

0>

&

St

00

3/

t-Untnoiai

:JT

f?

jlL

00

tt-f

—A-

—£-\

t

%a\

00

*t?

J4L

¥?

Z?4\

00

22<7

lOtner

. 0_

J

?

&£

44

7'

&

Z

4-L

00

?*

£-

2,

7

2£

7-0

J.i

Total

If

13

&

&f.0

j>/.0

/<?a

.Ih

V

f.t-

f/.f

/ft

t00

/?4

ft

/?Z

m.

sat

72a.

191

m*

■ if^iLif^^i , ^s-^* T - :

7>$#L£-- J/&2> ■G'f-tt- "/> r/ZW

?F

J/-4.

jr//L/isr//v/i<r

/-as a/as

Ssr*£s

rfV sjvssjr a>s- £?*-/£■<! r 5##/?£ ##r .srjr*o

/&i *

( f4* s

/4</7

/?4/f

/?ff

Cvalaatioa

Pel Cent

rnaoai

Per Cent

Noaier

P«Cnt

NiMH

P«Cai

CertaV

naUbl

Total

Certain

Tjarbtful

TDbl

Certain

Ooubttm

Total

Certain

DouMful

Tot*

:«t«in

Doubtful

Tottl

Cortan

DooUDil

T»W

Certain

OoiUM

Total

Ccrtan

DMttfal

ToW

CkBJllw

//

<&

/'

•/

*v

//

/

/

sz

00

S.2

J

r

.4

tf

*{

/tt

.<?

j^Lj

#0

00

1-Aslnnoial

/J/

#/

ttf

'£Z-

/^

*#

/J

/

//

V/.9

32

fe/

2.

^

b

6-S

t*-£

/ft

fZ

24

US

3*0 27-7

*t-7

J-Aircull

7*

5-/

/is

26

7^

/ff*

/

/

£

£2.

tz

£.?j^Lj

#0

00

1-Aslnnoial

/J/

#/

ttf

'£Z-

/^

*#

/J

/

//

V/.9

32

fe/

2.

^

b

6-S

t*-£

/ft

fZ

24

US

3*0 27-7

*t-7

J-Aircull

7*

5-/

/is

26

7^

/ff*

/

/

£

£2.

tz

£.?

_£

^

</ /2.S 00

/2$

2

f

/«•

fjf

f-6

'*9

3-Li(W Poena.

f

?

MA

»v

/■/

„£>.

. -0.

aa

00

00

.A.

. Z

&■*

ao

if

0.0

<?<?

00

4-Bi'ds

£

/

7

».r

*V

0>f

4

00

00

00

a

/

/

00

JT/

3/

/2

a#

<?0

00

S-Cloudi, Oast, etc

S

<s>

^

?.<e

<?<?

0-b

a

00

00

00

i?

0.0

0-0

00

-J2.

0.0

/?#

00

tkmftit Mb.

/09

£>

/Of

ISj.

^

/If

4

o

/

/L-f

00

12-9

7 1

a

_Z.

2/.?

pa

iff

r

f

S4

O-P

X*

7>PsytliBR)ttco]

2

? r

V

OJ-

^ r

at

/

Q

/

S.2

00

*£.

a

0-0

0-/?

00

^JL

0.0

t>-0

0.0

tUakaoaa

/9f

/?•

M

rf?<?

2fy

<£

t>

/f.y

a&

f?f

6

&

/t-1

00

/it

^ju

o

&

6#

0-0

6¥

»OMr

4/f

//

^

tt

/f

4-f

J

J

Sx.

0.0

rr

-JZ

#0

0.0

0.0

_ji

r

£4-

00

?¥

»

<4£

>£*-

**?

ZZl

xt.s

m

H-

!_ ^

**/

ff.*-4.f

/00.

29/

' t

12

7£0

2S.0

/0O.

.££-

&

r¥

tS.g Si Z

/an.

/?SV

/9 s-/

/9£T2.

Enlutw

tarn

Pa Cent

Nunbet

PerCeot

NlMDH

Percent

NnbH

Per Cat

Certan

nam

Total

CMji*

Doabth

TdUl

Eertaiji

CHwbttuI

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DomWul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certaio

Doabtni

Total

Certain

DaiMW

Total

O-Balloon

-4

? f

4,

4X-

i./

ft

.JL

Z-

&

0.0

Si.

JT^

sa

&

6J

£.2

H-f

/S0

1-MMmical

/9

/

23

ti.S

f.r

Zf0

JZ.

6

t$>

:?/*

/(?■?

t&T

5?

22

/<

/09

<{?

&<t

I-Aircnfl

//

/

■'/

tlj.

f?

2tJ

2,

Z

//

16

Si

7 £

f#

99

'ff

/0 3

£0

&3

MitKtPlmK.

/>

'.a

£&.

$<?

00

2,

2,

Zi

<?0

S4

s-

f

/0

0.0

/•0

I-Binh

0.0

00

01?

0.0

0-0

0.0

£

4

/Z

0-0

/.Z

Kloadi, Dust tic

(?

<7

i?J?.-

00

00

.-4.

,?

0.0

0.0

00

$■

£

A0

0.0

/0

'

frliounic. kite.

f

?

/0.6

0.0

/at

jsL

/

i.3

0.0

T*

fl

ff

,£.*

00

(ft

7-Pqrchiloiial

a/?

<?-0

0.0

/

/

/.?

00

/.g

-t f-

&00

.-4.

,?

0.0

0.0

00

$■

£

A0

0.0

/0

'

frliounic. kite.

f

?

/0.6

0.0

/at

jsL

/

i.3

0.0

T*

fl

ff

,£.*

00

(ft

7-Pqrchiloiial

a/?

<?-0

0.0

/

/

/.?

00

/.g

-t f-

&

2,

#0

#1/

*t

t-UnkMMi

zs

2f

27. f

00

2U

J2.

-

'f

p/.S

0.0

ste

/S/

///

21.9

0-0

2i.f

Mtbw

3

2s

f

si

*</

*?

$■

9/

0.0

f>'

?*

f

jy

*/

/*

6?

TtM

-U.

{£■

?f

pi

tf.g

/0O,

s

/*

?f

tl.t

/f-2

My

m

(<><

07

7*4

2/.t>

/00.<

192

f

■■■

[<■ <■■

i

i

,

W/V

4/33

Z^tsAl &A/-/&A/

<&■

/SA//r .

r/<s,#r/#6S

^£>je

/9l£

r/r/rjps

£</ S#/>P£ 0f CjSJ£-CT &l.i-/f>r'/0s9£

/}l-L </£/>*!

79V7

7fff

/9V?

Evenralion

Nueiber

Per Cent

Numbei

per Cent

HllRlbW

Pel Cent

Nuflnber

Pa Cent

Certain

Deubtfui

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Attain

Ooubltul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Swtain

Doubtful

Tola!

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Catain

DHbthi!

ToW

0- Balloon

/Z7

ff

1/t

40.7

f*

/#&

&

?

36~

00

u

4_

$

/*

/<?/

//■£

2/7

_£J

2,

<f

3c.

/■t

fY

t l-ktlnimtal

/$o

/ZZ.

1ft

tz.t.

/0.3

**•?

.9

/

/3

/f.r

?7

Z$.o

jk.

/£

z?

/%,<¥

*'■?

??,/

9 .41

^4

£a\

3f.4

46.V

J-Aircraf!

/&

/ft

2id

//■f

ff

2/?

../

/

2,

t4a

'•?

33

t,

i,

£t.

0>0

£■?

../.

£~

'■/£. £Z

¥?

/o.r

3-Lifht Pinion.

/<>

/s

j/

/3

/■3

7.6

.Z

2,

££.

00

fg

uL

3

J

00

4s

*r

. ^

^0

<?.<?

00

a?

i-Bitft

f

</

/z

07

£3

70

^_a_

<?

<?.<?

00

00

/

/

<?0

/f

/S

2,

2,

/,*

aa

a

VCIovrb, Dust etc.

J

3

03L

JL*

as

a

j?o

00

0.0

o

00

<?<?

00

_^_

£>

0(0

0.0

00

6-tmullit Mi.

/'/

<0

//•

?3

-££.

?.?

6

/<

//■s

0.0

//.£

4

i

?7

tf#

£7

/f

/f

/?0

00

ft?

T-Rtirthohifial

/?

f

23

/3

07

20

z

t.

/

SJ

3.3

*A

/.

/

^L

00

/■?

2.

I?

2.

fit?

00

/■?

t-untnoi

220

0>

220

ff£

00

7?*

z

/

/S4L

<?<?

/*■</

7

/

/&./

00,

/0/

/6

&

/i

/¥-J

#0

/V3

9-Otl»f

JS

f

¥z

z±

&7

3.6

JL.

/2

2?-/

e?.000

/■?

2.

I?

2.

fit?

00

/■?

t-untnoi

220

0>

220

ff£

00

7?*

z

/

/S4L

<?<?

/*■</

7

/

/&./

00,

/0/

/6

&

/i

/¥-J

#0

/V3

9-Otl»f

JS

f

¥z

z±

&7

3.6

JL.

/2

2?-/

e?.0

2tl

2,

/

J

££-

/■?

4.?

3

£>

3

t-f

00

H-7

ToM

gts

J&?

//fo

(,9-2

30$ /OO.

j£l

r

±2.

MS/3S

/a£>.

JlLL

2$

6?

££.y</(?.6. /<%>.

62

£0

//t

&■■?

w&

/0&

/?f0

/<?s-/ .

/?<?£,

Evaluation

HuBilwr

PerCent

Number

Pet Cent

Nunbei

Per Cent

HonbH

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Oovbtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;«tain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubHul

ToW

Certain

Douutfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tola)

O-Billooo

,i?

/

//

/g.t

f.t

/</&

JL

/

S~

/0.g

2.7

/^

Jl

77

Jl# //■£

f.2

20. r

I'ABraoMliCil

/O

¥

rf

/I1

?■/

6?

_£^

£.

J0

2LL

s4

no

M.

. s4 f*t

/2,L

t-¥

/$.?

?-Aitti»n

M-

2,

/3

111,

?■*

/&■#

-jL

/

f

JSJ\

2 7

/tf

/IS

/of

ZZ2.

/£i/ /3-a

2i-9

Mi jtil ptenon.

0,

0J>

&<?

/20

,..(?.

/

/

^2

f-7

?7

j£

//

25

//

/ *

30

4-Sinh

- ..s

a

00

0.0

00

.J.

/

/

to

2.7

?/

J.

2

f

0.7

02

or

S-Clmads, Otnt, tie.

a

00

00

00

-JL

r?

/>

Ml

/20>

00

.0.

3

3

0.0

0-V

*?

i-lnsuttiz. Wo.

/5

/s

/9.0

fi0

/$.£>

.d.

s

fyj

#0

/0j

M.

.,.&

£/

?3

00

73

(-Piytloloiical

2,

Z.

2.f

00

?*?

a

/

/

t?0>

2-7

27

_X

£

/3

/■#

06

/.0

8-UnlwoMi

. 2D

2o

K3

(?.a

2S3

JQ

f<9

2Z0

0.0

2?.0

121

■/sf

/??

00

'??

tOthw

2

2

</

2Z

*r

SO

a.

_Oj3.

0>0

0.0

_tL

£

20

/■(

06

i.y

Total

7<?

—2-

-&-

M.&

ttf

m

JO

—Z-

V&-

IU

/$?

/0O.

&L

24,6.

/<//

6X-9

//<i

/OO.

rjf^^ A/34

£jf/)i- L/A.T//2A* _

0F

^0/l//21

S/&M3T//I/6.S

fOt?

/in.

_ yrajes

#v i*^ & /?gjeAr

tydxgr A/f/j #/je£*#rr

.. /#*.£ .-fetfSj'

/?f?

/?</f

test

Evaluation

Number

Per Cent

Nurnber

PetCnt

Number

Per Cent

Numbei

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dooblful.. /#*.£ .-fetfSj'

/?f?

/?</f

test

Evaluation

Number

Per Cent

Nurnber

PetCnt

Number

Per Cent

Numbei

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dooblful

Total

Certain

Oniblful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doukttjl

Total

OBallooa

3

2,

if

2-4

U

¥0

_JL

00>

r20

0.0

00

00

__L

/

-ZZ-

0-/>

7/

t'Aslranomical

3

1

//

!.</

*■</

g$

o

a

00

<V0

00

2,

2,

0.0

//fZ

/£2

/

/

J2j2.

7/

7/

?-Aircr*ft

2/

2,3

W

JM\

tt-4

3&t

■o

£0.

00

0.0

-JL

/

i

&</

9-/

t#4

■ Z

/

3

/</.3

/■/

2/.jf

3'LiatLl Phonon. 
4-Biidt

i

3

At

fit

W

O

£H.

0,(0

00

_£.

0.O

00

0.0

f

0,0

0.0

o.o

00

fi.O

p.o

^_JL

OjZ.

<0.0

00

O

j2£.

00

00

O

a

0,0

00

0/?

rj-Cloorls, Dust, elc'

/

/

00

0$

03

SL

o

^0_

00

0.0

-J2j

0>

00

0-0

00

00

0.0

00.

6-inaiffic. mis.

/<?

/o

3.0

00

u

0.0

^Mj0.

00

/

^_0\

/

t/

0.0

f

Z

Z.

/<jtl

00

/f.3

7-Psycboloiiol

/'

a

7

<>■/,

00

£.£

Q

0.0

00

00

00

00

00

/.

■

/

■7-7-

0.0

7/

MliHuwim

■ 37

J7

29-i-

0.0

2f.6

&

&

/£#&.

00

/Ot>0

/,

/

?■/

00

t-7

6

&

</2?

0.0

¥2-?

S-Ottici

£.

f

7

4f

0.?

4.1

_0

(?

_0\g_

00

00

1

(

XL.

ao

?■'

__£__

d?

00

00

0.0

Total

If.

3i

/2S

ILL

iff

m

i

6.

/O0.0

00

/00.

JL

3

/'

72-7

07.3

/0a

/2

2

/¥

i£JL

/4.3

/ex>.

/fj-0

/?s/

/?trz

Evaluation

Nunber

Pa Call

Nnbei

Per Cent

Nunber

Per Cent

Hunbei

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain

Ooubtfu!

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;«lain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Balloon

/

0.0

lt-0

JL_

/

/

aa\

S3

£.3

/

/

2,

/.s-

/.£

3.0

l-Astrononical

/

2,

3

JUL

no.

33.3

jZjZ.

0.0

0.0

^

f

£

ZO

4*

z*

2-Airuafl

0.0

0.0

0O

S

¥

f

2M.

2/./

#</

— £

'7

2/,

/U

2S?

??.</

>Li|ht Pnenon.

0_

00/.s-

/.£

3.0

l-Astrononical

/

2,

3

JUL

no.

33.3

jZjZ.

0.0

0.0

^

f

£

ZO

4*

z*

2-Airuafl

0.0

0.0

0O

S

¥

f

2M.

2/./

#</

— £

'7

2/,

/U

2S?

??.</

>Li|ht Pnenon.

0_

00

0-0

0.0

0-

o

££.

<?■#

0.0

/

3

30

/■$-

^

4-Birdi

-QJL

a//

O.0

-JL

O

vOjL

00

/?■/>

0>

0.0

0>fP

0-0

j-Clowls. Dint, etc

O

OJL

0.0

O0

-j2-

0j2-

00

#0

/

/

0.0

/■^

/.£

frfrmffie. bin).

/

—2-\

t

ft t

00

ff./

2

t

/2jL

$0

ao. e

JL

V

/*/

0-0

6/

7-Piy<nalo|iial

o

00

00

0\0

320.

0.0

00

. (,

6

9./

0.0

?■/

„ .

t-Watm

3

J

ft*

00

??.J

' t<

6

^3/./,

/?J>

3Ai

/s

/£

22-7

00

22.7

»Hwr

■ /

t-

//■/

00

//•/

/

' /

0-.S

0-0

S?

.3

/

dlL

/■*

f0

ToW

./

A.

f

71X

22.Z

/oa

^

*

'J-

tU-

2L.3

w

4A

zY

u

63(,

3£.<j7

700

193

^^i-T j4 /SSL

£Ma //^r^fl /

0F

//jtj/r

s/t,#r/'Ajr,<

F/91?

S)i-J.

</^/?£S

yti/ s*J**r OJ? fi&JeCT. ftfr&s?£. 0* />.!?/*>£ r

Ail

t^V/fiT

/9S7

■ /9SX

/9</t

Evaluation

Number

PerCenl

Number

PetCenl

hi/irtat

Pel C«t

Ngmbet

Pet Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certan

DuibAil

Total

Certain

DOUbttu

Total

Certain

Daubtlul

Total

"citan

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OoutrUul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-BJllMKI

2.

<?

£

4-&

0-0

?.i

00

0f?

0-0

t?0

0.0

<?0

* l-AsttDmnical

■7?

2/

<^^

$2?

276

$/.£

-iL

/

i

i/k&.&JZ*

$00

/

$-

i.

/£?

?/.</

$$.7

jMUiciatt

2.

2-

</

2.&

26

<.Z

■ il.

.

0,0.00

0.0

0.0

00

_^P

J-LirM Phewm.

£

/

/

00

/■*

/■S

V

. p

^

J2JL

0,0

00

—£-,

0,0

0.0

00

(-Binb

o

/

y

00.

0*

/■3

i

r^>

&0

00

0.0

_£.

/

■ f

00

/// /¥.?

S-Clowh, Dint, tic

tf?

^

0,0.

00

£0-

V 
ft

0.0

00

00

&2-

0(2

/V./P

turjutfic Into.

/

<?

/

/?

0.0

/.S

-A

\J

0.0

0-0

00

j20~

0.0

0.0

7-Psrdnhificll

t?

f?

o

0:0.

0.0

00

^

0.0

00

00

&£-

0.0

00

UMrwrti

5~

...(?_

r

0.6

00

66

z

2

20.0

0.0

20.0

_p.o

0.0

-&£L

Miner

. J?-A

\J

0.0

0-0

00

j20~

0.0

0.0

7-Psrdnhificll

t?

f?

o

0:0.

0.0

00

^

0.0

00

00

&£-

0.0

00

UMrwrti

5~

...(?_

r

0.6

00

66

z

2

20.0

0.0

20.0

_p.o

0.0

-&£L

Miner

. J?

j>

22JZ

0.0

fro

00

rja

0.0

0.0

-OJZ.

00

Total

-JL

2>r

#

Aft

Hf

m

6

¥

/0

600

V0.0

/M

/'_ 6

r

/</?

$£7 /0O,

/9s0

/?*/

/9*2^

Evaluation

Numbei

Pei Cent

Nusnbef

Pet Cent

No iter

PeiCent

rtmta

PeiCent

Certain

Owbtful

Total

Certain

Douoilu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:erbin

Dnbtful

TotaP

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtfn

Total

Certain

Dm MM

ToM

O-Ballcnn

■ /

/

&S

0,0

£00

££.

0-0

0-0

_Z_

/

/.*

0-0

//

1-AstronWcal

/

/

&A

0S>

606

/

/

z

$}.&.

000

/004

sV

//

</f

6/ J

20,0

ns

Z'Aircraft

O

,?

0.0

00

0.0

/O.0

0.0

00

IL

- z

</

16,

36

7.Z

3-Lijht Pheami.

0.0

0ft

0-0

0.0

00

0,0

/

/

00

/,?

/■$

4-Bints

$0

0-0

0.0

0.0.

0,0

00

/!>

JZ&-

#0

£0

5-Cloudt, Dull etc.

0.0

0.0

00

j2_

0.0.

0.0

0.0

0.

00

(9.0

0t0

frlnaHic Wo.

O

0.0

0.0

00

\4J2.

0.0

00

/

f

/.g

A0>

At

7-PsrclBletical

J10A

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

'00

00

0.0

0.0

tvilotonin

£j2.

0<?

00

O

£0-

0,0

S

s

£</

0.0

*Y

Mfto

.&&

0-0

00

a

J24.

0-0

0.0

0>

0.0

0.0

00

Totat

2.

&

/mo

0.0

f0O.

/

/

£.

sao

$0

too.

jiL

/•

Z£

M.

f$6

/00

T/fSi.f rf/.ti.

Fl/A£.l/*r/0A/

0F

a/a/st s/6*7-/n/tss

F£>*

S9£.{-

ve^jeji

<SV 3-///>*>& &/= ^sj^e.r- ^£/i/r/<?0i.#je. C0/i//cj!(- &£. T~£#£jP/e&/>

At-c S/eagr

/9</7

/ft/?

/?</?

Ertiualitm

Ngnber

Percent.

Ntimber

Percent

Nuiter

Per Ceet

Nomber

Per Cent

Certain

Dwbthil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tola!

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttd

Tola)

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoUbttol

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-aatloon

06.

y

J0

/?C>

tf

2/f

_£_

<?

j££

r^r^

0-0

£

2,

2£0

00

sz'e

-X-

5"

ss.c

00

$*,£

I'AstionniicalDoubtful

Total

Certain

DoUbttol

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-aatloon

06.

y

J0

/?C>

tf

2/f

_£_

<?

j££

r^r^

0-0

£

2,

2£0

00

sz'e

-X-

5"

ss.c

00

$*,£

I'Astionniical

/.J

/?

Si

f-S

?■<

/ft)

'

/

/

0.0

/K/

/(■?

-X.

3

*?■?

0.0

*?*

2

2,

00

2? 2,

0fZ

2-Airoatt

f&

'J

*?

#7

u

2/. 2

O

0.0

0-0

0.0

_J1_

0.0

0.0

rt<0

2

2

£j2-

?? 2

22-2

3-Liiht Phenw.

a

/

/

0.0

0?

07

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

00

00

0.0

0.0

0.O

(Birds

c

/

^

07

0.7

/Y

0.0

0.0

00

-J-.

(

a?

0O

/2.$

(?

0.0

00>

0,0

5-Cloiids. Durt. etc.

J0

fr

2

j2j2_

/■ <

f.6

00

00

00

O

.0JL

0.0

0-0

0.0

0.0

ao

WnaiMic lo<b.

/J

fl

M.

0./?

t*

2

2

2J3

0.0

tZ3

_£_>

&0.A

0.0

0-0

j2^.

Aa>

00

7-Pqcholojicjl

V

s

±t

00

2f

0.0

0'0

I e__

&0~

0.0

0.0

0£-

0.0

0.0

•.UnblMri

2i

£>

20

tf.o

00

/f.0

1.

2,

m

0.0

US

Z7\

/

/££.

0.0

/f.€

0.0

00

0-0

Mttiel

/

4

£2-

0-7

?■?

/

/

%-7

00

/0f

/

f

/2£_

0.0

/2£

0.0

0.0

0.0

Total

/0t

3£

iSX

&£

#£S

/0a

f

.. /

6

&s

/L7-

/00.

/f

■

t

/O2.0

00

/#&

6~

*/

?

f£T.i,

Wv

/oa

pzzz

/9£0>

/?sv

/2^2

Numbei

Pel Colt

Nunber

Per Cent

Number

Pet Cent

HuntKI

PeiCent

\ Evaluation

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToUl

certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

j ft- Balloon

£,

/

3

ji±

ff

2?S

z

2.

#3

0",0

/Z/

/^

■J

/g

/£.?

J./

/?&

[-Astronomical

2

2

A0.

/ft

/f.£

/

/

0.0

/*</

/i-7

/0

/

(7

/0.S

f.2.

/U

Z Aircraft

J

V

ML

0-0

2fJ

-&L

rt.0

0,e>

./*

^

2¥

/3<7

'//.3

2</-7

J-LifJH Phtrnn.

00

00

00

M0-

0.0

0.0

/

/

0,0

/.0

4-Bifds

O

£0

00

00

—tL

■0

<?

A0L

00

00

/

/

0.0

/■0

A0

S-Clouos, Dust, etc.

(?

00

<?-0

0.0

AJL

00

00

£■

2

&£-*

£./

2/

frlrmilfic. Into.

/

/

9.1

0.0

P

2

2

2LZ

00

Uf

/

f

g.l

0-0

$■2—tL

■0

<?

A0L

00

00

/

/

0.0

/■0

A0

S-Clouos, Dust, etc.

(?

00

<?-0

0.0

AJL

00

00

£■

2

&£-*

£./

2/

frlrmilfic. Into.

/

/

9.1

0.0

P

2

2

2LZ

00

Uf

/

f

g.l

0-0

$■2

7-p5ycroloiicaJ

00

0-0

0-0

O

.

J0J2-

0.0

0.0

f

40-

0.0

*v

a-IMuoiw

£.

2,

/It

00

f&Z

t

/

\&JL

0.0

*7

20

2o

20.6

0.0

20i

»Other

_i2-

0>

00

0.0

(to

0J2-

0.0

0-0

/

/

/

/■0

/■0

2.0

V

t

u_E5i

&

2

//

LZl

2?.S

00.

_£_

/

4

l&L

/££

w

l^\

za

fr

HI,

st-s

/PC.

~"I '

194

^mm

pnpvp

i

: #

0r u,v/r S/

tZL&lT-t'VGS- .

/we

S?£J. . i

<£/>#?.. .

/?£*/>*£

An ii/tjd _

/W7

/&/*

/?S?

Evaluation

Number

Per Cent.

NumSer

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Naaitwi

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DeUUhl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Attain

Ooubthi

Total

Certain

Oditbttiil

Total

Certain

OrnKkfl

TOW

Certain

Ooubtlul

Total

0-Bailooo

2

2

I

22 2.2

*V

./

/

fap

00

s&e

00

0.0?

0-6

-40

00

0.0

1'AitiMiOfflital

-A

$7

77?

&.f

/7A

*?Y

/

/

fao

0.0

£0.0

7

S

/0,

//- s ///

£2./,

2.

/0

/£

S0&

0~2..£.

i-T/

2-Aticiatt ,

_/_Z

—L£-

tfr*

/22

7-S

/?•?

r>

0.0

0.0

0.A

/

/

0.0

6,3

4-3-

Z

/

3

/0.5

5. 2

/*j

1-LiiM Phenoia.

/

/

07

0.0

<#/

0.0

0.0

<?■<?

.0

AjZ.

0.0

0-0

J2i0L,

00

00

4-Birdl

/

/

0.0

0.7

^

0.'0

j0J>. .

?.(>

-J?.

G>

0.0

0.0

0.0

a_

r?

J..0

0.0

00

KloorJj,DuJt,«tc.

.0

/?

0.0.

00

<?<?

■ ff \

as

£>*&.

.00..

0.0

a.

£j2~

0.0

0.0

—A.

£>

0~.0

0.0

0.0

OlnMRic. Ma.

2

J

2t

0.0

/*

.0.

<?

0.0

00

00

—2-\

£0.

0.0

0.0

Z.

<>

z

&£.

0.0

/0J

T^Piyrjio bejel

2.

(?

7,

/.$■ a a

/^

a

o

(?

00

0.0

a.e

cr

<?

&0~

0.0

0-0

o

ZM

0-0

0.0

Minium

IS

ff

//■#

0.0

^

<?

00

0.0

<?<?

/

/

££-

0.0

&.J

z.

2.

/0.4T

00 /0.4

Mm*!

4

,<

/ f

<74_

*7

//

o

0.0

0.0

a.0

s

y

<9.n

2^.0 2*0

o

(?

00

0.0

00

Total

t*

472

/■«

At*

jaa

r^

2

<P^

<?

00

0.0

<?<?

/

/

££-

0.0

&.J

z.

2.

/0.4T

00 /0.4

Mm*!

4

,<

/ f

<74_

*7

//

o

0.0

0.0

a.0

s

y

<9.n

2^.0 2*0

o

(?

00

0.0

00

Total

t*

472

/■«

At*

jaa

r^

2

<P

2,

/mo

00 (00.

g

2

/a

£0.0 £0.0 (00.

jP

//

4L.

&/

£7?

/00.

./9SO

/9SS

/9SZ

Eralgitioi

Number

Pet Cent

Numbtt

P«(Cenl

Nurtrtr

Pel Cent

HUBbH

P« Cent

Certain

OolibHut

Total

Certain

Doubtta

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ctmin

DoubtM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

Ooubttu

Total

Certain

Oaibtnil

Total

D-SOIoaii

0.0

00

0.0

. 0.

0.0

0.0

00

^

s

£

L£.

,f/

U

1-Attnmiical

9

s

ft-

600

20.0

f0.D

/

/

,£

20.0

ffi-P

00

2£\

7

ff

J2f

ff

?/.f

?-Aiicnft

2-

&

/f.S

0.0

/f-3

/?

/?

/

200

0.0

20.0

/Z

$

?/?

/sl

/0./

26.3

3-Li(hl PlwaM.

0.0

0.0

00

0_

<?

0.0

00

00

. /

/

/.3

00

/?

4-Biids

P

0.0

0-0

0,0

$0

GO

0.0

. /?

/

/

0.0

/■2

/.2

S-CtowU, Out. ete.

0.0

0.0

0.0

.

0.0

n0

0,0

—JL

0,0

00

00

frhmlTic. bib.

A0

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

no

/

/

A3

0:0

/.S

7Pi(i*ilo|icat

O

04.

0.0

#0

0.0

{?■$

0-0

2.

a

z.

2*.

0.0

zs

S'Unhnun

/

/

£.7

#0

*'/

z.

£

#0.0

0(0

</0.0

9

&

f

M.

00

//¥

MtllM

0.0

0.0

00

#0

0-0

00

_. &__

/

7

\?0

/.s

St

Total

tz

3

/*

foe

tyP

/00.

jL

/

£■

%}0

€00

(00.

Ld

20

ff

7</7

9£3

/00.

r*g££ /f/Jf

£t/#4.t//4r/0/V

0f

iM//r

<r/&/¥r//VeiS

s<ae JtA

. </£■#/??

. s<c

S#/t/>&

<&sr jptf^ser

0r*(£-£, <sw&s

All Ve:/)£!.

/ft/7 \

/9V?

/<?479

Evalultioo

Nmba

PetCeol

NuDber

?«Cnt

Number

PaCeit

Nunbef

P«C<nt

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

0«*nul

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tutsi

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

Douutfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-BHIoon

S2,

/■f

4f

/f.0\

3T£

/ft

...«2

JJ2.

0.0

00

_2\

z.

/jrj

00

/f.3

./

/

2

JrV

Jff

ri

MstionMiial

2f

V

*P

/#.?

B-0

fZf

/

2

,?Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-BHIoon

S2,

/■f

4f

/f.0\

3T£

/ft

...«2

JJ2.

0.0

00

_2\

z.

/jrj

00

/f.3

./

/

2

JrV

Jff

ri

MstionMiial

2f

V

*P

/#.?

B-0

fZf

/

2

,?

M&.

?0-0

60.0

_/

/

£■?

00

-#/

/.

s

f

2?./

//.* 34 L

I-Aiicratt

3/

2,f

A>0

A7

/0.9

&.L

p

0.0

0.0

0.0

/

? t

s

££~

///

200

2

2

ff

//.€

77

/ft

J-Li|ht Ptaca.

4

jr

7

/.s~

ff

2.6

a

&£.

0-0

0:0

__£.

00

00

00

0]

0.0

JUL

0>0

t-Bids.

2*

2.

</

0.Z

0.g

/*

&&.

0.0

0.0

/

/

a.

6.7

6-7

/?9

0.0

0.0

00

S-Cloods, Oast. etc.

/

/

2,

a<?

0f

0.2

0.0

00

QO

0.0

0.0

00

__£_

■0

0.0

0.0

00

(-nuaffic. Ms.

2/

Z(

£0

00

f.0

rt

0.0

0-0

00

J

s

20.0

0.0

2&o

^L

</

&f

(?,0~

/£?

T-Psycholoitcal

6

C

e.3

06>

2.Z

JW

0.0

p.o

d>

0.0

0.0

0.0

_^£_

0.0

0.O

rz<0

O'tMnom

£5

&

^f

20. 1

00

Zft7

2

'0

2

</0.0

00

</P-0

2.

f-

///

0.0

/f.-3

-£_

s:

m

00

/f.t

Mttlef

9

&

ff

*£>

23

sr.3

A0

00

00

&

2,

ao

/ff

/f.JS

/

f

-J2

0.0

?J

Total

m

X-7.

Zi>L

7/./

2tt

/0O.

S

£

*r

6&0

#0-0

(00.

-JJZ

£

/f

a-;

?3.3

/0O.

20

6

Z6

ZL±

22./

/0Q.

■■;'}

-is

. /?so ,

/?5-/

/?££

Evaluation

Ma

PbCbiI

Nunba

Percent

Nuuber

PeiCent

Number

PerCent

Certain

Doobtftl

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doustful

Total

:eri«a

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DooMfu!

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

DoubtM

To**

0-BallOHi

&

/

f

/tz

20

m

J

2

/#>

0.0

tfs

Z0

/J

?2

/20

72

/r-t

l-Astnnwiat

2

f

4

9./

f./

/22

/

2

V

4Z.

f¥*

%•'

J?-.

/0

2/

/0.2

A0

/(fZ

WifOjft

7

S

(0

2/2

f-f

202

</

/

*

/f.0

ff

£t.t

/A

2/

fr

-llA

/2.7

27-3

3-Lietrt Phono*. .

O

0.0

0.0

00

A0

0.0

00

*/

2

' 7

£JL

/■$

42

4-Binb

O

00

00

00

, 0.

0,0

0.0

00

/

2

J2A.

0( t

A2,

S-Cloirts, Dust, etc

0.0

0-0

00

<?

0\0\

00

0>0

/

/

2

ALiL.

0A

/■Z

tVtaiflit tab.

2

S

iv

0.0

ff

2,£JL

/■$

42

4-Binb

O

00

00

00

, 0.

0,0

0.0

00

/

2

J2A.

0( t

A2,

S-Cloirts, Dust, etc

0.0

0-0

00

<?

0\0\

00

0>0

/

/

2

ALiL.

0A

/■Z

tVtaiflit tab.

2

S

iv

0.0

ff

2,

2,

frs\

0.0

?*

2

?

*.</

00

*</

J-PJldeloiieal

a

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

0,0

0.0

f 
i.

A

J.A

0.0

2A

Hmmm

f

*r

/£2

00

(€.2

f

S

222

0.0

22J

2£

a.

JA

217

0>0

2/-7

MMtm

2,

4*

0.0

A-f

i-f

,2.

0-

&

is-

00

t£

_SL

2.

/

2.0

/Z

4*

-

Total

2</

f

22

727

273

/00

4Z-

s

*t

if.0.

tt,0

/00

ff*

*/

/£&

0- *

20f

/H0.

195

■

ntate 4/ff ^i69£itAr/£ji/

at

//A//r

f//i&r//i/& x

/T04>

ft/

V£s?£-S

/?i/ St/***: a* /?&J££7- ■?#*/>£ /far sr/*Te*>

Aa. Yfa#s

ff</7

_//f7 „ _

/9V9

EwluatM

Number

Percent

Hunter

Percent

Nimter

PnCent

Noorbftf

Pet Cent

CHtan

Dcmbtful

Total

Certain

DoiiMrol

Total

Certain

OoubtM

ToW

Certain

OoattJul

Total

Xtain

Douttlul

Total

Certain

Doubthl

Total

Cntaiii

OouUM

Total

Certain

OOMWftl

Total

0- Billow

J£-

f/

f 3

£■.£

6/

//■7

/

/

X?

00

3$

J

2.

IT

/if

//

m

-&£.

0.0

00

(-■■ — — - 
l-Attmmial

/0J

*/7

wx

/d2

z*

2X?

X

/

t

30.8 ?f

*#

/

3

V

sh-

/2?

a- 7

//.

//>

ft

0?

f?7

/.£?

J-Aircreft

AS

fi>

'03

r0./

6.4

/LS

/

/

2

3? -?-S

z&

3

3

af-

00

/2.S

-JL

/

s

£L

Z0

MZ

Hi(trt PlwnoiL

<?

9

.id.

at?

/</

0.0

f?,0

(70

Z

&

ts

0.0

f.3

0.

00

0.0

0.0

4-BirrJj

^

/

j

as

az

a&

00

0.0

#0

■ a

/

/

0.0

4*

¥*■

0.0

0.0

0.2

S-ClwdJ. fast, etc.

2.

£>

2

/23

&<?

a*

.

a

J>£.

00

00

o

d?

00

<?0

0<?

00

0.0

po

rj-lnsifftc. Into.

/0 2

i>

&**

/i.3

0.0

/£J

4~

f

/Sj

<?<?

'*?

-1.

7

2f.t

00

2f2

L

£

/22

0?

/t-t

7Pvrth)taiia(

f

(

3

3

01

0S

/

/

*g

00

*$

a

0.0

00

0.0

JL.

(?

0.0

0.0

0O

B-UnkMvn

/1 9

' J f

22 i

00

223

<*

t

2t.f

<?o

2?(

z

2.

?.?

00

i?

f

?

%Z

0L0

u

f-aoip

3*

/

ft-

5T<i

/./

4-?

s

f

//■*\

00

//■£

00

00

00

I0.0

JL.

(?

0.0

0.0

0O

B-UnkMvn

/1 9

' J f

22 i

00

223

<*

t

2t.f

<?o

2?(

z

2.

?.?

00

i?

f

?

%Z

0L0

u

f-aoip

3*

/

ft-

5T<i

/./

4-?

s

f

//■*\

00

//■£

00

00

00

I

z

¥/

00

4</

Tttil

4t*

/3</

&zy

7?S

2/. 6

/co

g£

2,

24

f?3

?■?

'M

/#

6

*/;

?£.o

2SO

32,

ff

ST

64?

?f/7 /#2

i

/??a

,9-S-/

SffZ'

Evaluation

nvmber

Percent'

Number

Per Cent

fata

PerCeat

. Neater

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Tobl

Certain

DwbHiil

Total

Certain

Ooobtful

ToW

Certain

QniMnJ

Total

Certain

Oouottul

Total

Certain

Dwaotful

Total

Certain

Ooulirh

Total

Certain

DraiHM

Total

0-BalloM

2-

&

/

J.?

ft

6-6

/

/

04

£/

2/

£9

32

02

£.9

??

tf$

1-Astronmical

a

/

22

3ff.0

4-7

% 7

/0

A

ti

UZ

/Z.f

He

</3

/7

6*

//.6

Jtl.

/£<.

2-Atrcnft

?

/<

/3

//.?

/0.0

2/7

2

2,

V

#3

43

U

V/.

30

74

//.0

f.t.

tf.2.

3-L«(M Pknort.

00

00

<?p

2,

t

¥.3

00

4(3

5-

■5"

/2

00 AZ

♦-Birds

0.0

0(?

00

0.0

0>.l0

0.0>

2,

o

-*

0.S

00

0*

5-Cloodi, Oust etc

00

0/?

00

a

0.0

0.0

<?.0

2,

&

0.£

0.0

0S

frlrmirlic Info.

A

i>

see

{10

/00

</

¥

f.S

X*

f*

7*

/f.9

0.0

/t?

'-PsyctBkijical

0.0

00

fflrP

/

<?

/

2.f

00

*■/

/

/

00

02,

0.2-

friMunM

//

it

m.

00

///

ud.

//

29.f

0.0

Z,t,ft

/02,

ft>2s

MM

00>

tfS

Mther

3

1,

Y

*:0

/■?

4-7

5-

*

/0.i

00

/0t

22

&

fA

f.3

/.</

4-7

ToW

J&

//

(,0

til

Mt

/00-

£±

-*-

4?

&L

/?,/

/4S!

33/

t7

¥/t

m

&>.f

/0P.

1

4>

196

■//>/? i.e /?/#<?

F#'j9t.//s3f-/aA/

<?r

0£j£-£7-

S/6jVr/A/CS

^0/?

#/.*.

Ve*/?s

W S#As>& /PS? 0j3J£L&7' &.<-//> r/£/9L

All Vetins

/f^?

J /?</%■

tf.<££~ -

Enluation

' Number Per Cent

Number

Pei Cent "

Numbs

Per Cent

Niiitibei

Pei Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

IM

:ertain

□ocbltul

'Tola!

Certain

DoubHol

Total

lertan

Doubtful

Totil

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Ceitain

OaiUtuI

Tutsi

Certain

Doubtnil

TotalDoubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

IM

:ertain

□ocbltul

'Tola!

Certain

DoubHol

Total

lertan

Doubtful

Totil

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Ceitain

OaiUtuI

Tutsi

Certain

Doubtnil

Total

Id- Balloon

//3

fs

rt*

(0-9

30

/r?

S

?

MZ

0.0

//.?

&

/

//

ts

/2-7~

22.2

^

/

iT

H

<■*>

60

; I'Aslronomical

M£.

f/

*M

//■/

it

/?.?

s

y

/

J/

?■*

/£.£

//

/'

22

/f.s-

rZ6

fVt

t

ft

sS

9.5

S/-0

?££■

!Airtr»ft

^M.

(0f

2*1?

tf-6

Mf

23 J

^L.

/

£

£■</ <?.</

M

&

6

J*

00

f.s

r

<r

/£.

f.S

4-0

;</.s

3-Light Pima.

/6

y

3P

/■*

/.</

*■?

z

&

■?.

-4*

#6?

<<T

— ^

s

3

00

it*

¥,f

p

^£.

00

00

I-Bintt

_ 7.

•

//

07

jlZ.

/./

0.

££_

00

<?a

_<2_

/

/

j2£-

./■*.-

/.&<

2,

—^-\

<L

JU-

<?.0

*V

S-ClMib, Dull, (It

-&.

s

f

0-0

^x

03

.&.

JA.

<?#

00

_0.

0/0.

a? 00

_jZ_

0>0

00

00

frnnnit Infe,

U

n

r*

-A£..

ft

_£_

<?

{>

di.

0.0

/tf3

_X

6

££.

00

?■*

/f

/V

/&.?

aa

*.?

7-PivcholOfical

/</

3

2Z

t-4

j£L^

2.Z

2.

2>

4

dJL

¥•?

?'

/

/

/-*

0.0

A6

2,

a

z

T*

#0

*S

1- Unknot*

fff

/fr

tft

-Aj2a

/st

g

*

/$.&

00

/fa

7

7

//./

00

//■'

/Z

/£

/Vs

0-0

4te

3-Otbcr

30

6

M

-?■/

0.6

?.?

f

z

/te

f>P

tf a

&

/

3

J.Z

\ /■&

tf

J

0>

s

IAA

00>

ft

Total | jT/fc

3/7

/P33

6?. 3

M7 (PO-

2£T

7

&

fts #./ /pp,

JX

€<7

6*

6/?

Vfj

/pa

*z

ft

?</

&JL

ff./

/pa.

■/f»0

/f t/

s9z£.

Evaluation

Nunbei

Per Cent

Number

Pet Cent

Number

PfCenl

Hunger

Per Cent

Certain

Qsabtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouMfu

_Totalj

Certain

Doubttul

Total

O-BJIwn

../0.

/

//

tf!

//

/s.7

y

/

-/

ft.7

3.6

tft

jsr

?2

/£7

//«/

t?

2f./

I'Asumoflical

*

j"

/£

/f.9

**

{?£

s

JS

V

lP-7

7.1

/ft

P

4/<

(Z$

/A9

6-0

/&■?

2-Aturan

.£-

£■

/0

//4

it

tfz

s

<?

J

/t>-7

a<?

/(?,7tft

jsr

?2

/£7

//«/

t?

2f./

I'Asumoflical

*

j"

/£

/f.9

**

{?£

s

JS

V

lP-7

7.1

/ft

P

4/<

(Z$

/A9

6-0

/&■?

2-Aturan

.£-

£■

/0

//4

it

tfz

s

<?

J

/t>-7

a<?

/(?,7

/PS

/£>0

20£

/<//

f*f

*tf

3-Li(bt PtioiM.

_

0,0

0-0

0-0

a

/

/

#0

3>J,

3£

^C

/0 2¥

/.9

AS

2.2.

4-Bidb

#0

(?#

0.0

a

/

/

4.0

*&

£6

-r

£

7

0f. #f

/■0

VCMs, Doit. etc.

—&-

O.0>

00

80

__£_

0.0

#(?

00

S

S

0.0

?■</

*¥

Mniuffie. Info.

/J

At

tli

00

/?.&

_JL

V

A*.

0.0

/¥■■*

fS

£/3

?/

£t>

f-7

7-PiychDlo{ial

z~

2

*-f

<?(?

??

/

/

0.0

X6

f,(t

Z

£~

It.

0.9

0.7

f6

6-Unknowi

v/

/?

\2Z±

ep

271

?

9

2lL

&0

12./

/*/e

/4o t0.2

$0

tf?

Mther

£,

/

',?

■£.f

/V

¥.*

_JL_

#

££.

(?.#

<?,<?

/r

</

/?

2.0

as

f-&

Total

L. — — — __ —

£.A r

/^

M&

/o.o

m

£Z.

*■

tt

&&

S/.0

f(>0.

£05

W

7</£.

C7??f-3

/W

fjfgt.£ A/4/ £t//}£.i/dr/a/i/ ae- /Q#s&<s-r

J/6A'*'//l/<SS S?0/? /9£-£- </£/?*£

<*V .r/*A/'<? 0/= 0£jjsar

^0CAr^r */i/0 <4//e£*#/= r

|

Al*. <t/£Pjes

/f</7

/f</r

/?</?

I

Number

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Kumbei

PerCent

Number

Per Cent

Evaluation

Certain

Doubttu

Total

Certain

Dwbtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ceitain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ceitain

Dovutlu

Total

Certain

Dnibtfu!

Total

D-Balloon

H?

/

r

J?-7

09

3£

&0

PP

00

00

r?r?

00

/

O

/

^/

£0

77

I- Astronomical

4-

£

/

/£

£■3

7/

-J2_

j££-

00

<?0

2.

2,

00

&t

/%z

/

/

££.

77

77

^-Aircraft

Z0

20

^

'77

/7f

S>S.<

_0_

o

(?

/2J2-

<P.0>

&0

jT

/

&

&£\

f/

5f,4.

L

/

J

/££

77

??,/

3-UjM Ptoatan.

2,

/

3

/.r

#9

f.f

j2£_

0.0

0O

_A

00

00

0-0

0^

/P-0~

0.0~

0.O

«- Birds

a>

fi

0.0

00

00

_*2_

0.0

'<?■&

0-0

£0

00

A0

^

j2j£-

0.0

00

■rClouds, Dust, etc

-0

/

/

0.0

0f

0-9

££L

#0

<70

0-0

ff,0

00

P

££.

0-0

#,0

frlniuffit mto.

/O

P

/0

g.z

#0

r.t

0.O

<?P

/200.0

'<?■&

0-0

£0

00

A0

^

j2j£-

0.0

00

■rClouds, Dust, etc

-0

/

/

0.0

0f

0-9

££L

#0

<70

0-0

ff,0

00

P

££.

0-0

#,0

frlniuffit mto.

/O

P

/0

g.z

#0

r.t

0.O

<?P

/20

/.

/

9.f

00

9/

2.

2.

ts.4

£0

/S-9

7-PiycholoiicaI

7

P

7

62

#0

C.2

£>.0

<?o

00

<5>

00

00

0.0

/

/

7.1

00

7?

Hjnknonn

JJ

?J

i fit

0.0

2ft

£T

£

&M4

a#

/paff

/

/

9/

00

9/

S

ill.

<?o

?f.£

Mttiti

&

/

f

£3

#9

&.2

j2£-

PC

0>0

/

/

9/

00

f/

t-£—

.&£.

0.0

<0.O

Total

*3

J0

'/?

If <S

26. a

/PP.

£-

Z*

/0O6

00

/pa

/

s

//

72.7

2*73

/M

//

2

/s

&6.

/*■¥

/00-^

/fs-0

/ts/

/?<£■

Evaiualiin

Number

PerCenl

Number

PerCenl

Ntiuber

Pel Cent

dumber

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Sertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Batloon

/

/

/*«■

00

#.€

/

/

J2&.

4-f

6.2

/

/

*?

^

t-7

1-Astmnomical

O

2-

£

0.0\

H.0

fro

0.0

0.0

0.0

-it-

/

J

3.3

/■7

£-0

Z-Aircufl

&<?

0>.p

0.0

2

s

?

ML

fc$

$9.0

f

/<

23

/3.3

25.0

3?3

3*1_i(ht Phenom,

O

P

0.0

00

0-0

j2&

0.0

0.0

2*

/

3

S3

/-/

S0

4-eims

—S-

/9.0

0-0

0.0

P.

00.

0.0

0.0

0.

0.0

0.0

0-o>

S-Clouds. Dost, etc

_0_\

00

00

0.

J

JW

00

0-0

- 0-

/

/

jZJL

/■7

/■7

t-lnsuHic- klfa.

/

~j2—

/

/££>

0.0

tl-S

2

2,

'££.

#0

/76

<7

¥

AX

0.0

*-r

T-fHfchikiiical

_0_

/?

/?.0

£0<P

00

.zyl

0.0

00

6

6

M£

0.0

zap

(■UnlinoMi

S

3

3fc

^1 
0.0

17-s

^L

V

2£?

/?0

£40

/£-

/£

^££

0.0

2s.0

»0«ier

/

/

tL$.

p.a

(f.S

/

/

/,.!

0.0

6.3

J

/

?

£l£.

t-7

67

Total

£

&

g

7&o

2S.0

/P0.

~7ky

/c

1&.

2SP

VW-

£J-

ff

60

6g 't.

3/. 7

/PP.

197

j-/»4Le 4/</4s

gfrtLtsdr/od

0J?

^SJ^c'r

r J

^/&#r//iscs /^af j9o-

fe/t*2S

j*V £J££A£ _&

£>/?J£(

&£££#£. £(£.

SK>*?ET

All ferfits

J£<?7

/?</£

<2£#£J-

ff

60

6g 't.

3/. 7

/PP.

197

j-/»4Le 4/</4s

gfrtLtsdr/od

0J?

^SJ^c'r

r J

^/&#r//iscs /^af j9o-

fe/t*2S

j*V £J££A£ _&

£>/?J£(

&£££#£. £(£.

SK>*?ET

All ferfits

J£<?7

/?</£

<2£#

E dilution

Neater

Pa Cntt

Number"

Pec Cent

Number

"ToTaT

'erCent

Number

Pel Cent

Ctflan

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doublfu

Total

;«tarii

Doubtful

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Onbttol

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0-BallOOB

2

,0

?.

?•/

fi.fi

*v

#0

0.0

0-0

u2_

00

#0

00

l-Aitrorromical

2?

^

*t

4i*

&<;

fX&,

V

V

/,

¥0.0

¥0.0

tfflO

/

^

J

£&&

£>/20

MS

I-Aircratt

Z

2"

¥

JsL

*</

6.2

a

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

00

0.0

J-LnH Phenon.

_j2A

/

/

JUL

f.f

/z.

a

1

0.6 00

00

00

0.0

00

4-BHOS

_jZ_

/

/

JO?,

/■?

/7

7£

_£_.

#0

(?4?

0-0

_j2_

/

t ^M

M^

&>.0

5-CIOWfS, Dust, lit

£_

^

0.0

0.P

0.0

,

C

00

0,0

0.'0

..0.

tf.0

0.0

00

Urinific. Wo.

/

<7

t

/./

0.0

/.7

o

0.

0.0

0.0

00

_J2_

—0-.

0.0

0.0

0-0

J-PiycnotojicH

e?

0.0

0.0

0.0

hi

—£—i

<?0\

f?<?

00

_j0J

00

-Oj2^

00

tlMumn

</

t?

/

/-£

00

{,.£

V

2,

0^

1

Z0.0 0.0

20.D

_0

0.0

00

0.0

Mther

_j£_

i?

.00

00

#<2.

£0

0.0

00

<?

£0

oo\

0.0

■

TOW

JZ

i-2

*7

t^

3?S

/£&.

&

S

/0

£00

^00. S0t>

/

/

4

20.0

\$0.0 /00.

\

/?<>0

/■?£■/

sf&£

Evaluation

Number

Percent

Number

Percent

Nufflbei

PeiCenl

Nunber

Percent

Certain

OoiibOol

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtftil

Jotafj

Certairr

Doubtful

Total

Certain

_DoobMi

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certiii

Ooobtfu

Total

Certain

Doibtful

Tola!

t>Balloon

/

/

jga&

0ft

100/)

.£

J&

0.0

0.0

. /

/

f.S

fljP .

ff

l-Astronomim

.0.

P

JL8-

0.0

0fi

/

/

0.

*&£.

5fi0

/l>(kS

-g^

tf

10.

sir

^

7?'

lAiiuirt

.

-Qj\

00

0.0

(9

-M

0.0

0.6

^£

■?*

4

#9

49

?%

Mj(M Pntnoa.

J.

JUh

0.0

00

<9

u2jZ

&0

00

/

/

a0

£■</

f?/

/

0.

*&£.

5fi0

/l>(kS

-g^

tf

10.

sir

^

7?'

lAiiuirt

.

-Qj\

00

0.0

(9

-M

0.0

0.6

^£

■?*

4

#9

49

?%

Mj(M Pntnoa.

J.

JUh

0.0

00

<9

u2jZ

&0

00

/

/

a0

£■</

f?

«-Biid3

O

p

0.0

00

00

n

JI&

0./?

oo

~JL

0>

0.0

0.0

0o

S-Cloudi, Oust etc.

a

0.0

00

00

a

AO.

0.0

0.0

.

££.

010

(10

Olntuffic Mb.

0_

'f?

?

JZ&

00

oo

a

O

.££.

0.0

0.O

/

/

0.¥

0.0-

*#

7'p3yd»lo|ial

P

00

/?■#

00

s?

^&&.

0-0

0.0

0.0

0><0

0-0

■XJolowi

o

_££

ao

'afi

-3JL

0-0

2>

£

**

0.0

4?

9-Otjiet

a

JL0.

0,0

/?,/?

J2J2-

0-0

00

a

.<2/Z

&.O.

0.0

Total

. 1

/

mj

0-0

/00.

/

/

z.

£V.C

5&0

/&£>.

£L

/S

tf

a?

SA? /00.

7»rfteT /)/#* £ifAL/jnr/0A/ t4? 06J££r </fi,#7-/A/&S /C^W Ai </&**.<

J? jy/fW <0P 0SJ£O-r- Z;£/lt3r,e.ir£ J 0j0 *0/t//AAL _,

P/C^ Z£/M8*0/>

rftL. </E*e3

,9^7

■ /94*

;?</?

Evaluation

Nunber

Pet Cent

Hgnber

Per Cent

Nuabn

Per Cent

Number

PerCent

Certain

DoUbttol

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dnibttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubthil

Total

Ctrtad

Oouetfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

tt-Balloon '

*tf

J"

?7

if-Z

W

2/.L

0>

0.0

0,i?

0.0

Jf

/

4C7

<p.0

/i-7

A

?

f£.l

00

s&t

l'Astronomical

/£

/A

2S

f.i

9.&

ML

f

/

0.0

tt-7

/L-1

_^J

2.

tt3

JZ0

33.3

.0

&

f,-

0.0

n 2

212

2-Airenft

//

//

2/

//.&

WV

2A 6

(7

00

0-0

0.0

_0

a_

jZ6

0>.0>

010

__£j

?

2.

j2£.

$2-2

212

3-LiJM Pfienoa.

,0

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

0y

J2&.

00

0-0

1

0~

0.0

£0

0-0

«- Birds

—L-

/

2.

0X

fit

■'■6

^1

0.0

0-0

0>0

./

/

Jtg_

#0

'*■?

_&_

JZ£.

0.0

00

5-Clouds. 1 Dust. etc.

_jz\

z

2.

00

u

/■(,

0.

0.0

0.0

00

__<2.

0.0

0.0

0.0-

£U2-

0.0

0.0

frliuuffic. Into.

M-

;s

&£

0-0

/0 V

2.

■0

£■

??3

<?.0

fS3

_^

0.0

0>.0

0.0

d>.0

/?,<?

00

7-Psycholo[ical

_£

r>

V

3.2,

0.0

l-t

P

J&L

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0>

0-O

0J?

0.0

0-C?frliuuffic. Into.

M-

;s

&£

0-0

/0 V

2.

■0

£■

??3

<?.0

fS3

_^

0.0

0>.0

0.0

d>.0

/?,<?

00

7-Psycholo[ical

_£

r>

V

3.2,

0.0

l-t

P

J&L

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0>

0-O

0J?

0.0

0-C?

rt-llnknoon

2Z

z&

&L

0.0

n*

4.

P

2.

St 3

0.0

?S,3

A

/

/£.-?

0.0

'6-7

a

0.0

00

00

3-0rher

_J_

/

</

Z£

0.t

f2

/

/

&-7

0.0

K-7

__jC

/

/&.7

0.0

ttt

_2J

OJ2-

00

00

Total

-U

S&

fi£

7£L

2S.C

/00.

.<

_JL _

^

g?-3

/(,.7

/00.

— iL

*

/00.C

'0.0

/m

-£.

J

9

5£.£

M¥

/00.

o

/?4-0

/?f/

Vf<Z-

Eotuatiw

Number

PerCent

timtxt

?ti Cml

Humbef

Per Cent

Niiraber

Percent

Certain

Doubttu!

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;trtain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain

Doubtlul

Tobl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Balloon

L.

/

2,

/j//

rV>

2U

4,

2.

22J\

#0~

?Z3

/*"

f.

//

/6<>

2.2.

#1

1-AslroimTial

A

2,

00

t£t

ZU

/

/

00

/i./

/*■?

,0

(■

/«<■

//■0

U

/n

2-Aircrafl

/

/

/*/.3

00

/</.?

0.0

0-0

0.0

JJ\

('

*/

tf.3

n-t

2L4

3-LHtit Pflenon.

O

00

0-0

0.D

0.0

00

00

J2-

0.0

0.0

0-0

••Birds

j2_

■

0-0

0.0

0.0

(?

£4.

0.0

0,0

f

/

do.

/./

/./

5-Clrwdi, OibI, etc

JZ&

0.0

00

O

£0

00

00

z-

£

00

2-2

2-2

frlrauttic hfb.

/

/

t-V?

0.0

tf*

2-

o

£

13.3

0-0

ft*

_X

%

g.f

0.0

f.f

7'Pijriauk)(icd

L0-0

00

0.0

£j0

0.0

0.0

_^

S

&L

00

V¥

)-LM»<a

/

■0

/

4&

0-0

/¥?

i

/

&3-

0.0

^7

Jl_

'7

/U

00

tf.7

MHn*

tZ_

0_

0.0

0.0

00

j2^.

0.0

00

/

/

/

JJ-

/./

z%

Total

^

S

7

ill

'fat

/OP.

IT

/

t.

#3.3

^Z

w.

JJ.

2\f

3L-

1¥-1

263

/P0-

I ]/

198

.1

_TA/ti.£

4/44

£!&£.&* rvatf

<&*

&rfj&£r

G/<£Mrs/l>eZ S

^0/e At.L

Vf/fses

<SV S//rf/'£ _

sxr 0&JS&T

^S9*t£

/^i *£***

/W7

... .

/f<?f

/?V?

Erfiubai

Number

Percent

ftaber

Percent

Nu*t*r

P«C«it

Ntrmfaer

Per Cant

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Douttful

Total

Set lainsxr 0&JS&T

^S9*t£

/^i *£***

/W7

... .

/f<?f

/?V?

Erfiubai

Number

Percent

ftaber

Percent

Nu*t*r

P«C«it

Ntrmfaer

Per Cant

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Douttful

Total

Set lain

Doubthl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

r«tii

Attain

Doirttful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Tot*

t> Balloon

^

3

4"

A 9

?.$

&L-L.

/?

/

m#

0.0 IM£>

,0>

0.0

/3.0 0-0

/>

r?

^H

a.a <p.0

1-AltlWMiBl

31

f7

ft

sat

/£0

(t.Z

r?

0.0

A0

Aft

7

J

//>

m

/ft

$24

£-

/

/0

/it

S£S £1.7

Z-Aiiciaft

/&

g

24

/£-./

?*

$U

<?

0.0

0.0

00

#

/

/

a0

6.3

4~?

2.

/

y

//f

6? tt>.0

3-Li^tl Pbenea

t

,

/

**

?■<?

fit

(?

a

0.0

0.O

0.0

<0

0.

0.0

0.0

as?

/>.a

0.0

00

l-Bwds

' f

/

0.0

0-9

&$-

<?

0.0

00

0.0

o

_^.

&a

0>.0>

0.0

O

(7

r?

0/0

0.0>

0.0

»-Cloud», Dell etc

<7

0.0

0>JP

#0.

<?

<p

J2JL

00

0.0

. .0.

0/J

0>0

&0

(7

o

0.0

0.0

0.0

frlmfUt mto.

3

J

/./

a?

j?-/

0.0"

0.0

&<?

#0

0>,0>

<?■<?

Z

0*

2.

/j.3

JZ£_

Af-1

/■PfyeAotoficat

I.

z

/.<?

<P.f

Af

r?

<?.(?

0.0

<?.(?

(?

{?<?

j2.<?

0.0

a

<V

/SeP

0/0

0.0

HWWH

,0.

<?

/0

?f

0.0

?•?

&

a

0-0

0.0

00

/

(?

/

43

00

6-f

£?

0.t0

-£.£.

0.0

XMW

£

r

//

£7

^r

f?

a

a

at?

0.0

<?e

f

Y *0

?<0

Z&.6

(?

(7

P

<?■<?

0.0

0.0

Total

-X*

sv

/Pi

OA

&./

/pa

/

t-

/00.G

0.0

w-

_£

t

xi

f0.i *A0

<"00,

d

f

f4

</0.0

60.0

/0a.

f-\

t§

Eyalgilion

D-BaHoM

1-AstreiMical

i-Aitaffl

J-Li(WPtieBW.

4-BiniS

S^leudi, Ou)t, etc.

6-lMUflic M>,

7-Psyrtok)|i<jl

B-UnbHM

Mdia

Total

UtS£-

Cert»9

^2.

-JL

-2.

JZ.

X

Doubtful

-JZ

Total

O

^£

-£

-(L

JL

X

PerCent

Certain DouW Total

JZJL

Sag

2<r.0

jM.

<2j2.

J2.J2JL

0.0

jZZ.

4JL

sm

££.

/£^&££.-J.

JLO.

£j0_

J2J2.

4a.

JZ^L

£4.

/i.s £ .0

4JL

/ts\w.

i2^

2gJ>.

SJL

££.

JZ£.

_0JL

&£,

OJ.

££.

/f £/

Hunter

Certain Doublnil

-£.

jl

-tl

-0.

JL

Total

J-4JL

sm

££.

/£^&££.-J.

JLO.

£j0_

J2J2.

4a.

JZ^L

£4.

/i.s £ .0

4JL

/ts\w.

i2^

2gJ>.

SJL

££.

JZ£.

_0JL

&£,

OJ.

££.

/f £/

Hunter

Certain Doublnil

-£.

jl

-tl

-0.

JL

Total

J-

JL

PerCeni

Certain DoublM Total

J2JL

&J &t\

i££L

£il

££.

J2JL

4£L

AS.

SS.o

A2.

f^l

£JL£0_

0JLM0.

0.£>\

JL4-

0.0

&£.

J2JI

26.£>W0.

Certain Doubtful

£M

&JL

m

<?■£> 0P

J2UL

6

&JL2SJL

SJL

J,

Hittiei

^

/

/£. f? 2Z-

JL

#-

-L

M.

I£-

Total CerUio

zLj^

jz.

/

3-

-Z.

L2l

Percent

2f.0

'*■* *■?

/J

^L££.

jM.

Ak.

SJ^

tiJ.

4£

DoStSi

*s

A£^

?£S

W

££-

/{>

££.

JIjL

J0.0.

J2JL

7£f[ft(2

TM

jL£

6A.

M.

£0

M

SJl

//.Z

LA-(LL

/$o.

Niinoei

Certain Doirbtnil TolaJ

Percent

Certain DeuHttrl Total

"

TASi-e #/</<■

£MC£//)r/0A/

0?

04 J SAT

S/6//F//i/&S

t*0&

/9CL.

</£*£

s

4? S#At>£ 0f i9/lJ£<tT _OTMS£ &t*f>£S

flu.

/s/tAS

/9<

J*

V7

/?</?

/?#9

Evaluation

Nimbet

Per Cat

Nunbtr

Pet Cent-

' r 
Number

PetCeot

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Oobbtfol

Total

Certain

DoobtrW

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dotsbtfm

Total

Certain

DoubtfUl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

'Ooebtful

Totat

Certain

OoubtM

Total

O-Satroori

/£.

f<f

&

/f.0

f7

#7

^

9

^

0.0

0.0

0.0

2.

I

/3S

0.0

/f.3

/

/

2-

4//

«f

$*.

t-Aatrononical

23

ft

</l

f.3

tf

no

/

z

s

20.0

</0&

ifi-Q

L.

<?

/

IT

0,0

6.7

6

£

/

2*0

f*

33.3

2-MrnaR

±L-

71

<fi-

//■!

«?■?

?2,1

0J

0-0.

0,e

0.0

£j

£

3

6.7

//./

20-0

3

^

&

/ts

?3

mt

J-U(tit Ptier»«.

3

i-

<r

AZ

M

2.0

Q_

{?

0.0

ft??

0.0

ti0>

0.0

0,O

0,0

<?-0

/0.0

VBiios

2,

P

*/

P?

<?f

y.6

a

0.0

/>>(?

0-(?

/

/

I

LT

£.?

/1 4

.<?

/30

0-0

0.O

5-CI«idJ, Dial etc

./

i

£

S

*4

#2

&

0.0

/>Q

00

(P

a. a

00

0-0

O

0.0

0>,0

0O

Wmutlic. Info.

l ?

ff

tl

&t?

rV

&

0.0

no

<?0

3

3

40.0

0,0

&?0

3

3

/2.4

O.0

/t.S

7-Psytholotioi

6

&■

tS

0?

£k

o

o

00

fl.0

/1000

(P

a. a

00

0-0

O

0.0

0>,0

0O

Wmutlic. Info.

l ?

ff

tl

&t?

rV

&

0.0

no

<?0

3

3

40.0

0,0

&?0

3

3

/2.4

O.0

/t.S

7-Psytholotioi

6

&■

tS

0?

£k

o

o

00

fl.0

/10

a

0.0

0-0

0.0

o

0.0

0.0

0.0

rVUnknotm

$</

F¥

2/:?

0f>

f/.f

z

o

?

#0.0

00

40.0

£.

t.

/2 2

0.Q

tf.J

«"

&

20.9

0>.0

20$

Mum

H

6

If

?Z

*■¥

?t

o

(1.0

0.0

00

6>

£

2.

0.0

/?■?

/f-3

/

/

¥.t

<?0

¥'

Total

llL.

-&-

2</7

W-3

?t-7

/0a

3

7

f

6Qfi

4-6

zoo.

(O

£-

/f

U-?

333

/00.

/?

1

2¥

nt

?0.S

fSO.

'■ 'i

f**f

/?-

r/

. .../?$*

Erttoatron

Nunbei

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Nunotr

Pel Cent

Nwriiei

Percent

Certain

Dwbtnil

Total

Certain

Ooubttol

Total

Main

'mWA

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Attain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doobtltrl

Total

Certain

Doubtftil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

uV Balloon

.6

/

f

%).7

3/

rV/

3

3

M3

0'0

rfs

20.

/&

3Z

A3.(

7.3

m.f

l-AUionohical

3

f

A,

/0 3

J0j_

P6

/

3

</

.4t*

/#3

ff- f

ft

.9

Z0

7 1 -

£.?

ts.f

2-Aiitraft

Z£

f,

{>

/It

A.f

?0-7

zz

or

14.0

4fS

it%

//.

2<P

3(-

toe

/3./

2U

3-Li|tit Phrnn.

A0

(?.0

00

.

0>

0,0

0.0

0,0

3

?.

F

17.0

/■3

3f

t-Birtb

,0

#0

32JI

0.0

<?

0.0

0,0

0,0

1

L.

£.

0.7

fir

t¥

S-Clwds. Dust, etc

00

(?■<?

0-0

J?JZ

0.0

/

/

Z.

6?

fit

/</

(rlnwrlit tela.

3

3

»3

0.0

/£?/

Z.

z,

?£

00

?■*-

-L

3

s.z

00

5:1

T-Ptydolopcal .

_&_

00

e.0

0-0

0.0

0-0

/.

O

(i

3-f.

0.0

3?

S-Uaknran

S-

Z

/7-t-

-££.

ft*

_£

5

2?4

00

ttt

3£

3s

22,9

0.0

?2.f

MW*a»

2.

Z-

0.0

A 9

{■?

X

_£_

4,

?sr

0.0

?.?

f

&

7

33

■(■3

4*

Total

.2f.

r

If

m£

w

/00.

-&.

<t

2/

2/0

tf.0

m

IM..

Jt£

/$3

AtS

30-7

/00

199

w^z^r /^/*^s

*-fA>i.t//ir70Ji/

<*»/=■

passer

i

rsK/frs/VGi

rt?< /ft*.

i/£/f£4

d</ s#ajo# h?jt i?s^ee.r -st//9/*£ a/ar srytr£^>

At &«ev

/?*?

/9Vf

/?v?

[motion

Nneber

P«CM

Nuabei

f(f Cant*-fA>i.t//ir70Ji/

<*»/=■

passer

i

rsK/frs/VGi

rt?< /ft*.

i/£/f£4

d</ s#ajo# h?jt i?s^ee.r -st//9/*£ a/ar srytr£^>

At &«ev

/?*?

/9Vf

/?v?

[motion

Nneber

P«CM

Nuabei

f(f Cant

Nuater

Per Cent

Itabei

Pel Co»t

Certain

OoybHul

Total

Certain

□oubttil

Total

;erbin

DwMfUl

TOW

Certan

OovMM

Total

:«tan

DoottM

Total

Certain

DoaHMI

Total

CoUm

Ooubttil

ToW

CotWo

OtaMM

Total

ttiltaa

^L

?/

rr

£0

*f

//■¥

/

tf>

/

£0

00

^

£

2,

f &(,

t-f

21.7

0.0

00

00

Mllnooaical

Jl2^

4tr

/0V

{2.0

A

20/

«"

/

<

m&

!>0

4fetf>

f

s

0.0

/?6

{?■{,

-£*£-

(J

Z*

2*3

%■/

6M

Miitnn

-££.

?f

ft

/0.7

&<?

4J

/

/

2

fa

_££.

/00

3

s

!*.£.

00

/t£.

-^

/

&

//./

t*

/S?

J.|j|htPt>«e*.

t

$

/.t.

0,0

/.£

a

£>

r(?

00

0.0

0.0

—Z.

Z

t/

00

?■'

-J2-

a

j*£.

00

00

4-6*

2

/

&

jU

4*

&t

rf>

tf?

00

jM- 00

/

/

00

¥.£

¥s

_0

00

00

00

5-Clwh, Doll, ttc

£

2

4sL

00

*S

-&\

tf

<?

.0-4.

00

00

r?

00

0<?

00

00

00

0&

tUnltit M>.

9g

a

ft

/££

00

/?.<?

^L

^

/

100

00

400

-/-

fi

7

%t

00

J/.g

?

¥

//./

#0

//■'■

'•PiIuulopBt

£,

/

J

&£

£2

0.&

/

f*

/

£.0

0.0

£0

..&.

00

00

00

00 0.0

00

t-UODXB

//£,

//£

tt.s

00

22.S

_#:

r?

j5"

tta

00

2f.0

/

/

4*

00

<?.£

00

00

00

war

32

s

f?

U.2

/■0

?2

z

tf>

#

/££>

0.0

/0.0

a

00

00

00

2

?r

£1

<?0

S6

lot*

&f

t9$

£/t

7?'

20?

/00.

//

^

^

f00

/0.0

/00.

/&■

6

22

fa ? 27-3

w-

Z£

tf

JC

A/J

&f

/00.

/9s0

/f&

/f£2.

_

Enlutioa

Nnoa

PifCenl

NortCf

Percent

NwM

Per Cad

iMibtr

Pa Coal

Certain

DtOWful

Total

Ccrtwi

DobMoj

Total

Certain

DooUbl

ToW

CeiWe

OoAtM

TOW

Certain

Doubtht

Tobl

Certain

DO HMD

Total

CerW*

DnMH

ToW

Certno

OoabtU

Total

O-Bdooo

a.

/

/

~IL

£2

6?

_0

/

/

0,0

2?

2,1

2S-

^/

¥f

?.£

6-f

tf/

tMnnoaJul

9

J

Z*'

/f.i,

<£<

24./

Z0.

M

22.7

M&

x.t

2?

/4

</J

tt

^

/2.q

Mntl

/

£

/a-Total

O-Bdooo

a.

/

/

~IL

£2

6?

_0

/

/

0,0

2?

2,1

2S-

^/

¥f

?.£

6-f

tf/

tMnnoaJul

9

J

Z*'

/f.i,

<£<

24./

Z0.

M

22.7

M&

x.t

2?

/4

</J

tt

^

/2.q

Mntl

/

£

/a-

/f.2.

/(?-9

?M

Z,

2.

V

&L

¥■£

?0

?g

z&

/,0

*/&.$

f.S

tf-2

J-Li|li1 Ptan.

P

2JL

00

00

/

/

2.3

#a

2-2

£

—0-

*

ML

0.0

;•

•■eiits

_jgJ

00

Afi

0,0

#a

00

0-0

2.

-0—

2

0A.

0.0

rf?#?

Wwda, Ovit, etc

00

a<?

at?

a

d£>

00

00

Z.

2

0.6

00

&&

Wmnit. Wo.

6

/Z0

(?,0

/f.0

-<L

_^L_

¥

9./

00

9/

7*

/■*

3LQ.

00

%(.&

T-Pnclokinol

0.0

ao

0-0

/

/

23

0<(?

23

/

Y

00

03

0.3

8-Wnomi

t&

/0

*tf

<?><>

2/7

/?

rs

29.&

0.0

ft£

Z7

?7

t£0

0-0

2f0

Mlw

j

3

£.£

0.0

&*

_4d

/

9/

0<?

ff

2/

4

26,

4JL

/■¥

?V

Total

Jt-

-J-

ft

?0.4

4^-

/0fi

fs

■t~

4ft

tt£

£0.$

/00.

He

4f

30

20.4 /?.£ MO.

200

mm,

■-< --lyiiJsy.vts*-*?, :■'*.*.■

7- \^

I 
I

1ML£- J&&.

&*>#£ //*rs0*/ a* 4Li. sss,*>rs/i,&s roe s9ll gf<g^£ &£. <&/50&r£4_

*#

5f>££03

or

s>/§j&ers

sr^fr/0/i//94 </

All Y&rrs

19 4-7

/<?42

S9 4-9

Evaluation

Number

PHCait

Number

PerCent

Number

Per Cent

Numbei

Per Cent

Certain

Ooubttot

Total

Certain

Dgobtnil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total pertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

*?

yv

M

J/4

&.A

33-1

&

<?

*.e.

fi.O

OP

J

/

H

J3.I

1.13ot

_^L

O

;

4o

..0.O

4o

Milmnemieal

22

^5

n

M

74

t7,&

A

Z

o.o

/00.0

Zee*.

4-

/

i

io.S

*7

i/,r

f

f

1 7 SJ.0

3l,9.it.O

2-Aiicritt

^?

/f

?*

%*

*(,

tlA

O

o.o

0,0

0.6

4>

/>.o

O-o

0.0

/

/

A

4-0

4.0

t,o

J-U(M Pnenom.

12

5

7

/o

0.?

/.-?

e

o

o.o

6.0

0.0

o

O

LAA

O.o

0,0

D

0,4

o.o

00

<-Bints

#

^

a.t>

0,0

4>.a

o

l/Z&

o,<?

O.O

0.6

O.O

O.o

0.0

6.0

O.O.

5-Clouds, Oust, tic

4

*

10

/#

/4

Z-4

a

_€e

00

O.O

o

6.6

o.o

O.o

0.O

a.o.O.o

0,0

D

0,4

o.o

00

<-Bints

#

^

a.t>

0,0

4>.a

o

l/Z&

o,<?

O.O

0.6

O.O

O.o

0.0

6.0

O.O.

5-Clouds, Oust, tic

4

*

10

/#

/4

Z-4

a

_€e

00

O.O

o

6.6

o.o

O.o

0.O

a.o.

frlntuffic. tub.

Jit

*6

4-J

e.e

4.Z

o.o

o.o

0.0

2

%

J£A

06

/J-.4

JL

a.

i.o

00

Z,o

7-Piydslofial

//

/

/J

j/.

0&

zs

o

0J3

0.0

O.o

6

Q

0a

0.0

0.0

/

t

4,o

0.O

9,o

S-Untanim

74

19

/<?.o

0,0

tfo

e>

d

O.O

o.o

O.O

a

i

eo

6.0

0.0

A

O

A

S-0

o.o

*.*

S-OUitr

/3

7

H

4-i

77

4.s

6

o.o

0.0

0.0

/

J

%

1.7

7.7

IS-.4

a

0,0

O.O

o.o

ToW

296

/^>

4/6

3&

tf.t

J0O.

A

X

0.0/00.6 /OO.

10

3

/3

11$

*Z3I

/06.

15

10

JJ

&>4

4oo

/OO,

/9

fa

/?JV

/9T2

Evaluation

Number

r« Cent

Number

Percent

Number

PerCent

Number

Per Cent

C«rtarrt

Doubtful

Total

Certain-

Doutfnjl

Total

Certain

DcmotM

Total

Certain

DouMri

T«tal

:ertain

OouMnrl

Total

Certain

Ooatm

Total

Certain

OouMtu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Belloon

r

<s>

J>

£±

0,0

Jf4

-4>

o

¥

AiS

(?0

Ji-x

-&.

S-0

m

J?X7

/4.X

Hi

l-AstitmomiOl

j-

s

JUL

o.o

#7

j.

3

S

Mi

'74

194

X2.

/X

tfO

(j r.3

t/.l

Z-Airtnft

<?

o

a

6.6

00

P,o

/

/

A

JA.

f.1

//.?

S?

77

*H

So

J'o,

tA.o

3-Lt|M prtam.

a

o

o.o

o.o

P. o

^

o

0.6

0.6

00

t

3

7

u

0.1

zt

4-Biidi

o

o

0.0

0.0

o.o

a

. o

Q

0.0

00

o.o

o

J>-0\

OO

o.o

S-Clwus. DoH He.

o

0.O

0."

e>,o

H

0»

0,0

0.0

_£

C

/o JJ_

I.g

3.o

6-liuuffie. Mb.

**.

3.

SL

o.o

%/

/

1

J2

O.o

f.f

/4

&

11

S.6

0.0

s.t,

7-Ptrcholaflul

3

3

/*&

0,0

fM

c

9

0,0

00

00

?

/

$

Z,l

0.3

14

B-Unknom

JL.

Zr

JJ.

0,0

<?■/

J"

5

m4

o.o

#4

70

o

70

&$

0.0

Mi

Mthei

a

A

2.

0.0

f-t

9t

o

0.0

<?e

0.0

/J.

4

lb

M

}.l

44

"

Tolll

HO

A

SJ

ftf!

<?.(

/P0.

/3

«

/7

fU

Mr

/OO.

in

1*

537

70.6

A94 /ool

-#4

70

o

70

&$

0.0

Mi

Mthei

a

A

2.

0.0

f-t

9t

o

0.0

<?e

0.0

/J.

4

lb

M

}.l

44

"

Tolll

HO

A

SJ

ftf!

<?.(

/P0.

/3

«

/7

fU

Mr

/OO.

in

1*

537

70.6

A94 /ool

-

&*£.£■ 4/rt ■£uA*.t/4r/&l/ dT #*.t. £/£.Mr//t/6£ P0£ /?U. fe*£S 4V *>£/*/?*> TE/3

SPetras ar 0/3j&&rs *.£ss, r##ri 0/U£ tft/A/pjOej M/tss a>£a */&&£

AU. Y£Af?S

/<?*■?

/? <zt

y#- 0*

EvaluitiM

Number

Percent

Number

Per Cent

Number

PerCent

Nunbn

PerCent

Certain

Doubtful

ToUt

Certain

Dnbtni

Total

Certain

Cwttnil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doutitlu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0-84IKKI

11

So

7?

J3l

//'

311

/

1

4o,P

O.O

■fi'.f'

<?

A

10

2U

d

frr

/

4

5

4o

/(,o

-?*«

1-Astmmniical

<J3

<v

1*

9/

S.3

(H

O

a

-J£-

O.O

O,0

f

1

J2.

rf.2

Wf

41.3

?

j'

/3

$ZJ>

j£L0_

4%o

2-tanft

4&H-

<Z?

**i

7?

9>

no

o

a

4o

0.6

O.o

/

t

7

34

3-t

LI

/O

j

%

0.6

lo

f.e

Might Phenoa,

o

3

1

00.

M

/z

£

a

0.0

0.6

O.o

-JL.

O

0.0

0.0

00

0.

a

0.6

0,0

O.O

t-BirdJ

L

I

7

JA

4>4

*,$

o

a

0.0

..OrO

0-0

a

<0

AO

0.0

O.O

o

04?

0,0

O.O

5-CtowU, Suit, ttt

J"

A

7

2.e>

a?

■<*J

0,0

#.<?

(?0

. O

0.0

0,0

#0

o.o

0,0

OO

6-lnwlfit. Wn.

g

O

8

3.1

o*

ji

^

0,0

*,0

o,a

/

1

34

00

3.4

/

I

-4o-

o.o

4°

7-Paycbolofical

JL

1

as

&,o

0g

p

-Oji

-AS-

00

O

0.0

o.<?

eo

<?

a

O.0

O.o

O.o

tVUnbnm

49

»'

H9

M

0.0

/9*

-OJL

o.o

6.0

/

J

34

0.0

J4

J

o

i

/a.o

O.o

t*P

9-0»iei

g

4

11

3.1

/■&

4.1

/

i

$$0,

0..O

foj

o

j

i

0.6

/0,3

/0$

/

i

4o

O.o

4,o

Total

no

B<t

2SU-

m

33.1

/0O,

z

a

im

<P.O

/OO

H,

11

A9

££2.

44.1

/6°.

>H

H

j?j~

Si jo

44.o

/OO,

/fj-<?

/? J-/

/<?j~j

Evaluation

Number

Percent

Number

Pel Cent

Number

Pei Cent

Number

PerCent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain/OO,

/fj-<?

/? J-/

/<?j~j

Evaluation

Number

Percent

Number

Pel Cent

Number

Pei Cent

Number

PerCent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:«rtM

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

DouMul

Total

D-Balloon

J~

/

<,

JU

34

io.i

J

a>

(

J&.6

o-o

jZ&&

fs

2.3

rt

J?0J

/4*

&4

l-Astronomial

/

<P

1

i.i

0.0

3.1

O

t

1

O.o

JO.O

Jfo.o

-£.

i

n

xs

4.1

/e4

Miicraft

4

C?

&1

o.o

*e.l

/

1

?*o

6,0

&-9

/-i

#t>

U

13

/J*

ns\

S-Litf>t Phnon,

o

o

0.6

0.0

o.o

o

0.O

0,6

0.0

4

"5

o.o

/.*

M

4-BiflfJ

a

e?

0.0

e.o

0.0

o

6

0.0

0,0

0.0

£

/

1

3.7

0.&

43

tClwdi, Dint, tic

o

Co

6.0

O.O

o.o

0.0

O.o

<r

A

7

3j>

/*

4i

fruiwitic. hit.

S

o

f

J.*

o.o

J4

o

O

e.o

0,0

0,0

j-

o

S

3.0

O.O

$°

?-Piyd»b|ftat

c=»

Q

0.0

0.0

0.0

o~\

O.o

0.0

O.O

J.

.

X

/A

0.0

h

HMuxram

/4

o

Mfi

Hi

0.0

Hi

A

2

40.0

o.o

4o,o

J9

11

/ft

O.O

/7?

*

KjtlMJf

/

.ep

I

M

OO

34

Q

o.o

O.o

0.6

jq

/.

4

3.0

Of

It

Total

78

/

J29

m

44

/op,

H-

)

J'

$0.6

A0.0

/OYt

joi

S8

m

tf£

sr.f

/po:

201

wmmm

mimmmmimt.

/#«:,*- ^/^

£t//}i.{//?r/e?A'

ar

/?££.

tf

f0£ J<L/_

V£-tf/>£

. rfff'

A?£?0/3£

?e<e //00g

s?£E£>s of tfsej&jzrs _ c?** xmfffp r<? ^t?^ ////*//>?£# Afzi.es a

/lis. y^/fS 1

/9f.7

Sf4/

/949

Evaluation

Umber

• PeiCenl

Numbct

PerCmi

Number

Pel Cent

Nimtel

PhCsoI

Clan

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubllul| ToU

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Cntiin

Da* mil

Total

>rt»i

DouUM

Total

Certain

DouUlul

Total

Certain

Oaibtfol

Total

Certain

DMbHul

Total

O-Billoon

&

/O

n

13. 32 71.4

-J-

O

3

//.*

00

A'o

/

J"

c

£l

Af-1

tto

2.

2.

SJ

P.*

f-t

1-MtiWMiOl

/A

tf

3 5

s.0

6.0

//.*

a

00

0.0

0*

3

J

H

no

I A

/7-i

4

H

0.9

/0-i

/>}

2-AiKMtt

7*

3J~

101

22.7

/to

111

7

1

So

0.0

So

-A

1

S

11.42.

2.

SJ

P.*

f-t

1-MtiWMiOl

/A

tf

3 5

s.0

6.0

//.*

a

00

0.0

0*

3

J

H

no

I A

/7-i

4

H

0.9

/0-i

/>}

2-AiKMtt

7*

3J~

101

22.7

/to

111

7

1

So

0.0

So

-A

1

S

11.4

£3

U1

£,

jS,

>1

/j:4

ffA

>•/

>Li(W P1W1ML

4

p,

C

JJl

04

1,4

/

1

f.o

f.O

s.o

>

/

1

42

4,3

U

#.a

0.0

0.0

4-Binh

£>

/

)

0.o

0}

0,3

a

_££.

0.0

00

)

)

.£j?

<?

4 a

a

$

0.0

'0.O

0.0

S-aouds. Dim. etc.

£>

A

X

■ e.o

e<>

'<.

—^-\

4>

00

6-0

0.0

4

i

0.0

0-0

0,0

./L&.

^0.0

o.a

S-M»«it Mb.

*&

o

2i

Ju\

00

1*.

/>

a

\

JT.0

0.0

S.0

a

(P.

1

/./

a.0

til

i

a

8

Js.S

-AS-

Je.S

J-Pirdobpol

_eJ

2

f

.73

o.(,

2/

^L

/

■x

<T.o

J'P

/C.e

O

04

0.0

00

e&

0.0

0.0

t-IMoma

tr

n

221

0.0

A7S

-JL

a

1/

sXfi

0.0

fX.o

3

O

3

tf°

0.0

{3.0

/3

13

J3.3

0.O

&*

M«*

7

7

X

J.2

0,A

■>•/

/

£>

1

i'.O

00

t'.o

O

O.O

0.0

0.0

4.0

O.0

0.0

ToW

m

IX

i'i

m

22.7

700.

19

1

fa

fi'.o

S.O

/off.

HL

1

Ad

&&

IP

/C€>,

11

10

sf

74.4

A',6

tea.

/4 JT0

/4j-/

/9^rx

EirilHlw

Km bet

PwCenl

Numoef

Pet Cent

NlHtw

PerCent

NwbH

Pet c«t

Certain

Doubtful

Tobl

Certain

Dovbthi

Total

Certain

DoubHul

Total

Certain

Donbttoi

TOW

:«Uin

OoobBul

Tobl

Certain

CwtMal

ToW

Certain

Oonbtlu

ToW

Certn

nutMii

ToW

IHtltoo*

6

/

7

nc

if. 9

A/ 1

A.

a

^

143

fi.a

/At

/i2

4

/(,

1A

^/

If

t-AstRMoeHcal

.J

J

4

J4

f.t

//■?

. /

/

2

Jj-

1t

d*

JL

/o

At

S.9

j:^

/U

2-Aircntt

6

e>

A

/?■&

0p

/n

4~

/

J**

iU

7-f

.h'l

*7

e?7

?s

J7.3

M

U7,

Hijdt PtaHL

0.0

0.0

0.0

.0.0

6,0

0.0

A

/

J

A/

0A-

//.

t-Binli

a

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

$-ClwA DMt, etc.

a

~&&.

0,0

0.0

--&.

<?

4>

0.0

0.0

0.0

'0,

f

J

0.0

/■'

/./

frhnuNlc. hto.

•z

4'

&L

0,0

/*1

0.0

JLO-

0.0

-d*.

/o

S..1

0.0

J'.i

7-Psydnto |icat

/

O

■/

A*

0,0

J<?

■ 4

O

p,e,

0.0

4-

J

S

2/

0.JC

2-£0.0

'0,

f

J

0.0

/■'

/./

frhnuNlc. hto.

•z

4'

&L

0,0

/*1

0.0

JLO-

0.0

-d*.

/o

S..1

0.0

J'.i

7-Psydnto |icat

/

O

■/

A*

0,0

J<?

■ 4

O

p,e,

0.0

4-

J

S

2/

0.JC

2-£

t-tMmoMi

/a

a

to

194

0-0

#?4

3

4

2U

00

*U

£l

O

47

JJ-J

0.0

*ri

KWiti

<5>

/

!

00

J?

J1

/

/

JJ.

00

1/

_iC

O

S

2-7

0.0

Z-1

Total

If

5

H

4&"3

/47

too.

/-i

S

/*

ir.7

/4-3

/00,

m

tti

W

py

etyl

?00.

-

TASte J/s-a

evAi-t/Ar/OM

cr

/?tt

. S/6Air//V&*

>v5W

At-t. </£*££

#</

^>e/>e>ter_£&

Sfeeas af rtrfj^ars 0>v&£. 000* sSt/A/jjeei? a*/lss j#£a *s&£/4

AU, /£?i/?S

/<?<??'

;94s

/9<49

Evaluation

Number

Percent

Nurabet

PerCent

Nwn'ei

Per Cent

Kuaber

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubHul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

DoobHiai

TuU

Certain

DouWul

Total

D-Balloon

jO£

,f/

'sr

£a

4.1

ti

/

O

/

£&

0.0

*.t

A.

•T

7

4.0

/0.<9

Me

a

/

/

JL£-

JJL

Ar

1-Astmnwical

?&

74

m

/3./

19

23a

/o

4

/4

zu>

J0-A

JU

7

7

/4

74.6

/4o

Ato

<r

^J"

Jt

JA

H-l

4h

Z-*i rcraft

/&/.

44

tfr

/3.S-

/j.r

Z&.Q

2

2

-2JI

i'3

■r,f

-J^

A

j*

L.c

4.0

/o*

d

r

/,?

u

Jo.i

fi.t

3-Li(hl Phenoa.

7

4

//

0.1

o.r

/■4

0.0

0.0

00

/

J

4

J,o

Co

to

_&£_

.0.0

0.0

t-Sinrs

jr

<?

7

t>.7

0$

/c

£>

O

A>.0

0.0

O.v

-A

)

7

J°

A*

4°

<s.

/

5

P-1

/J-

44

S-Clouds, Oust etc.

-~J-

/

'e.t

0.0

£>■!

O

O.O

0.0

0.0

-/L

<0

0,0

00

0.0

O

00

0.0

0.0

frltaiiric tiro.

^4

r4-

1-A

^&0-

7Z

_,£

O

2

J' 3

0.O

rs

j"

,\~

/0.e

a.o

700

__jjT

' <?

r

1-4

0.0

7.4

?-Psyclnl<3(ia(

7

3

/o

*-9

0,4

/■$

/

f

0.0

J. 6

24

t?

&

0.0

0.0

0.0

/

/

AT

0,0

/■J'

rVllnrjnm

A/4

2rf

2PJ

0J2-.

28*

JA.

O

A?

Ha

0.0

34a

^L

II

*3.*

00

32.0

jX

/j'

221

0,0 21./

MMher

£7

4

31

3.C

0.JT

4i

j"

j'

/iX

O.a

n 2

_Z

/

A

Jo

to

4,o/■J'

rVllnrjnm

A/4

2rf

2PJ

0J2-.

28*

JA.

O

A?

Ha

0.0

34a

^L

II

*3.*

00

32.0

jX

/j'

221

0,0 21./

MMher

£7

4

31

3.C

0.JT

4i

j"

j'

/iX

O.a

n 2

_Z

/

A

Jo

to

4,o

^L

<?

2

2.1

_Q.0

2-9

■

.....

ToM

f3f

712

rso

7/7

2ls

/P0.

-3/

7

JS

»u

fU

/go±_

11

tf

So

(A,*

38.o

(00.

%H

?^

a

Soo

5t).o

too.

/<7J-0

S?j-/

/fJ-2

Endiatne

Itwbn ,

Per Cent

N umbel

Pel Cent

Niaber

Pa Cent

Mrnnbei

Pet Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OoLblfut

Total

Certain

DouUM

Total

Certain

DoubHul

Total

Certain

DoubHul

ToUl

Certain

Dotrbtnil

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

r> Balloon

-^

O

4-

J-t-

0.O

7/

/

/

4

-At

A4

i'o

/£

24

4*

3.X

4-$

So

l-Asusnowcal

-artJ

f

77

$.(.

7 a

'(41

/ft

)

/4

J^.jI

IS

1>'°

£3

At

91

72.7

SI,

/is

Z-Anuaft

f

4f

/j

JU

•7-f

13,2

4-

_2_

t

7&°.

r.o

isr.o

J$-

?7

/ft-

7S.4

7f.f

J7.4

HieW PlMom.

a

O

00

0.0

0.0

7

i

JJ\

t.0

s-i'

j"

7

C

/.0

"-?.

7.2

a-Binh

O

00

0.0

0.0

■

0.O

0.0

0.0

2

2

JLL

0.0

0.4

S-Cluuds. Dial. etc.

a

0.0

0.0

<?■<>

a

JLQ-

0.0

0-0

/

/

JL2.

0.0

0?

frbennic Mi.

7

£>

7

72J-

0.0

72 r

7>

s>

0.0

0.0

0.0

m:

'

3r

Jle.

00

7°

7-PirtJBlo|!cll .

a

£>

0.0

0.0

0.0

1

1

00

2.1

7-f

_&

/

7

/A

0.2

7,4

t-IMan*

/?

n

3e.4

-&£..

h4

/,*

7$

32. f

o.O

ixj

Ml

/4r

Z9J

0.0

29/

WIW

2Z

<2

4

34,

34

7*

3

J

7->'

f-0

/j-

Jr±

7

74'

ZL

ax

3.0

I ™

tu

/S

S4

Ma

247

700.

75

5

40

Sit

/A.r

7ft>>

1U

'P

4n

Tif.

2{.f

/OP.

202

MUM

mm

amm*

T/?£t.£ J3 /£/ J£?#*.y.#Ci0AL- . ft* /?*■<- Sf&Mr/A/at F0/Z S!£J- </&/?& S /?S f^,**?,* r£#

sulfas a^ Jj&j£<£rs /?£T&e>je.~t./fi:£: Ss>££as

/it Yexffs

<"?<?■>

/94*

/9 4-<?

Evaluation

Number

PerCent

Number

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Certain

Ooutjlfui

Total

Certain

Doubtful

TflUl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubCtuI

Total

lertainEvaluation

Number

PerCent

Number

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Certain

Ooutjlfui

Total

Certain

Doubtful

TflUl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubCtuI

Total

lertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dmbtful

Total

o-eiiiodi '

__£.

J

3

0-0

J. a

J.a

a

-&0..

0.0

0.O

a

0.t

0.0

0.0

a

_»£gJ

00

0<=>

1-Ajtreiiwital

jy

,?<*

V

ILA\

M9

4/f

J

O

,-T*

/S&IL

0.9

too

_ 6

■?

/i

Jf.i

43?

111

6

i

S.a

/aa.a

/0O°

J-Aircrjft

./s

^

/x

L2.

l*

8.0

-&£-

O.O

0.0

a

a

a

0t

0.0

a.o

0.O

a.o

a.o

3-Lijht Ptienom.

4?

<?

00

o.o

0,9

O

.&£.

o.a

0.O

O

a.o

a.o

00

a.C

a.o

0°

<-Birdj

/,

f

$.o

0. 7

0-7

O

£>.0

0.O

O

0.

0.e

a.o

a.o

*o

0>

I?

a. a

a.o

0,0

5-Cloudi, Dust, etc.

/

i

r <2 7

fi.a

7

0>

j2A

0.0

0,O

—£-i

00

O.o

&°.

a

0.0

a,"

6-lruutlic Wo.

9

o

f

\Lo

t-0\

&o

O

a. a

0.0

ff.O

0-

a

-P

00

a.o

4JL

~j3j

a

0>.t>

a.o

t a

7-Ptrcnoloticll

/

/

[ p.o

7

0.7

O

O

__e_

0.0

00

^a.

O

^0&.

P.0

0.0

—A.

_&-fi.

e.a

c.0

S- Unknown

2?

o

A?

tt.i

do

/i.l

a

O

<3

0.0

0.0

a. a

3

J

ill.

6-0

/in

£

&

^o_

_0. 4_ 0.<3

a.o

S-Olnet

-£.

4

J±

-£>£~

2 7

j?

O

£>

o.a

0.0

a a

j2£.

00

0.0

..<?.

0>

(O

J^0.

a. <s

a.o

w

/eg

41

/49

su

Xf.f

/ofr

J

3 /<#*»

a.o

/So,

-J-

7

/*>

ft,z4i.$

/&.. a

£

£

0.0

/ao.t

/to.

l-\-

■A

/9r&

/9j~t

/?J~X

■*

Evaluation

Nunbfl

PerCent

Number

Percent

Number

Pet Cent

Number

Percent

Certain

DoublM

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Ballmn

e>

O

IP

JLe.

<?0

0,0

O

O

42.

4,0

f<P

J?

5

fi.O

f /

J(

l-AsbDHwiical

f

7

/£

iU

Hi

ti&g.

J

3

c

$£JL

,^a,»

£0.0

36,

//

47

&1JIZ

413

I-Aircnft

fi.o

a a

£>*

a.f

O.e

/a

J

a

S4k

2-0

MJO

O

42.

4,0

f<P

J?

5

fi.O

f /

J(

l-AsbDHwiical

f

7

/£

iU

Hi

ti&g.

J

3

c

$£JL

,^a,»

£0.0

36,

//

47

&1JIZ

413

I-Aircnft

fi.o

a a

£>*

a.f

O.e

/a

J

a

S4k

2-0

MJ

3-Ufht Plnmai.

00

a, a

0,

0.O

0.0

O.O

.0 0.

a.o

a.o

*-Bti*t

a

j2±£j

pa

o,a

O

_^£j

0.a

4<*

/

t

0.0

/.o

/■o

S-Clouis, Dmt, etc

0.

a.a^

O.o

Q?

,

0.s>

0.0

0.0

/

a

(

/.a

0.0

/■o

t-lnwltic. Info,

a

0a

0°

00

/

a

/

/o

0.0

/0,°

t

O

t

S.2

0?

ft

T-Ps*choloiical

&

O

o&

O.o

00

a

a

0,a

a.s

0.0

/

1

00

/<?

/°

S-Unluwxi

0_

<0

a

so

O.o

0.9

JL

J

Jap

0.0

Ja.o

JJL

JS

H4

p.o

nV?

MtJtw

£>

0.0

*-0

e.0

/

O

V

{°£.

0.0

/6 a

s

a

.t

J.I

0.0

<?/

ToM

f

7

/£>

SC-2

4it

/00,

jL

3

/e>

T°.0

JO. a

/0O.

U

/*

'if

ML

ft4

/04-

rtfJte ///$■%_

/?M/.L>/tr/0A/

0S-

#/./. _

f// r ,A>r//i/&£

f=0#

/?*-!.

V

'£/?£

i 4V

*>&/v?&r£a

j/>££0f 0f . 0tf^/Fdrs sftssa /is0r sr^rsa

All Ye-a^s

/f47 f

/I4i

;$ 4<?

Evaluation

Numbu

Percent

Nunber

Percent

Number

Per Cent

Number

PerCent

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OouWfiil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

TOW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Dmbtful

Tofal

D- Balloon

-££.

•rs

#7

Az

4?

/•4

-2

^

-it

00

3.S

3

7

f0

£L

t.i'

/U

a

O

/J

s.x

0.0

/.X

i-Ajtranomical

24/

/4a

4a/

)1.3

/jj

far

/?

J

1/

SLrl

u

•409

//

/£

J?

/4$

At.(,

Hj'

ss

83

/4t

&-1

jr. 8

stx

2-AiKralt

/AZ

//r

23?

4.3

t7

il*

)

6

t

/.4

0.0.

■'t9

-L

t

1

/aJ

14

te*

/£

/&

M

1.9

4.A

/At

3-Li|tit Ptienon,

/•?

/j

*1

i.d

9

1.2

/

O

1

Jd.

-&0J

/■*

■ %

A

6.0

1-?

J 7

&

4

so

0.0

0.0

t-Birdi -

8

j-

/3

e.i,

0-4

/a

e

o.a

0.0

0.0

/

/

,?

/.4

1-4

j.$

A

2

0.1

fi.o

fi-9

5-Cloutb, Oust, etc.

/ i

j

4

p.'

03

03

a

-&0-

a.o

60

0.0

0-0

£>

Co

0.0

00

frlnsuHic Info.

/7S

/?•>'

OJ-

0a

/,?.*

//

V0.0

0.0

/

/

,?

/.4

1-4

j.$

A

2

0.1

fi.o

fi-9

5-Cloutb, Oust, etc.

/ i

j

4

p.'

03

03

a

-&0-

a.o

60

0.0

0-0

£>

Co

0.0

00

frlnsuHic Info.

/7S

/?•>'

OJ-

0a

/,?.*

//

V

J/l

0.0

#J

_£_

4

HA.

GO

/j*

<2a

J0

M

00

*■£>

7-Psycholt(ial

/J

3

/j'

0.4

oA

/■/

J*

3

3.8

O0

t.f

/

I

M.

0.O

/A

/

a

)

0.4

<00

*4

t-Unknomi

232

232

IK*

r-0^-

■/T-fi

4

4

JJ-

-0^-

7?

_2_

f

/Z2

/2-2

23

A3

<?.<?

00

99

3-Ottier

-T3

/9

72

4.0

f-4

f.4

n

a

to

13J,

a.o

/f*

Sl

,■?

4f

2.7

41

At

Z

X

M

00

3.4

■

Total

W

j7J

/3/J

iti

311

/00

jt^

A

Jfi

K+

3J

//Iff.

M-

Jo

74

&l

4*s

/pa.

m.

13

Z32

rm

4t>.l

/O0.

Vfj-0

/?!-/

/?fx

EvaloaliHi

Number

PerCent

Number

Per Ceril

Number

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

■"Total

Certain

Doubtful

Wat

Certain

Doubtful

Total

lertain

DeubMul

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Tom

Certain

Dootttul

Total

Certain

Dm*rtil

ToW

D-Balloon

/0

j"

/r

L2.

3.4

/Of

*?

3

4'

^X

4/

a

S3

4o

f3

7.2

fA

/»•<

I- Astronomical

*/

£

37

&JL

40

24,1

_^_

$

,14

Jjj

/e.g

/19

//4

4^'

>«**

Ji.2

l -t

2jJ

i-Aireraft

/S

//

21

&L

74.

/Is

4

4

10

SJ

J'4

/if

.71

Jff

/40

.?,!

/2,f

J/,8

3-LieW Pbinon.

0-

0.0

0-0

00

/

/

3

LA

14

2,8

-'A

f

24

JJL

/■A

,f.J

I-Birds

0.0

0.0

04

/

>

[gzO,

14

14

^r

3

8

0-2.

0,4

/■/

S-Cluuds, Dust, etc

-&JL

00

0.a

0.0

o.a

0.0

../

•3

4

0./

0?

0-i~

6-injutfit alio.

$4

O

34

ML

0.0

223

id

tz

JLZ

a

/£x

J±

81

/A.I

0.0

/2J

7-Pa|dalo|icU

O

J>o

0.0

00

/

&

1

AA

O.a

/4

__z

3

/0

A0

4,4

if

frUmuxmir

J18

12

///

0.e

/l!

^4,

M

&LL

O.O

iff

/02

/4*

Ml

0.0

/?*

J-ODier

4

Jt

£

J-?

/■3

4o

3

i

4.1

O.o

4-f

!£.

/4

40

J.r

M

4-4

'

Tolil

t3~$r

SM

f4f

8il

/C.I

too.

JX

11

14

77.0

25.0

/so.

(M.

Jo/>

734

-UL

2S.f

(00.

203

wmmmmmmmm

r/9/tce 4/S3£

J-?

/■3

4o

3

i

4.1

O.o

4-f

!£.

/4

40

J.r

M

4-4

'

Tolil

t3~$r

SM

f4f

8il

/C.I

too.

JX

11

14

77.0

25.0

/so.

(M.

Jo/>

734

-UL

2S.f

(00.

203

wmmmmmmmm

r/9/tce 4/S3

^Mi-UAni2A>

0fi

£/M/T S/AATf/VAS

rat /?tz.

VA-A}/?*

#y

/fes^a/er^/)

,. . pfttas ^ 0>£J££rs SrAT/0/V*£ >/

All y*Af?s

/4 47

/ a 4P

. ./949

. Evaluation

Umbel

Per Com

Nlllbei

Pei Cent

Number

Pei Cent

KurtXl

Pei Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Carta*

Doubtful

j_T»Wli_

;«tam

DoubtM

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;ert»n

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OoiiUtal

Total

Corbin

DHMful

Total

0. Billow

7/

<£r

//A

Jo.L

A/

^,7

<3

0?

0.0

0.0

P,o

r*

/

3

Al

t$

1.&

/

<5>

)

s.c

0.O

Si

lAstmnxiial

3t>

^

l4ff

/e. j"

to

US

o

*?

7

.AO.

M&£~

/00J>

4

/,

j'

111

s,$

f/,6

s

S

Jo 27*

?7,K

rrt

I-Aircraft

JW

'7

#

7*

H

M 2

<?>

<?

fie

0.O

0.0

_f2_

p

0.0

O.O

p,(\

/

/

X

■r.U

f.i.

H*

3-Licht Phono*.

_£

3

7

/-?

e,<i

«?■/

a o

*?

^£A.

0.0.

0.0

. 0.

—2-A

.00

0,0

0,f)

i>

0.0

0.0

*0

(•Birds

o

<?

jQ,&

0.0

0.0

o

<P

e.o

0.0

a

O.o

0.0

'G

&

^JL

-JLS.

0-0

0.0

S-Croods, Out, elc

/

4

S

0.3

/■*

I.S

<?

^

0.0

0.0

0.0

a

00

0.0

0.C

_J2-

-&°~

O.O

0-0

tlinuffic Mb;

Al

<P

JO

XL.

JUl

76

f?

0J

00

0.0

<3

2

/L7

0,0

M-?

J £>

X

/It

0.0

<?■/

7-Pfrd»loiicjl

1

/

/<>

2.L

0-J

?■?

£>

^

$.0

0-0

00

o

O.o

O.O

0.0

/

o

-JL

4',C

jo^ol

,r&

B-Uninmn

62

o

it

/to

0.0

/W

£>

e>

<?

0.0

0.0

0,°

e>

o.o

0.0

0.0

JL

2.

m

0.0

///

t-atm

/°

c

/<*

Jt4

11

^

<?

S.0

0.0

0.0

/

/

X

IA.

*.3

fat,

t0

O

0.O

0.0

/j^

Tot*

m.

/t>0

344

7e$

&.t

/ad.

2

^

ff.a foe.e

/0O,

_!

J

/A

7f.o

Sf.o

/op.

fZ

4>

\jL

64.7

is?

/a>,

/<?i'0

/9J-/

/?j-2

Enlwtiw

Nitmbei

Per Cent

rfuubw

Pei Cent

Number

Percent

HuabH

Pel Cent

Certain

OoubHu

Total

Ctrtliiv

Doubttu

Total

Ctrtir,

DooUojIfZ

4>

\jL

64.7

is?

/a>,

/<?i'0

/9J-/

/?j-2

Enlwtiw

Nitmbei

Per Cent

rfuubw

Pei Cent

Number

Percent

HuabH

Pel Cent

Certain

OoubHu

Total

Ctrtliiv

Doubttu

Total

Ctrtir,

DooUojI

Tqlal

Certain

DsAthl

Total

Certain

D00MI11I

Total

Certain

DsgUfut Total

Certain

Dtratirti

Total

Certain

DmMfcl

Total

0-B«lloon

A

(*

/■a

ff.0

4f3

3

a

3

fr'.O

ec

xflt,

JX

44-

foi 30.1

//X

%H

l-A>lmneaic*l

s

O

J"

l<?4

0.0

7ti

-JL

1

1

/L7

13

&A

3a

/,r

zr

1-1

JlL

*-1

2-Aircofl

..£>.

0.0

-££-<

00

1

1

?.

A.l

t.3

IM

J3

/f

3$

1/

J-.3.

fi.t

Ki|*t Ptiona.

O

0.0

aa

OA

0.0

0.0

66

.jL

,?

?

14

/./

PJ

4-Binb

&

&

00

0.0

Q.0

0.0

00

0/>

£>

J.o

0.0

00

5-Cloudi, Oat, etc

_£_£

°0

CD

__£_

0.0

00

Of)

/

4

i'

0.4-

JA

■/*

C-lnsiRic Mb.

-?

a

X

M.

O.o

//■?

' t

I

u.

-£iSJ\

ft

/<9

/<?

£■?

0.0

(*7

7-Ps>clBlo|ical

/

/

.£$-

O.O

.r,f

00

0.0

M

7

/

T

A-r

0.4

*}

8-UnkmM

<*

£7

A

m.

0.0

//1

J

J

££0

0.0

2,<T6

£JL

J'S

m

0.0

/f1

KMhei

0^

/

I

0.0

j:f

$t

a

00

0.0

O.0

_$.

4

/j

j. 2

?■*

U

TOW

/G

/

tf

Ml

j'.f

/60.

/0

A

/A

m

4.?

faQ.

Hi

86

Ms

4U

$0.4

/<#.

»Af f/s-4

*

&Ml-)//)1-/0A/

0f

/Mr,7-

&& M7-//U0S f£>£

j41.C

<S£-*£S

..*Y

#i?*>/}/er&jo

&0E0S

Of d?jgj££7S £Ei

S TjVA/V /?/!,& *S0A/0#e/}

**/££S _J0£&_ S/0&g

Alt YiTARS

S94-7 '

/14S

/944

Evaluatioa

Number

Percent

Hinder

PerCent

Number

Percent

Number

Pel Cat

Certain

DHibtfu

Total

Certain

Ooobrhj

Total

Certain

Oouothjl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doublful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Billoon " '

Zz

J7

?f

22.1

/?*

It/

/

«

/

■fo.o

0.0

fPo

s

/j

f

4X.I

rs

fti

/

J

3

S.6,

//'

(CI

1-AslrpnoiRical

£*

//

1/

£1

f.4

/<■*

O

O.O

0.O

00

4-

/

.<

JJ./

<3

U.f\

&

j

2

SI 3

///

ff.1

2-Aittraft

/i

a;

\f

U-

/0-3

n.0

0.0

0.0

/

i

? g

S.2J

3

S.6,

//'

(CI

1-AslrpnoiRical

£*

//

1/

£1

f.4

/<■*

O

O.O

0.O

00

4-

/

.<

JJ./

<3

U.f\

&

j

2

SI 3

///

ff.1

2-Aittraft

/i

a;

\f

U-

/0-3

n.0

0.0

0.0

/

i

? g

S.2

si

fdX

J

X

O.o

f/t

If/

3-Liftil PIukib.

3

*>

00

/J'

i.s

6

0O

-Ogj

OO

O

d

J&J2-

0.0

M

€>

0.0

~£L°-

0-0

«- Biros

3

/

f

w

04

? if

£>

£>

0a

O

0.0

a

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

'■b

S-Clwds, Dust, etc.

/

/

A

or

0-{

/■*

<?

£>

0.0

JL£~

0.0

.0

fi.0

04

O

O

O.O

O.0

00

6-lnsulfic Md.

6

i

j.i

_&£_

7-1

O

0.0

0.0

0-0

a

O

0.0

00

6A

/

<5>

/

jt.jL

o.O

<:(,

7-Pjyclulojital

-2.

-?

/.o

0<?

■/■»

£>

O

ft

0.0

0.0

O0

a

0.O

0.0

fl-6

a

O

O

0.0

Oa

t.d

MjnkKiMi

S3

?,?

//,./

0O

fr(

a

£>

0>O

0.0

0-0

/

£>

/

J' 3

0#

*;i

3

&

3

/Ll

JtfJ.

<C4

9-0*er

t

3

if

1±

u

f.f

/

O

/

A'0.0

0.0

fo.o

a

2

J

to

/OS

/Oi<!

- /

£>

f

41h-

0.0

~^T^

Total

/3S

a

Jos

£&.

3*7

/•*■

f

O

A

fjm.

0.0

/W,

ML

S

/i

73.7

#.2

/M.

a

i

/*

a.?\

S3 3

/M,

4>

/?J~£>

/9J-/

/?J-Jl

Evatinutti

Nonber

PttCmt

HwrAei

Percent

Nuaber

Per Cent

Niiinier

Pet Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DrjuMfill

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouMful

Total

Certain

DoobBiil

Tolal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

»■ Balloon

4

/

y

2lL

s.i

?A7

-Z

/

iJ".a

0.0

3S.0

1st

XI

,f,f

22.4

/Li

3W

I-Aslnnoaial

/

a

/

S3

-0JLa

t<7J

e>

t_

V

00

JS.o-

We

J3L

?

/(>

f.l

<.f

i(-A

i-Airciafl

j'

K

Si3

^0JL.

PCS

J-

/

3.S.0

0.0

AT.o

//

a

f?

17.

mi

tyS

Hi(M Ptiemii,

0.0

0.0

40

' O

a

0o

r

09

.?

y 3 J

to

S.I

?f

t-Biros

a&

t-o

0(1

6

O.o

0,0

0O

1

j

i

2.1

0*7

*■*

S-Clwds, Bust, et<-

d

04

0.0

tP.fi

<0

J

fio

0.0

0.a

/

/

A

O.y

0.-7

(t

frliunlTic. Wo.

/

/

s.s

/.0

,4'S

a

a

00

0.0

0.O

4-

y

Zt

O0

J-X

?.Pjjcralojic3i

d

0.0

00

0,0

a

0.ed

04

0.0

tP.fi

<0

J

fio

0.0

0.a

/

/

A

O.y

0.-7

(t

frliunlTic. Wo.

/

/

s.s

/.0

,4'S

a

a

00

0.0

0.O

4-

y

Zt

O0

J-X

?.Pjjcralojic3i

d

0.0

00

0,0

a

0.e

0.0

O.o

^

k

ML

jlS-

fj

(■Unknona

i

O

t,

UL

fij

icl.

/

a

/

Z£o

0.O

3Sj>

J*2

^

?•?

/i'.i

0.0

ffl\

MAC

/

O

f

j:3 /)o

f.*>

a

0.0

-&0-~

0.0

J""

/

c

3J-

0.1

Wx

f

Total

JA-

1

/<?

44?

r.i

/4>.

3

/

4

if.0

3£o

/00.

Jf

r4

/4J

UZ

n$

/M

204

HP

-Z2^£ &J££-

ei/ALi/Ar-jOAj <?/? /JAJir S/<$,#r/A/& s _>%<? j?h </£-j#s ££. / ?£s>a*r&0

i/feei?*

0f

0aj££Tt j

<w

£ W»0*£~O

T0

taise- //t/A/0££/3 M/£.t£i /*£•& /sea*.

rfli- y£-Afi3

/<?4 7

/94f

/<?4<f

Evaluation

Number

Pei Coit

Numbei

Per Cent

Number

Pei Cent

Number

Pel Cent

Certain

Douatful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouUful

Total

Cfliir-

Doubtful

Totil

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoutllDl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToIX

0. Billow

*?/

If

??

Iff

J.O

/r?/

-J,

<S

te,i

0.0

t»f

/

4

>f

JJL

2°J>

juo

A

<S

^

2JL

0.0

tf/

1- Astronomical

/4

n

W

u

1.4

/*£

0.0

0.0

0,O

S

/

4

;S.o

s ■ O

30.0

A

-?

£>.0

t-7

(T.7

2-Ancraft

4.4

j?

ft

24.2

/O.3.

■tf-9

/

ff

f

Xa

4.0

cz

4-

/

r

Jtc.o

i~0

M'C

4-

A

i

/?4.

t.7 16.,/

3-LigM Pnenom,

4-

i

s

/J"

fl.4

AT

/

f

U.

oo

*'■?

/

o

i

r.o

XO

e

6.0

O.O

00

4-ei'iii

o

t

/

0.0

cl-

0-1

_*gj

<?

o.o

CO

0.0

e>

/

i

£>J>

S.o

4'.0

. &

o

a o

O.o

A0

S-Cleuds, Oust, etc

: 0.

2

■?

&e_

ot

0,1

d

o.o

o.o

f

o

6

d.o

o.o

O.O

£>

a

O.O

<Lo

0.0

frlnttftic hip.

J-*

a

zs

is

pa

f*

A

a

A

6.2

O.O

6-z

A

o

2

Z&&.

O <

(O.o

z

- a

if

S4.S

$,P-

XKX

7-PijdiolOflal

<

A

s>

3.3

0.%

V

./.

A

■?.

jLa

La

nt

a

.O,o

*.Q

e.t>

a

a

o.o

0.0

flo

(■ unknot*

£*

o

6Z

Zl.i

>■"

?U

7

o

/

43.!

L&£-

4?B

*

o

2

/O.o

o.o

(0 t O

4"

o

*'

2/7

O.o

Ml

j-ofter

?

/

yA

■?.

jLa

La

nt

a

.O,o

*.Q

e.t>

a

a

o.o

0.0

flo

(■ unknot*

£*

o

6Z

Zl.i

>■"

?U

7

o

/

43.!

L&£-

4?B

*

o

2

/O.o

o.o

(0 t O

4"

o

*'

2/7

O.o

Ml

j-ofter

?

/

y

t-1

*4

*•/

/

o

/

X^

6.0

tf.r

O

Q

_£e.

o.o

O.O

o

o

a

O.o

O.o

o<?

Toll!

JoS

J-f

X4

71.1

22.3

/(&.

r>j'

A

H

fit U

/•V.

JL

7

Ao

fa.o

Zf.o sot.

US-

4

J$

to. 6.

H 4

/<*?,

/fro

/9J-/

/?J-2

Evaluation

Nwntjer

Percent

rViimier

Percent

Nwnber

Percent

flirnoer

PerCertt

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dwbtful

Total

Certain

Ootbtful

Total

Certain

OoiAttuI

Total

Certain

Doulitfii

ToUl

Certain Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

/

/

■^

di-

4-o

lo

A

•?

m

fi.O

/r.i

/2

S

/A'- 12 If

?4

1-Ailmnomical

/

4

J

4o

/2.o

/4o

- /

/

J\

7-1

1.7

*rf

//

/0

2/

u

do

/J.i

2-Aircraft

I

o

c

24.*

o.o

J4.o

-y

>

s

3oS

7 7

W6

j£iL

yj

6*26.9

fi.t io.i

3-Li(ht Phenom.

o

o

j£«

o.o

o.o

-j2-

a

<\

O.O

O.O

06

3l

/

J /.X .0.6.

f.%

4-Bilds -

o

o.o

O.o

0.O

_ 6.

o

fi

5^

<?0

0.6

o

o

d

0.O

0.0

tf-Q

5-Clowts, Dust etc

£>

o

_.OJ>

fi.O

o.o

a

o

o

e.o

Q,o

(10

2

X

/■?.

{A

G-tnsuffic. Info.

JT

.

r

JoA\

0.0

Aoo

e

o

<?*?

O.o

0A

9

_L

s.4

0.0

,{?

7-Piyclalo|ic>l

J

/

4o

0.O

4.0

o

4

o.o

&6

^h

/

< 1.4

G(*

3Z

tJnkiKjm

6

a

6

l4.o

o.o

H4.P

-J.

o

7

Stt.l

i.o

ZZ/

M.

39 J?l.t

O.O

r"f

Mthei

i

r

4,o

4.0

t

o

7

7.1

p.o

7/

j-

s

J.o

o,o

10

**

Total

10

s

&r

kj>

20.0

/00,

JL

2

/J

&L

/r.4

/'A

/J2.

4*

m

%4

24.0

/02..

9

,

r*Ai£ a tst.

^i/zti-UAr^Hi/

0£

_t/Aj/-r

sr&#r//v& s

f/2/£ ^9i.L

V£4£S

j?</

je£iS0£j-£D

SS5S0S Of OtiJftlTS £>?££, F06>*& s///A/0je£0 fl*/L£S /ffiO. //aVi?

An- y^x/gr

/f*7 '

/94X

/449

Evaluation

Number

Percent

Nira»»r

Percent

Nunder

Percent

Number

Per Cent '

Certain

OmbHul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

CertainAn- y^x/gr

/f*7 '

/94X

/449

Evaluation

Number

Percent

Nira»»r

Percent

Nunder

Percent

Number

Per Cent '

Certain

OmbHul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0-Balloon

J0

«?0

fa

33

3.3

ri.fi

/

O

/

jm

o

?1

A

' /

^

J5

jf.i

at

ff

/

/

0.O

M

At

1-Astnimiial

u

a

/ ,<

/it

/o.o

21.X

£

4

/o

tu

/If

<z?<y

-4.

c

to

' tlJk

n<*

ir.v

3L

/I 7 /

Zl

3J.

Jtey

ir*

2-Airctafl

V

iff

Kf

14.1

/J- H

#4

j

?

ff^

r.1

,p

S

f

i

AL

2.1

t/r?

J'

//

J/X

9.&

■?/./

3-Li(h| Pturnm.

?

j

/o

At

6.S"

l-L

0.0

O.O

So

/

A

3

is

JT.1

}.t

O

o

GO

o.o

0.6

4-Sirits

J

A

S

■6 J'

0,3

JK

0.0

o.o

0.0

/

(

Z

?.1

n

s-t

/

/

0.O

14

/?

S-Clouds, Dusl, etc.

a

o

0.0

0.0

An

0>

o.e

O.o

o.o

__£.

_2_

Q

_ &&.

o.o

0.6

o

f?

0.0

<?6

(?.fl

E-lnsuHic. Into.

&-

Y9

Jtf-

0,o

7.1

^

O

'<?

Jtf

o.o

>C?

4-

o

i\

/At

O.O

tf-1

JT

a

S

4.L

O.o

f.<e

7-Psyxholoiical

7

J

fo

JJ-

0.S

/c

/

/

o.o

J9

Z-9

O

n

Co

0.0

i>J

, I

o

A

/.<?

0.0

/■?

S-Unknomn

/4'3

o

P"1

2X1

0.0

zr.t

/JL

/%

St. 2

P.0

IK'*

■?

o

7

2o.(,

O.O

?0.&

_£.

o

f

n.s

0.0

a 3

4-O0ier

2£

4

16

4J-

1

X-9

s

S

/4.7

^2-p-

'</.?

/

/

•7.

2$

<?,?

M

/

V

J4

O.O

t..f

Total

43>f

/14

fat

7/4

2i.U

/oo t

^2-

7

s4

m

20. (,

/O0,

JA

/*

34

id

3S.3

/ot.

M.

2S

S2.

41.2

j'j.r

A°a t

/<?J~0

/fj~/

/?j-2

Evaluation

Number

P« Cent

Number

Percent

Nu giber

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tslal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;ertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dwbtful

TotaT

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

3

fi

12.

fi.0

If

/

O

/

jA

iff

&i

J±

v/

U

3.i

4}

?(>

1-Astnnonical

. *?

4

c

r.3

/o.jTCertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dwbtful

TotaT

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

3

fi

12.

fi.0

If

/

O

/

jA

iff

&i

J±

v/

U

3.i

4}

?(>

1-Astnnonical

. *?

4

c

r.3

/o.jT

tff!

/o

■ O

/O

£4.S

<P

WJ

u

2C

n

/4.A

L.t

10.?

J-Aireratt

. .?.

4

(A

/!.<?

/*-f

tt<1

4-

J

C

nx

Irt

zp.1

Al

47

Hi

Sf.<f

K1

VJI

3-Lijtit FhenoiiL

o

0.0

O.O

U

/

o

/

M.

9,0

*/

j-

/

b

J.D

0A

(.<

ej-Birds

.0.

6

-&CL

(}.o

0-0

/5

e

&.0

O.o

$-0

J

3

0^'

0.O

■0.f

S-Clwdi, Dull, etc

a

-4JL

O.O

to

0.0

O.o

<?•/)

-0.O

O

fid

frlnuffic hfc.

s

o

3

33-

e.o

77

O

■ o

0.6

O.O

*<>

J£

3?

i.t

0.6

a./

7.pljthjhj|ial

<?

-fi.O-

O.o

0-0

J

/

0.0

14

ni

<o

A

7

M.

0.X

U

gVUnknoM

//

(A

2$9

0,0

3f)

_z

-A

24.1

0.0

-2VJ

/e4

a

/at;

3S.I

04

zrj

S-OOier

2.

A

/

S.l

i'3

t6 6

3

3

to. 1

e.o

to J

J±

/

/S

3.1

O.X

t.i

.To."

M-

A°

Sf

is.')

*£3

/W.

M.

J

A<?

Hi

/o.$

}o0 t

3oS

tl4

4*2

130.

tf.0

/of,

205

fc

I

r/>gi.e Ar£7. . . J=.V/lL,i'/1Tf<?/v t?r i?A,/-r s/£/fr/n,f,s fee ^z v£-/?£s . &v hewers &

/4^i. Years

/<94?

/94S

/9S9

Evaluation

Number

Percent

Number

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Number

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

TiliP

Certain

Doutrtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tutsi

:«tjin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Totil

Certiii

OouHrul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

<£>

-?

■*

_&£

/•£

/K

JLSl.

6.0

D.O

CO

O.q

00

4)

#

0.6

e.o

0.6

LAsKonoitiol

~M

//

7*

J£i

iV4

WJ

. /_

>

M*.

oj>

Av.e

6

4

/A

til

4-2.1

U$

'£

&

£.0

/ap.0

toa.a

I-Aircrafl

^r

2

£

4.4

/<<

&,6

e?

_£A

0.j>

O.o

o

0,9

0.0

0.0

-£~

a

0}

0,&

0.0

0.0

3-LiiM Ptiwoin.

O

J>0

0.0

*e>

f>

o.o

0.0

O.O

a

0.e

a.o

00

o

4>

O.a

00

-&5-

I-Girrls

o

/

/

0.O

e.t

/C

&

o

0.0

0.O

Co

0-

c

$.0.

.0.0

f)0

a

o

P

0.0

O.0

0.0

5-CloudJ, Oust efe.

t

o

/

0.3

0O

^?

£?

o0.0

O.O

a

0.e

a.o

00

o

4>

O.a

00

-&5-

I-Girrls

o

/

/

0.O

e.t

/C

&

o

0.0

0.O

Co

0-

c

$.0.

.0.0

f)0

a

o

P

0.0

O.0

0.0

5-CloudJ, Oust efe.

t

o

/

0.3

0O

^?

£?

o

0-O

0.O

£j£_

o

a

e.o

e*

0.$

-j£_

0>,0

C.0>

O.0

6-biuflic. Info.

4

o

f

2£

o.o

?y

a

O

■ e>

0.O

0.0

0.O

a

o

e.0

e.a

0-ft

a

O.o

GO

00

7-PsvcMo(ial

3>

/

/

0.0

a-S

J9

a

ul£j

O.a

0.0

0.0

0-0

^i

00

4.0

0.0

>- Unknown

/g

ft

14.1

P-o

/M

o

o

(?

0.0

0.0

0o

z

z

Mi

<?,?.

f?3

c

IS—

0>.O

04

0.0

9-ODiP :

J

o

3

JS

00

Pf

a>

&SL.

0,0

O.O

-£-\

o

0.0

0.0

00

o

o

0.O

0,0)

0,O

Total

L&t

i?

/33

01

3oj

/<&>•

_J_

/

/<*)*

0.O

IOO.

2

6

/4

IZL

423/00.

4,

i

0&

<00*>

JOP±

/?J-0

/?J-/

/4 ra

1

•Vumb«r

PerCent

Number

Percent

Number

Percent

Nwibet

PerCail

Evaluation

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OwbtMl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain.

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certai

Doubtful

Total

C«tai«

JtabtMJ

Total

D-Balloon

o

a

04

fi-0

00

6

O

^

0.0

0.O

fi.O

A

-J

0.0

zt«

rf*tf

1-AslnnomicAl

f

^

If

Ui

}*1

/40»

3-

J

6'

3X1

SITi

fc<£

Jc

/>

Jl

il.t

/4K

.«■<*

?-*i retail

a

O

0.0

0.0

o,0

a

o

0.o

0.0

0,0

&

X

^x

f.f

?■(,

/0A

3-lifht Phenom.

O _,

0p

S.0

0.O

0-0.

0.0

0.0

•o

0.0

0.O

t<>

*■ einfs

o

o

'0.0

0.0

00

a

0.0

O.O

Of?

1

-L

4£-

/.J

/■3

S-Clouds. Oust, etc.

a .

0.0

0.0

0.0

6.0

o.o

/

O

_z

/.£

0.0

/■3

S-lDHiHic Into.

o

0.O

0,O

0,0

/

/

M

6,0

r./

_J_

c

_x

/o.i

0-0

tfl*

?-Pjrcr»fsficil

JZ0.

0,0

0.0

(1

0.O

0.0

0.0

7

/

0.0

/■3

AS

8-UnkiMMi

o

n

00

O t 0.

0.0

a.

o

33.3

0.0

%?A

M.

e

is m

0.0

/??

+~! r

MBwi

a

£>

0.0

C0

0:0

./

o

/

iU

9.0

//./

-?

3_

Z&

0.0

3C

.

Total

-±

a"

/4

&L

sr.f

/0fr

6,

3

<?

iU

S3. 3

M

£>/

if

Jl

7fX

V. 2

/O0-

\

TMS./Z

/)/SS

£

??#(.,

vtr/t

7n/a

£>

0.0

C0

0:0

./

o

/

iU

9.0

//./

-?

3_

Z&

0.0

3C

.

Total

-±

a"

/4

&L

sr.f

/0fr

6,

3

<?

iU

S3. 3

M

£>/

if

Jl

7fX

V. 2

/O0-

\

TMS./Z

/)/SS

£

??#(.,

vtr/t

7n/

0?

_ -0&ir _

X/&WT/AJGS F0&

^tc feaes

gy /?&/?0eT£0:

Sf£-£

OS 0>P 0>gJE<irs &&£$ _ A/0T <7-/9T£0

1 "

i

All Yexrts-

V947

/44f

/9*4

1

Hwnbti

PerCenl'

Nb»*«

PerCenl

Nuubei

Percent

Nunber

P« Cot

Evaluation

Certain

Oovbtful

jrowj

CerUm

Ooubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tola!

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooibtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cetim

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Walloon

-&L

41

(ft

AA.

4.9

tf,f

^

.<P

,3

4.S

0.0

/t

JL

$

f

iz.

s-.L

9.1

1

O

7

JTf

0.0

f?

l-Aslivrtomical

ni

//*

31/

IZL

'H

21 •?

/3

'.a

A

zu.

4.t

ttf

7

>z

/I

/S0

33.3

It- A

M.

44

if

n&

no

54.6

2-Aircratl

22-

P7

/79

JJ-

8 6.

(1.1

1

1

3.4

0.0

?f

_J_

I

ft

f3.o

/■f

(f.9

-JL-

X.

f

J-A

/■i

74

3 ; Liiht Ptunom.

-7ZJ

It

R?

JJL

/■/

JZ

/

o

1

3.4

do

3Y

1

1

o.o

/■4

/f

-JL\

O

O

0.o

O O

_&&.

"■Birds

7

J'

/3

01

OS

{•*

O

0.O

o.o

0.0

—I-

/

3

14

/1

W

J

o

3.

/.I

9.0

/•7

5-Clouds, Oust etc.

o

o

0.0

0.6

0.O

o

0o

O.O

o.o

__£_

o

0.0

-JLBJ

Aft

s

o

o

0.0

0.0

0.0

S-Kiailfic, Into.

iiz

o

w

&L

00

/fa

J_

6

1

3f.4

0.O

W

7

1

ti.1

0.6

M

n

t>

11

/4.s

O.a

rft

7-PsrtiBio|iial

i*

3

ft

A3

0.Z

ti

^3_

o

1

AL

00

M

L.

r

J

11.

0.0

/•f

_i_

<s>

t

.*t

0.0.

an

t-Qnlmom

■/.?

o

/(,?

OJ-

0.0

4.7

-±

6

4

ii

0.0

9 £

^k.

4

24-

O0

U

J£

o

J4

IU

0.0

/{4

Mther

JS

/4

fl

3.8

1.4

S3

_5.

o

f

ML

0.0

3/y

-^

,■?

r

3.?

JCM-,

9-*

-*\

a

4-

M.

0.O

,?:Y

Total

73o

tf<?

/0/0

73A

371

f<%.

do.

A

4x

&z

4S

/0d.

33

X/

s4

UL

ft.<?

/04

~M

u

m

Ui

oS.7

/0<t.

I)

/<?J~0

/9j-/

/?rjz

Evaluation

Number

Percent

Kumtwr .

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Number73A

371

f<%.

do.

A

4x

&z

4S

/0d.

33

X/

s4

UL

ft.<?

/04

~M

u

m

Ui

oS.7

/0<t.

I)

/<?J~0

/9j-/

/?rjz

Evaluation

Number

Percent

Kumtwr .

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Ooibtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:>|rtein

Doubtful

Total

Certai ei

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OrNbttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cabin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Ballow

s

3

//

J±

3 i

H»

^

3

1

jl

4-3

ij

H

4a

■ft*

1.L

i.4-

If*

l-Aslrononiital

J.4

6

So

3f,0

Li

%A

6.

$

/4

IA

IU

20,/)

Ml\

4o

ffl

/?■*

LA

tt-1

Z-Ainrafl

/2

7

ff

13.^

Tfi

If.i

d

4

/0

ft.L

S.I

Ifrf

^9

U

ft*

U

Hi

u*

3-LijM Phemn,

—

-

-££\

00

flo

/

/

3

JA.

It

-r«

tf

f

If

jA\

14

u

4-Biios

a

0.0

O.0

O.o

a

/

1

3.0

1.4

//

4

3

V

0.4,

o.y

f,l

5-Oouds, Dust elc

0O

00

0.O

J>0

0.0

(f.0

00.

0.0

<?.<)

frlnsuflic bib.

tr\

/J"

//.£

0.0

/X.<t

/Z

/ X

171

0.0

f?l

sr

a

is

/JJ'

0.0

/.U

J.PsjtfDlopal

0>

o

10

0.6

0.0

/

O

I

JA

O.O

/.¥

.7

A

f \

JjL

3

/f

t-IMrioim

;?

<?

(7

/f7

O.O

rt-7

<*3

■ .

*l

2J&

0.0

IV*

ML

M

/7.3

0.0

/?,A

Mth»

J

/

<?

3.1

■Iff

?■/

3

G

J

dJL

0.0

tf

/7

/0

27

£1

U

f3

■

-

TOW

at

(1

46

Si 3

171

/0O.

33

a

I*

1L±

34.3

/*>,

4M

111

tti

^a

3S.I

m

206

PWP

mm

«WK

TrfJCfL A /S,9 £t/Ai.l/#T/0Aj

/?/=-

0A.i££T X/6#r//lt6S

/?/)£

#irL

</£A£l

4V

*>£/>/?& T£0

sPsEas as* /?£jea.7-s ST-str/on/tfie V

Z^iL Vfe*/fW

/<?<?■>

/<?4f

/?#f

Evaluation

Number

Per Ctnl

Numoei

Per Cenl

Nu giber

PeiCent

Ninon

PerCetit

Certun

•Doubtful

Total

Ctrtam

OoubHut

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooublfil

Total

CeftJin

□wbtful

Total

Cabin

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

Ji

i"?

/02

jffi

/J.1 \%i

&

O

_<2-

.0A

04

P,0>

^

/

$

,20.0

/0D

■o^d

/

a

/

<jJ

£J?

1 1'AstnnMueil

Jl

VO

S3

/*■*

-UL

/7.J aTotal

Cabin

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

Ji

i"?

/02

jffi

/J.1 \%i

&

O

_<2-

.0A

04

P,0>

^

/

$

,20.0

/0D

■o^d

/

a

/

<jJ

£J?

1 1'AstnnMueil

Jl

VO

S3

/*■*

-UL

/7.J a

2.

2

4?

/60*

&**

3

o

.7

&4

04

34.0

. JT

- J

rf

if- I

M.9 ft. 4

l-Aitaatt

>J

/ V-

J-f

1.L

J.*

)/ .t

9

t>

06

90

0.0

o

o

6.6

04

0/)

1

/

A

(-2

I*

tf-f

H>tht PtwMm.

4-

V

<i

/■*

£>.%

-AJ.

&

-£J~

0.0

0*

<r>

~o

e

0jO

OJ>

#■<>

_fi_

o

9o

t>*o

0.0

4-Bilds

a

«?

&.o

0.0

0.0

a

00

0.0

0,0

o

JlA

aJ

0-0

a

0.O

00

S-Cloudj, Dust, tie.

/

4

J'

0.Z

'■?

!.(.

a

a

o

JUL

o.o

'#.0

a

6

j2A

A a

0<7

c.

a

0*

0.4

0.0

friiuvitit Wo.

2*

^4

1*

0.0

7.1

<?

0.0

0.0

0*

A.

O

J

3&L

0.0 200

_^

A

MS

-j2JL

tfT

7-Pitcnolo|ical

i

t

f

J.0>

0.3

>.*

e>

.0.0

0.0

40

o

o

-£4.

^JUL

(t-6

/.

1

Lx

0.0

S..2

S-lii*i»wn

J'3

e

S3

/tr

0.O

n.s

<?

e

4 6

0>,6

0.4

o

a

jZA.

0j

00

J

o

f

/J.f

0-0 &.J

»0dw

/•

J~

/**

3.3

J. 7

■r.4

<?

a

o

00

0.0

rfw

./.

/

A

/0£

UJZ0.

200

o

o

£?.

0.0

o.o

Total

2/9

i3

^^

7/S

XfX

J&-

Q

J

2

0.0

/064

/0A

-L-

J

/o

pm

&4.

/00.

/Z

4

/6

Z£e_

JW-0

J^

m

U

tP"

y?j-0

/4s-/

/9SJL,

Evaluation

' Number

Pel Cent

Number

Pel Cenl

Nunbei

Pel Cent

Number

Pei Cent

Certain

Dotibttu

ToUl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Otubtfu

Total

Certain

Dcutatlul

Total

O-Ballnn

dr

£>

s

4/J>

0<?

*/,%

J

3

ZJA

0.°

H3

xTi

J/f

fo

Xtl

/cA.^.S

l.*tlrar»BicJl

a"

o

y

UZ

.s2-0

iy3

J.

/

3

•/.a

?/

21. i

M-

/<f

J*

JJ.

i'.l

/1,<?

Z-Aitcralt

o

o

<?

d-4

rt#

0<?

-,/J

_^S_,

/

SI

0>,t>

it

a./

//

32.

f.y

4.r

/*,/>

3- Li (hi Ptienrm.

o

Ad

&0

'■4

o

<P

0.O

<?.e

0.0

_L

Z

(■*

/.L

0.S

■?/

4-BirrJs

O

A0

0.0

/?J

■a

6.0

0.0

#,0

O

00

O.o

0-/)/

SI

0>,t>

it

a./

//

32.

f.y

4.r

/*,/>

3- Li (hi Ptienrm.

o

Ad

&0

'■4

o

<P

0.O

<?.e

0.0

_L

Z

(■*

/.L

0.S

■?/

4-BirrJs

O

A0

0.0

/?J

■a

6.0

0.0

#,0

O

00

O.o

0-/)

KlouJs, Dust, etc.

aj>>

&\0

M

o

c

0.O

0.0

0.0

/

4

S

0.4

■ /.i

2 1)

tlnjuffic. Info.

J2.

o

z.

/%.4

*>'

#.J

t

i

f/

0.0

<?/

/7

,o

/7

A±

o.o

A?

7-PsrclBlOjicat

_z_

o

1

&■!

{}$

te

a

&

0.O

0.O

00

i

f

7

M

e.4

A -9

t-UoknoMi

2.

<5>

z

as

*■<!

/AS

1

o

$

2Zi

O

£?.$

£L

a

4*

/as

0.0

At/.

Mthei

O

/

t

A*

A%

*-Z

o

00

0.0

0.0

_J_

J

/z

M.

/.J

</■{

Total

K

/

/t,

ML

.S.z

/".

fo

/'

it

90.9

ft

/M.

(14

73

M7

&£

m

/a.

WLl

r A tie

£M£V/}T/0A/

0?

04JE&T Sf/ZUr/M&S 00£

/}U- </&A0S /?(/

/eera/erso

si*e*0s 0?

0gJ£dTS L£SS T/T/f/V 0to£ f/0#0££a M/l&S />&& #0M

AlL YlTAt?.?

/1/£lZ.

/?4-r

/?#?

Evaluation

Nueiber

Pei Cent

Number

Pa Coil

Nurabei

PerCenl

Number

PerCent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouWtitl

Tola"!

Certain

JJoubttili

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtta

Total

Certain

Dntbtfiil

total

D-BalloM

j£.

P4~

4Jf

Afi

m

Wj

/

/

&&

0.0

Q,0

-JlS

/

7

3te

4*

n,?

/

2

3

1.1

I4.i

JAf

1-Axnnoniical

/t

fO

AC

£.<9

f6

)ij

O

e>

J6

<?/)

()0

.1

/

4

a.t

£-A

mj

f_

t

(,

ir.-i

I'

n-t

:-*irciatt

/J

Z 4 ?

32

7.2

/0.6

ns

O

*}

0.6

fi-fi

(0

/

/

2.

£jl

6.x

//J

— &-

2

2

0^0

/4-i

/Y,3

3-Lijnt Ptienon.

o

J

$

0.O

/■I

n

s&

0.6

e.o

00

o

0"

—4M-

J"

o

_££,

O.O

j.a

4-Bims

J

f

4

/■?

M

Z'f

&

0.6

0O

£>.i

,10

0.6

06

__a_

0.0

to

6,0

S-Cloudt, Dust, He.

/

/

A

oC

e.C

)>%

a

fl

O

&A

0$

fij

0-0.

64

ft

6

,0

0.O

Oo

0.0

6-lnjuffic. Info. .

6

o

C

11

0.9

11

_g_

0.6

fl.6

/id

JlA.

0-0

06

u

a

1

7./

O.o

7, 1

7-Psyctnloiica)

s

A

U

0.O

/./

a

a

0.0

00

fifi

S

o

0J

/>■(>

flti

o

0,0.

0,06-lnjuffic. Info. .

6

o

C

11

0.9

11

_g_

0.6

fl.6

/id

JlA.

0-0

06

u

a

1

7./

O.o

7, 1

7-Psyctnloiica)

s

A

U

0.O

/./

a

a

0.0

00

fifi

S

o

0J

/>■(>

flti

o

0,0.

0,0

06

S-UnknoMi

£6

zc

ML

0.0

tYH

a

&

o

AO

n />

te

>

o

f

£i

6>J>

4Z

/

i

1-/ .

O.O

7< f

MKier

t

3

//

M.

1-1

*>■/

/

O

t

Sd.d

0,6

$t&

a

2

Ji

i?a.

/2.J'

/?*>'

/

o

f

t<

oo

Total

dJL

6A

IBo

d'i

S4.4

/«/,

1

o

A

im

e-ti

loO,

//

r

tl

OA

3/1

'06.

-SL

fi'

/4

&s.

Sr.7

/»6,

M

Mr

/?so

/?f/

/?fJL-

Evaluation

Number

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

NuAtbei

PerCent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dwottil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;ertaiii

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

4

/

S

21 r

r.f

tf#

/

0>

1

JJ.»

0.6

rffr'^

/<J

XI

s/

ilk

/U

fa

l-Astrominical

/

_^2-

1

J'*

0.0

ff

. 6

__L-

/

-dA.

Js.e

2^0

?

7

t*

s.i

J"j'

//4

I-Anciaft

j

a

3

/*£

/?(*

—L-

/

as.o

<?.6

&6

f

/(.

14

13

fz-t

ff-f

VLi jW Pliann.

o

o

o

t*

0i

6.0

' O

0.0

0/>

0-6

o

,3

s

6.0

X4

3.1

t-Biidi

o

o.»

&9

0-0

...

O

.0.0

00

0.Q

_1A

/

4-

JJl

0?

3-r?

5-Cloudi, Chut, etc.

<?

0.0

0.0

00

_

o

{?

0-0

'0/1

4.o

—JL—

/

Z

0i

0J

/■<,

t-lnwrfic. kilo.

/

o

1

.f.G

0.0

fl

O

_££

0.6

00

4-

o

4

2.1

0.0

nJ

7-Psvdiolo|icat

o

*°

e

*-0

a

.06

06

60

.2.

o

,?

/■&

00

/c

^Unanim

C

p

£

JJ'3

0*

if*

/

o

I

2jT.o

6,0

ts.d

/7

o

/r

/J.4

0,0

IZH

»-0tt'i«

/

o

/

j:»

O

ff

.

o

o

.0.O

0^

6-0

,j""

/

<,

S.1

O.S

/.?

Total

/(>

f

/I

94.1

JT.f

/#>,

Hj

1

4

7/.o

3S.o

/00>

11

f<6

/J.?

£ZL

394

/06.

207

ftftie

4/t,

/ £v/H.l/Ar/0/V

t?r

/?/?j^£r

S/fi Hf//I/

as

£££. iCf-

V£4£3

#s

^£fi0£ r£0.

Sfleees 0/? 0£j&ers 0/if

f *>w'P££0 r(? ft>4>A. {/0A/a/e£o M/ies sea ^00^

/4^£ v^»^

/<?41

/44?ftftie

4/t,

/ £v/H.l/Ar/0/V

t?r

/?/?j^£r

S/fi Hf//I/

as

£££. iCf-

V£4£3

#s

^£fi0£ r£0.

Sfleees 0/? 0£j&ers 0/if

f *>w'P££0 r(? ft>4>A. {/0A/a/e£o M/ies sea ^00^

/4^£ v^»^

/<?41

/44?

ff#f.

Evaluation

NunbH

Per Cent

Nun bet

Pel Cent

Hurnbei

Pet Cent

rhmt«i

FetCoit

Certain

Doubtful

Tolil

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:«ft»in

Doubtful

Total

Cat*™

Doubtful

Total

Attain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

Cerina

Doubtful

Total

Ceriiio

PooMM

Total

0- Balloon

^rk.

/

?9

1£

3.3

il.1

J

O

,?

Ji.O

0.0

3&Q

/

4

jr

S.0

304

3<t>

^

O

A

Mi'

ff.O

/<»<

1 l-Astomiidl

/J

/3

ajt

f.o

JT4

MM

o

£>.B

00

0,0

„J_

1

4

i£.6

SO

26{>

O

A

A

00

/*r

ttj

Mirer*!

_*ZJ

yC

U

lAli

/O.t)

IS. J

/

o

1

L7

0.0

67

4-

/

r

7(6

W

*4<>

4-

?■

I

1*/

/a j

i?/,6

>Li£h| Phomw.

3

I

4

/..$

04

1,1

/

o

/

£■?

0.0

t,7

/.

Q

/

S.0

0.0

SO

C

i.o

so

t 6

t-etids

A

t

i

0.0

6.4

04

&

o

P

06

OO

fi.C

. .£>.

/

/

e.o

f-Q

,{#

£>

e>

<?Q

Jp.tf

D.6

5-CloudJ, Oust elc.

o

A

ji

00

0.1

6-1

6

a

J>.6

0.0

d&

0.a

0."

a*

a

00

f.

/>,<>

6-lniutHr. trto.

J/Sl

o

XX

3jl

0.0

U

1

1

t. 7

(7,0

tf

3.

a

2

to.d

0.0

ia.a

_jC

c

a"

ji.3

0.0

M1

)-PsrdBki(icii

L

a

Z

j.y

0f

tl

/

/

X

Z..7

1-7

nf

e<?

0.0

0.0

0>

0.0

0.0

/!■()

g-IMtnmn

4'6

-o

rs

x{3

f-0

rf/,3

J^

a

I

<hp

e.o

ioo

?.

O

2

l».o

0/?

/*■<>

J^

c

+

?'■'

XL*—

s/t

»0rj*

_Jl_

o

7

1A

0.0

X<?

L-

o

/

L.1

ae

U

0.6

0.0

ao

e>

P*

0.0

4- ft

Total

fU

J3

23\

77.$

123.

m

^L

/

/£-

9J.3

£.7

(64

/3

7

20

bit

tf,fi

}te.

tS

4>-

/?

T'.f

#.t

{00.

t

- , .

/f£-0

/?£7

tf^-JL-

Euluatiori

Himba

Pet Cent

NumbH

Pet Cent

Nm*ei

Per Cent

Nwdh

Pet Cait

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dovotful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Dsutitfu

Total

CertainPet Cait

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dovotful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Dsutitfu

Total

Certain

DotMail

Total

n-Batloon

/

/

A

Ac

ti-

i-0

_A

O

A

m.

0.O

MA

//

J

14

f.2

<?,°

9-3

t-Astnnntctl

/

■v'

3

±£.

ff

&■*

_ /

/

-?

?/

*/

/t*

7

7

/4

u

u

9J

I-Aitcratt

-sd

O

S

M.0

0.0

*t-7

3

/

4

m

f.t

&s

4t

2. Z

ii

Alo

/4s

i/j

3-Uthl Ptlenom.

O

00

0.O..

£.0

a

00

0.0

aa

J

/

A

fi.1

0-1

i.f

4-Bints

-O

O

a

00

00

/}

O

0.0

0.O

40

0.0

#*

5-Clwds. Oust «tt

&.

_e_

^0

0.0

P 6

O

6

&./>_

0.0

0.0

■ <9

1-

A

So

/i

/3

B-rnsuffic mro.

■i~

jr

JJ-Z

<?

a?7

O

0.0

0f?

0.0

<9

9

4"f

0.0

S.1

f-Psyrtotapui

/

t

4.S-

*o

?■£

O

0.0

0.0

<?4

4

J

j-

J.C

-^L

4.3

8-UnUnwn

6

es

C

JU

0*°-

a* 3

2

O

z

/S.2

00

tfi-K

-0

■ O

a

J)'0

O.O

&*

M»B

00

0.0

0.0

/

Q

1

3l

0.0

if

S

s

3.3

0.O

■3 A

Total

/?

9

JZ

U.4

Mi

lea

_£

A

if

2/J

//.2

too.

jV6

te

/n

£3.

an

ff&

r /fgt-f

A

it. 2,

£&9U/Ar/0A/ (2£

tg&jeer

^t&H2-/A/£> %^

^0ae ^j?lj. </£j4£s

*t</

J0£/ , 0£T£0

&&£0i af _ 06~/£-drs __ .

at/£& sat/A #0*j0£ea M±£s />&£ s/0t><e

All Ys-Affs

/9^y

J 94-f '

/W?

Evaluation

Nlimbtf

PBCert

Nurnbef

Pet Cent

Nuitiet

Pa Cent

Nurabei

PerCenl

Certain

Doubtni

Total

Certain

Dnatful

Total

Certain! Dtrtnthtt

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoUbtfu

Total

Certain

Dogbtnl

Total

D-Balloon

/£

rf

36

Ji

3:3

(,.(•

. /

/

JX

0.0

f?-^

/

/

A

3

A,o

6*

O

O

<?

00

0.0

/,«

1-Astnnonical

61

^f

//2

//.r

f-9

U-f

JT

■ 4

f

/CI

/X.<7

IT-*

s

C

<?

9./

ft 3.

X.7.3

X

/<■

'//

4t

tl.X

11-1

J-Aiioalt

k>

7f

/S?

/f.o

/*?

M-?

A

J

.£&.

is

£J

1

/

4

4/

3.0

M.I

_L

J"

//

/4o

/H.7U.

3Lc[tit pbenuL

7

3

/0

Li

ft-i'

M

—4-\

^7

£0.

00X

/<■

'//

4t

tl.X

11-1

J-Aiioalt

k>

7f

/S?

/f.o

/*?

M-?

A

J

.£&.

is

£J

1

/

4

4/

3.0

M.I

_L

J"

//

/4o

/H.7U.

3Lc[tit pbenuL

7

3

/0

Li

ft-i'

M

—4-\

^7

£0.

00

s,e

_L

£.

3

So

(J

It

0.0

0.0

0C>

4-Bitih,

J

■\-

4'

OjT

0.4

fi.7

O

0.0

0.0

<?■£>

I

I

A

3.o

3o

-^

/

/

A3

^

5-Ctoods, Dirsl etc

O

0.0

0.0

H

O

0.0

0.0

0.0

O

A.o

-£J-

&o

0.0

0.0

0,0

6-Hsuflic. Wo.

4<

H

t.4

*0

*■*

X

O

z

O'

.&£-

t-t

_j£

a

4

/Xl

0.0

/X.f

1

1

1°

0e

If)

J-PrrchDloiical

?

J

fe>

/.s

0±-

I*

(

1

0.0

■J. 2

3-X.

<a

0.0

0.0

0.0

1

/

2.3. \

0,0

*.*>

(-Uniu»«) -

/&■

a

/4S

2LI

0.0

76.^

/ 2

O

/3

4/.1

0.0

V/.9

■7

€>

1

z/x

0.0

*/A

f

a

g

ILL

0.0

tt.L

Mttw

22

4-

J7

Al

fi 7

i.i

3

. a

3

1.1

0.0

9-7

/

/

A

Jo

3.0

<*,*

_i_

I

JA.

0.0

?1

Total

5f?

(*4

sfi

7/1

21 i

Mil

A±

1

S/

7M

ZlM

Mf.

2J.

/*

33

&.L

X*

/Off.

JjL

ZJ.

43

111.

nz

/oo.

/9J~*

/f.ry

/?^TJL^

Enluatnn

turabei

Per Cent

Nunbef

Percent

Number

PerCent

ttunber

PnCent

Certain

Oontittul

Total

Ctriain

DouMftil

Total

^cstein

DoutsthA

TOUT

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Xtan

Ooubtiol

Total

Certain

DouMtut

Total

Certuti

DouWui

Total

Ctrlain

Unntfut

Total

t> Balloon

. J

a

3

H

00

M

/

/

jk.

00

¥Z

M

n

M

3.1

4.r

7h

l-Aslnnoinical

/

t

JT

j.f

//4

/K7

7

7

21.2

0.0

*f-X

AC

L9

4>4

JLL

S0

if-,4

i-Airciall

<s~

4-

?

/4i

//4

Iff

Z£

/

4'

/£7

4-7

&■?

A±

61.

frt

/it

/(..x

H.0

J-Lijtit Pnenoin.

e>

00

0.0

/*

/

1

jU.

0.0

V-Z

^

1

I

/.?

O.l

/.(,

4-Bitdi

,

0.0

0.a

0.0

0.0

0.4

A

X

fij-

0.0

fi3

S-Clotids, Dust elc

t>

0.0

0.0

m

a

a

O

0e\

0.0

00

6.0

0.0

0-a

frtasuHic hfo.

1

3

ii

0-e

frt

0.0

0.

0.0

Ml

0.

34

S.I

00

r,r

7-pi)rclahi(ical

0>

0.0

0.O

0.0

-£L-

I

1

f.0

4*

¥Z

C

1

L 7

u

0.3.

1?

1-UnknoMi

_j/\

//

H4

a a

VY

-1.

7

2?x

0.0

39J{

ZL

19frt

0.0

0.

0.0

Ml

0.

34

S.I

00

r,r

7-pi)rclahi(ical

0>

0.0

0.O

0.0

-£L-

I

1

f.0

4*

¥Z

C

1

L 7

u

0.3.

1?

1-UnknoMi

_j/\

//

H4

a a

VY

-1.

7

2?x

0.0

39J{

ZL

19

M?

0.0

A*'l

t-Dther

ji

3.

4

J-.7

3~-7

HA

•x

a

LA.

0.0

$A

Z4-

i

/s

3.1

0-$

y-0

Total

-ZJ"

/a

35

7/4

lg£,

/at.

J£2\

2

#

m.

!■$

/e&.

m

jol

M*

72A

A/4

/O0-,

208

i

:

r*g£ £ 4/t.i £f/>i i/4 r/$A/

(?r

0rfj££r

S/&ASr/A>6

s

^o£ /96£.

</£/?£*

a v /e^fo*

r£i> .

5/>££0S . a? oajsars M^rea* -*./£■£■ Sfeeas

An.

YtTAXS

/*&

7^4/

/?<f9

Evaluation

(•inter

Pei Cent

Numbtf

Per Cent

Number

Per Cert

Numtiei

Pet Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain Doubtful

Total

:«itain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-BJlToon

J

0*

_££.

z&

?,£>

0.0

0.0

0.0

~^~\

,i

0.0

e.e>

0.0

' l-Astronomical

ss~

M

r 9

31.4

A4-*

Hi,

_jL

4"

//

4C-* 32s

W

<A

A

.0

IOb.0

/0O.O

'I-Airctalt

^r

2

8

XJ,

2o

It

_Jt_

A

'0.0

O.e

0.0

0.0.

0,o

6.0

3-L#t Phm».

—oA

o

e>

0.0

0.0

00

a

o

0.0

0.0

6

o.<?.

00

4-8irdl

f

t

J>0.

A.0

/.o

<0

6

-£—

a

0.0

0.1/

0.6

-&„

o

j&4„

0.0

0.t?

S-Clouds, Oust etc.

/

o

t

JjL-

-&0--£°-

^

t

_JZ_

a

o

0.O

<?.a

0.0

00

tlMuKic. Into.

t

«

g

SJ-

0.0

ti>

ft

_J2_

o

B

6.0

0.0

0.O

P

0.0

0.0

7Pird»lJ|iol

o

/

/

3,0

.£*.

A*

i

-JL.

0.0

0.0

0.O

.a

O

0.0

0.0

0.0

8-Ufiknonn

/(,

€>

Ac

A4J.

£0

#■*

V*

_£J

3

&.4

00

/fff

.0

0J

00

0.0>

9-Otn*

J

o

J

3o

0JL.

3"

O \

o

&

0,0

0. o

a

0£

0.0

0,0

ToW

if

3o

f?

W-

303

/#0.

,

2

■S

/3

\nz

3?i'

/eo

a

A

A

0.&

/O0.0

/00.

I

I

:§

/4ft>

/9S/

Sfj'2

Evaluation

Number

PerCent

Nunbtr

Percent

Nur*(l

PerCent

Nunibef

Percent

Certain

Dotibtfu

Total

Certain

Ooubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certaia

Doubtful

Total

CertainSfj'2

Evaluation

Number

PerCent

Nunbtr

Percent

Nur*(l

PerCent

Nunibef

Percent

Certain

Dotibtfu

Total

Certain

Ooubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certaia

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtnil

.Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Owbtfo

Total

Certiin

DouUful

Total

0- Ball oou

o

a>

#•<?

0.0

0.0

_J3_

6

o»

0.0

0.0

*9

O

X

A

0.O

3.o

J.o

l-A.stnno(iicil

J~~

4

f

££L

44.4

/P0&.

_J_

,1

4

/IS

fW

£~OD

JL1

/o

Ji

3<L3

/4j 49 J

J-Airtratl

a

&0.

0.0

0.O

0.0

0.O

c

A

3

?o

J.o

/l.o

3-Littit Ptiewm.

.0

03

S.0 ]

00

0.0

^JS^

0J1

0,0

o

o

0,0

00

4-Birds

.0.

0>

£0

00

0.0

a

e

0.0

0.0

0.0

o

1

i

00

/s

/■jr

S-CIoijoj, lest, etc.

~jL-

f-0

0.0

0.0

o

O -

0.0

0.0

0.0

J-

<?

/

/*

0.0

/J"

(•insiflic. Info,

a

9

0.0

0.0

0.0

/

o

/

/zs

0.0

/*?

?

o

f

/ej

0.0

to?

7-Psythl>ll>|ical

f

9.0

0.0

0.0

_j2_

0.0

0.0

0.0

0>

f

/

0.0

/.f

/,!'

9-Uulunwi

4

o

As.

0.0

0.0

A

J

2S0

00

tf*

A

o

/A

'7.9

0.0

m

9-0thtr

_tf_

0.0

0.0

0.0

2

O

/

/J.j'

0.0

far

>

o

A

J0

0.O

3,0

Total

^

4

9

S££

W4

/O0.

s

3

/

is

27-r

/00.

*L

/£

67

ILL

13,1

tO0.

f#/$t.£ £ /&</ £t/ALV/?r/0A/ /7f 0/*J£&r S/6tfr//lf6S &/>jP ALL IfeAgS .«SV J , /Z/>pfr£0

r ■_ _ _._.-'. _ S/°SL£&S 0£ .. 0AJ/=/>TS 3J>£1;£> A>0T STdr&0

All XfA/?s - --:

/<947

/<??/

/f

ff

I

Nunrief

Pet Cent

Nunber

Percent

Nu"tel

Per Cent

Nimber

Percent

Evaluation

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttol

Total

Certain

DoublMl Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tola!

Certtin

"Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtlul

Total

Certain

Douurtu

Tola)

Certain

DouMful

Total

u-Baltwn

43

4-o

M

1A

Vrf

W.f

^

O

A

J±

&:&

<-9

Jt

4

jr

3.4

/-?

9i

7

O

f

7C

■0.0

7.i

I-Aitnmnniol

//J"

89

^4

/B.i

/*■?

&,i

_JL

2.

S

/0.3

(■9

ft*

_2j

/o

(7

/3.1

/9X

ii.3

JZ

3f

4i

JlX.

3i?

$2.1

I-Aiicliri

/J

7S

/ft

/6.e

t»

/fit

/

1

3,4

0.0

*.t

__u

/

i//J"

89

^4

/B.i

/*■?

&,i

_JL

2.

S

/0.3

(■9

ft*

_2j

/o

(7

/3.1

/9X

ii.3

JZ

3f

4i

JlX.

3i?

$2.1

I-Aiicliri

/J

7S

/ft

/6.e

t»

/fit

/

1

3,4

0.0

*.t

__u

/

i

/3.7

j,0

/-T7

■7

J

7

JU.

2-Z

ts

Kittl Pfimooi.

/6

i

Af

/■*

/■/

f.*

_/.

/

3.4

0.0

?-f

-~£j

)

/

e>,0.

Z°

Z«

-£A

0.0

0.0

0.0

*-Birr»

i

r

//

J>7

0i

/.1

D

o

#A

0.0

-J-

I

a

20

z°

4.0

^z.

a

2.3

0.0

?-3

Kloudi, [hut, etc.

t>

.,**?

0,0

?,0

o

a

0.0

0\O

0.0

-JL

o

0.0

0.0

0.0

a

a

0.0

0.0

Hnsiiffic. info.

n4

o

m

m.

0.0

/*?

f

9

2/0

0.0

S/,o

_£_

<?

/7.L

0.0

/7,i

j<L

O

/4

AX 2

00

/&

7-Purclaloiieal

/j.

z

/4

JjL

02

t.l

A

o

A

£9

0.0

4,?

/

o

/

Ao

0.0

A.0

I

1

J./.

/./

fUnknom

11L

e

/H

JLi

0.0

61

3

o

3

/oJ

0,0

/fil

J

3

J-.4

O

s?

7

a

7

It

0.0

7,4

Mthei

J4

I*

t(,

jLL

M

fj

_L

a

£

Ao.7

0.0

At.f

A

3

S

3.<j

,l*f

f.t

4.

(7

4

A3.

0.0

4i

Totf

til

232.

!3i

4U

J7-9

/4?

Al

A

tf

&L

If

'00,

SA

ff

•r/

£23.

37.3

/00.

&

S3

fj

Ui

frl

zoo

■'I

/4j-0

/<pj'/

/9SA

EvallatiW

Nmb4f

Per Colt

number

PerCent

Nuober

Per Cent

Numbei

PetCenl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubltut

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttol

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

CerSin

Doubtful

Total

(eujlleon

tf

2

(0

A/4

£1

A44

/

3

■4

u

j.t

14

2fl

32

1f

lA

It

/43

I'Astronoaial

/A

4

/4

/U

*1

Ui

JT

i

7.4

fil-7

P0.(f

7/

44

/«r

/3S

£.f

Z*e

•

2-*iroafl

9

j'

/4

&9

f.t

Jo.o

M

4

/0

f->"

(.3

M

J-3

43

A/4

/#./

/Zo

W

H'*tPh«MI.

0.0

0,0

00

O | /

1

00

(< r

U

./*

7

A2-

M

A3

4>

4-Bircjs

0.0

0.0

0,0

0„

1

7

P0

At

/■4

J

J"

4,

4.<F

06

/■*

5-Ctoudi, Oust, etc

0.0

0.4

0.0

-&-

P.4

0,0

0.0

0,0

-&£-

P0

f-liuuflic. Blk).

JS

/3

Ilk

0.0

/It

./A

/2

&£.

-£0-

/f.0

?7

77

A4-4

0.0

fti

J-P>ycr»l0|iat4,

4.<F

06

/■*

5-Ctoudi, Oust, etc

0.0

0.4

0.0

-&-

P.4

0,0

0.0

0,0

-&£-

P0

f-liuuflic. Blk).

JS

/3

Ilk

0.0

/It

./A

/2

&£.

-£0-

/f.0

?7

77

A4-4

0.0

fti

J-P>ycr»l0|iat

0.0

0.0

0.O

L-

)

/.c

0.0

AL

. 2

2

?

M.

0,4

n

rHngaa

/4

(4

Joo

0.0

#0,0

/t

_gi_

IS

2U

0,0

2t4

Sl

9A

/!■}.

f.0

m

MtfHf

3

3

4.3

00

u

J

3

AL

#0

44

A4

1

J*

i.P

/■1

4-7

r

. Total

S?

//

1o

Ik

/s-1

/00,

A&

if

63

iJe

J?.*

/40~.

374,

/So

4*4,

1/.S

A$.S

/00.

\ 
1

t

>09

$?■•■;

*.--■.-. -^ ;-^v *»>.■»*. v-^rt^t-.

iPP

-

frttfie /t /&& £i///ct/#r/0/y

/a/*

/lit. £//Z//r//U6S P6>£ #£i, </&*££

4V *./£// r /tf/^A/rA/zss.

$v k us ftr Oft A}//r/?t/r

SuMi.lt/fT 0Y At-fMiNVM

4\/M^/<f/<r 0/v FLastsx

S'ufiti.lGf/T' 0A/ SrfiA/£~

Evaluation

Nuohei

PBCent

Nmbei

Pel Cent

Nonber

Pet Cent

(Mabel

PetCe«l

Certain

DoutMuf

Tolil

Certaji

OcuMful

To 111

McCain

OouttM

TtCal

Certain

Omtjtftil

TOW

detain

Ooubtful

_rot»ti

Certain

Oeubttol

Total

Certain

Ooabtntl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tola)

0-SallDon

-A

s

1

J±

-M.

9.3

M.

£3

fH

J},7

%4?x.i

//

t

19

I2X

t?

*/■<

_^

rA

if

ACS

'0.5 M 4

l-AitMMial

Jl

W

33

Bt

/{J

3Z?

Jz-

/£>

ZX

4?

iU

1.0

_L

f

if

ToJy

/0.O

ut

_A

/

3

JM

£3

/5~.3

2-Aiitratt

^1

3

tZ

/Ai

JS

/^/

VJZ

J¥

76

UZ

/3.1

J J.I

_L

(3

/9

£7 l*k**U

J

3

0.0

;f.f

/r.x

J-LifM Plum*.

I

a

1

AX

&.£>

A2-

c

y

_JL

JLC

U

u

t

/

0.0

/./

!■{

_^

A?

0.0

0.0

(LO

4-Bir* .

0.C

0.0

00

/

/

Z

M

m

0.1

/

(

z

hi

/./

u

A

A

(

0.0

£■3

SZ3

S-Clouib. Dint, tic

o

00

AO

0.0

Z-

A?

z

M

0.0

o.%

—L

2-

3

hi

1-3-

JT3

0"

0.0

0.0

00

tlftHflit life.

f

<?

i

/A 6

A,0

/0.L

/7

12.

Ik

0.0

ZA

9

'

f

tOJb

0:0 /0.0

/

i

£3

0.0

SIS

Wirdnloiial

Z

Z-

*r

A£

JL4

Mf

2.

JZ-

t

0.1

_£!

U

0>

0>

A>

ao

-JZ0.

01

00

0.0

0.0

(-Mm*

/r

&

jr

J7.6

P.0l7.i

S-JL

te

U3

IM.

W

J£L

0>

/A0:0 /0.0

/

i

£3

0.0

SIS

Wirdnloiial

Z

Z-

*r

A£

JL4

Mf

2.

JZ-

t

0.1

_£!

U

0>

0>

A>

ao

-JZ0.

01

00

0.0

0.0

(-Mm*

/r

&

jr

J7.6

P.0l7.i

S-JL

te

U3

IM.

W

J£L

0>

/A

/7J

ao

m

r

O

r

ZA3

00 ££.3

KMier

/

3

t

AX

as

#7

_2_

£.

//

\H

\0l

&$

3

0>

J

3,3

0>.A>

3,3

<z

d

<£

/AS

00

/AS

, TOW

rs

9-7

ff

6~U

sir

}M

W

76

zwttl

3IJ

100.

n

3M-

?A>

fZ2

nt

100,

AZ-

7

/f

03Z

Si.t

AAA.

Si>NuG#r 0/v So/t-

&ffr£#r£/? r#*yA70tA>

J-/X^ AJat/v

Dflt-*/T T#A# AfaffA'

Cmluilwi

NlMltKt

Per Cent

MumUf

P«C«l

Nimger

PerCcnt

Nanber

PelCmt

Certain

Doubtful

T«BI

Certain

DwMHi

Total

Certain

OoodtAil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doaunjl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

GbaitjHki

Total

Certain

do»«w

Total

0- Balloon

4

0?

H

J1L

M

sfl

_zf

04

47

M.

J7f

%f

/

^

$

if

3.?

A77

jH

7

IZ

-Jl

m

ai

VAitnnaniul

/

1

AO

ty.1

lif,3

130

in

zzs

746

*zt

>^

//

/s

7.S-

Mf

M.3

6

A7

2-3

IP

M3

3Z?

I-Aiicntt

_L

o

-Jl

0.6

0.0

JL7

02.

7?

£7

it.O

/i.7

JSl

X

AA

JM

3/

30.1

3

3

6

Jt,l

#3

u

3-Lifht ph»w«.

A>

Q

-M

0.D

00

-J-

3

?

M.

0.6

'>!

_JL

2-

3

1.1

3.1

£1

_/_

3

*A

-Mb

M.3

£7

*-Bidj

p

Q

-M

0.0

A0>

/

^

1

0.Z

M

0.2-

0>

00

0.0

00\

/

/

_^

-LJ£\

Hf-

£1

5-crwdv Dull, etc.

_(L

/

i

00

M-3

m

0>

0>

00

0.0

010

s

J£

ao

ao

. £

■0

0>

00

Ai>

09

frlnaflit Intl.

<?

AO

A0

00

XAL

O

?z

47

0>O

*7

0>

0.0

A>-0

0.0 3

3

#3

0.0

M3

'■Psycholepcil

a

Q

0A

$.0

§.c

3

0>

3

A. 6

0-0

0.6

/

1

0.0

si

J!

Z-

2~

zf

Zf

8-Unbioin

1

p

t

m

P.Q

/#3

X%

fz

/?J

' M

/?.5

JS.

0>

At

zts

A?P

JZ3

tr

/r &#

do

JU.4

3-0 Dim

^M

0.0

A0

y/a

(f

Z0

3.0

AS

#-J

#

0.0

0.0

A>.0

3

F

00

#3

43

Total

s

JL

7

n&

&.{>

/00.

2/#

/Sg

V-7Z

64S

S3S

w

3S

At

rs

66.0

3¥.0

toa

Jtt&

7&

4-U

nH-

700,

'

&4f?£rLy \//S/ffj.£-

M>r- <$rAr£&#-J

#

0.0

0.0

A>.0

3

F

00

#3

43

Total

s

JL

7

n&

&.{>

/00.

2/#

/Sg

V-7Z

64S

S3S

w

3S

At

rs

66.0

3¥.0

toa

Jtt&

7&

4-U

nH-

700,

'

&4f?£rLy \//S/ffj.£-

M>r- <$rAr£&

Evaluate*)

KunbB

Per cm

NuMhi

Pa Cent

Nunliec

Percent

NqnbH

Per Colt

Certain

DBibrfu

Total

Certain

DHbth

Total

Certain

CoobHal

Total

Certain

Dovblful

Tolal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

TcM

Certain

DoubUi

J3^±

Certain

DniNM

Total

O-Balkwi

/

/

Z

13

fj

K.£

m

/A4

£?Z

M

W

S3*

I-Aslmnonicil

z

Z

AAJ

0.0

m

ZfZ

J-Of

SPI

HI

w

U-3.3

MUrcratt

J_\

1

Z

M.

7,3

fc£

252

/77

¥tf

li -1

?x

l%1

3-Li(h| Phiwn.

0>

0.C

0.0

A.O

Z3

//

34

I.I

0.1

l.t>

1

4-Biraj

Afi

0.0

AA

J5L

4

Zl

Al

0-3

1-0

5-ClMids, Dust, etc

-M

A0

0.0

9

/0

/?

o-H

0.6

4-1

t-lntufflc. Into.

Z

2.

1£L

0.0

a. 7

X35

.

2-tt

J 6.1

0.0

\o.<\

J-Psychototiu 1

_^2

(?

6.0

0.0

0.0

31

3

3*

ML

4,1

\.s

S-Unki»M

H-

£>

4-

W.

0,0

313

474

Wt

U±

0.0

Ul

4-OtJiei

0>

P

66

0-0

0,A

fj

£/

/#?

3.1

i-o

M

Total

A0A

£

fZ-

fU

16.1

/0A.

/SOB

SM

%)Mf

Wf

1£.3L

166.

210

■r/>4t-&

#/{,i

£i//)i. v* r/e?/)/

asr

i/Arrr _

</<z//r/M<zs

jea£

^4t,L

r&4<

<s

g</ t-/&HT /S£f&#TA/esZ

1

SlNt~l$t*r OU A4//iff0ff

J>t/A/t.t&/tr AM dj-VfitJA/t/M

Sus//-/4//r o# P**STS*

. ?U/VASGAT 0M STMS:

|

Nunber

P«Cait

(timber

PefCent

Ntnta

PtrCtnt

Nimbar,

Pit Cool

Evaluation

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

Certain

DouttftJl

Total

Ceitain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

><t>0

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certllo

Doubtful

Total

Cotain

Dmibtlul

Total

'rj-Billoon

^

^

<r

4.7

.03

g.0

M

/?

Y7

/?./

f-*

Hi

//

f

Jf MM

u-f^a

J2-

^

_^

/as

/$£

21-H

■ 1'AiWnomiOl

/7

/3

ji?

30.7

/?.$

H-i

/I

/0

3-1

£6

S-0

lt,S

9

3

a

/J..3.

Y/

/u

2-

/

3

/A 5

$.3

\S$

Mirciatt

r

' J

//

>&.1

#0

I+.7

33

fi-f

exfU

W.l

3/,H

6

/I

JL

r.i

u.%

44.3/7

/3

ji?

30.7

/?.$

H-i

/I

/0

3-1

£6

S-0

lt,S

9

3

a

/J..3.

Y/

/u

2-

/

3

/A 5

$.3

\S$

Mirciatt

r

' J

//

>&.1

#0

I+.7

33

fi-f

exfU

W.l

3/,H

6

/I

JL

r.i

u.%

44.3

£>

3

_1

A0/S-T

IS.%

3-Lt«tit Phewm.

/

i?

/

It

0.0

13

3

3

p.o

(■$

t-f

1

i

$.0

■M

/■4

t>

0.0

AC\

M

»e.««

^

<?

o.o

fit)

^

1

/

2.

Of

C<5

l-if

/

~T

&&

/v

/•t

^>

/

1

0.0

fs

S3

S-Cloudj, Oust, tic

^

^

o.o

frO-

<0^

(

1

03

ao

(If

X,

2- 0.0

*-7

3-7

£>

0.0

t>,0

do

frlnjaRic Info,

_L

^

(>

?.e

ZC

T-6

/7

Jl

&

0,0

rr

<?

-j\

/u

W ISA

;

^

_L

S.3

0£>

S3

J. Psycho lo|i eel

/

3

JL1

Is

*c,0

X

£

4

1.0

At)

10

<7

O

w

W

^

£>

_£.

0.0

0-0

£fi

6-Unknown

ftf-

<?

<4

'XL

00

/K,l

33

33 <i.L

0.0

ii-6

(1

_1L

fit.

ZO

W

s

P

f

ti.3

0-0

2$. 3

*0<t)P

1

3

4

lil

f.6

f.3

_x

0L

_1

te

/.6

*•*

/

U-

aV

0.0

M

£-

#

.A,

/A.5

AO

li.S

Total

tr/

M

7i"

m

$1.0

loo.

133

66

maszs.iM,

«L

0-7

7fh , *3.63£.ttbo.

/*-

7

/f i?.2.Si.f

IM.

SyAfL/Qpr oa/ Se/i-

&ffisffrs/? r^A/ Alow

/-/AC^- /*?£>£>//

J?ut.t-efi r//A/f Mve/v

Evaluation

Noaiba

P« Cent

Wumbei

Pet Cent

Nurtei

Pel Cent

Number

PefCait

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doobtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Totil

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Omibtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

t-Bdlmi

if

ff

S7.I

0.0

5-7,1

/f

w

*t

.f.1

t£

l*,t

/

;

li

0.0

a .A

, J

V

f

9.3

1H 0,1

l-AshMo«faI

{>

/

/

0.0

m

/*3

t'2.

tt

($0

2i£

If 4

3

f

IX

75

*3.1

■K\.<*

6

//

'7

//./

16 H

il$

MUicnft ■

£>

£>

te

00

0,0

2-2.

a*

tf

4.1

II H

17,1

r

X

ip

11. \

fJ

3fT,4

3

3

4

5.L

S.i

11-^

J-Lilhl Phenoo.

P

£>

0.C

P.0

0.0

6

3

1

{J

OS

QA

i

JL

3

■%d

S.I

73

/

/

A

n

M

M

<-Bf«fs

&

O.0

0.0

0.0

_L

<0

1

A.l

0,0

(13

o

■

JO

0.0

00

7

/

2-

i a

t<\

itr

Mloiidi, Dust, etc£>

0.C

P.0

0.0

6

3

1

{J

OS

QA

i

JL

3

■%d

S.I

73

/

/

A

n

M

M

<-Bf«fs

&

O.0

0.0

0.0

_L

<0

1

A.l

0,0

(13

o

■

JO

0.0

00

7

/

2-

i a

t<\

itr

Mloiidi, Dust, etc

. 0.

/

1

M.

M.3

/*$

^A

*

AO

Q.Q

0.0

O.0

00

t>

06

0.C

AD

6-lnsuflic hfa.

0,6

0.0

0.0

XI

XI

.-C.5

0.0

si

0.0

do

M

3

C>

;?

5i

0.0

>f.i

7-PaycM9|lol

£>

o

CO

0,0

0.0

3

3

0.$

&P

0*

£>

1

/

0.0

J.i

4,1

0>

2-

JL

00

B.I

3.1

(■Unluniin

/

t

£23.

0.0

m

7/

71

/r.i

0.0

/f.4

1/

'

■//

XT3

a

3M

JO

IP

lt.5

0.0 n.£

HMw

a

O

p

M

0.0

0.0

_J_

6

IT

1A

hi

■3-9

o

0.0

010

0.0

3

3

0.0

f.(,

41,

T«K

s

Z-

7

7/.tf

%Z6

/po.

2S8

/JS

3%S

^1

3,<-l

Ito,

W

i*

3f

UJl

ns

(V>-

29 2f

&l

f.a

M4

fib.

ffj^ei r )// 3/j5>± £■

A/ar £r-Ar&0

Evaluation

Nunbef

. PnC«n

Ngnber

fa Cent

Number

Pet Cent

Number

Pel Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtful

Total

Certain

Dwbnul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfui

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Balloon

1

/

2.

Jl$

IjJ

JW

IS1

ff

ZH

tji

f.t

m

1-Astronoaiieal

I

1

12.$

0.0

12$

23X

/fP

31t

a.n

r.<?

nf

7-Aircraft

1

1

z

/IS

#f

iff. 6

Ul

(3€

3Jfi

Ji&

s.i

UJ

3-Li'tht Pfienooi.

p

oa

h

&Q

S3

ft

ty

JJL

&•(,

m

4-Bintj

c

p

0.C

00

$.0

/0

6

1$

O.L

<f.f

1-0

5-Clouds, Dust etc

p

oo

0.P

0.0

X

#

f

0.1

$-1

a3

(■Insuffichlo.

?-

7.

te.6

0.0

1f(l

ZO£

&£

1/3

&.Q

ti-1

J-Fsye)»lo|ie»l

(To

0.0

00

3.1

■ 3

32

1.1

t'l

M

r>Unkno«n

I

1

HL

00

134

St£0

340

?*•!

6-6

wi

Mtbei

0?

o\o

o.o

00

#

/i+

U

f.i.

6.1

to

Total

6

X

f

70.0

tf.fi

1%,

IJtfO

W?

lOfj

74 £

tf:1

Idi.

i

211

^ftTa'c^i*^^.,,-.^ . +

r/fftg

/}A.2^

^1/S?L t/j9r/£>A>

t

rff

0£j£?<ir

'Z/ASfrf/vm

/?<?*

rfCL

V£/*jtS

g</ t/GMr <s/e/e#rTss

S:<jjvi.f&//r o/v M/xttR

?0AU/G//r £># Mi>M /A/CM

iW/^7 f/y fZssrj-*r/fftg

/}A.2^

^1/S?L t/j9r/£>A>

t

rff

0£j£?<ir

'Z/ASfrf/vm

/?<?*

rfCL

V£/*jtS

g</ t/GMr <s/e/e#rTss

S:<jjvi.f&//r o/v M/xttR

?0AU/G//r £># Mi>M /A/CM

iW/^7 f/y fZssrj-*

Si/AfJ-SGAT J/Y St/>/T£-

Evaluation

Kunber

Per Cent

Nmbei

Percent

Hurter

Percent

Mnbei

PdCant

Certain

OoubUnl

Total

C«1"an

Ooubtful

Total

Sertau

Doubtful

ToW

Certun

Dnrtttui

Total

>iliiii

DoiabtAil

Total

Certain

OmiHM

TcU

Cotwi

DouMM

To«

CaMi

DdvUM

Total

t-ealloon

_JA

3

a

-13

VH

f.3

^L^LL

m

kj

ftxte

If

7

/r

J£L

&.0

3^7

Z-

/

3

/Af

-&k

tf.7

1-AKnoaiiat

u

//

&

J21

/r.<?

=17,7

_JL

f

it

JA

f:5

n

-^

^

it

m

AS

t&

/

1

a*

_^2

£.2.

3-AiicnA

y

2-

i

J1A

It

Iff

32

£7

st/7-1

lA-J

Z3-0

-JL

/*

u

JA

iv.i

M.1

-JL

,?

3

0.0

JLL

ft?

J-LitWPImw.

/

i

/i

0,0

(•(.

3

3

o.o

JAL

\1

o

/

i

to

i.i

/,4

-JL

0.6

OJ

M

Mi*

o

AD

0.0

0.0

-A

/

X

M

-JA

/.a.

/

i

Zk

hi

t4

'

/

1

0,0

s,x

(.X

J- Clouds, that, tit

0.0

0.0

0-0

i

1

0-f,

A.O

A$

^

£

H

it

tf

-JL

Q

M

&0

01

tuntlHc. kfb.

. 3

3

W

0.0

47

(?

■ iS

r.y

AA

*•*

7

<?

1

M

0.0

111

/

-J.

6.X

-Mi

£2

J-PirdBte|ial

JL

f

3

All

/.i

+■?

2-

A

ft

/.'

t'l

SM

<?

-M

0.0

at

£>

£>

0.0

p.o

to

H)*au—

. ft

<?

1*

UA

0.0

3&.0

*L

Sc

Mi

0.0

is.t

AL

^>

//

j£d

0.0

i*n

r

<P

r

3/.1

o.t>

31.%

Md*

/

fi-

3

Ml

T,l

♦J

A

d-

S-1

/./

\*

/

^

1

J.I

0.0

IA

J:

/P

x

/X.5

0J

/XJ

Tat*

#A

ll

4t

6?S

///

/<*

ill

60

121

(4A

,tr£ no.

J2

-^

70

67J SJU1M

/0

4

a fcs

37sm

SvNllGHr £>M So/J-

/?f?/$Hr&/? r#M Mom

A/Sftr Alow

Di/^LM/f 7~/ i '<i/if A?/30jv

Eviliutiw

NunrDH

Pel Cent

Nll*«

Per Call

NunOei

Pa Cent

Nuaibn

PtfCaat

Certain

DouUh

Total

Cnuin

Doutitfu

Total

Certain

Doublnil

Tom

Certain

DotMtuI

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Owiittt

Total

Certain

Dabttt

ToU

n-BHIoon

¥

^

>*

tff.7

40Doutitfu

Total

Certain

Doublnil

Tom

Certain

DotMtuI

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Owiittt

Total

Certain

Dabttt

ToU

n-BHIoon

¥

^

>*

tff.7

40

&7

-M

M

3S

¥A

it

m*

/

/

JA

AA 13

F

3

%

JAJl

CI

Ik 3

Mkitnmaiul

/

/

AO

fc7

/f.7

J2

U

130

2U

m

*\4

3

r

//

ti AtJSia.3

X

M

11.1 tt.l

3%.i

2-Aircnd

^

^

JM

AO

A.O

-M

W

4/

U

Q4

ir.3

S

O-

7

0.7

fl

V,7

3

3

A

i-l

i.l

H.i

3-UtMPMnM.

£>

^

^?

-M

AA

0.0

^

■ 3

?

AT

0-1

A. 7

/

x

3

.IA 53.

tz

_A

/

?~

1.0

X-t>

f.D

4-Binh

&

^

^

A6

0.0

0.0

-J.

t

JA

£>.0

0.3

AO

A.O

0.A

}

1

AC

I 9

ZA

MIOBdi, Dun He.

/

/

60

ff-7

ft. 7

A>J

A.O

0.0

A

AG

0>.A

0,0

_^

0.0

0.C

&

tltttgdic. tola.

^

i?

At

P-6

0.0

M

2A

AA

0.0

b4

.^

P.0

0.A

AA.

3

0>

3

U

4t

u

^Pt|rdalo|ical

0\

P

^

M

AO

A.O

£

%

AA

00

&k

/

/

AM,

2$

a.*?

_JL

-Z,

A

0>.O

y-t

l-'t

t-UntoiiMi

-Jl

0-

^

ao

A.O

OJ

At

tt

(Ll

00

fi*

JL

tf

■fiA

0O3X.*

-M.

/A

u.H

o.i

A»-t

MUm

^

o.o

£0

U/

.J.

e

/r

JA

A?

*J

0.0

AC

3

?

10

A-i

<>-\

TtM

-jt

2-

$

a?

33.3

/AA

ZJL

//?

33if

m.

J£i

too.

£1

A3

3H-

Aid

.#.1

100.

OS

3-1

^f

f7.l

U2.f

0.

/?4/?£-tv ,

Os/tftJT

AS/IT- STAT*/?

' -

Evilultun

Nnba

PefCext

Hunter

P« Cent

Nuafeei

PbCbiI

Hunter

PerCent

Certaio

Oaubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoaWful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Douutfu

Total

Certain

DnbtM

Totat

t-BaHoai

/

/

tL

/AS

/A3

2U

mo

7f

7-19

Si

f.f

)&

1-Astnmffliul

7

1

/M

0.0

fy.3

/S4

Iff

77?

161

44,

}H\

2-Aircntt

A-

1

2.

/&£

Ml

H6

211

12-0

311

Jll

e.1

m*

3-Li(JH FbetHL

&

A.O

0.0

6.0

11

f

2-1

AA

A-(,

a., I

4-Binb

O

At

00

AO

_Z£

/L

'/*

o.i

A.1

/.I

J-Cloudi, Dust, etc

'-Ah

0)

J2A\

0.0

0.0

-JL

t

$

6.1

M

0-<k

eVtnsuKic Ma.

-JL

. /

M3\&

A.O

0.0

6.0

11

f

2-1

AA

A-(,

a., I

4-Binb

O

At

00

AO

_Z£

/L

'/*

o.i

A.1

/.I

J-Cloudi, Dust, etc

'-Ah

0)

J2A\

0.0

0.0

-JL

t

$

6.1

M

0-<k

eVtnsuKic Ma.

-JL

. /

M3\

0.0

/#3

M

/ff

13.0

A.O

/3.B

f-Pjytbikitital

o

A.0

0.0

A.0

21

3

3Z

u

a A

a, a

B-UBkamo

/

1

m

10

J?3

293

n?

fi.'l

Ao

4^,3

Mthci

A\0

0.0

0-0

tf

//

77

ja

o.f

^4

Tom

r

£

7

m

1SJ

/O0.

m

3Vf

M3

m

MX

l»6.

t

212

mmmmmmmmm

WWPI^^wp

•»^.*r A /if u?MT/0/i/ 0F J/g<s£i>e£x Jt/£//fA s/&#r//)/6 ^(Z AtMrsrs

Po£ *t-L S/6#r/A/&s dli. </£A£S

J/9/V

tf^a

F£$fit/J>£U

M/)£t.rt

Afit/L

Number

Per Cent

Nurnbei

Percent

Number

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Const

Variable] Total

Conit

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

TstH

D-

-

'm ctm

tl

i

/7

jtf.

4.7 /JS

9

i

//

9.1

ja- jj-1

A

J

//

jU

J.i

a

M

3

J/ JJJ>

AS

'11

*0OTDaoOi

if

V

S3

2/3

2.9

m

-%\

/

w

Mi

j-i

#?

J&

2.

H

JZS

1.2,

m

1*

<Y

-LL

W.o

l,i>

ty.Q

*IN PLRNE

SL

A

33

321

1.6

m

if

tf

m

a.d

VIA

.14.

a

V

&l

o.d

ai.C

fi

/i

t.A

0,0

t.d

*-\H PWD&,

JL

/1

/IS

4.6

jJt.S

J.

JL

n

6.0

JL.X

ii

&

£1

u

i3L}

U

m>

/i.O

0,0

/i.t

s- ■ '

*

fr —

>

7-

S-

»■ OTH i £

-J.

d

3

J.Z

&d

2-1

s

$

S.H

0.6

SH

3

3

i.t

0.6

./.{

o

a

o

AO

a,o

o.ft

toT STftTtD

M.

6

,33

XM3

a.a

**3

^L

W

25.1

6.0

ts?

JL

*t

2?.1

0.L17.7

#3

Q

v3

A/-*

ao

sj.i

Total

ffl_

7

)34

ffl

*l

j a.

J*.

J

P

U.9

3.3.

ia.

H3

J fU

9f.JL

It

m.

!£L

7

too

U.S

3.5 /et.

t

I "" '

/W

Jn*/£

Julu'

Ai/6 v$r

Number

Percent

Number

Percent

Ngnber

Percent

Number

Pnr Cent

;

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Toy

Const

Variable

Total

,0-;

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Toy

Const

Variable

Total

,0-

|w/y CAR

A

a

f(

P

£.0

/7

#

&

A?

9.1

49

AfJ

7X

u

gv

7.1

1.3

9-/

i\

3

at

)\-l

6.b

.tt.3

\}-Ot>TDt>6f?S

?9

4

w

K.9

U

If*

/2l

3

(#

tf-9

/•?

ff!

m

V

W6

■#.9

6.1

W3

su

9

ifl

S/-I

■IS

«-^

IWn PLbNE

sy

w

£L

a./?

f7*

AT

&

//.a-

o,6

it»

VI

I

rt

Si

6.1

rt

31

%

3?

JLL

Af

U

U-jf^ SLOG..

t

f

M.

/?,<>

W

f

<?

?

Uj

<M

H

jr

3

M

?.v

■ a.3

11

11

Y

■13.

V

Or?

11

[s-

G-

7-

t-

*nTH£t

2,

p

z

JA

AG

10

_2^

a.

a.f

fid

tf

15

a

H

JtL

on

■/4

8

6

f

IS

O.b

It

mT STtfTSh

j?L

*/

2/./

W

M-t

w

4?

/9.1

0.d

/?.3

XII

hi

rt.7

OA

n-l

_3%

7 y

lU

O.D

lU

Total

SL

5

m

331

U

id;

133

,?

Vf

1f.t

It

{66.

m.

xa

13$

m

xXm.

50M

/?

5X(

f£.7

3-3

M.

S£f>r£MS£it

£>ero4E*

A/oyEMSG £

0£«e/^sse

j

Nurabef

Percent

Number

Percent

Nunrber

Percent

Number

PtrCent

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Vaiiable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

10-

•

W/K Cflfl

?'

a

73

/i.b

/,$

HA

_Ji

/

71

a.b

aS

a.*

/<J

y

/Y

M.

n

2.4

Af

7

32

'<m

#2

19.1

'■OUTDOORS

u

,<

/<)>

<¥S.1

7.1

mt

8?

/

90

41

Q6

ns

45

3

4f

MtL

J.9

m

ft

£

50

1L2

3.0

trJ

3-|M PLArtE

^k

%

/J.I

0,6

&i

XI

6

H

Ml

fifi

W

-J£

6

&

Ml

OJ

Mf

VS

/

*4

j4S

<?■{>

17.1

«-irirtU}&.

JL

x

IS

Jl

AC

n

_J£

1

tt

lU

Af

>M

-Jl

a

33

JU

4.6

}i.l

yy

&

t.3

40

%3

5-

6-

7-

«•

*6T/+C£

l

I

A$

<?.Q

<1S

JL

6

1

M.

4.0

u

z

a

J

n

6,6

a

j

/

di

0.0

*i

NOT^TWEJt

JtL

o

■%

2/,?

0-0

s/-f

/?

It

?.i

(1.6

f.H

33

a

,?3

M.I

M

A» /

xs

zs

rf,9

<!.d

/?.?

Total

101

f

2Jd

9S.7

w

w.

LSI

3u

z

a

J

n

6,6

a

j

/

di

0.0

*i

NOT^TWEJt

JtL

o

■%

2/,?

0-0

s/-f

/?

It

?.i

(1.6

f.H

33

a

,?3

M.I

M

A» /

xs

zs

rf,9

<!.d

/?.?

Total

101

f

2Jd

9S.7

w

w.

LSI

3

l?X

m.

U

166.

l£L

7

Jrf

Ml

vs

<id.

m.

J3

ti?

&3

7?

W>-

£■■:■;

213

m^s

Mi

.

r,*««? ^jfc?

t/r^r/aA/ 0*

tfAS^ZfE^S

0/JS/OfA

S/6#*-//i/fi.£

■rff

^f&AfrA/ s

P0£ SJ.L S/6#f-//V&S S9&7

JtA/M/tt/

Pea/tt/ttv

A7^<ry

• /rV//£

NunMf

Per Cent

Ninber

Per Ccnl

Nuiaber

Percent

Nunbo

Percent

Const

Variable

f»UI

Const

Variable Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

ToMi

Const

Vaiiable Total

Const

Variable

ToUl

Const

Vaiiable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

0-

i

*"l« GQfl

•i^

!

^

*f>yrPO0RS

<^

J

^

IZ

1

V>

*IM pt^c

fc

\

7; .

\K

:3

V

*-MflkDfi.

*3

\

-

^

\Y

-^

s-

y~

V

N

s-

r\

c\

^

trv

J-

^

1^

A"

i

b^

j-

\

* ■

^

»-flrj+£ £

M<sr ■smrzo

Total

_. pi*v

Juh/E.

Jl/Ll/

tiv<i</<rr

Nuntber

Fa Cent

rnmjer

Percent

Nunfeei

Ha Cent

Nunbei

Per Cent

1

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Vaiiable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable Total

tt-

'-to c.#e_

/

/

2.

13

17

*!M

i

a

t>

A>9

.0.0

I6.R

a-

2

as

kJ>

12-5

! -^urD«s§

^

/

C

tfj.

0.0

Ylt

27

47

ML

0.0

Vf./

7

7

*n3

i-Q

m

s-in ptftne

~7

\

3

' Q

3

73J_

A/9

73.1

/I

M.

toJ

D.O

&-6

3

$

m

Q-0

if.f

♦-i/MfU,DGi-

^

a

&&

A£>

fid

I

_L

j2

6-b

1.9

j

1

U

d.0

■is

5-

<

£

6-

y

*■

\

^

.

t-

\

k

•

»■ OTHg^

\

k

<?

Q

M.

44

tt

_£

a

JU

fro

6.6

a

&

d

0.Q

a. a

w

NtfTSI^Tfi)

Z

fi-

iM

04

16H

JA

d

ft

lit

d.b

IfX

3

3

j9.r

d.0

17.1

Total

22.

1

ts

fj.3

71

M-

56.

rt

56 &W.0

d.o W.

JA.

/6

wo

a. a idd.

5£flr£M3&£

fcrose-ie _

Ma^i

e *?£££

De.tSMg£H.

Number

Pel Cent

Number

PerCent

Nuober

Pei Cent

NuKbM

Pet ceit

Const

Variable71

M-

56.

rt

56 &W.0

d.o W.

JA.

/6

wo

a. a idd.

5£flr£M3&£

fcrose-ie _

Ma^i

e *?£££

De.tSMg£H.

Number

Pel Cent

Number

PerCent

Nuober

Pei Cent

NuKbM

Pet ceit

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Vaiiable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

ITotol.

0-

'i(v CAe

<*

^

O

OM

At

&t

?

9

421

64

*t

/

1

333

0.0

23.3

J

£)

)

W

(J.r)

^(3

2 OiijDMe<Z

3

6.

3

56.6

0,&

tfM

8

—g

HH

fi-P

1U

tt

0.0

M

I

I

UJ>

0.0

aw

5- IN PJ-ANE

J

(3

\

/i.7

u

/tf

a

6.1

0.6

u

bi>

0-0

0$

3

.3

UlO

o.o

W

tiN_fliJ&=

<7

^

AO

M

M

t>

d.i

oj>j

AD

_J_

J

«J

0A

TM

O

_M

AO

<t&

5-

6-

1

7-

"

B-

s- arn£e

i?

a

a.&

Ad

tt

&b

u

6-0

I

1

333

0.0

JS3

o

M

t*«

<M

HOT STffTBP

a.

3.

33.3

o.d

X?-3

3

3

153

0.b

IAH

on

0-0

0.0

0,0

do

0.0

Total

i

4

i

W.O

C2>

!M-

Jl

19

lQ0$

0.0

m.

3

3

110$

6.0

loo.

>T

5

lod.e

rf-0

m.

214

■jjjj&C

mmmmmm

■fitfoe />/?#

j.ac/tr//?/t/

*?A

/?*4£*is£je.s

£>/;£/&&

<//^WT-//l/lZ

S'

^f

/*sv*> </*r

f?0* *L± S/G#t-//>/£^ /9<tr

iJA/Vl/Att/

/T£ <***>*£(/

1 M/t<ee#

AfV/i.

ffeimbcf

PciCent

Numbe*

Pet Cat

Number

Pet Cent

Number

Percent

Const

Varilble

Total

Comt

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Tolat

Conit

Vlriible

Total

Cant

Variable

Tital

Canst

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

*

*m <k*r

/

1

a

W

4-1

(J

A*

o.o

<w

A*

0.6

<*>

<?J

00

Q*

^GtrTDOiftS

z.

Q

/

Q.

0-0

43

6

i

.u

9.0

(i.T

£

i aa

06

3U

_il

/H

77i

OM

nt

J-jn PLftne

3

2,

5

m

ffl-5

31.3

1

I

JU

0.0

"•I

1

i

II. 1 A0

|M

3

3

lt.1

o.o

it-i

*-tt\ BLQ&.

5

£

jy

o.a

3|.3

1 o

I

ll. 1

ao

it.)

1

I

11.1

0.0

III

1

q

)

54

6.0

,*t

5-

r>

^

t-

*" OTHEg

<J

5

0.6

Ob

«t

-14

£0

0.0

-M

ao

0.0

(3

6.0

0.0

ofi

mrswpp

V

V

m

fi.d

#tf

/

I

JU

0^

III

_1ao

it.)

1

I

11.1

0.0

III

1

q

)

54

6.0

,*t

5-

r>

^

t-

*" OTHEg

<J

5

0.6

Ob

«t

-14

£0

0.0

-M

ao

0.0

(3

6.0

0.0

ofi

mrswpp

V

V

m

fi.d

#tf

/

I

JU

0^

III

_1

5

M

ao

55.4

_n

0.0

&6

O.fi

Total

/V

I

/*

fti

)U

IflD.

_i

1

IM

0.0

too.

-A

9

wd.o

0.5 IW.

j?

1?

l&i'O

QAtOb.

M»<t

l/i/fl/£

Jw-y

^s&vsr-

Number

Percent

Numfjei

Per Cent

Numbei

Percent

Nvmber

Per Ceil

1

Const

VariiMe

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Varnble

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Totil

Const

Variable

Total

r>

'V/y Gfif

1

1

9.1

#»

V

/

1

JU

M

tif

3

3

-21

OJ)

7.7

3

3

m

6M

tf.3

i-Btfmae>RS

$

s

ISA

Atf

HM

^

5

133

M

m

-Jl

1

It

¥34

?4

Hil

_£

«

SL1

A.l 73.1

±/ai 0t/Wf

H

H

.M

<ftf

U,i

rt

A6

no

Qi

s

5

JU

0.0

0.0

o.t

(\b

Naples*

0.6

AS

t>P

_fi

(?

0.0

0-0

0-0

_J_

9

Mi

OJ)

«.!

JUL

Q.t>

OJ)

5-

8-

;-

.

»

*<&#£?

Aa

AO

Q.C

fl

OA

ao

&c

1

;

xi

u

u

u

M

CM

wsnr£D

1

I

?./

dfl

?./

_£

0-£>

00

$0

3

$

^M

0.0

1.1

0.0

d.D

0.0

Total

Jl

Jl

MA

^

ISA*-

6

k

M'A

0.0

ftf-

JL

1

fl

?7.H

urn,

II

i\

ll&p.

01 tOO.

-5"£/"r <£■/<?.#£-«_

Oi*T£>£trie

A/we a* #E/t

D£(Z£f*4E-£

NunbH ■

Percent

Nuiter

PerCent

Number .

Percent

Number

Percent

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variaolt

Total

Const

Variaolt

Total

Const

Vuiatte

TOW

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Totil

Corel

Variable

Total

a-

'•/>r c/p/f

6

_4i

44

Ofi

X

2,

JA

M

M

_£

1

J

oc

£0

ffi

_-tt

1

7

_M

^

JTJO

i-p/jratd/P;

5

■f

i?.5

fl-0

MA

t*

1

ii

m.

3L3

114

_^

1

1

HO.0

5-C

H5.0

JJL

1

//

J5J

?.<

3?.3

3-J/V PM/v£

\

J

/J.i

ri-0

a-a

3

3

iA.t

OH

tt>0

i

i?

$

35.0

o,t

&o

7

7

J5i

5.(5

^

hN 8LO&.

6

c

(5.r5

M

0j>

1

f

MA

(U

at-7

-A

<?

H

JWJ

0.0

2fi.O

X

£

7.1

^

7'

5-

t-

7-

-

B-/J.i

ri-0

a-a

3

3

iA.t

OH

tt>0

i

i?

$

35.0

o,t

&o

7

7

J5i

5.(5

^

hN 8LO&.

6

c

(5.r5

M

0j>

1

f

MA

(U

at-7

-A

<?

H

JWJ

0.0

2fi.O

X

£

7.1

^

7'

5-

t-

7-

-

B-

KQWIZ.

.-0

M

0-0

M

1

Q

t

-Jl

M

J.3

(0

U

OjO

6.6

■

~~ aJ

fl.«

0.0

wr&xrm.

X

2*

tf.b

QJO

MJ)

%

£

-&2.

a*

M

l

6

\

M.

0,6

&

J

1

_&

Ai

3.i

Total

• ?

4

t

'Op. &

CO

160.

JL

)

2°

M

3-3

^.

JL

3~

10

qo.o

0.6

166.

M.

0-

a?

9A.*?

7-1

)&6.

m

215

JSi.U

— -^*m ', -■ T +■ ( -^V fy " ■*;"

«t^^litwr^ Tr .^l^-^;;Sjt^K'r

■.-i -> y>j f mi l*^+¥-.*W1 , ?iv*Uf*3" r i

■iMP

JMi£

' Mt - -

l<K£r/t2&

ar

#/*<££)/<!?&

^

0C&/A/J&

S/&&7-//UAS

/?V

Afa/ur/^s

>£.

AU.

s/a#r//i/ti s-

/f<f?

1

J#Ht/#£.t/

F£ 4 #/;/>£ v

M/>£d/v

Apsul

Const

Nuititm

PerCffit

Number

Per vol

Nurrter

Per Cent

Number

P« Cent

Vanable

Total

Cons!

Variable

To 1 til

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Vaiiibte

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

_Cons1^

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

o-

_£

1

>rj/y r./?/?

/

9

^i

11

43

3

J

JM

AC

M

A.

1

.?

JEf

IA

5.7

a.

1

JO

fl.l

2/2

t?5

ifluTnoottS

/?

;f

#5

oj

#.$

_1

1

jm,

&0

SM>

etf

si

tf.%

0.6

m

ft *

IrJ

w»

^N PLftNfc

7

<?

7

m.

o.n

US

_i

<>

5

jil

<U>

*J

*

1

JLl

o-t

11

1

2

«

0.0

vi

'Jrt ALD&.

/<?

<?

^

j&

o.t>

/U

M

A0

^

_L

1

HA

0.6

as

<*

r^j

tf.5

0.0

St

s-

*

fr

1

i-

s-

»-OT*WER

6

' <?

<w

0t>

4<

1

1

JU

A0

/U

_1

OS)

01

M>

(3

_.4Z|

-A0

AC

MOT STATED

JJL

/.r

j^

0-b

JM

J

1

J.t 0,6

/•*

a-

6

A

3$

0.6

3.?

II

i/

J&l

-M

314

ToM

£1-

)

5?

jia

/•7

W-

/?

9

n

M».i

(M

/«».

.£L

1

51

m

t.Vu.

JUl

L

>V7 /«*.

V.JlrJtf.

MM

Ji//V£

Jt/L-f/

fe«r

I

NumtjB

Percent

Niimoer

Percent

Suiter

PetCenl

Numtrei

Per Cent

I

Cmsl

Varutrle

Tolal

Const

Vaiiarjle

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

VanaMe

Tola!

Const

Viriatjle

TotalI

NumtjB

Percent

Niimoer

Percent

Suiter

PetCenl

Numtrei

Per Cent

I

Cmsl

Varutrle

Tolal

Const

Vaiiarjle

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

VanaMe

Tola!

Const

Viriatjle

Total

Const

Vaiiaile

Total

Const

VariaW*

Total

Const

Variatle

Total

0-

'-/d C^(?

1

1

2.3

^

?.;

3

?

hj>

M

tu

_£

__£

JUi

M

^

^

II

312

A.d

til

^pmooRS

30

3

3$

m

i-7

WW

1?

it

fi.b

o.t

nn

9

_1

«d

U

*rft<

Jil

_2i

as

0.0

(,16

J-IIM pu>«E

a

3

JUL

ArJ

w

_x

J

H.0

01

u

y

I

i.<5

M S.L

^)

Q

£>

0.0

0.0

OP

•■/MRLDG.

-M

<)i

^

A

J&

0.0

o.t>

6

Aft

-M

Afl

-5

fl

0.0

0.0

no

5-

6-

J-

8-

J-OTHER.

<7

Q

M.

W

m

ul

o.t

M

OP

o

o.d

0.0

w

b

0.0

0.6

0-t>

NOT STATED

<i

3

US

iW

us

3

\

tl.0

\u

^L

~1

3i>A

6.0

30.fi

_i

fl

/7.3

OH

17.3

ToW

HI

3

45

m

M

Mr

M.

xs

IHU.

^

l».

JA

MM.0

Midi.

-£L

5Z f00.6

.,0'Hm-

SePTeMSeA

ePerptse/t

AZ&i/siMee*

De&z&gse.

Nomber

PerCent

Numaer

Percent

Kurober

P« Cent

Number

Percent

Coasl

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Vaiiatile

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

D-

J-LN CftC

J

1

.S3

A9

??3

1

1

_ZJ

0-0

71

_1

O

\

5.<?

d/)

*?

f

7

35.7

6.6

ti*

? T3yrMaRS

2

X

&.1

rt.i

U,1

A

•f

j£i

0.0

?*.5

3

?

irU

Afl

«..5

__£

3

<?

M.2

li-l

33.3

3- iN PUANE

60

0^?

01

^

J

Jil

0.0

J3.1

_1

^

Jlk

0.0

/ft

_^

H

m

0.0

ti-9

*-in fiLDa.

fi

O.0,

0.I?

OX

AA

0.0

rt,i

_JL

/

a.i

ftffl

J-r

_£

0.0

O.o

0.0

5-

c-

^

tv

»-OT(tER.

_il

0.0

OH

ox

Q

"0

w

0.0

Ad

I

J

J!

0,0

^■ < l

^)

6.6

0.0

0.0

MOT STjWEC

JLL

04

0.1

H

1

jdj

0,0

^.?

/5

15

w.l

0.0

W.I

_z

■

1

m

0.6

as-9

Total

-J.

3

mo

o.t

M-

13

)3

10&.G

0,0

/?&•

3*/

■0

M

00.

0.(J

llM.

_^

3

11

m

li-l

ftW.

216

B£fj5«^5PT?s fWW

$3Jf* fc f ^ ffiTfflgy?'^ ' **: ^V-T'iit^V w

■i1

m

0.6

as-9

Total

-J.

3

mo

o.t

M-

13

)3

10&.G

0,0

/?&•

3*/

■0

M

00.

0.(J

llM.

_^

3

11

m

li-l

ftW.

216

B£fj5«^5PT?s fWW

$3Jf* fc f ^ ffiTfflgy?'^ ' **: ^V-T'iit^V w

■i

..^V—.tes?/ltflvs

Jfwvaev

FE6*uA<e<J

flfA4&#

fl?ie/L

Number

Per c«ni

dumber

Pet tent

Number

Percent

Niwiber

P<rCent

Const

Variable

Total

CwJt

Variable

Total

Com!

Vanable

Total

Const Variable,

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Tout

Const

Variable

Total

C

.Hn car;

_i

_>

AIT

4i /JW

V

9

V.l

O.d

A>\

-A.

a

3

6.9

i.d

IS

£>

A A

ifW

d.&

*-OUTDOOH$

X

1

3

/&}

JJ

A*]

-A

/

__L

£1

J._J

N,l

/?

/t

2S.j

e.o&o

T

a

t

2U

DM

m

hti PLAME

r r

?

£1

o.t

v,*/ 1

V

' tP

i

12.1

0.0

m

?

o

r

//./

#.d //. J

G

6

*

/7.1

PJ

/7-Z

*1N RLD&.

a

At

o.t

r?^

___.

/

ML

Ad

$0

*

rt

5

U

6.0

_■?

y

V

as

6,0

W?

s-

6-

- "'

7-

e-

*OT i+Ep.

<J

J

Q.b

at

<44

^L

4

/

JA

0J

$.6

l

6

_L

2?

\U

23

6

d.6

At

<)■$

WoT STflrEh

;

_

szi

AU/.i

22.

UliAl

A*

t/.s

!£.

3^nz

a.dvr-1

/■*-

a

m

at)

Ht.i

Total

/?

\\ /?

sal

jr.?

\OA

3J,

. J

33

?7-0

3.6 m.

2Z.

6

72. W-i

______*__.

J3.

Xffat.0

. o.dta.

1

Mat/

JiJA/e

Jvt-y

— ■ — — ... - ~ — — -

1

MumSet

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Number

PerCent

Number

PerCent

i

Const

Variable

Total

Coasl

Variable

Total

Coast

Variable

Tolal

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const'

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

0-

l-!rt CAR

±

6

I

/AC

0.6

M

1

;

rf3

l).&

m

H

/

<?

M.7

j&m

1

I

Jtt

U

W

'OUTDOOR?

l>

&

o

/). t>

A6

t?,0

I

6

/

m

Ad

rtt

H

y

/i.1

6.6

/i.7

-JL

JQ

W.6

0.0

itf.6

*■ IN PLANE

—M

fl

H,

fO.b

fit

(d.b

z

z

#i

M

M

Z

t

M

Ad

IS

3

3

/J.6

__2.fi

ijjb

*-|fcl RUDfi.

O

Ab

A&

A&

&

6.&

M

4&

-A

j.

JA

d.b

1$

Z

a.

~M

_Jl_!

n

5-

6-

7-

l

5- OTHEH

6

JA

M

J-*

Abfit

(d.b

z

z

#i

M

M

Z

t

M

Ad

IS

3

3

/J.6

__2.fi

ijjb

*-|fcl RUDfi.

O

Ab

A&

A&

&

6.&

M

4&

-A

j.

JA

d.b

1$

Z

a.

~M

_Jl_!

n

5-

6-

7-

l

5- OTHEH

6

JA

M

J-*

Ab

M

d.C

I

/

JU

d.i

ii

^

f)

3

11.0

-M

ii.&

MefTSTWED

/£

/(>

fd.b

fid

fan

3

3

V2.1

tit

y;.?

i

4

$

a.0

3.&1S.&

-L

L

Mb

-JLfl

11.0

Total

20

M

IM.6

M

w,

JL

1

t»M

tl,9

Hi>

Jt

.f

Zi

211

?4.?M.

£L

iBlM.O

0M-

#

SE?r£M&££

Dtrag&e

_ Wa?EM££A

/fe^£W£<

K "

Hunber

PnCent

NurniH

Percent

Hombet

Per Cent

mmbtr

PeiCeal

J

Const

Variable

Total

Coast

Variable

Total

Const

Variatle

Tolal

Corftl

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

0-

^/ri C.B R.

V

q

.53.?

M

tit

J

n

1

tbb

u

ld-4

00

0.0

00

ze

3

?

«3

11

tfjo

'r>t^ry>6«S

J,

3-

HLH

0,6

HH

5

s

5d.6

Oi)

«j0

5

5

^4

OS)

7J.7

_

.

_£U

0.0

i%i

3-int PLANE

3

(1

3

_22J

0-0

>3J

_L

1

I0.Q

0,0

(0.6

_£

2

m

0.0

.?/•«

3

3

_ai

o.o

11

«-lrt RLOG,.

1

1

JL3

Q.0\

M

l

(?

1

10.6

0.0

0-0

_J^

5

ii.i

l).p

wtf

1

X

__i,

(7.0

t>,5

s--

t>

.

7-

t-

■

>-_>TH-£R.

1

f

Jl

rVJ

7.7

i

)

ld.0

(M

ld-0

__ai

00

<3.fJ

fl

Ad

0,0

O.0

HOT ST»TtD

2.

2

I6.H

o.fl

IS.1

__L

1

I6A

O.0

IW

__i

5

____]

0.Q

«.7

.11

M

3*i.5

ao

V>-5

Total

13

Q

t3

mo

04

w,

10

to

10t.i

OjO

/<«).

23

A3

l*M.C

0-0

Or).

3?

-3

Jl

?«

9-7

Wo.

I

217

^■.-"

'Tj-S -"7V ■"- V;f; *i>-- ?J ^t ^"«jt^.(|t

Ca£^f ^zxz. £££azmAL *

^ ass^M* 1/^/e.s de*e//i/& At&str/A/&s

(ff

./<4>0A/r&s

/^*? ^i £

S/A/TTf/tTlSS

/?£/

c/jf*^

tti/

F& Ate Attn

Mft#£H

AftAll. ..

Const

Number

Per Coil

Number

PerCent

Nuijhn

Pel Cent

Number

Pet Cent

Variable

Total

Caul

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

ToW

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Caret

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

0-Pet Cent

Variable

Total

Caul

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

ToW

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Caret

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

0-

'-jn c/j/e.

J.

c

3,

7-1

44

1-4

/

4

J

<7

13.5

SAO

_a

~n

6Jb

Ofi

*

1

331

A*

t&

1 PUTQQ01&

4.

2.

t

&•!

7i

an

J

1

J2i

0.6

m

_jj

i

4

MA

lt.1

M

2

r>

a

ii.1

(i.0

*W

J-ltM R-flNE

?

7

Ml

OJ)

,733

1

9

UO

Q-t>

(,o.b

.

1

M

At

M

_fl

0.0

0/3

m

*w:ftw&.:

V

„_£

y

_il

6.0

3.1

5

C

6.0

Q.b

6-0

o

-M

0A

0-0

o

_Q

0.0

00

i»J

5-

$■

;■

t-

9-OTHEe

/

/

.J2

0,0

3.1

J

J

JdL

M>

M

o.t

0.0

ao

_Q

ft

_J2

0.0

0.0

9.0

fi$r W9DU)

^rl

LU

6

^

0.0

»a

_M

M

01

1 F

J

JU

0.0

M

_Jl

i?

0-0

i$

10

Tow

^2=1

_^

3,1

5ii

7,1

/oo.

J3

*

15

S3

M

/A?-

l_5

/

4

m

IM

/w.

_A

3[#-0

88

vs.

1

A&</

.,///^£-

Jui-tS

fti/G-i/sr

i.

Number

PerCeht

Numtier

Percent

Hunter

Percent

Number

Pet Cnt

I

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Corel

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

a-

wn efli?

_£0

0.0

00

.0

-M

J)

t)o

1

1

Jil

-JA

J'.)

3

I H

ISA

1fl

%&

'OUTDOORS

3

3

tA0

0J?

10J0

/

1

WL

i

m

__t

■0

i-

M.

-M

Wi

Jl

1

13

U)J)

50

M.0

3-|7V PWME

-M

p

rtd

-Jl

01

00

04

/

(?

_L

JIM

h

III

1

2

IDA

OA

ha

HN BLDG..

la

k

ftO

-JL

M

9.0

w

-JL

-A

Ml

iiJ

W1

1

(1

/

zk

tf

56

5-

fc

<^

*■

5-OTr+EE

Z3

T0

■w

u

M

0.0

CiO

—L

Jl

ft<J

6.6

O

__il

-M

M

0.6

tji>T 5TPTEP

_4

>

#4

n.a

HD.0

i5

c?

M

P

0-0

1

I

111

-_M

III

~iV

__il

~M

M

QO

Total

_£

5

lOOA

w

*»•■

_JL

1

{&£

o.o

w&

_1

n

9 /AM

. 0-0m-

IE

I

W

110

WA

\(l<>.

Seprengee

Oct

pssa .

fi/0i/af4gEjz

DeceM/Sea,

Number

Percent

NunbH

PerCent

Nontier

PerCent

Nunbet

PerCmt

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable. 0-0m-

IE

I

W

110

WA

\(l<>.

Seprengee

Oct

pssa .

fi/0i/af4gEjz

DeceM/Sea,

Number

Percent

NunbH

PerCent

Nontier

PerCent

Nunbet

PerCmt

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Tola)

Corel

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

VariaMe

Total

Const

Variable

r Total

Const

Variable

[ToW

Const

Variable

Total

so-

i-l N CftR.

I

1

X

/.4

^

III

£

rl

I

-^

0.6

11

>

/

3

Jll

f-9

m

3

3

373

os>

m

'riorbooR.5

4

H

JeU

o.O

M

/J"

IS

Ilk

CO

J?-*

^L

1

Jil

0.0

its

__i

a

1

JL4

.*•?

3 '1N Pf-PfllE

9

<?

ft.0

0.0

M

_j_

5

M

M

/7. 7

7

1

Jll

M

%%

J

a

3

ir-3

4-;^ 8LD6

X

2,

ill

w

ll-l

-J-

1

3

JLL

At

W-1

_L

1

5.1

U

$.i

8

/)

6J6

M

^

&-

t>

;-

a-

»■ OTHER-

fl

M

(J;fl

Qji

J

3

JM

9.0

16.1

Q

OS

0.6

el)

OS

to

jji

Nor?T7)rED

1

J

_ii

0-0

U

Ul

&JD

Q.S

90

I

6

I

113

0-0

u.t

1

a

t

Jj

0.6

?-'

Total

Jl

1

It

2i£

,f.fc

lot-

Jd.

Vt

%H

H

mo.

Ml

1

n

M

5-1

\0-

II

.1

1004

6.6

m.

218

?%£l4 # /-f« i.t?ejrrs0At ar /?£<&* I/&4S /j&J/A/is f/4,/j'r/A;6.s AV A?0A/rJVS

FtPA, /?*.l, f/&UT-//lfG£ /«*2

J/iivt/fijtV

FsSAt/ARV

MA&£H

Afi*/L

Number

Ptl.Blt

Number

PerTent

. Number

Per Cent

MjiUhi

Pel Cent

Corel

V suable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Vaiiable

Total

Cmit

Variable

Tolal

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Tolal

Coral

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

f>

Wrt call

3

d

3

AW

06

ItA

/

1

f.i u

5.L

3

6

3

ID

d .b

//->

ti

a

/(

13.1

'.?

I5.S

l nuraoa(&

X

1

3

lit

4.7

XH

/

1

5.4

AS

51 3

1

*t

JU

3.7

fl*

fl

3

50

*4

M

Ht.S

H\i PfsflNE

Y

1

ui

M

ft.1

u

o

/»

JiA

Oh

S5.L

i

I

32.1

0.0

*2.2

_J_

6

f

it

Ql>

$>*

•iff G^bGa.

/

I

-M

6.6

f.7

c

6

6.0

116

-&£

7

9

35.3

fit

33J

il

II

id.l

Q.6

lt-1

5-

&•

7.

*

t-

'■0TT4E.R

i.

1

133

o.s

as

1

1

Jik

5.t,

/

6

J

3.1

$.6

3.1

d

a

0.0

dfl

6.6

NOT STATED

2,

}c

6

6.0

116

-&£

7

9

35.3

fit

33J

il

II

id.l

Q.6

lt-1

5-

&•

7.

*

t-

'■0TT4E.R

i.

1

133

o.s

as

1

1

Jik

5.t,

/

6

J

3.1

$.6

3.1

d

a

0.0

dfl

6.6

NOT STATED

2,

}

13.1

u

13,3

3

6

11.1

0.6

;7.?

9

9

H

nS

<\6

m

M

At

fM

u

m

Total

W

I

15

«3

6.1

IDO-

it

6

It

.««.

0.&itb*

X

\

J7

U3

J-7

\Sb.

ft

5

}0S

9S.I

M

166-

Mau

Jt/A/£

Je/uv

Au$i/st

,

Nuinbej

Percent

Nurnbei

Percent

Ntroner

PerCoit

Number

Per Cent

f

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Jolah

CMS!

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

0-

1-IM tflR

II

6

II

_£2

6$

V\

IS

I

11

_g5

■ H

<u

-£L

7

U

_ii

0.9

~ni

4/

Z

73

JA3

_J

I6.f

J n</rnoafts

51

1

S3

«7

t*

%1

92

3

16

3A

i.l

f&

317

3

3fo

vtz

oH

*#i

ffl

7

X>H

ni

1.1

H

3-IM aflME

JL

l<>

JU

u

w.i

11

l<\

M

6.0

16$

if

I

if

~U

0.1

11

*L

JL

$1

13

0.5

7.t

i*-|N RkDG..

1

a

f

JL

u

7<i

ZE

%

ZM

u

H4

jH

,?

1H

9.0

m

JA-JY

H

3t

a

i.O

li-

!s>

!«• " '

';?•

8-

>OTiJ£ff

2

£

J.?

0.0

a

i

A

Jl

Q£>

/./

ll

n

i.l

9.6

Jl

6

d

5

.IS

6.0

1.3

|fK<jTsrflre/i

±L

lY

IX.H

■Ofl

aJ\

JL

Q

Si

J*5

0,0

U'1

if$

Its

MS

0.6

Xi.5

7l

7i

/?./

0.0

lt.-l

Total

III

z-

113

~M

IS

M.

in

H

m

_m

%l

no.

74?

H

tfz.

Ml

Mia.

?tx

!3 fit

iu

_ !/«*.'■

$£Pr£M4l?A

Oi.T06£#i

#01/ £ At 6 E A.

0e:e.£A7tiG#

Number

rerun!

Number

Percent

Nurabei

PerCent

Nunbei

Per Cent

Caul

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Court

VaiiaDle

Total

Const

Vaiiable

ToW

Const

Variable

Total

Coast

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

Const

Variable

Total

0-

WM Cfl£

//

' /

4

Jl

u

f-f

9

1

/'

-Jl

/■/

/*.?

s

I

7

7.5

3.L

its

S

3

/

3.6

Y*

1S

JQuTTiCWRS

?t

£

15

*A.H

}.i

#$

i3

H

Ml

1*

¥11

-Jl

JL

V

~ffi

■ 16

1il.$

ZH

/

/?

JSl

14

?sx4

Jl

u

f-f

9

1

/'

-Jl

/■/

/*.?

s

I

7

7.5

3.L

its

S

3

/

3.6

Y*

1S

JQuTTiCWRS

?t

£

15

*A.H

}.i

#$

i3

H

Ml

1*

¥11

-Jl

JL

V

~ffi

■ 16

1il.$

ZH

/

/?

JSl

14

?sx

'IN PLANE

/i

6

a

Jd

0.0

1M

15

/6

M

I)

/t.3

__L

7

Ml

O.D

ti-1

Jt/

/

tf

37.1

1.6

21*

'*-m Rlds..

_L

a

JO

t.t

11

i.l

JL

H

Jig

0A

151

-M.

21

M

U

3/J

/£

. 6

/»

151

$.6

tit

>

«■

7-

»■ '

3-OTH6C

6

6

6.0

#A

0.

%

_M

ID

W

<?

JlA

CM

&.o

1

d

1

K

0.0

1.5

NOT^TTffEP

JL

$i

Hf.l

0.0

Hi

?

&

f

Jl

9.i

11

-1L

6

/'

M

61

i1.1

i

Q

6

U

oJ

ti

Tom

JlL

f

ux

111

ti

M.

AL

1

&

mi

!■>

/<*>•

M.

V

W

no

(,-t

Its.

a

$

a

tli

7.6

let.

m

1

!■■'

219

•J.'KKtti-im* '/*.

7~4gl£

/? /?s-

£it/L&/irs/tiy ■ #f /?Li*

5/&/f r-/A>6

•;

-^ae

SH-t

•/£<?£$

/}</ /?jL£>,tS

££■/**!>£. r&o

AM*- rt/j/>*r/r>A/ &/? s/6. f^r/Afa 6jtf/r£ 'Je &-0U///Z& wrt/r£ 0AJe<trs

>r jr<?i«vv&!

i 4/t Zfss

4>-/0 Sffep^Ds

It -30 Secesfvs

J/-60 Jm«-/Dk

EnJnnon

Nunber

PoCail

Number

P« Cent

Number

PaCmt

Ndn*er

Pn CctI

Certan

Doobtftll

ToUl

Certain

DouUlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;trt»in

Doubtful

Totil

Ccitatn

OouMful

Total

Certain

Ooubttul

Total

Certain

Ooubllul

Total

0- Sallow

/

^r

&

^E.

4.1

4?

a

A

JZ-

00

4.1

47

-2

4

I

S.o

6.0

.22-

/

/

a*

*0

20

lAstmoaical

S6

4*

n

JIU

3z.i

iff

/t>

1

ff

xt.x

2*.1

W.f

JA-

3

/L

m

/■J-

U9

X

A

y

4./

4.1

r.t

JAiraaft

1

/{

/K

f-7

/.*

/¥*

_J_

r

f

11.

/At,

f£?

ZZ

i

/9

M.

//.<?

W.f

/e

4

/</ 2a.4

IX

2S&

J.L11M Pnina.

a

4,

00

/.(,

/.$

/

/

£.1

00

£3

£>

f

/

0.0

/■y

/.*

00

0.0

00

4-Binb

/

/

2,

02

£>.e

/&

-0-

e>

(?

aa

0.0

00

_*2„

.a..

0J?

<?.<?

JZiZ

_jL

1

...£■-

$2-

2.0

/0t

5-Cliwb, Dust tit

£0±

.££.

00

JZ0-4J2.

00

4

00

##

00

.0

00

#0

£>0

tlmflic. 1*.

3

-f

1&

.00 i 'V

i

o

,?

t0\

00

to

*f

0'.a..

0J?

<?.<?

JZiZ

_jL

1

...£■-

$2-

2.0

/0t

5-Cliwb, Dust tit

£0±

.££.

00

JZ0-4J2.

00

4

00

##

00

.0

00

#0

£>0

tlmflic. 1*.

3

-f

1&

.00 i 'V

i

o

,?

t0\

00

to

*f

0'

<r

u

0.0

7?

d

6

/Zl

0.0

/■2-Z

7Pt¥0*>»|iai

o

00

de

00

_£j

ct

at

a- a

0.0

0>

/

/

00

/■S~

^

00

-&0A

0.0

MHvMt

/A

/2>

M,

£t0

t*

Zj\

o

f

209

00

20?

/I

t7

2S.</

0.0

2£V /<?

/9

3U

00

3?Z

WWW

J

/

/

S¥

at

I*

0.0

00

ao

*

o

&■

*0

a.0

30

#0

0.0

0.0

Total J ^3

4,o

Azi

£U

4s.g

/00.

It

AA.

43

M

nz

M

fo

AA

£7

14&

U4

t£&-

4i

g

M.

S3?

4*

/00.

£' Sf<r**j

pj SAt*ivr£S

£ - 30 /4*/S a 7-tfVX

0\><Slt 30> S4sA/tiYV&

2i/^r«v *>rT vlr>nr»-a

Enlution

Kuatoer

Per Coil

Number

Per Cent

Hmtier

Percent

Niniber

PerCenl

CtiJin

Ooubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DmAthil

Total

Certain

DouMtuI

Total

Certain

Doubtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certan

Douuttol

Total

Certain

Daittfal

Total

0-tUISM

J0

/?

sf

&L

ff-1

#4

<*'

X0

Yz

/74

Ms

?19

JL

3

tf

2*.e

J-S

*£$

/7

?J

.Zi.

/0.4

XX- /s. 9

1-Aitmniol

J"

4

f

4.0

SI

7.2

/J

r

/$

Jo?

4.1

/#$

-/£.

r

/,7

ILoJ,^3.

2/Z

AL

K

4L

Ha

42.

24.Z

l-Aimtn

/z

f

2/

4n

7.3

ff-0-

_£

/4

/rf

J.3

//&

/ff

-JZi

/*

tf

.£■*.

/£T0

2/2.

IA

£

/f

7.4

3.7

//./

J-Li(ti| Phtnoa,

0>

l>o

00

00

A

j'

/

M

*/

£f

/

(?

J2JL

0.0

<?0

0.0

0.0

00

4-Birds

j.0

00

0-0

0.0

00

0.0

__0\

tf

0.0

0.0

00?

_^J

_L-

0.1

0.0

0.C

S-Clouds, Dint, etc

/

4

IT

0.g\

■?■*

«a

o

o

0.0

0.0

00

0^

-£4s

010

0.0

..*?.

2,

/X

0-P

/■z

tlnailic. tin.

<i~

f

4.0

0.0

40

JL

a

?

JZ£

0.0

?Y

- /

a

Z

U-

0.0

/*>

AC

2f

J.J.Z

0.0

J$J

7-Piyclnlotical

t

/

P

^JL.

0f

/•+

j -

40

S'

jLl

0.0

4/

.

010

0>0

00

A

/

J

A2.

0.6.

/■f

t-Unknoin

39

<f

S/.y

0,0

3/.S

AL

0/

/?4

00

'M

AA.

c

zz

n.r

0.0

2?£

3C

o

Si

?3.l

0.0

22/

K»Kf

40f

/•+

j -

40

S'

jLl

0.0

4/

.

010

0>0

00

A

/

J

A2.

0.6.

/■f

t-Unknoin

39

<f

S/.y

0,0

3/.S

AL

0/

/?4

00

'M

AA.

c

zz

n.r

0.0

2?£

3C

o

Si

?3.l

0.0

22/

K»Kf

4

4

r }1

00

S.2

-J,

■f*

Z7

f-P

ff

-A

/

r.0

00

£.0

ZZ

//

£.?

0.0

6-r

^

Totri

11

21

/**

le.2

m

(00_

J2.

44

/^/

i*4

X.4

,0*

6dL

fe

So

Zr.e

tfO

/00.

fU

*t

/£} S/.0

/4o

/00.

TPSLS /}/7A

*

^£J*2JL&4zy0£L

0F

jttL ^s/&j/r/H6S^ ^0&

4Lt-

<Z£A££

/?</ /!0/.ojes

*>S?fi>f7£r£0

F0£> 00/e#r/0/V 0F SZ6//r/A

/& fi0ST4i.L./C 0£j£e7~S

^'5eeo*sj>* */t Acs.*.

A - /0 Jeeo^-zts

//-30 SeeefJiz

JI-&0 Sece+fbs

Evaluation

Nuabs

Percent

Number

Percent

Nuinber

Per Cent

Nuinber

Percent

Certain

Douttful

Total

Certain

Doubttil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doabtnil

Tolat

D-Salloon

-?

/

J

SL

it.ti

/*£

„^

A

2.

0.0

/0g

/0<

/

4

5T

/.i

It

$?

-J-

J2

<

44-

44

ft

1-Aslnnoaicai

/

-?

,/

3J_

77

ft 5

_2

?

2-

0.0

/as

/0.£

A.

*

M,

0.0

J.L

X

Jr

0.0

*¥

4*

2-Airaaft

A.

c

2

Jd,

JSJ

?at

-A

/

?

4JU

Si

<//.0

Z9

zC

ff

32.9

*?(,

tz*

J&

7

£.</

H.8

(f-l>

tt,4

J-Li|ht Pnenw.

/

^_s_

/

sj

0.0

?.$

/

/

00

S3

S.J

>

/

00

At

/■*

/

/

0.0

2-2

*■*

t-Bildf

/

/

f.g

00

S.f

j2j2.

00

0.0

*?.0

0.0

00

-jL

/

2.Z

0-0

2.2

^Clouds, Oust, etc

o

J2&

00

00

J2J0.

0.0

00

<?-0

s-*

0.?

0>

(?

0.0

0.0

J20.

6-instiffic. tea.

/

o

/

Sf

0.0

?-t

/

/

f.?

0.0

s.?

/

/

j£.

0.0

/■*

A

.6

£.

*¥

0.0

f.V

7-Psychoio(ical

/

/

S.g

0.0

*f

_^£.

O

J2J2-

^&x0

00

J

1

S

LZA.

/■*

?■?

.#0

0.0

0?0

t-Unkrann

4,

o

I

23.1

0.0

2S./

_jL

/

J//

0.0

2/.I

9

f

7lL

00

/i./

20

/<?

?2A

0.0

222

9-OUier

Ji

n7.

77

0.0

77

_JL

0-0

00

0.0

n

J&2.

0.0

00

/

/

2.Z

-0L0-.

2.2

Total

/?.

f

a£>

\M

3U

/00.

JA_jL

/

J//

0.0

2/.I

9

f

7lL

00

/i./

20

/<?

?2A

0.0

222

9-OUier

Ji

n7.

77

0.0

77

_JL

0-0

00

0.0

n

J&2.

0.0

00

/

/

2.Z

-0L0-.

2.2

Total

/?.

f

a£>

\M

3U

/00.

JA

6>

tf

m.

Jtf,

/00.

7?

J2

s'4>

&&1

n$

/00.

S3

At

4r

11.3

2C7

/£0_

& / itfisVPi -S A/rfj

& ~30> /*^v^7VSf

O/S/t 30 Mss/VT-tJ

1>i>/PAr,e*- /-/or St^rea

EvUiutnn

MnabH

Per Cent

Nurirer

Percent

Number

■ Pei Cent

Nitnbei

Pel Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certan

Doubtful

Total

Cerbin

Doubtful

Totel

Certain

Doubthit

Total

Certain

Doditful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

£/

/<?

J/

/u

/-#

U0

jK

J2

//

2£L

All

W

JJL

4

&

/f.3

7-o

2W

JL

4

ii?

/a.6

.i.i

/s:?

Mstnnonicaf

/

~J2-J

/

0.&

0.0

at

/.

y

4j2^

/■(?

/.0

_J_

1

V

J^j

Af

/'

-A

3

r

j:/

2.4

S^

?-Aiicra«

J6

/J'

?5

^L

/ZC

294

/0

10

?0

U^

Aft

29. r

Z

2

/

S.S-

3S

f- a

33

S

jf

fS.l

i-3

SY*

>Litht Pnenoa.

/

/

?■

0?

0-f

/•£■

/

/

£j2_

/■0

/■o

_00\

0.0

0.0.

/

/

6. ft

f.0

0X

(-Birds

/

a

/

0f

<?-0

0f

—4^

00

00

00

-j2-

~010

0.0

00

/

/

0.0 \

fif

as

S-Clowb, Dust, elc

00

0-0

0.0

\0.0

0.0

00

?

3

£■■3

0.0

£■-3

-A.

0.0

0.0

0.0

t-lnnflic an.

Z7

//

/4.1

0.0

z4*

_1

9

J^

0.0

?f

0.0

00

0-0

.dL

a

3 2.0

0(2

22J

7-Pi)CB)loBal

/

/

W.

0.0

0J

^C

/

JJ2

0.0

/.0

xA-

6

2,

j:^

0.0

f.S

/

a

/

0g

0-0

0?

s-gHnoK

jz

u

ZiL

A0

2/.g

ZA'

z<

\M

0-0

stf?

<?7

*A

414

<0.0

&</

J±

a

if

22.g

00

22$

Mlbtr

2

3

(f

M3-

j.r

4*

_Jzl

<2

t.

^djL

2°

6-0

£>

2

&

00

\?,*

?g

-f

?

ti

0.0

?'

>J

Total

90

It

tt1

7U

X4.4

/00.

u

3C

/0t

\AM

3*'.£,

'Off

AI.

7

A~7

Mz

IS.S

/<%>.

Z/J

ZA-

Az?

*t*

/u

/00.

220

&>/!{.£ J/?? £i//}Lt/#r/rt/i/

0*

#l.L

r/is m r/A> '6 s fite

rtu

¥£**£

A?

sol^s

j?js*>0/er£ou

3C

/0t

\AM

3*'.£,

'Off

AI.

7

A~7

Mz

IS.S

/<%>.

Z/J

ZA-

Az?

*t*

/u

/00.

220

&>/!{.£ J/?? £i//}Lt/#r/rt/i/

0*

#l.L

r/is m r/A> '6 s fite

rtu

¥£**£

A?

sol^s

j?js*>0/er£o

fae. 0v£/}r/a/!j- 0* f/Gwrs/Vtz. t?gj&dr ej3ta& war sr/freo

J" 5£COf*pA a* /.£■!&

6* /O Sft^BS

//•3o Seet^ot

Jf-&a Sef/ns.

Evaluanon

Nunbei

Percent

Number

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Numtsr

P«C«nt

Certain

Doubtful

,Totil

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ceirjin

Doubltul

Total

Cettiln

Doubtful

TOW

;«rt«n

Doubtful

Totll

Ctrtain

DooDtM

Total

Ccrtaio

OaiMfol

Totll

Cttlam

DouMul

Total

r> Balloon

/

/

a*

J.S

£*

/

/

2.

*&

f0

<W0

•

/

/

0.0

/* 2.2

s

3,

£T

«■?

u

/i..Z

1-AstoiBBial

/■r

//

2i

37.S

M

$*■<>

/

/

? t

<&0

5.0

46.0

-A.

/

/

(33

21

/&

JL

1

3

Jt^

3.7

f-7

(■Aircraft

4

,?

I

/t-o

To

/£#

A

.?

4

/00

700

?00

r

4

f

//./

l*

20.0

-£

A

t

a.9

fr?

ff.4

J-Li(W Ptrenom.

a

<?

£0

00

00

A

Z

0.0

/0-0

/0,0

_ <f

o

aa

J0>

0>0

a

o

0.0

0.0

00

4-ends

«*

0.0

00

#0

_£i

a j

40

0.0

<?■<?

fi

<s>

.0.0\

0.0

00

jp

0>

££-

0,0

P0

S-Clouto, Dull, tic

/

/

ftr

00

2£

a

0.0 00

#<?

. .4

7

7

0.O

-4 2-

2.i

.0.

<?

0.0

0tf

0-0

frlnuffic. Into.

jT

j~

/A.i'

0,07

/*.*

7

p

7

$0

010

*&

7

c

r

ffj. A0 /st.

*

a

2

Jk£-i

<?-0

6*

7-Ptyd»le|ical

e>

a

00

00

00

o

J&0.

££-

00

00

0.0>

0.0

a

<?

00

<0.0

£10

tlMwm

/

/

2&

0.0

t-4

2

o

Is

/#■?

00

/0.0

70

o

/0

S/J

00

22.2

J±

s

/¥

~7m

00

¥sl

K)the>

<o

AO

<?■(?

(20

o

0.0

0.0

<20

_^?

/

/0

M

n.t

22.-Z

/

' /

00>

J*

3.2

Total

t mL

w-

4a

£s'.o

tfo

m

4L

4

2o

?46

sa0/00_

?<0

/£-

4r

tLl

sii /<*.

25-

&

3t

iu

rtt

/00.

ft

&f JetortTDt -J~ rfr^VTft

d 'So A

f"/vrfs

0\/£lt 30 Mmrte*

"Ik*e#rtttf s/tt &wTen

Eialutnn

Nunbn

Pel Cent

Numoer

PetCenl

Nu liter

Pel Cent

Nunoei

Per Cut

Certain

DoUbBul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Totald 'So A

f"/vrfs

0\/£lt 30 Mmrte*

"Ik*e#rtttf s/tt &wTen

Eialutnn

Nunbn

Pel Cent

Numoer

PetCenl

Nu liter

Pel Cent

Nunoei

Per Cut

Certain

DoUbBul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoibHllI

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DovMil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

~M

y

tf

/XL

n

JZ/.2

__£

/2

2/

ILL

ICO

U.1

Jt

7

V

Z€

ir

/7.0

/3

/o

23

4JL

3.%

2.7

1-AitiMomical

_j2_

2

00

2.2

22

r

2

7

£.2

ZS

$-7

_fj

/

f0

//.0

A

f2.t

J±

ll~

£9

&£.

S.t

?? t

2-*i(tlifl

JJL

?

23

n*

19

2Z.&

JS.

C

/?

iLL

7-S

2?.?

/

J

4

J. 2,

3 7

Yf

-J3-

J3

¥/,

$.e.

i.c

17.7.

3-Li(ht Ptimwi.

A.

)

J

22

It

3.3

0.0

0.0

0\0

..40 \

a

0.0

00

0-0

A.

2

(,

£JL

0.?

/■L

4-Binls

00

0.0

0.0

/

/

&£\

U

/■*-

3

J

37

0.0

S.7

-A

)

£

JJL

0.4

/■?

5-Cltudi, Ousl ill.

0.0

0.0

0.0

/

/

LjA

00?

/.2

J

3

Al

0.0

3-7

/

/

0JL

£0

04

Mmiftic. Into."

_2_

fi

?

7,8

0-0

7$

/a

/2-

/X0

0.O

#?■*

jA

a

rf

n/

00

/r-/

.jrv

$~S

Zf)

0.0

?0-7

JPsychjlojiul

—j£-

da-

00?

0.0

_J-

o

2

2.$

(?.0

$*

3

o

3

37

00

S?

3

-t

4

/■'

a.</

/■£

HJnloiwo

M-

J/

rn.

0.0

8(4

/*>

/0

/2J

010

/2-f

2i

o

26

Ml

00

?f?

49

O

4?

/*4

#0

/U

MttiB

r~

O

£■

£<•

00

£&.

?

o

r

u

00

s-i

-A.

I

S

M.

/■%

6(

'9

/

70

V

*¥

fs

Total

&-

/f

i*

m

li.l

m

*$-

4/

to

m.

&*

/00.

M-

/2\

f2

M

M

(00

2/3

f*

Hi

So:/

M3 /oa

-r/tSt-£ d/7f

^£t/£LL/&tZ0Jt /?/=" £±U

<:r&t¥T-//>/6s

f0t

all testes #</ eat-aes;

££/%■

■>*>r£t.

F0A 0(jeATt0A/ 0tr S/ArtT//l/& /OSA/V6G 0* (iLOtUJJVG 044/U&E /7/2Je?ArS

S %eee*Sps. a* Jess

&-/0 Siffo^DS

//-SO S*U*/»£

f/' to ^i

teo'Vj>*

Evaloatkn

Number

Percent

Hunter

PerCenl

Number

Percent

Number

PerCait

Certain

Doubtful

Totll

Certain

Ctoubtni

Total

Certam

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Daibtful

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

CertainPercent

Hunter

PerCenl

Number

Percent

Number

PerCait

Certain

Doubtful

Totll

Certain

Ctoubtni

Total

Certam

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Daibtful

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubthii

Total

Certain

Ooulitfu

Tola!

Certain

Doubtful

Total

rj-Bailow

0.0

r^r^

00

0.0

W

(20

#

0>

fl.0

00

0.0

/

,?

4

jr.?

/s.t

2/J

1-Astronomical .

_J2_

f

2L

33.3

/7-i

fflf

1

t

/0

nt

4*

4(7

_£

4

2

JLi

7ft

n#

X

3

4

/OS

ft?,?

2/.0

2-Aiicrafl

3

£>

9

S.f

///'

777

zt

2

■t

2f.o

li

ft*

^

2

4

3J.

9-t

/$t

.A.

A

4

/as*

/0.S-

3/-0

3- Li (til Pnenom.

9

0.0

00

0.0

0.&

0.0

0,0

00

0\0

0.0

a

0,0.

00

00

4-Binfj

1

/

0.0

2.0

2.0

0.0

#0

0.0

/

/

1L

4?.0

4?

/

J£J \

00

s-.s

S-Clouls. Dujt, elt

0,

A?

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-#q

0.0

0-0

0,0

0.0

0.0

S-lnsoffie. Info.

zk

4

7i

00

ttt

a

0.0

0.0

0.0

£0

0.0

0-0

/

a

/

S3

0,0

s:3

7-Piyeholo ileal

/

/

20

0~<?

t,n

0.0

0-0

0.0

/

/

I*.

00

*1

/

jEX

#0

5.3

S-IJnlffUKIfl

i."

£

1.3

fl0

fif

J"

O

&■

frj

M>

%>4

1

O

/

m

00

V-?

_£.

•

21.1

#0

■?/,/

9-0!ti(i

4

J

T

*?

2.0

tf

J

/

4.1

0,0

42,

t

(

£0

4<?

4*

r

0,0

00

0.0

Total

5Z

(1

S/

Ul

333

(00.

Al

3

24

iu

/-?•■>'

/t>0,

!£.

1

J2

iu

M

/00 t

IA.

•7

/?

(,1,1

3U

/00.

m

6/S/rae*fZi* - £ ' Stf/nroTft

& -JtS> *4/A/*rfS

6>Vt?4,30 rfstStTfj

J)t//e/{TiBfi' SStT Sr/?rfx>

Evatualion

Nuiaber

PerCent

Kinbei

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Nunbei

Pel Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain-

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

^rtain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tobl

Certain

Doubthii

Total

Certain

Doubthii

Total

O-Balloon

IZ

J'

9

z»

is

/S.$

&

X

2

Ji.2

/*

2/.t,

3

o 1

S

/4s

0.0

74s

_£.

/

£

J^

/.4

/£

1-AslninHiical

-J-

4

/

0.0

u

f.P

_1

)

4

i./

*T?-f

70-9

?

4-

7

t£L

79,0

33.3

7/

6

/7

If.t

2.1

&(r

2-Aircraft

?

j>

(03

o 1

S

/4s

0.0

74s

_£.

/

£

J^

/.4

/£

1-AslninHiical

-J-

4

/

0.0

u

f.P

_1

)

4

i./

*T?-f

70-9

?

4-

7

t£L

79,0

33.3

7/

6

/7

If.t

2.1

&(r

2-Aircraft

?

j>

(0

to*

tf.o

2^3

J.

2

4

s:j/\

*<A

/0.ti

3

3

0.0

74?

tf.3

77

(,

(7

/■f.9

r-f

2f.{.

3-Lifht Phenora.

__J^

o

2,

3.?

ae

f-f

1

o

ir

/6.2

00

t^.2

/

o

/

AL.

0.0

4k

7

a

/

-^L

0:0

/■4

t-Birfe

a

0,0

0-0

O.p

o

0.0

7?,p

0.0

a

o

£0A

0.0

0-0

a

o

f?

0.0

0-0

0.0

5-ClMdi, Dial, etc.

o

0.0

0.0

0,0

&

■

£0\

0.0

0.0

o

0,0,

0.0

0.0

-£,

n

r?

0.0

0-0

00

t-iuaffle. brio.

£

e

>

lo.S

0-0

/as

t

a

/

2.Z

<?-0

z.g

o

o

&£.

0.0

?

7

70.1

0-0

m/

J-Peirehrrtoiltal

/

Si

J

21

\X

f3

00

0,0

0.0

o

)

/

£0

*t

4t

■J.

O

/

/.4

0,0

'■4

HWmowi

-MX

-

t?

£(3

0,<7

763

V*

O

/2,

324

00

?24

i~

ff

tUl

00

23J

76

/£

21*

0,0

n±

Vjfter

3

o

. 3

X.\

fl.0

4.3

6

2

2,

0.0

*<¥

?.4

t

o

/

Ax.

0.0

4X

7

4

f

/.4

ff

?&

Total

u.

71

r?

w.

m

/oa

IlL

7

J1

ill

/If

100.

ML

s

Zi

tit

39-1

m

£*.

71

£1

K£

AU

/00.

22.1

1ML£. AiSJ-

J-Lifit naoa.

EnlMboa

O-BUHrn

l-jutmwiical

J-Aircufl

«-Bird>

J-dowfa, [Nisi, etc

UranlTit Mb.

7-Firthoto|ical

tu*»WI

HHbo

T«t»l

»5* S&c*ff>.s o*_^.£j.i_ 
PeiCeni

f$£. pfjfkr/e/V 00 srSMr/A/^ V^llouJ . &e 6u)iaj/a/c </£j.l<?*s ortj&irs

Certain

M-

&

Jj±

DoubtM

_*r

<f

Tool

2A

-=C

.X

<*2

Certain

#£.

4*1 /S.s

ILL

12

££.

jLS.

LL

±*l

/LL

0.0

&£

Doubtful

0.0

1£

40

HJLL

O.o

0.0

0.0

0.0

X f<^ \ /00

Certain

0.0

£lL

ILL

JL1

0.O

s.-?

ILl

0-0

£■ -/& S\

rtatci

lL

LA

co*fi>*

PerCenl

4L2

m

*JL

12

00

0.0

0.0

a.4\

£*

$M

tKwtltW

0.0

0.0

20-

4LL

0. O

ha£4l

0.t>

P.O

0.0

0.0

fi'Avm

Certain

0,0.

lL

&P-

£°

*±-£$-

P.O

m

0*

//-So Secedes

*Z /

JJL

Oaubtdil Total

i

-£

/So

20

PeiCeet

Certain

Mt

£Sa_

0,6

0.0

0.0

/So

££.

I^LCt

0.0

/So

DocHtit

JZ&fi'Avm

Certain

0,0.

lL

&P-

£°

*±-£$-

P.O

m

0*

//-So Secedes

*Z /

JJL

Oaubtdil Total

i

-£

/So

20

PeiCeet

Certain

Mt

£Sa_

0,6

0.0

0.0

/So

££.

I^LCt

0.0

/So

DocHtit

JZ&

Mt

JUL

0.0

£*

A*

4.0

0.O

Mo.

Tow

/£A

3S£.

tS.o

0.0

O.O

So

&5L/£°-

Se

//,*

0.t>

m.

3/-6.Q Sj

gf t/2)J

JL

^L

_X

/s

Dflibtlul

5~

Total

^

Pei cm

00

3S.fi

/fo

0.0

£0.

A0

J0

SS±

0.0

2£*l

Doubtful

0.0

/&°

S&O.

S.0

0jo_

0.0

0.0

4.0

0,-Q

0.0

il'.O \ /0O

£4

4£o_

2£o

0.0

0.0

S.0

So

/So

0.0

<»/ 5icf

vT0S

- S /*^v»rtti

£ - }o >*///*• ur-t-s

/>w* 3o MAfuT-cj

X>,

*#*Tie*f -vfar- Srstreo

Evaluation

Numbs

PefCent

Nsrmtiei

Percent

Nintwf

Pa Cent

Niimtci

Pet Cenl

Certain

DoubHi

Total

Certain

Doubtfti

Total

Certain

Doujtlul

TOW

Certain

OoiMM

Total

Certain

Dm*t(iil

Total

Certain

Ooubtful

Total

Certain

CtnitJlni

Total

Certain

DwUhil

Total

D-Balloon

/

/

2.S

-Pt?

*t

~£

3

f

K.Z

//

*#.?

-A

J

_1

&.2

JLHS.9

s

2

/

//?

S.C, /9.£

l-Ajtnnoaical

J

J

^

2i

■^'6

HA

j

J

t

L2JL

fj

3M

1

Jt

0.0

/!■<

///

d

4

/0

/i.7

//■/

nt

7-Aitcnft

J_

/

/^

223

233

UA

-±

J

7

/oS

If

ft.9

/

I

2

jLL

St,

f/2

/

& /

J.t

j&&-

2.t

HijMPImom.

-?

/

.?

XL

21

14

j

o

3

i./

0.0

tf

£>

a

0\»\

0t>

0.0

/

-L

2S

o.e>

2.8

t-Bintt

<J>

tf>

4.0

0.O

0.0

a

.. o

c>

0JL

0.0

&o.

_A.

-c

o

0.0

0-0

a

o

0.0

o

a^o.

5-Cloedi, Oust, etc.

.0-

tf

^

0.d

0.O

#.*

/>

o

o

0.9

vJLO-

a

a

0>

0.0

0.0

0.0

a

o

0.O

O.O

o.o

frtmullic. Mb.

.?

£)

,?

/..?

0.0

f.i

/

o

f

2.7

0,0

A7

JL

-A.AL

0.0

//■/

6

<L

/il

0.0 /6.7

J-PjydolorcH

O

<S>

O.c

0.0

0.0

o

0e

e.o

0.0

0>

6

0.0

0.O

0.0

a

a

a

0.O

0.0

0.0

t-Untottm

/0

/'-S'

27J

0.0

m

d

a

(,

LIB.

0^

/l*

12

P

-Jl.

&.2

0.O

21.7

/0

o

to 2lt

0.0

art

Wthet

a

o

^P

0.0

0,0

a, o

JL

/

3

f.4

3.7

If

i

-J-

0,0

siU

■r.6

. ./

o

I

Jf.t/'-S'

27J

0.0

m

d

a

(,

LIB.

0^

/l*

12

P

-Jl.

&.2

0.O

21.7

/0

o

to 2lt

0.0

art

Wthet

a

o

^P

0.0

0,0

a, o

JL

/

3

f.4

3.7

If

i

-J-

0,0

siU

■r.6

. ./

o

I

Jf.t

0.0

J.S

_<

1

Tola)

zs

//

^^

&94

So.i

#0,

ZL

f0

37

13jl

J7-o

/oo.

ft

1

ft

a/

Mi/eA.

Se>

_iJ

34.

AS

/£.7

/00.

104I.S

a/gz>

^mtUAZl&V.

i&^dLt.

<//SA/r//t/&j

*/?£

4t*t.

¥&*£.£

M

/?0i.0<es

/£&&?<er&0

fi0A />fS,e4r/0/i/ #r s/tz#7'//i/<: agjeerr t?f z?r#&£

S0C/7&S

S tetet/bs. an ^esc

b'/0 ^'f(*<v'*J

//-

£e ,

Tecoffus

J/ -.60 See0*SJ>j

Eoalmtion

tfOTita

Pa Cent .

tkntei

Potent

Nwtei

Pet Cent

Humbet

Pet Cart

Certain

Doobtni

Total,

Certain

Doubtfc

Total

Certain

OoubHul| Total

Certs ji

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Ooubtful

Total

D-Balloon

/?

fi.0

04

0.0

A.

2

&L

0.0

/2-y

/

2.

3

4'0

feo

/■Co

/

/

-?

Jjh

I?

/3.4

1-AsWwjnital

/*

ff

/*

33.0

M*

M*

y

I

6

4/3

£*

su

^L

1

<r

f.0.0

S.o

ZC.o

e>

}

;

0.c/

1-7

£.■)

2-Aiicritt

J"

/

6

/0.0

J0

(?-o

2.

fi

04

/2.S-

/Li-

j-

I

6

Ato

r.o

3t.o

<A

3

j"

/43

20.o

333

3-LighE Ptienom.

/}

a

o

A0

0.0

0.0

/

1

0.0

£ t

te-

/

O

l

JT.t

0.0

r.0

£>

O

o

0*4

0.0

0.0

t-BitdJ

a

/

I

00

j.0

2-0

£>

o

04

0.0

0.0

/

i

Afi.

f a

r.o

<z>

0.0

e.o

j-CIouiJs, Dust etc.

0\

/

/

0.0

2*

2-0

. 6

o

o

0.0.

0.0

0.0

o

o

6.0

0.0

0.0

a

o

O

04>

0.0

f.O

WnaiHic. Into.

■f

o

$

£.o

0.0

l.o

JL

o

2

/J.i'

0.0

/2.i-

a

o

6.0

0.0

0.O

&

o

00

0.0

0.0

7-PiyclnloeJal

?0

0,0

0.0

JL£.

-£*~

0,0

a

1

1

0.0

j'o

So

o

o

04

0.0

0.0

S-Unknow

4.

L

/J*

-£2-

/2.0

JZ

o

A

UJ

0.0

SIS'

3

s

y^k

0.0

/£*

6

o

£

4o.e

0.0

40.0

VOtliei

a

f?

a..e

0.0

0.0

/

jU

fi.0

i*

a

o

^0.0

0.0

0.0

/

o

I

17

0.0

(■7

Tolal

J3

fl

£-0

dlo

34.0

/<s>a

/2

4

/(>

ta

jj7a

W>

M.

£.

Ao/£*

6

o

£

4o.e

0.0

40.0

VOtliei

a

f?

a..e

0.0

0.0

/

jU

fi.0

i*

a

o

^0.0

0.0

0.0

/

o

I

17

0.0

(■7

Tolal

J3

fl

£-0

dlo

34.0

/<s>a

/2

4

/(>

ta

jj7a

W>

M.

£.

Ao

JM.

Se.o

/00.

/&

S

far'

U.7

33.3

/00.

&/^V'c»'VTpt -S tf/tSur&L

6-$0 MiAfur/Fs

ZV«*P 30 /V^^rej-

2^>i/A/r,^v- f/or ^7MTet>

Evaliabw

Huobti

Per Cent

H umbel

Percent

Nuaoer '

Pei Cent

Nur»b«

Per Cenl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Celaio

Dwibttiil

Total

Certain

Doobttut

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

lertan

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubttal

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-BJltam

/

J2

3

J.I

f-?

u

5

3

6

U-

M

///

. /

/

S.3

44

■s

}

4-

S*

/.?

I*

l-Ashonaical

2.

/

£

S.7

2$

u

JT

f

I

'/r-l

3./

/t-7

.?

X

3-

/Si

/4.S

2a

;jl

/2

2.4

2o.7

207

m

2-Hiicialt

ZZ

<r

if

~M

f?J

3/4

-A.

f

*

13S

#.s-

2S.0

■JL

o

2,

JgJ

0,4

/4.S

c

3

f

/4.3

S*

/SS

>Li(tltPlHKHL

/

f

0.0

Z?

J.4

f

1

SJ

0.0

S.f

S

o

MA

0.f

0.O

a

ft

«

0.O

0.0

0.O

*4iia>

o

o

04

_04i

0.0

6.0

0.0

0-t

a

4.0

0.0

0.0

<?

-0.4

0.0

0.0

Ktoods, DnJt. ttc.

6

J

4

0.0

u

U

4.0

4.0

P.0

A

/

/

0.0

S3

S3

a

/

(

4.0

'/■?

/■7

f>ttttlTk.W>.

/

}

Z*

0.0

Z9

/

f

M.

0.0

3.1

/

o

f

3.3

4.0

S3

6

c

/0.3

0.0

/0 3

7-Ptrd»>l*»cri

-?

(

3

s<7

S-1

t.t

■ a

0.0

0.0

0.0

/

f

S3

0.0

<1

/

£>

1

f-7

0.0

f.7

i-IMiBa

/0

fo

2U

0?

3U

_1

o

1

2U

O.O

2tf

7

1

31.9

0.0

m

/^2

/2

20.7

04

2*1

MiMr

/> r A

0.0

/l°

/

/

0.0

.If

31

/

1

0O

S3

S3

C>

/

t

0.0

f.7

f.f

Totf

2/

14

sr

£o£.

4».o

/*f

33

1

J*

It.f

21/

106.

JJL

4

/i

213.

*/.t

/O0.

3kL

/S

5B

J&L

3/4

/00.

2Z2

1

Si

If

ft

Tdfte /9(79

£i//fi.l/Ar/0/!/ _ /?/=■ ^4LJ.

££&j££jL{Xi;^ ^£0£^

/9C/

i/F/!£S

#</ />0//?*S f£ /=/?*> T£0

. . F01, 0V£/)r/DAJ 0F s/£*r//V& ££0 0A. &L0UJ//1/K &£0 0>gJ£CTS

•SSgtcf/iis a* less

£~ /e> S£caf<i>i£i//fi.l/Ar/0/!/ _ /?/=■ ^4LJ.

££&j££jL{Xi;^ ^£0£^

/9C/

i/F/!£S

#</ />0//?*S f£ /=/?*> T£0

. . F01, 0V£/)r/DAJ 0F s/£*r//V& ££0 0A. &L0UJ//1/K &£0 0>gJ£CTS

•SSgtcf/iis a* less

£~ /e> S£caf<i>i

/ /-£& J^^oyfSJ

3/-6o 4

*<;e*fDS

Evaluation

Nunbet

PnCnl

Number

Percent

fturnbei

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doublru.

TlUI

Certain

Doubthjl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tola) :»rttin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

TOW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Bellooft

*

*?

0,

flo

■0

<£

&

<3

&

#0

(&

ao-

/

<S

/

41

0.0

//

-?

A-

V

/2.x

/#£

jK.«y

1-Aiimnomial

/3

/o

%$

Hi

37. o iSi

jT

t?

5-

50.0

0.0

50,£>

7

/

/0

M.3 /4.Z

m

/

a

t

2/

00

,rr/

2-AJrcttfl

A

£■

•^~

J14.

0.0

W

/

/

2.

tf.p /t.OlO'.O

/

4

£

A/.8- fl.D

01$

/

X

J"

*./

/ft

17?

3-Liiht Phew*.

e!»

e»

6

£0

M

00

<5

(P

0J

64

00-

a

o

/?

0.0

0,0

00

0?

c

.0P.

J2l£.

0.0

*■««!»

<?

/).&

AD

#0

A

<P

0>

dt>

00

o

0.0

0,0

0.0

<0

0.O

0.0

00

S-Cloud*, Dust etc.

-M

0$

£0

d

1?

M

to

at>

0.0

0t?

00

0.0

00

0.0

frlnujflic Ink].

e>

op CO

/

O

/

/OJ

0.0

{&.£

a

e>

Oo

0.0

0.0

a

0.0

0,0

00

7-Ptrcteloficil

a

<0

-M

At)

fit

O

P

0J

0-0

00

/

/

*.r

00

St

a

0.0

00

00

eVUnkrnim

Z

o

1L

?fr

A&

7V

2.

o

XUi

0$

m

i

J

¥■*

0.0

4*

/

O

/

9/

00

f./

*Omn

o.

HP

0.0

00

a

a

0.0

0,0

0M

/

o

/

4/.r

0.0

*f

/

/

Z*

9/

fj

/?,£

Total

^2

/0

*7

610

$U

J£>0.

h?

/

/0

m

MO

m

J4

1

JL/

6L1

S3*

/00.

_^.

f

//

s~4s

4r.f

/0G

6/Seec*-z* -.f Ay«

if -JO M/AfuTfS

Qvf* Jo tf/fvnt-i

~!^>UifiHTf4f^ srer Shore*

Evaluation

Numbet

PhChiI

number

Pet Cmt

Nunter

Percent

Number

Percent

Certain -

OoubMul

Total

Certain

Doubt*i

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoiArru

Tola!

Certain

Dnibtlul

TotalOoubMul

Total

Certain

Doubt*i

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoiArru

Tola!

Certain

Dnibtlul

Total

(V Balloon

3

2

S

JjL

^/

/zz

»<

O

i

lil

0.0

///

_£

/

¥

#4

3.!

n,0

/

JT

U

/*

tij>

?9

l-Atuonooiical

_*L

rf

4

.&:f.

4.1

/i.t

/o

O

to

23$

(?(?

^f s

7

?

/0

0/.4

q</

///

ts

II

2-9

M

Mr

fg.Z

2-Aitetalt

*

,2

//

21.1

(*./

3?4

_J_\

I

?

JJA

/4.3

£/■</

-2

A

4

La

rf,2

a.*

■7

7

ft

0.2 A3

fO,&

3-LI|tit Phenon.

.^

o

<?

0.0

0J>

0-0

/

o

/

J?4

Af?

£■?

..<?.

%

2,

0:0.

(«, 2-

6.2

&

S0

J0.0

00

4-Bin)3

J2JL

0,£!

0.0

o

(?

0.Q

0.0

00

<?

o

0.

0.0

0.0

0.0

a

o

0.0

0.0

0.0

S-Clouds, Dust, etc

<!>

o

0.O

G#

0°

_^_

/

/

0,0

2,4

?■?

6

e>

00_

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

frlnsulfie. Info.

-JL

V

/2.)

<?-0

(?,/

■1

s

Z{~

00

?'

t?

O

a 00

y 00

0,O /0

o

/O

tt:z

JZ£-

Z3.2.

7-Psycholpiial

6

0,0

ao

0.0

/

e»

/

2-¥

OH

tzy

/

o

/

Ji/

"00

3/

&

0*0

0-0

0.0

9-Unknonm

•T"

o

£-

/i'A

GO

ff.4.

//

O

If

2LX

OP

26.Z

,r

o

&

!*(>

on

M4

J>J

2./

21.1

-£JZ-

?7L

9-Oth«f

4-

4

/$./

0.0

/*•/

O

0.0

00

0.0

j"

)

i>

/S.£

j/

J«.7

J

&

21

00

?,0

Toial

*?.?.

6

S3

S/J

ttjL

MO-

!£.

7

4*

Ul

tl.->

/0O.

S3

9

3*

1M

7.V

/00.

S9

/1

7i

7U>

02.4

700

3

r/>gi.£ A/g# et/4Lfj/>rft>/>/ />? all. ffet/r/Mtss for, /)i.c.^/f£s /f/ ^0c0^s #£j*#/er£D

?£>&■ 00£/)T/0/l/ 0f S/&#r//i/£ 6£££aJ sS£ sz,-ai,j/A/< <Z£&£/i/ /3/?J£a7S.

S $£c»*fo

c e*. tCess

£-/& *

'een^m

//-Jo XecotSai

3/- 6o Seccrts

Evaluation

Nuinbet

Percent

Number

Per Cent

Nunber

PerCenl

Nunber

PerCait

Certain

-Ooubthi

Total

Certain

Ooubthi

Total

Certain

Dogbttul

Total

Certain

doubtful

Tolai

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Dotbtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Dcubtful

Total

0-BailoCHI

jUtf"

-tfr?

0,0

if

O.0

00

ao

O

ODogbttul

Total

Certain

doubtful

Tolai

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Dotbtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Dcubtful

Total

0-BailoCHI

jUtf"

-tfr?

0,0

if

O.0

00

ao

O

O

0.0

■0.0

00

0.0

00

00

l-Asttonomicjl

31

-<?■

#3

313

s-6.9

tf-2

/

t4

/?

££

iS.{,

4Zf

7

X

f

t So.o

/4.3

W3

/

(

/£.?

4,0

&7

2-Airciah

^

Z

S-J-

(?.$

f-Z

/

/

££.

0.0

V-fT

I

/

0.0

7-t

r-f

j?-0

0.0

3-Liitit Ptieneei.

&

p,r>

<-?■(?

ao

_J£_

o

^JL

00

<?.0

G

00

0.0

00

$0

0-0

00

4-Bi'nb

c>

o

&G.

(?.<?

a,<?

CL

J0.O

0-0

0.0

a

o

40.

0-0

0-0

O

0.0

00

/Z0

5-Cloiris. Oust etc.

a

ao

/O.0

0,0

o

o

<2&

0.0

0.0

-£j

6

(7

t?0

0-0

0-0

0.0

0-0

0.0

6-lnsuHic. Into.

a

0,

2.Z

0,0

i.t

/

o

/

MS.

0-0

#f

#

0.0

00

00

/

O

/

/£.?

0.0

40

7-Psychological

o

0.0

&e

0.(0

jZ£.

0.0

0.0

6

0.0

0-0

00

£?

0.0

fi.0

0.0

HJnbKnm

4-

4

4$

a<?

/>

s-

r

Xtf

0-0

?1?

^

4

2M

0:0

&.I.

_jL

4

ALL

0.0

(4.7

9-0 Bid

/

/

2,

M.

A/

f.l

o

o

0.0

0-(?

a.p

^

00

00

0.0

00

0,0

0.0

Trill

4o

S3

f-3

4U

s-7.0

/<?*?.

8

J 4

JX

MA

(,U

foa

//

3

(4

?/.i

J/4

{00.

b

6

/O0.6

0.0-

/0O

£>/ 5ee<>fS ftj 'S M*ur*s

6-10 rVwnrW

0\/ee 30 Ms/ U rrs

"fic/sana*- Mar *SniT*b

Evaluation

Nmnbei

Pet Cent

number

PerCenl

Nupber

Pel Cent

Nemoer

Pet Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtlul

ToW

Certain

Doubltiil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tola!

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

DouMhil

Total

0- Balloon

/

/

?./

0.0

7> J

/

a

/

-2/

0.0

9-'

/

a

/

/0.1

0.0

fa-7

0>

JA.

0.0

00

I'Asinnonial

1

/

a&

7-f

?-/

/

^

4f

-tL

71$

?i#

_L

o

/

/L/>

0.0

/A7

-*L

07

VS

2 S.I

414

1*£

2-Aiteritt

..-<?

i.

£

$.4

42$

<f*.1

J

a

Z

/tz

0,0

/?t

-J-.

(

£J-

00

/4-7

/

2

f

AS

3.r

£3

J-Lijht fimml

a

__£__

&4

rtr?

00

J.

2,

/te

O0>

a.i

■ a

0.0

00

001*£

2-Aiteritt

..-<?

i.

£

$.4

42$

<f*.1

J

a

Z

/tz

0,0

/?t

-J-.

(

£J-

00

/4-7

/

2

f

AS

3.r

£3

J-Lijht fimml

a

__£__

&4

rtr?

00

J.

2,

/te

O0>

a.i

■ a

0.0

00

00

JL0.

00

0-0

4-BndJ

*s>

D

00.

<?.<?

00

o

&

j2j2.

0O>

<o.<?

O

o

0/)

00

00

0-0.

^i2_

0.0

S-Clouds, DbjI, etc.

o

O

610

at?

00

(0

a

<?

4£.

0.0

0-0

e>

0.0

00

0-0

0.0

r^r^

0,0

G-lnsiffk. hfo.

/

/

4/

a.a

,av

o

<P

SdL

0-0

&0>

o

/?

0.0

fi.0

'0-0

0.

4

/*s

0,0

/0.S

7-PjydBknJcH

.&-£.

0,0

to

o

a

j2<&.

0-0

rSr?

a

00

00

0.0

0.0

0,0

00

S-UnfaBM

*

¥

2U

(7,0

&,+

Jl

o

2.

tl£.

Off

/F.l

3

e

J

Je.6

00

500

_£_

S

1.0

00

f-0

Km*

/

/

7./

oo

//

o

a

0.0

0-0

40

Z0.0

0.0

0.0

/

/

k*

00

ft

Total

7

1

/4

&4

s~e.o

W0,

t

3

H

3zl

07.3

/00.

/>

o

6>

/00.O

_£0_

'00-

£J-

?f

J?

Hi

->■#?

/00.

223

i

■m

Si

rff#t-f d/#f

£~fs?L£/jtr//}/t/

Of 0/tf/T

Sf&//rfA/6S

foe xc^z

</£-/fi?s

rf</ sasL/jjes

_ JS&A&e

r£&

. . Fee 4t/##r/0A/ * &f . s/c, /*//#& u^/rs si*>. m/7a///t/<i i,j#/r£ tf/fjE-^r*

__£ £sze*6t^

t Dt*_ less

d - /<? JicC ftVW

//-Jo Ser*>*rns '

J/~£o S'fcosf&S

Evaluation

Itflbtf

Pet Cent

Number

Pet Cent

Number

Pei Cent

Numbet

P« Cent

Certain

OovbHu)

Total

Certain

Doubtful

TOW

Certain

Dosibtlsl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;ertain

Doubtful

Totlt

Certain

DouMnil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cerbtn

Doubtful

Toti

0- Balloon

/

5

*

/.O

3,t

//

/

—A

_£*

24

2-i

/

2

3

-?,/

4*

t*

A

/

/

e.o

It

g.t

i l-Aitnmnol

-?/

J^

£f

1UL

JS.7

*£1

~L

f

/7 211

43.7

w$

/

-?

/*

/Al

U

&??

_^-

J

4

£6,

■f.4,

f/-2

Z-Aiicittt

4-

7

//

Al

1.1

//.£

J~

s

9

(•4 fS-x

ts.7

1

7

(4

J£k

/U

2J.2-

__*iZ

f

1

jU.

//./

2?p

J-trtal Pdokm.

;?

.?

A'

?-0

_Zj

o

1

2.6

0.O

2i

/

i

JUl.

?,/

ff

a>

S.0

0O

f}.0

4-Biid*

/

/

*

Ml

/.o

3-0

a

6

o o

f.o

fie

o

e>

.&&.

e.o

0.0

i

/1

jU.

//./

2?p

J-trtal Pdokm.

;?

.?

A'

?-0

_Zj

o

1

2.6

0.O

2i

/

i

JUl.

?,/

ff

a>

S.0

0O

f}.0

4-Biid*

/

/

*

Ml

/.o

3-0

a

6

o o

f.o

fie

o

e>

.&&.

e.o

0.0

i

/

4

/..?

X*

//■/

S-CI«rcts, Oust, tic.

a

<?

<?

0.0

0.0

0.0

o

Ox?

f.O

0.0

_c?

0.0

S-*°-

0>0

a

O

0.4 1

0,O

0>,0

frlnsuflic tib.

_i

i?

3

3.1

0.0

t/

3

o

_J_

J±

C.o

7?

5

o

f

/t>A

0,0

f<2?

d

C

/LI

a. o

#-T

r-Ptrdnlofiaf

o

c

0o

0.p

/p.0

_A^

o

o.o

0e

-&A

_0\

o

0.0

t.o

a. a

o

o

0.O

o.o

£>.0

t-lHmonii

f

o

1

M.

0.0

s.t

_S-

o

■7

lit

0. e

//f

m2

a

/*

27.1

fi,0

2/-'

/*

o

fX

3 S3

.0.0

ft*

J-OtJw

J

(

4

3.1

/"

4i

_Q_

o

o

e.o

e.o

#0

A

O

2

£±

^j£_

y.z.

j5|

o

a

O.a

-~&£-\

4.0

V

Tom

.f/

47

9$

fi°.

4fo

/Off,

23

/S

JJ

(Ul

Sf.f

{00,

$6.

12

4s

lr-0

2f.O

(00.

X2

z

S6

11.$

&.1

/O0

\

^/ Seces/m

* - %£

Jftrftrmi

£~£o A/iAfures

. £>*/€& Jh M/*ft,re.e

DatArjtr/ sSbt St/} rfh

Evaluation

Nuabei

Percent

Number

Percent

Nurter

Pee Cent

Numbei

Per Cent

Certain

Oooblful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doulitni

Total

Certain

Ooobttui

ToW

D-BaHow

ZH

/^

JJ'

t*4

//.i

33. f

-M-

/f

32

iUL

/u

4P.0

JtL

J

/i

A.4

<i./

&£

/r c

?l

lit

4-7

ft.*-

l-Astnoonical

J

3

£

If

3.4

£$

Jt_

4

/i"

MjZ.

it

/f.i

l£A

s\

n

Mf]

/^3

3</7

/Z

f

1/L/4.X

1-f

2IS

?-*iict»H

//

f

Xo

/o.t

9.7

if J

_£_

/f

ft

5.C,

«-7

6-3

^

3

r

4.1

(.(

/at

/z

jT

/?

a 4

3.9

/J.S

Midil Ptienon.

a

~s~\

o

0,0

0.O

0.0

x

j"

7

/■f

4-r

i-f

a

0.0

e.o

00

o

o

0<<

0.0

0.0

«■ Birds

_j2_

o

o

0,0

e.0

00

£>

d

o

A&.

0.0

0.0

0.O

6.0

0.01

0.0

0.0

££-

Klouds, Oust, etc.

O

3

,?

fi.0

ZL

2?

&

o

o

u&JZ.

*0

0,6

A

e

6.0

fi.o

0.0

- I

I

0t

6o

02

rVlnsulfic, Info.

j-n

a

y

4X£>

d

o

A&.

0.0

0.0

0.O

6.0

0.01

0.0

0.0

££-

Klouds, Oust, etc.

O

3

,?

fi.0

ZL

2?

&

o

o

u&JZ.

*0

0,6

A

e

6.0

fi.o

0.0

- I

I

0t

6o

02

rVlnsulfic, Info.

j-n

a

y

4X

0.0.

</S

-JL

9

n

6.0

/*

J>

i

0.0

O.o

J?£>

AS

A3

lit

0.0

/£./

;.Prrxlic(oiiCil

/

/

A

/.0

/,0

?■*>

_jC

A*

4,i-

0,0

fr

o

6

0.O

0. O

0.0

JL )

3

(4

0/

£?

J-Unknow

J9

e>

*1

?lf

6.0

2?f

4L

At

rt.t

0.0

#■>

/*-

o

/A

tu

e.o

2</s J<?

o

21.

te.f

0.C

ats

Mfta

-±

4

3,t

0.e

ft

A

o

3

l-f

0.0

Af?

<Z

&

A

At

a.o

<(f

4,

o

C

41

0.0

47

Tot*

A±

3s

f*

a.3

33.7

(09.

U

32

(/o

tir

J4.f

IDS,

38

//

4i

77.L&4

(04

f0C

X'

m

ns

/(,:r

/t0.

fft3L£ # /$?

ec//?LL//>r/0/u

' a? 0/ujt

S/Gft'T//l'6£

f0&

/?4.L

VE-JfS

#</ S0/i0Ai>S A?&04#rG/}

F0& at/f/ir/oiA/ a/? x/a#r/A//: MsrAtLt/i d&jears

S JT&CoAfaJ ait /.&SS

d ~/0 «SV<r<i>vCW

//-J^0 SgtatfAX

3/-tfc £*eorSt>j

j

NMiber

' Percent

Nimbei

Percent

Number

Pei Cent

Hum oh

Per Cent

Evaluation

Certain

Owbtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ccrtaji

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Telat

D-BaHow

^.

f

3

JU

4-r

/li

&

J

2

JLo.

IB A"

#>f

/

4

A~

Ji.

14

u

-2

J!

4

J±

it

f.f

l-Asbmnical

/

/

J?

JLL

4.JT

90

A

.?

AS.

.#/

10*

A

o

2

in

0.0

*■?

o

/

t

0.0

24

2V

Z-Aircnn

^

A

t

±L

2U

?0?

*

I

4

Mt

r:s

ft?

J?

/(

ir

iri

JU

tvt

/r

?

2*

3L.L

/I/

*17

3-Litfit Phenoa.

J

o

i

J

0.0

??

1

I

6

j'-'H

S3

—&.

O

^JL

0.e

0.0

J

1

0,0

*-4

W

♦■BirrJj

/

o

i

4,s'

*.a

#*

. 0.

o

o

^o_

0,0

/?■?

AJ>

0,o

0.0

t

o

{

24-

0.6

2 4

S-CI«i05, Dust, etc.

t?

0.0

1.0

-££-

-j2.

o

-£J.

O.o

00

O

p

0.0

00

00

a

o

0.0

t.0

00

G-lroutfic hfo.

/

a

/

IX

0e>

#£

—£.

i

JT2

O.t

£Tg

/

1

/.f

0.0

/.f

A

&

A

<M

0,0

<?

7'psrcholoiical

/1.0

-££-

-j2.

o

-£J.

O.o

00

O

p

0.0

00

00

a

o

0.0

t.0

00

G-lroutfic hfo.

/

a

/

IX

0e>

#£

—£.

i

JT2

O.t

£Tg

/

1

/.f

0.0

/.f

A

&

A

<M

0,0

<?

7'psrcholoiical

/

1

U-

fi.o

#f

si_

O.o

o.o

0.0

c2

(

3

3.7

£1

£.6

0.0

0.0

0-0

■.Unlunwn

3

o

3

52

0.0

/fit

-±

4

21.1

0.0

2/./

r

a

f

M

00

jK#

9

o

1

lit

0.0

2t0>

Htttitl

A

JL

XL

6.0

f'

O.o

O.O

00

o

O.o

00

<?,0

/

o

/

1.4

0. e

?■■?■

Total

itL

X

JA

iu

S(4

tft

/3

(?

'9

li.i

■iu

106

33

*!

S4

ALL

3M

100.

30

//

4/

13.1

ZU

/00.

/4/ ^jVtfart^ox- S Mtfitre*

£- Jo Mt*/jrej

Ouex J>

V Af,*/<srei

2>t/£Ar/e*/ f/tr S733T-fJ>

Evaluation

flumbcf

Per Cent

Ntrabet

Percent

Nuinber

FerCent

Nunber

Pa Cent

Certain

Owbtful

Total

Cettaiii

Doubtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtlul

Total

O-Sallnn

//

■?

A.r

Ml

t.4

/a/

x/

/O

31

3£A

(3.o

m

f

3

//

ILL

fe o

U.t

/3

^?

/c

1U

3.5

#7

1'Astnoonical

/

<?

t

M.

0.O

At

1

1

t.o

/■*

/■*

3

/

4

/e.o

33

/Ar

t

3

4

/./

3.3

¥,</

Z-Aiicrafl

JA-

/t>

-?.?

&L

tt,°

*?■?

ZE

lt>

/9

/*♦./

/i.O

23.$

<2

o

2

A

0.0

0-7

£0

4

M

23J-

4-4

U./,

J-LijW Phenom.

.J..

/

2

M

/■2

ty

I

1

04

n

n

•o

o

0.0'

0.0

0.0

/

o

(

1,1

0.0

/■/

l-B>Kli

J.

£>

1

/.%

0.0

/■Z

-0

a

0-0

00

^0-

A0

0.0

0.0

/

t

0J>

It

/■/

S-Clouos, Dust, etc

0.0

O.o

0.0

o

. a

00

0.0

0#

_J_

I

3.3

o.o

■ T*

O

a

e.o

0.0

0.0

frlnsvltic Mb.

1,

6

£±

0.0

?z

-£

1

fcj_

0.0

/0f

_i2-

a

0.O

0.0

0?0

^

o

2-0

333

0.0

22. Z

J.pjjcrskJtical

/

e>

1

MX

0.0

/.&

i

t

1A.

0*

f^

^2_

o

2

H

0.0

67

- /

o

f

I.I

0.0

/./

■.tWnoMi

Ja

2o

24j

0.0

Hi

/S

/i'

ILL

0.0

ft./

J2-

o

f

3a. o

o.o

200

/£

o

ft

n.i

00

iff

lOtrw

i

J

4

/•2

2L

4J

4-

3.

6

Al

24

f.zH

0.0

67

- /

o

f

I.I

0.0

/./

■.tWnoMi

Ja

2o

24j

0.0

Hi

/S

/i'

ILL

0.0

ft./

J2-

o

f

3a. o

o.o

200

/£

o

ft

n.i

00

iff

lOtrw

i

J

4

/•2

2L

4J

4-

3.

6

Al

24

f.z

£>

/

/

0.0

3.3

3L?

_Z

o

7

IS

O.0

r-t

Total

6.Z

J/

n

Ml

2A-.3

/00.

J±

A4

SJ

ill

2f.1

/C0.

Jf

S

3o

iu

/4.?

100.

J2

/{

fo

ttt

/2.X

100

224

££££.£ /f/ffS'

£'MjL/s#r/0A' 1

?,*■

///l/z-r 5/6Mr//)/<ZS f0&

fif.c

fejes

Jt</ <fffi.O£

S y?/f/^?^ re a

/23r* . ^/^rz/w ^ jt/^a' 7-v/t/fi /?£j£dr S.&A a*/

j//?r srsr&a

■£ ■S&seis/'iit aA tesi

£'/£> StfoASbS

//-Jfi> X<?ee>sSDS

J/-&<2 Seea'Afbs

Enlvation

, Number

PerCsil

Number

Pec Cent

Number

Per Cent

Numtjet

i Par Cent .

Cetttin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Cecum

OoubMul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

T«W

Certain

Doubtful

Tetal

Certain

DouWfol

ToUl

CMlin

oouurui

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

!o8aHe*l

e?

/

.. /

0.0

*4

3H-

/

/

2-

1/

1,1

MX

' /

/

0.0

Af

J.?

J

-?

J~ /S.o

t.i

M£>

' l-Ailnmnical

//

c

17

31.9

J*.7

*?■{

J"

/

6

U.1

71

fcf

JL

/

S

ri.i

<?.f

m.

JL

/

_JL

//

4.o

/£Q

J-Aircraft -

4-

/

,r

/J.f

3,4

f7,Z

a.

/

$

Ife

It

M¥

r

4

f /4.7

(t.t

Ms

I

A.

J~

{*.*

t.o

Mt>

J-Lijht Phenon.

o

p

Ao

00

At?

-o

£

0,0

0.0

A/?

e

<0

0.6

0.0

A£

4>

O

Po

0.6

A/P

4-gMiU

v

oie>

<t

fifi

A

e

0.0

0,0

0.0

£>

o

fi,o

0,0

.£1

a

p

a.*

0J>

0£

Kiouea, oust, «it

*,•

0c

0.0

A

c

o.o

0.0

0M

£>

/

/

*.o

2.1

^? &

€>

0.4

0.0

frlnluffit tnh.

■i"

. a

s~

ai

t,0

/7,2

1

&

/

U

0.0

7,f

y

<?

7

&■<?

0.0

tat,

A

c

-J^

t.o

0.0

to

7-Piyetslo|ieal

#

a

*j

do

0,0

, O

*.«

O-O

A$

o

O

6.0

0.0

to

o

p

0J

0.0

$,P

t-|t*no»m

/

f

M.

6.o

$.*

2

2-

&h

o.o

///.3

_£_

<?

ll.t

a.t?

ML

f

o

t

Uo

0.0

MP

9-Otlw

a.t

4-0

to

&

0.0

O.O

#0

2

J"

7

<t

/4-f

x&t

o

I

/

0.0

4.o

M

t Tool

21

s

2f

&l

m

(4(k

//

a

l4

3U.2-

&h

o.o

///.3

_£_

<?

ll.t

a.t?

ML

f

o

t

Uo

0.0

MP

9-Otlw

a.t

4-0

to

&

0.0

O.O

#0

2

J"

7

<t

/4-f

x&t

o

I

/

0.0

4.o

M

t Tool

21

s

2f

&l

m

(4(k

//

a

l4

3U.

J/.t

/o$.

A2.

t*

i4ai

2S1

loo.

/<?

i. \jr

ti*

Mo /00.

#

d/ £&**{Jls -S/f/f/rm.

6 -fa M^orf*

d?ve* SO tffssrrej

~2>tjie/}r,i>ff s/t>r ^tat^x

e»iiu»tion

Nunber

Pel Cent

Number

Per Cent

Nunber

Percent

Number

Per Coil

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoublN

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tola)

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;otain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Balloon

/3

,r

/7

m.

?r

AT^

/

/a

M

/C.S

f£S

U.3

f

i

7

h±

4.x

Ml

/J

7

>?/■

£.2

3.1

S.1

/fS

lAlbmiiniul

£>

;

/

0.0

U

/,$

^

X

t

■r.3

My

z?

.r-

/

4

/at

1. / 'AS Jtf

/-?

Mircrafl

9

7

/£>

/1.4

/0.4

**t

/a

r

/7

IA±

4-6

%w

/

J

4-

2.1

£.2

*r?

/7

//

3f

g.t

t.i ;i7

]-Li(hl pBtmn.

A

/

3

Jo

f-f

4$

sO

S

8.0

0-0

0M

O

s.e

0.0

0P

A

-?

tf

/.o

/.o

w

4-Bildi

€>

P

6j>

0.0

<?■£>

■

/

/

O.O

/■3

A3

-?

e

fi~

jLa

*.o

4&

A

/_

,?

/■"

Dx

/x

S-Cloucj!, Dust, etc

a

0.0

0.6

W

/

O

/

AL

9,0

13

/}

O

0.6

0.0

P.O

&

a

0.6

fi.0

A0

G-MsulftC Into.

J-

a

,r

7.1-

',*

7f

/*.

O

/jL

Ul

ft?

/■riT

_£_

f

/tl

0.6

117

Si

S3

ZLA.

6.0

2&Z

APsycholotital

a

&

6.0

O.e

i4>

j-

O

JL

££

£(f

M

/

/

1.1

a. 6

£f

J

J

t

/.4

ex

/>?

S-llnknowt

^

e

&

J/.3

0,0

#3

/0

/P

Ml

fi.O

/$?-

/j-

/r

11.1

0.0

3fc

,P

S3

tr.1

0.0

/ST7

m»w

^r

4

A<L

0,0

fiP

1

&

T

li.

6,0

?,%

_±

a

4-

Ll

6.0

Id

/?

/7

S.I

6.0

?./

, Total

S3

t4

C1

ftL

ft-9

fiM

£L.

ZO

&-

13J.

Jti.3

/p0.

&L.

(?

H

Ul

/AX

/£&

%f

4 / S10

U£.

t1,f<e*

■fA6L£ 4/ty

£W Li/ #r/0fy af /J/vir s^^-^/^^s / ^ /ill </£/>£.* m spates ps-fo&TTso

F0&

-&t/£/t£/£A/

0f V6H-r/A/ / i

a^/i/as-

#£.

tSM£>as/As&

/?*>*/!/ 6 e/AX

/£&

%f

4 / S10

U£.

t1,f<e*

■fA6L£ 4/ty

£W Li/ #r/0fy af /J/vir s^^-^/^^s / ^ /ill </£/>£.* m spates ps-fo&TTso

F0&

-&t/£/t£/£A/

0f V6H-r/A/ / i

a^/i/as-

#£.

tSM£>as/As&

/?*>*/!/ 6 e

0/fj£<*rs

& ^&fp*&s a it J/etf

£-/£> J*e**fT>s

//-Jt> j

■JreoWJie

2/- da ^ww

Evaluation

ftumoa

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Ninoer

PerCeot

Kunbtr

Per Coit

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doobtfu

Total

Certain

Ooubtlul

Tolal

O-Balloon

0,0

0.0

M

O

f

0.O

to

40

O

0.0

^

/

1

3

J.t

///

M7

t-Altignoniical

jt

/

Vl-

31.1

/7t

4&1

?

7

#.1

0O

4i7

-A.

4

%

2U

MJ

#%}

J.

2.

4-

///

///

&.2

Z-Aitcraft

2

c

f

4.4-

/j.i

/7,7

3

1

#

?6.6

L7

Ul

/

{

£

S.J

■fj

/0,f>

3.

2

#

///

///

12.7

1-Li(bt Pfienon.

a

d>

#

6.6

0.0

a<>

£>

O

/?

0.*

0.0

0.0

0.0

#[>

a

P

a,t

00

fix

4-Binls

/

/

fi.O

f.i

&

6

0.6

fi-0

/

/

jr.i

CO

jTJ

1

O

/

<<-

00

ft

5-CloiHfi, Dtut, etc.

£>

•

£>

0.0

0,0

m

i0

.0

jU.

0.0

W

&

0J3

0.0

&.P

c7

0,6

0.0

M

frtnsuffic. Info.

—?

f

IX

S

if

£>

&

0.0

O.O

P,P

6

#

0.0

6.0

#e

/

/

<t

X6

7-Psycholoajjcal

/

<?

/

M

A*

a

0.0

^0

0.P

/

/

i'i

0.6

£3

/

<o

/

j:&

0.0

£6

r>UnkjM«n

tT

5T

/LL

6,0

//■/

J

3

%L2.

0.6

UP

_£

O

6

3U

0,0

m

4

a

4-

22.1

00

22-JL

Mtfitr

3

1

4-

-£L

l*

?7

/

/

ii

■O.O

47

f

/

r.3

si

a

0.0

t>,°

t>X

Total

A3.

/I

4s

til

3*(,

/Of.

J£

I

/S

&i

C7

tM,

JL

(,

/<?

M

H<>

190,

l*.

i

If

U.7

SS.S

/oo.

ciV^Jf <rv. *sms - S St*/* nts

£ ' ~3a /V«'''?'■

P^€< J0 /Wwfc/riR*

Jiy^jqrtasS /1

riT- ^TATeH

Evaluation

Number

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Numbei

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doublhil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouttfuT

Tolal

Certain

OoobtlulPer Cent

Numbei

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doublhil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouttfuT

Tolal

Certain

Ooobtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

J

J"

r

LL

/*,*

/^

I

2

r

/u

fX

22,3

-J-

O

3

P. 6

0.°

zc.o

1

/

¥

_£it

/•/

^z

1-AstiDKMiieal .

J

3.

0,0

It

<*/

fi~

1

3

M.

AS

■Ph

3

4

7

J0.O

2C?

#■£7

i

c

fr

/4.S

/*,f

?$:/>

2-ij tcrafl

4

<r

12-

M.

/M

w>

2.

2

&

XL

i'.t

l/.X

6

t

1

0.0

c?

67

2

IT

/s

/4.1

M

$3.Z

3-Liejit Pfienoa,

J.

2-

4,t

00

*/

_L

6

M.

0.0

/f.7

/

/

Jo.

0.6

6.7

l

1

U

0.0

i-f

4-aiKts

0.0

o«

M

a

€>

p

0.0

0.0

pfi

c

6.6

0.0

#0

p

0.0

0.0

■0.0

S-Cloudi, Dust, etc.

6

0,0

tic

O

0.0

0.O

6P

6

0.6

W

O

0.0

0,0

fi£>

S-lnwtfic bih. .

■r

r

/01

6-o

/t.%

/

/

M.

0.6

2J

O.o

a.e

m

1

Z

/ax

0,0

/2-S

7-Plydu lop tat

/

2

3

Jo

4.1

6.1

0.0

O.O

ffl

■ /■

1

0.0

£7

41

/

/

//

0.0

/.s

mnknom

/3

/3

SU

Olt

MS

/*

/2

ill

0,6

tf?

/

/

lz

0.0

6-7

//

//

19. c

0,0

/u

Mftat

J

3

1L

fie

S,t

2

2-

0.6

A<r

&

/

1

£.1

6.6

6.7

t

4

0-

/.K

-?/

t?

Total

31

IS

4?

Ol

#1

(00.

21_

7

J6

$*4

19-4

/00,

-L

(,

tf

&A

400

/*0.

4o

/d

jY

M

if.L

/O0.

Z25

rgtlce ' s?/gf

zmt-Mf/M, , fjf..^//' s/ 6 #z^al<ls. . F die- ,&u. </£/ ?# s fy S0 <.0gs €e/'0<e r£0

£0& 0044 7-/0/V

0F

^tf&/t

££5? -

0£. 6£-0us/0/0

g£?0

(?4J££-rs

»5" JfCosS&s oft £<sx

£-/0 £fcc*f»*

//-30 SlFffltv'Sif

.2/^

o SfrerfDs

Evaluation

Nunber

Per Cent

Nunber

Pei cm

bertan

Ituirbes

1

'erCent

Number

P«C«it

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ceilal

Doubtful

TSUI

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Doubtful

JoM,

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ceiliin

Doubtful

TotJl

0- Billow

J

a

^

0-0

0.0

#0

B

O

4.0

0.0

0.0

/

O

/

r.f,

0.0

£6

~^A

^

</

tinTotal

Doubtful

JoM,

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ceiliin

Doubtful

TotJl

0- Billow

J

a

^

0-0

0.0

#0

B

O

4.0

0.0

0.0

/

O

/

r.f,

0.0

£6

~^A

^

</

tin

/If. 7

3 £.4.

Mstronomical

J6-

f

/f

^c

4e±

u*

j"

o

f

•fr.o

00

500

&

z

9

m

/a

$00

f

o

/

9.1

t.0

?/

3-Aitcuft

2

"c

£

-£L

fi.o

tf

_z

/

i.

/e.e

M^

2cl£.

/

3

/

<a

'M±

223

.J

Z

s

*./ /t.2 273

J-LuMPnawm

a

c

<?

~£a\

0. 0.0

t

a

JJL.

0,0

0.0

o

00

0.0

<?•<?

O

0>

-0JL.

0.0

0,0

t-Siids

<?

<?

-&JL

^0-\

0.0

_L,

a

0e

0.0

__£_

0.0

j£A\

00

o

0.0

0o

#0

tCtouds, Dial, etc.

e>

*

r?

0.0

0.0

00

e

#JL

0.0

<££-

__i2_

$.0

o.o

0.0

~-£~

s?

<?

0.0

0.0

00

frlnwffit Info.

a

«

(?

0.0

0.0

0.0

_L

o

7

/&0

-JLA^

/0.0

a

e.o

0.0

00

o

0.0

0.0

0,0

I-Piydnlofical

i5>

0.0

00

0.0

o

_&o\

-0£^

J2JL

_^L

7

i'L

JM-

5b

&

O.O

-&A-,

i>,0

t-Untao"

7

I

JA

^SJL

S.i

-1

2-

£m.

*.*

2A.0

-?

a

Z

7/7

1.0

/if

l_

__&__

/

9r

04>

fy

MKher

_j£

.$■<?.

ff.O

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

/

o

/

S.L

0.0

£i

/

/

t.

%t

°l

/gz

r^ Tom

7S

1

fz

Sfj

4*1

/00.

_1

I

70

to*

i00

/00 JA_

^~z~

t*

U?

ML

700.

i

J'

('

S4S

4£S

/i>0-

(5/ SeCO*/l>S -J) Af»/¥Tts

6 ~ 3a /-0/^urfj

_ j£>\/e<t 30 //^vrfis

~2>ff*tTs<?'<. rsor ■*5r*}re»

Evalvatioo

Number

Per Cent

rYufflbei

PefCent

Nurriei

Pel Cent

Plumber

PeiCenl

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain

ODublful

Total

Clitiin

Doubtful

Total

Cerlain

Dniblful

Tolal

pertain

Doubtful

Total

Cerlain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Douliltu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-BHtoon

_x

2

s

ILL

f.4

/?■?

-J-

O

•

//./

fi.e

'//

^

/

4

0.s 4 r.f

tt(

. 0.

J'

£-

0.0

u

i?£

l-Aitnnmiol

£_

f

3

iZ

74

//./

i

'O

(S

/u

09

ft.r

4

2.

%

tu ?.r

fct

/f

or

20

JfA

t/.

.?/«

7'Airaift

7

*

?

«/.-f

74

/If

J

c

t

XL

4,7

24.0

1

Ji

,f

At

f.i'

/</S

?

/

g

rt.i

t-1

/!.$74

//./

i

'O

(S

/u

09

ft.r

4

2.

%

tu ?.r

fct

/f

or

20

JfA

t/.

.?/«

7'Airaift

7

*

?

«/.-f

74

/If

J

c

t

XL

4,7

24.0

1

Ji

,f

At

f.i'

/</S

?

/

g

rt.i

t-1

/!.$

3-Li(lit FUenw.

_jSJ

-As.

00

0O

(

1

23a

0.0

2.$

2

^

0.°

fi"

fr

£>

4.0

0i

0.0

4-Birds

a

£0}

-fgjZ-,

0-P

t>

P:0.

00

0.0

__&

(7

^£S_

0.O

0.0

(0

0.0

0.0

0.O

S-Clowlt, Oust, «t

o

0.0

0.0

00

/

1

0.0

rt

.2.$

0.0

°,

A0

6

■0

0.0

0.0

0t?

frlnuttic lnf».

^jL

<f

Ml

00

MS

J

3

JJ\

0.0

%*

a

*,o

6.0

<?,0

/0

/0

MX

0.O

#,*•

7-Psychoto£ital

&

a

0,0

0.0

00

_7L

/

2t

0.0

Z.S

J

/

t.i

0.0

42

j.°.

0.0

0.0

8-Utiluw«n

_^L

V

m.

o<r

/¥t

//

//

3o£

0.0

set

-^L

/

Ml

0.0

¥-9

/i

a

tS

224

0.o

224

W*ei

^

z

7.4

S.ff

f9

Co

0.0

0.0

/

/

?,

jLL

4-4

?L

A

z.

34

0.0

*¥

Total

Ay

t

2,

MX

22.£

/00.

2L

7

J(,

Sol

iU

/06,

/3

t

£t

in

Jt.l

/to.

H

/'■/

ff

i/JL

/f°

f00.

TMt£ #/gf

&I//9L//Ar/0AJ

/OF

wr 3/<Spr//t/ &s

ft 7 *

/9LC

V£/f&$

f?V

e'0£./3££ /e^A>0£r£0

/=0& 0t/gArs0A/

0f jr/<s,Arr-//i/<z &£&£*/ ae. s^.o^//Afa /s*?&e/i/ tP&JGers

. „

<S Secosfb* */t ZfJs

6-/P Sd

■CotfZn

//-.fa S&e*"'**

J./ -60 Seca#'i>s

Evaluation

■ Ninnbei

P« Cent

Number

Pei Cent '

Number

Percent

ftumber .

Per Csit

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cetlain

Doubltul

Tolal

Certain

Daiblful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu 1

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

OBalloon

O

0.0

J2JL-

r^r^

0J.

-£j2_

00

O

f.0

0.0

0,0

O

<>

0.0

0.0.

0.0

l-Aitroi»«iical

47

JaI.

62,

£Z±"

4U

UJ

_A

to

ff

L,

d(?

?S¥

7

2,

f

li.L

ftT.

tf.t

I

/

S0.0

0.0

50.

?-Aiicralt

j2

a

2,

JJL.

^S-

?■$

1

1

JLZ

0.0

6-7

a

I

/

so

9(

?./

O

0.O

0.0

00

3-LieJit Phonoa.

,

a_

^JZ.

0.0

#&

t>

O

JLs\

0.0

00

So

0f?

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

4-Birdi

0_J

0-0

0.0

00

JL6.

0.0

0.0

O

0.0

0,6JLZ

0.0

6-7

a

I

/

so

9(

?./

O

0.O

0.0

00

3-LieJit Phonoa.

,

a_

^JZ.

0.0

#&

t>

O

JLs\

0.0

00

So

0f?

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

4-Birdi

0_J

0-0

0.0

00

JL6.

0.0

0.0

O

0.0

0,6

0.0

O.O

0.0

00

5-Clouds, Oust, etc

0,°

4*0^

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

<?

6.0

0.0

(7.0

O

<?'

0.0

0.0.

0.0

frlnsuHic Info,

^Z

ft

z.

ZL

jZ-£_

2S

J3L

0.0

0,0

e?

0.0

0.0

0.0

s>

a

0.0

J?0.

00

7-Psfcholofical

O

O

0.0

0.0

0.0

6

(?

0.0

-JtJL-

0-0

£>

DO

-JL3-

0.O

O

a.0

0.0

00

8-Unluiowi

4-

4

^k

0.0

Si,

J

3

2 o.o

00

Z0.0

/

O

/

J~L

0.0

?,/

_^L

O

/

££JL

0.0

S&o

Wither

^L

/

2,

JA

/.*

2.%

0,4

-0S-

0.0

O

0.0

0.0

00

O

<0.0

^2.

00

Total

Si

u

n

•C0.0

So. a

/0o.

3

tP

/r

33.3

111

/£0_

/

3

in

m

{00.

A

0.0 /00

£l ^Sect^fjtf. - 5 rfwiiT-fi*

£-30 /^/VH/»

0UP*

• J0> M,*<^re*

~boe.ATtesS jvor STarfib

Eiiiuatim

Hunter

PerCenl

NuntKi

Per Cent

Number

Pei Cent

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cnuii

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tntal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

/

/

JJu

0.0

u

/

/

9./

J.O

?.*

/

/

jLl

O.O

76,7

Jf0

0.0

0.0

l-Aitrononieat

1

/

0.0

£*

—A

J

/

$y,

•2.7.1

H?

7

/

7L7

0,"

M,7

J£

/1

33

JoA

413

77-7

2'Aiicratt

i

ft

0.o

r*.o

G0.O

j-

7,

//.J

0.0

/It

-y\

1

71-1

0.0

(/«-7

t

J.

3

J.2

4.s

7t<

J-L«(M Ftienon.

6

0,0

0.0

fl.0

£

2,

/S.2

O.O

/ft

.£&

0.

40

a

0.0

-&o^

0.0

I-Biids

—0-^

4t>

0.

0.17

6

0.0

0.

0.0

o.o

6.0

40

. 0.O

00

0.0

S-Clouijs. Oust, etc

-£JL

00

0.0

^ J o_

0-0

<p

JL°.

O O

0,0

6

a

0.0

0.0

0.0

frlnmrfit Info.

f

6

/

JA.

0.0

ft*

f

^jy.

0,0

0.0

0,0

0o

0.

00

6

7.

71.0

0.0

13.0

7-PiyctvlO|ial

a

0.0

0.«

O.Q

$

~0~\

0.0

0.0

0<0

a

Az.

0o

0(7

_££.

',0

0.0

t-IMmnn

J.

2,

fi:7

0±0-

ilt.7

-X

t*

/f.2

0.0,0

0.0

0,0

0o

0.

00

6

7.

71.0

0.0

13.0

7-PiyctvlO|ial

a

0.0

0.«

O.Q

$

~0~\

0.0

0.0

0<0

a

Az.

0o

0(7

_££.

',0

0.0

t-IMmnn

J.

2,

fi:7

0±0-

ilt.7

-X

t*

/f.2

0.

tf-2

_J_

3

<£Lo

O.o

&7.0

.1*

J-

*s

0.0

i>.£

S-Otner

/

/

i.l

0.6

ff

0.o

0.0

0-0

0."

'0.0

00

^_

/

z?

0.0

$3.

Total

S

1

/2.

ill

ffj

/00.

ZZj

,?'

//

teL

Z7.3

700,

6

6

too.*

■ 0-4

/0O.

&

At

44

m

4-1

700.

226

'■M<.£ r A^f?

£yji/ /ja-r/£>/!/

t?t=

/jA>/r

3/6//r/A/<S s

f0A ^i

</£-A*S

M

£&£.£>££

ggfasrZA

f£>& jyi/^jfr/^iif a* s/&Nr//i/6. Y£i.cat*j .a*. &L0U//A/6 *£ clous /lAje&rs

*f S^eot/t>A »s less

6~/o ^eeass&s

//\ J0_ .^c^aT***

J/ -to yf^eof/as

Evaluation

Hunt*

Pel Coil

Number

PeiCent

Number

Percent

Number

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain

OouUful

Tolll

Deitain

Doublful | Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

>1*n

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OouMfal

Tettl

Certain

OoubMul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

IV Balkan

a

0.6

0.0

0.0

e>

<? 6

*.*

0.0

00

/

(

,?

7?

6t

M<,

O

JU.

0.0

0.O

l>Aatronomial

J0.

S

/r

4,0

2*0

/P"

•r

O

Y

4S.L

0.0

<a.

.1

/

«

n.i

Ci

Zft

6,

)

I

J££

jff

41.7.

Mitoitt '

.3.

*

4

to

*0

ti.o

/

0>

/

At

0.0

//■/

J

C

J

ML

0.0

(If

3

-?

4~

Jf.L

/Li na

J-Litjil Phenotn.

/

P

I

4.0

0.9

4.o

o

JA-

0.0

o

-L0.

fie

0.0

a

/

1

t-0

r.l

r.f

Mir*

a

/

t

00

4"

4."

o

/

— J-

00

/'■/

/At

.Jp.\

o

0.»

**

00

&0

0.0

a.a

iCIoudj, Oust, etc

a

P

0*

0.0

ff.t

^A

O

o

-^

0.0

0.0

J>\

f

/

0.0

l*

43

e>

-P.. O.o

0.0

&j>.

frlnsiflit. tub.

.J

1

j£i.

0.0

4.o

o

-££,

0*

0.0

3

0>

3

JJ1

0.0

/f.S

o

o

.&&,

0,0

&°

7.Psjd»l(j|icj|

4>

o

e

0.0

0*

0.0

— &\

o

e

0J

0.0

0.0

/,

o

i

jU.

<?,*

1$

/

e

f

Jl±.

0o

S.9

MMmM

S

i

A.

0.0

MS

lZ.

a

-Z-

a l*

/,»

221

J

o

A

US

P.0

/as

3

o

J.

tlL

0-0

nc

Kith*

&

o

0.0

0.0

0.0

o

o_

£.0

0.»

0.*

o

oi

jU.

<?,*

1$

/

e

f

Jl±.

0o

S.9

MMmM

S

i

A.

0.0

MS

lZ.

a

-Z-

a l*

/,»

221

J

o

A

US

P.0

/as

3

o

J.

tlL

0-0

nc

Kith*

&

o

0.0

0.0

0.0

o

o_

£.0

0.»

0.*

o

o

6J>

*■*

0.0

c

0,0

0*

0,0

Total

ML

?

JZr

4L0

3X.o

/0t.

g

t

9 tt.9

//■/

i00.

1L.

J

/t

m

m

/p0.

/J

4-

n

?£.SZS.I

/0O.

. d/ SeeasSj** - £ M/Sum

/- SO fasfuror

Oue^^fl MisSuTe*

Jji/^^rnasf sSot Sntr&ji

Evaluatioi

Nimbi*

Per Cent

Number

PeiCent

Nurober

PerCent

Number

Pel Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolll

Certain

Doubltul

Total

Certain

Doubltul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doultfu

Total

Certain

DojMIuI

Total

O-Batloon

—L.

O

/

A*

0.0

.?,*

£

3

f

&J.

f.t

Hi

^±

4

_7

23S /7.L

4/,t

J-

A

7

ILL

u

M6

1'Asrjnxnieal

/

?

?

f.0

u

if

jC

3

it

ite.

*■/

ML

_<2

J

-A

J.O

//?

/fit

I£

3

?

UL

t?

3*£

Z-Aircraft

7

X

/J-

*t.i

Hi

4/4

-±

3

7

MJL

S.f

/*f

. .d

/

a

J 1 .?

<r.1

M-

/

o

f

S-l

0.0

3*

3-U(ht Pbemm.

2.

i

3

C.i

l»

ft

2

sA

3

AL

0,0

8i

.

.0-0

<p,t>

0.0

/

o

1

30\

0.0

3X

4-Biidj

. .A

o

*4

0.0

0.O

. 4>

0.0

0.0

0.0

_&_

<0

0.0

00

0.0

o

o

0.0

0.0

0.0

S-Clomts, Ovst, He.

00

0,0

0,0

-O.

4>

0.0

0.0

0.0

^A.

.0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

rj-frauffre. Into.

. 3.

<p

3

9./

0.0

1(

-jL-

I

U?

0.0

X. 7

A

£>

^//.L

0,0

//J

J

S

?(,/

0.0

ti t

7'PsrcMo(ica!

<?

0.a

0.0

0.0

o

O

0*\

0.O

0.0

£>

. C

0.O

0^>

0,0

0.0

0.0

8-Unrmwn

_X

ft

Ml

0:0

*4z

I

6

X

IS

0.O

/£.x

3

3

fU

0.O

fU

-£-

<?

f

2<f.0

0.0

tf-0

4-Ottiec

.OJ!

0.0

0,e

__&.

/

j

SA

f.l

S.i

o

t

/

0.0

J'.f

f.l

/

a

/

3.X

0.0

3X

TM

JX

ti

JJ

itf.

#3

/*0.

J7

/'

37

Mo

Z7.c

W.

m.

1

IZ.

s-ff

4i.i

/ty.

2i

s

V

I&

a,t

/0&.

7»/fi£ a /fa

£V/U.t/Af<0V 0/r i/As/T S/^f/r^i^ &?£ *££- Y&JZt 4f f0±&j*S *e/>0£T£0

#

/?0£, />0^Ar/0/u

0f#3

/*0.

J7

/'

37

Mo

Z7.c

W.

m.

1

IZ.

s-ff

4i.i

/ty.

2i

s

V

I&

a,t

/0&.

7»/fi£ a /fa

£V/U.t/Af<0V 0/r i/As/T S/^f/r^i^ &?£ *££- Y&JZt 4f f0±&j*S *e/>0£T£0

#

/?0£, />0^Ar/0/u

0f

S/<S.H7-/A*<i .

#&j£drs

<?s=

&T&&&

&0£.&£.S

4> ^/f^fTbi •>* jlsr*

£-/o

SfrjvSIir

//*-?0 j

vrfasSAf

f/- 60 J

'teffltZ

Evaluation-

Hunber

Percent

Number

Per Cert

Number

Percent.

NunibH

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tola)

Certain

DaibtM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtfu 1

Total

Certiia

Doubtful

Total

D-Ballocn

. P

0.0

0-0

0~0

J

O

^

/J.3

4.0

13.3

_/

J?

3

£L.

///

/*/

/

/

-?

-11

1.1

(S-.0

l-Asnonmical

J?

9

2t

}9.S-\

Xof

60.4

-if

/

4

•3l.i

I?

?<?0

^L

/

i'

JLZ

s.C

f/J

~Jj

/

/

-0\£J

7.1

77

^■Aircraft

»i"

./

c

M&L

zz

/}■?

A

?.

0.0

in

/IS

-A

/

.<

13,7

XM

p$

_A\

3

J'

/£4\

?2t

tf£

3-Li(ht Pbenon.

a

0?

0.0

00

00

t

/

0.0

i?

fif

t

4>

/

r.c.

40

*(,

D

O

JJL\

0.0

0.0

(-Birds

e>

1

/

<?£

J.3

J.3

~*1

P.4

0.0

00

_j2_

1

/

0.0

s.L

?,t

O

-4JL

0.4

0.0

HlouOs, Dust etc

/

/

0.0

2.3

23

_0j

-&£.

-£i£j

00

_j2__|

J?

jL£a

0.0

a

JL£\

0.0

0.0

t-MHiffic. nfo.

3

J

1^.

0.0

7-0

_^2.

X

/s.i

0.0

/*■$

.0

O '

00

0.0

00

s?

0.0

0.0

0.£>

7-Psyclwlo(ical

-#\

<S>

a

4*

00

fi.o

00

-0°A

P.0

f

/

0?

,cc

*-<t

6

P

00

0.0

(7-0

t-Unlumn

ZL

4

Mo

0,0

tic

/

/

1.1

-JLS-

&-7

-5

z

IU

0.0

(f.t

3

iP

4

3f.l

0.O

30 J

^OtJlH

-£-

£>

0.0

0.0

0.0

f

I

£1.

0.0

jtJ-

&

0.0

00

00

/

t

17

0.0

71

Total

3 f

/A

4s

t2J

m

/00.

1L

4

/*'

m

2£-1

/0O,

u.

L

a

U.7

33,3

100,

~J2

S

/J

ar\3U'

/00.

«J '/ &C0SiSjtS - S fajfuTKr

£-3<p Af"S*r{?£ .

0?vee 2n M /f/vrrc

2> ve,fi TtQ*r -rstt- Jm-re* t.

Evaluation

NurrMr

PtaCrnl

Numoei

PerCent

Number

Pw Cent

Number .

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total£-3<p Af"S*r{?£ .

0?vee 2n M /f/vrrc

2> ve,fi TtQ*r -rstt- Jm-re* t.

Evaluation

NurrMr

PtaCrnl

Numoei

PerCent

Number

Pw Cent

Number .

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:«tain

Doubtful

Total

Cfitain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

3

Certain

Doubrtut

Total

^Balloon

/

x?

3

31

(-7

/00

.?

3

L

JUz

4.4

ffi

/

O

/

*•

0.0

f-t

2

JS\

J.4

7-J

l-Ailranomical

^

/

3

0-7

3?,

/0.0

J-

1 1

I

/£i

3.1

tt-T

-^

/

4

27.1

<?/

?0

/ a

4

/i

J4A

4J

?y.&

2-Aiicrifl

J~

/

1

/LI

rtt

100

-±

4

$

tf.S

n-s

$6.0

-.2

O

?

(tl

0C

fU

^

J

?

Ml

7,1

Uf

3-Lijhl Phenon.

€>

/

t

0.0

3,3

3,3

. 1

l

31

0.0

J?/

4>

—Q~

f-0.

0.0

04

J/-Q

0.0

&0

4-BirdJ

£>

#

AAA

0.0

t>0>

—4-

0,0

~&£L

£>

4

0*.

0.0

00

4

—£-\

4>

00

0.0

0.0

S-Cloudi, Dust, etc.

0)

<?

00

0.0

00

0.0

60

00

&

0.0

0.0

0.0

.-0..

6

-P.-0.

0°

JZ4-

frlnsuflic anfb.

t

t

1.3

0,6

33

1

—2—1

/

s.t

00

3/

4

<?

0.0

0B

#0

4

— ~ \

£

/44>

00

*t

T-Pt|Ftflor>(roal

£

t

3

£2-

3.1

Me.

0.0

O.O

00

'.-J.

1

£L

00

f.f

1

j(2_

t

24

0.O

2?

t-Untjieein

/"

a

{*

33 .?

0.0

w

-£.

1

JS.I

O.0

2$./

3

i

m.

0.0

?P

7

7

n-t

0-0

'7J

MWw

dP

0>

0.0

-&£+

00

../.-i

/

0.0

3-/

,?•/

-,4

a

0.0

0,e

0-0

-0

7

/

0.6

i-4

2V

Total

*?/

f

So

70j>

3e>,e

/00.

AX

9

ft

T/.f

2 f.t

/00.

/*

f

//

$L±

1/

{04.

JL

f

4/

ts*.

A2.0

l\0L.

W ' ' ''■'''

227

s-

I

I'

f0& 0/j#s9t/d/i/ 0/? s/6//r/As& A/An-*? s?/? <sca/ts/*>& nj/ysrer &£J£<its

J" f&ef/Vjf *+ /<*_r.i

A-/& Se

eo*fbs

fee's US

3/- to S*eo"SZ>C

Enltatwi

Nnnbti

Per Cent

Hid]

*<

Per Col

NUOIOCt

PetCwt

Numb«f

PtiCtnl

Ctrttui

OoubrM

Total

Certain

ftMrtttlul

Total

Zettitn

OtttltM

Tatal

Certain

OmAltBl

Total

:«!•«

DoubM

Total

Certain

DotlHM

Total

Certain

DwNltil

Total

Certain

BwMlirt

TotalCtrttui

OoubrM

Total

Certain

ftMrtttlul

Total

Zettitn

OtttltM

Tatal

Certain

OmAltBl

Total

:«!•«

DoubM

Total

Certain

DotlHM

Total

Certain

DwNltil

Total

Certain

BwMlirt

Total

0- Balloon

J

f

4

AS

?.?

J.3

_/

/

0.0

3 J

2,1

/

2

.?

J£>

J^.

7.9

a.

f

/

•££

S.i

JJ

lAstwWicil

J./

^r

46

2?.£

.*?/

Alt

"•r

9 itw.L

2ft. t

4$2

*r

2

7

USL

XXlLi'

2

X

4

S.£

s.c

ff-3

?.fiiitrafl

4

7

it

S.2

tl

/4i

-2-\

_£.

7

°4

/2.JT

2(1

* 6

//

/IX

ALt.

if*

rT

4

1

au.

//.(

Jj'.o

}Li0it Pnonoa.

*

,?

2

fi.o

Jt,

l&

—p

a

/ /./

3.1

S>

/

/

6-0

Ml.

».(-

—2^

6

t.p

0.0

0.0

(Kids

i

/

3

A 3

A3

1-L

d>

&

00

6t>

a

4

0O

0t>

e.o

J

t

4-

f.i

z-t

//./

S-Ctouds, Duit, tic

o

o

0.0

0.0

0.0

&

0O

0.0

o.o

o

0.0

0.o

0.0

a

/p."

0.0

0*

tVtarffic Mb.

/

/

/■*

O.o

(■3

^J_

o

3

14

0.0

U

4

4

/ti"

0.P

/*/

£

a

(?

14J\

a e

6.1

7-Piydioloficat

c

£>

o

o.o

0.0

t/.o

2_

0.O

t°

0.6

a

a

a

O

0.t>

f.e

a

A

o

0.0

a.o

0.0

(.Unborn

■}

p

7

V

o.o

tl

i

L

nt

.0.0

as

/a

o

&a t-P ja

/A

O

/A

S$l

O.o

3J.3

MHier

J

(

4

UL

A3

C*

<?

.<?.

uS-

00

00

00

JL

J

f,t

0.6

SI

^JL.

o

a

0.6

o.o

t?,0

Til

M.

3?

17

4M

foi

/oo.

JL&-

^L

3x

m

4i.i

/oo.

27

if

//

ILL

2tt

fP0.

A?

36

11*

21.Z

/0O.

'■1

'i: 
\

6/ Se£essj>£ - S M,t**rpi

£-3q A?/*urej

. . . . — , — , ,, — ,._, — ,_ — _ ,. — . — .

' ■ — ■ — ' ■

Evalualttn

NiuslMr

P» Cent

ffunibef

Percent

Nunfcer

Per Cent

rtoarber

Per Cent

Ctiten

OovUtuI

Total

Certain

DoutjtJu

Total

Certain

Doubthil

Toy

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubthil

Total

C atari

Doubtlu

Total

Certain

DaiUful

Total

0-BallOM

AT

/X

5?

ATI

//■*

Hi

^£

/a

So

/f.4

t*1

m

t

3

//

ILL

to

atf

/*

J- //

/U

49

(IS

l-Aitnnoiaicil

-?

J

4'

2 J

3.7.

y,3

/*

4

(4

&L

4-H

ts.t

//

j'

St,

AS.L

?}.(,

iU

/0

i

/s

9.7//■*

Hi

^£

/a

So

/f.4

t*1

m

t

3

//

ILL

to

atf

/*

J- //

/U

49

(IS

l-Aitnnoiaicil

-?

J

4'

2 J

3.7.

y,3

/*

4

(4

&L

4-H

ts.t

//

j'

St,

AS.L

?}.(,

iU

/0

i

/s

9.7

12

}7S

MifCflft

/a

f

/If

Sf.jT

$.4

nn

3

/o

/2

3%

/fif

14*

J.

t

?

4.1

J.S

lo

s.

4

fS

17

3.1

iU

J-Lifht PlKnoai.

O

04

0,0

0.t>

A.

4

C

J2.

4-1

U

o

o

to

do

00

a

_£?_

0>. tf

j0±2-

4-BlnO

—&-\

0.0

a a

0.O

a

o

J0.0

0-0

ffo

0>

m

0ff

0.O

^aj>

& \

a

0.O

0.0

0.0

5-tlm«)s, Dust, etc

■f

3

0.0

3.X

3.X

a

o

0.0

00

ffo

A

o

0.O

0.O .O.O

/

o

/

la

0.0

/■0

6-lnaltic Wo.

•r

t>

S~

<3

*$

7

7

1£

0.0

7f

00

0.0 J>.6

Jti

£>

&A.M4

Z/.4

APqrcMo|ical

/

/

A

-LL

f-t

S-i

J~

■ 0_

4'

s.4

0.0

S4

6

0.O

0.0

PO

-2

1

-A-

If

/<?

X.f

l-Untjnm

JZ

o

*&.

m.

J?<f

At

/t.

/7.2

0.0

tn

//

e>

//

2S.I

.00.

3A±

A±

H 4 J3.3

00

HS3

H>ft«

s

o

3

3a

0O

3,3

\3.

Z

J.A

0.0

42

J

o

a

Al

00

4-1

4

O

_4_

3,9

00

3.9

Total

Ajl

JS

fs

4rt

Hi

/fie.

jU

3o

93

&L

3X.3

ft*.

J£

f

43

22a

Jt>.<t

/oo.

is-

tf &3

cV-J*

tu

/0a

•

r#4L£ 4/02,

£20£J£0!J0A'

0P: &J.£AZL

X/6//2J&/63.

/?0/£ **.£.

<S&/t£S

/?V /f0>£&£* *d?/'ai*T£0

F0£. 0#2s*r/0>ji/ 0^ </<z.#r/d/6 A^rAi/^ <04Je£rs

S~ Si^fo^Pi t>* Je*<

£~/o Sfcoffsis

//-3/? Sfe-oM'JiJ

3 '/-do J^eotSifS

EvjIuJlKm

Nunba

Per Cent

Nintei

Pel Cent

ttorrter

Percent

Number

PecCoit

Certain

OWibtful

Total

Certain

Doubtlu

Total

Certain

fruitful

Total

Certain

OnbtM

Total

Certain

Doubthil

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

OoirotM

Total

Certain

Dmbttul

Total

u-Ballo«o

2

/

■ 3

Sl

4.s

/*(,

0>

X

2

0.0

/or

/OS

/

J

4

J.O

4-t

rTV

_^

A

4

S3

X3

/0.4

l-Asimmiiieat

/

/

3

z

■ 4*'

9o

a>

z

7

0.0

/0.r

'fi-f

/

t

Zo

00

fr

a

0.0

00

o.o

1-knvHX

J.

£

t

9./

A>li

344

8

/

f

4X.I

r.3

414

/rf

/J'

33

31.1

Se.A

tf.i

/J-

K

XI

31J-

/ft

£SA3

z

■ 4*'

9o

a>

z

7

0.0

/0.r

'fi-f

/

t

Zo

00

fr

a

0.0

00

o.o

1-knvHX

J.

£

t

9./

A>li

344

8

/

f

4X.I

r.3

414

/rf

/J'

33

31.1

Se.A

tf.i

/J-

K

XI

31J-

/ft

£SA

3-Li(bl Ptiero*.

/

e_

I

1a1

0-0

4r

a

1

/

^0.

3'3

J'3

O

O

0.0

<t-0

f.0

a

/

!

0.0

2(,

?6

t-Biids

/

r>

)

4.jT

4(

0>

&

JLS^

O.O

O o

o

e>

0,0

O.O

a

J

o

f

.21

o.o

M

5-Cloae\ ftut, etc

<s>

0:o

0.0

a

o

o

00

0.0

0. O

a

0.0

0.0

0O

a

00.

0.0

a.o

(■Intonic. Into.

/

o

1

M

0-0

4f

;

i

J-3

^o_

s:$

/

a

I

Jt.o

0.0

2°

JZ

o

3

S.C

6

J-.i

7-Psycholo(ical .

/

a

)

Jj\

0.0

4,r

0.0

o.o

00

*2

i

3

4.1

2.0

£.f

a

J?£-

0.0

0.0

S-UnkMan

J

o

3

/It

0.0

/li-

<*

4

1U

o.o

Mi

7

o

?

i4.i

Off

/4s

g

/

*/.(

0.O

0/./

t-Othei

J

o

A

9/

0-0

ft

a

o

0-0

o.o

0.0

a

0.O

O.O

00

r

/

J.6

0.0

J,6

Toti

UL

?

0.2

£M

3C4

/&>,

ii_

£

/f

tf£

3AC

/O0.

10.

/1

41

£u.

US

/oo.

2±

1

3S

1LI

Zs.1

/0O.

i

A / ^<wfe - .< Af/n'urfr

£-.fo W//S„r-<?s

#{/f<e 3n M/f/vTfij

^bt/fA-r/asS sTvr STATES

Evaluabon

Number

Per Cent

Hunter

Pa Cent

flumbef '

Per Cent

Number

PetCent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

_0oubtMI

Total

:«Tain

DouWfol

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:trtan

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtnit

Total

Certain

Doubtful

T<<X

tt-Balloon

/?

J"

J2

323

u

AM

//

f

?1

JA*

M*

JK*

£

3

9

2<?-o

/3.0

3£-°

/0

3

/M

3.4.

/rs

1-Aslrtnoniol

/

c

/

Li-

/?0

/3

e>

/

t

MjS.

/3

/4

3

1

4

/2.0

-&0-

IAjl

J

4

/.x

3C

4-t

2-Aiicraft

A3

~/£-

23

za

/3.o

ni

S-

/o

i9

/J.O

/n

2X3

/

/

4.6

O

4*

'<?

4

JS

22.C

4-1

27.4

3-L'(h| PHom.

A 7 -

/J

JL

<0

A

!

0a

A3

/?

£>

S.O

0-0

g.Q

/

0?

/

.Iz.

0.0

A2

4-Birib

/

/

A3

00

/■*

a

o

Ao.

0.0

0*

Z>

a

0.0

0.0

0.O

i

/

0:0

An

(•*

S-Clotute, Dint, etc

a

0.0

3.0

JO

_&-

o

o

0*

^0__

0,o

S

/

4°

0.0g.Q

/

0?

/

.Iz.

0.0

A2

4-Birib

/

/

A3

00

/■*

a

o

Ao.

0.0

0*

Z>

a

0.0

0.0

0.O

i

/

0:0

An

(•*

S-Clotute, Dint, etc

a

0.0

3.0

JO

_&-

o

o

0*

^0__

0,o

S

/

4°

0.0

4o

<9

0o

0o

0,0

Olmuttic tito.

■J*

o

s~

zS

/.-*

0°

S

/O.f

j2^_

i°J

O

£>

0.O

0.0

O.o

2o

o

20

Alt

0.0

23$

/-fjyttaloea)

/

i

ALL

SO

/3

t

o

/

JJL

0,0

/■3

J

'

JLo_

0.0

J-O.

t

/

/■Z

0.0

12

f-Urtuom

J0

O

jo

2U

0o

Ltffo

/x

/x

/Lo

0.O

/i.o

_JL

o

7

&,*

O.O

2f."

/■r

is-

m

0.0

Alt 
1/

WW*

i

1

X

A3

(■^

-?<f

4

2

6

f.3

27

%o

A

/

/

0.0

4.0

4-o

/

a

A

t.f

0.0

Tot-

£e-

il

17

m\

&. I

/00>

rx

23

IS

&3.

30.1

/O0.

2.0

$

2f

Jao

20.0

/00

13

//

S4

369

A3,

/00.

Z28

•

ZMLS.

&?£.

or ss6*>TfA/& OgJZ/'r t^aA A/0T

tidies

/erfafsf

-5" S&p l ? j r'J>* */» t&ii

£-/o r sVf^" v ' a - r

//-Jo S&hfSzs

J/-60 Jfcossbt

Evaluation

Number

Per Cent

Nunbet

Per Coil

Number

P» Cenl

Number

PeiOnt

Certain

Doubtful

ToUl

Certain

doubtful

Tola!

Certain

Doubtful

TOW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

>rt«n

DoubUu)

Total

Certain

DoabUil

Total

Cetttin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtnrl

Tot*

0- Balloon

/

/

6^0

i.e

£9

_z

(

z.

Al

///

tf.Z

£>

/

/ ,

0.0

3.1

-sy

3

/

/

3-o

4a

'?<*

l-Aitronotnical

/

J

,V

4ff.a

/■CD

ViP

-?

f

3

212.

///

tf.3

s

1

y

M.

J.I

(?S

X

/

^■

k->

4 s l

i?0

J-Aiiciltt

-i:

/

^

2e.t

A'P

7*0

/

(

3L

//./

//,/

ft. 2

s~

4

?

it.L

tt.t 0S./

3

\

?

t.1.0

4.s

t/J

Htjl* Ptianoin.

^?

0.0

te

0-0

So

00

/?,<?

*

&

*#

4.0

00

<0

0^

00

0,(?

4-Bii<li

o \

0.0

0.0

00

O

A*

0.0

0-0

o

0S

6.0

a#

a

<?

<P

0.O

00

0,0

S-Clrwrli, Dust, etc.

a

o

f?

0.0

o.o

0.0

O

0.t>

0.0

Rp

&

/

t

0.0

AA

St

a

0.0

0.6

0.0

C-litwIKc Wb,

J

o

?

tfo

0.6

{£0

/

/

//./

0.0

tf.f

7

e>

7

2{.<?

0.e

2f.1

Z

a

£,

3.7

0.6

&f

7-Pirt)n1c|ial

o

<?

0.0

1.0

0-0

a

e>

o

0.0t

0.0

AA

St

a

0.0

0.6

0.0

C-litwIKc Wb,

J

o

?

tfo

0.6

{£0

/

/

//./

0.0

tf.f

7

e>

7

2{.<?

0.e

2f.1

Z

a

£,

3.7

0.6

&f

7-Pirt)n1c|ial

o

<?

0.0

1.0

0-0

a

e>

o

0.0

0-0

0.0

a

(?

0.0

0.0

0.0

a

0.0

0.0

0.0

t-Unkmwi

<s>

a

6.0

00

/

t

//./

0.0

((■/

j4_

O

¥

rt.t

6.0

12,*

9

?

39.t

o.o

S?(

i-QOm

<3

<?

0.0

0.O

0.0

a

o

a 0.0

0.0

0f?

X.

4

h

4s

/*J 'I2S

I

/

0.0

4.1

¥?

Total

/s

_£L

Je

1£JL

zr-o

too.

Jk.

2

<?

U7

333

100.

*/

//

IX

6S.&

HA too

J±

4-

z±

SM

/14

/00,

6/ ■&Ccu*£>£ SAf/rSurttr

/-3P /V'fSu-rejr

&ut*; 3q Af^.ret

3>ui?Ar,prS~ Af/tr St Arm

Evaluilun

Nuinber

PtrCenl

Number

Per Cenl

rrurrtwi

Per Ceil

Nrnntef

Percent

Certain

OnbtlulJ Total

Certain

Doubtti

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Dnubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doi*tW

Total

Cettaia

Omibttu

Total

Certain

Doubtrul

Total

0-eafloon

JX

_r

/s~

ft?

*1

Hi

^B_

//

tf

lU.

/y.i

5K.f

J

A

£?

M.

J'J.

/2.S

//

4

/5"

u

<?-4

f-0

1-Aslrononici!

(

/

0.O

u

a

3

X

r

Al

*?•*•

f,0

3

t

S

77

u

/0J

jy.

0°

as

9.0

4.f

t,?J

}-Aircrtfl

A

?

/s-

/3,/

/Ac

Mi

/JL

J-

t7

/£-7

it

tS.£

/

3

#

Jt.L

1.1

<£J_

S2.

/t

2$

1.2

U

//„<?

3-Li|b| P*enoni.

ZP

/

3

1.3

/6

4?

o

^.0

0.O

0.0

0.0

0.6

0.0

*

i

J

/■I

0.6

'■$

<- Bints

o

0.0

0.O

0,0

/

f

&.<L

t-t

t'9

2-

ft

£

c;/

0.0

s:t

j.

t

J

/.2

0.0,

/x

S-CIwjJj, Dust etc.

<0.0

a. a

0.0

/

f

/■*

00

/<</

6

0.0

0.0

&0

a

00

0.0

0.0

6-lnsuMic Inla.

J

a

J

4S.

0,0

¥t

.//

a

/r.i

o

/Sf

JL

r

3V

0.0

2&e 4f

o

<f

2S.7

0.0

28?

7-Psycbolg|iul

a

a. a

0.0

#0

^

a

0.

j.$

-££-.

2S

/

i

At

0.0

44

3

t

¥

/.S

0-4

?,*

S-Unkoow

26

_!&J

00

?2.g

0.9

3*.t

■A

c

f

/jj-

0.6

(If

//

it

ZjJt

4.0. n.z

rtf

2 ?

/7.4

0.0

tf*

Wither

-^

¥

1£

0.0

a

..?.

. a.

7

Zl

09

9-7

_4.

¥

/0.3

10.0

(0.3

(4

0>26

_!&J

00

?2.g

0.9

3*.t

■A

c

f

/jj-

0.6

(If

//

it

ZjJt

4.0. n.z

rtf

2 ?

/7.4

0.0

tf*

Wither

-^

¥

1£

0.0

a

..?.

. a.

7

Zl

09

9-7

_4.

¥

/0.3

10.0

(0.3

(4

0>

fit

M.

0.0

*S

Tom

4t

/JL

4/

Hi

ii-7

/00

a.

/?

n

ml

&4

/00-

S3

6

31

Mi

/j:4

{00,

/M

3/

M1

f/.4

/te

/&.

fJSLfr /?/t<?

£rMQ//tT/0M .0f <0£j£er S//Z//7-S4/&S f0g. #i.t V^Ms 4^ s/)£0&f ^sa.ere /}

r0e-

0C4JT/0A/

0f

s/6#r/w

6

0t/f<

V6/f

0/e <S£.0£j/*/6

c?Ss?A/CE 0*->£0rs

J? SfCaMCb-i n/T l&JS

d-/o Jq

"CosSbJ

//-30 See » asks

3/-4o Src *>/*■]>*

Evaluation

Number

PerCent

Number _,

Per Cent

Number

Pa Cut

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OoubHul

ToUl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouUbil

ToW

Certain

Ootibttu

Total

Certain

Doubtrul

Total

O-Balloon

^

-*££

0.0

0-0

00

0.6

?0

A

0.0

6.0

00

/

A

^

U til

%?.0

1-Altrwronical

//

c

fT

£U

/•T.&

tf.S

s

T

4/.1

4,0

Vfi?

H

4

L

/jf.S

Mo

?fc

f

2.

J"

I.1\/3.I

%>.0

J.Airtnft

A.

A

$

S.a

{S.o

W-0

3

O

f

tf-o

0.0

2si0

/

f

Z

L2.

4.2

/4¥

t

A

J

i.1 a.3,

20.Q

3-Liiril Pharon.

a

_i2_

0.o

0.0

00

-JL

_fi_

-L±.

e-°

(?,0

J

P

_£^_

06

0.0

4

o

6.0

S.O

00

4-Binli

/

/

0.0

^.j'

4.f

*1

0.0

&(?

/

/

^2,

0.0

£.2

a

tf.o

0.0

S-Cloods. Duit ate.

0>

a

0a

0.0

00

0.0

o

0.0

0.0

0.9

00

0.0

0O

O.0

C-lMUlfiC. Bit).

+

¥

fc.o

0.0

'0.0

o

O.o

0.0

0-0

.

00

O.t

0.0

/

_J0_

/

6.7

0C

<*■/

T-Psycrnloiical

/

/

2.i'

e.o

AS

a

o

0.6

0,»

t?-0

0.0

6.0

0.0

/

_j(PJ

■ t

Li

00

6-7

S-Unkno*

J"

s-

txj-

0.0

/?■*

_2_

o

J

1££

0.0

2&0

_L

£

21J

60

#*"

3

(0

4

#.->

Co

26-7

Mtfier

J

t

#

?.r

r?,.r

/00

/

/

-Ll

0,0

fs

/

/

0.O

H

tf.*

&

0.0

0.6

J2JZ-

Total

St

(4

40

foo

ZjT.o

100

JA.

f*

/too

0.O

too.

/o

{>

/<

Us

n?

/00.

i

4,

t*

ioo

4 , ».o

/0Ot

#

?.r

r?,.r

/00

/

/

-Ll

0,0

fs

/

/

0.O

H

tf.*

&

0.0

0.6

J2JZ-

Total

St

(4

40

foo

ZjT.o

100

JA.

f*

/too

0.O

too.

/o

{>

/<

Us

n?

/00.

i

4,

t*

ioo

4 , ».o

/0O

t3 / ^V(*» 'V** ~ S ' Mrfum*

4-3o S*/sS tl re*

£>K?/e 3o At.*ures

i^r/.y//.i- ^frun^B

Eval nation

Number

PerCent

Number

Percent

Nunber

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Certain

Doubtrul

Total

Cortrtifl

Ooobtful

WW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouHhil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tnlal

Certain

Ooubtful

Total

Balloon

J

J'

,r

C7

41

tf-H

J"

A

/

123.

11

&r<?

*

3

J0.O

6.0

20.O

-A

/

Y

-A

1?.*

X,0

l-Mnnwical

f*

3

O

(.1

b-7

/

f

£-

JL4

$,<>

/?

3

4-

7

£o.c

M

4/ t 7

*

JT

/Z.

Mo

too

Me

M\ircrttl

_£

c

f0

f.f

LU

2Z£

_J_

(

2-

iM

i.(.

7,1

/

/

e.o

I?

t*-/

4

J'

<t

/3.o

t0O

2?0

3-LiHilPherart.

A

2,

M

0.0

4*

4

■6

HA

A0

2/.f

/

/

Jj.

p.o

4-7

/

O

/

2.0

6.0

0.0

t-Birea

O

So

0,9

00

—0-

0.0

O.O

0-0

0.0

60

#.P

0*

&.0_

0.0

S-ClrHds, Oral, etc

0.0

0.6

00

..#*_

0.0

60

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

rrbntrflrc hh.

4-

</

t.9

0.0

'ff

/

o

t

Z.L

0.0

3.£

a

£>

0.0

0.9

<?.0

■?

' c

7

/4s

0-0

^0

7-Pircrek)B{jl

/

3.

s

f-1

44

hi

a

O^

0*0

00

/

1

0.0

17

'*■?

/

a

/

2.0

0.6

a.o

rMMn*a

/S.

/2,

2(.7

00

2t>7

-±

9

h±

**

&t

/

t

Lv

6,0

fa-7

_£

t

tt.o

0-6

tiff

Mt**

3

3

L?

0.0

t-7

/

f

t

0.0

sA

?fr

/

t

C7

60

67

/

4

?

20

lo

<(?■(?

Total

21.

/<,

4?

W.

SS4

100.

A3-

J~

*$

ill

w

m

_£.

(,

tf

6l.t

11/

/po.

jr

/s

So

■74.0

3<t-6

700-

229

-Mjjz ...£i££-

£?#c£//>r?04/ <?* #fj£cr j?/&//r//v£<: /0A? /ft*. V£j<es /?f S0t0yes ' ^e^tr*/ )

ft?*. />#<?s!7/a4/

0f

S/6S/T/&0

<f£0

0#

6<-0i,J/A/f,

£^0

0/3 .^££75

.5" S<fCOj*£>

f a/? /fjl

6-/0 ^/ffaf^HX

//-30 j£ce>*/PS

Z/-60 ~&Cj>" r ±S

cmwiwi) ,

Number

PhCwI

, Number

Per Centft?*. />#<?s!7/a4/

0f

S/6S/T/&0

<f£0

0#

6<-0i,J/A/f,

£^0

0/3 .^££75

.5" S<fCOj*£>

f a/? /fjl

6-/0 ^/ffaf^HX

//-30 j£ce>*/PS

Z/-60 ~&Cj>" r ±S

cmwiwi) ,

Number

PhCwI

, Number

Per Cent

rlumber

PerCent

Number

Percent

Certain

Oouotrul

Tola!

Certain

Doubirul

Total

^e/latn

DouMlul

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

:ertairt

Dourjrful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Ttlal

Certain

OouUhj ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Tot*

0- Balloon

aa

/?#

<?,?

^£

0.0

00

-J-

/

^Z-

r^r^

*■?

JLa^j

~~i

-^-2££

20.0 £00

1 I-Asljononial

J?

7

/£

4</<;

.ft?

t&

-A.

-A

f^

00

4ttf

^

2

4.

26,7

/3-3

4ao

/

./ I<?0

0.0 /0-0

!-A.iaift

JL

o

2

//./

<?.(?

*/■/

s

f

2. //./

///

22 i

J

A

*

£L

200

2W

. /

. .,./

2. j0. 0/0.0

200

Hithl Plusiom.

o

a&

f?<?

a<?

-J2-

0.0

00

0-0

a

00

00

0O

/P

...■0..

00

0.0

J0.0

«-Bnd*

£&.

/?&

ae

At?

00

0.a

£4.

00

/J

0.

0.0

0.0

00

S-Cloeds, Doit, etc

#a

#P

a<?

0.0

00

0(0

-A.

a

j2j2-

0.0

0.0

6

0-<?

0.0

0.0

C-lnnrftit Into.

o

<?.(?

<?e

a#

/

/

//■f

<?0

//./

^t.

*

0.0

00

0,0

0.O

.0.0

0.0

7-P5jdBlOpQl

o

aa

#<?

#£>

<?0

00

0<?

,. if

a

/

6:?

00

67

O

00

0.0

0.0

B-Unkl»»m

;

o

/

£76,

0.0

s:c

2

a

4,

22.Z

0.0

£7Z

_X

o

Z-

£&-

<?0

/f.S

.,./.

/ /0.0

.4

/00

Meier

a

<?

£j2\

0.0

00

G

a a

(?<?

a.0

&0

/

o

/

<L.?

00

tL.,7

-^

/

2,

/00

/0.0

?06

ToW

1J J

7

/S

t,/./

St. 9

/00.

t

/

9

Sf-9

//■/

/d>0.

. /0

&

js-

k^l

333

/<%?■

^

J

/0

U00

^00 /00.

<£ / -feffl-v^ir - ^'/*^v-»ryj-

£-3o W"/"T<?j:

0u{* JO At tr S«rejc

3><AeAr,o*' *s.r St Are *

Evaluation

Number

Pw Cen!

Number

Pa Cent

Muter

PerCent

NumbH

Per Cent

Certain

Ooubtlu

Tolal

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Ooubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:eriain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtn

Total

Certain -DonbtM

Tola

0-CHI»n

J

a

-T

/I0

*t

2A?

3

^

J/.£

00

/'■¥

J

/

r

r&eTotal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:eriain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtn

Total

Certain -DonbtM

Tola

0-CHI»n

J

a

-T

/I0

*t

2A?

3

^

J/.£

00

/'■¥

J

/

r

r&e

£0

21?.

&

/

V

0.0

£.2

g.z

l-Ajtrawmml

/

/

ft

43

*t

U

&

4

<*

/?/

00

//./

jr

A

?

2££

/00

3SiO

_X

4

A?

t£4

g.Z

2U.

2-Aircufl

•<f

)

f

26./

S3

3G{

3

ir

/

U

/43

21?

_ /

1

s

e.0

/00

f£0

7

/

2

/</■*

00

/0.?

3'Lighl PhonnL

...O.

o

t?

ao

06

00

I

&

/

*.f

00

*■?

5-

2.

0.0

/0.0 t&O

6>.0

0.0

0,0

t- Birds

<?

o

t?

a^p

0.0

_i2_

o

0>

0.0

0-0

0.0

o

00J

0.0

0.0

0-0

0.0

00

J-Clouds, Oust, lie.

a

a

AG

<?■#

<?■?

/

/

0.0

2?

€■?

d>

a

.0-0.

00

0.0

.0

0.0

0.0

O.0

S-lnmrlic mto.

4

<r

(l*

0.0

/?¥

?

o

,f

£1

0-0

u

c

££-

0.0

0.0

/0

(0

20£

00 20?

7-Psyetotofical

a

&0

&0

00

f

c

/

2.9

00

?■?

/

a

/

^0.

0.0

£0

£JL

00

00

HIMumwi

J

o

/

/J0

0,0

/j:0

//

o

( /

JT*

00

?/.#

t

/

£0

00

£0

/A

/t

2f.£

0.0

?#£

WttieJ

£

o

4>

f.7

<?■<?

?7

o

40,

00

0,0

/

/

2,

S0

£0

/00

*

2,

ILL

00

S/

1 TrtH

<?

V

fiS

£Z<L

/**

/pp.

19

t

Sr

21*

ttt

w.

/£.

?

2C £0.0

40.0

/00

&.

9

&

Ut

/Z4

/05.

rpg{.f /9/li. £S/i6i'/>7-;0/L/ 0f 0/lJ£&r $/&ff7-//l/0S £04 ,-Sfc^ t/£4#S dV /•Oi.a^J #£-&£7E0

f?& 4£>/e/rr/0/*/ 0^ s/gmt-/<i/6 £je£&A/ j?£> sst-ewsfG 6£££it/ 0>,3~/£izrs

•f <S*$OrftlS OlT jL&I*

£- /O Jcttf/is

//-J0 S&Orfpj

£/-{*£> ~^ J *<?**S'D.r

' Efalualion

Number

PerCent

Nunber

Per Cent

Nuitter

Percent

. Number

Pet Cent

Certain

DoUtlTB

Tool

Certain

Orwblfi)

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Tolal

Certain

Doubthl

Total

0- Balloon

.. £>.

a

0.J?

0.0

0.0

_^_

_&£.

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

. 0.

a

0.0

0.0

00

1-Astmnoaical

JS

21

si

ff-7

</?<?

f£t

V

f

rf

?■/

(,*■(■

n.7

4

/

7

£££

//■/Total

0- Balloon

.. £>.

a

0.J?

0.0

0.0

_^_

_&£.

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

. 0.

a

0.0

0.0

00

1-Astmnoaical

JS

21

si

ff-7

</?<?

f£t

V

f

rf

?■/

(,*■(■

n.7

4

/

7

£££

//■/

ft 9

tL

/

£0.0

00

£0O

J-Airairt

_£.

e>

<?<

3-3

0.0

31

u~

/

?./

0.0

?'

-0-A

/

/

J2j2-

//■/

///

00

0.0

00

3-Li(ht PtlSBm.

J

o

a

<?■.£>

0.0

0.0

_^_

-££.

0,0

0Q

0.0

0.0

0.0

£u2^

0.0

0.0

*-Birdi

a

£L£-

0.0

00

_&__

a

0JL

00

00

0.0

0-0

0,0

£^L

(0.0

&0

5-Clouds, Dust, ett

j2J2-^

0-0

Op

j2£.

0.0

0.0

a

jgj£

00

0-0

0.0

0.0

trlnsurlic Hid. '

J?

^

£3.

0.0

3.3

a

a

O.0

00

00

40

P.0

00 
0.0

0.0

<9

0.

0.0

0.0

7-Psycholoe,ical

_a\

e

<9

<?■<?

0,V

0.0

4>

a

"

0.0

0.0

0.0

&

0,0

0.0

~4„

a

00

0-0

0.0

8-Untamn

J

a

J

£L

ft

J.

2,

/g.Z

0,0

/#2

/

a

/

//./

0.0

f/J

_^L

/

&0.P

0>-0

£0.0

Winer

_/_

2,

Z4l.

/.&■

3.2.

__&_

a

0.0

00

0.p

a

0^0

0.0

00

j?.0

0.0

0.0

Toll)

3/

30

il

!&&

02.

'00.

£.

■7

//

SM

&,?.£■

/00.

7

2.

<?

Hi.

2.2Z

/O0-

^0s

Ji

/0ap

0.0

10O

&) &c<trf2>S --5t/&Vu.T,*r

6- So M/sStrres

Oi/eiC Jo M,jfurt?<;

2k>jeATte>fS a/, r SrjiTtra

Evaluation

Number

PerCent

Number

PerCent

Number

Percent

Number

Pet Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtnjl

Total

Certain

DouErttiri

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToUl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubthl

Total

0- Balloon

/

^

/

//./

a&

///

_z

/

£L

0.4?

t'

/

/

20.0

_£0_

55?^

JL£.

0,4

00

l-Astronomical

-£.

/

/

&J2.

//.!

///

/

sT

•

£L

27.3

1W

/

/

2aj>

00

&0

/0

ft

2-f

2-71

?f*

£6.7

Z-Aucrafl

j~

£-

M-

&£.£.

fi^t*

2

2,

/it

0-0

tf.2.

/

/

20.0

0.0

&D

/

/

(

S.t

'tit

£./»

]-Li0i| Phenon.

6

&H-

ft{?

0-0

.A.

2.

/f.L

00_

f?2-

a

j£0

aa

00

a

0.0

0.6

o.p

t-Biirb

_&_

a

,■?

&£L

0.O

#0

&

o

0.0

00

_0

o

00

0.0

00

-££.

SO

fl.OS.t

'tit

£./»

]-Li0i| Phenon.

6

&H-

ft{?

0-0

.A.

2.

/f.L

00_

f?2-

a

j£0

aa

00

a

0.0

0.6

o.p

t-Biirb

_&_

a

,■?

&£L

0.O

#0

&

o

0.0

00

_0

o

00

0.0

00

-££.

SO

fl.O

5-Clou<Js, Oust, etc

a

n

&0_

&0

00

&

_j2-^

4JI

0.0

0.0

0.0

0_Q_

0<G

0<L

0.<?

0.0

IVIimirlic. Mo.

/

/

1L-L

00

//■'

o

0.0

0-0

00

00

00

00

4

6

/£■?

0.0

/{<?

7-Piydnlopal

&0

e>-0

0.0

.t

j£4l

0-0

0,0

i0j2-

00

00

0.0

0.0

0p

Hmknoim

a

a

ao

0.0

00

^Z.

2,

/£t

0.0

tt&

^«L

a

£.

?0.0

0.0

#>.o

3

.

3

J.l

04

f.3

W)th«i

_!_

a

/

lU.

0-0

//./.

a.0

0>.0

&<0

a

0iP

0,0

00

/

/

■z$

0.O

0-f

Total

3

6,

9

3fJ

H-7

fee.

JL

s

//

72-7

2fJ

/00

■ *

\r

/0O.0

0.0

f0P,

at

{?

z4

£Ll

4 in

/00.

230

-f%*±£

dJ97

^ae^vfr/e/t/

0£

0g.]£/*T

</6A/r-/A/S5

>C2V /?£.l </£rj4?S j?i/ aae-a£s #£p£>£T£a

S0*> 4&iesrsiPA/ 0f S/G/fT/A/6 7£c£0t</ £?£ tSt.0U///V6 V££L0u/ 0jSJ£&rS

£ \Sj?COV0J OF /S3S

$~/0 Seco/vos

' /h3o SS-C0A-S5

3l-£<9 S^ca/vcj

Evaluation

Mumbet

PerCfflt

Numtwr

PeiCent

Nimbi)

Per Cant

Nuaibei

Percent

Certain

.Doubtful

Toul

Certain

Ooubtnil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

>rfaln

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtful

ToUl

Ctrtain

OnHful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

ft-Balloon

Z?

0,0

0-0

0.0

0,0

0,0

m

7

/

0-

Z7

?7 &.¥

f

. a

0.0

0.0

00

t-Aslnnoiual

0,

J

f

35T3

/70

&■?

S

s-

£Z6

O.OSS76

/

/

*-

7,7>

7-7

t&

JL

/

3

tr.t

77

23./

;-Airom

-2

•

sf

//.$

XT

'77

/

7

ILL

0.0

///

/

o

3

23./

0.0

**/

V

A

J"

M'

/*+

3U

Hiftil Phonm,

/

tf>

/'

j£

'fit?

Xf

o

0,0

00

0.0

0.0

0>.0

a .

1

/

0.0

77

7,7

t-Birdt

y

/

0.0

S?

£1

/

/

J£

//./

(hi

o

p.o

0.0

0.0

a

0.0

f?-0

00

5-Clwdi, Dust, etc.

o

o

0.0

00

00

a

o&

■0.0

OD

/

7

00.

T7

7,7

a

P

0.0

0,0

0.0

rrlniuflic. bib.

/

<5

1

rf

ao

51

£

a

00

0.0

0,0

J

c

3

£3/

0.O

M/

0.0

0.0f?-0

00

5-Clwdi, Dust, etc.

o

o

0.0

00

00

a

o&

■0.0

OD

/

7

00.

T7

7,7

a

P

0.0

0,0

0.0

rrlniuflic. bib.

/

<5

1

rf

ao

51

£

a

00

0.0

0,0

J

c

3

£3/

0.O

M/

0.0

0.0

J-Pirdoioiioi

O

r

ao

.0.0

(?i>

a

JA

0.0

OS)

/

a

/

7.7

0.0

7.7

/

a

/

77

0-0

Z7

>- Unknown

A

tf

2-

OL

0-0

"■7

2.

O-

&2

0.0

%&

J_

C

/

2L

0.0

77

J

.0

J

23./

&,/

MM*

<2

ao

0.0

0.0

0I>

0,0

0.0

o

.

0.0

Oj0

40

O

/)

0.0

a0

0,0

Total

/*-

i"

J.?..

7?J

&.?

fOO,

r

/

9

ffl

///

/M

/»

J

/3 7S.9 23. J

IW.

7

¥

/J

£?.3-3&?

/oa

1

£/ Sfro/r/z'; - £~A7//y0/*S

6~3£ Ay/Asisrjrs

~<2(f/rfi> 3PM/I/07F?

/3t/0A7~/#*' A/or Srsr&j>

1

Nunbet

PnCent

Nvmbei

PnCent

rtentei

PerCent

NunbH

Per Cent

Evaluation

Certain

Oobbtfu

Tottl

Certain

Doubtfn

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

D-Balloon

/

O

/

JJ.

01?

3.3

.jL

*

$

/f.z

£/

M3

^^

f

7?3.s-/n

mi

~2

2

/

/¥J

74-

^2.;

l-AaUHionical

/

/

.2-

S3

3. J

u

«r

?

r

/£1a

?./

H3

A

j-

00

/// //J

4-

J

7

mt

//,/

W9

2-Ailcrart

7

J

/r

£3.3

U7

SP.O

^J$L

X.

*

'*./

6/

/%*■

/

/

^

5?

J?

//$

/

a

/

3,7

fO.0

W

3-Ufbt PMtw,

/

/

3J

1*

3.

<9

a

M\

0-0

£/

a

^

00

0.0

d0

/

<s>

/

7.7

0.0

3.7

4-8ifdJ

Q

O

£

0.0

0.0

0.0

O

£0.

0-0

0.0

a

a

<?-0

0.0

ac

ff

0,0

00

0.0

Klowlt, Oust, ate.

&

a

0.0

00

.&

0\0

0.0

ee

a

a

&

00

0.0 o.c

c

0.0

0.0

a.o

K-lnjtirTic. Into.

/

3

/0.0

p.o

/P.O

/

-

/

M.

0-0

3.t>

A-

o

?-

//./?

J2P

its

_£_

4-

/¥.f\

010

Mf.f

T-Ptyclala|ical

6

4

0.0

O-0

ao

?

0.0>

0.0

0O

a ■

^

0.0

00

0.0

c

fi

0.0

/X0

e.p

MJnknow

_£

$

m

&0

U7

J"

jT

/£Z

0-0

sx

J

A

_2.

tz*

j£4>

174

7

7

1S9

SJO

M

MWw

o

4

00

0.0

0.0

*L

I

J

£L

&

U

/

/

P-0

sy

SJ

/

/

37

0.e?

3.7

Total/X0

e.p

MJnknow

_£

$

m

&0

U7

J"

jT

/£Z

0-0

sx

J

A

_2.

tz*

j£4>

174

7

7

1S9

SJO

M

MWw

o

4

00

0.0

0.0

*L

I

J

£L

&

U

/

/

P-0

sy

SJ

/

/

37

0.e?

3.7

Total

£L

f

3*

7M

Mo

0,

zs-

f

S3

22

W2*

m

/0>

7

12.

m

W.SL

/m

^

J

*?

Z/S /Zf

100,

f/>g££ />/fg

£W?£ MT/0A/ 0f

0&j£&r

.</6*/TM(S S

AT0£ JCL VSMfS /!</ S^agS /e£S/?je7£0

r0A 00£ar/0/i/ 0£ £fAMrf/v6 0£J£?.ts <?£ syrs/e^e* s/z/^a^s

S~S£6MPS 0A J-jrsr

d-/0 S&eoA'iPA

' 77r3j0 Sjs-ce/y&s

&/-£# S&cmpj

Evaluation

Nurgbet

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Nunbei '

Percent

Number

Per Call

Certain

Ooubtful

Total

Ceitain

OoubMul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoubUul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Balloon

£>

P

0.0

0,0

0.0

/

/

JJ.

' M

t3

/

S

3

7.1

m3

u?

7

/

X

7.7

7,1

4^

1-Aitnnonical

9

c

/r

230

/M

*m

~±

■y

33.3

0,o

tJ3

2.

a

0-

/*i?

0.0

ft?

a

/

/

0.0

7,7

77

2-AirciaK

Z3L

/

r

72.1

U

/*,(

X

0-

O.D

/a

767

i

i

4-

U?

7/

2ZS

3.

?

r

/sr#

&J

%5

3-UifJlt Phonon.

a

0.0

0-0

00

1

/

AO

V

f3

/

o

/

JZL

0-0

V

0.0

00

aa

4-Binlt

f

/

0.0

tz

IX

ao

ao

/

/

0.0

77

7,f

a

/>

0.0

ro.0

5-Clouils, Dual, etc

/

/

00

3.X

J.X

a

P

$P

0>.0

00

a>

07

0.0

00

0,0

a

0.0

&.0

0.0

t-lnwffit. ]nfo.

-1

j

9-7

0.0

f<7

X

a

£

76?

Q.0

/0-7

a

0>

Co

0,0

#0

t>

0.0

00

0-P

r-Piycholo{ical

O

0.0

0.0

00

P

-M

ao

0.D

a

/

/

0.0

7.7

7J

o

0>.O

00

0,0

Hjnknoim

&

i

m

0.0

/to-

7

/

M

M

P

a

JZ-

7*3

&0

14-3

4-

*7

30. i

ac>

w

*OHlM

/>

0-0

ao

0,0

/

/

J3

at

ts

o

0.0

ao

0,0

/

/

7,7

00

77

Total

J-2~

?

$'

7/.1

£ft>

m

J-

3

/A.

7S:&

■uy

/W

9

jr

74

m

3.517

100.

f

jr

/3

6LS

Jgjr

M

CAfeenitoa - S/^7J/0T£S

6-307 MfA/urs-'i

OPv£-f? . Vd/VI/yvt/rdrs

£?(/f?Ar/M Mr Sttivn

Evil ua lion

Hunbtr

PerCtflt

hunter7S:&

■uy

/W

9

jr

74

m

3.517

100.

f

jr

/3

6LS

Jgjr

M

CAfeenitoa - S/^7J/0T£S

6-307 MfA/urs-'i

OPv£-f? . Vd/VI/yvt/rdrs

£?(/f?Ar/M Mr Sttivn

Evil ua lion

Hunbtr

PerCtflt

hunter

Percent

Nuntw-

Percent

Number

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoibtM

Total

Certain

Ooubtful

Total

;ertaii

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Ballotn

/

A

3

3.0

7J

m

3

Ji

jT

/03

t?

77,2-

/

O

/

#f

■ O>.0

PsS

_U.

f

?

-Ll

3.1

M

1-Astrooomiral

/

/

2

30

XO

n

j~

/

6

77.2,

M

Mt

J*

3

37S

0.0

rz?

-L

X

t

/it

f.3

2&1

Z-Airciafl

z±

4

f

7*3

M?

M

±

■4-

f

m

/U

m

-2

a

£

Z50

0>.o

2SV

j"

J

1

Jirx

a 4

2s:o

1-Li Jhl PhgiolL

1

}

0.0

n

zo

0'

(

~M

ao

&

P

04

00

00

Ao

Ae>

o.O

4-Birds

£

&£

A0

OJ

#

M

to

0.0

a

a

0.0

070

ao

a

0.0

0.0

OP

5-ClooiD. Dint, etc.

.0,

0?

O.O

0.0

■0.0

0,0

0.0

to

a

0.0

00

0.0

a

0.0

J&JL.

0.0

t-lntoflic. bib".

...i

/

Ml

0.0

34

/

a

/

jjt

010

u

c

/?

0.0

&0

00

_»1

6

7S.1

0.0

/<?4

7.Pijct»l0|li*l

-2

t

,?

JUL

u

/&7

&

AP

0.0

0.0

/

/

/7S

p-0

&j

/

7

1./

t

If

t-Unbnw

/O

a

7P

3S7)

0.0

337/

7

«?

7

2lt,t

AO

Mi

7

/

I7J

£0

as

X

<o

f

/f.£

0O

'W

M«ir

O

0J>

0,0

0.0

/

/

J£

3<t

M

O

0>

JJ

t?o

0.O

/

7

0.0

It

s/

ToW

JL

1

M

en

&-J

100,

~M.

i

2?

~M

Mi

flb

~T

i

/m

0>.o

/&,

AC

i

iz

7U

M?

/0O.

231

7it£££ 3/7? £itfU/Jr/0a/

#r #££.

5/6#r//v6s

7c?£

JjLt-

/>£& S/6#r/A/& PP& 06>6 '/t7i£W 0/? S/6/>'7'//l/6 .

_JlS£cev0j_ e# lrj$_

S-/0 S &?£>#&. ,. ,

//- 3/? Strce/vps

Sh£0 Sfcwps

. EtHwIwd

Number

Per Cent

Number

Per CenI

HunOer

Per Cent

Ntimbet

Pet Ccnl

Certain

Doubtful

ul!HL

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cabin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DHlDHul

Total

Certain

OouDtlUl

Total

Certain

DoobHulCertain

Doubtful

ul!HL

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cabin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DHlDHul

Total

Certain

OouDtlUl

Total

Certain

DoobHul

Total

»■ Balloon

3

T

f

03

/4

2.2

3

#

JZ

23

JJ-

3/

M

/0

2.0

Z9

¥f

_a

//

A?

^L

rf.r

//V

; 1-AstrmMial

136

/3t

2-74 1

ui

$73

•*/./

M-3

-a.*'

f?9

S/i.

JLL-

3o-7

A/6

73 6/

22 A

' r.-?

p. 7

ts

r

£L

JL*.

xt?

/f3

2-AiicrItl

30

I*

36

3.3

43

9,7

/<+

73

£7 /At

M^

/?■?

21 3?

SI

/jiV

'ff7

?n 30

tt

m

JIA.

//.Z

2f-t

J-Lirtit Phew*.

3

£>

3

a-r

00

a*

/

1

^2,

03

a-f

/4

/

/

2-

as-

&s-

/.p

JIA

00

0,0

IBuis

J03L

00

03

0.0

0.0

00

0-0

00

0.0

&

7)

JlH

00 s

07?

S-Clowli, Oust, elc

1

7

%

as

0*

&&

&

J2-

0.0

_££

00

_A

3-

X

JlJl

to

/.ff

ft

7>

720

<?(?

at?

Mnuflit Mo.

IX

7?

s.z

00

s.t.

7

J7L

£~7

3.0

£/

M

o

w

A.i

00

6.8

M

' #

/a* 7s

6>t?

Z*

7-Piycftokipal

X

2-

as

0.0

(?<

00

_0&

0,0

3

/

*

■/$■

as

-Ze.

<p

2.

/.&

M

f-7.

)-lMlMM

33

23

a

00

63

33

£L

O.Z

0.0

/i.2

4+

4tf

2/.z a a

2/$

37

&

SI

ft- 7

00

S/7

J-Otlwr

r

3

//

2 2

0$

.JV

Z.

_£,

■/<

.0.0

/^

4-

f

&

?.a

3?

*.f

3

j-

r

{■?

7 2

■JJ

Total ,

£0?

J 43

370

&3

W.t

100

1^

W

m

7,73.

37.3 /m

m

6/ 2#f

7a 1 29.2

/lX>.

t?J.

31

/&/ f?.i

2</.Z

/GO

£/$fcet/Ps -£~- A 7'//wrfrj

6-30 /¥//i/tJrjr3

<9i/ef? ZPM/wr-es

J^vprfr/ay A/ar Srjtr^/p

E»aluatH)ti

Nuitbtt

PttCwt

Number

Percent

rtanbet

Pa Cm

Nunrtci

P«Cml

Certain

QaubUu

Total

Certain

DoubHu

Total

Certain

Oniittat

Total

Certain

DnibtM

Total

Certain

Doobtlul

ta*

Certain

Doubttiil

Total

Certain

DoUitfu

Total

Certain

OouMlul

Total

D-Balloon

Sr

3.3

W

Til

70

?19

fy

W-

//0

/7.S

/2.Z

S2p

J?

t7

£-#

fg.6

S3

273

#?

a?

7*

7?

</7

/?,/,

1-Astmnomtcal

/3

A?

2.7

?<r

it

tw

/£-

sx

7/7

f*

/£2

-M-

a

#t 73 i

4-3

7,7 f

ill

f£70

?19

fy

W-

//0

/7.S

/2.Z

S2p

J?

t7

£-#

fg.6

S3

273

#?

a?

7*

7?

</7

/?,/,

1-Astmnomtcal

/3

A?

2.7

?<r

it

tw

/£-

sx

7/7

f*

/£2

-M-

a

#t 73 i

4-3

7,7 f

ill

f£

U^-

ii£.

fX?

72.2

2-Aiitiatt

44

??

W

ft*

0-3

2lg

£?

3£

£0

1±

t-3

/7s

-±

/s

7?

44

7.3

77.7

£&

37

rff

M

60

f*<7

3-Li(til PtMoom,

r

^

7

/.<7

0f

/?

.JL

f-

//

20

/.£

£2.

z.

X

0.0

70

/.0

3

/

Tf-

0.<?

7,

0-7

(-Bute

a^

00

0,0

7>

0.0

0-0

00

0>

0-ft

00

7?0

_J_

7

£

0.2

0t

00

5-Clouds, Dust elc

7

7

ae?

/■?

/■?

__L

i

£

as

0- 1

0/>

$

6

2-1

00.

73

f

7

2-

0.Z 03-

0-7

6-losiilfie, Info.

3/)-

c>

3*

f-z

00

9.2

23

£3

£7

.00

4-7

fz

(0

72.

St

jO.0

?3

76/

70/

A. 3

0.0

?63

f-Piyctnlopcil

#

7£

■6

//

0S

/.£

?

9

2.6

0,0

24>

_£

6

?f

a0

73

3~

f 7>.L £>7L

0%

t-UnknOM

let

/?

M

2S2

00

2?3

AL

6/

at

00

/ts

&?

4>f

21 f

0.0

2 S3

1/0

7/0

117

00

/7 7

Mttlel

■/$-

3

/r

f*.

at

4/

JL

#

/s-

&_

/■2>

JV

t

J2.

■?,?

2.7/

£.3

ZZ.

#

24

,zr

01

43

Total

279

f?

36T

$£

2H

/M

jjtf

ts

343

?2.3

m

/00.

IS%

ra-

27>£

m

2$.t. (pa

4a /3?

i£L

iff

2$ I

tee.

*#£*.£ 4£0o

£t/aLL//>r/6<i/

ti£

■ Ati*L

s/&#r//vcs

raja

3U

7

'&4/>i

&v M/A*/te* a?* ,

Z&je&rs

/>££. S/6/t7-/A/£ ?£>£, /%/4/ir/0/t/ /?/? S/6/S7-//)/6 7it/0 t?/?JE£rJS

5~ JjrcM/75 0y? 2-£TS5

6* 70 S£~f?/>*'/75

/ '7-377 $JFC0/l//?s

.ZZ-fP SJTC0W3

Evaluation

Noniber

Per Cent

Number

Pa Cent

Kwtei

PnCent

Nun bet

PetCflit

Certain

Ooubttal

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OoubtM

Total

Certain

Doubrful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doutitfu

Total

Certaia

DniMful

Total

O-Ballom

70

0.0

0.0

r<?r^

D

0.0

0-0

#0

3

77

f

JLL

/IS

200

P

0>

3?7t

01

0.C

If. 1

l-Astiononical

X

4-

4

t*

(f-0

ft*

3-

2-

00

ff-4

/<9

•

P

0.0

00

00

7

J

0.1?

7-Aiicratt

M

s~

6

3(1.

2 J.?

27. i.

4-#0

3

77

f

JLL

/IS

200

P

0>

3?7t

01

0.C

If. 1

l-Astiononical

X

4-

4

t*

(f-0

ft*

3-

2-

00

ff-4

/<9

•

P

0.0

00

00

7

J

0.1?

7-Aiicratt

M

s~

6

3(1.

2 J.?

27. i.

4-

7

f

W

ft

If*

7

-T

7Z-

24. i

JtZ

¥/3

/

3

#

II. \

33.3 UU.k

J-U(ht Phanra.

/

i

A7L

4$

4s

ao

0.0

00

0>

0.0

00

0,0

/

7

0-0

1/3

//■I

4-Birdi

£>

a

0.0

710

00

D

0.0

0P

00

00

00

0.a

P

^M

(,.0

0.0

S-Clonds, (Kat, elc.

P

00

0.0

0.0

&

at?

0.4

-A

Q

'

0.0

00

00

-£

/O

77

O.b

0.0

00

tlnaiHic. Wo.

X

X

?4

0-0

?3

t

/

77

0.0

,7.7

3-

3-

0?

0-0

M

7

/

~M

p.o ll.l

7Piytinio{ica(

V.

00

00

00

p

0.0

0,0

00

X

Or

A3

00

±?

7)

QM

M

pi

S-Unknow

6

7?

6

273,

00

m

r

s

&4

0.0

ff,s

S

J

/?.£.

0.0

f%Z

3~

77-

IQ

0.0 322

M)th«

.7271

00

0.0

O

0.0

00

00

7

7

JL

23

*</

<rt

0>

£

/0

0.0

0.0

01

Total

U

70

V

£24

4ti

/<X>.

70

3

/3

701

2?/

/O0.

11.

/0>

M

i,S3

3 J

/oa

7£

jn

f

M4-

&.$

100.

1

6/S&00MP3 -S~M//Mr£r3

6-30 /V/st/isrjrj

t^i/jsr/r- 37? Afs/yvrTrS

03{//fAr//' / v /var •Srxr^/y

Evaluation

Nuabet

Percent

N inter

PerCent

Nutter

',. Percent

Number

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

_oj*tfuy

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Toy

Certain

Ooubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

D-Balloon

7

7

377-

H&

/is-

2*0

6

rf

/£

723

/33

2i3

3

/

'77-

/s:o

m

4-

s

7

3.7.

3,f

f.l

l-Aarowmic*!

/

P

J

33.

00

/■i

1

1

07

Al

L4

ft. 9

-J-

72

J

5,0

0.0

S.0

■/

3

9

IS

s.f

/!-?

Z-Aireraft

/7

7/

■2-g

279

/iff

¥s.7

^_L

f

/¥

/23

//■S

S/J

77

£

/0

m

3P.0

30.0

73

77-

/7

3LL

37X

SfLf

>Li(trt Ptwon.

O

7?

7)

0.0

00

00

3

70

3

/. L

0-0

0i

0>

'0.0,

0.0

0.0

7

7

/■3

00

73

♦■Birds

{■■

0.0

0-0

00

a

7?

0.0

0.0

00

72

7?

J7A

03

00

0.0

00

0.0

i-Clouds, Dust, etc

/

1

/./.

0.0

u00

00

3

70

3

/. L

0-0

0i

0>

'0.0,

0.0

0.0

7

7

/■3

00

73

♦■Birds

{■■

0.0

0-0

00

a

7?

0.0

0.0

00

72

7?

J7A

03

00

0.0

00

0.0

i-Clouds, Dust, etc

/

1

/./.

0.0

u

72 ■

0.0

00

00

72

/

/

0.0

!>~0

3,0

/

/>

7.3

0.0

t-3

frlnmffic Mo.

_^

7?

2

??

0.0

IS

2

o

2-

4/3

0.0

4¥

3

7?

JL

7t.O

0.0

/0.$

7

62

7

9.7

0.0

?./

;p>yt»i)lof(Ji

7

7

3.

/.A

/■&

33

0.0

00

00

-JL

JO

0.C

01

7>

0>

A0\

00

00

»IMnm

//

&•

//

/U

00

It*

-JL

f

/SJ

00

/f.3

-I

0>

/

3J

0.C

3,0

J£.

0>

£$

£.4

0.0

?&3

«t»n

3-

2-

33

00

S3

?

3

i-t,

00

7f3

7

/

0.0

Ac

r.0

S

3

7

A.sr

33

t.7

Total

X2-

7?

t/

Hi

3/3

/20.

zz

/7

43-

7,23

U 3

/O0.

73-

r

30

Ml

7/0.0

0,

6S~

'£

r?

f4<7

/£3

m

232

;

■»j?i£ ,#.&?/

£fAi.l//)T//}/t/ ..

ae

Ai-A

S/&JLT//k6i.

^e_a£

/U-l.

_ ¥£/2£S

AV &#**£<?£.

or Jrfjzerz

fe£ 5/6/</r//V6 /re?£. J?£/£Ar/0A/ £?f 5/&/f7-//V6 . 7&/e££ 70 7"<=V rt/?J&<*rs

3~S£CQM0S Off JL&SS

0V~0 SfCfiA/P5

//-j£> Ssehsvas

J/-f£ S&c&A/p.r

Evaluation

Number

Pit Cent

Kumbei

Pm Cent

Nuinbet

Per Cent

Nunftet

PtfCent

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Certain

PouMM

Total

Cerlain

Doubtful

Total

CeitJin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

2-

Z.

&0

£-/

63

-A

aa

0-0

0-0

2-.J-

00

?7

7-7

o

■

j2£~

.0,0 0><0

1-Astiwomteal

3

^

3

£3-

0-0

9(

/

/

/..?

0.0.

t-7

/

/

0.0

33

*t

^A

/

^-L.

<0,0.

-<9

SJ

2-Auctafl

^

/0

ZlL

?2.f

ty3

r

5

?s.i

00

ff.3

/0

3

/3

310

(7*

5*0

7

/

$

*//2

-*.?

40/

JUjht PtiBDom.

O

/

/

0.0

30

3-0

-£.

3

3

£>■£>

O0.0

200

/

/

0J2.

U

it-

P

/

__L

0?0

s.f

P?

4-GirHs

£

f

/-./

a.f

/f&

-A

/

/

0.0

7

it

_A

/

S3

00

si

/

/

z

4.?

JT9

//./

S-Cloude, Drat, etc

0.0

0.0

0.0

c>

££

0,0

00

00

00

00

0>.0

0.0

00

frlnuffic. Into.

2-

0L

i./

00

03

_L

O

1/f&

-A

/

/

0.0

7

it

_A

/

S3

00

si

/

/

z

4.?

JT9

//./

S-Cloude, Drat, etc

0.0

0.0

0.0

c>

££

0,0

00

00

00

00

0>.0

0.0

00

frlnuffic. Into.

2-

0L

i./

00

03

_L

O

1

01

0-0

f-r

0>

0.0

0.0

0&

■0

0)

0.0

.10.0.

00

J-Pttenoloiial

■

do

00

#0

_L

0.0

00

0.0

/

/

aa

J.f

/.?

J?*.

00

00

»m*nowi

7

7

2/.Z

00

£/. 2.

#

003

0-0

2i.f

7

0?

7

219

0.0

2l.f

S

c

S~ ?9J 0.0

2?-0

*0thr

^

z.

0.1

0-0

&y

0.0

0$

0.0

0.0

00

00

D

^

0,0

0>,0

#0

Tol.1

£0

//

33

&.?

333

/<?&

//

0-

at

73.3

MJ.

'00

JL

f

0^0

bf.4.

tet

<M

tf

#■

uz.

fa?

23.S /00.

&

6/S'sceA/PK - S~M/A'£/rjr<; ■

6-30 Af/A/t/rs*

</£# . 20> M//vi/rfs

Pt/tTfr/f/i/ a/ 6 T \5h9-77n

Eyaluition

NumbH

PnCent

Number

PerCent

Number

P«Cent

Nwuph ,

Per C«it

Certain

Ooubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doulitful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Btlloon

/

3

*

/.f

¥f

/.¥

3

6

«f

¥$

a

6

6

/2.S

0)0

/?/

J"

S.3

0.0.

^

l-Aatnnoinictl

Z-

-Z.

0.0

.tf.

SZ

0>

0.0

0-0

0-0

J-

s-

7

0.3

10 A

/0f

/

3

-J£

,/■/.

.?.£

«■?

2-Airetaft

_^=

/0

02-

/?</

&/

sis

$

/f

0L3

'■?

201

nt

/

/

A

*./

a./

YZ

/f

0-

J^

/g.9

02.

£?./

3-Li(fi| ffiBWin.

/

0-

3

/&■

3-2.

4?

?

£■

32,

f.Z

6-0

.0J2.

0.0

00

/

/

/■/

0.0

{'

4-Birdj

P

00

00

00

f

/

M

t-t

ft

O

0.0

00.

00

-Z.

/

_J_

2./

. /■'/..

?.Z

5-CIoijiJs, Dutt, etc

0>

0.0

0-0

00

0>

0'

0.0

00

0.0

0?

£?

0.0?

-OJ0 0^-0-

0.0

.0,0.

0.0

6-lnsuffit Info.

_J_

7

M3

00

((■1

/0

<0

/0

/£,./

00

//*■(

PL

£.

0t

0.0

¥■£

£0

U

2/./

. -0.0.

?JJ

7-Psrcholotical

/

/

aa\

/■£>

/.&

O

0.0

00

00

•/

J

00)

2/

^./

/

/

JL

/.f

/./ 2.1

DrUnknoMi

f-1

&

319

0.0

M?

/f

/r

£<tL

0.0

rtz

ZS

" *

2S

S3Z

0>0 SJ.t

2#

&■

2f.3

00

0S3

MBiet

JL

P

2-/■£>

/.&

O

0.0

00

00

•/

J

00)

2/

^./

/

/

JL

/.f

/./ 2.1

DrUnknoMi

f-1

&

319

0.0

M?

/f

/r

£<tL

0.0

rtz

ZS

" *

2S

S3Z

0>0 SJ.t

2#

&■

2f.3

00

0S3

MBiet

JL

P

2-

J.t

0.0

J2

-J.

0L

3

/.&

.ft

41

&■

P

4^

t£

00

fj;

/#-

3L

rf.7

0>,0

Ml

Total

■W-

t<-

0Z

7/-t>.

?U

/M-

W

A?

0£

m

17J

/0G

40

7

&7

2£/

4-t

{00.

T0

1

?*M£.

9.0

{00.

r/9/ti.£

4f0i

t

£Ml.&>jer//>/1/ /!>*:

**.i

£/6#r//i//is *-0&

*£t

40?*£S S?is AMVjeZA

0^0,

\#J£&

fee. s/&j/r//v& fo£. a/j0Af-f£>/t/

0£ S/6/X7-/X/6 . £t-£l/&/y .<PA Af0g£ /S>AS&&-rS

•0~\Sf00W; t/?j0.£~ss

0-/0> fjrffj/rtZ'i

//-3& S£~00AVS

^0~00 Seca/i/cs

Evaluation

HuinbH

PerCent

Number

PerCent

Number

Per Cent

Number

Pei Cent

Certain

Doubtful

TOUI

Certain

Doubtfu

ToUl

Certaia

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dwbty

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OouLtful

Total

Certain

Doublfnl

Total

O-Balloon

'

0.0

so

/

/

00

333

333

0?

0.0

00

00

_z2

AO

0.0

0.0

1-Asirancmiul

0?

f

/

-M

(A8

{0.0

-J£

00

0,0

/

/

0.0

33.3

&3

00

0.0

00

2-Aircraft

J-

0L.

.f

/t.e

U-0

ip.o

/

/

333

0.0

333

P

0.0

0.0

0.0

/

■/

at

' 0.0

as

3'Lirfit Pfiemei.

-M

0.0

00

0.0

'0.0

0.0

At

0.0

0.0

P

0.0

0.0

03

4-Birds

<?

0>

G

(.0

00

0.0

/

0>

/

33.3

0.0

333

/

/

A0s

333\

3^.3

#■

00

00

30.0

0.0

30-0

S-Clouds, Dust etc

00

■ 0.0

00

0>

0.0

0.0

00

0.0

O.o

00

o

O

03

00

0.0

6-lnsuHic. Info.

3

0?

3

30.0

0.0

30-0

0.0

00

0.0

P.

_M

0.0

£>-0

P

0.0

0.0

o.p

7-Psrcnolotical

G>

■

00

0.0

0.0

f)

0.0

0-0

an

/

/

0,0

^33

&3

.M

09

0.0

9-UnbnMi

J

C

3

3d

0J

?t.0

AH

00

0(1

0>

03

0,0

0C

00

3

3

30.0

0.0

373

Mther

P

00

■0.0

00

(0

Jxt

00

0.0

CO

00

0)

0.0

00

0.0

Total

3

J

00

mi

300

(00

-JL

/

3

m

333

w

s

3

A0.

mo

000.

ZL

0\f

(00.0

0.0

000.

t:

0/ SetOA,/)s - ^Mi/vi/res

£■ 30 M!A>UT-£.S00

(0

Jxt

00

0.0

CO

00

0)

0.0

00

0.0

Total

3

J

00

mi

300

(00

-JL

/

3

m

333

w

s

3

A0.

mo

000.

ZL

0\f

(00.0

0.0

000.

t:

0/ SetOA,/)s - ^Mi/vi/res

£■ 30 M!A>UT-£.S

0l/£g 30 M/A1VT&S

0i/£#r?0AJ /V0r iT/lT£P

Evaluation

Number

Pei Cent

Number

Per Cent

Number

Pel Cent

Nunbei

Per Cent

Certain

DouoHul

Total

Ceitain

Doubtful! Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Balloon

'

0.0

00 0.0

/

P

/

/zs

■ 00

013

0.6

00

00

_^

^£,

0-0

00

l-AitronoiiCii .

/

/

0-0

93

03

/

/

0.0

/0-.T

YM

_L

0J.O

0.0

%0.O

_z

/

4e

0>0

*v

Z-Anciaft

O

0L

A£

/tx

/00

3200

0.0

0.0

/

/

0./y

3.3

33

_^

/

/

00

0<

0.£

3-Li(M Phenom.

0.0

0.0

00

X

P

03

0J$

00

W

J

P

I

3.3

0.0

33

^0

#0

0-0

00

4-Biedi

/

/

JJ-

0.0

9,1

00

. 0.0

0-D

.M

0,0

0.0

_i2

/J.0

00

0.0

S-Clouds, Dust, etc

_0l

00

#0

0.0

P

■

01

00

00

Ul

P

JA

0.0

0.0

U2

00

03

00

frlmuflit Inh,

P

r

00

00

0,C

-J.

P

/

/00S

00

fa$

o

0.0

60

0.0

7

7

S/.S

00

m

7-Psyrtolopal

P

Ai

00

0,0

' Z

t

M

00

00\

/

/

3.2

0.0

33

_M

P

9./

00

?./

S-Unluswi

&

■#■

US-

0.0\30M

Zj\

3

320

00

V0

23)

0LQ

£17

■0.0

&7

At

?

V09

0.0

000

»0»ier

3

?

?2l

00\003

.jZ

0.C

0.0

00

/

/

00

3,3

33

AL

00

9./

00

t-'

™ ..

ZL

3

//

722

27,3V 00,

~T

f

m

P-3

M

~M.

X

30

U3

0?

/00

0-/

/

0Z-

?*■*

¥-0

/0a

233

t£Z

■00/

Vf/

i*8

~zr

9

/F

'00/

00

0Wf

3/

W

'00/

S&

dpP

f

/

^

~w?

&&

&w

9

9

i>k>i ;

I?

00

l-t

y

/

sj

00

*JL

•

V

/

0~0

~&w-

00

&

00

0V

00

~V~

»I»W

7#

00

1*4/

-p

?

T7?

00

/#■

Jtf

-s-

$ti

0-0

£&

/

/

7TP~

00

00

a

""M1W1-J

tz

£•$

00

/

/

Otf

00

00

0&

00-

00

~0

00

ov

00

0.'

inittimpA,!^

rre

0-0

r/z

-j-

a

M

zv

00

/•w

^~

Z

0i0

00

0-0

'Sit

Vtf

J- 9/0-0

£&

/

/

7TP~

00

00

a

""M1W1-J

tz

£•$

00

/

/

Otf

00

00

0&

00-

00

~0

00

ov

00

0.'

inittimpA,!^

rre

0-0

r/z

-j-

a

M

zv

00

/•w

^~

Z

0i0

00

0-0

'Sit

Vtf

J- 9/

~7~~

/

■(JH •3|)Jibu|hs

J?

0J

/■z

/

/

00

00

00

<?&

00

00

07T

w

00

■3(j isno ipnoo-s

**

00

>^

■z

?

05?

00

&&

£

r

00

0-0

00

0-0\

ctv

00

&

S(UW-t

Sz

/■2

00

/

/

~&w

00

00

~0~

£T£

f-fs

0tf

/

/

fW

00~

JW

/

/

wwtU m»n-E

$0/

/#

i'i

£_

f

/

00

00

00

00

00

00

rss

0-0

Sf£

V

'J

UM"!*-!

£&

J?

in.

?'

/

/'

ff

00

sv

/-

/

00

00

00

*

0'0

(Jit

V

in!uani)tv-|

/?

00

/■f

/

/

7T\T

0-0

00

F&

£&

00

/

/

ftf

tt-0

ste

71

'J

uniND

woi

inuqwa

BIOBD

WU

nmraa

•m

n»i

uw°a

UK|H3

IWl

mm

oiEps:

F>«i.

wmm

11*1*0

IflOl

imtqmo

iriems

M»l

JiWUMfl

uin»o

mn

imwnoo

wqna

u«IM|r«3

)«0»d

mum

l«OJSJ

»w

1*0 J»d

, tufum

|l»0»d

mm

<?^J4ttS -i0sV /v<psjp7/?tf

- • ^

S3?-t#/V'(T> fif**?

-■yjA/V/tv \5 -' Ff/r&7&£

/<?

-V07\

-ww

&'0&h~/

~W/

00WAV

wAiify-w

TT

0-V

-0V

-&Z7

0-&

W0

V^

ir

VI?

~0~W

0~V

-0W

T7V

-0-0-

m?

~7T

HWO-C

~&~0-

~P77

S>0-

or?

w

~0W

£

~017

~07?

~CT

IT

-0-Zr

~&V

0-0

~&-

~oir7V

-cr

\0W

-0~0-

^PW

ITiJonipXvj.f

07T

~&0r

00-

TT

-0-&

1T

00

^rgr

irp-

~V

qui -jijjmui-)

-00-00-

'0- 
0~

-00-

7TZ/

00 
7ZW

?&

-&&

0>0-

-w

/

T

V0-77V

??0~

^

-3^ isno fpmos

0V

-0^7?

Wlig->

017

0W

0W

0-

077

-0W

UV

70

-?w

7V

ir

%

lilHBlId Vfll-t

-0-0

m?

iTv

00S00 70S

m

TJs

W0

Utmiy-2

T?V

-0-0-tW

-0-

00

-0W

-0W

0V

~0-W

-0T

-0- 
-0~

~0-

mr-pw

*£k

ujW

W°I

l"W«0

9H&

00

00

7T

lOimaiuisv-i r

V

»»3*y

wruM

-

iqpi

iiwiwo

ulrpaj

|1"4.

mnqnog

u«p»:

-

90~

-0~ww

TT

0T

mira-o

)wD»d

W)>nM

W°l iwmnoo|»*W3

WSI WWKQ urqia;

IW»"0

uit|i»3

mm .WW!

u*WJ

llODHd

H9WH

l»3»d

*{>)if/?335 0? -//

St7/1/0?^S 0/-?ulrpaj

|1"4.

mnqnog

u«p»:

-

90~

-0~ww

TT

0T

mira-o

)wD»d

W)>nM

W°l iwmnoo|»*W3

WSI WWKQ urqia;

IW»"0

uit|i»3

mm .WW!

u*WJ

llODHd

H9WH

l»3»d

*{>)if/?335 0? -//

St7/1/0?^S 0/-?

CS/iUS 2friTs273rp0-~y7t — ?&V?7/W'^&tr/3M#??~30>~-/V0-£rp&7? — 'RTZ — 77V/JW>/f 
SrJp&fir0 J0" TfiW/W A? 5?&3ft 77& — 7Z& — S 9/I//-S//2& — ^y ~ =/0- -7S07T0tT7it/TW

7??7 70 ?0ft/0}*S S

Mi|mpA3

/5b r

S0? & — ^Tygr

ra*iE

<A2ttJ£:£Zs

-5~~ S~tz {£>#/?* 04- £<?S? '

& -/£> S£C0A>4S

//- fa ZeCfn'Js

j/ ■ d a s'&c&a/jps

Evaluation

Nunber

PnCenL

Number

Per Ctnt

Number

PeiCcnl

Nariwr

Percent

OrtaJD

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Toy

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Main

OoubtM

Total

Ctitain

OwMM

ToUl

Certain

OoubHW

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Mallow

5

3

£

A0

A0

?.•<?

3

3

6

2/

2-T

*/

3

6

9

/.?

S<L

s-Y

_z

A0>

/?

^t

ft

rV*

l-Astn>nonica.|

//r

(0*

2Ji

2g$

m

7*t

JL

•V

07

st# /t.9

£/.i

37

A?

ft?

2*,&

-fj>

tf.r

Z4-

6

£0

A0-7

¥&

/f /

2-Airr.fafl

76>

/$■

31

*4

z#

/&■</

23_

/0

23

///

f-0

2A>.7

zs ■ t-f 00

/df.

W,9

'?*

23

/r

w

Aid,

#.?

//.J

Hi|ttt Phawin.

2

2

0-7

<?■<?

<?f

I

A

0.9

00

0f

-L

A

2

<?&

0£,

/.&

-&

£>

00

jSJL.

/?/?

t-BirdJ

0.0

00

00

p

GO

00

4.0

P

.0j2

a-o

0.0

D

a.a

/2*0.

/2/Q

(-Cloud*, Out, etc

A

/

0.0

0*

0J

Jl

0.0

00

O0

X

2-

00

uO^

/■Z

.

0a

0.O 00

frlftsuftic M>.

72

A2

40

<?■<?

¥-P

6

p

6

JLiL

00

■*y

J±

W

f.3

00.

?3

/A?

£>

/0

7.A.

d0

76

'•Psidiniofical

2

2

02

0.0

07

#

0.0

0.0

0.O

3

/

#■

At

p.$

2f

JL

A?

JL

as

0.0

/■*

frUntmim

Jl

/?

£z

00

*/

IL

16

d£

0.0

d4

+21

fit

& -1

00

Aii 7

34-

^

2&0

0.0

2i..fi

t-oaw

7

3

A0

u

A-0

3.3

x

2.

/?

0.0

a

L±

£~

f

*</

Jl£>

s *

3

2-

f

23

/.£■

3t

Total

176

121

2ff

a. 9

</a.A

m

X H

3f

lii

&9.1

?0,l

m //i'

sx

US

&9.6

J£&.<£&-

3L

36

w

71*

27.S /00.

•

%x

2.

/?

0.0

a

L±

£~

f

*</

Jl£>

s *

3

2-

f

23

/.£■

3t

Total

176

121

2ff

a. 9

</a.A

m

X H

3f

lii

&9.1

?0,l

m //i'

sx

US

&9.6

J£&.<£&-

3L

36

w

71*

27.S /00.

•

%

6/ 5&!<2/)>tf - -T S?(&VZ£S

6 ' ?0 /f,A/0r£5

0iA££ 20 Mfv&res

/V/ j? /?<£>,*' Acrr A>r/rr<£&

Evaluitw

Ninrw

PerCent

Number

PerCent

Nunber

PerCenl

Number

PnCsit

Certain

Dotibtfu

Total

Certain

Doubttit

Total

Cirtain

Boobtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtrul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouUfu

Total

Certain

Ooubtfitl

Total

O-Ballooa

m

?0

76

/SA

tas-

2S.t

Jl

J?

?4

Af.5

Al-9

JA2

27

//

J 7 /

21-4

a

ML

42- 23

j:s" .w\

AAf

A J. 4

l-Aatnnwical

s

10

ft

2.7

ty

6.f

32.

AA

#3

70,3

3S

A3.Z

2J

//

37

ZO.&

f.7

ZM

IV.

rs Ajf

/?£

//* 2i./

1-Aiiuart

36

33.

49

(2.Z

AA-Z

23.4-

■U

?-7

J~3

14

M

J?3

7

4

A3

Xt,

m

AOt£ U# 2-A

JZ

%?

iTr fr.7

3-Liinl Ptienom.

r

z.

7

A1

07

?■</

7

4-

A/

13

A3

34

2-

2-

0.0

a

JJ-

?

/

4

0.6

A2.

at

4-Sirfs

0.0

0.0

0-0

00

0A?

00

0.$

0.0

-J£

/

/

2

0.1.

Al

atf

5-ClooDs, Dust, etc

3

?

0.0

A0

A-0

--L,

/

2-

0,3

0.3

0.1

/

0"

/

M

0.0

M.

/

A

*:?-

A>.0

01

o-lnyjffic [nh>.

2=L

J2J

■f.A

00

7-A

33-

?3

M

0.0

ft

6

6

U-.Q

0.0

#.t

ft

M.

Atj

0,0

/f-7

7-Psycholoiical

^t

X

£

A.4

0J

2.1

jL

Q

?

Zl.

00

#

/t-

t

3.X

0.0

3X

S

^

1.0

0.0

/,0

t-Uriltr»i»

fX

O

fa

iff

0>.0

*??

AL

//

/U

0-0

/U

J±

Jf

AS.I

0.0 as: a

7?

77

/6.C

do

(6.6

»fl»er

<?

J

'*

S,A

A0

</

JL

H-

/r

J.S

A3

A?

4-

2-

4

3,1

U

\j&12-

3

22

M-.0

■0.6

46

TotH

ui

13

&f

ILL

tf.Z

W,

m

tin-

3//

no

27.0

760.

IE

3^

/u

Wl

2STAI

mt-

ffl

/fit

a*-?? 77/ 22,9

m

fAigte fz0f_

&0ALl//)r/0/V

a? ///f/r

&<sr#r/t/s;<;

roe. .

4£(-

4A£A££—

/?>/

AAt/Magjes #f 0jejean

A>££ V6#r//IA6 *0A 0l/£s4r/£>A/ tfS* S/A#r/A/& -TH/0 s?jSJ££7s.

|

*T SEco/irps oii /.essfAigte fz0f_

&0ALl//)r/0/V

a? ///f/r

&<sr#r/t/s;<;

roe. .

4£(-

4A£A££—

/?>/

AAt/Magjes #f 0jejean

A>££ V6#r//IA6 *0A 0l/£s4r/£>A/ tfS* S/A#r/A/& -TH/0 s?jSJ££7s.

|

*T SEco/irps oii /.ess

/!-/0 6£^aA>fiS

7/-J& £E.caA/as

f/'A<Z S~&ce<t/js

1

Hvnntwr

PwCmt

Humbtt

Pel Cent

Huntier

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Evaluation

Certain

Dotibtfu

Total

Certain

Dointta

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouMJul

Total

Certain

Doubtiul

Total

Certain

Ooubthil

Total

Certain

Ooubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

AO

dt

OD

fiv

M

ffl

/

2

#

/ArJL

124

/6,7

6L

0-0

6.0

l-AjtmxMiial

/

*

f

Jz

?sp

f/2

2

2~

A/.Q

ALf

/0

0.0

OA

0.0

J

/

60

///

/(./

I-Aircraft i

/

3

H-

Jj,

/ft

?ffi

■J

/

4-

JSP

IS

$5.3

6

r

//

2SJ

20-$

¥s;f

A

3

^

///

33.3

AHA-4-

3-Li(lit Ptienon,

J

i

o.l>

f.2

6.?

P.

M

2.0

04

_A

P

00

0J>

e.t

^~P

/

/

8,0

(/./

A A./

4-Birds

{?

0.0

0.6

6,0

#

kC

0.6

£o

O

0.0

M

00

0.0

8o

6.0

S-Cioudt, Oust, etc.

0\

■

.0

-M

0.D

DM

t>

_m

00

OM

6

6.0

0JO

0.0

_£

6.6

60

0.0

Unsjffit Into,

2

o

4

!25

00

U,5

A

/

73

0.0

i3

AL

X

$3

6.0

%3

/

/

//.A

0-0

//•/

7-Pnrcrnl»|ical

o

0.0

#0

00

00

0.P

0.0

2

.2-

Jl

!>/)

0-0

0.0

0.8

B-UnlmMi

#

y-

2£t

U

tsJ)

S

J-

AAA -7

8.0

s?

3

3

120

0.0

125

JL

JL

2*2

o.o

222

dottier

_j2

_M

to

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

A

/

2-

¥.2

AA-.X

If

_j2.

6.0

0.0

6.0

Totat

.J-

f

/£

SPJ

re.o

A06,

~J_

,?

A2-

7s:o

te0

A00.

~7T

9

A4

625

37.5

m

-4i

r

1

M.Af

St 6

AO0.

4,A see^jups - *r tf(/t/i/r£i

ti 'f0 M//VVTZ:

0j/£/S 7d> /ut//vur£s

/?#/?/<) ffi>/t/ /t/£>r 0r/)r£a

Evaluation

Nutier

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Numbei

PerCent

Number

Percent

'Certain

Ooubtfui

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:ertain

Ooubtfui

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dwbtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

TotalOoubtfui

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:ertain

Ooubtfui

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dwbtlul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

v-Balloon

k

7

/3

Jl

617

2S.S

4

/0\

/4-.0

?3

23-t

3

/

A-

231

77

3<%

3

2-

5~

6.0

*0

70.0

l-AltniKMlical

f?

0.0

0.0

0.0

2

3

A7\

7,6

0,7

I

I

H.

o.o

70

3

2

,0

£.0

Af.e

/66

;-Aiurart

A3

/A

24-

m

VU4

*?,i

6

$

A"

/AC

fU

32/

2,

3

f

A0?h

2?>l

m

A0

/&

777-

26.0

f-6

20

J-Liffil Ptienon.

O

M.

6.0

o.O

3

3

3e

00

7,0

p

0.6

0-6

0,0

A

/

20

6.0

2-8

4- Birds

_£

V

P

0.0

0.0

P/>

0.0

£6

M

^

r^

0,0]

ao

66

~0~

2.0

0.0

00

S-Clouda. Dust, etc.

_^

P

60

0.0

0.0

_£

6:0

OJ

Of,

_M

0.O

0-

O

0.0

o.o

0.0

HuufHe, Wb.

2

o

2-

Jl

0,6

3.?

2-

,P

2

4?

0-0

(h-7

2

JL

/5W

¥

W

■7

7

/AA-,0

8.0

/Af.0

I-PjjdBloeial

/

A

2-

JA

fP

/t,o

0.0

O.O

6.6

C

0.0

fi0

06

_g_

0,0

$.6

0.0

1-UokMWI

<r

1

l£l

fro

in

6

P

£

/4,S

0.C

/40

~7

/

71

0.0

W

72-

P

/2~

2JA.6

6.8

MO

tOdar

2

0-

JJ.

O.o

?,?

3

3

7£

w

7,0

_&

01

0.Q

0.0

4

2

f.6

M

72-0

Total

12,

/?

Sri

m

373

M

M.

70

M3

&L

m

/OP

3

4-

A3

f?2

3*%

w,

M

70

sv

U6

286

/M

235

EnhtfttM

0> Balloon

l-felnnoaical

2-AgtoiK

J-LtfMPt>ewm.

«Bpnft

JG2d±£. /* 40L

5-CloudJ, Oust, elt

frlnullic. Mo.

l-Pjrdetorjo.

S-IMaon

Mflw

Total

£tsJLt/* 7-/& tf &? VArtT &&AT//I/6S f£>£- S?/t- i / £^£r £>/ A//;/4#Z A- <7r W=trs

*>££ S/& _ #7~{/ii6- f&& - j ? v#/trfaA/ aA S/6/f>-Ts/v<z J f//yeee ?z> r&v <&/e<s&zrs

3 S Erie as as eg /.as*

Certan

J-

y jl

J

J^

-M

r

j=i

L?

Doubtful

JZ

o

Total

70. J

X

-Z,

_s_

^

Per Con

Certain Doubtful Total

0.0

(7,9

0.0

2L/&Z

M

11

0.0

iZL

2L

XSVZ?

7,7

JA

M.

Ml

0.0

0.0

0.0

M.

M.

Mil

Certain

21

fo.7

A30

M

m

AO

21

M.

m.

ZJL

/AL

6 -/a S_ £&p/Mi

0\

P

J.

C

7

Doutltul

■f

3

7

J

JZ

JL

70M

11

0.0

iZL

2L

XSVZ?

7,7

JA

M.

Ml

0.0

0.0

0.0

M.

M.

Mil

Certain

21

fo.7

A30

M

m

AO

21

M.

m.

ZJL

/AL

6 -/a S_ £&p/Mi

0\

P

J.

C

7

Doutltul

■f

3

7

J

JZ

JL

70

Pel Chi)

Certiin

m &,o

J0

30. t>

&0MIMA

M

M

tM

j

0,0

30

70

Doubtful

0.0

MiM

Total

:m»q

00

0-0

Hi

Hi

M

'W30-0

"M

//'&

/

J_

o

i

£.

Doubtful

jZ

-T

7/

J_

£.

07

£L

3££o^/PS

Per Cent

Certain

0.0

00 Af

3fJ

M

Ml

M.

M

M

Z.3U

M

Doubtful

"^7

/&3Zlv

M

ML

00

o.o

00

ao

Wifi&w&.

M^A

M.

M

Ml

£0

00 00

0.0

323

0,0

.27-60

^£OA//SS

I

j£

■A

u_

Doubtful

Jl

/Z^jZ

5

JL

7

JZ.

/

JL

jy

Pet Call

M

0.0

tMt>

0,0

11

0,0

0,0

0.0

d^2£l

0.0

113

DoubtAil

40 0.D\

1L

JZ

^Z

11

Ml

JA

0-0

JA

0,0

M_

M0/M.

ToW

&1

11

IM.

££

0£

0.0

W7

10.

&/ feeoMS - £ Aii/wres

> '^£> /*4//v</r£s

0>i/£4 ?0 M/A/ur£s

J)if/?Ar/an/ wr fr/9re/>

EM'uillm

Numtxs

PnCent

Hombn

Pa Cat

Nunbei

Per Cent

Huatin

PeiCmt

CtrtJin

Dwitttu

Total

Certain

Doubthi

Total

Certain

Doubllul

ToW

Certain

DRibtM

Total

Certain

OouoHul

Tobl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doiiittu

Total

Certain

ObjMM

Tom

O-Wloon

/

3

/^

J&

6,7

19

_±

s

6

Sit

JTf

70S

0/11

0.0

74.7

s

jT

04\

00 £Z.

MMmMlal

X.

?-

0.0

m

M

o

0.0

0.0

0.0

X

S

-Z

/0723A

3

3

0.0

if

sit

Z-Aiitnft

4

?

/&

J3.3

/7t

3/./

Z

7

77

/*3

70./

3*4

1

7

3J

0.0

3.3

J7

77-

XI

3JJU

_£Q_26.Z

3-Li|M PtloMH.

/

2-

3

£2

Wh

u

\2i

X

?

M.

3.6

fc

0.0

0.0

00

7

1

JtZ

0.0

hi

♦•BirtJ

1

6

0,0

o,o

00

_j9

/

/

-£L

At

AT

_0\

•

0.0

00

0t>

7

7

-4

/,-z.

t*~

w

S-Cfwds, Dull etc

-A

0.0

0.0

0.0

.JZ

00

0>.c\

0.0

0.0

0?

M

00

^

0.0

0,0

00

tlnnitic. hto.

6

£

/J.3

0.0

m

JO

/0 >

a?

00

77.?

/

/

33

00

3.3

/9

79 23.2

00

ZV

^P^tlolo^i{^l

(

f

0,0

JZ

&■

0>.0

0.0

0.0

J

t

0.0

13

3.3

/

/

Z

/JL

./.x

M

tUnknom

/*£.

/*

3U

40

J/./

/r

/S

ui/0 >

a?

00

77.?

/

/

33

00

3.3

/9

79 23.2

00

ZV

^P^tlolo^i{^l

(

f

0,0

JZ

&■

0>.0

0.0

0.0

J

t

0.0

13

3.3

/

/

Z

/JL

./.x

M

tUnknom

/*£.

/*

3U

40

J/./

/r

/S

ui

0.0

Ztf

/X

&

7&

M0

0.0 #00

1£L

7$

&s

0.0

&$

MOiei

/

/

J..TL

0.0

J.Z

/

JZ-

3

/.f

3,6

W

J

^2.

(00

0.0

70.0

9

_£.

//.%

0.0

//.£

Totil

2£

//

+r

M-A

&t

m.

~M.

/7

<T6

iU

30?

/CO.

V£

6

3D

W

£00 100.

11

9

T0

888

J/.2.

w.

&&.£ #42?

&ML/j*T/0/y

^2/?

s/A//T~

</dfi>r/A/Kt

i?m

JU. <fe/?l»£ £tf /ttt/M/t^£,

/>/=

OgJS<£73

7>££ St

&#r7fl/df ?£>& 0/Jj?j4f70/lS

df S/&A>r-/st//Z ^-j.£-yj.

**/ a* /40££ 0/gjea-rs

...5*.X£0<?flt£l 0& 7.£is

{,-/& <(£

V0/V0J

//-JH> ^£i?^z?r

?/-££} <£"££> A>0s

Evaluatwi

NuabeT

PerCenl

number

PeiCait

Nuttier

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Certain

Ooubtfu

Total

Certain

Doubllul

Total

Certain

Dnbtlul

Total

Certain

^Dnibtful

Total

Certiin

Doubtful

Jotal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Oot»l*l

Total

Certain

Ooubtnil

TotaJ

O-aailtKMi

0>

SO

0,0

0.0

0.0

0i>

0.6

00

^

00

0.0

t-A&tiDnofliital

. o

/

1

■to

10.0

(0.0

3

1

/

0.0

30-0

SVC

1

■■/

00

333

33.3

0.0

0.0

0.0

I-Aiioalt

t

J-

3

/0.O

uo

3&-0

OA

O.o

00

_£

JUL

0.0

0.0

/

7

7?3

0-0

ft-3

J-Lijtit PHawL

o

J0

do

00

1

07

/

52.0

o.o

€0.0

-°A

00

00

ao

JP,

00

0.0

4-Binli -

'

o

M

00

0-0

00

00

0.0

J

t

0.0

333

333

3

4?

3

m.t

0.0

02]

S-Clowts, Dust, etc

-J0.

00

D

M

O.o

to

_a

p

Jn

10

01

O

0.0

0.P

0.0

tlnsitfic- ■*>.

3

1

30,0

0.0

300

_A

0.0

O.o

0#

o

09

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

00

J-Pirtholopul

0.0

0.0

0,0

_H

_£k

0.0

0.D

o

/

/

00

&3

33.3

_^

0.0

0.1

0J>

BrtlnknQliin

3

3

30.0

0£

300

_£

JA

07)

0.0

M

0.0

at

3

3

429\

00

Mltici

00

0.0

00

_M

0.0

00

0>

JL£>

0.0

0.0

_J7

.

0.0

00

Total

_z

3

70

\M

30.0,

700

_Z

'

&

SM.

no

{00.

-31

3

3

0,0

7O0.O

m

Zl}

7

1000

00

/00.at

3

3

429\

00

Mltici

00

0.0

00

_M

0.0

00

0>

JL£>

0.0

0.0

_J7

.

0.0

00

Total

_z

3

70

\M

30.0,

700

_Z

'

&

SM.

no

{00.

-31

3

3

0,0

7O0.O

m

Zl}

7

1000

00

/00.

&/ Seee/fits - s rtitvitrgs

di -ft? A^//VifT£S

0>V££ ?0 7f/A?VT£s

0i/g fir/t?/0 /i/#r 0r/it£a

Evaluation

Nabet

PefCai!

liuaber J

Per Cent

Nuaber

Percent

Hanber

PerCenl

Certain

DouotJull Total

Cedain

rjuubthil

Total

Cerbin

DouUfut

Jorat,

Ccrta'n

Doubtful

Total

;ertan

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubthi

Total

O-Bittoon

A p

0.0

0.0

~J\

/

as

O.o

/X3

60

00

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

l-AslnnrMtial

/ /

o.o

(0.0

70.0

/

/

■0.0

7&3

P3

. 3

3

7£0

40

7070

_J

/

373

0.0

3.3

Z*i reran

£.

0~

0.D

0-00

£0.0

-A

J4

0.0

0.0

7

7

00

V70

S&

-A

7

/

0.0

53

n

3-Li(tit PtHWa.

0.0

00

0.C

A

JL,

J£0

0.0

000

7

/

JLL

0.0

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

t-Birib

/

3>

i

109

0.0

10.9

0.0

0$

00

J0

00

0.0

00

o.o

0.0

S-OoooX Dnt, etc

<?

q

0.0

00

04

C>

1

M

00

00

J0_

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

4,0

frbwrffic Mb.

\o

ZM

0.D

00

/

/

723.

0A

/ju-

J0_

0.0

0.0

-L

!(.£>

00

3/>6

7-Piyctot0|iCnli

.

J0\

0.0

0.0

_0

-M.

0.0

0.0

_J

/

.4-0

0J

£*

JL

2

70S

0.0

70S

t-UDknw

A

0>

.3

300

0.0

10.0

_£

3

2Z>

\ 0,0

JZS

73

/A

60.0

0.0

400

JL

P

7

34.1

00

J03

Mto

3

4>

3

30D

00

30.0

0.C

00

0-0

■ 7

/

00

07/

W

0£

Z

70S

17,0

70S

'"

Wf :

JZ.

^"

00

9AP

300

700,

JZ

/

r

fys

'70L.5

^700

z£

0L

0LOP

M0

70.0

/00.

It

/f

m

0.3

/w.

236

L_

t

L.%

■ggze /li/Jg

J-Li(* Plwmi

E valuta

Cattain

O-Balum

1-Aitmnical

Z-Airort

*:Birt«

S-CtanJa, DM, etc

frhnlffit tab.

'■PifChotofial

•Vljontom

*C*er

Total

xvAmsrroA/ as M / (r <;/a#-r/A//z£ &£ Ju. v&a*>c /?<s tz/jfu^je- «??■ /?£ jeers

.€" ttte/vas t?ft Less

A

^■-£-

±

A

A

OouWul

jl

/

Total

J*

£.

Per C«t

Certain

Jl

i£l

0.0 33333.3

AL

M

M

M.€" ttte/vas t?ft Less

A

^■-£-

±

A

A

OouWul

jl

/

Total

J*

£.

Per C«t

Certain

Jl

i£l

0.0 33333.3

AL

M

M

M

jft

I

Doubtful

Jl

P.P

o.o ao

M

JA

M

M

U.7333

Total

M

Ml

M

m

M

1L

JC

M

M

m.

Jti/0— £&£&#£&.

Certain Doubtful ToUl

s

3:

<r

Per Cent

Certain Doubtful

i/

ToUl

>rt»n

//-■?/> fsifa^at

Nunoer

/? *?

£ ^

_^

^2

C

Tola)

Certain

/

o

A

a-Q.

Par Cent

$$,0

M

0.0

M

M

M.

ao

M.

M

J2&

mo

Doubttal

&£>

0d

AC 
11

£L

JJL

M

00

~m

0.0

ao

Total

fat D,

~M

JM

M^A

0.P

M

M

M

/0A

J?- A/9 fa£0/U0S

sr/tr&

Certain

/

£&-£

A

J.

Doubtful

£.

o

ToUl

Pi

eZM

jz

J2\

PttCMt

CwlaUt

M

jH

O.O

W.O

6,0

6,0

M

01

7 /m

Ckwitful

m

OJ

ao /wo

6t> 0,0

M

o,s

M

Total

JA

M

To

00 0,0

w

$.0

To

pp

O.OVOO.

Wl

a/ Seaa/v0s - g MtAisrss

£.-j0 A*/An>res

/Ji/eO. ?a M,/Vi>T£i

/?ue*t?6at /t/or Sr47£t}

Evaluation

N inn bar

Per Ceil

Number

Percent

Number

Per Cent

Honker

PerCtal

Certain

Doubtful

ToM

Certain

OwbHul

Total

Certain

Ooubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtfiil

Total

Certain

Dnutb

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

CHMUaon

^

0>

2

MO

■dfi

0J

<0

/

/

M

33.3

93,3

a

D

00

00

0,0

_L

~T

3tP

A&

3.0

1-Astronoraical

P

P

e>

~W

do

0.0

&

&

0.0

A0

04>

_j_

/

/zr

OP

aS

JJ-

/

tJL

33.3

3.0

3£3

I-Aircntt

/

P

(

m

W

?j.e

ao

Q6

0.0

-l

0.0

0.0

00

/

3

_Jt

3.0

9,1

a.i

3-Light Phono.

/

P

■ f

100

0,0

H°

o

M

0J>

fiO

D

.A.

0-0

00

0X>

■0

/

/

1m

3.0

3.0

4-Binta

£>

CO

M

■do

7

#

/

33.3

0.Q

33.3

2.

P

JL

2£0

ao

0£6

_a

M>

0.0

00

KlowJj, Dull etc

/?

$

00

0.0

te

.Jl\

#

0J

00

AP

P

00

0.0

00

-&

0.0

0.0

0,0

6-lnsiltit kih.

/

P

i

2M

0.0

2#.0

_£

£>

p

M

0.0

A0

J?

2. ?£0

&$££&

zs

r

*42-

0.0

Ptz

T-PsrdBlotiejl

P

M

ov

AD

_^

0*

&

0.0

£0

d.o

_J_

■0

DO

,0.0

01

__£

/

_J,0

3,0

3/>

f-Uohiowi

#

{>

-M0.0

2#.0

_£

£>

p

M

0.0

A0

J?

2. ?£0

&$££&

zs

r

*42-

0.0

Ptz

T-PsrdBlotiejl

P

M

ov

AD

_^

0*

&

0.0

£0

d.o

_J_

■0

DO

,0.0

01

__£

/

_J,0

3,0

3/>

f-Uohiowi

#

{>

-M

0.D

t-Q

/

/

33.3

0.0

333

2-

2-2S£>

W1S7D

_ r_£_

^/sri

o.O /s:z

tODiw

6>

M

?.o

m

_^

o

Jl

0.0

0-0

U.

-JL

/^^' A0/2rS /

-1-

3*0

0.0

3.0

Tout

~7

r

I0QD

o,d

m

-A:

/

3

(S.7

3)3

m

JL

r

mo

0.C /PD,

Z7

£

3JL

?/J

&>

10Q

i

M-5

K.M

m

237

fX&£ ^&?g.

Eolotm

3~ J?££4/t>/l

Certain

Dcwbtliri

Total

/ „ . e> £ £p*S

Pel Cent

Certain

OwhttJl

Total

Itrtaii

^-/i? S£d0/vas

Boot*** Too*

j/:J&Jg£&!>&±.

Pel Cent

Certain

Taw

:biii»

Doobthl

Total

Certain

T

Pet Cent

Ooubttul

Total

^-^^ f&ec/vaj

Certain

DwtthT

Total

Pel Cent

WWtttuI

Total

O-Balleo*

^i.

/J

^£

^_^

■T 12

J.3sr.f

2X

10

£f 9

JL

75 ' 7f/S&

l-AUnamctl

£*_2Z

/S13Z&&1

\67.9

2=L

13.

43.2U

J 17 #73

M.

33

SI

££m.

LJft

1L

4£/l2_

Mi toad

/y

M.

JS.

£M 4.0

&ki£

*

24

IM

%%Z2j>

2&

£2.

#T 7f*

&£m

J3

72

2L

/7.x

/2J3/.7

oTi 20 0.4

J-Lifi| Phong*.

JL

J*

Jl

02

M

±

Jl

0.0 /./

AZ

£1M.~J-

P

'•»!*

JL

4.0

00

A

o.o

0.0

JA

M

At

an

-2.

o

A.

00

S-Cbufc, Dial, etc

M

M±

4,lf O,

A

0.0 0-0

M

M

JM.

M

13

20 00

Hmffit hfe.

10

10

S3

op.

Mi

M

0-0

M

12]

13

M

p.o

&.

2&

22

0.0

M

P-PtTeaUtical

J,

Jl

10

09 P

Ma

0.0

£0

2.

7.4

-40a

JU.

A^0

Jl

20

Jl

l-U*M>o

Z£L

l£L

M.

00

M

&L

ML

/TA

J»

l£k

3Lf £?

£L

/?,6

aP

tt£

23

22.

ZZ5 ty zzr

K»m

2SL

M.

/J

%3

JM

H

JL

P

JLZ

£<?

Zl

It

X

Zl

J£

SX-^-

JT

2,L^L

4.2

r»«

23H

S&fWfWD-

AF\

?/

££%?&?

m

m

^ysWzi\2zM idd]

ZZ

11

/&

7MX2S1

m.

6/ fGetSLQf ' S M/*l>T£s

4- JP &^//tfur£i

(Pi/ee ft? M/A/t/r£s

fo£/9f/0A/ AWT &Af£0

EnlotUo*

Number

PwCwt

Ninbef

Pei Cent

Nudiet

Pel Cent

Hen bet

Pet Cant

Certain

Doubdui

Total

Certain

Dm*tM

Total

Certain

DcudHuI

Total

Certain

Dabthjifo£/9f/0A/ AWT &Af£0

EnlotUo*

Number

PwCwt

Ninbef

Pei Cent

Nudiet

Pel Cent

Hen bet

Pet Cant

Certain

Doubdui

Total

Certain

Dm*tM

Total

Certain

DcudHuI

Total

Certain

Dabthji

Total

:«tain

DuudHiil

Total

Certain

DouUtuI

Total

Cotin

Doobtfii

Total

Certain

OoibMUl

Total

D-MIom

m

2-r

73

JU

/at

m

sr

?/

u

m.

/»

W

.23

//

34

m

M

301

37

/t

J7

?.¥ ^4

/40

l-Asboasaical

t

t

' M

23.

}J

S7Z

&

//

w

/AS

Ao

MS

^?

/£>

33 20.4

23

29,2

V?

4/

90/Z.l

/&#-&.*

I-Aiicnlt

&-

3/

63

/*£

//.£

23J

ZA.

£3

41

u

13

V7

7

t

_J1

t.2

Z5 ?,l

37

2-f

62

n

63

/£?

3-Li(M nam.

#

/

S

AS

M\

A?

6

3

9

2.1

/./

S3

o

2-

a.

dp

At

/■?

3

£>

3

at

0.0 0f

4-Binb

P

■

*0

ao

M

P

a/?

to

AO

£>

-£

e.0

00

0.C

/

/

-X

&?

03

0£

S-Cloudv Owl t(c

J

3

P-P

/J

fit

__L

/

£

u

04

0.1

_J_

&

/

09

0.0

fif

/

/

03

o.o

$3

frlrisuDic tab.

ft

/f

M.

as

£7

xt>

&>

Z2\

40

£2

r

jr

44

-0£.

M

¥7

\P

?7&>l

O.OZZ.I

7-Pjjcholotiul

-Jt

2-

&

JS.

0.7

£2

„£

£>

?

?.M

W

2.2.

-Jt

*

&

0.0 ?,s

O

_JL

13

0.0

13

B-Unknote

-76

C

76

MA

£>.$

M#

JiS.

O

^

/23

fip

/73

/z

/?

17

/s:o

0.0 /f.O /f9

/>

67/7S

0.0 I7S

KIDiH

9

/

/P

34

#4

[ jlf

//

3

■/H-

40

/./

r/

2£

2-

6

3.5

t.1

S.3

J?

3

2JL

*,?

St

i~t

f<M

£2.

7S

24f

ZZ.D

zu

W

MS

7Z-

t-tf

M0

H0

m

M.

2-1

t/3

74:3

2&M.

%

tt 39*77.7

221

M

i

rftfti

■ A

*4.M

£t&u69ra?A/

dp

jagS££7~ S{6#Z7A£6S

f&e^atj.

<6£J£S

W .Aafatse/tc.

(?f

tXJ&iCS

/&A, S/AU-r//v& ?{>£, /)o>ji^r/t?/i/ £?s .<r/6/vr//V6 v/i/a /?*s/z&rs

£~ ssea/vas oe £bss

6-/0 Sete/vJs

//-J0 Sees**?*

S/~ 6 (^ &SC0A/0S

Evaluation

Nuaibei

PetCent

Nunbcr

Per C«t

Nuo6er

Pa Cent

Hinta

Pel Cent

Certain

DodbBil

Total

Certain

Ocublfu

Total

Certain

DooHtuI

Total

Certain

DooKnH

Total

"eitstn

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doobtno

Total

Certain

Ooutitn

Total

Certain

OeuMful

TotalCertain

DodbBil

Total

Certain

Ocublfu

Total

Certain

DooHtuI

Total

Certain

DooKnH

Total

"eitstn

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doobtno

Total

Certain

Ooutitn

Total

Certain

OeuMful

Total

0-B*Hdm

<P

P

4.0

0.0

P.D

P

P>

4.0

0.0

0.0

_L

3

4*

43

t?.0

/7.3

_^

D

0.0

0.0

do

1-Astnmiiiial

/

3

A-

Z2

?O,0

M7

P

2-

<£

6.0

/?,2

/u

0.0

00

0.0

0\

/

/

P.S

IN

///

Z-Airciaft k

/

3

'#

t.7

MP

M?

J?

/

-4

22.3

%(■

36-U-

^£

S~

//

UL

P.7

47.2

^jL

3

H-

ILL

33 \J

m4

3-U|1H Plxnm

/

/

J2C

67

*7

P>

P>

40

0.0

0.0

_^

07

0.0

0.0

0.0

ul

/

/

_M

//■/

N

4-BirtlJ

0\

&

P

0J

0.0

00

P\

P

P

0-0

0.0

0.0

P>

_M\

0.0

0.0

P

2

20

0.0

P.0

5-Clonds. Dot, etc.

(P

P

0.0

4.0

0.0

P

P

P

~m

o.o

~(J

{?

0.0

P.0

0,1

__£

0.0

0.0

00

C-htarifit nib.

JZ.

P

A

/Z3

0.0

133

/

P

/

\H

0t

?■/

J

2-

JZ

0.0

1.1

/

P>

/

IN

00

//•/

7-Ptgrdaio|ical

&

P

P

0.0

0.0

OP

P

d

0,0

OJO

20

2-

#

2-

J2\

4.0

V

P

£>

0.0

00

0.0

t-IMnov

4

P-

*+

7S7

01

&.7

4

0>

7f

3(4

0.0

tel

2~

p?

£

Jl

0.0

ft

JL

r2

Z2£

0.0

222

9-0 ttw

/>

0.0

0.0

0,0

P

P

0.0

0-0

00-

_z

/

X

43

4J

U

P

P

4\0

OP

PO

Total

$

7

/s-

rj;i^0.7

/40.

T

3

If

721

27.3

/0P.

/#-

f

23

M

&/

ffl>>

_Jt

S~

f

444

ST.£

/00.

<£/ 2&*0/\/0s - ^ M/AterZs

6-J& At//i/e/r£s

fliS^ SO At/A/VTGS

P>£//?#r;<»t/ A/OT frjrAo

Evaluation

Ntabtt

P« c»t

Nuaber

PerCent

Himbei

P« Cent

Nimbef

Pet Cent

Certaio

OoobBul

Total

Certain

Ooubtlul

Total

Certain

PouMM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DovWul

Total

Certain

DoubtM

Total

Carlaia

Doabthtl

Total

O-Ballon

A

f

'//

tu

4.4

250

f

- 3

t

w

13

22^

-3\

/

A

m

2.3

333

^2=

2-

4

Jkl.

43

$.(>

1-AilnmMicaI

2

P

00

40

40

X

3

6T

J3

13

J39

.0.

0.6

0.0

0.0

3

2-

£~

03-

43

/P$

2 Airciaft

/3

f

71

&s

/$.2

¥72

S]

r

/P

f3.T

&.fm

2.3

333

^2=

2-

4

Jkl.

43

$.(>

1-AilnmMicaI

2

P

00

40

40

X

3

6T

J3

13

J39

.0.

0.6

0.0

0.0

3

2-

£~

03-

43

/P$

2 Airciaft

/3

f

71

&s

/$.2

¥72

S]

r

/P

f3.T

&.f

&%

X

3

10.7

25~2>

m

-5j

?

/2-

/?.£

6-2

Z4

J-Uttit Ptienoa.

P

P

20

0.0

4.0

5\

?

13

0.0

$3

JA

0,0

0.0

-A

i

2JL

4.0

Z2

(VBirOB

P

0.0

00

00

0-

0.0

M

00

-0

P

ZM

A0

O.P

0.P

PO

S-Ctouits, thUt, etc

0.0

00

p.o

p

P

^M

00

00

-2.

(0

P

JZ2

0.0

00

_2\

P

0.0

0,2

OJ

frbauflic aito.

2

2-

.45

4.0

45

__L

p

/

2.r

0.0

2,?

^

P

2L

/£1

0.0

000

7

P

7

/&■

0.0

/rjL

7-Pirckalo|jat

I

f

2

&

23

44

P>

0.0j

04

00

-^0.

P

4P-

0.0

-J2.

0.0

0.0

00

Mttamn

7

7

M

0.0

/r.?

f,

(11

0.0

■ttf

^A

Q

/

%3

0.0

*J?

XL

it

2J.9

0.0

7.3.9

Httm

/

/

23

0.0

7^3

.?

a

,7

£1

00

&

M

0.O

0.0

JL

A

%7

43

/7.0

Total

3P

/*-

m

e%2

%r

M

2S

//

34

WL

30.$

m

^

4-

70-

m

333

m

37

f

4-0

S/,4

/?.£

too.

238

/4?l M«r/j/e fia£ 0&&U20/0 _/?<£ &£j&yAL&_ ?££££. ZT2. 7&J/ rfdJgGfS

£- s-£tc?A>as /te lea

4:4L ..Jgeed/fiL-

-//'?£>

z* — -t

S/-6& ftrca/t'^s

Number

P«C«nl

Number

Ptf Cent

Number

leitain | Doubtful

Per Cent

Kumbai

P«Cnt

Equation

Certain

Doubtful

ToUl

Certain

Dcubtful

Total Certain

Doubtfsl

Total

Certain DtHibtlul Total

Tolal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

»• Balloon

A.

£JL

XL

£L

a

0?

10

MM

I

ao

£■?

s:s

M

0.0

0.0

l-A,»li»nniiie*l

6Z£_

&£.

/&? -£>

A

10

#0 &3

trj

zZL

AA

12

£1

Muroett

X

~g-

Z-&2

JM

2e.e

2,

322 00 &A

.2

10

&£.

/£.??£ 4

/

Z

ML

Lzm.

3-Uffit Pbowm.

-A

_L

g£.

JA

JL

A=,

^

ZoZZlTZA

A

£?.?_ 0.0

£0.

A

0.0

JZs

12

(-dirts

.X

-^

A

11.

M*

2LSL

0.0

Ml

ILL

A

£1.

&j2-

&?

-1

/

X

AZ

II

/3U

S-Clouds, Oust. Ac.

A

££.

0U2.

vo.0

A

0,0 0.0

M

A.

AA

J2JL

GO

A

AO.

0.0

0.0

Hmuflic bin,

A

r./

J2JL

U.

ill

AS-

ILL2LSL

0.0

Ml

ILL

A

£1.

&j2-

&?

-1

/

X

AZ

II

/3U

S-Clouds, Oust. Ac.

A

££.

0U2.

vo.0

A

0,0 0.0

M

A.

AA

J2JL

GO

A

AO.

0.0

0.0

Hmuflic bin,

A

r./

J2JL

U.

ill

AS-

ILL

<2p

jO£-

£>,<P

P

A

M. to

£0

J-Pgchaloiial

A

OxZ

_&Z

0.0

A

M

M

0A

0J?

00

ao

0>

M

0.0

A0

S-Unknowi

JL

A

r

LZJ.

£&

CLL

3 333

0.0

5K3

A

3U

0.0

su

.£-

M-

/i

MJ-

P.£>

U7

HHia"

_^

J=.

ZJ-

&J2.

f/

c?

£0

M

i2£-

£.£-

£0.

6,1 /.C

M

~?Vz7\n3

-J"

Total

/!

Ml

6?.?\?3-/\

/aa

J

ft>0.

W

m^A

263YCV.

II

J^L

* ' $~\73.3[2J.7\/M

Enliiation

O-Baltoon

1-Artwwiiul

!-*iraa«

3-Li(hl Pbemn.

VBitos

^Clouds, Dint ate.

S-lnsuttic aita.

^PijfiM/oiial

t-Uoknoati

MttlB

Total

£LS£<?oA/ds 7 £" Aff/vi/rei

Nuoibci

Certain

CL-2^

J.

r

13

Ooubtful

L.&L

£_

^2

Total

A.

J^

JZ-ZjL£L

J_

r

7"

£1

L.

Pel Cenl

Certain

£JL

gA

g.jL ¥,j.

££.

££.

£!L

*&■

&4L

Ooubtful Tolal

4±

#^

&£.

JL2-

&J2.

rf-Z #0

£sL

&£

0.0

&L

1#A

M

&£.

t£J

M.

£LL

£$L

4, -J0 M/A'ti.res

Numboi

Certain

^„=?

jZ

_^

M

LI

J.

Doiblhi

X

A.

A

^_i

Total

7%

JL

M

A.

/£.

13

Per Coil

Certain

m

a&

££.

f?

a&

&£.

lfi&

m

2s:t>

L9

Doubtful

M.

M.

4d-

m.

s.f

j£

&&.

M.

M.

0,0

Total

Certain

u.

J2j1

U-

£Z

&£.

&z

&£.

&&

£21

JJj\ m# 7\&sMS4]\/s&X3S^ }7\rj&7&stfW« I /9\ f \jls\7{J\O41V0. \S7\ 9 \S4\uA a2

{2?£4 ^%<2J!aiM<X£S-

1L

A

m

Dubtful Total

s^7

£>

JL

A

.£.

-&.

.£.

A

IL\

3

Per Coil

Certain

£&

SA

M

£D M

M

M

MO

AO

mo

/Z0

Doubtful

00

ML

M.0

0.0

11

0.0

ML

At

oo

Total

a,o

0.0

~M

0.o

0,0

#6

M

/2-.Q

/}t/t/>r>0*; nor Sr/irsa

Humber

Certain

^L

J 3 4

A

/

mo j e

7 T

rjoulitbj

£

Z£_-£

/

4

LL

z

A,

AT

^

11.

A

PetCent

Certain Dmbtful Total

jLL

&£.

/?■?

6£-

A$

0JL

227

L£.

Ml.

&

JZJZ

&Z-

'4.5

AU.

&L

/■£

jM.

£^2-

££.

0te>

£4-

AA

z$.%

A£\

30

0.0

227

J0

Ml

-V-

1&2_

i

r/lfo£ A & $>

£t/4L///lr/ait/

tOfjLL

&£.

/?■?

6£-

A$

0JL

227

L£.

Ml.

&

JZJZ

&Z-

'4.5

AU.

&L

/■£

jM.

£^2-

££.

0te>

£4-

AA

z$.%

A£\

30

0.0

227

J0

Ml

-V-

1&2_

i

r/lfo£ A & $>

£t/4L///lr/ait/

tOf

' ^?£J/?jLT

■?/6ji>rs/!/6S

fr#

'. ALL

</&/?£S £Z A/e/to/?/:jL 0£ a£J£*fS

£g£, &/5rtT//l/6 S0A 0C/JAr/0/lJ 0^ .r/6#T-//l/<S &£C&A/ £>£_ /<*{?££ j?/?S£&r*

£~ S£i&A//?i 0/0 ££S£

£-/£> ?£<?0/t/ai

//-?& 5~££a/t/&s

^/-6£? 5<£i<z>/vas

Evaluation

Number . .

Per Ceil

Number

PerCenl

Nuisei

Per Cent

Number

Per Cenl

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubltu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tola!

Certain

Dubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtfu

Total

Certain

Ooubtful

Total

0-8alloon

6

0.0

&t

/

/

0.0

SP-0

S2.0

-A

P

0.0

0.0

m

_A

-Ml

0.0

0//

I-Astronomiral

J&

0.0

0.0

-JL

■

00

u

0.0

a

I

/

01

33.3

m

J&

^

0,0

?-Aircrafl

_J_

2.

J

fo.3

M*

m

i

i

T m>

Q.0

$**

0.0

0.0

M

#0

00

m

3-Li|til Ptieoom.

-A

P.0

D.0

O.0

_£

Q

0?

-M

to

00

m

JA

0.0

0.0

p

Q.0

4-Birdi

■0

0.0

CO

0.0

0,0

O.D

00

I

I

ZM

3J.3

333

2.

2-

W.6

£>o

mo

(-Clouds, Doit, etc

_^

<?

00

a

0-0

a

\at

P

0.0

__0L

(?

Oo

■ o,o

^_&

u

0,0

0.0

t-lnsutfit. Info.

/

P

1

/*?

Ao

m

~£

p

GO

p.e

0.0

.A

_M

01

fit

0.0

0,0

0.(?

T-Psycholo|ical

6.0

o&

oj>

iM

ot

#0

1

{

.JI

J3-3

333

~~~D

00

0.0

0-0

rVUnhnoim

.?

3

433

w

W.9

Zl

D

OP

0.0

AO

_j2

0.0

&>

01

_1

3

ooo

(00

bO-0

Mthti

f,0

AO

o,0

„&&>

HP

OJ

£>

0.6

Of

M

~a

VM

0.0

0.o

Wo

Total

r

2-

7

7W

Hi

100.

/

/

JZ-

500

000

Afifi.

^J0

^

?

0.0

/0O.O

too.

~y^

r

0.0

/PC.

A/ ferta/t/as: - £~ te,/t/(/r£s

& -S0 /4/A/vt£s

d?i/£/e SO /1fSV{Sr£s

#(g/?r/0A/ /uor JV/? rso

EHJuatim

Nunber

PeiCpit

Nunber

P« Cent

Number

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent .

Cutaia

DouotfuJ

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tola)

Certain

Dcubtful

Total

Certain

ttaiSfful

Total

>rtaM

DoabWulNunber

PeiCpit

Nunber

P« Cent

Number

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent .

Cutaia

DouotfuJ

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tola)

Certain

Dcubtful

Total

Certain

ttaiSfful

Total

>rtaM

DoabWul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dooiil nil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

(1- Bailout

/)

A6

AO

M

/

/

~os

0.0

/AT

00)

0.0

_J_

M

00

0,6

1-Aslronontial

/

/

0.0

/M

(0,0

1

/

0.0

0*

*fi

3

-3

100]

0.0

MO

1

(

j.ji

0.0

02-

2-*iraatt

Z

J-

Ml

ZOD

MO

_£

O.0

04

0.0

I

1

0.0

t?

67

D

1

/

_M

6.2.

0.%

3-Lietn Pbemm.

D

00

O.0

0,0

-ai

2£&

0-0

&r,6

1

(

0.7

bo

0.7

-J0

0>

0.0

0.0

0.0

a-Bitds

_i

/

/AO

0,0

to.o

~Z

s

0,0

00

00.

$.0

0-0

_^_

0.0

0-Q

0.0

S-Clouda. Dost, etc

_^

P

D

00

AO

00

0\

O

$

0,0

00

AO

0.0

0.0

0.0

0>

ZM

00

0.0

rVlnsittic Wo.

0£>

O-O'

/

/

as

0-0

/&>

00

bo

00

-A

37S

0.0

3Z5

7-Pi)daloiical

0.0

ft

04

_JL

0,0

o.o

00

_1

./

J2.

£e

0,7

7

£

a.s

10

«/

gMMlUM

-J.

S

20-0

0,0

30.0

-3a

-3

3Z2\

' w

37<0

_l

OP

f

07.3

■oo

f33

-A

r

.?73-

00

3f.Z

KHfw

1

,f

30,0

k

30,0

0.0

0.0

0.0

■o

I

I

0.0

07

6-7

I

J

0.2

0.0

6Z

Trt«

7

3

/0

70.0

30.0

/oo,

JL

/

^

m

#0

M

7T

■JL

yr

ft. 7

J3.3

(00,

is-

/

//

93.2.

6.?-

100.

239

wmmmmm

mmmmmmmmm<

mmmmm^msmmmkmm-^^r^-

-

7%£t£ d4tf £ttfLl/ST/0M

0F

S?AJ£/LT

svs.Ars/vss j^ae

#m

Vests #</ /to//*Aez, as adjects

/fe£- s,'G#r/#6.. <*<?* £>//& l 4r/4?A' &S &6#r/As$ Ji/v*f4£/l <?f £Hj/?£rs A0r sr#r&/>

S~S£fOAfaf /& £.£xj

<£. -so se<?0/v0i

//~fa 3&c0/t/0s

j>/-4£? £s£a/v/?s

EteJwMi

t Ntabct

Per Celt

MaW)

Pa Cart

Naabti

PuZml

Muriiet

Percent

CCftAA

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtltll

Total

iCertan

Douban

Total

CnUii

Desbthl

ToM

;trtiin

DoebtM

Total

Certain

DoutMil

Total

Certain

Ooobthl

Total

Certain

DoublM

Total

MM loon

-M

00 00

—L

/

ipi

00

?M

_JL

00

0.0

0.6

l-tetnuanol

J

/

SV0

6,0

Sty

^L

QO

0.0

atDoebtM

Total

Certain

DoutMil

Total

Certain

Ooobthl

Total

Certain

DoublM

Total

MM loon

-M

00 00

—L

/

ipi

00

?M

_JL

00

0.0

0.6

l-tetnuanol

J

/

SV0

6,0

Sty

^L

QO

0.0

at

£>

00

0.0

0-0

Mituaft

I

/

-M

rap

S00

J

p

/

£&L

0.0

£V0

_£

00

0.0

0.0

J-LljN PlWHWl

%\

Qt?

a#

#\

__£

_M

0.C

01

->4

00

0.0

00

«*rti

P

J£

00

op

T-^

Z&

V

0.C

0.6

0.0

^2

P

^L

mo

0.0

/W

W3otKb.Dusl.rtt

ft

00

-££

00

c

' D

-M

0.0

0d

o

ft

0.0

00\

00

tkaalTic. tan.

ft

m

00

Oft

o

1

-j2

ul

-M

0.0

00

t

00

00

00

^Psychotoiicel

a

ft

a>

0.0

0,0

w\

V

c

U2

J&

0.0

0.1

ft

-0L

0.0

00

0.0

UNnoaii

%>

' 00

M>

y

<P

06

0.0

0.0

o

-0A

0.0

00

Wo*

—M

&

00

00

-JL

M

0.0

0.0

o

00

0.O

0.0

Tot*

/

f

A

s-fe

&>.o

m

X- 0>

X 'OP*

00/00.

/

/ mo

00

000.

. '

A/ teee/vaJ - g M/iwr£s,

4- ft? Af/A/crss

0?fe& &? AtMi,r£S

fo4/9ti0A/ /usr fr/fm*

Evaluation

Number

Per Coil

Mumbef

Percent

Huber

Per Colt

Nmier

PerCoit

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Doublfu

Total

Certain

OooMlul

Total

Certain

Dosbttut

Total

Certain

OouMnil

Total

Certain

DooMM

Total

Certao

Until* Total

Cortan

DoaotM

Total

frMloon

2.

■

.2-

mo

0.0

/HO

_2_

/

/

ao

m

333

041

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

I-Ailnnoaicjl

D

0.0

00

00

c

0>

ao

0.0

'A0

_i

1

M3

00

'*3

-A

/

fO

&0

3.Z

Sf.4\

Mlircreft

r

/

no

CO

m

0.0

00

0.9

o

0.6

00

0.0

/

1

^

j.e

ff

7f

HifhlPama.

/

/

ZP.fi

0.0

&o

I

tf

/

tt3

ao

3T3

O

00

0.0

0.0

f>

/

/

0.C

?.g

?.x

4-Binb

&

ft

ft

<w

0.0

0,0

£>

AC

00

0£>

0-

7

£f.6

0.0 Mi

D

10

0.0

M

5-ClowK Oust, He.

ft

0.0

00

00

O

ft

0.6

ao

0.0

_^J

^M

,0.0

0J

O

zm

■7.0

00

thsilTtr. Me.

t

1

mo

00

m

D

ft

_M

00

0.0

a\

rZ-

'3U

0.0 ^fi

_£

t

MS

0O?ot

*-Psrcaolo|irjl

-Jl

00

0.0

00

_M

0j

0.0

ft

ft

0.1

0.0

0.0

7

/

00

3.f

?g

l-UMnom

p

ft

M

00

00

_/

1

3X3

at>

333D

ft

_M

00

0.0

a\

rZ-

'3U

0.0 ^fi

_£

t

MS

0O?ot

*-Psrcaolo|irjl

-Jl

00

0.0

00

_M

0j

0.0

ft

ft

0.1

0.0

0.0

7

/

00

3.f

?g

l-UMnom

p

ft

M

00

00

_/

1

3X3

at>

333

r

/

/*3

0.0 /#3

_i.

0)

J

//.sr

k

0$

«Ww

o

ft

\M

0J

0.0

c

P

AO

0.0

O.0

_z

/

/ih3

00

/A3

-±

/

S-f

00

3J

Total

ht

"

r

/m

0O

M.

X

/

3

07

333

WO.

JZ.

7

Ml

0,0

m

££

4-

M

&£.

/£-.$/ /to.

240

FiT*JF^ttIta-'-*tt*,>_^V

fa

#

rats* ttz/V

£~?rft t/Ar/0ty

tZf.

_^<L.

Sfsi/fr/svss

/rj?* ,4^ </*j?*i- sr

J

1£C

6*/9Av/£

£&r/9r/<P/V

■Tfrti

3/aer// Aa4*j?,sj

^p&r" s4/*£r*//yt

£~&f4tA£-

Evaluation

PerCwt

Number

P«lC(Bt

ttWltH

P«C«t

Muiltd

PetCott

Cirtlin

Daitbtfur

total

Certain

DcubHul

Total"

Seitain

Douotful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

:ertein

Douctrut

Totil

Certain

OouMM

Total

Certain

OniMM

Total Certain

Doubtful

Tot*

O-fWlCBT,

2/0

/ff

//?

££

£Ti

/4 a ?£/

/£*

f2(?

iW

*,/*/./

<?

<?

.0

>a<?

r^^

J0.0 /Z

/.

/*

/£/?

A3

#J

l-totrononrial

</?i>

T<H

f/4

*t

/0-1 265 MS S2?

71 s -

M9

.//./

210

*

__$/_&,£

/?<<?

¥0.0

?

4/

7

M

..■£10.

ft.i

Mrrcraft

?s¥

20f,

L4t

//./

f.0

2QJ

?</S

260

£0/

//.&

tt

ta#

2

z.

M&

0-(?

M6

r

//.

/i.

44

//7\

20./

>Li|tit Ptanore.

fl

H

K

/.0

Af

J.(

f/

23

4f

1.0

as

(J

10

fi.fi

at?

0.6

<?

.. /

. 1

00

AS

/■-?

4-BiMs

'?

/#

Zf

0.6,

03

0.9

/¥

9

fi

as

0.S

0J

A?

. <p

#t?

{?<?

/&?.

/?

-./.

/

t?<0

A3

/3

S-Clwdi, Dust, etc.

/£

At

2S

a*

a</

0f

,4

/-?

tt

<?■?

&* 0J

<?

#0

/?■#

$4

.. <?

t>

0.0

-&&.

0,6

tVlnsuffic. toti.

m

p

tfg

1.3

0.0

fj. f?/

tp

9 /

$.0

'9.(

4

£,20.6

#<?

&.C /£

—&.

ft-

200

0.0

m?

7.ptycrslo|ical

fg

/0

fr

A.2

&<

If

ft

?

</f

ML

0.2

/&

&

/

—L

/?<P

/*#

/0.6

/?

J

<*-0

A0

0.0>

eVuntno*

639

4f?

2/.f\

00

2/.S iff

... 4

*tf

2Ls

$./>

%•$

/■

/

/0j<

##

/&0

■/f

&

/•/*/

fit

tf$

iOrtitr

//2

&</f

ML

0.2

/&

&

/

—L

/?<P

/*#

/0.6

/?

J

<*-0

A0

0.0>

eVuntno*

639

4f?

2/.f\

00

2/.S iff

... 4

*tf

2Ls

$./>

%•$

/■

/

/0j<

##

/&0

■/f

&

/•/*/

fit

tf$

iOrtitr

//2

&

f17

s-s

/./

4.L

ff

22

/if

£?

/Stf

4,0

/?

0>

A/?

<P-0

d&

j"

f

Ui:

3t

//.J

<& /

Total

22ff

m

S/f?

J&

21/

/M

&&

gwmi <?/.?

23/

MP-

J_

/

/#

?££>

//?#

/00.

f3

2? gp

K-S

Jf.g /00.

*

. -JiZA _ .

Ar&f/f

/pysrfJt /*

Evitultion

Niinba

PerCenl

Number

Percent

Noiter

PerCent

Kueirw

PerCmt

Certain

Dotibtlal

WaT

Certain

OoubKul

Total

Certain

Dmbthl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:«t»m

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouMtuI

Total

Certain

Dnittthi

Total

Certain

DouHfoi

Ttrtal

O-Mlcen

?

f

/?

A.t

f.0

/*/

/

/

0.0

40

tf^

1-Aitranonlcil

/?

f

as-

fS.7

t/

2/t

7

. _y

f

4$J?

<f.0

f2,0

/

I-Aiioaft

4/

'0

/¥

3.5-

t?

r'2.2

/?

■7

, 7

0.0

220

M0

M

!-Li|bl PMixm.

/

/?

/

JO,

J

0.0

ft. 9

a

i>

?

0.0

0,0

0,0

\

v^

-

4-airds

S

f

is\

/?,&

¥t

£_

J2J2.

/?,/}

0.0

^5~

S*CI«idi, Dust, etc.

3

<?

J

2i>

0.d

24

.-&.

/?

0a

ti#

f\

1

G-hmlTib lite.

V

4>

/

J&.

0.0

■r.s

S

a

&

MA

00

M0

\

\T

I-P5ytnoki|ical

\JjL

0.0

00

/?

0.0

■ <%<?

0,0>

V

*.

(■UnhMMi

f&

a

/*

4zl

00

ZZt

-£.

<?

4

M.C

0.0

(6,6

\

Mttier

/2

*

#

m£

Sf

/JJ

0>

o

0Y)

0,<?

0(0

Total

JLl

*1

tiS

41

2£.t

100.

Jk.

?

£S

Ma

%&

/00.

r/}*/,£ -stz/f

^ K eirjaf / ? ^ . <&L / /A' /.r. s/t f t r/ j/cj £iae /ftc

i£^£L.

*r

2-Airciift

E»luatiwi

0-BaHoon

l-AsHommieal

3-Li|tit

4-Birds

S-Clwfe, Ont, etc

OInsutlic bib.

7-PiydnlotiPl

8-Unkrwxn

MMhei

Told

^gg^^

JJ2DU-

Certain

2U.

J£t

2£L

J&.

/.?]

£&£,

Si

$££

£L

\ML

Doubtful

J£&

2S6.

2S£

2./

/&

-Z-

21

Total

III

/til

Stf

S3\

M.

a£.

W-

1£

&l

m.

m&

Percent

Certain

It

/S:0

&4L

ML

&£.

&L

//U.

14..

&£.

Jk

&l

Doubtful

-St

M£.

jl£\

/2JL

.0.1

j2j2.

4JL

4J2-

JJ--Z-

21

Total

III

/til

Stf

S3\

M.

a£.

W-

1£

&l

m.

m&

Percent

Certain

It

/S:0

&4L

ML

&£.

&L

//U.

14..

&£.

Jk

&l

Doubtful

-St

M£.

jl£\

/2JL

.0.1

j2j2.

4JL

4J2-

JJ-

ZIL

Totil

m

m&&t

20J.

JLL

£L

/0$. 23&

£Z-

£L

m.

^££d2i/4!L-

/)/*?j?r»

Certain

2#L

2£L

?/

JL

£3.^.

JL

/fii$££

&

/m

Douttful

Ms

2& 40S.&f /0f/

£/f

J£.

-£

-J2.

-22.

'&£>$£.

Total

&lJe.

m./Lt

5-/

20

/ J</_ Af

e.4££./zz.

Pf/bf/f,

./ffit rt'C /f

Percent

Certain

AS

Of _#■$/

IMM

2U_/00>

££-ix

Doubtful Told

£&-

M-

££.

&J-

&&

2&S.

22JL~£

2,

M.

04

0.0 /0 : 0,

M.L

J2-0,

MU,

23. A/00.

JX.

/0.2

&

JO

Jg&JSL-

J!&£&&f-

Nunter

Certain

J^

J0-

4-

Doubtful

j£.

-<2,

Total

JS.0

2^m£

uz.

~£.

_ 2j_

£,^_g-_&&

Percent

Certain

£JL

&£_

A&

0-&&

££&

L&Jl

J-12JL

iZSUZ

Doobthl Total

£j2.

0.0

£&

A4-

££.

&j&

j£j2_

/££

j£A

_&£

&&

t£0

1§JL

£0

&&

0J2.

25JL

/2£

/££.

J2j2-

WL

£/?£&?/£

Number

Certain

X

{?'

//

A

Danbtful Total

JL

—£

/</ £?

/?

JU-

J-

jj.

UL

sL

S

Per Ceit

Certaig

MX

AjL

M\

&2-

jU.

£14-

££_

4t

i&MA

DcuMful

/.£>

-LL

/2.Z 20.3

JA.

/./,

gJZ.

jZjZ

/2JZ

/££ £/?

?.(/

S23\/0O.

Total

/2.$

M£_

AL

/./,

£0,

2/y

gjl.

/7.2

/¥./

I

_ .. _Jst* _; .

fet/iiA . . ..

d/zsrs^t-/*

Evaluation

HtiiBter

PerCenl

NUOTDH

Per Cat

Kuabta

P« Cent" ■

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Totil

Main

Doubtful

Totaf

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DaiHfui

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

-f

£

/z

If

5"tf

/S.S

0>

/

/

&0

H

4f

I'Astfommical

/P,

S

17

//•S

*(.

(?.'

&

/

/

& I,

4?

S3}

2-Aiiatfl

¥

/&

'</

45

(/■&

/&?

4

•

0.0

(f0

ff.0

(t ■

'

3-Lighl Pbenom.

/

(?

/

/./

f?0

(■'

0"

P

M

00

00

fc

4-Bir*

2

/?

&

2.2

0-0

f.2

<?

0.0

ao

P0

A

S-Cloiidt, Out, etc:

/

/

M-

0.0

//

a

<?

A&

$0

ftp

V(f0

ff.0

(t ■

'

3-Lighl Pbenom.

/

(?

/

/./

f?0

(■'

0"

P

M

00

00

fc

4-Bir*

2

/?

&

2.2

0-0

f.2

<?

0.0

ao

P0

A

S-Cloiidt, Out, etc:

/

/

M-

0.0

//

a

<?

A&

$0

ftp

V

(.liaatlic. Kite.

<{

V

.££

0(7

¥f

£T

/?

£~

Ml

&#

2ti

^

?-Pi»cfiolo|)cal

0>

?

a

0.0

00

#0

/?

(0

M.

<?■<?

r?-0

\

J

(VIMn*fi

26

i?

2i

■if. l

-&<?

0f.2

.JL

<?

¥

l?.0

0.0

tfe

^

Miner

Y0

2

/*■

//.z

~t-t

/W

/A

<?

/>

.06.

80

0,0

Total

JJt

it-

t?

2LL

stf

/00

/£

&

■z/

M

tf&

100-

*(: Se£ f6*TH»7t O/V fJtKT PA^f,

241

I

,

■r/fs/^ —7J2/4 gi/JLi/rtr/0/f

&

wjzer

.<;/<*> tvr//tt<z s f0/f

/9LC

</£/f&

<?y

aeoASJSA'/c *M/?r/t>a' _ _ .

far#

L

tfetrJ ^£jeiC^

Sh&r/* /?/*&*>/'*

_ £j!/£<?f£

EvtfutiM

Number

PoCsil

NlMbcl

Pet Cent

Nwabet

PeiCent

Hwrict

PerCuit

Certain

Doubtful

Tout

Certain

Doubtful

roSI JerSin

OwNM

Tot*

Certsiir

Oeatttal

Total :«tji«

tab (to

Total

Ortaifl

QtmtPrtil

Total

Certaio

OoubtKll

Tool

CortHi

DMtfil

Total

0- Balloon

£<?7.

/f/

m

¥

/-<?

/£4

/ff

/2L \.?/9

1m

&J,

-&Z

<2

&0

0,0

(?,0

-7

^L

f

as

fit

/jy

l-Ailnnaical

Wt

?0f

4??

//<T

t*

2LL

?4S

Hi-

4??

/2.S

?1

2JJ

0.

.$.

2S.O

$0

fs.o

S

4

7

jCjL

u

#■■£

2-Aireratt

&£.

20

474

/£/

ft?

ML

?s^

nt

44f

/2.5

?■¥ t(.f

2.

_-2J

2 2Z.O

0-0

2S.0

s

-JL

/Z

%l as

/?■?

J-Utfil Plnom.

f0

tf

#

^

0-8

12

29

j7

¥<,

*¥

-&L

2.2.

0.0

00

00

c

/

.09,

'J

r>£,

♦-Bit*

a

/<?

2Z

j2£.

fif

-&1

iQ

9

/?

#s

0.4

<?■?

O

0.6 no

O,0

_ / ./.

00

1.6

/,ir

S-Clowh, Out, tit

f

7

tf

6/

0-J

M.

2.

7

,9

0./

0.J

0-4

O

An\

o-e

0.$

6

(L

a

60

AA.

0.0

tlMuBic Wb.

2</0

?46

J0?

00

,0.9

?{$

i#

/a&

0.0 /a l

?

-D

<L

2$.£ 00

&.e

'¥

~£L

/</ wo

AJL

21.6

%Psrdnk>fial

.f£.

f

44

/i

¥

1.0

fe

f

fr

/■7

0.4

If

L

—L

O.0 /2.S

M.S

-JL

^-£_

6(?

£2.

0.6

t-UoJoKra*

4/4

434

tf.fl

<?.<?

If 7

Jfs

—JL.

W

/f-4

^SJL/</ wo

AJL

21.6

%Psrdnk>fial

.f£.

f

44

/i

¥

1.0

fe

f

fr

/■7

0.4

If

L

—L

O.0 /2.S

M.S

-JL

^-£_

6(?

£2.

0.6

t-UoJoKra*

4/4

434

tf.fl

<?.<?

If 7

Jfs

—JL.

W

/f-4

^SJL

,f.4

/

_<2.

-JL

as <?■<?

t?.?

A9

~JZ-

j&.

/ii-4

0.6

/(■<?

ion*

&

j4

fp?

^S.

< '■'

Ca

74

i7

ft

-I£

..0J

4.4

.. 0.

ao

0.0 O-0

J

5-

*

4f

tz /J J

Total

m>

V3

&rt

fit J.

n?

«& t4tz

. sit j m

2/,?

w.

m

. f

./

g

ML

/f. S /00.

<L%

^4-

6/

a?

3/. / /00

^f'-f

/?ft/r/?

#(/?T?Af>

EvaloatHA

Nuifibet

PnCtnt

Number

PetCnt

Nuticr

PhCoiI

nwbet

Pa Cart

CtiBin

Datibtful

Total

Cntain

rjHbtfu

Total

Certain

DouMful

Total

Certain

OouttM

Total

Cntain

Ooubrtil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Owlitni

Tola)

Certain

OwHIul

Total

D-Balloon

7

/

/(?

9.S

¥0

ff.f

/

/

SO

,rp

jr,0

l-tstnmaial

f

J

/2

/t.0

40

/i-0

s-

/

i.

2?A

s.0

300

'

I-Airmd

^L

7

//

S3

u

/4(-

f

¥

0.0

MO

M/>

-(u-

outfit Phan.

/

/

/?

0.0

/■*

O

0.0

00

00

\

V

4-Siids

£

2

J?,7

0.0

2-7

/9\

O

0.0

0-0

00

^

5-Cbudj, Dnt, okL

/

/

/.?

0,0

/■J"

.Jl

<?

0.0

0.0

00

_

\

„

t-lmuWic kiln.

^

#

$.3

&0

S3

£■

£■

25Jl

00

2S.e

3

7-PiyduloptJl

.J?-

6.0

0.0

00

a

(?

0.6

0.0

0.0

A

S-Uiibio«n

2*

4<t

2£Jl

t>.fl

32.6

-JL

(7

4

M0

OP

20.0

V

MOih

g

?

(0

/07

?■?

/?</

a

■f?

0.0

60

6,6

Tottl

40

/S

?*

f0.0

206

&?.

J<L

&

fP

7/L0!

J00

(00.

3r£ ToTAtlt »o /VOT 4$Rtt W ITH '«Vf/0US foTMS B«>( 046 T*'* g/fHT/A/fS <StcU»!HEJ> AT VAfUCvtH l.tcA.TlO*SS

242

7X3L/T

J2/-f

£?#*. i/j? rya/v

_ a?

JLJ.

5/a*sr-//yt:z

?/7A>

^?£^

9Z**£

&Y

AVAfrt/ s)At£*/?A/i/ £0esr/0Af

A/atr/t dM££j/*A

l/p/rg 1 /) Sntret .

A**A/J/)J

rft*SKA

Evaluation

Number

PtfCsit

Number

PerCent

Number

Percent

KuraMf

PurCant

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tslil

Attain

□sutitful

TOM

Certain

Doubtful

Tolil

lertain

Doubtful

Totil

Certain

DoubtfulNumber

PerCent

Number

Percent

KuraMf

PurCant

Certain

Doubttul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tslil

Attain

□sutitful

TOM

Certain

Doubtful

Tolil

lertain

Doubtful

Totil

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

Certain

DouMlul

Total

Ctrtain

Ooubtfel

Tot*

frfjalloon

2SA

tf P

&o

3.4

£.7

Mt

M

/iJ

4A4

XL

s.t

/4 t t J 1

<

7 J.7

*?

u

£

f

J

43

■*■/

A/

Mttniunictl

<A4S

A/

?TZ

rff

AAA

2t.o 4a3

J/0

f/3

(to

(/./

f££

//

r e/

234 2.9

&■?

/t.

A

At

J?£.S <A0

2f.S

2-Aircftfl

J43

«?#^

60S

/At

tt

IS3L3Z.L

2SL.

£?6 /At

U

lAA

/A

/

//

A2-3

t£

(3,$

J

J

A..V

*P

/«■</

3-Liiht Ptlanom.

2f

«?-f

54

A0

0-i

it

29

23

£2

/■&

M

/.t

0>

a

' A

at>

0.0

0.0

(

A

/

Zf

<?■(?

z.f

e-eirtj

(4

t

ts

a.£

at

0.2

At

ft

42.

A-v

At

At

/

A

At?

tt

/■Z

A

A

A?

00

A?,0

AA

S-Clemh, Oust, etc.

f

fJ

tt

03

a. 4

0.7

f

/£

2f

A3

0.4

0/

00

0.0

00

A

A

fi

0.^

<?<?

AA

iVIrauflic, biro.

*f

A

iff

ft

a.a

t./

Uf

4

2A.A f.S

0.0

9.3

4

&

4

U-

t?0

4f

I

2,

43

(?,<?

*$

7-Piyetalotical

Jg

f

W

A.S

a.i

/.A

St

f

JL

/<?

AS

J.L

/

<0

t

/£.

00

/.t

&

00\

&A

0.0

HJntoBMi

',33

t?s

2A.3

a a

2/.S 532

£32 20. f

.0.0

m

lit

22

*tl

00

ft*

22.

A

22

</a

0>0

&f\

^Otnet

97

Z2,

fff

3,3

0.7

4a

33

2/

A09

,f.f

t>X

S.f

S

/

f

S.7

{2-

$9

_jC

A

J

?.s

A>-0

fo

7

/

Tom

2/3S

m

w

m

2t.J A00. iff 3

301 tffi 7A.S

2$ 1/00.

M

/r

ff

US

tts

(CO.

JL

/

f7

ft?

2-/

(M

•

Ms/t/0

///!^j

V'

Evlluition

Nunbn

Percent

Number

PtrCent

Nunter

Pat Cent

Number

Percent

CtrUin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubthi

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolll

Certain

floubW

TolU

;ertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtftii

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

o-eniow .

£

A

£

733

^

/f.J

__x

/

^

9.7

31

Al9

l-Astnmnicil

A

Z

s

17

/3J

MA

-JL

f

//

(2.9

2U

¥tf

2-Aiicnft

A

/

00

(uf

t.T

A

f,

J

?.Z

iSCertain

Doubtful

Tom

o-eniow .

£

A

£

733

^

/f.J

__x

/

^

9.7

31

Al9

l-Astnmnicil

A

Z

s

17

/3J

MA

-JL

f

//

(2.9

2U

¥tf

2-Aiicnft

A

/

00

(uf

t.T

A

f,

J

?.Z

iS

f-1

3'UititPhnna.

/

A

/

i.f

0A

If,

A?

0.0

A0

0A

4-Birtj

A?

(9

0.0

at?

80

(7.0

0-0

0,0

5-Cloudi, Dust etc

^

A

A?

0.0

<?,p~

0,0

-£L

/

(

0.0

3 7,

s.z

t-jiuuffib Info.

2

A

?

AJJ

A,A?

/tf

£■

2,

i.e

0-0

4,f

<

?-Psycholo(icil

f?

0.0

&e

00

00

0,0

#0

B-Unkmomn

*

■ A

<£

420

AA~

<fao

6

t

/U

0-0

A9,f

Utfttr

a

A

<?

00

00

00

2

(3

■P

A- *

0.0

6<&

Tom

■tt

3

/f

MP

000

(00-

A3

A3

St

OL

4/f

AA0.

77MI*

J?0/S

£-lS#tlSJTV0A>

0>r

///i/tr

s/sjvrr/vs r

fas

S?£A

tS<£/?J<>f

4V,

AA0*Tt

f AMg*/M/lA 20fjlT/0A/

t/t)2rti /}**£*/<**

0/(K/reo Shire's

A** #4 0*

/4i./i^A

Evaluation

Number

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Number

PerCent

Number

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

T0U1

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

LTotal

D-BaHoon

2d

///

3*7

f.0

tA

/$0

705-

/T/

Pf*

JL

4/

/<t

-2

4

7

S0

At- 7

//■/

2-

/

J

*t

2.?

r.s

1-Astronomieal

S£9

M

(t0$

tSIA

(A 4

fat

?2?

77. f

fSO

/<£7

(02

i >*f

At

1

24

2f.i

t/f

<A00

f

f

2A.4

£0

2£.£

2-Aircrarl

i£l

?(t

494

t/.9

90

Pt

2^2

2A0

Ht

(2.2

94

?i.7

/

5~

31

A0

rff

3

1

,f

J-1

0.0

ff

3-Liitil Phann.

3A

?A?

-57

/.I

0f

2.2

*f

20

/.I

09

7.2

a

AA

00

fOA(

A

A?

/

*.i

/?0

2f

4-Birds

(t

f

20

0.sr

04

0j

A/

f

if

0?

04

0.9

A

A

0.0

/■?

A7

(0

A.a

0O

A?,0

5-Claudl, DuJt, etc.

2-

7

f

A. A

03

H

-2^

6

t

0.1

03

0?

(0

0.0

0-0

00

A?

0.0

A?0

(0(7

frlniutfic. Info.

ZM

t?l

(0.0

00

(A0

226.

2ZL

/at

00

(0/

_J\

¥

£,.7

<?■#

Ar,7

2.

0?

2-

£.4

00

<?f

T-Ptvcholo|ir3l

26,

X

¥<f

/.$■

A3

(J

1s

r

41

/(,

04

?J>A?0

(0(7

frlniutfic. Info.

ZM

t?l

(0.0

00

(A0

226.

2ZL

/at

00

(0/

_J\

¥

£,.7

<?■#

Ar,7

2.

0?

2-

£.4

00

<?f

T-Ptvcholo|ir3l

26,

X

¥<f

/.$■

A3

(J

1s

r

41

/(,

04

?J>

A

/

A.7

00

A?

<?

A?.a

00

(7,0

o-UoknoMi

4ss

fas

'f**

PA

HZ

4ft

4tt

/S.7

00

tf.7

/£

A?

(<>

75,0

0,0

25.0

(3

<1

A3

sit

/?■£>

3X2

WMJw

if

Z0

99

?3

0f

*t

72,

(?

9/

S.2

09

4(

2

A

s

S3

f.t

£-0

S

0>

3

JF-S-

A?A?

f?

A

Tom

tin

bfo

ZVo

m

tt./

/t>0.

&?%

M

2239,

f/.s

2fc

(00

£L

/3

{0

7Z3

2 A 7

AM.

33

/

St

97. A

2?

A0A>.

B

>f

ME XI

CO

J/AW

Evaluetion

Number

Per Cent

Number

Per Cent

Number

PerCent

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

To,tal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tom

Jertein

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

0- Balloon

/

/

3.3

0.0

f-J

^

/

4

//A0

Z3

A/3

1-Astrooomicil

/

7f

3

#.2

/A,.f

7£(>

4

f

(3

/3J

30A

&3

2-Airciafl

A

/

0.0

«,?

X-3

A

2-

3

S3

ft, 7

(0-0

3-Liilit Pbensm.

A

/

23

00

13

0>

0.0

0.0

00

4-Brrdl

0.0

00

00

A?

0.0

AAA

00

^Clouds, Dust, etc.

A

00

00

00

.

A

A

00

,7-f

f.S

(•Insuffic Info.

2,

2,

/A.?

0.0

tt-7

2.

A?

2

A.7

0.0

A,-?

7-Ps|rcnolo|tcil

00

00

00

■

0.0

00

00

J-Unknom

4

V

Sf3

0A>

333

&

0>

£

/i-7

00

A4-?

mother

P

0.0

0.0

0.0

2-

tf

2

i-7

00

t-7

1

ToUf

f

3

At

7Z0

&.<?

(00.

(7

/S

30

£6.7

43.3

700.

<■".)

243

fr4j ^ a l ftH\^ .i J »ifl ^ ^-^W^

r»i<z^ ^V? ^j*#£i/Ar/#/* *?/*■ a/tJecr x/6#r/A/<ss /^/J/p /m &?**£ _ ^^

/♦'/WTW' AAt£/>/S*A/ I0?*r/JAS

j/^T/f /}M£jtlPA

/Ar/rso Srsr&S

. Cf/HA

&A

jtlASXJt

Evatefiw

Nuber

P«C«I

rtrabet

Pet Cat

NiMtar

PttCert

Mnbcr

PaCe*

Certain

oaum

Total

Certain

OMithl

Total

lertjin

DoubtM

Total

CertaM

DhMM

ToW

^rt»»

DnOtful

Total

Orttin

DsrttM

ToW

C«rt*«

Dg^tM

T«W

Carta*

DMMW

TtM

MallsoaMnbcr

PaCe*

Certain

oaum

Total

Certain

OMithl

Total

lertjin

DoubtM

Total

CertaM

DhMM

ToW

^rt»»

DnOtful

Total

Orttin

DsrttM

ToW

C«rt*«

Dg^tM

T«W

Carta*

DMMW

TtM

Mallsoa

/fS

m

•?/f

!£.

t-z

/£7 /W /2J.

MS ft

4'*

#?

^

1

&

a

&.t

/tf

2.

/

S

6-7

x/

/00

Matmoaicil

&S

tf?

<ff£

j&£.

?7

Z2.Z

£&\

ft&

f/t

/?■¥

ft?

*t-t

f

<r

'4 /$-? '04

27.2

f

S

/L7.

0.0

*-7

Mirend

2$4

rff

W*

/2.S

H

#.?

M

fft

433

f*-S

u

22.6

£

S~

a.f

#0

0.4

t

s f

/0.0

00

/P.J

3-UHitPlww.

*9

d

ft

J£

**f

2.2

-Jl

/7

&./.¥

0.9

23

a

£0

#0

0<0

/

/

^JL

00>

f.3

t-Blife

/0

f

ff

j2£\

0/

0.9

<0

f

ft

0f

fit

fif

a

/

I

#0

*.f

*•/

c

40

<40

0.0

5-Cloaft Dim, etc.

2y

'1

f

4/

0t

0.^

-^

4

g

<?,/

0.3

0-t

a

0.0

0.0

0-0

0,

<?

0>0.

00

<?.0

5-lnadic, Mb.

l(S

?r<r

t&L

0-0 .

/a.i

m

W

<0,f

00

(0.7

4

<?

.jL

a

&0

I*

£.

2.

4.7

(?0

4-7

7-Pl)rd»l0fiCal

?£

f

&

/.?

<?■¥

2./

M.

1

_Jt

t.'f

&¥

2.2

c

/

its

a#

?■/

0.

<P

QJ0,

00

#<?

S-Uakma

SfS

3fS

/9.4t

0.0

tfM

ss?

35? t&r

#0

// 7

ML

j£

2f.t

#t?

tra

//.

t*

¥1*.

0-0

ffj

Wtner

7*

<1

F

Jit

0J

l£L

-kt

/4>

t3

J.5 0?

¥.*

2/

/

■ *

<fz

?./

*3

_Z

3

/0.0

00

/0*

•0

Total

4tt

Sfl

?#&

ZJL

2fJ

w.

W £fr tf/t

frS.

2g.£ /00.

JX

W

fins.

20.f

/00.

^Z

/

30

?tl ss

/00,

MSX/S0

f/Ah//t//

Enhatnn

Nimibtr

Per Cent

Nnba

PaCanl

NoeAei

POCBlt

■aabtf

. Pa Call

Certain

OouMW

Total

CerSia

Dnbttil

Total

Certain

OouUnjI

TotH

Catta

Outtid

Total

Certain

OnMhl

Total

CertM

DaditM

Total

Cotaia

DaaMai

Total

CataW]

PmblM

TOM

(WKlwn

/

/

fJ

#0

s

/

i/

^./_

J£

/«/

\-K6xmmn\

/

&

/

Xf

4-7

2£0

J

/

(f

mf.

$r.&

Sf.3

Z-Alioan

r

/

0,0

t.3

ftf

./

&

J

s.i

fJ.

/0.T

J-UlMPlKKm.

i.

/

$3

0.0

&3

0\

0./)

00

0>.0

4-Biids

0.0

0C

0(?

.0.

0.0

0.0

0,0

tCloNls, am, etc

a

J20i

0,0

0\0

~&-

/

/

00.

J*

J!t0,0

t.3

ftf

./

&

J

s.i

fJ.

/0.T

J-UlMPlKKm.

i.

/

$3

0.0

&3

0\

0./)

00

0>.0

4-Biids

0.0

0C

0(?

.0.

0.0

0.0

0,0

tCloNls, am, etc

a

J20i

0,0

0\0

~&-

/

/

00.

J*

J!t

S-Dnuffic hb.

2,

2-

/£?

00

K7

z

2,

?/

(?0

7./

TfsjpcMoticil

0.0

00

&0

#

0.4>

0-0

0-0

B-UntawM

_J-

/

#J

00

S3S

_,£

f-

/f.f

0.0

ttf

' ' "

M»w

n

0P

#0

0.0

i.

2,

7J

00

7/

ToW

-$-

j

ft

fat.

2£0

m

JL

(*-

0!

sr/

#■?

m

•

244

I

?»^^- A? 10 £t/4£l/jr/0A/ /?F ^Li ^/G#r//V65 . fCs?

*£.<.

</&**S /?¥

W/r

f A

sr*r*s /te6/0/VA£ £0>4jr/0#.

7ar<tt

A/atr# &tsr

fe/vrfi/fj. £jsr

J&i£rt- E<4fr

Evaluation

Neiftber

Pet Cent

Number

Per Cent

Number

Pei Cent

Number

Per Cent

Certain

DWDM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

To 111

Certain

Dotibltul

Total

Certlin

Doubtful

Toltf

lertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

OoobtM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Billoon

24&

/**

&¥

gf.

t f*

44

9

/

10

&L

2.0

/u

JT2

ft

M.

/?

47

'£<

/

a

/

-^

#.&

//

l-Aiinmonial

401

,?/0

,7/,t

/4.4

//■/

&£

£

f

'f

//J

tfl

tf¥

ft

32.

utrft

*5

?03

S'

/

i

/S.O

M

(t7

2-Airerafl

m

2*4

$t$

at

tz

2f0

£-

t

//

fit

/ft

2M

/&a

63 /t5

'2,2.

lf-2

m

7

<

II

0/9

/s.r

Iff

3-Lifht Prtmn,

2f

t*

ft

/■0

0$

/H

f

z

20

?&

tie

4

it

0-7

'/.¥

*•(

._/

_ /

1.

J/

*/

f.1

4-Slrttt

~k

t

20

a*

$*

fit

0,0

I?,0

0.0

£

a

£

a?

00

At

0.0

0,0

0-0

J-Clowh, hit, rtt

<f

It,

2'

#3

04

0-7

0.0

00

#£>

_JL

9

t

0,0

'{■&

f-f

0.0

00

(?<?

S-btatflic Ian.

2tf

W

93

00

fj

3

3

U-

0.0

*t

44

<?4

7-t

00

11

£

2.

i.S

0.0

tJ

7-Ptrthlo^til

3f

9

4

A3

#s

fit

/

f

2J>

<?0

f,0

*

3

if

i.4

fff

if

tf

00

f?<0

0-0

VMaum

$2Z

?H

2>,i

00

%>■$

9

9

//**

00

/.u

ILL

-J0

I'Z

If. 2,

00

(?i

¥

4

/l*

00

ll$

WMJnr

fg

Zf

(09

_?/

as

J.f

(?

a

0.0

0,0

0.0

/3

.J.

IS

?t

0,3

'?■$

. *,

6

/fi

0,0

lf$

TM2>,i

00

%>■$

9

9

//**

00

/.u

ILL

-J0

I'Z

If. 2,

00

(?i

¥

4

/l*

00

ll$

WMJnr

fg

Zf

(09

_?/

as

J.f

(?

a

0.0

0,0

0.0

/3

.J.

IS

?t

0,3

'?■$

. *,

6

/fi

0,0

lf$

TM

m.

&%

2ffs

%1

*17

M

UL

/7

S/

&L?

S3. 3

(00.

wL

/5€

Si±

12. f

2f./

m

2£

&

sz

gf.t

/fg

100.

#

w-&

%

A/0*Ttf fr//!M£sr

/'s'/vrjf/ti. M/awnr

Sptrr//- A?/j?tts£sr

Evaluation

Numbei

PerCent

Number

PerCent

Number

PerCent

Certain

doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Mloon

_^

/0

'ti-

Jit

//•/

& *>

SI

?*

ft

?l

13

/04

^21.

■ «

At

£2

.*/

10.?

■•Aibwuialcal

/3

6

ff

&£,

u

Z</l

fl>.

J 6

13 d

200.

10

27$

.IL

10 T

m.

dj_

// t -7

2?l,

Mi reran

s-

/

9

4-3

?J

//■¥

«/<-

¥/

U

f-4

Iff

iff

■U

*f

135

/2-L

94

2/.S

}*Li0it PtienonL

_j2_

f.

2,

0P

2.S

f,fi

.J I.

t

If

2.3

1.7

¥0

5"

/

i.

0.8

102

1.2

4-Birds

■ /

/

/■3

0.0

13

3

2,

s

.4 b.

*/

t.0

4

f

1

0-6

05

ft

S-Cloodt, Dust, etc

£>

00

0.0

00

f?

0.0

.00 00

—0i

0J0

0.0

0-0

Unsuffic- mio.

/0

10

(U.

00

If, 7

-M-

fit

/2.9

1)0

ftf

56

5C

M-

00

Iff

/■Psytfologital

/

/

A 3

$0

1-3

sl.

itt

JL£

0C?

2?

3

S

1,

0£ 0.0

10

5-llnkrioM

?*

22.

zp

0.0

ffj

7#

i¥

JS9

6.0

I&4

/$/

/$■/

240 0.0

*4f

Mthet

_z_

£

z.s

0.0

t?

/s

f.

■ f7

3.i

0.4

,?•*

ft

,r

13

/.3

a.S

2.1

Total

J±

az

ft

m

m

100

ist

ll¥

*(f

&2

2Z.Z

/00.

4tf

2/2

&2? 603

j£7 m

Merit

k/gsr

£eA/r*4/, k/esr

Savr/T' P>/fftr

Evaluation

Number

Per Cent

Number

'PerCent

Hutnter

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtnri

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dcibtfu:

Total

Certain

Doubrfoi

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Balloon

_jL

^

/,

^

ff

i£3

s

V

t

St

/,2-

^

^2L

/O

4S

■ft

96

(tf

1'Astronoaical

./0>

/

//

20.4

2-0

f?4

2f

/{

¥0

&7Certain

Doubrfoi

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Balloon

_jL

^

/,

^

ff

i£3

s

V

t

St

/,2-

^

^2L

/O

4S

■ft

96

(tf

1'Astronoaical

./0>

/

//

20.4

2-0

f?4

2f

/{

¥0

&7

/2-f

ft.s

44

a

lU

2L£

i>/2.

32{

2-Ai rtraft

. .&

/

4

&A

2.0

111

^7

/

f

S.S

4/

!?/

2/.

fl

st

a.7

&3

/£.£>

3-Liihl Ptiewia.

(?

j£JL

00

0,0

_ L

■0

/

/.2

0.0

/2

£-

2

4

0.ff

0ff

/.0

4-Birds

/

/

-£Z

0ft

10

/

/

0.0

1.2.

/,t

_£,

Z.

2

0.0

0.5-

a. s

5-Clouds, Dust, etc.

J

,f

A./

00

It 1

-M-

0.0

0.0

0-0

s~

1.

f

/S

0.S

At

Hnwffic. hfo.

3

3

A/

00

*>/

£■

f

5.f

■ 0-0

fi.t

.27

Q

2?

V0

0-0

70

7-Piyclmlo(ital

0.

?,

4/

iP,0

¥ ' i

t,

10

/,

ra

$.0

?e

O

O

00

0.0

00

B-llnhMwn

¥

/

f?Z

0-0

f.t

//

I?

17

/it

0.0

ff-i

m

/0</

20?\

0.0

2{.f

9-orjrti

J£.

//

2LS

0.0

&■?

S

,f

S.€

#<0

3-Sp

4

6

10

/■0

16

24

"-T

Total

/f

/

H

9/.t

£2-

/00.

/,?

I?

U

mz

/?,*

/00

2S-0

/3U

rft

6 4?

3£2.

100.

d/aer* f*#*/£sr

^Asr/frfi. / r /f / e^£ir

Sot,™ Arrises?-

Evaluation

Number

Pel Cent

Number

PerCent

Numbei

Pet Cent

Ceibin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;ertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Get bin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

r> Balloon

/S

J

X

/IS

2-7

fc&

^2-

tf

J¥

JM.

t.f

00-4

22,

/&

?4

/S.6

u

14./

t-AilmnorjiOl

. /-/

10

2/

f.f

?-t

/f<

/^

{>

22.

-&-

3.6

13.2.

6

If

tf

43

fj

f*-f

2-Aitcijft

/■?

//

24

tf*

f-7

2(£

A?*

f.S

4?

&7-

/?•?

m

/f

4

24

•fgg

4.3

Iff

J-Lijht PfienOB,

_£_

00.

0,0

0,0

/

1

at,

00>

0.t

_x

2

2.1

00

?.f

4-Blrdt

o

OP

ao

#0

00

$0

00

/>

-0

0.0

0r0

0.0

5-Cloui», Dint, alt

_/\

{?

I

J?Ji

00

fi9

.J?

/

/

ML

fid

0-t

0.O

0.0

00

frlMufllu klb.

/•?

/3

//.$

00

{(■£

2*

I?

24

/££.

4-0

df

/1

/i

g.4

0.0

ft

7-PrydolorlcH

_J2.

00

00

&0

. L

2.

3

Ak.

t-Z

/.*

1

/

4

2.1

£7

2.ZML

fid

0-t

0.O

0.0

00

frlMufllu klb.

/•?

/3

//.$

00

{(■£

2*

I?

24

/££.

4-0

df

/1

/i

g.4

0.0

ft

7-PrydolorlcH

_J2.

00

00

&0

. L

2.

3

Ak.

t-Z

/.*

1

/

4

2.1

£7

2.Z

t-Unanim

2S

f

£3

m

G0

204

2t

2?

/&■/-,

£0

if,-?

J4.

*4

24.1

A0

Hi

Mtbw

/J

■

a

t(*

00

(f-<?

2,

?,

4

1.2,

(.2.

2.4

?

<4

n

£.4

f.f

ti

L ToM

XI

2?

/'j

fit

2/.Z.

m

US-

41

/H

ILL

&■!

100.

107

34

/4l

ff-f

24:1

100.

fe

245

M

r

?#4lE A22./ ^VjLVtr //?/!/ £?S 6W/r S-/G//r//V6 i ^S?# s?L£. ¥&*<rs &</ i

0#/T

p> <r*r£-s fe6/£>/tf*t U<?//r/&v

T^r**,

7I7mt# £«zr

.. ^Z&rtitAr JC±SZ_.

5~<3</r/i> &*sr

Equation

ftiMpei

Percent

M mini

Pa Ceol

flwntr

P« Cwl

Nuinbti

P«fCotl

Certiii

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total Dertain

Doubtful

TOW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:ertjifi

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubthl

Total

Certain

OlK-'ltfUl

Total

CCVt9tfl

DouMhi

Tola)

0* Balloon

#><

///

/<*&!

12.

0-7

/ST/

7

/

/

W.M

277

4L

30

74 93

03

/jf.0

—L

/

y^

^^ /.0>

1-AjtKXMlOl

/w

/w

5^

tf-l

,*?2

24 f

/

/

/

*t£ 7.9

/£4

72

7.9

/0Z

&4

/./

&*

<

/

10.0

40

tf. a

ZAiicnrt

272,

£/<?

rtz

{2.2

,*f

£76

/

^"

f

If

//.2

2/./

f6

ff

732

£.0

/f.a

ff.0

if

2-

r

£&\

f.0

#/p

3-UtfitPhamk.

2<?

^

•f

-LS.

**?

2.7

/

/

2

2.1

*.«*

S3

_£

4

70

0.1

-JJ-

*/

/

/

t

jU.

</,0

f£>

t-Blnb

//

r

tf

ag\

<*/

29

£?

^

^

00

^

l 0,0

J

s

0J,

0.0

#0

<o

<?

0.0

/?.a

tt<?

S-Cloud*, Dust, etc

7

*

/

0.7

02

&£

(?

<?

•

~0HL

00

0.0

#

3

3

0.0

0.0

(96

d

C?

#

0>.S)

0>

ac?

frfejrttit Mo.

itb.

r?

*#

/£>./

<?■<?

/0./

/

<?

•J"

Jt

<J?i?

7-f

43

4*

?■/

fP.0

9./

a

0>

■z

$.0

0.a

10

^PirdBkiifat

2f

r

^

7.6

0-4

2.0

/

/

£L

<^

2,4

*

2

/0

fit

A¥

M

0>

<p

£01

0.0>

0.O

VUktem

4tt

^

*/*?

III

0-0

if.f

f

?

23.7 0.0

■217

27

g/

'f.(

£0)

/?.'

-JL

0>

*'

/Ml

0.0

tf.O

KXtaf

72,

//

7/

3.2/

£L

<^

2,4

*

2

/0

fit

A¥

M

0>

<p

£01

0.0>

0.O

VUktem

4tt

^

*/*?

III

0-0

if.f

f

?

23.7 0.0

■217

27

g/

'f.(

£0)

/?.'

-JL

0>

*'

/Ml

0.0

tf.O

KXtaf

72,

//

7/

3.2

09

4/

«?

0,0

^

00

/3

&

;Z

*.r

a.tf

J/

£.

<?

z,

S.0\ 00

t.0

'

Tot.

isn

.w

*!?#

^£

n*

/00,

zt

/#

&

m.

#.*

700,

*&.

/*f

tftfM

%£ m

2/

V

z£

MA /00

/00

/l//}#r// AJ//>tv£ir

te/rrjjt. /7/0»>f£7'

S^tZprtf A?//>*//=<r

Evaluation

Hunber

Percent

Hmber

PerCent

NUBtH

PerCsit

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DeuHTut

Total

lerbin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouUtuI

Total

Certain

DniuHu 1

Total

Certain

DouMtuI

Total

0- Balloon

.**

f

//?

s

/0.0

tf*

ts

jy

60

M.

r.z

{0.4

7/,

22 Si

£-0

iJ

/f.4

1-AtHonuaical

2±

rr

ff

d/

7J

743

79

27

/07t

/£$ '0-3

27.g

/.9

73 ' WZ

/4.7

jf-4 203

2-Aiicnn

«"

/

9

AL

$7

/2-f

jL

{0

ft*

M0 f.3

/f.3

£S

47

(0 2

///

/00

217

HJt*t PNnom.

^

t

0.0

?9

7-f

//

7

f%

{■£

4z

0-

/

£>

t.7

0.2

f?

4-Blnh

/

/

/¥

$.0

/-f

-f

2*

$

0.S

Z.2,

-J-

3

7

J2J-

tii.

/■S

Kloads, Dist, etc

__£

<?

0.0)

00

0,0

0.0

00

0.0

0>

<0

£0-.

0.0

0.0

S-hainc. kb.

f

IT

\//4

00

0¥

£f

0>

*g

/J.i

00

/f4

<7V

44

?{

0.0

9.4

T-Psyctakxlcal

/

0>

/

vM

00

/■f

/£

/?,

r 7J-

0.0

77

S

3

&

a&

0.0

f.2.

9*UnJunwi

20

?J

1U

0-0

tt.fi

0S-

a

as

S<ZZ

0.0

7s:z

90

70

tlA.

0.0

/f.7.

WMtw

&

■

2,

4.4

Q-0

7/

/*

/

/£

ZJ

02

3.s

■f

£

(3

/.7

/./

7.7

/

Total

#2.

JL

?0

143

2£.f

/00.

fla

/0g

427

its

24.2.

/0O. ?#4

fa 4

4&z

/,S0

3770

/00.

" '

-#0/er# - M£ir

/?£/vr#/tL ti/g-tr-

Sat/rs/ J^7£~sr

Evaluation

Nintei

Per Cent

Nuigoer

PaCenl

Number

Per Cat

CertaTrt

DMOtlU)

Total

Certain

DotWriil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtful

.Total

Certain

Doutitfui

Total

Certarn

Doubttol

Total

0-BallHn

_^

2.

■&

JfS.

■4-t

&i

.j*

/

4

l£.

/f

7.2

J/.

'?

//

MLTotal

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtful

.Total

Certain

Doutitfui

Total

Certarn

Doubttol

Total

0-BallHn

_^

2.

■&

JfS.

■4-t

&i

.j*

/

4

l£.

/f

7.2

J/.

'?

//

ML

27

*4*

]*Aitrano«ical

f

/

?

ff-9

,?/

7$0

±sL

//

2*

ML

ft ?

Ifit

JS\

^£7.

$4

(3i

/7.0-

t2J

2-AimaH

f

/

{,

I£i.

J./

t?7

s

2^

&

4£

¥■&

77

~2?

-2t

47,

-JLZj

2.7

tfi

3-Lijht Plunoa,

_£_

0>

(JO

0>O

00

/

0.

/

J£-

00

/■*

2

2.

4

-0J-

&2

76

4-Hirtj

_d\

0>

(?

0.0?

00

00

70

/

/

J2J2.

At?

■7*

2^

2.

/7.0

0%

M

5-ClMHil, Dust, etc

/?

0>

£j2

0,0

00

_jL

-J2-.

MJL

0.0

0.0

7

2.

j

4JL

0-9

f.2

6-lnsvlTic. bllb.

f

0>

s

U.

0/9

94

£~

0?

5

sx.

00

77

ML

"^

~J7

£±SL

0.0

t-f

T-Ptychiloptal

£

0>

2,

i.3

00

13

<7

0?

V

/,2.

00

02

1

07.0

00

0.0

f-Unknoim

_£

0>

4

17.4

00

tU

J4l-

{6

2U.

00

Hi,

St

£f

M£.

00

02S

M!*h

j

0>

?

9.4

00

f-4

^

■f

M.

00

ft

_Jt\

s-

f

7.^

f-t

f4

Total

2{

~~7

/£

tiff

ft.*

/00.

T4

76

6<7

ft<t

&,£,

m

/is

92

267

64l\

&,/

/00

A/0i?r# / r /fjfiv£sT

. &F/VTS41 Fst*ts£zr

S0&7?/ T^ttwesr

EnlulbOd

Nundcr

Per Coil

Kunbet

.

■ctCmI

Nunicer

PerCnt

Certain

Doubt till

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doublful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DoiHiil

Total

D-Billimi

/f.

-/

a

Tf.f

AS

/t-7

77

//

ft

fU

7*

ff-t

Jt

ti-

,7/

JL/

70.2

74-3

l-ijtranoaital

//

/0>

2/

/0.1

9J

fff

7$

t

2/

0-2

4/

t¥*

^0

ff

//

S-7-

f.3

/{4

Z-Aiicrait

//

f

f&

tf.0

ft

20.3

26

/3

3?

4 s

f.9

%f

/</

£

20

^S~

,ff

rtp

3-Lifht Ptmoi.

.0>-

0?

a

J2JL

fl\0

0>.0

/

/

'tr

00

0.7

?

3

7-s

0.0

f-e

4-Biids

0>

0?

P

0>0

0,0

00

0.0

0.0

00

^72_

0.0

0,0

00

S-Clouds, Dust etc

/.

0>

/

-£3-

00

A?

/

/,

0,0

07

0-7

.0

0.0

#0

00

t-BWlfit M.

?P

0>

M>

■M-

0.0

f.3

.M

*¥

fi-Y

0.0?

/i.4

7

9

f.0

00

740.0

00

^72_

0.0

0,0

00

S-Clouds, Dust etc

/.

0>

/

-£3-

00

A?

/

/,

0,0

07

0-7

.0

0.0

#0

00

t-BWlfit M.

?P

0>

M>

■M-

0.0

f.3

.M

*¥

fi-Y

0.0?

/i.4

7

9

f.0

00

74

7'PlfdV)l0tiCB

P

(7

0>

020

0.0

0.0

/

2.

3

<??

/.¥

21

3

7

4

2<3

0t

3-J

VUmm

41-

07

73

2LL

0.0

:?/.?

26

25

(?>

00

/7-f

22

f7

J££.

0,0

^i

*ott*

Jj-

>3

tf.0

fi.0

(70

2,

2,

4

•V

/</

i.f

*

4

(*

t-l

■f-4

(02-

ToW

I±

22.

/0g

m.

20,4

toe.

///

?*

7<76

f#«*

2^0

%>0-

JZ

s4

7/S

J-2.

2f r f

/M

246

i ■

, ; Sv

!>5fl*V.f

stftl.

jryji/SA r/a/V

jf

/9#j£tr

-JT/(S/fr//>>6-£

r<?<?

rfLL

Vf/ttl

ffY

i/^{r^o

frxr£T j?f?f,saA>4i i.t?f4r/a/t/

f&nte

/9/<?*r# s^ssr

^£-/vr*4i ftsr

S<0t>r*> ^ssr

Evaluation

NuMNt

Par Cant

Number

P«r Cent

Number

Pel Cent

Number

Pet Cm

rasr

Doubtful

tow

Certain

Doubtful

Total

^attain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

ToM

;irt«in

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DMiMM

ToW

Ccrtim

Doubtful

Ttdl

Cetbin

OoLblful

TutJt

O-BtlloM

rS

/£/

Xftf"

Z6

AS

/&.?

f

/

2T/f t

•v

tA&

ff

*/

rff

12-

4-f

/£.&

/

/

~<£\

v.i,

ts

1-MtmiMilal

2£Z\

/•fi^

T?f

'Z?

f-f

#/,?

-A

— &\

7

#>-f

1'

ft-t

40.

44' 7/)

//.7\

£./

'Zt

*f

/

s

£L£

**'

&.7

2-AJrtraft

^Se

/if/'

f<5t/

ftt

t.g

sg. 4

t

£

_L

?■/

At*

?/.£>

J£.

-J0.

//£

/£t /■*■?■

2S.S

«"

/

6

£ZA

<•,'•;'

^^2

J-Ulltl PIlnHL

21

•/

/**

/.4

J>f.

f-3

/

/

2.

2-7

t-7

£9

3

&

f

fig

J,S.

?■■*

/

/

?

..£. 3~

j^'»L

f~

4-Blrrh

-l£.

If

//

&s

*■¥

<?■?

__0

,2.

00

£>.(?

00

3

a

J

fit

-&£^

&f

^J?

ti>

t?

sLi2\

</■(/

&<;

S-Clouda, Dm), ttc.

2.

I

rf

0(

0.3

0-4

'a

0.0

0.0

0.0

<0

J

J

££_

at

0.g

^JL

£>

Mil

at

ipj

6-lnsitnc. Into.

22$.

^

#>£

jpr

0.0 /a?

J

_<?

. f

f/

00

ft

ss

—J0.

JS

-iz}

0,0

r.7

2.

Z

9./

;,'■&

?■/

7-Pqdab|iol

?4

ir

¥1

<s

*■¥

f-*

1-

-4

/

2?

0.0

7-7

7

2-

9

a

/?.*

Z-3

£>

<7

d>^

#>£

jpr

0.0 /a?

J

_<?

. f

f/

00

ft

ss

—J0.

JS

-iz}

0,0

r.7

2.

Z

9./

;,'■&

?■/

7-Pqdab|iol

?4

ir

¥1

<s

*■¥

f-*

1-

-4

/

2?

0.0

7-7

7

2-

9

a

/?.*

Z-3

£>

<7

d>

_jZ£\

<?.(;■

is. &

S-lManm

iff

<?

fsf

/#/

&._#

(W

X

a

8

U(*

0-0

2A6

£<?

<?

6f

/■£.&

<?■<?

f?6

^jL

?

¥

MA

&f

tf.Z

Mthar

-&2

/*

ffS

ys

*•?

/>

p

a

a

&0

0.0

&0

/S

z.

/•* r

is

as-

s.s

jl

2,

-te.

a. £■

?.'

ToW

fW

^

m

r/.$

dJU.

/<??>

Jt

/a

JZ-

T*-0

2{0

/&?.

txi

/f*W

?{,.<?.

??.£>

'&>.

JZ.

?

Z2

?w

fa*

'id

I

-$6*p/ /^/?l»'£Sr .

_ ££/vrjt*t fiftatvfsr

Srft>r& M/aHts-fr

EvtltnttM

NwMr

PnCent

Nunfttl

Per Cent

Numln

Pet ceit

Certiln

DouttMl

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certiln

Doubtful

Total

Certiln

Ooubtfu!

Tom

Certain

Doubtful

Total

O-Mltwi

s

7

M

^X

//.i

//,./

?/)

eg

€?

rfV

7.S-

/£,s

25

f.t

£3

*•¥

?2

/?-£

Mitranaicel

f

;f

{/

/2.f

f.f

{?■?

Sf

2 ft. 47/*?.

ty

f&(

5/

*f

//^

£££_

,*,

£i/

Mlitntt

s~

/

?

.7

jr.-/

f<?

/&

J&

24

77

ff-f.

f?

&+

50

4t

9/

'£S,

^2-2-

2£J.

3-Llejht Ptema.

^

&

_&jL

f,z

JZ

//'

$

/£.

*-f

./:3*

4z

4

<?

4

'■J

rt<?

/.£

4-Blrds

I

■0

/

JJ^

<?■<?

/■*

S

&

S

*f

,&s- /S

3 .?

6

fit

/If

/Jt

5-CIWidi, Dust, (He

.JL

(?

s

<?,(?

#■#

—£-

&

ft?

J>J2.

#P

t?

■O

JJL-/J.&

a?

S-lniurTic Into.

r

ft

s

/?.9

0,0

rt-f

$7

t?

S7

&z

Art

/£Z

IS

/?

-&-

?.'

?■■■

?<?

7-Psyclnl«ii{tl

/

<?

/

/.&

w

t>6

/Z

a

/Z

3Z

S20

JZ

s

j

/,

M.

ui>.£

>.(*

S-Unbiaum

JL

<?

ft

&2\

/?.#

2?.'4

*?

a

57

'{?.*

<?<P

/£T2

74

&

0. &£.-£.<?

tf?

Mft«

2.

&

^2ji

?.&

J£

zk

f

,./.&

f?

.£$ .

f<?

X

*

/£ 2. a /.£

-? ■;

-

Tbtat

&L

/L

tz

Ml

Z$!

/00.

m.

J*

12L&L

if 4 '<&. .

ess

/if

39/

itt

SXJ

'00-

. . :Jife£T4 Jrfetr

/ , £#r#/>i tS£sr

Sai/r# U/s-sr

Evaluation

Kurixr

Percent

Numbei.

Pa Cent

Nufflbfi

P« Centtz

Ml

Z$!

/00.

m.

J*

12L&L

if 4 '<&. .

ess

/if

39/

itt

SXJ

'00-

. . :Jife£T4 Jrfetr

/ , £#r#/>i tS£sr

Sai/r# U/s-sr

Evaluation

Kurixr

Percent

Numbei.

Pa Cent

Nufflbfi

P« Cent

Certain 1

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

TOM

Certiin

Duubttol

TotU

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ceiuin

Ocubtfui

Total

O-BaHeon

J

^

f

J£\

77

ff.i,

3

/

f

SJ-.

17

If

JL

&

&

ff.i

?.Z

Aff

l-AttoBaicil

3

• /

¥

//■£

fj

&3

_£L

/

Z0

Mk

ft-T

3?.?

1/

Sf

6?

/Jf.

,££

"*■/

2-AlicnR

f

/

6

/U

SJ.2

&.0

3

s

t

JU.

?■/

/?%

2/

2/

¥2

9.1,'

9 4 
?-9

J-Lijht Phenoa.

#

■&

ML

60

&(?

./

6>

1

JJ-

?.<p

/■/

j2-

4,

4

££-

t-Blrds

_Ul

<?

fid)

<?P

a<?

,Q

/

(

£JL

(■7

f7

a

a.

2.

JSJL

(?,*>

6-9

i-Clouda, Duet, etc.

&

a

&

tf.O

/><?

a&

_JZ

(?

<9

JZJ2\

PJ>

0.0

/

2.

3

JJL

£?

/.?

Hnsutfic. tih.

„-i_

a

3

J/&

A0

#.&

^SL

{?

^

££-

00

fs

^L

O

'¥

JLL

&<■

j.J

T'Paycholoiictf

— z.

&

£

Sl.

a#

7-f

*

(7

4

jLSL

/?■<?

4-f

a

(?

. ^

jM.

','y

t?.C

UlnliiBwi

.f

&

J

j££.

<?■/>

//■*

/£

<9

/$

££S

ft-0

&.*

&

S>

$3

CjJ,

!-J>

CSS

Mthei

^

(?

3

&£.

#0

//.€

J

,*■

MU-

00

*■/

2|

J?

?

-/JL

■:3

s-/

Tot*

22,

¥

*i

&£

/£■?

m

£l

//

*f

74- J

m~

/££>

m

if

<>*3

6&-

Jp.f

/pa

m.

tfMf/f JtftM/EST-

-^CgAZJ&L^ &r£l*'££T

-Seaz&^-JzM^gsr. ..

Eralialiwi

Number

Pei Cent

Nuntm

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Certain

Ooobjhl

Total

Certain

Doiatfirl

Total

;(rt»n

Doubtful

Total

Cert«n

DouMM

Total

Certain

Doubttil

_Walj

Certam

Doubtful

[Total

S'Ballren

/I

J 7

rV

~a2

J?

/0

Jk.

f

&

/Z2-

4.f

#'

~ij~\

f0

2?

-A-J^

?.7

?<;■*

l'Astiononlcal

S#

/

/f

/&.£

t-4

/£?

_IL_

£

//

t<t

¥i>

/f.0

Js\

—jZ

>Z

<,.?\

?7

r *

2'Alrcratt

/£

' ,f

1(

/U

U

21. '

~2£

a

■M

l£3_

?.z

n*

j.S .

j

. ?

■'U

s.f

<f4

3-Ligfit Phenon.

-£.

<?

&0

at?

<?#

./.

/

£2_

'00

0$

s

n

3Js\

—jZ

>Z

<,.?\

?7

r *

2'Alrcratt

/£

' ,f

1(

/U

U

21. '

~2£

a

■M

l£3_

?.z

n*

j.S .

j

. ?

■'U

s.f

<f4

3-Ligfit Phenon.

-£.

<?

&0

at?

<?#

./.

/

£2_

'00

0$

s

n

3

sX

0-/?

7-9

4-BM

-£.

J2A

#0

00

ML

00

0-0

$

s*

00]

0.;?

*

S-Clouos, Dust, etc

../.

<?

/

-/■l\

ft<?

/■/

_j2.

/

/

0j3_

0J

0$

o

-0

,

l.e?

00

frlnwlflt tob.

'0

<?

fff

&£.

#0

/&*

J£i

?l

iLM.

0-0

'■#•$

r

,>"

JLLi

0-v-

"■$

T-Psyebnlojlcal

/>

&

Gff

M

00

^jL,

z

3

M_

/.s-

?.3

^z.

/

_ t_

rV

■0

39

t-Unknown

-2L

ft

nu

fi#

m

JJ^

?Z

Jhl

#0

44

_t£

I?

j<44\

^.0

K.l

4-Othet

~L

r?

f

££

0<?

u

z.

4

4

M£L

f,f

J0

_£

4

. 4

JLX

?9

■/■/

Total

Z£

20

fsr

%J

*(■(

tm

Jf-

22

/J/

fSt,

z4¥

/£>/>■

f£

J/

/03

&£

10/

/m

247

p

h-j^-».T**—V™--K.4rf.VV**'

ffl^zf /<?2,j* £yi9Ltj/?r/i?A/

0f

/?U

s/6^r//t/cs

'f

■r#s

sr/CA /£■;'./" jjfifft i

0f rs/£ ££t/re#£ £s?sr

*>£'<S/<0#

A?£tv Vat*

#/9*f/{<Str#e;

A//}si*/A/6r0/v

/fy&A/k£& J'-'

:£tisf'f?£. £.fhr

ErthntiMl

Itaiber

PnCenl

Number

Percent

Number

Pet Cent

Numbei

Pei Cent

Certain

Ooubttul

Tom

Certain

OouMtll

Total

: train

OoatKrW

Total

Certsi

Doutitful

Total

:«rt*n

Ooubthri

To(ll

Certain

Doutrtnil

Tolal

/r'.i

Cfltam

DouWful

TdUl

Ceittin

OouWnil

TotJl

f$2.

Walloon

j&

/

2<?

fa

<r.f

¥'

9

6

/*

m.

7/

as

uS-

/Z

j£L

40

of

l-Astononieal

20

6

f/r

//.Z

?4

tf i

/e

/0

$0

J/J . /A..9JU.

-&L

/'

-SI

/?0

f.Z

2¥Z

.sJL

f

9. ■■

2-Airaafl

£S

>£

6£

0.S

£.?

fi,f

.//

/0

24

AJ.

//■?

2U 21

27

50

/i0

'2-9

?*?

-J&.

&

*c

J-LigM Ptiajori.

2

/

S

//

0i

//

/

/

a

~g£\

/■£

>?

0<?

/.0

/0

L.

f

/

-.-.?

-j£L\

*.</

4-Binb

a

(?

-M.

0,0

0.0

_jL

<■

MX

.,?.&.

4?

/

2

.0£

00 £>■!>

-JL

r?

^'■

00

4-Cloodj, Dust etc.

^

4?.0

0.0

0.0

0.

0£

-JZjZ

/>.0

£

*

&J2.

*.r

XX

0>

/

/

:r

:>■?

9

frlnuffic. Into.

2/

^

4/

M*.

at?

(t-t.,?.&.

4?

/

2

.0£

00 £>■!>

-JL

r?

^'■

00

4-Cloodj, Dust etc.

^

4?.0

0.0

0.0

0.

0£

-JZjZ

/>.0

£

*

&J2.

*.r

XX

0>

/

/

:r

:>■?

9

frlnuffic. Into.

2/

^

4/

M*.

at?

(t-t

. z.

2,

.M

-^2.

£«

//

0'

/

i>2

00

fi.

-i£_

<7

■r?

_i-l

J.0

9'

£P»]fd»toiicat

.?

^

7

J.f

00

J -f

. /.

' <?

/

/,P

^£j2-

/£

_^2.

tf£>

0?0

#0

_z2J

s

s

J.?

?.7

2"*

eVIMnown

££.

i?

2i

M&

at

'46

/<r

/*

/7.1

S&z.

//■?

$f

sj 2F-1

£0

2*±

JJL

s?

,f

.i',

00

//,+

Wtfier

<r

,£"

JX.

00

*■$

£

2.

M

00

2.4

s

3

/■if

0.0

/■<{

_X

£

&~

<■} f

,-"S

<S4

-

T«»l

J£2-

??

/ff

g4s

/*f

/OP.

sr

26

ft

6&

_-?/0W0 IST0.

ft

2/0

#■*

2g.&

/00.

-AjL

4?

ffp

tac

M£.

'&.

7Z&Z£- /?22tf £S/?£0Ar/0/y 0f ALL S/6HT//V6S //V 7V£ •>T*/?r£0.-0 A/C^^i

0f r#e d£/vT/e/?i A?/#i*/£sr~ ^d/0^

fM/S4&0

&4Vrfi//

^0/>,f£ #? (*£Af7#/H. M/DivCST

EvaloaliM

Nun bet

PerCwt

Number

PnCent

Number

P« Cent

NlMIDH

Per Cmt

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain

DqubtM

Total

Certa'n

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Dmibltul

Total

Certain

OouMM

Total

Catain

DnuliHul

Total

Certain

Doubibil

Total

u-Ballstn

^

5"

7

/i-

*r

f-0

^7

/

ft?

Jtt

Mf

%.0>

^L

ff

-er

7J./0.Z

#■#

Mitmmfcil

20

^

2Z

ft. 7

9./

?/■$

Jf

//

££

j£l

U

Sf.I

-2$A

/0

ff

/9.0

<f

23 9

2-Mnnft

//

^

/9

/2s

?•'

Z/4

2/

23

¥¥

//.l

/?.2

2S?

aF

/0

z*

6.3

4-f

//•*

34-ijht PheMM.

/

/

0,0

/■/

/■•/

&

¥

/0

I.Z.

?■/

£ ?

f

f

z

?.</

/>£

s.t

4-BiflJs

/

/

//

at?

r-/

/

/

0.<r

0,0

0,6

/

2,

J

a.4

/.0

/■*

5-Cloudl, Dut, etc

_a\

(?

0"

0.0

100

0:0

<?

10

j2A

0>-0

00

0.0

0.0

0.0

frlnsufllc fcb.

ji .

t(

&s

#■?

ft*

20

<?

?0

MA

0.0

&6

J/.

Jf

/S.I

0>.O

/$/

^Ps)ClBh|ical

s~

e

&7.

0>,0

£7

£•

<?

2

it

ft/9

/./

<?

<?

?#

00

2-4

J-Untooim

&.

ft

££A.

0><?

fU

//

/Z

Jl

0.0

U

¥4

0>

ff

ft.*

0>t?

2/.£

Mtfur

4

<

f&L

#0/$/

^Ps)ClBh|ical

s~

e

&7.

0>,0

£7

£•

<?

2

it

ft/9

/./

<?

<?

?#

00

2-4

J-Untooim

&.

ft

££A.

0><?

fU

//

/Z

Jl

0.0

U

¥4

0>

ff

ft.*

0>t?

2/.£

Mtfur

4

<

f&L

#0

t£

-i

&

f

SL

A/

#f

_ £■

$

24

<?#

2-V

Total

*&■

£Z

&

&*£

t$.0

/%>,

Z/2.

Si

/ff

mk

gf-f

/00.

a&

44

Z0<?

fit.

21-4

/t?0.

■X?J/.£- J224T

£M*.//jr/#/y

af-

s#U

s/£//r//r6S

//y

Z%T ST*/?T£-/Z/S

/?<e£js

0>fi r#£ . ££ll?r£/}/. ?Ajei«/£ST #F&/0#

SJ/S f*/>A/C/S{0

d#ta/i>e£ 0f few/toi. f#ew£Sf

Evaltulion

Nunbet

' Per Cent ■

Kumber

Percent

Humbei

Percent

Number

Per Ceat

Certain

Doubtfo

Total

Certain

Doublfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

CerWn

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DouMfu

Tolal

Certain

Dai MM

Total

O-Baltonn

/^

^

ffr

J&L

^/

2SJ

_2_

^

/

*£7

//•/

fif-9

l-Aslnnnnical

.//.

S

rV

-M-

2 7

tf.S

_r

3

8

4S

£.£

/¥?

\

2-Al reraR

/7

//

?x

/f-Z

9?

2£0

f

/£

Z/

6LL

7.Z.1

m

3-Lijht Pbemra.

f?

_£0

#0

0:0

r

/

<?

/

M-

00

'■?

«-Biids

a

#

££.

40

00

J?

0>

43.

00

S-Cltwds, Dust etc

0>

£0.

<?#

00

/

/

0.0

t- f

!?

G-lnstiHIc. hfo.

/&

a

&1.

0.0

/¥:3

t

V

$

rtt

/7.0

rf#

7-PsytholQgical

/

&

S

JZ?-

t-t

2.T

0.0

ao

0.0

frllnknOM

22.

0>

21,

lU-

0.0

/U

&

/?

fc

//./

Of?

//./

MBiei

/

Z,

S

0-9

/7

2-7

/

r?

/

/I

0.0

f-f

Total

u

ft

//z

%■*

2S.Z

m

M

2.2,

St

SiL

40-7

/Off,

248

1^--

7%41E J%24 £i/ffi.i/AT/ffV rtf ^fli . S?&M7V/r<Z£ //f 7M& Sr*#r£6/£ S}?*/?*

, . . Af me sour?/ M/aj*>£Sr Sdr^/aa/

,-^r^ /?/fy/V*

. uO>

(A

Sa/u /?4/r0/v//?

£/}<. A^ee tr? Soon/ M/ttaxat

Evaluation

hunter

Pet Cent

Number

Per Colt

Nmba

PnCnt

PwCcat

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

lertain

Doubt lol

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;«rtam

Doubtful

ToUl

Cidain

Doagtlul

TeM

CttW*

0«HM

Total

Cotai*

DouMkl

ToW

O-Balloon

.&.

/£

/r

i-9

/J J

to.-?

J

$~

XTotal

lertain

Doubt lol

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;«rtam

Doubtful

ToUl

Cidain

Doagtlul

TeM

CttW*

0«HM

Total

Cotai*

DouMkl

ToW

O-Balloon

.&.

/£

/r

i-9

/J J

to.-?

J

$~

X

.2 J.

-J^f

£6

?

i2

t

//<r

f.r

&±

/?

ff

Jf

£A

£0

/£>A

1-AstanMiOl

a

/t

^

9.z

ts.g

iio

J>r

*f

fr

22 9 4«4

6f,f

£

f

/* *x

///

22 r 9

M.

2/

?f

/a/

6Z

/i.4

2-Aiicntt

../&

(f

^/

//.£

(2.b

i¥t

j?

7

//

-££

4*

r,7

s-

6

{'

$2

fir

flQ

47

7f

?*>

/&.?

/&<£

ns

3-Lijfit Photon

z

/

-/

2-3

f-t

U

/

/

a-f

AA

0-7

/

/

U

fia

U

/

A'

/

03

(?.<?

AS

4-3iidi

a

A

a

0.0

AA

0,0

^

/

*r

22

At

t*

A

A

A?

<?■#]

&<?

j£&

/9

H

£

At?

A.*

A.£

5-CtoudJ, Diet, etc.

A

a

0.A

AC

M

A

a

at?

A.A

AA

a

<?

A~

<?J

a.0

J2&

A>

A

A

A.a

A<?

0.0

(rtnullic. Info,

X

g

<?.Z

00

9,2.

'/£.

A

ft

U-

A.A

fi$

£

A

2

fj

A(?

-££

JV

A

J4

/A/

A*<?

/&(

7-Pr(tilok>|ial

a

z

&

A.A

2.3

i.1

A

A

p

A.A

A.A>

<0(P

a

(?

<?

#(?

flA

AA.

>

/

~?

A.9

03

A?,

S-Urtamn

tS

A

(3

/49

Pfi

(49

9

f

A 2.

.Aj?.

42

2/

A

as

#{4

•AA

&£

/ffi

A

/A?

MA

A<0

t?,6

Mt*tt

/

/

2-

—JL

(■>

f-f.

/

A

/

Af

A.A

#7

/

?,

r

/■i

S3

JU.

sr

2,

7

/■*

0-6

?,/

Total

M

Jf

S 7

est

W-f

m

-V-

77

/¥¥

¥te

42.4 /AA

&-

't

6/

M4

29 s

/CO. 2*9

??

w

ftf

24./

/0A

f/tel£ >*$?'?

£MC£//?r/A^ <&_ ju s/aMr/^as /a -rtf/r S7- / e^r£<s//'

rf/P£Ts?S

-4£~

r#a.

seyiM &<U.r_tf£<s_ti?/iL

/?4 .4A?b>£.£<pi>&

£,*£/>*$£ a*

^ff/jm fJ gir

Number

Pet Cent

Number

Pet Cent

Hunbti

Pet Cent

Nmibei

PnCent

EvaluUon

Certain Doubtful Total

Certain Doubtful Tola!

Certain Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

;«tain Doubtful Total

Certain Doubtful Total

Certain Doubrni Total

Certain Doubtful Total

O-Balloon

JL

^L

££

24 fj

26

3/

MS

JJL

/te

l-Asbmomlcal

2L

-LO.

f/_ /A.A

2ZC

sr.i

JZ±

zz

U.

_/4./

(P,424jL

Mirctaft

JL

-£.

^2.

£12,Certain Doubtful Total

O-Balloon

JL

^L

££

24 fj

26

3/

MS

JJL

/te

l-Asbmomlcal

2L

-LO.

f/_ /A.A

2ZC

sr.i

JZ±

zz

U.

_/4./

(P,424jL

Mirctaft

JL

-£.

^2.

£12,

-&*2-

Ml

/£■■ /S

M.

1<L

£4L

/££.

RieMPhonom.

JL£

j2A

A A

JL

jLL

JJ-

2.1.

£&.

J2ZL

A.4

A

A.A

.£&.

A.i.

Klomh, Dint, etc.

Ai^

M&

ijA

Jl.

A.A

^LL

LL

HiBuflic. Mfo.

JL

J£.

£&.

£2.

u.

JL

4.

JL

6.Z

JM.

kZ

?P»ytholo|im

jkL

J20.

&£.

JL&.

J2Jl

A.A

t-Untamn

*3

£1.

2££

-#£.

2£1

£L

£L

2$£

JZ&

*?&

Wthet

££.

14-

M.

jjL

_££

M.

//f 1 f/ \ 2/A \fi 7\ d £3 VM \ /// 1 «*Srl /?& I TdjA 2£L \a 0.

Total

3'

f»4t£ J 2 if _ £ML/J4r/A0_ AS? J£L T/6 #T/y& S //I/ 7#& 4/-/e4r£<S/f s A>/&r/?S

_ &e rws <;o,jt& fjsts^sr te-6/A/v

ZAS j4MS£C£S

dfiAarlc AfZeur* 6fft*/£Sf

Evalvatkxi

Nuatba

Pel Cent

Nuita

Percent

Nnnber

Pet Cent

Number

Percent

Cabin

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooiibtfc

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

J-Bali™

2/

/A

<?/

/g.J

fir

27-0

../

f.

..?

J.2

//

//■ s ,

-

.

1-Astronoiaical

4

?

/f

*f

f.<?

//.J

/

s

4

Jg

//.4

/£T3

2-Alrcnft

tf

S

/f

(2.1

4s

fa*

•

/

s

/srf

J$

(ft

3-LilM Ptiawk. 
t-Binb

&

A

£

'■?

#A

/■?

/

A

{

J.fT

A<?\

*?

» j

A

&.A

AA

0,1?

. A

A

A

A A

&A

<?e

5-CIouds. Dust, etc

■

A

AA

A.&

00

A

A

O

O.O

(?A

At?

(-liuuflic kilb.

_x

O

t

f.a

AA

t*

4

¥

/C<*|

#(?

/&4

JPsycholop«l

z

/

S

/■7

??

u

/

A

/

s.i

AA

J!8

t-Utlawm

j/

A

J"/

ifA

A.A

no

J

O

,?

//.s

A>P

AS

t-OUin

2

o

t

7-0

#A

f a

/

¥

<r

.?&

{£■$

/?,2

Total

f/

U

//4

n/

2A.?

((M-

*

/0

46

U.s

ff-6

d&

249

T/>*/ f 4 2S?

fMiMZJddt. sa -n^z-

<?r

7//£

t

*±.\

/*W<

<^tf^7~.

«'£

'^^i^.

A/kn/ 00/?r

&/}£<?/*#&£&

.J>M££-<:A>:aXj3A: .

A'^/f^'iT £S- ,. % .1 /S4s /J's,,

Evaluation ,

Number

Pei C«il

rlunbei

Per Cent<?r

7//£

t

*±.\

/*W<

<^tf^7~.

«'£

'^^i^.

A/kn/ 00/?r

&/}£<?/*#&£&

.J>M££-<:A>:aXj3A: .

A'^/f^'iT £S- ,. % .1 /S4s /J's,,

Evaluation ,

Number

Pei C«il

rlunbei

Per Cent

Number Per Cent

nkmter

PefCent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:erbin

DoubllW

Tot*

Certain

Doubtful

ToW

Certain

Doubtlql

Total

Certain

DooMtut

Total

Certjin

DouMnil

Total

Catain

ifcublhil

Toti

0- Balloon

//

7

7$

f£

sT4

/!.?

9

<#

/*

//.4

-/£Z/Ul

//*

■ ?

J?>

9.4

t?

^1

.^

g

/6

J&

/'2-

I-Astnnmiol

//,

{*

22

/f.4t

47

/f-7

~M.

/

/f

ILL

-JSX

^/

J/

fV?

</

/f£

£?

2-//

/&

f

2/

M.5

-,:z

'A- 7

2-Airtrtfl

J7

9

<&

240

70

.?/■&

^L

/^

0¥

/7.9

JM-

.«2r

27

r?£-

^

/?-</ M7

&L

/{?

/-?

23

;t?,S

• '/ Y

23/

3-Lqjht Ptienoii

2

7

,?

/.£

>0t

*■*

/

^

7

/.?

_0j0

^/

£

£

d!?

/■Z*

,AA.

/

./

</

/ 1?

y/

<*./

'-Bints

^

A*

rft

00

_j£.

.*

^

■*A

^2uL

^

7

tf*

/

J&L

fit?

&&-

a

(?

d>\

00

07

P./.'

J-Oouds, Oust, etc.

<?

J2A

00

00

_£

J/J,

0.0

^<?

a

•»

2,

<?.£>

/2-

U2

,<?

/

/

00

/0

/■0

(-traffic, tifc.

Z0

?0

/£5

' 00

&;&

2

I?

z.

2.L

00

^

.//

//

A^

t>-0

6.S /0

/£>

/0S

0.0

<>0?

?.PrfdBlo(ial

f

7

Sf \

00

ft

/

i?

7

73

00

7:7

^

&#

fl-0

j££.

2-

2>

0<?

4./

i /

HWwm

/¥

/*

Ml

00

/<?.?

^x

^

7f

tt.7

U2&00Z.

39

a

J-f

22?

00

2?.f

/£T

/^

/&■£■

a.p

/CS

«Hher

£T

<

J9

<?<?

j?

2

^

\£ 2.7

-M£a

*.£

...sf.

s

/g

#P

-II.

J

2-

r £;

//

£./

^^2.

Total |

70

&

tZf

&z

tn.

.■/?/>.

J&-

*/

j£_

/«?■£

sat

/a?. /zz>

4*

/re

MS.

2g.Z

/m

43

.?£

97

&*'?.

3?'

t&

■TJfi/r /?2?# /?£/#£ ///?r//2/y or t/4//r x/6#r//i/<is //r 7^£ 5r<e#r£6'C s/r*

Ir/*,

/>/= «?#£: airvr/?/?*. /2//?M/^ir &t6,yj>ji/

d^if&isa

0/>YT0 fit

fa/?/PC£ Of &A/7J>te /'f/^^£Sr

Evalntien

Number

Pel Cent

Niunber

Pei Cent

Nunher

PerCent

Number

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DnibOil

Totald^if&isa

0/>YT0 fit

fa/?/PC£ Of &A/7J>te /'f/^^£Sr

Evalntien

Number

Pel Cent

Niunber

Pei Cent

Nunher

PerCent

Number

Percent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DnibOil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DDulirni

Total

Certain

Duublnil

Total

O-Mlooo

^

5

/

2.$

rf-2

f.7

■20

/

f?

/2.0

'f.'s

</4

,-J

/r

J0L

7.Z

'*</

706

t-Astnnmiical

/£.

/t

Z2,

/f.$

*¥

2?Z

2?

40

/7.<jt

06

240

JtL

/0

M-

/It 9

Si

24*

Mirerarl

//

/

/?

/Id.

?■?

?f£

<?

Z2>

4/

//.«/

tf-2

?46

/j

70

2?

7.2

04

/2.g

Hijtit Fhnan.

t?

/

f

0.f?

/■2s

/.2>

t>

4

{0

S.&

?-4

£0

£■

?,

7

IS

//

*t

•-Birth

/

f

At,

00

/.£

/

/

Ai.

0.0

06

/

2s

J

06.

/./

/I

-. .

Klourjj, Dust. etc.

O

0.0

00

00>

-JL

&

p

0-0

/?.#

00

f?

£ 00

00

0.0

ttosuflit hto.

//

//

J£A

0.0

AM

0/>

^2

$0

/2.#

00

tf.0

27

27

/&.<?

00>

/£.£>

T-Ps^dnlotial

5-

5

J^2\

0-0

6-Z

2,

2.

/.p

0O

/.2

$

S

?■$

00

fj

8-UrJrjKjw

//

jM.

0.0

/,?£

/f.

fJ

/7

/0, 2

0.0

S0P

?7

<?

*?

2P-6

00

&a.i

WMub

_jL

'*

-&

0-0

4-9

b

/

7

■ H

0-A

¥Z

¥

^

-C

Z2.

0.0

2.Z

Total

0/

&

ft

45J

Wf

m

/20

41

#1

#4

tf-t

/O0.

t?}

4r

fgp

n*

rtf

/IP0.

T%£t-€ <0Z3/ £l0f£/^r^0f7 0f 0A//r

.OM/V/VyJviS.5 //0 7//±- trf/treS/? s/S£sJS

OP ffite d£A/rS#l. f/9£i<j£3r S£<Z/0/l/

$#& Aej/vs/SM

£alaiuc£ 0* fetfTt/li. Tyj^h/gsi

Evaluation

HumbB

Pei Carl

Number

PeiCent

Nunber

PerCenl

Number

Per Cent

Certain

DobbKu

ZtoSj

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Cnrbin

.Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

_DMbtM

Tolal

Certain

Doubrful

Total

Certain

DquliHu

Total

Ceitain

Dublful

Total

O-BalloMi

/S

'■■ rf

23

/44

?<

22.?

2

J

k

4.7

10

77 7

1-Astmmmical

/a

,?

73

40?-

*•?

/2ii

0.

7

r

//'$>

f-0

tf-i-

2-Airoaft

/7

<

?5

/L.S

ft

24-3

.0

'4

20f

//■6

f2.S

3-LI(ht PtienoB.

a

ff

S)0?<

22.?

2

J

k

4.7

10

77 7

1-Astmmmical

/a

,?

73

40?-

*•?

/2ii

0.

7

r

//'$>

f-0

tf-i-

2-Airoaft

/7

<

?5

/L.S

ft

24-3

.0

'4

20f

//■6

f2.S

3-LI(ht PtienoB.

a

ff

S)0

7>-0

C\

7

2.$

00

7.?

*-Binb

f>

0.0

00

7>0>

.^0

0.0

0>

770

tClourls, Dust, etc

(?

_£Q

07>

7)0

/

/

0.0

2-3

2?

S-lnaflic Infc,

76

7>

74

/0-S\

0.0

/S.S

4

a_

f

Jf-t.

0-0>

rf-6

7-Ptyct»hi|ical

7

P

3

/■0

7?

2?

/}

00

0.(0

00

(-Untnow

20

(?

?£>

J&L

0.0

/?■¥

s

^

//■/,

00

//£

Mlttwr

/

2/

3

/.0

If

?■■?

/

/

2-3

00

2.3

Total

$0

23

/&

tt7

2.2>,3

/e?0.

-3/

/2>

4s

p-.f

*f.f

/00

250

'■■■% 
I

afc 1

l\

r

3-Ultrt Pbenon,

EireMitM

O-BHtson

l-Ajtronlal

Mirerafl

♦•Bind

JgBfe:^ JZ32

J£Mi. Mr/0/1/

J&i ..M/r sr s/4»r' < Y6S /a/ rt/zr zrggrgjLXL M£*£S

J-ClooOj, Oust, etc.

tlaattic. M>.

T-PqrcMogicii

MMnmi

MHw

Total

^2Xd&J&-

J2£-

ZSt£ saj/zr//.

Certain ICwubrigT

-^

^

j*

^

^t

.^

^

■^

-J2,

Jl

-JL

^

Tots!

oZ

^z.

.a£

^

^

Pa Cent

C«1»Hr

XI

JJ.JL4.

1L2

1A

4J2..

£JL

m£

&£L

aa

/.s

Doubtful

a1

£jji£

JJ.

£&.

-04

MJL

££

Ad.

JZ

fAtetXM. Was*

Total.

Certain.

22./

2lJ.

J£

&£

&&

/QA

&L

/JJL

2jL

.__

A?/pti/&S7^

_k/Jt0

Number

M.

A

J2.

JL

43

DouNlul

F

jLl

jl

JL

JL

JL

J2L

Total

X

^

.zz

Jl

Z/Z.

Pel Cent

Certain Doubtful Total

«■? . 4 &.

£3£'*lJ.S?to

JLA

£2\

JjL.

£&

ULfJL

/2JL

SL

44-

^J.

j2JL

JL£

4JZ

j2jL

CL0.0J2

s2J2_

£JL

S/.Mf.£\Ma

■22,

M

&$_

£A

0£

£A

SU.

#4-

S£d. /<?/!/

j^y *?/vr0*/st? Sbi/tfrfj r jp/:J?(/rti- 3j?ta/<-±.f

JL

/

&.

2Z_

Doubtful

jL

j2-

-JL

-JL

JL

J*L

Total

I^&L

ML

J_^4L

JL.

JL

JL

/&

Pa Coil

2£

££J£L

&£.

£JL

£JL

£.o_

*.</

imKk

Doubtful Total

££

MS

J2&

j2j2-

40.

e?,0

ZUjlO.

£L

JsiftM

M

2LA

2-4

££.

■2J1JUS-

JJL

OjO

tt.A

_ZL2

lM6et

Certain

J£.

JL

JL

-jL

JL

1£L

J

*£

£

LZL

Doubtful

ZfeL

££.

£

AA.

Total

&

Sd.

At.

^

J

£9

jLe?,0

ZUjlO.

£L

JsiftM

M

2LA

2-4

££.

■2J1JUS-

JJL

OjO

tt.A

_ZL2

lM6et

Certain

J£.

JL

JL

-jL

JL

1£L

J

*£

£

LZL

Doubtful

ZfeL

££.

£

AA.

Total

&

Sd.

At.

^

J

£9

jL

Per Cent

Certain Owt*ul

L^-L

/j.0

^L£

J&t.

a#

gJL

/.s_

24$

JLJ

238\74#.

JLL-

/&g

JL£-

&£_

£JL

0.0 £16.

&$L

£d.

^X

M&

Total

/2.Z

20./

<9' £"

J2JI

£&

O'O

/&:£

J-Z.

5<4£

X£

/£&.

rML& /Zjzsj grjie/jr/o// a& 4^/f s/^/^r^/v^s //>/ 7??£ ■ sr&s-£t£/s dtf&jn

J/= 7#£ .f0vr// i*/£*-r- #£-<S/a/v

fa £&?$ v&eouj?

fi/Hja/Vi£ 0F S<2tsfA/ £*t&7

<

Evaluation

Nunbei

PsCait

ffiinbei

Per Cent

Nm*«

Pa cent

KXwbH

Per Cent

Certain

Douttfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Ceitaln

Doubttil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

lertam

DaibHgl

Tobl

Certain

Ooubthjl

T«W

Certain

DouUtfa

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

tUMIwi

f

• f

y

4z

&f

*</

^_

</

3<?

&L

2$

?0.f

1-AiawMical

j.

J?

&

AfS

&■{

^V

/7

rf

ft

//<?

fit

?/-7

2-Alicntt

f

/<?

/?

*l

$</

&■#

jC

(•*

*f

,**

/

ft?

-

j-LijhtPlwn*

&

a

1#

0-<1

(?-0

Z

?,

¥

ML

f.<t

f.g

4-Blnfs

f

/

40

<?■?

fif

/__

J

_Ol2]

(?./

#?

S-Clomb, t>»t, etc

/

<?

/

d?

&<?

&f

_£_

?'

&

/?.<?

/-¥

'■V

G-lRWlDc hto.

J,

6

sa

(?.(>

*0

{/

r?

//

*■?

#<?

X?

T-Ptjdiokigieal

ft

(?

0.0

(?0

0.4

r>

P

e?.p

<?.o

0,0

fMMMM

24

{?

f<

2LO.

f?,ff

?l(?

&

/)

W

£??

p.<?

$f-t

Mttw

J

ff

t.

as

4€

£0

,?

<?

,f

.4V

0.0

?.,/

ToW

L3

&4

#2-

£?.9

fr.t

m

f&

&

¥J

rff

2£Z

w.

•

f$4(.£ P23<{ J~ t/j?tt/rf7S/2A/ rtfr /M/s-r £/<z#7~//l/<£S //I/ Mf STj^/fr^-ti/^ s?*?gj9S

a^ -r&j? za&Ty* /?/?£*/£ <t *£ &/a/i/

l0S /?A££££S

faci4/ye£ /9* So/str/ j£fa/£si

Evaluation

Nwtier

Per cent

Nmber

Per Cent

■ ftuirtier

PerCent

.Numlw j

PetCsit

Certan

Douttfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtfal

Total

Certain

DMbHul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DOTlitnj

Total

Certain

DnibthilCertan

Douttfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtfal

Total

Certain

DMbHul

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DOTlitnj

Total

Certain

Dnibthil

Total

u-BUloon

//

/(?

ft

/f.t.

0S

tf*

/

?/

.■?

£3

/^..<

*.$

1-Astnmnical

^

f

/3

s:/

K'

/f-2

/

J

^

*3

/£-.$

2((

2-Aiiaaft

./l

£

/f

a./

fT.f

rt2>

2s

/

3

/a.s-

£.3

/%%

3-UthtPhenoti.

A

e

1/

*.d

#<?

2.(2

/

(7

/

£3

/?.£

£3

(■Biios

0J \

t?

(?

/20

#<?

&<?■

e>

/?

&£.

ac?

<2(?

5-Ctails, Dust, etc

_£

<?

ft

#a

rf(?

(?/?

a

(?

4#

£0

<?#

6-hisiKic tifo.

ft

K

_£/

0.0

ft

j

P

f

£.3

<?./?

£.3

* -

-

7-Psyclnlojical

?/

/

3

JJI

/■(?

J0

/

/

£3

<?■#

*J

S-Uiumniri

' £/

&(

2/2,

ae

z/.t

J

d

/

£3

tift

£3

Miner

f

(?

/

f.f

<?.<?

f-t

/

4

f

£3

&/./

?6<t

Total

Jf.

2ft

9?

t£L

2</Z

4W-'

-X

m

//

<Jfv

'st.l

m

251

r&

.

■%<fi

£

/}?3* EMi.

i/Ar/AM

AF

agjer.T

S/6Hr//l/6S_

"V

/&£ .

'rsrf re<z/<r

^Sf-Js

AS

r#£ C£A , r / r^i ^sr /cso/aa/

tfejj Yae* .

//*fi/e/s&i/*&

___^£i<£^££Zi&£

Evaluation

NuMr

Per Cent

Nunbei

Per Cent

Nunbo

Pei Cent

Certain

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DOubilul

Total

Dertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tulal

Jertain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tohl

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Ooubtlul

Total

0- Balloon

J?

r

/*?

7.4.

4 f

a(j

r

*

/3

//.£

9.f

U$

/s-

if

?,3

M.J

ffZ

/&.*

_C

A.}

//

-£L

7-4

/7.J

I-Attnnmcal

//

ifi

/7

MS

,T/

fi,?,

-jjL

4

/4

A J

f-H

&■*

/£

/

zz

/0.3

4 $

/*"/

&

SL-

^?>

12JL

-JkJc-

/£*

MireraR

24

rf

/**

It.ft

7&

sVS

—£

9

/t

Ms

tfj

2U

2A

?J

4?

J£Z

/{■¥

M/

—?~

-4-

(*'

-VI,

/"//

Vt 7

HieMltnon.

/

/

?!■

/A

{■0

i.<>

/

£_

/

/.(,

AA

/4>

A

f.

2,

0.0

/■ 4

/■■¥

-j

</

/■2>

_? r

«■ 9

e-Brnfj ,

.a

/C

/?

A.A\

AA

&<?

fi

t?

f,

?3

A.<?

j:s

/

A

/

A?

t?0

<?-7

&

(A

4j2a

<?'&

//Ai.<>

/

£_

/

/.(,

AA

/4>

A

f.

2,

0.0

/■ 4

/■■¥

-j

</

/■2>

_? r

«■ 9

e-Brnfj ,

.a

/C

/?

A.A\

AA

&<?

fi

t?

f,

?3

A.<?

j:s

/

A

/

A?

t?0

<?-7

&

(A

4j2a

<?'&

//A

S-Clouds, Dust, etc.

A

r?

A/?

Aft

An

A

A

/?

ao

^

aa

A

*<

?.'

A0

/■4

'■<?

A>

_z

/

/? 3

/. T

.' ■*

frlattffic Ho.

if

A

(7

/£,.&

A.A

fat

/

A

/

/.-&.

AA

/•t

/A

A

JA

i.g

a/?

4-t

/A

A/

{A

?.£

/S.i

7-Piyd»l<)|ial

a

A

rf?

£ A

AA

&r

/

ri

/

/.&

A(?

s-4

A

A

A>

At?

at?

00

A?

-f.

T

■?A

3 £■'

2>

tlMonmi

//

A

ft

/0.S

AA

/<?„?

7

a

v

//■£

Art

//.£

39

(?

3?

&.?

A.{?

K-1

Z2,

A

/2

M£-

•' s

MS

Hitter

:T

<?

£

4s

AA

J$

2

a>

2

3.3

AA

3?

3

A

3

z/

<?.A

2j

3

&

3

J.r

2 x

, *1

ToM

#

2.2>

I0£

1P

U#

m

-M

2f

6/

b$4

*/.</

'At?

/AS

4s

{¥&

&s

2?.tr

/t?0

£?

2f

//

6£4

3<!.£

/0G

ftsie Jz<u

_&&?£ ## A/ftf af &J^£t?r $/6#r//ys$ //I/ rxe <rfj*r£&/c ^s^ds

Evalntion

IMallMo

I-Ajuooonital

HUrcian

3-LitblPntncn-

4-Blrdt

Wao«l».0olete.

E-lnauffic Wo.

7-Pa)d»)te|t<al

8-IMnoM

H)lbei

Total

-4j£'J46.

JE.

Number

Certain

2

J&

A

J£_

DobUhil

_/-

_j£.

Total

-^

//

/£

j2_

M.

■X

JL

<L2.

Percent

Certain Doubtful Total

J.A

3L&

/£2

£<2.

AS-

J&2.

&z

14,

iM.

Al

XA

JLL

M4.

Al.

-did.

Ml

j£.

M-J^.

&£.

M&.

A.A

£&

JJL

JJL

jZjZ.

&£

JLL

p. 4.

M.

A¥£ d^AfrfJi.

/y/Aii/£ir_ 1P£6J0A/

QiVTot/

Certain

M-

M-

/L

jA

M

A.

j£.

Ooubttul

/

.£.

^L

J2.

-4.

-£.

—L

Total

£1.

s&

12.

jZ.

JJ£

'JUL

&\ 4o\ £t\i9.-A30.3\/0a \a4C4i\jw \tet\9?.*AMa \/i9\3s- wAtf.AiTlvAA.

frtAftCe J9£ f£/i,7t>/?L tf/?l*£U

Pel Cent

Certain

<&? .514

&L

HA

<t.SL

££

&£.

MJL

Ul

±Z\

£U

Doubtful

JSei

ll£.

M.

A./>

Ad.

£4.

£JL

J2X-

Total

Certain

&JL

22 Z

&^

£A

A. 7

J2J2.JZ2.

az

J4.

11.

Mater

Jj.

4L

/J

JW

jL

DeuWul

JSL

4-

j^

2J_ .A.

Total

££.

*L

J2

J_

£L

<££

Percent

Certain Doubtful Total

7^

4L£

IXCertain

&JL

22 Z

&^

£A

A. 7

J2J2.JZ2.

az

J4.

11.

Mater

Jj.

4L

/J

JW

jL

DeuWul

JSL

4-

j^

2J_ .A.

Total

££.

*L

J2

J_

£L

<££

Percent

Certain Doubtful Total

7^

4L£

IX

JjS.

&&.

OjA

HL£.

££.

jgg/,

£4.

&t

ILL

y.£

A£-

&£-

&£.

£&.

12J2.

g£-

Z&2.

mg

/££

¥£

AS

j2£.

#.f

3.0

M£

Z.V

Certain Ctoutitfol Total

Percent

Certain Doubtful Total

tiHSLE 4237 £/AL t/A T/0/V /AS 0j6J££r S/&Af7-JA/<S'S Sfr 7Z/£ 5TSAT2?&/C Jfg.tiS

Ar r #^ AgA/rjfAt. /=>

9/ep\/£sr *£*& /aw

$W PkArtt'Sca

&»£#/>*•£ a? fe/vfPJL £hhmh

'

Evaluation

Number

Percent

Number

PecCent

IMer

Per Carl

Number

Percent

Ctrtain

DHibHu

ToUl

Certain

Deobtta

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain

Qoubtfo

Total

Certain

Dnibtlul

Total

0- Balloon

/4

/

^/

/!5~/

tf

?H

&

^

4

<3

ST3

/A4>

1-Astiwumlul

t

3

/(

f.i

3Z

f/.f

3

3

<>

7.9

7-f

/£*

MircraR

s&

f

zz

t&.l

if

ts.L

9

&

f4

22-7

(3-Z

■%?

3-Urtit Ptanon.

/?.

A

A

A.A

A.A

AA

/

A

/

2.6

AA

2.6

4-Biroa

a

A>

A

AA

AA

AA

A

A

A.A

A./P

A#

Kloudi.Ito1.eit.

A.

f?

A

A.A

A.A

AA

A

/

/

A.A

?,6

f-t

Wrtjuftic. hfo.

/£

A

/g-

£/

AA

/$■/

f

A

7

/g.4

A.A

ff4

f-Psydolojital

/

Z>

3

A/

z.z

?3

A

A>

A

A.A

A-fl

AA

frUntmrm

/X

A

ft

/9.4

A,A

ff> 4

4

(7

4

/AS-

A.A

/A.*

Kltnef

/.

2,

3

-LL

2t

3.3

/

A

f

2.6

A,A

$.4

Total

f£

2./

fs

m.

21. £

tflA

27

ft

SZ

!/■/.

ZZ.9

/AA.

252

m

f^ie £23$.

4 ktfuv/fr / £>/ )/-

0* #Aj£<zr s/gat/a/g*, {# rtf£

> r/v;gb/f.

JA'fJS

-0f

rf/£

SOe/r/f

M/Ptv'^ir'

j

t£6

<<?&

Art-Afl/T£_ _

t^ffa

S/?A/ rfn/Tff/l//u

fact/lit £ t?S • /'I,.'* ..\'.tk

£jf

Evaluation

tfeaber

PerCent

Nunber

Per Cent

Number

Pei Cent

Numtei

PeiCenl

OHM

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:erUin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttiil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

TotalPer Cent

Number

Pei Cent

Numtei

PeiCenl

OHM

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

:erUin

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubttiil

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

DooWtuI

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

.■■??

&■ Billon

s

f

/?

■*.9

_^Z£?i_

3

<

f

■*■?

41

ft

&

&

4i

£Tt.

£V

//.Z

/s

/3

£i

r/

^

1-Astnooitlcil

6

//>

fi

9.4

/f.9

fTf

/(

1S

4/,

2?J>

?</!

ft )

*r

<

fP

/Z9

/J.f

2f%

?.?.

'6

n :

^XUL

<<>

jjL:

2-Airtntt

i

<

'1

.//■/

7.4

w&

. J.

f

(P

3.7

%f '2-1

4

J>

/?

///

/A.?

??%

J?£

Ht

*s

",.*

//.a

■?■? "7

3-Lijtit Ptienon.

/

/

/■i

aa

u

/

f

J,£<.

0,0

/■?<

/

/

«z

aa

?.$

/

£>

&.*

!?■(?

J: V

(•BinO

a

<1

0,6

a.a

<?{?

J

/

4

3?

/. &

49

(1

J2JL

/■s-.a.a.n

„^S^

$

,i

/:&

c ■:

-2X.

J-CloudS, Dust, etc.

a

■f?

0.0

ao

art

a

rf

0.0

/7.0

at?

_£.

t?

6/9

£0

f?<?

. a.

f?

V

fi'.t'

' /

'.' v

t-lnnlllc. Into.

t

1

/LI

&a

(t (

£

(?

&

f.3

0.0

7T-?

/

/

21

40

fit

£1

^z

:j?./2

/.;. J

■ r ;

7- Parens bclal

n

3,

$>

0.0

3Z

x$

<?

<?

J2J2-

0,a

a&

<?

&£±

,;./? £C

^L

/

«.'

<:*

■f

1- Unknown

$

(?

9

/4.3

0.0

tf$

&

(?

A

J.3

0.0

X?

f

tr

221

#.a

ZIZ,

^/

,-,

j"'

2*3

J-.S

»Olher

/

/

P

/.£.

At,

??■

. L

/

/.2,

J2.<2

'/■2>

-./.

/

2>

U-

2.%

■?£>

. s.

1

f

2 -V

/ r

'.?*■

Total

J?/

U

(13

MZ

¥/-J

w-

J&L

<//

ft

&,&

S0.0/00.

2.2,

/</

Jt

VJ.

Sff

'SO.

<'£S

?$

?;#

<?}

2±.Z

>5C.

fm e 4 0.&

£Y/9J-tf #r tffr

G f ■ &#J£ Cr . s/6#r/#6$ ,/v r/j£ -irtjrzc*/' -?*& >

^£L

r#e

s<? vrtf &/<£

/?£<S/{LJV

fig/jipj/sspv/ir

£/te.A*£f er t Set/rss IVesi

Number

Per Cent

Number

Percent

Number

PefCent

Number

Per Cent

Evaluation

Certain

Dotibttii

Total

Certain Doubtful Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain Doubtful Total

Certain Doubtful Total

Certain Doubtful Tolal

Certain Doubtful Total

Certain Doubtful Total

O-Billowi

JL

£LTotal

Certain Doubtful Total

Certain

Doubtful

Tolal

Certain Doubtful Total

Certain Doubtful Total

Certain Doubtful Tolal

Certain Doubtful Total

Certain Doubtful Total

O-Billowi

JL

£L

J./

Ul

12.

2Z

U££

_££

M£

1-AiMnmical

j£

ML

4*.

&£.

21A.

&i.

-4-

II

HA.

£L

iM.

2-Ai reraft

U>

Ul.

&JL

JJ_

J3L

2L

iM.

£A

2£l

MtifilPtienon.

AA

<2J2-

do.

JL

AA.

S.2

•■Birds

££.

M2-

M.

_£_

y

#./?

££.

&£_

b^Cloudi, Dint etc

£&.

££L

A&

£.

£j2.

^A.

AA.

frhuafRc Info.

J?

-£

£Z

£<£.

£J.

£-

z&

A%L

Z&.

7-Paycbologicjl

JL

JL

££.

&1.

&£.

JL

JL

J?

£JL

a#

££.

fHJnknom

4L

JZ.

21.

2L£.

£^2L£

!£.

JL.

22,

&£_

/20\

££A

Mther

/

_^

JL

A<2-

ilZ.

#./

JL

£JL

gJL

£Jk

Tolal

S4\ <f3\fg \S&. A 4S.?\/M.

*&\/2&rt.*\eaf\/ M

r^ts- s?24<? £{/<?*- yjTyp/i/ /?f faj<£f.r 3-/<s//-r/A/as /a/ Tf/4 sr/?,4r£G/<: J/?<?J!>

/?/=■ ***/£■ sa/;r// /teSASjiST- *&<$//?*/

lit* J?/I/6£££TS

t#/9£ /f /ttt.E /!>£ Sxti/rs/ /#£w£S1

Evaluation

Number

PerCent

Number

PeiCenl

Humbef

PerCent

Number

Per Cent

Certain

Doutttfu

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Duublful

Toy

Certain

D*gMM

Total

Certain

Doubtful

Total

Certain

Duublful

Total

Certain

Doubtfj

Total

Certain

Doubtful Total

O-Baltoon.

/&

f

fV

A J?

f<>

ff!f

. /

^

3

J-3

/<?.#

/4TJT

I-Astnnomical

4

<r

/!

t/g

ft

fit /

. /

J

4

5-7

/srK

U/

2-Aircnft

//

<?

/&

/*/

/,/>

If./

. &

/

s

0f

<?,

'ft

3-Ligtit Ptienom.

2>

<?

?,

2.4

flt?

Z4

/

a

/

£3

t?.fl

*1

tfjifds

.a

(9

.0.0

W

/?./?

: a

<9

&

at?

00

fit?

5-Clouds, Oust, etc.

.0.

fO

aa

t?.C?

G/0

_ 0.

<?

<?

/?.A

/?<?

#t?

(•Insuffic. tnfct.

4

(?

1

-U.

-Of?

l*

_iL

<9

/

s:.f

W

&..t

7-Piycholopcail

£

/

J

*.*t

/Z

SJ

^.L.

(

S3

(? (i

X3

8-Jnkjwm

/4

/?

fit

fa z

#■(?

fi-'f

_ /.

>

'/

$3

0.0

43

KHhet

-1

/?

1

t.3

#J>

13

, ./

4

5"

£3

?,/■/

%i«

'

Total

43

z>

ft

f4.0

2<r.e?

m

_x

M

/f

4U(

S3

(? (i

X3

8-Jnkjwm

/4

/?

fit

fa z

#■(?

fi-'f

_ /.

>

'/

$3

0.0

43

KHhet

-1

/?

1

t.3

#J>

13

, ./

4

5"

£3

?,/■/

%i«

'

Total

43

z>

ft

f4.0

2<r.e?

m

_x

M

/f

4U

fr.l

W-

L

4 
f

f

253 and 254

'I

1

f^SW^fo^s**?-

APPENDIX B

WORKING PAPER FORMS

Wm

.33

255 and 256

tr."*??!*'r,'r>.---»:': ,, ~ *.,

INDEX OF FORMS

?#(

Exhibit Bl, Tentative Observers Data Sheet

Exhibit B2. Tentative Observers Questionnaire ..' 
Exhibit B3. U. S. Air Force Technical Information Sheet.

Exhibit B4. Codes for Worksheet

Exhibit B5. Work Sheet

Exhibit B6. Codes for Card Bible

Exhibit B7. Card Bible . . .''...

Exhibit B8. Example of an IBM Card

* . *

Page 
259 
267 
277 
289 
297 
301 
309 
313

M

257 and 258

M

I

J

i ^

M|H W Mff4MM J

^■*r-^p^q^ i^-^sfflr^-frv- j i

EXHIBIT Bl

TENTATIVE OBSERVERS DATA SHEET

cT

259 and 260

fiW!iff* ,i fc, l &] 1 i|>iW^^*»p^*^pffi1*;'! $■*&* -.VivVWwa-

TENTATIVE 
OBSERVERS DATA SHEET

Where- Choice is Given, Circle Proper 
Answers, or Insert Answer

1. Date of your observation:

Day

Month

2. Date you reported the observation:

Day Month 
3- What time was it when you sighted the object:

A.M. P.M. Daylight Standard

Zone: Eastern, Central, Movjitain, Pacific,

k» Length of time object was observed. Estimate:

5. Where observed:

Hours

Year

Year

Minutes

Other

Hours Minutes , Seconds

■J

i-:m

Postal Address City or Town

6. Where were you at tine of observation:

Inside building, In Car, Outdoors,

7, Were you moving at any time during this sighting:

8* Did ycu stop at any time during this sighting:

9. If you were moving - give

and

State

Other

Yes or No

Yes or No

'ountry

Direction

miles per hour,

Speed "

iO, How was object observed: Naked eye

Eye glasses

Other glass (Window or Windshield)

Binoculars, Telescope, Theodolite

Other

11. How did you happen to notice the object: , 1 , ■ '■

261

■51

12. Describe what you saw as briefly as possible in the following spaces:Binoculars, Telescope, Theodolite

Other

11. How did you happen to notice the object: , 1 , ■ '■

261

■51

12. Describe what you saw as briefly as possible in the following spaces:

a.

Souhd_ 
Color

b. Shape^ 
d« Size

e. Number

g. Light color_

i • Speed

f . Light brightness^

h. Motion

j. Other _______

13» How did object disappear from view: Siiddenly or Graduall y

Circle One

lh* At any time did the object:

a. Change direction, b. Change speed, c. Move behind some thing j Cloud,

House, Tree, \ d. Blond with background, e. Decrease

Other

in sise. f. Decrease in brightness, g. Hove in front of something.

h. ; " ,

aEher

15 • When you first looked at the object, \zhat direction were you facing?

16. ■". v/hen you last saw the object, what direction were you facing?

17» In the following Sketch A, draw lines

from the observer's eye to the circular

arc to show the apparent elevation of the

object in the sky.

A. When first seen, label a.

B. When last seen,, label b.

Directly 
Overhead

Observer's 
Lye

Yrvizn

SKLTCH A

262

wm

?3I?*WW;?^.7i

mmmmmm^m^ezsi

.|T«r^Vn*Jl. | tt> 1 ,4.^

18. On the following Sketch B, label a at 
the apparent position of the object 
when first seen and b at point last - $ 
seen. Trace the apparsnt path of 
the object between points a and b.

Overhead

#

Horizon

Observer • s 
Eye

SKETCH B

Horizon

If possible label 1, 2, 3 3 etc., 
along the traced path to show the 
successive positions of the object 
after equal intervals of tirce dur- 
ing the sighting. 
19. In Sketch C please show the

observed features of the object 
such as$

A. Apparent shape, (were edges 
pointed or rounded) 3

B. Apparent direction of motion 
(show by arrow), and

C. Other details, exhaust, trails,

tails, surfaces, etc. SKETCH C

?0. The sun and the neon are shown below as they appear in their correct relative 
.size* In this sketch 1), show the apparent size of what you saw.

SUJJ

OBJECT

MOON

SKETCH D 
263?0. The sun and the neon are shown below as they appear in their correct relative 
.size* In this sketch 1), show the apparent size of what you saw.

SUJJ

OBJECT

MOON

SKETCH D 
263

21 » In your own words please describe the sighting you observed. Use sketches 
if desired. All observations from the time of first sighting to the time 
of dissappearance are important. Include a description of the weather, 
wind, and cloud conditions at the time of this sighting.

264

Mm±

m

ipp

WWHW .'

&'■ '"■§

22. Your full name:

23. lour address: 
2U» Your occupation:

2f>. Last school you. attended:

26. Year of last attendance at this school:

27. Please. list the names and addresses of persons who discussed this sighting 
with you. It is not necessary to list the names of officials or investigators.

28. Further conurients which you believe are important should be entered here. 
Use additional sheets of the sane siz3 if necessary.

265 and 266

^j^^n**^ ''ErJV^'"'-

EXHIBIT B2

TENTATIVE OBSERVERS QUESTIONNAIRE

i.

m

;-3

I

267 and 268

!*if^te4*.*v*^#^s*;:4ty:."^f!-*.h-,^. <^. ,

TENTATIVE 
OBSERVERS QUESTIONNAIRE

_ i

(-■"■ 'J

SECTION A

When did you see the object: 
1.1 Date:

Day 
1.2 Time of Day:

Month

Year

A.M. or P.M. (Circle One)

d. Pacific

e. Other

Hrs. Min. 
1.3 Time Zone: (Circle One):

a. Eastern

b. Central

c. Mountain ~~ —

(Circle One): a. Daylight Saving 
b. Standard

l.U Circle one of the following to indicate hoy certain you are of 
your answer to the above question 1.2:

a. Certain

b. Fairly certain

c. Not very sure

d. Just a guess

2» Where were you when you saw the object:

Postal Address

City or Town

State

Country

Additional Remarks:

.Via

3« VJhere were you located when you saw the object:

(Circle One)r a. Inside a building d. In an airplane

b. In a car e. At sea

c. Outdoors f. Other

3.1 Were you:

(Circle One):.Via

3« VJhere were you located when you saw the object:

(Circle One)r a. Inside a building d. In an airplane

b. In a car e. At sea

c. Outdoors f. Other

3.1 Were you:

(Circle One):

In the business section of a city? 
In the residential section of a city? 
In open countryside? 
Flying near an airfield? 
Flying over a city?

f . Flying Over open country?

g. Otfagr ■'

a.

b. 
c. 
d. 
e*

269

mm

»-»*^'- k * A *v***** , " i * "T»>l- *?'->y^Wi»'*

U* How did you happen to notice the object?

5* When did you report to some official that you had seen the object? 
Day Month Year

SECTION B

6. What were you doing at the time you sav the object?

6,1 What had you been doing for the 30 minutes before you saw the object? 
Try to list the activity or activities and the approximate amount 
of time spent on each*

f»i

7« Were you moving at any time while you saw the object? (Circle One)

Yes or No

IF you answered YES > then complete the following questions: 
7.1 What direction were you moving?

(Circle One): a. North e.

b. Northeast

c . East

d. Southeast

7 • 2 How fast were you moving?

South

f. Southwest

g. West

h. Northwest

miles per hour.

8.

7.3 Did you stop at any time while you were looking at the object?

(Circle One): Yes or No

What direction were you looking when you first saw the object?

(Circle One): a. North

b. Northeast

c. East

d. Southeast

e. South

f • Southwest

g. West

h. Northwest

270

f«i?r*- s S**WW*^ ! '""^'i''"'-~'V

<W

8.1 What direction were you looking when the object disappeared?

(Circle One): a. North .

b. Northeast

c. East

d. Southeast

8.2 Circle one of the following to indicate hovi certain you are of

your answer to the above question and preceding question (8 and 
8.1).

e*

South

f.

Southwest

g»

West

h.

Northwest

a* Certain

b. Fairly certain

c. Wot very sure

d. Just a guess

9. Were you wearing eye glasses when you saw the object? (Circle One): 
Yes or No 
10. How was the object seen?West

h.

Northwest

a* Certain

b. Fairly certain

c. Wot very sure

d. Just a guess

9. Were you wearing eye glasses when you saw the object? (Circle One): 
Yes or No 
10. How was the object seen?

(Circle One): a. Through window glass

b. Through windshield

c. Through binoculars

d. Through telescope

e. Through theodolite

f ♦ Through sunglasses

g. Through open space

h. Other

11. What do you remember about the weather conditions at the time you saw the 
object?

11.1 CLOUDS (Circle One)

a. Clear sky

b. Hazy

c. Scattered clouds

d. Thick or heavy clouds

e. Don't remember

11.2 WIND (Circle One)

a. Ho wind

b. Slight breeze

c. Strong wind

d. Don't remember

11.3 WEATHER (Circle One)

:a. Dry

b. Fog, Mist, or light rain

c. Moderate or heavy rain

d. Snow

e. Don't remember

11. h TEMPERATURE (Circle One)

a.

Cold

b.

Cool

c.

Warm

d.

Hot

e.

Don't remember

SECTION C

12. Estimate how long you saw the object?

Hours

Minutes

Seconds

271

12.1 Circle one of the following to indicate how certain you are of your 
answer to Question 12:

a. Certain

b. Fairly sure

13* Bid the object look: (Circle One) Solid 
lU« Did the object at any time :

c. Mot very sure 
d* Just a guess

or Transparent

lii.i

Change direction?

res

Mo

Hi.2

Change speed?

Yes

Mo

ll;.3

Change size?

Yes

Mo

1U.U

Change color?

Yes

No

1U.5

Break up into parts or

Yes

No

explode?

1U.6

Give off smoke?

Yes

Mo

11.7

Change brightness?

Yes

Wo

111. 8

Flicker, throb, or 
pulsate?

Yes

Mo

11* .9

Remain motionless?

Yes

No

(Circle One for each question)

Don't know

l£. Did the object give off a light? (Circle One)t Yes

15.1 IF you answered YES., what was the color of the light?

16. Tell in a few words the following things about the object?

16 .1 Sound __ __ ____

16. 2 Color __.

17. IF there was MORE THAN ONE object, then how many were there?

Don

t

know

Don

't

know

Don

t

know

Don

t

know

Don

't

know

Don'

t know

Don

't

know

Don*

t16. 2 Color __.

17. IF there was MORE THAN ONE object, then how many were there?

Don

t

know

Don

't

know

Don

t

know

Don

t

know

Don

't

know

Don'

t know

Don

't

know

Don*

t

know

Mo

Don't

know

Draw a picture of how they were arranged and put an arrow to show the 
direction they were traveling.

n

18. Did the object at any time}

13.1 Move behind something? (Circle One) Yes Wo

Don't know

IF you answered YES, then tell what it moved behind.

272

fift

18,2 Move in front of something? (Circle Orie) Yes No Don't know 
IF you answered YES, then tell what it moved in front of.

m

19 «

18. 3 Blend with the background? (Circle One) Yes No Don't know

Which, of the following objects is about the same actual size as the object 
you saw? (Circle One):

a. Pea

b. Baseball

c . Basketball

cU Bicycle wheel

e. Office desk

f . Automobile

g. Small airplane 
h. Large airplane 
i. Dirigible

j. Other

19*1 Circle one of the following to indicate how certain you are of your 
answer to Question 19*

a* Certain

b. Fairly certain

c. Mot very sure

d. Uncertain

20. Try to tell the following things about the object:

20.1 How high above the earth was it?

20.2 How far was it from you? ^

20*3 How fast was it going?

feet.

feet or

miles per hour.

miles.

20.U Circle one of the following to indicate how certain you are of your 
answer to the above questions:

a. Certain

b. Fairly certain

21. How did the object disappear from view?

(Circle One): a.. Suddenly

b. Gradually

c. Hot very sure

d. Just a guess

c. Other

d. Don't remember

SECTION D

22. In the following sketch, imagine your eye at the point shovn. Place an "A"

on the curved line to show how high the object was above the horizon

(skyline) when you first saw it. Place a "B" to show i-iiere it was when

you last saw it. «■■,■-' 
" ■ Overhead

Horizon

You

273(skyline) when you first saw it. Place a "B" to show i-iiere it was when

you last saw it. «■■,■-' 
" ■ Overhead

Horizon

You

273

23* In the following sketch place an "A" at the position the object was when 
you first saw it> and a "B ,r at its position when you last saw it.

Horizon

Overhead

You

Horizon

2li. Draw a picture that will show the motion that the object made. Place an 
"A" at the beginning of its path and a "B" at the end of its path.

H

25* Draw a picture that will show the shape of the object. Label and include 
in your sketch any details of the object that you saw and place an arrow 
beside the drawing to show the direction the object was moving.

274

. i -s f

Hj

si

;'!'■■

SECTION E 
26. Was this the first time that you have seen an object like this? 
(Circle One): Yes or No

26,1 IF you answered WO, then when, where, and tinder what conditions did 
you see other ones?

27. In your opinion what jio you think the object was and what might have caused 
it?

28, Give the following information about yourself: 
NAME

*{■■''"

M ADDRESS

Last Name First Name Middle Name '

Street City Zone State

TELEPHONE NUMBER -

What is your present job?

Age

Sex

29. Was anyone else with you at the time you saw the object? 
(Circle One): Yes or No 
29»1 IF you answered YES, did they see the object too?

(Circle One): Yes or No 
29*2 Please list their names and addresses:

275

fe

30. Flease add here any further comments! which you believe are important. 
Use additional sheets of the same size paper, if necessary.

&*

;

Hi

276

I

rp&^^0&*-

m

Sf»Sft* L ^*V , !-"*!*r> ""i » T^^pciiljH.^ Jnfl-w^-.-.-j^i^-i- -^ , L ;a

T.-.V **' ;+■ *, , "W^^S^tA*iV i ^^.

i.

EXHIBIT B3

U. S. AIR FORCE TECHNICAL INFORMATION SHEET

:*m

111 and 278

w5?Sw*

^^l^^^tf^mi^Sif^^v

" !,:l ? !i *^.'**r.'' , **? T, *'>;*'l ^

<.*,: m -r?,'y.'r?,?^;¥ J\??t* ^i"**^; ~

m

mm

U, S. AIR FORCE TECHNICAL INFORMATION SHEET:*m

111 and 278

w5?Sw*

^^l^^^tf^mi^Sif^^v

" !,:l ? !i *^.'**r.'' , **? T, *'>;*'l ^

<.*,: m -r?,'y.'r?,?^;¥ J\??t* ^i"**^; ~

m

mm

U, S. AIR FORCE TECHNICAL INFORMATION SHEET

This questionnaire has, been prepared so that you can give the U. S. Air Force as much 
information as possible concerning the unidentified aerial phenomenon that you have observed. 
Please try to answer as many questions as you possibly can. The information that you give will 
be used for research purposes, and will be regarded as confidential material. Your name will nor 
be used in connection with any statements, conclusions, or publications without your permission. 
We request this personal information so that, if it is deemed necessary, we may contact you for 
further details.

1. When did you see the object?

Day

Month

rear

2. Time of day:

Hour

Minutes

(Circle One):

A.M. or P.M.

*

3. Time zone:

(Circle One): a. Eastern

b. Central

c. Mountain

d. Pacific

e. Other

(Circle One): a. Daylight Saving 
b. Standard

4. Where were you when you saw the object?

Nearest Postal Address 
Additional remarks:

City or Town

State or Country

5. Estimate how long you saw the object.

4

He

Minutes

Seconds

5.1 Circle one of the following to indicate how certain you are of your answer to Question 5.

a. Certain

b. Fairly certain

c. Not very sure

d. Just a guess

i

';

'.

£

♦{»

1

i

v.

t ■

-ft"

p-

5;

1

£*

6. What was the condition of the sky?

(Circle One): a. Bright daylight

b. Dull daylight

c. Bright twilight

d. Just a trace of daylight

e. No trace of daylight

f. Don't remember

m

7. IF you saw the object during DAYLIGHT, TWILIGHT, or DAWN, where was the SUN located as you looked at 
the object?

(Circle One): p. In front of you

b. In back of you

c. To your right

d. To your left

e. Overhead

f. Don't remember

279(Circle One): p. In front of you

b. In back of you

c. To your right

d. To your left

e. Overhead

f. Don't remember

279

IF you saw the object at NIGHT, TWILIGHT, or DAWN, what did you notice concerning the STARS and MOON? 
8.1 STARS (Circle One): 8.2 MOON (Circle One): ,

a. None a. Bright moonlight

b. A few

c. Many

d. Don't remember

b. Dull moonlight

c. No moonlight — pitch dark

d. Don't remember

9. Was the object brighter than the background of the sky? 
(Circle One): a. Yes b. No

c. Don't remember

10. IF it was BRIGHTER THAN the sky background, was the brightness like that of an automobile headlight?:

(Circle One) a. A mile or more away (a distant car)?

b. Several blocks away?

c. A block away?

d. Several yards away?

e. Other.—;

f

f i

11.

Did the object:

Appear to stand still at any time?

Suddenly speed up and rush away at any time?

Break up into parts or explode?

Give off smoke?

Change brightness?

Change shape?

Flicker, throb, or pulsate?

a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f.

g-

(Circle One for each question)

Yes No Don't Know

Yes No Don't Know

Yes No Don't Know

Yes No Don't Know

Yes No Don't Know

Yes No Don't Know

Yes No Don't Know

12. Did the object move behind something at anytime, particularly a cloud?

(Cire/eOne): Yes No Don't Know. IF you answered YES, then tell what 
it moved behind: - : -^— .

13. Did the object move in front of something at anytime, particularly a cloud?

(Circle One): Yes No Don't Know. IF you answered YES, than tell what 
it moved in front of: :

14. Did the object appear: (Circle One):

a. Solid?

b. Transparent?

c. Don't Know.

15- Did you observe the object through any of the following?

a. Eyeglasses Yes No e. Binoculars

b. Sunglasses Yes No f. Telescope

c. Windshield Yes No g. Theodolite

d. Window glass Yes No h. Other

Yes 
Yes 
Yes

No 
No 
No

280

■&*-'

™WW^W*'*^^^*^^«lW''m-- | -*if!--*v--. :,'«.. «.'-,,,-, -,„.,.

16. Tell in a few words the Following things about the object. 
a. SoundYes 
Yes 
Yes

No 
No 
No

280

■&*-'

™WW^W*'*^^^*^^«lW''m-- | -*if!--*v--. :,'«.. «.'-,,,-, -,„.,.

16. Tell in a few words the Following things about the object. 
a. Sound

b. Color

17. Draw, a picture that will show the shape of the object or objects. Label and include in your sketch any details 
of the object that you saw such as wings, protrusions, etc., and especially exhaust trails or vapor trails. Place 
an arrow beside the drawing to show the direction the object was moving.

sfii

■1

18. The edges of the object were:

(Circle One): a. Fuzzy or blurred

b. Like a bright star

c. Sharply outlined

d. Don't remember

e. Other

«19. IF there was MORE THAN ONE object, then how many were there? , _ 
Draw a picture of how they were arranged, and put an arrow to show the direction that they were traveling.

J

281

■pay ;*M^ r .^ : :j^-rt^-v

20* Draw a picture that will show the motion that the object or objects made. Place on "A" at the beginning 
of the path, a "8" at the end of the path, and show any changes in direction during the course.

21- IF POSSIBLE, try to guess or estimate what the real size of the object was in its longest dimension. 
feet.

22. How large did the object or objects appear as compared with one of the following objects held in the hand 
and at about arm's length?

(Circle One):

g. Silver dollar

h. Baseball

i. Grapefruit

j. Basketball

k. Other

a. Head of a pin

b. Pea

c. Dime

d. Nickel

e. Quarter

f. Half dollar

22.1 (Circle One of the following to indicate how certain you are of your answer to Question 22.

a. Certain c* Not very sure

b. Fairly certain d. Uncertain

23. How did the object or objects disappear from view? _ — _

24. In order that you can give as clear a picture as possible of what you saw, we would like for you to imagine that you could

con struct, the object that you sow. Of what type material would you make it? How large would it he, and what shape mmcon struct, the object that you sow. Of what type material would you make it? How large would it he, and what shape mm

would it have? Describe in your own words a common object or objects which when placed up in the sky would give the ^^

same appearance as the object which you saw.

282

mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmiK^^^

!^?5W!p5Sf!RSf5«^«Kt

^™>*.>7»* "' ;X ■•**-«* ■

f,:l

H

25. Where were you located when you saw the object? 
(Circle One);

a. Inside a building

b. In a car

c. Outdoors

d. In an airplane

e. At sea

f. Other .

26. Were you (Circle One)

a. In the business section of a city?

b. In the residential section of a city?

c. In open countryside?

d. Flying near an airfield?

e. Flying over a city?

f. Flying over open country?

g. Other

27. What were you doing at the time you saw the object, and how did you happen to notice it?

its!

m

w

28. IF you were MOVING IN AN AUTOMOBILE or other vehicle at the time, then complete the following questions:

28.1 What direction were you moving? (Circle One)

a. North c. East e. South

b. Northeast d. Southeast f. Southwest

g. West

h. Northwest

28.2 Mow fast were you moving?

miles per hour.

28.3 Did you stop ot any time while you were looking at the object? 
(Circle One) Yes No

29. What direction were you looking when you first saw the object? (Circle One)

a. North

b. Northeast

c. East

d. Southeast

e. South

f. Southwest

g. West

h. Northwest

1(H} 30. What direction were you looking when you last saw the object? (Circle One)

a. North

b. Northeast

c. East

d. Southeast

o. South

f. Southwest

g. West

h. Northwest

37. If you are familiar with bearing terms (angular direction), try to estimate the number of degrees the object was 
from true North and also the number of degrees it was upward from the horizon (elevation).

31.1 When it first appeared:

a. From true North _

b. From horizon .

degrees.

31.2 When it disappeared:

a.' From true~North 
b. From horizon _l_

degrees.

degrees.31.1 When it first appeared:

a. From true North _

b. From horizon .

degrees.

31.2 When it disappeared:

a.' From true~North 
b. From horizon _l_

degrees.

degrees.

degrees.

%

<■;■

Z83

32. In the following sketch, imagine that you are at the point shown. Place an "A" on the curved line to show how 
high the object was above the horizon (skyline) when you first saw it. Place a "B" on the same curved line to 
show how high the object was above the horizon (skyline) when you last saw it.

n>

33. In the following larger sketch place an "A" at the position the object was when you first sow it, and a "B* at its 
position when you last saw it. Refer to smaller sketch as an example of how to complete the larger sketch.

284

"*'$%?&* ■■*&*•?*■

34. What were the weather conditions at the time you saw the object?

34.1 CLOUDS (Circle One) 34.2 WIND (Ci>c/e One)

a. Clear sky a. No wind

b. Hazy b. Slight breeze

c. Scattered clouds

d. Thick or heavy clouds

e. Don't remember

34.3 WEATHER (Circle One)

a. Dry

b. Fog, mist, or light rain

c. Moderate or heavy rain

d. Snow

e. Don't remember

c. Strong wind

d. Don't remember

34.4 TEMPERATURE (Circle One)

a. Cold

b. Cool

c. Warm

d. Hot

e. Don't remember

35. When did you report to some official that you had seen the object?

Day

Month

Y«ar

36. Was anyone else with you at the time you saw the object?

(Circle One) Yes No

36.1 IF you answered YES, did they see the object too?

(Circle One) Yes No

36.2 Please list their names and addresses:

ii

37. Was this the first time that you had seen an object or objects like this?

(Circle One) Yes No

37.1 IF you answered NO, then when, where, and under what circumstances did you see other ones?

38. In your opinion what do you think the object was and what might have caused it?

285

-.-j°^S*i

i'r

39. Do you think you can estimate the speed of the object? 
(Circle One) Yes No

IF you answered YES, then what speed would you estimate?

. m.p.h.285

-.-j°^S*i

i'r

39. Do you think you can estimate the speed of the object? 
(Circle One) Yes No

IF you answered YES, then what speed would you estimate?

. m.p.h.

40. Do you think you can estimate how far awoy from you the object was? 
(Circle One) Yes No

IF you answered YES, then how far away would you say it was?

. feet.

41. Please give the following information about yourself:

NAME

Last Name

First Nam*

ADDRESS

Street

City-

TELEPHONE NUMBER

What is your present job?

Age

Sex

Please indicate any special educational training that you have had.

a. Grade school _

b. High school _

c. College

e. e. Technical school 
(Type)

Middle Name

State

f. Other special training

d. Post graduate

42. Date you completed this questionnaire:

Day

Month

&:■

286

v"

8W^'tt|^Bfl5B^hRi| 1 -^i>'fip_7»io l *t *^«^|pft**^^rT*i=* -iim,-ik^» s^K^t. ^

y

U. S. AIR FORCE TECHNICAL INFORMATION SHEET

(SUHHARY DATA)

In order that your information may be filed and coded as accurately as possible, please use 
the following space to write out a short description of the event that you observed. You may re- 
peat information that you have already given in the questionnaire, and add any further comments, 
statements, or sketches thot you believe ore important. Try to present the details of the observa- 
tion in the order in which they occurred. Additional pages of the same size paper may be attached 
if they are needed.

NAMF

(Plsat* Print)

I SIGNATMRF 
DATE

(Do Not Write in This Space) 
CODE:

t

...

■'■'$ "" - ■ ■'■ '"

•f-

287

I

Z88

•

EXHIBIT B4

CODES FOR WORK SHEET

289 and 290

lito

CODES

CODE 1, GENERAL

a. Every column must have at least one entry* If no data are 
available for any column, the Y should be used*

b. If a number in any column is used to enter data, then X 
qualifies the data as indicated in the Code for the specific 
column.

CODE 2? DURATION UNITS CODE 26 LATITUDE

CODE 32 LONGITUDE

•

X

y 
o 
l

2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9CODE 2? DURATION UNITS CODE 26 LATITUDE

CODE 32 LONGITUDE

•

X

y 
o 
l

2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9

Days 
Hours 
Minutes 
Seconds

X

Y

1 
2 
3 
L 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9

South latitude

s

X

y 
o

i

2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8

9

East longitude

CODE LI POSITION

CODE LZ MOVEMENT OF OBSERVER

X

Y

1 
2 
3 
K 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9

Variable

In car 
Outdoors 
In plane 
In building

Other

X

Y

1 
2 
3 
U 
5 
6 
7 
6 
9

Wasn't moving

Was moving , - stopped

Was moving - didn't stop

s

291

J

CODE 43 OBSERVATION METHOD

CODE 44 SOUND 
X Variable

X Variable

Y

y

Naked eye

Motors

1 Eye glasses

1

Jet or rockets

-

2 Window

2

Explosion

3 Windshield

3

Unlike aircraft

4 Binocular

4

Hiss, swishing.

whining

5 Telescope

5

Rumbling

6 Theodolite

.6

Humming or buzzing

7 Radar

7

None

8 Photographic

8

Not stated

9 Other

9

Other

CODE 45 COLOR

CODE 46

NUMBER

CODE 47 LIGHT-COLOR

X Variable

X

X

Variable

Y

y

y

Metallic

- ;

I

White

1 Light-glow-luminoua

l

2

1

Black

2 Red

2

4*

3

2

Grey

3 Orange

3

— i

4-

3

Red

4 Yellow

4

^

5

4

Orange

5 Green

5

- 1

6

5

Yellow

6 Blue

6

I

7-10

6

Green

7 Violet

7

-

11-20

7

Blue

8 Black

8

*-

20 - 30

6

Violet

9 White

9

~

31 or more

9

Other

CODE 48 SPEED

CODE 49 SHAPE

X Variable

X

Variable

Y

Y

Hovering, stationary

Ellipse

1 Less than 100 m.p.h.

1

Rocket

2 100-400 m.p.h.

2

Conventional aircraft

3 More than 400 m.p.h •

3

Unconventional aircraft

4 Meteor like

4

Meteor, comet

5 Not stated

5

Lenticular

6

6

Conical

7"

7

Tear drop

8

8

Flame, tails, fire

9 Other

9

Other

292

CODE 50 SHAPE PARAMETER a/b

CODE 51 SUBTENDED VISUAL ANGLE 
(Referred to sun diameter)

X - Variable

X - Decreased in size

Y

Y

0-0.0

- 0.1

1 - 0.05

1 - 0.2

2 - 0*1

2 - 0.5

3 - 0.2

3 - 0.75

4 - 0.3

4 •* 1.0

5 - 0.5

5 - 1.5

6 - 0.75

6 - 2.0

7 - 0.9

7 - 4.0

8 - 1.0

8 - 4.0 to 10.0

9 - Other

9 - Other

CODE 52 LIGHT BRIGHTNESS f.1 - 0.2

2 - 0*1

2 - 0.5

3 - 0.2

3 - 0.75

4 - 0.3

4 •* 1.0

5 - 0.5

5 - 1.5

6 - 0.75

6 - 2.0

7 - 0.9

7 - 4.0

8 - 1.0

8 - 4.0 to 10.0

9 - Other

9 - Other

CODE 52 LIGHT BRIGHTNESS f.

Intensity) CODE 53 ANGULAR VELOCITY

X Decreased 
Y

Sunlight on mirror

1 Sunlight on aluminum

2 Sunlight on plaster

3 Sunlight on stone

4 Sunlight on soil

5 Brighter than moon

6 Like moon

7 Duller than moon

8 Barely visible

9 Other

X

Y

1 
2

Variable

Zero

Very slow, 1° per second

SI j«wj *jO riai< e&nnn/l

2 Slow, ^ w per secona

3 Moderate, 6° per second

4 Rapid, 12° per second

5 Very fast, 30° per second

6 Extremely fast, 90° per second

7 More than 90° per second 
8

9 Other

te,s?

CODE 54 ANGUIAR ACCELERATION 
(Change in Angular Velocity)

CODE 55 AFPEARANpE BEARING

X Variable

X

Y

Y

Zero, V=constant

- N

1 Increasing slowly

1 - NE

2 Decreasing slowly

2 - E

3 Increasing fast

3 - SE

4 Decreasing fast

4 - S

5 Increasing very fast

5 - SW

6 Decreasing very fast

6 - W

7

7 - m

8

8

9

9

Mi

293

W^ftv^^^ *? 1 **^

'.'■,*■''■.> '^^IVtLV^-v.i,.,-.;.?;^ j,^ r - *.p-" rVV'd-^HW^^S-f.-M^---;

J o.^lv--*'"

/

CODE 56 DISAPPEARANCE BEARING 
X - Disappeared suddenly

y 
o - N

1 - NE

2 - E

3 - SE

4 ■■■- S

5 - SW

6 - W

7 - NW 
8

9

CODE 57-58 ELEVATION

WITH RESPECT TO GROUND. DEGREES

Initial

Final

X

Variable

X

Variable

Y

Y

0-9

0-9

1

10-19

X

10-19

2

20-29

2

20-29

3

30-39

3

30-39

4

40-49

4

40-49

5

50-59

5

50-59

6

60-69

6

60-69

7

70-79

7

70-79

8

80-89

8

80-89

9

9

CODE 61 OBJECT ORIENTATION 
Apparent inclination of principal 
axis of object from horizontal

X

Variable

Y

1-90 to €)p

1

4-60 to 30

2

*30 to 10

3

4-10 to

4

5

to -10

6

-10 to -30

7

-30 to -60

8

-60 to -90

9

CODE 65 I

SERVICE

X

Y

Army

1

Navy

2

Marine

3

Air Force

4

Coast

Guard

5

Merchant

6

Commercial Air

7

CAA

8

Gov't

. Contractor

9

Other

CODE 62-63-64 CIVILIAN OCCUPATION9

CODE 65 I

SERVICE

X

Y

Army

1

Navy

2

Marine

3

Air Force

4

Coast

Guard

5

Merchant

6

Commercial Air

7

CAA

8

Gov't

. Contractor

9

Other

CODE 62-63-64 CIVILIAN OCCUPATION

Dictionary of Occupational Titles, 
Vol. II, 2nd Edition, pp. XIX-XXVI. 
U.S.: Department of Labor, Bureau of 
Employment Security. U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington, D. C, 1949. 
See pp. XIX-XXVI.

CODE 66 DUTY

X

Y

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9

Pilot

Weather tech. 
Radar tech. 
Tover op. 
Balloon obs. 
Tech. spec. 
Guards, lookouts 
Ground or deck crews 
Navig, or bombardier 
Other

294

i»L.,

wmmmmmmm

PiiPSRlBPPlPi

mmmmm

f^55^R555*5-S!^^^*^

COPE 67 RANK EQUIVALENT

CODE 76 EVALUATION OF OBSERVER RELIABILITY

X Officer

X

X 1

Y

Y

Y

Lt. 2nd

Private

Complete

1 Lt. 1st

1 Private, 1st Cls.

1 Quite

2 Capt.

2 Corp.

2 Fair

3 Maj.

3 Serg.

3 Doubtful

U Lt* Col.

U S, T. Serg,

4- Poor

5 Col.

5 M. Serg.

5 Not

6 Brig. Gen,

6 Warrant Off.

6

7 Maj. Gen.

7 Chief Warrant

7

8 Lt. Gen.

8

8

9 General

9

9 Can't be judged

CODE 77 EVALUATION OF REPORT RELIABILITY

CODE 78 PRELIMINARY IDENTIFICATION

X

X Possibly

Y

Y

Complete

Balloon

1 Quit*

B

1 Astronomical

2 Fair

2 Aircraft

3 Doubtful

3 Light phenomenon

4 Poor

4 Birds

5 Not

5 Clouds, dust, etc.

6

6 Rocket or missile .

7

7 Psychological manifestations

8

8 Electromagnetic phenomenon

9 Can'i

t be judged

9 Other

CODE 79-80 FINAL IDENTIFICATION

■-.35 ,■:■

X 
Y

1 
2 
3

5 
6 
7

Probably

Balloon

Astronomical

Aircraft

Light Phenomenon

Birds

Clouds, dust, etc.

Reek9%-ep-a4sB41e Insufficient information

Psychological manifestations

8 Eleefc¥emagRe£4e~phenefie»eR Unknown

9 Other

295 and 296

|J„ _ MMWmb.AivHwmi^.^w^,

SSWGBSWllWII!^^

' irl + ^'ry-/'^ v :

^^HM#*^.jtt^^;^u _ jjnii y^fifl^_l^iwt;-«> J.-. V*Y'*» *':'*¥.''

<?%!

EXHIBIT B5

WORK SHEET

297 and 298

mmmmm

Observer's 
Data 
Sheet 
Question

WORK SHEET

Punched

Card 
Column

1*

2

3

U

? —

Code<?%!

EXHIBIT B5

WORK SHEET

297 and 298

mmmmm

Observer's 
Data 
Sheet 
Question

WORK SHEET

Punched

Card 
Column

1*

2

3

U

? —

Code

Description

Serial No*

Serial No.

Incident serial 
number

Insertion

1.

5.

7 
8

9 
10

32*

33

3U

35

36

37 
39 
39 
iiO

Day

Month

ll

12

Year

Observed

13

lii

Day

V?

■

2,

16

Month

Reported

17

18 .

Day

.

19

20

Month

Rec'dATIC

21

22

Hrs.

Time of observation

23

Greenwich C. T.

3.

2k

Min«

25*

Time Units

Duration of

26

— *

observation

lu-

27

Duration

28*

29

30

31

Latitude

Location

Longitude

Cosine latitude

* Denotes separate code key is needed*

299

Observer's 
Data 
Sheet 
Question

6. 
TTST"

Punched

Card 
Column

Ul*

Code

Description

Vhere observer was

Movin g - Stopped

10.

"TO*" 
15*

How observed

12a.

12c.

"TSeTHS*"

12.

12g. 
12i. liib.

T7*

12b. 19 £9*

12b. 19 
12d. lUe.20

3o*~

12f. lUf.

51*

~5W

3P"

Sound

Color

Number

Light-color Appearance 
Speed De sc rip tion

Shape 
a/b

Size

Light brightness

gni

Angular velo city

U. 12h.,lU, 18. 19

355"

Angular acceleration Motion

15* 
13. 1U. 16

35*

Describe appearance

Describe disappearance

17.

3B*~

i9- 
la*

Initial elevation

Final elevation

Elevation

I2i. 21.

Altitude^ 1000 ft.

Altitude

18. 19.

Object orientation

2U.

"6~2*~ 
63 
6h

21.

66* 
67*

"38"

69 
70

71 
72 
73 
Ik 
IS

Civilian occupation

Observer

Service occupation

76* 
77*

Observer

Report

Evaluation

78* 
79* 
80*

Preliminary 
Final

Identification

* Denotes separate code key is needed.

300

' ■ m

EXHIBIT B6

e.-j

&

CODES FOR CARD BIBLE

301 and 302

ajiii.'

CODES

CODE 1. GENERAL

a. These cards (and the corresponding WORK SHEETS ) contain data from

several sources. Columns referenced to the U. S, Air Force Technical 
Information Sheet (Form A) must have at least one entry. If no data 
are available for any column, the Y (or 12 punch) should be used.b« Columns 22, 23, 2U> 25, 26, 36, 37, 38, 39, UO, Ul/I*2, 1+3, Wi, 1*5, 
k6, 1+7, U8, k9, SO, and 5l are calculated from data appearing in the 
U, S. Air Force Technical Information- Sheet (Form A).' If the basic 
data for these calculations are not available, the appropriate columns 
are left blank*

c. If a number in any column is used to enter data, then X (or 11 punch) 
qualifies the data as indicated in the Code for the specific column.

CODE 7 SIGHTING IDENTIFICATION 
(Txiis column may or may not 
contain multiple punches)

X 
Y

1 
2 
3

u

5 
6

7 
8 
9

All sightings

Unit sightings, all observers 
Unit sightings, single observers 
Unit sightings, multiple observers 
Object sightings

CODE 22 LOCAL SUN TIME 
(Refers to date of G.C.T. observation)

->.A

X 
Y

1 
2 
3 
k 
5 
6 
7 
8

9

Same day 
Previous day

? CODE 23-26 LOCAL SUN TIME

(Calculated from G.C.T., 
date, latitude s and -longitude) CODE 27 LATITUDE

CODE 31 LONGITUDE

X 
Y

1 
2 
3 
k 
5 
6 
7 
8

9

South Latitude

X

Y

1 
2 
3 
I* 
5 
6

7 
8

9

East Longitude

303

£1

tpmtitff*^- L f ■**!

mrnmm

mm

i>

i

U. S. Air Force Technical 
Information Sheet Question

Punched

Card 
Column

Code

Description

5.

"H7

15b7

16b. 17.

19.

11a. lib. 39 . 
17. lb. 2U.

llf. 21. 22. 2U*

10, He.

5. 11. 17. 20. 
33.

29. 31* 1.

23. 30. 31. 2.

31. 32.

"HT7

"3BT 
39

{«*

hi

U2*

"&3#"

"4 
U5 
U6

W

U9. 
5o 
5i*

T2*

5T 
51* 
55*-

35T

3B*

39** 
6o#

6i*

"S"?*~

"55*

"55*"

66*

£7*"

"S5* 
"59*"

70*

_71» 
"75T

73*

IP"

75*

76*

77*

"7S**

Hour 
Angle

Angle of 
Elevation 
of the 
Sun 
Group Classification

Sun

Bearing

Angle

•

Time Units

Duration

of Observation

Group Classification

How Observed

Sound

Object Col or

Light Color Physical

Color Group 
Classification

Number

Speed

Shape

Size

Description

Light Brightness

Angula r Ve lo c i ty

Angular Accelerati on 
Appearance Bearing

Motion

Disappearance BearingColor Group 
Classification

Number

Speed

Shape

Size

Description

Light Brightness

Angula r Ve lo c i ty

Angular Accelerati on 
Appearance Bearing

Motion

Disappearance Bearing

Initial Elevation - . _,. . 
Tl nalSlevatlo ~ Ascription 
Orientation

Maneuvers

Observer Occupation 
Observer foating Observer 
Report Rating

Reliability Group 
Classification

Final Identification

* Denotes that separate code key is needed,

304

mmt

v ,,..-, r .

£1

»'■ i

X 
Y

1 
2 
3 
h 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9

CODE U7 GROUP CLASSIFICATION 
(Derived from the angle of elevation)

CODE U8-51 SUN BEARING ANGLE 
(Calculated) 
CODE 5l SUN BEARING ANGLE

-79.99° to + 79.99°

+80.00° to +89.99°

+90.00° to +100,00°

+100.01° to 130.00°

+130.01° to +180.00 and -180.00° to -100.01°

-100.00° to -90.01°

-90.00° to -80.00°

X 
Y

1 
2 
3 
U 
5 
6

7 
8 
9

East oJf the Meridian

CODE 52 DURATION TIME UNITS

X

Y

Days

1 Hours

2. Minutes

3 Seconds

h

5

6

7

8

9

CODE 55 DURATION GROUP CLASSIFICATION

X

X

1

2 
3 
h 
5 
6

7 
8

9

5 second and less

6 - 10 seconds 
11 - 30 seconds 
31-60 seconds

6l seconds - 5 minutes 
6-30 minutes 
Over 30 minutes

E:J

CODE 56 OBSERVATION METHOD

X Variable X

Y I

• Naked eye

1 Eye glasses 1

2 Window 2

3 Windshield 3 
k Binocul ar

5 Telescope 5

6 Theodolite 6

7 Radar 7

8 Photographic 8

9 Other 9

CODE 57 SOUND

Variable

Motors

Jets or rockets 
Explosion 
Unlike aircraft 
h Hiss, swishing, whining 
Rumbling

Humming or buzzing 
None

Other

CODE 58 OBJECT COLOR

X

Variable

Y

Metallic

1

Light, glow, luminous

2

Red

3

Orange

h

Yellow

5

Green

6

Blue

7

Violet

8

Black

9

White

305

-

r -.'■*-■- ;1■|•--»^ J ■:-;fi'■*^■!""■■

CODE 59 LIGHT COLOR

CODE '60 COLOR GROUP CLASSIFICATION

CODE 61 NUMBER

X Variable

X Light glow

X

y

Y

Y

White

White

1

1 Black

1 Metallic

1 2

2 Grey

2 Red

2 3

3 Red

3 Orange

3 h

k Orange

k Yellow

k $

$ Yellow

5> Green

5 6

6 Green

6 Blue

6 7 -10

7 Blue

7 Violet

7 11-20X

y

Y

Y

White

White

1

1 Black

1 Metallic

1 2

2 Grey

2 Red

2 3

3 Red

3 Orange

3 h

k Orange

k Yellow

k $

$ Yellow

5> Green

5 6

6 Green

6 Blue

6 7 -10

7 Blue

7 Violet

7 11-20

8 Violet

8 Black

8 21-30

9 Other

9 Other

9 31 or more

CODE 6k SUBTENDED VISUAL ANGLE

CODE 62 SPEED

CODE 63 SHAPE

(Referred

to sun diameter)

Variable

X

Y

Variable

X Decreased in size

Hovering, stationary

Ellipse

0.1

Less than 100 mph

1

Rocket

1 0.2

100 - hOO mph

2

Conventional aircraft

2 0.£

More than 1*00 mph

3

Unconventional aircraft 3 0*75

Meteor-like

U

Meteor, comet

U 1.0

Not stated

$

Lenticular

5 1.5

6

Conical .

6 2.0

/

7

Teardrop

7 U.O

8

Flame, tails, fire

8 ii.O to 10.0

Other

9

Fire

9 Other

CODE 65 LIGHT BRIGHTNESS

(Intensity)

CODE 66 ANGULAR VELOCITY

X Decreased

Y

Sunlight on mirror

X

Y

Variable

Zero

1 Sunlight on aluminum

1

Very slow, 1° per second

2 Sunlight on plaster

2

Slow, 3° per s<

Bcond

3 Sunlight on stone

3

Moderate, 6° per second

U Sunlight on soil

U-

Rapid, 12° per

second

£ Brighter than moon

$

Very fast, 30°

second

6 Like moon

6

Extremely fast

, 90° per second

7 Duller than moon

7

More than 90° per second

8 Barely visible

8

9 Other

9

Other

306

CODE 67 ANGULAR ACCELERATION 
(Change in angular velocity)

CODE 68 APPEARANCE BEARING

X Variable

X

Z

Y

Zero, V » constant

ON

1 Increasing slowly

1 NE

2 Decreasing slowly

2 E

3 Increasing fast

3 SE

k Decreasing fast

U s

5 Increasing very fast

5 sw

6 Decreasing very fast

6 W

7

7 NW

8

8

9

9

CODE 69 DISAPPEARANCE BEARING

5 
6 
7 
8

9

Disappeared suddenly

K .

Ne 
E

X 
Y

1 
2 
3 Se

W 
NW

CODE 70-71 ELEVATION 
WITH RESPECT TO GROUND, DEGREES

Initial

Final

X

Variable

X

Variable

Y

-

Y

0-9

0-9

1

10-19

1

10-19

2

20-29

2

20-29

3 
h 
5

6

30-39 
hO-U9 
50-59 
60-69

3 
U 
5 
6

30-39 
U0-U9 
50-59 
60-69

7 
8

70-79 
80-89

7 
8

70-79 
80-89

9

9

r$

^:MY

-

Y

0-9

0-9

1

10-19

1

10-19

2

20-29

2

20-29

3 
h 
5

6

30-39 
hO-U9 
50-59 
60-69

3 
U 
5 
6

30-39 
U0-U9 
50-59 
60-69

7 
8

70-79 
80-89

7 
8

70-79 
80-89

9

9

r$

^:M

CODE 72 OBJECT ORIENTATION 
Apparent inclination of principal 
axis of object from horizontal CODE 73 MANEUVERS

X

Y

1 
2 
3 
h 
5 
6

7

8 
9

X

Variable

Y

+90° to 60°

1

+60° to 30°

2

+30° to 10°

3

+10° to 0°

1*

0°

5

0° to -10°

6

-10° to -30°

7

-30° to -60°

8

-60° to -90°

9

CODE 7U OBSERVER OCCUPATION

Civilian, occupation not stated 
Army, military 
Navy, military 
Marine, military 
Air force, military 
k Coast guard, military

5 Merchant marine, military

6 Commercial air, civilian

7 CAA, civilian

8 Government contractor, civilian

9 Civilian, other

307

■«■£'■*•* r^fr «r^i a jfei^ <

DE 7$ EVALUATION OF OBSERVER RELIABILITY CODE 76 EVALUATION OF REPORT RELIABILITY

X

Y

1

2

3 
it

6 
7 
8 
9

Complete

Quite

Fair

Doubtful

Poor

Not

Cannot be judged

CODS 77 RELIABILITY GROUP CLASSIFICATION 
(Based on observer and report ratings)

Excellent (Observer or 1 and Report or l) 
Good (Observer or 1, Report 2, 3, or h>

Observer 2, 3 t or h> Report or 1; Observer

2, Report 2) 
Doubtful (Observer or 1, Report £ or 9 i

Observer 2, Report 3, U, $ t or 9> Observer

3 or k, Report 2, 3, k> 5, or 9 J Observer 5

or 9, Report 0, 1, 2, 3> or k) 
Poor (Observer 5, 9> or Y, Report ?> 9> or Y)

X

Y

Complete

1 Quite

2 Fair

3 Doubtful 
k Poor

5 Not 
6

7 
8 
9 Cannot be judged

CODE 78 FINAL IDENTIFICATION

X 
Y

1 
2 
'3 
U

6 
7

Probably

Balloon

Astronomical

Aircraft

Light phenomenon

Birds

Clouds , dust, etc.

Insufficient information

Psychological manifestations

8 Unknown

9 Other

308

rx

mmmmm.

mmm

#-

EXHIBIT B7

CARD BIBLE

m

-'if'

309 and 310

CARD BIBLE

U. S. Air Force Technical 
Info rmation Sheet Question

Punched 
Card . 
Column

Code

1.

k.

1 
2 
3 
h

T

6

7*

9

10 
11

12 
13 
IF 
15

22*

23

2U

W

26

27*

29 
30CARD BIBLE

U. S. Air Force Technical 
Info rmation Sheet Question

Punched 
Card . 
Column

Code

1.

k.

1 
2 
3 
h

T

6

7*

9

10 
11

12 
13 
IF 
15

22*

23

2U

W

26

27*

29 
30

31*

32

33

3U

35

36*

-22L

Description

Serial

No,

Sub- 
Serial No,

Sighting

Serial 
No.

Day

Month

%S7

Hours

Minutes

Latitude

Longitude

Identification

Serial

Number

Identification

Incident

Serial

Number

Observed

16.

17

Year

lb

Time of

19

Hours

Observation

20

Greenwich

2,

3.

21

Minutes

C. T.

Local

Sun

Time

Location

Regional Area 
Strategic Area

i

•* Denotes that separate code key is needed.

Card Deck No, is identified by an X (or 11 Punch) in Column

311

U. S. Air Force Technical 
Information Sheet Question

Punched 
Card

Column

Code

Description

5.

TFT

16 a » 
"l5bT

16b, 17.

157

11a* lib. 39.

llf. 21. 22. 21|.

lQ, Ue»

5. 11, 17. 20,

33.

29. 31« 1*

23. 30, 31. 2,

31. 32.

T37

IB"

UO

111 
U2*

"HP"

&

li6

ht**

50

51*

52* 
55*"

355T

57* 
TBT

3^r 
To*

"oTh"

1>2» 
"6J*"

6u* 
T5*

6*7*"

TB*"

70*

_71* 
"72*"

73*

TIF 
1W

76*"

77*

ToT

Hour 
Angle

Angle of 
Elevation 
of the 
Sun 
Group Classification

"Sun"

Bearing

Angle

time Units"

Duration

--^-^ °^ Observation

Group Classification

How Observed

Sound

Object Colo r

Light Color Physical 
Color Group

Classification

Number

Speed

Shape

Size

Light Brightness

Description

Angular Velocity "

Angular Accelerati on 
Appearance Bearing

Motion

Disappearance Bearing

Initial Elevation n ... 
Final Elevation Description

Orientation

Maneuvers

Observer Occupation 
Observer Rating Observer

Report Rating

Reliability Group 
Classification

Final Identification

\

Denotes that separate code key is needed.

312

^> + - r ' j! ! ! !^^

.tjiS^tftHMK***?"; .'A*^. -■ v. ViM>i.„

!i^.i. : i* J .,.'?:-^-y>r^t-.> ^■/■/v;.- i i ;t?^.iiv-y-!itWf^siTr.^v .■>■ ■ "■■' '<"Tv:

#

ill 
Bit "£c !

EXHIBIT B8

S^ W

EXAMPLE OF AN IBM CARD

.7 - :

■I

I

H

Pi!i^.i. : i* J .,.'?:-^-y>r^t-.> ^■/■/v;.- i i ;t?^.iiv-y-!itWf^siTr.^v .■>■ ■ "■■' '<"Tv:

#

ill 
Bit "£c !

EXHIBIT B8

S^ W

EXAMPLE OF AN IBM CARD

.7 - :

■I

I

H

Pi

f:

;; 
"■

I

'I

313 and 314

1

sfe

EXHIBIT B8

EXAMPLE OF AN IBM CARD

#

;

IBM^SERVICF UUP r AU

Blank — Unused

■.'I

CO 2? • —

•5" !o *J>

<x> ;^ c^.

to 1?

Blank — Unused

Sighting Reliability

s

:™

CT3 S —

CI ?'-'■ "

■^r ": ir>

uo S r^-

Cti j?

tT* ,-*

— v Final Identification

?

e-> :: ■—

cni ;-! c^

-rr : ■ *n

c/^ -". *■—

tj r

t;,'V ! "

Observer Reliability

■~v_

cni ;*: i^>

^.-r --' u~>

to "? r—

O]

i j, j

t_

Report Reliability

-

e=> .? *-

cj J- 1 <-^

'<* r? lt>

u ^.' r— *

to ■

C3 ■:

V_

Maneuvers

s

= *"-

cm :: lu

vr ■-' fcrt

(J i-' r-*-

'co T 7

ui ;:

— v Observer Occupation

■7T

<ss :"■? "—

evi :i' -.-*■*

^- !'J i?»

lO ;-• t~—

co :-

" *i r ■

Final Elevation

s

1 i_i

« h —

w t2 n

»cj- :; u >

<jj r: ■—

4JJ .-?

oj :J

""v-

i_i

o ^ *—

CJ ^ «

-rr K «>

lo ^: r--

co ^;

en -.

Disappearance Bearing

s

i_j

a E —

Cvl *^ n

^» ! . w*

»,C3 \S l~"

<** T:

cr> r ; :'

"^^

Initial Elevation

P:

vo ^ •— *

f^j .'i; ^">

u ■■■ uri

to ';j i**-

*i'^ .,

.;3 ■

Angular Acceleration

"X

r Lj

C3 ^ «

ex ^: <*J

■•r u'; J">

u3 ;J rv

*o J_

4J^ Lj

"X-

Initial Bearing

toi

or,"

CM ^ CO

-4- ^ in

ui r . *^-

<o .^

■ en L-

Light Brightness

" N

I'-'l

IZD V' •—

tH tT co

***■ L> *^^

fji .;: f—

^T';

cn Ir" 1 .

■^^_

Angular Velocity

u

era :■,; "—

r>j ^. , T m

^^ : ^ '.n

t^j ... **-■

^>"j '!.;

t:> ■?,

Shape

\

- H

C3 ^, ^~

t^i ^.t<t

vr :J1 U-*

(U ^ ^

I^O L..

Jj'il"

Size

— Cr

t - ? 1 <~—

CM L» C 1

^s- f.; *n

tij ;j r-^.

<-j !,!

sijt;

Number

v.

i

J

C3 Li -^

cm !^ co

v [j w

to Li *~-

c^-t:

CTl U

-

"V.

Speed

~

I__I ~ —

r-j C *•?

■"^J- C "^

to ;5 t*—

co "..

. n ,'t-

Light Color

s

fwv

ta ;/ •—

p,3 - «

*■*" fJ "^

C3 IjJ f~»

t*^ :

( n -.i

"^^

Color Group

^■T

ca

CO JJ * —-

"V.

Speed

~

I__I ~ —

r-j C *•?

■"^J- C "^

to ;5 t*—

co "..

. n ,'t-

Light Color

s

fwv

ta ;/ •—

p,3 - «

*■*" fJ "^

C3 IjJ f~»

t*^ :

( n -.i

"^^

Color Group

^■T

ca

CO JJ * —

cn :^cj

-j- i*.; u">

«n en r—

to ; ;

■j! i f ;

Sound

~\

'J*

ta

ra i" *—

r-Ti V; cr

«cr s u->

to S r»»

to '.;

<JV ^*.

"^w

Object Color

O o ^

r^* 1", ro

vr ♦."• u "->

to i-. ra

cm [;.

«rt ,?>

SL Group

s

in

o ;# —-.

N S rt

. vr ^ -i -x>

ta ^j i*-

tw i:;

CTJ Lt

- ^ How Observed

t/J

C3 j» ^~

C^l L'l rt

"*.. ^ ir>

<o ft r*

^uTT> r

c*i ::i

of* Duration

«

CO ui ■""

to \n r**

CO ^

s o a _ .. _. ..

w

o L! ■—

cm ! f T tU ■

** ^ u**

t» i-: ,—

c**- L?

CHSi

0*0 Time Unit*

/

M^

o

CM ^n «*? 
C«sl si CO

co :^ ta 
to *; r*- +

en ~ : ,

Hundredths _ t *

3"

co ?; *—

m i;* iij

•*r t7 u~*

to ■.'.! rv»

co v;

I - * 1 * <r

Degrees "» £ '" <

s

c=» # —

C3 tt ^

^r :v* Lr *

LO '/; p-»

oa iv

*S y*' e Group

r.

co :; •—

cn ;; rt

n"«

<£» ;/ f-»

en i7

*J1 ^

ijc^ Hundredths

«

CO ■£ 1^-

CO -r,

co Sr';

•^ •"«•£ Degrees

;t

m

rsi :j co

vr ;; BS

*-j '■.,

-t

Uv' —

OJ 1? CO

cm :i m

to t r—

t tt* r,

Hundredths k t>

«

-

CM tl PS

ca ;;; to

ttn ;,' r*- 
us ;.: r—

co ;-";

c

Degrees ^ ■<

Strategic Area ^^

;r

c=» ;~. —

t j ; ; f^

t :~. iO

ll> ■-", r—

Cf*

rj"j

1

Regional Area

KM

^ M *—

rsj ..; <o

■<r :.; u^»

CI .; r-

o. n *

c^ .

-i

/

'-.'

vr 'f, irj

iO rt I-*

Hundredths .^ „

si

=> :.^! *—

cVj I^ fO

JLJ :": ^^

to :-1 r—

to ■ ; 
cm —

C37 rt

_) .

c"| 
Degrees _j *

to F, —

CNI •,'■» CO

w 'j;i in

U3 M 1-^ 
to ,*7, i—

.i o Hundredths

IN ^ O

CM * t*l

co ■":

_l £ Degrees

~

C3 ;■; * —

csi £L co

CO .'^ v --

co ;.; r^-

rs

c3 i;; — 
c=> ?: —

ICJ ■■" to

U7 ,u- r—

cjj ■-■:

tji 1

j

Minutes ^

~

o ;*, * —

co r: * —

123 ■■; CO

Hours g ,| |

f-;

CO i ; If *

l-N| , ^ CO

*=r r; ifj

<^C* t^ 1*-.

u. 1 .

k'j i . ;

Key J h

. : * Minutes

f;

t^l ;-, —

cni r*. p"-*tji 1

j

Minutes ^

~

o ;*, * —

co r: * —

123 ■■; CO

Hours g ,| |

f-;

CO i ; If *

l-N| , ^ CO

*=r r; ifj

<^C* t^ 1*-.

u. 1 .

k'j i . ;

Key J h

. : * Minutes

f;

t^l ;-, —

cni r*. p"-*

era ~ £-*-.

v_

*a .: —

tr**t f.' r^

■

"g OH Hours

z

C'i i-J — -

i^i "■

8 Y " r

-

C-3 -■ ,

CVI ..• CO

**r ■.- **^

tr> ■. r-*-

. t^ 1 1:

<Si . -

. ■■-.'

<-t> r.' r^

OJ '.i'

O Month

p

£Z3 £ *™

cnj : ; co

vr :: t-n

- to :f i— -

i^3 V:

m " r

Day

i"

C3 :_■ >—

in u 1 n

til t^ T--

O; r:

-•

eta --_^3__

CVI C CO

rvi '■ n

VT C *J"J 
^*- 1.' «-3

to - r-. 
to £ " 1 —

to ^- r-^

CO ^J

to ■■"

o3 ^

Incident Serial Number

-

c^» ■ ui

KM -'"«tt

v.- -■- h^-

iu -- f^-

m

i-7 ■

,

Sighting Identification

Subserial Number

^-,

S- -

cvj -. cr»

tii r*-w

/ -»

ui ■- r*

^_

Serial Number

'

o - ^ —

CVI .'■> c^> 
CVI ' - CO

Mi ~ **■*

-<T ■- u->

Ml -r r— -

tea -^ i-^

LD ' ■ Bit

in - r~~

as ■■■ 
co ---

CO ■*

en ■'

en >^-

L j"J • -

w

. ~ '

315 and 316