ROLL


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Microfiln Publication M887


.RECORDS OF THE UNITED STATES
NUERNBERG WAR CRIMES TRIALS

UNITED STATES OP AMERICA V. KARL BRANDT ET AL. (CASE I)
NOVEMBER 21, 1946-AUGUST 20, 1947

Roll 9

Transcript Volumes (English Version)

Volumes 22-24

May 22-June 14, 1947


THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES
NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS SERVICE
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION


WASHINGTON: 1974


INTRODUCTION

On the 46 rolls of this microfilm publication are reproduced
the records of Case I {United States of America v. Karl Brandt
et al., or the "Medical" Case), 1 of the 12 trials of war criminals
conducted by the U.S. Government from 1946 to 1949 at Nuernberg
subsequent to the International Military Tribunal held in the
same city. These records consist of German- and English-language
versions of official transcripts of court proceedings, prosecution
and defense briefs, and final pleas of the defendants as well as
prosecution and defense exhibits and document books in one lan¬
guage or the other. Also included in this publication are a
minute book, the official court file, order and judgment books,
clemency petitions, and finding aids to the documents.

The transcripts of this trial, assembled in 2 sets of 30
bound volumes (1 set in German and 1 in English), are the recorded
daily trial proceedings. The prosecution and defense briefs and
answers are also in both languages but unbound, as arc the final
pleas of the defendants delivered by counsel or defendants and
submitted by the attorneys to the court. The unbound prosecution
exhibits, numbered 1-570, are essentially those documents from
various Nuernberg record series offered in evidence by the
prosecution in this case. The defense exhibits, also unbound,
are predominantly affidavits by various persons. They are
arranged by name of defendant and thereunder numerically. Both
prosecution document books and defense document books consist
of full or partial translations of exhibits into the English
language. Loosely bound in folders, they provide an indication
of the order in which the exhibits were presented before the
tribunal.

The minute book, in one bound volume, is a summary of the
transcripts. The official court file, in four bound volumes,
includes the progress docket, the indictment, amended indictment,
and the service thereof; appointments and applications of defense
counsel and defense witnesses and prosecution comments thereto;
defendants applications for documents; motions; uniform rules of
procedures; and appendixes. The order and judgment books, in
two bound volumes, represent the signed orders, judgments, and
opinions of the tribunal as well as sentences and commitment
papers. Clemency petitions of the defendants, in five bound
volumes, were directed to the military governor, the Judge
Advocate General, the U.S. district court, the Secretary of
Defense, and the Supreme Court of the United States. The finding
aids summarize transcripts, exhibits, and the official court file.

Case I was heard by U.S. Military Tribunal I from November 21,
1946, to August 20, 1947. The records of this case, as the

1


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


records of the other Nuernberg and Far East (INTTFE) war crimes
trials, are part of the National Archives Collection of World War
II War Crimes Records, Record Group 238.

The Brandt case was 1 of 12 separate proceedings held before
several U.S. Military Tribunals at Nuernberg in the U.S. Zone of
Occupation in Germany against officials or citizens of the Third
Reich, as follows:


Case No. United States v.


Popular Name


No, of
Defendants


1

Karl Brandt et al-.

2

Erhard Milch

3

Josef Altstoetter
et al.

4

Oswald Pohl et al.

5

Friedrich Flick
et al.

6

Carl Krauch et al.

7

Wilhelm List et al

8

Ulrich Greifelt
et al.

9

Otto Ohlendorf
et al.

10

Alfried Krupp
et al.

11

Ernst von
Weizsaccker et al.

12

Wilhelm von Leeb
et al.


Medical Case

23

Milch Case

1

(Luftwaffe)

Justice Case

16

Pohl Case (SS)

18

Flick Case

6

(Industrialist)

I. G. Farben Case

24

(Industrialist)

Hostage Case

12

RuSHA Case (SS)

14

Einsatzgruppen

24

Case (SS)

Krupp Case

12

(Industrialist)

Ministries Case

21

High Command Case

14


Authority for the proceedings of the International Military
Tribunal against the major Nazi war criminals derived from the
Declaration on German Atrocities (Moscow Declaration) released
November 1, 1943, Executive Order 9547 of May 2, 1945, the London
Agreement of August 8, 1945, the Berlin Protocol of October 6,

1945, and the Charter of the International Military Tribunal.

Authority for the 12 subsequent cases stemmed mainly from
Control Council Law 10 of December 20, 1945, and was reinforced
by Executive Order 9679 of January 16, 1946; U.S. Military Govern¬
ment Ordinances Nos. 7 and 11 of October 18, 1946, and February 17,
1947, respectively; and U.S. Forces, European Theater General
Order 301 of October 24, 1946. The procedures applied by U.S.
Military Tribunals in the subsequent proceedings were patterned
after those of the International Military Tribunal and further
developed in the 12 cases, which required over 1,200 days of
court sessions and generated more than 330,000 transcript pages.


2


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


The crimes charged in the Brandt case consisted largely of
medical experiments performed on defenseless concentration camp
inmates against their will; "euthanasia" carried out on the
mentally defective, the physically sick, the aged, and ethnic
and racial groups; and the murder of concentration camp inmates
for the express purpose of collecting skulls and skeletons for
the Anatomical Institute of the Reich University of Strassburg.

The following medical experiments were conducted:

1. High altitude: to investigate effects of low pressure
on persons.

2. Freezing: to test human resistance to extemely low
temperatures.

3. Malaria: to develop controls over the recurring nature
of the disease.

4. Mustard gas: part of a general research program in gas
warfare.

5. Sulfanilamide: to test the efficacy of the drug in bone
muscle and nerve regeneration and bone transplantation.

6. Seawater: to test methods of rendering seawater potable.

7. Epidemic jaundice: to develop an antitoxin against the
disease.

8. Sterilization: to test techniques for preventing further
propagation of the mentally and physically defective.

9. Typhus: to investigate the value of various vaccines.

10. Poison: to test the efficacy of certain poisons.

11. Incendiary bomb: to find better treatment for phosphorus
bums.

The prosecution alleged and the judgment confirmed that these
experiments were not isolated acts of individual doctors and
scientists on their own responsibility but that they were the
result of high-level policy and planning. They were carried out
with particular brutality, often disregarding all established
medical practice. Consequently, large numbers of the victims
died in the course of or as a result of the experiments.

The euthanasia program was the direct result of a directive
by Hitler of September 1, 1939. It resulted in the secret killing
not only of aged, insane, incurably ill, and deformed German
citizens in sanatoriums in Germany but also in the clandestine
murder of foreign workers. The killing in gas chambers and by
injections in the sanatoriums served as a proving ground for
these forerunners of much larger installations in the mass
extermination camps.

In addition to these experiments, over 100 concentration
camp inmates were killed for the purpose of obtaining their
skeletons. Their ghastly remains were found in Strassburg by
Allied troops.


3


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


The transcripts of the Brandt case include the indictments
of the following 23 persons all of whoa were physicians except
defendants Rudolf Brandt, Viktor Brack, and Wolfram Sievers:

Karl Brandt: Personal physician to Adolf Hitler, Gruppen-
fuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant (Major General) in
the Waffen SS, Reichskoomissar fuer Sanitaets- und Gesund-
heitswesen (Reich Commissioner for Health and Sanitation),
and member of the Reichsforschungsrat (Reich Research
Council).

Kurt Blooe: Deputy [of the) Reichsgesundheitsfuehrer (Reich
Health Leader) and Plenipotentiary for Cancer Research in the
Reich Research Council.

Rudolf Brandt: Standartenfuehrer (Colonel) in the Allgemeine
SS, Persoenlicher Referent von Himmler (Personal Admin¬
istrative Officer to Reichsfuehrer SS Himmler), and Min¬
isterial Counselor and Chief of the Ministerial Office in
the Reich Ministry of the Interior.

Joachim Mrugowsky: Oberfuehrer (Senior Colonel) in the
Waffen SS, Oberster Hygieniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Hygienist of the Reich Physician SS and Police),
and Chef des Hygienischen Institutes der Waffen SS (Chief
of the Hygienic Institute of the Waffen SS).

Helmut Poppendick: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Chef des
Persoenlichen Stabes des Reichsarztes SS und Polizei (Chief
of the Personal Staff of the Reich Physician SS and Police).

Wolfram Sievers: Standartenfuehrer in the SS, Reich Manager
of the "Ahnenerbe" Society and Director of its Institut
fuer Wehrwissenschaftliche Zweckforschung (Institute for
Military Scientific Research), and Deputy Chairman of the
Managing Board of Directors of the Reich Research Council.

Karl Genzken: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS and Chef des Sanitaetsamts dcr Waffen SS
(Chief of the Medical Department of the Waffen SS).

Karl Gebhardt: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS, personal physician to Reichsfuehrer SS
Himmler, Oberster Kliniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Surgeon of the Staff of the Reich Physician SS and
Police), and President of the German Red Cross.

Viktor Brack: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Sturmbannfuehrer
(Major) in the Waffen SS and Oberdienstleiter, Kanzlei
des Fuehrers der NSDAP (Chief Administrative Officer in
the Chancellery of the Fuehrer to the NSDAP).


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Waldeaar Hoven: Hauptsturafuehrer (Captain) in the Waffen
SS and Chief Physician of the Buchenwald Concentration Camp.

Herta Oberheuser: Physician at the Ravensbrueck Concentration
Camp and assistant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the
hospital at Hohenlychen.

Fritz Fischer: Sturmbannfuehrer in the Waffen SS and assist¬
ant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the hospital
at Hohenlychen.

Siegfried Handloser: Generaloberstabsarzt (Lieutenant
General, Medical Service), Heeressanitaetsinspekteur
(Medical Inspector of the Army), and Chef des Wehr-
machtsanitaetswesens (Chief of the Medical Services of the
Armed Forces).

Paul Rostock: Chief Surgeon of the Surgical Clinic in
Berlin, Surgical Adviser to the Army, and Amtschef der
Dienststelle Medizinische Wissenschaft und Forschung
(Chief of the Office for Medical Science and Research)
under the defendant Karl Brandt, Reich Commissioner for
Health and Sanitation.

Oskar Schroeder: Generaloberstabsarzt; Chef des Stabes,
Inspekteur des Luftwaffe-Sanitaetswesens (Chief of Staff
of the Inspectorate of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe);
and Chef des Sanitaetswescns der Luftwaffe (Chief of the
Medical Service of the Luftwaffe).

Hermann Becker-Freyseng: Stabsarzt in the Luftwaffe
(Captain, Medical Service of the Air Force) and Chief of
the Department for Aviation Medicine of the Medical Service
of the Luftwaffe.

Georg August Weltz: Oberfeldarzt in the Luftwaffe (Lieu¬
tenant Colonel, Medical Service of the Air Force) and
Chief of the Institut fuer Luftfahrtmedizin (Institute for
Aviation Medicine) in Munich.

Wilhelm Beiglboeck: Consulting physician to tho Luftwaffe.

Gerhard Rose: Gcneralarzt of the Luftwaffe (Brigadier
General, Medical Service of the Air Force); Vice President,
Chief of the Department for Tropical Medicine, and Professor
of the Robert Koch Institute; and Hygienic Adviser for
Tropical Medicine to the Chief of the Medical Service of
the Luftwaffe.

Siegfried Ruff: Director of the Department for Aviation
Medicine at the Deutsche Versuchsanstalt fuer Luftfahrt
(German Experimental Institute for Aviation).


5


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Hans Wolfgang Romberg: Physician on the staff of the Depart¬
ment for Aviation Medicine at the German Experimental Institute
for Aviation.

Konrad Schaefer: Physician on the staff of the Institute for
Aviation Medicine in Berlin.

Adolf Pokomy: Physician, specialist in skin and venereal
diseases.

The indictment consisted of four counts. Count one charged
participation in a common design or conspiracy to commit war crimes
or crimes against humanity. The ruling of the tribunal disregarded
this count, hence no defendant was found guilty of the crime charged
in count one. Count two was concerned with war crimes and count
three, with crimes against humanity. Fifteen defendants were found
guilty, and eight were acquitted on these two counts. Ten defendants
were charged under count four with membership in a criminal organiza¬
tion and were found guilty.

The transcripts also contain the arraignment and plea of each
defendant (all pleaded not guilty), opening and closing statements
of defense and prosecution, and the judgment and sentences, which
acquitted 7 of the 23 defendants (Blome, Pokorny, Romberg, Rostock,
Ruff, Schaefer, and Weltz). Death sentences were imposed on
defendants Brack, Karl Brandt, Rudolf Brandt, Hoven, Gebhardt,
Mrugowsky, and Sievers, and life imprisonment on Fischer, Genzken,
Hand loser, Rose, and Schroeder; varying terms of years were given
to defendants Becker-Freyscng, Bciglboeck, Oberheuscr, and
Poppendick.

The English-language transcript volumes are arranged numer¬
ically, 1-30; pagination is continuous, 1-11538. The German-
language transcript volumes are numbered la-30a and paginated
1-11756. The letters at the top of each page indicate morning,
afternoon, and evening sessions. The letter "C" designates com¬
mission hearings (to save court time and to avoid assembling
hundreds of witnesses at Nuernberg, in most of the cases one or
more commissions took testimony and received documentary evidence
for consideration by the tribunals). Several hundred pages are
added to the transcript volumes and given number plus letter
designations, such as page number 1044a. Page 1 in volume 1
(English) is preceded by pages numbered 001-039, while the last
page of volume 28 (English) is followed by pages numbered 1-48.

Of the many documents assembled for possible prosecution use,

570 were chosen for presentation as evidence before the tribunal.
These consisted largely of orders, directives, and reports on
medical experiments or the euthanasia program; several interrogation
reports; affidavits; and excerpts from the Reichegesetzblatt (the
official gazette of Reich laws) as well as correspondence. A number


6


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


of the medical reports were accompanied by series of photographs
and charts of various experiments.

The first item in the arrangement of the prosecution exhibits
is usually a certificate listing the document number, a short
description of the exhibit, and a statement on the location of
the original document of the exhibit. The certificate is followed
by the document, the actual prosecution exhibit (most of which are
photostats), and a few mimeographed articles with an occasional
carbon of the original. In rare cases the exhibits are followed
by translations or additional certificates. A few exhibits are
original documents, such asj


Exhibit No.

Doc. No.

Exhibit No.

Doc. No

301

NO-1314

410

NO-158

307

NO-120

441

NO-1730

309

NO-131

443

NO-890

310

NO-132

451

NO-732

357

1696 PS

462

NO-1424

362

628 PS

507

NO-365

368

NO-817

546

NO-3347

403

616 PS


No certificate is attached to several exhibits, including
exhibits 433, 435-439, 462, 559, and 561. Following exhibit 570
is a tribunal exhibit containing the interrogation of three
citizens of the Netherlands. Number 494 was not assigned, and
exhibit 519 is followed by 519a and 519b.

Other than affidavits, the defense exhibits consist of newspaper
clippings, reports, personnel records, Feiahsgeaetzblatt excerpts,
and other items. There are 901 exhibits for the defendants. The
defense exhibits arc arranged by name of defendant and thereunder by
exhibit number, each followed by a certificate wherever available.

The translations in the prosecution document books are
preceded by indexes listing prosecution document numbers, biased
descriptions, and page numbers of the translation. They arc
generally listed in the order in which the prosecution exhibits
were introduced into evidence before the tribunal. Pages 81-84
of prosecution document book 1 are missing. Books 12, 16, and
19 arc followed by addenda. The document books consist largely
of mimeographed pages.

The defense document books are similarly arranged. Each
book is preceded by an index giving document numbers, description,
and page number for each exhibit. The corresponding exhibit
numbers are generally not provided. There are several unindexed
supplements to numbered document books. Prosecution and defense
briefs are arranged alphabetically by names of defendants; final
pleas and defense answers to prosecution briefs follow a similar


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


scheme. Pagination is consecutive, yet there are many pages where
an "a" or "b" is added to the numeral.

The English-language final pleas, closing briefs, and replies
to prosecution briefs of several defendants are missing, as are
a few German-language closing briefs and replies to prosecution
briefs.

. At the beginning of roll 1 are filmed key documents from
which Tribunal I derived its jurisdiction: the Moscow Declaration,
U.S. Executive Orders 9547 and 9679, the London Agreement, the
Berlin Protocol, the Charter of the International Military Tri¬
bunal, Control Council Law 10, U.S. Military Government Ordinances
7 and 11, and U.S. Forces, European Theater General Order 301.
Following these documents of authorization is a list of the names
and functions of the members of Tribunal I and counsels.

These documents are followed by the transcript covers giving
such information as name and number of case, volume numbers,
language, page numbers, and inclusive dates. They are followed
by summaries of the daily proceedings providing an additional
finding aid for the transcripts. The exhibits arc listed in an
index, which notes type of exhibit, exhibit number and name,
corresponding document number and document book and page, a short
description of the exhibit, arid the date when it was offered in
court. The official court file is indexed in the court docket,
which is followed by a list of witnesses.

Not filmed were rocords duplicated elsewhere in this micro¬
film publication, such as prosecution and defense document books
in the German language that are largely duplications of pros¬
ecution and defense exhibits already microfilmed or opening
statements of prosecution and defense, which can be found in
the transcripts of the proceedings.

The records of the Brandt case are closely related to other
microfilmed records in Record Group 238, specifically prosecution
exhibits submitted to the International Military Tribunal, T988;

NI (Nuernberg Industrialist) Series, T301; NOKW (Nuernberg Armed
Forces High Command) Series, T1119; NG (Nuernberg Government)
Series, T1139; and records of the Milch case, M888, the List case,
M893, the Greifelt case, M894, and the Ohlendorf case, M895.

In addition, the record of the International Military Tribunal
at Nuernberg has been published in Trial of the Major War Criminate
Before the International Military Tribunal (Nuernberg, 1947), 42
vols. Excerpts from the subsequent proceedings have been pub¬
lished as Triale of War Criminate Before the Nuernberg Military
Tribunal Under Control Council Law No. 10 (U.S. Government
Printing Office: 1950-53), 15 vols. The Audiovisual Archives
Division of the National Archives and Records Service holds motion
picture records and photographs of all 13 trials and tape re¬
cordings of the International Military Tribunal proceedings.


8


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


John Mendelsohn wrote these introductory remarks and arranged
the records for microfilming in collaboration with George Chalou.


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 9
Target 1

Volume 22

May 22-June 2, 1947


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vs KARL BRANDT et al
VOLUME 22


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


22 May-2 June 1947 pp. 7955-8399


22 May 47--TD-l-l-Fost«r (Int. Eaalor)
Court No. 1


Official Transcript of the American Military
Tribunal I in the natter of the United States
of America against Karl Brandt, et al,
dofondants, sitting at Nurnborg, Germany on
22 May 1947, 0930, Justice Beals presiding.

THE MARSHAL: Persons in the court roce will please find their
scats.

The Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal I.

Military Tribunal I is now in session. God save the Unitod States
of Anerica end this Honorable Tribunal.

There will be order in the court rooa.

THE PRESIDENT: Hr. Marshal, will ycu ascertain that the dofendants
are all prosent in court?

THE MARSHALt May it please your Honor, all the defendants arc
prosont in the court.

THE PRESIDENT: The Socrotary-Gonorrl will note for tho record tho
presenco of all tho defendants in court.

Counsel nay proccod.

«. HARDY: U«y it please tho Tribunal, it has boon called to ay
attention by dbfenao counsel that next Sunday and Monday aro Gorman
holidays, ncaely, ‘.hitsuntido. Tho dofonso counsel dosiroo to hevo tho
court adjourn on Ibbd&y that they may observe this holiday.

THE PRESIDENT: That, I undorstrjvi, is this cooing Manic.;'?

UP.. HARDY: That is tho 26th.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho Tribunal would be indinod to head tho re-quest
of defense counsel if they dosiro that \ hit sun Mandey bo observed ns a
holiday. Tho Tribunal will cooperate with then and hold no sosoion next


tonday.

/ .Do ycu^f/. what the other Tribunals have done in connection with
/this nnttor? • «)

f “0 , ‘rj \

UR. HARDY: I Uhderstand that Tribunal No. 2 downstairs will hove
r» session on^Jfcnd^y as to the decision cf the other Tribunals, I


love the -


whorein Defendant click is being tried i3 having


no session on Monday.


7955


22 May i7-M-ATD-i-2-Foster (Int. Easier)

Court Me. 1

THE PRESIDENT: Tribunal will recess tomorrow evening until Tuesday
arming in compliance with the request prof erred by defense counsel.

Counsel nay proceed.

HBUANK 3SCKEH-FREYS2iG - Resumed
DIRECT EXAMINATION (Continued)

DR. TIFF (Counsel fer the Defendant Bccker-Freyscng): »ir. President,
some technical remarks first. i$r colleague. Dr. ilarx, has rotumed today
and hc3 recovered sufficiently in ordor to again take over the caso of
his client. Dr. 3cckor-Frcyseng. For technical reasons we hrvo decided
that I finish the question of typhus end yellow fovtr, and I think that
after the morning recess Dr. larx will ccao in and take over the sea¬
water ease.

THE j RESIDENT: Any arrangsaent satisfactory to the Defondant
Bockor-Prcyscng and his counsel will bo approved by the Tribunal. Dr.

Marx may resumo his activo position as defense counsel when it is
agrooablo to him and to you.

DR. TIFF: Thank ycu, your Honor.

BY DR. TIPP:

Q Doctor Bockc- when wo condudod yost-rdry wo had arrived at the
question of the Chi f o.' the Medical Department of the Rc3oarch Institute
who the Prosecution assorts was. I think you have clarlfijd this point
sufficiently end shall now pass over to another point upon which wo havo
already touched on re on. time. I want to talk about tho natorial which
you fourrf in >aur Re \r .t regarding Haagen's work. If I roacabor correctly,
you said th t ycu only r-x-aber interim reports from Haegen. In that
connection, however, I have to put to you a document from tho Prosecution
free which I think they concluded that ycu also had knowlcdgo of Haagen's
flnel report. Thi3 is Prosecution document from 3ook 12, on pago S8 in
the English copy. It was submitted under Document -.’umber .‘X) 123, rnd bears
tho date 9 ’lay, and the Exhibit Nusber >03. It is a letter writton by
Dr. Haagon to the Hauptamt SS through Professor Dr. Hirt, Anatomied
Institute of the Reich University Strasbourg. The letter 3trrts, and I
quote:


7956


22 May i.7-tt“r.I3-l->-Fc at or (Int. Healer)

Court lie. 1

"I enclose herewith a carbon copy of a paper on our exp eric wit 9
with a dry typhus vaccine. The paper was s.nt as e manuscript to the
Chief of the Luftwaffe Medical Service with the request for permission
to publish it."

Obviously it is a final report of Heegen's in the form of a
scientific publication, which was subsequently submitted to the Chief
of the IfcdicH Service of the Luftwaffo. Sinco we aro hero concerned
with a research natter, I assume that the Prosecution will chnrgo
you with having had knowledge of this report. Did you know of this
report or do you remember it?

A I do not renenber this final report of Hnagen. However, let mo
point to c number of matters in thrt connection. It boconcs cloar
in this document presented by the Prosocution whrt 1 have already said
about the reports nado by tho rosocrchers who have received resorrch
assignments by tho Chief of tho Luftw'^fo Medical Service. X said that
the researchers mostly submitted their final reports in tho form of
manuscripts or in the foro of reprints. Kaogen says here specifically
tho papor naa sent, tho manuscript, for permission to publish it.
Professor Hargen was a researcher and c-rteinly wasn't as well familiar
with the bureaucratre .ulntions as I, sinco I set at a dook for
almost fivo years in a buroaucratic agency. Just as there was no
Jauptrmt SS, 3Uch a» is mentionod in this document, the work of nodical
officors of the Luftwaffo did not have to be submitted to tho chief
for approval,, ' rat at rate was not tru^ in the year of 1944. The
agency which 'tried cat. and which hod to carry out ttu censorship
of scientific w.ri: 'fore its publication was the Lecture Unit for
Science- and . s arch at the I Iodic rl Academy of tho Luftwaffe. This
agency, to be sure, 3cnt the purely aviation medical papers to ttio
Reforat Aviation Medicine for its information. AH other papers, however,
were not s^nt to the Ref era t Aviation Medicine but was handled by tho
Locturo Unit for Science and Rcsoarch Hone.


7957


22 Kay-144E-2-1-Narrow (Int. Rssler)

Court No# I.

Perhaps it ra s sometimes sent to the consulting specialists for their
attitude on that work. I say point to what ft*ofessor Rose testified
in this witness stand. He said that he had read that paper and that
ho assumed a position on it. Furthc-rnore, lot me point to the docu¬
ment of the prosecution, NO-128, Exhibit 307, page 97 of the German
ard pa<_e 95 of the English Document Book 12. This is a letter by the
Medical Acadoay of the Luftwaffe, which I just mentioned. Lecture Unit
for Science and Research, and constitutes the reply to Haagen*s request
in order to permit the publication of his paper as it is nontionod in
the document before us. Sinco file references seon to play such a
considerable part here, I ray also draw your attention to that# This
is file rcforenco #5, which concerns all published literature. At no
time was the file roferenco •£> handlod by tho Roferat Aviation iedicino#
In addition, it becomes ovident from this lottor that tho -.York had boon
sent back to Dr. Haagen.

Q .itnear., you ore now speaking about tho last document which
you just cited?

A Yos, I aa speaking about Docunont NO-128, Exhibit 307. It
says horo "Annox - one manuscript, two copies". That Haagen sont more
than two copies of this manuscript is highly improbable. It is thus
very improbable that the Locturo Unit for Science and Research had nont
a copy of this manuscript to tho rcsoarch files, for instance; but oven
assuming that this rather impossible situation was true, I may add that
if Professor Luxemburger, who was tho director of this Lecture Unit,
when censoring that work, had not had tho suspicion that it dealt with
something inadmissible, I am euro that no such suspicion would have
arisen within me. Apart from that, I cortainly would have hardly road
any such specialized bacteriological paper frea the beginning to tho
end since neither I nor anyone else in the world would have do rived any
benefit from that.

Q Witness, you were just speaking of the Document KO-129, this
letter by the Medical Academy of the Luftwaffe, dated tho 7th of July,


7958


22 Kay-K-Ix- 2 - 2 —Xarrow (Int. Rader)

Court Ko. I.

ani you acntionod the nane of Dr. luxeaburger. There is no such signa¬
ture in the German docuoent book and since I have not received the
photostat copy I don't know whether any such signature is apparent in
_ tta English document book. I assume, horevor, that the original docu¬
ment does bear that signature. If then the Tribunal nay have any
doubts as to whether this docuaent was actually signed by Dr. Luxen-
burgor, I would ask the General Secrotary to sufccit tto photostat copy
of the original to the Tribunal. Unfortunately, I was not in a posi¬
tion to obtain the photostat copy in the Information Contor. It had
been given out sonowhere and I couldn't ascertain to whom.

THE FRZSlDEJiT: If Counsol trill inform tho Secretary General -
the Clerk is absont at prosont - that the Tribunal doslres that this
docunant, tho original photostat he produced before tho Tribunal, tho
Tribunal will bo obliged.

BY DR. TIFPi

Q Yes, Hr. President.

In this connection, Mr. President, lot no offer as tho noxt
docuswnt tho Bockor-Frvysong Docusont ,/37 fron Docuaent Book ?3« This
car. bo found on Pagos 156 to 153 of tho Docuremt Book and is an affid¬
avit by tho Just mentioned Professor Dr. Luxenburgor, dated tho 2bth of
February, 19h7. I shall quote briefly from this docuaont.

THE lUSSIDEhiTi tfhat oxhibit number do you assign to this?

BY DR. TIFF:

Q This rill receive the Exhibit nuebor Bocker-Froysong 23.

Professor Luxemburger states, after tho customry introductory

formula:

"At present I an a nor-/, specialist at 12unich, ana consulting
psychiatrist at the Catholic Institute for tho Caro of thi Young/

"Until 19kl I worked at tho Gormn Institute for Psychiatric
Research, r -bo Kaiser '>.ilholn Institute attached to the University of
ifunich. As I was considered politically unreliable by tho Nazis, 1 had
to leave this institute in 191:1. In Jan u ar y , 19Ui, I ras drafted to the


7959


22 Kay-tf-*e-2-3-Karrow (Int. Hosier)

Court Ko. I.

Gorman Lufttraffc, at first as an Assistant Physician. After having
boon with the ifedical Inspectorate of the Goman Luftwaffe in Berlin
until 19Ui as a psychiatrist, I became Instruction Group Coocandcr at
the Luftwaffe Jtdical Academy in Berlin in the summer of 19 Uj, and at
the sane tiro, consulting psychiatrist tndcr the Chief of the Luftwaffe
Ifcdical Service, with the rank of Ctocrstorzt."

The rest of Dr. Luxemburger's fate during the war doc3 not in¬
terest us in that connection and I shall therefore skip the noxt fow
sentences. I shall continue to quote from paragraph 2 on page 2 of
that document:

■Each raedical-ecientific work to bo publichod as nodical liter¬
ature had to bo submitted chon roady for printing, to the Instruction
Group of tho Luftwaffe liedicol Academy of which I was Chief. The
chocking, insofar as it was dono by no, was carried out in the caco of
non-poychiatric works only from a military point of view. Spocial ox-
ports approved then as to their scientific content. The author of tho
work was informed, of tho oxport's criticisn in full or in port, in n
lettor of approval or rejection, which I signed.

"3. Generally, those manuscripts did not havo to bo submitted
to tho Chi of of tho Luftwaffo Medical Service. Only works in tho fiold
of aviation medicine were regularly submitted to tho offico of 'Chiof
of tho Madlcal Service'. Tho other works cure only checked from tho
medical point of view by tho apjxopriate consultants or other experts.

"Ji. Proa nono of tho manuscripts 'diich wore over submitted to
me in the course of my dutios could I gather or assure that human ex¬
po ri-onts were being carried out on concentration coxsp inmates or, in
any coso, on persons who were unwilling to act as subjects. Although my
chocking of non-psychiatric manuscripts extended only to military form¬
alities and I could not judgo them as an export, I still think that
clear and distinct reports or. experiments which had been carried out
forcibly would have struck me."

There follows the signature on that document and the certification.


7960


22 Kay-U-E-2-ii»-Ksrro (Int. Rader)
Court So. I.


Witness, let us non go over to another point. let us turn to
the research list which has been so often mentioned here. This is Docu-
nent ?10-93b, Prosecution Exhibit 1*53. Tho docurent is not contained in
a document book. It was submitted to Professor Schroeder during his
cross-oxaainntion. In this research list there arc contained tho re¬
search assignaents by the Chief of the Lcdical Service of tho LuftwrXfo
and Peso arch Guidance of the Raich llinistry for Aviation and Supreno
Comaandor of tho Luftwaffe. As tho re visor tho Stabsant Dr. Dockor-
Froyoong is mentioned. On pago 7 of that document under IV wo find
tho title "Hygiene." Under 2 wo find tho assignment to :ir. Hcagcn.

Let no quote this short paragraph:

"Tho manufacture of typhus vaccine (secret). Hygienic Instit¬
ute, Strasbourg, Oborstabearit frofosror Dr. Haagen."

7/itnoss, you know that tho prosecution naintainod and concludud
during tho cross-examination of Profossor Schrooder that since this re¬
search assignment was kept socnet thoro must have boon some valid
reason to koop it so, and tho prosooution naturally assumes that tho
Jfcdical Inspectorate know that Haagen wns carrying out oxporlmonts on
human beings which, thoroforo, had to be kopt secret. I have alror.dy
discussed this list with Mr. Ruff on tho 29th of April, 19li7, on ;ogo
6?l6 of tlio German and 6622 of tho English record. Since you aro
listed hero as tho expert dealing with that list I must ask you to
give us your opinion about it and, in particular, why this ro so .arch
given to Dr. Haagen is listed as secret.


22 .-lay (Raccier)

Court I

•

A. Well, lut me say at first that all the documents
which have so far been submitted by the prosecution rigir-
-*ing Haagen' s research assignment have shown time and again
that this assignment was entirely open to the outside world.
How, suddeQly we see this research assignment is secret, i
cannot roooSb^r that this research assignment was suddenly
changed over to a secret one, out perhaps professor Ha igon
personally will be able to talk about that when he takes
tho witness stand.

Q. Lot me interpolate a question in order to clarify
this point: since you were the expert in thxt case, did you
a dlrectlvo to whoever was compiling this list to insert
this assignment a secret or did you previously issue a
genoral directive that this assignment be converted from
open to secret?

A. IT anyone could have done any such thing this could
only have been done by my department chief. I could have
made a suggestion to that effoot, but tho research aoslgn-
mont had boon issued a long time ago, and this would have
been a subsequent change in the Summer of 194-1, which I
cannot remember.

Q. At any rate, you don't know, witness, how this
word "secret" was inserted?

A. It is remarkable that the next assignment by

Haugen, namely the o-mufacture of a yellow fever vaccine,

is also designated as ■secret 0 here. The Prosecution itself

has aubclttod a document here which wo shall later discuss,

that this assignment for the manufacture of a yo low fevdr

vaccine was stepped by the medical Inspectorate of the Luft-

•

waffe in the summer of 19-x^.

Q. For purposes of clarification I may say that tho
document which was just mentioned by tho witness as tho


79c2


22 Hay 47-K-jft-*-&-Maloy- (Raseler)

Court I

prosecution Document N0.-297, exhibit -*16, and It can bo
found in Document 3ook 12 on page 112 of the Herman and the
English text. as you were already saying. Dr. Becker, wo
shall revert to this document when discussing the yellow
fever experiments.

.‘iow, in the document which you have just designated
it becomes evident that -his assignment for the production of
a yellow fever vaccine vor' clearly vao a ncn-socr.t matter.

In addition, not oven the prosecution has .* .sorted that sub¬
sequent to 1942 yellow fever experiments on human beings
were carried out. If in the year 1944 this assignment, which
had been stopped In 194, Is really designated as seerst,
then it either constitutes on error or there were certain
reasons for that which certainly cannot indicate the planning
or the execution of any experl unto on human beings. But now
lot us turn to tho yellow fever vaoclno assignment itself.
Unfortunately It Is not knows to me where tho Proaeoutlon
rooelved this document fro.. It bears no signature, the
person who sent It is not mentioned, no reolplcnt Is men¬
tioned, and It is quite Impossible to conclude from where
tills list originated. I remember exactly that In tho course
of the summer of 1944 a similar list had oeon compiled, In
my Reforat. It was the ordinary list of all research assig¬
nments, which was usually available in tho Reforat and which
had merely been brought up to date. Slnco I, in the meantime,
had taxan over Dr. Bonzlnger's work in the Research Guidance
of the RLM, the medical research'assignments of the Research
Guidance of tne RLri were also Included In the list. Tho list,
or the supplementation of the old Hat In Its form as It Is
before us, was compiled ay y instructing my secretary, who
was in the Research Guidance ofx'lce In "erlin. to co:b out to
Saalov for a period of 2 or * days, which was about 15 kilom¬
eters outside Berlin, and I gave here all the research files,


7963


22 Kay 47-M- Xt- ’'-Mai oy- (Raami er)

Court I

the entire material under file reference 55, and on the
basis of this material and the old list she carried out the
new compilation, bringing the list up to date.

Q. If I understood you correctly - to return to the
Haagen case - these were all the letter, reports, etc. filed
at the -'eferat. I would imagine that all these documents were
filed properly in one filed according to date, as it Is cus¬
tomary in every army throughout the world?

a. The latter 13 true, but naturally these files wore
not Kept In the Roforat, but as la customary everywhere else
these were kept in t*w Registration office. I, after all,
only had one little office, and I hadn't enougn room there
to keep all my files in that offlcu. furthermore, I can
remember that this list, in the course of the summer or
fall of 1944 was sent upon request to various other agencies.

I bolievo I remember that one 3uch copy had been sent to the
Rolch Research Counsel, and I think It possible that one copy
was also sent to the office of Herr Professor Rootook. It
may oe posslblo oven that ono copy was sunt to tie Office of
Oeneroloborstabsortt Hundloaer. I am 3uro there were a num¬
ber of other offices too; howevur, I cannot toll you that in
detail. When Dr. Ruff was sitting in this witness stand you
discussed a number of errors with him contained In that list.
In ad dltlon the errors wore dlscueced with Ruff there are,
in the allegedly true copy which Is before us here, as well
as in the photostat copy, a number of other errors.

Q. hay I Interrupt you briefly, witness. Did I unior-
otand you to say that even here, when compiling the documents
Tor the document boos and when mimeographing this document
which 1 s before us, a number of mistakes were made, typogra¬
phical errors, wh ch means that the photostat copy does not
quite correspond to the allegedly true copy as it is contain¬
ed in the document book before us?


22 'ay 47^»- ■*- 4_ xaloy- (Rfckholer)

dourt I

Yes, chat ia Just vfaat I wanted to say.

Q. Veil, m that case would you explain these errors

to us?

<*. Unfortunately, wo only received the photostat cop¬
ies only after you had dlscuaaod this allegedly true copy
with Dr. Huff. After only looking at the photostat for once
I found out that all tne errors which refer to the research
assignments given to Dr. Ruff are not contained In the phot¬
ostat copy, but that these are errors which resulted from
Che copying of that photostat copy when thlo "true copy" was
uude.

Q. If I understand you correctly, Wintaas, those are
obviously purd alstakoa in copying?

Yes, furthermore even in the photostat copy thero
are a number of mistakes caused by negligence, which, how-
ovor, are all so striking to anyone who knows the subject
as well as I, that upon thd first reading of the document I
guarantee that I would have notices them immediately. For
Instance, the nano of Harr Professor Velti -


7965


2 2 47-iK ij-4-l-MechEn (Int; Racier)

Court No. 1


Q Not., let me ask you> witness, to speak slowly here and always
mention where the point can bo found in the document which you happen
to be discussing.

A For instance, on page 2 of the docunent under 1-10, thero is
an assignment given to Professor Welts. This name was copied as Koltze.
This is obviously a very simple natter, but had I looked through this
list la the year of 1944 I an sure this would have attracted ay attention.
Another mistake, which could easily occur in the caso of a Icynan but
which I should have noticed, can be found on page 10 of this docunent.
Kero, under Will - >, there is a research assignnent .icntionod and I
nay quoto: "The significance of individual factors in measuring
distances." The institute which obviously rcceivod this assignment is
mentioned horo as the institute for Physiological Anthropology of the
University of Uarburg/Lnhn. In roality wo ore hero concerned with the
Institute for Psychological Anthropology, which is well known to ao.

In copying, the difforonco between "physiological" and "psychological"
always causue great difficulties, and ko have often had that cxporlcnco

when dealing with ono another hero and compiling our document books.

^ * •

psychiatric clinic has a collection of autilntions of its nr-ao, and tho
word "psychiatric" is very often misspelled,

UR. HARDY: I don‘t believe it is nocossnry to toko up tho tino
of thu Tribunal on a insignificant setter such as this. If thoro nro
some errors in the German document books when it was mimeographed the
defendant .cay call then to our attention. These are so insignificant and
so minor that the Prosecution dooms tho documents may 3poak for themselves.
The prosecution resents some of the remarks of the dofenso.

THE PRESIDENT: It appears to tho Tribunal that this matter may bo
corrected for the Tribunal by r. conference between the defend end tho
Prosecution without taking up the time and covering the records with
such matters.

IB. TTPF: I am naturally prepor ad to adhere to the wish of tho
Tribunal, but I believe that counsel for the Frosecution misunderstood


7966


22 May 47-4r-r.TD-4-2-Ucchan (Int. Rtnlcr)
Court So. 1


the oim I have pursued in this matter. I am not concerned rdth proving
the t t *.3 copy in the German document book contains mistakes, which are
not in the photostat, but I an concerned in showing that in the photo¬
stat copy, in the original, there are already errors. This nay sound
somewhat like an argument, but I nust clarify that it is our intention
to prove that there are actual mistakes contained in the list, the list
which the Defendant 3ccker-Froyseng had had compiled. Furthermore wo
want to prevo that this list was not compiled by an oxpert, but only

originated, as was already stated by the witness, from an unskilled

% •

and ncdically untrained typist who Just copied something fren soao
documents, rnd for that reason the inaccuracies are contained in tho
list. I think this is something that oast be discussed rdth tho witness
and cannot be clarified by a more discussion betweon the defense counaol
and Prosecution. But, I think, witness, that wo can adhoro to tho
Tribunal*c wish, and drop tho nettor.

!&. !u\RDY: I au3t point out that it is of no interest hero what
tho capabilities of the accrotary of Bcckor-Froyscng wero. If oho made
tfeu adstakoa in tho original list, it seems to me that is tho nogli-

9

genco of tho defendant in not checking tho secretary's work.

THo PR33IDS?.T: Tho defendant, howover, could show that tho *
eccrctary did incorrectly transcribe what he had given hur to copy or
what he had dictated to her.

DR. TIPP: Ur. President, I on in a fortunate position to givo you
thir proof In a minute. Witness, you hoard the Tribunal's decision and
you hoard shot I said, but I think that we cro in full agreement. If you
have something to say, would you please express yourself briefly.

IKS 1T7IESS: In connection with the reprimand by tho Prosocution,

I rust say I always was very careful in reading over what ay secretary
had written and I am sure that such sill;- and noticeable typing
mistakes would have drown cy attention. Thc.ro are a number of other
mistakes contained in that list, for instance at one time Haagen's nemo
was spelled with one "a" and once with two "A'a." I an sure I would have


7967


22 Jfey 47-ii-..7>-i.->-i&ch£n (Inti R«nler)
Court Hoj 1


noticed that. I do not believe that this list is tho sene list which
wr.s typed by ay secretary, which I am sure that I read through very
carefully. I easumc that we era h3rc concerned with a copy.

5Y DR. TIPP:

Q Do you mean that this document, which is before you now, is a
copy of the original list, which you ordered to bo coapilcd?

A Yes, this aist bo a copy nr.do by one cf tpe offices which
rccuiv Jd the original list from us. Furthermore, I oey say that our
socrotarios were wall vorsod on the difference between physiology
and psychology after they had been with us for sane tine. This orror
nay havo occurred with new secretaries during their first fem wochs,
but not later. However, enough of that.

3 Lot ua finish then. Ur. President, in this connection lot mo
offer - document fren Document Book Buckor-Freyoeng 3. This is Document
Bockcr-Freyseng 36 and can bo feund on page 159 to 161 of tho docuaont
book. This will recoivo o^hibit Ho. 24. It is an affidavit.

Jfi. UHDY: Ua:* it pluisc, Your Honor, this document contains tho
onat subject which the defendant has been discussing hero for nearly
fiftcon minutes. The prosecution deems it irrelevant and I object to
any further introduction of documents .-long thoso lines.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho Tribunal has not read the document. tihet is
the probitivo v;luc of the material offered in this document, counaul?

DR. TIPP: This can bo settled briefly, Ur. President. Ihis i3
the secretary who hed typed and ccopilcd the list by order of Becker-
Froysong^ -nd she states how she compilod the list. She says that
Bcckcr-Frcy seng gave her ell thw material for that list and that she

could not ace anything about experiments on human beings from this list.

•

She further .x?r- says, it is quito possible that in her hsGtc sho over¬
looked seme errors contained in the list. It i3 not ay intention to
quote anything from thst document and I think li-. Hardy is correct in
saying that this point has been sufficiently clarified, Witness —

7968


*


22 tfcy 4?-JF-A7D-i.-i.-'.'ccfcaa (Inti Renlcr)
Court Ho. 1


THE PRESIDENT: Just e accent, counsel.

Dh. TIFF: IS". President, I did not quite understand you. Ur.
Frosidont, did you ask a question of no?

T}C P T -ESI DE MT: Ho, I Just requested you to wait a few nonents
until wc cxrninc the docuncr.t.

IR. KaRDT: The ifcolc jist of this scons to no to bo as follows.

This docunont !X >-934 contains a list of tho assignnents *hich cano
fror. tho office of Beckor-Froyscng. Ho*, B eckcr-Freyac-nt is aeintnining
that this list is Just a copy of the list •..hieh originated from his
office and that his secretary cade typographic'! errors and ho points
out that such errors aro nade like spelling tho nano of Waltz rdth two
"E's" instead of one "S", etc. Mow this docunont is introduced to show
that the or,try concerning the wortc of Haagen with typhus and after that
entry is tho nuihor designating the word “secret 1 *. The prosocution has
nado an issue of the -.K>rd "secret" and ho is now attempting to intro¬
duce that she erroneously put down the word "secret." That is the Jint
cf this entire affidavit and tho context of this argument.


M


7969


1


Court 1

Rcy B&dH-5-l-HD-Cook-Ramleri


TRH PRES 102: T: Is there available there in the original
photostat of the Exhibit wnlch ccme from the defendant's
office?

DR. TIP?: Yes, Your Honor, I hove the ori-inal
photostat of that list.

I--R. rhiRDY: The section In Issue, /our Honor, Is
c. ite obvl ualjr-in the photostat as checked In pencil
ris.

THE ?=S5ID2: T: If this Ho. 93-i which la now . In
evidence?

DR. TIPF: Yes, Your Honor.. Perhaps I may say
In th t connection that the defendant hna not been aeaertin*,
that the remark "secret 0 wc.s erroneously transcribed but
he says that he does not think that this photostat copy
la a car bon oooy of the orlginnl li6t but thinks that It
is just c transcrib d copy of the original. He thinks that
there are two ooeslbllltloe, one that his secretary, Hiss
"Voinor, by mistake Inserted the rem ric, or It crept Into
the original In some way; or It Is farther poselble that
the erson who Is unknown to ue and who has transcribed
tt. c or 1 Inal list n s made th t error. It Is In no way
contested that the photostetlo copy submitted here contains
t.»e r.-aerk "secret."

DR. 32-RIMG: You ore attempting to show that a list
'••a* '-c.de b; this defendant's Secretary and under his
direction but that the list that was directed to be made
b- elm or. the cne hand or teat may actually h ve been made
under hie direction, did not list these projects as secret.
Is that C..e thin- you are tryln = to establish, that as a
mr.tt v of fact tney were open subjects?

DR. TIFP: Yes, according to ur knowled a e, lour Honor,
Che Heaven assignment wae open. *e have a wealth of I letters


Court 1

-ar 2&-24-5-3-KD—Cook-iteEler i

b Haagen and directed Co Haager. whlcu was material sub¬
mitted to as by Che Prosecution, which so far as they
c noera the Luftwaffe are always open, and now suddenly
we nave the remark “secret B from the year 1944, and we
d'.n't thins that Haa t er,'s assignment was suddenly converted
Into a secret one. I personally have another explanation,
which, of course, cannot be proved, but may interest the
Tribunal if I any mention it briefly. «t one time we
discussed the fact that all reports of cases of typhus h d
co -3 ;opt secret throughout the entire Vehricacht. In

other >crds, any typhus case which occurred anyvher? lr,

•

Ov-rmany had for military reasons to be reported as
’•secret". It la quite possible that Mias tegner knew about
t la ru ulstlon <nd It Is »lao osslble th t somebody else
new : et this re~ul tlon and told nor that olnco this
concerns .yphus the as*l c nmont oust be secret. Since I
•ay so If was n soldier and had to deal with German military
cor es ondence, I know It happens very often that some¬
thin. ctin became secret sin ly because somebody Just at
random ut "secret" on a doouoent. In oy opinion t.iat
roves nothing c.t all. I think that too ouch significance
is atCached to this point and I only refer to It beoause
tne Prosecution seemed to have attached so ouch value tu It.
Otnerwlso, I certainly wouldn't have put that to 3ocker^-
?reyssn 0 - and asice: him for half an hour about the
significance of this little word "secret."

Thd FRSSIDSNT: Exhibit No. 24 offered by defendant •
Becker—Fveyeeng will be admitted in evlaenoe and the
object!-n Is overruled. Counsel may proceed.

DR. TIP?:

'.fitness, wa have now concluded the question of
t hue. I have no further questions to you In that connection.


Court 1

May 2&4l-6-3-H0^Cook-aaaleK


In conclusion, cs the last document lr. ths connection X
may ffer 3echer-Freyeeng Ho. 36, which Is the last document
In Bedcer-Freyseng document booh No, 2. This will be
Exhibit No. 25 and con bo found on page 153 of the document
booh No. 2. This Is an affidavit by a certain Jr.* Halbaoh,
wr.ic.. was made at Che Chlonsee on the 27 January, 194?,
and was certified In the proper way. I consider this
document to be of considerable importance since It
discusses a number of -olr.ts with which the dofondant lo
concerned. I may draw your attention to tho fact that
Dr. Hal bach Is a doctor of engineering and a dootor of
medicine which means ho Is versed both In medical and
technics 1 matters. Under Paragraph 2 of Dr. Knlbcch des¬
cribed hi-- career and says that ho studied chemistry and
medicine at tho University of Kunloh a..d also states ho
was never a member of the NSDa?. I may quote from Paragraph
3:

"3) During tho war I sorved from 1 September 1939 to
12 May 1940 as a sorvlcc doctor with b round crew units of
tno Luftwaffe, from 13 May 1940 to 30 November 1942 with
a Bombor Squadron; from 1 Docombcr 1942 to 31 August 1943,

I was a specialist at the Institute of aviation Medicine,
and from 1 September 1943 to 3 October 1944 a specialist
In tho Medical Section of the Testin. Station of the Luft¬
waffe, Rechlln.

»4) On 4 October 1944 I was transferred to tho
Instruction Group Science and Research of the Luftwaffe
Medical «dadeny, the commander of Milch was Oberstarzt
Prof. Dr. “nns Luxenburger.


7972


22 I'ay-H-OJG—5-i^Ccok (toiler)
Court No, 1


■5) IT, Bock or Freyseng was at that tir»o the only specialist in
aviation medicine. Since this field of *>r>rk could not possibly bo
doe l t with by one nan alone, part of the work was to bo takan over
•by the Instruction Oroup Scienco and Research. About the end of
October 19LL, Dr. Becker Freyseng therefore handed over to no all tho
orders for research which had, up to then, boon distributed by tho
Chief of the licdical Services of the Luftwaffe, together with tho
files, reports, etc, conncctod therewith. The Instruction Oroup
Scienco and Research was, fro.: this time on by ordor of' the Chief of


7973


May 22-U-3K-5-1--Cook (Int. .iannlor)

Court No. 1

tho Ho.’.iocl Services of the Luftwaffe, to supervise tho •
carry in out of those orders, since the consultant, -;r.
-ookor-Froyson: could not possibly ncoorr lish this task of
su. jrvisior., in view of tho multitude of his other duties
and of th~ incroasin ; transportation difficulties. On tho
other hand, control had been rendered necessary 'ey tho strict
re ;ulations concornin; tie use of nnnpowor nd natorial.

"6) .sion th-j files hondod over to r.o wore tho order for
roso rch jlvon to the Strassbour z hy ;ienist ^rof. Dr. ^ujon
Hoajon. ~s far as I runoaljor, they were ccnoornod with tho
.reduction of ty.hus, yellow fovor and influence vaccines.

„3 far -s I rorcabar they were dated sor.o years back (about
1910 or 1911), and, ct Ha;on's request, were oxtended ~»-a
annually. The order for the product! xi of yollow fovor
vaccine was cancelled at tho ond of 19ii 3inoo thoro was
no further clonruid for it.

"..t the witton request of ..ttornuy Dr. Hens Marx I
ox.rossly declare that noithor frar. tho urdor3 frou
rosoaroh ~ivcn to i'raf. Ha ;on, which had i>oon hondod to no,
nor frot; Ha;on's reports on his activities in connection
with theso orders, nor fren any infornntion ;ivon to no
either when theso files were handed to tie or on any othor
occasion huvo X been led, directly, or indirectly, to
ooncludc that Ha jon carried out hunan uxpor inonts in a
concentration c . 1 ., which wore conccrnod with artificial
infocti n with typhus or with any othor disoaso.

"7) Tho .orders for roscarch or 4 reduction ;iven to
j-rof. Ua 'on were of a purely bnctoriolojiool nature .end wore
therefore actually dealt with by tho appropriate consulting
hy ;ionist. Thu *K>forat of ..viation Iloilicino of whioh Dr.
liookor-rroyscxv; was a neaber, was not Oh‘ir.;od with tho actual
execution of the work in accordance with theso rosoarch
orders which did not cono within the scopo of "aviation


7974


-


~".y 22-CI-JK-5-2::-Co (Int. ±tc;-:lor)

Court No. 1

no’.icino", but was ccly c ’ncomcfl with the fomnl, adninis-
trativo, financial and supply questi >ns connoctoc’ with
r~soaroh Rssi :nnont. -.11 rosorxch orders boro tho rile
nur.’ or "55" which wr.s r. number a 1 lotto,’. _,uroly for filing
- ur - - SJS to the .vofer-t of ..vintion Medici no. This *vcferat
had tho roforonco nuaber

-hero follows the si -nature and tho certification.


Court 1

May 22-K- >- 1- KD-Ka rrow-Ha _ 1 e r.


".tness, in conclusion of this question of typhus I any
su:u_:arlza that you have said that ro£ a factual point of
viev never had anything to do with dealing with ty.hue
qua • Ci -ns. secondly, you said that up to the time you took
over the Referat in the yeer of 194-, you had nothing at all
co c.o with these research nssl-naents lr. bncterlolo-ical
ields, even formally. Thirdly shat from no documents,
fr. no converst*-tlons, and fr ; no re orta you received,
did u t .ov whether nnd to what extent e^erlaenta on

n jeinga were carried out in connection with typhus ixnd
yallov fever, or anythin- else. Did I understand you
correctly?

a. Yea, that ia correct.

i. Mr. President, there ere only r few short quoBClons
in o-nnootion with yellow fever, of which thu prosecution
has a :'.e cn issue. I think th». t 1 can finish that by
11sGC o'clock. I should bo e rateful to the Tribunal if
they -emitted ae to conclude that question.

THZ PAZSI02ST: 1 think the Tribunal should follow its
oust . of taking a reoess at this tine. Counsel any -^rocoed
• th the untter at 11:01 o'clock.

Thu Tribunal will now bo in recess for a few minutes.

(« recces was tnkon)


22 L7-Ii-S2-7-l-Miloy (7ca Schoon)

Court So, 1

—■ ‘--HSHXLi The Tribunal is ogain in scsicn.

2?ESIDE:T: Tho clc* rt li rotum this photostat to the counsol.
Counsol ray proceed,

r >. Dr. Becker, now ro cone to afar :ioro points with which you
r^o c.arged, You .-ore accusod ordly vith oxporinonts in influonsn.

It was only ccntioncd. I havo not beon able to f ind any dccun*nts
referring to influenza, thoreforo, I only ask you did you Imon of

ary c:r.xrinonts in tho field cf influonza at my tire any. he re?

»♦_

Um JO#

1 m -itness, you arc elm cnargod th participation in oxpar-
iaonta in cholera, typhoid, pcra-ty?]»ld and strdlar things. Tlw

onli- dccunont *.hich tho Prosecution hrs submitted on this subject _

ay it ploaso tho 7 p ibunal, to stnplify tho issuo tho
ftrosooution ‘•'ill at this ti_o rithdrmr charges a-jainst Boc!:or-

a

n-oysong c once min." yollcw fevor, c.allpox, para-typhus A and B ,
oholora, an! dipthoria, - not typhus.

?;r. Tho Secretary C, ncral dll note for tho record tho

nithdr-ral af these changos, and c unsol ferthe Prosecution v3 11
file '-1th tho Sccrotary General and sorvo upon • ppoaing counsel a
•Titten statenont of tho charges d.ich are withdrawn.

on * 177: '•’■y 1 " Jk > r. Ha* v, do y •-» also -rithdrenr yellow fovor?

;:.IXY: roller.- fovr, snallpox,para-typhus A 4 B, cholera,
dipthoria.

DR, ;IPP* Tcllow fever is also uithdrmm?

-It. lURDI: In other rorlc, all tho other charges to tho dofondant
Pochor-frcyscag, yellow fovor, snail pox, para-typhus A & B, Ofeofera,
dipthoria, and 3ulphanilasdc’o r.hich t*c *..lth ror bof.-rc -rill bo rith-
rca—, by the FTocccutien,

xr-?: ir. President, in vie.. of this statenont I hare no
further questions, T hc only p int re; l. ring for discussion is tho
change cf sea rater, ad this t. 111 be dealt 1th by Dr. lane, tho


22 lay -7-2-C ialcy(Ycn Schoon)

Court :jo. 1


dofoniant counsel for Dr. Bcch.rw roysong.

I should liko to givo a brief technical explanation, -ho witness
:iaagon isZjcrc. I hovo boon only able to talk to hin briefly. I can
say that he Till bo called as a dofenso rdtnossfor Dr. Sc brooder aixi
Boclxr-Proysons, after tho oxaaination of this dofeniant. I shall
sutait th is in writing to tho Secretary General,


22 - £-3—l-4ioeban (int. Bailor)

Court Id. I.


rRZSJDELT: Very well, counsel. Counsel for t'>? defendant
Beelc&r-rreyscng, Dr. i&rx, aay proceed.

3Z DR. HARX:


5 With tho permission of the Tribunal I shall non; begin the ex¬
amination of the defendant. Dr. Beckor-Freysang, on the question of sea-
rat . r. Witness, wo now coco to the final charge against you. You aro
charged with special responsibility for and participation in tho sea-
>rat:r experiments carried out in the concontration camp Dachau, the ex¬
periments to tost two procodures for asking sea water drinknblo. Wit¬
ness, you woro actually involvod in planning experiments as a Referent;
will you please tell the Tribunal how tboso experiments care about?

A The proUes of combatting thirst in cases of distress at soa
up until 19h2 was not settled either in Gornuny or in any other coun¬
try, at 'eart not with much succo33.* Just as in other countries, thero
rtr.a a small supply of water in tlao Goman enorgency equipment, but it
wr.o inadequate in most cases. The office responsible for equipping
airplanes with or.orgency equipment ras that of tho Technical Offico of
tljo Luftwaffe. Lhon German pianos woro usod in tho Mediterranean area
and over the Atlantic, tho cases of distress at sea increased and also
tho cases of sovoro thirst and complaints from tho crows.

In ny previous testimony, I Juive already said that one of ny
main duties as Assistant Referent in tho Raferat for Aviation ISedicine
,rs that I had to work on fror. between three hundred to four hundi*od re¬
ports. In tlic reports from the Luftr.rffe doctors in the flying forma¬
tions in l?!il and 19U2 I found an increasing nurber of reports of cases
of distress at sea from tho i5editerranear. area free units which flew


over the Atlantic.


When severe thirst had cose about tho danger for


fliers in thoso sub-tropical and solo tires tropical areas was that they


"ore not exposed to the cold, like their comrades in the North Sea area
and the area around England, but they were exposed for days at a time to
the heat of the sun and consequently to thirst.


I had personal scientific connections with this field. From 1935


22 Jiy-li-iS-2-«ioban (int. Rosier)

Court ::o. i.

to 1935 I hod worked on questions of water and salt nyseif, although
not -rith this definite a is of couSxatting thirst. Of course, I wondered
how this problem could be solved. I discussed ■ ith the Referent Pro¬
fessor Anthony and at ny suggestion, or rather our suggestion, in the
spring, perhaps in April of 19U2, Dr. Konrad Schaefer was given tho
assignment to see to it that tho thirst problem was dealt with scient¬
ifically. For this purpose, ho was sent to tho Aviation iiidical Re¬
search Institute in 3erlin.

Q Hitnoss, do you know that Dr. Schaefer in October of 19l*2 at
the Kurnborg conference "Son and Winter Distress" made a lecture on
combatting thirst in distress at sea?

A Yos, I beard this lecturo. Of course, it was simply a locturo
based on his reading, because Dr. Schaefer had not performed any ex¬
periments hlasolf at that tine.

3 Thon, to your knowledge, up to the fall of 191*2, Dr. Schaofor
had not iorforrod any exporinords on human beings himsolf?

a lioitivr or. human boingc or on animals, as far ns I know.

This locturo was siaply a lecture bared on his ronding on tho cubjoct.

Q Hew, what happened after this ^eating; how did tho matter de¬
velop?

A (ir. tin winter of 1912-1:3 and in 19l3, Dr. Schaofor worked on
this problem intensively. First of all, lie undo physiological tosts
on how thirst was caused. It is remarkable that a thing uhich Boons
so simple and primitive to a layman, thirst, from tho scientific and
thcorotical point of view was not settlod at that time and is not com¬
pletely sottlod oven today. Dr. Schaefer performed many animal experi-

•

□eats and also self experiments on four or five of his technics^ assist¬
ants, who volunteered for this purpose. I should liko to point out
that these technical assistants went without water and food completely
for four days, at the sace time being able to carry on their full lab¬
oratory work.

The second way that Dr. Schaefer took was a purely chemical test

/?&)


22 Uay-ii-f5-8-3-M*eban (Lit. Raaler)
Ccurt Ko« I.


or development. Ho tried to discover a sc ^-distress food as good as
possible. Without going into detail, I shall state briefly that most
foods fihich wo oat are burned in the bod;.' and bee one carbonic acid
-.nd rater. In normal food about 300 cc of rater are created daily in
the body. It is possible to compose the food in such a ray as to
chango and prepare foods chemically in such a way that this amount of
water in the body is* oven irtdrorsod. That was one purpose cf Schaefer's
tests and on his suggestion two research assignments v.ero issued to two
research workers in Prague. That you ca.nnot find these two aon on the
list, which has been discussed at loxv-th, is because this cssicivnont
t.'no given in the fall of 19 hi after this list was drawn up. Also Dr.
Schaefer devolopod c oathod to make sen water drinkable. Soa rater
las about 3* salts, about 2.7? table salt and about 0.2? nagnosiun
sulphate, also snail mounts of other salts, which arc not important.


7931


Court So. 1

22 Kay 47-K-S-l-nHh-Cook (Von Scfccen)

The table salt Is icportant especially because it is the salt
'hicb causes or can cause thirst, and the nagnesiua sulphate ic ianor-
tant because it can cause diarrhea. This diarrhetic effect of cagnesiuo
sulphate has a certain significance in this trial. This is causedonly
after a certain anount has been take. ?or example, if sea water is
taken, diarrhea is caused only if tho individual dose, that is, tho
anount taken at one tine, is at least 300 or 4C0 cc. In nurely scien¬
tific collaboration with a research laboratory of tho 1.0. Parbon Indus¬
try Dr. Schaefer worked out a procedure, and for tho first tine In the
history of husanity it was possible that sea water could be node
drinkable even under the conditions prevailing in a lifeboat. In the
meantinu I have becoco acquainted with a procedure developed by an
American scientist, but I can still uphold this statoaent which I have
Just node bucouso through sy knovlodgc tho procoduro dovolopod by
Dr. Schaefer is the only one which at tho oaao tine removes the tablo
salt and tho magnesium sulphate. Dr. Schaofer hod finished developing
tho procedure in about Sovesbor 1943 and in tho first days of Deccnbor
1943 ho demonstrated it in ny prosonco to a saall group of pconlo,
including the Hodical Insrcctor, Professor Kipokfl, and Oborstingonicur
Christonoon of the Technical Office, the non responsible for introducing
such a pioco of eauipeont into the energency equipaont.

Schaefer's procoduro gained general recognition at tho time and
Cborstingeniour Christensen proeised the kodical Inspector, Professor
h'ippko, that this procedure would be introduced. In December 1943 ho
issued a so-callod development assignment to the I.G. Parbcn Industry
in order to have the las*, technical details worked cut noro ouickly
and preparations made for large-scale production before the beginning
of the cuaaer of 1944, if possible. This settled tho whole natter for
ne. As this trial shows, it van unfortunately not settled.

Q, Bow, witness, how did it happen that the natter was taken up

again?

A. In January, February, up to the niddle of Aoril, 1944 I had a


7982


Court So. 1

22 Hay 47-K-9-2-DQ(-Coofc (Von Schoen)


leave to do sene scientific work, to carry out soso crpericcntal work
of my own, and I hardly had any contact during this tine with Professor

Anthony. When on the 16th of April 1944 I rerorted back to the office

•

end took up ny work, I heard to my great astonishment that in the mean¬
time lr. Vienna a second procedure had been developed to make eco water
drinkable by an engineer neccd Bcrka, and tkat a forcer Oberstarrt in
the Luftwaffo, Dr. Von Serany, had tested this method in experiments on
soldiers of the Luftwaffe in a Luftvaffo hospital in Vienna. Professor
Anthony hod heard about this story and had Dr. Schaefer go to Vienna and
work with this procedure and with Serany's experiments, but unfortunately
ho had oinply told the Technical Cffico that thoro was a second nroccdure
and had not taken any further interest in the matter. Since betveon
the 15th of April and the 15th of Hoy I hod taken over the affairs of
the Rofcrat - Anthony was to leave on tho 15th of Hoy - I immediately
suggested that tho original records from Kr. Von Serany should be sent
for. I saw those records about the end of Aoril. I looked through
these records myself ond suggested to ay department chief that thoy
should be shewn to Dr. Schoofer and hU opinion on them asked for, ond
on Che basis of Schaefer's opinion ond my ovr. opinion vc came to the
conclusion that tho Berko aothod was to be rejedted under all condi¬
tions; and so In the first days of Hoy 1944 a vfiry definite rejection
van given to the Technical Office. I shall go into the reasons for our
rejection lator. On the bade of our rejection almost oroctly threo
years ego, or. the 19th or 20th of Kay 1944, the Technical Cffico called
a conference on the subject, ar.d =y department chief ordered me to go
to it, and also ordered that Dr. Schaefer wot to oarticipate in tho
discussion as ar. export in tho field.

(*. Witness, I now come to the first docuaont on the subject. I
show to you free Document Book 5, cage 10 of tho German, page 9 of the
-nglisn. Document £0-164, Prosecution Dxhibit 132. This is a letter
from the Technical Office to the Rcichsfuehrer SS, dated 15 Kay 1944.

I ask you, witness, did you know that in the oucstion of making sea

7983


Court Sc. 1

22 May 47-K-5-3-iHM-CoGk (Von Scfcoen)

water drinkable there had been close contact between the Technical
office of the Belch Air Ministry and the r.eiehsfuefcror SS fron the end
cf 1942 at the latest?

A. So, I knew nothing about such a connection and, of course, I
did not know this letter.

Cj, Witness, do you have the letter before you?

A. Yes, I have it.

q. If you look et the letterhead and the signature, can you tell
us vhnt office this letter cone* froa?

A. Yes, it coses frea the Technical Office end the abbreviation
"Gi/co 54" indicates it ccc^s free the office responsible for the
dcvclopacnt of •ouipewnt for airplanes. That was the departaent of
Otorstlngenicur Christensen. On the copy I hovo here I cannot declphor
the signature because there Is no signature given, but sosc tlrao ago
I saw tho photostat of this letter and I know tho signature on it. It
is that of Korsann, who wac a Generallngenicur and Chriotcnoon'c
superior.

Q, Sow I coco to tho contents of the letter itself. Witness,
the Technical Office writes in the first oarrgrnoh, and I ouoto:

"With rcfcrenco to the lntor-office conference between Gbcrct-
ingoniour Chrictcnoer. ond Eauptoturafuohrcr lag. Poh;e regarding tho
natter it is announced that two croceeses have been worked out by the
office to render sea water potable."

Eoes this statement not contradict ~hat you have .lust said?

A. Yes. but the statenent in this lotter is definitely untrue.
Seithor the procedure of Dr. Schaefer nor that of Engineer Bcrka was
vxkcd out by the office, neaning the Technical Office, as it says here.
Schaefer's process was worked out for the nodical Inspectorate and
Bcrka worked first at the Technical College in Vienna without any
assigenent. and only when Anthony informed the Technical Office would
the Technical Office have been turned ever to Berks.

q. Witness, the Technical Office now speaks of Schaefer's


7984


Court Fo. 1

22 -<A 7 47--e-4-Lr-Cock (Von Schoen)


process and I quote. That it So. 1.

"Xhe IG nethod usee nainly sulpha nitrate. For this orocess auito
b large plant needs to he sot up and it rewires about 200 tons of iron
which costa about 250,000 Heichsaarks; the asount of the nroductlon needed
by the Luft’-affe end Savy requires 2.5 or 2 tons of pure silver a nonth;
besides the water which is rendered potable by this preparation has to
be sucked through a filter in order to avoid absorption and percinitation
of cheatcels. These facts aako the application of this orocess
practically iapcssible."

In your opinion is this stateaent true, witness?

9


7985


22 It'oMHWG-lO-l-Karrcw (vcn Scbcn) .
Court I


« Sc, I can say the following. These 200 tons of iron night be
a lot for a -cldsnith or a housewife, but for the Luftwaffe, which
had cnoru.us losses of planes, ZX> tens of iron were really not an
insurmountable obstacle, net even in 1944. The 250 thousand Rdchs-
carks which sotting up • plant fer Schaefer's settled would have cost
are, cf ccursp, quite r lot cf aonej for a priv.tt citizen, but if one
considers that the training cf cnc pilot until he is ready for the
front, until he is ready tc be used as r fighter pilot or a beraber
pilot r.t the front, costs the state about 50 tc 100 thousand narks —

I nay renark thrt this includes costs cf accidents in training end
aany other expenses — if :r.e contrasts this sun and considers thrt
the first two cr three fliers who rxo saved will reimburse the Luft-
waffo for these 250 thousand Roichs.aarks, then one can bolieve that
this sun of nen-y is nc valid argument against the introduction cf
Schnef-r's uethed. ,.s for th- 2.5 to 3 tons cf pure silver which would
allegedly be needed every nenth, this is a gru’t exaggeration, as 1
think I can prove later. These 2.5 to 3 tens cf pure silvu- were the
amount of silvor needed fer the sc-called prinery equipment. In the
course of future aonths “there would he needed only fer replacements
the Toour.t used in cases cf distress at scr or by less of planes. Tho
Technical Office acts as if every flier wculd to forced down at oca
cnco a menth cr that every piano would crash and be completely destroyed
once a r. nth. .*nl new for the last rcos.n, that is, tho difficulty
because r filter is needed ir. Schaefer's process, Sven a ncn-cheaist
will bo willing U believe thrt tht is a very hairless natter, which
can be easily settled and which is nc reasen against introducing such
a acthod.

q itness, the letter gees cn tc say, I quote:

"2. Tho second process which was worked cut is the sc-crllod
Serkr. nethed. ..cccrding to this nothed thu salts present in the sea.
weter are net precipitated but are so treated that in drinking they
-re not disagreeable tc the teste. They pass thro ugh .tho body vdth ut


7986


22 D JG-10*-lS-garrow ( ven Schcn)

Ccurt I

cvcr-s-.turrting it with salts and without causing undue thirst."

In my opinion this is a ncdical Judgment on the 3crkc nethed. Wes
the Technical Office in r. position to make such a nodical Jud^aent?

i- Me, md for that reason this propaganda for Berkatit is that
cf n lejram end is rather dumb. You indicated in your question thr.t
it was r. medical statement, which the Technical Office was net cor.ipotont
tc make, since it was c.npcsod purely cf engineers. I said before that,
at the beginning cf 1fay, 1944, the rejection cf the Berka method, which
hrd been very clearly formulated and explained, was sent tc the Tech¬
nical Office. Nevertheless, on the 15th cf Key the Technical Offico
wroto this lottor tc the Koichsfuchrcr SS.

Q In the next sontuncc, the Technical Office speaks cf the
practical aide cf the prccoss, I quoto:

"Mo special plants arc necossary for producing preparations needed
for this process ncr do the preparations themselves consist cf scarce
nctorials."

..ill ycu please cccacnt on this statement cf the Technical Office,
witness?

The only thing true in this sentence is that no special plants
wore necessary fer producing this preparation. That was really an
advantago tc this nethed. Berkatit could bo produced in any sugar
factor;'. ..s fer the statenont that the preparations woro net scarco
materials, I nay point cut that the preparations needed were glucose.

It is significant cf the ebstinancy of this Technical Office that 200
tens cf iron they c.nsi.ier ’n unsuracuntsblc obstacle, but glucose* they
say is net c scarco aatcrial. I d:n't think I'll bo giving away r.ny
secrets if 1 say that, in 1944, glucose, which is aede of corn primarily
here, was a very scarce nattrial and that gluccso was used only for
feeding sick persons and was available only in very limited quantities.
Today, when all the papers arc writing about calorics, I can soy that
during cur discussion with the Technical Offico about the introduction
cf Berkatit, the Technical Office went to the Supply Office of the


7987


22 Mey-^DiG-lO-3-Karrcn (vcn Schcn)
Court I


Luftwaffe end demanded the first two tens cf glucose. Fortunately, we
learned eb:ut it end were able tc step it. One ten tf glucose con¬
tains four million calorics. If one takes the amount cf two thousand
calorics per person per day, which is ideal under present day condi¬
tions, this one t_n of glucose which the Technical Office wanted would
bo enough tc feed a feur person family, from the point of view of
calorics clone, of course, fer five hundred days, and yet the Technical
Office says th.'t is net a scarce material.

THE PFlSIDEifi: Counsel, the it.ness has been testifying as tc
the various methods that woro suggested. I do not see that it has
probative value before the Tribunal, the fact that they s-lectori tne
method instead cf another, and that they were even falso with both
notheda*. One method was selected end that method was attunptud tc
be carried cut. Certainly, tho relative merits cf the twe aethedo
are net particularly important. If the higher authorities rejected
the bettor method, I dc not see that that wuild be relevant.

9R. ILJOCs Ur. President, tho testimony cf the witness has
prebntivo value inasmuch -a ho wants tc prove what difficulties wore
raised by the Technical Office and that prejudices existed in tho
Technical Office pr.i hew the natter dcvelcpod, so that f_n.ally, from
tho point cf view cf the Kcdical Inspectorate, tho experiments becano
necessary. For this reason I think thut tho testimony cf the defendant
is relevant, but in order tc avoid delaying the trial unnecoocarily,

I sh^ll ask only tho mest imp rtent questi ns and I ask yeu, witness,
tc be as, brief as possible in answering my questions. Y.u heard what
the President ju3t said.


22 fcy-i:-GJ-ll-l-i--.lcy-(vcnSchon)-
Court 1

TrE ??-LSIZEfiT: CCunsol, you nay proceed.

t:., su-RX: T v c letter of the technical Offic. continues, I quote:

"It cm be presumed that this s_thcd, that is the Berk.-, Method will be
introduced ir. the Luftwaffe end the Kavy within a snort tine."

« I ask you, could the Technical Office cn its own initiative nuko
such a decision?

/. Yos, the technical Ofi'icc, could dc that. The Technical Office
al'ne was competent to decide whether a piece of equipment was to be
intriduccd or net. I tasy add that in the organizeti.n cf equipment cus¬
tomary in the Gorman Luftwaffe, such as an iUm for making Sei water
drinkable was n t foed—the food Office would be competent to handle
that. It was not cedicine:Thc Chief of :<cdical Service would have had
tc decide about that. Rather it was n piece of equipment, end thu3 fell
under the authority of the Technical Office. Sut I my point cut brief¬
ly that this statement of the Techinical Office on 15 toy 19iih indica¬
ted clearly that at that tine the Technical Of! ice r/as firmly detained
tc introduce Berkatit, and this prejudice cn the part of the technical
Of tic, is extras, ly imp rtant fer what I have tc say about the dis¬
cussions of the 19 and 20 toy which followed.

Q V.itness, did the Technical Office demonstrate this prejudice
which you speak cf before the discussions of 19 and 20 toy?

A In regard tc Berkatit, in p>rt, yes, b_cause b.fcrc the 20th
of toy, fer example, Christensen called up Dr. Schaefer or called him
in and t- Id him that h*. prohibited any cement against 5„rkatit. And
from work in the Ref-.rnt for rt /iatien -.-decinc I was u3ed to similar
prejudices in scientific attituos from the same office, and in other
fields, for -xanple in the field nirtht sight, which is of no intorest
here.However, I refer to it only because there is an affidavit onwtho
subject.

DR. ieiRX: At this point I should like to refer to an affidavit of
Dr. H .inrich Rose, who is net identical with Professor Gerhard Rose.

Dr. Heinrich Rose, was also a doctor. He was a dyo doctor, and ho was


22 ^y-i:-3J-il-2-*-alcy-(vcn Scfcon)-
Court 1

called up;n as a consultant frca tine to time. I quota frca the nffida-
vf ^ Kcinric h Soso. This is docuacnt 39, on pages 162 to 163,

34 CUE ‘ at hu * 3 * Thls “- 111 ^ Exhibit 26. I quote only one paragraph,
that is the -nc under « 1 »). The affidavit of the 2 ? Oeceabcr 191*. I quo¬
ta]

’" rhc ^chnical Department of the Reich Air Hinistry pr.:co-dcd inde¬
pendently also m questions of medical research. F:r instance, the Tech¬
nical Department gave orders tc tost Xip id rctjnalo - a remedy which
n3a aupp s-d to improve night sight cn the tre ps without previous con¬
sultation with ether nodical outheritios. n

I shall not read the rest of tnis dccunont. Is shall cc=c back tc
it later in ay argument. I cff.r ti-is affidavit as Exhibit 26.

Q fitness, I ask you, when ycu Went tc th- discussi- ns of 19 .nd
20 cf -*ny ycu did n.t knew that tee technical Office has already decided
en Beckatit and nad promised that it would bo introduced soon?
i. No, I did net know that.

Q T »- u Prosecution has submitted a deconmt which is no doubt the
nest important one in the whole prccccution dccucent beck in this con¬
nection; in -ny caco the Prosecution shewed this Dccuae.nt V. ?r fessor
Schrotder in cross-examination and drew the ccnclusi.n that the sm-watcr
experiments wore criainol. I should therefore like tc discuss this docu-
aent rlth you in detail. It is in Docunent Bock 5, page 12, in the Gcr-

•* 3c k, page 11 of tho English. This is Decuaont Mo 177, Exhibit 132;

-I. you hay, th, photostat?

•* Yes, I have it.

itr.-ss, h. w did the twe discussi ns of the 19 and 20 cf .-ay cc-
U ' b Ut; ,iid 3U£F-st teem? Did yru make the preparations for t:.^?

" ld th< “ r lh - -^-dical Services f the Luftwaffe call then, or

" These discussions rrcre called by th. Technical Office, and at both
—cussi-ns the person who called thma presided at them, that was Oberet-.
insqpicur Christensen, the head of this Apartment GL/ce 5. *y


7990


22 i::y->-3J-U -3-Halcy-(ro« Schcn)-
Court 1

dcpOrtccnt chief, os I said, scat a_ and Dr. Kcarad Schac-f.r to these
tw discussions, and 1 nay add that he did this because according to
the inf creation which we n.coi? t d, I think it ras a telcphon. cell
to ay department chief, we expected a small discussion attended solely
by Rforents, and not a discussion on the scale on which it actually
took place.

* itness, will you first cocacnt generally on this r_p. rt?

A I should sorely like tc rvfcr very briefly to what I said.
Above all I should like to go tack to Instrument Ho. lSL, Exhibit
132, according to which, on the 15 Kay 19LL, th. Technical Office
vrus already determined tc intrcduc. -erkatit. .e, that is the office
cf the chief of Medical Service cf the Luftwaffe, wwxv. asked to at¬
tend two discussions on the 19 and 20, and want tc these discuss! ns
convinced that it would b. a purely technical discussion cf this point
questicn. Hew, please look at the letterhead and th- heading of this
document, which on the 15th of December 19ls6 was submitted by the Prose¬
cution page 525 of the '^rc-.a record; -..hat you h • to tf :t.

A The heading, and if I my mention it right new, the signatu¬
re of this .etter shews that it corn free the Technical Offi c „, that is
the Office of Cberstingeniour Christensen, and was signed by him per¬
sonally. Abeve the d:consent it says -Minutes”. If the Prosocuticn
Uiinks that it is a rec rd transcript I must say that 1 d. n.t knew the
exact definition ef these teras in International Law. 1 merely knew
new a rec-.rd c-aae ab ut in the Aviatirh Ministry, since I belonged


22 eScv-sWP-U-la-Xolcy (1st. von Schcn)
Crart I


to -lie office for nl-cos five years, .it a noetic a porson was ajrsoint-
cd who either took down the entire wording rc' the ceeting in shorthand
or took down tr.c nain points of the ncetisg. A t the cad of the .:octing
t-is document w_g shown to those present, Jhey had an opportunity to
road it, to approve it and to sign it. 2aec it w_s signed by tho recor¬
der and in taia way such a document oot-ined the character of want uo
call a "Protckoll 3 , or if no recorder was appointed tnon at tho end of
t.'.o aoot.-ng q brief decision v_s drawn up In a few pregnant ccr.toncoc
wlsich were dictated to a secret ary and it was also signed by pll par¬
ticipants at the nooting. Thoro Was a third possibility in very long
discussions; tho office w.dch callod tho uootlng, tho roprcscnt.tivo of
which Van in charge of the ueoting, drew up a report of tho uootlng, a
roiort of tho discussion rather, tho draft of which was sent to tho
various rgenclos or porscas t*o had part icipated with the roquoct for
signaturo, then one h.d nn opportunity to road it through colaly. Tl:o
porsons Justlflod to do so signod it. It was sont back to tho offico
whoro it hod cone free, and then aDovo such document it said, "In
C'.roa.ont with such and euch agoaclos tho following report in iosuod.''
according to uy rather thorough knowledge of tho procooduro of tho
Reich Aviation Ministry those voro tho threo possibilities of how a
binding record w .# drawn up.


22 Hay 47 -L-12-l-=kp- Meehan (vcr. Schon) .

Court Mo. 1

A. (Cart.) This Bocuaont indicates th t th_r- as a no person
appointed or nc=ud here .*o kept the .record end that the participants
did r.ot si^r. this document. It is not - shorthand record and it
docs not say that it -.its issued in ngroonert with the agencies co.ncemod
tixl fir-'Uy ‘bout the entin* cocieo-r.t, there is the word
"Hiedorschrift" end not "Protokoll", which neons that the person who
drew it up did not think it was a bindi^ record. Therefore, I want
to soy th-1 the person rtio drew up this Docunnt, prusu.-v.bly tho
JJcfe-rent of Christenson, and Christensen hinself, who signed it,
apparently are just putting down thoir impression cf the ewetin* and
what they thou; ht should be passed on to othor offices.

Q. Mott tho i/ocuav.r.t lists thj poople who wore present. I do
net want tcroed this part of the document, hot I want to - si: you frea
whrt poin t of view had these people beon chosen?

A. I need not read all tho nones, but it iA noteworthy that ihero
won. nine people there end that with xm exception, 11 people -xc-pt
Dr. Schcofer and ay self were Majors or Colonels nd as I shall -xolrin
Later that they wore all pocpL, who did not urderstaod aocic-1 problems
.anl wore therefore all the tore in favor of the introduction of
D-rkatit.

Q. Now, 'id you wonder why so a:ny officers were called to this
discussion?

A » Y-s, espcclr,lly or. the 20th I noticed what was going on
v-ry quickly. It was - typically staged scene, -t which every one
except Dr. Schaefer -nd ayself knew his role very well by heart.

They were to cut-voto us to sec th t Borkntit should by introduced,

Q. : fore I c o cn with the document, witness, I should like to
ask: was th- iscussion xi a scientific o-sis or were ther- --ny
debates or qunrr-ls?

«. I auat say thrt t this discussion I heard xiu of the
p-rticipants, th- chi-f of the Traveauandc Government T-stin Station,
a Major J-worok, ttack ci personally. He said I was against
&rkatit only i-.caus. I was financially intcrest-d in the other octr.od.

* - I


7993


22 kay 47 -ir-I2-3-pkp- lfcthan. (van <Schon)
Court Ko. 1


I stood up and nnritod to leave. Unf ortun'tely, I old not md I lot
Christensen-and Joworuk'a apolori-s induce n. to stay.

itnoss, I shall go or. with th„ document. I do not
int.rt’ to ru*d tb& next p-r~.gr rph entirely. Thu first paragraph
r-produces port of the discussion b cc-usc ©army's experiments nor-
n-t considorod adoquato, according to yau. Th-n the document continues*
"Thu Chiof of tlu Ifcdicol Service is convinced th*t, if th- 3orkn
aethod is us-.'., 'rnn^o to health has to be expected not later than 6
Jays after t eking Borkctit, which d&aage wiU result in p.rnancnt
injuries to he.-. 1th a*.— according to the opinion of Dr. Schaeffer —
will fin lly result in death after n-t later th-.n twelve days.

Extern-1 ejwptoca 're to be expected such -s drainage, di-rrhoc,
convulsions, hallucination* md finally death."

"ill you ^lonso caaount on this passage; first - preliminary
question. On 16 December 194b, pr.x 526 in th. German re cor*, >-.ro
480 of the relish trr nacript, the Prosecution s-.i * that thedcfendante
Schaefer rn' Schroodor expressed the opinion that tho uxperioonts
would cause injuries to the health of the axperiasntrl subjects.

Before this nuctirv., id Professor Schrooder knw about the plm for
those experiments?

n. No, ha uac inforoed only after th. discussion. I hear* this
statement of the Prosecution too. I think the nanos were confused:
it shoul* have boon “Becker-Freysong and Schaefer," or it rr.y be that
since it says Chief of the itedicr.l Service, otc., that ni ht have confusad
hin. Tho Pro*, cut ion th-ught that it wc; tha chief of the n-dic-1
service. Dr. Sohroodor, personally. In Ger r.n military t-.rwlo-y it
was custxaary to :r.e-k of the office, to fry Chief of tho lidic-1
Service nd Chief of the Intelligence Servic-, etc., nwanii^ the ofifico
not the rxrson in charge hims-If.

.itr.se, . ill you say whether you ectuaiiy aa :« the statement
in this document *nd held the point of view reproduced h-re?

o\. x t is true that cr. Lay 19th I made a brief speech »syi«;


7994


22 uej A7 -_-12-3-Meehan (vc« Schon)

Court So. 1

roughly wnat wc had said three necks before to the Technical Officer
in writing. I said more r less that Dr. ven Scrany's experiments in
Vienna did not saec valid to us because they contained a number of
mistakes, but I would like to go into a state-sent contained in
Schrocdcr's afiicanit, that I said Serany 1 s experiments wero not
strict enough. In ay opinion, Scrany's experiments were stricter end
aoi*> dangerous than those which wore later carried out under air
responsibility. In Scrany's exporirtnts, every subject could drink
as nuch as to wanted. This caused diarrhea, which sr.de the thirst much
wor» and tUsdcarrhoa was not included in Scrany's rocords cl tho
experiments.

In ay speech, I said when speaking on sx* definite experiments
subject of Dorcny's that if this oxp^ri.*;ntal subject, who drank ecau&tor

•

for four days, had jorv. -n in t.*v rv-xt few days to drink as nuch Kanator,
he would have loot so much water because «f diarrhea that after about
six days ttoro would have boon serious cawequonces. 1 unfortunately
forced to mko o vorybriof physiological rco rk on this subject in
order to ocplain -hat will folios. Tho human b-xly ccnsista to .\ very
great percentage f water. Tho body :»/ a n-w bom child io 90* water,
this water gradually lessons in a norsr.l adult to .bout 60 % water.

Tils water is in p.-rt in the body tissues nd is kept constant as a
permanent supply. In addition to this supply of body water, we also
have the so-called transport wator, which we take in daily with ur
food and which » eliminate daily. This elimination is in part by
respirtaion, ir. part through the akin, but the majority is through tho
kidneys. In our fo.d, ingest daily a quantity of salt which must
be eliminated, also Li nets bo li an a number of products are created
which must bo elLiinatod through the kidneys. F r this reason tho
kidnies rt-ed a certain amount of water. Ttoy ne_d water because thffy
arc -bit to eliminate urine only up to a certain concentration of
3alt. If I now give the body either too much salt or too little vr.tor,
then the normal transport will be insufficient for the kidneys tnd
they will be forced to use the water supply of tho body itself.


7995


22 Kay LI -1*-12—okp- Me-bin (von Schoa)

Court Soj 1

Mow, if the net or in the body tissues has b-en reduced to a
cv.rt-.in limit, t a,a feel thirst. At least, that is on« reason for

thirst. „ loss of body water up to about 10 % can be s us t tine a without
any danger. At 1C£ disruptive syaptcas begin, the tenger increases up
to 20 %, arri if tho loss of water of the body reacts about 20 % thon
there is a cort'in danger of death.

I should like to point out me thing in connection with the
cxp.rin-nts under discussion hero. I h?ve r.lruady said in Sorany's
experiments diarrhea occurred because Sorany let his experiment
subjects drink unlimited quantities if swruater of nhich the unpleasant
taste had boon covered by 3*.rk-'tit.

It is $o norally kru»n that in diarrhea large quantities of liquid
axe lost. That was our preliminary argument ap'inst ajrk.itit.

It slight soon that tho Pros-cution is right in saying that I
call-d the 3erkntit -xp.rio.nta ^ry dangerous, but that is not tho case.
I said that the use of Eirtetit In practico in distress at s-a was-
very dangeroxs far tho following reasons. If civ. looks at the reports
of cases of distress at oca, and there aro sxa. very good English
descriptions, orvo observes generally that shipwrecked pers-ns first try
to go withxxt drinking at all for mo or two days. During thisti/no, of
course, they lose ur.tor and they become acre rxl aoiv thirsty. Finlly
thvy cannot atr. nd tho thirst and under those conditions they drink
wh-at they have in unlimited quantities, that is, soawater. In this
condition, seawater cm ir.vo v-ry dangerous consequences. Cases havo
been described 'here after mly a few hours r. very &>rious conditi n
was caused, 'nd evon sx*. times with fatal consequences.

THE HtSSIDSi.T: Hitrxss, at this tine ysi will have to suspend
tho discussion until after recess.

(A r-cess was token until 1330 hours.)


7996


/M]

May 22 -..-DK-13-1-Fostor (Int. rfeanlor)

Court No. i

.jTiuw.;; 3Z3JIUS

(The hearing reconvened et 1330 hours, 22 U ay 19*7.)

TH-i M.-<SK..L: The Tribunal is opsin in session.

IK- P33SIDENT: Counsel cay proceed.

HEiaUGi xiiCKl^i-FlcSySZNG - .iosuasd
JL-ZCI SLlilN.JnON (Continued)
j.v. (Counsel for tho Z’cfond&nt Hocker-Frcysons) I

3 hall now ccntinuo with tho direct oxaninatico of tho
witness, Ur. Hockcr-Froysoac, with .omission of tho
Tribunal.

,T£ SCI. il-JC:

. i/itnoss, n little while a ;o you wore dosoribinc tho

hyslolopieal fundonontal idoos which t ;ron..tod you, and

which constituted tho basis for tho ux.orinonts. May I

ask you now to"toko up tho threads onco noro and continue

with tho descriptions of this oornin^.

.. uuforc the noon roco3s I shortly stuted that tho cain

denpor in 30 a oaorponcios is that tho shi;>-wrookod person

in a oonplotoly diiod out 3tato eftor having suffered

thirst for a numbor of days, is drinkinj sv,a viator. -nd I

further said that accord in;; to tho njroorxont nado by all

exports in this fiold, tho er3or. in this driod out state

3uffcr3 c nsidcrnbly and th.*t his orpnnisn can tltroforo

al 3 o bo considerably decayed. Tho danflor of 3orkatit was

soon by us in tho following: The borkntit a super like drug

whioh has tho capacity to-tic away with tho bitter and

3 nlty taste of soa wator and to convert tho sen water into

. drinkable.liquid. Th« person in son enorfconcios

with'^tfcAdd of jcrkr.tit will bu able to prepare a certain
Y?.\ •

anount of drinkable son \v;t-r. oinco, however, Jerkatit

does not chai;o the salt content of the soa water, tho

Oy /

ship wrecked .arson ,-ftor scco tiua will, of course, booono
ohir3t^-^nd ajnin with tho aid of his eorketit will try to
drink son water. He apein intreduoos a considerable anount


7997


May 22-..-3K-12-2-?ost a r (Inc. Jiamlor)

Court No. 1

of salt inco his body which oust ojain bo eliminated fron
hi3 body end, since, by and larjc, the wator which is
nin.ulod with the salt is not sufficiont, ho will ;ct aoro
end noro thirsty as tiao joes on and thereby will be jin
to drink increasingly larger amounts of son water mixod
"ith dorkatit. ..s soon as ha starts drinking aoro than
300 cubic contir.otcrs r.t one tino diarrhea will or oust
onsuo. Not only will ho lc3o water through tho bladder
but also as a result of diarrhea. This moans that tho
thirst condition oinroasos and at tho so;* tine tho dan .-or
of bo in; thirsty.

Ono could naturally say that one could prcscribo oxactly
how nuoh 3on wator c :n bo drunk oixod with borkatit. Thoro
is no nood for a Ion; discussion in stntin ; that a shtp-
v/rooked person findin; hiasolf in an ocoan full of son
water which he allowedly can nako potable, by tho uso of
Jerkatit, can not be credited with a sufficient aiount of
3olf di3ci.line in actually ndhorinj to this do3o as it
was officially proscribed. ..t any rate, such cn assumption
oan not bo r:ado tho point of do.arturo 0 f any ailitory
dir^otivo. This i3 tho bis danger of iiorkatit in tho
soa oacrjoncy .;ractico. Entirely different, howvcr, aro
tho conditions for tho b^rketit oxpcrir.ont. If I start
to spook ceout tho axporiment which we carried out without
cuch ado, tho situation wo3 a3 follows:


22 I'ay li7-A-nTD-li.—1-Cook (Int. Raaior)
:ourt Kb. 1


^hiring this experiment tho entire aaount of sea water with or
-..it tout berkatit had been deterined baforehand. The mount of the
individual dcs&go vras pre-detor.inod in such a saonor that ir. no case
could diarrhea result. That was very sinple because only had to keep
tho individualcdosage under 300 cubic centimeters. In addition, there
was always a physician Present during the oporinent, who was in a
position to observe and Judge tho condition of the oxpcrinentr.l subject
and could always interrupt at r.ny somont this artificial sea distress
condition by sla ly vivin" ar?in nomal water to each exp.riivmtal
lubjcct. Thoro is a vary clear .and absolutely logical difforonco for
the exp'.rt betwoon the application of Sorkatit durin; tho actual
oxpori'inco of soa cttstrosrmhoro tho shipwrecked person is 3'dnrd.ng in
his rubber boat senowhoro in tho aiddlo of tho ocoan all alono and
tho oxporirvjnt undor poraanont adequate oodical control and cxact
pridotorrdrod conditions which tako into consideration all of the
Laapors I Just d scribed. During tho conforenco on 1? nd 20 May 19U»,
in order to rov.rt back to our original docunnt, I had to instruct tho
‘.achniciara and angin^ors, who al30 oro participants in this tooting,
about the retter as I Just described it. Vory soon I noticod that I had
doscribod it in such a way as to really r.akc it clear to tho engineers
it the danger of Borkatit act- .>ant. For vory understandable

propaqandistic reasons T tharofor- aaintod i ly black.

I told those on-ir. ors that -.*0 radical nen very ••oil kno.: tha extrnoly
sorlous consepuonco3 of thirst and tho loss of water. know it fror. .

'fory danjorous sickness, reooly, the cholera. In ord^r to avoid any

•

labor ri sun dor starving I ray no-- state that naturally th -ro is eon-
; idorablo difference between the consocuoncos of soa wntar and tho*
thirst and tho cholera. ' cave this ixanplo, only to rescind these
P-oplo of cholera, sinco particularly during this illness continuous
liarrhea results, and a groat los3 of water ensues as a result of those
iarrhaa attacks, -fhich in turn provokes 3erious disturbances in the
cr^anisns ahich ray load to death. I quoted verbatim during this aeeting,


22 'lay U?—A-t-TD—lii—2-Ccok (Int. Gamier)
Court So. i


what * a kT>ir ‘ abo " t fcfca ioss Of inter in tho ease of cholera as contained
in tho text book of internal nedicir.o by Bergnaim. I at that tine *ns
in the possession of that book and I had read it through before. I an
ovoa new in a position to road to you the sane passages.

; "itness, you just speaking of Bergaann's text book. I sh

have it handed to ycu and I say ask ycu to read tho passages to which
you have Just referred into tho record.

A •'0 are concerned with tho text book for internal nedicino by
Asarann, Bachnann and Gustav Von Borgmrm and a nuubor of other
rrofoosors, jxiblishod by Julius 3prir*er, Berlin Edition of 19Ji2 —
aiTOXi ’4ay it ploaso your Honors, it secras to no that this
tochnical argument concerning tho qualitios of tho-8orta Method ia rather
oxtonoivo ard it seono to no that tho dofondant can got to tho issues
involvod in this case without going through all of this tochnical argu-
aor.t and discussion. !io doubt thoro is room fer a considerable amount
of this discussion toro. Borovor, ho has covorod quite a bit of ground
nor and fcho i3suo in tho caso is -<hother cr not tho oxp.-rinonts woro
.'•’rforr-jd, whether or not .hoy -toto perforud on non-voluntoers and
who the r or not tho oxpiritvmts v.ro criainal ir. their o3sor.co, and thoro
ro throe factors in tho cxp?rinont3, ona is the Schaoffor nothod
hich me foll<wod out and tho other vas the Sorka nothod, and tho
dofondant has testified tho Borka r. it hod was more langorous, and I
don't 30-i irh.at other natter i3 nocossnry no to got this ratter before
the Tribunal.

TiE FOETDEIT: I would ask the counsel for tho defendant just rrhat
tho cur peso is of pursuing thi3 particular phase of the interrogation
any further. The Tribunal night ..-ell bo convinced that the Sohaoff r
notr.od for pirifyinc sea rater Taking It potable was tl» bettor nothod
and it was tho nothod that oilowed. This tod was adopted and
tills defendant is charged 1 th having carried it out to the --rojudicu of
certain cxporiruntal subjects. «*- .lust rhnt is the purpose of reading
fron this book, counsel?


8COO


22 -SBy h 7-A-ATD-lli-3-GO€ic (Tnt. Raaaler)
Court So. 1


DR. yJi RX: t. President and Gcntlsain of the Tribunal we sro
hero concerned with the follcndng: The Prosecution charges the
defendant that ha in knowledgo of the alleged danger of Berkatit has
used this drug and porcitted it to be used during tho execution of the
exp.rinents. The ‘.dtnoss says that there can be no question of any
danger incurred as a result of 3erkatit if tho experiment is guided
accordingly from a zed!cal and scientific point of vierr. This book will
prove that the atatoaants by Dr. Froysong are supported from a physio¬
logical point of vies by radical authorities, including Professor
Borenann, and tho other authors who participated in compiling that text
book. I shall only read this passage into the record for tho purposo

•

of identification and for tho purpose of lator argumentation. This is
Mroly a short Fassago which tends to confirm the testimony cf tho
dofondant. Furthermore, I shall undoavor to do everything possiblo to
licit tho testimony as such as possible.

T!£ PRSSIXH7: Tho text of a rooegnizod authority nay of course
bo used in orguaont, but if counsol dosiros the vdtnoss to road only
a short pass-go from tho book ho nay road that.

DR. Hf.RX* Thank you. Your Honor.

WITNESS:

A *0 are only concomod with four sontoncos. I quoto on page 28 of
tho book I just nontionodi

"Considerable less of water through tho intostinos.has to occur
to a considerable extent during astatic cholera but also during gastro
enteritis can lead within a few hours to the most sev ro drying of tho
bocty tissues. Soon psychological disturbances occur, fatigue, a feeling
of heat in the face, numbness and apathy. If the rater in tho tissues
is decreased by ton per-cent consid-rabl- disturbances already occur.
Docroaso cf tr.j r contort up to 20 or 22 percent has doath has its
result."


22 ifey U T-A-ATS-lii-h—Cock (Int. Harder)

Co-jrt :to. 1


3 Is that all?

A Ios, I think that I either quoted this passage verbatin or
indicated it to then in order to convinco the engineers present about
the danger of 5erkatit. Laynan who heard this natter for the first
tirn considered it first to bo an unpleasant synptoa fron the sub-
Joe tivo point of vio-.rbut it rasry task to put the purely objective
danger of this proceduro to those peoplo. I think that ry description
rather inprossod theso peoplo. Everything contained in this docuaunt
. 177, Prosocution “jcMbit 132 is an oral repetition of parts of

this text book by Bcrgnann.


8002


22 itoy hi-.'.S' -l5-I-X^rrc*.:(Rcrdcr)
Coart ITo. 1


A. Itoy I nonrofer you to another point in tils document to nh ich

•

I shall taro to take a position. In this correction. Dr. Schaofcr is
said to havo 3tatod that death rr uld have to be o xccctcd after a
riod of twelve days. This period of trolvo days, to a certain extent,
was a necessary cxa;roration. Those t;:olvo days referred to the
oxpoctod loss of rater, referring to a very if ini to cap crirontal
aubjoct fzon the cxporinontolseries of Profess cr Dirany. At any
rate, I succccdod with thc3o rather proneuncod arguaents on the
occasion of the preliminary conforcnco of the l?th of liny that
Bcricatit was not introduced as contrary to what the Technical Cffico
had already loci clod, but that furthoroxpaT nonts would bo carriod
cut co no o min;; t'.iat question. It says in this letter, I quoto:

"An a result of this pro-discussion, it rrzs ar-rood upon that new
oxperinont3 ovor Siortpjricds of tine bo started."

Vhilo accordin;: to Docunont NO 181;, Eadbit 132, elded tho 15th cf
toy, 19lili, tho Technical Qffico was determined to introduce Dcrlcatit,

I !ud at loact ouccocdod in dissuading this Technical Offico from
ocision.

;. -.'itnoss, how did it happen that in spite of your roasrna given
from tho radical point of view, thisoffico still insisted on udng
Borkatit and didn't drop it? .-’rcn this report *.?o soo no reason for tho
ttitudo adopted by that offico.

A. After 1 finid'.cd ny lccturo , era of tho onpinoors present
stated *!iat Professor Spplngor of ‘•’ionnn had oxaninod tho Bor’.a-,
procedure and had considered it t be reliable. :-rofcssor Sppincor
is one of the Indinr German internists and with such su port tho
Technical Offico was naturally succcjcful in oppednp no. Cn the thcr *

..•urd, cf couiso, I could a-t contradict tho internati nally renowned
authority -f -rofossar Eppinrer.

itncss, th<_ witncascontinucs on ;r. ye 2 end I qaotc:

"In or:lcr to lotcminc these experimental s.rics a coroiscLcn will
A'.vc to ricot, who, dnrinr the conference n the 20th of Ihy, 19UU,


8003


22 '-'~J U7W.-S7-l5-2-ifcrrsr (Scalar)

Court Ho. 1


should bo agreed upon In collaboration with tho OSH*"

Docs this f omilation correspond to That actually happened and nhy
vas it necessary for a later cemission to ncct?

It is correct that on tho 19 th or the 20th of ifcy, 1914;, it v;as

•

dscidod to arronco for a cctrdss-. cn to nootoa tho 25th of I lay, which
fivo days later, in order toebteradno tho conditions for tho
caporinont. On tho 19th of Hay, thorefero, noithor the oxpciJnjntal
scrios thersoIves nor tho comissi*n wore rb: were to detor-

rlno tin conditions for thoso oxocriconts. Tho norfccrs of this
cendssion wore only cp painted on the'20th of '/ay in tho pro;once
of tin ronrosontatives of tho ’’avy and, only on the 25th of /»-y, 1914;,
wo exporinents woro actually discussodand tho conditions determined
in such a ray as thoy iroro actually errried out t ter.

Q* Witness, tho otatenants nhioh you just .uido oro contrary to what
rxn bo soon fro:, tho next oontoncos in tho document. According tc which

a coxdain pro.^raa for tho cxpcafeiont ires already* vorkodcut on tho 20 th
of ISy. It says thoro that dofinito caccriuor.tal o crlosrcro Cotor-
.Inod, I»r not joine to ro-.d the jo experimental series bccauso thoy
airoody knem to tho Tribunal. T/ould you plonso dofino your
-ttitudo trrarda that, ritnoss?

A, Tho oxpcdaontal conditions, as thoy rrcro stated en pace 2 of
V.m photostat oopy undor II, 1 and 2, do in no ray correspond to what
fivo days later was determined, They do not correspond to rhat
actually Jvpponod rhon tho oxperixionts wore carried thr urh. Eoyond
t: at, thoy do not corro3pond to That was actually raid about thoso
arcporlnonts on tho 19th or 20th of 'by »14i. In addition, that
becomes apparent, tho follorinc, wry clearly. A fer linos cboyo
it says:

"In order todtornino thoso cxpvr:.*xntiseries, a cernission i3to
root, which borinc the discuss! ns of tho 20th of li ay, l?lJi, toe tlicr
ith tho OK., xf ich is tho Hi£h Cccsiand of tho ’avy, is to he dotorrdnod."


8004


22 Iby U7-*>^V-l5-3-K=rrwr(Sa=3or)

Court Ko. 1


Then tho litter continuesi

°Tho experimental l cries are to cerr?isa tho following:"
hoover ra the flutter of that letter, hen could he know on tho
I$th, T.*hat the ccrriasicn ~hich tta 3 only bo appointed on tho 20th nuld
L :oido on tho 25th. 2 0 yond that, tho author of that 1) ttor r~s not
cron a physician* Otherwise ho wouldn't have bocncfcle to entertain
-_~j- auoh thoughts* T hiaran wasnoroly a technician who crobabiy never
in his lifo hao porforaod a ncdioal o^jcriront. You rcrc, furtioriuro,
rsldnc OP such a oocrlssion wao nccopoary ard rriy tho ex.: - inontal
conditions couldn't ha vs bcom'ctcroincd already cn the 20th, That had
tho following reasons. During tho conf. reive-s on tho 20th of 3’ey
besidoa a very young captain ~.t tho <J ovy, rho had hoard about this
;nblon for tho first tine in hiolifo , only Dr. Schaofor and I woro
:rosont os physicians. a inco both of us, however, woro arbor of tho

s •

Luftraffo -odlcal Sorvico aid sinco tho Technical Offlco -anted Dr,

•

ippingor toreprosont then during that oonfcro.nco, and , sinco fvrti.or-
rcro tho "avy * anted a roprosentativo tea, it is cloar that v*o vrero
.-.ot in a position toebtoraino tho ooixiitionsfcr the experiments among
th of ua, but that tho “'avy and tho lochnical Office urgod that tho
:.:pcrir>Qntal conditions bo determined in tho prosonco of thoir ropro-
:er.tativos *

0. itnoGS, in that caso I o an soy that t!»c cenforonco of tho 25th of
d-y, Iplili, rouid have boon ontiroly aupcrflucus, ovon sonsolosu, if, on
the 19th and tho 20th of -fey, suoh iocioions ab ut tho experimental
renditions liad alroaiy been made. In other words, it ”a3 to doj.-ond upon
die prcsoncc of Eppingor and a number cf other null 'norm scientists
dooidc upon tho final conditions f:r the experiments? Is that
::rroct?

i*os, that is correct,

V, The conditions for those medical cxp.i-cntscouidonly bo determined
y the nodical representatives cf the respective agencies, 'ho was to

eoo5


1

22 ~ay 67-A-ST,'—15-6—Xarror (Eadbr)
C:urt Ko. 1


bo assigned for that purpeso f ren the different agencies?

A. Tint car. be seen on pro 3 the original document eMLOh I
haro before no in photostat fom. It says that the cession ras to
inolude Professor Eppingor, v icnna; roprocontativos of tho af-onc;.- cf
tho Chief of tho ihdical Sorvico; roTosontatives of tho Toohnical
Office; and representatives of tho High C axrtld of the Uavy, o.* 3 :.

Didn't you discuss oxporinonta at an cn tho 19th of :hy?


8006


22aloy (int. amacr)

Ctvrt I


— --tur^ly. cxpcrincr.ts vcro discus icd. I told tr.o- in m vox;.*

,c :or .-2 —d understandable wcy for all the lcynon present thoro, end * ith-
ut ;ol:.~ into jy physiological or oxporinoatal questions th. t a numbor
coyorl~cat.il groups would h_vo to oc act up If tais question could
oo colvod oxpcriacntally at nil. I appro xi natoly said vh.-.t vould bo
tc ©-Try out such an experiment J aeries. I certainly e id that or.o
jroup would h_ve to be treated with the 3exfcatit procedure,. .\sd I
corCnin ..uat have mentioned th_t it would oo oayvdient for puroooos of
c:upc\rieo.i to leave out ono group entirely, und naturally I also must
.V.vo arid taut it vould bo noccss-ry to havo a so-called control group
:t *&lch normal drinking viator waa to oo given. What, however, I
certainly did not aey v..s th..t u nuuber of e^oriment-1 grape ahould
io li ited to six doya at tho moat, and on tno other hand no aporluon-
:rl group ahould bo limited to 12 days. iko aim of those o:q>arlzonto,
:ftor ell, wot to dotumino tho timo durir,; which 3orkatlt son vator
oculd bo consumed. If I must for once assuuo tho credit which \/no
.r ntod mo oy tho Prosocution initially to the effect thut they ndmittod
I Woe young, but to a certain extent an oaporioncod eoionbiat, I
"ill asaumo it nor*. I novor nu . osted any rich experiment..! neneonoo,
r/. novor would nuve done ao. If I carry out an ox?ari..ont in ordor to
find out tho toloranco of an *rgjerlmunt_l subject towurda a cortaln
rag for any particular length of tiuo, it lacks tho moot primitive logic
*.9 determine already ..t tno voxy be.tinning how ling this cxjcri-e-.it
'.6 to last. If so I could h„vu saved mya-lf the entiro experiment,
die timo us to how long thuso experiments could or should bo carried
: .rov,li naturally primarily depends upon the -nou.it of aoa water consumed.
.3U, this oo-cailed "minutes" of this discussion was laid down by c -
Irymm, and only a complcto layman is in a position to derive :eroly
tho fact teat one drinks sou water dally. Can derive a dehgor from
f-.ct th~t one drinks sea w_ter daily, any such st~taJt.it cin only
--vo sense and ro_scn if it is stated how ouch sea w_tcr i6 to bo consumed

3CC7


22 1.,rv?- 16 - 2 -i. -lev (P-oalor)

Cctrt I


..-•aria. that tl-o. If, for instance, it vas said hore; *:cnlc c.Mjined
500 cubic centimeters, or 10000 cubic ccntiaotcrs d-ily, cr any other
figure, and if there had been stated tfc-t enfor tnis special ccq>cri.icn-
»ol condition the expected duration of the exooriuont is so and sc
dry*, then this sc .cement would-have the merit of n cort-in amount of
sense* It constitutes, of course, a tremendous -mount of diffcrcnco
-aether I carry out the experiment witn a sli.^t -mount of so., vat or
or cncn.oua amount of ae_ v rt tcr; but do lot ..e point t t.-.o following
ir. this docu.-ont; undor I, 'a" it is stated, md I quoto: "Peoplo nourished
with 3orfca se- w>tcr -prccoeduro. ■ a little fart nor oelow it nays,

"Period of oxtorinont 6 days at tho most". Immediately undorno.-.th it
says, “ ooplo to who., soa Water and Jorhatit was introduced," .nd so
orth, and thor. it says, "Poriod of the oxoerluoat 12 days." Had I
av. cotcd *n oxporiuoct to 1 -st over 12 days then I certainly tnuldr-'t
v rixy I should have su gosted the other experiment to l.nt only
: d-j-c. hhutevor I could have derived freo the oaQtorlncnt which
.-llo odiy should tjco 12 d.ya, would h-vo also includod what w.ld
h.v.-c ha^poned in the first six d^rs of this aatiro poriod cf 12 days.

For nny physician »*io has only the most primitive ia-glnatica of on
ccnoviucnt it lo entirely out of tho question to read any sense out of
..'.is so-called cxnerimontal plan.

In conclusion, I ~.y t-y th_t noith^r or. tho occ-sion of tho oon-
foronce of tho 20 or 25 of *.ay in the presto of Profosoor al> in\or,
n. 1 . ti..o Halts were determined throughout i£;ich tne .jcporL.cr.ts woro
tv bw conducted, or when these experiments wore to oo interrupted. eo-
C.aisO thes'6 very d-tvs were to bo exceeded experimentally, isn , t th t
correct?

Yes, th t is true.

0 , Witness, during these nc. otiaticr.a .--id duri.n trio no.otintion
Cf the 19th cf koy 1944 w_s there any mention i-ado of tho selection of
the experimental subjects; w..s it e-id expressly th-t these were tc bo


22 16-3-b-loy (let. ?„ler)

Crrt I


; shod by tie Hcichsfuehrcr SSI

a. lit3 proocs.il V -5 not c„dc on tne 19th of Hoy 19^-:, xtf th..t
c I stated npproxic.itCI 7 the following, I said tu.t tho osporiuonts
i>.:ich hod now once uoro become necessary should naturally bocarriod
throu-ii under tho responsibility of the cr.icf of the kedic.,1 Sorviccs
for uno.ubitlvoly wo ar. here concerned with a nodical uattor. In
Jobrucry or ;,..rch 1944 I had pcrfoiuod cy own experimental worlc in
jorlic. To bo sure -t th-t tiuc I didn't work on huena experimental
persons, out on cnic_ls, out at th..t ti.:o I v .s „ctivc in ny nodical
research institute, _r.d experienced tho cnoxvicut difficulties which
conditioned the execution of scientific work un?or the streos of doily
rlv attacks on jorlia. I therefore know exactly Just how difficult
oar oxccutloa of experiments w^j in tr.c cursor of 1944 and in parti¬
cular L'. her! in. In .Edition it vj cioar to no amroxiuutoly ho\f
nsajr persons would havo to oo secured for this e xperimont if it w o to
bo c..rrled through. I think that at tfa.t ti«c I ostlu-tod that about
20 or 30 experiuent.a subjects would be noodod. IXirlng tho confornnco
of tho 2 - th wo h_vo found out that wo would nood to jroxlu.-.toly 40
xyo;l..out-l subjects for th..t ounooo. In addition it w o clo.\r to
ao th .t tho experiment -would h-vu to oo continued for abo t i UOOks vith¬
at any interruption because oof ore tho sou w ater oxppri.-ent prep or
.nd aftor tno so., v-tor axporir.ont propor, tho experimental subjects
Would h:.vo to undergo a pre or S ter^-bsorv .tion. For th t ro son
I considered it my duty to point out to tho ;o irticlpahto in tho ..eoting
cn tho 19, 20 and 26 th-t it would probably bo oxtroioly difficult to
U tho aoccss-ry experiment.I subjects for such experiments.


I'a7 22--.-3K-l7-i-::c-har. (let. jtonnlor « Von Schoon)
Court No. 1


>*e did not have tho basical order in the Lurtwaffo to the
effect that soldiers wore not to bo used for ox. orixaonts,
as it existed in the arcy. Jbctrenoly often we used
soldiers for experiments. I booceo increasingly difficult
to jot such soldiers for any lonath of tine and I thoujht
it to bo out of the question to jot forty soldiers for such
an experiment fra: anywhere. The sane was truo in tho oa3o
of pationts in hospitals. ..t tho end of 19-13 or bejinninj
of 19-14 a nunbor of re ,-ulations had boon issued by tho
O.X. .. to tho effect that tho stay in military hospitals
of soldiers was to be United to tho similest oxtont and
as far as it could bo Justified medically, which meant that

not ovon this possibility could bo considered.

The Prosecution asked Gonoraloborstnb3arzt Prof. Sohroodor
during tho cress examination whothor ho considered it
possiblo that in tho year of 1944 - whetiier we could obtain

40 experimental subjects in Berlin, a oity of four and u
half million inhabitants. Germany in the year of 19-i-i was
aunist total war faro. ..nyono who has not oxporioncod that
on hi3 own body con not ;rasp tho situation which then
pro vailed.

S’ron tho . oint of view of personnel, tho situation ut that
tico was such that practically every nan capable to boar
arns had boon dr of tod into the ./ohrnacht and all others,
ovon wo nun had boon used for some kind of lebor. Sven tho
youth3, fiftoon or sixteen years old, were used as either

ack-nck assistants or in tho labor sorvlco.

Naturally in Berlin, considerin'; the four end ono half nil? I a
inhabitants wo could hc.vd raised 40 people on which wo could
havo porforasd these ex. orinonts, but who would tftoy hove
-eon? ..t tho nost, 'kj could have jotton sorx! women, who wore

»

ins. irod b y a will to sacrifice themselves, or sonu ill pooplo,
or soco younj boys and jirls of a very youthful aje. Thu 3 e
•'-re all experimental subjects who in no way could have-


8010


"ay 22 —--3IC-17- 2 -Aeolian (Int. senior i Von Schoon)

Court No. 1

conformed to tho conditions, ilxpariuental subjects, who
had the corresponding a^e, no one could have found in tho
y'szx of 19« and none of then could have received lonvo
fer four wooks froc their office or work place.

. .'ell, how was the thoujht finally entertained to use
prisoners for thoso oxpericcnts?

.. On the 19th of clay I pointed out theso difficulties
briefly, tho difficulties I have just described and on 19th
May this question renoined^ open. Then i/inodintoly after
tho discussion ondod, while I wa3 still in Christonson's
offloo or in tho corridor, I talked to one or several of
tho on^inoers who hed been present and one of us pointed
out that at that tine in Jerlin conpanius of prisoners
wore usod to cl-ar away dobris of building which had been
dostroyed by boubs. That was sonothinG that was faulliar
to everyone in Jorlin at that tirso and tho ..risonors, who
v/oro scon at that t ino in their striped suits woro tho

very pooplo whor. we oould uso for our oxporinonts. Evory
Jorllnor saw in tho stroots in those d ay3 thoso youn-j non,
twenty, thirty or feurty yor.rs of nee, healthy stron*’ and
capable of work. One of us, naybo it was cysolf, I don't
rononber, ronarkod that thoso wero tho people free whor.
one could cot a few volunteers for such an oXporinent.

How, tho referent of Chri3tcn3cn, Stabs-En inocr Schick-
ler, referred to this renark in the oeotinc on 20 th of Hoy
and asked nu as it is st-tod in this record, since ho had:

consulted no about tho nectinj of tho 19th and 3inco he
hinsolf sail it ’./as vory difficult to jet ox. orinentcl
subjects. Schickl.r 03ked no son3thinc like this: "Dr.
bockcr- rreysenc, yesterday we discussed another possibility
co ;et out of this difficulty of finding' oxporicontal
subjects; would you present your idea to thoso ..resent in
this nee tine aj-in?"I said that I considered it pbssiblo.


v’-" 22-—3X-17-3-J:cjohon (Inc. Scaalor & Ton Sahoon)
..o. 1


IT -.11 other sources for ex.orir.ental subjects dried u , wo
0 ul'I ix3k the oon-jetent authorities for ;risonors for ox-
- -'fir-ont .1 subjects. I said that was u;j to the chief of
th: -.’ouical oorvicc, tut wo would try to have the ox;>ori-
aonts c.jriud out in our own office with our own *>o;:lw and
if that v/es not possible, wo would try to find other subjects.
That was assuuin; that the discussion on the 25th of lisy
actually onfu, to the exclusion that the ox.oriuonts woro
actually to be carried cut.

' ./itnoss, how do you fool about the ox. lanction 'sivon
by tho ; orsor. who drew u., this r^. ort for the chart of the
laboratory in baohau?

- -ou .robably noan tho basis, 3inco tho chief of tho

aediocl service ex;* 20 ts certain dnr.a .30 to hoalth and there-

*

:or ' ;;co:Ie should bo taken free a oonoontration can 4 j.

• Yob, that i3 tho basis I noon.


22 ihy hi -wlS-l-pkp- Gross (v_r. ochon)

Court Sj, 1

A. Hero the n n-audlC 1 writer of this report has confused two

jr -too three thin-s which hcv- nothing to do with one -r.oth-r. First.

• •

of 11 :u has confused the danger of Sorlr.tit in practise with the
-ofl-lat® safety X the saa. drug in cn -xp-ria:r.t. And tfton he confused
thiatihoL: cr.ttcr with purely organisational difficulties. Inth& suasor
of 19W. in Germany finding forty healthy y-ung men as subject a for an
exp-ricont which would last four weeks and besides I think that this am
did not rtalito whr.t ho was writing. And, as a Laymen there is o or haps
something mm actional in having to do with the subject of human
oxperim-nts.

C. itnoss, 1 go on in th. document. I skip the next paragraph.

It speaks for itself. Thu next two sentenc-s r. page 3 ^f th> documont
I shall queto: "In regard to tta. silver problem GL/C - E 5 IV will
deteraino whotlvr the n-cessary amount of silver is available. With
GL/C-D 5 it is to bo determirv-d .whether the sam. quantities will bo
required .as heretofore." '..ill you please caua-nt on that?

A. Yes,l cm cament Very briefly bee*us- I have ruforr-d to it
before. At tlx, tii. I this meeting I said that the alleged 2.5 to
3 tons of silver required was a @-oss exaggeration and the technical
office had to dait that rd promised to check the affair '.gain,

Q. Then what con you say in c nclusi n on the point f tho
d .cuirwnt?

A. Tr» whole document?

Yes, I moan this last passage. You h; vo already 3poke ’.bout
the re-St if it.

A. It is the admission of th, technical office that tho 2.5 to
3 tons of silver is an -xag^eratim.

You h ve said already that that would bj necessary only f ivtho
first equipment.

/». Yes.

h. N «, I coo. -o the second p-rt of the doc urn-at dealing with
the conforen c-- of the 20 Hay 19AA. The list of participants is on
P“gc r>- of the docunmt. I should likuto ask you did you know those


8013


22 ILzy LI Gross (v* Schon)

Court 1

:-n who c =v ir--a the Navy?

A. No, I teen none f ttese K-vy n-n nd I did not kn« , ns the
doea*.nt indicates, that tte technical office S the Luftwaffe- ted
previously discussed the some subject with the Navy becausu it is *sun
hvrv that Schickl-r reported -.bout the -work eon-, since th. test
discussion. Since we ted ted no discussion previously with the technical
office it could only be discussions with thv Navy which v.r. orrriod on
behind our back.

l/itnoss I shell nn quoto t he first paragraph : "At tho
orin conference or. 20 May 19U, Captain Xng. (itabsingonicur) Dr.
Schicklor reports on work done s ince tho test conference especially
regarding tte r-sulta of the pre limin'ry discussion described in part
Ka. I." You tero just sold that Hr. Schickler jpico ; t the second
meeting. K-v I would like to -sk you - it s-ys here that ho reported
on work dorx. since tho last conference especially reg'rdin^/.ho results
-f the preliminary d iscussi.r.. Did y.u kn * f *ny conference before
the one if 20 lt*.y 19iU,?

A. K , I just arid th‘t I ted knsin of no discussion betwocn tho
technical iffico *rd the Kavy,

Q. No the neat paragraph contains the Navy*s point .f view. It
ar*id th-t tho Kavy considered it important to introduce the awthod
i.-xiedi tely, ate wants to f ir.d something good for three to five days,
h't do yai havo to say 'bout th-t?

A. I oust go Vck to p-g* one of th- docurrent briefly. Ute-or
nunb-r L thero is a Marine Str.bsarst Dr. Laurens who c-ao fr«n tho
ffico of tte C mandor Adair-.1 of Sufco-rinos in Kiel. The Navy hrd
planned if possible to g-t all th- drinkinj water supplies for the
submarines by :ne f tte new methods developed by the Luftwaffo. •

Cir.co r. wtrrrinc is -t a-a for longer than three to five rirys it is
ovious th-t this statement were proof that the writer failed to understand
the pr blert. Hot only every Navy expert but every»e els- wh- thinks
-r.ic n-.tter thr-.utfi carefully will agree with n« no doubt if I say that


8011


22 ~\y 47 -*-13-3- --cp- Gr.ss (va Scbon)

Court No. 1

precisely in the Navy there is great interest ir. i lading s uch a
process. While the Luftwaffe had nly very snail life b its in its
pl'nss, rubber lifo r-fts, tr*i Hivy ard the Submria-s hive life
boats which re nuch larger, where. 50, 60 or oren 100 pe.pL> can use then.
Or.e rved aiercly open *ny book reporting a ship wreck, one will sec
that such lifo boats if the Navy .ire -ft-n 30 ^r 40 days at aor.
bof:ro they roach lard. Th. tr^lish who hive been soif.aring oc.pLo for
centuries hrvo .vny very clear reo;rts on that subject. If the Luftwaffe
wish.s ship wrecks f course within r. certain limitation frnthu Lin:’,
biso md have bwjn satisfied with tiree to fiv. d-jrs this limitation of
three to five days would hav~ n. sense f r th. Navy it all. I don't
kn,w what th- writer w.s thinkirg, at Lnst he didn't write down
whit wr.s actually said.

Now, lid 0;- Novy c-nsider Sirany's exporin-nts sufticient?

A. Th't is given h-re ir. this dwcuomt nd in th. second place,
it least, the rwpret ntatives >f the Navy who wore present said they
* uld consider Sirany's experiments sufficient. In dditi r. to this
St.absrrzt Laurens. Notv )f then w oxv d ctors. I sh-11 explain later
th.t certain pc plo in the Navy did n t think these vxperinonts
"decjii te tut durin this discussion represent-tives of th- Navy said
Sir-ny's experiments Were ad.qu-to.

Q. K n, I cxw t; the rv-xt froblon, -nd I quote:

"These Series of experiments should be finished and reported n

r.»t later then the one' of June. During this period all prepare tins
ire to be cr.do for the coanenceOwnt f production according to the
Berk: rvthod a t a date not later t*rn July 1st 1944, and Is., if ihj
I.G. ncthjd should b- introduced, 1 r th- start f th. construction
of th. rveessary mnul'acturing equipo-nt by the I.G."

On y u cocrient on this. Wore th-se points diccusm-d in this fore
during this conference?

A. No, rd if li>_y had been discuss. ' I would have objected so
violently trr.t they would probably n t be given in h-re, but a -ybo


=015


*

22 lay L? -A-i:--A-pkp- Gr-ss(v;n £ch n)

Z art 8}. 1

they w.uld be. On the first July the Berks cuthod is t a be in
production. At tho s’ao tine th, bogiming of the construction ,f tho
manufacturing equipment is t. bo h-gun for the other sothod. This
iniic'tos to a: tho -..-hole prejudice and unpractic -1 spirit f th- p roar.

■ho wroto this. _

The ntet paragraph denis with the oo.ple , r . this c aoissi zi
y m have just a.rfclaru*i who were to acct lator -nd determine the
series f uxp.rl^nts. Is this list of the Member : f the c.acdsrion
here. correct?

A. Yes, no ruvaos re new except ?r foss;r Eapingor. It is terdly

possible to .t.I® -ny mistakes, th,rofon.. I nsy point -ut tho folljiing:

• As rupr«jsontntivc f th. Uodic-1 Service Stabsarzt Dr. 3ccl;.n-Froyseng

ispr vi-led. 1 ' That was the pinion r porticps the w ish f this .ffico.

In reality ay c'op rtmer.tal chief was To sent ,n the 25th. I wan with

hla, that is true. T-.sii'oa after I h->d rto^rted t ay dopartraontal

chief when I returned to th. .fficu he erid th*t -we w.uld ask two

thor scier.tisto to participate at this nccting. First, the Profossor fo r

•

Pharanc,1 jgy at tho University ,f Berlin - Prjfoss r Heubner, an*,
th.. Profos av for Physiological Chenistry at tho University at Kiol—

Professor Kotto. Tien it gives here as r> vesentntivo of the ?Jr.v”

Profess.r Oralchowaki. Unf-rtunately tho K'vy inf .mod ?r .fossor
Orzichowski se late that h, did n t, attend the noting hinoolf. I
nay also point .ut that this s-c.m* iiscussi.n n the 25th was n tho
jrdur ef my dopartaBiital chief in Berlin. hile it was originally to
t-kc place in Munich because f Pr.fcss r Eppingor who had tj c.e .all
tho way fr*a Viannasince cy doparto-ntcl chief wanted t: bo oro3on t
at this ate-ting laiaaelf, since Profe3s.r rkmbtr fra Berlin wh: was to
bo present anc Profess.* Hctte fr a Kiel, it was n.r. sensible to h w
the discussi.n at 3--rlir. - which happened.

Q. Km, rdtncss, -chat -b ut the sentence in peronthwsos which
aentions a tele an. conrorsati.nwhich yon rr_ supposed to hav. had on
tao basis f hich -he pi c_ f the -..tir.r was chrng.d frn iQmich to
sorlin, do y:u r.c-U anything abo ut this tclcph^.o canvorsteiao?


&016


22 11-7 47 -A-iS-5- pkp Gr ss (v n Schon)
C.urt K-. 1


A. S-s, I rocccber this telephone c 11 but it c-uhi h Vv boon
at the earliest .r~ day ' ftcr the retire, th-t is ,n the 21 st. And
I don't knar ha/ it c ould be put in -n alleged r-cord f what happened

ont he 20 th.

Then, again ir. y ur >pini n this is -pin or oof h-w light-
heartedly this record was drawn up and that it dies n t give the ix al
course ;f the thing.

•

A. 'I -roally that w uld have had to bo r. supplesv-nt to this record.

Q. itness, thu report goes on to say. I quote: "Dachau was
deternined as tho place f the experiments", ’.Jho determined that and
what do y u have to say ab ut it?

A. Nibody dutorained it and nobody c tils' d-ternin. it. There was
n-t a single representative jf any officer there »h- had -nything to
do with concentration c-aps. That would have hod to bo • representative
of a high Police Agency of the Reichofuehrer-SS or the Reich Ministry
f Interior, It is quit-j possible that that is based n tho f Uo./ing
cistckos or the foliating facts: Everyone present realised tlrt
experinents with prio-rxrs could n-t be porferrv-d in any pris n .r
penitentary and probably -u of the people present wondered how this
w.uld be don. technically. Then I no d ubt told him what I know - that
1 knew there were laboratories in Dachau an! that I. c.ulc iaegin- that
if uic c-uld obtain prisoners the experlo-nts c uld be purforraed in tho
Laboratory rooos of the caap.it Dachau. I know of then because of tho
Nurnberg Sea Distress rnd Cold neeting.

Q. Hod you over b-en in Dachau y urself?

A. N , I have never been in Dachau.

Q. N-Wj . itness, the nxt s-ntencc in the d. cunent says that y u
did get in tough with Pr jfess.r Eppinger an’ the P.oichefuchrer S3, is*
t hat c -rroct?

A. It is a fact cnyhaw that Profess-r Lppingvr was informed by our
ffice probably by teL.gr-.rn -r telephone to the Vienna Medical' office,

'rr’ I nsauau tr.-t thu writer of this report did not a.an that I did get

6017


22 hr7 47 C-r-.ss (v n Sch r.)

-.art . . 1

Jr. toqgh -it.: the Huichsfu«hrer-SS porsjc ll/ b-c?.use I did r. t
"r. Killer. Ho jjrobr.bly n^-ns ttet if - ny contact his necessary it
» '-Id be wflt blisheC thr.ugh tK, ffice _f th- Chief .f the liccic'l
i.rvicu t. ihich I belonged.

Did ”-u r. t sry th-t the responsibility f^r the planning
nd execution if tho exoeria-nts would hr.v_ ti b- with the Chief if the
lledic-l Service'


C013


22 ’ny-h-OSS-19-1-r^ rrw (Int. . - Sch >r.)
C urt ’■ . 1.


... In view f the oxraria'nts which :tr. v n Sirnn” had carried
ut n his -wn initiative, and because f the — ri us ther ex; jr-
ionccs with the Technic 1 Cffio? which .iro testified t >y the offi-
• it f Dr. Boinrieb sc which tec been . fforod in evi , I said
that these ox;or’.rvrts war* a pirely no !ical nr.ttjr nr.d th :rof re
vuld, f c urs , fall un'er tho res. nsihility f a nodic -1 ffico.

Q. “itness. it is r. w noocssory t discuss tho dist-riluti n list
f fin d c*in nt, rioc.sc 1 1 c at it raid tell nc whether th, .ffiooa
listed there were -.ctuclly otr.cermd with tho qu--tti na ■’iscussyi ct
th"»so n ".tin's, r int< rested ir. then, .t 1 ast?

... First, there are throo Vary ffices ah ut which I kn w n thin-,
v ut since the Kevy was raj-resented I qssubo th * theso ffices wore
interostod. Tho .0search Instituto of tho *:DL '.nd OBDL w.a the
Luftwaffe aponcy e ncornod with tochniccl r sonreh. Siwo I wna n t
referent f r research nt the tiro I d n’t kn w vhothor tho referent
Dr. Eonsin.’or was into ro stud r not. Lutor, fr ra tho files which 3
t k 'wr, I sow th'.t this ffico had n thin,- to do with the , r blun.
Than it lists L. In. 16. That w s tho Insjeet rate f the Luftwaffe,

II . 16. It was tho insjoct rato f r -*i stress t sen which was, of
C' urso, interostod.

. w c'rw th" ffices which wore t rot this »’ eunent f r th ir
inf rmti nr K :w nb<ut then?

... First, it lists throo fficos n'-.oit which I kn w f r curtain
that thay had r. thlnr t di with the ;r.blon. That is, tho 1^0 die 1
Dxforiaentati n "nl Instruct! n Divisi n f the .or F ret *.t Juoturhors
tho Testin' Institute of th > Luftwaffe nt Lochlir.; and th Institute
f r i.vinti n ilodicin.- f th * D.V.L., 3. rlin-.'.dl -rsh. f. I ncod net ,•
ir.t that in detail n< w, '-ot I "nr. s v f r certain iVt th:ec three
offices novor dealt with ;r *blc:-03 f- oca iistross, anil T i! n't kr. w
why they re list ad. I sh ulr! Ilk t-. pint ut riofly th rr.xt cffic
Ls L. Ir.. K. Th-t r>:ans tr. ffic. f th* *hi of <f tho !' iicl S or vie
f *! • Luftwaffo. 7hc c f nano h ccurrod ' t least six nonths

l ofere. The text sponks f the Chief of thy 21c die* 1 S.Tvice, hut hire


8019


22 isJV-A-fT3S-19-2-Kflrr w (int. ? r. Schoon)
C urt 1.


it -ivcs the 14 n-M, and then, undor L. Ir.. K, a aunhor f cu’ -
c :cti ns ora listed. I art f then had n thir.;- t d<- with the su'ject
rt “11, end it ms not cust'mry t :ro scribe t an thar a oncy which
portnonta, roforcts, etc., w_ro t>. ho n n eertni-
Then c n a the So ichs fuehrer S* with wh -a tho Tochnicol Of.-ico, nt
- w* nt " . led, Exhi* it 132, has ah wn h~u ’-ocn in ernt-'Ot tchir.d
ur cck, ‘*:hind tho ’ack f the Chief f the I odic-.l Service, and
finally, the Technic-1 .'.endony in Vionm. which want, as *-r. ’’crancy
assured, lr fcaa r S.jin-.-or's ffioe, »ajt the ffic . where Borka had
cerriod ut hi a ox, orients.

'• Thin, what c r.cluai na can y u dr w o’ ut this jJors n wh irow
ur tho distri’uti n liat?

'*• I c-n nly a ay, Voctuao o nuc'or f a -oneioa ore listed which
had n thin* whatever tr with tho j r Mon, ’ut that tho egonov tr
which Tr. Schnofer ’-ul .nrcd, the ..Tioti n ?.C8< r.rch Inatituto, ia n» t
listed; that . Id nr.r.oa were included sh~wa, at least that this dio-
a li3 - *»• r. t irewn u; with tho naeoasory thor u'hncss.

;. ..n ! I my edd, kn rlod « f the subject?
oa,

Q. "hen witness, I can say that tho 4 cunont which w h vo lust
'iacusao' o ntoina nunur ua ine rroct stntor.cr.ts, -' 1 st rt! r.s, and
c seldom? lo nona nao. :.-hcn did you f r tho first tino -,rs rvt all theso
incr-rr«ot thin-s? TLirc in Kurnbor- r oorlior?

... That v.a » aVlior. Tho letter wn a si *nod ..n tho 23rd rf Toy,

19;-:. 3ir.ee ur ffico was a cut SO kilenders s uth f S~rlin »nd v;o
received ovorvthi nr thr uch tho mil cr'yc urior, I nssuno that we
*-t tho letter ■ r. ths 25th cf 26th or 27th. In any enso, : k w that I
did net -ct tho letter, booruao it hr.d to .- thr urh ef fie ini channels
in cur ffico t e, until nftor tho discuss: n of tho 25th f May, rt ft «r
* - nditi' na for tho ox;orir»nt hnd boon settled in tho ; ros« nco f

r f rs r ~ :ir..--r and . rT.rs-r Eeubnor and -thor jVJoplo. Tiwn I
aur.- sted tr my dojnrtsent chiof that n written onsw.r Should bo sont tc
tho fficc which hrd sont cut this rc; ort, pointin’ ut tho mny niatnkos.


8020


22 Jfc»y-A-GSS-19-3-Kar*rw (Van Schoon)

G ort r . 1.

Pnf Ttunatcly, ay surrcsti- n was r. -t accosted. It was tiid tliat the
•lscussi r. n the 25th had sh-wr. h-rr the oxporinents w.ro actually to
be corriod cut; I thought that the o-ntents f this d cup»Bt wore
* a lcto; end, in the sumor of 1944, there ware r.rro inj-ortnnt thin~s
t d< than t waste pepor.- On the next recast n f henovor, I told oithor
Christensen, personally, or his ropresontativc, Schicklor, oithor 'y
toloihrno r poraon lly, th't : h.d f und n nunhor f aistakes in this
d curwnt, and I cskod then if thuy issued an ther such document to Iv.vo
it si- nad bef ro h- nd by s no effieo which knew c r-thin,* r.V./ut tho
subjoct.

Q. hr. .rosidont, in this c niwcti n I wanted to offor an offi-
d<i7it <>f thoporsoa in choree .f those c.'nferoneos onrt tho si-nor f
this d ounont, C or-Bnrinoor Christenson, which :ir. Chrir.tonson avo
rw porsoanlly in tho Sn,-lish ooftn f 'kuonrarro. Unf rtumtoly, this
in’ortont d current has n t boon tr-.nslatod yot and, thorof r , I nr.
urn’ !o t ffor it in ovidonco. 3ut, in view of the fact that this is
1 orhijs tho n st ir.; rt-.nt d cun;nt in ny or.tirj case, ! nsk for ;ur-
nissiT. t Bubnit this Christenson affidavit lr.tor in a so. plorwntory
decunont l k ns s.on as tho En-lish translation is ovnilaUo. I
Bhoild like t- tnko the li’xirty cf ; intiir ut that Christenson filly
c nfirrs everything that the witness has just tostifiod, csj-'ioially tho
f ot that thi# dccuaont was written dtn by naaory by ?!r. Schicklor at
lo-.st throe dn»s nftor tho r>ictin r f tho 20 th of Uov fer tho i-urposos
f th- Technical Office, end thet thoro was n sh rthand rcc rd durinr
th-, noctin-. I do n t wnnt t soy onythin * olso, but I should like to
have purr.issicn t submit tho dccurvmt later.

Vcy it plocso four H-*n r, I request that the c emont f
c- unsel concerning tho Christenson affidavit be stricken (V a t?fl» ro-
e rd until such tiao as the affidavit is prosontod in c«-urt.

T!C I RESHEhT: ~h: c .mor.t f coins 1 is imat*,ricl. *h>: document
- y 1 • fTarod as s on as th> translrti.-n is ready. If tho d cur^nt

J not offered, the ctmunt of counsel will To strickon.


8021


22 ! :•) y-.. -- IS -19-4-?Ic r rnr (7 r. &hoor.)

C urt *r. . 1.

22 . I'.JZt I 'Or y-ur nrin, I should li^o to rorark cnc thin,;.
It is thro weeks since wo sent tfco d<-cuaoat in for translation. I
ccause thf-t the Lnn.-uaro Divisi n is cwor-wrrkod. Thst is the only
ex’-lo notion I con think of. I cr. very sorry, but in this natter I
certainly don't hear the bkre.

?!»S .ISSUE*'?, (Interrupting): K thin - I said r.-ns noent os i.rty
reflect! r. upon ooonsol. Sinvly the fact that a ocaaaat n a d.cicnent
t- bo I'fforod in the Aituro is entirely imetorial. I on entirely
awaro th-t the Translation Divisi n is behind in its work and it is no
foult f c-ur.se 1 ot oil.


*22 Hay JC-20-1-! oloy-(Homier)

Court I

3- J .. . aHX: ;iay it please the Tribunal, I shall continue
vith ay interrogation of the witness.

v. witness, what did you do after those two mootings
of the 19 and 20 of ::*y 1944?

-*• These two meetings took place In Berlin, .ifter the
meeting on the 20th I went back to ay office, which is I
have said was about 50 kilometers south of Berlin In
Saalow. I laaodl -tely reported to ay top chief, Oberstarrt
Dr. Htterz, '.bout which aeetlngs he decided that Professor
Jpplnger should be informed Immediately, do also decided
tnat Professor Heubner and Professor Notto should be asked
to attend the conference as experts for the Chief of the
Medical Service. He also decided that he hlaself would
attend the mooting cn the 25th, and I believe It was on
the evening of the 21st of i*ay, possibly as late is the
22nd, That I o illcd up Dr. SchAfor In Berlin and asked
him to l.afora Professor Heubner and asked him to attend
the meeting on the 25th. That was because I knew that Dr.
3chAf-r knew Heubner personally, and of course I did not
Viet to call up Professor Heubner by tjlephon and thought
It better if achAfor would go and ask him p«-rson»lly.

DH. ; *RX: Your Honor, this Professor Heubner who has
Just been mentioned Is a scientist who still enjoys lnter-
n .tlonal renown. In order to show th-.t we offer Beckei^-
r’reyseng Document Ho. 10, on p ago •* cf Becker Prey song
Document Bock This will bo meeker freyser.g Zxhloit 27.

It Is an excerpt from the German l.edlcal -'ooKly of 17
January 19*7. I quote:

“The Constituent assembly of the Scientific Senate of the
German Central .administration for Public Health In the
Russian Zone took place In Berlin. The Senate, consisting
c: leading German scientist* and medical practitioners, is
an autonomous corporation independant of the central ad-


8023


.2 Hay •7-.-.*2-20- 2-kaloy-ivan J. e r
COUHT I


ministration, with a self elected Board, and has Advisory
CIBKS * Professor Heubner was elected chairman and Professor
brugsch vice-chairman.■

I offer this excerpt as proof of how thoroughly the ques-
:ion of whether these experiments were necessary was examin¬
ed.

'fitne8s, what w..s the essential content of the dis¬
cussion of the 25th of Way?

.w My department chief an I hoped that it would result
fron this conference that no further experl-onta would be
necessary. Consequently, the first question put before tto
professors, that la Profeasor Spplnger, Professor Heubner
and Professor l.’ette, was whether they would regard new
experiments necessary before Berkatit should bo introduced.

Q. fitness, did you yourself consider further experiments
neouesary? You remember th.t tno Prosocutlon at one time
said that this question could hive been oolvod by a chemist
In one afternoon?

.v. I don't consider the rroblor. so simplo that a chemist
could have solved It In one afternoon, but perhaps I may cone
bacx to that later. I myself dldnot consider further oxoor-
lia^ntB necessary. That can be seen from everything that I
have already said on the subject, horoovor I stould like
to point out that the representative of the office of the
Chief of the . edlcal Service at the meeting of the 25th was
not myself, but my Department Chief, who was an Oberstarzt.

Q. ./as that Dr. k'aerr?

A. Yes, Dr. Maerz.

Q. For wheat reasons did you la ter participate In the
planning and reparation for the experiments, if you your¬
self did not consider them necessary?

That I did not consider these oxper lments necessary


6021


22 Hay 4?-.^«K-20^-HAloy-(Hanaalor)

Court I


was ay own private scientific opinion, on the basis of ay
position I thought it whs ay duty, however, to participate
in the planning and preparation of those experiments.

Q. Witness, can you explain those official reasons
or considerations which you Just mentioned?

%

A. I shall try to do so briefly. One nuot nako a
distinction between nodical roaaons, eoonozic or technical
reasons, and military reasons.

DR. K.lRX: Kr. President, this explanation will take
some tine. I should like to take the liberty of suggesting
that wo adjourn now, beoause I personally am still suffer¬
ing a little from pains in my foot md would be vory
grateful ii I oould sit down.

1.i£ PRJSIDfiNT: The Tribunal will bo in recess until
9:*0 o'clock tomorrow morning.

(Thereupon a roodso was taken until o'clook

Hay 2\ 1947.)


&025


23 !:7-:«^-l-l-Postcr(7on Gchocn)

Co-, rt No. 1


Official Transcript of the -e^ricon Vin ter?
Tribunal in the not tor of the .'nited States
of .uiorica, against Narl Trandt, et al,
defendants, sitting at lumber", lerrrr.y,
on 23 lay 0930, Justice Seals presiding#


TKS HJSHil: Persons in tie can-t rocr: rill pic os a find their


Tho Honorable, tho Judges of Military Tribunal I.
lllitary Tribunal I is nor in session. God savo tho United
Statos of .Ulrica and this honorablo Tribunal.

Thcro trill bo orcLr in to courtroco.

T:^ TP2SI3EM?* -lr. liarshal, y.u ascertain if t'.o aofondanta are
all present in court.

183 —3EH-L! -lay it pic as o ycur \r.or, all defendants are .rcsor.t
in tho court,

TIE PTC JS DENT i The Soc rcfcary-C-cndrsl rill noto for tho record t!o
prosonco of all the dofjndants in court.

Counsol coy proco-d. Dr. Har::, if bocauso of your injury you
find it inconvoniont to stand you eay conduct your onaaination
aoatod. ..rrsn-jccxnta can bo raado for a . icro;-hono for you. ihoro
:rill bo no objection to your oral: in- tho uitnoss fro:; a chair ins toad
of standing.

DTu ::jc: (Counsel for Bector-Froysons)* lr. President, I thunk you

hut it Till bo possiblo for .o to stand. Hith tho remission of tho

Tribunal I shall continue *riti; tJx> direct ox&iination of tho v/it:iosu,

•

Dr. Icckcr-Froysonc*


E2C.13—TTTTZJ—S3 — p.osurud
^ SLUHXClU (Continued)

DT DP.. HR" for t’le Defendant Doc’.: r-?rcysca~)i

•• 1 ~‘-r,:s$ tw;jtopped yesterday rdth the question that you iron
your ;»rsona 1 point of vi.r, ycur pa *scnal s cicntific point of
N^SQg^o otf / tho opinion that t:»cso c:?crinonts roro not necessary


8026


23 : U7->rS -l-2-?ostcr (Von Schools)

Court So. 1

but that on the basis of your office you had to participate in the
preparations and plans for theso experiments. PI cos o comont
briefly aid toll us what natives you folia red here.

... The lest thine I said yestorday t.*os that there were, first,
medical considerations, sac r.d, cccnccicand technical considerations,
fimlly, military caasiderations. Tho medical considerations affoot¬
ing no personally, I have alrcadydoscribod. I need not go into
then furtlior. In contrast to my opinion, Profossor Eppinpor consid¬
ered furthor oxperinonts noce33ary in order to Cotermino rrhotiior
borkatit should bo introduced or rojcctcd. I nood not go into all
tho scientific reasons which Profossor "ppinjor ~avo at tho tino.

I can only say briofly that Profossor Eppin'.cr had soon Dr. Von
3irony's experiments in Vionna, and in tho mooting on tho 25th of
::ay in Borlin ho pointed out that in “irony's oxrorla-nts ho had
observod that cno or sovorai of tho experimental subjoctc 3irony
hrd shoro a salt concentration in tho urine which was far abovo what
scionco had nor.ally assumed up to that timo. Thoroforo, a number of
roaaons of sciontific thoory ho concidorod it possiblo t!v»t with tho
aid of borkatit tho body was onablcd to tolerate lar^o quantities of
salt such 33 ora contalnod in sea water, without danaro. Sppin'jor
indstod on hiapoint of viow and ho peraaadod Profossor Kcubnor, tho
second important sciontist present, to join him in his opinion,

-. '•itress, you have oxplainod tho nodical point cf view. That
about tho technical ono?

"• I touched upon that briefly yesterday. I should like to sun it
up as foil Otis : if it had boon possiblo to introduco a druy just as
;;ood• as wofatit, that would havo b_on a jrcat advantage. For this
reason , of courso, it Tould have to bo tested Spain.
f; . :!ovr » please co into the military paint of vionbricfly.

-to military point of viewin the sunmer of 19bh was character¬
ised by the fact that the Luffrraf o as --ell as the Navy wore in an

6027


23 ~r ' "-"-S':-l-3-?35tcr (Y-- schgcn)
CwrtSTo. 1


uaTavarablo petition, in such a position remedies at see aro
noro in xirtanfc Tor nr. air force than rhon it is victorious. On tho
ot;-r hand, I havo tho point of vionthat if tho *:r-ng decision is
reached tho censoquoncos 5f this rron-- decision rill be carried
not bv :r. Chris to neon or tho toclnical o-'iicc or qysolf but tho
flyers in distros3 at sea. lor this reason I oonoidcrod it -- absoluto
duty to do cv.rythinrj to convince t-Ixc technical offico and Profosocr
7/jpin cr that b_r!:atit could not bo irtroducod.


23 May 47 -it-2-l-p»q>- Karra* (von Schon)

Saort So. 1

Q. witness, yea have just said test, on tho basis of Professor
Eppingsr's opinion, it was decided that further c-xperincnts were
necessary. Did that solve the duties of this conference of the 25th
of Hay?

a. That solved one point - the question of whether further
experiments wore necessary. 7; second question was how these :oc?crir>onts
wore actually to to carried out.

Q. The final conditions for the .xp-rlmonts tb-n did not agree
with those in the letter written by tho Technical Office. Pl^aco
describe briefly tho conditions ret down or. the 25th of May, 1944,
but please bo as brief as possible so that wo c n get or..

A. First of all, the conditions given ir. this report of the
Technical Office could never have been seriously discussed by doctors.

Thu conditions decided upon on the 25th of May wore to follows: Tlie
■hole experiment was to bo carried out in varl uc .. ries of .xpcriionts#
Every ocpvrinur.tcl group was t o contain sever, or eight •woplo. All
the subjects nure to be given r. careful physical oerjainntion before t!>o
experiojet. Boforc the expwria^nt proper, there was to be n
prullnirnry period of olght to ten *.yc. Ir. this prollolnory period
the subjects her- to be kept under crrvful observation and also t.vy
■ere to be fed with the fliers' rrtion <f the Luftwaffe which cont: inod
35CO c lories per dey per .an with -bout n hundred grans of fat 'nd
eight rv xa of croteir.. Also th> necessary urin and blood t-sto
w.re to be t- kon ir. ttais prelinin ry puriod. For 111 who were to
drink sea wr.tor the tot:l anoint of se*. water was de tormina! and tho
cnount :i tho individual doses; that is, the -mount of sea water token
't one tie. Tho first group was to drink 5CC cc if sea ‘.inter p-r dry
with 3erkntit. Tk© SeCord group wrs to drink 1,CX» cc rf sea wrter per
day. Iso with Berkatit, and there was to bu a control group which
*>•.= to get normal drinking water, 1,000 cc pur day. This n;r.r.-l
drinking water was Inter produced during the exporl-> nt by treating
- a water with of tit, Schaefer's drug. But I want to point out that
this Jhs not a test lor i.ofatit bocr.usa no one, not -v.n any


8029


23 1lay 47 -“-2-2-pp- Karrow (vco Schoc)
Court No.. 1


representatives of the Technical Office, had any doubt of the ef¬
fectiveness of this drug. It was not necessary to include Wafatit in
the experiment. A fourth group was to drink sen water without any ad¬
dition, and a fifth gr«wp was to get nothing at all to e ct a* drink.

I oust explain southing about the last two groups. The croup which
was to drink only sea water was chosen in order to deurni.-xj what was
to bo done if, for technical reasons or reasons of raw material, tta
ttofatit could not be introduced and, i„r nodical reasons, Berkr.tit was
not taken . The opinions of practicing physicians, as well ra the
scientists, as to whether it was better to go without water entirely or
to drink anrll quantities of sea water, wore divergont. Sana thought
it bettor to go without water entirely. Others thought thoro would bo
certain advantage in drinking small quantities of aoa -water. In order
to get a decision, these two groups wore- includod in the oxporinent.

Q. Now, how a bout food?

A. The four first groups hr.d the full fliers' ration*with 3,300
calories a day for ton days before the «.oqaerinont. During the experiment
they were giu-n the oowg-ncy rations. These oixrger.cy rations
contained 2,474 c- lorioa and consisted >f chocolrto, zwiobr.ck and
dextrose. I happened to bo in a position to give the nuabor of
calorics of the English sea onurgency rations of 1943 per nan per dry •
This was U.8 calories ,xr d-y.

r ,. Hew jeny?

n. U8 calories a day. Considering this figure, the Goman
orxrgency ration, which included 2,274 calories 1 together, v; ulti be
equivalent to the English ration for five and ono-half days. In an
affidavit submitted by the- prosecution, it was said that during the
‘-xporlmakits tho people got only a little chocol te and soue zwieback,
but chocolate and zwieback are very concentrated foras S food. That
is be-t shown br.* the ccapositijn f the English emrgcncy rations.

Th-. .j .8 calories of the English tzxrgoncy ratirr.s arc composed of or.e
ur.ce f biscuit, on- ounce of peraican, ne ounce of talk tablets,
r *‘ ne -ur.ee of chocolate. This is not vary ranch in quantity, but


8030


23 Ifey 47 -U-2 -3-pte- Narrow (vor. Sc ben)

Court No. 1

it ia very concentrated feed.

Q. In this connection, I offer the affidavit of Dr. Henson
Ln Doctta#nfc on !*««« 165 t« 167, which will bo Seckor-

rreyseng Exhibit «* 28. I should Lite to read excerpts. Dr. Hanson
is a unowned physiologist wto, since the 1st of July, 1945, has been
working at the Physiological-chemical Institute of the University of
Hallo. I road -/ 2*

"For cases of distress at sea, the Goman Luftwaffe had the
foliating facilities rt their disposal:

n. Tho uoorgency ration containers in rubber liveboats.

b. Th* sea emergency ration bur-a dropped by piano.

Ore urgency ration container in a rubber lifeboat cental! tho foL-
lowing itons: ainorcl water, windproof sr.tchca, cigarettes and
Pervitin Amy biscuits, chocolate end Doctro-energiters. Total c-lorie
content of tho food: 2,474 calorics."

Thon I ccr.tinuo -ith

"The food supplied to tho flying personnel of tho Luftwaffe in
action at the front consisted -f tho goncrr.l basic ration and tho
oimen's special, raticr.. The first consisted, in 1943, of 3,700
Q’.lorios p.r day per w, in 1944 ctf 3,5CO calories with 97 grams of
protein, ei grams of fat, and 569 grans of carbohydrates."

A. Perhaps I nay explain briefly the fact that’tho fifth
group, which was to got no water, got n thing to eat either. To a
lajBun tlrt ■=* rather cruel. In reality, it's tho other nay

round. Yesterday I explained briefly that with -ut food wo tokc in
a number of substances, ;r rather that a number f metabolic final
products are created ir. tho body, freo tho food, which must bo
elimirr ted through the -urine. If 1 dc nut give the body any liquid, p
but do give food, tm nc.d for water will bo Increased am that
wiU subjuctivoly increase the thirst. It is therefore quite general
-mdical ocpcrioncc, fr-n thirst euros, that they are much marc easily
tolerated if no food is taken during then. The sa=o experience is


i


8031


23'Jny l*7 -:f-2-4-nki>- Karrm (vai Schcn)

Court J'd. i

reported in '.11 cases of shipwreck and, ns an exeaplo, I should .
like to cuote only one source. That is the paper by a Gerana Xavy
St abaarzt Dr. Sasr in the Kgaaine The German Uilitary Doctor'- fron
July, 1944. It is n report on three shipwrecked persons who wore
rescued efter thirty-seven days: I quote:

"Ascause of tbo extx\ae]^ sell quantity of wator,after f jut to
fivL flays the rejority of the shipwrecked persons could no longer cat
th« biscuits sinco they rwr.inod in th. nooth as c dry powdor and it
was not possiblo to swall tr.is powder without rny liquid."

I boUevo this brief quotation shoes rhy wo decided that this
group would rvot bo given any solid food.


8032


23 Stay 47^-SV-3-2-*evh£n(7cn Schon)
CourtHo. 1


* - 16M6S * •« acv to the duration of he exnorinent. Were
dorinlto tloea «et. vhlch hBd to to Ploooo •* trl.f , Ill( . e you '

keTO <llro "' l3r Bcc: “ c tout le-Cts of the eieerl=ehte. I thinly
to -aov .hot «. decided on the 25th of hey m thli reject.

*• S °- tt0 cf the emerlaecti vn. =ot detcrninei hefore

hend. tecoueo thet vr. the mrpo.e of the te.t; thnt ve, vhM », to
be det.rained.


Q. Witness, you icnev that the rro.ecution finds the aain charge
«/:Qln t you end your co-defendant. in the feetthet. according to the
so-called ninutes vhlch vc here cuoted before, en exccrinnnt vrr to
be carried out with e definite duration of twelve days.

A. I ^nt into that in cnsidcrablo length yesterday, I noed not
repeat. I can chly say briefly that these twelve days figured in the
deliberations bcceuse it vas said that the drug . vhlch vro to be
taken, had to bo tolerable for at leest tvelve day,. Th.at lo, cf
course, socothing Quite different than saying that the cxoorir.ent had to
bo continued for tvolvc day. oven if the drug ennnot be tolerated.

Q. Vhat -ns to haopen to the subject nft.r the cxocriacnt?

A. The exnvrinent proper vas to bofclloved by a period of ten
'Inys, during vhlch the objects v*:« to be kept under careful
observation again * 0 that nay da.=ngo could bo nseognltcd. Secondly,
during those ten days, they verc again to got tho filers rrtion
of food, ith three and one half thousand cclorioc'n dry. Third, tho
flnul consulting teste verc to be tak*n.

P-rhapo one vord on thouossiblo hnrnful effects. According to overy-
ting that -edionl science knev then nrvi knows today, no such after
effects are to be expected. This as only r . precautionary neesure in
order to overlook nothing.

Q. -itness, in the conference of the 25th of kny w* E it scld that the
experinentc vould becnrriodcut on prisoners?

A. So, thrt v.-r not sectioned for the following reasons. -irst of all,
both ny dep.-rtcent chief. Ober.tarst Hr. Kerr. as ^11 as I, ejected


8033


23 Ho 7 47-HSV-3-2-Ueehsz(ron Schoa)
Court Sc. i


that Professor Lppi ngcr end Professor Eeubror would not cnsidcr furthr
excorinor.ts noceseery. Seenily, for this rcrsons we had done nothing
tc decide the cue tion of the experimental subjects. Besides, ny
dep rtaentel chief expected thit vo could get the necessary subjects
fron the Medical Academy of the Luftwaffe. Finclly, GeaerelcKrstpbsrrzt
Schrocdtr vei on en official trip in France at that tine end on‘y ho
could decide this ouestion, Cn the 25th nc such decision had boon
reached yet.

At the conference of the 26th of key vns it said who was to curry
on the cxpi-riaer.ts?

A. Yes, that wi discussed. Professor rclngor suggested tho chief
physicicn of his clinic. Professor Seiglbocck.

Q- a l yo« '<cow Profossor Bciglbocck pcrsonclly at thr.t tino7

a. Bo, I did not know Professor 3ciglbocck, but I knew his nnno fren
lltircturo of courso,

^ Cn the25th of .icy, was it not considered that tho cnerlacnto night
bo ccrriod cut ir. tho clinic of Professor Eopingtr in v ionnn,

A. Profossor Sppingcr suggt.ted thft, but vhon it discovorcd that
it wouldroaulrc 4C subjects for c porlod of four voiles ho withdrew
his suggc tion gain boccusc thrt would not hrve been • 'ootolble in
his clinic.

‘'id Profossor Zppingcr want to sunirrise tho cxoerlaonts himself?

A. Yes, h« wanted to undhe ves suonco^d to.

“itness, did this discussion of the 25th f Key go off without ny
ileruption?

"• Jo, there was a little dioturbcr.ee in the norning of the 25th
of :-py. ‘hro vt-s one of the ferred American daylight raids on Berlin,
which forced us to continue tho diccussion in the rir-rnid sholt P, which
is perhaps significant cs t! is diTidci us into several groups end it
is possible thrt not everyone he. rd erery word thrt wrs spoken.

Your Honor o, to rpove vfcr.t hr a just b^en said regarding the nesting,
the defense Counsel of tho defendant Schccf r •'ill cubn.it rr. affidavit by


6C34


23 Hay 47-H-S^3-3~*cohon(Ton Schon)
Court So. i


the Berlin Professor Ur. Jeubner end the Kiel Professor Ir. Sctte.

We therefore aoed not go Into this ouestion eny further.

•itness, whet happened aft^r the discussion of the 25th of Mry?

A. Aft .r he discussion on the 25th of Mry it had been decided that
the experiments were to be carried out. Ky departmental chief told ae
to find o^t whether wo could get the necessary subjects froa tho
Medical Academy of the Luftwaffe or froa n Luftwaffe hospital.

I did net succeed. At he end of Hoy on the 2Sth or 30th, G enornl-
oberotnbsrrzt Professor Scfcrcedcr cane beck froa his trip nndin the
proscr.cc of ay deprrtucntrl chief I reportod to hia on this natter
nnd he dccidoi that ho hInself would first talk to tho conacndur
of he Berlin Mciicol Accdcay and to tho biggest and best equipped
Luftwaffe hospital in Brunswick in order to carry out the cxo.rlnwnts
at one of those two pices. Afterr few days. I was cnllod .to tho chief
again and I heard that his efforts with tho Hedicnl Acrdery of tho
Luftwaffe in Berlin end with tho Luftwnffo Eospitel in Brunswick ted
boon unsuccessful. Together with ay dev-rtneatolohlof, I ouggootod to
&oncrnlobvrctnbsrr 2 t Schrooder thet wc should try to got prisoners
as experimental subjects; i auuttion which w a conolctoly now to
Professor Schrooder.

Q» Witness, did you not ‘ nforn Dr. Sckroodor that you puraor.nlly
had already tried in rain tcobtain these 40 subjects froa tho Medical
Lopartaent of tho Luftwaffe nnd froa tho Kodical Acadeay of tho Luft¬
waffe?

A. Yes, I told hie that in ay first reoort.

H. Mill you please continue then?

a. I mid Professor Schrcedor vhnt I knew aysclf at the timerfcout
tho prisoners, first that th<-re were a number of c xanple s in he '
acdiccl history of the world of sxch experiments being c> rried cut on
nrlsoners. I pointed cut that tinder his redecessors, G er.c rrlcbcrctrb-
scrct Prcfcssor Eit-oke end Kolzloehncr, such 'experiments hrd been carried
out nnd fir-lly I ccintcd out th- t the ser—water errxriaer.ts wore


3C35


23 May 47-M-SV-3-4-Meehaa(V 0 n Sdon)
Court So. 1


absolutely hffruleaa, that nothing could kronen to the subJoets ar.i
that I vi o convinced that v« vouli find enough TClunteers anong
the oriscrxra for theso ejcxrincnts because before and eftcr
the cxrerlnonte they would get especially good food.

Professor hekroeder ceiced rsa whether ! know any dotsilsenbaut hew
Kolrloehner had obteined his subjects. I had to answtr i'r. the
negr.tive, I could only a*- that I knew thft richer hed said in tho
dumber* oeeting that the chief of the Goman Police had supplied
the prisoners. Professor Sohrocder said that he *culd talk to the
chief of the aedicnl service of the l, crat Police.

"itneos, did you not tell Pressor -chroodcr on thie occasion
that they were a rvlonned criminals; crininale scntonced to
ooTero penalties?

A. *08, I an sure that I said that.


25 -iry-ni-J?-4-2r-Cook (Ir.t. Vo- Schoba)

Court I

^ Yocr .vps, I should like to refer _t to is point to tho
.hfi ..vit cf tho Caoiander :f t-e 4 .cdic_l -c_da.y cfythc Luftv_f;c
which is Schrocdor xxai'oi- Ho. 19 la tho Schrooder document book on
p./.o - it Is ftocrsieat 25 oa pohOs 72-73 and h.x .1 ready been accepted
.x on otdiibit. This affidavit eaafirus th_t toe rap ori. lent v .a to bo
cai-.lod out in the ..edical -Cudaiy :f too Luftv.n'f e aad also the Chi of
Physician of too Eoo?it-1 la Brunswick, Conor lurst Harriehausca .ui
uafto nn affidavit which le Lr. Btcker Treys oa.. 42 ounces 168-170 of
docx’.-cat 3oc::or-~rcysca«; Ho. 3, watch I sh old like t offer la cvidcnco
..a lii-.lMt '.To. 29. I to-11 rc-d the 1 st n .r... .ih oa t»o,; 0 2. I shall
aot road -o rent cf tho affidavit. Karri*.-usca writosi

"I roc .11 very veil to t I w .a coco -shod x .. other it vo-ild ho
•jot oiblc t; carry out control emertocntB with so r-v-tcr, ado drink.-blo
by v rious -othods, ca-> .t loots aufforin, frc\: :.iaor cc-..-31-iuto -id
tho cli iitly wounded la tho Luftv ffc Hospit 1 la Brunswick vhick ir.'.o
under ;:y suporvlsl 'a. bhotoor Prof. Dr. Schrooder or ono of hio
ropreBO.it tivoB put t.-.is question to uo, -ad at what oxact tiuo, Z
cenhob rcc.. 1 ox-ctly. It could h-vo ocoa lr. Juno 19.4. I h-d to
refuse t.io under*, uk in.; cf sue;', oxpcrlnonts, as I h i ctrlct ordoro to
■oad ill patients -ad V adod v...? could oc rolo-cod b..ck to tho troops?
tkuo I did act h-vo cxrumd of hoa”>it-l la-.tca suitaole for thoco
ornorh.cati,. lurthcr-ore, the hospital v b ovorcrcvded .t tain
o-d, therefore, v_s aot c it able for scioatiflc oxiori.-cr.t6. I can
_1 bo reC.ll dearly th t, at a 1-tor ti:.c, I a;-in spoke to Prof. Sr.
Schroodor ..eoat t.:io •• .tter. -ad t .t a- espressod ais Turret oa t .is
occasion that -:csc cr’crL.ants could act be carried out 1 ;. too Luft-
waffo Hoc it 1 ia Brunswick which was under ; s - direction."

hhls affidavit is si aod -ad certified oy too notary obcrh..qt M*ixa
oa tho 9 January 1947. Ibis -ffid-vit v.s to h-ve be or. offered ia too
Scare-odor c so but tho abolish tr-nslation was aot yet -v~il-do» I
withdraw it ia the Schrooder c-sc and offer it a a Scckcr-Treysor.j


6037


22 ok (ir.t. Ton ichon)

Co’trt I

Sdiijit.

■‘1*^038, you 8 —Id th..t Brofcsaor Schroedor w s to spe 1 : to tho
,’odlc:JL Chief of tao C-cious Police, tunt 1 * Scichsurst SS ernwit::, do
ytr. 2 -u vhothor ho _ctu illy t.Xcod to hi.. -,".d wh it result the dio-
cuseica hud?

u. Yce, I uaow t;:_t ho did t-lk to bfc. .athru-i: I :>yself v •* »°t
preaeat, but ./ter 2 few duy* 14 ' dc?>..rt..ont c.'.ief ordered ue to ncad
„ lot-tor to the aoich 1 .‘sister of the Interior -ad the Chief of the
Oor-na Pollco, or rather dri/t such 2 lcttor, since in tuo -cuatiuo
Conor hLobor 0 1 ubs.ir zt Schrocdcr b.A tjx.:«d to Sr-witz. *-r..witz hud
ouid th.t 20 w. a will in to coopor-to tat is order to deal wits tho
u.ttor offioi lly nc would ne*d u brief lcttor. ilo a..id the lottor

nc-d oixl;* cout.ds tfle nccose ry lafociutioa oiuco Oc--.cr.J.oocrot.i’oo.xst

•

Schroodyor h.A di«cussod t .10 nutter or lly with .;ru«ltz.

VltsooB, I thai chow you docu.e.-.t ‘Jo. 185, Prcc.c- tion
ibhioit 13*1, xi.c 16 of tho cr. u. 18 :f the ^ich docui.oat bool: 5,
nc.; u. tor o;:>oriuoatc. 2 . 1 c ic t-.o letter to too I.olcn hir.ictor of
too I-.tcrlor, Did you draft thi« letter?

.w Yea, I uJ.o tr.o first dr ft for tuis lcttor. The dopurtnoat
chief and t.;o c..iof of ot.ff ch_v;od - few niaor points ocforc it WM
ni-jacd by Schrocdor.

Q. -04 tho letter h-s t.;e oi, nature of your roier.it, doeo it?

Am Yos, it 8.4-c 65 -ad tho ref or-t 2-7.

a.;it ti..o you wore a refur.-at -nda t sa uosist.-nt roforor.t

any loader?

a, I hud been a roforor.t frx. tho 15th of .%uy on. Tho lottor
ia dated tho 7th of Juno.

?. whoa did tao reforest, ProfCBtor .aathesy, lo-vo t..is offico?

^ jsti-.ony loft noout tho 15th of 1 -y •

C.. Jew how v_s t.iis salutation for-ulutcd? I ae-s "Highly rca-
pcctcd _.c:.ch l.i.lister?"


23 ..1 .-vT—1—3-Cock (Iat. Yu Schoa)

Court I

j. Ei-3 v..s _t tee spcci -1 request of ^cncTjloberstaJsarrt
Sekreodcr.

Tour Honor*-, this is - lot-.er of the kcdical Inspectorate
for the „oi<n. Minister of the Interior and the keieh Fuehrer SS Hi-rilor,
which is tho Uv-lish d5ci£-cnt Ho. 185, docaiont bock 5 of tne Priro-
cution, Prosecution Exni'oit 134. 3efor«. I . o into a discussion of tki3
deem out vita tho witness I should like to point out that at tho
bciinnln;; of this dccucat there is a tr-n slut ion which wo co-.sidor
incorrect. It is thu first soutane*. which h_s tho words "volunt.uy
wpcrinoat.a subject". Xr. tnc jv;lish translation, which u..fortunatoly
we dc not h..vo official - yet, tho punctuations nro different frou
t.-.o C-or.ina, ahd thc"voluat .ry oxoerlucat 1 subjects 0 v..s intondod to
rofor to the new or>eriacats ad in the ha. lish it Dc uo to refer to
too fo:v.or o^?orluents.

;.7, kuHBYj Your acaors, tais is .point of consider .bio La?ort.*aoo.
Indo-d for such .. problem .s tois, it's ooin,; discussed should bo
dispensed with at well -s _r,.u;ent..tioa c f it before tho a'ribunol rad
t. w ori-.iu.l document oh.-uld oo brought into the Court rooo by tho
Clerk and turned over to the intorpret .tion den .rtaont to conotruo
as to vhothor t .lo English version is correct. She Pros.cution uaii>-
tains t. t it is one hundred pc re oat c^rr^ct. ••o have h.d it cnockod*

‘h.lSXTH. I: The Clerk will procuro frou the Soerct .ry Conor, l's
office the ori inal cf this document Ho* 185, ad tuc docunout \dll
co submitted to the interpreters for a report by thoa to tho Sribuucl,
33* .._Uh hr. President, on tho 3 of ^ay I eubuittod an a'plic:-
ticn throujy-i the Sccrot..xy Gcaer.2 -oout tnia trasl .tion out no
decision has boon rc.ahcd yet. I h «T«, tnerefere, h A a tr.asl-.ti on
propnrod and a;- opinion corresponds to tho wording of the Gen»na ori,\-i-
n.l docrtioat. Hey I .;ive this tr.asl .tion t. the iribuaul because in
-v opinion it ic vital. Inis firts sentence is the one on which the
Prosecution wants to put ,re_t cgih^sis. I sh-ulf like pomissitn to


23 ;;.y-iX?-i-4-C30Jc (lut. Ton Scr.oa)


submit this translation which «„s prepared 07 -in -ivvlishuan ..ad tarn
tr.o final tr nslation by tie int-rpreters 0*. undo 1-twr out it bocob
* c IC i*-i=rtu 3 t tu.-.t t-c TriJUii-l be iven tr.is translation.

j._ - Uill counsel for the Ounefit of the record ;ivo

too u.-uo and position of the interpreter vao a^do the tr-nsl-tion to
v.. cl: c. *_■ sel h-s Just referred?

i.d, a*OK» four Honors, I i.i.’^t st .tc _t talc tine th .t the
tr aslation division .-.ad the interpretation division of tao Offico of
Chief C June el f :r v„r cri cs h_s cert .inly tested all iatcrpr-t^ro
and tr nslntor* boforo n person c j\ qualify ..s .-1 interpreter, and it
„i'j*.t bo woil th-t this version f ?r. Karx be submitted tc the into-
protntion 4 op..rtucnt end th..t they c.a tjec t. is int » consideration when
the;' arc interpret In;; tr.o docuacnt,

p_siaiL.jj When co -.scl f or defend nt h 41 naswerul ay ques¬

tion I U.vS GOih<: to su est theta


i


B OLD


23 lay-*'i-DJG-5-l-Gr:ss (Von Schon)

C urt 1

£R. .so.- Vx. President, I :n't ra.:w . crsonnlly. !fcr staff tcld
at thrfc a translation h?d been prep-red end when I asked whether pre-
p.-Xwd by c G^mcr. or an American I r.as tcli by n Englishman l.ith the
nccossnry knowledge cf the G«.r=an as veil as the English.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal would like tc be ' ivised the nrxw
cf the person whe .cede thr.t translation, if thr.t can be furnished for
the record.

ER. I have Just been inferred thr.t it was a :*r. Dirks.

THE 1 RESIDENT: Dees this rcntlesnn who ardc the trr-nslrticn,
this Jlr. Dirks, held any official pcsiti.n here with the .xiericen cr
3ritish Gevomaent?

DR. ;.S far as I knrw he is r. nomt ~r cf the .jterican Hili-

trry Gevernnent and translates fer the General Socr^t-.r;-, but 1 it n't
know exactly. I den't knew hia personally at nil.

THE rRESXDEKT: ihen the cri.inal dccuaont is presented tc the
Tribunal the transition in tho prosessUr. -f counsel fer the 'cfendant
niU bo submitted tc tho interpreters together with the crir^nrl dccu-
n.nt end the interpreters will then consider the natter rn:‘. report in
pen ccurt tc the Tribunal.

MR, ILi.DY: Did the Sccretcry General bring in the csdilfcit? The
interpreters can take this up during the rc$c3s I think.

THE rhZSIDE?iT : The Tribunal has instructed that the crijinol
dccuaont be brought into ccurt.

,R. H.J-.DY: I jus net cle-r whether, ycur Hener is givir.,? the
translation tc the interpreter at the saao tine.

THE ThESIDEtfT: That is wh't I have instructed t be dene, th? t
the interpreter should bo furnished this intcrprota.ti r. -ith the docu-
=ent. Tho interpreter will then revert in open ceurt to the •Tribunal.
The interpreters -ill consider this ar.ttor during the ocrrdn: recess
which . ill be called in a few minute.

3Y DR. UdC: Witness, ploaso let us discuss the contents of this docu¬
ment. Thw first sentence reads: "Scrli^r this na-'o it possible. - r r


SOUL


23 :fcj—4S-DJG-5-2—Ore ss (Ven Schcr.)
Court i


the Luftwaffe to settle urgent nodical setters thrcu^i experiments cn
huar.n beings," '.hat experiments docs this refer tc?

A The experinonts that I knew about, that was Hclzloohnor'a
experiments^

1 New I gc cn to the next sentence: "Today I - ;rin atm-.', before
r decision, which, after nun-rcus oc crincnts on hucons and else cn
voluntary human subjects, demands final resolution." The Prosecution
considers this sentenoo sc important that -n 16 December 19A6 en
530 cf the Gcxnan transcript they said a. about it. I quote* "1 should
like tc cell the attention of the Tribunal tc tho words 'voluntary sub¬
jects' . This pr.vos that they (nooning tho defendants) had finished
their work cn veluntoors an*! had U have recourse to innrtes cf c n-
cvntraticn ccnvs," ' -11 you please cement rn this, witness?

A Sir.co this seems tc be th- cest inp- rtmt sentence in the whole
question cf sea water, I would like tc £c inte seno iotail.

UR. F-hDYx Hay it please ytur Honor, I don't think it nocosscry
to go into detail in this quostlcn until wo have tho translation settled.
It w uld sorely take up tho time f tho Tribunal unnecessarily,

TIC .RISID3.T: I think this rrtter should be delayed until after
tho interpreters have reported en tho tr-nsl tien.

DR. H.1JC: Very well. IXr. President, vy I suggest that no recess
new so that I c-n discuss this point with Dr. Bockcr-Froya-ng since this
io .no cf the nest important points fir t'nu c'so,

THE .hZSIDS.T: The Tribunal will new be in rocoss.

(«v recess was token,)


EC U2


I


22 -.; -i.-C?-7-l-..cchin (lr.t. Jrown)
(hurt I


J __ -T. » She tribunal is —-in in soscicn*

ZZZ. T.ZSZjj* I: aro tr.c interpreters prep-JOd to rtport to t..c
Sribuad c,. t::o translation cf the docu~or.t in question?

I. Tour honor, t c original jorz^x of t..i6 x c.o'O

raids no follows:

“Ich stche acute wieder vor oiner uatscncidun, , die uuCh snhlreichon
nor unt* ..cnschcnvorsuche.. sine out£uolti,.e noosun.'; verl-a«it."

2ho version of t..io passage, >ropoe od b - tho Prosecution in diglish

in ..s followsi

,, 2odn;•, I -.-in st..nd before - docision, which -ftor nunorous axxo-
riuenta on :>iiuds -nd veluat«ry huuoa subjects, da—ids fin-1 colntiou."

and thowersion, prenosed by C unscl for Jof-nd.-nt -iocJcor-rroj'ccsir;,
io as follows*

0

"2od.;-, I o«; .in st.-nd before - decision, wr.ic . nftor mtiorou^up^.'o-
ri .onto on aniuals .aid l.u.-ns da.-nds u solution on volunt-rr export.iattd
subjoctu."

In tno o lnitn of the i-torprotors, t..o Jordan saitenco io cubi-
,Tuously ,iiir.8-d -.id is open to both the Prosecution's -nd the Dof-nno'o
construction* She f..ct w..ich i.^it .../o t:.o Prosccuti n'o lntoxprat.-
tioa soaouhnt i.oru liScoly is t..o following: if tno vritor of tho lottor
h-d iatuiidod to a.ph..sizt that tho sue sequent cxic.i-onto ver- to oo
carried out on volunteers, ~o cculd have i_de :iis uonnin<j ocrfoctly
clc..v by placing tho phraso "on voluntary subjects" of tor the phrase
find solution", or b- insorting -r. ..dverb such is "now", or nt loi.et
a ccamn, rftor tho word "hur.an experiuente" and oeforo tho vordo "on
voluntary subjects",

Z'? , Z.ZSTD'H'Ii It .spears fro- tho re >ort of tho inturorctoro that
t o nooning of tho origin -1 letter, u b written in wor..un, is ut lo;8t
Uibig”. 0 U 8 . She n-ttor is open for ergu-ient, dso open for further
tr ; 8 l .tioa end. further 6 tudy b 7 cupotont tr.-nal ;tors if either sido
d«sires to produce tho-. Exo mound, of esurec, carroEsec nq opinion

SO/,3


(Int. 3row=)


utt this ti-o £3 to the of the letter, tr.^t is e a^ttor for

aJjrneat Kirch will oc 1 ,tcr considered*


5Ci.i


— r


23 riy-y-^S-S-l-C-- k (Int. Brown )

cwt r . i.

DS. v -JJLr !>. President, I have token notice 3 f what th-j Inter-
protor said. but I have failed t.- hear the position f ihj Pr.socuti r.
wi*h r 'fcroneo t the nsserti n bv the defense t. the offoet that neither
th tmr.sldti -n n r the interpreters have tajeor. int? consideration the
tx Jtuotinn mrks, which er.nnrt be f und in the Gerner cri c iMl, but
Wl.irh have been ins rted int. the English trar.slati . n. Th.t h c hr u,-ht
Ct Ut tronsloti n t th« di. to-o ef th.--- defendant, if it was
stated th"t thoco tw e. rens were err-no uoly inserted, trs o.uld tbor.
discuss the question r.a t whether thv scntor.ei is anbiru us :r n t.

First f oil, h rover, itw.uld h \v t bo c* ted th t those tn e nrr.s

rgly inserted. They d r. t-rr-r.!» tht Gomm ri-in.i.

~''Z rXSSI!)EK?* It WTiId Scon that tho matter si.-ht Vst bo
approached if tho interpreters will rake a vrittor. report end file -no
tilth thu Seerotr r- G rur 1, v with th If.-accuti n onl n< with Da-
fonso C -ms 1 >nd r.» e py - with th, Tribunal -

’IT., HiJiDIi 1 ur K n rs --

7I?S i’SSSIOBWt *'<ad no - ;y f r r tabor 1 *: Tribunal. Then
th natter in a. f-.r ns tho naohoniaol trar.slnti n in c neornod c uld
well bo -.rpr'e ehod bv written ‘'riofs by *hi >r s cutl r. • nd by Jefonsn
c ur.sol, '.nd onv evidence.which w - 3d thr : any 11,-ht r. th. subj ot m-.y
»r ffored, but th-> nurc or^ur mt up r. th.. r. nrirv- c uld b> n r
apprcprlatol- c nductod nr.d r.-.re c nvoniontly by uv rvb. dy by written
■'r^in. nta os t tho neacin.* f the vr rds.

• I rd ht odd at this tir. th- * th-' lmnunc 0 division f

CCC? V.C. has s n v r.l roferntc ’h'-roin, n. 'f which is th trnnslnti n
'ivlsi n r S'.cti n and - nc f which Is the interpret ti n soctim.

"r. F-.ul J s ton, vrh is chief f th trineloti r. sect! r., I an inf-mod

h-s r .lr<ody prepar.-rd on oxto:;sivo ncr. mndu= c ncernini; this particular

9

fossa pc in tit. -J evr: nt 185. Th ,r eecuti.n has n intonti n f sub-
sittinn briefs r nrrunents .-n tJ.is p int, but re rill h w*ver mV
-ilrbld f r th. defense c< unsul nnd tribunal the aoa rr.r.dur- subnitt^'d


i-. Chi. f f thr Trans la ti n *lviei n.


23 ” V-H-G2S-8-2-C k (Er «n)

C urt ?- . 1.


THS r?.E5rr'2?Ti The 2nr.'rt rf the interpreters will be submitted
t • the Tribunal and then any • eur.-nts which they nay ndd nnd nan s bnn
b added t the rep.-rt f th Intcrj roters .ai the matter sutnittod to
the Tribunal.

Die. ’’-.HXi :'r. rrosi.'or.t, p«.mit no t ,-xit in an applienti n in

aritir.- nnd nls- permit so thet a Reman Untwist wh • 'Is- kr-.ws En-lish
car. express his rir.i n roc'.rdir-r this partioulnr jaasn.-e.

r. "(ES!rE!!Ti Certainly defentJ c- unscl nay f. 1 l.rw the srno plan
■hieh is t bo f ll.-wcd by the ir aoouti n.

ru. HaRDYi lour ” n rs, in that re~rd I have a point t mice. To
stressed this much inportsneo «:n this possn./c, nr.d if any ,ir.i ne
my bo ,-iven by trenslot rs I think the translnt rs sh.uld '» qunliliud
namely by tosts, for instance when o tranalat r is hired by CCC? \.C.~

TTf2 r:SSID2.*.7i The translator" nay hi cal lei as witnesses and
submitted t an cx nir.'ti n s t thoir qualifienti ns, and -ither party.
If they doslro, nr.y d that, that applies, .f e urao, t b th jnrtios,
tronslot'ra n the pert f th *r sccutin and transInters n the part
f tho do fondant.

D.:. J ur H n ri, 1 shall then wait t seo h -w this rr.ttor

it docidod up n by the translators and ox, ere and shall o ntlnuo with

this i int in rv caso Ir.tor.

s. "fitness, plans* stato y ur p int f vi -w briefly repnrdinj; the

rest f tho e ntonts of this lottor which is run,- well k.n «n t y u.

Thiro o nos n «* tho pro^rdin.^ tho sovero synpt'wx f p'isenin-;.

Sinoo this nuttor has already boon dealt with, y. u can touch upon it
?>ry trio fly new.

"• Tfhat Is said here about tho dr.r^or invclv.d ir tho Berks
ruth-d rofors only dourly to tho use • f bc.-ki tit in practical use
• ir -ng sen onor^oncios. That is said hero about tho feet that tho
“ethed must bo useablo for twolvo dn«*s running, the w. rds hero spoak for
Mvr.se Ives, nnr.cly tho rractical domnd for a twi lvc lay peri-d c f us
* v -is docs net rear, that '-.eh oxpc ri rental sub,} ct would ba treated
T M. this borkatit for twelve days, r.nd then ir. th next sentence

B046


22 Vny-*!-G5S-5-3-C''ck (3rcwn)
court r . 1 .


It is stated what I nysolf knew about the possibility of oxrorinonts in.
thti oaap Dachou, naooly, that ttoro wore suitable 1 r r.riis th-re.

Yju are talking now of the ferty healty cxyorinontal suhjoets
wh- nust bo mdo available for four wooVs and thon it goes on, ns it is
W «n fr-r. previous oxperio-'Rts that laboratories oxistod ir. tho Can}
Dachau, nd thorof ro this orr? would v : suitable, is that what you aro
referring to?

A. 10S .

in the ln-t j ir.t ir. that dccic-cntj '.nd I quota*

"Duo to tho en-’nvus inj.ortir.co which a s.luti r. of this • r hl'.rs has

fro. Idlers • f the Luftwnffo en 1 *’ vy w>. have boeerw shijwrockod, I

w uld bo groatly billed t y u, ay door illniator, if y> u w.uld

tooido t c-rr.ply with ny request."

Yu are writ in- thon of t!;o <n. r.us infortanoo ettnehed t' tho

solving of this jr’ l n. In this connection, lot n. ror.inl y->« • f the

f.llcwing, witness: It c-'uld ’ sai *. th-.t y«u really c uldn’t spook ut

that tine f the on err. ua inportanco « f s lvlng this problo* bccauso

t is rfas in th surn ir • f 19i-i and it c 1 * be said that the situotl- n

%

at that tino wns n t such cs t rr.Vo this s luti.« absolutely nooosscry.
■>.'.1 d< y n hevo t soy ;!• ut th"t?

A. Lit no r for to what I have already said that in ny oj inlvn such
a nothod is f relatively rro“tor injort'.noc f r rn inforlr *ir -m
than fV r a superior no. ..n inforicr -.ir force will suffer rrouter
e-BM'.ltios and 1 ss-.s and will he n r* s ri'MSly affected by those lee sob
thm w uld supori r ir am.

0. * low reached the mA f this ■ cua.nt. ’•hat

heppon-jd in this Bitter after tho letter war r :;t r f?

i.. First, we waited for the r.nsw- r fr -n the sinister of tho

•

Interior and Chief of the Co man rd ice end in tho n .antinu ir feasor
; ip lb cock iris t< Id t- report t the office .f tho Chief cf the r.-dical
Ir.ep-ct rata.

.. Di ycu rue ire . r npt r ; 1 " t this letter aco 3i • v u d -
-."•-bin t expedite rrtters?


Z5 !'ay-’'-riS-8-4-C Sr to )
C art ,v . 1.


i.. ITo waited a 1 n* tiro for the reply -r.d I beliove that finally
the answer c; no rly m>r th tolvh'Sjc i -ir or six we l:s -ft.r tho
letter was sent .*it. I zysrlf ht-J n- re os r. t expedite or hnston tho
rr.tter.

Q. *7hnt had happened in the re-.ntisc f Ir-.fosser Sciflb-'eoJc?

A. .»t the riddle «:r end f June Boi'lbccele ev.nc t' ur ffiea and
ctovud in Berlin f-r tre r' thr.o weeks t study the newest literature
r. the pr 'Mens of thirst c ntainad ir. the librr.rios in tho University
ir. Berlin, and then at the begiminc *r tho riddle ..f July, when news
on no fr n th itoieha ..rzt SS th t the oxporiswr.ta c--.Id he curried
thr urh he w nt t Dachau,

Q. N<~r dcourvr.t heck 5, jrgo 20, of t>v. En- ish be k, documnt
Fr, 179, and TC, sup - ! , xhibih ICC, tho first docu-

mmt is o : TJiralor f tho 2?th f Juno 10-;;,

the soc mi is a lottor fr Prindt t Grvits, dated th • 8th July 194-1.
w < * toll r-, d. yni ka>v those tor latter 8 .nl th ovonta iia-ussed In
then.

•*. K- , i V tho lottor itself it c-i; be scon el arly th nor.t if

ff and t wh a it was u ':rocsod. This is .ur ly an int. r- ffico
rr.ttcr within the .* lico and SS -ffico :f tho f'.et th-1 Uinrl.r was
rrkir- vaJla'-lo ^ypsi s f r those ox;crlwati, which I found ut
thr urh lY-fcss >r Dei •.It'xck • nly after the c nclusi r. of the -(Xpori-
ac nta. S lonp oc -rofess r Boiplb ock wr.s in Borlir. he lmc-w n thin-


f that doclsi'-n either


23-:-r-X-y-l-rr ss (1st. r r.)

C tire :Cu. 1
*

Q whtn -id y-ts fir.- 1 cut then that gypsies were- to 'oe uso'. ~s
oxperiEKntd subjects?

A That they were to be used I never found out. I just sale’ that
I found that out cnly after the experiments were cncluded.

Q Hot: die natters develop further vith Professor 3c i,lbcock?

A First of all I discussod this natter Pith Professor ^oiglbcock
and infonxd hin briefly of what it ooncemed. I had cssun-.d that
Professor Eppin;-er had already tails. ‘ with hit since he had proposed
as director of tlx experirxnts. I asa-rxr that had happenod.
Professor Boi lboeck didn't knor anythin, ab ut the natter. I went
with hin to *.y 'opart cental chi-f r.introduced hin to General-
oborstabsirst Schr odor. Fr those t\ :: superirs ho received tho
order tc carry out the oxpt<rln_nts an ’ fre/r the departmental chief
he received, in riy presence, the core precise instructions as to
h m they non t bo carried out. Ir. the preliminary 'i6cu33i n
that I had with. Professor Boi lbcock, Profoss r Boi- lbcock asko I no
if it would not bo possible tc carry out those oxp-rlacnts clse-
whoro because ho wasn't very anxious to carry out .xporhientc in
a cancantrati .n ca-.p. I than ox, lainr' to hixe that wo ha ' already
attonptod in vain t- have tlx exforii.vnts carried cut cleowfuro but
that wo had boon insucco: sful. ftcfec3or 3ci lboock arid that ho
'T ul still lik^ .tc -attenpt that, atter.pt tr have the uxpurl-xnts
carried out in th_ hospital in which lu was director in the dopart-
no nt far internal diseases. I til', hi:', i-nxdittoly that probably
he would h-vu as little success as -c had had but I said that, of
c urso, it would be perfectly a^rcv.ablc with no if he would nako
that Deleaver. ,v^r wc had s..e.. the ’oparfercntal chief, Boi;i-
breck asked ne train whether this -.-as a specific rilitnry rdor
t hi: . I answered ir. tlx affimativc and then Bci-.lboock said that
aft-t i ccurso was fr r. then or. a bir.din ordir f-r hin. ?h_ in¬
structions that E : i>lbcec-: receive"' far carry in.- ut the excerir. r.ts
wore briefly ns fellows* under n: drcunstarcos were the oxporin_r.es

80A9


- 2>-5K-9-2-Or ss (Lit. Prrwn)
Court . 1


to cause serious c-aa~. ; c tc _ health ' t.ic subjects, ar.d :f course
there should be n. fatalities. I’-'.t was perfectly clear. Soc:n^lly,
t! oxporiamts wen. to be interrupted on the basis of that instruction
if they bocrr.o dangerous. Tba oxporirentc should be carried out
according to basic scientific practice but, f course, 'hat was clear
t both of us anyway. It was also clear to us that the exporisonts
r-ra to bo carried cut in such a way art c provide p:rfcctly clc-r
results. I also discussed tea question of the voluntary oonsont cf tho
experimental subjects with Profess:r Boi .lbr.eck, not for lcral rcas ns
but far pur-1. Mdical reasons. fr*ofoss:r Belclboeek is on internist.

I als: was a d*ctcr de^lin; With internal ’iseasos and -,o both had had
considerable experience with rc.tients rhe had t- b» iven a. special
•Hot bee '.iso f purely* theraojttic r s-ns ir. the clinic. .vary dodt.r
has had the oxperione- that hurra >Ar K a 'Jjxnd to a rcat extent
rndwont t keep n hovin. their evat'-nary :i..t and uvery clinician
has tho oxjxrienco that sick p.x*sous t certain foe s arc
frrbidden for radical, reasons, sii\i that f rbid -n f rod ir. particular
even will pr-curo it i.r ihonsolvos b r«i

t:io reason Pr-fsos-r Pci.lbccc;: ashed r- about t'u oxp-riiwntnl
G bj .cta intended f r those oxporiaonts. Sh uld precautions bu taken
t soc. that they received only tho foed and t. cunts if wr.t.r “v*. sjr.
water that •..•ere prescribed for tho experiments? I enswurod that I
ii : not think that particular proca.uti-.nary measures should bo taken
bee-use these wore vluntecrs rd.r bectiso :f their c ansi lor .ably better
f d Which proceeded tiw exjeriaants were interested in tho oxr»rinont3
if it was explained tj those p.c 'la V-f ro tho exjx.ri-'ants what was
r._rc concerned I ccui: net '.xli~ve that Ii-fesscr S-i.lbccch vnflil
-vut any particular difficulties wit . a - axp rir nt -1 cubj-cts.

q nitmss, what did yen su^ as tli- -uamtec that oxporiaants
rc-llyw.uld bw c-rrlcd rut r.cccrdir.- t this p licy?

A i -ar this uaranto-- -n the. :r»,- har. ir. the p.rs n of Pr fos: rr
i IVaccI: and soc ndly, i:- :~rc- r.-cf ?r fuss r levin , r v. had


8050


* '-y 2(l-: -lZ-9- 3-Gr:sr (Int. 3rr a)
C-• rt 1


proposed hio chief physician.

Q Bid any other office have the ri ht to int.rfor. in nry ray
with those exceri:^nts in Dachau?

A Kb, either by ny departnontr.l chief :r by », Herr 3ci lbcock
was explicitly tele’ that ho had nothin. to Jv. with th-_ rest of tha
crunp of Dachau, that ha was, sc to speak, a little Luftvrrffo unit
cf his ora, and was subordin-tc only t th Ghicf 'f *Jio Ibdicol
Inspectorate of the Luftcrffo. ?h-rv was no such thin- as any
subordination to any authority within the conp cf Dachau.

3 „ -itnaas, I pat aoc lv r D.cuttant to you now. It is in Dccunant
Book K . 5, F23, KC-132, Inhibit 157. It is a letter frea
the Re iohsfuohrer-SS Pers "'1 S»ait to Dr. Grawits f 26 July 19liA.
In this letter is a. descrlpti.n .f a conference that took plaoo
on too 20 July 19IJ. at Daefc u between D... rr-r.dt and t:ve si;ncr
of tills lettor, namely Slovers. Did you know anythin of this
discussion?

A He, I kr~w nothin of it. It is ’>esnblo that 3ci- .l 'cock told
no sene thin atxut tills after ho orste bac!: but-iurin cr before the
disc us si r. I knew nothing of it.

Q 1»ns it not y'ur duty to jo to D-chau and to ir.spoct or to
observe?

A IF'.. Porivape one rf ny superiors could have iv.n r t. that ta6k
but f irst of oil it had b^er. - rood with the technical cffico that
Frofusccr iipplngcr was t sap-rviao the cxpcrlr..<nto ant that rv. one
lse was to c ncv.ru hiicaolf with the experiments. groover. Dr.
Boitjlboook ras carrying out 8.a oxnori-.nts with Dr. Eppin .r*s
supervision and no n; c nsideroc' it necessary to rivo thoco two
t*an any further sup.rvist: u.

Q Witness, in that case you r u r« not in Dachau? 01'’ y-u kn.v how
V tings wer- th-n c.oino on there?


:23- wP;<_ic-l-s-irr- (lot. rcwr.)

Court r . 1

.. I tesrd bow they wtre cin cn only after B.i lbccck c-ane hack
tc Berlin or Soalnw afc.ut the rAVlo • f S-pterlur after the cxp.ri-x nt3
ha ,: been concluded, It is cur^Ticiry tint, in thr iwar-ti t;, rt had
net been in touch with orv another, but J aust cay, that ir. July and
Au.ust, 19 ' , b-th 3vrlit. tat'. . onic;; wer. subject t al rst dri. ly air
raids and that it t k even toL rsc f ur r five rcekr to roach
their destination in Gernany; that jnemous difficulties c nfr.:nb_J
.r- /is: i in. t lake an official trie; an ’ that, therof_ro, rav 1 was
dtc an aba lut<- :iininiu. Kovorthcless, I ha a r rood t !wot
Pr.foasor Boi-lb jck. Vo nested to rsuot ia Brands nbur. r %n tb Inn

. f Xufatcin, wh r business t attend to. wars

bo tli thoro, but ay train tr.s tuo days la to an' 1 Sol.lboeck liad loft
Ion;, bofero I -rrivod. In th cfeor, I hoar fr Dr.

Boi.l'xock a^ain and, in the p:\serco of tho depart;wnt chief and.
cysolf, ?r Sasser Boiflbcock rep rt.. tc Schra-lor an h w th. oxp;.ri-
•onta had. boon carried, out. vitro t.... bojie.ir.; -f t’x< oxp.rii.nto,
Bciglboock hod carried cut m oiporlKent :i hlasalf, usin„ 3orkntit,
rhich lasted four end on.-h-.lf a, I boliovo. Subsoqiontly, h. had
boffun tno oxporiaents with tho ox.x rinntal subjects* -to drsr-.o
was done to tho health of tix. subjects* Ho shewed us phot r pha of
the sub jects tin looked strcir- and wall fed. Kavir. r. coiv.: 3' 00
calorics p_r day, nest of tlx ox.xjrlj.ntol subjects Kai^had rr.ro
.ftcr thu oxperironts than they had bofor- and whet interested ur cost
of all was that the results woru perfectly- door, at least .as fer -as
practical use cf then was concerned.; noisily , that Bork.atit could
not -x intro ucod into otxn.ency son equipment f-r nodical reasons.
Professor Hoi; lbceck then workod or. tho results of tho uxporirxnts,

■'r.d about two weeks 1-tcr, tho -!■' 1- or one of Saptenb-r, 19l|, he
reported on this at a discuss! r. afctondod by sany people. Ibis
Piscusrirn to .k place ir. the Flak Tosror ir. tho 2oo in Berlin as r.
protection a .Last the air raid danger.

P "i’..a_sr, di y u learn anyc'iin a', ut the rtlcc-i r. .f tho


oC-52


"ry 23-?'-3K-10-2-Karrrv (Int. 2: xrr.)

C ur . . 1

experiment '1 subjects r their txh~vi_r -herin the eroerin:n tc ?

A Of course, I naked 3oi3lbceck hew h, h/. . t his subjects ’

he sai ’ that both An SS officer end the prisoners the: selves had

c nfimid the fact that they vert v luntaers. He ov a '.scribed one

r t».t eases v.hcre imates in 0 Boh.au nnde several efforts to p.rsuado

-bin t-, lot then into the oxporiivnte »•_ that they c ulf. nke up fbr

s i? bar behavior previously (Pluchtpunkt). Since tills Gcrum word

"Fluchtpunkt", widen the pris :i.rs used, v:5 n't tatwn to tu before,

I asked that it rve.ant and Eoiilbe-ec!: tel*, -e that this referred tc a

prisoner whe had boon cm ht while tr/in tc escape, Ik'.- 1 boor. brought

back to the cr. p, and »:-s now La so* -vnitivj c ajr:y or r .. other

Jh unit • r c.lvia r. oevart tranteont. This • an, ;f

caurso, mntod to ora sc thet blob -...cinst bin and I boliovu bo applied

* ^ •

t Frefoss ?r Pel lo-eck, threv ,n a prisoner nurse, fbr urulssion to
x ueod in the oxp-rir_nts.

Q Your H-noro, I put in, in this commotion, the 3-cua. nt eoCkor-
?roysong i;3, Deeuaent 3, pa o 171 to ps^o 17b. flcaso L±vo t!ds
Exhibit 30. This Is t. f i iftavit »y Dr. Thec-’or Lcss^. I quote

this nt, | 1. It c .. o soon that Dr. L*jssj had to carry

aufc c l i ni cal Laboratory tests in those natters and knurr then. I road
pr’ro ...••

T ‘" FRESIDeLT (Intcrruptin ): Counsel, there is ease difficulty with
the translation. Just vn.it a xnt.

BY OR. l\RX:

Q Paco 2, #7.1
••

"I ay chemical tests I dfcsorvod no kind of J isturb-rjce or dara^o
tc tx health cf th*_ oxpOrinontal subj cts, other then th_ well-known
synptoaS of thirst. iy actual -’uti_s topt rx in the laboratory, so
that I was never in constant contact with the exporiruntal subjects
thwasolvos.

n . I r-rsonrlly was a these when SS-Hauptstur'fuehrer Dr. rice tt—
-r ar.. several other SS eiiicers, r'-.cs- ivr.-es I esc: not re:-..bur.


\

23-5 -::--10-3-S-rrcvT (Ir... 'ro r.)
Court !*c. 1


explained to rtcfessor Dc. Boi^lboeck, at that tire iAiftsaffe
Oberarzt, that the experimental subjects intended for the eon water
experiments/. had all volunteered for this purpose."

■1*. For 10 days before cxpirinents started, the experimental
subjects received fbll special aimanis rations. During the oxperi-
Bxnts &hsy received sea eaargoncy rations, and at the conclusion of
the experiments they a^ain rocoivcl special airnen's rati:ns lor 10
days."

"L’i. : - .abers of the SS were never used as cr.orlieo, nor did they

help in any other capacity durin theso «xp-ria»nts.

"15. Several inmates, however, w_ro ©--ployed .as doctors and
orderlies in these cxj>-ri.^nt&.

Signed: Or. Theodore less©*"

Cortificd by n notary. This ifl&hlblt ?30.

.Yitnoss, wo must nor discuss a few documents put in by t!v- uroso-
cutior. ir. this connection. The first one is in Docuront look 3,
p- a 6 of the Sr. lish bcok. This ic Docuraont he. llh, Exhibit
131. This is an affidavit by Dr. lonrad Schaefer. This is in
Docxcxnt Book 5, Tour ff-ners, pa^o 5. Ir. this affidavit, thure -ro
a low passages that could lead U rdsintorprotetions. .le-.oc say-
son; thins .about then.

A I believe that Dr. Schaefer, -hoi i*c is in the stand, can best
correct thorn mdsintorprot-tisns. I Aould like to point out
aijain, Ycur honors....

"p. i-ITjjy (Latorruptin; ): Your Kcncr, It sec-is most unusual that
this witness sh ul J correct affidavit of tfk defondant Schaofur.
Schaefer will be here in th. witness stand and will be able to
correct thot affidavit if h has aifc* corrections to aak_.

THE nfijsmail: I understood that the witness nado that a: cstion.
I :.-r.»t knew what the witness is oinp to say, but the def ---'.ant
Schaefer would certainly be in a better prsiticn t- c,-rruct his
cm statement.


802 .


23- - ^-1C—u-Sarrcv (Ini. Brown)
C:rt J-. 1


The witness ^ay prcccod.
r il D2. I.JGC:


^ r


“ - cysel^ ted just requested that Dr. Schaefer clarify those
aisinterpretatijns. I bolien that settles the natter.

Q Lot rn sirply ask y-.u, witness, to sry sonethin ; . cocut ^7 in
.his ttflU avit. He says lu.ro, and I quoto:

"It was on ccer. secret in the highest ocdicnl circles that the
--r/a jo thee was used or. inaates of concentre tion craps. It was
alro known that sea water, processed by the Berko method, was ’
substantially the soao as ooa water and. was, thcr-fore, exceedingly
Ion; ere us. I was clwcys of this opinion and personally advised
Sehrcodcr, Dacfc.r-?njyscnj, Apttony, Christensen, Berk- .and Schicklor
it this, -y opinion."

Plocce spy soaothin; about that passage.

A First of all, re tc thi* question of the -pen secret is ccr.-
cornod. It was neither an spot nor a closed secret. It war, as
£ * r "* vc wn concerned, a perfectly irreproachable natter. So far
■■ tl ~ h; nodical circlo? arc c r.cornjd - I !->n«t knenr whether
■>r. Schaefer includes no ir. those circl-sf U never thou .ht tn.-t I
c.lon;v' t-- those circles - and Sv far as thA*. xc.edir^ly •'.•n.rua-
neos^f tho Berk", -netted we c j scorned, I ern refer tc what I havo
-lrca.-y said; namely, that I also hoi the application of thu Berfca
r-*hod in practical encr.jency sea etc!ions as dangerous, out
0 1 1 1 ” t ernsi:r it dan; : orous in experiments. Dr. Schaefer

is ri .ht in sayint; that I knew of his opinions about Borkatit.

“< But, witness, you remenber that the prosecution spoke of tho so-
c:ll-d toxicity cf sea water.

A Xos, I heard that. I can s~ about that the follarinj. Since
t,,c f " aous Tlicophrastus Boabastus von Hohanheia knorn as Ruracclsus,

- - iYc - -round 15CO, it lias '-ccr. known in medicine that ary material


- a poison. It nl; depends :n tho sc. I c dll


P-rr n


- h °VJon. I cm oven kill hi with distilled water, but still


8055


:;=y 23r4f-BK-10-5-?tarrcw (lex.. drorm)
Crurt Ho. 1


no one is inf to assert that these two substances arc pjiscr.. ROgard-
inf, 5 -‘- water, I nay point out that f:r centuries sea vr.ter has been
used for therapeutic purposes, oven in lar^e mounts, by doctors. I
kaow, -f course, that there is adifferonco between this doctor*s
proscription of sea water and our experiments, but I thin, it is
impossible to apeak of the toxidity of aos water as such.


6056


2Z May-iA-J -ll-l-I I sc han (Drews)

Ccurt 1

* . Your Honors, I put In Eacker-?r jyaoa._ Doca-eat No. "A,
r a : os 175 to 181 of locu. jnt bock 3. This will bo exhibit 31. This
is o rocont doscrlptisa of t!ia history of tho uso of soa-wetor as a
*ri;-kia£ euro. This is ’./rittan by Dr. Hon^an Bruoalni. This iocu-
or.t pr^vos that eoa water has lcr,_ bje:: uso; in -odiciao as c. thor-

a

apouticol ..oaas and if trains loss then 300 cc ycu do not have to ex¬
pect diarrhea and elo- aoa-ustor i3 used for intastlcnal iafoctions
puch as typhoid a—', cl; lor a. ?ro.. this <l-cu.o;vt, I .iey juoto b.*i»f-
ly. It ie po;o 1. Ti o -oclt is entitled: "On tho History of tho Sea
••ator Drink in:. Cures, Hitkod-. and Indicntieun, 3 by Dr7.or.ann
Gruoninfc, Diroct r. of ... Restock University Childrena-Cliaic.

KR. 'l^OY: I Vojact to thin Dccu or.t. It is i. .Tutorial,
your Honor.

DR. H/JIZ: Ur. Prosldor.t, I boliovo I oar. disponso with
roalinc tho pansa os f:a: tho booh, bocauco I :«vo al oady sot forth
-hat tho ocsontlol points In thin iocu-ont a-o to hlch I wiah to
draw ycur attontion. I ash that this docu. o.-.t bo acco .tjd ir. ovl-
donoo.

T.-1J rRXIDI'-’: CoujisoI, cn Just w.iat p >ints do y >u of for
this doca*jnt? Ia other words, what uo you think it tonda to prove in
the c .so, h*» will It bo helpful?

DR. :&&£: This document cl^ll prevj first cf all that coa-
ujtor la oven uaod a-* a Uirkir, euro an., ti.is proves that it is not
la itself her Sul, thou it . ill yrevo in what a ousts sea-wat-r car. bo
a: inictorod, that it caucos r.o intesti .al dicordors and tint on tho
e .nt^ary soa-wator is -.iso: in troatim iatocticnal infections such as

typhoid and cholo a. That can bo coon fra; this dooaant Ho. A,

*

Szhlbit No. 31.

Hr. KTD”: ?!ds is a situation, Your H ’ r, ca.poroblj to
‘■sfess-r R ’so wit: .malaria. St-o of tho vork o :id iith .alario
•a f r tho benefit f his ,ai touts, houuvor Pr-forr.r R'-so Z'os not
ai.itcin th-t .Gloria i' har Io3s.


8057


2 C 1 -li-l-riacban. (Brcua)

Court 1


Your Honor:, I put in Buckor-Yruynoiv. Docu-ont No. 44,
pa-os 175 to 181 of locuiant book 3. This will bo o-hibit 31. This
is a rocont description of tha history of tha usa of eao-uator as a
driJciae euro. This is written by Dr. Eor-^ann Eruonini.. This docu-
_.ont proros that soa water has lonp been us ad in medicine as a ther¬
apeutical .'.eons end if usiiv. loss titan 30C cc y.u do not havo to ex¬
pect diarrhea arJ also soe-vetor i3 used for inta&ticnal infoctlona
such as typhoid oal ch lor a. ?ra. this d cau; tent, I ..ay - t uoto brief¬
ly. It is ?Q60 1. 7 o hock ie ontltlod: "On tho History of tho Sea
Tator Drinkini Curas, "atkoft* and Indications," by Dr V .or Ana
GruMdr-L, Diroot->r of .. scatocfc University ChUdrens-Cliaic.

VR. '{JOY: I objoet to this Dccu ar.t, It la i:rtetoriol,
your Honor.

DR. ! JJIZ: Kr. Proaidont, I tollovo I can diepanso with
roudlrv tho paoso os fia: tho book, becauso I : ova al-oady sot forth
. hat tho orsontlal pointo in thia docu-ont a: o to w blob I wish to
draw ycur attention. I ark that this doou ant be occo .ted i:. avl-
donoo.

TKJ KXDIT: Counsol, on Just w.iat p <int j Jo you of for
thia docuont? In other words, what do you think it i.o;id3 to prove in
tho cqco, h cm will It ba halyful?

DR. ICdRK: This docu-ont s'.-oll prove fiiet of all that coa-
..itjr is ovon used as a drlnhin,. euro and this provo3 thot it io not
i:i Itself !mr ful, thou it ..ill pr va ir. what o aunt:. saa-wat.r car. be
a! dnistorod, that It causoo r.o lntesti .al dicardora and t;.at ;:i tho
ntrory sea-wator lo use: in traatin. lntosticnal infections such ar.

tyohoid and cholo a. ‘.'hat can bo coon fra: this docuuint Ho. -A,

Sshibit Ho. 31.

Hr. H'PDY: This is a situation. Your V .' T, ca.parable to
Troracs.r Rosa with --alario. So-o of tha . rh ha lid Jith .-alario
• sr f -r tho bonafit -f his .-citauts, however Professor H'-sa 1^33 nat
ai-.t'.i:; thrt ..ilaria i* bar los :.


Z? I :ay-ilr -11- 2-1: oo -an (Ercoa)
Court 1


TM! The Tribunal fools: that the prcbutivo value

cf tho exhibit offered Is vary siijvt. The Tribunal will oidt it In
ovldenco and over-rulo the objection.

3Y DR. : „Pls

o. >:r. Prosidout, I should liko to pcir.t cut tho biblio¬
graphy attache*! to this docu. out, which rill ah on you how uxtor.rivo
tho literature or t.ilc uhjoct is, all ;_oi.». .0 prove that h ca¬
va Mr is not poisonous or har Xul If used ir. ronaihle, clinic -1
doaa*os. T/itnas-., th Prviocutica cha ..es you with c usir^ the or.-
porl.antol subjoct inhu a e poiuo and isory; wiiat do y u have to cay
ab'-uf that?

jl. i bellevo that first of all it is a qvostlon tc by yut
60 tho oxport who will bj :oa?d on this oarticul r ..otter. for
yeaIf, I should like to cay that this in a confuci on tho part
cf tho Prococution betwoor. tho eondltione that rovailed In uxror-
1 enta and 00 unions • ich provailod in eottialy j j oncy sea situa¬


tions.


The oxporL ants *.<hich Bol'JLboeok alo cf the four and o;io


olf days la tho ar:->orl Ol.t :n ht-self I hove eon. 1 1 :qvo also
at -hen with two car throe f 9r. Schaefer* s technical-asulfltj*nte, who
stayed wit-’Mut food cad drink for f *ur full 1 -6 a., 2 still continued
hair lat^raiory duties. I kr.cw of course t:.at hu.„.or r ud thirst are
xiplawact, in fac- that can be bery anploa-a/.t, but I lo not be¬


lieve that it cm; bo c.iloi ia?.i


or ln':u an t c rr: ut such ax-


oorl-ossto. iloroovar, P -fosaer 3ol*_loock informed th.e ox par l -ontal
subjacts proclsaly .j tho ouwl on tc Muld be cc;Uiuctod o’. i in tho
expiri. onto the .-elver, in tho pi aval n_ .-f tho x: j- 1 wo did

ovorytrdru pccsi lo h avoid any uur.ocaecary uctIo caatnoss. ?or ln-
-.taaco, tho thirst ; r-.p bid not receive -> .7 s-li' fool, becouso, as
is hr.. ... that si .1.' a. revatos tho - once f :hlvst e:d produces un-
-loasaiit syn.pt re.

Ci. h'itnorr, i.- not the result! c. ios h wei ' t 0 i to


8058


z: :.ay-::^-ii-3-::oa ar. (sr- r.)

Co-ar? 1

these people and i . air: danger to thair health?

A• This loss tf ueitht, ’..hick cortoinly 'ccurad duri:... the
oxperL-ant: , consists f--, the :aost pert si. .ply in a li/sc of water and
lr. tart consists in real loss «tf wi&ht, but In : ca3o did his los3
Of iolt.ht approach the 1Lits of -'rat ca.: ha r.’ereto:'. I .:nov/ that
fir i..3ta..co consol on tl 003 objectors in othor c-ur.trlas c rrioi out
oxyori ants in. ;/hlch thoy lost as . .uch as 2 ^j of their total voicht.

"Tia-tf* .-aixul-’o f 10 Deco her 10do putlisluyi an articlo on
this ani in --iliral litorituro t.'.ore are caco; if uch louder faat3
Kith raich _roator l.s .* oi ht. I boliovo tliat it con ha cour. that
ouch a loso of voi hi. within o lL*dtod period of ti.o does net con-
o'-ltuto an:- oseontial ■>- or to the person's health.

V Ur. Pro , : a doouuont haro.

Docu o :t Bo. -*.5, Dect : . book 3, pofio 102 to q i 133. This is on
trace pt fr .nr. Sohaik . : .tJ D-. Tloyer'a book, o.rtltlod •’Fast". 1 wish
to rja-1 nothin-, fr-. thlr rtocu.ont, but wish to refer briefly t.-« what
It: aln co.-.to.-.tr aro. Thin hock rojwrtc or. a odlcal oolf oxperi.ant,
to tie r 26 days* leain. l-:.3 kilograms. This

of 17 of his total body vol&ht can bo toloratod wltl no da.-v.or.
Thera lu no raiuct^ - in tho por-rn's ability to roriot dinjaaj, hiit
iulto the coatrcr:. The scientific attitude toward fo-tir* -ver
brief poriodo of si.-j . lLdtod ..oriodc of fci a» iu Loro -alo cloar.

I si ould 1 2co to put this in an exhibit 32 and ask that it bo ailttod.

Ill FJDy: Your Honor* I object to tMr ieeu a.:t. I don't
think it has any ir-'ative valuo hats cover.

—.j-.Irra-ily, the substmeo cf this docur-ont is to
tho effect that th. .. ho foots .ill lore oi t. T’ o Tribunal
is of the opinion t a. it har no prrbativo val-.o -• atsoovor o»i the
objection io susta* . 1 .

3R. JI-: I s all withdraw this lecu nt.

‘.'Itnoss, it -./ill ’ j oecossarr t deal it! re point cn vhlch
the P peso cut i n laid roat i ,'rtanco, aawoly, t e juo: il vhOthor

- 5059


23::ay-.r: ooha:. (Dram)
Ccurt 1


those export arts had zX' sonso or puro'co onj *~-i 5ro ctar:®; with
the fact that a clo let ecuId havo ccca to tlo sa j c sr.clusisns that
t’a experiments lei to by oxperi-anting f r ono '-alf hour vith viator
with a filter in it.

!3. Hfcl©T: It 30032 tc -a this quaction is out of order. I
object to it. This dofoviant is char u oi *:ith having jarticiyated in
oxpori.ar.ts on huan boi.i'3 at Dachau cor.cor.truti a coup, not for par¬
ticipation in soa-'-xtor rosearch. uo dc not oc .tor.t that the rosearch
as to the potability sf saa-«atar is unnecessary, it was cortainly
•.eco3sary, it :;or d i . .yarici and it *.fas ior.a ho o In Oor any. I
don't coo any rJason J.r ccntinuln alcni thoco lines. It hao b on to¬
la'. or. for five bourn uv I think the defoosa counsol car. ond up his
cq j uch a: or..r t .an ha as.

DR. :yj»Z: ::r. Prosidont, I -luito ualorr-tcnd uhot tho Proso-
eutor said a -1 I a. .led tc hoar that tho Proiocutor sold tkono m-
ps i or.tn had a pur .o t tho:.. I diotir.ctl;. ra v:bor ho laid they
uom soiwoloso and c-hra^uattl:* I had to toko that late consideration
i y def or.o, but a on th t ho akos th.ir stataa.nV t tho Tribunal,
this in no loa/n necessary, I '.dll acco t t’at.

:3. &3DY: Tliat lost state .ant, 1 accopt with.ut projulloo,
Yvar Honor.

TIL! at&MS’?:


Ccxirjol a;- prucoel


. v 23- -3X-12-1-C ■'< (Inc. Brown)
t n't y.;i 1


Dr.. TiRX: Hr. Resident, I Ar.il try to cti. tc the- conclusion
hie presentation rapidly. I ivx; put in cccuiaonfc Boclcor-Troyscn^-
fart a ccujnt -

0 .'itnoss, .’id you talk about thv.ee nodical experiments with any
other doctors? -*

A I felt a. reason not to and did so.

Q m ether words, you did not f- .1 that these experiments should
» kept secret.

“ •*t any rate I sprkc with ccUna^u.8 about this natter, »h I
th u;ht would bo interested in it.

1 How I put in, :t. President, Docuxnt h3, page 2C6-9 in
c’-r. nt oh This rill bo Deckcr-Fxeysorv Exhibit Wo. 32 . This
i- affidavit by Otto Loch .rt, v o had an official roasen for
talkin wLtU eh* witnosa about those experiments. The rffidnvit is
f t.o 1? January, 19h7 , md I quote fr-r p-fc 2:

" ' Jlon Problem woro discusaod - in -.-y presence at lonct - no
n -r-.us r own cruel oxpor •. rr woro over dobntod.

I ala r ^axdod this as .uiU ii.mciblc in vie: of the oxtrocoly
ht*;h : indod and ethically i; maculate fundamental attitude of L!ic
*viaticn nodical rose.arch tror’c.rs I kn w."

And tfv»n on pa; e 3, about the nidOo*

"3 citcr-rroyserv was Vvr. upoot that h_ had espoci-ally to rut a
difficult ii.tab.lisa v.xporia.nt in notion for such (obvious nonsenso'
but he saw i.j other p.ssibiiity of prevent in. tlv. layaan fron
unstinr ccnsi orable qu-ntiti_s of raw material and subsequently
distributing t the tr ops a proparaticr. -.;hich was net conplotoly

har.aL.-sc, Ho was .all the .are n.xoyod about the oxpcrirmr.t, b--

•t

ci so :n -.c-' -ur.t of the strained situati-n n the v xiius fr r.ts,
ich, X c urso, effected the tr: y-x t hco_, it .as ver- '*ifficult
obtain a sufficiently lar - nu-Xx .-f soldiers f'r ''ays n end
a be us:-.' exclusively f r t „ :.tabolica xperL.-nt. 7hv.se
‘iff icul;i. s ar- uli_ainat_- if inmates “ere used -s cxperin.ntal


23-:-3K-I2-2-C - '< (Int. Sr ra)
C*urt He. 1


subjects. I had not the faintest icon that the experiients re* re-
carried ut until p-mer»ent injuries tc health ‘ccurrcd, ar.d I did
a--' at the icproESim that Sector Frcyson* intended anythin; -f this
•<in . !V “Pi-ni- n was that only th. period up tc th: iirst indie -.tin
' zl the boeifi.tin f nttabclic disturbance was t- be det~.r. ined strict¬
ly scientifically rind under careful ucdical control. C;:.so\cntly,

-n oxporinoRt for which n are at uany voluntary cxperiner.t -1 subjects
would have boon found without further ado - -Iso ar.cn the prisoners."

r, -.fitness, I c-o to the cnclusi/.n. If y;u critically appraisod
those oxFcriiijnts today w!iat is your print f vicr toward thor nnr?

A Dr. I.nrx in those eight lon~ .xntha I h-ve -ften ashed .-ysclf
this qujstL.n and hava Buditatod on it profundly. I as!: -yself this
su sti-n with particular iicrvstrvess b-c-.uso three -f ny co-defundants,
rrraoly, Sohrooder, ry forrxr chief, an! Schaeffer, and Bciylbocck •
r uld not bo Jurv. in the Vjck ted-;- if I had succeeded in finding
o-rj ot>. y of c-rryir, out vhese expori- nts. ven today

! car. sou in rotrcsp;cti n no '.her p-scibility which could have boon
ai v.rtaton with ny likelihood f succosc.

I cnor, hcvtvor, that t.x subjects fer th».c« cxpcriner.to roro only
volunteers; that tno probln r -ich the o<pori»;nts wore e-ant tc sclvo
bho eldest and the most urgent in ti.o whole- history of rescue fr'ts
soa; that • ho results of solving it would not holp sir.plv soldL-rs at
i r, but beyond that all p.rc nc vh.r found ths.nselvos shipirockod,
l knor that before tho oxporirxnts bo e an, the director of the axpori-
-:nts explained t th. subjects hat unpleasantness'they caul-' cjpcct
fr th- oxporixvnt. I' ^xp.rl-u.nt-1 subject suff.rud the. least
'a ia .c v his health and c moqpr.tly I an today still .f tho opinirn
• t those sea r.- tor oxp.ri»:r.ts r_r porfoctl y irreproachable;

•v'ic-1 _x.xrirr.nts that offended in a •..ny a; ainst the. Laws af ethics
r lorality. In th. last tv days I fc~vo ivon y u the reasons for
is c nvicti n f ain. as r*.ca.r a-’ as - sci.ntist. -dr ar. rfflcor
f rvr Geraar. .'chraac it I c ssidor it t. b. ry naturd clain


SC62


-y 23- -:::-12-2-C > (I r J . .rc:.r.)
courti


V-4=y -VCR to bear the res : . .asibilit: that falls t- at on the basis
r .* f ici.al position at that ti^e.

DR. -V JC: !£% President, this c ncludos ay tlrcct oxaninaticn of
D-. --jclcer Froyeeng.

T'-J FRZ6I3Z;?: The Tribur.'l will nor be in recess until onc-
thirty o'clock.


6063


i.ay 47-.r--iY-l"*-l-VOnSohon)
COURT I


.jraRNOOM session.

(Tad hearing reconvened at hours, 2^ :ay 1947.)

TH£ .>L»R3K«L: The Tribunal is again In session.

MR. H.JOY: May It please the Tribunal, during the
noon recess It was called to ay attention by Mr. McHanoy
that the cbjoction to Docuaent NO 185 — that Is Prosecut¬
ion Sxhlblt No. l‘*4 — had been raised prior to today and
at that tine the prosecution had submitted to the Tribunal,
and tc defense counsel, a inoaorandum to whloh I referred to
this nornlng. However, If further worh is being prepared
which the prosecution nay Intend to do In addition to that
raenorondum, if the interpretation departaent has anything
to add thereto, we will aubait th.it at a later date. But
at this tiao the prosecution wishes to statj that thoy
stand flraly upon the translation as It appears In the
prosecution document booh, No. 5.

THS PR33IDSHT: Did I understand you to say that a
written noaorandun on the translation has already boon
filed?

MR. H.RDY: It already has been filed with the Tribunal
and defenso counsel.


THS PR2SID3NT: Vhen this supplementary translation Is
prepared, a aeaorandum by the Interpreters, see that it Is
attached to that and ando cne file. If you please.

HR. H«RDY: Yes, sir.


THS PR3SIDENT: Has any dofense counsel any questions
to* pi'^^md to this witness?

k£Tv:«n. v bscxsr-frzyssng-

Rosuaod

CROSS RX^'.IKATION (By Defense)

0 (For Dr. Sauter, counsel for the Defendant
Ruff):


£064


2* -'-a: 47-.r-.iZ'-l.’-a-Foster-(/onSchon)

COURT I

Q- Witness, in your direct examination you said chat
thu mobile low pressure chambers had to bo transported by
rail in the second half of 1942 at the latest because there
was no longer any diesel oil available for long trips.

Old I understand you correctly?

If I said that, you understood ne correctly. I
can't remember ray words at the moment.

Q. How can you still remember that that was the case
froa the second half of 1942 on?

I happened to remember a definite event, the
transport of a low pressure chamber fron Berlin to the
area of the Gross-Glocknor. A lew pressure chamber wao
needed there for nigh-altitude research and a lev pressure
chamber was sent there. That was the sane low pressure
chamber which at the end of July or the beginning of
August 1944 — uxouoo oo, 1942, was taken over by a Luft¬
waffe crew at tho German Research Institute for Aviation,
and this must have been the same chamber which according
to Dr. Ruff had oorlior been In Dachau. Since at that
time I was In the Reforat for Aviation Medicine and was
responsible for these chambers, I, myself, was concerned
with this transport and I know that we wore unable to get
any dio6el oil fer this long trip, and that wo had to move
the chamber by rail.


23 17-,-..”>-lW3>Gros9 (Inti von Schor.)

Coart *fc. 1


“ In so-o socurwnts which have been submitted, that is in various
ictt:r3 fron SS c -ancles an', in a 1 otter fro- :-s. >:ird Saschar, it is
su os to d that Rcscher bo assi nod tc the DVL branch ffico Dachau.
Althsurh no such offico existed an: no letter f ron ary Luftwaffe aroncy
took up this su jostion I should lilao you tc tell no whether it was at
all possible t assi n soldiers an', nodical cffleers to the DVL? Di ! you
yourself not arran o for .jodical officers workin- for a shorter or
lon er tiuo at the Aviation ''odidno Institute to work there a3 -nost3?

A I cn at least t-tll infemoi about the s teps connected with this
aivi I car. first of all confirm that the Goman Research Institute for
..viation was not a uilitary agoncy, that it certainly had no branch
offico in Dachauj and if nodical officors or sol’iers woro to work at
the Institute of Dr, Ruff, woro to loarn soaicthin thoro, it was ban Ho l
as followsi Thoso sol ’iors or officors waro assi -nod to the noaro3t
Luftwaffo unit by tho porscnnol offico an* tho DVL was ask o’, to taka
theso sol Hors in as .aiosts an', lot thc;i work in tho instituto.

Q Do y u know that tho officors and scl i„rs who worked as .aiosts
ir. tho DVL ha 1 for their identification a aiost pass of tho Goman
Research Instituto for ..viation an* net tho sano pass that tho rsonbors
of the instituto had?

A Yos, that is truo, I can confim that fren qy ovm knoiAo.l o
becauso at tho borinnin- of 19U3 I nysolf set up a aachino in Dr. 'biffs
instituto which I could not sot up elsewhere bocauso of difficulties
ith tho current, ..r. , bocauso I was at tho Instituto froqucntly ’.urin -1
that tino, I ha ’ such a uost pass rysclf an I know that other nonbors
the Luftwaffe hr.! tho sj.to Icin' of most pass,

Q In tho examination of Professor '-eltz tho question of adaptation
v. altitu *o playod a certain role. I, thorefor., have a few brief questions
7 on this subject which y u can answer as an export or. the basis of
" ir axjjjrinatttal work or fror. your knowlai-e of literature. Does the
of feet of a Captation to altitu 'o play an important role in oxporinents
" c ‘‘ "3 -o hoar', of ir. Dachau for rescue fr or. hi* altitude?


0066


23 "ay !;7-..-» .rh-2l:-2-Gros3 (lot* von Schon)

Court ¥?. i

A First of all I shcul I like t: answer a preliminary question. I
o acbially consider •^•solf some sert of an expert on these questions. I
-rk j for soco tine on adaptation to altitu !c an-’. I aav refer to
naabors 21* an * 25 of the list of ny scientific publications offered as
Bockor-rToyson • Exhibit 1 . Theso aro papers on altitude adaptation which
I r^roto iirir. the yoars 1939 to 191*2, I boliovo. I tb not believe
that the quostion of altitude adaptation was important in Dr, Huff and
Dr. Roabor, 's experiments,

C} can oro compare altitude a daptation ".ainod through cumulative
ar.Ion- stays in a lew urossuro chamber with the altitu 'o adaptation
acquire! for oxar-plo by nountain dlnbors. It is woll knovm that clinbirs
in tho Himalayas havo reached 8,OCO voters by moans of tho nost lifficult
physical exertion without artificial scurcos cf oxy.-cn,

A I have ha no experience in the Hiraalayns. I porfomod ny wn
exporiaonto in Switzorlan* at tho hi h .Jpine Research Station on tho
■m fraujoch at altitu’.as botifjon 3,500 an 1*,000 rioters. :5oroovor,
lator, as a referent ux’or tho Chiof of tho ”o’ical Sorcicos of tho
Usftwaffo I ha’ to consider tho possibility of altitu !o adaptation by
ropor.tod stays in a low pro3suro chamber. As proof of this I nay refer
to hocunjnt ’>-931;, Prosocution Exhibit 158, That is tho list of tho 97
research assiptraents. On .a-;o 3 of tho copy, I havo at ny 'ispos.al on
; a e 1*, I bof; your pardon, under in 5 throe research assi. nnonts on this
subject are listo V An ’ sinco I know tho results of this research woll,

I can answer this question. By ropeatod ascents in tho low pressure
chanbar nr actual altitude a Captation can bo achieve.. slight increase
in rosistanco to altitude is obsorvo! to be sure in thoxcon’, thirl, a*
■irth ascent with the low prossuro choaber. To extant =f this effect
is so nil ht, h'wovar, that in effect it is af no importance,, especially
in the experiments which Drs. Ruff .an' Harder.: carried out at altitudes
'-vo 12,COD m-tors.

3 Thon I can assume that the sli at 'o~rcc of a Captation which
' cvrr ’ - ir * thj cour3 ° ° r - scries of experiments such as was perfomoi -


8067


23 "~7 *.7-..--.r>li.-3-~r-ss (Xnt. vzn Schon)

Court Ifc* 1

at Dachau does not influence tha results of the cxporinents to ary
important extent.

'^ 3 i this assumption is correct.

Q Is it true that as far as possible after a lour series of
experiments with the low prossuro charier the experimental subjects
aro lift cut for a short tine to do away with even the sliyhtost
adaptation which nay exist?

Yes, that is true, but I must point out tho following* with the
aviation rwiicino oxperto who constantly performed oxcorijwnts or. thon-
soivos in thoir institute, wo are ccncorno with ropdoto! ascents over
a porlc ’ of nary years. That is of course, somethin • quite .afferent
than in series of . xperi-vents ltd to ' to 2, 3 or U months. And, an
attempt rill of courso bo an do after conclusion of a sorios of oeperi-
.-’.onts las tin- sovoral nonths to insort a certain pause.

Q In Dachau about 20 oxperlnont3 noro carried out in the course
:f approximately throo months. Is it y<xir opinion as well as that of the
:io'leal ^F^rt of tr.o Prosocutlon who has ropoatoUy tol l tho !ofon.l-
ant Dr. Ruff an Dr. Sou* or that in tho scientific execution of tho
oxporirwnts for roscuo fron hl : h altitu dos thoro was nothin ■ objoction-
ablo?

.. After carefully rondin" the detailed roport nado available by
tI:o Prosecution I, too, consider it an unobjectionable scientific
rop rt aai.'.o from tho fact that threu-h years of acquaintanceship I
observed nothin: but porfoctly lo-itiaato scientific work tone by Drs.
Rorjborr and Ruff.

3 If tli aro was nothin to be bjocto*. tc ir. th- xiontific

• •

arecuticn cf this work, then there could not have boon any ovai^burden-
'' * “ - uxpjrinor.tal 3ubjoct3 either, since othorrriso this would rave
influenced the results. Is that also your opinion?

A Yes, that is :y opinion and I should like to ad! — you sail that
t. re ware about 20 experiments carrio 1 cut in throo nonths. That coul!


8068


23 I;?-..-.. Mlmt^Oross (Int* von Schor.)

Court Ho t 1

mfc bo on ovarbordonine un^or any circumstances, I nyself bo’, those whan
I subjected nysolf to ncro than 20 si m i la r oxporinents in tho course
•f 3 aonths crio ’ on I know that Dr. Huff hai perio-'s when ho par-
£o r-B-’. c nsi torobly ncro experiments on hlnself in a similar porioO,


K69


23 - fey-* .-D J3-1 5-1-Karrc w (Vcn Schon)
Ccurt 1


Hr. President, I new have sesc questions fer Kolto on behalf cf
the defendant Handleser.

'Mlo you were working in the Luftwaffe Medical Inspectorate, did
ycu ever sec nn order cr instructiens fres the Chief ef the behrmacht
ilodical Service referring-to research of the Luftwaffe?

A No, I never saw such an order free Gcncr&lcberstabsarzt Hr.ndloscr.

Q ’.ihile ycu wore working there did ycu ever see c report te tho
Chief of the Medical Service about the execution of any research carried
cut or ordered by the Luftwaffe Ilodical Service, cr did ycu ever draw
up such a report?

A I cannot remember any such report.

Q Khot was the effect of the establishment cf the Offico fer
Science and Research, from the end cf 1943 cn, cn your roperts in
research questions?

.. I con answer this question cnly from 15 May 1944, on, when 3
myself bocono Referent for ..viaticn Medicine. The effect was thrt wo
made one mere fjtcn copy ef cur research assignments, and this copy
was sent to the cffico cf the Chief of the ’..ehrancht .4.. lied Sorvicc.

Q Did theso lottors about research assignments indicr.to her. tho
research was to be carried cut?

A No, thet could hardly bo seen fren then. I may refer tc what
I have stated in consiter able detail here cbeut research assignments.

Q Do ycu knew cf a ease when Professor H nndlcsur visited or in¬
spected *the Research Institute cf the Luftwaffe?

«v No, I dc net knew of any such case.

Q Do you believe, cn the basis cf ycur knowledge cf the organiza-t:
cf the (Chrnacht Medical Service, that professor Handlcscr cculd have
prohibited any research which the Luftwaffe cv-noidcrei necossAy?

n First of all, I don’t kn-w of any case when he did sc or attempt¬
ed tc dc so. I can’t imagine his ^cing it -r being able tc do it.

\

Q ’.as the medical research system cf the Luftraffe under the

c -rnand cf the Chief cf the ‘..chrmacht Medical Service?

6070


23 :1~y—3v. : G—15-2-Karr-V (V:n Sehm)
Ccurt I


.. I ra net wmre cf anythin. that sight indicate such r. suber-
finatian.

a Oc ;vu h*7c your affidavit, fcofero y;u?

.. Yes, I have it.

■1 Hot* !c you oXpl:An your stnt-^nt, in this affidavit rliich led
t: wren;' conclusions?

.. I -rosuno you aeon this sentence:

"Hrndloacr, ns Inspector :i th- ' chrsneht iiedicol Service, .just
have been acquainted with the research pasigne-nts ctrri^:'. ut ' y the
,a*-y, 2!r.v: -nd Luftwaffe."

Y«-s, that's the sentenco I aeon.

.. Tills refers nly tc vhr.t I s-i’. hof.~rc, thrt the :ffico .f
Gcnoroloborstobs , 'r*t Hrndlcaer reedv-d a carbcn copy cf .ur reserreh
-ssicnrients.

'i Di ' the Chief cf the chrarcht L'cdicrl Service hr.vo cfiidrl
knc'lc'l.e cf the ocn-wtor oqjcrincnts?

Ho,

1 D. v u know the Cllitnry holier 1 i.o.«y?

•* XwS.

T D y.u knew thrt there vtere institutes v.ldch carried ut re¬
search; r oxa^Oo, L st rcs'onreh under '.irth m -1 bleed serui rosc-j-ch

’enter Lrn-7

.. 1 i.aist t -11 you h;w I knew ;f the l&dicol ..codaqr cf the «.ry.
ih- ..viatic:i i-dicinc Research Institute was in r tuiidin trjiich -..as
Fart » the I lil it ary .ielicrl ..cadcy, mi I, cf course, knew rrofeaser
.irth -tvI ir. fesscr L*nr. I knew th. t IT Teaser Lrn priiucod bleed
scru-., an’ I knew that Ir fes3.r ’.‘irth \ r.s workin; on quests.ns cf
chcaiccL warfare, I -a net ir.f r.el of -ny dotails -f the urjc cf
either cf these .ien.

: 3c you knew that oq-crdients were perf-rnu*. there .a ftuarn
• -in -3?

.. 1 s, • ec-uso I often a-t th - c- .etc f the ..cc lay vac prrtici-


6C71


-3 .-DJG-15-3-hnrr s (V r. Schn)

Court 1


.-tod in "11 kinds cf xjqjiri.--r.ts.

3 The aq.wriLxr.t8 «vro pcrf mod n cadets?

.. Y-3, I kncrr .'£ cnc t&g cpcperlxcnt on Pervitin, fer acc/aple,
her. the erdets c.uld r..t sleep f r sev.ral Irys, -r. then I xii iv cf
chaicrl i.-rf.-rc ' -ent oqxrinxnts >ceruse, in the institute, I sr.w
..-ny c* 'eta eh hed •indnges cr. their ferenras, rail I wr-s tcld thrt
th- jo cere ehc.ic.-l wrrf-rc _nt t-ots.

. D: you knew the Zf antnin io lied School c f the OKU is Sc.

Jeh-nn?

.» Yes, I knc. th t Inst. Lute, 'he Arny buntnia ifcdiocl 5chcol
i Zt. J hrain in tix Tyr.l.

■} D- ycu ka w th t oqicri'-cnts core p.rf.rtoi there on volunteer
SvIdlers?

.. Yos, 1 knc.. that very well. This kncv«l-l."c vc.s the rcr.sen f^r
th. su -flticn which I nenticned yesterdry, thrt c sldl r training
c -.i such o the -roy h-J in St. Jehnnn should bo set u;; for the
Luftweffe ir. th- Vrrinin,; S-cticn in Juctcr 1 ' ;.

q 'fir t y u c*i i y stord-y night h-v- been interpreted t nor.n th;.t
t‘. ..ny did net pcrf era • v el] aenbers cf the ..ray.

Th*t in n-t right?

.. *i-t 1 ani'l cr. the subject referred cniy U •ihrt 1 hoerd h-rc
ir. this c urt r. 1 bdiovod th t ither ir.fess: r Krodlcr.cr r s.iac-
:.e els- hr ' s;jcku; . f - ‘ -sic r'-r free. Keitel th-t nc wc-cri-.jits
? ull 'o . erf croud ,n s.ldi.rs vf the ..rqy hut, cf ccurse, I luiow thrt
ir. .tii the x lie-1 ffice*s ir. St. J. h-nn in the Tyr 1 rn’ io’. the :l-
ic‘l ,.c“ ' 0 * such oq erlacntc verc xrfemod n v luntcers.

. I. oh- list ;f . rrticignnta f the ilurnb-rc i> -tio* - IJ 0 -A 01 —
•J'. r Ai, there is Cb rsrzt Dr. enig cf the lfborat. ry trriaAf
th. o: . Is it true th t Dr. Ktenig :.rs r. t present?

.. Yes, ti.-t is true. Thtt s vi.us in the ri ;iml ’.canent.
h-rc t. ^ 1-cturc ,f Dr. Teem.- is printed, there is - fcctnctc -t the
it . cf t o , * > ir.eic .tine th*t Dr. Kceni£ ves uhhblo t: ttor/ the


23 ->v- --DJG-15-t-K-rrrw (Vcr. Schch)

C urt 1

ncctinr or serially fer reasons connected with the war, and that K conic 13
lecture was rori by Dr. Benzin.-or, at wr.csc institute Keeni ha.', v.rkod.
The nose of Keen! ; is listed anenr the participants cnly because his
lecture is included.

o Thank ycu. I have rte further questions.

BY DR. TRIEILLn (Defense Counsel fet tho defendant Rcstcck am. "Iso
representing Dr. Sorvrtius, Defense Counsel fer tho defendant Karl
Brandt):

Q Dr. Bccktr-Frcyscnc, did ycu, free your ferner work, knew tho
duties of tho Office f_r Scicnco and Research well?

.. I believe I hr>ve alro- *.y aa.de a st'tcaent tc tho effect that
1 did net h/vc any kncwlcdre cf ay cwn abcut the specific duties and
position of the office f-r Science end Research.

q Then I nay sua up ycur st-tveccnts to the effect th't v.hcn ycu
said that Krrl Brandt was perhaps tho hi .hv.st nodical authority in
science n 1 research ycu did net say this fren ycur cwn knowledge, but
that it was a ccnclusien which was su jested t. ycu?

The wer: 1 "perhaps” exprossos th."t I Merit only tho possibility.

Q Thon the ccphasis is cn the "perhaps”?

A Yes.

Q During ycur vork, at that tirw, did y u ever receive any in-
stracticr.s fr-o Frefesser hv.st.ck :r any suggest! ns tc carry :ut vany
experiments?

.. So.

q Th^n, Rcstcck did net surest the seft-wator experiments and
h-d no ccnnecticn with then?

.. Ho.

Q Then, in the field cf those ex; erin.nts, there is nc connection
which ycu renemher tc lay with the Office f r Science "nd Research?

.. I have said that tho sea-water experiments were n:t worked cut
thv. ’ cic cf a research assignment riven t. a civilian research
rrk.r, ut * re carried ut by juts elves on a purely aUitnr; basis.


e073


23 bhy-..-D JG-15 -^Kcttc v (V:r. Sch r.)
Court 1


‘ c '■-id not have t_ .;ive any ix.^ rt tc the Office fer Science and Re¬
search, and no did net do sc.

1 Thank ycu. I have nc further questions.

BY jR. rZLCK-iJu.’ (Defense Counsel fer the defendant Schaefer):

' Dr. Bockcr-Frcyscns, you have cr.de detailed stateaents ab.ut


Hclzlcchnur 1 s lecture at the .Numbers racotir-c and r.bLut Reseller's concents
Dii you talk t; the defendant Schaefer clout H. lzlcohner*s eoc'criiiuits?

.. I dc net recall any such ccnvcracticn.

'J i’-u hr.vc discussod the deb .to between yc u end the non of the


r


Technical Office about the usefulness cf Bortatit. ‘.Alet did Schaefer
uaj hasizo during this debate tc sh.v he- dan; ere us Berkatit ires?

.. First cf all, I of rood in . rir.clplo with idr. Schaofor that the
ra-in dajvvcr cf Berk'tit was that it ccncoals the unpleasant salty
bitter taste of sea-water and lee's the p'crs ns in distress at see to


drink it, :ut by tho failure tc change the salt content, tho effects


ere the sc:o. as th t if untreated water, and that was what Schaufer
eephasizo..

1 .. n if t.o <-o into the physiclcgical considerations, he ,irc-
-tly addod th t that would incx-er.so the thirst -«nd the desire tc


•rink, end acre end cere hanaful so.a-4»r.tor would be drunk?

.. Y es, I bolievo I srl-l the ariac thine yestordny afternoon.


B07h


23 -by 47 !r~ M-l-y (v:n Scnon)

C-urt No. 1

Q. In yjur cxrviin ti r. s- for you rrvc said that Christenson
ir. th- first cliscussi-ns prohibited interference in his job; you also
s id s thing -bout a quarrel with a Luftwaffe Officer narx-d
Jevi rck at the oeetirg of 19 May. Hon, I ask you whether you ivc-nbcr
another quarrel which Schaefer told you about?

«. I believe it Has between the two .aoetings .f the 2Cth and the
25th that Schaefer told a- that Lir. Schicklur, the Referent of
Oo-rstirgoniour Christ-ns-a, acid th“t h- could expect to bo prosecuted
f-r sabotage if ho continued to oppose Berkatit,

Q. Is it true that ,n 19 May 't this oie-ting Christensen gave

♦

orders at Alt what the Luftwaffe worv to do rood say at the neetirg
-n the 20th?

a. I kn.w what y u ae-n. Christeno-n said, asked, or demanded
thr.t the differences nit bin the Luftwaffe should bu put in the
b-ckgrjurd on the rxxt day and those differonces sh uld. n-t be
expressed befer- th- Navy non.

And did you or Schaefer -t th- ’.tooting ;n th- 20th act on
this r«qu«.3t of Chrisensen, >r wore there quarrels in spite of it?

a. I express- ay point of view on the 20th, Just as'i had on
the 19th. Thoro ware, f c-urse, debates. 'fho consequence was that
Derk-.tit was not introduced as the Technical Office had ordered, but
that the decision ms nado to iipond on no; oxperia»jnts.

Q. Can x.o say that th-s- quarrols Her- violent?

A. At loast the ones _n the 19th twjro very violent, yes.

Q. 3ut I am asking -b-ut the nos ;r. the 20th?

a. They wore perfectly clear, anyhow.

... Now, the discussion n 25th May you said was carried out
uring an -ir raid?

A. As.

Yxi said that it wa3 cxitinued in the air-raid sh-ltor?

a. T-s, an ir-rcII shelter f the Helical Acad-ay to which -ho
a starch institute ‘xlorved ~nd in on- r . a f which the discussion
••as ; ( king place.


8075


23 J&y A7 -r^l£r-2-S,v.- Malay (v.n Sch-a)

C:urt h>. 1

.. You '.loo said that pert of the participants were soperatod
b-cause of circaeswir.co?

«. Yos, I roscajor that -/try clearly.

Q. 1= it .ossicle, or do you know, whether the Defendant
Soha.for rwnr.L-.tu with the gr up which prircrily continued the discussion
r whether ho was with one of the groups which was so parr tod free
the .win participants in the discussion?

A. Ho was certainly n-t in the seas group as I was, which
La eluded ny dopart.cx.nt chief and Professor EppLngor end Professor
Htubrv-r.

Q. Y.u saitl that in th, discuss! ns on 19th 20th Uay no condition
f r the ex-xrlsxr.ta wor.- s-ttled?

A. Yus, I said that.

Then it is no doubt correct that no experiment or sorios of
experiaants to test ofatlt was decided upon tore?

A. Yes, th t is c.rrect, an'. 1 aay add that that was unnecessary,
h/caus- r.> one ever doubted the effectiveness >f Viofotit, n>t ovv.n tho
representatives of the Technical Office.

Q. If Later a sorios of experiments with .. fat it was introduced
without Schrofcr's kr.owlodgo, what was the purpose -f this series f
.xperlnunts?

.v. I explained th~t this norning. F.r reas-ns f ooperLoontir^
a s.-called control gr up ha, to bu c cducted which was given
n xai 1 drinking wator. This couli* havu b eon 'bt-inod fr a any water
tap, but since this wepwrioent was being carried ut '.’ofatlt was
included and tho nra -1 water was 'rxlucod by xvaoving the salt
fr a sea inter erLth ofetit.

Q. Can you recall whwthor the- inclusion .f this i./fatit series
ws decided upon or at least discussed on 25 May?

A. There was no great -mount >f discussion about it, certainly,
because it was n>t r. questi n of testing Wofatit.

‘k. On 25 U«~.y y_u w«re with Schaefer at least part of tbs

ti-6?

8076


23 - Y 47 -A~l6-3-*p- U=1 7 (vac Schon)

C.urt Ut* 1


A. On 25 K-7, yes.

H-w Ling was it until you sew hin -g*in after that?

.v. A few necks later, perhaps five we..ks.

Q. At least yiudi^'t a* hin daily 3 brief intervals?

*• Ho, I was narsnlly 50 kilometers south f Berlin; Schaefer
ha-: his laboratory in Telt®, I believe, in a different direction fron
Berlin, and anyone who kn-ws coitions in Berlin in the suanor of
19V. knows hoi? difficult it was t- get around.

If you say you didn't »jw hin, do yxi noan y u didn't talk to
hin either by tele phorv., f.r instaraoo?

... I don't rocall - ny c-nvorstti n after the 25th.

'*• ’..hen y ai saw oin again after about a month, can yu rcncabor
that ho asked you what had been dan. in this natter?

... I saw Schr.ufor for the first tine after the 25th whon
Hirnlcr's 'eciaian h-al n t yet beer, received. I n-nenbor that.

And what did y-u toll hin ir. answer to his question?

a. I told hie nothing had buon decided yet.

Did y u ary y u ha 1 heard nothing non. about tho natter, it
sou=a to bo dwindling away to nothing?

a. If Schaefer rv^r-bers those words it is possible. I don't
r-'ojabor that it tho nroent.

Q. n*r. when did y.u soc -r talk to Schaefer again after tils
c.nvorsotior. ?

a. As far as I can recall, it was in th. flak tower at tho
; > which I aonticnod this morning.

d. .ok’ whon uas that?

a. That was the middls or end _f September 19U, after the
«:>crincnts were cao late

Q. Dr. Bcckor-Froyseng, y u kn w the 1 cuaents which tho
• : r socuti n has subnit ted ir. S cicK-nt 3:ok 5 -gainst y.u rnd Schaefer;
r. u tell n-. which 1 .cua-.nts Schaefer w.uld have obtained knowledge
* - :r ^ugh fficial channels r whether he would hr.ve seen any of

-currents n.r.-*.ily, for instance the nir.utes signed by Christenson


£077


23 li-jr L7 -..-16-4- kp- Sfcl.y (v r. Schon)
c urt 1

• * •.* 1

^ *

'r.-d the letter which Schr.edcr a* y« s-na to Hinraler; y_u know k m
business was caoductod, n* y .u kr.-w Schaefer’s poaiti n.

A. I ccnn-t imagine Setaofor having known f ny of those
docuasmts.

DR. P3LCX5*NK: Ibank you.

DR. FRITZ: Fritz, for Rose.

BY DR. FRITZ: In - .ciivnt Bo_k 3, • it ness, f the Prosecuti.n, there
is an affidavit jf yours, KO 448. In paragraph 5, which is on pago 7
of the D cux-r.t Book, you cr.y aawig other things: "Profess r Rose nca
perhaps the most significant factor in the hygienic service >f the
Luftwcffo," rro those y.ur own wores, -r was that formuLation ut
into y Air aouth by tho interrogator?

». In ny -'irect uxanimtion I have already acid that the
affichvit was put to u in the English language f.r signature; so far
as I c'n reoonber today I think that tho :nly w*rd in that ser.tunco
that rigirv.to fr a ne is th, word "perhaps" .

Q. H never, ' itn-ss, yxi signed this vorai n; would y u -lo“se
express this more -rociaoly to tho Tribunal; did y u wish that to no an
that Pr feasor Race tad tho a: at to say in tills fluid, in ithor words,
that he had tho g rentest powor to issuo orders, r just what did, you
rxan to aay?

/». H , I did not intend it to be so inter pro tod, buccueo thero
is n-thing in this sentence that indicates anything of this sort. I
thought I could h-vu signed this sentence having intr duood the won 1
"pertaps" int; it, because-, urely scientific"lly speaking, I emoidtr
him - highly ounlifiod bncteriol gist and hygienist.

Q. Then a t least you did not want t say in this Sentence that
he had -x.cutiv- poirors, or that proposals if h- made thorn ncr_ binding
f r tta persons without executive p *or?

... First f all there i3 nothing to that effect in this sentence,
"n d 'Ctually s a -cobor A the office of the Chief f the Medical
Inspector*te I knew very well that the surge-sti ns cede by the


23 *-y -.7 ---16-5- :o- '-l y Orw.)

C-urt Ko. 1


consultant wore in m way binding :n or dop-'rta^r.tal chief, :r in us
Q. ’iiw f cnothor sr.ttcr; y-u testified that thu research ~s-
sigments Treat ho nutu-n if 19W. on wore r..t worked or. in yjur
Eofornt, hut in the Department of Science *n3 Research are! tho
Military Ucdi& 1 .'.esdeny?

... Porhepe I any correct y-u right away. Thoynoru taken care
of by the training or lecture gr.*ip of thr.t ansb r. cnc’eny.


23 Kay 47-A-SW-17-l-*cehai:(3rcvn)

Court Eo. 1

Q» ' ell, eftor thisorgan! ration changed, vfco vorlced on these assign¬
ment e? This is of particular interestin Professor Soee's *sc, beeeuse he
«s one of the consulting specialists; O you know whether he concerned
hi'-self with these r escerch essisngr.ents.

A. “et no printout to you Dr. hens irich Hal hack's affidavit ,
w kich ves put in yesterdcy as a Seeker-<Freys eng exhibit, the nuaber
cf vhiefc I dc not reaenter, in vhltf.he says that he took over the
future work of these assignments in the lecturcgroup at the afore-
aentionsd /cadeny.

Ho further Questions.

BY US. SSLDSUBZHi (Counsel for 9r. Selglboock)

•, My deer Dr. Becker-Jreyseng, froa your testimony I have observed
that you have studied the rt-oseeutl r. documents very carefully; does
anything occur to you vhen you consider Dr. 3eigl v .ceck'n croftseionnl
title?

Kiocrofessioiuil title7

y. Yes, that is vhat I a. an. Ho is not celled a University Trofosoor
or an Oborarrt, but vhat vasho called?

A. You aeen his title "consulting physician"?

Yes, that is vhet'I aoen; v:s he or.c?

a. Ho, he vos not.

\ *id you ev>-r seehia at a conference or meeting of consulting
physicians?

I only ttended ono 6uchconference, tho ono in May of 1544 at
Kohenlycbec.

Q. *0 you kr.ov whether Dr. Beiglboeck ever attended such-a confer¬
ence?

a. I noT-.r brnrd anything to that effect, at any rate I did not sec
•‘-in in 1944.


'-hrt was -^r. ^eiglboeck's rack?
A. Sank?

•v -'r.zkl


8080


25 «ay 47-A-SV-17-2-Keekan(Brcwn)
Court So. 1


A. At the beginning if June, when ve first sew bin, he wee an
Obercrzt and I Relieve later he becase a Stahsartt.

W. Sow, let us turn to the experiments; did Dr. Beiglbocck attend
any of the conferences that ere mentioned in document hook 5?

A. SO,

■% ~id he participate in tho setting of the 25th cf hay in particular?

A. So.

Sov, another Question; you seid that the experiments wore to he
supervised by a specialist, neaely ‘V. Epplnger; do you know whether
Dr. Epplnger really carried out this sut> rvision, whothor he was In
Dachau or not?

A, I believe I can recesbor tr certain taht Tr. Bclglboock,
after he returned from the oxoerisent* when they wure over at
Travisio .said th/t Dr. Zip! Eger had been in Dachau.

Sov coac to the oxp.risonte thcssclvcs; you roceivei tho
asoignsent to have those oxoorisonts carried out?

A, Yoc.

Dr. Bolglboeck wr.s at thr.t tise in Italy; what did you do to got
tho exoerimonts started; did you tolsohono to Italy to get hla; did
you vrito to his or telegraph to his; what did you do?

a. If I es to explain that to you in detail, I oust say the follow¬
ings I dlctatcl a short aosorenlus throught our Pirsonnol Cfficor in
tho offico —

r <. So, I don't vent to slow up the proceedings; how was Bclglboock
infers; d?

A. Ho received a written communication from the Cffico oftdu Chief
cf tho Medical Inspectorate, stating that he should report to the

A

Office as soon es possible.

Q. The cure-se for which he had to report was not told to bin; is
that right?

a. -o, it vis not.

’. ®cv he r ported to you. sou seid this morning that noithor


SCSI


23 ry 4-i-S , J-i7-3-Hcckah(Brovc)
Ccufc So. 1.


officially nor unofficially br.d you previously known Dr. Beiglhoock;

thus Seigltceck did cot know what your political opinions were;

you could have teen an informer, he had to te careful ; is that not so?

A. Cf course.

V Nevertheless, when you explained those experiments to hin. he
cold, "I don't vent to 50 to Dachau to carry out experiments there?"

A, Yes, I seid that this morning in my direct examination,

0 . ®hen you seid this merning that he proposed that the experiments
should not lb carried out in "nchou :ut elsewhere?

A. Yes, .1 did.

And you refused that?

A, You ere exaggerating =y authority, Dr, Stcir. v *uer.

Q* No, I aa not doing that. I Just wanted to ascortrln that for
another rer.son.

rt . ior personal rcroons he vented the locrtion to lb changed. X
told Boigltoeck that I would glidly agree, tut I wrs sure ho would not
to successful, end I mont lined such and such a ronson.

Q• 2r. Bockcr-ircyscng, don't Qisundcrstrnd no, I don't want to
incriminate you in ary w„y, tut wont to tring out the truth here.

I simply soy that for one reason or another you refused the proposal
thrt Boigltceck made that the experiments to trnnefornd clsowhero?

A. Yoo, that is 60 .

Q» - ; 5v lot me ask you e supplemental oue tion to this; did he not
akc another oroposol to you?

A, Yes, he mode mother proposal, which unfortunately cent to
nothing, told me thrt teforc he had tccone the director of the

Internal Department of the Luftwaffe hospital at. Trc/lsitr had had teen

S

the same in Brunswick, and since the hospital in Brunswick had vory
goci laboratories, it should be possible to carry out tho experiments
there.

v '*;ry good. Now, let =t remind you of something else; did not Dr.

*“ --.:lbccck make oven another proposal; did he not spy , " Deferent, I


23 -*jr 47-^-3¥-l7-4-Keehnn(Brown)
Court lie. 1


have still eaother suggestion to -aike?" Sow you Just reflect on this—
—Beybe I'cen help you a little. Did he not say to you, "I an expend¬
ing the hospital et Trevisio and I have an assistant there vfco could
very v 0 ll carry out the sea veter experiaents there?* hasn't that so?

A. Tea, he suggested that his representative in !Travislo should
carry out the experinents there alsc.

^ AT.i did ycu not say, Dr. 3eckcr-?reyecng, "Unfortunately.^-Tr.
3oiglboeck, that von't work because Eiaaler is ir. the wuy7"
n. I told fcia that the proposal did not originate vlth us; it had
already teen decicded that Seigltoeck should be usod and this had
already teen reverted to Elrvrlor.

Ci. Siw, in naaing Eiraler you ueent to say that the proposal vaa
lOpOHiitlO.

^ I mated to toy that froa a rllitary point of view the whole
situation w» s cettlcl and thwro vrs no purpose In trying to .take n
lot of changes tecauso It *ac too late.

<<• Bow, v-o won't talk about the experlnonts thor.solvoo as vo
have already gone into then a.t great length. Sow, Bolglbocck and
Bccker-Frtyaeng ncet; did ho tell you anything etout vha.t things
voro like In the concentration caar; what contrcts ho hud th rc; vhnt
the S3 vrs liko, etc.7

He told ne two things that rather surprised nc. Birrt , I had
trld Bclglboock that ho veuld probably find a very '-ell oauippod
laboratory there. I did not know nuch about it in detail, but it vns
the g^norcl belief that the S3 coui-acnt vrs good. Vr.cn 3oiglboock
returned, ho told ac that ell he had had vrs en e-nty rooa there and
ell the ecuicaent, retorts, and vhat not that he needed for tho

ft

exaeriaent, he hed to provide for hir.sslf,

Tho sesnd thing that surprised ae cor-c-rncd is relationship to his
colleagues who w.ro present i nd *:o were SS offierrs . This roletionshio
v; 3 so coor that reiglbocck ves obliged to eat not in the SS officer's
-csshnll, but outside the caap soacvh'.re in the town of Dachau.


8083


23 'ay *7- A-3V-17-5-ti e ehen ( Brown)

Court Sc. 1

Sew, after the cxncrirents ve.e concluded, didn't veu toll
Belglboeck that you would help bin tc get e Jot. a* a consultant rni
he refused to accent that?

A, Pr. Wilheln •-•eister, one of the Slovakian rcEi6tcr.cc aoveaent
aen, was nurdered and thus his position ws free,. I asked Besglboeck
whethor he wuld like ae tc apeak to ay depart cent chief end nek
for the position for hin, since It was open. Beiglboeck refused that
because ho preferred to reaain es the internal director In his
hospltalj

u o further auettlon.

TrE PHEJILASTs If there ere no further questions by the defense
counsel, the frocecutlcn nay crcss-exnaino the witness.


22 'ay-A~G 2 S- 18 - 1 -Ck (Ir.t. Brw.)

C urt " . 1.


CHCSS EX-dTtt.TION

81 -'3. E..FDxi

Q. May it plcaso the Tribunal, Dr. 3cckcr Freys eng ir. th c urse
f v tr direct oxnninati* n y u statod ir. regard t y ur ; cvsiti -r. in so
far so the experiments or. hunan beings aro c neorned thit y u held
throo joints and act forth throo ; -ints which mat bo fulfilled pri r
t oxporinentati n n huacn boings. ..a I understand it, point . 1
w>s that the exporirwnt rust bo nucossory, that is, thoro is no rthor
e luti-nj point It.. 2 , tho oxj-cricont rust also h-.\v boon woll jro-
perod and nil research along t'-eso lines thr ugh onion 1 oxporisiontoti-'n
has boon oxhnuetod, and y u had for hoys -..del oxyorinonta and ex; ori¬
ents n tho physician hlnaclf; or.d, Vr. 3, u statod medical oeti ns.

" uld y u kindly ex; Lain t nc just wbnt y u cennt by \ int Ho. 3?

... I think ny ;■■•int I! . 3 ns that tho jeporinonts ah.uld be
carried ut in strict acc rdonee with regular nodical pr ccduro.

i. D.os the olucunt f c naent or the v- luntary nature f tho
aubject c ru. into ploy?

... It d es c no ir.t • lay ' nd lot ro_- p< int ut t ■ •• u th 1 1 when
rr/ c unael asked no this quest! n he explicitly said that in ny nnawor
I sh uld ljnvo tho quest!-n • f tho t luntory c nsont f oxjorinontril
subjects oIt-father ut -f rr/ onsw-ir, rnd, thtfrof ro, I did r. t sny
anything at that tino regarding tho v lunt-ry nature f tho subjeota.

I^tir, h wuvor, I did g int-' the quoeti n f thoir e r.sont and said
that I w.s c nvincod th-.t prisoners c uld o Is b usod as v luntary
subj ots.

Q. Toll thon if I undorwtnnd y-u ocrroetly the othico! c nditi. no
under which y u w-ulii ' ct w. uld bci 1 , tint tho oxrorinont must be
necessary, that there is n - tfcar soluti'-n; Ho. 2, that it was woll

V *

j ruperod thr ugh nniml oxyorinontati r., a dol experiments, and salf-
xporinents; and H . 3, that it was under the ; -called nodical act!'n
roi-.*; and lb . 4, the subjects mst be v lunteors?

Th sc ar th c editi r.s under which I c nsidcr the xperi-

I

" ntati r. justified.


8085


23 !£fty---G£S-18-2-CT k (3r to)
C r urt S- . i.


Q. do yyj fool nay vrluntoor fr cx:orincnts?

A. .^ny-:no in full possess! t. <.f his senses.

Q. TToll, dr yu think s.newhat cl^ng the sere linos as ?r fess r
B SC, that rorhera r.ly oodicel atudonta r physicians shoild v luntcop

f r oxperinentati n?

A. N , it scons t pso that any r.ontnlly n«*rnal pers n wh can be
t l 4 . what tha nature *f tho oxjcrirwnt is.

TTcll thon by that t ken it rust bo necos«ary f r tho physician
t warn the exj cpincntnl subj- ct nb ut tho hatnrds f tho ox; opinents,
is *hnt true?

“• I should like t- sny that it sh uld at least bo explained t*.

kin.

Q. Thon p-int So. f under Bockor Frey song :% . 1 la that tho
rhysioir.n sh 1 uld cdviac the oxporinontal sibjocts?

a. Lot =» i int ut that I had nlroa'v included this c mliti n
under point 3 of nv provi us principles rr i n answering quuati r.s put
no bv Judge Sobring.

Q. ~ol! nw th-«t it hsio y nr othical principles clearly in mind,

! v u foi l that o7< r* exportnont which y u instigated in tho post
f llorod those j rlnciplos, that ovorv experiment instigated by y u in
tho past f Hewed thcco jrinci;lrs?

a. Since I instigated nly no, ranoly, th sea mter oxporir.ont,

! an O' nvir.cod that whet was r» by rs Carres; nds t< tho principles
Z ,iu*t cot f rth.

'I. D y u fool th t any oxporirvntr 1 plan th^t did n t c r.; ly with
the othical principles wmll bo crirdnnl?

T u asked whether I believeany * th r x;orinont. 1 plan th: t
id n t nL-ot tho principle I sot f rth w uld bo crininal — is that
"hit y u asked?

*». That is what I asked, y s.

... That I can't say because I kn w n> thing f ny wn knowledge
f the lar.s f r the tb-r exj crie.r.ts.

'• Toll, * u think it w i id be un thic. 1?


23 ?a»y-A-G3S-18-3-C k (Br wri)

C urt y.-. 1.

Any cxioriaont which >2 id n t neat tha reguioti -ns os sot f rth
by - u hare -n this witn>ss stand?

A. I cant rnswor that questi n oith~r bacause t d s I sh el l
have t kr.'W nil f the o.ndjti r.s rni ! d n't hr. w the.--*

Dr. Beckor Freys ong, ,s I understand it, in 1941 y u -isaunttd
this : siti r. ns As cist*, at Roforont in the Ruforr.t f r Aviotl a Hudioino
in tho Hedies 1 Soj>ortnont f tho Chief f the lindical Service p «.f the
Luftvrr. ffo, is that a rraot?

... Tr. August 1941 I boerr.'. on ..ssistont R. fore at in the liofornt
f r .’.Tintii n liedicir.o in the Cfr'ico cf tho Chi f f the Modi'*-.!
Inspectorate, y s»

n , H w rvmy ..nsisvmt Daforonts ware there?

I sold y starrier,' th t nly n fc-.? f tb Roforots hod Assistant
Seforonts. I b-liavn thft thcro w ro jarh-.;o hw thor Ro fa rent a --
in thor Reforata, n t in th R-’forr.t f r ..vinti n a Kodioino -- which
hid assistant jtoforonts.

Q. That wns tho t ts 1 nur.bcr f ; orr nr.<il in t^o a foret f r
i.rinti r. Xodicinof

•*. I think I t 1<! v u th t y-ot rd-.y in s no C-'toiJ. Bosldoa Pr -
fees r ..nth ny am’ nyaolf th-ro w-6 o clerk r.nd s nutinos thvro was o

1 1-iirr t holi nr und tho ffioo, end I believe during Dr. ..nth ny»s
tine thorc was a ooc nd foa-lo hclj-or instead ef a s ldior.

<1. Thon there wore nover :r ro th-'n f ur yc-plu in tho Rofort t
f r ..virti n Hodioino.

... That is right.

Q. And nly tw h-J auth rity, th - t is th* Raforont and tho
..ssistont Roforcr.t.

... That is right.

> • ’

Q. Thorc wrs tho fficc f tho Roferat f r ..victi n lladicino

1 - CO tod?

Until August 19-13 it wr.s in n building f tho Ton^olh- f Alr-
no ar.d fr r. 1943 n it w-c ir. tho ir.rr oks can. f Snr 1 w near

2 sser., nb ut SC kill noturs fr — Berlin.


S0S7


23 1-C k .Int. Br ~ r.)

C art y-. 1.

~hcrc was the Office f the Chief f the "udicel Ins poet.'rate
f the L-.ftwaffo, nnr.oly. Ei;ykc, and l-.tcr Scfcr odor?

That was until 1942 in Berlin in tho sar.c building in the
■■v.jelh f ..irirnc, and fr n 1943 .'n it w.e els. in tho barracks canp
3- .1 w, nca r Z.sscn.

'«• Physically h vr far w ro the • fficos -f tho .loforont f r
.'.viati n Xodioiuo fr n th. Offioo f thv Chief f tho llcdicol Inspect r
a to f tho Luftwaffe?

“• In Berlin, HippkV’s ? fico w :s r. tho soc nd fl r and ur
ffice was n tho third fl r in tho sano jnrt ef the snra building,
end in tho barracks canp ot Sfiolrw the barracks in which tho vori.us
fficos woro wero perhaps fifty t citfity noters opart.

Q. .'oil n* in Kay 1544 y u boosts tho .tcforor.t ir. tho ftoforat
f r ;.vinti. n Jtodicino, is that c rroct?

«. Vos.

S during thetirw nt issue in this trial wo ht-‘ tw liofo rents
fr r. ..urust 1941 n ..nth ny «r.s tho Soforant in tho Itofornt f. r
Aviatim "adlcir.o up until J'sy 1944, end nftur that tiro y.u bocano
Soforont?

... Vis, tho change t k 1 lnco nb ut tbj IS Hay 1944.

Q. “.'ore the duties f the Itoferont in the .toforot f r .‘.viati n
'’odicino lir.itod t nor«ly tho ;hcr of a viati n radio in 3

... I believe I already described that it grout length. I'y rani
duties sow United t tho field fevirti n r..-dlcino.

Did y u have art;/ thcr fields in which y u w ro active?

A. Vestorday I said that fr n July n f 1944, that is, I wfs
-Is radical 3c fo rent with tho research I/jo dor ship. f tho ..ir !'inistry,
'“ J until tho boginning f 1914 I carried r. research *>f ny vm in
!’odical Research Institute. I casn t row 11 -.tny -thor dutios ot
*-ho r. nont.


3C33


23 *--7 -7-.-TD-i9-1-Orcs5 (Ir.C. Broun)

Court So. 1


3 ./oil new bL 1 n*t, as a sitter of fact, all assiiznssts pass
threu- h y:ur cffico when you wero Roferont to Schroodor — ail
research assignments?

A I ’.oscribod that at -tc t 1 anyth. I sal.’ that the Reforat for
..viation "o'icino, aside freo-its 95? aviation assi -naonts, also '1 ‘
purely foraal work for the rest of tho rasearch assi naonts, oven if not
aviation nodical assi rrents cr in other fields.

Q V all, than could it bo construed that tho offico you hold was
r-.oro r loss a cloarir. h:uso far all rosoarch assi iriants?

A C.ul you perhaps ox. lain what you :wan by tho expression
cloarir. h:uso?

Q \Vr>t no3t of thoso assi rxionts had tc havo allocations, various
:r.torials, had to rocolvo subsi.’ios, aonoy, havo ro ulations to bo
ftbidod by. IJow, wasyour offico t’.» offico rhoroir. thoso riattors v;oro
taken caro of for all rosoarch assi nar.ts ef tha Luftv.r.ffo?

A I had thought that I had Uscussoi this so oxhaustivoly
alroa 'y that I would not havo to ;x> intj it ayain. Hewovor, ———

1 TV, Bockor-Preysen;, before you continuo I want to toll you
that ny reason for askin y u this is that perhaps in your Iroct
examination you './ore t o elaborate, so jlabora to that it bo car. a very
oonfusin^ to r.j and I ou trj to straighten xysolf out now. So, if
y u .dll bo brief and. nnswor ;y questions briefly perhaps I can un lur-
3van* you noro cloarly.

A I shall bo only too happy to try to.

A In our offico there wore always rou hly ono hun 'rad currant
assi rr.ents at one tiro, 95 of thee* C-ncorr.ir. thj field of .aviation
-j 'idno. Thoso .as3i n. or.Vs -..-ora taken caro f by =y Rofcrat formally,
far as their contorts w.;ro concorOo *. I t:ck caro of tho formal an!
r nizutional aspects of t:*j other 5 assi-pnants of this .auiv’r j You
• itione' fur ls necessary. Perhaps I shoul ’ toll you that —

ill - .t . t!rt later, Deter, when air.- into chat point,
in bri f, all rcsoarc assi nr^nts rale by vho Left.-affo cane


80S 9


23 Ifcy U7->W.Ti>-I^C-C-roS3 (Inc. ~rr.m)
Court Ifo. 1


thrnr h tho cffico of R- c!: „n-?r cysor.';, trrospectivo of whether or net
they !oalt with aviation o leine?

Yos, after I bacano Roforont in 19Ui they all want through ny
Roforat, that is ri/'ht.

1 Thank jru. Doctor. 2fow, durin; tha course of Anthony*s tom as
Roforont, if I understand you correctly, ha 'i ' not havo tho authority
to is3ua oriorsj is thrt corroct?

A That is sc. Jfc Roforont ha! tha ri' ht to issuo or:lors.

Q 'loll now, -I ', you havo tho authority to issuo ardors vrhon you
baca.'o Roforont?

A Ik noro than any other Roforont. !Jono ->f tho Roforonts ha l tho
authority to issuo triors.

Q ’ oil, now, suppooo y-ai woro intorustoin sono particular
r os oar eh and in or'.or t. initinto a propra=» y-m raust tavo cr ’ars so
that you caul*, hr.vo Hr- or. or any one of your consultants at vari >us
universities who v.-orko:’. on a particular problcn comonco thoir work,

■,;h-> would issuo that erdor?

A Roso-arch assijnnonts woro iosuod only by tho Chiof of tho
deal Inspootorato hi-aolf personally an’ si nod by hin, boforo tho
first f January 19Ui by Hippko, after that by Professor Schrodlor.

Q Thon, in brief a pain, a Roforont ha', no authority whatsoovor
to issuo or.tors, is that corroot?

A That*s ri ht.

q JJw, you havo statod horo in 'iroct axaiination that 'urin-
Ar.thonyts torn 03 Roforont in tho Roforat fer .iviation ‘lo.'icir.o you
••foro rarely an assistant Roforont, that you woro not a ’.oputyj i3 that
corroct?

A That is correct.

"J Thor, you ha * no authority t: issuo instructions to tho or-ply-im
in Anthony*3 abs or.ee, is that corroct?

A !*ay I ask what aaployoes you aro talkir.7 about?

; "oil, the other tr.ro onployces ir. y-ur cffico?


8090


1


23 :tr.* h7--.-..~-*19-3-Orcss (Ir.t. Brorr.)

roixpfc a>. i

"'ell* of course, I coul 'ictnta a letter to then or smothinr
like that.

Q Suppose Anthory Treat on an oxter, led trip, how coul’. you carry
or. tho business of the office, would you lock tho door of too office
then an t take a vacation?

A !f“, above no was ry dapartaer.tal chief who was conpotont for
:.y dopartnont and irho pavo no iy as si gnats. I had ry own reon to
rhich tho topartoontcl chiof sent :a tho - cuner.ts I was to work on.
dut ..nth ny*3 room was really 1 ckod up, that is so.

Q "as the ’.opart-cntal chiof an export in tho field of aviation
no icino?

A !&• two lopcrtcontal chiefs coul be considered specialists in
the fiold of aviation nodicino, boonuso tho first was Genoralarzt Dr.
dartius, :ho had rovicuoly boon tho iroctin Victor of tho Goman
..viation Sport Association, and consequently ho know about aviation.

An! tho aocon’. ono was Oburstarxt Dr. "art, who was hinsolf a ~on J
pil t aw! know a good deal moro about flyin tta f ,for oxanplo.

Q Assur.o for tho noaent that Anthony was on a trip an’ an -
important prablai cono up in the fiol l of Aviation Idodicino v,heroin
it was nocossary for or:loro to bo issue ’. To when woul .* you turn?

A It is very oasy to answer that question. Such a problcca vr'*ul
•0.70 ccno t< tho offico in rrritin in the n rr.al c urso of ovonts, at
- -ast lot us assun j so. Thor. thi3 report or this inquiry, boforo it
reached tho Roforat, woul l havo boon soon by tho flopartaont chiof. Than
tho dspartnor.t chiof nul * olthor have reacha l a loci si or. ircao ’lately
\L:salf or ho would havo -asked :.a to find certain ‘ccunents for hin on
thi basis of latch ho coul’. r.ako his locision. Or, if this arr.s a field
hich the lopartncr.t chiof know was within the special fiol' of Anthony's
rdc, then tho ’o. artaant chief — ar.' this ft in In.-pono ’ whan «ntheny
• '•* or. trips would havo ordared that efforts bo r.a do to reach Anthony by
t 1 pho&: an • to put tho prettier. to hin. These arc tho nair. possibilities.


23 I-fey U7-i-nTI>-i9-ii-Gross (Inti 3rcn.r.)

Owt ffc- 1

Q Bairc hypothetical a. air. for a accent, assuno that Anthony
"oci dad that it was nocossary to initiate research in the fidd of hirh
.altitude, or roscuo fron hi^h altitude an’ he wantod to cc mission
3onzinr;er in his institute at Rechlin, or Ruff in his institute at
.. larshof, or 'oltz in hi3 instituto at :*unich, to conduot rosoarch alon,-
tliosa linos, who wcul ’ initiato the research or ’.or? Anthory?

A Un.’ar no circuits tancos.

Q !tow, lector, .to y'u havo Dccunont B'ok No. 12 in front af you?
That’s docurtont No. I*>-306 in the typhus experiments Docunont Book, on
pa.-o -

A I sorely havo a f an /ocumnts fron that ttocunont Book.

Q This is pc;;o 7U of tho Sn lish, lour Sonor. It*s locunont
!D-3C6 that you 'locus sod y os ter toy. Dr. Pockor-Froyson , whoroin you
pointed tc tho last sontonco in tho lottcr. This is a lottor fron Rose
to Hao/ on.

A I havo that locu: ant hora.

Q Y;u pointod to tho last sontonco in this lottor, which stitos
cs follows: "It will take oono tL-n until 2-F pro due os its now rosoarch
or 'or, as Anthory is on a duty trip for sovaral rooks." An l you in ti-
catod t; the Tribunal that this sontonco substantia tod y ur position
that ycu woro unablo to act in ..nthony’s abs-jneo and that you woro n"t
by this tokon his loputy. Ifcw, isn’t it apparont fron this sentonco that
Anthony had the authority to issuo a rosoarch or lor?

A Ho, that is not apparont at all.

q It certainly is, lector. Road it.

A Th- sontonco roar’s aonowhat ’iffarontly ir. t’lo ori inal than
fr—. what I Just hoard over the earphones. Tho translation says: "Its
now research as si araonts”. H~ovor, in tho copy I havo haro it sryh
‘Until 2-F can pro >ico tho nsr rosoarch ardor."

in. RIRDY: I won*t quibblo with y:u about tho translation, bocauso
all lay yesterday tho translators translated tho word rosoarch order,
huther it b> rosoarch assi nr-ant r research or dor, that is immaterial.


8092


23 "‘7 17---..73-19—5-Gross (Ir.t. 3rem)
Co ur t l$c« 1


Tho assl joent or or’or irri.tir.tod tr on Anthony, accor±Lnr tc Hose* Now

I want 70 U to boar in nin.l that if you attest tc state P.oso i in't

know the inr.or workings of your office, then ycu roust also boor in rrinl

that refutes your or^uzaont that ycu wero not a 'eputy to Anthony, if

?.cso .idn*t know what was oin: on in y.ur offico. Isn't it true hero

frea this sontoac a, fTcn'roa in; this sor.tenco, that Anthony ha ! tho
authority tc issuo a rosoarch assignment or or !or?


8093


t-


25 Key
Court :


'Is*., Brcvs;


A Chat is not to b< seen in this sentence at all. Hew, let n«. say
remrding the translation, tha* it is not a question of the translation
"research order" or "research essignnent", hut what you r.ad sc before
vos read to =c that "it would he quite a while before 2 -I gave cut
its rcsoarch asclgnsent", hut here it says "until 2-1 produces the new
research ordor".

* That's right. Just what I spld, "producos its new rosonrch
order". I'll ash the interpreters kindly to turn to Docuaent Book rl2,
rhe Gorsan edition thoreof, and re-*d the last sentence as it ic in the
dccuncnt hook which will he an oxa.ct cuotation of what I have Just rend
!r. the English.

Interpreter reads sentence in C-ernan.

A That's Just what I read, end it doesn't correspond exactly to
what I heard fros the interpreters before.

Si Jfcv, this states that “it -ill take 2 -T soac tiae to produce Its
r.tv research ordor", 2-T heir th* Bofornt for Avlntion Modlclnc, a.nd tho
chief thereof w«# enc Anthony. Sow, how could Anthony produco a ro-
:oarch order? Ee d'.dn't hove that authority.

A Tvert is nothin/- here to tho offcct that Anthony win issue thio
riooarch ordor, hut only that it will take soae tl-« before the or-'er
is '.cosed, because so long as Anthony is r^ny the order can't be worked
Mid, consequently, cannot he put tc tho departmental chief, or th*

>.itf ' the Medical Inspectorate, for sirnnturo.

^ “hon it is true that all research orderr initiate frea the
Scftrcnt'r office ar.d that the signature of Schrocdcr was aerely a. fera¬
'll*-”, ie that true? Or did "chrotdcr knew the contents cf each t nd
research 'rdcr?

A I* had to he shewn to bin hy tho derprtaent chief, e-nd I can re.v
"‘■"ir., ir. thin connection, *his particular research eeoign-ent surely
'l 1 r.<- * initiate fres the Kefcrat fer Aviation Medicine, hut certainly
- the “eftrat fer Hvri«no, '•hieh wag interested in such vaccine
’■' tz. The i *nnont vent through the Beferat for Aviat ion Medicine

ir, through Anthony 1 c office only so that tho fornal end


8094


23 Key -i7-^F.'C_2C-2-£*rrcv (fat 3 rcv -'

Co-rt I

orfr&lcatlonal aspects could of it and prepare it for the signature of
the department chief or the chief of the Medical Inspectoral. Both
the Heferat for Hygiene and the Heferat for Av.etion Medicine was 0 u-
bordinate to the sr=c department chief, so that if Anthony, or later I,
submitted a research assignment to hi= that really concerned th. Hygiene
3eferrt then, of course, the Hygiene Heferat had already orientod him
■lout the natter.

<i “her. that io aoet interesting to =o, Doctor. Then I can aosu-.o
that every research assignment issued in behalf of the Luftwaffe was
5caovn t0 Schrcodcr. *rery detail of it. Bocaueo he issued it. It was
ktfl order. Hotody olao 1 ©.

A Thp.t lo trae only after 1 January X 944 .

^ That is when ho tocaso chief. That is correct. After he bo-
c»=e Chief of the Medical Services of the Luftwaffe, Schroedcr was per-
tonally acquainted with each and every research order that emanated from
the Luftvaffo.

A After he sl/r.cd new research assignments, he knew that ouch an
tisignmcnt existed, of course, tut ho could not possibly have known the
'ct-ilo of such an assignment hicauco when ouch an assignment was given
*h-t was only the beginning of the research, at which iixo, ao vo know,

*be details arc not even known. Otherwise there would bo no need to issue
* research assignment.

Who knew the deteila?

A Only the scientist himself ~ho worked on the research assignment,
tTA kc 0Pl y tacv ?ftcr he had finished th, research.

* Whenever it bcca.no neccssary to issue a research order,did Fro-

Cr Sehrof<;cr sit down by himself and fi.-jrc cut what order should
‘t lesued? 0

*• Certainly net.

* He took the advice of the various Bcferats?

The vorioua Hcferets or consultants cr the commissioned spcciel-
•: r wh-cvcr it might be. That differed from case to cast-.


I


23 May 4?--wijC-2D-3-i:?*rrcv (tnt«,Brcvn)
Court -


^ Then, in cescnce, the particular research order would have been
draw uo >y the Eefc-rant for Schroedor's signature ? I? that what you're
trying to eer.vcy to me 7

A The research assignment, for exarplc, in the field of aviation
ne-'icine In 19^ was drawn up, dictated by =c after the scientist in
cucstlon had generally cade an application and had told bo exactly Why
ha wanted to receive a research assignment. T^is draft of a resoerch
assignment I then subaitted to =y depertaent chief. He cither aade
changes in it or approved it as it wr-s. Under scat circucstancts, he
turned it down lsncdiately. That scaetincs happened. Then wc had it
rewritten and it was put to the chief of staff, and if hi wns in
rgreonont with it then it went to the Chief of the Xcdicnl Inspectorate
for thi fine! decision.

H Perhaps I gained an incorrect iaprossicn froa the testineny of
Professor Schroeder hero beforo this Tribunal, Dr. Scckcr-Preyocng, I
have the lapression froa the testimony of Prefossor Schroodor that you
sore or less dealt with Professer Schroodor directly without going through
■ny interaedicrios. Ion't that the impression he created hero?

A I don't believe so. I believe that laprcosicn arose beemiso we
arc sitting next to each other in the dock hero without the representa¬
tives of the cfflees in between. Without first sneaking to the depart¬
ment chief end the chief of staff I could not go to Schrccdcr personally
or dlroctly,

^ Didn't Schroeder say that whenever any of thcoe research assign¬
ment problcas ease up he always turned that over to Pcckcr-Prcyocnr, on
pare 3616 cf the trenscript?

A It is quite possible that he said that, but I think if you had
asked him acre exactly Just how that was done he- would certainly have
?»'.d that if he, for oxasple, received a report that concerned an avic-
tion acdicrl research esslgnacnt, the report went first to the chief of
staff, who sent it to the depertaent chief, who sent it =e.


23 Mav -'7-A-J<C-20-A_£arr3w 'Int., Brcvtf)

Court I


^ Veil now, I think «£ have fairly well cleared up the scope of
vcvr authority »s a Heferant. Sew, I'd liko to know. Dr. Bcckcr-Frey-
senr, what authority you had over the various institutes of the Luft¬
waffe, such -3 the Institute at A'lershcf, the Institute at Munich, and
various other institutes?

A Ifcae at all.

^ But Professor Mcltz told ne, here on the witness stand, that his
subordination was to Lufterau VII _ that i3, the regional ereanization of
the Luftwaffe in Munich - for disciplinary measures, and to the Office of
Anthony for scientific resnons. Ebn't 'hrtj It .con. scep-h-t

otranf-e to =c that the chief of cne of your institutes felt for a nuabor
of yerro that hie suporior var Anthony, and later BecJcor-Treysinf, for
scientific purposes, and fer disciplinary purposes, the iAiftfua.

A Let =c reaind ycu that Dr. Melts said in answer to Dr. Tipp's
ruccticn that this toatisony roferred to the fact that scientifically, of
course, he vro subo-dl-ptc to the Chief of the Medical Inspect rate of
the Luftwaffe, and v-htr. he said that ho was subordinate to Anthony's
office he simply wanted, to express by so sayirv* that he know thnt avia¬
tion nodical natters vert handled in Anthony'o Pefornt.

V 4 Aro you trylnr to create the inprtssion, Doctor, that Professor
Melt, didn't knew ~hc he was working for, for five years of six years?

A I said explicitly that M c ltz said, in answer to Dr. Tipp'c
puestion ox-ctly what he ncant by that previous testlaony.

* -c'U let the Tribunal vei£h that.

Mero any other institutes subordinate to you, Dr. Bcckor-Breystry*?

A I Just said that no institutes were subordinate to mo. Ccncc-
cutntly, there were no ;AhPX inetitut03 that were subordinate to me.

s This i3 e ecod breokinc point, Your Hen or. I'm poinf tc another

subject.

THL FHi3I2L,"T: The Tribunal will now bo in recess until 9:30
o'clock Tuesday corning.

( A reccr-r wns taker, until 0930 hourc, 27 Hey 1947.)


8097


Court So. 1

27 Hey 47-K-4-l-REK-Gross (Staler)


Official Transcript of the American Military
Tribunal in the natter of the United Statee
of America against lari Brandt, et al,
defendants, sitting at Huernberg, Germany,
on 27 May 1947, 1015, Justice Beals presiding.

TZL MARSHAL: Persons in the eourtroce will please find their scatr.
She Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal I. Military Tribunal I
ie now in session. Ood save the United States of America and this hon¬
orable Tribunal. Thero will be order in the eourtroon.

TKB ??BS!Dl::T: Hr. Marshal, will you ascertain if the defendants
are all present in court.

TK£ MARSHAL: Kay it please Your Honor, all defendants arc prosent


in the courtroos.

TER PriSIDaST: The Secretary General will note for the record the
presence of all the dofendanto in court.

Couneel nay proceed.

MR. EARLY: May it ploaso the Tribunal, boforo I stert the continua¬
tion of cross examination I have one problem to take uo with the Tribunal.


Defense cour.tel for the defsndont Bocker-Frcyseng hao reouosted that tho
vltnoss Hr. Lugon Haagen be colled before this Tribunal. They have aleo
reeuested that the case of Beckor-xrcj-song, Schaefer, and Eoiglbcock be
cocplcted before Hr. Hcoger. is calledto tho stand as o witness In behalf
of Secker-xrcyseng in as ouch as they do not vent to interrupt the con¬


tinuity of tho ceo vatur evidence. Prosecution is in agreoence with that
and,if it coots the approval 6 i tho Tribunal, it is euggorted that the
case of 3cckor-7reyseng be cocploted, then tho cote of the dofendont
Schaofor, and tho defendant Beiglboeck, and then tho witness Eeogcn be


called bofoyx this Tribunal.


The Tribunal adopts the suggestion of counsel end


that procedure will^e followed.

HR. EARLY: you. Your Honor.


■ ; 3BC£iP.-7ciYS£SC - Resumed
CRTbS RXvIIKASIGS (Continued)


3Y HARLl'i -


Court So. 1

2? Kay 47-K—4-2-£EH-Gro*s (Hazier)


Q. Doctor, during the course of your direct examination I understood
you to say that when you assumed your duties as assistant Beferent in the
Heferat for Aviation Kedicine in 1941 that one of your major tasks
the rcnodoling of lov pressure chambers, in as much as low oresaure
chanters oxistant in Germany at that tine did not meet modern retire¬
ments. Is that correct7 .

A. Yes, that is correct.

Q- Can you kindly tell us whoa you engaged to manufacture a new
lov pressure chamber?

a. 2 never engaged anyone, but the building of tho new low
pressure chambers wae started by my departmental chief or by whoever
has signed that order. A firm was cntructod with that task, Zcuzen at
Frankfurt on the Xain.

Q, Kov many low pressure chambers did you order at that tine?

A. During my direct examination I explained that in 1941 wo wore
not concerned with ordering new low pressure chambers but with tho
modernization of those chembore which wore already available. I esti¬
mate that at that time wo had twenty to twenty-five chambers that had to
bo remodeled that woy. During tho coureo of the war wo hod another fow
chambers and at the end of tho war thero wero about thirty to thirty-
five chambers.

Q. Then did the manufacture or reconstruction of each chembcr take
place in this factory in Frankfurt?

A. Ho, the Frankfurt factory sent their engineers to the nlaco
where tho low pressure chembers were located, because they were firmly
built into the ground. They wore so-called immovable chembers and the
firm sent a number of non to whatever place the low pressure chamber
was located.

Q. -ere there any other manufacturers of lov pressure chambers
other than at the Frankfurt plant?

A. He.

I

Q. What I am driving at. Dr. 3eckor-Frcyseng, is that I recall


8099


Court So* 1

27 Hay 47-M-4-3-2EK-Grofts (rosier)


that vhoa Ruff needed spare partB for his low pressure chanter it scons
to sc that he sent his representative to Cologne to secure the spare
parts. Sow, vho in Cologne would produce or aanufacture spare parts for
low pressure chanters, or were such parts available in any hardware store,
for instance?

A. ?rce ay own knovlcdgo I cannot say with what spare parts wo
wore concerned. I on not inforaed about the particulars in this natter.

I do lenow, however, that the firn Leibold in Cologne manufactured cusps.

I assuno that when procuring scare parts from Cologne Dr. Ruff turned to
the firm Leibold. However, I know no particulars about that.

Q, Kow, as I understand it from other conversations with cooplo
at Hoidelberg, and during your testimony here, that you aro docidodly
an export in the flold of high altitude research, and I noticed that
you aro particularly familiar with tho construction of low oroosure
chanbors. Sow, could you tell so ^uot what particular couipcont might
go out of order in connection with mumps in a low croscuro chamber? ?or
instance, doos a pump have anything to do with tho barometer, oloctro-
cordiogrem, realising fully, doctor, that I as not familiar at all with
tho mechanics of a low pressure chambor and I am anxious to dotormino
.lust what might go out of order in connection with a pumo so that it
would have to bo replaced?

A. 'doll, I may repeat thet I don't know in dotail whet actually
vent out of order.

Q. 3aroueter? *OUld a broken barometer hove any connection with
pump eouipaont?

A. I can't determine any direct connection between those two

0

matters.

Q, ."hat is the purpose of the barometer on p low pressure chamber?

A. "he barometer serves to determine the exact altitude.

Q. Whet causes tho barometer to riso and fell?

A. Dh: rise and fall of the mercury is caused by the rise and fall
of tho pressure in the chamber.


c ait t ::o. i

2 ? KfQT 47-H-4—4-HEk-GrOB* (Haaler)


And what causes the rise cad fall of the oressure in the chun¬
ter?

A. Tho puape letting in the air or punping it out again.

Q. And then would it he oossible that the aenufacturer in Cologne
vfaerein Dr. Buff atteaoted to secure scare parts for his ounce — that
beroaeters for lo*- creesuro chanters could t«- obtained fron that sourco7

A. I wouldn't eesune that, because the flrn nanufr.cturing euoh
bwoneters was the fira ?uues in Berlin. I know of no fIra for brxo-
acters in Cologne.

Qc How, doctor, in a low pressure chanter can you tell us in tho
connection with the controls of a low pressure chanter Just hov far tho
various taroooters and othor dials nro froc ono nnothor. That is,
relatively hov far would tho clectrocardiograa to froa the control and
the baroacters? Can you rttvapt to doscrito to thie Tribunal Just what
tho picture is of tho cmiioaont which is on o low pressure chanter?


SI 01


27 Ifey^DJG-5-l-Kerrcw (Raomler)

Court 1

A I oist say the following in that connection. The instruction
cf the electrocardiograph k?.s a part of the lew pressure chamber. Hov;-
ever the electrocardiograph was used fer the lew pressure chamber, it
cculd be pieced at various parts, cither insido or outside the chwnbor.
Since I was not personally pr-scnt during those experiments, I ernnet
■civc ycu any description which would correspond to the truth. In other
words, hen. the various instruments -..ere placed in relation to one an¬
other.

Q Could you, fer instance. Dr. Beckcr-Freyseng, conduct an
exporin-nt rlonc? In cthvr words, if ycu wore conducting an experiment
and using the electrocardiogram, cculd ycu conduct the c.xporinont and
manipulate the controls without any assistance?

A 1 w.uld have to have one technical assistant or an engineer,
and I think that then 1 would be nblo tc perform n normal experiment.

•»t any rate, I did perform numerous cf such ex.-eriraents.

Q Havo ycu ever performed experiments in the course of y.ur work
in the field cf high altitude — that is, either prior tc tho end cf
the oar or at tho ..ere nodical Center in Heidelberg — and used tho
electrocardiograph?

A Yes. I think that was before the war. I may draw ycur atten¬
tion tc cno thing, however. Fren the description which Dr. Rc.Tfccrg
gave here, strut the way how tho clcctrcgra.ph he was using worked, it
became evident tc ae that this was a special model not us^d by us in
cur institute. This was an ir.struccnt where the cardiac output cculd
be observed through n tube.

9 Just what is the express -urpese, doctor — I want t: ;et y ur
’.efiniti-n cf the express : ur.-ese cf an cl cctrc cardie graph? *\hat dees
it tell us?

.. The purpose cf an electrocardiograph is tc register the- elect¬
rical currents ; reduced through the >crk of the heart.

D Can ycu tell f ren the study cf the electro car diegraph vhether
r net . crSxn in a lc*,; press-ore chamber, utt'ergpin.; an ex crir.ent,


27 ifejwtWJG-5-2-Karrc* (Reader)

Ccurt I


is ir. danger?

.. ub I alroady said before, I never performed any experiments,
whore we could observe danger for cur experimental subjects by ncano
of tho electrocardiograph. To used ether methods in order to orJee
that cbsorvaticn. *fter what I heard hero frea Dr. Rcoborg on tho wit-
ncss stand, I knew, or I can confirm, thrt by conns of the electrccnrdic-
CTftph cno is in 2 position to carry cut such cn exnalnation.

Q Tell, prior to the war — to the end of the war, prrdcn ae,
what w«s tho highest altitude that any cf ycur experinents had attained?
Did you'go up to 23,000 actors in ycur coqjcrincnts ever, prior to tho
end of the war?

•' I personally was engaged in ether esepexiaonts and cy highest
altitudo was only 15 kilometers.

Q Now, Doctor, those low pressure checkers, they wore under tho
control cf tho referent, is that correct, for eviction IJedicino?

A Yes, aftor thoy wore taken over by us.

Q Now, that was in 19U1? The lew pressure chasbors wore trken
ever hy ycur office; that is, tho office of .Atheny?

.. New, this is net exactly right. That was already earlier. Tho
lew pressuro chambers which had been taken ever by the Medical Inspect¬
orate, and that also hold true in peace, were handlod by the refornt
for Aviation Kcdicino.

3 Did you havo any further connection or authority over the alloo-
'.ticn cf the lew pressuro chamber after you had cnco assigned it to n
particular institute?

« Mo.

~ Then, in other words, when you assigned a lew prossurc chamber
tc, a ay, Ruff 1 3 Institute, tc Institute cltz, or to tho instittrie -t
r.ichlin, whor-. Benzingcr was the ccrranding officer, after the rasignaunt
then you hr.d nc farther ode with that lew pressure chamber? Ic that it?

.t No.

<' Suppose Dr. Ruff wanted to scr.d tho lew pressure chan’ er to
.-■echlin? 3enzic-er c-llod him on the tclcphcnc and said: "Dr. Ruff,


27 C-5-3-K arrow (RorSlcr)

Court I


I'd iik>- to use your lc. pressure ch&n'.cr for two r three *..ocka," Could
Dr. Huff transfer the lev pressure chrj± -r tc tho Institute at /.echlin
without superior criers?

.. That is scacthinc diffcicnt ejain. Tho institutes ruvl tho
cth.r smaller research stations hed their own lew pressure chral -rs
which v;ere finely installed. In Dr. Buffs ease vie nro concerned with
r v-ry special type of chamber, notorized .ccbil-. eh —-r. The Ger.um
Luftwaffe only bad four of such .labile note riled chambers. Dr, Ruff
explained here, in detail, thr.t the lev pressure ch/evbor which was at
his disposal fer sc.uo tine h.d been furnished t. hia on the ' *sis cf
& very special approval y th .cal Inspector : s r Hippke.

It wis n turclly furnished t; hin an:’, tc his institute or.’. hr he, fer
instance, wonted tc tr nspert this chrnbcr tc Dr. Bernin^er at ..-chlin
h~ Mould he.vc bod tc ask fer pernissien fer that frea Professor Hippke.

q ..nS, cf course, Trefesser Hippke would then consult with you
ir.-a:uch es ycu were his expert cn lev. pressure cheaburs?

.. Yes, ncrurlly that would have tc bo ossuacd,

T Vfcll, did h- consult vdth ycu when Ruff asked to transfer the
lev pressure chvjber to D-*chr.u?

.» He, he didn't do that,
q That's r-th-.r unusual, isn't it?

.. It wasn't unusual in that case bee-use this chrrv.cr lire! net
vet b.jj taken over by tho Medical Inspcctcra.to officially. Dr. ..uff
had e^lrine*', and I can only repeat it, th't t!iis cha.nl -r hr 1 ' een
sunt to the Gciucn Zxpurloentcl Institute fer ..vi-ti n fr;.. ih~ firn
Zeuz^n in order tc ’ c equipped there with their latest cqui. iwit,
such as breathing rnd cczxainic&ticu -.qui. ..-nt, rnd 1 -s th- c.vy-etcnt
r-ferent for these questions, tack ever this oh oibor the aft of July
-r lurin' tfc first dry s cf ..u exist, 19L2, in cell-bar tif n rith a
c p* in ‘ the ::-dic-l Corps, Dr. Jmst Kcllcrst nn, • h. ccaiivrvul this
i ct thTr h 'n -ffi- vit which _,r. Ruff has Ire ly su’. rdetod.


: 'Ml the:, if I undorst s.-X ycu correctly, Doctrr, * il<

ressure drearer 't Ruffs institute t Berlin-..dl-rsbw .ra n-t


27 ’.fc^tf-DJG-5-A-Krxrow (Herder)
Ccurt 1


under tho supervision of the Ifediccl Inspectcrotc until July, 1942?

Is that correct?

4 :.t any rate, not under tho supervision cf the r-ferat Aviation
Icdicir.e. .-fter that I heard here, the -iodical Inspector had tc send
the approval for tho transfer of theso chanters frea Berlin to Kunich.

Q ’.ell now, when did ycu fccccse ~ cn what date — tho day end
nrnth — did ycu tccoac ..ssistant Referent in the refernt fer ,.viation
k’cdicino? ^

A I believe that was tho 8th cf August, 1941.

3 ..nd ycu then assumed, as one of ycur ncro iaertant tasks, this
lew prossur- chasidi^ business, is that right?

A I bcliovo I explained it in detail that I cansidcrod one of ray
nain tasks tc to tho oedernizntien of the lew pressure chwabors.

3 Then, every low pressure choubcr in thb Luftwaffe was of intorost
tc ycu, was it net?

.. I bcliovo that one word was lest during tho interpretation and
it was the word "ortsfest", ircx’cilc.

Q ''Oil then, in ether words, ycu had nothing to do with tho
.-.ebile low rrcasuro charabors? :fc Jurisdiction ever theso whatsoever?


Court 1

Hay 8?-H-o-l-HD-..a loy-Roal c r.


A. In that connection I have to tell you the following:
the immobile lev pressure chambers had all been built before
Che war, and for that reason were built in correspondence
t. the reserrch regulations as they prevailed before the war
as t-' their resistance to high altitude. During his insocct-
tion in the year 19 1 Dr. Ruff had found out that those old
Immobile low pressure chambers no longer sufficed for modern
requirements. The modernizing of thlse immobile low
pressure chambers b.came my main task. The noblle low
pressuro chambers on the other hand were all bjllt during
the beginning of the War. For that reason they all complied
with :heso requirements I Just mentioned, so that it was no
longer necessary to romodol these mobile low prossure
chambers. In addition, the low pressure chambers wore all
subcrdln-tod to the air fleet, were onnlttcd by the air
floot in orucr to examine and instruct the pilots of the
various flyln a jnlts. Fr>o the moment when by ordor of the
Hodlcal Inspector'-to I took over this low pressure chamber,
together with Captain Kolleram'*nn, this low pressuro
chamber had als, buen subordinated to an air floot, and
after a short stay in the Alps for research purposos was
sent for lecture purposes to the Troops.

Well, then in summation. Doctor, after nugust 19-il
a had Jurisdlctl n ever the permanent low pressure chambers,
but did not have -ny authority over tne mobile low pressure
chambers and would not have Jurisdiction in any manner
whatsoever /or the low pressure ch cber used at Ja.chau
until July 1£42, but that prior to tna.t time the Jurisdict¬
ion ever that m/oile chamber was purely in the hands cf
Huff and Hippke, is that correct?

a. This entails such an enure us amount of individual
quostkna that I cannot possibly answer it with Just one
answer.


8106


• i


Court 1

Hay 27-A-5-2-ED- ha loy-Raml e r.


i,. You can answer just one of them; frist of all I
vill ask teem individually; after August 1941 you were
assigned the task o: remodeling low pressure chambers for the
Luftwaffe, is that correct?

A. Yes, Chle task was assigned to me.

Thut duty assignment did not Include work on mobile
low measure chambers'?

A. No, not on notorized low pressure clumbers.

When was the first time that /ou had anything to do
with low pressure chambers, that 16 mobile low pressure
chambers?

A. Do you mean when I for the first time had anything
:c do with mobile lo-’ pressure?

3. At any rate when did you have any Jurisdiction over

- when did you h-ve any authority as referent in the

ei’eret over tnese mobile low pressure chambers?

A. You mean the mobile ones don't y u?

«. The mobile?

AS far as I roaombor that was approximately at the
or.d of July 1942. *hen, in collaboration with the already
mentioned Captain Kcllosnann, I took over the low prespuro
evnvoy for Dr. Ruff.

5. Alright, then you h~d Jurisdiction over the mobile
If. pressure chambers — pardon ce, *'e will qualify It,
doctor — y.u had Jurlsdlctl n over the single aobllo low
pressure chamber used at Dachau prior t? July 1942?

«. I can nly toll y u vivt I maard hero. I heard that
-r. ruff obtained the approval for the use of these chambers
•r m Professor Hlppke. In other words, at that time he
didn't c nslder himself competent en ugh to send this chamber
" Daohru on his own Initio live, but obtained Hlppke's
"-val for that.


Sourt 1

Hay --5-3-HD-Maloy-Rrdor.

v- Thor. Huff mi Hlppkc hod Jurisdiction over the low
pressure chaaber and consider It In the ease light as an
. rpfcan child?

A. It me no orphan child. I would designate this
circumstance as the birth cf the child.

3. Allright. Ye will go on. Doctor. Ir. connection
*>ltk y ur testimony concerning research assignments within
the Luftwaffe, whenever n research assignment order was
Issued, and at this point I will not quibble with you about
the originator of the orders, that is the person with authori¬
ty to give the orders, but vhon a research nsslgnov-nt was
Issued, who aumllwd the funds to carry out that assign¬
ment?

A. The. funds were auppllud by the Medical Inspectorate
f the Luftwaffe, and after the 1st of April 1944 that wa6
d.nu by the Office of the Chief of the Medical Service of
che Luftwaffe.

i. Didn't your chief have anything to do with the funds
at all?

A. The Hoferat of «vlntlon Modlclnc had nothing to do
•'1th the funds. There was a fteforat 3udget with Its own
-dalr.lstrati ,r. stiff, and li was only tho task of the
?creronc for Aviation i-cdlclr.G t> s.lve the question In
: porrtl n with tfc*. budget Ref.rent whether there was any-
t-.ln -.gainst the reason given for any research work, ana
• -o Budget Referent then c. r.f lrmcd his approval by making
a el^n n th. origin 1 research assignment to that effect.

!* w. Just a jonent. Doctor, It is my understanding
- : -11 research cseignaents in the field of aviation

••-diclne had to pass throu B h the Refer^t for «vlation

cine Office "fter May 1944, and prior to that time the
- ice of Aiith.r.y who approved-


ei;s


Z -Tt 1

1 k: ; • 27-1—3- 4- I- Ma ioy-fiaml c r.

A. Kay I Interrupt you shortly. I think you were say-
in- 3fcy 1244, ware you?

Ye3. Mow who approved the allocation of funds for
Che orrticular research which was .rdered by the Chief of
:hc Medical Services or by your office?

-•v. In that connection I tiny point out to you that my
?.wferat did not order the furnishing cf these funds, but
_r.ly sug_.est-a thorn. The approval for such funds was
reserved for the ..odicnl Chief himself.

%. V ow, wa r. getting d wn to something. Doctor.

’-'-'.on after it was determined that n research assignment
oh.uld ce mr.de in th. field of eviction Medicine, the .

novel for the assign nt w uld be made by your office, la
Chat correct, because Profossor Shroeder certainly oouldn’t
ltudy all these things. Ho was n busy nan. You would have
to study the assignment and determine whether or net it was
necessary at this time, inasmuch ns you had a lack of nnn-
; ov;or and a war going on; now, tho research assignment must
have ‘coon approved lr. the fieferot for Aviation Medlclr.o
wasn't it?

A. I don’t quite understand what you said. Did you
°°y it was ay Cn3k to appro-. . l rose- assignments.

'■'ho approved tho research assignment wherein it was
necessary to allocate funds to carry It out, who approved

the sc?

A. Tho appr vrl for any research assignment was reserved
: v the Medical Chief and b fore for the Medical Inspector,
w-s the task of tho Heforat to furnish the necessary data
order to sake that decision.

h In other words, the fioferat would suggest what
- -isi.r. sh -.-Id be made? How, in y-ur position as Ref era t
mter May 1Z44 lid you have tho now or t: pny sums of m.ney


6105


I


Court 1

.Icy 27-I*-6-5-HD-MGloy-Hr.alcr.


for experimental purposes?

A. In my capacity ns Hefcrat with the Chief of Medical
Services I did not have such authority.

Z. Did your Chief, that is Professor Schroeder, knot*
of what y.u were doing, did he have any idea of what your
duties were?

A. I would assume thrt.

Q. Ke tells ne that you had the power of Attorney,
nevertheless, to ray sums of coney for experimental purposes?

Can you toll ae about the connection in which
Professor Schroeder nr.do that statement. I think there mist
be an error. Not a single referent could place his signature
to a grant of funds. That could only bo done by the Chief
of the Medical Services for any annual grants.


; - - f-7-l-..r „fcan (RtufLcr)
' rt I


. Then it is your contention that Professor Schrocdor did
r. i ns: bio job; is that it,

... I would rather believe that there izist have been so: a; other
ndin" durina your conversation *.±th Professor Schroodor.

; v. S’.'i-j that Professor Schroder was v_ry veil versed irith his tas!:

.anf a error could have been possible.

. oil, nor, in those rcsoarch assignments, Doctor, when did
/;v. first roport to Professor Rostock c'-nccrninp research assijrrxnts
of tlw lufttraffof

... I rononbor one tira, that was in the sirrcr of 19ldi, vhon
wj sent a list of all research assi arar.ts to Professor Rostock* office,
cannot ivc you the oxact date, it could cithor have boon in July or
c vst 19ldi.

Q. *il Xf did you dond report® to Rostock's officoj
... If I r. j.abor correctly, I was ordered to do so by .y nodical
cldc.‘rofossor Schrocdcr. I don't bolievo thoro was a roquost tiaclo
by Rostock's office, hoaevor, I cam r.o lenyor tell with cortainty,

'!• Veil, now, you received an ardor frc:i yoor nodical chiof to
■e.V. re.crts to Rrstcck in 19)ih; Is that correct?

... I pr for.b?;* df r. * <,ot -his rdor -.r-onnUy fron .y nodical
aid.of, vt I at it fr » d. ?avt.fcntal chi l, rcrov v, in the final
-a-lysis it did oc.v> >e- ).'a.

It Did y-»u ua -»-s ’• • •- ' D was

: f science an' r^a •..•eh *■? tki Roloh'C'.r ilssrr for ir.-s3.th and

•‘•vv’.to i-o andor Dr .ir.an't?

I think that 1 Saw: that at that tine.

. iir- often did you send reports to Rostock?

... "uch collective reports, as t . r port concerning the 91
' as. : r. .nts, —is only sent out onco as far as x rcrxcdjcr by

f the - 'deal Sorbiccs. Inter on copies of
lr . _ research asoin-ats ;:«a. sent to Professor Rostock*:;


£111


27 - J-7-2-iehnr. (Ranlor:

Court 1


> Then you sont a collective re pert for the first tirx to
Rostock in 19hh and thereafter you sent Mr: a copy of each research
-ric.-j is that riyht?

i*08, he received a copy of these research asslyiaxnts issuod
later. There roro only very, very fen, horovor.

Did you sond hie a report on the sea-crater exporLnonts?

... I an suro that I did not, because that ras no research
assi ruu-nt.

i. Did Rostock have any reason to knor about the soa-aator
cxpcriirents J

A, I knot; of no such reasons.

I. * ‘ore you ovor at a aootiny concerning the soa-ratcr oxperi-
aonts and at such rxetiny a ropr. oontativw f Rostock vras present?

A. It is possible that at the l-st root in that tooJ: place I
think at the ond of Soptcuhor 1?U1: at thv Plnlrtum at tlx Coo, t/non
rofessor loiylbocck ras spo.alriny a*x>ut the causo and the results of
cripsriconts, a representative of IVofosoor Rostock was present. This
is ruitc p sriblc• I knot- for cortain, he ovor, that Professor
•'.- steel: ras not personally present.

.. Do you knor rhothcr >r not ; ur .nx Accessor, Anthony, sent
r-ports tv Restock?

... :b, I knor nothin of tliat.

.. ou ’.-n't exclude th rssi i* ity, hevover?

... It is id lly i. ps33i :lu bocauso Rostock's off ico crux
' appearance only in the year cf 1 ?Ji!j.

. It carx into appe-ranee in Jeneary of 191:3, lidn't it,

- :c -or, actively?

. I* ras in the curt:*- 2

1 me *. the office of R stock.

r i%. lookin- at the ovidonee her ,

status the office ras dvon in 19l;3? ,


8112


27 :iy-iK'aJ-7-.3-:fceh2n (Roller)

Court 1

... Yes, I believe I rcztubcr havin; hoard of here, but it al-
• ays takes sons tire be for- any such office starts working.

0. It takes a rrholo year?

... '-ell, I can only say that froa zy point of view and as far
as I could see, I only taow of Rostock's office in the year of 19Ui«

. Q. ‘.loll, new these research assi^naonts which noro ordered by
the chief of the Ocdical service or by tlu. nodical inspectorate, nc-
eaaponing th- assi^nnent a certain anount of acnoy ra allocated; what
did you direct cr '..-hot did the •‘cdical Inspcfctcrato direct tie re¬
searchers to do in the way of reporting? Did you have soar chock on
just what was happenin': to your nonoy,

A. Yes,

fj. How often did you requost the particular scientist; how often
die’, you roquire reports free the particular scientist?

A. Arc you now speaking about reports rejardin- the research or
rcjnrdinj the uao of the noncy?

Q. Recording tho uso of the nonoy.

A. Tho accounts regarding tho nonoy wore :r.dc at tho end of
tho bud jet y-ar after th- nonoy had boon used. Only such anoint of
nonoy was distributed as was expected to bo uood during thu course of
cno year.

.. How often did you requiro th-i: to report on the results of
tiioi? research?

... l^st of the research i>:n wore asked to send half yearly re¬
port:, however this war not done in every case bccaussc considering
-x situation at that tine thzro zzay net have beer, anything to report
cv-r* half year. Enough confidence -as placed in the various res-arA
■•‘crkcro an- it was assuzszd that they uld r-port any r ay had they
- iund anythin- worth . hilc, however, it was stated n the re-sozxch as-
-i nexnts that they were requested te s-nd in repeals every half year/

!. Doctor, hen :’dd you first hear f th. hi h altitude oapuri-

-r.tc r.t


Dachau?


27 iJ-7-h—ooten (Ranlcr)

Court 1


.. That was T-hcn Dr. Rasctor and Dr. r.oribor.- shcncd their filn
r rather intended to she - their fill.', at General - r iold Marshall Cilch's
-ffico.

Q. Did you see the filn?

... Jfc,

"ore you present?

A* No.

0 . Do you knor who wa3 there?

... I knor it nor froa the documents submitted hero.

0. Did you evor talk to Dr. Bcnzin>r about it afterwards?

A. Ho.

0. Do you know whother or not he saw the file?

... .’.ccordin tr the report by Dr. Ro.abcr;, rhich was outaittod
horo, I ossuno that ho saw it. I cannot say ^ortain.

Q. Did you hear any repercussions as a result of tho choiring of
that fill?

Repercussions, I know of none.

Q* "ho infomod you that thox*c was to bo a rxotiny in tho R.L.!'.,
wherein a notion picture filn m3 to be shorn concerning hi?h altitude
research?

.. Darin ;y direct oxaninntion I explained that a telephone call
tts uado that Jimin;, which I received in tho roforat that aerning to
the effect that either Professor I Call -r his assistant Dr. Bruehl
were 03kin" *.:hcthor re know any thing about a fill and a lecture re¬
gardin' high altitude experim ents, rhich was tc to shewn in tto Itoichs
inistry for aviation.

!. Tlicn Professor Kali: infers.' ycu; is that it?

— H I have just said rhat Prefos-or Xalk told to .x, he said
n - than that because that icopcncd before the fill ras shorn and
that tine to of course knew none of the details. I can*t say thothcc
it rac Pr-fess-sr Kalk -r Dr. Bru-.J.,

.. I utoerstand that this fil; in this rcctin- ms sup?.sod ta


8114


27 ^J-7-5-:iciiin (Ranlo*)

Court 1

be - secret nutter; rras it not?

I know nothinr of that one the only knowledge I hove ccr.es
free, tho docuitnts suboitted here.

0. "cro you usually inferart of nil sccrot natters?

... I t depended --bother I hud to knew then or net. Haturally
I learned about secret nutters during tho rrur. I ccrtlnly did not
le-rn of all sccrot natter*.

Did ynu leur of all secret nutters in the field of aviation

n-dicinc?

Cortainly not, fcccuuso I fetch*, cut about a nuubor _f then
aftor tho war, which I did not knot; boforef.

0. Did y u learn cf all otters in tho field cf aviation uoli-
cinc ofter the tix you beca.ro roforant f.r aviation aodicino?

... I cannot really answer this question because I don't know
vUat secret natters existed.

0. If you did not know, who did?

I d n't kn— what socrots there Wv.ro, oxcupt tho things I
actually kxr rt -rdln tJxso tilings. I actually don't know : ho lwicw
then.


2? Hay 47-M- .,X&-1- Co Ok- (Rannlor & von Schoen)

Court 1

Q. Doctor, do you know Dr. xottenh: ff?

.i. Xottenhoff, yes I nade his acquaintance In the
year 1944.

Q. Did he.have any connection with your orgmlzatloB?

... Yes, for a few days in the sunner of 1944 he was
fer a few days with the cffico of the Chief of the office
cf the C.dof of the Medical Service, but was transferred
iamodiatoly thereafter.

Q. Did you know hln before that tine?

<». No, I did net know hln.

Q. When did you first sake the acquaintance cf Dr.

Kelts?

.u Ky first personal aoaory of Welts dates back to
July 1942. That was on the occasion of the aviation aod-
lclno O/nference lr. Hamburg. I would assume, however, that
I had soon hln before that tine sonovhoro. However, I c-m-
qct give you an exact late.

Q. Kill you toll no, doctor, a few nore details concern¬
ing your first aootlng with RaGCher, Just when UJ that
happen?

... I think that that happened on the occasion f the
conference between Klppko and Raschor, which, according
to a iocuaent which I have seen here, dates to June 1942.

Q. That Is Jur.a 1942?

.u Y£s, Juno 1942.

Q. Well Wiion did this nee ting - pardon no - where
did this aootlng take place?

This meeting between General Oborstabsartz Prof¬
essor Hippko and Raschcr took place at the office cf
Profess r Hlppke.

Q. ..t the office of Professor Hippko, how did you


8116


27 May 4?-x-«:{-8*^Cook-(Royaler k yen sehoen)

Court 1

happen to be there?

A. I didn't quite understand.

Q. How did ycu happen to be there?

•w I was ashed to attend the conversation, it was

Goneral&rzt Dr. Marius, ay department chief, who ordered

no to do sc.

+ *

Q. Who ashed ycu? You say Dr. Marzlus ashed ycu to
attend this meeting?

a. Yes, Dr. Xarzlus ordered ae by request of the
nodical Inspectorate to go there. This .fflco was Ju6t
one floor below ay department, that is, under the dopart-
□ont of Gonoralarzt Dr. Marzlus, and in this department
our referat was located.

Q. Do you any Idea why he ashod you to come to this
mooting?

•u Yes, I hnvo an Idea and I have alroady explained
that luring ny llreot examination.

Q. Glvo It to uo again?

... I rccolvod an order to gc down to Hlpphe with the
files concerning the planned cold meeting In Hurnborg.
Originally .jithony was t- go there but since he was nrt
present I was to replace him.

Q. Did you usu illy represent .wthony when he was not
present?

I didn't usually ropresent him but only on certain
occasions, on occasions when my departmental chief ordered
mo to do so.

Q. I am ashing you what time, when did you represent
o-.thony?

a. Tnoro wore occasions, not times.

Q. I soo. Now at this meeting between Raschcr and


8117


27 May 47—&-;^-Cook-(Ramnlor & Von Schoen)

Court 1

Hippke, Rascher spoxe very clearly, did he not, about the
use of concentration camp Inmates fer exporlmontation
purposes?

I don't remember him raving spoken particularly about
concentration camp inmates. He mentioned that ho had
received a spoclal commission for particular cases to use
condemned criminals as experimental subjects, who could
volunteer for those purposes, and to whom a mitigation of
thoir sontence would be promised, as a result of such
experiments.

Q. Now, doctor, this meeting took place in June
1942 and the reason why you wore called to the mooting was
tc make arrangements for the cold conference in Nurnborg in
Ootcber, is that tho reason?

No, I was asked to attend buoauae professor Hippko
wanted information on what the individual members of tho
Luftwaffe, who wore dealing with tho cold problem, would
bo lecturing about. Ho wanted to recommend O no of thoao
experts to Professor Rascher so that ho could got in touch
with him.

'I. Did you gather from the conversation why Hippko
w.nted to make the recommendation to Rascher, for vhnt
reason?

I assumed that Rascher asked him to name an export
for coll problem.

3. Veil what lid R.3Chor want to Know that for?

rt t that time I assumed and I still assume that
Rascher wonted t, collaborate with a scientlest who had
r.is own personal experiences in this field.

x. That was the gist of the whole conversation - that
Rascher was seeking an expert in the field of cold, from


27 Hay 47-K-.wC-&-4-Cooic-(Racier & Vcn schoen)
Court 1


exposure, - shock from exposure to coll, is that it?

- At any rata that was tha subject of tha conversation
as long as I was present. I was only asked to attend the
conference after It had already started and I left Profess-r
Hlppke and Haaoher before the end of It. In other words.

I was only present for a brief period during the middle
of the conversation.

Q. Then as near as I can gather there were two things
you heard at this ooetlng between Rasoher and Hippke,

No. 1. Raschor was seeking the collaboration of an expert
in the field of freezing, and No. 2. Rasoher talked about
th ° U8 ° 0f inaatoa  Cho concentration oanpo for oxporlm-
ontal purposos. That was only two things you hoarl at this
mooting?

A. Yob, those wore the two subjects, wherby I want
to emphasize once mere that I don't remember Raooher using
the word 'Concentration camp Inmates”. He usod the
word “criminal

Q- I see. Raschor mentioned the criminals that Himmler
w>uli assign tc. him for use in experiments?

'fes, he was mentioning that.

5. Now, I assume you are an Intelligent young man.

You have exhibited on the stand superior Intellect, were

you not able tc ascertain at this meeting Raschor's Inten-
Cions?

*». I ion 1 1 know what you understand by Raschor's true
intontlons.

•

Q. Couldn't you put two and two together and make four,
namely, criminals on this hand and seeking an expert for
'roezing research on the other hand, and that the two of
-non together make experimentation on human beings?


27 May 47-K-dX-8-5-Coolc- (Ranmlor i vor. Schcan)
Court 1


-»• Certainly this was discussed very openly In Hlppko'
presence and that is what I said during my Uroct examin¬
ation. One needs no particular Intelligence for that.

Q.. Then you know in June 1S42 that experiments on
human beings, condemned criminals, you say, wore to be
performed by Dr. Rasohar and a collaborator?

a. Yes, I said that during my llroct examination.

Q. With tho approval of Hippko?

•w Yes, with the approval of Hippfcc. I had assumed
that. Mind you I didn't stay until the end of the conver¬
sation but since Hlppke discussed the matter with Rascher
I hal assumed It was with his approval.

Whon was tho next tlno you hear! about the freezing
experiments?

a. The next tlmo was In Nurnberg, at this discussion
here about distress at sea and winter distress on tho 26 th
and 27 of October 1942.

Q. Who arranged tho Nurnborg ccnforonoe?

•». Tno preparations for this mooting wore rondo by
the referent. That was Profossor .jithony at that tlmo and
I had a few duties of an organizational nature, for exam¬
ple, four woe/. 3 bo fore this mooting I was here In Nurnberg
for day or two and Investigated hotel possibilities and
arranged a row other questions, such as for tho hall for
tho meeting and equipment and so forth.

Q. Then you wore on tho commltteo for tho arrangements
of the meeting In October 1942?

a. Tr.ore was not a commltteo. The preparations for tha
meeting, not only this meeting, but all of the tvolvo
meetings of this nature which tho Luftwaffe held, were
always mado by the referent because he was in charge of


* i7 May »2C-&-&-Oook-(aanmldr & Von sc ho on)

Court Ho. l

discussions later and I had organizational taste, Just
as later, for oxanple in lSi-i, i assigned such duties
to soao one else.


ei 21


Court 1

Kay 27-M-9-l-KD~3roes-Von3chon.

Yet y - were raking all these ' rrnngc=cnt6 i'or hall
n.d for chairs, etc. You didn't know what the meet in.. was
.* v?

A. I didn't sav thrt I didn't know that. I knew the
subject. I knew 3jre~ or less the program of the lectures.
k. Did y u know Raaoher was going to lecture?

A. No. Th t was not expected. The report on this
meeting indicates clearly that Rasoher'e lecture was a
so-called discussion remark - it was not a pi. nr.ed lectui'c.

Z. I see. Yell, now, doctor, on page 77 in Document
5-ok II. Do you have the Gorman Document 3vok II before
y.u? This la Document 343-n-PS - a letter fr->n Erhard
Kilck to Wolf and is the "Door Wolffy letter".

a. Yes, I have that. Yes, I have the doounont.

Q,. Now, in this document 1 note thrt ill 1 oh states
lr. the first paragraph about seven lines down from the top
"These h^ve been pr^red in immediate agreement with
ov'.por offices; Ooorstabsarzt Voltz will bo charged with
the exocuti n and Stabarzt Rascher will be mode nvnilnblo
until further order in addition to his duties within tho
helical Corps of tho Luftwaffe." This is concerning tho
institution or the initiate n of the freezing experiments.
Car. you tell me rr.d the Tribunal how Kllcn received lnfor-
aati n th*t r oltz and nascher w -ula be good non to put on
t/.is assignment? Who would advise ftllch in that matter?
a. Unfortunately I cannot give y u that information.

- car. only refer to what .-rofessor .-ll-pke said as a witness

*

C:._ Trial n-cp.inst field Marsnal iiilch. I know no more
:.'.r\r. t.:at and it Is not quite clear to me ho:* at the end
• such n letter could h-ve been written. Up to this
:ri 1 I had believed that when Rascher talked to Kl pke
'.-use experiments were discussed for the first time, but


8122


Court 1

Ihy 27-K-9-2-HD-Gross-VunScbon.


here I see It must have been discussed three L.i. 1 . .-j;—
weeks before hand and must have been discussed by various
people.

?„ .ire y u certain then of the date that you have
_lven us about the meeting between Kippke nr.C Hascher?

::ight it be possible that that sooting took place two or
three months before the date y >u have 6ald, Juno 1942 you
have said? Might it bo possible the talk took place in
/arch, April, or onybe six months before, or oven the
summer before, Juno 1941? That might fit into all these
plruis. «re y^u certain of that date - June 1942?

A. In June 1941 I was not yet an assistant referent
in the Medical Inspectorate. I was in Roucnnln at that
tine.

... Could it have boon in August 1941?

£. That is quite impossible. I roaonber It as much
later. I thought that this Rascher-Klppko talk, where I
xaa portly pioscnt was in the middle of the summer, perhaps
iJly or august of 1942. 5ut According to Document NO-283,
Exhibit 80, Raochor's letter to Klmaler, it has the rl 6 ht
Jato and fits in with the rest of the documents on£ as far
“ i can Judge moans that this mooting was on 12 June 1942,
:ocr.uso cn the 15 Juno Hascher writes to Himmler -
« fow days Ago I was called to the Inspector of the Luft-
liedical Service, etc." and since I was prosor.t at
••ly one conversation between Kippke and Hascher this must
tho one he is talking about here. •

i. Vail, didn't it seem to you that this meeting
: -:v;con Hascher and Hippke, that this was the first time
1: ~ J h-.d discussed this problem, that is what I goth.red
:r - your testimony?

That had been my impression - that that had boon the


Cj


• 7

,-vr 27-j -3-H J- Jrose-V •nScbon.

first that Hi- k* t-.lked to Fischer -xb et it. I .lad the
! ..-I'cajl^n that Hip tc baa known Rase her before, but I
,_ht this ■'is the first tine they hed talked possibly.
... Veil, then the testinvny of Veltr was enlightening
u when «'eltr t Id us he had discussed the ore bleu
wit.: Kippke hineolf in the susner of 1941?
a. Yea, X neard that.

However you still ar.intain that the date of June
1942 when the teeting between Hi. he and Raacner tooh
-laoa?

A. Yes.

... Your Honor, I night suggest that wo could have a
en oinute recess if it sect* with the a rovnl of the
Tribunal.

THZ 1RZ3IDENT: Very well, the Tribunal will be In
ecesG for - few ainutoa.


ei2i


27 4-iy-11-l-GJ-«alqy-(von Schcen)-


Ccurt 1

THE MARSHALL: Inc Tribunal is agin in session.

THE P RB S TE BMT: Counsel nay proceed.

BI -ffi. HARDY (Continued)

Q Dr. Scckcr-Freyscng, how often in the course of professional
business in the Office of- the nodical Inspector of the Luftwaffe, did
Professor Hippko refer to the referent of Aviation Medicine in regard
to natters pertaining to that particular field?

A I an afraid that is 2 question I can't answer.

I could say how often Hippko called no, for instance.

Q .ell, he c lied you in; how often?

* Not very often. I would estimate that it was five to 10 tines
but I wouldn't want to give any definite figure. It was certainly not
oft-nor than that.

^ How often did Hippko concern hinsolf with natters in the field
of Aviation Ltdicine without referring to the referent?

A Very frequently I an sure. I alone of quite a number of nat-
tere, where Professor Hippko for uxaaplo, delivered lectures on avia¬
tion Bodicin^.

Q How do you know about;then ?

A Because I hoard then later.

Q He n^v.r reported to you.about then cr told you about then
cr asked your advice about then?

A These are V o questions, you is/ no first, whether Hippko re¬
ported to r.e, - no. It is r.;t custc&ary for the bo3s to rop^rT'lo his
subordinate, and ho v-ry addon asked a. for advice-. The referat was
Antr.ony. There is an old German saying that you siK>uld get to the Black¬
smith end not to his apprentice and during Anthony's tin- Anthony tod
- i. balcks.aith. Cnly when *nthony w:s not there or when it wassomething

v^ry ap.cific that I had worked with th_n f rof-ssor Hippk- called nc. For

•

-x-xple, at the discussion have Just bo-n talking about.

Q h.n I presun- whenev-r Professor Hippko concerned hicsclf


27 Asy—J-GJ-ll-2-4Lo 1 oy-( von Seho.n)-
Ccurt 1


ir. in the field of Aviation .iedlcine ohat h_ would consult with

Anthony, that was the reason why he hod antheny then.?

« I con't quite answer this in the affinaativo, because I know
of cases when Professor Hippke dealt with aviation oedepin. questions
.viesoil without consulting Anthony.

Q How could your office, that is Anthony have efficiently per-
feraod his task in the assi^ncaent without have ccapletc knowledge of
the activities in his fi-ld.

a In ay explanation of the duties of the referent, which is very
thorough, I said that the n.fercnt worked on the orders of his superiors
" d of course it happ n.d froe tin. to tie*, that these suporiers acted
iiidoponiontly on an aviation aridccino question without consulting the
referent for aviation acdicine.

Q iVoll, now you toll us that it was your understanding in these
expurinente that criainals condemned to death Were to bu used, is that
correct?

a I don't believe I said that. 1 said that convicted crininals
r-.re used. I-rco that discussion, between Hippke and Roschur I didn't
know of anything ibeut the persons condcnnod to death, and I never
said 30 .

A ‘hat is your opLiion about the ability of a person incarcera¬
ted to volunteer for an ex? rinent?

a I 3i.«uld l:ko le refer again to ry d lives cxnn.lnitlon and
repeat briefly that ir .j. rsl pllcc frj . * orta cf c or aaa and
foreign werks, I know fa* throughout the wcrld the possibility is rcco-
Ini zed for prisoners to volunteer.

Q I cc not interested in the possibility throughout the world;

1 tc * tn: " ?^cJa.r-?reyscng's pinion, what do you think -bout the-
-s-ioility cf Parser, incarcerated in prison to volunteer for an cx-

=*risuat?

a l«y -rscnal opinion is that under the conditions on incarcara-
- b-rser. v luatcers r.adily for such n experiment whei a special niti-


27, ay-.-.-G J-ll-3-imloy-( vonSchocn)-
Court 1


ration of sentence is premised to bin, and even if no such pronise
1 ; ondc, because he can assume that by participating in such an exp^-ri-
n-nt ho will put himself in a good light in the ey-s of the parole
b; rad, and nest of the -prisoners would K. intcreSt.d in that.

, tVcll, nor: yew issued or ordered the sea-water cxixricents,
or initiated then, or whatever nomenclature you wish to adopt; you
have told us you nove accepted th_ responsibility for the sea-wattr ex-
p-rinents, and in the sea-water experiments that used concentration
c.rp innattS; those inmat,s were criminals, c nvictcd criminals; did
ycu approve of using convicted criminals in those txp.rincnts?

n I rant to correct on e thing first, I said oven today I take
responsibility for the- sca-witer »xperin.nta, that is the responsibility
rhichws due \c at the tine according to zy position as referent, to
ecru back to ycur question -

Q Just a accent, Doctor. In connection with that if you assume
responsibility for the sea water experiments. Then you did .nticipate
:r .rculd you state that Anthony nould or should assume responsibility
for -.11 t!.„s- .xperinents performed cn behalf the Luftwaffe, — that
is that rr.pp-.nod prior to iLny, 19Mi?

A I cannot say that, because I don't knew what part .mthony had
an the planning or suggestion of these experiments.

Q You Just stated Doctor, you ascur.e full responsibility for
water experiments t-cause of your position as refer-.nt in the Refc-
ratSf Aviation L'edicir.e, new by the sea, tnk_n don't you think it pos¬
sible that ..nthony should accept responsibility ef the -xp-rl-.onts was
tr ught ha. to th. Ref era t?

•* -'^der this Lost condition I believe Anthony would still take
tn_ r sporisibility today, but I should like- to paint cut that I naku a

distinction between the scr. mkr experiments and other experiments
~ i-ir as the p.rticipaticn of the Re-ferat for Aviati n Medicine is ccn-
r -rr»_d. I this fr . th-_ documents submit t_d by the Prosecution, and


2 ■' ~-y-GJ-ll-h-*alcy-(vonScjccn)-

Ccart 1

1 dc act bull-vc Anthcny wculd tike the resp nsibility fer experiments
ilch he n-ver suggested or In the planning of which he participated,
cnc can take responsibility cnly fer things which one plans cr sugges¬
ts cr carries cut ones self.

Q vYculd you assume responsibility fer the sen water experiments?
Cr.e must assume that have had jurisdicti:n in order to assume responsibi¬
lity

“ I believe in the course cf cy direction examination 1 ex¬
plained ay responsibility very carefully. I did net have jurisdiction
r.:r independent sup.,rvisi'n, but I had sine- tnerc was nc ether pos¬
sibility for carrying out these sea water experiments, and since ay
.wn plan which I mentioned of tr-ating a group of the Luftwaffe at
^-terbeg in order tc have experimental persons at the dispos il at
jry convinicnt time. This plan was rejected by ray superiors, 1 pointed
at that as a last possibility that these experiments, which I considered
completely hamleas, and I take the responsibility of that —

Q o’e will ccao to the sea water phas- a little later. 1 wnnt
t; gc back tc the subject cf volunteers used in your sea water experiments
.'-a kn-w they w-ro going tc use ccnvictod criminals, that is what you
8^..-steed would take place that convicted criminals wore t_ be used in
th, experiments?

a Yos.

^ And what did ycu understand would be the reward given to
convicted criminal for subjecting himself voluntary to the sea
^ter oeperiaont?

« In the ease cf the sea rator exp-rimen*. he never mcnticnod
special re-wards. I said before that 1 can imagine that a criminal
lur.teers,-not cnly fer a special r-ward, but also without sucj a r_-
- r '- -here were sovcral reasons —

Q «nd ycu,are net sure whether any reward;were offered?

.. I knew that ‘refoss-r Bcigelb.ck procured special cigarettes


5123


27 -ay-J-GJ-H^5-*-alojw(voaSch on)

Ccurt 1


riticns for these pc«L. and give thc-o t thee, end that be triud tc
g^t ether regards. I'rof-ss-r Pcigclbcck will tell you about that himself.

k Did ycu set hie give the cigarettes to the prisoners?

“ Since I was never in Dachau I did net sou that. I have already

stated.

Q I n as nu c h as ycu were talcing full responsibility for the sea
inter cxperin.nts do ycu think that it would have been =uch butter had
y.u though abcut the cutters cere Seriously and effuTud a reward to the
pclitical prisoners that vcluntcercd for the cxpuric.nts or offered
a reward U perhaps a Jew incarcerated in a concentration coop fer ha¬
ving c:naitt.d Rassenschando, rather than offering a reward to a criai-
a -1 The night go cut ano be a c-nacc to the public again; didn't that
•ccur t' ycu? Ycu art a clear thinking young roan, cr weren't you intc-
r.ated?

A I oust tell ycu that ay chief, Profusscr Schreed.r, as is
true with the Rcichoarat of the SS Police, t:ld ac that he had talked
*-. Grawitz about soldiers unwrrthy for nilitary service being used
: r these cxpcrlnonts. «s far as I knew everything -lse was clininatod
v.c-.usc I had nothing to dc with tho s.lotion cf the sublets nor with
t.S„ question of reward. Besides I an convinced that if I had suggested
•hat political prisoners be used for these oxpcrlncnts tho prosecution
T.uld uso that as a special charge against ne tc*ay.

Q Toll, now in the field cf high altitude research ycu have
'-stifled here quite extensively cencarning the adaptability ;f uxp-ri-
-at:.. subjects tc high altitudes, in.snuch -s y.u art on uxp_rt in
■i.is field, a can who has d-ne c nsiderablu r rk in Huilcclberg since
•Jil uni of the war in oxplcsivu occrs^rossian, can yu tull eh* cany*
"-:-s an average individual can undurg a high oloitude -xp-rL-a.nt ondin
- s P iCc c * h: can undergo said cxp-riner.ts b-frr. hu b.CGncs

to high altitudus?

•' 1 d_n,t too* *<-ru y.u gut tho idea that I had d<n-_ a ruat


2 ? *: ay-h-GJ-li- 6 --£lcy-(vonSchccn) -
C-urt 1

J eal cf Tfcrk in explosive dcc^rorcssicn. I ntv-r said sc.

W You have d no it at B_idclfcurg cine- the end cf tho vrar,
haven't 701 dene a c-nsidcrabl- anouat cf work in explosive dcoco-
prvssi'n at Eoidclburg? T~at is liiat I un derate cd free your direct exa-

sinatien?

n H , I worked cn bends, that is tho condition when a altitude
f 12,(XX) nct-rs ltitudo or scoc ether altitude is reached ncraally.
Explosive doccnpressicn is a change in pr-esuro taking plac- within
steads fr-n ncroal pressure tc the pressure of very high altitude.


£130


Court So. 1

2? Hey 47-44-12-1 -23t-Heehan (Vcn Schoen)


Q, Beetor, do you feel that you ere in c oosition tc testify beforo
this Iribunal concerning the adaptability of an experimental subject to
high altitude as as expert?

A. Yes, I assume so, because I have rerformed experiments syeelf
5S adaptability to high altitude.

Q» Can you anower =y cuestion, does a person ever bccono adapted
to high altitude?

A. In this general form the ouostios has to bo answered in tho
affirmative.

Qi, And if a noreon becomes adnoted to high altitude, I imaglno he
would bo ueoleos for exuerinontal purposes?

A. That dooonds on the nature of the experiments one vents to con¬
duct, for certain types of oxoeriuents this condition Is not tho correct
tosie, that is true.

Q. It follows, however, that you would not get overage statistics
if you used a person who b«car.o edooted to high nltitudo?

A. Yes, they would bo evorngc figures undor thoso spociel conditions.

q. Is there any set poriod wherein a ocraon boeor.es ndaoted to
high altitude; for instance, would it bo four or five times undergoing
extreme altitude in a ooriod of a veeic, which would enure a oorson to
toccao adopted to it; or would it be within a month or would sono noonlo
covor bectmc adnoted or is it possible to etriko m average? You nay
reaver that extensively if yai care to, doctor.

*. I will bo glad to do so because one car. oxplcin this ratter
very simply end I shell try to do so. Genuine adaotr.tion to altitudo is
only tho circunetanco or rather tho condition arising after a stay at
high altitude for some time. 7or example, in the Alps between 2,000 rad
4,000 mature it takes about two weeks to be complete. At «von higher
altitudes, for trample, in the Andes or the Himalayas, it is possible
for the mountain climbers to go up to 8,000 meters end adapt themselves
to this altitude and this of course takes even longer. Between this
true altitude adaptation rnd want occurs when a person rises reoidly ir.


Crurt Sc. 1

2 n -'-ay -*7-K-12-2-i3i-i<eehen (7cn Schoon)


•he lo'* pressure chanter for a limited tinea there is r. definite distinc¬
tion. It is not possible to cbtain altitude adaptation through rooented
stcye in a lov orcssure ch/nbtr. In any cese not if these lov pressure
chenbcr eroorinents ere United to a period of tine to tc, throe or
four nonths and if for exanple there is only one ascent uer da," ar.d then
after the second, third or fourth tine the person is a littlo .nore rcsio-
ttat thz.n the first tine.

After the first or second tine, did you say?

A. Yeo, but that neons only very slight increases in the resistance
to altitudo. It lo possible because in the first ascent the subject is
unused to this n«v situation end does not act auito right, perhaps tho
breathing is not auite right, and those inhibitions will bo renoved on
the nocond or third tlno when the subjoct is usod to the situation. Xow
if vo continue those prossure chaaber ascents for jeers, such as the
pooclo working in aviation scdlcino arc forced to do, tho nuch later,

•ty after nino nonths or a year, thero is c further lnproveaont in tho
resistance to altitudo, but this doos not epuroach what is caused by a
• toy in the aountains. I do not believe that tho results of orcoricer.tD
vculd be influenced by it if within throe nonths, twenty or thirty or
thirty-flvo expcriaor.ts were porforned on tho ia r .o person.

Supposed you used no for instanco as an oxporlnontal subject.

So you think I could take fivo of those tests a vook and not bccono
adapted for a period of three weeks?

A. According to what I have Just caid, I do not believe that you
v ould bo -dented after throe weeks. I cssunc that you are healthy; you
could of course undertake five eroorinontr with the lack of oxygen within
c week vijtkout suffering on;/ ill effects.

ft. ?3r a period of three weeks end net bccono adapted?

A. Yog, altitude r.dantion is not caused b" a limited stay daily
in a low pressure chscber.

... ’.‘iv, how can you tell when I beeone adapted? Give ne a. Ginclc

t-svtr*.


8132


27 JJG-13-3—Uccben (vcn Schcn)

C^urt .Tc. 1

- That is 7cry. sisrilc tc Ictcrcdne. *r.c first tim- I check
cith.r - l:r.r you can y on ith.ufc exygen *t r. cortri.; altitude, hrn
l ; n : : y u ccn stry ~t certain altitude cr hen far ycu can ascend viiti.-
cut cxyjcn, th t is an 'scent otp^rijcjit. If I repeat the erase txper-
tr.-.it rfter thr.c, four or six reeks, I can ietcraino whether ycu cen
r-iria in fer c len/cr tire at the same -ltitule or rt the sane seco-i
r -Jfc-t:: r ycu cm ;c tc a hi ;hcr altitude vdtr.cut Suc .ain.; sick. Thrt
test is Very sioplo,

Q Mew in n poric: cf tte :wnths, jrcUr, nii^ht I bccc.ae adapted
if I rs iscc! thirty tim.s?

•• I h'vc rlrcady said, repute-’. r 3C mts i:. the lew pressure
eh-.. 1 -r c use - very slight improvement in the resistance tc altitude,
ut nothin.- that aviation medicine calls rltitudo adaptation in the
atrict-st senso.

Q Ucw, jeeter, the freezin: experiments at Dneh'u; y ur first
mounter *ith any nctitiviUo ccncornini, cxporlmcnt'tion in the field
r roserreh ccncemin. freezing cr shock free ensure tc eel' 1 vre
after hcvinj sr.t in -t the nee tin r, '-otaccn Hippke nnJ R-sefcer; • rs th't
the first time?

.. t -fter the r.cctin-, but the discussion tetreen Kippkw and
.-.•.7ch.r -- .s th.j first time I heorJ anythin*. about it, lec'use Ii.;s
Cr>lle t L\ U j - rticipatc in this -tiscucsicn.

On lr.ee 11 cf dccu;:.nt beck 3, this ic 1 .cumait 3W-IS. .;e
12, I . sorry, this is document .Jo. 203, that is the leW fr i
--h- r the T eichsfuchrer c-r.ccmi;,. the -asi-TU.-oct f Joriscii,
lslcchn-r -r.d Singer t. v. rk :n th- . r ':1m rf freosir..*;; c ycu

ti. t letter, teeter? * * |t

.. I have the photostat f the cu-e.-.t, yes.

. ‘ as Jr-risch in the Luftvnffc?

- T1 * is is Trefesser Jrrisch, h- had nr office r pcsiti. . in
1 Luffrffe.

• Kclzlc-hn-r in the Luft rffc?


9135


27 - ’ -JG-12-4-I&.chrn (v a Scb- r.)
%urt h'c. 1


Klslcchn-r n"s a Stitsarst or O' crstmbs-.rzt in the Luftwaffe,


-i .-6 Sincer in tho Luftwaffe?

.. I have learned here that Singer v-s a Luftwaffe prthrlorlat in
JAlnich. I believe in the research assi. 7 r.ncnt list there ktjj acme ro¬
se rch essifisacnt jiven tc Sinner fr. 1 vhich I have aeon, ho si't have
been an ObersteLsnrst durin the war. I dc net knc*. hi-i . ers: nelly an-:
I bed n chin, tc Zc with hia.

0 Itaschtr was ir. the. Luftwaffe?

.. Yes, Rnschor im a Str/ 3 -rat in the Luftwaffe.

q ‘ oltz wes in the Luftwaffe?

.. Yes, that hr 3 been established here.

-1 Tore th- freezing experiments rt Dachau Luftwaffe cxpcidncnts
-r SS ex. orients?

*. ..cccrding to '.hot I heard at the tine fr'a Rrschor, 1 theu^ht
they rore iofinitely ftaachox’s experiments, based cn specific crier
rnl np Tovd cf Kijxsler.

' here did Heclzlcohner report cn th uc* urinents, or rather
Roaoher; hero did he re,crt ab-ut hi 3 wert:, lid ho reprrt at the
October Booting in Humbert?

.. The experiments wore reported only and exclusively to H ii an le.'.
ftischor hr. 1 obtained , orsdssicn from Hi-nlor tc speak at tho loctur-,.
-he s-ryviatcr experiments were n tep secret natter and he tveo t«. ivo
caly a mi eh inferoatien as necessary.

» Th-t ncetinp in October in tarnberg was a Luftwaffe a etir. ;

•-3 it a t?

.. Yes, it nr. s Luftwaffe n.otinj cr c. nee tin; or. '.'chrlf ci tho


;vlic"l ir.rpcctcrr.to cf tho Luft..-ff j»

“c ycu knew '.here Jnrisch is new?


.. I as suae that he is in I nn s b ruck.


c .c ycu knew where Hclzlcehncr is new?


net, I he'd he ".rs 'lead.

3134


I '


27 I ch^(von Sc-.cn)

Ccurt 3


Q ycu kncv thct he c.crittcd suicide?

.. I hoe Pi that, y<-s.

'i *.cs the c-usc fer his suicide his portidpoticn in these
coc -ri~.er.ts?

l. I :’cn»t knev, I cculd act scy,

Q Thio is c -cod brockin’ point, Y^ur He nor.

TTZ rRESIT Z~: The Tribunnl vill ' e in r-coso until ls30 this
nftcrnc n.

(„ rccoss una token until 1^30 heurs.)


27 Ifey 47-».-DJG-1/.-l-Ccck (Raaalcr)
Court I


AFHWIOON SESSION

(The hearing reconvened at 1345 heurs 27 Hey 1947)

THZ l.S&uLi The Tribunal is again in session.

TK2 iRESDSHT: Counsel mtj proceed.

BECKrR FKETSE.NG - Resumed
CROSS EJUlfBL.TICN - Continued

BY Ift. H.U.DY >

q Dr. Becker Freyseng, in Juno 1942, luring the course cf the
conference between Frefosser Kiprkc and Dr. haacher did tho nanoa Dr.
Jeriach, Dr. Hclzlcohncr and Dr. Singer ever appear cr ever ccuc into
the conversation?

I dc net r counter the noc ef Singer because ho never played any
prrt in -ir force rcsc.-rch, Hc»ever, the n-mes Jarisch an' Holzloohntr
wore mentioned rt least in ay prosenco lecauso !>cth the -jo n-mcc cculd bo
found on r. liat cf these whe had to lecture during the planned meeting
about emergency aca matters. I never horxl at a later deto that .ra-
feaacr Sin er in any "ay icrkcd cn the scientific cold questions.

Q New let us refer again, doctor, tc decuaent No. 2S3, that is a
letter free haschor tc the Koichsfuchrcr. It is on pr.go 12 of English
document beck No. 3. This letter, as ytu knew is dated 15 June 1942
and reads as follows:

.. I may correct you, it ic really June.

Q I said Juno, I am sorry:

"A fow days age 1 was erderei tc a c.nferoncc with the Inspector
of the Luftwaffe Uedical Service, General Oberstabaarzt i'rcfosscr Dr.
Kippke. :ihon I told him you had net yet rccoivcd the report concerning
the experiments as a whole and you still had tc givu permission for


thv reportTha cf the results, he lid net rsk fer any report. Tnc In-

>>\

specter was extraordinarily kind aivl ask~d ae as liaison nan with the
SS tc express tb jjV:, esteemed Rcichsfuehrer, his private thanks fer
the experiments." *


C136


27 hay 47 -„-L£r-2-3k.>- Cook (Rasnler)

Court 2k>. 1

2 .’cti is it your contention Dr. Bicker Iroyseng that this nesting
30 ra roforro-. to 'y HaseVr was cV auotin* botseen Rase her or.. Hipoke
at uh-icfc yew -.lore resent?

I would SS3U3J so, yes.

C. Ka* tho letter goes.pn to say, doctor:

^At th- aa._ ti -j .V (which r«.f^rs to General Oborstabeorzt
Profess or Hipoko) asked for p^r.cissio.n to c^rry out t.V cold oix-
)»at«r erp.rltents in Dachau and ssVd that the following bj
in the*, vxpcric-nts," and Uxroin v. note -hro. naxv.3, Jarisch,
Hslsloohrwr on’ binder.

Kw during tho course of tho conference did you .Vnr or did
the .xttcr cooo r> thet it would be n»cosoary to .ngugu a pathologist
to caeiat and coll.'urate with Raachcr and. i.oltlo-hn-r r whoever
wns picked or chosen to ::ork with Raachvr?

A. No, th.olo 1st was not eiscursu in ay pr«3enco.

Q. ft. 11, new, c.3 a Oidical *..n utr.t 'lould bo tho purpos
for ~ssignir. a pathologist to this research dutiiil?

A. T V )ur os. lor that .:ayvar;/, boc-.uao for ocov.rij»-ntrl

pathology a nvudwr of papers iwr- written by ao in collaboration -.;ith

r.toolo.ista orri 1 therefore sewowhat informed about this a vcl- l

fora of pntholo I n.ver .Vard t.Vt .’rofessor Singer :.t -ny tljo
conc.rn-d hics-L ,.ith cold questions. When I saw that dociMont

Vre for tho lirbt ti-v I mj very 3urcris.d. It srya tho n*raj of
Singvr. At no ti« boforu had I se r. th.-t nra- in conn-ction ..1th
’:'.ld or 'ny other air force research work.

Q. '.lit t ro thu duties of • oatholo ist in Gernon aedicino?

A. T;»c ’uti-c of the octholo. 1st re tensive and varied.

*•“ Bain task o£ c .ethologist is to Oe-arch XortV c;usu on’ the •
- liuCt of thj illness on th- living orfenisn. for instance, i.f part
‘ bad tisr-u- is j oir£ cut out during n oovration rrd if IV
•- --icing physic! n-:ants to knew vhother there is cancer. this ;-rt

hiiyz r.rk. to ih. o-thnlogiot. On the oth-r hatf*, Vnev.r

f!37


27 Hay 47 -..-14-5- Cook (Pannier)

Court Ho. 1

any patient dies, cn autopsy is very oftonbeing carried out in order
to clieriy find cut the cause for the illness and the death. I
have r Irocd y told you that aodom pathology in x rticular performs
a great nuobor of cnxuriatnts. For instance, cninel locpurlaants,
end ov-n -ftcr this letter 11 does-not 'x.cou. rppor.nt to -w *t
.■’ll that jr. Lipilo :t that tine counted on death coses cur ins
those wspuriasnts .'u t becue- he ask-d pathologist to particip a tv.

It is cuite oosoiolb that ho nontioned tills nemo of winger to
Rtachor ir. ore or to got then into contact with one another since he
know perhaps, tSfct Singer hod particular inf oration in thit I i-ld
but I knew nothin about that o-rsorr.il/.

Q. Ilan 70U exclude th« possibility that ?rofes:or Hioplio
vac fully \.:rsi of the fact th:t death die' rosult froo theo. -no- i-ionts
at Dachau me* that it was n-c-ssrry or would b- n_ c _ s e ~ry to hrvo
c pathologist on it so that ho can perform an autopsy in ordor to
dotercinu th- cause of death.

I c nnot oxcladu that possibilit bo cause as a result of
the i 11-0 41 ch I xvac :n<3 hich roro suaaitt-d during the Iri-1 of
Uilch regardin', arolcssor Klppku, I can sou ?rofesoor Kippkc <i-ittoc !
that possibility hich rou Just u.ntion.d. ta.-uvir, 1 lmo’’ that .0 .

I did not kne tJv.t at the tir.e.

C. Do-tor, J-t us turn to doeua-nt ,x>, 2Cc, which is "’rosuoution
irhibit 86, to be 1 ounl on peg- 22 of the ax lioh. This i3 a
r-s.'rch order on ir-voing to Holaloohner:

A. Yen, I have th- eocunent.

C;. 11a: *.io see our fil- r.ot tion, that is the r.uaber 55,
th«n rrbic 2, r.c .n numeral II 3, those re ih. file nuaberc of -d-t
office, in dvl ri at?

... Sir.co :to to concernad with ti«e year of 1942, tv.is is fcho
refvrnt Anthony Iwre I was working, that is correct.

Q. And .that tin. Anthony was ref. rent nd you wt.ro ssictnt

ny*


r-f. r_nt?


27 ila y 47 -ir-Ur-Jr-?-?- Cook (Sasnlsr)

Court j»o. 1


A. Yos, that is true.

i. Then is it true that t.is letter criginntod from Anthony's
of: ice?

A. Yv8| it c -to from the refemt.

Q. I mo. ell nowJ rote in th- first parr-grr.phjift-r.. >be‘
salutation there ia the foliating lsnguage:

"The msx ctorct- of the Medical i^rvice of the Luftwaffe !r.a
given order .or roseorch to tho Stebserzt .’rofeasor It. Kolzlo-hncr,
r- ferenco .'’jovo| doted 24 February 1942, . or work on the following
problems

'"The effect of lreuzinc on w .aro-bloodud subjects. 1 "

Her/ did this order for rose.irch to Professor kolcloehrv-r
initiate from 70 nr office 1 ?

A. I canaot tell you that from ay o n I-nowledyu.

Dr. n??d: Hr. ('resident, in order to avoid any nisu:x!er-
st.rdlns I .ucy coax-nt or that docura-nt a follows:

It was quoted h»r. : "Th- effect of freezing or. warn blooded
subjects." Object, Iw.eVoT, must be understood an meaning tho
human being in Ux. canon ussgo of tho relish language. Perhaps
th Interpreter would do kind enough to confirm that warm blooded
beings as it is stated in th- German docurxr.t book, in other words
" Tabluetor" does ;vot limit itself to the human beings but Iso
extends to t!ie -nifl.il. In other words, it cuans every being which
has warm blood flowing in it'3 veins. I on r king this remark now
b-c uik the very uaae nisunderotanding rose r eCer.tly during direct
•-•xanixv tior. and on that occasion the interpreter was kind enough to
canfira that this tr nsl tior. wns not correct. H should rood, nc'

I quote: "On wen blooded beings”. Perhaps I may sk the interpreter
*hoth-r he thinks this interpretation is more mxitoble.

THi ZLZSJDZ'.iT: l.iil th- Interpreters give their opinion
•••a t;.e matter?

I'TiHT?. Yes, Your Honor, the other dry defense counsel


S139


27 Msy 47 Cook (Hsalur)

Court Ho, 1

-sk^d for cpinion nhcn I suggested thrt interpretation to hia,

it should o. ■ orn blooded beings, instead of ^orz. blooded subjects


27 Kay 47_IjC_15-l-C-T08C (lhtj| Ba-ler)

Court I

^ I new continue, doctor. It is immaterial to Prosecution
whether that is subject or whether it is toeing, I eight add. But did
this reee-rch order to Professor Dr. Eolzloehncr initiate from Anthony's
office?

A This research assignment wee handled by the referat Anthony
because certainly becomes apparent fron the number of*that research
assignment ifcove t^ere. In addition I already mentioned repeatedly
that aviation medical assignments were necessarily handled in the refe^
rat for aviation medicine. Here ve were clearly with such a problem.

H How, we will note the next paragraph, doctor, which reads ao
follows: "At the proposal of Stabarzt Dr. Raecher appropriate examina¬
tions were made of husain beings, and in agreement with the Beichsfuchror
SS suitable facilities wore used for the examinations.''

It continues on: "In order to carry out those examinations a
research group "Hardships at Sea" was set up, consisting of Profess Dr.
Holzloehner as loader and Stabcnrzt Hr. Raschor and Dr. Flnke."

How, might I gather fron reading this document th* the reforat
for aviation medicine was fully aware of tho activities in which Raschor,
Finkc, and Holzloehner wero engaged in at Dachau or might I acouno that
their work was merely working on actual cases of persons rescued from
thO BOB?

A I didn't puitc understand your question. Arc you asking me
now about the meaning of the research group "Distress at Sea"?

Tot.

A I cannot clearly answer your cues*.ion fron my own knowledge ^
because I don't knew whether at this tine, in the summer of 1942, Pro¬
fessors 3olzlcchner, Rancher and Finke were at the channel coast and
were working on "distress at sea" questions. I know that a number of
other researchers were sent to the channel by Anthony end Hlppke in or¬
der to gain experience. I do not know whether Holzloehner, Plnke and
Rancher were among them.


27 Hay 47-A_JjC*l5-2-C-ross (1st., Baalcr)

Court I

* '■'ell, than I subnit to you, doctor, this possibility. Aaeunc
for the scsent thi« research group of Eolzloehnor, Finke, and Hp.echer,
as outlined In this docusent, were working as a research group on the
sea shore, on the coast, with actual cases of persons rescued fros sea.-
In as nuch as the document Is signed by Anthony would you assunc that
Anthony was aware of the work being perforacd by Eolzloohncr, Ilnkc, and
PaocherT

A I«t ne say at first that this letter was not signed by
Anthony,. Anthony only certified tho true copy.

Ct I roall-e that, doctor. He olgned the true copy. He cuot
hovercad It to sign It. Bo you think that he had knowledge of those
activities?

A I would assuao so because I hac nado a little file notice
about the conversation betveon Hippie, and Bascher which I handed to
Anthony when ho cane back fron hlo vacation. He then continued to doal
with thio natter.

k Then on tho faco of this docusent It Indicates to us that It
originated froa Anthony's office and this further that out - we see
Anthony's signature appcrrlng on the docusent. How, Isn't It true that
Anthony's office ordered Professor Holtlochncr to work on this particu¬
lar subject and, in fact, set up this research group of Kolzloohner,
Raochcr, and Flnkc?

A I an sure that the refarat wag no*. In a position to do that.
Only Hlppkc was in a position to issue such an order.

k But, doctor, .it has the initials and the code, flic nusbers,
of Anthony's office on the order. *hat arc they doing there? Hippko
doesn't write out an order and put down the flic nusbers of Beckor-
Preyseng's office. He puts down his o«n file nusbers. It sta.tes here
in the first paragraph that “The Inspectorate gave an order for research
to Professor Eolzlochncr,.reference above*, and the reference that •
appears above is reference Ho. 1 and it has *55 there as the file rus¬
hers of Anthony '3 section, isn't that true?

A Ho, that is not true.


81L2


27 Kay 4 7-A_F »C_15-3-Btobb (Int*, Busier)
Court I


I suppose that you are going to tell me now reference Ho. 2
le the reference referred to In that paxapraph. That is the only way
that you can slip out, doctor.

A Ho, nc, no. I think in ay direct examination and also yes¬
terday I discussed the- fill notices in great detail. I nay repeat once
more. The reference So. 55 and lib 6hov th>t this asslgnaent vps worked
upon in the referat for Aviation Kedlelno and I repeatedly stated that
all the original rcsoarch assignments as far as they vcr< not aero
continuatl-ns had to be signed by the Medical Inspectorate or the Chief
of the Medical Services.

^ Hell now this report that is aentioned here in this document
la undoubtedly the report which Eolzloehner was to deliver at the
October netting. Io that a correct assumption on ny pert, doctor?

A ihat passage of the document arc you roferring to?

H I an referring to the sixth paragraph which reads as follows?

"The research documents and an extonslve report will be presented
to the Boichofuehrer-SS by Stabaarzt Dr. Hascher. It is requested that
the origlnalo or copies of the report and of the documents bo put at the
disposal of the Inspectorate of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe.

"It io intended to sake the results, in the fora of an extract,
accessible to experts at a conference which will take place in Hurnborg
on 26 and 27 October 1942. The daily schedule of the conference is
enclosed."

How f then, as a result of this order fron Kippkc Holtloehner,
Bascher, and Fluke are to give a repo-t tha* is a concise report at
the Humberg Fretting Conference in October, isn't that the gist of thin

docuaer.t?

A Were you talking about an oral report? Or e brief report?

Tea, in thio letter by the Bcichofucfcrer-SS'e permission is asked that
the results of 'he experiments be published at Hurnberg.

*4 I sec. Hell, now ve win proceed to the- report which weB
published at Humberg. This i* Document H0-401, I believe.


27 May *7-UjC-15-A-Gro«8 (Int,, Ee=lcr)
Court I


A Tea, I have it.

It la to he found on pa#-* 79, of your Honor's Docuaent Book,
Docuaent Book III, Prosecution ixhibit f93. If you viu turn to the
second page of this report, doctor, the section referred to as the
"Contents". c go down to IV, headed "Trcetnent of ?roen Persons"
and we acc there tho nance of Jarisch, Veits, and Eol-loehr.cr. A r e
those the sane gentleeen we have been discussing here this norning?

A I only know one Professor Jarisch and this is the one. Then
we have Professor Veit* here who is sitting in the dock and then there
is Professor Holtloehncr whoa we have discussed here.

<< Sow wc go down to VI which is entitled "Measuroe to conbat
Thirst". V© see thore the rare Schaefer. Is that the sane as the
defendant Schaefer?

A Yes, it is the ease.

H Schaefer was at this nectlng, was he?

A Yes, he was present during thatasoting and he held a lccturo
about conbat of thirst.

<< Did ho participate in any other phaso of this nocting?

- A Voll I an sure he didn't participate in any of tho discuss ions.
I cannot say whether he was present during tho loctures. At any re. to
I don't roneabor it. Ho had never had anything to do with tho questions
of frooting and cold,

vi Sow we go down to VII and under there wo see 5, the nano of
Euebnor. Is that one and the sane Huobner as tho Huobnor implicated
with Bppirgcr in the sea water experiments?

A So, not only is it a different nen but hie name is different.
This nan here is H-u-e-b-n-c-r and the Professor whoa ay departnent
chief asked for advice about the sea wat*r experlacnts is not Huebner,
it is Ssubncr. They are t«o entirely different persons.


Ccurt No. 1

27 Hay 47-A-16-i-LE>:-Harrcv (Hanler)


Q. Nov, the na=e Just above that, »4. Doorfler. Who is that?

Do you know that gentlercan.

A. I think I have teen bin once. That vat on the occasion of that
Suernberg seating. He was e caotain in the Kedical Corns of the Luft-
vaffe and hod been connitted as a physician near the channel coast in
sea distress sorvice. That is all I cen tell you about hla.

Q. Wo note on the next page, doctor, the first nenc is Anthony.

A. Tet.

Q. And thereunder, we go dovn to *7. That is your none.

A. Yes.

Q. Wo go dovn to *11 and ve find the nano Buechner.

A. Buechner, yes.

Ct, Do you know that gentlcnon?

A. Yos.

Q, Was he the gontlenan that worked with Professor Volts?

A. I know of no such collaboration.

Q. Was ho one of tho lecturers at the Luftgau School?

A. At first, I never in ay life heard about a Luftgeu school.
Secondly, I never heard that Suechnor was ever a loeturer in any insti¬
tute of the Luftgau. Ihero oust bo sone nisundcrstanding.

q. Do you rocall, in Raschor's document to tho Reichsfuchror, which
vas Docunont 1602 PS in Docuaer.t Book So. 2, vhero Rascher stated, "For
tho tlno being I have been assigned to Luftgau C-xr'.ando No. 7, Hunlch,
for a nodical selection course"? Maybe I erronooucly called that a
school. I'a sorry. I ask you now, was Buechner one of the lecturers
at this Luftgau Connnndo No. 7 Kcdical Selection Course?

A. I novor hoard anything about that. I really don't knov.^

Q, And then ve go down to *22 and see tho nc.no Pinko. Is that one
and tho sene Pinke as nentioned in the other documents here?

A. Yes, that probably is the case because, up to now, I have only
heard of one Pinks.

Sov, Doctor, when you heard these lectures, particularly the


Court Sc. 1

27 Kay 47-A-l6-2-5EX-£errov (Easier)


lecture gives by Eolzloefcner, I understand that it wasn't possible to
ascertain that the work upon vfcicfc his report ves based ves verk on
experimental subjects. Is that your position here?

A. I have stated in great detail that one had to deduce from this
Eolslochner lecture that in his results we were concerned with conclu¬
sions derived free a coabination of practical cxooriences with sea dis¬
tress, experiments on human beings, and experinents on aninals.

Q. I see. Well now, I vast to recall tho tostinory of Professor
Schrocdor vhoroin he said, on page 2625 of tho official transcript, that
he tasod his statement solely on Eolrloehner's report vfcich was the only
thing that interested his. la answor to a question by Hr. McKancy
wherein Kr. HcEaney asked, “I think you stated to your dofonee counool
that it vac impossible for you to conclude from this reDort that oxperl-
nents hnd boon carried out. but rathor you thought thoy were clinical
observations made on rsoople fished out of tho North Sea. Ic that right?"
And I repent Schroedor's answer: "Yes, I bnsod ny testimony solely on
Holtloohner's roport which ««s the only thing that interested no." Now,
do you concur with rrofessor Schrocdor that, after seeing the Holzloohncr
roport, that you could only ascertain thrt the results thereof wore
obtained from practical experiences and not from oxocrincntntlon?

A. Yes, I say rccind you that the situation under which Profcsoor
Schroeder read the reoort and under which I Just hcord of it orally were
entirely different. I knew beforehand, by virtue of ny participation in
Eipcko's and Bsscfccr's conference, that those exoerinents were olonnod.
Professor Schroeder, on the other hand, did not know that. Ho neroly
knew tho feet that Eoltloehner had gained experiences in practical Bea
distress servico. In other words, our points of departure are entirely

M

different.

Veil now, you testified here that you felt the reason why tho
witness Lute was in a position to ascertain the nothod used by rolsloohr.er
ves because of his extensive knowledge of freezing uroblcas and that
other people, such as Schrooder and yourself, and, I suooosc, ar s v other


eii.6


Court So. 1

27 Xay 47-A-16-3-£EK-Karrow {Easier)

-edical nan not specializing in this field, would be unable to ascertain
the ease thing# that Lutz ascertained. le that correct?

A. Tes, that is correct. I nay point out to you once noro thet
rrofessor Schroedor wasn't even nreaent during that meeting, hut only
read the printed report atout half a year later.

Q. Veil, reading the printed report would he to hi9 advantage in
being able to ascertain the method* uaed in the experiments, wouldn't
it? I would thick that you could gather nore fron reeding the report
than froe eitting down lietcning to an oral reoort, or would it he vico
versa. Doctor?

A. I nay draw your attention to the fact that on the 26th and 27th
of Octohor there voa no vrltton report available, hut that thero was
only tho oral roport by Kolzloehner.

Q. How do you know that?

A. Becauae I heard the roport. I listened to it. I have already
■aid oo.

Q, How do you know ho didn't have the written one available?

a. At any rato, I didn't have a written report ovaileblo. I novor
■aw one except tho one that waa later printed.

Q. Let'e go on. Doctor.

Sow, aa I understand it, you havc.ltatcd hero thet tho method of
rapid re-warning wee not new. Vat nothing new. That, in fact, it was
a very old nothod. Ia that right?

A. So, you niounderstood no.

Q, hall, do you know, as a natter of fact, that tho method of
raoid re-warning is a very old method and that it was firet worked out
in 1880 by a Hussion doctor naned Lepczinsky?

A. Tea, that is true and it la included in this report. This
method, as it frecucntiy occurs not only in medicine, vrs entirely for¬
gotten so that decades later nobody else thought about this ouick re¬
versing method. Vo are here concerned with a re-discovcry which so often
occurs in'human history.

eu7


«


Court So. 1

27 Hoy 47-A-l&-4-HEX-Kar r ov (Easier )


q, That's true. It nay well have teen a ro-discovcry, tut it had
bees discovered in I 860 by LepczinslQ', had it cot?

A. Yes, it says so somewhere hero.

q, Veil now, Doctor Volts here had admitted repeatedly that, ic
his own experiment el vorie on animals, that, in addition to Lepczlnksy's
earlier exneriencos, the problem was full>- settled and was ready to be
applied to human boings, hasn't he, without further oxperinentation on
human beings under artificial conditions?

A. I believe Professor V e ltr said so hore. >hat ouestion do you
with ae to answer now?

q. Voll, in view of Professor Volte's testimony and in view of the
fact that Lcpczinoky had founded this method of re-warning - raoid re-
vornine - in leeo, wasn't it roady to be applied now for purposes of
thorapoutic trial on people actually exposed to shock from exposure to
cold without any further experimentation on human beings?

A. I don't believe thet any nodical authority anywhere in tho world
would havo boon preparod to introduce catcher's method of rc—yarning
officially without first experimenting upon human bolngs. during tho
slow re-worming—

q, (Interrupting) Just a moment. Doctor, you're trying to got
nvoy from no. Raschcr's method? Thet wao Kolzlochnor's, Finkc's, and
Reschor's method, wasn't it7 It wasn't Rascher's alone. Raschor had on
ordor to experiment with Holxloehner and Finkc.

A. I don't know exactly what assignment fiolrloehnor had received
from Hippie*.. I assumed that this was the main assignment.

q. Well now, you hove mentioned, in the course of your examination,
that those experiments - these freezing experiments - were decidedly
useful and you Quoted Harper's Kagazino wherein it said that Dr.
Alexander had found the method of rc—warning a useful ono end reported
it as such. However, Harper'6 didn't quote that passage correctly.

But, nevertheless, it was Lepczinsky's method of recid and Intensive
rc-warning that was found in the Raschor experiments, -wasn't it? It


Court Ho. 1 . »

27 Key 47-A-16-^S«-*arrov (Ka=l«r)

vntii't Veltr's end Eolrloehner'e end Hatcher' s findin* or discovery,
vtn nothin* but e reassurance of Lepczinsky's ncthod, vas it not?


27 r.ay ‘.T-A-aK-lT-l-Kaloy-(Rainier)
Court 1


*v. I cannot rep.'.y to that question because I neither
concerned myself with freezing research generally, nor
lid I read the paper by Professor Lepczlnskl, and I don't
know exactly what he suggested.

Q. You concerned yourself with it h;re for nearly
a aay on direct; since you exhibited such an exhaustive
Knowledge in the natter I think it necessar* for you to
take a stand here?

A. Only on the basis of the documents.

'J. Is it necessary tc porfora exjcrlaenta or. human
beings to reassure tho Lapozlnsky method?

-i. ^8 I laAglne tho situation once more I could

affirm the situation clearly.

Q. /oil, now after hearing thlsnjport and the
roassuranoe that tho Luftwaffe do to apply that method?

To be sure some 100 gontlenen, as set forth In this
dooumont llatonod to this report by Holzloohner, what
did they do about it, did they use it?

'./oil, lot mo point out to you that during this
meeting n number of researchers held lectures on tho basis
of a number of experiments and all arrived at tho samo
result, which was finally confirmed by Profeooor Holzloeh-
ner. Professor Kolzloehnor's lecture was only the final
confirmation, and I Know that the modloal Inspectorate
afterwards introduced quick rew.mlng no the only decisive
Qethod of treatment.

Q. Veil, now. Doctor, what la bothering mo and
bothering no terribly is the fact that extensive rosearoh
was conducted at the Dachau Concentration Camp on rapid
rewarding, — tostlcony here in this trial shows that
many deaths occurred. There isn't one shred of evidence

Cl 30


27 May 4?- rf -AX-l?-2-:-;aloy- (Raaler)


Court 1


available in this Tribunal produced by the defendants
that indicates to any decree that these methods as dis¬
covered by Holzloehner, Hascher and rink a were ever
applied oy the Luftwaffe or by the ^nay or by the :*avy,
yet you have taken the'at.rnd here and attempted to in¬
troduce Harper's .»a.;azine to show that these experiments
werj Justified end that we, as a matter of fact used
them in the United States .iavy; why didn't you use thorn
in tne German .o*ay and -«avy?

The method was used from 1942 on.

Q. l/o 11, all that Schroeder could tell us about it
was that someone in an air sea station In Greece requested
a bathtub which as a matter of fact was never delivered,
because of subsequent retreat from Greece, but he didn't
toll us anything about the actual use of the method; there
is no evidonco hero that you ever used the method; what
was the reason for this ex.naustlvo research If you novor
intended to use the method, and in fact never used tho
method, apparently?

tfe nevor tnod to prove that. This lo the flrot
time that the Prosecution has raised tho onarge that this
raothod was never applied.

Q. I havon't raised the cnargo, doctor, I am merely
seeking information from y?u. inasmuch as you have defin¬
itely taken up the tls» of this Tribunal to explain groat-
ly the value of those experiments; now what was the value
to the merman Luftwaffe, to the German .-onay and tho German
Navy; you haven't been able to show us that?

-»• I nsver tried to show that. I don't consider
that relevant, I and my defense counsel. If I were to go
Into everything connected with the trial from a scientific


£151


27 :*.ay -«7-17- al oy- ( Raaal er )

Jourt l

point of view then the time I have used so far would be
completely inadequate, but I as quite -willing to bring
a number cf wlmesses to prove that quick rewarding was
applied. I believe that will be quite easy to prove. ,»s

to the Professor Lepczlnsky -

£. Now youare getting at it; you are coming along
with me. Then the method was actually applied, the method
of Lepczinsxy was .ctually applied in the (Jarman Vehrmaoht?

-v. I said before I didn't know the LopetinSky
method. I never reed his paper on the subject.

Z. Then the method rediscovered by Rascher,
Holzloehner and Flnko was actually used, and adopted by
the German Vehrmacht, la that correct?

I am quite oort.aln of it. I w.ae never present
myself, because I wasn't working cpeclfioally on these
quostlons, but I believe I can find people who will bo
able to confirm that the method wao actually used,

Q. Woll, now. Doctor, in regard to the position
that Sohroedor was unable to ascertain from Holzloehnor '0
report, that the results were secured from experimentation,
I have a fow questions to put to you; now, on the seoond
page of Holzloehnor's report, that is page 10 of the
document itself, page *2 of the original, that is document
Wo, 401, Chat will bo found on page 38 of the English
Document book III, in the second paragraph on that page,
Holzloehnor speaks of human curves, "human curves." It is
possible, Doctor, to obtain curves which require special
measurements from people floating in the sea; don't you
think it would bo a lot to actually obtain one good meas¬
urement under such circumstances?

A. Lot me point out that these cooling curves very


C152


2? May -i7-,r-.i£-l?--r-Maloy-(Raaler)

Court L

obviously refer to the animals. Professor Holzloehner
•-'rites; "In tho case of water temperature under 15 degrees
of interest to tho Sea Distries service, all reflect reg¬
ulation appears only slightly in the usual test animals.

The freezing curves to a groat extent resemble tho phys¬
ical nodal which can only bo compared with many reservat¬
ions to hun.in curves oecauso of their different measurem¬
ents and differing constant tem.»er .ture."

This shows qultool early that these curves wore obtain¬
ed from animals. Those are the experiments that professor
Kolzloshner mentioned on the previous page, and now some
other rosults and constant figures of normal body tempera¬
ture, and freeting point o: fat, and so forth, that for
these reasons the experiments cn animals and the physical
context cannot bo applied to human bolngs.

Q. Now, this report of Dr. Holzloehner refers to
statistics found on reecuod iiersons from the sea, refers
to statistics found fro-, experimentation on animals and
the roport Is more or less a comparison, is it not, and
that Is I assume what Professor Sehroudor thought when
ho road this report, that the mention regarding human
beings referred to those rescued at sea, and not to aotual
experimental suojocts, and nereln he refers to human
curves, and data concornlng human curves, unions it was
on a human being. I would think that would bo elementary,
wouldn't it. Doctor?

. 1 . That 16 not elementary, and it is not true, bec¬
ause suoh coolln-j curves can, of course, bo obtained fron
blood, 1 « can be determined how long a ship wrecked person
has been in the water, and then I can enter this timo on
a curve and the temperature which I have obtalnod from the


'153


27 Hay 47-^-ja-17-5*.Kaloy- (Raalar)

Court 1

boat. These were covered boats with cabins, and I could
measure tho temperature. I could correlate the tine ••'ith
the temperature and after I do this lr. 10 or 20 cases I
ootain a curve, but what Professor Holzloohner says her;
clearly refers to animals experiments.

Q. Let's refer to the next paragraph; I wonder if
this refers to animals ex 'criconts. The next naragr-»ph
states:

Q. The blood count, as well as the changes in tho
blood analysis wore also tested in such severe friczlng.
Is that referring to animals, to the aoga and cats he
mentioned? That has nothing to do with the tost on hura-m
beings which ho refers to later in the report?

Any I road tho context?

Q. Yes, that is paragraph‘s. of page 10 of page -k2


of the original?


Court 1

May 2 ''-a- 16-1- HD-i-loehan-VonSobo n.


«. Ye8, I would Ilka to reed the context. It rends:
^r.-.e blood c ur.t, es well r.s the chr.p.gae In the blood
ar.'-.lysie were rlsj testec. in such severe freezing. These
investigations yielded few new results ana they cort’es *ond
the results of elow freezing or the results deterialncd
fr c local freezing. aso ng these ch >n ; us, the c- n^lderncle
rise m viscosity lr. dogs and cats o mentioned, which
cokos It obvious that they were •'nlnel experiments.

alright, let . s ref r t the next -j-ge. Tuls will
bo >,n ;V c e 11 , which is oage 63 of the document bo.k lr.
onglieh. nefer to the third par-graph fron the top, pnrdon
no, factor, we will b ck up to th. s C'.r.d *r>r O ro?h which
G-ya ns follows:

“It has now been noaolbl- t. conduct n aorleo of A n-
voetlg.- tlons of hunar. ooings wno were rescuec of tor Iwlng
seen n cold water for a lon w tiae. The relevant otuto-
hents we owe to t.ie coopernti n of ofbearzt Dr. Rnscher
and otabearzt Dr. flnkc. They refer t. r etc in w tor
f Z th 12 degrees."

There Is no question but that the relntir. 0 facts in
this report were facts deduced froa r series of invostl^a-
t^ons on human beln = s who were rescued after being In c^ld
water for e long tine; Is thet corroct?

Yes, thrt Is true. 1 he rd late* that Dr. Finke
v 3 'no of r..lzloehner 1 s assistants at the a^a rescue

9

station In Beeen. I as convinced that p t of th- findings
were based on actual experience m erretlsu In rescue froa
sea.

Let us examine a few of these ^es, Doctor, the
utri paragraph Holaloehner soys:

“The re-idlty with which n-n:ness -ccurs Is remarkable.
- */ s determined that already 5 to 10 minutes after fall-


Court 1

Kay 2?-*-18-2-HD-.4eehan-VonSchon.


Ini m, Qn advanceing rigor of the skeletal muscles 6ets in,
which renders the movement of the a:'=3 especially lncreaingly
difficult. Inis affects respiration also: inspiration is
deepened end eviration is delayed."

Do you mean to say now that during rescue operations
one would actually watch a can fall into the water, then
sit by and do nothing for five or ten minutes until he
becomes rigid, until his respiration slows.

No, but one does pull a man out of tho water with

rigor of the muscles nnd slow breathing. Such experiences

have occured everywnere. In my direct examination I spoke

of this same experience of rigor within five or ten

minutes by Captrln .taxer of tho ^mcrlorn servlco. Tho same

experience has .been had by every rescue service in the

*

world.

<1. Now further down in tho >nr O rcoh wo find tho
words and tnls is the sentence after the one I just read—
wc find the words. "Tho rigor is a conditional reflex
and not, as many persons apparently think, a contraction
of the corresponding muscles due to cold. It censes
spantanoouely at death.*

Now, do you moan to imply seriously. Doctor, that you
as a member cf the armed forces would ovpoct one of your
nodical officers to treat members of the armed foi'ceo thaA
way or that they would sit there and let the ill man die in
the water so they could take measurements, moke observations
end investigations?

«. These sentences do not indie to that either. 'I
g.-, eld like to refer to the first per-yrnph of K. lzloehncr 1 s
lecture, which re-ds:

"Observations by the oea Distress service h"Vo shown
t.. c chv; roduLtl n In body temperatur~ proceeds very rapidly


Court 1

May 27-A-1S-5-HD--^8han-V. nSehun.


_r. the esse of persons in distress at s.c subjected to
•;-ter temperature below 15 degrees. «6 uncor.scl-usness or
jven deetn c?r. occur already fter half an hour, the
OBslblllty of using olons and boats is greatly decreased.
..oroovor, observations of ca.es cr.tastro:hle6 (the sinking
of transports or war ships) revealed that even r rather
long time aft r the rescue, drng-r to Ilf still exists.

: us, sudden deet.is were observed 20 Invites to l£ hours
rfter rescue, w.'.ic.; ntil now h ve regained unexplained,
(Collapse of ter ro.-cue.)"

Those aro the ae the whic . -r - ctors observed. - ey
ybaervod th“t w.ien deot occured, t_o rl. or suduonly
ceased, I ayself rwver ob urved that, I v; s nev^r prooont
or, suik occasions.

.. Let us go to the next paragraph, Doctor, here is
Che most oropoetorous and obvious uossn^e,. This lo the
iaeglnnln.. of the next oar ^raph, No. 43 of the original,
j. o 11 of the document and £9 of the dooun_nt book.
-.is states a.s follows:

"*’lth a drop of the rectal tempuraturw to 31 degrocs,
a cloudin 0 of consciousness occurs, which masses to a
oop cold-induced anesthesia if the ecllne reaches below
30 degrees. “

now, Doctor, t • have made this observation It would
dvo been next to lcpoeslblc during an air sea rescue
operation; wouldn't it?

a. No, no. at oil.

‘.'oil now in the first Diace to measure the rcoUnl
:j_rpe.ra.ture of r ran bobbing in the hi- seas would be
' i;o a. Job, wouldn't It?

a. No, not at all. Tht w re something teat was done
’■'jr frequently.


:-d57


Court 1

Mr.y 27—.-i-l;—4— HD—He eha r. - Vo n 5c ho n


Vhnt aid you do, Joe tor? Did you Just bo by the
non floating In the sea In ° rescue boot, come up to him
ead Instead of throwing hin a life line, throw hie a
tor-uniter and ash his to place it in his rectum?

«. Jlo, but the temperature was taken after the people
wore in the life boat. I have already sold that the rescue
boats were bli motor boats with covered cabins.

1. New, Doctor, Just r moment, JU3t a moment. In
t-fcin- the mn ir. the life boat to perform this; what did
you do aftc-r c.iis, ut him in the life boot and then
throw hin back in th_ water?

h. That is an interpretation of yours, vv.ich dooo
not correspond to real conditions. «hrt v:e ivvc hero is
Chat when the temperature drops to below 3J decrees there
can be a cold anesthesia and one need not bo nn export on
c Id to know this. «ny doctor will recognise , that thore
nro two oos-iblo exlanatlons. One is thot ihero wore
‘ibsovvrtions on various people, it coos not say that chcoc
observations wore all xodc on the s mo nan. doc .idly, a.n
oven more oo33lble solution is tht when one 'orson was
rescue:- and to.ap^rature of 30 ..e. 3 rees was taken and his
toaporaturu continued to fell while he vr.s in the bua.t,

*b.-t is the new fnot which ncs be>n discussed by American
'0 well as German experts durln_ cals w r and th: c unless
one applies warmth to the rescued people immediately buo
alanly covers him, s is done in tile life coat, che
temperature c.ntinues to fall. One has no need to >ut Che
-rs- n beck in the ice weter.

I n- tiled thot you have a definite opinion on
;fl "- Doctor. Let us look further on down on this pr.^e,
vi u h will be on t.'v rey: jr & _ of the ducunent book,

43. This is the to*' paragraph. The next sentence


Court 1

hay 27-n- 18-5-HD-Heeban—Vo nSchon


therein. It states:

•'It Is certain that the rapidity of the drop of
.e-terature increases when the neck and occiput are washed
by v*ter. 1 Do "ou see It?

Yes, I see it.

It would take pretty careful observations fro.: a
‘toat, a rescue boot, to find that out on n can floating in
era sot., but It would be pretty easy to do it or. a nan
floating in s tub the experimental station In Dachau;
w«.uld It not? Wouldn't you have to follow hia -round in
Cho boat pretty cucn to see how cuoh of ..is neck rnd
occiput was wished by the water?

«. This observations aeons that in the Deraan Luft-
wr.ffe, oa well ra In che &ercnn Kpvy, there were various
:oc.el3 of life preservers. One codol was constructed in
auen a way tk t the person fti the back of his head and
:ho bock of : 1 a reck out of the w*ter, that is the baok of
rlo neck aa protected. The other .uodol wca constructed
in i c.- a wn- tha: the back of the neck wr.a not r.rotooted.

To thin., was norn sia le to see what happened to the oople
-o?rin jnc :odel compared to people vearin e t.;e other aouel.

Besides, I can -oint out tn?t .-*r. Rase her, after
.*-Itloehncr‘s lecture, cade a renark in that direction
83 " ia b c es:erlner.ts rtrd eeen carried out on c..lu subject,
: - c c^orelr.i :o what ..r. Rpscher a id «t th*t tine and
vruu ho -rote, they were completely hrrrless. He -.-rlCes
- '0 c,:o coolln t of the beck of the neck rlono, even over
• VC5ep of nours, c uses only e ell c bt change of body *

' -jer-ture up :o 1 do = reo Celsius, noc-crdin^ t> what
- Cf - Cr “eiortcd, it vs ;• very slliflt result for dlls
"* ^rl-.nt nd one nust casune tnrt aulzloehn.r's remarks
.-3f»r to ..is -ctuel experience in sea-rescue ear vice.


8159


Court 1

Kay 27-A-18-6-KD-X3chen-YonSchon*

Q~ Veil, let us go to the passage on page 44 of the
criminal document, prge 14 of the transition. This is on
page 93 of the document book. You note here the following
language in the first paragraph on that page. The sentence,
•.r ich is seven lines down'from the toe, rends ns follows:

“The t oud results with quick w: rmlng obtained in
;r ei’lr.ents with animals enccur- ; ed c corresponding procedure
vith human beings. These experiments showed that b the
with a w ter temper * turc of 40 degrees net only accelerate
the return to normal temperature and absorb the sudden
dangerous falls of tomuercturc after rescue, b..t may also
be of life-saving effect should the heartbeats begin to
stop.

Now in this :olr.ted discussion, the author w~s even
far more outspoken, was ho net, which I understand was an
?boro via ted and expurgated edition of what ho actually
said rt the ao-ting; is that right? Jhnt did ho say at
ho .‘.coting to elaborate on tr.ls point in the corresponding
rocodure on human beings to bo used, inasmuch as they
fuund such good results on their work on animals'?


27 Key b[t-i^S . - 15-l-Ccok (Vcr. Scbcer.)
Court 1


I believe tlx t isbest shorn by the feet tket Mr. Rcachcr hr.d
en order free Higgler to Resent the results of the experiaert es c
to? secret setter, -bet Holzlcehner sold ebsut the ex peri rer.ts c 3 I
acid ir. ay direct exednetion, rhrt I tech ta referring to exper-
laer.ts, res thisperegrephr here where it sold expressly thet no
denser no ever observed to persons treated in this my. As fer the
other ccccri rents concerning which Rescher sent c repertto Himlcr
end which report to Hinder is signed by Kolzloohr.cr m3 Rcachcr
end Finkc , thero ves s-id nothing ct Numbers, r.or did Holzloehr.cr,
Finke or Rcachcr s-y mytfcing fbcut it. Net only I but ninety otter
pooplc herxd it cndacat of the otters ere et liberty today red r.r.o cf
thee heve vor; high positions.

\. -oil now let us turn, tc cnothor aoctlcn cf -this report, which is
cn pego U3 cf tho o rig inti, prge 12 of the — this rill be found cn
pego 9* of tho dncutxnt book 3, the ptssrgc cr.teinod in the socond
portgreph frea tho top, five lines down, beginning in the niddlo
of the per greph end tho aiddlc cf tho sentence lir.o, rteroln I rill
qlioto , wherofroo I will quote*

'Noticoeblc f.rd iaoertent 13 c tc.* t incroeso in viscosity of up
to 7.9 . This lncrcf.ac epporrs very orrly, thft is, rlrcrdy with

0 body ter. poreturo cf 35 dccrocs. Ikoso incrocsos ero greeter fchm
thcco found in eniad experiaonts. “ith does for instmeo, or.
ir.crcrso cfrxro then 6.2 era never obssrved under «x> me spending cir-
ciastrr.cos."

!fcw, i'r. Becker-F.oyseng * in order tc determine how high the
viscosity of the ticcd cor. bo, wouldn't it teke c a--.sidor.’ bio
creunt ofreesurirs?

A « No, I den't kreT how Holzloehr.cr did it.

'•■oil now, doctor, thft would test ever your ingenuity, you
re c pretty capable fellow, tc teke cno seaplclemo enough to deter¬
mine the visccsity cf the bleed fr-n n acr. fleeting in tho ocean
next tc c bert, let alone sufficient for rcr surcrcr.ts —


27 He7 47—S'—19-2-Cook (V-n Sciser)
Court So* 1


*'hc rxc 3 ^rer£r.ts uculdr.ot bnve to be race cr. c men soirning
beside the beet. Either e s~x.ll errant cf blrod is teker. from r.
ran -ho rxsbocr.tr tu^ht into the beet or clso the bleed

~oll you do not eccocplish this free: y~ur experiment of you do
r.ot nee aplish rhit yen ire looking for, dc yoi? You did net find
cut the necessary infcrrxtion from that aenner, did you, if you
Just pulled him in, you can't he ecrtcin hr-.? it rcects, you hove to
determine him m riimcl rescued mould rccct, in er.prrisen to tho
ro; cticr. of humor. being. You htvo to hr vo sore sort cf ccrptriscc.
Isn't thet whet Holzloohncr, Finkc rr.d Rcschcr did ct Dcchru?

». I never heerd anything cb-ut thet, tut the purpose of Hclz-

loehncr's cork ft Excheu, let r.o print rut tlx next sentonco rhich

reeds* ■••ith decs, for irstrr.ee, cn ir.crorsc cf more than 6 . 2 . re a

nevor observed under corresponding circuratfr.cos. * I cn corvhcod

thet Mr* Holzlschrxr ardo his cercfjl tests with cninels end thet

rith human toiogs ho carried out moroly r fee prccticcl tonts r nd I

%

eacenvincod thet the aoraweaent of Tisccsity is very sinplo ovon in
prectlco. In r.y direct cxcr.imtlcn I discussed this point. I reforrod
tc the report of Ccptcin or Mojor Kczer, rho performed clr.cct coccctly
tho seme tests in tho Aacricen see rescue servico, blood concen¬
tration tests, cr.din offcct fc-und out ox* ctly tho scao «: ing.

/ 0 C.. '-oil, doctor, let's turn to cnothcrscctien here, thin is per-o
15 cf the roport under discussion, note the ntr.o ftrschir. Hero
H'seher stetes in thisperr. r r ph, 1 leh ispr.-c 93 cf tho doaincnt
bock, end I quctc» sentonco beginning rithi 'After tekin*’clco-
fcol, body toepertturc deertnsps t c quicker prcc. Hies the inter¬
preter he.vo thetr "«ft<.r taking dextropur tho dccrucso is slorcr then
uitk the experiments in both sober end clccnolic condition. Hit
infusions, <1 ,¥ t dextrj-solution, physioleg. tcblo selt-soluti on, tutc-
fusin. physic led- Tcble srlt x lutien rith pencort-.x) "<.rc successful
ohly for c time." ITco frm rci.diq* thet doctor, do you seen tc
s* y thet you could issue r.lcohrl tc airmen Ju3t on the eh cnee they


L


6162


27 ¥ey 47—S.-i9-3-Cock (V c n Schoen)
Court No. 1


sight fell in the see so that you cull make comparisons trith otter
airmen who hadn't taken alcohol?

A. I ±ould like to point out toothing and I an quite Trilling
to bring proof of this too. Ir. the emergency equipment of the Lr.ft-
csffo, goodwhiskoy-

^ *hen when you pulled c men in from the water did you cak each
run if he !a! teken a drink yet?

Yes. in meny ceacs kc wculd cak that beccuso the doctors hold tho
point of view thet alcohol iaharmful in such ceaas. Firm 1943 approx¬
imately on tho olcohel rra roreved from tho oncrgcncy oquipnor.t
cgelnst the rosiatcnco of ncn-r.cdiccl son. I cm quit? -illing to
bxirg proof of thia tco.

Nos easuna for e moment. Just caauno for tho moment hypoth-
etlcclly you were working with Raachcr, Helzloobncr r.nd Finke, end
this roport was the results cf ycur work, would you be willing to
cssumo ti lft responsibility for everything cor.tcinod in Holzlcohncr'a
report as being ®cplctely on tho 1c vol, nothing crlrlncl rbrut it.

I think you ero toing bit ncive, doctcr, hero is Lutz who erno
hero aid testified it "ts obvious Just wtat tho roport roent.

DR. TEii Mr. i’rcsidor.t, in tho direct exeninrtion !!r. Kcrdy
roproachod me with eponding too nu* tir.o on n subject. I ' ont into
tco much dotcll with thcao quostlcna, ho seid. Bow he is going into
then again. I have net otjectod butnow Mr. H'rdy amen with e
completely hypothetical question. He, rs soil cs tho Tribunal end tho
dofondemt know that this is not true. 3 tolievo in answering this
question "whet would hevo happened if * — is a purely hypoth¬
etical question and will net get us enywtere. I should like to
object tc this question cs ecopktcly irrelevant.

I’H. HARDYi H/ving learned c great deal during the course of this
trial, I have just finished a subject ord -ill go on to sens thing
else.

THE 1 RESIDENT; x lease proceed.


27 Hey i?-—5—19-i-Ccck ( Veto Schrcu)
Court So* 1


MR. HARDY*

f. Doctor, let's turn to pro® 127 ef the document bcok, which is
Exhibit 1C6, document No. 268. This is e dccir:cnt which originated
fror. A*r.th3cy's cf flee, which is signed by Irofcssor Hippke. Sonc-
body ore to thftt, somebody in Anthony's offico exist have written it or
it wouldn't hove Anthony's code letter or. it, beceuso rs you sry
Hippke did aost of his work without referring to Anthony if ho ehoso
to do it. New this lottcr reeds ro follows*

A. I en sorry. I r.ovcr sold thet. I sold tbr.t Hippke sometimes
felled to ® nsult tho refortt but I never sr.id in meat o'" his work.

f. you think now, lr. cs nach ta the eodo ktters eppeer, tfrr t
in ®nnoction with this document Hippke referred it to the referet?

«. I not only believe Hippke referred tho It tter tr the roferr.t
but I think t: is letter r*s worked or. in tho roferet. I r.ysolf did net
work on it. I see it here for tho first ti no.
fu Let's reed it, doctor, quote*

■Tho experiments conducted in Wcheu • oncoming protective
ncesurcs egeinst the effeets of freezing cn tho huren body by
irr.crsicc in cold voter have lrd to results cf prectlccl uso. Thoy
rcro a rductcd by Stebserzt ef tho Luftweffo i rofosscr Dr, Holzlooh-
nor, Dr. Firko ond l*r. Hcschcr in croporrtlen with tho SS, end rro
now finished. Tho rosults vrs repj tod upon by thoso who worked on
thee, during e ® r.fcronco cn nadiccl problems cxisi rv; fron distress
ct see ond victor hfrddips on 26 cr.d 27 October 19t2 rt Number/?, The
dotoiled report on the oonfcror-co is rt present in strtc of proportion.

■I think you root grctofully for the greet cssistcnco thrt cooper¬
ation of tho SS hr s ncrr.t for us in conducting tho exper¬

iments, end beg you to express our thonks too, to the cocvnder of
the Dcchru err?.

Hell Hitler

Fref. Dr, Hippke,*

Slot


1


27 Key &7-£-&.19»5-Goefc (Von Schocr.)
Court No. i


Now vhrtcvir inprcss ion wcs giver, to tho listeners ct the Num¬
bers conference '.fter he'ring the report, it is c feet, is it ret,
tbet the reports were btsed on experiserts upon hurxr. beings '.t
the Desheu ecr.ccr.trcticn cerp r cd here is tho 'TherJc you' note fren
Hippke? -

m. In ny direct oxerdnetion I hero clreedy scid thrt I held tho
opinion frer. the very beginning thrt K'lzlcehr.cr's report rrs Just
c osnpllctior. find thrt in the ccurso of tho cerpiliftion he included
tho results of the Dccheu experiments in his rep'rt. I never doubted
it.

f. ••oil, W* Lutz !»d no difficulty ir. csccrtrir.irr thrt either,
did ho?


5165


:sy 27->BK-20-lGr:ss (Int. V„n Scbocn)
&urt Nc* 1


.. Iat nc refer to three things: first of all Lutz hicsclf worked
cn the col/’ question; scecnd ho workod in the very institute whe-rc
c raider able work was den c on the sane quosticn; third, Recording to
whet he said, ho knew !!r. Raschor nuch bettor than I did. If he rood
senothinp else fro-. Bolzloc hirer's report and Rascher's rerark fchar I
'’id I re: not surprised.

Q Of course, yu can recall that Dr. Lutz naintri nod in the ecurso
of his oxaaination here that an average nodical nan could have
ascertained the sre-u thiny., didn't he say that?

A. I don't understand your question.

0 Didn't Dr. Lutz say here that any physician or zvcdical nan, regard¬
less of his specialty, that is, ho didn't necessarily have to be a
specialist in shock frea oxpesuro to cold, could have bean any nan,
if ho had. slight kniwlodgo of rwdicinc could ascertain Iran tho reports
that worn: hoard at tho Octobor cootin; tint tho ox;»»rl-.enta rroro vado
on htnan buinga and wero not just air rescue practical tests?

L N-, Dr. Lutz did not say that. In tho course of ny direct examina¬
tion I repeated exactly what Lutz said. He said he beliovod it was
clear to uoot poopla that is to say, at least that it was not quito
clearly expressed and that was his own personal ■ pini< n. ihat ho
rualizod ni^ht not apply to othor pooplo.

Q Lot us turn to the yellow jnun'ict c,aplex, doctor. This is
Dccunont .VO-137 '•hich is on par© 6 of Dociuvnt Bock 8.

A Yes, I havo it,

Q '.oil, now we note her-, ur.’or 1 - th: subject is yellow fever
vaccines and we find there three references to tho code lotters of tho
office of Anthony. Is that correct? Co see this #55 on three occasions
there,

 I aa seny, un^or ye 1 lew fever vaccine, is that what you naan?

I Under prabic number 1 —

A Yes, you cnly sec two naibors which do refer to referat. The first
55, etc. 2 II B and then 55/lb - the rest is nissin^. I ’on*t know


• >y 2?-:.-3K-20-2-Gr ss (lat. Yen Schccn)
Court llo. 1


what the original says.

q Those references, be there one, two, or three - refer t; Anthony's
office, is that right? It is very simple, answer it. Do they or don't
they?

..If I have to say yce or no I will say no. They nc an norcly that there
is a research assi^rr.ont sc that if the files arc lcokod. f r in tho
:ffico of tiio 'fc'Acal inspectorate the registry pe-ple know whore to
lock - under file #55-

1 Let's straighten this out. '..hat is 055? T.hat ''.ocs it can?

A In tho correspondence of the Gcr.uan '..bhriacht there was a so-called
’..'chnacht file plan.

q Lot's forgot that a vonent. That do numbers 55 no an. You can
answer in three words. You have answered it in direct examination.

I want to hear it a*;nin. I don't nxeuber what you said. Doesn't
55 2 II 3 refer t th. office of Anthony?

iv He. This Ko. 55 ycu will fin' in correspondence of tho ontiro
Luftwaffo and the ontiro Gor. an Ibhrmcht where Anthony leans nothing
it all.....

Q 2 II 3 refers t Anthony's office, doosn't it?

•>?.. TIPr: : : T. President, I an afraid I raist cbjoct to this tyjc of
questioning by Vx. Hardy- Ho has interrupted the witness three times
ncu. if Hr. Har V will let Doctor Bockcr-Freysong explain everything
•-ill be clear. I : cn't want tc attack It. H ar *y personally b;, any ncans
but I think this continual interruption ’ocs not scr-.*c the causo.

2. HARDY: Since the object! n has boon raised.. Your Honors, I 'dll
Instruct tho Tribunal tc instruct th; witness tc answer ivy question
"hat ’ocs 2 II 3 roan? He has testified on direct oxadnation that
they no an ..nthony*3 office. He is hero under oath and. now he says \hey
do not near, Anthony's office an.' I wish tc clear up the confusion.

"HI PriSIDZ T: Ccuns-1 for Prosecution asko-’ the witness what the
■•Juhjr 55 -cant an interrupted the witness before he answered, by
‘skin- what the letters 2 II 3 acan. ..'ill counsel a ain prepound his


-y 27——5 K-2C—3-Gross (Jr.z. Vcr. Sc'.:c^r.)

Court !*o. 1

qixistion to the- witness?

BY IR. HiHDTi

Q uhat is the code initial 2 II 3 refer to, doctor?

A That is the registration abbreviation for the referat Aviation
:!eclicine.

Q And at that tine 7 October 19U3 you were assistant referont?

A Yos.

Q And £1 in this docrant refers tc yellow favor vaccine?

A Yes.

0 . And "2" in this document refers to spotted fever vaccine?

A Yes.

Q And tho code lettors 2 II 3 appear tncre?

A Yos, that is true.

Q And so on down through th« document?

A Yes, that is truo.

Q That is all I have in that ccaplcx. Your Honor. However, I havo
ono request to Make of the Tribunal boforo wo ndjoirn today. Dr.
Tipp has roquested that ho bo permitted tc seo tho defondant Bockcr-
Froyson3,thi3cov*aina. I havo agreed that he coul ’ coo Bock^r-
Froysong, of course adhorin to legal othics and not unking any
rcforcnco to the questions boix considered in the ccurso of this
croso-cxarinaticn. Dr. Stoinbauer has a prcblcn to tako up with
tho Tribunal before adjourrc-unt.

DR. STdIHBAUER (For the Defendant 3ci;;lbocck): !'x. President,
tho court has approve.’ for no a witness naned. Dr. Rolf Jaogcr. This
ritrv-SS has boon brought tc Hurnborj. This noroin. tho General
Secretary's office, 'dr. ..artena, told ^ that Dr.Jaeger is the head
of a British Hospital in Graz .and th: British military Govcrftx.nt
in ..ustria have urgently asked to have hiia rcturne'.’. Ho has to be
taken back Thursday nornin. and I should like pjr. lssion to call
this witness tonerruv when the exar-inntian of Bcckor-Froyscn; is
c r,eluded. Itr. Hardy, to wheel I have told this, thou ht I should


- 27-A-3X-20ii-Gr3Ss (In-. Von Schoen)

Court Ko. 1


subnit an affidavit. I would be very very glad to fulfill :x. Hardy’s
irish but could not do so; I acrcly pro-lse that I will be very brief.

If he trill do the sane thins «u Trill gain what we would otherwise
have lost.

TH2 iftESIDoKT: Has coxmscl for Prosecution any objection to calling
this witness at the closing of tt* testimony of the dofondnnt 3cckor-
Fre-yson^?

P. H.J5DY: On the ot-tenant cf 'cfonflo coir.sel, Your Honor, it
appears to bo that in as ...uch as this witness will only testify as

A

to the rank and organization within which the defendant Bci. lboeck
was otetionod or rhero his orders cans fra., I don’t think it necessary
to tako up tho ttno of tho Tribunal. I undorstnnd the witness has
nothin, to add c^ncominig tho soa water cx^riacnte of any of tho
plans or ontorprisos connected therewith. Ho will noraly testify
ns tu superior ordors of Boijbocck and I feel for uy P" rt fch -nt an
affidavit could accomplish that object without taking up the tine of
the Tribunal.

TH2 rPxSIDHiTj I undorstaix! free defonso counsel that dofonsc councol
desires to put the witness on the stand and not filo an affidavit of
the witness. Is that correct?

A Yes.

TH" H&SXQgNft The witness will bo hoard utu-r '•lose of tho
tostiaony of defendant Bccker-Frcysertb tonorrow,

Thu Tribunal will be in recess until 9:30 tomorrow uorninr;.

Tw.: V.BS4 u. Th«. trl,W Vivwte -nnoss unf.O 9l30 ^OTTO*

•:crnin-.


28 S v b7-K-S—l -l-?sttr (Vcn Scheor.)
C;urt Nr. 1


OfficiU Tr'rscript cf the •ceric-r Hilitrry
Tribur/.l ir. the ertter of the United States
cf Acericr. egeinst Krrl.5rr.ndt, et cl,
defendrnts, 8 it tine ft Kimberg, Gerrer.,
on 29 >!cy 1947. 0*30, Justice Beds area id inf.


•BS HiJaEOj ? era ora in the cr urtrrrc nill ple'fc find their


3V tS.

The Honorable, the Jii ca of Kilitry Tritunrl I.

Militiry Trihinrl I io raw ir. session. God srvo tho United St' tea
of •ocriee end this hor.orcblc TWtuml.

7h-rc *-111 to order in tho crurtrooc.

THIS * RESIDENT* ?*r. Krrakrl, you racertr-in if tho defordenta rro
prosor.t in tho court.

THE V>JSH-Li llcy it pierao your Honor, ell defendants -to proaer.t
ir. tho court.

TVJS 1 RESIDE? Tho Sccrotr.ry-Gcrorrl rill note for tho record tho
proaor.ee cf rll the defendants in c*urt.

Cour.aol rxy prococd.

BECKEUPREDSCG - ^oaiaod
CROSS EWT'/.m' (Centinuod)


BY iSL H-.RDYi


r u vjy it plor.se tho Triturxl. Dr. Becker-Freysonc. yestordey ,


during the ceurao cf cross oxrrdr.ctior., I caked ycu -rhothrr or not
yett hed error porfoiTcd oxperinonta ir. blrh-eltitudo rcscc.rcb cbovc
12 , OOO rttora md I rccell thet ycu enrr-tred thrt y-u hrd dar.c th t
type of research yourself up to 15,000 cctirs.

I acid thet I pcforced c very fen , pcrhxps or.o or tw eoeper-


irer.ts ?n^elf. Generally, faovtv r, cy rcrie vra up to 12,000 cetera.

Th-1 r: a % k in 1945 w 1946.

Ken, tail work Therein you rent tc 15.000 cetera, rrc t: t

also in 1945 cf* ' u6 ‘'

•. No, the*' era t of rrc. thrt era during the cnr.


28 Jfey i.7-::-S~l-2-?cst.r(7cn Scbccr.)
Court ??c* 1


There ~tre sere oricr.trtier exp-.rincr.ts ahich I performed,
perheps '42 of '43 only to lccrn cbout t*e sc things by r.ysclf.

T-.ro rrs not er.y extensive research. Just r fern experiments for ay
on orient'tier.

Hr:’ my one olso to your knowledge per fornod or experimented
tbrvo 12 , 0*0 et that tiro or prior tc 19427
*• Yes, quits e feu people.

“ho?

"• &r. Ulrich Luft end Dr. Hire Geer' JQcnenr, et the eviction
Roaerreh Ifcdicel Institute, end Dr. Berzir-cer :r.d his people in
Hedtlin. Tho highest cltitudo torched thet I knee of urs r little
over 19. r C0 rxters. JV.ls via rccchcd by Bens *rieh Hilb»ch in r self
oxpcrlner.t. Ho is no- 1 i^±rc in Irion In tho Chionsoc. He worked
for Dr. Bonoinrer.

Do you knee how reny tires experiments hrvo been conducted rh,rc-
lr. cltitudcs over 15,000 actors trero rocoked7 approx in tsly, doctor.

Just c r*u;:h cstinctc.

Ccrtoihly 50 tc 6o expert cents.

Ov..r i5,coe?

*. Yos, over 15,000 rxters.

Tea rll thet cork eond doted prior to the oxpext-ents ir. Drchxu,
in ether cords, prior to robru.ry 19427
*. Vert rxs before the Dreheu experinerts -nd prt -ib r.ftor the
^roheu experiments.

"culd you hevo my rty of telling us Just her ruch vis done
before tho "cchou experiments in f is particular field, ir. cltitudcs
higher then 15.00C rxters? a

'• Unf .T tunc tel y, I cm ir. no position tc d: s~, hut 3 cm tell you
^ he cm give you very cxcct inferv tioc. Ttiso men ere ell in tho
"-.ericcn service — Dr. H: r.s Go err Elc-tr.n, Dr. Left md Dr. Benz-
irccr. I myself did not ccrry cut this s-ccific type of cork myself, end


23 Key W-H-S—l-3-?=st-r(Von iohcon)

Court 2fe. 1


I did not work on it in the reforrt. Ur.fortur.rtely, 3 aa uneble
to snarer your quest!on. I ccn only refer you to the correct curse.
r .. -ell, r.o-, in these experiments thrt were conducted in the
altitudes higher then 15,000 meters, whet field of research -r a
thitconcorncd with? ’-f S thrt with explosive deccrprcssicr., dew docor.t,
or whrt phese of high-dtitude resorrch , do you knew ?

«. Yes, prrt cf them explesivo compression expression experiments
end pert of than experiments su h c a were dcscritod hero, experiments
on rescuo free high r.ltitudo.

New theso cxrxrieor.ts thst re 're rofc;r‘ns to, those eorcorr.ed
with altitudes cbove 15.C00 neters, rcro the results of theso
exp rimor.ts published so that r.ll students of cvir.tion medicine oould
study thee?

"a".'Y es, quite c number of results of experiments rrc tvrilrblo
which I myself sew in tlx cxvrctrlcr.l Conter in Hoidolborc S.-r.c c i
them wcio published in tho ^rurr.el for vi tier. Medicine, end some
of them rcro Just of field roports


Coart So. 1

2o hay 47—:-2-l-£M-'.-?r Inaen (Von Schoen)


JUDG* SaSHlSG: :-'r. Hard;- - , vill you ascertain free the witness en
those reports were published?

3T HH. HA-DY:

Q. -Itr-cGS, will you kindly tell the Tribunal vhen the yeoorts
concerning the exoeriaents above 15,000 netero, which took ol-ce prior to
1S42, February 1942, when and where wore they published?

A. Z cannot say e-actly. They '-ere published in 1941-1942, aporoxl-
rately, but I etnnet givo an enact date. I had nothing to do with, the
publication of these reports but the reports are available. They arc at
the Aero Radical Center in Heidelberg. The date can be checked.

^ Then I oresuno that the experiments that were conducted sftor
February 19*2 in the sene field were also published.

A. Yea, 1 an sure the:' w«rc published, too.

Q, And was the work conducted by yourself and Huff and your col¬
leagues ct the Aero Medical Center at Hoidolbcrg after the cessation of
hostilities? tfero they published in this work or wero they noroly put
in United States Ar=y Publications?

A. A very snail oortlon hod a report published. At least, Ur.

Saver infornod no to that effect, but the rest of the o-ocrlnonto wore
interrupted before they were cccolotcd ec vp hod not cono to an:.- final
conclusions that could hevo been pub-ished but one snail oaoer in said to
have been published.

2Y JUTOh SlS?.r.:G:

Q. fitness, who had accese to thoso early reports thpt you eay
vere published concerning e-perinents prior to 1942?

A. To you neon, Your Honor, now or to when they were evaileblo at
that tine?

To vhoa they were available innedictely after the date of publi¬
cation.

A. irinorily, aviation nedicine institutes and research workers;
also the conseoucnces resulting, for tcchnioue, were available to the
T--chr.ieai agencies.


::urt Ho. 1

2: ~ey 47-«*-2~2-E.--'.-rrimeau (Von Schoen)


Q, Then the” vould here been eve liable to the defendants Huff end
Somterg7

A. I an suro they read the reports vhlch vere published oreviouely.

I an not able to say erectly vhlch reports vere uublished before the
Deehan ercerinents and vhich vere published after the Dachau eruerlments.

Q. But ycu feel reasonably sure that such reports as vere oubliehed
beforo the Dachau erperinents vould have be.n available to the defendants
5uff and Soobtrg, and that as experts in that field the assumption is
very strong that they vould have read then?

A. I assume that it is extremely likely that the reoortB that were
published bofore the Dachau erperinents vere sent to Dr. Buffo institute.
3 : yjsmi

Q. Dr. Bcckcr-rreyoeng, 1 vish to nov turn to the condor “Tyohus"
in Doeunoat 3cok Ko. 12 on page 74 of the English docuncnt number HC-206,
Prosecution Exhibit Ho. 206.

A. I have the d.cument.

You recall In this document Professor Koso vrote to Kaagcn und
referred to the production of spotted fever voccino for ell nrned forceo
in the eastern area. Ho stated he had not heard anything yot fron
Deoartnont Ho. 1 ar.d that it vill take sono tiae for 2? to produce his
r.tv research order innoauch os Anthony is on a duty trip — and do I
understand you clearly that ycu had no kcovKdgo vhatsoover of any of
these activities concerning typhus rcsoarck or the production of typhus
vaccines?

A, Yes, you understood cl correctly.

Hov, in this letter ve note the code or file nunbers 2F. Doctor,

I var.t to clarify a point at this tine. Jirst of all, in the 2eferat for

'

eviction aedicino you have had the code or file numbers 2113. That vas
the first ono. Wasn't that the first one that they had in the Beferat
for eviction medicine?

A. Ho, that vas the registration abbreviation, -he firet note ves
if for the research assignments. These arc two cuitc different thinge.


Court *fo, 1

26 Xay 47-si-3-3-Eji-?ri2eftu (Yes Schcen)


Q, You know VCry '■ell vh£t I as referring to. You have tried to
quibble ne os this severe! tines. Tell ne Just '-hat the Roman mineral
ceens. Vkat does it scan? Is it the reference number?

A. "he registry number for the Eeferat for aviation medicine.

Q, I yes't make the error again. V'ould you tell ce - 2113 - what
that registry number mease, when that came into exletar.ee in the Rufcret
fer aviation medicine?

A. I cannot toll you. In August 1541, vfcon I vac transferred to
the Reforat for aviation medicine, tbo Refcret already had this number.

I don't know when it started. I never took any intero6t in that. I
presume in 1940 or 1941. I don't know. Perheps already beforo tho war.

I really don't know.

(*. '.her. did the registry number 2T ccoo into existar.ee?

A. According to the documents which you have cuteitted here it must
hivo boon in June 1543. 2h«ro are occc among the document* dated during
this a with which still have the old number and some which hove the new
number. I assume in the course of this month of June 1943 the chango
took place.

"non the numbers would have overlooked. Is that truo - tho uso
of tho numbvrol

A. Tos, they no doubt ovorlapoed in a few let tors.

Q, When did 21IA coco into existence?

A. 21IA vns introduced as of the first of April 1944 oe deadline.

Q. And I oresumo that the registry number 2? ond the registry
number 21 IA would have overlapped during that ocriod of Aoril ar.d Kay.

Vcu spy ha--*© well used both su.-b.rc.

A. It is quite pocsiblo, yes. I have not bus cuy such document
here but it is possible. I don't knew.

Q. Xill you turn to Document XC-131 '■hich you will find on oege 58
5f document 3ook 2io. 12.

A. Yes, I have it.

v :,'ow, this document — do you bavo the German cooy that has tho


3175


Court So. 1

2c May 47-H-2-4-53Wri3eaa (Ton Scfcocn)

code designation on the top of the document, Doctor?

A. Tea, 55, 2IIA.

Q. Would you kindly read that slowly so the Tribunal cay Insert
the code designation on the copy of their docucent inascuch as the
English copy does cot have the code nuchers set forth. It norely has
•he parentheses 'cede designation". “hon they translated the letter,
thoy did n-t put do*-n the nuebers, so would you kindly read that code
designation so the Tribunal cay insert thee in their docucent.

A. It reads, "High Caicand of the Luftwaffo"; next line "Chief of
the Kedical Service"; next lino "File note 55/6026/44, Secret, (2IIA)".

How, that code designation with the registry nunKr 2A refers
to tho Roferat for aviation nedlcine, does it not?

A. You.

Q, Tho date of this letter woe 29 August 1944.

A. Yob.

At that tlco you wore Referent for Aviation Medicine.

A. Yes, that is truo.

Q, How, as I understand in tho course of your direct examination,
you a&nit knowledge of this letter which yx state that you can only
recollect reading rocenboring the first paragraph therein. !c that
correct?


Court 1

lia;* 8-h- 3-l-HJ- Ore 6 s - Von 3c non.

1 worked -n only the first saragrach of this letter
in vy Ref era: end dictated it to ay t:*?ist.

k. Ooes the Secretary Oeneral heve the ori_lnrl copy
f c-ouent ;i0-131? Vo ala yoa hi.idly brin u it in .lease?

row, this first pers^nTth that you sela that ; a drew
voads ae f .Hows: "The research derlln u vita* two dry
= jcc-. fev_r v’ccino free vltellinu sac cultures vo oo
continue:. Therefore the 4,0C0 RH requost-a -or the
r beirio -l cad et - poscl. 0

. aid y,a hlndly ex lain to :ho Tribunal Just what
;• . can bj thre rnrr e rooh?

... T.oia v>r ; .ra“h ncr-ly eo r.s tn.-c the rssi~nccnt
earlier ...Iron to Haugen to ddvolon c cethod for producing
vue vpc^lne ia to rcoclve farther o . :i*ovnl n& it
inf ris-i .vag n th t In 1C4-. no will ..•'in receive tho
•id- of 40.0 caries which he requested.

... Now this is written by you when you were referent?
a• Yes, thee is whet we worfcc. out r s a referent.

: is tywlcel of the wori which the referee fvv aviation
-- Heine did in non-rvictlon "e;l ncjnts.

.‘ell, now how did you ir eten to unow about

.ese-ren dealin- with dry spotted vaccine?

a. I know that frjc the rose re.. naal_naonts whivh

:eon issued to Raagen, In tv.ia c'se jrobnbl; hr.

Season said tee subsidy which he obtained in 1943 w o

up. He, therefore, request d c.vt the nsslgnaant be

-tended and that hie subsidy also be extended, -his letter

to the office. Probably the j)e>ortaent 3hief sent

let er to the ne referent. He either erde a

- :l v. of the let: t r or wrote . asaiorauidus: on it saying

*

t H acen’s woric v : s desired by the Hygiene ref eiat.

• a :.-.3 let r w.ald be sent arch to the deport cent Chief


3177


fleer!; 1

;>y 2S-iv- 3-2-H3- Gro s s - Von 3 cho a.

;.e a notation "rese:ren assignment can oc entencLed"
god sent It to cy ref-rat. I went wit'-, tills letter to the
Finance Referat nl found out whether ther- w a or. u 6 h
-oncy vallable, to'see whether all conditions could be
: lmiod for living him 4C00 arts. «nd, if the Hygiene
rofirent and the Finance referent h*c had no objection I
-.roV oly lidtated this to my secretary *nd submitted it to
ey lopartaent Chief.

/ell, now nore ou -ru utiorltlng eroenditure
of 40CO 324.

No, I aaid already yertorday....

... You -./rote this p* r-_rn h?

a. I wrote tills, diet ted It for ...y Doorrtacnt
Chief but the authority for oz-endlng the 400G r^arks bo-
longed to the ann who 3lgnjd t:.e letror, -nd that ir e the
ii'-rtoont Chlof.

v. ¥ 03 , but no leos a man thrn rrofessor Sohvocdor
rolls jc th t you had power of attorney to i:y out funds
for o:r eriaontr l purposes nd this eeaas to be rather
consistent with this statement.

Yoatordny I scld th: t this must be come □lsunder-
-trndln a which can be very easily cleared up. Neither for
• : search assignments cr for any other turpooe did I pay or
- :rove of 5 pfennigs. Not even ay dopartaent chlof had
to power to do that. The authority 1-y with the Chief of
staff, '.'her. it w-g nev c-'ses it was the Chief of the
••c fieri cervices hies elf. That i3 something clo-r, It
:*n be -roved «ny time.

v. Tell, doctor, w..en you issued or when you a -proved
rdon so, th-t is the wrong word, too. Ihen you suggested
t 40CG Hi-I be set aG?ide for .-1- gen's work what did you
: Investigate the necessity of the c.ntinuetion of tl-.la

0173


Court 1
2S-:


roes-Vonachon


*3 order to determine the efforts rare being used for the
benefit of the Luftwaffe?

a• Vinr t I did wes very single. I baaed ay work on
;hc judgment of :h v Hygiene referent who nc.d to vrss judg¬
ment n It. I already said sac., cn resi-naer.t w.vioh did
a! effect aviation uodicsl, accordingly the referent v:ho
..new somethin- >.ut tne field wrs oo:r>eter.t.

i. how, Viler* ygu use the tern "research f ;.nd n , arc
a referring tj "research f-nd of the PL.-."? Th.t arc you
rtierrir.b t by use of the tern "research fund" in tho
.ivst prrrfcrrt'ph?

a. No, th t refers to tr.a _-ney w .ioh the offices
of who oiiief of the ••odlcnl Service ned available 6 -oolfic-
1 " for research ounosos. ns in ever/ other office thcro
: .re w"8 - br.dget v..erc the n no-/ was listed nci.or&lng
t-: ur*oso - for construction, for our.osc of
8qv.it/mjnt, and also fer research. Not I, because I had
a chin- to do with finance but the 3udgct ref-rcnc Know
.it these twinge. a research fund of the a.‘ lotion
.dulstry did not exist in thr»t _ener.il sense.

Tell, this coordin :ion of chi a -rose re,' fund
vH'.ln the Inspectorate, ber*rin e In hind, of cour o, that
-•/.! took over cs referent in tr.v referst f.r Aviation
••oleins all u-'tters for research oas• ed thr.u b h «. ur
.f ice n le’6t for forward to ot.ier referents, which was
due tv schroeior’s procedure. Ko*.r vhv coordinated tho
c. unditure of thj research fund?: homebody ..rd to

•

- .ruinate th«: f; tv determine whether it WuUl- allow
*::o marks to hr i,en, 5000 to r.irt, 5CCO tc some other
- '-or ro ., 1.100 to a lershof, 'nd so or.. Kow, who
fin tud tie ellocrtlon ;f rese-rc.. funds?
a. First of 11, let ~e point-out that Professor Kirt


3179


* Court i

He ;• 2c—I — 5- 4-Hd- --ro a e - Vonoc ho r.


nev.-r received rny subsidy c - ell.

Excuse oe. 5ry John Doe in :l*ce of Professor
Eire. Sow, 'ns--er ay question.

very well. This cooralr.- tion of the money vrr.s up
; the refer? c for Che budget which wre responsible for
:he coney.

v. Just v" ainuce. The Saferat for the Bullet didn't
hnow my thin? bout these research problooe. Only one nc.n
. the over- 11 picture-tr. t w s Becker-Freyseng tho
voferont ir. the ref erst for *virtlun ^odiclne. Hov; did *
i.u finance n know whether it wvuld be r worthy cruse
fev jive $dCOO :o Hangon.

.a. I thought I hr- rlre _y explained that. I didn’t
r.it to rene^t It. I sr.ld when such research assignment
nd ouch r resorren subsidy woe issued I O ot ir. touch with
tho Bucket referent if it was cn avirti.n aedlcr.l rssl 0 n-
.wnt -nd I g ve the necesorry information. If it was
In acme other field either the other referent went with no
r - got n written note from him so that the Budget rerorent
c ;i: be convinced tiirt the use of this money was sensible.
Sosldes rny ;rovrl of on ex^cnditui'e hrd to bo submitted
fin lly to th; Chief of tha nodical Service hiaaolf end ho
signed for this expenditure.

k. Tell who did you c^naulc with before you wrote the
-'- •• c r-graph of this letter?

*>. The budget referent - th t was Oberfeldintendont
or.zcl.

... did consult with tne referent for Hygiene?

In this specific ense I cannot scy whether I
C-..s.-.lcod with him orally or whether In documents which

given to me there vre c. written note from the Hygiene
eferent. That al^ht hrve been either way.


Court 1

lie: - 28—k-3-5-HD-3roS6-7on3cr.cn.


In cay event you suggested that 4000 Ri< be placed
~ 5 disposal of Hanger, end your suggestion was made to
cho 3uduet referent?

On be hr If of my depar taer.t chief I worked on the
suggestion which case from Has can hlaself and I discussed
-e problem with the Budget referent.

- I will ask you gain; "he v>6 the coor .lnrtor of
:sec rah f -note? It wasn't Jr. Becker-.-royaeng, w s It?
a. You really overestimate u:e. I v«s referont. Of
c urso, I n?4 part In the coordination of this money, not
only I but various other people had part in the coordlna-
tlon of this m.r.ey, no: only I but vari us other people
had s net.-in. to scy about it and the final word wp.o up
co iohroder the Chief of the .-.odlcal service or one Chief
of Staff.

... Yo. said hu would take ur w#rd for it. He
left th ac matters up to you.

DR. II- 1 ?: hr. President, I must object against
this type of questioning, for the fourth or fifth time
hr. Hardy is tellin- 3eckor-?reyseng that hr. ochroeder
said t.vt Beokor-fvoyseng was res-onsibla for distributing
trip noy. I think hr Hardy will grant that I know the

cu_-.er.te ' , r.d that - know very well wh-t •-•r. 5cn\*oeder
ft 9 ® ai£ - * : «ither In the documents nor in the testimony
j: cchroeder h-ve I beer, able to ascertain when hr. Schroedor
s"id t is. I would like hr. Hardy to tell us when ind
"h-re and to whom Scnroedor mode this statement. In the
oro=e examination of hr. ockroeder, as far as I am informed,
cni5 point was not wrought up.

i:-3 PRESIDENT: This Is cross examination. Object cion
-s overruled.

aim


23 ' r -.y l7-i-^ATT-L-i^Karrew (In-, von Schon)

Court Sol 1

BY If?. HABDTi

Q !fen, lot* s turn to the third paragraph in this letter, Doctor,
-dwrein it 3tatos:

"Plonso advise whether it nay bo assuacd that tho spotted favor
apidonic prevailing at ?fo.tzPoilor at present is eormoctod with the
vaccine research. 1 ’

Do you hr.vo any knowledgo of that particulrr ir.3tanco?

A Yes, I know now that in 1914* there actu a lly was an opidordc in
KatzTfoiler,

Q r/hon did you first loam of that?

A Hero, at tho boginning of tho trial.

Q You ncv_r hoard of it buforo that tico?

A At least I didn't roneribor it. I nov..r had anythin'; to do v/ith
opidcnic reports.

Q 'oil nor, was it custosnn' for c letter to bo rrritton, using
your registration rackor or rogi3try nurbor, and prornred for tho
signature of tho Chief of Staff Kant by an office othor thr.n your
offico?

A In sty diroct examination I said that this possibility did oxist.
Horraally, if I had boon thoro and had known about this lottor, it would
•wvo said at tho top at tho loft "2 II a/ 2 I 9". That of ton happenod
that a letter cono from tiro difforont roforats and had two numbers, but
since I iri3 not there Airing those days that was unfortunately omitted.

Q • ff oll, —s it customary for ch. Chief of Staff Kant to docido that
he was going to write a lottor tc Prcfossor 11aagon and thon ask you to
writo ono paragraph and a3k another referent to rite another paragraph
and then only give you a copy of shat you had written and toko a pair
of scissors and cut off tho oth.r paragraphs sc- th-.t you ccuidn*\ read
then?

A It wa3 cust--r.ry for the deportoent chief or tho chief of staff
to change letters which ho obtained frer. different roferents and son j tines
t? nakc one letter out of two that v,ro addressed tc the s::;o nan. Besides,


26 —U7-'!-..- >^.-2-'tarrow (Ir.:« von Schon)

Court !ibi 1

I did net receive a carbon copy in roferat. This was sont to the
Registry vdiorc it was filed and I never saw it again. Sven if I had
seen the carbon copy lator — which night even bo possible — thon the
establishment of a vaccino .sanufacturing plant and an inquiry about an
apide.de would not have interested no, because I never had anything to
do vdth such :cttors.

Q Touldn*t the fourth pcrngrnph have interested you, which states:

"The report of 21 Juno 19ldi, in which tho investigations at
ilatzrroilor arc nontionod, should, have boon sont as secrot."

Secret ?

A I happened hero, during this trial, to loarn tho explanation
for this final paragraph which I would not have understood oarlior.
Professor Rose told no that all tho typhu3 r-ports had to bo sent as
secret in the »7ohmacht and, since this list was apparently none infor-
natior. about tho typhus opidcaic in Katzrcllor, it is clear that this
roport had to bo sont as socrot.

Q “oil, this fourth paragraph doosn't rjf.r to an opidoaic at
Jfctzwoilcr. This rof.irs to "invoctigations at Natzwoilor." Tho third
paragraph is roforring to an cpidordc thoy'vo hoard about and want to
knew if the so "invostdgations at Jfctwoilor" havo ary connootion with
th_ opidordc. I3nt that what that iottor conveys? Ita perfectly
obvious that :Ccnt or Rose or uhoavar suggested thoso two paragraphs
was wondoring whether or not the research work done by Kaagon had caused
disease cr opidcadc in tho caap. Isn't that tho inport of this letter?

A It is -.rh:t Professor ?.oso tostifi.-d h_ro on tho ritnoss stand.

2 It«s quite obvious too, is it not, frar. reading tho letter?

A But lot cv. point out, sinco I know that Profossor Haagon was a
bacteriologist or a Zionist, it would not have callod ay attrition
particularly, at th: tiai, that ho ras carrying out investigations
during an o pi deni c bocauso that is what hygienists are supposed to do.

Q 'ell no , ycu state horo that ycu have bocaia mrrro of th; fact
titat typhus problems like this are supposed to bo dassifiod as socrot


28 : jy 1x7—: W.TD-k-3-Rarrow (Inti von Schon)

Coirt So* 1

rjTd in this lottor Baagen is being politely reprimanded for not having
classified his report of 21 June 19hh as secret. Yet you spent con*,
sidarcblo tire in the course of your direct examination to point out in
connection with J>ocuc^nt ho. 93k, which is not in a document book but
was Prosocution Exhibit .:'i;5S, which was a list of radical rosoarch con-
missions drawn up at the tine rhen you wore referent apparently, and
within that li3t of research co-missions you nado an attenpt to indicate
to this Tribunal that tho entry concerning tho typhus research of Hangon
was erroneously classified in that paragraph as socrot and that you
introduced an affidavit to indicate to this Tribunal that your steno¬
grapher nay well havo nado a typographical urr'r, or the st r.ocraphor
who typed tho copy introduced here into ovidonco nado said error. Now,
how do you consistently attempt to doclaro that there is an orror in
this particular list of comissions when wo find this language preva¬
lent In this lottor of 29 August 19Ui?

A I shall go back to the. beginning of ycur spooch when ycu said
that I reproached Kaagon and told Karon that ho wan to nr.ko these
roports sodrot. I must say that th_ lottor is signod by Kant, tho Chiuf
of Staff. It was not I but sc:xj one 0I30 who told Hangon......

Q (Interrupting) I don't boliovo I said ycu. If I did, I stand to
bo ccrrvctod. I refer to tho writer of tho lottor and tho writer of tho
lott.r is apparently Kant, but you vreto tho first paragraph.

A As to this famous list, J<o. 93k, I havo already axplainod vory
carofolly that I an unfortunately unable to give a definite* explanation,
because I do not knmr whoro the list com-os fr^m. I gavo a number of
possibilities that night explain 7.*hy the Haagor. assignment is suddonly
listed as sucrot, although in all documents, including tho ones which
you havo su'oaittod, it is considered open, and Dr. Tipp was kind enough
to explain to the Tribunal that, according to the practico in German
"ohnacht correspondence, it night- very -ell bo th~t in Kar.gcn's files
this secret letter ^hich Kcngcn sent to rm, Ho. 132, iras perhaps tho


26 liay U7--iCarrow (Ir.t* von Schon)

Co-art :fo. 1


top ore and that ny score tarn* then assumed that, the whole* assignment —
everything connected with it - was secret. That was a rdstako, however.
Hot the assignment was secret, but only a report about a typhus epi-
dssdo in the canp of Matswoiicr, and I think thoso are two ontirely
difforent things. 3ut, sinco I unfortunately do not knew whore this
list co.oos fxru, end sinco, thcro aro a nunber of other very obvicus
tdstakes in tha list, sinco, in copying from tho original photostat
to this typewritten copy a number of further rdstakes woro nndo, I roust
assuroo that it is possible that this list was copied fron our original
sonowhoro also end that ni stakes occurred thoro. I cannot say dofinitoly
that it was oro or tho othor. I can only say that I do not know that
Haegon's rosoarch assigrrant was ovor socrot and bosidos, I an convinced
that this notation "socrot" doos not indicate any illogal uxpurinenta
on the part of Haag on.

Q Doctor, let us turn to tho next docu.-v.nt, *». 132 on pago 99
of Docunont Sook .5*12.

A Yos, I hr.vo it.

Q Will you kindly, under tho ward "rofcronco" in tho hoading of
tiio lottor whoro it statos: 'Your cornu nicatl on dated 29 August 19Ui",
thon in perunthosis thoro is a codo designation, will you road tho
codo designation from your docurunt so that tho Tribunal nay insert it
in their document?

A Yos. Tho roferonco in IC. 132roads: "Your coixiunication da tod 29
August 19hh — File notor 55 Ho. 6028/Ui socrot (2 II A)."

Q Did ycu over rocoivo this lottor. Doctor?

A I did not racoivc it. It was net addressed to no.

Q It wasn’t fonrxdod to ywr office inasrruch as it had your
registry assignation on it?

A No, I on sure it r.s not because I have alroady explained how
correspondence was dealt with in our office. All lot tors, without
oxcoptior., were sent first to the ctopaxtaont chief. Since :jy department
?Mof kniT.-very well that I had nothin,- whatever to do with c?id_-nic


8185


2~ !'Cy U7-II-.\TD-u-5-^rro-,* (Int. vor. Schon)

Court ?fc. 1 ,

reports end typhus cpidcnics, ho certainly would not send this on to my
roforat but s ont it to tho roierat which was ir.tjrostod in such opi-
dcxd.cs. That was tho Hygiono Ruforat and thoreforo I never saw this
lotter boforo thi3 trial and certainly novor had to work on it.


Q1C6


23 !fay U7-:W7D-5-l-:fcchan (Int. von Schcn)

Court ?Jc. 1

Q Lot u3 go on to tho discussion of the sea-wator oxporinents.
Doctor. I notice in tbs soa-aator docurent book, the affidavit of
Schrocdor...

A I do not have this document.

Q therein ho states they hod two uutheds of asking soa-wator
drinkable, orv was the Schaof-r -othod and the other the Borka method?

A Tos, I havo it non.

Q Hu states that certain oxporirvonts had boon conducted on huran
beings with soa-rater procossod according to the Berka nethod by
Dr. von Sirany) will ycu kindly toll us what you know about the oxj*ri-
nonts conductod by ven Sirany?

A In the courao of ry direct oxwination I said that in the first
fow wooks of 19UL, I did seme sciontific wc.rk at tho Aviation Research
Institute and was not prosont at tho rofernt for aviation aodicino.

'fhen on 16 April 19U: I rotumod to :$r office, I learned then that in
tho noantir.o tho roforont, Profossor Anthony, had loarnod that .an
Engineer Berka in Vienna had allogodly developed a ncthod for rvaking
of son-water drinkable and Dr. von Si ran;-', who was a Luftwaffo nodical
officor, or had boon a Luftwaffo nodical officer, had porfomod uxpori-
ront3 narkinc; in military hospitals with soldiers, I beliovo to tost
this ivthod. I also loarnod that Profossor Anthory su<_"ostod that
Dr. Schaefer was in Vienna for a ferr days and looked at tho oxperinonts.

knovdodgo of Sirary*s experiments I obtained fron what Schaefer
told r*j about tho oxperinont3 and also fron a report put out by von
Sirany at tho end of April, which I road.

According to thoso no ports, those wore oxporteonts on hospital
inaatos who wore convaloscino or had slight wcunds or illnesses. Since
von Sirery was, I beliovo, a skin specialist and had only a sAght
knowledge of psychological experi rants, an expert could soo at first
glance that ho had nr.do sene fundarxintal rdstakos in sotting up his
oxpurir-nts. Nevertheless, tho records of the oxperinonts indicated that


?7


23 Jfay L7 —' J-& i i^-r—2 H iochan (Ir.t* von Schcn)

Court Hu. 1

Slrqny's conclusion was wrong. Sira:y hod concludod on tho basis of
hi3 oxp;rirjor.ts that tho Berka nothod was suitablo to bo introiucud into
soa distress practice, althougi wo did not consider-tho experiments
thorcufJ>. Prxi a scientific sonso, ono oculd still soc from tho record
that Sirory*a conclusion was wrong though easily to bo explained,

Q Vfell then at that tisx, studying tho records, wo noto that
Professor Sc brooder 5 tat os in his affidavit on paragraph Us

"Th-ccnsulting export (Referent) on Aviation todidno, Fockor-
Froyaong, '.ho had boon ny subordinate sinco January 19UU (prior to
this tiao Bockur-Frcysong had boon C3 istant t Anthony who was chief
under Hippko) took tho position that tho experiments conducted by
Simny woro not conclusive sinco tho conditions iroro not as difficult
as thoso on tho high sons."

Is that tho position you took?

A So, ny position was tho opposito. «gain this is a nisteko on
the part of Professor Dchroodor, who for two years had nothing to do
vdth this problcfu In tho courso of ry diroct oxnaination, I
emphatically oxplainod that I ansidorod Siroiy's to3t conditions
oven more sovoro and oven noro dangorous than tho tost conditions
existing later ir. tho oxporir-jnts conductod by Dr. Beiplboock in
Dachau. The fact that oxporinontal conditions arc never as sovero as
tho conditions existing on th • high soas, I think i3 obvious. IJo
experiment can bo :iado sovoro -ncugh to correspond IOC# to actual
conditions at soa, T.ith all tlx- psychological conditions, etc.

Q ^J3t a nooont, Doctor. You say this is a nistako on tho part
of Professor Schroodor; a pain tell no is it difficult to bueaxi a
Goneralobcrstobsarzt in tho luftaaffo?

A It i3 clear that a chiof whs lias about twenty five rcfcrunt3
subordinate t hin cannot bo inf ormd about all tho details of each
referent, so well that tyro years later ho will know all the do tail
or one specific statca-nt lado by each of his twenty five roferonts.

&188


2? 5ay -1 ^5—3— xchan (Int von Schon)

Court Ifc. 1


I ar. convinced that over. General Taylor aay not bo oxactly or conplatoly
inforaad about every statenant you have rede hero, that would bo
Ixoanly inpocsiblo,

« Toll :io waror.it you scrx sort of a sup-r roft-ront, you wuro
tho one that h a n dled all the research assignments, they all wont through
ycur officoj you were in the position to Professor Schroo&jr similar to
the oxocutivo officor of General Taylor?

Bo that as it nay. Doctor, lot us go on. In Document l8lt, which is
Pro3ocutdcn SAibit 132, found on pago 9 of docunont book 5, wo find
tho first letter concerning tho sea water prblcm. This lottor is fron
tho tachnical offico, da tod 15 'ey 19lilj. Under 1) in the lottor, it
states i


• "Tho I.G. *'.athid usin^ r-inly slaver rdtrato,"

The I.G. noth*! is thy Schnofor nothod, is it not?

A las,

Q Thero is also another nano for that ruthodj isn*t thoro?

A Tho factory rvux was r-o-f-c-t-i-tf. that was tho factory nnnu,
it has no si;nificanco,

Q doll, now, who infemad the technical offico about tho Burica
no tho i?

A The Sjrka nathad?

Q Yos.

A I oxplainod that in s$ : ir:ct ox-adnation too. Professor Anthony
first hoard of tills ~ .rkn nothod and then in tho courso of I larch or
April, I dan»t know oxactly as I was not there, told tho tochnical
offico that such a zaothod oxistod and thun tho technical offico no


doubt got in touch with IS*. Sorka,


Q


A Hero again I should like to rofor to ry direct oxanination. I
said that in the first days of Ik;corker of 19u3, Dr. Schaofor hirself
denonstratod his rxthod and gavo tho neccssary explanation. In tho caso of


5189


23 :iay U7-MTD-$4W!oohan (Int. vor. Schsn)

Court No. 1

this danonstrntion and this littlo lecture, the aadical inspector
Gorvjraloberstr.bsarztappko was present and so was Obersti.ngcniour
Christenson, who was a deputy chief in the technical officer '.here
this lottor cones fren.

Q Tfhat relationship did tho chief of the nodical scrvicos havo
to tho technical office?

A They woro both egoncios of tho Luftwaffe, thoro were no diroct
relations. In 19Ui in particular, tho chief of tho nodical scrvico of
tho Luftwaffo was under the High Comand of tho Luftnaffo directly,
whils tho technical offico had othor subordination, but I an not
oxactly informed about that.

Q /oil, now, you have taken oxcoption to tho opinion of tho
vrritor of this lottor whoroin ho s tatos under paragraph 1 that this
would r«xiuiro 2$ to 3 tons of poro silvor a nonth. You said that was
a croat oxa&foration and y.vo ycur reasons for it. Hon, who tho r or not
that would roquiro 2$ to 3 tons of silvor a nonth; can you toll us
v;hcthcr r not silver would havo boon roadily avrdlablo in Oornany at
that tins?

A I knew tint Dr. Schaefer told no at tho tino that according
to his lnfc nation frea tho I.C. and fror. soao agency of tho Roichs-
bank he believod tho nocossory silver could bo obtained oven in
but I nay ref-r y-u to Dr. Schaofcr. I did not inquiro about that, I
rolled on what Dr. Schaofor told nc.

q -foil, inasnuch as this Schaofcr nothud would roquiro tho uso of
silvor nitre.to, would it not havo boon tc the advantago of tho Luftvrofro
at war to nako c serious attonpt to develop tlx Borka iJothod duo to tho

fact that tho Borka nothed was inoxponsivo as caaparod to the Schaofcr

£

nothed?

A I havo explained in groat detail as I boliovo that thoso
economic reasons and raw anterial reasons were what influoncod tho
technical office to advccatc Borkatit and what in tho final analysis


G190


28 Kay Ji7-i'tohon (Int. von Schon)

Court Ho* 1

dotomfnod Genoral-borstabaarst Schroodor to hovo the quostion of
Berks tit investigated by Sppingcr and Houbner. Of course if Borkatit
had boon just as good in its final offect, it would have boon a groat
advantage if one could got along withontttho silvor.

Q You would like to havo the experiments to dotorvi.no whothor
or not it was good?


3191


23 Ksy-ci-JB-6—1-Cooic (1st. Yea Schonj
Court I

Z didn 1 t wuat to h„vc tno esperincnts. author I hod to parti¬
cipate is t.iu prepur ..tioa for those orporiueats because it vus or chit;-,
lirct of .11 I h_d to prevent the Jerku notaod being introduced without
Mias tested again und wo Lad to doternino wh.,t advice should oc given
to the .victors .sid secern, if for ucdic.l reasons aorkutit could not
oc introduced, ernd for oconceic reasons the liofutit could not bo
introduced.

.. Yet nil of the tU:e, th .t is while laying theso plans and
instigating theso cxocriuoato, I understand you knew th_t ->orkutit
vusa't cay good? Isn't th„t iii_t you suid oa diroct ciaeinution?

a. I nuot tell you th..t v a s ny personal scientific conviction
out cisco : hud coiootific opponents of the caliber of Professor
nj linger end - rof cssor noubnor, w-.o ur. rccongisod tnroughout tho world
end who n.wc y.»tients free ovorywhorc In the world, I hud to assuhO
t..o jocsioillty th .t even I night be niotukca oaco in a wnilo.
ikon you are not M a a of your convictions, doctor?

«• Of course, I uphold ny convictions. I said if you think tils
uet od io good vo c_-. docido only through ah erperinent.

.... iwJY* Pn'.i sl.'.l oo a good breJdag point, Year »oaor.

. - >13111. * notice th. t on yesterday's witness sheet Jugoa

Kaogon is listed uo o witness to oo called by tho defendant, heckon-
Tro-song, Oa tills aora lag's witnoss sheet tho n.-.-c nugon i.—v,on do os
..ot %fjn o n- but Koif Juogor uppcurs oa the witness sheet for tho fief end ant
Jcd:or .ruyseng, Ih-t witnoss is it tho defuafi..nt noc.ror Toysen; wishes
to Cell?

..... E-iSYj *a I undorst _ud it, your Honor, jr. Ea..gon is going to
..o'Or.r after tho so M wator cocpKx, nuflely _ftcr t.io c jo of Dr. hciglboock.

Ur, Jaegor is the witness am roved by tho tribunal for Dr. Stolnbcaior.

0

Dr. Jnogor is the witness culled by the defendant aoiglboeck.

-t t is tiuo, Tour ho ior, I wish to request Dr. Stoinb-uer to
nrovido a with a notation vita reference to Dr. Jaeger out ling ouost.J>-
tl.J.ly un. t he will testify to, vnere he wus boon and soac of tao


c!92


28 ::^-*-C?-6-2-Cooic (Ini. Ton Scfcon)

Coart I

particulars.

■a— ?:13132-2: Counsel for the defend ait jeiglbocch will furnish
the prosocution with such a st-tcccnt concerning tho witness.

•L_ 2 _I£ ,L will now bo in recess.

(a short recess w„s t.Jcon)


23 Mcy U 7 - S^T-8-l-Xerrcw (Brc«m)

. C-urt No, 1

THE SUFGHiLi i'erscnais the ®urt rocn Till plccse find their
sects.

Iho Tribune1 is egoin in session.

3Y IP.. H-aDYi

Dr. Bccker-Freyscng, rill you kindly turr. to D-ciront
No. 177, *hich is i'rosecution Exhibit 133, fcund on pege 11 of
Deal cent Book ft 5*

I hevo it.

I gethcr froa your testimony hero in direct cxcnincticn thrt
you think thet this do«nent is e freud. Just rhr do you think
perpetreted this freud?

I bcllevo you harecocplctoly aisundorstcod ay rholo dofonao
if you esauao I acid this dccxnontrcs o freud* I cover scid juch c
thing. I 4, n't knou hoc you «:ldhsvo one to thtt eor.Aiaicn. I
ainpiy cxplcincd thet tho Tochniccl Offi o hed drem up c ncdlcd
report end thet, unfortunc-toly, in ao doing c lcrgo number of erroaa
waro emitted end, in 19 Uh. I dretr the Tochniccl Cffico's ettontion
to this feet but, dr.co I uuldn't knoc thrt this drcuacut res going
to bee no involved in a airier trid, I didn't send in tny rritten
ccrroction tt thrt tiao nor did I csk tho Tcchnlcd Offlco to do so.
Ifcwovtr, thcro rests telk of c fr»ud it ony tiac.

0. Veil, let us lcok tt this docunont, Doctor. Cn tho first peco
of tho document re find tho ninutca of tho cnfcrcnco regarding tho
notheds for acking sec re ter drinkcblo on 20 Mey 19U4, r nd it lists
tho nuabc-r of pocplc present. Theroin re notico the t thero rcro
feurteon pooplo pxxsont ft the acoti ng. Nor, right I rsk you this.

It secas thet you heve testified thrt you rere uncblo to secure,
volunteers for tho oxperiaents froa the civilicn populcco, froa
acsbers of tho Luftreffo, erd thrt res rhy it res ncccsscry frrycu
to resort tc Himler's source, -by didn't htc3C fourteen aen volun¬
teer for the experiaont? You hrd fourteen aen right here, interested


23 liny Kerr or (Brown)

Court Not 1

/

in the problem; ycu <rold lereused those fourteen non rather
then Jeopcrdlic the lives of ooncentretlcc ee=p i metes, couldn't
you?

So fer ca 1 cn concerned pcrsrntlly, I should hr.vc hod no mis¬
givings rcgerdlng subjecting nysclf tc such bfntl experiments,
end, ifyou would liko, I shell subject ays elf to e period of eight
days without feed or wetcr if, theroeftcr, I receive three thousend
ceclories e doy end I know elso thet Kerr S c hicklcr end others did
aeko thccsolvcs cvcileble for brief oxpexiaonts. *11 of these
peoplo listed hero* in tho fifth yerr of the err, hrd o aoroorlcss
lnportcnt position in the err mcchlncry end simply couldn't lerve
thoir offlcos for e month ct e time to subject themselves to exper¬
iments. It rr s for the seme rorson th't vc could not find c totcl
of forty - boceusc it ucs forty vc needed, not fcurtcon - in other
segments of tho population.

Q. You culd htvc brordciot it on tho rcdlo end received some
viunteers out of tho milliens of people livl ng in Berlin, for i
termless experiment for tho benefit of tho Gcr=f.n "ehm'cht. * cell
cn tho radio thft *lt la your prtriotic duty to vluntcor fer this
experiment.* Something of thrt nature. Ycu culdn't hove rccoivcd forty
pocplo in tho wholo of^orlin?

A. In ry dlr.ct excainrticn I elso testified ct erect length regard¬
ing this, th't I res convinced thft for this acicrJncr.t ro undoubt¬
edly cculdhtvo fourd Jbrty persona in Berlin, but not the forty
peoplo whoa we needed for the experiment. It would hove been oesy
enough fer the prosecution tc find witnesses tc prove thft, in the
sumor of 19W,, thcro were certainly net forty hcclthy young pen
between twenty end thirty yotrs eld whose time -rs s: cvciltblo to then
in such L ray thet they could teke pert in tr. experiment for four
weeks. Thet ns, in the sum. r cf 19&h in Berlin, absolutely cut cf
the question.

You-seen thi t tfccinn-tcs of c ccacuntrttion cc.mp were hcolthicr


8195


23 Wey 47-SWS-8-3- Hrrrcw(3rcm)
Ccurt No. 1


then t v o civi lien pojuleee in Gcraeny7

Tlx "forty- experiacntel subjects used fer tbeso cx-criaents
aero assuredly noro hcclthy then neny of the inhefcitents ct thr.t
tico< In the aurso of ratkr presontiticn of cTridcr.cc in the see
enter cxperiaer.ts it will bcccno perfectly cl err th'-t these forty
persons cere p< rticulr rly hcclthy, r.rd when this proof is br-ught
forth ycu will be tblo to convince yourself cf thet feet.
f ; . '.her. did ycu physloclly ox;nine these forty expcrincntel
subjects?

*• The cxcodn«tlon of then wes errriod cut by Trofeaser Boigl-
boeck very ccrofully.cnd if ter the delusions of the exporinonts
I heerd frea ircfcsscr Boiglbceck ft dotcllcd report cbout this
hoclth oxcainction thft tho exporinontd subjects rocoivcd.

C. "hen did you ;hyaicclly c xcairc the forty cxpcrfcacnt'.l aubjocts?
a. »lccac, acy I refer to ay direct cxcain-' ti on hero in which I acid
that I vra never in Dreheu end rysolf never err the oxpcrlnontcl
subjects. Thet res capl toly unnccossory i nee i‘rofessor Boigl-
boock wes exaisrf onod to errry cut the experiments.

Q. Those experiments were e.*nductcd in 19W# weren't they?

hnd cf July erd -ujust, 19^.

0* Ycu didn't see the subjects?

A. Ho, I vts not in Decheu.

Tho subjects were c ncontrrtien crr.p irertea?

». At bat daring the tino the ox:>.rf rents were efrricdr.it, they
woro in tho e neen tret ion ccrop Decheu. Just whet their f: to res
beforo thon end eftcr thon I don't know*

Nett let's refer t= --ego 12, Doanont Bock % 5« ^his st;tcs
in tho first jcre/arr.ph r.rd this will bo the second scntcnco efter
the list cf tbeso presort ct thonecting on 19 !k.y 19&4. It r«ds ns
follcwsi

■Tho Chief cf tho Kodieel'Service "(Chef dcs Senltccts'.roscr.s) is con¬
'd need thet . if the Berks r.ethod is used, dcccgc to heelfch hr s tc be


8196


23 Kay &7-K-S—5-4-®arr:w(Brown)
Crurt So. 1


expected not Iter then 6 days after taking Berketit, which denege
Trill result in permanent injuries to h;alth end — according to the
opinion cf tfctererzt Dr. Schaofer — will finally resist in dorth after
net lttor than 12 dcys»’

Now this report, that tics bitten by e 3c ynen end not being c aediccl
non. «nteinoi that information. '-'es thet information incorrect?

"• Not only were they erroneous thon, tut they still ero.

f.. Lot's turn to Document !'o. Zj 7&, the affidavit cf Dr. Konrad
Schaefer, c defendant hero, irosccution Exhibit 131, on page 6o,

Document Bock If 5, peregreph 3. Turn to the third for.tonco therein*

■It uca dooidod at t his meeting to cr.duct experiments on •
concentration carp inmat.s Tilth the Bcrka process, although it was
generally admitted that Bcrta-tit s^c water prceoas seriously impairs
tho hoolth after six days and causes dorth after troolvodcya rt
tho It cot. It r s farther decided thet tho human oxpcrinontal sabjccts
Here to be fed only see rater, processed by the Etrka netted, for a
period cf twclvo days.*

Taking into consideration this affidavit rf Sehcofcr, it aopccra thr t
the or.try in the ninut cs of the 19 Key meeting ero correct, does it
notV

*. First , let me draw your attention to the fact thet you your¬
self prevented me from specking bcut Schaefer's affidavit in my
direct oxamir-ticc when ay counsel * -l shod to ask mo questions rbcut it.

Now, I ikr.'t know whether it is very fair to ask no about a docunont
during during the cr:33 examination.

fc (Interrupting) Boar ir. mind thet I did not prevent you from
d-ing thet. The Tribunal did. The Tribunal ruled on thr t. Not I. Now,
i-t'3 continue.

«. Then I ccn say new whet I ir*c.r.dcd to sry duifcg my direct

cxnmincti n, on which matter the Tribunal ,■ on yrur auggestfcr.,

Tuased a rulir.T.

-- * ... W . - •• *

Z happened tc kr.;w that Dr. Schaefer mr.s shorn this °hri stems on

S197


23 Key &7-M-SV-8--5-Eerrc*(Brown)

Court Kb* 1

re pert before he signed his offidevit end thet Sr. Schecfer bolfcved
that he wculdfcwc to aipplcmer.t his rcoc llvcticn en the besis of
this peculiar report erd, consequently, hes set down in his effidevit
whet you Just reed to oc, ted I believe thet Sr. Schecfer willdiscuss
this effidevit ot greet lcegth.

You ccer. thet you ere testifying now on behalf of D r . Schrofer
thet he prjured himself, under ccth t in this effidevit?

J.. ::o. no , no perjury. I think perheps this question should better
be discussed during the heering of Sr. Schecfer.

r. . "ell, it vis evidont to ycu, however, thet deeth would result
eftcr not letcr then tvelvo deys with tho us. of Borkc scr. water,
wouldn't it? Didn't you sey thet you fla-ted thr t es propegende so
thet you oculd hevo tho experiments conducted to prevo thi t Borkr.tit
nes c fcko end so thet it wouldn't Jooprrdlno the lives of r.vi'tcro
in tho Coraon Luftweffo?

*. I c ocnvlncod thet under ccrtcin circumstcncos dorth will occur
such sooner then twelve deys if the Berke method is used, end I heve
pointed out ct greet length that c scntcr.co such es it steeds here;
namely, thet eftcr using the B C rke mohtcb, scr 1 us demngo is to bo
expected eftcr six deys -- thi t sontcnco issorothln^ tha t c nodi eel
leaden could 'rito but not c -xdicel specif list. First of ell, eftcr
you tike Bcrkr.tit nothing ccn hoppon to you. "hot tho lcyr.rn wants
to any is ’eftcr teking see w*ter which is ‘rcitcd with Berkrtit".

Thus, from this false formulation yon cen see thet tho person v o rroto
thin sentence didn't roclly recognize the true medical * nd scien¬
tific implications.


8198


Court 1

Kay 28-:-.-9-1-HD-Meahar.-3rova.


Q* I aa net * a-dice 1 aan, but I can recognize the
implication you r.re trying to convey at the present time,

I aa sure that the Tribunal can see and 1 na sure that
Christensen, the author of this report, wnoee signature
is .r. th_ original, and rt is to be assumed that it v;as
written by Christenson, oan certainly recognize it vra
stated at this meeting if the Serkn method wa.6 usoci, it
would result in death. It siaily eaya that in this sen¬
tence and I think you have shown th-t same fact in the
course of your c::aain tior. here when you now say that it «

would r 08 ult in perhaps leas than twelve days. Kov; l^ng
do you think it w»uld take after drinking tho aea-wator
treated by the 3orkn method; six days, sevon days?

According to the < vnllable literature on ohlp-
wreok oataatro 'hes death can follow even after a few hours
after the person drinks sea wa.tor, that depends first of
ell on the person’s condition who drinks the aea-wator
and secondly how much ser-wntor he drinks, 'ih t is to bo
ascertained hero was really and in o.'foct a specific

t

experimental subject v s tafcon from Slrnny'o experimental
aerloo and It was explained to the technic 1 n that if
this specific pors-n drank in the next six or twelve days
as much sea water as h. drank in the first two or threo
days, then this s cclflc -erson under these very specific
re-c nditlor.- would probably die after twelve '.nyG.

This waa t-ken by the technicl-ne an: generalized by them
nc. chat is the basis of this unf-ctu -1 report.

"e will let the Tribunal decide as to whether it* is
nfactual or not. Tell me, when ere the sympc as

"pp-arent whan a -oeraon drinks sea water for any period

• •• •

of time; ‘hat happen* to them?

a. Here again it depends r, wh~ : c-jnditiun the person


1?5


Court 1

1; - y 23-M-i-3~H3-}feehan- Brown.

la ir. ~n& how auch he drink6.

They ni^ht s-f:*cr froa diarrhea; is that rld'.t?

Thnt entirely depends on how -uch sen-w"ter ho drlnk6»

%. It Is possible, of course, tlvt v. person could hrve
diarrhea as r result of drinking eea-wrter.

«. You cannot answer Chat q.^estlvn In such ^ener 1 terns.

«-• It It possible they could h ve convulsions, that la
the synptoas of the effect of drlnkin. sea-water; isn't it?.
In a hundred cases ni 3 ht it appear in one?

a. I never herrd that.

DR. TI??: hr. President, c^aln the objection thnt I
unfortunately had to a:ho yestordn;. I nrve to aelce ny\ln.
hr. Hardy is not letting Jr. 3eclcer-Freysen£, finish his
aontences. I believe it would contribute to the general
olnrlty of the interrogation if the witness c^uld conclude
his euntonco6.

THE PRESIDENT: T.:o witness ary be allowed tv finish
*ny sentences he desires to answer no nut to fc. o by the
Prosecution.

BY XR. HaBDY:

Q. Is diarrhea a sy^cptoc after a person drinks sea¬
water even .no percent of the tine; in one r.unhred caooo
- 1 -ht it hn aen once?

«. Thnt .vis nothin^ to do with n percentage, it depends
wholly on the quantity contained in the Individual dose
of sea-wrter. If yo; drink 3ore than 3C0 cc of sca-wnter
m no 3in^le dose thor. you have dlr.rvnea, if she dose #
is scalier, then you do not.

•i. Car. j u suffer fr,u convulsions '3 r. result of
drinkln- ?. certain mount of sea-water?

A. I cannot answer that question, Pro- the literature
- read, 1 -:n w of -.v air. le case of c r.vulei ns and


6XC


Court 1

Hhy 23-&-9-3-m>4feehan-3rown


since I did not see the sea-water ex.-sriaents myself, It 19
impossible for me to answer the't question In the affirma¬
tive. I dc know th-t in the case of the disease that I
referred the technicians to os a horrible example, namely
cholera, you do h-ve convulsions, but these c nvulslons
r.ro not solely the result of drinking sea-water, - v ut ere
a symptom of sickness itself. I cannot designate between
those two possible sources of the rucctlon at the moment,
what is the result of thirst or of the sickness itself,
perhaps Professor 3el t lboecke can answer that question.

(t. nfter drinking sea-water for seme period of time,
is it possible that the person may suffer from
hallucinations; will they have halluolnotlons?

«. The literature I have read on cases of ship-wrecked
arsons and this is • bout all detailed descriptions of
English sea-wreoi ta , they speak of "Fata i4or b ann u and
other natters. Now whether In a etrickly psychological
oonso these are genuine hallucinations or not 1 do not
know, the literature is vory llmltod in this matter. I
am not a Psychiatrist and I cannot answer this question,
but since I know that you ere referring to this document,
this Christensen document, let me say that in my dlroct
examination I quoted a passage from Bergmann’s text books
regarding thirst symptoms of oholera rnd there was nothing
there about hallucinations.

i. And you have testified already death can result
from drinking sea-water?
a. ’fee.

Q. Well now this sentence here in this report written
by a lay-m^n, Christensen, st-tes: "External symptoms are
t be expected, such as drainage, diarrhea, convulsions,
hallucinations end finally death." That Is n -retty good


8201


Court 1

.Icy 28-H-9-4---:i>-Meehan-3rown.

accurate statement, isn't it?

Let me say first of ell in xon.ral it frequently
occurs trot lay-men do core talking about difficult subjects
nd are sore dangerous and unuleassr.t tnan specialists, ana
sec ndly, I a?ve already told you what the 'oasis of this
Iry-xen's etc tenant la, which is mainly the quotation
fr that text hook. I mentioned that sentence in the
text book and oertclnly it suet h've made a .rent impression
on Hr. Christenson or perhrps os Schickler, if ho drew up
the \-eport, thrt la why you find it reproduced here in
report, .loroover in Sirsny's erse oxtorinontal
9 ibjoots -ctuclly ..id h-v*. diarrhea bet clrany'e experiments
were vach x^ro unpleasant nd d»n u vr us than the experiments
th?t ay associates lanned * nd wnicn Slvglboeck carried
utt ... in thoso arses of -urs we did not h»vo any diarrhea.

Well, now, Cnristens^n soys hero In this report
tit” c a n result of the prellnlnrry discussions it was
s teed to -r^ng.- n new series of experiments of short
duration; tn°t fact is true isn’t it?

/i. Ih.it la nd ubtodly true. There ler.'t cuoh in
s’ in. tr. t, eocause everythin, revolved rround that
question.

It was 'iso agre.d th?t In t.i- series of experiments
ersone would be ^lven sea-water processed with c e
ierx; tit method; wasn't it? Let ue juc-t set aside the
report for r. moment. It was also reed that persons
vr-uld ie used In the eroerimer.ta 'nd said persons Would^
ecelvo sea-wrter -/rocesscu by toe : .erko actnod; isn't

t- t right?

.•i. Tnafc did not »v.ve to ce reed J?on, because that


t.i- q.estl n we were trying to decide.


Court 1

l-r/ 23-14- -5-HD-*eehan-3rovr..


It w's also staved th*t o r6ons selecte.. w uld be
*- ntrol arsons *nc the would ..rink rarely plain water;
didn't they?

Tr.-*t c 9i-i is >ne of those c ntrol jr^acs, w .lch
~e frequently been senti-ned in tills trial, namely the
ov.cr 1 ccsae. The) wove such better off than the actual
experimental groups uao drank the oerfcatlt mfi aon-vaccr.

I JS -ibly Q ~i- t t nt that ti e bao^uea these wore
scientific objections which I made to Dr. Von olrenl's
*'lr.n for tha ex:ericent as he did n<-t nrva such o. control
v in ni , series of experiments.

Sow, ; . ve stated here in . irect exsminatlon
t -c persons would be given SCO cc of Sorketit, nothor
-r up would be cjlven 1,000 cc of Serkatlt, the t.?lrd ^roup
- 1 - ' ot « ncrunl 5 roa. c iven ordln-t • drinking water, the
f urc e»roup would be a lven aea-w ter without rnycnin B and
r ©V up • ould ; .c nothin.,; is enw rl = h; what you

said ncre in direct examination?

I.Vv was o prrt of what I sold in direct oxaaino-
ci n, out n,t "11 «nd vnrt ,uu ..we left out I consider
very important, nr-wly the conditions under wuich t.:o
or^eriaenta wor. to ^ carrier j ut, wnlch were docidod
n .n the presence of Professor -5:>->in*or and fceubner,
icii -s f ndiaentally difference fr.o n aediccl exporl-
onfcc.l series.

v. Veil now ou said in your direct exonun 61 n that
intended t aake the Cheese -or* bind in ^, Doctor, when
stated t-.vr. •..•-a c fifth c r an nd a fourth . roup.

5 flft. will B et nothing " t all, tn. fourth wall B ht

l-in sen-rre-r; y a wouldn't even hv. . the c urtesy
_vln_ u.:os Si-a-water Cre«t d wit.: he Berk?vie toethod;

- i - t ri_. t? I.. v is not nr eve lane kqrc in t.'is report

e2C3


Court 1

hay 28-i—9-o^KB-Kechcn-Brovm»


cither that you intended to use people end give then: nerely
sea-v. ter and nothin-, else.

I arc very gird that the Prosecution has finally
stated that what actually was decided on and what atate-
aenta ere lr. this resort is in contradiction to each other.
I never thought that Berkntlt w'.e a particular act of
philanthropy or that drinking sea-water is not such a
horrible anttor as you soca to believe.


32C4


2 ? - - J-JP-1O-l-Coa* (1st. orown)
Court I


PoojIo die with it, don't they?

iv, you c_i die with anything.

Certainly. Let's go on, urJbie Ho, 2 on page 13, Christenson
st tee hero ur.or the section: "Persons nourished with sou water .aid
bcrX-.tit, end ns diet also the cnorf «cy ee_ r_tione. i>nr_tion of
experiments: 12 d^i. ei-ce in tne opinion of tee Chief of tho
uodic.l tcrrleo (Chef des SaaitACtsveeens) permanent injuries to health,
th .t is t_c do.th of tno ejperineat 1 subjects nos to be exocctcd, ns
on?oriucat.a subjects such persons should be used ~s will bo put ut
tao diB 'Oa.J. oy the ueichsfuchror SS." Dr. Christensen a-do th .t
ra;.\rk .tad ho obviously b..sed th_t rui_rh on what he hc_rd at tho
co.ifcrcr.co, did he not. Ho didn't Just conjure up th_t idc. by hinsolf,
did no?

..e corcainly no.rd th-t out wft.t is written down hero is not
wn. t ..o heart frot: ac or Sr. Sch.offer verb .tin out lo tno result of
what Christensen understood.

.oil no -

<w JX.t is right ant it appears th-t - 1 -ynun who ..tendod a
conference idll think r.o is not a s^eci..list and docs not unde-rot ad \Ax&%
re 11" v x mint. Let no point o-nt two a.ttcrs to ou. Tho first is
tout if I ronlly E_d proposed .a experinent in ne. v .ter with borX-.tit
that 1 nted twelve d.yo, lot us .ssuno for the acuont, thu; I Cannot
ur.'.crs.. ..C. vhy I should h„vc Jso sug.-wsttd the o.ao experiment for bIx
d- a bocnv.no in the 12 d*y cxocrin.nt 1 nuot ^rforco Just c-rry out
tno fire. si;; d_ys _r.d consequently c_n see in tno tv-clve d,v oxporiucr.t
everyth ng that I could sec in tn; six d_y experiment.

.. T u .l.vo cl.oor.tcl;- caJ>l_iaod tne experiment. I n.von't asked
you t. c o.-.cstion _t nil. I have asked you ccncor.dng wn.t Chrin&cnsoa
vroti in t is roport right hero in this p.r_^r.oh: "Since in tho
cni..i .. yl .no Cnief of tne kcdic_l services penaanunt injuries to hodth,
tn..t is, t-.c e'e .th of tao cx>eriacat..l subjects n..s to oo expected",


28 -2-Coolc (let. irovu)

Court I

.or ■ -C he re. th-t t t;. t ceoting, did-'*, he, or hu wouldn't h-vo
written it n«.rc?

a. ho nasi certainly did not c«.ur it _t ta_t tiue because I
36VO" S.id ca flUCh aOU3CT.BC.

T„ He s;j s he hc..rd it rrt the aoctia^, doesn't liol

A. Ho S. J*B BO, :-C8.

r. .*nd fr.rthcmore no «.ya in t~io n-r^r .’jn th.t due to tho
f..ct t . t dc..ta is to oo cxpectod, vo vill h_vc to &ot our oxperiuontrl
subjects f vet. tho ..clchcfuohr.r SS, taut Ib wn .t t.iut s.ys ir. thio
p-r.<;r ph, does it not?

Plo.Jic let j. tell you ny second rc..Boa why t.iiB c.unot oo
true, .uid tain X c a -cover your question.

Juat .. uouont, dove tn..t Buy th .t in tnit parugnph frou
rcadi.^ t ia p..r.r.,uh on it'«f xo, doeo it not «.;• tr. .t tr.o do..th
of t..w c:;.)oriaaat-l subjects a^a to 00 expected, und us experiment.1
• objects arch )»rcona should 00 uoed -0 vill be put ut :.-.c diooo.l
or t.:o .oic.ua’uehrer SS, does it s»y th_t or doosa't it?

u. fhoro 1 b no doubt it io r.wrv. iooody doaios it i« writ ton
hero, and. Z newer denied tn..t tno docc-ent is genuine.

?. Hotf could Christenson Jtow tho .-.clcfcsfuchrcr SS would amply
co..:ouSr tio: c.*:p inures?

^ Lot tell you firot of -11 th .t between Christenson'a office
und s. - .O-Chfuehror SS, there, without tac ChUf of t .10 i.cdlc-1
Ir.Bpoctorr.ti or ays.If h..twins „o©ut it, tr.wrc v.rc cloeo connections.
..oroovo: at t-r meeting cf tno X sioko of t o possibility in

c-sc VC f; a t r.o other ox-^ri-out-l subjeetc of mah: ^ -a effort to
use iatL.tos, uad net boc.mav t..e orjoriuonta were dangerous or co Id
Cu"Ji- dc..tu, out parol;' for oru_ai rut i caul rouaono. How I _sk y -n
for tl._ t lire*, tine, plo-se let ue fi..ish ay second re-sen. -»ftcr the
coot* :. : -o 2cth of ..-y w tried to c-rry out tr.o exp cri Junto such
-e t sc .c. Oly to he carried out in O-chuU on e-dots from the


C206


28 ::^--:i-v"?-lO-3-Cock (lut.arovn)

Co rt I

-Hi: ry .caiica;- aad taor. vr.on v t vcr. net successful ia th-t, tacn
to Carr t_ou rat oa persons la the LuftVaffe iosuit JL ia .rfrunaviok,

Th-i t.’Wci vita out doubt ta_t taa conclusion v.ich Caristvaaea scam
tc :...vo dw*a ia to.ls rc ort is certainly not - correct conclusion.

.. "acre is th_t cvidcr.ee?

It B-aas vcr; sieplo to tie - ..r. Christens oa b^« -

"aerc is t*.c evidence to .t you a_d ca sorinonts ..fter that
tiuo, iter too 25ta of ...y, oa c.-dotc? -tore i^. that oridesco?

_ .hofer to the ..ffid.vit of toe Ccuaacdor of the r.odic_l
^.Aaay of tao Luftv.af®. I don't bolleve you vill accuse hiu of
CO - it tin;. pvrjuxy. Otaerviao, you vould n-vc- to aJto aiu et..nd trial
and taat a ..a ..ct yet tje-a ol..cc, -ad too Ca'.cf of fac Luftveffo
.vault 1 ia -runovick who fi-m also givoa an -ffid-vit oa tr.lo subject,
c-ya ta t clto«r Scirrocder nor arcane ->tnorircd by tin, v..o to
car;* cut a;jori..cat« ia too LuftV-ffc Hoooit-1 ia arunoviefc.

.. i)iu they c..rry out tao croon-onto?

I c-ld o-v «. r„l ti-os tr.-t ooc..ub« of coaditions in 19*«
unfortrn..tol:* to- c^3o.-Uur.t« could bo carried out neither ..t top ono
nor rt oto.or >l-co .jvd ta- o v„s tau re-son toy tae letter v_ D ooat
tc Hia-ilur .-.c^a* titot these ox-erinc-ts bo carried out on i»atoo,
pad V...I lo toe rc-sen

?. Of c - rou. Caristcacca iaplius hero too only roaoon way you
-ro *>ia; to -i.~l-r lo *o.c axoc you ejected do-too ufld you c..n very
vt-li hill concoatr .tlon c.ir* inuntes vhurv you c<n* 2 da't vtr; voll
.dll c. -otn, you ui at vvll perform oxcoriavats on c.-dots th.it \»ouldn»t
result to death, but here Christo aso.. pointa out fv.t you people .,-.rood
ia toe aoroucc th-t death vould bo too result .ad hence it in
necocoary to resort to to too Eoichsfuchrer Si for subjects to bo xiood
bee., \oo didn't v_nt to :-dll eay of these valuable cadets, isn't that
_cr. aiholy to— sit-.--.tion?

Iz..-. ir ^orav.ua a picture of »~ .t -ctuall;- ver.t on ia .


3207


23 ::..:^-:.-v _ ?-li-4-Cooic (int. arcvn)
Court I


Christensen's aiad, th_t I do not taov. At any rate is it not a
reproduction of the theu^ts th..t vent on in ny aiad .aid also lot no
poi t cut tc you t..e follovlng: Sever, nover, not area in this confe¬
rence t. . ; tool: pl_ce alaost three yo„rs ego, never did I sty tn t doctho
were te he cc-ted on in taese experiments. I said th-t in prnctic.J.
C..B 00 of ship vrcctc th..rc would b« serious dan-ge to he Jth if the
bcri.itit method vas used -id tn„t ic sccotaiag altogether different
use. over, nodical specialist will n ruo with ue tfcoa I say that oay
ecthod th .t took place out in tno occ-a hundreds of uilcs frxi shore,
is d.-ngOrcuo, Uses I s-C' ta-t tacsv s-~o circumstances can be reoroducod
in n laboratory on an cpcriuental suoject with no danger to the c»-
poriiiohtal subject's lifv, -nd t-.is v^s proved Inter in effect as to
nov o::;erlucr-ts v-ro ..ctunlly carried out -ad aov they resulted ~uA t. in
Is unaUbigously a misunderstanding on Christenson's part, who confusod
ocporine-at.il danger vit.. tao uxporL-ont-l situ-tiou, v.*o never in his
lifo had c. ried out any uodicul cc^.-luvat.

.. ‘-a..: did Professor S&pingur think about using concentration
C..n ia. too?

a. I c.a't toll you econus c I nover discussed the Uuttor with
Proiocsor 3r:iagor;

... Did he exhibit any misgivings aeout it?

a. hot to JC bee-use in tao aacting of the 2 Stn which I attended
vita Pro escor h-r^i gor tho question of oxjcri-oatal subjects was not

. Ifcc oxoorii-ontal conditions were established according
to purely nodical -nd scientific -oriaciples, independently, vnothor
tho;* vora t: be Carried out ca volunteer c_dvts or hos’it-1 iam.tos
or concent:* tioa c-.p ian-tes, tn_t v„s not decided-t -11 on tao 25th
,,.d it v s .. ; diacussod. also I do not know vaor. pr. jgningor iirst
found ct t a e:qjcri~«.nts w.rc c-rried out in hucfccu nor do I icnov: \f...t
hv. thought ..-cut that, consequently I cannot ..never your question.

Professor ijpingor V.x - very f~cus ph sici-n, v..s ho not?

3200


28 :.ny-..-e?-lo-5-Ccoh (Jut. brown)

Court I

«• Yob.

0., —o vv.3 associate Vitn the University of VienaaT
h. Hotf.'B an ordiuarius for iatcrn_l uodlcino on tno uodlcal
faculty of the University of Vienna.

Ynsa't his iio on a *-igh ?l»ao ia -cdic.l circles in -lirojo?
a. In the field of internal aediciao no was certainly ono of tho
lo iliiv- Authoritics of bur ope. I assume that beesucc I have heard th.t
stutcoaou oad .-a-bor3 of tne royal noble f _.ilica fro;, outside
Germany have frcquoatly Callod on r.ia for t reatuont.

v. 11? yovt know vrv.t n^jpoaed to Professor -iriingor?

•*. I t-.e course of this tri -1 I h„vo hc^rd that Profoesor
4’.‘i V,cr cceuitted suicid-?

.. “'id y:u enow ti;..t Professor finger s-v tao actual crporiiioats
3ci;.l’ooec ; vcm conduct!.-. at D.xhau?

a. I lio-rd frou Professor nioglboci: that ’rof essor -ppinyor vac
at Dachau oao ti- c I believe during t.:o course of the cx>cri..ento i -,\d
in tho ono or tho other testimony here 1 co_rd ti'. t corroborated.

•*, Did you nc-r free defuse counsel or othor sourcos tnat
Professor lining or coiuitt^ suicide ia u Juttor of heuro after being
vioited o; a representative of uy offiect

a. -.To, thin is t o first ti_o th..t 2 have ho.Jd th-t.

You don't n..ov whether or not Professor Droingor ever hod uis-
jlvi •> about boiag ic-^licatcd !r. the B*>ori. eats with sea vatcr r.t tho
ynch.vu c ..co-.tr .tiin c._''7

—. If a over ..„d .jy such aisgiviags Just g.iertly before his

do..th.


8209


23 Ifey-iS-jJG-ii-l-<5rcss (Brown)
Court 1


Q Let's turn t_ ikeument NO-185, page 18, Document Bock V,
wr-ich is i rcsccuti; n Exhibit 13L. You *rcto tnis letter, doctor?

.. I drew up the first ircft of this letter end dictated it.

Shewed this draft tc =y department chief end he, as I clearly rcaentocr,
cade a few changes that I dc not remember exactly today. . erhr: 3 you
cay have his files end there ere in cy original draft tho changes
that he ancle. Then the letter was soicittod tc the Chief of Staff
end finally was submitted to the chief hicsclf to be signed.

3 Acccrding tc the translation cf this docunont by dofenso
counsel. Dr. Urrx - the important scntoncc that *o have been discuss¬
ing hore is the second statement in th't letter. Dr. Marx's trans-
1- ticn roads as follows: "Today a yin I an standing before a decision,
which, after numerous exj-cricenta cn an Inals and also on human beings
demands a. finrl solution cn voluntary experimental subjects." New,
using that translation can ycu tell no whe tho hunan beings wore, that
is, tho ncn-v.luntoors that ycu used prior tc this. Y~u are aakine fer
vclunteors. Free that sentence it indicates tc me that ycu had toepori-
centcd with rnicals, thon n;n-vcluntocrs, rj»d new ere stressing the fact
ycu want volunteers, 'ho were the ncn-vcluntcers ycu used before ycu
asked Hinder fer volunteer subjects?

.. First cf all in this whclc 1-ttcr there is n.thin; about vdun-
tcers. Life dees net consist scl-ly of contradictions sc that bocauso
there is the word volunteers ir. cr.e sentence ycu cannot ccndudo that
all the other persons that were used were non-vclunt<.cr3. That is net
necessary antithesis. There were tw t,u 4 >s cf experimental porsens.
First cf ell, in the two series of -xperiaaits there Wurc the associates
cf Dr. Schaefer an! cn the ether hand experimental su Jocts used by
Sirany in Vienna, E.th of these croups cf subjects wero volunteers,
no doubt.

1 . oil, y:u have already experimented on animals, accordin' to
the translation by defense ccuns 1, end y u have already experimented
cn hunan beings, but new it demands further <jc>criaents. ’Set is tho
re-son ycu couldn't use the same hunan beings, f.r instance, that y.u
used for the ethers. Is it because the final solution is death?


23 ^y-JWJG-ll-2-Grcss IBrcwn)
Ccurm 1


Sc. Schaefer* a experimental subjects wore in tctc four tech¬
nical assistants end I think nothing threirs a sharper light cn the
sere oli; 7 it in which Germany fcun: itself in at the tine, then the
fact that Schaefer, during the course cf his experiments had tc uso
feur technicians as experimental subjects at the s&ne tine carrying cn
their regular work. If cnythinr c uld have been dene it avoid thrt
these technical assistants certainly we uld have given up regular work
during the experiments. Sew, the second group of subjects were inmates
cf hospitals. These are people in pert, as 3r. Schaofcr will be later
cfclo tc state, whe had wounds whe, hewover, cculd net bo usod at tho
front because of the wounds. And, theso consequently were persons
when we cohsidorcd net tc be appropriate fer the testing of tho Berko
method because whet we needed for oxpcrincntal subjects were healthy
porsens free th ago of 18 to 30. He . ersen among tho specialists
concerned ever mentioned cr thought of death in cc.incction with these
experiments and in this letter te- there is no nentien cf death. It
dees n.t oven say in this lettor pors-ns ccndcnnod tc doath should be
usod fer the experiments which should certainly bo in the letter if
death was censidcred at all a possibility cf the cxpcrlacnts.

a ’.oil here in the letter in the second paragraph you atato
"As the experiments cn human beings ciuld thus far cnly bo carried
cut for - period cf four days, m* as practical riccicnds requiro a
runeiy fer these who aro in distress at see up tc 12 days, appropriate
experiments are necessary." .j\'. the other document signed by Christ¬
enson says death nculd result in 12 days. Ycu have it in here thrt ycu
thought of death when you vr.te this document. These two documents
fit tegothey like a jigsaw puzzle.

.. I beg y_ur pardon. Ycu said thrt death is again mentioned hero.

*

According tc the true- copy that I have before lx. I sco no oonticn cf
the word doath.

q Ycu said here necessary tc experiment with than for 12 days,
and any experiment lasting 12 days acccrdin; t; ycur cwn testim:ny and
acccr ir. tc the document rill result in death using the Berica method.


8211


28 :!ay»:.-.vG-ll-3-Grc3s (8kwa)

Court 1

Of ccursc, I admit that ycu need the other document. leu aoist realize
that it is apparent here, isn't it?

It is not at all apparent. I have cade efforts but I 30 c they
have ‘cun in vain tc say in my direct oc ac i n ation why tho numb^r 12
ccr.es up here in reference tc the numicr of '.rr s. If ycu stress it
I will repent that testierny new, otherwise I can wait until later ,n
when ccur.acl re-direct examines no.

Gc ri^ht ahead.

.. Thrnk yeu. This sentence simply says th't the autho ’ that
wculd subsequently be used in practice vas t be tested for 12 days
experimentally. !.’cw let us esaumo that I h'd 12 different Methods and
wanted to chooso tho test ene. Th-n thu first aethc l would fell cn
the very first day, end the persons .ho were used for this first
nethed would bo eliminated fr n the ocpcriaentr 1 series on the very
first day; this would keep cn until* cn tho 12th day of tho experiments,
only theso persons would be left who had bean treated by the best
aethod on.', that would be the method proved to to usable in practico,
which would thv.n jc introduced. There is no mention in this letter
cf .-ny experiment tc be carried cut fer 12 drya with the dangerous
and unsatisfactory Berkatit. ..ni I bjiov. I cm io.av . the rest tc
the preef of the actual results of this . x^ronents • wWch oho no th't
they we.c enried eut as I have just described

*J Doctor, at the tc;: cf this letter we Sv e the registry nun! cr
2F. Hew does it happen that y.u used the ru-istry number 2F at such
c late date as 7 Juno 19UU, cr was th't just ene f those instances
whero 2 F and 21 L. overlapped?

I have enly a type! co,y hero, net a photostat, but I assume

t

what ycu say is correct. Either that was one of the eases whore tho
two overlapped, cr I made a mistake in the ictu. i oif.aps tho new
number was not introduced until ii.y. ..t my rate there is nc dcutt
that this letter was handled by my Eeferat.

-j Hew many tir.es had ycu requested inmates from Hiamlur prler
tc this tiioc?


fly ?


26 Hcy-K-3JG-ll-4-Cross (3rc.nr.)
Court 1


•» I cysclf, never.

1 Hew Hd you knew that y.u ccul<: get inOates from Himmler?

.. I ' oliovc that *as explained at greet length during the exenin-
ti. n of * ref. Schroeder. Tref. Schrceder was j rovicusly employed with
the Rcichsarzt SS and iclicc end found cut frer; hin whr.t procedure wns
tc be pursued in this ease, and then I received an erdor, frea the
Chief of the Medical Inspectorate via ry department cni-.f tc draw up
such r. letter. That's hew I knew about it.

; ell, you of eovrso kr.uw in 1942 free; listening to the cenfor-
unco hotwoc n Rcscher end Kip; kc that you ccul 1 cot uxporiracntd subjects
frea Him-ler. You knew thet at en early date, didn't you? Had ycu gene
to Himmler r.t any ether tiao? Or had Schr-cder gene tc HinJ.tr? Or
had Hippke gene to Hinder? Frea this letter it appears ycu ore quite
f.“oilier with the procedure necessary tc ret tho proper nuraber of sub¬
jects frea KLxder. Ycu sry here "Earlier already y»u aado it pcssiblc
fer the Luftwaffe tc settle urgent nedical natters through experiments
en huacn beings." New, when, other then in the hijjwltitudo and
freeling experiments, did Hiaalcr arJca it possible fer the Luftwaffe
tc settle urgent nodical natters? Ycu apparently -t this time knew
about all ether experiments conducted en concentration camp inmates
fer the benefit of the Luftwaffe. Ycu urcto this letter.

•• Fr^.a the c^nf«r^.nco betwuen General Oberstabsarzt Hippke and
'.ir. Rcschor I found out nothing about the way Rcschor get his experi-
°®ntal subjects. I dearly renumber that Kcschor named not only Kircm-
l- r ftt that time but dsc Hitler. Sc, if I h:d had tc do ti .-lone I
aa-ht have filed ay application with Hitler er with hcich Ministry cf
Justice, er I don't knew rtizz I n ,-ftt have sent it tc. .nd, moreover
in ay direct examination I said ct re. t length that this fipst sentence
refers tc the fret th-t I inferaed Irefesser Schrcciur ct that tine
th:t iTefesser Hclzlcchner h-d carried cut oreria.r.ts in 3r.cb.au end
th.-t Rcschor h-d stated in Numbers th: t these exporinents were under
Himmler* s responsibility. That was t c total oxtcr.t cf kno* ledge in


2213


p


23 ::-;'-i:-JJG-ll-5-Grc3s (Brcvn)

Court 1


these sitters, ind I cannot reedy cny acre into this first sentence.
This give the Luftwaffe the opportunity u clarify urgent acdicel
prcl-clss — quick req-rsing — threu^ ocp .riment — net experiments —

on huar-n cir.-s. I don't knew hew you can draw the conclusion frea
that that I knew about oil the experiments.

Q .ere you ewaro of the fact that Hasten get inmates from tho
SS?

.. Me. Of that I knew nothing. I believe this question will bo
thcrcuJily clarified hero.


62 1L


26 —ay-~-j J-12-i-r.ar ro _ — (?rciin ) -
Court 1

*11, now this SwCoM s-ntcncw, t:„ one which the interpre¬
ters s j is rati._r ambiguous. however, they co state t&at thy rros.cu-
t ton's translation is more likely. This sentence as it stand in tlx. copy
p:\JcnUnd by the prosecution, or the translation present-r.a by the
prosecution, or. pege 16 of Document ~ock 5*, states us follow
a Document V5, not 15.

Q I believe I srid 5.

‘Today I .again aVxr.d before a decision, which .fur nun.reus
-Xp.riments on animals and also on voluntary humn: subjects, demands
final resolution,'

Mo.;, as that stands hen. now, isr.' t it apar-r.t that you had
-forked as far as possible on voluntary human subjects >nu tint you Wer-
lookinfc for inmat-s oth-r th n volunteers?

TIP.- . r. .rcsii-nt, perhaps this would o- the appropria¬
te r.oo nt for a brief remark, n ml; tli. : olio-ring: Jlr. hardy has just
stated that th. interpreters said that the prosecution's version was
more lik-ly. I ale p.ruicsio:. to put two questions to the interpreters
to clear up this difficulty once ar.d for all, tn.n 1 b.lieVe We shall

a.. thi3 natter r-"f-ctly clear. The first quwttion.

. H. n. Oust a zccxnt, 'four honor, I h-v. - 1 ready filed with
th- Tribun-1 a neajoroadaa. Dcfens. couns.l r_s that opportunity to do
• sou-. The Prosecution has fil.d their a morandua, a copy has be.n
Sent to defense counsel, natter o: ..re. months ^go, .;ith th. opinion
of the Chi,, of t;»e translation Section, nd the Chief of tho transla¬
tion Secftaon , who is core an authority o.i this matter icndcmicolly
ihan th. int-rpr-ters in this cour. rcon, has stated in that a_aormdum

rcth to the Tribun.1 nd to Defense Counsel, that the translation as

»

pr.scnted by Defense Couns-1 is absolutely incorrect. Ther-fore I think
I can continue =y . go a l na tion, presuming that -h_ Prosecution's con¬
tention is right, "Ithout int.rruption.

T:xj FILe ID£"'i: as far as I know, no c_mb_r of t.-.e Tribun::! has
a. n *,h. Certiiic t_s •••hich rare filed concerning th.se different trans-


<3215


23 tiy-JH5J-12-2-Karrow-(Broim)-
Court 1

lations. I understood that the interpreters, who reported to the Tri¬
bunal in open Court, would file a written statement of That they had
reported. If Counsel desires to cross-examine the witness upon the
assumption that the Prosecution's translation is correct, th_ Prosecu¬
tion nay do so.

utK&Y: Pardon n., Your Honor, cay I cross-cxaain. the witness
following the contention that the translation is correct and not assu-
ain^ it to be correct?

DP.. TIP*; Hajr I reply briefly, r. President? ..r. Hardy stated
that a memorandum from th. Chief of the t ranslation Dcparto.nt was put
in three months ago, stating that the Def.ns. Counsel translation is in¬
correct. Let Qe nention two points in this connection. First n-ith.r I
nor ay two colleagues conc-m-d in th Sea water natter. Dr. Pelcknann
and Dr. Steinbauer, ever saw such a memorandum froa the Chief of the
language Division. Secondly, the sentence which . r. hardy s-.ys th«

Defense is translating incor-.ctly is apparently the one which was
put to Beck r-Ffeyseng four days ago, by Dr. ;rx, in direct examina¬
tion. .Vow what Er. Hardy says cannot b. entirely corect. I do not believe
*r. President, that it is permissible, before it has be.n cleared up
without any dcubt rhich of the two interpretations of this Sentence
dOvS justice to the spirit and the letter of the Geman that cross-
vxmination be carried out on the basis of the translation submitted
by the Frosecution and contested by eh- Defense. If this cross-examina-
tion is tc have any point, it can be carried on only on th. basis of a
new translation which is accepted as cor ct by both the Defense and
the Prosecution, -nd such a translation w. do not have.

THE p.'ESirVT: Does Defense Counsel desire to have hos # own _x-
p_rts a-Jcc another translation of this, with their reasons for the tran 5 -
L-.tio.n which they contend i3 ccr..ct?

DH. TIFF: Yes, -j. PreSid. nt. This memorandum is in - state
of preparation but is net yet finished. I b.livc »e can dispense with.

• written memorandum however if the interpreters would not answer two


GZL6


25 —ay- '.-0 J-12-3 -:.orro-(Br <r*n) -
Ccurt 1


questions - which I should lik- tc ut to thus if . Ir. _r<ty ill It t

2 v. The first on. is .

( interrupting), I subait, lour honor,....

T.-.l ?.: 5Ii“ .’I: (interrupting), a 11 err counsel to finish his
statue-nt.

- . aeTDI: I., •ns “bout to ask question? of th- int.rorot«-rs.
h icIEUT: I did not understand that. Counsel >111 not r.sk
tl e quv*tions without the p-mission of th- tribunal, but counsel was
making sob- further statesunt.

D' . TIP, : s. Pr-sident, I should like to put to th- int-rpr--
t-rs only taro questions, th first of vhich is.

TKL r. ZIZ .:i( Interrupting) Just a nonr.nt befor. propounding

those questions, Oh. t h v. jou to say conc-rning that proetdur.., .r. Hardy?

. hn.Li. lay conc.ming that proccdur., Your Honor, that

it isn't prop.r to ask the court int.rpr-t.rs this questions. This is

a uc deaic on . Office for Chief of Counsel for >.'ar Crises has

•

:oui’ Abtilujifs in th- language Division, on- of hich is th- tr nsl\-
tion Suction. In th. translation Section are p-ople that have different
qualifications ir. -any rsp-cts froa th. intrpr-ters ncr-, nd in such
.iatt-r as this t.-,-y coaf-r with on. anotn.r nd sit in a rcur.d-tabl-
c nf.r.nc-. Just that has be-n don-. To ask th.s int.rpr-t.rs h-re to
rinuttnn.ously runr.r qu.stions conc-rr.in th-s- points vhich re
oo abiguous, nd to uo it in a p_ricd of l-_lf hour, is unfair, nd
I subnit that if D. i_ns- Counsel r.qu.sts to nut qu-c'ion» cone-mine
translations, that tb.y should b- dSr_ct. d to th- Chi-f cf the Trans¬
lation :ranch of the Of*ic_ of Ch. .'V Counsel for far Crivs, nd th-
3r-i-: of that Br nch will nsu-.r his qu-. tions.

D: . TI.’ . 1 r-gret that l-r.riy is cccusin. j- of unf ;im-s£.

- b-li-v. that i h.v- not d-s-rved such an accusation ir. th. course of
~y pr-s-ntation so far. low-v-r, if 1 h*-v- so b-.n r-proach-d, .ir.
:r-siO-nt, I 1 that it is Just as fair that th- Iranslation D-p-rt-
. , according to . r. ! xd;, turn . three months a c


26 Ii-ferroF-( ;rown)-

Court 1

bout this dcc‘3iv. dcocuix.it in the seawater case, which def.nse counnsel

h:.d n-ver -v,r heard, until now, such less seen a copy Oft

THE P:-SILENT: The Tribunal finds no occasion for any reproach

to uefunst Counsel. During th- noon r.c.3s, rhich is about to take place

Counsel for Defens- nay procure - the S-cretary General nay deliv-r to

Ccuns-l for Lcfe.ns a copy of translation which the frocecetion says

;r-.s fil-d tit:. the BbfUnsc Counsel see- tin. ago. Defense Counsel nay th_n

prepare th- questions thich they d-sir- to propound to translators and

submit those Uestions to th- Tribunal when it r .convenes at 1:30 o'clock.

•

Copies of all these pap-rs should be prepar-d so that each n.:3b_r of the
Tribunal nay hr.Ve *. copy.

-“*• Ha.DI: Tour Honor, ir. corr.-ction with this topic, I undcr-
st vnd that this situation arose see- nonths ago - was brought up by
D-ftnse Counsel. At that tlx, ix. .icfcan-y - oj cours-, I m busy rdth
a-.ny other problems. I didn't ban le this prOblca. .j. hcH-n-y handled
it. .ir. mq honey at that ti-n requ-st-d th- Translation Division to a-
laustivcly stud;, the docuo-nts, and h. ( 11 .d a o-aorandua, writt.n by
-ranslation Division, with the Secretary Ckn-ral for distribution. It
a--y r.ll bo that it has not b-.n distributed to date, but that was, .as
I understood it, .and it was in answer to an objection previously rai¬
sed, by Dr. : one, not Dr. Tipp.

JUEC2. S2~:a;!3i .Tell, .ir. Hardy, if that has been don-, shouldn't
it be a Very easy thing for you to procure copies and deliver thus to
3 uch Counsel the Defense as are interest-d and perhaps deliver than to
this Court. This Court have never seen then.

HAHDY: All copies wer- delivered. ..'o copies were saved, Your
Honor. I hrv- be a unable to find th- other copies and I an preparing
• icvr one. to sub nit durin rebuttal.

•-- .'iL.lI DLJ.T: You say the Secret_ry u e.ieral has no./ no ori-
Din -1 copy on fil_?

r». 'EY: ..-11 I didn't check with the Secretary ’civral.

a


BZLC


2'- -ij J-12-5-:: arror-(Trown)-

Court 1

I:i ?:23nsy - ; Itot -.fOBld b- th. Office. - that node bo the
plocw ~-r. e.rtainly ar. original should be. Counsel for the Prosecution
^ C ~ fui8t rin -wceXttin, curing th. noon recess, whether the S.cre-
t.-o-i 1 -n.rol -till has an original copy of that translation as it was
r.ported end filed with the Secretary- General end delivered to Counsel
s stated nor by Counsel for the Prosecution, although he 7/as not
Personally connected with the preparation of that translation, a copy
of that translation should b, r.ad: to pr.Sent to the Tribunal at 1:30
o'clock. By that via. D-fense Counsel nay pr.pare th- qu-stions conccr-
nLng this disputed translation which they d-slre to subsit to adequate
int.rpr.t.rs, whether our own in court or others or a combination of
both The Tribunal will then deUnain. how th- natter will b. handled
and a final report will be andt to the Tribunal. Th- ultinat. d-cision
rill, of course, r.st the *ribun . 1 .

KAliDT: Your Honor, I'n afraid I won't b- able to Secure those
copies of the tmaslation. I would hav- to explore around to find theSo I

copies, and I could not oak- the* available at 1:30.

n:. ela'N'T: It cccured to =. that the origin:-1 would be on
file with the Secretary -aural, it hadn't occur.d that th. disputed
translation would be very Ion?. I suppose it would take fiv- ainutui
to nake copies on typ.-.-rlt r. I nay be wrong.

*- • iji "hen, could I request eh- cl.rck her. to piocedure
that froa the Secret-ry O-n-rals Offic.?

Ti . ISi. fi : The Court is about to *o into r.cess. I would
cugr-st that Counsel for the Dcf-nse ind th. ‘ros.cution and the Clerck
of this Court proceed tegeth-r to the Office of the Secretary ‘enural
nd .scert in if that record i3 available there and can be found. If
it c nnot, and no other copi.s ar- available that would be an lapass! I

3 * r -* this tr:nslction is conc.rn-d, and w. would hav. to start
ev.r if :in. Is there anything lurth.r th_ Tribunal can st- te prior to
t.irir. a r-c.ss?

Z • :I? * : - c “haps, ir. President, I could ask that the noon r.cess

0219


25 ay- -3J-12-6-Karrow-{3rown)-
Court 1

bo until 2:oo o'clock. In the. period of one hour I doubt whether I or
r. Hardy -vill be bl. to slake these necessary ascertainments.

.. .. HaED?: Tour Honor, I think the best solution to this pro-
;lja is, _ think the objection has b.-n raised to a question put by
- in the course of cross-cxaaination. The problem is that d-fenst coun¬
sel n :s submitted a translation which creates a doubt .s to th. authen-
city of a translation submitted by the prosecution. That is argument
I think chat if we can put this off to a futur- date - p.rnaps during
th. tine of rebuttal and clothing wh-n both sides can ably prepare a
trUf on the subject and submit then on that drw, th.n the people in¬
volved can be c tiled bafor. this Tribun :1 as itn-ss s and testify,
if necessary. I think the probl.a i3 far too .cut. to try to settl-
it today jid rill continu. ay cross-.xanination by m.r,ly r-f.rrin.
that ay copy is tni., as an assumption, as I did in th- case of th-
d. ^ns- course's copy. I hav don. that in on- instance end I should
lik. to do it in another instr.r.c-.

Ifl. SICr.iT: If counsel -rill base his questions upon th-
issuaptlon that the translation subnltt.d by th. prosecution is corect
f.'.n the examination any proceed. It would b- inpo3Sibl- oth-rwisc bc-
c-une the ritn -33 do-3 not admit that that translation is corect. I
tlini; th. r-.k-.nd is approaching and th- Tribun-1 r.lll recess tonorrow-
noon - until ..ondoy r.omin* which will aloe little bit long-r tU=..
luring that tic., 3 oc. progress might b. n de in settling this transla¬
tion, tut if Counsel for Defense dcsir.s to pr.par. the questions which
th.y wish to submit to a group of int.rpr-t re they x_y pr.sent those

qu.stions to th. pros.cutior. -ad to the Tribun .1 os soon .as they ire pr.-

par.d.

Is tii-rc anythin, furtr.er that can b. added? •

Df.. ilPr: n this occasion, r. President, unfortunately, I have
nothcr c t u - Etion brinf up that cone .ms the translations. Many days
•c I g.v. a :ocux.nt to th. Translation Division which is of decisiv.
Kportcnc. in clarifying this s-.a wat-r probl-c. It was an affidavit by


D22D


26 Ksy-4>6J-i2-7-Sarro»-(Ero>n)-
Court 1

the scsi. -r. Christensen who dr_- up this report 7 , fciv. recently dis¬
cussed here. E-spite ay efforts every day, I hav, not succeeded in
receiving this translation within a period of t-n days although this is
- document of only four or five pages, .nd, in qy opinion, should take
1 aaxisoa cf t-.ro hours to translate. I wish to sake nc charges her— 1
do not knew what the r.ascn for this is. I do not knor why this decisive
dccus-nt has not yet been given back to n- r.nd p-rh-ps th. Iribunal
can h~lp Je in obtaining this translation in tin. to use it in the
c’.sc of cecker-Freys.ng.

V E PH S1ESHT: The 'iribun 1 has be-n-uvised that th- Transla¬
tion Department is v..ry h.avily loaded with work and has bc-n un..bl-
to produce the translations as rapidly .3 pos;ibl-. If Counsel Tor
D.fense till call at ay office, I rill endeavor to c'll the Office of
the Secretary nd oe- cf this Translation can b- -xp-dit-d. Ti*at is Just
inaudiet.ly upon the rtc-.ss nor. Counsel -rill con-, to aiy office and
; till tel.phone and c..<. if I can ascertain the r.asons for th- delay

in th translation

At thas tint will b_ in rccecs u ,iQ 1:30 o'clock.

(A recess was taken u. til 1330 hours, 2t i-.y, l?u7.)


£221


Court So. 1

26 ..ay 47-A-13-l-iHH-Mcehan (Von Schoen)


ATCHBIOOS SiSSIOS

(Tho hearing reconvened nt 1250 hours, 26 Kay 1947.)

TKZ iiAr.SKAL: The Tribunal Is again In session
HIPJIASa 3RCRi--.-JRlYSi.SG (Resuned)

CROSS RXAmIKATICS (Continued)

Mr.. HAEXTF: hay It please the Tribunal, first of ell I oust hunbly
apologize to the Tribunal for stating this docuaent was filed three
nonths ago. I was inforned at noon tine the nenorandun «ps dated 15 Mai".
I nust odnit I an thoroughly eabarrasaed that I said It vat filed three
nonths ago.

TKR PBlSinST: You are referring, counsel, to this translation?

KA. HARDY: That is right. Your Honor. ! havo here a cony of tho
nocorandua vritten to Kr. Janos r.. KoHaaey. Chief, SS Division, by Paul
Joosten, Chief, Translation Branch, attached thorcto a carrier noto to
tho Socrotary of Military Tribunals, subjoct: Translation of Docuaent BO-
185, aloo a copy of the nenoraniun to The Secretary Gonorel, Military
Tribunal:


"(1) The attachod acno.-anduc, subject 'Translation of Docuncnt KO-
185', presents accurately and vithout oaission tho viov of tho Langucgo
Division on tho translation of tho sentence in ouestion." (Signed)


Thooos K. Hedges, Director, Languago Division.

In order to clarify this point. Your Honor, I suggest at this tine
that this conornndun be given to tho court interpreter and csk her to
read it into the record. It is only one and one half peges. It
clarifies the point to egrecnent, I think, of defonse counsel. After it
rppvxi, I think defence cainBel will sake a etatooent on
JrJtHoa ve ori.*»j\ar up the .uatter here end cow. After having beon
read by tho interpreter^ it is suggested that the copy be turned over to
*-he court reporters so t/iat they will place it in the record vithout

- 4

errors end emissions end then returned to the Tribunal.

THL PZxSIDRST*^Rach -c:bcr of the Tribunal desires a cony of that
“eoorandu::.


, ^
it toy t£


c2Z2


Court Bo. 1

28 Kay 47-A-13-2 -S St- K e«han (Von Schoen)


KS. HA2TT: I vould like to have It read into the record end turned
over to the court reporter* end then returned to ne and I vill have a
sufficient number of copies made for the Tribunal.

THE PSISIDEST: Hos defense counsel eny objection to thet proceed¬
ing of that being read into the record by the interpreter? That will
in no way be binding on defense counsel; they can still nnke any arguments
they dosire as to whether this is correct or incorrect.

Very well, that procedure aay be followed and the interpreter nay
road it into the record. I will »*y for record that the defense
counsel signified no objection to this orocedurc. I vould suggest that
the interpreters first rood tho sentence in Demon and then read tho
document which has boen given to then.

HE. KAEDY: Tour Honor, the nenorondun ie oo written that it has
tho ontiro passege in Geraon in the memorandum.

IKE PRESIDES!: Very well, that is all included in the nenorondun.
THE INTEEPEETEB: "15 Kay 1947.

"TC s Hr. Janes K. KcKaney, Chief, SS Division
"FECK i Paul Joosten, Chief, Translation Branch
"SUBJECT: Translation of Docuaent No. 185

•Dr. Hans Karr, counsel for defendants Professor Schroeder and Dr.
Becker-Freysong, objects to the translation of a sentence in Document
NO-185. The disputed sentence reads in German:

"•ich stehe heute vieder vor einer Entscheldung, die each zahl-
relchon Tier- und auch Kenschenversuchen an froivilligon Vorsuchs-
personon oine endgueltige Loesung verlangt.'

"The translation of the docuaent in euestion was certified by
Kiss Gertrude Levingor and the sentence reads as follows:

■'Today I again stand before a decision which, after nunorous
experiments on aninals and also on voluntary human subjects,
denar.is final resolution.'

"Dr. Karx claims that a correct literal translation, according to


the sense, would be:


8223


Court So. 1

25 Kay 47-A-13-3-SHX-Heehan (Von Schoen)

■Today again I am standing before e decision vhich after
nuncrcue experiments on animals end also on kunan beings dcmends a
final solution on voluntary experimental subjects. 1
"'Resolution' is, of course, wrong; it should be 'solution'. The
German sentence is very awkwardly worded. You do not find a solution for
a decision. 5ut I cannot accept Dr. .iarx's translation, however awkward
the sentence nay bo put together in German. Ee asks for a correct
literal translation, and the one he gives is supposed to havo these
cualiflentions. However, it vill bo seen that in this translation
■oine or.dguoltige Loesung' does not appear in the correct seauer.ee.

Dr. Marx makes an arbitrary traesoortation. A correct litoral transla¬
tion, without commas, just like the German original, is as follovo:

■'Today realm I stand before a decision which after numerous
animal as ^11 as human experiments on voluntary experimental sub¬
jects demands a final solution.'

"If the Gorman aoant what Dr. Marx claims it to mean, then tho
ooxo scouenco of words used in this inglieh translation would also oxlct
in tho Oernan version.

"Tho Gorman sentence uncauivocolly states that up to now animal and
human volunteers have been experimented upon and a final solution is
now demandod.

"It is correct that nart of tho lest sontencc of tho first para¬
graph is missing, namely the words 'nach unscron houtigen Kenntnlsscn'
(uccordlng to our present knowledge)."

(Signed) Paul Jooston, Chief, Translation Srcnch.

MR. HARDY: Your Honor, Z submit that tho new litoral translation
intended by this memorandum reads as follows:

"Today again I stand before a decision, which after numerous animal
as veil as human experiments on voluntary experimental subjects demands
a final solution."

I could ask if defense counsel is willing to accent that translation

for the passage of the German document, in other words, this is different

5224


Court So. 1

23 May 47-A-lS-4-i34-Mcekaa (Von Scfaoen)


than the other two that have been offered.

7EL P S SS n a ai : refease counsel nay ask that Question if they
desire, but if they desire sore tine to study the natter they will not
be reauired to answer that Question now.

IS. TIP?: hr. President, I do speak scce nnglish, but on this
inportant point I should not like yet to sey that the translation is cotc-
olotcly correct. As far ae I can tell, the translation last suggested
agrees with the Screen words, but as I said I should like to have an
export in tho field oxaeine it.


8225


2b ::ay 47-A-A''-14-l-Goldbsrg “(Von Schon)

Court 1 - Case 1

X.-iJ PR-SIDi.'T: Defense counsel may consider this
natter over the weekend cr sooner, if possible, and r;port
to the Court as to the translation which thpy believe
is literally, gr-fnma tic ally correct.

Meanwhile, in cross examining the vitneas, counsel
for the prosecution could either ask the witness, upon
the assumption that the translation Is correct, or avoid
that suoject to be cross examined, If desired.

3Y ».a. mxxs

Q. Dr. Bec/.er-?reyaeng, In this document, that is,
the letter written to the a*iohsfuehrer, signed by
Schroder, was It your Intention to ask for voluntary
experimental subjects?

A. Yes, that was my intention. If you permit, I
shall briefly glvo a few reasons which today too, prove
It from this sentence. Perhaps that is a matter for
later argumentation. I as not informed on that.

Q. I think we shall wait a bit on that, Doctor.
After you had sent this letter, requesting that voluntary
human subjects wen* to be used, did you after that time
follow up the sequence of events and determine whether
or not the persona used actually vere volunteers?

A. In the course of further events I t-ico concern¬
ed myself with the question of whether these persons were
volunteers. The first time before the experiments and the
second time, after the experiments. Befor • the experiments^
I talked to Professor Belglboeok this question, \b I have
already testified on direct examination, not for legal

roasens did not interest ua at the time, but for medical
reasons.


8226


2o Xay 47-*-AX-l4-2-Goldberg (Von Schon)

Court 1 - Case 1

After the experiment, I talked to Professor Belgl-
boeck about the question of volunteers vhen I ashed hln
what kind of prisoners ha had obtained and how those
prisoners wore actually put at his disposal at Dachau
and were turnod ovor to hln for these experlaents.

Q. Let us turn now to the next dooument, Doctor,
which la Document NO-179, prosecution Exhibit No. 1^5
found on page 20 of Document Book No. 5.

A. Yea, I have It.

Q. This Is a letter of 26 June 1944 from Gravltr
to Himmler Including comments by Gv'ohardt, Oluecks and
Nebo on who the experimental subjects should be, and In
this I want to coll your attention to Paragraph 2 whore
Orawltt reports tho attitude of Oluecks, and therein
Oluecks stated: •Referring to the above letter, we report
that we have no objections whatsoever to tho experiments
requested by tho Chief of the Kedlcal Service of tho
Luftwaffe to be conducted at the experimental station
RASCHS1 in the concentration camp Dachau. If possible,

Jo v s or prisoners held In quarantine are to be used."

Does that sound like a good expression of volunteer
subjects to you, that Is, "Jove or prisoners hold In
quarantine"?

A. I may say that I saw this letter here during
the trial for tho first time, that I aa not accustomed
to tho wording of 33 agencies and I don't know what this
sentence Is intended to imply. At any rate. It does not
say that poople are to be forcod to submit to tho experim¬
ents. Why prisoners were to bo taken from quarantine I
have no idea at the moment. I do not know I had nothing
to do with the matter.

6227


28 Hay 47-*-AX-14-^-Goldberg (Von ^chon)

Court 1 - Case 1

Q. Well now, If It 1 b fully understood that you
did not soo this letter— the prosecution doos not con¬
tend that you received a copy of the letter — but I am
now assorting, after all, the evidence 1s In at length
that the experimental subjects wore volunteers, that is,
the evidence on the part of your defense, and we are now
Interested In shedding some light on the subject. I an
sure that the Tribunal 1s interested in getting your
understanding of the implications of this letter because
It doals with *oso persons who were, in fact, selected
to undergo these experiments you sponsored.

3o let us forgot whether or not you received this
letter and Just devote your attention to the letter itsolf
and what it points out; and I will ask you If Gluooks'
comment doesn't raise a little suspicion in your mind
olnco ho suggest the uoo of Jews or prisoners held In
quarantine". Haybe thoy weren't going to be volunteers
and maybe they were.

A. I thank your for admitting the theorltlcal
possibility that It could have been voluntoors, but
unfortunately I am unable to answer your question because
I do not know why S3-Gruppen-Fuohrer Gluecks suggests
taking prisoners from quarantine. I had too little con¬
tact with conditions In concentration camps to know, per¬
haps he meant people who have beer, through quarantlno,
so that one couldiciow definitely that thoy are healthy,
out, I don't know that Is merely an assumption. I waq
not consulted anil was given no opportunity to make
suggisvions.

If Gluecks thought people should be taken who had
Just been through quarantine, - perhaps - who came from


28 Kay 47 -a-a:-'- 14-4-Goldberg-(Von Schon)

Court 1 - Case 1

an epidemic district who had been In quarantine, and of
whoa It was definitely known that they would not be com o
sick in the near future, then this was quite a sensible
suggestion from the aodlcal point of view. It must hav;
been clear to S3-Gruppen-fuehrer Gliaok 8 that for this
experiment, which was to last four weeks, we neoded
healthy people.

But I am unable to say what Gluecks had In mind
because I never talked to Gluecks In my life.

THE PRESIDENT: Witness, I am entirely unfamiliar
with the German language. Is there any other word In
German which might be translated as "quarantine" and
also give some other translation?

THE WITNESS: Y 0 ur Honor, I know of no suoh second
meaning for tho word quarantine.

THE PRESIDENT: Very voll, Proceod.

BY MR. HARDY:

Q. In other words, Doctor, If you had recolved
a copy of this letter at tho end of Juno, 1944 — say
you had seen a copy of this in June, 1944 — would you
have still gone ahead with tho experiments?

A. May I ask for a moment to look at the letter
first? I have not studied it as carefully assomo of tho
other documents, since It did not refer to me.

Q. Go right ahead.

A. Against at Ifcast two of the facts given here I

would have objected. The first la In the statement of

SS-Gruppenfuehrer Gluecks that the experiments be carried

out at the Experimental Station Rascher. There was never

any question of that. After the Nurnberg meeting, I never

had anything more to do with Mr. Rascher. Neither I nor

£829


26 May 47-A-AK- 14-5 -Go ldberg-( Von Schon)

Court 1 - Case 1.

anyone el6c thought of bringing the sea water experiments
into any connection with Mr. Rascher, not even the
slightest connection.

The second would be that I would have suggested
that It bo written to Relchsartz Dr. Grawitz concerning
nis view; that gypsies, since they are of a different
raoe, might give unreliable results. This Is a very
childish statement from the physiological point of view;
that would not to b. expected at all.

If Prof, ichrooder had seen this letter he would
probably have called up the Relchaarzt S3 and reminded
him that he had promised him to find the experimental
subjects under the soldiers unworthy of bearing arms
who were sunt to concentration camps.

Those are the points which I can pick out
Immediately glance as things which I would have dealt
with if I had got this letter; but, I did not got it.

But I can say one thin; For me, in 1944, it would not
have been clear, v\y more than today, that our pre¬
requisites for tho experiments, th'.t volunteers be
used, was in any way doubtful.

Q. Doesn't the third section of this letter, a
do ament Hebe, create some sort suspicion also, wherein
ho states, and I quote: B I agree with the proposal to
conduct experiments on prisoners of concentration camps
in order to evolve n method for caking seawater potablo.

I propose ta/.mg for this purpose the as oclal gipsy
halfbreeds. Ther> are people among them, who, although
healthy, are out of the question as regards labor commit¬
tment. Regarding these gipsies. I shall shortly make a

special proposal to the Reichsfuehrer, but I think it

6230


28 Hay 47-A-AX-14-5-Goldberg-(Von Sohon)

Court 1 - Case 1

right to select from among these people the necessary
number of test subjects, should the Reichsfuohror agree
to this, I shall list by name the persons to be used. "

Now, In fact gipsies were used in the seawater ex¬
periments and Nebo says chat he still alt up In-3orlln and
list by namo the persona to be used. Now, woulin't that in¬
dicate that there would not be any volunteering here on the
part of the subjects?

A. That is a conclusion on your part with which I
cannot agree to. Hr. Nebo merely says that he will name
tho required experimental subjects to the Helchsfuehrer 3S.

He does not say how he will do that. At the time I would
haw assumed, quite naturally, that he would have gone to
the Comp Auschwitz, which I aotually heard of for tho first
time in 1945; that ho would have had forty gipsies volunteer
and would have sent this information on to the Rolchsfuohrer.
according to what we r.now today It Is very easy to find
a different Interpretation, but at the tlno It would cer¬
tainly not have occurred to mo.


6231


23 issy-A-iO- 15-1-Cook (Von Schon)

Court 1

o. * 7 cll nor: vhcn did 70U learn gipsies rcro used in tho ex¬
po rinonts?

A. I learned that rrxn Bciglbocck came bake froa Dachau
rftcr tho experiments. la sy direct examination, I said that I grant¬
ed tho possibility that I night have learned it during the course of
the experiments when I agreed to ncct BeiglboccU near Vrutstoin. And
unfortunately casx tro days too late because of an air raid on a
train on vhich I -res travoling. I found a short note fron Professor
Bciglboock rhen I got there and it is possible it said something a-
bout gypsies but in any caso I rcccxbcr only that Professor 3ei;jibocck
said something about gipsies only after tho oxperiaonts wore finished
and ho caae back to Berlin.

0 . 7c 11 vould you have confix*, sod tho oxporiaonts if you had
!motm that before, that gipsies rould be used?

A. First of all that is again a hypothetical question so that
I can give a hypothetical ansrrer; since I did not tour: befero hand.
Tfhy should not gipoio3 volunteor? I don't lenerr rhat I rouli ha.vo
done at tho time. I can't say.

■1. Did you.soo Bciglbocck boforo tho experinonts?

A. "'bother I sarr Boiglboock boforo the oxporixaents- yes, of
course.

q. "ell did you say anything to Bciglbocck about the oxpori-
nontal subjects?

A. I already said that for purely medical rci3on3 I tallied to
Bciglbocclc about the experimental subjects and I told him I expected
to ^ct volunteers and rould not have any difficulty fron the subjects
in carrying out the experiments. I she’aid li ke to emphasis^ I hau no
anticipated legal reasons to say anyt'.iing a'-out these volunteers 'fat
a '.surely nodical cau3o of the- ^xperi. cats for radical reasons.

% Did you say anything to Bciglboec:: about asking suro that

tlu cxprinontal subjects "he ~crc volunteering fer the experiments

6222


28 : hy-JUi SJ-lS-2-Ccok (Von Sc ton)

Court 1

nust be of Gernan nationality?

A* I an sure I did not say that bc.ca.uso I never doubted that#

I never thought of any other possibility for I don't kno" ho:: any
other possibility could have occurred to rt.

n. Do you knon rtettor or not gipsies rerc recognized as
Gernans under the racial lor of tto P.oich?

A. ’I knorr that the racial lars of the Reich and the so called
Nurnberg racial larr3 specifically' left the question of gipsie3 open
because just tho racial affiliation gipsies is a question on vhich
scientists arc not quite agreed, but I too:: that certain gipsies
woro definitely recognized as full Oer.ian citizens. I don't toov
horr it raa in general.

Q. Do you think tht the gipsies vxro recognized ns good
Gcraans Nordic citizens?

A. Nordic Gomans, I wouldn't rant to reject that. Tto idea
is told that tto gipoioa cone froa India and sinco there is a great
oany intor-Gcnaanic racial faailies I consider it quito possible that
30:10 peoplo hold the point of vicr th t gipsies are Nordics but I
don't too::. I an no oXpert on racial problem.

0. Of course, if they rorc good Ceraanic Nordic citizens
they - ouldn't have been in a concentration emp, vould they?

A. I rould not toor for certain. I van never in a concentration
cranp but I have toard since and I h vc s.cn tho ritness Kogon vho
looks definitely like a Nordic type, raid I wouldn't consider it in¬
possible for Nordic gypsies to bo in a concentration canp.

ft. !tor you have outlined just vhr.t you instructed Dr. Doi-;l-
bocc’; to do :.hcn to arrived at the concentration canp to cozrxncc •*
his experiaents?

A. Let i>o point out I did not say that. I talked to too-
fossor E i'lbccck about it but I didn't give Ma any orders.

Q. ell you said that Dr. Deiglbocck—I --111 read it to you

8225 .


23 J-l5-3-Cook (Von Schcn)

Court 1

hero ir. a minute. You said on direct examination that you told
Bciglbocck that this ms a specific military order and that he ras
to follow the following instructions; vhon he received then, and one
of tJv. instructions wa s that thorc would be no serious damage to
toalth and no fatalities, two; to interrupt the experiments if they
became dangorous; and, throe, that they ranted clear results from
th3 oxporin;nt3 and also the experimental subject's consont. '.!ov;

I uniorstood you to say thoso were the instructions you gave
Bciglboock befor he proceeded to Dachau.

A. I an convinced that if you :-ill read over the transcript
that you till find vhat I actcrlly said. Boiglboeck received this
order in -v presence fron ay department chief and after •ro had left
the doportnont chief f offico and gone back to c$' office, porha.pa it
:ma tix. noxt day- I don't kno~- Professor Boiglboeck asked no
::hothor that ordor rhioh ho had received fron the dupartraent chief
•.•an to be token as a dofinitc nilitary ordor and I aaid "yes", but
Id * vo hia tho order aysolf. Besides if I had givon hiu tho
order I would take the responsibility for it today sinco 1 consider
tho ordor which ny department chiof gave hin quite a permissible
uattor.

Q. Tell now was th. judgment a v out whether or not tho ox-
pcriaontal subjects could continue to tolerate Derka v.-ator left
up to the experimental subjects or warn that left up to tho discre¬
tion of Dr. Boiglboeck?

A. To at tho tia: did not think of this question fron the

lcyl but from the radical point of view and I assume that I nay

atill leave tho legal decision to the Tri‘ unal. Fron the purely

medical point of view it is cl^ar that the decision as to -bother an

experiment is to bo broken off deponds on the findings of the doctor,

as well as on tho statements of the subjects. IT I nay clarify that

v- on example, it night be that cnc of tie experimental subjects in

6234


28 kay-A.i:J-l5-&-Ccak (Von Sohon)

Court 1

the course of tho experiment beesm: unsonsciour: If the nan in
charge of the experiment wanted to wait until the subject woke up,
end said, "Let's stop the experiment no*. ', that a ould have be-n too
late,

n t Then actually the conduct of the experiments was up to

the discretion of the doctor?

A, I would like to put it like this: The responsibility

for tho health and lifo of tho experimental subjects was, of courso,

in the hands of the doctor, and it is quite clear that a doctor

lilaj Professor Bciglbocck will take into consideration the statements

of tho subjects, that is, a natter of course to a doctor,

n t Toll then if soosono died in those oxperinents Bciglbocck

would certainly been held responsible by the Chief of tho hcdical

Sorvico* I an conplctoly convinced of th*t, because that it would

have boon a violation of his instructions that no deaths -.to ro to
• •

be allowed to occur,

Q. 7c 11 if a death had occurred would you have felt re¬
sponsible, in as much as you take full responsibility for tho ini¬
tiation of the experiments?

A, In 19UU I -ould hov_ had to leave that up to a court
martial of the Luftwaffe, I can't judge, Pbrhaps I nitht havo boon
indicted too, I don't know,

T, 'ould you have expcctod to have been indicted had .a death

occurred in these cxpc-irxjnts at Dachau?

A, That is a double or triple hypothetical question, I would

have cxp-ctcd that if I had been indicted I would havo been acquitted,

Q, Doctor, after tho conploticn of these experiments a roport

"as liven, in October 19Ub, in a bunker near the Zoological Garden

near Berlin by Dr, Eciglboock. Tho was present at that nccting?

A, I assume that the see tin-, "as in October, I don't know, I

heard it was in September; September or October, I an not sure. At

6236


28 ay-A-l "J-15-5-C c ok- (V c n Schon)
Court 1


-ny rate it t:os only one nocting. I enn rcrx^cr definitely that
CcnomloboratnbBcrzt Schrc.dcr *./as present, Professor BoigU.- cic.
cf course, otj there. Dr. Schaeffer tras present, Berta ms
present, and representatives of tho lfcty xrorc present. There vcrc
all to^-ttor about perhaps tronty people. I can't roneaber any
acre individuals than those I have just given.


e236


C urt 1

28-*-16-l—3B-Gross-Von5chon.

i. Who presided over the rieetini?

GeneralGboretabs^rzt Dr. Sohroodor opened the noetln fc
7.:on I spoke * few v«,rds boat the ur use of ti.e ex'crinents
T on Profess-r Belgltoeck held his lecture. Then "Xter It
I believe, Professor ochroeder left, because In t :1s hunker
Chore was a Luftwaffe hospital end Professor oo-iroeder hod
r.r.lsed to attend on operation which he wanted Co perform
himself. In the dlscussl.n whlc . followed, I presided
:ecouse I w^s the referent In ch-r 3 e. But the discussion
lasted ;ilr - 2 .at ten minutes and thot was the end of it.

i. Dr. Bclulbocck c rve 0 c--u. lute clinical ronort of
the results of the experln.nts?

«. He .. ve r reuort on the clinical course of the
cx-.oriments, yes.

x. Did ho state wh-t synntons were apparent 00 ft
result of the op llcotlon of sea-woter to t.ie subjects?

/v. Yes, I am sure he re»rtod that because thot was
one of the *:r. loses of the report.

‘..'hat sya-it-jas did he find prevalent after a certain
n.:.u3or of day8?

In this trial I neve neerd so much rbout the

symptoms thet I cm unable to toll you exactly whet Professor

jo 1 lxjeck sold then rnd vnet 1 hcv. read in tno meantime

iut chose t..in-9 Professor 5el;-lboeos will be able co ^lve

. 20 re feflnlto onever. But, I shell try to cell you

h t I remember for certain. Professor Bel b lboook oxpllned

t'.’c the feelln. of tr.lrst was -.ch stron^r in the ^roup
•• -
v ic: had dr \nk sea-water thon.in the <rouc which had

r. dun. to drink ct all ana th. c in che w roup wmio .ad

drunk sea-water the peoole were more restless w. lie ciio

a le who drank nothin, were sle v mure tnan nyciiin 0 else.

7 : .s -'Hat - can definitely recall today.

6237 1


Court 1

lv>y 28-A-lS-2-H£>-Gross-Von6chon.

C. Vbould che report of the meeting In October contained
in Schroeder's affidavit, which is paragraph 6, document
KO-474 which is on page 6 of the Document Book 5, the
passage la found on ?a~a 7. This narairanh 6 reads as
follows;

■The experiments were carried out at the Dachau concen¬
tration coop by Dr* Belglboeck, in summer of 1944. In
October 1944, Bei 0 lbocck reported on these experiments at
r meeting which took pi ce in r bunker near the Loologlcnl
Gardens in Berlin. Schrocder, 3ecker-Fraysen 3 and I were
:rC3ont. It i3 -/jeslbls. that Dr. cchuster, an ..lr Force
physician who worked at the Luftwaffe Medical academy in
Prague, was also mresent. Bel 0 lboeck showed those present
-.c the meeting auoorou6 charts of analyses of the urino
a blood of the ojrorlmontnl objects who were c lven only
3crk~tit to drink. Photographs end films were also
proeonted and various c roups of oxmorlaents were discussed.

On the basis of. this report, I estimate that 20 to 40
persons were used for these experiments, which were c.-.rrled
out &urln e a period of seven to twelve days. Or.

3olglobQCk also re ortod that the experiments had resulted
.n the swelling of the liver and vervous symptoms. Delirium
nnd mental ilsturbancos also "ppeored. «s n result of
cl"is meeting, it was decided th~t the Berko process was
resolutely of no use to the Luftwaffe."

Now, is that c concise rnd more or less accurate report
of -:hat 3d lboeck had to say?

a. ho.

Q. What dlscrep nciC6 do you wish to ooint out?

A. First of all Dr. Schaefer is perhaps the only

rsmn vno saw a film. It mu^t ivve been such a secret

sAo\rin th-c only Dr. oefcaefer noticed it. No film was

625c


Court 1

Hay 28-«-lS-5-HI>-5ros3-Von6cnon.

ever taken. nZ any rate, I never saw one and there at the
3 nk«r seating r.o pictures were shown.

He could have aeant by tnat aerely onotographs and
used the expression fila.

Let ae point but first it says - photographs and
films." Photographs were shown end will be submitted in
evidence here.

ftny other discrepancies you wish to coins out?
a. Yes, I w'nt to point out above all the “nervous
tjyupt ns, t.;o dollriua, pr.u the ncnti'l disturbances."

First of all, thw n-rvoas synptons, can neon so many things.

I don't know wn-u dr. debaofor aeant by it but he v;ill be
'olo to exrl'in th t •iiiaself. I know nothing about any
norv us a yaptoms. It could be, I believe Or. 5oijlboook
a k« of a tot-nold oleture of e mptoas. That is a
condition in '■'hion the muscles to very easily excited if
no tars n muscle, a nusclo knot is formed. Th t is a
v r .armless thin-. If ‘..-it is called o nervous disorder
th t 13 possible, but it la very h rmless t..lr. . “Delirium
roau-rosed fever." The transl-tlon is iaposslele. Poe lbly
it L .ht bo fover-dellrlua. I do not now from Professor
3ol;lboeck'8 report that the subjects had rny fever.

3o, I don't kno- whorofr _ they should have b otoon
“fover-dollrlua. ■ «nd "mental disturb nces 11 , I know only
that Professor Soiglboeck spoke only of so-called "apathy."

Ik- t is nothin, but stron = sleo-jlnoss nd some lack of
interest to Che outside world. That 1 J known from ell
uvular and thirst cures that the stole prefer t*- slceo and
are r t interest d in anything. Just ns if n person i6 tired.
ftCoot\.ing z, wh-’t I Anew of osychlatry, I would not call that
r "mental diecurbancc. "

"ell, did Or. Bei 0 lboeck tell ou how many* “* 0 o::le.

S23S


Court 1

\'jxy 23-A-15-4-HD-Jross-Von3chon


in tha experiments?

.-v. He said definitely that no one died.

Toll, did ha tell you what Joseph Sultolng says in
his affidavit which is found on page 28 of Document Book
5 wherein he states, and'I quote:

a. no far as I know this is not an affidavit. It is a
Viennese Police record which is not sworn to.

MR. HaRDY: This hns been admitted arovisionnlly and to
bo aworn to and Prosecution has had tho seme affidavit sworn
t and when we Introduce our documents formally, the one
with the Jur-te on which contains the srao information will
bo then odmlttod. The Tribunrl had admitted this provision¬
ally pending receipt of the Jurate. Therefore we can use
It here, doctor. Nov, in this document-

a. Thank you for the Information. Unfortunately I do
not have the doouoant.

DR. TIPr: Wight I ask Hr. Hardy to give me the exhibit
number of this new document. I know only what (.no is in
o document book.

MR. KaRDY: The same number, your Honor, slnco the
•:;i:.-vlt was only sent down for the Jurate.

DR. TIPP: Has it already boon Introduced? Has it
already bojn given rn exhibit number?

HR. KaRDY: Your Honor, it v-s last January 15 when I
Introduced it.

THE PRESIDENT: Yes, I have it here. It seems to be
exhibit No. 139.

MR. KaRDY: It was admitted :rovision: lly pending *
obt"laini of J urates from the affiant In Austria. Now this
d C '.uiant, in the English copy on p G e 28. The interpreters
"ill note in the middle of the page the words pa.,e 2 of
-- iriginoi in parenthesis. If you will 3 o up towards the

£240


Court 1

day 28~A-1 5 - 5-HD-Groa s-VonSchon .

: . of the page tj "page 2 of tno original" in the middle
Ccie -a~a - 6 lines I will start reading where it says:

■rrofessor Belglboeck ceae' 1 -

"rrof. Sel^lbooc.' erne with a stiff of three Luftwaffe
"5 1 ster.tsi end the experlner.ts began. as far as I know
In various methods; starvetion diets to be = ln with, son-
vrCc-r nnd salt diets, 6alt lnjeotione, '.nd so on. The
i rtures led tu enfeebling of the tody which resul'cod In
loss of consciousness and, > e rsr as I know, in one doath.■
:>w, did Dr. Bol-lboock aentlon anything of that nature
in hie report?

A. SO,

v. How It spy3 f erther down here - we ski 5 one scntenco
:nd o to the st-tenon t beginning "3el_lbocck del levelled
-hoso so-called troublenrkers to the zs, which treated
c . c In the rnn-r customary In the c-xp."

Did he ...rttl n nychln^ about that In .'.Is report?
a. No, he said nitr.ln a r bout t..i?t end I consider it
a erfect lie.

ell, now he snys forth.r In t.i.s affidavit that
vlll bo down 2-3 no re sentences be^lnnin^ with !, *.b In
all Che txi .rlnontat Ion stations", th?t will be 2 sentences
after tne last sentence, I read: "«g In -’ll the oxperl-
centatlo . st-’tl^ns, it was 3cl .lbocck 1 s ornctioo to send
s rlsoners .ndcrnlncd by the experiments, to the
v lnr infirzrry in order to c nccnl the nuxb-r of deaths
“ '•n th_ e~ -crlnental subjects."

Did he coll that to your rttentl^n?

a. Not only -id r.e not call th t to ay attention, but
C the tine I sow t.-.e records of these experiments and
■ -ble t note that all tnc subjects with whoa he md

• i-rted were .-til. : .ere nt the end . the experiment.

6241


Court 1

Kay 28-«-lS-6-HD-Gro ss-VonSchcn


I think that Is up to Professor 3eiglboeck to present
proof of that.

Q# Doctor, did he tell you about the fret that when

t. m

presons died in the experiments they were put then on

•

stretchers, covered with a wnlte sheet and delivered to
the oor 0 ue, as testified here to by the witness Viohweg.

I think you neon the criminal Vlehweg who is charged
again for calling himself a doctor illegally. So much
for Vlehweg. *nd as for the dead persons whon Vloftwog
says he saw for the sake of brevity I may refer you
again to the case of Professor 3el a lboeck and say In his
dofonso because to ay own knowledge I can say nothing about
those dontna personally who were resurrected later.


26 .vay-A-G J-17-l-Knrrosr-( Brown) -
Court 1

Q Did Dr. Eciglbocck tell ycu wh-r- the experimental subjects
com free.?

A I consider that possible. I don't knar today where they ewne
free, but I don't knew whether Professor 3eiglbocck knowns, I can't re¬
member.

r 4 Did he tell you that they cone fren an other concentration
camp other than Dachau?

A I just said that I can't x\-uerbcr that. It's possible that
I asked Professor Bdglbocck what kind of subjects he got. It is pos¬
sible that if Professor B^iglboock knew that he told me, but in three
years since that ti.ee 1 have forgotten again. It may be that he told me.

Q Did he t-11 you that th;se volunteers w-rc men who had volun¬
teered for a "special commando"?

A "Spocila Coecondo". No, that was rv-ver mentioned.

Q I see. Doctor, in connection with typhus and virus research,
did you kno* of the Typhis and Virus Research I stitute in Lemberg,
also known as the Letibcrg Fleckfivber Institute, th. Lemberg Spott-d
Fever Institute, ot the Behring l w stitut--L_rh-rg?

A No, I heard of all these Institutes for the first tine hero.

I never heard heard of thee heretofore.

Q Do you know wh .th r or not the Lemberg institute had any
connection nh tsc.Ver ^ith the Luftwaffe?

A I can neither affins or deny that. Never heard about it.

4 You don't knew anything about, th administration of the
L_ab.rg Institute? .bether it was administered by th- Luftwaffe or by

1.0. Fnrbcn?

A I have no idea.

Q I hcv- no further questions. Your Boner.

THL F:iSE;.;T: Any redirect examination by Defense Counsel?

:i?.. HARDY: Your Honor, it is my understanding that w_ arcgoing
to call the witness Jaeger at this time.

THE PfESIDSfi?: I would ask Dr. Steinbauer, is it satisfactory

8242


23 koy-A-1?-2-X .rrcx-{crown and vcn Schoca)-
Ccurt 1

to you to, at this tin., coll your witness Joagcr?

D? - STSIKBAUER: . j. President, :Iay I call the witness Jae-gcr at
this tin-?

T: - PSLSUSh'JT: The defend mt Bcckcr-Freyseng is excused froa the
iritn^s stand temporarily and will r_suet his place.

The .’--rshall rill svreen the witness Rolf Jrteg-r.

ROLF JnLGER, a witness took the stand and testified ns follows:
3Y JUDuT SEHRL'.'G:

Q “ ou P 1 ^ 30 hold up your right hand md take the oath.

I swear by Qod, the Almighty and Omniscient, that 1 will spoak
tho pun: truth and will withhold and add nothing.

( The witness repeated the oath.)

You say seated.

THE r.E-SlDrLVT: Cou:»sel nay proceed.

BY DR. STEIJ/HAUIR:

1 Witness, what is your exact none, where wer. you born, what
is your nationality and what is your present address?

A i'y rune is Dr. Rcl. Jaeger. I w a born on the 1st of Novon-
b-r, 191c, in Qraud.nz or. the Vistula ir. Testem Prussia. I x .i doctor
by profession. I t a G.nvan citizen. ~y present «d«*rcss is t»raz-Li.be-
nau, Austria, 721ct S.E.P. hospital.

Q rfh-.t is your _-iploye..nt there?

A I sc an Ob.rctabsarxt and s.nior Jtdic.-.l officer for S.r.P.
units under British cc -and. I nn p.rsonally directly subordinate to
th- hoadqu tors of the British troops ir. Austria. I an tlao ,a chief
physician of the ?21st S.E.P. hospital.

0 Hew is it that you know Professor Pciglbceck?

A I net Professor ‘.iglbr»-ck under the auspices of th. adjutant
- the Corps Physician in P- r 1 in-T^r.p,lhof about the end of 19B3. Ho
as sent to ay hospital in Tnrvisie in Noth.m Italy about Easter, 19M,
*nd he was und. r tv- free that tin- on.

low long was he your suberdinatv?

5244


28 -Lay-A-17-3-Karrcrw-{frown-von Schoon)-
Court 1


A He ins my subordinate, until the end of the war.

4 What ms his position there?

A Ho was leading pliysician of tfc. internal department of ay
hospital*

Q Do you know whether iJclglboack had tbo title "Consulting
Physician of the Luftw-.ffc?"

a No, Professor ®ciglbocck ms not ft consulting physician of
the Luftmffei’ I remember, howov-r, that ho would suggested as such.
*rco a p.rsonai renark of the Gcn.ralstabsarzt, Dr. Ncuoueller I lear¬
ned that he was proposed at the consulting internist of the kray.

C| Why was he not appointed?

A He was rejected by Generalstabsartt Neumuollor since he did
net think he was a good enough soldier and was "too soft ", as ho said
to ne pjrsonally.

Q ..ho then took the position that he w.s intended for?

A His position wis taken by scce else who took over the duties
of consulting internist. K. ms r.ot a academic teacher. 1 cannot remem¬
ber hia none today.

Q Now, what military rank did Boiglboeck have in Jun- of 19LL?

a Profesaer BeiglbOeck ms an CfcKrarzt of the reserve at the
time, but he was already classified for Stabsarzt at the tine when ho
came to Tarvisio.

Q Can you tell us southing about his previous employment in
the Luftwaffe?

A He cane to U3 free the Luftwaffe Hospital in Brunswick with
a good reputation. I knew nothing of his previous work.

i Yevr hospital in Tarvisio, was that German t.rritory or was
that outside G.rr.any?

A Tarvisio was cn Italian soil. Th, hespit-1 belonged t' the
..rmy operating in Italy. Th. borders were strictly blocked.

Q Did Professor Bciglbe-.ck have any personal connections with

:a; h.r offices, particularly to the Ifcdical I sovctorate?

£245


2* Hay-A-GJ-17-L-Karrcw-(Brcwr. vor. Schcwn)-
Ccurt, 1


A So,.he did not. I don't bcli-v- bo wanted any.

Q •'hit can you t.ll us about his medical activities and his
attitude a - physician?

.. His radical activities consisted in talcing care of the inter¬
nal dapartment and caring for the patients, -*y hospital had 1500 beds
at that tine. L50 approximately belonged to the inUmald:partox.nt. To
this was att ache d an infectious ward and a tuberculosis ward, an X-ray
d-partnent, a clinical laboratory and a department fer physical thera¬
py. As a physician Professor °ciglbocc:. had a very good reputation,
not only among his patients but also ■'song the personnel under bin
and above all rrxnj his colleagues. As a can to every on. respected hin
and liked hie.

Q Old you h.v. only tx-nlx-rs of the “im-n '.Vchrnacht as patients
or did you h;vu also foreign patients?

a Not cnly O.rman nenlx.ro of the arced forces, but Iso Italian
soldiers, and also Pel ,s, Russians, Yugoslavs, Anericons and Englishmen.
The latter rr_rw fliers who had bov.n shot down and sou- of them in cur
hospital for months. Professor Bciglbc^ck made no distinction as tc
nationality when tr.ctin; his patients.

Q Did Eoiglboeck, during his stay in Italian territory, hwe
touch with tlx. civilian population?

a Yes, v.ry close touch. He had good reputation as a doctor,
net cnly or.cn: us, but his reputation got round in the small town of
~ rvlsio and, in hie free time, h did all to h_lp the peer mountain
papulation. He v s often cn the read at night which was without danger
tovards th>. end cf the war bee use thcr. w_r>. partisans in th«. area.

i Now, Dr. Jaeger, let us turn to the exo-runents. Do you knew
*h.n Bwiglbcck was crdcr-d to n-port tc “^rlin?

« I conn t give you the. date -xactly. It was about the. second
half cf June in 19LH.

«t In what way was this carri_d cut?
a oy a tclctyp. rossngo.

£246


3g-.rt_iS-l-H3-.-ie®han-Von Sc hor. £ Brown


i. Do you recall whether the teletype message con¬
tained a reason for this request?

rt. Ke, It merely sail that rrofesaor 3ei£lboeok wee
to report inmedl tely to the .-ledicel Inspectorate In 3erlln.

Did you ask by phone or by telegram what was afoot

hero?

a. Yea, I inquired by telephone and I woe Informed
that Professor leiulboeck was to be assigned to sono
scientific work; I could learn nothin- else.

Sow, when Belglboeck vns in =erlln, did he tell
j a wh't w-a uoln ; end nsk you to request ..Is return?
a. Yes, he did.

"hrt teas n :.l- he c lve for this request?

.-v. He exvl 1 nwd ..Is wlan to be oent back by soyin£
t.y»t ho ‘1 not Ilk- t, ccco :t tno nssl tf nraent to carry out
cxj^rlu. nts in a concentration coop >n.. bo si oa, ho wanted
to c mu b ok to the internal Department of the Hospital
and shod au to try to arrange it.

Did you make efforts to h ve hiu tor Ught back?
a. Yes, I Aid, I sal;. th e I .inf. entrusted him with
Che h lldln. up of the Internal v-ep rtment nd It was hard
: r o t -ot along without hie.

... "hy was this request u.n your part refused?
n. Hy request went through official channels to tho
-.'J it nt i the Army Surgeon and he h to ask for tho
release fv »a th. -iodical Inspect..ante. It ws rejected and
sal', t -t the assi-nsent ho hnd to carry ut vs important.

i. Did Bel.lbock then tell -ou tar: r.-d asked that

:experiments be c r led oat In larvlsle?
k. Yes.

" aid tlv - h ve been technically pcssiele?

«. fcdm 1 cnl ly, yes.


524 ?


Court 1

May 22-rt-18-?-H3-:i3ehsn-VonSchon-Brcwn.

Q. How bo?

n . "e had q ilte a vood lrborntory end the laboratory
vorkors would h o vo been adequate to carry out the normal
experiments.

Z. Why was this then 'not done?

rt . The military situation was such that we needed
every bed In the hospital. There w s also an order that
the borders cf the Reich were closed for the return of
patients and It would have been difficult to solve the bod
question. Immediately after tr.o Invasion, we received a
Fuehrer order which again strictly prohibited any return
of patients end this order w'8 binding on all Wehrmncht
offioes.

Q. Vhon 3clglboeck went to Dachau, did ho write any¬
thing t you or did he write to any of the other doctors
about what vent on there?

Yes, I romomber thrt very well, ho wroto to several
cumbers of the hospital staff, and in all the letters he
said how unhappy he was at Dachau and how much he disliked
carrying .*ut the experiments there. I remember before tho
experiments began, he wrote me personally a letter and
asked mo again to try to arrange for his return. I tried
again, but without success. I myself, of c urso, was
o-rtlcul-rly Interested In getting him bock, because I had
-ssigned him to do this now building,

Z. Dr. Jaeger, y u were In f~ct the medical offlcor;
ay y 'relieve that Sleglboeck could have refused to cbey^
this military order?

«. No, I do not believe so. .-*fter all. It came from
the supreme superior nnd Professor 3elglboeck wos a medical
■:f*lcer. Orders for medical officers were the same as for
’■iiy ocher officer and soldier.


c24-


Co art 1

Mr; 28-A-l£-3-KD-Meehrn-Vbnochon&Brown.

Kov, 3elslboeck carried »at hi 9 experiments and
"'ter the experiments wore over, he c'-me hack to Tnrvielo.
'ort . ' * he report to you about :iis ex: rlcents?

a'xit the middle of October, Professor Solglboeck
re ported hack to me s his disciplinary 6 U'orlor. Then I
inq irod, he tjld mo about his assignment, ho told me that
he carried at the sea-water experiments as ordered. Ho
"Iso said tht to fore tnc :e 6 lnnlng of tho experiment ho
also porfrroed an experiment on himself, he srld that the
e.T ohiaental subjects were gioeleg, who had volunteered and
that chjy wore granted extra food rations, less work, eto.

Z. Toll mo, Dr. Jaeger, did he eey anything to you
•'b ut wi.r: hie relations were with the experimental
rX : Joe to, those c. ncsntrr.tlvn caco inmates?

A. I had the impression that ho had vory good rola-iono
wit his experiment ?1 subjects.

Q. Dj ’ou think that Dr. Eelglboeck had any reason
to conceal the true facts?

Ko, I do not; he under the t .on existing conditions
had no reason to conceal anythin, from me aside from the
ct tlv fc I asked hie as his superior */fficor.

Tell, Dr. Beiglboeck came b ok to Tarvlslo and
ho ccmo b ek f'uom " concentration camp; - id you ask him
whr : is looked like in a concentration or nr:?

a. ’fee, of c arse, I as well as the ot/.ers who heard
1 : were quit.- st-nlehed trr t he c »uld not say much about
the conditions, ho only said that his movements lr. the
c ncentrati- n comp were restricted and relations with the
S3 were richer tense.

xow, I want to .sk you something else. Do you
: ink Professor Bolglboeck had any personal, scientific or

Mcer?v/ .nterest ir. these sea-water ex'eriments?

62 49


Court 1

Ifcy 23— a- 18-4-HD- ISe e hen- Vb n Scho n & 3rovn.

A. Jio, I do not believe sc. On the contrary, as far
-s I cr.n remember, he •.■•as doing scientific work or. hepatitis
;ha tine in the clinic and I think he wanted to publish
bovh or, the subject; thus I believe the contrary would
bo true.

But maybe you think that he did these experiments,
ns the chief prosecutor said in his opening statement, from
r I'azlstlc point of view ir. order to torture tne enemies
of national Socialism.

«. I do not believe thet as that w^-uld not fit in with
hla character. I nover knew him ns a fanatic, hl3 sympathy
and hoart nlwoya belonged to tne weak ^nd oppressed, he
never refused them aid. I think he V"S a party member, yos,
but if .no hoard him, one had to irve the oppoait impression
of his ideals; his criticism of party or political mea.3uros
of tho hlghoat agencies indicated that. I don't believo
that I can assume that.

S. Xow, lot mo n3k you c lrst question. You nro a
Siyslcian, r medical officer, and I know of your erreoer;

C-j •" u c-nslder tho problem of such soa-watcr experiments
such as these r ouporfluous one; do you think they werc
unnecessary or do you think thoy were serious experiments
and a important problem?

Yos, I believe it w: s an Important problem. X
-r.y say that I was a parachutist on Crete and know the
s ocial dangers of the sea. I was 6hut in for two days

near the coast In Crete and suffered greatly from thirst.

•

After these two days we reached the see.; we were sitting

practically ir, the water rnd were suffering neatly from

thirst, but were unable to drink. Or. the fourth day we

received fresh water from a well, anyone who has thirst

r-cticrlly sittin* ir. the water will realize how important

S2£C


Court i

• -~y 28—*-l£—5-HD-He e nan- Vo n 8 o ho n ic Brown.


toe problem is.

•.. Did you have ship-wreched people who suffered from
thirst re tivt tine?

.•v. ’foe, Chore were e number of people who flew to
Crete who err shed and I s»w quite a few people who had
aenegad to reaoh the lend and who had been fished out of tho
water, I saw tha conditions nnd the greatest problem for
ell those people was the water and their great thirst.

Ho further questions.

THE PRESIDE!?: «re there any further questions to be
propounded to the •..•itnoss by defenso c uneel? If not,
the 7-rosecutl >n say cross examine.

CROSS EXaHIKaTIOK

3Y HR. E.-.RDY:

h t v'S the s joclflc date when Dr. Boiglboook
vent to Berlin to roport to the .-.©dlcnl Inspectorate?

a. I sold before that I don't /.now the exact dato;

I believe It w-e the eooond half of Juno 1944.

n. And when did ho return?

a. as far a3 I can remember, that was about October,

; - i ld.-le of October.

*.• “-•.on did ho toll you that he had nn "sslgnmcnt to

c riu’hl on concentration cr mo lnaK tos - t Dachau?

a. He told ue trrt in n \etter.

%. 'To. t was your interest in this matter?

a. In his carrying out the experiments?

Yes.

a. Ho, I hed r.o interest In them. I wanted hie as nn
rnlst for my hospital for medical reasons and because
- w^re building a new building.

" s Jr. Beiulboech a man of good character and
v cmtion?

6251


Court 1

24ay 23-A-18-&-KD-Meehar.-Vor.3chor.-Browr.*


a. Oh, yes, I cay well say so.

G. Did you ever tear of the Fuehrer Order of Secrecy?

a. For this earcrlncRt?

k. The Fuehrer Order of .Secrecy in Germany, not for
this experiment?

No, I never heard of It.

*.• Do you know what “Secret" means?

A. Of course.

G. Do you know what “Top Secret" means?

A. Yes, I know what that Is.

Q. If you were given a secret order, would you go and
tall your friends about it, or would you consider that
a broach of your allegiance to the Fuehrer and to the
Natl Government?

A. That depends. I do nut know.

G. Do you think th't 3olglboock was being very
consldorate end very loyal when he lnforned you about
natters which wore "Top Secret", a man thet hod nothing
to do with the probloa?

’..'hother that w o loyal of Professor Belglboeok;
w-s that your question?

C. Well, wasn't it rather unusual?

A. No, I don't believe 30 , I don't think there was any
reason for secrecy In this natter.

-.ell, for your Information, Doctor, the matter wn6
classIflad "Top Secret 8 . Don't you foci Dr. oeiglboeck
w-s broaching his olleglance when he Informed you, an
outsider, about his proposed work at the Dachau concentra¬
tion ca.ap?

.-v. I don't believe so, otherwise he would probably
nave created it as such.

C. Now, you scy that Dr. BeiglbccCk enjoyed e cordial

£252


Co -rt I*

Hay 23-«-16-7-HD-Me efaan—Von5chon-3rovn.

relationship with the experiment subjects; how do you know

that?

n. I know that because he told me a treat deal about
their existence in his series of experiments; He said
th< t they came to him with their personal troubles, ho
said that they all epoke German. Since x knew him personally,
I believe that he hod close contact with his experimental
subjects.

... You know that only fr-.m 3el 6 lboeck himself, a man
who hPd broached an oatu in giving y.u information about
a Top Socrot project? Is th.pt right?


Court So. 1

2c Aay 47-A-15-l-lHH-Coole (Yon Schon & Brava)


A. Professor Boiglboeck, yes.

Q, Tou said that Dr. Beiglbocck didn't want to conduct these
erpericcnts at the Dachau concentration caap. Did ho toll you vhy he
had nisglvlcgs for not venting to co n duct these experiaento at tho Dachau
concentration canp?

A. That vts even in a letter vhich has been nentionod before, that
he didn't like to carry out these experinents in the concentration canp;

I gathered that froa his nentality.

Q. Vhy didn't he like to do that, do you fcnov? Vos it becauso it
vas a criminal ret or sooethlng? Vhot vrs his objection to it?

A. I can't read his aind ao veil as that but I don't think that
he likod the concentration caaps. He didn't llko working thoro.

Q, Vhot vas your rank, doctor?

A. Cborstabsarzt.

Q. In tho Luftvaffe?

A. Tos, in tho Luftveffe.

Q. Vhon did you Join the Party?

A. I vn« en active officor: I vas not in tho Party.

Q. You never Joined the Kati Party?

A. So.

Cc. Tot you voro an officor in tho Luftvaffo?

A. I vas an officer In the Luftvaffe, yes.

k- Kov do you spell your lost none, doctor?

A. «J-&-g-c—r.

Ci. Did you ever hear of tho experlaents conducted for the
decontanination of voter?

A. Yes, I heard about that. Of course, the decontanination.

Vhat did you hear about it?

A. Hot the renoving of salt, but tht decontanination?

Q. That is right.

A. Decontanination?

k- Yes, vhat did you hear about that?

6254


Court 2o. 1

2c Hay 47-A-19-2-R2.-Ccck (Ton Schor. 2 Brown)


A. Sothing esoecially, only vhat everybody knew, that is a filter
to remove bacteria fro: water.

Q, Did you ever year of experiments conducted by the "Reichs-

esstelt"?

A. Bo, I didn't.

q, You never heard of that?

A. Vhat "Eeichsanstolt*?

q, "Roichsanstalt" is c Gornan word. I will have to ash the
interpreter to read it. It is spelled Vasser and Luftgau.

A. So, I never heard of that.

q. If your mo appears in a document concerning experiments
conductod on ISO hunan beings to detornine the value of certain decon¬
tamination agents in tho decontamination of water, would you bo inclined
to think that that was another Dr. Jaeger?

A. Yes, I think that must havo been eonobedy else.

Hr.. HaRDY: Bo further Questions, T-'ur Honor.

THL PRESIDES!: Is there an.'- further examination by counsel for
defendant Bciglboock. Thcro being no further Questions to bo oronoundod
to tho witness, the vitnoss Jaeger will be oxcusod.

Tho dofondnnt Eecker-Froysong will resume tho witness stand.
miviWR BECiCRE-FREYSEl-G - Resumed
Ei-DIRECI EXAKIHAIIOT

31 DR. TIP?:

q, Dr. Becker, the direct examination and the cross examination
have been so exhaustive that I do not believe I shall hove to ask many
more cuostions. However. I want to clarify fire*, of all one Question to
y iU that Dr. Hcrdy broached tfcie morning, the cuostion of the so-called
■ Super-Rcferents". Did you actually, aaor* the Referents, of vhem there
were twonty-fivo in the Medical Inspectorate, have c position that cut
70U above the other Referents?

A. I took this statement of Hr. Hardy es a captatio benevolentiae,

and I don't think he meant anything of that nature by it. At lt-est I

6255


Court 'Jo. 1

22 May 47-A-19-3-lHK-Ccok (You Schon a Brown)

vei one of tventy-four Befercnts. I did act have the highest ailltery
tp-*. among then. There vure scce lieuteneat colonels there. There wore
some older non there. There were experienced university professors. I
did not hove any particularly high position.

it. Sow, according to the evidence put in during this trlel it
would seen as if the research work in general occupied n very pro-eninont
position within the office of the Chiof :f the Medical InsncCt-rato of
the Luftwaffe. It would seer, es if the whole office concerned itsolf
with research. Sow Just what mb the actual situation; what importance
did research occupy within the entire work <f the office of the Chiof of
the Hedicel Inspectorate?

a. I an unfortunately unable to tell you what porcontngo of tho
correspondence of tho office referred to research, but I can mint out
one thing, first of all, py Rcfernt vno one ,ut of twenty-four, and
within ny P.cferct research for.nod only a pert of ny work, toorhros twonty
percent, fifteen ocrcent, certainly no c;ro. Of ccurso, It wis a vory
inportant part of zy work, but the othor parts woro Just at lnportant.

Q. Then if I understand you correctly, you say that your work with
research and research assignments was only a fractional part of all tho
v-rk involved in the office of tho Chiof of the Modi cal InsocctorntoT

A. Of tho whole offico, yos, certainly.

q, Bov, witness, please turn ^nce again to Document >'0-306. This
is Exhibit Bo. 296 and is in Prosecution Document Book Bo. 12, on pngo
77. unfortunately I do not have the English page - it is page 74 in the
English document book. Vc have elreedy discussod this document three
tines. Kr. Hardy tr.ugfct it up twice and I must unfortunately refer to
it agein. ^ut I have only ono Question, witness. Mr. Hardy concluded
fre this document, which is a letter of 9 June 1943 fron Professor Hobo
to Professor Eeagon. The last sentence reeds:

"It will take some time until '2-?' produces its new research order,

?s Anthony is on a duty trip for several weeks." Ur. Hard;/ interpreted

this sentence to cean that this resoerch assignment ves nut to one side

c2E6


Court So. 1

25 May 47-Jt—I9-4-33C-Cook (Vos Schoa & 3rovn)


because the nan was not preseat who issued the orders ia resepreh assign-

I

neats. Sow ia one sentence, witness, can you tell us why this research
assignment was put aside while Professor Anth.ny was absent on an official
trip?

A. That is very simple. Because the Heforent was not there who
had to do the technical final work on the assignment, and because it was
not an urgent natter that had to be settled overnight and it veo not
given t> no, and because even as assistant afferent I had so much to do
that I didn't look for any additional work. I don't think azqrbody docs.
*nd so the natter was loft until Anthony cane back.

Sow, regarding tho question of research asslgnncnts, which vo
h=vo been kicking around ling onough, now one aro Question, witnoss.

Y-u said in cross exoninatl.n that the scientist apulioo to your offico
and y-u dictated the rosearch assignment. I bolievo that is rathor a
telescoping of what took place, but plocsc tell us Just oractly how nr.
apDlication for a rosearch assignment was hrndlcd in tho iffico of tho
Chlof of tho ksdical Inspectorate.

A. 2 shall try to answer this quostlon vory briofly. Tor tho
sfko of simplicity let us essuuc that it is an avlntl.n ncdlcir.o aonign-
ment. Tho epolicati-n fr>n Professor John Doc, vh>n Mr. Hardy nontionod
this aornlng, erne first ^.f all to the Chlof .i Strff, who decided
vhothcr this letter would be submitted t> the Chlof cf tho Modicrl
Service or sont direct to the department chief, and ho nr.de mo nota¬
tion in tho margin - either."please consult", or "cm be granted”, or
"inquire of such and such a person" - then the lottor caac to tho
department chief, who also signed it end put a note in the margin for no,
*nd then I got the letter and sew what ay two superiors had already said
about it. I either reported to the department chief about it, Bir.ce it
an aviation medicine assignment. I night have euggosted that
frofessor Strughold or someone else bo consulted, and if the donrrtnont
chief approved the application I took the documents over to the budget

afferent, vho was responsible for finances. I got his p.o'rovrl, end he

5257


Court So. 1

26 rui;-' 4?-o—IS-5-S3i-Coot (Ton Schon i Prawn)

clso signed it, and after I hed all of this together I dictated to ny
stenographer the draft of a research assignment vfcich I submitted to ny
depertr.ont chief, and ho alone, or together with no, gave it to the
Chiof of Staff and the Chief of the nodical Service for signature.

Q. In other words, you did not actually dictate something which
vould be in the neturc of an order, but your work was of a purely
technical nature, was it not?

A. Yos, i believe I have explained that sufficiently. I was nover
o rosoarch dictator.

Mr. Hardy, who has flettered you in certain ways here, has
also charged you with being in chargo of the aviation medicine research
institutes. How, after what Dr. Veits has testified here, I do not be¬
lieve ve hevo to go into that any further, but like Mr. Hardy I should
like to ask a hypothetical aueotion. If the Referent had been in chargo
of the aviation medicine research (of course the;.- woro not), would that
have boon a nilitcry subordination in the sense of subordinate or superior
in the nilitery sense?

A. I car. answer this Question only by loading it ad rbsurdum.

"ho heeds of our rvietion ncdicinc institutes woro: Professor Strughold
vith the rank of colonel. Iho office was that of a brigadier general.
Professor Veits had the rank of lieutenant colonel, and tho office had
the rank of colonel. Professor Puechner, head of the Institute for
Aviation .iedicrl Pathology, also held tho rank of lieutenant colonol,
and tho office was clso that of e colonel. Professor Knothe, com wider
of tho Training Section at Jueterbog, was first a major end at tho end
lieutenant colonel. That was also a colonel's position. Only the head
of tho Institute for Aviation Medicine in Hamburg was e StrbsexrV
(captain). I don t think it is customary for t-rp prny in the world to
kavc «ii colonels under the cor-end of a captain, and I an convinced
that if I had tried to give orders in the military sense to Cbcretarzt
Professor Strughold or Cberfelder rt Professor Veltz - all old enough to bo
father - they vould have teen ouite astonished.


23 Ifry^.-lJG-420-l-Grcss (Vcn Schrn-rr wn)

C-urt 1

5 Thrt then rr.svore =y hypothetical question. Hew, I v-licvo
th-t vc ’ net need tc enter intc my further discussions cf tc in-
f.-jcua file note t 55, end the Refemt nuub.rs. I think they r re
clc'r enough. .kreever, en nffidevit is reins tc be rut in carding
this osr ttcr lr.ter. «.c do n t h'vc to discuss ycur position in the
Referat nny len :cr. Kcr. cn. question rcrrrdinr the lot-prossurc cir.i -
er. You !oic«, Vitn-ss, thrt thw labile lev-pressure chonb-r used by
tho DVL -.t /.dlcrshof rnd When to Dachau rn-’ used there in the ccurso
of tho ex. crincnta h's pl*yed - l-rre r:le hero. I dm't knov? whether
it \/ a brought cut thqt this lev-pressure chcn2>cr »: s nrvdo subordin-tc
tc tho Refer't fer ,.vi tion tfedidne.

.. You r^rin ere putting r. unit under no irllch ms n-v-r un-^r sic.
1 .lust c Jeet tc th't. I couldn't >vc .-ny erdtra to th. rn in cl-.-rgo
cf • ue! ile lci—prcaeure ch-nler unit.

^ I r'on't referring tc when the unit vrs evdc subcr in^tc tc
ycu, .ut then the lcvv-.rosaur- ch-.v -r itself v.rs i«t uj/.er the Kefere.t
fer ..vir.ticn Uo'lcine?

.. Tlirt vi"o r.t the end of July or the beginning cf ..u ust 19/.2,
».hcn this actc.izcd low-preosur. eh rat or unit nr.a trJ:en ever *r St V-
s-rzt Kollcra-n end lvia cron.

q This then ura after the conclusion of thu hr.chr.u cx.-cadocnts
fer rescue fre a hi-h *ltitu;lc?

.. ..ccording tc wSu-.t 1 hr.ve he.-rd hero, these exp crl.vents v:crc
c. Ujlctcd ?t the end of June ct the i'.tcst.

1 S-nothing wise in this n-ttcr, -.-itn.ss. Ycu aai ’ in crcss-
-x*. l.v ti. n th t when the ccliio lcw-prcssur- ch'.a'er ’units v .rc used
ycu acid th't "ue saw tc it th-t these netcrizei lc.pressure chrflbera
were use'*.," Jtew, yU.ao exlnin the use of this - er’. "we", sc ®ct v.o
cm ,vu J . the impression th't y:u -..e.e s. no s;rt of •* aupex^-forent?

.. That is -n inaccuracy cc.uu.ttcd 'y every.ne -^hen s -Jdn >f

hi? . flic-. The lcw-prcssur- chra era were iodt with in X ?.*-fer't.

Criers to . issued ty ry icvrUwnt cll«-f er the Chi.f cf 31

6259


26 ;t-7--.-3JG-20-S-GrcsB (vcn Schcn -Br. va)

Court 1

q Bcrrrding the. hirji-cltitudo experiaenta, Utneas, I h:.vo -niy
one question. Since Hr. Hardy hs take ycu in crcss-c^idr.rticn rbcut
jr. K: wtc.*iv.-ff, tell =c, hew lcn. ;• -s 3r. Krttonheff in your Referrt?

- I hrvc rlref.dy arid th:t in the succor cf 19U. 'Jr. ICcttcnhcf
«rs there Xcr c very brief tine. Kc hrd just iven u? me ;>ositicn
ml w's * itinj t: ’-c rssijncd f -ml in the nerntix orcauncUy

nobody kn/.. ahr.t tc dc with hin, -irl fer y^rhrps s week or two cr
thr^o weeks, porhrya leas, he v.rs in Berlin rnd kos in the fiico cf
the Chief cf the ifcdicrl Services, :nd since ho w~.s interested in
..vision kodidne, he ws in kefer t -b r guest, I ai-t.t s*y, fer r
few dry a.

c . . , ’ itneas, cno quosti “ding the fr^ezi ■. trlocnts.

Ycu a-id in rep-rd t: this ns well rs rltitudo, thrt Prefuaaer Hippko
errrio:'. cut r grert dcr .1 of the ir.rk in this fivAd on his orm initiative
end di sc without infereinj. tho competent Referent cf this. '1 , tho
questim '.rises, could Kippko dc this - did he hove rny kncvlcdrc in
the field cf rvi-ticn medicine sc th-t he cculd reach ~utcnc„v us
decisions?

.. Profess-, r Kippke hr.d not conducted "«y cyir.ticn uvlic-l re-
oc-roh hi-iself hut hf.d tfkcn rn intensive interest in ' vi-.ti. a n.'licine,
rad, n- doubt, hr* h in ttur field vhich TO8 f r - eve the

nfiraCL cverrye cf • dcctcr.

} r.ien, if 1 mvicrstrnd you ccrr-ctly, y u :.tfn to s:; thrt
fuwlaacntrl questions cf this sort he coull decile without ccncultinr
* npccirlict.

D ubtlwss.

\ Than, tdtn.ss, pic-sc take u. the freesin; cunmt dk,

first cf rll, 3ccuccnt :»-268, . 14C in the G.rnm v-rsim cf tho

dccument heck cn fr.esin : . It is - letter of 19 Februrry 1?43,

the Ins., .ctcr cf the i-udicl S-rvicc f lto Luftwrffo, tc the "eichs-

fuohrer-SS, si n^d by Hippkv. On this occuuent tln.ro is the f-oicus

file note 55 ~n\ then in p. renthesos the registry nun 1 or kill

6260


fvU


26 ! JG-2C—3—Srcss (von Schcn-?rc> n)

C'-urt 1

in cr-ss-cxa-min-ticn, T.itnvss, tht this dccuacnt v-a net r.crkori
cn Ly ycu. l£r. Hardy -.sked ycu r. fei things about this letter, tut
regarding the qu^-sticn cf the freezing cxp-riccnts I should like to
rsk ycu a few acre questions. Witness. How ices it h-ppen that -'es-ite
the f-ct tfc t y_u s~y ycu arc art a specialist in freezing -ir'-tcrs,
ycu c;ul’ cake - perfectly dc-r, understandable stetuaent about th-ec
freezing prcll-ns? Cculd ycu arkc these st-tceunts from specialized
experience in the field cf cell, cr on the ' -sis cf experience cf a.
purely _jicrr*l nature th:t ycu had r.s : sci-ntlst, research . erker, and
experimenter.

.. I nev-r perforaod any cold experiment either cn -ni-rlo cr
cn lysclf cr cn mother human boin . I, cf ccurs-, read scuo papers
cn the su Jeet, tut the statement which 1 have ua-’c here refer ■ enc re¬
ally to r. careful study cf tho dccuacnt rnd t; qy general q-.'.ic-l
training.

Q 7r.cn ycu u"ic stat—nents cn the hr sis cf jur«-ly general in¬
fer.: tier which ycu had as r. lector, supported by, a study cl tho dccu-
:.cnts v.’ y infer ..'ticn cn research in ,-tncral?

.. Yes, th-t is right.

1 Cn ;ar;o 22 cf the fccuaent bock on freezing, document :.'0 2C6,
exhibit (W, there ic r ward which Hr. Hardy put to y.u — laoumont
NO 2- 6 — - letter to tho Reichsfuehrer-SS frcn the Reich .lr Minister,
6 Oct-’ -r 1942. Do ycu have the document?

.. Thrt is the me ycu were just talking -.lout? Ics, I ha.vo it.

dj In tii.3 dccunmt pi- se turn tc the 1: st prrr.arr.ph cn the
first \ -, r-h-rc «*nthcny writ-s: “Tho ruo. rcli records mb n ex¬

tensive rep- rt will be presented tc the I.^ichsfuehr-r-SS by St-’.s. rzt
Hr. R-seller."

-fr. H rdj contended th t th- extensive rcp:rt aaiti neb here is
the repc:t th*t lr fess r H Izlcchn^r '.v- in liurn' -r;. -i y I ask ycu
rheth.r tile cpini.n of Hr. Hardy is c-.rreot, cr just i t is the
r. rt hero nuiticnod?

6261 o


2S 11"'-.D JG-2C-J.-C-r zss (von Schcn-5rcwr.)
Court 1


.. As :*• r -s I rcncr-icr, in the ensrer which I & vc l£r, Herdy
I sri*. th't me cf th- next documents shc>>s thr.t wh't Hdzlcehnor sidd
r.t the. Hurnhtrg electing its the prrt cf this report which ccul -c
a*ic pullic rs tep secret. ..cccrdinc: to iih:t I knew tclay, t:ds ex¬
tensive report was th- one which rrefesser Hclzlochncr, Jr. FAiike, end
Rr scher signed* It wr.s sent by Knachor to Kimlcr cs top i-crct \ ith
c pcrscr."! letter, wt was certainly net wh. n t rrefesser Hclzlcchner
rbout thr-c weeks lr.tor tcld the cceplo as seeded ct numberg.


6252


- ‘ 7 ~. ;JG-21-l-Kzrrc(Brewn)

Ccart 1

Q In ycur direct exce-lnc tier. ycu h*vt alrcedy stated thrt this
extensive report, sc for 's ycu know, did net £c to the office of the
Chief of the Uedicrl Inspectorate of the Luftv-ffc, rnd tfcct, .".t any
rate, ycu never s'■ thv. report in the office,

.. Tht’s whet I arid, yes.

q How, the last question re. rrdinp the freezing experiments,
'..Itnoss. Very surprisingly, th~ Tvesecuter stated here for the first
tine, thet the method cf rapid r^wirain • as net introduced i.-.to prr.ct-
ico in tho Coruen ’’chraccht. This st tc-aent surnriccd ao re. tl; ,
since I found no document tc this effect, nor did I hu-r .anythin"
orally tc thrt effect. Hew t«-U us, >itn^ss, was this net-hod ctunlly
introduced in the Guiae-n * ohroacht, end if 3v, when?

.1 positive kncvlcd/o about this introduction is cm follows:
First of ell, I knew thrt in the course of the winter of 19/>k-19/*3,
instructions fer acrtlchl officers woro issued .-dvoertinr 'li nt crier-
in.;, quick rowindng '3 the only acthod for tr t after fraccing*
Secondly, ever;- Germ soldier in the Zr st ir the Herth received r.
oofflormytua :n his pry bock .-’ cut rh t tc dc f>r cold r n:’« tr~' taunt of
frozen persons, .Iso, I knc. tirt the Kedic'l So Din trees Strtions,
in their .-aster heats, life torts, had - rr-ngcaonto fer U3in the het
~ tx.r which c--_.es cut cf the ootcr efter cooling the aorcr, fer the
tre’toent of frozen persens. But I elievo thrt c-n proved 1 y rn
-ffi i.vit fren r dec. distress dcctcr.

* I’ncn the fin -1 question cn ccld, which ycu c-n answer vdth
'-no sentence, Witness. In yeur direct cxasdxvtlcn you s-i ' th*t
*'pi - rcoerninr h-d been discus sc: t great length, -nd then ilr. Hardy
-r:u-ht the discovery cf c Russian dcctcr freer the year louO, I bc-
licvc, tc y ur .attention rnd asked ycu why these exp _rim-nto ’ey Kclz-
lcchncr ~t Dachau were necessary in vi-h cf th.-t. Can you r.-r sene-
thin: tc thrt?

.. Vh_sc oq-eriaents — spccificall: Kclzl:diner’s ex _ri :nts —

n quid: rarc-Anr, where, ir. Hclslcvhncr’s cwn nerds, n- c^eidmentrl

8263


23 ,-3JG-Zl-2-K?rrcw (Brown)

Court 1


subject suffered Miv h*rd cr vs cnd.-ncorcd, v.cre ncccss'r; hoc’use
ir. spite of the capcrioonts cf the Russian Ureter, Lcpcsins!-' in 1CCO,
ow- in spite of nuacrcus rninrl oxporirwnts, -nd in spite cf sotic
iscl ted o* 3erv ti:ns in .ir'oticc, iv: cno c-ul-I decide “.^rinst slow
r or-min", *-hich hr.d teen used fer thcus“nds cf y-rrs fer frees? np, "nd
tc chrn"c orcund ccuplctcl7 rnd dc oxr.ctly the opposite — -xr ctly
whr.t h"! *lv *73 boor, considered the greatest denser — th t is, .Tiick
rev.'rain..

1 Jr. rresident, I h-vc - fet. questions rogrrding the ncact sut-
j^cty but I think this would be c _-<A tine tc hre'k off.

THE i-aSSIOEIT: The Tri’ ur.-l ill n w be in recess until 9*30
o'clock tcoorr. w nomine.

(.. recess w-s tfcv^ until 0930 hours 29 .~y 1947.)


6264


29 May U7-^WTD*l-WCarroTc (Int. Brown)
Court So. 1


Official Transcript of the Acer!can Military
Tribunal I in the natter of the United States
of Aasrica against Karl Brandt, et al,
defendants, sitting at Nurnborg, Gernanyj
on 29 Hay 19U7, 0930 hours. Justice Beals presiding,

Tje MARSHAL* Persons in the court rocn will ploase find their scats.

The Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal I, Military Tribunal
I is now in session. God save tho United States of American and this
honorable Tribunal. There will be order in the court.

THE FRESIDZNTt Mr. Marshal, will yew ascertain that all tho defendants
aro present in court.

THE MARSHAL* 11 Say it please your Honor, the defendants aro all
present in the court.

THE PRESIDE’(71 Tho Secretary General will note for tho record tho
presonce of all defoliants in ccwrt.

Ccu mol nay pro coo d.

BECKER-FRSYSEM3 - Rosunod
REDIRECT EXAMINATION - Cdntinuod

BY DR. TIPP

Q Dr, Beckor, yostorday wo concluded our discussion of tho froosing
problon, Tho noxt chargo of tho prosocution arainst you is tho typhus
oxporironts. Howovor, I believe that this problo* has boon discussed
alroady at such "rent length, along with its file nurtoor, otc., that w 0
need not concern ourselvos with it. I boliovo that wo can leave that
woll to tho decision of tho Tribunal,

I cor.o now to tho noxt charge against yewj namely, that sea water
problon, and here I have a question to put to you. In tho direct exami¬
nation ycu explained what part of tho responsibility* you ore trlllinr
to a^p&Jt water oxperirwnts and explained this again tp

Mr. Rarty in tte'qfios^ examination. Nevertheless, Mr. Hardy contiruod
to speak of your cdtplbte responsibility for the sea water experiments,
Will you pleaso, in cruder to clarify this point, again state to what

J I

extent you feel jr^elf responsible for these experiments on the tosis
of your official position?


29 Ifey U7-4WTD-1-2- Karros (Ir.t. Brown)

Court No. 1

A I think zy responsibility for these experiments lies in the fact
of sy riving ny department chief tho necessary documentation and data
in order for hin to arrive at decisions regarding the necessity of
these experiments and regarding the conditions under which thc-y wore
to be carried out. Further, regarding the qualifications and perso¬
nality of the nan conducting tho experiments professor 3ei"lboock. I
bolievo those arc the throe points with which I was actively concernod
and I was then, and still an, roady to accept tho responsibility to that
extont.

Q That thon is tho responsibility which you, in your position as
ref ore nt, had to boar and you took this responsibility within tho
office, wis-a-vis your superior at that tino?

A fos.

Q And thus do: not t^ko the full responsibility for thoso oxpori-
nonts — for tho carrying out of thon?

A I bollovo I can rofor to what ny chief nt that tino. Professor
Schroodor hinsolf, said, here in tho stand.

Q Y/itnosa, anothor natter in tho soa water problem. In tho direct
and cress examination ycu explained that tho Burkatdt nothod, if uso!

In practice, you considered to bo very dangorous. Howovor, oxporinonts
with Borkatit you considered to bo absolutely without clangor. This night
bo an inportant point in tho docision regarding this laattor an l I want
to ask you what tho difference is botwoon the uso of Borkatit, on tho
ono hand, in practico and, on tho othor, in oxparinonts?

A Borkatit is a chemical which conceals the salt content of 30 a
rmtor aid seers to anko at least a potable liquid of soa water• In this,
way tho person suffering fron shipwreck is induced to !rink a certain*
amount of this water and thus hopes to allay his thirst. However, sinco
3erkatit does not chango or lesson tho salt content of sea wator tho
thirst is not allayed, but subsequently becomes all the rcre severe.
Thus, tho nan rill again Iiink sea rater, probably this tine Trill !rink


8266


29 Hay hi-- [-,.7D-l-3-£arra* (Int. Brown)

Court So. 1

nore of it, an:*, so sraiaaily this will increase. He will drink noro and
core, be cone core and core thirsty, an J in consequence, lose noro body
water. Above all, because, single .'cses of noro than 300 cc briny about
diarrhea and, in this tray, one can foresee without beinc a groat
proptot that a serious condition irill davelop. That is what happens
when 5or!catit is actually used in practice. In an oxporinont, I can
deter nine exactly tho total anount of the water treated with Borkatit,
that is to bo ccnsused in one -.toy by tho oxporirvintal subjoct. I can
do to mi re ho- nuch Ixi has to drink in any sinclo doso, an:', tho decisive
factor is that tho oxporinont can, at any nonont, bo interrupted for
nodical roasons.

Q Tl»n, if I understood you correctly, you soo tho danger in
practico in tho fact that a nan in a soricus caso of soa distress —
shipwreck — will ctrink too :.uch soa water nixod with Borkatit? That
will bo Lanyoroua to hln, whoroas, in tho oxporinont, tho anount that
ho consuros is itotorrxinod by the physician and kept within propor
Units.

A It can so bo su-narlsod, yos.


29 Hfiy-M-FL-2-l-PriQePU (Int. Brcv/n)


Cc-rt Nc. 1


t .- Another question in this cotter, Mr. Hr.rdy asked
you whether yea agreed that a pers-n cculd die from drink¬
ing see water and yea then answered briefly and precisely.

••You can die cf anything".-Perhaps, however, the deduction
c-old be drawn free this statement that ycu counted on the
cases of fatality in the see water experiment ? Perhaps ycu
c.old elucidate y~ur statement, "Ycu can die of anything."

...- :.t that tiao I w«s refcring in ay thought tc a
passage in ay direct examination when I explained that the
tcxic effects cf any substrnc. depend on the dose in which
that substance is ccnsjm«-d. That is a most primitive rule
of toxicology and I simply wanted tc ecy in that statement
cf mine that ycu ora kill a person by feeding him sea water
if you went to tut, cf course, ycu can also feed him pure
oxygen if you want tc, cr toe much sugar or any ether sub¬
stance and you can arrange it that it will bo dangerous if
you wish tc.

Then, you meant, th-t in general it depends cn the
pn-unt of the aibstance c-nsuaed ~nd you say that any sub¬
stance which is c.nsuncd in too great doses car. be fatal ?
A.- Yes.

But ycu didn't want to say that such doses wero
osed in the experiments p.b cculd lead to death ?

/».- T-iat is right. I wanted to say exactly the opposite-
n*n-ly, that in the experiment the doses were each th~t it
w^s e certainty that deaths would n t ccur.

> CJ.- Then, in ccndueicn, witness, a last question. The
prosecutor repeatedly asked ycu about documents regarding
which he assumed that they oust have reached the Medical
Inspectorate and must be in the files there. For ex'iiple,
the concluding reports by Hozloehner, Richer and Finke re-

9263


29 J£ayiI-FL-2-2Priaer.u (Int. Brown)
Court No. 1


gprding the freezing experiments , you denied tbet ycu had
;ver seen this report and e large lumber of others* There¬
fore, I should like to ask ycu, dc you know what heppeted
to the files cf the Chief :iedicel Inspector rf the Luft*
waffs ?

At - Cur registry office was in Harzburg in the Herz
Itountains whGnce it was transferred in February from Berlin,
whereas I stayed in Berlin until the middle of April and
then, with the rest of this sm«ll staff of nine, went to
the Tyrol where at the end cf liny wc were taken prisoner#

< 1 ,- Now, what happened to these Herzburg files and the
registry .ffice of the Medical Inspector ?

A.- in the first half of April the office was taken
by American troepst In this oey the files certainly foil
into American hands since later when I wps rt the Aero •Me¬
dical Center in Heidelberg, I received a number of these
files to bo worked vn by avo for the Aoro-Mcdicol Center*
t #r Witness, among the documents jxit in evidence in
this triil have you seen nny dccur,ents that originated from
the files wf the Medical Inspectorate, that is, used for the
prosecution.


Hwi


Dr* TIri . No further questions#

THE PRSSI LENT : Any questions to bo propounded tc this
witness by any defense counsel ?

BY DR. SAUTES (Defense counsel f-r the defendant Ruff and
rppocring also for defendant Romberg) ;

Q.- Witness, yesterday and the day before yoi want in¬
to the experiments with the 1 -w-prcssuro chamber at great
length. However, a few points oust yet be clarified in this
tatter. You said yesterday - - :r maybe it was the day befere


8269


29 :isy-Zi-?L-2-3-Primeau (lot. Brown)

C.urt Ho. 1

yesterday — that when these experiments began with the low
pressure chamber in Decheu in 1342 they h»d been preceded
by :ther experiments which were ^lsc to clarify the problem
for rescue frea great sltitu.des — experiments by Dr. Lutz,
y:u said, Dr. Claannn end Dr. Ec-nzinger. These expcrimc-nts,
y.u said, were carried :ut above 12,COO actors and there
were reports en them but you weren't able t: say whether
these reports cn the preceding experiments were already avni
lnble at the time of the Dachau experiment or net, I should
like tw take my p^int of departure from th-6«. statements
-f y.urs and ask a few qucsti.ns. You mentioned the names
of Doctors Lutz, Clroann and Bcnwingor.

A.- I believe there was ?. little li.nguinistic misjndcr-
st°nJing here. I do not remember having mentioned Dr. Lutz
in this c -nnection. At any rate, I w"s thinking of the name
Lift, who w.rkod with Clcrann or. these problems. However,
those experiments of Luft were ta^de in 1312 and 1343. Clr-
mann h-d w.rkcd on this subject before alone.

Q.- Then let mo ask you something regarding this. In
these experiments with Dr. Luft are you thinking f the oxpo
ritnents which are carried cut by the experimenter with
White mice, instead cf people.

.»•- Those -r_ the experiments that Lutz carried cut.

Ho carried thorn cut with white mic^.

'«• - but tiu experiments you were thinking :f were dif-
foront experiments ?

The luft experiments took certainly pi-cc after ,
the D 0 chau experiments.

And what about the Lutz experiments ? '.'ore they
bof.ro the D-'Ch'ii experiments, *nd when I say Dachau expe¬
riments I am referring t- the experiments Dr. Rur.bcrg
--rried .ut on Dr. Ruffs authority. New the UJtz experi-


8270


29 ’Say-H-FL-2-4-Primeau (Int. Hr.v.n)

Court Nc. 1

ments were white aice instead cf experimental persons. Were
they be fere or after the Dachau experiments ?

/»•- I can't answer that from ay cwn precise knowledge
but only .n the basis the documents and from the documents
it can be seen that apparently these two experimental scries
were carried out acre _r less sicultancously. I believe thet
R-oibor menti-ns in his report that the stucics of Lutz wore
concluded only eftcr his v/erk.

Q.- This is d.cuacnt 402, I believe, the concluding re-
p rt by D.ctcrs Ruff and Re uberg which c-'ne cut <*ftcr the ex¬
periments were c.ncludcd *»nd in this report there is mention¬
ed, if you remember, the fact th*t through Lutz's experiment
the problem ~f rescue fr.m gre-'t heights h*d net been solved
yet. Dc yeu rcu.nbcr that passage in the concluding report
cf Ruff *»nd Romberg ?

a.- That is certainly so. I c-n rcmombGr the Lutz rc-
p.rt to extent.

c*- Dr, Becker, is it still ycur opinion today that Lutz's
experiments, with white mice did net solve yet, the problem
.f rescue from great altitudes ? Is that still year personal
opinion as an expert and specialist ?

That is n~t *nly .my personal opini n but the cpini.n
f scientists in general.

<.•- D: y.u remember that after this report of Dr. Lutz's
it was s. asc-rtained thr.ugh further experiments, particular¬
ly thr.ugh Ruff 6 and Romberg's experiments, that the- c nclu-
si.r.s and results t- which Lutz had c.mc were actually wr'-ng--
n'Mcly, ir. the following respect. In this report v/hich you
Oust oenti.nec Dr. Lutz -- -nd I ra asking yeu if this is
s: — comes to the c.ndusicn thet rescue fr.m grc*t altitudes
-s p.ssibl. only up to the altitude of 15,CC0 meters .to which
-*• is tru<., Dr. Lutz adds. "So far as that can be ascertained


3271


29 lioy-K-FL-2-S-PrL2Ccu (Int. Brown)

C-art Nc. 1

fro a animal experiments." Than other experiments went to much
greater heights and it was seen that rescue was possible from
the60 heights Rise. Is that correct ?

A.- Yes. I c°n corroborate that be ecu sc in 19*4 I, cs
a referent, concerned oys-lf with this pro len but I must
correct you tc this extent. Lutz's c nclusicns reached with
his white mice were certainly correct. However, there is p
difference between a white ocuac and a human being in sueh
smell animals arc very narrow channels and thU6 present
different Cwnditi-ns f:r absorbing and taking care of air
pressure or pressure in general and are thus different from
what rosults in cases <-f larger air passages such as are
f.und in human beings.

Q.-' men I think you are trying to say, Dr.. Backer,
that Dr. Lutz's experiments did n>-t solve the prcblen of
rescue frea great altitudes -- at loc6t did not sclvo it
for human beings. Is that so ?


29 Ifcy 47-J£-S5->l-Iteniels (Brown)

Court No* 1

Yes, that opinion isorrect.

C. Now, how about the experiments carried on by the other two nor.

I mentioned previously, ncmely.Drs. Qlanann endBantfi£cr, In your
opinion , res the prctlem of rescuo fran great altitudes arlvcd oon-
pletoly by the experiments cf »ra. Clamann end B eaZ in^ or , 0 r was
the problem net yet solved by thso experiments in the sprinc oT 191*2?

A. Lot ae refor to what *\iff expleincd from the witness stend record¬
ing this sfcole problem* cndscy thot within the framework of this prob¬
lem es e whole there were two main questions, ^bo question wns, how
does n ran stand explosive doecz^rossi on et ell if ho is in o presaire
cabin in e bcllcn or in on eirplcnc? litre is in thic chcnbcr, first
of ell, o prosairc of 3,r»e or 8,000 aetcra, lot us say. Th> Qlr-
plenc, horever, is tt cn altitude of 15*000 or 20,000 raters, end -
suddenly the ccbln is hirst. Now, tho first question is, whet heppens
to the huz»n being when til of c Bidden this oxploslvo decompression
tokos piece? Cl erne nn end EcnAiger concerned thoasolves with this pmblon
of cjp losive decompression. T odty I ccnnot sty without documentation
Just ct whet dote the vtrious reports thot thoy issued on this problem
ccao outj hit even on the assumption thet those cxporlnonts were ®n-
el"dod before Huff's end Haaterg's oxporinonts began, tho se®nd noin
problem cr question would still not teve been solved, namely, hovr c
hunon boing, when ho hes survived explosive deajmprossicn, ern bo
br-ught down free Q greet cltitudo to lower oltitudea end whet hr.ppons
to hin. *nd this eeccnd question wes, sc fer cs I know, tho problem
which formed tho basis for ^ff's end ikmbcrc'o rcric.

fV The, °r. Becker, in ordor to state this perfectly dearly . you
soy — end if I err, plecsc correct me — there arc two problems ^to
be jclvcd. 9ce is the problem of explosive de-compression, nir.ely, the
problem res: lting wh6n tho pessure cabin in an cirplcne bursts ct e
~rect altitude* end this feet is simulated in the experiment. Thus, the
experiment is designed to discover how c human being reacts to this
ai Men redact lot. in pressure. That is thoproblee of explosive


2$ l£ay icla<Brra)

Ccurt No. 1

doecrr-rosaico.

Noe, if I understood you correctly. Sectors Cl: ora nd Denrin-cr
oonomod themselves pristrily cith thisproblem, in their experiments,

Thon comes the second problem, the -roblcn of hoc tho person who
heatcer. subjects', tc explosive deccr.jresaior., r.nd he survived it, cen
be brought docn fret: this reft altitude to tho T=ur.d cithrut injury?
*s you heve said, Doctors Clrmr.nn end Bc-.zin~cr did r.ot a>lvo this
probltn, end this -rofclea cesthe nt.in a ncerr. of Drs. *\iff 'nd Rcnbcr;;»
this tea the problem they rerc to solve. Is thrt orrcct, sof'r rs.I
cs t loyrxn cc.n undcratind thiaor. iter?

Yoa, you understood me completely, I <c-ldr.orcly add t»: au-® 1 *-
ccc.t1.r7 dcVilai First, thrt %c* ra “uff end lircber ,?. el ar irncrrncd theo-
solvcs with tho prctleo of cxnloaiw. dccmproflaion in experiments on
thccaolvos, I nysc .f atv auch cx-JcrJnor.ta performed by Huff t r.d
Hcnbcrs trd ovon took 7 rt in thorn to c very amt 11 octont.

The aocfr.d edd tion I ahculd like to acko lath-1 es I hrvo clror.dy
sold,Ixio not knew chor. 3 or.*:cr'a cneluding ro^srta were ubllahed.

It nipht heve been beforo t?n Dr.ohcu experiments. I tot Induned to
think it via Iter, tut if thla question la very important, you ®uld
choak up in Heldfltore es tc Juat rhen tfa-ao rererto did cppocr. Ibo
roperta tro there.

c .. ^t Banaln^ar'a rad Claarnn'a ro-ort did not concern ltsolf
with this aocond problem rt r 11 j thi t - s res erred tc Doctors Huff
endnomberc.

K ^ight.

witness, ao thrtyou do not orsit perjury, let me ro-.ind you
cf sccethinfc. Doctcra Benzin-er wn? Clamann did not carry on sir^lv
explosivo decompression experiments, of rhich re hire jus* spoken, but
elao experiments of a different nature, to rit, experiments involvin':
e "rescuo diva", another specialized tern. This is an experiment in
vhiah the flier, stayinc in is plene, in case of dancer, descends at
sreet speed free a great altitude to a lover altitude, rhereaa in


29 Hay 47-ii-S—3-3-Co=iel9(3rorn)
Court Nc. 1


ftiff'a and Romberg's experiments It is thought thet the filer does not
descend In the plene tut leaves the plane and descends by perechute.
Did ycu know thet Dr. Benzinger, I believe, also carried cut exper¬
iments of this sort, and can you state that through this second type
of experiment carried cut by Benzinger the problem which ^iff and Rcm-
berg were trying to solve was still net solved tut still he* to be
solved? Is thet so?

*• I nist give you three ensw-rs tc this question. First, only
Benzinger and not Clamar.n carried out those experiments. Scconily,
Benzingcr'a idea was the follow ngi If a mar. experiences explosive
deanpreasion. lot us aey ot 1? kilometers, tut the airplane is still
maneuvoroble, tho flier can at ill be oxpccted to go through Thatover
nanouvers aro nocessory to brine hie piano down to a lower oltitudo
in a powor dive, or you have to crcato a cccpltcly autmetio
nodionism which, indopondontly of this sudden chango in pressure, auto¬
matically and ritheut tho flior's having to do scything to naninilrto
it, io capsblo of bringing, tho piano down to a loner altitude,

Tho nodical question involvod rosi At tho holght of 19 kllcnctcrs,

In this specific coao, how long dees a flier rorein capable of action?
Thet is on cntlroly dlfferont problem fx^cs tho Toblce thet Doctors
Buff ond Romberg darlficd.

Now I <mo to ny third answer. Through those spool el invest lgcticns
cf BonaJngcr's, the problem thot Ruff erxl Romberg declt with wos net
clarified.

r ., *nd I believo thet Is beceusc in Bonzi amir's experiments the
oirpleno, perti culcrly the cabin , i3 still Intact trri ctr. still be
steered, whereas in Ruff's end Romberg experiments tho flier 1ft
the piano and descended outside tho pleno. Is that jc .

Yes, thet is so.

Q. Do. Becker, It hes been cllegcd thet perechute descents free
air "lanes above 15,0^0 feet -- I repeat, 'feet’ — • ere net undertaker,
in practice. New, in order tc clei r this met ter up, I should like to


29 Key !;7-:i^->$-Dt-ida(3rc*n)

Court Sc. i


eak yai the fo Herrins. D o you kr.ow that even several yecra before the
Second ~crld '~cr ec Italian, I believe kia name c.s Fetal, cacetried
with e stratosphere plere without^*eaaure cabin, only with a pressur¬
ized suit, and he did thlsin erder to sake the plene lighter —
to 17,000 cr 18,200 set era? This, cs I say, rta a c-vert 1 yctra before
the aoccod 'world -er. Did you know that?

a. ff ccurae I did, Ihet is the recognized altitude record rith
airplecea to dote. Tkla nee the Italicn Colonol by tho nano of Tctsi,
fran the Itcllen *ir ?orce Rcaccrch Institute rctr Scce, in Guidonla.
I bclievo this world record era aotin 1937.

0. Thao were oltitudoa between 17,000 and 18,000 actcra?

I believe that tho recognized oltitudo was 17 ,500, but I cn
not auro. -t least over 17,000.


azr*


29 Jfay U7-:^TD-i.-i-Ccok (Inti Brown)

Court Ho, 1

Q Dr. Becker, do you know that in other ways nach grooter heights
bnvo been reache ’, heights of as nuch as 21*,000 noters, at which the
huaan boin* survived?

A Yes, The experiaents woro carried out several tins3. Onco at
the bspinning or the niddlo of the thirties, two American Captains, I
believo Orville Anderson and Albort Stevens, in the Anorican stratos¬
phere balloon Explorer II, reached a height of 17,200 uotersj sono
tine lator the Swiss or Belgian Profossor Piccard with his assistant.

Dr. Kuepfer or Knoopfor, or seno such nano, wont with his stratosphere
balloon to a height of aaao — what noro than 2l*,OCO aotors without any¬
thing happening to then, but, of course, this was in a pressurized
cabin.

Q Do you know, Doctor, that in the poriol that followod, those
altitudes woro oven oxcoodod? I sota to rcr»r.bor a oaso whoro an
altitude of as nuchas 26,000 notors was attainod. I don*t want to
toll you tho none for tlio nocaont. Porhaps you can ronenbor tho nano
yourself. I should profor thnt.

A I cbr-H know that 26 kilonotors was actually reached, but fron
ry activitios as a Roforont I know that tho Goman Rosoarch Institute
for Gliding in Ainring near Salzburg, under tho direction of tho well-
known ooro-.ymnic export and aviation rosoarch nan, Profossor
Georgij, developed an airplane, or rather was in tho courso of lovcilop-
infi it, and this piano was intondod to roach an altitude of 26,000
neters. Howovor, I don*t kmrr whether tho plane actually ovor flow.

That wa3 at tho end of 19UU.

Q Now, Dr. Bcckor, when yew rofloct on Ruff*s and ftanberf-'s
axporicent3, do you agree with no whon I say that on tfio basis of
those oxanplos, an ur.^ont necessity existed in the year 1912 for
solving tho iroblor. of rescue free proat'altitudes, at loast altitudes
as hirh as 20 or 21 kUoaetersj do you as a specialist agree with no
in that assertion or do you not?


3277


29 Vs? L7-V.TD-^-Cook (Ir. -4 Brown)

Court No* 1

A I an entirely in accord with you. Dr. Sautcr.

Q Than Dr. 3ocker, I want to ask yew a few questions about this
lcw-pres3uro chanbar. Do you know who delivered theso low-pressure
chambers?

A Yes, I do.

Q Who?

A They woro all delivered by the 1.0. Zeuzco firr in Frankfurt
on the 'iain.

Q Do you know whether the chaEbors wore delivered ccwmlotoly
roady for use, or woro the chambers when they woro (tolivored not yot
roa'V for uso, and, if so, what was lacking in thon?

A I don't know what you are driving at.

Q I fold that sinply bocauso perhaps sinco I don't know what
you aro drlvii*; at ry answer my bo a little nsido fron tho point. *7olI,
for one thinj tho fira didn't itsolf ranufacturo tho punpa but bought
thon froa other firra. In addition tho oxygon oquipewnt was not nanu-
facturod and not ontiroly installed by this fir=,cnd abovo all tho
intor-con systen, that is, tho tolophono systenj those piocos of
oquipnent woro usually built into tho chanbor later by I.uftwaffo
units.

q Who built thon in? Wero they not built in, on tho basis of orders
fron tho Hodioal Inspoctcrato, by a technical dopartnent of tho DVL —
that is, tho Goman Rosoarch Institute for Aviation — bocauso that
technical dopartnont of tho DVL had the necessary technicians nvail-
ablo, always on orders fron tho "o 'ical Inspoctcrato, that is?

A Yos, tiuxt i3 ri ht, in tho caso of the four low-prossuro chanber

units.

Q The nanufacturo of the low-pressure charbors, including Ahoso
piecos of oquipnent tint woro nissinc, the inter-con systen, the
oxygen systen, and so forth, was not according to you, done by Dr.

Ruff's Inctituto, is that so?


8273


29 May L7-M-A7I>4i-3^Cook (Int. Brown)

Court Ho. 1

k Surely not, because Buff's institute was a medical research
institute! the equipping of tho chamber was surely done by sane
workshop of tho D7L. I don*t know the details.

Q How this mobile low-pressure chamber that cane to Dachau in
Januarj’ or February, 19U2, when it reached the DVL, was this chamber
immediately allocated to Ruff's institute, or was it still under tho
orders of the Medical Inspectorate, that is to say. Prof. Dr. Hippko's
orders?

A Dr. Sautor, I beliovo that that is an economic or logoi
problcn. Just who owns sccothing which has boon allotted to someone
olso but not yet delivered. 3o long as tho chamber was in tho DVL,

Dr. Ruff could of course not disposo of it with comploto froodom, but
if ho had somo spodal pxrposo for tho chonbor, had to got Professor
Hippko's permission.

Q Then tho disposal of tho lc-w-prossuro chamber, oven tho ono at
Dachau, was hold by &•. Hippko as Chief of the "odical Inspectoral,
is that what you are saying, are. if I understand you corrootly Dr.

Ruff coulcl not dispose of it independently but only with Profos 3 or
Hippko's approval, is that what you aro saying?

A That is what I think is tho case. Howovor, I cannot tako
responsibility for tho oconocdc and logoi problons involvod.

Q How, how did this work out in practice? For oxanplo, who
issued ordors for this charter wasto bo sont scrowhcro, thoro had
to bo travel ordors, a directive with ?omission for tho chamber
to be oovo . Mow nho issued thoso orders, *ld Dr. Ruff or hi3
institute issuo thorn, or did tho Medical Inspectorate, or did sons
luftwaffo unit issuo then on ordors from the Medical Inspectorate?

Are ycu personally informed regarding this matter?

A First lot no tall you that of ny - 77 m knowledge I oan toll you
nothin' regarding the conditiora at that tine, because I had nothing
to do with the transportation of these chambers. I can speak only on
tho basis of ny ~encral information. I can say for certain that Dr.


8279


2 9 Ifey U*4S-ATD-&-h-Cook (mu Bro«r.)
Court !fo. 1


Ruff could not sign such travel orders, because that was a purely
military natter, and Dr. Raff, as the head of a purely civilian
institute, had no right to issuo any such nilitary otders, so those
orders aist havo been signed oithor by Hippko himself or by soneono
olso with the necessary nilitary powers who was caoiissioned to do so
by hin.

Q ffow, regarding the right of disposal of this low-pressure
chamber, I should bo interested in tho following: Jhen the chonbor
was in Dachau ready to bo usod for experLunts, who, in your opinion —
your are a doctor, not a lawyer — vhs, in your opinion asRoforont
or the Nodical Inspectorate, had tho right to disposo of tho chamber?
V/ho do torn! nod -bother it stayed thoro or was rmovod, and Dr. Bockor,
before you answer this quostion, lot no lesdnd you of a lottor that
has frtquontly boon roa hero, a lottor fron Prof. Hippko to
Oborgrupponfuohror Wolff of tho SS, I boliovo of 20 May 191#, in
v/hich it is statod that tho chanbor was to bo brought back to Berlin
and was to stay thcro and was to bo usovi for front-lino purposos, but
was not to bo usod by tho S3?

?R. H'.RDY: In view of this last question. Your Honor, I mist object
on tho "round it is a loading quostion. It soorw to no that tho
Defendant has oxhibitod that ho can well tostify for hlnsolf, and undo-
tho circunatancoa it is unfortunato that I cannot cross-oxanino
ur. Sautor. I can only cross-oxanino tho dofondant.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho question is certainly a leading one. The
objection will be sustained. Tho quostion nay bo propounded to tho
witness, but lot hin answer it instead of counsel putting the words
in his nouth.

BY DR. SAUER:

Q Witness, I shall then ask you tho following quostion: Do you
kntfw Hippko*s letter to 'olff s f 20 -'ay 19h2? This is the lottor in
which Hlppkc writes that the low-prossure chamber is not to bo made


8280


1


2? ISay l i 7- , -W.TD-u-5-Cook (Int. Brown)
Court fc* 1


available any longer but is needed for front-line purposesj do you
know this letter?

A I know it, but so that I nay answer ycur question, nay I ask
you to hand ae the docuoont? I don't receefcer it well enough*


8281


29 "ny-H-J?-5-l-Grcse (int. 3r-wn
* Court I

Q. Dr. Seclcor, v u ore r t t" nnswor the «*jc9ti~r. as I nsfcod it
first. Tho Tribunal acid it was a leading quosti n, just answer tho
quest! n I ;sk y'U n«-w, certainly .30 leedinj question, wheth r v u kn-w
th it letter which was fr*quently reed durinc this trial. This is tho
lottor in which "rites that ho conn t mice tho ohanhor avrilnhlo

any 1 re Nicnuac it is needed f r fr-nt line purgeaoa. I huliov' it is
tho lottcr .-f 20 ray ly.Z. T7 it ness, I hav, n o* ;y f the lottor horo.

I soo it is n t o lottor ....

T:G ::j»ID33Ti Comae 1, just su’-nit the lottor t- tho witness,
the ncssenfor will take it t the witness and ash the witness if he is
familiar with tho letter.

D:;. SAUTEI'.i It la n t a lottor fr n HI; 1*0, ns 1 SCO, hut a lottor
fr n Field P rshnl Hiloh. I must c rrc ct nysolf.

... Tot, this is tho infarv.ua lottor hosdod "Doer T7olfy", and I nn
of e'urso, familiar with it.

Q. Dr. Sooker, when y t road this letter when y^u woro a roforont,
whrt e rvclusi n d ycu as nn cx,ort draw fr r this lottor recording who
was ontitled t dis. -so f tho chanbor whilo it was in Docheu? TTas It
tho SS, r tho Cmap Cfrmndor f Dachau, r wh waa it?

A. It soens t mo t ho o r^thor difficult legal i rahlom. Hiloh
anvs, n thr no hand, that tha chnn v or cannot r. rr.in in Dnehnu. Thus,
Field ’Marshal I’ilch is a.j-arcntly nasuninj; that in thie oceo ho, ns
o rc;r aontrtivo f tho luftwaffo, was entitled t toko tho chnmtor nwny
fr r Diohau. But wh w-.s l:relly c-m;otont t dis; so of tho chnnbor
in DcoVu, I ns a fora n n t familiar with leg 1 matters conn't clonrly
soo.

Q. Is there anythin • in the lettor t' tho effect that Dr. Duff
cr hie institute had th.s right f dis, siti<n? Is thoro anything thoro
to indioote that "ilch had n rights in this natter and that *7olff r
the SS had t f t .Tuff? Is that in the lottcr?

A. That certainly is n-<t i- tho letter.


62S2


29 ISiy—IS-JT—5—2—Gross (Xnt» Er* wn)

C tirt I

<3. V thine * th't effect in the lotter?

'Jo, sir.

Then vih-, according t this letter, has this ri ht f dis. sition,
r at lo s* a scenes it. '

At least Field "firsh'.l Filch feels thrt ho has thu rifht to
fetch th; chaabcr away fr t: Dneheu at this dato.

Q. 4.b inspoot r Conor 1 cf tho Luftwaffe.

A. I d n't kn w when he received thrt c -nissin. At any rnto,
ho was State Secretory in the Iloieh Aviati n Vinistrv.

Q. Dr. Seek or, I havo on thor tochnioal qucstl. n which y u surely
con answor. It will ho r*.thor in; rtont t kn w whr.t o rt f oloctr 1 --
enrdi r*" a l h wns used. This is rorhnts inr.rrtent in Dr. lt<ohere's caso.

Day hof- ro vostordr.y I helie-u, y v oxprosead the araunptl n that tho
1-w pressure ohanhor in Dachau was oquippod with a Braun's tuho, o
Cnth-de-ray «%soillo C r«:h. D y.u k-'w precisely whet this nj j-erntus
w.s, tho apparatus that was in th<; lew-j rossur: ch-.n^ort

A. Since I w.s s nt »recent during th sc ex/orinonts Id ntknt*
that. Fron wh/ t Dr. 2'-ifcorg said, I gathered that this w.is nn apparatus
which cnn’-lod hir. t jbsorvo the c rso f the cloctriocl-raphio
r presentstiens f the heart bontc, rnd I sujposo that this Bight hnvo
toon nn o jarotus such r>s was rnnufneturod \v the Viunneso flrn Karajan.

Tho Karajan n «Jol wos o cothcdo-rny oscillograph with a Srr.un'a tuho,

•ut I conn t soy f r sura which mchinu Dr. Jhnbcrf; hod. Thoro ore
c-srt-.in raehin s which d n t poroto witn .rcun's tu’o ' ut still w rk.

It is a vary likely c.njcoturc, but I d n't kn w f r sure.

Q. Is this the so-called Klcino Siemens n.jnrstus? In answering
this quest! n, let re renin^ y u f Dr. 2 nborg's testin ny n tho
stand. At that tiro he said that it was n - vinp ; ir.t f li'*-ht n a
s-mll scr-on. That is what r ’or - said. V w, ;crha s y u will rrwnbcr

that. *• w, is this th- s rt f nachin that y u just r.jnti nod?

A. H , I nust c rroct rrysolf. In this case f the anil scrucn thoro
is a sen?cn r _-t lCxoy-, end this is tho screen vu fir.’ in th. Xloinc


29 12ay-M-Jh-5-c -Or osa (Inti 2r wn)

C urt I

Siencns olcctr cardief-raph.

Q, y by « bacrria^ this n vine 1 int *f lirht rf which Itodbore
s; 'lco in his faatin ny, can no c no t a r-cisc diagn sis f the
c r.diti n f the heart r is thot singly o vacuo indiocti n .f the
honrt retivityt TThot can y u, ai a d-ct< r, toll us about this?

A. riot so <1 ate rstruo what I an o’ -ut t soy os tho testin-ny
• of a hoort socialist because I an n t nc, K wovor, I «*. kn.w n little
ab. ut olectr cordi- graphs. I w uld r. t trust nysolf t- -draw on occurato
diof.n sis a the fcosia f th s n-viar p. int . f lifo.

Q. Last qe.-sti n, witnoss, ro,rnrdin,* tho hor rutor. Did this
bir rotor have nrj> technical C ' nnocti n with tho yunja? ’Jos it nttachod
to the .-unps, or whoro woe It instollcd f r tho . urj. sc -f noasurinc
altltudo?

A. There was n diroot tcohnical r rochnn*cal ornnocti-n totwoon
tho v "r nrtor and tho ,uapa. That con bo soon fros tho foot that tho
punps w oro in a difforont truck fr n tho truck in whioh tho chanter was,
and, f c urso, tho tor no tor was in tho 1 -w pressure ohnn'-or itself,

Q. I horo n furthor questi ns. Hr. Irosidont,

r.rrz fo;» r.oss*

Q. Dr. Bockor-Froys> ng, in yur er ss cxnninatl n, witnoss, y u snid
tint tho rosoareh nssi,-.nr*jnts nf tho !!odicrl Ins.oct rr.to that did n t
c ncorn oviati n nodical quosti* ns ri,-lnatod fr r. Itoforat 219 f tho
IVjdicnl Inspectorate. Fra the w rd " ri -inat< d" no understands that tho
initiative was t- kon by th*. t lieforat ir. issuing those research nssi ,'mponts.
*ref. Ts.aa c- nsidors that statorent inc rroct and c nfr nts y u with
tho fact that s fbr as ho kn.ws n sin^lo hy.iono research nssi^nrwnt,
p articularly r. r.o to Iref. Il^sa, was issued -a tho initintivo X tho
?!odio«l Ir.spoct rate; rather, those research assiyn-nonts with ut oxco ; tion
riijinatod in a n aj.j licati'n a the . art f the research nan in quostiv-n
hinsolf. Do y u wi3h t su; plcnont r c rroct tho ststonont yu nado
ir. erflas-oxaninnti n a tho v asis f this inf nonti r. fr-n Ir-f. :{r S o 2


323L


29 ••oy-Jt-JT-E-'l-Gf-ss (Int. Brown)

C urt* I

A. Of c urso, I unf- rtunatoly dc nrt ha no tho rorhotln r-cord
of what I sold in er'-ss oxaninnti n tefcro no n.-w, txit I very nuch daibt
whether I actonlly said what y u Just said I said. In s-i nany words
let no richt away correct a nisteko that y u nado in nenin C a eocene.

Yu said esaienponta t- "rofossor 2cse, rad y u naan rrefossor Eaejon.

Q. Yes. that is ri-ht.

A. Thor., when I was speaking of tho Heforct far Hyciono in er««s
oxaninaticn, I was openkiiv; mly of o wry few hyciono roscarch ossiennonts,
and n t oil rcsoaroh nssienronts that awro n t aviati n nodical as*Un-
oentsj end finally, if I really said that rosoorch assignments tc Enn C on
roally riginatnd with tho Itofcrnt f r Hyciono, then what I noant to
soy In this ocimoeti.n was that the actual w. rk tho opinion oxproased by
tho licforont, was done Vy tho hyciono .Toforont. X, h wovor, dr net
know whothor tho assipr^nt t Hnneon was issued on Haap-n's application
or beoauso tho Roforont for Hyciono c nsidcrod it nooossery, but, oocord-
in C to tho general custcn, it is tho n«st probably thing that Hoa C on
opppliod t tho Jtodicnl Inspectorate f r the nssipwont, 9nd 1 b * 41#v0
this questi•n c uld be cloorod up <nco and f r all if Haopon w uld
tostify on it hlnsdlf.


3285


»


25 ray-l-z-JP-o-l-Zarrov (let. Breve)

Court I

* f

<. *nd one ether point, briefly. In the redirect exariration you
e*id that you had seen no docusenta here that originated from the files
of the --edical Inspectorate in Harsburg, but the so-called "greon folders"
containing the reports on.the Consulting Conferences, w»ich wore submitted
by the rrosecution, come from those Harxtwrg files, That can be
ascertained iron the races on the covers cf these folders, entries by
hand in tho text, etc. ^oos that give you any reason tc wish to correct
the statesent ycu gave your counsel before?

a. I can't correct it, because I have nowr soon the green folders
of which ycu are pseaklng in the original, and there is no start) of t ho
radical Inspectorate on tho copies that the Prosecution put in ovidonco.
Since cany thousands of these reports wore issued, I supposed that tho
copy might have coce froi sccewhore elso. however, if you toll me
that there la a etacp or a naco of soco Berber of tho staff of the
nodical Inopoctorato, then I a^st correct cy testimony.

<. So further questions.

7n2 pBJSI^BSTi The Tribunal will bo in rocoss for a few momonts.

U recess was taksn).


8286


29 May k7-y-.'.TD-7 & 5-1-Meeier. (Int. Frank)

Court No. 1

TIE MARSHAL! The Tribunal is again in session.

THE PRESIDENTS -Are thoro any further questions to be propounded
to the witness by any other defense counsel?

DR. GIlif: (Representing Dr. .lille, defense counsel for Dr. Waltz)
’.’fitness, durin: cross oxanination, you described how in Juno of 19li2 jou
were present at a discussion between Drs. Hippko and Raschorj now
during that conference and in ycur presence did the namo Woltz cone
up at all?

TIE WITNESS: In rprosonco, no.

DR. GIUl: Thank you very such. Thank you. Mr. Pros!dent.

TIE PRESIDENT: Are thoro any questions by any other defense counsel
or any questions by tho Prosecution concerning the subsoquont exami¬
nation of tho witnoss?

HR. HARDY: Dr. Bockor-Froysong, do you have any knowlodgo as to
whothor or not in tho yonr of 19h3 Dr. Raschor rocoivod another
pros sure clvurtoor at Dachau for fur tho r exporinontation ns solicited
in the Siovor'a diary for tho yoar 19U3?

TIE WITNESS: No, I havo no knowlodgo of that, but considering
ovorything that I know I think that it is absolutely out of tho quostion
that Raschor roceivod yot another prossuro chanbor.

HR. HVRDT: Did your offico or did you havo cognizanco of any othor
correspondence which nay havo originated from Raschor or Siovors
rogardinr the allocation of apressure c hasher to Dachau in 19U3?

THE WITNESSi Eithor during z& direct or cross examination, I said
that*, during tho winter of 19U2 to 19U3ny dopartnont chief asked no
to define ny attitude in writing briefly rorardin*; tho question of
whether a sub-pressure chamber convoy ccwld be handed over to-Raschor.
The requisite fom I did not see, it nay havo boon done ovor tho tolo-
phono or it nay havo been done in writing, nor can I say that it cano
from Slevers, Wolff, Raschor or Hinder and whether there was a tele¬
phone call or letter I cannot soy.


8237


29 ”ay 1:7-?W«TD- 7 & 3-2-;Scchan (Int. Frank)

Court Ho* 1

!H. SJBffs Do you have anythin', further to add to that?

TrS ' 'ITSSS: oil, with rovard to whet I havo alroac^ said upon
this point in tto direct or cross examination when I described the story
in detail, I also said that I, as an assistant referent who had to doal
with lew pressure chamber questions, had to ' ivo an opinion to tho
effect that no low pre3suro chambers were available, further 1 havo
nothin to add,

•B, H.JIDY: Dr. Becker-Froyson", in the course of your examination
wo havo hoard your position in ro- ard to nodical othicsof experimentation
on hunan boi:* s. If I recall correctly, ycai statod that experiments
on huren boinr.s shoul-' not bo conducted until such time as tho rcsoardi
on animals ha’ boon exploited to tho last io~rocj is that corroct?

TK.5 .irCSS: I consider that it is an obvious . ro-roquisito for
oxporir»nts on hunan bcin-.s that ono would first attompt to solvo tho
problcn as far as possible by animal oxperinonts.

•B. H.RDI: Do you apply that also to tho field of tho hiph altitude
rosoarch?

TJE /ITKESS: Ho toubt, cortainly.

!!?.. H’.?.TT:: Dr. Sautor quostionod you concomin tho animal oxpori¬
nonts of Dr. Lute and Dr. '-’ondt and roforrod to tho docunont Ho. Ii02,
which is in document book 2. I havo a point to briiy- out to you, which
is on pa . a 96 of tho Sn-lish docunont book 2, docunont No. Ii02. Doos
tho interpreter havo that; pa~o 96?

7H3 IHISRPRBT3R: Too.

?R. HARDY: It is tho »ara;raph in tho niddlo of the pa;:c, bo-inninr
with tho words.

"Boforo wo *;o into a discussion on the f a l ll p exporinonfs, it soens
ossential for us to cite tho work of Lutz and "endt on Ljiimal Zxpori-
nonts on Parachuto Ampin, fron rossuro Cabins*. Unfortunately,

this work was not available to us durin: the experiments so that wo
ccul J not build upon tho valuable results contained in it and d.orivod
fror. numerous animal experiments, or upon the experience of the authors."


29 I'ay U7-JW.TD-7 & 8-3-i Meehan (Int. Frank)

Court No. 1

Fron that passage, a-. Bocker-Froysong, is it not obvious that
Drs. Raff and Rorberg conducted their experinents with rdforrinn to
work on animals or without having previously workod thensolvos on
aninals?

THE ~ITJESS: .'ith rcfercnco to that, I woild like to say the
followin'-. The report to which Crs. Ruff, Ronborg and Raschor aro
referring to in this caso is merely the report nade by lutz and 'on-lt
and the Air Dopartnont wasnot concornod with this, at loast fron the
translation I hoard fron tho words Lutz being nontionod. Intz?

I!R. HARDT: Yes, that is correct.

TIE 1TIESS: ...Then I consider fron Drs. Ruff and Ronborc
oxaninations that thoy thensolvos in thoir institute of Adlorshof
had carried out oxporinonts on aninals *i th reference to this I'arti¬
cular field arvl that thoy had also carriod out certain initial infor-
r^tivo oxForinonts. Finally, I do not boliovo you can reproach any
scientist when anothor scientist who has had nado similar oxporinonts
in a sinilar Hold, if tho other scientists work is unknown to him
arxl if thoroforo tho original sciontist conduct his original axpori-
nonts without being ablo to utilize tho work of tho other sciontist. I
think tho nodical export of tho {rosocution will confim it that in
extraordinary nunbor of nodical works you will find statenonts to tho
effect that during the tiro I carried out ny work, I gained knowlodgo
of work boing carriod out in tho noantino by sonoono olso." This will
always happon and you cannot rai3o a singlo filler to prevent it.

MR. HARDY: Daring your tostinony before Dr. Sauter in direct
oxani nation hero this no min-, ho took tho position and a3kod your
opinion as to *.bather or not tho aninal experinents carriod out by Lula
had solved tho problem; you stated that the cxporinantal conditions,
under which Lutz carriod out his work on aninals, did not solvo tho
problem. Is it not apparent free this report that Ruff anil Roriberg
had no knowledge whatsoever of experinantal work on aninals and
therefore ttey could not determine whether Lutz and <’endt had solved

I


6289


29 Hay L7-M-..TD-7 & S-L-iteehan (Int. Frank)
Court *fo. 1


tte problem, Inaaraich as they state hero, "Unfortunately this work
was not available to usa duripg thcso experiments, so that wo could net
build upon the valuable results contained in it?"

THE v/ITNESS: T/ell, this would show that the authors of this report
only learned of Lutz and Vendt»s work after they had conplotod their
own exporinonts.

!$. HARDY: Thank you, I have no further questions.

Tffi PRESIDENT: If thero aro no further questions to bo propounded
to the witness, counsol ray proceed.

BY DR. TIPP:

Q Mr. Pro si dent, only two none questions arising fron tho
quostions which ry colloaguos put. First of all, a quostion. Dr. Beckor.
You said this nomii\; whon Dr. Sautor quostionod you that you hod
loamod fron Ronbcrg’s roport how tho oloctro-enrdiograph irorkod
during tho exporinonts at Dachauj nay I ask you in ordor to cloar up
this .Tcasuro that roport you woro roforring to and whon did you gain
kn^rlodgo of those roports?

A In that enso, I was roforring to tho roport which Dr. Ronborg
had nado fron this witnoss stand boro whilo boing interrogated.

Q Thoroforo, you woro rot thinking of tho roports fron an oarlior
date as ono night concludo you did?

A No.

Q In that case, ono noro quostion arising fron tho question which
! : x. Hardy just touched upon, nanoly tho transfor of the low prossuro
chanbor to Dachau, which was supposed to havo boon carried out in 19li3.
?{r. Hardy wa3 caking reforcnco to ontrio3 in Siovors* -nary. Unfortu¬
nately tho ’ocuncnt is not before ne at this noraant and I cannot
ascertain tho document nurbor. Tho interpreter nay bo able to help no
in that connection.

A It i3 docuocnt 538, Exhibit 122. Unfotumtoly I cannot tell you
the page. Exhibit 122.


8290


29 May U7-*W.TI>-7 & 8-5-Meehan (Int. Frank)
Court No# 1


Q Could you plooso toll =e what do cure nt book it is in, I think it

is 3.

A It is an appendix to 3, I an afraid this is all I can say.

Q gut, you have tho document before you. 7/culd you bo good onough
to clarify this and to road just what Siovers said in regard to tho
high altitude oxporirents at Dachau. Perhaps in order to naintain con¬
tinuity you can start with tho boginnln: and thon road tho subsequent
paragraph.

A I havo only a brief extract hero, an extract fron tho scientist's
diary of tho Ahnonorbo Socioty for 19b3, kopt by tho Roichs Manager SS
Standartonfuohrcr Siovers, undor No* 8 #

Q Bxcuso t n, witness, but would you rdnd tollinr; ao just what

tho dato of this ontry was?

A Unfortunatoly I cannot tell you tho date, :jy docunont doos
not show it, but thoro aro thoso words, "Continuation of Low Prossuro
Chanbors."

Q Dees tto docunont show Just what wo wero coneomod with thoroin,
in other words on what occasions was that roproducod in Siovors' diary?

A As far as I know tho entry was nado in connoction with tho con-
foronco betwoon siovors and Raschor on an inquiry Raschor nado to
Siovors.

Q !!r. Presidont, I can cloar this up. It is 6 March 19U3, tho
roforenco is nado to a conference between Raschor and Siovors during
which a raimbor of points aro listed. Under No. 8 of this point of tho
conference thoro is nontlon of tho continuation of tho low prossuro

oxporinonts. You cannot draw any othor conclusion fron this entry

*

excopt that it was a conversation between Raschor and Siovors.

»!R. HARDYt I request the Tribunal to instruct Dr. Tip? that that
is an argument and camot bo taken up at this placo.

THE PRES IDE NT: I think that is Deroly an explanation of tho iocu-
nent and ho did not state the contents of the ctocunent at all. Counsel


8291


29 liay U7-H-ATI>-? & t-6-Heeban (Int. Frank)
Court No* 1


nay proceed*

DR. TIFT: Mr. President, I have no further questions to this
>.ltness. If I nay have the pomission of the Tribunal, I would like to
continue with the presentation of docuaonts and tho witnoss nay bo
excused.

THE PRESIDENT: Did you understand tho ruling of tho Tribunal?

You can pro coed with tho question! ng of tho witnoss, did yew or did
you not understand tho objection by tho prosocution was ovorrulodj
did you understand?

DR. TIPP: I understand !!r. Prosidont, but throur* tho‘explanation
I have assunod and tho addod tostinony of tho witnoss, tho quostion is
cloarod up and I don't think thoro aro any furthor questions necessary.
In conclusion I want to ask you. Dr. Boekor, you probably ronaibor
tho contents of tho Siovors* diary, do yai agreo with ny intorprotaticn
that this is noroly an extract of a eonforcnco botwoon Siovors and
Raachor which doos not show anything about tho continuation of tho
oxporinonts?

THE .ITNESS: That is r$r opinion *>o. At any rate, I an absolutely
convineod that in 19U3 no low ;iro3Suro chanber was ovor a Rain novod
to Dachau.

D*. TIPPt Again, in that ceso. Hr. Prosidont, I havo no furthor
questions to tho witnoss.

THE PRESIDENT* Thoro being no further questions to bo propounded
to tho witness, tho defondant Becker-Froysonr is oxcusod from tho
witnoss stand and nay rosuno his place.


8292


2 ? Mry-M-ie-9-I-Gros5 (Int. Frank)

Court Ko. I.

THE PRESIDENT: I understand, counsel, the defendant Bcckor-
Frcysong will not call as a witness Eugen Haagen. His nano was 1istod
as a witness for the defendant Bockor-Froysong on the witness sheet of
May 27 th.

DR. TIPP: That is quite right. Hr. Frosident, and I can clear
up this point. I agreed with Mr. Hardy that in order not to interrupt
the sea water case the witness Haagen will not bo called until tho
whole soa wntor caso has boon cooplotod, after the examination of Dr.
Schaofor has been completed, as well as Beiglbocck.

THE PRESIDENT: I Just waited to see that nothing wr.s overlooked.
Counsol nay proccod.

DR. TIPP: Mr. President, tho noxt docunent which is offered on
behalf of tho dofondant Bockor-Froysong has oxhibit no. 32. It is con¬
tained in Docunent Book III and is Bockor-Froysong Document 1:8. May I
now continuo with subnitting tho documents from Book III and it is no.
U9. I should liko to offor it ns oxhibit 33«

MR. HARDY: May it ploaso tho Tribmnl, I have throo or four
docunent books and Dr. Tipp has several docunonts to introduco fmn
onch book and I don't want to interrupt tho continuity of his caso or
tho soquonco of his caso but it would bo ooch aoro convoniont if ho
would introduco the affidavits and docunonts through each book and con-
pie to the introduction of Docunent Book 1, then 2, 3# and h in that
order if possible and I could follow so much nore rapidly and could
intorposo ay objections without too auch difficulty.

DR. TIPP: I don't think this difficulty will arise. I an only
going to subnit the remaining docusents froa Docunent Book III. As far
as tho remaining documents in 1 and 2 which have not been offored in
evidcnco, these are documents concerned with experiments on human beings
which arc inpossible to offer now, in accordance with the ruling of tho
Tribunal all docuaents which were meant to be submitted since Prosec¬
ution has recognised the inportancc of the exporinents. Therefore, as
I said I will turn to docua;nt U9 in Document Book III on f&go 210 and


8293


29 lfcy-lMS-9-2-Gross (Int. Prank)

Court Ho* I*

I shall call it Exhibit 33. It is an affidavit dated Hi February 1947
and it is merely being offered in order to show that a nunbor of thirty
high ranking officers of the Goman Air Forces were having confidence
in Bccker-Freysong and Professor Schrocdor to tho effect that thoy wore
carried out on strictly huaano principles. I don't propose to road
this docunont.

HR. HARDY: Sfay it pleaso tho Tribunal, I have agroed with Dr.
Tipp. I will not object to its introduction in ovidonco ovon if it
does not ncct with tho previous regulations of tho Tribunal. It doos
not have a jurato, isn't in good fora. I do not wish to object and v
wish to have it admitted but wish to roservo tho right to objoct in
the futuro.

THE JRESn)E.vr: Tho record will show counsel's reservation to
tho right to objoct in tho futuro.

DR. TIPP: Now I shall, >tr. ft-osident, submit tho document frera
tho soao docunont book, pago 213, Bockor-Froysong Docunont 50, and 1
will call it Exhibit #3b« It is an affidavit from a clergyman Dr.
Ooatroichor fron Hoidolberg datod 23 Deccnbor 191:6. This witness con-
fims in this docunont that ho know Dr. Bcckor-Froysong intimately
sinco 1928 sinco ho had boon a friend of his son and ho was a rogular
visitor in tho house of this witness at the tine his son was at tho
university. I should liko to quote paragraph d fron tho first page:

"I an ablo t hero fore to testify that Dr. Hornann Bockor-Froysong
had a truo Christian conviction and dovotod hinself to an irreproach¬
ably pure way of lifo. As a physician he was filled with tho highest
sonso of responsibility, and only tried to help his pationts. In ny
opinion Dr. Hcraann Bockor-Froyseng had a Christian character and
never did anything against his conscience."

Paragraph c deals with tho reason for Dr. Beckor-Freyscng join¬
ing tho Party aixl the witness says that Beckor-Frcysend told hin ho had
cerely done this because the Party was based on Christian principles and
had promised to relieve the great unemployment and need of tho masses.


8294


29 May-JME-9-3-Gross (Int. Frank)

Court So. I.

This is paragraph 3.

I should like to turn to page 2 of the document: "Liko so nany
othors, ho, too, ras disappointed in this trust, and abstained thoro-
foro iron any political activity. Ho never agreed to what was called
later the national socialist outlook on life either in theory or in
practice, but as I learned in 191*5 after a prolonged conversation with
hin, he regained unalterably faithful to his cbtistian conviction."

Then follows the signature and tho certification.

The next document I should liko to offer is Bockor-Froysong No.

51 from tho sans Docuccnt Book on pogo 215. I shall call it Exhibit
Bockor-Freysong 35. It is an affidavit fron Profossor Dr. Albort Dour
who was a rosidont of Hoidclborg, dated 30 Dococfcor 191*6. Dr. Dour
doscribos theroin that ho had known Bockor-Froysong as a school boy and
that ho had continued to noot hin during his university tin© and tho
boginning of his nodical career. I should liko to quoto free paragraph
2 of this docunont, tho last sontenco on tho first pagos "Ho wants to
create, not to dostroy, and his nodical offorts can only bo diroctod
towards helping, 1 waling and saving".

I shojld like to continuo ny quotation urdor paragraph 3, tho
socond sontenco* “I consider it inpossiblo that ho could ovor have
takon pert, on his own responsibility, in any wrong doing or any kind
of i ab man o bohavior, and if, as Stabsaret of tho rosorvo, ho was on-
trustod because of his activity with sono special tasks, ho is suro to
have carriod then out only as tho good nan ho always was."

Tho final paragraph of tho docunont assumes that tho witness
hinself has not boon a nenbor of tho HSDAP and that sinco Dccocbor 19l*5
had boon working with tho peraission of tho Military Government. Thcro
follows tho correct certification.

Tho next docunont is on pc go 217 of tho Docunont Book, Docunont

52 of Becker-Freysong and I shall call it Exhibit 36. It is an affid¬
avit of tho wo11 known physiologist professor Dr. H. Ruin at Goettingen
dated 21 January 191*7. After tho usual introduction tho witness states


8295


29 lfcy-K-KB-9-UGross (int. Frank)
Court No. I.


under paragraph 1 - and I should like to quote;

"I nevor thought Dr. 3ecker-Freysong capable of c emit ting Q
crirc against hunanity as ho never gave ze any cause to think so
either in his conversation or by his behavior. I was surprised to
hear that ho was arong tho Hamburg defendants and to this day I aa
entirely in tho dark about how ho mdo hinsclf guilty."

The subsequent paragraph undor 2 contains tho statement to the
offect that Dr. Bockor-Freyscng had intervonod for a scientific book
which was to bo prohibited in Gcmany since tho introduction had boon
written by a Jowish author. I don't went to quoto from this paragraph.
Paragraph U on tho noxt page I should liko to quoto if I nay.

"Dr. Bockor-Froysong conducted oxperinonts on hinsolf to tho
very linit of tho possiblo; ho oxperixontod, for instanco on hinsolf
for days with oxygon poisoning to tho point of pneunoniaj thoso expori-
nonts were oxcoodingly elucidative and thoroforo noritorioua for tho
whole nodical scionco."

I should also liko to quoto tho last paragraph in ordor to throw
additional light on tho personality of tho dofondant and tho witness
says, and I quoto;

"I nysulf havo boon affirnod by Jiilitary Govcmncnt as tho Rector
of the University of Goottingon, os a norher of the scientific advisory
cconittoo for tho British Zone and as tho oditorin chiof of Flat-Re
views for Fhysiology."

And tho signature is once again followed by tho proper certification.


Court So. 1

29 May 47-M-lO-l-iEM-Ierrov (Frank)


The next document I should like to offer you will find on pege 220
of the document took. It it Becker-Treysong Document Ho. 53, vhich I
■kail give the exhibit nunber 37. It la en affidavit free Dr. Front
ruechncr of Freiburg dated 22 January 1947. I ahould like to etote in
suppleaentation that Dr. Buechner has, of course, been auoted repoatodly
during thia trial. Under figure one of thle document Dr. Buechner
describes, to begin with, hi* persoaality. He eaye that ho hlneolf hae
neither boon a center of the Party or any of ite aeeoclated organitatlone
end that during tho tine of the Third Reich, becaueo of hie poeitlon
towarda the national eocielietic doctrino, he vne subject to pcraocutlon.

I ahould llko to cako a brlof quotation froo figuro 2:

"I net Dr. Beckcr-?royaox« whoa ho vas an aaalatnnt at tho Institute
for Aviation Medicine of the Reich Mlniatry for Aviation in Borlin, if
ceaory aervea. In 1938. During tho var vc wero in freouent official con¬
tact, when I vns In charge of aviation aattora and pathology and he
repeatedly vlalted ae in Freiburg, partly for the renaon that he worked
with =y aaaiatanta Llebegott and later Plchotka on a n Inal erperlnonto
regarding oxygon poisoning. Sevoral tiaoa ho had lunch or dlnnor in ay
houao. I therefore conalder cgrself Qualified to givo an opinion as
reoueatod on Dr. Beckor-Freyaeng fros tho 'gonerol, huoan and profoeoional
point of view'.*

Tho witness then continues to deecrlbe how Dr. Beckor-Froyeong,
because of kla personal attitude and his Christian education, rosalnod
true to these characteristics and he describes hin as "open-ainded,
roliablo and very correct" in official setters and ho describes his as a
■dentist who, during exoericents on hinself and aniaal exuerinenta, had
achieved great results. The witness states how far he had authority to
sake decisions of hie own and the signature, as usual, is followed by
the required certificate by a notary.

The next exhibit I ahould to offer is the Docunent Becker-Froyscng
So. 54 on page 222 of the docunent book and I will call It Exhibit Ho. 38.
It is an affidavit fros Professor Hernann Koeoke of Koidelberg, dated 27


8297


Court So. 1

29 Kay 4?-M-10-2-I£X-iCarrov (Track)

Decester 1946. I should like to cuote free this docuaent where Professor
Eoepko says, after the usual introduction:

"Dr. Becker-Freysecg vus a student of nedicine in Heidelberg fron
1929 to 1932, and as such attended all my lectures and courses. Since I

9

respected hin very such as a talentod and industrious pupil, I invited
his several tiaos to ay house. Dr. Becker-Treyseng has stood by mo since
that tiae and later always visited vith ay wife and ne whenever he was in
Heidelberg. Ho did that in spite of his knovltdgo that ay wifo was holf-
Jovish and that the Satis had dismissed ae from ay office as a univoroity
profossor for this reason."

Tho witnoss states, and I continuo to ouoto:

"In Daceetor 1937 he revioved, in the aagazlno 'Gyanastlc and Folk
Dances', 12th year, 12th issue, =y book published in 1936, 'Tho Mueclco
of tho Hunan Body and Their Play'. I have tho copy at hand. Tho follow¬
ing eontoncos aro inforaative: 'Hermann Koepkc dedicated tho work...to
his pupils. I was fortunate onough to be ono of thoa... Ae a tokon of
gratitude to ay ttachor I boliove that I should direct the attention of
German gymnastic circlos to this book.'■

I think I night say in connection vith this docuaent, Hr. President,
that after all it takes Quite sece ccurego and faith in on old tonchor
for a Gorman scientist in tho year 1937 to oppress so openly his faith
in a aan who is being persecuted on racial grounds.

Tho next docuaent I wish to offer is Bocker-Troyscng Ho. 55, but
tho following docuaent I don't want to offer. It doosn't actually offer
anything new and would merely mean unnecessary burden both to tho Tribunal
and to tho record. It li6ts points which other affidavits have alroady
proved aoro clearly and efficiently. So, therefore, I will not.offer
Docuaent Ho. 55, but the next docuaent I would like to offer is Becker-
Treyseng Ko. 56, page 225 of the document book. I shall Bake it Exhibit
39. It's an affidavit froc -rofcssor Eerl Matthes of Erlangen, dated tho
18th of January, 1947, and I should liko to give a brief cuotation freo it.
After the customary introduction the witness says, and I ouote:


829S


Court Ho. 1

29 Ha;. - 47-*_i(>_3-i£M-Zerrov (Frank)


"I certify that Professor Dr. Hernann Bccker-Froyseng, in his
capacity as scientific consultant for the chief of the Medical Service
of the Luftvaffe, always supported =e in =y scientific work =ost appreci¬
atively though he knsv that I was affected by the then racial laws
because of ny wife's ancestry.

"Zvon in 1945, when for racial reasons I was threatened to be callod
into e work cenp, he pronised ce the support of his office."

That's the ease point which was proved through the provious affidavit.
Tho signature is once again followed by a notary's certificate.

The next docusent I would like to offer is Becker-Freyseng No. 57
which you will find on page 226 of tho docusent book. I should like with
your pornisslon to give it Zxhlblt No. 40. This is on affidavit fron
Dr. Josef PichOtka, dated tho 20th of January, 1947. The witness
describes, to begin with, how ho got to know Dr. Bockcr-Freyscng nnd ho
says, following the usual introduction:

"I havo known Dr. Hcrnann Bockor-Froyscng slnco 1940. We got to
know each othor because tho fiolds of our scientific activities wore tho
ease. In tho course of tine theso relations becaso consistently closor
with tho result that wo sonetines worked in direct conjunction and voro
closo frionds.

"As to ay political attitude, I want to stato that, because of ny
anti-Nnsi attltudo, I was exoosed to persecutions during the wholo of ny
period of studies - this is officloi/recorded in a lottor of the Univer¬
sity of Freiburg. In Decesber, 1944, using a weapon contrery to ordors,

I rescued a parachuted American aimer, free a crowd of people vhich
wanted to hang hia. The proceedings against ne were cuaehcd."

I go on and continue to quote:

■Because of ny close relations with Dr. Bcckor-Freyseng we very fro-
auently discussed the burning problens of this tine. Froa these conver¬
sations I know his strong antipathy towards the neny National Socialist
nachinations; he elveys abhorred in particular the inhumanities which
resulted free the consistent application of National Socialist idoolo©’.


8299


Court No. 1

25 May 47-K~10--j£X-errov (Frank)


As I knew his attitude free several conversations, I turned to hin in
1944 in connection with the case of a half-Joviah friend of nino."

Then the witness goes on to describe, and I quoto:

“At that tine this friend. Dr. Franz Froehllch, now living in
Keidelberg-Handtchuhsheia, Kirchgasse 4, was a nodical student at the
Institute where I was an assistant doctor. It is true that, for the
nost part, nobody troubled hin, but ho had no Incone and w»s always sub¬
ject to the danger that one day ho w»ild be put into a caap or that, at
least, ho would lost tho right to go on working at the institute. I
thoreforo appoaled to Dr. Bcckor-Frcyseng to try, with the help of his
official influence at the Medical Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe, to
procuro for Froohllch a ooraanent post at tho Institute for Aviation
Kcdlcino In Freiburg. Dr. Bcckor-Troysong pronisod his support. Shortly
afterwards Dr. Frrnz Froohllch did, in fact, obtain a permanent post
at tho Instituto of Aviation Kodiclno inFroiburg."

I would liko to add ayself that that is Profossor Buechner's insti¬
tuto.

I should liko to cuoto tho final paregraph of this docunont:

“For his fairness in scientific natters, too, Dr. Beckcr-Froyeong
deserves ny highost ostoen. Eo never aonopolizod an idea or a rosult as
so frequently haunens. I an in e position to Judgo this osoccially voll
as we worked for years on the sane subject." _ —

Tho noxt docunont I should like to offor is 3ockcr-Froyoeng 58,
which you will find on page 228 of the docunent book, and I will give it
exhibit No. 41. It is an affidavit froc Dr. Linda Vunderlich in Stutt¬
gart, datod the 21st of December, 1946. I should like to briofly state
that Mrs. Wunderlich was a colleague and physician together with Dr. .
Beckor-Frcysong at the Robert Koch Hospital in Berlin which ^s under
Professor Dr. Daunich's control, who too has already given an affidavit
on Dr. Becker-Freyseng's behalf. I would like to ouotc fron approxi-
aetoly the niddle of the docunont:

"It struck ne especially that Dr. Becker-Freyseng had nuch synpnthy


3300


Court So. 1

29 May 47-M-10-&-EEX-£errov (Frank)


vith the patleata and always ahowed deep understanding, even towarda the
aoat difficult ones. He did cot indulge in conversations of a political
nature and so I do not know whether he belonged to a:$* organization of
the SSDAP. I never say Dr. Becker-Freyseag in unlforn either."

In order to elucldato, I should like to state that, of course, the
witness is thinking of a Party unifora and not the Gernan arced forces
unifora.

I continue ay quotation:

"Iron his conversations on setters of cedical ethics it was
apoarent that his ideas were not influenced by tho Hational Socialist
conceptions of aedicine."

Then follows the cuetocary signature and certificate.

The next docuaent I should like to offer is Secker-Jreyseng No. 59
which is on page 230 of tho docuaent book and which I will give tho
Exhibit No. 42. It is an affidavit froc Dr. Hans Denser of Alboun/
Sauorlond, dated the 2Srd of January, 1947. Dr. Donzor describes first
of all, aftor tho custooary introduction, what his activities were and
he soys that since tho 4th of January, 1946, he has boon the head of the
Reich Institute for Fishing, Director of tho leeching and Research
Institute for Trout Breeding ard of the institute for Fishing Drainago
in Albaun/Sauerland. He states that tho British Military Govorncont had
confirncd his in this position. Under the following flguro 1 the wit¬
ness statos:

"Since 1940 the Medical Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe continuously
sent so research tacks concerned with 1 corporative physiological high
altitude erperinents on an l cals. 1 During these investigations I intro¬
duced now ways and rears of exocrinerting on anlrale which had been
reported to the public as veil, o.g., In the Periodical for Aviation
‘ledicine and the Clinical Weekly, Voluae 21, page 126, 1942. Thoso
oxoorinents were to serve general physiological knowledge and had there¬
fore no direct rilltary-econocic purpose. I sent the rice which I had
inbred especially for the purpose to nur^rous institutes and scientists.


Court So. 1

25 May 47-H-lG-6-Za(-Xarrov (Track)


"2. Dr. Becker-Treyseng has supported oe since 1941 as Assistant
Specialist (Eilfsreferent) and free 1944 as a specialist for aviation
cedicine in nunerous cases."

Shea I'll just briefly explain the other points. Ke says that Dr.
Becker-Freyseng helped bin to get test aninals and the witnese draws
your attention to the fact that rabbits were supplied by Dr. Suchalla
to Dr. 3ecker-Treyseng vfco is the sane nan who has already testified
regarding the use of rabbits for exoerinental ourposes and has alroady
given that affidavit.

Under paragraph b the witness states that Dr, Beckor-Treysong was
always interested in anlaal expericents and several tiaos aade sugges¬
tions during conversations.

I should like to quote froa paragraph c:

"Dr. Bocker-Treyscng has carried out auaerous exporloonts on ani-
aals. During recent years he frequently coaplnlnod to ao that his
dutios with the Medical Inspectorate wero robbing hla noro and aoro of
tho possibility of pursuing his own exporicontal rosoorch work on anl-
aals."

Tho final paragraph describes aeroly Dr. Bockor-Treyscng's attitudo.
I should like to givo a very brief ouotation froa figure 4:

"I do not know whether Dr. Becker-Freysong was a aeobor of tho
SSDAP. He has never shovn any attitude which could indicate sympathy
with the Party, ^e also criticized soveral tiaes the aethods of tho
Party in the presence of cany colleagues. I nysolf have never boon a
oosbor of tho SSDAP and have never belonged to any branch of it."

Then follows tho elgnaturo end certificate.


8302


29 May-n-5L-ll-l-Goldberg (Int. Fr-nk)

Court No. 1, Case 1

The next document .f this bock I cannot yet offer, Mr. Pre¬
sident. It de=ls with human experiments and must, therefore,
bo submitted at a later stage.

New, Hr. President, we are faced v/ith a difficulty. I
had already had the h-n-r to discuss this with you yesterday,
end it is that Document Beck Nc. 4 has been landed in for
translation by us a 1-ng time ago and I had been promised
that it w.aid be- ready for the second half of this oerning's
session. I do n.t know whether the General-Secretary has been
able to obtain this bock during the recess or whether the
Tribunal has it on h^nd.

I 6huuld like, .f course, to submit those very few do¬
cuments from IXcun^nt Ecck Nc. 4. I think there aron't mere
than two. I should liko to submit them now. But due to the
orders _f this Tribunal I can cnly dc sc if the translation
is available alr.ady.

THS PRESIDENT : , v t this time the document books have not
been furnished to the Tribunal.

1ER. HARDY ; What document numbers is counsel referring
to ? I have some from Document 3ock Wo. 4.

Inc. rRbblifcnS . The Tribunal has some odd documents from
Book No. 4.

LIR. H.kHDY ; I have No. 62 and a copy of this was given
to me by :ir. Travis.

DR. TIPI ; I can dear this up, Ur, President. Two do¬
cuments of cur Document Ecck He. 4 I h-vo given exhibit num¬
bers ar.d they have been introduced. That is Becker-Freyscng
Nc. 64, which is an affidavit from Dr. K~ns Schaefer. That
is E xh i bit No. 7 and the Document Beck cr-Freyscng 61 which
is Exhibit Nc. 2C. It is. Dr. Harry SUchella's affidavit.

The translating Branch has beer, kind enough, the other


2S lhy-::-?L-ll-2-Goldberg (Int. Frank)

Ccurt Nc. 1, Case 1

dey, tc place at ay disposal the translation cf these two
documents and the document which I would like to read now
frea Document Book 4 is No. 62 — I beg your pardon — I
should correct ayself -- No. 63, the affidavit of Ufred
Christensen. I don't know whether the Tribunal or prosecu¬
tion have had a translation of that.

THE PRESIDENT : The Tribunal has available Becker-
Freyacn# Documents 62 and 63 . 63 scene to be the affidavit
of Christensen.

• 5 HARDY ; I have both of then too, ycur Honor#

UR. TIPI : In that case, Mr. President, I should like
tc continue with Bcckcr-FTcyscng Document 63. I should like
tc deal with the affidavit cf Mr. Brigitte Crodcl dated 1?
of .'.pril and jut a question with reference to that. Scao
considerable tine ago I had sent —

TIi£ PRESIDENT ; What nuaber do you offer as Becker-
Brv,yscng Document 63 ? Is that the document you are offering
now ?

D3. TIPP : Just one second, please, Mr. Presidentf I
on told just now that this is ^cing to be Document No. 43.
Now, Document No. 63 I should like to offer as Becker-Froy-
seng Exhibit Nc. 43 and your question —

THE PRESIDENT ; Ycur document is He. 63
D3. TIPP ; No. 63 rnd it will get Exhibit No. 43. It is
on page 335 cf the Document Book. First of all I should like
tc say that the author cf this affidavit is Alfred Christen¬
sen.

./ell, then, Document 63, Exhibit 43, on Page 335 of the
Document beck, is an affidavit cf .J.fred Christensen and I
would like to add that this is the Christenson often mention¬
ed during the Scawa.ter case who has signed a statement dated


29 licy-I'-FL-ll -3-Gcldberg (Int. Frank)

Court Ho. 1, Case 1

the 19th end 20th of I!ay, and I should like tc quota from II:
"With regard to myself I declare ;

1. ) Trained and worked as Engineer.

2. ) Worked with the Luftwaffe, was a Group Leac’-or du¬

ring the v/ar and later Section Chief in the Tech¬
nical Office.

III. To Document No. NO-177, Prosecution Exhibit No. 133,
shown tc me by Dr. H‘nns !!arx, Attomcy-at-low, containing
transcript of 2 aectings held in the Technical Office cf the
Hoich Air Ministry, Berlin, on the 19 and 20 May 1944, I
state os follows :

1. ) In the photostat of this dccunent I acknowledge and
recognize the signature as being nine.

2. ) The transcribed report on the meeting held cn 19
and 20 liny 1944 was n_t made from shorthand notes or
any other written remarks on the result of the discus¬
sions. Neither was there any resolution accepted by
all present at the noeting and passed according tc the
wording or the sense which cculd serve os a basis.

The report was furthermore net sent to. the other de¬
partments which had token part in the .meeting for co¬
signature end consequently fer expressing their agree¬
ment cr disagreement '’nd fot* stating their objections,

before it vr-s sent off.

•

3. ) The report was only made 2 cr 3 cays rftcr the mee¬
tings from ma^ry by zy Referent, Staff Engineer Schi-

*

cl'.lcr, and I signed it without checking it thoroughly.

IIr. Schickl.r was a Dr. Ing and had no medic-'* 1 knowledge
or experience, just as I cysolf had ncr.c .t the utmost
th* report noy therefore only be considered unofficial
as a randan cf the Technical Office for the files


29 L£y-:i-FL-ll-4-Goldberg (Int. FT*nk)

Court lie, 1, Case 1

or for other offices.

IV. A8 to the contents cf the report and the progress of the
discussion on the 19 end 20 Hoy 1944, I declare the fol¬
lowing :

1.) 3y virtue of the tests already carried out in Vienna
by Dr. vcr. Syrany with Berkatit, the opinion given
by Professor Sppingcr cf Vienna, as well as by vir¬
tue cf the fav-rable raw materiel and manufacturing
situation with regard to Bcrkatit, the Technical
Office of the Reich -»ir Ministry was determined to
introduce Ecrkatit. In this respect ay department
has already settled this with the German Navy and
the S3. !iy cc-workors w c re of the impression that
Dr. Bccfcor-Frcyseng was p.rhaps materially interest¬
ed in Vofetit and consequently opposed to Bcrkatit.
.it the meeting on 19 .»pril"-- and I should like
to c.rrect this, 'It. President. Of course, it should acan
19 of '.'Ay, a nd I should like to add th^t in the original
the date is the 19 of Hay.

"At the aoeting cn 19 :ipy Major Jcworeck therefore at¬
tacked Dr. Beckcr-Frcysong personally. It w^s only due
to ay interference that Dr. Becker-Freyseng did not
leave the seating together with Dr. Schaefer. There
were, however, no grounds for suspicion or even proofs
regarding Dr. Bcckor-Frcyreng cr Dr. Schaefer.

2.) '/c had informed the Navy and SS that the introduction
of Bcrkatit was paracticolly certain , the letter was
ccaposed with a view to covering us airinst the objec¬
tions code by the Chief cf theLuftwnffo, -'edicrl Ser¬
vice tc Berkatit. In ay cpinion therefore, the medical
objections arc exa - crated *>nd represent ■> biassed

3306


29 Iday-:I-FL-U-5-Gc Idberg (Int. Frank)
Ccurt So. 1, Case 1


emphasis cf seme remarks, while leaving ethers out.

3. ) This refers in particular to the remark made by Dr.

3eckor-?rcyseng about the consequences cf thirst. At
the tine, Dr. Becker-Frey seng mentioned that with one
disease, I believe it w?.s cholora, the patient dies
frem lack of water. His description cf the convulsions
and hallucinations referred to this. He then also re¬
ferred to a case free thw series cf tests by Dr. ven
. Sirany, who had lost n great deal cf water j Dr. Becker
Frcyseng remarked that if this lack of water continued
it could lead to disturbances after a few days and af¬
ter about 12 days depth oight occur.

4. ) The decision to have r. detailed plan for the expe-riaents,

as set down in the transcript vr.s deferred cn the 19 and
20 :day 1944 in the presence cf Professor Eppinger."

Might I correct this, !lr. President ? Unfortunately
we received the dccunent so late that the copy couldn't be
checked. There is a copy .mistake v/hich disturbs the conti¬
nuity. I aa not sure whether it expresses it in English.

In orckr to clear this up and recti fy the record, I should
like to road the sentence under 4 from the beginning such
as is contained in the original document : "A detailed plan
fer the experiments such as is set dexn in the transcript
vns not made cn the 19 and 20 cf ‘lay 1944, but wrs deli¬
berately deferred to the meeting cn the 25 which was to
take place in the presence cf Professor Eppinger."

I should like to c ntir.ue quotin' fron this document :
"Cn the 19 and 20 cf :Pay 1944 only the necessity of
further experiments was discussed »nd genor^lly referred to.
Dr. Becker-Freyseng then immediately h~d serious drutts n s
t: the possibility cf carrying cut these tests in a. hospi¬
tal or institute in the required manner, since the sur.mer

8307


29 rfey-:;-FL-ll-6-Gcldberx (Int. Frank)

Court KO. 1, C&se 1

cf 1&54 there were neither sufficient pers.ns for experi¬
menting en ncr suitable space available. In -'newer to a di¬
rect question put by -no of the ether perse ns present at
the meeting, whose name I cannot remember, s to the possi¬
bility of txperiaents on convicts, Dr. Bccker-Frcyscng re¬
plied that he thcu~ht it possible that prisoners would come
forward voluntarily for this experiment, which wrs net dnn-
joreus, an- that he v. -uld m-Jcc the necessary inquiries about
this thrcu h his office."


29 Uay-IS-H3-12-l-Samp6on (Int. Frank)
Court No. I.


But the reason for this was pot the likely danger, but the abovo-nontion-
ed organizational difficulties in tho organization.

"5. ) Dofinito decisions were not taken at tho roe tings of 19 & 20 Hay
19UU, but were reserved for tho discussion on 25 Nay 19UU. Neither
could a resolution bo passed about tho oxporircntal station at Dachau,
as there was no representative of tho SS or tho police present, the
authorities responsible for tho concentration canpe. Therefore, thoro
nust bo a niaundorstanling on tho part of ray "Referent", which I unfort¬
unately overlooked before appending ny signature. Dachau can only have
been mentioned in connection with laboratories, in caso prisoners wiro
used as experimental subjects. I also bolievo that for roasons of air
protection tho concentration caap Dachau was referrod to, since it was
go rurally known that no air attack was ovor nado on this canp.

"6. ) But I do know, however, that later on tho oxForinonts wero actu¬
ally carriod out at Dachau and that staff onginoor Borkn hirsolf was at
Dachau. Having boon told by hin that tho oxporinsntal subjocts wero
volunteers who had core forward on tho proaiso of hotter food boforo
and after tho oxporirent and a special ration of cigarettes and that
nothing could happen during tho oxporinonts, I regarded the so oxpori-
nonts as entirely admissible.

"7. ) Sono tino after despatching this roport, n and I should liko to
say, Mr. President, that the roport referred to is tho mooting of tho
19 th and 20th, ard I continue my quotation now.

"a cxinbor of the chief of tho nodical offico rang up ny depart¬
ment and pointed out several orrors in tho roport. As, however, in
tho re entire tho mooting of 25 Iky 19UU had boon hold at which I was
not present, whereby this report was superseded, the matter was con¬
sidered closed.

D 8.) Tho meetings of 19 4 2) Hay 19l*U took place at tho instigation of
the Technical Offico and under ay supervision.

"9.) Tho Technical Office alone was responsible for passing prepara¬
tions for airplane equipx-nt fit for use, to which also the moans for


29 lfcy-li-4«2-12-2-S2=pson (Int. Frank)

Court No. X*

tasking saltwater potable belonged. The other offices, as for instanco
the radical chief of the Luftwaffo, rarely had the right of veto."

Tho docuaont is signed on tho 16th April, 19U7, and it has tho
certificate, signed by an alliod officer fron the Adninistration Of¬
fice of Civilian Interment Canp No. 6 Neucngamc. In connection with
this Docunont Book No. IV, I should like to ask a question, Mr. Pres¬
ident. Sono considerable tino ago I handed an interrogatory to tho
Secretary General, addressed to tho witness Brigitto Crodol. This wit¬
ness had boon granted for tho defendants Schroodor and Bockor-Froysong,
but sho info mod no that tho Soviot Military Coaaandant had prohibited
her fron leaving Borlin. Up to now I haven't had a reply fron tho
Socrotary Gonoral's office as to whothor tho interrogatory has boon ro-
coivod and rotumod. Such parts as I introduced in that document book
arc tto sane quostiono which this witness has rocoivod through to this
Tribunal, and I sont ray questionnaire through the ordinary mil in
ordor to achieve that sore statonont free that witnoss my bo obtninod.
Howovor, I don't want to introduco this roport today. Profossor Haagon
is now avnilablo as a witnoss and ho will bo testifying boforo this
high Tribunal. Thoroforo, I consider it advisablo that tho questions
which aro connoctod with tho typhus oaso, and that includos tho affid¬
avit fron Crodol, should be offorod in this connoction in order to
procorvo continuity. But I do want to say, ifr. FTosidont, that as far
os I know, it is within tho ruling of this Tribunal that if an inter¬
rogatory fron a witnoss is handod in, cross questions as desirable for
tho IVosocution should be cade available to tho Defense so that re¬
direct quastions can bo added. So far I haven't soon tho cross exam¬
ining interrogatory, ard, thoroforo, I do not know whether tho Prosec¬
ution proposes to or has put such cross examination questions, and nay
bo Hr. Hardy will be obliging enough to give us sooo information on
the question.

HR. HARDY: I have not cone up hero for that purpose. Your
Honor, and I don't particulary know what he is referring to as cross


8310


29 !£vy-^MS-12-3-Sa=pson (int. Frank)
Court No. I.


interrogator/ and rc-direct intcrrogatcry; it is conplotely strange
and foreign to no, and I an afraid I will have to bo briefed on it
further before I corrent on it. However, I Tould like to ask in con¬
nection with Doc men t No. 63, the affidavit of Aifrod Christensen, to
ascertain free Defense Counsol the address and location of Alfred
Christenson*

THE HlESIDSNTi Can the Dofonso Counsel furnish that inforaation
to the Prosocution?

DR. T1PP: Yos, I would lovo to, lir • President. Tho affidavit
itself shows it, nocoly, ho is at tho Civilian Intomnont Cnnp No. 6,
at Nouongasro. That is in tho British zono, so that in this case tho
witnoss is quite oasily accossiblo. And now tho second quostion, !Jr*
Prosidont, regarding tho interrogatory of tho witnoss Crodol. I
gathered !!r. Hardy is unablo to cloar up now tho quostion, and I will
try to do so during tho rocoss; and I will be ablo aftor tho rocoss to
subnit tho ronaining docuccnts fron Docuaont book, Bockor-Frcysong V,
and I think that on Itonday ono hour will suffico to subnit tho ronain-
ing docunonts, and I would suggost that wo rocoss now bocauso at tho
nocont I Just sinply havon't got any translated docunonts I could sub¬
nit*


Tf£ FRESIDEOT: As stated yesterday, when tho Tribunal takes
its rocoss this noon, it will rocoss until Monday noming at 9:30, and


at that tine we hope tho rost of tho docunonts itill bo in ordor to bo
prosontod. As there is nothing furthor to jrosent to tho Tribunal at
this tine, tho Tribunal will be in recess until 9:30 o'clock lionday


norniW.

(Tho TrttW


rt i


adjourned until Juno 2, 19li7, at 0930 hours. )•


*311


Court So. 1

2 Jun 47-K-l-l-EEH-Karrcv (Von Schon)


Official Transcript of the Aaerican Kllitary
Tribunal in the natter of the United States
of Aaerica against Karl Brandt, et al,
defendants, sitting at Suernberg, Gem any,
on 2 June 1947, 0930, Justice Beals presiding.


TEX MARSHAL: Persons in the courtroco vill please find their seats.
The Honorable, the Judges of Kllitary Trilxinal I. Military Tribunal I
is nov in session. God save the Unitod States of Aaerica and this hon¬
orable Tribunal. There vill be order in the courtrooo.

THE P3ZSIDEHT: Mr. Marshal, vill you ascertain if the defendants
are all present in court.

TEE MARSHAL: Kay it please Your Honor, all defendants are present
in the courtroc*.


THE PRESIDEHT: Tho Secretary General vill noto for tho record the
presonce of all tho defendants in court.

Counsel say proceed.

IS. TIP? (Dofenso counsel for tho defendant Beckor-Freysong): Hr.
Prosldent, last Thursday I stopoed with Beckcr-Froyseng Docunont 63,
Exhibit 43, an affidavit by Alfrod Christensen, dated 16 April 1947.

Tho rost of tho docuaents free Docunent Book 4 I should like to offer
In connection vith the oxoalnation of the vitnese Haagen. There is an
affidavit by Kiss Crodel, Mr. Haagen's associate, and I believe thie
docunont vould be bettor outfitted at that tine than nov.

I should like to continuo today vith Docunent Book Ho. 5 vhich has
bcon distributed to the Tribunal today. Tho first docunent vhich I
should liko to offer froa this docunent book ie Bcckcr-Froyseng Docunont


Ho. 66, vhich is on page 344. I give it Exhibit So. 44. It is a supple-
aent_tO--thfiaffidovit of Christensen vhich I havo Just nentioned, an

affVdartt'by the sane Alfred Christensen, dated 6 Kay 1947. I shall

’ </ \^\

quoto. After the^,introductory forsula. the witness states:

■I hereby eu^ojLeaent ay affidavit of 16 April 1947 end add tho
folloving:

■To Ho. IJ/(e):

- /

"The notes in Question, by Dr. Schickler of 23 May 1944, nerely con-

8312


Court Ko. 1

2 Jon 47-M-l-2-LEX-Zarrov (Von Schon)

tftitute a aecorandur aade at least several days after the discussion on
20 Kay 1944, which was not at all based on the ainutes of the session.

It is, hovevor, poasiblo that Dr. Schickler cade a fev notes. Minutes
vere considered legally binding for ay office only if they voro cither
taken devn in writing at once in the presence of thoso present at tho
oeeting, then read and approved es correctly rendered, whereupon the
person calling the ceetlng signed the docuaent with the consent of thoso
presont.

"Or, if tho ainutes were taker, down subaoauently, they had to bo
submitted to those who took part in the ceetlng for ncknovledgeaont and
counter-signing.

■In the distributor filo such notos always errriod the aarglnal
noto 'countor-signing reoucsted'. This aarglnal noto for countor-sign-
ing is, hovevor, aissing on tho noto In question.

"It is cortalnly incorrect, whon in tho note on tho aocting of 20
Kay 1944 it is said that Dr. 3eckor-7roysung proposed Dachau as the
placo for oxporiacntlng because of tho possibility of death of peroono
subjoctod to oxperinents; for tho result oiacd at in those oroorlaonto
wns not to ascertain tho oxnct nooont of death but rather to ascertain
tho exact aonent when potential dnaege would sot in, in taking Borkatit.
Dachau was aontioned only becauso of already* existing laboratory facili¬
ties thore and in the event that oxperinents could not be carried out
in hospitals of the Luftwaffe. In no circuastanccs hes Dr. Bcckor-
Troyseng spoken about the possibility of death in such exocrinonts.

Under no conditions should I havo agreed to experiaents which, in the
opinion of acdicaj exports present at the ceetlng, could havo led to
death and I should have expressed this point of view at onco. T?mt tho
experts' opinion corresponded with ay point of view is evinced by the
fact that I nyself es well es Stabsingenieur Dr. Schlckler declarod our¬
selves ready et that aeetlng to take pert in the Bcrkatit experiaents
in question as guinea pigs as long as rccuired, provided vc were granted
the necessary leave froc duty.


3313


Court So. 1

2 Cun 47-M-l-3-23*-ierrow (Ton Scfcoa)


"Cfco fact that Dr. Becker-Fk«yscng reoeatedly stressed the feet
that persona would have to submit to t 06 ts only voluntarily and that only
persons in good physical standing would be considered is another roaaon
I considered these experinonts completely harslets. As far no I
remeaber today. Dr. Becker-Freyseng aontioned that ooraons subjected to
those oxperiaents would be granted special privilogos nftor the conclu¬
sion of the experiments.

■To So. 17 (6) of ay affidavit:

■It is not known to ae how these expcrlaents were finally carried
out. It is only known to ae that Stnbsingonieur Berka, undor groat
difficulties, procured water fraa tho Mediterranean and brought it to
Dachau.

■Likowiso, I did not receive any reports on oxperiaents conductod.

In conclusion I wish to say that for at least 14 days I ayoelf drank
one glass of sea water with Borkntit regularly evory morning. I
oxporlonced no trouble end had no diarrhea. I considered this water
nixed with Borkatit as a pleasant tasting, rofroshlng drink and fro-
ouontly offorod it to visitors in ay offico."

Follows the signature of tho witness and tho certification by tho
Lngliah officor of tho lntornaont caap at Ncuongoano.

The noxt document which I offer is Becker-Fkoyoong Docunont No. 66
on page 347. The exhibit nuaber will bo 46. This is an affidavit by
Dr. Caaoron Luft, Berlin-Friedonau, 74, Zclseralleo. Ho signed this
affidavit hero in Nuernberg in ay prosonce on the 11th of Kay, 1947.

It was intended to call Kr. Luft as a witness for Becker-Freysong horo
but he was called to America as e loeturer on physiology and had to
liave earlier than expected. I shall auote scoo statements frdb this
docuoent. Under I, the witness says that froa 1936 until the caoitula-
tion ho was a scientific worker at the Medical Research Institute for
Aviation in the Setional Air Ministry undor the direction of Professor
Dr. Strughold. I should like to ouote II:

■I heve known Pr. Secker-Froyscng since 1937. In the years 193B

83U


Court So. 1

2 June 47-K-l-4-IHX-Karrow (Von 5ckon)

through 1942 ho worked together with ae at the Medical P.escnrch Institute
for Avietion in Berlin, mainly in the fields of physiology and aoro-
nauticel nedicine.

"By reason of our Joint work extending over .-any years and my know¬
ledge of his scientific work I an in a position to Judge beyond a doubt
as to his attitude toward nodical expcrincntation upon human boings. In
conducting his scientific work, Dr. 3ccker-Frcyeeng has always been
guided by the principle that all nodical experlnents upon human beings
Involving damage to health should first be nado by doctors in eelf-
experiaonts. That he neant it seriously is proven by the following."

In the following sentences the witness describes tho expcricents
of the defendant Bockcr-Frcysong, togethor with Dr. Clanann, which hnvo
been discussed horo several tines. Tho Tribunal knows that Dr. Beckor-
Jroyseng was seriously ill rftor theso experinents. Therefore, I shall
not quote this pert of tho affidavit. However, I shall quoto fron
pago 2 of the document, the first paragraph that boglns on tho socond
pago:

"In tho courso of the years 1939 to 1942 Dr. Bockor-FTeyscng under¬
went, undor my direction, over 100 solf-oxoorlncnts in a low prossuro
chanbor for tho purposo of cloarlng up the naturo of tho high altitudo
disease. Those experinents rogulorly resulted in conploto loss of con¬
sciousness and constituted, through thoir frocuoncy, a considerable
danger to his own health.

Ill doals with the conditions of experimentation in tho sunmor of
1944 in 3erlin. Ihe witness says; I ouote:

"Although I pursued ay cxporimontal work at the institute in Borlin
until the ond of 1946, the work was rendered extreoely difficult through
continued air raid warnings, freouent cuts of electrical current and
through the damage to the experimental station by the aerial attacks.

A cystematic pursuit of scientific work was hardly possible anymore.

-ho problem of getting the necessary number of subjects for experiments
presented special difficulties. Ihe cadets of tho Military Medical


8315


Court Sc. 1

2 Jure 1947-Jt—1—5—5SM—Ear rev (Vor Sefcon)


Academy of the Luftvaffe wore sostly et the front; the Btudente, as far
as they wore etill at herd there, could rot offer themselves for expori-
sents bcceuso of their studio*, special parallel dutios and traffic and
food difficulties. Through the good offices of Dr. Becker-Freysong I
succeeded occasionally in obtaining nllitary rale nurses as subjects.

They always placed themselves at ay disposal of their own accord gladly
and in sufficient aunbers. 5ut we had to fight for every ono of thou
with their coonanding officers. If, for once, we got a few pooplo, it
happonod again and again that they were reassigned before the exoerinents
woro finished. Judging fron cy own oxperionco, I think it would have
been impossible in tho summer of 1944 to got 40 to 60 healthy young nen
in Borlln, ovor. for a harnloss oxperinont oxtending ovor 4 to 5 vooko.

All the sec who night havo boon eligiblo as subjects were either la
nllitary sorvice or were working so stronuouely in their civilian Jobs
that they could not bo taken away from thoir work. Uncnploycd, or non-
bore of independent professions who could have taken a four vooko’ lcavo,
did not exist acorr.oro in Gorcaay in tho summer of 1944. Likcwioe, I
think it was net possible, in view of tho aortal vnr, that an oxoorlnont
with 40 subjects on metabolism oxtondlng uninterruptedly over 4 to 6
weeks could practically hove been brought to a conclusion in Berlin or
in any other big Gorman town. Conditions prevailing then rendorod such
a thing absolutely impossible.”


8316


2 June 47-M-JjC-2-i-Priaeau (lr.t«| vofiSchon)

C^urt I

^ - ■"

IE. TIFP: In 17 the witness deals with the special rations
for pvlat'rs. I shall nerely call this paragraph to the attention of
the Tribunal. 7 of this affidavit doals with Prosecution Bocusent
HO 1419, inhibit Ho. 447, n letter frn the General Cozsiseioner of
the Fuehrer for Hygiene and Medicine dated 25 January 1943 tc Ober-
grupp cnfuohror Vrif. Since this dneuaent was n't hold to be of great
lnportrr.ee In the case of Beckcr-Jreyslng and it was xrt nontioned In
cross exarinatl'n, I shall n t quoto this point. I shell nerely refer
to tho contents of this pnrp.-raph. There follows the slgnaturo by the
witness and tho certificate by ayself.

The next doewsonta, nunber 67 >o 72, all deal with tho re¬
search assignments issued by tho Aviatl-n Ministry or the Medical
Inspectorate to varl-us scientists. All the witnesses wh- have test¬
ified horo received such asalgnacnts ar.<* Break av^ut the c-nditi'no in
tho dcrarticnt, the check cade 'f the aeulgnncnts and speak aVut tho
conditions in the department, the check -ado rf tho assignasnto, otc.

Tho next drevnent which I offer is Docuncnt 67 on pago 352,
which I five the Exhibit Ho. *6, jvuro 1 of the English. Thcro is an
nffadarit by the Professor In tho Medical Clinic at Erlangen datod
April 2^, 19^7, Dr. Karl Matthcs. Tho wltneso says *n page li

■On 14 Kay 1942 I received an ordor fr--n tho Inopoct'-r of tho
Luftwaffe Kodical Corps to conduct a scientific Investigation of tho
following problcns 'Tho action of carbonic acid on the paradoxical of
oxy*on following acute oxygen deficiency.' Sec supplcnont for copy of
this ordcrl

"I ga also enclosing 1 copy of an~thor research order issued
by the Medical Inspectorate on 13 August 1942, directed to Prcf.
Buerger, dlrcct-r -f the Leipzig University Medical Clinic. I was head
physician at the Leipzig Medical Clinic. I head physician at tho
Leipzig Med.icnl Clinic zycelf at that tine and had w-rkod in that
Institute since 1930. At *-rcsert, I a.- director rf the Erlangen Uni¬
versity Medical Clinic."


6317


2 June £7JC-TjC_2_2-Pri=e«u (int., vonSchon)
Court I


In the next paragraph the witness says:

"The ca'-se for =y reeelvli^r this order can he traced back
to a discussion I hurt In tho spring cf 1942 with Professor Anthony
who vp a then a specialist for tho Medical Inspectorate.*

He says then that he had been for soao tine boon dealing
with the subject of this osslrnnent ond he also soys that the Medical
Inspect~rate supported science In every way.

MR. HARDY: Hay it ploeae lour Honor, attached to this affida¬
vit arc tv- suppleocnts — that Is, two original C-oraan doeuaonte —
one dated August 1942 and the other cnc May 1942, originating fron tho
offlco of the Beferat for Aviation Modlclno. I night ask rtofoneo coun¬
sel whothor or n-t he Intends to substantiate those documents — that
Is, certify the authenticity thereof.

IE. TIPP: Certainly, In his affidavit tho vltnoss rofore
t" those two docunente and srys that they are included In his affadavit.
I believe that th-t institutes the proof which Mr. Hardy wants.

MB. HARDY: !>-os ho state that theso d^cunonta are truo copios
of tho original In his affadavit?

IR. TIFF: Yob. Yes, ho does.

MR. HARDY: I won't object your Honor, but I think It lo
rather an unusual procedure and I will not objoct without projudlco
to the richt -f the prosecution to objoct to docunonts of this type
that nay bo ontersd In the future.

TKB FR1GIHUT: I win ask defense counsol if tho original
documents are attached to the original of this witness.

MB. HaBDY: The original affidavit is hero, your Honor, and
he merely has copies of the documents. He does net have tho original
documents attached theroto.

DB. TIPP: The original docuaents, M r . President, are of
course not in the p-ssessicn of the witness. As was custoaary, tho
witness aade a copy at that tlr.e and attached it to his affadavit. He
certified the correctness of these crplee under oath. If Mr. Hardy has


8318


2 June 47-MJJC_2_3-Prineau (In*.., vrnSch'n)
Court I


any objections, it Is, of course, possible for ae to send these dccu-
aents back to tho witness who lo living in Erlangen and infora hln to
cortify expressly that these arc true copies, but I believe it is su¬
fficient in his affadavit ho refers to then end thus certifies that
the copies ere corroct; but if the Tribunal wishos it I will be rlr.d
t« send these tv- copies back to Professor Matthes f'r a certificrto.

TiS niSHDIi The first copy referred tr is apparently a
letter written b 7 tho inspector of the Luftvnffo Medical Corps to Dr.
Buerger.

TR. TIPP: Yes, Mr. Prosidont, and I eh-uld like to point out
that I have Just said that the witnews says on page 1 of hlo affadavits
“I an also oncl-sity 1 c-py of anrthor resoardh order issued by the
Medical Inspect-rate on 13 Aurust 1942, directed to Professor Buorgor,
director of tho Leipzig University M 0 dical Clinic. I was hond physi¬
cian at tho Leipzig Medical Clinic cyself at that tlno and had vorkod
in that institute since 1930." Tho witness very dofinitoly refore to
those suppleacntary d-cuncnts in his affadavit.

THfc PRiSIDLNT: Bros tho witness stato in his affadavit that
ho hlasolf aade a copy of this lottor whon it was rocolvod? I havon’t
had tiao to rend the witness's affadavit in full.

IP.. TIPP: The witness d-os at say in his affavit how ho pre¬
pared tho copy. Ho ncroly encloses it and aakes it a r«rt of his nffa-
davit.

7HL PRSSIIErr: I think a.t least there should be sono state¬
ment fr-a tho witness that ho made c-ntcaporano-us copies froa tho
orlrln"l docuacrt when it was received, that ho v*e not ou-tinr it fron
nea-ry. Thero is n-thing hore that acc~unts for the absonco of the
-ririnal d'eunent. Thcro should be a rather corplete statement concern¬
ing that bef-ro It should *e offered.

IE. TIPP: Yes, M r . President. Then I shall not subait this
d-cuaent t-day. I shall wait until the vltnoss Haafem i6 hero.


2 June 47-K-JJC. 2 4- P riseau (Int., vcnSchon)
C'urt I


TEE FEXSIHS?: I would iQfmit that the docuaent he subnittcd

provisionally and subject to Inter clarification on thl« natter.

!B. "IP?: Hr. President, nay I renark that if I offer it

today the criminal will he in the possession of the General Socrotaxy

and I win have te have a ruling fr«a the Tribunal to get it back

%

fron hin. The stalest thing for me, I think, would be frr no to
withdraw it today and offer it again in the Haqgen case.

THE pPiSIEldT: 7ery well. Follow that procedure.

IE. TIPP: Then I shall go on to tho next docuncnt, H r . Pre¬
sident. This Is an affadavit by Froiherr von Eonbcrg. This is Bockor-
Xroysing's IhcuMnt Ho. 68 on pa po 360 of tho docuncnt book. I shall
glvo it Exhibit nuaber 46. It is an affadavit by Froiherr von Boaborg
25 April 1947. Xros this docunont I should like to quoto only a few
oxcerpts and explain tho contonto briofly. Tho witnooo on pago 1
describes hio activity in tho flold of bio—physics and ho says that
toward tho end of tho w*r there wero difficulties In carrying out this
w«rk to such an ex’ont that tho was obliged to got aid froa tho authori¬
ties, which aid was rlvon hin through the go~d offlees of Profoosor
Strurh"ld, Hodical Inspectorate of tho Luftwaffo in the forn of a re¬
search assignment.

This witness says: "I encloso a copy of -tho resonreh
assignnent riving all the dotalls* and ho continues: "Through this
rcoonrch assignnent I was in no way subordinated to tho Hodical Ins¬
pectorate in a military sense. However, I hnvo never sLsuaed that
fron a scientific vlcw-p-int this carrcid with it the duty or tho

right to control and eurervise ry activities. Moreover, this 1 b not

at ell the practise either, because the object rf riving a research

•

assignnent has always been to entrust the assignnent to a roeenreh
worker wfa-se nase guarantees that the work will be done in a strictly
scientific Banner and any specialist would nest emphatically reject
intervention fr = n-'r—professional quarters, be they ever so highly
piece. Consequently, the Medical Inspectorate has never exerted any
influence in this respect."


3320


2 June 47-X-J*C - 2-5-Pri=emj (Int», vonSchon)

Court I

la this respect I shall skip the next sentence and shall
qnrte fro- the next paragraph! 'in viev of the fact that a research
•ssirnaent also carries financial support. It was only natural that this
authority requestod to he kept informed on tho progress of tho work as
well to be plvon an account of the nonay used. These reports, however,
were rendered only at rather lone lntorvais and only ns a sunnary."

Tho witness says he had the i-yrcsslon that the rosonrch
assignment was ^onerously Fiver. fron n purely scientific interest and
with full confidence in the research workers. The rest of tho docu¬
ment I shall not quota.

Tho cnclosuro, Mr. Prcsidant, is a typical rcsoarch assi/m-
nent. The witnoss in his affadavit has cortificd that it is a true
copy and X, therefore, believe thcro can bo no objection to tho sub¬
files ion of this docuacnt.

MR. HAHDY: Y-ur Hon'-r, this attachment of tho -'riplnnl Ger¬
man docunent brings up the sane situation n in the Inst do canon t
t*at was offored. It is ncroly a typewritten copy and isn't substan¬
tiated t« the derroo I think it necessary to bo substantiated for
this Tribunal. I night surest tho sano couroo bo tnkon with thio
document, that tho dofonso obtain proper certification in introduce
tho original GcraAn docuacnts. It noo=a to ac tho Tribunal should bo
a llttlo bit srro striegont about having then duly authonticatod —
that is, as opposed to bavin* nffaditvits notarized. T^ls document
purports to be n i original Goman document but, like the othcro is
ncrcly a typewritten ©py with an cortificato thereon. X night ask the
Secretary to pass up the- copy sr the Tribunal nay peruse it.

I i M


3321


2Jun^- JWss (Tea Scaon)

Court 1

TH3 P52SX32*T: I win ask dofcase counsel, this docuaeat, if I
«c looking at the correct document, was a letter written to the af¬
fiant Rcnberg, Is that correct?

33. .'TIP?: Tes, The witness In his affidavit In the last sen¬
tence says and I Quote: "I state again that the enclosed research
order corresponds to the research order actually given to no and that
it is therefore ’lurt of the affidavit." I believe that would bo suf¬
ficient authentication in this caeo.

TH3 P23SI33ST: Voll, if the original lotter was sont to tho xdt-
ncso ho should huvo tho original lotter, if it ceco to hia. Undor tho
olrouust.pxcas tho original lottor was written is noithor proved and
he ncy or nay not have it but if tho lottor was vritton to hin ho
ohould have it—this original lotter should bo in his filo and ho
could eubuit tho original lottor with his affidavit.

3?, TIPPi Yos, your Honor, but it is an oxporionco which wo havo
had rtnoctodly that old gontlccux>- Profoosor von Rcnborg is an old
scientist -aro voxy roluctont to glvo up thoir original docunonts. If
tho Tribunal ballovos that original rosoarch aoslgnnont should bo cd-
nittod I will try to got it free Raiborg and to outfit it.

'iaS ??j&I3BoT: Voll, if he has the original docunont ho could
havo a cortifiod copy node .-aid tho original docuaont bo roturnod to hin.

ii?, KoRDIs This is a natter the Prosecution docas uost inportent.

33, TIP?: Tory woll. I shall try to got tho original frea Kr.
von Bart art end prosent it as tho Tribunal has Just suggostod.

TE3 PB3SI3E-T: You can toll 3r. Baibor L . that his docuaont will
not oc taken free hia but if ho would loan this so a cortifiod copy
could bo undo and certified by tho Secret ry General, to bo a truo
copy, that would be sufficient- th^t copy would bo received aid ho ori¬
ginal returned to hin.

33. 21??: Yes, your Honor.

tho document 2 should like to offer is Pocuacat 69, page 2-.,


8322


2 Juno-iHU—3-2-Gross (Yon Schon)

Court 1

the exhibit no. Is 47. It is en affidavit of Profossor Eaas Hettor.

s: gmsipan?: Counsol, you n^ricod the last Olhibit by Hcc'oorg
as 2 Mbit 46?

Da. 21??: Tot, 46, that was doeuncnt 68. How the next doeuncnt
id Document 69.

?=? PRDSIDEyT: Bat tho docunont of Dr. Rcubcrg will bo adult tod
provisionally ia so f r as it refers to this lottcr which ho rocoivod.

DR 21??: as I said tho noxt docuucat io an affidavit of Prof.
Hans Hottor, datod 25 ^ril 1947. Shis witaoss again describe* hio
carroor and ooys that ho rocoivod a resoarch aosignnont frcu tho Luft-
weffo 19 ilovenbor 1942. Ho goos on to say that tho distribution of re¬
search assignments was very goncrous, that his aoslgruont constitutod
priunrily a scientific work. I do not intond to quoto any furthor
frai this doc'V.ont.

The noxt document io an affidavit of Dr. idchholtt in Hoidolborg
d .tod 28 ipril 1947. *hio docuuont no. 70 which I ohould liko to offor
as orfilbit Ho. 48. On pngo ono of the docunont undor r2 tho witnooo
scys and I quoioj "about 1942 I rocoivod an order, datod 3 Doc crib or
1941., Silo Hoi L in 14,55 Hr. 46 007/41 (2 II 3 ) "Influonco on
altitudo Tolornnco by Chaiical k oans". Tho research ordor was lntor
handled by tho aviation Bcsoarch, Hoidclbcrg, end was not concludod.

3. ) Tho ordor was not given by the Kodied Inspoctorato, it ori¬
ginated on tho contrary, frea oursolvos; a third party was not in¬
volved.*

I -o on to Ho. 4, on tho noxt pogo. I quoto: 4.) I askod for

this cssigoiont for difforent reasons to rocoivo this ordor. Ky uoin

•

aitivo that I wuntod to project tho employees of tho Instituto as
long o.s possible frtxi being cdlod up. It concornod oxperts who could
not have boon replaced. Therefore, tho plocasont of tho order, its
occcptnnco end perforcanco -as in tho interest of thco Instituto, end
only in the second instance in tho intoecsts of tho *odical Inspector-


8323


2 Juao4»-iU—5-3-Grcss (Von Schcn)

Court 1

ato, which garo the ordor. It was cxproscly state* that this roooorch
order conccrnod a so-cdled fund am ental research."

I shall ship do. 6 or at least no. 6. On pag.0 3 of tho document
at tho top I quoto: ■ I never noticod that thoro was any thorough
control, e xam ination of tho protocols, or, oven iatcrforonco in ro-
spoct of tho sotting up of tho oxd or in onto. I nlvcys gavo Dr. 3ockoi'-
Troygonfc tho opportunity to got in touch with tho experts, but horo
also I aovor noticed th„t uoro than gcnoral scientific intorcst was
shown.

■7.) Tho reports wore sutnittod in tho fora of short, scientific
reports. 2 io reports novor contained any dot dls about tho axporiuants."

Tho rost of He. 7 and He. 1 I roecc;:end to tho attention of tho
Tribunal . a*. I shall quoto Ho. 9j

* I oennot laagino at all that a ropresontativo of tho Kodlool
Inspectorate could h..vo givon uo any instructions in such a special
tonical quostion concerning tho Carrying out of tho ordor for rosoarch.*
*hoa tho witness doscribos wh .t support ho got free tho Hodic.'l
Inspoctor-tc and I should liko to quote ono gontonco freu this
paragrrsjh at tho bottom of tho pogos

■Thoro uoro novor negotiations about tho control or suparbinion of
tho rosoarch ordor; this would also have b~cn quite unusual."

I do not wont to quoto any noro free this docusont. I uoroly
rof-r to tho fact in Ho. 10 - tho witnoss says control could havo boon
exercised by a spccialish, that is a r>hamacologiot - no ordinary ucdl-
cnl officer. It boars tho signature of tho vitnose and was notarixod
by a Hotary Public in 3eidclborg on 2 Hay 1947.

Then thcro is attached \o this document o copy of on accounting
If Ur. Hardy has an objoctioa to a;- submitting this copy I shall '-lth-
drr.v this part of the document. I do not attach any great value to it.

I attache it uerdy becauso the witness refers to this attnehaont in
his docuaont.

113. IhJJJT: I have no objoction, your honors, to the admission of


2 J—j-Gross (Von Scion)

Court 1

the attachment but unfortunetcly I do not hcvoa copy of the attach¬
ment,

2S PPJiSIDIL'T: There is no copy of tho accounting in tho Document
Bcoi beforo no.

DR. TIPPS: Tkon I shall withdraw it, Hr. Protident.

DR. -I??S: The next document is Ho,71, on pago 32, tho exhibit
will bo 49, This is un affidavit by Uaivorsity Profossor Dr. Hubort
Mooisen, of tho 29 ^>ril 1947, This affidavit doscriboa how ho got
a rosoarch assignment free tho Medical Inspootorato. says in
parogrt®h ono, 2 sontoncoa after tho boglanlagi

■This rosoorch ordor consisted of a puroly financial support of
tho furthor work on o subjoct tfclch I had already begun in 1936,"

Thor, tho witnoos doocribos how this osoigroont was isauod. I eon
■kip this part, Tho witnoss continues: ■ I never rocoivod any i»-
st rue lions no to tho nannor in which my order should bo carriod out,
fr.o resonreh subsidy corresponded ontiroly with tho assistance given
by sciontific organisations or pharmaceutic-1 lndustrios.*

Tho rost I roconr.cnd to the attontlon of tho Tribunal.

Tho next document is Ho. 72 on pago 375. I assign to it Inhibit
Ho, 50. It is on fiffidavit freu Physiological Chaiicol Institute
Irolburg dated 2 «cy 19*1? Profossor Joseph Kapfh;muor. Ho also
had an r.soij^iont free tho Medical Inspectorate. Ho guys thut unfor¬
tunately ho cannot givo any exact dates bocausc all his records woro
destroyed during the Var. I shall quoto free it, tho last paragraph on
tho first pagos

■I obtained tho research ossigrnent through tho kind ncdlation of
my colleague Prof. Ducchncr, who, -t th„t tine was in chargo of tho
Medical Research Institute for aviation in Proiburg. The theme orgi-
nntod solely free my own sug. Ration, as I bud worked in this very field
of aotabolism of tho liver for years."

Shcn the witness says that he had worked on this field years
before that end that he was not r.eroly working for the Medici Inspec¬
torate but was working in the interest of scicnco in general. In tho


2 Jun»-K—lU-3-&-Gro bb (You Schoa)

Court 1

2 nd par.-grcoh oa the second p^o cf tko document I should liicc to
quotoi

■I was ia ao way subordinated to tho Medic i Inspector ito by re¬
ceiving this ossigreont. Oa the contrary, I bed cccploto frcodcu of
action; I was air/or given orders with regard to tho progroso of ny
work. Eo oao over chocked the work I had done. I was rostrictod in
ono point only; I was to sulci t intermediate reports evorythroo nonths
but I troated this point so liberally that I dalivorod a short report
concerning tho st^to of ay rcsoorch work only 10 -12 nonths at tho
cost.■

I oaa skip tho next fov soatoaccs and I quatot
■Thus, tho Medical Inspoctorato did not oxort any prossuro what-
soovor with rogard to tho rosocrch assignment so that I was ablo to
work ceuplotoly unrostrainod and without being choakod in any way.*

Tho docmcnt is signed 3 Key 19*i7 by a notary in Troiburg i/


Broisgnn.


2 Jun-IW 5—ii-i-Haloy (Int. Von Schoen)
Court No* I.


DR. TIP?: The next two docurents. Hr* President, No. 73 and
No. 7U, deal with a different subject. They deal with Professor
Baagen* I do not believe I should offer these documents at this
point because Professor Haagen is going to appear as a witnoss, and
will be able to testify as to how long he was on leave from the Luft¬
waffe. If it should prove necessary in the course of the case I may
offer these docuaents lator.

Hr* President, I have now completed the presentation of evid¬
ence for the defendant Becker-Freyseng. All that remains is the ex¬
amination of Professor Haagen, for which the Tribunal has already
eiven its consent after the conclusion of tho sea-water case, and in
this connection I should like to offer a fow more documents which I
have rocoived in tho meantime, and which generally refer co Profossor
Haapen's work.

THE PRESIDENT: The docuaonts referred to by counsol for de¬
fendant Bockor-Froysong may bo offered later*

Has tho Prosocution any rebuttal ovidonce to offer?

HR. HARDY: Not at this time. Your Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsol say proceed.

DR. FELCXHANN: Dr. ftolcksann for dofondant Dr. Schaoffor.

lith the permission of tho Tribunal I should liko to call de¬
fendant Dr* Schaofor to tho witness stand.

THE PRESIDE-VT: Defendant Conrad Schaefer will tako tho witnoss

stand.

DR. FELCKM&NNi Before the witnoss takes tho oath I should liko
to submit a few documents which deal with the personality of Dr.
Schaefer. These are documents about the political attitude of the do¬
fondant and his scientific qualifications. It is necessary to’ offer
these documents, because tho prosecution has made the assertion, for
all the defendants, in considerable detail to explain the charge of
conspiracy, that they were obsessed by Nazi idealogy; that this ideology
affected tlie medical sen, especially the younger ones; that during their


2 Jun-M-hB-u-2-i!aloy (Int. Von Schoen)
Court Ho* I*


studies they were trained in ?Jari Idealogy; that they beloneed or had
to belong to various tori organizations, and similar things.

Without going into the question of whether this argument is
necessary for the charee of conspiracy I shall prove for the defend¬
ant Schaefer, at least, that -these assertions aro not true of hire. I
shall deal in those affidavits with another charge, that is that this
tori idoalogy reduced the scientific work of the defendants to a low
and that on the basis of this -tori idoalogy the defendants, including
tho defendant Schaefer, wero unable to perform oxperi-nonts such as form
the subject of tho indictcent horo. I shall disprove theso assertions
too through those affidavits.

First, I should liko to offer Docirnont Schaefer No. 1. It is
tho German No. 20, tho English Document No. 1. I was forcod to in¬
troduce two different sorios of mmbers, beenuso by accidont tho nun¬
boring v/as not carried out in tho sano way in the Qorman and English
docunonts in tfc translation, and I shall always havo to givo difforont
pogo nunbors of Gorman docunonts and English docunonts —

English Docunont I, Gorman Docuaont 20, is to havo Exhibit No.

1. This is an affidavit by Frofossor Dr. Hubortua Strughold. I shall
road all of it.

"Dr. Konrad Schaefer was assigned as a Junior grade or assist¬
ant physician to tho Research Instituto for Aviation Medicine, Borlino.
Up to tho end of 19U3 — at whioh tiro I wont to Silesia to stay — I
frequently had opportunities to talk to him and therefore I am in a
position to givo information on his scientific capability and his per¬
sonality.

"Scientific capability: Dr. Schaofcr is a serious scientist
who applied his thorough knowledge of tho most modern methods of
biological science to all problems with which he was confronted. In
this canr.or he also carried out tho scientific research assignments
which ho received free the Luftwaffe Ifcdical Inspectorate. Ho also
handled his investigations on the physiology of thirst in this way,


G323


2 J«> H I B U»3-;taloy (Int. Von Schoen)

Court Ho 4 I,

and it was due to this that his experiments on the development of
Zoo loth for making sea water potable were crowned with success. Ho
was not afraid of performing experiments on hirself, and in 19U2 he
and two of his female assistants conducted a throe-day thirst experi¬
ment, This experiment belongs in tho category of heroic nodical self-
oxperinents ard the three participants nay bo justly proud of it.

"Personality and political views* Dr, Schaofcr is a very hunane
and socially tainted nan, a good friend and conradc and a modost char-
actor. Ho is very intelligent. In tho Third Reich he was unlucky in
his university carocr, as ho was a pronounced antagonist of National
Socialisn. I had repeated examples of his views when I discussed pol¬
itics with hiri. It was also duo to his anti-Nazi viows that ho had to
go into industry, wbero ho worked successfully as a sciontific dopart-
cont chiof.

■As to his views on oxporinonts on humans, I know from a conver¬
sation which I had with hin in 19l*2 that ho was decidedly against ex¬
periments tho voluntary naturo of which could bo doubted for any reason
at all. I thoroforo fool that, as far as I can judge from horo, Dr.
Konrad Schaofor cannot bo involved in tho matters now being ploaded in
Nurnborg by anything but an unfortunate constellation."

Document No. 2 on pago 3 will bo Exhibit 2. It is an affidavit
by Dr. Helmut Vcnxjst, dated 23 January 191*7. It roads:

"I have known Dr. :*d. Konrad Schaofor, born 7 January 1911, for
many years. We both studied at the saao high school (hunanistischos
Gymnasium) in Landau/Pfalz, whore we graduated in 1930. Wo woro to¬
gether for nearly all the sonostors of our medical studios at Hoidol-
bore, Innsbruck ard Berlin universities. >7o were not merely chance
school follows and study companions, but wero also close friends* I
therefore have exact knowledge of Dr. Schaefer's w>rk outlook and con¬
ception of life. Until 19l*0 whon our paths were divided by profession¬
al duties, his political attitude was clear and distinct. It was in
opposition to National Socialism. I know that up to this time Dr.


2 Jun-M-JB-Wi-Jfeloy fjnfc. Von Schon)
Court Ho. I.


Schaefer did not belong to the Party or to any of its organizations.

In all our political discussions ho rover failed to express his stark
opposition to National Socialise. Shortly before taking our Stato
2 {edical Examination in Heidelberg in 1935, considerable difficulties
were created for us both by the National Socialist Students* Council
which questioned our admissibility to tho State Examination. Tho offic¬
ial charge against us was based on tho fact that wo did not belong to
the Party or to any of its organizations or to the National Socialist
Students* League• "

As Exhibit No. 3 I offer English Document 3, German Document 2lj,
English paec US, Gorman pagO 52 and 53. It is an affidavit by Dr. Hel¬
mut Roichol free Bad Fyrmont:

"I cot Dr. Schaefer through Prof. Juorgens when I workod with
then both before tho war in tho Naturo Health Clinic in Berlin. I had
no official connection with Dr. Schaofor. Through my friendship with
Prof. Juorgons, basod on many years of joint work, I was woll informed
about tho internal affairs. Prof. Juorgons, as a world-famous homotol-
oeist, had principally scientific interests. Ho rogarded tho political
point of view forced upon his subordinate colloaguos in tho clinic as
falsa and irksome. In this connoction Dr. Schaofor was montionod to mo
os an oxcoption and as a man who, although possessed of scientific
obilitios, did not approve of tl» political tondoncy at that tine.

Prof. Juorgens was therefore always afraid of losing him.

"Whon Dr. Schaofor had to loavc tho Clinic, his doparturo was
described to no as a confirmation of our fears.

"/if tor all those years I cannot ro member do toils about discus¬
sions which took placo then. 3ut I renoaber Dr. Schaofor as a man who
dedicated himself to serious and conscious responsible research, and*
who wont into private industry because his path to tho State Clinics
was barred for political reasons

8330


»


2 Jun. 17 iivc'rrn (von Schon)

Court ’to. 1


I should like to stop there.

As Inhibit -Jo. 4, I sh“ll offer Znglish Document Ho. 4,

Gcracn !.'o. 25 , pngos 6 to 8. This is rn affidavit by Dr. R’ns
Bruns:

"I snko the following affidavit:

"I made th- acquaintance of Dr. Konrad Sc hr. offer in 1935 at
tho Hydrothor.apoutic University Clinic, Berlin, Harwikstr. 2.

'.'o wuro both working there ns sudical internees nd 1 -ter .is
voluntary physicir.ns under Professor Rudolf Ju_rgcns. Sinco
ft’ofessor Rudolf Juergons :.n internr.tiorrlly ronewnod hematologist
— r. dicvr.sc of the blood investigated by hin on the Aland Islands
wo a rr.ojd after iii_i "Thrcnbr.sthonia Juorgor.s-Uillebrandt' —>nostly
dealt with problems of hooatology, wo worked at first on such
probleas.

"Nhilft working together . rd 'Iso through our friendly relations,
which Lasted for several years until 19A1 — when 3 wos drafted for
military service - I learned to estcon Dr. Schaeffer as an excellent,
judicious, diligent 'nd horv-st scientist with a knowledge of chemistry
and physiology far exceeding the usual medical level. In 11 ids
scientific research work his self criticism ard honesty stood out
prominently so that .11 the works publishod by him are products of
tho .-aost serious scientific research.

"!!y reason lor fostering ay friendly relations with Dr. bch-efor,
which b y f*r exceeded the usual contact between two colleagues,
was due in no mall ol a sure to his high conception of scientific
honesty nd fairness -nd to his high -steoa of tho nodical profession
which I ah ro also, conception which surely prevented him, from
a scientific as -.*uU s . roa human point of view, Iren carrying aut
expv.ri.’xnts on human beings which could h'Yo d'ngerous or ov.n fatal
results.

°!ly friendly relations toward 3r. Schaefer were, moreover,
influenced by a far re-chin.- agrecojnt in our political views.

"hy awn ’nti-na.zi attitude is to be sc.n ! ren the attached

8331


2 June LI -i$-£-3*>pkp- l!cohan (von Schon)
Court Mo. i


affidavit node by Mrs. Serti Schncidor, at present in Zuurich,
Switzerland, at the u e If are center for tfo. vie tins of Facisra,
Hildoahoin."

I need r.ot reed all this sta tec.cn t, it will be Exhibit No. 5,
it is Docusmt :io. L-k, English pages 9 to 11. Gcraon 29. I shell
read it.

I shell continue to read Ex h i b it

"In ids frequent ling conversations Dr. Schaefer ofton usod
drastic expressions -gainst thu rrovailing systea of that ti.au end
its lenders. I also confided to Dr. Sc hr.-for that I was engaged to
c half Jewess, the then lira 3urgschnt, new* lire. Schnoider. Ono aay
Jvx'.go froa this the extent of confidence I nlaccd in Dr. Schaefer
an d how convinced I aust br.Ye been of his political reliability
when I told hie a fact which would hrvo cost rae raore than ray position
at th't t ico.

What infuriated oo raost was that Dr. Schaefer, who had proved
hlraself so outstanding .a young physician interested in science,
could not continu. his career at th- university, because he did not
belong to the NSDAP or to any of its or. animations. Hcnever, Dr.
Schaefer preferred to renounce a c^rt-in career at the university
father than bew to * systua which he rejected as contrary to Ms
political convictions.

Sven after rer.cn at rat ions by our rautnzl chief, Professor
Jurgens, who greatly usteesxd Dr. Scha-for and was unwilling to
loso his corvice -s .a collaborator “nd who told hir. that ho could
not kc-p hin i f he did not join sco- or aniz.aticn. Dr. Schaefer
regained true to is politic" 1 convictions.

Dr. Sc hoof or was r-novod ‘ ft-on the university as voluntary

assistant because ho did not belong to any of the party organisations .
when the reraoval took place I do not uxactly kn:»*. I know cr.ly thrt
I was a>3t indignant at the tie- -bout this incident as it showed that
when appoint nenta wore/rr.de- to scientific posts at the university


2 Jurt L7 3- pkp- fcc.sbr’.n (von Schon)

Court Uo. 1


politic "1 views - rd rot scientific qualifications noru decisive,

I ar.y therefore tcintr. in with r. clear conscience tlr.t Dr.
Sch-cfcr was not * physician or man possessed of any Nazi ideology."

Tton, I should lilx to offer Docuacnt 5, P'f>s 12 to 15 ,

This will he -Inhibit 6. It is by !£rs. 3aillr. Rahenbrock, Urjburg-
Lohn. I shr.ll not road the entire affidavit, it begins:

"I, Cailir. Rahenbrock, i&rburg-Lahn. have known Dr.

Konrad Schaofor 3incc 1939. I j husband introduced hia to so. Uy
husband know him already in 1936 and Ms anti national socialist
political r ttitudo which ho had held. Dr. Schaofor 'sorkvd .as .an
assistant in the Chcrite, Berlin. tt. had been ccroc lied, so he told
OU, to give up his position beesuo- of his political attitudo,
particularly as ho refused to join tho Party. He describod t*mt
happonod in following words: »'I was called to the Profossor
of ny Institute was -ak-d why I had not yet Joined the P.arty.

To ny answer thot this would not agr^e with ay political point of
viju, !i- toll. to fact thu consequences .as I could not longer stay
in the Inst.t ute."

V’hon I a»t Dr. Schaof-r at that tiao, ho had a Job as aciontific
collaborator :dth tho Schoring AG, Borlin. On tho occasion of our
froquont conversations Dr. Schaefer cponly and without any lestraint
spoke against rational Socialise and the goveraawnt. * e ofton
listonod to f oreign b roadcasts with him and Dr. Schaefer was always
very interested in them. I gathered fro-a Tia remarks that Dr.
Schaofor was an outspoken ar.ti-faci3t.

On 20 July 1944, Dr. Schaefer was with an in ay Landsberg i/artho
apart sent. * e had switched entho radio, and suddenly we heard tho
ncw3 afccut tho attarpt on Adolf Hitler. Assuming that the attfept
had succeodcd he las so overwhelmed w ith Joy that ho entirely

forgot ho>; dangerous the situation was. I raaenber that ho said tho
follcwirg words "at last the bastard is dead". Unfortunately
we were informed soon afterwards that Adolf Hitler was still alive.


2 June Ll Hechan (vcr. Schcc)

Court No. 1


Dr. Schaefer was bitterly disappointed by this news and he openly
expressed his opinion about this. The chances of success of this
attaept were discussed again."

a

I cortinuo aftor two paragraphs:

'Dr. Schaefer was completely against all alii tar iaa in tho
nodical fiold. *fnilo he was called up he hardly ever '.ore unifora,
at least I hardly ever saw Ua in it. Ho was strongly against the
use of specialist physicians as troop physicians and the use of
practical physicians as specialist physicians, respectively, 03
bocaueo of t Yclr ^ack of experience they did n>t meet tic requitc-
no.nts of thoir duties. Accordir^ to all ny observations and
experiences, I oust say that Dr. Schaefor had an ethical conception
of tho medical profession, i.o., to ba a helper of his follow mart,

'Dr. Schaofor r.narked that Cornany would never win tho war.

"On occasional visits Dr. Schaofor laitatod Adolf Hitler
perfectly for general aausmoor.t. Ho pulled part of his hair ovor
his face erti ioitatod lisaothod of spocch, his voice and gestures
and tide Hitler incredibly ridiculous."

Tho document ccntinuos under tho saao Exhibit Ho. 6, it reads
as follone:

17 February, 1947.

"I, Dmi.lia Rah.nbrock,

"I would liko to add tho following to ay ctataaent of 30
January 1947:

"On the occasion of a convorstaion rv-ferrin,; to an announc-munt
circulated by the th~n chief physician. Dr. Conti, I asked Dr.
Schaefer whether i>u and his wifu r. ould not havw to visit this
organization too, 03 th*. requested stated. Dr. Schafer rupliod that
this 'association of idiots' would iv>t be visited by any decen^
physician nci certainly rot by hia and is wife."

The n»::t docuaont Ko. 6, will b. i hibit 7, on page 16, by
Johann- s Nowak, Ifcaburg:

"I hrivu Iajo:m N:. Konrad Schaefer for -any yuars. I net hip


2 Jum 47 -i^5-oIa- Meehan (von Scfaon)
Court rto. 1


one day in Berlin at the becks hop of Ernst Doenig through a autual
friend, Mrs. Erika Koenig. .Dr. Schaafor at that tico was junior-
physician in tho Luftwaffe; in the ensuing conversation tc expressed
his hatred and antipathy for tho Nazi regine. After that I
frequently ait Dr. Schaefer, at the bookshop and at other actings ho
-xpressod his groat disgust about the regiac, especially a bout
the treatment of Russian prisoners of war and Jews and tho drafting
of Juveniles a nd woman into the armed services, so that I had to
warn hi*, since h o was wearing uniforn, not to be so careless as
to -ndanger b oth of us.

I oust oop ha size that neither Dr. Schaefer nor Mrs. Koenig knew
that I was not of aryan descent so that he could not have talk.d
against the No-is so adversely just to please mu. Our cocraor.
hatred for tho dictatorship led to a genuine friendship and after
I had to floo fraa Berlin I tret Dr. Schaefer hire in Knaburg
whore h*. expressed his happinoss about tho end and told at that now

•

at last he could work as a free nan and live for his reoearch work.
Dr. Schoefor is a -reat idealist who rosoocts hucan like abovo
everything and who® views are known to ju as definitely anti-
nazi."


3335


2 June U7-?W.7I)*«6-l-?utty (von Schoen)
Court No, 1


English Docuasnt IIo, 7 Goman #27 will be Exhibit No, 8, pages 17
and 18, page 65-66 of tho Goman "Erwin Schulz, Borlin-Gatoir,

"I havo known Dr, Schaefer since 19U1 and frequently not hin as I
was in chargo of and looked after his sailing boat. Since I frequently
spoke with Dr, Schaefer about the Hitler rorinc and the National
Socialist ideology, I fian but say Dr. Schaefer could not possibly have
thought and acted along Nazi lines. He also knew that I listened
together with foreign civil workers to English nows broadcasts; he
warned no to bo careful as it night cost no ny head. During his loavo
wo listonod together to foreign broadcasts, I wasnover ablo to detect
Nazi tendencies during tho ensuing discussions. I looked up Dr.
Schaofer when I was drafted into tho Navy at tho end of 19 Uj to ask
for his advico. Ho gavo no the following instructions as to how to
conduct nysolf, I should wait until tho Jay of ny drafting, then call
a doctor an’ pro tone’, that I was suffering free ischias. Dr, Schoofor
explained to no oxr.ctly how I should act. *"ith his holp I was ablo to
succeed in this docoption so that I was roloasod fron ailitary duty.

If nocossary* I can produco witnossos in this nattor, 'rs. &•, Olatzol,
Spandau, Jaczowweg, Antsarzt, Dr. Franznoior, Spandau, as well as
Hr, Franz Pycha, Spandau, ’/oimoistorhom, Tho latter can also tostify
to our listening to nows broadcasts,

"My political foolings aro woll known and o3tablishod facts in tho
district in which I live, that I thought and acted as a Socialist
boforo and during tho Nazi period. Proofi ny absolute opposition to
military Aity, ny refusal of war work and ny nonborship in tho Legion
for Hunan Rights,"

Document 8, page 19* will be Exhibit No. 9. It conos fron Erich
Lehmann, chemist, Hannovor-Horrcnhauson. I shall road na ny excerpts.

"I u ave known Dr. ned, Konrad SC3/.ZF2R for abort 10 yoars. Ho
had been rcconcar.ded to se in professional circles as being well
acquainted with phamacolo'y and as being an important scientific


2 June li7-'4-A7D-6-2-Pu r ty (Int, von Schoen)
Court !fo* 1


chords t» At that tlaa I was working on the'Emyne preparations which
had just been introduced, and I was in need of an absolutely reliablo
nodical nan with the above-osntlonod reputation to assist no with
control experiments.

"In the many years during which I was permitted to work together
with Dr. SCHAEFER, the specialized knowledge nentioned above was
proved to tho full. Our sciontific work led to a vory doso friend¬
ship, so that I was ablo to gain a doop insight into his human and
political views.

"I porsonally have boon a Socialist for nany yoars. I 3ubscribod
to this conviction ovon boforo tho first World War, and I an a nonber
of tho Goman Social-Dcnocratic Party. Owing to ry political views I
was violontly opposed to tho Nazis fron tho very beginning. IXiring
tho Vforld War of 191AA8 I sorvod on tho Western Front fron tho start
until I was soriously woundod in tho fall of 1917, and I was o confiraod
pacifist whon returning to ay civilian occupation* I thoroforo was
dolightod to find in Dr. SCKABFSR a nan who shared cy viorrs and who,
in full agrooraont with no, disapproved of Rational Sociali3n and all
it stood for. ’.'o ngrood Just as mch on tho subjoct of war and its
consoquonooso SCHAEFER Was a dyo>in-tho wool pacifist. I do not
think that until thor. SCH..EFSR had over known hatrodj but ho hatod
National Socialisn with an urtooliovnbly strong hatred and usod to tann
tho syston to hell.

"We often usod to discuss thoso outrageous torrorist and
dictatorial measures. At such tines SCHAEFER usod to expross hinself
in tho nost violont toms against the despots. How often did wo air
tho question, whether it would not bo possible sonehoir to olininato

0

thoso bandits, in spite of everything .

"Dr. SCHAEFAR consistently-^nt-.>d the !lJ7i racial theory. ..'hen
SCHAEFER was called into the airy at srj later cfato wo wore separated

for a short tine; however, Schaefer often wrote and told no about his

*

life with tho "PrussiansI could tell fron the thinrshe wrote how


2 Aina li7-»U.TI>^-3-Futty (Int. von Schoen)

Court 1

difficult it was for hie to adjust hisself to the blind Prussian
discipline. "Then Schaefor then was ordered bade to Berlin, it always
pleased me to see that ho never woro uni fore when in ay company. He
ha tod the amy and the uniform as nuch ashe hated fiational Socialism."

I skip the next two paragraphs.

"Publications by Jewish authors, oven works which contained only
brief references to such, woro banned by the NSDAP startire fron 1939.

I had, at that tine, to run through air wholo archive in Borlin in
order to sort out and disposo of all Jewish works on the subjects of
medicine, cheeds try and pharracolosy. Thoro was not a Journal or rovier
which would accept such articles, oven excerpts of than for publication.

In order to oxplain this toStirsorjy, I offor Document Schaofor 38

qs 10.

THE PRESI1HT: 3cforo procoodinc with this, tho Court will bo in
rocoss for a few ninutoa.


rocoss was taken,)


t June 47—M-AX—8-1-Xarrow-(Brown)

Court 1

TH3 MARSHAL: The Trltxjnal is again in session.

TH3 PRESIDENT: Counsel nay proceed.

DR. MaRX: (Defense Counsel for the defendant Bec¬
ker- Frey seng) : Mr. President, I ask pernission to make
an explanation. The nan called as an expert for professor
Scnroeder, Becker-Freysang and Beiglboock, Professor Dr.
Volhardt, from Frankfurt, who was approved by th;

Tribunal, has now arrived. Professor Volhardt is a
scholar and scientist of International repute. Therefore,
what he has to say will be of goneral interest and perhaps
it will bo very docislve in deciding the outcome of this
trial and the evaluation of these throe defendants.
Professor Vollhardt has only a little time at his disposal
Hu la the Director of the University Clinic for Internal
hodlcino of the University of Frankfurt .and must return
on ’./odnosday to r. tto.V a scientific ccnfjrenco. I there¬
fore ask the Tribunal to permit Professor Vollhardt to
testify tomorrow morning at the boginning of the sosslon
so th.it ho can tostlfy as an export.

Tti£ PRESIDENT: Has tho prosecution any objoctlon?

MR. HrtRDY: Tho prosecution has no objoctlon, Your
Honor, but the prosecution would llko to know substantial¬
ly what this witness is going to tostlfy to. Vhothor it
will bo tho sen water experiments or other experiments.

TH£ PRESIDENT: Will counsel advise the prosecution
as to the specific matters of the proposed witness's
testimony?

DR. MARX: Mr. President, this expert will testify
for us primarily regarding tho sea water experiments.
Perhaps, in addition, ho will make a general statement
regarding experiments on human bolngs, cut that is not


8339


E June 47 -H-aX— d-3-SCarrcw-(3rcwn)
Court 1


absolutely nocossory and. In the main, he will confine
himself to the points regarding sea water experiments.

THS PRESIDENT: Will defense counsel, as soon as
possible, furnish a statement of the witness. The usual
written statement that the witness will be called?

DR. H.»RZ: Hr. Proaldont, I don't believe that that
is expedient since the expert will testify hero before
the Tribunal. Questions ore to be asked of this expert...

THE PRESIDENT: (.Interrupting); I referred simply
to the usual typewritten statement that such-and-such
a witness will be called for certain defendants.

DR. rURX: Wo applied through the Socr^tary-Oeneral
ar.d the witness has boon approved for Schrocdor, 3ockor-
Froysong and, so far as I know, for Dr. Stelnbauor for
Dr. 5elglboeck.

THE PRESIDENT: That will bo satisfactory. Tho
witness will bo hoard tomorrow nornlng at the oponlng
of tho Tribunal, but this usual form that tho witness
will be called at ouch a time should bo fllod for tho
records of the Tribunal. Counsol will have no difficul¬
ty in procuring that fora.

DR. MaRX: Very woll, Your Honor.

HR. HoHrtNSf: Hay It pleaso the Tribunal, I am
advised and bolleve that tho expert witness to be called
tomorrow will tostlfy from original German documents or,
at least, alleged original documonts, concerning tho
soa water experiments. That is to say the defendant Belg-
lboeck has, in his possession, original charts and records
concornlng the experiments which he carried out in Dachau.

If the witness is to testify concerning those original
records and is to base his testimony upon thorn, I think

32.0 - *

-I


2 Juno 47-arrow-(Brown)

Court 1

that thoy will havo to bo Introduced Into ovldonce tomor-
row bo that ho will testify concerning those documents.

The prosecution has not received any copies of those
original documents. I think we're entitled to them In
ordor to be able to formulate our own questions to put to
tho witness and to permit our experts to study tho originals,
tfe'ro also entitled to twenty-four hours' notice on any
documents which rro to bo submitted. I therefore request
that, if It Is true that this oxpert Is to base hla testim¬
ony upon alleged clinical reports prepared by 3olglboeck
at Daohau, that thoy bo roducod today in their original
form and pusentod to The prooooutlon.

THJ PRESIDENT: «ny original documents concerning
which the witness will testify should be filed In tho
offlco of tho Sooretary General where thoy nay be examined
by counsel of the prosecution. If copies nro available,
copies should bo furnlshod the proseoutlon today, but if
copies are not available, tho original documents should bo
filed in the office of the Secretary Gonoral.

DR. STEINS.JJER: (Dofonse counsel for the defendant
Boiglboock^; dr. President, at groat troublo to myself,

I havo found the originals of the-records of those exper¬
iments and on tho 20th of January I showod thorn to tho
export of the prosecution. Dr. Alexander, In tho prosonco
of an American professor who was a specialist In this
field, Profess?r Ivy, and both these men have roturned
the documents to me. Thereupon, I made thorn available to
Professor Volhardt and I hope ho will return then to me
at noon and, f£ that tine, I shall turn then over to tho
Secretary General. Thus, it will be possible to show them
to the prosecution. However, It is Impossible for me to


2 June 4?-M-a2-3-4-Karrow-( Srovn)

Court 1

naico copies of thoso because a great many of them arc Just
notes, partly charts and graphs and such things which It
Is technically Impossible to reproduce. However, as I said
the exports for the prosecution havo already seen those
documents.

HR. HcHjiiiSf: Well, of course. If the documents are In
the possession of tho export thoy can't bo made available
today and wo will not Interpose any objection to calling
tho witness tomorrow. But, at the 6amo time, we will
require that wo be furnished coles, which oan bo photos¬
tated vory simply, for future study. I do not think It la
truo that we have soon all tho originals of those documents.
I am alvlsod that Dr. Stelnbauer oven has tho names of the
pooplo who wore subjected to theso experiments, yot I find
no reflection of thoao documents in the document books so
far submitted for the dofondant Boiglboock and, of courso.

It la quite Important for the prosecution to havo that
information.

•

IH2 ?fi23ZD£NT: Counsol for the dofondant Belglboeok
stated that those documents might bo available to him at
noon today and if thoy are, he will fllo them with the
office for the docrotary Oenoral whero they nay be examined
by tho prosecution.

P 0

Counsol for the dofondant Schasfor may proceed.

Just a moment.


3342


2 June 47-V*-S3-^-l-Uelcy(£rcro)

Court ?fc. 1

THE PHeSIDETi I would like to address counsel for defendant Beigcl-
bcck. It wea the intention of the Tribunel to instruct counsel thet
ell of tfceso documents, vheteTir they ere, cssoon (s they errive should
bo filed with tbs office of the Secrotery Ger.erel to bo eveiltble to the
Prosecution. Thet refers to all the avd leble (bcuaor.ts. Decs
counsol unloratnr.d thotf

DR. SIEKBaDERi * p?rt of these docuaor.ts cro lcrcedy induded
in ay dcainont becks Ko®» 2 end 2, which will bo put in evidorco
■hen the Boigelbock ceso ones up.

THE FRESIDSrTiGa cr.urso, these docunentathr.t tro f voilcblo in Boigol-
bock's dccunor.t book need not bo filed In tho Office of the Secretery
General. They arc elreedy ttoro.

CB. STn:SADcRi How over, it is not neccsscry. for lnstcrcc, in order
to understand this wholo aettcr fer ao to jut in the r.tnos of the
oxpcriaontcl subjects. It is quite oncugh for ac to put in tho nurbtrs,
However, to ho to nothing to aoncoel end nothing to hido. It is not
r.occoscry thet tho noses of theso unfortunate persons, who perheps
cro still clivo, should beccdo public here so thet they ero tvnlloblo
tc tho press. I . ca e dccor.t huarn being, feel rvyaclf obligated in
tho wey in which tho storilizod Polish subjects wero protected from
unplecaor.t publicity, I fed tb» t tho nctxs of thoso pooplo :lso shoilld
bo kopt free being acdo public, ^ut if tho Tribunel wishes I'll nubnit
the list.

THETRlSIDETi Tho TVituncl sees no creprrisen between these

experiaerts end such oxperiaonts cs thoso thet were cnductcd by ray

of sterilization. If tho prcpcaod witness is to testify fren dooinents

containing the r.eaea of witnesses, then those docuaonts should btf filed

in tho cfflco of the Sec ret try General • ith the others. If the aibjocts

were not herned by these ex-erInert3 then there cen be no hr.re to

%

then if their renes ere contiored fr:a tho witr.oss stciid end nothing
will be lest with c few hours delay in or king these r.cones cvcllcblo.

&3L3


2 Juno 47-:^ —Q-2-Mfl-y(3rcT7n)

Court No. 1

IR. STEDiaaJERs Very voll* Consol fer defendant Schaefer nay
proceed.

DR. PELCKX’^i Your He©or, I bed reed Exhibit 9 in jn-t. In this
exhibit Ur. Latcenn certified that the publicctior.s of Jewish cuthcrs
--ore strictly forbidden b the Netionel Socialist Party, end thet it
xes elao forbidden to quote thcc. In this connection I put in Exhibit
No* 10. Thet is Dccunont 33, frm which the foil owing can be soon.

This is c Kiontific paper by the dofendent Schaefer rogrrding tho
blood picturo of whito rico in cxperinontel infections end chcniccl
therapy. This is Docunont 39, end eppeers in the supplen'ntery voluno.
Tho Prosecution arrf tho Court teve tfco dexuaont, but tho interpreter'
do not. Hcwover, I shell not qurto fr.-a it, so perhaps tho inter¬
preters cor. dispenso with it. Tho rork is ontitlod ’Tho Blood Picturo
of tho -hi to Meuso in feporlaontaX Infoctions and Chcr.othorr.py, • end
on pogo 26l is a bibliography, and it is this bibliography which
Dr. Schaefer oppor.ds to his r-rk. This bibliography contains tho nones
Levy and Lcowonstoin. M tho oonclusion of this pepor thcro is rvor.tion
of tho fbet that it wesnot pcsSblo to print colored reproductions
because of the war situation. This proves thet tho pepor was published
during tho war, that is after 1939. end tho ritr.oss Lohrenn in l.is
affidavit hessteted that at loest 4 nee 1939 it *ca forbiddon to
queto Jewish scientific papers. Dccunont 38 -ill bo exhibit 10. I
oontiauo nowin ry reeding of exhibit 9. Decuoont 8, Exhibit 9. on

pege 21 , the third paregrtph froc tho last!

•la ny opinion Dr. Schaefer is a research scientist with uraisuol
intellectual gifts and idocs, of when one cay still expuct greet
things.*

I shell new skip the next paragraph end ra;d the concluding paragraph!

•In ry profession as e ehezdst cr.d scientific worker I rcy scy
wit cut flattering nyself that I have bec^voo ac-ucint-.d with alncst
ell tranches cf r.edicir.oj I knew clinical physicien£ end priveto

8344


2 June 47-:i-S7-9-3-L'olcy(5rcvr)
Court No* 1


practitioners elnost ell ever Germeny, end thereforo I tsr. eble tc
fern on occur etc opinion cn e doctor* * doctor oust, ebove ell be on
understanding hum® being who is eble to comprehend end appreciate the
nee s cf sick people. Only then his nodical knowledge oonesin. In a
hippocretic sense. Dr. Schaefer conforms to both cf these ©inceptions.

Extensive physiological learning end inexhoustiblo knowla-dgo esc
physician — thet is D r . Schaefer.•

The next document is Dccinent No* 9. Pego 23 of the English Dccunent
Bock. This will be Exhibit 11. This is a phctc-copy, end on tho
second page of this phctc-copy there is Dr. Ilso Kuntzo's effidevit
of 2 J emery 1947. pert cf which I shell rerdi
•Sinco tho Spring of 1943 I fatf boon working on ry Doctor thesis
under Doctor Ocnred SCRaX?SS. I heve knora Dr. 93HAEFZR sinco 193&
and through his conversations with no and with others I learned to
know hin as c determined OD«cy of National Socialism. Of that period,

I know tco, that his rofuscl to jcin tho Party or er.y Nrtlcnr1 ScciollPt
association compelled hin to resign his appolntmont as assistant at tho
Hydro-thcT 1 peutical Instituto in Berlin. Ho froquontly voicod his
anti-Nazi opinion so openly ovon in tho proscrco of strergoro, thft vvo,
his friends and acquaintances feared tho consequences which this
attitude night havo for hin and s-metises rcstroinod hin.

Noithor by OOeviction r.or in his bccrirg was ho c militarist. After
his dreft into tho Luftweffo to accepted a pceiticn in cviction-
rxdicel rcscerch, s ho hinsclf told no at thrt tine, only In order
tc be able to continue his private work at Sc hexing A.G. end tc cacapo
the nilitcry restrictions to which a Tkupponcrzt has tc submit . Ho
detested wearing uniform. Eo therefore usually appeared in civilian
clothes end wore uniform on official occasions only. He wont into the
Research Institute for aviation Medicine only in order to deliver his
roport3, — I cstimeto that thrt heponed every month, sinco he worked *n
in the laboratories outside tho Institute.

' 6345

•: i


2 Jure &7-y.-SV-9->i-Malcy( = rcun)
C^urt :.*c, 1


At that tine I vesbusy preparing =y dee ter's thesis on the moltr
c cceectretioc of the blocd during thirst. My aileborttion with
SJHAEFER enabled me to see that his scientific methods were exceed¬
ingly ex'ct end reliable. His long eetivity in the reoln of pher-
rxeclogy hod eccustcccd hln tbrtfcb prretico of trying out medice-
oenta and ether rccodicson human boings only after they htd been tested
chemically, liercocclogicclly end in experiments on ft n l ce ls.

1 distinctly remember the following ineidont in tho Fell of 19/i3.»

"hilo uo wero inspecting tho lcborctiorios which wore jxit ft tho dis¬
posal of Dr. SCH*ZFEB and n solf in the Fhysiolcgicnl Institute of tho
University of B od in end discussed tho prollnincry rosilts of cur
thirst experiments on voluntary experimental aibjccts, o Stebscrzt of •
tho Yokraceht wes present, nho, during c privtto discusd on on tho
difficulty ofpxocuring voluntary oxporimontol subjects sold, why not
use inmates of con or.treticc corps. Cutrogcd, SOH EFB< rojcctcd tho
idoc with such orthosis thtt I secretly nado signs to hln to restrain
hlnsolf since I thought SSHAEF-Jl's romarks vory hazardous, considering •
tho rank of tho Stebsirzt.*

I shell retd tho lett paragraph on. erbtfxr occasion.

I one new to the affidavit of Miss Inc ven Bocttichcr, Document
Kc« 10 , page 36, of the English Dccuacnt Book. This rill be Exhibit
12. *ron this document I shell reed first of ell only the last tno
paragraphsj pego 37 end pego 38 of tho English Dccumont Book, bcccuso
tho bt of the offidevit I shell rerd in a different context.

•As I lived for elnost two years with the Sc he ofcr fonily, I res
well oequianted with the political opinion of Dr. Schaefer. Right
ct tho outset he t:Id me that he *cs-bliged tc work in industry because
he htd refused to join the party and wes not cllc id tie refrre, to
hold on official position. It -is for this ret son th-1 ho loot his
Inst position with e University clinic ani therefore could not fulfill
his greatest desire of establishing himself cs University lecturer.

B%6


r


2 June 47-&USS- Q-3-M1 oy (Brown)
CcurtNc* 1


Tiro end egain he expressed his regret ebcut his. Dr. Schaefer
frequently had arguments and violent political discussions cith Dr.
Foldt who had national socialist tendencies. He ueanot afraid to <onfesa
his antih'czi views to ell tho other rosters of the department end'to
Justify these. Ho actually propagated these. Xr. Keulisch end I were
much irpressod by it end re here enlytto thank hin for not Joining
any organization.*


8347


2 Jan o -Li- FL- 1C -1- 2 i_ oh n (Ir.t. Brown)

C_art Sc. 1

JXcuaent No. 11, page- 39 cf the 3n. lish Document Beck,

I siaply draw the attention cf the Tribunal tc it. It is
cf the sane purport ns the other affidavits and it will re¬
ceive Exhibit No. 13.

Finally, from Document Ho- 12, pa£.o 41, I should like
to rc*d one paragraph. This will be exhibit 14. In this con¬
nection, I shell ror d into th>: record only the l~st p°ra r^ph.
L-t me say that this is "r. affidavit by '!rs Ursula I'lcff
and I quote .

"From the be..innin;j :f eur acquaint<-ncc- I .r.thered from
his r_.arrks that Dr. Schaefer was an opponent of Notional
Socialism. This continue, threu h the v#rr. Dr. dchaefor pass¬
ed reanrks which, as far ‘•s the ideas of that tiac were con¬
cerned, were rbsolutel • 'opposed tc the state.' And it was
tnr-u ;h this attitude that he occasionally enne into con¬
flict with cur Chief, Jr. Fclet, who \vr6 a convict'd suppor¬
ter of NrtienPl iccinlisu."

This cvr.clades ly presentation cf those documents, which
I consider t- bo iei.:ortrnt in clarifying th^ defendant's po¬
litical attitude end his scientific achievements. These two
natters have been considered by the Prosecution i.opcrt-nt
f r all the defendants, indue in; the defendant ‘Schaefer.

The charge that the ofendant Schaefer c:nspired with
all the ether defendants is supperted by the Frcsucuti n an
the charge that Jehaefer occupied a high position in the
Hierarchy cf the Health cervices in Gcraany ant that all
th<- defendants knew of the criaos connected because cf.their
official contact with ^nc an: thor and their ccoiocn medical
interests. This vv~s said cn December 12th by the Prosecution
at roa.t lunjth. In interrojrti.a: Schaefer, I shall refute
this on the basis of d-cuacnts in which I in dolineatin r


8348


2 June-::-*'—1G—2-"e,han (Int.
Court K— 1


his official position Shall prove thrt he- was in the Insti¬
tute only vR rare occasions, that he tcck no part in the
Humber ccnf-r-ncc, etc. I err. dispense with r’iscussin- the
defendant jchaefer's career, that is sot f rth in its essen¬
tial points in the affidavits.

Dr. Schaefer, after you left the Hydro-Therapeutic Ins¬
titute in Berlin.

JUDGE S3BRING : 5y request of the counsel, the swear-
in,, of the witness was dc for red , dc you want hiv. sworn now?

DR. PSLOCUN . Yv-s, Ycur Honor.

BY JUDGE SSBRING i

*}•- Vhr.t is your name ?

...» K-nrad cchacfor.

hill you repeat this octh after ac s
I swor.r by God, the .'.lai hty '•nd Omniscient, that I
will speak the pure truth "nd will withhold and add nothing.
(The vfitness repeated the oth).
jUiXil jSLRING i You *U"y sit down.

ey dr. PELcri/jn; .

t .- Dr. Ichaefer, after you left the Hydro-The ropcutic
Institute in Eerlin bccaus. you n: fused to join the Nazi
Party , what position die you take ?

a.- I went to dehor in*, Aktion - estllschaft to tho Chc-
:.utherapeutical laboratory them and was under Dr. Foldt,

•h; vrs chi*.f of tho laboratory at that tine.

..- In what field did you work there during the course
of the years ?

In the field of Chemical therapy, that is to say
the examination cf che-nic*>l substance to ascertain their


effects or. various diseases


2 Juno -IFL-10- 3*1 lech an (Inti
Court Ho. 1

V- Did ycu c-rry cut anin-1 experiments in this con¬
nection ?

f»-S.

4 «- llany or few ?
riany.

c .- Di- you also cerry cut experiments cn huoan bcinp.s?

A— No.

■ 6 .- Until whet year di- ycu function in this capacity
at Schorin^ ?

Until the end cf the war, until the bo'-.inninj: of
1944 r.s Dr. Feldt 1 s assistant and from then cn ee director
cf the department because durin/; the spring of 1914 Dr. Feldt
was killed in an air attack.

V- Frea ! larch of 1944 ?

A.- YwS.

r i- m out in 1911 ycu entered the Luftwaffo •, is that so?

A.- Yes.

A .«- Hew was it possible then for ycu from 1941 to 1945
to hold a position at Sch-rinj ?

.vftor ay period of basic tr-ininfj, which lasted o
fow .»nth6, I return.! to Schcrin- .».G. and I reclined a.
scl-ier.

• v . - ..nd when did ycu beccrx. an Unterarzt of the Luft¬
waffe ?

A.- In the ©.inner cf 1942.

4 .- Dhat is an Unter-rzt cf the Luftwaffe ?

.»•- That is one r~d_ bclcw r lieutenant , in ether*
words a sorvoant.

«.•- In this context, I nay p-int cut to the court that
in Decu.ivnt 5ock He. 5, Document Ko. 177, Exhibit No. 133,
there is the- minutes -f the conference of 23 *fcy 1944 and
Dr. ochaefer is mentioned as a participant in t .is ccnfe-

• I-

8350


2 Jane-II-?L-10-4-* ic chrn (Int* Brown)
C_urt Kc. 1


rence end under No. 14, Dr. Schaefer is dcsi~nated ir. the
Sn. lish translation as a ncn-commissioned officer, which of
coarse is not on officer 4 *

Hew did you co02 to take up your activities in the se¬
rial medical research institute ?

A.- In 1942, I was transferred to Juctcrbo~ and assign¬
ed t. the Research Institute for Aviation Medicine in Berlin
at the sa„t«j tine.

Q«- You singly aenticn the nanc of Jueterbor } what
w'-s your position there ?

A.- I was in the medical trinin£* and «x?crinentl de¬
partment.

t .- In thiB medical training and research department
in Juoterbcg what position did you occupy ?

A.- None.

Kow 1 8 that ?

A.- That was simply n formality at the Rcsocrch Insti¬
tute for Aviation Medicine, there were no military ranks or
offices, only civilian offices end since I had to be offi¬
cially accoanodated in one way or another I was put into
this or v;as trar.sz*erred to this training and experimental
department in Jueterbog, which paid my salary by money or¬
der to Eerlin.

The Prosecutor, however, has assumed that there was
some official connection between everybody who belonged un¬
der this table of organization to Jueterbog , is this assump¬
tion so and Professor Holzloehner also officially belonged
to this department, does that mean you had official contact
with Professor Holzloehner ?

A.- No, that assumption is entirely incorrect. I heard
here that Professor Holzloehner did not work in Jueterbog
*it..er, bit mainly in Kiel. I do ncjt know irofessor H 0 I 2 -


2 June-;i-*~-lC-5-::e«har. (Ira. Brovr.)

Court No. 1

loehner at all nor car. I even remember his person.

'«•- perhaps you sent reports to the Medical Train¬
ing and Experimental Department ?

a.- No, that never happened.

*•“ was there any actual connection between you and
this department which could fce charged against you really
by the Prosecution ?

A.- None at all.

you said that you simply drew your salary from there
by money order , is that so ?

A.- Yes.

t .- Now, to clarify this position of dr. Schaefer,

I should like to put in from Document Book No. 1, Document
13, this will be Sxnibit No. 15, page 42 of the English Do¬
cument book. This is an affidavit from Dr. Warner Knothe of
Gosiar. When Becker-Ereyseng was on the stand and also through
on affidavit, it was ascertained that Dr. Knothe was the
director of the Medical Training and Experimental Deportment
that I anst state here, because unfortunately that state¬
ment is not included in the affidavit. I shall reed the docu¬
ment, it is very brief ;

"Dr. med Konrad Schaefer, whoa I hardly remember per¬
sons liy, cr.s not a member of the personnel of the Medical
Experimental end Training Department of the Luftwaffe and
never worked in Jueterbog either. It is possible that ho
'/ns assi.jr.cd to the department's payroll, this I cannot rc-
meater. The Medical Inspectorate sometines put people on
the budget appropriation of the department even if actual¬
ly they had nothing to do with the department. The files of
those people were kept in the office of the department or
in the administrative offices of the Jueterbog aerodrome


3352


2 June-.(Int* Brown)

Court i\o. 1

for purposes of administration and pay."

L;t me again draw your attention to Document 177, Ex¬
hibit No. 133 f This document you will certainly remember it,
Jr. .,chaefer was in the list of distribution that would
subsequently be sent to the experimental department in Jue-
terbog , if that is so, can you state whether you ever saw
this document ?

A.- No, I never saw this document. That is to ery
that I saw it for the first time when it w^s shown to me
during ny interrogations.


2 Jane U7-?S-..:D-il-i-Ritty (Int. Brown)

Court So. 1

Q Can you in this connection say whether you saw any of the
documents which the Prosecution included in Itocuncnt Book No. 5 as

9

incriniratlr^ docunents, particularly the ori.-Inals of tho documents
on conferences, letters of 3i*nlor»3, letters fron the defendant,
Schrocder, etc? How was the conprtible with your activities at tho
Aerial Hodical Research Institute?

A All of these docoaonts I saw hero for tho first tino.

Q Now what is tho significance of your assi-mont to tho AArial

Hodical Rosoarch Instltuto?

A That noant that I was to mko ny scientific capabilities
availablo to thio institute*

Q But you Just said that durin- tais wholo Foriod you woro
activo in tto Schorine fim, evon os a director of a department at
tho end. Now how can ycu Co this and still bo activo in the Aerial
Nodical Rosoarch Institute?

A That was quito conpatlblo* In tho Research Institute thoro was
only a lied tod nunbor of positions. Consequently, tho director of tho
Institute, Prof os s or Strughold, rocolvod permission to carry out tho
work of tho Institute in tho laboratories of tho Schoring A. 0. I
askod for this portdssion and rocoivod it.

Q And this nado it poesiblo for you to stay always with tho firm,
is that so?

A Yes.

Q Vital t was tto relationship botwoon tho work ycu did for the fim
and tho work you did for tho Institute?

A I could keep ny provious position with the fim an:', in addition
I did tho work for tho Rosoarch Institute.

Q You did then sort of incidentally, you say, on tho side?

A Yosj they were a relatively snail part of ny total work,

Q How often mro you actually at the Aerial Medical Research
Institute in Berlin?

335A *


2 Juno Ii?-*^TD-ll-2-Putty (Int. 3roim) - _

Ccurt No. 1

A About onco a aonthj

Q "by wore yew thoro?

A To ropert on what I had dono or to settlo sons formalities op
to fetch apparatus.

DR. fSLCK'AKNi In thia connoction I eight return to Exhibit
No. 1U. This is i!rs. Ursula Zgloff's affidavit, and I nay road tho
following fron tho first para graph*

"Fron 1936 to 19U5 I was a nedical-technical assistant in the
chemothorapoutical do parent of tho fira of Schorlng A. 0., Berlin.

In 1937, Dr. Konrad Sc hoofer boca&o a co-werkor in tho sano laboratory.
Dr. Adolf Foldt was our oitual chief. During this tino, that is, ovon
after ho was drafted into tho Luftwaffo, B*. Schaofcr was nostly
presont and nt work in tho laboratory, oxcopt when ho was away on an
occasional official trip."

I should now like to pit in Docur»nt No. lh. This xri.ll bo Exhibit
16, pago ii3. This is tho affidavit by Ulrich C. Luft and roads as
followsi

"Birin*; tho poriod in \rttich ho was assigned to tho Aviation
aodicino Ro s oar eh Instituto, Dr. nod. Xonrad SCHAEFER oontinuod his
civilian work with tho fim of Schoring A.O. in Borlin. Tfhilo
carrying out his Aitics for tho Uodical Inspoctorato of tho Luftwaffe,
ho was novor actuaUy in the Aviation Ttodicino Research Instituto
builcling itself, but worked in his laboratory at Sobering and lotor
on in rooms at tho Ptysiological Institute of Berlin University, ffl.3
connection with the Aviation Ifedicino Research Institute was purely of
an a-fcinistrati^o-technical raturo, and ho only appoarod thoro ovory
U woolcs or so to obtain cquipnont otc. On these occasions ho usually
wore civilian clothos, and remarked to no that ho did not like wearing
uniform. I know that Dr. SCHAEFER did not belong to tho National
Socialist Party. Various rorerks he nade concerning political events
at that tire definitely proved to no that ho was no ?hzi.


8355


2 June b7-M—ATD-11-3—Putty (Ir.% 3ro*n)

Court No. 1

’Frco Jamary 19Uj until tho end of the 'ar I wai frequently
Deputy Director of the Aviation Medicine Research Institute for
oxfconsivo periods and nade the afcovo aontioned observations in this
capacity.' 1

*

That was Exhibit I6j and now lot no return, please, to Exhibit
No. 9, Docunont Mo. 8, freo which I should like to read another
passaco fron tho cdddlo of the docunont, tho last sontenco of tho
socond paracraphi

"Ho went to tho Institute only once a nonth because he m3 working
at tho Scboring laboratory."

Q When you did cono to tho Institute, now. Doctor, whon did you
speak to?

A Either with Professor Stru^hold, the director of tho institute,
or with Ms doputy. That was oithor Dr. ELarnann or Or. Luft.

Q Tfas Dr. Struchold prosor.t?

A Froquontly ho was not prosont, and fron tho Autunn of 191,3
on ho was not thoro at all.

Q '.Thoro was ho?

A Ho was at the branch office in Silesia which hid boon transferred
to thoro as protoction acairwt air raids.

Q In other words, ho was hard to got to?

A Tos.

Q -.That -as your official relation to Beckor-Froyoons, to Prof.
Schroodcr or to his pro doc os s or Hlppko?

A Tho Bos oar ch Institute was subordinate to tho ModicAl
Inspectorate. Professor Schroedor or Hippke was the chief. Subordinate
to hin was the chief of staff. Then care tho depertaontal chiefs*

Q Ploaco nano tho nanes as you co on.

A Tho chief of staff was Kahnt; the departmental chief was Hertz,
and subordinate to the departaental chief wore tho roferats. But in
how the Research Institute was specifically subordinate to the Helical


3356


2 June li7—‘-'-i'.T!>-11-^-Putty (Int. Brown)

Court No. 1

Inspectorate, that I do not know.

Q How often did yew see Professors Rippke or Schrooder or spoak
with then?

A Hippko I saw once, Schroddcr twice.

Q How did tho orders that Schroodor issued or which wore issued
in his nano roach you?

A First they wore sont to*the Institute, and tho Rosearch
Institute infornod no of tten since I was not active in tho Institute
itoolf.

Q Did you currently rocoivo such written ccccunications, daily,
or just wtot did happen?

A No. In unimportant natters I found out about thoso nattors on
tho occasions of r$r visits to tho Institute. In important nattors
I was callod up by tho Institute, which, however, was not always
possible bo cause in Berlin tolophono cccnunications wore ofton dis¬
rupted for weeks at a tine.

Q YToro you tho only collaborator, in this Aero Hodical Rcsoarch
Instituto?

A No. Thoro wore nany collaborators who, howovor, did hot work
in the Instituto building and whon I do not know today even#

Q You said not all of then worked in tho building. Is it corroct
that only vory fow did so?

A ‘-'oil, I had that impression, yes.

• •

Q I now cone to tho freezing conference in October, 19b2, in
ttirnborg. At that timo ycu were an Untcrarzt and had boon assigned
to tho Aviation Itodical Research Institute for Just throe months, is
that corroct?

A Yes.

Q Durinr; that tine did ycu know tho numerous collaborators of
that Institute?

A No.


8357


2 Jane !i7-:5-..TD-ll-5-Putty (Int. Brown)
Court Sc* 1


q How eeny did you know?

A I knew Professor Strughold and possibly Dr. Xlarnann or Dr* tuft.
Hovrovor, I cannot recall that in detail today,

Q titter this tine* nancly, October, 19U2, until tho conclusion
of your activities, did you nake the acquaintance of others? Did you
nako the awjiaintanco of nary or for? I*n satisfied with the nunbor
of then*

A I nado the acquaintance of a very few.

Q Did these few have anything to do with oxporinonts which aro
counts in tho indictment in this trial?

A No.

Q r 'hoc of tho contlonon in the lodical Inspectorate did you know
in Octobor of 19U2, in othor words, at tho dato of tho Nuroborn
conforonco?

A I know Profossor ..nthony and Dr. Bockcr-Froysonc.

Q You say ycu knowProfossor Anthony. Villi you, ploaso, explain

that?

A I saw hin onco when hu ^avo no tho ordor to spoak on tho thirst
problem in cases of soa distress at tho Numbor.^ conforonco. That was
on orior on tho part of tho dopirtnontal chief at that tino, Gonsral-
artt .’jartius^


2 Jiu>-44-:3-12-l-Gold=erg (Int. Brown)
Court No. I, Case Kol li


Q How did this order to you cone about?

A In the Sucrer of 19li2 I was told to work on the thirst prob-
len in cases of sea distress and in the meantime I had collected sono
literature on the siiject and had oriented nyself by way of animal
experiments*

Q What W3s the content of your paper read in Numbers?

K This was a report of a bibliographical nature on works by
Goman and foreign scientists concerning the problem of salt and tho
water content of the body.

DR. FQCKIJANN: I put in now Docunent Ho. 15 which will bo
Exhibit Mo. 17, listed on Pago Ua of tho English Document Book. This
is tho report on Dr. Schaefer's papor which is to bo found in tho
official minutes of that Numbcrg conforenco. Since the prosecution
put in ovidonco only fragments of tho total roport on that confcronco,
but did not put in Dr. Schaofor's paper, a contained in tho official
report of tho Nurnbcrg conference, I shall do so now.

BY DR. HSZCICANH:

Q In tho session of tho 12 Doccrbor tho prosecution assortod
that you. Dr. Schaefer, road a roport on oxFcriconts that had boon
carriod out on hunon beings. Is that correct?

A No, that is not correct. I, until that tine, had carriod
out no oxporinonts on human boings.

Q And consequently you did not report on such experiments?

A Ho, I did not.

Q Did you report on experiments that others in tho Luftwaffe
had carried out?

A Ho, I dito't.

Q ITho of those who wore present at tho Nurnberg confcronco did
you know, Dr. Schaefor? I on referring now to the list of thoso who
attended, which has repeatedly been cited by the prosecution. This is
Docunent NO-JiOl, Exhibit 93. Presumably this is on Page 80 of the
English copy.

S359


2 Jun-:5-:s-12-2-Gc:dberg (Lnt. Brown)
Court Ho. I, Case No. 1.


You don't have to go through the list in detail, but lot no just
ask you. Doctor, whoa did you know who was at that conference?

A I knee Professor Anthony whcc I saw on tie occasion that I
just doecribod; and I knew Bcckor-Frcyseng and Professor Strughold.

Q You did not knew Professor Hu-'orer?

A Mo, I didn't.

Q You know that the prosecutor, on the 12 of Doocnbor J.9li6, for
the first tiro, ard then a few days ago on the 27th of I'ay, for the
second tine, assorted that Professor Huebnor, who appears in this list,
is the serco Dr. Huobnor as tho ono who later took part with Schrocdor
in tho soa-wator oxpcriconts. You also know that this orror was cor¬
rected and that at tte conference there was a Ft-ofessor Huobncr but *
that the nan who appeared as an oxpert in tho sca-wator cApurinenta
was a Professor Huobncr fra- Berlin, not tho sano nan. Is that correct?

A Yos, that is so.

Q Thon Frofossor Huebnor was not at tho confcrorco?

A Mo, he wasn't.

Q Whoa of your co-dofondants do you know?

A Profossor Schrocdor when I have soon twico. Thon I boliovo
I saw Profossor Rose sorwwhorc or other. In addition I know Bcckor-
Freysong and Profossor Boiglboeck.

Q You were an Untcrarat in tho Luftwaffe at tho Nurnborg con¬
ference. There wore rany otter participants. Wore others present who
did not have officers' rank?

A Yos, there wore a for; there.

Q How nary? One, two, three?

A I should estirate four or five.

*

Q And how cany attended the confcrorco as a whole?

A About seventy.

Q Did you attend tte conference with Dr. Becker-Frey song?

A No, I didn't.

Q Is the reason for that this, that tte officers sat in the


2360


2 Jun-”-«-12-Xk)ldbQrg (Lot* Brown)

Court lio. I, Case Ho. 1.

front rows and you In tte back?

A .ell, that was ore reason. Ibreovor, Dr. Bockcr-Fruysong
was very ixssv at this conference. Moreover, I was so unacquainted with
the othor participants at the confurorce that I didn’t ncct Frofossor
Becker-Freyseng there nor any of tto others actually.

Q Wo have hoard hero about your attitude toward the a my and
military rattors. Did you fool at hoco ttaro at that meeting, as a
non-cosnissionod officer?

A Ho, I didn’t; and I don’t think any Untcrarst in tho Goman
arry felt at hcuo in the conror^’ of officers bocauso up to tho rank of
Sargoa.nt a soldier ms, so to speak, second class hinan boing, in ccra-
parisonto the officers.

Q Did you hear Kolzlochrv-r's and Rascher's statononts at the
confercnco?

A I cannot recall neither Holzloohner nor Rase her nor r;!ut thoy
said.. I must say that I did not hear tha papers read on tho first day
of tho conforjnco bocauso thoy roro oxclusivuly piporG dealing uith
cold, ffcith-r boforo nor after that tiro had I had anything to do with
cold. Moreover, I had not yet fully prepared ay own jnpor and busiod
nys-lf exclusively with it.

Q How is it that you had to proparo a paper?

A Tho period I had in which to do so was relatively short.
Iloroovor, cy job at Schoring noant that I had a ereat deal to do and
this paper was to be particularly well prepared since it was my first
public ipjcaranco and tho audionco consisted solely of persons of
scientific renown ard in high ranking offices.

Q Could it be said that you had stage fright?

A Yos, that could bo said.

Q You do not recall having heard Kolzloohnar’s or Raschor’3
reports?

A Ho, I don’t.

Q Aft-r r. ading your paper, did you h_ar anything about these


2 -Goldberg (inti Bresn)

Court Mo. I, Case Mo. 1.

reports, Hol z loeh-Tcrs or Rase her s reports, or the experiments that
preceded then in conversations with private persons?

A No; I had no private discussions with the other participants
in the conference at all.

Q Good. Did you perhaps spoak with Professor Bcckcr-Frcyseng
about that report?

A No.

Q Thon that is all you have to say about the Nurnborg conforonco?

A Yos.

Q Did you take part in otter conforcncos? Dr. Bcckor-Froysong
stated Yihor. he was on the stand that there woro roughly twelve ouch
conform reus.

A I took part in no othor confere.-cu at all.

Q Mew, to return to your pr.por, what conclusions did you ar¬
rive at in your papor? ftrhape you would liko to quote sonothing
fron your papor to shorten this nattor?

A Tills is Docurwnt 15, Pago ldj to 53. On Pago 52 of tho Eng¬
lish Docunont 3ook under No. 2 it says:

" 2 . ’tonsures to bo adopted when conbatting death fron

thirst t

a) do not drink any hypertonic sea water,

b) toko as littlo nourislxxnt as possible, with tho
oxcoption of dextrose,

c) use drugs as sparingly as possible, and no drug
recouxndod for qujnchirv; thirst,

d) dc not bathe in sea water,

o) take as auch fresh water as possible, which contains
only a little salt."

Frra this it can bo soon that I always recorronded not drinking
any sea water.

Q Did you continue your research after you read your papor?

A Yos.


8362


2 Jurvr 2-12-5-Goldber (Int. Brown)

Court Kc« I, Cos. Ho. i.

THE H'.ESIDSS'T: Counsel, at this tire tho Tribunal will bo in
recess until 1*30.


(A recess wca taken until 1330 hours.)


2 June Z, 7 -'*-S'"- 13 -l-? 3 ter (Greu U • crtcnberg )
Court Sc,- 1


*fTSg;<XS S5SICK

(The he trice reconvened at 1330 hours, 2 June 1947.)

TKB M*vRSH-Li The Tribunal Ja cgtin in scaaion.

KCNRiJ) SCH&EEER - Resumed
DIRECT BUICQUTXCN (Continued)

BY m. iSLaa'JW: (PouomI for the Deferdcnt Sehcofor)*

Q* °r. 3 0 fc£of«jr, firat of ell, I heve to csk you tc ccoe beck to
something you said beforo. Yoi spoke about the position ofthe Gerrcn
Onterarzt. It wee perhaps e clumsy fomulcticn, which cculd rxko a
wrong impression. »hon I caked ycu how you felt ct thrt necting, 0 nong
the higher ranking doctors, you acid something ebeut how or. Unterorzt
must feel among such higher officers, ^ill you plecao explain again
why you did not fool quite ct ecso?

». I meant by so saying that a person of ccadcnic training , thrt in,

0 physiclan, who has the rank cf o sergeant is in c rcthtr unfortuneto
position and la dissatisfied a priori. This opplied in particular to ny
own case, sinoo I booicclly disllkod dlittry aubordincticn.

I only xontod to correct the goneruliaction which ycu dror, Ycu
followed up that prcbltn after thit noctlng. "hot did you do?

In the subsequent tine I carriod on o large number of anincl
experiments, which woro to stow tho influence of secrotcr end different
forms of Rcurlshncr.t upon tho cnlcel organise. In this ccso tho anlrxls
used woro robbits. I was able to save seno of tho roeords of ny
experinerts end I should like to csk you to sutr.it then in evidence


hero.


tine do thoso experiments cover, roughly?
oxpdr|Ants cover tho n«ricd fren the end of 1%2 until the

■<nd of 1943. yi

ER. iiLCKIW.’Ni I d like to submit English Document 16 as Schiblt
18. Tfco pages in ijc English Dccuner.t Book ere 54-62. Thct is still

v Y/t. * .* / ,

^suaanfJcck^. I.

-- c-364


2 June Zi 7-^-S’--13"2-?3 tcr(Creu & "C-rtenberg)

Court No. 1

iB. H*BDYi In ay copy of Document Bock No. I, Ycur Honcr, Dccunont
No. 16 is not hero. It gees es for cs Document No. 15 • I don't krow
whether your document book contains the sere documents cr not.

THE xBESID2:Ti Cur document took cr.teins No. 16, notes on oniatl
experiments by Schcefcr, pages 54-62.

IB. H>BDYi It hrs the* listed in the index, your Honor, tut it
doesn't hove the docurer.titself in the contents.

THE I RES UK T i The so dccicents in cy book ere simply cherts. I cssune
these wore No. 16, I don't know.

IB. riLCXilANNi They cro merely eferts, your Honor, thet is correct.

MB. KjRDYi Might I ask Defense Counsel whet ho is attempting to
prove by uso of these charts? " Tbs so charts don't olicit or.y dote on
experiments that wero conducted et Oecheu or cny experiments thrt ore
et lssuo in this trial* It soor.s to me thet they a®o enlrcl experiments.

I can't soo tho motor id it y of thorn la this ccnnocticn.

DB. rZlCJQW;Ni Tho irosocutlon is cterging all tho defendant#,
including tho D C fondont Bohaofor, with having used non-scicntific
not hod s. Tho Prosecution spent a considerable amount of tlmo trying to
provo this one choree, and I want to provo that in occupying hirsolf
with tho thirst problas owl with tho task of finding c nothod of taking
tho selt out of soc water, the Defendant Sc hoofer proceeded in a
strictly scientific mennor, so t hat this particular, ebergo dees not
apply to him and thet for thet recscn ho, of course, also rejected tho
Borka nothod, end his rejection pf the Berko netted was for scientific
reasons. I shall thoroforo havo to shew generally hew scientifically
Schncfor worked and, porticulcrly, hew scientifically ho worked on
tho prebite for tho solution of whipfc ho is prosecuted her*.,

•

2-fl. HiBDYi i.fter hearing the remarks of Ccunsel, Ycur Honor, I object
to tho continuation of the examination using this materiel. I don't see
tho mcterielity of whether or not Schaefer inducted himself in cn
ethical manner in otter experiments. The point et issuo here is whether

5365


2 June &7— -3~3~ heater(Grtu & -crtcr.bcr^)

Orurt 5c. 1


or not he la icpliceted, whether cr net he took pert in the -lena
end cr.tcririfloa involving the acescter experiments tt Dcchau. The
ircaecuticn chcxgea thet he sea icpllccted therein — the two nethoda
were to ho uacd £t Dec hen erd ho ms a perty to the crino. I ctr.'t ace
thft whether or not he ected ethicelly free, the tine he grcductcd fron
cedicol school until the tine he beeme involved in trie criminal plot
hea no hearing here.

DR. TELCIQUiiNt If tho ireaeeution would be ao kind oa to tell no in
accewhct rcro detcil, at leest or>:o, why the ftjfendent Schaefer is
rcaponaible for the epplicction of tho Berke sothod in the experinenta,
then I could lirdt ny dofOnao aach r.ore intelligently . But is tho
i'roaocutlon only lota no infor what it ao raiders tc bo incriminating, I
nuat nako my dofonao ca aure ea pcaaiblo end , therefora, rust bring
ovldoDCO for, firat. tho personality of Sc hoofer, aecond, hia aclontific
ochlevor.onta gcnorolly, third, hia acientlfio cchlovononta in tho
queation of the solution of tho thirst problem erd fourth, in connect¬
ion with tho invention of tho Eofotit rat hod, end fifth lr. tho rejection
of tho Bcrkotit mothod.

T!*. iTOSIEENTi Thoobjoction of tho Trosecutlon to tho cdrnlasion of
tho as c tart a ccnj-rialt^ Schaefer Document 16 ord tho decunonta will bo
rccoivcd in cvidonco. ^hat nunbor do you assign to this exhibit?

DR. l'ELCP3^?5»’i No. 18, Mr. President.


3366


2 Jun-A-IE-lL-l-Frineau (inti Grau)

Court No. I.

:<R. HARDY: I trust, your Honor, that I will be supplied with
a copy or Docuaent No. 16 in due course.

THE PRESIDENT: Certainly. Counsel for the Defendant Schaefor
will see that the Prosecution has a copy of this docunent, or furnish
one to the Secretary General, who will furnish it to the Prosecution.

DR. PRICKKAKN: Mr. President, if the Goneral Secretary will
do this — I was not inforned that the Prosecution had no copy.

THE PRESIDES.*?: With refer© .too only to these photostntic
notes — those notes cocprise the docixaonts.

DR. FEICKUAHNi They are oorcly charts supported by two af¬
fidavits, which I shall read irradiately.

JUDGE SEBRDC: Doctor, I understand fron what you say that
those photostatic papers oonpriso Exhibit Bo. 18. Is that correct?

DR. FEICKUANN: It is pages 5U to 62 of tho English copy.

Your Honor — that is Exhibit No. 18. Than I should liko to rotum to
Exhibit No. 12, pogo 36 of the English docunent book. I should liko to
road tho following free Kies von Boottichor*s affidavit, tho first
paragraph:

"I* Ina von Poetticbor, 10 January 1939, Joined tho scientific
deportenont of tho fire Sobering A.G., Borlin-C harlot to nburg, as a toch-
nical-ceaical assistant. At that tiro Dr. Foldt was chief- of tho dc-
portcontj Dr. Schaofor, hie assistant, whoso labor it ory assistant wr.3
i!r. Kaulisch. 1 ^' sain task was to s-ako aninal experiments, and, as
this work for Dr. Foldt did not toko up all ny tino, I frequently also
worked for Dr. Schaefer, who could explain everything particularly troll
and whoso tx>rk was always interesting. I constantly carried out hunger
and thirst oxporinents on rabbits and aico for hin, after Dr. Schaefer
had again takon up his work with Sobering in tho spring of 19l*2, fol¬
lowing upon a fow nonths of tr-i ning after being drafted to tho Luf t-
waffo (outuan 19lil). n

Then I should liko to add to the charts Docvanont Ko. 39
which will bo Exhibit No. 19, and uay I be pcrriittcd to read a fow


2 Jun-A-:-3-ili-2-rb*iri3au (Jnt. Grau)
Court lio. I.


pages only out of this affidavit.


(Int. Vfartenberg)


I ask you to oxcuso ao for a oonont. I shall find it in a


sJnute •


It begins: "Dr. Konrad'Schaefer, H.D., during a very heavy air
raid or. Berlin during the night of 22-23 Hovorber 19h3, which dcstroyod
almost tho whole Hansa-quarter, lost his apcirtaer.t and all his property."
Excuso no. I believe the Court and tho Prosecution have tho supple¬
mentary vol'jx;.

TIE PRESIDENT: Tho Tribunal has this suppleixmtary voluno.

DR. PELCKSiANH: It has bo.n translated. It nust oc just an
oversight that tho interpreters did not rocoivo it. I have Just givon
then a copy of tho translation.

"ly husband and I rccoivcd tho Schaefer family into our
housw, and I thus becarc very well acquainted with Dr. Schaofor and his


wife. Ftoq that poriod until tho ond of ths war I cssistod Dr. Schaofor
in sorting out tin literature and undertook his written work, which con¬
sisted chiefly of copying notos on tho oxporimnts of Hr. Kr.ulisch and
of dictation into tho typowritor. Tho copxios of tho notes on ’Schaefer's
Aninal Exporinonts' (hunger and thirst oxporiaonts with rabbits), Docu¬
ment Ho. 16, and tho two last tables of Documnt Ho. 18 regarding tho
compilation of th>- results of thirst oxeorijjonts on voluntary subjocts,
the originals of which ware shown to no by Counsel, Attornoy-at-Lnw
role krona, wero drawn up by r ».

"Dr. Schaefer dictated to rc in Ifcy 19U; his viems on tin re¬
cords of tho oxperi rents of fc-rarzt von Sir any, on aking sea orator
potable by Berks (Documents Ho. 25 and 27), tho originals of which 1^
was also 3hovm by Attorooy-at-Iar Fblc’.cmnn. Through this collaboration
I received tho impression that Dr. Schaofor was a very conscientious
and serious research worker. His zeal often nado hin work untiringly
throughout tho night."


2 Jun-X-:2-Ii*-3-?rtneau (Int« Wartcnbcrj?)

Court No* I.

3Y DR. reiCKKAHN:

Q This for the identification of the tables on the anted
experiments, Exhibit No. IS. Dr. Schacfor, did you not also study the
thirst probloc ty Beans of experiments on human beings?

A Yes, during the course of 191*3 I carried out some hunger
and thirst uxporinents on voluntary human subjects who were froc. They
wero technical assistants who in pert woro working for no. The oxperi-
nonts showod that while continuing one's full work one can very woll
hunger and suffer thirst as long as four days without suffering fron it
nontally or in thi ability to concontrato.

Q In ardor to prove this, I submit the affidavit of Dr.
Kuntso, which I havo already introduced as 'Ixhibit No. 9. I ask to bo
allowed to read now only tho Last sontonco from this affidavit. It is
pages 23 to 35 in tto English Docurscnt Book. The last scntcnco roads
as follows* "In 191*3 I carriod out for ny doctor's thesis simultaneous
hunger and thirst oxporirents, lasting throe to four days, on nysclf
and otlior persons. I one lose tho ro suits of the so oxporl*xnts arxi con¬
centration tests." Thoso aro tho following pagos attached to this af¬
fidavit.


2 JUno J7->-^'-15-l-Gros(*-rtonbcrs)
Court Nc. 1


ER. :2C;CW.i I eak farther tc bo roraitted tc introduce into
evidenco Document No. 17. peso 63 , English docunent book, cs
S xhlbit 20,. These ere records of tho experiments - the hunger end' * ••
thirst expcricents - cerrled cut on c Miss Gerdc lierio Sctaidt. Like-
also, Document No. 18 es Exhibit 21, jngea 70-80. These ere records
co roc mi ns expeiteenta on iSisa Irr^crd von Boetticher. And, fi nelly,

I ask porrdsfflcn to refer egaia to Doc\r*-ont No. 10, affidavit 12, tho
offidevlt of Miss Xna ren Boetticher, frea whoa I Just introduced tho
record of tho oxperiaer.t cs Exhibit 21. *roa this document, thet is
fithiblt 12, I should liko toroed tho following, on pgo 36 feOGlnnlng
with tho third paragraph of tho affideviti "After tho cnincl expor-
irents, thirst experiments on humno were clso ccrriod out. I nyaolf
volunteered throe or four tires. Just cs soao of ny ccquclntoncoa
end or.co ay sister did. be found tho oxpcrlnonts nost intorosting
and sufferod no ham cs c result. Burins tho first two deys ono
hod roolly only a sonsetion of hunger, which thon chcngod to thlrot.
Cnco I festod ord thiroted for four days, usuclly for throo deys. I
wont cbout ny work ct tho lnborotcry cs usual, stcyirv: hono only on
tho fourth doy, bocouoo I wes very wock end doprossed, which however
pcsscd icncdirtely after drinking. Naturally I observod tho regulat¬
ions strictly and really took neither food nor drink during tho
expcrinentcl period, because I knee that tho expcrirxmt would cthcr-
wiso have been absolutely sor.sclcsa. I bcllcvo it pcssiblo to go with¬
out food or drink for or.o cr two days longer if one ccn renal n In
bad.

■«11 those hunger end thirst experiments were carried cut by Dr.
Schaeffer for tho Luftwaffoi otherwise he continued working for tho
fire Schorl!^."

0. Only ono thing for cl criflection. Dr. S=hcefer. ~ith these exper¬
imental subjects you experimented neither with ^ofotit nor with

Berketit, because you hadn’t proceeded th-t far yet?

3370


2 June 47-*
Court No* 1


15-2-Groaa (••ertcnberg)


K Y.a, that la correct.

^ Hew did it occur to yew to occupy yourself with removing the
selt fron ace be ter?

411 theoroticel conalccretioca end ell prectlccl cxpcricents shewed
thet aeo water la not uaablc. Therefore, It wea of courao neturd
to «m aider e cot hod to rerove the salt free see reter, since In
cony cases or.o la not eblo to teke along aufflcior.t fresh wetor.

Q* Andif ono tea no fresh weter one =ust ren=ve the salt free sec
water?

A. Yea.

C. About this dovolopcent of the resoirch of Dr. Sohoefor I subnlt
tho fbUoainga dcourentai Docunont No. 19. on ? gca 81-33 of tho English
Document Book. It la tc bo Sehibit No. 22. This la on affidavit of
Dr. Grlessboohf Dj.. Louth, end I’ohl. It rccdoi 'For nmy yecra tho
treatnent of wotor, in pertlculcr by obacrptlon proper*tions, wes o
scientific field of work in tho inorganic brooch of tho Jolfon dyo
works, in which wo cro ccployod.*

Tho “olfen dye works belonged to tho 1.0. Konzern, I rcy cdd.

•In tho surrer of 1943 c wero cssl.^ncd tho teak of r.ckln, selt water
pctoblo for uao in the rescue ct aoo of airaon, autocrine crowa, etc.

A rosocrch caaigrernt for this w:s issued by tho Luftwcffc. Untcrcrzt
Dr. Kcr.rcd Sc hoofer wtaccmlsaioned ts cn expert for this work by tho
Research for letleu Medic ir.o.

•At tho stno tine tho Navy wes also interested in this problem,
end c alnilcr dcvolcpsent order vea irsued by tho CR4.

•Tho I.G. itself undertook to pay the cost of the research work,
including the expenses for those sen detochod free tho Johrr.eeht for
work in Jolfen. No ether kind of fir.incicl agreement. wes node, either
with official area:lea or with any of the jErticipanta.

•The process dovelcped involved the reoovel of the selt fron tho water
by using the specid prcpercticna for this curp-so to ebsorb the cdclun,

G371


2 June £7—-lS-S-GrcssCSertenberg)

CcurtNo. 1

cxgneaiun, cad elkoli ccntent end to precipitate the chloride end
sulfate content in the fexr. of insoluble selts. The desalting wes so
effective thet a ccnpcund wts echiered with e salt content belcw thet of
a physiologic cl ordiun chloride solution. The rater was not erectly
testy, tut w s do-daltcd enough for really successful use.

■Certain doubts, expressed in pcrticulcr by Dr. Scheoffbr, led to
experiments crncornirg eventual silver erd beriun ions in purified
wetor. The tests, however, disproved the o^istonco of aediccl scruples
in this direction.

■Otherwise the problem wes dealt with on c strictly scientific
be sis, and two applications for patents wero file!.

■By lcto fall 19£3 the process resdoveloped to such or. extent, that
at a lceturo given by Dr. 3 ehaofor no criticisms woro roisod by tho
Medical Inspectorate. Thcroupsn. at the beginning of 19«£, ^olfon filed
on application for the establishment of a nor.u featuring plant.

■At first, hewovor, no erder for this wr.s given. Lctcr on wo lcernod
free Dj*. dehoofer that another rot hod hod recently been rccconondcd
which had first to bo tosted. He hinted thft eccordlng to observations
nedo with toaatcoa it had sccething to do with r.ixtxrcs of fruit Juices,
etc. Dr. Sc hoof for said thet ho hcdobjoctcd to this not hod, to it
was useless free a oedicol point of vie*, ^ut his objections w to
not sustained. In view cf the scientific facts wc hed to r.rreo with
him*

•Later - at the beginning cf 1%5 - Dr. Sihacfcr's (end also our
own) views on tho mitebility ajid ireontcstcbility of cur process
woro confirmed, choc news reached us from England nndAocrlcc, thet
tho somo method was being used there. The periodical "Iho Illustrated
London News" rubliahed rescercb. reports of tho ^cyol Aj r ?crce
lhysiologicel Lahoretcry, the Ministry of Aircraft Traduction, ord
the English I emit it Company. «-t the setae tine publicrticns eppoorod
in Sweden tc tho effect that in cerice elso the Icrrutit Company,

New York, hed de-selted scowcter in a similar way.

S372


2 June 4?—-S--15-ii-3ros3(»ertenbers)
Court Nc* 1


■The effect cchievcd with the Anglo ■ faerie an emthod was not so for-
rccching es thet achieved with ours, -je rt fren tho feet thet our
rer-einin 5 aediua chloride contest =as only half that of tho Ter-
rutit Coepeny* we elso achieved on eldest ccnplcto el ini net ion of
tho sulfete content, while with tho Terrutit prccess the sulfcto
scstoot recoined in the voter, -o Lai* occasionally voiced rur intention
of not removing tho sulfete from the water. Dr. Schaefer, however,
relsod objections, pointing out tho disadvantage of t laxative effect
of the sulfate content.

"On tho whole wo con stete that in the discussions with Dr. K,

Scheifor wo always hod tho icpresslcn that ho res o serious scientist
end a ®nsolcntlcus medical can.

Dr. Criessbeck
Dr. Louth
Dr. Xehl"

This already states in dotcil thet the Eolfotit mothod . whloh
Schoofor rocccr.ondcd was unobjectionable *and ncs tho boat nsthod
that oxisted. Mow, turning to Dccunont 20, pego 81 of tho English
Dccunont Book, excuse no, pago 84 of tho English Dow cent Book.

This dccunont confirms that ct tho request of Schaefer tho exper¬
iments regarding tho pcssiblo dorego cf tho potcblo water producod
with V*ofotit wero cerriod out. Dr. Schcofcr, hevo ycu turned to that
pego in tho docurcont, yourself?

N 0 , I haven't.

l .+ I should liko to quote free the end of Dccunont 20 - Schibit 23-
it soys 1 '3nmjvi "hen 7 opering potablo rater fron see water by
neons of ^ofetit SW f nc silver cr beriun Ions o->ncar in the drinking
water either if the given -ropertien of Hofotit to searctcr, i.c.

1»5. ie iccrocsed or reduced, nor if diluted scawcter is used, nor if
sea water cf a higher tcapcri-ture is used. Only after the water hrs
been filtcrod ray any sort of odd it ions be medo or nay the drink! ns
water to uoed for booking "unooes.*

S373


3 June 47-A-S'>-15-5"^r®35{^£rtenfcerg)
Court Jfc. 1


THE PREUMi -*hct staber document ia that?

DR. nUHJ!^ That is Document No. 20, Mr. President, on pegea 84 to
88, Exhibit 23.

THE IHSIDE.'Ti I don't find In ny document book, the portion ycu rood,

ElURxHEIlfli Your Honor, at the end of page 38, the k st paragraph
on pege 58 - su rr z-ry.

THE ^RESIDENT* I have it now.

DR. xELi&iNNi I reed only the sundry at the ond of the document.

TCE ifl ESIDB.'Ti I underetend, C C unaol.

DR. i£LKU*NNi Thus, ^r« 3c hoofer also considered tho pnaeibllity that
eoewoter with a low salt content ia found , for instonco in the Baltic,
end if ono also ©naiders tho tompcreiurei then tho chcmlool process
is olao so that the water which ono obtains ia potablo end ianot
dangerous.

Now so turn to Document 21« ?hia *ia to bo Exhibit No. 24. It ia
co pagos 89 to 90 of tho English Dcounont Btx>k. This la o document
frea Dr. Schustor.

MR. H*HDYi If it plocso your Honor, eight I oak Dofonso Counaol
if thia purports to be an original copy of a letter? There la scco
difficulty in tho presentation of documenta horo. In occh instance
lr. tho past two days, these original German documents that ere bolng
submitted arc not authenticated in tho monner ca sot forth by tho
Tribunal. IV.la ono here hcanc outhonti fleet ion on it whatsoever. Duo
to that fact, it gives ecuae to doubt the cuthonticity, cndl would liko
to autnit it to the Tribunal for tholr perusal. It nay be thet Dr.
1'olotaenn con in due course receive c certific* tc of cuthonticity erd
offer it ot thia time provisionally.

IE. x ELCQUNNi May I =eke the following explanation ? "a is cp^srcnt
from tho dato on the document, it is cf 10 February 1944. end the sig¬
nature hero on the original la by Dr, Sc taste rj it is c docuaont in
the sane way as a document that the Prosecution submits from the year

19^4 free, let us scy. Hi trier or any other person vhc is not here as a

-374


J


2 June -7-^^*-i5“£"'£”08s(-artenberg)

Court No. 1

defendant cr u a xitncss. It is *c original docicer.t, end, of
course, I uz net in a position to certify the sign; ture, boccuso this
Dr. Schister is not eveileble.

MR. Hi<RDVi Yair Honor, this docuaent is addressed to the Defendant
Schaefer, and it could be duly authenticated by putting it to the
Defendent end hiving the Defondent idontify seme, but I on merely
pointing out that for the seke cf this trial end othor trials In
tho ftituro, *© have proscribed regulations, and if possible ro &. ould
like to insist upon the Defense ccunsel ad her to tho regulations of
tho Tribunal In that ell German documents be duly authenticated rs
set forth in tho rogulntione of this Tribunal. It creates Quito a
Problem , end it is cnc that is core important, I think, then ever, tho
ocrtlficctcs cn affidavits.


Court 5o. 1

2 Jus 47-A-16-l-3D{-Deniels (Vartenterg)


3Y JUICE SEEING:

0- *itnoss, are you familiar with the docuaont which your counsel
nov asks the Tribunal to receive as Schaefer Exhibit So. 247
A. Yes, Your Honor, I received it at that tine.

Q. Tou can identify this original exhibit as being a lettor
rcccivod by you in due course of correspondence?

A. Yes, Tour Honor.

TE2 PRESIDENT: Tho Secretary aay return this docunent. This
document Is adalttcd in evidence.

DR. PUCKIANN; It is to recelvo tho oxhlbit nunbor 24, Your Honor.
Dr. Schaefer's critical examination of his preparations continued;
this la proved in particular by Exhibit 24. Dr. Schaefer tented to
assure hinself that even if it was appliod unscientifically, the pereon
who used Vofatit would not suffer any hara. Tho writer of this lettor
noked Dr. Schaofor to conduct oxperiaente regarding tho effect of
hydrochloric acid in the stomach on Vofatit.

Sunbor 2 in tho docuacnt shows that Vofatit which has previously
boon truatod with sea water docs not giro off any barlua.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho docuaont reads, "sea water that had boon
previously troated with Vofatit."

DR. PELCKhAKN: I an only referring to paragraph nunborod 2. Tho
paragraph nuabored 1 in the document concerns tho ooieon effoct of pure
Vofatit which has not been brought together with eon water. Dr.

Schaofor, for instance, counted on the possibility that a soldior, a
pilot, did not have n vessel and therefore could get tho idea of swallow¬
ing a handful of Vofatit and then aftorverds drinking tho eco water.

In regard to this, the paragraph nuabered 1 of this reoort of Dr.

■

Schustor says that this too is cntiroly harnless.

These eccpllcatcd cheaical explanations, however, are nade ouite

clear by Document Ho. 22, which I would like to introduce as Exhibit No.

25. It is Docuaont So. 22, pages 91 and 92 of the docunent book. It is

an affidavit of Professor Dr. Frits Eickfcoltz, professor of the University

• 376


Court So. 1

2 Jur. 47-£—16—2-2Di-Daniels (Vnrtenberg)

of Heidelberg, arri it reeds as follows:

Tou vast an expert opinion ab<it the experiments carried out by
Unterarzt Dr. Schuster. In these experiments tho effect of hydrochloric
acid on Vofatit is investigated according to the question of vfcothor
free berium can appear in tho gastric Juice when Vofatit has accidently
been taken. Dr. Schuster finds with one gran of Vofatit a maximum value
of approximately 2 ailligraas of bariun. One would have to take about
100 great of Vofatit before the vory lowest toxic dose of e soluble
bariuc of 0.2 grans would bo free in the gastric Juice, and one would
have to tako Vofetlt by tho kilogran In order to roach the lethal doso
of two to four grans, supposing that tho solubility of the barium Vofatit
in tho gastric Juico is not higher than euooara from Schustor's oxpori-
nonts. Wo have therefore choson a direct course and have fed Vofatit
to rats. Tho er.inals received, per 100 grans, 0.4 grans of bariun
zoolith and silver zeolith. The animals did not show any striking
injuries. In a second scries of ixporlccnts tho sano dosos of Vofatit
woro given, togothor with 1 cc, 1/10 hydrochloric acid. In this case,
too, nothing of importance was observed. Converted for tho cose of a
can weighing 60 kilograms, this shows that dosos of approximately 200
grans of Vofatit with or without hydrochloric acid ore hornless. Vo
thoroforo concludo that tho chemical properties of Vofatit have novor
resulted in any considerable toxic offect boing obsorved.

"I therefore confirc that even if tho filtor does not function
sufficiently tho Inorganic elements in the water could bo introduced into
tho digestivo system without any dai^or."

Docunents 23 and 24 show further vory careful experiments which
Schaefer carriod out reg«-dicg all possibilities of a harnful effect of
his preparation.

I ask you to receive Document 23 as Exhibit 26, and Document 24 ns
Exhibit 27. The documents, Exhibits 26 and 27, show the experiments
which tho laboratory assistant Kaulisch carried out in accordance with
Schaefer's instructions. Keulisch reared bacteria strains from tho Horth

y yn


Court So. 1

2 Jus 47-A-16-5-Sa(-Danlels (Vartenborg)


Sea end observed the effect of Vofatit upon then. Els research donon-
• trated that Vofatit kill* bacteria very effectively.

After the conclusion of all these experiments - about vhich It can
be said that they were carried out with unusual scientific exactness -
It was no longer necessary for Schaefer to test his method any further.

In conclusion, however, I would like to Introduce Docusent 25 as
Exhibit 28, which Is on page 101 In the English document book. This is
a questionnaire, with the answers. It originated free r rofeesor Ivy,
the rice president of the University of Chicago, and It Is dated 15
April. Of course, I recelvod it in the English language. I had hoped
that It would be translated into Goman for tho Goman docusent book
but unfortunately this was not dono. Tor the Information of tho Judges
and ths prosecution It Is in the English original In the English docu-
oent book; however, in the German docuoent book It le aleo in English,
but nevertheless I would like to read tho letter.

KR. HARDY: hay It oloaee Your Honor*, I sight state that Dr. Ivy
will bo here in a aattor of a week or two. At that tlmo the prosecution
vill prosent Dr. Ivy hero as an export witness and Dr. Pelekmann may
woll conduct hi* examination; I know well that he will examine Dr. Ivy
if Dr. Ivy le here a* a witness. In order to avoid tho confusion of
having to consider this document In both languages, ho could merely offer
it a* It le now and avoid having It translated, bocuuse tho witness will
be here and testify and It vill bo in the record at that time.

DR. PELQQiAHH: I thank Mr. Hardy for the suggestion which ho hae
made. However, I believe that I can valve the examination of Professor
Ivy if I nay reed the aucstlona which wore put and his very precise
answers. I believe that it would expedite the trial. If clarifying
Questions on the part of the prosecution or on the part of tho dofonsc
should still be necessary aftorvards, they may be put, perhaos, when
Professor Ivy appears here.

THE FRESHEST: Counsel may oroceed in the manner Indicated. Docs
counsel himself reed English?

33?U

J


fo o


2 Jur.e-ir-3 JG-17-1—Ifalcy (Brown)
Court I


"I herewith sufceit tsy answers to the questions subaittod by
Kcrst ?clcctaann. Defense Counsel for the Defendant, Dr. Konrad Schaefer,,
whoa I interrogated on 22 January 1947.

"!• Qucatlcn. Do ycu knew the method for removing tho salt from
sea water rcccmonded by Dr. Schaefer during the War?

Answer. I aa faniliary with the theoretical acthcd which
Dr..Schaefer said that ho reccener.dod x*or use in removing tho salt from
soa water and developed with the I.G. Farten Industxy during tho V.ar.

I lid not see and examine chemically the actual product.

"2. Question. Is it the snao in principle as tho nothed ycu in¬
vented, which is new being used by tho U. S. «ray?

»nawor. The thocretical nothed doscribod by Dr. Schaefer
is essentially the sane ns that being used in practico by tho U. S. Array
and Navy.

"3. Quosticn. Do tho methods roccaxaondcd by Schaofcr correspond
to tho lutost developments cf Inorganic Chemistry?

Answer. The nothod doscribod to no by Dr. Schaofcr represents
in principlo ono cf tho host ootheds fer rcoeving the salts frera soa
water and utilizos ono cf tho latest developments in inorganic chemistry
which apply to the moans for removing salts freo sen water.

"4. Question. Before Schaofor rccccnondod the method, was a
chaaical cnalysis made to shows (1) that noithcr free barium ncr silver
ore prosent in the drinking water, and (2) that the salt content cf tho
see. water was completely ollrainatod by the method? Arc these rosults
sufficient guarantee that the w^tor is completely hornless end fully
suitable fer use as drinking water?

Answer. I was inforeed by Dr. Schaofor that he had made

X j, •

chemical analysis of tho water which resulted after the sea water was
treated by his nothod and found tc be free of the salts in sot water ns
well as barium and silver. It is strongly presumptive that thi3 is true
because that is what any chemist cr scientist would do tc ascertain if
the acthcd fer desalinating the son water, was effective. It is the sole

e3ec.


2 June-A-OJG—17- fl Hal ey (Brown)
Court I


reliable means for developing any method for desalinating sea water.

Such results would be entirely adequate for determining whether sea
water desalinated by Dr. Schaefer* s method was harmless end suitable for
use as drinking water.

"5. Question . In that case, is it still necessary to carry cut
experiments on human beings?

Answer . It would be unnecessary tc conduct experiments on
human beings if tho water resulting from the application of Dr. Schaefer*
method was found tc bo chemically free of tho salts in sen water end
barium and silver.

"6, Question . After Schaefer had completed this analysis and
had discovered that the egent had a strong bnctcricido effect, had ho
fulfilled his duty sufficiently to bo ablo to suggest that tho agent
should bo usod on a largo scale?

Answer . If tho chemical analysis showod that tho water had
boon froed of salts, barium and sllvor and that the chemical agent had
c bacteriocidal cffoct ontirdy cdoquatc, sufficient evidonco would bo
availablo to suggest end rcccncond that the agent and procoduro should
bo usod on a largo scalo for rondorir.g sea wator potablo and harmless.
And, it is ontiroly rational, as in tho caso of cur cwn oxporinonts at
tho Naval Medical Rcsoarch Instituto, that his egont and method would
accomplish these things claimed Cor it., namely would render soa wr.tor
potable and harmless. n

That was Exhibit 23.

Q Dr. Schaofcr, wo soo from this that the method that ycu end
tho I.G. dcvclcpod was ready fer use?

A Yes, this was November 1943, rnd at that time I could toll the

. •

Kodical Inspectorate that a nethed had been developed which wa3 ready
to be introduced. In December cf the seme year I deaenstr’tod the pro¬
cedure in Professor Hippko's presence and in the presence of a few
other officers. All cf these men drank water prepared with VTefatit,

arid largo-ocala anrmfeot-urc ‘ and introduction cf this preparation was

3381.


2 Jun©-».—WS-X7—mlcy (Brown)
Court I


rcccaaeadod.

1 *&e.t did ycu hrve tc dc with the so-celled Berkn method?

•* Jr. Bcckcr-Frcyscn^ -ont into thet point ct crer.t lonth. I
received frerr. the i&dicrl Inspectorate in the first deaths cf 1944 the
order tc check cn experiments th~t m O'crst-rct ven Sirmy hrd errried
cut in Viennr cn soldiers, end to report cn vh-.t I found. It rrs per¬
fectly petont tc tht :ir« Berk-. wrs r chrrlatcn md Jlr. von Sirony

«M enothor.

Xi. .ZLCKi:.In thic connection I offer -/ccuncnts 26 md 27

• • •

cnl 5ivc them exhibit num-ers 29 end 30, ;v-ccs 103 end 106.

®» H.JOT E-y I inquire, Icur Hcr.er, whether or net 3j*i'it iJo,
29 ;nxrpcrta tc fco rn oripin-1 file not- cf Jr. Reared Sclvofer?

OIL, \ Let ac draw your -ttention to '£xl\i it 19, the

rffidr.vit cf Ik-a. Kocnir. 1 hrve nlrory reed Lxhit.it 19, her str.to-
nent th t lira, Koonig identified those docu.ionta ro tho erlgLacl docu-
nents. i arhr.;s .ir. H-.r.:y cm ro-rc'd this identifier titn.

•U. H.EDY: I h-vc its ohjocticn. Your Honor. I ni/ht ou -cot
that thceo - e put tc tho dofendmt fer r.uthcnticn tinr.

.ILCHUJiN: Yoa.

Q .'ill the dofendmt plcoac identify these dccuacnto, 00 th; t
this nrttcr will '. c pcrfoctly derr? Jr. Schoefer, wh-t cm you spy
.-.bout tiioao documents?

A Yes, these -re the originrl documents ro I Irew them up; then

there is c. eepy of then which I sent tc the Ifcdiccl Ins. ecter to -t
Seelow.

4 ..r.d is it true th .t lirs. Kccnir rrcte these documents, re she
»eys in her cifidavit?


i.'o* , from these dccum-nts th t ycu h-ve ^ofer. j u in the
crivlnrl, ill ycu kindly reedy yourself from Document 26, Heum
Humoral IV?

.. I quote: "„tput the Bvrkc preccdur-:

v-3C2


2 Juno-..-DJG-17-4-:1*1 ey (Brc-ir.)
Court I


■c) Berks scc-wr.tcr differs frea natural water only Ly its trstc.

"O Like the letter, it cruses - salt diuresis, which 'ccordins
to the era-.unt drunk, can quickly Iced t a dcnccrcus exsiccosis. It
produces cn c' Jeetive thirst,

"c) In cany cases it increases the subjective thirst, causes dry¬
ness cf tho ucuth end throat auccus accrue riul diarrhea.,. The sene
applies else in the ease cf snail doses,

Berks sco-cip.tcr, like natural i ter, is q-ita unsuitable fer
quenching tidrst et sc, either in ler-o cr aril teses, an. is even

tnneerous. In any esse, it is tetter to so thirsty then to ‘rink it,"

Q Ilorr, fren Exhibit 40, Jeeunent 27 -

TOS rrSSDEHT: Counsel, V r rr.ph 1, under Ixurn IV, this Jeeu-
nont Beck coys: "Berko scr.-i: ter, like natural u ter, is quite unsuit¬
able for cu«nchini thirst r.t sar," Is not natural water suitable for
quenching thirst at sea; ecs thrt .icon natural sco.-vr-tcr?

Da, IdXCKJiJ.H: That aeons n*tur'l scr.-va.tcr naturally, ‘four
Honor, yes.

In the Geman original it says Just "n tural."

3 He. , frori exhibit 40, Dccunent 27, ’-ill you ploa.so quote, or
dll ycu yleo.se explain the significrnco cf this 'ccunont revor'inr
onmncscs?

.. '.hen I cane to Vienna, 'Ur. ton Sir any went with ac in his
unifora a.s Cberstrst into the roou in which tho p ticnt3, that i?, the
experimental subjects were,

4 They were soldiers, were they not?

.. Yes, they were. !5*. von Sirany state! siex:«rily that "Berk-
water w-s a. fine thir H ~, w-sn't it," an! "ycu • aren't thirsty, -.ere ycu,"
end "everythin -r. 3 fine, wasn't it?" The sellers sad*., "Yes, Cclenel,
everything went v.ry well with us." Hewever, I was in civilir.-. clcthin_,
«r‘ caked Ilr. vea Sirany tc . .nrit ao tc cu-sti;n the nun iadividuclly.

I tel' the sel lers tc -jqalain te c_ he-, it ar.s possible, I told then,

I w-as ■ scientist and h-d n.thin- tc with the military, *nd then I

o3f«3


2 Juno-..--JC-17-Wiley (3rr..n)
Ccurt I


fcun - out ctcut theso enr:=no3C3. Itst of thee s?i! the sore they
.resje the thirstier they cot. Fer instrr.ee, KLr.Tr. s’i'. thr.t, ’..inter
sri J . it. The thirst w-s quenchoi only temporarily. 11-ny ari *. th:t
they h r£ X'Trh-n. In ether wor's, wh: t tre fin.’, here is nh t one ncul*’.
expect to fin* with the Berkr. noth;;’..


J


yn.


2 Jtmo-4rfU-i5-1 -kochan (Brown)

Court l

- r » Biacfcr, I shall put Docuacnt "So. 28 to you, this will
bo Zxkiblt Ho. 31.

These aro direction for using Berkntit, signod personally by
Mr. Borkc. -hose aro tho instructions that ho gavo no at that tine.
7rcn these instructions for uao one can see ono or two voxy loportmt
points. It a.-ys hero under tho hooding "Clinic.! o^joriconts", I
quote:

"Clinical cjp eric onto have shown that in ease of dlotross at son
it will bo advisable to stert at onco with the drinking; thuo tho
polato bcccnos gradually cecustouod to tho potion, nai tho otrain on
tho kidneyp doos not occur in ono shock but lncroasos gradually."

Tito coin cr^jhasis lios horo on the phraso "tho strain on tho
kidneys" this proves with tho Borka nothod tho salt still has to bo
ollninatcd by tho kidnqrs. At tho consluslon of tho instructions for
uso, it says*

■Borkntit has, at tho seco tlcc, a high food voluo and can bo
tekon as a food lnstoad of hard candy. Borkatit contains vltauino."

I, uysolf, havo oaten Borkatit, and it was in offoct nothing but
hard candy.

Q • Dr. Schaufor, in tho discussion on 19 and 20 May, 1944,
xhat opinion did you express about Borkatit?

a . Mr, Borka and I had a rather vehement argupont. I put his
own instructions for uso to Kin and also confrontod hlu with Obovotrr.zt
von Sireny's oxpv-rlnonts. I told hin that his preparation was slxiply
s ccothing that coverod up tho natural tasto of soa water and conso-
quontly was nuch uoro dangerous than see water itself, because tho
soldiers would havo the illusion that they could drink unlimited qvsur-
tltios of it. Howovor, Mr. Borka was not to bo persuaded ,nd ccuo for¬
ward with nodicrl explanations which ho did not even understand hiiieolf.

Q . I should now like to put in Documents Hos. 29,30, and 31.

Doc 'moat iTOfc 29 will boo^o Jcthjblt Ho. 32, Poo.siont Ho. 30 will b »-

G305


2 Juno-^iJ-l &-2-K cchan (3rown)

Court 1

ccco a&lblt Ho. 33, aad Dociracnt 31 will bocenc Exhibit Ho. 34.

Ihosc oro affidavits free porsona who took port la tho confcroncos.
Thoao aro representatives of tho Havy who know a littlo bit about tho
way la which thoao dlacuaaloaa woro carried on. Iran what thoy say
It cm bo aocn that tho atrugglo botwocn tho doctora of tho luftwaffo
and tho teclaical office was very vlblont at thta nooting and that
Schaefer took part In It.

7rcx; Exhibit Ho. 32, I zhould llko to road a part, of tho affida¬
vit of Dr. Hurt Lloacho. Thlo la tho 12th or 13th linci

■1 rccaibor that the Kay aoaaion 1944 coaalatod aalnly of a
lively dlccusalon botwocn tocbaical and nodical roprcaontativoa of
tho Luftwaffo. Tho phyaiclona of tho luftwuffo and olao tho phyal-
clana of tho Havy-aa for aa they aodo thaaaolvoa hoard ralaod ocx*-
ioua objections against tho Borkatlt procoaa. In thlo connection
physiological questions entorod the discussion, on 'dilch, owing to uy
training, Z could not givo on oxport opinion.

■Tho technical representatives of tho Luftwaffo hod nado Borkatit
oxporlnonts on living hunans in a hospital of tho Luftwaffo olrocdy be¬
fore tho Kay sossion. Ho ono aufforod health dcoogos at thin oocnolon.
Tho physicians of tho Luftwaffe hod considerable objections egainot
tho procoduro of tho oxperinonto and dlscusood thoao In o specialized
Danner which I could not follow. I hod tho inpreaeion that ull tho
Othor participants of tho nccting woro noroly llstcncra and that scuo
of thou did not epprovo of tho sharp controversy botwocn tho phyaiclona
and tho technicians. The physiologists of the Luftwaffo attacked tho
technical oxporta In a very pointed nonner and forbado my non-profoa-
slonol interference with their epoclollzod sphorc of work. Z cannot
rocall the litoral statements of any of tho physicians."

Then fren Exhibit Ho. 33. tho affidavit by 31 chard Hondstoin I
should like to read only a port. I quoto: free the fourth lino of tho
second paragraph:

■Tho dobnto was conducted eeong acebors of the luftwaffo. I can
still rccasbor S tabsingcnlcur 3oriC£^(ho defondod his own procoduro.


2 Jur.o-*H:j-18-3-Hccfcac (3rown)

Court 1

Ic opposition to hln, a young physician of the Luftwaffe upheld Q
difforent opinion. This nay have been Schaefer. This young physician
argued with physiological reasons, *.ich, however, I do not rcuccbcr
in dctdl. I know nothing regarding the details of possibly planned
b orica of osporiconta. ■

JJJDOZ SZ3RIHO: Just, a nenont, couasol. I notice that ccvoral
of tho affiants who have subcittod affidabits horc that thoir nouos
eppoor in Prosecution Decup cat Ho. 177, Prosecution Exhibit Ho.133,
Docupont Book Ho. 5, aa being rocordod "Present" at tho Hay ucoting.

I do not notico tho nope of this affiant, Richard Handstoin; can you
oxploin that, ploaso?

DP. paCEiudQ;: I myself failed to notico that, lour Honor, It
lo possiblo that this rocord is faulty and that Eendotoin was prosent
and was not liotod. Ho, hinsolf, spooks in his cfflcavit of a nooting
in tho spring of 1944 in tho air Ministry. I personally assuno that
that in tho scuo nocting, and it is possiblo that his nxr.o la not
nontloncd.

JTiSC-S SEBRIi r G: Could it bo that tho affiant Rich .rd “andstoin
is ono and tho seno as Haunctoin, »dio <*jpOurs as tho ninth n.v»o in
Prosocution Sfcibit Ho. 1337

DR ?HLC£4aNH: Yes, it is porfoctly possiblo that this nano
H.'.unntdn is roally landstoin. If this copy of Docunont Ho. 177 is
correct, then tho nlstukc was cado in tho original uinutos of this
nooting. I thank Your Honor for calling this to ny attention. I
■hall look rgaln at tho original in ordor to ascertain whethor tho.
nauo is set down falsely in ny docuaont.

according to his own signature, tho nan's naio is Hand stein that
io in tho affidavit, which I an putting in and in tho original of Do¬
cument 177 of tho Prouocution tho naao is Haunstoin.

3Y DP. pdlcd^il::

Dr. Schaofer, woro you able to express your point of view
regarding the Berka method, although oechor-?roysong had already* c^-


prossod hisi


G3&7


2 Juacv-irnJ-l&-4-Kcch(Ui (3rown)

Court 1

d. T cs.

Q. Hov con you substantiate in ary othor wo y your statcnont horc
th.-.t you opposed tho Borkatit aethod.

A. I was so conTlncod of tho nonsensicalnoss of tho Borkn aethod
that I said that It was totiroly ineffective and that this was so
obvious that there was no point in esporinaating with it.

Q. Then, you oppressed tho opinion that ouch ojporiaonto would
bo ecoploftoly unnocossary.

Too, I did and for that roason I was not oaong the najbors of
tho canlttoo which was to proparo for theso exporinonts, cs can bo
soon free this record of tho ncoting of tho 19th and 20th.

Q* You noon to say that you did not boccoo a a tub or of that
cauiittoo?

a. Yos, that is right. This was a group of pooplo who woro ready
for a cue sort of ccnprcciso.

Q . Did you not have seno difficulties on tho 20th of oxprosslng
your opposition og&lnf

A . *os, of courso I did, bocauso tho Toehnicnl Offico, which
had ctxio to rocogniso uo as tho nost radical opponent of tho Borka
uothod, was In chargo ot tho costing. Voll, that is to sny Christenson
was prodding and ho sinply would not givo no tho floor, and slnco I woo
on Untorarst, c non-cocuicslonod officor, I could not tuko it on ny own
initiative.

Q • And you woro oven threatened once; wore you not?

* • Yos, ot tho consluoion of the discussion, after tho Tochnical
Offico saw that I was trying to portray the estporiuents as scnsoloss,
Schlcklor told no that if I wont on in this ecuo diroction I woultf havo
to oagrtain uy actions to Hilch and to answor tho chargo of sabotage.


Court So. 1

2 Jus 47— A—19— 1—Putty (Brown)


22. PZLCXMASS: 3ecker-?rey§eng has already stated on the stand
that Schaefer told hie this later.

Q. Vas there a discussion at this meeting of the 20th of the fact
that faunae experioents vere to be carried out with tho Vofatit aethod?
A. So. Even Herr Eerka hiaself saw that the Vofatit aethod vas a

good one.

m. PELCKXAKKi I can again. Tour Honors, draw your attention to
Docusent 177, Inhibit 133, and I draw your attention to tho fact that
there is no aention there of argr eroeriaents with Vofatit.

q. Did you have any interest in seeing to it that experioents
should be carried out with Vofatit?

A. So, none whatsoever, because I had nothing to do with Vofatit.
Q, Perhaps this would have been out of soae personal interost to
you slcply to prove how good Vofatit was and how poor SerStatit was?

A. Veil, that would have been sisply a ridiculous aabitlon on ay


part.

Q. At any rate, although the chalrnan, Christensen, lloitod you
more and nore. nevertheless, on the 20 th you did state your opinion that
tho experiments with Berkatit wore coapletely unnecessary and uscleoo?

A. Yes, that is so, and the suggestion was then nade that Dr.
npolnger should then be put in as director of future exoerinonto, and I
thon said to nyself that, if Zppinger cano to Berlin, he would kick uo
oulte a ruspus because he had been given any trouble or been bothorod
at all in such a useless affair.


Q. How after the 20 Hay auctlng did you still do everything you
could to prevent oxperinonts being carried out, particularly exoorinonts
with prisoners, whatever sort they night be? (

A. Yes. In a telephone conversation with 3ecker-Frey*eng 1
oxpresfled^kisglvings.

23. PILOC'JlH:;: In this connection I should like to return to
Lxhibit 19, Bocuoent 39, an affidavit of Hrs. Koenig in the supolonontary

document book. Since I have already read the first mart of this affi-

3369


Court So. 1

2 Jun 47-A-19-2-i2t-?utty (3rovn)


davit, I shall read the rest. Page 125e:

“I remember veil hov Dr. Schaefer at the beginning of 1944 returned
in an onraged state free Vienna where he had inforced hiosclf on the
development of the experiments with the 3erka preparation. Ke was
furious at the stupidity of eoce cen who had even proposed euch a thing
and ho told no that this preparation rerely altered the taste and that
he would have nothing to do with this charlatanry.

"Based on the notes of the erpericent by Dr. von Sirany Dr. Schaofer
dictated to no his view* on it which he conseauently took to the nodical
inspectorate at Salov to report on it to his superiors. Soce tiac later
Dr. Schaofer returned hone in an excltod state and said eoaething liko
this: ‘Today thero was a violent ouarrel. Thoso idiots cannot be con¬
vinced by anything, and the naval pcoplo too havo no idea of Physiology,
Tor soae unknown reason new oxperinonts arc to bo node. I hopo I shall
havo nothing to do with theso. It has oven been proposed to nako tho
experiments on prisoners.'

"Dr. Schaefer then immediately celled up Dr. Beckor-Troysong. I
was in tho sane roon and I rcaoebor this conversation very voll boenuso
I ropoatodly had to ask Dr. Schaofer to keep his termer end not to shout
so ouch. Among other things ho said that ho simply could not undorstnnd
why new oxoorinonts should bo code, and if thoy ht^c to bo aado, thoy
should at ienct not be porforaed on prisoners.

"Aftor onding this conversation Dr. Schaefer told ao that some
other experts wore to bo called in and that he hoped that they would
decide to cuash the whole natter. As a minor official In the Luftwaffe
ho was sorry ho could do no more than he had already done to prevent
this nonsense. Dr. Schaefer stated in various conversations that he ns
opposed to any experlcents on prisoners on principle as in such cases
one could never be sure whether the experiments voro rcelly made on
volunteers and not by exercising pro6sure in view of the more or less
dleagretable condition under which they were living. Besides, his poli¬
tical principles made him averse to everything in any way connected with

S390


Court So. 1

2 Jus 47-A-19-3*i£K-Putty (3rovn)


concentration cam*.

"Upon sy Question whether these experiaents with the 3erka orepara-
tlon caused severe pains. Dr. Schaefer told ne that they vere not agree¬
able but in no vey dangerous and would not cause any lasting daceges,
orovided they wore node under sensible nodical supervision. Ee addod,
however, that in spite of everything he ves opoosod to such experiments
because ho rojected everything connected with the concentration camps,"

I should like to read tho following linos at a later tino. As can
bo teen fren this affidavit, another effort was nade to examine tho
necessity of theeo experiments, namely, ty receiving testimony fron
nodical specialists.

Sow I put in Documents 32 and 33 in ordor to show vhat the nodical
spec tails to did in this natter. First I should llko to read Docunont Ho.
33 which will become Exhibit 36; it is on prge 116. Docunont Ko. 32
will bocone Exhibit 36; it is on page 113. Profosoor Dr. Fens Vottor
fron Klol enys tho following:

"Towards the end of May 1944, at tho roouost of the Medical Sorvico
of tho Luftvnffo and without having boon inforsod of the dotello of tho


Questions which would bo doalt with, I wet asked to take oort in n con-
concernod

foronco/with making sea wotor potablo.

"Ac far as I can remember, tho following persons wero orosont,
opart froc nysolf: Professor Heubner, Professor Eppingcr, Professor
Schwiogk, Dr. Becker-Frcysong, Dr. Schaefer, another representative of
tho Hodleal Sorvice of the Luftvnffo, the enginoor Sorka and ono or two
other representatives of tho technical offico.

"At the beginning of the conference the possibility was diecusood
of supplying with water persons in distress at sea, and the discussion
turned only gradually to the two methods which obviously had already
been considered before by the Luftwaffe. Vs, tho as yet insufficiently
orientated participants, learned about then by the slogans Serkatlt and
Vofatit.

"At first the Berkatlt nothod -invented by the engineer Bcrka vac

. £391


Court So. 1

2 Jun 47-A-lS-4-ZHX-?utty (3rown)

generally declined by the Luftwnffe physicians including Dr. Becker-
Freyaeng and Dr. Schaefer. I woe under the l^pree.lon that only
Profeeaor Zppinger'a greet euthorlty made it a topic of discussion.

Without being eble to give factual proof of this, there seencd to bo a
autuel understanding between Berlca and Spplnger. Cbvloualy Zppinger had
full confidence in tho experiments already carried out by Berlca and
seemed to be ccnvlncod of the value of hie method. Vith regard to thie
• ituation, Hr. Becker-Freyseng remerkod that tho Luftwnffo could have
the nethoda for the roacuo of airmen In diatroea at aca ovaluntod by
preliminary toata on human bclnga. *othing wao oald about tho fact that
theae experiment, voro to bo carried out on priaonora. I thought of
volunteer., a very obviou. idoa, aa during the porlod of cy work at an
examination point for airmen. which la.tod for .one yoera, <*« doalt
nearly oxclu.ivoly with comber, of the Luftwaffe who had volunteered.

■In a frequently contradictory and long laatlng dlacuBBion the par¬
ticipant. agreed on a program of axpariaenta, the dotaile of which I
can no longer recall. It ie out of tho que.tlon that thie conference
vn. baaed on any orevioualy fixed urogram. I can no longer recall
whether a ecrice of exoerimonta for the evaluation of Vofatit vna really
agreed on at that time."

And Document 32, exhibit 36. page 113, reada e- follove: .

Q, This, Dr. Schaefer, la the conference of tho 25th of Kay?

A. Tea.

m. PELCKKAKB: 'At a conference in the spring of 1944, vfclch vna
held at the ftllitary nedical Academy, the following took olace, a. far
a. I can recall:

"Among the participants were the following nen known to me, na far
aa I reoember:

Stabaarzt Dr. Becker-Freyseng
Stabaarst Dr. Schwlegk
Unterarzt Dr. Schaefer
engineer Berka
Prof. Dr. Zppinger, Vienna
Prof. Dr. Setter, Eiol

and my6Clf; also two or three officora «hoeo names


Court So. 1

2 Jun 47-1-19-6-234-Putty (Brown)


I cannot recall. Xarlneoberstabsarst Professor Dr. Ortechovskl fros
Kiel was Invited but did not attend.

"1 discussion took place on the use of a preparation for producing
potablo vater free salt vater, proposed by engineer Berka. Few details
vere given about the nature of this process. It vas obvious to no, hov-
ever, that occe very high authorities of the allltary adnlnlstratlon very
seriously considered the Introduction of this preparation while the nodi¬
cal experts who were acquainted with this preparation, nartlcularly
Messrs. Becker-Freyseng, Schaefer, end Schwlegk, had sorious doubts
about Its efficacy for it was daised that this preparation vculd sake
salt tor potable without ellalnatlng its salt contents. I rysolf had
tho sane doubts as to the efficacy of this process and Prof. Dr. Hotter,
who sat noxt to ae, v*s of the sane opinion. The neetlng was lntorruptod
by an air raid alara and vbs continued standing In a dark beoeaent,
while the boobs could be heard exploding anl it vas laposolblo to tako
notos.

•As far as I reasebor, tho outcaae of tho discussion vas that
dosplte all doubts tho process as suggested by Kr. Berka vas not to bo
rojectcd without an lnvcetigatlon for evon tho alightoat ouccoss would
soon sufficiently lnportont froa a allltary point of view and any suoh
slight benefit should not be rojectod. The calnent clinical physician
Zppingor In particular upheld the view that tho aattor was at loast
worth investigating.

•In tho eneulng discussion the general application of tho tests
van discussed and three groups of exporlaental persons wore suggested;
one, those suffering free ordinary thirst; two, those vho were given
ordinary salt water, end three, those who were to drink salt vntor which
had been treated according to Berka's foraula. The discussion then
turned to tho precautions to be taken to prevont vator being obtained
during the experiaents. Barlicr clinical oxperloer.ts in connection
with the water and salt content of the body had shown hov necessary
those orecautioss are. There was, of course, coopletc a^reeaent on tho

- 3393


Court So. 1 # ,

2 Jue 47-A-lS-S-ISM-?utty (Brown)


necessity that the experimental persons should he under constant nedical
supervision to avoid any possible risk to the health and Herr Ippinger
therefore suggested that his assistant. Dr. Seiglbocck, vho had much
experience in the field of metabolism, should be placod in charge of
theso experiments.

■Some months eftor this first conference there was a meeting of
numerous physicians of the Vchrnacht, presided over by Genoralstabsarxt
Dr. Schroeder. to which I also was invited. There Dr. Beiglboeck, among
others, reported on the outcome of the experiments. This report did not
show that the experimental persons had boon treated any differently from
previous scientific experiments in the same fiold. It %«s understood,
of courso, that in order to carefully supervise tho supply of wator
close supervision had been maintained. The te.ts showed that tho pro¬
cess suggested by at. Berka in no way improved the drinking qwxlltlon
of sea water by people suffering from thirst. Tho discussion rovoalod
that war •xporloncos had shown that humans can suffor thirst much
longer than tho earllor doctrine of physiology had taught."

That is Professor Wolfgang Heubner's affidavit, vho is at prooont
teaching at tho University of Berlin.


39


2 June 4?-A_J JC-2C-1-G"ldbcrg (»•*.» Srovr.)
C^ort Z


ST IP. mCDtAHF:

^ Dr. Schaefer, were jru present throughout the entire course
of the c-nfercncc a n the 25th of Kay?

A H". S"-c tine after the discussion began there v*j an air
raid. Every"no me Into the cellar Including those participating in
thle discussion. The cellar w«*s divided into several smaller rooms
and the participants in the discussion broke up lnt" little groups and
nixed with the other persens In the house. There wore a gTeat winy
pcoplo there, poople fr:n everywhere in the Medical Academy.

Cn the 35th of Kay at this discussion was there discussion
Of human experiments with Hofatlt?

A Ho.

(* let no say that Professor Better's affidavit states the canc,
that Is, Exhibit 35, and Bcc.'-crJFrcysong corroborated th-t as a wit¬
ness on the stand I>r. Schaefer, Bcekor-Frcyscng and variue affidavits
have oh-wn us that 7"u wore against the Bcrka. ncth"d and t v at y"u were
•jralnot experiments "n rris-nert. You also stated that during thle
dlocutel"!*.. How, yu stated that an tho occasion of the previous con¬
ference. H"v, why didn't you do so .gain o n the 25th concerning cx-
porl-orte o- Luftwaffo personnel or concentration ca=p Inmates?

A Cn tho 25th of Kay I again said that tho Bcrka method was
n't useable after several university professors, Including persons with
a European reputation, such as Ir' lessor Epplngcr and Kuobner, had.
stated that the Bcrka method could n"t be rejected without a further
experiment. I, ef c-urcc, could not present any nodical countor-argu-
ments or refutations since I had -- military rank nr did I enj-y repu-
tatl'n In science. I was, after all, then simply *n cmpl-ycc In pri¬
vate Industry.

However, you had -thor reasons which yu explained to Mrs.
K'-enic and which »rt corroborated lr. her affidavit, misgivings c-n-
ccrning prls'ner3?

A There w.s n' mention of rris*r.trs lr. this diccussl-n and.


*


e395


2 June 47_A_JjC.£0~2-C-*iat>erg (Inti. B r ~,)

Court I

I could not return to something th?t had been *aid in a previous dis-
ensslnn and take that occasion to express ny private opinions of that
experiment on prisoners. Moreover, such a thing would have teen a
political attack on Rational Sociallsa end its systen of concentration
cases, which w-uld net he exactly the thing to do in a meeting attended
ty -ffleers. I- don't believe evon the aost courage~u* resistance nan
would have done such a thing.

* Perhaps you would like to describe to the Tribunal how you
hed previously been threatened.

A In a discussion that took place with Dr. Christenson be¬
fore the 19th I had serious difforonccs of opinion pnd he forbndo ay
interfering in his business and he told no that Obcretar*t von Slrany
certainly know alot noro about those thingo than e-nc Untcrartt. Tho
aan whs had a colonel's insignia on his shoulder cortalnly was scien¬
tifically in the right also, and the higher his rank tho noro right ho
was.

Then thcro was ay clash with Major Jowrrek; n-t only my
clash with hla, but also Bcckcr-Troysong's; and then in addition thorc
was the throat that Schlcklcr rado to no at or after the meeting of tho
20 *h. All that would have boon necessary then would have been a little
noto of some sort in tho ainutos of that mooting and Borka or Chrlston-
son would have been ablo to get their opponent, namely ae, out of tho
way.

h Then, in other w->rds, you c-nsidcrcd it lnp< aoiblo, ~n tho
25th of M«y, to express you ideological objections to tho Bcrka nothod?

A Tea, that was quite out of the question.

TR. P2.ICDUVH: I shall read now tho rest of Frnu Koenig'a
affidavit. This is again Inhibit 19 in tho supplementary v^lurfc in
which she discusses Schacfor'a disappointment in the failuro of the
last possibility of preventing these experiments.

In the third paragraph fr-a the ond it reads — this is on
uago 12V, tho first »nrHgraph:

539 >


2 June 47—i-I jC-2o-3-GeZaberg (Ir.t., 3rnWa)

C?*lrt I

"A sh-rt while Inter Dr. Schaefer returned hone soon after a
severe air-raid, with the fallowing word* which I clearly rcne=ber|

'These asses have alto failed. I cannot understand what qualifications
secured such persons their professorships. I am tired of It and I
vnn't do anymore. The experiments will xrv prcbably be nade at Bruns¬
wick. 1

*1 also very voll remember that Dr. Schacfor returned froa a
discussion In an enraged state saying that he had Just coao froa a
neeting with officers of the Luftwaffe. He and Dr. Bcckcr-Frcyecng
had been called saboteurs when declaring the Berka preparation as
completely useless. Thoy also had to submit to ether strong attacks
and the acotlng had noarly been broken ty,"

The throats against Schaefer charging hla with oabotago can nloo
be soon from this docuaent and aloo froa Herr Fahl'o affidavit, which
Is D'cuaer.t H-. 40 to which I have given Exhibit So. 37. This again
la In a supplementary volume and, as I said, this again mentions threats
against Schaefer on the chargo of sabotage. In the nlddlo of this docu¬
ment — rr, rathor, I shall road the third paragraph:

■The so-called transcript of 23 M».y 1944 (Docuncnt Ho. 177 Ex¬
hibit 133) lnc-'rroctly reports the discussion on 19 Hay. One rf tho
O'tt obvious mistakes In this transcript Is the mention of a series of
exporlncnts which vero supposedly to have been’ agreed upon at that time.
Actually, no sorics of experiments were scttlod on this day, therefore,
als n't thoso listed under rignro lA_d (6day period) and ao experimental
series (12 day period). Sot one word was mentioned to the offect that
the experimental subjcctc would be supplied by tho Relchsfuchror-SS or
that tho experiments were to take place «t concentration camps, as tho
Hr fatIt acthed was considered acceptable by all present at the confer¬
ence, the question -f experiments on humans did not arise and v* 0 n*t
mentioned. The experimental scries with V-vf 8 tit was later neither
suggested nor ord.ered by Schaefer.


2 June 47-l_7jC_20-4-Cc'ldbetg (Int*J SrownJ
Court I

■Curing the neeting either Major JeWefek or the Chief of the
tceting station Trevenucnde accused Bocker-Jrcyeeng end Schaefer of
being financially interested in the Vofatit aethod.

■3ecker_Preyseng, Schaefer and I protested against this accusa¬
tion and got up tc leave the aoeting. Christenson interceded and there¬
upon ve regained.*

I now nut in Dseuacnt 3*. This will he Exhibit 38, page 118.

This is an affidavit by Professor Hubertus Strugh"ld. This proves
that the B3RA, in other words, the C-ostepo, took ocasurcs against
scientists saying th*t they wore saboteurs if they enbraccd nodical
opinions that differed froa the officially accertod opinion. Tho
affidavit roads:

■In fall 19*4, my two collaborators Dr. Heinrich Brso, Luftwaffe
5tabs«rst, and Dr. IrgeVrfc Schaidt investigated tho offccts of vitamin
A, on night vision. They found *-ut that when coabined with a sufficient
supply of fat vitaain A - when given in ncraal dosos - it improves night
vision. Proa another source, it was discovered that very big doses of
vitaain A - whon glvon in certain solution agonts - inpreve the night
vision in a way never previously experienced. My collaborators did not
conflra this. Thereupon, soac tlac lator, tho Roscarch Mrnegcacnt of
tho Luftwaffe or tho Medical Inspection received a lettor froa - * bellovc
the 3S Slchorungshauptaat or wha.tever lte nano was, and in this letter,
ay collaborators and ay Xnstltuto were reproached of sabotago. Ac far
as I recall, a correspondence took place between the two agencies named,
the subject of which I d- not rcaenbor in detail. Later I hoard nr nc-ro
aVut it. Anyway, the fact remains that Vth ay scientific collaborators
were attacked by the aVve acntlrned organisation ncrely because they
C'uld n r t conflra the results rf another research wrker. This lo a
matter unheard of in tho field of science."


0390


2 JU&-&-4S-21-1-Gross ( i nt* Brows)
Court No. I.


DF:. ESLCKKAI.'K: Perhaps at this tine, Your Honor, we could

break off.

T?C rP.2SID2OT: If you have only throe n.oro you nay proceed
and wo will conclude this evening.

DP.. FBICKUAHNt I have only throe nore that is correct,
your Honor. However, I see that the connecting test in what I intond
tc crasont Iwro is so long, it would bo bottor if I presont it tomor¬
row.

THE mBSIDBBr: The Tribunal 'dll be in recess until 9*30
tonorrew morning.


399


Roll 9


Target 2


Volume 23


June 3-9, 1947


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vs KARL BRANDT et ol
VOLUME 23


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


3-9 June 1947 pp. 8400-8789


Court 1

June 3-M-l—r-HD-rr lmeau-Frnnk »


Official Transcript jf the American Military Tribunal

in the matter of the United States of America, a g a in st

Karl Brandt, ot al, defendants, sitting at Hurnborg,

Germany, on 3 Juno 1947, 093C, Justice Beals presiding.

THE 24aRSHaLL: Military Tribunal I is new in sosslen.
God save the United States of America and this honorablo
Tribunal. There will be order In the court.

THE. PRESIDENT: Mr. Marshall, have you ascertained
that tho defendants ore ell present in c urt?

THE '..aRSSaLL: May It al^aso y ur H- nor, all the
defendants are .'resent In the c iurt.

T>2 PRESIDENT; The oecrotary-Genoral will noto for
the rec'.rd the resenco of .all the defendants in court.

D. I understand thrt the witness franz V-llhnrdt will first
*:e called n behalf of the the defendant 3eckor-Fr-yeeng?

DR. MaRX: '1th the permission of the Tribunal, lir.
President, I should like to call rr foes', r V.llhardt whom
* l * . Tribunal has permitted t. on-oar as an exoort wltnoss
n boh- If f defendant 8c..roodor and Dr. dcckor-Freyoeng,
and vh .- -s also been allowed t • testify on behalf of
defendant Dr. Bolglboock.

THE PRES IDEM: The marshall will show to the witness
stand Franz Vollhordt.

FRa1:z VOLLHaRDT, a witness, t ok the stand and test¬
ified as follows:


BY JUDGE 8E3RING:

hold x your right hand and be sw* rr., 'lease,

1 me the oath: I swear by God, the Almighty
yx. Car.isclV*Aj\ that I will s enk the mure truth and wljl
(withhold -nd n- thing.

(The witness repeated the ootr.)

M\ /

JUDGE S23RIKG: You may sit down.

^ DIRECT EXAMINATION


BY DR. I^RX:


8UOO


Court 1

Juno 3-i4-l-*-HD-?rlodau-Frank.

Q, Professor, please, would you state y'.ur full name.

A* Frcnt Vollhardt.

£. Where and when wore you born?

A. Munich, 2 May 1872.

Q. Ploaso, w.uld you briefly toll the Tribunal what
your sclontiflc activities have been and reg-rding which
spocira field and since when you have taken a particularly
groat Interest?

A. I an Professor of Internal Medicine at Frankfort
and predominantly, I have dealt with the question of
circulation, metabolism blood pressure or kidney diseases.

Q. Which aro tho Goman Universities where you have
boon a lecturer?

A. Halle and Frankfort.

2. Hove y u boon an author of scientific work
regarding this sooclal field of activity?

A. Yes.

3. Have they been circulated and translated in
forolgn countries and in foreign languages?

A. Yos, they have boon translated in Russian, behand
my back.

Q. C nslderlng tho facts you have Just stated, would
it bo right to say th-t you hr>vo had honors allotted to you
in this c.untry and abroad, so would you please telo tho
Tribunal what types of decoration you have received abroad.

A. I really have to?

Q. Whloh foreign academies and Foreign societies
have you been a member of? Professor, I really want you
to answer my questions because I am sure my questions
pursue certain purposes.

A. I am Honorary Doctor at tho Sorbonne, Paris, at
Gottingen and Frolburgj and, as far as societies are


o401


I


Court 1

Juno &-!4-l-3-HD-?rlocau-Frank.

c nc-rnod, there are i lot of trios, Medical Society at
Edinburg, at Cenf, at Luxemburg. I as an Honorary Monbor
of trie university et Santlage, and so on and so forth.

<. Thanh you very such. Thor. I w uld be lntorostod
t. hoar fr s you whether you had c •nnaotions with the
N8DAP and what s .rt of c'-*n..ectl-ns they wore and whether
trio Party persoout d y u in any way. Perhaps, you night
answer tri. last question first.

When I was lecturing In Spanish In South «norlca
nd when I was giving a lecturo in Corjoba Argentina,
beforo a sedlc-’l Congress, I recelvjd a tclegrau to trio
effect that I nad been relieved fr.n ,:y office and the
reaa a giver, was loch of antl-socitlc attitude.

Q. When was that?

«. 1938.

Q. «nd since when hrve y u nco sore be-n reinstated
and aro r a active again?

«. Since 1945.


I


3t02


3 Jun-tt-i3-2-1-Gross (Int* Frank)

Court No. I.

Q As a full ja*ofesscr?

A Yes, as full professor far Internal Medicine at the Univ¬
ersity of Frankfurt.

Q How, Professor, a few questions recarding your own re¬
search work. You have dealt particularly with hunger and thirst treat¬
ment in tie oase of kidney diseases. Is that correct?

A Yes.

Q So that you have personal radical and scientific exper¬
ience regarding the observation of human beir-gs when they undergo hun¬
ger and thirst treatment?

A Yes.

Q Mr. President, bofore continuing with the examination of
this oxport witness I should like to permit nysolf to make a suggestion.
There aro two typos of possibilities for the examination of Professor
Vollhardt regarding questions which interest us here. One possibility,
the one which I nysolf consider the corroct one, is that Profosoor
Vollhardt should give us a continuous oxport opinion regarding tho
ontiro complex of questions which are of interest here, arri that at
tho oid I would thon permit ays elf to put a few concluding quostiona
to the export hore as, of cou-sc, any defence counsel and prosocutor
is entitled to do, too. The other possibility would bo that I put a
number of individual questions to tho oxport which would deal with tho
subject chronologically ard technically from a nodical point of view.
But, that would distort context and would not give as clear a picturo
of the situation as would tho first possibility. I should like there¬
fore, Hr. Frosidont, for you to make a decision whether tho expert is
to give an opinion in tte fora of ono iecturo first.

TrE i?.ESID2:T: If counsel would propound to tho ritnoss a
hypothetical question covering the basic facts which hero arc at issue,
and if tho witness would answer that hypothetical question without fur¬
ther question from counsel and rake his response brief and to tho
ard without enlarging too much upon the fact that salt water is not fit


8A03


3 Jun-!W!E-2-2-Gross (Int. Frank)

Court No. I.

to drink and is injurious, which the Tribunal very well knows, >ro might
proceed that way aa suggested by counsel* The hypothetical question
should cover the facts here at issue, that experiments wore tried upon
a group of pooplo, a control group, a non-control group and others,
thin the witness may answer that question without further interruption
by counsel if his answer is, as I said, brief and not enlarging too
much on generalities*

DR. : ASX: Very well, ISr. President.

Q Now, Professor, do you have sufficient insight into the
planning and carrying out of tho so callod sea water oxporironts in
order to give an oxj*rt opinion on that subjoct?

A Yoa.

Q What docuaontary ovidonco did you have?

A I had tho original records propared by Boiglboock which I

had seen*

Q I shill first of all doal idth tho character and typo of

t

tho ojQorinonts. Are thoro difforuncos bo two on tho character of tho so
sea wator oxporisants such as oxporinonts with artificial Infection
with nalaria and cholera and; if thoro are differences, what are thoy?

A You can't cooparo tho two at all, becauso in tho caso of
tho sea wator exporinonts you have things so jxirfoctly under control
and can interrupt 30 instantaneously and because tho experiments liad
boon planned at 3hort notico, it could bo oxcludod with absolute cert¬
ainty that no darage could bo done* In tho case of artificial infoc-
tion you can not do that*

Q You are saying that in the case of sea wator experiments,

%

providing they aro interrupted in time, danger to health and bocy can
bo avoided with certainty or bordering on certainty?

A Not tha Latter* I said with aboolutc cortrinty.

Q I shall now coco to the planning of these experiments. Did
Professor Sppingor's participation and the participation of Professor
Kouoner during tho meeting decisive for tho planning of 2 $ Uay 19Wi,


auoh


3 Jury-IME-2-3-Gross (Inti Frank) .

Court Ko. I#

•

which I assume you know about, did they givo a guarantee for purely
scientifically and medically proper treatment of the problem?

A )lo doubt they did. Professor Heubner is a loading
scientist and an extremely critical porson, and Professor Eppingor was
one of tho leading clinicians in the world and a most outstanding ox-
pert, and I ftSEixao both of the so gentleman had reasons for allotting
the so experiments to be carriod out, presumably in order to strengthon
tho back of tho aadical nan, vis-a-vis tho technicians. And, secondly,
it scons to havo been in Eppii«or»a mind that during such oxtromo ex¬
perimentation conditions eight bo possible that the kidney would suffer
noro than up to that tino and it night havo boon that Borkatit which
contains vitamins might support tho work of tho kidnoy.

Q FTofossor, what is your opinion about tho individual ex¬
perimental groupe?

A I think that sciontifically spoking tho planning was ox-
ccllont and I tovc- no objection to tho ontiro planning. It was jpod
to add a h\ngor-<md-thirst-group bocauco, wo know by oxporionco thirst
can bo suffered hotter than hunger, and if oooplo aro sufforing from
hunger and thirst too, thoy do not suffor from hunger, but do suffor
from thirst and that rescnbloa what people in tho soa would bo subject
to bocauso hu is only sufforing from thirst. It was oxccllont that
TYofatit was to bo introduced into tho experiments too, although it was
expootod from tho boginning that this wonderful discovery would provo
itself. It did turn out that groups treated with soa trator according
to Schaefer Just reacted as a group that were subjoctod to a reasonable
hunger treatment and did not suffor free any great discomfort. In tho
hunger euro cf 12, or, we rfcould say 3 days, bo cause tho people Still
a to during the first U days, that is a minor affair, and wo carry that
out lnmsaornblo tires for nodical reasons. There exists a sanitarium
where people are made to hunger for four weeks, and as long as they got
water in tho shape of fruit juices, thoy still carry on wall and often
with enthusiasm. Group 2 was Schaefer's group, groupe 3 ard u was tho

I


GA05


3 Jun-iX 3-2-u-Gross (Int. Frnk)

Court Ho. I#

group that received 50C cubic css. of see -rator once without end cnee
with tfofatit. Group 3 was tie ones nho hod drunk 1000 eras, of sea
water. That ono could only use volunteers for this group is an ob¬
vious fact, since tho cooperation of tho experimental subject is in-
disporsiblc. Without tleir good will such an experimental arrangement
is impossible. That sufficient volunteers could bo found for a caso
was a enttor of course, since a poriod of ton days of oxcollont food
boforc and aftor tho oxperinont was before them and since ono could as¬
sure than with tho best of confidonco thoy would not or could not bring
any danger.

Q Wo will cone to that, Profossor. You hnvo just started to
spook about foed, nouristaont. What is your opinion about tho food be¬
fore, during, and after tho actual oxporiaonts?

A Wo 11, before tho oxporiaonts it was cplondid. During tho
oxixjrinonts it was noagor corresponding to 3hip wrecked people and
afterwards quite uxc:llant. In ny opinion during such brief ojq>orl-
conts nourishment doesn't play any part.

HR. HARDY i Kay it plor.so tho Tribunal, night 1 inquire
whether tho tritnoss is now testifying to facts as ho has ascertained
than from stutfying graphs and charts raado by ft*cfossor Boiglboock or
is ho testifying free hearsay that food was givon to the so inrv.tos or
what is tho basis of his knewlodgo that ho is oliciting here?

A I was giving ny testimony basod on the records which I
hnvo studied.

HR. HARDY: Thank you.

A But I don't attach a-.y irportanco to the aoagor food sorvod
dicing tho oxperirents because that is an insignificant point lfhich as
I have said wo havo alio ted to others many tiros.

T!C HISSIDSIT: Witless, idicn you referred to this examina¬
tion of tho records, state briefly just what records you oxaninod.

A The original records.

THE .-32SIDS.7: Comprising tie charts that were taken fron


3 Jur.-H-> 3-2-5-Gross (Inti Prank)
Court No. I.


day to day during the experiments?

A Yes.

TIE PRESIDENT: I would ask counsel for the defonso if those
charts arc available hero in the Tribunal?

DR. MARX: Ur. President, thoso charts are not in ay hands.
They aro hold by the defense counsel for the defendant Bciglbocck.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsol say proceed.

%

HR. HARDY I Your Honor, I have the charts in ny hands at
this tine. I will pass then up to tho Tribunal for their purusal. I
haven*t had an opportunity yot to purusc then, thareforo, I don't know
what thoy scan.

THE PRESIDENT* It is not nocossary to subnit tho charts to
th.- Tribunal at this tire. I would ask counsel for dofonso if thoso
charts purport to bo tho conplcto record of thoso oxperinonts fron tho
beginning to tho end?

STEE3AUEP. (For tho Dcfondant Bciglboock): Hr. Prolidont, I
m in tho nost fortunate position of laving boon able to study Boigl-
boeclc's records in his previous office and to find his additional
notorial which ho usod for tho cccposition of thoso records. I found
corn of the30 in Vienna and brought tho- along at Christmas rnd imed-
iatoly showod then to Dr. Alexander in tho original. Dr. Ivy wr.3 hero
fron Anorica at that nooonfc and dor.lt with t*.viso records, locked at
thcci carefully and ther. in tho prcsonco of tho dofondant roturnod than
to no.


CU07


3 Jun-IM .3-3-1-" arrow (Int. Frank)
Court ;!o« I.


T— HSS3DEKT: Counsel, ny question was whether or not thoso
cherts purport to be a ccoplote record free the beginning of the ex¬
periment to the ond of the experiment. That was the only point con¬
vince in ny question.

D.l. ST2H01USR: Yoa, at the tine I was looking for then,
the tables of weights wore missing. I started looking for them and I
have found the original potionts' histories, aade up for oach indiv¬
idual .ntiont froa 1 to Uli, so wo can prove, in groat detail, how
thoso oxporironts developed, How, thoso tables are ava.il~.blo, Tho
P.-ofossor ccwposod then in a weight table which is contained in Docu¬
ment Book 3 bocauso it had been i;-«ss^blc to copy the so things.

T3S .RESIDE!.?: I understand that. Counsel. But thoso charts
purport to bo complete to tho end of tho oxporireont? That's tho point
in which tho Tribunal is interested.

D... STIINBAUERj Yes, ttoy aro.

:P.. HARDYt U‘y T ask a quostion of counsel. Your Honor?

Tho proBecution desires to know whether or not those charts and rocords
purport to bo thoso charts and records undo during tho c our so of tho
experiments, or whothor Profoscor Boiglboock coaplotcd then after tho
er.«rlr*.ent3?

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel will answer tho quostion propounded
by the prosecution.

D.l. STEDi'BAlER* Yes. That's quito out of tho quostion sinco
Professor Dciglboack didn't oven know where tbo docurants woro. Ho is
a typical profossor who leaves things lying everywhere. I aanagod to
gather then togottor - bits of paper, notebooks, all sorts of things.

I got it together with much pair. 1 brought it to Tiurnborg and I didn't
part with it until the witness saw then, and by comparing tho handwrit¬
ing, this car. to ascc-rtairod. It's quite out of tho question that any¬
thing could possibly have been altered in thoso notes.

IS. HARDY: What disturbs mo, four Honor, is that on ono of
the charts the name of tho subject is erased. The subject's nano appoarod


CACC


3 Jut.-. — 3-3-2-:;^rrow (Litj Frank)

Court !fe. I.

hero and now it has tx:cn erased free the top of the chart, and througlw
out the clarts I have bc^n unable to read tho German language and I
only received then about thirty minutes ago,

T” fRmSHEHT: Such a natter as that can properly be tnkon
up in cross-examination.

h’ith the understanding that these charts contain a complcto
record free tho beginning of tho oxnorir-unt to tho end of tho experi¬
ment, counsel say proceed with tho examination of tho witnoss.

3Y D?.. VJiSXt

Q Frofossor, how do you judge tho individual exaninations
carried out by Professor Bciglboock? '.ere they adoquato for tho solution
of the practical question whether Borkatit was sufficiently usoful and
a preferable thirst troatasnt, and was it sufficient to judgo tho daily
condition of tho oxpurinontal subjocts so that tho right tiuo to inter¬
rupt tho oxcorinonts could bo ascertained?

Did you get ay question?

A Tes, I«Vc got it.

I thought that tl» nrrnngci-onts of this., oxperiixnts was
splendid from tho scientific point of vie.., and, apparently with trenv-
ondous industry and great responsibility Boiglboock dovotod hiasolf to
tho carrying out of those experiments which ho had boon ordered to do.

Q Would it bo right to ary that a personality such as
Bciglboock, as a professor of Interior Ibdicino and chief nodical officer
at a clinic for nany years, on tho basis of daily oxanina ions and through
his personal consideration and examination of the experimental subject,
would 1>j in a position to recognize any threats to the health of tho
person before s’ich threats could actually t\.coao serious.

A That was a tatter of course. 3eislbocck is an excellent
internal .nodical aan and the gr«.r.t care with which ho carried out the so
oxyorinonts shows that he was fully conscious of his re sensibility.

CTily, it's hare to imagine that, during such brief experiment* serious
damage could have occurred at all. i


3409


3 Jon-: S-3-3-? arrow (Int* Frank)

Court "o. r .

•?.. :cHAJEY: I object to tlx Latter part of the answer and
ask that it bo stricken free tlx record. This aan is an oxcort and,
as I understand it, he knows nothing whatsoever personally about tho
aannor in which tlx so oxporieonts wore conducted. I therefore) tnku it
ho is not in n position to State h an Dr. Beiglboock conducted tho ox-
poriaonts.

T'C raZSIDEMT: Tho Tribunal understands tho knowledge of tho
witness and tho objection will bo ov-rruiod. The record may stand.

!R. ?*c HANEY: While I ns on ay feet I ».ould lilco to observe
that of course tho tostinony of this vitness is of suppositivo probative
valuo at this timo. Tho records upon srhich ho is basing his tosticony
hrvo not been adbittod in cvidonco. Tlsoy have not been, in any va.y,
identified.

Tin EVIDENT: That is understood. That is tho situation
beforo tho Tribunal.

DR. KAftXt Vi*. President, I do want to say a few things nbout
that. Professor Vollhardt, -XUr all, is an internationally’ recognized
sciontist who, particularly with rog.ard to tho fiold in which vo aro
intorostod tore, nnaely that of thirst and water supplios, is tho inter¬
national capacity, as one puts it, so that ho is in a position, on tho
basis of thoso clinical records of rrofossor leiglboock, to fort. an
opinion regarding tho way thoso cxporixnts woro carriod out. I can*t
iragirvo that such a san would not be in a position, on tho strength of
such Material, to fora an opinion.

T : -:: rxaSJDSNTj Counsel, it is not a quostion of tlio ability
of the witness to Torn his opinion, but tlto records upon which ho is
basing l»is opinion are not in evidence before tho Tribunal. Tlioy Uavu
not been subject to oxnaination and crcss-cxTaination, and tho witness*
testiiony is based upon tho supposition that ti;os_- records aro correct,
.and they aro not ev^n before tho Tribunal at this tire. That was all
tho st-.te..xr.t ’cf counsel was intended to convoy. If the records had al¬
ready be on admitted in evidence, and ->_cn oxaninod, and people oxxi_nod


C410


3 2-3-,-farrow (Int. Frank)

Court V<Jm I.

vi cross-examined on thee, the situation '.fould be different, but tho
tost ins ny of tho witness is basod upon tho hypothesis that tho records
ore correct, and they arc not bo fore tho Tribunal.

Counsel nay proceed.

31 DR. XtX:

Q Prof-ssor, a little oarlior you had already briefly dealt
rith tho question of starving - of hunger or of thirst for tho pur.oso
of troatnont, and I non want to ask you whothor tho administration of
hungor and thirst euros of several days is .a uodically rvccgnizod
fact, and also how long would you consider that hunger and thirst with
com plate refusal of food and liquid could bo administered without put¬
ting 8oaaono»3 health in joopard/?

A It depends who it is. Initially, I rocomiendcd hunger and
thirst tr.ataont in tho ease nf acute inflaaaation of tlu kidneys, but
t’.iero people have a great doal of water in thoir system and thu water
is r.bsorbod during such a cun.. Astonishing as it may so an, a euro is
cfr-ctcd vory rapidly. In such casos, throe, fivo, sevon and ovon more
days of hunger are employed. In othor cases, whore no water surplus is
in existence, wo would only apply six days of hunger treatment. During
tlx tiro ihon I had to be int-rested in those particular exoorinonts,
there w.ro foiu* women in ny clinic, all who wore thjre bjcav.sc of high
blood pressure. They w_re aged $0, $1 , 53 and S3 years. Ono had a
bleed pros cure of 210/100, and, six day3 later, it had boon rcducod to
170/lX. The third had a bleed -srossura of 230/160 and, six days Inter,
it dropped to 180/100. The loss of roight mounted to thro, or four
Kilofraus and tho patients naturally, during those days, suffered from
thirst rnd felt r,-k at tho end f tho sixth day, b'jt thoy wuro so bSp?y
about the i rrxorcd condition that they considered tho unpleasantness of
the r-cont days as being worthy of forgetting.

Q Is it correct that when water is withdrawn, ncurishaont

I

should also bo withdrawn?

A It*s easier to suffer ‘-first when you ar_ '1st hungry be-


SU1


3 Jun—- 3-3—5-i’~craw (Int. PSrc.nl:)
Court ::o. i.


causo the supply of nourishment makes claims upon tfx. kidneys and, if
ye exclude salt in the ncurisirorrt, the -rater loses furt'wr hunidity.
Thus, ap.xstito disappears vhon you an. thirsty. The refer-, it is de¬
finitely butts-r to be hungry and tliirsty simultaneously.

Q lYofossor, is it ri^xt to observe the individual dosos
in rd-r to prevent diarrhea, and, if individual quantities of loss
then 303 cc arc admitted, err. you prevent diarrhea?

A In the case of sea and bitter vitor you only suffor frem
diarrhea if y->u drink a largo quantity at onco. If you distribute it
over a dry you suffor frea consti-ntion.

Q Yus, but you didn't quite answer ay question. I inquired
about the individual d^eos.


A Yos, woll, I 1 n trying to say that if you spread it out
over a day, giving snallcr individual dcsos instead of all at cnco,
then thxro isn't any danger of diarrhea.

Q Can you deecribj soa wa.t-r as poisonous at all?


A Absolutely nr. There is a trond towards tho troatoont
with sea watox* which is increasing, and ;«oplo aro drinking half a
liter of soa water, -vary day, for wooks. Thoro can't bo any question
of poisonous quality. In fact, .uoplo say they are fooling splendidly.
Tho only difference is that in t?» case of such euros fresh water is
.administered too in tho manner :f tea, coffo- and soup so that tho do-
hydrifying offoct of tho s^a. water is ecno away with.

Q rtc£v.sscr, I wonder If you would spe“lc a little naro slowly
and make a pause aft^r individual answers in ur&_r to arable tho intor-


pr-t-rs to folio*.:.

Has thoro been an experiment during which a desj of 5O0^lo
1 ,CC0 cc of soa rrat„r doily w-s taken and it is to be dcscri'ood as
dan ge r ou s providing tho experiment is discontinued as seen as thoro io
a threat of a danger tc health?

A Thxr^ can't ex. any quest! n f thoro b_ing .any danger to
health during the first few days. niy quest! n is, how long can


3412


3 Jun-^j-!B-3-&-Xarrcir (Ins. Prank)

Court lfc>. I.

the body stand up to this continuation of the deprivation of hiaidity?

So- water has a three per cent salt water content. Generally speaking,

at least so far, re hove assumed this to bo so, that tlx. kidneys can-

r."t deal with such a salt concentration sc that salt will remain in tho

•

syston which is anxious to collect water fron the tissues. In tho be¬
ginning, this is of no icpartanco; but after six or seven or eight
days, this bee ones unpleasant and it is to bo expected that after tho
twelfth dry thoro is sore danger, but there have boon casus 'X son
rescue when oven seventeen or Dare days afterwards recovery' was achicvod,
but one would generally say that I would novor continue such an experi¬
ment - dare to continue such an oxporinont beyond tho twelfth day, and
in this case with which ro are concerned, all oxporinonts woro dis¬
continued "/tar the sixth day, so that danger to health during that
porird was rut nf tho question.

Q Could the ain of those oxperL ontc have been achieved
wit}i a safti-ponotrablu suflbrano?

A I can't understand how one should inagino this. V/hat wo
ore concorncd dth is tho question of how long tho htsacn body can sur¬
vive idthout water and under tho oxcoss quantity of salt. Now, that
is tfubjoct bo tho water contents of th~ body and it depends upon
whotlior, first of all, water is only usod by tho intermediary tissues
or what her tho coll liquid too is being used up. In tho latter case,
there i3 a danger which bcccrras apparent through excess potassiun
quantities and this was also continuously observed and chockod during
such ox-xrl-^nts and there Tore no oxcoss Potassium quantities such as
can bo axcoctud after six days.


Court 1

June H5—I^aloy—Fronk

3. Nor would It be right to say that these experiments
• ore lanncd scientifically and medically, is that corroct?
absolutely so.

v. Could they have been planned differently?

n. I couldn't Imagine how.

C. "ore these experiments In the interest of an active
warfare, or in the Interest of the care of ship-wrecked
sailors or soldiers?

The latter.

C. In other words f r aviators and sailors who woro
ahlp-vrocked or would bo shlp-wrockod?

A. Towards the ond of the war there was an lncronBO
In tho cases of pilots who had been shot down ns woll no
the cases "f shipwrecked aors^nnol, and It was therefore
tho d ty of the hy b leno department concerned to cor.sldor the
question of how no c uld deal best with such cases of
shlp-wrockod personnel, that was tho roaeon how this
c nforonco o^ao ab ut. Previously Schaefor, as wo ho. rd
yeaterday, h"d rec- amondod not to drink mytnlng. *.‘(‘hon
t gather with I.C. he succeeded In eliminating salt and
‘ lcter salt fr c sea water thr-ugh V* Ifatlt tho problem
was really solved scientifically. There were, however,
c nsidorabU technical difficulties ond It lGn't exactly
aim lo to equip o-oh filer with Sv much 'Jo If at It In
addition to everything else ho has t* carry in order to
’protect him a alnst the danger of shlp-wrcck. That is no
d.ubt why Spplnger and nuebner were In f-vor of tho
ox orient, and it w a unfortunate that hr. 3crka appeared
with Bei'katlt at the same time, and Impressed the
technicians, because his method was more simple and cheaper.

J.. rrofos Q cr, v-’e there any rcas- n to epict la.tor
syp.pt ms of dnmr_e which might o .near l~tor than 1C days.


'MU.


Court 1

Juno &-I4-4— 2-K3-Hnloy-Fr?ink

aftor tho end of the experiment?

"• It was entirely ^ut of tho question, even aftor tho
seventh day. Late* "lagc is out of the question, because
the duration of the ex ».xents is toe. short.

Q. To what do y^.u attrltxito the loss of weight during
such experiments?

A. That is almost entirely the loss of water. «s I
have alroady told y^u the excess salt supply in tho bsdy
deprived tho b^dy of water. Tho body au6t have a supply of
water if it is to supply salt. In other words, if the body
is not receiving any othor water than sea water tho attack
against tho water held by tho body must toko place, and
thoroforo a loss of volght is b und to happen, which,
however, can bo caught up with instantly.

Q. What would y:.u say to bo oxpoc'tcd in tho way of
tho loss of substance of tho body and how much loss of
water?

A. I would say tho bulk is tho loss of water, but to
s jilt this up is s'nothing I consider Impossible to do
with cortnlnty. Y.u night possibly oomparo Just hew much
was lost during tho tine applied by Schaefer when there was
consldorablo hunger and how ouch was lost in tho case of
water.

Q. Does tho speed play an important part with which
the loss of water takes place?

A. Yes, of c urse, a tremondcus part. Tho colored
nostras is a well-known example during which disease, tho
must tremendous loss of water and salt takes place during
24 hi urs. I knew a case where 10 liters 'of water and 150
grams of salt had to be added lntraven- usly through the venes,
the skin and through the stomach in order to save that part¬
icular life of a person suffering fr-n such an acute loss of


Court I

June 3-H-4-3-KD-Maloy-?rEn}c

water. IT on the other hand this 13 spread out ov.r a
period of days and If you ac not have tc. expect such a
dangerous loss of tha salt, then the holy can stand up t:.

It d-r a such l nger period. I eight -orhaps add that the
loss of salt is Just ns dangerous as excess quantities of
salt, nr.d also in the event of the loss of salt wnioh Is
always C'nnected with voter considerable losses of weight
are suffered. It Is well-known that an expedition on the
mountain M nto Rose lost 5 kilograms,, and the loss of salt
and water, and that the weight could not bo replaced In
s;.ito of the addition of water when salt was also addod.

*i. Professor, according to the doousonts at y ur
disposal wore these experiments sufficiently woll prepared?

a. It was ay laprosslon that thoy wore extremely
woll prepared, and I was particularly impressed by tho
faot that Bolglboook had sufficiently exanlned tho partici¬
pants oarefully and had considered tho use of thorn to bo
unsuitable slnco ho f und a defect of the lungs.

5. I dso wont to doal with such preparations-

151. KcKaNEY: I do not think by nny stretoh of tho
lnuiglnatl n o*n this witness testify fr-a the rooordo that
BoigolbOock conducted an oxaaln'tlon or rejected throe
ox orlnontol subjects. In ay opinion It does not a poor
froui tho records, and he can • nly testify what Soi-clboeok
t' Id hla. Unless he can say it d'os s, :enr In tho reoord6
I think It should 'co stricken.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel has an - :~ortunlty of cross-
exaainlng tho witness at the close of his testloony.

k. Professor, w uld y u n t soy c at preparation for
these experiments also means that certain experiments, suoh
as experiments on oneself and animal experiments, ..rinted
preparations. If y/a like, must have beer. In oxlstonoo or


CU6


I


Court 1

June 3-'4-4-4-HD-Kcloy-?rcnk

was that true cf this ease?

A. Yes, a report from oclgelboeck about an experiment
carried out upon hlcsolf Is In existence which describes
the condition nost efficiently. In which ho found himself
during a sen water experiment, and this description talllos
to the highest possible degree with what ay voluntoers
have doacrlbcd who h^ve submitted thensolves to theso oxperl-
nonts. I night doal with that later.

Q. Whot opinion do you hove regarding the experiments
which wore carried out by 31rany In Vienna?

A. Thero appeared to laok a critical attltudo to no.

I think Schaefor had tho sane lnprosslon yonterday.

Q. nro symptoms reoognlrablo regarding tho planning
of those exporinont3 whloh would go beyond tho absolutely
essential practical pur. oses and whloh w uld load to
considerable pains or painful feelings or night have load
to that?

h. Of ojurso It Isn't fun to be thirsty, and that Is
tho major complaint In theso casos. Theso poo /lo aro
Increasingly thirsty, and they are disappointed to find that
tho administering of sea wator doesn't dooreaoo It, but
lnorcasos their thirst, and towards tho end of tho experi¬
ments arc disturbances of tho muscles and the mood doesn't
exactly lmprovo. It Is the sane In tho salt water experi¬
ments v/nore there aro cramps of tho calf, becr.uso of tho
lack of water, but the chiractorletlcs of that oro theso

symptoms disappear Instantaneously at tho very moment when

£

the first gln6s of water Is dr^nk.

3. Would you cnsldor It possible that disturbances of
the nerve end might appear, - temperature?

A. Temperature doesn't happen at all, and I can't
imagine there are disturbances of the nervous system at all.


oU 7


Court 1

June 3-&-4-5-HD-Maloy-Frank

Q. How about rage?

In the case of insane people there any appear
Insane r-ges, say bo, but not In the case of n rnal human
beings.

If y’»u y .urself had been placed lr. this o ndltion
would you consider your attitude toward nodical et/.los, do
you h'-.ve objections to carrying .ut the sn.mc typo of
oxporloont -a was o: rrled out here, if healthy stron- young
ncr. had been at your disposal?

A. I actually did it. Since I was interested in
c nneotion with sen-water ex eriner.ts. I colled for
volunteers nffloung ny young doctors, mil five of then
volunterrod, amongst then: ay youngoet s'.n, and thoy drank
the synthetic sea water, hnvln b the ox^ct amount contont of
ooa w. ter to the extent of drinking 500 oo=; they _ot n
little food, because thoy were to continue on duty durln 0
the ox orlaent. The loss of weight varied and was around
one kilogram a day. nt the end of the experiment ny son
got .retty thin, but aft^r h?vln a a cup of tea was flno.

Two days later ho had regained It fully. All five part¬
icipants desorlbod the experiment In tho onao way ns
3oi_olboock doscrlbcd the experiment carried out on hlnself.
Four of those subjects interrupted the experiment after
five days. One carried It out for six days, and utsldo
of the resent tnlrst he had no c n-l-inte. Any sorl.ua
disturbance or darxuv is . at of the q uoetl-.n, and the
extraordinary f ct was the aieod with which all symptoms
-' tl-.lrct dlsr. * oared after -eater had been administered.


Court 1

June 3-5-1-H-KD-Moehon-Frank.

Q. Vould it have been possible at all to carry out
such experiments if cxperlnental subjects had not cooperated
willingly?

A. No, you can -nly carry out such experiments with
v luntoers because that collaboration is indispensable, but
that d'es not exclude that they might treat the man in
chargo of such experiments, such as many educated persons
will try to deceive the ^edlc^l expert during such casos
and thoy will probably oat n beefsteak during such a hunger
cure or drink somethin© during thirst treatment. In this
oaso thon there wore s< me failures nnd some did got a
hold of drinking water secretly.

C„. Professor, you said that the cooperative attitude
of the ox'erlmontal subjects is indosponsablo; night I ask
you Just why It is indispensable?

A. occauso thlr6t, as I havo told you, is not a
ploasnat symptom over a longthly period. It is quite un-
plocBant to bo able to think of water alono and droan of
wntor and to have a dry mouth and a dry thront. Thus, you
havo t'. have a certain amount of power of resistance. I
can wall imagine that unoducatod end weak.individuals
night lose tnolr willingness to collaborate after that.

Q. But it is not right to say that for the samo reason
it is lndlsponsable if the observing doctor is doponding
of the statements made by the experimental subjeots if ho
cannot control and check everythin^ that ..000 on in the
rar.n^ mind.

h. That is correct, but the analysis later on would
show that the man had sooetaln^ to drink during the findings.

£. Did you see any photo t raphs of tho expcrlnental
subjects?

«. I saw the pictures, the neJccd bodies, and I saw


C419


Court 1

June 3— '/•-5—2— HD— lieo han-F re nk«


they were etr ng, well fed and well-conditioned people.

Do you know. Professor, to what extent and In what
direction filers and sailors of other nations had been
equipped In order to survive the ship-wrecks?

A. There were a gre-t variety of experiments, but I
d.n*t think that Is important because thoy were nr.do with
water catching sails, etc., but at any rate they did not
have that excellent dru 0 Volfatlte.

itR. KaRDY: The witness has Just testified a6 to the
condition of subjects used in the experiments as he saw
in pictures. Inasnuoh as the witness has testified to that
effect, the Prosecution desires to see the pictures which
the witness and defense oounsel has mentioned. Thoy are In
the .i: nde of the defense counsel for Professor Sol^lboeck
end t.ie prosecution thinks It is only fair that tney be
turned over to the .;rosooutlon at tr.la time.

THE PRESIDENT: On cross-examination the proscoution
may roqueet to se^ the pictures. Counsel for defendant
may exhibit tne pioturos to tr.e -roseoutlon; thoy have
no objections.

l-Ci. aaRCY: Your Honor, it would be rather late for ue
to study the pictures between now and during the time of
cross-examination.

THE rRESIDENT: If the pictures are available, I think
the defense counsel enould submit them to the prosecution
for examination.

DH. AaAX: Mr. President, I myself do not nave those
photographs and I would think that later on durln. Prof.
3elgl;oeck*3 testimony or durln- Dr. dtelnbauer's examina¬
tion with the witness of Professor Vollhardt, the opportun¬
ity will aris- to snow the photographs.

• C420 .


Court 1.

June 3-Iv-5—3-HD—Meehan-Trank


3Y D3. ;^.RX:

Nov, Professor, the experiments we were talking
about; did they have a practical valuable ale and did they
show a corresponding result?

A. Yes, that is correct. For instance an Important
observation was mado which Epplnger had expected and desired
to carry out to see If the kidneys d;d concentrate salt
under such extreme conditions to an oven higher extent than
one expected previously. One thought that it would be some¬
thing like 2.0* but 2.6 or 2.7* and rocord figures of 3.0,
3.5, 3.6 and 4* are shown so that the fortunate man who Is
In a position to concentrate 3.6 * or 4* of salt would bo
able to live on sea-water for quite a long period.

THE PRESIDENT: Witness, after a question Is propounded
to you by your counsel, would you pause n moment boforo
giving your answer so that the question may bo translatod
and convoyed and when you begin to make your answer, would
you 8*poak a little core slowly?

THE WITNESS: Finally, one unsuspected fact occurod
which may be connected with this and that 16 the rosult
that the drinking of small quantities of sen-water up to
500 cc given ever a longthy period turned out to bo bettor
than *'uro thirst.

3Y DR. MARX:

Q. What do you think of Wofatlt generally?

It Is a wonderful think.

Q . Is It correct to say that sea-water really assumes
tho character of drinking water through It?

A. Yes, the only difficulty would appear tc bo to
obtain the drug In sufficiently large quantities for a man
who Is sea-wrecked and did not have r.is luggage; but It is
a. wonderful discovery.


Court 1

June 4-HD-ifeehan-Frank,

*

*-• So, you think that the result of these experiments
does not only have importance in the case of o war, hut is
of importance for the problems of sea-faring nations?

«. ^uite right, it is n wonderful thing for all 6oa-
farln. notions.

So that both the experiments with --bfatit, as well
as tho experiments made regarding the symptoms when such a
drink woe not vaila'ole, were important to display, such for
instance ns the consumption of sea—water In certain given

dosos.

n. That is quite correct.

... That w■ s only discovered by use of these experiments?

a. *ulte correct.

1. hr. President, I have no further questions to tho
Witness Vollhurd at this point.

TKS ?R£5ID£'.'T: Any other defense counsol have any
questions tc be propounded to this witness?

3Y DP.. 8TEI;'3aU 2R: (Defense counoel for Defendant Prof.

Dr. 2el 3 lboeck.)

Z. Witness, first of all may I put a formal question
to y u. The Prosecutors, are, as a rule, the most suspicious
people. It is quite poslble that these Prosecutors might
state that the documents which I have submitted are collosol
forgeries by Professor Belglboeck. Let me ask you then, as
a scientist, would you consider it possible that c..ese
documents which I n-vc given you for your expert opinion
ere original documents or If they ere for-ed?

a. I consider that the latter is out of the question.

Z. Thank you. You also have .:ad an opportunity tc
look at the weight tables which I submitted already In
document book 2 ; would you consider th t the figures re gar d-
in_, v: lghts °nd loss of water contained therein are correct?

CL22


Court 1

June 3-*H-5-5-HD-Meehan-Frank.

a. y e8l

2. One further question; Do you believe as a scientist
that one could not have saved oneself the trouble of these
experiments and satisfied themselves by animal experiments?

n. In the case of problems" of water and salt metabolism
that is not to be assumed for the simple reason that rabbits
and dogs react differently, that is the difference between
vegetable and meat eating beings. The dogs, our most
Important experimental animal, has no perspiration glands,
and can concentrate water much more efficiently than the
human beings.

Q. Let me come bock to the question of diarrheas once
again; Do you consider diarrheas occuring a fortnight or
two later after the conclusion of the experiments as being
connected with sea-water experiments?

A. I consider that out of the question because sea¬
water experiments lead to constipation and how one may
suffer from diarrhea afterwards is a mystery to me.

Q. Is it correct that during lack of water the body
restrains the persperation lnterslvllos and the govlng off
of perspiration through the pores?

A. That is correct.

<2. Would it be right to assume that the consumption of
fresh w. ter by the expcrlmental subject would reduce the
subjective and objective symptoms considerably?

A. Yes, you have to assume that. It is extraordinary
how much the subjective symptoms ore decreased by s mall
quantities of drinking water.


0.23


3 June Itf-Vt-S—6-1-Cook (F-enk)

Court 'o. i

TEE Jt XDEJJTi Counsel, the Triburxl is about tc go lr.to recess. I
sec r.c possible retscr. rhy counsel for the deferdent should r.#t subr.it
these photographs to counsel for the rrosecution. I feci compelled
to direct thet counsel shoo these photogrephs to the FJ-osecution* I
see r.c retsen that they shcttld.net.

The Tribuncl now will be in recess fer e feu ooaonts.


Cd.21>


3 J0n-*i-!3-7—I-Gross (Int. Bronx)
Coirt Ho, I.


?*— l&RSHAL: Tte Tribunal is again in session.

TIC HGSUCOT i Counsel aay proceed.

BY DH. ST JHBAUSRi

Q Professor, teforo tho rocoss wc said that the ingestion
of even snail quantities of frosfi water influences the subjective and
objoctivc condition of the wibjoct. liar, tho question - from tho
tables of weights that have been presented, can it bo ascertained
whether tho subjects have drunk fresh Trr.tor?

A That is certainly possible, since tho loss of weight must
occur with a rcdund-.nco of sodiio nitrate and tho woight is not lcet
if frosh wator is drunk.

Q Ignoring tho question of the state of tho blood, tho con¬
tent of nitrogon, otc. A witness horo nontionod a certain incidont
that occurred, a screening spasn, a tetanic spnsn; do you regard that
incidont as dangerous?

A !fo.

* •

Q 'i."ny not?

A Scroaning spasns occur in casws of hysterical persons.
This ire not tetanus. This was a to ta no id condition which occurs liko
tho craaf6 in cholera, and the increase in ausclo irritability in tho
sea-wator oxpjrir-onts. This is ontircly unimportant. That it was not
truo tot-mss can bo socn fron tho fact that tho nost important synptons
of tetanus x.-crc uissing.

Q Thon, surrlng up, I should liko to ask you, is it corroct
when I say th~t tho experiments nado v<*y high donands ospocially on
tho will-poTajr of the expertntal subjects?

A Yes, you c-n say that.


Ti.^5


Court So. 1

3 Jus 47-K-S-l-iat-Serrov (Brown)


Q, In carrying out the sane experiaent in a hospital, vould It
also have teen necessery to keep the experimental subjects segregated
and under strict control?

A. It vould have been even nore necessary* It takes a great
strength of will to subject oneself to thlrsi.

q, Vae It nedlcally Justified for Beiglboeck to continue the
experlaent after it vas discovered ty analysis that the person had
secretly drunk water?

A. The experlnent should really have been begun again.

Q. Sow, to exclude any possibility of doubt, your answer applied
to people vfao have carrlod out the experiment the way they should and
have drunk only sea water?

%

A. Tes, that Is eo.

Sow, does this oxperlaent involve special pain or torture for
the subject?

A. That vould be an exaggerated statenant, but thirst is a torncnt
I draw your attention to the ancient a>;the of Tantalus and Sioyphus.

Of course, it is a tornent not to bo able to drink and to droan about
drinking, tut ay aen said it wasn't really so bad that it could be
called torture.

Q, Sow. let as ask you, to sua up, vfcat about fatalities, in
these experiments? Are they inpossible or not?

A. They are entirely impossible.

Q. Co you consider a lasting injury to health possible or inpoc-
slble?

A. That is Just as iapossible ns fatalities.

TKB PHKSiroi: Counsel, will you instruct the vitness not to
answer your question until the interpreters have fully coopleted inter¬
preting your question?

3T DR. SBUBABER*

Q. Professor, I esk you to answer in such a way as to permit the
interpreters to have finished translating the Question.


Court So. 1

3 Jun 47-i'-6~2-2EH-Xarrov (Brown)


Sow, I have one last ouestloa to put to you.

If fatalities end serious Injury to health are assumed ns e hyr>o-
thetlcal possibility, then I want to ask you whether you. es a physician,
eabrace the point of view that arranging and executing such experiments
ere offonses against hunenity.

A. If I did, I would not hare carried out the experiments on ay
own son and on ay students. There can be no ouestion herein of inhumanity
or of brutality, as little as in the case of therapeutic hunger end
thirst cures, which I like to carry cut. In vie- of the good food
given to the experimental subjects. I should like to ncntion that one of
tho vcoon shoo I treated in this way had the oitiful weight of 51.7
kilograms and lost three kilograas during the experiment.

DR. STEISBAUEH: Kr. President, during the rocoss I gave tho
nrooocutor photostats and photographs of the experioental subjocts oo
far as I hare thee. I shall show theso, if tho Tribunal wishes, to tho
Tribunal, but I should prefor to subalt the originals, at least, to tho
Tribunal in tho course of ay caso, which has suffered anyhow bccouso
tho expert case first and not last. At that tloo I ohall give thorn
exhibit numbers.

TEE PrSSinUn: The photogronhs may be sutnitted to tho Tribunal
lator in tho courso of the examination.

DR. STZIHBAU5B: So fur*.bor Questions.

THE PRESIDES!: Any Questions to be propounded to this witness by
any othor defense counsel?

DR. 7LE.-»ISG (Defense counsel for tho defendant Mrugovsky): Hr.
President, I ask permission to csk the exmert witness four Questions
regarding the circulation of the blood.

-HE PRESIDES!: Counsel thon desires to make this witness his own
witness for this purpose?


Si. T&Mn ISC: Tcs.

TEE PRESIDES!: Very well, proceed.


Court Ke. 1

3 Jus 47 -H-&- 3 -EB«arr 0 v (Brown).


3T 23. TLSOilSS:

Q, Is it true that after typhus there Is freouently a weakening
In the circulation of the blood7

1. Tes.

Q, Can blood-letting in such a case hare a good therapeutic effect?

A. One can't answer that in general. It depends on the specific
case. In general, if the circulation is weak, one avoids blood-letting.

Q, Zb the case of convalescence after typhus, do you considor thnt
blood-letting to an extent of 400 cc in order to nrke typhus sorun -
do you consider that is peraiseible?

A. Yes, v* do that to get sorun, becauoe that blood can lator be
replacod, olther by transfusion or by soao llouid or by food. In
gcnoral, the body can well stand such blood-letting.

Q, And a last aucstlon. So far as you know and asouno, can blood¬
letting to tho extent of 400 cc in a porson convalescing fron typhus,
who is in an avorego good state of hoalth, bring about doath?-

A. I cannot laaglno that It could.

Q, thank you. Ho furthor ouostions.

THZ PEZSIDiOT: Any other Questions to propound to tho witness by
ony other defense counsel?

There boing nono, the prosoeution nay cross-oxaaino.

CaOSS-EXAi.IKAlICK

3Y id. KC E^riT-

Profcsoor, you ere prepared to testify to this Tribunal, as an
oxpert, thnt the withdrawal of 400 cc of blood froc a person convalescing
fron typhus end who, wo shall as suae, is in a '-eakenod condition is per¬
fectly permissible end would be rccosicndod by you7

A. 2 consider that oeraissible for the purpose of getting serua
if one is in a position to ecopensate for the loss.

Q. *nd suppose there wos no coaocnsetion by voy of blood trans¬
fusion?

a. In that case sufficient additional nourishment and liouid or


Court So. i

2 Jim 47-*-&-4-LEK-Iarrov (3rovn)


even an injection of sodiun nitrate eolation vill suffice. At ony rate,
there would always te sene way of coepensating for a rather unir.oortant
blood-letting of 4CO cc.

Q. Vould you, as an expert, reconaend the withdrawal of *00 cc of
blood fron a tyuhue patient, without conpensation?

A. That defends on Just what aort of food he recuirea.

Q. Veil, let's sunoose he ia a concentration caap innate and he
is receiving 15C0 calories a day. Vould you recccnend that 400 cc of
blood bo withdrawn froa that patient, suffering fron tyohus, without any
cospensation by way of food or otherwise?

A. Z do not believe that vould do hie cuch bars.

^ Vould you recoa-aond it?

A. Uo, Z can't toy that Z would.

think that with 1 E 00 calories per day and with no cce-
penoatlon by w*y of injections or blood tronafualone the withdrawal of
400 co of blood vould not veakon that patlent7

A. Of cau-oe It vould weaken hie, but he would recover fron it.

<<. How do you know he would recover?

A. '-’e hove so a any blood donors who do not receive nore calorioe
than tint. Previouoly, It wo* custoaary that the oorsoc who donated
blood received aono coeocr.sation, but later this cocoensntlon beenno
smaller and soaller, and the ounber of calories which they actually
recoived - not Just on peoer - also bccaae anollor and enaller. Conso-
cuently, it happens very frecuontly that they donate blood without being
thereby injured.

C*. fell, but these blood donors were not suffering froo tyohus,
were they, doctor’

0

A. So, but v« also like to take blood fron oorBOns cick with
typhus because ve want that for sens. This ^ do not do et the accent
because we have no typhus today. However, when ve did havo.it, wo did
take blood fron persons convalescing froc tyohus.

Q> -id you ever have any tyohus patients under your care?


CLS9


Court So. 1

3 Jus 47-tt-8-*&-£EK-£arrov (SrovsJ

*. Yes, of course,

^ Did y®" eTer v'lthdrav any blood froa tfcca as they vere con¬
valescing to sake senm with?

A. Sot 1, but ay assistants did.

<*• Under vhat conditions vas that done? Eov ouch did you with¬
draw?

A. I can't tell you that today. It vas also 400 cc, I believe.
Q. And hov cany calories vere they receiving!

A. I can't tell you. At least, in the hospital it vub core than
outside. Taking blood free persons isn't looked on by us as so tragic

a setter.

3- Vhat stage of recovery vas this patient in froa whoa you
directed that blood be withdrawn? Had ho recovered cocpletely froa
typhus?


3 Juac—ii—iU-9-l-it.loy (3rcwa)
Court 1


a . I can't 8 _y chat, because all that was done by ay assistants.
£.0 wouldn't h.-.ve chosen for this anyone who had suffered particularly
serious case of typhus.

la other words, a person >co hcd a very severe case of typhus
would aot be used for the withdrawal of blood, is that right?
a. Shat is a nodical icstiact.

2. Did you cojpens-to these patients froa whco you directed
that blood bo withdrawn by blood tr.nsfusioas or by further feeding?

a. I can't tell you that now vhethor wo ^id that. That was too
long- ago.

Z . you would h.ve recor.ended th t as good practice, would

you?

4 . Yob, I would have told ny assistants that, of courso—

0, . Do you regard the defendant Schaefer as an oxport on soo-
wetor problems?

a . I bolleve he knows enough about tnut probleo.

•. . aTO you fw.ili.ar with tno ncio Profossor a. C. Ivy?
a . Yes, I believe ho has concerned niusolf with thoee pro,lajs,

too.

Q. Veil, have you road any paporo by hin, or nro you acquainted
witli hie refutation in nodical circlos?

Am Hot very woll, ncr can I rcncobor whothor raoag tho nany
things I hevo read on so.T-w .tor thoro was o peper by Ivy.

£ . C.ux you tostify whether Dr. Ivy is regarded as an oxport
on son-water questions?

a .1 know nothin,, about that.

On vr.at precisely is your testimony with respect to the .ex¬
periments by 3iegelooeck based?

Am On tho records and tne descriptions that 3iei,-aloock nudo
of tho o^orii'.cnts.

^ , ? rccisely wh..t rocords have you seen on these experiments?


3431


3 Junc-i-T-S-2-K-1 0 " (Brown)

Oourt 1

A . Ehe record* th.it the defense counsel had yesterday or to-
dry in his hnud .

Doctor, I will here pcssod up tu you a set of rocords which
nro nuobored free jne to 44 in red pencil, and I ash you, did you

mm

havo thoso rocords before you and did you uako & study of then!

A . Yen, I had these records, and I uskod one of ay collabora¬
tors who took part in those osperi-.onts to read through these ro-
cordo and to sake excerpts froc thtc. he happens to be horo also.

Q . bho was this collaborator!

A. On of ay assistants oy tho a*ic of tfornor. Ho is at tho
tiue auong tho audience.

Yra said souctnlng about his hiring participated in ox-
per Inoat s; you don't neon tho Dachau oxporinents, do you!

a. Ho. In experiments that I carriod out with qy students.

3 • Did you porsoa.illy oxaaino thoso rocords at all!

a . I saw tho;, but I didn't study ovory ono of then. I loft
that up to tho young nan.

^ . And what did tho young nan do!

a . Ho gave no a vox:* exhaustive report on thou.

u . In what fora w.* his report; vh-t did ho hsve to toll you!

a . I should prefor to show you tho report itr.olf.

$ , Do you hevo it with you!

a . Hot at tho acnont, out I do h„ve it in ay belongings. Dux*-
lng n^oa recess I could fetch it for you.

$ . Your testimony, tnor., is based 'jp on a sua:,iry .-ode by your
assistant, is that correct!

A. Yes, that is so.

$ . Kou what othor rocords wore node available to you upon which
your testimony is based hero!

a . She charts that were filled out in pencil with figures.

^ . I'll have passed .up to you a pqjor-bound book with the


3 Jca©-l^fc?-®-k_loy (3r:Vn)
Court 1


n.-*io "Schuster ■ written in pencil on the front of it, and down below
in indelible pencil two words which I cannot decipher; I will ask you
to rend -I'.an into the record when the booklet is passed to you; was
th.-.t booklet unde available to you!

A . Ho, at least Z have not studied it.

You have never seen that book before?

A. I don't believe *o. Porhcps it was Given to ao at the sauo
tine, but thorc aro too nony statistics and figures in hero. I
h..vca'i lookod through that nil. This is a laboratory book. Iho
two words on the book aro ■Gastric Juice, ailiaotor p*s)or", end
this ia no doubt a record usod in ca-plling tho original report. Xt
is a so-o.Hod laboratory book.

^ . 3ut whethor or not tho book was given to you, at least yOu
aro clfl,r that you node no study of tho book, is that ri,;ht?

a . Yos, that is so.

a ad you don't know whothor it Was turned ovor to your
assistant?

A . Shat I don't know.

Z . In . % ny evont, he presented you no digest of facts baood
ig>on that book, did he?

A. Ho.

Ci . I pass you now Aoigclboeck Exhibit Ho, 36, which has not
yot boon offered. This is in foot an a&glish suuuary, but I think
porheps tho witness night bo able to testify noout vhothor or not
thin was node avail..'ole to bin.

A . Tec, this I have seen.

r.. Did ; on personally a Jcc «ny study of that?

Yes, I lookod at that personally.

hh.t does that record purport to show?

a. Shis shows the changes that took pl.vco in tho body woight.

It is b.ckca down into loss of water, loss of bod;* weight, percentage
of ihe body loss, ^n L 60 forth.


Ci.33


5


Court 1


(Brovu)


'* 3"°^ turn that aver to your assistant, and did he ucko

a su.-v.ry of ih*t record?

— Tea, lie else reported on this, but I nj-self looked at this
vevy carefully also.

*'• Z'.at shove only the weight changes, is that right?

* • £’ *- 1 ‘ largo, yes, But Z said there are all sorts of the¬
oretical calculations here uoout los3 of vator, tho vator ret_ined,
the probable absorption of fluids, and so forth.

Z* How, I think you dso said you sou sane pictures; thio has
boon uarhod ns 3iegoloocck Sxhioit So. 34.

A . -os, I h.,ve seen all those too.

Q . In what fora did you soo those pictures, did you two tho
orlglads or did you soo photost..tic copies, such as thoso?

- . Z saw tho; in this fora.

Z . Eton you novor s..v tho bucks of those pictures, did you?

A. Ho.

Tou don't know thothor on the backs of thoso original
pictures tho iusios of tho oxporinontul subjocts ^jpoarod, do you?

A . Ho, Z don't.

Z» "ill you look at the photogruoh on tho pego .;nrkod nueber 5
thoro? Tcu will find in ink a Henan V on one of tho sots of picturoo.
Z>o you obtorvo tho picure vhoro tho young non Is lying in bod, appax^
ontly with c tourniquet around his am, und in tho lovor left-hand
port of the picturo a hypcdomic syringe?

a. Tos, Z soo that.

Z . Scvo you been infomod that thes pictures uro picturos of
the crpa i.icntal subjects during the courgo of tho oporiacats?

a. Z assumed so; coreovor, tho experiments wore ooncludod by
injections, in the thirst experiments with sodi'-so nitrato solution ,
in tho aea-vutor Csnorimmts with sugar solution, by intravenous in¬
jection uhich immediately improves the condition.


-434


3 Juno-i;-i:^J-^-5-i..Joy-(3rcvn)

Court 1

^ oa vhat is y°w opinio- bo»ed that these are picturos of the
•oc-u..ter o^joi-iceatal subjects?

-- -XI of the pictures or Just the one with the syringe?

•1. *U of thoi.

* • I v'BBime so. bocause the defense counsel put thai to no ca

■uch.

Z. Dr. S teinbouer told you that th.i is what they wore, is that
ri:*t?

A . Yob.


0.35


3 lUne-T'-GSS-IO-l-’V-ofcnn (Breen)
-ourt


3* » thi * Picture which I hovo called ycur attention to on the
shsot norfced Kc-. 5, would ycu say that this picturo sh<ws a ran who
pp.-rently has had s^nrhr.t of nn unpleasant tine of it, who is in sons
c in, r who was in s^co pain ot the tine this picturo was nedo?

... Thctfwr he was in pc in cr net, 1 don't know, /.t my rnto ho
soocs to have sufferod sono effects frem tbs oxporinents.

Q. 'oil, for the bonefit of tho Tribunal, you would scy that his
facial expression in this picturo indicotos that ho is suffering seno
pain, wouldn’t you, Prrfossor?

I should not scy that, no. Ho locks ns if the oxporinent hnd
had sene offsets on hin, he locks worn out and oxhaustod.

■*. Hc-w cony oxporixontol subjocts con you say woro used in thoso
oxporinonts, based tiper. the study of the records which wero mdo avail¬
able to youj con yoi pako ony stotonont about tho nunbor cf subjocts
used?

... As rar as I Jnuw thoro » w M subjocts.

Q. ;.nd upon vhnt is that stotonont basod?

On tho reports thet I rocoivod cn tho oxporironts.

Q. Tho written reports?

A. Yos.

Q. •.'ill you lock c n pogo 4 of this sorlos of pictures; do vou
soo tho picture in tho l<wcr right-hand eornor?

*'». Yos.

Q. Do ycu find c nunber written n this nan's chost shewn in this
picturo?

A. I think I sec the nunbor 4.

Q. D n't y v find r nunber in front of the fur, Profess, r?

... Yes, but it is very unclear, it c uld bo n caw, and tho total
nunb r wuld tb*r. have boor. Id.

Q. Don't y u fir.' r. rathor sh-rp curlicue nt the b ttm f this
figure which v u wmt tr rood ns one, which night in dice to t- ycu that
it was a six, on' thr.t tlx f\a 11 nur.br is 64?

-. I c ul' r. t road thr.t as - 64. If I n inj t take that

U36


3 June-' -GES-IO-2-rxoh; n (3r wn)
Ccurt !'• . 1.


little curlicue into consideration, I should take thet ns a rero.

9

Q. Suppose you turn to page six; do you see tho oxporinontal sub¬
ject wr. is lying on the bed in tho lcw..-r niddlo picture?

Yes.

Q. VT.-uld you say that this oxforir.cntal subject appears to bo in
robust health?

«. K , I should say that he is ormciotcd, cs can bo clearly soo.

Q. ’foil, you don't kn-w whothcr that was tho result cf tho oxper-
rwnt ho underwent or whether ho was choson in that enditien to bogin
with, d<> you Dootor?

A. That I don't knew.

Q. New, woro thoso tho only records made ovniloblo tc yru — tho
sorios of individual reports which I possod up, tb: weight chart and tho
pictures?

A. I i1st sow o eolloetlon 'f roccrds written in pencil.

Q. Do y< u fcvw whoro they arc now?

A. I nssuRo that tho dofonso ocunsol has then.

Q. 7fhat did t.heso records sh w?

... They also contained n large nunbur cf stctistics on gastrio
juice, loss of woight, nnd oil sorts of clinieol findings — tho nunbor
■ f rod blrod c'rpusclos, etc.

Q. .md did you porscnolly study those roc-rds?

A. I saw then but did not study thon.

Q. Thov were givon to y.-ur assistant?

a. Yos.


_ .. .. .. ! Y- u which wo

Q. ff w, wore thorc any other raeurds th t - -

haven't hoord ab ut, n which y ur testimony hero is based?

A. I conn't say at tho rv-nont.

Q. 1'u wo; ld here t confer with — -

a. I boliovo thnt tho defense had roperts by Bockor-Froysong aad
by Boiglb >eck?

A. , These wero reports n the wh lo dcvolcpncnt f the quusti.n.


CA37


3 Janc-r-CZS-10-5-::3oBaa (5r r-)
Court :..l.


Q. "ill. Professor, what sort f reports wore thoy? "a have not
soon than, ycu knew, and wo would like t<-> kn-w on what you are basing
:-"ur pinion before this Tribunal.

Descriptions of the wh lo course that tho matter t k regarding
the c nforenco, h.w tho docisicn wna rcechod, hew tho experiments were
planned, and thor. Boiglbrock's report on his own oxporinonts on himself,
which is a vary caroful description and c-rresp mda exactly to what ny
subjects experienced when they ccrriod cut oxporinonts on themselves.

C. Did you read and study theso oxporinonts corriod out by
Bcckor-Freysong end Boiglboock?

*». Of course.

Q. -uv* thoy influenced y-ur testimony bof ro this Tribunal; you
rolled on thorn in making y.ur to a tin. ny hero?

"• theso I had an idea >S the aituatl<n as o whclc, in ordor

tc torn my .-wn cplni n or I porfemod oxporiaonts mysolf.

Q. And yrur tostineny h ro is boeod in part upon tho roports nndo
by Bockcr-Froysong and Boiglboock; that is tru«, isn't it Doctor?

A. Yes.

Q. And these roccrds nado by Beckor-Froysong nnd Boiglbcook wore
n"t o'ntonpornnorus rocords <f theso oxporinonts, w ro thoy Profossor?

A. I don't boliovo sc.

Q. They w«ro, rather, essays or reports which they havo written
up since their orrost nnd incarcornticn; isn't that true, Profossor?


A.

That is very possible.


Q.

Hew old c non is this assistant cf yurs,

Professer?

• ••

Twunty-six.


Q.

Twenty-disc years Id?


A.

Twmty-so von.


Q.

Twenty-seven years old; ha* ho studied nodlolaof

f

4k •

Of courso.


<1.

Tihero did he study?


A.

Heidelberg.


s.

Kerr Pr fess r, I -rill csk y u t-. tostify

1

fr a y ur wn nonary.


ct3S


3 Junc-?:-G=S-lO-4-!!ochzn (3r wn)
C-iirt n.. 1.


SR' 4 , if dofonso c-unjol wish t' cut yrur assistant 71 the stand, they are
privileged t- do sr; but I on interested primarily in knwing what y.u
kr. w about y ur assistant. Hew, y u did r. t kn w he studiod ct
Heidelberg until ho told ycu just new?

... I have -10 to 50 ycung non at tho clinic, end it is inprssiblo
t"T nc t kn w rf each enr where ho studiod, but I nado his ncquiintnnco
at tho clinic. Eo is a vory industri us and intelligent pors.-n and for
that rooson I askod hin tr do this w. rk and tnko setae work off ay
shoulders.

Q. Hew long has ho boon working with y v?

«. Hi ro than a yoar.

Q. forking with you ob'ut a y cr, end sinco that tino you havj
o-nduatod those son-wator oxpcrlronta y.ursolf?

A. To carried then out shortly bef ro Ur.rdi Gras.

Q. Of 1947?

A. Yos, this year.

Q. Hw did yi'u hopper, t corn’ -ut theso oxpcrinontsj were you
roquostod to d s> by dofonso ccunsol?

A. H;, I had been osked vor often t interest nysolf in this
imttor, and I nysolf w-s int rested t. soo ryeolf, tho of foot of son-
water on the cxporln-ntal subjects. This was intorooting tc no boenuso
I nlrcady hod censi I.mblo oxporionce in tho Mold cf hunger and thirst.

Q. TTorc y u approached at all with rospoct to this enso boforo
tho time ycu started those sor.wator oxporinonts?

/*. Yob, that is why I startod tr intorost rr^solf in the mattor,
because I was askod t. apjvocr here as r witness, but I carried cut thoso
oxporinonts entirely sprntcno usly, with ut cutsido interference and on
ny '-wn interest.

Q. But the fact that y u wore approached t ccoc hero and testify
influenced y ur docisi n t- c=rrv ut these oxporinonts, is that right?

Of c-urse, f curse.

r i. And did y. u ror.ko cny effort t havo those experinonts ccincido
with the c r.diti ns which >*• u were t-'ld existed in the Dachau experiments?


3*39


3 Junc-U-OZS-10-5-Vochnn (3r-*n)
C urt !.* . li


... Yob, wo nr.do only 'nc 'istincti '-n in this, noncly, that the
oxperinontal subjeots received r urhly 1,600 calcrios n day, because
they w re n t t‘ interrupt ttair we rk. ?• bo suro, as tho oxperinont
nt 'n they ato less an' 4 loss f tho 1,600 calorics, because tho
thirst node thee lose their appotito.

3. leu exper inonted err five non?

A. 2os.

Q. Bof.To wo go on to that oxporinont, I w uld like t« go bock to
the roerds a littlo bit; whon did yu first L *ot theso records?

A. Thich records?

Q. Tho rooerds which purport to be rcoords on tho oxporimonts
of Boiglbcock in Dachau?

... 1 u will have to ask Dr. Stcinbauer t»hon he sont no thoso
rocords, I don’t kn.’T.

Q. i 'u d. n’t to w hew long thoy wore in y ur possession?

/•« No.

Q. Can’t yai cay njproxirntoly; ono n nth, sixty days, ninoty

days?

Porhops ono n^nth.


CiZ.0


3 Jon-i : - 11 -l-C :ok (Inti 3 r t.)

Court He* I*

3 When did you return thus?

A I brought then with ue.

Q Then you returned then y0stv.rd.7y?

A That is right.

Q Did you get theu froe Dr. Stcinbauer?

A Yes.

Q And you returned the?, to Dr. Stoinbauer?

A Yes.

Q Did you Mke any changes in these records?

A Ho, no.

Q But you yourself aren't very faailiar with then, are you?

A Hot very, no.

Q Can you state whether the records which I have Just passed
up to you, that is to say, those records nuabered froa 1 to JsJ; in red
pencil, can you say whether those records boro the nano of t1» oxpor-
inontal subject at the top of the pago?

A I didn't interest ayself in that.

Q I pass you up a nurborori sheet picked at rondos from this
6 roup; it is narked No. 2 . I will ask you if above the word "nano", it
does not appear that a nano written in pencil has been erased?

A That 800*3 possible.

Q Do you coon to say that is so? That the naae has been
erased, isn't that what you oean to say?

A No, I wouldn't say it is possible. It looks as if a name
had boon erased. Cne can still see traces of it.

Q And you didn't of feet that erasure yourself, did you,

ft-ofessor?

A Ho, no.

Q Do you know whether your assistant did?

A I think that is quite oiTt of the question.

Q I '-'ill ask that that particular sheet be passed up to the
Tribunal and I will remark that a number of other sheets are in the suae

2441


3 Jur.—-11-2-0 ook (Int. 3rcr.Tr.)
Court 3cl I*


condition. V,o will have a careful study nado of them and make a report
at the proper tire on that problem.

Have you ever seen a full list of the naces of the experi¬
mental subjects?

A Mo.

Q Now, I take it you have no personal knowledge about the
Dachau experiments with sea water conducted by Beiglboeck?

A No, I wasn't present, if that is what you mean by personal

knowledge.

Q And you had no associates who participated in then and re¬
ported to you about then either, did you?

A Ho.

Q Your sole knowlodgo about those experiments is basod upon
these records which we havo gone over and what you wero told by Dr.
Bolblboeck and Dr. Becker-Froyseng? Is that right?

A Yes.


Q Now how many oxperinontal subjects did you use in your
experiments?

A Five of the*.

Q And you say that thoy were volunteers, your nssistans, is
that right?

A Yos, thoy wore all doctors, voluntours, and, as I said,
included also ray youngest son, who also hap ons to be hero.

Q And ixccisely what happened during those experiments?

A Those persons woro as sorb led in ono roca, rocoivod the
same amount of salt each and jrotty much continued thoir work. Thoy
drank 500 cc of so a water and ono of ttea drank 1000 , and thoy stuck
pretty close to the jrovisions sot dem for the experiment.

Q You say four of then drank 500 cc of soa water cor day and
the fifth ono drank 1000 cubic centimeters of sea water?

A The fifth drank on ona day, I think, on the last day I
think he drank an additional 500 cc, because ho was very thirsty.


3 Jun-. - 3-11-3-C oak (inti 3roi.ii)

Court Jo. I.

Q Fnen did you start the oxperiaents?

A Cto the Monday before tho beginning of Lent.

Q And how long did they run?

A As I said, four, because of tho carnival season, broke off
t&» oxpurijnnt after four days and one of then stuck it out for six.

Q Well, you spoko of four days, do you know how many hours
they wore under the experiaonts?

A Five tii.es twenty-four in general and tho otter one six
tiuos twenty four.

Q Tfoll, I »isunderstood you, or olso your tostinony has
changod; you said four of the students stayed on the oxporinonts for
four days and ono went for six days. Is that right?

A No, four did it for five dnys, four broke off at tho ond
of tho fifth day, and ono stayod until tho ord of tho sixth day.

Q And you are prepirod to tostify it was five tinea twonty-
four, is that right, 70 hours?

A I would havo to chook on that for sure in tho record,
whotlior it wns five tines twenty four or four tines twenty-four, or
sixtoon or eighteen. Thcso things didn*t soca very laportant to no.

I ras interested primarily in sowing how greatly tho persona suffurod
under the oxporinjnts, but tho nan who did it for six days, did do it
for six tines tr/unty-four hours. Howjv w r, I don't 'rant to cako a
strtenant for certain und-.r oath r^garding the number of hours.

Q Wo 11 this little oar.oriu.nt conducted by you, as I tako
it, had as its purpose to find out hor nuch a nan suffors, is that
right?

A los.

Q You didn't kr.au that before you conducted this cxporinunt,
is that riffht?

A I asstssod that they would be very thirsty but I ^ranted to
see what tho subjective sensations or feelings of the cxpcriaantal sub¬
jects were, '.bat was tho cost important to no was to know can those

> CAA3


3 Jva~ - — 11-- -Cook (Int,* 3rvr..n)
Court No. I.


experiments bo characterized as cntl car inhuoane or brutal, end aro
tlv.y exporiaonts which lead to a pro tty strong sense of discomfort,
rv:a_ly, thirst, but do not do any daaago to health, that is what I
wanted to know.

Q And your testimony before this Tribunal is based upon
those ojQtirlacntsj is that right?

A No, on both, of courso, both on those carried out by
. Boiglboock and on ny own.

Q '.'all, your Jodgaont was also influenced by what Bcigl-
bocck told you about ht* ouch tho oxporia>ntal sublets suffered, is
that right?

A Boiglboock drew up his own report on his own oxpcriajnt
on hinsolf .and a general report on whatever cooplaints tho subjects
uttered.

Q that is that tho oxporiaont Boiglboock conducted by hiia-
solf? You noon ho has boon undergoing an oxporiaont back in tho irison?

A Ho, bofore tho oxporironts bognn, ho carried out a soc
wator oxparlzunt on hiesolf.

Q rhoro did thoso oxjxrrinontal subjocts of yours stay during
this oxporl-ont? I seen to recall you said they contimxd thoir work
or sonothing of tho sort.

A They all stayed in ono rooo where they ate and slept and
this was dono to sake the conduct of tho oxporiaont oasiur, as thoy
wore to receive special rations.

Q .Toll, now tho re wore all five oxperlaantal subjocts in ono
rooo during tho whole cours, of tho experiz^nts, is that right?

A Yes.

Q And what did they do? * •

A They wont froo this rooa to rhorevor they had to work but
they returned to th_ rooo for slopping and eating.

Q Woll, doctor, we arc having groat difficult}’ in really get¬
ting a clear picture about how this ex-erigent went on. Van you moan


3 Jua-*i-lE-lirr5-<Jook (let. Brown)

Coart No. I.

to say they carried on their work about the clinic? They didn't stay
in this roce the whole tiae, is that right?

A Yos.

Q They actually only ate in the room and slept in tho rocc;
is that right?

A That is correct,

Q Did they leave tho clinic at all?

A I believe that ttoy did not during those days,

Q But you don't know?

A I can't swear to it.

Q You ain't swear that they didn't go to a load cinona
during the coir so of tho oxporiaints fer oxaaplo?

A No, I can't swear to that, I just don't know.

Q In v othor wards, thoy had thoir normal daily liXo nvailablo
to thon during tho so experiments?

A Thoy carriod on thoir daily work and in this caso it is
ixrfcctly certain that thoy did not drink any fresh wator. Ttoy know
porfcctly well what tho point of tho oxporirunt was,

Q How much food did thoy got, again?

A 1600 calorios.

Q And do you know what tho food was?

A Yos, that is also in tho record. It was moat, fat aid
what not, but I can't toll you that from ay memory. However, I could
givo you tho record in writing.

Q In at record? HLave vo gotten any rocord on those ox-

porinonts?

A Yos, ttero was a record.

Q Now, they got absolutely no fr^sh water during tho*courso
of the oxrerlajnts, is that right?

A No.

Q Did they get any either r-.kr or fluid ether than salt

water?


LUL5


3 (Int. 3rom)

Court Ho. I.


A No, that was tho whole purpose, that they should receive
no other fluid rnd that is >hy tiny lost their appetito later.

Q They got no Bilk end no fruit juices?

A No, no, that would have violated the whole oxporinont,
and than they had not lost so nuch weight.

Q I can appreciate that, Profossor. Where did you get tho
soc wat.r that those oxpcriaontal subjects drank?

A Wo xonufactured it carefully in the c heal cal laboratory
according to a choaical analysis of soa water that can bo found in or.ny
text books. I hare a chenist who was in oharge of tho laboratory and
ho undo this soa water according to tho fomuls. We couldn't gat any
natural soa wator for this oxperiaont.

Q You don't knew tho salt oontont of this water?

* I can give it to you in writing.

Q You don't know how it oaaparos^with Hoditorrnnoan soa
water cr son water free tha North Soa?


CU6


3 Ju*>-a-i3-12-o-Cook (Int. 3rowr.)
Court Ho. I.


A Mo, that was the whole purpose, that they should receive
no otter fluid end that is *y they lost their appetite later.

Q They got no milk and no fruit juices?

A Ho, no, that would have violated the wholo osporinent,
and then they had not lost so such weight.

Q I can approclato that. Professor, Where did you get tho
son wat-r that those experimental subjects drank?

A Vo manufactured*it carefully in tho chemical laboratory
according to a chemical analysis of sea water that can bo found in many
text books. I have a chemist who was in ohargo of tho laboratory and
ho iar.de this soa water according to tho formula. We couldn't got any
natural soa water for this experiment.

Q You don't know tho salt oontent of this water?

*• I can giro it to you in writir^.

Q Tou don't know how it oaaprxus with Uoditorranoan son
water cr son wator from the North Soa?


GU6


Court So. 1

3 Jun 47-k-ia-l-iEX-Grcss (3rown)

i. So far u I know, it vu nanufaetured on the sodol of the
Sorth Sea sea vater. There was sooe deecriptlOB of it in a hook sooe-
vfcere arZ that vae iaiteted. There are such analyses of sea vater in
textbook*.

Q, You say you think it was according to a fonsula for North Sea.
Do you know whether North Sea «ater was used in the Dachau experiaente?

A. X don't knov for sure where the water cane froe that was used
in Dachau. That wasn't the laportant thing to ne to repeat the Dachau
experiaents blow by blow. Is X said, ve siaply wanted to know how
unpleasant it is if for days on end a person receives only sea water
to cover his needs for liquid.

Q, When did you tell these five expericental subjects that you
used that they were to undergo the sxperiaent or when did you toll thee
that it would begin?

A. A few days theretofore.

Q. A few days before? Heaaaber how aany days?

A. Haybe a week before. First X had to have a conference with
the kitchen to set that they %*re willing to prepare special rations for
the five doctors.

Q, And you say this special ration was eooewhat above that which
the Dachau innate* got?

A. Yes. For four days people in Dachau received eoergency soa
rations and ay subjects received about 1600 calories a day in dry food,

Q. Veil, how sany calories are thore in this eoorgency sea ration?

A. For four days there are 3200 calories.

Q, So that is 800 calories a day.

A. Yes, sir.

Q. Vho told you that tbs cxoerlaental subjocts got tliose rations
in Dachau? Do the records show that?

A. That was the plan for the exoeriaents that was worked out in
that %ay and X aesuzed that the experiaents had been worked out as they
had been planned, but, as I say, I laid no inoortance on the whole


CUU 7


Court So* 1

3 Jan 4?-K-12-2-££X-Gross (Brown)


Question of the calories because the ieoortant point is the loss of body
water and not loss of body weight.

Q. Sov, you didn't keep ary of your eroerlaontal subjects without
any vater whatever, did you?

A. live hundred cc of sea water vas the liquid they received.

Veil, weren't there sone experiaental subjects at Dachau vho
didn't get any %«ter at all, soa water or otherviso?

A. Tee, the first group fasted and thirsted. I have already
spoken about that and said that thirst can nore easily be tolerated
if one is fasting at the seae tine so that the kidney hae as little as
possible to do; thus the body is able to retain nore water.

But you can't testily to the Tribunal about what pain and
suffering those oxpst leant el subjects were subjected to, can you? You
didn't run any elsllar erperinsets yourself?

A. I do not understand you. I carried out theee experiments to
know what tort of suffering the experimental subjects wont through.

But you didn't carry out one where a nan fasted for five or
six days without either food or water. They did carry out such an
exnoriaent in Dachau. So you have no basis to testify about oain and
suffering to which that grouo of experimental eubjecte were subjected,
do you!

A. Z aentlored that at the sane tine purely I was having four
voaon fast and thirst that had cone to the clinic with very high blood
pressure and for six whole days these women fasted and thirsted. This
so improved thel- condition that they consopuently forgot the unpleas¬
antness involvec in tho fasting and thirsting. I also nentloned aaong
then one wocan who weighed only 61.7 kilo and who lost 3. However, her
blood pressure, went down froo 246/125 to 185/100. I carried odt such
experiments alnost daily in the clinic. That le done in the hundrods.
And, in the case of persons with kidney disease that is the accepted
nethod so tliat during the ~ar people froe the fronts vent through
thousands cf such hunger and thirst cures. I didn't have to have any


GA&3


Court So. 1

3 Jus 4?-JC-13-3-IEX-Grost (3rovn)


eontfol experiment In this; that vet furnished daily by the clinic.

Qi And these voaen vent vithout food and v-ater for four days?

Ai Six days vithout food and water.

Q, And what vat the retult on then aside from their blood creature?
2id they euffer ouch pain?

A. There it no oueation of pain in such cates. They siaply felt
thiret. Strangely enough they do not coesplain of being hungry. The
bo*r water that ttill reoaint there it enough to koep the body nctabo-
lisa supplied vith the necessary choalcals. However, there is lack in
tho body of oodiuc nitrate which, however, can bo overcose by giving
sodium nitrate. They never oosplain about hunger, only thirst. Soao-
tises thoy cocplaln of a feeling of weakness but fasting for six daye
is nothing very special. As I said, soao oeoplo carry out hung or cures
for four weeks. To be suro, they drink fruit Juicos during such a long
cure. Ho also aako use of It for therapeutic purposes. They will
rccolvo fruit Juices but that is by no noans eo unploesant as an oight
day* long hunger and thirst euro.

Q. And you gave then no coapcnsetion for going vithout food and
vator whatever? Tou have then no injections of any tort?

A. So, no. Ky whole purpoec is to ollBlnate free tho body all
tho unnecessary fluids In tho blood to that tho blood pressure will
drop. X gradually bring these people over to a fora of nourlshaont
without any salt.

Q, How you say that four out of five of your eroorinental sub¬
jects broko off on tho fifth day?

A. Tot. Tor external reasons only, not bocauso they could no
longer tolerate it. It Juet happened that four of the non had dates on
the 5th day, but the 5th one stayed through until tho sixth day and I
asked his specifically whether he felt particularly tortured or in pain
and he said no. Eo said that with the first drink of water he took all
unpleasantneee end disconfort vanished. I observed ay son tayself. As
soon as he drank a cup of tea, be was perfectly ell right and two days

oW.9


Csurt So. 1

3 Job 47-H-la-4-iawfroM (3r*m)


after tfco experiment he had recovered all the weight he had lost. He
had loot roughly one kilo a day.

3* Ton say those four men had a date on the 5th. Tou mean they
had an ongegement vith a young lady?

X. I do not know vfcat the detail* vero planned for the carnival
celebration. I could simply draw the regrettable conclusion that tho
interest in tho carnival vas a llttlo sore than tho interest in tho
eroeriaent.

But this does indicato that the oxueriacnts did not hove a vory
deleterious effect on then, othervlso they could not have gone to the
carnivnl and enjoyed it.

Q. Voll, it night also indicate that they didn't regard tho
orocriaants as boing very serious and that, oven though sovorel oon in
this dock ore ouito intorosted in the results of this ©articular expori-
nent, your four young assistants didn't regard it as sorlous enough
to refrain froc going out on a dote. Isn't that about tho site of it?

A. I can't dory that. I wasn't too ©loosed by thoir behaviour.

Q. Voro thoso non iaforaod of tho sorlousnoss of this under¬
taking?

A. So.

k. And vhat reason did you advance to thoc for undergoing tho
oxperiaonts?

A. Of course, I told thorn and this vas known that such son voter
ovuorlncnts vero an issue, but I was perfectly convinced that thoso
experiments could by no aeens be called lnkunnno or brutal and conso-
euontly vo didn't approach tho ex©crlnonts in too tragic a manner.

All we wanted to know was how unpleasant such an oxperinent vas.

TKo PriSnJLETi The Tribunal will be in recess until 1:&.


3 Junc-A-FL-13-l-Frimoau (Int. Brown)
Court No# 1


AFTERNOON SESSION

(The hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 3 June 1947.)


THE LivRStAL : The Tribunal is again in session.


DR. FR-vNZ VCLZHARDT - Resumed


(Continued)


BY 'JR. UcKANEY :


Q-- Professor, vhet experience had your assistant who
helped you in your sea water experiments had in sea water
problems before that time ?


None. Perhaps I cculd take* this opportunity tc ma¬
ke a few corrections. I have been told that the interpretor
failed to scy that I said that the sure proof for the cor¬
rectness of our experiments — and that the experimental
subjects had not drunk any fresh water, wns that otherwise
they would not have lost as much weight as they did. More¬
over, I elso said five times tw6nty-four hours and I added
once -ight hours less and onco twenty-four hours more, Then
I made a misteko saying that the emergency sea rations were
32CC calories for fair days. I havo bc>,n informed that in
reclity they were 2474 calories.

Then I spoke of students when spooking of my experiments.
Perhaps the English v/erd "Students" refers to students in
a University or some school. I should like to s^y that *11


of them wore accredited ooctors one of which had taken his
degree as early as 1941.

just s n id that the assistants who worked
submitted to you by the defense had no
with sea water problems. Is that cor¬
is ec. Moreover, I had had none either,
not have found anybody with *ny experience


0451


3 June-.*-?!--13-2-Prioeau (Int. Brown)
Coart No. 1


in sea water experiments because this - as the first time that
people had carried cut experiments on themselves.

<•- Have you ever before studied questions concerning
see water ?

Yes, of coarse I read literature on the subject,
even foreign literature including the work of Liddell and a
large number of other works, also reports on persons who had
suffered shipwreck, the literature on how long after c per¬
son had suffered shipwreck he could still- bo saved, but I
cannot recollect any details now.

v.- You had yourself done no practical research on pro¬
blems in connection with see water ?

.*•- Not in this field but in the field of hunger and
thirst I had.

^.- What do you aeon by — you h«d done research in the
field of thirst ? What research had you done ?

A.- I couldn't list rll of the investigations I have
c-rrisd out, That covers a period of, probably, 3C years,
and in O onorr.i, tho important dement is tho behavious of
the rosidud nitrogen. This i6 thw important point, aside
from the diminrtion of srlt, and the mechanism th~t pro¬
duces residual nitrogon suffers, both in cases of a super¬
fluity and in cases of too little salt because cf the lack

•

of water. This example of acute do-sniination in the case of
cholera shows that slag is retained in the blood in the same
w?y as ir. the diseases of the urinary tract.

t .- Professor, could you tell us the day-by-day clini¬
cal symptoms cf the experimental subjects in ycur experiments
■ ith sea. water ?


3 waa^-A -t^J-14-l-Iarrov (3rown)

Court 1 /'

A. I have already report*! oa that and said that oa the first
two days the thirst was ao sovoro, oa the third day it becjje uinlo-
soat, cad oa the ftxirth d^y the thirst was ■ y . -aln reduced, .mi* oa the
fifth ley it bectce wary strong, the nocuous membranes in the mouth
were dried up so that the situation was quite unplosaat.

'-hat about the a^n who under went the sixth day)

A . So suffered no ill effects a* all and said that it hadn't
aodo mich difference to hiu one way or the other, *nd one of than
oa tho fifty day, attsadod a court proceedings whore ho had to de¬
fend a friend of his.

^ . Veil, can't you &vo us a few aoro dotoils about tho sub¬
jective rocction of these experimcatal subjocts!

a . Uiscles bec^is so-evh.it hard and aoro oeasitive so that if
you t.-i on the uusdo a muscle knot is foniod but, in general, their
ability to work did not suffor. Howevor, they all felt the urgent
□ood for v..ter, Z Can guaraatoo that thoso experimental subjects did
not drink .ay fresh Water on the side, Tho nourishuont consist*', of
neat but tor, broad, j*si, two eggs, us on and threo >iocos of candy,

Z . Zs is inforoation your assistant has given you over tho
rocosc?

i. I loolaed it \q> in uy records.

Z • a nd how can you guarantee that those experimental subjects
got no additional watorT

A . is Z said, on the basis of thoir loss of weight and bocauoe
I can roly on my ass is touts,

Q. But you made no blood checks, did you!

A . mood Was also tested—ox .mined, yos,

Z~ Are you going to make all of these rrcords available to the

Tribunal?

Ics, Z can do that.

vU In your enpert Judgment do you state that the experiments cca-


a 53


3 Juaa-»-l-r-a-rrov (3rovc)
C ou^t 1


S, * you «M in .11 —ntiol M to th. ««•«'•

In Dachau?

* . I ho,. dr.™ your .tfntlon to th. dl«-r««l

Mly. u • V «ij«t. nil u* nor. to ..« *«— *»•«'

v.ro not Jyuif. it l»d but v.r. Mfr»lnt on th.lr rH5*« ,ort -

% . «a, do you think that you vould h.T. *ott» . aluabl. ro-

it. fr« ;,oor Mp.rln.nt. on th. probl« 1* vo. *•

jfrtg.t occhl

A . I dlda*» un^or.tant your *u®atlon.

. I .ay, .1 yol n-j ». 3.rit*tit in your Mp.rin.nl. and you
uj.l w-t.- pro..,.* « oh. Mf« n.thod «d T~ 1- f —
e.u vat or utd.nl toother sroup ab.teln froo nil liquid. and .11
food., your eapdrlnont .-id h... yielded .aid roll.. 1. that -" 1
* . I do not O.U.T. .o, bec.u.e X didn-t •* "*•

from Jorfiitlt end of .ho Sehaef.r n.thod I knee th.* it vould raoov.

al tho tern eat. of thlr.t nnd I h* «nou.h Mp..l«m=.. m «“"*•

.bout fnlrv 1 didn't h«r* to h-v. eny contro on....

X . Doetor, l.t>. put it . 11‘tl. ■«" ,h * r>17 -
^ u) ..rcntl7 er. tIiU« «bU •««- «“* ^
oonirdd vlth tho Dadh_u eiporlnont. and you bu your.olf upon
your -Mpoo tuMt. in re-hl»« certain conolu.lon. about y-n 1 «*-
fMUG 1 about th. llkllsood of injury. Tour -tW* .uV
JCt. Oa»ri*d on thalr daily Mtiritl... They vorlcod and «h«, voro
-not clo.aly confined. Tor vh.« r.a.on lit n~«.«T that Dr.
loljlaoock e e to D-hau 1 Carry out «•»«*. on ooncontr.tl n

cxr, l^tee, Thy couldn't h.. a. y~. ha« «•«“- °° ^
in th. W in Benin. Thy counln't h.lndo* have U.0d th. d.f.nd-nt
, chroedo in hi. ~p.rm.nt., Dr. Bchrood.r could contiai. vlth hi.
daily activities, U. only necalty bela* that h. oat and 1«P. «
that i. n uartlvularly nutMlal factor, in n certain roe,

* . I don't b.lm. it 1 . an -pert., task to .ay vhy Mp~m»t.


3 Jun£x*-::j-14-3-Zarrov (Brown)

Court 1

•

wo:o not carriod out ih a different w^y. They wore decided on at a
conference at which such eoinent scientists os Bppinger and “eubnor
vero present. Shis plan was drawn up and given to Beiglboock and ho
was told to carry it out without any chaagos.

3. I won't ask you to f>eculate, Professor, but you are brought
hero as an oxpert on these problems, and X'a asking you if the o»-
pe-inents could not have been conducted in Borlin in a nannor sinilar
to tho o^jorinonts conducted by you?

i. Pros tho reports on tho conferences and on what wont on bo-
foro tho exporinents, it could bo soon that efforts woro at first Budo
to find othor ways of doing thoso exporinonts»and thoru is no doubt
that Proffcesor ^jpingor would havo preforrod to carry out tho exper-
inonto in his clinical or in a hospital. But tho war situation was
such at that tiao that it was out of tho quostion to Baking uoo of a
largo nuobcr of bods and Bale hoalthy pcrsonnol as oxporlncntul sub¬
jects for those exporinonts. In addition, thoro was a strict ordor
that evory soldior, lmodiotoly nftor ho hod rocoverod fresa his wounds
should inaodintoly bo divissod frea tho hospital. Ho couldn't oven
stay thoro for another twenty-four hours, but only as long as wns ab¬
solutely nodossory. That procludcd currying out tho oxporioonts on
convalescent eoldiors. It would huvo been bettor in evory roepoct hod
that boon posaiblo.

$ . You didn't carry your experinents out on convoloscont soldiers
did you?

A . So, but I hod enough doctors. I had core than forty doctors
at ay clinic free when I could chooso the voluatoors.

Q. I supposo you road tho conferonco report on tho nooting hold
on the 15 th of May? There wero about fiftoen nen—not tho 15th of
Kay, I thick it was the 24th of Kay, 1944. Thoro woro about flftcon
non at that Ejecting, weren't thoro? Is thoro any reason why they could-
n't undergo these experinents and continue thoir daily work without ui>-
duc inconvcnicnco? G 455 "


3 Jun&-A -4iJ—14—4—Sarrov (Brown)

Court 1

A . It Is lsaossiblo to prosuan of tho fiftocn participants in:,
a cocf eronco that thoy should go to a hotel, or house, or hospital
end thoro subject theesdves to such experiments. With all tho noc«»-
scry blood and laboratory tests.

Q. Profoasor, your experimental subjocts didn't stay in one
rocc all the time. They went about their business, didn't they?

A, Yes, but they livod in this roc*. They woro all woithod in
this one rocc and uto in this rooc and olept in this rocc and this
facilitated tho orrporinont groatly. It would havo boon impossible
even if they hadn't oated in tho seco rocc.

Oan you, <s an ojport, odvanco ono valid roason porhqjs othor
than inconvonionce, why those experiments in Dachau could not Just as
woll havo boon carried out in Borlin in a nemner similar to tho ex¬
periments carried out by you?

A . At that tino thoro was no froo bod in any hospital, Every¬
thing was ovoi^-crowdod and it was impossible to find so many bods for
a scientific oxporinont.

Q. Did tho oxporinonts havo to bo Carried out in a hospital?

A. Yes, bocauso it is only thoro that you can find tho apparatus
and laboratories to carry out tho extinctions that aro nccossary—
extinctions of blood and rosiduol nitrogen, otc,

Q . Profossor, aro you testifying horo, as an oxpart, or in m
effort to Justify thoso experiments?

A . I tc testifying horo only bocauss on tho basis of ay obser¬
vation, I con state that thoro was no crino against humanity involvod
in these experiments.

Q. And con you toll us ono dinied reason why thess experiments
could not have boen carried out in Berlin?

A. I said, for purely oxtoraal reasons. Simply lock of room—
leek of apnea.

Q. Did I understand you to testify carilicr this morning that you


3 Juno-A-1J-14~5-Iarrov (Brown)

Court 1

would haro had no conjunction in going to Dochou and carrying out
thoio oapcrincnts yourtolf?

A . I noror would hnvo had this opportunity and noroovor, had
othor things to do.

Didn*t you tostify that you would havo hod no objection to
carrying out those exp or in oats in Bochum yoursalf?

A • I spoko of no objections at all. *hat is not o question that
concerns no os on export, of what 1 would have dono in this caso.

q . Voll It concerns- no because, ss I rocnll, you tostlfiod to
that effect upon n question put either by Dr. Marx or Dr. Steinbouor?

I oennot recall h-ving aado such a stataaont. I only said
that you absolutely hod to havo voluatoors for this. That, without
tho voluntary ol«ont, orery such sxporinont would havo boon inponoiblo.
Q . Uxat would hempen if tho oxporlooctal subjocts *oro not vol-

untoorsl

a. Tho porson conducting tho oxporinent would very soon intorrupt
tho oxpoiinont and sny th«t that situation was ls*>ossiblo, or ho would
havo to toko draconian noesuros and lock ovozy export*octal subject up
in his own coll*

Q. Voll, do you exclude ths possibility that they would tiy to

choat if thoy woron't roluntoorsT

i. If c porson is in en oxporinent and is not voluntary in it
then ho vill nost assurodly cho.:t whonovor he colw

^ A nd did you find any ovidonco in tho purportod original rcr-
cords sutaittod to you that the oxporinentol subjocts in Dachau had
cheated?

4. Tos, that con bo scon free on a or two of tho weight charts.

If tho subject does not lose woight, that neons that ho has drunk water
on tho sido.

Q. And your statement that tho Dachau cxpcrinontal subjocts woro
voluntcors is sinply a stutaaent free Bciglboock or Bock cr-Troy song
which you aro passing on to tho Tribunal, isn't it?


2457


3 (fcrovn)

Oourt 1

s'

JL • lo, free tho Tory bogl^zlr^ ard for porfoctly ondoretr.ndablo
reason* it vaa planaod that tho ■objoct* hiA to bo Toluntoore, end
whoa Dr. Bcdglboock oliainatod throo eubjoeto bocaueo they wore not in
good enough etate of health, throo other Tolantoori innodlatoly oppliod.


3 Jun-u-i3—15-1—- r nloy (Int. 3rowr.)

Court :io. I#


Q Did you participate in this planning of the so experiments?

A Ho.

Q Thon thu 3 to tenant you just made is nothing you know any¬
thing about oxccpt what was told you by Boiglboeck and Bcclcor-Frcys-ng,
is that right?

A Everything I know I know only froa the sources in question.

Q If you wero-autcittins those records as clinical data on
thoso experimental subjects without being told anything about it ono
way or the ether and you ascertained as ycu did ascertain that n mnber
of the subjects cher.tod, would ycu bo quite so sure in your str.tenant
that they woro voluntoora?

A I havo already said that tho fact that tho porson is a
volunteer is not a certain guarantee thr.t tho experimental subjoot
will not oho at, you will aoko that oxporionco with all pationts. They
foci that thoy have abidod b7 tho rulos and doctor's instructions, but
novo rt ho loss you find out thoy did drink water or did odd salt ard
that thoy did do sooothing — even though thoy wore volunteers —
which thoy should not havo done. Tho notto applies, *Tho mind is
willing, but tho flosh is weak."

Q Of course that is pure assumption on your pert ns oppliod
to thoso oxporinonts nnd tho only oonoroto fact you can tostlfy to is
your observation free thoso purported original records that sorno of tho
oxporiaontrl subjocts did choat and did obtain water, isn't it?

A Tou could see that froa tho rocord of tho experiments.

Q Do you know what Berkatit is?

A Yos, I do. That is sanething to correct tho tasto of soa
water, originally manufactured froa tonatoos. It covers up tho
nausoous tasto of soa water so that it can bo drunk oven with ploaturo.

Q And what is your opinion about tho effectiveness and re¬
liability of Berkatit?

A I consider it c aspic to !y superfluous, unless in cases of
s.~ distress ono prefers to follow tho edviso of drinking rather 500 ccs


3 Jun-A-itB~l>-2—lfeloy (Jnt. Br o w n )
Court !fo« I.


of sco water than to thirst. Thet could be pleasant to »moono If he
could drink sea water without it tasting bad to his, but it has no
effect on the da hydrating of feet of drinking sea water*

Q You did not use 3erkatit in your experiments?

A No, wo didn't have-any.

Q In what fora is Borkatit manufactured, is it sosuj solid
substonco one oats or is it a powder applied to sea water? Just what
is its form?

A I don't know.

Q Bavo you over socn any Borkatit?

A No.

Q Thon who tcld you what it was?

A That beea*o obvious during tho course of tho confcronco.

Q '.'ill you ropoat your answer, plonso?

A At tho conference I believe on tho 15th of Ajwil or sono-
thing, I boliovo, the conference wo wore talking about yostord.*y,
whore thjro was tho discussion about Berkatit and Wolfatit, it c.-mo to
light that Borkatit was rocoaaandod by tho technical offico aid given
tho profercnco to tho Wolfatit. Nor, incidontally, have I over socn
any Ttolfatit, but I na convinced it is a wondorful lnvontion or dis¬
covery.

Q Tfoll, professor, I cn completely lost to understand how
you can testify anything about Borkatit when you have never soon it.

Up to tho present tlao you haven• t told mo anything about information
you have received on it, and there is nothing in the conference report
which discussos tho content of Borkatit end its process of manufacture
on its fora ?

A It was said in this confcronco that Borkatit was sirfcly a
taste corrective, and for a doctor that is a concept of which ho knows
*hrt it naans, cv_n though he hasn't soon it or tasted it or actually

had it in hir hands.

Q So as an export you ur-, willing to say that Borkatit is no


L460


3 m-A-!3-l5->:feloy (Iat. Brow.)
Court Hom I.


good although you can't tell tho Tribin.il what is in Berkatit, how itfe
conufacturod or its fore?

A 103, that is rigfct. In this connection I sn in exactly
the a fine position u Schiefor who irr.udiatoly cone to tho conclusion
that if it was simply a taste corroctive then it was not ?ny good for
our purposos, namely to overcame ar correct tho dehydrating offccts
of son water.

Q oil, I dare say that Dr. Schaefer his more information
about 3ork.itit than you hawoj hov do you reconcile tho fact that Ep-
pingor, who you xvcomaondod to this Tribunal a a an oxpert was support¬
ing tho uao of Bark.itit?

A Ctf courso Eppin^r didn't think oithor that Borlcatit re¬
moved tho salt fron tho w-.tcr in tho wry ‘..blfr.tit doos, but ho believed
in tho possibility that tho vitmin content of Bcrkatlt could perhaps
contribute to permitting tl» kidneys to concentrate noro se.lt, and tho
quostion that interested hin was how long a person could drink such son
water with tho tasto corrected without suffering serious injury; thr.t
is what I assisoo without actually sporking to hin.

Q 3ut you ontiroly disnissod 3ork.itit in spite of Eppinger's

opinion.

A Fron tho very boginning I was of tho opinion that for
eases of soa distress, in other words to correct tho dehydrating of¬
fccts of soa water, Borkatit could not bo used at all. .

Q lien i, free the notes rrhich wore submit tod to you wore you
able to ascertain how cany subjocts wore vsod in tho Dachau oxrorinonts?

A I didn't bother to count thus. I estimate or believe 1
knew that thsro wore U* of ttxrs.

Q And could you ascertain fron those records how A so ox-
p-rlaEr.tal subjocts wore grouped?

A Yes, I have alro-dy said that there wore five groups, and
I know hew those five groups w^-ro treated individually.

Q How were they treated individi.-J.ly and how largo were tho


0461


3 Jun-A-I3-l5-ii-ibloy (Ir.t* Bream)

Court :fo. I.


groups?

A Tho first group fastod and thirsted, the second croup,
Schaofor, tho third group had sea water with 3crk.itit, tha fourth
group sea water without Berkatit, and the fifth group drank son wator
straight up to 1000 cc.

Q And how arny wore in oach group.

A I didn't count the, about six, but in ono group I think
there wore noro.

Q And woro you ablo to ascertain froc tho records hew nuoh
so.- wator tho group cons icing Berkatit was given, that is ho-.r uuoh
Berkatit procossod soa wator?

A In tho Berkatit group, 500 cc of sea wator wore given.

Q And in what quantities wore thoy given that?

A 500 cc in portions of 100 cc.

Q In othor words, thoy wore given 100 cc. five tiraos during
a 2U hour poriod, is that right?

A That is roughly it, yos.

Q And how long did that continue?

A Tho oxperiaonts were discontinuod after six days.

q CouM 70U toll froa tho rocords what tho reasons for in¬
terrupt ing tho experinents was?

A I believe that f\5ndancnta.liy they did not wish to continue
tho oxperinonts aftor tho sixth day bocauso froo then on tho synptccs
bocoiva very disagrooablo.

q And hew nuch plain so" w.at,r was giv^n to tho group that
was fed only sea water?

A Ono group had 500 and tho fifth group had 1000 ec.

q How oBDjr experimental subjects were in oach group, cluld
you tell that?

A I believe six.

Q In othor words, ono group of six got 500 cc of sea water

per day and another group of six got 1000 cc of sea rater per dy, is


3 Jur«-A-I3-15-5-^t-loy (Int* Browr.)
Court Ho. I»


that right?

A Yos, that ia roughly it, but ->s I s-y I cannot swear to
tho oxact of cxpcrl-xntr .1 subjects.

Q How, you got this infornation fron these records and not
froa what 3cclear Pr.yseng and -fioiglbocfc told you; you can toll all this
free tho records, is that right?

k Yea, that can bo so_n free tho records, above all fron
the photostat tables of ■eights shore tho nuabar of experimental sub¬
jects is along ono edgo.

Q How long did tho oxptriaonts continuo with tho groups get¬
ting 500 cc of soa setor?

k All oxporinonts woro interruptcxl after six days and only
in ono or two oases they woro prolonged for a day or two if tho subjoct
had drunk fresh wator.

Q And tho group that got 1000 ccs also Lasted six days?

A Yos.

Q Did you food any of your oxporiaxmtal subjocts 1000 ccs
por day for six days?

A Hot for six days. Cno of ay subjocts on tho last day
drank a thousand, bo cause ho thought that would in soiio usasuro quench
his thirst.

Q And how way ware in tho group that fasted?

A Just as many.

Q And how long did thoy fast and thirst?

A 3otwocn four and five days.


3 v'un3-..-G2S-l6-l-!:oeh=n (1st. Brrwn)
Court Ho. 1.


r \. ,jv\ you found nothing in those rocords which indicate to you
thrt those jxrcrincntnl groups suffered any sovero pcin; is that -right?

... X u cannot speak of pain ir. tho easo of these experiments, you
can speak simply tf discoafert, unpleasantness, had nerd attacks, n
goncrel fatigue, but sevore pcin is not eausod hy hunger or thirst or
drinking soo w~ter.

;. Hew such unploasnntnoss end disomfort wculd bo causod; could
you toll anything about that fr'n thoso roports?

regarding tho subjootivo reaction cf tho sublets, thoro was
nothing to bo scon in the records.

3. Tho best imv to fin*' out about that w.uld be to call in ono of
tho oxperir.ontal subjects; wouldn't it. Doctor?

... I beliovo so, yus.

Q. Did you observe any different symptoms fr<.« thcao rooords ns
betwoon tho vnriius ,-rcvpa cf oxporir*.nts 1 subjects?

A. Bet thit I kr.ow cf; cort.inly net fr n the rooords obtaining
tho figures from tho ,;orwnl roport, that is.

Q. In othor words, tho onus that w?ro fed soo-wntor and Borkntit
wore Just as well off as tho gr-nip that got Tfclfatit; is that right?

A. He, that is a Tory sort us mistake because the onos whe rccoivod
• rlfntit did n't how any treble at all, thoy fp t along fine.

Q. But tho others did ha-o n little trouble?

.. lot of trouble, the*' wore very thirsty, very soveroly thirsty.

Q. .(* an expert, supposo you tell tho Tribunal, if you con, what
tho synptens would bo each day in a twolvc doy oxpcrlncnt, using for one
group sea wntcr, for another gr.up, Borkntit, for another ;r up oolfntit
and for tho Inst group no feed and n.' water?

A. This situati n c uld never arise, because I wculd never extend
a sea water experiment for twelve- days unless it was with Schaofo/'wntor.
I w.'uld net lot a hcnlthy person go with hunger and thirst for twclva
days. The nenxinun ycu c'uld oxpect rf r, pers.-n is six days. Fr.r. the
twelfth day to there is already danger f death. I thereforo conn-'t
’.escribe whnt th- synptens w. fid be n the seventh, eighth, ninth.


3 June-A-C3S-16-2-Kcehan (3r<-wr.)
Court Sc « 1.


tenth, olevcnth or twelfth day. I can soy thet thero i-ld ho -one ml
dehydration and they wn'ld be very thirsty indeed and that thoy would
n^t yet bo dead cn the twelfth day and that I would «vor undortaleo
to corrv „ut such on experinent nyacIf,

H. Ycu connot glvo us then the clinicol syr.ptcos Airing tho days
free the so vc nth day on?

a. 1 osk you if y«i want that inf.mnti n to road descriptions of
pors ns ship-wrocked.

Q. I want to kn<w whr.t w. uld happen to a nan if ho wore fed son-
wntor f r twelve Joys; yes, that is exactly what I would want to Icn-w.

A. "Toll you ean too that free tho dosoriptlcns of pooplo nhc for
twelve cloys or core woro ship-wrookod.

Q. And what die! they haw to sav ab-Ait it?

... I oann.t toll y.u that fr si ny recollection. Uy nonk-ry is no
1 \*or as seed ns SO yoors oro.

Q. Yu oann"t testify eb« ut that then?

A. H< , I can only inocino "hot it ni,-ht bo.

Q. I an n-t intorostod in y-ur ienrinati n unloss it is basod on
s.no sciontifie observations y«u redo, y«u are on oxport on soa-wntor.

A. But I an net an oxpert beyond tho linit whor. thine* bopln to bo
dan^oreus far the life.

<5. In thor w rds. ycur oxportnoss is br.sdd cn tho oxrorinwnts you
c-'nductod y-ursolf?

I Vn w tho literature n tho subjoct, but I oonn--t so roproduco
it here s as tr bo able t- testify under nth rocordinc thoso nnttors,
but n tho basis rf ny '.vn oxporirvnts I m in a position to say to
what extent thoy oro unpleasant tr n t until tfw sixth day.

C. Y.u have testified t s-nothing cb ut tho can who was ot son

for seventeen days; is that richt?

a. Yes, such reports aro available, sovontoon days, ninotcor. days
and i no 7 up spent thirtv seven days on the, soa with very little water.
Of this -r.-up tw survived and tho rost died. If y u sent 5 . re liter¬
ature n the subject, I c-.n subr.it the bi TCphies t y u but n t


3 ^an-rt-G3S-16-3-Ifehan (Bream)
Court Vo. 1.


fren ny recollection.

Q. Professor, I on interested in yair knowledge cn the net tor.

Nw, lot us take the ease of the sen who was ait setwntoer. daysi ore
you fosiliar with it?

.». I road about it, but at ny age ono is likely to forgot things.

I boliove I rerwaber he oculd be revived by giving hia water and that
very few subsequent illnesses occurred. In oasos whore poraons are
ship-errooked for so long, it does occur that thoro aro oases of bron¬
chitis or pneunonia and thore ore systens of dehydration in tho nucuois
nonbrane layers sinilar to thcao frund in diptheria, but theso aro all
oxtroaa cosoo at which you wonder that the porson survived at all,

Q. Do you know how rtuoh water this nan had who was ait for
sovontoen days had whon ho first got into tho boat?

K , I do not knew, but I do knrw that whon ho was givon wntor,
eftor ho wes savod, ho inprovod rapidly.

Q. Well, you Just horn a vory gonoral and haey rooollootion of
that oaso, den't ycu. Doctor? leu knew nothing about tho oenditiona
undor which ho survived tho sovontoon days, hew mioh water ho had to
bogin with, whethor ho had food, fruit juioos, if any and how nuch
salt wntor ho drank] day by «!ny ycu knar nothing about tho dotails, do
ycu?

•

... H', I on net in a position to testify about fruit Juiocs, food

and wntor and what not free tho litoraturo I road a coo tinvo ago.

Q. Frofossor, you aro probably fanilinr with tho decumont, *iloh
I want tc put to you. It is tho rocord »f the ccnforonco hold cn 20
>'ay 1944. This doouaont is K0-177, Prosecution Exhibit No. 133.

Doctor, before we turn to that dcoun- nt, I would lilpo to got
veur rooetion to a statenent redo by a cr.n who was in Dachau and who hod
an opportunity porsonclly tc learn saacthing about tho soa-wetor expor-
iwnts. Tint is tho affidavit Tschofonig, D-. cuaont No. 911, Prosecution
Exhibit 139 cn page 28, tho English d'eunent book 5. Irofosscr, Vs.
Tachofonig, wh was, as I say, in a position tc kr.rw personally about

6466

• I


3 Juno-A-02S-16-4-!fcohac (Brcrnn)

C^urt He. 1.


these oxpJrinents, states that tho cxporinontnl subjects could act oat
mieh feed, that srjjo of then hod creeps end naniao attacks, that ho
know that oxparincntal sabjoets had hurlod thoasolvca on tho floor and
sucked dirty we tor out cf rags usod to nop tho floor. How, aro y.-u

9

willing to state as an oxport that these ata tenants ccnoornlng aufforlng
and thirst aro incorrect and unrelieblol

A. I don't know those stntcnonts but I oensidor It quite out of
tho quoatl^n that the experimental subjects folt it nocoaeory to drink
in tor rf acp«, bocauso thoro wore air raid buckets tho re and if thoy
folt thoy noedad a drink thoy could drink mt of then. How, insofar as
tho oranpa aro oonoornr 1, I don't bclicro that oithor. Neno of ny
subjocts had oranpa.

Q. Did you say scoothing ab^ut then haring difficult anting food?

... Xoa. that ia ao, thoy loao thoir oppotito boocuac thoir ncutha
bo on no ao drv thoy oil egrued thnt thoy bconao lose and loao intoroatod
In food fro* day tc day.

Q. H^ oranpa?

A. Ho.

Ho nnntol disturbenooa?

a. Ho, I oensidor that out of the quoetion.

Q. ^Thr-t physical lajoirncnts of-ony sort; no inpairnonto -f Iho

eyos?

... thysical or paychologioal?

Q. Phyaiool ia the questin.

A. Konkncaa, atiffoning <f tho rtuaaloa and oortain uncertainty In
ncvcaont, tha hnrdoning --f tho nuscloa and all thoao things I already
spoke of.

'i. H-w, r V say thcro wore firo buckota in tho rccaa whoro thoy wora
carrying ut tho oxporinonts?

... Hat in tho roon but in front cf tho wash roon.

Q. “os this in Dachau?

A'. That is whit 1 heard, yos.

'i. '.110 told yew obout that?

0^7


3 JuBC-A-G5S-16-5-Seohaa(Brcwp.l

Court Ho. i#


A. I boliovo I heard that tre— defense counsel.

Q. So, it is yeur oxpert judfpoant that it would hew boon quito
unnecessary for tho oxperlncntal subjects to suck water out of dirty
noft; they eould have gone cut and used tho «tor cut of tho firo
buckotsj isn't itt

A. Ho, thoso who e ho a tod did not take as such trouble os that.

Q. In cthor words, if thoy wanted to withdraw free tho oxporimonts,
thaw oould do so and drink ell tho water that thoy wanted toj that is
yur expert Jud^ont on this exporinont, is it Doctor?

A. We, of course it was «ado escro difficult than that for then,
but pooplo liko that will of course find o way cut s mo how and tho
supervisors oro gonorally spooking aro at looet 60 * on tho othor sido,
so tfcr t ono con novor bo quito suro there,

Q. Fcoplo like what, Frofossor?

«. Tho assistants who wore prosont thoro. I think smo of then
wore interrogated. Two yi-ung pooplo I think woro thoro, some helpers
or s«no lcbcratory assistants,

<*. I think I undorstand yen to say that pooplo liko that always
found it possible to choot or words to that offcotj I wont to kniwr what
you ncan by the roforer.ee to "pooplo liko that." That woro thoso
oxporincntnl subjects liko. Doctor, in y ur oxport opinion?


Court So. 1

2 Jus 47-A~17-l-*B-.-Cook (Itack)

A. That I don't know. I would hare to road that In the reports.

I would bare to hara It checked on the apot fros people vfco vera there.

I as specking generally. Vhan you hare 44 people whoa you uae In experi¬
ments, than thara la a cartain raster of ueonla there who supervise and
then one ian't culte certain of one'a reeulta either. I an Juet aaylng
that in order to illuatrate that in thla particular cr.ee it haa happened
rad could have happened that expericantal subjects actually ottnlned
drinking water.

Q. Let'a go to Docuseat So. 177, Prosecution XxhlMt 123, which
you hare before you. A* I recall your teatisony earlier, you aald that
you aeeunod that theao axporlaanta wero carried out aa planned. I put
it to you, doctor, that thie conference givoa ua pretty definitely whet
the plane wero. You find the paregraph at the botton of the firat pago
whore it readai

■At thla seating Captain Dr. Backer-Trayaung reported on the
clinical experisants conducted by Colonel Zhr. won Slrany, and cane to
tho final conclusion that ha did not consider then aa being unobjection¬
able and conclusive cnwigfc for a final decision. The Chlof of the
nodical Sorvlco of the Luftvoffo* — strike that, Luftwaffo la not in
hare — "is convinced that if the Berks aethod la used danngo to hoalth
he a to bo oxoectad not later than aix days after taking Berkatit,
which danago will result in peraar.ant injuries to hoalth and - accord¬
ing to the opinion of Dr. Schaeffer - will finally result in death
after n»t later that twelve days."

Professor, in your axpert opinion la that a corrcot statcaent of
what is llkoly to occur if Berkatit la used?

A. That neat probably la a aorroat atatenent.

Q, In other words, if you use it six days, you aan expect perma¬
nent injury?

A. Cti no, I haven't finished. It la corrcat to aseusc that
after consuming Berkatit injuries say be expected after six days, but
permanent injuries to the health of the subject I would not apeak about

C469


a


Court So. 1

3 Juz 47-A-17-2-£=X-Cock (Track)


after tvolv* day* have nested, aai ovon then I have ny d«ibts. If you
carry out a sea water exnerisent or If you have been shipwrecked for
twelve day*, then I as convinced that the patient would recover without
oeraanent Injury, If you succeed In getti:* hln over the difficult
Initial period of dry la* out.

Q. ell then, you don't think thl 1 * right a* you testified
earlier, you think It is wrong?

A. That 1* too strong an expression. After six days you nay
expect injury to the health, hut I dec't believe that they are percanont
Injuries.

Tfcsn you wouldn't sxpeot peraanent lnjurios even aftor twelve
days, X understood you to say!

A. I consider that it la possible that even aftor twolvo days,
provldel the dancer point has boon paeeed, no ueraeLnont injuries will
result.

Q. Veil, Professor, of couree there are a croat nunber of things
that aro poselbla, but ae an expert I would prefer ycai would testify
with rospsot to probability rather than possibility. How, Is it
nrobable that there would be peraanent Injury after twolvo daysT

A. Have hln repeat that oueetlon, please?

(Question Is repeated)

So, it ie probable. I have eald that If a pereon has lived
throuch thoee twelve deye and If you have succeeded In gottlng hln -oast
the first danger ©jint thon it is aost probable that he win not suffer
any peraanent Injury to his health.

Q. Is It probable that he will llvo to the twelfth day?

A. That depends on whether he has no weter at his disposal,
whether it has boon raininc, whether be has boen able to collect cel ted
snow, whether ho has drunk a lot or little sea vetor. The oosslbility
is very great for a reel shipwrecked oerson to survlvo tvolve days and
in en experiaont, if he hasn't been drinking aoro than 500 cubic ceeti-
aetorB of see water for twelve days, he will probably still be alive


Gi.70


_ *


Court So. 1

3 Jus 47-A-17-3-L»t-Cook (If ask)

and oscrge healthy asd without isJury.

Q, Let's get thie very clear. Professor. Wo are not talking
ebout shipwrecked sailors now who have the henoflt of rain periodically.

We are talking about the exoerlsents which were the subjoct of this con¬
ference. Ab I understand it, it was the opinion of Schroeder's office
and Schaeffer that death «uld probably ensuo after twelve day®. You
disagree with that. Is that right! You think it is probable that one
would survive for twelve days?

A. I oonaldor It possible but as I also said previously during
ay testlaony that beginning with the twelfth day danger to life exists
Indubitably.

Q, But probably ho vould live to the tvolfth day, 1® that right?

A. I can't glvo you the probability factors of that. I said it
Is possible that ho will survive.

q, Profossor, let's continue at tho ton of nrge 2 vhoro it says,
■ixtornal syaptoas are to be oxpectcd, such as drainage, dlarrhoa, con¬
vulsions, hallucinations, end finally death." You disagree with that
too, don't you?

A. That again depends. That isn't said with roforcnco to a special
arrangenont for exportaonts but cuito gonorally. It Is generally tho
developaont of a shlpwrsckod case, or In this case on the other hand It
•ays aftor six days injury to health and thereafter diarrhea. That,
according to our experience, is lnprobabls. Convulsions - -oil, we
haven't observed any; hallucinations - that night happen on the tenth
day and If a patient dies on the twelfth day then it is quite possible
that days beforehand ho has had hallucinations.

q. But you don't agreo that the nan gets dlarrhoa? As I rocall,
you testified to tho contrary, that taking soa water causes constipation,
is that right?

A. Our experimental subjects, since they never drank all of the
see water in one dose, all got constipated duo to the dehydration of tho
body.

CL71


Court So. 1

3 Jun 47-A-17-4-i=X-Cock (Prank)

Q. Veil, lot's continue toward the tep of page 2 end sac what
oxuerimants vero planned, Professor, and get your exoert judgment about
thso. The first sorios is one group of persons to he given see vnter
processed with Serka; one group to he given ordinary drinking vetcr;
persons without any drinking water at all; porsons, given to drink
according to the present aethod. Those experiments wore to last six
days, is that right?

A. Tes.

Q, In your opinion would those experiments give any disconfort?

A. HO.

Q. And no injury?

A. Ho.

Q. Psychical dlsturtanco?

A. That not oithor, certainly not during six days.

Q. Sow, that cleaning, tho second group of oxporlaonts, Profossor,
"persons nourished with soa \«tor and Eorkatit, and as diet also tho
emergency eon rations; duration of oxoorinentsi 12 days. Slnco in tho
opinion of the Chlof of the Medical Service ooruanont injuries to houlth,
that is, tho doath of tho experimental suhjocts has to ho oxcoctod, as
oxporinontal suhjocts such porsons should ho usod ns will ho wit at tho
disposal hy tho Relchsfuehrer SS."

Doctor, attuning that tho twelve day experiment was carried out, do
you still maintain that it is urobable thorc would havo hcon no doath
and that it is prohablo that there would havo boon no pomanont injury?

A. i ;rtunatoly, such an experiment was rofreinod from, hocauso
that w-xild have got pretty near the dividing line towards endangoring
life and fortunately the experiment was not extended beyond the sixth

. v 'i*

day.

Da. *AEX: hr. President, as dofenso counsel for the defendants
Seeker—Jroyseng and Professor Schroeder I wish to object to tho way in
which this dxujent is being -xde the subject of cross examination by thp
orosccution. *irst of all this record is being contosted by both tho


Court So, 1

3 Jua *7-A-l?-5-IE^-Cick (Srovn)


defendants end the defense, the reason being that the affidavit of the
zar. Christenson shivs clearly that there is no ouestion >f there toeing
an authentic record of the nesting vfcich took niece et that tine, tout
only a fov days later a nan by the nano of Schickler, who was neither
cuallfiod nor entitled to sake it, orepared a rocord froa his senary,
end ho v&s definitely not a nodical nan, he vos a technician, and vhat
is nore he was a prejudiced author of this record, and vhat is ncre,
ono nust consider that hero vc are not concerned vith the planning of
oxperinents which vould aeke any cloin towards real existence. It is
proved beyond doubt that only when Professor apoingor and Heutonor voro
there vero these oxperinents planned and that thoso natters arc faleo
end if Professor Vollhardt is to define his attitude at all thon ve
could only too concerned vith a hypothesis. In other vords, ono night
•ey that, assuning this rocord hero does correspond vith tho truth,
vhich on the other hand vo deny, then it could too so, tout not as if vo
vero c neernod hero vith a true record of the outoone of that conference,
and that in fact no planning for an experiment v*s carrlod out at tho
tin©, and, therefore, I object to this type of cross exaninatlon and I
naintain ay objection to tho record as such in its ontlrety.


3473


3 Juno-i^J-18-l-Gross (Frank)

Court 1

722 ?22SE>arT: 2ho witness has testified as on export vitnoss
celled by the dofehao. Ho is now undergoing cross examination. Tho
roles of cross extinction cro llboral end Prosocution is entitlod to
tost his kaovlodgo of these nnttors and had not oxcoodod tho propor
bounds so for, Couaaol nay procood.

DR. iUHH Mr. President, nay I soy ono noro word. There is tho
alditlonal point that tho ninutes procisoly stato under II that tho
Ccnnisslon* end this is at tho bottco of pago 3 of tho Goman tost,
tho Ccucioslon for tho planning for tho conditions of tho oxporinents
to bo carried out i s coaposod as follows*

Profosaor Ippingor froa Yioana, then a reprosontotivo of tho
Hygiene Departnont. a representative of tho air Force, a representa¬
tive of tho Goman air Ministry, and a roprosontativo of tho OEM, tho
high oooBand of tho levy. So, tho caxrl.sion who vas to draft tho
plans for thoso oxporinonto was only being nado up—it hadn't net,
but was only to bo constituted during a further uooting and then
draft plans for tho oxporinents. *hus, in this nost roioront point
this record is folso and thor-foro the assucptlon is Justifiod that
tho record vas not prepared on tho 23 Key but oven lutor after tho
26th of Key. Ghristonson, you soo, upon ay questioning, ansvorod uo
that it vas oven possiblo that it vas after the 25th May that thin re¬
cord vas proporod and it porbobly ha* boon antedated. For that reason
alono, when you rood that particular passage, it is quite unnecessary
to State that there voro no details, that the emission vas only being
foruod and then during a later nooting vas to uako tho plan, to bo
carried out. Consequently. I bog you to take this into consideration
and to hero further extinction of this vitae., refused.

DR. S«XHB-3S.. JOB 3SIGLB0ICX: I also object to tho typo
of cross extinction carried out by Prosecution, but uy reasons are
different- thoy arc of a fomal nature. It is not proper that an
expert witness should bo shovn a doctoat that a sentence should bo


31 * 7 *.


3 Juno-*-W-l&-2-Gross (Trade)
Court 1


tom free Its context- without tolling hie what wo aro coacomod with
aad. without giving tho witnoss ecplo opportunity to peruso the entiro
docuncnt-to poruao tho oatiro docunont in hi a ova tino and then ho
would know what is going on. In ordor to provo this I would like to
point out how Prosecution quo tod free Tschofoaig's interrogation
saying that Tschof onlg had experienced all that but in tho niddlo
of tho eocoad pogo- tho witness is seying duo to ny position as io-
sponsiblo prisoner for tho X-ray station of tho ccep hospital insist
in tho csporlncnts." Which could havo boon only a siqjorficU ono.
Thus, tho assertion that this witness was inforood in dotoil io con¬
tradictory to faots boforo this Tribunal.

ms ?HSSIS3«T: V hon tho witness Is being cross oxcoinod in con¬
nection with any cortaln docunont tho wltaoso nay too, oxauino, and
rood that docunont in full If ho dosiros. Othorvlso tho croso oxnulna¬
tion nay procood. Objection is oror-rulod.

3T iw?. KcH-STT: Witness, I ac not asking you to nrguo whothor
thois onporlaont of 12 days as outlined horo was carrlod out, but I
understand you aro an unbiasod export on soo-wator problems, testify¬
ing in cn un-blnsod nannor, I an asking you to os-uno that this ex¬
po rlncnt was carried out and, os it statos, It was to lust 12 days,
end tho sole oourco of water was to bo soa water and Borkotit, and I
put tho quostion to you os an export-what In your Judgment would havo
happened to tho oxporluoatal subjects? Con you onswor that?

a. Tcs. Without o doubt tho cxporinontal porson would havo
nanrgod to get ahold of wator gcoc wey or othor, booauso even tho uoot
enthusiastic aoluntoor wouldn't continue that long.

Q . Doctor, lot's ossuno that ho had no rocourso, no acccsr. to

0

othor wator, ho was put in a cell, whore there was no othor wator.

He had to drink soa water. He hod to drink Borkjtit, That is all ho
got and that wont on for 12 days. Kow, as an oxport, what porbnbljr'
would h.vo hepponod to tho oxpcrincatal subject?


6475


3 Jua>-A -(J-l&»3-*ro6s (Trank)

Court 1


A • After 12 days ho would have shrunk considerably and all sorts
of sysptcca would havo bococo apparent. I can langlno thoro would havo
boon hallucinations and physical woeknoss, hardening of tho nus el os,
acd so on, Sit, if a porson woro ahlo to conoontrato ho had a chanco
to survivo thoso 12 days.

4 . Zs it probablo that tho oxporinontal subjocts would havo diodl
▲ • I wouldn't describe it as being a probability but as bolug n
possibility.


Q. I'ould you doscribo it as bo lag proballo that tho axporiaontal
subjocts would havo survivodf

A . that I ccmsidor very possiblo.


$ • Veil, is thoro cny probability in horo anywhero or Just
possibilitiosl

i. In biloogy you cannot figure out forocosr. Much dt^onds on
tho typo of porson you arc ooncernod with, how is condition is how ho
can goaorally roect. Ono can say gonorally that dangor to llfo coo-
aonooo after 12 days, ono cjn assuno that aftor 12 days ho is still Alivo
A nd it is proballo that if ho survlvos, os you stato is very
possiblo, is it probablo tha t ho would have suffered any ponaanont
daneA'Ot


A . Ho, that is ioprobablo that ho would suffer permanent injury.
Profossor, can one kill a porson by aaklag hio drink soa water
as his solo sauce of water supply?

A. Tea, of aourso you can kill anyone if you only give hio soa
wntor to drink pcrtiancntly. Ho hue an bolng can stand up undor that, ho
drios out,

Q, A nd, as an osport, what is your best ostiuato as to how long

that would teko?

A . as I havo Just said danger to life c cm one os aftor 12 days .
is a general ostinato.

Cl. That is tho best testimony you can givo in rosponso to that


C476


3 June^-j-HJ -l ftifOroaa

C ourt 1


quoation? Ho la giver, only ioa aator, that ia hla aolc aourco of
v-tor. Tou can't cay anything noro definite than around tho 12 th dry
It bee coca quito dongoroua to hla lifot

Toe, I can aay that on tho 12th day thcro ia danger to hit

lift.

Voro you in court yoatordoyf

a. Toa.

Q . Proaocution would call to tho Trivunal'e attention rulo
Ho.9 B of tho rules leauod by thia Tribunal, which roquiroe that
witnOBBOa bo cacludcd free court prior to thoir tcatinony. Vo call
that to tho Tribunal'a ottontion for %*mt ovor weight they night widh
.to giro it. Vo nokc no notion* bocouao that rulo waa vlftlatod in
thia lnatcnco,

DB. TIPPi Hr. Proaidont, thia Justified objection by Prooocu-
tion can bo clarified oaaily. Mr. HcH-ncy dooan't know thia fact
that wo aakod tho Tribunal in writing to allow Profoaaor Vollhardt
oa an oapoit witnoaa to pornlt bin aa on except ion to bo in court
during tho examination of Bockor-7rays eng, Schaofor, and Boiglboock.
Thia roquoat by dofonao waa grantod in writing by thia High Tribunal.
Poaaibly that doclaloa of tho Tribunal ha» not ceno to Mr. McHonoyle
knovlodgo.

Mr. McHcnoys X hovo no further quoetiona.

3T JTOGB SiKRIHO:

Doctor, con you etato for tho lnfoxnation of tho Tribunal
whether ao far aa you know thoro la any food value in tho preparation
Berkatit?

i. An actual nouriahing valuo la not containod in Borkatit aa
for oa X know cbout ita ccnpoaitlon. X bolievo that initially if was
s ado of taaatoo# and than later on otfcor typo a of augar woro uaod,
but I don't think thia waa of any actual nouriahing valuo.

Q, . if it should appear that thoro ia acne food value or noui*-


3 Jun»-A •KMMnii (Frank)

Oourt l

isfcaect Taluo In tho preparation them would It not bo iwo that error
an oxtondod period of tlno tho oxporlncBtol auhjoot tdio was taking
Borkatlt would bo placed In the oaoo poaltloa as would an «®erinontnl
aubjoct who was glron foot but doprlrod of all foroa of watort

1 . If Bcrkatlt cron did haro ono to 3 oalorloa thee It wouldnlt
pi aj any pert ot oil alnco that would bo without any Inf or once mveo
tho dnngoroua quality of ooa water which la ita dehydrating quality.

I would noror nor or daro to oontlnuo a too wot or caparlnont with
Bcrkatlt longer than a ooa water oaporlnont without Borttatlt. That U,
to tny, not baycuM tlx ditfs.


C47C


Court 1

June 3-A-12-l*KD-Xarrov-3rovn.

5Y TEE PRESIDENT:

Q. Professor, taeae aabjects upon unco you conducted an
experiment In /our Institute were very excellent subjects for
such an experlnent were they not?

A. They were char oterired by the f->ct that the;.* were
nedlcal sen who understood tne meaning and that I oould rely
on them. Physically, they certainly were no better-condl-
tlonod, according to the photographs at least, then those
rather well nourished experimental subjects.

4 . I was not thinking so much of their pnysloal condi¬
tion, but they wore non who wero interested in thl6 work,
uere they not?

A. Yes.

4. The results of the experiment - each upon hlmsolf
and upon each of his associates - would be Interesting to
or oh one, would It not? Is that not true?

A. I would osaunj so, yes.

4. Eaoh no wes entirely controlling his own partici¬
pation in the experiment, was he not?

A. Yes.

4. If, at any time, any one of the subjects felt that
tho conditions which he was undergoing In the experiment
were beoonlng too heavy for hlo, he would have been relosod
from further oprtlcipatlon upon his request, would ho not?

a. Ho doubt he would have reported and ho would have
said "I want to step out. This Is too bad for me."

4. That's what I meant. He w^uld have asked to be

released end he would .eve been Immediately released?^ Well,

Is It or is it not a fa,t that a human being will voluntarily

nderuo hunger, tnlrst, pain, discomfort, and stand It

better when he knows that he is doing It under his own

vlltion with a scientific objective, than a person of

G479


Court 1

June 3-*»-19-2-HD-Karrow-3rovn


equal phyeloal condition will stand such an experiment when.
Insofar as he Is ooncerned, he has no personal Interest
whatsoever?

A, No doube that Is correct and I am perfectly oonvlnced
that Professor Epplnger tried everything he could In order
to obtain such volunteers. He w: s cost discomforted through
the fact that these experiments were carried out In Dachau.

He would much rather have seem then oarrled out In Vienna
on hi a own scholars or students but, at that time, there
weren't any students any more. They had all boon oalled up,
and nodloal officers were very scarce so that there was no
question of obtaining volunteers. Hence, In this very tenso
and difficult time, no subjects could bo found to ccrry out
such a series of experiments ae was planned here In a
hospital or cllnlo or any kind. It would have been better,
more praotlcal and more sensible, by all means. If tho
experiments had been carried out at that time upon medical
students, but, unfortunntoly, that was Impossible.

ft* perfaced your statement. Doctor, by saying that

Dr. Epplnger had this sentiment. How do you know that?

A. Because, during the oonferenoo, it was mostly Prof.
Epplnger who was In favor of these experiments being made
and, since Professor Epplnger had earmarked his favorite
pupil Belglboeck, for the carrying out of these experiments,
it la a matter of course that Epplnger would have llkod
nothing better than that these experiments had been carried
out under his own control In Vienna.

ft* * ou ore assuming that Epplnger would have felt as
you would have felt under similar circumstances, Is that
correct?

A. I know that all those who were interested In these

experiments were making efforts to find places where theee

CJXO ,

. _


Court 1

June 3-*«t-13-3-Hi)-Xarrow-3rown.


experiments oould be carried out in a military hospital on
soldiers or convalescent patients or other persons, but,
unfortunately, everything turned out to be Impossible.

You can only. Imagine the situation If you know how every
hospital bed and every doctor was being utilized In this
tins. That w s the finsi poriod of the war.

You prefaced this last statement by saying "I know",
"ow, how do you know? 3y any other method than assuming
that these gentlemen would have felt as you lhlt?

A. Mo, I recollect that I have rend that In ons of the
reports, that one had tried to carry out the experiments
jlsowhore and that one had come across locked doors evoi'y-
w.-^re. for Instance, one had Brunswick In mind, I know
that accidentally, the *lr hospital at 3runewlck, and that
was impossible. Thus, all lnq.lrles had no 6 atlvo answers.

%. I gathered from your cnsier to one of my Questions
a short tln^ o©o....I would llXe to return to that subject

. ..that a person of Intelligence will endure moro

discomfort, pain and suffering, pursuing a voluntary
experiment which he knows he can terminate at any moment
chan a person, prob-bly of less intelligence, would display
upon ‘ndergolng an experiment whloh he could not stop at
his own volition. Is that correct?

A. Veil, there isn't any question that, for those
persons in Dachau, the only talt v*a the good food before
and afterwards and the cigarettes that they had been promised.
Th.-t w-sn't poa lble In the case of ay doctors. They did It
because they were Interested and, of course, that w. old
h"vo been by f n r the most preferred solution If It uia been
possible.

And, lnsof-r cs the aibjecte at Dachau, If any of them,
at any time durln- tee course of the experiments, believed


Court 1

June 3-A-13-4-KD-Karrow-3rown.


that the pain or discomfort or whatever It might be called,
which they vere suffering »*>uld not be compensated by
cigarettes or other promises wr.loh had been made to them,
that they would be very rnxious then to be reler.sod from
prosecution of that experiment. Is that true?

a. Certainly. Thrt's why quite a number of experimen¬
tal subjects oeoretly drrnk water, because the strlot
pursue nco didn't please then too much.

’•fell, unlike the experiment-’! subjects In your
Institute, thoso subjects would not be particularly lnter-
ostod In the result, w^uld they? They had no clcntlflc
Interest In the result, did they?

*. No, no. None at all. None whatever.

Tri£ PAi8ID2NT: Are there nny furhter questions to the
wltnoss.

3Y DR. TIPP (Dofonse oounsol for the defendant
Bocker-Froyseng:)

Q. Professor, tho stntononts made by the prosecutor
during the oroas-exaaln tlon unfortunately neoesaltato
certain clarifications.

First of all, might I ask you one thing? In your
direct examination you have, of course, emphasized tho
purpose of these experiments. Now, would you finally
say Just once again what was to bo aohieved by means of
those experiments carried out at Dachau?

a. The situation was the following: After Schaefer
had developed the Idea of his excellent drug, the question
of sea water was solved. Unfortunately, Hr. Berkc arrived
with his taste corrector and, becr.use of very euoorficlnl
experiments carried out by Colonel Slrcny, the Technical
Department spoke In favor of this drug which, from the
medical point of view was not suitable beoause tho


CLQ2


Court 1

June 3-*-19-5-H3-Xsrrow-3rown.

dehydrating effect of sea water wee not being eliminated
or it. Thus, a oonfllct orose between sediclne and
technique, and the teohnlclans had the greater force, they
had to grant the funds and they said "The raw materials
for ’•'o feat It were too difficult to obtain. It is easier
for as to nanufrcture the Berks affair." Consequently,

:hls meeting cooc about during which the two leading experts
spoko in favor of carrying out these experioonte although
every one of thoa know tha: Vofatlt, of course, oould
not bo be ten. Ait It might h'-.ve beon that Berkatlt too
hrd a certain advantage over ordinary Sda water nd, as
I have said, 2?plngor was thinking of the possibilities
that the o.-ncentrrtlng owors of the kidneys might some¬
how be lnoreased. However, the experiments didn't give n
definite supportive evidence of that, but thoy did have an
la.'ortont result - not only the obvious result, namely,
that the ochaef-r water was superior to onythin Q else -
but, also, the observation that the kidney onn, never-
:hsloes, oonoentrate solt so astonishingly well up to the
concentration of sen water that, In futuro, on- could give
Che advice that In oases of sea dlstross. Instead of being
completely thirsty, one could rather, drink 500 co of eon
water end, In tn t annner, lncroase the salt contents of
the blood but would not nrvo to be afraid of dehydration
q lte so quickly.

.'ell then, Professor, if I understood you oorrectly,
It w s the ala of the ex^erlaent to estobllsh whether
3 rkctlt, -fter all - probably In preotlcal c'-ses <$f
sea distress - ought not to bo Introduced? Is that correct
so far?

a. Yes, that Is quite correct, since the aviator
w uldn't be quite so ourdened by It as by Tofatlt.

8403


Court 1

Juno 3-s»-13-6“3>-iarrow-3rown


G. Then ney I put another question to you?

According to what you have said, these experiments
actually materialized since the technicians had the stronger
influence, as you put it, and since they were being
supported by Professor Spplnger and Professor rioubner?

a. In not quite that sense. That possibly they
might have gone over to the technicians 1 side, but thoy
did oonsidor it appropriate not to deprive Berkatit of all
its useful purposes.

G. Veil, then, if it hadn't been deolded, during
that meeting, to carry out experiments - of course, this
is a purely hypothetical quostion, Professor - what oould
you say on the basis of the details? What would have
happened? Would WOfotlt or Berkatit have boen introduced
in practlco?

A. I'm afraid tho technicians would have boon victor¬
ious. Thoy would hevo been victorious over deoonoy.

G. So you mean that, without those experiments,
berkatit would, nevertheless, havo boon lntroduood in
practlco?

a. Yea, I believe so.

G. And you went on to say, Professor, that tho
admonition of water with Berkatit, which is equal to aoa
water, would have done serious injury in prnotloo and,
provided it went on over six days, would load to doath?

a. It would have serious oonsequonoos after going-
on for over six days and would most certainly lead to
death after.

G. And you are making those conclusions on tho basis
of final cases of shipwreck?

A. Yes.

CUiil*


Court 1

June 5-«-lS-7-HD-K?rrow-Brown


Then, may I put the final question. In this
connection, the Chief of Che rfedloal Department, General
mr.rtlus, and his assistant, Becker-rreyseng, would have
boon actually Irresponsible If this development had boon
used without the action being token? In fact the only
possibility for preventing the introduction of Borkatlt was
t achieve that experiments were carried out?

a. It appears that It seamed to be the opinion
among responsible persons that, considering the increase
iu air crashed, one ought to deal r.pidly with tho question
of shipwrecked personnel '•nd achieve the solution.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, I oust again ask you to
prooeod a little more slowly. It Is rather difficult for
tho reporters to follow. <tsk your questions a little noro
slowly and the witness will not answer tho question until
the Interpreter la finished with tho tronslatlon of tho
question.


C4C5


3 June •i?“rf-«X-2G-l-Maloy- (Pranks)

Court No. 1

Q. Professor, you Just said that It was the aln
of the export to clarify whether Borkatlt night not pos¬
sibly after all bo Introdueable, consequently what was
further aln, supposedly It was to find out how long
3crkatlt can b« tolerated during the experlaent ?

A. How long sea water with or without Berkatlt
can be tolerated.

3. In this oonneotlon, Professor, I night ask you,
have you got the sea vator doouaent book bofore you?

I will have It sent ovor to you. Hay I ask you, Profoeaor,
to turn to Doouaent 177, Exhibit 13*. whloh is tho
nlnutee of tho oonforonoo, tho ono Hr. MoHaney had put to
you, It is page 12 of the doouaent book; do you have It?

A. Yes.

'J. There is ono ouostlon I want to put to you with
roferonoo to that prosont test. At tho botton of pago 1
of that doouaent you will find tho description at the end
of tho leoturo aado by Dr. Booker-Troysang, and It here
says that the Chief of tho Xolloal services Is oonvlnood
that if tho Berkatlt nothod Is usod, daroago to health
is to be expooted not later than six lays after taking
Berkatlt, and will lead to death not later than 12 days
after; Professor, according to the underlying Idea of
the experiments which you have displayed I should like
to ask you: to what did your stateaent refer? to tho
experiments or to the case of an aotual shlp-wrooked
person.

A. I would assuae that this applied to tho praotloal
case of an actually ship-wrecked person, since at that
stage there had been no talk cf experiments. They were
only really noticeable In this expostulous report.

C456


* Juno *17-j«-fiX-20-3-Maloy- (Franks}
Court 1


4. Vo will ooae to that, Profesaor, but In tho
same document the Proeeoutlon pointed out the supposed
planning of experiments suoh as contained heroin and on
page 2 of the dooumont under Figure 2 he talked about
the ec-oalled duration of oxperlaents of 12 days wlthBer-
katlt; first of all I would llko to ask you, Professor,
tc look it page * of the same doounent and particularly
the end of that page, and It says thore, "The Commission
for the determnation of conditions for the experiments
to bo carried out Is oenposod as follows: profossor 2ppln-
gor of Vienna, representative of the Chief of the Medloal
Service of tho Air Foce, representative of the Gorman
Air Ministry (RUL), representative of tho High Command
of tho Navy (OXM)."

If you look at that page, Prcfosscr, nnd then consi¬
der the serlos of experiments vhloh supposedly had been
discussed during the oonferonoo of tho 20th, can you
then imagine that during that meeting of the 20th exper¬
iments had boon doolded upon as according to this record,
whereas as we have Just read the oomnlaolon only met
later, namely on the 25thT

a. Tho whole picture la that as painted by tho
layman. No medical man would have written that page, —
you can sec from tho report that it was sluod togothor,
and I can assure you that according to my knowledge that
humane person as Professor Schaefer, would never havo
given hlB consent to a duration of 12 days with sea
water,

Q. May I Just ask you a final question. Professor *—
TH£ PRS3IDENT: You are still continuing too fast,
Counsel.


C487


* Juno 47-*-^-20-VMaioy-(franks)
Court 1


DR. TIPP: Yea, Hr. President.

Q. Then may I put tho final question to you, Profea¬
sor, do you consider it probable considering the aim of the
experiments to have mentioned that a duration of 12 days
would make sense at allf

Mm It would be quite sonsoloss, absolutely sonsoloss.

DR, 71??: In chat case I haven't any furthor questions
on this particular point. I beg your pardon, yea, I do. I
have one mere final question.

q. *a you stated, you yourself havo soon tho original
records of these experiments, would thoso records show any¬
thing to the effect that during the aotual experiments any
type of torture was committed or that any lnoldonts ooourrod
which could be described as crimes against humanity?

I haven't found anything like that at all, aid what
is aoro I oonaldor It absolutely out of the question. Tho
duration cf tho experiment Is too short. During tho six
days It Is humanly no possible that any tortures oould be
connected with It that you oould dosorlbe as lnhunano.

q. ^nd thAt the exporlmonts didn't last beyond six
day* that Is something which beoamo abundantly clear from
tho records?

A. Yes.

DR. TIPP: Thank you very much. No furthor questions.

DR. ST3IN3JJ2R: Stelnbauor for the dofondant Stogel-

book.

BY DR. STSINBAJSR:

has

q. Professor, since the prosecution not stepped

down I au6t ask you some more questions; you nave been
shjwn photographs, some of which of oourse, after consider¬
able conferences with medical offloes, will bo chosen by


C4&i


S June 47-.*-a2_20-4-i(aloy-(Franks)
Court 1


no and shown tc the Tribunal; is It your Impression that
these people, - as a witness maintained with reference to the
transport from i/elaar to Munich, - would not have survived
such a transport?

Wo, this Is net qy impression and all you would
have to do Is look at the trains and clrcumstanoos under
which people travel from Hunloh to Frankfort today.

to could havo put those photographs together ao
they would havo boon favorable to the Prosooutlon as well

as tc ourselves; the Prosecution told you to look at FI sure

5, How let no put a question, you look at that photo and
tell no; Is thore not a possibility that thero would bo
distortion and that the faoo would show pain when pooplo
aro given an Injection?

Yes, that is plain and nost people contort their
faoos during the aotuol lnjeotlon and show that contortion
coro q.lckly oven before the lnjeotlon takes plaoo.

<1. Then look at the picture and I ask you this quostlon
la It not a technical fact that In hypertonic solutions Just
ao woll na in thirst it Is the laok of water, and that this
question of water shortage is the doolslvo question medically
spoaklng in connection with that quostlon?

<%. I thought I had unmistakably said that sea water
endangered tho llfo because It drains water from the systora
of tho body. It is a condition of dehydration which arlsos
because of salt and this salt produces doh/dratlon without
salt.

Q. That fights tho expression In tho faoo.

a. Not quite. I told you =7 son had quite an emaciated
face after the sea water experiment, so that everybody sot

a big shock. But after 24 hours that disappeared.

G489


* June 4 ?-A-AX-2&-3-Xsloy-( Ft* onkt)

Court 1


Q. The Prosecution first of all node the gypsies iio
of whoa I told you in Frankfurt, end now thoy would Ilka
to revive thea and therefore thoy want their nanos;
could you have given your expert Opinion, Profoasor, If you
h-.d no naco, would it have altered It In any way? '

k. I wouldn't have looked for the nanos. Thoy are
quite lavatorial to co.


So to you as a nodical nan the only deolalvo factor
la what theao oharta will ahow to you?

A. But of courao.

Consequently, you alao hoard fron no that we were
concernod with volunteers?

A. Yos.

Q. Might Dr. Marx have given you any more dotal la than
vo?

A. No, no.

DR. 37iIN3««U-£R: Thank you. I have no further quoatlona.


Tri£ ?KZ31DSii?: DOoa the Praeeoutlon doalro to oroaa-
axanlno thla witness upon tho quoatlona brought out?

hR. KoHaNS*: The Tribunal, please, we have no further
quoatlona. Havovor, olthor after tho witness lo oxouaod or
right new I would like to brine «P tho quoatlona of the
naves of these ex^arlnantal eubjoots, the Proaooutlon has
boon put in aonewhnt of an onbarraaalng position because
tho witness has testified all day long about dcounonts which
are not a port of the reoord. On the notion cf tho Prosooutlon
yoatorday tho Tribunal, as I understood it, roqulrod tho
production of tho docunents about which this witnoss would
pass hla opinion on, wheroupor. aoae purported original drafts
voro produced, on approximately half of which ponclllod names
had been erased, by whoa or when the Prosecution does not


3490


* Juna 47- .r- .JC- 20- 6-Kaloy- (Franks)

Court 1

xnow. Today soae original documents vero produced half of
which wore roaoved froa one cover and insortod in a second
booh here. I am advlsod and bolievo that the first book at
one tlae contained the naaes of the experimental subJcots.

I think that it is only -proper that the dofonso oounsel bo
required to produce the original docunonts and original form
without any deletions or changes whatsoever; that aoroovor
the dofonso oounsel be required to produco immediately thj
nanos of the cxperiaontal subjects which thoy have and thoy
be furnished tc the Prcseoutlon. Vo can go to corjsidorablo
trouble, I suppose, and by use of an infra-red aaohlne have
the naaes raised which have been erased froa the original
doouoents. However, we don't oaro to go to that trouble if
wo con avoid it. I also don't wish to pursue this nattor too
far, but wo understand that the dofonso has those names and
I think thoy are required to produoo then. I night also add
that the photographs of the exporlnental subjects which wore
also subcitted to this expert and fornod a part of hlo
opinion wore submitted to you as photostat ooplos, and show
nothing but theoover of the plcturo. The Prcseoutlon would
also bo lntorostod in knowing what appoara on the back Of
the original pictures.


04.91


3Junc-;.-iW21-l-:fcehan (Inti Frank)

Ccart No* 1


DR. ST3INBAU2R ; Your Honors, it is very regrettable
th°t the expert had to be heard before ay case come up, since
he wanted to depart. All the agitation of the Prosecution then
would have been superfluous.

You can rs6t assured that I would not have felt sc safe if
I had not shown the list to Professor Alexander. It was not
too clover cf him net to copy the list as he- had it. It is
my privilege as defense counsel tc decide whether I shall
submit it or not, bet I am net going to have the Prosecution
force me to do so. Ent, in order to express my respect for
this Tribunal, I shall do so at the point when it is most
beneficial to the difense cf ay client. Jhen everything has
boon cleared up, then the list thet the expert did not
have '‘nd which did not h^vo any basis for his expert opi¬
nion will be submitted. I rm afraid that these gontlcmon
will have to bo patient until to-morrow, then they will
see "nd hear everything that they wont to see and heer to¬
day.

JR* UcKANEF . The prosecution has no control whatso¬
ever on the way in which the defonse puts in his case, but I
think wc pro untitled to hrve thv. records on which the ex¬
pert baaed his opinion, be have not received the original
cf the documents which contained the list cf th6 experimen¬
tal subjects. While certainly it is Dr. Stoinbaucr's privi¬
lege to put in his case any way ho sees fit, when original
d.cumcnts aro submitted, they should be submitted in their
original form without changes or deletions cn same, ’fc re¬
quest original or phctcstntic copies. We make available
our records to him when they go in and we have gone tc con¬
siderable trouble on several occ n sicns tc have original do¬
cuments, Karl Brandt's for example.

QL92


3 June-..-FL-21-2-Meehan (Int* FTr-.nk)
Court No. 1


Now, it is his ri#*t tc pat in his evidence as he wills
but there also exists the ri^it of this Tribunal tc require
the presentation _f evidence which is known tc tee in the
possession cf any jna. Just as defense counsel frequently
asked th6 Tribunal and the Frosecuticn to submit particular
documents which they knew we had.

I don't want tc be disagrcablo ebout my of this. Wc
tried new for two days tc get the names end have not boon
successful. It 1 b no pleasure fer oo to be put in this po¬
sition.

THE PaESIIEIiT i The witness who testified today was
called out of order f«r his apparent necessity :t being
in hurnborg. Hiring his examination he was shown dccumonts
tc which reference was made, he wrs also permitted to tes¬
tify concerning the documents even though they woro net
prosented in evidence. When they arc- efferod in evidence
on behalf cf the defendant if they appear in rajtilated
form or are not complete, they should then be cbjectod
tc and if they nr^ net submitted in evidence, then this
testimony given this afternoon would not be ccnsidorod by
the Tribunal.

If the Prosecution wants to be furnished with any of
the documents, I sugg-st that the pr.s«cuti«n make written
application tc the Tribunal, stating just what is desired,
h*nd it to the Tribunal end the Tribunal will rule on it.

The Tribunal will be in recess until 3;30 tomorrow
morning.

(The Tribunal adjourned at 1535 Hours until o&;3C Hours
4 June 1947.)


-»


G493


e. June 47_M_FjC-i-l_PrincAU (lnt», 3r~vn)
C-mrt I


Official Tr-nscript of the Aacrioan Kilitary Tribunal
In the setter of the United States of America against
Earl Brandt, et al, defendants, Bitting at Murribcrg,

Geroasy, on 4 June 1947, 0930, Justice Beals presiding.

3Z M A R S H AL: Persons In the courtro.a will please find their

scats.

Military Tribunal I is now In session. God save the United Statos
of Acerica and this honorable Tribunal. There will bo order In the
e-urt.

THX PRISIHi'?: Mr. Marshal, have you escortalnod If the defend¬
ants are all present In court!

TEE MARSHAL: May It ploaso ymr Honor, "11 the defendants aro
present In tho o^urt.

THE PRSSXIUTi She Secretary-General win show for the record
that the defendants aro all present In c-nirt.

Tho record will also sh'w that the witness, Trans Vollharrtt, was
cxeusod froa further attendance boforo tho Tribunal last evening, hie
tcstlnony having boon close’. With tho defendant, Conrad Schaofor, on
tho stand, counsel nay prrecod. Tho witness Is rcslndod. ho Is still
under oath.


m. XCURAT SCHAiTSR _ Rosunod
T1STCT IXAMXilATXGH (Continued)


3T m. FSLCKKAXI:


<4 Dr. Schaefer, tho day bof-'ro yesterday wo wore discusclng


attributed to you that in the last eonforcnco on
c^uld have done nore than you did. Let no

you havo d.cnc to prevent the experiments

s>

they were t* *o carried, "ut on c'-ccn-
of tho Luftwaffe Hrspital In Brunswick.^
done nothing else because the chair, of coaaand
v *uld have been the s^ne; namely, through Dr. 3cckcr-Trcyscng, Tt. Mcrtt,


SU9L


4 Jur.c 47-HJjC_i_2_Priaeau (Inti« 3r-vn)

C-art I

dcpartoent chief, and thee Dr. Kahnt, chief of staff, end, finally,
frofessor Schr-eder hiasclf. Dr. BeckerJrcyseng end Dr. Morte were
theasolves prossnt at this conference and took pert in it ell together.

I could act hare cede rcconnendatlona to Dr. Schroefler directly because
I should here had to hare the pornieeion rf the doportaont chief to do
io. Moreover, Dr. Schrcoder testified here that ho would not allow
hlneolf to be influoncod in any way in hie decieicae.

<i Xt is you opinion ‘then, Dr. Schaefor, that if you had expressed
7-ur aispivisgs to Dr. Morts, Dr. Xcrti would have eaid to yout "Thie
is co^letely unneceeeary. I know all about thie. I nyeclf wee at the
conference and you know that X approved all thoeo nattore. -
A <<oite eo.

And for thie reason Dr. Morte would c-ntinue, *1 cannot have
a report on this natter eubaitted t« ny superior, Dr. Schmcdcr."

A Vpiltc so.


395


4 J une 47-K-PjC j2JLlm90 (int., Brown)

C-urt I

I ebould like t* turn now to Dscuaer.t 35. ft It is to receive
Ixhlblt *39. It'a «a pago 119 of the aecr-nd. ("ocuacat hook. I should
like to h/ivo It put to you. Kindly read It aloud, Doctor Schacfor.

A I quote:

"The substance gent In..-.."

«i (Interrupting) Dr. Schacfur, please reading the heading also.

A Thin la a lettor fron Dr. Schuatcr when I had naked to teat
Serkn.tit la -lta capacity to rotaln eodltai chloride.

<4 It vaa aald that the aalt la tho Vdy wag aaalated la lta paa-
aago through the body by the lngcatlon "f Bcrkatlt. la chcnlcal terna
thlo la to aay that Borkatlt foraed a conpouad with tho aalt and thug
aalt la aon water waa carried thr-ugh the body In thla conpound without
doing rey Injury to the body. Waa that aoj

A Toa, that waa Berka'a thccry?

<4 And you opposed thla theory?

A Tea.

«i You, In 'thcr words, waatod. to prars that thla a"lt fran cen
w«tor foraed n" c-ap-W. with Bcrkntltt

A That la ae.

H An' y-u e-Missioned Dr. Schuator to lnvcatlgate thla swttcr
what w-’o ho to Investigate?

A Eo waa to provo that tho aalt catorod Into nc compound with
Borkatlt and that no empound waa f'-racd.

And when did y~u giro thla aaBlgnaont to Dr. Schuatcr?

A Roughly, the 20th of Hoy. And thla la tho nnawer to it, of
1 -uno 1944. I believe it la ncceaaary for ac only to tend tho lnat
sentence:

"The alight alteration :f the tpcclfic rcalatanco ie duo pnsaun-
"bly to the incroaao in the nuaber -f aolceulea in tho solution. Ho
o'=rlcx fixation therefore took place."

<i Dr. Schaefer, I ra having this rend aloud r-nly in 'rd.er to aok
7 - whether, pftcr the 25th of Kay, when you caw all you hepe of prevent-


4 June 47-3t-jTjC_2_2_2errcv (lr.t», 3r-wr.)
Court I


1 = 4 : these experisents ccslng to naught, you still <*ld eoacthlng fur¬
ther la this setter?

A I forva.rded this letter to the Medical Inspectorate. That
was all.

k This letter dees prove that your opinions wore c-rrcct In
this natter?

1 Yes, it d~es.

k After the conference rf the 25th of May did jru spoak to Dr.
Becker Jr eyseny again?

A Yes, a few weeks thereafter.

Vhat was said?

A I asked his what had e-ac of this natter. Ec told ac ho
dldn$t Mn'i* either. Arparer.tly the vholo sattcr was elsply being
dropped.

at that stayc that scesa to hrvs bocn a correct opinion be¬
cause, as we kn-w fr-s the d-cusent books of the prosecution, no de¬
cision was reached lr. the natter at this tine. I ha.vc already proved
that Dr. Schaefer had nothin? to do vith ord.crlny oxrcrlnintB clthor
with Borkatlt • r Mofatit. I should near like to put In D-.euacnt 36.
This win bo Inhibit JO. Page 120. This Is an affidavit by Karl
Thoodor Lcsse. Ha says the following. I shall read the first para¬
graph.

r <fhcn, in the suc-xr '1 19*1, I reported to Dr. 3ciglbocck, I
was Inf' rood that two neth-ds for uakiny e»lt-watcr potable voro t"
be tested t ar<* t*at I w-o to carry o U t ’■art of the chosical research
work in the laboratory. I *aa informed about the effects of tho
effects of the Schaefer neth'd. The Berka acthod was a secret process
and was not revealed, even later."

0

1 shall r.-v read the third paragraph fr r o the end:

"Tho course rf the cxr.erlncnts showed n- syspt-sa of Illness due
to 6 alt water s*dc potable according to Schaefer's aethod."

And. tho last sentence:


C497


4 June 47_V_J j.C_2_3_Xprr"v (lnt»j 3ro#ni
C-urt I

"Dr. Schaefer was ft-t present at these tests. I as unaware of
any sufecstlcnj nade by hl=."

This d-orient further corroborates that Seheofer hinself dirt
r. t t»fcc partiln the expcrincr.ts and that the experisents with Wof P _
tit produced ft- pathological synptons.

Uov, I rust ••lscuss a doeuaent put ia by the prosecution. This
Is the affidavit cf Dr. Schaefer hinself, *0. 474, &afclblt 131, Doeu-
cent Bo-k 5, pa#;e 6. I nust yo Into this doeuaent because the prose¬
cution asserted in the session -f the 16th -f Decc-.bcr that this affi¬
davit sh-ws perfectly clearly Schaefer's full kr.-viedre of these natters
anJ sh-ws what part he took In every conference that took place.

Dr. Schrefer, because the pr-Bceuti'n has put this d-cuncnt In
os one that Incriminates jru, I nust ask y-u, first -f all, In yenoral
d- y-u c-nstrue this d-cuncnt «s an lncrlnlnatlon of y<urtolf and ns
lRdicatl-n that y-u bear responsibility for the expcrlnonts that then
to-k olnco lr. D-chauT And. would y>u like to assert the sane n-w ro-
cardlne tho oth 0 r co-defcnd.-ntst

A H-, n-t at all.

*4 Is it not so that, on the c-ntrary, when you Inters yated y-u
descrlbod hiw it was that precisely you were not responsible f-r the
expcrlnonts?

A Tos.

^ Dr. Schaofcr, If y-u say that, hrwever, I nust lo-k Into
vhy that opj-lon of yours is not set f-rth In this affidavit of yours.

*• nust po through this affidavit point by p-lnt. T-u have the d~cu-
rnent before y-u?

A Tcs, I do.

H Let us first take 73. It pays here:

"In May, 1944, I v PS ordered by the office of the Chief of the
•fedieni Srrv'cc of the Iaxftwrffe t- attend a neetir.f called f'r the
'ur-^ge -f c-nsistiiv further research on rvOcine ecp water potable.*


C49C


f- Jc-e *7-H_TjC- 3 . d . F prrw (Ir.t,, Sr-vn)

C-urt 2

Is this statement correct?

A I should say that It Is badly f-raulated. S-» row research
v^$ to he considered. It was alaply to he decided whether Bcrkatit
or V-f*tit was to he the preparation Introduced.

Q If I understand e-rrectly, the Idea of carrying rn further
exrorlacnts was discussed by ether participants In the conference,
art by jru, during the c-urse of the c-nfercr.cc. Is that correct?

A Yes.

<i Then It states further. I skip mo sentence, cr rather I
don't skip a sentence:

•Present were BeckerJreyeciv. Bcscireh Advlsftr to Schrocdcr...

Scv, Is that dosimatlm correct?

A In Tlcv pf what I have heard here. It does not appear to be
correct. At any rate, It can load to confusion with the so-callod
•consultants."

Vi tfov, I'll take the next sentonee:

"It was decided at this retting tr omduct experiaents on con¬
centration eaap 1 mates with the Bcrka process nltlvufh It was fcno-
raliy admitted that the Bcrka sea water process sorl-usly lnpalro tho
health after six days and causes death after twelve days at the latest."

Dr. ochaofer, what d« jru understand, first 'f all, under the
phrase "it was decided"? Va 8 * decision reached on this nattor? W*s
there a v-tc on it?

A K-, there was no rote on It.

Vi The-, how should It be phrased, here In this affidavit?

A It should say that me -f the participants in the conference
aade the propose’.

Veil, but that doesn't decide anything.

A Bo, and that's -hat I said durirr ay Interrogation. That one
of the persons attending a«fc the proposal, end then I wae told: "Very
v cll. Ve'll write the proposal was made and adopted without a vote."


3*99


4 Jure 47-X-7jC-2_5-Xerrov (tnt. f Brcwn)

Court I

But that Bce-.s to ac to be even lea* correct end, nore*ver, the word
•decided" did n-t lncrirlnetc re in nay vey bcceuBO it ell depends
open who we a in e position to reke decisions*


35CO


4 Jure *7- v J\lC_3-l- ,, eloy (let., Brown)

Court I

q In other word* the vord ■decided" doee not incriminate yon
because It depends on who had a right to rote?

A Tee, that le to.

q Did you have the right to rote, end did you tell the interro¬
gator T

A Yeo, and the interrogator told ne that would be decided by an
expert of the Luftwaffe organl?atlon.

q Mow it eaye further, "Although it wee generally edaltted that
the Berkatit eeawater proceee, although it wee generally admitted
that the Berkatlt eeawater proceee eerloualy impairs the health?"

Did you etate it to during yeur interrogation?

A Tee, but that doee not refer to an eyperiaont but to practical
caoeo of oca dlatrCee.

q Too, and it ie for t v *t roaaon I aok you if you ehoec this form
during your 1 -terrogatlon youraclf?

A Mo, that formulation vae proeented to ae in ita final fora.

q In that caoo y«u must explain tone greator length how it
hanpenod that thie formulation wao choetn; it couldn't hero been cho-
oon unleeo thore had been some dlocuoeion with you boforo hand?

A I was ahevn Ibcusent MO 177 and elnco I had only the vague-at
eort of recollection of the whole aatter I baaed what I aald on what
wee in thie document MT 177 .

q How of*cn were you interrogated, Lr. Schaefer, in how many
cccelone was thie affidavit drawn up: plcpsi describe that in greater
lorght?

A I was interrogated t~o or three ticca *r.d on the baele of
these interrogations this affidavit w* 3 drawn up.

q Mp* i* drawn up in your presence?

A So, it wrs submitted to sc in its final fore.

q What do you have to s.-y about this formulation?

A T>*crc is ar obvious confusion here between conditions that
arc to be expected in an actual case of shipwreck or sea -Metres*, and


0501


4 Jure 47-XJjC_3jfe_M*loy (iht., 3rcvn)

Court I

any experiacntt that night hi carried out.

<4 Tou say then that in the foraulaticn in the affidavit there
it e cenfutien ahont what you said about the proposed experiacntt rr.d
vkat you said about the dangerousnees of the BerJea drug ft tuch, if it
it uted in an actual cate of tea dietreat without being tested*

A let.

% And you tec that particularly clearly in this scntcnco which
reads: "It was decided—" tuch and tuch, although it was generally
adait’ed that tho Berkatit seawater process torloualy i'npairs health,
ate.: now what it the incorrectnete you tee here?

A The incorrectnete lies in tho fact that in practical caect of
tea distress t*c sh'rwrcckcd person drinks seawater in unlimited quan¬
tities vrter the taste of which has boon improved by Berkatit, and dcot
not have the will-power to drink only small quantities of the seawater.
The ruantltles that he consunes becos© larger and larger until they
give grounds for tho apprenh*ntions regarding death expressed in this
scntcnco.

<4 And for this r»ason you opposed Berkatit as such?

A Tes.

ti Tho experlccnto that in your opinion would not lead to these
injuries, why did you oppose then?

A Because in cy opinion they wore oooplctcly uncccssary.

<4 And in your previous interrogation you had clearly delineated
this distinction, had you not?

A Tes, I had.

And you a da it an-* want to cay today thnt that distinction of
7ours is not to be seen in this fomula.tion of the natter in this
affidavit here? #

A Tee, that is 00 .

H But your opposition tc Berkatit ao such and your oppocitlon to
*>c c-pcrincnts, did you make theoi two oppositions clear to the inter¬
rogator in your interrogations also?


G502


t June 47_M-JjC_3_3-M*loy (Xr.t., 3rovn)
Court X


A Yes, I did*

Q, And It it true In this affidavit there is nevertheless nothing
to t*at effect?

A ?ht 1 bo.

‘v You fid aor.ething shout notes you had set down?

A At the end of the Interrogation I was —

<i So, no, let ne interrupt. You said you had druwr. up a suwsery
of the various points that had occurred to you, well what happened to
that?

A I wee asked to turn In this scr»p of paper to make the record
coaplcte.

H And In thlo list were the points you considered lnportnnt?

A Yes.

^ And this piece of paper Bust still he among your papers?

A Yes, it stu«t.

% Eld you know anything about the various series of experiments
st the time you were interrogated? Yho scries of experiments that aro
dcocrlhod in Docuntnt — that Is hxhiblt 133 whether or not they are
•et down there correctly?

A : had only a vague notion about then and about what was cx-
ptrl-icntcd on.

s, However, In this affidavit It says: "It -»• further decided
that tbo husar experimental subjects were to be fed only seawater,
nrocoteod by the Bcrka ncthod, for a period of 12 days." How is it
that It la ao fomul®ted hero?

A At th-t tine I srid that thlo did net -can thar the persons
were to b$ obliged to drink oerva.tcr for 13 days.

\ However, at thle tine you were shown the inhibit 13^ and told
that tho cxperimc-.tc had been so carried out?

A Y«s, that is so.

^ You were told it hPd beer, ascertained that the cvr-«rla. -ts «crc


eo carried out?


z June 47-H-3-4-Maloy (Int.,’3rova)

Court I

A Yes,

v* And this exhibit 50 133 of 23 M«jr regarding the conference
of 19 and 20 Hey, 70 U had never previously seenT

A Ho.

h You sav It for the first time during your Interrogation?

A Yes.

h Then to sum up , this formulation wee net made in your presence
but wag a compilation and suc-ary from previous interrogations and
was put to you as such?

A Yes.

How to return to the conditions of this affidavit; now to
return to the facts thcasclvcs, it is not true you were not a member
of the cosnisslon that wr B to arrange for these experiments.

A Yes, that is so.

vi Could you have known anything precise about the experimental
series as aconsequcncc?

A The experimental series were diacussod only on the 25 of Hay.

And we have already said that you look part in this only in
part; new, lots take a look at 5o. 4 , in your affidavit, the second
sentence: “Cn orders of the office of the Chief of the Medical
Services I looked over Slrrny'e experioents personally.* So, no,-—

"I personally gave 3»cker-Jrcyscng a copy of ay report which was meant
f-r Sehroeder, and therefore Beckvr-Frcyseng and Schroeder must havo
known that the Berka method was very dangerous. Becker-Jrcyseng and
I were of the opinion that Sirany's experiments wore not complete
since they did not simulate actual conditions of a sea emergency."

It is true tha* you told Bcekcr-Jreystng and Schroeder about the usc-
lcisr.css and dangerousness of the Berka method?

A Yes, that is sc.

<4 Ifces this ouestlon have any*hind to do with the question of


; v r dr~£er'uancss of the experiment?
A Kothing at all.


4 J*-e 4’»-Jt-JjC-3-5->Uloy (Iet|J Bt-eva)

Court I

<4 But I>r. Schaefer you will edait that the wey this So. 4 la
forsuleted fires the lapreaelro thet tfcc experiments wf hclnf
celled d»8Ccrotuf

A Tea, y-u emld fet the.t lnpresalon fr*a thla fmrauletlon.


C505


4 June 47 -U-S^-i-l-:fcohe=(5ro=r.)
Coirt Ko. 1


I


r ^Dt4 ycu overlook thet fcctwhen you accepted end signed this effid-

eritT

». It is quitoeleer thet es e former kberetcry research me n cno
2 cca not woight every A nglc 'erd cal think ones vey through tho
-.-sibio aonsoquoascs of every wexd.

L't no retd to you tho lest sent one o from n unber fouri

■Beefc-.r-freyrerg end I wero of the opinion th»t Sireny's experiments
vers not ccnsunetcd slrco they did not i naktc cctuel conditions of o
sec or.ergoncy.*

D®s thet am ell the Sireny experiments -ere irc-nplcto end there¬
fore tho noocsdty existed end y~u ocUrboretcd to cerry on further
experiments?

*. No. In !=y opinion Sireny's experiments - ere not sufficient to •
errivo ct c Jud nor.t rcgrrdlrg the Berk t rothed.

\* ®ut, 3cheofcr, hero again you will edrlt th't the fnxuolr tion
hero , : ives tho impression thft you er.d SoeVtr-Freyaeng, boccuso tho
Sireny experiments wore ineonploto, nedirted f-r new experimentsi wrs
thet tho Impression you wish to give in this f-rculrtion?

No, not rt ell. I hcllovc thet oar. be soon f ren ny finel turnery,
In which I steted ny opini-n of Sirrr.y's experiments.

Let us teko o lock ct cumber six. There is discu.-eion here of
Boiglbcock's experiments in tho surrxr of 1944 rrd it soys hcroi

•Photographs end film were else presented erd verious groups of
experiments wore discussed.*

'ov f whet dc you heve to scy flout thoso phetegrepha end films, vbi&i
by tho ccy were olrccd diseussod in the interrogation or herring of
Bockcr-Prcysongi whet did ycu understeed by this rexd * films* | does
thot word •films* lr. the efdid-.vit criginitc with you7

Yes, it did.

.* *r.d whet did ycu undorsterd under the term?

I wes net thinking of nvin§ pictures, but I did roccll t’. -t
,3-nc photographs hed been projected cn c screor. r :d thought thet theso


S506


4 June 47»l-^*’-Zi»2-£Iecbtn(Brorr.)

Court No. 1

sere filna of the servo sort ts x-rcy filra, dicrositive filns thr~u~h
vhloh li£jht peases.

^urthor it reeds fceroi

•Dr. Bclglobccck else rop-rted tbrt the experiments h.d resulted
in swelling of tho livor endnervous syr^trcB.*

*• Thet neons tho nusclts acre noro sensitive, thr t expression * nervous
syr.pt cco."

°id you uso thtt phreao, "nerv-us synptoca" in ycur previous
other lntcrrogationst

-.Yes, it is qulto possible thtt I did.

Q» M*het didyou understand thet to neon?

*• I understccd thtt to neon e senertl incroeso in reflexes tnd
increcsod sensitlvoness of the nusculctca*y system.

'‘U "ell, it seys herei

•Deliriun erd nsntcl distrubcrccs olso cpp»erod."

The nerd ■deliriun" Is an error on ay pert, crlsinc fren oonAislon
cs to thirst thtt is ottondent to cholera.

U H^r did it htnperd thet you nede this oonfiieioni her did you
concern yruraolf provl-usly with the thirst »yz?tr.cm of di 'lore?

Thirst in Cholero, this thirst cts tho only thirst previously
known rwailting tree c sovere loss of vetor in the iitestines. In
cy Numbers ixiper I nedo use of this cnorlgyi thtt is whoro the
confusion arose.

s* Ho«, how about rental disturbances?

"ith this I neavt on apathy end sonnolenco.

°r. Sebeofcr, do you have onrush dinical experience, ns yru have
cot tetuclly scon these synptcos y-urself, to describe then y.~\yself?

*• No, I did not have thtt degree of clinical experience. My d iniccl
experience wesnot ltrge. I was prirxrily a labrrrtrry researcher.

*t says here furtheri

'«s c result of this zeeting, it was deoided that tho Berlcc process


3507


» June 47-tt^.^>Sfcchafc(Bo«nJ

Z -urt No, 1


wta cba^utely no use to tbe Luftwr-ffe."

H ci thet olrcya been your opinion?

Yea.

.. mt I mat to rek y.u whet the word cetna ’decided?
a. -all, thot ia cn ill dj caen expression, I ahruld here said It m.a
ascertained cr reported eedthet res the reault of the oxperinenta.

>%• -c.a nrything dedded ct ell, did you be we the right to rr-kc cny
dtcld :nj dcca the dlitery cckn declaims?
a. The a© ere tfao ailltery orfera.

New, I aero to cucber ewwon.


•It via or. open aocrot lr. tho highest codiccl circles thit the
Berko nethed woa uaed on imetea of concentration cecpa."

'het do you wont to acy obait the necning of thia phrcaoi ’An opon
aocrot in tho highest nodicol circles?"
a- The expression •open aocrot" did net crigincto with no,

U -het bed you than sold in the procoding lntcrro-rticna ao thr-.t
tho interrogator chcee this famuleticni whet did you octunlly soy
in dotoil?

a. I don't beliewt I acid anythin; in thia connection.

But it vea dlacovorcd in your interrogations first of oil thot
lrcf oaaor Sohrcedor knew of theso things, secondly thet BcckcT-Froysong
tajew of then ond who olao?


latonson*

Now hero by tho phrase "in tho highest acdicol circles" did you


apock with tho highest nodical circles, or did yoi Juat happen
to hoor tho nonaa ycu Justnonticred?

• Yea, thet ia tho phroso "in tho highest radical circles la not
Just tho one thet should hare been used. I res told if o nan like
frefesaer Schrooier wos present it vculd be perfectly )ustifleblo


to use the phreae, "in the highest nodical circles,.*
r «. And thet satisfied ycu?


Yes,


S50C


& June U7-H3 .-4-*-aiecfccr.(Brc%)
Ccurt Kc. l


in the sene =cy ycu ucro satisfied to use the ~ord ■ decided*
entirely ealdo fron the question whether you hrd the right to veto?

*• Vta,

U Now, ^r. Scheofer, I shell aua up. Ycu h -re lust steted thet
this affidavit occteics correct lnfomet len end aloe incorrect
info motion end the Incorrect lrfoxnatlca reailts Trcn the feet thet
correct etatenonte erebreught into eaaccietior. with one another,
trhich leed to a construction which you did not intendj ia thet ao?

Yes, thet is ao, but I rust any also thet et thot tine I did
net aee the full oonsequencea of this erroneous construction.

U *nd ycur own attltudo about the axperinonts ia not exjroaaed in
thie affidavit! ia ltt

-. No.

In thia affidavit only your attitude on the Berkctit “ethed ia
orp*eased ea such?

< Correa t.

HcwoTor, durinr the intorro^aticn you did exproaa your opposition
to all acperinor.ta end ecnseqaentjy deny rcaponaibiilty for all of
then?

Yoa, tut apparently I did not do that clotrly enough. teaidoa I
acw no roeson far car r ying out tho experinanta *co thore wca nothing
to investigate on -ofotit end the cxpa'lnonta on Berkotlt wore uaoleaa.

S. Novortholo ss you signed this effidevit, elthough it oontolned
portly with ycur knowledge end partly without your knowledge txny
errera. It aoya htrci

•No duress cr threat of cny kind.’

“ould you please cako e atetanent ebcut this ateteoen
subjected tc no daroaa or throet of cny kindf*


C509


t, 'I wos


Court Sc* 1

1: Jun ii?-4t-5-l-2HK-Cook (Brora)

A It is quito true I was subject to no duress or throat but if
one is suddenly put in prison there is a certain shock end ono roncta
to things thnt really don't exist.

Q Until your arrest you wore working in the Aero Medical Center
in Heidelberg, is that so?

A Yes.

Q You woro arrested on 17 Septcater?

A Yes.

Q And you woro first interrogated hero on the 27th of September?

A Yos.

Q Wore you told with what you woro charged?

A Ho.

Q Hew did tbo interrogation bogin?

A It bogan by ny being askod if I would recognize ft-ofossor
Boiglboeck*

Q Didn't you ask why you woro in custody?

A Yos, I was told that I first of nil should give infonwtion
as an oXpert.

Q ’iforo you told you had tho right to rofuso to nako ctataajnts?

A No.

Q Or woro you told th-t you could rofuso to answor mich
questions ns eight tend to incriminate ycu?

A Ho.

Q VToll, woro you nover told that?

A Only .after tte indictocnt.

Q m other words ycu voro not told that before this affidavit?

A Ho.

Q Were you told that you had tho right to have counsel?

A Only after tho indictment was tho right of counsel granted.

Q I gat ter now fro- your testimony regarding this affidavit and
all of your previous testimony that you asserted you wore net respon¬
sible for tho planning or carrying out of tho experiments for tho


8510


Court So» 1

4 Jun 47-U-S-2-£E(-*Cook (Brown)


following reason*: First, yj u considered then completely superfluous
tsd then there was the further rceaon that during the conferences you
could not say any more than you did, thet you had spiritual misgivings
about experiments in concentration cenps, that vo know particularly
froc kr*. Koenig'■ affidavit. Inhibit So. 19. Bov I should like to ask
you the following: Vhat •hsuld you have done had you received tho
order to carry out the oxperi.--.ents yourself?

A. After the conference if that had cone up I should have askod
that I neither bo put in the cccrolsslon or receive any order which had
anything to do with that.

Q- *hat is all very well, Dr. Schaeffer, but I an asking you
vhat you should have done i f you had received that ordor to carry out
tho oxporiaonts.

A. That is a hypothetical Question which is very difficult to
answer. Of course, it Is very easy for ae *o soy today that I should
not havo carried out the order.

q« Hot havo carried it out?

A. So, but vhat I really should havo dono in that caso I don't
knew. I should have made efforts to oxtract aysolf free that situation.
Hjwovor, that would have been vory difficult.

q. K jv could you have extracted yoursolf? Vhat risks would you
have run?

A. I could have reported as sick.

Q. And if you wore not actually sick?

A. I could havo given aysolf an injection In tho laboratory or
saaetking of the s-rt but that *rs Just cs dangerous itself, bocauso
after, I was adnitted to a Luft-'affe hospital it would have been easy to
fee vhat I had done and there would have been vory sorious disciplinary

conseouenccs.

q. Did you have any chance to turn to the public, let us say,
through tho pross, if you really did not feel that you could not have
a--ything to do with these natters?


Court So. 1

4 Jus 47H-5-3-I3i:ocic (Bro*;)


A. Shat »«a aulte out of the question. There w no public, not
even In peacetiae. There we* no one to turn to If you objected to
obeying a state order.

Q. And through the regular channel, through official channel?

A. There wee even less poibility there.

Q. Sow a final aueetion. Are you *till opposed to those eroeri-
cents today, after you knov the defense put up by Becker-Freyseng and
in part by Beigltoeck? Sow you knov that froc the nedical point of view
these experinents ware not dangerous or lnhunane perhaps?

A. Ay reasons nov are the sane as they were, naoely, I object to
the* on the grounds that the experinents vere superfluous; secondly,
because I nyself would not have carried out any experinents on concen¬
tration caap inoates?

Q. Shy not?

A. Because the voluntary consent of^a concentration caap lnonto
is a very relative thing.

v And for you this reaeon was sufficient to deteralne your
unwillingness to oarticlpete?

A. That is so.

DR. PLLCXkAXL’: So further questions.

THE. PRESIDES!: Arc thoro any further ouestions to be propounded
to thie witness by defense counsel?

DR. KRA'JSS: Counsel for Rostock.

3T ER. KRADSS:

Q, Dr. Schaeffer, I revert to the affidavit you signed, NO-474,
Exhibit 131, in which under So. 7 you recETk that it was an open secret

in the highest cedical ciities that the Berka aathod was used on

•

ireates of concentration cnaps. In the exclamations you cad© during
your interrogation ’ * your counsel Just nov a raiabcr of further ouos-
‘.ions he.ve bcccae superfluous. Lot so esk you the following emcetion*.
Vas the Berks aothod as such a Batter that concerned the Geraons and
that was fatiliar in general to the Gercac physiological chooists?


Court So. 1

4 v'uc 47-X-6-4-ZEM-Cook (Srown)


A. So, by no neons.

v Dr. Schaeffer, It it your opinion that for exaaole a veil-known
3arnan surgeon was inforaod about whet the 3erke orocess vns?

A. A surgeon - certainly not.

0 .

Q. Dr. Schaeffer, do. you have any concrete reasons for believing
that the defendant Dr. Eostock knev of this nrccese and of the exuerl-
aento on concentration canp lnnttes?

A. So, Z didn't knew Professor Rostock at all. I siaply knew ho
had a surgical oilsic.

Q. Is it true. Dr. Schaeffer, that the ouoted statenonts under Ho.

»

7 in your affidavit could not ani vas not intended to include Profoseor
Soetock?

A. Toe, that le so.

X. OAUSSl Thank you, Hr. Preeident. Ho further euestione.

Da. STSXXBAQZSt Counsel for Bolglboock.

£T DS, STilEA'JXfil

Q, Vitnuss, Z havo only throe short Questions to jxit to you.

First, when did you sake the acoualntance of Profeesor Bolglboock?

A. In Octobor 1944.

§

In other words, after tho cxperincntsl
A. Tos, after tho oroerlsents.

Q. The second euostioni Did Dr. Belglboock perticionto in tho
planning of the oxocrlnoats in any way, in particular, did ho take
port in the conference aeationed in Do curie nt Book 5?

A. Ho, Dr. Bciglboeck took pert in no coaferencoe.

Q, And until he wns given the order ho could not have known
anything cbout the natter?

A. Tee, that is so.

Q, And now ' It tie final Question. Did he tell you anything
about his oxocrinente on hinsoif?

A. Tes, he did.

ER. S2SI1GA£S3: Thank you.

•^513


Court So. 1

4 Jun 47-»-5-5-2ZH~Cook (Brown)

THE FrJLSlZLl^: If there ere no further cuestions by dcfer.ee
counsel, the prosecution nay cross-exaciae the witness.

Prior to the beginning of the cross-exacln/itlon the Tribunal vlll
b« In receee a few nirntes.


(A short recess «■ taken.)


h Jun— r— *— 2j¥. r.loy (Int. Von Sclaer,)
•ourt Jo. I.


T.'i iLKSHiX: JLixU r; ri ur~l I is t;ain in session.

CJC65 1XA1TCATI0N


31 :R. I-XTUT:

Q Ur, Schroeder, you ucro in attendance at the freezing con¬
ference in lcumbarg in October 19U2?

%

A Yes. On the second day of this oeeting I held a lecture.
Q >’ho ordered you to that conference?


A Goruralarzt Uartius.

Q TJho approached you and roquested that you glvo a report
at that conference?

A I received this asci^-ruont fron Professor Anthony.

Q Uoc; did Dr. Anthony happen to approach you?

A He knew that I was voicing in that field.

Q Voro you conaidcrod an export in that fiold — thirst?
A At that tiro?


5 Yes.


A I really don't boliovo so.


Q Did you have any discussions *.;ith Frofossor Anthony prior
to the dolivornnca of your loeturo or report at tho Octobor nooting?

A Yos, I talked to hia.

Q Did you have any do .“lings irith Bockor-F roysong concerning
this natter?

A Yos, I talked to 3cc!ar-y«*cysong too.

Q l.Tut did you talk to hin about?

A Tho thirst probler. in ersos of distress at soa. Ibro or


less rhat I know up to that tiro, and -hat I had porforvod an orient¬


ation axporinont.


. Q that did you think Bocker-Froysong• s position -..-ns at that
ti-r ir. reference to tho Cctchor rooting?

A I h-.d the irpr_scion tint lio had to tako care of the
business to supply billo* - etc., but that is Just a vaguo depression,
I don't, kne-; exactly,

Q "ell, vhy did you talk to hin about your report?


:-515


l Jun- - -:-2- -4°7 ('int. Von Schoen)

Court Ho. I.


A Because he happened to be present when I was talking to
Professor Anthony.

Q .ell, then when you net with Professor Anthony to deter¬
mine whether or not you would give a report at the October neeting Dr.
Beclcer-creyaeng was present also?

A Yes.


Q £»-d you hear any of tho other lectures while you wore at the


conferenco?


A Yes, on the second day I herrd tho others.

$ Did you hear Kblsloohnor's lecture?

A I cannot reooctoer Kolxloohner's lecture. I «ssu.» that it


was on a dlfforont day.

Q Did you hear Hascher's lecture?

A No. ’

Q Did you see Becker-Froyceng at the seating?

* Yoa, I saw hi.-.

Q You stated on direct oxnainetion that 3ockcr-?royson(j
was so busy that you didn't havo tho op.ortunity to talk to hin at
tho ooting; can you tell us what Iso was busying hiasclf with?

A I saw hie in conversation with other people.

Q '..'ore you able to ascortain fron faring tho loctvrcs,
the various lect»res at this eating in October 191*2 that concentration
c-m- in-atos had bejn used for experimental .Purposes?

• Ho.

4 Did you hoar any talk about it aft^r the Dotting?

A No.

Q Did you read the reports that wore published?

A V'hon I saw tho record of the eating at tha Institute for
Aviation. Iodicino- I read ny locturo to sea whothor it had been ro-
?rc veed correctly and I was u int -rested in tho rest.

Q Then the first eico you *oard clout th? axpe-r iron tel prog-
■■rith huaan beings was hare in this courtrooa?


£516


sea


- Jur.~ 3-3-3-:hloy (Int* Von Seboon)

Court Ho. I.

A So, the noting on th: 19th ar.d 20th concerning the
water experiaents.

Q And after having bean co the Iruraberg confcrc-rcc in
Cctoeor 1 . Ii 2 and at a later date laving read this portion of the re¬
port of tho October seating you r«rc unable to ascertain that, hunan
beings ware used in experixnnts those various officers?

A That is correct.

q And the first tire that knorlodgo was brought hoao to you
that concentration canp incites wore used as experimental subjects * was
that conforcreo of 19 Hay 1914, is that correct*

A Sot that' th*y had been used, but that tho idea of using
thoo was being onturtained. Before that tim, it was through an officer
of the Vohrrnclit who had pointod out to no that ho knot of difficulties
of getting oxporiaontal subjects for uy thirst oxpori-aonto and suggested
that I use prisoners.

• q Was tho frocting probLaa of intorost to you?

A Ho, not at all, not boforc or afterwards did I over have
anything to do trifch the suitfoct.

Q Yot you listonod to Ko:zlochnor«s locturo?

A I cannot acy. I thin;*.'I did not hoar Holtloehner's

luoturo.

Q How surely. Doctor, you nvxt rccrl 1 whottor or not you
hoard HolzloohncHs lecture?

A I would certainly havo rc.M .bered Haschor's rennrk, conseq¬
uently I assix-.o that Holsloohnor's or.d Hasohjr's reports woro on tho
first day.

q In Kov>;labor 15U3 you ro _ ortcd to the ifcdicrl Inspectorate
-'■ :t You had developed a cx-thcd to r.*.a coa .ator potable, is that cor¬
rect?

A Yes, that is c err act.

Q Was that tho first tl e you had reported to tho hodicr.l
I.~-;cc torato?


- «-’ur.— rloy (Int. 7or. ichoar.)

Court Ho. I.


A 3o£ore that I had ndo a report that work ms boin^ carried
or. and I rcTXjrtod h cm far the ror!: had gon_.

Q Did you conduct experinintetien on antoals wiiilo you wore
developing Tfolfatit?

A Yv-s. I carried out aninal cxp<ri*cnts, but they ircro in
geiwrel caapiotad.

Q Did you carry out exporlaonts on human boii^s?

A Yes, I carried out experiments on volunteers, persons who
were at liberty.

Q ..’hero did you e-rry out thoso oxperiaonte?

A In 3orlin.

Q Did you oxjxiriacnt on yourself likewise?

A Yea.

Q Hoar long did your ax^orlrumta take?

A HhiehT Tho oivjs on ay huaan subjects?

Q Yoa.

A Throe or four deys.


5iu


4 JUBO-::-GT3-3-l-:fcohxn (Int. V - Schocn)
C-jrt.T' . 1.


Q. H--r reny hurar. subjects did you use?

• ?hopo were afc.-ut f ur er fire, S 'wo :f then Kero used
sCTural tia:s.

r -» W'" y v ols- use a ostr 1 & up; did you set ycut experi-
-lnts up Into o sorl.s «tv:rois y^u subjected s w to ordinary sea¬
water, others t nrrnol water and tho ethers t<a soa-wat^r treated by
y-ur noth d?

a. V , n-' centr 1 .rr u; was nooassary lr. ry oxporinents. I noroly
carried out testa •'n hungor and thirst. It noror . ccurrod to no to
perfern huwn oxporicocts with soa-wetor frea which tho salt hod boon
ror vod, ace rdins tc the Berks nothed, I frequently drank this
inter nysolf and tho chcnicr.l analysis was absolutely sufficient for
such water.

*

r x, Dcot-r, w Old it bo p-ssihlo then t- osccrtain tho potability
f soa-wntor with at hr win, husan exp criaonts?

A. Iti neon natural eca-wstcr?

*• K-, Oect t, if y^u treat soa-wator with y ur Sohaofor nothod)
was it possible tc <'»tovr!no the p^ta*ility f that soa-wotcr trootod
by y-ur noth d without hrwinc ros^rtod t huran oxrcrirnr.tati ;n?

Tea, thrt Is 10CT* p-ssiblo.

thot bo possible in tho oaso of soa-wetor troatod by

cthor noth, ds?

*•, That depends ■ n tho ’ttthodj in the oorka mtor is was pcssiblo.

Q. It yr>B r ssiblo to deteminu ehenioally whothor cr n.t Berka
water W'uld 3x> offootire, that is water treated by the Borka prooass
w -:l'* bo offcotiro t‘ rondor the son-wat».r r r t 3 "l* , T

a. Thrt is true and T have prewod th-t.

Q, P-w D^ct r, whon yu o.'.rric»3 cut your oxperiaonts then y u"

.-vroly pava these »*xperinonte 1 subjects, which y u usod in 1943, so

•r.nv cubic cor.t: tors f s -.-water troatod by y ur nothccl; is that

*

'’rroet?

An, y u speaking ab ut tho experiments, which I subaittod as
' cunents t • ny technic.'1 assistants ;u tJw experiment® where 1 drank


-519


4 *m0-K-G3S-9-2-H«ofcnn (V.n Sch.cn)

Curt s-. 1.


tfco «ca-wnt*?r trootod with ""lfntit aysolf?

I \. Vnybe I nisun' , cratood jwi, Dcctcr, I understated yru V say
this - rnir.r, in answer to my cjjcsti ns, that in tho process cf
ioTolopins y ur Schaefer arthed, y:u had experiments or. eninals and
experiments n hraan beings. N'w maybe I nlaunderst.' d, did you neroly
skate that ym had only tried tho water on y ursolf and did net aubjoct
experimental subjects t' sso-wntcr treated by tho Schsofor noth'4?

... That is true, *hot is true, py on ire 1 oxparirents end tho
cxycrinonts on hu-rn subjects wv w n -1 cameotcd with i.'clfatit beenuso
it was n»t necessary.

In tho oxycriaonta, the nnirnl experiments and the human
experiments, did y.u subject tho experimental subject# t- son-wator?

Only in the animal experiments end ir. s<-no oaaca in tho human
oxporlncnta nt tho end -f tho oxnorirxnt.

Q. ‘.'oil, whnt wr.a the pt rycao f y-ur hurr n oxporiraents that y-u
c nluotod in 1«3; t< lay the .-r.und wrk -f developing tho Sehaefor
noth Th'-t did v u d. in these cxyorirv r.ts, did y u ,-ivo tho human
sutjaeta wator t* -’rink; just whnt did y u d- with thorn?

... Those subj-. cts wore t •‘•r- nstrote h-w long no e old yo
Xith ut wntiT rnd food with<-ut rtcnoginr the ability t-; o< ncontrato
sad ability t"> irrk.

Q. Then I prosuaw after they hr..’ fia. for a few dr.vs without water
r v u w-i-id hsvu thorn ’rink o certain nc unt of soc-wntcr to buo

■hnt the off ots w uld be; can y u explain t us in dotail, D-ctor,

Just whnt y u w ro tr”in.y t acc npliah by y ur oxperinents?

• I held the peint f vi-xt that it wus better t . with ut fond
thrn b*. -’rink sca-wat r. C r.sequ. ntly, I wrntjfl t t03t with
oxperirvntal subjects h w 1 -n ; .no can .• with ut f-*cd and r#tcr
ith ut 1 sin ir. .fficienov or-’ whether at tv end if nc drank salt
■^tor ‘hirst was lotscnod r increased.

Q. -11, at t v sane time did y u --Is. Ir rc an ther ~r uj drinking
?-w:tcr, s.- thrt.yv cm»ld compare the tw<-?

K. , I ’id r. t hrvo any rr uj th'.t drank soa-wntor all the time.


3520


•i .*J3a-4T-G'S-3-3«!-'?aHan (7 r. 3eh on)

Court V . I.

'Q. Tell h -w did ycu rrkc 3 c -npsris n, Doctor?

... I quest!'ned the s-^nr fors- r. bef ro 2 nd after ihev had drarJc
: It ir.t'.r , I asV:d then how they f.lt end whether th t was a god thing
«- 11 . n "- or - y« n rc subj.ctir.*; ;ers ns t sclt water, is it
necessary t c nfir.o the* ur car. thov c n'uct th-.-ir usual brfsin^ss : r.-»
tend te th->ir w rk lilto th*. oxrcrinntal subjects Tr foas.r Vrllhnrdt
used In his or,orients?

«• That depend n hew rolln^lo the eubj.ets cro. If I hnvo s.no¬
ne in wh n I have c rifletc c nfidonco th"t ho will keep tho c nditi ns
f th cx-erirwnts, then ..f c urao ho ©an c ntinuc t pcrf.rn his w.rk.

Q. Ccrtainlv if a rrn volunteers f r y ur cxjorlncnts y u w. uld
hoeo o nfidonoo in hie, w ulln't y u?

... '>t if ho was j r Toleod r rowor', t ha ref tj r.v ex; orlncntal
subjots did n * t ar.v reward.

Q. T.tll if w.-u wro c n^uotinf: cxfvr'.nunto n v luntocro and c
mr. ha 4 drank eoe-wntcr f r tw J evs and thor. 'ocidod ho c mid n-t
stand it any 1 n-or nd thon Welded ho did n.t went t. -o thr uj:h with
tho r> st f tho ex; orirrmts and ask if or f d net! wot f 0 urso
y u w 11 hero ;ivor. It t- hlr., wuldn't y u D et r?

... F' , of c- ur3c n t.

• Thm, he e-j.as'e t- he a v luntcrv subj et, doesn't ha

... Th-t is truo unloss hi had ,Mi,-3tod hlnsclf in th<- beginning
fra c .-rtair. nrr-.r' t h Id -tit f r * cvrtoin peri d. If he withdraws
fr r his c ntr’.et, he w old n t %t his ;.ov on* th-. oxjcri’V.nts w uld
h 'isc-ntinnod.

Is it injur! us, D ct r, t ’rink se-'-wnt-r as y ur nly
s ”rce f -.ntcr suyj ly?

... Th:. • J :v r. n tbu - ORt f W * r ftn' thi pori «' jf tine

• vhich tho water is t ' - {funk.

'. quantities f 3 * .-vr t.r car. a n rml pera.n t' 1 rati

»ith ut injury am’ f r hew 1 . n.;?

... I w-vld say 400 t 5CO ce per day in Individual doses during


4 Aine-H-CiS-9-4-UochSn (7 / 'n Schocn)

c urt y/>. i.


Q. "Jell n-w, aftar h*w nony days un’or th'se c a'iti-ns dees the
•raiment if hcilth 1 oke plrco?

... In tho £■*: bo >f 400 to 500 cc?

*. 1 s, D ctir.

... I wruld thick fpi= tho sixth day .n pai-hops.

Q. Toll V'uld that ccur if they continued t drink the sen¬
ator; mslly wJkc would don th "ccur; eft or h-wjttny dry 8?

... Yh-at *ia oxtrenoly difficult t cq-%

Q. C:n r u toll us th: ror-a n why eca-wnter is injuri us t«- health
nrvi o n esuso d'.oth?

A. 1’os, tho rgonlsn has t. olirainato the salt which has boon
t kon with tho sea-wr.tcr, but slnoo tho kidneys cro unrale t- raiso such
o hi.rh C'r.contratii'n in the urine os son-water, in tho l*«ng run tho
•V rust usa up its wn wirplv cf s r-water in rdor t* ol ininn to this
»oIt a ad c-nsoquontly dchy’rcti n ecurs. This 1 as • f water • f c urso
influences unfO*r robly tho bi 1 • icel process in the tissues.

Q. Then e^c it b sold th-t tho nly roas n why son-wr.tor is in-
Juri us is tho fr.ot it is n hynort nio salt s lutirnT

... ics, :p w that -

q. Toll, was this fhot well mo gnitod by MAloal scientists,
bof ro 1M4T -
Yes.


o522


0 >urt 1

June 4--4-1 0-1-KD-Co ok-Vo n Sc ho en.


Q. "ell, doctor, you say that If a person w>a to drink
four to five hundred CC of sea vatr that an Impairment
of health cay normally occur after five or six dayi, can
you tell us vhen on impairment of health would occur to a
person drinking one thousand cubic centimeters of a
water dally?

a. I would say that disturbances eight occur In such
cases as early as the. third or fourth day. •

Q. Veil under those circumstances could you dotermlno
or la It possible to state when death would occur?

a. That Is extremely difficult to say. I would not
venture to say It. The oapneity of the kidnoy varies
groatly from ono individual to another.

Q. Doctor, what syaotoas develop while a person la
being subjected to sea water exclusively, say after the
first or second day, what symptoms develop that nro
unusual?

a. You moan In the case of distress at oea whon ono
can drink unlimited ouanltlos of soa water or deflnlto dosoa?

Q.‘ "ell, are you familiar with practical casos at son?

A. I know them only froa lltcraturo. I have nover
experienced any suoh case ayself.

tfoll now what symptoms would develop In a practical*
cr.se of a human being at sea where he has access to
unlimited quantities of soa wrter?

A. If he has unlimited quantities available there
would be severe diarrhea.

Q. When would that take Diace? V^uld it depend upon
the amount of soa water he had drunk or is It ordinarily
a second or third day occurrence?

A. That would depend on the 6lze of the Individual
£ se, from 3CO cubic centimeters on.


Court 1

Juno 4-M-10-2-HD-Cook-VonSchoen


x. What other symptoms would appear?

A. Great thirst, then the symotocs of dehydration,
dryness In the mouth and mucous membranes, dryness of the
skin, reflex Increases, the cusoles become harder.

Q. Hay a person devlop hallucinations as a result of
drinking sea wnter?

A. Yes, I should think so, because of the need for
water there would be hallucinations.

Q. Well now would an experiment conducted by a scientist
in his laboratory on human beings wherein he applied four
or five hundred cubic oontlaetera of sea wator to the subject
daily, would those same 'symptoms appear thr.t would be found
In practical sea wator oases at sea?

A. No.

DR. MAAX: (Dofonse Counsel for Professor Schroeder and
Dr. Bockcr-Froysong)

Hr. Prosldent, I should llko to tako the liberty of
Inquiring whether tho Prosecutor ia cross examining the
defondant Schaoffer or whether ho is consulting him as an
export. If tho lattor is tho case I should have to objeot.

I cannot assume that Dr. Schaeffer is in any position to
give an opinion here as to the harm which can bo caused by
sea water in this case or that, because from the point of
view of tho defense I cannot ascrlbo to Dr. Schaeffer tho
nodical experlonoo nocessary in order to give an opinion
hero. Moreover, it is not compatible with the role of tho
defendant in the witness box to appear at tho same tlmo as
on export, Moreover, the defense could argue that ho lacks
not only the qualifications but the Justification for doing
so, I should, therefore, like to suggest that the Prosecution
limit Itself to cross examination and not ask questions of
this defendant which should be put to an export,

C52A

S


Court 1

June 4-#-10-3-H3-Cook-VonSchoen.


TEE PRESIDE}!T: The cross examination by the Prosecution
-ay proceed to the extent of determining the reasons of the
defendant Schaeffer for establishing his opinion as to
berkatit .n the one hand and wofatit on the other. The
cross examination should not proceed to the extent of exam¬
ining the witness ^s an expert upon acre general matters.

The cross examination may proceed.

3Y MR. HARDY:

Q. Well now, doctor, what symptoms would develop In
an experiment after a percon had drank 500 CC of sea wator
per day?

A. If It was given In Individual dosos of less than
300 cubic centimeters In the course of time the s^rao
symptoms develop as in ordinary tnlrst.

Q. Vo 11 would the same symptoms bo apparent, that Is
diarrhea, hallucination# and those symptoms that you out¬
lined that would be apparent in tho case of a person aotually
at sea?

a. No, diarrhea would certainly not occur, but dn the
contrary constipation.

Q. Veil If you used 1000 CC would diarrhea appear?

A. No, ee long as the Individual doses were under

300 CC.

Q. I see, doctor, was there ever a method Invented or
developed In the history of Germany to render sea wator
potable prior to the time you developed wofatlt?

A. A t least I knew of no method.

TIicr you were the first one In Germany to develop
a method which rendered sea water potablo, an effective

set hod?

a. Yes, one could say so.

C525


Court 1

June 4-I4-10-4-KD-Cook- Von 3choen .


Then you are perhaps the only expert In Germany
or. the potability of sea water, doctor, you and Dr. Ivy
held that distinction In common?

as far as removing salt fr^a sea water Is concerned

0 •
that seems to be so.

Q. Well new In November 1943 when you reported to tho
medical Inspectorate that you had a method to render sea
water potable, I understood you to say that you actually
had an experiment at the medical Inspectorate and at such
time Professor Hlppko and others present drank tho sen
water rendered potable by the ochaeffar method, Is that
correct?

A. Yos, that Is true.

4 . Can you toll us or can you recall who olso drank

your soa w-tor? •

I assume Profossor «nthony, Dr. 3eckor-Froysong,

I can't -lvo the nomoe of the other con, I didn't know
thorn at the time.

« •

Q. Now, when you conducted this so-oalled experiment

at tho medical Inspectorate did you have raw soa water
and then apply tho wofatlt tu It In tholr prosonco so that
they could determine you were actually using soa water?

A. Yes.

Q. And after applying your method the water wqb
drinkable. Is that oorrect?

A. Yes, tnat Is right.

5. The gentleman at the aceting wore fully aware of
tho f ct that water treated by your method was no differ¬
ent than natural water, natural drinking water?

„. That is right.

4 . Then actually that was not ~n experiment, It was
merely a demonstration on your part?


Court 1

Jun e 4-&-1&-5-EB-C o ok-7on 3cho en.


Yee, It was a der-or.stratlon.

Q. Wien did Professor Schroeder first hear of your
sea water, pardon ne] of your method to render sea water
potable, that is vofatit?


4 flun11-1 -Grose (YonSchon)

C ourt I

-- I cannot say when ho first hoard of it. I can only say that
I dcncotrctcd it to bin in 1944, perhaps in <pril.

Z • a nd Professor Schrcodor was also aworo of tho fact that you
had dovelrocd this nothod, and he in f_ct hud drank saao of this vat or?

▲ • Tee, that 1 sright.

Z» * boa did you first hoar that Berku hod dev doped u nothod?

a. Shat was in January or Pobruary 1944.

Z* A nd then you rocoivod on ordo to chock and review tho work
by Dr, von Sirany, is that right?

Y°®» that'srigit. Z wont to Yionna and lookod at tho ojpor*-
inents nysolf.

q* Vho ordo rod you to Yienna?

a. Professor Anthony.

(U V as ho tho only ono you dealt with in that .-.attor?

a, Yos, at that tino, yo*.

Z, A ad you ccr.o to tho conclusion aft or oxanlnlng Dr. von
Sirnnytg work with tho Borka nothod, that this nothod was not of any
raluo end would not in foot render sea wator potnblo?

Tos, that's ri.^ht.

0. Veil, woro you of tho opinion th t Dr. von Slrony's oxporinonto
had not gono far enough?

a. Ho, that was not ;sy opinion. Z was of tho opinion that con-
ditions cro difforent in tho coso of distross at soa but that tho cx-
porinents wore conplotely adoquato to dotoxnia* whothor Borkotit w as
of .ny valuo or not.

q, When did you decide, doctor, that that was your opinion?

Eiat was always cy opinion. Zn -y report to the Nodical In¬
spectorate at the tino it soys that there aro tho followlag dccisivo
f-cts to aid in forming an opinion on tho 3crka nothod.

Vero you of tho opinion that persons subjected to son wator
treated with tho Horka nothod would develop tho seco syupteng as peo¬
ple subjected to cocacn ordinary soa water aftor a period of a fow dayoj


G52C


4 Juno44-i:j-ll-2-Grcs-3 (Ton Schon)

C ourt I


Aa Tcs, that*8 right.

q . Voll did tho Bcrkatit help at all? That la, you statod that
Bcrkatit Mas nothing but hard c-ndy aa a fact. Vould tho application of
Borkatit to aoa water hero aided a.person distressed at soa to any c.-?-
tont? Or, to tho contrary, would it hero workol an additional hard¬
ship?

Borkatit would not change tho sea water in any way but it ii>-
provod tho taato and this brought about a psychological danger for tho
porcona in distress at oca.

Q. Voll, would the food vjuc in Borkatit havo aldod tho distroosod
person?

a. Bo food content of Borkatit is very groat but tho aaount of
Bcrkatit which was to bo put into tho soa water was so eacll that in
practico ono can rorlly not spook of any food valuo.

Q. Bon whon you reported to Profossor Schroodor you carplotoly
outlined nil thoso disadvantages of tho Boriea acthod?

A. Tea.

V 08 it obvious froo your report that a poraon subjoctod to con
w-.tor troctod by tho Borka aothod would dovolop tho iiso syeptOiB oftor
t poried of a few days that a porson would develop hod thoy drank cco-
aoa ordinary soa wator?

A, I onpreoBOd that cloarly.

q. Vhat did Profossor Schroodor say? Did you talk to hin about it?

A . I had tho iaprossioa that he ronlized that.

^ Bon you stoppod ovor von Sirany's work wore you ablo to tost
a srrrplo of tho Bcrkatit?

^ I obtained tho Berketit Inly later.

q. Did you ovor test it chcilcally yourself?

A . I did not analyse Borkatit itself. Shat would h .vo bocn on-
trcsicly difficult, That would havo kept a whole instituto busy. *acrc
were various cccpounds in thoro, sugar und fruit acids, etc., but tho


0529


4 Jur.o-i5-iiJ-ll-3-Gross (TonScfcoa)

0 curt 1

effect cf 3crkatit on salt contoinod in soa vetor I tested.

CU Voll, how long would it have takes to prove that Berks water
van chcr.ic.Uy nothing but see water? Would it take ton yoors, t\:o <ky 0 ?

jtm Half on hour. —

Q. Edf an hour? Then the point could hnvo boon proven chcnically
within h;lf an hour that 3orka water woe nothing uoro than sea wntor
cmouflcgod as to tasto?

It could only be provod that the Borkatit did not fora any
chcnical compound with tho salt.

Well, did you suggest such a sinplo chaicnl tost or a
chcnicrl toot as a substitute for tho exporiuonto on tho prisonoro?

A . I said that tho chevied analysis provos that Borknt doco not
fora c chcr.icl ccnpound with tho salt.

Q. Voll, now would such a tost not huvo had tho adventago of o
log tine end rlso could you not hnvo aado such n ougcostion tnotfully
without running tho risks which you hnvo sold ootod ns dotorronto rr-
gninst opon criticise on your port?

A • I oven said that that fcpppcnod but that provod nothing,

&orc woro biological objections that said that Borkatit would inevonso
tho activity of tho kidnoy and that was tho point th.it also brought into
tho foreground this advocation of Borkatit, and that could not bo provod,

0 * Vhnt “os that again, doctor. I nissed that last answor,

Vculd you repo, t that again?

A . Bio advocates of Borkatit, ospociclly Professor finger, oaid
ta t Lerkatit ir:provcd tho capacity of tho fcidnies. That was sajothing
that could not bo proved chcticolly;

Veil, how could you provo Dr. 2^pingor f s point? Merely %y ox~
purnentisg on hunan beings?

In ay opinion that was a hypotnosis which was not Justified,

S'.o success could bo only so slight that in prcctico it would bo without

•icnifiernco.


3530


4 Juzo-H*J-U-4-aro M (Ton 0chcn )

C Jurt 1

3* Veil, eft or ho had porforr.od expcriisonts on hqaon beings hoi?
could ho dotomlno whether or not tho 3crice water would inprevo tho kid-
nay condition or would aid the kidney condition?

a • 3y tho concentration of the urine.

Veil, would you have to soke testa for o rather extensive md
long porlod of tino to dotonino th it? Could that bo deno in 2, 3, 4, 5,
or 5 dry a or would that hevo to oxtond over a period of 12 days if tho
objoct of tho czporincnt was todotomino whothor or not 3orka we.tor
would net aa an aid to tho kidney condition?

Ju Ono could dotemino that within six icyo,

Q. A ctually, howevor intho 3orka wator tho Balt was never ro-
uovod, wr-a it?

•*m Toe, that is true.

Q. Voll how did you find out that tho 3orka cothod wasn't offee-

tivo?

a. Took tho toota which Kr, Von Sirony hed alrondy carried out.

Voll, did you noko any toetc yourself?


*


G531


!_ Jyn-- arrow (Sit. Ten Sc hoc r.)

Court “o. I.

A IJo, but the records of Ur. ven Sirany's experircerrts -.ore
turned ever to no.

Q noil, could tte point havo boon proven chemically by a
staple dovico of psychological cboiaistry or physiological cheaistry
s’xh r.s, for instance, that Borka water would still extract i/r.te-r from
a coll ii':o any other hypertonic salt solution?

A Y~c, that' could have been dot^rained.

Q How long *ould that have taken?

A lorhapa half day.

Q Lid ;ou suggest such a pia.:lo choaical test as that?

A That rould not shot: the capacity of tte kidneys. That
would have not'.iing to «to with that. Through a physiological cheaistry
test ono cannot dononstrato tho nor.; of tho kidneys. Tho trey tte
kidneys work lias not been clarlfiod ovon today.

^ ’.roll, is a result of tho Jorko nothod coning into tho
picturo it tecara nocossary to hold a noetin3 to dotcraino which
sotted would be adopted. I* that correct?

A I didn't understand your quostion.

Q Hall, tho purpose of this -looting on the 19th of ay and
tho otter aootins on the 20th of Uay was to have a discussion to do-
teraino rhich netted vas to bo vsod? That is, tho Berko nothod or tho
Scfceafor nothod? Is that correct?

A Y-s, that is right.

q Prat that point on, it ;.ts a contest tetwock Uurte end
Sc tee for? Is that correct?

A ..'o, that's not ri.ht. I oxsMSS-d ny opinion and tbo
ether pco, lo had to decide.

~4 roll, your rotted had proven itself to bo effective, had

it net?

, A las.

Q Sorka's -sotted was still to bo proven?

A It ted been craven 'ay er.terinonts by !*. von Sirany.


!i Jun- - r-l2-2-::^rrcv (Int. 7or. bchocn)

Court -'o. I.

Q Ir. your opinion?

A Yos.

Q ::ot in the opinion of too other ruabers of this conforms?

A Yus, that's right.

3 tToll, what was the cause for tixi refusal of thes- . .on in
the Jvft-offe - non like Schrcodor, Christenaon and these various won
at this ootin: - to refuse to adopt your othod that had already boon
.rov-r. which did net necessitate furt’.iar exjxjriaintation or further
argurvint?

A I cannot give you any nns*~r. I don't knenr.

Q ..'as it because they do_aod the production of your not'iod
to be too ox-ensive?

A Tho Tochnicd Of.'ico - C’,3*istonson - said there res no sil-
Ycr available.

Q Of course, if tho 3cr!r. njthod iiad boon offootivo - that
is, Cerkntit hod be .in effective - it would have boon for a»:*o raasor.-
ablo to .reduce than Wc^atit, 1 s that right?

A Yos.

Q At this aectin (, on too 19th of 'ey, Just what did you say
concerning tho lurfca nothod?

A I said that tho Bc?ka r-othod norcly iraprovod tiio taste;
that it did not change the s-a wstur, in any way; that Sirany's ox cri-
i-or.t3 had rh-rod that, in spit- of .J^rka, tho salt is absor.oc* end tins
to bo olininated through the kidneys; that Sir ry'c experiments had
ehotm that thi patients loso water. I also said that ono can still
fird salt - that is, so diva chlorido - in tho sea water, and I said
that even if there woru a coapound fervid botwo-n 3crkatit and S°

"'It in tho s-a wat-r, this cowpound jould robably not be abscrb-d
aac af it were absorbed the cr&anio port would bo turned and tho salt
ould raanir. in tho kidneys. Sirany's experiments proved this.

1 TToll, "OW, you have describ.d to us your objection ct that
rc-tir.-. Did that objection bring homo to tit:sc laymen that tho Dorka


L Jur>-:-3-12-3-': arrow (Int. Von Schoen)

Court Ho. I.

nothod wes nothing rvor- than sea water with a caaouflagtd taste, and
that a person subjected to sea water treated by tha Borka itoxIkk* vouid
suffer injuries to health and, after a sufficient length of ti_o, die?
Did you bring that hose to th. nce-b-rs of that uceting?

A Yes, I did.

Q ./oil then, tho note by Christo nser. on tega 12 of Document
3ooI: 35, Docv.unt MO. 177, Prosecution -Hiibit 133, wherein ’..a str.tos -
on r.go 12, tixj aucond Sentence aft-r tl*. liai of nacaa of those 4 xo3ent
at tho 19 'by -etingi

"Th» Chief of tho : edict* 1 Service (Citi deS Sr nitactwosons)
is convinced that if tho Berkr. uthod is used, ir.i-.gc to health has to
bo -x.ected not iter than 6 days after taking icrkntit, which datage
will r-ault in >jr»*.mnt injuries to hoclth and, according to tho
opinion of Uaterarst Dr. Schaofcr, will finally result in death after
rot hater th*n ttfjlv- dry a."

Thun, it ia apparent, that Dr. Cliriat-r!in waa fully nrrro of
tlx. drnf.era of Barfcntlt as djeer:bud by you. Ia wist correct?

A Yea.

Q Did you eaphatic-lly state, th'.t d-’ra'i e rould roeult in
jxraanont injuries to health and finally result in death after not lr.t-r
than t..elvo days?

A remanent injury to health - I did not c-y that. T <-ro
*= no ;roof of tint. I only arid that aft r twelve days one would
have to exooct d-oth.

q sell, ac a reauit of this oxjarersicn of your o.-inion, do I
understand that you v-ru tlir^atoikid?

A Cn tho 20th - at tho end of tho 20th of Kay, Schicklur
took no to one side and s-id "If you go on liko this, you will *kve to
aisu-jr to ilch for sabotage.* And I asruu, and it is urobably true,
that :>j aad, this stfttcacAt because I said that the exp-rfa-nts which
to be xrforn_d ware un-ec-co *ry.

0 Did you iawdiately tell Sc]a*c-d_r about that?

£53*


I Jen-' - —12-k-Airrow (1st. Von Schorr.)

Court llo. I.


A I told Dr. Bcckor-Pruysosg about thin threat on sabotage.

Q ^xn?

A Iuadistcly after tlx ix.ting,

Q Did Dcckcr-Fr.yav.n- go to Cchrood.r about it?

A I don't know. But, according to what I know nor:, it was
imposeiblc b-caus. Dr. Schro-d.r was not in Berlin at tlx tine.

Q Did you consider it your duty to att_npt to stop tlx ca¬
per lx. at 3 .at Dachau? You wore nn export on son wat.r. That is, tho
{Stability thereof •

A I considered it ry duty to express ty opinion that tlx ox~
ptrlxnts wore unnooossnry and I did so.

Q Did you note Ccbrooder for his support?

A Irofessor Sc hr cu dor was not in B.rlin tt the tine.

Q '.'oil, is it possible, Baotor, that you wore anxious to
have t!x oap-rixxnts conducted with tlx Zorlantit so that a carpai-ieon
could bj drawn and, as a r.sult cf t!w 0 aperients, your nuthod v/ould
b. the outstanding ora and it irould be necessary to produce your h'ofatit
in .r-f.rv.rce to the incffoctivo IXrlcatit? Is that tho reason why you
took this passive resisto-nco to tho exp-riaonts?

A I didn't show passive resistacx. to tho oxpcrl: ents. I had
no int-r.st in bringing this about. I didn't want Tfofatit to bo intro¬
duced beenvao of xibition. I had a nothod t.iuch was bettor. If
TTcfa.tit w.ro introduc.d it would benefit only I.Q.

Q This is a good breaking point, ’four Honor.

T U iF^6!DS,Ti Tho Tribunal -..111 now bo in recess until 1:30

o'clock.


(A roCv.se irs taken until 133C hours, ii June 19h7).


U Jun-i.-'2-13—i-rriaoau (Ir.t Brcwr.)
Court Ha. I.


AFT3EJCCK SESSION

(The tearing reconvened at 1330 h'-ura, h June 19lj7)»


THE :'A2SHAL: Persons in the ccurtro-n pleas,- find thoir

s^ata.

The Tribunal ia again in scasi.n.

D.-i. GA'LDC: As Ccuna.l for Dr. Hevon, Hr. Presidont, I oak
th-t Dr. Hovon bo excused fren attonding tomjrrow«a session for tho
purpoa, of orvporing hia cnee.

TIC 1?CSID2«T: On rocuost of counsel for Defendant Hc-von,
^X.fcndant Hevon say be excused from attondr.noo joforo the Tribunal to-
n rrm aerning in order to consult with hia counsel for tho povparati.n
£ hia caao which will bo ter.rd very soon.

D.t. GA’.XIKi I hava ono further request, Ur. President, For
sovorcl days I an having a witness hare by tho naao of Dr. Hern who
nuat loavo by tte end of this week. Perhaps it might be possible for
no to .ait tho witness Horn cn tho su-nd Frid*y j'rning. I already
talkdd it ever with tho counsel for t!.o prosocution.

THE mSSIDEhTi TeS — hew long?

131. HARDYi £>r. Steinbmior anticipates his direct ox'ninntion
cf tho Dofendant B-iglboeck. It night bo forcible to call tho witnoas
Herr, after tte caae of Bciglboeck who will not take nor, than a dry.

If not, I cn agree able to having iorn cr.Uod upon tho completion of tho
Schaefor case if the Tribunal fw,ls it 'rill n't interrupt tho sequence'
-S tho B ea r at-r evidence,.

c, : It trill probably be better to c~U tte vdt-

hterr afttr tha'c cf tho Schr._f,r caso.

lit. liAiiDjSpt is agreeable with so, lour Hor-t.

THE I -./ill ask counsel f r defendant Coiglboeck

h\ it^sg ,w-onii^pat_r.

D.'TST.XN3.'»DE?.i I agr-- that this witness ia hoard after


the caaplsuirn f <hc Schaefor caso.

' 6536


U Jum-A-I3-13-2-rrtncou (Int. 3r.ro)
Court No. I.


K Ci U BT i I rould ask counsel for Defendant Bci^lboock

that.

A. HAHDIi Counsel for Dr. Hcvji is Dr. Gawlik. Row counsel
for Dr. 3^ Is loo-ck is Dr. Stoinbauor. I request that Dr. Steihbaucr
should call this witness.

:HJSIDE.VTi It is desired to ask Dr. Stcinbauer a ques¬
tion. How Ions do you anticipate it will tnks to pro sent the ovidonco
for Dofondrnt Soiglboock? ,

DH. 37JII3AIER: I balievc a day and a half or two dj^s.

TK1 FRJSIDSfft .Tho Tribunal -..ill ho*r tho witness Horn at
th. closo of tho Schaefer ease.

DR. GA'/LIXi Correction, 'r. -resident. Tho witness's rvt:o
is Doit:, nor Horn. However, I should Ilko to know when tho Schaofor
c-so will bo concluded. 1 ennot contact tho witness tod-y. It will
h-vj to be tomorrow morning at tho herring.

TIC FRESXDBfTs Very >roll. T ©sorrow morning will bo satis¬
factory.

itU HARD!i We haw- a request of Defense Counsel for tho filo
in offico with notice of tho haclcground of tl* witness Dorn — that
is, his nationality, d-to of birth rod so forth.

I

TIC l-USSIDENTt Counsol for tho Dofondant Hcv u n will find
the u3url state.vjnts concerning the witnoss as soon as possible.

DR. KONRAD SCHAS^SR - RESU&D
CROSS ECIJHATItti (Continued)

31- :a. ha-ot«

Q The conf renco 19 iry l9liN — did the members th.roof dis-
cr3: - at that time what plan would outlinj tho actu*l vXjxrijKnts which
•■c-Jri bo later p-rforaod at Dachau?

A Ono suggestion or another vas _cd> but plans in detail

not dra.m up.

Q it obvious free that moeting on tho 19 th 's.y that ox-


Pirlajnts wor- ir-.viV.ble?


U Jun-i’i- 3-13-3—?rir«. - a (Ir.t. 3rotm)

Court -*o# I.

/ 4

“ I don't knpK how you intend that question.

Q "hat X cm driving at, Doctor, is sL*>ly this. On the 19th

of ay, Christenson, Schicklcr, Berta, Schacfor, Beckor-Fr,y^n«. -r.

•

Jtehl and Jirjcr Jowerok net togethir to discuss further research -.s to
the potability of son water. Can you kindly t^ll no whether or not on
the 19th cf I .ay — not the 20th or tho 25th, but the 19th.— a discus¬
sion took placo concerning experiments to b_ conducted; or was that a
neetLag limited aaroly to tho discussion concerning the attributes and
qualifications of the Berta aothod as opposed to tho Sehoofor nothM?


Court So. 1

4 Jus 47-A-14-l-E3i-Maloy (Brown)


A. The conference on the ISth was Halted to ccr^arlng these two
aethods to one another. Eoverer, the proposal wj *e also aade that this
difficulty he attacked exocri mentally.

Q. Did you raise any objections to a proposed exoerlacntal plan
on tho 19th of hay!

A. Tos. I said that I— I said I couldn't soc why oxocrlaents
should he carried out about that.

Q» Vhy did you object, aore spoclfleall"?

A. Bocauso * didn't see tho reason for that,

0- Too thought that they vero absolutely •innecossary!

A. That is right.

Q, Did you consider that these axporlaento would have beon
crlalnal?

A. So, one could not have boon of that opinion.

<u ?hcn tho ontlro basis for your objoctlon was aoroly bocauso
tho oxoerlnonts woro scientifically unnocossary!

A. Tho reason for ay objoctlon on the 19th was that tho oxporl-
nonts wore scientifically unnecessary, bccauso tho further dotallo
about how long and on vhoo and vhoro tho experiments wero to bo por-
forsod, end so forth, wore not contionod.

Q, Then you after tho strenuous objections attended the costing
on 20 Kay?

A. Yes.

Q. thy?

A. Because I was ordered to and because the representatives of
the 5avy were to apoeer on tho 20th and because It could be assuzod that
the discussion would bo carried on. ior this .reason I vrs ordered to
attend as an expert.

Did you have any alegivlngs ebout ettending the ceconi neeting
Bn 20 Ksy inasmuch as you had strenuously objected to the developments
of the 19th ceetlng?

A. Shy should I have had oisgivlngs in attending the conference.

8539


Coart So. 1

4 Jun 47_A-14-1-ZEK-Xel oy (3rown)


A. The conference on the 19th *bs Halted to ccrrparing these two
netfcods to one another. Eowerer, the proposal was also aade that this
difficulty he attacked eroarlaontally.

Q, Did you raise any objections to a pronosed experimental plan
os the 19th of kay?

A. Tos. I said that I— I said I couldn't soc why ofueriaonte
should be carried out about that.

Q, Vhy did you objeot, nore spoclflcell"?

A. Because * didn't see tho roes on for that.

0- Ta» thought that they vero absolutely 'unecosearyT

A. That Is right.

Q. Did you consider that these exporlaentc would havo beon
crlnlnal?

A. So, one could not have boon of that opinion.

k. *hen tho entire basis for your objoctlon vae aoroly beenuso
the oxnerLuents vero scientifically unnocossary?

A. Tho reason for qy objection on the lfth wno that tho oxporl-
nonts were scientifically unnocossary, beenuso the further dotalle
about how long and on whoa and vhuro tho oxporlnonts wore to bo nor-
fornod, cad so forth, voro not nontionod.

Q. Then you aftor tho etrenuous objoctlons attondod the nootlng
on 20 May?

A. Tcs.

Q. »hy?

A. Because I was ordered to and because tho representatives of
the Xa7y were to apooar on the 20 th and beccuso It could be assumed that
the discussion would be eerrlod on. ior this reason I vrs ordered to
attend os an expert..

-id you have any qisgivings about attending the second neoting
20 ilay inasmuch as you had strenuously objected to the developments
oi the 19th aeetlng?

A.. tfhy should I have had misgivings In attending the conference.

6539


Ccjt 5o. 1

t Jun 4?-A-14-2-ZS:-KaIoy (Brown)


I couldn't argue about it. I was eicply ordered to ettend. I wasn't
a privato citizen vfco could de or refrain from doing vfc*t he wonted to
do, If I hod been a private citizen, I would have laid, "I have enough
of this natter." _

Q. If you had been a privete citizen, you would have eaid you hnd
enough of this natter and would not have attended, is thet right?

A. Yes, that is right.

Q. Did you tell that to Schroeder on the ovenlng of the 19th?

A« On the evening of the 19th I didn't cce Schroedor at all.

Q, D ld you see Boeicer-Yreyseng end ash .hrt you be relieved froa
further ettendence at these conferences?

A. Thore was no reason to do so. Yew eiaply can't rofuao to
obey a r.illtory ordor. That is a pcrfoetly absurd idea. That isn't
done in tho arny.

Q, If you thought a .military order cricinal in nature, would you
carry it out or would you refuse to carry it out, hypothotlcnlly?

A. I should have tried to find sooo way of ovoidlng carrying
out tho order.

Q. And Just what did you do on the evening of tho 19th of Hay?
Did you roeko any fUrthor ettenpt to further oxolaln to Beciecr-Yroyeong
or Schroedor or any other noober of the office or Kodicnl Inspector of
the Luftwaffe that those evoorL-ents were absolutely unnecessary and
that if the subjects used were to subjected to sea wntor rondorod
potable or allegedly rendorod poteblo by use of the Berkatlt nethod
n danger would exist?

A. On tho 19th of Hay there was no talk at all of any crininal
experinents. And en unnecessary experiment is not e crininal one.

Q. Veil, now, on the 20th of Kay, Doctor, vo hear for the first
tine that an actual experimental plan was discussed. On rage 15,
Document So# l 77 . which is Prosecution Exhibit 133, Document Book 5,
ve r.oto at the top of the page that a cconiseion was to be set up for

the arrangement of these series of exoerir-ents and then it states:

* 85UC


Court So. 1

4 Jun 4?-A-14-3-iS<-Kalay (Brown)

■The aeries of experiments shell include tho followirgj

a. Persona to be given see weter processed with the Borka

asihodj

■b. persons to he given erdinary drinking watcrj
"c. persons without any drInkleg vote*- at all;

■d. persons given to drink according to tho present method."

When did It arise or when was It doclded that a fuXthor group
would he given the Schaefer sec watorl

A. Helthcr on the 19th nor tho 20th. When that vns decided I
cannot tell you at all because as frr as I know it wasn't decided on
the 28 th either. I assume that this additional group was Included at
the very ond.

Q. Wxo included It!

A. That X can't tell you.

Q. Did thoy ask your Demission!

A. Vo.

Q. Vhat would bo tho purpose In experimenting with tho Sehcofor
drug or Schaefer aethed ae opposed to tho Bcrka nethod If theso oxoorl-
aonte ee you stato were .merely to dotoralno what offoct tho Borka
method would hrvo on the kidneys!

A. I ccn't toll you that either. That w mid have been a per¬
fectly sonsoloss order. At loest, I do not know I aa responsible for
that;

Q. And you feel that tho caaaisslcn that nrde tho arrangements
for these sorlos «of oxporlnents *vro not properly informed or were
they so blind that they would not soe?

A. Tho c'smisslon, no, the coaiiesion probebly had soao Ideas

*•

about this, but I don't know whether the cxnlsslon was tho agency
that ordored It. Possibly It was thought thrt instead of using the
orarl control group, end I think Beckcr-7rcyeeng stated that here.

In other words, lneterd cf hevlrg e group drinking fresh water a group


would drink water treated with Volfatit.


Court Sc. 1

4 Jun 47-A-14—4-iSK-^'lel07 (Brown)


Q» Veil, dow, lc an experimental serloe. Dr. Schaefer, le It
nocestary to employ a control group to discover whether or not Berkatit
would havo effect on the kidneys? Could not you do that simply by
having five expert mental oubjects and subjoct then to sea water nado
potable or soa water treated with the Berica r.ethod without having 44
subjects employing control groups giving sene of then 500 cc, othors a
thousand cc, or having a starvation group, etc?

A. Veil, food plays a role, too. You had to havo a ccnparatlvo
group, a group which for the sck« of cceperisn rocoivod normal vtor
end food like people in sea distress, horeovr, Boeker-Proyoong has
statod hero in detail that when drawing up th< olnn for theso exoeri-
nents they considered what procedure should bo introduced and thoy had
to find out whether people sh-uld bo left thirsty or whethor thoy
should be givon large or snail quantities of soa wntor.

Q. Then the express purpose*of the experiments were not as
Professor Eppinger had lntendodj Bcckor-Froyiong hod some idoas about
the natter, is that it?

A. Tos, and thoy wero extended by Professor Zpplngvr.

Q. With your knovlodgo as to tho offlcl ncy of the Bcrkr nothod,
having reviowed Sirony's work and later having heard Bolglboock's
roport concerning the experiments at Dachau, do you think that you
could havo possibly conducted experiments to dotoralnc the effectivo-
noss of the Borka method on the kidney without using such a substantial
min bo r of experimental subjects as used at lychriu; for example, could
it have boon tons with five or six experimental subjects as the purpose
of tho experiment vr.s aitlined by Professor Erolngcr?

A. Veil, that's very hrrd t answer, hard for mo re r laboratory
researcher. The characteristics of individuals arc so different in
-11 biological experiments that it would probably be well to use such
a large group,

Q, However, you could have determined tho effect of Berkatlt on
the kidney and have answered Professor. Eppinger’s Question without such


Coart Ho. 1

4 Jun 47-A-l4-6-I3(-*ftlc.y (Irovn)

an exhaustive experimental plan end program, could you not?

A. The simple ouestiou whether Berkatlt Increased tho concentra¬
tion capacity of the kidneys or not would of course have been nneverod
with only a part of the total experiment.

Q, Veil, i*at do you propose to tell us what the reason for tho
extensive program was? Did Becker-JVoyseng have another idea? *hat
was his purpose?


4 June-..-FI>15-l-::eohan (lot Brown)

Court Ho. 1

DR. PSLOCI^HH i I should like tc object. '•*. Hardy is
asking questions regarding thrcughts which Becker-Freyscng
perhaps entertained or could have entertained regarding the
reasons for the experiments that were undertaken. I believe
thrt this is a hypothetical question because the defendant
Dr. Schaefer cannot state what thoughts Bcckcr-Frcyseng has.
He has repeatedly said that he repudiated the experiments
and that he had to do only with Vofntit. I do not believe
thet the witness can answer cny other hypothetical questions
but the so relating to that.

UR. HARDY : I am unaware thrt I asked him for his opi¬
nion, I asked the 'witness just what thoughts Beckor-Frey-
song expressed when they planned these experiments.

D.i. PDLOCl/klJN . Then in that case I did net understand
the translation, it is perfectly alright fer Mr. Hardy to
ask the witness whrt thoughts wore expressed.

IKS PRSCIIBNT i Ccunsol en cross-examination may ask
the witness what was said at these ncotings by the different
members and present if he* remembers wlv*t was said and if ho
has the information, but he shculd net be asked for their
thoughts, ideas cr purposes insofar as they were not expres¬
sed in words.

BY MR. HARDY .

These ex. vrinonts, Dr. Schaefer, ns I understand
them - and I might admit th»t at this point I am slightly
c-nfised - w^re conducted f r two purposes , one was to sa¬
tisfy the curiosity of frcf.sscr Eppinger > what w°s the
cth^r purp-s. for ?

•».- To satisfy Frofcsser Eppinger's curiosity , I don't
believe that was the purp-s- cf the experiments.

1- - rf'ell, one was te test thv. efficacy of Eerkatit cn

85Ui


4 Jano-*-7L-15-2-:'eehan (Int. 3rown)

Court Nc. 1

the kidney and that wps Fro fe seer Bppinger's question j was
th.re another purpose ?

«%•- I assume that . As Beckcr-FTwyscng stated it here.
There wos also the purpose cf deciding whether it is bettor
to thirst altogether -r to consume scell quantities cf see
w«tcr, but who first had this idea or drew up that plan I
conn-t recall that. His opinion was that ''Iso small quanti-
ti s ,f that s-a-water should tc drunk.

Veil, in viev/ cf ycur constant pretests to Bcckor-
Freyseng, didn't he else strenuously object to any experi¬
ments ?

A.- N~, ho did not.

>- Wb6 he also r doubting Thoons, so to spc*k ?

A.- Ho was c.nvinc,d thpt Wefatit was good, but Chris¬
tens,n said there is nc silver and everybody including mo
th-ught that Woffetit is out of the question because there
was nc available silver. Nov, I resume that then the ques¬
tion wps, should the 5c-rkc method be used r not, should p
little bit jf sea-water be drunk or should the person thirst.
3y the way ir. quite n different position than I rs in. I do
not knew it, I do n-t kn,»/ his motives.

Thrnk you, J,ctv.r. ’/ns it discuss:d at this meeting on
the 19th -r at the ncctin 0 on the 2Cth cf ?fcy as tc the du¬
ration of the experiments ?

/».- Regarding th- duration .f the experiments only this
rs s r id, p drug r prep? rat ion is needed which will permit
pc,pi-: tc survive for twelve days at sea and the experiments
'.re t; be continued until seme physical disturbances occur
ir. the experimental subjects -’.nd if nc disturbances occur,
then the experiments »r_ tc be discontinued after the
twelfth day. That was r.ughly the general impression cne ga-

8 5U5


4 June-A-rL-15-3-::eeh£n (Int. Br.'wn)

Czar t No. I

therod from that discussion.

i>id it annoy you that the moating went this far
after y.ur objections had been raised ?

A.- Yes, that did annoy me.
i*~ -ell, when they discussed tha duration cf the ex¬
periments did they at that time discuss the subjects to be
utod ?

The discussion cf the experimental subjects wa6
taken up later. It ws generally ascertained that there were
nc experimental subjects available and sc ffcr ns I can re¬
call, Jr. jchickl«.r spoke tc Beckor-Freysong, and they were
speaking nt this tin. ef mother pcssibility, and then the
proposal was cade to use prisoners.

... .as the prep', sal net tc use prisoners brought up
because of thv fact th"t you omphesizwd that <*ny experiments
lasting tw.lve days wherein Ecrkatit vrs used th^t death
Q“y finally result ?

A.- Ho, I consider th^t quite cut ef the question. It
was n^t said th»t the experiments had tc last twelve &~ys,
tut that they should last that long if there were nc dis-
turbancas that occurcd.

This passage on page 13 ef document bo Jc He. 5, the
same d.cumuit, He. 177, Prosecution Exhibit He. 133, under
2 states ;

"Hiration cf experiments : 12 days.

“Since in the cpini.n of the Chief cf the nodical Ser¬
vice (Chef fC8 S-’nitactswcsens) permanent injuries'to health,
* .rt is, the death of the experimental subjects' bad to bo
expected, as experimental subjects such persons sh'.ul'- be
us>.a 5 s well be put at the disposal by ReichefUchrer $5."

DCcsxft th-t passage, written ty Christensen, convey the

85Jj6


4 June-A-?L-15-4-:fcehan (Int. Brown)

Court Sc. 1

thought that the necessity cf resorting to the Reiehsfuehrer
OS t. obtain subjects wns simply because the death of the
6 xp6rimont°l subjects had to be expected ?

A.- Sc, nc one ever sold anything like this ncr do I
recall anything of thot sort.

I>-es that passage convey that thought oven cf it¬
self ?

V- Yv.s, if you would rend this passage you cculd get
that thought. Th»t is however simply a coapileti.cn on tho
part cf thG pers n who ’.’-rote this statement.

v .- Vos this the first time that you have henrd that
jxperia.nt 0 ! subjects were "v^ilcblc in ocnccntraticn camps,
ine&auch as you were unable to -scortain fr~m Kolzleehner's
report -f the Numbers conference in Octrber cf 1942 that cen
centrrti-n cemp inmat.s v/crc used > \vp 6 this tho first time
that information vas br*u3ht home to you ?

•m- Yes.

;. - -Jit this horrify ycu, D-ctor ?

A.- I oust s y th°t I found that ? very unpleasant thought,
because I dislike experiments cn prisoners.

k .- li?.C y-u ev.r b.«.n horrified at -»ny other aotheds used
in c-rtain research circle*s ?

A.- .re ycu thinking cf ether literature ?


U J^-.WP-16-l-Ccok (Int. Dram)
C-urt I


C ; . !Io, I an thinking of a passage in your doainent book Ho* 1,
in Schaeffer docu.-*nt boo!: 'o. 1, Docir-ent Ho. 3, which is Schaeffer
Exhibit j:o. 3, on page 5, "hich is the last page of an affidavit by
Dr. Heljsufch Reichel, and ho states therein in the last paragraph as
follows:

mj vas separated froa Dr. Schaeffer by the war. Not until the vrar
was ovor did I r»et him again in Dad Fjrraont, where, as he had done be¬
fore the war, he expressed tc -» his horror at the Mthods of certain
resoarch officials."

;* 0 w, Dr. Schaeffer, nhat of .ods do you have in =dnd and That were
the horrors i*<ch were so repulsive to you, that are outlined hero?

A. I was thinking of the Zerka nsthod.

Q. Then you considorod it rather horrifying, horrifying to use
the forte nothod on hunan beings in concentration cnnps, is that right?

A. I .leant to say it wcs horrifying thot such dillotontisn reached
such -roportiona as to sot throo govornxsntal offices in notion and to
expori ont in this direction beyond the Units of all reason.

n. - ell, nos when the sub oct of volunteers * as brought up at
this meting, did you tate a : natal note of that?

A. ?ron the words that wore used, era could soo that the subjects
wero only to be volunteers, and I third: Teeter Freyseng said enough
persons vovld volunteer in vier of the -.creased rations they would get.

% you actually heard 'ecter 'ra-ysons say that they would only
use concentration canp iraatos if certain inmtes would volunteer or
did ho ere3c state - pardon re doctor, go ahead.

A. I was about to ansuar ;-our uestion.

n. Answer it please.

A. Tou asked whether ho said that only subjects were to be used
if they rare volunteers, how perhaps ;-ou couldn't assure that f ron
vr-nt he said but yen could ass-^ te “as thinking exclusively of

volunteers. I can only repeat the words as I now remnber then.

8&0


u June —i— Jr-l6-2—C ook (Int. Brown)
Court I


q. well non these experiments with Berkatit were to be perfornod
on volunteers at your disposal or at this comittee's disposal by
t:» '’eichsfuehrer SS, t ho experiments were to be supervised by Professor
-eiglboeck in a mnner perscribed by this ccrcdttee so that no condi tions
Txwld exist which night impair tho health of any of the experimental
subjects, yet you vwro horrifiod, - why?

There are so aany thoughte e^xodied in that question of yours
that I aa not sure I can rore-ixer thorn all. In ay answer I will have
to take then up one try one.
q. Kindly do that.

... You said first that they <hrore to be node available oithor
to you or to tho comittea-. HOOO i*re nado available to nu, I needed
none and wanted none, nor did I want to carry out any experiments for
I did not aeo any necessity for then and I had :v own field of work.

In addition I wouldn’t do anything after othors drew up tho plans for
the o::porir*nt3. • tore over, I have already rods clear that tho ro;.w>-
snnnce that is expressed in than affidavit which you just axxtod refers
to tho quackery on the part of Borka and Sirany, ^o, not only in
this field, but also in otuxr riolds, -.wrc sold on throvdnK their weight
around. To ra personally o:nori:nnt3 on prisoners did not anpoal.

q. Do you feel in year opinion that a person incarcoratod in a
concentration ccnp or a orison is not in a position to volunteer for
radical ortporinonts?

It looks os II ho could but his active for so doing oonnot
bo checbod on ond p^cholosically easily influenced persons sdght un*r
certain clrcunstances apply to ho subjected to such eaportants *on
under other circunstancos t*yrould not. Ihis is in a certain sonso
an exploitation of the situation ir. nhlch these p.oplo find thonsolvos,
and the ratter is still bouv. debated.

q. yctrat these varies conferences where it wnsdxci<fcd to
oxporiixmt at Dachau were you offered the op;ortunity to supervise thq
errxoriiicnts?


h Juro-.'i#-JB-l6-3-Cook (Lit. -ram)
Court I


A. This was not offered to re. oroovor, qr attitude teforo then
had boor nuch too clearly oapr-srad for ary one to think of offering re
that opportunity, J5-. Bcrka v ras a mhber of the c emit toe and ho was
also ir. Dachau and watched tso e xreri-ents.

Q, T7as !!r. Berka offorod too opportunity to conduct the erporirents?
A* Whether he was offered that op. ortunity or "bother ho made
active offorta to do this I don't know, but in ry opinion ho wint thorn

noro or loss on his cam initiative,

ft. Thon I submit to you, doctor, too reason for offering the
opportunity to ccnduct the o rvrlmnts to tha dof-ndant Boiglbooclc was
ainpjy to a void havii* a prejudiced report nado out by the too non who
had produced or d ivolojvd too Schaeffor and t ho lerka methods, is that

a corroct assunption on ^ part?

Ko, I do not believe tot is a correct assunption be or. us o too
director of tho experiments was irofossor 3ppingor and ho ms a ran whom
gorica had proposdd and an informed porson. Tiorka, moreover, was in tho
corulssicn; ho was also at Dachau, so I cannot see whoro an*' sort of
neutrality would still have been proservod hero,

Q, .iftor those -votings in !£; of 19)lt, did you hear any noro
about tho experiments, that is, did you hear any now prior to tho
Soptorfvr mootings?

... ITo, I hoard notUioc tho rooting.

n. .oil nor in this voting *liich you have outUned which was in
te-3 affidavit which took place in October, 19Uli« .
res.

»heroin PjiglboecU reported on the seporimonts, was that toe
first ti- e tint you heard nrrto-ing fibmt tv nannor in whi«h tho
carori: eats rwre ccnducted?

I have seen a report but I cannot say today for sura whether

tliis report reached me before er a.tor,

Q. Ton man before or after tie actual ■xting in the ^logical

gardonsf


U Jurc-.>JP-lo-J»-Cook (jnt, Tram)
Court I


A, Yes, that is right,

Q. Did aoiglbo-ck report at th'.t rating about the ejperirfints
1» performed on hinaolf?

A, Do yOU runn Mother bo ro. ortod on it officially?

I <ton*t know, but later ho told about then,

n. Did ho tell you about then?

A, lbs,

o. That did ha toll you?

... Ho said that by and large ho had tru vndous thirst but that
ha continued his regular rror’ and I can't r~:uiibor arything particularly
j in wliat ho told v otfwnriao about this -xporirvnt on himwlf.

0 . noil did ho eo through t'j rag'dar routine in his own orriori-
rents, in his so If oxpjri ant o’ relying on son wr.tor cnly throughout
the ontiro oaporinontal poriod or did ho cvrcly fool the oxpjrl wnirl
subjects by drinking soa rotor in “rent o', thor.?

A. I didn't understand t’o ciusticn,

0. 7 0 11 as I "sxlorsUand it, tha purpose of his a xpori ont was to
convanco hiasolf and to corn nco tho a?norlnontal subjects that tho
0 rnerkants would not he dan-orous, is that right?

A. That I cannot tall you, I can only state tho fact that ho
told us that ha had carried cr.it ah o p.ri~ont on hinsolf. Perhaps Iva
wanted to reassure then and as I acy, I don't -crew,

1 . Slow long did bo carry out this self crrvrinent, how nary days?

A, That I can't toll you. I don't know.

ra, -;cll now in his report at tha October voting, didn't ho
outsUno tho urviri'-nnts that ha conducted on hinsolf?

... I den't knar. I can't tell you*


8,51


U Jun-A-4B—17—1-Gross (Inti 3rcwn)
Court Ho. I.


Q Ho didn't tell you hew long Iv; had experimented on the
experimental subjects?

A Yes, he gave us the times for the individual group,

Q Well, did he s~y that in his experiments with the concen¬
tration crop innate s ho wont, as high as 12 days and that soma of tho
experimental subjects were experimented on twice with only a few days
of rost in between tho experiments?

A Ho did not say that he wont as far as 12 days. That can
only havo been true of those treated with h'ofatit and I bellovo that
ms only 10 days.

Q Did ho toll you what synptens developed during the course
of the experiments?

A Yes.

Q Did the synptocs develop as outlined in your affidavit
on page 7 of Document Book 5 wherein you state i "Dr. Boiglboeck also
reported that the experiments had resulted in swelling of tho livor
and nervous synptocs. Delirivn and cental disturbances also appeared".
Did he outline that or do you wish to correct that?

A I don't want to oorrect it, I want to elucidate it.

Swelling of tho liver ...

Q You want to add to it?

A I would have to delete delirixxi. That was my mistake.

When I said that I heard the nervous symptoms were increased — rofloxos
and sensitiveness of the muscles. And the mental disturbances wero
apethy and somnolence.

Q Well, do you report that some of those subjects developed

hallucinations?

A That I do not know, I don't remember.

Q Didn't you emphatically tell -Ir. UcHaney in the course of
ore of your interrogations ttot Boiglboeck outlined the symptoms pre¬
valent in these experiments?

A I never spoke to Hr. JfcHaney.

8552


• t

l Jur^-A-:B-l?-2-Grosa (Ihti Br onr.)
Court Ko. I.


Q Didn't Mr. Me Haney sit in on an interrogation wherein you
were interrogated Inst fall.

A Can't reaecber that he did.

Q I will have to produce the interrogation, doctor. V/hen
you sure interrogated last-fall didn't you explain rather enphatically
that the synptccs outlined by Beiglboeck indicated that these experi-
-entnl subjects ordured considerable suffering during tlx- course of the
experiments?

A The thirst experiments certainly weren't pleasant.

Q That is all you have to say about it?

A Yes.

Q Coca now, doctor, you havo been answering ay questions quito
well to this point. Now, you attended this mooting. Beiglboock gnvo
a report. Ho must have said nore than that. Didn't he give you an
outline of all the observations he ran do, didn't ho toll you what symptoms

e

apro*red, didn't ho toll you whothor or not sono of the experimental
subjocts attempted to drink water off tho floor? Wrsn't ho more olab-
orato than I hnvo gathered from your testimony?

A Ho didn't say that anybody dr-nk water off tho floor, no.
Above that I couldn't nako out a question from your last currnry.

Q How I want to know, wasn't ho more elaborate than you
have testified to thus far? Can't you tell us?

A Yes, yes, of course. That was a long tir» ap>. It is ox-
tronoly difficult to re ranker all thoso things and the consoquoncos of
one little word that night be wrong I have soon horo.

Q Hell, did he toll you, for instance, that it was necessary
in tho course of the experiments to tio one of the experimental subjects
in bed bccauso tho Gxp3rL-ont~l sufc joct had succeeded in gotting sane
water to drink? Didn't he tell you that?

A Ho didn't say that anybody was tied to bed, no.

Q Tell, you recall in Document Book 5, the affidavit of Bauer
which is on page 25. I anticipate an objection. Your Honor. This docu-

8553


I Jun-A-!3-17-3-C-ross (Inti Brcrm)

Court lib. I.

sent was admitted provisionally.

DR. STEINBAIBR FOB BSIG12CGCK: I object to this question be¬
cause this document was a (bitted only under the condition that a sworn
certificate bo subnit ted later. The xTosocution can, therefore, not
use this doc ice nt and I object to this question.

IS. HARDY: Tho docunont has been suanittod provisionally,
your Honor. Tho FToeecution was to obtain a jurate to tho docuaont.
That has been obtained. The docurorrt is in duo fora and will bo of-
forod forrully when the Tribunal sots aside a date for Prosocution to
do so. I hare the jurate, it states: "Boforo co, Lionel Shaffrow,
special agent, CIC, appoarod Ignaz Bauor, to ao known and in ay pros-
oncc signod tho foregoing statorsont written in tho Goman language"
Signed by Lionel Shaffrown, CIC. So that hurdle has boon ovorcono and
I should like to continuo ny cross oxraination.

DR. STEINBAUER: Thank you for tho explanation.

BY IB. HARDY:

Q Now in this Docicont on pago 2$ of tha Docunont Book, Uth
paragraph, this witnoss states: "Tho thirst was so terrible that scco
patio nt s did not hesitate to drink dirty wator usod for washing tho
floor* I saw ono of tho so poor devils."

Do you havo tho pngo, psago 26 of Docunont Book 5, Docunont
NO-910, Prosooution Exhibit 1]*0, tho socond pago of tho affidavit, tho
paragraph in tho ciddlo of tho pago occnencing with tho words Tho
thirst was so torribla that sono patients did not hesitate,..." It

nay well bo - you havo it? Tho thirst was so terrible that so no

patients did not hesitate to drink dirty water usod for washing tho
fleer. I saw one of these poor devils falling on his knocs, bogging
in vain for water. Doctor Bcigolboeck was pitiless. Ono youtfi, who
succeeded in getting sono water to drink, was bound to his bed for
punishment." How, did Beiglboeck report about any of thoso conditions
that ho encountered during the course cf his experiments?


U Jur.-.’.-KB-17-u-C-ross (Int. 3rcwn)

Court Ho. I.


Q TToll, didn't you ssk tho all important question of tho ex¬
perimenter Bciglboeck - how well tho experimental subjects cooporr.tod
and whether or not using concentration era? inmates would be advisable
in tho future? fferenH these questions important to a sciontist and a
san who was horrifiod at using concentration crap inmates?

A I don't understand tho last part of your sentonoo.

Q I s-y, weren't you interested in knowing how well these

experimental subjects cooperated?

A Yos, tho Boiglboock said that aany of them drank wator.

q Did ho toll you whether or not deaths occurrod?

A Ho said that thcro was no death and that all pationta re¬
covered extraordinarily.

Q Did 1 » tell you what ho did with tho subjects after 'no had
couple tod tho oxporiaonts?

A Ho said thnt ho gavo then a follow-up examination and at
tho end tho patients got very good food, and that they wore givon
specially good oaro for a ccrt-in time afterwards.

Q Woll, do you recall in tho affidavit by Pillwoin uhoro
Pillwoin stated th-.t tho patients wore put back into tho regular in¬
firmary in a vory weakened and darngod condition where they diod after
a short tiro?

DR. IEICKMANH: May I make an objection, Mr. President. Mr.
Herdy is hero asking the witness whether ho remembers tho affidavit
of Hr. Pillwoin. I boliovo this question is relevant. Tho issuo is
not to tost tho memory of the witness - whothor ho is able to roro>sbor
an affidavit which was submitted four wocks ago or 8 weeks ago. Only
that can bo shown by these questions. Tho witness can say ho can ro-
ur.bcr it or cannot renenfcor it but that is completely irrol(frnnt in
the cress examination of this witness. I soe therein only a moans of
bringing up for discussion prosoctuion documents which have alroady

been sutaittod and I think that should be avoided.

MR. HARDY: I think the objection is veoy well takon, your


U Jun-i-?S-17-5-Orc85 (Int» Brown)

Court Ho. I.

Boner* I sill rephrase ny question*

31 B. HARDY:

Q Did 3eiglbocck report at the tieeting in October that
patiants were put back in the regular infiroary in a very veakenod
ard danngod condition wherv. they died nftor a short tine as set forth
in ?illv;cin*3 affidavit?


4 Junc-A-?L-18- 1-K°rrcw (Int. von Schcen)

C:urt No. 1


2 ic, Frefess^r Boi_lb.eck oid n:t report that, and
I do r.:t believe thet that is in tho effid^vit of *tr. Iill-
vem.

Yea will find it in the. effiervit of *!r. Pillwoin,
which is Prosecution Exhibit // 139, lament Ko. 912, in
IX-Cv^nt 3cok // 5, Year Ken.r.

TH£ PRESIEGOT : C-uns«.l should exhibit these affidavits
t: tho witness if ho desires to question hin.

BY :S. H-uRDY i

i h"ve n. further questions on the affidavit.

Did Dr. Beiglb: ock tell ycu vhrt nationality the sub¬
jects were that he used ?

Iw#

Did he t-11 y-u whether cr nrt they were volunteers?

I r.member that he sc id that they wore volunteers
in tho experiment.

uid he tell ycu that Gypsies hrd been set aside
by the deichsfuchrer SS f.r use in tho experiments ?

.v- I heard that Gypsies were used, txit I do net reacn-
eor frea when I hoard thet.

dc ycu have D cuhont Beck // 5, Doctor ?

.*•- Yes, I do.

-..ill you turn tc Document No. 179, which is 1 r: se-

cutier. Exhibit 135 ? It is on p«-go 20 cf the English, The

letter fr.m Grrvitz, R;ichscrzt SS, te Heinrich Kianlor,

%

ccr.c.rning the experimental subjects tc be set aside fer
these sea v^ter experiments at Dachau, .ould ycu kindly
turn tc the p^r°graph numbered vith 2 stating tho # fpinicn
-f 35 Gruppcnfuohrcr Gluocks fren which I quote :

"Referring t~ the above letter, we report that we h*va
nc -bjucti.ns whatsoever to tho experiments requested by the

8557


4 Juno-'»-FL-13-2-ICar row (Int. vcn Sch. on)

c.-rt Ho. i

Chi-f -f the Icaical Service cf the Uiftwrffe to be conduct¬
ed at the cxpcria.ntal station Rp.scher in the concentration
camp Dachau. If p-seible, Jews cr prisoners held in quaran¬
tine are to bu used."

New, Doctor,' I «*a fully »wprc of the f p ct tlvt you old
n.t "oceiv- this letter end th«*t here in this court room is
the first tia- th-t you hove 8v-cn it t However, dess it *p-
pc-r. t y.u th^t the language ‘‘If possible, Jews cr prisoners
h.ld in "uarantine arc to b- used" conveys the thought that
these subjects were volunteers ?

I don't know how aiuiy prison.rs thirc were in qua¬
int in-. I c-uld imagine that if there wore several hundred
prisoners there, one c^uld go and esl: for volunteers. That
c ndusion is net ce spelling.

«til, d-es th- next paragraph, written by 3$ Gruppcn-
fuehr..r Ncbt c-nv-y to y-u that the subjects used wore volun¬
teers *? Thj pri-graph reads as folicv/s :

"I n & r.e v/ith the prop oar 1 tc conduct cxperir.ento on
pris-n.rs cf c-nc.ntrati-n caups in order tc evolve' a method
f:r unking see. wnt^r potable. I propose taking f-r this pur-
r-se the asocial gypsy h-lf breeds."

DR. iSLCKTliK: • Mr. President, I should like to object
to th- c-ntinuati-n cf this lino cf qudstinin?. *!r. Hardy
has elr-ocy confirmed that Dr. Schaefer s r v thi6 decunont
here in the court r, a for the first tine. Theref ro, quos-
ti.ns es tc his interpretation of th- contents of this dc-
cuent cannot bo the subject of an ox«ainati-n of a witness.
Just as w«.ll as this witness, or cv-n bettor, the Tribunal
can interpret what the 1 -ttor uc'ns.

:a. H .Rrn . ypy I call to the attention cf th^ Tribunal

tO.Pt t.liS S--»- objection was rr.ised when I put - or orybe

8556


4 June-.'»-?L- 18-3-Kcrrcw (Int. von Schcer.)
C--irt So. 1


[r. ITcHaney put the sroe questions tc the defendant Schrcedor
?nd I put the aecc questions tc Bcckcr-Frcyseng, end, at
that ti2c, the Tribunal overruled the objection.

IKS PRESIDENT : There is ne recollection cf the ruling
of the Tribunal on "ny similar question, but it scens that
the answer would be ueroly a supposition cn the pprt of the
witness.

?3. B.RDY : ?hc question I nn driving et, Your Honor,
is tc ask the witness whether or not, if he hod knowledge
cf the frets elicited in this letter, would he core stre-
nuon sly objected to the experiaents on the inaates et Da¬
chau.

JUDGE &SB3MG ; Why don't ycu ask hie that, !Ir. Krrdy ?

:n. asRDY i I'a building up tc the creation, Your Ho¬
nors'

Witness, will ycu kindly answer that question.

THE 1RESIDENT ; Propound the question again to the wit¬
ness.

HR. I-^RDY * If you had received this letter, would you
have core strenuously cbjcct.d tc the ^xperiaents at Do-

ch«u ?

DR. PBLOCUKH : I should like to object fig«in. The pro¬
secutor hinself hrs acid.that he knows that the witness
did net get the letter. Therefore, it is unnecessary to
ask vhcth..r he did get the letter.

THE ^RESIDENT . Objection sustained.

BY-*#. HARDY . *

Dr. Sichacfcr, when ycu executed your affidavit,
which is Decent NO-474, prosecution Exhibit 131, was that
submitted tc ycu in the Gcrorn language fer signature 7


4 Jur.£-.»-rL-18-4-f:arrcw (Int. von Schoen)


Court Nc. 1

Tht was -n the 23rd cf October, 1946, was it net ?

J \

A.- Yes, that's what it srys. It's probably right.

- Jid anyone compel you to sign this affidavit ?

A# - Nc#

Did you have the opportunity tc make corrections
therein ?

A.- Yes. May I finish answering ycur question ?

Q.- Certainly.

A.- On the unimportant points it was very ecsy, but on
the -lore important things it was acre difficult and, tc whe-
ly oppose the arguaonts cf the interrogator was difficult.

I, at the moment, thought it was true.

You, in fact, did make n considerable nuaber <-f
corrections in the original, did you not ?

A— Yes, in the original, Yos, I did mako a number of.
correct!-ns.

You wore unJer ceth when you executed this affida¬
vit ?

A.- ^0 8.

D-ctor, new in auaaaticn, you were in attendance at
the c-nforcnce cm the 19th cf 'Ay, wore you not ?

.»•- Yes •

At that conference you submitted objections to the
testing and use .f the EerkA method ?
if Yc.8#

You etteno’cd the conference "n the 20th cf '>y ?

• Ycs«

And you attended e conference- in Octeber, 1944, when
Dr. Leiglheeclc reported the results cf hie experiments ?

A.- Yes, bat I was ordered to attend all throe. I was

-recr^d te att.nd -’ll thr-e meetings.

856 o


4 June-A-FL-18-5-Karrcw (Int. Vcn Schcen)
Court No. 1


t .- I understant that.

I have no further questions, Your Honor.

'uu. r^^siDSTJT : Any further questions to be propounded
to this witness in connection with the cross examination ?

RSDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY DR. FSLCXHANN s

q.- Dr. Schaefer, the prosecutor asked you whether you
demonstrated your method among others also to professor
Schroeder, in the presence of Dr. Becker-Freyseng. Then, on
the basis of this demonstration, yrtte everything done - all
steps token for the introduction of Wofatit in the Uiftwaf-
fe ?

A.- You mean my demonstration in December, 1943, to
professor Hippke ?
q.- Yes.

A.- Not Professor Schroeder. Yes, of course.

q.- Orders were given to do everything to introduce

this method ?

A.- Yes.

q.« The prosecutor spoke of your opposition to the ex¬
periments end said thet there was only a passive resistance
because you sow an opportunity in these experiments to ma¬
ke it quite clear, by way of experiment, how good your me¬
thod was and how poor the Berka method wos. He said that,
didn't he ?

• * Yes, he did.

v- First, I should like to ask you, was your resistance

passive ?

A.- No, it was not passive. There were violent alter¬
cations.

7 .- ait you didn't have any success with your resis¬
ts!


4 Jun.e-A-FL-18-S-Karrow (Int. von Schoen)

Court 2i o. 1

tance. Therefore it oust have been we»k.

...» Cne couldn't say that. After all, I kps only an
Unterarzt. I could not do much against a group, of universi¬
ty professors, world fsaous sen. I couldn't do such against
ay superiors with the highest military ranks.

-*nd the possibility that you wanted to bring out
through these experiments that Vofetit was good and that Ber-
katit was bad, that would probably have existed only if
experiments had *160 been conducted with Wofatit ?

. A.- Yes, that idea is divergent....

(Interrupting) Just a minute, just a minute. Answer
my questions concretely.

The possibility of contrasting these two methods in an
experiment and proving how good your method was could hove
existed only if your method had been included in the expe¬
riment ?

.»•- Yes.

(*. - -»nd did you do anything to hove your method included
in the Dachau experiment ?

No, nothing at all.

.;- On the 19th or the 2Cth, at these meetings, was any¬
thing said about introducing a series of experiments with
'.’ofttit ?

A.- No, nothing.'

At the meeting of the 25th of May, while you were
present, was anything said about introducing a series of ex¬
periments with Wofatit ?

•a.- No.

Jo you consider it possible that the introduction of
a * Of at it series of experiments was ordered after the 25th


4 June-.v-FL-18-7-Karrow (Int. Von Schoen)

Court No. 1

of Uey on the basis of deliberations of thQ so called com¬
mission 7

A.- That is possible.

4 .- .ind is it possible - the defendant Bcckcr-Freyseng
testified this - is it possible that n series of experiments
with Wo fat it is exactly the s«ae things as a series of ex¬
periments with fresh woter 7

A.- That is not only possible, tut that is a certain


fact.


o r-


June U7-^-».TD-a9-a-»aloy (Int* von Scboen)
curt No. 1

Q Then suming up all these considerations which wo have Just
elicited in individual quosticns, what do you have to say to tho
assumption of tho Prosecutor that yrxi had a personal interest in tho
execution of tho Dachau experiments, would ycu reject that assumption?

A Tea, completely. In this connection I should like to remind
ths Tribunal of Exhibit 37, the tostlr»ny of the Witness Pohl where
Pohl says that no mention was ever made of tho Introduction of a
Tolfntit scries of o xp-rinonte, I should like to say that If I had
had the slightest lntorost in this I would have taken an activo
Interest In tho oxporlmonta, and how they woro arrangod. Professor
Eppir^er had boon invol'od by Eorkatit, Ho was in chargo of oxporirwnla
for SIrony. Tho oxporinonta showed what tho ucthod of the execution
of tho cDcportoonte, what significance it has and tho objectivity of
results oan inprovo on tho nothod of axpuriaontation,

Q On tho 19th of ‘lay you oppoeod Borkntit, ypu also ob Joe tod
to undertaking oxporinonte?

A Toe,

Q But experiment* on prisoner* had net boon mentioned yot?

A Tea, that is right,

Q For what ronson* did you objoct to^cxporlnonts on tho 19th

of Xayt

A Booauso I considered then superfluous,

Q Did you havo any roason to rofuso to oboy tho ontor to
attond on tho 20th of !toy?

A No, thoro was no roason to do so,

, q Was thoro any roason you had to know that oxp-riuonts

would bo performed or would at least bo discussed, oxpjrimonte on

£

concentration canp lrnatoe?

k No, I did not know that,

q If you did not particularly want to go to this meeting on
2* Hay why was that?


o vr


JUTJJ U‘W-iTlW. 9 -a-»lor (Int. Ton Schoen)

;urt ffc, 1

A I vr.3 annoyod because the other people rofbsod to under¬
stand*

q Ycu thought tho whole thing was superfluous, the discussions
cf experiments?

A Tos.

q Thun on the 20 of 'ay us Beckor-Froysang and ytxirsolf
h?.vo tostifiod, tho idoe of experinents on prisoners was brought up
for tho first tino?

L Yos.

Q Vfjs-t fooling did you havo then ssido fren your cbnscious-
noss that tho oxporir.onts woro superfluous?

A I folt tl»t it was unpleasant to carry out cctpurinonts on
prisoners,

Q Did yownntijxithy oxtond only to p-rfornin-j oxpurlnonta on
concentration oaap inintoe or waro you then are you nowi convinced that
oxp-risents on prisoners should not bo porfomod at all, cdthor on
concentration ctrip prisoners, or prison imatos, prison irwatos in
r rany or •-'erica or any place ulso in tho *orld?

A Yos, that was oy convidtion then and it is :iy conviction

row,

q Mow, aftor tho 20th of ’lay did you do anything toward
expressing onco :»ro your dovintinp opinion?

A Yos,

Q Km it did you do?

A I talkoi to Bockor-Prcysore about it,

Q You telephoned to hL:?

A Yos,

q Arvi was your telephone conversation indudod ir. the af A-
lavit exhibit 19 of firs. Koonig of which I havo subidttod, and is it
described c.rroctly?

A les, it is described correctly?

8565

I


U Jtao U7-n-t'.T>193-'2l03 r (Brt* von Soho on)

Court Ho. 1

q What caused you to attend tfca conferonco cf “ay 25th,

first oxteraally tb.ro was a rdlitary order, second whr.t considerations,
what inrlfcr attitude did you havo at that tine?

A Tho axperta wore to consult with each othor. Px*cfossor
Sppirvgor, rofossor Huabner an-' Profess or Setter ware to decide nhother
oxporinonta woro necessary at ell*

Q lour nodical opinion waa settloi?

A Tea, and I aaau-od for sura that those throe gontlcnan
would roalixo that Berkatit waaocnplotoly useless.

Q And thon in the Booting at least ac far as you woro
prosont, until you wore aaporctoi fren the ethers bocauso of tho air
raid, yxi woro sorioualy disappointed in this opinion?

A Yos, I was quite bitter and I lcot v faith in — I will
havo to speak gen-rally, — ny faith in scientific Ju ’gr-ont.

q Do you thin:; that tooso gentlaacn gave their opinion
against thoir hotter knoslodge?

L Ho, noj why ahould thoy 3o thet.

q -Tho rocs on I ask is that tha Press cut 3r has stntod that
Professor Bppingor eo.isittod suicide, awl aa the Prosooution said
apparently booauao ho was aware of his yuiltj thoraforo, I ask you do
ym know whothor all tho other gontlcnan •-arc still alivo?

A Tos, tha others arc still alive-, ind are still working os
pr-foasors in thjir flal-’a.

Q Tho;.' havo not oo :dtto J . suici ’o? s

A Ho, they havo not ca nit tod suicido.

q So apparently they arc not sufferin • fren a uilty
corsoicnco?

A He, -pparontly not.

q If csx? ri ajr.ts were porfemod with Hdfatit '.-as your P»r-
ission require’ t-' p:rfor: axp.rir r.ts with "cifatit?

A 'r, cno .could ut the '-olfatit flren tho I.C.


h June U7-.'.--TI>-I9-^Aloy (Int. wn Schocn)

Ccurt ?fo« 1

\

Q Con y jo li^slno that too ror-dssiun of & Untomrst would

havo tc bo obtained?

A ffo, that la quito fantastic.

Q Can you l^ajlno that too experiments with >lfctit woro
performed to aoo what effect ^olfatit or rath or toe s<* vator troatod

with '4olfatlt had?

A Mo, there was nothin? tc bo soon.

Q !tr. 5fcr-V cakod yea about what Professor Bicgolboock
roportod concerning too ox^rinonta in *chauj I assume it escaped
your attention that !. Hardy *1"=) «•» Profossor Biogolboech
ask you and you answered ro panting a cyoat doal of what Pro foes or
Biagolboock rc per tod about the oxjx-rlrcntsj did you noon to say that
Professor Bertatit told you all that personally or that ho told that
in his locturo?

A (to, I Leant to say ttat bo said that in Ids locturo, at
loaat sw*t of it»

Q Professor Biogolbook spoko to you only briefly?

A foa, only briefly.

DP_ pslcC'AW* I have no further quostiona.


It Jun-A-4©-2^1-Meehan (int. Brown)

Court No. I.

3T DH. MARX (Defense counsel for Professors Schroedor and Bocker-Frcy-
aeng.)

v Q Dr. Schaefer, you said in your cross ejcsalnation that

Professor Anthony had given you orders to go to Vienna and look at
Sir any* oxperiaenta; do you know eatently whether Professor Anthony
gave you this order on his cwn authority or whether ho passed this
order to you dn behalf of the dopartnent chief?

A I assuoo that he gave it to m on bo half of tho depart¬
ment chief.

Q Can you rocer.ber who sipiod tho travel order and the
nilitary ticket toe this trip?

A No, I cannot recall that.

Q lou said that you warned Prof. Schroodor and Dr. Bockor-
Froysong that Borkatit was dangorousj now did you warn thon about ths
danger of 3ork«tit in practico of soa distress or tho dangor in oxpori-
nonts?

A This warning roforrod of oourso to cases of distress at

soa.

Q Thon I should liko to ask you scoothing else, tho Prosoc-
'Jtor askod you Mother An tho nooting whon it was docidod to jX>rfona
tho oxporiaonts in concentration cnape, those aro tto words of tho
Frosocutor, ""hotter you woro offered to suporriso thoso experiments
or to carry then out yourself"; in tho threo raeotir^s on tho 19th, 20th
and 25th of May was it decidod to carry out oxporinonts in concentra¬
tion caape - the oophasis on tho word "decided"?

A No, that was not docidod.

Q to 19 )L\y 19Uli was it jicntionod at all that experiments
ware to bo jnrforaod on prisenors?

A No. -

Q to 20 Hay 19U» at tho nocting, what was said; was a de¬
cision reached at this nocting?


A No, the suggestion was made, i.o. the possibility was


a Jun-A-ffi-2 0-2-itoe han (Int. Br cwr.)
Court No« I #


brought up#

Q fta tho 25th of May, 19UU, were prisoners nentioncd at
all or was not everything else to bo triad first to carry out the ex¬
periments; for example in the Luftwaffe agencies, in tte Military Ifed-
ical Academy, otc.j were not all other possibilities to bo exhausted
first?


A I was present at only a part of this rooting on the 25th,
as long as I was there nothing was said about prisoners, that is
3howi by a few affidavits, too* Tho possibility of carrying out tho
experiments in Brunswick secned to bo tho predominant idea.

Q Tou can reuonbor that Brunswick was discussed, the Luft¬
waffe hospital in Brunswick?

A los, that is right.

Q Do you reroebor any other agency; perhaps tho Military
Nodical Acadotqr of tho Luftwaffo?

A Yes, I roseabor tho Military ; tod leal Acadony.

Q You rtnonber that too?

A Yos.

Q It was not then said that tho carrying out of cxporlaonts
in cTips was tho prinary idea?


A No, no.

Q No further questions.

DR. ST5INBAUER: (Coixiscl fc r tho Defondant Boiglboock).


Q Witness, tho Prosocutor oxr.mired you as an export, I ask
you,^ have you worked on tho effect c£ aoa-#atcr on Jnnan boings or
have you only concomed yoursolf with the question of removing tho

salt?

A I worked primarily on the renavnl of salt.


Q Then you havo no practical oxpcricnco?

A No.

Q Your statements a'cout tho loss of water with 500 ebea and


1000 eben with various kidney concentrations are than purely an as-

8569


li Jur>-A-?2-2G-3-4feehan (Int. 3rown)
Court Ho. I.


suaption frm your part?

A That is ay personal opinion gained froc literature, re¬
ports and theoretical opinions of ny own.

Q Then you cannot scy that this opinion of yours is ab¬
solutely scientific and accurate?

A No, of course I cannot ascertain that 10C%.

Q No further questions.

HR. HARDY:

Q I have two further questions. Your Honor, if there are
no further questions by defense counsel.

THK PRES I DENTi Does defonse counsel desire to propound any
further questions to the witness?

. DR. FBLCOLUWi At the end, I have a renark to aake. I
havo no further questions to the witness.

RE-CROSS EXA-*ORATION

BY *!R. HARDY:

* Q When did you learn for the first tins, Dr. Schaefer,
that sea water treated by your nothod was to be aaployed in Dr. Boigl-
toock's experiments?

A As far as I know now that was in October.

Q In other words, you did not know about it until after
the experiments had been ccnpleted?

Q No one told ne anything about it.

A They employed your method and never infcraod you?

A It was not necessary. I did not have the material and
it was not generally known that I was connected with this nothod. The
I.G. Far ben industry was in contact with the technical office and with
the Navy; whether the gentlemen knew, I don't believe they did.

Q Did you develop this Schaefer method of rendering sea
water potable in your capacity as an Unterarzt in the Luftwaffe or in
your capacity as an‘employee of the I. G. Farben?

, A In ay capacity as Unterarzt in the Luftwaffe.


1* Jury-A-iS-20-i.-Jfeehan (Int. 3rcwn)
Court Ik, 1,


Q Have you ever had any c lini cal training. Doctor?

A lea, after I took xqr state exanination, I was for about
one year an interne and then I was an assistant for or» year and in
1938 I had to leave the clinic.

Q I have no further questions. Your Honor.


U Jun-A-MB-21-i-Cook (int. Brown)
Court !to. I.


DR. IBXCDONHs At the end of ay opening statcuont xaony weeks
ago I sjade application that the defendant Schaeffer be released from
custody and not subjected to the trial. I an of the opinion that
this is a case where according to the practice of Aaerican and English
Courts, the Court is able now. to accede to such a request, and X nnke
the sane application once nore.

THE F2ESIDS.V7: Tho Tribunal will consider the notion by
counsol for defeniant Schaeffer for a dischargo at this tine. The
Court will tako the notion under ndviscoont and nnnoimco its ruling
on it in due tine.

Tho Tribunal will now bo in recess until nine-thirty o'clock
in tho aoming.

DR. GAWLIKi Hr. President, tho Tribunal had ordcrod that
tomorrow tho dofondant Ho von ary rcra-in away. I r.-do this rppliontion
on tho assumption that the witness Dorn would bo o::-ained only Friday,
but sinco tho witness Dorn is being oxr-ainod tomorrow, I would like to
concol application and have tho defondant Ho von prosont taaorrorr.

THE HISSIDEHri Very well, counsol.

THE JIARSHALx Tho Tribmal will bo in rocoss until nino-
thirty in tho norning.

(Tho Tribunal adjoumod until 9x30 5 Juno 19U7).


Court 1

Juno b-'i-l-l-HD-Xaloy-Brovn.


Official Transcript of the American Military Tribunal

In the natter of-the Unite! States of America, against

Karl Brandt, et al, defendants, sitting at Kurnberg,

Oornany, on 5 June 1947, 0950, Justice Beals presiding,

IKS MaRSHaL: Persons In the courtroon will please find
their seats.

The Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal 1.

Military Tribunal 1 Is now In session. God save the
United States of «nerlca and tills Honorable Tribunal.

There will be order In the courtroom.

THE PRESIDE!:?: Mr. Marshal, will you asoertaln If the
defendants arc all prosont In Court?

THE MAHSHaL: May It ploaso Your Honor, all defendants
ere pi-ssent In Court wltn the oxooptlon of tho defendant
Gobhardt, absent boonuao of Illness.

THE PRESIDES?: Tho Secret ry General will no to for
tho record tho presence of tho defondants In Court, oavo
tho defendant Gobhardt, vh-. will bo oxcusod fron nttor.dr.nco
today pursuant to certifier to of tho Captain of tho
•icdlorl Deportment In chare® of tho prisoners, as to tho
Illness of dofondant Gebhardt. Tho Soorotnry General will
fllo tho oertlflcato for tho rooord.

Counsel nay proceed.

DR. GaTLIK: (Cour.sol for Hovon): With thu permission
of tho Tribunal I would like te oall the wltnoso Paul
Frn to tho stand.

* V ••Wv

THE PA£du}SST: Will you ploaso repeat? I did not
have tho eai^lnes on.

DR. OiVtfflr: Ulth tho permission of tho Tribunal I*
would like it call th. witness Paul Friedrich Dorn to the

s>y

vl’tnoee' stand.

THE PRESIDENT: Pursuant tc a^froosont between counsel
c roved by the Tribunal, the i-iarshal will call the witness


Court 1

June 5-B-l-2-HD-Maloy-Browr..


Pr.ul Friedrich Dorn a witness for defendant Kove.o.

The Tribunal will trie under advisement for further
consideration the option made by counsel for defendant
Schaofc-r to dismiss the charges against him. Ruling on
that motion will be passed until the conclusion of the
testimony, ct least.

PAUL FRIEDRICH DORN, a witness, took the stand and test¬
ified as follows;

THE PRESIDENT! Hold up your right hand and be sworn,
please. ’.fill you repeat this or.th after me; I swear by
Ood, the almighty and (fcr.lsciont, that I will speak the
pure truth and will withhold and add nothing.

(Tho wltnoao repeated tho oath.)

THE PRESIDENT: You may bo seated. Counsel .-tay procoed
to examine tho wltnoss

DIRECT EX/tAI NATION

3Y DR. GAVLXKs

Q. "ltnoss, your rws. Is Paul Friedrich Dorn, Is that
correct?

A. Yes.

Q. When and where wo\*o you born? *

A. Tho 16th of February 1916, In Vlnzholn.

You are a German national, Is that correct?

A. Yes.

Z. Ploc.so, what is your present address?

A. Eschwcge, An don «nlagon, 14 a.

Q. Uhnt Is your -resent profession?

A. Taxi service and renting of fotor cars.

Z. For what reason wore you nut into the concentration
camp?

«. Before the war I wa6 the proprietor of c snail
transport ( buslnes6. In 1940 cy truck wes requisitioned


6574


Co .rt 1

June 5—rt-1—5-HD-Jtaloy-Broihi.


by the German Wohraocht and I was instructed to work as a
workman In an armaments factory. In «u s ust of 19-*0 I refused
to do this work and was arrested by the Gestapo of Leipzig.
The Judicial proceedings against me for refusing to work wero
squashed, end I was turned over to the concentration camp
of Dachau.

4. How long woro you there?

a. From September 1940 to to 20th of December, 19-1-0.

5. Whore did you go on tho 20th of December 19*10?

A. To the concentration camp of Buchenwald near Weimar.

Q. ’That commando were you in in the ouchonwald ccncen-
tr-tlon camp?

A. First of all I was omployod In tho quarry.

C. How lon 3 wore you employed there?

A. Until 15 January 1941.

v. What hap cned then?

A. Cion because I was sick I wis sent to the Prisoners
Hospital where a necessary gland operation was carried out
on mo.

Q. *.nd what happened then?

«. For 8 days I wns nn out-patient and then I wont
back to tho hos-ltnl for o second operation.

3. And what happened after the operation?

rtftcr the operation I at first received nn easier
Job and was employed In the prisoner's kitchen for light
work.

Q. r *ow Ion.: were you there?

Until Hrroh 1941.

£. Where did you then?

A. I was ut into the prisoner's hospital ''nd since
March 1941 I was used there ns a clean-up man.

^575


5 Juno 47-2-1-neehan- (Brown)
Court 1.


Z. Hov lens did you do tills cleaning work?
a. Houchly ona year.

Z- What dll you do then7
a. I -'as a sale nurse.

Z- How l)n b - wore you a sale nurse?
a. Until 20 September 194*'.

Q. font happened then?

a. .iftor Dr. Ho von was arrested onl I lost the support
I had had in Suchenvaid, I vaa transferred tc .iuaohvltr.

Z- ^' on » vltnoea. It 1 j correct that from March of
1941 until 20 Soptoaber 194\ you vera In the prisoner's
hospital of the ccncontralon caap of ruchonvald?

*08.

Q. Durln; this time who was oanp dcotor?

.u Until 1942 Dr. 31anka as far as I Know anl later
In 19*2 Dr. Hovon was appointed o-iap doctor.

Do you know when Dr. Hoven v*o arrested?
a. I know that vary voll, on 12 September 194'.

Q. Do you you rocojnl to Dr. Hovon aacn.; thoso In tho

look?

a. Yes.

Q. Pleace state vhloh of thaso persons is the former
caap uootor, Dr. Hoven.


a. In the last row, tho thirl aan fren the left.

Z- Perhaps the witness ai.vfct ba allovol to stop
forward and point to D r . Hovon.

THJ ?RJ3ID£.\’T: IV e vltneos may stop to the dock and
examine tho defendants an* identify the Defendant Hoven If
he eftn.

*H 2 VITl^SS: /ary well.

(IHJ WITN35S ST £33 TO TH3 DOCY -ViD POIUjS TO DSPSUDdlIT
HOV&H.)


2576


5 June 47-K-AX-8-2-Hechan- (Brown)
Court 1


THi WIIN'iSS: Here.

TH£ ?R23ID2::T: The record will show that the witness
when stepping in front of the defendant's desk has ocrrect-
ly identified the defendant Hoven.

BY OH. OA/LIX:

q. T^en you know very well ’that the conditions wero
in the oaap hospital In the tine during which Or. Hoven
was the oaap looter?

A. Yes, I do.

q. Are Blochs 4* and 49 or Blook 4d known to you?

*. Yes.

Q. Hew la it that you know of then?

a. Whon Block 46 was being used as an oxporlnental
station I was there a few tines and hai to take dru<o and
nediolne fron the o&in hospital to this blook. However,
at Blook 46 I had no tasks to porforn.

q. Tnat happened In 3?.cok 46?

... I know that typhus experlnents we.-e performed there.

q. Who was the chief of Block 46?

rt. Tae then Sturnbannfuehrer Or. Ding.

q. What functions did Dr. Hoven perform in Block *6?

Dr. Hovdn had no nedlcal functions whatsoever at

Bolok -.6.

q. Did the defendant Or. Hoven carry out any experi¬
ments In Block 46?

So far as I know Dr. Hoven dll not hnvo the right
to do that since the experlnents wore conducted on oriors
fron Berlin an., during the first experlnontal series even
33 members were strictly forbid len to enter that Block.

Q. Who lid carry out these experiments in Block 46?

S- for as I know only Or. Ding.

q. Hew do you r .now that?


C577


5 June 47-H-.*2-2-‘'-y.ee harv- (Brown)
Court 1.


«. I had a friend who was a Jewish fellow and a nurse
and I talked to hla daily about what was going on In Block

* 6 .

q. Vho was this Jowl ah nurea?

I can only reaeaber hla faally nano - Jellir.eck.

q. Do you believe that thla aan la worthy of crelenco?

•*. I knew Jelllneck aa a very good frlo.nd and a vory
hcneat poraon.

q. What do you know about tho ex >erlnont9 that wore
oarnea out with lice?

v. I know that at the end of 19i2 cages of lloo, In¬
fect, d llco, arrived In Buohenwald for tho first tine. Dr.
Hovon conferred with the .cost laportant prison nuraea of
Block 4c and afterwards these lice wore dostroyed alnco
the danger of opllealc vao too great for tho whole oato.

q. Vnat do you know about tho aooond shlpaont of lloo
that arrived at Buchonvad 1 ?

I know that thla aooonl shlpaont was brought to
3uohonvald by a higher Wohr.e.ioht of floor. In the presence
of thla fehraacht of floor those llco wero to bo put on tho
prisoners lauedlately. Tile would have constituted a great
danger not only for the prisoners in tho oaan, but also
for the 33 meabora In tho oaap. Ihereforo one was very eager
to rcaove this Wohraaoht officer frea 31ock 40 aa quickly
aa poaalblo. .Jso thla second shipment of lice wao destroyed
In the presence o: tho orjp dootor.

Q. What do you mow about tho way In which thla ’.'ohr-

M

aaoht officer reaoved fron the caap?

Frca a telephone conversation that took place bet¬
ween Bloc* 4o and the prisoner's hospital, I know that Dr.
Hoven used a trick and told this officer that if he dll not


5 June 47-a-.JC-a~i-Heehan-(BrownJ
Court 1.


go back to Vslmar with the truck that was than made avail¬
able to fair., fae would have walk that Ustanoe In the evening,
since there wore no other naans of transportation between
Vole ar ar.l Buchonwald.

'I* Vas the experiment dbtoontinuod Immediately after
the Wohrmacht of floor left Bloch -.6?

Yds, according to what I learnt from Jelllneck
and a nurso froa Blook 5 who wae aocoaodated there the
11 co wore _ ostroyoa as soon as the Vohrnaoht offloer had
left.

Who was tnls nurse; what was this nurse's noae
froa Bloch 3 3uohenviil whoa you Just mentioned?

-»• I cannot give you his name, as I hai very llttlo
to do with hlo.

What do you fcr.ow about Dr. Hoven's visits In

Bloch 46?

I /.now that Dr. Hoven dll not visit 31ook 46 for
.nodical reasons, but I /.now very well that Dr. Hoven had
sot up In this laolatol blcok a taller shop and a shoe shop
and he .'id so since It was already voxydlffloult at that
tlao to have shoos and uniforms repaired or to get now ones.
For this reason Dr. Hoven had this w-rh done illegally at
this Blook because the pationto were aoooncolateX there for
this purpose. They war; ^pt runnlnj the danger of being
suprisod by any 35 of floor and punished.

What oon you tell the court about the prisoners who
were working In those shops?

-*• The prisoners who were omplo'ed there by Dr. Hoven
with the understanding of the Illegal car.p management, who
were hidden here In these shops and they wero people who
hai drawn the attention of the So camp management in some


C579


5 June 47-K-^S_2-8-Keohan-( Brown)

Court 1.

way and ware ther-foro to to removed from the own on very
poor transports or ware tc be liquldated.

q. Was Dr. Hovon Interested in tho typhus experiments
in Bloch 46*

I -ust honeatly state bore that I never considered
Dr. Koven to bj a good doctor and I did not believe he ev<r
had any cedloal interest or any interest in experiments.

Vho ohoosa the experimental sub loots for Bloofc 46?
«. The general Instructions for the selection of these
persons oame from the H.3.H.*. in Berlin. Those people ware
selected from the so-oaliod political dop*-rtaent by two
Hauptscharfuahrers on spoolal detail, namely Serno and
Leolalr.


5 Wine U7-*sATD-3-l-Priseau (Int. Rrown)
Court NO. 1


Q Did Dr, Hover, participate in this selection?

A Dr, “even took part in this selection only when he wished
to protect a prisoner known to hia free being sent to this block; or,
if political prisoners were there who were of great inportar.ee to the
caap, then in that case the oapo of the dispensary appeared before
Dr, Hoven and asked that these inportant persons should not be 3ent to
Block L6 but that they should be replaced by valueless criminal
elenonts,

Q Did Dr, Hoven work in conjunction with the so-called
illegal canp nonagenent?

A I believe Dr. Hoven was the first SS member to whoa the
illegal canp management dared to cone and could dare to take into their
full confidence with no foar of being denounced to the caap coraander
in an instant,

Q To clarify that point please tell tho Tribunal now what the
political department was, that solocted tho prisoners.

A Tho political doparteont was a special Koreando within
the Koenandantur of the concentration canp. It oonsistod of
Hauptscharfbohror Some and tho Unter or Oberstumfuohror Leclair,

Q T»ero the so rxr.bors of the Gestapo?

A Yes, they did not wear tho regular SS uniform but had other
designations of rank.

3 I shall now put to you tho testimony of Roenhlld. This is
the transcript of lii January 19U7, morning session, p*ge 1632 of tho
Goman record, ?'ay cy secretary carry tho transcript to the witness?


Q Please road. The prosecutor addressed tho following question
to the witnos3 Roechild: 'Did a*. Hoven participate in the selectiorf
of the patients who were subjected to the typhus expert:jonta?" Roeahild
answered this question in tho affirmative. Further, the witness Roenhild
stated: "If an experimental series was in prospect a certain number of

9


35C1


5 Jam L1-. TD-3-2-ftrinaau (Int. Brown)

Court SO. 1

prisoners was demand®d. This selection was cade on the basis of the card
inder file th.it we had in the office." ^hit do you have to say about
that?

A I should Ilka to answer the s econd question first, loeahild
is probably referring here to ihe erx’.vmges that Dr. Horan frequently
cade, accepting substitutions ho frequently nr.de, because Dr. Hovon did
not take part in the actual selection; and now I should like to ask
counsel to road that first question to ne again.

1 T!» first quostion reads* ’Did Dr. Hovon participate in tho
odocUon of prisoners who wero subjected to tha typhus exporlnents?"

A Ho, ho did not.

Q Do you know whether tho illegal caup mnegonent dr or up
lists for the substitution of political prisoners for inferior prisoners.

A Of course, all the prisoners oeployod in tho hospital knew
when tho next oxporlnontal sorios was to begin. Tho illegal canp runago-
r»nt alroa$* hed roily for substitution all the persona in tho canp who
had bohavod wrongly ir. scno way or who had been guilty of any sort of
botrc-yal or nni'thlng of that sort,

Q Wd Dr. Hovon concorn hinsolf about thsso substitutions or
did ho leavo that up to tho illegal oaap raanagoaont?

A In ovary respect Dr. Hovon was givon ;roni confidonoo by
tho illegal canp management and -/ice versa and, in general, paid vory
little attention to what tho ill oral e ft s? canagormnt did.

~l Tou, witness, nro roforrin- to tho illoqal oaap nanagjnont
now, arc you not? Tou nean tho illogal carrys nonaiqoEant of tlia prisoners
tbo=t3 elves?

A 103.

Q Did Dr. Hovon carry out tho charts of tho persons to bo
usoi in tho Typhus asperiaar.ts on tho explicit wish of tho illegal carp
nanogonont or, rather, did he supervise this solection for that reason?

A I know of no case in iddch Dr. Seven, without tho knonlcdgo
cf the illegal can? nanagarant, undertook anything which could do ham

C5C2


5 -Sins l7-LWvTIV.3-3-Prt.-Kau (Int. Brown)

Court So. 1

to ary prisoner and which could load to his being brought to Block h6 t
Q Did Ik*. Kovon take on this supervisory activity in order
to prevent porsons other than 3V»s ana SV's fror: being used — nanoly,
professional crirtnals?

A Tho basic orders free Berlin statod that only Gcrron
professional crirtnals and persons in preventative custody were to bo
usod for those ox^rtuents. Howovor, the SS can? nanagorjont of tho carp
al*rayr tried to havo political prisoners who had boon in tho canp for
a lbn 3 tiao also included anong those persons to bo usod in theso
ejcporlaor.ta in block 2 j 6 and it was only because of tho alertness of
Dr. Hoven in collaboration with tho illegal can? aanaganont that theso
political prisonars I Just nentionod had nanagod to survive their stay
at tho oa.jp.

Q How is it that you knov this?

A I occupied a protty confidential position at Buchenvmld an!
consequently rainborod anong cy frionds th-norbors of tho illegal canp
nanagonont and in this my I found out aary things which other innatoa
could not find out and novar did.


5 Jua-M-IE-^-l-Cook (Int. Brown)

Court Bo* I.

Q Ware non-Gersan prisoners used for such experiments?

A I hare already said that the ordors from 3erlin said that
only prisoners, criminals and persons in prevent ire custody were to be
used in these experiments*

Q I now put to you Document K0-1053. This ie the file for
the office for the locating of war crimes in Amsterdam. According to
page XU of the German translation, a Dutchman by the nano of Von Nen-
varden stated that he was infected with typhus by Dr. Ho von. What can
you say about that?

A I never knew of a Dutch citiaen boing accomodated in
Block U6 because in the coop we had a Dutch painter by the nano of
Harry Pieck who had an enonaous influence on Dr. Koven. This Dutch
politician certainly vould hover have peraittod a Dutch corrado of his
gotting to 3lock U6. I can, henrever, atato with certainty that a
group of 80 Dutch prisoners was given injections that wore perfectly
haraloss in another block of the camp. Those non had no work to do,
wore given double rations and tho only regulation they had to submit
to was that their toaporaturo was taken throe times a day. Theso in-

0

Joctions woro ontirely hamloss. Nono of theso porsons could Jiavo
fallen ill of these injections or could have suffered any physical in¬
jury.

Q Please turn one page back, to page 13 of tho Documont J.’O-
1063. According to this Vondolink states that Dr. Hoven is responsible
for tho nodical experiments carried out on prisoners in Block Ii6. I
ask you, did Vondelink have tho necessary knowledge and information in
order to judge who was responsible for th> experiments in Block 1*67

A I must say first of all that I do not know this Vondelink.
A prisoner who was not employed in the prison canp know nothing what¬
soever of what took place in the prison hospital ard in block 1*6 bo-
cause tho prisonoB could enter the canp hospital only with pernis-icn
of tho canp ccmaardar.t and they could not ontcr any wards at all.
Vondelink probably hoard this as a ruaor in the canp and repeated that


Q5CL


5 Jun-tt-ae-ii-Z-Coolc (Int. Broro)

Court So. I.

runor in gocd faith. I believe that if I myself had not been employed
in tho hoopital and if I were asked today who was responsible for the
conditions there I also probably would have said the camp doctor on
duty.

Q Can you erawer the question whether Vondolink was em¬
ployed in tho hospital?

A Ho certainly was not employed there. Otherwise I should

know him.

Q Do you know of the action

A Yes.

. Q How many transperts left the caap under this action lh-F-lh?
A One, nasoly, at tho end of 19U1.

Q Whore did it go to?

A Tho rr iso nor s and probably also Dr. Hovcn did not know
what tho roal destination of this transport was. However, aftor somo
tine the property and clothing of thoso prisoners wore sont back and
this allowed us to conclude that this transport had gono to Dornburg.

Tho prisoners nust havo boon liquidated thcro, othorriso tlioir poroonal
offocts would not hgve bocn sont baok to Buchonwald, and curiously
ohough it was at this racoont that the nunbors lh-F-13 bocano curront
among us prisoners.

Q For what reasons wero no furthor transports sont out with¬
in tho fraaovork of action lU-F-13?

A As far as I know all Jewish innates of the caap wore to
bo removed free tho canp in tho subsequent transports. Tho illegal
camp management iasodiately took measures and all the Jews thoro wero
thenceforth listed as mason apprentices \c.dar the loadorship of one
Robert Soibert from Dresden, who treated those Jews vGry well.

Q Who prevented thoso furthor transports?

A The illegal caap management in collaboration with Dr. Hovcn,
because tho second transport that was sot up was declared by Dr. Hovcn

to be in no condition to move and was thus roc oiled.

I


C505


5 Jun-A^G-ii-3-Cook (Inti Brettn)

Court So. I.

Q Can you give the Tribunal information regarding furthor
measures thet Dr. Hoven took in order to prevent the carrying out of
action Ui-P-13?

A I can only say tliat Dr. Hoven, whenever transports were
to leavo, always conferred with the illegal caap management and with
all the prisoners in the caap who were of any consoquonco and who oc¬
cupied any illegal offioe and approved and brought about the nocosenry
counter noaaures.

Q Is it true that the defendant Horen, only in order to
prevent such transports, undertook the so-callod anthropological
moasuroaents of prisoners?

A Yes, I know about that, there was an SS (toerorat in tho
caap who was interested in this sort of aoasurcTwnt, and those
measurements wore consequently undertaken. If tho SS cup nrniogo-
nont had knew that those noasurononts voro really pro toe ting many
very interesting Jewish types, anthropologically spooking, then they
would have boon stopped, bocaueo asnjr Jewish pationts had boon hiddon
in the caap for years.

,Q Io it corroct that tho dofondant Hoven acccnodatcd in
Block U6 and 50, persons who wore threatened by tho action iii-F-13,
perticulnrly Jews?

A Yos, I oa in a position to giro you a fow rut 30 3. For
0 xt. pie, tho Jewish prisoner August Cohn, whoa I root recently in
Kassol, whore ho was the Public Prosocutor in tho Donat if lention
court; also of tho nurse Jcllinock, also a prisoner named Kurt Qliosor,
and thon in Block 50 thero was a prisoner rvuiod Hoogotor, I boliovo
there was quite a number of Javish prisoners who wore removed frqw tho
action in this way.


5 June £7-]*-33-5-l -Ztosa (Brcwr.)

C-urt Ko. 1

•„ Ccn you tell the Tribunal bow -f ry Jews there were in ^ichenweld
when you left In September 1943 were still there?

*. Precise figures I eenrot give you, of ®ursc, but I beliovo I ca
r.ot overeat lac ting if I sey there were 10C/" to 2000.

{.* Did the defend ent Dr. Keren ever examine prisoners intended frr
►renepert to Btrr.burg?

*. Vc, beceuoo ttoe transports were not Judged on c ncdiccl br.sis. I
knew thet tbc first transport thet lc ft wrs rrrraged for fron Berlin •
erd thet Leelelr airyly put hii CT on it. These prisoners were not
token to the ceap hoepltel before tfcoy were put on the trenapert.

f*. I now put to you Roenhild'e testiaory. This is poge 1634 of the
Geraen transcript. Roeahlld sell thet the tro eery doctors, irduding
Dr. Hoven, exerdned Jews with reference to their cbility to work, thet
lists were drewn ty of those who could not work erd those wore sent
to Bcrnburg. Her, whet do y-u hf.ve to sty rbout thrt?

*• Z otn only tcy thrt there were very frequent oxeninctions on til
the Jewish prisoners because the Jewish prisoners rocclvcd only hclf
the reties thet wo rccolvcd. Ter this rc'son Berlin, or perheps tho
canp oorsender, wts pcrticultrly interested to knew Just whr t tho
phyaioel ocrdltlcn of these peoplo on hclf rttl^na *■# But, theso
oxcalnotions bed nothing to do with the trensporta bceruso ca it
heppena for rxrre then c yeer I hfd to be jroaor.t during these extn-
i nr tiers, or rtthtr during the r.s feebly of the trenaports end o-noeq-
uently I wts elreya inforotd by Dr. Koven rhero tho «T 0 r.sprs "ero
going erd who wee on thoa.

^ Thoso exeairxtima with reference to tho prlacr.crs' cbility to
work, were they errried cut by the eerp doctor?

No, usually by lnaet© nur scs.

f- Y-u yoke of hclf reticus thrt tfcc Jewish priecr-ers received. Is it
true thet the lllegel eery a.ncgecert with Dr. Hover.'s support illegally
supplied theso Jews with food contrary to expl oit orders?


0537


5 June 47-ii-S'—5-2-Gr3 fl(Erovr-)

Court No. 1

*i I do kr.cw that the Jewish blcoks were supported to e very Irge
extent tree the ce^> hospital.

Q« Do you know Rcachlld?

Yes i I* dc.

How long hevo you known kin?

». I have known Roechlld fron thrt nenent on when I w^a employed
in the oecp hospital.

What did ho do there?

*• tree. 1%9 to '43 Roechlld wes the so-ccllcd tree.surer of *ho
ccnp hospitd. Thet la to acy he took care of the prisoners' -oney
there end in 1943 — and this took plrco very shortly befero Dr.

Haven's erreat, Rooohild ms used ca c olerk for the doctors.

-as Roechlld ns hrspltcl treasurer presont ct excel net Iona?

*• No, nover.

Consequently, doss Roechlld have the neccaacry kntvledgo In
order to be tblo to ncke atr»cnenta regarding events of this sort In

1943?

*• No, he doos not fcccruao befero Roechlld wra carp tcapitc.1 treasurer
he w*n for coat of the tint efcacr.t fror tho hospital in the flntnoo
offico or it the qu'Ttcm-atcra end only nt very abort irtorrcla ho
VLB in tho hospital Itself.

-hat do yru kr.o-r about tho killing of lr.forr.cra In the carp?

I know thet in Duehenwddpr 1 sonora, who did rot obey the ruloa
set up by tfco Illegal cccp nenegeoent end who rerkod rlth tho SS
dor.'utclr.g rthar priaoncra erji th.ua br*ught cb~ut their dex ths, tmxo
liquidated by Dr. Hover, ir colic here ti~n with t Ye Illegal errp
Beaagt&snt. The ceac 2 e- specking : f now concerns a forcer ~h.ito fiuas-
ler. General by the nerx cf Bistlncr Eusehnersr, e rtcld German by the
none cf Built, erd threo Gcnxn ^cfcralonal criminals. These nen hed
bur/ n Uvea on their c-rseiereo. Life In the ccnp res very rugged end
"he prisoners -ere very bitter tor^rd these traitors. Consequently,
th.cy hed to disappear free crong the living.


3522


5 June i7-iw—^5-3-ar353(BrOT=)

Court Me. 1

Tell the Tribund abet the lllcgd eery ntr.cgeccr.t 'a tesks crx!
activities seret

*• The Illegal cerp manegener.t ate cn institution act up by the
priaontrs themselves for their ran protecticn. In the c-urso cf tire
it developed to o atr:ng illegal organization which sin to it th; t
necsurcs token by the 3S carp ccccandcr wero acbotcgcd in every possible
aey end the cecp wca kopt free of traitors end informers.

G* Describe the ectivities rf the infezners end treitera on the
conrur.ity In the cccp.

Let no first tike up the ctsc of Kuaefcnir Kuschr.crcv, the ^hlte
Hussion General, bcceusc that was probably tho most prodigi us drrroc of
treason thet ever took piece in Bucher.weld, then Biaohnlcr Kuschncrov
wca in Buehenwdd k. rge numbers of Russicn iTis-ners cf Ear wero turned
ovor tc tho cecp Buehenwdd. The 'ai» gnrxnt thet Kuschncrov hed fron
tho 33 coop e^rxxndcr uts tc esacclrtc with thoao Russicn irla-ncra of
Wor end tc pump then regerdin* their opinions cr.d to find cut If thcro
wero ony Rod *rny officers c=ong thee end. If sc, tc inf err. the canp
ccrrxndcr, elao lnforcntion on ell prisoners who worked in connection
wi»h those Russian prisoners or who ncturally sympathized with the
Ruosiui prisoners or. the teals of thoir Cccrunistlc pest. Tho prismers
wten Kuschncr Kuschncrov donounced were token by tho Obcrschcrfuohrcr
Boicr.Tenfrctshofcr, Corrxndcr of tho Laundry Sc he of ex, Kitchen Chief
Schmidt, 3orr.s, Locleir, or either they were shot ir. tho stcblc or
hanged in the crematorium. I cen rasert here thet it was cn incredibly
lcrgc number ofpersons whose death Kuachnicr Rischncrcv ccuscd.

TKt iRESIDE.Ti ’-itneso, oounsel, the Tribund is cbout to teke its
recess. Tho witness mty corplc tc his story efter the recess.

JDDCE If the Tribund will permit *no to interrupt just c moment.

This is Judge Tons, presiding in Tribunal II. Cr.c cf the defender, te in
this case h.ca beer, authorized ts c witness in Ceso IV r.c v being tried
in '•Vlbunal II end, if a?r.venier.t, I would request thet this defendant


• S5S9


5 June 47-^‘-5-fc“ G rcas(Br''trr.)

Court So. 1

be excused et this tire end the Ikrshcl be directed to conduct hin to
TVlbur.c.1 II fa: the purpose of testifying for the defense.

THE iKESlXEhTi the Is the defendent before this Mtxinelt
JUICE TOSi The witness Is Ridolf Brendt.

THE nOSlBBflfc Judge Robert U. Tees, presiding Judge of Tribunal II
now In sosslon, hewing requested fchet the defendant ftidolf Brendt
be cxcusod free or.der.ee before this Tribuncl fer c sho r* tine In
order to testify refers Mbunel II, the Hcrshcl will see thet tho
defendent »dolf Is esiducod to ^Vlbuncl II to testify cs c witness
before th*t Tribune!, to be returned to this Tribune! ebon his testimony
Is finished.

JUDGE TVdfli Thenk you rcry such.

Til . RESIDENT i The Tribune! will r.o* t* in reeoss for e few slnutos.


Court 1

June 5-14-7-1-HD-Jfaloy-Franks.


TKI KaRSSaL: The Tribunal is again In session.

THE PRESIDENT: Just Q moment. The Secretary General
will note for the recori the obeenoo from the Tribunal of
defendant Rudolf Brandt who has been excused to testify
before Tribunal Nol 2 which is now In session. He was
excused and his absence from tne Tribunal will In no way
prejudice his case.

Counsel say proceed.

Witness, did the activity of stool pigeons consist
pcrtloulrrly of aoousing prisoners wrongly?

A. It has happened repeatedly th-t people because of
Lntylguo by those traitor:- with the S3 Casp administrators
were reported and due to this type of treason wero severely
punished and lost thoir livos.

Q. Could you tell the Tribunal an exraple of that type
what -b ut the reolal company of prisoners?

a. In 1942 some criminal prisoners wanted to got tho
oaap administration over to their side and they went to
the earn- leader and told him that political prisoners In
the oamp had a radio station and were thus listing to
enemy stations. The camp administration renotod Immediately
and relieved oil polltloal prisoners who had Influential
positions, suoh as capos and blech leaders, and prisoners
in the hospital such as vlce-capo and many rn'ls nurses and
they formed a special oomppny. It was tho tr.sh of tr.ls
s-.oclal company to worh In tho garden, 'under oturafuehror
Duabeoi and cart soli all day long, and all this worh had

0

to be done running.

i. Did tale hilling save the lives of numerous accent
prisoners?

A. I can any that In the case of Xusehnlor Kuscharew,
yes, because Kusohnier Xuscharov during* th”t time of 1941


C591


Court 1

Juno 5-»-7-e-HD-Jfclo y-Frnnks.

until tho end of 1941 quite certainly w?.a responsible for
the death of one thousand 1200 ftasslan prisoners and Goman
polltloal prisoners. In the case of other killings of
which I know for certain, the situation Is exactly tho
sane. I believe that If Kusohnlcr Kuscharew had lived to
oxporionce the end of the 3uohenwald one? he probably
would have achieved a reoord figure four tc five tines as
big.

In what canner did the Illegal can? adnlnlstrator
ascertain who the lnforaers and stool plgoons wero?


Court 1

June £—!4-o-l-KD-Me ehan-Frnnk


a. The illegal oca? administration really only consisted
of prominent political prisoners. This illegal canp admin¬
istration saw that every position, be it commando, lender of
the oaap, or the camp physician, in other words every
position where interesting things might be learned, was held
by their confidence men and everything they managed to
find out, be it orders from the SS, be it work of the
traitors and Informers, whom I have mentioned, was immedi¬
ately reported to their own men. I would like to add that
tho seat of the illegal C"np administration always was in
the s lok-bny as long ns I knew Buchonwald. Dr. Koven was
porfectly well informed about what was going cn inside tho
oanp and without resorve approved of tho measures adopted
by the detainees. I con woll say that Dr. Koven has always
been tho bok-bono of the lllogal onsrp administration.

Q. To whet extent did Dr. Koven participate In these
killings?

A. I did not understand that question, would you mind
repeating it?

Q. To what extent did Dr. hovon participate in those
kllllnge?

A. I know for certain of five killings and they arc
th080 which I have already mentioned. Those killings took
place in tho presence of Sturnbannfuehrer Dr. Ding and
a man unknown to no, whom I think was a doctor.

C. '•.’here did these killings take mlnco?

A. In the Hospital Theater Ko. 2

xi. 'Ihere do you derive yoJ knowledge from?

A. I would like to tell this Tribunal that I an
'.ossibly the only risoner of Buchenwald who without tho
knowledge was ocservln- all killing of Dr. Koven ana the
camp administration. I spent a long time in Vard No. 6

3553


Court 1

June 5-H-8-2~rID-Keehan-Frank.


where Dr. Hoven placed me as a nurse. Everytlne n S3 man
entered the cann I knew It. I of course, did watch out
froa ay window by cllnblng on ay bed or by taking a high
8tool| I could froa the latrine look directly into the
operational theater froa the top window. Consequently,

I could see every aove In the operational theater. I oould
see the Inside of the operational theater, I could see the
operating surgeon and ascertain accurately what was going
on In the operational theater.

<%, Did you see that apart froa the hi .J\ informers rnd

traitors you centijned Dr. Hoven killed other nconlo?

* •

a. That I never aav.

S. "ould you have soon It If it had happened?

A. I would have ’occ-uso I have already mentioned that
overytlao a oosbor of the 35, be It a Doctor or onyono clso,
entered, I lascdl-'toly wont upon ay observation post.

Q. For what period con you testify to this?

a. I was op jointed In Hnroh of 1941 and wont fron
3uchom/nld to Auscnwltr a few days after the nrrdst of
Dr. Hoven, that Is to say thnt during the period fron
1941 to 20 Septoaber 1943 I was there.

During this period were yo.» always -'resent In ward 6?

a. Yes, I was always In ward 5.

«i. ’rfhr.t about the nl t hta?

a. During the nl-ht I slo t in tne ante-rooa of
operating theater 2. In otr.ur v rls, everyone wno had to
enter opor-'tln- theater 2 ha- t* ^r.sa tl r ugh ay bed rova
'•.nc. thus I could really see everyone who hod any business
In o-jercting theater 2. During the night no one could

m

enter the c -erntln- t eater frov. t:.c br.c- since I hnd
orders to lock the back door of the o era:in- theater
every night 'f top the end of treatments and n-nd the


J5%


Court 1

June 5-:i-6-3-HB-Heehan-Frcnk


key to the chief nurse.

Q. Could It have hap~ened that these killings wore
carried out lr. another operational theater?

A. No.

Q. Can ycu give any detailed reasons?

a. Operational theater No. 1 was worked In exclusively
by Dr. Horn, the Crecho Slovakian prisoner dcotor, who
carried out all operations and also the Cceoh prisoner, Dr.
Matnsohok and I believe with certainty If anything happened
In that operating theater that .-iorn would have op osod It
and would have lnforcod all of uo«immediately, ovpnrt froa
that Oporatlonal theater no. 1 Is o roou whore only
operations of an Internal nature arc carried out end for
that reason had to be kept ooapUtoly sterllo. For
Instance, If I wanted to or.tor operational thoator 1, I had
to undorgo oonrleto disinfection boforc and I cannot
Imagine that any othor personnel could have onterod
operational theater 1 at all.

Q. '.’hat do you know about Roox Ho. 11?

A. I know that Ro^m No. 11 until 19-41 was n hosoltal
ward In the T.3.C., the so cried Aim.

Q. And what do you know about Roc- No. 11 after IS il?

A. At the ond of 19-41 new f urniture wao put In and It
was mndo a recreational and dlnin- rooe for the nurses
working In the T.3.C. station, since the ccmy -.hyelclan
had strictly -rohlbltcd that rooms v .ore T.5.C. -^tlonts
were c nfinad should be used for oatin L . •

x. Whet do you know about the refutation of this
Room No. 11?

A. The refutation of Room No. 11 was the worst In the
whole corny of Buchonvold, be ecu sc at the time * hen Dr.

Slsele still racted as camp physician, he collected all the


Court 1

Juno 5—14-8—4-nP—Meehan—Frank.


-or.ticnts w. y. no longar had any ho-'o for recovery In noon
No. 11. I hardly think that «ny of tnese nctlenta left
t -o rooa alive. It was said tmt Dr. Slselo was liquidating
lncurc'olo patients there.

In to what tine would It have beon -osalble, there¬
fore, that killings went on In Boon No. 11?

«. actually only until the end of 1941, ns long os
Boon No. 11 was a w:rd and nardly after that tine.

2. Vho was chief cacp physician until the end of 1941?
«. Dr. BlAnhe since Dr. Hover, only becaze can; physi¬
cian In 1942.

2. Let ze put Doctor Horn 1 a testimony to you. It Is
pa o 539S of the Gorzrn record. Dr. horn only workod In
the slok bay after the be lr.r.ln. of 1942 and he testified
ho had to <&gn a oertlfloato that ho could not enter Boon
No. 11; how can you explain that If according to your
stc.tcncnt he was there ns early os 1941 and Boon No. 11 hr.d
becono a recreational roo _ for nurses?

*. The way I can explain It is that In 1942 and 1943
It was strlotly orohibltod that this departaont whore
T.B.C. patients were was to be entered by anyone. I, too,
had boon instruct.d by the can- ohysiclan rnd even by Capos
to the effect that I had no business In the roon for
lnfectuous wards for T.5.C. patients and I never tried
to get there either.

2 . Nhet do :*ou know about the nunber of poople
killed by Dr. Hoven? m

a. I have already said before thst fr-z l r 41 to 1943
I was an eye witness to all klllir. = s. I can only testify
In this court rooa that I have seen for ay self how Dr.

Hoven killed the five prisoner? v.ooz I zentioned. I would
like to add at this point that after the second killing.


Court 1

Juno 5-;i-8-5-nD-.He«h-rt-*J , rnnk


Dr. Ding took the syringe r.wny fron hln end accosted hin.
Juat what Dr. Ding said to Hovon I could not read from his
lips, possibly ha was not satisfied with Hovon'8 work.

I shall now put floenhild's testimony to you, accord¬
ing to the Goroan Transcript Pago No. 1639, ho gave a figure
of a thousand.

A. I can only reply to you by rests ting the fact that
I was actually an eye witness to thoso killings. Hoonhild,
who did not work in the sickbay wards and had no opportunity
either to wntoh tho killings or to bo cotually present,
cannot possibly know who onrrlod out those killings.
Naturally, it was assuned in the onap that the oanp doctor
wns carrying out those doedo.

Q. Did you over boo that tho Defondant Hovon killod
peoplo who did notcct as stool-rlgeons or lnforaers for
the oanp administration?

A. I have certainly no knowledge of such a caso.

Q. Vlll you ploase tell this Tribunal Just in what
nannor it was ascertained in the case of these five peoplo,
whon you have talked about, if they were lnforaors or
stool-pigeons for certain?

A. The case of Kusohnlr Kuschnarev was quite doflnitely
a sensation in tho entire camp. I don t believe there was
a single prisoner who was so hated as this nan, but I do
know that Dr. Koven nevertheless oade absolutely certain
Just who Kuschnir Kuschnarev was. I an quite certaln^that
during those two days when Kusohnlr Kuschnarev was in the
hospital. Dr. Hover, interrogated one hundred witnesses for
certain to find out whether Kuschnir Kuschnarev wa6 really
the traitor whon he had been told about.

'C597


5 June-IM 1 i^*9—i-Pr iceau (Irst. Frank)

Court So. 1

Q.- Did the defendant. Dr. Hovon, kill prisoners who wuro unable
to live any longer ?

A.- So.

Q.- uid the defendant. Dr. Hovon, kill prisoners aho reported to
hia for treatment ?

So, I hrvo never seen Dr. fever, send a prisoner may who wont
to him for troatcunt or blame hia or hit hla ns ao xny other camp doc¬
tor® <^d.

Q.- If any other persons corriod out similar killings, would not
Dr. Hovon havo had to hoar of such ccts ?

A.- I really couldn't give you an explanation Just how Dr. Hovcn
would have gained such knowledge because if people wore killed thon it
was always done at the exact aoew-nt when Dr. Hovon wasn't in tho camp.

I would like to give you a brief explanation on this point. At
the cntranco to tho sick bay there was a doorkeeper's hut and in that
hut a political prisoner sat whoso nano was Franz Blass. In this shod
thore was a bell and when Dr. Hov-n como down tho camp otroot which was
clearly visible from this doorkiopor's shed then Blass had ordors to
ring this bell twiev. If anything illegal ms going on in tho sick boy
by prisoners or by tho SS and this bell rang twice, then all activities
ceased. Consequently, Dr. Hoven co»jJ.d rvivor surprise anyone who was
doing anything or trying to do anything without his knowledge or had pos¬
sibly done 3coo such thing.

Q.- Wasn't it essential that Dr. Kovtn had to gain knowledge of
these killings because of the fatality or casualty r-parts in tho camp J

A.- To my knowledge, that w.ac impossible. The ordinary normal doath
figure at tho caap 3uchcrenld at that tkt was v„ry low. Up to ym I
have rued every publication cna ch-cked everything Uiat was written about
Buchenwald and I tv vc devoted mys-lf intensely to the study of those
articles but they all concurred that the nora'l death rate in the camp
at Buchenwald did rot exceed 2%. It was, therefore, quite certainly not


C592


5 Jur.c 4’-:(Ip*., i'raSk)

C'urt I

difficult to snuggle ir. a fc~ de*d, particularly since Dr. Eoven didn't
aigr. all the dc~th certificates: bat 3ir.ee this vp.b purely a natter far
prisoners and in ca*.s where the bediet were dissected the death certi¬
ficate was issued togetk. r with the findings of the dissection, signed
by a prisoner in the side bay, and then passed on tc the 3uchenv»ald
registrar. He countersigned it and then sent the certificate tc tho
relatives of the dead person. I, for instance, w C uld never have had
the courage if I had know about the killings to go to Sr. Hoven and
say, "This and that nan has killed," bccauso the capos vculd have iamed-
iately taken ay life for it.

^ What can you say e>cut the ex*cr.t -f the cr.tiro e'.ings on in
the sick bay? Vas it pretty blr?

A The sick bay at 3uch. rald was aeually vory large, indood.
T hcr« waa a large b-rr-cks for internal diseases, two barracko f^r
surgi nns' patients, and then across the park th, n wore two further
b-rracks. Tw C ro were altogether -p rr oxinatcly eight rocas and I think
that it was Just as inpossible for Dr. Erven as it was for ayself to
control all those eight barracks and supc-vise then eiaultanoausly.

^ rf as it for those rerscns that defendant HvV.n couldn't corv-
cern hiastlf with all details in the sick bay?

A X would alacst like to sry that the sick b"y -f a prison C"mp
isn't a rrlvatc clinic and that Dr. Even didn't know »-st of the pa¬
tients who w t ri there personally at all and, therefore, he didn't dis¬
cover if one or the other prisoner wam't in the sick bay -ny n re.

The following day if he had really r.adc ir.culrlca on any occasion then
he would have gotten t^e answer that thv prisoner had been released
back into the c-ap.

H wa? Dr. Owen's attitude ria*rding prisoners and, particu¬

larly, sick prison.rs.

A T'-at Question I c~n "nly answer "excellent," if I draw a
c-npariaor. between -thcr eaup d ct rs and during ry detenti n I -.ct
20 or 25


^99


5 Jur.--i:-?L-9-3-?ri- a:u (let. I rank)
Court No. 1


emp doctors. For instance, I rcaccb^r one certain doctor by the name
of Eiaelo who took special pleasure in accosting elderly Jews in tho

ca^p and caking them if they were hungry end telling thua if they would
go straight to tho sick bay ho would givo then aooathing to cat j and
then, instead of giving then food thire or any typo of assistance, Or.
Siscle took his hypodcroic syringe* froa his pocket and took two such
poor wretches and gav_ then doses so that the victims usually sufforod
terriblo cramps and, for Dr. Bible's aous. ^nt and in front of pri¬
soners who alght liko to &e that sort of thing, wuro rolling about in
front of the barracks or night start screaming and raging. In conjxori-
aon to all that, I nust say that Dr. Hoven did a proat deal for pri¬
soners, particularly for recently operated prisoners.

You alght think it somewhat funny if I tell you hero that in a
concentration emp people who have Just beer, operated receive on «k!i-
tionnl ration of -ood butter, silk, whit- bread and fruit or that the
treatment of convalescent people actually included the construction of
a wondorful garden ordered by Dr. Hoven and tfrit thoy managed to got
deck-chairs in their garden so that r^curer*ting patients could lio in
tho sun in dock chairs durini. their stay. During ay prison tern I got
to know threu ccnp doctors and I never saw any othor doctor doii^ any¬
thing like that.

apart from that I would liko to add that all prisoners in tho camp
liked Dr. Horan v-ry ouch and that ev^ry prisen-r who h"d any troublos,
bo that he bo sentenced to f logging or anything like that, whenever ho

went to seo Dr. Hovun he always found a willing ear. I cane ortainly
put sufficient eases to you here where prison-rs had boen sentenced to
25 Lashed, and when Dr. Hoven con?god to carry out so at sort of manipu¬
lations in order to save people from this t~*x o: punishment.

Q.- Did the defendant. Dr. Hovo::, makv. offerts to give sick pationts
every conceivable aeaic.al attention ?

A.- I can certainly s-.y that to the best of zy conscience.


3600


5 June-J5-FL-9-t-?n=cau (Lit., Frank)

Court So. 1


Q*- Can you examples to this Tribur.il ?

*'•“ Pir3t of rill » 1 - ould liJco to describe the case of a 17 year-old
Jewish prisoner. This prisoner, mart Kurt Glacscr, used to carry soil
for the head gardonor an Unterscharfuchr.r, Donbock. Some how, on one or
so occasions, this men took a disliku to him and he tri^d to hit him
end hit hi* so unfortunately with his boot that Glaoscr dropoed to tho
grourd. Donbock jusped upon this young am with both foct and this in¬
flicted a complicated double fracture of th~ thigh. That was somewhat un¬
pleasant for Doabeck. The prisoner was taken to the sick bay and there
he was supoosed to bo liquidated.

When this ->riso»~r os odalttud Dr. Hovon was present in ay ward
and allocated a bed in aj ward to this Jew. I can say that this young
am would rv-ver heve survived in that emp if Dr. Hovon hadn't loft him
in ay ward for a year and a half. I have experienced frequently during
that period that Dr. Hovon ccae along and asked him if ho hid anj^iohoo
ard 1 know that this prisoner w-a operated probably nine or ton tino\
within th-t period without knowl*.dgv of tho Kexasa ndrnt • a office.

Then there is another case I would Lik«- to tell you about. It was
forbidden as a rr.ttur of principle that Jewish prisoners should bo ad¬
mitted to the sick bay or treated th.re. Dr. Blaule cert-inly observed
that instruction most strictly ; but, or.ee Dr. Hoven gained a certain
amount of influence in tho camp, ho found illegal ways and means for es¬
tablishing a eodl ward for Jews only i.-xl lie forbad expressly that wo,
nurses should draw Jewish marks upon the patient's history and favor
chart. If thoro wore visitors or if tho Clip Konmadabt wont through.

Dr. Hovon always described tho so patients as bwing no.i-Jewish. I cm
firaly convinced that army a Jew that ras doctored there is^otill alivo
today but otherwise th"t ho would nroba !_y neve o'vd in 1942.


C601


5 Jaa-M-iB-10-l-Cook (Int. Frank)
Court No. I.


Q Will you please describe to the Tribunal Dr. No van's at¬
titude toward you wh:n you sere sic'.'?

A It that tine I was working in the quarry and I contracted
a swelling of the glands* I was operated on by tho prisoner Walt or
Kraoncr and ttan was discharged Iron tho sick bay and got eight days
of light duty, but unfortunately a for days later tho sane trouble oc¬
curred again, Glnndula Inguinalis, a spoiling on tho left side, and I
rotumod to the sick bay and reported sick and ay reception wasn't
oxactly glorious, because first of all Kraeaor described ro as on
asocial olcncnt, and thflt these *..or_ ponitonti ry rot hods, and I had
inflicted this trouble upon r^E-lf, and I had done eorothing to cauao
nyny second hernia gland to swell, and he ordered no to wait until tho
out-patients had boon doalt with, end I didn't know at tho tino what
this roant, but I loarnod la tor that this waiting would have noant ny
doath, since after tho other prisoners had loft the operating station,

I would havo boon transported olscwharo, you know where - and then Dr.

Ho von coat along and asked nc -hat I «aa suffering fron and took an
obvious interest in ro, and I can't toll you why tody, I don't know,
but at any rate Dr. Ho von sade an Lvcirion ’.rith his crm hr.nds, and
after I was discharged fro:. the sick bay he aanngcd to got no n job in
the prisoners' kitchon, and new I -..'ould like your pcmlssion to describe
just how I got into tho sick bay. A political prisoner Tho was suffer¬
ing fron n very serious infection und^rrunt tho reputation of an am.
This prisoner's lif*. depend.' upon whother ho could be given frosh
blood or not and thus the loud speaker of the oanp -nnounced that if
there was a prisoner in th. canp - ho hod once given blood, then ho
should inodiatcly report to fro sick bey. Saio tiro previously I had
givon blood in a University clinic and I knew I had blood group "0" and
was therefore universal, and so due to the loud speaker's announcement
I wont to tho sick bey and cave JCO cubic cor.tirotcrs of . 03 * blood to
hin and I wee about to leave the sick ‘cay at the nooont and Dr. Hoven
said: "You will stay here- first of all and relax pro; _rly, and you alll


5 oun~^ 2 -Cook ( 1 st. ?r±)

Court Ho. I.

refresh your food situation," and I stayed in bed for about throo or
four days, and after that I got up, and Dr. Hover, gave ae instructions
to report to the food store of the So, which was under the e re of
Hauptaoharfixihror Aar sc h, and Dr* Hovon .rroto down for rx that Kaupt-
schcrfuohrcr Sarach should give no very large quantities of rations,
end this special ration at that tine consisted of approximately two
pounds of butter, 5 litres of milk, several pounds of good sausage,
white bread and grapes, and than I xecoivod glucose in addition to
thet, and I was about to leave the sick bay about four weeks later,
when Dr. Hovon ca.oo along quito rddonly and told _aci "You don't havo
to work in tho carp. You cm st'y right ’ere in the sick bay. You can
bo employed hero as a nurse.* And than I was a oloaner for about a
year and after that I was «^>lojvd as a nurso.

Q Tho story you havu j’vst told no, was that tho dofondant
Hoven'a attitude toward all prisonors or was that his attitudo toward
you because you woro an acquaintance of Dr. Hoven?

A Lot no say b-forj that that I hardly kntr- Dr. Hovon at
all. In fact I only e*. him orcc befor. ’.liven ho operated on no. Dur-
ing the poriod of ry blood transfusion, I didn't soo Dr. Hovon at all
since it was carriod out by a nvrs^, and I don't think he was even a
doctor, and I can cort.ainly say it v.ao only v'.ion I vac about to leave
tho sick bay that Dr. Hovon took a ronewod interest in no. I fool al¬
oes t nshaaod bocauao sone of ay fomcr cs.-r-.des nay be sitting in tho
audionce and I would find it r ilxu.* nrd if I would say 1 aei tho

only ono ho preferred in tills w-y.

Q ’ 'ould it be right to s ; that up to tho norvent you onterod
tho sick bay you were on. of a ny cf th. 'nlavrrr. prisoners to Dr. Hovon?

A I would like to add to t’..-t that any nan i ho can aoe no
sitting horo tod-y and who nig.it h™. s_on e at the tine would probably
not havo given five cents for ay life, because I had spent months in
the penal company at Dachau .and .ay hysic.nl condition tr.as miserable.

Q Would tho defendant. Dr.- 3ov_n, gain any advantages frea


603


/


5 Jun-I *4 2-10-3-Cco-k (Int. frank)

Court ’-'o. I.


you? 'EM that the reason shy he helped you?

A TTnet sight I offor to Dr. Hover.? Ail I had *.-ere tho
prisoners* clothes I was wearing. I wasn't even allowed to ko^p vy
wedding ring when I wes ir. prison, so what could I offer to Dr, Hoven?

Q What was the general ro.mtaticn of Dr, Hover, in tho canp?

A Let ac s»y that contrary to other carp doctors, cost
prisoners took an interest ir. tho personality of Dr. Hoven, boceuoo I
believe caong all ambers of tho SS there -..~sn't a nan about whoa any
good runors circulated in the onep. It boerxo known, fer instance,
that in one block in that cu:p, and I can't give it to you accurately
which one it was, but it ras in too row botro-n blocks 1.5 nni 50,
thcro was a block with a fonco around it, and in that block fon^r
high officials of tho Dutch State vero confinodj acong than tho forraur
Dutch l ii n ist^r of Flnanoa and tho 2 : iniotor for Colonies and a high
ranking govurncxjnt official free India, and also a certain rrofocsor.
Dr. Sldori, »rtio had onco been thi head of tho International Rhino Con¬
trol Cocc lesion, and there wore anny othor veil known personalities
fron Holland. Theso people had a groat doal of advantages over othor
prisoners, and they succcodod in getting Dr. Hovon ovur to thoir oido
coaplotoly. I knew for certain that Dr. Hovon hoi pod a groat nany of
the so people to regain thoir froodoa and it is a wo 11 known fact and
case that Dr. Hovon really onployad ;*eans to have those people re¬
leased, and had he boon found out It would have resulted in his ir>-
rodir.tu dotontion by the Gostnpo, and having to face vary probably the
noxt special court. Dr. Hoven succo-.dod in having these people re¬
leased when they wore only physically weak or sick, to fako x-ray
findings for hoolthy people by substituting photographs of tubercular
patients, by rhich neons ho succeeded in getting these people^ out.

Q hould it have boon possible to say that in accordanco
with Hovon*s position in Buchenmld that ho actually kiUod prisoners
when there was r.c other in tho ccammity to do so?

A Your Honors, I can't iragino that a nan who helped a Jew

. C6C4


5 Juan’:-;3-l&-L-Cook (Int. Fran:-:)

Ccurt So. I.


whc had nc right to lire in tbs national Socialist state, th-t he

people is possible, a can The asked hie for his wishes regarding
food and nursed hin and aided hin in the sick bay for months and oven
helped conceal hie in the sick bay for years, that the eaj» nrn arbit¬
rarily night have carried out killings which were not necessary. I
just cannot Laagino such a thing.

Q tfhnt was tho nodical care like during the tiao vlon the
dofend-ant Keren vns caap physician at Buchorr.ald?

A I aa glad to o--y that this raodicnl care whs a vory good
one. I would like to emphasise perticuiarly at this point that this
was a considerable ac hie recent on the part of tho old ostatlirhod
political prisoners who collabcr.atod with Dr. Heron, because it is a
fact that no obtained radical supplies, bandages and additionrl foed
fret: the Chief cf tho Hygiene Pood Dopcrtjor.t at Borlin, Lichtorfoldoi.
Apart fron that it was possible during Heron's period that ho addod
two largo huts to tho cuip hospital which *.roro oxtronoly voll oqui?:x>d
and woro raaliy quite werthy cf hunan ooings. I can r<.colioct t'.r.t on
several occ'sione during tho inspections carried out by d'-ct -ra v<ho
wore nouboro of tho -.raid forces, tho oxprossiens woro usoc’i "lock
hero, dcctor, the installations horo is almost hotter than ours, oven
the barr'eka for the troops and our front lino hospitals," and I want
to add that until cy dopr.rture in 1?U3, which was after tha fourth
yorr of v-r, wo wore still sleeping in bods with white sheets. Vo had
bluo and whito shoots which wore porfoctly cloan, and in 1913 in ad-
diti.n to that wo still had considerable quantities cf glucose, inrulin
and so on, rhich cany soldiers have told co that tho front lino hospit¬
als wore terribly short of.

Q TToro there sufficient beds?

A I can well say yos, because I would estimate after all
that thjrc woro certainly 800 to 900 beds in tho prison hospital in
Buehonnald, and apart fr'r. that Dr. Bonn so organized it, if tho sick
bay was really full, then prisoners received a so-called light duty

0605


5 Jur.-I>-!3-C0-5-Coofr (int. Frank)

Court Kc« I.


certificate, which rcunt that they could stay la bed in their own
blcck. I cca reaweber very accurately fer instance that at the be¬
g inning wben Dr. Heron had bocoao canp dee ter that the death rate in
the o ip BuchertKild really went dcca quite a bit and it happened that
half cf tho wards in the sick bey were aapty. A^ong us prisoners there
was a gon-ral nror that Dr. Keren really deserved great praise fer
what ho did in the sick bey.


0606


Court 1

June 5-&-ll-l-HD-Gro sa-Frank


Q. I would like to s ubalt to you once again Docuncnt
1063 of the War Crimes Commission at .%nstcrdon and I 6hall
now mut to you 3chaltor's testimony on page 16 of the German
translation. Schalter states in this doounent that tho
cesap doctor, Dr. Eoven, played an extremely bad port and,
no doubt, had on his conscience the death of innumerable
people due to insufficient oedloal care. The witness says
■food supplies" but the translation of that is a mistake.

It is medical caro in the Dutch original. Nov, let no ask
you, was Schalter working in the Sick Bay?

A. No.

Q. Vould Schalter tr.en be in possession of the necessary
knowledge which would onablo hln to pass Judgment cn the
medlonl situation at 3uchenwald?

A. Counsel, I think I have already said to you boforo
onco today that an outsider would have found it quite
impossible to have gained insight into the rrison hospital
or tho 8iok Bey and the acturl canp had boon two ooparato
canps at all tinea. Furthermore I on flrnly convinced
that if I hadn't boon working in the Sick Boy ayself and
wore told today that Dr. Ho von played a bad pert that I
would assume that to bo the truth without orltlclsn because
outsiders are not lnforaod about the conditions and about
tho activities of a can? physloian.

Q,. Do you know a case whero a prisoner during the
tine whon Dr. Hoven was conn physician died bccauso of
insufficient nodical care?

a. Ancngst the people who were operated on by the
prisoner Dr. Horn, with Dr. Hoven as tho assisting surgeon,

I c?nnot remember a single case.

q. Vhat do ycu know about the defendant Dr. Hoven 1 9
political views?


Court 1

JUne 5-M-ll-2-KD-5ro e s-?rank.

A. I oon*t inline that Dr. Seven was a famous Nazi
because I think if he had had any plans of that nature then
he would have lcoed his whole wireless set at the disposal
of the people in the hospital - that g;ve us o wonderful
opportunity of listening to England and Moscow every night.
Apart from that Dr. Hoven was most oertalnly informed that
there were two night watohmen in the hospital especially
for this purposo. I can remember very well that Dr. Koven
placed his dog at the disposal of one of these watchmen
sc that anyone who ap-reached the Sick 3ay was immediately
announced by the do 5 and the nl fc ht watohaan said "’.fatoh out,
trouble, turn off the switch.* I beliovo if Dr. Hoven
had boon an oonvlnoed 33 man he would hardly have made
Jokos llko that.

A. You have already spoke about Dr. Hovon's attitude
toward the Jows. Do you have anything you want to add or
would you Just describe Dr. Koven 1 s attitude toward Jews
summarily.

A. I believe that it la genoraly known that Jewish
rlson-rs in that camp were actually suffering the worst
lot of ell. If an S3 mar., be it the doctor or bo it another
ascertained the blook leader of the Jewish blocks was
taking an Interest in the Jews, tnen he had to take quite
some risks because he always ato d between che prisoners and
the S3 and I know for certain if the preferential treatment
w.-.ioh Dr. Hoven gave the Jews had been mown then Dr,

Hoven w uldn't be in the Dook today. I think at that,
tlse he would have gone the way bj many prisoners went
at the oaaro in Buohenwald. I would really like to remind
y<u of the case of August Cohn In this connection. I think
I have mentioned the name once before today. Cohn was a
C-erman, a .olltlcal Jew, and with his comrades and all the

I

0603


Court 1

June 5-H-ll-o-KD-Gro a s-rrank.


prisoners In the caap he had an excellent reputation. One
day this «cn was supposed to leave the caap of Buchenwald
on a transport. The Illegal caap adnlnlstrator immediately
contacted Hoven saying there was danger for Cohn to be
transported ?va>* from Buohenwald. Dr. Hoven immediately
adopted the necessary measures and brought Cohn to 31ook 45.

I can remember that a few weeks before Cohn left for the
United States, because I live near Kassel, I met him In the
street quite by accident when he had a break down of his

car. I reoognlted him Immediately and stopped and started

•

talking with him. For the first time I learned that tho
defendant Hoven had later been a prisoner In tho concentra¬
tion camp of Buchenwald. Cohn also told me that an American
Armored Troop had put B.ven on top of a tank end had
taken him from Weimar to Buchenwald. When they got to
Buohenwald Cohn saw .-.oven standing on top of the tank and
he stopped tho American driver and said to the officer
wh- was thore, "Gentlemen, don't do any harm to this man.

Ho Is the an who fought In our ranks." Your Honor, oould
you Imagine that a Jew of all people - those people who
suffered most by hardship In that camp - would spoak up to
savo the life of an S3 man and describe him as a decent
human telng? I don't bellove so. I wouldn't do It In any
other case either.

Q. Will you please tell this Tribunal tho measures
adopted by the defendant Dr. Hoven In order to camouflage
Jews In that legal Sick Bay?

A. It happened very often that Jews who arrived In
the prisoners' Sick Bay were Immediately deprived of all
articles, that the markings were removed fr -a the prisoner's
clothes and all that was left was a number so that any camp
commander who might come to the Sick Bay, even the comm?-nda:i«


C609


Court 1

June 5-H-ll-4-KD-Qrc as-Fre nk.


or little 8S men, could never find out that these prisoners
were Jews. It happened every day after all that Jews
suffered 111 treatment In the open camp streets. If one
of these gentlemen eight have had a bad breakfast he would
then go out and assault those Jewish prisoners, beat them
senseless. And I must add that all these people who came
back from flagging were admitted to the Sick 3ay by Or.

Hoven although this was severely prohibited. I would like
to tell you about the Jewish prisoner Brandt from Hamburg.

I know I am under oath In this Court Ho m and that I must
think onrefully rb^ut every word I em saying. I want to
tell you that this man Brandt had four operations on his
behind since all flosh had been beaten off his hones. Dr.
Hoven kopt this man perhaps 8 or 9 months In the Sick 3c.y
and I assure you ho was excollently fed first of all for
pity tho nurses felt for him, and secondly, Koven saw what
this man hud gone through, o terrible torture. I an not
exaggerating when I say he had sores on his behind as
large as ay bend and It must be highly considered that
Dr. Hoven helped so nuch at the time.

Q. >Jh;t was Dr. Hoven 1 a ooneem regarding food
6upplloe for the prisoners?

A. I would like to say that I myself acooapanled
Dr. Hoven during many Inspections of the prison ketohsn and
It happened quite often that Dr. Hoven took a plote from
the kettle In which the prisoner's fed was cookod and
tried this food, rtiea Dr. Hoven felt that tho food was
not edible he wont straight to the phone and got In touch
with the commandant and replied that the fo <1 would go
straight to the pig sty©, the work would be interrupted,
the prisoners would return to the ermo and a new meal would
be c. ked and only the newly cooked meal would be given out.


J610


Court 1

June 5-M-ll-5-KD-3ross-rirrJc.


I know he went to the prison kitchen three to five times a

week.

What other measures did Dr. Kovon adopt in the
Interest of the prisoners?

A. Counsel, would you kindly repeat the question,
please?

Q. *Vhat additional measures did Dr. Koven adopt in
the Interest of the prisoners?

A. I know for Instance that a largo number of oases
when prisoners had to do hard physical work In the working
party so that many were near physloal breakdown. I have also
experienced It that Dr. Hovon crossed the parade square
several times and that during rool call, which bofore Dr.
Koven's time occupied three to four hours, convinced him¬
self of the physloal condition of the prisoners. No doubt
the whole camp was deeply groatful to Dr. Hovon that ho
suocoedod to reduce the roll call period In Buohonwald to
d minimum. I con well say that roll oall during Hovon's
period hardly took longer than 20 minutes. Now when Hoven
saw poople cn the parade square that locked weak and badly
nourished ho gave Instructions to tako down the number of
the dotalnee and saw very quickly that thet prisoner wont
to another working party.


3611


5 Jur^tf-FI/-12-l-Xarrow (Int. Fp*r.k)

Court No. 1 -

a.- tfhct do you know .-.bout aeaair-s adopted by tho defendant Dr.
Hover, to vc Polish pcoplo who were to be hanged because thoy had
sexual intercourse with Goran girls ?

A.- Tho situation o i those Polish prisoners in the canp wes rather
b-d. kost of thus, rft«r they'*,re in Buchenwald for two or throo wcvks,
were called to tho political department by either LcClair or Serno and
hanged. After tho illegal ca.p administration erri Dr. Haven hod disco¬
vered that there did exist the possibility to «ve these people sinco
thoro was cn order frea Berlin to tho offoct tf»t Poles who spoke Ger¬
man well were bo Gorarnited if possible. Dr. Hoven ar.de excesslvo uso
of this loophole. I could describe you asxy a case when Polish prisoners,
who were in the crap for thr-e or four days and could, therefore, not
be recognised r.s good comrades in that shor period, were instructed to
r-port to the sick bry ..here they were then physically and medically
examined, assuring was carried out - this always nppuiKd u»st ridicu¬
lous to a. - and then thus, people were included in soac list - I think
it went up to 5 - rad then when Dr. Hoven succooded in putting theso
nui on List tf 5 then thoy had escaped doath because a Cera in who had
intercourse with a Goran 6 irl couldn't very well be hanged for that.

Q.- Had prisen-.rs requested th* dofondrnt Dr. Hoven that wh.n ho
was away froa Buchcnwald he should always leave a mossrgu to tho offect
where ho could be found ?

A.- I'd like to say that the hospital hrd connection with Dr. Haven's
appartaent, ov»n I think with the the commandant, the caoaandrnt's of¬
fice and thw gate by telephone, end every tine that Dr. Hoven loft the
hospital he told tho nurs- on duty where he could be found. It happened
for instance, that operations hrd to be carried out right in the niddlo
of the night. Saactiaes, quite possibly. Dr. Horn didn't know whether
he could carry on without Dr. Hoven*s, the ca? physician's permission
:r not and then he wont to the tolephon. and got Dr. Hoven, but I have
ot to say that in no case which I ever saw did Dr. Hoven refuse to cox,

0612


5 Joce-l‘-rL-12-2-Karrcw (Ir.t. Frank)
Court Go. 1 *


crkiRi som. excuses or even delayed. It was generally known that when
Dr. ffoven was needed in the cc-p he was thare. There wuro circumatrjt-
ccb socoo tines when, quite suddenly, two or three cnap loaders arrived
in the sick b'-y. They had got an idee aoouhow that t;>e coop hospital
■r.s really the ooat of the illegal ca=p administration, and they start¬
ed to turn everything up side down looking for papphluts, written and
printed documents, rcdio receivera and trcna.aitt.rs, end it never took
a lor, tlvi before Dr. Ho von showed up and stopped these people fron
c-arrying out further search, tel lira then that they nadc c nuisance of
thesselves. I tliink ".any a boot Lag was saved in that way nrd many of

our good cxircdes osoaped the erwsatoriun that way.

f..- las it generally known in the cnap that the do fondant Dr. ll-Ven
collaborated with the illegal camp cdininistr’tion ?

A.- If I were to any "generally" in the camp that would probably
be too ouch because if wo question one hundred persons froa 'dixhcr.nnld
in this court roan and ask thea who ms tho illegal ea^> administration
then ninety-nine of then wouldn't bo able to give you c definite anawor.
I .rust tell you that I .ay^lf had b-on in frequent contact with tho il¬
legal ccjxp administration, but if you csk me today or if you toll nc
to write down tho names of the illegal camp .administration then I Cer¬
tainly wouldn't jet beyond .ay ineodinto superior. If there Wero any
.nessarus or roporta or orders to bo transmitted by e* then I only had
ono non who was directly ahead of a who was dosigmted to no and all
I knew was that I Ird to Ull him but I didn't even know to whom ho
Vent as th. next ono. The illegal comp administration, therefor., was
always quite definitely a very aysUrious affair. Admittedly, the SS
camp ad inini st rat ion alw-ys stated that the former hospital cap* Ernst
ousse, had been tho head of this conspiracy, but I wouldn't like to
state that her- because, quite definitely I ccn't tell vou for certain;

What o ;*ou xizm .ab-ut the reasons for Dr. Hoven's arr-so by


the £^cr_t State Police ?


5 Juno-!f.FUi2-3-Xarrcw (Int. Frank)
Court Ko. 1


A.- Of the official arrest of Dr. Kovon I hoard very little, but
I umc that subsequently to this arrest I ms iradintely sent amy
froa Buchonwald because it wes very probable that tho SS wore convincod
that I night have scon too ouch with liov.n and that it was high tt-o,
aftor Hov^o went, that I went too. I'n absolutely convinced that tho
reason why Dr. Hover. was arrested was this. The SS cacp administration
quite definitely did not fail to we the collaboration between the il¬
legal coap rdainistration and Dr. Hov-n. In order not to nr.ku thciorclves
ridiculous they couldn't obviously arrest Dr. Hovcn nrxi say "You have
collaborated with tho prisoners" because the prisoners who collaborated
with Dr. Hovcn could well be hanged without c word of treason ever pass¬
ing their lips. Vo certainly saw this case an as-a of tines in Buchcnwnld
because people being uni^r suspicion of bcin? in the iUogal cup adni-
n istration went to the so-called ■banker" in 3cchcnwald where they died
in axtre.no .-misery ; forturrtcly, however, without ever gibing their ca>
races awry. So I think it would have boon quite useless if Jr. .'.'oven bad
been arrested officially in order ot get fren bin the names of the illo-
£•.1 ca^j od’lnlstrr.tion because I don't believe Dr. Hovon would have bo-
eono that weak.

C,.- ..'ill you please describe to the Tribunal how it happened that
you arrived hero as a witnass ?

A.- I road in tho news capers that, at present. Dr. Hovffn was in

•

the prison in Numbers and that he was be?ng held responsible for tho
euthanasia progrra before the International liUtary Tribunal in 2iurnbcrg
and, at fhc snao tine, I road that a certain Dr. Go*ilk tad taken over
tho dofense of this dofoodant. Now, sincu I owe -ay own Ufo to Dr. Hovcn,
and since I taro soer. s; cano good duds done to ae during tr* tine of
ay detention, I erne here as a voluntary witness. Neither tta prosecu¬
tion nor the defense noted ae to do that -ad it's really incoaprchunsi-
ble to De that -11 those ocn who cnee lived Well thanks to Dr. Hoveq awl
who, tod-y, have very important positions in Germany, and I'll Just

0614 . *


5 Jone.-M-FL- 12-1 ,-Earrca (Int. Frank)
Coart So. 1


briefly aontion tho Vice President of Thorii^in hero in this connection.

I do not urdoratant the personal cowardice of this sen that he hasn't
coa- to Nurnberg today to say ".Tfcet'a how the situation is". Tlv.ro arc
other pcoplo too who are holding high police offices in tho Russian Zonu
today, ny do these people not consider it necessary that tho atan who
has done so .ouch good lor then and saved their lives or ar.de thoir li¬
ves easy for then during nany years of detention - that these pooplo
didn't cone hero today. I'd also like to say that it -..as tried to crocto
difficulties for no. khen it bocaae known to tho Caxdtte for Racially
Persecuted People that I would apj*ar r.s a witn.ss in Numbers, it
was actually tried quite shortly beforehand to have rv imprisoned. They
wer-n't ov.n eahoaed to talk to fellow prisorv-rs behind ay ba.cl: -nd ask
then if it wasn't possible that I .dsht have beaton a Jew on saao occa¬
sion or wheth-r there wasn't sono reason for ny arrest thus provor.ting
ay Journey to Numberg. But these acn didn't score in that effort.

Q.- Thank you. I h.vo no furtlxr quoationa to the witnoss, *ir. Pro-
sident.

TYx, rReiIDJiT : Tho Tribunal will now be in xecoss urtf.il 1:30 o'clock
(a recess was taken until 1330 houro, 5 Ju:* 1947)


8615


Court lo. 1

5 Jun 47-1-13-1-iSWtaloy (Zrovn)


ATTLE50CS SLSSICS

(The hearing reconvened at 1350 hour*. 5 June 1947.)

TEX KABSEALl The Tribunal is again in eeealon.

hay It please Your Honore, the defendant Rudolf 3randt has resumed
his place in the ecurtroom.

TEE PRESIDED!i The Secretary General will note for the record that
Rudolf Brandt has resumed his olace in the dock.

Do any of the defense counsel have any ouestioas of this vitnessT

If.. STinEAUIR: Stelnbauer for defendant Boiglboock.

3Y If. STXXXSAQBl

Q, Witness, ! vas interested in vhet you said at the conclusion,
namely, that you vere subjected to sovore pressure not to opuear hero
ns a vitnoss. I ask you, do you believe that if a former hospital capo
in a concentration cemu today is the regional chiof, let us say, of the
Coaounist Party in a country not under American nrotootion, vould ho
have enough po*cr thet former concentration cnap inmates *-ould bo afraid
to opuoso him?

*. To this cuostlon I can only sny thr t efforts «crc made to nako


difficulties for me before my d«.ocrture for Duornborg.

rloasv speak e littlo louder. ! don't hear you.

A. I repent, X ern only say that difficulties vcrc made for mo
boforo ny departure for Su.rnberg.

Q, Thon you believe thet if less intelligent fornor concentration
camp inmates are subjected to such orossure they ere likely not to toll


eampsT


that Quito possible,
wxrt you in a conccntrction cc-tdT
to 1944.

exhaustive cvo*riencc vith concentration


that can be stii.


.ere you detained in one concentration cerx, or in different


Court So. 1

5 Jun 47«A-l£-2-Hfc-4aloy (Brown)


caspil

A. r -«• first in Dachau, acd froa December 1940 to 20 Seotenber
1943 in Buchenwald, and froa 20 Septeabor 1943 until 16 July 1944 I was
in Auschvitt.

Q. Then the inmates of the concentration carp wore they persecuted
by the SS and w B re there political struggles for power within the concen¬
tration camp?

A. I would say the inmates hed more to fear of those letter
struggle* ?=vor than of tho Sb, bcceus^ the aotto in tho eaap was
■Bo who doesn't toe the line or it is bolicved hv doesn't toe the lino,"
death sontence is already ureparod for hi-..

Q, Then there was a fight b twoon the blues nnd the reds In the

caapT

A. It would bo better to say bet-eon tho greens and the rods.

Vithin these individual groups, let us say -ithln tho red group,
were thoro also not struggles for oc'-orT

A. I can answer that oucstion only in regards to Cisap Buchenwald,
and I can say that es long rs tho ccr.tor cf the illogrl canp manngonont
-os in the camp hospital it wvs possibly determined through Dr. Hovon'o
protection, when tho political prisoners, particularly if they wero for-
aor cccnunists, were practically united, and Bujhenvnld %es tho only
canp group this >rgi nisetl >n -to extended to all ::c:.bors if tho canp no
•matter W-.rt thoir nationality was.

Witness, because you Just mentioned Buchonvald, wore there
gypsies in that canp?

A. (<ulte a few, indeed.

^ Vhat colors did the gypsies carry?

A. T ai refer to -hat triangle they wore?

Its.

A. They wore the blech oao designating them as asocial.

s* I must tell you that in the booh "SS Stria" by Xogon it is
stated that the gypsies vor_ the br„wn triangle.


"617


Court 5o. 1

5 Jun 47-A-13-3-I3t-Kel07 (Srcvn)

A. Insofar as I know, the hrova sign was done away with In Buchon-

Is 1540, end all gypsies arrested for rectal reesons vero asocial.

In other vords, fron 1940 on thore were no gypsies In the cam *>o
vero not designated In the filing syetea as asocial, as unwilling to work.

Q. iov ve have these various designations, the rods, blues, and
browns. Did any of these groips have aore opportunity to escapo froa the
carp aore culckly than other groups?

a. The green prisoners, the professional, crialnals, had no chanco
whatever to be released free the caap. The political prisoners - of then
I know only three or four oases who wore released through channels. To
be euro, there were soce releases which X said this nornlng which Dr.

Eovon was behind. The black ones had quite a good chance of being

released.

<?. And according to what you have said tha gypsies belonged to
this class.

A. I havo already said eo.


sac


Court 1

Ju .10 5-A-14—1-ED-Keehon-Bro vn.


h. I^t me ask you again, did the gypsies belong among
those who had a better chance of early release?

A. Yee.

Q. Do you know whether there was a tuberculosis station
In Dachau?

A . I know about this Tuberculosis Station from my
owr. experience from the tine I myself was at Daohau, more¬
over, I can state that from ay Auschwitz time, we sent
tubercular persons If they were native Germans to Daohau
for treatment.

Q. Now, since you said you know about this station
yourself; how was It kept?

A. I oust say I saw this station only fr-m the out-
sldo, but I know from prisoner nurses with whom I associated
In Auschwitz that the tuboroulosls station In Dachau
was very well oqulpod.

Q. Now, If a prisoner had the misfortune of falling
slok with tuberculosis In Daohau, do you bellovo that he was
taken Into and cared for In thj tuberouloele station, or
do you believe he was killed because he had tuberculosis?

A. The Important thln_ In the camp was always whether
the prisoner had some connections either with the camp
doctor or with the Illegal camp administration and If so,
ho was Immediately taken Into the Tuberculosis station.

3. Did you ever hoar that prisoners were used In
experiments, medloal experiments?

A. So far as I know there were high altitude experi¬
ments In Dachau for the Luftwaffe, then I think there were
experiments In making sea-water potable and experiments of
thr.t sort, however, I am not exactly Informed on this.

Q- That Is not imoortant, but can you toll me perhaps
vero these people forced to participate In these experiments

P619


Court 1

June 5—A~14-2-HD-Heahan-5rovn.

or was there an opportunity for then to apply?

A. Please laagine the position In which a prisoner
finds himself, who for many years has not been able to eat
until his appetite la satisfied and imagine how he think If
ho applies for suoh and such an experiment, ho will reoelve
doublo or triple rations. You can madlly seo that hundreds
end even more prisoners would sake themselves available
simply for the purely huaan urge to have a full meal.

5. New, witness, you said that for an Inmate of the
oaop It was difficult to know very much about what wont on
lr. tho hospital; what opportunities did a person ontlroly
outsldo of the oanp, lot us say aysolf living In Vienna,
have to observe what wont on In Dachau or Ruchenwald?

A. I oan only give you tho one answer; I myself did
not know what went on In tnere until I myself was lnsido.

3. Thank yvu, I have no further questions.

TK2 PRESIDENT: are there any further questions to bo
propounded to the witness by defense counsol? If not, tho
pr'. socutlon may cross examine.

3Y MR. HARDY:

Q. Hr. Dorn, how long did you work In the quarries at
Buohonwald?

a. Frjc December of 1940 until I first fell sick
around the middle of January, then with short interruptions
I was In the hospital and then until March of 1941 I v;orked
In the quarries.

How many people did you 66e killed there?

A. How many In the quarries?

Q. Yes.

A. That Is a very sad chrpter. The prisoner Kapo
Herzog, a man if ill reoute, treated the prisoners exactly
in aocord with what his mood happened to be and it 16 true


C620


Court 1

June 5-A-14—3-K3-He eban—5rov n.


that people were sis treated for so long they finally died.

Q. Didn't they actually take Inmates to the quarries
to execute then?

A. Mr. Prosecutor, in the early morning, when the
prisoners were leaving the cacp, the Camp Commander SohQbert
frequently ordered that when the connando camo back In tho
evening there wore to be no a.re Jews in It. I bellovo that
you understand what that means.

Q . How long was SchQbert Coop Commander?

A. As far ns I know, until the caap was llbcratod.

Z, When Koch Ccap Conaander?

A. I cust correct; SchQbort was not tho Camp Commander
but tho adnlnlstrator of tho Preventive Custody Caap.

Q. What kind of a oan was Caap Conaandant Koch?

A. I oust §ry that I saw Conaandant Kooh only vory
Infroquontly, tut so far as I rocall, ho was a nan with no
ounsolonco and a crlainol, that is Bally tho only descrip¬
tion that ne oan find for that nan.

Q. Vhon did you first enter Block 46?

A. Approximately throe or four days after tho first
experimental eorlos was begun.

Q. How often did you frequent 3lock 46?

A. You mean the ontlro period of tine during which
I was in 3uchenwcld as a nurse; If you do, I aust say that
I cannot give y*u the exact nusber of times, but that It
was very ften.

Z. Did you go there two or three times a week, or two

*

or three times a month; Just how often?

A. I believe I car. state that I wes there twice a week.

Z. Twice a week; however, you had no duties to preform
at Block 46?

A. No, In Block 46 I rad r.o work to do, only occasl^n-


ally


C6 21


Court 1

Juno 5-A-l4-^-ED-ke efaan-3rown.

I fcrd to take medicine and drugs there.

2. Then your only reason for frequenting 3lock 46 was
to deliver drugs and nodlclne; Is that correct?

A. I frequently had to take food there to, butter which
vrs given as an additional ration and which I received in the
kitchen to be taker, to Block 46.

"ell, then, whenever you paid a visit to Block 46
how ouoh tine did you spend there; ten alnutes, two hours a
whole day?

A. S metises I was there for an hour and conversed
with the nurses there.

3. Did you ever see any experiments being conducted?

A. I sow the pjtlents daily, I also often asked then

how things woro going with theo or what they were doing,
but I o uld not see the experlaents theaselves since Dr.

Ding never took ae Inside the Block.

i. Did you ever see Dr. Ding administer any injections
t. tho experlaental subjects or porfora any of the
experience thereon at any tise?

A. No.

ii. Then, you ere n-t rt liberty to tell the Tribunal
who experimented in block 46?

A. Hr. Prosecutor, I as in a position to do so because
X was on very friendly terms with the nurse Jolilnek and
he frequently told ae wno woe d >in« what in Block 45.

Q. Did any of tho nurses over tell you that Dr. Hoven
was performing exr?erla,.nts in "lock 46?

0 *

A. Ho.

Zculd it have beer, possible for Dr. .-.oven to perform
experiments in Block 45 without your knowledge?

A. - hardly believe 30 , Ar. Prosecutor, because such
things v uld lanediately hare become generally known in the


8622


Court 1

Juno 5-A-14-5-KD-Heehan-Browr..

camp lr. our circles.

£. Suppose Fritz Klrchheiner stated toot he personally
saw Dr. Hoven experiment -n -- ubjects, In 31ock Ho. 46?

DP.. 3AYLXZ: I object to that question, Klrchheiner never
said such a thing. I wish the Prosecutor to show the trans¬
cript to the witness so he say a^e what Fritz Klrchheiner act¬
ually did say. I knew that Klrohholmor stated he never saw
Dr. Seven giving an Injection.

HP-. SARD': Pardon me, Your Honor I did not say
lnjeotlon. I said experimented on. Fritz Klrchholmor
testified hero that Dr. Hoven tied the cage of lice on
inmates legs In Block 45, if I roo.lloot ocrreotly.

Did Klrchholmor over tell you ab ut that wltnose?

DR. GAVLXK: Mr. President, I bollovc that the ruling
.f tho o art Is that tho transcript sh.uld be shown to the
witness s. ho himself oan road what the vitnoeo Klrohholmor
said.

2 ®. HARDY: Your Honor, I don't think that Is nooossory.

I will aok him whether or r.^t Klrohholmor over told him that
he saw Dr. Hoven ever experiment on Inmates In tho camp.

THE PRESIDENT: Then y u will withdraw tho previous
question?

MR. HARDY: That was my previous question. Your Honor,

I asked If he ever talJccd to Klrohholmor and If Klrohhelacr
over told him that Dr. Hoven over experimented on Inmates,
that was tho Import of my question.

THE PRESIDENT: The translation must have cone through
wrong then, Mr. Hardy, I did not understand you. Tho
prosocut r will propound his question - gain.

I-H. HARDY: Did Fritz Kirchhelmer ever tell you that ho


saw Dr. Hoven performing experiments n human beings In
Block No. 46?


Oourt 1

June 5— ^-14—6-HD— He ebon— 3r own.


“HZ‘ITHZSS: Ko, noreover Fritz Zirchhelcer was* so far
r.s I know, oaployed only in the bath and had had no
pportunity to observe the functioning physician during hie
experiments.

KH. HARDY: If Fritz Kirahhelner stated that he hrd tho
-P ortunlty to .bserve that; would you tend to dlsbellcvo
hi a?


5 Juno-A-FL-15-I-Prioaau (L-.t. Broun)
Court So. I


EE. CA'TJX : I spin ask ttet the prosecutor put the transcript to

*

tho witness. I dony that that stateoent was ov»r aado by Kirchhoijaer,
ir. ay recollection. The witness Kirchhoiaer did not say that and, in or¬
der to bo sure on this aattur, I ask again that the transcript ho put to
the witness so that he can boo what really was said.

THE PRESIDENT : I think in ordor to oakc the question proper tho
transcript should be procured.

JR. HARDY : Strike tho question. Your Honor. I will not hotter to
put it to tho witnoss yet. I will savo that far the brief.

BY JR. HARDY :

4

Q.- Di you knew on w of your colicages, an innate named L-ounnrdon,
spoiled LueuwnrdoR?

A.- No.

Q.- Did you know another >no >f your colleages, a witnoss nanod
Schnlkur, Schalkor?

A.- Ho.

Non, you say whon this first shipment of lico 'rrlvod. Can you
tell us wh*r It caco froa ?

A.- So far =8 I knew, froa Cracow.

f;.- How did you happen to know that it arrived from Cracow ?

A.- Ttero was orxr-1 talk about it in that caop and it rras s-.id
ttet tho .fehmacht officer who brought tho socond shipaent of lice had
cooo froa Cracar fra the Wtbreacht Institute there.

Q.- Did you sou the lice ?

A.- I personally did not.

Q.- Did you seo the lice destroyed ?

A.- No. •

Q.- Do you knew wtethur or not it was destroyed before or after uso
in the uxp;ri/x.ntr.l block 46 ?

A.- Tho first ahipaupt was cert-inly burned before any experiments

3625


VN.ru done nit a it.


5 Jure—A-H>-15-2-Prlaoau (Int. 3r awn)
Court :io. 1


Q.- ‘..ho told 70 U that ?

A.- In the whole hospital that was noil known to ell the nurses.

Q.- './ho told you that ?

A.- Hy suporior in the.illegal organization.

Q.- ’..-ho ?

A.- Holljaith Dioannn.

Q.- Ia ho tho nan who wee one of thu doctors working in the hospi¬
tal barracks ?

A.- Ko.

Q.- ..hat was hia position in the hospital barracks ?

«•* HolLauth Dieaann wae a prisou-r nurse.

Q.- .hen did the second shiptaent of lice nrrivu ?

A.- That was at th, ond of 1942.

Q.- wid you sec it.

A.- Ko.

Did you aco it destroyed ?

A.- Ko.

Q.- Do you kr.» whether or not it was destroyed before or after use
in the oxporinontal block 46 ?

It was burr.ee' after the lico had boon pLacod on the prisoners for
a few oinutes. \hor. the person who brought this shipment, tho 'Wohroacht
officer, had l-.Xt blxk 46, the cages of lice were taken fron block 46
and burned.

Q.- '.»ho told you that ?

A.- In the illegal oragnization that was explicitly -rde known, be¬
cause wc prisoners, so far as we know what was going on in block 46 , were
Just as afr-id of an attack of disease as anyone else who had anything
to do with block 46. For this reason those jocsutcs were taken fjr our
own reassurance .arc’ so far as possible to roassure all tho prisoners in
the cr-.p, and for this reason this .‘.nf onsetion was ianodiatcly or do known.

C..- was present in tho illegal caap aan-^oaent when thoso lice


5 Jur^A-PI/-15-3-Prliacan (Lit. Brown)

Court Ho. 1

»cro tied on to the logs of inmates ?

A.- Vary probably, only tho prisoner capo of block 46, Arthur
Dietzsch.

Q.- 'feo ho a muaber «,f tho illegal cccp management ?

A.- !Cr. Proaucutor, in this irotonco, you nro asking too xAuch of
m hgro i if y°u ask ao about the organization of tho illegal camp na-
nceu^nt, I cannot answer this question on tho basis of a list. I can't
say such and such or such and such a prisoner was o ■oenbor. I can only
tell you who ay superior was, who gave no ay instructions, and to whom
I reportod. It was abs-lutcly necessary to builc the illegal organiza¬
tion accordin', to this pattern because if a ftur.ber of the organization
was tortured by tho SG in the Bucher*.aid bunker then, at most, ho could
only naoxi one nan who was his superior and only one none was his infe¬
rior. Tt^roforo, h- cojld betray only two people \ end, if tho camp or
organization had been differently set up there would have boon a groat
misfortune in the camp.

C.- Kaw tai\y criminals wore auabers of the illegal ennp management ?

A.- I beliove th-t is ono of th« hardest questions that you could
have asked no. In view of tho Ihct, that I an testifying undor oath,

I cannot answer that question definitely.

Q.- r/as Arthur Dietzsch, hospital capo of block 46, a criminal
prisoner ?

A.- Ho, Arthur Dietzsch w~s a political prisoner of many years
standing.

Q.- Aim you sure ?

A.- los.

Q,- Do you know why ho was incarcerated ir. a concentration ca op ?

A.- Diatzsch 'as a foraar Hole :swehr officer and had bc-n punished
because within tho Roichswohr ..v. had carried Coaounistic propaganda,

Q.- Had Arthur Dietzsch been in jail for so-* 20 years ?

I believe he- had served 15 years ir. a penitentiary and from


5 Ju.Te-A-FL-15-4-Pri.se.-iu (Int. 3r:wn)

Court So. 1

1934 on h«. hod boon in various concentration r. --< ps,

Q.- Ke woa classified as a political prisoner ?

A.- Political prisoner, yea.

c -«" r«! no reported to the illegal coop onnagecunt that the lico
in cages acre tied to the thighs of experimental atfcjecta ?

A.- Yea.

Q.- '..ho tied them on tho thigha of tho experimental subjects ?

A.- So far aa I knew, Arthur Diotzveh hinaelf.

Q.- *nho naa pr-aont ?

A.- Or. Ding, and a doctor froa Berlin.

Q.- .fca Dr. Hoven thoro ?

A.- That I cannot answer.

Q.- Waa Fritz Kirchhein-r there ?

A.- :io probably ice because Kirchhci^er na ->r.c of the a trangoet
aeu in the coop and he waa uaod for auch aervicca.

Q.- You etato that Dr. Hoven, in order to atop the uao of thcao
lico, called the SS officer on the telephono and told him if he didn't
return in tho truck tfrr.t ba would have to wlk later in the evening. Ia
that in thia connection, that you told ua that ?

A.- I didn't quit*, urxleratand tho quaation.

Q.- On direct oxr.-dnatlcn you stated that th. second ahipaont of
lice waa to bo uaod in on o.*porirxnt and was, in fact, used and that Or.
Hoven, knowing that tho lie- wav being used, attempted to interrupt tho
experiments by calling tho SS officer froa Berlin by tolophono and tell¬
ing !iia that il would not bo possible for him to return to ./eiaar lator
in tho evening and that tho nly transport' tion available waa a truck
that was leaving imodiately and then the SS officer took t» availablo
transport - tion ::hich enable Kovon to destroy tbo lice. Ia that what you
tried to cortv-y to us ?

A.- Yes, but apparently there was or. error it. tho tr-nslation. It waa
rot an SS office- tut a o..abor of the Geraan Vehraacht.


5 Ju.t-A-rL- 15 - 5 -rri 2 oau (Int. 3rcwn)

Court No. 1

Q.- I X6. 1 hero did Hoven telephone free ?

A.- I hr*vc already auntionod this v>rning that the prison hospi¬
tal had direct telephonic connections oith Block 46 so that there, was
cn opportunity that anybody who had to be celled up at any tiao could bo
called up.

Q.- Uwro did Bowen call this Bohr.wcht officer free ? 'Am Hoven in
the hospital barracks and the 'Dehroocht officer in Block 46 ?

A.- At ttet tino Kovon was in the hospital end was brought by a
prisoner in-.odlately to block 46 and apparently was inforned by this pri¬
soner in the hospital what was going on nt that tlao in block 46.

C..- Then he tolflph r*d the '..ohmacht officer and told hlu a truck
was ready to leave. Is that right ?

A.- No. Dr. Hoven thon returned with the prisoner froa the hospital
the jno hurfxed Mtura to block 46, and called tho notor pool,

Q.- T.’hero did tho use A tho telephone cooo into ploy ?

A.- In the hospital.

Q.- Did you Joar tho telephone call ?

A.- No, but 1 taow all about it becr.uso this was a aottcr that was
of wast iaportance to us prisoners.

Q.- Non, Dr. Hoven toloph i the ..ehroncht officer from tho hospi¬
tal, is that ritht, aj* told hin the truck was leaving ?

A.- Nj, Dr. Hoven telephoned in tho hospital to the aotor pool and
had tho truck arranged for .and thereupon he xvtumed in person frora tho
hispital with this prls-..-»jr to Block 46 and p-obably told this officer
personally that the truck was ready for hie, that he should seize this
opportunity because otherwise he would hr.vo to nake the long trip fron
Buc Ik nuclei to \VLoor that evening on foot.


5 June-..-OIS-16-1-Ccale (Int. Br'im)
Curt No. 1.


Q. *hcn, Krven proceeded to Jestr'y the lice after the 'Vohrmacht
rfficcr left?

a. lea.

Q. What was Dr. Din d<inc all cf tnia tine?

... Dr. Din, acc< apanicd~the ..ohmacht fficcr to the sate.

Q. .ell, was Jr. He von the superior cf Dr. ^in? C ull he des¬
troy the cqui^oent Dr. Diu was usiiv: in his or.crinents with:ut the
perniasi. n cf Dr. Din .

a. N , it w s quit, tho c ntrary, but Dr. H-v-n was the man in the
c-cp whe steed n the beat Urns with the pris ners anl who w ulJ n.r-
aally take charge af such a natter aa this. I d.n't think Din* wculd
have drne anythin in this case.

i

Q. Din. didn't have anythin, t say abut it?

... I an o. rry I didn't quite understand the quest! n.

•*. Din 'i In't have, anythin- t say ab ut the c’.cstructl n f the

lico?

•». I n*t Veliev- Din.’ kn-w anythin ab ut this occurrence at all.

Q. H w auch aatfc rity c ul-J Dr. H^ven cxerciau .v^r blck L6?

«. I kn w f r certain that Dr. H ven tnly .nee waa put in as Dr.

“in 'a '.oputy f r nr. rt peri *. -f tlx. Dr. Din hinaolf ha! typhus
at that tiao an’, I believe, he was n l^ave f r c nvalcacncc.

Q. I aa n t ref err in- t when Dr. Din; was n 1-ave. "hen Dr.

Din was present in B1 ck li6, n * jach autt. rity *.i.' H ven have rv^r it?

«. N ne at all.

•*. He had authority t .-a in and lestr-y the lice Dr. Din- was
usin'?

a. x. Pr sccut r at the tin_ wh n Dr. H-ven destroyed the lice
th-*t was s nothin he lii cn his wn initiative, ini if Dr. Din- %Bd rot
win! f that ho rul * i-n, 'lately have had Dr. H ven punished.

. ell n-w then when Jr. Din- ease back an 4 culan't find his lice,
'i tn't he kn w a* ut it?

“. .'x. Pres-cut r, the situati n was ft^n such, that Or. Din-
Just cacu t t.V canp f-r half an h ur, order.-s nothin.: r iher and


5 Jun_-..-G_3-l6-2-C r k (Br im)
C urt . 1 .


then left the caap on.’, then pai! n. further attention to the natter.

Q. Dr. “in. certainly knew whether ~r net he ha! exp-risen tol
sutj-cts that had been infected wita lice, di!n't he?

A. Y.b, that ho knew; but if Dr. Din were tcld that the capes had
leaks in then an' that they cnetituted a dan er -f infecting net nly
thw e pcricental persons but f r every:nc in the ca-ip, inclu '.in ; * ( the SS
officers, I as sure Dr. Din w 1 ' havo washed his hands an', left the canp,
because Or. Dinp was n-t auch rf a her.-*.

w. "he was the a st p w-rful tan. Dr. Dinr -r Dr. Heven?

A. »ith ut any d*ubt, Din , but s far as tlu illegal activities
were cnccrna Hvcn was the san with n*rc c'urc c, on! Din r was a
c nsci-nti us SS con.

Q. "hen Dr. Din was absent fr a Ruclunw.il! wh* was in charge .f
B 1 ck I 46 ?

Dr. h ven was Jest natc! as his deputy, but I aost ail hero that
Or. H ven i n t have the plenipotentiary powers t c nclu’.c the
experincntol scries rr be in n itw -nc,

Q. ifiul' they Just sto, the cxp-ricenta an-* net dc anythin: cn
than while Or. Din* was away? In thcr w r's, if a parson had ty hue
f• r ex c risen to 1 purposes, in' the. w^rc t ivc hi su a vaccine er
inn culato hin later in the c ursc f the experimental series an’. Dr.

Din. left Buchenrnl’, Dr. h ven became the ’eputy in naao cnly and ii"nt
anythin* «I :ut the expcrinentil series an' subjects used *ut there
and Just c splctoly nc 'lecte * it all t cth r?

A. Tes, I an convinceth i -Jr. i ven never roatly interested hic*-
self in the typhus experiments anl when Dr. Din wus abs_nt tho pris nor
nurses in bi'ck I 16 wv.re s trained th t they o ul’ take perfectly g'od
care f the typhus cases in bl ck L 6 . •

Q. 0 yu kn w whether r n t Dr. H-ven fr a / ur wn pers nal
kn wlci-o ever selected imates t be us. J at the ex erimentol stoti n,
black h6?

... I can "ns* _r that questi n ; arfcctly efinitcly in tho ncrntivc.

4 . i u kn w f-r certain he never participated in any f those


5 Jnrx-d^'£-l6~3-C y k (3r wn)

C'-urt S . 1.

activities?

... ‘hit I to * f r certain.

■». Di 4 . you handle the rcccr Is?

«. I saw the reefris several tires in th». pris n office an! there
saw the signatures of Lcelair am! Sera* and I know that these ?crs ns
w.re in 'cncrol selcctai fr a Berlin and w_rc nly Gernan pr-fessi nal
criminals r pcrs ns in preventiv- custody.

Q. Did y u handle the records? X ndly ansr_r cy questi ns, Veter?

«. I often had the records in ay hands, yes.

w. Di l y u k^op the rccar’s? .‘ere y u the clerk, were y u the
cl-rk in the hospital barraoks?

Nr.

Q. ••ho was th« cl^rk?

*ho pris n in ex car 1 , file which had really n thin-; t ic with
this entt-r -ms un cr the char/.c f a can nice R echild at that time,
an the actual fil-c theiaselVwS p.r- ilwa>s in Busae'e r a; Busso bciru:
the Iipo.

Q. "h was that first zan?

a. Reu&hild.

w. Ferdinand Recahild?

a. 4 hat is rieht.

Q. 1'nr.nks, D y u recall wh-n bl.ck 50 was bcin constructed?

a. Yu pr. bably m^n wh-n bl ck 50 was started t- bo use' as an
experir/.ntal stiti n?

W. That is ri ht.

a. I b-lieve in 19lil.

h- ha', char c f equi. pin it, sc that it c ul' b- used, as an
-xpcrU-cntal stati n? D y.u kr.w whether rntit was Dr.* H~von?

i.. Dr H vwi equipped 31'ck 50, but I b-li-vc you want t know the
naacs f the pris n-rs wh functi ned there...

•i. N , I want t kn w whether or n t Dr. h^ven ha char-.o f


C632


«. Y.s


5 Junc-*-GiS-l£-lHCc'k (Br nr.)
Court Ho. 1.


Q. Eow aany inmtes were ther- in ruchcnwai: crnccntriticn canp
in 191*0?

»• In 1910 there nust have teen n- nr re than 5000.

Q. Hew nany Scathe dirt yru average a no nth thr urh natural
causes?

• A very snail nunter ct natural deaths.

Q. roll h w cany w ul' that be, ten, twenty, two hundre-.’ or five
huaired?

•*. Kr. Pr s.cutor, I sh ul' like t‘. say that I caruv-t freely
Judge in this natter because I have roa J . a reat ical ah ut 3uchenwald
since ny rcl-asc an’. hav_ r^a ’ a let f statistics an’ n the basis cf
what I have rca ' I c ul! say that the nunb-r was afc ut tw percent.

<4. Tw percent :f five th usan.:?

a. I.s, thr.t is ifcat I asc-rtr.inetv? p.rcvnt f five th ucand.

Q. How at ut 19L1? H w nany inrr.tcs in the can.' in 191*1?

H-rc the ’ovel pr.ent at the canp Buchemr.i; ,-lnyei a lar.*c
r It. In 191*0 at the be/innin -f the Russian canpal.n innunerahlo
prisoners of war w-rc br u.-ht int th.. cat, an ', then wh-.n the Ukraino
was ecu led there «or. iruv.xdsj-ablc Ukrainian pris ners s th it tho
p .mlnti n f the can;. increased ra. i’ly. I bellovc in cnc year we had
ten th usan! n-w ar.-toils.

w. Then in 1911 y u had 15000 people ther., y u think?

•v. That nuat bo appr xinatcly c rrect.

H w nany ieaths !i.! y.u have then?

«. hen the ttasainn pris iw? f war cane there w„r\; relatively
nany heaths because tdes^ aen hi! walked fr a th« b r _r t the cap
an.'. « r. c nplwtely exhausted an ’, cnaciate in c nscqu-ntly iod in
relatively large mnbors.

U. "3 it as i_uch is five percent r ten p-rc_nt?


Court Si. 1

5 Jun 47-A-17-l-iHX-Gr css (?renk)


*. Sot as cuch as ten percent under ary circunstecces. If it had
been possible fren the very beginning to treat the captured Russians in
ths carp hospital, then in nany erses death could have been avoided, but
there were strict orders fron Berlin that the concentration oanp and
oris oner of war carp, although the prisoner of v*r C pnp was within the
barbed wire, were to be kopt segregated froa one another. For instance,
a large nuebor of Geraan prisoners were tarnished because they threw
bread over the fence to the Russians. Because of the fact that sick
Russians could not be taken into the caln hospital, a little special
hospital was set up Inside the Russian carp. The drugs—

Q. Doctor, Just a aonect. Can you kindly toll ao whether or not
the death rate was over five percent, under fivo percent, ten percent?

Do you know? Ycu have sade a stateaent hero in direct exaninntion that
in 1942 and 1943 the death rate dropped. Now, whrt vas the death rate
in 1941?

A. If I spoke of the decrease in tho death rate, then I was talking
about ordinary prisoners, but now at this nenent I a a talking about
Russian prisoners of war for vfaoc no old soasures had yet been takon.

Q, Veil, lot's forget tho Russian prisoners of war for a nonont
and talk about ordinary prisoners, inascuch as you have based your tosti-
nony on that. How nany prisoners were there in 1941, still 5000, or wae
that roduced because there had been so nany deaths each nonth? v« r o
thero 3600 or how cany ordinary prisoners?

A. Now arrivals of Gomans took place all the tine bccauso the
campaign against Russia started. All politically unreliable persons
wore arrestod then as "actlonlsts*.

How cany ordinary prisoners were in the ccnp in 1941?

A. Approxinetely 8000.

9

What was the death rate?

a. I would estimate that coopered to the previous 7Car it certainly
didn't increase.

It did not increase?


Court So. 1

5 Jun 47-A-17-^-iSi-Cros« (Prank)


A. So.

Q. That vould bo tvo percent again, canely, about 160 ueople a
nonth?

A, Tee.

Eov nary ordinary 1coatee vere there In the canp In 1942?

A. ! vould expect that nev arrival! anountod to 5000 oooplc.

Q. rive thoueand?

A. Tee.

Q. So there «as a total of 6000 In 1942 or ordinary prleonere, or
ie that 13,000 - olght plue five?

A. Quite right - 13,000.

Q. Thirteen thoueand. *hat vne tho death rate In tboeo 13,000?

A. I believe that It vould not exceed tho tvo porcont.

Q. Veil, nov. It dropped, didn't It? Tou eald that vhen Hoven
took ovor ae carp doctor - and he took over In 1942 - tho death rato
dropped oonelderably. Eov, did It drop one percent or one-half percont?
In 1942 it vne tvo percent and nov ve have a considerable drop bocauso
of tho efficiency of Hoven. Did that drop lover than tvo uercont nov,
or didn't It drop?

A. The death rate certainly did not Increase.

Q. Old not increaee? Did It decroaee?

A. Tee, I aseune eo.

Q. Well, vould you say that It vould be rathor exorbitant to etato
that 300 lnnatce diod each nonth In 1942?

A. Hr. Prosecutor, the nore the casp vae crovded the worse tho
checks and controls In the canp becane. *here one nan used to live
previously vhen there voro 6,000 innates there had to be tvo o* possibly
three later on. The larger the nuaber of innatee beca-.o the vorse the
living conditions becene, possibly not so nuch fron the point of viev of
food but froa the point of viev of spece.

Q. Veil, nov, didn't the cenp doctor each nonth subnit a report .
on the nunbor of deaths that occurred during that particular nonth?


G635


Court So. 1

5 v'us 47-A-i7-3-nHh-Gross (frank)


A. I hare no information on that subject.

k- Then y-u don't know vhat the death rate actually was, do youT

A. Hr. Prosecutor, I an here under oath. I have to think about
every word.

Q» Veil, now, did you see '-r didn't you sec the death rate reoort
that vaa signed by Dr. Boven and was signed by the camp doctor before
hint You had access to these records kept by P.oenhlld ani Buese, Sow,
did you see those death reports?

A . Yos, they were always rceuosted fron Berlin concerning the
number of innate* in the eenp, and how many sick, how many capablo of
working, how many sent to other canps by transpes-t, and how nany dead.

Q. And you saw then?

*. I saw then often.

0* Veil, how nany deaths did thoy allege a aonth, in round
figures, in these reports that you saw in the year 19407

A. I will take an averago figure. It variod trx\ 100 to 120.

Q* 1941? The year 1941 wfcat was tho figure?

A. This was in 1941.

s. I asked you first vhat the figure in 1940 was and I want tho
flguro now for 1941 and then I want the figure for 1942 and then I wont
the figure until you left in Sopter.bcr 1943, beering in r.lnd, of course,
that you sew these resorde.

Q. hr. Prosecutor, with regard to the year 1940 I can't fom an
opinion or pose Judgment because I didn't arrive thorc until 20 Decenbor
1940. Aa far aa 1941 is concerned, I an giving you the figure 100 to 120.

k. How nany in 1942?

A. I would like to stress that cuite often large transport®,
arrived in Suchcnwnld, for instance, fron Dachau, fron Auechwlt*. Those
people were very poorly fed on their way and had often boon severoly
exposed to weather conditions that they died on the transport. They were
unloaded at cuehenveld end immediately increased the death rate in that


n a nnor


0636


Court So. 1

5 Cun 47-A-17-4-EE4-3russ (Trenk)


<U Eov neny people did you ice Eoven kill?

A. I knov definitely that Dr. Horen killed fire ueoole, the nanee
of »4iicfc I gave ycu this norntng la this court.

Q, Would you repeat thoee iucss again, pleaee?

A. Jlrstly, Xuahnir-Xushnarev, a White Busslan forner general.

Q. Tee, and the other one?

A. Secondly, Bulla, a German national vfco ease, I think, fron
Lltsnannatadt, and then thero vert three Goman professional crininala
vhoee nanee I oan no longer give you.

Q. Whore did thie killing take placo?

A. Za operating theater So. 2.

Q. Dr. Ding vaa preeeat?

A. Tee.

q. What did they kill then vith?

A. With an injection.

Q. Phenol?

A. I don't knov.

q. Did anybody else aeelet the tvo doctoral

A. There vere tvo prleonere vith then.

Q. Who vere they?

A. One of then cane fron Upper Sileeia and I cannot glvo you the
nan# any longer.

Q, Tou don't knov of any other killlage by Dr. Eoven?

A. So.

q. Tou knov that Dr. Eoven etatee in hie affidavit that he oarti-
cipated indirectly or directly in the killing of 60 ?

A. I vill adait that Dr. Eoven knev of klllinge carried out.by
the illegal canp administration.

Q. Sov, thoee klllinge vherein eo-callad traitors vere killed - Dr.
Eoven telle no ease of then vere killed by linetee, ie thet ri^t?

a. Tos. I can give you a very lerge number of caeca when those
people wore handed over to the penal conpeny and tholr fete vae then


Court So* 1

5 Jun 47-*~17-5-I3i-Gros• (Track)


definitely worse than those of Horen killings, because the ueople -ere
throva out of a second story window of the block so that their skulls
wore crushed and trodden on with feet until finally dead.

v I see. Do you know Aether or not ca=p cor-nandant Koch evor
reouested that Dr. Horen execute lnnates?

A. Kr. Prosecutor, I beliere If Conjicdant Koch had raade such
a de s a n d to Horen that Horen would have refused unconditionally.

Q, Do you know whether or not Horen ever offered hlaself to Koch
for that purpose?

*. Ho.

Q. Do you know the nane Ooldstoln?

A. So. I do know the nane Ooldstoln froa Auechrlt*.

k, Do you know the Goldstein that was killed In Buchonvrld?

A. So.

Q* Did you over henr the nine Schllteseycr, S-C-H-I-L-7-K-
a-I-T-fc-a?

A. Ho.

(*• Do you know vhother ho was killed or not at Buchonwald?

A. So.

Q, Did you over hear the neae C-O-L-L-I-K-K-T, Colllnot?

A. Jupp Colllnot, yes.

Q. Vho killed hi=?


5 Juno-A-FL-13-L-Xorrow (Int. Frank)
Court No. 1


A.- I know Ju^p Collinet for a long tiro. Japp Collinet very proba¬
bly was killod by Hauptscharfuehrur lo clair.

C,.- Ho wasn't killed by Hovon ?

A.- Mo, ho wasn't killed by Hoven, no.

Q.- You know that for suro ?

a.- That I know for sure.

Q.- uid you ov-r hear the none Tits - T I T Z ?

A.- No,

Q.- Do you know who killed hin ?

A.- Ho, I don't know the nano.

Q.- Did you ever hoar the nano Freuduaann - FRZUDEUANN?

A.- I know tho wvm Proudaaann.

Q.- You know that nruu ?

A.- Yea,

Q.- ..ho killed hin ?

A.- That I don't knew ; at any rate, not Dr. Hoven. Froudsmn had
played a vilo rolo in that canp.

Q.- How about !tvy -MAY?

A.- tho ir_:o May is also known to no.

Q *~ Who killod hin ?

A.- May was killed by Hauptscharfuehrur Vilhelm.

Q.- Did you ever hear the nano llots - H 0 T Z ?

A.- I was together with the prisoner Hots at D.chau, but I didn't
aoot hin again in Duchemald.

Q.- Did you cve-r hoar whether or not Dr. Hoven was corrupt ?

A.- Mr, Prosecutor, if you unit to understand urciur the expression
"c >rrupt" that Hover, hod a pair of boots node or had a par# of his uni-
fora nade, then I wouldn't dery that he did, but, or the othor hand, I
kn-*i ttet these articles which wen. nanufacturcd in the illegal work shop
were only used in order to satisfy Cwp Leaders Gust, Schobert and others
in order to have thoa close their eyes to prisoners on some othor occn-


C639


5 Junc-ft-FL-lP-2-Karrow (Int. Frank)
Court Be. 1


ai^i. «part froa that, everything in the ccnp of Buchenwnld woo "corrupt",
every hunan ‘Join, rating to live in the cc^p enJ renting to live better
than th.usarda f others had te be corrupt. Of course, not corrupt to tho
extent that others light ^>eriah in the procoss.

Q.- •'id you over see people give Hovon rxngs, fountain pens, silk
und*.rewar, gold teeth, etc. ?

lEr. Prosecutor, I believe that the doferrinnt Hoven didn't nood
to have presents given to hia by a prisoner.

Q.- Arc you fimiliar with this book written on Buchonwr.ld ?

(Shows book to witness)

Yes, I kn -j* it. I know all tho litoratun, published about Duchon-

wnld.

0 .- ViU you kindly road fr^i page 67 the paragraph I have marked ?

I don't have it translated. Your Honor, 1 neruly want those paragraph
read.

DR. GA'LIK (Interrupting) : 1 .bject, t. President, I bjoct to tho
presentation of this book. It has not been introduced os a docuaont. It
is not a pioco of evidence.

.'I 1 .. HAPDY t four Honor, I will give it c nuober. I do not have .py
nuabers. Out I will givu it a nuubor and offer it formally later. I do
not wont to USB it as a d„cu.xnt now. I =»i\ly want to rufrosh tho aono-
ry of the witness ard if he can state whetner tho facts clicitod in this
book are tru- or false.

THE fH“-3IDo2.T : Exhibit the book to tho Tribunal.

DP.. GA LIX : Apart Iran that, I deny the probative value of this
book. It isn't in any way know. : y wK-.a this bjok is written, ho is not
under eath, and the person by whoa it is written should be bAught to
this court if it is to be presented. At this n.aent, particularly, so
"ny books arc being written cont ining the =. st exorbitant inaccuracies.
Ir. tri"l ll!:o this one here, such a book can't possibly be celled ovi-
f '«*co. In that cas_, the person who wrote the book ought to be brought


5 Juno-A-rL-lS-3-Knrr ow (Frank)
Court Ifo. 1


h * re nnd JBWt > »winod and like every witness, oust submit to ay cross
oxoainotion #

:R. HARD! : I subinit, T*ir Kon_r, that in toe passages I w iah to
use in this book the writer there devotes :nc page to Dr. H>ven. Ho
s'vs that Dr. Korun was caap physician in Buchcnwald in 1940 and 1941
and worked out a racket with a prisoner noaod Hotz whereby inantes of

the penal coon*ny, for example, - prisoners who wore treated sono-./ha.t
worse than others in that penrl coapeny - would bo actaittod to the hos¬
pital for a few days if they would turn ver their valuables liko rings,
fountain pons, silk underwear, gold teeth to this imato , ;totz. Thon
* in turn, delivered the valuables to Hovt*. Thon if somebody
didn't have valuables t« offer, then they w-uld bo admitted to tho hos¬
pital and done away with by inj.ctioos. Now, I want to kn^. if this
witness is fhailinr with that particular opisodo.

THS mES!D.:'.'T : Tho objccti-n is overruled. Tho question is enti¬
rely pr -per. The book is not being offered in evidence, but the witness
nay bo quostionod as t statements appearing in the book.

WITNESS : In .Tier to elucidate on this point thnt in Buchcnwald
no innate.

DP.. Gjc/UK (Interrupting) : L*. President, I want to, at least,
mvu an opportunity to ajc tho book before the witness makes a sta.to-
nont m it. As far r.s I have Just boon informed, it deals with the yoar
1940 and, at th-t tin*,, Dr. H.van was not oven caap physician.

«T.. HAP.DY : It deals with the ye-rs 1940 and 194ll I shall ask
tho witness to road the ocssago in tho book which states that Dr. Hovcn
was the assistant c.-cp doetjr and that he was at the Buchomald con¬
centration coop serving in the. .-.-spitH barracks.

THE HlEoD -IT : • hat is your question to tho witness ? Tou asked
the witness to ixo C the passage rv fox-rod to ?

--*• HARDY : If your Hon'r desires. I r.«ulo prefer rather have hira
r^ad the passages.


5 June- A-FL-lS-/,-Xarr w (Int. Frank)

Court No. 1

THE {RESIDENT : Tho objection is overruled. The witness nryroad
ttx. passages and, t.on be questioned by counsel.

IE. K«RDY : But for the Tribunal, lnasouch as I da not have this
translated, if the witness weuld road tho two paragraphs alou:! then the
Tribunal oould foil:* ay qu.stion.

THi FRESEH.T : Very well. The witness will read the two para¬
graphs aloud*

ER. GAT/LIK : :!r. President, noy I .ask you to chock your docision
onco -.gain. By having those two p>r-grabs read they will go into tho
rocorde and bococc evidence.

THE PRESIDE*! : Counsel, the paragraphs will becone part of tho
roc 3rd but thojr-~.ro rat ovidcnco in tho cr.ro at all. Tho purpose of
roa-ing thoa into the record ic t. enlighten tho Tribunal as to what
thu witness is being questioned about, but reading then into tho re¬
cord doos n-t cake thea evidu-.co.

BY .P. HARDY :

C.- 7oul you kindly loading the passages which aro oarkcxi, ,7r.
Dorn ?

A.- Certainly :

"In 1940 and 1941 a now d>ct^r orrivod in.Suchonnold, His naao
wrs Valdoorr Koven, SS-Cberstumfuohror, always kind and nice. Ho said
abr-ut hiass-lf when ho received tho Kar Cross f fcrit "You arc no horo,
but a .an wtio ploasos." Haven wac proaotod to S3»Hnuptstumfuohror and
becano cajp physician, ith that began his -.dual career. He had .aany
irons in tho fir-. Or.e of his sources of supplies was a pria nor nened
^tt. Ho had roor. sorvico t.> do in the p-cal coapany and it was up to
hid t: produce the sick rixl weak prisoners iro.a tho penal coesp.aj$ call¬
ed the "Houslunon" in tho sick ward. The granting of a few days decent
treatment in thu hospital and easy work, granted through the doctor,

>r admission to tho hospital depended upon what the individual deliver¬
ed t; :_>tz, I.ur.trin pens, rings, silk under, err., golden teeth, etc.

C642


5 Jun.-A-FL-lS-o-X^rro*' (Int. Frnk)
Court Ho. 1


parcels with laundry could be sent to every one, at the tiac, froa
hose. Uiti hand - the aajor share nvor to Hovon. For this ho received
a free ticket i;r all his p-rpetratl»s which he c-znittcd against
pris.n.rs in the penal cccpany. Anyone who didn't give presents or any
to ILtz was token into th- hospital -nd injected b7 Hoven. At thi end
Mots b-enue a lugalooenlcc. He no longer had any feeling for prop-r
a-aaures applied to his s-st-r and foil into disfavor nnr* one day wes
finished off tiitiin two hours : he was injected. *Xotz was only one of
aony s .ure.s of suppli-s for Hoven. He got furniture, carpets ant’ ra¬
dios 1-r Oborsturufwhrer V elker Iron tho 3uilc'ing Brigade #$.iron
Cologne, de of our outside X mantles. Pris n. rs who woiv- w r’.tin«; thero
wore giving aid to b obed—out citi s in dorning-up operations. 11

Q.* Die you ever hear f this?

A.- :tr. Pros-cut r, let - t-11 y u, that I'd like to soo the
pris.ner .iho still had a silk shirt in BuohemaLd -r a ring. I think
I said thin noming :n one xccsi <n h-* ait adding rings were pulled
-ff our Una era n u. were admitted. Valuables w-ro taken ver by

the *dninistration -flicu cm. they were : ept in th- safe, and 1 ern't
giv- y u the nose of any pris-n-r »iho was talking about in tho coop
with a gold f.unt-in kji in his p.cket. Likewise, the -ritire affair
,f .tz - y*i c-r. Oeli«ve ox that - such rn unscrupulous aan as described
h-re couldn't Iv.vc survived five >ys f Ouchersrcld under such a nyo-
t. a. 3y .rr'-r . th- ill*-..'L c-up - Jainislr-ti n ur c arades v old
probably have t r-T. hia int the barbed wire fence. Such -xcosa-s
in Buchurold ha bec.:x Lop ssiblo in 1940. If y u had said in Ausch¬
witz then I ru the first t ,e- -w Ln, -aZ & y "yes", but X.:r Bucben-
wr.l'’, since 1?A0, vrfectly rderly c.r. * ti ns -xistec".

Q.- Dir' y a knw br. K-rn?

A.- I knee Di. K-rn Very w-U.

r .- Di l>r. K m >r. mst J th- *pratijns in tho hospital

C$43


nr cks?


5 Junc^-A-FL-lO-c-Karr :w (l“t. F r mk)

Court Kj. 1

A.- He lv -^1 to wixth^r b- wanted t >r rut, because Dr. Hovon cer¬
tainly Hasn't a g-od surge.c.

Q.- Was Dr. Hovon studying under Dr. Korn?

a.- -'ell, I always felt as if H>m was tho msn who wr.s having to
teach HoVen ov^n the surliest typ^ of operation.

Q.- I sc- • Did you know PiJc?

A.- Dr 7 ^ Jh-an the Dutch painter, ?iok?

Q.-Tws.

A.- I knew hin Very well, indeed.

Q*- *te.t was Pick's profess! >n?

A.- Piok was a painter by pr-fvsai.r.,

Q«- Did he. ever paint any p.rtr-.its i r H,ven?

A.- I think n-t cnly for K ven but i >r every SS leader in tho
«eap. 1 kr.w for certain, f4* instance, that he p'inted Dr. Dina
Wallenstein with a flying cloak.

$•- Did lu paint p 4 -tralts of H-von's children?

A.- That I c >uldA'i possibly tell you hero with ourtrinty.

Q.- N.m, y.u say in bixk 46 H-von ,nly Went to visit tho tailor
one oh,worker because he ted set th«xn up in business there where they
wuld be free £rxx bother by the SS. H.w ofto did he visit the shso-
nak-r one tcils-r? Did he go ,vcr there two, three, four tiioes a week,

,r h m often?


0644


5 Jun-A-^E-19-i-' tloy (Lit. ?r=nks)
Court Kc. la


A Yes, you can say that Dr. Hcven visited the work shop
generally frequently.

Q How often would that be?

A Every second day, quite frequently.

Q Chen did they set :? this tailor shop and shoe shop in
Block U6, was it installed and equipped at the beginning or during
the Riddle of 15U1?

A Well, I think the block hadn't boon in existcnco for
four wsoks when the work shops had also been equipped. T’.jo situation
at the beginning was that Block I 16 could not be entered by anybody
not a jozber of the SS, even with permission, and I believe Dr. Woven
was also offeoted b 7 the prohibition, consequently the work shop would
only havo boon constructed four to six weeks, or 6 weoks later.

Q HctiV long did the shooaaker and tailor stay in tho shop
in Block U6, for two years 19U2 atxi 19U3, or for how long woro they
thero?

Q .^uite decidedly until Hovon's arreot, because I don't re-
neober that tho natter was best ope nod in any other way previously.

A And Dr. Hovon onl;. went to Block U6 to visit the tailor
and shoemaker in the workshops, he didn't go thero for the purposes of
the experiments?

A Hr. Prosecutor, if Dr. Hovon left Block U6 with a parcol
uider his arc or a pair of boot3 or a uniform Jacket, I can't possibly
and really imagine ho got those fro- the sick ward. Ha probably go*
those fron the work shop.

Q I see. He went ever there about ovary other day?

A Every second d3y. •

Q Did Dr. Hoven have about 500 suits and 300 pairs of shoes;
ho wont there every other day for over two years?

A Yes, that would be so, if Dr. Haven hadn't been passing
on these other things to other people, for instance Oust, Schobert and
3iester, they all walked about with shoes soled in Block U6.


5 Jua-A-13-l?-2-lfeloy (Ir.t. Franks)
Court .To. I.


Q In other words. Dr. Hoven, a nar. who was a concentration
can? doctor where you had sons 15,000 inmates and you had about 260
dj-ina eech month had tire to go see the shoe nan and tailor every
ot'.ser day?

A l!r. rrcsecutcr, the facts are that the nodical work, ir.
fact that the doctors' work in Buchenwald was in the hands of prison
doctors in a vary considerable extent, for instance you only havo to
think of the systematic training of nurses. T/e had an evening school
for two or three hours every evening given by Dr. Datuschok and Dr.
Horn.

Q Do you know who uroto Dr. Horen's thesis, did ho wrlto it
hinaolf or was his thoeia to boccxae a doctor writton by Dr. h’ogoror of
Vienna?

A 1*. Prosecutor, all I oon toll you is what I happened to
road a fow days ago in a book. It soys thorc that Dr. Hovon's thesis
had boon writton by a cortnin Dr. Ttogorer from Vionna. This nan is
supposod to bo a doctor or profossor of chonistry. I read that a few
days ago. I can't give you any certain inforaction on that subject.

Q In tho hospital barracks how often did you soo Hoven,
did you see hin continually oach day?

A I saw hie daily.

Q You saw hia also adninist.r injoctions to five persons,
that is all?

A That killing I obsorvod.

Q And you state that Dr. Rovan is correct in his figure of
60 killings either by inaates or by hiasolf?

A I can't answer that.

Q And those inaatos, accofding to Dr. Hovon's affidavit,

60 persons wore killed and others ware beaten; of those 6C persons ho
statos that some of them were kiliod by inxatcs, is that ri$ht?

(No response.)

Do you hav^ a copy of Dr. Hoven's affidavit, please?


5 Jun-A—12-19-3-lialoy (Int. Praia)
Court So. I.


This is paragraph 12, Document Book 12, Doc leant HO U29 on
page 5 of the German, paragraph 12; will you kindly read that, Hr.

Dorn, an affidavit fay the defendant T.a ld en ar Horen?

Q "The total ni=ber of killed traitors was approximately
150, 60 of ahich were killed by phenol infections oither by nysolf or
under ry direction, and the rest rore killed by various methods such
as boatings fay tho litotes."

Q Troll now, he statos that there were killings eithor by
himself or undor his direction, is that right?

D?.. GAVLIKi Mr. ftrosidont I wish to objoct to tho sufccaission
of this affidavit. Tho affidavit hasn't ;*ot boon admitted in ovidonco.

It is an affidavit that has not yot boon admitted. Its admission has
boon retarded until defondant novon is put on tho stand.

13. HARDY 1 I was not aware of that, your Honor. It boars
an oxhibit nunbor. It isn't a fact that it is not admittod in ovidonoo.
This is scoot .Lag now today. ; .o hr.vo boon using it throughout our
cross-examination continually. It certainly h".e been admittod into
ovidonco. If it hasn't boon admittod which is so nothing I can't ijuag-
ino, than it has baon ovjrlockod by tho Procccution in tho presentation
of its caso in chief, and we subait it at this tiao. Tho documont is
in order, it contains a Jurat, is srewnto and signod by tho dofondant.

THE RESIDES Tt Tho first question is to doteraino rhothor
tho document has boon admittod in ovidonco. I will ask tho Secretary
Gcixral to pro-'iico thi original document end dotoiminc how it is aarkod.

:a. HARDY 1 Do you have tho prosecution oxhibit number? Your
Honor, I dan't know the oxhibit mrbur off-hand.

TIE fRESHJEOT: It i3 docunont Ko. HO 1*200.

HARDY* Do you Invu tho ivosocution exhibit number narkod
in ycur document book. Your Honor?

TrZ EPZSIDEIT: I cannot tell free this book. There is a
symbol aftw-r that, but -rh-’t it is I -

HE. -LARDY* 5k-. Travis -ill have it in his file of tho proscc-


5 Jun-A-JS—19-4-Maloy (Int. Franks)

Court Ho. I.

ution nusl-crs. If ho will call ay office phone, 61212 and ask for
Dr. Hochwald to give him the p.\.sccution exhibit number of that docu-
?acnt, he will be able to secure it.

GA'TJX: Lr. ftusident, I had placed an objection to
the admissibility of this document, it has once been submitted and
then its submission ras put back until Dr. Hoven has been examined. I
havor.*t got the record of that boforo no. I trill have to wait until
tonorron, but I could submit tbe record of it.

iE. KAPDYi lour Honor, I submit if that is true thon all
tho ottor doeixaents admitted in cvidoncc voro admitted incorrectly by
this Tribunal. This document horc is no different from any othor
affidavit we havo submit tod. I m sure it nas admitted and thoro is
prosocution oxhibit nunbor, and I would liko to finish up ay ox-mina-
tion and I only have thro- or four more questions and cloar thoa from
his affidavit.

DR. OA'XIKi I havo Ivcn dcV.ilod reasons for my objoctlon.

Tho document was submittod to Dr. Hovon at that timo in tho English
lnnguago and not in Gorman, and Dr. Hovon has not suffioiont control
of tho English language fer tho knowledge of oxcoining on it. Ho in-
tor pro ter rras prosout at that tiro. That was tho cause of tho object¬
ion and the Tribunal docidcd that arteicsion vould be put back until
after thu examination of Dr. fbven. For that reason, I trill oojoct to to¬
days use of the document.

i-R. HARDYi I proceed to mother question or tu>. Your Honor,
while tto are siting for tho document.

BY HP.. KAPDY:

Q Dorn, do you know for what reason Dr. Hoven wr.s nr-
rcstod by tho SS?

A I can only repeat ay explanation which I gave this mor¬
ning. As far as I re informed “r. Havon was arrested because tho sus¬
picion existed against him he was cooperating with prisoners, cooper¬
ating with them extremely closely and as ti;oe progressed the suspicion


5 Jun-A-i3-19-5-^107 (Int. Franks)
Ccurt Ho* I.


increased* Professor, Dr. Hoven is supposed to hav3 been arrested be¬
cause of the case with Hauptsch-rfuehrsr Koehler. Just how this af¬
fair developed is sccathing I an not informed about. I only know
that it was 12 September 19U3 Hoven was arrested on leaving the camp.

Q Do you know whether or not any other officers of the conp
were arrestod at the saao tire?

A I know that tho c ccn a ndan t Koch T.-as arrested, but I can't
tell you with certainty today whether Koch was arrestod oarlior or
later than Hoven, and I know at that tiro Cbcrscharfuchrcr Sceanor was
arrestod. I don't know what connections there wero.

Q You don't know whothor Koch was also arrestod for collab¬
oration with tho ircatos?

A Koch? I think ho was tho biggest devil wo prisoners over
clacipod oyos upon.

Q Do you know whothor or not Ho von was indiotod after being

arrestod?

A That I do not know, bocauco on tho 20th of Soptcrcbor 19l*3
I loft Buchoronvld and then novor again established contact with Buch-
onwald.

Q Do you know whether or not tho crap coravandont Koch hnd
Hoven were indicted in tho saco indictuent?

A Ho, I don't know.

Q Do you know that Crap Coarondant Koch and Dr. Hoven wore
charged with fraudulent conversion of Raichs' funds, of frauds on con¬
centration coop inoatos for thoir ora benefits, and condoning and
fostering corruption in tho carps.

A Hr. FToeecutor, I know that Koch and his brothor-ip-law,
Hauptscharfuokror Michael were arrested for corrupt actions in tho
crap.

Q lou know that Hovon was arrestod in the sane case along

Trith- Koch?

A Ho. 'Jy information is to tte affect that it ns because


5 Jua-A-!3-19-6—jfclcy (Int. Franks)
Court He. I.


of the case of Hauptscharfuehrer Koehler that Koch was arrested.

Q Who? Hauptscharfixihrer who?

A Hsoptwcharfuehrer Kcehler.

Q 3aa he a witness against Koch?

A I can't tell you that. If I had ronalned in Buchorrrald
then I would certainly' have had the exact details the fortnight after
Hover, was arrested.


5 June-A-<3ES-2G-i-;ieehan <Int. ; ,-orJc)
Court So. 1.


Q. ell, what was the reason why the EauptscharfUehrer was
connected with the arrest of aoven?

A. V.'ell, the Ha up ts char fuehrer Kuehler was imprisoned by the
cocrandant's office at the time.

UK. HaHDT: Ycur nohor, this affidavit of Rover. has been admitted
into evidence as Prosecution Exhibit if. 281.

Tf£ P.ZSUJZ.7T: Sufceit the document to the Tribunal. Submit the
document to the dofenee counsel. Apparently it has boen in evidence
as a prosecution exhibit.

DR. QkOJK: -r. President, this exhibit, the affidavit, as far a3
I remember, was given the nuaber when it was submitted and I raised the
objection. Following that, the Tribunal's decision was made to my
recollection. I can only now recall from noaory but I will submit tho
statement to tho Tribunal when I can read tho record and all of the
defense coined arw willing to concur in the fact that the admission
of the document was put back.

:R. H..RDY: Then ycur honor, I submit this document has boen ad¬
mitted into ovidunco, if it had not boon admitted into evidence it
would not now be in the hands of tho Socrctary Goneral but It would
still bo in the hands of the prosecution.

THL Fi.ESIDE.rr: Certainly, if appears that tRu document has boon
admitted in cvidonco, it has bo-n assigned a number. It is almost
tin- for a recess until tomorrow morning and after tho Tribunal reccssos
this ovening, tho entire matter can be studied, the record con be read
and tho testimony at the time can be oxa-dned.

«&• FaRDY: Your -on^r, I have only one or two questions on this
document. If it is nee-seajy - rill offer it now and give it another
exhibit number. It is in good order, it has a Jurat on it*' it is signod
by tho affiant and dated. It is perfectly admissible.

Pr-LSIEE";: That would be saving no time and it would probably
take longer than until the recess time.

I well remember in connection with at least one of these affidavits
by on- of the defendants, either by this one — although I believe


5 Junc-A-GCS-OW-iiecban (Frank)
Court Vo. 1.


it was another defendant that a question was raised as to an affidavit
and the Tribunal adaitted the af idavit byt ruled that when the defend¬
ant tcok the witness stand he cculd be asked concerning the clrcun-
stancus under which the affidavit was aade and at that tine its pro¬
bative value before the Tribunal would be- considered, but the aero fact
that an affidavit has been adoittod in evidence docs not establish its
probative value as the Tribunal nay consider it because circumstances
may be shown when the affiant takes the witness stand that would defy
the affidavit and if ao nor or less weight slight or night not be tho
ease.

Arc there any other questions yew can propound to the witness with¬
out using the affidavit new?

LB. rURDI: nftcr locking it ov^r, four Honor, I can propound tho
sane questions without using the affidavit.

Bf *R. K..53Y:

Q. ias Or. Kov^n assisted by innates when he perforned those kill¬
ings in the hospital barracks of th„ Buch_nwald concentration camp?

*• I did not understand your question correctly, ~r. Prosecutor.

i. as Dr. Heven assisted by innates when he pcrforaud those
killings in the Buchemrald concentration coop?

lea, there w^re two prisoners who w«,rc present.

•1. Did othur innates ever kill thv. sc-callod traitor innates in
the concentration casp?

“• Did other prisoners kill the so-called traitors in the con¬
centration caopj was that your question?

Q. T«s, wer- ether traitor prisoners killed in the concentration
camp by innat-,8.

«. Tory often.

Q. rfas that done under the supervision of dr. Foven?

«. Nc.

Die he knew about it?

“• H,. cc ild not know because. death reports always Were made to
appear that it was a n:raal death.


5 Jur^-»-GES-20-3-fc.uhan (Prank)
Court Kc. 1.


Q. --hat did the inaates kill th~ so-called traitor incates with;
did thoj kill then by injections?

A. Hr. Prosecutor, I have already told you once before what the
sceno looked like in the penal company, they were thrown out of the
second floor window and it really happened that prisoners used the so-
called injection syringe, but these were few and far between.

H. How aany iraaato assistants did Dr. Hoven have in his capacity
as canp doctor?

*• "o you noan these who worked with Dr. Hoven all tho tiac?

Q. Yes.

A. It was generally Dr. Horn and >. Matuschek in 0? 1 —

Internal (^orations in the Uedical wine. OP 2 there was a certain
Hcllnuth Dicaann and another ran and I can no longer roaoefcer his nano,
I do know that the aan cane freu Upp^r Silesia and I can see him with
ay own ^yes but 1 cannot rcacaber the nanc. He had a Polish nano which
it is difficult for ix to pronounce.

W. how nony nurses did he have; Ben in ycur capaoity?

A. Altogether possibly 90 ocn, possible acre than that.

How, realising you are under oath, can you Ul1 this Tribunal
how nany nen you assisted in the killing of with Dr. Hoven?

*• T' that f can answer with a calc conscience that 1 did not
assist with a single killing, nor assist in any aannor, nor was I pro-
3ent at any ticc.

H-.w cany cen did ycu kill when Dr. Hoven was not present?

... I havu never killed a hu:on being.

Q. You hsd access tc the drugs, didn't ycu?

“• N., but to the phenol drags no one had access.

Q. ‘hen you know they used phenol in killings in Buchcnwald?

«. I think cv.rybcdy whe ever worked in the sick bay knew that.

W. I have rv: further questions, your Honor.

THE P ESIIE.'iT: Ccwnse-1, hew aich tice will ycur rc-cxaniniation
f this witness consuac?


5 hnx.-»-jeS-20-ii4£cvhan (Brcwn)
Coart Ho. 1.


DE. G&.UK: I Just heard that ay colleague. Dr. Holte, has a
fuw questions and I would say about fifteen tc twenty minutes for
ayself.

7HS P.-SSTEEJfT: I would dcsiro that the Investigation be node now
before tcaaerrow nerning to ascertain the status of this affidavit of
the defendant Heven. The Tribunal would like to knew whether it was
formally admitted in evidence or wheth-r it was net because the record
indicates it was and if the record is incorrect. The Tribunal would
like to be advised.

The Tritaiml will be in rtetis until 9:30 o'clock tomorrow corning.

THE iivRSH.»L: The Tribunal will be in rocoss until 9*30 o'clock
tomorrow morning.

(The Uribur-al adj-umod until 0930 o'clock, 6 Jun_ 19li7•)


f*rr

6 ' r-JF-l-l—Jrocs (Int# T-arf:)

Court I


Official Transcript of the laorican i^litary
Tribunal in tlx setter of the United Status
cf .w-xrica, a-ainst ::ori Drnadt, ot al,
cfcfo-.jdanta, • slating at -umberg, Garraqy, on
6 Juno 191:7, 093^-1630, Justice goals prosiding#


7'; ''.SS'.^L: Arsons in the c urtroor. nill please find their go at 3.
Iho r n a-ablo, tho Judges of "ilitnry Tribunal I# •

!', lit jy Tribunal I is new in 303si:n# Cod save tho United States


of .jaorica and this Honorable Tzibwal*
Thoro will bo order in tlio c urtrocc#


T.* . ESHei.Ti 1 *. rjxrabal, will jxu ascertain if all thada-
fondants are present in c mrt?

!*-. SL.Ls ’.'ay it pleaso ytur Honors, all the defendants oro
prosent in court#

TI£ j'lSSEJBITi I}jO SjCrotar; Gonoml will note for the jaecorri
tiw presence of all the defend*nts in court#

Tho vitnoss is ronindod J*j is still under oath#

Counsel nay proceed with tho o miration#

DCTuI - Coavrod

ICDrECT SI.' J ' JIG' (Continujd)

K 'X:, 1 ZLT 2 (for dif ndant Uaadloaor):

0# l.‘itr\»33, during y ur com -nation and a- so sxmalnation you
have s oleen of tho ccnsignixints of ty^ius carrying lice to Buchonrnld#
eid, if eg* notes I tock aru oorroot then you said ir. that cnnOction
it -'as .j rurally talked a*: ut in the cr. p that tills officer fr.r. Cr-zeen
ca - r an institute cf tlio ehnr.cht# Is this n to of nine corwct?
-.# *fes, your note 70 U tool. Is correct.

t-ll anything, th-r-for-, fr on y ur orm personal


4f^ ^
?*! • *• 1 i

Q» Do you hi#

Vof Xioe crj»? y )


th t Dr# 'oven knew fr<n whur- this dispatch


6655


6 Jvr«-:i-J^-l-2-Gross (Int. frank)
Court I


A. I assune yo3.

Q. TfeU, nr* if y-.uworw to aaertu that Dr. H<-von know that tide
eonsignnent of lico did not c o fret: Cracow and not iron an Institute
of the j-:«d Forces and i? Dr. Hover wore to testify this under oath,
would you then believe that the runor circulating the canp which reached

you too, was false?

A. Yes.

Q, I have no further questions* I should ns rely like to draw
the attention of this Trihmal to Dr. Horen's a' idavit, Docunont Ha-13,
Exhibit 9 which states "the c sigjiant of lice which are mentioned
in Ding's Diary and in t.io tosti’wny of Xogon and Kircidielmer care
frai Dr. Haas from Lesfcorg. 7ne roason why I know this to be accurate
is, that I told Dr. Haas the lico -.roro destroyed. I can thoreforo
say froa ry erm personal Imowlodge that the statoraants of Xogon and
KLrchhei»MDr. Kogon was not yet with Dr. Ding at that tir*>) -wore
erroneous, narely, that aasicrewnts of lice camo fron Cracow.”

Thank you very such.


Or. urt I

June 6-J&-2-1-HD-? r lcea u~? ra nk.

DR. GaVLXX: Mr. President, to begin with, I should
like to speak about the affidavit which case up for
dleousslon yeaterday and I would like to say that the
decision of this Tribunal Is In the record of 3 January 1947,
on pcgo 1113 of the Geraan record; and this ruling of the
Tribunal s tates that the Tribunal has ruled that to begin
with the affidavit oan be admitted subject to a later
objection by the defendant Hoven and that the defense Is
not showing whether the defendant Kovon has aneworod any
(luostlona at all. Should ho havo boon Interrogated without
having boon properly warned, he can say so on tho witness
stand at a letor date. If ho did not understand the English
language and If the affidavit was n«.t translated to hln,
ho will be able to clonr that up, too; but It was adnittod
provisionally without prejudice to tho right of dofonso
o ,unsol to lrtor vbjoot t. Its cdalssablllty. If tho
Tribunal should then assu e th*t this affidavit Is not to
be adnltted in ovldenoe thon It will bo struck fron tho
rooord.

THE FRESIDE:*!: Counsel Is correct. That Is tho ruling
of tho Tribunal.

MR. HaRDT: May It pleaso your H^nor, to note for tho
roo'rd, the c''nter.tl n of prosooutljn of this catt^r during
yost-rdr.y's session la correct?

THE PRESIDE!*!: The record will bo aade to dv;w exactly
what happened and will epeak for Itself.

ay dr. QaVli:

i. Witness, the r.ur303 In Slock 46 — did they act
indopor.dor.tly to a considerable oxtont?

a. I wouldn't fl- ouch any tho nurses as tho prisoner
k-.po, Aurthur Dlotzsch.


8657


Court 1

June 5-14-2-2-HD-Frlmeau-Frank.


i. If Dr. Ding was ebsent, was it necessary at all
in such cases that an S3 Doctor took his place7

a. No, all the work and every action wcs carried
right out by Diettech, Dletzsch Independently.

i. Did defendant,_ Dr. Kovon, have the essential
knowledge in jrder to give orders to Dletrsch and the -ther
nurses who were w rlclng in 31ock 46?

j%. I have already said before that I never thought
that Hoven was a g^.d doctor and I hardly think tnnt ho took
as muon interest in the typhus experiments as was necessary
for him tw give instructions.

Q. Is it true that you met the nurso6 working in
45 repeatedly?

A. Yes.

i. «nd did you also talk nb.ut d~rlng such meetings
that Xing's experiments wore carried • ut by the Kopo Diotzsch?

A. But, of oouree — wo, the prisoners, interested
-uroelves c nelderably in tnose matters "nd wo had it
o nflrmod repeatedly tn«t Dletrsch and Ding carried them
out al.no in Block 46.

3. It w uld be correct t- say then that amongst tho
nurses f Bluok 4S ond the nurses in the sick bay the
iencral assumption was tent tnwso experiments were carried
u- by Dln c and Diotzsch but n.t the defendant Hovan?

A. Yes, indeed.

The figures relating to deaths wore dlscussod
yosterday, tho Buononwald dootn figures, that is, and you
said that y : had read vrrl^us publlcati ns about
B.iohenwald vhlohdi.wed that the death rate never exceeded 2*.
A. vulto o.rroct.

k. But this wouldn't exclude the possibility, would
it, that the death rate In Buohenwald was considerably


Court 1

June o-H-2-3-HD-?rlaeau-Frank.

lover temporarily. That la correct, too, Isn't It?

A. (No response)

%. In order to refresh your memory, I now submit to
you, not ns on exhibit but merely for till 6 purpose, a
d puncnt which has been submitted to Tribunal II In Cneo
IV and I would like you to,road please — read aloud,
the donth rato In the concentration camp of Buohenwald
from It.

KR. KmRDY: Is It proposed to offer this document In
ovldonco here?

DR. G»VLIX: No, I don't want to submit It In evldonco,
as I have already told you. I am meroly using It to rofrosh
the memory of this wltnose. That Is the purpose and also
to question him on It, cf oourso.

A. The death rato -

THE PRESIDE!!!: Just a nomont. Did this witness
tostify before Tribunal II?

DR. CUVLIX: No.

THE PRESIDENT: Veil, you asked him to road this
affidavit Into the record. That Is not refreshing his
rooolloctlon. Ho Is not testifying from his own reoollco-
tl-n when ho answers your question. Ho is simply reading
this exhibit. If he knows he ay glance at that to refresh
hla rcc' Ueoti n then he could testify from his own know¬
ledge but If he Is simply reading a record ho Is not test¬
ifying fr:m his own recollection at all.

DR. 3«’/LIK: : I shall put a few questions subsequently
*'lth reforonoe to it but. If you like, I will rend rt.

MR. HrtRDY: Imsmuch as that Is the case. Your Honor,

I suggest that the defense counsel prooc66 the icunont In

i . •

duo form end offer it cs an exhibit.

DR. GhWLIK: No, I a-.n't.want to submit It as an exhibit.


3659


Court 1

June 6-H-2-4—ED-Frlaeau-rrank.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel may present to the Tribunal a
certified copy of this exhibit which would be admitted In
evidence or If the witness nos his own recollection, ho can
tostify from his own knowledge as ho pleases. Ho could also
be asked whether or n^t he agrees with the statement In tho
document.

DR. SA’VLXX: I now propose to reed this figure and then
cak tho witneaa whether tne figures are oorroot and I teg to
have y.ur decision whether this Is porml6sable.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel nay proceed. Of course, you
understand, Counsel, that tho document will not becono
ovidenoo unless It Is Introduced before the court.

DR. GkVLIK: V.o I don’t want to aibnlt It In evidence.

I nm merely using It in order to - lve a basis to ny
question.

This is 'x letter fr^n Pohl dated 30 September 1943
and addressed t Himmler. Attached t j It Is n tablo of
death figures f r the month of August, 1943, In concentra¬
tion amps. It mentions Buchcnwald and there tho etrongth
v;aa 17,600 detainees and the number of doathe was 116,
equalling a percentage of 0.67*.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, there ••ao that cany deaths
In what period of time?

DR. Oa'-T-IK: August 1943, Your Honor, the month of
August 1943.

THE PRESIDENT: For one month, and that was the record.

DR. GaVLIK: Tne average for all concentration comps
In Ml list 1943 was 2.09*.

3Y DR. ChYLIZ:

Z. Is It correct thnt It wrs owed to defendant, Dr.
von, that tho death rr.t~ for the concentration camp of
Huchenwald was considerably lower than the overall rverage?


3660


Court 1

June (M4-2- 5-HD-?rlneau-Frank .

A. Yes, that Is correct.

i. It was later sectioned during the croBs examination
whether you knew anything about the death of Jupp Colllnet?

A. Yes.

v. >.*111 you describe this case in detail?

A. I knew the prisoner Jupp Colllnet during approx¬
imately two yoars. I know that Jupp Colllnet case from
*ld-la-Chcpelle and that he owned several houses there. Tho
spoolal cosslssloner of the political auction of Buchonwald
had boon a crlnlnal cosslsslon.r In Asohen earlier and he
had a row with Jupp Colllnet in tho oourse of which
Colllnet fired a shot at Leclair. Later on Leclalr wont
to the political departaent of Buobenwnld as a special
commissioner nr.d amongst the prisoners there he rcoognizod
Collinot. Following efforts ande with tho camp Kor.wnndr.nt,
he suocoedod In getting an order for Colllnot's liquidation.

I know for certain that Collinot was not killed by Dr. Hovon.
On that day, on the day when Collinot had been beaten half to
death and was or ught to the sick bay, Koven wasn't present
In the casp. The killing was oarrled out In tho prosonce
of the first and second camp lendor, Max Schobcr, and
'Jntersturmfuohrer Oust. I cannot give you any more detail
about this affair.

Is It correct thr the ?ollt leal s action was
under the secret state police?

A. Yes.

You were speaking about gypsies yesterday and the
grouping of gypsies. Du you have anything to adt^ to that
part of your testimony?

I can merely say that Initially all gypsies were
arrested for racial reasons. Later on this was changed.

Some of the Gypsies who were not declared as social elements


5661


Court i

June S-*-2-S-HD-.?rl=eau-?rank.


were removed fron Dachau to the labor house In the Rebdorf
Bavarian penitentiary.

DR. a».LIK: Ur. President, I rave no further questions.
THE PRESIDENT: Does tne prosecution have any nore
questions to be propounded to the witness?


6 June-2fr-5I/-3-l-Cook (let.* Frank)

Court to. X

gg-caoss zaitmuM

3Y Jft. HAP^Y:

f..- -hat ia the extent of your education?

A.- Initially I was a waiter at the Grand total in Humber-., For
condition, in xy family I had to give up this profession and I was
re-trained as a ootor mechanic. Ae a very young aan I went to Africa and
I was a soldier in the French arey for several years. In 1938 I return¬
ed to Ger-any and went into business on ay own. After the German capi¬
tulation I started afresh, starting as a taxi owner.

Are you a graduato of ary University?

A.- No.

Can F° u toU - us whether or not from your knowledge Dr. Hovon
was considered to be a so-called ladiea' man?

A.- I don 't qulto understand, a so-called what?

Q.- Lacies' a§ in.

DR. CA’.'Li::: :j. President, I object to that quostion. First of all
this is an utterly irrelevant quostion, and secondly, I beliovo that
n» in the re-cross examination only such questions can bo put -hich
are due to ay re-direct examination. 1 do not bolieve that a cross exa¬
mination can be started ail over again after the Prosecution had com¬
pleted oross examination yesterday.-

IB. HARM* I subait, Your Honors, this is a question concerning
thc cheractor of the deferment.

THE HU Bmaff i Defense counsol states the rule correctly but tho
practice of this Tribunal allows vary liberal direct oxaoinatioa and
cross examination, and counsel for defense, of course, cay ro-exuaino
the witness in connection with any natters which are now. The objoAion
will bo overruled.

3Y ?R. HARDY:

f..- To your knowledge, did Dr. Horan have nistressos, that is Indy

friends otr.or then his wife?


8663


6 Junt-lf-FL-3~2-Cook (Int. Frank)
Court So. 1


A.- Ora axi~ht well ossuae so.

°° ^ ou to®" whether or not Dr. Hoven had relationships 'dth
the wifu of the Cano Cconardant Koch?

A.- Quite decidedly no.

Q.- You don't know that?

A.- T;iis wuld not havo reecincd unknown in the c?ap.

Q «" Aro you nerriod, witness?

A.- Vho, _»?

Q.- Tes f

A.- Yes.

r .,- How long have you boon aarriod?

A.- Since tho 10 of August last year.

r ..- Sow friendly wore you with Hoven while you wore in tho Buohan-
wald concentration caap?

A.- I -.ust say that I hrd a largo nuaber of odvant&gwc through
Hoven cut there was novur a relationship which you could cell friond-
8hi P bntt ' un JJ ® v#n V®lf. I havo never U Iked with Hovun off duty.

Q.- Did you wear a violot triangle?

A.— So.

Witness, when ycu woro testifying h-ro on direct examination,

I noted that you woro using natvS to refresh your recollection, do
you still have those notes before you?

A.- ho.

Q»- h*horu arc those notes?

A.- I only have befer. au here the nivus which i!r. Prosecutor road
out to ae, Diotiaoh and Collinet and others.

f,.- -ret ic you do with the notes you wore using to testify why?

A.- I aa not sure but I think they ar_ lying on tho table in -ay
apartment*

C..- ..ore thoso tywritfcon note?, soac ol then?

A.- That I don't knew.


G664


6 Jur»-H-FI^3-3-CC05c (It. Frank)
Court No. 1


Q.- W 011 , who pr-pered the notes?

A.- P.'rdaa.

Q.- ho orcpcrod the notes?

A.- Nobody iar prepared anything for me.

Q.- doll, you had typewritten notes boforc you in you wore tes¬
tifying yesterday; nho typed those notes for you?

A.- As soon ns I knew I wia coaing to Huroborg, of course, I oro-
pered syacll with reference to the trial, for I waa able to toU eporo-
xiaatoiy the questions which would be put to

Q.- Did Dr. Gowlik give you any typewritten notes?

A.- I talked with Dr. Gawlik a few days before npponrir.g here.

G.- Did he give you any typewritten notes?

A.- No, I filled a typewritten sheet before a> which had U ques¬
tions on it, end I Sent it to the Tribunal.

Q .“ Did ' 5U tter0 “7 otour typewritten notes befon you?

A.- No, only whfit I wrote with ay own hand.

1- . HARDY: I have no further question.

TK« PRdSIDlfT: Doicnse couns.1 aey casain^ tho witness, if he de¬
sires.

DR. GA-’LIKi I don't tave any furthar questions.

The PRESIDdlT: There being no further questions to bo propounded
to the Witness, the witnoss wiU be excused froa the str.nd.-

Tho Tribunal will proceed with tho oaau nginst Boiglboock.

DR. ST3L:3A'/.R: (For defendant. Professor Dr. .ilhela Bolglboeck,
froo Vienne.)

Mr. Pr.aident, .our Honors, I shall begin the case on bo hr. If of
ay client, Dr. Eei lbo.ck, by reminding you with one sentonc. of *y
opening apocch. First of all, 1 went to picture to you the personality

o. this defendant and then I shall show thet he carried out son water
eX'xriak.nta a ainst his own will under explicit nilitr.ry orders, and,
thirdly, he carried then out ih such a wry that you cannot conclude

3665


6 Jur*^-FI^3-A-Cook (Int. Frank)
Court Ho. 1


criau.3 Qjninat huaonity or war criaos froo the way they were carried out.

In order to draw you a sood picture I should like to remind you
of an air railway, when I speak of ay re ore sent *t ion as an air railway,
as a row rope, and that is represented by the defendant on tho witness
st".nd and the few documents, ar.d on tho corttrrry if that ropu were to
break then I have tho safety rope. The scientific pillar, nnocly, tho
evidence that beers cn internal rxdicine it is out of the qi^stion,
that thuso oxpurlnonts can be called criminal. - I aa not pleading
Hr. Hardy, I a * A,r\.ly plaining. I oa awfully sorry Professor Ale¬
xander hes bed so ouch work to do but I should like to envo work for
tb. Tribunal ruv’ ayacir and the scientific deccrlotion lists, I think
the crr.rt has 13? pages, *nd I would like to #r.v» ay honored collar uc,
lr. H-rdy end ly&elf the trouble since *. are no experts md also I
would like to put ell of theBs. scientific questions back. I would like
to nsk you, Pr-sidcnt, that ay client, Dr. Buirlboeck, take the
witn-ss stand r.s a witness now.

V.IZ »2Sm\RT* Tho defendant Beiglboock will take the witness
stand.

The defendant Bciglboeck took the witness strnd and testified as
follows:

BY JULGo Sa-vJ Xi:

r .*- Please raise your right hend and be worn: repeating after ac:

I nw.- r by Cod, the ALaighty and Cbnlsciwnt, that I till aperk
tho pure truth rad . ill withhold and add nothing.

(The witness rotated the oath)

You ,»y be a-ated.

DI RaCT SU I1..VII0H *

BY. DR. SI X IVUffi:

Q.- Your naao is Dr. ilh,-la Bviglbocck, isn't it, and you voro
bom on th. 10 of October 1905 at Hochrev.’circhen in Io*-:.r Austria, as
:.T, of a c ntr7 doctor. You r.tt_r.dod the Second "ry school .t thu


6 Jurc-K-i 1^-3-5-Cook (Int. Frank)

Court Ho. 1

Benedictine Monk* College in Malic and you studied :v.dicin- at tte Univer¬
sity of Vienna ?nd them gat your degree, didn't you?

A.- All of that is corr-ct.

Q.- What is the Jkodical training you h~d?

A.- I first of cU began working ch-oically, pathology and ato.ao-
logy. I turr.od to intern"! cxdicine and after I was promoted I joined
the third nodical clinic in Vienna, the chief of which was Prof. Dr.
Chwoatok.

Q.- ./ho was Frofessor, Dr. Ctooetck?

A.- Cbiostck nr.s the son -f an also very well known and famous in¬
ternal ffledica.l van, r. student of Ueinort rnd J.eussert, and also acting
as an internist ani neurologist, and was particularly famous for his
diagnosis and was highly esteuaed in this field and sought after in tho
whole of Europe as being a representative of the typical old Vienna
school.

&•- How long did you itaair. with Professor Chwostek?

A.- I stayed * ith hia as Long as he wns the head of that clinic,
in other words, rbout two years, and then Chwostek was pensioned off
and his clinic was cliasoiv-d, end I wont to tho first aodical clinic,
the chief of which became at that tiao Professor ippinger.

Q.- oppinger, he has b. n nentionod here quite often - nho was
Kppiagor?

...- It is difficult to say, in which .field of internal medicine Pro
feesor Epoin^er did not contribute) highly important work. Evon when ho
wis young - bcc.'eao famous because of his w:rk about internal Secre¬
tions, particularly activities of the thyroid gland, and ho carried
out research into the vegetative n, nr, us system nd created with *,q»s
the conception of Vago Unsiapatioonus.

Q.- Tou i avc to speak wore slowly *nd sake short sentencos.

A.- Those two c-x.cepti.ns have b.c.ac general knowledge in aedicino
t dyr:. Eppir.vor then varied on kidrh-y diseases, dropsy and Later as


8667


6 Juno- 'J-FL~3-6~Coo 'Int . Fr-.nk)

C-urt &o. 1

S-nkobach's scholar ha worked on shock and collapse tivetaont and ho bt»~
ccsfc. the son who cleared up the erases of oollnpso to a ooneidorablo
uxter.t and lixliiiod and cleared it ip in a basis rtinner.


8fc6G


6 June k-i-Grcss (Ererk)

C urt S3. 1


*• (continued) Later on he corked on aetcbolian of heart diesoasoa.
er.dhe erected a beaia for the fane tl end diseaao of the heert acicr.ee.
His first work wee on pathology of theliver erd his research in this
field erected ® relate novelty. It oca due to this thet hia reputation
becaoe international, end it o< 8 If ter on that be do voted hia ontire
r<.acirch to this field epert fr:a hundreds of smaller rorfca in tha
cotcboliaa field. The race Eppirger ocs knewn the vorld over end I
do know, ea hia chief deputy, th't hia scientific airrcapondeneo oxtond-
cT to dl cur.tr 1 cs of tho world. The external ayaptcoa of thiaintemet-
ioncl reputation ca c phyalcicn erd scientist wes th<t doctors free
•very eeuntry of the world — Buropo, -strica, -sic — worked in hia
clinic all tho tine erd that EfPlngcr hiasolf waa colled ebroed o
greet deal, tlao, ta a doctor, of ®uroo. I only wont to any thet ho
fcroctcd Kosal icache, th<t tha f aioon of Bcunanio ct-llcd hl=, end tho
King of Bulgerlc and thf.t he clao treated J'arhael Stclin.

-w I think thet la enough in order to olucldcto tho international
importance of ircfcaaor Eppirgor.

*• I would aay thf.t it wta thla interr. tloncl reputation which wes
tho rcLasn he rccoivcd o profess on*: Ip in Vionre. It vie known quite
■oil why Spplnger bcccno e University irofcaaor. Tho conception thet
he woo cn cas la cor*x inly r.ot held by me.

irofooaor, how long did y:u roacin in Enplngcr's dir.ic?

*• It wes In 1936 thet I bcceoo Epplngcr's essistent foiling
-ustrien regulations.In 1939 I bcctno hia chief caslatent dector
and in 1940 I was given the fcitlo cf ohlcf aodicfl officer. I
remained with hia until the erd of the -tr at which time lea
released. I had been celled up to the -my airce 1941 and rend ned
there on the strength of the clinic only nominally.

-her. were you habilitated*

My habilitcti:n occurred in 1939 andin the beginning of 1°40 I wt.a
given the title cf Orient (lecturer).

0- Thet ia e very lerg psried. Haw do ycu explcir. that?

260 )


6 June i7-lUSS-i*-2-jroaa(Frenk)
Court !o 1


- Ccntrtr7 to the custec in Gerneny tbe -usricn hebilitetion

regulations prescribed it thet first of dl yai bed tc spond eight

yeers in e dlnic kfie qualifying f~r tabilitetion.

-ell, now it sight be acid tfcet you ere e Nezi professor. If

we, the -usiritns, htd not been cc cup led ^culd you still heve bee coo

© profosacrl
•

a. -s ecrly es tho beginning of 1939 . before the -r.se hluasE-^pinger
bed gl-en no instructions to propers cy hebilitetl-n in! he bed
already taken tho first steps in the Collegia of Ircfosaers in Vienne,
"hen did you first bee coo c University lYofcssorf
• :t *< in 1%3 thet Eppinger submitted ay ncae for this nodn-
etion end in Juno 19&E I wns ncointted.
f -* " er « o neeber cf aedlcsl unions ccr.dor.lesf

*• I wes c aoabor of severe 1 aedied unions, partial frrly in Vlonnc-
- *h® Orter of Doctors of Vionnn, Society of In to mol l^odlclno in
Visnns, Cocioty of Micro-Biology in Vienr*, andBlologlcd Society
in v ionnc. I sts clso c rosber of the Gorsrn Socloty fer Intcrnd
Modicino end Goracn Sccioty for Ciroi lction Research.
f .. °id you clso writo scientific works yoursolff

»• Yes, I did.

^ M r . ircsidont =ty I aifcrit t few dccuacnts with reference to
»hc.t has been said so fer cadi shell bo ca brief rs possible, -a
Boiglboock Exhibit I I effor tho affidavit •Testinony of tho Mod led
Faculty cf tho University of Vienna* end I present this to tho
Tribunal. I shell reed fr-a ptgo 2 of tho D-cusont Book.

MR. H*RDYt Moy I csk dofonso cunscl if he prcpa-ls that tho Dean
of the University is eating es Notary hero?

STEEJB ,."IRi I cen show Mr. x'rcsecutcr the rrigind tut since
this is e vitcl document to cy client who will need it lc ter on I bc-vc
hed it photostated end I as certifying ttrt it is c true copy. 1 lccsc
w-uld jru give the origind to the Ircsecutor.

MR. H-ROTi Mo cbjecticn, y ur Her.or.


6 June 47-tt-S—i-3^3rc8« (?rtnk)

Orurt Bo. 1

BY DR, STH HS»TSi|

-« I •bell coed ft-aa this dccurer.t, fxca the =l<Mlc of the second
peragraph* *Sept.«ially opt for the qulok oricotcticn et the sick
bul f Dr. Boiglbocdr shewed glendid dicgnostic cbillty. Ho Is fully
oenversent with ell csdern aetheds of extrdnr.tion end treatment.'

♦cd thon the fiwl pertgrephi 'His cngfgirg ntiracr, his dlllgerec,
his gr oet skill end, lest tut not lcest, his huntno behevirr tcrirds
tho petlor.ts entrusted to hie cere, hero clwcys brought hie *ho
fullest recognition fron his superiors,*

I clso subrdt to tho Tribunal fehlblt Hciglcbocsk So. 2. It Is n
ocrtlflcotc froc tho first Bcdiocl Clinic of the Unfc-crslty, dated
11 J tnuery 1935* '"geln It Is subedited 'a c photrstetlc sepy. I shell
rood psregreph 2 of thr.t cortiflcetoi *Ho shows c specie! Interest
Thtt's Boiglboock. *Ho shoos c specie! Interest In the execution of
scientific resccreh, which hte enabled hin to write, ct ny cllnlo, c
series of oxcollont w-rks, in o-nrocticn with which special ettontion
rust be drawn to his grex t thoroughness end extetitudo.*

Exhibit Ho. 3 which I now subrdt is tho tcstlsony fron tho first
Medical University Clinio irof. Dr. Hons Bpplngcr, dotod 18 Uococbor
1943* * shell readonly ono sontcnco, tho lest scntonco of that dreunent.
1 quote* *1 leek upon the sold person, in cso rppolntacnt cs c
teturor in 1%0 I wee irstruaonfccl and whoso cppolntaont cs o ir^fossor
extraordinary I paropatd, cs the ablest of ny pupils.*

Exhibit Ho. U which I new subcit to tho Tribunal is cn index of
the scientific works written by .jcf. IV. Belglbcock. It lists 53
- rks TTitten by hin erd 11 dcnxstrt tires — c stlccti-n -f then.

-liness, I shell heve tc ask yru with rofcroneo to thet drumor*,
dldyou yoursolf write the works listed in thet index cndpublish then?

*• I ublishcd the bulk *f then endwpote thon ell. Sore of thsc
--rks, two cr throe of thee, I cr. ncr sure, weren't printed cs far cs
r know. I composed this index antho brsisef e list which I still held
rd I oaapnsed it to the best of ny kn— ledge.

8671


6 June -Gross (Trank)

Court Ko. 1.


Q Thank you. The next docice..t is a lot tor frees a nurse of Ep^in-
for's Clinic. It is Exhibit 5

y:». ili Tit May it please the Tribun?-!, exhibit 5 is sorely a letter
written to Stcinbauer. It contains no jurato as to the signature of
the vn-itor of tho letter* Hand* it is not attaiseiblo by tho Tribunal.

DR. STKIKEA'JEIli Mr. Hardy is perfectly correct. Bocauso I knew you
wore going to coao out with that cbjeotion I sent the lottor back to
Jfre. Brovor and asked her to have her signature notorized. Therefore
I su trait to tho Tribunal a docuaont which is properly oertified by
notary although ay signature wo old do it Just the cone.

!Ct. HARDY: Your Honor, I auoait that docurwr.t is not ndaisriblc. I
objoct to its adaisslon.

THE IRESlDif.T: &>os tho Tribunal understand froa counsel that tho
docunont is :xwr properly- cortiXicd? It will bo sutraitted ns such.

HARDY: It is not jroporly certifiod. Tho certificate put on
by Dr. St-jinbovkir was put on of tor tho dnto of tho signature.

DR. STEI:.BA'"JRj Tho Prooocution '.won't understood what I said. I
rocoivod this letter of Mrs. Brover and si:wo sto gave it to bo
personally I cortifiod its authenticity but in tho noontloo tho
Tribunal has fulod in spite of tho foot as of 11 torch lvu7 all
signatures wore to bo notarised by a Notary. Consequently I returned
this to Mrs. Brovor end askod her to havo it oortifiod by a notary.

HR. HARDY: Just a nwcwnt. I will havo Dr. Alexander look at it. Tho
English document doosr.'t indicate this and I can't read tho Qormon.

No objection, your Honor.

£


6 Jur.e '?-y_J v lC_5_lJ(*l-y (Int., JrPTWa)

C-urt I

IP. 3'IHEaCIB: In th*t c»ae, subjoct to the Tribur-f 1 1 e per-
risai-n I vrnlrt like to ro>d the litter, I quote:

“Iro« 1937 Fr-fiBBor Dr. ^llhcla 9lof< lbocck wps ay eupori-r et
thi clinic of I r*f . tppinfer, vrad C 3. In Karch 1938 I wps t' he dls-
aicBcd fr;a the clinic fer =y outspoken pntafonlsa tcvprds nMlon*l
aocilisa. Professor 5 ic.~c lbocck stood up for a in the s et helpful
sinner, end succeeded insofar th^t I w«s left in sy positl-n. In the
course of the following ysprs I -es often nttnch.d, becouac I tried
c ntinurlly to flfht <■ins» the irfpti Refine, end it w*p plwpyo Irof,
BioclV.ock who helped ac. After the days of the Jewish Pogrca I hoprd.
Dr. Bi«f«lbocck soy to r eollerfuc whoa he know well: "I will not trkc
prat in this, this is too ouch for ac, wc dn n't wpnt this."

"X wrlto thc-e lines freely »nd without c nstraint, in cr^tltufiC
f-r the *sf1strace which BicrclWck fpvc ac fr-.a 1938 until the tiac
of his Km tray Scrricc (19*1)/

The next d-cusent I tubait is * certificate froa the Medic*1
University Clinic, Professor Dr. Kcllncycr, which is pore 96 of J>cu-
aent Book I.

7JC FR1SIDUT: ht document nuaber is this!

IB. S-l.IHBAUlP: Lxhiblt 6.

TW FPi-SIHJi7: Jh*t Arcuoent nuaber do« c u beer?

IB. buabor 2/. I bee y ur » radon.

KB. HiBDT: Hpy I Psk c'unscl if it cratrins * Jurot?

IB. SlilJBALUt: Xr. Hprdy, this is » certificate of the Univer¬
sity Mcdicpl Clinic. In order t' 1 acit * possible ''bjcctira by the Iro-
necut-r I hov, returned this tistia'-cy t the Ir’fcsr'r with ra order
t' return it to me properly certified la-.cdirtely. *Jnf rtur.ptely this
letter hos n t yet c'=c bpek since the npil t«*kcs p v ut r frtrifht,
but I would like to *ek thrt it be "daitted provlsi-nolly until the
s^-rn certificate is returned t ' ne. «cturlly it is raly r University
Clinic hepded by Fr'fess-r Ecilaevcr, rad perhaps jr'u ''ill be food
cn-u.~h t' shew this t' the President.


9673


6 Jure .•-7_M_JjC_5-2_ 1 'plojr (int., Ir-nk®)

C-wt I

X2. HAP.DT: The doooacnt V® nr* jurrt.

“71 PRISimr-t The Mbwsl -111 adr.lt the drcurxnt provi sir re¬
ally subject to tho correct certificate being added Inter.

IS. S-XimOBs I don’t even want to read the whole document,
only the first paragraph!

■l nude ths personal acquaintance '.f Unlr. Prof. Dr. Jilhel a
Belglbocck of Vlonna, nt lecture® given at iclentlflc acctlng®. I
h*vo known hi® scientific works however, for a lrng tlae. He drew
particular attention to hlcself through hi® excellent work as * pupil
of the on®t pronln«nt German internist, Jr f. ip-lngcr. In particular,
his resenreh Into the effects :f vrricus vjt-nlna and lnt'- tho pathrw
loiy of the liver and cplAcelo Kopatitie hr® aide a grert inprosci n.
Iref, Botrlboeck 1 ® doubtless raong the =>■ ®t promising reoerreh work¬
ers In the field cf lntcrarl nedlcino. I kr.-w aleo, thrt Prof, fcpplng-
cr always spoke <-f hla In terns of the highest regard."

tfc Iw, let’® e-rry o RJ wi trees, whet showt y-ur allltory ser¬
vice, h-w did thrt progress?

A In May of 1941 I was celled up Into the Gcr-an Air 7'.roc as
n Medical Soldier, and z? basic training I passtd In Baden nerr Vionnr.
In August of 191 I becamo a nn-cr Missioned officer, and I w no «ont
t* tho air firce h-srltal rt *cl», Au®trlo, and I wr® promoted to n n-
e*>nrls®toned efflcor corresponding to ehe rank of sergeant, and after
sorvlng in the rir force hspital of Vienna for a short tint I went to
the war college at t-ecr In 1942 rnd then In August of th* sen*. yc«r I
loft f-r c aotorlscd c:np«cy In Russia. I remained *>• re until tho end
cf 1943.

«i hrt duties did you have la Hue1.-7

A I headed th«. lntcrarl ward rf a field hospital.

 Bid yen hold the position of a ®ecti a doctor?

a Proa point of discipline, no, I woe kert on the list "a


i»3»l3tpnt t' the surgean.


£674


6 Jure 47-MJ«C-5-3->Ul y (Int., Pranks)
Court 1


H *nd -here did jru fo fr'= Suasiaj

a Subsequently I *r« transferred as »n Mililrat t' the internal
ieyrt-ert <-f the air f-rce hospital at 3runsvick, and fro there In
K«reh of 1944 vent to the war hospital at Taravist, Italy.

H So rren In Brunawiek y~u didn't bco-r.c department medloal
officer?

A Bo.

i And you didn't receive that title In eplte ~f three year of
•crrlcc and alth-ugh y-u were a university pr'-fceoor and already had
beta admitted f->r pr'ftet'-rehljT

a It wrt only lr. March 1944 I bec-nc an Independent oceti n
medical officer for tho flret tine.

% In the indictment yo arc described ae an caaultcat medical
officer of the air f rec though?

a I vat never the cnsultant to the air free. Admittedly at
the bcylnalny if 1*44 I had been aarn-rked for that petition in tho
Parachutlet Arny, bu* fc-r rcar-ne which Pr-fcaa-.r Dr. Slcvcre hat
deecrlbcd hero a y-un^r oellca/-uo of nine wo# preferred.

k So you didn't participate in *ny meeting, partlculnrly n'no
af the mooting Bontloned hero in thta trial, la that rlkht?

A Tou mc«n the meeting, the eorvreaa 't the aaeiatlnr coneul-

tantat

•4 Tea.

a I-u arc ri^ht. I didn't oarticipa.to in any ono cf thoac acct-

iaca.

\ Did y-u have any contact with y-ur fcllcw defendrnta before
this trial.

a I only know Profoaaor Handloaer durln,: the yeara of 1939
and 1939 worked in Vienna where h*. waa the military diatrict medical
officer, and. I alao knew him llatcniny to lecturce cf hit occasionally,
but I do not believe he knew ac, becauac he probably impressed me more
pb a genernl than I impressed him as a civilian. Of course I knew


8675


6 June 47-X_JjC_5-4-K*loy (Ir.t,, Pranks)
Court I


Pr fces-r Schmcdcr, Chief ncdlcal officer, toy naae. He v*s ay highest
superior. The first tine I sw hi- personally was when I va ordered
tc v-rk on experiaeats and reported to the nedleel inspectorate. It
w»s dor* toy noens'of the cocroc torief military report for duty. It
was in that occasion I net Dr. Becker-Treyseng and later in October
19 *a, Dr, Schaefer, as the evidence h»e already shown I had r toriof
e-nference with Xr, Slevers In Dachau end I didn't know any other of
ay fellow defendants before,

<4 Xell, X think X can conclude the chapter regarding your charac¬
ter and personality, and in order to save trouble to the interpreters
a nur.toer of testimonies and certificates hart n-t yet been submitted by
ns. How, let's pass on to the question of the order, when did you
receive the order to cr.rry out seawater experlacnts?

SB FShSIHiT: Counsel, before proceeding with thrt natter tho
Tribunal win be In recces.

(Thereupon a short roccss was trken.)


8676


Court So. 1

6 Jus 47-J»-7-l-EHX-Xeehan (Brovn)


IH* KABSEALt The Tribunal Is again in session.

Trie. PriSin.iT: Counsel cay proceed.

3T IE. STZIi^AULE (Counsel for defendant Seiglboeck):

<<• Witness, ve shell turn no- to the second chapter, to the
wiestlon of cilitery orders. When did you receivo the ordor to carry
out soa voter evoeriaents?

A. Today I cannot give you tho exact date vhon that order reached
ce. It oust have been the siddle or end of June, probably the end of
June.

Q, At that tine voro you already told tho purpose of this order?

A. So, the order cece to ay chief phyeiclcn at Tarvisio, a tolo-
typei this toletype told =o to report icoodlrtoly to the kedlcal Inspec¬
torate In Sorlln. There vrs no reason for this order In the tclutypo.

I vas side at the tiao the tclegran arrivod. I thought at first that I
vculd be collod to gvt the position of a consulting internist, which had
been prouised ao; hovever, since ths rebuilding of =y dspertnent in tho
“arvlsio hospital had Just begun, ! asked py chief physician to toleohono
to Berlin and if possible get porsission for ac to eti*y In thc’hosoitnl
in Trrvlslo. Ur. Taegsr, cy chief physician, then callod 3erlin. Ho
vns lnforced that I vas not being tranaforred for tho reasons I had
thought but that I vns to carry out acicntific experinonts for tho cco-
ciasion froc the hedioel Inspectorate. I wi to get preclso dotalls
about this in 3erlin. At any rate, I vas to get under vay inaedlatoly
to get to Borlln and a fev days later I vent froc Italy to Borlin and
rooortod to the Kedlcal Inspectorate, as ! had boon ordered, ond there I
vas directed to see Dr. Boekcr-Freys*ng.

Q. When you had not knovn theretoforoT

A. Whoa I had not knevn thcrctoforo, neither personally nor by aaao.

Q» What did Dr. Becfcer-Frcyseng tell you?

A. he told =« briefly first of ell vhet ves afoot and then took ao
to Dberstarrt Dr. I-.ers froc vhoc I received the forcal order to take over
the carrying out of those exnorinents.


Court So. 1

6 Jon 47-h-7-2-IEi-*«oka-n (3rovc)

V 2i4 yai accept this order without any opoositlon on your part

A. After I had been lnforocd exactly what was going on there, I
Loaodictely faxed perclsslon to carry out the experiments In ny denert-
nent In Icrrislo. I vested to carry then out on eoldiore who would
volunteer for thee. Z alto said that S did not v«nt to carry out exoeri-
noatt In a concentration eecp and gave aa =y reasons for this, acong
other thing#, tho fact that It sscaod to oe aore practical to carry then
out In an Institute vhore tho nocceetuy laboratory fecllltloe -tro avr.il-
nble. Of courea, I could not expreee very explicitly rgr ocreond
opinion* regarding concentretlon caepe bocrusc In 1544 In Gcrnany that
not •0=othing that one Just did. I vee told that the Hodiccl
Inspectorate had originally Intended a hospital to be ueod for thoeo
experLicnte and I rooo-.bor very exactly there vae trlk of Brunswick; X
r as tabor thle for a poraonel roeaon. Sot to long ago I had boon working
In Brunswick In the hospital and It vould have plotted ne greatly If In
thle way I thould hrvo had an opportunity to eoe ay frlcnde there again
and conaoquontly X nuch rogretted that thle plan vae not carried out.

Q- 7or l ^at reason vaa your proposal that tho sxpsrlr.ent* be
carried out In Tarvlelo turned down?

A. Ihe reason that Oberetnrxt Dr. Kor* gave no, that le the roason
he expreeaed to ae, vae thet the very aggravated situation on all fronts
did not perr.lt keeping eoldlere In hospitals longer than wee absolutely
necossary for their convalescence. Thle wi shortly after the beginning
of the Anglo-Ar^rlcon invasion. He pointed out thle fact to no specifi¬
cally and asntloned also the fuehrer ordor about vfclch I had heard
already, that very strict neasures were to be applied In Judging vho vns
to stay i n hospltale. for Instance, we had to releese fra: the hospital
persons sick with gastric disorders oven before they were healed.


8676


6 Juno-y-FI^>l-Pria_au (Ir.t. Brewn)
Court Ko. 1


V.'c had peo ph. with gastric ulcers who wero absolutely in need of h_s-
pit^l rju. „'c ted 13 take theso people Ir.-a the h saital -nd sent
thwa to thj so-called *st«ach batalli.na." Thoao were coapcnios cx>
pj»;d a lcly of p~rs na with gastric ulccra wh_ received a special diet
but nevertheless did full active service.

P>r exrs-plc, there waa auch a etaoech cocpony stationed near Tar-
viaio which in iull active survic. coebnttlng partisans and I r^riwr
vory well that fra thie stoat eh c «p-ny wo frequently at the hospital
received cases of gastric hen^rrhnge in the surgical dep-rtraont; wound¬
ed 8‘ldiera before th-y wen, c Uplotoly healed were put inti the so-
called convalescent cinpenies.

W« had difliculties again end again when we had hepatitis caeca
wh kept relapsing when we released thus because the liv-r ngnin relaps¬
ed.

Th-t, in renoral, ica the situation. \io did not act according to
purely nodical .r acientiiic principles but acted aiaply in orders that
were dictated by necessity, lhnt was the .actual situation in 1944 at
the tiae I was given this rd«r .and fir this reason I regarded this
reason giver, to by Oberstarzt Mur* as a justified -no.

Q.- N u, witness, did you say s o-thing else to escape frm this
asslgnoent?

A.- When I realised. that tho l ection of the oxperirvonto c -uld not
be changed and since I did not want to go t> that ch-son 1 ecti n, 1
asked aeckor-Froysong t Send ae back t Tarvisi -nd to C-onisslor. ny
deputy in Tarvisio r .ho was also an internist with th. carrying out >f
these oxperioonts. Beckwr-Freyseng .-nowore. that it was too Into n^t
to change anything. ?r:fesa-r Zppingor had r«-c.mended ac cs a suitable
■xp-rt. Beckoie-Frcyseng said that ha hrc supp sed this h-d beer. t r.o
*ith ay pc mission, That, however, w-s n t actually th- case. Becker
Freyoonr said that he hiaself was n t ‘pleased th-t a c.nc_r.tr-. ti r. c-iro
had been chosen .as the 1 c -ti-n ofr the oXrx.ria-r.ts. K .v.v.r, he w-s


6 June-’A-FL-3-^-PrL :e?.u (Int. 2rjwn)

Court Nr. 1

c r-vincod that this problca of see distress ted to be solved boenuso tie
nany rua^rts that he had received in the last time a-do it imperative
t a lv« these oribl^as. He told ». that I h*d been >rdorod to carry out
the cxp.rimcnts. TMa was an rder fr a higher up. It was just as binding
n hia as it was nai; nnd more,Ver, I ted already been n.oinated to
HLaalor as tho person 'ho would c nduct tte experiments. Consequently,
it w uld be imp 3sible for a* am to withdraw.

I then naked hia whether I was to understand this as a strict mi¬
litary order rn' he answered "yes."

Nxi, in tte year 1947 it is perhaps r .~t quite so oaay to understand
that in the year 1944 it was abs lutoly ixcossnry to regard a military
-rdcr as binding, that ne did sj,

Q.- Then it was Pr.'foes.r Dr. Spoiler that pr-posed you?

A.- Yes, it -.ins ho.

Q.- Had you previously spoken ab at this natter with Bapinger?

N . Regarding everything that happened before I arrived in
3-rlln I kncti nothing white.ever. Eppingor, -a he told ae Inter, had
unterud this wh.lo affair jT had attended this conference with tho in-
untim >t carrying out the experiments at his clinic and f'r tlr.t roa-
oan he wanted .Vj of his assistants ti make the ojqjerLaants. Since it
was a military assityvwnt ate since 1, as the only -no of hia older
assistants, tt-s c neater A tte Luftwaffe, hu orop-sud ae as the person
to make the exporia-nt.

Q.- Did -'ou, h wevvr, pert *ps, Lat-r apeak with Eppinge-r ao ;ut
this assigia^nt?

A.- Between tte, time A ny arrival in dorlin *ind tho actual bo in¬
ning A tho axporlaonts, I was ace in Vienna and, of c urse, soolfc
with Sppinaer re^rrding this cuesti n. I '*id n.thing to conceal the fact
that I was ver- unhappy t have iec--iv.xi this -rsirr.aent. teacher
t Id me that 1 r the ab-vu -v-nti r.ed reas ns he had pr n.sed x. ate,

-r r- ver, to said that he expected ne t carry ut these .xperiaents ut


G680


6 June—M-FTr-S-3-?ri-A.cu (lot. 3r*n)

C. -JTt Nv. 1

in perfectly irrx-cccblo aannsr. M-ro ;ver, he srif it was neither Ills
reap nsibility n r had it been his intent! n that I sh.uld be assi.jwd
t Dachau. Ke had neither prjp.Sed that n;r had he been asked his api-
ni n in that -r.ttor end, as a natter A feet. Dr. Eppinger had rtasjlu-

t-ly n tiling t- < j with the ch.'ice f Deichra cs the l catin A the ax-
jKrlicnts A A iris ners as thb experl \.r±? I subject.

Q.- what t;.«i had his intenti -ns beun?

I have already said that ippingor wanted tv carry »ut the ex¬
periments -t his clinic and tad already agreed n that with’Sirany and
Berka bof-rc 1 vonfc to Berlin.

D:.. sriI*.3AlTu.: !!r. President, in tnis c nrx-cti n 3 should like
tj put in D-cuaer.t 12, page 26. Ihis will be Exhibit Hi. 7. This is
a letter free a then iear.le d-ct.r at tho 1st Medical Clinic — naaoly,
Dr * i shall read the ®-c nd pcragr.aph frva this:

"As assistant i the 1st Medical University Clinic in Vienna, I
tad the jpp art unity jf attending tv a port A the report f Dr. 3oi$l-
b-eck an his w rk at Dectau sutnitted ta Pref. Dr. Eppinger. On the
>ccasi-n A this c jcTvorsr.ti .n. Professjr .Dr. Beiglb-eck generally can-
J. m~d the principle A the perf raar.ce *1 scientific ex-xrtaento in
c.ncentrati n crjpa just str.r.;ly and at tho sane tine roprscched his
chief, Prjf. Dr. nppir.fer, f-r electing hia I r his wvrk. Thereupon
Pr.f. Dr. Spoinger assorted that he hr.’ nat nxainatod hin.

"S xe sunths later, 1 ng after the terainati-n f the uxn-ri unts
at D_ctau, he frocuontly talked in ay presence ab .ut the uxperL^nts
at Dachau t. Ger.tan and f .reign physicians and nurses. Up n .ay rc.iark
that the86 experiments surely were Ushraeehb ex^rio-nts and ttaruf-re
"=.cret, n they w. rut intended f .r evory ne’s ears, Pr f. Dr,-finger
r-pliud n. c.uld frankly spe-.k nb:ut then as n-case A death has c-
aurred with tho seawater experia-nts rjvl .alsm that n- experimental per-
s r. tad suffered any Seri.us consequences thr u'h the experiaent s*.

~.-t th-re vms r. reas n tv aa.ke a secret f it."

• "631


6 June—M-FL-6-i-Priatau (Int. Brown)
Court Hj. 1


3T If.. SraKP.JHii

Q«- .itn:ss, it mobs t- am I detect a slight cpntrndlcti n here.
Ttw u-ct .r who write this letter states that Eopinger had r. t n siiir.twd
you but y ai just s-id that ho eid*

A.- I think ttore is c aisundorstanding bore, bhen I jbjsctod. to
receiving this nssi na-nt, £pping*r said t- m litorally, "It is n t
fault that 'j u h-.vo beer, assigned t > Dachau." N w, apparently. Dr.

Spiesa' waphnais should fall r. the •. rd "y u." H wev-r, the emphasis
A whnr Dr. Sppingcr sold should lie r. the word "Dachau,"

Q.- N-w», did jr JU accept this aasi^raent with ut aakir.g further of-
f rts ;r Jit. ym into Jther eff.rts to otcapo fr..a it?

A.- i.o a. Last att-opt I a billed ay chief physician in Torvisio
and -akor' hla t request ay return. I h ■pet 1 th't such c request throu.;h
p.roy channels Mould lead t. ay return t Tarvisiu. *s Dr. Jaogor has tes¬
tified here, he di ’ ao. H.wever, he had no succpsa.

Q.- Now, in tho cr-aa oocialnation Ur. Hardy will certainly way tj
y u;

"Sure, you di-n't w-nt tjg-t Dachau because y >u c-noic’.oruc’ the
experiments unnecessary .at all." Ia that the tive f.r y.ur attitude.
a.- «s I gradually becaav. a;rv and *.:re experienced in the av.-nti n
f aan water experlaontati n, I cr.-iw, to think that th- experiments woro
n;t unnecessary.


Court So* 1

6 Jon 47-K-9-l-*EK-Cook (Srown)

Dr.- Beckor-Jreyscng, on the basis of various observations end
experience on the part of the £»err«j air force and navy, informed ne
of the urgency of the sea water problen and pointed out the unfortunate
feet to ns that precisely In the problec of alloying thirst we had
Schaeffer's preparation but the Introduction of this preparation was
apparently going to run Into insumountable difficulties. Therefore.

If ye didn't succeed la Introducing this preparation, we had to know
what sort of advice we would give a person vfco found hlnself In a state
of sea emergency and under these oircunstencee I considered It ny duty
to work on thoso oxperlr.ents. If ! were ordered to do so; I not only
considered It a r.Uitery duty which I had to fulfill anyvny but It was
also the kind of a auestlon tfclch concerned =e as a physician. At
that tlno I had not been lnforned about the foregoing ovente of this
affair, or at any rate was lnfomod of It only very superficially and
I know nothing about the Intrigues of the technical office as they hove
been described here. I knew nothing at that tine and fren ny point of
view I saw tho natter as follows: Both Bccker-Froysong and particularly
Profossor Spplnger told ne that ve could assuoo that the Schneffor
ncthod would not bo Introduced under any clrcunstanccs bocause tho
technical office declared It vus lnposslblo for reasons of lack of raw
material. However, If the Schaeffer nethod cwxld not be Introduced,
then tho ouestlon etlll ronalnod open: le It better for a person In
son distress to drink nothing at all or should ho drink sea water and
If ho drinks soa wator Is It expedient to give hin tho Berka prepare
tion? Begardlng the cueetlon of the effects of sea water thorc had
been up to that tine no systenatlc scientific Investigations cnrrlod
out. In tho neantlno such Investigations have been carried out and # the
results becano known, but, of course, e problen that is solved In 194?
cannot bo viewed re of the yeax 1944, In the sar.e way that you night
reproach Hippocrates with not being fanillar with nodera train surgery,
and it 1 e ouitc understandable why fron the nedical point of view this
nroblea had been greatly neglected, because in tines of perce thore


8633


Court So. 1

6 Jua 47-fc-9~2~£EH-Cook (Sr>n)

really vbi no problem of sea distress anynare. The greet liners had
solved their drinking veter problems but the wer, both navel end air,
suddenly made this problem a very burning one, not only for the Gorman
Vehrnncht ves It a pressing problec. Th-»t can be seen frer. the fact
that at precisely the sane tine vhen we were concerning ourselves with
this problem, l.e., at the tine vhon I received the order to work on
•he problen, experiments In that direction vere being carried out in
A-orlca, and It is a great tragedy that we learned with this work too
late. If It was Intended to decide whether the consumption of eoa
vator was good or bad and whether It is good or bed to add so-.o dextrose
preparation to It, then this problem had to be solved on the basis of
fcasaa oxporl.ttats. There vrs no other wry to docide It.

Q. I road through the indictment yesterday and the ouoetlon
occurrod to no, couldn't you have contented yourself with animal experi¬
ments alono?

*, I think I can state that vory briefly boca.uso Professor Yoll-
herdt has already explained the essential nattors concorned hore. Thoro
Is no laboratory experimental nnlnel whoso sodium chlorido motabolien
and water metabolism can be compered with the human. Herbivorous anl-
nils rorct to salt much differently than err niv.roue anlnrls, or an
anlael like tho horse which ocrsolros a gr«.r t deal contrary to tho dog
which dooe not svoat, end how specifically a cat rc cte. So far as I
know, thoro have been no very exhaustive exporlmcnts to invest If'to
this matter but X should have been only too girl to buy o-nsorlmentnl
animals for this purpose in order to escape from that nssign-ent.

The essential reason was that the human boing Is tho only living bolng
which uses salt not only as food but elco uses it as eoice, and for this
reason tho human being is adapted to the consumption of ouitc different
ouantitles of salt than arc any animals. I later saw that America®
scientists when they completed their studies on sea water reforming
an2al)that 8 thoy explicitly noted that with dogs they had to use not n
throe percent but a five percent salt solution in order to got aporoxi-


C6C4


6 Jan 47-H-9-3-IEK-Cook (Brown)


natoly th« aan« reaction aa a fcunan would here.


8635


6 Jun-J{-J£3-iCi-i-Grcss (*nt. Brora)

Court Ko. I.

Q iir. Resident, in order to corroborate what the defendant
hae Juat a aid I wish to put in a docirjcnt uhich will bo Sxhibit 8.

This ia on page 71 of Docuoont Book I and this is Docic^nt 20. This
ia an extract froo the Vienna .fcdicnl Weekly of l$!Vl9U6 regarding
physiological effects of the drinking of undiluted son. water. I shall
re? d only one sentence free this docaao.it, the fourth line - "It was
necessary to give dogs a $% eodiiuj chlorido solution instead of a 3.5£
one, in order to ostablidi an oxpirinental situation analogous to that

of Qjin# *

However, weren't these ox^rironta enrriod out in this .ray in or'’or to
accord with scientific regulations?

A Tho jroblocs of tho water and salt notnbolisa, of course,
bring up nany jroblcss. So fer as bop. ./ator was concornod I know of no
writings on undiluted sea rater. Tho first papers that I nan thjro,
which I Later realised to bo tho first in this field, vorc those of Dr.
Sch ofor which war- given to ai. Proa then I could see that Dr.
Sohaofor had dono all the prulinin-ry work on this subject but I could
also Suv that Dr. Schaefer, that tho knorlodgo th-t ho had derived
fron his oxporisante werj not relevant in any way for hunan brings be¬
cause, for ins tare o, Schaefer discover,! that rabbits fed with barloy
oats cm live for an enormously long length of tine in spite that
they arc. drinking sea water. Ho gave ttaa daily dos^r of o.a rrat-_r
which for hunm beings would hnv. aamuitud to l/2 to 2 no tors. Mover-
thcloss tiwoo rabbits lived for woaks and weeks. In other words those
results c annot bo transferred to hu=an beings.

Q Did other scientists, especially those outside Gomany,
also ruport on aniasl oxpcrLxntr in this field?

A I think I havo air. ~.<Sy said that I had found no reports
at all on such o^orlneots. Tho oal * oxpcrir*-nt in son water that was
accessible to us in Gorcany in -ndical lit-ratur- up to that tiao -was
an Er.glish cxaerinur.t on hurmr. beings. Tho publications I case to know
of later frori England and America .^r_ also papers on experiments vith


6 Jun-4M 2-10-2—aross (Int. Brown)
Court IiO. I•


huran baings. And that is understandable for the reasons I have just

given.

3 Did you yowsolf hevo anything to do in deciding whether
huran being oxperirunts rere to bo used xid were you askod about your
opinions on this natter?

A I have already said, and in tho interrogation oxrainations
of Professor Schrocdor, Bcckor-Fruysong, and Schaefer, it has becono
clear hero, that X had nothing to do with tho preparation for these ex¬
periments. Neither tho decision to carry out oxrcrinonts nor tho way
thoy woro to bo carried out wjre taken up in ay presence. In tha con¬
ference of 25 boy in which tto way tho experiments wore to bo carried
out w-ra agrood upon, I was not pronot. After 1 arrived in Bor 1 in I
was given tho plan for the oxporinunts which hod boo:: workod out in
overy detail. I was instructed at that tlao to abido closoly to thio
program ~nd I was also told that this program had been workod out at a
conference of loading specialists and that Sppinger end Houbnor hod been
anong those who warkod it out.

Q In other words you yourself could affact no changes in this
experimental progr’aa, could you?

A No, noroovor in this conference of 25 kay it was also du¬
el dod that ny exporiawnts wore to bo chocked on tho spot later and I bu-
liovo this shows xost clearly ny connection to tho oxporlaontnl program.

Q Th-n tho main problem was - is tho Berks preparation ablo
to roducc tho drseago done to tho Huron system by seawater?

A Yes. And fron tho xholo situation at that tire tho Berka
preparation had bocoso tho bon. of contortion. To be sure, as I havo
already indicated, thit was not the only problem that had to bo solved.
Beckor-Freysong told no that Dr. Sir any in Vienna had experimented on
soldiers, but in these experiments ho loft it to the discretion of tho
experimental subjects to decide hew much sea water they would censure.

In this way he collected what I can only characterise as total confusi?n
of results because one nan drank 100 cc and the other 2 liters, and tho


C6S37


6 Jun-k—'S— iO-3-Gr c bs (Int. Brown)

Court So. I.

third drank as much at ho wanted to. One _>on drank such and such amount
one day and either core or loss on the n_xt. In short, this was tho crc-
parlmaatal urogram of a man who /-rhape vas a good dermatologist but
certainly not a specialist in tfk field of metabolism. Simcy over¬
looked in his results sore very elementary and prirury thing, and unfort¬
unately ho ando an even mere unpardonable arror, namely ho did not find
out how soa water worxe alono and connected everything he observed to
tho use of tho Borka method. If h, had not overlooked tho most prinary
necessity of having a control group I know for certain no man vould bo
indicted for having carried on sen water experiments bocauoc then tho
tragic error would not have occurred vhich in the last cons-quenco sot
tho 'hole v-Lancho in motion. Berks vont to Eppingor with Sirony's
experiments -nd told him that Sirany's oxporirxmts had proven that finally
sea water is potablo end secondly that it is much loss lt£uriouc than
cthon.iso. Bertha, like many char La tans had unfortunately certain nug-
gostivo lnfluenco on his environment, rnd I boliovo that to cooo extont
Eppingor foil under this influonco. Whon I visited Vienna I discussed
this whole problom with Profosscr Eppingor in all details and I askod
him for what reasons ho was r^com-oni ng this preparation at all be¬
cause choaic lly tho Borin prepor-tion c-nr.ot c'mngo son wat^-r at nil.

That was pcllucidly clear and Schaefer who - as a chemist rnd fortunat¬
ely npproachad this problem only from a chemical point of view var por r
fcctly right, of courrq in repudiatin'- the 3»rk:. method 10 Q 2 .


C6CC


6 Jun-tt-ie-ll-i-Kalcy (Int. Braun)
Court No. I.


In Eppingor's cm the situation was scaowbat different. Eppingor had
heard constantly fron both Sirany and Berks and it had been confirmed
in Berlin that Schaefer's excellent process would, under no circur.-
atancaj be introduced. Eppingcr, of course, was no am who said to Ua-
3 -If "if I have n c'nenic d. dosalinating method on tho basic of the
Schaefer procedure then that would be worse than cy putting a little
sugar into the water." Eppingor always told ao personally, of couroo,
tho Schaefer nuthod ie bead and shoulders above this other r*thod.

Thor* con bo no discussion about that whatsoever. Tho only thing that
could bo discussed now was that if tho Schaefer method was not intro¬
duced the quostion re reined opon, .as tho Berks preparation was not in a
position to giro at loaat slightadvantegos. And no*’ tho tragedy rf
which I spoke previously cocoa to light, because Sirany did not havo
any control group that drank only sea wr.t r, in other words didn't do
what tho FTosocutor was so outragod about boforc, namely ns ho did not
givo pure sa.a water, for this roa.son th.ro was no basis for comparison.
How, Eppingor saw in Sirany'a records of tho experiments that one of
tho experimental subjects noachod a concentration of salt in tho urino
as high as 3 pur cont. Soa water has about 2,7% of salt. If tho kid-
noys can acccoodnte this concentration than about U or 5 ccs of trator
nust bo added fron tho body daily. But experimental persona, howovor,
nust givu much aoro water than that because it is absolutely nccossary
for him to socroto urine, and in order to oonbat thirst, and it is by •
drinking more that you do combat thirst. Now, literature has always
assorted, and this can bo soon free all textbooks, that tho maximum
salt concentration in tho kidneys is 2 por cent. Eppingor relied on
those statements, and consequently ho can bo pardoned for making toe
error of construing tho higher concentration of salt in the urino as
a consequence of the Bertha preparation. Since Berk-itit contains
vitamin C and citrate acid, aid since it is known that vitinin C has
ar. effect cn the kidneys and thar_- are many papers on that subject,
so Eppingcr thought that it was impossible that Berkatit teas having


6 Jur.-i?-MB-ll-2-3fcIoy (let. 3rcwn)

Court Ko# I#

rjch an effect on the kidneys. It i^sn't as if Eppingc-r was tornonted

by a vast curiosity, or rather it was not as if Eppinger was tornonted

by an e no me us curiosity, but because of this curiority wanted to push

US concentration camp ireates into an experiment. It was that Sppingor

was asked his opinion and he based his opinion cn difforent presuppositions

than that appear tcd%r, namely on the presupposition that tho Schaefer

nothod could not be introduced because of raw material shortages, and

•

from tho jwoly nodical point of view ho could not shoulder tho rosj-on-
sibility not to tako this possibility into consideration, this problem
which had to cone to his attention by Sirany*s experiments. If ho had
founl this suspicion confined, then this of feet that ho thought tho
Borka method had, would have prolonged tho life of persons who had
suffored ehifwrrock for a fow days. This is the sort of thing that is
characteristic for s clinician and not fer a chemist. And if Sirnny
had nrt, modo this mistake in conducting his oxpcrlnonts then also tho
oliniclan wauld not havo Q»lion victim to tills orror, but then that Ep-
pingcr was not ontiroly wrong was proved in ny exporinonts, nanoly
that tho addition of vitamins does actually c lightly incrcaso tho
concentration of salt in tho urino. That is psr'^aps quite inter¬
esting from tho theoretical point of view, but tho incrcaso in con¬
centration was so slight that it was unimportant from tho practical
point cf view. This was tho reason why Ffrofosscr Eppingor and Dr.

Schaefer were talking two difforent languages in this conference. One
was spooking as a chemist and tho other as a clinician.

Q Ultra ss, do you on tho basis rt your previous opinion
accustom yourself to this Hoa?

A I must say that I persenally didn't have confidence in
tho Eorka nothod, but cf course as ny tc-cher whoso knowledge in tho
field of atabolism I have tavr.n and respected for lli years admitted
such a possibility then I hod to bo of the opinion th-.t his possibility
did exist.


Q .'itness, did you havo any opportunity of speaking yourself


6 Jan-iWe-lI-3-|faloy (Int. 3rcwn)
Court So. I.


with the sc often nontioned engineer Berko?

A when I was in Vie nna I did havo an opportunity to nako
Bcrka'a personal acquaintance. I saw him then for the first tine and
discussed his disccvaries with hie. Nov, r. doctcent has been pit in
cTidonce here which shows that Borkn was of the opinion that his dex¬
trous solution passed the salt through tivo body. Just what ho, as n
technical chooiist, iregined under this torn "passed it through the
body" I don't knew, but he was convincod, and this is hard to under*
stand in a choriist, that apparently under the influence of thoso fluid
acids corn coaplox compound took plnco between the sugar and tho salt.

I also saw his laboratory in Vienna and ho had started a wholo series
of experiments in order to track his favorite idoa down. Ho had also
taken this idoa about this compound to ottor chenists and hod had then
give !iin export opinions, which ho showed to ft-ofossor Eppingor. C»io
of thoso export opinions nffiraod tho possibility of tho formation of
this ccnpound. Tho nan who gave this oplnicn was a chenist of very
considerable reputation. I think thoro was a caso of nlxod crystalixn-
ticn. I inediately asked Bcrkr. whothor his compound was solublo in
water and that cf course ho had to confirm, and then 1 said for us
fren tho soiled, point of viow that is tho only important point. If
you oannot nako this salt insoluble then thoro can bo no quostion of
anything boing tossed through tho body, but I was spooking to deaf oars.
Borka was particularly obsecssod with his idea, and I believe I can ex¬
press tho suspicion that even today he still considers his nothod
bettor then Schaofor's. I If effort to pursuado hin to withdraw his
cethod fron ccr.petition, so to sponk, was unfortwxately in vein. If
he had done so, a groat ranny of those exporinents would havo
unneoossaxy.


bocone


C691


Court 1

June 6-.-1-12-1-HD-Beard-Brown.

5. Shon you wore not convinced that the experlnents
ware unnecessary In theaselvea?

I can only deny this question. What struck ae as
the oost Important aspect of the experiments wee the clarifi¬
cation of the problem, that had not been clnrlflad oxperl-
aontclly; ncaaly, whether thirst Is better or sea water is
better, and how big sea-water doses have to be. .is I wish

•

to ealphas 1 to again In 194-1, oven the great sea faring nations
had no cloor knowledge regarding the effect of drinking son
water. I personally, however, was of a different opinion,

If .no has developed prop-rations which con provent
s.Idlers from bolne injured, then It Is both Irresponsible
and Incomprehensible to oonccrn onesolf at oil with the
worso preparation. In ay own opinion the technical offlco

w-s undor tho obligation to remove all the difficulties In

\

ordor to Introduce tho Schaefer ajthod. If there was talk
of sabotage when tnoso efforts wero boln 0 aado, thon I wot
to say that tho ro«l sabut-ge was committed against humanity
and health by tho attitude adopted by tho technical offlco;
if that attitude had not existed thon wo could have dispensed
with at lo-'et h-lf or at loaet two thirds of tho experiments
and could have started a short expcrlaentnl series which
would have been better fr,a every point of view, also froa
the scientific point of view as the sucoose of suoh oxporl-
aents had to bo doubted froa tho vory boginning, becaueo
thirst cxperlaonts with sc aeny parsons cannot bo so closely

supervised, undor whatever circ-astancos the oxporlaonts

•

are conducted, so that the inevitable oxpcrlaental
mistakes occur. «nl it Is decisive that such errors are to
bo expected in so many such exporlaer.tations. Because of
-bo expectation of this sort of errors, the number of
experimental persons was aadc ler^er from the beginning.


Court 1

Juno 5-H-12-2-H0-Beard-Brown.


I recall v.ry voll tact 3vCkcr-F roysoag toll sc at that
tino we want t U 30 6 • uaay rooole because In the conference
.f the 25th of May, one of the scientists, I do not Know
wk. It v?s, drew ay attention to the fact that a larga
number of experimental subjects would confuse the experi¬
ments by drinicing fresh water.

Now, Professor, when you received this assignment
with — the precise Instruction? how t> carry out the
experiments, did you start on tnea loswllotely or did you
;rve to wait a while?

«. I could rui begin Immediately but I stayed, I think
for three weeks, In rerlln.

... Now, whrt :i; you do in those throe weeks, take
walks?

A. I used this time to c ncorn nys~lf with the questions
that w nil oosc up in Judging sue: ex orlncnts. I did this
'ey re-ding 11 eraturo on the subject. I hod alrondy pre¬
viously c.ncerned ayself very a oh with the problem of
wrter and 89lt metabolism. I had to work to n ..rent extent
for this information, and since sea water o-nslsts of Belt
and water, tnose are the two fundamental tnln*s one must
know. Sut, of c urao, I did not wish to reproach myself for
hav .n« overlooked e.aethln e that was already generally known,
and consequently I vent to the libraries In Berlin and road
thr uuh a very a rcct amount of German an. foreign literature
on the subject. I sat there end took notes on everything
tha: w-s known -n the subject at that time, and I do not
believe that I overlooked anythin* that was accessible to
ue at t.mt tlao.

V Vitneae, did you write words of your own, that c ncern
'passives with this :roblen or ts least this general problem,
If not with the s;eciflc sea wat^r -rohlea?

£693


Ccurt 1

Juno 6->^-l2-3-HD-3e?rd-3rovn.

In the clinic. In EpplBgor'e clinic, a groat leal
of attention had nlre- dy boon devoted for years to salt
metabolism, and slnco It la practically Impossible to
separate aalt metabolism from water metabolism because
they rra ao closely Interwoven, I of course, also concerned
myself with the problem of water metabolism, and In several
V'.rks of my own I tre t-d this subjeot or collaborated
on It though not precisely fr-m tho aoa-wnter point of view.

From the documents which I put in ovidonco whlcn
lleta your 8olentlflc publications, will you owrhaps Juat
lvc tho numbers of these works that rofor to that, whloh
doale with this general subJoot7

Vork No. 15, wnloh states tho influonoo of Insulin
on the min.ml aotabollsc; No. 10, on wat.r aotabtllsm nnu
tho Internal soorotlen; No. 21, takes up the question of
salt metabolism and three or four of ay works oonccrn
themselves In -roa.t detail with the changes thnt take place
In the mineral txt^h^llso under tho influence of vitamins.

S. Did y^u find much literature on tho offoct of sor.
water?

A. In Gorman literature, I found -<nly such works concern¬
ing themselves with sea water from tho aspect of a son
wa.tor drinking cure, ncaely, with the eff^ot of diluted
boo w"ter. In Germany up until thnt time, the question of
undiluted sea w"tcr and not bc.n dealt with. Tho work of
Fall, ultaent, and Cawr.dy, who wore British, came to my
knowledco also In tho course of this war studied the #
introduction of sea wat r into the oudy tnruu B h the roctum;
tek ng thdlr cure from an old rumor that applying tne sea
water In this way the body would absorb only the water, but
n.t the salt. Later I read to my reassurance In English
‘.ubl loot Ions that tnls had not boon a. negligence on my part


Court 1

Juno o-Iv-12—s-HO-30'' rd-Brown.


but thr.t -t that time no work, in tr.ls dlrcctl n had
boon done.

4. In ;hls connection, Ar. President, I should like
to ut In *t few documents,one of then is an affidavit of o
physician Dr. Ortho*.r« document book I, pa^e 92, document
Ho. 23; this will oe exhibit Ho. 9. I shall rer.d only very
brief passages frvn this document. Cn the eeoond peed,
at :he too 1. e. pa.:e 93 nnd at th3 bottom of the ,>' a c:

"In any c-eo, I know very well that he used *"ic dwj or
Strou weeks he s-sent w-itlnj. in Berlin for zealously insult-
in-.. who libraries in order to ^-ther still more accurate
knowledge re a ~rdin_ the pertinent questions. I recall
•; is sc. well, because I was then detached to tno forensic
Institute in Berlin, end procured from ay chief at that
tlm the ocrmleel n for him to uso <ur library. But he
also often consulted clinics and other institutes for the
sane pur>oeo, though he, at that tine still hoped that he
could -et away from that o88i e nmwnt. B

.Then I should like to read from the top of the samo
pc^o:

■3. quite frrnkly told me hie point of view, that he
not ,nly tn u.ht such experiments unsjlt'>ble in a conoon-
tratlon com out particularly also nad strong weighty
doubts, though he hod been assured that only volunteers
would bo used. 3ut hj, wno on principle woe against
concentration c-r:e nevertheless wanted to hnv. not-iln* to
di with them.•

THE PRESIDENT: Hov t you finished readin. from that
document?

DR. STEIKB^'JER: Yes.

THE PRESIDENT: The court will now be in recess until
1:30. (’Thereupon a recess wrs tekqn until 133C hours.)

SW5


Csurt So. 1

6 Jus 47-A-13-1-JW-Jo b ter (Ciberall)


A?ti?5CC3 SSSSICS

(The hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 6 June 1947.)
TH5 KIBSHAL: The Tribunal le again in eeeelon.


VILHxXK BIIGLSCSCK - 3eeu=ed
DIEiCT IXAMIHAT10S (Continued)

ST SB. STilSSAUS (Couseel for tho defendant Beiglboedc):

Q, kit&eu, laet ve dlecueeed that In American literature very
little was contained ebout nnking eea water potable —

Concerning this chapter, I should like to eubrslt Document Nunber
21, I'hiblt Susber 10, pegee 73 to 89. That le a scientific study by a
Mr. Label1 who is a aenber of the British hedlcal Ecsoorch Council. Ho
vroto a study concerning reaction sfter drinking snail ouantitlos of
soa vrtor.

A. first, I should not like to read anything froa this docuncnt


but I shall refer to it later. I should like to deal with another
cuostioc. In this study it is vory clerrly orprossed that uo to tho
yoar 1944 ir. nedical litcrnturo nothing was systonaticolly known ebout
the results, the reaction of sea wr.tor.

Q, air.ee you oentloned this, I should like to cuallfy that. It


can bo found on page 73. There it soys, "During tho last yoar work
has boon carried cut in the laboratory, for the Hodlcal Keeearch
Council's committee on tho care of shipwrecked personnel (KP.C Vnr
Mcaorandua So. 8), on the phyrtology of subjocts receiving the saao
food and water as shipwrecked non in lifeboats."

Cn page 13 - in ny document book on page e5 - Leboll oays - and
unf ortukkt^s^I cannot bring his here because he hnpnons to be in
Africa nov^vjtf^^beria - he says:

"So referCdpLs heve been found in the litereturo to the uhytlolo-
gicnl effects of /drinking sea vr.ter but the effect of rectal instilla¬
tion has been ©*e=ined in eoae detail. Ixoerinents have been reported
VToj-j AXt^ann, and Kondi (1942) on this subject, and 3radish and hie
colleagues (1942) followed the effect of instillation of sea wator not

9696


Court 3o. 1

6 Jus 4?-A-13-2-iHA-Toeter (Uiborall)


o=Iy Into the rectus but also up into the colon."

To elucidate thle, I should like to say that rectus 1* the anus
and colon le the wider part of the anus.

To return to our experiments, you described that icnadlately after
being Informed about the order you ashed not to be sent to a concen¬
tration camp In order to carry out these experiments there. Vfcy ve re
you so much against It, carrying out these experlnents thoreT

A. I had not so such an objection to curry out the experiments but
I was against tho feet tlrt these excorlnents should bo crrrlod out In
a concentration camp. If these exocrlments had bccoco necessary, I
vented to carry than out In a hospltel or In a clinic.

Did you know about theso conditions In concentration cicps so
that you wsro against thon?

A. I did not know any no re about concentration camps nt that tlno
than that they existed, that It v«i* an Institution whore political and
criminal prisonero vers kept. As to vhat actually occurred behind that
barbod wire enclosure, tfcrt I only rood after the wrr In tho nowsnnooro
and tho roal Insight I gclnsd only through this trial. Tou think It It
ridiculous that I say that, and incredlblo, but although I nysolf worked
at the time In a concentration camp it was also under thocs circua-
ttencos that Z had no opportunity of any kind to look behind tho ocono.
Tho objections I hrd at that time against the concentration can© was
based upon a fooling of sor.c sort which was causod prlrarily by tho
fact that It %rs known to me free tho Austrian cross before tho Anschluss
that strict rules end regulations apparently did not exist for that
institution.

In tho Austrian newspeoers at that time I could froeuentl^ read
that tho treatment of inmates was bod. Ccceslcnrlly there wore rocerts
about casualitlot that had occurred, end one said nftorvrxds that these
peoplo had been shot Alio trying to escape. Cf course, thooe were
newspaper reports end nobody, not exes in Austria, hod an opportunity
to make sure whether they were correct. Added to that wrs the fact that


Court So. 1

6 Jus 47-A-13-3-IE4-yotter (Ulbcrall)

grti nelly the novo stopped in the Austrian press. The Austrian nevs-
pepers gradually took up a nore defensive ooeition in their propaganda
end in 19M, after the Anschluss had been effected, all nevs about con¬
centration carps ceased to be published and Whatever had been rerorted
in Austrian nevspaoers vee described as an invention and ralicioua
cropagande. ,


S696


Court 1

June 6-«-14-l-HD-3eard-Uberall.


Then in 1341 I became a s-.ldler. Most of the tine I wt.b at
the front for o long tine, a lunger period in Russia; there
of course, one did not hear anything at ell about such
natters opart from the fact that our duties os physicians
consumed so ouoh of our time, that beyond that we hardly had
any jy? rtunity to think about anything else.

Q. Kr. President, In connection with this fact, may
I refer again to t.io affidavit by Dr. Grthner, documont
booh I, page 94, on the bottom of the page. Dr. Grthner
says:

■If I said that 3elgLboock objected on principle to the
soloc:ion of a concentration camp as site for tho experiments,
thon it Is to bu attributed to the fret that ho Is an
ldocllat throughout, and, on his port, would have rejooted
every forcible method rnd every arbitrary ootion. Especially
characteristic of this scorns to bo tho fact that he told
no of oxcmplos, with which irresponsible 'generosity' tho
detention lr. tho oonoontrntlon camp wne ordered. I rooall
that ho particularly referred to tho medical studonts who
woro allocated as prisoners to him for assistance. u

Since I h~vo Just mentioned the word "prlsonor" I should
llko to osk you, witness, wne It your opinion that no experi¬
ments should bo made on prisoners?

A. That Is a question which Is Very hard to answer,
and a question vnlch v s also discussed time and again by
ay teachers. Cf c urse, from medical literature I know
that such exoerlaonts on Inmates wero frequently made. I
know, of course, the world famous Plague experiments, the
fan us Loper experiments by *rnlng; and from dealing with
vitamin research, I knew of experiments with 3erl-berl nnd
Pellagra; and I knew froa dealing with liver Path logy,
llv.r research, that in the year 1935, eleven criminals who

6699


*4 0


I

' urt 1

une e-A-14-2-HD-3derd-Cberoll.

had bo jn sentenced to death were used for experiments In
order t- test the reaction of a Llv~r poison.

In Vienna vs vero also somewhat opposed to experiments
with prisoners. I roaemb.r lr. tolhlns, that my teaohor
Xos-rro , also violently rejected that idea. On the other
-end, no has t admit, of course, that certain problems of
medicine which are of utDost importance under certain
o ire instance a require *r. experiment on human beings, whloh
of course, entails a &ront rlsh.

I believe, therefore, thnt it is extremely difficult
to obtain ra .it;lt.de here yhlch would be decisive, and
aonca thor- re no regulations by law, it la probably true
that the research m-rn who, with the aut-orlzatlvii .ranted
him by the leodorsr.lo of eteto, is glv^n th^ possibility,
to coho auen experiments, nos to do that on hla own
res .onslbillty, and to decide on his own now fnr tr.ls wr.s
oom.atlble with ftla et:.loni attitude *a o physician. I,
on my mart, was oioosed to it in my lnn*r moat footing,
rtnd the attempt to, 3 vt eway from these oxo-rlaonts was mr«e
by me, brsed on sy lnnwrmost fc.lln^s '•grlnst it, and I
ocrtainly suff.rod when I realized that wna not oselblo
for me to do. =ut, I received absolute assurance that
the experiment exclusively would be made on volunteer
subjects, and since, on the whole, these were experiments,
which, if conducted correctly would not cnt -11 d-n^cr of
Ilf 3 -nd that together wit.: the as-urar.ee th~t I would got
vr.l.atary subjects, a ve me the pr.—requisite that ^ did
not refuse to carr out cn orv.cr, an order which I could
only lv*ve refused in e manner which w.--Id hvvo t..o most
serious consequences for myself and my family.

Let us deal further with thl questlbn of voluntary
subjects. was it that t:ld you tn-t these suejocts were

7700


Court 1

Juno 6-*—14-3-HD-3eard-Uberall.


all volunteers?

That I would c et vol-nteere for these experiments,
that I vr.s told on the occasion of the first conference
with Dr. Becker-/reyseng. He nssured me of that. In order
t. ' vc ms furth-r assurance on that point, immediately after
arriving at Oaohau I ashed whether those conditions would he
ho;-t. Dr. Slce^ener, at that ties, before witnesses,,
assured mo tr.at volant: ry subjects would bo used for oo
ex.ori^ente. Vhen I rc-.orted to the adjutant of the comp
o mmrndont, I raised t..e question "^aln and I had him
”3euro no als’ once uoro that there w-^uld be voluntary
a bjects. -then the experimental subjects arrived at
Daohr.u o Sturabannfuehror of the 33 arrived to 0 other with
then, who a>iarontly had accompanied that transport. I
ashed aim a^nln If tr.oee people volunteered, ho ovnflrnud
th t n c aln t <j mo. Ho also stated that certain advantu^os
had bo~n prunlsed tnom, and wnon-tnla Sturobannfuohror
left 2 { sicd ny experimental subjects whether It w:s truo
Ct 5 c. ey hud volunteered, and tnoy affirmed that. At
that' time I had no reason at all to doubt that this lnfor-
matl n wrs accurate. Superiors of Jy office of the 63,
and t..c experimental subjects, tnonselvos, oonfiraod it
and I cannot see wnct elee I should hove done In oi'dor to
ucko more cortain at ut that fact. It bucnno quite obvious
t'. no that now In the year 1947, a statement on a; port,
ihr.t .no had v lunt-ry subjects sounds entirely different

that I hod to understand It In 194 . I wrs never accustomed

•

to :o t Id by ?r./ officers of the armed forces of any
branon of the armed forces, upon c question whlcn I had
put to hln, anythin- which was not rocordlng tc f-cts.


6701


6 June V7-*-i£-15-l-C=rk (Olberell)

C jl Fc. 1

-t cr.y ri-'.e cm ftr cm 1 res ersetrrei I bed reeasc tc be ao r.vl need,
cbeolutely <r nvlnccd, end I -cs convinced thtt I fcrd vclurtory sub¬
jects in front of roe. »pcrt frm fchet it did cot seen incredible or
icprcbrbla to rx et ell tfcct jrzebody oould volunteer for cn expcrinor.t
of the kind es I intoeded to'cerry out if on the otbxr her.d cer^.in
tdver.tigcs rxre offered. a* try rf.te it is Quite clctr tc no thrt
even scldlcracf *hc 'mod forces would here volunteered in order to
gcln certtin cdvtr.tegca. Beyond thtt, of course, I rcillzcd thrt one
could ret txkc e cr^ rison hero tut if the soldiers volunteered fr
Dr. iJirir.y, they ccr*r inly did cot do t»/.t beetuso in the scrvico of
scicnoe they ir.tendod to rtke cort'ln pcracnel sacrifices. They did
it reecusc they obt« ‘.r.cd other cdvtrtrgcs ir. c'chtngo. *nd furfcla rnora,
they did it fcectuse t private first class, If he is raked by rn -berat,
■do you vr.nt to teke pert in er. cxpcrlrcnt for -e*. he ccrtr inly till
r-nsu«.r yea sir. Th* t, of ooursc, is tc srnc extent c United volunteer,
end th» t t is feet of i relatively United nr.rncr of volunteering
else cpplltd to the nris-r. ra I hnS nr drabt. Thtt precisely ms tho
roe son why I did not rent to hevo r ry prisoners rs exjxrinontcl sub¬
jects.

f .» -itr.css, c^ro you told,were y-u ordered to fir.d'ut »b~ut th't et
Deoheu?

*. I did net rccoivo cry specific order of thet kind, th? t probebly
cr.n been seen ft*c= the cr.tiro discussion with Dr. Beckcr-Frtyseng. I
hed 6 dcfir.lt o irpressi-r. tfcit ho Iso vta convinced f t tho or per-
inontel subjects hed volur.t-.ervd for t>o experiments. I -;do thcao
inquiries ir. Dcchcu or. zy cwr beetuso it s.czed to nc to be c rv *Mt of
course end for rctsons which : re to be understood t the besis of t*»
exp lent t ions I hrve given Just before,

*i. Die you hevc influence et til in the solcotion of tho piece where
the experiments cere to teke pi- cc?

Sc, ir. no zcnrxr t rll. I h? vc a tried clrccdy ftt ev rything
concerning thcao experiments, everything drvn tc the list det: il of

I


8702


i Juno *7—a.-If-2-O-ffk CTSbemll)
Crurt :*o. 1


their execution, wos stlpuli*td before I *«s ever ordered tc take pert \
in then*

•* Dld Torn have influence in the selection of the experiments!

subjects!

"• » 1 wtfl *=13 tt the medical ?napcctircte thrt r.rrtnge-cr.ta h'd

bees =/de with the iS end that the S5 in tccordrr.cc with thcao crrtngc-
sxnta would supply the oxpcriaentcl aubjeeta. I did rot hr re to worry
cb:ut thtt.

* v ° u order to find out rherc the exreriaoctcl aubjeeta

ccae from end wbtt the apeelfic circunatcr.cc a erd conditions rere?

Wo, that tlso wea neither e deoiaior. thrt I could here a o, nor
did tho Luftwaffe*

D * d y before tfc. t gypsies htd been u-odf
a, rv 0 feet that gypsies were crnlrg I only found out in 2 re he u by
the Cc-jp 0-^;, rdor.

-ho vero thcao gypsicef

a. They stro aoatly helf gypay people who hxd gypsy bl:~d but were
not erectly vh. t one would expect r. gypay tc lock llko, c reel Ikingir-
ien gypay, aty for inatcnco. They wero r.ot puro gypsies. ^>c os lor of
the inalgnic they hed to uccr ’u black .The Stunfeconfuehrcr who
brought thee, sold thet they were csoolal elements end rddrd thtt for
veri-ua offonsea they ked previous criair.el rooerda. ^croupon I raked
hia for whet kind of effeaaca, cr.d he acid their records htd not been
for.:erded, but I could rely upon It, erd ;n thet occ»-alcn he- dao t-ld
no bcceuao I htd geined tho iepresti on thr-t possibly t;* fee t of
thclr deacon t uls the ccuae for their err cat end their irepria.-nnent,
he to Id mo thtt gypsies vert no acre kept lr the eo ncer.tr: tl on cess 0
' c recount of their dercort or belonging t- thrt rt.ee tv. t htd been
the ceac prtrisualy, end then thoy rere ret ring c trorn sleeve insignia,
end thet only ties® were still Interned who rere put in tho ettegory of
en csccitl end cllegcdly cene free such fcrllies. I ah-old, » ref ore,


8703


6 June &7--S - -I5-3C' c fc ( Uibcrell)
Court re, 1


llko to etherize ihi* I hrd no p.-ssibility to check on their records
and I htd relied upon *-k' v that -cn hts toldro. I had elso received
the esaig na ent or rather the cxclenrti n ef »hc instruct!-ns th:t I
•eta r.'t to interest aysclf into any ether pr.blaroa -f the ccrcontri *ion
coops that h d nothing to do with the carrying -f the experiments
and the feet that ny own interests were in th;t direction, end tho
assignment nedo it nuoh c'sier for ne tfc't I had to worry ab-ut
c'thing else thee ny ctocriacntcl place. I, *kcrcf“ro, do not fed
thet I as rcs-cnslblt either for tho selection of the nit co where
the experinonts rcro carried rut nor f-r tho solecticn of those
pcrs'ns who were used.

m r. .resident, in tVia ccmeetlm I should like to refer to tho
document produced by the .'rcecoution, Wo. 179. fr-o the act rx t.er
dooincr.t book No. 5, rfccro Si* Gruppcnfuchrcr Neber stakes spccif-
loclly about the cxptriraortj.l subjects, th/t aw: old gypsies, which
is very importer t for us, had tc be healthy. These two terns I should
liko to derive from thi » d:«uncnt — asocial end heclthyj th-t the
eocoiels actually had to *c'r e black triangle cr.d rot o brown nno.

-ith the permission ef the irrsccutor, I should like to show to tho
Court free the Kogen Bock, — I could not have photostats node, bcccuao
:f crurso tho so colors would sot ceec out, — but If the court desires
to l ok at it it can be soon that thcro is e difference beacon the
brown triangle frr gypsies end *ho bltok triangle for an asocial.
Unfortunately , I here only one eooy. Therefore, I eannot subrite
it in eridence, but only shew it frr illustration purposes.

TKS uR2ilDlNh, i n this iretenoo if defense counsel naild prepare
a paper containing these triangles end simply describe the colors,
write In the colors, tho freo first, red with F end rod with S and
next the Jewish sign, e yellow trienglc with red *rienglc reversed
oror it, just describe thee in color.

yn. HuJCYt May I ask defonac counsel uhr.k Ms purp sa is in lr>-r-d-
ucing these v rirus *r‘angler. It scans to ne they were elabori tcly

lTO


6 June 47-—S -15-4-C^lc(01berell)
Ccurt Ifc. 1


described by tj» tcatiixay of Kbgcn whoa he we* boro or. the witness
■teed.

- BISECTi Counsel chained that he desired to cell the cttentlon
of the Tribunal tc the dlffcrerce between the br-tr. cnJ block end the
Triburxl obserredthe difference in color.

ZB. a»Ur®«31R| !*£y i elucidate briefly upon the objection redo by
the prosecutor. My client is eherged with hewing emitted crirocs rgeinat
hurxnlty. Control Counoll Lew No. 10 unfortunately does net contain
e definition of crises against hurunity. It acess there is elso little
dorwatio cad foreign, pcrtlculcrly American, literature c neerning the
tern •crises egeinst hurrr.lty" cr *het ccn bs found, but it hes to
be persecution (geinst pcoplo for politiccl or redd reasons. Thorc-
foro, I went tc say thet re ere r.ot dcr-ling with rfoitl persecution,
tut theso ere peoplo who fer other reeeone here been in tho concen¬
tration oespe, erd therefore waild here tho insignia of theso persec¬
uted for roes:ns of their rccc, but r.ot of those who rro persecuted
beoeusc they woro e-neldercd cscoicl* I will ropeet thet lr ter* I
Juat went to submit it to the C-urt now to support whet I heve
arid.

THE i rtSEETi -tuld counsel explain to »hc 'Vi bun cl your ur«5ar-
stending fotha word ■csccicl.* 1‘rccosd, c- ur.aol . —

CR. SrziNBmJcRi 'Asocial* la c terr., the concept of which la very
well known even in the Unitod Stctes, porticul rly in the Uni tod
Stctea end thet egreca ooeplctoly with -ur ooncopt 13 far ra I know
It fr.'n Europeen literature. The oo*hcd applied la theThird Reich, of
course, went ruch furt: or in ooplylng thet tern 'asocial' than ro used
to do it. I vnr.t to put the same question to =y ollent, sinco he ccn
answer it tr-c the nsdiocl point of view, but since the Crurt asked
re about it, I went to state frankly cndoponly that in the Third
Reich , of cour3e. thr t terr. was applied In the nuch wider sense then
we know it fT's the metriccn erd French lav. Indicer.tally I heve here
tho Austrian bock about ocncer.trction camps which I really originally


6705


6 June 47 -^--15-5-Cc-k (Uibcrcll)

C :*_rt No. 1

lctooded to submit but I did not rent to dreg the nc=e cf Christ
Into these proceedings. Tv e book res rrittcn by o Ceti'llc I'ritst
sho w ta here in the cor.centrcti:» camp Buchenwcld end todcy he is
e rycr e.fc Salzburg. -but the *aocitls at Buchenrcld those tsocicls
who -ore my subject persons he says, the rest of theta were mixed from
the h»micas proper up to the dangerous vegrant. They v or 0 the blrck
trlrngle of an cscclcl. The numerous Jcrs were marked by the yelloc
Deris star with differences *xde between political and asocial in¬
mates.* That can also be seen in fact frnc the color scheme cf
Kogan's book wh ro he also had eddod the Star of David to the Jewish
asocial insignia.

-ith the emission cf the Court I should like to tsk my defend¬
ant, now would you like tc answer the question from your point of

view.

T15. ..iSIDE.Ti Before inquiring of the witness as to whrt his idea
is cf the meaning cf the word 'asocial* the TVibuntl would be vary
glad if you weld explain your legalistic idee of the nerd "asocial*.

EP. Sti:'S.Uini ~e designated as asocial, the person who consciously
co-nits cots ageinst human society and by theso acts is asocial,
an enemy to occioty, that is tbs ocnccpt vro here. I bcliero in
English it can be expressed by the terms, a-soelcl is cn enemy of
sccioty.

T!E iRiSIDS.T: You can proceed with the exerdnetix.

TJEGE 3EEar*Gi Under your view cf ►he natter, is it your view that
simply one isclctcd act of criminality might tend to bring a main
into the cctcgory of rsocicl or do you understand by that classif¬
ication that type of individual or classof individuals who constantly

s

end persistently ere guilty of ar.ti-s*cial c-nduct?


8706


Court 1

Juno 6-j*-16-l-KD-Moehan-Uberall.

DR. 3T£IH3/iU£R: Your Honor, If I cry bo permitted to
tell you my opinion without that ay college on tho other
aide Mr. Hardy will use It against ae, I wish to any that I
personally at cf the opinion that one offense never makes
any person asocial, one violation of the law, but that part¬
icularly in the caaa of gypsies we are ?ble to soke tho
observation v-ry frequently, that we are confronted thora
with real aaoclals; that Is with people who roaont with oil
force to bo Included In tho normal process of work.

In studying the problca of the gypsies I cam© upon
a book which revers to that quality that asocial quality
and I am "lac quoting fr>s that book In my dooucont book.

It oxplnlnt to what extent tho gypsies themeolvcs hnvo
contributed to term, that oonqopt of the gypsy pln 0 uo.

It is o book published by tho Bavarian Government In 1905
and a similar book existed in Vienna. It Is a hand book
for tho use of the police force in both oountrlos in order
to ootobllsh the oltltonshlp, nationality, and family
origin of the gypsies. Later I shall refer to that
quootlon again. It Is Important because 3ol 0 lboock is
not only charged with crimes against humanity, but also
simultaneously for th>- same acts ho Is cnargod with w r
crimes and war crimes, in my opinion, can only be oomuittud
against allied nationals. Fr a that bjok, which I quoted
In my document book, I should like t' .rove that It was
just a asocial feature of tr.e gypsies that at ell tlmos
tnoy deny th-;lr nationality, they dony their desoent tyid
Just wander around.

I an submitting this ns my opinion, however, not as
the o lnl^n of 3elglboeck, who might not have the same, in
order to ovoid any undue conclusl n on the part of *Hr.

Hardy. I repeat, however, that the method of concentration

6707


Court 1

June a-16-2-HD-jiaehan-U'oarall.


car-' administrations to consider people who were late for
two days or three days, to consider these asccials, to
dent unco then and to send then into concentration comps
Chat I consider a uroat injustice.

Do you h-ve that pas?a 6 o in the hook?

Hr. President, for that curnoee I refer to A cuaent
bok 2 , p‘ 5 e 105, document 28 , which I should like to
eu&blt to the court cs exhibit 11. The original; v; -lch
belongs tv the University of ^rl-n«.on, rnd whloh I have
6 return, I hove brought h-re. The ooy.y is certified by
no and is n ncourr.te copy of the origin*! of this document,

I should like tv olnt out thrt I hov~ copied .on..o 5
• ioh lndlo~tos where the 0 ; teles ooae froa, sec ndly, tnelr
csooinl activities, wnicn rrve been terned the "Plo.Uv of
c .e Gr'Bios 0 and thrt w. lch seeaa t me the coat Important
and which I intend to \-ead namely on 3?,o 2 the first and

soo nd ?cr = rc;hs:

"The greatest difficulty arises in sec-rln^ o cenous
.f gypsies. The majority of then cakv every effort to
obeoure their identity thrvU^h false statements or thr u,.n

r .retenco ,t ignorance.

"The number of false census stntea-nts and of/icial
certificates or. the r. rlsr. rc.istcr of births and doaths,

-it do by thw 3 y".eiee, is v.ry extensive."

>?.. : noy I lnqulr. of C.uncel by introduoln-

“-•is d cun nt ?nd by nis statement he intends to a-cv the

Tribunal thrt the word "ravels!" in this connection aeons

e

-rely thrt 2 ore n n^y.oo as^i"! 1 : he is r -- ey?

DR. 57SIK3«jER: Thrt would be absolutely v-ron a t-. be
. that opinion. I only ary aers,ns who were supplied for
the -v ori;,nt- had riot beer, or'.a ht t the concentration
c-nrs for rrciol reasons, but for reas ns of bo in consider_d


C708


Court 1

June 6-»-15-5-har.-Jb.roll.

-social, because ns the witness Dorn said yest.-rday and this
zornln. slr.ee 13*2 there wore no Gypsies -.ersecuted on raclc.l
rounds Tor the it 1c reason th~c German laws ns I shall
describe In _ro-t detail In ay trial brief, the gypsies nro
mentioned only twice In the lav for the protection of the
Govern rice. In 1942 Hi--lor who was very .yeticnlly inclined
• s -"do to believe that the gy-alea wore really the original
typo of the Indo-ierar.ns, that they v.ere decendants of the
original Indo-CK.re?ne and ?ro the iurc Indo-Jv.rfcr.n3 In
Eur-oo and they wer. cr.eref .ro no lon..r sent to o ncontrn-
tion c-c a, for rooicl reoson9. Is that sufficient, hr.
Prosecutor?

HR. H-JU)Y: On that b ale, I auat object to the dooucont
as join, nbs lucely lnarturl"l to this case.

7} is PRESIDE: - ?: The objection la 'Vwrruled, the doounent
will be admitted.

JUDGE SE3RIXG: Dr. stelnb"ucr, I unlerst"hd also that
oner lly t ..re w.-uld bo included vlt.'ln your concept of
'soolrls; r.^ucs, v^obonds, Idlers, drifters, wanderers,
and lorfera who wander ab ut the c entry alio with no
a • icrent hone, resoct-blo voonClon or visible s. uroos of
11 elyhood; Is that the central concept?

DR. 5T£I!’3aU£R: Veil, that w-uld nean a t narrow
Int r retnti.n. always, os-eclally today, when th.ro aro
nilll ns of ..usen 'eelhjS vno h"vc lost their hoses and
have wander around, that Is not s-f lclent for v-. va.icy.

*’e in «ustrla prosecute only those wno rru nntl-soolrl, the
plrp for instance. He hrs his nous.., llve6 well and Is
still asocial.

THE ?AE5IDEHT: Co-nsel nay prooeed.


•709


Court 1

Juno 6-A-16-4-HD-Meehcn-Uborall.

3Y DR. 8TEIK3-UER:

Q. VItnose, I should like to ask you what you, as a
phyelolon, seen by or would understand by the torn "asocial"?


£710


*


Court So. 1

6 Jus 47-vL-17-i-^3t-?ri3cau (Ui'oerell)

A. At far at I hav« noticed as a laynan in legal natters, thoro is
no absolute legal definition for the tern of an "asocial eienent", red
if tfcia vas done around the conference teble then, of course, vc vho are
scientists cennot be biased if ve havo even less definite interoretatione
or concepts of thet tern.

In our books on psychiatry vhere vc discuss such natters the chapter
on tho ouostion of "asocial' and "entl-social" eleccnts is one of thoso
nost difficult to deal with. Speaking fron the nodical point of view,
the torn "asocial" vould cover a porson vho in cost cases has an inborn,
sonotinos hero dltary defect of his ethical instincts; that is, a typo
vho not by reasoning but on the basis of instinct cannot abido by
prevailing rules and lavs of society.

furthermore, those people, of c^xrsc, do not liko to vork, aleo
ono of tho rocuirenente of hunan society, and froc thoso tvo roots for
the individurl there derives a vicious cycle. The nore crininal ho
bocoaos, in tho widest ncaning of tho word, tho noro ho cocos in conflict
vith hunar. society, so society, of course, tries to countoract that.

Eo considers this to be rn injustice bccauso ho thinks that the donando
of socioty axo unjust and inapplicable. Thcrcforo, ho considers hinself
persecuted although innocent end continues to coruit further violations
against lavs and regulations and that brings about tho tern of the
"asocial" and "anti-social" as a sociclogic Urn rather than a -.odicol
ono. Tho physician is only interested in thet cortein inn.r defect, tho
lrck of a natural, healthy sense of ethics and tho fact that in neny
cases this is hereditary; ,-od as birds of a ferther flock together and
as Just the fact of vagrancy - that is the rosontnent against settling
dovn, to the sar.c extent as rosentisnt '■gainst every typo of ccnuulelon -

m

belongs into that picture, it hapsens frequently that tvo asoclals got
carried. Zvcn nore frecuontly they didn't get carried but they have
children together and that tri^s it about that asocld families, entire
r.BJcial families, coco into existence and on these fpcilies studies have
been c. dc, especially in the united States, where as far as I know these


£711


Court Jo. 1

6 Jus «7-A-17-3-*3i-?ri=eeu (Sibera11)


studies here becooe very fen*is, and In these families one ear. find tho
entire scale of examples which vc considered covered by the terr. "asocial".
Chase fasilies distinguish thersclvcs in soce cases only by hating to
vortc. Other nenbers of the fanily axe habitual thioves. A third cate¬
gory again nay be vagrants. The fourth type nay bo real criminals all
the way to tho habitual criminal. Anong the faoale ner.bers of these
fanllics prostitution is extremely widespread.

All that epoorently cooes frx: sane psychological aberration which
•ears to be the clue to the reason why theso Inclinations show to a dif¬
ferent extent In various families. Generally, recontn.ent Of every hind
of authority is apparent. There rro :-»ny ar.ing then who nay have other
difoctc of the Intellect but also racy who, apart fron an othicrl defect,
hsvo a great-r or high dogree of intelligence.

As far as I know - and X only know it fror. occasional reading of
nedicsl studi-'s - in Gor acy especially the cuettiin of horedity of
such Instincts wrs greatly ocpha.slsod, purely fror. tho r.edical point of
view, but ho*- the lvga.l ferr. *r.s found that, of courte, I could not say.

0- Vitnoss, now wo can go on free the subject and I ask you after
you receive! that order to carry out sea water ovoori ents you wont to
Tachau*.

a. Tos. * hen those exocri-.onts woro supposed to start, I w„ 0
ordorod to go to Tachau and install the laboratory thorc for the o^orl-
••.entn. Criginolly I had boen pronisod that that would be necessary only
ti e very snail extent because et Dachau there w c s an excellent and vory
extencivu laboratory available. In fact, I did not find ary thing thoro
v*ich I could have used for that ourp-so and piece by niece, laboriously,

I had to carry everything together. That vp 8 particularly difficult at
that tine because .Munich, ‘dierc it night fcav c been possible to b rrow
eouiorent, wr B just at that tins the subject of heavy r ir raids rnd frn
that r-.oking her.p of rubble one could not get anything.

5. Vitnoee, what order did you get for the purpose of c:Trying cut
the axporir.^nte?

-"712


Court So. 1

6 .Tun 47-£-17-2-ZE:—?rineeu (Vartenberg)


A. -ha order said that these experiments were to be carried out
vith the instructions that four different group* were to bo included in
tho experiment: one grrnp vfco vert supposed to be eterved tad suffor
frs. thirst, another group vho received only eea w ft ter, end another
grAip wfc j were supposed to drink *ep water together with tho Serkn
preparation - that 1 *. vtre given five hundred th-usend cubic ccr.ti-
aetor* each bccrus. in the cae of all of these groans one would have
to count cn a loss of water end all of the would be subjected to con¬
ditions of nourishment which were unusual, s >r tho purposo of being
ablo to decide h w much water is lost, a grouo would have to bo included
also in tho wxocrimccts ~ho received a nomal mount of lleuld but who
rocoivod tho sp.:o solid food as the other groure, and, in regard to this
gr Juo which was /rlginally supposed to get ordinary drinking wr-tor,
they lrtor received tho Seha.cfor wrtor in order by that r.erns to
assuro oncsolf -ncc r.;ain that even in the orr.cticrl use of this water
no cfcx nges of any kind became epurront.

7urthem«ro, as I havo a.lr*rd;’ stated, I wrs instructed oxjctly
vhat observations were to be cade during those experiments and this
was a rather extensive progran %4:lch gave us a. groat deal of v'-rk for
that period of tin*. Very oxtenslvs blood analyses were undortrken,
not In rogrrd t, tho amount >t tho blo:d tut to deter ino the different
constituents of tho blood rnd vory exact urinelysos were renulrcd oo
that wo could cake sure, to a vory large extent, vhr.t effect the charge
-f tho water contents in the body would bring about. That is whet I
was told. I did n-i, h/waver, the discussions of the ISth axd 20th
which fctve ployed such pn important role here but I knew nly the con¬
ference -f the 25th end only to the extent tc which I wrs cncerncd

r

with it; nr;;oly, first, the unfortunate choice to c'nfirn no as being
in chrrge of the experiments pnd, secondly, the regulations which wore
edited there for the executi n -f the experiments.

The purpose of the experiments was es follow*: first, I w\s sh'wn


*'713


Court So. 1

6 Jus 47-A-17-4-iEh-?ri=eeu (Vertenberg)


exrxrinents carried on so fax by Schaefer pnd Sir ary and I eleo vat
given an opportunity to study the records of their croerinents. It wne
pointed nit to ns ercressly that Sirary's sxoerinsnts vere inadacuato
f x the reasons vhich I .have alrerdy neationed in pert end that they
vere of the opinion that they vere in no vay sufficient to urovc tho
prectical suitability of the Berk* aeth*. Above all this was so for
the reason that Sirany only cerr.cd on the eroerlnent f<*r four days and
the Luftwaffe wanted to have e nctfcod which c -uld bo used and would bo
found valuablo, especially if sea distress lasted for a longor ooriod.


em


I


6 Jir>A-I2—l9-l-3aard (Int. Hartenborg)

Court Sc. I.

F:r tlir.t reason only such a ;»thod cculc oc introduced, could ba con¬
sidered for introduction. At that tiro, 12 days were requested as
the nininui rocuiroaent to prove the value of such a nethod for tho
reason that at that tirx several cases of sea distre® bocano known
who w_ro saved after 12 days. So that I shall not be nisui.dorstood,
tho roquiresent was that the notiurd to bo introduced could bo taken
fer 12 consocutivo days without homing, damaging, the health of tho
person, ihe conditions of tho oxporirout ;»ro, as far as poseiblc, to
bo aado the sawe as threo existing in soa distress, but only in res¬
pect to the -mount of water and foodj on tho cthor hand, everything
olao that is at a disadvantage during sea dietrose, that is tho in¬
fluence of tho client*, cold, boat, changos in the woather, otc., tho
*iind which lets the salt of sea water, .affect tho person by forming a
crust on tho sirinj tho inability to slo-p in tho rescue boat, all
the so conditions of courso woro to provail during tho oxjvrinont:. I
have discussed thoso questions with EwCkor-Froysong, thoco questions
which vuru of importance f or ay experiments. Ho alec discussod tho
theoretical basis. Ko called to ;jy attontion spocifically tho stato-
cont of Schaaf-r which were given in sotao kind of a report, which was
available in a typowriton cor, and also ho pointed out to no that
Scha-for had made calculations about c Certain na-'unt of soa water
th“t could bo toloratvd for 12 dayc, but, of course, not without
causing changos in tho water oalarco. Tho quostion was not whothor
smaller aucunt f sia wat_r could bo given for c longer poriod of
tine, and -hothor with about 50C cubic contiaotors of son water, ono
could liv- fer a certain period of tine. Our aviators, at that time,
vuro provided with a very snail anoint of water supply which 3nst~d
f or only t:.*o days. If now, one of then was out for eight or ten days
core, drinking snail amounts of s-a wnt-r against his thirst, ho had
thun, of ccure-, tho advantage not to jnd.ang.-r his health s,ri usly,

I

.ad h. c.uld survive at sea. The as-unptirn, f course, was also at
that tir.u that tu Schaefer hr-..-rations would not be introduced.


-715


6 Jua-4-!E-l9-2-£eord (Int. VabtoEfcarg)

Court Ho. I.

TToll, he told ne that this naxiroxu limit of 12 days was a dcsir.a'olo
air. in sons fom or another, but it should net bo forced and in tho
different experimental groups I should try to approach that dm to tho
extent as I could take the responsibility free the nodical point of
view examining tho persons. Wo thon discussed the queatim where tlio
danger li;it to the less of water begins, whore ncrnally this bordcrlino
is, and where ono could normally assume that life was ondangorod. Tho
period botwcon tho dangerous bcrd.r and tho border endangering lifo
ccr.porjd to tho fortaor loos efwater only tho following conditions changei
originally, only tho free wr.t^r is olimdnr.tod, rhilo during tho period
be two jn ten or twelve per cent and about 22 per cent, tho water fron
tho oolla too, is ollainatcd. In other w rds, the intracellular
wat«.r supply is affected. At tho very beginning cf the diocusei on I
oaphasisud that under rv' conditions would I carry cut experiments
which would LXj-n donogs to the ha~lth or would ondargor tho lift of a
subject; that I »ould refuso to do southing liko that. Aid, Bockor-
Froyssng r.plied Ik edintoly that that was aloo in accordance with his
viows, and, that, of course, d.r.th should havo to bo avoided in any
case, and that the limit should bu sot vhoro no d.ar*ige to tho health
of the subject had to be fearod. 3ut, anyhow, tho experiments would
h-vo to bo carried on so far that thirst reactions woro notic.ablo and
without any doubt -ould ncko it ;x>ssiblo to r.ako o comparison between
tho two groups. As for -si could toko tho responsibility for tSmt
fror. the rodied point of vimw, under the giv.n circumstances, that is
by pr-venting any dor. ago to the torlth of sub joe tc, I was cupposod to
prccood that far. I also discussed with l»iu, discuscod with bin, that,
of course, :a. would have be-n quite clo-rly in our mdnds that thiyit
experiment is not a pleasure, .and that it asks v u ry much fron the 'dll
pov:or of oxpcrirontal subjects if they arc required to thirst for
s_v.ral d-ys. Arid frer. that aoir.t of view, of course, one would have
“O r j r rc t' e a experi _nts as core .act -*d with cotjo unplc.rs.antr.es.' for
the ox'urixmtol subjects, and as a consequence tho oxperinoat -1 subject


6716


6 Jun-A-43-18—3-Board (Int. Tartcnberg)
Court No. I.


had to be volunteers. And, axpcrirxmts on volunteers who made thea-
soIves available for those thirst, oxscrir»nts would, of course. sake it
possiblo to put these high requirements on thin. In order to protect
the experimental subjects in other ways, they had to stay in bed. Thoro
woro two other reasons for this: First, the aviator who is in sea dis¬
tress is “Iso forced to lie desra in the rescue boat; and second, every
covenant that is by walking around, incrcasos tho elimination of water
by the lungs. So, that a lack of aovcaant, tho quiet lying in bod re¬
tains the wator of tho body somewhat core. In otbor words, tho ex¬
ternal conditions were kept in such n way that is, with tho oxception
of hunger and thirst, as far as possible no unpleasantness and no
hunger would result for tho oxporinontal subjocts. Tho nia of tho ox-
porinont was to achieve absolute clarity about tho following question:
First, whothor thirsting or tho drinking of so a water would bo hotter;
whothor tho r.bstinonco fron water or tho drinking of see water would
bo bettor, drinking of a snail * »unt of sea wator; secondly, whothor
tho Borkn preparation contrary to expectations would bring .about an
inprovorunt of tlv to lor ability of sea water; thirdly, whothor tho
Schaofor preparation could be tolor'tod for 12 days without ary danago
to tho body. And, this group of oxporinents was supposed to bo car¬
ried out for 12 conscoutive days if tho obvious conclusions recultod,
i.e. that tho preparation proved to bo hamlcss. On tho occasion tho
metabolism of those suffering from thirst and those who drank sea
water was to be studied for one eight obtain clues whether any changes
take place within tho body, and one would perhaps obtain hints for the
treatment of persons rescued from sea distress. As I have said, this
program of experiments was laid down in the meeting of 25 H~y, 1 re¬
ceived the respective record and asked whether any one of the Wavy, or
of the airforce, Luftwaffe, had found any papers on research work about
sea water which Becker-Freysen- d e ni ed. In nodical literature there
existed nothing but very nebulous reports and opinions, to the effect,
in general, that sea water is dangerous. Nobody concerned hinself with

C717


6 Jur.-A-»3-l3-i;-5eard (Ir.fc, Tf.-rtenberg)
Court Ho, I.


the question of */fcy it rt dangerous in detail, and it was strange that
nobody ever asked wither this was not conditioned by the acount. I
also have to add that in all the report* about cases of sea distress,
it becomes apparent ag-.in and again that usually one only starts to
drink sen water only after one has suffered thirst already for sovoral
days. In other words one expects an organise to tolerate son water,
an organise nhich is under quite different conditions than a healthy
organise. Now it is as foliovsi 7!mt a person who has been suffering
free thirst alrotdy for a few days has already reduced his elininntion
of vrater to a niniaun; if such a person is now expected to drdnk about
one or tno liters of sea water per day, that is a quart of sea water
per day, then this dehydrated body ia forcod to elininnto a r.ultiplicity
of the anount of water which he irould have lost if ho had continuod to
suffor froa thirst.


Court l

June 5—«-15-1 -HiWfe - ban- - a. r t anoa r t .

Since a -.ors n who is suffering fro- tnlrst and sea
'.le-ross usurlly drinks c l“r«e amount cf wat„r, aaon d the
aocfarrer3 the d^n-er of the sea water is ..r.cvn as a degna
:all reports about sea distress wnloh I have f ’end so far,
with v.ry snail exceptions. Indicate that the tokln^ of sea
up t--r occurs in an uncontrolled Benner and this practical
ox;orienco in partio'l^r was avarently the reason why in
the English end ASerlcen papers on the subject studies were
nr.de predominantly on what the effect of sea water is on a
body which hrs boon -ehydrctwd already, while we ashed our¬
selves how developments were wnen fr.n the very betinning one
drinks sea water. Spanking from a nedlcrl joint of view,
t -ro is r difference in principle.

4. Witness, woo had to docldo when the experiments

vroro to be interrupted?

a. This dooiei>nvas of course up to ny modloal
.Xpert Judgment on I con assure you hero that I dleoontln-
u d the experiments in such o way that the oritioal limit
wta not exceeded in any experiment. «s far ns the aubjootive
elements were o-nsldored, I also took then into oonsldora-
tl n, but th-t o-uld t ke mloco according to the nature of
the experiment only to n certain extent, beoause the
C irst was in these oxporlnents a "Conditio sine qua non,"
condition without hloh it could not be carried on. Such
*n ox erlnont could not have boon carried out without
..'.Ting the oxnerinontal subject suffer froa thirst. I
certainly can understand how it feels to suffer froji
t iret and I had node sure what the sensations which ere
caused by t is thirst.

i. With reference to this experiment on y -.rself, I
' v«: already -er.tl-ned the cnlzd experiments and d ancll


ref-r to then later; but now I want to ask y/a, witness,


Court 1

Juno &-*-19-.2-HD-H3ohan-Wcrtenberg.

did you carry out tha experiments yourself alone or did you
have medical or other collaborators?

It would of course hovo boon absolutely impossible
for aa to c-rry out those ..joerlaonts, which wore propounded
hero, all alono; that would have been laposslble. Therefore,
throo physicians of the Luftwaffe, medic 1 ohonists, who were
otherwise working In largo University Institutes and
laboratories, helped so carry out the laboratory work. On
this occasion, I plso want to etato that theso throo phyelr
cions carried on the laboratory work *nd they aro only
rosponeiblo for whet they found In the urine and In the
blood. In other words, they made analyses of tho body fluids
I sent to then, but they ore not responsible for the
oxperlmento In theaaolves nor for the Conner of tho
exooutlon of tho oxporlmonte. For that I alone aa
ro-ponslblo.

In addition to the oodloal personnel, did you have
any other collaborators?

«. I also had three ncdloal officers of tto Luftwaffe,
who In oert wore also working In the laboratory, In addi¬
tion I received too aale nureea who wore prisoners to holp
mo and three French medical students, who olso holpod mo
to oarry out the exnnlnatlon and in tho care of tho experi¬
mental subjects. Furthermore, I oonsulted spoolallsts
from Dachau. They were exclusively prisoner physicians
who holped me with the examinetlons In tho specialist's
field, and In tho roports, which I still have In my posses¬
sion. although I mode the greatest effort, 1 did not
succeed In procuring ono of the French rselstnnts so that
here he oould testify cs e witness about the execution of
the experiments.

Please ask me another question.


8720


Court I

Juno S-A-19-3-HD-iteoban-'fartenburg.

How did the experiments begin ?ft-r the experimental
.•ts ned arrived?

Taon Che ox:erlacr.tol subjects had been hrjidod over
.x .:o, first I extlclned to then very extensively what was
rt otrke in these experiments end what they wore about. For
no that wns natural fron the audioa1 point of viow. Hover
in •: life did I require a patient or oxperisontrl subject

t. dr. suoothln. that they did nvt know anythin- about, but
if I as not believed then I seat sdy tht for prr.otlor.l
roatone alone it was absolutely necessary to toll the
o x:oricent a 1 subjects what c. urso natters wuuld take, because
an ox.orisent of sioft a r . n tare cannot be unlortakon at all
without bavin- the expericentol subjects know what they
have to do. Such an ex erls-nt depends exclusively upon
t.io ex eriaentrl subject and I did not keep it fron tho
oxTorlsont-.l subjects in any way, that the thirst was v v ry
unploaeant and that what we were requiring of thorn would
✓0 vary difficult for them. I still renoob.r quite exactly
th t one of thvfi thereupon told me, "Oh, well, p few days
of hunger and thirst." I then told his he should not under¬
estimate this at all, how thirst will feel. I then requested
them to support sa in this experiment and told thoa also,
that with those un leasant things tnoy would now suffer
they mi e ht be able to contribute to savin = or prolonging
the lives of a lcr £ a number of people Inter on, r.nd I told
t~o group who were suooos-d to suffer . un-or and thirst in
particular ar.d t.ie t roup who were supposed to drink 1,000
cc bf sen water"that the were b far in the worst Asltion.
"or that reason, I selected the strongest ones for these
two grouos, and contrary to the original orders I had
cceivod 1 kept specifically these -roupe down to, the
smallest number of people. That t.e group that received


Court 1

June 5--19-4-H3-Meehar.-' : artenburg.

1,000 cc of s 60 water loter became larger is not duo to the
fact that X enjoyed Inflicting this torture on another large
.-.umber cf -xperlmontcl subjects again, but it is by the fact
that of thla group in particular during ell the first experi¬
mental series none of then, not one of then, carried out the
experiments without in addition to sea water drlng a large
amount of fresh water. I also told the experimental subjects
I would always be near then and I also kept that promise.
Furthermore, I -romisod them they oould have absoluto con¬
fidence in me that nothing would happen to them, and thirdly
I promised them that with the influence I had, duo to the
nr.turo of t.'lngs, I would uso all of it to soe to it that
the oromieod ndir.ntr.^os were glvon to them. I then asked
than whether they would agree to eubmit to tho oxporlacnte
undor those conditions and they said yee, they would.

Q. You 'flentlon-d before that bofae tho boginning- of
the experiment you c-rrlod out an experiment on yoursolf;
would you please describe that to us briefly?

The ojporloont on myself did not oonsiot in ny
tasting from the water when it was being administered to tho
o^orioental subject or when it was given to them in order
to make fun of them, but this experiment on myeelf was
carried out by myself before tte beginning of tho other ex¬
periments and that was at tho time when the experimental
subjects were not oven there yot. I did that for tho roason
that I wanted to find out first whothor Berka's opinion that
his preparation quenched thirst was oorreot, and socondly
I wanted to suffer thirst myself, because tho director pf
such experiments would ce at a disadvantage if ho had no
idea what the aperlmontal subjects wore faeling when they
were under^oir.i his requirements. Perhaps for an experiment,
of another nature, under certain conditions, that zljnt be


C722


Ocurt 1

June 6-74-19 -5-HD-hee han-'&r t anber&.

X)e?lble. For an experiment, however, In which tiio subjec-
ti symotoms of the experimental subjects are predominantly
ertant It Is necessary that the person carrying out
-x crlnonta know how It feels. For that reason, I carried
ut the experiment on myself to orient myself and to Inform
ayswlf, I am not very proud of this at all and I cm ready
at any time to repent It. 3ut actually this was an experi¬
ment on ay own eerson, which v'6 executed In the regular
fashion and I believe I know now thirst feels.


£723


6 June 47-*-S--2C-X— t irxcufccrtcnb'-rg)

Court So. 1

'.•Dldycu ctrry out this experiment on yourself without c ny
i: J~?T »c your health?

I c'-rriod on the cxperlner.t for four dtya end rights, the cttct-
irx-ts with acawctcr. I drenk fivo hundred cuMc centimeters c day.

Of course, I scs K.irstyi Jn ft-et, I wes very thirsty j esrtcielly on
the third dey cy thirst wia cxtrccrdinrrily gre.t. I else oba. rved
thi t fren the fourth dey on I got srnev-het '‘rosay, th 1 1 cy alccp
sea dietrubed by the thirst, tfcet from the n*nont ahon tho msclos
be gen to loso their otter th.ro res a certain lercltudo in the nueclea
erd ovac t weekr.css'.f the nxaclca, c ccrtrir. hervir.eaa'n sy Unba,
end t greet need for reat. I then diaoontirued tv. crptriaont by
beginning to drink art. r end, even though I bed lost rsoro then four
erd c helf kilrgrcna — thit is acre then nine peunda — after tr-
doya I '*ca tblc to erke t *rlp to Vienne from Uunieh without cny
Mr.plcln*a.

-ltr.osa, after *hc experiment you carried -ut cn youraolf,
lettr cr. didyou oeecalontlly oleo a till drink a< center?

*. <cU, not only I syaclf tut tlao the ocdicel students, the
froac'.cer., for lnstencoi end tlaony esslaten‘8 occraionclly trsted
®ne of tho Berio. water end, to c rule before the n t fc r res hfndcd
nit to the cocpcrfnontel aubjects I dr» nk a-ce of it. 1 did the*,
tapeoiclly ao that the axpirloantel aubjeota would not think the*, in
this Berko prepercti n rao kind cf c ncglo wta hidden — God krows
shet kind cf e ntglc —end thet it could diat^eo with thee. Th< t r: s
the reason I drtrJc in fr-nt f thee, not in order to rxkt fun cf then.

-ell, let ua r turn now to the oxpcrinontel subjects. You
rccoivcd than. You toldthco whet it eta ell cb-ut, Lnd whr.t did ycu
do youraolf?

«. Of cc urao, when the ca:o crimen tel subjects rrrived, I urdertood
l very detailed rxdicd examinetion of etch cf then, til of thee.
Originally I bad altogether sixty. Cf these I I=rdit-ely eliminated
those whose condition cf nourishment seemed unsuitable to *x. The rest


E72*.


6 June rtceberg)

C-urt jfc. l


I Jeep* ard gave cn interacl end X-rry cxnrlncticn. On this occasion,
i- toe nr three, I found or. infection of the lung. Those cl.-cs, cf
c \r. e, I lirncdOTcr tc tho hcapltcl erd I else aew to it thet they
were received there. Hcturclly, not e slrglo peraon wia iceludod in
the cxpcrlncr.t who wear.ot t-fea olutcly healthy. Aside fron the fco* fchr-t
two cr three bed acne ekin disc esc on the lega, whloh via quite aupex-
flcid erd hoc ltd quite aeon.

During the period before tfccee experiments, during the preperftory
period, one cf the expert cor. tel pereena fell ill with r.n cau+e infect¬
ion. He got a fever end cppercr.tly hid bra-.cHcl pnouncric. This
priaonor — that la, thla expert mor. tel aubject — rhor. he began to run
i tcnpcrcturo, I olao turned ovwr tc the hca-itcl tT Tc* ttaont. I cn
•peeking of tho oxperiBontel aubjcct who in my record of the exper¬
iment a he• tho rcerrd number 9, erd *hct la the ^oup thtt rr a- originally
intoedod to rocoive Schaofer outer. I elaoxnt to aephesUo rgoin thet
thia happened before tho cc*wl oxperitaort begen — th< t la, ft tho
tlmo when the cxpcrinontil aubjccta -:*rc rccoivl ng *hc foed thet
amounted tc about 4*000 cdorlca per day. Thua It «a certainly not
e oonaco.uonoo of ny cxperlnonta. fcit ftrxa thla ono aioglo trenafer
treae the rumcra of the transfer cf thsio who wore doelthy ill rd of
thoac who wero rllowed tc dio in ether dopcrfcnonta.

Mere ever, thia men fctd e brother, rrd 1 kr-w thft ho frequently
rialted thia brother — I knew thet he did not die, but kept on
living, ond , im 2 acid, often visited hi a brother, -or did I trrnafcr
enycr.o lctcr cn bcocuee I mightherc considered it ncocaatry duo to
my experiments t; ocoouflcgc tho dying cf tho oc^crinentil aubjccta.
Besides. I would not here dered to compete with tho phyaioicna of
tho ccrp hoapitel.


June 6-.'.-5K—21-l-C<-xk (Int. "artenberg)
C urt re. 1


Ti-'t hppp-x.ed with the ivst of the experiment-1 subjects? How
did they enter Into the experiment?

A First, I received two substitutes for thbsc who as I tele! you vero
•lrcr.dy eliminated after the first oxrnination, that is, -ftor the x-
ray, These ere* frem the „ach"u camp itself, while tho other ex¬
periment-1 subjects, tho gypsies, c-r.c free the Buchonwnld cup. Those
two substitutes free L* B ch.-u were Cenvn gypsi- s and one of then h«d
escaped from the crop once. L'ter ho v-s rg-in taken into custody rnd
ng^in brought tc the c-cp, He had • so-clied escape insignia. That
was the first tine 1 found out that this insignia existed rnd this
osc-pe insignia ctrnt th't the prisoner was core strictly -guarded.

In order to reoovu Ur t escape insigni' tho gypsy ind ft friend of his
had volunteered fur tho cxporimer.ts, they 'nd a xew other prisoners.

• The prisoner nurso wSio was at ay cfficc at Ux time »ind when 1 told
th-t I r.cided two substitutes now, looked for two people on his own
initiative nd brought these two prison-rs to noj nd cere than -nj-body
he reauestud th t I include those two in p- rticul- r in the experiment
in orccr te give then, or nt least one of th«mi, tho opportunity to
roneve that esc- ne insigni- . The witness Viehwog testified hero that
the sale nurse himself w-o half gypsy, is the r.ura. l^oc, 'nd for

that reason he app-ar-ntly helped those two gypsies. I thus included
those two gypsies in the experiment, after the c-mp officer had given
the approv 1 for it, -r.d I know of those twe that they were not under
'ny pros cure of any kind on my p rt er cr. the p-.rt of the canp '.cminl at ra¬
tion but they -.‘id this in order to -chicvo nn rdv. ntftgo for themselves.
..fter the conclusion of the experiments I -Iso achieved thr.t the escape
inaigr.i' wns removei.

, How w*3 the I'd cm in which the experiments w re c- rried out?

A The rcca for the experiments vs r. 1- rg« room in the principal
hcspit-l where the expcric-r.t 'l subjects were rnito comfort-bio nd
for the cost p-rt were ir. individu -1 beds. Thus-. be-ds were kept ne • tly
-r.d h- r.e-t -nd clen linen m them. I was given this 1-rge room for

S726


June 6—L—3n—21—2-Cock (Ir.t. >.rtenbcrg)
Court Ho. 1


the cxperin-r.tB only eftcr I hrd intervened bec'.uso orl&Lnlly I h'.d
been 3signed *. saillvr ro c in 2 r. Eloehncr's str.ticn, of when there
ia nention in Inhibit 137, the letter by Lr. Sievers. I rolUsed to
t"Jcc th*t reen because it w-a too an 11 for the lodging of rll the
experiment 1 persons, -nd then I wr.s • ssignod this lx rgur w'.rd ir. the
prison hospital, -nd I theurfit th't ». a p rt of the hospital. Only fron
the testimny of the ..ltn« aa Yiotowog did I find tut this »• a pf rt of
Schillings* experia<4it>l station.

_ Kr. President, I believe th t wc cn c.ntinuo on lindry.

..... llUKs Per the rk-f.nd-r.t Seven. Ur. President, I ask you th-t
the defendant Boven bo excused fr-c th.e suasion cn i.ond »y in order to
prepare hia defense.

T;_. P..SIEKT: Th- defendant Hcvcn'a ccunael having requested th't
the defendant Hoven be excused fren attendance before the Tribunal
next lfcndny in order th-t he crj prep*.re his defense, the request is
gr"r.tort »r.d tho def- nd'.nt Hover. will be excused froo r ttondrr.ee before
the Tribun-1 next Kcr/.-y.

• •

D:.. GA-LIT: Th r.k you very ouch.

UC. Pl-ESDOIT s The Tribun-1 will new be in recess until nine-thirty
cclock Lend ;• coming.

TIL._ iL.L: The Tribun-1 will be in rocoaa until nir.e-thirty

o'clock llond-;- naming.


19 * 7

9 Jur.-M-JS-l-l-: riseau (lot. Tferteiborg)
Court No. X*


Official Transcript of tho Asorioan Military
Tribunal in the natter of tho United States
of Aaorica against Karl 3randfc, at al,
defendants, sitting at Nurnborg, Oereofly', on
9 Juno 19U7, 0930, Justice 3oals presiding.

THE MARSHALt ftrsons in tho courtroce will please find
their seats.

The Honorable, tho Judges of Military Tribunal I. Military
Tribunal I is now in sossion. God save tbo United States of Acorica
and this honorablo Tribunal. There will be order in the court.


THE FRESHEN!! Lr. Marshal, have you ascertained if tho do-
fondants are all prosont in tho court?

THE }AHSHALi May it please your Honor, all defendants are
prosont in court.

THE FRESIDEMIi Tho Socrotaiy Oenoral will noto for tho re¬
cord tho prosonco of all tho dofondants in court. Defendant Bolgol-
bouck, tho ritnoas, is ronindod that ho is still under oath.

Cc insol nay proceed.

THE MARSHAL! Your Honor, defondant Hovon is absont this nor-
ning having boon excused by tho Tribunal.

THE FRESrDENTi Tho Socxutary Gonorol will note f cr tho re¬
cord tho absonco of defendant Hov-n from the courtrooa having boun ex¬
cused by tho Tribunal in ord.r that ho nay consult with his counsel.

Counsel cay procood.


WU12I2; BZIGI3Q2CK - Resircd
DIRECT SLimiAIION (Continued)


(attorney for defordant, professor Dr. Boiglboeck):
yesterday we stopped with the description of tho
were carried out and now I an asking you

M

about which witness Viohwag was talking,
yard about which the witr.oss Vichwog was apoak-
connectod with tho barrack in which there was the
rocc. I have cade a sketch froa which tho situation can


oe seen and this sketch is in ay document book No. 2, docurar.t No. 31.


G723


9 Jun-i-IZ-1-2-- riae-.u (Int. ifsrtcaberg)

Jourt i:o. I.


DR. STSIKBAUZRs Mr. Fresident, in that connection I suicit
docuaer.t Ko. 31 froc document book 1 o. 1, an affidavit of uniter
ifcasion of 2e 'larch 19l7. ..ttnehed tc this affidavit shic'n I shall
not read now is an original sketch. I havo photostatie copies nr do
of this and a translation. Therefore, I cannot sufceit it to you no - .;.
Excuse ..c, I shall give the Schibit r.uteor 12 to this docisaar.t and this
sketch. The oxporinontrl rocn ia included.

THE rRESIDEI/Tt Just a noaer.t. Counsel, the Tribunal has
tho Englisli translation. It har the document both in Gcraan and in.
English.

D!i. STElI.-BlXP.i I had the sketch aade here. You havo it,
too, .r. H*rdy, don't you? This oketch is added tc the teocion affid¬
avit in its original fora. 1 had photostats unde of it in addition.

I had a translation aado for tiu Juigos which Z could outciit to you
only at this ucoont.

T3C iSESHWTi 1*0 havo tho docunor.t, both in Oor_~n and in
English nor.

Dh. STEEIB.‘.'JER* Tho original of tho sketch ia included in

tho document of the teesion affidavit in the back, toward tlo tec., tho

Inst page. The original is included in tho Irrsion affidavit. ttrote-

•

stats and English translations were taado so that tho expressions rill
bo undorstcod.

,x. 8oeretary Qcnoral, would you ploaso bo so kind as to hand
tho original to the Judges?

Tin RiESIESiiT 1 Counsel, I widorctood you to Sfgr tho original
translation ted not boon prepared but 're have it.

DR. STEIKB..UE?. 1 Ko, it is included haro. It is attaclioj,

TI3 raSSIDEKT* Tory well, I oust havo nisundoretood you.

The docuncnt appears to be cocploto.

H&EDYi May I inquire, your Honor, whether or r.ot tho af¬
fidavit purports to contain a certificate therein certifying th't the
chert is a true re presentation of tho conditions existing in T~ch.au?


o729


9 ,Jon-»:-:3-l->Prij«au (Int. nartonborg)

Court Ho.I.

DU. SarmXSSRt The signature — Dr. Sorvatiua subaitted tho
original to tho witness in Cologna. Dr. . assion certified that it was
correct in the preserve of Dr. Serratius. This is apparent in tho af¬
fidavit. Cn the origin'll you aoo the signature of Halter !inoaion.

THD PRZSIBBNTx I find no certification by Dr. Sorvatius.

HR. HARDY« Only on tho affidavit, your Honor.

7HZ HtE53DSHTi Dooa tho affidavit refer to tho chart? I
havon*t had tino to rord it yot.

32. HARDY« It obviously docs not. Your Honor, innsnuch os
tho chart is dated 2U April and tlw affidavit is dated 2h 34*rch. I will
not object to its sutnission in ovidonco but I want bin to olnrify this
certification, and, if possiblo, hr.vo it cortificd beforo tho close of
, tho cflso.

D.1, 9TEXKBJriK&t «o shall ask Dr. Sorvatius. I didnot spoak
to tho witness nysclf bo ecus o tho trip was too inconvonior.t but Dr. Sar-
vntius spoko to liassion and sutnittod it to hin. I shall ask Dr. Sor¬
vatius for a certification and Shall hand it in afterward, also a
cortificr.tion of tho sketch.

TH2 r'liZSIDENT« Vcxy soil*


9 Jun-:i-UB-2-l-Coo!c (lat. Yfortertourg)
Court Ko. I.


BY D?.. STEE'BAtER:

Q Would you please continuo nor, witness?

A In this skotciv the rooc in which =y oxpcrimental persona
vero lodged ia narked by broken lino* !to;ct to this rocc is a e:nllor
ro«xj in vfcich the medical students wore living. Theao wero the French
nodical students whoa I bed takon out of thoir working companies and
put into the hospital whero they had hotter living conditions and could
got bettor food* Through this rocc whoro the radical students roro
living ono could go into tie court yard about rrhlch tho witnoss ViOhrog
toptifiod. Tho door ia narked by on error. A aocond way to got into
tho court yard wr.a through another door cf tho oxporirental roon via tho
main corridor of tho hospital. Sinco not nil of tho experimental sub¬
jects wore included in tho oxporlTont at ono given tine but in two
diviai ora which alternated, thoy could always toko walks in tho court
yard if thoy happened to bo off and whon tho weather was good thoy also
ato in tie court yard. Thus tho vitnoss Viuhnog had ample opportunity
during tho or.tiro length of tho experiments to talk to tho ojqxirinontal
subjects. I rovur prevented him fren c'rrying on such a convcrar.iion.

His statements that only during tho first days of tho experiments ho
could talk to then is not correct.

Q How was tho oxocution cf tho oxporimonts thoasolvos?

A As it had boon laid down in tho program of tho oxpcrim-nt
which was given to me, all of tie oxporiiontcl persona wero first given
tho food that tho aviators rocoivod, that is, about 3# 500 calorios per
day, and in addition tho co-cnllod heavy labor food, so that thoy ro¬
coivod about U,0C0 calories per day.

Q 'fora thero iddfcions to theso calorics? 4

A Tho additions ware tl*o food for tervy labor. That was, as
far as I romonbor, oggs, butter, gyado A nllk, otc.

DR. ST -H3A-JEE: I5r. rrocidcnt, ia that connection I want to
sunlit too documents, f ir^t accuiA-nt "o. 26 , in my docu_vjnt bool: Ifo. 2 ,
on .mgo 103. 1 would like to give it Exhibit :2o. 13. This is an original


6731


9 Jun-i:-:2-2-2-Cook (let. Tartenburg)
Court Jo. I.


document of thj military district nodical supply depot No, 1?, -bout
the food that was given to the ospariswixtcl subjects. On pego 103,
document book 2, this next document I would like to sufccit -

THE HtESIDEXT: Just a ucecr.t, counsel,

VB, SI/LRDYi li-.y I inquire again if this doc urgent - does this
purport to bo a list of the food permitted to Beiglboeck for uco nt
Dachau?

D». STwINBlUERi Tos, this document has to b_ regarded in
connection with the next one which I want to cutcit, fron which it can
bo soon quito exactly uhat quantities voru given to the experimental
subjects for tho so-called staff foedin-. Tho first'document is a re¬
sult of tho experimental station regarding tho food Bciglboock 1a to
hv/o for bhc carrying out of the oxporinontc in a very scientific and
exact nmnor, and with ovox-ything 1 have now I cm even sutaait tho
woathor chart for every cinglo day but that is of no great interest
to us. This is only so th't 1 cm soot tho objoction that tho people
did not get anything to oat. Thoy gob oxcollont food. If you rill
look at tho list - 2C90 ernnod neat — and that is hew it goes on,
whito broad, buttor, choose, Jan, Hoosta biscuits, chickon oggs, sugar,
eoaolina, raw potatooe, -and in tho second doeuxont rhich I now want
to svtonit as ErJxibit V-c, Ui, it is tho following document on pa-o 10$,
it says at tho top, if you will look at tixat docunont: "Hoi Empjri-
ixnts to rorder sea wat-r potablo. IX.'livery of foed supplioo f .-r ox-
^rir%-ntr." It is ador-ssud to Obcr.arst FJrof, Boiglfcaock, Si Sntcc-
ologic'l In3tituto .at Dachau, It roads:

"Flo-re receive Iwrowith fren this station food for tho ox-
per Xante in tho following quant it ios: T.'o should be obliged for a
receipt as deduction vouchor fer tho kite': on he uco keeping book.

For 32 ccn for 7 days (cxrcri; Kintal groi-p I)

1. ) Beef in tins 9,350 kg - 11 tins each

containing 85~ grr.

2. ) Pat (nargavine) 3,2C0 Kg.

3. ) . 9,600 Eg.

U.) rot .too? 27,000 Kg.

5732


9 JuxWZ-2-3-Cook (let. Vrten'curg)
Court Ho. I.


5.

Aray bread

112,000 Kg.

6.

'ihito bro'd

Ul,600 Kg.

7.

Gravy Fovrdor

11,200 Kg.

8.

Cooking Fat (Uarg.)

U50 Kg.

9.

Sugrr

8,960 Kg.


Ceffoo Substitutes

2,016 Eg.

10) Cottage cheese

8,000 Kg."


Thon tte sc-c'lled starting rations:

11) Foil crora uilk 112 ltr.

12) Bs.a 22U

13) Buttor 5,60C- Jig.

lii) Sa n ol ln a 5,600 Kg.

15) Roesta biscuits 2a oaoJcets

16) Cig-rottos - 6 for each id rsen ; xr day"


That is all tegettor 13Wi cigarottos, and then tho signature
of tho Stabszhhlceister.

HABBIi 1 nuat ixquirc your Kenor i/hat is tie purpose
of introducing docunont Ho. 26, teloh is Exhibit No. 13 • Frora vrhnt I
see tto food is tho sane as that ft-ofossor Boi^lboock in Exhibit No.

IU, dr.tod tho 11th August 19W:, Exhibit No. 13, "hlch is dated 19
August lpUli, end obviously port-ins to tho sane sublet, ono is tho
Exraainntien of tho food at tho Vionnr. 3rnch of tho Technical Ccllogo
Biochonistry Institute of tho Technical Doprrtcont. I don't sou tho
connection fcotroon tho two dccuaonts.

DR. 8rZDOAOER: It is very easy to clarify this. Tho
socond dccicont only port'.ins to the dolivory and it is dated tr.0 11th
of August, and in order not: to gat a ociantific basis for his uxpori-
=onts Pirfoesor Beiglboock in regard to the so foods sant samples to
Vienna in ordor to deteraiue tho -.count of salt and the mount of
inter contained in it, r.rri tho food offioo acdo records of this in
order to find cut teat the basic values wero. Fer exanplo, conned
neat, sodiun chloride, 1.5, pir-ccnt 73, that is 73 F&r-ccnt inter, is
that right?

A The reason why I still have this receipt is because I had
to have tte analysis. I had to knew hot- such salt they received in tho

f0od * 6733


9 JuneiM32-Aj-Cock (1st Wartonburg)

Court Ho# I#

Q I ® now asking you did the gypsies - did this food agree

with the gypsies?

A One can certainly say so, and they ate it with a groat
de*l of -ppotito. They enjoyed it#

Q Witness, in Exhibit 139, the witnoss, however, says that
the experimental subjects, the food did not agree with the oxperiaontal

s\±>joct«.

A Tschofenig was working in tho x-ray station. Ho was tho
Kapo there, Tschofonig newer onto rod ny experimental room at all,

Ha once or twice saw ny experimental subjocte for a short jxriod of
tine. Usually I was frosont -ysolf during tho x-ray examination for
tho reason ho roports just what ho hoard and not rhit ho knows from
Ids cro observation# Tho statcaints in Exhibit 139 begins with a
dosorijtion of tho oxp^rirents carried on by Dr. Raschor and tho otato-
nont ords with a description of tho oxjcriTorts carriod on by Dr.
Raschor and in tho -lddlo I an so that, something that is said about
Raschor 1 s oxperiaants also applios to no# Of courso, I want to raise
sono doubts as to who tier Tschofenig when ho would havo boon askod
about Raschor's oxpa-ironts would havo nlso talkod abcut tho soa water
experiments. Horr Tschofonis only reports nnars.


C73A


Court So. 1

9 Jua 47-k-3-l-Z=>.-Gro«« (Vartenberg)

v In that connection X want to refer to the testimony of.the
-tatenant of the witness Dr. Horn, Oeruan transcript peg* 5395. Ee
nuscrlbas hov these ncin arise. As defease counsel X also wanted to
fled ait sacethicg about the personality of the witness Tschofenig. I
epolied to tho government of the province of Carlnthia, 6lnco Tschofenig
Is living In Zlegenfurtfc, and I received a letter frch thee which eaya:
■Tochofonig le not,Slovene representative hut he le ol Carlnthia.
According to rolleblc testlaocy he has several previous convictions
hut I do not kn-.w any details about thie so far. It Is correct thr? he
wr# In Dachau ns Xapo. Ee been.-* very disllfcud by a nur.ber of pol'l tied
prisoners." X also wrote to thu Government of the province of Carlnthia
about dotells and I rocelved the answer: "X could not find out any noro
details ebout Tschofenig. It Is, however, felt that he vr»s Kapo. A
groat dc' l Is being said fcer« but nobody is ready to naJco a doflr.lto
etrtcaont." X rend this not In ordor to submit it in evidence.

:®. KAEDT* I object to those remarks of thu dofonso countol *>or-
trIcing to tho character of one witnoee Tschofenig. If the defendant
has something to say rbout Tschofenig's character, dcfer.eo counsel nay
well cut cuostlocs to the defondant, but if dofenso counsel viuhoo ho
oan toicc tho stand and testify hlnsalf.

Trx FRLSIXtrT: Prosecution's objection la sustained. The reeding
of tho lottor by counsel which ho has received Is entiroly Irrelevant
and will not bo received ns part of the testimony In the ceto. Of
courso, counsol ney propero an affidavit. If ho can do so, which will
be in propor fom to rocelvc, but merely reading tho lottor is not c
provocative natter at all and cannot be considered.

IE. STXIS3AL1E: This is an official document by tho governor of
the province. Eowever, I shall try to get an affidavit to this affect.

X only wanted to demonstrate here how difficult under certain govermonte
it is to obtain evidence material.

TEZ PUSSIDES?: If counsel is of tho ouinlon thet he has a document
which because of its official nature constitutes e propor exhibit in


3735


Court So, 1

S Jun 47^-3-a-iHX-Oros■ (Verteaberg)

evidence, counsel sight :ffer the docunent in evidence subject to objec¬
tion end argument but certainly Just reading the docunent Is not evi¬
dence and cannot becooa part of the official record.

ZE. SaiBBALIB: I shall try to obtain an affidavit vhen I go to
Vienna.

v Witness, at this stage did you already carry on examinations of
experimental subjects?

A. Yes, of course, ve were after all concerned in this preliminary
period to obtain the orellr.inary estimate In order t> nako a nrellminrry
determination in order to be ablo to propere the natter later on. Thus
urinalyses vero undertaken regularly; free tine to tire the blood vr.s
analysed; oloctrocardlogrrphe vpre taken, the funotlon of the kidnoye
vrs jboorvod. This was esovdally Important bocauso the kidneys had to
accomplish e great dea. 1 and In -rdor to oxclude ditnago to the kidneys
the background of the eyes was alec cxa;:laod by a specialist.

Cw Vas this specialist an SS Physician?

*• during my entire sojourn I eav SS physicians only very soldon
In the camp. *s far as I kn.v, the only physician »>fc: «ao viking thoro
va.s the chlof physician if the hospital vho, hovovw, I bolleve conoernod
hinsolf naialy v«h the adninistration. Tho caro of the prisoners vns
exclusively in the hands of the prison doctors. Soao of the- vhon I
mot hrd an oxcolliat medical education,

Q. After the conclusl >u of these jrclininaxy exn-vi nations tho
experiments began. Can you describe briefly vfett vr.s then at stako In
the so cxoorir.onts?

A. The experimental subjects »-ero divided Into three gr>uos which
dlfforod in principle. The first gr nxo received the Schaefer w-ter.

T:-erc wore altogether five exporlnsntal subjects. During the fir«t four
days they rocuived food that pe:plc at soa distress wore supposed to got.
Inuring tho folljvin*- drys they did ast receive ery food. Thus, this vpb
something like r fast. Such e feet is used oulto frequently n'v in
modern medicine. There is also an Acer lean physician in particular by

5736


Court Sc. 1 .

& Jut 47-k-3-3-ii..-Or i st (Vwteaberg)

the nose of Tenner who at the cod of the 19th century introduced this
method again in nedicel therapy. I had ouite a great deal of erooricnco
regarding this treatment by fasting. Therefore I eculd diagnose the
synptccs that occurred during that Tjy veil. This group that received
the Schaefer water s included in the experiment for 11 or 12 days.

Jdl of the other groups were ercorlnontcd on for a shorter time.

Q. Verc there any incidents that occurred?

a. This gr:up of course went through the oroerlmonts without any
complaints and without any incidents.

• Veil, in the other groups whrt were you concerned with there?

a. One of these two groups was the hunger and thirst group, the
other tho group with sea weter. Both of these grouno had the following
in corr.on: The water balance in tho body is offcctod. They havo tho
so-callod anhydrenlo or dehydration. Such an attack on the water
balance in the body of course it nuch noro important then tho hunger and
it is well known that th».rc ere people who will hunger by profession end
they fnst for long tine for politicrl and roligious reasons, for instance,
Ohandi. Cases have occurred and have been certified of people who llvo
for 40-60 days without taking in any food. That le poetlblo only if they
rccolvo sufficient llauid. That is about one mart per day. If rt tho
•a so tine they, however, havs to thirst, tho boefc' curtains it for a nuch
ohxfc/porlod. Cnc assumes in general that the tolerance of thirst is
about 14 days. Only r short tine ago I reed in Strro and Stripes thet
in America a Miss Volfe in Sew Haven started a hunger and thiret strike
and for thirteen days she lived without food or water and that gradually
they were considering to glvo her llouid artificially. Tho fact that
the hunen body can live without w^tcr for p relatively short period le
connected with the fact that t ven *ion it is a. condition of thirst it
hrs to allr.inate water constantly. Iron if this elimination is United

f

to tho smallest amounts possible, nevertheless there is r lost of water.
Vo know that the asouat of urine vfcich is eliminated normally when tho
food intake is normal amounts tc twp to three liters or marts Pur day.


Court So. 1

5 Jun 47_W3-4-LHX-Or i.8 (ksytenberg)


It can ba reduced ua to 200 cc. and that the elimination of ^atcr .
through the heart and lunge 1« decreased. Observations have even been
=ade that vhen thirst reaches am extrcce the lung is able to take llould
-ut of the eir. The nrcunt if the lost of wetex Is docleive in the
Question of life and death. Ctoe know* free the animal ©Toerinents and
one concludes it from observation of see distress that a loss of 22 to
25 percent cf the vatcr in the bed:' roeults in death. In general ono
considers that if 20 oercent is lost the danger to life begins, Dp to
10 t- 12 percent can bo lost without any daevge. Thu so mounts arc the
so-called depot vjter of the body, that is, the «eitcr supnly that is
froo in the body. Only when this has beon used up, the wrtor of the
b^y colls is attacked and in this anoint butvoen 12 rad 22 ncrcent thoro
is sons destruction -f the colls which does not noan danger to life but
dengor to ths normal function of tho body cell. That is a eortain dangor.


C733


June 9-Jfl-BK-c-l-w'-loy (Int. ’Jhrtcrfaerg)
Court Fo. 1


C Thu lnek of water to *ecr. by the fact th't tht organs which
ccr.tain * lot of water, cllr.ir^tc water - first cf * 11 the skin >nc*
the suacles, seocndly the blood which is r liouirt *r.d oontains ft lot
of water - thus the skin dries up and the nucurus begins drying up
and there is a hardening of the cuscles. The liver becomes slower,
bcc'ust it too elinin-tcs its w«tcr, and a so-called thickening of the
blood when, the solid prts incrensc proportionately '*nd relatively.

- Is the t*king awry of water alae used in nodicine for thernpeutic-
rl reason*?

A Y os, th't is dene too. Peiple whe suffer fron kidnty diseases
arc exposed V thirst under oert'-in circumstance*. This is carried on
for 10 d*ys, or even longer. K'turally then due to the retention of
water the liquid in the body of th< su persons is incre-Bed. Out there
is alsc a certain diet which forcerly w's used for reducing diets, the
s'-c llod Gchroth diet named after the discoverer Cohroth, who
discovered this therapy. In this diet they rccoivo only dry solid
food, and th* liquid is reduced to a very aet 11 mount. This diet
w-s c-rried out formerly to " very heroic extent, and in the older
litor->turu there are reports in which 10 tt. 15 per cent of tho body
liquid w s giver, up by patients.

..re there possibilities during such e diet or during these ex¬
periments to c>lcul'tc • loss of water exactly -nd to «io so constantly
tc follow how nuch water is lost?

« Tes, that c n be done very well. Iher. • re sever .1 way* of doing
this. First, the body weight, secondly tho measuring of the amount
cf urine. Fron th< relationship of these two mounts one c n ‘
determine the mount of rater which is elisin ted by tho skin qpd the
lung3. Of course, one has to consider how much is lost by water and
how nuch is last through the hunger, tho starving *nd fin r lly from
the analysis of the blood. O.c can see vi ry quickly tc- wh t extent t
the drying up is going on, f-.r the blotd cxisits of • watery liquid of
‘lbucen on tho one hand *nd a lot cf blood cells on the ether hand. If

5739


June 9-J-EB--2-i'xloy (lot. ’.l-rtenbcrg)

Court ?*c. 1

v“.tcr is lost the blood bee eta trie:. .• rjx its protein ocntcr.t becomes
l»rger. This cn b« s«c-n through very cosy ncthods r f rnilysCs, ,.U
f these m- lyses wore carried or, during our experiments. ..eg *ing
the “count of w:tor lost, we h r d by using the gr^up which receive! the
Cchrefcr w-ter t> c.lcul-te ex-ctly the loss which resulted frre the
st'rv tion »lrr.o, thus we could gin t» ct figures for the loss cf
w.ter.

- "h.'t rre the sy-^tona which result free the taking -, w T y of w-.tur?

.. I 'Ire-dy described ther. in prrt. I only w.-nt te- mention here th«.t
in the text books usu' lly one finds. i.eftnitc pictures • escrlbcfri, that
is by nor r.s of rn illness which is carried cn together with - disturb-
rr.ee . f the w-ter b-l/nc. Ih t is the si-.-cr.Utd di/botes incibidus.

In the or se of this sickm ss the hurvn kidney loses its rbility to
c nt-.in v-t, r rnd ulicir.- t*.s endless amounts. Such pr.tients lose 10
to 12 liters, thnt is quarts, _f nt* :• per d'-y. In uxtrutc cr sos lS'
litors or «i»*.rts h»vu even bc^n observed. It is obvious th-.t these
pe pic h-vo t-> drink Just ns rauch 's they elinin tu. If the waiter is
now t-ken -wy fr a such n pr.ti.nt he rv.tur-lly reaches the stngo of
beir^ lired up ir.c<cpftrrbly quicker th*n r ho lthy person. Since there
is "loo r hyst- ric 1 fern <f this diaersu, nr this c-n not be distinguish¬
ed rt first sight frvm th- re-1 disc* so, the p^vsicirn is frequently ; r-s
forced t. un-'-rt-ko thirst experinmt in order to mke - proper
i gn sis. Th« r> fore, on*, kr.cws the strong thirst syuptcos. It is
< bvi-us th* t such pec pie if one would V-ho writer nmy fr c then entirely
could bo brought to the rie'dly Unit of the less of v.tir within one
r t* d-ys. These • re people whi h’-ve br*in disw: sea, *nd thorofere
it c isos bout that in the ti.irst expe-rinento these people react with
ve>ry str r. nervous systems. Therefore, this is the srurcc of the
run-jr th-*. the t irst e-n brinr ~b ut r»©fcrl disturbances sc o-isily.

Ir. r u rrc 1 pern a the thirst experiment never brought -tout such results.
The sec r.<! griup f lise* ses -re the t'ir rrt.e- * iseiscs, r a 2 s-.w not
r.ly ,r.c but very many eyser.t- ry eases ir. kussir., raid they lost up to 20


June WMK^r-3-H’loy (Int. '* rteoberg)
Crurt Ho. 1


per cent of wter, thrt is the licit f the dmger to the life. This
c nditl r. is so dx-gcrcus bee-use the u-ter is lost so very quickly.
Secondly, because sftlt is lost with it v.d tho L-.ci: uf s*lt is -.lir ys
r very p.re't danger, *nd it is dangerous thirdly bee-use these re
toxic disc'ses. Free these diaorses -ne c-n not dr* p-nllcl, to

n. rror -1 thirst txpriont, becusc ‘hero is r difference between ft
disc'.so ■ Q*1 r condition f lnck.

. This extrasrdlnr* rily Lm.rtrr.t difference, <*uld you pic,so ex¬
plain thrt te us briefly?

A In the o-so or n dise-se w«. -rv rlwys c neemed with the- struggle
between the bedy -r.d the c use i f tho dae/ se. Th'-t is ncetly the
b-ctcrir. !ttrc rte the pcsitlv. 'posts, '-r.d tore -re tho defensive
forces of the org-niar.. Hero there As struggle between two forces.

In the c-so of - condition ef lrck it is ruito different. Tto body
is deprived of s ne thing which is used nomrlly nd which it is
using nonarlly. Such. cmUticna^of Irek, for ex-cple, -re the 1-ck of
s-lt if there h s been r. grent .VI of p-.rspir-iticn, '-nd the l\«k tf
s-lt when the kidney is insufficient - the Ipim.ph insufficiency)
then the condition of th« l-.ck of vitnnin, leek cf sugrr when 1 - rgo
m unts cf insulin h've been ndoinisterud, ur oxygen lrck which D r .

Ruff h'O described. Thus only cm physiologic-1 oonpenent is 1-cking
hen in e'ch c-se, .-inti cne c n c-lcul te with nanll n-.thua- tic-.l
ccrt-ir.ty vh -1 this 1 cl. is, -r.d for tto t reason over;.- physici-n is,
o-i to s-y, glr.d th't -.her. ft sick person dees ccoo to hie he ties to
tr-'t - c. nditicn of 1-ck of soce inport-r.t component, bcc'uso
therapeutic -1 successes c-r. be ► ir.ed sur- ly rnd it c*n be very quickly-.
If ft person who is in n condition of insulin shock is • -inisUral sug.-r
withir. • fe* dnut-.s his hor.vy synptcc.- ' re oliainntod; is
• enoxynic person is -Hawed to brerthe oxygen ho is -lright f-gftinj if
- person who is hungry first is * 12 cwcd to e- t, if n person sufiering
fr a thirst is • llcwtd to drink, if - parser, suf ering - r r-r 1 -ck -f
vit-ains is * deinistered vitnnins, fc beernes he lthy g-in. Any


S7U.


June 9-U-EK-^-u-:Mcy (Ir.t. ~ rtenberg)
C'.urt !'< . 1


cor. itier, tf lack c'r. be cure ! by - leistering tho cexponent lacking
n* th« re is no d-nogo tc the body. There is wither two -ltorontivos,
one dies bee m so cf 1; ck or lack is reecvud md cr.c bee ncs he'll thy
-grin.

£ "TltneBs, befor. y 0 u *’id that tho trklng awny of rUr i»d the
taking of aonvter rerxr lly brings nbout the sane changes in the
body; is sen ter ns such .r. V-xic?

A Cert- inly not, bee-.use it is used for purposes of curing people
rnd I cm retort here fn i ingliah nodical liter*.turo tht kusseU
g'Ve one r his patients -ltcgcther 112 lit-rs or quarts of aor.kntor.
In drily -losus of nbout one-*.-If quart; mother person drink for four
n nths ono-hnlf quart or eh naming. Th-t is altogether 60 quartsj
•nt! cno pors n f r 9 r. nths clrmk • ebout one-half quart, th-t is
"lt^rcthor "be ut 135 qu*rts, of c -ursc, together with fresh water.
sr a these fifcun-s it is quite • pp r. nt that sow ter -s such cm
not be toxic, .me cr.« 'ls<- knvs thrt sew-ter proctionlly never
c at-ins germ, b-cterl-, t le-nt net p-thegenic agents. There -re
many -nd vnri-us nJctnlsr.Ur.as th t hrvo been carried on nbcut this
rr 1 fr n the entire literature ab ut dfngcrs r.t sea I do not know
cf my cose which reports n in tost in-1 infection duo tc tho taking
i f =e’W't« r. The seawater w.ich we used had been br.ctcriologically
ex-rlr.ed in tea institutes, moreover it hr.d rise been filtered, md
it therefore w*s free if nny Inctcrln. y assistants md I nlse
drmk it very frequently, *n . r.cr.e of thic ntr nysolf either got any
intestinal disuses, or.- neither the experiraental subjects. The
•ngcr of seawater is alone the fret thrt it is n relatively highly
cmcontr'ted s-'lt solution. This needs w-.tor for its clinin*tion.

This K-tcr has tc be adninisttfrofi either .after fresh water, nnrt if
th-t is net done body w-tcr h s U be added. If n person is given
one mir.rt of scatter t' irirJ. a d y he oust a. about cne-h.ilf qurrt,
b. c-ure the ki-'noy concentr* t-.s only about 2 per cent of sr.lt if it
concentrates no re this - Utional .mount is less, &th 50C cub. cent.


8742


Jtam 9-*5-B&^-5-MOoy (lot, 'VUcberg)
Court Wo. 1


quo c-'n consider thr.t .-bout 2C0 p r c«ut hr.ve to be added by the kidney,
tfcut ia 2 D 0 nddition/il purccntnge h-vc to be ellninited, if tho kidney
concentre tea ns euoh silt n* the so-wr.ter ia oooccatrating. This
c.uld be seen quite olfcr.rJfr in Sirmy'a, r.a veil *.a in ay craea. Only
th-t w.tcr is lost .ich ia olinineted by the akin w lunga end since
this alinin'*.! 1. n ia relatively inerwsed n Uttlo. Therefore, ma-
Tt er c*n bo tnken longer than one rssuao-i forr^rly, aooonUne to the
theoretic* 1 suppositions. Thus the only elation ia to «h»t extent
the enter supply of the body la attacked by tht tiking of aomttr.


C743


Jur.* Icy (Int. '•> rUcberg)

Ccurt Ko. 1


■_ T cu now hive apckcn about the c r.ditiun between dise-sc and the
L«.ek, new I • sk y u c-n such • c u'iXLai of Lick be observed sc th't
•n endangering cf life or health is icpcssiblc?

« Ccrtninly, '-od *e rlso kncw.fmn '11 of those ersea of se- istress
wh were re soused th' t they were restored relatively quickly, “cz ng
these there w. re. C-Bcs th't bec-ac known of people *»o while r.t st-
istress L-st U 0 to D p-un^s in body weitfitj oven r c-so w s described
whore a person lost 5 atone; in spit*, of th't oil cf thus wore restored
to he 1th. There is r possibility in such extreoc c-sta, bccruse cf course
in - e r.dition of 1-ck it is nuch «rsior, 'JV- one nust not forget that
in c'scs c.f se” (istress nmy ether tilings, such ta wither md the l“.ck
of sleep md the like rxv • :<'lti n-1 str in en the body.

Iherofi re, <*uring yiur cxperis<nts yju ooulci cssuae with good
c; r.science tf t ycur exp risuxt-1 tubJwets would not suffer -ny dnargo?

*, Since the r-ojunt of the less of vtor *"o const ntly controlled
the ownin'tion of Ukj bloc’, u-in- nrt wcnthvt wen- cirri-d on
d'ily, l* the not/bcliac, the lungs, etc. we c.njld, cf course, recognizo
the licit of ncrv-tol* r-r.ce* rrA then.fore I could bo sure that he would
not go beyond th*. d-ngcr licit, ^cturlly ncr.< cf ny exporiamt il
sub.' .cts ri fi rcea tc that sphere. I c* lcul tod the loss of water
very c'r- fully, urt of course gracu- lly saw in s- doing that nrjy cf ay
experiment'1 subjects drink fruah w'tur in rddition tine And again. “Ith
this secrctivo drinking rf n ter they id not (b r. good service neither
tc theaselvec nor to ne, r^t t> thenselves because the experinejit
last- ! 1-nger. In such a c-sc until I knew ’ ith certainty *h’t had
clcul ted this disturtmcc cf this expericent, and they did not do r>
s« rvico tc ce bee us. - gift de -1 of c r* ful work was lestnyod Vy that.
« How wer- the «xpe.rin-r.t-1 subjects supervised?

In in7 c-3. it W'S not -s strict *s cr. be seen frea these incidents
which I h-vf Just ni Aliened, th-t it '.iuL r.ct h ve boon *> aaible for thus
t- rink fresh ..'ter r. the si^e, ad in sene cases It happened net ir.
c. :nai( '.c mble "se untc .


June 9-W-=*'-5-2-i May (Int. Wrtenberg)
Ccurt Wo. 1


“ I h-rc to i sk yu, does this circunaVroe itself that they -grin
nn£ -g-lr. dr-rk w^ter dots th't not spe'k against the f-.ct th» t these
parsers were volunteers?

n First I w-r.t tr. sy th t the circunst'nce th't sony cf the uxr-
perto-ct* 1 subjectairfirf not drink fresh vr.tcr on the si('c sporfcs for
the f*ct thrt they were volunteers, 'nd it dots nbsolutoly for if
the p. ssibility to drink fresh w-ter is giver. 'nd the person dees not
da so, in spito of thr.t, it rust be r. volunteer, tersevur, on thirst
lets it is »n experience »hich is a - d’ily thr t •’vai the nest
intelligent p> tients tint end ’fr in V.rink sixiething on the side in
between secretly. Thirst is ore of th strongest impulses of n-’turo rnd
it is very difficult not to givi in tc It, • nd for thit rer.son thirst
experiments h'vc to b* c rri< d on behind locked doors, rr.d the doors of
ny experiment 1 ron»o rpp- runtly net looked securely enough.

Dh. STTXIB40FRt )'r. President, in th t connection I w r.t to refer
tc Document Bcok b., fr-r: tbc Document Bo.-k Schnefor, p*go 38, whore
Huobner, » toll kn «r. expert, speaks rbout those nor suns of locking
the n>cn. Fr>r. sy own ducur.ot bo.k I n jr w~ot to submit Document
29, Document Book 2, prgo 108. I give (tat exhibit number 16.

TK~ F’' SHJTH'T: 'h't is tho numb- r of the document concerned?

DT.. 'ttZimai'At Ho. 29, Document Book 2, p-gc 108, Exhibit 16.

THE PRLSZDQ'T] Is th*t rot Eid^it 15?

Dh. STIaHB.UO: Y cs. Excuse x, 1 sou. It is No. 15, Yeur H-nor.


It la tn excerpt fron r. very veil knovr. n«*’ic"l work of Profe—or
Der.nlg, about the- import"nee of wter nix', the aet-brlisn inf r.ourlwh—
mvnt of huo-n beings. I u, net wrx.t to rood the entire excerpts, but
I c* 11 -ttention to the center cf tho first p-go in »* ich it says:

"~hile the people rro blt, curing the *>rly days, successfully to
fight their thirst with r gor< gr co, their energy is ir.suf:icient
during the l-'tor dry a; they devise extremely subtle nona of obtaining
w-,t r, see the c'se- cf Jcergcrsun." Thor. or. t! c second p r ge I c-11 your
rttertioo to the t-blc of weights, in which the loss cf weight is


C745


Jo.no 9-K-BIC-5-3-K loy (lot. rtonburjr)

Court He. 1

shown in » c'S, -nd in th sunvry ft thu end I oil your nttenticn
to '’ 2 )" which srys tie weight 'n' size of thu body dec re-so rapidly."

' Itr.eos, I r.s.- you did you rlwnys terain te the experiments
i-r.odi-tcjy when you foun- .out th't fresh, wrtc-r vc a being drunk?

In the fc*» c-scs where wo observe' tl't directly, yes, we did

interrupt th«*u In other c-sca not Iwrys or not irrcuei-tely. Of

course, I oftc h/ul tho suspicion th't this hrd h-ppmed, but it wns not

*

riw-ys possible to prove it imodirtely, cspeci:lly in the first series
of experiments. I w-s confronted with gre-.t difficulties. First, one
hnl to 3'kc uxict ccop-risons of • cert*in ’mount of urine -nd ollninn-
tion of s-It until on- could nseertMn with curt' inty. If tl* uxperi-
ment'l subjects h’.d in each o-s« ncaittod it lreu> 1 toly th’t they
drrJc fresh wter »nd how cuch, then, of course, it could h-vc boon
sii pie, but in tltls wny wo ir. n r.y c'ses got fricncs wldch le» U us on *i
long course, so th't fru-wer.tly we gtlnod the impression th-.t soau srit
w-s boin retained, p n ir.Ur being s'vod up in thu body. In other
o'ses one g-inert th« iepression th't not '11 of the s-It vs buing
-bsorted, so tfcnt .-t tines I hnd sone- doubts ’nd thought th t porh'P*
Berkr.i a prep-rr tion does h' vu nn effect on thu absorption of sr.lt,
therefore, I *skod the oxperiaentol subjects 'grin -n- rg’in whether
thby h-V not -fter rU hnd some fresh enter, in order not to become n
subject of deceit, but they constantly "nd stubbornly denied th'.t, nd
therefore in any craus t the end of thu experiment it w-s pushed out
btc-uae if they hrd token w ter th* general cowl tion was such t . good
ono thit r.e danger coul be .expected, no ri-nger of Pny kin .

PfTSIBrUT: The Court is About to be in recess. I «oul< like to
-s ycu if you c n rive tic Tribur-1 ny estic'te ns to the ^ength of
timu your exrniiv tion of the wStnesstwill continue?
rn. STT.IKB.nil: I believe th-t I slrU bfc rblt to rini3h
T 5 E PT-.'SIHTT: Tho Court will be in rccus .

(Th reupon •’ red* ss r-s token.)


9 June 4?-H--eC*-?-l-Pri:aeau- (Von3chon)

Court 1.

THS KdRSHA: Persons in the courtroom will please
find their seats.

TnZ PRS3ID2.'?: Counse) cay proceed. The Tribunal is
again In session.

BY DR. 37£XN3.u;JR: -

Q. Witness, lid the experimental subjects say that
they had not drunh any water because they were afraid of
punishment?

I assurod thorn ropoatodly that thoy would not bo
punished, elthor If they had irunh or if thoy had Interfered
with the experiment In any other way and no ono was punished,
not a single person. I uwrely as/.ed then again and again
to tell no the truth because by these evasions the experiment
was cade very difficult. It was sometimes impossible to form
any definite Judgment on tho experiment ospoolally when small
amounts of water vorj tafcon,

Tho experimental subjects had an entirely different
roason for Keeping their minor and major sins seoret from
me. At the beginning, as I see now, I male a psyohollgloal
□letaho. I promised that those who dll well In tho experi¬
ment would later bo given clgarottos in tho form of a prem¬
ium, as it wore, and now they thought that the lcngor they
held out in the experiment tho better tho ex;eriaent would
be. Therefore, they tried to stay In tho experiment as
long as possible and sc this prospoot of getting clgarottos
induced them tc got water secretly, and this was the
roason why some I caught when they ’ioro drlnXlng wat
in ordor to get tho cigarettes volunteered again, without
any compulsion from cy side, to go through the experiment
the sooond tine.


Court 1

Juno 9-:4-8-l-HD-Co'-i-Vbn Schocr.i


The so wore eiyht cases ell together, these were people
w had lost v.ry little voter because they had drunfc fresh
water c.urln v the first experiment, and they were coses v:hlch
os I c in show definitely h*jd nt leost the sane weight when
t..ey were released as when they were accepted.

Q. Hew from the rec rd of the trial I oust show you
Exhibit N . 159, the testis r.y of the witness Tscnofenlg.

Ho er.yo that you turned the experlacnt*«l subjects over to tae
Insubordinate ones ovecr to the 36 te be treated In tho way
oust aary lr. the cnep, what do you h?vu to say ab.»ut that?

A. That nev-r happened. If tho experimental subjoot
repeatedly denied hnvln. t-Jcon water that annoyed no and I
sooldod than, I admit that, but I never punished or had
punished-any One of thorn. No SS =an over entered my oxperi-
montrl room, none of ay experimental subjects was ever
turned over to tho SS for punlaliment or to be msdo compliant
and I oft .not lx*»ylne wliy Mr. Tschofenlj made this stotemont.
Ho prrboMy c ncludos fr n tho general t-. the specific. Ko
pvobc. v ly .1 cs not care lr. this case If he a aid somethin,
that Is n<t truo. «t any r n te he hs n- t tho shadow of
proof.

S. Hr. President, in thl6 c nr.eotlrn I should llho to
submit Exhibit No. 16, 0ooum«mt Ho. 16, or. pa w e 52 of ay
document bo.\k. This Is nn excerpt from the bu,fc, "The 3S
Stftto," by Kogon, pn e e 317-218.

MR. KaRDY: Hay It ploas~ the Tribunal, I must object
to the admission of this extract by Ko.on, in as much q»
this particular extract 16 taxer, out - f lt6 context, after
this paragraph Is c ntalnod In the document, In Sei-lboeck
Xcunent Booh No. 1. you will find In Ko^or.'s Booh,

"The SS-5tate, * that lr. subsequent lines Xog&n emahaei zed
the resim'hable fact that this attitude - as set forth lr.


S7Z.3


Court 1

June 9—&-8-2-HD-CO k-Von cdfcon*


this paragraph bolni introduced now - changed as soon ns
liberation case. None of the expected nets occurred, end
the .rlsonera behaved with remarkable objectivity. If at
all the whole pogo of Kogan's book snould bo lntr ducod to
show the fact that the revengeful attitude tir t ai u ht bo
exhibited in this paragraph Or. Steinbauer is now Intro¬
ducing, nev.r actually occurred or the inmates didn't
exorclso such revenue. I think that this should bo brought
out in this particular ot nnoctlon.

THE PRESIDENT: I wonder if it Ovuld bo agreed bbtwoon
defense o unsol and the Prosecution that any extract fron
Kugon's book which has not been translated oauld bo usod
and road into the rec rd by either Prosecution or any dofonso
0 ^ unsol, and tno whale book or all Portions deeaod portlnent
by Prosecution or dofenso c -unsel oould tooomo a part of tho
rooord. I suggest that for consideration by the Prosooution
and by tho Defense Counsel.

KR. ErtSDY: Your Honors, I aia not off hand able to
rooolloct whether or net Kogon's book has been offered In
evldonoo, D es the Tribunal recall that?

THE PRESIDENT: I don't think so, because It was not
translatod. We felt that was an unsuitable objection which
might woll bo.

MR. HrtRDY: Now the Introduction of this document, tho
paragra h which Dr. Steinbauer ha6 extracted, whon h« intro¬
duced this as the Belglboook exhibit, c uld at this tlao
the Tribunal accept the entire book rather than Just this
extract, then the entire book will be before the Tribunal
and wo can quote portions or sections tr.ereof In brief or at
other instances.

THE PRESIDENT: It was with that end In view that I
made the su^estl-jn which I made a moment ago and defense


2749


Court 1

June S—St-e-S-HD—C-oi-Von 5cfcj.ni


counsel night object If the book hea never been translated
but the: c.uld have It read to then and ascertain If the
original of the b'.ok was In-

’.S. H*RDY: The original booh Is In Gersan, hour K-nor.

TH2 PRESIDENT: It nee been translated Into English?

hr.. KaRDY: I think the translations are available In
English, your Honor.

THE PRESIDENT: The whole booh?

MR. EaBDY: Yes, Your Honor.

DR. KELTS: For the defendant Handloser:

Hr. Prosldent, I should like to raise a bnslo objection
against the lntr ductl n of the vftole book, the 8S State,
by Xogon. The book has throe or four r.undred pagoa and fcr.s
s.no v.ry lucrtar.t natters in it, bit naterial .atters w.'.loh
cannot bo checked. The witness Kogor. whon w-s on the witness
stand horo was uskei the quest!'n, was raked concerning a
dof.nlte fact In .la x k, he sold I should like to cnrphaalzo,
I aa net buln e asked ab.ut ay book here but wont to tostify
Sorely tc what I aa asked here and what I answer hero, I
sb- Aid like to point >ut that ay request to .avo the printed
report of the coatings of the consulting nhyslcinns wero
n 1 t accepted, because tney were to extensive and could net
oo translated. In c.-ap'-rl^on to that it is a big burden on
us defense c.unsol, if wo are now confronted with the ques¬
tion of finding the individual pages in Kogon*s bojk of
lo’.kln;. thro ugh the wh le book ar.d fcavin- to disprove atato-
aente in it. Therefore, I ask you not to accept the^ entire
t .3- in evidence but uerely tr.e r^oe froa it, which aro
•. Important in the oyes of the Defepse and the Prosecution,
and which can bo certifl d so that we oar. answer the indivi¬
dual charges.

THE PRESIDENT: If the book has been translated cad

6750


Court 1

June 9—li-fi— i-HD- Cock-7on Schoen.

copies f the translation of the book can be ca-c available
to the Tribunal not as evl .once cut available to then
f >r r 0 f 2 rer.ee, then whon either the Prosecution or any
Defense counsel desires t, use. any portion of the book,
copies of the .:r tlun and supplemented by any portions of
the context whloh op using counsel desires to ;ut in could
be intr duced In evldenoo. I suggest that matter for tho
consideration of tho Prosecution and of the Dofenso Counsel.
It is, of curse, unfair that a acre fow words out of tho
oontoxt bo put in when the contoset nay vary very greatly
the nooning of the portion whloh is introduced in cvidonco.

DR. 8TEIH3’JER: Hr. Preoldont, that le not tho case
hero. It is only n psychological referenoe to tho fact
that the testimony of prlcltlvo *eo le nust bo oxnnlnod
vory oarofully, because the oo-lo have suffered torrlblo
things, that Is what the paragraph moans, and that is ny
purpose in submitting it.

THE PRESIDENT: Of course, o.uneol for Proseoution is
of a different opinion, as stated in his objection and tho
Tribunal is not in o position to rulo upon that oattor, not
having tho oontoxt of the book before it. I will ask
counsel for the ^rosocuticn if he la awore whether or not
tho translation cf this book con be sale available to tho
Tribunal.

KR. H^RDYr Yes Your Honor, I ac certain wo can. I
believe new Judgo Swcarlngon do. s have one copy and I will
aaka cn attest to 6 ot four or five acre copies of tho
Sr. 11 ah and ^ako thou available to tho Tribunal. If tho
Defense counsel could au'oly the Tribunal with the page
number, this paragraph a -errs in Kogon's tc>k so that it
ar.y be compred to the English, and then if the'Tribunal
deslraa to place any merit on this particular paragraph


5751


? lune on Sehoon)

C ux* Nc. 1

TEE iB£SILB’'!'i Objection is crax-ruled. This nay be submitted.
‘Xosecutian may either furnish eapiea or furnish aiditirael copies
of the efij-ining p-rtion of the pege, the ertext of which this is
a pert, and sutelt anything it desires in that lino.

1®. HjKTTi Thank jru. your Honor.

TXu 3B2ZS4QSRi I shall read this short paragraph then, page 317
end 3 I 81 •The majority of those in the comps mere filled ritfc cn
inconceivable deslro f:r revengo, the mental ru.ctlcn to their help-
lessness. T-rturod poopla reeked their breins for r.tw, grertar, frr
nore evil tortures *ioh they would inflict sorxfcioc on thoso who now
vented their cruel nooda on then. This desire for revengo wro extendod
to tbs whole netiorvd scclelist regime end its adherents ....*

THE *7u-3IEE'Ti Do you went that nxrkcd rs >rur Inhibit 16, c-unsol?

un. STYJN-B/ilLRi Yes, 16 , plctso.

Witness, n*w whit were the aymptems which you observed on tho
experimental subjects during tho experiments? House be brief.

*• In tbs first poriod there acs the feeling of hunger in tho hunger
erd thirst group beccusc thcro was sC 11 enough :vallnblc. ? ron tho
third day -.n ep-rrxi metcly this fooling cfhungcr wrs displaced by
thirst end practically disappeared. *Ith tho leso of water thcro
cans 0 suden drop in body 'olght. Therefore, thirst causes r bad
SPV» trcnco. The person bcoooeo very thin, and , of courso, to c lrynr.n
the person looks ouch sicker while ir. reality there is merely a lack
of utter in the akin end the muscles. The skin bcc"r.oe dry. There is
no perspiration, the rucous rombrencs beemne dry, the nouth and tongue
era dry and the oyta lose thoir shins cad they burn c little. The
socretion of saliva la r ducod and eating becomes unpleasant. Then the
wctor is lost from the mscles which brings about a hardening of the
msclea end axeitebility f the muscles. There is c feeling of heevi-
rxss-i* the limbs end c certeln uncor‘cir.ty in cerements tod also t]e
desire to move cs little as r-ssitle • r.d to lie in bed. That bts tho


6753


9 June '-S’-9-2 -jtc asScboon)

®curl So. 1

•dv«tege tfctt the lose of w* ter through the lungs is thereby reducod.
The tenpcrcture remains ncmel on the whole. Snell Trrictiona of
373 J?»5 etn * observed in individual coses. There is conatip:tier

es is e typicel sysptxi reported free cases of distress rt sec. The
drying of the palate mokes a dry cough in soae cases. *or the first
2-3“ £*ys sleeping is still possible. Thon it boo cats interrupted end is
an Interrupted sleep but there is a short period cf sleep end then
ewekening. *r.d r therefore the subjocts ore sleeping clmoat soaiolcnt
during the day. This a: edition of dehydrctlcn fees been described
frequently. This cocurrod in tfco jct wey in ell the gx'ups rhioh
went without water.

IK* iHx^1LE:Ti -ltr.ess, the Tribunal will be in rocesa f-r c fow


moments


9 *Uac 4 7-iLJ jC-lO-Ufeloj
Coart I


TS. JU?SHill Tlu. Tribunal -ill be In recces until 1330 thle
nftcrncoc.

(Thereupon r recess vre trices ufitll 1330 heurs.)


C755


Court Jo. 1

S Jus 47-A-13-l-iflV-f > rlsjcu (Vartcnberg)


AJ7IS5CCS SISSlCS

(The hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 9 Juno 1947.)

7KI MABSEAL: Che Tribunal is ega.ln in session.

THL KXSIBOT: Counsel nay proceed.

’•'ZUilK BiIGL?CiCX - Resumed
DI«CT UAHOUffZCa (Continued)

BT Zfc. StAimUSB:

Q. Professor, hov long did the exoerlmente lest?

A. That differed considerably. I seld already thrt the group
vho received the de-salted sea vet«r vr.s In an experiment for eleven to
tvelvo days. The thirst group regained in tho oxocrinent four up to
six and a half, that is, up to the seventh day. Tho tvo pocplo vho
renalnod in the experiment for six rad half days had, as calculations
shovod, apparently drunk »™ fresh water in betvoon. Of the group vho
drank a thousand cubic centimeters of sea %*»tor none shoved results


that voro without d^ubt. lour of thorn must haro drunk roletivoly
snail an aunts of fresh water. They remained for four or five days in
the experiment. Of the othors vho drank a large naount of fresh vnter,
sono tc' tho liter, as v« could calculate later on, most remained in tho
exoerinont six and sovon days vith tho exceptional eight days and ono,

I boliove, avon nine days. In this ccso it vas especially difficult to
recognise immediately that he hcc takon in vntor and that for the follov-


lng reason:

khen I noticed for tho first tine by tho amount of urine that tho
experimental subject had drunk vetcr, becruse tho amount of urine had,
^4r^bdr^jjCj»^reascd, I reproached him about that. Thereupon, they
C adopted the' t&tfk to throw avey half of the urine that they cll-i*ated
in order to doc^yc no in that meaner. Through that I vas caused to
drav a vring cocc^usion. In tho examination of tho urine it shoved now
V that rolat Ively .Small amounts of eplt were eliminated. Thus I vrs of
tto 8 ^ 1 t vre kept in the tody rnd In thrt vry vrtcr vr.e


6rved,


C;urt So. 1

S Jus 47^-15-2-ZSi-Prir.eau (Wcrtenberg)


Is those cesea, of c>urse, the leas of body velgfct vbb snail. It
•teyed the sane. There vas even sonetices a temorary increase in
velght. In thia caae the condition of losing veight vea stooped by
this scent and voa nade up egain end alao the experimental subjects felt
fine and they did not show an incraeae or even ahoved a lessening of the
dehydration aysptoca.

After the event, of courae, it ia eaay to a ay one ahould have
noticed icxediately all of that, hut in tho niddle of the ewpericent it
vaa not ao aicple ae all that, especially aince ve were dealing vlth a
preparation, the effecta of vhlck had not been clarified yet entirely,
and one vaa not auite eure that an unauapected effect of thia preparation
night appear. Thia eroerlcent put ut in a v k ry difficult position in-
judging it and aovoral tinea one could alnoet doeoair, especially bocauae
it vaa ao difficult to prova that thcae people had taken in freah vater
and becauee it vaa ao difficult to get the exoericental aubjecta to con-
fcao. Tho ncaaa by vhich they obtained vater vere, of courae, aeny fold
and everybody in the aurroundlnga voa helpful. Thcrofore, thia erpori-
gsont, at loaat for a large part of the eoa vater group, voa to be
regarded aa a cosploto falluro. Cur fight against thia eonatant drinking
of vater vaa a difficult one, not bocauae I had oorhapa not undoratood
that a person if he la thirsty obtalna vaur, but vhat I wanted to
achievo vaa that theec people should have honcctly coco to ae and anil,

"I Just couldn't stand it any nore. Last night I drank a liter of
voter." Ivorything would have been all right and ouito ainole; it is
auite clear that da voter cokes you thirsty end that, therefore, the
group vith the thwiacnd cubic centlcctcrs of vater, of courae, vaa cub-
Ject to this tcaptation the nos*.. *

On the ether hand, the group vith five hundred cubic contlaetera
of soa vater, to a relatively large extent, yielded at lceet a useful
result. There are sceo enong then vfco certainly did not drink anything
or. the side and aone vho drank very little. They recoined in the experi¬
ment five to six days. Those vho had obtained fresh voter r-.-caincd seven.


Court So. 1

S Jus 4?-A-13-3-IBk-?rJaeau (Vartenberg)


eight, or, a few of then, area else daye in the exoerisent.

Cf all tfct group# that cf the fire hundred cubic eentincterc of ece
«itar vet in the best situation because their lots of body weight was
the lowest and thora was hardly any experisentel subject in this CTOua
who reached the lislt of tec percent. The lose varied according to the
Banner of conducting tho exoeriaent free four percent to eight percent.
Sono of then drank so such fresh water that the;* were balanced at tho
ond of the excorln-nt end had the oane water content as at the beginning
of tho experiment. In the two cost difficult groups, in tho thirst
group and In the thousand eublc ccntinetwrs of con water group, too, no
on# exceeded the litit of ten percent to, et tho cost, twelve ccreor.t of
loss.

Thus, net a c'.ngls ovuerlnant le included which edvnnood into tho
*oau where or- ern really consi~or dasngc to the health of tho subject.

I ac'do theso calculations so.*/ carefully snd I beliwvo that for tho
Banner in which they xhtj cade the* I can take tho responsibility boforc
any scientist. 1 an nitre used that the dehydration did net rerch any
dengurous uxte.it it the case of tny one of ry e'^>orlsontal cubjocto.

x. Ikon. lse: reaarke yxi c<ji\X repent oxprose rofcronce to

your o«th vhich y/x have sworn/

A. Yes, 1 can do so. As 1 hwt elreody staged, ! node the calcu-
lations in such a thet I works! out the loee which cuss abtwt
through fasting vith special cocridorution of th- wuter balance of the
Schr.ofer group. *Vt regains is the water loee and th-1 loee of w^tar
v*s calculated by ne and in no case, as I said, did it tnount to ~oro
than twelvo percent. Thus, to the beet of ny enowlodge and uy con¬
science, did I calculate- it and state It ooccTdirg to the trut! .


9 June <C_l/_l_C<v'k (Int., W-rtcnbcrp)

C'xrt I

k* la the case of those experimental subjects, after the drink¬
ing r f ter water, did they get diarrhea?

« Ho, net In a single ease. Cn the contrary It was notlce"blo
that practically all of the experimental persons w<re strongly consti¬
pated.

But Cr. Schaeffer reports that In Dr. Sirany' experlncnts
diarrhea was observed.

A The difference between Slrany's experlncnts and ny experiments
was the following: The cxpcri-.e-tal subjects used by Slreny could drink
sea water Just as they liked and sac of them drank large amounts at ono
time and that is at a time when the* body still had sufficient water.

Taken In such awurts the sea water has the effect af causing diarrhea.

In ur experiments, the experimental subjects received sea water In snail
amounts of 100 to 300 cubic ccr.tlautcrs per dooage, five times a day.

The witness Hllwein has stated In the affidavit which the Prosecution
has submitted as Inhibit So. 1*0, if 1 t; D't mistaken, In hlo statement
of tho 13 March 19*6, stated before tho Vienna pollco as follows: The
participants were moreover In addition given dally four to five times a.
day salt water lr. amounts <*f one- half to r.c cuart all together; This
sh'-vs that the amounts -ere r.-t larger than 100 t 3>0 cubic ocntlmcters
por day. Pr'm the experiments undertaken by the Arglishnrn Eay from the
year 16 &i, it Is tawwn already that the sal*o which cu-ioc diarrhea, If
one Is In a state of dehydration already, d- n-t have that effect any
more, but In the ease a stubborn c-nstlpati-n appears. Moreover, Slrany
used water fr'm the Adriatic which had n~t been examined brntcrlolcelcally
and ours was guaranteed t~ be free of germs.

‘v In the ca-c of jrur experimental subjects, did thcy.gct fever?

A The highest temperatures which I srw m the sea water c*scs
were around 3?.5 cc."tigr*dc, only *n tw- caeca ioncdlateljr after the
Intravenous Injection rf hypertonic sugar salutl'n «n salt solution,
there w^o a short rice lr. temperature, an occurrence which 'therwice

£'759


3 June 47_A-yjC-.l4-2-Cook (Int., Greenberg)
Court I


In practice It <clt* frequent after intravenous injoctions, but that
1 * not the effect of ten water but the effect of intravenous injection*
of liquid that appeere In every tenth or twentieth patient, and it it
a abort rite of tesperature which lasts for about an hour and then it
subsides ag*in fc but at to tea water lttelf nobody could get any fevor
froa it.

W rfhat wat the degree of tesperature!

* I already ta.ld that they did not go abovo 37.5.

ii *hy then according to statements of witnesses, were thoto
patients delirious with fsver, the cjcperlaental subjects!

A Xorsally there «m a dsllrlun froa fewer if a patient has a
41 degroc tcaperaturc, ever 100, but where it is 37.5 or oven lest, 'no
cannot have a dolirlus fr«a the fever. Such tcstlnony is a shano for
the witness, otherwise there was also no delirium in any case, not in a
tingle case, the delirlua which usually coats aorc froa drinking than
frees thirst aftor the .drinking of tc« wntor, can be observed once in a
while in the n*et rare cases, but in such a degree cf dohrdratIon as

occurred in ny experiments thoy aro not posslbls and actually thoy

*

never occurred.

Witness, hrw did the ending, the interruption cf the oxpcrl-
nsnta occur!

A 1 either discontinued thi oxpcrlocnta by the Intravenous injoe-
tion of liquid, or in the thirst group, I gave th»a a solution of salt,
light hypertnic salt solution, because causes the salt solutions to re¬
main in the body longer than water and therefore, the body depots arc
filled up with a norc lasting effect. In the sea water group I cither
only gave sugar solution or sugar solution alxcd with hypertonic salt
solution, »nd that is tho reason why sene individuals froa that group
had ellnlnated. ar.re salt than they had received, which w*s unusual, so
that inducing snail aaount of salt could be urdcrtakcr. here and regarded
•t useful. A large number cf the experimental subjects, at the noaent I
cannot renenber their nuaber, discontinued the experiment, slaply by


0760


9 June -7_a_i jC_ls_3.Cook (Int., ^grteaberg)

Court I

drinking v^ter or silk. In the intrarenous adainistratien cf a liquid,

I acne tine s adniniatered aoac calciun.

t* Tor what purpose did y~u add the calcinet

A Cnc kn^wa fr-.a results of exrorir.ir.ts that through adalnistr«>-
ti-n rf ««lt over pn extended period calcine ie clininated fr-a the
hlood *rd in order to prerent such p loss or 8Plt or lowering ~f the
••It content, I added tone calcitn.

^ Witness, what was th, effect of these Injections or the drink¬
ing of water!

A Thr effect extrp ordinarily lapreaalvc. If, in the croc
of the lntrarcn-ua injection, one injected »Vut 15C to 200 cubic ccntl-
natcra, the feding of thirat stopped elrcrdy, and tho entire appcarrnco
vb8 , pftcr nbout :nc quart of liquid hod been rdalnlatcred, changed
strikingly. It la true thpt the thirsting person through hio loss <t
wptcr, lo'ks b«d, his eyes ore sunken in. This and a certain lassitudo
pad p fptifu*, lassitude in the auacleo, -p a strikingly ended with the
injections. I kn.w that only with the firing ^f auger and. other intulln
shots I noticed such p cuick effect.

S, Sow I hare to toll 7'U thPt tho witness Bpuer, in the exhibit
which wp« net girtn under oath, testified exhibit Ho. 13®, th»t tho
interruption to-k plpce alwry* -nly when the expcrincntal aubjecta
were Plrcdy in afc-ny. *hat do jru hare to sy V* thrtl

A "V.e witness Bpuct vm perhaps three tlr<s at the O'at, for
pcrhps half »n hur, at ny stations So hinttIf h n s s»id in hio state¬
ment that the experiments lasted f-ur tc six d-ys, at the time when he
vs thcro, there was at a->st only 5^r cc of sc wtsr In tho experiment,
p-d pfter this «nount had been ad-ninistvrod nobody is in agony after 6
days. That d cs n t exist. I kn w tho witness Bauer and I an c nrinced
-f n thing arc than th-t he doesn't kn v at all vhrt agony is, tut a
lay pers-n "f course, likes to thr-w »Vut ncdic'l terns. *hat did
occur in the experimental pere n v»- a so-e*lled apathy, a certain


u761


9 Jxo 0 47--TjC_l<_4-Cook (Int., rfartcnb rg)

Court I

aouarUnce, «ht is oiled elceplr.ca?, but wfca*. 'nc neans by ng-ny,
de-th agony, r C c scans the condition of aooebr-dy ah-rtly bof re dying
in hi a Vat n-aenta, and now the witness Bauer said aftor the inj.cti^n
'{ the i»na, re he expresses It, the cxperi-.ntal subject revived, <*11
rt then, a' it la a considerable -rdical achievnent if - nc or. rccrll
f-rty people fron the la B t #vrp.

i *»• v ltncee Bauer, wh* is a businesa s*n in a civilian pro-
fcaai-n, say* furth-r thrt he s-v sysptoas ->f heart wcakr-can. What do
y*u say about that? . -

A The vitnesa Bauer develop^ the clcotro cardiograna which I
took. H* developed the fllna. I suppose that on that opportunity ho
alao examined thto like an expert. *hat occurred in the c^oo <t tho
experimental subject* vaa a cloving down f the puls*, ^io la called
ir. Goman acdlcrl llternturo "Scfc natellung - , It la a protective poaltlen
of t c blood circulation. Thla is aupp'-aed to express that through the
al wing up ~f the heart beat aa In the caoc * f any case *f deficiency,
aa In th« case 'f hunger a certain ccnonlc using up, that lo * quiet¬
ing down 'f tho circulation results. This thcry I boliove la tho
c'-rrcct ono but not the one that Herr Bauer accepted.


Court 1

June 9-JV-15-1—3P- K de h c n -Vp rtentcrg.


Z. how the sane witness says that zany of then get
rabies and similar things?

A. There was no c-se of rablos, not o single one.

The o-’se of rabloe has not ben described In literature
ab ut sen distresses or later depressive conditions. In
healthy persons peyohlatrlc symptoms do not belong nnong the
symptoms of thirst but there Is a certain nervousness and
excitablenoss as In any condition of deficiency. Those aro
all part of the thirsty person's reaction.

One single time It happened that one of the experi¬
mental subjects went to the .tale nurse and cried for water.

I was In the adjoining rooa end I hoerd these loud volcoo
so I c"ae it and asked \:i at was going on. I was afraid
that in his nervous condition the erson would perhaps
c.ntlnuo to soroam. I asked his to return to his bod and
with the hel; of a lln-n bondage lot hln bo fastened and
asked for the termination of the experiment, which took
placo In t few moments. The ox*orlmontr.l subject ronalnod
in bed absolutely qi let and ho was told by me that the
exerlcont would then be terminated. I said nothing aoro
and he waited qulotly until the lnjeotlon was prepared.

From this lnoldent, which from a medic'1 point of view, was
quite Insignificant, the case of madness woa ma-o out of
that. In this case of ar.dness, flnrlly It has been 3 aid
that I had the -orson tied to his bed as a unlshnent.

Suoh an extraordinary statement snows, now one con Uatort
facts which arc quite Insignificant and how they onn be
cl8lnt_r;reted to have actives of 111 will.

Were there any other incidents which oocurod
during the experiments?

... Otherwise I only ex-erienccd cr-.rps in the muscles
w ich lasted for c short period. They c.ro called tetanoid


S763


Court 1

June 5-2-HD-1 :ecban-’.’a rt enb er u.

or tetanor :.—us attacks, 'hlcfc can -c obes-rvud in any cose
of ; ef iclonc. of water, which are conditioned 'ey the clraw-
ini of water >ut of the muscles. In this case I immediately
discontinued the exeriment by neons of «n injection of
calcium '.ni immediately achieved that the croans stov-ed
nd immediately achieved the restoration of a con lately
r.\rmml fe-llng. From that Incident the famous crying, attacks
were developed and the so-called tetanoid attack, r relative¬
ly froquent ha tening. There '-re -eerie who o-nlrlng it
a': /Ut n ur ose if they breath quickly. This attack can
.0 o-ntrolled with oert-lnty immediately with calcium.

”o ex orionced it quite frequently in cur • rnctise "nd I
never saw any damaging offcota fr>a It. How such nn att"ok
looks nay -.erhn?e ^ seen fr^.a the plcturo w-lch I had
nuado 'X in ord r to show how it looks.

DR. iZZZ.'Sjt'CLR: Your honor, I would like to oall tho
attentl n of the Tribunal to the picture from th- famous
text book, it lo a photostat of the lcture of t..e famous
text f a tetanoid attack. I pa only submitting the
T.hoto b ra;h, I t lvo tnis picture tno title "tetanoid
picture" Ha. 17, that is exhibit No. 17. It Is referred
t< In Doouacnt Bock 2, under Document No. 35.

7K2 VITKZSS: This manner of cramps shown in the
picture, that shows now these crying attacks look.

HARDY: Has Dr. Stelnbauer as yet introduced
Document No. 35?

DR. 5TSINSAUER: Yes.

-■-£ FHESIDSHT: That Dooumer.t has not been introduced
in evidence. »

HR. HaRDY: I am not aware tnat it has, Your Honor.

This a.norently 1 a sup lemer.t to Document No. 35; la
that correct? <


. o?iL


Court 1

June 9-A-15-3-fiD-Heehan-Vartenberg.

DR. ST2H3AUSR: Yea.

HARDY: Do you at this time propose to Introduce
this? May I ask the defense counsel to explain Just what
Doouaent Ko. 35 is. In tala docuaent book I have a copy
of the picture but If It refers to the weight table, I do
not have that.

DR. ST£I.'3A-ER: Thl- is to explain to the Court In
the fora of a Picture h<* such a tetanus cramp looks. It
is uneoesaary that an expert desorlptl >n of tetany be oade.
It Is altogether unimportant In Itself; It Is Important
only booauee the witness for the prosecution emphasizes It.

MR. HARDY: Is It an extract of Exhibit 17, Your Honor?

DR. 6TEIKBAUZR: Yes.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel do you now offer your Document
Ko. 35 In evidence?

DR. STSINBAUER: Yes, Your Honor, It Is only the
picture to Illustrate to the court now such a tetanus oranp
looks.

2-JR. HARDY: I have It straightened out. The picture
1 b the exhibit and not a supplonent In the docuaent book.

I did not have a copy of the picture and I thought It was
a supplement. I don't see the materiality of the document,
but I won't object to It.


S J nne-^-L-J-lo-l-Gross (Vortonbur.-;)

C curt 1

IC. S2ZH3JJU.; Hey X continue, Your Eor.orJ
ZZ PICSI3Z3T: Tou givo this Ho. 17T
DH. sSBBoiOffi: Yos, your 'donor. So. 17.

122 pass i ng ; ?; Counsol nay proceed.

3Y DP, SlilJ&JEE:

C - - whet would huvo happened if such an incident hod

occurrod uhea you wore outside of tho ccqp ct your own quartorsT

a. Bxring the day I was practically oil tho tiao at this oxpo>-
iuontnl station or in tho adjoining lavorctory. and, during tho ni^t
thoro was c night sorvieo. Thoro wo* alw^rs c nodical non-coo thoro
who van on duty during tho nitfit. In the plan which I osplainod bo-
foro it is shewn that tho nodical students hod their rooa next door
to tho oaporinoatal rooo. *hat is , they woro availablo ot any tlao
whon anything was nooded. Cortainly I could bo roachcd by tolophono
freu thoro. I hod givon strict ordors that I nust bo callod at rny
tino if anything unusual should occur and I could bo in tho exp or i-
uoatrl rcoa in a few alnutos from uy own quarters. 2v.-ry day I ay coif
paid ay ai ; £t visit about 11 O'clock. *nd, I boliovc that I saw to it
that everything was token cars of for tho night that could bo tnkoa
Coro of in advnnco.

3. Vltnoss, tho witnoso Tschofonlg tolls us now that tho o;>-
perlaenttl rabjccts wore so thirsty that they over, dr end tho wator
out of tho pells that woro usod for cleaning.

-- I boliovo that tho experimental subjocts had so much cppoi' -
tunity as has been shown to obtain water by other aeons that they did
not have to uso tho pails that wore used for cloaning. Uorcov-r they
could drink out of tho pails only at a accent whon thero happened ' 00
ncbcc;- to superviso thee or guard then jd I don*t boliovo in cuch cr.goo
tho;* would havo waited until tho water was dirty end uoreovor that thoy
dr-nk cut of such pails 2 think impossible because I had issuod a
strict prohibition that no water should bo carried into tho exporina&tal


9 v—c-^r-1 U-l6-3-C-rone (Vartoaburc)

C curt I

recc. I fio not believe that this over happened either. If, hovever,
it did hrrnon it was u strict violation of ry ordor. If I had socn
it I vculd hare hold tho person responsible.

£ . Tschofoals, who was for ^w cy at his r-rcy station, not at
tho oxporinautcl station, oontinucs to m? that you withdrew lcr t ”0
mounts of Wood out of pcoplo that decapod tarn. Uhat do you sry
oh cut that?

a . She mount of blood which wo needed for our cha-ic^l dotox-
nlcatlons mounted to ah cut 10 co por day. and thoy wero not ov on
trjeon every dry. I do not believe that anyone of ny ojporii.ontc'l
subjocts hfld aoro than about 150 cubic cc. of blood taJcon out of thaa
befero end during tho cjpori-cntnl period. If sauebody rItos blood
ho jivos 500 to 600 cc of blood at ano tine. *nd I uysolf rA ~ 0 blood
duria; tills war at loast fivo or six tL.es and I know that ovon euch
a lnr t ;o mount is of no slcnifiojnoo, nuch loos c.n 10 cc per d cy
have rn influor.co cn tho honlth. *o cannot tJ: hero about largo mounts
of blood at all <ad if Itchofonig st^tos that tac t.hin.- of tho blood
was dono in rn uniolor.tifio nannor I c.n only so.' that it woo dono
aLiost exclusively by nystlf. Only in very fww cos os did ono of tho
Ironch lodical students t Jco tho blood under iiy supervision. I ay-
self hod e^orionco la clinics for oJOut 15 years prior to that and
X hopo thv.t durin,; that lino X roachod the piaco that I could toko
blood toots in a scientific and correct i-aimsr.

Tou nro also supposed to have curriod out livor punctures
unint errupt odly.

Sheso liver puncturos have tl.o following history. In tho
ccso of ocno export .outcl subjocts as It bee mo ovidont lot or on c-
fto;* tho drlnfclju; of water tharo w . 8 a tamorary onlv. ln\* of tho liver
Keen %piCoCr was thoro I showed this to hin and I£p in,~er thoroupoa
told ao to puncture the liver in ordor to be ablo to exclude the pos¬
sibility that throu. a tho addition of salt in tho case of a differ¬
ent mount cf wator there were any changes in tho liver. On his ox-


9 Jun^-_ —i J-1&-3-&T088 (Vartcnburr)
Court I


icr I curried cut sccc livor punctures at that tino. I boliovo thoro
vor about e or 10 and I did it by tie method which was practice*, for
years r.t tho clinic end which I knew vory well. During ny life I ccjv
riod out about , let us soy-about 100 livor puncturos alrocdy. Tho
uctuod is absolutely not dangerous if it is carried out corroctly and
it is also absolutely' painless.

Q . ilew Tschofcni,j »oys further—■•e it was tho caso in othor
csporinoctcl stations 3d.:lbocck too transferred prisoners to tho
regular hospital in order to voll tho figures :t do,.tk c.jos.* I oak
you now, did you transfer osporinor.tal subjocts daring the experiments
to the regular hospital?

-ot a single ono of ny experlnsetal subjects wus transferred
to tho ro ular hospit a during tho aporlnsut. I havo already told
that during tho proli:dnary porlod to tho oxporlnonto ono experimental
subjoot foil ill with fcror, that ia in tho preliminary part when tho
oaporimonts woren't in process yet*.and that I trmoforrod tnis porson
to tho hospital. Shut was tho only ease which was transforrod at nil
freo ny station fr*i the beginning of tho preliminary porlod. Sschofojiig
doos not som to know what thirst noons. Othcrwioo ho would know that
it vculd bo absolutely sonsoloss to transfor scuobody who io thirsting
to nnothor hospital in order to voll tho bad condition bocuuse whilo
ono is thirsting thoro arc only wo things to do, oithor you lot thai
dio frou thirst or you administer liquid to hin and than ho rocovors.

«nd giving hin liquid if such a condition hud occurrod at jjy tino I
would havo givon hin liquid und I wouldn't h.vo undertaken any 16 mg
transports bocau^o that wouldn't h-vo nado .toy sense. xHit, not a
single ono vac tranoforroi end this ono tr.-nsfer r.t tho boginnlfc, that
is tho first diminution cf pooplc when I did not ko<n ^t all in :iy
station, Curing the proli;:ia_ry oxamin».ti'a-thcso persons woro not ny
osporincnt.l subjects but they were sick 'rtsonors whose illnoss I &io-
cova-cd vhoso troatnont I initiated -ud wh; v-erc nover included in my


0763


9 Ja»g-;.J—16-4-Qro « » (tf-rtenbur,-;)

Court I

c^criucnts, It hcsiponod in the Interest of thoso prisoners that thoir
lllnoss we* t routed. Eero -gain that wag an action on :y part which was
nccoas.-jy fres u nodical point cf riew <a4 %*iich hod nothin,-; to do at
ell with czperinonts and which then wag xiudo tho basis for such uie-
intovprotr.tion. and the witnogg Pillwein who during tho whelo tiuo
dnrino- tho oaperi-ents was at xy experimental station end so tosti-
nocy tho Proaocutor read to Dr. Schaefer soys in his otatcr.cnt before
tho Vienna Police, inhibit Bo i«iO of the Prosocutioa Exhibits Boyo tho
following* *Proc othor experimental stations I know frea hear gay that
neny ocs-s of doath occurrod . Eowevor, ono practices in tho following
nannor. Tho potlontg wore in a very vojeenod one'. dauigod condition and
woro treneforrod to the ro .tdar hospital where tho;- diod after a ehort
period of tiuo* Details about this could giro a fotcor co-prioonor
Stchr, Treu this f emulation it is shown unoquivoc.-.bly that tho wit¬
ness io spooking about transforg to regular hospital which occurrod in
othor station*, ttis fomulatlca is so dour that it cannot bo uixod
up frith uy caporiucntol station at all. Vhon I concludod the ojpo-.-i-
nonts, I still rotuinod tho experimental subjects in .iy station co
thr.t tho occond group wan aloo observed afterwards for «.t least 10 days
the first experimental Troup for 16-17 days. Iton I r-quircd of tho
chiof physioian of tho hospital as woll as tho c«S?? rfficor that thoso
peoplo would not bo allowed to work for mother 1 -; days and thr.t they
would rood ro odditirnd food rations oven thou h the Majority of theu
had ro.-chod rgoin thdr ori. Inal weight cad in p xt h A oven cxcoodod
that. I was as cured of this quito cortialy and at teat tino I oboo-
lutoly thought that this prar.lso would bo kept.

Q. tfitnoss, othorwiso you also did sCcetbing on bohulf of tab
prisono a, you already nentioaod ci.;arcttos, and now this, did you do

anyth ing olao for the prisonorsT

• • • •

a . I tried whatever I could do. Of crarso, I was a foroi nior,
end an outsidor after .'ill and had no influoace myself vUt among the


G769


9 Juno-a —hv—16-5-Grcss (b'orteabur.-;)
Court I


GTCTE) thoro voro ecco vhc hod served is the ^ir 7crce, ono of thaj had
ovez received tho ires cross decoration. I c Olod the attention to
those pooplo oarrosaly and ashed that tho reason for their bein'* ka.it
In dotontioo ohould bo rccxecinod. This, too, vac pra;iBOd at that tine.
On that occacicn I found out or rather I was told or assured that thoso
nca.;lo wore not k<?t in tho concentration c.ur> bcc_uso they were
slos but ’-ccauso thoy voro asocial or aoebors of asocial f&&ilioc, I
want to ttr hcsixo a, ain that I had no opportunity to oxaiinc tho filoo
of those pccplo and in that recpoct I had to r.lio upon what was boine
told thoro. Soday hero I do not want to characterise thoeo orporiaoa-
tsl subjocts as scoothinc possibly thoy wore not. at that tiuo, of
coxiroo, I rolled \*oon it that things voro as -1 van told but now I
havo hoard sue:. thin,?* that nov I could not .ruarantoo if this was how
tho conditions actually voro. FurthoRjoro I have nlro^dy coutionod
th'.t tvo of ny oxperinentcl subjects had so-Callod osc^o inol,';nio.
aft or the ccnaluaion of tho exporinonts I wont and said that they hrd
reported to tho oxporinents undor conditions that this coc po point
would bo trhon av_y fron thaj. Thorcupon I was prenisod that tho os-
c-»o i.:oi;Axin would bo rciovod and I nov hoard with j-lcnsuro that this
act-iidly hqpjonod. Ono of tho prisoners requostod that I do •Cuotbln,>
that his hair bo cut. I should have thou/.ht it ridiculous to uosticn
tho thin-; here if tao vitnoes Horn had not tostifiod as to hov dif:*i-
C'J-* it was to .rot sajothiiv: liko this accxv'liohcd. I succoodod in
that too. Furthers ore, in re.-.rd to tho Trench uodioJL etudonts ifco
vero verkin: for nc I spcio on their behalf and I s..v that thoy voro
removed frou the lavor cananics and were a.ployod in tho hospital.

J:r thaj, of course, that vas a considora-lo alleviation first bo-
cau 80 it is acre ploasant for a nodical ion to oo cole to work in hie
own _ refoasion, soconily because in tho hospital th<5* nad quite dif¬
ferent lo'.^inc, quite diff-rent food, and quite different work. I 1 -
so tried in tho cose of tvo to ret it throu,h that their coses be cn-


6770


9 Juno-j-iU—16-6-Gross (Vartanbury)
C ourt I


Kilned but I was refusal and that was pointed out to ac that in eases
of these nodical students wo wero concerned with politic..! prisoners
an;', therefore examination cf their files was without on? hopo. Oao
hes to eonsidor that I as a aasbor of the l«iftw,ffo was nothing but
on outsider and was thoro as a ,iuost who hod nothing to gjy, no ir-
Jluoncc, who didn't know anythin,; about concentration c .sps either.
Thcro ves nothin; in ay powor but the ability to unko requests that
ay o^iorlaontal subjects end the prisoners who wore working for no
bo given thoso alleviations which they bed ashed for and I saw to it
that tills van done. That was all that I was ablo to do. I could not
do noro end it was not in ay powor to do uny more.


era


9 Juno ?-«-.v<-17-l-3oard-(Von Schoen)

court I


%• In the Plilwuin affidavit, exhibit 1-.0, or. incid¬
ent is Ponticnod that you gav.. up a Yugoslavia medical
student from your aodlcal station; what was that about?

.v. It is true that tlais Yugoslavia a.dlc-1 stuiont
had volunteered to wor^ with me. I is.-ced him whether he was
acquainted with laboratory nethods and blood ex aginations
and wnon he said, yes, I tooi hla on. I discovered that
he was not capable of doing t .oao things; therefore, I
assigned him to the night servloe, and after the first tlmo,
I discovered that he had slept all night. Ir. every hospital
a nurse who sleeps at nl ;ht, ignoring the people who are
wntru3t:d to his care, is called to account, but I only
o/iid to hin that was impossible; if he was •98l-;n .d to
night service he had to 6t-;y awoho. Two days later I come
to the station - t r.l tni ht to inquire, to sec hew the
exporlromtol subjects were getting along. Ko was n night
duty again, and was somewhere in the hoe ltal, but he was
not whore he was supposed to be; thereupon, I .shed that
he be exchanged for another medical student. Thlo Yugo¬
slavian medical student v/.a not punished. ■ He •••as .aligned
to onether part of the hospital I do not believe that I
did anything Inhumane there.

Q. Professor, thv. nur3d i'nx, was mentioned by the
Prosecution, '.'mt do you nave to soy about th t?

.». One day during the preliminary period of the
experiments when the people ware given the Luftwaffe
rations, I c jt,o to the station one day, and I was told #
by the oypsles that they had had - discussion with this
= lo nurse . They complained, they said, that ho :i 2 r.ot
lve thorn the food they erj supposed tc get. -"he nerse


»


772


9 Juno S-reard-(Von Schoen)

JX'.-.r i

. «, s-id that the Gyp si 03 had bo a tan bin, »nd tho Syosios

said that ho was alwa '8 brutal with thon. I investigated

tho nattor and found out that this nurso had given art of

tho food to aonoon-e else, nJt to tho ox werixontal subjects.

I da-Minded that ho bo ox chan god. Tho witness Vichvo; tostlf-

iod ho was sont bach tc his forner station. Ho vaa not

punished lr. any way; .nd ho was replaced, fron that tine

on thore wore no longer riots any nore.

^v-n at tho tine w;ion thoro really v.ao hunger. This

first incident occurred when tho jx.:orl-.ontal aubjocto

voro supposed to bj getting *iOGO calories a day.

/fitness, new I nr- coning to tho soat serious

charge which tho Prosecution has raised against rou; that

i 3 , that in these -xporinonts you had death casos. I should

like to r- for you tc the tootiaony of .eagust Vloh-'cg. I

should like t^ remind tho Tribunal of looucont Z., frort

loounjnt fcoofc 7 of tho defendant fluff, which was suba: ttod

by ay colleague, Dr. Sauter. This file shows that thio

Prcaocuticn witness, aside fror tho five years pon’tontlary

sentence, which ho admitted, had a nunbor of sontencos,

five sentences before tho no which ho nontinned. The

witness said on the ’ 1 th cf Docoxbor 1 S-. 6 : "Two or throe

•

tines I believe I can ro-.onbor that tho stretcher was
carried out with a cloth over it, and they were tnkon to
the -aertuary. n Ho -■'as ox-mined by i.r. Hardy on page -*72 of
the record, where no repeatedly said that there were two
or thro- cases which were taxon to tho h-rtuary, and^whorl*

I questioned hin, on page -isj of the Gernan record, ho
said: "T car. rononber frou ay own observ itlon having aeon
that .ecplo wore token d.w;-. tho road fr the station to
the t rtuary."

3773


5 June 47-«-.j^l7-^-3card-(Von Scfaoen)
CCU ST I


"Da. STmINB-iUS?.: Th*n. you ver „■ r.ot positively -old

that these people had died?

■VI38U3&: I cannot say that under oath. I do not kno*
I don't roaember exactly."

I want to remind you of your oath, witness. I ask you,
did you have any death cases or do you bollve that.such
wore consequences of your experiments?

•u Hot ft single person died m those experiments. No
one was harmed. .£1 the experimental subjects wero released
by no in a satisfactory condition and with a weight corres¬
ponding to their original weight. I was not able to have
any body covered with a cloth and taken t the mortuary
because there were no bodies. SevcrAl times, however, I
sent experimental subjects ever to the X-ray room, and It
is true that I had them oovored because they had to pass
water, and I diin't want those thirsty people to see
water all the time. That is the explanation cf those
"doad persons". Moreover, some cf tho experimental sub¬
jects were carried out into the court yard bo wj could
photograph tnoa. The testimony of the witness Vlehvog is
definitely a mistake if it is not anything else.


9 June-.—3J-17—l-^sr--Yc lk-Sch*cn)-
C urt 1

y Oc y-u r.aec cr the witness Viv.hw._-?

.. I rencii r hnvin- sun iiin. I noticed hin cciuso ill tho
nurses w.rktn in the hc« r itsl when I ha; s.-n -cf r_, and ay ne ileal
etu-nts ml-s -firth, ha.’, z r 1 trim L. 1 notice; that thr- was eno
nurs- there with a r.en tri .n le. I inquired a v oi*t that • rc.n trian le¬
an: I was t i; that tr.-.t was far criminals. 1 uas t 1* that this cun
ha ’ quite a . aat.

. Di * you over see .rf-ss r L. in'er in Dachau Our in the
.r crlnants?

.. TeS, .in-r -.as tr.cr. -nee with Seri a n 1' ke'’ at the
*_x r -rinents. no was th-r- in the ex. eriner.t?l ro c < r the IV ■ rat ry ter
c' cut an h-ur.

(] hit, Ole witness. Tach; fen in- , says that filin’or ‘-as in
Dach.au earlier an tc . k c re rf settin up the ex .ri&ontal station?

.. ..cc.r’in t what has ‘con sal' in the c ursc. f the r.-
sonteti n f evi enc. ; the sea nter _x. eriaente, it is quite iir s >:s-
el'lc — in -r ha nothin t. ! with th- wh lc j..elininari 3, except
that h- wa3 r-Sent at th. iiscussi n cn the 25th -f ay. Before my ar¬
rival in Jachiu n x. -rin.nt: 1 etnti r. wrs ret u. or ev.:; talked a’ cut.
This tostic-n? cf Tsch.'fenin , that . in'or arron e ' an ox, -rinuntal
station there is inc rrect. Hi. statcecnt that lp yin _r tt k i. vantage
it the • tunity t. c rr/ert . ris n. ro i- .<ati nal dciolisa, 1 r ev.ry-
cne who kn-w . in _r r. I his attitude is ri-licul us ind incr. it ' 1«_.

But this tv.stix. .iy had a . rrt in hairdn ly t in er in his . siti n in
Vienne, an:! it -r i'ly ha’ : c nailer' lo part in t ;.In .r's unfortu¬
nate decisi'n tc cccxiit ruici Only the final in otus, in the lust
years f his life, (..pin _r suffarc.l s: ouch nisi rtunatc, atij, was sc
cft.n in is: air that it require !cnly a snail in; .uis tc take that
final st_; . ~ .in ._r 1 st his only sen in the *arj his ranehil' was
kill*. ’ ’y : ‘ ; his s n-ir.-law was sent t ..ussia f r s r/ica; .. in-

-,.r 1 st his h r__ in an air rai'; 1 . in or r.s Iriv.n out f his clinic

0775

I


9 Jur.J-17-2a-3card—(7 'c Ik-v:n Sch -n)-
Ccurt 1


L.pin-cr was refuse*! .^ztdssicn tc pu' lish hisscicntific life's n.rk.
niv-, for a nan who had w.n hen ref thr u heut thu w.rlf ’efero these
thin s ' r.u ht his tc d is; air, at the or..' cf such a rich lif*;. Ji . t in
cv.ry auici le is there ac nfessi.n f milt; it can 'c the result :f
hopeless lispair.


9 Jun-A-42-1:-I—love (Int. Vor, Schon)

Court No. I.

A Sppinger had no nore part ir. these experinents than
that ho was asked for his scientific opinion; that he gave his opinion;
that .e was asked to observe theso experiments and to check with
whetror they were being performed correctly; that was all, and not one
grain core.

Q Witness, I brought that up only because k’r. Hardy nen-
ticned Eppinger and his suicide in a different connection. Let's go
back to the experiaents. I should like to ask you about the food
after the end of the experiaents?

A After the experiment was finished, the subject, for one
or two days, got a very light diet. That was of course necessary be¬
cause soe* of then had been fasting; because it is a mistake to give
hia a heavy diet immediately when a person has been fasting. Thoy were
giv^n oilk for one day and light foods for one or two days; that was
not chicanory, that was a nodical .ueasurc. After that thoy voro Liven
tho reations of the flying jwrsonr.ol as tl»y had been given bofero tho
experiment. When tho socond group was finished I had temporary diffic¬
ulties with tho food. There woro n^out fiftoen ton. This was because
the airfield froo which I got the food had been beebefl and tho supplios
had been Burned out. I wont to tho kitchen of- tho caap, therefore, end
requested food of the sane number cf calorios as tho flying pcrsonnol
got. I had difficulties for one or two days until the supply fron tho
Luftwaffe was re-established and this amnge.^nt for high calorie
food frea tho prisoners' kitchen for two dsy3 brought no into temporary
difficulties with the S3. Tho prisoners did not get loss; they ro*ly
got nor focd. If I had given th-n the re -alar canp food I would not
have had any further difficulties bccavso the camp kitchen woul? have
bc^n obliged to supply this feed.

5 .'itnese, at the er/i did you ascertain that all tho ex¬
perimental subjects were returned in good health?

A “.fore releasing the ox;c.*i-?r.v-al subjects I -.rfer a
very careful oxacination of than. ' ras * natter of c' vrs.. : C -


9 Jun-A-J ?-Ic-2-Love (Ini. Ton Schou)
Court Ho, 1,


a=ined thoa clinically; I cade X-rays; I examined the eiectro-cardio-
gran; I repeated tha blood analysis; the cheaical blood analysis was
nado at the end and in none of the casos was there anything wrong. I
did not demand that they be' given special caro because they wore sick
but because I wanted than to have sore tiao to recuperate and the af¬
fidavit will show I dictated thoso findings to the witness which showed
that ttoy sore norsal.

Q Do you conaidor it possible that complications canc up

later?

A I believe I have repeatedly caphasitcd ay point of view
that after a thirst experiment is interrupted tho condition of thirst
has coco to an end onco and for all. If ono adninisUrs rater cvcxy-
thing is all right again. In all ti>j literature on distress at sea
available to so not a singlo case is described whon there was any
X*tor cooplication because of thirst. Tho only cases of later complica¬
tion or- coBplications resulting fret: cold, that is, pn^unonia or
bronchitis and oven thase are very raro. I know from the English re¬
port that in about threo hundred cases of distress at soa and rcscuo
trxire Hero six or coven colds, catarrhs, and only ono case of pneu¬
monia. How, my oxperinontal subjects did not suffor cold; frcci
thirst alono thoy could not iuivo complications and as 1 said the sea
wator me oxaairod bacteriolorically and wrs found pur* . It was im¬
possible for tlsn to have any intestinal discuses as a result, espec¬
ially since wo ourselves also drank this water and didn't notice any
aftcr affects because the incubation period cf all such diorrhoc dis¬
eases is so short that the diarrhea zust nr.vs occurred while th_ per¬
sons rs-n: still under ay observations.

Q -'itnosr, I should like to ojxr. another chapter nor;. H<xr
c«jch inside viow do you have nor to live in a concentration coup?

A Practically neno; I ras only admitted to our er.ixrijaontal
roor. and labor atary; onco I .as in th_ pharaioy of tic hospital In order
to borrow cquiaaent for the laboratory ar.c sever. 1 tires I -rue in the

. 8773


9 Jun-A-lE-15-3—Lov, (In'. 7on Schor.)
Court So. I.


kitchen to see to the preparation of food. These are tta roeas which
I sr during =y stay in Dachau.

Q Could you ccco and go rhon and vbore you wanted in the
ceap? -


A In tho first two or three weeks on our way from tho cn-
trnneo to the c-:ap on our ray to the hospital rccc re wore acconpaniod
by an SS escort. * Later hjeauso we often had to wait until a guard had
to go with us - waited for fifteen ninvtos or longer at the gate, I
asked that this bo given up. The Adjutant of the Coap ConBendant gave
do and ny associates ^mission to go these thro.- hundred actors with¬
out a guard but I had to pro also not to enter an;- other rooms in tho
errap except those assigned to us. I kept this proaisj and all ny r.osoc-
iatos also hod to cako the sane proaisc. Besides tho guards and guard
towers could watch us all the time- fro. this way and it .Quid have been
very difficult for us to go to my forbidden regions.

Q Then you could net receive visitors without the permission
of tho Cftap Administration?


A Ko.


Q In this commotion, your Honor, I should liko to refer to
the quostion of Judge Sebring to t!x» witness Horn, page 53'32, ir. tho
Oonaon roccrd whore tho witness describes how difficult it is oven for
a high TTohnaactat officer to get to tho canp and soto freely thoru.
Witness, did you yourself liv- and oat in tho canp or outside?

A Tho C-ap Dachau consisted cf throo crape really, one was
SS crap, one was tho canp where thj SB eon cf tho concentration crap
lived, and the third was tho concugratioa crar. iteolf. in tho SS c-ap
there rre - hospital. In this re four doctors of the Luftwaffe were
g:-v,n a roon and •. lived thor_. Ihnt was outride tho c-:a:p. Vo took
our aools in restaurai&s arc h?.d ractically no contact therefore.

3 you subordinated to the Sc- in any capacity?

A Vfe had been strictly obligated to conform tc '.21 orders
cf the. SS and SS guards while re In the canp. Otherwise rre were

8779


9 Jnn-A-;S-l8-J*-Iov_ (Lit. 7on Sc hen)
Court h'c. I.


•in agency of our own and quite iixicperder.t and for the experiments
themselves tho SS hod no right of disposition and rvsvor interfered.

Q Witness, did you co&o into any other expei*i. - xntal stations
during theso experiments?

A No, I have already said, apart from the kitchen and the
pharr-acy, I did net enter any other rocri, nor any other experimental
station. I did not even know the existence of scr.o of them.

Q Now, what was tho result cf your experiments?

A Tho following results more or loss wore ascertained which
I boliovo iroro not without impartanco. First of ill to show that tie
sr.nll amounts of sea water are butter than ccoploto Lack of water.

This is shovm bcc.aujo tho loss of woight ms much slower and loss of
water much loss; that tho thickening of tho blood was loss; that tho
loss of nitrogen was loss arvi that tho non-protein nitrogon in tho
blood did not increase whilo in those without water it did increase.

It was shown that a Larger amount of sea vater had no advantage- over
pure thirst but under so no circumstances ovon had disadvantages. It
vrns shown that eho concentration powor of tho kidneys had to be tnkon
to bo much high.r than hithorto lx.li.ved and about 2.5 per cent could
bo nchl.vod by aLaost anyono, with sooo even 3 per cent or noro.


9 June U7^.-.^T!>-19-^-Priaeau (Int* von Sohon)

Court ’fc. 1

It was shown that this concentrating power of the kidrwy was not
considerably influenced by vitamins. It ^as shown that soa water in
limited doe os does not causo diarrhea. It was sbo.fn that the subjective
symptons, the feeling of thirst after sal t rater, is about the sane as
in co '.pietc thirst, that objectively in s;all amounts of liquid even
salty lieplid is bettor.

It was shown that ovc*i snail anounts of fresh wator taken in
between have variable offocts. It was sho.-n that the Schaefer drug
supplios quite usable drinking to ter and that tha Berk* not hod is
useloss. It was shown that in the blood an incr-aso of salt is caused
by drinking soa water and a slight loss of calciua and that it is
therefore advisable to intrcduco calciua if a person is drinking soa
water for a considomblo period*

It was shown that in the condition of hungor and thirst there is
a relatively high lossof tablo salt and that, therefore, it is
c.irtr.inly expedient for a person ..ho has thirsted for a considerable
p-riod of tiao to bo givor. salt wr.tor that is a physiological solution
of tablo salt.

It 7Ri3 shown that after tic uxp-rir* nt — that is, after a long
period othirst — thcro is r. quick wator retention and that th. only
danger fron thirst and typo r tonic liquid i3 tho loss of wator by tho
bo^,-. It was shown that the introduction of liquid leads to a very quick
recovery.

I knov- that tho3o experiments have not brought out as much in tho
way of results as would havo oo-jn the caso if the experimental subjoct3
had cooperated cosplotoly, especially since most of the exporir.jnt3 wero
interfered with by the persons drinking fresh rat,r and th_ concentration
power cf thj kidney wa3 subjected to groat variations. A strictly
scientific ovaluation is po3siblo only in a United extent but for
practical decisions they were sufficient that wha. was found in principle
Lth wfcr.u was Incur Hsccv.r- i by Ir. lich and lean work ra,
that rani 1 aacunts of soa ;.~t.r are better than coriplete lack of enter.


S731


9 June li T-A-^TD-19-^-Prir^n (Tr.t. von Schon)

Court Ik). 1

Uovr, through the discovory of Trofossor Ivy and Dr. Sc hoofer, wo
ore able to aako son water drinkable. It si'ht still b, th-t with
soi.on; who is in distress at sea rithout taving this drug with hin and
tlv knonlcdgo that with snail doses of sea vator he car. improve his
lot, this knowledge is not useless. If the extension of lif j, according
to the theoretical calculations, is now possible — according to
findings it sight bo only thr,o or four days over, coaploto thirst —

3 till that sight bo docisivo in practice.

\ !3o*:, witness, after completing your axporlacnta did you report
on than to ycur superior authorities?

A Tos, in October 19UU I sont ir. a report.

3 Then I shall rotor to tho Sehaoter document book 2, docuaonto
lii and 19, th toe tirony of Houbrv.r and Johcftrsky, so that I will not
have to submit affidavits of ny own. fitness, why did you not publish
the results of your uxperin-nts.

A I !'-"-va already giYon th, reasons rhy exact scientific evaluations
tma poo si bio only to a linltod extent. r .r ar.ally, I had no intoroot
in it boeauso I had no sciontific benefits to reap from thuso expori-
nonts. I refrained from doing 30, not bocauso I thourht I had anything
to kcap socrot.

1 ^fitness, arc you .van today of the opinion that, undor tho
orders which -.fere' given to you, you carried out tho3o oxporioor.ts
urobjootionably from tho radical and sciontific point of view?

A I have had al=«3t a year ani a half nor to examine qy conscience
and I believe that I can answer your question in tho affiraativo. I
cirri id t!na out Just as I would Ir.vo done in :-ny hospital or clinic,
if I had to perform then at all. I never considered cy oxp-rental
subjects a substitute for oxp.riamtal animals ana it is not trio that
I lacked sympathy with them. I kn_r; oxactl;* her.: difficult it is to

r thirst. It is not that 7 di dn«t caro .tint I had to asl: tb.m to
1 this, tc suffer thirst during th days of - experiment, but I was
net able to spar, them this after they had volunteered for tho exporir. .at,

I


C702


9 Jure . 7-.-:.7>d.9-3-.ri.x:au (Ir.t. vor. Sc'xn)

Court !fc. 1

The1 I recognised th. services cf the exwrinontsl subjects at tho
«r.d I bcliavo I car. say, ret only in -eras but also by dolr.; for then
what I oould. That I -an joyed theso sufferings of ny vie tins — I vns
incapable of such a horrible thought, Frew tho beginning 3 had sorious
cd3 r ivings find inner rejection of o-eperinents on prisoners.

If I ignored ay misgivings, I could still put up 1th tho natter
for several reasons* First of all, I was never of tho opinion that I
r.rs tir. • an;-thing illegal. If rjy superiors, tho highest security
authorities of tho ’'.aich, gavo aa such ar. assignment. thon,in 19U*

I had to boliovn that this could net bo anything illegal. Ir. 19hh I
could not know that a for years 3a t r t-ioso iars would no longer bo
valid.

I ovorca b sy sdsgivii^s becauso I van fir.rly convinced that :ry
oxp.riuer.tnl subjects had volunteered for this certainly unpleasant
experLnont. I ov.rcano th:=, furth raoro, because* I knew that distross
of tho tinv> undo such a . ossibility odvisablo but ospocially booauao
froa tho modical point of view I considorod that tho rescue problon to
bo solvod icj t!v> important thing and bocauso I thought that if a
person van to take on hi.isolf tho sacrifico of geing without food and
drink for sovoral days it rill bo in tho interests of hundreds of
others rho nould ba in distress later, in rrar and peace, and they '.'ould
benefit* It was not tho negative sido which notivnted mu but bocauso
of tho positive goal I too': tho nogativo upon aysolfj and, under a
military or:’or and under a greet personal, spiritual burden, I carriod
cut this ardor* but I belie r, it lould bo Illogical and hard to undor-
stanr: psychologically, if I did rot -.nt to ;rfor.a axperin^nts on
pri .oners frr. tho b ogirxins, 1 Seoul- to ar.r. is treat th jxjfcrifficnt.nl
subjects.

I/urirc. ~ jXT.rin.nts I did not scare ray o'.tti •■•orkinr capadty or
that of iy- associates. I tried to carry out the experiments in such a

~r: fiirrly convinced, oron today.


37^3 '


9 Jan. 19-t.-Prinoau (Int» von Schcr.)

Court :fc. 1

that I -lid ret cause any haze* I cannot reproach cysolf for having
onlttod any cdical precautions which cculd bo required, I havo a quite
clear conscience in this respect, I carried the exp_rln_nt out vd.th tho
seriousness and the scientific tborouginoss which I had learned ir. qy
aar.y years of university training, and at the Tor»nt when I stood bo bird
this barbod wire for tho first tino I.did not change basically and
loeva ~r for-, or attitudo and ay foraor character outside; and that wo
roally triod to do our best in those oxporisonts Professor Ivy adnittod
Later whon ho lookod at tho records of qy . nts. Ho ■ , "You

havo -ado 'rcr.t of forts but you Selected tho wrong oxporincr.tal subjects/"
It ns not I who soL-ctod then, I was convinced froa the beginning
that it was an xxnfortunato choice but I -ns not capable, in spito of
all the. r.ttcipta rhich I aodo, to charge this fact.


C704


10 Juna-A-r*£-20-i-Cook (Vosi Schoen)

Court 1

Q: v 3ur Honors, the next document which I should like to subnit is
Exhibit No. IB, as Document No. 11, frca Document Book i, peso 25. This
is an original latter frea the defendant to his aother, written in Dachau on
the 12 September, 1911. I shall n;ad aerely tho first paragraph:

"Dearest Mother:

ifcny thanks for your deer letter. I r-s sorry that lately I havo teen
able to give you only occtsiorol brivf si^ns of life, as the .ad rurh to
which vc rro subjcctoc h-.ro did not permit of norc. By and by also this
job is con in to ?n end and I as net sorry ’ bout it. The results of ay
work ero only . I had not oltnr.ee: it so but only 0 rried out orCors.

I hooe that I shall soon be .bit to return to ay foraer offico vhcro I
or.joyud tU work ouch aero."

VP.. This it docu-.tr.t No. 11, Your Honors. 1 do not have

that in ny index.

THE PRESIDE T: It io not included in o>ur index either.

:R. KkHDY: Yob it it or. ongo 25. I have found it.

THE PRESENT: It is in the docua.nt book on -r.ge 25.

BY DR. STSIHBAUS?:

r .: I i: you »o re thing. You said ;\iur*nork m-o only fair.

What do you .»rn by thtt?

A: I h* ! ..lroady o value ted aost of the orporiawnts it that tlx:.

Vo had sour, that about two-thirds of tho work h-'d boon in vain b-ciusc it
"to quite clear that these people had so.:* watar and *11 of the work was
in vain and nh.t I had originally thou ht about the reU-r.tion of a*It was
a nistato:, that is, the r.sults wore roltiv.lv slight, ir no proportion
to th- t aount ol work itself.

Cfi the noxt coeuaont which I sufcoit rill Exhibit Ko. 19, fAi
Doeiront Book I, Docurcnt 10, pr .. 23. It is also a Later fro.- the
attendant to his o. -r.ts in Ian Iron Dachau, 12 August 1911. I offer this
letter on the question o! the or .-r cr.d the toIut.v ry aoprov l, It r.-'ds:
"De-r It and pa;

».ft.r : very considerable delay I r-.c iv\d your c’vcr Lett - a.-* the


3725


o Jaxxi U 7 -A-=- 20 - 2 -<>e> (Int. cor. 5 chon)

Courts * 2 . 1

cigarettes for which I thark you very such. This delay was due ( to ny
stupid transfer here, they sent on :y rail only after I had finally

0

'settled dn> and could give zy unit zy new address."

I shall skip thi rest of the paragraph and read fran the botton of
the page.

"Sinco 1 J 11 I 7 I have b<»n roaaing about in the district and havo
wasted exactly crco month at this timo. Hew after groat toil and troublo
and after orcru£i vexation to last for rv.ro than a year I havo sot up shop
thjre and can at last conduct the oxa-tinations «hich an unkind fate hf.3
sont no hero. ;{y feelings ore thoso of Pontius only it nattorod loss to
Mju than to no.

"I shall probably hang around horo until tho beginning of Soptoubor.
Then, unloss a bonb drops shortly boforo conplotion, ruining all ny work
arc! efforts, I hope to havo finished and tc say gcodbyo to this gonorally
unpleasant plaoo. Anyho-., the ooraont I board tho train at Dachau railway
station will count as one of tho nlcost and never to bo fergotton of
ny lifo."

An \ thon tho last sor.tcr.coi
"Jfcwovor, grunblirc doos not holp."

Jfcw I offer tho Haosion 'ocxuont, which I handod to tho Tribunal
today, tho chart, it is in ttv> sooorvl book, Ho. 31, pago 113 to 116,

THE PRESIDES? t Has that not alroady boon odrdttod as dofondant
Boiglboock oxhlbit 12 ?

D”. STOIIBAUER: Tos, that is tho saao docunont. Boforo I was Just
Offering tho chart and now I want to offer tho docunont to mko tho
Tribunal acquainted with tho • holo plan of tho experiments. It is on

page 113 1

l 'I, tho undersigned —"

TIE .ussnsjrr* Counsel, I aoo no reason why they cann ot bo both
aJQittod as Boiglboock Exhibit 12, and treated as ono dccvuxmt.

iyi. STST'BAUER: Yos, I noroly want to road it now, I did not road
it before.

’ 6786


10 Jar*-A-?ifr-20-3-Cook (Von Seboer.)
Court I.


TH3 RLvSIEZJiT: I urr’-.rstood you to sry you were oxf-.rin the c'ocuaont.
Just proceed with i : ia£ it.

re. ST2E>3/.1££: I ~a Merely reading it now:

■I, th- un -reined, ViltSo Ifcssior., hove be-n caution*. thr.t I run
liable to punistoent ii I ntko a false affidavit."

I shall leave out the fora -1 rrrts:

"I wish to str.t- tho following:

"I worked -dth Dr. Buiglboeck !rca 25 July until about 2C September
1944. I hod been -r vr-t theiv. Or. conocr.cing y -ati-s 1 '.iscov-red tta
s-.lt water experiments were concern.':. 1 oyseil was not always present
as I frequently had to travel as r. courier.

"To tile best of ny belief the olan of tile p.is.nor* quarters at the
Dcctru crap is correct. I h'v- r-._r.ee it wit. it n r. .

"The experi.-xr.ts war© node or -bout 40 persona. The color of tho
chevrons won by th- nrc black, r.z frr as I c-n recall.

^ihutb-r tixae jxp rineQtnl subjects had b-er. s-r.. nee or whothor thoy
had volunteorc-., I o m; knew. The prison.ra r.erx rub'oeted to r. thorough
uwtainrtion b.u'or. the or>rix atr ...r- started. T*v.y wore r.uartorot! in

- largo roo ; with SO.io single beds -nc seno ti-rct' bunkr..

»3efor- beti.ir.in_ th- oco-ri:-.:.*, t!.o jxp-ri.-aer.tr 1 subjects wore given
the saae lose as sup li C to ttv Uyinr personal oi th. Luf tv-rife, that
is to say, v:r~ nuti-itio s ui-t of s-.rJ.rxs, che-.ae, butt-r, ill!:,
nert, etc.

,r eurin i th- - o-riaent 4 p-roor.e assi r.-i to tho thirst ^roup received
no food wha so v-r. The others rec-ivod s -.-oaer£unoy rations, with chocolate,
choco-col-, etc.

"The exp-ri_r.v j- controlled by a hi^ht rhift soneistin;, of taodicnl
non cor.’.s and prison s -ihc were n-dic 1 stuv-nts. These acdic L stu'-nts
lived in as 11 roo ' joining tb. rrd ror.i. I took part in this ni ht
shift on thred 0 ccr.sa.n 3 . .e were ori-r-d t: c'd I>r. 3-i*,lboock in the
•-VeT.t of any a ~ci 1 -v-ic.iconts.

"In c.ditior., .'actors who w_r- prison rs w^iv c-Veled uoon to ct .as
spec!'lists, who -ere tre*ted b j Dr. 3-iglbocck as fully qu-lifi-d experts.


$ Juno-ir-?.:-2C-4-Coo> (To- Schoen) (HJ)

Court I

■I remember two coses where infusions wer undo because tho o>-
pcrlcental subjects had hed a peripheric! collapse. after tho infusion
those pooplo rocovored inaediatoly. I know also that tho oxpoiiuontd
subjects bcc:iio extrcooly i®cthotic and somnolent. nothing ia known
to nc of brain-store attacks, although I do know that in the two eases
quo tod. the persons whlnporod. Z never observed any cases of hysteria.

■I havo no knowledge of any deaths occurring during those ccsporl-
aonts. Z would have known hod thore been any such case.

■ 2 ho experiments lasted 4 to 6 days as far as Z can recall, fflio
experimental porlod was lougor for thoss exporiucctal subjects who ri>-
coivod ur.tor troated by the Schaofer r.othod and vac finally brokon off
without any spoci.a roa on. 3fco persons treatod by tho Schaefer uothod
sufforod no cccpluints, as far as Z know. So diarrhea occurrod during
tho oopo. iaents to ay knowlodgo. Zn the beginning stool opociuons uoro
seat to a uodicul lnstituto in Tionna, later this ua6 stoppod, possibly
boerraso it was unr.ocos□ axy,

■During tho jxperii.cn to blood was taken ixnu tho oxporiucatcl ouh-
Jccts in tho naming. X assuao that it was lOoubic centiactors. Z uy-
solf forwardod only tho blood which hod passod through tho con trifugo
and which ucj. maJ.l in vol\*nu,

*Ai the concxueion of tho exporiaent tho final report was dlctntod
to no, and free this Z know that none of the experimental subjects diod.
2 ho report stated that no lasting ill effiots to houlth raiulncd.

■Dr. Boiglbocck troatod the prisoners as iuxianly as ordinary pntionts.
Ho was rough to theu"—

E:o Carman word is "grob", and a bettor translation would bo rudo.

■ Eo was rude to then only whan they obtained drinking watftr con¬
trary to orders. X know definitely that none of tho experimental sub¬
let* were turned over to the SS for punishment because of any offensoo.

■I cu evaro that D r. 3eiglboock used his influ coco on behalf of
tvo Triooaer medical students, to o.-se their conditions.

■Eie oapccinentol rcoa was located within the camp, but was othen/iso


10 Jine-«-?J-2C->Cjok (Vor. Schocn)
Court I


not connected nlth the rest of tte crap. IIo SS doctors took p-.t in tho
tro-tner.t. *t first wo »-iv only -.11 owed to enter the ccnp accoopcnicd
b 7 r.fi SS of fici-.l, la.tar wo v*er j allowed to enter un-ccoapfinio^ but were
forbidden to go into any pa it of the ca) outside of our rooms. To ,\y
kr.^ilcdge Dr. Ivoiclbocck had no connection with the SS doctors, ho only
do a It with tho jinior physician (Unterrzt) of the troop-training comp of
tho Uff.n SS fra: rhOB he obtained his medicines.

"The doctors taking part in the ocp-rin-rts ate only at first for
about .* wcok 't the SS cr r.tvcr. nnd lr.ter 't a rusturr-r.t. The cmcentra.ticn
caap or.du r.n or--rly rr.’ ..rganisud i^oreision, *e noticed nothin, of

cruelties which L'tcr b-cvx kr.ain,

"I know that on one occasion iific-ultics arose 1 :. ti., rood supply
which possibly were ©oanoctod with *r. airr i‘. I was tw. s-r.t to
Frankfurt wit:; the urgunt order to obtain se- («r| rations there.

"The signr.turo of hr.Iter Ussier. aa.fc before n., .tt-mey .at Law,

Dr. Robert So nr tius, representative of the iefendant, 1 rl Brandt, as
representative of the ..ttorv.jy r.t Law, St-ii.buer, representative of tho
defendant, Professor Beifleboeck, 1e h^r-by Certified."

The r»-xt dccinent which I should like to offer ia the affidavit of
Dr. Karl Loss.. Tfciu is docurxnt 3ook I, pagu 32, nd will bo Exhibit
Ko. 20 . It is “ very leng ocu.a-nt. I sh 11 , therefore, read moroly
excerpts from it, containing thi a. at Loport-nt points.

WZ P?2SID. , I:T: Couns-i it is nor tin. for th, Tribunal to recess.

You nay read such jortior.r of th. docunnt as y;u desire in t to. morning.

The Tribar. 1 will now be ir. rec.ES until nine-thirty o'clock in tho
morning. "

THE 1UPSK.!.: The Tribanl .. 1 U be in recess until OtfC ^lock in
the morning.

(The Trib.m 1 - Mourn.;, uri.il 0930 hoars 10 Jur.. 19U7)


C7T9


Roll 9


Target 3


Volume 24


June 10-14, 1947


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vt KARL BRANDT ot al
VOLUME 24


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


10-14 Juno 1947 pp. 8790-9232


Official Transcript of the xn-ricon ^iiitaxy
Tribune! in the natter of the United St‘ tos
of .d rier, .-.-rdrst Karl 3rr. t, ot !,

.xi'en rats, sittinr -t dumber,-, Gexnray
n 10 June 194?, 0930, Justice Foals pxxsi ing.

THE ILKHAL: Pers-ns in the Courtm.c vj.ll plcc.ce fir.-* their seats.

The Hen*.iable, the Jfe'.ges of UHitary Tribunal I,

Jttlit -17 Tribunal I is now in session. Gc : sav ( . the- United St tos of
Aceric-' an ' this honorable Tribunal.

There will be or :er in the Courtreuc.

THE PHTSIDIIfT: lir. Y. rahnl, you aacert in if the wfen :nts are ill
present in Court.

THE MAPS- - -L: 11*y it please Yrur K< nor, all the r.ofundents r re present
in the Court.

THE PSSMDIT: The Secretary-General will notu for the recor 1 the
pm acne o of ell the '.ofvndnnta in Court.

Counsel nr.y preccoi.

D:.. 3T.ICLBCECK - Re sunn -l

DIRECT JEWEWATIOr (Continue l)

D... STEUfBAUni (Counsel for th. Defen ent BuisHock): Tcur Honors,
yostcr ay I et :ppc with ExJdbit 20, the affidavit of Dr. Er rl Thoocor
Lesse, ono of the footers involve in tho invostirations in the sen
water experiments. It is in Document Book 1, D-cument 14, cn page 33.
Tho document lndu os 62 questions. In or’.er to save tico I shall
rev! do rely tho cost lnportant points s

1.) Tv t was Boiglboock* s attitude tewnrus tho sot up?

A.) His opinion was that there w:.s r.o necossity to carry cut those
experiments -t Drchau, since they could vt been c rri. 1 ut easier :nc’.
better in any military or civilian hospital.

-Is tell us in Dachau that i.pplic B titn to
wrs voluntary-, n- thr t in cxch n;e
to tho prisoners?

up fer the cxperln ntd sxi>j cts . n this
tho release f K-no of then?

when re-.lncecer.t5 were needed after the

790


preliainp-xy acnainr.tl-cs s.*~i people frn Dachau volunteered
sr ntanecusly, that me if thee, r. ryzry from IJunich, former hctcl-
empl yec, whe had an "escape ir.t" even trie-’ terribly* hnixl t~ be
fukdtte'? Di Dr. B. succo©'. in petting special permission for the
ren:vnl c? the "escape point", at the er *. cf the experiments?

A.) Dr. Ploetner said that the applications wore voluntary. ..a far
rs I rer.Tbcr oven rlr se was precise - in exchnee. B. repeatedly
spoke up f r the prisoners. I cm net s*y anything about the last
question.

3.) r, ore there any deaths?

A.) Wo.

A.) "*ero all provisi< ns rvuk f-r coreful ncLic'l attention for the
experiment-'1 subjects nr. ’ ms such attention in fret Riven?

>s there a rc^ul-r nirhtr-service in operation?

•fco was on 'uty?

TSs th< r* m orc'ur to the offect that in spcci'.l emus B. was to bo
calls i, oven 't ni;:ht? Ei 3. go ovary nifiht, nostly between 2*0
an 2A03 h urs, tc th« expo rime nt nxrj to check the woll-beinr >f tho
experimental subjects? “•'S he also callo’ twico in no nijht nix*.
eir 1 ho then effect an interruption of the oxperimnta?

A.) Y os. Hitfit utics wort taken care cf by nc ic 1 students,

B. himself rav'.e n Into inspect! n every ni^ht. H o hrvd t c bo kept
infwRr.e 1 . I cm ni t say nnythin.*’ nb ut the last cu cation.

5. ) Di he succeed in ecttinr tho ncaicnl students, who were
asoin. 1 t him, transform t. the infira\ry ujxn their own revest
at th< on’ of tho experiments?

A.) Yes.

6 . ) At tilt eft- (f the experiments, vob thorc a thervueh P~3$r-
exp-.rimcnt.nl exnoln?ticn pit' wh -1 were its results?

A.) Y-s. Ace r In- to 3ci-lbreck's reports nc injury wrs f .un<’.

7. ) Di « . it any tint h-n ! an experimental subject over to tho

DS for punishment -r "S- ftcr-in- up"?

-791 ’


Jur-( r (Ir.t. 7 r. Sch in)

C.urt Ko. 1


9.) “hat was his ettiture to the pris cers in general?

’••) Very hur."ne cxvi benov ie.it.

12 . ) *tnt was the physical c n'-iti.n tf those pypsics who were used
for the experiments?

13. ) Di E. rejoct icce'i .tely r.t the begi nn i n g these wlu. le*_k unfit?
.... to 12 aw* 13.) The experimental sub jects were Given a thorough

intorr.-.l examination by B. and sever*J, »hc were n t aiite healthy,
were rejected.

14. ) IX. y-u reaicbvr that then, after X-raying 2 cr scs were found
among the rest *.ith now but already decaying tubercular affections of
the lur.gs? "on ill the uxporirwnt"l subjects w-rryud?

A.) They were *11 X-myod, I knew r. thing about the results,

16.) %, acc-r ing U yeur observations, treated the inmates in
tho cr.p infirmry?

A.) IVvstors who wore leant* themselves.

21.) "hat w* a the attitude of thu SS towards us?

A,) Nearly always arrogant and unfriendly.

25.) "fere w., told anything ab ut Rnsch« r's experirtnts? Could wo go
nn l 1 k int* Schillings war ?

...)t No. b.) 1. .

32.) “fas everything nlwys roVy in tho sick rxn or tho adjoining
ru a for an intorrupticn of th« experiment? '..tv.t?

A.) Yus. Sterile fluls for inje-cti n. Heart it circulati n drugs.

34. ) '.hy »3 tb« Yugoslav nodical student, origin-'lly 'ot .ilod f^r
night 'lity rer_ vo.i fr c the ward? Trt happened to him?

A.) He was unreliable, foil asleep. I i n’t knew what hn,.j>eneci to

•

hin.

35. ) " s it .*t B.’s instigoticn that the other a ical stuents wore
quartered ’.urirv the night in the adjoining r>on (next to the expi rl-^nt
ro a)? r r »h t rurr.se? Di it have incidental advcnUges f- r the
students (irrrt«s)?


792 '


June 10-:-F st.r (Ir.t. V n Sci. er.)

C-urt *: . 1

Yos. T be ».blt t'’ h»lp rs re quickly. Ir. ti.is uay they rot
better fee .

35«) D>* y. u reoccber Dr. B. telli nr y. u th: t he first teste-i the
3erk>i syst«r. >n hlcself?

A.) Tea.


93


Court 1 . .

Jur.c 1G—14-2-1- HD- Lo v 3-* on echo on.


41 .) "h-t W38 the offer- of Che lr.Crr.ve-.oar Injection of
Fluid?'

A) Soiglecoeck reported an immediate cuenchlng of the
thirst nr.d lmprcver-.nl. of the oonditior.

44 ) Did Bolulbocck inform the gipsies about the purpose,

course ana subjective symptoms at the beginning of toe
oxrcrimontM, simultar'cnuely as urir. e th*» tnat no
would conduct the ej&erlmentc in euch c way us not co
cause permanent injury?

There’iron did they bind themselves also to carry out
the experiments honestly?


A to a rr.d b) Y38.

45 .) Do -'ou remember that 3. appointed the oldest gipsy r.a
a confidential nan who had to wport all wishes,
rocuoste and oumplnlr. s, r.nd who -Iso had permanent
orders from baigloboook to influence those who ~ld not
behove in r disciplined manner.


A) Yes.

43.) After the axpoririMlt were flying personr.ol rations
giver, out?

A) Yes.

47 .) Do you remember that there wore sometimes difficulties
in 'tho supply of s^me? Cf what kind and why?

Do you remember that while wo were thoro this nlr-
bc.s'o was bombed and the food score was hit?

A) Yes, bocaueo 1 C came from the Sohleiasheia airbase.
A check sometimes showed deficits wnloh had to bo
dollvur.-d afterwards.

60. ) Was Boiglbocck supported in his -xporlcor.to by tho SS?

A) No.

61. ) c.) Were the exoerlments carried out in two groups,

i.e. when ono section of the experimental surjocts
vr.8 being exnorlaented upon, were tho others not yet
or r.o longer included?

b) How were the groups divided?

c) Could the experimental subjects who wore not bolng
experimented upon go out and walk in the courtyard?

d) Was it always the same courtyard? ..

e) Could those, who wore cut walking talk through tho
windows to inmates lr. other barracks without super¬
vision?

A) a) Yes.

b) ap rovimntel" into equal numbers.


Court 1

June 10-l»-2-2-HD-Lovo-7on Schoen.


c) Yes.

d) Yea.

o) Presumably.

62 .) ’“'-ere vrs the or.o group given food and drink vrillo
the other was oe In* experimented 190 . 1 ? I an son for
this nee b are?

A) Always separately, to spare the cthere tuo sight.

64. ) '.'ora v:e In possession of on exact chemical ond

bacterlological nclyale of the sec water w.nlch was
used?

A) Yes.

65. ) "ero cigarettes distributed aft-r cos-lotion of tho

experiments?

A) Yds.

Did wo hove difficulties in obtaining then?


60.) Did Belglboook request:

a) that the experimental subjects should re.-rr.ln
afterwards -«t least for n week In the hospital?

b) th t they should be cn light duty for sometime?

0 ) ; they really receive the concessions promised

to thou.

d) tent Bolgltoeck be Informed If any of them show
any a:;ur-offacts (Ploetner).

a) £.:o! requests wore cade and also -ranted.

73. ) rhr C w a tho o hlpwr-ck diet llze?

K V wg It o^okei? Whore did It cone from? Who
delivered It?

A) In trie original arses peeked by trio producers.

2 .-.tr.inod 'clsc-lts, cnocnlnte, doxtros:, cigarettes,
S'dn water.

74. ) How ..uch blood was token dolly?

A) I; vr*rlod between 5 end 10 cc.

75. ) Did .ou obs.rvo any fits of roving madness? tfhat

other nervous symptoms aid you 3oe?

«) I*o. 3. reported c general exaggeration of tho
reflexes.

77.) Die'. .1 teuoeraturea '•rise during the experiments?
Do . u consider it possible that cases 'f "fever
delirium 1 occurred?'


7)5


Court 1

June lG-.-2-3*-HD-Love-Yon Schoer..

A) 5olglboeok never reported "fever delirium."

82.) Did we have a lot to do'or could we arrange to have
"free time 0 ?

«) ”0 had an extraordinarily large amount of work.

*?o usually worked until late at night. This appll-d
also to Eelglbocck. '.*e ocae jd against many technical
difficulties.

DR. 5T2IN5a : JFR: as the next exhibit, I submit the
affidavit of Fritz Flllwein of the 5th of Any 1947,

Document Book II, Document 32, on page 117 to 124, and I
assign oxhibit !Jo. 21 to it.

TH2 PRSSXDSIT: The last exhibit from Wiioh you read,
what lo the exhibit neater froa which you road in your
document book I, the answer to the interrogatory.

DR. STZIMBaDHR: That was Exhibit 20, the Plllwoln
affidavit will bo 21. I must road all of tala doouxent
bccauso the proseoutlon examined this witness too.

AFFIDAVIT

I, Fritz Plllwoln, studont, born 11 Kay 1919 In
Vienna, Auctrla citizen, I’csldont in Vienna - III,

3rumgnoco 31, nerovitn 6tnto in liou of an oath that my
following statement is truthful and that it was nado to
bo submitted ns ovldonoo to Military Tribunal I at tho
Palaco of Ju61ice, Nuremberg, Germany. First of all I
have boor, duly advised that I should rondcr myself llnblo
to ounlshmont If I rere to give a false affidavit.

Ao to tho facts I state the following:

1) 5uc3tlon:

How and why did you c.-Sj into tho concentration camp?
Answer: *

I took p-rt in tho Spanish civil war on the Republican
side from 1937 to February 1939, was then®nt to a
French c^zp and w-.s transferred in 1941 by tho

-- m~n occupation forces to the concentration camp

-79= .


C art 1
June 10-


Lcve-Vor. Sc hone.


Dachau, where I remained until the liberation by the
«moricuns in «pril 1945.

2) Question:

hew did you cone to the sea-water experiments ir. the
c r. cent ration ccmc?

Answer:

Since 1943 I was employed in the dispensary ns nalo
nurse, cr.u in summer 194- I received the order from
the dispensary police Cape, to go to station l/l fox'
the purpose of relieving there a male nurse called
Knx. This man h d been employed aa male nurse for
about c days in the sen-wnter exoorlnonts. The
typoics b«*d had a qurrrol with hi.: before the begin¬
ning cf the actual experiments regarding the distribu¬
tion of food and assorted that he had beaten then,
w. ich ho denied. T..v director of the experiments
was Dr. Bel aboock who after bcln- informed of the
incident demanded the dismiss*! cf Xex who also
gave no the strict order to treat the gypsies dooontly,
r pon 1 answered that that wont without saying*

3) Vh'C do you know a’o -ut the experiment'1 subjects?

Ar,B*.;er:

4-: aon were used f jv the experiments, --nd I recoi.ri.zo
a.me of them among the nlcturee snown to me by the
defense. These cersone were in a good st*'te of health
when who experiment was started, became I s^w cysolf
that they all were examined thoroughly by Dr.

$cljlboeck for t.wir suitability.

4) .h t dc you know about the citizenship of the experi¬
mental subjects?

7)7 ' '

»


An ever:


Court 1

Juno 10-K-a-5-Hi>-Love--Von Schoen.

I hr.vc stated to the Vienna State Police that the
experimental subjects were of the Dost varied
nationalities. After having been confronted with the
lict of nones and the fact that these names al 60
appear in the Register of Gypsies living in Germany,

I can state the following:

The experimental subjects in most cases spoke
their gypsy dialect. Many of thorn were obviously of
Slavic origin. I did not see Identification pagers,
however, as this was quite impossible in a concentra¬
tion c mp and as I did not a6k them anything pertain¬
ing thereto. I therefore car.not uoke any exact state¬
ment regarding the nationality of the individual
gypsies.

DR. STSIKBa’JER: There must be a mistake in the
document be k, here; in my opinion, it should say

" Citizenship".

THE PRESIDENT: I am asking the interpreters their
ldoa concerning the translation of the word which is
translated as "nationality" in the affidavit which Dr.
36olnbaucr translated as citizenship.

VOH SCHOEN: Your Honor, wo boliovo that "citizenship"
would be a better translation.

THE PRESIDENT: I would ask counsel for the prosecution
if he desires any further study or investigation os to
the translation of this word.

HR. vvRDY: Your Honor, I request that it bo takor.
ns stared by the interpreter without prejudice to tho •
prosecution and with a right to bring tho matter up
later, if necessary.

THE PRESIDENT: Very well, counsel may proceed.


people, end ante of them did not even kn~..- their -rn
birthdays. I kror Mu % they «re allowed to receive ravels fr'm thoir
relative 3 just like the ther intmtee of the concentration ccp. Of


crurae, during the experlaenta they did net receive eny. It ia true
thit mo of these ex-crimcntei subjects served in the "ehmcl.t for
»»o yetra. *11 Me gypsies w-re 'he black patch given *0 ca-cicl
nt-ra-na. hen not being used in en experiment they were in the ocurt y«rd
where they were clao photcyrt hed.

"5) -ere the irrxt -3 volunteers?

'er.aweri

'I knew for ctr'cfc thet two 1 ex tea xluntecred txcui re they were
inn tea of ^nohtu end ^trrxn gypsies, who by p.* rticip* ►.«» in the
experiment were relcucd from the ao-called pur.ia’mcnt company. Thik
the other innttca , *zc, were rolunt^ora I ocnclude free the fact that
Bolglboeck ota very engry whan ho discovered thtt * ra of *hr, hrd
drunk water er.d that ho re proto he d the gy-'iea for firat volunteering
for thx expcrlr.or.ts and then r»t obeying the instructions during tha
experiment. Phc gypaica cam. from ether ctr.-a, err* of then coming from
Micchvi'z, they errived to.ether in e trenap rt frsn Euchonrold, trhtro
a ora Bucher, old inmLtea Joined them, end they rero then ‘reneperted to
^ochou. ?rcr. the *tcheu cc-p itself only 3 rapltceomte vero selected.

I am of the opinion that there Tere re ccncor.tr* ► ion cir.p 'volunteers*,
even if they rcro in uced by premises to volunteer for the experiment
in order to improve somewhat their miserable lot. I , who hed sh.ircd
ir. the sufferings in ►lx* c:ncen‘retion camps fer ye*r.», ctrx> to this
crnclusion, but it i 3 <pii‘e -.craiblo, hosevtr, t: ‘ Bfiglbocck, who -r. a
r.rt icqutir.tcd with conce-'rc‘ion ccrp conditions. hod ‘be irprcsGiofl
'htt they u*re genuine volunteers.

*6) Kow did Beiglboecfc tract the i me tea?

■*r.sweri


759


1' Jane u7-—3“ •— 3-2 -Ire 3 3 ' 7cr£Jc h*on)

::c. 1

•Beiribceek *ret^ed the ;x *ients mill, which m-a & striking con’rfat
to t„.- : ‘ret tee-1 which re i tret® a received fr — the S3. Heirlboeck
only hccc=9 rery angry wher. the gypsies htd lied »o hin regcrding ♦he
drinking cf utter erd Then he found ait ebcut i» fron the hi cod test.

He used hi* influence to ktve 'he retch reared frcn Tcubrxnn end
hia friet.i, another ^emen gypsy. He elao sew to it thet the Fror.ch
phyaicicns acre '.rcncfcrrcd fror the ltborcra' bcrr:cka to the diapen-
aery personnel. He else obtained for re jerrdssi-n to cocr a nil!'cry
Ixir cut. r c those persona who subr.i'ted gracefully »o the eroeritaor.ts
ho precised cigtrc"ee end distributed then , *cc.

*7) ‘"het ota 'he eccorrodition like?

•answer1

1 eta r.y teak to icccmode*r the -oople or/:, cccrriinc *0 their
a'-etc of health they slept in cl cn single beds cr double tunica.

*d) Where did Eeiglboeck trd the internee doc ter a rcaido?

•answer*

"Belgleboecic slopt cony free ►he priaon cccp, erd during rest of 'he dty
ho vta present ic thoverd. ^.c staff in chtrgc of "o risencra hed •
their own s'cff dordltory end the physic lens slept in cn r.r.»croor.
c'ttobed *o the aick rcos, ao is to be on cell if required.

•9) "hit eert cf food did the cxocrioentel subjects rc-oive?

•answer*

■Cns tr the sale nurao Mtx they rccoived the so-celled Luf tweffo food
beforo the experiment. Airing the first four days of the ex peri Dent they
recievrd see-rescue erxr ency re tiers Lr.d then nothing until 'he end of
the oxperioant. aft roords they received first efcimod rdlk, then slops,
then c special diet ewi finally egein acroel co'-.p food . Or.cc vhen 'he
feed supply fron the Luftnefic ms interrupted, there trosc diffisr. nct-s
between the ccnp tdrdnietn tion e nd ^eiglbceck bee cure the cenp rdr.in-
istr- tion refused t ; supply t'is Lu ftreffc fcod to "c prisoners aa bid
teen rroaised et the expense cf the 33 cerp,

■1C) -r.d now -e esne to the =cin question, “ere »hr« cny coses of

-00


1* « -r.- ;7—'-^--3-3-^ rsC'on Cehcn)
c-urt :*3. :

dct^h cs t rests!/- ‘he ex7eri:xn*8? I re-rind you of your oeth.

■leaner*

•lie. - a ho-Id regerd 1‘ es & betrayal cf zy ccrxedca End should to
-ahered cf rysclf if I • ere rot >.c enartr this irpcr'tn*. question
cbarlu ‘ely \ruthfully. -

■3ood.

•5u». I asst rt-iniycu of ‘he tes*ircny of the oifcneas Joaef T&chof-
osig. flemaont !-o. !’0 911, Exhibit !'r. 139. end ►he ‘tatireny of Tri‘neas
August Views, records, pece 471. You your elf hr/e 1-ckcd fit these accu¬
ser.. ‘aehefenig now soya the* sclinc injections e»e lod to uncorsd oua-
nees end dce‘h. *nd Viereg aeyai I hove ‘rice or three tiroes seen
coffins being ctrried in the direction of ‘he dc.t*h ch.cr.bcr.

•Answer:

"“oth witness*a re personclly -ell known to =0 end I believe I en
Justified ir. presuring thit neither of »hcr. hta mlicicualy ;iven 0
felac end con*rcJic‘ory tcstlnony. In »he cc-p »hcro vta e rifely
aprttd whispering cir^tijn in which nor end then the coat itsurd
runcra wero cirosl^tcd. Neither Pschofenlg nor Vicrcg *re directly
involved In the experironta end therefore cirnot steto r-nything fr-on
thoir m obscrvLticna. iiy Viennese ajrpttriot V-rlicck, who -.'a •. ith
ce in ►he word cs uaiattn* nxlo nurao uculd i>lso.cccfirc ry 8tt»eacr.t.
"Ith regerd to '^itwcg'a testimony I would steto tho follonirgJ Through
the r-fcin corridor cf the iriaon Bcapitel , peat the doer of cur ojper-
lrx.ontol vnrd 1 / 1 , the deed ucro ccrrUd to the deeth chcrbcr fron ell
tho blccka in the rctr of the /risen Hcapitcl. TKy • or<- on o‘retchcrr,
covered with c sheet or telr-kct (see sketch). Vicwcg oist hive
erroneously presu-xd thet th.e deed were frer. our rtrd.

■11) ^ii “oiglboeck hend over gypsies to the ■* for liquid, tionVor
ao-cellcd brtwling?

Ana- cri
•No.


01


ir Ju'=< i?-l- 3 — .“-l- V:ss(Vc- Scfccb)

Court rc. i


•Ik) -ere gypsies brought to ‘.he rcgulir Prison Kispitel bp
ci«a iso the fee* het decha occurred?

•*cewcr»

ure gypsy rta brought to the gcrcrel sick bey ir. block III room
2 , there c aocrtc© of nine, b; the r.cne cf *n.nz York, *ts cr-loyed
ts no la nurse. 1 ora sure he vcudl have told o. if this gypsy bed
died.

* 13 ) “is there try connect‘on tot-'Cn *Vc c:^. crl-xr.ts vifcfa sec enter
end the experiner-ts of °r. oher or x nclerie exatrinenta cede
by ^r. 3chi11Inst

■-ns - eri

■I have never s.on Ktaohcr nor Schilling in cur vtrd block 2/1.
otherwise I con s-y nothing cbout it,

■14) °id y?u have any inciden*s such ls c tticks cf riving ivdncss
cr hunger rio*s, etc'

•^r.swiri

■hare -ere no hunger riots cr ttusks or rt-ring mrdncee. I rcncnbtr
or.c incident her. sonebedy bed c screening fiM he rts bound with
streps cr sheets to the bed tod ns ‘hereofter • lthdrcvn free th©
cxperlnent, I knew nothing obrut tying then vith 3*nps is nunish-enk,
Tho people suffered exactly frer thirst is veil <s fr*c lunger rod tried
oil kinds of ray* to ottein uot.r csceciilly. !ty c^credos end I *urnod
o blind eye it a ;ch tL-.es.

15) -he rx.de the blood ‘ests?

This translation is net correct. It is, •••ho took the blood scrplcs?'
fhet could be e better transitMen.

frS .rvLDISK’Ti I rould isk ‘he cp'nicn cf the interne tors r.s to the
translation. • .

ni nr^EL^i Y«.s, your Hcr.cr, ■vho took ‘he blood ethics Tr~n tho
patients' would be the correct ‘nnslcMon.

TIE IRLai-ET'T, Dees counsel for . rosecuMor. hevc anything to suggest

C

• •

02


to t is trer.sl t-cn'


1? Tune '7-:S-S -J-S-Vc s( Von ^cter.)
C _r7c. 1


!?. I htvc ro objection *•0 ‘ t f rrr.or. I ce r. 1 t sec tbc

’i ferencs elfttr testae this one ted the other one.

TI-S -RiSUfTi -rccecd, sunsol.

■-nsveri

•in rest eases ^clglbocck hirscIT cr a Xrerch internee doctor
under his supervision.

•16) -htt do you know nbeut tie duration of tho tests?

•-nsveri

,j *b *:o 'he exc ct tiajft of the ir.dividuel grrups I have forgotten tho
ce*uel detells. Hortver, to fer ts I remember, 'he longest rts 12 Cl ya.

•17) “he*, do you know about the less in -eight?

■*r. avert

’-a o cele nurse I hid to supervire v hc dtily riegbing «r.d I knot/
tbit the t tienta lost up to one kilogren daily- 1 •. oold like to
r.onticn here in general that I can no longer r-.rtrvbcr exact doteils
of kilo;rer.s end decagrams. The notes shorn *o ire 'hoso ted. by
tho internee doctors. I made the temperature curves on instnicMena from
irof. "clglboeck. Or.o of the radical orderlies rrotc the history of
tho illness. 1 nr., of curse, no doe'er and cannot Judfc tho accuracy
of the figures aantion d in ‘here becks,

"lfl) Hot ncrc the expericents concluded?

•-nsvert

■^hey were stopped either by sediun chloride injections cr by giving
'■ttcr. silk cishtd food, etc. -s already mentioned above ‘he fueling
of thirst scon dice-*« red,

*19) -hit ha-enad to the exper‘sentel subjects after *ht end of the
see rater experiments?

*"t the end cf *he arperinert ell t‘» cxperincr.tcl subjects -ere
still recent erd Lftcr c for days r spite Ter recovery, -ere places it
the disposal of the liber iccl. ^aiglbccck asked for sev.ral


-03


rune i7^S=-3->-'5ro*s ^on SeSc)

Court 1

ocncccaic-s, b_S I don't fc whether ’hey were mde , because shortly
efter the ccrcluaicr. cf the s:t vecr ox per're r.3 I ris pca’.d from
Stchau to brench -c'tll, ^ischcn/--!^’

-cvr honors, I should cor like to cell cur t‘tenti*n to the sketch
t -ttchod to this tffidevit. I htve htd an English ‘retail tioo properoi
ty -..o "-'oncrtl -*ccrcttry's office so that you will he tblc tc follow. If
you will he kind enough to ‘tko this sketch you will find i‘ the Gotten c
treed ce-p r'tJ, then tt ‘hx right the on‘rtnco ‘a *: o *ospi»el, trd
thee in the riddle the rein corridor cf ‘he hospital, trd ncrpcndlcjlLrly
the block street. The third squire in the - ddle is ‘he emeriti n‘'1
s‘fcticn. icu aco "vxsh rccc, 'toilet*, *sct ter cc-<Jincr>il
s'ttiot', 'nedica students roon*. end rxs ur'. Vc: t c >1:‘ there is
tho outer c'urt ytrd of the block street, ••or, if ; u «o fuit er to the
right you will see ‘he neac ■Vlcreg. That is t‘c .n. rhero tho

witness Vieteg via. It soys there '"xltric *'=•; it is ecrttln

the t ^ievog r.ust hrvo beer, t>crc beccuec he at:.*. ho -worked for
So hilling in the r. el trie 3‘ttion. !•«, you rill to inter, a ted in kneeing
where the sec and witness Tachofenig via. He "it - ty in beck in tho
lest category. 1V.crc is one nil subdivision er/ %h: t scys *X-rey
fltjfcicr.'. Ihtt ia • re the • ‘.‘ness r sch?fonig • i s sit* innod who took
ell the x-riy yic*^rcs for * c -holt he#pi tel. I» is ir 3aible i'-r r achc-
fenig t* sec free there rhet happened in tho sc • • ‘er oxp^rJacntel

ateticiu


06


1C Jur.-' -SS-ii-l-EBrrd* (lr.t, Vcn Sc'.-.rn)

Court He. I.

::cw, lot's folio* the path token by the corpc.s that Ir.

Vie wag saw. Bo hind the barracks shewn here, there arc- sany other
barracks. ::-w, if you fellow the corridor of tho hospital and the
block reed, you will find, at tho tep, TK. That is tho -aerguo. That
was tho hosoitnl co-guo, Thon,_^aving on to a deer. Here there is
written "uoor express". I asked hia what he noant by that. He said
that was a joko in tho canp. Thoro was no railroad in tho ccr.p of
Dachau, cf course, but the prisoners thcnsolvas had to reneve tho
bodies fra-, tho rorguo and tako then to tho crauetcriun in a hand cart.
Ttoy *orc token past tho sea water station, through the block r^ad, and
thoy wore covered. Those are tho corpses that lx. Vierog saw.

How, I shall subnit an affidavit fra: Document 3eok I. Docu¬
ment 015 on pago 1*3. This docirecr.t t.111 bo Exhibit r22. This affid¬
avit is by n Catholic prior of a big cloiator in Austria free tho sajo
district as Boiglboock. I shall not road all of it, o:. ? paragraphs.

H. -lARDT* L y it plorso the Tribunal. Hey I inquiro of
counsol whether or not he iutonds to continuo his direct extinction of
tho defendant Boiglboock this coming, or r',»thor ho is going to road
his affidavits nor. It soens to ;» that ho could continuo his direct
examination and ir.troduco his affidavits after tho tiro that Boiglboock
has loft tho stand.

TH3 FRDSIDE.Vrs It uould soon, counsol, t .at it night bo a
bottor procedure to finish tho direct examination of tho witness and
thon ir.troduco tho docunonts unless you desire to question tho witnoss
concerning those doctcents. I understood that your direct ox“Jiinr.tion
of tho dofondant Boiglboock was alnost concluded. You stct.d that you
expected ic conclude it last evening.

D.l. ST2I?3.iU2H: ios, this is tho last dociraont, Only tfio
documents whoro thoro rare possibilities of q’tstion I wanted to read
while tho witnoss was on the stand. Thon thoro arc some othor aocirionts
I shall read inter.

THE H13S1D3BT: frococd, coin sol.

'-'05


1C Jun-%X3— u-2-?Iixtot7 (Int. Von Schon)

Court 2*o. I.

bt d?.. srsiidiiZRt

Q I 5hill road froc this docurcnt cf the prior only tv©
paragraphs. On cage 5C, at the top:

"*< reaaxfced that,_ if ho had to carry out such work, }»
would prefer to do so in his hospital at Fleskau,"

T at is a torn wo haven't hoard yot and I wanted to ash the
witness why it cays PlesJcau hero instead of Daehau. That so-is to bo
e nistaJco. 'r it nose, too sentence will be enough, witness.

A I believe that is a confusion, I visited hi?, twice -
once froc: Plcskau and onco while I was in Vienna during this <ob, and
apparently ho confused the two placos because ha didn't keep tho so tv©
visits entirely sopareto.

3 And what was Wcsk.au? Only in order to clear tho location

A Meskau is a Run rim town whore I was in tho hospital
while I trs in Russia.

Q Thank you.

I shell continue*

"Sinco ho addodi 'If I do havo to conduct those oj$>crij«onts
I ccn*t holp it, bocauso I aa on offieor' - I gathered that Jio was ab¬
solutely opposed to those ozpuriaonts ard tlr.t ho entertainod tho idoa
cf refusing his cooperation, if pocsiblo, but that ho hid inner doubts
ne to tho possibility of such a refusal boing succoscful.

"According to hlr -.rtiolo behavior, ho obviously was under
strong pressure at that tine."

And tbs last paragraph cn the bottom of this pngos

■Significant for our relations and for tiw truou I placed
in Frofoscor Dr. Boiglbc^ck is the fact that upon receipt cf his fcoto
stating that ha was in D'Chnu, 7 nskud hie: to look aftvr c axibor of
our convent, Father Ricnard olf, who w-3 hold as a prisooor thore.

■I naturally would nerer have done this if I had not placed
full reliance in Dr. Sciglbooc.t's attitude.

"In reply, I racjived a letter fron a Luftwaffe hospital.

•AX>6


10 Ijnt. 7ch.Schon)

Court Ho* I.


Free this hospital it appeared that he had left Dachau* In this letter
h= emphasized hew happy he was to have gpt aa.ny fret Dachau and' tc be
back at his fextaer nodical' work,"


And new I an finished with ay dccirents,

^ •

Your Honors, in tte bewinning of ny ease I said that 3
wanted to build ay case up like a cable car. 7hsrc would bfc a leading
cable and a safety; cable and tho safety cable would be tho scientific
basis. I den't believe that I slir.ll haw to use this. I don*.t rant
to argue r.ow, I just want to call your attention to the following eir-


cunctonccs. T:x» prosecution baa submitted docirxnte by Tschofooig,
irhcc I hr.v- chr-cterizcd, end Vionjg, when I have characterize, rr.d a.
l(r. Br.ujr, ufcrtc I ah 11 speak of later* It is nctc~ortljy that tlx>

prosecution, ;dvo are such advccat% cf hvrvuv,ty, did not do. tho r.oit

A •••*.' •

natural thin;, that is, to bring tho experimental subjects, tho victims,


rs witnoss.-s. </hon .1 two to ry effico today I was surrounded by ay
colleagues nr* s.ctvtcrica end I was told that at eight and oloYon
Last night, cn tho radio, thoro was m appeal to all victims of tlx>

g • § •

sea water cX;_ri.:ent£ to wpjrt and they ».vro pror.lrcd that they would
b, giv.-a quarters and good food. I was very happy because .1 saw that
tho uxaalnation of tho do ford', nt ns a witness was so offuct.'vo that
tho prosocution was obliged tc- send out an SC6. I now mako application,
your Hoivrr, for pjrrisrion to cril a’vitnosr, before the cr-.sr oxurinn-

tion bo7in.-, vho >.ns one of thoso axpuiiuunt.-l subjects. TItf s- is Yr.

• • ^ .

Ibttb-ch, rho:. I announced -s a -it no an cn Saturd'y, -ccordL^ to tho

rules. Ac dafonsu counsel, it is imy duty to sou to it that this

noss appoars befavo you without ur-yudicc ood uukes his otatotents

•

here. Otherwise, I would have submitted an affidavit, but I thought
that tho Tribunal would like to'so^ this witness end t 't :r. Hardy


would c.rtainly like to hava an opportunity to cross examine. this nan.
Therefore, 7. sk for p_-rmiscion to call this-witness no;, so that lie
c*r. bo quite irr.prejudic e i. I can't giro him anything to oat. I havo .
no food cards. I must sene hie back* K- is .a poor Gyrey and I don't

•CCOT


10 J»ai-M-aS-ii-VKarr^w (ir.U Von Schor.)

Court Ko. I.

want to too? hin bore too long. Thorefcra, I cake application that
tho wit re or be cal l ed now.

IB. HARDY: Of .course;, I object to that application. I wish

to start :ey cross examination of the defend an t so that tho continuity

• *

will not bo interrupted and so that =y preparation will not bo inter¬
rupted. Furthermore, tho renarks regarding tho prosecution* s request¬
ing that those Gypsies report to Numberg is rather uncalled for inns-

nuch ris the prosecution hasn't boon in a position to send out such a
%

call bofero inasmuch as tho nnres of tho Gypsies were never nado avail¬
able to is. I wish to cross ox'nino tho defondant Boiglbooclc today.

The Tosocution strenuously objocts to calling tho- witness prior to
thj cross ox.T;ination of 3oiglboack,

TH2 P.YSlDSfT: I assure, !!r. H^rdy, in viow of your stato-
ront, I assure that tho authorities rill bo jr«.pnrod to furnish food
for tho witness until ho is called,

!R. HARDY« If he is a defonso witness, there are regula¬
tions sot up for that. They ..avo a Defense Information Center aid Hr.
Wartona takes care of thoso pre-I.-j.

THE RUSSIDEhTi Defunso counsel ivy refer tho unttor to
tho Dofonco Infor-ntion Center which trill toko care of food and lodging
of the witness until ho’ is called.

m, -HARDYi Furthermore, Your Honor, I request that duo
notico bo given to the prosecution as to tho witness* nano and all
particulars concerning his background.

THE rfCSIDS.Ti I understood from counsel few tho dofondant
B^iglboock that ho had furnished that information. If he has not dono

■ e *

so, it should .bo dono irmodiatoly.

✓ * . . ' .

IR. HATDZi I have not -received it, lour Honor, and I

»

wouldn't be in a position to cross exralao the witness until such tiro

/ • • *

as I m able to study his ease also. * .

•

DR. ST2IXBAU3t: Your Honors, re are dealing with vory

• •

primitive xople. Tha prosacuti". .as-quite different resources than I


cGX


10 Jtm-:l-i3-ii-5~Sarroir (In*. 7 or. Scar.)

Court ft). I.

do. They could have issued nr. r*- .eel see© tine ego, but did not do so.

I tried to find these people. Kith greet effort, I rr.s unable to do

so. I could not.undertake any largo scale actions, cf co'trso, and I

^pey that I was able to find at least one ufeich uill cccplotc the

•

chair.. You have hoard the doctors, the r.rrsos, the defcrxi~nt, and
there is ■only one thing rlasing no*. I had no obligation to say any¬
thing. X could have been silent. I could have said "It's u» to you
to prove 'it." I sufcoittod scientific natarial and gave it to the-pro¬
secution os ny client said he hr.d nothing to bo afraid of. The prosec-
ution has the teaperaturo charts free which any doctor can ace rhon tl»e
experinont bep-n, vh^r. it was finished, shat tho courco of the oxpori- *

sent t.-.s - tho tlu'-o history is In tho possession of tho prococutioh.

* •

I have net asked fer it back. I rar.tod tho prosecution to have an op¬
portunity to study it. I lay*- that ivofocsor Ivy is boro. Bo rill

. • •

certainly study tho natter. 77c vo r-thing to bo afraid of. That is
ny point of viev.

<v

:R. VJJSJli four Honor, I don't understand this ploa and I
roquost a ruling as tc whether or not I can cross.oxanino the defendant.
Boiglbcock r vrx or rhothor I have to vr.it ur.tii after tho witnoso is
celled.

TKZ IRHSJD2‘T: Tho Tribunal rill nnko that ruling in n

n^rent. baforso counsel rill i; cdlately furnish to the prcsocution

thu nrre of tho witness and other infemation concerning this witness.

*

DR. STKDtBitSR: lour. Honors, it war dono quite fcruelly
on Saturday through tho General Secretary's cffico.

TKD IBZSlDEKTt 1 u.i^rstoed couns .1 to sake that statoaont.

Council for tho prcsocution haa runted hi has not received it. That is,

• • •

of coars-, not the fault of co-asd fer tho dofoniant.

1. E12BYs Ycur Honors, it scons to s» that this ,rocoduro
would lx. tsoet umsu'l. This “itnors is near on the stand undergoing

J * •

direct arrginftticn.

THr Ccuns-I, tho direct examination - tho examina-

^05 . •


10 Jar.-::-:: : -.i-£-:<'rror (int. « r. Schcr.)

Court "c. I»

tier, of this -.It-Tosa will pr;co-d, but c nro discussing tho status of
this witness who will not be called until after tho defendant 3oigl-
bocck is accused.

IiP— HIRDTj Thank you.

Till PRESTDEiT: Sant is the none of tho witness?

DR. STUNhiVEP.i Tho witness * nano is.

THE PRESIDE..T (Interrupting )i Tho Tribunal regards this
witness when you have nased and sontioaod as on important witness, but
tho Tribunal dosires to so. that thu witr-osc is fed and housed 's it
is dona - tho usual nnnnor "its 'tier witnessor. If my question arises •
concornins that, and tho Dofonso Infor-aticn Center is not preerrod to
core of tho wit:. , if you will report it at onca to tho Tribunal,
tho Tribunal r.ill t.ko tho wit serf under its CTO protect ivo custody in
order that hi will bo fed -T.d h.uood until such tine ns ho is crllod
tc the stand. I cannot i 'giro hy tlv Dafonse Infraation Center,
if you have requested V.vju, has net so.n that this witness has boor,
fed and housed as ether rita.ssec nro.


Court lo. 1

10 Jun 4?-*i-5-I-iS.-Kaloy (Toe Schocn)


DE. SZZH3AIJSL: He 7 I announce the nice of the witness? "he naco
le Ernst .ie t the eh.

THE PEESIDE1T: Will you pler.ee spell the nest?

3.. SttlSBAUSEs L-r-n-s-t k-e-t-t-h-a-e-h. Ee lives 1c Eschcnau
10, TUcrth, Bavaria. So that there is no confusion. I au on friendly
terns with the Secretary General's office. I acre!;- vented to sry that
through this radio appeal, In vlev of the food situation in Gernrny, hun¬
dreds will report and say, "I will he gl>on <ood and i will £0 to Huern-
berg and tell then sccethicg."

THE PSXSinSTl Counsol need not concern hiasalf with that problua.

f£. KAEITf: Tour Honor, I assure you tho orosccutlon isn't running
a bread line. The prosecution narely Sent out an apnenl.

TEE PEESinL Zs That mtter has Icon sottlod, Hr. Hard;/. Thoro Is
no use taking further ti-o.

IP.. STXDOACEEi I a= flnlahcd with the direct extinction of thle
wit nasi.

THE PRESIDE:!: Do any ether d-Tonso ccur.sol ha/o any aucstlons to
profound to this witness?

3T DR. WXISGZEBZP. (Counsel for dofendant Slavers):

When did you ncet Volfre.n Sieves?

A. I saw ..r, Slcvers for the first tine and only tine In ay lifo,
before this trial X scan, of course, on 20 July 1944 In tho discussion
In Dachau which hns boon rationed hero.

Cv Had you been i-iforned beloro that you «<uld see Slcvere on tho
20th of July in D'chcu ct this conference’

A. Eo, X vos not lnforuoi of Jhet, or ct least only i.T'tdittely
before the conference.

^ Then your suovrior agency did not tell you that you had to
negotiate with Sicverc?

A. SO.’

Whr.t >lnd of an innression did you have fron this r.cetlng with

Sievors? £■ s that just en rccidcnt?

-c» 11


“o mrt So. 1

10 -Tun ^-X-tr-Zn IHX-v^lcy (Von Schsen)


A. .-r. ? 10 ctstr, with Aon I had negotiated before hand concerning
these laboratory cacstions, raid to one day, B A atm has arrived froa
Berlin. Ho can decide this question. Coue with ~e. Ve will take to
hia.-

^ And vfcrt did you discuss with Slcvw-re?

A. I told hia that tfcic snail laboratory in Ploetncr's institute
ves not adequate for ny^invcstl gat ions and asked hia to give us a socond
bigger laboratory In the entlouolcgicn! institute, and he oronised to do
so, and vo did get this rooa,

Was anything said on this occasion about the execution of tho
sea vetor orpcrir.ents? Vcs anything said beyond tho supolying of tho
laboratory roon?

A. So, not n word. The conversation wes exclusively about this

rooa.

N Thon you did not tclk to Sievors about tho supplying of
expsrlaontal subjects?

A. So, tho exp«riaer.tcl subjects woro no doubt supplied on ordore
froa 2crlln and through the eaap coanandant's offico. As far as I know,
Sievors had nothing whatever to do with it;

Q, And this original ooinlon of yours did not chnngo In tho courso
of the orporinsnts?

A. I didn't see Slovcrs cay aore; I didn't hnvo erythlng aoro to
do with hia after tho end of this conforonco, tfclch as I enid was about
the laboratory. I nover saw hin egain. I never heard of hia again
• until I case to Suernberg end heard he was one of ay co-defendnr.ts hero,

Q. And after this discussion you never sew or heard anything of
Slavers which eight have indicated that ha had nothing nor® to do with
this natter?

A. So, I never hcerd mar thin* aore.

Q, Did you in any fora, orally or in writing, give a renort to
tho Ahncnerbe or tho Heichsfuehrer SS, or any other agency, aside froa

your own branch of the Vchmecht, concerning your experiments?

J&2


Court So. 1

10 Cun 7-4i-£-3-njj->-Xal07 (Ton Schoen)


A. I reported on these ex-' I-erta only to ay superior agency, the
Luftwaffe Aedieal Inspector, and no one elee.

Sov, you heard in the course of earlier exaninetlon that the
Ahnenerbe had an institute for silitary scientific research. Did this
institute have ary connection vith your experiments In ary vay?

A. I knew the nans, knew that Ploetner was working at that insti¬
tute, tut aside free these very vague connections, which were Halted
entirely to laboratory ouestiens, I had nothing to do with this institute
and the institute had nothing to do with ae, that is, ay e-nseri.ments in
no vay were carried out or orocoted or Influenced by the Institute for
Scientific research.

Q. Hov, for ay final ousstloc. The fundanental Question Is the
sea water oxoerlsents as far aa I an informed were tho 20th of Hay 1044?

A. The 20th of July.

Q. Yes, the 2Cth of July. Pardon ne.


10 wune-K-::j-6-l-fceehan (TonSchon)

Court I

Subsequently did you learn whether Siewers or any other repre¬
cent at ive of the ohnenerbe was present at thie discussion?

I did not understand you; that was on 20 July?

Eo, at the fundamental discussion about the execution of oee-
vater experiments?

A. Oh, you sean in Berlin?

Tes, in 3erlin.

Ju free ny own knowledge, I cannot tell you anything about this
discuasion* I was not present Byself. What I know about it, I learned
the details free this trial here. I heard free Becker-Jreysong at the
tine that sene Ben froo the Savy, scee cen froo the technical office
and scco tbirersity professors, including ifcpingor and Heubner had
hold a sooting and arranged for tho experinents. I newer was told that
the iheaeorbe or any SS agency participated in this discussion.

Q. ghenfc you, no further ques:ions.

2£3 PHBBXBBfTi any furthor quoetions by defense couneel?

DP, rL3G.IJiO: (Jor the defendant Krugowsky.)

d . Profossor, the Prosecution has charged Krugoweky with ro-
spor.si'oility for and participation in tho soo-vator oxporinents; did
you know Krugowsky before tho boginning of this trie!?

A. SO.

q. Did you know his rucoj' had you hoard his naao in any connec¬
tion with these exporiccnts?

A. So.

^ . Did you hear anything ©lee which eight indicate that ho was
in any way connected with the sea-wutcr experinents?

A . I newer heard of any other agency or any parsons inoonnoction
with tho sea-vutor experinents, exct*>t the centers of tho Luftuaffcnor
were tho adTisors callod in by then, neither krugovaky or Schuofer or
anyono else in tho SS. I knew only that Eicnlor had giwon approval for
tho use of the experinontal subjocto and for the elocution of tho or-

wr_lA


10 Juno-K-IU-5-2-Kehen (Ton Schon)
Court 2


porirents in concentration c-cps.

Do you know tko cccnittee for Drinking Vater ajuipnont in tho
Eoichs Ministry fceer?

a. I learned of the ad stance of this coeoittee bore.

Z . 2hon aa for a« you know this ccscittoo had nothing to do
with the ooa-water oxperinental

A • Certainly not. Waking aco-wator drinkable was not done bjr
a cccaittoo but by the diacorory of Dr. Scha«for.

Z . Do you know Dr. Zikowaky free Vienna?

A • Toa, he ia the load In,- o sport in Vienna for infoctioue dis¬
eases and tho head of tho big infoctioue hoapitol in Vionna.

Z . Vhat waa hi a attitude toward national S ocialisn?

A . 2 cannot give you any dotuilod inforaation about that, but

aa fer as I know ho waa not a party neebor, I bolioro thut ho hod
certain politicul difficultioa, but X cannot giro you any dotailod
infomution, only what I cun noro or leaa raaccbor.

Z . Ihank you no further quootiona.

JKD PPJSIBS.'T? Any quootiona by any othor dofonao counaol? If
not, tho Proooeution uuy croaa oxacino tho witnoao. Boforo procooding
with tho croaa-oxeeination, tho tribunal will bo in rocooa.

( a rocoaa »ai token. )


C-C15


1C ^U-C ^7_:_JjC-?_l_Prl=cpTJ (let., ven S cheer.)
Coer* I


7H2 KASS51L: Per*0=8 In the courtroom please find their septs.

The "ritunPl Is again in session.

XB. EAPET: It. Beiglboeck, when did you Join the Kptlonal-
So-irlistisckc paxtcl? /,

JulGi. Sij£L»G: Ar* you now proceeding to exa-sinct
MB. HAl-JTf: Tes.

JLTG- SlSSIaGs Kpj we ask a question or two?

BT JtTCL Sh3? IjC-:

^ Witness, will you plessc turn to your Inhibit Ho, 32 in Bcigl-
botek Docuncnt Book 2, the docutnt having teen adnitted in evidence
this dry ps 3«lglboeek's i-xhlblt Ho. 21. I refer in particular to the
chrrt which has been np.de by frits Plllwelr.. Do you hrve it heforo
you?

A Yea.

<* Can you s-y whether this ch^rt is a correct representation of
the wards, Mocks and streots shown pnd whethor or not it is correctly
drnv to 'ec-lc?

A I ern not say anything exactly about the scalo fron senory.

Those wore tig barracks. Where is says, ‘•Entrpnee to Hospital," that
wps where on* cane into the hospital. That was between two long
barracks as arc shown here.

vi How wide would you s"y that sick try entry vast
A I cstinato that it was about seven actcrs fron tho camp rood
until this li-c which Pillwcin -ut in here at the end of his renark,
■intrancc to Eospital. I estate that was about seven meters.

h How wide would you ostl ato the sain corridor shown on the chartl

A How long you scant

<< The width, not the length.

A Tour Honor, you mean this sain corridor that gees through the
hospital? It was aVout three and a half or four setors wide.

it The space that is indicated on this chart as being the "31ock
street™ through which bodies were wheeled tc the sorguc md finally to


Court I


the crematory, v^i ho* vide ir. your estimation?

A Xt was the sane vidth w the tain corridor of the hospital.

As frr rg I rrmember, it w»a the s"cc width.

/ng it cowered over PS it part of a building or vn.a it pr. open

■treat?

A It «m between two bprrpciea. ?hie va.a p. covered hpll «nd be¬
tween the barracks.

^ It that elao true of the ppasrgewry which la designated on this
chart in i-n&lish p.a the ";4aln corridor?' *ea it elao covered?

a Yea. Between the next two brrr'-cks there wero open courtyards
vhlch '•lac rre c-llcd "Streets" here. This ncxr atreet, the middle I
cpn't say. I wps never there, between the last two b-rracka where It
any* "Outer Court of the ixperlucntpl St«tlon of Baachcr - that wra at
that tine Floetner - f-H was an open courtyard.

^ Would you estimate that thoac "Block Streets" or "Courtyard"
between the hrrracka were about the erne width aa the bprracka thca-
aclvca? ’

a At lc-ot.

S, "ha barrack building or roon in vfcich you conducted your ex¬
periments, wv*t would you aay wra tho overall width of that barrack
rooe or building?

A I cetlra.te that it v,.s olght rxtera wide pr.d at least ten
cetera long.

S. Then frea tfcu r.carcat point of the outoide wall of your aoe
w-ntcr crperiaental atrtion to the outaido wall of the atrtion whore
Vl-vcg waa atatloned would be, in your opinion, about wknt dietrncci

a Thrt v«e also a courtyard. It wp.e before the Floetner station,
about five meters vide.


017


»


Court 1

June lC-Xr-8- 1-HD-3eard-Vor. ichoen.


Q. *'ould It be your best Judgement then that all of
these barracks shown here are about 9 meters In width, and
that the yards or streets between then were about 5 meters
ir. width; Is that correct?

A. Approximately, I can't give you definite figures,
of course, but I remember that the distance was approximately
the same as the width of the barracks themselves — It oould
be one meter or more or less, I do not know, I cannot
remember so exactly.

Z, Then, from the olace where your Sea Water Experi¬
ments wore c?rrlod or., you were approximately 5 to 7 meters
from the Malaria Station In whloh Vlowog was stationed, and
you wove about the some distance In the opposite direction
from th. Malaria station whloh Is shown on the chart as
Block 3?

A. That this was the Malaria Station I did not know
at the time. I tho^ht It was part of the hospital ct the
time, '•'hero It says “Vloweg," that was a laboratory, I
know that, a laboratory for blood teats. I was novor In
cither of these places. I cm only testify as to what I
saw through the window of my at tlon. I eaw that ov r
there, whore It says "Vleweg" there were microscopes and
laboratory tests wore ccrrled out. Between my experimental
station and whore It says Malaria Station, Block 3, tmere
were soex;times prisoners In the court yard. - considered
that they were hosoltal patients.

Z. Sow, then, the area, this Is an area marked on
She orart as *Ccurt yard for Dr. Rascher's exoerlm^ntol
station,■ where, In relation to that court yeard, was Dr.
RaSchor's experimental station?

A. Dr. Rascher was not there any more when I was in

' Dachau, as far as I car. Judge from what has been said

*>lf


Court 1

Juno 1C— l£-c-2-KD-5eard-V on Schoen.


here, he must h~v.. been dead already. I knew this as the
■Plootner Station*. «nd, in this laboratory which is at
the end of the chart, Ih'do snail room as r laboratory.

Koxt to this roon there w-s o big laboratory in which
Plostncr worked. «nd, those laboratory rooms were shut off
by c solid wall from the ruons where it mys, "Personnel
Rooms of the Experimental Station." I believe that the
prisoners who worked for Floetncr also c~ne froa this
dlroctlor., oparcntly they lived there.

One zero question. I understood you to say thrt
ns one of the rewords for volunteering for your experiments,
the experimental subjects were to bo given or. addition-1 or
supplemental ration which woe the sumo in quality and
quantity c.a the SS food ration; woe that inducenent hold out
to then? 2iot the S3 food ration but the Luftwaffe food
ration?

«. 3ofcro and after the experiments, they were to got
tho Luftwaffe rations. Tho policy which I rsu d for then
after tho oxterla^nts wns Chat they should not bo 'rut bek
to work, yet, and tfcnt they would be given addition"! food
from the hospital for, sick people, nd for persons who did
extrehoavy work, there wore additional rations, "nd I
damandod these additional rations for my experimental subjects,
and the Chief Physlcin promised them to me.

C->n you state in what particulars the additional
food rations which were to be given to your experimental
subjects differ d fr-m the regular "ohrs-cht food rations
iven to the soldiers in the field?

. I cannot say, exactly. The patients in the hospital,
1 know this only from hearsay, I did not see thi3 for myself,

I only know the food that my nurses get. The hosoitr.l

tients got milk, butter and bread and. In addition, as far

-19


Court 1

June 10-I4-6-3-HB-3ecrd-Von Schoen.

"8 I roconber, they got naif a loaf or 'fehroacht bread In the
morning, the same hind of breed that w~3 Issued in the
’.rehrc-cht; then for breakfast they hrd either margarine or
..-ir.Z'lrde and ersatz coffee; for lunch they had a one dish;
T.d for supper, they bed some hind of soup and bread, or

sovirr.l days I cw that they got sausage and cheese and
aarg-rine and bread, one uf these things enen tine. I wo Id
esSlants that this food of the nodical etudents was about
2000 calories; that is a rou c h estimate.

Z. I believe you said at the beginning of your direct
exncin ti n that you nrdo soae effort to hove those experi¬
ments carried cut in your own laboratory or Institute; Is
that correct?

Am Yes.

4. «re yo of tne opinion that you could have found
on u^h vol nteers outside a concentration canp to hovo
ccrrlod but your er.arlaents In your own laboratory or
Institute?

A. I an convinced that if ono hrd gone to an unit of
the German "onrnacht and hrd said wo need so <-nd sc many
people for ar. experiment, who wants to v l.nteer, thrt I
would have got enough soldiers. .Certainly it was not tnat
nobody wiull have volunteered; It was Just thet because of
the existln c orders, no one would bo released for such a
thing. But, under peace time conditions or less stringent
orders, I ar. sure I would have .jot enough soldiers.

Z. Whet did ;*-ju tell your experimental subjects by way
of preliminary exdonation concerning the d_tails of the
exerlaents they were about to undergo?

I told tr.en about the following: It was to bo

•

decided whether sea water could be urde drinkable or not;
and, how one sho-id conduct oneself if in distress at sec;


20


Court 1

June 10-ii-2—=-HD-3e5rd-Von Scnoen.

- on I descrlb d to Chen, no re or lees, wna; z:.s conditions

•

i 3 e?. 'istress rre; that the flyer crashes at ear. with hie
llTe boat drifting nloru, ar.d .-.as to ^.o cion b wlt.-.Uu water
r drinh eee water. I told then Snrt there were two successes
« io.. would sie sea water drinkable; I told then iw.cc we
.rd tv- -recesses v .ich were So be tested. I rlso told Shea
: *t dr .nilr.i ser water or salt water la very ..n 1 accent.

.-vRd, t.: t I ec .ild -Jrrentee only the one v.rou-3 wnJ.oh _ot
: a- w.'ter t.'.'t they would not b= t lrst", and oil the other
roups would 'jo thirsty, *nd, then I told then that during
t is cine they would hove very little food or perhaps none
rt nil; thrt they wo Id be hungry, too. I told t.:en thrt
v.ev thirst would be very unpleasant. I n?de that vry
olac.r to then, and then I ashed then whether they would
bo willing to do this, and enyln^, thrt this wr.s an oxterl-
ont ir. zl :• interest of rescuing people; that by triln =
this unpleasantness on thenselves they night help apny
other people. *nd, I told t..on thrt if they cooporr.te and
c o erperlasnt went off well, the: would et cl c -i*ottos
.? n ne recording to r syston of oreniun?. «r.d, f urt.horfliore,
t. c I would try to _et alleviations of thoir sentences .

: r then. Vn*t I h d In nlnd was wh-.t had been pronload
; we by tne S3. I had been explicitly told that cue so
c pi- would not neva to -o through the experiment3 for
nothing; th t they would _et certain considerations. Two
h- pie told no thrt explicitly.


10 loao-w -cCJ-5-l-Oross (VcnSckou)

0 ourt I

bho voro those people «o told you that?

-a- One was tho adjust of the cj=p ccenaad..at. *ae other was
Or. Ploetnar.

<v . Did they explain in detail what concessions wore to bo civ on
theso concentration c_cp volunteers?

A. Easy told no thoru was light work in the conp. 7or instapoo
nrxy priaoaors as f-r as I saw were Just keeping the roccs in order—
tho billots Jf tho SS gua *ds and tho officers had to no straightened
*5> in tho naming, oto. *his work was very covotod. It w u a nuch
ctsior then work in the factories, for iaotnnco, or construction woi-k.
2no;- uoro to bo assigned to such light work for a considerable poriod
and, thoa I toow that nrny of then wanted cortain alterations for
thoir rolciivos. I rceosbor that ono of uy gypslos wantod his fr.thor
or occo relative who was also a prisonor to bo roloasod. I pascod tnis
request on. 2hoa, as I said, p ; rt of tho gypsies voro fomor a cabers
of tho tfchnmcht and tho;' told no thoro woro certain prospoots for
naabors of tho Vofcrcacht to bo roloasod noro easily, and, I roportod
thoir naaos and had thoir cases rovlcwed.

Bov, thoa, "hut wise did you toll your e:perlnontal su'ejocts
about tho oxporincats? I cn talking about prior to the tino that you
actually began tho osporinonts.

A . I told then that I would di?ldo tho: into various groups.

That ono cyroup would receive water that had bcon procc-sod and tho
othors would go without food or drink and othors would get oca vr.tor.

I told then ono group would got oao-hvlf us wich os the other. Ouo
vould cot oao-iuOf liter cni the other oae lit^r a doy. I uleo ^eint-
ed out the groxp that got nothing and the group t. at get so_ water
would hava tho nost thirst, that the;- would kov*. tho aost to put up ’ith.
A-d, 2 nac.o tho distribution in this way by picking out tho strongest
people for thes-j groups. .and then I told thee at the beginning that \:c
had to nuke a nunbor ofitcsts, that urino had to be colloctod and that

iC22


10 J tno-K—:j-9-2-Oro 8B (TonSchon)

Court I

blood would be token free thee for extinction. That i 8 roughly the
eznlonatica that I gave thee.

v- I* that all you told thee7

im Z-.cz I asked thaz vh other they wore willing under those ci~
cwjstcncos, azphosislng the feet that they would suffor fros thirst-
whother they wanted to participate ia tho oxporinonte. Tfcoy had a
chanco to think it over and tho;- c^co back and said, *Yos, wo want
to participate.* and I said, "If you’arc willing now then you havo to
koqp the conditions of tho exporlnonts later.*

D id you toll thoc tiny thing else?

1 . I oon't rtcanbor .anything olso at tho accent.

Zm Tou havo introduced in cvidor.ee Boiglboock Document Ho.32 in
Boiglbooek Docuuont 3ook II, which hae boon roccivod In ovidcnco
tho Ssib'uul a* Boigl'ooeck fchibit Ho. 21. It is an affidavit or a
statenont undo by ono frit* Pillwoln, I bclievo. Tou ir.troduco that
onhibit os.part of your ovidcnco in tho ease and as a part of your do-
fonco, do you?

A . Ton.

Q. On page 2 of tho original oxhiblt which eppooro on pago U8 of
tho Snglith text is tho answer directed to tho affiant us follows* •»
■What do you know about the citisonohip of the oxporinontal subjoctn?"
*nd ns a port of tho anewor of tho effiant .ppoars this st„taaont:

■Zio 0:5? riuontal subjects in uoct c.isos spoke tho gypsy dialect. liony
of thee were obviously of S luvic origin." Is that corroct?

A* ioa. tong tho gypsies thoro wore scec who cano froo Hungary
or tho Hungarian bordor. I don't know how aany, throo or four porheps.
Thon there was c larger group which cane free noar Bratislava. I don't
know exactly where but thoy ofton spoke SlovJdan. Thoro were u.-ny of
thca Hi zot have any definite residence. I talked to the gypsies
quite a bit during the ccurso of the experiments. I know part vcrc

Ocmnn, part of thee free austric, one was, I bclievo, from Sou-ianio.

23


10 Jur-C-h— ;u—£-3-GroB* (Tons ehoa)

Court Z

I believe, a few of thtc, I don't know exactly how nony at the accent,
v-ra free Hungary, free tho *nstrein Hungarian border, and u group
c -a frea Slovakia. I «c unable to give any details about the citizo-
sbip-enything definite, x didn't see their pep era nyself ca d I oust
sc~ that at the tino I didn 1 t coaaidcr this quostioa vital.

Q. appearing in the ti=o unswor to the soac question ia thia otr.to-
n«r.t| "I did not boo the identification papers, howevor, ua this was
quito lapcaeiblo in a concentration ceap and as I did not ask thee enj'-
C-ing pertaining thereto. I thenforo c-nnot njco any exact str.taaont
regarding the citizenship of tho individual gypsius." and then I dii*-
oot your retention to this st.tecent node by the affiant Pillvoin: "I
did not ash thm becauso the gypsies wore very pricltivo pooplo and
soae of then did not oven know their own blthdatcs.* Did you cfcoorvo
tho sreo thing regarding thoso people -s did tho affiant, your witness
Tritr Pillvoin?

▲ . X don’t rccccbcr asking then for thtir date of birth uynolf.

Zs is, of ccurco, possiblo that sccoone said "X don't know exactly."

2^.t is an movor that ono ofton gets free ax gypsy, ab X know, oarlior
in Austria wo often had occasion at tho clinic to treat gypclos and
tr.oir poroonol data was not alvcys vory accuruto,

Q. t'oll, I ask you this, and this is tho natter about which X tu
lntorostoi, Unsit aa aoparont to you <\a it was to your vitnooe Pillvoin
that tho fi-psios uoro vory primitive pooplo, and I teko it woro in ucjy
particulars in a sense v6ry ignorant or poorly oduc.-ted pooplc? Did
you obaorvo that in your dealings with thoso people?

i . I have already said that scco of tnosc gypsies woro tho .'dud
of pooplo that go about the country in carts, didn : t h_ve cay regular
B&:ool training. K^my of then even if they had a d of Ini to rosidcnce
ii .n*t have regular schooling which could be called oven ..v or ago. Eh t
i= no doubt true that their cduc .tion was protty bod but they woron*t
iuub.

024


1 C J'tSl9-4—Gro : • (T onSdioz )

Cc^rt I

Q« Ho furthor questions.

3T PPJSIDiL-:

v- ’Ataoii, reforring to the chart egcia, the siiio ono which in
a -portion, nn annex. to your Exhibit So, 21, you roferrod— used the
word—barracks. Sow, to you io a barracks a rocn is a larger building
or Is It one sc*>aroto independent building under its own roof?

i. If I understood the question correctly by barracks wo noon
voodoa buildings. 2aoro wore in Oernaay quito n n*:ter of barrack
•ottlmonts, nostl7 for Vehroucht labor worrico workc s' hones, etc.

Q . I undorstund that, vitnoos. But, now referring to your
chart. D id tho roon where your sea Water experiments were carriod on,
was that undor a cccnon roof with othor adjoining roocs or was it strp-
arr.to and hod its own roof?


■


1J June ^■-t-3-lt-l-r &rrcw (7 rn Schon)
C-ir-. ?k>. 1


-a thia barreck whore ay experinentel 3>t‘ioc ns, there were
' : - te rcc=* altogether. * aacller roo= which atuck u» into the big
rzzzm *hea there wta a saeller race where it says ■rrsour.'. I don't
yri3 * %ke% pcracnally. Phot wee locked. I *ts aercr in there, end, torerd
•r.c hospital sain entrance, there rea tfcowcahrccn end the toilet. Thct
wta ell ud or cne roof end thtt «es e barrack - e *eptrtt e building.

.. *r.d thet roof thtt covered y-ur barrack did nc» cover any other
buildirgl

• ' ° a0 » between ay barreek end the ether btrrreka there were open
specoa, uncovcrod court yerda,

-• T btt ear/or a ay question.

Counsel cxy proceed,

CJtJSJ L'LUObVTlOK

BY :s. E#JUYi

• *rrfesacr ®tiglbceck, when did you Join tho NSLATT
+• Ir. I 933 , I Joined the before »ho Tcrty eta prohibited in
Austria, er.d thoc X Joined egein in 1939 eftor the Anschluss.

*• ^id you belong to the

*• No, nevor,

»V.e

A. Yea.

- 014 y= u bolon e to any ret load s clcllst Physician's *asocl» tlona?
Yea, 1933.

- y^u belong to cny ether organization?
rhe It Ague of Lecturora. To thing else.

'•* 014 Ycu ottor^l the school et «ltrcsof
No, I wta never there.

D r. Sciglboock, d> you know Hens Toppert
A. Yea.

"ho-1 shot

lopper wea e student of 5n?‘nrcr's. He nr a ct Sppinger's clinic
ca esslatent.

- “ta be finger's iaacdltto es*is»t=t?

-26


June 47-l^S—«-2*Ksrroo(Von Schon)

Jourt Nc» 1


». Yea, of course.,
u *id you succeed hist

. 3 Id I axeeecd hint I res en assistant t? ret her rih hin,

.. -oil, who wes the fir a* easie*intt You ;r Topper?

A.The first essia*ont ots no!thcr 1 'oco r r.or I.

'...'here ia . o per nowt Do you Know?

I fc-cw »hc‘. ho week tc *c.cr!ca.

Vfcet wes your reek lr. *he luftweffc tgcln, witness?

. I vta 5’absent ct the end. The la, Cep’tin.

- -hen did you enter the luftweffe?

*• w.

s« ’"hen didyou enter tho ••?

A. 1934.

D id you a*ay lr. the Luftwcff© until libcr<t«cn?

I rc-Ainid in tfcs Luftvcffo until the end of the wtr, yea*

• Whon did you resign loa the S*?

». I lid no* resign froa the S. I 1939 1 stopped ay 3 scrvlco.

Whet wls your ionic in tho Sa?

M the end I wes Oboraturntann fuehrer. Thi t rta c honerery runk,

.. ->.et sere your duties in the Luftreffo. Frea the tico when you rent
to tho Luftvcffo were you on cotiwc duty ca o Luftvcf’o nhyalcicn?

>*. First , I wes c ccdicol soldier. I get ay braic training like cny
recruit end efter btclc tmining, I wes used is e d^stor end got tho
norrcl prcr.ctioos Just liko cry cnc else.

‘'id you vatr tho uni fora 0 * ell tise*.

Of c:ur3o, 1 Bl*'oys woro tfco ur.ifcrr. unless I ront out in civilien
clothes.

Now, in 1744, you rtcoived orders t= rt “rt to the Hod leal Inspect¬
orate in -eri in. Do you rxnenbcr fc he cxcct dete?

No , I cermet re-caber the exect de'e. It is in the second helf of
Juno, I bclievo. I believe frre: the letter leer. here where I rite the t


10 June 47 -V-S—l % 3 -^-r^(Y =n Schon)

Carr'. 1

I hero been on thisjob since ‘he la» of July -h- ‘ it rust ftve beer. in
tbo lea* feu days oSfuno the t I get the order.

- Then, when you re-or ted to Berlin y-T» ucre inferred tfcet you hed
been r* contended by Jrofcaaor Snpiagtr to perforr the act utter cvpcr-
irents. Is tfaet crrrcc'7
Yes, tfcet'a right.

»>: i-forced you to ‘hit effect

*• Bockar-freyseng inferred re.

.. ^id ell your declines take rltce ir. orlin rith "cckcr-Frcyoong or
•.res a-eebody clrc iratrurer.tel ir. irotructitg ;-cu is »o i.-v you 11
perform the cx.'oricer.ta et Dcchx'jf

A. Meat of >hx ‘elks ebout the experiment eht J hid vt re r«th Beck, r-
? reyscng. I received the cfficicl order f-'r !!crc rh-e I believe - a en
obcrfcldtrst et the tjao, tr.d onco I re--rted to xrefesaer •'c 1 render
briefly,

U -hot did you a? ek to Scixccdcrt

I cerj-.-'t give you the di t erectly. 3 hid beer, in “crlin fr some
tiro, . refesaer Jchrocdcr rta r.~ ‘here until trro :r three <-ys liter,

I believe, er.d he oco to tfct 'ediccl 3na->ectcri *e for ebout one dey
er.d I reported to hin, but then I never c. ’. hie tgtin until I hrd ctc
bock free "ecteu.

Itor.cd'ctoly upon being inform d end ins‘ruc*cd by Bcck.r-?rey-cn^
ea to your t-aigr.oxr.t, did you then tak for t rclecae?

«. Ir. ay direct cxtr.int‘ion I -cid thet irroedii ‘cly nftcr-xrda I
caked thet 1 not oerticir*-‘c in these cocperincnta or else be illoocd
tc curry thcr ou‘ in ‘trviaic or et the clinic i* "i C nrr or ao-x piece
tl3o - not in e ccncan*r: tion Bher, hen I Itemed *hr t rea
irpcs3iblt, ta I stid in my direct croini *i'z, I raked ‘hr t some one
else be put in ay piece. Pfc -e ere the efforts th- t I code to gct out
f it. j.-: then I -rote *e roy chief phyaiclcn th t he should i sk for

tc be sent beck so - could get out cf these ex-- rirxrts.

2 .


10 "unc i?»—• , -10--Ktrroc(' , cn Schcn)
Court ::o, 1


E ccVir-Jreyseng inferred ycu thet i* vxs toe letc to get out cf
it,’la the* 1st

Yea.

‘ere your slsgivinga besed on the feet th*t you hed c h err or of

•

working In c encentreticn ceap?

-. Yea.

^ No other re sons?

No.

.. You told appingcr ebsut your riagivinga, didn't ycu?

Yea.

’•« I>ld ycu tell ^ohroader ebcut then?

• No btctuao htd alreedy refused definitely. Her* scld.'iMa
Is on order. Y-v have to cerry It cut. -© can't cxchcngo you ', end then
I sew thero vta no point In Tying tc do enything acre,

v. Why didn't you Juat refuse tc cerry out the order?

*• °eceusc I hed been given e ailitery order.

^ and ycu wero efrcld the, arxthing rculd ho on tc ycur feally,
os ycu sold in direct cxeainiticn?

a. I wea efreid if I eeid, efter 2 hed Inquired whether i» ria c
nili'ery order, ®d then scid 1 ren't cerry it cut. I res ofreid ahet
I would be celled tc cce-un* for refund tc ebey order*. T het la
oustemry.

.« Ycu s«id thit, in direct cxesinttion, ycu thought if ym h<d
refused to cerry out this order thet s-aething ney c'no brch on your
ftally. r>- t your aether end fethcr txy suffer fr-a it. Is tjy t
correct?

• Ky aether ind fethej -culd set hvc suffered* Ky fethcr, beceuso
he wis no longer dive, end ay -eothcr wouldn't hrve suffered ci t'l r» but
I w-uld orrbcbly heve been br-ught to *riel trd ay wife end children
would heve suffered frra t>«t.

.. Wes Hiaal-. r involved in thcae txpericcnta?


11 June 47-M»S.*-lO-5Sexrcw(V- B 3cfcon)
Court1


«• I Sene nesting etut Kinder in conncc-ion lift these expcric£i*a
-r, et lecat, didn't until this *rid # cxcopt *hi ► Hinrlir hid hid to
givo p<^-aissi:n for the cxxriaer.ts tc be cerried -tut in Dneheu, He hed
been caked to give this pcrr:issim.

"ell nT, if y-u hed refused the erder end hed been br~ugh* to
‘riel, Just wb * would htvc hc"~cncd to y~ur wife end child?

a. ‘h; k deponda on hew the court »r*iel turned out. It would hevc
been possible f:r cc tc be ec w’tacd to deeth f-r refusing tc
•bey cn order end then ay wife end children could here been helpless.

Is thet ell?

• ^ti k would here beer, onugh for ac, pcrsonrlly?

%. “ould they here been phyaieclly birred?

If yow consider e deeth s or. tone c bodily h-rn, yes.

»’cll, ytaterdoy you accd on direct exerdw ticu, very explicitly
•het if you hed refused tc ctrry out thcao orders th? t s. me thing •vuld
hevc happened to y-ur ftrdly. N’oc, Just hi* rculd hevc hepponed to
your fnail/i

a. If I * .stifled thi t eonethirg could hive v « yrtzci tc zy fnnily,
rhich I dcc't believe, then I rust hive oxrrosrcd nynclf bcdly. I
believo I acid *hek cut of oonaidcrctirn f r ay feaily I fctd to obey
this order. I a cr.t tfcct zy fenily r-uld siffcr indirectly.

Non, you 3 * 1 .t. d fchrt y-ur fether via nc* elivc it this tine. 2 s
the* right?

-• Yes, thtt's right.

CU Wta your rather elivc?

*. Yes.

^ D-d y-u htvc t e'ep-fether?

Nc.

'..ho do you rofer tc in this letter tfc« t you hive introduced Into
evidence dated the 12 th of Auguot. 19 Li f vher. you or*te free ^ cheu end
addressed it to ■Deer .c end lit - '. ' .


30


13 June 47-U-S■ -10—6-Etrre*(Vxi Schcn)

t r=. i

*• These were zy in-l£~s. ? trends cf ry iifo«

- I see » Tl.enk Yc\u


Court 1

June 10-M-U-l-HD-Xeloy-Von oohoen.

How, whan you were Instructed by Seeker Freyseng
c'.nocrning the experiments Ju6t what did he tell you the
purpose of the experiments were to be briefly, Doctor?

He told ae that the purpose of these experiments
w?s first of all to deolde whether the Berka sethod was &
useful method to avoid damage fron 6ea water, that is to
remove the salt froa seawater in certain forn; secondly,
whether we want to test our oth^r aethod ct the scae tine.

The control -roup which was to get frosh wrter originally,
we will use the Schaefer a-tired for then; thirdly, we did
have especially the Schaefer aethod group introduced because
lack of raw material «nd wo thought the 3orkn method would
not do what people expected of it. In this case if one
nohtod could not be introduced because of raw material lack,
and the other beoause of ineffectiveness It would be
Important to decide whether it would be bettor to go with¬
out wrter or drink sen water.

Q. Then tho clrcuastance as outlined to you was noroly
to tost the efflcaoy of oc.aefer and Berks's methods?

Among other things, yes, but thd first question
that vr uld come up and which h*d to bo doolded, was that
aocordlng to the witnesses nt the time it was prob bly that
nclthor of the aethod* o>uld bo introduced. One beoause
there w s not silver available and the other because the
nedlcal lnapQCtor'’tC8 expected thet it would not bo of footed,
and the quoetlon wrs whether to fc o without w-ter or rather
drink sea water.

Q. Veil, was the Berka oetnod effective enough to
reduce damage to the human system?

You aeon theoretically or according to the results

ox* ay investigation?

4 . Veil, first theoretically and then according to tho

’•■332


Court 1

June 10-I*-ll-2-HJ-Kaloy-Yon Schoen.

results or your Investigations; et tfcet tine, was It believed
tbrt la nrlor to the tile you Instituted the experiments, was
it bull-v.d trjl the Berha method was effective enough to
-educe damage to the human system?

a. I explained In my direct examination what opinions
were held. Tnare were two different Ideas, one which «r.
Scuafer represented with so much nerve wea tnet the 3~i'lta
set of. h»d no effect r.t all because It h*d no chemical ro¬
tation with the- salt, .-nd I'believed . veryonc realized t :1s
with the exception of Borha himself, and perhaps dr. Slrnny.
The second lioa w s one represented by <Spplng.r that It .icd
o ohcr.lc.il effaot but perhroe a psylolo-lcal effect, -nd
thcroforo It would bo somewhat effective If It v-e possiblo
to Introduce the Schaefer method which night Justify a
rcooomondntlor. of the other method.

Z. Veili then the purpose of the experiments was to
find out whether or not the Beria method would be effootive
enoug.. to remove doma 3 o to the human system, that was the
ourposo of testin,.. the 3erico ectnod?

a. The purpose of tno test wae to dotermine whether
undor the lnfluonos of the 3erfcr drug tnero w^uld be other
reactions of the body than when sea water alone was used.

One does not hevo to hrve any dn.ooge. ?nyBiological testa
will be enough or analysis to arrive at such c conclusion.

Then what was the purpose of eing the Sohaefer
method in your experiments?

a. The Schaefer -etr.od was Included in these experiments

far an external reason, If I understand correctly. I onn’t

determine the motives here. It would be better to ?.sh

Seober-Freyseng ch-t. It w-s necessary, of course, an* was

intended ;..*t tnero snould he a gro Jo whlcu. would n- vu the

•

sume f-.od conditions, but • ould enough wrter. «s fr.r

33 '


Court 1

June lC-24-ll-3-HD-Jfcloy-Vor. Schoon


r.a I recall this group originolly was to get drinking water,
and 1 believe I roaoaber that Beckor-Frcyseng sold we might
take the Schaefer method right away. At least the technical
office will then have the proof that Schaefer water la drink¬
able.

i. Did you consider this whole program to be superfluous
work?

A. I considered it superfluous If one has a good method
Co quarrel for months about Introducing a less effective
method. I considered it superfluous to billt a laboratory
from tho sereton In 1944 while on one hand a laboratory
already, but it seemed to me worth determining whether
bettor results could be given by soa water than by going
without soa water. This question was not solved thdn. At
tho same time wo worked on It «nd when I was forced to work
on It It was an urgent problem olsew.ioro cr.d was c. lvod
and better than I did.

'.'Ill you toll us why tho program was classified

seorot?

I b.llcve I can tell you th-t. I oan't tell you
with certainty, but I think It w~8 lnport-nt tr.o program
was socrot. koreovor In Germany ot this time thoro was
very little thrt was not secret.

It w'8 classified top secret, Wasn't It?
a. I believe It was secret, but I can't s^y for sure.

Q. *.ia8 It customary in the Luftwaffe for an officer
working on a secret matter to communicate the secret ar.tor
to persons net engaged in that same work?

a. No not as far as the secrecy was concerned. I didn't
cell anybody what the Schaefer process * as. I didn't know.

- don't know today. It v-s pot secret that we were lnvestl-

I

6 ‘tlng It. Nobody told me It wa6 secret,

*34


Court i

June 10—4—ED-loy-Von oofcoen.

lou aeon It wasn't secret you were wording :C
Dcokr.e on this work at Dachau?

rot in no way. «t least I was not given any such
Instructions.

... You thought that you could freely communicate to
Jee _r or anyone else that you were going to experiment on
huma.r. beings at Dachau to toBt the efficacy of two sea water
methods?

«. I was convinced of It.

i. yell, I note In Exhibit 7, 31egolbock Exhibit No.

•

7, wulcn la page 26 of the Document b ok I, w..lch is a
letter to Dr. otelr.bcuer from Dr. ocless, In the second
paragraph the last two sentences states ns follows: ".'upon
ay remark thi c those xierlacnts surely were Vehraaoht
experiments and therefore secret, they were not intended
for everyone else. Professor Dr. Epplngur replied,

"One oould frankly speak -bout then as no cnee of dor.fc. nad
occurred with the sea wnt.r experiments, nd also chr’c no
experimental person had suffered any serious oonsoo.uonooe
d'lrin- fciao experiment, so that there was no reason to ako
r. sov.rot of It." Isn't it evident from t.x t passage It
••re .woes9''ry to keep the entire program « 6ccret prior to
the execution thereof, and the documents hero In ovldenoe
-re clns-lfled secret, not the metr.ods?

«. ■•.’hother trds undertaking was olrsslflud soc\*et or
not or what degree of secrecy it w*e given, I oan't toll
you, I am not m expert on tact subject. In my yehrmac.it
service I did mostly medical work and my service was
administrative, or.d I pm not familiar wit.i the other sldo
of it. If Dr. oplcss told Epplng^r It was a Vehroaoht

9

matter that possibly m^rnt tht Vahrarcht matters were on

; .enerrJ_ ;rlnci-lo kept secret, but they were not treated

-<35

I


Court 1

June 1C—&-ll-5-HD-iialoy-Von achocn.

r.s secret as Is shewn.by the f^ct that Zpplng-r who was
cn officer himself talked about It. Anyway Zpplnger vas a
It. Coir.el cr something like It, end he didn't 80„ any
reason for asking r secret of it. He talked about it every¬
where. Thrt Is probrbly the reason. One didn't talk about
•fOfcrar.oht art tors. It was not customary. If one knew there
was a new weapon or something, one didn't go around end
Cell everyone how It was constructed. All the Wchrmr.cht
setters wore clothed with c certrln eocrooy. That vc.s
->rob-'bly the assumption of Dr. 5pless when she asked him
about It. The wording, by the way. Isn't very ouch to the
point.

*. Nov prior to the time you proceeded to Dachau to
start your experimental prograa you st ted on direct examina¬
tion you remained In 3orlin and stayed a oouple of wocks;
while In Berlin did you hrvo an opportunity to confer with
Schaefer?

A. No.

Did you contact ochr.ofer?

A. No.

Did you talk to 3erkr?

A. I got lr. touch with H«rka later for a very minor
reason. It w^s that wo had certain equipment, test tubes,
etc. from his lrborntory in Vienna which we had borrowed.

2 , Vould you repeat thet answer again. I don't think
I understood you correctly?

A. I said my connection with 3~rka or rather the fact
that I got In touch with Berka had a very minor reason which
wr.s that I had borrowed equipment fr-m 3erka's 1-boratory.

2 . Then you didn't have any extensive consultations


with either 3^rka or 6ch?cfer prior to your .aptufil experi¬
ments? 36


Court 1

Juno 10-J4-ll-5-E3-:-.aloy-Vdn Sphoen


Not orally, no, but Slrany's experiments on the one
hand cr.d Sch-cfor'a experiments on the other hand I had
reported oa. It was originally Intended I would not got
in touch with either or do nothing In order not to endanger
the objectivity of the experlnents.

'i.'hot was that again?

It was Intended that I would not get In touch with
eithor of them In order to not ondangor ay objectivity, so
thrt I would not be influenced eithor against or for
either of the methoda.


•37


10 Jure 7-K-TJ C_i2-l_Kcehr. ( T nt»| vonS cheer.)
Court I


k Veil, vm thi? « coapctItica between the Schrefer mf Berk*
sothed rnd you were tha Judge?

A I w^g net {he Judge. I vss the one who hrd the sisfertune to
he ordered to errry out expcriaer.tc which were decided upon rt the
seeting of 25 M»y hy vnrlcni c^HIm rnd ailltnry celebrities, hut
Berk* obviously h»d the fcelirr <h*t th<rc -»i soae rlv-iry. I be¬
lieve thrt wn* the psychelcgicrl reason why this wpb denuded.

Well, then if you would hrve consulted with Schrefer rnd Borka
would thrt hero effected the objectivity of the experinent?

A X did not telle to Gohrefer, I did net consult with Berk* either.
When I got these things fron Berk- fron hie lnherrtory, I did trlk to
hin, hut I did not get rny rdvisc froa hin. I Just happened to he
there end wb-t influence thrt hrd on the cutcouc of the experinent, I
ernrot s*y.

■rfcll is it tru« thrt yrhrpo Berk* hrd aorc roliticrl influence
thrn Schrefer?

A * I know nothing nbcut rny political i"flucnc< of Borkr. I he-
licve he w»i orlglnrily r Socirl Ecnocrrt.

v. I don't aern his party rfflllrtlons. I ao»n his pnrtlculrr in¬
fluence with the people who wero to deterainc whether or not the Berko
acthod wrn to he inetrllcd or whether or not the Schrefer aethod vr»
to he Installed: did it ocr'crr to you froa your discussion with
Bcckcr-Trcyscng in connection with the cxptrlne:rto, thrt Berk* hpd tho
nost influence?

Aim co’-'lnccd thrt the technical office w» ( behind Berko,

Berkp woe r technic* 1 non hl-.sclf rnd belonged to the tcchnlcrl office.
The. tcchnic r l off lot nrde Berks's c°uae its 0 *"-. pr.d I holieve thrt
Berkp h»d quite C7r.aidcrr v le influence with the laportrnt non in the
tcohnicr.l office. At lent thrt wp S sv »s=unption, thrt wre the ia-
pression I hpd.

\ "’'-uld Bcckcr-Frcyicsg fcnrc been uvdic'-lly turliflcd to h^vc
conducted these experin»r.to?

- 3 ^


1C Cvxic /7_K_;- *C-ia-3-Kc. han (Xnt., vonSchoec)
Court 1


a Toti «rc Piklnf the wrong person, hut I imagine bo.
s Would Ircfcsaor i-ppinger h*rt been medically curllfied to per¬
form the b i experiments?

A Tea, I an convinced that he would have.

•v Then, Schaefer?

A I «a Informed about /.r. S eh* of or 1 a training only core or lean
from what I hc«rd here. Ae far aa I know, he was primarily r laboratory
worker, a radical chemist.

^ Could Berka h*vc conducted the experimental
a Berka wri ar. l>rginc«r, a technical ch»nltt. I don't believe
th»t cxperlncr.ta car. be placed in the h'-nda of » technical chcnlat.

V. "her, thia cucatlon could not have been dctcrnlncd unlcan you
had v ccn employed to dctrralm it; ia that correct?

A If you near tvt I w«g tho only person In the world who could
have decide'* thia question, then r.c. X suet lay there could havo horn
twenty, thirty or sore intemlito in Oornnny who would havo be on able
tc carry rut thcac experiments. That I <ust happened to hove the nln-
fortun», waa a unfortunate coincidence.

s Did you ever exptrinent on huaan being® prior t your experi¬
ments with aca-w-tcr at tho Dachau concentration camp?

a I RUBt aak you what you scan by experiments on hun"n bdrga.

Of oourao, we had cuitc r cumber of natboliao tceta which we carried
out at the clinic.

I think vr.u arc hotter cualiflcd to determine whnt an experi¬
ment on tannn being* la than I. Did you ever c*rry cut experiments on
hur-n belnra v cfcrc in the acnac we are dlscuscirr then before the Tri¬
bunal: that ia what I ICaC?

A That la why I naked vou to tell sc wh»t you meant by huaan ex¬
periments. I never performed a dargtroua experiment on a huaan being,
including the sc«-watur oxpcrlnerta.

v* Well did you ever perform pr.y experiments cn hum* n beings prior
tc the sea-water experiments »t IVehnu? •

C339


1C Jur< 47_y_iJC—12-3—iechm (I-t., TcrScfaoen)

Court I

A I hm »*lr«»d7 s c ld thft rt the cllr.ic I perfoxucd - mater of
"sctrhollaa cxfi rlacnta, If you or. oil t'-en experiments. For cxrsple
vc vcre interested In hnv Vit«»nln 3 effects the elimination of t«*hlc
■'It or pct^seltc s*lt in the storrch or «h»t the -icdic'l Influence
!• to Vitrain so rrd ao, thrt Is th* kind of tcatt vc ryde rt the clinic
•r.d I perferaed <• nor.ber of such testa.

C, ’.'ere the cxpcrircr.trl au v J. cts used volunteers?

A Tea, of course.

Did y'u hove to foliov nj prrtleul»r procedure to secure those
rolurtccra?

* At the clinic?

*v Vta.

* The procedure v-j th«t I 'shod, do you vrr.t to help? rrc
Inter, stid lr. finding cut certain thirds if vc give rn ''rtlflci'-l in¬
jection or this dru, «c vnt to find out r'out trhlc a*lt research,
rfc don't hov» to go lrte dctrll, you vlll hrvi tf keep on r certain
diet, ivery d»y jru -'ill


10 June- :-DJ3-li-la-iccefcn (Yen Schon)
CC’iTt 1


r certain _".jectior. end •• e .ill teke -he urine end blood 3a:.ples. Tnen
the parser. ->c_ld say yes or nc. if he ss.d yea, then it •:« dc.jc. If
he said, nc, 1 did net continue and dad act do it, I merely rent to the
next osr. • he said yea.

3 Vhc tro the people you rafer to; dc you near, the clinical
aspicyeea ov • ere the;' outaid-ra?

A Soot cf the* >.ere the employees of the clinic, cr lectors cr
aedicel students. Sccc cf the: ere thorepeutied experLaants, fer
example, v« could not decide whether the theoretical effect cr. a hurt
patient »ts ci-ilrx to the effects *e received by testing it on r healthy
person •r.' similar testa oust be made on patients tc aoo if with certcin
disoasos th t is truo end affective.

Q Did you ret their consent in writing?

A Ho.

*• ca it nocesMiy to dot<.rain« the age cf a pcn.cn bofero you
uaod then in such an experiment?

A Yea, cf ccurae.

q Hew cld did they have to bo?

a It »es net necessary to knev the date of birth, but it wes ia-
pertant to kne- if the person wa3 twenty or eighty.

q oil, did ycu have tc know whether cr net the person ; ts over
tho ago cf twenty-cno?

a Cn the whole, vc hod cniy pacplc over tw*. : - clinic.

o Could ycu have used a person under twenty-cnc years of ate if
they volunteered?

a That I consider os certain.

Q A person under twenty one years cf rgo is considered to be a
amor ir. Gcrceny; cr they net?

A Yos that cay be, but for example I knot. well that such tests
are porfcincd in children's clinics toe,

q It is necessary, if a person is a minor, to get written per¬
mission of tfeo parents cr gucrdier.3; is it net under the D-rurn lew?

.11


1C Junc-.MX 3-l^-2&-:fcthan (Vor, Scr.cn)

Court 1

7r~is £ legal question crd I carrnct answer it. In Lhc tests
, p irf; r. ■-c -t the clinic, we never get ids vritten peraisaion ren cn
ei-ht.er. year eld, wheth.r it was e stenreh tuacr ihich vaa to be given
q new trc. toeet, i.e did net discuss whether written perjilsaicn ws
received ire. the parents or guardians.

'> c9 there ever certain operations vhich cennot be porfenzed in
C'^mar. acdidni. unless you have ritten permission; this is not r legel
prcbl»_z but a legal zu.iicr -1 prcbluu which every doctor is - r with;
is it not?

K Ics, when p-rfeming such iv jer operations, evor; surgeon gets
the stetoauit of ccnsunt and hi has it signed.

r i I boo, ’ull, suppose, the person is under tvonty-cno peers of
ago and c acjcr operation must bo purferr. vhc ai :ns the per. ieaicn,
the parents dc they net?

a It is possible, yes.

1 .ollj don't you knew. Doctor?
i. Ice net a surgeon.

1 Suppose you had acme p^rticulrr function to err' cut vhich
requirod the ccnsont cf the subject end the subject war under t-.cr.ty-
onc years cf egc; wculd you carry cut the duty of r. physician -ithout
having first received the consent of the parents or would you neraly
accept the ccnsont of r. child?

a Vais ouwstion never ccnfror.l-d n«, because in the hospitals in
Vienna then the petient >p.s edsittod such oui-stions were diccuased t ith
the parents cr ith the patient and settled. I vculd like tc rant you
that in gencrrl practice if or.o res to teke any neosur<.s tc - hich this
law applies, then you vculd have to rsk the parents if it is r .inor.

Q Then, you never bothered considering the problem cf consent cf
e person under t> enty-cno years of age during your entire ccrocr no ■*
-.tdicfil -ion; is that ccrr-.ct, until tcccy?

a At the rxc.nt sc-iubcdy was admitted tc the clinic, he si ned


10 rw j-lx-3gj"Mfc€hcn (Von Scbcn)

Court 1


TSict is * child *.111 cc.:c in ni sign his ocr.s_r.t or :iill e
ptront icccc^fnj' the child nd sin their consent?
a Thi-r. the pertr.ts signed.

: *hia is l joed brerkinf pcint, Ycur Kcncr.
r:. IKESI3EST: The Tribunal *ill be in recess, until cr.o
thirty o«dock.

(i. recess at s teken until 1330 hours.)


3


10 ’ur->- 47_A_IjC_13-L^ri=c-u (Ir.t., 3r~wn)
Ccurt I


^.RaCCa SiSSIQi

(The hearing rcoocrenefi -t 1K0 hears, 10 Jure 1547)
TEi XtP-~T-'XL ; The TVibur^l is ^le in session.

IE. •ILHLIH 31IC-L301C2 - Be none d
CBCCS MLJUaiEC* (Continued)


BT KB. &£XT:

t* Pref. ss*r Seigltocck, regrrdirg the subject, volunteers to be
used in nedlcrl cxcerincnts, «ht Is your opinion i»V>ut the ability
of * 1 -ynnr. tc volunteer for sidle*l cxpcri.nc-te?

A « l-7-yr w.o lo Inferred vhrt will t^ko pl-cc during the cocporl-
-vnta le, of ooursc, In ny opinion, perfectly treble of volurt'rlly
deciding whether he v-rts tc p-rticip-.te in thrt irpcriocnt or net.

v. Then do you feel tb't first of -11 the field of rcoo-rch suet
be exhaustively studied, oxrcrine-t-tlon or -rin-ln -met be exploited
tc the fullest extent prior to resorting to «xpcrincnt»tlon on huaon
bel"gaT

- I r# Of the opinion thrt whin 'rinnl crperiront-tion lo uoeful
every hur.-r. v iing evrcrinwr.t rust be prccfded by exp.ri-irta on enla-le.

H Ard the exporinest -1 subject* nua* be w-rnefl of the hrr-rd*
of the expcrlnento, if my?

k TiO.


^ rf hrt is your opinion regarding the rhiliiy cf «■ ;t-eon irerr-
ccr-ted in r c-r.certr-tl'n c^rp to volunteer f-r - r.cd’crl cxpcrloont?

a as I h-v. -lrt-dy indicated in ry direct cv-in-tlen, it ia
ny opinion t v *t every prisoner is, to r ccrt-in extent. United in his
froedon; but, within the frroc*-,rk f this licit-ti n of his freedr.a.


.fct^"fljT>?p r ^^nrse, r-uwer th» emstlon yes cr s-y whether or not ht
' V.W—13 1* tvt -neperi-.ertt, yrts-'rp-sing, cf course, th*t


in \wV tivi w-uld net lny open to nny sort f reprisals.

• * |

«hrt t?yprleorer in - conccr.tr'ticn c*-sr. do yu d.cn fit to
/ ,

velu-tccr f.-r np&icpl experiments. nc*cisg by th»t using the word


10 Jrc 7 -a- j *C-l3-2^rincu (Ir.t., 5r-vr.)


•7:ln-ter lr. the tru s<-nac of the word.

A «iih the llalt»tlon that I h®re Jass stated fer the prisoner,

* c-nsidcr that ary type of prisoner c*r. decided "yea" or no in such
a Question.

s £fciac prisoners or gyplca used lr. the sea water experleant,
cm y:u tell ua In what saner they vert selected for the ac® w®tcr
experiments T

A 3s frr »a I heard regardInf this fr-n then, they were aaked
whether they wished to rpply f r cxperlnc-te lr. Dachau ar.d th-n froa
the tep or acne i»rg< group cf then there the maser In Question did
"P^ly.

h. Sid you p'rticlp®te in th« actual acloctl"* of the f7plea used?

A In. Btfyrdlrr thla I can only give y-u details about the gyplca
••ho woln-tccrcd frea the eonoor.trrtlon c»» pt Dachau.

•v S'd yu c raider the sr lection «f the gyrle* to he used p natter
for the 33?

A Tea.

* And 7-u had received p direct order not t' single In SR --ttera?

A I received the order o- the lnstructlns net to Interfere In
srttcri IhPt cr-ccrrcd the concentration camp. I u»- »courtd th®t it
hed been «grccd with the S3 thot only volu-tccrj were to v o uact fer
the experiments -n i the 3S had t- c-rry oat the selection of the-, with¬
in the froneverk -f lta datico v ecpuac, _.f c.arec, the Luftwaffe, a 0
* rr as I ^}T?olf pcrsorally had pry Influwrce or power to trace complaints
t- the conccr.tr-tlon c-np, I think that has to *c cspkasi&od -fair »rd
r£pir. — nanely. thrt the situ*ti-r. w. re net the erne aa they arc lr
rny free ©ra-nrlty. Cn the -r.c hand there w«t th» dehrnaefat, n the
:t-.cr hand the 3."; ar.d the affairs -f the c-nccr.trrti'n c-=p c nccrned
the 33 solely and I could exercise n: Inf lacnee r then. I slrply had
t' rely or. what =y s"perior officer told me or v'-at I wa e told fc y the
officers who were In char.-e of the rff-jr- -f the comcr-tr-ti r. c*.np.


-^5


1C J-a-e ^7—»_S .*^13_3_rrirx-a (I-t., ?r-«r.)

Ccnrt I

S i”ow, 7 "U a»j tt*t yu checked with Ir. Flo«d-cr, the cr=p
rd ;•”t, the 3tur= v «-n*-fuchrcr In charge of the transport *»b
to the atotia of the gypsies. Is thet right?


»-• 2.6


10 Junc-A w-l-l-3e&ri (Brown)

Court I

~y did you - Jce such on ear, ousted check!

a . Bocc*:taa 2 wished to be absolutely certain that they really
were volunteers.

Did you have scco nisgivlsgs as to wkothor or not they waro
vcluntcero, end that was the reason why you questioned throo persons
in that regard?

jw I had no uiskivings. I was told that volunteers wore to bo
used for those oxporlnor.ts but, of course, I wco intorostod in being
absolutely cortain or. this subject.

Q. Veil, now, wore these Gypslos In thoso experlr.ents full blend¬
ed or brlfbrocds?

A. So far as 2 knew, they wore in the uost port halfbroeds, but
in this natto r also, I hero no spociflc or procioe data-. <cd, in oo»-
vo. nations I did not concon :.ysolf too :.uch with this u.itto. bee.noo
ftt that ti;io it did not soa: to :;o to oo vo:y Luportaat. 2 was oi r>ly
tdd that t '.ooo Gypsies; tnat was tho assuraaco 2 rocclvod when I li>-
qiurod into tho uattc: erf tho lnsigna they woro woarlng.

Q- Voro tnoy r ndored or Judged social siiiply bocauoo they uoro
Gypsioo?

a. That, I c nr.ot toll you in dotail; I only con tell you what
tho SS offioovs told ..o aoout this: They told no oxplieitoiy they uoro
net in custody bec.-uso they vero Gypsies but because thoy vo:o asocial;
noat cf theso had already boon previously owntoncod. And, I ackod thca
»hc.t thoir pu r . l e hr , on t hod boon, and the Oypclou said nothing ronlly
so.icua. S o t I asked thai what they had dono and they said, woll,
nothing of Lportancc. Z had tho inpression that they did not liho to
be questioned about that.

. V hat typo of criminal offense ..ust they have entitled to bo
rondorod asocial?

a. That, I do not know; but, I believe that for tho nost part, If
- c eh Judgo that I read in the nedical pcrodicols, they wore cnLlod aco-


10 euao-A 14-2*-3oard ^Brova)

Court I

cid for foully reasons. Suet asocial fouilios vorr being chcchod is
Qonjrcy that tine. Sow,whether this was the reason for toidng then
into custody, or whether that gave thaj a right to ttJco thee into cus¬
tody, that I cannot tell you, I did not put thm there. I saw no
pcr?o.-a on thcc, and I know nothing about the previous contiutlons
thoy had received. I sicply was infoxuod that they were held aa aso¬
cial persona, end it was not important for no to carry out the non
water otpcrlucnts on asocial persons. Z did not have the iuproaaioa
that asocial poraom wore being spoclflc.-lly turaod over for tho e,—
porlnoats. I took then for tho orporir.eats eiupjy because thoy wore
givon to no by tho SS, and I assured ayself whothor they were volun¬
teers or not. If voluntocra with onothor triuaglo on their urn hr A
boon turned over to ::c, I should have used then Just us well, and, r.a
I said, * did not coneorn ayself at all with tho question vtothcr thoy
wore caocid.

How, Doctor, would a child bo adjudged asocial if hie father
was classified as asocial?

a. It is not easy to onawor that question. Tho to arc aouo frtiilios
who hc.vo boon investigated vory carefully, and a largo nuubor of tho uar
bers of such foaUlos belong in Iho catogory of .isoolol. Tho feuily
Jucko, if I cii pronouncing it correctly, is such n foully; thoy rocolvod
-uch attor.tion as asocial family, whon having boon investigated by uoo
cf psychiatric md hereditary problecs. Hectors of thut foully hnvo
distinguished ti.ocsolvoa by being guilty of crinco and other oaOclcl
cations. x 'his does not oxcludo tho possibility that, in this froily,
thorc oca bo c large nut-bur of poraons who did act can Hoary crluos.
nevertheless, tho foully ia declared asocial. How, if there ore chil¬
dren froc a fcully in which, let us any cuoag 100 ucu&ors an ootiuato
of 70 aro characterised by a criminal life, thon that whole foully will *
bo sciontificdly classified as asocid fauily. I do_ not know whnt tho
basis for giving the insigna was, n^cly, the insigna that classified

GCi*C


I


10 Juno -a -i-v—14-3-3 ecrd (3rova)

0 craxt I

-jccplo cb asocial; that la, os I acy, I do not know.

V Veil, now, what did you ectuxlly say to ooch aubject thor. thoro
reported pcaplo to you for the ojperiner.te, did you talk to each ono of
v.ci individually?

A. I celled tho ospori-catal subjects together and tcld theu th.t
the o^?e;L-cat was about, Z did not repeat this infor. Nation to onch ono
individually, because that voald have t Jcen a whole day; and, then I
told thec. that they could think about whether or sot tr.cy van tod to
participate. I h_d boon informed that tone of the “riaon«ra In Dachau
v.atod rory ;.uch to participate, and if noceasary, J ahould h,.vc aado
substitutions*

Sid you, la tho courao of your locturo to theao 44 subjects,
toll thaa what your espcrii.ental problem was to bo, and what al^ht bo
03])0C tOdf

A. X.could not tell thou what v„s to be expectod booauno I could
not prophocy that tho rcaulte would bo; that van the whole purpoao cf
tho oipcriacnta.

You ..oca it would bo scientifically olthlc.-l to conduct or.
orpo. iuect cn c huaoa boiag without having any conclusive knovlodgo c m
to idiot tho rooults ::oy bo? .

a . tfhat tho pooaiblc rcoulta eight be, that van noro or loan
known, but if tho precise roculto woro known, that vould tndco cay c:>-
porinoatntioa superfluous. Boforc you oator upon cn exporiaent, of
courao, you have u plan. You know vfcut you aro looh'ng for, but you
do not Imcv whnt you cro going to find when you are looking for It.

I could toll ay experimental subjects that 2 could guarantoo to thaa
that nothing v-ould happen to thec; that was the cost i.-portont thing to
tho experimental subjects. Whether the concentration ir. the kidapya
was going to cc 2 or 3 percent, that was uni:.port.~nt to tho esocrli.ont.'l
cubjocta. And, that as I s-y, I an ouro they did not wont to know that.

£ . 2 id you warn then cf any pocsiblc danger or L-rurd during the


CX 9


10 Jua*-A4i^-14-4-3eard (Brows)

Court I

the course of the ejperinanta!

Jl . I told then that they would feel severe thirst, and they
would probably boccco nervous bee-use every one who is thirsty bccocios
nervous, I told thee aoreov er, that 1 would also be near thee and
protoot thee free any denser ,

Did you toll thee that thoy could quit whenever they wished?

A. . I told thee you aust put up with that thirst for a fow <!L-y*.

I ccaaot toll you for how long exactly, and I told thee that they would
not hero to thirot any longer than X could take tho responsibility for*
and, I told then if thoy si ply c~ald not stand it, they should toll
no end X would take that into consideration. But, X did not tell then
and I could not toll then that as soon os th«v folt thirsty thoy should
just ccne and t oil no and then wo would givo then wator, beccuso eftor
ell, thin was a thirot o:porineat. and, I hod to roquiro of tho on-
porluontol subjocts that thoy should thirst for c. corthin period of
tiuc, thct.vcs tho very naturo of thoeo •xporinento. I know that you
aro trying to aako a ch vrgo out of this against no, and uro trying to
.pprairo tho fooling of thirst in this w^y; thirst being ono of tho nost
unccuforta'olo fooling* of ull foolinge, but that was tho ugroaiont I
aado with tho— X told then that such and such and such and such for
four or five days, I do not know how long that is going to bo—you aro
to have to stead thio thirst you feel.

£ . Tho discussion as to whether or not thoy would bo roliovod
free the c^joriaents or whether or not thoy sould bo relieved liod
solely with you; is that right?

a . That decision lay with no, yes.

<1 . ttiut reward did you offor those cxporiuontul subjects!

I tcld then that afterwards they would oc spared what they had
previously boor, subjected to, and that they should cauo to no with their
wiohos, end I would do whet I could. Xorcovcr before and after the c:>-
pc iaents, they would receive the extra rations; before they could rest


10 Juno-* -liJ-14-5-3eard (3rowu)

Court I

for thrco weeks, or -1 after tho experiment6 for throo weeks, and also
ca.uniccted any spocid visaed of theirs to the ccs:p ccc n a n da n t,
and rocclved hie approval for nany of those wishes.

Veil, did you offer thee cigarettes la addition to that?

1 • Tos.

dd the;* got th«t!
aw Cortdnly.

Wd yon have a vest quantity of cigarette on handt
j. I got tho cigarettes frer. the siiio placo I got tho food, tho
dr flold. And, I cannot toll you how ueny thoro woro in toto, but
it was oorord thous.nd cigarottos.

Q. Voro you in u position to got all tho cigarettocs you noedod
within rocj on!

a. 2o tho oxtont that tho Kooa Sorgount gave r.o the cigarottos;
to that oxtont I could provide then.

VoU, then, *hy was it nocossaxy for your aothcx^-ia-lav end
f..thor-i:»-lav to send you cigarottos!

/

a. Bocause I rocoivod tho cigarottos fren tho hoos Sorgonnt not
for uysclf, but for :;y oaporinontul subjects; and uy parents did not
have to oond uo theso cigarottos. *hoy sent th« to no; that sort of
thing hi^yozM in tho boat of finllloo.

q. Did ytu chock -nd absolutely nuke cortdn that each ono of
thoao subjocta received, aa hia due roward, aftor boring bcon sub¬
jected tc tno sea vutcr export.cuts!

A . I distributed tho cigarettes according to a cortdn ex-
roagatcati 2hoso who had kept on with the cxporlnont received the
aoot cigarettes, end those who frtxi tho second day on kopt on drinking

frcch water eld not get any cigarottos.

0. . Veil, what oth-r reward did they got beside tho cigarottos!


S'51


1C Jurw-^-RI-lS-l'-Groaa (Br-an)
Court X


«: X c a only rcpu-t th:t th-y -pplio’ .n the that

-revieus 'r.- th.rc'itc they shjaLI receive better r't.i ns. After the
er-*crlaujta they *~r~ to be tre'.te. -a convPl-acents r-‘ n-r. not tj nor!:.

They i-r. prj-’ia- -dti^eti.r. -f th-ir ’-Ur.ti ®. An , wh't I t’ on ay
an initiative *.;'a ti ai'piy tb. cigtrottes nals , I xor.t per. airily t >
tfv ctap Ciaon'rat en t L. hin thrt th-s- pora r.t hrd c'rriui’ bat fcho
experia.cta in r way • n that they ah ul b- rtarrV:.

C: lool. "n’t it h-'vc b^n i~n_r.u 3 t j h'vc per nod jt t • have
c:neut%.^ tk. sentence of r. >ra r. ' Jul^x/ re ci"l in N-’.ti thinking?

A: Only v.ry fv* :i the aa.cial peraoias t- '"r, -or ua, nr.oily
thoso pr.fwaalin.-l orl -a who arc ; uilty if violent criae. The otters
-to n:t d-r._-r.ua. I ~n thinkirv if -eveifJ. pert ns -.a I un'wrst'n’ than in
ao ics 1 t-raa. Suoh - -;• lo r. Ui s» ah- RTO r.-lin.-r.rs - vi;. a n*t ji irk,
Suoh people -re not 'zv.r.ua, Just us.iL.sa. Piclnoekutc '.r- 's.ci'.l
p-rsons. 7.»y ro a :-.vhrt -’tr.ocrous, pnrticttl'rly f r people who. ::cketo
they pick. But they *r- n.t ‘n^cr ua cri in:la in ' criainr.l sense of tho
v a -.

Q: • Than n-uL‘. y-u s y tfctv^ch -n" -v-r” n w f tte f.rty-f ur

• xpwriAont' 1 auhjwcta ua«- * in y >ur a. v.tcr w'.ri-..r.t3 r.t Dtchtu woro
crL&a'ls '.n‘ :\>r- ' oxirrcw to a ciety “n' h-rc- .\.s-:v-* nothin out
inerreemtijn i nr. concentx- ti r. c-a .r y.u feel ttrt ao.»- of tho
inrt-s y u us- * wore f- Lauly Loris r.e ’?

.xi I c ..vine fch ' 5r- t .v j rity, snr perbepa -LI if t'.i-a,

woro not • n.er ua. I -a fully p-reur/V of th-t but I : ; * kr. f.v»y

»ierc inclu '. ir. the crte.ory 1 “a ci-.ls. r.r j I ! r. x why those 'c'ci- la

s-r- ir. c c. nc_-.tr ti n cr«j>. I n-a n.t ' -'ri-r.i .i H'.xiLrs n-r i ‘ I
twl.n., in his office, n-r *1 I heto -ny p w-r to int-rfer- in the ?l‘na
f Reich IX-ietv. HLmlor. I wr.s just In t* Jfo officer nho h\ ’ received

r. Kcr t c*rr .ut orperla-uta *.r.f if X b- «e t Hiualer r. t 1' hin,

"Reich iSiAste-, you r. k-eyii^; these ~ alee h-ro -aipustly, I cor.si Ir th-.t

* criae". I vjuI ‘ v. been n*..t, .’cille. , >r t best lxsto.' uo ir. --n insme


ID .r:.e-.,-?!;-15-a-C-r ss (Br.ur.)
C-STt I.


Q: Vfaer. 1 crriva -.t D'chea, "t the cxcontrrti-n cfiap, the
(■'to? T-'J tuc*. rc.-iLjh-r th'.t ti. as -tuch v 3 in Ibtto-a t /-jut aothor-in-
1.-H rrv2 I th.r-ia-lr o^l r .l n ad this ss the a .at unf .rtur.- tu inci.-nt
in y:ur career. surely y^u cn r-asxber the i'te 7« - r;*ivu«' tt

Crchca.

a: I catin t :r. t;>* 10th. I i’n't -11 yea f-r sir- bat I thick th-
12th -i T uly bcc use v-r7 eh.rtly thorc’.ftur, th- n-zt £~.y Jr th; c!-y
'ft-r, tr.- cj.nfurar.eo t-.k .lrc- : 4 th Si-v-rs which I cttonlo . Then I
*-nt t- Vionrv t: ^ct ny l b r l r; -rui-wr.t.

Q: '?n yju l-ve D'Ch-.a?

a: After th- uquriaents y u a-r.n?

C: TwJ, whoa i 7 u U v- i r ' r.nt' br.ck t; Vienna?

15 Jr 16 , I b-li-v- th- letter, ef Su.t --bur.

Q: 15 th r I6tii A SujUik>-r?

»: T-s.

Qs l.Vt i ;:ur icrkirv >y t thu c.nc-r.ti-ti « c' c r.tlat .£?
’..hr.t tlaj :’i y:u rrriv. there i.-. thu e. >min, ?

«! 7 “• • -•

Q: •..'hr.t tl.x> •'! ’ 7>u 1-nvo ir. tho -v. nLn, ?

A: Usually ~t 6 I -want t. ir-n-r. Than I r.t xn.’ an', finish-.',
ropart* Zt .. frtqtMrtl? 1C r 11 befaro I w-a * «-• with thoo.

Qs D “Ju roer.ll th- r.'ti-nlity A o ch -ru th-Ou aubj-cts use',
whether '•ny -f U «> y. si-a vur* Cz-ch>sl v‘Xi'..r*, /.ua.rir. 3 , Deuanc,

Hut. ri .ns, .r F L.s?

I tt this nri.; wirt I kruw abant th’.t*

Qs L u know whether ir r. t nr.y -1 th-r. w-re -thsr th- 2. i G-r.vTi
ir.ti .nr. lit y?

Ru\*r in," thiir citizenship I .tv. n -r-cis- kr.»lu£-. I t *.1

thu papers jf n-r» .1 th--.

C.: \-li th.r. y -1 r- r. t ir. -. siti r. t. t.ll us :.h thur r .-t
•h-7 ,r- Cr.c.: si v ki r. citic-ns, ..ustri'r. citizens, Hungnrirns 3 r FjI-s
,r wh tuv.r thu;- 17 hrv- b.-n? I a ectu-ily A r. t kru*, y u?

CC53


10 Jur.i 2 3*<ir- a a (or .wr.)
Court I.


«s I knx; th-t s:ac Jf thca c'ac frx: there. I s“» nj injure or.
th«fc but I knxr that they u,re 'rrv-et^C in Geraany.

Q: TA.il, ox didn't ~-ny of these gypsies ca. fr a another concentration
c-ap by tr nsport to Dccb'u to be used in your experio-nts?

*»: Alsoot “11 of th-a aim. froea Bucbeiair.lt:.
s.: ftich^nw-lU? Hot ..uscbiitz?

a: I have hoard fron Pill-in tht of then wore allege.’. to hnvw

boon in Auschwitz. But that transport which arrive! for sic c“ao fron
Buchunw“ 1‘.

G* Thjy rctur.lly volunteered f .r this ux;-orim.nt while r.t another
concentration cap, is th *. right?

A: Yus, certainly*

Q: Vioxx. you inforaoJ *s t. wh“t they ‘ctu'Lly volunteer^’ for *7hen
they wore in the „th-r c neontratixx craps?

As I wr.s t.l't that they wore -ske’ whether tb-y wished t> .r-rtici v>to
Li experiments involving mr wter ux ’ th-t r. buing *> asked that gypsies
" oplie. 1 . I thon toll*, then, when they c“mo t -x wh't would go :n in tho
•xparinonts and nsko<* thus blether th-y w-nt-I to participate or nit. In
>th.r wort’s, if they h*.:’ beon told in Bucionv 1 sjmuthing th“t w-s mt
true I id lc'rn of it then *n‘ they ier». lven a ch'nco to corr-cttha
false ia^rcscixi thoy h“ - . I til.’ then xrfoctly clearly what would go on and
*-nd r.oke 1 thva \.“in if tlxy wiehe : tj take part.

Q: Did yy j -vor t~ll the subjects th t it uoul-1 bu to their bust
interests if they urx ’erwunt the ox.s.rlaenta?

It what r^s.-ect? It would have been to thoir interest t. tho extent
th t this woulresult ir. :dv ntages to them but I never told Ux.a they had
r.y -H.rson ‘1 interest ir. tho experiments. I told then the experiments -cro
b.in. c rri.e on ir. or '.r t help people distress- ' at a*a. I told the®
<-x,)Hcitcly, ,

Q: n r.' you told fc!xa there w.uld be an advantage to then if thoy
«d»-rxent tho caci-rlnonts? . (

n: I tol. then thrt before and niter the otov.rim.nts they woul.:
receive Ux.se uxtr* r ti-ns, I t Id trxa the SS had t old ae they would


ID Jur>_*-Gr as (Dram)

C Airt I

receive aiti'-'-tlm sf their sentence -ft or the cr.->ori*<-nt6. I t:l t..c~
th’t Iter the —I »:uL t-w t- it lfc-.t they vul’ z,~t !rvc to
a rk ix. irtely -c ».ul: roCcivt itiari f -i. If you -r, it tb.

.pini-n th't ars m cdvnt-’.ru f;r then th-r. I t :1c'. fcfcva it k.uL' be -n
v* ittV' t: the*.

Q: has the .* ltersr tiv*. obvious?

A: Uv-y c,uL' hrve ff'i! no.

Q: ’.h-t ti ul. h*vc a \A-nu- to then?

A: Whr.t I n-ul’ hevo rv. exile! hvo bw*n that I a! ul' h vc
returnee! thc.u to the. ce* Trnr.>r.nt -n'. s’.:.- the c*rp crh’tjaauit who
a psins t. t ;> th ir -sl'ce. It c entirely in i;;er-r.t ti a- who
iro the experimental subject in trtjs. experiments. I hr :i > spoci 1 .roup
in nin!.

Q: "org th. c<:.rivr.t-1 subjects cert’in jf th. c-r.3eC'a.nc>-r. Urt
m uL Cov.lop h-A* th-y r..use.’ to unCor. o the .x >-ri aunts?

A: I wj n*v.r “ske about that. I w-.a r.-t ~n ca;x.rirv;ntr.l subject.

I c r. s y that If rnjr eX'erlxnt'.l moj-ct h r i n. t n- I ch ul*. n^t
hv i -rv. -nythiiv t: hia. !.h t pinions thu xp.ri^ nt :l oubject* h-.e
thuaselves I ,'.j not tauw. -t -nyr-tv I !i n-t t: -rt.r. tho.o r 'ut ip
-n7 ur.ss.

Kin’ly toll thu Tribur/ 1 the nnraia >1 tho thnci French :son who
» rke-i *ritl y:u i:i this experiment: 1 Ltn?

as One v.a i. oc:! Christian.

Qs Ten.

«: One «-.s r.'ii; S-n^s.

Q: SoeU t:v t ylv SO,

a: S-e-n-e— d. An r.e »' a n~ao' Fuinh‘vt.

f: T--1 us t. o mas f the three luftwrffe jffiotrs?

A: On, ci-a iru Dr. U. ; c., r.e Dr. Schuster, rfvl ne Dr. F,*»rsU.rlin^ .

Q: T-el us tic n .-xs f trv. thrvKi a* le r£3 n_r nurses.

A: Fr th - lu crif. cr Ir a - a n ; the pric r. rc?

Q: Froa ti.. >ris ners.


De‘55


10 Jun#-»-PK-I5-5“--r-S8 (3r -*r.)
C irt I.


a: Piilwolr..

Qs Tu8.

A: VJr licok. '

Qs T-s.

A: An-1 t .-.t ra fUItei.

Q: Di y;u b vu *nv .tb-r »xv>ljywvs b t opurjc st this
Bt-ti :n :r la tb.t the entire c eplcaunt?

A: Thut-v •<-b r. S.-r uish ch»zi8t uhjsc nr.a. I hv. 1 r^-tton as*.' then n
jewel job ern wh. w^rku la Pl-^ivr's L'b.rt pjr w rke *. f r ao -.lth» :h
he w-.b n.t ne A ./ 'eaiBt-nts. .. 7 ur. St v, >r i .re r & Sh-.aiatry
fr>a L‘lb eh I t>-li»v-, jcc-ri-or liy Cl.' cl. x.a :>t a*. I c'n't wll
hie a oe either,

Q: Hjw arny of tb-a*. x» '1- y--i h ». aortliwor- -.Is- 1 - icrl

«* Ct TB?

A; 7b. tfcp-w am Ir a the Itifte ff- w-rc :3>-.

Ql Di - they v .rk air. h ur» - a 7 i‘, 7 ta

10 ■’.a. r 11 p,.:.?

A: fca.

Q: ,U, 1* v.u h v« 11 r ur a-a k rkli. tb. • b r 1 h *uro,

ttr.t lo fr>a 7 t. 10 ,r 117


I


Court 1

June 10-» ^ 16* 1 * KD-rkr r ro v *• 9r own •


' e doctors did work those a.-urs. The nurs^.6 and tho
aedlc 1 students spelled each other off.

i, X sea. Then the cedlc'l students more or loss had
wctchas, so to speak. One vould be jt\ watch ot night rnd
other In the dry tlae f Is the l correct?

The students helped me In 'n'lyjlnt tho blood s-mplea.
They took measurements of blood pressure. They .-*n lyz^d the
urine w aeosur d the soeclflc gravity of the urine, etc.,
whoror.s, for the night duty, the members of the Luftv.offo
were used.

'oil, who served after tho members of the Luftwaffe
loft r.t 10:00 or 11:00 Fft? "ho w-a on duty between that

hour end 7:00 «M lr. the coming when you o^ne?

/v. Tho Luftwaffe assl8t'nt3 did only night duty.

In other words, the Luftwaffe doctors stayed on duty
rll night long?

<V Tho Luftwaffe codlos were tho one who stayed nil

night,

i. Now, isn't it true codlc-lly, doctor, that dollriura
In orgrnio or toxic conditions usually c-aes out ct night?
Coaos on ot night?

a. Delirium occurs when the cruse of tho delirium
comes "bout whether th-t be d-y or night, presupposing thrt
dellelum otours at all,

Z, Isn't It more opt to be more severe In tho evening
hours thon In the daylight hours? That's ,a setter of oooon
knowledge, Isn't It, oven for the lrymen?

Th-t Is true, newover, dclirl- ~re unpleasant when¬
ever they ofeur, but let ae reassure you by saying that the
medics who hid the ni t ht duty bed been carrying out that
night duty for years _nd years with our soldiers In our
hospitals, Moreover, I told you thrt the cedlcnl students,


G357


Court 1

Juno rrov-=rovn.

one o:' w.vc h-.d boon in school for nin- semesters, wove ueod
: is worh nd I told them that they were to onll me as
eo.n ".a tnoro wrs -\ny need for no, prrticalnrly in c?so
: .-Vo '3 any delirium. Xov.v.r, no c~6cs of delirium
uoourrod.

''oil, »t any event, you were not in r xalwlon to
.n • t.:o w^rat uent'l syactoma "a^nfe y.ur subjects, >-:.c-;:t
b .c-re-’y, in-smuc a you were not on duty durln 3 the lots,
cr-nlnfc Hours? Is tnot ri^ht?

a. If * serious syaptoo h~d occurred during -He nl^ht
I iulf n-vu bwen on ar*nd l-i five nlmutee.
n. ’•’h-re did you live?

/v. I lived in « b-rricka odj?c-r.t to ta« concentration
c\:r. In the 3c c r .rp.

n. Yo- didn't live in tn* c^nt-r of the vlll-.-o of
Dnohcu? v

a. Ho.

V. Oo ; u enow Josef Vorllcei?
a. Vorllceic?

Yes.

n. Yes, I t%.ld you lie wos nurse 't ay station,
i.. he vorfc.d in your laboratory?

a. Vorlloe^ w's.p nurse at tha experimental etrtlon.

He wticed in the a lei ward.

did no see me subjects used?

a. ”h”, of O', urse.

Vpa he in r noeitlcn to t-lk to them?

a. He h"d to t lh to them. He w*s « nurse -.t this

etnti n. Tnia Yorllcei fellow vns also froa Vienna and

•••'6 broueht to the station by P Hive In.

%

*-s he •» reputable sort of fellow?
a. I nev^r heard 'nnythln._ to hie detriment.

ST-53


Court 1

June 1C-W-16-3-HD-X'' rrov-3rown.

Did you ev^r have to chastise hie: for some of his
notions In the line of duty?

I'Ot th"t I can recall. If ho bed done s*.-mo thing ho
eh uldn't I certainly should hvc chastised him.

Do you recall the rag Incident?

I don't know what you are talking “bout, at the

moment.

Z.' Didn't Vorlicck, "t one time, spill some wntor on
thw floor and then wipe It ep with a rag and, rather
negligently, forget to remove the rag fr^s the experimental
station ani the inmates were allowed t • such the water from
3ho rag?

It hapoenwd several time, of ooura^, beoauao of sum-
one's thoughtlessness that w-ur was 1 -ft lyln 0 around or a
dr.cn cloth, nd I always told th,m that that was forbiddon.

I forb-do that strictly because I didn't w^nt water to
appear In the experimental room ~nd, If Vorlicck left water
standing around or r d-np cloth, I cert inly roprlm-nded
him, I c”n "saurw you, because he, like every other nurse
or any one else who hod something to do there, w'.e under
oreers not to leav- water standing ar.end In the experi¬
mental room.

v. Wh"t did you s oy to Vorllcck?

«. I preb-bly told film that tr.at wa* forbidden and
I might have said 'I'd like to know vtr.t you would do If
you were very thirsty and saw w t^r sitting around all the
timo. n I presume th-t I tvld him something to that effect,

?ut I don't recall any specific episode. It happonod, on
occ-slons, that such thju f .htlessness took place and that
water > 0*6 left in the experimental room.

I

Did you ev.r threaten to use Vorllck In an experi¬


ment


Court 1

Juno 10-*-ld-4-S0-K rrov-Brovn.


I believe that I certainly lid not. I rs _y.ro
- a I'Ciefi d with tha nlubor of experiment'-! subjeots tnnt
I :~~i -nd wished to r. va no aor_. The w' ric tart I had with
:1.0Sw 4- w-s q-ite enough.

... Lt us l^.k r t Joousent Ko. 3283/ Your S n^r, which
will b* offjr-d for Identification ns Prcs.cetl n ixaibit
8ce. This la cn affidavit of the tiurse Vorllcck. This la
rn affidavit that is dated Vienna, S May 1347.

"?wforo 2 c e?p_ars riarr Jo3of Vorilcok, residing In
Vienna. XVIII, 24 Geya'acller-insse, 35 ye rs old, a Tried, a
driver, and arises t.io aworn st.-tcaont ?e fallows:"

I will aklp the oath "nd proceed with the third pi ra^rapn.
"«ftvr having bown arrested by the Coat-po la t..o year
1939, -nd after nav lag -c.r. Sent snood So *»nd having 6-rved
v ur year* of penal servitude, I vrs a^nt to Onohau. I
ococaa naslatant-nurao In Professor 3cl tt lboeok 1 a experiment'!
bloc!'- In A«roh, 1944. «f ter the incident with the aorkud
so uring-oloth, >a:cn the hua n exy-riaer.t"l aubjeotg .md
c nfc?sed how t.vy e ot the v ter, Professor Soiglbocck
threatened t. e*e uo as well rat guinea pl e If It v; aid
ha or. ^grln. I took this throat for e ran tod, and the
Incident did not hapten rg. ln. In the oourso of cr.o ctgjorl-
.-iontt, - very alck a-n v-e transferred to the typhoid block,
rtftvir tho oxporiaents, thw nuarn experiment 1 subjects ero
transferred p-.rtly to tr.. overcrowded liter blocks, partly
Ss she .etdocr 1 : r squads. Iho utdovr l^cor squads wore
Very >d b-c use the work there was nsrdor nd t-.-re was lo68
food taan in tr.« o-ap.

THE PRESIDENT (Interrupting): Counsel, I '2 in able to
* - nd In this docusont handed uo t- h, Jocaoent #3282, the
rti n v.ilch y u are reading.

---iRDY: Just a absent, Y ur Honor, lt u y be that I

CC60


Court I

June lG---v-15-5-HD-KorrGw-3r3wn.

h-ro n-'nd-d /cu the wron 0 doouaent. I*a sorry. Just a
- --at.

Yes, I -~vc handed yju the vr n^ document. I r.,vo two
- 1 oucente fron Josef Vorllcei. One's 3283, the other 16
3292.

THE PRESIDENT: a'd hr vo D..cunont #3232.

:G. H-RDY: Decusant #3262 will he off-red r.e 50S and
3283 will be offered n6 5C9, Yf-ur Honor. 3otn these
affld vita -re fr.a the aone ^f.’lrnt. One trios In n
llitl- avre lnfvrer tl ,n than the other. I an referring
now to Dcoeaent #3283.

THE PRESIDENT: Ta-t'a the ^ne we hrve not received.


3C61


10 Jar^-PH-17-1-!'-'-!?/ (3r.wr.)
C urt 1


It 5 .. STKIh'B-.OLfi: xir. Pr-si c.-.t, I -b, 4 ..ct t. the cub^issi ~zi 3 , b th
A those in-nts, tor it cm t bo soon ir.z the ‘ civxrt «h t !: th-
-ffi.'vits ir the. affiant. It st xt- jtffc in th- first 3«r.t.-.iCc
■B-f ru a«- -a x ra Kerr J.8t )h Tjrlicck." I cort'inly vr^nt t: kn.w nils
th-.t ia. T.;c ate is 9 Ifcy 1917. I ask that I bo t.<i th t 3k t.iP
-ffisvit . 1 X 1 .’. I v:isi. - Is t„ bu euro th- si.n'tuj*. is c-rti<i- , tl - ir
c-rr-ct but it s-y» "b-f >re i" an. -u#n*t s y wh ".a;" ia.
c.nsequcntly 2 :rnt sn -a • -rtunity t. cr >«»*«-afno V-rlicok. This nan
w-.s kn .nr. in January t. the ?r-Socuti n Jr?a th- pflico roe-r.‘ but ho nr.s
n.t br.uht 'a r. witness. I uust ir kst r* Inst tl. t. T:~ olico roc r’a
-ro avnilcblo to th Tribun 1 -.ft* ti the pr;s-cuti 45, cn:l ho c ul'. have
bo.n br u.nt at that tia.. Vo 11 kn w what ho was chare- with, an* I
want t- s i 1 / f:r V rlic-k boin- br.ujit t. Kurrbary *s r witness.

'JP.. HiHDYj Y rlic-k ie n hie n-y. H-will ho h-ru nuxt nook. Tlvoo
•' cin.nta -ro in -!t»_ sr.’or, buf.ix * Ifjt ry *n.: th. ai.n-turos arc £r--rn
tj, an! 'ix ir. th- huv s A th. c'.f-n -nt a*. r.avu th. si-nature of tho
N;tary th.ro -n.

THI PT-SSIUil: Counsel i r the Pr»s-cutir. st't---‘ th- witn-os V.r’ic-k
will bo in Kernixr r. xt nook rnc • t r b.! a the Tribunal. Tho

cua-r.to h v- jbvi ioly bo.n sw rr. t b-f >ro th- K t~ry, 3 izrni. Kia

n-no t ou-rs ~e h Yin r*c tho -nth t. the betaant. Tlx * emonta

arw ix. -r'er.

Q: N-.«, in Dooaacnt 3 Z? 3 , which is c Ho f r i.-lentillc ti.n
Pr-Socutijn Z-aidbit 509 , I will n w xxf r t tho r.oxt t th- tho l*at
santo-nco fr^c thu b-t- a r. tho first 1 -, x' I quJt-:

R those uxaerixontnl nxbj.cts w-r- citisont A -11 n'ti^ne;

Cz-chs, Austrians, Gor.a ns, Kunfj ri'.ns, P L. 6 , but r. J.ws. I roojflbcr tho
P-los -art Cz'jcr.s v-r - oU bocaus- I taLVo ir. th- 3 r-ch ln u' ■- with tho
latt-r. Th s- -x ri.i.r,t'l subj-cts t.l! a, tfc.t they h 'J b.-n roqiosr.
inAusetpitz tx Tslur.tocr f r ,n *s>ft J-b,' but tli-- i r- n.t i_ - irt it
. : - : rise n frightonc wi lo-rn. ’ a-rriv l a

rl.-ck 1 at Dachau that -o'ic 1 ox,-ria ais xr« c»curn- . Thuy stntoU to


10 Jur.e-A-P*-17-2-li- ley (Brjwn)
C art 1


hrvc nevertheless be- : .rce t ur. ora j t;-. se cxvrisents, an.' they wore
■uinoo: when - ain if t rev-It "o-r-l 'aja; thoa. Pr f.ss^r
Bci-lb^ck hi^ia-lf t'jl thw’i: 'It is in yxar interest t j un'orvo theso
ox-cri-icnt z bee us. il everything turns -ut rlriht, you -will ct c. jM«*
dotal1.' The alternative was obvious. I kn.w fr a ay awn oqj.rion.ee that
Prifeaa.r 9ci\.lb.«ck .ac'-nt such thr. ts in earnest, since I “Is. t ok such
.-•enr-cca inat ay tell sori-usl/." Dj y:u r on b nb ur th so ihstre-e,

D-Ct-T?

A: I h v- -Ire' 7 s“i.. th't it is i srlble th't V.rlicek left nr.tor
Lyin. *rcunt‘ ~n pcrhvjs I put it in the wey h. a ays, — but if h> conatruod
that ca - thre-t n iy ,~r.rt to tote. hia irrtj the ex.-x-riaent. — He says
the altera' tivc »r a ;bvi :ua. "I kn* fras ay mn ox->orioncua that
Prjfess.r 9 ei ulb cck occnt such thru ta in ornv-st, since I also took
such norc-a against -yaelf s-ri.ualy." In Ahcr w-rda, ho t; k ay throats
“:'.ir.at hi-, acri ualy. Th-ao gr-un a A hia ' n't acoa v-ry a.rijua to no.

I never t. L’ tho o^urLiental subjects it wa t thoir interest to auhait
to 1 1 *. ux.joriA.nta, n;r i I a-y "if -v.rythin turns ut clri ht yau
will vt ' et'il." V.rlicok rsn t m s^nt *h.n the experiments

atr.rU.- c naoouo.atly lx. c'nn.t knjw what I i with the cxpcria-ntal
oubj-cts a few :oeka earlier. I til: the uxpuriaLBtal aubj.cts if they
i. the eX’erio.r.t well; if everythin cjns Jut 'lri.h, then I Viul6
try t et u'-si-r - ork for then. Th't ia wh“t I t.-l* them. I n.v-r
force! 'nyjfio t. submit tj th.se experiments n th>re '.tore ai .is A a
rev It rut t r t:.- xv s.na ho -v. but this r-v-lt which waa the nly
rev :lt th t t Jk --c. when lirx r-fu»-* t iv. thus their octr“ r-ti:sr.a.

The _iJ6iec r-vjlU Against n.-t .jot tin the !-.>* they wore. itjcIao .

That was that hur v er revell. I -n't kn-w what will beC «je A this
'further; it d. ht be r. r-v.lt which wri/ thr u h ut the c a with 100
c-su Iti-s. I c' . nly tell you wh t t -k -L-c.. I idn't tsll the e:::-r-
ivnt l subjects it is to y.ur inter.at to ur.'.r j the exx.riac.nt 8. -Irt

• I I

I i' tell tlx... wc if they i-' in erj • an oxx.ria.nt they weil receive tho
r-ti ns jraaisu . That I »tver thrvatuno! to' use V -rlicek as an


C art I


vxx.ri 3 . 3 t i subject tea c-rt‘ i. v - n-i c met. I t -k Vorlieok b»n t3
tf»- strti-n only because Fi-lsiein cake ' .a- t. 'n* buc'uso he we s - Viennese,

r. in this hw ut A his w.rk, I think, *.n iat th. hospital i.hich
s s thin, ... urnt- very ouch.

hhr t ii yiur th.u.ht, D-ct-r?

«: I -r -loin he-- this i Tjr, “Ithxjgb I .Isn't really njoi hi;a he
br.s ;ut this un -rslT/finc A his t un -n .^pcr.

Q: Is it accessary to lc&o? the subjects c nfinc on yvi ixv usir...
th-n I r so a trtcr coc.jvri.ivnt 6, rust the '.j.rs be l.ck«.' in’. the 'U'.r.s be
.jjatet?

Ql R» vX wri-i-nf i subj-cts were lock-.* in wh-r. th- experiment began.
That was nocvss ry. They ah uL h ve b-cn lrcko in ft lot bettor th*.n
they uer» b-c tbun they w.ul hvu fcv ns r»*>rtunity at “11 t' .et
fr-sr. wtor ;r. tho ai’.v.

Q: TJr.t *'«3 t. th. v iu. ry : tor- if the oc.vriaents, *?ean't it?

If y u re.-.* ..-leal Litvr'tur- y.u will s-- tfc-t thirst cx.>orir»ntB
%

r. 1 78 c'rriw r. b-hir. * i.eko :..rc. Tlrt is not ' a vcl-1 ch-rcteris-
tic A the thirst ox .rivnts inDch-u.

C,: Professor VaU.hrrit i r.'t carry it n bchin 1-cko' -rr?

Pr-l-so r V ilhtr t hai * ct rs rt objects.

f,: He .1 n't crry it jtt ».hin. I ci:-' c! >~ra, -i' ho?

A: K., V lh-r t in't, but thr- r- r.u.er:us c-e-s f thirst
. . ts 1 . Lit r tuxs which • r. c* rrl. ft behind 1 cko *. C rs. If

y.u re Lly nan t c iry ut thirst cxvrii-r.t ccur"tvly y-’u have tc
Sbu t. It th*- - : :ts not hcvu ioc&ss t- t-r.

Q; The.i th-or e:; oiMt 1 subjects *ctu lly ftoro 1 eke- into tho
-x.vrlxT.t'1 st tithe rs Were lek* n' u rp —

A: Thre mnv ro u r a. Th- -r to the -x'-rLr.nf 1 r. i was lockot*.

f.: 'ts there ny jr.tchrr r?

A: Or. the ex-.wri.xnt 1 st tin thwiv s-r- '1" ys r.urs-s, ~y rn’ ni(ht.

r.: I n te ir. D.cxxnt JO 910 which bis been intro duce by the
?r aecuti.n, t 140, th- t:flint 3"usr s- .es in his “ffi’.ivit thr.t

seV_r-1 series : on .rixnts btr- crrrl. ii forcibly. Is u - 1 m met


3C64


ID Junc-«-Ft-17-- toy (5r.r.)

C-urt 1

in th -saujpti-n too?

«: H. in Curtrinlj -.iron,. in th-.t nsa*=?tian.

f.: S'n 7-^ t.li r.w how y-u c-al ~sccrt*ir. uhethcr or nit thi.su
subjects wor ,ottin^ ur.ocr v:s tret h-c'u8-> their urir'ry -uv at would
be l.sa then. It ahiul. hrvo bocn L.. they b~r. rinl-dn soranicr?

A: Y u c . do uce th t ir.t^r h-.a been ’rank in sorer 1 wr.ys, y.u
tfi Ju «b fr-.v he s-j-Lb A Urine *r.l tto s --lea 1 bl>>:, ~n.’ y»
c'-n do ucj it lr d th .»ei h A the cx>.r&aont'1 subject.

Q: Is it oust jo* ry f.r tft ;.era r. «h' k- c v iuntucro". for *n
«X:xri.xnt t t.a* i; a ice i his urin 'try t. .c*ive y;u. Yu ate. toe’

:n Jir-ct sorainr.tlon th&t B.a. A the8. subjects threw thvir urine cwrjr.
If th.-t be a. it wool.' b- n.xt t Lo .rdbl- t ;ct.rr.ino tho oxcrotlon
.f v-'ch -r~, u.uL!r.*t it?

Y-a, i*- is i v adbl® un er those c n iti ns. I hnvo -Irondy

8"i-’ tlrt these o -i« ikT'~ interest- ir. r.cdvin the ci. rottes I

aontl os'. ~r. t ibi r. riet a ay I ro- iiy -it that I

%

r >.dao th i in r./vneu, P r th t rv s n they «r~nk fresh wtor
thir.’-dr.. thay v ul b- -blc to st r.' th- cot; _ria.«r.t l.n\r an. this
w iL’ ivu th. \ r. ro ci/ r-ttes. Th-.t w~.s their tative.

f,t Th. t ia tr -e ct A v.lunteer t. threw wr.y hie urino, io
it?

A: In tils enso rhorc th- : nrnt.' ci rettes it is -rhr o not
quit, oust rry, but It ia un.'erct n*'.ble.


Court 1 .. .

jur.e 10 -E- 18 — 1 -HD-ifeehe a-Browa .

^ Now, you proalsod rll these people better food; alan't
7 u --S n rev rd for the exp^rlnent?


Yes.


Vhy didn't you £ lvo It to then?

A. «s long ns they were with ne they did get It r.nd
after they were released fr.a ay station r.nd the stadon
w-s closed, I deornded that they should receive tho food
In the future end I wr6 told th^.t they were.

i. Venice* srys on Page 2 of hie affld vlt, 110-3282
that 8 -'4 food rft.-r the exp.rlxents was also promised to
them, but these pr alee, were not kept; do you know Mother

or not the proaloes were kept?

I only know that or. oy reiterated request this

promise was hade to me. I then loft Dnch-u and assunod
too promise would oo kept. If I tad known that such a
thing wrs possible, n-moly that the proviso would not bo
Kent, I>should proa bly h-ve otteopted to find oven mono
assurances that the promise would bo kept, but there was
nothing else I could do. The Chief Physician promised me
tb-t this w-s rdor.d -nd If he s-.ys the comp commander will
• 0J Id they should receive extra calorics and extra food
■nd If in the office af the comp, I e-y this Is the list of
people vto Should receive extra rations, I of course had to
rely on tr.at statement -s 1 could not stay In Dr.oh.au.

4. Yes, but the volunteers relied on your statement,
didn't they? ‘ hen y-u left y.u did not care whether or not


t.aey received tr.elr food; Isn't th -1 rl t ht?

! ald 0 -re, I made efforts to see to It that this

request of alno reached the oompet.nt offices and 1 was
C 1 -- that these promisee would bo kept by the office.

4 . Veil now, why did you not bring the food with you
urSclf after the experiments? I h-tlce


pjvi row' re thea y -


Court 1

Jana 1 C-.*-13—2-HD-ke chan-Brown.

rather Interestingly ir. the docua-nt -u introduced .n p^s-e
103 of ,-var D. c-t-r.t c, 2 th^ee docu~..ntB concerning the

fc.i -llocr.tcd t. y u by the Luftwaffe, thrt y>u only got
or. a..: feed dor seven d^ys for 32 -w.n -nd yoa ae^d uor.
in these experiments and the cyp-rlUwncs lasted fr.n ie
July to 15 ieptenb^r; Y< u did net soon to u^ko ..#ch of an
off.rt to fo.d those poor fellows then, you left the-, -nd
did n c c-re if th-y got their prizlsed fovd or did y u
_ot ' thor a .i'3-unta - f T'-A?

*. If ; .a look •'t t-.l- document •-a will e-- that
diCOw 32 persons 'r- colled the first ex-jorleiont '1 ^r^up,
t •- w 8 the firs: a;.l“ient of f od I received fr.a tie
rlr field. I did not s-v. tae . enur receipts b-cnuco In
July of 1944 I did not think th t In Juno of 1947 I v.uld
. v t j reduce tr.oa in front of the trial. I* saved thon
because I nooded tnaa as a basis f.r the calculation of the
ptrcentn 0 o -f salt contained In the food. I can assure
y u that tale n.ont of fo-d, oo long ae I w a there, was
delivered oy the Luftwaffe, lth the oxcoptl n of those
,no or tw j days of lrr^ jUlnrltl-6 which I h-'vo already
sc kor. - f. Then I did n t give the subjects Luftv.ffo
fo a, but '•eked that they receive extra ratios f r< □ tho
c.noontr- i-.n crap, r nd this was jroaised to no. If I had
l.ncw. chrt they tould not receive tease extra r tl^ns from
the c.r.cer.trcti n crop nft-r I left, I v.uld h vc reelied t.
the nlr field and so~n that the LoftwafJc rations tfovo
doll ve red.

i. 'ny did you not call Bccker-Freyseng and ary,

"They -re not fulfilling their obligations here; I Java
03_n promised taose Individuals good food; they - ve not
been - ettln s it;" c eld you not contact Secicer-Froyseas or
ochv. ider, the ae-:le who assigned y -- -nd ordered you


Court 1

Juno 10- «-1 c - 3- HD-ko ohm- 3ry vr..

down to Dachau?

»• «*pocrcntly you niaunderstma. For two toys the
.'.olivary via dal-yod because tha air field was bombed.
3ackwr-Frcyeong and Prof, dohruedor Cvuld not h: vo
prevented tala, but two drya Inter this food w^s delivered,
•..id -3 long 'S I v^e tncre the food dellvcrlaa wore in order.

Now, Plllwoin a^ys in hla -ffldevit, welch la
::0~912, found in Document Book No. 5 on pogo 30; this will
ba -^n p^go 31, the aeevnd p-'r-grroh:

“Vrr.an the people were cnoaon for these experiments, they
wave olao promised better onro for aoae time. In reality,
tila on re w'o only o corded p-tlonta in the flrat :r.u-3;
rll the others received w-tor and skimmed milk for two
' \ya -f ter the end vf the experiment *»nd about the third
f.V w-ro ol"oed m the norm'l c mo diet. The firat gr/Up
raoolved a m eaua-go, brc"d, butter, cnoeae, _tranlr.de,

Z clg~ret cea for 4 to 5 day a. I remember that dlo~
'gfoementa arose between the c-m? administration nnd tho
e iwetont - thorltioa of the Luftwaffe, tlnoo tne Luftwaffe
did r. t mrico sufficient provlel-ns available for the flat.

Thv noa wh. bore the erunt of this vara n terally the
participants.“

•’ Wi lar.'t it evident fr z Plllwcln, from Y- rlieok and
ihoaa others, Tachcfonig, tr.^t y,u did not fulfil your
pr.-mise even during tho CvUrso of the oxocrlmonts?

«. During the experiment, when tho second group had
finished the experiment, I did not receive tne food fr.n
the air field for the reasons I hove already given y.u.
R'ther, I did not got it 1-modlntely. If they had bc.n fed
h ;ho c'.pp I should not hove hoi any difficulties ;;ith
:-3 SS, ns tmrt wn8 under the direction of the SS. I did
h re difficulties vith the 55, because I •'Sked them to give


Court 1

Juno 20---V-16-4 -1-3- Me e h an -Brov n .

n_ food of this caloric content, and tale caused difficulties
slr.ee they said they c.uld not do that on credit and would
fc-.vc to h-vc authorization fros the Luftwaffe. after two
or tierce day a I received this food delivery, and fr,m then
n the experimental subjects did receive tr.is diet.

That 18 your explanation of the accusation nade by
P Hive in?

— Yes.

I assume, of course, thet you flatly deny any deaths
In the c.urso of t.ioso experiments?

a. I n-ve nothing to deny; there were no deaths in these
experiments, nor car. ~ny deaths h'vo t ken pl^co later as o
result of theoe ejojcrlscnts; that is Impossible.

Q.. Did you know Tschofcnl^?

a. 1 did not kr.ov his; I knew hie nose and whore ho

case from; and I lc'rnod Htcr that ho waa Capo of tho

X-ray st-tl.r., nd thorofcio I uuot h'Vc- suoken to him

ncc or twice.

•

Do you know what r.la dutlos wore ot tho X-ray

station?

a. Proaumrbly ho took c-re of tho machinery thero.

I don't know.

•’ds he over In r posltl n to nave X-rr.ycd any of
tho subjects y u used in tho cur so of your aea-wator
experiments?

a. Probably Tschofenlg was present wr.en tho /ojocto
wero X-rayed or. -rrlval and then later I sent over a
couple of pc ,pie for -n X-ray check-up, and ho was probably
presont then, too.

Thon he was in r position to have X-rayed or have
seen subjects X-rayed?


Court i

Juno 1 J-A-13-5-.-13-..OO.V’ n—Brown,

However, you exclude the possibility that no of the
eubjeots used in your exrerlmep.te died three days after
lo*»vint your experlnental block?

A. s*t the beginning I received X-rnys of the subjects
-• on -ho subjects themselves cr_e to me, tw of those subjects
affections of the lunge. I did net keep those two
e -lo in ay expcrlm-ntol s tation, but sent then directly
t who lung department of the hospital. Those voro not
oxoerlaentnl subjects of mine, they wore peoplo who onus
lung n the transport« In vlvux the X-rays found r.
tuberculosis of tne lun a s *»nd w.-v.-a I turned ov_r to tho
hospital for treatment. I arv these ex erlnent.il eubjeots
f r ;erh-ts .."If on hour rnd then h"d them transferred, as
I said in ey direct examination. Kow, you cannot hold me
rosponelblu for couple with lung diseases being n the
trar.sp;rt. I ollxlnrted them lnnodl-tely. If I had not
had them X-rayed 1 ....-dlrtoly, this tub-roulosls of the
lungs w^uld ;ro .ably not U"ve been disc-v red at mil.

Con " pers-.n b.c.r t•>' work t-< walk os c. result of
being admitted or subjected to sea water experiments?

a. Tnlrst brings about a oortaln weakness In the muscles,
i. Kow, you say thit t:;e6e oers ns that were suffer¬
ing fr.-B " lung disease you never used in your uxperinonte?

Ko.

... Kow many X-rays does It t'ie to determine whether
.r n.t you c r. use a person lr. y-ur experiments; one?

/». One X-ray le en.u.h for the orolinlnary eacnsln-.tlon

yce,

... Veil, let us turn to Document XO-334which Is
offered f'-r Identification as Fros-outlon Exhibit 510.

. eld you kindly return those otner two to me, Doot'-r?

Dj the interpreters have c.ples of this affidavit?


m 70


Court 1

Juno IG-Jv-lB-o-rU-.-tcah^n-Brown.

rills Is an,ther affidavit fr.m the affiant Josef Tschofenlg,
dated Klagenfurt, 14 Hay 1947. Eo states In the third
paragraph of thl3 affidavit ns follows:

a Ir. the experinenta of Dr. 3ZIGZL30ZCK, which took place
In the summ-r of 194-. In jaCKaU, -„nly healthy gypsies were
used at first. I know th-t oecauso 1 received the whole
transport, which cane fr-.m SACH3 SNHaU 3ZN, In tho X-ray ward
for lung examination. Altogether about 60 gypsies were used,
chosen from c a roup of 80 or 90. They wore oortainly not
volunteers, beer use they all wished to ovr.de It. I noticed
that fr-.m their conduct durln c the assignation, as regards
tholr nationality, I only know that they were gypslos; they
woro doscrlbod by rrco and not by nationality. Tho 20 or 30
wh; wore not used were sent back for health rocsono and were
excluded fr a the experiments; thoy ronalned In tho sick
quarter. During tho experiments, which lasted about 6 weeks,
tho et tb cf health of tho originally healthy participants
deteriorated rapidly. Ono went mad and was trion In a
strait Jacket to the mont"l ward In the clddlc of tho period
of the experiments. I do r.* t know what hao^onod thoro. From
my general experience of c«mps, I know th"t If no foil Into
good tends ho ni»fct h*vo got over It, If ho did not into
~ sick transport.

During tho experiments I again rade X-ray photographs In
a fov; cases, about tho middle lc of the experiments, and In
a few cases thoy were made by Dr. Z2I3ZL30ZCK himself,
because he did r.-.t trust my findings; for I, as I am glad
toalmlt, hrd In a few cases given him findings which had the
purpose of saving the Deople fr.m the continuation of tho
experiments.

At the end of the experiments the experimental subjects
v:ere divided into two gr.ups, namely those who were fit to

C-:71 •


2. JTt 1

0 X -.0 1C—rt-1 a—7—HD—nan-Brovn.


v rb and t.-.csc irio were side, by tzu resp'-.olble pbysiclon
-r. 3ZIG.£L30iv2 hlaeclf. Those w: were fit i *rrb were
iroctly rele-sov. f-r 1 b r Ia_edl- roly if ter 5.-e tarair.ft-
: a *jf . j er;ericer.ts rad were employed In rr.rl us lr.bor
eou^a. T-.ee w:o were n.t fit to w r^, r b.ut s2C- pc ole,

« *a were tka obvious invalids, y .. were a nifcatly incap-
:lv vf w orb Ini n^- slcic, were tr n^ferred fr a the uxperl-
Jentrl atoi-n Into different sect! na of 5h* Soatwl
PriF ner H. spits 1. «aon&st tae^ were r nuabuv w-.o wore
" 7 wenbenad and *'prrently d.-n.er uely 111, nd whose
r.-.rviv'i «:ecsd unliScoly.

I knvv th c because I ivd to redio-rsph >11 She people
o ami lat the prisoner hcs3lv»l *n - bnev t.v-t those
- pie c"-ia fr a t.'.a cxperla nt.al at tlon. I r:dlo~

.v phad ".11 of thea onoe end acae of Che a twice 'lroady,
ad t.eref re I knew then. Moreover It c,ulf. zo seen froa
:o art lent a 1 oikirta where they onae froa.


"72


10 Jua&-xr-19-l-Prinoau (3rovn)

Court I

■^iiongst those Tori on* people who rejoined in the prisoner hospital
throo wc-t into the 'internal' section; I cj no longer renaobor thoir
nexes. I inxov free cy cvn experience of one de_th euso acongst tho
throe ho \zt to the •lntonud soction. *hia was c can about 1.68
actors in height. I still rectcbor hie in particular bocauso ho vc.e
brought into ay *-rcy ward on a stretcher, slnco ho was too weak to
v.lk any aoro. I «o cortain that on the day the oxparinento wore cce>-
plotcd ho was transferred free the 3eiglboeck ward to the 'internal 1
ward cat* next day oono to bu x-ruyed us a normal prisoner hospital
patient. I rocognised nin lunodiatoly -s I had already x-r yod hln
tvico before when he was still with 3olglboock.

■ I knot: that this uun diod three d.ys lator. Out »-ruy ward ro-
eoivod tho news of nls douth fra.', tho office. I had to eond tho findings
according to whothcr tho patient was dead or still lived, cither to tho
depot (in oast death oceurrod) or to tho ward (if tho uutiont otill
lived).

■I rcxcubor oxuctly that I roportod this finding to tho depot an
I he! b-on infomed of his doath. I ra.o.bor this ono caso so parti¬
cularly *'011 bocauso tho lung finding was in ordor, that is, nornrl
and clso that ho did not suffer free othor pathological syeptaos. Thoro
foro, I Ionov that this :an diod us a direct rosult of tho oxpovinento
throo days oft or they ondod.

■Z.o others who wero unfit to work, about sovcntcon, wore dividod
botwoon verio-fl othor prisoner hospitals; a fow woro handed over to tho
invalids 1 block and Z do not know that boceac of then.

■Jraa ay general oxperionco of cx ps I ass’xxo that abo .t 30£ did
not survive tho invalids' block ana other fatiguos duo to their weak¬
ened condition op a result of the oxporL-cnts. Vithout tho cjciorlixcnts
their chances of surviving the c^p would certainly h-vo boon ;uch
be; ter since they wore originally healtoy prisoners who for-cd Z)r.

3 ci lb seek 1 s experiment _1 ,-;roup.


10 Juno-* -i:j-lS-2-?rlr.eau (3rova)

Court I

■Mother expert.cat^l subjects alroady diod daring the expeui—
neats in Ool^looock 1 s station itself I do not know for I was now cllow-
od in tho ejporiuentul station iteolf end the covering up of such
cases of docth in experimental sta.iona we* always vary clover.*

Signed "Josef Tschefeaig.*

S ov, Dr. Boiglboock, do you rocull the case of that individur.17

DZ saaS3JJSS« Mr. Prlsldont, 1 wish to hero this witness for
cross QYc;iln.-.tloa.

HE, HA.-3T: 1 will bo glad to, your Honor. Ho will bo horo uort

wook rl so.

ZHZ ?32aXS£’T: Couaaol for tho prosocutloa states that the vit-
acso will bo hvro next week.

3Y US. JUTSTt

Ci . Sow, do you still acini :1a that noao of thoeo oxporl-jontrl
subjeoto diod r/tor they left your ojptnimeatJ st.tioa or do you know
vhothor or not they did*

A. Too, I do. Ho oao cortnlaly died of tho experiments or of
conaoqucacos of then. Xhor. were not sick poi son la ny cxporiuontcl
group. X bed given the:: o very c.iroful oxalnatioa boforo tho onpen-
iuoato cad afterwards. V hut Tsehofeaig Is talking about horo is com¬
pletely iacaarohonsible to uc. X cun't imagino that, only in fan¬
tasy. So imagine what ho is talking uoout is Just too r.uch to ash of
uc. Tschofoalg didn't know anything about ny experimental station at
oil.

^ . Sr. Beiglboock, as I understand it, you considered thcoo om-
perimonts to bo puroly c Luftwaffe natter. Xs that corroct?

a. Tcs.

Z . Ho association whatsoever with the SS7

a. Ehey had to do with the SS to the extent that the SS undo tho
roo-is avcilcbla and I was there uore or less as a guest. Xj.o SS had no
influence on the course of the experiments.


10 Juuc-.^:j-19-3-?rimoeii (Brown)

Court I

v» 2Le S£ merely provided 'ho subjects aid the space in tho co>
contrition 039?

i. Elat is right.

0 .. Hitler had no part in the initiation of the expericonts or
tho conduct of the experiments?

A. lint 1 know about Eisnlor^s purt in ti is that ho opprovod tho
osporinonta.

Q. How, do I understand you co.-roctly, the. your testimony is to
tho oTfoct that thorc is no danger in tho drinking of aea water?

a • I said that if you drink soa wator and thoso experiments oro
undo: observation then cno is perfectly c^>ublo of intearuptlre iho
c 330 .-lao. 1 t whoa tho dun^r *ono is ro^chod. I didn't say that it van
not drn^o. ous to drink son wator. That dcpor.de, of couruo. budor
cortnin conditions drinking sea wator Is dangerous and ton bo fctcl.

Q. and n:orv; son farors tho dur.,-orousnoss of cocnuption of sor.
wr.tor is c. well known ^nd xceptod fact. Is that ri*hi.‘

a . Of ccurso. It is clear *nd woll known that shipwrochcd pe>-
«o;is hevo had voiy unplocs int ozpo.ioncus fron dr«nhlnp sou wator b^-
cr.uco thoy did so in uncontrolled quantities and bccauso tho importune
point is tho qmmtity consumed.

^ . How, in your solf-oiqjeriaent tnat you oonductod prior to tho

exporiuont on tho irc^xtoa, how long did you drink soa wator-/

•

-hJour rad a half drys.

<v . How many cc ; a por d*y?

A . H.lf a liter.

livo hundred cc r s?

A. livo hundred cc’s, That ia rl^tt.

Q.. Did you o^t any food?

A » I ato soa eaor,-oncy rations.

C- And you dratk exclusively soa wator—no other w^tcr?
a . Of ccurco.


>


- 75


10 JUn*-a -mJ-19-4-PriEC« (Brown)
Court I


£ . How lose iii you have the ejporine-tal subjects raxda on ex-
due ivo sea. water?

u. Shot depended end it depended on how tho experiment was oar-
riod cut. Sene of tho experiments which wero carried out properly,
w-ro interrupt 3 d on the fourth or fifth day. ‘^aoso who dll dricj;
fresh water la the noontime kept the experiment up longer. In this
eriorh-ont it depends oa now much wator is lost. If a subject com¬
pensates for his loss of water by drinking fresh water then, of coorso
ho caios out ia a ’ ory j*ood condition,

(i. Khet was the longest strotch whoroin a poison or imnto drank
soc. u.-.tor exclusively ia tho oxporlmont? Sight days? Kino?

^ I bclloro for or fivo days. I ex «g give you *>ny <uoct ca-
swnr to that Just at tho moment bocauso I have to lock 'hat up ia ::y
notos.

Q , ’Jo trill got into that later, doctor. ±' : d 'Luf deo got
axergoney soc rations?

a. Yoo.

C. Exo sc:o as you had?

a. Yoo.

Q , How many culorios in an csiorgoncy ration kit?

A . I a tho axorgancy ration for four d^ys thoro oro twenty-four
hundred calorics. *h«y got a lit-.lo bit noro than that bocauso I had
a lltilo noro than I nooded, They received rou^ily, oi^t hundrod Cal-
orios a day.

Sou long can a povsonckink fivo hundred cc ! s of son wa.toi—
hoi; many days?

A . You r.oa- boforo reaching tho danger tone?

CU Tos.

a. . You could calculate that ct sever, days.

Q. Hov long did tho subjects drink it?

A . Chose whe drank no fresh v^tor did not drink it under cay
circumstances longer than six days ca i I believe there were nono vho c.
tied it on farther than fivo days without drinking fronh water.

Hou long con a person drink a thousand cc’s of sea wator?


10 Jure -rjC_2C-l^5c-rd (Ir.t., 3r vs)

CoiiTt I


A tvax r-d B fcelf dry 8 .

*i tbf t long?

A Until 70 s reach the danger done.

^ That l'"g, f'ur and a Kb If to five days?

A Tc«, four and a half d"rs.

-til, that li a c nsidcraMe length of tire, if yea cnr..' dri-k
1000 cc's of oe* Mr ir. four red r hr If d-y«t Bd you cn only drink
500 ce'e ir. eix days?

A That deperd* upon the fret thrt the cll=lrrti-D r f w»ter through
the skin rrd the lurga is the sane in t'th c<-ecs, nsd the additional
ae' vrtcr only leads t rn addition'll cllninaticn :f urine, Tfcla
rdditi'cri quantity cf urine that la ullalnrtcd — vhethor r person
drinks 1000 cc'a la not ao rcrlly very large over tho raoust whan
drinking 5CC‘ cc'a; it mounts to roughly 25C cc'e a dry.

H Wouldn't there he twice the drain cn the hodica vrtcr nd de¬
hydrate the pcra?r frater if he vre drinking IOCO cc'a per dry ra
oppoaod to W* cc'a?

A I Just told you vhat happened. A greater quantity of urine ia
lost, and the dlfferc-cc V ctvccn the ounrtltlcs vhon drinking 100 C and
5 C 0 cc'a la not ao very important* because the vnyi in which water io
otherwise eliminated throughout tho body, nmcly, through tho akin and
lungs rcm-ln the erne. It cm <von be asau-ed thrt with 100 C cc'a the
nnount ia lees. The dryer the skir. la, the lea? vatcr It oxcrots....

k How long did the subjects drink 10C^ cc'o of aer voter?

A I just told y-u, according to theoretic*! e-leul»tlcna, If
txperinc-.tnl subjects could live four and a half to five days, drink¬
ing acr v^tcr pr.d n-thing also until he reached the d.nngtr *one of a
10 percent lot: -f body vrtcr — danger' tr life ernes with the l-ss of
30 percent, and that ia roughly after 12 days.

h How nrny days did y-.ur subjects drink 1300 cc's of aca va.tcr?

a The txperir cntnl subjects, well, in the troop that drank 10 C 0


cc's, I had n:ne who w C r.t four days without drinking fresh water.

. C-177


10 June 47_-i_J , JC_2C-3-3eaxd. (Int., Brown)

C:urt I

%

severer, r re of the erp. rint-.ts node with this group was Useful. Cn
the second or third d»y, t v ese no-pilr >epm to drink freah water *y
the litre. S-, the deration rf the experiment is unioportant In this
ease. The lnp-rtancc la net h-v long the experiments lasted >ut fc-v
lorr it l*etcd only vjtfc ace water. And, if he drrnk only sea water,
then the experinent had to he in tempted of ter four doyj, hut if he
dr'rk a lot of freah voter, then under acne circumstances thcoc Cxperl-
aents ary last as long »a « aonth.

\ ihrt wna the hifheat temperature you reached in these experi-
norts?

a Luring tho experiments, ns far ra I rcsca v cr — yvu probably
knew this v ettcr than I do because you h'vc ay nrteo at tho noroent.

*e 37.8 Centigrade; thet la net vory high la itT la that - dan¬
gerous temperature?

A Certainly not.

*v la that above noma 17
A 5 one what sore than nomal, yes.

V Veil, n'*/, when y'U stated on dir.ct cxrninatlon, aoncthing
that interested at, that when you pr T c this vator to the inmates, thit
you had to drirk it in front cf the subjects yourself; now, why veo
that?

A That w»b n't necessary, I Considered it expedient.

^ ^hat v*i the reraon for you drinking it first in front rf the
subjects? I do n-t pet the significance of that statenent, D-ct:r?

*as it because they th»ught y'U were fooling then and insisted y-u try
it first?

a -t, doctors, vi art used to the fact that ncdicinea giver, to
patients which are s ucvhnt foreign t< him, rnd in 'r^tr t*. awaken his
confidence ir. this nedicir.c, we take sr nc of it ourselves; th»t is the
custocary procedure in clinics »nd particularly in treating children:
that v»a the rc's'n I did that. There axe lets of ye 'pic when they
hear the word sea wrtcr, they Imagine Lord hr. v 0 how dangerous a sub-
ctor.ee it is, and in order to.convince then that acr wrtcr ir really


10 Jure 47_^-Jj:_2;_3_3eprd (Irt. f Br vn)

Court I

a-ncthicg B th»t is potrhle, 2 firm k it ic their presence.

■e K - w . 7'- rp-.‘« f surdcr run rs in the cr=p in connection with
the 8er vptcr experi-* nsr vht v»3 th»t phout?

a I never s-id pnvtfcing p v cut nurdor runra, ra f»r »s I kr.-v, I
epid there vere vunrro »font, "-.d since I h-vc hrd <r'r.8l'*err.blo expo -
rle-cc in ouch c-=ps, I ern nsaurti you the* rll a rts 'f runor3 -rise
in such C”-ns "r prlo^no, phi* pricing fr*n the n-'O? Innocent <-f cir-
cu-.stmc. s; th»* it io on the h<-sls -f such ru=-re thrt ouch "-.en'rlcs"
“a this l'St Pffldprit y^u put in is fcpsed.

e Wfcp.t v's the nurdor rus-.r in c-np? U»s it p provel*nt run-r
thpt tcoplc vere being nurdered in yrur station, is th.pt vh»t 7 -u
uopn7

a I kr.-« r thing of p nurdcr run r. I ps henrirg n « f r the
firet tine there v-s "ny such ruaor In the c'rp. I erld thpt Tsehofe-
nl* C'uld hrve hpowd his otrteaent thrt nmcV dy vent wd only on ru-
nors tut nnt or Y.rwlc (»ge; thpt la 11 I srld: thpt deco nt ucpn thpt
there were aurder run ro current In the ernp.

*e How lone did you ohserve crch expcrlaontPl subject rftcr they
hpd coaplotcd their experiment? Three or f'-ur vcckc?

A The first group *s frr ps I rccpll n-v, wps 16 drys, vr s u--
dcr ay ohscrvptlon f-r 16 dpys pftcr tho experiment wps conclude'*, *nd
the other group 12 t' 14 dpys.

^ You "hserved ereh one of then f-r thrt length "f tine?

A Yes.

^ Did you keep then right in y ur cxpcrincr.trl strtlon r.ll thrt

tie© 7

jv Of course.

^ When were they turned heck to the h'spltrl er the l*bor groups?

*s 1 rclepscd tho cxpcriuentPl subjects <-n the 15th of Scptca v cr
vhen the* expcrls«.ntel atrtl.n vrs broken vp.

S. Did you ever return to Drchpu therepfter to sec h v they -ere
getting Plong; t'* see whether or not they h»d received their pr-d.-ns md


CC79 ,


10 June ‘ 7-A-J jC_30-4-Bfard (I-*., 3rc«r.)

C'ur*. I

and vert- getting their fulflllaent of presides that y:t a-di?

A I assuned a* * natter of course that those pronlscs would
be kept, r t thrt tine, and I waked that thsc subjects should be
given e physical crar.ination subsequently: this was also prenistd
-e. It was very lnprobpbly thrt way eynptons should bt developed
but should way develop I wished to bo lnfcrned of then.

^ iiw, this chart you hwvo subaitted te the Tribunal, drawn
by Iritr HUwein, giving the location of the various blocks in the
carp. Do you-hrve that hefore you there?

A Tea.

% -ow, v* will note the Trl'unal has it bef^ro then. I have a
few ouestl'ns to wsk.

X nay 'c *f lntorcst to the Trl' ur.-l in O'-r-cetl'n with this
n«p or chart, y-u will n^tc the Malaria Station of Schilling's and
the na-.c Viwwog in parenthesis.

Directly t" the left of tha.t le a block containing yrur expori-
osrtwl station, right?

A Tes.

•v *hwt -as botveen tho tve blocks, a stroct?

A A court; that w-e tho c^urt yard in which oxporlncntal
subjects walhod. around, »nd that is whore I sp-k< with tho subjects,
and this is the court yard in which Viewe * w-s not in w p-siti^n to
require or.-ugh lnforrr*1 n about what wort cr in qy exreriucntal
atation.

^ Viewer could see in th-t court yard culd he not?

A Cf course, he could; his wird-ws rive onto this court yard.

q Veil, r. w lo-'k up t' tho front of the 'lock cont"lnlgn y'13-
exp eriner.to.l station.

If y-ur Honors will refer to the photostatic copies cf the Ser¬
na- it gives a -rich nort accurate view of the situation in as such as
th't is the wffi-nt's draft, -r.d that is » translation which is ut
of proportion to the original.


»


10 Jure .:7-J_iS_2C-5-re>rd (l-.t., 3r:~n)
Court I


•V, lr. y-ur v lcek there aeons to he p dcorvpy between the
toilet PT.t* w*shrooa; is that correct! Thrt is in the right hrnd
c.rr.er :f the block, le that n doorway going out into the street?

a The exits, there were tw. cxitc fron =y expcriuentpl sta¬
tion; one through the roon where the erne ‘'Vcdisinor* is vrit-m,
thrt vent down to the court yard: and, tho other exit went past
the w'-shroon.

* ^h« cthor exit went pest the vaahrocn; thrt io right hero
(indicating)?

A Yes.

h Vhat wns rjght here (indicating)? In >etvccn tho Mnlnrln
Station «md y^ur v lack, wc hawo ► court yrd, r*nd «c h^vo » line
drawn h»rc between the court ynrd and the block otreot. Hew, whnt
w-3 here, p wire foncing? (i-dlc«tlng$-

JITC-i olB : ISC: (Interposing) Xr. H^rdy, I would suggest that
perhaps when jru say vh*t vas hero or what was there, cr vhat vat
'Tor there, that when you begin to read the written record it decs
n:t ccnrcy very nuefc lnfcrantien unless, when you arc dircoting
theso question, y'u at the im tiro, perhaps will *ry: Wfcat is
here, tho point I n-v nark "A"; vhat lo hero, the point I now -ork
"3'’. Thf.t is Just p suggestion.


1C Jure *9 (tat., 3r-wr.)

Court X


'*?• '1PIT: Thank y~u, your Ecn-r.

Too will note fr^a the chart, Ir. 3clglho«ck, the arlarir sta-
tl-r. - the v lrck that he* Vieweg's neve ir. it. Sr~ « e go t- the left
h*nd e *—,er. We nark th«t point A. Wc follow that orcr to your
crcerlacntal •t»ticn. We nrrk that point 3. Sow v ctwccn * •n* 2
th-t is the point between, or the lino drawn between the yard end the
hl'.ck street, w*t is this supposed to represont, this lire7 Docg
tfcet represent " wire force or docs that rtprcgcr.t a brick wall or
<*-eg that repregent gone sort -f obstruction?

A *. wooden wrll.

v* Wooden wall?

* Teg.

* Could you see orcr the wall?

A So.

^ Tou are certain it wag woodon -nd not wire? T-u arc certain
of t.Vt?

Aim culto certain It wrg wooden.

iv Tou are eertain it wr* n-t wire?

a Teg.

<i Would It hart v ccn p-gglhlc t* stand in th« aalrria station
ar.d hare seen over that wall, he aMc to rlt-w people pasting up the
Urck street?

a If y-u otood on tho roof of the nrlarir station y'U night.

Didn't Viewer toll us that he could fr^n his position in the
nalarln strti'n sev the norguc?

a If he wrg ir. his nalaria station he c~uld geo rnything. That
wae impossible.

s. T u d-n't think he c-uld get the aorguc froa the solatia sta¬
tion?

A So, *ut he could gee it if he were somewhere tlso in the
e-=p. Sc wag-'t locked up in the srlaria station. 3ut fra this


Z232


10 Jrre 47-JLJ*C_2v3-C-rb«« (ir.t., 3r-vr.)

Crurt I

apl-rir 1 -rfry in which he sppracntly wpb, -r.d I pseuat thet is
where Tieveg stpyc* in his lr v or*tory, when he vfj in there he could
not see into tfcpt pprt r f the h-epitpl.

^ A 3 bu=c th*t it bccp-jc r.cceBfpry for y-u to c°rry -nc of your
erperiac-.tPl subjects t- the n-rpue. I p= not suggesting thot your
experlr-ertfl subject vps depd v ut nssunc hypothetically thpt yu h»d

t- crry pu excer lacntl su v jcct t- th« » rpuc, v uld y u corry fcia

*

thr'uph the prssnecwpy -r exit fpciop the ="in c'rridr f tho hos¬
pital block -r would yu tola hiu - ut thr ugh the exit facing tho
s/lri Bt-tlr.,7

a I w-uld never c*rry a living person to the n'rpuc. *nd, for
t'«t rc-e n I nrcr hrd *ny ro-am t bother aysclf phout thio little
pr-..>lea. C rsccucntly I don't knew vht I sh^ul h*vc dnc.

*v *sll, h w did y u tpke y ur su v jccts t' the x-rpy st-tl-n,
thrugh the doer frclrg the =/in c rrid r *r thr'-uph the d«or facing
the nrlrr> Bt-tl r.7

a -here it says "wAih ron“. They were trken there rlorg the
c'uroo of the rrrov, then to the right whero it opys '’LoVr". They
were teV> r th< re. They were token in between where it opys "Hcvlcr-
stptl'n* rad B Lr v *r". And then they wen token t the brrrrcks
where the x-vry Btrti-n wpb.

W H-o» -»ny floors di«* eoch v *rr«cks h~vt, wpb it p cno story,
t" at ry, or three stT7 building?

a Cnly one.

\ Cr.ly 'no, tf'uld it v c p''ssi v l to stpnd pt p p- int in frr nt
-f the ire, lrr, 3-sc & "hropt strti n 'n the v lock street *nd view
pcro'r.a c-=ing t' y ur experlscntpl BtPti n r C'nirg 'ut f ycur
experiment *1 ctrtl n?

a If yuwtrc in the lye et*ti'n, the r- ulpnt prtienta f
the h-rpitrl were in there writing f r -.idicrl exrniivtl'n. Sow in
there where it 8*yc "Cp sg“ thrt rents c rrid r, y u '"'Uld hrve t etmd
there to see whrt wro 'eing erfried myvhere.


'.0 7_a_J<C_2i_3_C-r St (Int., Br —

C-art I


Bat in s- event vrs the view 'bstracted -n the Bl-ck
Strrsec. Th*t wasn't c-rercd with r> ro f, vrs it?

* Th-t I crc't toll y-a for tare ra this Blrclc Street, I
thick It wrs <T:cr t* the sky.

<% This is r good brer king pr*int, yoar Htr.-r.

THi. msiaJ!: The Tribanel win a w v c la rccfBB ^til 0930
r'el-ck t a rr w n-rnirc.


mi

11 Jiro-£-J7-1-1-Gross (Int. Brown)
Court I


O'fioial transcript of tho .^erioan Military
Tribunal in the mattor of the United Stntos
of •rarioc* against Sari Brandt, ot el,
dofonderta, sitting at Kurnterg, So many, on
11 Jico 19*7# Justico 3oels prosiding.


T.-3 M-RSHALi Persons in tho ooirt roon will please find their


sects.


"he Honorable, the Judgos of Military* Tribunal 1.

Military T r ibiial 1 is now in *«sion. God save tho Unitod States
of -aerioa and this honorable Tribunal.


Thoro will bo ordor in tho oourt rooo.

THS PRSSIDE'Ti Mr. Marshal, will you asoertoin if the dofondants
aro all presont in oourt?

THZ iLJiStULi May it plorso yoir Eor.or, all tho dofondrnts aro
pro sent in ths oo urt rooo.

Ti*-S FRaSlDE'Ti Tho Soorotcry-Gonorcl will r.oto for tho rooord
tho prosonoo of all the defendants in Court.

For the information of oil oor.aomod tho Tribir.nl doslros to
anno^ioo that th s oftorr.oon it will oor.vono at I 130 o'olook at tho
usual tine rnd will rsooss at 3 o'olook, this nftomoon.

Coir.sol nay prooesd.

DR. 3BIGLB0ECK - Ros-cod


CRC3S BUMIJUflOS - (Continued


BY MR. H.-RDY.


W. Profossor Bdglboook, in the tost loony of Viowog bofore this
Tribmal he olioitod that ho saw three stretohors leaving your ox-
periwar.tnl station oarryinj bodies to tho worguo. Do you rooall that


W. V^\m pc-a 23 of your Dootmnt nook !*o, I, Soiglboook Bxhibit

19 , wo %• tY&i.ln a lotter r.d ressod to your rothor cr.d father-in-law.
y/} I

. L.J^rl its-ir.-lr/r, y«s.

S+ J>j Ii(o third paragre h, tho 1 st sontoscu - would you kindly read


tF.tT7 please?


B£85


11 JmoJ£WP-l-5-3rcsa (1st. Ircsn)
Court I


“• " M T fooling# ere these of Pontius in scredo only it nattered
loss to his than to as."

W. «ho is Pont!usT

Hie n hr a so "Pnntius in soredo Kcoaon" is n Gorarn phrr.se.
Banning that you find yourself involved in so-.o notion without knowing
h<r» you got yourself into thet position. Khat I wantod to say w-s thrt
I fovsid nyscif obliged to oerry out this cssi^iront without doing
anything to aohiovo this. So, quito \noxgcotodly end '-gainst cy will,

I found sysclf involved in nr. aotion that 1 didn't wish to pursuo. This
is a Gorman prevorb.

Q. This Fortius horo hr a r.o oomootion In oiblioal history to
For.tii.s who wr.s responsible for tbo oonviotion of threo persons*

:.'o, When y u s-.y F-r.tiu* it roans ho ronohod this position
in whioh ho f ur.d hinsolf -.r.d ho d-dr.'t -..ant to do it. /.Iso, lot no
edd th't Per.tius Pilot did r t h*ro cnyt ng to do with tho oruoiflxioo
of throe pooplu, tho t-c thioves wore oruoifiod, without Pontius
ploying any pert.

W. Woll, then, did thr-o people actually dlo in your oxporinonts
thet you ror-lly didn't went to hr.ppont

/.. Mr. Prooooutor, in ry uxp..rinonts nobody diod, not ono porson
nnd not throo porson#.

W. How, will you kindly tell us, tr. Boiglboook whothor or not
you would havo published the r.suits obtained in y-.ur oxpori-ents ot
Daoheu in a kodiorl Jeumr.l?

/.. If those results hid been porfoatly in^xco-.tionnblo frop. a
saior.tific point of ri.i then I s’.ould h'-vo. ..a I already s-id, 1 had
r.o p-rtioul'r soiont'fio 'nb it ions oonnoctOd rith thos* oxperic.er.ts
•<nd 1 hf-vo fccld you, 1 vt-s glad wren thoy wore onoludod end did not
oxpoot to receive my particular praise free then.

*». Sinco y?u hr.-ro b-or. horc in "urnborg yea h've prepared several
reports on the export ents btsud on records that you had in your r.osscs-
sirr. ar.r fre- y-ur -onory cf the aettr 1 r:rk conducted at br.ohau. I


6886


11 Ju:e-i>» T P-l-3»3ros» (Int. Brown)

Coirt I

“ coinr to pass up e photostatic oopy of ono of the reports proparod
by ;*cu fer Idontiflection, Kill you tell ae whoa you wroto thot roport?

I wrote this report after my first interrogation, writing
it frno neecry without dooieontation.

Now, will you turn to the last pago, Dootor, of that report?

Cn tho last pago we find, 8 linos up fror the bottoo, the following words«
"In exceptional ecses also by weans of adoiniator'ng wator by a stonaoh
semd"* Do you find thoso words. Doctor?


11 June~i:-i;C- 2 -l-Zarrow (Srowu)
Court I


Am Tos, I have it.

’-oil now, in these experiments, is that on nvtuul condition
tn/.t existed as you have written in this report?

* • - ■’• row «P this report fra; mecoxy at that time end I was
nolo to roioibcr what l had put into ;y concluding report and I ro-
□otb.red thoso cases of the subjects who had curriod out the exper¬
imental so los in an orderly v.y. There oro sane iauccuracieo hero
bcca.usa 2 had not etneornod nysolf with tais natter for two yo.tra
end I put data everythian in this roiort frai nooory. Consequently
I o.-x't suo.x tfcut occrything in it is correct. So,o snail dot.lie
acy J. inaccurate, that 2 ado It, but what I have reported here dooa,
by and lar;;o correspond with what actually hayponod. j curriod out
oxrt’.ina.ionn with a stccmoch ocund for purely external reasons, 2
vant-d to snow whethor aodiun chlorldo could bo dim inn tod by :ae-
tric fluids and, conaoquoatly, aftor the ooporiuants woro over I
tool: this occasion tc introduco w^tor diroctly into the staouch vith-
out demtroso.

Z. 2 ?hon that is your explanation for tho necessity to ,;ivo wet or
by st coach sounds?

a . Shoro was no noccssity. j could have lot thaj drink it. 2
had tho atccicch sound usod so I could cranlne tho gastric fluids bo-
enuno lltoraturo pro^s that aftor the consumption of soa-wuto thoro
is rn incrocscd sccrotion of gastric fluid, and in ordor to chocs on
taut 2 ".sor*. tho storach sound in, I think, fivo casos, and 2 did this
ocenuoo 2 hc^poned to have tho stomach sound lying ri *-t around at
tho time.

.. Uoll, didn't that c-usc tho subject consido-ado distress
without am;- duo c .use inasmuch as the particular activity wus unnec¬
essary?

t

.w S ounding tho stccoch doesn't cause unploaseatr.css to anyone.
It is .. mo;hod that is used ever;- duy at least twenty tim.es in mtc


8S88


11 Juno-i :-i 'J-2-2-Zzr: ov (3rovn)

Court I

clinic. Ze accent is vuich the stcccch sound ia introducod is pcr-
hc:s c. little UOTloosont, out once it'a is you can walk around vith
i; is vcohout its oothorisg you. It's ose of the nost huiuless uothods
of cecils, ties that inters cl nodiciso c-n ,Ave witness to.

'• It has always bees ny ejqieriesco, in witnessing, that a
patient is latch disturbed by the insertion of tho stcaoch tubo.

Could it have boos that this subject was usable to drink the wator
because of uscosscicussoss?

i. . Is ny cjperiscsts so subjects bocuno unconscious, and if
I had had a person who was unconscious thos, of course, I shouldn't
ha.vc put a sta.ach sound into hi:: but should b«vo chosen the uuch
si.nlor acthod cf ririn,- hi:, tho fluid throng a vein, bocauso this
is quicker. 2 hc intravonous injection of fluid brln<;s aoout a a-ro
r^>id thi nisi-out ~f the blood and thin quenches tho thirst, bo-
eauco thirst in notciat ::oro then a conscqucr.cc of tho thicknoco of
toe bod:/' s blood, tfov, you can sec that there was no roason at all
to introduco a staunch into a porson evoa if ho had boas unconscious
sinco tho othor way would have bo<.n uuch quicker.

Ziat patlocts did you ..Ivo this wator by sound to?
a . This was certainly in tho second oxporiiiontal otrios, ono
of tho pat louts ootwoor. 22 and 44, boenuso, in tho first ..roup, I had
no tine to put in stcr.ack sounds because takin.: core of tho patients
in othor urys took up too r.uch ti;;e.

Ci. A t tho final a ootinc is Berlin in tho Zoolo.Tical Gordon in
October, 19-,-., did you rqjcrt on tho ccnorinonto as they actudly uoro
conducted or did you attest to ca.ouflaio oaao of tho rcoulto?

a . I concoalvd nothin.:. I described how the state of thirst
developed, wh.t tho offsets of soc-vutor aro. I did this at rathor
..rest length end I particularly pointed out th_t tho casos that had
used 3cr!Tntit were no boot r than those- .who had drunk strai ht 6 C.-r-
wr.tc -, cm*. I icrticulcrly a:phasizod the effectiveness of tho Schaefer

8833


11 Jaa*-u-i«£-9-3-CaxTov (3rown)

Court I

aothod in order to point up tho contrast between the two groups and to
bred- down the let of the opposition to use the Schaefer rather than
the 3orha uothod.

Vv S s chaefcr particularly aloiued when ho discovered that
you hod used his uethod at Dachau?

A . X ca not infomod as to the spiritual life of Dr. Schaefer.

Z. '/oil, Schaefer Was at the ueotias, wasn't ho?

A . Yes.

• You wcrc there, weren't you? You reported?

a. Yos.

0. U;at did Schacfor scy when ho found out you usod his aothod
at Dachau?

A . 4i for m I know, ho didn't ciy anythin.

Vas it your understanding that Schacfor know you were to uoo
his nothod at Dachau ?

i. X didn't as.tfco anything about t;.is. I haro already told you
t.:nt Dcchoi-Jrcysoa; told no that lnotoad of a control ,;roup, with
fresh vat or, wo would have a control ,;ro*s> with dosalinutod w a tor. X
do not fcisw vhothor Schaofer boforo or during or after tho oxperiuonto
found out that his noth* was used. I Cut only ropoat what ho testi¬
fied to horo, noncly that before tho report he know nothing about it.

* hed nover s-iokon with Svhaof^r previously. J saw hlu for the first
tine at this canfcrone , and do not know whet ho know about it boforo.

C. Would you kindly tell tho Tribunal, Dr. 3cirJooocJc, Just what
records Profoesor 7 ollhardt studied in order to f^iiliarise hinaelf
V-5h this subject sc that ho w„s in a position to tostlfy u s an o^-
port boforo this Tribunal?

— Professor Y ollhardt saw :jy fov^r grtohs which you now h.tvo.

Shat is this ^roup of .jraphs?

“* ~...t*B ri^nt. I extracted tho inport.;.t data frii hero and

ircu thm ^ lr * ° tSjl * oc- a °' look* at this table and checked or. :.y

6550


11 Juuoi>*;j-a-4-Iarrov (Brows)

Ccurt I

root&t* frcn it.

Did you tiro hixi cay other material?

A . la addition, I only told hia that the ealt concentration in
the urlao rose, *cr thie I bed ao origiaul docuocatuion, hut I told
hl:i that frai naiory .uad I also told bin whut anybody ezpoct,

naioly, that the blood bccaie thicker.

r -. Hict othor rocorde do you have ia your possession besides
thooo .Tc^h# and thco two books? Do you have any other record?

A. Ho. /

5.. Doc* (o' 0.18e counsel n„vo any othor record*?

«• as far an I know, ao.

"• at any ti;.o, did oithcr oao of those books have a black
cover?

a. Vos,

Q. tfcich oao?

A . Sho oao ia your left head.

Ci, Cca ycu toll ce what happened to tho covor of thio book?
d. -y oour.*el probably had it.

Voro tho mmos of the subjocts ueod la tho oaporiaontc vritton
in thio b:ok?
a. Yob.

SU la tho first two puces, X presume?

A • I think it was on the cover.

CU Vi11 you kindly look at the book tc sto if they aro otill

there?

j. I dont have to lock at it. I can soo thoy aro not thor
ri.fct ewey boccuso tho necos wore on tho cover.

wlOr-J STDHIKj Xa. Harry, if this aattor bccaaes iuportant bo-
fora the Tribunal I would suyjoet that, for tho seko of the record,

70U put 3CU0 identifying "-ark on this book.

12 . Z*.JZt I intend to. Your Honor, but first I want to find cut


8c91


11 v v—c—k—i!«7—9-5-Z<-r- ov (3ro*n)
Court I


whore this evidence cone free. I intend to aaric It for idcatlfio-
tion Inter.

S ^lrV . tG t It seens difficult to look at a cold record.

2^3ir: Tour Hoacr, I would liko to a ark it later. The c.o-
fosBC counsel nay Want to use it hicsolf and acy went to a_ri: it with
o dofonao amber. I»u fcavo to discuss it with him.

3?, S3SIK3o.7S?.| I should liko to scy that thoso docuaontH aro
cauc i hi eh I goto to tho prosecution only for its Information. I should
liko tc hevo tho: back. I hero not put thee in ovidcnco, ondl still
hare to docido vfcothor j iatond to. *s cay rato, I cun soy that Pro-
fosoor- 7cllkardt did aot 3 co thoao two booklets. I showed then to
Professors 1 Grander .d Xry and Kr. Hurd;-. I cost object to thoir
boia^j sod oa incrinia.-.tla.' ovidonco o,-ciast a;- cllont so Ion,-; .-a they
have aot hoc:; put to tho Tribunal.

!*--• *^-£Tti Kay it nlccso Your Honor, inasmuch as defense coux>-
sol haa naked for tho return of tho documents that ho has prooontod to
tho prosecution for study, tho prosecution duly requests that those
doowiOhts ho inpouadod by tho Tribunal, he nado rocords by tho Tri-
buncl, for uso by either tua prosecution or the dcfor.co. Thoso ftooa-
aouts purport to bo ori.rinul records n^do at Daohmi during tho course
of t .0 ospc: iJQnt. They aro fitting absolutely into tho propur ovi-
’• Cii °o rjle - ^0 not affidavits or hearsay. They -to actual con¬
ditions at Dachau and recorded jy tho dofond.nt himself. In a any
instances, thoso docu.onts have boon alt.rod. £ro alterations acy havo
Jocn ardo at Dachau, the;- nay havo been uado la tor. In view of tho
feat that they have been .dture;„ the prosecution thinks it necessary

tn.:t they bo impounded by the Tribunal and if study of then is rcquii'-

•

04 cit “ or defense or prosccu'ion that stud;' should be doco before
. ccsidssionor. *t this tL.o, I wish to use tho documents for tho ror
■ Qc0 of cros»-oxcninctioa. These dcc-ments war- presented to Professor
• olluardt cy tho dofens . Professor Ycllhardt cane burn an:, testified


88S2


11 cuao-iH■tt.rrov (3rowa)

C oart I

ca ca oxpcz t for tho defease. Els testimony was basod solely oa thcso
chcrto * t0 tiu - t fac ‘> I i at cad to uso those charts today in croco-

Cx reila ntioa of tho defendant 3oi^looecJc. la order to da the gcue, I
would request the Tribunel to sore freu the beach dova to tho first
dcfoaao counsel beach. Vo viU h_vo three alcrcphoaos scat la. Do-
foaao ccuasol for Bdclooock aoy sit fcosido tho defendant and I mil
cross oaralao oa tho documents this aornia£. Inasmuch as tho docuooata
oro aot ecustruetod so that they ucy bo ropreduced bocauso of poacil
notations, bluo narks, rod narks, ots., such e round table discuaoioa
of tho tribunal and the defendant and ccnnool will bo aocossaxv. I
r-quoat that I bo allow© to proceed, and if dofoaao counaol roquoets
tho doouuonts bo roturacd to bin tho prosocutioa petitions tho Tri¬
bunal to havo then iapoundod.


8633


June II-
Court To. 1


(Iat. Stfovr.)


2?.. S-_~ -ATZHj Tour Hoaor, I nyself intend to offer these docuaents
tc the Trlbnnrl, so there vrs no rerson to i mound then. I simly
v»ctcd to offer thee r t the correct r.oaent, (tsi I fcrve left then
vith the Prosecutor *11 this tine. As I s'-v, there ie no reason to
imound then. I w*nt to rept't: Professor Volherd did not see ttese
tvo booklets, perticulrrl? the one thrt hrd the blr.de cover. If Yx.
Herd/ doesn't believe it I c-w produce three or four witnesses to
orove it. I don't think thrt is necessrry. I rr. spicing then cvrilrblt,
HATJTi If I could be -llowd to cross-ex-cine the defendants
usinj the docuaents, then st the connletion of the cross-cx/r lnrtlon
vould bt the tine for the Tribune 1 to determine if they would impound
ths records. I era point out rltiretions in the docuaents, which I
think hnre been ordc sinco the trirls strrtcd. In vi'w of thrt fret
the orirlnri docuaeate rrt rltercd. I do not contend the nlter.-tions
were nrde by defense counsel, but lMscuch r.o they hiv been rltercd it
is necessary thrt they be irrxjunded so further rlterrtions will not be
ande.

TE3 PHI51 -~T: Ths Tribunal viu now tnke the docuaents in its
custody. T hey will be in the possession of the Trlbunrl froa now on.
..vy ai»y be used for cross-cxrninrtion, rnd under reason-bio cirrua-
strnecs they will be subject to exrr.inMion by cither counsel under
ouch rules -s the Trlbunrl shell lrt*r announce. 3ut froa now on they
ere in the custody of the Trlbunrl until further order.

TH. STZI/BAUHB: It is perfectly rgreenble to ae. I tinply vmt to
87 these tve llttlo booklets were never in the hnnds of

Professor Volhrrd. Consc^iently, he didn't use thea rs r h-sis for
his testimony.

!3. HAHTT: To- thrt the protlea is brought uo I would like to put
-vc or three questions to the defeudrnt concerning these records.

3? ;a. EA5DTJ

% Cm you tell us. Dr. Sciglboeck Just where these records knro been
* or thc P-" 8  tvo yc-rs. After you left Drchru in Septeabcr of lo'-A did


e 9-i


J-iae li—A£BKr3~2-Uf lay (Int | 3ro"n)
Court To. 1


you take those records vith you to TlennaT

«. I took then vlth =t cad hftd the a vlth =e la T'rvisio until
roughly the end of April 19-5; then I put then In r. trunk In which I
hod =y books end other pipers red jw* this trunk to r fstily to
keep for =e, end it Is ffoc there they were fetched.

Vho fetched the a froa thr.t trunk!

A Ky counsel,

^ rtf your counsel bring then here to Yuraberg!

A Yes.

^ 2id you see thee rf ter they rrrlved In Ifurnbergt

A I paged through then once.

^ And they hrve been In nosseeeion of your counsel since that tine!

A Tee.

^ >!ov, rre these the only records thrt your counsel brought to you
fron th/t trunk, thrt is these charts and those tvo books!

A Only the grrphs rnd charts ceric fron the trunk, I already had
the tvo little booklets vlth as rt CChrlstars. K> r counsel brought ns
the efc-rte at Saster end the booklets r-t Chrlstars. The llttlo books
v^r« not in the trunk.

^ Did you have ray other records here in “urnberg!

A Nothing else.

^ These -re the only records!

A Yes.

\ Is the infomrtioa in this booklet, the one vhich the blrck
cover hrs been removed from, based on the cherts rod grrphs!

A The t«o things were crrrled on side ay side. The one is the
Irbcrrtory book used in the expcrlscntal station, rnd the other book¬
let, the grey one, v*s in the laboratory in the Sntonological Instit¬
ute vhere the chenicrl »nrlyalB vps c-rrled out, nrncly the cxr—inr-
tion of the nitrogen. The fev-r ch*rts were nede during the experi¬
ments.

^ Could cn 'nrlysis be reached, as to your experiments by referring


B£35


Cuss -1-X-3Z -J-y-ilrioj (1st, Brov-)

Court To. 1

to the grrphs rad chrrts vlthout reference to these tvo booklets?

A The so it issorteat eipect of these eroeriseats v*>s the cbm go la
weight, th*t is thu decisive fretor. 7ro= thrt done the exoerisenta
era be evflurted. V. re over, is the fever cherts there «re descriptions
of a few other things, so thrt for the specirlist they present c pretty
clerr picture.

!ri. EjJJDY: At this tine if the Tribunal could adjourn for n poriod

1 C ainutos, I will hrve the trble arde up so we cen exn-ine these
rocords, nad I era continue =y cross-sxmlnr tion froa this first
defease counsel beach, if thrt oeets the rp xovrl of the Tribunal.

TKZ PH2SIT3TT: You have so further croes-cxrnlnrtion thrt will
take up the tiae to the tin* of recess!

!3. JLJOTl So, Your Honor. Ve :ro going to proceed to the charts
now. It will t-ki a artter of 5 to 10 slnutcs.

T3 ?33SI?3rT; Very well. 7h* Trlbunri will be in recess.

(Thereupon r recess wre trkes.)


8396


11 Juao-il-iLHlr - !— i-ch -n (Ero..n)

Court 1

•

• (follw:in~ recess)

-'.l -il-LL: The Tribun 1 is again in session.

EH . The defendant B'-iglboeck .ill st.p do..r. fro- the.

etaoa and take - seat at this table.

H:. HHjY: .\t tills tii— I . ouid liko to take up :dt-. the ..fendant
the civ of theso individual cmp.rim.nts. Th-s. charts, four Honor, arc
in aeries. U- sill note that the first experimental subjects have four
charts, -'-'.eh run continuously. At the tep of each chart the nuober one
np.-e.rs. ?or convenience, 1 will roqueat permission of th~ Tribunal to
number the first page with the .\*o. 1 as A-l and mark thereon tho letter A
on the s.cond chart, pertaining to the first subject, the No. 9-1 on the
third chart the number 0 - 1 , end on thw fourth ch-rt the nuabwr D-l, so we
may .rep;^” r.f.r to each on- of the four charts referring to the first
subjects, if it please the Tribunal.

1 ZZ K-vUe-TT: .ill note for t... r.core that U.e -varhs now on

the charts, on the first three, are antic ,iti. r.u pencil.

—A i —LA': The fourth ch rt. You*’ Honor, does not hove tho red
pencil No. 1, you c n a.o it has No.l.

ELI ...ZSDZHTx It 1U be noted for the record that the fourth
chart has be on marked for the Tribunal no I>-1 in black pencil.

IZU —-o/fz Nos, in order to clearly understand these chart3,

I .am going to .ask Professor ieijlboccl: to explain some of thaa, si nking
thereon the na. ... ich .pjtnro on th- top left-h nd corn-r. In this case,
!to. 1, could you tell us, Piuf.ssor Beiglbo-ck, ...aat this name is nd ho
do.a it refer to?

r.L. Hut is the nv.n of the .xp^ricent-l subject.

i?.. IIAHOX: Sant nm on that chert.

2 -A i-AHlXI.T: PL. isc repeat.

Hi. .h t is the r. me, please?

AH .-.i»itl3iTs Tell him to spell it.


£597


II can.-: -h n (Brown)

Court i

UT-. fLJBIi Kindly spwli the naac.

zij rr:cssi f-?-a-::-z .

1 _ : . h.-UT: !io* on the first line under th. ho dine; of tho chart
th.ro v .card this word, could you kindly tell us what that lino is, th.
first Garb?

n.; ... ; i would suggest that yai designate it cs thw first

horizontal block running frat 1 -ft to right on the page.

IT.. EAEJTi Thank you.

TKb I-ZJSJDEOT: Just a recent; nr- you Jotting the 3n_Ii8h? On. of
th. Judges as not receiving the .English translation.

BC1 E::_«RPRSTZRx It oxst be in the switch. Tour Mono*.

10U ILJUI: Mow, Prof.aoor Bcdglboock.

0.1, J1DALZR: Cn 1 tell you somethin* quit, g-neral for your
infon-* -tio.: .' M i the pros.cutor ay r.ruao again at once. First of .11, this
gw ns thw ooa of weight, the duration of tho cxp.rir.nt, the body tecperatui
pulse, .vi t:.. stool nd mount of urine cli._inr.tod. Ail these ar.tt.ro can
b. n t.:. eh .rts for cv.ry experimental subj.ct. Th- .cot. important
thine is t; loss of weight. On tho basis of these eh rts, Boiglboccjc c-1-
cul twC t is very -acctly in the prison -nd let c. ..Iso *-y for your in-
fonr-tion that th. tabl.3 of ..eights are the asst important part; they are
the key to cv.ry thing. The AOot important thing again is the loos of weight.

I shoul :.ei:e later, -.hen I get to thee, to -ivo an exhibit nuab.r to these
docu. ait3 a. I oha.id iii:. to ivc the so you now. I have had a .vhotostatic
copy of . oh on. c.ci. nd \ii.n 1 cor.tinu. .ith ~y case I shall cone to
th.se in. So far, however, I have not put then in -vid.nc., s that
..•no .io. ...rotoior. n.cessaxy before the docua.nt3 were iopounded, but 1
r. v- n- objection to thv.re bwin: loobdd at »st exactly no. . Pin jo .cccpt
these tables no so that you ery iso check on the I 035 of -..“eight. It was
for t. is i*. son that 3.igloo.c:; has then her. in court. Then 1 c n also
coil -ar- ... 0 those oth.r two booJOots are .bout. Ur. Hardy, ple .se jet.

the 1 C:. JOliet.

_*!. . . h-IiLhT: ,/iil you explain .hat the cooks -re.


8898


11 Jug* -7-?£-ST->-i-r riaeau(Brc*m)
Court !'c. 1


• - • HARDY: Tour Honor, I obj*ct to the introduction of these charts
at this tine. If defease counsel se.s fit to preownt t.'.ir: in redirect
rar'ia--tion T will object. I do not see during cross- xaninot ion how
these chart- can he introduced. Those charts which were prepared alter
the defendant « a incarcerated would not be in nuch force and olfect
here.

THE •vJSSIDS’T: Unless these charts will bo of assistance to t. k o
Tribunal now, it is suggested they be off red later. I will ask the
defendant witness if he confix-a the explanation of theso charts
which was sado hy hia counsel.

PT THE ?' ZSIDD'T:

C. Has counsel correct'y explained .these cherts?

A. In thu first line here is the date: On the second line, tho doya
on irfiich the subject was oba- rved. Here in the third line ti.ore ia tho
record of tho we.ght and, if I member correctly, it ia alao act dour,
below in sose cases. Her. io the subjoct'a height. The blue is tho
t'npurature. The red is the pulse. Here ia the record of the- person 1 a
solid elinin'*tion. Hen is tho blood pressure, and then these aro
notes which were copiud fron tho other booklet regarding the blood
cxarlnatior..

r «* fs thf r*. any record on this sheet which you havu just described
to tho Tribunal of th> change of weight of the cxpi-rinontal subject?

A. Kore — 63.5, 64,64.5. On thu 22nd —

Q. Thet is on th« third line froo the top.

A. Yes. This ia curve "B.” Hero is the -.eight: 64.7. l ow, the otper-
ir.ent begins here and now hero you set the loss of weight. This is n
subject fror. the hungering and thirsting group. You can c*te th-t ho
loses * eight very rrpidly, goes fron 64.7 down ta 62.2; then 55, 58,

4

down to 57.5. Here th* cxncrlnunt is into-rupt* d at7:00 p.n. Thor, the
next cays he weighed 57.5 and 58.2 58.6 and 62,t1,61. Then at the
conclusion the ran was w.ighod ei-sin. This is on th*. 12th of -c-rt.caber.


LI Junu -?-i '.-S’ — 5-2-?rictau( Prow.)
Cc-.rt Vo. 1


Thft is where the curves were concluded. Bat was the weight \,hen he

^as r».leased. Let no point out also th t this rriting her-. _

r:. K SIX: Ycur Honor, for the systematic ncthod of examination cf

th> -c r cores — rr.d I think it would be more clear to the Tribunal_

to avoid repetition I would like to direct ny questions or. each point
or. « ach chart and then the defendant can explain it rt th t tine and
have sene sc-uence of continuity.

THT rn . SI2£>T: As it is suggested, counsel oty now proceed.
nv ?•». H- ltDTs

. Professor -eiglboeck, the drat horizontal line running loft to
right across the eh- rt is the calwxlor date line io it not?

A, Yea.

. The second horizontal line is ttw oay of oach cx-'ericont - th /1
i", the number of ays under which the subject is being subjected to
m experiment. Is thrt correct?
v cs.

. Tho third horizontal line contains on the top of that particular
line the i eight of the pit lent s.n erch lay. *s th.-t correct?

A. Yes.

' . Immediately under the weitft of the patient on the third hor- .
izontal line it contains the hoight /.nd other niscciltnoous data. Is
thf.t correct

A. Yes, that is right.

. ’*ow, at the niddlo of tho pr ge e see, running left to right, c
hlunt black line. Th-1 is the line denoting the taapertturo curve —
t*vt is, cny blue lino errbd under the blunt hitch lino indicates
-corral terry *ture rnd any blue Lino a-rked fbovc the blaok lino
Indicates tur.oerrture fbovc ..ontl. Is th't correct?

A. v es.

. Inizedlately under the bL- ck blur.t line, in the middle of tho page,

* klu *-’ running left to right in an ir-guL- r manner. Do

. 6300


11 »ur.e Z.’’-! -S' -5-3-“riceauC Bnr-r.)

Court "o. 1

those indicate the tecp« reture of the patient or subject?

A* Tne red line?

Blue line.

A. 'fes, ttet is right.

'• Under the blue line in the portion of the chart directly unoer
the black blunt line appears a rad lino running irregularly froe left
to right. That ndicatea the pulse rr.to of the subject, dees it not?

A # Yes.

lot., a ft r thu graph station of the chart there runs n block
which vo will consider the first line of blocks under the graph section
of the chrrt. This f£rst line xvnning left to right under the grarh
section of the chert indie-t*.o the stool, do- c it not?

*. Ttut is right.

0. The sec-nd line under the graph section of thu chart indicates —

I ac unable to determine thet, Could you ttll us whit that line
indicates — the second line under the .raph section of the chart?

'• ' 1* entitl'd "Voedt." tat r.e any that theoo fever charts

are the regulrr charts us- d in the a roan aruy. They are already
printed cfc.-rt.- thrt are generally u- od in Ccrasn ' rry hoa. itals. That
line T Just mentioned is entitl' d '"’waiting."


11 Ju-e (int., 3rcvn)

Court I


% A-d, the third line uuder the graph section of tho chert
Indicates what?

A 3ody weight.

% The fourth line indicates the blood pressure, does it not;
that is the fourth line under the graph aecticn of the chart?

A Blocd pressure, yea.

h And, then the large blockes, tha* ie the fifth eectlon tinder
the graph section of the chart, are used for what purpoeo?

A The results of blood exaclnetien were occasionally entered
there, and various other notes.

•i B*s the chart B-l, in the graph section of the chart un¬
der the blurt black lice, appear rod vcrticle lines: is the red ver¬
tical lire which appears in the graph section of the chart, under tho
bleak blunt line, the indication of urinary output or excretion?

A Teo.

'■* Is the blue vertical narking under the black blunt lino an
indication of the intake, that ie, the watir a person drinks?

A Yes, Bare or less. It strikes bc here — let so say that
perhaps the ancunts aro not exact here. Later on it was not checked
exactly on Juat how such they did consuae.

:B. KAPUT: Kay I rce.uest, your Honors, to look ot thlo flrot
eorlco of charts, and if you have any further Question concerning tho
narks thircon, ve -m clear that point up before we proceed to ecp-
lvte the charts.

THi. iRLSIIiiT: I win ask the witness how nacy days the charts
indicate that the subject was 6x?erincnted on.

ME. HARUT: If your Honor, pleases, I intend to enalyio that in
taking cpre of each chart.

" Well.

«< In connection with the last exanineticn of the defendant, he
stated that these vertical narks and red narks appeerinr below the
black blunt line, in the =id J le cf the page, dc not contend to bc

8302


11 cure ^jC_f_2-3«pri (Xnt., Brown)

Court I

accurate: is that correct? I* t'-at what ym Intended to irply?

A I oeid that in the latter part of tho exporiscnta, the
aorur.t of fluid vhi act atrictly controlled. It did not rake any
difference to ae, for Instance, whether oa 1 September there was a
eonsusptlcn of 20CC or 3CC0 cc. If he drank cn the oide, for ia-
atar.ee, here, that would not appear in the chart.

S. c « you tell the "ribural in the scientific marking of cha-ta,
hew ycu indicate that the vertical line, auch an appear* in chart C-l
ic not to be oonotrued at an accurate one? Is t-ere a difference in
the nethod cf narking in that? Sha blue vertical line on chert C-l,
la there a difference in the -ethed cf narking in that if it io to bo
ccnoidercd an accurate figure, the narking la perfectly blunt at the'
end, that ia running lev»l, and if it la to be construed aa inaccurate
or sorely an cstl-aate the Une h*a a fri-ged edge or an irregular edge?

A Z ■•oa*. llr.oa were dr«wn by the nodical students or by the
redies, and »hnt t>«y lo kod like dcpcr.dod on how they drew them. I
as not oractl inforned on thla. *h© only thing important to mo waa
to knew hew the a-.ount of urine act down. ‘.iorcoTcr, thia graphic-,
rcprcacntatlcn of the urine clln'.natlon la not ao lcportant bccauao
vi Boasurcd tho ancunt of urine eliminated acporately end entored it
neparatcly. The nodical atudenta who measured tho urin cnt.rcd that
every tine in the- bocklot, and then wont to the chart, if ho did co
at all, and put the narks in it hastily as vc sec h»rc. I cannot
guarantee that tho lino ia correct to the millimeter. The real dota
on the urine ancunt ic to be found in the booklet, and this ia Dimply
8orothing that was a-re or loaa accurately or inaccurately traneferred
tr the graphs.

s. Is it custosary in scientific rtccarch experiment on human
beings and keep haphazard repertr or ia it cuatosary to keep scien¬
tific accurately reports, so you car. properly report about the rcaulta
of ycu*- *^rk?

8903


11 June 7Ji_JjC_6&Je«rd (Int.. Srevn)

Court I

A If you vin please pass sc the booklet I can show you that
t v c aaocn* of urirc arc entered Terr exactly.

W That is cot =y question, "octor; xy question is: In scien¬
tific research lo It necessary to keep accurate or haphazard records?

A Of course. It is necessary to have exact In recording the
asount of urine ve put the Mounts down in a separate booklet.

* T'-osc records that arc before the Tribunal purport to be
accurate scientific records of expcrl-ents conducted on 44 experimen¬
tal subjects in the concentration ca-p Dachau?

A /fcat was necessary for arriving at a decisive result in tho
erptrlaints vas set dovn in an exact way.

 n,ctor » thle «8‘. o. 1. 1 the first case in tho hunger and
thirst gro^, is it not?

A Yes.

^ He* the subject's first nase vas Frans, was it not, I-r-a-n-z?

A I cannot tell you whether that is his first or his last

nano.

Is it possible t v at his last -a-c did arr»-ar on the charts ft
one tl-ic or is it customary to acrcly put down the first naat of tho
patient?

A I attune that is his faailv »anc. Ac fpr as I know I ncv<r
en*ercd the first nano, so in the naacs here those arc the faally
names of the subjects.

TK>. HILSin. 7; iitncss, in «hosc handwriting is the nano Frans

written.

A That is cy handwriting.

S. Witness, this experiment, w C note on chart A_l you indicate
for the first seven days of the experiment was an obocrvptlon period;
is that correct?

A The period of observation closes at the eifht day. The ex¬
periment begins on this day here.

S. Then, the experiment you contend began on the ninth day?

S 80 -;


11 June 47— u _i v 'C_6i-4-2terd (Int., Brown)
Court I


A Yea, ea you can tee fren the weight.

JBIC-i. &3FIJC-: Hould it be sore explicit tc say then that in
the four graphs nev before the Tribunal, narked A-l, to D-l inclusive,
the chart A_l is concerned only with the preli-inri-v period or the
beginning of erperlnents?

MB. HAEDT: He , your Honor, I can possibly identify then, but
the Irosecution contends the erperlnents began on the eight doy and
not the ninth.

k How, on the eight day, which Is indicated on chart A-l, wo
ace in the portion of the chart under the eight day, the note "Hunger
If; what does that refer to, Doctor?

x That scans that on this day I ordered that the hunger-thirst
experiment was to begin.

s Tken, this eight day which wrs the 21st day of Auguot, tht
eight day of the experiment as indicated on Chart A-l, is the begin¬
ning of the experiment?

A It begins on the 22nd, that can be scon fron the weight
very clearly. If it had began on the 21st the first loss of weight
would have occurred then. It went, ho actually gained weight in that
period and that is a certain indication th«t the experiment did not
begin on that day. You notice here that once the experiaent began he
lost 2.5 kilos and 2 kilos and so on. In other words, a hung*r-thirst
experiaent supposes that the can will lose weight lmcdlatoly onco
it begins.


6905


11 Jir.o-ii-JP-7-1-Jr sc (Int. ..rrtcnbcr^)

Court I


L ct r, car. y u tell the Trib'-ainl whon tho errow in tho
- r~' n f tho ch'rt ur/or the n<sth dry f th- axporitant, and or tho
' to f 22 #.u£ust, n Ch'rt 5-1, tho err..w wh ; eh has the bluo cirolo r.t
tho or/ tharacf and tho initials IB nlor.r tho si^o cf it, weg rlr.ood
cn this oh'rtt

A. I bolioro thn t I did it at tho tino whon I ovr lusted. tho graphs.

V. la it apparont froa this ohart that tho rod t.rrcwr nn-o-rinr in
tho bluo oirolo in'or tho 2&v* is in e different oclcr rod por.oil then
thot of tho rod por.oil n-rha on all tho charts?

A. Yus, you o-r. s;o th'.t evor;whoro. Those oir70« were ar’o by
different people. I can't say tho sene por.oil wet .used all tho timo,
but that lr. itaoif proros nothin-. Xhoro woro throo or four difforont
pocplo. Onoo thiB person took the tosporaturos and then anothor ono
or.’ whothor they always us. t o sem rod nonoil I onn't say.

<*. few, •’ootcr, ro uoto on tho ohart 5-1, ir/or tho 22nd August
tho oth dry of tho axporlsont, tho p-tiont has roooivod pyraaidon, a
drug, hot wes tho purpose of r/s* si storing pyr sidon to that p'tiont?

i>. I don't rononbor that tnynoro new. For hops ho had some
hon dooho or sonothing llko th't.

<t. Is pyrscidon o hoadooho rooody?

A. ■•#11, pyrsnidon is adeinistorod for ell kinds of difforont
thins*• other th'nps it is given in ors-s of ho'daoho.

tv. It is possible that the pationt didn't hevo n hur.deoho boforo
tho acpcrir.ont started, did hot

A. I onn't say onynoro today why I £ nvo hin pyrnnidon nt that

time.

W . V.ell, new or. tho asac dote, tlrt is r.lso eo tho snr.o dr.to,
that is tho 22nd August, tho-oth doy of tho oxncrimcnt as indiostod on
ohart 5-1, wo seo in tho -ortior. of tho ch'rt under this blcck blunt lino
that a bluo vertical lino has bo^n pi* cod or. the chart and then ornsod.

Is th't correotf

A. ?.ell, there was ar. orrer. In any oaso probably it wns ornsod


J9C6


11 J*e-L'- 0 ?- 7 - 2 -"ros 3 (Int. ..'rtcnberg)

Court I

beaauso it ires nerked in thoro by -istake. Suoh th*ngs occur once in

•

a whilo. At the noror.t I can't reconstruct in ell dot'ili. In nny
aaso the huigor and thirst period bogins hero nnd, therefore, it is
Impossible that ho had c blue line hero. Tho person rear kin - it ondo
b nist-lce. First narked it in blue end then in rod ponoil.

Tou exclude the possibility that tho arrow with tho tluo
oircla on the end thereof end tho blue vortical ».rlc wh'oh has boon
or'-3cd on tho ohrrt 3-1, mdor date of 22 *.\\gust, the 9 th day of tho
oxgorinont, woro n'rks nodo on those ch-rts sir.co tho comonoonont of
this notion boforo this TribmelT

x. Yes, 1 ear. oxolude that possibility. 1 did not nnrk anything
et nil hore.

Ci. Whon did tho bluo oirole and tho arrow cppor.r on this ohr.rt
for tho first tine? Ih-t Is, tho rod arrow with tho bluo oirolo on
tho ond thereof oonta inod in ohrrt B-l *ador deto of 22 August, tho
9 th dr;- of tho oxporinont?

A. I or.nnot state th-t with oertointy. 2 don't ronvnbur it any-

ooro.

W. »»ell, now you stated that you put that arrow on tho ohort
when you ovoluotod tho mtorial. »os it whon you ovoluatod tho m-
tcri*l hero in ffurnborg or wr.s it whun ycu evaluated tho oatoriol in
August I 5 M* In tho Dcohnu concentration or.-p?

A. I ovoluatod it r.t a letor tino. I oonnot atoto with oortninty
whon I did so. It happor.od that at that tine 2 narkod that orrew but
that arrow isn't important at all. Tho ir-ortant thing is that by tho
ounros of tho weight ono o*m soo quito clearly whon tho ox orioont was
startod..

(». '»oli, in tho first instance, that is at tnohau whon you
bogar. nn oxporioost, didn't you nark r-t that tino whon tho oxporinont
bogan or did you wait intil a la tor data to nark the beginning of tho
oxporinont? You soo, doctor, on chart A-l, mdor tho d to 21 August, tho
8 th -y of the oxgcrinent, you Tory clearly, nr.rk tho ooetsonoeaont of


■J9C7


11 Jir.'--4.'-CP-?-3—'Irons (Int. T.;o*tonicrj)
Court I


th. oxporiscnt by sr.yia; hir.gor acd thirst will bo gin or. this dr. to.

Isr.'t that truof

7H3 r-t*3ID2'?» TThoro is that seif, kr. Hardyt

I3t. H.JJDY i On’or 21 -u^ust or. chart ,.-l, your Eo-or, the 8 th
d ;r of the ox-.rir.ont - tho Go rein nark "Hun^or-D", which neons "hrogcr-
thirst* 1 .

A. U 0 11 tod-y I oennot infors you onyraoro rbout ovory littlo
dotcil. Probably r.fc that tico I -r-’o th-t rerk on it so that tho
nodi®’ 1 orc’orlios would know that this wrs tho hinder and thirst croup,
and whan tho ox per i-.arts bogon. But, olo-so boliovo no, tho oxporinont
oculd not have st'rtcd any oarlior • hm tho loss of woight, boo.ausu it
is irvossibla that a porsor. hunger and thirst for 24 hours end still
£Mn roight. That is inpossiblo.

4. Cr.n r. porsor. lose woight ieaoiiotoly t$>on boing subjootod to
himc-ir or.d thirst for a vary short period of 24 hors-e? Hill ho loso
o tronoedous anoint of weight in that short period of tiro?

*»• Yos, oortainly.

4. Is it possible, dootor, th't you put tho arrow with tho bluo
oirolo on tho ond thoroof, found on ohr.rt B-l tar’or date of 22 August,
tho 9 th dry of tho axporinor.t, on this ohrrt r.t • lator dr.to in ordor
tc sherton tho period of starrr tion of this patient? Ir. other words
to shorten tho cKporir.ontnl days fror. to 6 ?

JlXGi 5S3P.:i<Gi Do you roar, that, Kr. Hrrdy? Or, do you noon to
apparently siwrtcr. tho acpcrinontcl d ys by indicating upon tho rooords
kop.t a shortor porio«' of tino?

1 G<. HmHDYi Yas, Your Honor, th't is what I noon to oonvoy.

A. Fren tho curves of tho weight it is visnblo so cloarly when
the oxporiront w's st-rtod th-t it would bo absolutely senseless to
attonpt o t-inp like that.

J'lLGi 3a3Ri::C* Dootor, can you state at whrt tiao during oach -'ay

I

* he woirht of your ox peri nor. t '1 subjects wr.s trkos?

CSC3


11 Jieo-iWP- 7 -^-Oro 3 s (Int. ur.rtcr.bcr;-)

Court I

A. Tha weight, I believe a t-kon ir. the r*orn '■ n- or during tho
rcrr..r-, during the fcrcncon.

JlOuZ 535HI1 :Gj Then if thnt bo truo tho first day men which
hunger nd thirst, that is, tho dr sting poriod svrtcd, would not ir.di-
0 'to t leas of woight, would it, dootor? Thc.ro would h-70 to bo an
ir.terlr of 2 h hours before thoro would bo cay recorded loos of woirht,
if weights wc.ro te-kon ocoh corning?

... Woll, horo for axnrplo is tho weight doterninod boforo tho
beginning of the ox-<.rir«c»nt. Ihur. th- yorson sufforod hunger end thirst
for 2 k hours end then tho r.oxt woight is 2.5 kilogrr.RB loss, th t ia
5 poicds. Thon 2 ii he. era elapso and than 2 kilogrr.n loss, end then 2U
hours and tho gorson woights 1 lcllograr loss. In other words, you
oount upon th't person who la hungering r.sv* thirsting losing l/2 to
2 Wlorrarj of body woight lr. tho firat 2 t; hours. J’ow, hero by
dOpidoBt it hep-ons th't the roi-ht was not dctamlnod on tho 21st.

This nlor -o *. «• I tho oxnoriront -’i-' not bogir. on this day,

buoeusj we had to find out tho woight befor- tho boginning. If tho
ox; .rlnont hr.d not icily begun on thin dey, the oxpuri rental subjoot, in
ordor to bocir. with e loss of weight of 2 kilorr-na, would havo had
to rein 2 kllogrnns or. the first day of tho ucyorinont,. fron tho 21 st
to tho 22 nd, end that is impossible.

BY ’lit. H.&DY i

ti. Dr. Eoiglbcook, thin r.rrat with tho bluo circle cn tho ond
theroof, Vidor date of august 22 or. ohort 8-1, tho 9th dey of tho
oxgorirort, whon did you plcoo thr.t r.-rk or. thc.t ohr.rt? You say that
you aado it yoursolf . Kenr, just whor. did you do it? Sid you do it
sir.cu you hr.vo boon her- ir. this prison when p-ou ov'luatod tho so oherts?

a. I m rkad t- is '.rren ir. ordor to ovlurto tho oh’rts.

*»hon?

i.. I boliovo th't I cjd it in tho yocr 15 ^ 5 .

t -. 1 ^ 5 *

... Yon.


5509


11 J mo-*UJF-7-5-Grass (let. T.' rrtonfcers)

Court I

<*. You didn't do it in prison?

So.

1?*5? *hat i» oco year sftor tho oocplotion of tho oxnori-

rcr.ti?

i>. Yoa. /.t that tins I ornluntod thor a-oin.

W. Isn't a ohert of soiontifio axperinonts sun.-osod to ropros<-nt
thir-c* th-t actually happonod end not on order book?

A. uoll this was net a docutont, not fro.- n^/ point of view, but
was thw tosis for oveluction for no. If ono oonduot* on cocporinont
ono first tokos sono nctos during tho cxporicor.t and later or. ono
ovnluatos theso nctos.

5910


Court 1

June 11— H-8-l-HD-2arrcw-'«nrtenburg.

i. These were not a docnont, tut merely the record of
tie experiment kept dally. 16 that right? The only
roc rde kept?

n. These records were kept in order to obtain the
curves of weight °nd thirst. The rest of the flguros voro
recorded in the notebooks. That Is how it Is done In
overy experiment. #

1. Veil now, on Chart 3-1, under the date 22 ^ugust,
the ninth day of the experiment, wo see a n tntlon that
-yi’amldon hod bOv-n administered to the subject used. If
that Is the correct date *. f the commencement of the experi¬
ment -s c ntended by you, v-a It propor scientifically to
st-rt r person out .n an ejperlnent or hunger and thirst
f r a port'd of five or six dnya if they were suffering
t' the extent th-t It woo noceosnry to administer pyraoldon
t that subject?

«. «t the moment I as n longer In a position to stato
t y tho reason why I gave them pyramld-n at that ti-o.

If s ae'a-dy tells me, "I hove r little headache today,”
that lo n t on Illness, nftor nil.

3. On Chart 3-1, under tho aate lino, that is, the
first iv>rir ntal line, after the healing of the chart, wo
n.to the dates, tho 22nd, 23ru 24th,25th,26th,27th 28th
*nd 89th of august. Each <.no f thos- d-tee hrs been
altered. Can y .1 tell me when those d-tos wore altered?

«. They wore cortalnly miswrit-;cn by mistake. Somo-
:>dy made n mistake In writing them down. Thv-y wore
changed In t.ao 6a;ao iariwriting re the ' rlglaal figures.

?r brbly he Just made a mistake in writing them down.

These charts were filled out in advance. They were fixed
r. the wall rnd then the medical orderly went over and
roju the dates f .r the entire week i wn. Mow, it Is


69U


Court 1

June 11—&-8-2~HD-Ka rrov-Vo r t onburg


entirely possible that he made n mistake and later erased
the wrong dates. You car. sea from other charts that that
Is possible. Certainly, the same correction doesn't appear
on all the charts. Of course, If some one writes the dates
down In advance it is possible that he cakes a mistako and.
If he undo a mistake, he later on corrects it. I consider
that entirely possible.

Q. Veil, now, you say, under the date of the 21 st of
August, contained on Chart a- 1, that the weight under tho
eighth experimental day does not npponr and that If you had
comaonccd tho experiment on that date that the weight would
ap ear. Is It possible that the d"to - tho 21st of august,
was erroneously alacod 6ndcr tnnt dr. to and then tho da to
lr.tor changed to tho 22 nd?

A, Ploasa hand me some other fever graphs. Others than
thoso tore. The experiments all started on tho eamo day.

Q« Icbolro to chjck this no now. no'll go to tho
ethers as wo c no to then, Doctor.

a. Tho experiments all began on tho sane day as far as
tho first gr’uo fram 1 to 32 16 concerned. a 11 of thou.

happened here, Is, In ny opinion, rn error of tho
aidlor.l orderly wh wreto the dates inoivanco - who porhnps
:r.do a mistake of one dry nd then, >n his ovn, ho corrected
it later on.

Q. Let'8 go to the next portion af the chart. Now,
this experiment you contend began on the 22 nd day of
«ugust and lasted until the 27th day of «ugu6t. That Is,
the experiment lasted five days. 13 that your contention?

2 , o, 4, 5 days?

To indicate the end of the experiments, Your Honor, In
hunger and thirst experiment, the subject being given no
: 1 -‘r water, will indicate no Intake In the section of


Court i

Juno ll-h-S-3-HD-Karrow-”artonburg.

tho chart below tho black blunt line - that Is, the vertical
blue lines which indicate or, Intake <n the part of tho sub¬
ject used do not a'pear in a hunger and thirst exocrimont,
and when the blue vortical lino appears for tho first time
that indicates that the patient or subject has received f^od
.r water, In this case, water.

JUDGE 6E3RING: Do you -groc with that, defendant,
that explanation? Do you agree with that statement?

■ r ir.:E53: Yes, blue moane int"ko of liquid and red
moans ollnln"tlon.

3Y MR.' HaRDYj

Q. Now, on the 27th of «ugaat, lndlcoted on Chart
3-1, the 14th day of the experiment, do you contend that
that wao tho last d~y f tho experiment or the end of tho
hunger and thirst f this patient Franz?

A. Yes, I do.

d. Woull y>.u kindly tell tho Tribunal what tho rod
arrow running vertically, with a rod circle on tho end
thereof, f end undor the date 27 august on Chart 3-1 undor
tho 14th dry of the experiment, lndlc-toc?

a. It means that the oxporlaent tne terminated.

Q. How, In that 6amo block undor tho 27th of nuguet,
n Chart 3-1, the 14th day of the ocporlmont, appears some
pencil notations which Indicate, I assume, that this
> tlent wo8 r'ther 111 -nd that y u gave him 100 oc of
stcrofundin, 4C cc of glucose and 10 cc of calcium, by vein.
Is that correct?

«. .is far n6 I c^n tell n the blue line, ho must have

ocolvud at least 5C0 cc Intravenously, but it Is ^os^lblo

th-t s*me physiological 6alt s-lutlon was ceded to this.

Siuc'.sc _ received in order to give him erne nurishmont -

♦ *

; ,_lvc him the first c-l'-rles, and calcium no received....


Court 1
Juno


-'..'rrtcnburg


e>»


Yog, I gave them colciun because cf tho muscles. 3ocr.use of
the ovcrscnsltlvity of the ausclcs, this strong reaction that
I have already described before, I gave calcium In all these
experiments In order to calm the muscles. You will probably
find that '<n many of the charts.

•*.’hrt is 6tcrofundin? Is that a hoart stimulant?

Sterofundin?

Q. Yea.

*. Sterofur.din is a trademark for a liquid which is
s-nothing like a physiological table-salt solution. I
should say it is a s <rt of Ringer solution.

Q. Whrt la its purpose?

A. To Introduce liquid.

Q. Now, on the 27th day of «uguot, which was the last
day of the experiment, lndlcatod on Chart B-l, wo note,
that is, under the black blunt lino and nbovo the black
broad lino, the blue line running irregularly from loft
to right which Indicates the temperature of the patient hno
cxoccdcd the normal temperature rate end has gone up
c.nsidcrnbly. How, vs th-t patient very 111 on that day?

A. Well, one really cannot t Ik of oonaldcrnblo
lnorcnso if e -nobody Iy b a toeperaturo of 37.6. The
Intravenous Injection of salt solution brings about a
6llght rise in temperature regularly. Th-t c-n be seen In
tho rv.at hcnlthy peroon. One even ®n obsorvo that tho
chyalological table salt solutlun, If intravenously injected
causes the temperature to rise to 38 or 39 degrees. That Is
not n sign of illness. That Is Just the reaction. Itoroover,
If this 3h',uld fi va hnp.enod b.fore - and that seems to oo
aoro oorbrblo as I Just see now in the case of persons who
~re thirsty, one sees frequently that they have slight rises

of temperature. That has been known In v»rld of medicine

8911a


Court 1

Jur.c ll-:^B-^KD-£nrrow-Va r ten cure.

f-T •'nj hundred years.

*-• "ell now, tell us. Doctor, in these charts wo note,
mdor the date the 29th of august, on Ch-.rt 3-1, tho dates
50tr. on Chr rt C-l, then the 31st on Chart C-l, then the
i.st f September jTi Chert C-l, that the patient rocoived a
considerable ooount of water end food but the lrck of
indlorti- n of urinary output in the last days of tho cjoorl-
uont? On the l-»st day *.f th. charting of tho subjoct's
condition?

A. Pleaso show so the blocic n* tebo k. Then, I can
•oil exactly how reach urine tho patient cllnlnatcil on
tho 89th. Tho 29th......

2. Or was this no of the patlonts wno throw away
..16 urlno?

A. I know now. Tho 29th - fron that date on, tho
urine was no longer s-ved because wo no longer aado tho
tho analysis of tho urlno,

Kov, the entry on Septenber 3 >n Ch* rt C-l, under
So itoabor 3, Indicates thetcl^ht of tno patient on tho 3rd
of September to be 61 kilos, and tno Tribunal will note
teat thovcight of the patient here is indicated ,n the third
L * nw under tho graph soctl-.n of the chart 06 opposodod to
the Indication of weight on tho Charts 3-1 and *-l where tho
v'oight is Indicated <vn tho third lino froo the head of tho
c.:- rt. They navo two places to Indlonto weights, and on the
- lrd chart, naaely C-l, they aorely placed tho weight down
•ore n.ther than an tho top of tho chart. They placed it
"'" n "t tno bot ton - the third lino under tho graph section.

-• i3 weight, 61 kilos, lndlo.ates that the subject was still
r ur ^unde unlerwel^ht. Is that oorrect?


11 J un- 3-5—1- loy (Int. Viartorfcurg)
C-urt 'J -. I.


3 .fell, now in the sx.ce aider 3rd Septesber aider Chart C-l
the 21st day of the experiment appears English translations rhich in¬
dite that the weight of the patient on the 12th of September was 62
kilos, is t..at correct?

A Yes,

'..hen was that entry in ink made under tine date 3rd Septem¬
ber indicating that the weight on the 12th September was 62 kilos made?

A That was made on 12 September. I let then carry on the
fever curves only for a short tiie afterwards, because tier© was r.o
reason later on the person who iras feeling fine to aeasure everything
quito exactly, ar.d on the 12th o* September I had the final weights
taken for the moot part, because then I gathered the charts and took
tho c arts to my npartcent, that is where I was living, and theroforo
on the 12th of September I had the weights takon, and if I could ask
you a\rin to sivo me that notebook, on this occasion I can show you
right away th t theso figures were writton down here. You sec, for in¬
stance, the fiipuec writton down by the fronoh nodical stvdont. You see
I shall shew you none of thee—I wrote then, for oxaaplo —

3 In the black book, which coincides with t ho registration
of tho weight under the section 3 ooptenoor on Chart C-l?

A The woignt is notod dorn only hero.

Q V. on was that information put on Chart C-l?

A On the 12th September 1?UL.

Q Is it in the black book?

A !io.

5 r.iy net?

A Because the weights are recorded only here on these
curves, and in the black book they put corn the amount of urine, the
specific weight of the urine, the 33 determination of the urine, the
blood analysis, etc. and similar things. The weight was narked on these
curves here,

3 Is the black book supposed to be the scientific record

5515


II Jmt> ^aloy (Int. k'artenburg)

Court !.*<?. I.


that has all tho particulars of the experiments contained therein?

k The black book is not tiia notation of the scientific
valuer, but only a part of the notations. 2 v_ry person rho took part
in determinations had his orn notebook, you can see that quite clearly.

Cne had a grey notebook where ho put the nitrogen values, another one
had a notebo k where the salt values were put down, and then Biolvroin
or *oiooak, one of then, I believe it was Bielweia, looked at these
notebooks every day and narkod it on these charts here. Prose that tire —

Q Vhnt does tho word "don" in Goman near., which is '..Titton
beforo tho date 12 September and 62 Kilos, which is indicated under tho
date 3 Scpte.bor on Chart C-l?

A "Tho 12th Soptcibor 1°!!." That is another expression for
saying "On tio 12th of Goptc- ibor." A Frenchman wrote it, and occasion¬
ally ho "light lave usod a uceowhat acre unusual expression.

Q You near, a Frenchman put that notation which appears on
3 September 1 UI during the last seven nonths of this year oinco your
trial bogan?

A Since tto 15th September 19Wi I have not soon thoso
"n. nelson. Through cy dufanso covnsol, I .*it in application through
tho Secretary General already in Docc jbor 19U6 tint thoy should look
for those French radical students aa witnesses for me, and I would con¬
sider aynolf very fca-tunate if ttay oould bo found, for at this noiaont
tht identification of the handwriting and tho curves would bo mado pos-
siblo ir. a much aio simple mm»r than possible under tho : jrcsor.t cir-
cunstancos.

Q I havo one aor*. question .:ith thoeo series of charts.

Doctor. Ur.dnr date 3 Septcakxr 1:1*1, tlx very first day vo find tho
temperature li.xs, the prograa toaporntura li.-'e, intersects tho pulso
lino, that is tho red pulso lice, lit;, isnt tho crossing of the ton-

i

jxraturo and pule- curves rathor significant causo for worry?

A Toll, the inrcrtnr.t thing is to what .-xtent this takes


placo*


8917


11 Jun-~-:3-9-3-; ilo7 (Ir.t* Sferter.burg)

Court :o. I

Q And I oe infonaod tint clinically the crossing of the
tviopersture and pulse curves is a deadly sign, is that right?

A -/jU, Ur. Prosecutor, you probably got soce insufficient
infcraetlor. hero. If a person has a pulse at 100 that is not a deadly
sign*

Q If the pulse curves ar«d favor curves intersect is that
a sign that r cvld give a clinician cause to Kerry about his pationt,
vo’ild hj have a little acre cause to rmvy about his patient than
usual?

A I don't knew rhothor tills pulse was not taken after tho
cxpcriaontal subjoct happened to havo token a loz« walk. But you sac
that litwr on tho pulse was takon several tines, and then this dond
person has a pulse of 80 and tbon 60 .

Q I didn't say tho person vas deed; 1 asked you whotbar
clinically tho intersection of tho pulao curvo and tho fevor curve
would give the clinician cauco for worry?

A .Vo, I oan't say thr.t Just like that. If before a person
has a toacoraturo of lot us say 37 and ho suddonly sinks to 3h, and
his ptdfto rices fixe 80 to 150, then that is a sign there is disonso
here, but thooo are physiological deviations you soo hero.

Q Lot's go on to Caso II, Dootcr. Case Vo. II contains
four charts — Ko. II, and I request tho Tribunal nark than A to B-a,
C-2 to D-a.

HARDY t Your Honor, 1 hope that going cv^r tho next
two charts rill not bo ac oxt_nsivo as tlx* first one, inascuoh as going
ov '- r the first one it was necessary to acquaint the Tribunal with tho
charts and explain tfc«a so wo can discuss tees.

Tlt-I FRESIbB.T: Tho Tribunal rill be in rccos3 for a fcnr

ninutes.


(Thereupon a recess was trk>>n<)


11 Ju-'w.-ifi—IQ-l-g ^,han (int. :farfc_hbur3)
Court Ho. I.


C* . -w * :* ‘

T.~Z ' XSrALt The Tribunal is a^rin in s.ssion.

3T !?-. IIA OYx

Q Ho*, with the charts indicating tha socond experimental
subject, ro noto on chart A-2 ;ho nau_ of tho subject has been erasodj
err. you toll us what her or not that erasure v: s c*vdo by yoursolf, D'ctor?

A }Jo, I did not err so anything hero at all.

Q ’ifao a ado tint erasure?

L* A I cannot tell you that rvrr, orhaps at tho tiro it was
written down by -ilstako.

Q Tho Tribirnl ».±11 note tho naro on chart A-2 has boon
erasod and you can see tho iryreasion of tho letters i X - L-A and I
boliovo it is and then tho noxt letter, tho impression c~nnot bo scon
ani tho next is E again; who r.ado t'.r.t erasure, Doctor?

k I do cot knc*r that any aoro, I cannot tell you. Perhaps
it is possible that there was a wrong nauo written dom. In any case,

I did not ur.aso it or perhaps I did so at tho tin. but I did not do it
later.. If I had erased it here, I would probably have done it in suoh
a vy tint yru could not read it iy>r.

Q >.Vu you been advised that was oras-d horc in larnbore?

A Ho.

3 Can you look at tho naao on ciirrt A-2 and detervino fron
tho impression thereon what lott.rs cay have been there before tho
crasuroj using this glass?

(A magnifying glass is handod to tlic witnoes.) *

A Klau - Klauj troll .as far as 1 can sou th-rc is a K-L-A
and thon it must have been a D liiao in Dora and th_n the next I cannot
rvt.it then an E again. Gaudc or sere tiling liko that, such a naac was
tong tho prtionts or soccthing liko that.

Q Mrs that originally your hand-writing before the or-sure?

A Could bo, maybe yos.

1 13 it possible that 7 ns orured here in Kiraborg by your

6919


11 Jun-i^-iB-lO- 2 -^fachan tint, 'r-orteBburg)

Court So. I.

defense counsel?

A noil, you will have to ask ay d-fenso counsel hinsulf•

In any c~.se, I did not erase it.

Q Does it aoc= strange to you that the neat- on chart A-2,
written in your hand-writing, should be erased when later negligently
tho Chert on D-2 has tho sono rert as the inpxvssi on conveys on Chart
A-2 has not bc_n erased?

A Veil, any way, it sc. as to ao to a pc-ok with absolute
cort~inty that tho orasura was done for reasons of camouflage, you do
not have to think ny defense counsel is so stupid ho would orrso ono
and not tho other. If he had done that, ho would have dono it more
thoroughly.

Q :iow, on chart D fra: thoro would you kindly spoil tho
naao you havu written, tho naro you havo written in your own hand¬
writing?

A Klandj or Klaudc and it could bo Klafdo too. Ho, I be¬
lieve it suat bo Klan or Klaudo.

Q How do you spoil that. Doctor?

A K-L—A and either a U or an N, I cannot say that, thon a

D - E.

Q Dees Chart D-2 bo~r any recording thereon, or was it
Just an oxtra shoot thrt was not usod?

A That woe not used.

Q That was not used; thon it is possible in studying tho
ease of tho second subject that tho fourth shoit, namely D-2 or riark
D-2, could have boon overlooked by the person who erased tho name on
A-2?

A Ics, I already saw that. In c.aso 1, it scons to havo
been as follows: namely, that those curves had been prepared then and
soncone forget thoy had beer, prepared already and now ones wore stfri¬
ed. I contend that possibility or probability.

^ At any tirt has your defense counsel consulted • ith you

8920


il Jjw>B-10-3-:jehan (inti artenbvrg)

Court So, I,

corci.rr.in6 possible alterations on thoso cherts?

A I do not ondsrstned your question.

Q At any tiae has your defonse counsel consulted with you
concerning alterations on thase charts?

A Tf 0 were in igre-nant at all tiaes that the charts and the
eurvus shall bo si ihr .ittod in the sane as re received them hero,

Q But, this chrrt has bean oraaod. Doctor, was that in tho
s^io condition as those found in your trunks in Vienna?


Hrl>-SE-Ii-I-?riceeu (Int. Vp-tenb?r-)
Court ro. i


X Tec, ri ->nrentiy la way cases I didn't erase it. I can't tali
anythin? core than that. I did not erase anything here, end,
la toy case, they were lyim next to each other. It Is ocesible,
to &| that It vpB aresed at that tine. I can't tell you any core
r.c“ vhft btp-ened. In any case, I sysolf did not erace It end
certeiniy not with tho intention tc hide the none.

i Did the defense counsel erase It, to your knowledge?

A I certeinly don't bciievo that he did.

% Do you exclude the possibility that he ceuld have erased It?

A V ell, the sinpltst thing would he - I no:at to say that cy
defense counsel could host answer this question hioeolf.

I Left <o to the next section of this cate Vo. 2. Under the
lato 21 August on CbtTt X 2 , the eighth day of the expericer.t, ve see
in the third block n. arrow running horitonteily with a vertical
line bisecting the*, arrow, I=e 4 lately thereunder appoer tho
Orsrn words "Hunger D". V hot does the errov and the words "Hungor
D- Indicate in that block?

A That armi the sane as in the other curve, and here I ai so seo
that cy original opinion vat correct after all. 2 stated at tho
•-ice, you start with banger end thirst. Therefore the arrow Is
there, because if the arrow had started before, I orebably would not
lave drevr. that errov. I can't tel* you anything else but that the
exoerixcr.t begin in any cose for the first greup on August. That
is visible fron all the values. Froc the weights it is unequivocally
noticeable that it cust have been that way. Of course, I had the
weight determined on that dry in which the ex-xricent began.

\ 3ut now you hove an inconsistency with your oxplar-etion of the
arrow and the blue circle, thereon in erse Vo. 1, in that here on
‘C-hrrt 3: you hove Just stated that you sold the expericcnt was to
otert on the 22 nd, but ycu have pn arrow under the date of the

5 rd with r blue circle thereunder indicating the expericcnt begnn

-922


’use ll-K-Pfc-lL-2-?riceau (In -. tfprten berg)
C curt !*o. 1


rr. the 2?rd. I'cw, did you erroneously niece that errow in the date
of the 23rd?

A fee, presun-bly at that time I cede the narking end it is ocesible
that I v*8 sonevhet superficial. I didn't do that, after ell, because
I believed that at any tine it would be submitted; but you can sec
that the weights show Quit# clearly that the expericent ter.® on the
??r.d. On Cr se 1 the arrow w*:s on the 21st and the fever curves -
I believe it rust hrve beer, on the 22nd, I c*n't explain to you any
sore.

!j. President, please look at the weights. 7roa the weights alone....

..H, HAHTY: If defense counsel has an objection. Your Eonor, he
coy raise it. I will proceed with cy ernes exasination.

% If that arrow with the blue circle ot the end thoreof under tho
23rd of Aa-jot w Bf cede to indicate the beaming cf the oxporlcont,
ern you explain whet the arrow with the blue circle thereunder under
the date of the 22nd af August indicated?

A I nad« those arrows at the tieo vhtn I cooled the weights when
I evaluated this experiment.

<4 You slip-ed -op caJelag this entry of the rrrow under the 23rl end
put in ike wrong date, didn't you?

A V ell, in any case, that was done erroneously. Yes, it can't
te ony other way.

4 And did you put that red arrow with the blue cork on the end
thereof, blue circle on the end thereof, on this chart ct the tico
nf the experiment * n August IQUU a t Dpcheu?


11 Jano u7-: ~.TD-U-law?rlr.aau (Int. urtenberg)
C->urt 'Jos 1


A I toll you droopy that at a later date I evaluated these charts
and ’otordned the afferent values and curves, and for ay crm use at
thrt ti 3 I entered this curve, this arrow, because in the copying of the
wai- hts and locking at tho weights at that tine in different charts it
st-rts onco hero and once there. I noted down the loss of weight at tho
ti.:o in rdnr to ovaluato ther., and I aado that sign -t that tirw. At
thvt tine I wasn* t thinking that at one tit this sign would over bo of
any significance. I don't stand hare and say that tho exp^rlaunt began
\t tJrt tLue bocauso of that. I say only that on tho 22nd of ?fcrch tho
oxperirvents of Group 1 bogan.

Q If you ontorod this .r.rk or thi3 arrow on tho 23ri at a lator
date — that is, a year or two yo'rs after tho conclusion of tho oxpori-
nonta — as an evaluation nark, why did you attenpt to irdtato tho rod
an l hluo pencil of tho ordinal? Tfhy dl "n't you Just use a scratch
pencil which woul 1 show tho lator ontry end not bo an attonpt at
forgory? If you ontorod this nark one year lator, y.u had to 60 and
ot a rod an’ blue pencil to acko your evaluation joark, di ’n't you?

A T oll, in rdor to uako tho difforonco apparent to tho cyo,
botwoon tho boginninc and tho end, probnbl; is what it was. I

wasn't thinkir. for a Ion tine at that tlno about what I wa3 doing.
Perhaps, I Just lilcoi it that way. I can't toll yeu that any noro.

Is it possible you nado tho -ntry in rod and bluo pencil in
vrdor to tocolvo y *r oxF«jt witness Volhar', so that ho would think
th, oxpor±: vents wore cf a shorter period of tine than they actually
wore?

A I ah wed Pr fe' 3cr Volharl tho weight chart. I pointed out to
hin particularly in th evaluation of this experiment that tho ra,st
important thing seemed to bo how tho <oi.hts bohaved in this oxpori¬
ent, and I hopo that I shall havo an opportunity later on to prove
this. Only fren this can one ’_tumine one decisive print — namely, tho
amount of loss -f water. I did nrt think that tho Professrr was so

3tupld that ivS wouldn't notice that between the 22n! an' the 23r‘ there

•924


il Jtmo L 7—1 W»n>-iX-2a—Prinor u (Int* arteribors)

Court S3. 1

«m a l:3s cf weight of rxro than 2 kilosrens while froa the 20 th to
the 22a* on increase of weight cf 0.5. This constant loss of weight I
would bo crazy if —

q whether or net Professor Volbard wouli ba stupid enough
n:t tc assuno that the. experiment bo';an on th- 3th experimental day or
the 9sh or the 10th is not an issue here. You, in fact,it«ro eith-r
carploss enough or stupid oncu-h to yourself to nark tte chart that tho
experiment began on tto 23ri and narkod it one yaar later when you had
anplo opportunity tc evaluate the charts. Isn*t that correct? Wow, if
you, the oxporlnor.tcr, oarelossly — or, as you put it, stupidly —
state hero with y:ur aaridaj that the experiment bo^an on the 23rd, how
wcul '. an innocent expert looking at thoso rocoris an' asking an attonpt
to ovalur.to thorn an', then ooalng hero bof:ro this tribunal and testify
under oath — hjw ccul! ho lotor-dno that any hotter than you did?


925


11 Jun— k~ 3—12—i-oeard (lnt« i.'rrtonburg)
Gcurt J 13 » I*


A An export, cf course, should bo able to sec. that r.t first
si^ht, that thj experiment started hero.

3 But, you could not so. it, c- uld you, wh^n you ndu tho


A Wall, th-.t is cvid-nc. of thj fact that this was an err'r
on my part.

3 Jiow, under the date -f tho 22nd — you contend that is
tho d te tho cocerinont bugan, is that c.rrcct?

THS iSJBrDEVTt I would li!co to oak tho witnsss a question.
BY THE rR3SID'2.T i

3 Witness, on nil of t:»eso four charts, the first lino in¬
dicates the date, does it not?

A Yas, your Honor.

Q On A-2 we find the date in pencil on tho first block XU;
is that correct?

A On the third block, the date 16.

Q C*i the fifth, the date lfl, and on the seventh, tho d-.to
20. Tho next block is vacant.

A Yes.

Q That would be the 21st of the nonth, would it not?

A Yoa.

3 Over on 3-2, the next succeeding date block, was orig¬
inally wrf tten with tho date 22 , w-s it not?

A Yes.

3 It was then r.lterod to tho 21st, is that correct?

A Ho.

3 It wtc altered froa tho 22nd to tho 21st?

.. Apparently from the 21st to the 22nd.

Q Then, as tho charts now stand, there are two dates for
the 21st, are there not, tho Last block on A-2 and the first block on

3-2?

A I can reaanber now, or I oelic-ve that I rervraber, her.- it

.926


11 Jun-l-l3-*12-2— 3e?ird (Int. L'.artenbur ~)

Court lie. I.

n-ppened. These curves wore written in advance; that is, r.t the desk
he wrote dc^n the dates before t.x c.r.rts wore fixed to the vr.ll v
ivz'z y to -ids r. mistake in the date lero. Inter on it probably
rill bocu * ap;jcront ho* tiiis happened. Originally the 21st bed boon
written do»/n, then he changed that to the 22nd, etc. Ho probably
wroto tru whole thing in advance and .ado an error of one day. Tiiis
is no: the 21so, 22nd, 23rd, eto.

Q On the lower blocks on the chart where tho r^d and blic
graphs indicate, both dates aru tr.do out. Both d-.tos which should bo
the 21st -to indie " tod, are thoy not?

1 Uo. This curve was drum continuously. I said that tho
d-tes Tforo already written do'..n in advene-, that is, tlw date of ili-
noss, thrt was written in advance for tho entire curve, rnd then tho
curv. w's placed on tho wall near tho bed, and then every day it ras
:.r.rk>d several tLus — th. pulse, t ix. teu.eraturo -and thj liko, .and
hore ho nust have noticed that in writing tho date down in advance ho
r’.do a uistako. Therefore, only tho date w-c changed and rot tho ob-
scrv-tional data; that corresponds to tlw pulsu and tonpuratro* of 21 st,
and .er„ to tho 22nd, and then* -o tho 23rd, and so on.

Q Then, one day aero has a curv,. than actually oxiot-d in
the days of the week, did it not? There is ono oxtr.a day in tho curve,
is there not?

- No, the curve was -ado fro,.: day to day by the adical
students, and t'.u. ur.tries woi\. . .ado continuously; and thon apparently
he noticed that in writing tho dat-c in advance ho cr.do an orror .and
he corrected that. This was carried out on the saeo way, day by day,
ono dry aft r tho other.

T7K laSSHCff': Very '.all.

BT IR. dee:

Q Under the datu of 28 August on chart 3-2, w<_ find in tho

fifah block under th. graph section of th- chart tho word which I will

*?oll B Z-u n , and the next .©rd-"S-c-h- -a-c-h". Kow, do6E th t c n

C9&


11 3—12-3—3o'-rd (Int. ITartenburg)

Court Jo. I.


thr.t the patient‘s pulse was too weak to get a recording?

A The blood pressur- of the patients was neasurod overy
day wi~n they were lying down and standing up, or after a slight ef¬
fort. Thai\_ are two different values for the blood pressure; 10 L over
68, 112 over 80, 106 over 71, 110 ov^r 73,

Q (Interposing) Wet docs that entry no an, doctor, tho
word, "Zu Schwach"?

A Well, that is because he originally did not want to
undur^o this effort. Please shew no thj black notebook again.

Q Will you kindly twll rhat those words sunn? What is
tho -waning of the words?

A Woli, it is concerned with tho blood pressure. I want
to clarify that by asms of tho black note book.

Q '.'nt do the words "Zu Sohmch* uoan?

A Bocauso origin-lly they were not supposed to subject hia
to an effort Vcause if the blood pressure is taken after a person has
be.n subjected to an effort.

Q (Interposing) What do the words "Zu Schwach" moan? That
is s tuple, is it not?

A That the person who is thirsting and hingry in bed, of
course, has a cort'in weakness in his nusclcs and therefore, first of
all, they did not want to put any pressure on hin — his blood jroscuro
was taken after he first got up, and so forth.

* Tills saco patient on tho 2*'th and on tho 27th of August,
in this case, ho has a tonpornttov rato above normal, does ho?

A les, 37-3 and 37.2 in tanperaturo, but that is not a rise
in tanfcruture in th. sens.. of a sick person.

Cl Ha , on this sa c day, on ehi 23th, did you not find it

rv_Co3G'ry to give this patient cith:r St_rofundin or Strychnine? Tho

-retry wider tho 2'th on chart 3-2 in pencil has been nade illegible.

The a^rd Strychnin* can b^ r.do out if you puruso it closely, and tho

^ord St-rofundin c-n be made out. ' Kow, -.rent did you givu that subject

092,


H Jun-'.3-I2-i;-3card Clnt. Wsrt-nb a r g )

Court So* I.

whos- blood pressure was too w~ak to taka?

A ’be blood la-.ssurc ms 112 ov_r 30* It ms not too work,
f ob- iy .i. also ~ot Sterofundin urobably because ho — that was ad-
ninist-red to hi.-, or. the next day — that to ana t!k interrupting of
the liXpurixnt. If a thirsting person is -iT_n 350 cc'e Sterol undin
intravenously the cxj>.rinont has, of course, been interrupto- 4 .

Q 'tell, you had so:io trouble vith this patient, didn't you?
ertn't his pulso and teeporature ratar erratic?

•* If you oonsider a tcTpurr.fcur- of 37.2 .a strong disturbance
of tunpariture, then I do not know what you would s-y to a person vho
h-s a fever of i,i dogru.s Pont 1 grade* ajr condition of thirst 37.2

occurs. Zxperl-oats have boon described in which the tocp-ratv.ro rent
ov-r 3- up to 39 d-ur-.s Centigrade without e-using any danr.jo.

Q 'ell, on th. 30th of August, tho 31st of August, and on
tho 1st of Sopte.ixir, as indicated on ohart C-2, vo see that tho sub¬
ject ooc-ao rathar cold on you, didn't ho?

A Tho oxpcrln-.ntol sublet bucr o cold? With 36.1i, 36.5,

— if firs- of all you consider 37.2 .a hi'ih Un.^ratur-, th-n 36.5
could not be considorod cold te.Tpemtur-• A bc<ty tenporntuiv of 36,
35.5, is enough for normal teaporaturu.

Q His toaporaturo drop-od down to 35«3» didn't it?

A khoro?

Q Hero*

A - -at ivans tlics two; that is 3 tires 2 ar- 6; 35*6 was
th- lowest tosporaturc.

Q Dooer.'t that indie to th t tho s-ijjc-ct got rather cold?

A That xar.s that tho person res still within the ccopu of
nrr -1 tcaper-trx-j that dc*_s not ^~n anything else.

Q roll, new, the final weight -ntry, which is included

•xider th, 3rd of September, states inro that on tie 11th of Septo J>cr

his w.aght was 62 kilo grans, thpr. that 62 kiloar-eis is written :v.r in

•

-ak rath 51; kilograms. Her do you th t correction?

V29


11 J'—>-! 2 - 12 -;— x;.ard (int. wnrtcnburr)

C::rt Bo» I.

A That can only bo ox;inirv_'* by Buying th-t cpp.nror.tly *.io
r-ocL .a niat&o her-, confused it with mother one. Apparently ho
rc -ist. red tho woicht of cxporinmtal person No. 1, error., ously
narked it on chart No. 2, and thin be corrected it because he noticed
that :» -n error. It is the sreso handwriting — the handwriting

af tho j.dic'.l student Seine fror. arsailles, -hon I ixntinned yvStor-
d'.y, and whou I hav, net seen sinco Soptorber l?i*2i. and I should like
t: a«k you that this nodic-.l student should identify his o:m hnndvritii^
hero.

3 This nodical student obvioi-sly did not put this weight in
on the 11th of Sept.“bar did h_, boeaxeo ho said "un den", no-ning
about the _lth of Sopto- bar his weight vaa that; is that corr ,ct?

4 Jo was n FtvncJr boo who spoke only n few words of Oer.rn,
and probably ho vartod to \irite "on tho ".an deer", because frequently
h. uaod Oerian toms uhichworo r.^oo . not correct.

Q In case he. 1 ho used enly th; vrd "don", didn*t ho?

A At tie cccont I c~.ruvet tell you any aorc v.hy the nv.di¬
c'd- svilor.t, tills Fivnch nodied atudont, t tiro wr^to "in clen".
That is tho tiny it w-s dct.rnincd at that ti:u. ‘..hat reason should
r. have had at that tino to write about.

Q V.’horo did this patient go ofter the 3rd cf Soptytiber?

To tho hospital?

A I did net send any ore of ny oxporinontal subjects to

ti-* hospit-1 oxc_rt No. 9 which cnio up rising the jxvllninrry

p .ri d. Ctl.arTTise -’ll tho cxporir-ontal subjocts renninod with no

fr~r. tho beginning to the ore*.. I had tho fever curves in tho )xpcri-

rx.r.t -1 rear: until tho 11 th or 12th, and then I tock then amy, uxcoyt

far group 2 . They my havo stayed thoro a fow days longer. I lookod

cv_r tho results and wrote tho.. down Th; fever curves wore carried

*cn until tho 3rd regularly, crei f re the 3“’ to tho 12th the te: -.peraturo

-a r.o longar recorded. And or. the lith, probably tho 12th, the final

•oight was determined. That is aha weight which he then carrier as the

■930


11 Jun—; 3—12—!o~rd (Int. ^Tartenburg)

Court S . *.

weight at the tide of discharge. If I had kept the curve longer end
*nlr :;c' tlwa until the 15th, ny vrei'.-ht balnnc- eight have cone ut a
lot better. ^

3 Will you find the weight for us in this bla:k bock? Fer
this So. 2 subject?

A In this black book, as far as I ror«nber, there are no
weights rue rded at all.

Q I aj sorry, your Koncr, the black book does not have the
weights which are indicated on tl» charts.

A It does not show my weights at all. The weights were
not recorded anyvliere else but on those curves.

Q ITell then, on these ch-rts *o see in the last few days
of the experiments, as opposed to the chart of case No. 1, that tho
urinary output is recorded undor the date of the 30th end 31st of August,
is that correct?

A los, that is correct. Tho .cdical oan put it down once
\nd another tiao he didn't — I did not consider tho record of tho
mount of urine on this chrxt so important, bocauso tho mount of
urino had boon marked on the fovor curve.

^ One question, your Honor, will you kindly tell us whether
or not tho urinary output indicated on charts 12 and C2 ~ro rocordod
in the black book?

“ C» the 30th it says hero, 52', that is, 500 is roconkd
here. On tho 2nd, that is not exact; on the 2nd, 60C, on the 31st,

6CO, is nrked h&ra, and thars is nothin , --art r.cc-rdod hero either.

TKS These records having been impounded by tho

Tribunal aust ra.ain in the custody of the representative of the Secret¬
ary Gcrxr-1. If either p~rty wishes to exr.aino thor. during the noon re¬
cess, ho -ay do so in tho presence c: tho Secretary Gencr“l.

Tho Coixt will new be in recess until 1*3C o'clock.

(Thereupon the Court rccoss..• ur.til 1330 hours, 11 June 1-1:7).

• *?31


li June •* 7-.i-.iK-l‘ , -I-Foster-(Brown)


-ourt I


3 - 3510 ;’.

- hj b.-arln 6 reconvened at l’WO hours, 11 Juno 1947.

'•"TT >..i=3n-»L: Persons In the court rooa will please
taid their seat8.

The Tribunal is a~alr. lr. session.

*/!L HJLJ 3-I^LrCGX - He bubo d

cross udttiuujd)

—- PHJSIDJI.'T: The Tribunal bavins reconvened, not jo
th; absence of defendant's counsel, Or. Stolr.bauor.

H.JtOY: ’four Honor, Or. 3tolnbauor la on his way
up to the courtroom. -:o al sunder stool the Tribunal wd
thought this afternoon's session would not bo,;in until
three o'clock.

DH. STJIHB.iUJH: I numbly bos the Tribunal's pardon.

I hod sup^sei that the court would reconvene at three
o'clock. That Is w.;y I was late.

THJ HHJ3IDJ T: Defense counsel beln.; present, counsel
aty proceed.


\vd\


\s\


i


11 Jun-A-i 3-lli-l-Gro s s (Int. 3rown)
Court. :2c. I.


3Y >?.. EIEDY:


Q Dr. 3eiglboeck on chart Ho. 3-2 *2 find under tho date
29 August, the 16th day of tha experiment, an initial on tho side of
the chart "Hr" or "C". Could you explain to us whether that is .an "HP"


or an -;c?


A That Rust bo "HP®. That was tho tino when wo wore looking
for r. hypertonic solution.

Q Tfould you kindly ropoat your ansror. Dr. Bciglboock, ns
to tte earning, of this initial under date of 29 August?

A 'lany cases ware interrupted by drinking end sorao by in-
tr*venous injections 3 rd coco, rg I said before, through a otonach

sourd. This was a hypertonic injection, nasoly, through tho veins.

|

Q 7/o 11, is this tore sort of a puncture?

A Ho, an injection into tho vein.

Q An injection into a vein? Woil, did you jxrfona any

punctur.s?

A Yes.

Q Did you perfon any systornal punctures? Systornal

pu-ctures?

A You seen an occipital pmoturo? 2k>, I can't do thr.t# I
don't know how. Haver did that in y whole lifo nor do I know for rhat
purpose in tiiirst exporironts such .a inct.uv ^rauld have bo-n perf'on.iod.
That would hero be-n sanscloss.

Q Did ycu ptrfoni .any la... nr punctures?

A In individual cas^s in tho sor. water oXf& rirents 3 did
jxrfcm la bar punctures.

Q Did you p-rfcr-_ any liv r punctures?

A T.s.

q Sor, this is C.so Ho. 3, yrur Honor. I will request tho
Tribunr 1 to -.ark these throe charts A-3, 3-3, C-3. How, this C'so hr.

3, Dr. -iglboock, is also a hunger and thdrst cass, is it not?


A Yes.


-933


II «Jun-A.-i3-Hi-2-^Gross (Int. Browr.)
Court So. I.


Q will you kindly read us the nroo of tho axporiaontal sub¬
ject contained in the top l«ft head corner of chart A-3?

A Bornh-rd.

Q Spoil that.

A -To s that is Bernhard.

Q Kindly spoil that for us.

Q Siw, urdor tho 21 August on chart A-3, under tho 3th day
of tho bxporiio.it, does th, .nrkings therein whjro tho Goman words
"Hunger D" appear indicate t >o stato of tto exporiawnt?

A Sire also you ;tust deduce frm tho weights that tho ox-
purirant bog'r. on tho 22. I do know that all tho oxpirironts bogan on
tto 22. I belie vo I recall .*ow that on tho day before, in tho morning,

I wroto derm that there wero to begin hungering and thirsting thoro and
that is why that arrest was undo thoro. 5- »5, thon on tho 23 another
weight, thor. on tho 2l*th nnotter weight, and so on.

Q Tho arrow with thj blu», circle found undor da to of 22
August, thi ?th day cf the oxpcrii-jnt, on chart 3-3, was put on this
chart on- yo-r aftor tha oxpjrinonts wer~ coaplotod?

A As I have already said I put do-in nil these errors whon 1
r.-ovaluatod th-nc curves but I can*t t-11 you when that precise datu
was.

Q 'Jew ::iny d-ys was this ,-arson subjected to huns^r .and
thirst if wc Cfltu-U that th, oxrvi*iaont3 start d on tho 22 as you
alloga?

A The oxp-rlaortt was interrupted on the 8th day.

} On the 3th day? Hew vY.ro do you start to count tho

first day?

A 22. Cn tlw 8th day at noon, at 12:30, starting on tho
22. L-t point out that fro:: tho 25 to thu 27 there is a loss in
--iart of -nir 70C gr -as. This loss •'ccvrs \iien a person hungers aitl--
- vt thirsting. That is certain .-rocf that in th- amti-ce this ox^ri-


11 Jun-A-i B—li—3-Grosa (Int. Srcrai)

Court Ho, I,

acntal subject bed drunk water. On other dr.ys he lost aero then a
kilogma ~.nd on this day 700 grar.s, This is one of those cases where
th. ox.^-ri.-.nt tr 3 disturbed by the subject drinking.

Q Kell, can you asc.rtain fror locking at the section cf
the chart ur'/Lr the block blunt lino in tha middle of the chart and
examining tha vertical red lines which indicate the urinary output that
this subject was getting waU-r to drink?

A You cannot ascertain that fro:: the anount of urino froa
a jx.rson who is thirsting. You can ascertain that fron a person v;ho is
thirsting fron sea water. You c.an*t tell that when a person is thirst¬
ing bocauso at the nooar.t he received water he cbeorba a gr_-.t de'l of
that v-tcr. You ccn see that after tin conclusion of the experiments
whan a .van drank 2 $ lit.rs and only olininated 500 ccn in his urine.

In other words th- subject does not excrete all but absorbs a great
do-1 of it. In this case tha anount of urino is no r^Uabl- prorf for
the fact wtotbOT ho drank or not. How-vor, tho difference in roight
a person who is thirsting loses is a reliable proof. For it is im¬
possible for a person thirsting not to lose weight, bocauso ho has to
olixdnato water hot only through the kidney, but also through tho lungs.
In tho other cacos that w u will cotu to those who normally rocoivod a
good deal to drink and only fastod and got the sane food, they lost

faily 500, UCO, 600, grams find you havo to doduco free that that this

•

nan althcu-h thirsting and fasting, is oliadnating only 100 or 200 cc
of water through his lungs, his Imdn-ya, or his skin. That is imposs¬
ible. This v-n h-rc certainly drank. lie even -dotted it. .i-r^ov^r
it cm r - 'ily be se.n fron the rol-.c- .irhin cf tho red corpuscles.

Tii. r.u.:b.r decs not inert Se from 5,903,LOO that ho had, but decreases
to 5.7 "ad th-n to 5i -iliion arc this is c-rt inly a sign that tho
eloed trm thinned down. That could only eccur if ho consumed fluid.

1 . ell, now, on tho 27 August as indicated on ch-rt 3-3,
that Is the litth day of the -x erLunt and tho 6th d-y that hj was sub¬
jected to lunger and thirst, if we assure that the ccna.rw;.-.t was 22

3935


11 Jun-A-3-li*-ij-Grccs (Int. Brcvr.)
Court So. 1.


of Au : v.et, cr 7th day If »_ cs«u_x; that tho corruact-wnt was 21 of
August, we net- tint the language, or words appear "Zu sciwach" at
the bottom her- in lino 5, which indie-tea that tho blood pressure'
was too soak to toko* New, that appears under 27 August, under 25 Aug¬
ust, under 29 August, and continually .through tho oxturiTjat. Mow,
what does that a-an?

A At first in tho pr el Lin-ary period tho blood pressuro
was talcon while ti» patient wr.s lying derm. Those arc tho records you
have there. Thon it was taken acc'rc&ng to stress. That is known as
tho stress uaasuro of blood areasur-. For this purpose tho oxpori-
ncntal subject has to novo, tc trko oxercis-. Usually lot hire do knoo
oxcrcis-s, bonding his kno.s. Her’, I told tho doctors that if tho
nuscles bocr.ao dried out, giving cart-in vaaknoss in the r.uscloa
thich was to bo oxpoctod in th. c-so of thirsting, should not bo givon
tho stress uonsuro cf blood pressure but their blood pressure should
be taken only hilo lying down. Tnat is uh t tlw words "too vo-ak"
socn. Tot weak to do oxorcisu. Tho van who wrote this d«m was a
Fronchrv-n and if he had kno*n that tills would bocona c matter of dis¬
cussion in a trial perhape ho wouldn't have oheson this oxcroscion.

It siaply aaans taken whjn lying down -nd nftor exerciso. This young
colleague was not crv. of thcco who liked to work vory much and conseq¬
uently ho w sn*t too careful in what torcinol-gy ho chos-.


11 ihn—A-?9—l5-l->\nrrxwr (int. Brawn)
Court Ho. I.


Q Then, those entries of "too weak* vxvlow «. <*o» 27 th,
28th, 29, 30th and 31at of t, do not iadi«^te tfa-’t tho ruhjoct is

ill?

A This is Case 3, I so~* Ho hed so-w intestinal dif .'icult-
ies. This experimental subject, I rc:ic:bor now,..

Q (Interrupting) *ould you kindly repeat your answer to
that last question, Dr. 3ciglboeck, and at this tiro, Your Honor, I
roqixst tho interpreter in English to spo.ak louder because I havo dif¬
ficulty hoarin& tho English over tho voice of Dr, Bciglbocck,

A Cm I go on? In this case, after the experiment was in¬
terrupted, tto um had intestinal troubles in the forr. of a selling
ot tin nbdonon. For a long tins, ho had not eliminated any solid
waste .material *nd eo ho had acno pains and, for that reason, ho was
?ivon strychnirM in order to sturt his bouols moving again.

3 Ifoll, Doctor, did tho ontrios "too wook" under tho 27th
of August indicate that ttoro should be enuso for worry about this
petiont’s condition?

A !ihon a p;raon is thirsting his rusculaturo goos through
a certain change. There is no cause for concorn, naaoly, tho nuscL.B
becooo weak bocauso the nusclcs aro dried out. That is no cause for
concorn, as hj has perfectly norai-.l toaporcturo and pulse.- It is n
wuaknoss in tho muscles brought about by tho fact that tho uusclos
havo boon dehydrated because tha ran is thirsting. If you thirst for
several days, tho muscles will greatly change. Thjy become. hard and

there is a certain debility in thee.

4 Ev-n aft^r thos„ symptoms appeared you continued to keep
hia on tho hunger anJ thirst oxpcriixint until two days later, isn»t
that correct?

A This effect on the muscles is brought about by tho thirst.
This is one of tho symptoms of thirst. You do not havo a thirst con¬
dition unless you havo this, symptom. -There is nothing dangerous in it.
There is only one dangerous situation that can arise in a tnirat ox-


II 15-2 -Harrow (Int. 3rowr.)

Court Sc, I.


perinorrt and that is the ccocnt whan the body has lost noru than a
ccrt-ir. porcantago of its boc*r ilothing else is of any inport-

onco or danger*

Q toll then, do you maintain that these aarks "too weak*
indicate that, because of thj lack of water, the patient was unablo
to get out of bed?

A That acana tfc*.t tho muscles had given up water. That is
a typical syuptoo of thirst.

Q toll, what would be nocossary to take th* blood proesuro
of a patient in such o condition as that? Couldn't that bo t.akon
under any circuaatancos?

A I did not get that.

q Couldn't the blood pressure of n parson in r. condition
as set forth in Chart B-3 und^r tho date 2?th of .lUtpiat, tho liith ox-
pcriwntal day, couldn't that blood pressure bo takon under any cir¬
cumstances, or was it necessary to say "too weal:" to take tho blood
pressure?

A Tho blood p-ossuro has b-.n regularly rwasurod hero whan
tho nan was lying down. If you ■oasuro blood assure after tho person
has exercised - ha has to go through sene movements to take this oxur-
cise,and, since I didn't want those non. If they woro already having
difficulties with their muscles, to go through oxorciso, I told then
*So won't have you got up any noro. ho'U noasure your blood pressure
only when you are lying down." This doos not wan that wo stoppod
taking thoir blood pressure. -This was a difforont nothod of taking
itj to wit, whon tho can is lying down and not after ho has gono
through exercise.

q toll, in scientific recordings of experiments whon you
•ax* recording blood presto isn't usually tho first blood press.oro
the blood pressure of tho person rhile lying dom, tad tta second blood
pressure is while n person is standing, tad than n third entry would
bo node for blood pressure after erorcine? Isn't that custouory?


C933


11 Jun-A-lS-lS-3-Karr cm (Inti 3rf*m)

Court ICo. I.

A Tho custon is that you tako a first neasurcixnt whon tho
=an is lying down and then after novoaoiit. There ire various methods,
but the important thing is to ascertain the change in blood pressure
that occurs betwe-n nuasuring it whon tho n:n is lying down end when
he has oxercisod. This is the typical is^thod.

$ How, on Chart 3-3, under the dr.to 28 august, tho 15th day
of the experirant, would you kindly explain to tho Tribxnal just what
those four entrios neon? One with 350 cc, 150 cc, 1*0 cc, etc,, of
various drains? Would you explain o.ach ono of those entries, plo-aao?

A This entry belongs to tho next day. This is tho fluid
that was usod whon tho exporinont was interrupted. Tho intravonoous
injections.

q Well, why didn't you plsco that entry under tho noxt day
rathor than place it under tho dato 28 August?

A That is a question I should havo to ask tho ncdic r/ho
made tho entry. This arrow obviously ao ans that tho experiment was in¬
terrupted and any introduction of fluid was -n interruption of tho ox-
periront. I suppose that so no ono first on to red tho urino horu and
then tho noxt person could not find sonco for his entry in tho propor
placo. That is something I know vory well at tho tiro boc.auso it is
cloar that tho interruption - it is perfectly cloar that tho introduc¬
tion of this fluid into tho person noant that the experiment was in¬
terrupted. That the interruption actually occurred is evidont fron tho
weights.

Q Tfoll thon, this entry in pencil, under tho 28th of August,
on Chart 3-3, indicates that this subject was j^iven 250 cc of stcro-
fundin, ICO cc of saline, UO cc of glucose and 1 cc of kolanino, is
that correct?

A Yos.

q Weill you explain to tho Tribunal Just what kolctiino is?

A Kolrxd.no is a circulation stirulant.

q That is, a heart stiiulant?


11 Jun-.'»-. E-15-k-torrcw (int. Broim)
Court Sc. I.


A A drug that affects tho circulation, not tho heart! I
usually gave circulation drugs Then intorrupting the experiment not bo-
causa it was nocossary but because tho heart had tho rate fore boon workf*
ing under different conditions. You can boo that tho pulse sinks hero*

In other wes-ds, ttore were eases of thirsting and fasting - as wo knew
also free fasting euros - whc.ro tho puls a and circulation is consider¬
ably slowed down. If ho received fluid, all of a suddon tho amount of
tho blood in tto body is chrngod, Thirst loads to a reduction in tho
ar.ount of blood, and in order to nako this sudden change core tolerable
to the heart I introduced occasionally this drug to offoct tho circula¬
tion, as you will see freu rv-ny graphs. That was not any part of tho
treatment, but a prophylaxis,

CJ Woll now, we notice hero, on tho date of 30th of Juno, on
Chart C-3, a cot^sidorablo riso in temperature curvo is continued for a
poriod of four days. Ttat is, tto 30th of August, 31at of August, and
tho first and socond days of UDptc-bor, and tho continued adninistration
of strychnine to tho cubjoct.

A I told you why that was. This nan had an intostinal dis-
ordor, and a nan who has not go no to tho lavatory for many days, if ho
suddenly dove.lope o swelling in tho nbdooon, you aust assume that ho
is having difficulties with his digestion. Strychnino was simply given
hin as a tonic. His temperature oaxirasa is 37.8, thon it goes down to
.2 and up again to *U. 37.3 is an inert-aso in tomporaturo which would
net bo mentioned in any text book as a stato of fever.

Q Hall now, on tho 3rd of Soptenbar, tho last dey of re¬
cording, which is indicated on Chart C-3, wo note a considerable drop in
the toajoraturc of the patient. TTrs that drop a fatal ono?

A This drop could r»t have been fatal because it was follow¬
ed by a subsequent rise. It seldom happens that a dying person's ton-
peraturo rises. That is almost impossible-.

Q Hell, ia this case of Bernhard ono of your most trouble-

I

some cnos7


11 Jun-A—1C-15-5-Karrow (Int. 3rcwn)
Court So, I.


A Ho was one of the few cose a that had a c explication is
so far ca ho tad this difficulty with his .abdooen* Then, I had the
t*c cases with tho cuaculnr crTipe. That was in Crise 1 ^ and then
another one will turn up later. Tou oa*t sporJc of this as n serious
or difficult case.

Q Lot's look at Case OS for tho accent.

If your Honors ploaso, I request that those throe charts bo

narked A-5", *8-5, and "C-5".

New, could you kindly toll us tho nano of that oxpjrirontal

subject?

A That 1 can't toll you.

Q Has there been an orasuro in that document in tho space,,,
A las, but certainly not by no. That is a handwriting that
I do not roco^niso.


11 June 47-A-JjC-16-l_''.*loy (Int., 3rcwn)
Court S


I

<% Could t>mt naae be C-ett, G-e-t-*?

* That could be P-e-fc, cr it coal* be F-e-t-x, but so far
 I rt-c-tcr we did not have *nj subject by that n»«.

S, Io that y«ur hundwtitlng?

A So.

I* that your handwriting of vhlch the lsrpres-ion le legible
bcrcath the hanA*r‘51ng you deny to be yours?

A Ho, that Isn’t either.

. Do yeu know whether or not th*t document has been altered
heri In Sumbcrg?

A Certainly not by ne.

S Did your defense counsel alter ItT

A I on convinced that he did not.

S i*cv under the 2?th of August ©a Chart 3-5 wo note a pcncillod
notation which hao been crossed out in blue pencil, do you see that?

A Too.

-hat appears there prior to that crossing out In blue?

A Acetone positive.

\ Eld you perfora a liver puncture on this c»sc V?

A Ho.

«i Under t*c entry 32 August cn Chart 3-5 the red arrow with
the blue circle at the end thereof, docs that lsdicato the beginning
of the amcriaent?

A Te..

Vi Did you placo that nark in there at the tine of the experi¬
ments «t Dachau or at some later date?

A I have already told you that I put d~vn all of these marks
when I evaluated the experiments. They w c r\ all put down later.

<% »ow, the nark under the dptc 2lst of August on Chart
cn the 6th day wr.s put In at the tlae of the experiment at Dachau,

Is that correct, under “I f, rnd the arrow?


3%2


11 June -7—s—i jC-lS-2-Kaloy (1st., 3rcwn(

Court i


A It 1* the icsc la every ease. i-rory experiment began on the
22n J of August. That can be teen very clearly froa the vcighte. .1
c»n only ccntlnu. to reiterate what I have said, on the day before I
determined who would hunger ar.d thirot, who w 0 uld get swa water, etc.
and that indicates that the experiment would begin oa the following

d*y.

^ 5*-ca if ar expert locked at thl« and did act eoneult tho
weights he would think the rxccri-.cnt began or. tho 6th day, tho 3let
of 1-guet, "ad then you changed y-jur nlnd aad began or the 22 nd —
there are two na-ka Indicating the beria-.ing of tho experiment?

a Avery tpeclaliet would lo k, first of *11 at the weights,
otherwise ha wouldn't be a specialist.

a Lets turn to Bo. VI. ■HI the Tribunal kindly nark theeo
a, B, and C. a — Let a* try regarding ca 0 e five that thcro lo a change
In weight froa cnc A y to the other whero a man loeco only 200 grant
in one dry. k< too then autt have drunk water.

‘dould y u kindly notice Sheet a_*>, the section whore the names
should appear and tell ue whether or not t* t nan hat been craood?
a I can't toll for cure.

\ ^ell, is it eustcrary to sake cut r tet of charts on r pa¬
tient ard not put his nane cr. anyone of the throe charte you nade rut?
a I didn't u-.derotand.

S, Bid you customarily In the course of your experiment c-spllc
data on a specific Individual »rd not put *hc -craon't name on tho
charts that pertain to that particular croc?

A The nase of course, is entirely ur.l-pcrta-'t.

*t la it ntt obvious to you the na-«. rr.ee apporred on this
chart a-A, p-d hat beer orated; nay I suggest to you that tho nano w^i
Schakowikl?

A I can't read anythin.- here.

\ Bo you see the cr< sure th« re ?

* I can't be sure that I do.


11 June S7_JJjC-16-3-Maloy (Xat., Brown)

Court 2

H Did you erase the nm off the no dvrta of tfe<- 4h *peri-
aentfl person!

a I ermd no n*acs wt *11.

Did defence Stur-sel tell you tlvt he erased then !

A So.

% Ten cover talked to your defence councel About the erasure
of voi ■ In these charts?

* So.

<* Ccoe So. 7, — If your Honors win kindly rark thoco A.B.C,

*nd D. How, I cell your attention to ehnrt a- 7, could you kindly tell
us whether or not the rat h»c beer. erased froa this chrrt, the erasure
th«re 1« obvious, Isn't It!

A It w-uld so«n so, VCS.

H Do ye u know who erased th*t waet

A So.

% Oar experts fc»*vs found thut the first three lcttvrs thrt
hvo been erased there ny possibly h*ve bocn the letters does

tVt help yur rtnc-ibrancc to tell us wh*. this cxperlexntM. oubjoct
we!

A 2 ern see ps "D* here f<-r certain. The other letters I
n t so suro *f.

K Tcu cannot recall looking tt th»t err sure juot who the cx-
pcric-ntel subject wrs, c^r. y,u!

a So.

s. This erso So. 711 is this the first CP so of pers ns given
Schaefer wptcr t' drink!

a Tcs.

i* And h w long did t v ls rerson drink Schaefer w*ter!

A I estl-.»to 13 d-rs.

s. He drank Schaefer wrtcr then fra the 21st -r 22nd of August!

A Iron there m.

J9W*


11 Jure *7-k-JjC-l6-4-JGaoy (lot.. 3rown)
Court I


S. If he drank It frota the t§nd of »««->•*< 4 ^ ^
for the urinary output registered on the 23m., or *-Ud It he ywl
to record a urinary output on the day >oji began yo«r mtci«-*^
a. Troa the dav on when the experiment began the amounts of
urine were set down.

t* Then If you began the experloent on the 22 nd then you would
Irnediately start collecting the urine of the yorosn upon whoa you
were experimenting, and Isn't It a:re likely that this experiment beg.
gr n on the 2let as indicated by your own rod notation on chart a-VII
under the d-tc 3lot?

A The mounts f urine were norsurod for a few days previous¬
ly in rll the cages. I simply had then written down here as a ba¬
lance. 3ef re the Intake was free there was not much point In mea¬
suring the fluids r urine bef- re the aa-unte were strictly aca-
ur. d and calculated. Corsccucntly, tho urine was measured roughly
from the 16th "H.

S. ao Z correct in my urderstanding that when a person is sub¬
jected to exclusively seawater to drink that the urinary 'utput will
exceed the Intake, disregarding this chart?

a Then if seawater is c*nsumed the elimination of urino is
grirtor th«n the consumption of water, but if y u havo different food,
if that is what y-u -.can, p> rhrps then anyone ho i suddenly given
leso t- eat, and t^sc people vere taken fr m 3000 cal- Ties down to
emergene 7 see rations, “ny translti-n to fasting or e rt of fasting
cure is ass'-cintcd with elimination f wrtcr.

fell, isn't It possible In tho first Instnr.co the sc-water
that y-u applied the Schaefer method t- was impure, that lo Schaefer
netted hadn't been applied c-'rrcctly, and that aec'unt* f-r tho
excessive urinary output on the 22r.d, 't this case 3-VI1?


C9/*5


U-A-Sr-17-l-Keehen (I-t. Srawn)
C curt ”o. 1


X Llternture oa frating throughout the whole vorU # owyiata

to -,CCC urges ct lerst, vill readily nrove to you thrt ra 600a re
° person is receiving too little food, there la r vest increreo in
the eljninrtioa o- vrter ^-".d thrt It hrd nothin* to do with incorrect
handling of the aer water by the Schrefer netted. The fret that the
Schaefer water la la order can be seen froc the fret that the urine
extrreted la core than the water drunk rad the mount loot through
the akin end lunga. It ie node son nr eat In the urine, e« courae, corw-
acquently the figures ahow here core water w«* conauacd then wna
elinio-ted in the urine. If you ert food, which la rather lrrge in
arl* ooatenta, euch aa theae peoule received in their orellalnrry food
-ad then you feed to thcc aer rrtion cctrgency er liber,food, then thia
Mount of a* It la uaod up. 7 hrt ia ra iron lnv. Then, for thia
reraon the bod;/ aust ellclnrte aose aore vrtcr.

^ Kow, I interestingly note, Doctor, thrt thia cxperiaent continued
until the third dry of Scntesbcr rnd then you continued to obaervo
thia subject until the 12th or 13th dry of Senttabcr; how do you
crplrin the fret thrt you obaervod thia subject until the 13th day
of Scptecber rnd indl cotcd your obaorvrtioaa on chrrta C rnd £-7 rnd
did not obatrve the hunger rnd thirat grouo rny longer until tho third
dry of Stptccber; wra that bacruae the onca using or drinking the
Schrefer vrtcr aurvlvcd?

A I ern readily «xol.*4n thrt to you why thrt vr 6 done. When thia
experinent-1 group w««a atlll in the exptrlncnt with Schrefer vrtor,
nracly on the lot of Senteaber, the eeeond rroun hrd rlrerdy begun
lta corlea with aer wrter rr.d those who were atlll in the cxoerinentel
atrtc hrd tbo&r ttaperpturea trken, wherera those who hrd finished
the experiaeat no longer wer» h-"ving their tespen*ture trie on, they were
not on the bed but elren.dy on the trblc. T hen, core or leaa by
nrediction, thia toaperrture wrtch wra continued on the chrrta here.
The aer aurecr-nts of teeperrture -nd pulse were not continued bccruse
it vould hrve cerat a greet deni of work.


*» € ll-Jr-Bl-17-^efcra (Sat. Brown)

C ourt ?o. 1

X Tti.!« no- the ch*rt of subject eight; would Tour Honor, kindly
=»rie those A.B.C, end D.

To-, on °hart A--c, under drte 21 a u^ust, the eighth dry of the
ob.errr.ticn*, -e note thrt you here inserted that thin person was to
be subjected to the Sch-efer —ter snd then the arrks indicating thrt
here been crossed out in red pencil; vhen did you «coke those corrections?

X these corrections were cede In Dcchau, This was an expcrlncnt'l
subject who had diarrhea on the loth. In other words, a catarreh of
the intestines, thus I oostnoned beginning the exoeriacats on hin until
hi. weight wr.s in order. At first he weighed 51.5 ktlogrras, then
rftar two dry. of diarrhea, he lost soac weight, he thrn recovered it
and attained a t of 53.? Wlogrms. In other -orde, he gtined nore
weight than he had rt the beginning. This is r. definite indication thr.t
the intestine 1 infiuensr he had, fcod been corrected, and then he started
on ths Schaefer cxrcriscnt.

' V ell, when were these three Barkings ardc with the red and blue
pencil aade on the 21,22 end 2 J of Augu-. let us treat with tho 2 Pnd
of August, that is tho red arrow with the black circle at tho end there
which has bt»,n stricken out with the red pmdl; vhen did you arkc thio
line?

A This change fro? the 21st to the 23rd wn B C ado in Dachau. V hen I
-ooked theso drafts over I possibly thought tho experiaont begrn on tho
'2nd and then 2 saw ay error so I crossed out the nark and aoved it

over.

' V hen did you sake the clussy attract to erase the lines ndc ing a.
urine output on the 22nd in Chart B-S?

A I did not erase thr.t, thrt is not erased rt all.

\ I think you will find thrt our experts win B t-tc that is an erasure
there, Doctor?

A It looked to-36 as if there vrs soactrine sticky there, as if
sonething stuck to that p-rt of the prper.

V Wouldn't it here been feasible th->t you atteapted to erase the red


Jine l^i-3S-17-M(?*hpa (latj 3roVn)

Court To. 1

line la order to eoncerl see-vrter ecceorptlon oa the 22 nd?

A If I hrd erased here, I would not have erreed the line In the
riddle of - Use. Ih.-t vould rtrlly have been eort of stupid n I
would hcvt begun at the beginning to erase the line. I vould not
erase r piece out of the nlddls of the line ce that would be eooewhrt
sore or less stupid.

^ "hrt Is questionable whether you vould start at the beginning of
the line or In the nlddle of the line; nt ray rate It Is obvious fron
this docucent, Tour Honors, that soneonc attenpted to erase the red
line cad seeing the erasure would hevc been lopoeslble, then stopped,

A I na absolutely sure that there vns soaething stlclcy which fell
on the piece of prper ml for thnt recson the red line did not trice on
the piper, that is why it looks rs though it vrs erased, soncthlng like
rubber or sonethin: sticky fell oa the piper, naybe it was food.

TKZ P“ZSICSTC: V ltncss, the blue line of the drgft is nloo Biasing
as well as the red.

n-3 VITTZSSI It tfess to sc th-t eoacthing fell on the piper hero.

TH2 ?F3SIXri: Sir question v« # that the blue line of the draft is
r.iso slating; prrt of It, Is it not?

7S2 vniGSSt You sera this one? Yes, all the lines nro broker, off
or interrupted here. Soaethlnr fell on It, you can see r larger
spot 1« discolored on the paper. Soar thing fell or. the prper. I
think that when they were pasting the tables together or sonething,
sone of the patto fell on It; that is whrt It looks like to ae. You
cm see very clearly that the continuation of the lines Is there.

3Y 12. EASCYl

\ V e will turn now to Case So. 9, Your Honor, kindly aark those.
Tow, this is the case, Is It not, of the cxp^rlacnt subject whe
obviously was too 111 to undergo the enperlaente, hence you dlsaieoed
hint

A This Is rn crperiafr.trl subject who hrd diarrhea on the loth and
on the 2 Cth hrd bronchitis with r bronchial pneunonir heart; that vrs


^i-A-It-17-Wefcta (1st. 2r©vn)
Co-art To. 1


3- 'ceurete cese of illnea*. Thle la experineatrl subject Q.

^ This la tfct eeae of the Kettbach boy, ien't it?

1 Tee.

\ faa that tlx eubjeet the*, you rttezptei to cell here *b . vitneeel

A T*e.

% And ht did not have to undergo the drinking of aer-wr.ter in jour
experluenta, did he?

A But, he arv than.

\ Yh-t hrppctxod to his efter h* hid been drotrocd on the eighth dejr;
did he et'„ll atey i»t the rxperinentrl etetion?

A Ho hrd ^relative there vho visited bin ell the tine nnd he wpb
trrnsforred to the hospital.

^ He wra transferred to the hospital on the eighth Aryl

A Tea.

^ > hila atill ccrirlng c tonperrturc considerably higher than

nornrlt

a At that tine wher transferred he had n temperature of 39 dogrcea
centlgrrdc.


11 Jure-A-JP-18-1 -?riaea u (let. Brown)

C-urt I

*3» HtRDYi I turn n w to Case So. 11 , Ycur H-nr-r. If you will
kindly nark those.

7r3 PS53ID2:7« Take those, Ur. Hardy, and plaoe then in order.

UR. HARDY* This, your Honor, is the first sheet. Just a moment —
BY MR. HfaRDYi

Q. Sew, this Case So. 11 is the first ease wherain wo note that
the experimental subject was used co two tccoeione. Is that oorroot.

Dr. Beiglboeok?

A. Yes.

How, whet was the purpose of subjecting this man to drinking
sea weter for a period of seven days and then torninating the experiment
with tho lapse of five days -»rd then putting hin book ro sou water for
a poriod of five mere days?

A. This can had drmk fresh water several tines. From tho 2Uth
to tho 25 th ho lost only five hwdred grans weight. Although ho was
fasting and was lotlng weight ho only lost five hind red grams weight.
That is a sure indiooti n that ho drank water. Also free tho 2oth
to the 27 th ho cnly lost fivo hundred grans weight olthough at this
tino ho sfrould hove lost th t nuoh through tho Iddnoy alone. In
ether words, this would noon that ho didn't loso any weight at all
fren fasting and didn't lose any through perspiration or through the
lw\gs. In other words, it is perfectly dorr that he drank fresh water
and for this roaa n the oxporinont was usoloss, so what happened hero
was thot for a few doys he drank fresh wator and then ho bogan tho
ex-orinor.t oil over '■gain.

(*, bid ho revolintoer to be resubjootod to sea wntor experiments?
This is a case of a nan drinking plain sea wator, isn't it?

A. Yea, and he did rovolmtocr.
ti. ..-d after having drank water and ohectod on tho experiments
during tho first seven days he then revcluntoored and ollcwred you to
subject him to further experimentation although ho foind out it was
very distasteful and ir.o:=fortcblo?


2950


11 Jiro-A-J?-ie-2-?riaocu (Int. Brown)
Court I


A. I here slroady told you that ho did that in order to got thoao
cigarettes I ner.tior.od.

W. Oh, then after ha hod oheated you offered oigarottoa to hin so
that ho would ocr.tiauo tho oxoorirsr.tt

A. -her. I oeught hin drinking I told hia thr.t ho would got no
oigerettoa and thon ho ease to no and later eaid ho wantod to do an
axporicer.t again.

<*. Can you toll us tho ncao of that aubjeott Look ovor thoao throe
oha rta and aoo if you oon aoe any ©rasuroa thoroof — that ia, up In
tho accticn whoro tho nano should appoar. Can you aoo on ohnrt. No,

Cl1 tho nano, Siogfriod Sohnidt, whioh hoa boon orcaodt

A. Yoa, that's poaaiblo. *oa.

••ho oraaed that caaof
•4. I don't know. I didn't.

W. Do you know whether your dofcr.oo oounaol oroaod itt
sj». I an y-ro ho did not.

Ahat would bo tho purpoao *.n erasing tho naroa of thoao oha rta;

dootcrl

A. If I roaenbor oorrootly, wo wjrc to oroac ell tho names ot
that tir.o. I think wo woro tol<* thon that wo woro to uao no naraos.

Q, la it poaaiblo that that r.on'a nano wna ornaod boonuso ho
was later oxtoralcatod, ao that ho wouldn't talk?

A, *ho sc fovor graphs at the ond of tho oxporinont I took away
from D^ohou with no. I rot urn od tho oxporinontal aubjoots xmdor tho
oor.ditiona that I Haro alroady doocribod to you with tho roquuat that
thoy bo troated aa oorvalosocnte for a faw day* Pn d that thoy roaoivo
tho additional rations prccieod. That any of tho scoots woro annihilat¬
ed, that 1 oensidorod cut of tho quo at', on, at lcaat in oenneotion with
ry experiments. Of gouts-, I ocr.'t toll youwhot happanod to tho
sub jo ota later when I was no Ion; or in Dooheu. That I oannot toll y n u
but it ia auro that no experimental subjects hod to be annihilated
because of ay experiments.


11 Jic a» * -J P-18-3~Prlaoaq (Ir.t, Brcac)

Court I

Q. Do you know whothor cr not tho noses he'* boon orasod when you
had theso docmonts in your custody here ot the Furnborg jail in
January?

i.. I didn't hero then in sy o us tody in January. I sot thos only
at Easter. I hove already told you thct. I didn't pay any cttor.tion
to tho nanus. I ainply looted at the woi-hts.

k. You nean you didn't pcy any attention to tho nemos of tho
ai&jocts?

A. Ho, I didn't beoauso 1 had tho naaoa in tho blaok booklet

anyway.

Q. Of oourso, they aro not in tho blaok book any noro.

a. That ia ao.

DR. STEllBJtUSRi Boocuso I haws tho oovor, Ur, Hardy, and you nro
not goinr to get it oithor.

lffl. HaRDYi Boforu I proooed to tho next oaao do youwiah to
adjourn ir.til tho aftornoon roooast I am 2 oi "i t0 prooood r.nw to oaao
Be. 13, your Hcnor.

THE FBBSIDBKTs That is tho next ohort?

UR. HaRDY l Yea.

THE P&SSXDSKIi Wo will proooed with ono noro.

BY UR. HaRDY i

Q. Has tho none boon orcsod fron this ohertt

I don't bolievj that th«ro was a r.aao, caly on tho last ti-« —
it would havo boon on the first chart.

ft. !a it truo thct t v :s experimental subloot was alto interrupted,
th'.t ho drank soo we tor for o period of sovon days, than was intorruptod,
thon drank soa water again for B °* rivo or 9ix dt -y 8 » and in tho

first instance drank fivo h<cdred oo's and in tho scoond Instcnoo drank
ono thous nd oo's?

A. Th* s subject fr-a tho 2uth to tho 25th, cnly loot a hundred
grass weight. It orn easily bo seen fro- this ihzt or. that day ho dr-nk
-t least a liter of wator. Trca tho 2 ?th to tho 26 th ho lost throe


0952


11 J'XiG-A-Jr-16-4-Frinsc.u (Int. 9rcwr.)
Ccurt I


bmdrcd grans. Fror. this you oan a-o for oortain thot ho drank at loost
a half of a liter cf fresh water. In othor words, for practically throo
deya this a an wesn't in tho cxroriront at all for all practical pur¬
poses. For that roasoc I lot tho car. oor.tinuo to drink and 1 proved
to hin thot ho had drvek. Then ho applied ora in.

W. You offerod hie oigeroatos if ho would go through furthor
oxgerinontst

a. I didn't offer thus oignrottes for that rocaon. I told him
thot ho wus net going to got any oignrottos booouso ho had drimk. Thon
ho said, "I went tho oigarottoa anyway and I apply again."

. Of oourso, ho ohoutoc onod end you now woro going to lot him
try ogain and you didn't know who tho r ho would ohont tho sooond tino.

How did you dooido whothor ho was ohor.ting tho aooond timoT la this
ono of tlio pntionta you tiod to tho bodt

I didn't tio anybody to any bod. In the aooond uxporimont
ho also drank. Hero you oar. sco tho gradual loss of woight. You oan
sou fr - that gradual Iocs that ho didn't carry out tho aooond oxnorimont
oithor in a rropor way.

Q. !«ow, th- dato "7 3ontorbor" on Chart D13, wo noto tho rod
arrow indie.ting interruption :Jid tho initials thorouiv.’or in bluo
gonoil "L.P." uhat does that rofor tot

A. That no-ns liver functuro.

(». i.hrt rae the purpoao of tho livor punoturo in this instanoo?

t ., I hr.vo already told y u that Sppingcr nskod mo to nako livor
pmoturos.

<*. *i.hy did you -nly fcllrw th‘a ontiont for n poriod of four
days; that is, the 0th, <?th t 10th, 11th and 12th, porhars, of So r tonbor
aftor having sub‘coted hin to soa w'tcr for suoh on extended poriod
cf time when you follcwod tho rrtionts th t :r-r.k ^uat plain Sohoofur
water fer c period of six or eight days?

-953


11 Jur.c-..-GJ-19-l-3card-( 3r to)- •

Crurt 1

/v I have alrca'.y said that these curve* Were c ntinuoi in
crnne-cti n with all the ther curv-s. The curves f r the sec n* -rcuj
t which this nan, ef c urse, hcl r.*s *ere c ntinuo * t the 12th .r 13tn
'{ Septesf cr, and since that Schaefer r u/ was still in the ax.-^rinent
when this series c an -n the 1st r 3r cf St. teahor, an’ since the
charts won. still ban in .n the c! they also wer- c ntinued. This nan
went up tc 61 kil.s, th u'h when h- was taken in it was 57.5; that is
a clear in icati-n that he suffered n injuries; if n« had Vocn injured
he w uld n -1 have >cen released with a Wei ht hi her when he entered
th- ex.wrijxnt. This can c nducUd ' th ex^erin-nts pc.rly. -rank
sc nuch fresh wat r that ne cl ht Just as w-11 hav- tr.r wn these rec.rds
-f his away. This was n experiaent at all.

w .'J w, 1 n tice that this . otient r subject us-whose none
has eon erased was 20 years a c. Di! yu hav- thv writt-n c nsent f •
his .arents t _'cri ro a liv.r juncture? Di: y u have the written c. n-
sent f his parents U rf .ra this cu hie:

.. Wc, I .ii n t. Y u n t ask any’ y in the /chrmcht;
n ’ y is aske in the itoich la*rr Service r in the .ehrcacht. Mo 10
y-ar el » y when in’uote ' int the ..ray is asked if he wants toe. If
a can is a s.l’-ier an' is in ressin nec rf an p-rati«n, the parents
are n-t aske 1 whether it can 'e carrie. rut. If you wait until that hap¬
pens the can w.ul r •a* ly ’ie in the coanttao.

W -as this y in th- ..ray?

.. . ssi* ly he was ne if the soldiers — f.rnacr s Idlers.

HolvDl: This is a . ‘ r«.ak, T ur Hen r.

JUDG- SE'HltU: I want t -.3k a f-w queSti ns.

BY JUDGd S&S&I/Kr:

Q 0 ct r, in c nn.cti n with the sea water x rinents, what
is th- ru Se cf aakir. liv-r ;unctur-s?

.. In s c- f thes- cases it was se-n that after flui ’ was

4

a ain taken ir.t tho ’ y the liver ' ccace s .cewhat enlar . . In ay


^956


11 June -..—j J-19-2-rear'-(cr im)-
Ccurt 1

-pinicn that re suite! free the fact that s-ao f the. salt fren the sea'-
water r_=aine.‘ in th_ liver, an that the enlarccent f the liver,

*hich alsr happens when a lar. ^ an cunt f fluid is injecte’-ut is
ver>- sens ry, in this c-so because _f the r-si iun f salt in the
liv.rlasteJ fer s'.acwhat l:n cr tie-. .,n , wh_n Lapin .r was there he
saw that th« liv.r ha ^cc a- enlar. od, an 1 askc ’ himself what the
cause -f that cifht *x; and h. s-.iJ, Jc tak. a 1 : k intc this and make
a fon punctures sc we can fin ut nh^th-r scacthin. cf a athrliical
nature has rutaino! in the liver. 0

W What is the technique or procedure f r nakin a liver

puncture?

.. "j-crc is a Icccl .nncstncsla a-'lninistorei in thu area f
the liv.r anl a nee le Is inserted inte tho liv_r s n part f the liv r
is suckwl lnt the hy.. r'-nic nc. :ie an' that c nclu’es the -uncturo.

It ai. ht ’ - c a., are with a ’* r.e .narrow .uncturo.

4 df y u ex lain t^ th*. -r -ri-ental su'Jeet that y.u were
in t nake a liv.r puncture?

.» fee, I ’iI -'-1 hit. that 1 wanto.’ t make a juncture;

I t 1" hi. ho w uli feel nc ,-ain; I t 1 him n.thin w ul’ happen t'
hia. Then I -Ve then th„ 1 c l anesthesia. This is an ./ernti n that
can ’ . oirrio! ut in Just a few minutes. : st -f the t me is use;!
in waitin fer this 1 cal anesthesia t- take eff.ct. The uncturin
taks. loss than a aimite.

T . -SII.-TT: The Tri’ ujuI will n w ' . in recess f r .a few

minutes.

(Thcrcu; n a recess w_s tak.n).


■9 55


11 JUne 17-..-,.TD-2 1—21Carrow (Int. Tfartcrberj)

Court He. 1

If*.— '.^SHuLt Persons in tho court rooa will ploaso fin - ’ t&a±r

The Tribunal is a^-in in session.

5? !fi. BUBTs

: 'o "i 11 new proear! to Case ill. Tour Honors. Kindly nark thoso
A-ll, 3-11, an! C-ll, Also attache! to Case #11 is this rdcroflln of
curves. Prcfossor Boirlboock, will you toll us wtat this nicrofiln
purports to bo?

A That is an electro cardiograph. It is not tho one of Caao 11, but
apparently it only slipFod in thoro orronoously, but it is tho oloctro-
car Sio^roa of Case 9.

Q Thank you.

!fcw, in this Caso #11 wo note, on tho 27th, or on Chart B-U,
conaidarablo riso in tenporaturo, an', then, on tho 29th, an oxcoptioml
riso in tenporaturo. *'culd you toll us. Dr. Boi lboock, whothor or not
this was ono of tho pationts you had const lorablo troublo with?

A I ’.on*t knev irhat you roan by const \jrahlo troublo. Aftor an
intako of salt solution, it is scon quito froquontly that snail
toaporaturos arise. That is cello! table salt fovor. ith chlldron, such
a taoporaturo riso, up to 38 cr 39 do roos contitrades. In this caso,
tho tascaraturo wont up to 37.6 tiring tho courso of an injoction of
hyi-rtonic salt solution. That is no lan&orous event, on; imodiatoly
after tho intravonovus injection they had a short rise in tenporaturo.
That is son; thin: which occurs quito froquontly, as I havo alroady
statol sovoral tines before. That tho interruption wa3 roally undortakon
intravonomsly is also shewn horo. On tho noxt day, the tonporaturo was
a join quito ncroal an’ it renainod norral.

"1 t ul! ycu toll us how lcnp thi3 subjoct irns subjected to $00 cc
f sea water?

A That was ’lsccntinuod on the 6th lay.

Q Of course, if the aark in’icated un’er tho 22n ! is tho date of


th- c~—„. nearer.* f tho orpcrlnont, an 1 not the 21st.


11 Jun. L?-W.TD-21-2—Xarrcw (Int "artenberg)

Court Jfc. 1

A Yos. I can cnl7 a;:oin an! a^ain ,ive tho sons answer to the
saao question. If a parson is brought into a condition where ho losoa
wator, vhathor you let hin thirst or whothcr you lvo hie soa water to
’rink, than tho person east l;so woi,.;ht, end this oxporinontal subjoot
too l:st 2 kilogrens on tho first day, then it gra vel ly bo care loss.
Furthorrv.ro, ffcoa tho 25th to tho 26th, this exporlnental subjoot 'rank
wator for horo, althou h he is fas tin , ho lost only IjOO ~rans, Ho should
have lost approximately 1,000 p«as. Thor of ore, it is certain that ho
rank, end it is pr bablo fron tho 27th to tho 28th, whore ho lost 600
- rams altogether, ha “rank sono wator n_uin. Thus, it is an oxporinont
which coul not bo retarded as a sovon or eight day lone lasting soa
water oxporinont, boc-auso it was intorruptod by intake of fresh water
sovorcl tines an!, in ry ostlnatc, aero than ono litor.

q On tho 29th, which is indicated on Chart 3-lii, what was tho
pulso rate on that lay?

A 60.

^ An! what was tho teeporaturo rr.to on that day? Tho highest
torqwmturo rato?

Toll, thoro was a short riso which appor ro ! r.ftor th- intrr.voneous
injoefcion of liqui !• I ’cr.'t kn.w whothcr th; pulso was taken at tho anno
tiroi too, Probably that was hi hor too at that tino,

Q 'oil, isn ! t it true that whon tho pulso reaches tho rato of 60
and tho tcsvc=*“turo reaches tho rato of 39, that that nan is rathor ill?

A ..s fftr ns I can 3.0 froa tho curve, tho temperature was takon
in botwoon horo. FT-bnbly because 1 no !intol7 after tho injoction ho got
tho c'i'l'. La far as I can see, they took tho pulso whon ho had a
rvrcal pul3o. Probably tirin’: tho ti_n whan ho had this shrrt riso in
temperaturo they 'id not taka tho pulse. That is on occurrence which
disappears quite quickly. This riso of temperature after tho injoction
of physiolci.ical salt is not a result of ly experiment. It did not
happen for tho first tiro in Dachau an! he 1 nothin, to do with 3©a wator.


C957


11 Jane k. 7D-21-3-Xarrow (Int. ’ Fartenburt;)
Court ft. 1


but it is quite a froquont reaction -rt»n liquid is injected intrr.voncusly*
Svan in tho case of a healthy person, this can occur. In itself this is
quite an insignificant occurrence.

Q 'hit narks inti cat o, under the into of the 29th, that ho rocoivod
injections?

That -leans that by mans of i.ntravcnocus injection of liquid tho
coeporinont was torrinatod.

Q Is that what this arrow .-roans? Tho rod arrow un’or tho dato of
tho 29th of ..waist?

A Tho ro l arrow? Tho oxporirunt was discontinue! by noons of a
hypertonic solution.

Q r, on tho 1st of Soptasbor, wo no to that no urinary output is
rocordod. *.tes it boenuso this patient nay havo boon unconscious at this
tino an’., thorof.ro, inco potent, ho was sufforin trzn a flaccid paralysis
of tho bla.Vor?

A It doos not moan anythin. but that this amount of urine was not
rooor o'. Perhaps fr.r. that ’-“to on, tho urino output was no lon;or
noasuro \ Tcu can fin ’ that out fi\>:i the black n; tobcok, whothcr tho
noasuroRont of thj urine output was continued,

Q ’.Clndly 1 ek at tho black notobeok and ’.oterrino that. Dr.

Boi riboock.

A !fr, tho last reasurorront in tho liith caso is roeerdod on tho
31st of August. That is, fron tha 1st of Ssptctibor on, tho urino output
was no lon/jor uo-asurei. It -.loos not loan a paralysis cf tho bladder nor
unocn3ci7usno33, but cno seo3 that apparently ho was foalin' very wall
because, 'nrinr; that tiro, ho had, after “11, ,.clnoi alrea *y 2 kilof-rans
and he continuo . to ain in woi'ht, an. I certainly kn*t know what
roason rnybo y who ha! been tak^n out of a thirst exporinont shoul’ still
bo unconscious five ’.ays later. It is a physiological principle that if
scaqbo *y is takon out f a thirst oxp arinont an riven water, that ho
recovers i-rrodiately.


C953


11 Juno U7-A-:.7D-21-i.-Karrcw (Int# ~'arterbcrs)
Court So* 1


q ‘ loll, this is net five days later* This is tv, days later#

A Four days# 1, 2, 3#

3 1, 2, 3 days it wcul 1 bo then, fron tho 29th to the 1st. Then how
!o you explain tho fact that you only ebsorved this patient for a period
cf fivo days after ho had boon rsathor ill, as noted by th« tenporaturu
curve of tho 29th on Chart B-Hi?

A If sonoonc, after physiolo.icnl salt solution has boon actd.nl-
stcrod to ldn, cr su-ar solution, tiring a half-hour has a rise in
tonporatura which disappears then irsiodir.toly, this does not si idfy
that this porson was seriously ill but it is a roaction which has boon
observe * noro than one hun'rod tines, a roaction to tho lntravonoouo
injootion of liquid, and that ho did rot havo a paralysis of tho bladdor
eftor tho tordnatir-n is evident fron tho faot that on the othor days
whon tho noasuresents wero still teton thoro was still a urino output,
so if any porson sh:ul’ bocceoo unccnscicus an*, havo a bladder paralysis
that woul • occur duria; tho thirst. If it di: not occur durin;; tho
thirst, than it woulln»t havo occurrod throo '.ays lator oithor. That
'•oosn't axist. It is ao dcolly inpossiblo*

q This is Caso #17, Iwr ffcn>rs. 'cull ytu kindly nark that A, B,

and C ar.d D?

A You aro it t sutr.it tin; Cosoo 15 and 16 .,
q Jfo, thoro is nothin, salient thoro#

•fc", could y u kin ly toll us tho rnro of that subject? I noto that
his r.nro has boon orasod fron A-17 an'- frcei B-17.


11 June -i7-.r-.i£-22-l—Maloy- /artenbur.jer
Court I


.i. Its probably Oleschkowltsch.

'1. Coudl that be

•k. Yes.

Q. Ubo erased that, Doctor?

a. I dldr.' t.

Q. Do you nnew who did?

*%• No •

Z. Can you tall us fr a the top.of that pa;e how
old that suoject was?

17 years old.

Q. Did you have any written consent fren his
parents to exporlnent on him?

«. Nc.

Q. Did you customarily use 17 year old bova in
.joilcal experiments?

rt . normally not, but at that time the 7*r had
already boon :oln •, on for five years.

q. This 17 year old boy was obviously one of the
cheats too; you had to interrupt the experiment because
he o-vlcusly was drlnklnj water, Inasmuch as his urinary
output of the 2'rd, 2*ith, 25th and 26th wasn't substan¬
tially more than his Intake?

... In other words on tho 25 th he had a -el *ht of
* 7.6 kilos, and on the 26 th his -el ht was 47.. Then he
reduced from -.6 to -.5.7, and from that to -.5. T . those
two tl-o s he certainly nust have had somethin - to arln:.

Z. Then did you interrupt the experiment because
he must have had s methln* tc drink cr was It your purpose
here to experiment on this youn.r man for a o.rlod of 12
days with an interruption which would assimilate rain at

••96C


sea?


11 June ‘* 7 --*-.C<-22-2-kaloy-(Vartenburg)
Court I


/ell,__tfcia Vfta Interrupted bar* quite ra^uiariy
on tho 2Sth. .*nyhow, i never had the Intention and nobody
had the Intention to assinllate rain at sea, beoauso rain
n .t sea that la socothin; tha experlnontal subjects produced
themselves, not because It was within tho aoopo of our
experimental pro ;ran, but because sacratly they obtained
witar.

3. *&an there would have been no ourpese In having
conducted in experiment wherein ycu would hav* subjected
a person to seawater for a period of 6 or 7 days then
Interrupt the ox. orl.zent and .;lvc hln a snail quantity
of vatw-r, and then i jaln put him baok‘on seawater for a
period of 5 daye In the Interim, nafclivan attempt to
assimilate an actual rainfall while a p-raonla on a raft
In an open aea, wouldn't that be of lnterat?

I do net bellove that a person on the hi h seas
could have It happen to hia that in five dava they could
obtain about 10 liters of water, or even more by means of
rain; In the lnt rla sore than 8 quarto, probably 1C quarto
of water were ta/.on In.

Q. '/bon you discovered this boy was oheatlng hod you
stopped the experiment and offered this 17 years old boy
cl.;arettoa to volunteer for further experiments, la that It?

.v. I did not offer hln cl. arettes. I have to repeat
that a-jaln .and a-;aln. Those who did not carry out the exper¬
iment correctly and whom we founl out, In accordance with
tho a reemont, which I had nado before I took the cigarette
premia- away from them, and then they said," want to have
cigarettes atUr all, and in the second *rcup we ohall try
tho ex erlront again," I could assume the responsibility
for that absolutely. If a :erscn during the first ixporl. ent
lost only small uzounts of water for Instance the loss


• 961


11 June 47-,-.,K-22-^!.aloy-(Vartenburq)

Court I

cf water m the case ?,'o. 17, it was only about 7 per cent
of his water b.‘.lanes th -t is a 1ob3 of water which Is
absolutely not dangerous. Durln.j the second experimental
period he probably lost even less.

Q. /o turn tc O'*so 16, If your Honors will kindly
* that In the order of sequence. Car. you ieolphor the
naae cn the ohart >la w'ich has been erased?.Could that
possibly be the nano J-.cob 3aab:r.ser?

4. Yus.

q. /as Bamberger a Jewish subject?

.t. No.

q. You are sure of that?

Yea, I m qulto cortaln I had only gypsies,
q. 3aaber^er Is a Jewish name, isn't It?

I wouldn't say sc. On the contrary 5ambor.;or Is
a very wide spread name.

q. Toll us how ion,: this person was subjooted to 500
cc of seawater?

«. This subject was practically very—
q, Tell us frea the oharts befor ) you and not your
pencilled notes, that is oharts 3-18, >16 and >16, how
lon_ was ;hia subject subject to 500 cca sea water, you
can observe thftt quite clearly fron the charts?

.v. On the 10th day the experiment was dlso ntlnued
and this oas- sh vs especially wall now such 'in experiment
was carrier cn; I con sr.ow you fron the 24th to the !5th
that 1 s already on the third day cf the experiment he loses
100 ram. It Is quite certain that he drank at least one-
half a liter or half a quarter cf water. On the 25th to
iioth he d_.es not lose any weight at all, cv-n though


C962


11 Juno 7-.,- «X-22~-Holoy- (’fartenburs)

-curt 2

suff or In, frcn hunger, a twin,-. It ia qulto oortaip ho
dram at least cno quirt witer, than ho loses a kilo.

Then he loses 600 jraa, and then starts to drink a*aln.

Here frcn the 2ith to the 'Oth he does not lose any volrht,
thus ho obviously a-?aln drank froa three-quarters to one
quart of water. Thus this ia a case th-.t during this exten¬
ded period lest 7 kilos. That this loss of wol-jht during
that tine was roaohod is not shown by the first page at
all. Frcn that it can be seen without dcubt this was not
a loss due to lick of w .ter but a loss due to hunger. So
that is a case whioh cannot be considered a seaw .t r
experiment at all. Tho loss of vat r Is --

This pers-n after havin ; been subjected to 10 days
irlnkln seawater was Interrupted for four days and put
baok on seawater a^ain; 80 in total he drank seawater 1 -
1/2 da:'s ?

Yes, of oourse one can continue *n oxoerlinent
with seawater for 1 ' years if In between fresh water Is
administered xjaln and a>jaln. The essential In a 3oawater
experiment is how much water is lost by the body. If the
water ia replaced a-'oin then the body is in the same con¬
dition as before. One cannot say tho man drank sea water
from time to tine, If he hai lone so without interruption
this would have been a da.ujeroua experiment. If luring
tho 9 days he was in this exporlaont this subject ho.l
not during 5 days drank a half liter to a liter cf water
than the experiment would have been a Ion; one.

Q. Lets turn tc Case 21. Kow, this patient or sublet
received 500 cc. seawater for a period of 6 days, 6-1/2
do/3, is that correct?

. k . So, he received, two. three, four days. — durln.;

5 days or. the 5th day during the ril ±t It was discontinued


11 June *»7-rt“.UC-2^-5-MQloy-{Wartunbur t ^)

Court I

nz 2 *G 0 o'clock. X can roM-bop this caso quite v^ia. jt
vas a oase whloh ml a totar.ua attack, luring tho night
at 2CG had a tetunu6 attaok and I 'ae called and caused
on Interruption. .' k t that tlao ha was glvon Intravenously,
or ajpar-ntly drank 20 C grans of rain oral water, I iaiosa
Intravenously, than calolua and than atorefandnn, and than
this cn tho top I oan't road it, the nark especially, It
was au .or aolutl n.

Q. Now, Doctor, tho marks horo 'aTop abso'utoly In a
rath r .rratlo .annar, and how urlno output la shown for
the last two or three days, Juat what happened to this
patient?


964


U_Jur.w-A-?;-23-I-fceehm ( ,-rc-nburg)
Court 1


A: The people r-cov-r-e co-::L.t.ly - f t-r .era -nu -3 you can see he
-Iso s d-schdrg-ri ..ith the vcijxt of 57 jd. 03 r.jas after ix. ‘-T.iv_c \.ith
tho ,ci ht or 55 kilo’raca, th x is lv v.iiv-d 2J kiiogr-res oiu 1 discharged
his '..ci>iin_ kilogrons ccr. th-a .hen I received han.

.jhat do you rely on to indicate that h- .<as dischargee •..■uighing
57/5 tH . lo res; this oxrk zir.de m ink at a Inter date?

A: Karo, .-s in all c.ses, the final weight is recorded. You can
see in all curves it is in the sv - hcnt!aitii«, r.U.ys the hand • zriting of
tho Hanch ekidical student.

Q: ./oil, no*, froc: the 30th on CSv'-rt C-21 to tho 31st, -.zt see that this
cun g.-inud fro_. 50.3 kilogrues to 52.9 kiiogrjns, -Mch is approciaatoly
four pounds in *.<«ight in one d^- and hi co..timaj to gain in tho next lour
days u; to 55 .; .aiich indic-t-s ho gained in a p-riod of four days a-arly
ton pounde; eidn«t you in fact retor-lo" this ..tiefit?

A: Ji iuivily the gain of voLjtl talcca pL.ee very quickly. This is not
a specialty in Cos. No. 21. It is quit obvious the -.«uUr he hr.s lost in
thu cxpci'lixaus s ~3 replaced in . vex-* a,*or. tine. I c -i read to you
frou Ce3e t c 3e hou quickly t.*.;- -in-d nicht, sax lost eight ith in
t..o or t.ix*c-c days nd then grined tkr.o or fair kiiogr.uas and the entire

-x>unt of -.ter is replaced quickly.

Ien«t it unusu. 1 to sain four or six kiiograos in a xriod of

four days?

X: I- _u ..usual for a nor.. 1 ->ut it is not unusiwl if soQ-one

iio h. d b-c. tl.irstinr no.; is dx-2.eJ-.g ualer. If you now drink t o quarts
cf jrtev nu ;-ou ei^h yourself 1 i-v, toon you xuld «iqh t.o ::iio;r x.s

aore.

Q: j s thet pencil note or. the - ck of 3-21 in your handwriting?

A: So, l the huvl rilln of as of x i^dic .1 or-crlieS.

-11 you r-au that?

' A: I . Sub - - - - - '■ - - in

the .re., a., hie heart, general co^ition .cod; color of skin aaeu  th -


11 Jun>*jrH —23-2-iiechcn (.fartcnimti)
Court 1


ausclis act irritable; v.vacb nor»l without nry clini°- r

r-sulta; hc~rt 7, that ia heart -<xx. jure, loud _nd d nap. nine; or the
he ri, .-.ot _ni-.r a -d.

.: ”ou ill note on the bach of the peg- on the ah~*t .'.-21


■L-Siblc?-

A: Yea.

is that the sin-.

At T'.-'-t in ^ carton copy, yes.

jo you ales- her- that ti ls pataaat her* .ha porfcchly t*raal
\ the end or the —p.ria*nt3?

X .: Yes, I a intain t.Vt.

Q, Balo 13 !io. 22, lour Honor.

Can you —11 ua whit happened tu this patient, he »-a aubj-cted to
a* .-rfutur far - period of a-v*n aid one half days; was he not?

dix -ad on* It If, perhajw.

j.: Inclue Ins thr-* days of hun.-r?

A: Yea.

You;* Honors, I not- th t t.iia wtject on tho 22nd - shown on
G.-rt D-22 - aubjectd to c ter, end thn on th 25th tliet xo
thro* 0 ;• fit or h* -..a drinkln: ocr/-.s*cr, is :.lx> aubj-ct-e to hvftj-r,

JO CheT. lx. had a period of hutvior for dir-* days na >,11 aa tl aca-wator?

A: arait’onw cf the a* -xperi -rt.l outlets :*re subjects, to the

sxu. exp-_A. 1 progran. Darin: the first days they sot sea-diatresa diot

and then rot—., -nr-, lhat cs not a specialty of Cese Ho. 23, but that w

th- plan of KM prograa red thirsty peo le or* not hungry.

h'o.: or. th- 22nd th* cxpcrixx:nts began; but I notice ..-tor. you
cvilurt*: theee cherts you ..ere rather c. rtl-sa. It indicates here by
your littha arrow with a circle thereon that the exp-risario did not

t

be”in until ehs 23rd; no., .hen did th* experiants b* R in on th* 2lat as
Uu S d b; th. chart itself or on the 22nd -3 you .>uld Justifiable a*y hy
th- weights or onatho 23rd cs you hove indicated b; th- arro. you yourself
placed or. tho charts on- y*ar after the crpcriisents began?


HJuno-Jkr?i>^3-3-Maohan- ( artcnbur?)
Court 1


A: .11 of the ocp.riri.nt 3 l:.--.". on the 22nd, with th- exception of this
OB- case, that xs So. 7 aoi that began t o days lat-r.

: : .'a this patient I notice alas has sort of on irr.;.ul:r to.\p-rr.turc

•

end pula^ Cir.’- :nl he g.ined c. consider--L. aeount of ..cijia _n r. period
of feer or fiv. dtys; is it possible that thr.t p tient bec.une ’.-'.ear-logged?

A: r-.os .iOtiwnt ot th<_ beginning of a.i. -xp^rirents wci^i® 56.6 or 57
kilograms. .wring the ocperirs-ntal period ho lost water and he drank ei
aicn as h. .i^d-d, th.r-for- h- r-..inc-d the -Sixuit of water lost and again
cbtnin.d the sane :-ight he had J-for.. The restoration of the noruU
condition, -1 you c_U th-.t .. tor-log -d, then 1 ndaifi thr.t he -.r.s -.x.ter losgec
;.nd was filled up with water.

Q: Ife ; on th- last chart, that is C-22, we have a pencil notation on

the bach tr.ei-eOf; is that in your h.nd’.Titing?

A: Mo that is also t. .iting of ,y ttdical non-con. It says:

good, ; j-.wr .l condition; Vessels, alrijit; heart alright; liv-r not enlarged;

druepenin, o. the liv-r r.o at the beginning of th- experiment.

Is that jord translated or interpreted "dampening" or "juilneos?"

A: It .e .ns the sound you hear, .hen tapping on tho liver. I don«t

ruexaber the in lish technical eXpr-ssion.

'.fculd you kindly r^d that in G^xv-n .again and 1 .dll .si: the

•

interpreto;* rh-ther or not the last s-ntence could be transl ted .nd tho
last phrase could be transl-t-d .as "dullness". At th« beginnin. is the
.>ord "dui_n.se- 1 or "dampness"; a.ould you r-ad the G-rrrn Doctor, it is a
TUeSticn tc th- int-rpr-tor?

As ®ie Qer-.*n .lord i3 ZXawiJfung", it is a certain medical _:prension.

If hen the ch-st is struck and if it -nkes a eexard or if in ooxc places
you s *et a.ht sound, or in sore places a so-called dampenin' so^nd as
though . d a.aar had been put on it, therefore it says her - that th- noise

is the. s_s it xs at the beginning.

.-11, .h-t does it a-an?


A: la couic be interpr.t-d “dull"


U (fartcnbure)

Court i


Pro..330r Bioglto-ck, \hzt does it s^an "at tho beginning"; the
b-ginninr; or what does this dul ln ess or deepness appcar7

A: Tfc.lL, I suppose that in this c s_ too there was a slight enlargement
of the iiv.r temporarily and at the final ex-ain.it ion, ihich tins ap*r.r-nt]y
r-cordod o.i Sept-aber 12th, I dictated tlv-t tho sound of tho liver -.ms again
the sraa ..a at th_ D-ginning. The nan -.could have boon ill only if he at the en
did not havo that sound of the liver, that tiould have boon an abnormal conditic
Tho dull sound of the liver, is r. noxnnl condition.

Q* T*.'..n this a. .-lies to tho liver and not to the lungs; you dcn»t naan
therefore :.t th. beginning this applied to the lungs but not to tho liver?

a i Fra this, apparently.

Q: :.T.s ho a fit sti>Joct to be subjected to sea-water exporir-v-nts?

A: Yes, Certainly, other./is- I .nuld not have included him free the
Very b-.;lnninc» I attained -.11 ay ccperinont.nl subjects at the beginning
quit* clirooujhiy.

Q: C* so 23, four Honor. Kow thio nan was given 5C0 cc of Berka venter fo
the duration of ten straight days; vnsnit he?


d963


11 Juaa-^-JP-gu-l-Frinocu (Int. ••.ertcnborr)

IV'urt I

*• Ok the 10th dr.y is interrupti^m, yos, T Trent to point out
hor:, tee, thet free tbo third day to the fourth dry thcro was a loss
cf woirht of only four hir.drod grans, to tho next day el so only fivo
hundred greet. Thet thoro exists the probability or oven tho oortr.inty
that ho drank horo. “ho loss of woirht fro- tho next to tho Inst day
is olio Tory slight.

V. This son's tcr.poreturo end pulso reto showod n dooidod drop
throughout the oi-ht tc ton days of thi oxporinont in a somewhat alarming
mnrxor. ?hon on August 30th you ir.tcrruptod tho oxnorimont end havo
plnood horo tho initiels "C.H." .That is on tho ontry of August 30, tho
sor on tooth dry or. Chert C23.

A. This is surposod to bo "P.H." elso. It is always tho snno, It
is not writton won .

Q. whnt wn* that?

A. Ttet norms tlrt soro lntreronous in'oetion of tho hypotonio
solution in tho oxporinont wet disoontinuod.

i. Hew suoh did this non woigh on tho 30th dy of august ns
indioetod on 323, Chert C23? Ho woirhod 53.0 kilograms, did ho not?

a. It is writton vory badly but you oan soo horo it has boon
trensforrod. It is supposed to road "59.6."

'». *»hon was this por.oll notation "598." put in thoroT

If you will look over tho oh-rts this ponoillod noto is in
ovory one, boonuso this is apparently oorxuotcd with tho fr.ot thr.t tho
foror ohrrt had nt boon rocordod yot and that on tho 29th tho weight
is still rocordod in ponoil end was then transferred in ink. Th-1 onn
to suer. iYor. ourvo. In othor words, it eras written in Itohau.

V . Then you don't toliove th-t it wos 53.8 end thr.t ho gninod
oightoon pomds in or.o ’ey?

A. Thet would rjolly bo a nir-olo.

<i. Could it bo possible if you waterlogged a person and cevo

then cc--aidorable enouits of fluids that they would gain eighteen pounds

I

In one day?


3969


11 J«:3«-J?-&-2-Prinoau ( x St. firtter.boVg)
C:urt I


a• If saeobcdy is given liquid ho olininr.tos os ouch os ho hr* in
excess of whet ho notds. One would have to out out tho kidney* in ndvon-
co so th-t tho entire ancmt of wctor thct e porson i* given should bo
retoiced in the body. You heve the oxouso bo, but I reclly have to toll
you coly o bloody ley-person can ask suoh n quostiai.

t. X it possible that this is the ocn v o diod of that Tsohofonik
refers to in hi* Affidavit? This son ooeoloted hi* exporiaer.t on tho
third dcy of Septosbor.

/.a regard* tho dead pors rr.s of Tsohofonik, only ho know* some¬
thing about then, end in cy oxpcricont not a singlo ono diod,

Q. Ttould you knew? You loft thero on tho 15 th of Soptonber.

Yos, cortoinly, 1 ornnot know, of oourso, who diod. on tho 20th
of Soptcnbor, but ono thing I oan know c* a eortointy i* that in ny
oxpor inont* end their wrao^uonoo* nobody diod of ny oxporinonts and
thoir o'r.soquor.oo*. Th«t I know with absolute oortainty.

t,, Do y u have any ability ta writo shorthand, doctor?
k. Yos, I know *h rthcr.d.

Q. atc those your stor.o.-rnphlo natos on tho br.ok of C23?

U. Yos.

T ._-jld yru kindly road tho*o to tho Tribunal, transcribe thon?

T.culd that be too diffioult or wauld you Uto to have no givo you ny

transcription of then to aid you?

i. It "Tho thlrrt ooqulro. f-m. thrt oro il moult to

butr. Tho o-.tior.t to cnothotlo.*

4. ?,rfon BO, dwotor. It nl-ht to holpful If you u.od thl.

tronsor'ytlon, I h»TO h-f ox-art. trv.orlbo tho noto., onf tho
intorrrotor. oon folio" u. roro ronflly oof I how tho SniU.h oo r lo.
B l,o for tho Trlbur.ol to folio- you, onf H *>« -W
to point out - 1 th tho trnn.crlptlon » sot out In tho 3r-r.U.h -
Jlitcs SSBBlSGl _ro y. u rf Torino thio, '-'z . H-rlyt
®. un. Thtt 1 » n nroblon, y~— Honor. Ixmttota..hl«
tronnorlSo tho noto. onf -hon tho Tribmnl oottlo. -ho -HI ‘ ffor thl.
fooont into ovldonoo, oithor tho fof-n.. or -ro.oouticn. ot thot tlno

• :?7o

1 * /


11 inocu (Ir.t. •»-rtonber-)

Court I

if nocossary, I will ;ivc this a dooiaont r.u-.bcr, I think wo will hirro
to wait to clarify thrt point lator.

C». Would you chook that transcription, Profosscr?

L, Th't is ocrrect, oxceot ir. the first lir.o it soys —

BY THE PHZ3II 2i71

Y'-u hevo roar* your own stenogrephio notes, havo you not?

*. Yes, and I hevo ccsporcd then with this trr.nsoription.

*hat you ah'uld sow roed is y-ur nm vorsion cf these whnrt-
hend notos as you soy they aro oorrcctly rood. You uv*or stand that?

You con rood tho- frer this. You ora ror.d then fr-c that, rs a you oorrootod
it. You opr rand than fr n shorthand direct or fron tho typowritton
transcription, r.s you plopso. hond slowly, too, plonso,

kk. H..3EYI Vihilo ho is rondir.g that, ycur Boner, I surest that
ho stop rt tho oorrocti .r.s ho wishos to nr.ko and wo onn oorroot our
English oapy cs well cs tho intorpretors oar. oorroot tho Corner oopy,

THE pi.iSII £■'?s Ho will onll thoir ottonti n to tho oerrootions
whioh you nako.

"Tho thirst assures ferns diffioult t ond\a-o". It roods in
tho scoer.d version is "already mondurnblo". It doos n't ro-d that
woy,

"Tho thirst eas-xtfa fores diffioult to onduro. Tho potiont lios
thoro quite aoti r.loss with hr.lf-olosod oyos. Tho potiont lios opotho-
ticnlly. Ho telcos little n tioo cf his s\rr t»din-s. Bo osks for
wator only wfcon to awak-s fr^c his sctrv.lont o-nditi-'R.

"Tho npporrar.eo is very bed and d ~nod. Tho -.onoral oordition
gives no or-use f r alarc.

"nespiratien s-r.cwhrt flatter, aodcratoly froquont.

"Respirations 2? per ainuto.

"The oyos rrc doop.ly haloes," it is supposed to read. Boro it
says "open"

"Tho turgrr f tho skin groatly reduced."


'’971


11 Jxr.G^-jr-aU-U-Prirocu (Int, hrrtonborfc)

Court X

"Skis '’ry, tcaguo c nplotcly dry, whitish oootin; in tho aiddlo
fairly fruo.

"The buO'us aoebrenos of tho o-uth and tho lips dry, lnttor oovorod
with orusts. Lui^s shew slirht Tory dry bror.ohitis, lower border VlJtl."
It is supp.sed tc reed "XI". Oricir.elly it snid "XII" and. opparontly
I oerrooted it to road "XI*.

"Shorponod roaioulcr brocthin^". That is oaittod horo, of ogutso,
"bro'thin^".

"Sharponod vuioular breathing" — that is ft ncdicol oxTrossico.

"Heart boats Tory lor, poorly oudiblo. Palpability of tho pulso
folt. Palpability of tho pulso w^rso," Horo is says th't tho pulso is
"folt" and it should bo "filled". It is n't s woll filled — not
pclp'bility but tho pul so is loss well filled, loss full.

Thor, this whioh is dosoribed horo ns x*v ooiphornblo roadsi "Tho
ooll walls nro sooowhtt th'okonod." Hero 1 rrob-bly s-id. "noro strongly
thlakonod".

"Livor 2i-3 flr.rors bol'wr stomal sargin, rather s'ft, nodoratoly
sor.sitlTo t- pressure."

"Sploon s.ft" is wr n£. *t saysi "Splcon rout^rlo, onlargad in


a rinc f rr., slightly enlarged


11 J\:owv‘?- 2 "—l-G'ldbor£ (let* itsrtonbcrg)

C vet I Cqn I


"-•jacjlQturu kjypotonic. J ints esc bo extondod r/r® then uau*l.
Salvos sli-htly sensitive to prossuro." Thon wh't is described *.s
illoyiblc here readsi "Indioetod wolt tor ■notion - vertical, str ng
wolt f r/.ti n horizontally."

Thet rof.rs to tho reaction of tho nusolc, to tho lcnookin;, tho
so-cellod idoe-auscular wolt.

C». u uld you kindly st“rt thet n-ri.rrph a. “in end rood it ns it
is written?

A. It re-da heroi "llusoul'turo hypotenio. J-ints onn bo oxtondod
oxoossivoly, oclvos slightly sensitive tr pressure; ind.iontion of
hori*>'ntnl welt ferratiens, Str-np. vortionl wolt forrr.nttona," Up
to this point this is her it roods in tho toxt, nnd in ordor to oxolnln
it 1 “«.cod th'.t wo woro o'.noomod with tho so-oallod. idoo-musoul-r wolt.

Furthor tho toxt oontinuosi "Sofloxos" with two littlo oronsos,
that is, thoy rorct str-n^ly. "Abdcsiral reflexes", nldo two littlo
crosses, "ilcsr.bor^" as it says hero. "Babinski no^r.tivo".

"Loft" — horo it says "Loif" "phoY.cacn:n". Horo esi tho loft,
"phon-nor.;n af 3«ohor", "Opponhoira nO£“tivo". acssollmo no^otivo."
"Bulbous roflox bnd*. "Tcr.us cf tho bulb ef tho oyo bed". "Bulbous
roflox" with o little orosa — that is oositivo. Interruption,

. Hew, Frofossor 3oi£lboook, li kin* over thoso stonopro-hio
notes in tho sor.tonoo in tho first per-praph, which will bo tho
third sontonoo, whioh states« "Ho tr.kos littlo n-tioo ^f his nurrotmd-
inps", has on oresu-o boon -r 'o in tho steneprr-hio n>tos in that
sontcnco?

A. Ho, I orn't aoo any.

C*. In placo of the w rd "littlo" whioh apponrs in tho prosont toxt
on tho b-ok of C-2J, was thoro aripinelly a symbol, stone*r“nhio
svr.bol Ter tho word "no" nnd then tho w..rd "no" was orr.aed and rorlaond
by tho word "littlo"?

A. I soo her© that actually saothicp olso had been written there;
probably nt that ti=c I wroto over it. 1 don't so« anything orrse',

I


973


11 1-T>or- (let. rt jr.bor -~)

Court I Osm I

'• " tho aar.tcr.Go in tho ac-o paragraph the first parn-

T*cnh, tho f wth sontenco whoro it statosx "Ho rslcs for water only
wher, ha awetos fr .n his aornalcnt oondition", did another word opponr
ir. tho suno plroo as tho ohereeter for "scraolent condition"? Did
another word opnonr in tho saao place as tho oharootor for "somolor.t"
now eppoers and oar you na to out whothor cr n:* that othor oharaotor
thr.t has boon orrsod w- s tho word "scei-oor-sci'-us" and hns now boon
roglaeed by "scenolor.t"? I think tho original ohnrnotcr oon bo woll-
ruoegr.iiod to road "somi-oonaoicus" .

A. l.hct is legible isidor hero saysx "Sisab # drowsy".

Q. After tho sentenoe that 1 hr.-c Just roadi "Ho asks for wotor—

THS PI^3IDS:7i I did not w.dorstmd tho witness' explanation
of thnt last double reeding of the shorthand. Tihot tioi your explanation,
witnoss?

7HZ T.:TKS3Si Tho Cor-nn word "bcr.orr:on n , n\nb.

THS rJUaiDESTi tfusbf Hot ir.oor.soious?

THS KZTVSSSi Sir*.

BY 1IR. H/J-DYi

Ci. In tho first instrnoc, ir. tho aoatonooi "Ho takes littlo
n<tioo of his surrnuxdings", is an oresuro n-tioocblo thoro in that
tho word "no" hes boor. ro*«lroc' by the w.rd "littlo"?

A. ScBotiiln.; h-.s boor, writton rvor.

C*. •• ill :• u sh>w thrfc to tho Tribunal, nlc-aa, thrt ohnrrotor
that has b.on writton owor? '*oul<! you point th r .t out t then, footer?
Point out tho oh-raetur ir. thr.t sontonooi "Ho takes littlo notioo cf
his surroundings", an'* point tlrt nut, this ohnrnotcr hero (indiorting)
on tho second lino of oh-rooters.

KH. HiJtDYi Here it is,* y ur Ho^cr, the last oh'raotcr on tho pngo,
BY 131. HAfitY i

Ct. h*<w, would you show tho Tribunal also rb.ro the word "3ori-

I

oor.aoious" or "nicb" apporrod ond thr.t h^s also boon written ever?

That is tho last ohrraotor on tho thir lire.


974


11 w'ur.c-A-v'?-25-3-Ool<*bors (Ir.t, tnrtanbcrg)

Co’Tt I C-S3 I

A. Y oa# hare (indicating).

Sow, eftcr tlx; scntoncoj "He oska for weter <xily when ho
awakes fro- his scanolor.t condition," which ia the fourth stenographic
lies or tho hack of Short C-23, we notico thr.t on or.tiro lino or
hclf lino has boon oresod. This holf-1 ino‘hod previously centninod
stcr.ogrn.-hie aynbola but they ore now no longer identifiable. Is that

correct ?

•

A. Yuaj soaothing has been oresod horc.

1IR. KaRDYi Y3ur Honors oen sea tho rod orcaor that has boon usod
to ortso thr.t half lino of oherrotora; tho iraproaaion of tho ernaor ia
atill obvious thoro,

BY MR. HARLY«

<». tf 0 w, Profcaaor, in tho aentenoo in tho next ncr-graph of ateno-
grephio no to a, tho soo-.-nd aontonec roadss "Tho -onoral condition givos
no oouse for nlcra," Ia that corrcott

A, Yoa.

<*. »<w, throughout year writing of thoao oharaotcra y.'u, botwoon
ooch words, uaurlly speoo, lor.vo o anooo, to indie-to anothor word,
do you nett That is very deer throughout yoir trar.aoription. You
have loft spoooa bctwcon onoh ohcrootor signifying words. Is that
oorroot!

A. Yoa, thr.t differs —.well, that differs. Sorootinos sono
worda oro written oloacr together, quito olotoly, for oxonplo horo
(indior tir.g) .

Ct. V.ull new, horc ir. this sentence where it says, "The ,-onoral
condition giv^s no oauao for alnra", tho wer’ "no — that ia, this
oh'.raoter horc — docs not hove the spnoos betwoon It that nil tho
othor characters on the shoot hare, does it? In fnot, the syr.bol
for "r.o" t uohos tho previous synbol for "Oo r .or -1 oor.ditirr", lorring
no spacing. Lid you add tho word "no" at o lator dnto in n different
ponoilf

A. Ho. I do that quito frequently wfc® sorao thing is writton

3975


11 Jur.o-^-J?-23-4-Gcldbor- (Int. «artonbor K )

nboro the lire In stenecrephy that I writo it oror ornin.

-' 3 Wi if you will turn to tho sontcnco in tho third p-j-r. 5 rr.ph
whioh roads« "Respiration scecwhct flattor oodorntcly fruquontly",
appeared ori’jnelly, did it not, boforo an orasuro was r»db? Tho wort,
instead of -soaewhef, didn't it road ori S inclly "Respiration is flatter,
»?deratoly frequently"*?

A. t still soys set "sooowhat fre-quaht aodoratoly froquont."

I wrote that twico.

W.T»ell, new, hew doos thet sentonoo roodt

a. "Respiration sceowhat flatter, nodorotoly froquont* rosnirntion
25 por ninuto.

W . Wd the word "is", tho ohara at or for tho word "is", appoor
in tha t sontonoo bofer- o ohen^o was nf'dot
A. Uhot w-rdt

Q. -I.- - -l -

A. Ho.

4,. Can't y-u olonrly sco in that sentonco that tho w <rd "is" has
boon erased and in its ;l«oo tho w rd "•'-raewhat" has boon written, tho
ohrrooter "sr.orhat"?

A. Ho.

lou wnr-'t see that. Did. y u lo< k at it thr'u^h tho class, d otor?

A. In stenography I writo tho wort "is".

^ How, lator in this so no sontor.oo. Dr. Bai£lbook, eftor tho
w-rd "flatter", didn't tho w rd "hardly" appoor ririnnlly in plnoo of
tho w.rd "nodoretoly"? Tho w rd "hardly" was orasod and roploood. by
"m--dorntoly" and thon crossed out twico.

A. Haro it said "tr ubloscno".

It says, "rospirati'n flatter". It c uld soy "hardly fro«jMont"
fcef-ro tho ohon^cs, c-uldn't it?

A. "Modoratoly" it soys horo. "Hardly n-doratoly froquont"

C976


it could say


11 J ”no -L -J? -2 p- j-0' let or r (int. T. OraenfcQrg}

C urt I Casa X

Q. Hr.j the chereotor been ohnn^oc ct all?

A, I s-id already criminally it said tr ublosao.
Ct, Hero any ora swob boon node in that sontonco?

A. It w-s written ever, written evor.

(<. Add then or-ssod out?

A. Yos.


'977


►


11 «T-iw -i?-rf-^C-2c-l-5r.iibjr -{ ■/arteabei;')

Sturt I - Ga3o I

Z: Vhat v;r- vis written over? is that von there
th-.t is writ tor. ever that Is now legible the word “moder¬
ately* cr 13 that the word “hardly"?

"Hardly* it did not say hen. It said "troublesome

V. -all, which character said “ trouble some", the one
th .t Is legible new r the .no that has been written ever?

That says “coierntely it was troublesome".

0 ,. > ’..'ell new. m the sentence which starts out in
the el ;ht paragraph with the veris: “Heartbeats very low
poorly audible,■ in that sentence has a character been
erased and onoth-r one written over? Has the character
“scarcely* been erased and reel ;cod by “poorly"? I believe
the a rks of the original symbol for “3oarcely" can still
bo clearly distinguished, can thoy not?

... Yes, that Is correct.

q. /ho aode these changes, doctor? Did you make
the- yourself?

'U. Yes, I Old.

q. -/her. did you make them?

... I can't tell you that any m-re exactly when I
did it.

Q. Did you aakd them at Jachau?

... No.

q. Did you make then in Humber/;?

... Yea.

C£. Did you oraso th so shorthand characters that
ipjoor on the fourth lino here in Nurnborg?

... Yes, I did that too.

q. How, doctor, those notes that are on the back
here, I r.-te that you state that the bulb of th) eyobal 1
— that the-yea are deeply hiloei. That is.'the fifth


11 Jan- ■7-A-AK-<'6-3-Gcllbar»-iwapt tnb.*«r}

Court I - Case I

paragraph. Mhat dees it moan If toe tulS c'f tiv»
joca soft in a rodent?

It doesn't -.ear. that they beocne aoiTt but that
they slnh bach Into the head. It is a sign of .dehydration.

Z- Vull new, we have her: in the flrot p^a^'rato,
the paragraph that "Thirst assumes forms difficult to
endure," and so forth. ,iow, in this scan lent oondt' tion
that i8 referred to — now, is the half-closure of the
eyes in a s.aoolont patient a br.d prognostic al.*n?

.i. Ir.e half closed eyes, of course, can also oxpr 'as
sleepiness, somnolence. In this case that was the case.

It la apathy. One o^rt .f dozes. Sometimes one sees
s':-.ethin-j; soa; times one opens the eyes and then cn- closes
t.aen -ujain.

Z. -'ell now, had the original word that you hadt
written in that paragraph, that is "seal-conscious" or
nuabness" — would that convey an entirely dlfforent
meaning that the word "somnolent"?

A. Sonl-oor.sciouonoss, drowsiness, and oomnolenoe
are about the same.

3 o you moan if a person 1 s sleepy that that Is the
same a3 a pjrson that is numb?

A. 7011, x ieon sleepy — yes. liuabness, of course,
is not the same as sleepiness, but In these cases It was
that they dozed. I don’t want to say cleepy but they wore
drowsy.

q. Could you toll us what the medical term "lagoplv-
thalnus" moans? I will show you the word, doctor and spoil
it for toe court report-ra: 1 -a-g-o-p-h-t~h-a-l-n>-u-s. «an
you tell us what that word means medically ?


'979


11 June 47-A- £o-■*-Soldberg- ('fartcnberg)

Court I - Gaoo I

A. L^gophthamua — that was not a lagophthalmos. It
was a drowsy — lying. ±t says right afterwards that he
aa<ea for water. Thus it was not a lagophthalmus.

I haven't aa.:od you whether or not these condlttonn
are symptoms of lagophthalmus. I am ashing you what la
lagopfcthalaua medically?

A. Lagophtbalnua being the open condition of the lids.

ft. toll, is it a general condition in adult patients
which 18 ofton found when the patient is approaching death?

a. Yoa — well, this condition did not exist hero.

ft. I am asking you a'oout the aodioal tern lagophthal-
nus now, ao a nodical nan. You are a physician. I an not
as-clng you now to compare this with the ooniitlono of this
duojeot Ho. Z'.

A. La.,ophthalaua oan arise for varying reasons. Of
courso, it can also ooour in a temporary unoonoolousnesa.

It is not a cortain sign that the person is near doath.

THi BRJSIDS.*T: Y 0 u have been ashed to doscribo the
oonditlon, what the oondltlon is. Now, just please describe
the condition In thi words stated by counsel for the
proseoutlon.

fITIfJSS: I said already that it is the remaining
open of the lids, that they remain open.

BY ..1. HpwvDY:

ft. Go ahead.

A. Thus by lagophthalaus one means an open condition
of th- lids with the eyes turned around, the eyeballs.

That is, the eyoballs are in the same condition as they
ar- during sleep out the lids remain open; but that isn't
what was talked about here. It says ex -roacly that he is
lying there with his eyes half closed. If it had been this


-- June * 7 -«r-A&-«J6-4-Goldberg-(v .rtenborg)

Court I - -aeo X

c-r.ii tion I probably would have used the more appropriate
zodical tars, lagophthalous.

Z- 'nor. did you, as appears in thes. notations, resort
— vhlch la m the last sentence — resort to the bulbous
reflex examination?

A. On the occasion of the other reflexes I also
oxasir.od that one.

Z- Vhat type of examination is that, doe tor?

A. It la a r<jflox. One presses the bulbous and at
the same time one taitoo the pulao.

Q. Could you demonstrate that, what a person does
to tKfcu a bulbous reriox examination, on yourself?

'•/hat do they do? N

A. One precsoa on the eyeball (Indicating).

Q. ./ell, ion't thit a test cost oorasor.ly uoed to
decide whether an noonecious, eu'selesa and motionless
son is dead or alive?

A. So. It is i ruriex which In any clinical examin¬
ation this is examined. In a dead person this la not
exasln-d in any cose, not at all. It Is quite an ordinary
reflex such as "Romberg 0 and ■’Bablnsfcl" and other abdominal
r-flexeo. So the bulbous r.-flex was examined here too.

Q. How, the next sentence Just abovo 'Bulbous reflex
positive" wo sc j the words "Tonus of the Bulb of the eye
bad." JIov, what does that 3e*n?.


Court 1

vuria 11-.V-27—1-HD-£c r 1*0 w- Ir rtfinfeurg.

«. : ze» ns that the feu lb tonus is b«d. It s*ys ore

t'.o d 1; - -nus is feed. In r thirsting pors n this can fee
seen t ih t the eye fe.ll becomes sonewh t softer.

v. ; eothwtically, Doctor, disregarding this remark
po-ut "t.nus of the eye bell b d» for th„ moment, wnet does
it -can h*.clerlly f. - payslclm if the bulb of the eye b:ll
g’j-e soft in r patient?

*• Z.i'fc cm noen v>,ry different taints.

«.• d es it noun that ce-th le rpprvaohlng'

Jn'.cr n-. clrcu-8t'T.c».a ?

<t. In dor bosj circ.nstmccs ye?, but h.rc, in *
thirstIn w ^ere n, n .

I didn't a"/ In - thirsting person. I s-id
hy: ,t.- tic'lly, clinically, wh t does It — m to - clinician
•* r in inc rn If - -,~tlor.t's - If the bulb in a D-'tUnt'e
eye : 11 e g no a-, ft? ifcwS it h ve nny prtgnostlo sign
wh csoov^r t him?

*.. "oil, not necessarily.

«.• .iow, tnla te-t "Soafeerg 2 plus 0 or whatever It
-“■J* ‘do. "h t does tn t refer to - ftooeerg, plus, plus?

Wh tt ie tw. plus a mborg?

n. .1 afecr*. is . r-fUx or n ex'-uln-tl n concerning
th~ * -culled ntaxi', *7hy, in these o-tients, not only In
c *~ no tiat is described her., but in xest cases, it wr.s a
positive xkxberg, t.-.'t le et nn«oted with *> weakness of the
ausolw. If the muscles re s-.ra&ct we-i.no;. nnd .no -«s
ua, no la 3.nev.v't uncertain -nd that results in n ooeitive

i. "ell, i'ue it mean th'-t the o ii-r.t ern no longer
stead n hie feet?

a. E'.-t morns tint when he is *st nding ,r. nls fwt he


0922


Court 1

June ll-^r-37-2-H3-Knrrow- T r*rtenburg.


Is unsure.

C. -'ell, Isn't that the 6?»e symptom re thu witness
L’sckof-nli described In the p-tl~nt whe shortly thereafter
died?

I don't believe thrt the wltne36 Tschofenlk can
describe c. ?. aoerg. If I reaoaber correctly, the witness
Tschofenllt described that a long tine a.ftorwards. Soaobody
fr a the Intern-1 Clinic ccao and was X-rayed In his station
"nd he thought th t t:*ls rn fr-a the Internal Clinic was
one of ay .xpwrlaont* 1 subjects. If a condition of thirst
is interrupted by the administration of liquid, tnen this
condition disappears and the o-tlent recovers Instantly.
Later n, he cannot f 11 ill with It "ny aoro. That docs
not exist In aedlolne oven If ycu try as h^rd os you can .

C. "oil, I aa not contending that Tsohofor.lk was
qualified to determine vlrt a Romberg plus plus was, but
Tschofenlk c uld well n-'v- doteralned whether or not the
aan who coco to be X-r^yed w r s able to st-nd on his feet,
c uldn't ho? He c uld observe that as c lay aan, c>uld he
not?

Every person wr. is thirsting n*s.- difficulty stand¬
ing on nis feet. ^>ft-r tr.roe or f^ur dr.yo of thirst it Is
already very difficult te st^nd ju your fe-t because tho
cuscles are dry : r.d they tlr^ very quickly *nd because thero
Is a certain uncertainty of the movements which arles thcre-
fr.m. This doe6 r.ot a.ar. anything out the fact that the
muscles h-ve been deprived of water.

d. *nd Tsohofonik s-ld th t there v s nothing wrong
with this aan's lung condition, didn't he? The a^n ho
aunt1. ns in his rffld-vlt. There wrs no other pathological
reasons for the _an tc die, didn't he?

Yes, well I bcllovo that the people who Tschofenlk


Court 1

June 11-/v- '7-5-Hi-£ - r riv-V « rt enburg i

let dlo - that more was r.o reason thct they should ale. The
man th?.t *.:e -re concerned with here, #3C, ho w^s discharged

by sc with c weight of 50 kilograms.

(Interrupting) Just a moment. Let's “toy In Case
23. #30 you enn t"ke up 1-ter. Do y*u exclude the

possibility th“t In Case 423 the aan you descrlbo In suoh a
c nditiun r.s Indicated by your stenographic notes, la not
one and the sane man -s described by Tschofenik lr. his
j»f 'ldr.vlt?

n. Thosw stenographic notes refer, first of all, not
at all t- C-ao 23 but to Cr.se 30.

... */hy «re they written «n the book of cose 23?

a. r-ro'o bly It w"a lying next to It -nd I made the
notec hore before the Interruption.

Q. Then, It's Case 30 th"t the man was in such .a
condition that he night be one and the anno man ns outlined
by Tcohofonlk In his affldrvlt?

ft. The :an wno Tsch. fer.lk described did not exist.

3ut these n.tos refer to Cr.se 30.

C. I h~vo no further questions today, Y.<ur Honor. I
will continue the examination tomorrow If y u wlan to "dj urn
nt this time.

DR. cT£li;3ft’J£R: Mr. President, I only w~nt to ask y u
whether I s.-i ula urder the witness to come "gain tomorrow.

The witness hettbach.

UR. rl-JDY: Y-ur H n.r, in th» t connecti.n, the witness
•iDttbr.ch, recording to the statement of o.unsol, lives -nly
In Furth, Eav-rla, which is only a matter of a mile fr^c
hero* end I e.r.'t see th-t it will be necessary to call that
witness Immediately. He c.uld .o stalled off until a lr.t~r
date *nc celled at the c.nvonlcnce of the Tribunal Inasmuch
as he lives 'nly in nearby Furth.


- rt 1

Jjne il-*-27-4-H3-Xnrr .w- -"rter.bur c .

: i ?.-£3IDSST: I think It will be better to writ for
tr.- : witness until na can be called later since be lives
onl;* few tiles fr- a Kurnbarg. He will still be available
as f-’r ■s -ou know -s a witness rt 6oao later tine.

HjvRDY: Very well.

T>I£ -r£SID£:;T: rat these in order. It 16 called to
tnc "t; at lull cf nil e^rtles tnet all these records have
bee/, impounded -nd arc t. be turned over tv the custody of
the Secretary General.

The Tribunal will now b.e in recess until 9:3G o'clock
tomorrow horning.

U recess was t^ken until 0930 h.ars, 12 Juno 1947)


0935


12 June 4’J4_5 Ci.l_i_Eprr-w (1st., Warc"berg)
Court I


Official Transcript of the aoorican Military
Tribunal in the setter of the United States
of ^series, agplr.it Earl Brandt, et al,
defendants, sitting at Sur-berg, Semany, on
12 June 1947, o930. Justice 3c*>ls presiding.


TKi X A BSF.' Xt Fers r.a in the court roo= will please find their

seats.


The Honorable, the Judges «f Military Tribunal I.

Military Tribunal I is n-v in session. G-d save the United
States of Accrica. and this h-n'rable Tribunal.

There win be order ir. the court.

Hi FR!SIH;iT: Mr. Marshal, «i’.l ascertain if the defen¬
dants ere all present in curt.

Ti& M-ESHaLj Hey it please T-ur Hr a rs, all defendants arc
present in the court.

THi IRloIIi.?! The Secretary General wm r. tc f r tho rocord
the presence of all the defendants in C'urt.

UK. KaBDY: K ay it please the Tribunal, win It be possible)
f r the Marshal t- sore the other niernph-no dwp. t'* this tablo so
that we can use it for the purp-sc of this interrogation?

THL IRIS I IS. 7: Mr. Marshal, win y-u bring the n'vablc nlcro-
ph-ne d-wn?


12 • * J -a?UT: Mhilc we're waiting f-r hia t- bring tho novablc
nlcrophonc d-wn, Tour Eonor, defense c unscl for Earl 3r*ndt has
requested pcrr.iseion t- interrogate Walter Keff, the witness who
appeared bef re this Tribunal earlier In the prosecution's c*bc in
chief. Ec has filed his application t Interrogate Writer iioff and
■ths^is a.Tccable with the prosecution, defense counsel desires a

the Tribunal granting hia p« mission to interrogate Writer

Counsel for defendant Earl 3r»ndt haring re¬
quested nimissicn to interview Wa.lt. r i'eff and the pr sccuti-n

C gt

h.eying^^- objection, the Tribunal order# that the request of cau-e..!


•:9C6


12 June -7 _X_j <C_l_2_Zprrcv (I„t., Wartcrberg)

Court I

for the defendant Earl 3rer.it la granted end defense counsel mpy
interview Welter Seff.

WIL2EK 3LIC-L3CiO: - Sensed
CECSS UaiKATICM - Continued

3T EaPOT:

Professor Bciglbocck, re I understood yceterday, the steno¬
graphic natss, which ere found on the rcvcrec eldo of Graph *C_23, re¬
fer to Cnee 30. Ia the c~rrcct.

A T e ..

 Then et thia tl-c, T'ur Hoot, I would like to hnvc Case *30
narked *, 3, end C.

Pr-feseor 3elglb:cck, n Chert 3-30 y u have mad© e mark or en
rrrow with - blue circle cn the end thereof, Indicating the beginning
of tho experiment, and thla rrr v l t drawn In a curvod fashion which
le rather difficult fr nc t- decipher. h'ow t culd y-u tell uo just
when thla experiment began? VhotSur it began on the 22nd dry of *u-
guet, the ninth dry rf the exporlacr.t, er whether lt topan cn tho 23rd
*e Indicated by the arrow?

a The cxpcrlncnta *11 began on the 22r.d.

H E<>v *7 you account for the Irregularity of the arr-w which
y-u have dr«wn In Chart 3-3C1 .

A I can't rc-cibcr any o-rc why I -v<*c the alsn there.

H ^1* ■i£^t of course, w«a made when y-u evaluated the rc-
p-rte some nontha after the cxpcrlncnta had been co^jlcted a.t Dachau?

A Tea.

I acy point out to Tour Honora «hat I a- referring to In that
Dr. Bciglboeck'a arr-.v to Indicate the beginning of the experinente,
wfcl* he maintains began on the 22nd of August, which e:Isoldes with
the fact that the blue vertical line under the black blunt line ir. the
middle of the graph on Chart 3-30 Indicates that the subject received
10CC cc of sea w-ter, which would be more logical to assume that the


2937


12 June *?-v - jj C _i_3 r Z«Tow (Int., ^rtcnbtrg)

Cs^rt I

exp<rl=ent began either on the 22 nd or 21 st, rather thfa -e Indicated
by this irregular kttov.

fc'cw, Frofessor Sclglbocck, thl» experimental subject is mo
vho drank l.GCC cc of sea water for a period of h'« many days?

* To* nine days.

Ve Is it obvious froa Chart 3-30 and C-30 that this experimental
subject chc-ted and drank normal water?

* That did happen on the 25th. Iren the 25th t' the 26th he
lost only 300 gran* of weight. Troa the 29th tc 29th, ho lost only
200 f rr=B * Thtref-'ro, In those two days, ho certainly drank fresh
water. Iron his rctroclde it is also visible that the valuoo decrease
here again, then it increases, the it decreases again, and then,
aprarmtly, he la thlrstli* again.

* ^hon, of course, the lack cf Indication of excessive urinary
output, as opposed to tho Intake, is indicative the- the subjoet
cheated?

A -ell. In any case, tho urine output la -rich to snail as It io
rocorded here. It aunt also be one cf the eases who did away with
oor.e of the urine output. At first, I th ught, wh« a I 3a w thooe
amounts cf urine, that in these cases th«re woe retention duo to tho
salt, and that confused no, and I thought that, ot first, some salt
lo retained, because, in the urine enalyolc, a-ell anourts of salt
were contained In tho urine and therefore, at the moment, I was not
cental- cf the course this exrori-ent was takirg. For if salt lo
retained, water can be retain®' too and, therefore, It ic possible too
th t the loss of vel. ht is slight. «*nly later on when I celculatcd
the results I feund th»t he taist have thrown away soce of tho urine
output.


Court 1

v " uo © 12-14-2- L-K2-k- 1 1 y—* •*» rt enbur-.

Cn the 28 th It en.wa r.r. indie-ti.n thr. t the subject
 as - 3 - weight; thv urinary ut ut v uld n^t

indio-to t.-t ho ah uld h-ve lest weight, w uld it?

«• h.'.

It tth-t why y u etrte tmt it ia vbvl us thnt this
eebj-ct huat .wo thr wn awry e sj sf hie urine?

*• It heehaw -.bvi us because in the porl.d iohodiifccly
* -•..••.win. uuc oxpjrljiwntfi there w s m increased eliainr.ti.n
f e it. If there h*d bovn r rotonti n f silt during tho
or ,jvi-.nc tf-on in tho. ocri d f allowing tho o.vievluont this
- "1 “ V. ioh >d boon retained v uld h ve k-d t bo oliain tod;
* n *- ‘ r ’ th t I c. old r.c gnlzc th't ay rlgln -1 oplnl n
th t t w*3 rotonti n .f s-It, *nd th-t therefore tho
"°- unfc -- urin * w ~ 3 r.d-cod, c uld n.t bo correct, but th .6
th- urine rt h v- bc-n thrown *w-y.

On the 281.: of -uguat on Ch~rt 5-30, tho 15th dry
r th- o- xji'laent, wo n,to in the gr^pr aootl n tho
lnlcl la “L.F.* Jh"t dues thrt aenn, d ot r?

«. In rod ooncll ta-: a*.nna lu-b-r puncture,

• Orn 7 u tell ua vn-t w e the jurp .ec f porferain^.
lua>r mnoture n tala subject?

«. .*t tlvt tiae no c cpl-lned a uowhrt -b.ut no-'drA.nee,

-nd I ia-_ined chit if rotonti.n .f e-lt arc. t-kon 5l.-co,
the It in tho br d so well *• a in the ore in fluid au t
mvc inu' a- c-od; tr.orof re, I believed th*»t If I w.uld
undertake - luab r juncture I c uld reduce tho at-, re .f
-1~ ' n --to "dy fluid. I.r t wra tho rone n.

1. . v: -,n tr.e 30th f -u.ust, is indlcitod on th©

Ch-rt C-30, the 17th dry rt the exporl ;*nt, wo n. t© tnc
:i" l?r rod ^rr w with *i red circle -a tho end thereof,

Indie tin, in Interruption in the experiment, the initials
ir. .’od Pencil; will y a tell us why -nc. whit th t


Court 1

Jut. c 12-1 >- 2 - 2 -HiX-Ka 1 oy-'.fc r t enburg.

aenne and why y u perforated that?

"• H. ?. , X h-’ve sold already, it means that the
Interrupt! n v s made by «*n intravenous Injection ,t a
hypetrnio auger solution, -r.d in e me cases salt s luti n, in
the case jf thirsting persons.

«*• .»nd than ir. the acme block th-t is the 30th of
Aj c ust, in Ch-rt C—30, the 17th day of the ej^crlment, wo see
laa-41’ tcly below the initials "HP* in red pencil
in blue -pencil the initials "L.P."; will y.u tell us whc.t
that moans?

... In blue it aoana liver puncture.

"ill you tell ue what was the pur '.so of performing
r. liv.r unoturo on this subject?

Tli t w-s always the trme. I h-vo -lrondy t Id y-;u
th“ - I m-.uo s me of these liver punctures because Frofossor
Spplng-r told no at the time th-t n- should see whether
t.-.ls alight er.l"r^e=ont -f the liver w-s -cc mpnnlod by
o no chan a ea lr. the liver.

C. ?r a those o.onrts is therv. any indication that
tr.io ~i tient -r subject became ill? I not„ on the 30tn of
fti;,uot n C/.*rt C—3C, . n the 31st, that hi 3 temperature did
rise -ixvo n rar.l, and then we note of the 1st, 2d, 3d, and
*.th of Sept caber a considerable dr. p in t^mporcture; was
tnlc subject an ill nan?

a. T.-.le slight rla~ in temperature after tne c nclusl r.
of the exp-riaent happens in very anny cacos. That is a
tonporc.tuTw of 37.4 cent.; th-t is practically no fever;

.and lr ter . n he had normal tempera ture6. V. roover, ho very
quickly gained weight.

C. .-wnd those descriptive notes in shorthand on the

• f Ch rt C-23, I refer t . No. 30, indicate the con-iCi«n

: t.-.ls subject th-t is cr-artcd mere jn c.'.crts a-3 C, 5-30,


990


Court 1

June 12-o-3-3-HD-Hale y-^ortenburg.


and C-3C?

a. That la the c ndltl^n Immediately before the dls-
c ntlnuati.n. That was n the evening of the 30th of august,
In zhev words. The condition which la described here, la
the c ndltl.n of a strong dehydration, th"t Is a thirst con¬
dition. The changes which I described hore concern the
auaoles, the hypotonic condition of the muscles, the lncroaso
• f the refloxes, w..lch arc seen .n the basis of those ohengos
In the muscles, the dehydration of the nucuous aenbrane,
which I described ns dohydratl.n here; n certain apathy,
wnloh Is oxprosaed by thirst.

Q. Prof east, r Siegel eck, in thcoo stenographic n toe
' n Lino 4, where the erasure h’S been Jade fr n the middle
vf the line t the end of the line, In these stenographic
oh-ractors, onn y u recall now what has been erased, and
what ae eared here before the orosuro?

h. I cann-t rcc -11 the v rds, tut it v s a deocrlptl n
'f thirst o.ndltl n. I wr to "*ekcd f r water," and "again
and rgain for water." "The thirst Is very extensive," or
a mot log like that was written d.-wn there too.

Q. ! w, doctor y .a h"vo hed the op-y rtunity to think
*vor during the c.urso of last evening y< ur examination
yesterday, and y >u have t Id this Tribunal that those
ston'-graphic r. tee were altered by y uraelf hero In liurnborg;
are y u ;reprred to tell this Tribunal now Juet why It
bo cane necessary f >r y,u to alter these stenographic notoo?

«. I ask coral salon to bo allowed tr* make the following
k-xolanation. I changed these n.tcs bof.re tr.c 3 e sheets woro
handed In, that Is aft„r they had boon returned fr*n Prof.
Volhard. I made s>no changes in these steno c raphlc noics
only, and tncr. A told ny defense c-unscl, wh*c I h d not
Informed ab at tnls, as I went t' state expressly, wc want


-991


Court 1

Juno 12->—2-4-HD-Hnl oy-Vcrtenburg.

t'j withdraw the weight chart. I w-s immediately sorry,
bee-use I had changed a >oething. I originally had the lntcn-
ti n submit the weight cr.arts of those persons, because I

believe fr a the cncngod weights •'lone ono enn see on the
wh >lo how this experiment developed. «nd then, when I hrd
c omitted this thoughtless notion. Immediately njr conscience
b thored me, and I told my defense counsel I shall not
submit this; but I wont to state th«t I did net nnko any
changes In the rest of the report on the course of tho
experiments; that In the urine am-unts, as woll -s In tho
tomporaturos, and oxpoclally In the case of the weights,
thoy aro definitely the orlgln-1 values ns also In tho cose

•f tho blood pressure,- a In what y u see here on tho

fr nt pages of the chart n thing h-'s boon chang.d, slnoo
those charts • rrlv-d hero.

Could y >u tell us Just wh t w^s y ,ur rons>n for
ohanging some of tho stenographic notes?

A. Because the description ns It was here is a doocrlp-
Cl n, which on a person who d- es not know - condition of
c lrst, loavos an Impression which perhaps Is stronger than
the aotu-.l o ndltlon was.

Q. Ik you have anything further to soy 'bout thoso
alterations, Doctor? You roy ~t this time explain to tho
-rlbun-'l anything else in c nnectlon with those alterations
If you wish?

«. "ell, I want to state again th-t I am very sorry that
1 did lt * l > 08 1 sold, I only had tho intention to*subclt
the charts to show the weights and not because -f tho other
results of tho radical exnnlnrtl.ns, because I am of the
-lr.lon that fr m the weight charts one can recognise with-
' uC doubt, first, how much weight the experimental subject
Sec ndly, one see6 fr a them unequivocally on w.alch


0992


C urt 1

June y- -’artenbur.,.


Saya water was drank in between, and thirdly ,ne car. sco
olo rly fr a then that Immediately after the conclusion of
-he experiment In the case f ell the experimental subjects
Chore vs a gain In weight, and fourthly, no sees that whon
the iors no wore discharged in Boat cases they had again
ranched choir original weight.

9- JUDQS S23£RING:

'oil, doctor, h'w d you explain the f-ct that
n >nos h vc been or-sod f r ,c many of these charts?

a. This er~s ln u of the n^ses must irve been done
bof- ro. I did not do that here. On the f r* nt p u os of thoso
cha rts I did not change anything hero. It is possible that
n^d a lready in £nch"U. I can't tell you that.

It is poo3lblv that Inter .n I erased them too. I did not
orr.ao thorn hero.


Court Ko. X

12 Jus 47-)M-l4BM(a«fcaa (Vartenberg)

i* -"-iring the courie of an experiment, considering that your
experimental subject is one who has been put on a salt water procedure,
hov such '-eight will such an experimental subject be expected to Iobg
each day during the course of an experiment?

X. Theoretically one can assume the following: If someone drinks
I'CCC CC of sea water, the kidneys, which receive seo water containing
2.7 percent salt water, will eliminate this as a 2 percent solution on
the first day or second day; in other words a urine output of 1,?50 cc
is necessary in order to elialnate the entire asount of sat. In addi¬
tion, water is eliminated through the skin and through the lungs. One
can count on it anounting during the first days to 600 to 600 cc. This
elinination of water le then reduced in the following days, that is, con¬
siderably restricted. That would bo a loss of wator of 850 to 950 cc
ar.d that would be the lose of water per day. In addition, these exouri-
nental subjects lose not only water but through the chango in the food
they eat thoy have to loee in weight what a person who it fasting is
losing and this amount can be calculated frea tho experimental group
which drank the Schaefer water. Those experimental subjects did not
lost any water; thcrofore, they are a editable group to tfecldo how cuch
le lost through starving. I also calculated those chnngos in tho
weight and always doducted that froa tho entiro Iocs of weight, so that
one ccn froa that see how such is lost due to tho water. I calculated
tho following values and found out that through hunger alone on the
first day 1,000 cc is lost; on the second day 1950 cc is lost; on the
third day 2,400 cc is lost; on the fourth day 2,500 cc is loct; on the
fifth day 2,850 cc is lost. This is always the total. Shea 3,400 cc
on the sixth day, 3,500 cc on the seventh day and 3,760 cc on tho
eighth day.

These veluet, which I had gained ac average velues for the Schaefer

group, I cccpered with the statement6 aade in medical litcreture end

that agrees with the amounts which had so far been observed in loss of

•-eight with fasting end thirsting-experiments. thus hac to eeleu-

•


Court So. 1

12 Ju* 47-h-3-2-iEk-*eefcan (Vertenberg)


law that en eroeriuental subject on the average loses one and e half
kilograss per day if they drink 1.009 cc of sea water. One has to con¬
sider that during the ti=c when the e-pericer.ts vue carried on daily
about SCO cc has to be attributed to loss due to starring, so that a
gaining of weight and weight regaining on the sane level during the
experiaent roan that considerably sore see vater vas taken in than *-es
conditioned by hunger. I cay perhaps point out sone exoerioents which
were carried out relatively well.

<k. I hove to ask you that in particular in this. Ml' the orocri-
sental subject be erpected each day to lose an increasingly greater
aaount of weight than on the preceding day?

A. Those figures, which I have stated, ere always tho total in
erch case; that is, the loss of weight in the ©receding tlso is always
eddod; thus there suet be a progressivu loss of weight. In a caso of
fasting it is so that gradually the loss of weight is roduccd. That Is
the diffurenco. During the first days they ere creator than during
the latter days, while tho loss of water is not considerably reducod, and
if tho kidney concentration were found, it is oosciblu that no water is
lost through tho urine but through the skin end through tho lungs about
260 cc are loot. The uxporicent, which gore core or lose successful
results, is froa this 1,000 cc of sen water group. At tho beginning
the weight is 67.5; the next day 65, then 62.5, then 61.5 and then 60.3
and hero there is a weight loss of one kllogren and I boliovc that some
wptor had be«n drunk in between. In that aenner the loss of weight
would take pleco if th*. ewneriaont were continued regularly, while
lesser losses of weight, that is, less than one kllograa oer day, show
in this exotriscat with certeinty water vos being drunk.

hey I perhaps oull out these charts end in the fors of a written
resort subcit thoa in order to show where froc case to case they drank
vaterl

Q. Eert is the thing I as interested in. In the course of an


uxperinent is the place eventually re: chod theoretically froc a


Court So. 1

12 Jun ekes (Yartenberg)


certain day on tho loss of weight will be e roe-tad to be substantially
tho seme eech day instead of progressively greater, or perhaps vlll a
•tato or condition be reached In the erperlscr-i^eubjeet where theoreti¬
cally ho hes lost ell of the weight that he can and then from day to day
thereafter hit weight will reaaln aubetantlally the seme? Do you under¬
stand?

Jl. Yet. This It perhaps true only to e certain extant in the cate
of thirst experiments. If scoebody starves and thirsts, the lota of
weight due to the starving Is gradually reduced to 200 or 250 grace, but
the lost of weight due to the water output becomes nrogroeeivoly smaller
in the cate of thirst. If we administer salt solution, a certain loss
of weight is forced, because the ellnination of salt nurt be accompanied
by voter, iven If the kidneys v*ro to concentrate very voll and If the
lung and skin still ellainrto very llttlo voter, thero still nuct bo a
loss of weight, due to that and fastis, ebout ono kilogram.

Vha.t confused ac here was the fact that due to tho throwing away
of tho urine very little salt vr.e eliminated per day. Duo to that
fact It would ha.wt been oossiblc theoretically to save voter, and th -1
tho loss of weight vat caused by the ttrrvrtion alono. That vre tho
first opinion I hrd on those losses of weight because I did not know
rt firct that the experimental subjects drank water on tho clde; there¬
fore, I assuao that. In the beginning, therefore, this confusion r..eul-
ted rnd therefore the experiment was not always discontinued when tho
loss of weight was not accordingly, and that Is medically possible.

Q. If the defendant ie of the opinion that the preparation of any
statement or a table of these losses of weight would bo helpful to the
Tribunal or will throw light on the cceg now before the Tribunal, such
a statement may be prepared and offered to the Tribunal by defense
counsel. Its admissibility cs evidence will then be considered when it
Is offered.

•£. KA3DT: Tour Honors, I would like to proceed now to Croc 25.

' ould you kindly make that A, 3,- and C, please?


: 996


Court So. 1

12 Jun 47-h-3-*-L£X-fcs«hen (Verteaberg)


TEE JESSEEST* Before proceeding to that, I vould like to ask tho
vitsess regerilng Case SO, la eocaectlon vith vfcicfc you nado the o*eno-
graphlc notes. Vhet was the age of that experiaental subject?

IE* VITHLSSt Ee aust have beet about, as far es I reeenber, 24 or
28 years old,

THE PEL Sim: IT s Do you renanber hie nene?

IHx. VICSLSS: I believe you can eee that froa the chart. Krot-
echlaekl vee his naae.

TEL PBKSZXSBft That is all. Proceed.

BY X?.. EAEDY l

Q. Case 26, Professor Belglboecie, Is that a case vhere tho sub¬
ject van drtaking see voter treated by the Berko nothod?

A. So, It is a cato- Cfc, the Berka method, yes^ I confusod

that vlth the Schaefor aethod, txit It is tho Berka nothod^

Q. Can you toll us whether cr aot this subjoct choatsd In tho
couroo of the ezperlnents?

A, This oxporiccntal subject on the 24th and 25th steyod at tho
sane lovol of velght; thereforo, he suit have takoo la vater,. a lltor
of vater. Furthermore, fron the 26th to the 27th thoro vas a roletlvoly
snail loss of velght. Purthernore, froo tho 80 th to the 31st there vne
a loss of volght of only 300 gransj thus ho must hevo drunk at least
throo tines,.

Q. Veil, nov,. I note on the 26th of August, la Chart B-25, the
15th day of the experiaent, that the temperature of this subject rose
above nomcl and again on the 29th of August hi* temperature vns about
normal. Sov, la the course of an oxpcrlacnt vhoa a person tenperoturo
increases to that extent vould you not consider the fever a good reason
for stopping the erperineat?


12 June 47J/^^-l-prinuau<VArtenberg)
Court ::o. 1


A. 7:lc tcmper-turc of37.2 or 37.5 degrees centigrade during an ndmin-
i at ration cf a great amount of table salt is >i at ve call the "table
oalt fever, ’ "sodium cholride fevor." It is not a real -ever but a
rise in teaperaturo »hich i3 caused by the dr-inistrr tion of salt.

"ow, on th. 31st of Augurt which is on eh rt C25, the 16th day, we
note hero that by the foailir r rod r.rro* with tho red circle on the
end thereof, th t the experiment ’.ud b<en interrupted tod then I o»© e
otanp indie-ting an-x-roy had been taken. Could you tell us the purpose
of having tho x-ray taken on this date for this subject?

A. This experimental subject had bronchitis: ~hr.t is, dry bronchitis of
a thirsting person. T had an x-ray taken in order to soo whether any¬
thing olac r s wrong with the lung but the result of the examination
wrs negative.

‘ho x-my fora with seme markings therein containod, under tho
d'tc U Septcaber, 22nd dny, on Chart C25, purports to be tho results of
the x-rny ordcr«xJ the 31at or is this an additionrl x-ray?

A. That is an addition'll x-rny. The patient then got n fever throo
days after the conclusion of tho experiment and caused an xuto bron¬
chitis and then I igain sent him to bo x-rayed.

r . Did this fever that wt see, that skyrocketed up to 39.8 give
you ccuse for wo. ry that is indic'ted on the d- to, 3rd of September,
on Chart C25?

A. v cs, of course. That's why I sent him to be x-rayed, buc&usc he
had bronchitis.

. "ho x-rayed this man?

A. I believe it wes a French x-ry specialist.

r • “he:v w a the x-ray taken?

A. In the x-~ay room.

f. That'S the room in which Tschofonik worked?

A. v cs, it wr.s.

"ov», I note or. th« date of .'Jopteebor 1 th't there wr.s r.o indie-tion


12 June A7 ~ ~-L-2 -F rime -ui (' r ;. rt enb <. rg )

Court Vo. 1

of any urinary output of tliia patient.

A. That probably aes not recorded. Jfcy I ;ak you to show me the
notebook?

r . Sure.

A, They forgot to record it, on the 25th of August, he had 870 cc's
urinery output.

J5t. HjJiDY: I wish the records to show, your Honor, thr.t the urinary
output which is lacking on chart C25 for the date , 1 Septu-bor, is
contained in the book which hrs butn referred to 's the "blnck book,"
indicating that these reports in the book >rc nil a part of the suxi
situation on the reports of th« at experiments.

r , ’hut did the two pwicil narkings ir. the interior of the dingran
undt-r tho data, U Septoobor, on Chart C25 indict tc — thr t is, tho
x-rry di'»gr , the pencil n rks confined th*r«in? Do tliey convoy r.omo-
thing of significr nee to you?

A. '•ell, t that tine I received n written report on the examination
end from th/.t diagram I era toe ay no longer stt to what tho results
"-ro exactly.

. How, 1 -iloo note that the pulso curve* torrdnatoa fr. n tho beginn¬
ing of the hth of Scptacbor but the fev^r curve continues until tho
6th of 3eptuaber. "h*t is your explanation for thr.t?

A. “robably, tho pulso ws no longer taken, only tho Usapcn.ture,
h' cause- tho patient h/d a fever.

"• Could you record tempo rt ture in a person without recording pulso
inthe human body?

A. Cf course, one can do that.

Zt is most unusual, isn't it?

A. •■ell, r rust not hrvc noticed it ct tho time. I must have over¬
looked it.

r . Can you determine free the black book whether or not Ids pulse-
-te- Mas taken? Docs thr. black bool, contain tb t information?


0999


12 June L7-K-S M.-3-?rixM>u('fart.«ibcrg)

Court "c. 1

4. Ho.

. tfou, cn the rev« rae sice of Graph B25 we sec pencil notations.

Is that your handwriting?

To.

f. Is th : t legible so you could re*d it to us?

A. Tes.

C. •'ill you rc'td it very slowly so the interpreters can follow?

I imagine there my be sac* nodical toir.s that any confuse.

A. "Cn the 2nd of Soptuebur aono pains in the nren of the etoonch.
Otherwise, subjectively no cor.plnints. Tenp- nturu up to yi degrees
centigrade. °rcr.chitis rbovu the bases of the lung.

" 3 rd of September, left bnsul on both sides ibovo the lung; n short¬
ening of th« sounds nt the lung itself." I cannot road the next word.

f.. Re d <h; tever you an. If you find n word in Uio sentence that
is not legible so that the sente mo will not convey the waning, then
don't bother to r-~d that suitervcu.

A. I c-r.'t decipher th's word. "Bronchitis, individual rasping sounds
which don't rev- rher tc, O.h. After -vdalniotrrtion of pyrnnidon
the fevor sank isr. dintoly."

"Ath of ^eptutber, or. both sides increased healing. Both points in
shadows, 'hun there is coughing spoil they almost do r.ot lighten
up.

"15th of ocptteher, subject!.ely the sice cocpl-'ints of staunch
prdr.s • o be for* the beginning of the experinent.”

r. "ill you stop for * r.a:ent there, doctor? You sti te there arc
stor.-ch cccpl'ir.ts ra before the b ginning of the expericent. Kow, if
a nrn complained of sc.--, ailment, why did you use hir. in your exper¬
iment if he cccirloined of corn stowch ailment? I would have thought
that you o Id h've eliminated people with ca.plaints.

A. v eS, prob'bly he h-d sene gastritic complaints which certainly
were not exter.siva -r.d tiis not-- s* ys during the final cxi^dnntior.


12 Juno 47-w-SVi.-4-Priat».u(*-rrt .icrg)
Court "o. 1


th- t due to the experiment there were no chne‘3 in the conplnints.

"Condition of nourishoent not satisfactory. Paleness of the skin.
Turgor reduced. Vueculcture still excessively er.civble. Heart O.P. ,
not enlarge-

"ell, now, is there a tors there th. t says "noao-pfclobitis.*
sncllcd nor. o-phlebitia?

A. Yes. I don't knew whnt th* t' s supposed to nunn. Probfbly, it ws
supposed to a ji thrombophlebitis.

. ”ht docs that ncrnT


( nrt-aburs)


Q: Jv.t > loe s tiut Burn?

.4 Bv-t is :.n infi-oo-tior. of th. veins.

1 : 7.:--. it goes or. to say «2iutrifcional state, nen sp-ciiic"; -.fcat do
you sy that?

A: It ipjrr-ntly scons satisfactorily.

B: it —

•

A: (Interposing) This pati-nt tui he \r. s diseased, I r-Iievo,
..uighbd 56 I;iio^rrxis; thus, he had.not yet reg .in.U his original ;/ei£ht.

%: Then, tht firth.r st t.u^nt :n those nct.s says, "Palor of skin,
Turgor J-or- red". rf-.s this n n pretty -.ell dehydr-L-d?

A: ttt* or reduced, it says — Turgor r.duc.d; thus h. had not yet
be-n f.d enough*

Q: :/eU, no* on the 12 th of September, das it st ac that the
huecuJ tar s still Very strong w-r-occitnbL..

A: It Jo-s not s.y, "very strongly"* but "otrvrgly".

Q: Stragty ov. r-cxcifcablc?

A: Ton* -s soovtiu. t ... retained Tree the csparifients.

Jell, is th.t a conditio;: uhich :;ojld require that tit- subject
-v given su*. tention, oidic-.l attention?

A: Yes.

.-.C yea left Dachau on t.;e 15th?

9

A: 7-e, tint is why I r-r,uir-U that the expwriu.nt.al subjects still
r- kept andcr u-dic.l .tUnticn. It r.s .:y request thit they should again
t- exuxmui.

Then you turned th.3- subjects ov-r tv the tender -trey of the
SS physic! .;= in th_ c .rp hospit.-l?

. a: Yes, cure and in the c'£? hospital for the prison rs s riot
don- b; cin 33 ."hysici'ns, but t; the prisoner's physicians.

I |

I to t .-Ce up nr . u.ie Ho. 36, your Honor. This c ~~ ... h:.v_

. : .,3. ,r.- .jiii a- i "A n ani e..e oth-r "B".


9002


12 Jiasc—:H-::-5*i2-^c;--rd ( -rtecherg)
Court i


Iv. E-i£loo_ck, rer. th_r~ oh_. charts ra.__ out cn tfc 3 subj_ct or
•are these, the. only t.« cherts?

-‘S The -.;-.ria_ntcl subject js fro.: th- s.cord experiment.. 1 group.

In the case oi the s-cond cxpcriii-rfcal group, .as you hav- proj eiy all

the c:. rtn st rt only on the 30th of August.

'll J631, now, this ajiia net is clearly legible, isr.«i it; that is,
S-'-vi.r ReLThard?

A: Yes.

21 ye ja of ag-, nd his nueber .. s, 9U49. Xa/, those exixrLu-nts
h'-r- iitac .ac .V took 5CO cc* s of sen Mtor ev.ry day for total of six days;
la that correct? — five days?

«: ..ce;r._ly only four d-'ys.

.J X> : <- t.ink that this subject -..t.o 1 ithful in th. experiments in
ua -a*ch t:v ant :k- on the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, .rd 4th of September is
indie .t_ on the chart A-3o, the ur .vary output -xc.eds to - rc-at proportion
of s_ . ..icr -nt hu. Apparently t is subj-ct .;:s faithful i.. drir-:n?, the
3 - . uiter; c he not?

Y-o.

Q: Did d as u ji give you ny trouil- in as -uch .as his temperature
la .oout nunr.l . consider .ol- part of the ti-x?

0

a . I .ia> regarded that as tabl- salt f-v_r. Ke ,r.s 21 y_ ro old,
•nd yc«n_ pw-....- have. — but, no;. I s.av that he had had r. Angina bet ore.

He hod la . .cy lost his tender, turc .run the -xp-rirent . = strrfc-d. Aid during
the drx&Li. he 5 .La ~3t a ris- is. t*xpcratur- . ne, therefore —

(ina.posing) .ell, it a-.es r i-r etrang- to r*. th.-e o.a the
30ti. dry oi 5~. t_.ib-r this ra\n had r. teaporatur- .above nora.l; yet you
U3_d hLa a-: tL. ^p.rLxnt?

. A: “cc, b-cause or. th- rvixt day his teap-r tur- Kent do.si. It s
. .• sli he mfl'jj. tion of his .i it had disap. e a—; nd

r—Oi-, -. ginning c.' . ..it a. did not iav_ ._y temp, ; ; .

I


9003


12 Jur..-:;-r.:-5-3“3v:rQ (..
Coart 1


Q: './ell, -sr.tt it r -tier duteous t- us~ . cn -ho, perhaps, ju3t
r.cov-r-d or -s or. the re d to recovery Ira- an iilr.c3s as indio c_d by
the t-j.'-r'.uiTw curve in an ^perisent?

A: ..’ell, th't detx-nds upon vhr.t illness he had. II' 3a/eone has a
little 1. -1 . t-ior. of the throat ;ich has already disappeared, - .at

r_'lly is ..ot s-rious illness.

I .vote that on the d .teS froa 1 September to 1C S-ptc-ve^: that
this can's pulse rate ro3- continurlly, stayed about normal I or ax
extunsiv. period of tin-, and that in sor- instances /hen the pulse r .t-
ros- above nor.nl the fev-r cur/- :/aa below normal. Now, do-an* t that
indicate .. rather d -aj-roua condition?

A: til, the subnormal teopejeture xfcich is r.cord-d here is 36.5,
36.2, 3o.C; if u. t is r. subnor. 1 temperature, then all of humanity has
subnort. l tu-p.r -ur-s.

Do you lenv wh .t happened to this jr.ticnt?

A: K- l-ouiined there until the end.

JiL you s— hie after tho 32th of S-pteeb-r?

A: ..-II, 1 sr.u hie until the 15th.

Q: ..etc in the last day thr.t the taopervture .and pulse cu.-v-a

arc recorded, that the tecpcrature and pulse curves cros3 one another?

A: ivery human being in the course of a day has slight variations
of his tody taip-raturc. Acd th failin', of the temperature curve in this
c. s- occurred to the alnraing extent of 36 degrees, and that is the boat

none* 1 t». >r: tur. you can latrine. That is, these .or. absolutely normal

. j .

wlu-3 aivich are recori-d here for the last days p ,ond the patient rafter
h- had lost 5 kilograms during th- course of the experiment .Iso gained
'•Least 6 idlo. racs; that is, she., he .r.s discharged he weighed somewhat
aor. than he at th- beginning of the experiment. At th- ginning

c:.:djpitunt he wuighed 60.3 kilograms \ra on the 12th, 61.5 Jcilograos.

Doctor, obviously so.- no . -:v has made a drastic error in that
i-.rcviy.ou'i c. reports .f~ notice that in ink weight .. .s — pi .Ced eii


900C


12 j-

Court I


~rd •( . trtv^fcwrg)


the charts; that is, or. ail those charts. That is iniicatwd oi. ch.it C-14,

tli-.t is tix. . eight on tkw 12th oi Septeiior s 59 kilo;r-"c, eh rt

OH, and I h’v- cr.iiui thw attention of the Tribunal throughout to those

p.ncil oorks, in 3on_ e a ses it is irx lo it.', a blue pencil .aui ir. so;— c'.s-s

ir. ini.. Jto- , here saw that this patient or. the 12 th of SeptiCfacr, his

•

..Might is r_corded -s 61.5 kilograms, and sai.body at a lat.r date put
60.5 Idlo.r -as for the 12th of Sep tocher. How, can you maintain that these
weights cr- .ut in .11 those other charts, in ink, .nc in -his eh rt in
blue pencil, sotx of the other charts also in blue pencil, were put in at
D..ch u or —r« they also jx:t in her- at Dumberg, in as ouch an the ink i3
rather fresh and does not look to be three ye a*s of ego?

A: I c t-11 you with certainly- th t inis was not dor- L. h'urnberg.

And if you look at the figur.s tAick ar- -.mitten in such . c.. r-'.cteristio
a nner re a. us La the handwriting of the Fronca a.die .1 student* If you
.. 1-1 co.p ve -lea with the other figures you c .n s-e th.t it ie the 3 -'u.
h nd.ri'-ir._. 1 b-lieVv, however, that in the c-.a- of the o-cond cxperla-ntal
group L— fin* I weight, on- or two il-ya later, perh ps ev-n or_V on the L.st
d.y, u taken, -nd fch .t was not recorded '.uit- correctly. If I nay -.sk
you t. she*. other feVer curv-s from the experimental group ::o. 2, from
2 to 44, I c n probably cl rifv that quite easily.

’.A ill cover t:.-o or three of those. Doctor, before . c f. aish. Ho-.t
do you cam:.: for the discrepancy here: liou, th- fact — on this chart,

•nick .a HD. 3-36, und-r the date of 12 So/.tcabcr, je s-e the ..n laas tv.-o

difr-ri.it -igkts —

A: (in.-rposLag) I h .v. just tried to -xpiain that to you. It.is one
group from 1 to 32, was related or. on- <1 y, and the audio ol student apparently
r-coi led t in ink; .iailc the second r—:_nt :1 aoup, Li y opinion, w .a

.eiJ-.-d t.r; n-i, that is vdv.t - had done incorrectly, it s not that
• - wrote these wights I'-ter but ..e rote it down ther-. I teli v. t.: t it
. d the entire second experimental group, fro.. 32 to 44.

Q: I-- vie-., o. the const.’nt rise La la; av.sur- La the . -iw.it, A-3», r.d


9305


12 Junc-L-tl>5-5-flv^rd (,;-:.rt.e±v*g)
Court 1


ch.rt ;-56 rrui 5-36, l adl e-.ting th-.t nia tcupcmtur- r-=cir.cd r.bor. noixi-.l
during th- entire tLa. tfcnfc he u-r subject to the drinking of cc-. .r.t^r, -nd
thr.t you tre! to interrupt it nfter four d~ys, \«i hnc to iive the _i'r. ste.
inj-ctiona o; St-riofundin jk! 33 ferth. Arc you c_rt'.ir. thdt the subject
wr.a not ofle of th_ :xn .hoc the :dtncss Vichtes sr.n b-ing t.\lcj* to tiv. lacrguo?


9006


12 June ■»7-M~iiC-6-l-'Gro3e-( 7ai*. onburg)

Court I

*'• Th_s expo.'leantal subject on the 12th September
still gained 2 xilograns in weight above the body weight
at the beginning or the exponent. That Is how the subject
is rdecried here. I don't xnow why a person who gains
weight sc -fall should die ani anyhow from a throat Inflam¬
mation he doesn't ale.

Q. Itl9n't certain on those charts that the nan
weighed 61.5 xllos on the 12th September or whether ho
wolghod 60.5 kilos. It la ap._arent from the chart, and the
chart speaks for lcsalf, that you don't know what ho did
weigh. Isn't that so?

A. I am telling you the weights which are recorled
here on the lower lino are the dally weights that were
takon. Those flguros that were recorded up hero - that is
the final weight. That is the last weight that was taken.

I would like to say for sure that the medical atudont
rccorlwl it on a wrong day because wo had agreed that the
final weight will be reoordod up hero.

Q. Did ho do the same for all thoao charts in the
second series? Rooord the final weights on the wrong
day?

A. Tea, that Is what I suppose. That Is the final
weight, the last weight, that was tar.on. The some medical
student recorded on all the charts In the camo handwriting
«’-nd apparently he recorded tho final weight on the 12 th
perhaps only l.at r.

Q. I request, your Honor, to nark....

TH. ?H2SID2.;T: I? we are st-.rtlng on a now ohart
the Tribunal will bo In recess.


T T*


Cc-i-t I, Cose i


Ih i ^ShaL: The Tribunal is again in session*

•-u, SAhDTt Ktg* it please the Tribunal, before proceeding with
t~c osmiantioa of these records, I night odd that I have only two
uoro charts to ,;o over vith too defendants, end then per hups threo
or four other questions which raise questions nnd ny cross examination
will be c:c>lotod. I understand that Dr, Stcinbcuer has redirect ex¬
amination of the defondant. In any event, the Prosocution haa now
Dr. Ivy hoi- in Hurenborg. Dr. Ivy is the Vice President of the tfn-
ivoraity of Illinois and performed tests with woa-Vater, and in
qualified to tostify os .um export witness on the part of tho Prooo-
cut ion. Ina smuc h ua Dr, Ivy'a connections and aasociotiona in tho
Statoa roquiro thut ho roturn on next Tuoaduy, the Prosocution r<v-
■pcctfully requests (bat wo bo allowod to call Dr. Ivy out of ordor
and havo hiu tcJco tho stnnd thic afternoon at 1:30, inasmuch aa it
is anticipated that hia direct oxiCiln itior. will trjeo a conaidernblo
longth cf -iuc, and in cdditiMX th ,-oto it la anticipated that tho
defence counsel will havo u ccnaidorailo n\e.b. r of queations to ask
in orooa oxc.-inuti:n. So, if it aoota with tho approval of tho Tri¬
bunal, I should lifco to Cull Dr. Ivy on direct ox.siin .tion at 1|30
thin of torn oo n.


9003


12 Jun&-i r-\ ^J-8-l-oarrow (7on Schoa)
Court I


STn.SaDIE: Kr.Presldeat, for purely fomal reason*, I should
ll<e to apeak against tho calling of an expert at this stage of the
proceedings, as far® I knov, Dr. Ivy was in Surnbarg on the 20th of
January, during the prosecutions case. He could hare been exanined as
an eriert at that tine ty the prosecution and, of course, I tnink it
Important considering contain occurrences that the natter be investi¬
gated by an objective third party. I will not object particula rly
because, In =y opinion Dr. Ivy Is only a cross exacination witness for
Schaofc: for ttfcce he has given an affld-vlt, hut I ask pernlsslon that,
instead of the written opinion of Professor Olatsel, which is in a y
docunent book, I be allowed to call this expo.t too as a witness „o
that ho can cccuont on the notarial submitted by Profeeoor Ivy. I
was not ublo to give hiss this cat«.ial beforo when ho vroto his opin¬
ion booause I did not havo It in ny possession, but I norely govo bln
scco tables supplied to no by Professor Belglboock. 2ho opinion of
Crlataol I ohall not subalt for tho tine being, but shall ask for poi-
olonion to coll this export as a witness horo personally, and thon tho
prosocuticn will also have an opportunity to ox*aine hin so that wo
will havo t'.’o oxports.

'XZ ? HSirZTTs bhon will this wltnoss be available, counnol?

D?. S l’:X3aIEai I beliovo, if he Is asked to cc*e by tologrco-
ho la in nensburg, in ‘Jorthorn Oemacy, no c r Eiol-I think ho covOd bo
hero In c dey and a naif.

5E3 PX5ZDZ.7: Tory well.

HiXJTr Tour Honor, I night stuto in that connoction that
Prcfonsor Tolhcrd hus.already a>pc a rod as an export in tho oea-vator
ox>o.liscnta for the dofonso counsel. I have no objection to further
escorts If ho wishes to call tain, nowever.

Z£Z ?: 1213^72: is a nut tor which c_n be detoroinod later.

Sl ° Sri^cnol -..111 afford the defendants r^asonaole opportunity to call
••ItncoGOs who can be of assistance to tho Iribunhl in detemlng theso


9CC9


11 Juao-i ov (To- Sehce)

Court I

lsrios. ’iillo the Tribunal is cf sours:- reluctant to interrupt the
oxcoinatiou o? a witness, particularly cno cf tho defendants, ii
qipj-Jh to t*io Tribune! that It. Ivy, boiag hero, should bo borud
ca.'. the rcruost of tho prosecution will bo ucco-dingly grunted. D.\ 1
IT7 HOT t.i- the ct^ni tt 1:3? tbla afternoon.

i- thru tine, tho CritunoJ <11 cit, /-s it .lid yo*t«-dey. froa
1|30 tc 5lOO, nad «)1 otaor t-j thes*- ii.o hours twaorrew, md will
sit certainly Saturday sorting e"d possibly S-.tuvrtay uTternoou, in
ordov to ccrailoto the testimony of this wi cross.

Counsol nry proccod.

3T Fi~fX:

Q . 7. f .<• te *..• -a to Ons? :3v, 1 AO^rfotfully raj-oot the

Tribunal to nark *t pie -a?.

jo-ild pou Madly tu««l the aubjoct's arco frou tie to? of Chart
S 0 , Profncc-'r B-ilg-boocfcT

*. C'ohraa Jobl^rtH.

Wtnt is >ii* •*-’ hj-o, plou- Jt

X O.

U Vas oca« T?nrc of og a sui;uole ribJact to bo usod la
ua ^crinoat?

1 . X rvreabor this non very voll. X not. v a at to t;*.c
hiu into tho oop .incut, Du; lia fco •'oatad to roioiu il the station
end I assigned Lin to tho nporiaort with 5CO cc of s^a-water and
tho I:’ probably nears Vie tef levin, end h»- was in tho orporlnont for
throo days altcgothur. Bo lost 2 fcUegrow.

s,. Vzl 2 . c nan <9 yocrs of egc didnt toot with tho qualifica¬
tions of tho luftveffe, did ho?

a. I navo already Said I dii not want to *ckc hin in tho first
piece, but ho wanted to stay thcr. and I accepted hlxs into tho o^oiv
iaent synbolicolly, as it were. It wo* cn aaporlnont which nour.t
practically nothing. l>uring thcs-i two days the nan -cat about 2


9010


12 J*uio-i'~;;j-8-3-Zarrov- (Yon Schon)

Court I

fcLlogxvss cr, in throe days, r_thev, cad than he west back to hi a

original voight.

v Did ho recoivo 600 cc of sea-water?

i. Toe.

Tor q period of threo days?

A . -hroo days, yos.

that scc-vator treated with tho Borka nothod or wan that
plain son water?

i. That was Borka and lactoflavia.

Duo to the ago of tals subjoct, why didnlt you use hin in
tho S chcofcr oxporlneat? That is, subject hin to drinking sou-
wutor troatod by tho SchaofOr nothod? Eo would have boon a noro fit
subject to hav» drunk tho Cchaofor vator inasauch os tho Schacfor
veto:- vao hc^leao.

-I said It was not ny intc-.tion to kotw hin in tho oxpori-
nont. Ko van takon out ioaodlatoly. Ho would havo probably lost
nuch ooro voight with tho 8 chaofor vator than in this synbolic ojpor-
Incut, and booidos ho drank vator in between. Ono cun soo from tho
snd to tho 3rd ho dropped free 40.2 to 40 kllogrcos. That io, in of-
foot, ho actu a l l y did not participate ia tho oxporinont ot all,

Q. 2id thio nen bcccoo ill ot ull during tho courso of thoco
experinenta?
a . Eo,

^ . Did hi6 condition beccoo below aonaul?

A. I didn't understand.

"as ho below norucl at any tino during the caporincnt?
a . Ho, ho was unchanged.

2ion, why was it necessary to give hin a storofundin in¬
jection, together with glucose and c.lciuc?

— , I did that aoro or less regularly because that was tho best
ucthod to brcch off. I treated thiscase very, very c-refully. Eo was


'9011


l2-tfuno-Sr4U’—8—ii-Zurrov (Yea Sehon)

Oourt I

In tho e^je laent for three days, then he was put into the aosiost
,7Toup. Lactoflevin was an aid for hi a. Third, I broko off with nil
possible nrocautions. It was not boc<aiso ho noodoi it, but to holp

hia.

Bio oasiost group of tho oxporinonts actually was thoeo that
WCPO drinking tho Schaefer water, isn't that truol

A . But thoy woro in tho exporinoat for 12 days. If I had lot
hin go without eating for 12 d-ys ho cor.uinly would have eufforod
noro than ho did In this threo d.y exp eric ont. Actually tho oxpori-
nant lasted only for ono day. I dia not want to t.Jco hio in tho bo-
ginning.

lot us turn now to Ceso r-iO. Will tho Tribunal kindly nark
that, ploasoT Kcru wo b ;ve, on Chart ar-40, on obvious orasuro of tho
a.co of tho subject. Do you soo that, Doctor? I havo boon ablo to
doolphcr that to road Jordinand Daaiol. Vould that bo corroct?

A. Tos, that's ritfit.

£ . Sow old was that ycung nan?

a. 16 , it otys hero.

Did you havo tho consont of his parents?

A • I havo alroody said, noithor la this caso nor in tho caoo of
any othor patient, did J nogotiato with tho parents.

v* Vtxct did ho do to bo branded asocial at tho ago of 16?

A . I havo already testified about that. I sold that I do not
too-./ tho causes of this cloasific.tior.

Let us look at his cherts noro specific.lly, Doctor. V hat
Wad his voi£;t on the first lUy of tho experinonts. ^hat is, tho 31st
day of Angust?

A. 52.5, the first day was 52.7.

Q. Vos this young non subjected to 1,000 co of soa-watcr?

4. Yes.

’Jhat was his weight at the end of the experiment?


A. 47.9


9012


12 v —o-i-l-i-J-S-5-Zcirrov (Von Scion)

Court I

fcr.t vaa Mb v digit when you discharged hin and left DochnuT

i. 60.7.

0., 4?pror±—at®ly four pounds undervcigit at tint tine?

A • Hot quite.

How, tio water balance*—that ie, tie urinary output and the
int.-Jco* vhich are indie ted on those charts .*-40 end 3-40 show that
ho did not toko tho entiro l.OOCce boaauso the offoct of what ho did
toko—that is, perhaps ho got r.omcl wator—thut on tho niddlo of tho
fifty dry, novortheloco, It w Q e noecssary for you to support his heart
action by on injection of sterofundin, glucose and colciun, wnen*t it?

a . I broke off o largo part of tho erporlaonts by intmvonoous
lnjcctlono of liquids and for the ro-vsone which I hevo olroudy givon.
3002*080 auddoaly tho nsount of blood in tho circulation is incro.".soci,
not on a treats«nt but go a s^ort, a precautionary nonsuro.I ad-
oiniatorod o circulation: and not be%.uae he noodod it. One can bco
fron hia ptlae rato vory clocrly that ho waa Quito no real.

Sov neny aviators did tho Oornun Luftwaffo hove ogod 16 ?

Pilotof

A . Pilota of thot ego? Thcro wore nono, only aoalatonta, no-
c all cl A A guanora.

3. You noon you hod boys of 16 yours of ago in gun crowa in cIjv


plonce?


12 vun-:x2-9-i-Xaloy (int. Ton ochon)
Court Ko. I.


A 15 to 17 year olds worked anti-aircraft guns in large
numbers in 19UU

3 They were working anti-aircraft guns, were they flying
in the planes?

A Ho.

^ It wouldn't have been very likely that a young boy of
16 years of age would be isolated on a raft at sea as far as the Luft¬
waffe wa3 concerned?

A That was unlikely, yor, but In the case of a young per¬
son, of course, one would expect that he would suffer less from the
medical point of view. A 16-year old would be able to hold out bet¬
ter than a 20 year old.

Q la that why you permitted a boy of 16 to be subjected
to these ex*>erl-ant?, or didn't you concern yourself with his age?

A He was quite well developed. In my opinion 16 years is
not a reason why a person can't drink sea water for a few days. You
can aoo the exporinent was stopped vory suddenly on the 5th day. The
entire loss of weight—he drank water in the meantime - for oxample,
fron the third to fourth day not only doesn't he lose anything but ho
gains weight. The total loos of weight in the experiment was U kilo.

* Did you perform any surgery on this subject on 6th of

September?

A Ko.

h as it necessary to give him a series of injections,, or
what are those penciled notations below the black line in the middle
of page 10, under the date "6th Soj."?

A These words under the block line near, after the experi¬
ment was broken off, he was given .rater several times in dooes of 200,—
one, two, three, four, that is he took a liter of water in doses of
200 cc. every hour or every two hours. That was not infusion, that was
the amount he drank.

Q ST.at was the ropa temperature of the rocsn in which the


90LL


-2 J'—.T-2-i hloy (let. Von Schon)

Court ::o. i.

subjects were kept?

A I can't teli you at the ecneot. It was tho beginning of
Sept-cber or of August, and probably not very hot.

Q Does the temperature at which a rocc is kept have any
tearing on the outooce of the experi r it?

A Of course the temperature has a certain influence as far
as there is perspiration high temperature has an influence. When sec¬
retion stops, this influence is no longer important.

Q Did you attempt to keep this roots at a temperature sim¬
ulating temperatures that cay bo found at sea?

A Ir. ny opinion temperature at sea varies considerably. It
depends on whether one is at the equator or noar Greenland.

Q rould you repeat that again. I don't bcliovo I uader-

stood you.

A I said temperature at roa varies coneidoraoly. It makes
a big difference whether one is in distress at sea on tho equator or
"tetter bne ijr ra r Greenland.

Q To simulate temperature trould be nocossary only for a
v°ry specific caso. Horo wo just V> 5c the torperatwea that happenod
to bo.

Q Did you ooneldor tho tec »raturc of a room had no bearing
on tho results of effects of tho oxparirentation in sea water research?

A Of course the tenperaturo has a certain influence, but
it cannot be dor.o in practice any otter way than to carry out tho ex¬
periments in a roce.

Q It is pretty rart: in August and Soptejixjr in tho aroa of
Dachau, is it not?

A The end of August or beginning of September it was not so
v.arn anyrcrc. It was the beginning of fall.

Q oil, the climate in Dachau is similar to the climate

here in i'urnbcrg, isn't it?


• - i presume so.


I don't hav any exact inforr-aticn on the


12 Ju rt-l S-9-3-4 aicy (Int. Von Schon)

Court So* I.

subject.

Q Did you cake any effort to install fans or to put in
cooling apparatus in the barracks or the experimental station wherein
the experiments on these U; subjects were performed?

A There was ventilation constantly. All the wiicows were
open and besides the temperature was not vory high at the tiro of tho
experinonts. It is possible when the people arrived, which was the
beginning of August, it might have bo^n warn for awhile, but when the
experiments proper started tho t-mper -ure was quite bearable, no
special heat.

Q We have seen in most of thoco charts that you had n 7-day
or 6-day, or perhaps a 6-day observation period of each subject prior
to tho cceracncu ..jnt of the experiment, and during that observation
period tho experimental subjects received additional rations. In ad¬
dition to that what physical routino did tho oxporinontal oubjocts go
through?

* A Tho subjects wore not given any furthor treatment. Thqy
woro given this just this diot; wo j.-ado urirw tents and scooticos blood
tests; they could novo frocly, go walking in tho courtyard; thoy had
ccnrloto fredden of ncvucuint within our area.

Q TToll, new, on tho weight charts w u have boon considering
hero for tho last day or two, you show tho weights of tho oxporinontal
subjocts prior to tho 7-day cbsarva‘in period, '.herein they received
additional rations, «hat can you tail us as to the weights of thoso
subjocts as compared to tho weight, or tto normal weight of a person
of their particular height and stature, woro they of average weight,
underweight or overweight?

A For the most part they were within tho normal deviations
frets the average. I will read that: Ono tras one meter 69, 63-5 kilo.
That is quite ncrml. The next was 169, 6ix kilo. The next was 160,
with 56 kilos. TJje next 163 with 62 kilos. Tho next was 167, with 61
kilos. Or. j whole perhape there woro a few who were a little below


9C16


12 (In*-. Von Schon)

Court So. I»


average, but only a very fcr»r, a very few exceptions,

3 Hor would their w_ights or sizes compare to that of a
Luftwaffe aviator, wore they of the normal German -viator type?

A I believe that in tta year 19Uh those weights wore quito
the average iw-ights in Gcrmny.

Q Now, those men avoraged about 60 kilos, that is striking
an avaragu, isn't that so, or about 120 pounds?

A Yoa. But you oust consider that thos^ are rather short

0

personsj I have Just given you tho height. They are about 160. Some
of then are oven under 160 , one 157, 159, one 162, odo 160. Soao of
then woftr tailor, but the average was quito noticoably shorter. It
makes a differ.. r*o whothcr a person is 159 cont. tal? IGO in regard
to tho normal weight,

Q Could a person underweight onduxe o soa wat> r oxperinont
hotter than a porson of nor&il weight?

A Tjjt of then had normal weight or oven incrcscod undor
tho special diet. At least thoir woight was in airh proportion to
their height that they could enduro thj oxporiaont.

Q For instanco, could an ovomoight liko nysolf enduro a
soa water oxporirwnt as well as a pirson of nrrnal weight?

A I do not consider it impossible that it rruld bo worse
for hin. Sonoono who is nuch overweight has tho water in his body
much sore firmly and suffers more from a lack of water than a thin nor
person, that is a fact.

»R, HArOY: I have no firthar question to put to Dr•
Boigolboock,

TIE FRESIDENT: Tho Tribunal will be in recess 5 minutos
until tho Tribunal is ro-arranged.

YJA DTs Does Dr. Stcinbauor h3ve any questions about
tha civircs that ho wants to ask while tho Tribunal is bore?

TH3 HESHELT: I should have asked that. I will ask coun¬
sel for defendant Hoigelboeck if he has cny redirect examination of


9C17


12 Jd>4WB-?-5-^Ioy (Int. Von Schon)
Court So* I.


the dofendant on these charts wo have just been locking at*

DR. 8TRIHBAEE?.: Yes.

THE PRESIDENT: Then we will proceed with that aattor hero*


9010


Court 1

June 12—l^-l^HD-Heehan-VonSchoon.

Redirect Examination.

2*. =TSIN3aUER: How many liver punctures can you see in
this chert?

THE WITNESS: It will toko me quite a while to find them.

I believe, however, I can remember oven though I only have
a vague recollection; there were eight.

HR. HARDY: I suggest that when he names the case whore
there was a liver puncture, he will state the case number.

THE PRESIDENT: Will thevAtness observe that when a
liver puncturt is named, he will state tho case number.

THE WITNESS: Numbers 12, 13, 20, 24, 29, 3C, 31, 32,
and 38; that la all.

BY DR. STEIN B*UER;

3. The Prosecutor showed you a number of charts, I should
llho to '■sit you now to look nt the charts which ho did now
show you; tho first w~s No. 2, so let ue discuss No. 1.

Toll us briefly how it was and how long this perron was in
the experiment end ospeclnliy if no drank wat-r. I consider
this last oolnt especially iaoortnnt.

«. I believe No. 2 has already boon dlscussod.

Q. Yes.

A. Yes, No. 2. I think for certain that ho drank water
once between the 25th and 26th.

Q. «nd tho next one, No. 5?

No. 5 certainly drank a larger amount of water botwoon
the 25th and 27th. It Is quite certain in this caso. In
24 hours he went from 57.2 to 57 Kilograms, a loss of only
200 grama. - That is impossible.

i. «nd then 5?

I believe that he observed tho conditions of tho
experiment the whole time, and it was Interrupted or. the
fifth day.


9019


Court 1

June 12-M-10-2-KlX-Meehcn-Von Schoen.

^ Ho. 10, where there is no nunber on It?

rt , No. 10 is o Schaefer case and there la no question
of drinking water against the rules. The next ono which is
not narked is No. 12. On the 4th day of the experiment,
fruB the fourth to the fifth lost 100 grams, so he drank at
lonat one half liter or three-quarter liter of water. From
the 28th to 29th he not only does not lose, but he gains
600 grans. I must assume on that .'.ay ho drank at loast a
liter of water. That is a oaso »4wro I would bo oortain
that ho drank on and one half to two lcters of wo.tor, and
what I figured out theoretically would correspond to that.

Wo have discussed No. 13, we h"ve discussed No. 14.

Of a urso, in the cases which wo have dlocuosod hero some
drank water, without its having boon mentioned oxprosoly,
and I shall put this in the statem-nt for the Tribunal
which I shall write down about this natter of woljht.

No. 15 has not boon discus sod. On the 4th day of tho
ojqjorlnent, woight was 55.9 kilograms and tho no;:t day 56
Kilograms. That is also an increase lnvelght. He had 600
cc of sea-wator for six days in the oxperinont and drank at
loast one liter of fresh water.

No. 16 is a typical case whoro the sea water drinking
had tho same effect. He got so much fresh water in botwoon
that ho hardly had any loss at all, at least in tho boginn¬
ing. Fron the 25th to the 26th ho loses only 400 grans,

Fron the 26th to the 27th his weight ronains tho same. From
the 27th to 28th he loses 200 grans. Tn^t is one of tho
cases whr drank *r.tcr constantly.

Case 19 on tfcj second day weighed 48.7 kll-grr.as, on
the third day 48.2; on tho fourth day 48.1, cr- on the fifth
day 48.3, and then he 6tarts to lose weight and was in the
experiment for two more days. That is mother case, ho


9020


Court 1

June 12-i4-10-3-H0-Keehan-Vun Schoen.


he drank water Sally. He was In the experiment a second time
durin-. which he drank water constantly again, his loss from
the 2nd to 3rd was §C0 grams; 3rd to 4th 200 grams, then the
experiment was interrupted for the fficond tine because he
failed to carry »ut the experiment.

KCk 20 fro a the 2nd to 3rd day he loses 400 grans, this
Is much too little. From the 4th to 5th day he loses 100
irons; after the 6th day the exoorlsent Is broken off. He
woe "Iso In the experiment twice. The second tine for five
days he lost a total of four kllogras3 and from the 2nd to
the 3rd day of the experiment shows an Increase of 100 grans.
Ho failed to anform to the cond:tlons of the oxpcrliiont for
tho second time too.

Case No. 24 fr m the 3rd to 4th day loses 200 \ra..io,
fr = the 4th to tho 5th dny he loses 3C0 grans, from the 5th
to tho 6th d«y ho loses 30C grans an- then for two more days
a.b;ut 1 kilogram per day d«nd then tho experiment la broken
off. The oxporlnont lasted for nine days, but the total loss
of weight w-s 8lx kilograms. That Is a certain olgn that ho
drank w-’ter c- nstantly. Those were tho cases which deceived
io whore I did not know what the cause of tho fnlluro to
1 .se weight wrs, because I could not know that. That Is why
the experiment w-s c ntlnued.

No. 26 was not discussed either. Ko had a regular loss
of weight. The ejnoriuer.t is broken off on the 6th flay.

Cose 27 Is a typical example. From the 3rd to the 4th
day he loses 2C0 grans, frun tho 4th to the 5th day no loses
cOO grans, fron the 30th to 31&t, 500 grams; another ca.se
that drank water.

Case 26, that shows such a slight average loss of weight
that one can assume that tho cx erlnent was interfered with

-y drinking water, which he began on the sec nd day ~.nd fr-»n

v02l


Court 1

Juno 12-H-10—4—KD-Meehar.-Von Schoen,

an^ fron the 2nd to 3rd day the loss of weight was only 100
grans. «t the beginning of the experiment, the losses are
U'Udly 2»re pronounced; later the loss of weight Is relative¬
ly loss. This shows he drank snail amounts of water evory
day.

Case 29 possibly drank little. Fron the 2Cth to 27th I
think that he drank sonothlng. The experiment was broken
off on the 7th day. In the second experiment, fron the 3rd to
4th Ay he loses 200 grans end the oxpcrlnent wont on only to
the fifth day.

I should like to spy that in the socond group, when I
know their devices fro cy experiences with the first group,

I knew what to do and broke off the exporlnents. If I had
wanted to continue the experiments, I w uld havo dono it
in the secind group too. This I did In the first group only
bocauso at first I did not realize tho s lgr.ifloanoo of the
failure to loso weight.


9022


Court So. 1

12 Jun 47-k-il-i-2£>:-?ri=cau (Tin Schon)

Case SL. -hat is c cc8c- of e thousand cc, t&ero one vould exocct
relatively great losses of weight. Froa the third to the fourth dry he
loses only six hundred grans; fro= the fourth to the fifth day only
three hundred grens; so that one can assune a water Intake of one and a
heIf liters, at least.

Case 32 protably cooperated rather veil. He was taken tut on the
sixth day. A careful cxrnlnatlon of these cherts will chow that when
nothing vos drunk the oxporlncat was elvoye short. Where a gre-at deal
was drunk, the condition was such that there was no reason to lnterforo
with the exoorlnent.

Case 33. Iron tho third to the fourth day he loses two hundred
grass; froc tho fourth to tho fifth dry eg'in two hundred grans, and,
nevertheless, it is stopped os the slrth day.

Case 34 Is one of the Schaefer group.

Case 36 frea the first to the second day loses only five hundred
grans althou gh the enount A urino alone has this voight, so that tho
loti -f weight through hunger cr through tho reducod caour.t of food in
this ento and the lots of water through the lungs doo# not ruuoar at ell.
Ko oust hnvo drunk tone thing. Fr js the third to the f mrth dry tho
voight rose ins tho ease. 7rv: tho fourth to the fifth day ho l*»eoe five
hundred grans although the osount of urino is eight hundred cc groator
than tho Intake of water. Theso throe hundred cc sore that ho lotos
oust bo Included In these five hundred so that this rveans that ho drank
s j-4 thing. In oclte of all the mount thnt he hoo drunk, ho wie taken
„ut of th* oxoorlaont on the sixth day.

Q. Io that the ono with the inflannrtl;n of the veins?

A. So, that case vrs not discussed. Thrt v-b n t va acute inflca-
r.Rtion. Many -f these gypsies had old skin infections a* the uiaturc
will ahow, whet nedlcine calls Vagrant's Skin, fron Insect bites
or going barefoot, and this e-oiscd chronic thrvnbophlebitle. ChPt is
not c disease but o chronic chtngc >f the veins.

I


>023


Court 5a. 1

12 Job rr i neeu (VonSehoa)


*•» 33 has been discussed. The: v; e the one vh *vs token out on
the f-.urth day.

Cr«e 27 probably fror. the third to the faurth d ry drank r littlo
'-ter, pr-bably not very such. Cn the. whole it ves ore -f the better
experiment. On the sixth dry he we taker .ut :f the experiment.

Ceee 36 — fro= the second to the third day the loo* of vcight of
tv *° hundred cc, although the kidneys alone eliainetoi three hundred cc.
Thi* indicate* with certainty an intake of water. 7roa the fourth to
the fifth day the weight renain* the sane. nevertheless. thl* caoo v* B
taken out of the exoeriaent on the *lxth day.

Cae 39 ha already been dlscusced. That is the 49-yeer-old who
alvay* drank v»tcr and actually did not pertlciocte in any cxocrlaont,
really.

Case 40, fron tho third to the fourth da?/, increateo in weight by
one hundred grass. He certainly drank something. On the fifth day ho
vd* takon out of tho cxoerlncnt. That vae the lo-year-old vo we in a
vory feriof exoeriaent.

Coo 41 ha a relatively slight lose of weight froc day to day.
ri* total lo of weight within a six-day e'rjerl lent period aoounto to
three kilograas. He begin® Mth forty-nine kilograms and or.d* the
exoerinent with forty-clx. That is ono of the coses vho v*s rather
clover, r-e took snail enounts regularly and that i* hard to prove. It
ie i-roosgible for a oorson vho 1 * in a similar experiment for sir dayo,
vhon he has lo calorie* than he need e, to looo only throe kilograms
in this long tine. This loe* of weight i* lece than whrt nary people
in the Schaefer group had.

Cp*e 42. Iron the third to the fourth day the weight did not
change - or, rather, he loses a hundred grans although the amount of
urine vos two hundred grens acre than tho intake, -ne oust assume here
egain that up to three-cuartere of a liter of wDt«.r was drunk eni, al-
.theugk fron the fourth to the fifth day he eliminates Part of this
e ~'- of wj,?tr and had four hundred cc acre urino, the loss of weight


9024


Court So. 1

12 Jus 47-k-li-3-lEk-?ri3ean (Von Scfcon)


It only seven hundred grass. That is hardly cossible. He certainly
Irani: water tvice. He vas taken out of the exnerinent on the seventh

day.

Case *7 free the third to the fourth day of the exnerir.ent gains
one hundred7 Judging by the anount of urine alone he suet have drunk
five hundred cc of vater at this tine. Kevertheless, the e'xerinent is
interrupted on the sirth day.

And Case 44 is froa the Schaefer grouo.

Q, Sow, vfaich grouos drank water according to these tables?

A. diving the subjects the benefit of the doubt, I have calculated
that froa the grouo of a thousand cc no one vpa aoro than three days
without fresh vpter, not a single person. I figured that out eubsoouontly.
Froa the group which got five hundred cc of sea wetor about 20 to 25
porcont shoved good results. Thoso wore all caoeo whore the crocrisont
woo stopoed In a short tiao, on tho sixth day at the lotcst. Everybody
that lasted longsr was sor.eonc who drank water; and, to tho best of tty
ability, and using aethods which I think any doctor would rourove of, I
figured out the loss of body weights and I shall hand that steteaont in
in writing later. Shore is not a single case who lost so -.uch body
weight that he was in any danrer of dar.rge to hie health by loss fron
water.

That chjrt c n be chocked by the curves - that is, on erotrt
can coopare th on?

A. Yts. The total loss of weight ie entered in this curve and
that figure is taken fron tho chart.

D.-.. S.ZirHAllr.: kr. President, I should like to show these weight
charts to the exp*rt, vfcich are in Docuacnt Book 2 and is So. 75. This
is a photostat. If I nay subnit then now 8 o that they nay be shown to
kr. Ivy and so that I nay ask fcia cuestions about these charts, I win
give it an exhibit nunber later. Sc, it will be Exhibit 27.

T?Z PSESHEST: Counsel nay ureser.t the- to the witness in due tine.

JUDGE SSSEIuG: As I understand your statement, dcctor, you hove


Court So. 1

12 Jun 47-ii-ll—i-iSt-rr iaeau (Von Schon)


certain charts which you vttild like to have the eroert *fco Is

going to he called by the prosecution see end study, prior to the tine
that he takes the stand so that vfaen it cones tine for your cross-
exenination you nay nropose to his hynothetical Questions hared uoon
these figures end then you vill then save tine heceuse he has had then
available for study. Is that correct!

2 E. STEIESAISB: Toe.

THS PriSIDirT: Counsel, you can consult prosecution to see when
they can be subnitted to Dr. Ivy, the expert.

Ifi. ECCEVALD: I shall do ay beet to got it through to Dr. Ivy, but,
lnasouch as he is going to take the stand at one-thirty, I do not think
it vill be possible for hia to stud.” those charts before thic afternoon.
Possibly, if dofonse counsel vill oubnlt .hen now. Dr, !w win be orc-
pared to answer Questions submitted by defense counsol tomorrow.

TEE PRESIDENT: It nay bo oubnitted to the orpert, Dr. Ivy, and he
vill considor th«s vhon poselblo.

IF.. STEIKBAU1E: It le aleoing in your docuncnt took, "our Honors.

JUDGE 5Z8EIW: Vhet nur.bcr did you give that!

IE. STEXS3AUER: 23. his document consists of to parts, r ohoto-
stnt chart and a typewritten chart. The typewritten chart I have trkon
fron the cross-exanination by .r. Hardy. It contains tho c'perinonte
which vorc roncatod.


.902 b


>


Co-rt 1

June 12-.'.-12-l-HD-3er.rJ-Yvn Scnoen.

Those are esses XI # 13, 17, 18, 19, 20, 29, «31. I
repeat, 11, 13, 17, 1=, IS, 20, 29, 31.

THE P&SSIDEIJT: I understand th*\t those numbers refer
to ths exoerlaentrl subjects; Is that correct?

DR. STEINS-.'o'ER: Yea, the subjects, nccorwln_. to tnese
c.i-rta which we h ve discussed todvy.

DR. K0C.-"«U: I Just note th t tnls typewritten sheet
Is only In Sornnn. ro.slb’y Dr. Stoinbru-r Ins aooo list
for the snico of the Ex ort ''ltnoee which he could •»’ n.‘. over.

DR. STEINS-CER: *Je con see fros this bl s clvrt there
ro only r few figures — a weight ch^rt; ther- r.ro none in
English.

DR. KOCH’.’jiLD; Only the typewritten ch rt h-s n
ex lcnrtl <n to the nuabora, n.l is e lvcn ln Geram. I only
want to Know If you nossess •» translation.

DR. ST£ir:a»USa: Bemuse of the lock of ti.-o, It wee
:-t ooeelblo. It ..'8 not been translated rs yet.

JUDGE 5£ BRING: I would surest t.V t .if the translators
hive a cony of tno Guru n, one ■> c e I chained, they h-vo
written ir. pencil the Er.-lish translation of the C-^ra-n
text n that sheet.

DR. hOCBV«LD: I will try t -et the translations.

THE PRESIDENT: Joes too Counaol h ve any further
quostl.ns?

DR. 5 7 El NS n -'IR: One very brief question.

3Y DR. 5T2IIJB-U2A:

Q. You testified pbjut _lvin£ drinXln_ water orally
r intravenously, nna you used various si e ns for fir. at;
one sign in the Ch-rt is ■HP". You said thet v s petonic
table 8-It. It w s thou ..t that t / t -e'-nt br-is junctures,
but I w' nt y u to state tnls *nP! Is always nt tnc end and
.or.3 e. -ct..i' t _ with the Int^rr -.fcl-.n -f the c: rlaents.


9C27


Court 1

Juno 12-14-12-2-HD-3card-Von Schoen.

Would you please with tho rid of the chert show ne very
briefly whore this "HP* Is, th-t It Is at the end of the
experiment?

A. Yes, the "HP" also neons that the experiment was
Interrupted. There wns no puncture jT the brain, In any
casos, ~nd I never In ny life performed a puncture of tho
brain. It w~s a Hyootonic solution th-t was Introduced. It
Is Orrlor P-rent-rl-l; Oral scans through tho south,
Parontorl-1 scans the Introduction through the veins.

DR. 6TZIJ3«USR: I h~vo no questl'.ns about tho chart,
but I should llhc to asit questions ir. tho direct examination.

THS PRESIDENT: Well, It Is aloost time for the roooes.
Tno redirect examination will w'-lt until the close of Dr.

Ivy 1 8 tostlaany.

Tho Tribunal will now be In recess until 1:30 o'oloc&.
(Whoroupon tho Tribunal recessed until 1330 hours,

12 Juno 1947.)


c 902C


12 June U7-».-AID-13-l-Gross
Court Bo. 1


-FT3S0D0N SESSION

(The bearin' reconvert I at 1330 hours, 12 June 19U7). *

THE MTSH-Ls Persons in tho ccairt roon will please find their
seats.

Tto Tribunal is a^ain in session.

IP. H..7DT* 'Jay it please the Tribunal, at this tino the Pro solution
deairos to call Dr. Andrew C. Ivy to the witness stand.

THE PRES ID E??!* Has tho witnoss shoot boon nado for Dr. Ivy? It
can bo mde as scon as possiblo.

HP. Hf.RJX* I will have it complete.! and filod at a later dato,
you Honor.

THE PJESnECTi Tho ’©fondant Boi/;lboock will rosuno his placo in
tho dock his tostir.'ry bain interrupted hio to an orwr-cncy call for
nivjttor ritnoss.

Tho "-rshnl will suiicn tho witnoss Dr. Ivy to tho stand.

Dr. ..ndrow C. Ivy, a witnoss, took tho stan’ tostifiod as follows*
THE PTE^ENT* TT vj w l tnoes will rc.iso his ri ht han> and bo owero.
Pa pent after noI

I swoar that tho ovi ’cnco I shoil lvo shall bo tho truth, tho
wholo truth, an' nothin but tho truth, so help no Oo U
(Tho witnoss ropeatol tho oath.)

TJG PnasnehTi Tho Witnoss will bo sor.tod.

DIRECT SX.Jd’i.nON

BY HR. HJlDYl


Q *.viti»33, what is your full nnno?


12 Juno U7-1 .-A7D_13-2-T-rc s s
Court Ih. 1

A I rccoivsd ry ransar school education In several statu* —•

!!isscuri, Tennessee, Goor.ia. I receive*. ” college education In
Missouri. I receivod tho Master of Scienco degree and the Doctor of
Physiology 1 .o r-a fren tho University of Chicago, Doctor of Hodicino
tegroe frai *ush deal Ceil ego in affiliation with tho Uni varsity of
Chica- o. I have boon • ranted the honorary Doctor of Scienco dogroo.

q Vhat has been your experience in tho educational fiel, 'octor?^

A I tau ht physiolo y in tho University ~f Chicaro for four years.

School if !!o ’icino for four years at Ncrthwostom University of Chica.©
for 20 yoars air.’ zkw 1 an Vico President of tho University of Illinois,
in charge of tho Colloro of ’lodicino, Dentistry, Pharmacy, and Nursing,
and at the saao tine distinguished profossor of physiolo-y in tho
praduato school of tho University of Illinois.

q Do you nalntain uo-dburshi? in various nodical sociotics? If so,
would y-u kin ’ly olidt fer tho Tribunal Just what sodotios you aro a
rwnbor in?

1 Marbor ef American Counoil of Physicians, American Modical
Association. I havo boon choirnan of the Soctlon of Physiology and
pntholot-y of tho American ’'odical Association, ilenber of American
Physiolo ical Sodoty of which I havo boon prosi Vont an 1 nonbor of tho
African Oc.stro-Entorelo leal nssn. of which I havo boon president, a
nonbor of tho Society of Experlnontal 3iolo.;y of which I havo boon
past chairman, amber ~f nu-’-arous othor spocialty seciotios an’, havo
boon president for example of tho Instituto of ^odicino Society of
Internal *icino of Chica;;©.

q "ill you outline for tho Trihun l briofly what rosoarch
oxporionco you havo ha ’?

!y research as pertained principly to subjects in physiological
and. clinical investigation. ^st of ny werk has boon in tho fioll of . |j

the alirtontary tract, more recently in the Gold of aviation nodicino.

I havo published scao 900 artidos in tho various Gel Is of rosoarch in
njdicinu. Turin; the 7ar I was scientific ’iractor of the Naval Nodical


9030


12 Juno 17-.^.73-13-3-0ross
Court Jr‘» 1


Rosoarch Institute which ©ovared rosoarch in all fields cf hinan
fcdoloy.

1 Have you been a aa-.bor of too Comitt ee on Clinical Investi-
..-aticn of ttvi Kati onal Rosoarch Council?

I have boon a noabor of several co-rdttoo3 cf tho National
Rosoarch Council cf tho Uni tod States. I was a caber of too Comittoo
cn C lin ical Investigation sinco 1939, a ^Ksr’bar f tho Cmittoo on
Decompression Sickness, a no bar cf tho Corrdttoo on Fati'-uo and
!*itrition as related to Indus trial workers# I an a nerfeer cf tho
Comittoo on ..vietdn ’tolcinc, also of tho National Rosoarch Council#

"1 Y'oro you also a consultant tc tho plans of to) fjuartor nstor
Control of tho Uni to *. St- toe?

A Tos. Consultant cf too Surgeon Gonoral of tho Uni tod Stntoa
Arry in tho Division of Nutrition, consultant to tho Pear! of Mo.lcino
and Sur^ory of too Unito! Statos Navy#

CJ And in addition to ycur Mtias as consultant to tho Buronu
of Molcino an’. Surf ory cf tho United Statos ?fcvy you wero sciontific
director of tho Naval Ho leal Rosoarch Instituto?

A Yoa. I sarvo in that capacity for 9 Tenths hiring tho la tor
part of 19U2 an’ rvst *f 19U3. function was to orpanlw tho staff
of tha institute an’ start its pr-Motion in research*

Q Doctor, I will intorrupt you for a xxrunt. In as much as this
intom. ;aticn is in the Zr\;li3h lnniuago, nftor I ask a question if you
will, kinly hesitate for a nenont boforo answorin;- so that tho in¬
tegrator can .rcporly interpret the answers an! quostiens into tho
Oeman language#

An.!, noro recently, Motor, havo you served in tho capacity as or.
export to th: Secretary of “ar, selecto ! by tho American !'edical
Association?

A Tos, I have been s.rvin; in that capacity* solccto! at tho
request, of tho Secretary 7 ; ar by tha Boar 1 f Trustees cf the .aiorican
•fedical Association#

9031

I


12 June U7-A-uIT>J3-i.-Oros3
Court No. 1

q First of all, ic this exardnation, dector, I desire to ask you
srvj questions relative t.c research in the fiol’. cf aviation aodicino*
First, whet are ycur ros«.r.”ch qualifications relative to explosive *
'oo.oprossion or tho situation tc which porscns flyinr in a pressure
cabin aircraft would b'. tx.::sed when flyir. at bO to 60 thuaand foot
if the cabin wero runt a *ci by I'un fire?

4 As a DCdber / tic Zo nit tee on Aviation ’fo'lcino and the
Co.Tdttoe on Doc apr-easion Sickness of tho National Research Counoil I
recently publish* \ two a-rticlos on problem portainin to doconprosaion
sicknoas, Ono a.-ponrod iia the Journal of Aviation Moll cine early last fall.
Another in th.*, journal rf tho, ..noriocn radical Association, I boliovo
oithor in D^jcccbor or Jaranry.

Q iCjnt aro y:ur 'rosoarch qualifications rolativo t. doc-nprossion
■icknofjr ; r .rossurr drop sickness?

A I havo Just in licatod that. I have cn’o a apociil stu V of tho
C.-.U 30 an’ synptr-.a of chckos or ecu idn ’Xhich occur under certain
conditions *t hi'h altitude. X node a spocial atu’y of tho cauao of
bonds or pair* in the re ion f tho Jcinta on expoauro to hi <h altitude.

I havo undo i r.ocial at«V of froo foU through tho air. In 19h0 and
19 ul xohilc ,r fessirnal ^rachuto Junpor bail out cr Junp out of tho
piano at an altitu !o cf 32,£0 foot and fall wittout oponinj tho paro-
chuto to a level ef around 2000 foot whero ho eparod hia parachute. No
wore interostol in tho offset of freo fall on hoart rato an’, roapiration
and other physiclc ical functions. This Junpor had ottachod to Mn 100
pounds cf physi:lojical apparatus, 'o had oloctro ’.os connected to his
chest so that the heart boat couli bo broadcast out over tho air ’.own
to tha ground to bo recorded cn a wax ’isc. ~o had a '.ovico, a recording
baro-raph, so a curve cf the rato cf fall threu h tho air could bo m.lo.
-fe ha'* a nourr raph *r an apparatus for aakinp a rec-rd f tho rato of
nnplitu do of respiration and ether evices for »*!»;: stu’ios cf tho
physiolc ical responses to free fall fren hi -h altitu do.

90 32


Court 1

Juno 1 >-ji-14-l-H3-Feldt-Yartenburg r

Have you d>ne any research work relative to rescue
froo hi*.. altitudes?

a. Tills particular problem on free fall pertained to tho
probio- of rescue froa hljh altitudes because It was our
belief that perhaps it was aoet advisable for aviators when
the 1 ' t to br 11 out from their pl"ne at altitudes particular¬
ly above 35,‘CO foot, to trice e free fall.

i., "ell then those were studios on oorlode of useful
ci,iaol-uano98 whon exposed without oxygen nt different
altitudes?

n. ’.'oil, vo u^do studies on periods of free conscious-
no3fl at various "ltlcudos Is order to find out how lon e no
would bo -bis to write or to thin?, effectively and efficiently
whon exposedvithout supplemental oxygen at hloh altitudes.

To bo 8 oclflo, If on aviator wore exooso.* without a sup plo-
nontary oxygon supply to an '•ltltu.*® of 30,000 feet whoro
thoro 1 8 not enough oxygon to supply tho brain for n very
Ion .orlod of tine, r.ow lon 6 would It be before he would
lose o.nscl uenoss, or how lon 3 w.uld It be before It would
be .in? bio for him to write? Or If he wore exposed to 40,000
fe«.t with at supplemental oxy £ en, how Ion. would he be bio
to wrlto?

...w did tho United dtrtea nr my- nlr Coras equip Its
hi .fc ltltude flylnpersonnel for escape at hi«h nitItados?

«. Tho;* wer. equljaed with an oxygen mask which wr.o
ntt.acted by rubber tube to c boll-out Pottle of oxygen. In
It was r. quantity of oxy = cr. was comorosood Into the b.all-out
bottle which was In r pocket ->r« the pants le_. The supply
of oxy cr* w-s adequate to keep tho flyer adequately supplied
wit •; xy e:i until he reached a level of 15,000 feet, where a
su \e ent?l oxy -en supply was no longer required.

.. Did the flyl.-it personnel also wear an electrically


9033


Court 1

June 12-A-14-2-HJ)-Feldt-Vartenburg.


boated suit?

A

A. Yos, the suit was electrically heated until the tiaa
they left the plane. It w?e not electrically heated, how¬
ever, after they left the plane. But the wnrnth of course
would ho retained for some tl=e after leaving the plane.

Q. With this equlpaont coult the flyln fi personnel of the
Jnltod States nray «lr Cores abandon a plane at helots up to
40 ,000 foot?

a. That Is correct.

Q. Could they abandon a plane at any higher altitudes
with this equipment?

a. They could abandon the plane at n higher altltu&o,
but they night lose consciousness because at altltudoe obovo
40,000 f-ot In order to adequately oxygenate the blood It Is
nocossr.ry to sunoly ICO.i oxygon under pressuro.

Q. What Is the chief d"n a or in balling out at altitudes
of 4C,OCO foot? I 1 angina the cold would bo one danger, -and
then the unconsciousness feature. Would those be the two
dangers that they would encounter?

a. If you did not take n free fall or open your pnrnohuto
within a few seconds after leapln c out, you would be oubjoct
to the hazard of freezing an exposed ->art, particularly,
and to lack of oxygon.

Q. How In th- dovelopaont of thlo oqulpoent used by tho
Jnltod States «ray Air Corps for flying personnel who escaped
from high altitudes was It necessary to use prisoners no
orperlaont-l eubjects to develop that equlancnt?

a. Ko. as a. Bettor of f'ct. It was unnecessary to use
huaan subjects except to test the equipment f'ftor It had
boon made. It was possible on the b-'sls of theoretical
considerations to deteralne tho asount of oxy._en that had to
be put in the ball-out bottle In order to -reserve con-


902.


Court 1

June l2-j»-14-3-H0-?eldt-V2rtenburg.

eclcusneas or to maintain an adequate oxy-enntion of the blo^d
froa r>. certain hl.h altitude to a lower altitude where a
supplementary oxygen supply would be unnecessary.

ft. Dr. Ivy, are you familiar with the evidence waich has
been -.resented before the Tribunal in connection with the
hl 0 h -ltltuie experiments conducted at the Dncnou concentra¬
tion ©gap?

i« I am.

ft. Hnv- you had the opportunity to dtudy the report
written by Ruff, Romberg, or.d flascher, which is Document No.
402 f ound In Doouawnt Book No 2?

A. I am.

%. Do you hove Dooiflvnt Book 2 before you, Doctor?

a. Yus.

... *'ould you kindly turn to Fo b »> 88 of the £n b llsh
DooUBant Book, and you will note therein o rc ort of an
cxporla-nt. Can you toll us whether or not It w-s nocosaary
f. or form suoh « hazardous experiment as sot forth In this

document?

A, I do not bellove that It w.-s necessary to do this
ox*,orient in or .'.or to '.cteralno the equipment to supply
avl.tora who h"vc to toll out of *n airplane nt high "ltitudo.

Jr j you tnlnk It wns necessary to subject these human
boln .s t'„ suoh a -rolonjcu aorlod of unconsciousness duo to
Oxygon lack t find ut whetnor or not It would be best to
8.:. ly toll out oxy.cn equipment and to take a Tree fall part
of t:e way from 40,000 feet If the .xy = en equlnnont were not
?v liable?

«. No, I believe that the Inform’tlon wnlch was obtained
by chose ex eriments on human belr.^s coul- :c obtained froa
oniaale, a6 Is Indicated by the results of- Lutz and Wondc
referred to In the document. The differences between tho


9035


Court 1

June le-«-l4-4- HD- reldt-Wartenbur 0 .


responses of tho human subjects and tho animalo os repovtou
by Lutz -*nd »endt were not sufficient, In my opinion, to
vr.rrent the performance of these quite hazardous experiments.

i.. Prof. Ivy, do you oonalder the experiments which
are described In this document, thrt Is the O roup Romberg and
Rcschor report, Document No. 402, to have boen particularly
dangorous?

a. I consider thee to be dangerous because of tho
prolongod period of unconsciousness to which the subjoots
wore oxpoBed. For example, they woro unconscious for periods
of around twenty minutes, and they were disoriented for
periods of rround thirty to ninety minutes. That la a dangor¬
ous period of oxygen lack to which to expose tho brain. I
r.groo that since these workers followed the electrocardiogram
domon8tratee that the ho-rt of those subjects wna-not
nomcntorirlly affected or sl e nlflcantly affected by this
prolonged exposure to oxygon laok. 3ut tnose experiments
do not show, or the results do not show that the cello of
the brain were not injured. One of tho higher faculties of
tho brain 1 b le^rnln^, and Wv. Know that tho learning process

•

Is rather sensitive to oxy Q on lack, and tho only way to
chock against tho possibility of ua.nago of the learning
mechanism by prolonged oxposurc to oxygon would have boon
to have determined the I.i. of these subjects or tho ability
of those subjects to lerrn before and after the subjocts
were exposed to such a -rolonged period of oxy 0 en lack.

KR. H.-RDY: I wish to Interrupt you for a moment, Dr.

Ivy. Hry it please the Tribunal, It hce bven called to my
attention th'’t defense counsel for Ruff and Romberg arc not
present, -nd Inasmuch as this testimony will affect their
ensos, I at tnis time will aak Dr. Ivy to set aside his
testimony concernln- the hi-h altitude experiments, and I

9036


Court i

June 12—l-i-5-HD-r eldt- orten'our 0 .

proceed to the aoa water exoeriaenta. I «a advised that Or.
S'.uter and the other defense attorney any be here this after¬
noon. If not, we can t:.ke It up toxori-cv In tn»ir prosonoo.

TK2 r?.£3ID£N7: Vlll you see to It that counsel for
Ruff and Roa'cor- arc notified of the f"ct that this testimony
lo to bo c lvon?

kH. rJvRDY: I will, Your Honor.

THE FR£3ID£1T: Vtar t -hnae of the witness 1 examination
sro y.u -bout to take up?

KR. EaRDY: Sen water oxnerlmenta. 1 note that ooeneol
for secfccr-Froyaonu arc present. Io It possible th t Dr.
Polkocnn Is here In the court house? I wonder If Dr. Stoln-
bauor c^n answer that?

DR. STZZ£3aUSR: Dr. Folkaann la on a trip.

KR. ShRDY: Then In view of that, Your itenor, I will ask
to roceod with the aeo water experiments • nd Interrogate Dr.
Ivy o. noornln u then. I don't know what wo c-n do -'o ut tho
obsonoo of Dr. Polkaann, Inasmuch is ho Is out of tho olty.


12 June ':7—Id—ij-I-Karr-w (Int. irtonburg)
Court Sc. 1


TI£ ~?E3HZ2.'r: Counsel nay proceed.

BT W. HdRDTt

Q Dr. Ivy, what has been ycur experi-ucco relative to the larger
problem of survival cn a raft at sea or the potability of sea water?

A In 1939, as a noebor of tho Coosittee on Clinical Invo3ti ,-ation
fer the Kationcl Research Council, I was askoi to nako an invest! g-ation
of tho host prcceiiro fer packinj drinking water in cans for use as
e:»r;:ency ’rlnking water aboard rafts. As a rosult cf that study,
cannot w-tar was pr^ ’ucod anti was supplied to the robber rafts that
are part of the oquipcent ->f airplanes. I was also askod t. aako a
stw *y ,f survival rations ftr robber life rafts, ant! tho ration that is
now be in uool by tho U. S. .jy an’ Kavy for that purposo is a part of
that dovolopremt. I sight say, that whon I was at the Naval Modioal
Rosoorch Institute as scioitiflc Irootor, I served as a collaborator
in tho projoot which lei to tho desalination or tho xvnoval of salt fron
sea water in or'.or tc ron !ar it potablo* In that connection, I nl;:ht
soy that tho cherdeal netbod which wo dovolopod is, frea a chemical
tochnilo deal stan*pcint, very much liko that which was favolopod by

A

Dr. Konra l Schaofor. 'o carried it furthor, however, an’, '.ovolopod it,
insofar as its application to c- ndtions •^oard a raft is concoroed, so
that it was vary officiont. fa used plastic bags which could bo packod
in a vary acoU spece and which would bo usod for carrying out tho
chonical raaction.

'I W. y u ever naka a stu V of tho toxicity jf soa wator?

.. Tho toxicity cf soa wator, yoc, It»s ono of the first exporinents
that wo porforuefl at tho !fevrl ’fa leal Research Institute. Thcro wero
throe subJacts. I s.-rvod as ono subject, tho first day takin~ only 106
celeries in the fern cf can!y. I oonsuasr 600 cc of soa water which had
ft salinity of approximately 3,U$ and a so dun chl-ri lo or tablo salt
ccntont of 3£. The second day I consumed 900 cc of tho sea water. Tho
Thirl day, 1000 cc, or in threa ’ays, I consumed a total cf 2,U)0 cc of
soa wator. At the end cf that tir.e I was rath.r markedly dehydratod an!


903C


12 June U7W 1 -.;i3-l5-2-?-arrcw (Ir.t* Fartenburs)

Court !fc, 1

rr.ther intoxioatod to the point cf developing hallucination*^ A second
sublet, who served with vo voluntarily, was a hospital ecrpsnnn* Ho did
iv-t fellow directions, Tho first day he becano so thirsty that ho con¬
suls d a total cf 1,000 cc of sea water. The followin' ncrnlnj ho was so
thirsty that, within tho course of throo heurs, ho oonsuzei an
a mtional 1,000 cc, which caused hia to develop vonltint and dlarrhoa,

Uo stopped thJ continuation of tho oxporinent cn this subject, Tho
other subjoet was a -toctor rho did not oonsuno the sea water in quantitios
to which I co ns used tho soa water. Ho oonsuno d, as I rocall now, only
800 cc of soa water in throo days,

Q And what effect id that havo on hint

A That quantity cf soa water had no particular effect on hin. Ho
dolotorirus offoot,

q Thjn whet stuios 1' y-u ixiko durin tho course of this
oxporiaontal series?

A Tfo node rather clabcreto studios cf chan^os In tho exposition
of tho blood an ’ cfanncos in tho output of urlno. 'o woro prlraarlly
lntorostod in krcwin,'', purposos of confimation of litoreturo, tho offoot
cf drinkin; soa mtor cn oursolfos, and a Iso in conflmine data
alroa *y in thj lltoreturo ro. ardlnv tho capaoity of tho hunan kidney
to corxjjntrnto salt in tho urine,

q To what extent can tho team kidney ccncontreto salt cr chlorido-
exprossod as so'iun chloride?

A In this an-’ subsequent studios wo porfornod on this subject wo
found that tho hunan ki May will cone antra to so'iun chloride or tablo
salt to tho extort of fron 1,8 to 2*. Nov, occasionally ie tho literature
yi will find a fi-uro as hi h as 2.3. I know of only cno such fi ure
that has boon reported in tho literature. However, and I havo always boon
skeptical about the accuracy cf that fi ure, and when I roa in tho
Record the report that cor tain subjects of Dr. Boi lbceek concentre tod
salt in tho urine to tho extent of proctor than 2,3, or oven as hi h as
3 , I felt that that was '-Mo to inaccuracy in tho use of chasdcnl cwth.


9039


12 JUre li7-v\k7D-l5—3-£arrow (Int. arteribur,;)

Court tOm 1

3 "net is the concentration of salt in sea water. Doctor?

- That varies Ispcndiaj upon tho scurco of tho sea water, ;.s I
in icatal so-su fcise a o, thj salinity of tho sea water wo usod which
was picked up off the coast of Norfolk, Virginia and had a salinty of
around 3,1*1, Sceotines, water taken frea tiw coan has a such lowor
salinity than that, Tho roason for that caurally i3 that the sea rator
is re:mod too near tho m-uth of a rivor which would dlute the salt in
sot mtor, Tho awravo salinity .f sea water fron tho oceans throughout
tho world., accor in to cy reooilocticr., is sxnwhoro botwoon 3,U and
3.5 U That Joans that it contains around 2,9 to 3.2* table salt,

3 /Ivon cno drinks sea water containln approximately 3,3* salt,
tho ki'noy, in or'or V cxcroto tho oxcossivo salt, mist uso body
water. Is that correct?

i. That is correct. If y u ’rink son wator that contains 3* of
tafclo salt an * if tb, ki 'itrj cann t concontrato salt to a ;-ranter oxtont
than 1,8* thon, in jxcrotin thj ronaindsr of tho salt fren the bo 'y,
body water, which otherwise would rv,t bo oxcreto!, woul ’ havo t> bo used
in tho oxcroti.n f tho extra salt. This wtul*. brin about unusual, or
roater than cthjrwiso would occur, .aeration -f bo V *ator,

1 "oil, if a pjm n -rjro iven sea w. t r to ’rink, would thay
’ehylrato faster than if they wore ivun n w.ator to Vink?

.. Yes, that is correct up to a our tain point, Tho bo y, under
ccn'itions cf lack of intaloi of fresh wztar, can oxcreto a snail quantity
Of tablo salt which rai ht ccno fran a s-.all covunt :>f sea wator. For
oxarplo, if I woro t start fastir.-, after two, throo r f ur lays tho
-utput of urine - ry output vf urino .foul" bo appr xir.ataly hOO cc. That
would e.ntain less than a ran -f salt r it would contain only a
fraction of 1* f salt, so it ’r-,ul ’ bo possible f. r m to toko in nr.ybo
a :r a :ra.- ar.” a half cf salt in the fora of sea wator 3c as to
ir.croaso tho concentration :f salt in ry hOO cc of urino up to a concerv-
tration ;f 1 , 81 .


9010


12 Juno u7-a-r.TT>-l5^-Karr JK (Ir.t. ^arteribux-r)
&;urt !fo. 1


1 "'ell, Dec ter, trail* y.u 327 that if parsons were given 500 or
l.OCO cc of soa water daily to 'rink thr.t they aiht io sooner than if
a -orson was jiven no water?

- There ia m question about that.

^ ' 7 ell, wool ’ you refer to the -.fficial transcript of this trial
n pa 0 8UB3 of the En lish transcript? Do you have that with you. Doctor?

IHPTP'STEtt 'Tiat fete is that, please, ?lr. Hardy?

!Ci. This is tho afternoon session of 3 Juno 19h7, the tosti-

i»ny of Dr. Vclbar'« Pace 8^83 of the transcript, in tho rd !dlo of tho
paje, be.lxrtLn.;. tfith tho words t "Howovor, tho exporlnonts didn't yive n
definite supportive ovi '.ones of that." Does che interpreter havo that
sontonco?

i:rrs°-PnETZR: ios.

BY !2. H..2DY:

■1 Men, Doctor, hero, in tho tostinory of Pr fess-r Dr. Vclhnrd, it
stfttos as follows*

"Howovor, tho ox-.'ortuwnts 1 n't ivo a ’x>finite supp-rtivo ovi.'.onco

of that, but thoy 'id havo an lap rtrnt rosult, Not only tho obvious

result, naaoly that tho Schaofor .vWr -.ms suj-ori^r to anythin- olso,

but also tho obsonr tion that tho hi ‘nays can, novortholcss, concontrato

water so a3tjni3hir. ly well, up t, tho c-.ncontrati.n f soa water, that,

• •

in the future, no ciul' ivo the adviso that in casoa A soa distress,
instead of boin c npl^toly thirsty ono could rather ’.rink 500 cc cf son
water on'., in that merer, incroaso tho salt contact -f the blood but
would net havo tr to afraid if dehydration quito 3c quickly."

Now, is it truo that the hnmn ki 'noy can concontrato salt to tho
extent that salt is prosont in soa water?

A Ha, it is n-t true. The stctenant is not true an' tho roasrnin.;
is not true an’ it tnull be a very ’an, orou 3 stataiont tc nako for poople
at 30 a cr. a raft. It would lea 1 to their ’.oath in the c-«irso of around 6
to 1 L lays. I acar., sooner than fr a 5 1U "ays, ’open'in upon tho

90U


12 Jam 1 >--5-?-“*rro(Int. ' ur^orfcnrg)

Court So. 1


enviroaDsntal c:n 'itlens. TJ»7 wool ' *a sooner, .rlririnr- SCO cc of sea


watdr q dey, then if thov 'rank no wator.


90t2


Court To. 1

12 cun 47-A_16-l-SEX-,*.aloy (Yartenberg)


Q, Have ycu bed an oooortunity, Dr. Ivy, to read extensively this
testimony of Professor 7ollherd?

A. Tes, I h«-ve read all of It.

Q- I visfc to point out to you an page 6464 of tho record that
Professor VoUhard testified thet drinking sea water treated with 3orka-
tit «wuld have serious consocuonces after six days and lead to death if
continued. Sow, is that statement on tho cart of Professor Vollherd
inconsistent with tho statement on page e463 which you have Just
analyzed?

A. Too, I believe that it is inconsistent and I agree with tho
statement you Just read on oage 6484.

Q. Then you agree that 3orkatit is nothing aoro than sea vntor
without tho taste, is that right?

A. That is cccrect.

Q, In studying tfcesi experlrionts of Professor 3olglbocck and tho
charts and records could you toll us vfcethor or not those exoorinents
wero necessary?

A. They wro not nocesscry In order to dotornlne whethor or not
Schnofor vntor oould bo taken without horning the body. That would bo
determined by a Chemical test. ke have set uo public hoalth standards
wfcaro the chemical composition of potable vrter, Schaofer water, produced
would be analyzod to see if it ccao up to theso chemical roouire-.ontB,
end a number cf experiments have boon done to demonstrate that bob voter
in Quantities larger than ICO to 200 cc's, as I hare already lndlcntod,
hove a doltarious action on the body when sen water is tho only sourco
of weter, md it is well known that there is no fruit Juice or similar
orgcnic material which can be added to sec wntor which will neutralise
the effocts of snlt on the body. All thpt one had to do would be to add
som aerkntit to this sea water *nd stud;/ it chemically, as Dr. Eonrad
Schaefer did, to see if the salt in any vey were modified, and there

I

was no reason really to do that, because e person who knew anything about


900


Court So. 1

12 Am 47-A-ie-2-i£X-«alov (Vortenbcrg)

bio-chemistry would know that you could not modify teble salt in any way
to at to codify ltt effect on the body.

Q. Vat Itnwceteary to test the Berka method uoon human boing6 in
order to determine lt» efficacy?

A. 3ot for practical reatoce, no.

Q. Could yc*i have detcmlned vhether or not the Berka .method vat
of any value chemically?

A . In the tame v*y Dr. Konrad Schaefer did It.

Q, How long would that take. Doctor?

A. If you had the etraeretut act up, the eolutlons and the nccos-
tery arrangement! cade, you could doterilne that In the coureo of half
an hour. In order to a tody %«tcr reoulrecontt and talt and «*»tor
metabolite, the oxpcrl manta at were performed by Dr. Bolglbocek could bo
Justified, but they w^rc only nccettary to perform In order to dotormlno
whothor or nit Beriea water vat a potable water, end vhothor or not
Schoofar water vet a vator which would be of bcnoflt to human phyeiolo«y,

Q. Dr. Ivy, do you havo before you Documont Book V? That It tho
documont book of tho proaocutlon which containt thu docurentt concerning
tho ace vator exoerimentt.

A. Yoa.

Q, Vould you kindly turn to Document HO 177, which lc Proaocutlon
Exhibit 123? Have you had tho opportunity to study that document?

A. Yet.

Q, Sow, thit document it the minutes of a conforcnco which was
called to devite on experiment to test whether the Berko .method of
treating tea water could be tolerated, and it it ateted in thit document
that the chief of the ..edlcal Services of tho Luftwaffe is convinced
that if the rerke method it used damage to health It to be expected not
later than tlx days, tnd will lead to death, according to Dr. Sehrufcr,
not leter than twelve days. Sow, on the basis of your knowledge of tho
toxicity of sea water, it that statement eacentlolly correct?

A. Yes.


90 U*


Court So. 1

12 Jun 47--16-3-iHK-alcy (Vartenberg)


Q, ¥hy do you sey that, Doctor?

A. Unon the basis of ny knowledge of the effect of drinking sen
vetor on a body retch oiler, body chealstry.

Q, Vould the acolicat i in of sea voter treated by the Berka r.ethod
In quantities of 600 cc. caueo death la twelve days, or would the apoli-
c*tl:a of tea water treated by the Berka aethod In Quantities of 1,000
cc. cause death in the sane tin© or a shorter period?

1. It would cause death in a shorter period, that is the lorgor
arount, bccaueo it would dehydrate the body aore ropidly.

Q, Vhet do you estinate '-ould be the length ^f tlno a person could
drink sea water treated with the B.rka noth* before death would bo
reached ofter they hod been subjected to 500 cc. of sea water, or Borka
wr.tor?

A. That would depend upon the onvironrontnl conditions rnd upon
the strength .r robustness of the individual who vas drinking tho son
water or Berko %ter. Bor oxoanle, if one drinks no *rter under dosort
conditions, death occurs in throe or four days. Tho dosort is hot and
dry end this increases the roto at which tho body loses voter. If n
oers n is on a raft at sea whore tho humidity of tho otnosohoro is high
and tho temperature we shall soy is around 70, then death would occur in
ar.und 8 to 14 days. There is no report on the latter, because tho our-
vivol of a person on a raft at sue with ait vntor is f or 17 days, but
thero is roes on to bolieve the authenticity of that report, but one can
celculatc that uai*.r ideal conditions that a robust person could live
14 days without any vrter at all.

BY J33G2 SiBEISC:

q. Dr. Ivy, excuse no please, you said that in going ovor that
report concerning the person who livcdl7 days that there was reason to
believe tho authenticity of the report?

A. Henson a-t to believe, reason to disbelieve tho authenticity of
that report. For erar.ple, it isn’t certain but there is reason to believe
this person had e stall aaount of water with hit when he rot into the life

9Qi*5


Court So. 1

12 Jan 47-A-15-4-iEX-Kaloy ('’srtenberg)


raft. Sew, if one were to take 500 ce. of Bcrke water or im «ter in
e desert where the te:rcereturc is high end the hualdity is low, they
would not survive the otherwise three or four days which they would if
they drank vholo water, and there are I sight say deserts on the sea, so
far as rein is concerned. There are arena in the ocean which have no
s're rain than the Sahara desert, for example. If one were to take 500
cc. sea water or Berica mter under ideal conditions, they would not sur¬
vive the 8 to 14 days, but vjuld die soiner. If they were t> take 1,000
cc. of sea water or Berkn >«tor, they would die sooner, for reasons which
I have Just tried to explain, than if they to'k 500 cc. Bcrkr or eon
water.

Q. S-w, Doctor, this D>cunont 50-177, on oage 17 of the English
D.cunont Bock B-7, wo find under the Section 2 a heading "Dorati on of
Ixpcrlnents 12 days", which roads as folios: "Since In the opinion of
the Chief cf the Kcdicel Servico (Chef dos Senlteotswcscns) ©omanent
Injuries to health, that is, the death of the o'-oerinontel subjects has
to bo expectod, as cxovrioontal subjects such oors ns sh*ild bo used as
well es will bo put at the disposal by tho Rcichsfuohrer SS." row, in
ordor to dotoraino whether tho Bcrka treated sco vator is loss dehy¬
drating to tho b-dy than untreated soa water is it nccossary to be so
atrocious as to conduct the oxporiaonts to a pclnt whore llvos r health
is endangered?

A. Ho, throe or four days wcuid be all that is necessary.

q, So it was absolutely unnecessary to sadangor life :r to cause
nernaT.eat dacago to organs to deteriins whether the trontnent f sea
water with Berkatit node it better fir tho b>dy than untreetod sea water?

A. It ws unnecessary unless one desires to dctcnlne survival
tine cf hunan beings ;n 5CO cc. or 1,000 cc. it Berka weter or sea water.


902*6


& Juxu^-PJ- 27 -l-v-Uun (.irt-nburs)

Court I.

T.a that perhaps to- cxpl .nation-.iiy i t.n day -xp-rii3.nt..\l plan
w.a t Haul -cue h-r-?

It i.3 th- only logic-.1 deduction th t len arise fro- that
at-.tv—nt.

Elen, ir. other ..-ords, fro r- -in- th t Docucent ‘JO. 177 *nd fraa
yewr of a. .-.r.tu- r-scircii prool—you '.r- certain th-.t this

caa_ittcv.*3 dnut.a or this r_porfc —iib-r't_ly pl'.na or -xp-co3 d- th to
occur?

a

I do .at f.no'., .r. c th.y ftrd in dnd Jen th-y ;rot- the atit-cunt
of tiv. report, out th.t ia th- tnly interpr-t tion <hich I \‘> 1 - to giv-.

;t Li t. j r.ptrt did you rui .cross th- .ora "voiunt-cra" .t -.ny

tia-7

At lio.

»s a*- . cu f'-eill.r .t -.11, no.. -ft-r your study, or ore you f-alli-.r
-nou3h to teat lay r-g rding th- cip-rin-nts p-rfore-- by Prof--a or B-iglbo-ck
on priaon.ru -t D .eh u?

A: *.a.

.: Coul- you t-U ua th. d-ai^. of t.- au -.-.rater expo-itLrtto conducted
on Lie —nt 1 suoj-cta b. dr. ~ei ,ibo-ck -t D eh u? I .ll.. p 33 up

to you, joceor, for r-f_r-nc- if need b- th- r-cords of the e..p TJ-u-nt .l
sublet. .’n th- t..o books nu if you ial. to r-f-r tc t:_n e j.. tine,
you try do -o.

Dr. Ivy, to u t- ‘uat wh - reccrda h*.v- you a.-n Aiich outline thu
r-sults of t:.- -xp.riA.nts cn-u: t — t D'.ch u?

..t Sica I 3 in JJurno-rj; in J x.uiy ~nd I n.t ;dth Dr. Leo Alexander,
Dr. B-iyieo-d: ~.nd hia u.orocy, t thet tin 1 si* records xn tuo books,
hhidv ccnfcddn-d d t*. -iiich c w. *rc~ L—ce -xp.riii.ita nd w.-ch I
discus _d ,±d: Dr. Beiglbo-ck. ianc- r-turrung to Wur.b-rg, s of this tic-,

I h v- 3—.. "i . - s - docuu-nta, .wick you just brought up; on. d“t: book \nd
notli-r d - book .fiicfi is oniy . •_ t jI L;- d-.t*. books, -hick 3 3 in
J nu ry -k-n Lies- cp. -rts, jivin. the andixiduil c t. or r-coni on the


9047


12 J_r~^d-r'_—17- 2 -ii —fc n (.jArt-aourg)

Court i

44 subjects of the -xp-rin-nfca.

!: v- you 3-_r- .v fUrth-r d o or. thes- _xp.ri-v.nts7
4: I v. 3 --a ene au— .riem t ,bl_, uhich a suboitt-c: to the
Tribur- '3 Docn-r.t. The ;iu~ii-r of tht ....

: .u th\t on- written* by Professor 3eiglbo-ck sw. ::s inc-.rcer-
-tio.i her- in Hurnb-rg yew a. n?

A: Tti .t is th. on. Z h C in -iind.

"J: Then you htvc s—n no uth.r oocusnnta concerning th. r.sulta nnd
recor-lo of the -xo-ri—nta t i)r.ch*u?

A: Ifot th .t I r-c 11 t th. . r.scnt.

•): iio th-t on. rotc-boc.:, toich you a y thr.t th-r- ia only p rt

th-r-oi tli. iul-v.r it th- or-s-nt tiac; a tir.t not--too:. udeh hid

•i bl.c.: cot-: ua it when yo- . it in J-nury?

I could not ay r.-t color th- cover .. .a. aCCOIxIsa: to jy

r-cdeection, it «r.a . cov-r, it ,r.s a atiff cov- no differ-nt iron tho

not. oi. Meh h a b—n Mbtfitb-d in -viC-nc- ;ith cov-r. As I r-c .11,
it .. .a r. stiff c-.rdbo ru cover.

;.r» 7 cm -ol- to ac-rt in u- c n you ru..uzt>~r ;h r—uv.d

fro- th t eOOl.-?

I c.. -cific IIy r-c .ll- tir.t there ia losing •- au ..risiA”, title
-ith tl;- -:v of ira-a of th- vaious auj-cts. I r-c-.ll this .. .oificnlly
b-c us- xa kiscuaaing tl;- dr.t*. tir.t tr 3 su.. .-ricins t:da t bl_ fro.j d .y to
d-y .3 the _ 3 y.riu.nt progress, I carl l J 1 fro- the d*.t tir.t th- aubjocU
or .t L. st so.~ sublets, ir.d ct-u soi 0 :t-r, 3oex. fr-ai; ter r.nd it
tLxa ur.'n. a loot, it tiixo p rt of th. d-y'a sp-cin^n r-re lost nnd
.pj xcnfcly 1. n-3 of tfcvt 3ort.

I r- -er-r t.. t sjiuclfically o-c.ua- Itu* I loote-d ov-r th- data,
th- -tv •. r d —, I a id bo Ur. Beiibo.cJc, "i/ould yo- ..ublini. this
it. s cc.-ncific r-port in j-drc-l oic-nil?" H- &'id, "Ho". Th .t
..io u:e sur.-r tr.-c’I -xp-qt-U -o -t .re-- n hoft-st consciuitious sci-nti:
Th.— J s.'.*.., « .tty ciid you, - sell tr noi clinic .1 i.ansti, tor, ‘-Ion- rfiU


22 (.ixt-aburg)

Court 1

-.uqu*t-ly fcr - irw d chemists fer ssistr-sts, ccns-nt to porfor: J:p»rin.nt3

rquirins r. .t —r.l cf effort on such nnri.li.bL. no irr.sponsibl.

subjects, .. .rtlculnrly in an -::.x.rii_nt of this sort .W. th. cooo.r tion . n<

int-r^si 0 ^ t»v. subjects in th. oucco - ci tn- uX.’KrLi.rts is wssonti.l lor

th- succ-as of ti.w jcp.ria.nfc3?" H- told u. that he did that b-C'.ua. h.

•

'••3 orc-r.- to Kv s id that h- had .ritfc.n to prof.sssr 2ppan>r -nd had
sugj.stv- th. t thus- jcp.rii-.it:. b_ p&rforcj; on hi-.s.lf nd his co-ttn, or
30~c co.ff Lac.nt soldiers bout to b. r.turrv.d to th. front, but h. h-.d
b-«n tolc tii i th. sc Jcp.rin.nto -.rcro to b. p-rforujd on prisoners at
Dich'.u.

H. -.loo told a. ttr.t h. h’4 ntt-i l.tt.r to his n.L'.tivos or hou.

folks tdiliivi t-h. did ml liic. to do this werk. So, I rcixflbor

specific -Ay for th t r.taon til t particular t bi. no I do act find it
In these jocu-.-nta.

Is th.r- nythins .Is., .iiich you tl.ink is .issir^ fro-i th.s. docuu.:
or do you thinl. th .t Uios. doer.—.rfcs o-fer. you idw rfio* th. c. i.pl~t.
r.cor.3 o.‘ ill. .xp-rit-nts at J-'.&.'xx or is it oustomry in scientific
r.3. rch d this sort to k..p .cr. .ccur .t. r.cords?

A: 'Jill, I think th-s. r.a‘.8 .-.lv in .s -uch d.t ll .u thos- rdiich
on- ;jicr aak.s chlorit. .-.din,a nd phyo3phari fisux.n, Xrai zilch th.
final r.y It 1. v. b-.n c lcul t.u .r. co-.ti.-.3 K.pt, but j r. jorwral x-ul.
ar_ o. re .. Th .r_ is on. -.ur .-*-cc in th. r.cor-3 of th% individua

pp.-ti.ni3 th t is it xald s.» tc — tli u h-n cn. is u Jcirv. a stucty of

th. -ff.ct ol th. d.priv cic.. of ic ;<1 ... . *-.r on th. huftan bo<i' for a

•

p.riod of fro- i«r tc .it.t d ;-s or non ,a- is givji sc.-.r.Ur in dos.s
of 1,OCO cc ;-rJ y, ch.r. ov. uld o. . : on>r follow-up {xriocl to cturnin.

c: ..o. th.r. ...r. i.1 .l^-ccc of th.s- proc.uir.s cn the piti-nts
,p.r ox;J-Ct. So, I b-li.v. th t it ould h.-.v. fc-.u highly ieair bL. for
Ur. ;.i Iboeci. to r. v- du-d longer .v-r-od of Xt.r observation. Ho did
.dd r.l —.-.i, loro p-rio., sis; t —.v. d rs, Li th- ?rcu.; f 3tuuy o:i
Sc.. ~T_r o.r. I fc.ii.v. >,^s ouiu h..v. o..n sic. _.t_.r if


Jun.n-urs)
Court 1


ck ifUr mi hia sublets inthc ofch-r *.rcups.

The,. jwu .r~ i -oii r, jr. Ivy, iU. th v i-si-n of ..is experioints;
cou~. ; oi_ -..tiin. for th. Tiibunhl r.-.t design he followed, thtt is the
V ri U3 gT0Up3, vtc.?

A: r.i- g.n-r.1 pl-n of the experjAunts 1 think i3 tdocur.te lor ~.
study of and s'-lt ext boliaa in the hu*n bedy. He h ne group

,ho r-c-iv-d no food or water, I b-jiwV. eh.r. : -r- six oubj-cts in thi3
gr-vup. H- ...1 no'h-r group rhich r-c-iv-d 3ch efer *r.ter, hicl. essentially
is fresh *.t«r nd they receive 1, COG to 1,500 cc d .y. is r.doquatu

to keep tk-a in ..ter b-l-.nc~ unless th- -..e'.tltr h p,^.3 to b- ;r.m, b-enuso

600 to 1,000 ec of irw is 11 th t .a rotuir-d to keep the body in water

b l.nce.

JJj xt -joul- h-.v. o—n better in * il of tk-s- ~x. jluAe if h- had

t .-Jten intj conaiderat ion th- loo a of xat-r by th- lunga -nd b the 3..in,

•

beexus- hen - s.y tfr.t fro., SCO to 1,000 cc of mUr dig-ot-d jxr uay in
enough t keep n ordin'.ry ~.d It in -Ur b-l nc.. That Is -nouji to aeke
up for t: - loss of at-r loss through e._h ling of lr in the Jungs through
s-nsible or insensible perspiration n.l b; ..-y of tile urin-. I 1 -li-vr.
ther- oix 3-ubJeCts in tlx occo;»* ^roup. H- hid n thin, jrrup, which
r-c-iv-d 500 cc of set .. vt.r .ne fourth group iJiich r-c-iv-d 500 cc of
Berk. .be. ni then group .ixich r-c-‘.vod 1,00) cc of.Berk .ter; five

subject;. . i. th t group. I r—e., -r i v- xioj-cto, xhlch reOtived 1,000 cc


12 J\r.a-A-JF-l 6 - 1 -r rino ay (Int. »»ertcnborg)

Court I

<* . Ia -onaral would you or.y fren y \r obsorvetion frora tho roeorda
that tho T'rioua teats wore c3rfcr=od edoquetoly?

X. Yoa, I should scy ao.

3y and lrr;o —.

X. Th-ra ia ono oxoontion. That ia, I think aorno of hia ohlorido
datcrBicatior.a wor- inadequate, too hi;h, ao ns to ;ivo hin n oon-
ooatr'tlon of tnblo salt ir- tho urine cf jroator than 2 % n r -roxi!rr.tinc

5 *.

Ct. Hi\70 you bconoulo to r soortcin fro- tho study of tho rboordt
what was tho -ur-oao of this cxpcrirv-ntal nlont

X. *a I acid, it we a r.doqur.to to nako n good study with rclioblo
autjoote or. wotor and a'It notebolian — that ia, ur.dor various oondi-
tiona or undor tho oT.ditiona that aoiontiata working in this field would
liko tc hrvo.

W. a y and l'r>, the oxporiaontel plan was t.ohnior.lly to dotor-
oir.o whether or n t derkn wrtor and 3oh efur .^.tor differed from son
wntor, wca it not?

A. l.oll, this u let rate aotupwran't nooooary in o r dor to
determine wither cr n t B.rkn V. ator w-.s diff-ront fro-, aoa water.

1 thought I had already t=;do ttrt print. Y u o uld dotorrine that in
tho ohonio'l 1 boratcry ar.d if you h-d to d tone oxporinent on humn
beinca y u oould fotor^ino the answer to that question in throo or
four daya #

l*. -cri the results cf these ocyeriaonta of any aoiontifio voluot
hr. Bol-lboock atat j a he w v\6 n t publish then in n nodiool journal.
Envo y u anythin; further to =d< t"> ttrt?

X. 1 don't bcl iovc t v iOy rt re of aoiontifio v-luo.

W. Is it probable, Prefos.cr Ivy, that one *i;ht expect acute,
ohrocio bodily injury to occur as a r-sult >T thoao rtporinontst

X, If dehydration cf tho body is carried too £hr, acute injury
and nora&nent injury nay occur, oren in tho robust, healthy individuol.


12 fcvr.i— k— Or— 15 — 2—rrinor.u (In*. r'cr.b-r -)
Court I


If individuals h- ve sow ohranio disease auoh a a tuberculosis, n period
of fasting and rxrkod dehydration =cy cause on exacerbation or a lightning
ur cf the chronic diaecae or process.

W. Iho only group cetunlly in thoao oxporiaents in whioh oouto
ayoptona would n;t be anticipated ia tho group which woro receiving
the Schcefer water. Ia that ocrreot?

A. That ia oorroot.

*». 'Kuld o noriod of festir.g for one week weaken e reraont

a, Yoa, obviously.

W, Mould thoy bo linble to feint?

A. On staling, yes, 3-ao poojilo would be likely to faint. I
fr atod two weeks. I tolornto f rating quite noli, I hr.vo ted othor
subjoota, hcwoTor, when fr-ating only throo deya, feint cm auddonly
ori air.g fron a oot.

tv. M'uld ym ur/ornouriahod r und jrwoight person bo raoro inolinod
to workon quio'cor then c noranl poraom?

A. Yoa.


W. Cculd injury hr.vo ioourrod in tho gr'up in thoao oxporinonta
which rocoivcd r.i wntor end no food?

A. That ia possible.

<», 'Jew, aono *f thoao poople wont on tho huagor end thirst
fr c, oh, ar.jwboro fr n fivo t oight day*. Did y u n"tioo that in tho
reoorda, deot-.r?

A. Yoa. that 1 s oerroot.

Cculd y u turn t> aubjoot Kc. 3 in tho rooorda thoro? la
there any indie tlcn ir. aubjeot Ko. 3's rea^rda to the of foot th-t
ho noy hevo aufforad ns r. result of this hunger nnd th'rat period?

A. 5*11, I r.otioo on studying tho record that on aurorrl
occasions tte p .tiont or sufcjoot wns too wonfc to stand, apparently.


tc have hia blood rrcasu to tekon.

Q. Doctor, on th so reaords bof-ro you I boliovo on Cr so So. 3


9052


12 Jvr.o-,W?-l5-5-?riccau (Ir.t. »•'rtoricr-)
i urt Z

ycu will find or. tho top of oneh -r«ph « r.urfcor on tho aooond

oe^e "35", asd =c tho third pago "C3*. Dc y-u find thoso nuabors?

A. That is ocrroot.

W. »-uld you kindly rofor to tho ontfios on those oh*rts by tho
orxrt mebor and tho &tj wharo you find thoso ortrios ycu nro roforrinc
tot

A. On tho ohrrt lcbolled "33" I n to thot tho subject was too
wook t hnvo his blood prossuro tetam cr. Au-ust 27 th and 20th, and in
tho eftor-psriod, on Au, ust 31 »t and Soptonbor 1st and 3o.rtonber 2nd
I notioo ib ohort lobollod "33" that tho notiont was jivon an injection
of Caronino whioh is a heart atinular.t. That was on *.uy,ust 28, tho
d-y beforo the cassation ef tho auppes-d porird :f deprivation of fond
nr.d wttor. On *u-ust 2©th bo wns riven • »o stryohr.ino. On Chart
"C3" I find thr.t cn ^.u^ust 30th and 31 st ho re- » jivon sore Strychnino.
Stryolnlro la *iTcr. es - jcr.or'l stimulant and ajs ns a oordiao sti-
nulant. Or.o w adore why tfcos- stisulotin.; drura waro given nr.d why
tho p'ticr.t v .s t weak t stand r t o wonk t have his bl<vd prossuro
taken u*?oa; ho was r,r. ill pationt r aarkodly disabiad by tho oxrori-
eontr.l procedure.

W. I y u have nry further O'rsmr.ts t mko o^naorrinj C- so
Ho. 3, d >ot rt

a, ro,

••hot is tho r'r.jo f s'-rvivnl, Dr. Ivy, 'f atr mg non
without f^cd oat weto-r

A. I have indicated, t.i't d.oponds up n th-i onvir rnontrl
o nd it ions; under oortnir. c r.diti ns .r und throo rr four f( ;*s, under
idonl ervirraaostal c nd it ions cijht t- f< urtoor. days.

V. s.*r d' y u ho ppor t spooifioclly kr. w that so wall? Did
you over publish ary w rks in thot rojor-t

A. Tji, 1 hnvo roviewod tho ortir-e litornturo n th 1 1 subjoot.

I hevo publishod theso reviows >f tho litornturo in tw- places, cno in
a c uplo f articles or. dasqlincti r. of sea water, the ninirr.l water

9C53


*


12 4-^rino».u (Int. Wnrtanborc)

C urt I

OE<? f ^ roquircaor.ts In tho U.S. HtTnl Aodioal Bulletin, end onothor
ir. tho gr ooodings ir. tho Chioego Institute of kodicir.o.

Dr. Ivy, when you ate to thet it is possiblo fr>r n poraon to
rocoh et too a nexlaun of fourtoon cr fiftoon deya boforo donth, how

yua oo unt for tho feet that in /.norioa in ldi3 wo onr. roocll having
aeon ortioloa and headlines b ut e aoemn in tho Onitod Stotoa Kr.vy
noaod "Iojy" wh urvi7cd or. a reft on tho Atlcntio Oooen 03 or 04 dry at

A, , thet sooner, waa Icoi, I o o 1 , I roooll. I interrogated

him whor. ho raturnod t T. tahingten. I wr.a intorcatod particularly in
tho doteils of his cchronturo , I f;und that tho lcr.gost that ho had
boon deprived of doc wetor woa sever, days. Kaw, I onn roonll that
figuro for this rooter..

Pardon = ., l ot*rj y. u sxen do-rivod if acr.-wntor or do-
prlvod »f natural wator?

A. I no - do;rivod rf water. Did I *ry "too Wator"T

Q. Tea. dret^r.

A. I neon ho wa» errivod • water f r novor. day*. l.hor. ho
b arded tho reft ho hrd a .no water r«th hir.. Th-t wt a uaod up and
then ho oollooto.' re*n water wl.ioh ho n uld c lloct end h^ld, I
ror.ocfcor the a.vo> dey» bocauic at that ti o I was ir tho groooaa 'f
to Vcir.g ro'n ohrria f r cho ooonns and ho hod pr.sood thr' ugh cn r.roa
of oocan ir. tho uth Atlantia whoro tho 1’ngoat peri d ~.t frood.n
fr a rein wot oight dry* and, when ho Tan in ttet nirtioul r region ;f
tho cocar., ho hod hour, with'ut wator for seven dr.ya. That wr.a tho
lor.roat period that ho ti trithrut w-.tcr to drink.

4. That de»th ray havo nojirrod ir. fasting and th : rating aubjootn
is n t pr beblo, is it?

A. Will you eak that quoatian "gain?

la it pr<'beblo th't death sight oosur in f-ating and thirsting
subjects uaod ir. oxpcriaor.ta liko this?

A. Ton, after o pori d f dr.ya, 6 cr 3 tn l4, dono'ding up^n
tho orv ire mortal conditions and tho vigirol health of the subject.


90 %


12 Jur.w-i-^?-lS-5-?riao-u (Ir.t. V.crtunfcor-g)
0 art I


• Then it is pcssiblo that doath night occur?

A. Tos.

Is it nr bcblo that drinking 500 oc of soa wntor doily fron
f ur t tan and a half days or/ taking no food fer fren two to six
drys will ocusc. in'ia-yt

A. Soil, it eight oauso oouto injury nr.d oabarrossnor.t suoh ns
fair, tine,

<t. I- tho drinking af soo wotor —

A. Or ocllanso

t.. Or. pego 12 of D?ouno:.t Vo. 177 , ir. Doouaont 3ook Vo. 5, Dootor,
this is tho rep.-rt -r. tho orreittoo nocting hold in Borlin. On pnro
12 of tho d'ouaov.t bark, tho last tw sontonoos fr a tho botton, you
soo tho follrwir.j language 1

"2xtorr.al syr.pt'ns aro to bo oxpeotud suoh a* droir.ogo, dinrrhoa, oonvul-
■lens, tt-.lluoirctior.s and, finally, doath." Is that an aoournto
statonontt

A, I hovo not found that,

V. That is on pngo 12 «f Dcounont Bcok Vc. 5. That is Dooumort

no. 177.

A. I have it nnr,

Cw. Thrt lost sontor.oo cn that 0030 12.

A. I do rot kr w whr.t is njar.t by tho w rd "droinago n but
is truo th-t diorrho', 0 -vulsions, hallucinations or/, finally, donth,
nay occur when r.o tekos 500 to 1,000 00 of soo wotor ovory day.

Diorrhoc w uld n't ooour i* tho oasc cf fasting or.d thirsting but
hallucinations, finally death, miscul-r twitahings, porhaps o'nvulsions,
right occur ir. sirdlnr thirsting er/ resting conditions.

yj>. a.FDTi This is o £o ©<5 brooking point far rcooss, y-ur H-’r.or.
THS “HiSILSKT: The Tribunal *ill bo in rccoss.


9055


12 «hco-A-JF-20-1 -Gr ss
C urt I


(A rocoss »c.a taken)

TjE !-J-.3.wu-: Tbo Tribunal ia again in so as ion,

IS. ESEYi May it ploaso tho Tribunal, the irtorprotors hovo
oallcd to ny attor.tior. that tho w rt! on pcgo 12 of Doounont Book V. that
i« in Docunor.t HO-177 whioh is ?r .acoutior. 3xhibit 133, in tho Jr at
aontonoo fr a tho bctton of tho page tho intcrprotora atoto that tho
Gorw-r. word whioh hca boon translated aa "drnincgo" in Snglish should
bo rcplcood by tho ward "dehydration". In oa nuoh as Pr . Ivy o^uld
na.t quito ur.dor stand the Bocning of "dr air. a go" tho ir.torprotora ohookod
tho 3or=*»r. cr.d tho Gor»r. ia bottor tranalctod oa "dehydration n . In
that oenreoti on, W. Ivy, do hydration, f oourac, ia a sytaptotr. whioh
would bo found ir. ox-v-riaorts of this a .-rtt

A. Yea, .Ir. all f tho jr upa with tho oxoontion of tho Sohaofor
we tor gr up,

Ci. N-w, h’W mry of tho \U subjects woro supposed to hnvo
rocoivod JX) oo f soa wetor daily ftr six dnya ?r core aoo.rd.ing to
y ur atudy of the individual ohrrts?

A. Tou moan of tho U?

Ci. Of tho Uu, perdon no,

A, You s-y h^r nrny rcooivod 500 00 of aoa wntort

C.. Yob, doily for six dnya cr »oro,

A. lU.

Q. Ir. Ivy. oould you rofor for a »>Dont t- cf tho oharta

hworein tho person drmlc 500 00 of aoa wetor and dotornlno whothor or
not tho exporinonts began n tho 21at dry of August or whothor tho
ox.-orirortt. began on tho 22r.d day -f August. You will note on any
or.o 'f tho oh.rts tlrt a =ark has boon inserted undor tho date 22
August whioh ia an *rr ~ - a rod arrow - with a bluo oirolo at tho end
thereof, indie-ting tho date cf tho ooHBDnoo*mt of the oeporinont and
in addition to that there ia also a nark in rod indicating tho dato
cf tho oeoaonooacnt jf tho ex-'orinor.t or. the 21st, Er. 3«iglboook
suggests that he plaood t*» arrow with a bluo circle at tho or.d thereof

9056

- _ •


12 Juno-A-J?-2C-2-3r - a a
C urt I

•^:dor tho dote f 22 August ct ar=o lrtor dr to when ho we* ro-ovnlunting
thoao charts. H-w, orr. y u str^ijhtcr. rut f r us, in yur opinion,

*uat when these oxnt.riaor.ta began, whether thoy actually bogan or. tho
22n<* r whothor thoy beg-n cn tho 21at. Dc y u understand tho inp^rt
of ry queation, dcotcr

A. *7oa, I undoratard. If wo rofer to aub'oet 12 whr was rivon
500 00 cf ace wr.tor rrosuer.bly. Or. tho oh*-rt nrrkcd 12 ur.dor tho apnoo
of the chert indicated f<-r August 21 at thoro ia e aqunro arrow nnd on tho
noxt ohf-rt 12 ur.dor tho spaco f August 22 thcro ia n oirolo in bluo
free whioh thoro oxtenda a straight arr.w upward. . Tho oxpor iroor.t appa¬
rently atrrtod on ..ugust 21 at whore th. firat r.rrwr is indiertod and
tho first results on urinary output ore indiortod on August 22. That
is a natural way t mleo a rep rt or.d a study ef this a rt booeuao if
I start r.n axperinont wo ahrll any n Bay firat wo gonorolly mko a
wioghlng bof r» brcckfr.st or. icy first and thor. or. Hay 2nd wo will mko
a woighlrg beonkfeat. Thrt la the first dr.y r tho firat 3* h ur# of
tho oxpcrlmont ond oa r. general rulo wo or.d tho urino o llooti ns ot
0 ainllrr tiao or/ then tho urlncry rutput is indicated ea tho urino
utnut f r tho firat dr.y f tho oxporiscat. So, n tho baais of thoao
rco-rda 1 ah uld any that in tho caao of subject no. 12 tho oxporinont
actually st-rtod r. the 21 at r.nd tho urinary output ia roo rded f r
tho 22nd. Thrt h wovor nr.y diffor froiwhat actually aocurrod.


9057


12 Jur.- 1 -r <-ldt (Int. v n 3oh n)

Z -4 TZ I

». &r. Ivy Prof. 3oi£lb-cck points -ut that the reason why
ho out the err .* under tho date of tho 22nd wei boo-uso -f the fact
thet n disorjpenoy in weight arroora fr^n tho deto cf 21 to tho deto
of the 22nd, ar.d honco he deducos th't if r.r leas of woight ocourrod,
that tho oxaerioont o uld r.-t hrvo be run on tho 21 st. H:w ia that a
logiool deduotin n his port?

u. S~, The first woi;ht loss would ooour an tho firat day of
tho actual experimental poried. -.a I oxplninod, y<-u jot y?ur firat
woijht I'-aa by tricing tho »oi’ht bef-ro breakfast on tho firat day of
tho experleant end fr a thrt avibtrnotinj tho woight obtr.inod bof -ro
bro'kf"St on tho aooond day.

I*. I aoo. If y; u atertod tho exporinont cn tho 21 st do- of
august ca lndioetod by tho squaro rrrew n th-ao oharta, w uld you
noooasrrily roerd on intake of wr.tur on tho 21 st, or w«uld tho firat
roo rdir.g "f nr. ir.trko of water bo nedo n tho 22 ndl

A. ".oil, on tho basis f tho wny 1 cxploinod tho koopinj; of tho
roo^rds, ycu wruld roo rd it on tho 22nd*. But Just cxr.otly what t>r.
eoirlboock did I oanr. * st-.to, and wo onn't stato fro» hia roo-rda, bo-
c'.uso tho water intake cmd tho urinary cutout f 'r tho days proooding
tho alleged st-rtin- cf tho oxporiaont are n t indloatod. “ho wntor
lntako nnd tho urino output is only indio'tod in thoao oh-rts f'r tho
oxroriront'l porir^.

V. B'W aer.y cf tho ^ subjocts woro tick at tho ond of tho aon
wotor poriod, acc rding to y ur ir.torprstation of tho oharta, ro-
jardloas cf h-w r.uoh cf tho 500 co, they actually oansumdT

A. »oil, if wo teto subject 3, whioh wos on cr suppcood to bo
cn thirsting and fasting, acocrding t tho nodioati n tho aubjoot
rocoivod, that prtiont wna siok cr disabled. If wo rofor to Subjoot
lU, whioh was supposed t^ bo rocoivinc 500 oo. cf son water f r,
acceding to ur orlouloti.ns, 8 £ days with k * days of hunger,
there was on aouto fever and tornornturo f 39 Oontiffodo nn tho

day cf tho conclusion cf the cxporicor.tnl poried. Th’-t patient was


12 J*o-i-vT-21-5-?wi^t Int. vrn Sch-n)

Court I

aiek, If *c rofor to pctiont or sub^oct 36, roooivlr-g allogcdiy or
aurr ■oc'ly 930 oo if son water, tint patient wns givon atrcphanthin
thoropoutioolly, Indicating thnt tho pctiont wna ill; othorwiao why
*ivo auoh nodicetion? If wo rofor to potlont 37, wo find that that
potlor.t had a fovor during tho omrao of tho ar.norlnontnl poriod.

If you rofor to potlont 39# *h° likowiso wna supposedly rooolving
500 00 cf son wntor doily, atorcamdin was given thorapoutionlly.

Ttat would lndloato that tho potlont wo* 111 nnd noodod ir.travonoua or
pnrontorcl nodi on tier..

Q. Do y*u bellovo. Doctor —

A. Rofor ring —

Go ohood, oor.tinuo.

A. Roforring tc Subject 21 , thnt potlont wr.a aupnosod to hnvo
rocoivod 500 00 of 3orkn wntor oooh day, wna givon ohloronlno an'* wea
too work t atend for bloct proaairo ro'ding on (Soya, Sub'oot 23
In tho anno gr up woa op orontly very eiok ond o rr.toao, and ooo-rdlng
tr tho r.outo woight gains, 8 to 10 potada nftor tho oxporinontr.l
poriod, tho prtlont waa aiok, Sub'oct 25 In tho anno group had. a
fovor end wna givon aorphino. Thoro wna x-ray ovidonoo of lung
pathology, whioh oouaoa no tr bollovo that that potlor.t wra 111 .
Fatlont 20 waa too woak to hrvo tho blood frosauro taton. Tho anno
wr.s truo of potlont 29 . That o rplotoa tho Hat of tho pntionta who
wore 111 dtring tho cxporlnont.

k. Do you bollovo, Dr. Ivy, that or.y of thoso UD subjoota woro
porrw.ontly ir.Jvrcd tr diod lntort

A. Or.o oann.t anawor that quostlcn yoa or no. It ia poaaiblo,
but I ah uld acy not highly probably. Thoro nro throo petionta whoso
aftor rooorda I should bo pcrtioulnrly Intoroatod in knowing abut.

Thr.t la aubgoota Ho. 3# 23, and 25 .

Q. Hnvo you onrofully obaorvod oaao Ho. 30? Er • Boiglboook
Info mod us thr.t tho sh-rthendnotos whioh "ro ontoinod on tho book of
sheet 23 -" aro sh rthand nates onccming tho condition 'f the patient


9059


12 J«*^-JP-21-3-?el£t (Ir.t. Von Sohor.)

C urt I

ir. on bo Sc. 30. ire y u nblo to <*otcr=!no fren the bo Btcno-r^phio
n-tas on< Bttfy zt c-.so So. 23 or/ 3c*o 30 whathor or net tho nctoa
apply t C'bo 30 or tv C'BO 23T I will pr-ss up tc yru an Sn^lish oopy
of tho transcript!cn of tho stono^rarhlo n tea cn tho beck of o*-so

S-. 23.


Court 1

June 12-*i-22-l-HD-Karrov-Von Schoen,

Fron ny study of the charts for subject 23 and
subject 30, since the ttenogrnohlc pencil record on the bach
of tho Chart C-23 Is not drted, I can only answer your
quest 1 n by etatln a that the stenographic record on the back
of Chrrt C-23 Is Just os likely to be true of subject 23
as of subjeot 30. There Is nothing In the clinical record
or data which would lndlc to that the lopllcatlons of tho
eyaptons and sl c ns described in the stenographic record is
soro likely attributable to subject 23 than subjeot 30.

Q. While you have the copy of the stenographic notoe

before you, Doctor Ivy, oould you analyte for tho Tribunal

Just what state of health the subjoct referred to In tho

•

stono. raphlc notes, c-. ntalned on tho back of Graph C-23,
was In?

«. This patient w-s In a ooma. He wns qulto side.

Doos that trko cr.ro of your question?

Q. Would there be a ^root deal of difference In your
analysis If, In tho sontonco whloh reads "Ho asks for water
only when ho awakes from his sonnulent condition," thr.t the
word "scnnulcnt" wns rolacod by the word ■sool-oonsclous"?

«. Thoro'a a definite dlffcronce in the nodical
implications of soanulonce and sonl-conatose.

Q. If you please those two words that I sugg-ost In
t.*.is paragraph, would you be under the lnpresslon that tho
patient w^s sicker than ns Indicated In tho earn rciph as now
written tho nl^ographod sheet you have before you?

a. By thj8e ch-nges you lnprovo tho clinical c ndltion
of the patient.

Z. lnprovo the clinical condition of the patient?

”ith the changes nrde.

Q. You seen, with the changes tnnt will now appear on
the ^Ineogrn )hcd sheet. I have given you, r.jt by the words I

9061


Court 1

June l2-A-22-2-rI3-£rxrvrf-Vc,r. cchoen.


'-‘VC suggested to. yea to be'rorl-.aei, to uuike the word -no 0
-»*• the word "eezl-c nacloua-7

«. The lies t.vt I'n trying to convey Is that r.ftor
-* :0 t - agde -v>ve been zu _e you get the idea thnt the urtient
wn not is alc-c «s is originally lndicrted before the ohe.ngee
were aria.

Q. Perhaps I have crested a difficulty. I h-.ve -shod
* u V re'l»ce the word -little" • ith the word -no- .nd the
u.r* -eoanuleot* with tfc word -aenl-coneclcue" , but you
~oan now, tnrt it la written on this sineographod sheet .-.nd
ra the doounent now ro«ds, nft.r it ha a been ohnngad, it
w •?.: lndlcrtj that tnc patient la n* t *8 sick as it would
in float a bcf.ra tne otenogronhlo notoe were altered?

T.V'to* correct. In other werda, by a *ln. these
o.. r. d- In the stenographic record, tho ollnlool o ndltion
of the aubjoot wc8 lx.roved.

:;*jw, in the aer.ter.ee in cr.e second parogrr h whloh
re?da: "The .onurol condition s lvea n esaoe for rl*r;.i n ,
if 5 o a tenogrn ...io oyh.ol for -no- wpa rd..ed lr.tor would
thrt h?he a o. neiderablo difference in your analysis of the
pr.tiont?

Obvl i«ly.

i.. Ir. the aantar.ee ir. the third >:r r ^vprh wniou -.ends
h v r.e ft Hows: -Aje :lrn ci^n o>xcw. ^t fl ttcr, nodorp.tely
frequent" wo Id there :e r c n«id«rrble difference if it
*J 3 ritcon r.a it - :erred origin- lly before on er euro, In
t ft e word -ia- vps -Placed ir. he sentence in.-tore*, of tne
v rd "aonewhrt"? In other words, the eer.ter.ee w. d road:
"ass-: irntloa is fl tter", "no than, 1 -ter in the er.-.o
sentence, rf; r tne word -flatter 3 , in ol®ce of c.e >:.vd
“h.ferrtely® we insert t..e . ord -hardly- so tn t no sentence
us -.Titter, orijlnxlly would h ve -ap.d: -.neenir^ ci n is


Court 1

June 12-A~22»3-HD-Karrow-Von 3choen.

flatter, hardly frequent." ”ould that convey ar. entirely
different asanlng to you than the sentence as It rends now:
"Respiration a.mevnet flctter, moderately Frequent."?

«. Yes, the ohangee made Indicate that the clinical
condition of the oatlent is better.

C. In the sentence In the 8th paragraph which rends:
■Heart beats very lew, joorly audible", If the w>rd poorly
v:aa re*laced by the word "scarcely" would that tont to create
? different uoanln* oo that the sentence would rend:

■Heart oer.ts very low, scarcely audible" rather than "poorly
audible"?

A. 1*0 trying to mho a difference between "poorly" and
"scarcely".

i. 7ould there be e difference?

a. Sof-rcslcc personally concerned, that would cake
no difference. Poorly and scarcely audible aro claoet the
ao.ee thing.

i. doctor, are you familiar with the agrees Ion “Rtmborg
plus -jlus" ns indicated In the last prragraph?

A. I an, of cuur3e, fonillar with the Rumbarg toot or
R aborg sign, but the use of blueses varies with different
doctors, 30 ,uot exactly what Is meant by Romberg plus might
moor. soaetnlD; different for co from that It would ~.ean to
some ne olee. .

5. Whrt le the purpose of e Romberg test, Juctor?

A. It Is to determine one's ability *o stand steadily
without falling with their feet together and their eyes
closed. « two 'lus would lr.dlcpte that it would bo difficult
for this subject to etond without falling. Thrt would be my
In ter-re tat lc r..

i. Could you explain to us t the remark in the last
sentence Ir. the last paragraph "bulbous reflex positive"


9063


Court 1

June 12 -j»- 2<3—i-HH-Karrow-Von Schoen.


sarx.s?

"ell# that Is the patient would respond when 'she
eye ball was crossed upon.

'Out Is the purpose of suoh a test as that, ftoctor

Ivy?

*• Io?t Is generally used to determine the oxtent of
unconsciousness or the decree of coxa.

The second sentence from the bottom, In the lc6t
paragraph, which roods: "Tonus of the bulb of the eyo bad",
what does that indicate?

a. Th'C ‘gain Is a test used for the purpose of estimat¬
ing the extant of unconsciousness or degree of disability of
c person. If the tone of the eye ball Is low, that indicates
that the blood pressure Is low or the state of the circula¬
tion Is qilte :oor.

Is that a bad prognostic sign, Joctor?

a. It is one among others th*>t is bad,

v. If suoh a condition exists In id-alts 13 It ap r.ront
to th- attending physician that a serious condition is
existent nn~ that -er.th any r.sult?

«. 7111 you repeat tnat question?

Q. Is It apparent In the goners1 condition of c.dults,
lr. grown-ups, thrt death ay oe c pronchlng if wo find tho
tonus of tile bulb of the eye Is bed?

Yes, rs you say xirj be"

d. Do y. 1 h~ve any other analysis to males concerning
any uf the other notations on the be oh of this C-ii rt #23 as
sot forth in the translation th-c you hrve before you?


v. Have I pointed out to you clearly the reaarie which
arc indicative of Illness' on the ?rrt of tho patient?

«. Yes, I think It _ls obvious thut the petiant was quite


9C64


Court 1

Juna 12-A-22-5—HC-Karrov-Von Schoen.

slci, ar.d as a natter of fact, I should say In r dangerous
condition and requires lanedlatoly remedial therapy.

'-'ell, then, you would state that c follow-up of
this prtlent would have been necessary?

Yes.

5. Can you tall us froa observing Charts *23 and
Cherts #3C, Inasmuch as It Is not certain whether or not
these notes aptly to case -/23 or Case *30, Just how long tho
follow-up was cade on these two patients?


June H-A-rd-iteloy (von Sehocn) - 23-1
Court 1


In c s- 3 toep-r -ur_ ~nd pulse r-cord ios er.de for feur d'.ys
-ft.r the t_i~inetion of the cxjkria..Ttal period, \nd in the cue of
Suo^ct 30, 5 dya.

■): Jj jtxirthink th.c, ...s .. sufficient length of tL., t: folio.; up those
C.3C3?

A: I Uo mt think so. As 1 fe-.ve nlr- -dy indie .ted, I believe thr.t
r-coids -r.oule h .v- kept as in the cr-sc of Sohtefer j.'.tcr (aperients
for rau-r.teJy * week, ~.nu in c sc ehere p'.tient3 or subjects hr.v v becoi..
‘.a i-. c ti ia auoj-ct nppircnfcly -.a, 1 rujuld think should be folloucd for
or lic.e echo ft-r tu. tcr-un ti:n of the ocp-riixnt .1 period.

: ouU you ary it . a -isaible th-.t this subject oculu h v- died

if not properly t iken c .r- of?

..i On the b ais -f th- s- ... tons r.nl aigna r-corded 1 should .tnawer
th-'.t question, yes.

■: Ko ., in the auu- tion conccrmn these records, Doctor, let uo
ocnaierth. .roup of 6 subjects tu-.t supposed to drink $CC cca Berk-,
nats-r or s. Ur tre t.d .1th Sene-tit; now, of the3v 0 subjects receiving
5 CC cos suit. .. .ter o ilc- lo you at. t- fcl. t three bee iao definitely sick and
en. jtlwr x_-j-ct, No. 24 doubtfully sick, ccorclin? to tie record?

T. - is correct.

.nd jub^-ct 21 hr. d fcc Ve.i cor one, heart atinulaht,. s he
.r.s too .o ti st ol on tjo occ -ions?

As r-o, h- ..3 too feu. to .. ve hia blood .r-ssur- t !xn.

*jv_ Subject 25 b a i-v.r t the/end of tie Beric. r.toi P-riod ane

u. o c< o e .: to st re u on t;;o jcc sr.nc, nd he h .d to !. v- -orpnint, '.nd

X-r-y - -- ci.eot disclos-i lithology, pextopa pneunoni*.?

•

A: Felfc .'3 P-~U..onL , yea. 7.l-r- r.s •. eh -doa on e.cii aide of the
brun&itue,

Jecfc r, you arid this _cr. tiv.t coalition w..u ert. c.j.iis,

1 ... ft c. rts sfceth* tint . -»

us til t toe difficult?

9*>6


Ju3^-A-F!>*f'.loy (vc r. Scho-a) “ ^3-2
Court i


A: Ho, I .iculd h‘.v_ to sc*. th- ctu'A fiX_,

Q: 2It.;, 701 state th t one eh.uld ir.ve certainly fol.ow-u up

the sxcj-cta 21, 23, and 30, rn_ ouao-r 25?

A: Yea, and nuob-r 3-

.jul nu-b-r 3. Mo<, subj-cts th t supposedly r-cciv-d 1,COO cc.
of Bufc'.bib treated a icn-rt-r d Aly freer .about 7 to 10 days, ho.: o£, thoa-

b-ean- eicU $ain, Doctor?

A: T.o.

Bv t u*.a aubj-cta —

A: 20 nd 2?.

Q: Ho./, I note fch't SubJ-ct 27 is su.o.:o3-d to h v. 3cm. 10 dayn,
Subj-ct Z. -up.oaed to hav- jt.iJ' 9-i e*ys, ivi Sublet 21, o U ya on 1,000
oc Bor»- i-r, la th.t possible?

A: Ho- that xa not poaaiblo. .ceor. inj to th. urinvl output in
r-1 tion to th- 1,0)0 cc of i.b OL P tiiht 27, for oxf-apl-, suppos-dly did
not t :x A3 th- 1,(00 cc c£ Bert; . tor.

r 4 : -11, no--, ho., ^id th- fiv- sqbjeeta supposed to h-v- t 1,(00

cc of a*. ’ t-r daily fro.. U-i to C uya f :.r ^?

w«bj ct 32 na ^uoj-ct 40, the iiv- ..ho .e;u nipposod to

h v- u .. ;. 1,000 cc of oc-.—t-r, /— uxt- ill. 3ubJ-ct 32 .vs t-o .v--.k 01
t*..o tee rvo.'ki to r. v- th- bicou .\.s-ur- ti»n, - nd JubJ.c’c l.t' .0 giv^n ao
st-roIua-.:ji -iN.ni-.lly.

*: II® , Doctor, it is obvious th t .all of th-se p .ti-nt did not
drlrd: l'. ^a.c.t-r, tut tht so.. of that che-.ted, isn't that true?

A: Yes, that ia true.

50 it is .p/oar-nt th-t these ^poriawnta turned out to b- a
f uc. oci-ntifieally?

.c-.ntif ic .lly spc.--Iin„ yes.

do., out of the tobhl oi - sublets is it tru- 32 Ci'e too woak
t» si -X a - . or -Jar-' -ce ei ..s, .x #> h . *- i-v-r nd ho ruquir^i
c ivi c . -c oc tion yr ^-r- fcne .-eciuis,

90*7


tl.^ie subjects b-in. 4,3>14,21,23,


^ ;uiiW.-Rr*>3 J X'.ls7 (Von Scaoen)

Courtll.

• •

25, 2S, 29, 32, 36, 37, 39 md AO?

» ccordir.* to th- ir. recorded or. the eh .rta those ir.tients
-itn_r r. u_r— 3 ^. sort j ! Z-r ;- cr unusu 1 thu-ipy, or -re wo \k tj h-.v
th-ir 03~c.. pressure t hx, or I'.'ju ' fever or h d difficulty — th the X-ny# j
£(JT UCUiplc?

_r. Ivy, 3.v.ri .it-iear-s h-.v.. —stifled h»r, th t one cr threw of
the AA subj-cts died curing the ccr.-.rsc eh-s- experiments w 1 ter, no.,,
ir. you* opinion if ter 3tujyia_ these recoils whicr. of th-ac 32 subjects who
a nii-ac-d >oo»i v.» sijn3 of incra lity curin' the perio- o, observation
r-cord-' .. the eh .rts ver- axch -nsu h to c use concern re" rdins whether
they cd.*»t h v- died?

eJl, sutoj-ct 25, the subject to eh on the atenojr'.phic not-a on
tn- e c.. . e 023 p ly, u»d bubj-ct 3. Those .r- the aubj.cts in this

erou.j .. . c concern -. in r-1 cion t> your question. Now, Ur.t otr.teo.nt in
*« o. Anion b .s.d wn th. C t t; -.t :-.r- vr.ij_.bl-.

Onpv> S762 of Lv. officii transcript of this trlAl, joct>r, the
t.stii.orc' . th. i.f.nd nt ai-“-loo-c!., hicr. will b- found in Ih- fc-rnoen
session of 9 Jun- 1947 —

A: .--’t 3 the P pie Oe?

I*.', .w is p 8762. qu-stxon put t- Jr. Bieg-lbCeCr-.ds -s
folic , *• t.ia is found in t... o-c..k. .>\r ,r -.ph j£ the Uficlr.l transcript

for 9 Jv... 3.947# on PSe b762 of the Ln eiah. *,Jun the in-erprebern h .Ve th
ii.1 t.-y —31 ue. I ..Hi .it .ir you.

r._ IdlEJlPlSESR: ito dor.*e h v. th- SnpUsh text -t r.U yet. :/o don't
Hive t.x. 9 June, but if you continu. no c si tn ns Into.

Qs (continued) The c£iesti»n: "Th- witness Bluer, who is ; busin-os
e..;i, _. . civil! n profession, sr.yo f rther th'.t h- s.w ay opto .3 f heirt
rfe*d<r.e3s; fc t do you 3 .; ibeut tint?" flr. Bicgclboeck insecred ns folio-,. 3 :

.. 3 /J-r dev .Hoped i-.e -L-ctro-c i*dio5r.e ei ,h-c.: t.olc. H. ,

d-v-lloped e..e I sip- c.. _ .. e.. L. , pert unity _ io —. lined

th— li^e .. exp-rt. .fc-.e oceuiTed in t.._ c~.se of the expad-.-ent 1 subject;:

, * 9C6" I


Jun_ lay - (Voa Sd.oca)

Ccurt 1


ir.3 . ciai-x 2oan .f th- puls-. T~is -a c_Ll_d in G-r-:ji -edic-1 lit-rntur-
Sch-r. Stellua^* It is protective position of th- bl-od circuit ion. ihis
is a.p.-oa-- «. -.pr-ss ta.t tijcu.v- the slo. ing up k f the. h-\rt bcr.t, a in
the c .. .rtf c 3 . .1 d-fici—tcy, s in the c .sc of hinder, certain

- - - • ■ ie lain -j, th t is quietin' n the circul ii .Loot a.

rhis -ic.ry, I believ-, is th- c rr-ct on-, but ret th- o.-v. th t H-rr 3'.u-r
'.cccpt-4* : Dr. ivy, do you r~c 1 L. t a-v-r-1 cf Ui- aiSjj-cta \xrc

^iv-n cii’-inc cr strychnin. th- -r.d of th_ cxp-riiunt-J. .-riod?

•»! 1 - 8 *

c r- tl.. drufcs ca io. Jy uacl in trc'.tlx^ p:.ticnts, ;h“.t “j.

. this- . co .a; Ay _a.d for in tr- t n .v.ticnte?

..a c .rdi-.c stiixl'nt?

Does not th. uae of — rt a a by Dr. B-isltoec!: on r. few

cf th-— subjects cjuflr- t;. r.p-rts cf Herr B-u.r?

r-o, 1 would a'.y x, t. tl.- t:~ori-s, th- opinion -x.or-ss.d

by B~u»r?

.. . Jt ..t this ; -i.fc * 2. v- no .ucatiens to put to Jr. B'-u-r
conc-mii.; ac t-r .np-ri-ent.:, -V. if th- Trilun l h s -rtf 1 iL 1 not
ppoc-cd t. .. t.;-r portion S th. -x .iin\tio:».

3Y JUX.. iilQJC:

It D-c'fcr, do you h .v- b-for- you Docwxnb HO 177, hie', h .a b.-n
introduc. *. a irooucutiun 2 ;- i.it 133, nil n,. .ts in Prooecution D-cufc_nt
book V, -.t .. .-.-a 11 tu 17, ir.clu.iv-?

A: Y-c, 1 h-.v- it*

:.iil you pltf:se turn to prj- 33 ir. Dacucxnt Beck V?

A: Tea, I h v- it*

.ill you pi- a. turn t- 33 in D^cuo-nt 3ook V?

Y-a*

1 : .-a I dir-ct you .bt^-Cidn -j. ..-tiail n- to th .t p.r r ph ’.chich b

. 1 - -2* Pt r t - - -r >• there- . :

Bduratioit _f exp-rici-ats iiai-u id 3 . In Aiition to th. oqxjriiwnta


Court 1

June 12-A- 24 - A- HD- ke ehan-Von Scbo an.

«. Zxcept for the subjects In the group receiving
Schaefer v?.tsr, which Is essentlaly fresh water, none of the
experiments extended longer than 1CJ days, according to my
w-.y of interpreting the cxtont of the experimental period,
according to Dr. 3elglboeck'8 way of Interpreting tho extent
of the experimental period, th3 longest period would be
days.

S. Will you please explain wh-t is comprehended within
tho period of 10? days ca you estimate it and 9> fays, as
the defendant Bioglboock estimated; op^be perhaps I can make
ayself sore explicit; in ostlnrtlng that period of time are
you taking into account the preliminary observation period
of seven days?

Ko, whon I used the expression experimental porlod,

I meant the period of tlxe th-«t tho subject w^s thirsted and
fasted or tho porlod of tine tho subject rccolvod Schaofor
water or the period of tlmo the subject received either
3or';a water or sea w Ler. The period b-fore tho ox-porioentsl
period wro rwfered to -'s the control period or prc-oxpcrl-
montal period and "r.d the period after tho experimental
orlod may bo roferred to s the post control period.

*. Let us assume that your interpretation of the
records ere complete and that come of tho experimental
subjects p 1 rtlcip-’tod in the experiments for a period of os
long as 10 * days; can you sry fr.m exrmir.ln^ tne report
whether th t ac an unbroken experimental period?

In every cose, I should first cey that I hr.vs
ct-dled the r.cerds with that Idea or point in mind and lr.
every ®se, according to the urlr.o out-put, I should sry that
tho cxperlaentel period was broken. Th. t is, i» you refer
t the chart of rtlent IIo. 27, you viJLl find that that
patient was supposed to take 1,000 cc of Derke water for ter.


9071


Court I

v ur.e 12 — 2 —rU—y.a chan—YonScho an.

lays, the lost six or which were hunger. If you look at .-Is
reoord of urine out-put, you find it was impossible for him
to follow t-i-t strict routine.

In re gore, to tae axierlmental subject you have Just
bear, ef erring to, can you state from looking at the chart
anf. rue rde what his - yslcal condition wr.s "t the tlao he
ore he Int*. the experiment by grlnin- ~cce6s to wrter or to
fres/ wnter ns the c;ee Try be?

a. The record will show the I did not Include subject
'A'j. 3 ? in list of the subjects who ap-eared to so sick .n
tha b-.eie of the study of these records.

.. The defendant h»e mrde the statement, If I undor-
striid -la testimony correctly tnat he found of tr.e entire
®rou of ox erla-ntrl subject chrt twenty of them gained
aoucsa to w ter durln e the course of t.u experiment end ho
llste Chou, if I 'understood his testimony correctly.

Per hull a you urve a -encll r nd pad there, do you, Joct-r?

ho listed them is the experimental subjects Nos. 2, ?,

1 , Id, 1., 10, 20, 27, 28 , 29 , 31, 33, 35, 37 , 38, -10,

*1, 42, T.l 43. Can you examine the -.rafts or recorde of
tu'.sa o.*r.erlmer.t''l subjects, or any or either of tnom and
give t..c o art y>ur ms die. 1 view as to the c nditlon,
physlcc .1 or mental, that tuoae subjects were In pt the tiu»3
they broke off the experiment; by thrt I m.an 1 the time
t- sy disc ntlnuel the strict routine 'under which they wore
ol.eed as experimental objects?

-■». First, I should like to give er. answer to tl.ut
question Insofar is Subject No. 27 Is our.cerned. I Just
referred to thst subject ns nevln c been supposed to reooi/o
1,0 cc ol’ Berks witer. «ccordir.g to uv interpretation of
-la urlhrry outout, that subject received ses-water U ny
significant extent only on -the first f^ur days of tna ten-

9072


Court 1

June l3~^-2-i-3-HD-:4eehan-Von3chocn.
day experimental p-riod.

'• Here Is the tr.lng, Doctor. Perhaps I -ay aid you
tr. gotting the Infraction, if you can got it, that the
Tribunal is interested in. Here is an experiment, which
as ytu sry, according to your interpretation of the cahrts,
wr.s conducted for a period of at least lOV days with some
of the subjects. I think thet the Tribunal is interested
in knowing.

a. I think we should correct that figure to ten days.

G. Ton days.I think the Tribunal is Interested

in knowing what tee oondltlon of those subjects wae vhon
thoy broke off their ex:erl3ents, because os I renenber
the Defendant 3elglboeck said that when he discovered that
fact, ho pl-ced a.ao of then ngain hack on the routlno as
volunteers. *a he puts It, if he fund thoa rnd continued *
then In that status; wo are interested in knowing whether or
not rt the tlao they broke off the experlmont by gaining
access to fresh water, they wore lr. physical fit condition
or, if they wore not, whether during the Interim that thoy
gained -ccesa to fresn water they -gnlr. became flt.onuugh
so that thoy could safely be put on a second routlno of
salt water, or hunger and thirst; do I make jysclf clear,

Sir?

Yes, in tlie case of oubjoct No. 27, rnd we are
talking about th'.t subject, the chart indicates that tho
plus- was quite slow and unstable and th-t is the only
indication jn this chart.

a. '-hen?

ihie was on «ug st 3Cth, which is the ninth dry, and
the patient was fekan off of £ne experimental -oriod the follow-
in. day, so that would indicate that either because of tho
Other*evidence indicated that the patient was quite


9073


Court 1

Juna 18--2i-4-HD-Keefcan-Von5cfcoen.

dehydrated or because of the condition of the pulse, that
Or. Seiglbo.ck decided to break the experiment. On the
ot.-:r uand, he may hove decided to break the experiment
becauee the patient wrs not taulng all the eec-v-ter, I
mean all the 3erke water.

I think the defendrnt made the explicit statement
that :.n xogrrd to some of t ho subjects, he c~me to the
oonclusl n that they were gaining noc-se to woter and ho
c.n:'rontod them with tn«; :'sct and then threetenod them with
the feet that he wrs not going to glvo them the cigarettes
he h d -.remised them because they were not engaging in the
ex erlaent fairly end then they entreated him to be allowed
t. again embrrk unon ai c experiment, whereupon he started
a r.ov erl-.d. «r.d I am Interested, the Tribunal is Interested
ir. et. or r not, t the time they st-rted the new period,
-.ay ::a?e hyeically in condition that they should fteve
been allowed to d; sc.

a. subject ... 11 is supposed t j : ve received 50v cc
of on-tntor; hie exerlmentnl reriod was seven days and
then tr s taken of i tno experiment and then a few da. s

l*:or ac rted or. <? second -«jrlod for five days. If vu trf.ll
refer 5 t.-.e Hat of numbers that you gnve me, you will not

f-nd r '-act 11 there. .--e was eupsoscdly on the 500 cc of

•

sea w&tov for two different -*erlods.

i. "all. In fairness to the defendant, I believe I
a/, Ulf. say, that Is as I understood his testimony this
s.rnlngj he called attention to tn.se subjects by number
who not already been dealt with by the Prosecution. I
bell ere lr. fairness to h-.e defendant th*t ought to be
st bed.

fectcr, merhr.ms th-t will take some time end -.erh-rps
you v.uld like to go back over tnose records wit.', our


927U


Court 1

June 12-A-2-1- 5-K3-Me ehan-Von3 ebon.


question In mind end perhaps he in a position In the morning,
after you h eve had nr. ojrortunity to analyse all of those
sheets....

a. I have already done that.

Z. I see.

A. I tfcout maybe you wanted me to tahe them up ono at
r. tine on the b'sls of my study of these records of the group
of subjects who wore exposed to two experimental ro c imos
without more than four or five days between. *11 of them
wore in good condition t the tine the second ixrlod was
oerrlod out. Now they had not all {pined as much weight* by
that I mean they a. d not returned to their original body
weight, rll of thorn.


12 Jurv- -A -C-J-2 5-1 -Pr lmcnu -( vonSc hc-_n) -
Court 1

A (tuhv basis of their pulse, on the basis of their tunpe-
raturc and other data available, I couldn't say that they were debili¬
tated tc such an ~xt-_nt that they could not tolerate of renewal of
the regime for the period on which they were- plac-d.

Q *iay I ask you now this. Sir? In your opinion, under what
circumstances should a volunteer for a sea waU-r exp-riment such as we
are considering here be allowed to drop out of an experiment before it's
conclusion. I mean be allowed to drop out of his responsibility on his
own request?

A T“at isn't an cosy question to answer. In the experiments
which I have p~r ora-d involving thcJ^gravation of sea water with and
without dilution or in which I have restricted the water intake to deter¬
minate adninnl water r quir.aents, I have permitted the volunteer sub¬
jects to withdraw from the experiment whenever they expressed the
desire to do so, regardless on the fact that th.y agreed at tho start
to continue until they Were, released.

Q Th>n let c, ask you, should the factor whether the cxp.ri-
;xntal subjects feel that n. is unable to continue with the experiment
be a matter to be act.raln-d by him or should it be determined solely
by the can conducting on experin.nt?

A I do not believe that it should be solely determined by
the man co.-.duetin.;, the «-xp-rizxnt.

■I If it should -appear fraa the evid-nc*' that the person
conducting the oxperia.nt reserved for hiss-If the decision is to
whether or not the experin_ntal subject should be .allow d to drop out
b.causc of physical omental distress or disccofort and did not allow
the experiment*! subj.ct to cake that decision or choice for himself,
would you consider that experimental subject, who desired to drop out
of an experiment during its course but who was not allowed to do so by
the man conducting the experiment, w.:s thereafter a volunteer?

- I do not b.lie-ve that he would be . volunteer and the reason
.• 9C76

I


12 June- n -1J-2 ~—2-c rim _ au-( von Scho_nj-
Ccurt 1

>»fcy : hnv- Urjrs emitted subjects to withdraw free the experiment
whcc th -7 expressed the desire was free one, a humanitp.rian standpoint;
nunb-.r tro, free a pragaatic standpoint free which I neon that if I
fere.d hin to continue he. would net be reliable -rvd cooperative and I
could not expect to obtain r-lioble data free hin; so I penait then
to drop out as soon as they express their desire — the reason of huma¬
nitarian -nd prrgmatic ethical philosophy,

1 U.t us assume that at t;»e outset and prior to the beginning
of the experim-nt the person who is going to conduct the experiment advised
the potential experimental subjects that he hinaolf was going to reserve
for hinself tix, decision, th- sole decision, wh.ther am experimental
subject would be allowed to drop oat during tr.e course of the experiment
=nd let us assume that the -xp-:iment started nd that , because of extre¬
me physical or a.nt.1 distr as or.discomfort, one of the experimental
subjects expressed - dvjlrc to drop out nd let us assume that the m n
conductinc the experiment det-rain-d that they should not drop out be-
c-use prior to the beginning of th. ; pcrimuit he had wnrn.d them that
he would reserve that decision for himself, would you think that after
that time that experimental subject roild bo in the s.nse of a volunteer?

a No. /./ U3mrer is th. s:me as b-for. because when you co.rce
or c ase a volunteer subject to continue as a subject you c m expect
cheating and unreli.blo cooperation md, h.nce, that challenges the
sci-ntific nature of the complete .xp.rici-nt.:l design and at th- same
eim. you ar. vx-rciring coercion.

IK5 PR SIuLtfTS 7h..e will b- r.o furth-r queStior.3 from the

Tribunal.

SI JR. HARDY:

Q Pro.'essor Ivy, in connection with the Sea water records,
did you note thereon ny indications that Professor SciglbOeCk had per¬
formed liver punctures cr. th- experiment-! subject*?

A Yes.

Could you -xplain to us whether or not in these experio-ntc.


5077


12 Jon».-*-G.I-25-3-?ri=cau-(von Scboen)-

Court 1

those liver punctures w-rc n_ces:cry, whether if necessary they would
be harmful, ~ad whether or not 2 person suffers as a result of a liver
puncture?

a A liv.r puncture is a diagnostic procedure which has been
used considerably in the last five or six years, >.hen the procedure is
carried out by a skilled and experienced operator, the danger of the pro¬
cedure is alidad, Very small. In itself it c.'nnot be said to be- a dan¬
gerous diagnostic prccedur-.

Q Do those records Indicate that Dr. Seiglboeck performed
1 unbar punctures on any of the xp-riaental subjects?

A Tell, when the first look.d over the subjects wu did not
know exactly what the bfcrcvlation "L"' meant. ./e thought that that might
mean a lumbar puncture, or a liver puncture, fe also Were not cert-.in
regarding the me-mine 01 the abbreviation " ?*■. "JT could stand for liver,
"hep .tie , 1 or co'ild stand for thv word ’'hind-brain' 1 , but wc

thnight that V-T' stood for cist.mal puncture aad "LP'* for lumbar
puncture. I don't understand that "ii'‘ r.-fero to liver puncture and
• Hf ’ 1 to intravvn .es indication.

Q .'ocld ther« bv anj purpes.. rtvr.tsccver in performing a lum¬
bar puncture iti thes- ocp.riajnts

a —11, I Co not think so. iroa a scientific standpoint
on. could aa> that it would be wortwhile knowing whether or not th_
ccribo spinal fluid presaur- rns changed by dehydration, whether or not
the concentration of Ceribo spinal fluid was changed.

i .'ould there b- any ourpose in th« course of 3 ea water ex¬
periments -3 pvr‘or=ed at b-chau nd performed by Professor 3 v iglbOeck
to perform a cisternal puncture?

a Ho more than the reasons I gave you for a lumbar puncture.

The lumbar puncture is c much safer procedure than a cisternal puncture.

lit . '.iAHDY: Your Honor, at this time I would like to proceed
to tru." examination of Professor Ivy concerning the high iltitude pr-ssure.
Dr. Saut-.r is now here in the courtroom and he inferas m- he c _n represent


12 Jun_-A-GJ-25-L-rrineau-(von Schoen)-
Ccurt 1

defense counsel for icltz end defense counsel for Roob-rg as well as
for himself for Ruff.

THE rReSIDEtfT: Very noil, proceed.

' BY hR. HARDY:

Q In order to bring Dr. Sauter up to the points that we rea¬
ched this afternoon in conn-ction with the high altitude rcascarch, Dr.
Ivy, I an going to request that we go back over the questions concerning
the report. Document MO b02, now if you will turn to page 88 of Docu,
nent Book, Ho. 2 which is the data given concerning an experiment per¬
formed at Dachau,.the protocol of which appears in Document HO b02, I
wish to ask you th_ following question: rfas it necessary to perform
such a hasardcus experiment as elicited hero on page 88 in Document
Book No. 2 in th. report of Ruff, Rcobvig and Rascher.


12 Jxa^-A^a-as-i-Oro..

Court I

^ opinion no.

■• 30 S'®* consider on tho viol* the experiments set forth in
Docuiont UO-402 to have been particularly dangerous?

*. Only those experiments Involving slow dcscut or descont with
the poiechuto openod from the nighor altitude do I consider dangorous.

^ * 18 those experiments which were concemod with slow do-
scont fra; an altitudo exceeding 15030 actors or 47200 foot?

A- Yes. *11 thoso in which tho poriod of unconsciousness or
oxygon lock worw prolongod I indicated that that night cauoo injury of
tho oolls of tho brain in a ponnunint way which would bo lndioatod by
a tost of tho looming uoehanlsn.

^ . ’Jell, is a slow doscont experiment of this sort how long would
tho brain and tho heart bo deprivod of udoquato o>ygon?

a. * s I lndioatod tho oxporluonts, tho rosults of tho o.-pori-
aonto, show that tho subjoots wore unconscious for fiftoon or, I bo-
llcvo, u? to thirty mlr.utos becuuso of luck of oxygon and they woro
disoriontod for a poriod of fra; thirty up to ninty minutes.

. V oil, now tho extrenonosa of thcce conditions «ro rocordod

by tho authors on page 97 of Document Book IX. Ofcorcin thuy report
that no lasting injury duo to oxygon luck occurod. Is that otctaiont
uncritical?

a. I bcliovo it 1 8 in so fwr as tho brain or corobrun is concern¬
ed- But I bcliovo it is u corroct stuttcont so far as tho hourt is
conco.nod.

i ■ But in those axDoriuents they did not study tho learning
uochnnisn of tho bruin, did the;/?

A . hO.

^ . Would yon explain to the Tribunal Just what you noon by tho
study of the learning nochr.nl ga of tho brain?

a. '-ell, in order to loam tho colls of tho cerebral cortex
must bo normal. Jho cells in our body which are aost sensitive to lack

9035


12 Jun©-A -W-2S-3-Gro3«

Court I

oxygen euro the colls of the corcbrua. Eonco, in dotercininf *./!'.cw
thor or not a period cf oa^en lode had erased cay injury to the body
toat should bo Qjplicd to that bodily nochar.isa which is aost cuscce-
tiblo or aeaaitivo to oxygen loci. It ia for that roason, I boliovc,
t -oao exp or ia oat a woro lneoapleto and it eould not bo st„tod er.to.~ori-
odly the body of theao subject 3 rcaultod in doaago fresa oxygen lack.

q. As experiment of this type, would you bo reluctant to do
rich an onpoxinent on yoursolf J

a . Yob, Z should ualoss it wore absolutely necessary to pro¬
vide aaic infomatioa that could aot be obtainod by scoo othor uothod.

q. Da you :;•«» by experimentation on naiads, uonkics or othor
nn lacla?

_ Yea, cad oven perhaps myself.

<U -oil, would tho difforonco botwoon the roault on uaiada end
the result obtdnod on uor. bo s trikin,;?

A . 2 a soqo lastaacoa Yea but aot ia thia particular inst nco.

I hould soy that the difforeaco botwoca tho results obtdnod by Lutz
cad Voadt cad tho rcoulta on ai-uli obtained ay Huff, Rctibor^-, end
Haschor or. those huaaa subjects w .o not oaou^-to lndlcuto that thooo
o^joriuonts wore accessary. *od that is rtiat I should anticipate on
tho boat cf uy kaowlodgo.

3Y "JDC-L S33=D»:

Z . J:czor, that was tho question 2 was going to ask. Could
that havo boon anticipated with your knowledge prior to tho tiao you
hod it e n d tho reports of Buff, dauber,; and 2aechor.

A . Yes that is corroct bocauoe wo enow tho particular proBsuro
of cry ;cn et those various dtltudos and we know how long thoro will
bo on rdocuato aacunt of oxygon in tho blood to naintdn phyciolo/.icd
function. a ndwfl know at what dtitude there is sufficient ooount of
oay jon in tho cir to oxygenate the blood in order to brine about con¬
sciousness. Uith that knowledge ono can determine the amount ; cuy-
/.on that has to be put ia a bde out bottle ia order to presorvo
, 900.


12 Jun*-A -i-J-26-3-Gro38
C ourt I


consciousness free cae high altitude to a lower safe altitude.

^ . V as that knowlego known, were those facts known generally
ia the cedie.l vorld in tho year 1942, doctor?

A . Yos, in 1942.

3Y ia. HaHDY:

Professor Ivy, in your opinion is it possible for a physician,
that is a senior physician or a nodieal scientist, to be attachod to a
distant laboratory by having -is assistant working in thut distant
laboratory?

A • Yes. X have done th-t. X have had vj assistants or non
working under no in :iy laboratory to to othor laboratories and work
thero on problems undor ;.y supervision.

Q • Is that u ccacon practice in the scientific fiold?

1 . Relatively so, yos.

Q, .jeno, doctor, that you were offorod an assignaent to work
for last nco in tho Univarsity of California laboratory. How you are
situated in tho TTnlvorsity of Illinois aid you oont an assistant to
work ir. tho Univorsity of California laboratory. Would you feol that
you voro responsible for tho scientific activity of your assistant?

A • Yos, as long as ho is undor ay Jurisdiction I ou rosponoir-
blo for his scientific cctlvitios.

0,. If in tho course of his work u doath occurred in Mb labora¬
tory and tho assist art reportod tho doath to you, that is, assuninc
that ho is oojioriiieuting on bunui beings. Would you then bo iuprocscd
or uniuprossod by tho report givon to you that a doath occurrod In hio
werh?

A. Veil, I should be very ::uch impressed and I ohould oithor go
qyoolf to investigate tho circuast^ces surrounding tho death or I
should have saio ono locally ia wheo I had a great deal of confidence
ncko the investigation and rive their report to ae.

Cl . Shea it is tho senior iavestigutor*s responsibility to caro-


90C2


12 v—-&J-26-4-Groes
Court 1


chock the cause of any irregularitieo la the courao of any cj*-
■lataat* ■ ro«o.irch progr^ai?

* . Yoe.

^ . Xe it .. ecc^oa occurer.ce for u person to die or to bo kill¬
ed in tho course of e^perir.eato in eviction cediciae or clinical ix>-
vesti.,ctlcae of cay sort?

A . Yob, it is rolotivoly rare. as a nutter of fact I only know
of one death which has occurred la oil of tho exporlaoatutioa which
has ,'joae oa in the United Stotee in the fiold of * victioa Kodiciac cad
that is tho case of Major Boynton who in tho etude' of froe full brilod
out of an airplane I rocull ct ecnothlag lUe 40,000 feet, all of tho
othor o^jorineati worked. I know of ao death having occurred.

Voll when a death dooe occur, for exunplo a caeo llko llajor
Boynton, did tho decoueod beccue u eo-c-llod ftedied horo a aertro
to uodlorl eciencot

a . Yoe, wo coneidor Major Boyatoa a horo, a nodical horo, la
tho field of nviutioa aodiciao aad I night eay that on tho occaolon
of hio doath tho cuueoe voro levee tinted Tory carefully by tho *ir
Surgeon.

. p r. Ivy, boc^iac of tho fact that you aro bo funiliur ’1th
laboratory and aviation roeoarch I ehould like to have you read oov¬
er cl docuucata ttipinj the coateet ia niad that after which I donire
to obtain your opinion as an expert. 7 iret I ohculd liko to kavo
you road on pego 76 of Docu:cnt 3ook XI. That is

EU TXSOBtt Counsel, how lone will it take to read and dio-
cucs thC30 docunenta?

13. S-L 3 Y: It night be adviecuble to adjourn -t tala tine, -o
could uiccuaa thie tho fir.t thing in the norning. This will bo a
rather c;tcasivo question.

S3 ?SK3KS» -re yon £Oi=o to Mud tfcoM docunont. into t .0


record?


90C3


12 Jane-* -W- 26 -e-Oross

Court I

K?, I w oat to road the particular sections into the ro-

cord so that it will appear la the record Just t&at Dr. Ivy's opinion
will bo baaed on as to tho particular aoction I referral to.

E2 Pl^SHSCT; Tou ni^ht read these sections into tho rocord
cad than in the norniog direct Professor Ivy's uttontion to thoso
documents.

1-h. E^2Y: If your Honor pleases, I would Just as soon wait un¬
til touorrov aernin^.

P23>IMET| Tho Tribunal wUl now be in roc ess until 0930
o'clock tomorrow norfeing.


13 Jor.o (Iat. arterfcerp)

Court So. 1


Official Transcript cf thv «nerican Military
Tribunal in tlx; natter of United States
of .'"—-rice, a~ninst Sari Brandt, ot el,
defendants, sittinj at Hurhber , Germany,
cn 13 Jun: 19L7, C93C, Justice Boals .residing.

THE fiJ’SH.,1 J Parsons in th. Ccurtrean will ploaso fin! their seats.

Tho Honorable, tlv. Judges f : Military Tribunal I.

Sfllitary Tribunal I is nnr in sossion. Go.’, savo the Unite;! S tat os
of /jaorloa and this Honorable Tribu na l.

Thoro rill be order in tho court.

TKS PH3S IT.:??: Kr. Karshol, will you ascortain if tho defendants
aro all prosont in Court?

TiT. u-RS&Xs Ifcy it ploaso Ycur Honors, all defendants aro
all prosont in tha court.

THE *TGSIDS.N7i Tho Socrotary General will note fer the rocord tho
prosonco cf all tho lefoodnnts in court.

Counsel nay prccood.


77>i3SS0R IVT - P.osunod
DIRECT EL;T«:.TI0H - Continued


BT !°. ILWi


Q Dr. Ivy, at tho cleso of yontyr.Voy*3 sossion I was bo inning
to take up. tho ’-fitters ix.rtoinin to thj various reports by Rancher,
and by Tuff, »o:jbor an' Bascher, and I “hcul* like to havo you road
parts of those iocurvonts, Ico. pin tho context in ;dn', after which I


doslro to obtain y-.ur opinion as an oxport,

DR. SSIDL: (Dr. Soi’l for defendants Qobhordt, Oborhauaer and

Flshor) Y ur Honor, I cbjoct to tho questionin' of this witness in tho

^^•Bjj^in^ich it has been '-no so far. an! as apparently tho Proso-

A, /tuticn inteu*^ V' continue. This witness was intr hxcod into this trial
\ &


)


by an affid


daA'&AhLch concerned itself exclusively with scamtor cxp_ri-
ixsnts. Kerr, v^ittoapt is tdn aado to su!rtLt a •..hole series of !ecu~

. r^r.ts to wjftnoss which aro in no ray connected with the soawator

The attenpt is bo in -eado to jako the -rltness an ac .rt on
oxj>;rincnts which aro in a. way compete! •r.iatr v_r ith the -bin 3


90t5


13 Juno LI- VVl-2-'ini y (Int. - atftonburs)

Court >fc. 1


stated in his affidavit. I object to this procedure, and aero so bocauso
this is takir. place at a tine an placo after the other defendants
case have boon concluded as far as too defense is concern: V.

In al'ition several cf defense counsol have already nado their
final pleas based on the results of thair offorts an! alroa ty sub—
aitto i thin to the translation Vi vision. Therofero the Prosecution had
a chanco to find out about these final ploas. I consider it inn bdssiblo
after the Prosecution i»nths a o finished its caso n:w eftur tho dofonso
conplotos its caso tho nholu trial in a certain sonso j-ins at tho
be innin a ain, an’, in answer to cortain thin s which tho Vofunso has
statod tho Pro3ocution brin s in an export who is supposed to arenror
what tl» r’.ofonsu stated. ?hj Prcsocution whin its caso in Chiof *.rr.s
boin 'iscussod nlnHUfy -jforc tho Tribunal, that is

Dr. Luibran It. ..t the tlio when Dr. J/jibmn’t was uxaninod froro in
Court this witness was also resent in ::urribor , and. the Pr.socution
would h»avo had tlw opportunity ct that ti*» to question thin witness,
or this axport before tho Os”rt if tho Prcsocution dosires to do so.
Hawaver, I conai Vor it ina'drsiblo that now, aft.rwr.rdj, tho Prosecution
oxr:dnos an e>4>-rt in ro ard to Vocuiants which oontor.ts speak for
thjiis-jlvos, :t a aotwnt whin tho Prosecution kn ws th: ontiro caso cf
the ’ofenso by tho statxunts of Vo fondants th>nsclvo3, as well as by
the '.ocuvjnto tho ofonoo hr*3 3u‘ rdtto'. I an cor.vincol Control C uncil
Law Vlo. 7 can ivo no lo ;al basis for this procedure, an 4 'urthornoro I
an convinced that those tactics of tb, vosocutor are c ntrary to tho
oooral 1 j al principles of my cc Vo of lor-nl prooo hire, bocauso it is
not 50 ssi'J.o-afta* tho conclusion of thi entire caso cf the defonso
a ain on tho part of the . rosea: tion tc intre Vuco now oviVonco into tho
trial.

T "d. rLHDT: Hay it pl.aso Tour Honor, I h va no caa-mt an thi3
r: -ark rth r than tho fact I request the Tribunal to instruct VofonGo

r; r • - • ' ,


13 Jttno -:7—'V. -1-3-iOoy (Int. artcnburs)

Court Ho. 1

and I rant tc naim it dear to Dr. ^eiiEL in as inch as : was not
?rosont wbon I requested tMa Tribunal to call Dr. Ivy cut of or Aar,
as a rc'xittal witnoss of the Prosecution !ue to the fact Dr. Ivy aust
return to th_ states iaaodiatdy, and on that particular day nr. Sci 1
wasn't hore, an' the Tribunal ruled that wo can call hin out of or dor,
axv' ho is hero as a rebuttal witnoss. The Prosecution has choson to
call bin as a rebuttal witnoss that is tho reason why he ’id not appoar
boforo this Tribunal boforo,

D".. S..77Z~i (For dofonJents !tuff an-* Itoabirt) Hay I also take tho
fl or. I as’.: f;r por-lssion to spook, !lr. President, ospocially for
thoso of the dofon'.ants who n» havo to suffer nest un lor tho present
subrdssion of ovi ’cnco and by tho help of the expert are su.poao l tc
bo oondoonodf they arc tho '.ofe:: bants So f an*. 3c:.barr when I on
represent in . I _y with tho protest f ay ooUoajuo,

Dr, 3oi 1, and I wail' like to aupplon.nt his rc:iarlc by tho followin'i
Already :t a very early sta-jo of tho trial tho defense frx> their
point of viow consi It rod it suitable, perhaps oven n^co sary, to call
saw unproju icod, ©oaplotoly unpruju 'icod inparttal f-rci. n exports,
to call thj^ to court for one or another quootion, and tho dofon3o
hepod that id thin this scope of tho examination of those oxp.rts tho
ifficult medical quostions ni ht bo clarified inpcrtially, TJvo ouoationo
which this trial brin 3 up are especially ’ifficult for U3 lawyers,

;.t tho tirw, if I an not rdstaken, tho crurt rofusod thv. applications
^f two defonso cc.un3el3 to call two ferui n exports. ' ithin the circlo
of th. .'.ofonso counsel ~o at tho ti-^o, of course, iscussol tho
nttitu '.o of tho curt, an' at that tine, wo reached the conclusion that
th.ro i3 no point ir. nckin a..plications for callin further averts,
as tho court had tol' us the lx* no ativo attitu j» tr.nr'. us. Now at tho
vary last aa»nt cf the trial and I really havo t. nay, "cntljncr., at
thu vary last n -cent cf the trial, the Prosecution cones dth a f:roi n
or., =rt, when 'to are s.ein hr a f ;r tho first tin ir. the courtr on hero,
and. by this noan3 the Prcsocuticr. tries to overthrow the entire ovidunwa

90:7


13 Jttno L7-:.n-l-u- bsloy (Int. artafmrj)

Court dfc. 1

suirrfttc 1 s ; far. I dc net consider that correct. ' e J afenso counsel
hare always boon of the opinion that hero especially, boforo an
.. erican Tribunal, we want to conduct the trial in an absolutely fair
amor, an ’ I believe that this cannot bo brou ht in a Tooaont -.. 1 th

9

the fact t'nat yesterday th. prosecutionmnouncos an expert is cc:.dr.;,
first they say about seawator oxp-rircnt3. The expert, without keep-in,"
th. eroscrlbod tin: lirdt, i3 callcand irno'lately h- starts tosti-
fyin about hi h .altitu da ur.A-ri v-nts -..-hen it ha not boon announced
he woul'’ testify about thesv at all. How, for tee .’of ora a the rosult
is c very roat ifficulty fron this way of treat in the cosI an a
lawyer. I cue la-ally trained, just cs th Ju ’ es cr:, on* of course it
is very Ifficult f r -.o to uiKtorstan:' these .eo leal questions, oven
thou h bJ to the half year poric d for which the trial has lasted I
n loarnod quito a bit about these ao&oal quostions. It is for tho
doforao absolutely n&cossary that theso Ifficult questions bo properod
in Iscussion /ith th- dofon-dants in an a doquato -aannor. In a short
tine, spent sinco last ni ht this has not boon possible f r us. ' o spoak
downstairs in the Jail threu h a lass an! threu h bars to tho
defendants, .an' wu have foun* out by aqxarionco that every question
an ' ovary mmt-r has to bo ropoato I t j cr three cr f ur tin os until
wo can uadersten’ each oth-r finally, an’ thon-ro have at cur disposal
for tho discussion f all theso Important questions c poric 1 of partaa;*
ono h ur. That i3 th. my it was last ni ht. "nr in this short period
an' undo- theso ifficult conditions to o thr u h th.se if'icult
quostions for which th. *.?q rt as rj,:--' hi-asclf nir.co January is
ccrrplotaly inpcssi’l for the defame counsol. ..s defense counsel I
roquiro tdu r:3ocution th t such a witness who has boon at thoir
Isposal for v.nths, that the prosGCUfclon rill in cdvonco toll uo what
tho expert is tc bo oxadne-d about, an.' if the Prosecutor loos not do
that, of course, cw^rlasr, an’ I shall leave ith


the f.olln .uy clients have boon treated unjustly, and I appoal tc ycur


13 «fano L7~»-..7r-l-5- r aloy (lot. artenbure)

Court !fc. 1

su; port, or.tlucjn. I cannot bo expected that such ifficult an2
conplicctod questions shall bo troatod by no in such a short tino, in
such a jannor that I havo the fodinr I nvo ’cr.o bity .-jro. Thus,
jr.tlocon, I ask you not to a felt Ion weeks after the conclusion of
tho fluff an’ ^onbarc* caso tho vitnoss* testimony as ho is exsninod horo
as an export on altitu !o questions,


13 *uao-&-i-:£-2-l-»ieohan (Yortonberg)

. C ourt Z

ZJH. S=.T_::US: (Counsel for Defesd-nt Karl 3rcndt.) Xr. Presi¬
dent, insofar os I understand it, the cupert has b..en called ns re—
but tel idtnoss for tho dofonsc evidence. To wh..t extent such a re¬
buttal is i daisaable under ^orlcu law, I don't know very well end
I don't boliovo n j coll cogues know it oithcr. Eoc heart of tho let-
tor, however, is that this onpert .ppcari here who should have tpucruv
cd months .v.o. Vo think that tho unjust part of tho question of this
export spooking about .11 thoso questions is that ho tqnecrs as a
foreigner wnilo the aborts for which wo ::adc explication has boon
refused.

Tho rronch.an, Oeorjes 31auc, oven stated to dofense counsol ho
was yonGy to eppoar horo and wo would all fl-vo ooan roaiy to sub. lit
to this authority. This o^>ort here is an A-oric.tr., who is called
hero in c cr.no of tho Uni tod States. Vo have nisjivinjs to tho of-
foot that tho witnoss cannot bo froc and ho r.ust bo projudicod end
I wnnt to point out tnis point in particular.

Ihcraforo, I dto -,;roo to tho plication of cy colloacos that
tho oxaiinntion of tho * itnoso insofar os it cxcoods tho goa-wator
exp or in ante should bo refused.

ill. H^KETZ: In that concoction, Tour Honor, insofar as it on¬
ce ode tho sor^ator oapcrlncnts, I ai not aw ( jo that tho Prosooution
introduced tho affidavit fron Dr. Ivy concerning soa-wator, but it
was tho dofonso that introduced tho affidavit, cad it was tho dofouso
counsol *uo liuitod i'.in to so a-vat or experiments.

I think I have perfectly qualified Dr. Ivy to testify or. tho
natters which I ai tc brin,; up in this axor-lnaticn. I soo no reason
why I should net bo allowed to continue if tho Iri-uad sees fit to
olio-..' no to continue to examine this rebuttal witnoss at this ti..o
due to tho circuast_nces that he r.ust return to the United Stetos on
Tuesday.

3E3 P23USE: I t will be advisable that the Prceocution u;ko


9090


13 Jrao-iM^-g-s-flcefcan (Uprtenburg)
Court I


c ctcrccent concerning the matters concerning which Dr. Ivy will he
oirclned.

a! tc the foreign exports, roquestod oy the defcr.su counsel,
it ves novor the policy of the tribunal to ordor the production of
z wit no S3 tdio resided in a foroign country, boexaso it was iriponci-
ble to enforce tho ordering of any witness who had been protondod
cad vho would voluntarily ccco here. Ho could bo celled by tho de¬
fendants ct any tine. 2mt was always open to tho defendant. But,
duo to tho natters \hich defense counsel is voll nvaro tho Defendants
Information Burocu could never undortcho to prosont to svrxton cad
procuro tho attendee of u witness residing in a foroi *n counter no
thoro cro too uoay difficulties and that is c nattor of impossibility.
Tho Tribunal ad op tod that policy in the beginning, as to the procoduro
in original trids. The only procoduro wo fcnow anything about c &d
aro accuottmod to Is that tho prosocutlon presents its caso, tho de¬
fendants irosont thoir caso and tho prosecution nay tho:; call ro~
buttol vitnocsos to discuss, consider end testify to ovidenco intro¬
duced by tho dofondants. This ovidonco in robuttcl is Halted to tho
dof ondrat * a ovidenco, now evidence is not to bo introduced, but Just
cm in tho a.r’ii.onts tho prosecution offors its arguaonts, tho dafonso
rcplios and tiro prosecution replies to tho urguuonts of tho defendants
Tho ordor of aoeeptunco of cvidonco follows that sene principlo.

Tho vitnoss of courso is called cut of ordor but ho is c.-llod
as a. rebuttal witness, as ordinarily he would have boon called aftor
the dafaadnnt»s closo their c_so. defendants in no w^ aro pre¬

judiced in calling this witness out of order. They have the privi¬
lege cf cross oxa-.inin : hir. _nd if tho defendants can procuro ary
rebuttal vitnoss the case is still open and if they cm: c -11 any
witness who '.-ill ccc.c here fra; any foroi.m couniiy to testify, tno
Tribunal rill hear hi:-. That rulo had been strictly understood rl all
tines. It is absolutely impossible for the Tribunal or the Defendants


9091


13 Juno-il-i-J-?-;echan (Vortenborg)

C ourt I

Information Center to bring witnesses fret foreign countries.

Zro objection is ovor-mlcd in colling the witness out of order.
The togtiaoiy of the witness is perfectly regular accord!ng to tho
procedure which has been and will be followed in this and I assttio
before all othor trials ponding bofore those Tribunals.

D?, Sal,r~: Tour Honor, in consideration of your docision I
then ncko a new application and ask you for permission to nako this
replication right now. 3cforo I stetod tho reasons why for a loyally
tr.-lnod deforce counsel it is voiy difficult, without having a vory
thorowA discussion with his client to undertoko a crors-cxr-.innticn
or rodiroct extinction eh cut very difficilt nodio.l questions. Sioso
st .taionts, which the export nedo broody tod oy, I could discuoc
only in part with ny clients and what tho export will state todry I
■hall not jo nblo at all to discuss wit:-. :y clients, therefore, it
is absolutely impossible for no during tho cross oxr.ination to clari¬
fy everythir.g that has' to bo clarified in our opinion. Thortforo, I
r.ato tho request to tho Tribunal, in consideration of theso spooirl
circunst ncos, without prejudice for other easos, tho TriJuna should
grant no tho permission that tho nocoasury questions about thoso no¬
dical netto s, that thooo questions u.qr bo ashed of tho expert by 2*.
Huff himself, as veil us at tho «u.;o tiuo in tho neno of his co-wox:-
or, Dr. aa-.bc-.-g. Thio uannor of treatin'; tho caso ooa;o to .10 0 —
podiont as .n oxcoptlon-

JU 20 D S3HIL1: Hepoat that again, I did not understand full;*
tho irsport of your roquost.

D3. Sa V ~; I should r^joat :*y request? I Just stated that
last ni^ht in the short poriod at ny disposal, it was not possiolo
for ua tc discuss all those nodic 1 questions with ny clients ad-
ocu.-.tcly, which were brought up by the export. Tostorday and. tod-*
tho c^nort, ct tho questioning of tho prosecution, vill onn has
possibly quite extensively discusscc a number of questions re: - ing


9092


Court I


the prcblcc of altitude oapcrir.cnte. It is ay duty inr.odictoly iol-
loviaj tho direct exotinatioa to -ah the expert quest! :ns and I ca
act cblo tc do bo, fit I tc - ley-aca free a nodical standpoint, I
cannot do so without haring diecuoaod tfceao questions for houra xith
ay clicat cad have clarified thee to such an ext oat that I c_a r.ck
tho necessary quest 1 ran oai naJee tho aeccaacry renrocoatatioan. Ia
consideration of tho e; eel cl circuaatnacoa la thia c.a-,

I therefore eshtd the 2 ribuucl th*.t durin; tho oroaa extinction that
tho questions which I should asi, that tho Defendant Huff bo pciaittod
to conduct the croes-cx.-ciaatioc, and they will be clarified tad I
boliOYw it would also aorve to expedito tho trial, if a aodlc.-l ojycrt
a inocifliet ahould a*k, ca a nodical ejport, tho questioao of taothor
export cad clarify the ;.odlcal quoatioae. Thia ahtuld aot create a
procod.or.t f r othor c*-aoo bccauso thia io as exceptional ccau

5E3 PS-SHSE* Doctor, you neon jy that your request it. that
aa you cer.iinc the prose -1 witness that your clioat .it;* be c.Ut.uud to
cono iato tho pit vlth you, ait with you at counsel t..»ic rad dir—
cunn xdth you tho quc*tioa« to bo put or.d if nccoaa<iry ;mt tho ouoo-
tioao hiueolf tc tho vl*.. ooo who ia now ia tho oo r; io that the point?

3S. 5-J-ThT.: Hot quito, Tour Eoaor. I would ooaaidor it beat
bocauao tho only nodical quoationa which have to bo clarifiod c a bo
clarified daring tho crosa-ox. .ia-tlon and thcao quo6tiona ahould bo
clarified by haria,. Dr. Huff hinsolf, an hia ova, ask tho quostlcna
cad conduct tho cross-extinction. Ho c-a f cnaxlcto tho quontlonc, ho
crei nn&oratcsd the answers bettor and erduato thou bottor then I
eo a lav/or. uhothor thia au7uld bo done frau hia plnco in tho dock
vhw-.v th. Defendant huff it Bitting by haring a niorephono put ia
front of ; h or whether thia should be dcac freu acuo place elec,
that if up to tho President at thia tine.

1.2. Of course, Tout Honor, tho prosecution objocts to

this --rocoduro. I uinht aoint out in this ccnnccti:n, Your Honor,

S0V3

I


13 Jv^»^J’-9-64:otfxa(¥iirteobarg)

C ourt I

that tho (ruination concomint hi.jh dtitudo will be very llnitod
cad defence counsol will have tcplo opportunity to dtuSy with hio do-
foudeat rad per heat Dr. Ivy will bo horo until Tuesday cad tho hi{£&
altitude will bo postponed until hcudty. Ho c<_n spend Saturday cX-
tcraooa r-r-d rll d.y Sunday interrogating tho defendant and th^y c.a
veil prepare tho cross-axtnicutioa at that tiao.

TEH ??_SI3Qri: The Tribunal sees ac objection to tho dofoadoat
Huff ceding down cad sitting with his ciunscl cad possibly asking
sotio of tho luoetioas bias elf to tho witnoso. fito defendant Huff,
eXtor tho vitaoss has toctiflod ccscorning qncotleao la which tho
Defendant Buff is intorootod. She Defendant Huff would bo cxcuood
fren tho dock to consult with his couasol if his counsel dosirco
until tho tine for cross cxcoinatica errivos. Ia cay event tho de¬
fendant uc; loavo his ploco la tho dock cad cooo down and tie a
position ct tho table with his couasol and stand with his counsol.

If his ocuascl dec.s It accessary or advisable, defendant Huff nay
ask the witness soac questions hii.solf as tho Tribunal dooiroo to
rXford every poesiolo opportunity for a thorou,h croco-fflUdination
of tho vitnoss and that process night rosult in shortening tho croso-
oaniiiaatioa cad r.nkia,: it noro direct and to tho ; oint. In any ovont,
aft or the vitnoss has tostifiod concerning tho nattors in which tho
Defendants Huff end Hxiborg aro intorostod they ncy bo oxcuood freu
tho court if they dcoiro end consult with thoir couasol until tho
tiuo crosc—maiiini.tlon arrives.

3T, SobTTS: Thank you very auch.


June l3-:^3E-3-l^?rlseni (In*-. Ver'-saber^

Court Tc. 1

3T X2. Hx?-T:

% m.pt/'tisj r 'flu. Dr. Ivy, I wish re-d portions of sevcrrl
documents rnd desire thrt you keep the context in nind 60 th» t I
cn obtdn your opinion rs ru expert. Jirst, I would like to rerd
v»-e 76 of Cocun* nt Boole To. 2* which is * p* rt of the report nr do
V Erscher to Eirrler which is Document rCr-22C3. 7 hie Is d-ted Hry
11 , 1 ?U 2 , ocactaela; with prrrerrrxi Do. 5 'Q 4 bhe sentence, "?or the
following experiments — ■ . Thrt Is pere.rrrh Vc. 5 or. pr y 70,
ccnnencin • with the words, "Tor the following experiments," rui
concluding with the cad of the report. I will read tivt. The
interpreters hrvt thrt section.

"7or the following experiments Jewish profeesionel criminals who
br.d committed 'Hrsssnschrals' (reee pollution) were used; Z ye
question of the formation of embolism w-i investilted In 1C c*sts.

S one cf the VP's died duriiv: r continued hick idtltudo experiaent;
fer lnotrnce, efter one-half hour rt * height of 12 kilonctcrs.
After the skull hrd been opened under wrtsr on rsplo ••count of rlr
echo 11 sn vr.s found in the hr* m vessels rnd, In ?rrt, free *ir In
the brrin ventricles.

■To find cut whether the oovere psycho lc.;icrl rr.d physicrl effects
rs mentioned under To. 3, rre due to the forertion of embolism, the
folio win • wro done: After relative neuperrticn fra- such e
prr~chute descendin' test hrd trfccn piece, however before rer-rinlnj
conscio-.sr.ess, some VP's ~ere kept under vnter until they died.

V hen the skull rnd the er.vlties of the brerst rnd of the rbdomon
hod been opened under wrter rn enormous mount of rlr oabolisa wr.s
found in the vessols of the brrin, the coroner/ vessels rnd the
vessels of the liver and the intestines, etc.

"Thrt proves that nir embolism, sc frr considered rs absolutely
fetal, is not frt l t rU bit the*, it lo reversible rs shown by
the return to cornel conditions of ell the other VP's.

"It vqs rise proved by ex- risents th/t rir embolism occurs ir.


9C95


* 13-l^aS-5-2«Pri=eeu (Is;. Yrrt cabers)
Court To. i


practically "11 vessels even while pure oxygen is beta,; inhaled. One
V? wrs nrie to breathe pure oxygen for t*© cad one-half hours before
the exoerlaent started. After six alautes at n hei-'ht of 20 kilonoters
he died rad nt dissection rfao shoved nrplc air eaboliaa re vae the
cr.ec ia all other exreriaente.

"At sudden decrees ia pressure rad subsequent i.T:edirte foils to
hei.hts where brer thin.- is possible no deep reach!-- daa- -eo due to
rir tabolicr. could be noted. The fora#tion of r.ir cabolisa always
needs r. certrln raouat of tlae."

Scv, I should liiee for you to note particularly the followin' sentences
in this prssr.-e - thrt is the sixth p-rr. 7 rr.ph - the passage: "To find
out whether the severe nsychclo-ic-1 rad physioal effects , ro aeatlonod
under To. 3, rrc due to the forarticn of cabollsa, the follovia.* wrs
done: After relrtlvc rtcuperrtion free such n parachute descend!n:
test hrd :*itea place, however before re.;rinlr. • of consciousness, ooco
VP'c were Apt under wrtor until they died. Vhen the sfcull rad tho
cavaties sf tho breast rad ©f the rbdosen hrd been opened under water
17 . onorcous rriount of rir cabclisr. wrs found in the vcoscls of tho
brain, the coronary vessels rr.d the vessels of the liver rnd the
intestines. 1

row, Doctor, if you turn to pr.-c 91, Docuncnt Bock To. 2, which you
will note on pr t 33 of Document Boole is 0 pr,"o fra", the report by
3 ’iff, Kascher ml Barters on exncrincnte on rescues froa hi h altitudes.
This is Document SC ^02. Sow, m pa :« 91, starting with the first
prrr rach, on the top of the p»c, with the words: "In spite of tho
relatively lam nuaber of exncristate." This is Soecscnt I’D hG2 which
would bo p-.*e Is of the ori jinrl Cernrn, the last prrr rrph or. pa .-1
lo of the ori.-inrl Gcmaa, pr-e °1 of the Znrlleh.

Tou have Document 10 ^C2 bvforc you, do you h*vc it?
trrz?_..~TZ?.: Toe, vc found it, Kr. Hardy.

v I r ov, be *inaia • with that prra.xaph, on the top of pr. t 91, 1 will
quote:


9096


June 17—11-3Z->->?rineau (in-. 'fartenbers)
Court To. 1


■In spite of the relatively lrr^e irreber of experiaents, the ectuai
cruse of the severe nent.-l disturbances end bodily failures (Paralysis,
blindness, etc.) attendant upon post-hypoxeaic twill*t state rtn-d ns
sene thin of a riddle. It ep peered often r s thou* the phenomena of
oreesure drop sickness had coabined with the results of severe
oxygen lrck."

1’ov, X should like to kaov, Professor Ivy, whether the sentence vc
hrve Just read - that is, the first sentence wo read in the Hrscher
report - that wrs Document 1C 22C which srys: "To find out whether
the severe psycholo leal end physical effects, as rentioned in l!o. 3,
ere due to the fornatlon of air tabolisn, the followin' wrs done";
hrs the sane -eaerel acral a-' and implication of the two eeatcneee wo
Just read ia the Buff, H oeberr and Hasober report, Document to U02,
which srysi "It rpreared of tea re though the pheaoacnaof pressure
drop slcknoss hod conbiaed with the result# of severe oxyicn lack."

A Tes, they refer to the sor.c subject natter.

% Toes the expression "severe psychological cffectc" in the
Hrscher report acra tho sms as tho "severe aentr.1 disturbs.cos" in
tho Huff, Houber ' and Hrscher report?

A In ay opinion, they do.

* Does the expression • such a parachute descendin' test* in tho
Mao parr t nh of the Bcschor report acan the saao thin.' as tho
expression "dcscendin.* test" in tho Buff, Bonberg pnd Bascher report?

A Tes. In that connection I should like to point out that in pr.ro-
<:rr?h 5 on pare 75 Hascher uses the expression ■ continued hi -h
altitude erperiaent." In thr. >--r»£roph that is a different type of
experiaent fro:: thr t referrod to in prrr :raph 6 in the sane report
where the expression * parachute descending test" is used.

^ Veil, did not the experiaent about which we have Just read on pa -e
7o of Docuaent Book To. 2 - that is the Hrscher report, Document TC 220,
ir. which tho VP's were kept under water until dead and' their blood
vessels exr-.ined for air eabolisas - bear directly on the solution

I


9097


Jcae (lit. IfrrteaTJerca

Court To. I


of tat "actup 1 er.uee of the eevere rental dietur brace e" of the Buff,
Bobber.- rad Beecher report referring to prr-e 91 of Document 3ook Eo. 2,
Socuaent ro 4C21

- Tee.

; Ib rlev of the feet that Dr. Berber.- U^e he reported the depth cf
three evirtioa eubjecte to B uff, la view of the findings of air eabcliea
ia eoue of the eub'ecte icllled in parrehute deecendlnj teete in
Erecher'e report, rad ia view of the iatereet of Srechtr in hie roport
rad of Buff, Berbers rad Srecfcer ia their report oa the eruec of
aentcl lieturbracee, ie it probrble beyond arcreonrblo doubt, in your
ooiaioa, thrt Buff, when he rp-roved, reed or wrote j^.rr.-rrph 2 oa pn ; -e
91 of Docunr-.t 2ook 2 which etrrte with the worde, "la epitc of" , did
heve la nind Beecher'e expcrlacate of r.lr tabolleaf

A Ia ay opinion, yee.

Q Cra you be r littlo aore elrbcrrte rad tell ue whyt Tell ue what
you bees your opinion on. Doctor.

Alt hre been the theory for eoce tiao thr.t tho eynptcce peoocirttd
with docoajreeelon or preeeure drop elckneoe ary be due to the formation
of *:re >jbblee ia the blood vceecle of the brein or collection of ,-,re
bubblee in the re lone of the Jointe or the collection of .-re bubblee
la the blood vceecle of the lun 3 .

V hen the bubblee collect ir. the blood voeeele of the brrln they
ere eup-ceed to c*uee n phyeierl or ac-nt^l dieturbrace or parnlycie.

- hon tho rr.e bubblce collect ia the re.;:loa of the ‘ointe, they rrc
euppoeed to ccuee ppir. In the rerion of the .lointe. V hen the bubbles
collect in the blcol vceecle in the lun a, they pro euppoetd to cruse
the choicks jr Attache of cou hin.-.


13 urc 47_y_I'C_4-l-3enrd ( 1 -t. , fartcnbcrg)
Court I


That her been e theory that has been held fer ecac 15 or 20 yenrs,
sad one is the field of Avirticn Medicine suet have know about It
fer ac-ctimc.

Secondly, if Eaccher had observed bubbles as is described in
hit report, document 22 t, en i 3 ince Dr. Buff associated at the
Laboratory at Dachau, since Dr. Boabcrg was there, obviously these
findings of Dr. Bescher could set hav» escaped the attestios of Dr.
Bcsberg and Dr. Buff. It is for that reason that it eceas to xc to
be logical to deduce that Dr. Buff aust havo known about the findingo
dcsc-l^c* in deepest 220 vher t w c report or document *03 was written.

•c And the language on page 91 —

THL p?:3I3JT: 'Interposing) Just a acaent. fl* Tribunal would
advise Counsel for defendant Boaberg, that if Counsel would like his
cllont to sit besido hie at his table, the client say do oo. The dt-
f»ndnnt -oaberg also, it arpearo that defendant lonborg'n Cou-scl is
net present. If defendant “oaberg would liko to chooo sono other
Counsel to act for his in this cross examination, he say do so. Both
of the defendants nay cost, down and sit at table with their Counsel
while this examination is proceeding, n-v. Urdorslanding the Counsel
deoired that this preecdure hi followed, the Tribunal directs the de¬
fendant Buff and dofcndnt Henberr also, step froa the d^ck rnd. sit at
the table with Ccunsel.

IB. SAU^St Tonr Honor, when the report froa which quotations
art read, 2 would request Mr. Hardy to steto the C-eraan pages of the
dccuacnt, tco, because it ie very difficult for ac if I only Vepr tho
English page numbers, to fird t v » quotation, and *7 the time I have
found the tuotptica. Hr. Hardy has already gono cn to another question.

HE. HAPDT: Tour E-ncr, 2 will request the Interpreters to refer
tc the na« number. I am unable to read German.

TV- rrJThe Ccunsel'a request win be complied with.

How, *- regerd tc the defendant Beat erg's Counsel net boing
preser.*, I would ask him if he win chose' any other Counsel that is


SC99


13 •''use 7_y_jC_4-a-Beard (X-'t., 'arterberg)

Court I

present t-> sit beside hie, if he desires.

(- 0 reply frca defendant Becberg)

I understand defendant Posterg is content to sit besido defend¬
ant Puff without having any other Counsel designated.

Counsel for the Prosecution nay proceed.

H in yiev cf your opinion concerning these t-o reports, then,
do you feel, Dr. lYy, fat the language contained In page 91 cf the
decunent book 2, the paragraph beginning with "In epito of...", vac
obtained froa tho result of experiaents by Easeher?

A So, the point I *a making is, because of the nature of the
subject natter, and a prior knowledge froc the obserretione in the
Paaeher experiaents, the ideas expressed in perofrwph 2, dccuaent 403,
cannot be separated froa those in the paragraphs, tho contents of
which we lurre been discussing on page 76 in dccutent 220 .

^ CharJc you. In so far na exoerlcrce in *-esearch In Aviation
nediclr.e is concerned hat was ‘he ordor of soniority in tho case cf
Ruff, Rcabsrg, an-* Rarc w er?

A I should say that Dr. Ruff, la senior, because of hlo ex¬
perience and standing; Dr. Reaborg, sooond, banana* of his cxperlor.es
an' training; and Dr. Rasebar, third. That Is their scientific se¬
niority.

H, Veil, undor ouch ceriltions 1 * i* not likely that Bascher
got hie idea to lock for air oabclioa froa the two sen with the ex¬
perience, naacly, Ruff rnd Roaborgt

A Shat ic possible, unless Baschcr had acceoc to literature
on tho subjoct of tho cvioC of doccacressicn cr pressure drop olcfc-
r.esc, and got his Idea frex reading the literature.

\ -ell, are ycu able to ascertain froa the evidence her. whether
or net -uif and Eoabcrg had knowledge of such books as Baschcr na” hove
had 8CC63S toe?

A -c, bnt it ic very reasonable tc assume that Puff and Bcabefg
'■sd access to the literature or. this subject.


9100


13 "vr.t tT-'-J ‘C_^-3-3eard (Int., ’d*rtcnberg)

Court I

k la It net the usual practice in any laboratory for the
senior investigator to ase-xx charge, especially «hen life is cr,-
dangtred?

A ?es,

*t The senior investigator has the greatest responsibility, does
he not?

A In ry opinion he ic.es,

s, Aarnne for the noaent that I was acting as your assistant in
a laboratory, say at ’fright field, United States, in a field of high
altitude research, and at that tint I vas experimenting on a human b.lng,
and had Mb up to ar. altitude of IS tc 20,000 r-etors and left his there
until such tine as he died: ar.d, during the co-rse cf this crocrircnt
you voro able to ebserre clcctrc-eardlogrero, to cboerre the conditions
cf the cxpcrlnent; would you, then, hare assured reopcnaibillty and
stepped t.c?

A I should have, vcs.

\ Is that your duty to stop sx?

A I personally should consider it to.

«* Assure that you voro not rsy superior, that is, I vns not
werki-r as your assistant, tut that you wore an observer, but a se¬
nior investigator; in the sore prcblcso would you still feel it wan
you duty, ae a scientific investigator, senior, to step no if life
was to be endangered?

A It neerc to nc it would bo cy re:rol duty.

v* In Basehor's experiments in which he hilled human subjects
at hirh altitudes, ard exacinod *hc blood vessels cf the brain rnd
other tissues; was the purpose of his experiments to cxccinc the blood
vessels cf the brein and other tissues, when he killed pocple at high
altitudes?

A Cr the basis of his reports, a* least it vac ono of his ob¬
jectives.


'7101


13 •'ure 47—-£_J jC_4-4-3®erd (1st., ■artcsterg)
Ccsrt I


Ve "s pare 6553 cf the official transcript — you hare the
C-ernan part rasher for that?

XJTTIBPSiTlB; Yes, page 667 in the Gerara text.

vi Cn the page of the transcript, Dr. Buff testifies that flvo
tc ten sinutes art required for hubbies to forn at an altitude of
12,000 seters; is thet correct, Doctor7

A Yes, I surree with t v at etatemnt.

He testified forth.r that when balling out at 15,000 cetera
and falling in en open parachute, these people wore at fc©ig>ts abcu*
12,000 setera for three clsutts; is that correct?

A Yea.

* Ho concludes that since the subjects vcr.. only about 12,OOP
ncters for throe ninutos, the bubblco in t v o picture free Poscher'e
autopsy crocs, could not h-v< occurred with tho probability that
bordered uncertainty in etrerlncnts fres rescue froc hl~h altitudes.

Do y-u agree?

A I do net a.-rco “ith the expiation that it nay occur en the
basis cf probability that basis on uncertainty for this rcreon, thbt
wo View on the basis of dovelop sent of ey=ptons of docosprcssion ard
prooaure drep sickness, tn the bacla of x-ray evidence, that bubbler
nay fo-a at er. altitude as low os 30,000 feet. Th.ro Is soac cvldoncc
indicating that bubbles cay fern at an altitude as lew nc 2 r ,0C0 feet:
hence it is possible for, in this particular case, for the bubbles to
start forcing at the c ’ inal altitude, vo shall say 47,000 foot, and
the formation continued ca clew paralysis occurred. 3 c, the fact that
the subject was at pn altitude between 47,000 end e. 0,000 feet only
rbout three cinutes dees net preclude the pcooibllity that bubbles
forced this particular subject arc continued to fore in this part¬
icular subject at lever altitudes as expostulated by Dr. Euff. i*ow,
by submitting this testis: ay er explanation, I do not scan to irr ly
- v pt this rartieslar subject vps er. -f the subjects referred tc pg
b^i" f - a subject cf slew decent or cne cf the subjects in the Bpschcr

7102


13 nr.e ‘ <C-4_=_3card (in., -'ar*onherg)
Court I


report. I sinply w P -t to correct iciertlfieelly the interpretation
which the witness hisself on pa*« 6563 gewe.


June l»>2E-5-l-5re«« (In*.. Yertenber?)

Court To. I

i Ca : e 5552 cf the record - whet prvre is that in Of rural
imBTPZTTB: Per# ooSo in the Gemrn trrascript.

% On nr.ce o5°2 of the record H uff testifies thrt he knew thrt
theee derths - three reported to hia by 2 outers - had not occurred
in the experiments for rescue from hi,-h rltitude hut in other ta¬
per in eats which Br acher carried out on order* from Hinnltr rad
rnevere: "There we a no occasion to seation theee deaths in this
report." That is To cun eat ?0-^2. That's the final report of
Buff, Souher~ rad Brseher. I* Buff breed hie otrteaent th-t he knew
theee deaths hrd not occurred in the experiments of reecue fror. hlch
rltitude oa this preceding deduction could he he justified ia con-
cIndia,: that the three subjectc did not occur ia hie rad Bonherfl's
subjectel

A To. At I pointed out I do not believe that explrnrtion that
w-o :ivt: an pr«7# o5?2 of the record shove thrt the subject referred
to rs hivia,: .rs bubbles ia his blood vessels erne fr 0 = a coatiaucd
hi * rltitude experiment. It was rersoar.ble to believe that thrt
subject erne to o slew perrchute descent exporiaent.

^ Hence it vre r question of rescue froa hi-h rltitudol
A Yes.

^ la the c*sc of the first death B onberr in Us rffldrvit,
which is Docuntat !0-l7n oapa'c 2 of Document 3ook II, stetee that
he wrs recordin' rad studyin.- the olectroc>-rdio;rra rad then lotcr
he testified tfcrt this derth occurred in one of Hatcher 1 6 experi¬
ments md not one of his and Buff's. Is it possible frea your
study of the documents thrt this first dc«th could not have been
one in the field with.which H ocber-7 end Buff were concerned rad
could hrve been * derth of one of their subjects!

A Zither is possible. It could hrve been n death resulting 'rem
one of Brs-her'6 pontiaued rltitude experiments or one of the ex¬
periments lavclvin: rescue from hi-:h rltitude. * . -

T, Or. T C 0^20 cf the record - would you kindly :ivc the Gcmra


91a


Ju=e l>f^3I-5-3--5rosB (let. Y-rtenberg)
Court To. 1


Pe-e nunber, plerse?

ITIS2PafIS3: Scrmrr. vre 7011.

^ 7 irnk you. On p^*e a920 of the record r.t the bottom of the pr-u:
2r«oher is raked - err do a me, Hombf-rc io raked - "row you hrd not
other cluea to oreesure drop sickness thm Srschcr's pir bubbles
which he he# shewn to you durin- nn nitonsy, hrd you?" Sorrier* r< lied,
fuotc: This ;s the question on pr-.^o 3920 , the lrst cueetion p.t the
bottoa of the pr t, the quoation be.-inniny. ell, now here rre some
tell trie rearrks of thi® -ftnectiOm.... ■ This is the lrot sontoace

in thrt prrp-rrph of the cuestioa which I will report: "Tow, you hrd
not other clues to pressure drop sickness th-n 2 raeher's rir bubbles
which he hrd shown to you durin - m autopsy, hrd you?* To this a oabtr-
replied: "So, the rlr bubbles which one secs in rn rutopey r.re not
proof of this. They didn't neceasrrily hare Anythin#- to do with it.

One ernaot spy thrt the picture cf ers embolism necesorrily leads to
the symptoms." Kov, rrc these otrtenants cr this view ccrrcet record¬
in'- to best opinion Dr. Xvjrf

a 3est opinion rt the present tir.e is thrt rymptoms of decompression
sickness - preocuro drop sickness - rrc due to the ferartion cf -a*
bubbles in the tir.suc «r blood vcanolo.

T hen, • :•* view is not th* best or widely rcceptcd opinion on the
subject?

A So.

^ 3id you ever publish rr. rrtlcle on this subject?

A : hrvo published two rr tides on this subject end the Cocaitt®.* on
Decompression Sickness of the Krtionri Heserrch Council of the United
Strtes is vritin- p book on decompression sickness nnd evidence collect¬
ed coaes very close to cetrbliehin- the bubble theory of symptoms of
■'re 3 sue drop sickness -a n fret. ml -it gry thrt the most ccnvincin-
tvidtnce in support of this bribi, theory in the erse of symptoms of
Pressure drop sickness is thrt if the subject brerth^s oxy-tn for me,
*vo, cr three hours before .oin - to hi a rltitude, in order to v: ah cut

f


vie 5


‘nne 13-K-3T-5->-aro«s (Int. Yp-tenber^

Court ?o. 1

tie nltrc.-en free tie body, bubbles do aot fora rnd the syaptccs of
deccrpressioa sickness do not occur.

« V *11, ties la sunse.tion tic best oplaioa oa tie subject le thrt
the synptor.s of decompression or pressure drop sickness ic due to
bubbles la tie blood vessels pad tissues.

1 Tes.

^ And you sry the best evldeace of th-rt Is the feet thrt brer.thia:
o>y.»s for ra hour or so to wash out aitroqaa of the body is the only
wry to ‘went the eyrritor.s *ad the fornrtica of the bubbles!

A .Tes.

<x Is there ray other sxplrnrtloa of how the pre-brerthin: of
oacyjsn jrevents the syuptor.s!

A Tone other.

Q, Hoc tor, will you pkr.se refer to pr-*® 6 $Z8 of the record.

inSE?333BJ Pr:e 7919 in the Corara trrnscript.

Q, row, Doctor Xv, oa p-.x ^928 of the cfficirl trim script of
this trirl vt rerd Boaber^r description of the cIrcuastraceo
surrounding the first derth. Jew, will you refer to pr,ro S933 of the
record end I with to rerd or. pr.tc ^933 - the Ocrsra po :e nuaber
for that, plerse?

iltssphstsh! 7c?u.

a The question rnd rasver nt the tot*.on of the p: c to- which R osber,-
rnswers It w»s not so clear to cc thrt he vrs r. nurdercr, ne-thcr
corr.lly or lr-rily is it Tilto derr, I srid rJ.rcrdy. r As n
•Jiysiclrn rnd r scientist hcvln- studied the circusstraces surreund-
in.- the depth of this prisoner, whrt is your opinion?

A It spoorrs to ce thrt the k 11 line could only be viewed ro rn
execution or rs * dellberrte killin* cr nurder. If these oubjccto
were volunteers the dellberrte killin- ccuid net be rr. execution -
it could only be « Border.

q V ill you rerd or e o9*2 of. the record., ^in-; berk cne pr a.

-- ??ZSI"7: Counsel, court is rbout to recess. I would rck the


Jane 13-:i-3Z--~3roes (la.. Vf-rtenber.-J
Court Do. I


def endrr.t Headers If he knows where his counsel isT

2?.. 3D1.3Z2S: Xy defense counsel h-s been infomed hr tcle-a-rn
hut I don't know whether he on cone heck. I expect hin to ccao
trek todry but I m quite setisfied with bein: represented by
Dr. Srater.

22. SkTSBs Tour Honor, r e'er din.; representin'* Dr. Hosier-:.

:>/r« will be no difficulties because during the past weak I have
rnyhow every cvenin.: when I spoke with Dr. Huff I also discussed
his o»-o with Dr. Hccberc in order to be rble to represent t:e
interests of Dr. Bchber.* during the rbsenco of his defense counsel.
Ther^ib re. Dr. Honber.- will not interoosc ray objection.

CHS JBHSSIDH'T; Try well, counsel. To^ counsel understrnd,
not cnly counsel «for the defendrnts Huff rr.d Hocbcrj, but other
counsel rs w*ll t th/t if In connection -ith this cxrnlnrtion
eounscl desires to consult with their respective client, it will
be nrrrn xi thr.t they ='/ do so at rny tine, at noon, or r.-y be
excused fror. the Crltunri for consultrtlon ~ith their clients if
they dotiro upon request of the Crlbuarl . Any such reasonable
requests viU be cr.Urtrined. Che Cribunrl will now bo In rdccss


for c. fev ninutes.


13 Juno-%rtU—T-l-ilaloy (Vertcat xg)

Court I

ZHU lia H gdal: Tho Trigonal is main ia session.

IZJ P'd^IDS-T: Tho Tribunal desires to announce main that
the Iribaafil vill be in session tocorrow, Saturday, froa 1:30
until 12 * 3 , nd possible vill bo in session toaorrov afternoon,
ft. ,t natter vill bo dotc.mincd later when vo asoortoia how rcpidly
tho cross ocauinatloas of tho vitr.oss progresses, but at least tho
Tribunal vill bo in sossion free 2130 tcciorrov nornia f, until l£:3C—
on S aturday.

0 cuuscl :.oy proceed.

32 IIP, KaPDY:

^ . Dr. Ivy, main I wish to ask you to hcsltuto oftor 2 no!: a
quosticn beforo you answer, so that tho interpretern nay huro cn 0 ]>-
portunity to ir.te:prot our questions and answers noro prcclsoly?

I f a collaborator cf yours deliberately fclllod a person in your
laboratory, .nd a colloryiuo roportod it to you, that would you do
about it?

A . 2 chould nako a caroful investigation cf tho report and if

tho rc.ort cro truo I shcold roport it to tho polico.

Q. "Jould you rxko on attenpt to also report it to your supor-
ioro if you had pooplo to when you wore subordinated?

A • Certainly.

jjy. S~X: (Soldi for Cobhordt, Tishcr and Oborhausor.) Kr,
President, I object to that question.

~.y priSIDSal: Tho objoctiia is sustained. Tho quostlon and
anavor vill bo s trick or. fra. tho record.

C» . a o you *nov, in Doc-x.cnt So. 402, this docu-ant roprooento
a printed ro-icrt of Huff, "onb.rg «nd Hoschor, K-ich was written tho
23 July 1942 end the death occurred in tho Hoschor osporinonts in
a pril or liar 1942. At that tine according to the record Huff know
that at local threo deaths had occurrod and Hor.be rg know of noro.

Hero then vo have two scientists Joining their naios as co-authcrc


• 910?


13 Jun&i-l J-7-2-i>XL oy (V ortoaburg)
Court I


with a nan utca they regarded either cs c ;:urdor®r or of such cul¬
pability that the;- refused to work with hie again; la your opinion
as a scientist la natters of a scioatific nature of this sort cad rc-
socrch problem such as we are ooneornod with horo, which would to
the aoi: inportcat thiog for the scientist to do, to sco that
Haechor was cyprofcendod and othor deaths provontod, or to tjfce a
chcaco that tho scientific rosults in tho Joint report ni.fct bo lost
to tho world ia tho Instance that the case against Sasebo: was not
pushed.

2C P.JSIDi-T: The question propounded by counsol to the Vfitnoso
la purely r. logoi question end should not bo oasvorod by tho witness,

KS. HaHTYs X subnit, Tour Honor, tho questions I an propounding
to tho vitnoso aro problems that will confront scientists all error
tho Vorld. I a: atteqptlng to present a cot of faoto that n ociont-
lst would do if ho was tho senior scientist in caso such .a situation
evreae in his laboratories.

JT3G- K3SIS0: Isn't it possible, Mr. Hardy that this Srlbnacl
will, in its opinion, onsvor that quostlon in such a woy sciontioto
in tho futv.ro will have setso landmark to guldo thee.

S2» E*J3T: That is true, Tour Honor, but Aofenso counsel havO
brought horo that six persons diod cf high altitude wporinents
in tho U . S ., I also want Dr. Ivy's opinion on that which coincides
with the questions that I have Just a shod and which tho court has
otrihen frea tho record.

JODK* S3PJ80: That is a different question. Tho question
propounded by counsol to the witness is objecti-.noble and will not
bo anavored,

Z . Soforo this Tribunal, Dr. Ivy, wo hnvo hoard testimony to
the fact that in an osporlnant on high altitude in tho D. S. sotjo
six person* diod. It has also aeon alleged in «5>c:i_ont8 in tho U. S.
that only a a or cant end not a physlcien was first in chcr f ;o of tno high
cltitudo chcabor; do you know aiQ’thing about that!


9109


13 Juno
Court Ho. 1


•Iliban (la . 3r-rwn)


1 I know of no deaths -Hbich havo cccurrol ir. the oourso of real
ajc .-r lno r-tatjon in aviation oedicine in tfco Oaltod States birln tha
war, I to.ir cf seen .'.oaths which occurroi, however, in the courao of
rcutLao in.'-ctrination of roe'leal -officers, idiots, an' aviation
personnel in tho U 3 a cf cxy^on oquipnont at hi h altitulo thoso deaths
have boon tteu ht t o bo iio to tho expesuro to hi -h altitu'.c, althou-jh
r*_ real proof of that was ftrthccrdn . 7 -hon tons of th:us:.n 'a or o van
hun ’xo ’s cf th-usan's of ;wo?lo pcss throu h a routine y u oan oxpoct
soaa to io simply as a matter cf course. I don*t knew hew OC»V of
those people woul*. have ’lot eiaply in the ocwrso cf be in 7 axa n l n od
vj.’loally or of natural causes.

Q Thon, In su.ration yoi .‘c not know cf any ’.oaths which occurrod
in real orciurincmts in an altittt *0 chs-ibor in tho Unite.’. Str.toe?

/. That is c-rract. In regard to tho serjoant, it is true that a
sar cant, adequately treinot, was in chrrjo of thj '-P’-ra-ion of tho
chenbor, ’out a no.deal officer or scientist was always at han *. in tho
rocn cr in on a linear.t non,

q ll, ttonyou steto that In routine si r . cu,

in which ijin ro ts of th usen ts of persons I procures -ro routinely
itw’.cc trim tod ro-ar In tho uso * f cxy;;on cqai/iont an * tho synpton
of altitude, either four- five or six .rao.i3 Hoi in tho Uni. to*. States?

A Xos, I can a3curc y.u that tfcj circunstftnoos un'or rhich thoso
’.oaths occurrod rora th r-u hly invest', at-'. Vy ap-ripriato cc rdssions
or coixiittoos.

<1 Thon, in the course of ox?-rlr.onts in tho Unitj*. Stetos tho only
* on tli that y u knew cf is tho ’oath cf 1'ajor >. Vayndan nho was kiilod
ir. an ax,erin-r,t m a fT-c fall frm a . Ian; in an altitu '0 ohaubor?

L los.

Q If Ycur Hon r please, I havo no furth-T questions tc -wt to I-r.
Ivy ooncomin. hi h altitude. If the Tribunal hr 3 any questions at
t'i3 ti-'e I ill not r-Cv.u'. with otfcor subjects.

. 9110


1


13 Jan- -3-2- =:rr. (Ini. =rrr.)

C:urt Bo. 1

ST JDDC2 S83EHS3*

q Dr. Iv7, I tLroct your attention, Sir, to Prosecution Docanont

l£2 t which res boon rocoivoc in evidence as Prosecution Exhibit
Kc. 66 an a; errs in Pr -socutlon Ty.rxiant ?:©k So, 2 a* pa oa '2 to
99, inclusive, the, Ruff, Harbor , 3ascher r«.;crt?

A Yes.

Q Are you thoroughly f.ardli'r ~ ith tJvt report?

A I have studio' it qur.to ccrofully.

0 Can ycu stato for tho ir-ernaticn of th. Tyibuml whether thiro
is any scientific conclusions cr inforrr.tion containain -hat report,
which cml: not have boon ainod reloly Ire:: the exporiiwnts sup;>csoi
t have boon c n ‘.ncto ' 5 ;.- Huff, Rerburs anl Raachor in collaboration?

A ill ;• u havo the question ron a ain, plersa?

q Call', y-ax say whothor or ret thoro nro cny scientific rcnolusicna
or whether thoro Is coy scientific infix-ration cental". ’ i: that ro.ort,
which caul'. not have boor, o’etrire. *. cr air.;' ’. r. lly fr n tho ox.icrinonts
fcftTO bo n c-r.-ucte: ry Cuff, Berber;- Ml Rtschor in
colla'- ration at Dachau, I take a Istinctien, yen vr. ’ji ctan*, otffoon
“■iff, Raaohor on .* 11 - an’ tho Eoscher axparLut which Ruff and
Ronbor--; ncintr.in na c-aacio' ty schor ir .. afantly un *or an or’.or
fren li-vlcr.

A I un ’orstan ’. ?b - oondnsions in th-, report of Puff, fonborr an'*,
loochor. P-cat jr.t u02 c;ul havo boon !o solely on the basis cf tho
fir.‘in s an l lata subrittod in t’jrt ropert without ary !m :1a V;o of tho
rer rinonta purportod tc havo boon . erfcr-. y i.

Raaohor.

Q Is f- ir ary thin in the luff, ?c-‘.vr , tasoher r./ert f
exporiser, ta fr a which it err. bo sai ' with absolute curtain&y either
that 'oaths, per.-nni.it injury r cx-iro-ao arin rcsultoi tc the expori-
aontal subjects *ha te; rt therein?

.. - , ’ ut y u my recall that I rapertw! that* tharo ir " Ulty

that f.vra . ay have boor, s-r.o bair. -o t tho Icarniny naclr.nisr of the


9111


13 Jane l;7-^'.TT>-6-3-:feetan (int. Braun)

Court :?o. 1

duo to len; exposure of brain to oxycen lack. That ms net tasted
fer in the etudes cf buff, Roafcarg an: Raachcr.

q l3--h.ro such a thing as an experimental sub ject bocccine
acclirntod tc the experiments ho is un 'ergein at high altitude so
that eventually he roachos tho point uhoro t’x. results obtained from
the observation cf his routine .’uric th- coarse cf the experiunts
would not bo the sane as it woul *. be for a nc w subject?

lfc, tlx? natter cf adaptation has received ccn3i lerablo attention
•jy investigate rs in the fid*, of aviation icdLcino in the Uni tod States.

9

I, rysolf, have studied the Bitter in relation to th> cccurronco of
bonds, nhich is gains in tho region of tho joints in the cxposuro to
hljh altitude. I subjoctod sovjn subjects to an altitu do cf 37,500
foot frci; 70 to 150 tiros durin: tho ccurso of 12 to 18 nenths. Ono of
those subject a boccre loss resistant to exposure to altitutdo, insofar
as the occurrrnco cf bonds ins ccnccrnc Tho other subjects shcrred no
chango, n. adaptation, that is a nattor that tho subject apparently to
in ’1 visual variations is posltivo cr negative. Adaptation to seno
oxtont ay ocour. By that I wan an .ccasional individual :xy boccmo
\x,ro rosiston*. or I 033 roristant te oxjcsuro to altitude.

r:; FESIDSrr: Ccunsal -r.y .rocco:

BE B-TDT*

q Profoscor Ivy, in the high altitude oxp.rin.nts, as outlinort in
the Ruff, liascher, Keener ra:>ort, !e you cowi'er that thoso oxgori-
toont3 TTuro particularly dan orous?

A Those oxn.rinonts a*hich >ro 'ono "ith clear descent frer. Id h
•atitu lo, that i3 with the parachute civ.no ’ after bailin cut froa tho
plane, aosociato ’ vith a Ion; period of oxygon lack an! they more
-'an orou3 experiments for that reason.

q And would you bo reluctant to perform thorn ycursolf?

1 I -..•raid be reluctant te .orfoe. the :, yes.


9112


13 CUH.----OJ-; -1—Tin- m-(rfartenberg )-
Court 1

n In the course c£ this trial. Dr. Ivy, w v hav_ had
considerable tcotinony conc-rning experL— nt .tion o:. hunna b-ings
T.d probl-as of n-ai *1 ethics. this tin-, I wish to discuss wit;,
you these iditions und-r which hemn beings hav. ix.n us_d in i__-
dical experiments end which conditions -.re consider-d to b- ethical
and 1 - 2 - 1 .

First, 2 would like to 1 v- you explain to the -ribun_l in
detail th- -xp.rirents on y-llo. f .v.r by Dr. \lte»r *_cd -.3 told
in the yellow fever coapilntlons on various public tions, Docua-nt
622, United States Jov rn-nent rrintin: Office 1911.

Dr., S..CT Rj 1'our honor, I object to th- -xp-rt witness being
c xn a in e d on th-s- general qu-sti is. I rcuind you of the following. «
nuJscr of defense counsels have, included in their docun.nt book exp--
rin-.its Iroc international liter.turc Iron .11 the civilised countries
in th v.'orld. in erd-r to dcaoaetr t. th. attitude of th-
uic.l profession .nd x-dic .1 -thics is to the probUu of th. p raissu-
bility of experiments on lain n beings.

* n alaost 11 tiuse c-.s.3 the Co-art has ruled that this
probl.u should be pcstpon-d until the conclusion of th- pr-sentetion
of evidence :nd only then would th- Tribunal rule whether .nd to
rh-.t extent th- ex -ria.nt Iron int.rn tion-.l nedic-.l liter:-.tur- ~.r.
to b- rcc pt.d in evidence. This attitude on th. part of the Tribunal
nuot also bo calntbincd, in ay.opinion, at th pr.aent tin- rher. an
expert froc nc.ric is be in- examined on th s. quest'ons.

If the d-f-nsc during th course of the trial ind until
th- conclusion of the trial has no opportunity to put lit-mtur- th.n
this would - . strug. 1- on :n unequal fc'sis. Z, thu pros-cuticn no3
ti;- opportunity to produc. on- vitn.es eft.r another tad have thes- wit¬
nesses it has ckos-n answer ti.es. questions rner.es the delens- during
tr-. course of :rcsentation of sentte did net have t. is opportunity,
ccns_quontly, I obj-ct to this iir.-- ol qu stions end ask that it b.
not .

9113


13 Joac - -3J-5-2-- ri=e au-(-rc-m)-
Coart 1

THE PRSIDEST: (Teasel's ruesticn to the sitn-ss sixaply
r-f^rr-d to c-rt in publication cone ming ?. certain «_xp_ri=_nt by
a litc Dr. “alt.r Heed. The witness has not h;n-shd concerning his
kn sledge of this Better. If there is j publication r.f^rr d to by a
counsel that publication vould bv the best evid.nc-. The witness might
testify, if able, from nis cam knowledge tret the ur. report itself
would be the hist evidence of what ho pen id in connection with the
oatter r-ferred to by counsel's qu.stion.

iR. LiHDTi Unfortunately, lour honor, all-these reports
ore not available. I night say that, wi hout exception, most of th.-
defendants have brought up the subject »hen they w.ro on direct
examination about various ~xp -liaents. I reraeac r, I b~lit.vc that
.rug05icy m-ntdcn.d the Heed's cxp.rinents. Rose quite stronfly
e.ntion.d th. esp.rlmnts of Colcn.l Strong on b.ri-b-ri, and plagu.
throughout nd Ur. Ivy has considerable knowledge of all th.se xperi-
nent-.l pre .• as; and I thini. it xculd be of int-r.st to th, ‘ribunal
to h-ar the information be pcssess-s conc.rning the circuaatanc.s
surreundin; each exp rlc-nt.

T'5. cR 3I3E.iT. Counsel has not 3hc.wn free the ritn.3S that
1- has knowledge cone mine th.se . tt.rs. If th. witness has knowl.dg.,
of it coun3.1 nay propound a question to his ccnc -ning th.m.

T a. HaBDXi

; Dr. ivy, to you h v. kncrl-d,-. conc-rninj th- y-llcr
f-v-r experiments by Dr. •■ead?

« ics, I hav. a paotostatic copy Iron the r-.port, "Y-llow
< -v.r xp.rin-nt3 by *lt.r P-cd."

; Do you hav. any knowl.dg: .s to the circus tone.3 surroun¬
din. these -xa-in-.nts— that is, xfccthor or not th. subjects used
x.r: vclunt. rs in th. n_t:;od of procurir. th: subj.cts, xp_rin.ntal
subj.cts, nd oth-r circumstances -hicn .alt.r H.vd .nccuntcr.d the course
of his uep-rimen-.G:

7U4


I


13 Jur.e-.>.}.*-9-3-- ; rm_au-(-ror.-
Court 1

a I h v _, as re veiled 'ey the publication.

^ -o you have. knowledge of the _xp. rinents of Colonel R.r.
Strong eid Or. 3.C. Crov.ll or. th. fc_ri-b-ri .xp-ric-nts:

a X-s, .3 rev.al-d by th. publication of their x, rinents,

_ hat is th- date of that publication?

A Th- d-tv. of that public-.tion wra 1512.

Q Co you luvw information cone.rning the -xp-iin-nts of
Colcn.l P.,P. Strong on, '’Denonstration on th- D-v-lopa-nt of Inaunity
to the United Living Plague Organ!sas in uz nl

a 1-8, os publish.d In the rhillipin- Journal of Sci-nc.

in 190S.

3 Do you have inf ora*'ion cone-mi rv the experiments on <•
Trench f.v.r a-.de in 1517 aa or-ears in th. r-port of th. cccnunication
of th. .’.ediaal P.estcrch Casaiet-e of th. .ua.ric n P-d Cross, printed
by tho Caford University Pr.ss?

a Y.s, -a rav-al.d by that publication.

3 Do you have knowledge of .an -xp-rin^nt on p.llMjra on
if hit- tale convincts by Jcs.ph Soldo rp-r ~rA Dr. T.a. rtn.tl

X-o, ca ivveal-d by the publication of th.ir rork i. the
archiv r. cf International -diein. n 1920.

Q Do you .av- information on th. .xp.riacnt on th- Vacci¬
nation of Hunan beings against Fxanthesntic Typhus by r-lix •‘Vontolnei-r."
.. ;-s, as published in th- Journal of lanunology in 1939.

■t Do you have any other .knfr.l.ege cone.mine these -xp.ri-
acr.ts free-. discussions with p_opl_ participating therein or is your
knowledge United to that of publications?.

n I discuss-d t.a. natt/.r of plague cxp.ri*ents with Colonel
Strong, with Dr. B.C. Crowell, ..os collaborator in the b.ri-b-ri
-x?-ric..nts.

, . ve you discussed these ar.tt.rs with any oth-r physicians
who p'rticinatLd in or h-ve dir-ct knowledge of th.cocp.ri.ints?


9115


13 June-CJ-5-i.-.'rfac u-( ^ own;-

Court 1

A Kot o' tho.xp-riacnts which ycur questions have referral
up tc the pr-sent tl_a. .

Q .a*e you in a position tc tell us the conditions surrounding
the -xp_r iaents on Yellow :vV«.r by Lr. .-itr

« I c J1 ZB they arc iaxrib-d in the publication.

TnR .-’R-SILSJI: J“st - ccn.nt, Doctor.

OH. L-... • •: r. .resident, I object to this line oi question¬
ing oi • .xart witnsssr.g rdin. those . xp.rio.nts. The -re. rt - itn.ss,
according to vhr.t h- told us yvst.rday about his c r. .r, is a physiolo-
gist but. he is not . bacteriologist nd not a hygienist. or thnt
r.ascn, in opinion, h. is not n expert in t..is sort ol oxperinenta
for which only bacteriologist would be .n espert. ’.h.se r- solely
exclusively exporin-nta that wrs c rri-d out witr. bacteri .

fe. . *DY: I night put on- nore qv-avion to Dr. m Ivy to
qualify, lour honor.
i^lyi

wi Dr. Ivy, hiv- you particip .t d n eprograc covering -jdi-
cal tfcics r.d .Hal.sol -.dic.-l .‘xp.ris ntntion in b.h.ll of th.<

African .-die 1 association?

a Y_s, and also 1 a chairs:n of the c&iaiUe. appointed
by Jov.rncr br.vn in th. State of Illinois to consider th. .thieal
conditions und.r which prison.rs nd p.r.it.nti:ries aiy b. us.d ethi-
c-lly ~s subjects in th. a_dic.'l exp.rit.-T.ts.

In ord.r tc substantially carry cut your position in the
American - -’ic.l ..sscciatior. and in th. -asaitt-. as appointed b;
lov.rnor -r. .n of Illinois,did it b.con. n.c-ssary or you to exclusi¬
vely study the conditions surrcur.din- 11 th. oth.r -xo.r ..tent;1 pro¬
gram nd services in nodical history in crd.r to ably d.vic- rul.s ol
.a_dic 1 -this* to b. orli-d in the cours of a.dicl .xpcrinjntaion
on hurnn b.in?s?

.. Tos, I had tc su ahat .... cn=:on practices : v be

_H. HaHDI'. In vi.* of that, your xa» or, I su'mit tha,t -he

I


9116


13 Juns-I '-OJ-9-5-fri^-=u-("roitn;-
3curt 1

witness is qualified to testify conc.rnin? th-se probl-os.

Dr.. S..U7 ?.( Counsel for t*se defendants Ruff and Rcob-rg):

„r. President, I beg your pardon for interrupting but I should like
to dr"- year attention to the following points: first, if th- Tdtn-ss
is .sked whether he knows sea-thin;, r.agrdin; 8Uch an such a uatt-r
then I should like to know , in order to void repeating all th-.se
natters, free whr.t date on the witness h..s this knowl.dg-. In ord-.r
to evaluate what the witn.ss t.stifiec t , it is inport nt to know
wh-th-r he has this kr.cwL.3.. frea ^publication of Un or twenty years
ago or whetfc r he acquired this knorl-dg- p-rhaps - we.k or two w_eks
ago in .Ju.rnb.rg free a d-f-ns- docui> nt book; secondly, if th- witness
dales to be : s-aber of ‘ cocni-te. nd in his c pacity is a aejbtr
of that cooaittee to have such .nd such knowl.d; ., th-n I think it Is
n.cessarj for fcin to st- u. how lcn^ h. his b-«n . .e-nt-r of that cosmittec
how long that ccc—ittee has been in ocistance and how long h. has had
this Jencwl-ri.;_, nd th-n, r. President, one other point.

If th- Prosecution is p-redtted in this w.y tc take ill sort
of quotations fro n.dic l literature -nd to subnit th.;: and put then
to the witn 33 and to .xaain. the witness on then nd cn wh -1 his
opinion is 3 -n expert on this lit-rature, which all of U3 can re id
and fort. cur opinion on, th-n the defense cust also h .ve that cane
risht: but I i= -afraid that if follow U.i3 pr ctice of tne prose¬
cution we shall hav. tc put the witness on th st-nd gain a we-k
lst-r. I brin this tc your attention in rodcr to avoid future

difficulties.


911?


I


13 Jazk-B-te-1C-l-Beard (Int. 3r^m)

Court Ho. I.


DR. FIOSZCC: Ur. President, I object to tho witness h_ing interrog-
- tod in this ^ray because he is net a Hygienist ncr a Bacteriologist
and, therefore, dots net have tho necessary specialised knowledge.

Tihen Hr. Hardy asked hin, the ritnoss stated that ho belonged to con-
nit to.; which concerns itself with tho quostion cf tho ethical uroblons
of oxporiaonts or. prisoners. I believe that nenborship in such a
ccmittco can nover replace tho knowledge that 3actericlogists must
hrvo, and which rlono con be tho prerequisite for giving export testi-
nonoy hero cn such nodical questions. Tho wit-iosc also stated that ho
knows of theca axporironts fren literature, but I do net believe noro
litorary knowlodgo alone is sufficient f r oxport toctii? ny here, ibid,

I should llko to Cephasixo what Dr. Sauter has just said, nanol, that
it =ust bo doterainad whottor tho ox/ort witness has his knorlodgo
from cur docm.ont bo ks cr rhothor lie has rend any original publications.

P.. iAHDY: Your Honor, in this rogard, apparently I havo
not rado uysolf clear. Dr. Ivy is not going to testify .as .an orp^rt
concerning natters of bact-.riolopy* 3 aorcly putting this quostion
to hin in tho snao nrnnar 's rTfosscr Light bum tostlfiod. Dr. Tvy,
inth- course cf his c-rour has lind ample opportunity to Ktudy experi¬
mental ;xoblons in nodical history. Ho is fully aware of tiio o::f«cri-
ncntal profrra 13 in thj Uni tod States. !to can testify as to tho condi¬
tions cf tho oxpori-iunts, rvaaoly, nictixir :>r not the experimental sub¬
jects w,n. volunteers; rhothor thuy vorc fcrcod in tho exporirents -nd
so forth, as indicated fren tho studios, in tho sano n- .nor as irofos-
3 or Lightbum did. Professor Lightbram : idicatod that ho laiows porsnn-
ally frxa hie erm kn~vledgc of tho nature of tho nodical history.

T*;: FRoSIDE;.": Propound tho witness scce furt'ior questions
to shaw to tho Tribunal his knowledge concerning this natter.

BY DR. HARDY:

Q ?rxi your knowledge of yoiic* lover exp-riments, by Dr.
Walter Reed, c n ;r.u tall us how bo used experimental subjects?

A Ho used volunteers from t'm U.5. Army, but'bef rc that


911-1


13 Jun-*MB-lQ-2-Beard (Int. Btokt.)

Court Eo. I.


Dr. Carroll permitted hirself to be bitten by infected nosquitoes, and
mother Drctcr in experimental tests, was -'-Iso bitten by a nosquito.

Dr. Lazar. Dr. Carroll and Dr. Lazar died, and ir. this particular
gmup of oxporinents, Dr. Carroll and Dr. Lazar wore the only ones
that diod.

Q .taong the experimental subjects wore then any doaths,
that is, soldiers who volunteered for the -xpartuntc?

A So.

Q '.fora tho solidors offered a reward or any inducoa-nt to
undergo the exporinants?

A As I recall they vero, and refused it. I ca not certain
about that. I havo information on that fretx this roport on tl>o yollor
fever experiments 'hich I could road, IT that is appropriate.

IS. HARDY* If tho Tribunal desires to havo this report road
Dr. Ivy sill road it. I do not think it ir nocoasary. Your Honor.

TKB rRESIDE:'?t What is that report; ropovt by rhon?

DH. IVY* This is a document free tho Oovomji.it printing
offico, Unitod States, Washington, D.C., ontitlod "Yellow Fcv-r, a
Crnpiliaticn of various Publications"; and it is on offici A docunor.t,
Ilo. 622. It w-s fron tho 6lot Confess.

THE IRESIDLiTT: Cont-i-is rop.rts aado by officials of tin
United States Govorrcvnt, Axr.y or otherwise, to tho Congress of tho
United States?

D!.. IVY: That is c-'iTecu, presented oy Hr. Owon.

?!~ HCSIDEWT* Wen, tho witno3C nay testify and aaalyzo
that docunont as briefly as possible for tlu benefit cf tho Tribunal.

Dh. IVY: The subject f tho first oxporir^nt was n young
private fron Chic, r.mcd J:hn K. ills singer, who volunteered far tho
service to use his cm words: "Solely in tho interest of humanity and
tho cause :f science." 7.hon it bocaao known anon? the treope that sub¬
jects rore needed f;r the export jnfcal aadrposac, Kissinger in c. -ny
vritii another young private nx.ee J. Hcr.an, ilsc free-. CKi., v lun»


13 Jux>-^3—i.C-3-Beard (Lit* Brown)

Court So. I.

tccrcd their services. Dr. Hoed talked tho natter over with then ex¬
plaining full the danger and Buffering involved in the experiments
should they be successful! end, then seei ng that they were determined,
ho stated that nonatary compensation would be nadc to them, but both
con declined to accept it, caking it indeed their solo stipulation
that they should roceivc no pecuniary reward, whereupon Major Hood
touched his cap 3-ying respectfully, "Gontlcnon, I salute you."

01 Ht. HARDY:

Q Hhrt is tho dr.to of that publication?

A Tho date :f this publication is 1911.

3 In tho courso of Dr. Reed's experiments, did he uso any

natives?

a I ru net cort-in.

Q Did you ov-r hoar toll whothor or net he usod natives,
and rffored tlx;a a ccruy reward for undergoing tho experiments?

L Ho.

Q Do you krv*w whether er net 'cite r Rood, in t‘io course of
any ettor ox^riisjatal progra., used natives?

U Ho. I eight say that rhon I too aekod by the American
"jedio-l Association to servo in the ca.r.city ~s advisor, I did ny k°st
to cover tho nodical literature in situ-tions whore human beings hr.vo
boon used, in hazardous experiment 3 in order to inform mysolf regarding
the conditions under which they wore used.

Q Ve have been informed here that natives were used by
Walter Heed in his experiments, but you arc triable to enlighten us
further?

.v I know nothing -bout that.

Q Vow, in tho experiments of Colonel R. P. Strong ~nd Dr.

3. C. Crowell on Beri-beri; whore were those experiments performed?

A They w-sre performed in Manila, Philippine Islands.

Q Tno ~ s used as ojrwriaeat- 1 subjects in t:-;:
experiments by Colonel Strc.Q and -Dr. Crowell?


Beri-beri


13 Jur.-a-:S-lO-U-B0arti (inU 3rom)
Court So. I.


A, they '"'ere prisoners »rho were condemned to death, but who
had voluatoered to serve r,s subjects.

Q la your opinion, is a person condemn d to death ir. a
position to volunteer for a nodical experiment?

A Yosj they can say yea or no, and if the natter is ethic¬
ally presentod to then that there rill bo no coercion if they s ~y, yce.

Q Hov would you approach —

A Unless they wuxv thro tored with punishment.

Q Herr wculd you approach a person condomod to death for use
in a rodicnl oxporimantj would you appro -h thjc directly or would you
have notic.s sont out, radio appeal, or what would be tlx nothod of
attempting to socuw the services of a criminal condonnod to death?

A In ny opinion they should be approached through a ..Titton
document sont to then or posted on a bullotin board or by cooriunication
by word of nouth in which the pjxpoao of the investigation, rod leal
stuiy, is outlined, in »hich the has^rds of tto exporinont ro indic¬
ated* and, whoro it is pointed out that t/x>ro will bo no r-unislux-nt or
penalty in case the individual d<xs not volunteer.

Q La thoso experiments by Coloixl Strong and Dr. Croroll on
Beri-beri, wore those cri ainala condaanod to death offered a pardon
or offered a co:rritation of santonco if they survived the experiments?

A Ko, the;' irera. not.

'I They wore not offered a pardon?

A Ko, th-y wen i>at of for i a prrdon or co: uV tion of

sentence?

q iToro they offered any reward?

A Thoy were offered only extra cigarettes or cigars if
they desired t!v. _

q Did any of the oxrorircntal subjects used by Colonel
Strong and Dr. Crowell in th-ir -ri-hori px^riaents diu?

A Ho.

q Tfnen cid tres^ experiments t’.:o place. Doctor?

9121


13 Jun-*M33-10-5-3eard (Ir.t. Brown)
Court Ko. I.


f

A They took place in 1912.

Q And, you b-.se your knowledge of the so experiments froc
personal conversation with Colonel Strong, Dr. Crowell, and publica¬
tions?

X knowledge is based on the publications in tho Anerican
Journal of Science and by personal conversations with Dr. 9. C. Crowell
who is in charge af Cancer Research of tha oaoricsn College of Surgeons,
and resides in Chicago, Illinois.

Q In tho experiments by Colonel Strong on the demonstration
of the development of imunity to living organism in thj nan, do you
know whothor or not volunteers w.ro ’used?

A Tho article states that prisoners condemned to death
wore used. I discussed this natter with 'r. Crowell who irforaod bo
that these prisoners wore exactly in tho s-no category as tboso usod
in tho Bori-bcri oxpirironts; that th:y wore volunteers.


9122


»


13 J'anc i7_’LJjC_ii_i_C-r c3 3 Drown)

Court I


* lr>T the scacnt, doctorJ v c haVc discussed the cepaeity or
ability of a criminal condemn.:* to death to volunteer for an cxpcrl-
=ort. *-at 1 b you opinion about the ability or capacity ©f a person
Incarcerated In a prls-n to volunteer for an experiment, that le, a
person not condemned to death?

A There le no doubt In ny nlr.d that they c«n freoly vclu*tccr
to serve as n ncdlcal subject, p-ovldcd no coercion la exercised. In
getting thorn to say yos or to volunteer.

»t Can y-u tell us -hither or not anyone died in the course of
tho experiments by Colonel Strong end Crcvcll In the plague prcblcs?

A So dnt died.

H An cxperlncnt on trench fever wes nadi In 1917. *ho cade that
experinent?

A That was sadc by o commit tc working under th* auppicos of th«
"urgocn C-cncrol of the Vnltcd States Amy and of the African Rod
Cress.

H fhat -ac the atatuo of the subjects used in that cxperlncnt!

A They wore volunteers fren the United Statea Arny and before
volunteering the purpose of the experinent and the pooaiblo hazards
-on explained to the volunteers.

k w he -ere the vclurtccrs?

A Soldiers. United States Arny.

S. In the experimental rrogroc pellagra with <*nvicts, -ho con¬
ducted these experiments?

A They were conducted by Dr, Joseph C-oldbergcr aa tho senior
puthcr. “hoy -ere published In the archives of Internal Medicine In
1920.

H Dece that publication give the details of the o-poriaents?

A -t states that the experiments were performed cc convicts
vho were volunteers and other details arc net given.

v. >0 you kmc- -ardcr -ha* ci-cumstencca thcoe ccnricte volunte¬
ered for these experiments?


5123


13 June 47_X_* jC_ll_2-C-ro9a (Int.i 3rwn)
Coart I


A The details arc not given ia <he published rrticlc*

% Hare you ever had the opportunity to talk to Ir. Josef
C-cldberger or Dr. T. A. VlehlT

X Ho, I hare not.

^ «< Then your knowledge is United to the publication In the
archives of Internal Medicine, Volunc 35, published In 1920?

X That la correct.

Do you knew whether anyone died In these experiments or
suffered a great deal?

X Ho en« died but eoac of the subjects developed pellagra.

H Did they suffer to a great extent?

X They suffered to so*e extent but as soon os the symptorso
appeared treatment was instituted.

*i Hea there any consent in the United States at t v nt time con¬
cerning the Banner lr. which Dr. C-oldbvrgtr and Dr, fithl and their
assistants conducted these experiments?

x , and I hove never hoard the cxpcrlaentt criticised.

S In the experiment* which were nado by the United "totes Armed .
forces concerning the testing of various vaccines do you have any in¬
formation on that subject?

A Yes. I have in sc far ns the method of developing and test¬
ing tk» typhus voccino used on our soldiers in the lest far.

Vkat do you base your knowledge en?

A I base sy knowledge on reading a report of this work which
Is In one of the United States Public Health publications and also
free a letter vr'.tttn me by Dr. Tepl-g of t*c United "totes Health
“crvicc who did this work, the developing cf the typhus vaccine that
wrs used en our treops.

H Cen you tell the Tribunal something about the particulars
concerning the development cf cur typhus vaccine in so far os ex¬
periment- arc concerned pnd the method of experimentation, the pur¬
pose, about the method cf curing the subjects, etc., not technical


912*-


13 Jure '1 -j 'C_ll—?_C-rcss (1st., 3rown)
Court I


and sedicel prcbless concerning typfcbs itself*

A The worker* la the leboratcry of contagious diseases at
Scthcsdn firet served as the subjects and then soac four hundred
volunteers outside of the Sesearch Institute served ae subjects.
These subjects were injected with the vaccine rnd t'-c develop¬
ment cf the ontological responses wore followed, ionc of then
were infected with a living virulent typhus virus to sec if t:-e
vaccine p-otccted arai-s* such an Inoculation.

i* Do you have any Inf'mat ion concerning the conditions
under which prisoners In Federal prisons in the United Statos
served as subjects in nodical cxp» rlamtation pro gross T

A Yes. Ao chairman of the Conslttcc appointed by Governor
Green of the State of Illinois to eubnit a report on the conditions
under which prisoners uav serve as subjects In sedlcel cxperlscnts
I investigated tfcrt and I have with sc a statem-nt which the pri¬
soners were given when they were invited to volunteer and I hnvo
the agreixent which they signed when they decided tc v:luntce-r. I
c'n tubaIt that if it 1 g desired.

* Could you outline for the "rlbucal the sithod used In pro-
caring these experimental subjects, first of all, what wro the nnn-
rcr of selection?

A Veil, a written st tcr.ert vps posted in the penitentiary In
which the lupcrtprcc of the proposed r.edlcpl lrvestlgatlon wps out¬
lined, In which the hamrds were Indicated, and In tone Instances
without any proaiae of reward.

^ Do you hprxcn to have that notice that waa peeted? D: you
have p copy of that?

A Yes.

^ Is that tco lengthy or could you read It to us?

A It is net very Ion.-. This is entitled "Stetesent to Pros¬
pective Volunteers."


13 June 1 C_ll_A_C-ro 33 Cat., Brcvn)

Coast I

■-he study «c are pier-la*: ic flurry ch here and fer which we
have esieed your cooperation is concerned with the testing of new
anti-nalariel cc-pounds which are being deviloped by conpitc-t in¬
vestigation for use hy the Arsed Forces cf the United States. The
purpose of the testing pro gran la to ascertain whether the* drugs arc
efficient and safe for hunan beings. The nature of the drugs wc
propose to use is such that we do not expect serious conplicptions
frea their use. The toxicity of the drugs is unknown, however, an
far as hunan beings are concerned no drugs win he used which on the
basis cf extensive antral testa ehov evidcrcc of severe toxicity.

Persons volunteering to »e?lst in this study will subalt to the
inoculation into the blscd cf aaliv-ry glando cf nosouitoo infected
wl*h the so-called Chesser, strain of ralarta which is prevalent in
the southwest Pacific area. Vhlle the drrvror to lif> fro* this
strain of ralaria it snail there ia a strong probability cf relapse
or recurrent salaria fever for a period up to eeviral years after
the lrfcctlon. Drugs to prevent or treat the infection win bo
adslrlotcrcd by south fer varying periods nnd blood tests will be
tnicer.. A fee win be raid to each individual -ho la r.eceytod and
who ecspletco the precribed test. One-half cf thio fee will be pay¬
able within thirty days rftcr the tests nrc started the other half
will be* payable after the cosplctlon of twelve oontho of observation."

I eight say that the fee waa S 1 C 0 . 00 , S5C.00 at tho start and
55C.OO at. tho tcrcination.

Io that the cr.tiro notice that was published cn the bulletin
boards at the Penitentiary ir. Illinois?

A Tcs.

Jew what wpc the reaperae to that?

A Tv cr c were uorc volunteers than could be usrd,

N

v, V C rc any cf these =er. apnrcec cd personally - vea ihi3
r.vticed pub 11 she s in the bulletin beard t v t only netbed used to seech
the prisoners?

9126


13 J ur.e a7-M_IjC_ll-5-Sroas (Iht., 3y:wn)

Court i

X So, none vere approached pcrioaaUfJ

% Ho# many subjects were used In these malaria experiments
In the Stetcrllle Penitentiary?

X The exact number I dc not knew but I knew that in the entire
program of malaria study eighty compounds were tested on human volun¬
teers who were prisoners in the penitentiaries.

t* Sow, in this conrccti-n do you know whether or net any
statement was made concerning this by Governor C-rccn of Illinois?

X Yes* I can read the statement.

v* Would you read the statement of C-oremor Green if you please?


9127


Court Ho. X

13 Jus 47-fc-12-l-iEM-t:arrov (Srovn)


A. "The State of Illlsoie has regarded these eroeriner.ts, alned
toward e cure for solaria, ae a definite challenge and a definite respon¬
sibility. ftea the project vai begun at Stctevillo Prison, It vae a
- 11 it cry project. The var against the enenies of the United States vas
at Its height, Halaria research was viewed as another reans by which
Illinois Bight help win the war. Sow, vfcilo still a silitery project,
it becoses a ceans by which Illinois say help in can's unceasing «ar
against disease. Ve are proud of the nanncr in which the inaates of the
orison volunteered to subeit theaselvas to tests which rcouired that
they actually develop solaria, and then take new drugs in order to teat
these drugs' potency in the control of the disease, liaay aoro hundreds
have volunteered than have been called. Their only corrolaint has been
'I volunteered; why haven't I been called'."

q. Do you have the agrewscnt that was signed by tho eroerieental
subjects boforo being subjected to the oxocrlaonts?

A. Yos.

Could you. in substance, tvll us what that agrocsont is or, if
necessary, read sosc of the portions thereof!

A. One of the points that is node in tho agreoaont is:

"I heroby assuao all risks of such tests and, acting for ayself,
ay heirs, personal representatives and assigns, do hercb" release tho
University of Chicago...", which I eight c-.v were tho sponsors for this
nrojoct.

"I heroby assuso all risks of such tests and, acting for nysolf,
ay heirs, personal representatives and assigns, do hereby release the
University of Chicago, all technicians and assistants esclsting in said
work, tho United States Goverroont, tho State of Illinois, the Tlrector
of the Zopartaont for Public Safety of the State of Illinois, the werden
of the Illinois State Penitentiary, and all eaoloyees connected with tho
above institutions, fros all liability, including clei s end suits at
lew or ir. ocuity, for any injury or illness, fatal or otherwic-e, which
ray result froe those tests. This is to certify that this application


512'


Court So. 1

13 Jon 47-fc-l£-3-iBC-«errov (Brown)

la redo voluntarily and under no duress. -

Those are the essential joints of the agreceent which was signed
each prisoner roluntecr who ves acceoted for the experiment.

q, Sid you ever hesr tell Just vhat the reactions were of the
prisoner volunteers?

A. Tes, that vas aade e subject of a redlo broadcast in tho United
States.

q. Did the orisoners talk over the radio?

A. That's right.

Q, Do you know what they said over the radio?

A. I have the scriot of that broadcast and can reed what eono of
then said.

q, That won't“be necessary, Doctor. Vas tho gist of their steto-
:ants over the radio that they were volunteers?

A. She gist of thoir statoeents node over tho radio ver that thoy
voluntoorod in ordsr to hole thoir buddies who vers sick with nalaria.

q, Do you have any Othor circusstencos to tall us about ich sur-
rounded thoso oalarla oxperiaenta at tho StatovilloPenitentiary in
Illinois?

A. So. I night scy in the federal penitentiaries tho conditions
were very much the sene, except now, since sane orisoners have rccoivod
some reduction in sentence, it is steted that tho orleonor volunteers
vill rccoivo a consideration of reduction in sontoncc as ft oart of tho
good tine reduction in sontoncc for good conducv.

Q, Do you have information concerning nay other experimental uro-
gracs on kunan beings which were conducted in tho United Stetes or by
rcproscntstlvos of the U.S. ncdicol asBOcictiona or soclotles or profes¬
sions?

A. During tho wr subjects were obtelned fron the civilian nubile
service agencies. These subjects were Ja*vB et conscientious objectors.
Ihere wore t-o tywi f conscientious or religious objectors. One tyoo
would not cooperate on any urogram of oublic service and hence wero in-


9129


Court So. 1

13 Jug 47-K-12-3-t3i-£arrow (Brown)


prisoned. The other type of conscientious objectors wculd cooperate in
public service, with the exception that they would have nothing to do
vith any pert of the ailitery effort. Iheso letter conscientious objec¬
tors provided public service by serving as orderlies in state hospitals,
by serving in forest fire crovention work end sir.llar public service pro¬
jects. Soae of those conscientious objectors ^ro invited to bccaro sub¬
jects for nedical experisent3 conducted in university laboratories. In
inviting thee, n letter vns sent to the supervisor of n group of conscien¬
tious objectors, outlining the ourposo of the nodical investigation to bo
sade, how it would be undo, the possiblo hazards. If the conscientious
objector volunteered, his transportation to the university would bo paid,
end while ho was at the university, he wes given $15.00 . north for
pocket aonoy and his aalntenar.ee wrs orovl ed also.

Q, Can you tell uo, Or. Ivy, whether or not you yourtolf ever
exporiaor.tcd on conscientious objectors?

A. Tos, I oxocriaontvd on two groups of conscientious objectors,
one in a high altitude oroeriaont and cnother in n vitnaln deficiency
©''■oorir.oct.

Q, In the high altitude cxocrlaont did the subjocto volur.toor as
you havo outlined?

A. Yob.

Q, Did you talk to onch subject prior to using hin in an evoerl-

aent?

A. I talked to the subjects as e grouo right rftor they reoortod
and had bcon subjected to a thorough physical exrain/ 1 ion, and I told
then again the purpose of the experinent, its naturo ar.d the possible
hazards. I also explained that, 'hen any -yaptoas of a sont-l or ohysl-
cr -1 disturbance beeene ainifeet, therapy would bo instituted.

Q. Did p.ay of then withdrew, at that tine, after ycu had warned
then yourself?

a. So.

q. Bid any of then ask to be relieved of the exptrinertc during


9130


Court Bo. 1

12 Jus 47-i.-12-4-ZHM-2arrow (Hrovn)


•he course of the eroer‘rental program?

A. Bo.

q, Did any of thea die in the course of your experiments?

A. So.

q, Did you always recain with the patients or did one of your
Physician assistants resale with the patients while they were being sub¬
jected to the exoerlrents?

A. They were under the constant supervision of either a physician
or a radical scientist, depending uoon the nature of the work.

q. In your oroerlnents on diet did you, at that tine, also addroes
the experlaontal subjects?

A. Yes.

q. Did you warn thea of the hazards of the erocrlsents?

A. Yes.

Q, Did any of the erncrlnontal subjects bocone 111?

A. They developed sees syrotors of vltaoin S coonlev deficiency,
yes, and the therapy was started as soon ra these oycptocc -reared.

q, Did these oroorlsentol subjects, conscientious objectors,
rocolvo any pa:/?

A. Hone other then that which I have Indicated, $15.00 a nonth
for pocket noney.

q. Vas that their regular allowanco for pocket money an n cor.sc.len-
tioua objector, or was that given to that sorely becrusc they eutaittod
to these o'-ocrlzents?

A. Xo, that was the aeount that was regularly allowed thea.

q, I SCO. In your opinion, Doctor, what should be the rules fol¬
lowed a physician beforo exper is anting on a human being? In other

words, do you have a set of principles - nedicel ethics - concerning
exoerlnentation on huraa beings? If so, would you outline to the Tri-
cunal wr.;.t you does to be the ethical manner in which e-oerlner.tntion on
human beings should bt conducted?

A. Having been appointed by the House of Delegates of the American


9131


Court So. 1

13 Jus 47-k-12-5-IHk-£er r ow (3rovn)


Afldlcd Association, and since la ey advisory capacity in these trials,

I sadc a study of the conditions under which faunae facials have been used
as aedicrl subjects in cultured end civilised nations throughout tho
vorld, I foraulated a set of ethical principles which I believe repre¬
sented cocaon practice in this regard. I subnitted this 6et of ethical
principles to the House of Delegates of the Anericen Hcdicel Association
for consideration.

:G. HARD?: Anticipating en cbjoction. Tour Honor, I night add that
this is the opinion of Dr. Ivy concerning vhat orocriaentation principles
should be followed when working on hoann beings. I have ashed each
defendant that saae Question when they have token tho stand and they
have glvon thoir opinion. I an now asking that of Dr. Ivy.

!fc. ILSKlXW (Counsel for the defendant Krugo-sky): Hr. Prcoidont,
it is ay opinion that this is a cuestion tfclch only tho Tribunal can
decido. Tho opinion of an individual, of a arc who is even a nodical
expert, is not, in any way, designed to further tho trial or to dony tho
Tribunal the right to aako its own docislon. Tot this rcrcon, I objoct
to this cuestion and ask, if oossiblo, that it will bo stricken froa tho
record.

SKL PSSIDiFI: Objection will be overruled.

Z will cak tho witness tho dato of these oxoorlaor.tc in tho ponltcn-
tiary In Illinois, or nporoxiacte date.

VITIESS: As I recall, .tho;' started cooutg£942 rr.d they are still in
progress. \

TH1 PH£SHS5Tt Witness will ensver the cuestion propounded to hin
after tho noon recess.

Tho Tribunal will now be ia recces until 1:30 o'clock.

(A recess web taken until 1330 hours, 15 Juno 1947.)


9132


Court So. 1

13 Jus -4’-A-13-l-ia{-4ieloy (VarUntx rg)


ajuhsccs sissies

(The heart eg reconvened at 1330 hours, 13 June 19*7.)

HAESEAL; The Tribunal ia pgcln in eeeeion.

TKi PEiSUEST: Couceel nay proceed.

3- TLZXm (Counsel for defendant Xnigowmky): Hr. President, I
reoueat that the defendant Mrugowsky, according to the agraerent of the
Tribunal that vbi announced thia aorning, be allowed to ait next to -.a
during the aoaaion today, ao that I can diacuac with hin the facts
possibly discussed by the expert.

T?i PE2SI28Vti Very well, purauent to reeuoat of Dr. Tlenlng,
counsel for defendant ..rugoweky, tho defondnnt Krugovsky nay bo aeated
pt tho attorney's table beoldo hia counsel for thia afternoon oeaaion.

31. ASDEEV C. I7T - Po.ur.od
DIPxCT SOKHUTIOH (Continued)

BY KB. EArDY:

Q. Dr. Ivy, boforu taking un the problaa of ncdlcd ethica, I
wish to go back to tho testinony concerning the yellow fovor expcrlaonta
by Dr. Valter need. Do you h»ve thoro the publication "Tollow "ever",
which ia a cccvoilrtion of various publiertiona which woro put out by tho
United Statoe Oov-rmcnt Printing Office in 19117

A. Tea.

Q. Is that a true photoatetie copy of th. publicr.tlon that you
have before you!


a. It is a true photostat copy of those negea of the uublieiitlon
which used.

-T iSb&yf, this tine, Tour Honor, these publications Dr. Ivy
has referred tc. -th*- oroaecution desires to know if it nay bi narked ne
er. exhibit end give* a prosecution identification exhibit mr-.beT, the
purpose being thatAhe oroeecution entlcipetea and if the Tribunrl rules
favorably that .the evidence conc-rning c-oeri-ents in the U.S. and other
countries Is deened to be admissible in evidence before this Tribunal
that the prosecution^^!! then be in a uosition to introduce these docu-


9133


Court 5a. 1

12 Jto 47-A-13-«E'.-«lor (arUnberg)


=«at« referred to today during rebuttal.

IM. PrXSHEETx The document* nay be narked vith a prosecution
nunter for identification, given nunbera especially.

2AHUT: Vill you kindly paea up that photostat of the oublica-
tion "Yellov Fever", Dr. Ivy?

At tkia tine, Your Honor, I do not propoee to pats the.- over to
the Tribunal and give then to the Secretary General, inaenuch aa they
have not teen procacaed. Tha oroaecution vill hold then, giving then an
exhibit nunber, and if necessary introduce then, if the Tribunal's
ruling is favorable to the adciaaion of auch evidence. If it is unfavor¬
able, ve vill not use then.

TKK P72Sm:T: That vill be satisfactory. Fovcrer, I suggest
that thay nay be available to defsneo counsel to oraaino in the office
of the Secrotary General in tha naar.vfalle, if any of tho dofonae
couno-1 daaire to exaslne then.

ii. HASDTl I don't knov hov v« can -joseibly do that-—

?EZ PaLSITUTT: I understood you to say you -ould douoalt thcao
originals la tho office of the Secretary General. Tas that correct?

EAnDT: ::o, I asked if vo ecxild dlroenac vith doing that ao
ve vould to In a noaltion to orocaea then.

THa PHISIDLIT: They should be orocctaed. That ia right.

^ In *■ rcoort "Tcllov Fever", Dr. Ivy, on the second pngo of
tho report, of the aubetence of tho roport, «»hich ie pago 10 of tho
coopilation, ve note a oaragraph ^hick reads as follova:

■Free tine to tino Spanish inoigrants neviy arrived vtro brought
in directly free the itsigrant station, A person not known to bo
Innuno vaa not allowed to leave carp, or if he did vus forbidden to
return."

Could that have teen construed to be nativoa, as I referred earlier
today in the cntnin&tion vhen ! asked you vhethor or not natives were
used in the eroer incuts?

A. It nay have been, but it Is not to be inferred that the Soonisb

9134


Court So. 1 *•

13 Jus 47-A-l3-2-22{-i<al 07 (Vartccterg)

cd

immigrants were submitted to experimental biting by as lnfoc,t/ncf ouito.
Zhcy were ouarantloed to be sure that they her. not boen bitten by a
no*ouito before coming to the case. Chat was a control procedure. To
=y knowledge natives vere not used as experimental subjects. That nay
bo wrong. I nay have overlooked something. One can't be perfect In
searching the literature.

IS. SEEVATXUS (Counsel for defendant Kerl Brandt): Mr. Prosldont,
aay I perhaps suggest that this document vfcich is sutaltted here should
be sj. de available to the defense after ell, co that we can eranlne
Wuxt the context le of theeo plecoe which ere being read now, so thot
vc do not find out later on that we could have out ouoetione to tho
witness which ore essential.

KR. RAR3Y: Your Honor, in that event I rtnuoct instructions. I
ac vondorln.- whether or not at this tl^o it will bo nocorsary for tho
Tribunal to rule whether or not this evidence concerning oxoorlmonts in
other countries will be admissible or will be Inadmissible, or an I too
proaaturo. If the ruling is favorable, it will nccecoltrtc processing,
filing copios with defense counsel; if not favorable, that can all be
ovoldod.

THE PBSSUS3T: It le lnposeiblo to nako such a ruling at this
time. Uhllc some of thv evidence nay bo adnlosible, other evldenco In
the dooI would probably not bo admissible. It would foil into dif¬
ferent classes. Here is a government document oublishod under tho
supervision of thv United States Government. At tho sane time, in tho
general pool there ore .megazinc artlclee, some of them free rcsoonolblo
magazines end soce of them from rather Irresponsible magazines, soma
by known authors and some by unknown authors, some by known authors,
with a good reputation and some by kno—n authors whose reputation was
not particularly good.

HR. HAHDT: I car. turn It over to defense counsel at this time
end of course let them have the opportunity to stud:-* it, but I ronuert
that it bo preserved and locked in a cefe if he intends to keep it

9*35


Court So. 1

13 Jun 47-1-1 ogr ('.'artontxrg)


over the recess end this evening.

FEESIDE1T: I think it eaa be giver, to defense counsel now, tut
It choiid bv returned to the prosecution before the dose of the aftcr-
nooa session. Of course th« document will be available again to you
tomorrow aoralng If counsel desires to lock at It.

Sow, the eroerinent by Colonel Strong end Dr. Kurz on beri-beri
or. which you h ve testified and breed your testimony on, a publication
"Phllllplno Journal of Science", Vol. 7, page 291, published In 1512,
end elso besed on your oersosrl ccmv.rertions with the eroorluonters, I
wish that you vjuld peso up to ce the oublicetlon on *hich you base your
testlaony, Doctor, so that I nay nark It for identification.

KE. KARTT: The yellow fover publiertion. Tour Honor, tho yollow
fov^r docuaont win boar Pr>eocution Exhibit 511 for identification,
the berl-bcrl document, ich is an ertrret fren tho "Philllolno Journal
of Sclenco", Tol. 7, 1912, rad which will boar Prosecution Exhibit 512
for Identification.


13 Joob b7-*.-ATI>aii-l-Love (Int, ?arienbers)

Court I, Casa I

7H5 PHBSHEW! The- record till show the identification nunfcura.

3Y 1®. HATTOl

Dr. Ivy, is that extract fro.-. the •'Phi Hi pins Journal' 1 Voluao
i, 1911 appear to be !fc. 2 froc the crllnai Journal?

A Yes.

Q You certify that this is a true copy?

A Yos.

Q The implication concornin,: the pla uo oxyorinonts, Kill you
idr. Ij* jass that up to Me, Doctor. This publication -rill bo aerkod
Proaocuticn Exhibit 513 for identification, your Honor. Dope this
extract free the "Ffaillipino Journal* of Scionco, Voluno 7, da tod 1906
portainin: to tho plaiuo exporinonts of Colonel stren purport to bo a
true oopy of the ori dad?

A Yes.

°*  tb080 reports concornin the borl-bori and plaguo o^orinonts
Is it possiblo to ascertain that deaths cccurrod in oithor of thoso
axparlaonte?

A In tho plr.juo axa.rlu.nts it is a ?s~o photostated in which it
statos that no injury of any of the subjects occurrod.

Q 18 tlrfc on W 103 of the rtdIUldno Jourrr.1 of this exhibit.
Prosecution Exhibit 513 for i '.ontification, . fwrein it states, '»Jp to
the present tine h 2 porsons havo boon injr.cto’ with this larr/o doso
72 U ACAr-slont culturo of th^ livir. bacillus an * althcu h tho innoou-
lntion which I include in this report rcro all purferaed reoro thxn
twe Months a o an ' the in’ivi 'uals treated have been un’^r constant
surveillance I have no accident to report.-'

A Yos.

c That is in tlw pla uo oxr^dajnts. In the bori-bori exp_rinonts,
fr - yw © nvorsations were you able to ascertain whether or net any
'eaths occurre :, that is your conversations with th. ox, .riruntelists?

A I was told no deaths occurred.


13 Jana u7-A-n. - _~Ii.-i-Lcvo (Int. . artonx*-- )

Ccurt I, Caso I

1 Prcfesaor Ivy, ttouI 4 . ycu ids.ly -,-ass up th:- pu v .licntion upon
~hich y u baso ycur testimony concernin' tbs oxperiaent on tronch fovor.
This -111 bo -arkad Prosecution Exhibit 5li for identification. Dr.

Ivy, .lees this -xtract purtairdn to the .-xroria^nts on tronch fovor
m ’o in 1917 purport to be a truo photestatio cop:-' of the* notarial
contained in the report of too Caxdssicn of too I-aiicnl Resoaroh
Cemitto, .’eacrioan Rod Cross, in too Oxford University Pros3?

A Yos.

q V'oul ! you kintly .ass up the report upon rhich y.u has a your
tostiaeny concornir. . th: .olla.m ox; orlr .nts. Does this photostatic copy
rhich has boon rarko ! Prosecution Sxhibit 515 for i 'xmtification
purport to bo a truo pho testa tie copy of tivj .xitorial c ntairocl in tho
Archivos for Intorivl "odicinj, Voluno 25, pa.-o U51, latod !5ay 1920
ooncorcin exp ri-v.ntnl poilcra in nhito jvle convicts?

/. Yoo.

Q Would yai kin 'ly pass up too :i:torir.l you have concorninj tho
oxporinunts first of all on tho inaatos of tho Statovillo Ponitontiary
in Illinoia.

A I havo too aurary aarooiioot, "r. Kar 'y, of too Dopartomt of
Justice, the Buroau of Prisons, that is for tho Fodoral Prisons.

Q Tijank you, I will rofer to that in a ;»nent. Doctor. Dr. Ivy,
to-'S t’ds statonont to prospective voluntoors end tho a.pli cation for
inclusion in stu $r of new anti-tnlarial conpcun-’s purport to bo a truo
copy of too stnteiwnt to prospoctivo volunteers an! application which
was 3u’ rdtto ’. at toe St-tovillo Ponitontiary in Illinois prior to tho
execution of toe ..-.Inrial experiments therein?

A Yoo.

q rnis i3 ..-.rice I Prosecution Sxhibit 516 for identification, your
Honor. Do you havo any further Tutorial before you. Doctor, that I

havor.it rofcrro J . to yet that y u have boon tosfcifvin*’ to?

913S


13 Ji na 1.7—1L—3—Love 'let, artoribur ;)

Court I, Case I

A I have a copy ef tho which prisoners In the Federal

Penite nti a r y si^n when tbay volmtoer for subjects in a. leal ccc-orl-
■aents*

q Do you havo any oxp-rionca fc*oa ycur o-m knowleVo c f the
subjects in ?o l ml Ponit-ntinrios, that is, it you know of any
ax^arlr.-nts whjroin Fod-ral inrr.tos wore used?

A Tos, they -oro use! in tho ralcrJsi afei los in th; so*. *.r.y tho
prisoners woro uso at Statavillo.

Q "htt pcrtioilar Federal penitentiaries '1 thee* traw their
subjects fro.’.?

.. One t Atlanta rr.' ancthor in Teona.

Q 'ill you Id that 'oc , .kt Ivy. Doss this

Bla co, gr *.U: "Dsparta^nt ef Joe tic-. Fur .au f Prisons",

application for permission to partic^Aio in oxp.rln.nts" an’. aaricoci
Prosecution “ohibit 517 for i ’ontifioation, purport to bo a truo copy
of the. actual rvrooionto hi oh arc si vuA >.y FoY ral in a too of
ponitontiarioa in tho Uni to’. States?

A os .

Q Do you have ary further Lctoricl boltro y u, D:ctar.

•"* I l»vo a certified lott-r frm the Soorctary r.n' Oen ral ’anchor
fron the African ^ leal Asa elation in which thoy stato wlr.t tho
throo basic roquirt:xnte f r th. ro -or use o Jniar.n subjects in
-ko lcal exp rii nta.

1 ‘-0 oen ut that ir. '<jr. It im«t r licabl. to thi3 section of
the -•aidnr tion. Do y-,u hero any mtorial on th. oxp^rinantol vacci¬
nations for I'exion n .r chotio-typhua?

A Tos, I h~v 3 - phot:static oopy o: t-.»o \>3 ef zr. article in

..hich bunan subjoets wora vaccina to '. a .'Inst exic'n r chotio-ty, bus
in lea tin v-lunteers rrj uso '.

0 ’fcul! y u kir. ly . ass that up. Doctor. Does this extract fran

t: - Journal f ‘-famnelo y, 7oiaao 3a, .« iirhc *. in 1939 ccncarnin an

mr rir.iif or. vaccinations of human >oin s a ainst Mexican or chotio-

9139


13 Jttix.- 1:7—..-V.u—Lovo (In-* r’erter£jarp)
Court I, Ccao I


tyrl-aia frcn ?ollx Viani Killer purport to 'to a true photostotic copy
cf tfao orf lid?

A los.

*-Tia is virkcl Prosecution Exhi-.it 518 for identification, you

ffcnor.


9U3


13 Jaro -?-»W.ID-l5-l«-Prii3Qan (Ini. rirteriborr}

Coart :to. 1 '

q r* steterunt which you roa * by Governor Orein, that pub-

lls!«l in any journal or is that rvrdy a iooso statoe»r.t?

" * ri t waa 3 statenant aado over tho rr. ’io by Governor Grocn.

Q >aa that adds in connection -ith tho quotations of tho prieonors,
of vcluntocret

1 That is correct.

3 la tittt rado up into a script?

A Toa.

"i Are ycu able to certify that script as bein'- a true presentation
of tho ra Ho pro-ran?

A Toa, as of Thursday, feanzy 3, 19fc6 over Station TOH.

Q ’foul ’, you kin 'ly paaa up that script. Dr? Doos this purport to .
bo a two acri-t of tho brua-taast ov„r O':, entitled "’Maria Hoaoarch
Report, " tatod TtaraJay, Jrrnary 3, 19 an’ contcinln a statoaont by
Governor Croon of Illiaoia end attaints fr,i the ;risortrs of volurv-
toors used in tho course of the jxpari-iont?

A Tea.

‘i It is :»rko for i ’ontifieation as Prosecution Exhibit 519. Jfcnr,
Pro fosse r I'7, bof;re c ’.jouraxmt you v.ru brlnnla- ta Hoctus no lical
atdea in tho umtol Statos. I wish to Infers yrj thr.t wo hav* had
Pr fossor Loibbwndt, any of tho ’ofoaftwta and otbor '.ofonaa and
proaocution vitnossos testify c.nooridn no Heal othics in .-(moral end
in your report w.ul ’ you kin ly outline for tho Tribunal the procedures
follow* ’ in tlx, Unit id Statoa concornin tho principles of ethics in
or.uri. xmtation on ha-ian be in* s?

.. I •.■ill stats thwo . rinciplcs bovolopin oach ono briefly.
Princl-lo ]fo. 1 is tho c nsent of tho su joct rust bo .* tain o'.j also
subjects nust have boon v;luntaors in tho sencu f c orcion. Eoforo
voluntocrin tit subjects havo tc bo inform * of thu hzzzr 'a, if nr?’.
S-r.ll rerr-.r s in vnriouo for.-a havo boon provi'ol as a nil a.

Principle ' . 2. Tit xp.rLi.nt to bo .■erferrtnust bo so ibi nod

an based n th- results of nninal ^orientation anl a knorlod o of

9141


13 Jana ■ .7-A— .ZE»-l5-2-?rl -sau fine. -rtarf: r •)

Court ?b. 1


tho natural history of too iseasa unCor stu y that tte entici;ctad
results will Justify tho performnoe- of tho msporianta. That is,
the cxs&rlaent aist bo such as to yield results of tho . cod of
society unprocurable by other notho 'a of stu V anl mist not be ran den
an unnecessary In nature.

Principle 3. Tho osporinont oust bo con uctod only bo scientifi¬
cally qualified persons and so as to avoi! all unnecessary physical
nnl nontal sufforin • and injury and so that on toe basis of tho results
ef prorlcuaadoquato aninal ocpartocnteUon there is no apriori reason
to believe that '.oath or Isablin injury *culoccur except in such
oxiMrl-^nta as thoso on Yellow Fever whjro tho oxp. rinentors servo
as subjects al:n ./ith tho non-sdontiflo ; ercennol.

This was thj list of othical consi Urations vhich I subnittod as
c represontotivo of thy Souse of Uelujjstcs of tho Anorican 'Se.Uoal
Association to the H~uso of D-lo ntos in Doccc.ber. I rood vod this
luttor frea tton. This is a report of too Roforenoo Caaittoo on
*lsoollanoous 3usinoss to tho fouso of Dula.ntosi

■Tho Rafbronco Cc-mttcc fin's tho caporlmnts -.oscribe'. in l>r.

Ivy»s report era opposed to tho principles of sto leal ethics of tho
•JTorlcan 'todiocil sscclation which hr.vo tor. 3 basic requirements t Jfc. 1 ,
tho voluntary consent f tho in’lvi *ual cn nhen to. oxperinont is to bo
porforjod rsust bo obtain©!j lh. 2, tba fangor of each cxj.orJixnt uust
bo ..rovioudy invest! by antoal axparlncc • -in’, " . 3 , tho
oxpcriixnt rtust bo porfnmo : un -or .ro.xr roe 'icnl protection and
mrn-ccxnt.* •

0 Oc ycu hero aq? rurthcr sto ton :,ts to c ,nc rnin- rules of
“ 'ioal ethics © ncernin urperi^ntation cn huran bdn-s?

L 'oil, I fin • that sinco nakln this import to the Anorican ical

association that a bercc of tto inist.r of Public olfare of C-orrrxy

ir: 193i 011 ‘ lv - s^’J-ct of "Ro ulations for b !om Tb.rary for too

-orf rranco cf Scientific Sqprlncnts .n ‘-XLcn - .ir. s" ©.ntains all t!w

principles vioioh I have roa L. I havo that loerew in tho fern of a

'* 9142


13 line 1 7-». 7D-1 7-3-Pxim>au '-rtor&erf*)

Court !fc. 1

nJaso^xupfaed '.ocun^nt with re boro.

3 And that purports to bo a rula of ix: Heal othics for tho
exp^rinontefelon upon hu^an boinrs drafted by the American Moil cal
Association bused on investigations by you and a report by you. Is
that correct?

L The lot tor that I read rjavo the basic principles, tho othics for
the use of tarn boin:;s in ns .'loci axporlajnts as approved by tho
American : to Heal Association. In a ! Htion to that, I pointed out that
I have a zdao-> repfaio copy cf a circular lottor ft.-a tho Reich Ilnistor
of the Interior ooncorrdn rc ulctions fte no.tom thirapy and tho
perfomanco of scientific oxporiscnfcs on huran bcdn"s which contains
tho Othioal principles which havo boon approved by tho Aaorioan
Jto-Hoal Association an" irhich ,<vro subnittod by no to tho Houso of
Dolorratos cf that association f:r const.’.oration.

Q toll, to you have thoro also thu principles and rulo3 as sot
forth by tho Aaorioan ItocHoal Association to bo foil >wod?

A I?o.

^ .ftat was tho basis on which the Anoricnn !!o Heal-Association
'••'.opto 1 these rules?

.. I subalttod to ttea a report of certain oxpcrir.onts rrhich had
toon porfornod on huren cubjoct3 alomj with ty conclusions ro.^ardinr;
tho principles, what tho principles of othics shoul * bo for uso of
hunan oir. ;s as subjects in ao.Hoal exp rluonts, an' asked tho associ¬
ation to ivo >0 a statcr.-nt ro -r!in • the principles cf no-Heal othics
an! rt ttvi Azacrioon ‘odical Association had to say rorer Hn" tho u3o
of hunan boin s as su’.Jocta in ao Heal oxporL-xnts.

b foul*! yen !dr. ly pass u. to nc that rulin- of tho principlos put
out by the Anorioan :to.’leal Association? This, apparently, isn»t what I
-- 1 roforrin to, Doctor. Do yeax have a publication which is published by
thj Auorlcan : to Heal Association or.titlod 'Principlos of Ethics Cen-
cornin- Exp -rinantatlon on .Hunan Bedn-.s"? ,


913


23 Jtoo U7-A-..TD-l5-i-?r:Lio2u (Ini. rtcniborc)

Court So. 1

A. Hot with 20 hero*.

'dlj *»■» yu haT3, first of all, a basic roquirc-n.nt for

art ont&tion on bacon beings, boingt " 1 . tho voluntary consent of
tfca indiviiial upon when tho cxr>-rticnt is to bo porforcod mat bo
obtained. 1

A Yoa,

1 '2. Tho 'anfor of each ^ rin.nt tust be previously investigated

•

by aniranl ox.>:rinantatior.," an* '3. tho axp-ri.-jynt :a»st bo purfornod
under propor no 'leal protection and .arc ;cnont."

tow, -oaa that purport to bo tho .rinciplos upon which all physi¬
cians an’ sciontiats uido thcraolvca boforo they rosort to nodioal
oxporijvntation on lu:cn bain s in tho Uni tod Statos?

Yos, th_y rojrosont tho b-oic .rinoiplos approval by the Anarionn
"j 'leal .‘.ssooiation for tho uao of hursan Vein ;a as subjocto ir. ootUoal
exporinonta.

JITX3B "£3? IX: Ifcrr do the prlnciploa wlxich you havo Just onunciatod
conport with ttu irinciploa of tho lodioal profoosion over tho dvi-
Hsod world ':enarr.lly?

A Thjy aro i lontionl, cccor’in - to y information, and with that
idor. in :dn*. I dtod the principle vhich r„ro mntionod in this
circular lottor fron tho R.ich ’Inister of thu Intirior dotal Fobrunry
' # 1931 to in’.lento that t’x» ethical ;x*inciplos f-r the uso of hurnn
b An s as su'.Jocta in nodical oxparlnonta in Gr.rmny in 1931 vrero
similar to these which I Ixvvo orar.aiatol and which have boon opprovod
by tho H:uso of Dele atoa cf tho -rioan '/c ical .‘.ss-ciaticn*

3Y :r. iauii

3 Is it possible that in saso field cf scientific rosanrch that
invosti aticn by anLaol experimentation woul! bo ina.loquato?

A ‘ ill r~u repeat that question? I ’id not ;ot it.

- I 3 ■ .«ssiblc ir. s .vs fill’s of rtjchocl rosoarch that expert-
:atation r invest!--tier. :r. aniiials . ul * be inadequate?

91 UU


13 Jur». - 7-*.-\.7^-i5-5-?rin3au (Int. "artonbirr)
Ccart So. 1


 iC3» The -xp^rirent on Tronch Fov&r is a very ;-oo i oxanplo.
q ifaw vculi invest!;ato tho danger of the expariisnt prior to
rosortir.' to tho uso of hnran bairns?


9U5


Court Eo. 1

lo Jun 47-11-15-1-iSi-Beerd ( -artenberg)

A. The hazard vaild hare to he determined by a careful study of
the natural history of the disease.

Q. Does aalarla also fall Into that category?

A. Ve can use aclnale to sone extent in ralarial studies, canaries
and ducks, for example, develop salaria, and in research designed to dic-
covor a tetter drug for trectaent of re lari a ve can use Avian Malaria as
a sort of screen netfcod to detect which corsounds night be escloyed with
• one asouror.ee that night be effective in huaan nolaria. In that way ve
decrease the rardee and unnecessary exserirentation on son.

Q» To your Icnovledge have any exuerinents been conducted in the
United States wherein these reouirenents which you eet forth were not
net?

A. Sot to ny knowledge.

EAEUT: Your honor, I have no further ouestiono concerning
cedlcol «thlcs to put to Dr. Ivy; ho- vor, I do havo one nuostlon con¬
cerning the high altitude experlronts which I wish to go tacit to at the
conclusion of that coaolex, in high altitudo, I will have cosnlotcd
ny direct uxaalnatlon.

TKL PSiSIDUTT: Tho Trifcunol has no ouostions of tho witness. Do
I understand that you have completed your exaainatlon of the witness?

iffi. EABUY: So, I have not; I have o further ouostion to out to
hia, cut I wan going to lcavo the caso of nodical ethics.

THI PB2SI3ZST: Me havo no ouostions on that subject; you ray
orocoed.

Dr. Ivy, in nedical science ar.d recearch is tho use of huaan
subjects naccceery?

A. Its, in a meter of instances.

v Is it freouently necessary and docs it oerforr groat good to
hunanity?

A. ?e6, that is right.

5- Do :*ou have an opinion that the state, for instance, the

United States of Aaerica, could assure the responsibility of e physician

9146


Court -o. 1

13 Jus 47-A~15-2-iEX-3eaxd (Vartenberg)

to hie pet lest or exrerlnental subject or is that responsibility solely
the noral responsibility of the physician or scientist?

A. 2 do cot hell ere the rtate can assure the coral responsibility
that a physician has for hit patient or croe.-inental subject.

D?.. S1IILI I object to this question in thit it is a purely legal
auostion that the Court has to answer.

2Jw SAZZS3 (?or tho defendants Brff and Rcnberg): Tf I an not nls-
ta^ec, a docuaont vet read this corning in vhlch it says that tho stato
ateuaos the responsibility. I believe that I at not cistekcn in that.

I also want to point out setae thing else, gentleaon, in order to supole-
□ont vhat Dr. Soldi Just said.

Kero the oucstlon is always asked vhat the opinion of nodical
profession in Acerica is. 7or us in this trial, in tho evaluation of
Oercan defo n d an ts, that is not decisive, but in sy opinion the auostion
cust bo docislvo vhat, for oxacple, in 1942, when tho altitude oxpori-
nsnts voro undertaken at Dachau, tho attitude of tho nodical orofossion

9

in Germany was. Jros =y point of vlov as a defense counsol I do not
objoct if the prosecution should ask Professor Ivy vhat tho attitudo or
opinion of the nodical profession in Germany vr.s in 1942. If ho can
answer that aueotion, ell right, let hin answer it, but we are not in¬
terested in finding out wfcat tho ethical attitude of the nodical orofos-
tior. in the United States vr.o, becauao a Ooman pliyuician who in Ger¬
many undertook emerirents ou Gor ans cannot, ir. qy opinion. be Judged
exclusively according to rn /uo7l eaa rod led ooinicn ; which noreo ver is
froc tho year 1945 cnl coded In the yeer 19*5 and 1946, was coded
for tho future use; it can hrve no retroactive force either.

THE PRSSIUSET: She first objection Imposed by Dr. Scidl night be
aortlnont if the cucstion of legality was concerned, e legal responsi¬
bility; that would be a cuestion for a court. Dho Question of aornl
resoonsibility is a prouer subject to inouirc of the witness.

As to Dr. Scut or's objection, tho opinion of tho witness as to

codicni sentirent in Arerica ney be received. The counsel objection

'JILI


Court So. 1

Ic Jus 47-A-16-3*-j£K-3oera (Vertenberg)


gzca to It* weight ratter than to admissibility. The witness could be
r*:<ed If ho It evere of the sentiment in America in 1942 and vhethcr it
1* different from this of the present day or whether it does not dlffor.
^■.e witness nay also be asked whether he is ewero of the opinion as to
medical ethics in other countries or through<*it the civilised world. But
the objections are both overruled.

Q* ■ 3" opinion, then, that the stete cannot assure the noral
responsibility of a physician to his patient or experimental subject?

A. That is ny opinion.

*het do you base your opinion on? Vhat is the reason for thnt

opinion?

A. I base that opinion on the orinciples of ethics end norals that
aro contained in the oath of Hippocrates. I think it should bn obvious
that a st p to cannot follow a physician around in his daily administration
to sou that the aoral responsibility lnhoront thorein are prooorly
carried out. This corel responsibility that controls or should control
the oonduct of a physician should bo inculcated into tho ninds of physi-
clens Just as noral responsibility of other sorts, and thoso principles
are clearly depicted or onunclrtcd In the oath of Klppocratos which
ovory physician should bo acquainted with.

Q. Zs tho oath of Hippocrates tho Ooldon Rule In tho United Statos
and to your knowledge throughout tho world?

A. According to ry knowledge it represents the Ooldon Rule of
tho aidloal profession. It states how one doctor would like to be
treated by another doctor in case he wore ill. And in that way how a
doctor should treat fcls patient or experimental subjects. Be should
treat then r.s though he were serving as a subject.

Q» Sevoral of the defendants have pointed out in this case that
the oath of Hippocretcs is obsolete today. Do you follow that opinion?

A. I do not. The noral imperative of the oath of Hippocrates I
believe is necess ry for the survival of the scientific and technical
philosophy of nedicine.


91A3


Court Fo. 1

13 Jua 47-A-i6-4_£E<_5 efr 4 (W*rtcnberg)


i. Going back to the high altitude experinents for the n<nent, Dr.
Ivy, this nerning I put the foilrving question to you la that I asked
you la vlov of tho fret that Bonberg seys he reported the deeth of three
aviation subjecte to Buff, la vlev of the findings of air er.bclier. In
■ioe of the subjects killed la parachute descending tests la Eaechor's
reprrt, aad la vlcv of the interest of Easchsr la his reoort and of Ruff,
Roaberg, end Baseher la tholr report on the cause of nontal disturbances,
is it probably beyond a reasonable doubt, la your opinion, that Ruff,
vhen ho approved, read or vrete paragraph 2 on jvge 91 of tho Doeunent
Book So. 2, vhich starts vith tho vords "la solte of", did he have In
nlnd Batcher's oroerl-.onts oir eabolisn? And you answered tho ouestion
yet. Sow, Juotico Sabring aeked you whether <jt not any conclusion
c uli be drawn fren the eatirv report wrltton by Buff, Ronbcrg, and
Easchor which Indicates that the writers of tho report had knovlodgc
of export.lentt at Drchau to any extent, that Is, tho entire report. I
believe that was the Inport of the ouestion by Justlco Scbring. In any
evoat, is It possiblo t; ascertain free the ontiro roport written by
Ruff, Ronbsrg, and Easchsr that they had knowledge of tho v-rk of
Resohor ns solicited in the othor reports?

A. So, ay tostin iny in answer to these two ouostlcns was not
inconsistent. I said that in view of tho clrcu-.stpncos and beenuoo of

the siiiilcrity of tho subject urtter in paragraph 2-

Page 91.


9149

I


13 June 7—1-Gross (Int. arterturr)

Court Ho. 1

-* Par^rTaph 2, pe-jo 91 - anl tho pertinent psra.'-raphs in tha
Raaetor report.

<5 That is Document 220.

 14 is inpcsaiblo ebon Parogre; h 2 on pa,"o 91 was written that
tho observations ropertoi in too Has char report wore not in dn 1 . But,
at tho saro tfcao I said thoro is nothing in this roport by Ruff,

Rotf erg, and Raschor which proves that they had in nind tho observations
in tha Raschor roport pertaining to tho . rossuro drop sicknoss.

DR. S.UJTBP.I !lr. President, I havo to objoct to this question and I
ask to havo t;« question and tho answer strickon free tho record. Tho
question was astral by tto Prcsocution regardin'' this docunont. I an of
tho opinion that zny.ex'y .-ho is ablo to road an’ who is able to think
lo'lcally can road a -’ucunont for hinsaf an’ who is asked to nako a
Judiaont about a ’ccuxnt does not nood tho statenont of anyolso
in order to nako a Ju ru>nt about this doomant. Thjroforo, I an of
th.i opinion that it is inadrdssi.lo that an oxjxirt is askocl to yivo
an or.xjrfc opinion about a fccununt which evoryono of us con road anti
Ju Vjo and that ho is to toll us hat ho, freo his porsonal point of
view, thinks a'xrnt this etcunont.

2P. li.RDYx Thon I assure that elofenso counsol is objoctintf to tho
ontiro oxarination of Dr. Iv-y concomii\ hi 'h altitude an! tho questions
to a-. Ivy by tho Tribunal.

JJDOS SSBRX&t 'ir. Har »y, in urdar to doar up this natter perhaps
the Tribunal had hotter a a in attcapt to fras. its question that it
ft’onod this nornin .

- 5r * ;V 7* y«u Mi * this nornin . in answer to a question put by tho

Tribunal that you had ;iven thorou h stuc^ to Prcsocution Docuncnt no.

X-U02, bo Annin at pa"o 82 in Prcsocution Dccunont Book n which

purports to bo tho roport aacto by Ruff and Ronbore concernim: "oxporl-

nont3 cn roscuo fren hi h altitude”. Tho purport of tte question put

! -y tho Tribunal this rwrnirv was this: Can you stato whothor or not

thsro is any scientific lnfoi-nation contained in tho Ruff-Renberg report

9150


13 Jir.c li7-wlTD-17-2-Gro3S (Int .rortenburg)

Court !fo. 1

which caul \ not have been gained by Ruff and Ror^r arc as the- result of
thj oxporir_nts suppesod to have boon conducted by then on thoir own
experimental subjects and within ths frenework of tho experiments as
outlined in tho report?

0

1. '.y answer was no, by which I nean that tho Ruff, Rcaborc,

Raachor roport as it stands could havo been written if Rascher had not
'one his autopsy work on tho subjoct in question.

BY Ff.RDYi

Q In that connocticn, doctor, nay I ask you to refor to pago 91
of Do euro nt Pook II. This .arsvrr.ph roads -'In spito cf the rolntivoly
lar^o nxcibor of cxpoidmonts, tho actual enuso of tho sovoro rwntnl
'isturbancos an'! bodily failures atton'nnt upon uost-hypoxc-dc t?,dli[:ht
atato r-jnains sonothir\; of a rifle. 0 hat do you dotomino that
sontonoo to roan scientifically?

.. oil, in that connootion I bcliovo that sinco Dr. Ruff an ! Dr,
Rottbon know that a subject had lad at hi h altitu !o, that tho sub~
jaot ha V boon autops! , ; bblos foun! in tho bloo 1 vossols, that

they oould not nrito this .e.ra ;mph 2 on ; a o 91 without th.it infor¬
mation cad nr' to "dn! booauoo tho subject mttor of this para-mph on
91 jrt-ins tc tho sera su‘joct :r.ttv.r that Is roportc 1 in tho Raachor
report.

q Tlwn it further statos "It appoarod ofton as thcu h tho
phorrnona of . rossuro drop sicknoss 'a ccnbimd with th, ms'llts of
sovoro oxy -on lick.’’ oil, nr-.- cculd that infenatdon havo boon rodtton
in this ropert 'lthout kn:wlob;o cf the Raschor cx^arir.cnts?

.. Yos, t:-r.t coul *. have boon -..Titter, in this report on tho basis
of knjwlod::o cf tto rovi -.us literature.

Q . oil, they stito here - "It appoara! often as thcu h tho
phonoaona cf pressure !rc:- sickness.... 11 ‘ oil, r •; if it ap. o.irod
rften they rust have tor. in a ; - si tier, to c's_rvo this pressure drop
sickness, is that trio?

9151


✓

/

i3 Jaas i:7-n -.. 13-17-3-Ore 33 (int. diartenburg)

Court So. 1

f

sickness, is that fcruo?

• VL I * |

*'• Yos, an-’, as a result of their experiences in aviation -ttdicine,
stu y of subjocts at hi .h altitu Io, they coil:’ have observe:! doco:>-
l-rosaion aicknoss .r prussuro .!rop sickness.

-I Can you observe ..rossurQ '.‘rep sickness an • dotorrine that a
Person is sufforin frou urassure drop sickness without performin' an
autopsy or dthout socin bubbles in the blood, strean?

u Yos.

1 ffcw can you *0 that, 'octor?

oil, you can 'etondno whothor they have the Bon Is of tho system
•;hich is oviJoncot ty peln in tho joints an' inability to walk or stand
cr tc. novo tho joints normally. Thoy could dotorsino whether or rot
the .ationt hn ! chokos an:', fits of cou-hin which is another symptom of
pressure 'rep sicknoss. Tiwy could dotorrd.no whothor or not tho patient
ha' a localised .nralysis whioh is another synpton of prossuro drop
sicknoss and it is perfectly rocsopablo on tho basis of the knowledge
of tho literature tc assino th't vhon a human boin is aubjoctod . *
to tho conditions that woro usod in this oxpcrijiont that tho symptoms
OMlfostod by tho patient al ht bo duo to tho corf ination cf oxygon
lack an ! of lew . rossuro.

1 Thon, in tho first sentence of that era raph - that scntonco
coul' havo boon written also without knowlo d/;o of tho baschor work?

That is tho aontonco star tin out with -'In spito of......"

A Yos, because tho ox;res3ion" relatively lar .e number of

es.-cri ants' refers, I believe,to ax.orincnts porfomed by Ruff,

Ron' or , end Bucher.

1 I ibit unlarstcnd your answer. I ask yeu, could that sent once
havj ' son written without kncrrle d o of daschar's work at Dachau?


1 Is it hi hly probata* that the author of this report had knevr-
1 -;'- a cf base bar 1 3 work ir. nritinj thrt sontcnco?


9152


13 June (Int. rtetf - r--)

court ::c. i

A I !on*t soc how sine a Hoi; or;' was present at the ’.oath of tho
subjoct arc* witnessed tho autopsy in vhich tho air babbles in tho
hiao' vessels, an-! reported that to Dr. .Tuff. Ho*: they cctild have pre¬
vented htvir. kn-rlo pro of that whan thay wrote that . sra. ra\h - they
*r.l it cn the ’ a3is of .rovicus experience.

q I havo n further questions, your Honor.

DH. 3..U7T'* "r. President, the last question an! the last ans-.ror of
tho -.ritnoss id not cox throu. h ovor the translation systoa. "ay I ask
Hr. Burly t; ro.oat tho last question ar.d tho -.fitness should ro.-oat tho
last answer ho : avo.

1ZU H.3DTI I osko !, if thoro tra3 a ,roba' ility that tho author of
tho report had tho work cf Rasohor in r-Ln d whan the;* rroto tho .arayraph
on a o 91 with starts out rrith words, 'In s..ito of...."

ITirsS: TJjr answer was Tes an' I answoroi it yes because rjx&ore
saw tho 'atlonfc do, attended the rutopsy, saw tho as bu’.Vlos in tho
’-loo ' Tassels on! ru. ertod that Dr. Huff an* . hen they r to this
■ r- r . •*. in the Buff, *Uxf.or-, ttuebar report they ooulto«t have lono
that, in ny >plnlon, without rocullin tide rvsatic irvei !ont that
happonod ondor Basehorts axpurLfentation ohau. I thin l .'.

' o obvious.

!”H. Tis :fc farther questions, ycur Honor.

Ti:. rHSSrrsr.s I understand counsel for Prosecution has concluded
his oxr. in ion ir. chief.

D !It Yes, your Honor.

7!T. PR’SEHiTi .n;, questions to tho witness *jy ’afanse counsel?

!fcy it pic .so year 'bnor, in the crcs3 examination cf
this witness v"~ul! it bo ,-a. si’ic for ths defense counsel to keep tho
cross exnrinaticn in nee, thrt is, toe subject aatter in soqucnco.
Per instance, sea water, hi h altitu b, etc., so th t it nay ' a followed
oca ior in the racor !•

: . dd ho halfAl. toes' otfUnsel desire t c, erase

::v-dr.i tho -fitness cr. s.r. r.-y^r ri r.ts?

9153


13 Jojm ' t-fc-uTMT^Oross (ir.t. trrtc-jCrJrg)
Court !/:. 1


ER. L'Tv.: "x. Prssiier.-., say I ask that tho brief afternoon
recess shcui to taker. nor sc txt thj cross jxa.:ir.ation shjul * to; iii
only after the recess, I have n fa.: questions to * 1 3 cuss vith :.^r
ocllcauos about tho fera that the cross examination shall asauno*
^JlSUBffT: Vary veil, counsel. I roui’ su est that tho
Prosecution identification 1c clients to etherod up an J raturned
to tho counsel for Prosecution.

Tea Tribunal '^ill new to in racoss.


7154


Court So. 1

13 Jun 4?-A-15-l-iHX-£arrov (Drown)


Si ~AR3HAL: Persons in the ccurtrcce will please find their sects.
The Tribunal is again in session.

iP- HARDY: Hay it pleese the Tribunal, I request that the Tribunal
ascertcin ho uany defense counsel intend to cross oznnine Dr. Ivy so
that the proiecution can, in turn, ascertain how long Dr. Ivy will renain
on the stand. I have sany other duties to take care of in the course of
the next two or three days and I want to sort of guage oy work and if it
will be possible to ascertain how long Dr. Ivy will be under cross exami¬
nation it will be helpful to the prosecution.

TFI. P8SSXX&BT: ¥111 defense counsel %fco dosire to cross exaaino
the witness. Dr. Ivy, plecte signify so by rising.

•iR. HARDY: ^hank you. Your Honor.

CROSS RTAKKATIC8

BY IF.. SAUTRR (Councol for the defendants Ruff and Eoaberg):

Q. Vitneso, you aro an oxpcrt in the field of aviation nodicino?

A. Yes.

Q» what fiold: within aviation nodicino you h*vo

voricud on specifically, because cy cliontc, who arc roco.tniccd specialists
in this field, attach izportnnce to ascertaining orocisoly what fields
you have vorkod in DerticularlyT

A. I have worked particularly in the fiold of dccocoritsion or
proseuro drop sickness, and I here also worked in the field cf onorio
or oxooture * . altitude r u peotodly at a level of 16.00C foot to osc rtcin
if that has any effect in the causation of oilots' fatigue.

Q. At whet tine did you succifically concern yourself with tho
fields you have v ‘ust ncsed 1 Vos that befor. tho Second World Vor, during
the Second Vorld War, or wee it torll^r then that?

A. .Iy interest in these fields of eviction aedicine, including
free fall which I did not nention, stnrtwd in 1939.

Regarding your specific work in this field, witness, you have

also nade publications. I believ. you sookc of two nufclicetions. Die I

understand y<x correctly, or wvr*. there norc?

. ?i55


Court So. 1

13 Jun 47-A-l&-2-i2.-2arrov (ircwn)


A. There were two is the field of d»co-xroeeio= sicknceB. There
vtu one puollcetlea la tb. field of the effects of repeated erasure to
aild d-greoa of oxygen lock. Hy other work hre not yet teen published,
hut veB rubai ttod la thi fora of reports to the Co=lttca on Aviation
.'.eliclac of the Setloael 5esearch Council of tho United StPtee.


715


13 June 47-: ,h-n(oro»»i)

Court iro. 1


.. hen were these two papers published of wrich you Just to 1.1 us
thpt the? were published; vr.tr., and where they printed by a publishing
house. Did they ."ppt*r in a jcur: 1 or a periodical?

. . One rnpe-rs in the Journal of Aviation J’.edicine either in Sept¬
ember or °ctobcr of 1946. The other appo'rs in the Joumr 1 of the
eeric^n Jodi cal ... socirtion in either 3eccch r or Jo nu-ry of 1946 or
1947. The publication on tho effect of repeated exposure to nild
degrees of oxygon, Lack 'at Altitude appears in the qu?rterly bulletin
of Northwest . Univeroit; Medical School ru.d .«rrt of tno work, insofar
as its effect on the olicinr tion of the b- sis in tho urine is concerned,
apporrud In tho Joum- l of Bi logical Chcoistry around 1944 or 19*.5, I
an not sure of th't date.

0. Theretofore, dtness, you had thus c'do no publication in tho
field of aviation r.edicino b -fosx the papers of which you Just gavo
tho d»tco of publication?

<*.. The question is not clear.

Q. You Just g-vo us the titles f tho publications you have published
and nhn; new I asked whether b-.foro the d'tco you just gave y u u did not
have nny public tions in thj field of vi-ticn codicino?

Wo, ay first research started in 1939.

. You yoursolf have c rried out oxpcrlccr.ts too; is that not so?

A. Yes.

•4 ”ith hu ‘n exr rinental subjects, of course?

A. Yes :nd cn nyaelf. $

f.. -nd with -a low f assure chrrber?

4. Tes,

r . '•ero these frtcuw.t ex. rinentr or ..ere they experiments in which
you yourself took p- rt or.l. infrequent ir. number?

. The experiments ir. nldch 1 took part virv ir.fr cuent in number
conpT.'d to the total nurfcer of exper^aents which I performed.

C. Did you take pr rt ir. these uz: •trincr.ts as tr. director of the t-xrr-
inents, s thu person respcr.sifcL or were ycu usually the • x- *.ria-ntal

9157


13 'unc L7-..-7 -23-2-h»n(Brc*r.)

Court :*o. 1


subject your elf?

... I s. nr -t. Ir, both capacities. For example, I hcvo frequently
gone to the altitude of 4*>,000 ft. to study the syaptena of dens with
nr. intercedi*to pressure- d vice, which we produced ir. our laboratory.

I hftve b.en to 4.7,500 ft. on threo or four cccr.sions, on one occasion
at 52,0-0 ft. fer half an hour. I have frequently been to 18,000 ft.
without supplement /-1 oxygon in order to study the effect of the degre<
of oxygen lick present tb re for cy -bility to perforn psycho-rotor
tests.

r \. Con you tell us approxinat i j during h t yo-j you began thuso exper¬
iments of your own?

A. In 1939.

1939; did you at this tine carry out explosive docor.proscion
exrcrLT.er.ts too? ’’itnoss, cne ccr.ent please, the English for tb t
is "explocive dec; repression." 7b t is thus th* experiment in which
one ascend.- r .owly to *i certain height, let us any 8,000 c« tors and
then 1 11 fit once suddenly one is brought up to n height of 15,000 actors;
th-t is, first slowly up to 8,003 rnd then suddenly to, let us ary,

15,000 — th* * is whrt I understand under the tern "explosive decor.-
prose ion" experiment, rnd cy (juestion is: whether you also « r.*iod cut
s'uch < xp' rioonts -nd if so when and to whrt extent?

... I csrried out ovir one hundred experiments cr. explosive doccmprusion
ir. various laboratories cr. rnimls, the rabbit, the dog, the pig 'rti the
monkey. I did net serve ns r. sv’ joct nyself in experiments on < xplcs-
ivo decompres3ior^ but r student who wr s tr-ir.cd with cc in
physiology*. Dr. •' Smith did the first experiments ~r. v«plcsive
d-compression in which hu-rr. being s ejects were used -1 "right Field.

I nn faniliar with the work which Dr. Ctcfccock did on tliis subject nt
Ohio State University ir. which he studied sob# one hundr d students under
ccr.diticr.s xplcsive d compression.

. To r... t :Ititudu , vitnuss; to what crxinua rltitude did you carry
•*our cr.tr. explosive c- compression cxr.<. rimcr.es'

• 9156 .


13 .Tun- i.7-.-£"-20->-' h-r.(r rorr.)

Court l~-o. 1


It. t i els it was up to .0,000 ft., in the cn_« of humn
sub Jo cts the tarod ran was 47,50) with pressure breathing eodjswnt.

. This • ltitude you reached ir. your own experiments. Dow, Doctor,
it would ir.t.rcst rx to kr.c»- to id.-t arodnun altitude have any
rino-.ts ir. explosive decompression been ca-rieJ ir. •o.rir.;
vh-t do ; u know about this arc dcun altitude?

A. I beli-.'j tfcrt 47,500 or slightly bevc is the nnxinuc.

r. ' 'itness, do you know the Gem r. Physiologist Dr. Uin; Professor
FCcin, do you know his n'co; P-e-i-n fron Goettingen?

Yu8f

r, *»t the r.-ocent he is the ordin- rius for Fi.ysiology at Goettingen,
he is n. rector - t the University end a xueber of the Scientific '*dvis-
ory Comittoe for tl.- British zone. Cn th* bi.sis of your own knowledge;
do you consider Professor Koin m nuthorr.tive scientist in the* field
of physiology r.d svi-.tion nt^cir.c?

/.. I consider liin in cuthomtivu physiologist , I an not acquainted
tilth his wor): in the field of mrlrtioa rxciicino.

r. I's. President, I prvviously put in evidence — I want to rtcnll
that now — an expert opinion fron this Dr. “cin regarding Dr. Huff
in Docuccnt Book huff Docununt !To- 5 , Exhibit 3. This expert teoti-
nonejr is fi Professor «ein.

In your ow.. exp* rlcents, witness, you also used cornel entlcms
objectors, is t.rt ot so? Did I understand ;-ou CorrucMy?
v ct, .r. ms* oT the -xp- rir.ents.

. Will you toil us vhy you, specifically happened to use conscien¬
tious objectors, i..~e t.» ,7 rr. ticul; rly - anted for u.eso exp rifflwnts;
or what was the reason for -o.' -r >-*i t .-ducting e. eriacnU t< use
especially conscientious Objector

Yes; it was their duty, th--Lr volunteer duty tc render pubUc
service. They had noth ing else to do but to *vncl. r public service. In .
the expericunts ir.,*ich we- used the conscientious objectors, they

could devote their full .attention to the experi.-cr.ta. IVr.y of the

9159


13 «URt -7-
Court !o. 1


h-n(Er^)


subjects, which I hnve used, h'Vc be-* medic-.l students or dor.tnl
students, who besides serving .-.s subjects hrd to r.ttend their studies
in school- 1 . In the e-x^cricvr.ts >e did or. the cor.scier.ticus obj-ctor3,
they ecu' . ,.ot rttend school nt the snee t.r-.c ' r.d carry on or perferr.
-11 the tests they were supt.-osed to per.crrj. ”or cxnnplc, •.*. used
n group of conscientious objectors for repented exposure to :r.
rltitu'e of 18,000 feet vitbeut the r dr nistr- tier, of supplemental
oxj’C^n. These tests involved tf •. folic in* of > strict diet, they
involved the z -rforr..nco or sort; tests 'r.u psycho-notor tests, which
r-quired sev.r l hours every dny to perfom. /mother c™ u ? of c.r.-
scier.ticus bj- ctors th-t I usee wore used f. r vitnrir. studies
in rel*ti n te fatigue.

U.eat c. nscier.ti us bjecters had t . dc r «:r<vt deni cf carefully
no'sur-d wark during the tir.y r s ' ell n te. perforr. psych--futur
tests; a , medi • nta r dental students ootid net bo used.

“o had t h-v>: subjects ;.t c v id sp^d thoir full tine lr. the exper¬
iment a.


Court -o.l

lo As 47-A-21-I-ZS'.-?r izeeu (3r va)


J'-TGi SLZill'G: It. Sauter, at this ooint I should like to esk a
cuestion, if I nay.

S? JTJIGI SZ33ISG:

Q» Dr. Ivy, do you know whether or not Anaricar. citizens *dio wore
conscientious objectors were drafted into the Aaerican cllitory service
during World War II.

A. So. They »*ro drafted into this Civilian Public Service Corps
and, aa I indicated, there verc t~o tyu-o of conscientious objectors:
one typo that did not csoporetu in any wry - they were izrorisonod - and
there vns another type that were villi-#: to oerforn outlie scrvico as
long as it vr s not in the nature of nilitrry duty.

Q, And vhat grouo is it that you say you used for your cxnerinento?

A. The latter group.

Q» Do you know the nature cf the ortfc, if rny, that they took when
they wore inducted into thin snecirl service!

A. So, I do not.

Q, Do you know vhrt thalr general physical nuciiflcat Ions wore r>s
cooparod to the physicrl ouallficrtions cf the nan vbo wr>n inducted into
tho ailitrr- .rvica of the United States!

A. Well, sc of then vero erccllcnt ph» slcrl speclaonc.

Q» What I scan to say is this. Was there a physical curlificition
scalo sot up for then in regard to ego brockets -nd physical ourllficc-
tlons Just pb th.ro vrs for the non vho wre inducted into ullitrry ser¬
vice?

A. I prosuno so bcccuso they would be drrftcd, end they would have
to report that they wero conscientious objectors.

Q» Then, so frr as you kne* t they '-ere drafted; the:’ had to
register their nrues, ambers, residence, and so forth rad were drrftcd
Just as dl other ^neriern citizens within certrin age brackets were
drafted?

A. Tes.


And then when it cane tine for selections for induction into

9161


Court Z-. 1

13 Jua 47-A-21 -2-!2i-?rinceu (Brown)


too fcrvice they registered the •' ct that the:* were conscientious objec-
t -rs aad then were olrccd la e specie! organisation for public service If
th67 y-rvld egree to do nubile service or. If they would agree to do
nithiag, vero rlaced la DrIsos.

*• That Is according to ay lnfor=r.ti:a.

JUDO! S12BIDG; Thunk you.

BT re. SAUTi :

<3, Vltn-ss, froa the answers that you have given so fur, I aa still

not clear in ay nlnd precisely why you hit uoon coaccioctious objectors

in particular ns tfco expericaatol subjects. You said there -ore two

•

grovris of then: soae were in prleon and bct.o b«*d to norforn outlie ser¬
vice. ?roa the lrttir group you took your cmorirontal subjects, but
Dle-sc givo ao t dorr rnsver to tho oucstioa: Why did you soocifically
use ouch conscientlWis objectors for your rltitudo orocriaentsT

A. They could devote full tine to the erocriacntal roouiroronts.
They did not fcxvo to do coy othor work as va# the enso of acdical
students or dontrl students, th« only other typo of subjects that : had
ova 11 able to ao.

Q. Doctor, thoso oersons were obliged to oerfora vublie service.

If thoso conscientious objectors hd not b«.on there or .Z the./ had boon
used for public service, then you wouldn't hrve had an:' erpariaental sub¬
jects either. There aust bo c specific rerson why you specifically ured
conscientious objectors and I nsk you, plorse, to tell no that reason.

A. Veil, w_ couldn't heve done tfco eroerlrxats unloss the con¬
scientious objectors had been available. Sh t% is tho answer to your
Question*

Q. Could yew not fc.rvc used ray prisoners, even conscientious objec¬
tors who refused to do nubile service cad, therefore, were in orison
without doing cay work? Could you not have used then?

A. Veil, thrt would have n at that I ?nd ny assistants would have
tc .TO to the orison which vrs ouite r. die trace away. The- conscientious

objectors could cere to us at the university vh«.rc they could live in the

9162


Court So. 1

12 Jun 47-A-21-2-z2k-rrimeeu (3ro*-n)


university dormitory or la the university hospital.

Q» Sector, If your experiments vere really important - porha.pe
important la view of the state of war - then It le difficult to under-
•t-ad vfcy the experiments could not hare teen carried out In a prison,
lot us Bay. Other experiments hrve been carried out in prisons to a
large extent end in enother context, Poctor, you told us that you simply
had to get in touch with the prisoners; you simply wrote then e letter
or you put up e notice on the bulletin board and then; to a certain
extent, you have prisoners available. Can you give me no other lnforaa-
tion as to vhy you used specifically and only conscientious objectors?

A. So, If It had beta convenient and accessory for me to use
prisoners, Z believe that vo could hevo gotten prisoner volunt ore for
this work.

Q. Witness, were you ever in a penitentiary as a visitor?

A. Yes.

you thore how the crlninols ooadomnod to doath wore

housed?

A. Tes.

<<. Are they ccnolotely nt llborty there or are tho criminals
condemned to doath locked up In their cello?

A. They voro locked up in their cello.

Kov, con you please tell us fcov 0 criminal condemned to dorth
Is to see tho notleo thet you would put cn the bulletin board? You told
us today that It was very simple - you simply put a notice on the bulle¬
tin board - and for hours I have cow been trying to figure out how a.
criminal condemned to death, who is locked up la his cell, le going to
see that notice on the bullotin board.

A. While these prisoners -re taken out for their meals, they
can pass by e bulletin board or a niece of oaoer with the rtetenont cm
it which I read cen be placed in their c*.lls for reading or, as e large

| I

group in the dining room, tho statement can be read to thorn.

Are criminals condemned to death together at meals In America?

51 «


Court So. 1

13 Jus 4?-vi-2i-4-'icX-?ri.-6*u (Brovn)


So far as I knov, there too the erlainal condemned to deelh is Riven
tie food through an opening 1 = the cell door; he cannot eat in a coanon

see* hall.

A. Tee, hut you suet recall that I did not specify thct the crinl-
ol '•hieh vere need for malaria experiments vere prisoners condear.ed to
death; neither did I epecify that if I vere to go to a penitentiary fo
eee if I could get volunteer* for a nutrition experiment that I should
•elect prisoners condemned to death.

Q, If 70 U are sneaking here of condemned crisinale ee eroerlnental
eubjecte, ere you speaking of crislnal* condemned to death or *uet of
crisinale vfto have Just received aooa sentence or other.

A. I have not used prleoner* or crislnal* condemned to death. You
have been using that statement. I have u*ed prisoners.

Q. You spoke only of prisoners then!

A. ?hst is correct.

Q. Aro those prisoners in pro-triel isprlsonaent vhc hare not yot
been put on trial or are those prisoners vho havo elroady received sacs
sentone*?

A. krisoners vho have already received scoo eentenco.

v In other ords, prisoners vho have been condemned or sentenced?

A. But not necessarily to death.

Q, Yes, other sentences, aside from tho death sontcnco, includod.
Bid you ae a scientist interest yourself in the oucotlon of vhjr a person
va« sentenced, for vhat crises he vac sentenced?

A. Ho, I did not.

Q. Bid you et loast concern yourself vith the ouestion whether tho
man vas condemned, vae sentenced by a regular court or e court martial or
an extraordinary court7

A. Sone of these prisoners vould have been sentenced by e court
martial; they vould have been sentenced by ~n ordinary civilian court.

Q* Hov do you knov? Bid you see the personal files of these

prisoners or did yew see the opinions end sentences on the basis of vhich

9164*


Court lo. 1

13 Jun 47-A-21-C-i24-.frIxeeu (Brown)


the prisoner had been incarcerated?

A. Only on the basis of the tyne of prisoner that *culd be incar¬
cerated in a certain oenltentiary.

^ How do you, as a doctor, know exactly vhrt sort of orieoner is
incarcerated in this penitentiary end what sort of prisoner is incarcer¬
ated in another prison? How do you know that?

A. That's a natter of cocnon knowledge to one who reads the novs-
papors, the press, who is generally inforned on such natters.


13 June 4?-A_FjC_22-l-3eard (let., Brown)

Court I

a In « Tederal pesintantnry then you night have prisoners who
hare been incarcerated because of courts-eartlal?

^ Are lnna.tes of Pederal penltenteries used for experiments
tec, as far as you know?

^ -es, they any be.

<* In other words, political prisoners tto, that is, prisoners
who were condemned by a court-nart IaI or by another oourt?

A V« hare no political prisoners In the Vul&i States.

* Are 1101 P r l»oners condemned for high treason or treason and
the like. Those 'are political crleee.

A lot to ny knowledge.

k On conspiring «l«h the eneny during the war; that such cases
haws not only arisen but they have also boon punished, and you aust
know fhat from reading your newspaper. Professor; .those are political
prisoners. Do you not hare those In Aaorica*

A Hot to ny knowledge.

H Eootor, If I understood you correctly, you stated this Dom¬
ing that n nodical expcrlnsnt with fatal consequences le either to be

e

designated either as an execution or as a nurder; is thrt whrt you
said?

a I did not eay that.

*hat did you say then?

A It w«c sore or less as I quoted It, ae I reaeuber, I sa.ld
undor ths clrcuostances which surrounded the first death In high alti¬
tude experiaents at Dachau, where Dr. Honbcrg Is alleged to hare wit-
naseed, Dr. Eascher kill ths subject; that the death e-uld be viewed
only as an execution or as a nurder; and If the subject were a volun¬
teer, then his death could not be viewed as an execution.

Mtr.ese, In your opinion. Is there a difference whether the
exporl-cr.te arc to be tro C . d back to the Initiative of tho experimenter
hiaoel. cr vfcethcr they arc ordered by sene a-thorativc office of the

Stntc which also assumes the responsibility for then?:.

9166


13 Jure 47-A-TjC-22-2-3c?rd (in*.. 3rwr.)

C urt I

A Tea, there le a difference, Tut that difference does not per-
t^in. In =7 opinion, te the uoral responsibilities of the lnvcetignt'-r
t'-^erd hit experimental subject.

<4 That, I cnn*t undcret»nd, lector. I can laaflnc that the State
«!»«■ experimenter the order, particularly during war tine, to parry
out certain experiments, and that In peeco tine, on hie own Initiative,
the researcher would not carry out such experiments unless ho was ordered
t° Y 7 the State. You must rce-gnlzo this dlffencacc y ureolf.

A That dees not e*rry 'ver to the a ral responslMllty of the In¬
dividual to his experimental subjoct. I do n-t hellcve that tho Sta.to
e«n assume the responsibility of rdcrlng a scientist t~ kill people In
ordor to obtain knowledge.

Witness, that is act the question. I en ivt Interested In whether
the State oar. order eoae one \>. aurder; I aa Interested In tho question,
whether, in y ur opinion, tho State can order, let us s-y dangerous cxpcrl-
aents, experiments In which perhaps fatuities a«*y occur. In America, to-,
deaths occurred sevoral tlaes In cxpcrlacnts; what is y-.u view on this?

k The State, at far ss I knew, in the United States of America has
never ordered selentlste to perfern any experiment where death Is likely
to occur.

, ^ Iteetor, I did not say where death was probable, I said where

death Is possible, pad I k you to antvor tho oucstlon I put to you. If
deaths are probable, then 70 U are correct, then It Is snxrdcr. If deaths
aro possible, then I want to know what you say to that. And, let ae remind
you, Doctor, that even In the American Airforce deaths did occur; In other
words death was po«sl*lel

A Ye., I that It tr pci 8 l v le for depths to occur accidentally

In experiments which arc hazardous. *i I said In ay testimony under such
conditions when they do occur, their cause is investigated very thoroughly
*»• well ae the e 1 rearstanees surrounding the death


9167


13 June 4?-i-JjC_22_3_3£flrd (Int., 3rovn)
Court I


H I should like ncv, Ifcctor, to draw the inevitable conalu-
•lcn* free your answer: If e doctor undertakes an erperi :-nt end
another scientist watches this experiment, aerely aa a spectator,

•nd he sees that the experimenter is caking an orror, or that the
experisenter is carrying the experinest so far that thorc is a
possibility - not probability - the possibility of derth, In such
a ease do you believe that the one doctor ie under obligation to pre¬
vent the first doctor by force fron carrying out his experiment!

A X do.

H lorceably^ I aa not asking you whether he has tfco soral
obligation to advise the other doctor to stop, to draw his attontlon to
this or that. I as asking you whether he has the legal obligation to
fcindor hie fron his cxperlncnt by forco?

A I know nothing about the legal obligations.

9 Ch, about that, you know nothing, Iteetor, in the couroo of
the day you stated that in Africa a compilation was published regard¬
ing the prerequisite under which experiments on human v lng aay bo
carried out. Tcu know what I aa speaking of, do you not?

A Bo.

4 To told us that a coaalttcc, I belUro or an ago'elation had
aado a coapilatlon regarding tho ethics of nodical experiments on human
beings. Tirst of all the question of volunteers; second, animal experi¬
ments; third, tho hazardousness. Can you recall now vfcnt I aa rofcrrlng
tot

A Tee.

9 That was in December 1946, I believe.

A Tes, I remember.

*4 Such instructions for dcctors, or such a compilation of
medical norues did that not exist before December 196, in Anonc then?

A You apparently did net g*t the cleer understanding of whrt
I s B ld. In that regard, I said t v at I harrcr.ed to be chairman of a

committee appointed by C-cvernor C-reenc of the State of Illinois to con-

9168

. . . . . . . . -


13 Jure 4 F, -A-J*C_22_4-jc>»rg (Xnt., Brcvn)

Court I

eider the ethical conditions under which prieocere in the state pen¬
itentiary cay he used as subjects of nodical experinents. This ques¬
tion ha.s cone ^ because these prisoners who served re subjects in the
salrria expert* nt? have ccne up ter a consideration of reduction of
sentence to be so large that if r prisoner when asked or invited to
volunteer would sry, no, he would be saying no under duress, or ho
would be pencilling hlnself if he said no and did not get a large
reduction in sentence. In other words, a reduction in sentence an a
reward for serving ra s subject in a radical expert* ”t shruld not be
oxcesslvo. I also said because I was r representative of the Board
of Trustees of the American Kedied Association, I submitted to then
sons ethical principles and ashed then to take action regarding, or to
nako a etatoacnt regardi-g the ethical principles of the African Nodi¬
cal Association lr. regard to the oue«tion of hu-vr. beings as subjocts in
r.sdical cxreriscrts or. the basis of thoir principles of aedlce .1 ethics.
An', they took action, and I gave *he three principles lr. ny tostltaony
this Borrlng. As n natter of tact, 1 read a lcttor fr.n tho 3ccrot» r-
of the A-trican Medical Association.


13 J sao-*-KJ-23-l-G rcaa (3 rcwn)

0 aurt I

3 . 5 his was December 1946?

A. T 08.

3 . D id that take place in consideration of this trial?

A. ell, that took place as a result of ay relations to the

trial, you.

(U 3ofore Deccchor of 1946 wore such instructions ia printed
fora ia existence in *merlca?

a . So. They were understood only as a nattor of coxa on prac-

tico.

(J. 3ut you said that ia 0 oniony there was soao decroe froa tho
year, 1931, 3 boliovo, which was issued by tho Soiohsainietor of tho
I atcrior?

A . Erat is ri,;ht.

Hcyo you rood it?

a. Tcs. •

To what experiments or to what aodical actions does his do-
croo refor?

a. It refers to a docreo of tho hinistry of Public Vclf.iro
regarding tho carrying cut of scientific ax?oriuonte on human boings
or concerning regulations for r.odors thorny *nd tho pcrforcanco of
scientific experiments or. hue* beings.

Tcu didn't quoto that in full, witness. for it refors not
to wporiaonts of all sorts but only to experiments on patients in
hospitals. In other words, it refers to experiments on persons who
wore sick in bod in a hospital. Is that not so?

A . I tall road tho par^T^h below the title: *Tho Hoi oh
Eodth Council h^s emphasised tho necessity of tdcing measures to
insure that all doctors are acquainted with the following regulations
end has, thorefore, unanimously agreed that all doctors working in in¬
stitutions for private or for medical wolf-re must si,sn a certificate

on entry binding then to those regulations.■

9170


13 «Tuno-.» -*Ur-2o-3-Gr08s(3rov3)
Court I


Z . Grcti which It can be seen, doctor, that this decroo cp 'llos
only to clinics a nd hospitals. Suit is what it says thero.

I ten ao 7, however, states that ■ nodical ethics rejects
utilisation of social distress in the performance of new thorapy 8 ,

?„ 2 ho caploit.tion of tho poor, you will admit, and of thoso
who occupy a socially wo-Jc position for ceiled osporinents. Shat>s
why tho decroo was issued by tho Dop .rtcont of Public Volfaro. ^o
you r<;roo with no In thatl

a . Yob, but Z sco no reason why it should bo rostrictod to
that octont boenuso nodical ettico have goaorul ^plication and r.ro
not to bo confinod to c s;-ill rostrictod ,‘;roup of porsons,

Z • Doctor, tho reason is obvious. Tho poor person is not to
bo used for an oxpvricont slnply boccuso ho is promised, lot uo scy,
1000 narks, ,nd a rich nen doosn't havo to carry out ojporinento.
that is tho rocson. V oil now, witnoso, *>nothin,'; olso about this
docroo you Just rood. I usauno that you horo conoornod yeursolf
protty closely with how this docroo cazo to bo p-.ssod boccuso you
hero it with you and bocaus* you refer rod to it in ycur diroct oi>-
.Uiinatioa. Do you know that tnis docrco you quotod fra. novor bocrxso
o la'/, that this was nothin but a draft and rccvlnod aor.ly a dr.-ftt
a. IToll, I do not bolioyo principles of nodical ot~ics should
aocosi'-Tily h.ve to boccac a law In order for thee to bo followed out
for tho -~ood of nodical clones und nodiclnc in yraoral.

Z* How, lot no ask you somethin,; olso, doctor. Give ..o tho
rocson why in a aorica sontorxod persons are used ttr oxporinouts at
ell. <Hvo no tho ianor reason for this, not only in erica but clso
in other countries, why don*t you tdee freo persons for experiments!

a. Veil, in part it is for tho s.oc rocson that wo usod coa-
sciontious objectors. Coasciontious objectors had nothing clso to do
except to render public service. Prisoners in a penitentiary c a givq
their full tino or full attention to tho experiments, and of coureo,


9171


13 J^o-^-i-^-23-3-Groi6(3rowr.)

C curt I

•

they axo subjoct to strict control.

A person who is, for ozacplo, to bo subjoctod to t ploguo
experiment, oast ho really derotc ell his attention to this pl-^uo
ape.Imont, for the experiment to succeod? Is that your opinion, r.s
on oxpert, Profossor?

a. jt* a doctor has othor things to do, so does a nodical stu-
4or.t or c dontd studont. If thoy h*^pon to b econo mildly incqonci-
tntod, having some fooling cf sickness, they will not bo ublo to 'jer—
tom thoir other duties %fcor~as if a prisoner or saioono who has noth¬
ing olso to do boccsios scacwn^.t sick nothing is intorforod with.

Do you oensidor ho feat that a porson oust go through c
ploguo o:porimont and then for a long tino must oount or. boirv; a
viotin of plague, Profossor, do you really think that thic oaa bo
chcractorizod as a slight indisposition?

A . Veil theso patients of S trong* e woro not givon thcploguo.
They woro glvan on injoction of killed or attonuntod plague orgn»>-
ious so that thoy would urn no taiporaturo, or only a slight taipo-
aturo - ldccroo 7ahrochoit or so. Thoy woro not sick for a Ion*; tino.

Q. Profossor, Colonel Strong, whou you havo Just quotod tolls

us in tho Philippine Modied Journal, which I huvo put in cvidu .00

•

in connection with 31cno and Koso, doscribcs his plaguo osporhiOnto-
Yau know frou th_t, boenuso you haro read it, that ho worked with
living plague bacilli *

a. Yos, but they wore attenuated.

0. . Step wore living plague bacilli and a uthor Strong hLiaQlf
vondorod vdiy there hud boon no fatalities. Is that so?

j. So, he did net wonder. Ho said t: 07 did not have any reason
to anticipate any fatalities because these organises did not ccuso
illnoss in guinea pigs. That is plainly evidont in tho photos', -.tie
copies which were submitted in evidence.

<£• - no nhotoot. ; t that you subxit to us, professor, contains a

1 9172


13 v i-OroiBp* c*-;

Ccurt I


llttlo woe oncerpt free oil tho extensive actoricl that wo havo bu>-
nittod. VLtness, whoa roadie^ S tron^* • pc?>or on those plc^uo «-
porta cats lid it not strike you, too, that Strong car:lod out thoso
oxporiaeata oa 903 prisoners cond«a.od to death oil of wheo volun¬
teered?

a . Ho, I oa not acquainted with that. I havo not seen thoso
rocorla.

% . But it soys no in tho report. 900 persons coadcunod to dor.th
ia tho city of konil*- 9C0 voluatoers.

A . I hevo not seta that report.

Z . • Vo rnckod our breia as to how it was possible that thoro
woro 900 porscas coada-.cd to teeth in such u sadl city ns "anila,
how cone thoro could bo so nuny volunteers. 3ut, now souothin,; oloo
in this context. In may regions trhore thoso o-^orinents woro car¬
ried out, tho Stro-JG cxporlacnts ia tho Philippine and in othor
oroas such as Juorioa, thoro oro unemployed pooplo who aro only to
heppy to oc.ro srccthin,;. Lot us soy, yon said tho pooplo rocolvod
$100 in rewer3, end probably they received froo food, and oxtra
ciucrottos cad ci,--rs. bhy wore unatfloyod pooplo not uoed? Vhy
did you use conscientious objectors, why pooplo under sontcnco,
oron pooplo condemned by fodorul courts. Can you .,-ivo no a sutie-
fcotory cnouor to that question, witness?

A . 2o :;y knowledge there wore no una^loyod poople in tho
Uhitod St at os during tho Ver.

^ . a ad before tho \i ar?

Shore woro unalloyed pooplo in tho Unitod Statos beforo tho
V cr curia-; thoteprossioa but experiments ca .-alcola on c largo socle
were not conducted then. Rmrnaceutlcal chalets of tho country -i..-
nct boon orernixed to synthetixo some 80.000 compounds for tooting of
effectiveness in the troctnent of nelarie.

9173


13 June-A-FL-24- 1-KAK?CX. (I-t. Brown)

Court lio. 1

Q.- Doctor, didn't it occur to you just in America, that with your
splendid radio network, you could readily have received volunteers for
your experiments by advertising for then by air, and, if this did occur
to 70U, why didn't you do it?

A.- That obviously is impractical to collect people from all ovor
the country and to bring thoa to one point for purposes of an experi¬
ment.

Q.- I am not requiring that people should be collected from all
over tho country; but Aaerica has such lnr.,e cities that you could find
thirty, forty or fifty volunteers in one city alone. Now, why was that
not done?

A.- '/oil, sc-xtieoa that ia done.

Q.- But you didn't do it. You used conscientious objectors.

A.- Yos, that's right, because tho conscientious objectors woro
available at tVt time and wu did not havo unonployod to uso.

Q.- Thoro woro unemployed pcool*. in orisons - thousands oi thon.

A.- Yos, wo uaod the oncaployod in orisons, end also tho cons¬
cientious objoctors.

*51. ZfcHA! -Y: If tho Tribunal pleoso, personally I think tho ooint
being pursued by Dr. Sautor has beon covered in exhaustivo dotail, Ho
has been roocatodly asked thu stoe things, th- same question, and I also
objoct to his arguing with the witrvjss. If he restricts his quostions
and puts his questions shortly r.nd Tr.cis ly, I am sure ho will got a
short answer, but wo usually get c question, olus four or live scntencos
of arguzttnt.

THS iHJSIDoi.T: Cour.o-1 should avoid asking argumentative quostions.
The subject has bo.n -retty well cover.d; but counsel may proceed.

5Y m, 1?:

I s ill torn thin to another the n-, although! I do rv.ne.-.bur cases

I

where individual questions were- asked by the orosecution and wore /:-pt


13 Jv.o-X-¥1^-21~2—Tj-S?.&> (Int. Browr.)

Court !. 0 . 1

or. the floor for two or three tiro-s ns long cs this question of nine
which the witness has still not onsworud.

lit rues, you told us t.So joining that 5n tho esse of these oo:;»c-
ria-nts in which Ruff, Honb-rg and ha sc her w.ro involved, - the last
being dead -, you arid that Ruff bore tho pccUct responsibility, then
c -'- J Hoc^-. , v.- imlly, Rare... r. Did I unr^rstand you corr-ctly, or
•iid you aacn aocothlr.g dif'.roit?

that is the ord-r of s«.iiority , grve, on the basis of
scientific op crlur.cc.

Q.- 3eforo ;i»u.»rw3ij.: this o?irl*.. Doctor, din you .take cur-
t-in of th roln t v’ what Butborities Ur. Reach, r hod in the Dachau con
centrrtion cap, end did you t Ice tint into consideration the special
cirBunotouccs under uidch P.-actor liv-d there?

- beli.vo so. I rw d tho r.oord end thu documents ro>arc’irig
that point.

Q.- .hat I ca rof.rr5.ng to. Doctor, io :.ot in the record or in
tho r-iorto. . r.-t do you know about R sc ar's position ir. D-ch.au -ncl
about his relations with the Ruichsfuohr-r Si H5.wl-r who was in chargo
of -11 concontr- ion caps? Do you know bout tUsu relations?

A.- I r_n only h - .oilier with t int which I h* v j road in tho racorti and
in the docu juts,

Q.- Ir; - r.L r.cord* You .»n, the r cord of the trial?

The record of the trial.

Q.- The r.cor' :f this trial, you oan?

A.- Yes, ia tho record of this ariai.

Q.~ And in the reports?

A.- And docue. nts.

r <“ Io you knew iron this record who, -t the tiao whan tho axoe- .
r a.Rts in lichatt began, Dr. Rasctor was subordinate to officlc.il"?

A.- In tho early pert, to was scientifically subordinato, acoor ing
to ny information, to Dr. Reitz.


9175


13 Jarv.-A-PL-2ft-3-!^20b (Ir.t. 3r o*n)

Court to. 1

Q.- What clc ou scan, at th_ beginning? ' hen?

A.- Tivt is, in LvCeobcr and January, Fobruery of the tLa- ol
tbu exporLaent or of the yvrr of the -x-^riiri.

Q.- May do you still embrace the joint of view that Dr. Ruff jcs
responaiblo for eschar since Raschur who was subordinate to no one?

A.- I a*. if. that, in sj far as scientific responsibility in con¬
cerned, R'if- rs senior and Ronberg was Second and Rcsch-r was third.

C..- That's that you said. But I want to knx» you reason for
saying it.

A.- 3-c raise of their .xo.ri^nc- in scientific work ir. "vir.tion
medicine.

Kr :«v» "O’- figured -Ut how ouch experience Ltabsarzt of the
Luftwaffe Dr. Rascher h d? Raseher was a Strbsarzt of tho Luftwaffe and
Ruff wns a civtli-. . How do you know that Rascher knew nuch less about
the field :! aviatlor -vdioinc in w-.ich ho was working that Ruff did?

A.- 1 know that Dr. Ruif has bo>n wor'.inr in the field of aviation
dictUU for some ti and Hot don- ls|) r* ant >»ork La that field, and
I learned fraa reading tho record that Lr. Rx-h-rg had boon ids assis¬
tant for several years, and no one had >v».r heard of the work that
Rascher had eon- in enoerlientr.i work in via ti m ncdicir.u, an f roa

the record, b» had n training in ODerruntal work in aviation zodidno
• t was nnyvixirw equal to that of ^r. Ruff n<: R. Rosberg.

Q.- You r- spooking if tbs ec lie r sponslbillty. .~vo
heard today of the li :.l reto.nslbilit *, the aor'1 resoonslbilit'', and
no* We -r- he ring -- -ut the scientific ret . .sibility. Do you base
this asruaytiv. .f •.« only » the fact th*t this concludin' report
of July, 1 . 12 , was also si.^r.-c by Ruff -s chief of his institute r
do you as 3-ithat r. F.uif was pro sent at toe sepuriaunts in Laohru
continuously col’.-': r-ted ir. the exovri Jnts there? '..hat o on assume?

I ass that Lr. Ruff si n.d the report La his ch^acit.* as


head of the institute and as a sci-r.tific collaborator, but not .an a

9176


13 June X (let. Brown)

Court ko. 1


oolL'-^ratar who twk otrt dir-ctly in the ox?-rii-nts at Dccfaai%

Q-- Did you tele- into conoid.rati or., iit&.ss, the feet that Lt.

?:i:i hr. a stated, «iz.cr oath, and has not boon contradict-d, that throufc!.
throughout tho vfaolo ->3-rl>-nts ho was only pro sent at Dachau far oix,
ainfcU clay in ardor to assure hir.s.Lf that the -xp-rioeuta wore joint
carried out in an orderly fashion and to chock an this?

A.- Yds.

Ther., plo^ae toll ee, if -ou corridor Dr. Ruff reaper.-dblc,
h could Dr. RuTf, who was in Berlin, in ; ur opinion, pr-vont oat.jn-
bU nets in Dtchnu of which ho knew notl-inr? You Just s-id that Jio
was responsible; that a~*na prlarrily responsible?

*•- I boli-rt ho was responsible b«cause ho was tho s> nior van
in this f.roup of invorcigntors.

C.- Doctor, i. ou rro hero in .:urr.bor£ ^r.i y>xr assistant, with
whws i'st aonth you .oscuss-d sox- experln.nto .and other, and t.lio is
carrying out thes- experiments in ^series, coxsits a cri.au whilo doing
so, do you holt yoursoIf to bo responsible i l you are hero in Kurnborg
•no can't prevent the crime? Please, nr- you the r-spor.siulu parson or
not?

If ho is r.ssoci tod with a- ir. acxao -xp-ric-nt that 1» is
o rrluctir. I boliwvo it is .ay responsibility to r-turn ioaudlctu.V to
V Laboratory to study th_ truth oi the. r. vrt and tho circurcstrncos
surrounding it, me tfcon have that car-fuily inveoti*: .tvU, «t least,
a;* responsibility -r.tonda that far.

C.- Your r-s? -.asibility consists of this, thr.t if y u find ut about

abus.s or offense you eh -old r-torn t Am-rica, inveoti ato tho c so

raw t: _ ajceawy conclusions? L-. thet y say -.it rusponsibil t”.
Do I underat-ad you c.rrjctlr?
r.s.

9177


13 Jarm.-«-L-24-5-:i— (at. 5r^r.)

Court 2fo. i

• SAUia 3 .: -i-. President, in tir.t cr.se I fc-r. no further q»u.sfcio..s.

I sh'ulr* like 70 a to x.rait the defendant Eh-. 3 cff to ask n fur- ax,dicrl

quustloca of tlw witness which hu cm suttL- norc expeditious Ly r.nd _\-
oec'l-ntly than ayseL;.


9173


Court Sc. 1

12 Jun 47-A-2£-l-i£A-Love (Irev*)


TKt PriSISSI: The defendant nay propound aedicel cucstions to
the witness.

2Y ZR. 3017:

Q. Dr. Ivy, you reported yesterday end eleo this nornirg sceething
shout scce fatalities that had occurred in Anericen aviation recearch.
Sow, I should like to ask you that aside free these deaths, regerding
vhich you hovo already tcstlflod to hero, do you fcnov of any othors In
addition to the death of the aajor vho had a fatal accident vhen nara-
chutlng froc a greet height end the five or sly deaths that occurred
during training?

A. I know of no other deaths.

Q, Don't you know of the ono death that took ulaco during tho
course of the contrifugal wrporinent In vhich the ovoorisontrl subject
vns thrown down by the Cvntrifugrl aneblao and thus waa killed?

A. I aa not feclllar with that.

You are not fenilirr with thrt. Then do you know about tho
twe canes of docth that Profossor Alexander, ths exoort for the urose-
cut 1 on, told ay counsol, Dr. Smtor, about? Theso vero two deaths In a
low pressure chnaber ascent In which orpcrlnental subjects In different
crucrlaants, of course, dlod bcc.-use allegedly an oxygen reduction volvo
bcccne lccd over end for this rocoon the eroorlacntel subjects received
no oxygon. Do you knew of those tvo deaths?

A. Vc# that in tho course of exT^rlaontPl «ork or routino indoc¬
trination? Those two deaths aey have been included in the five or six
doaths to which X referred.

Q, I don't believe so. I e= about to turn to the six fatalities
that occurred during indoctrination. The case vne described by the
nedicrl crpvrts, by the prosecution expert, no& it vrs spid that of
course there was e very precise investigation into this natter but that
finally further investigation ves ouashed because it was discovered
that this valve had been frosea over. Would you consider such e freel¬
ing of the valve with the consoouent death of the exoerlnental subject

9179


Court So. I

13 Juc 4 7 -a-2£-2 -LEI-.-Lovc (rrovn)


at e height of say 12,000 neters - would you consider that an extenuation
for the observing physician or sergeant?

. I do not understand *feet ia nea-nt h;. tho expression "extenuation
for the attending physician or sergeant". She neaning of "evtenuation"
is not clear.

Q» Let no express syself differently. If such a valve faile, would
that constitute for you on act of providoace that led to thia accident
and a reason for declaring tha$ the sergeant in ouostion was corally and
logrlly innocont of any crins?

A. I should say that was a aochanlcal failure and not a hunan

failure.

Q. Pr. Ivy, 1st ns realnd you that fror. the oonent *+.cn the supoly
of orygen is interrupted until death occurs at a height of 12,000 actors
there is a rather long lapse of tine. Kov lory: this tins is neither of
us icao*« probably, but at rey rote It is r considerable period of tino,
Luring this tine in the first piece tho eubjoct bico-.ee altitude sick,
ho hoe creeps, he falls unconscious, etc. Shis lapse of tins should bo
long onough for the crev oocrr.ting the low nrossure chrr.bor to bring tho
subject b/ck to a safe altitude again. Zs that not so?

A. Yes, those presumptions are reasonable. I enn't say that they
arc accurate because I do not know thu oxr.ct circunstrncoe surrounding
those alleged dorths.

Q> Thon let ns turn to the ne»t frtality.

- TEL PEISIZSLnl: I cn going to csk the witness if ho finished his
answer to the preceding oucstlon. Lid you flnioh your answer?

TrL *iIS3LSS: I did but I don't know vfcethor it get through to tho
recorders.

SEA raiSIIBSI: I think it did.

BY 2?.. F.177:

3. Dr. Ivy, I cone to the next fatality which occurred within tho
fra.icvork cf aviation nedicinc within An erica. In these five or cix

coses that are alleged to have taken dace during training indoctrination

91:0 ■


Court Sc. i

13 Jun 47-J^-PB-g iWI TiOV (Briva)

vac your documentation for vfcich you have said regarding thee - what
papers are you referring to - vere any papers on these deaths published?

A. I believe there vas a report, eicecgraoh in nature, that was
released. I an not acquainted vlth any publication of that deta in a
scientific Journal. I have heard the natter discussed on two occasions
in aeetings of sub-coaaittees of the Cosnlttee on Aviation liodicine of
the Satlonal Research Council.

Q. Perhaps I can be of assistance to you and tell you the publi¬
cation. At leest, I think it Is that ve are talking about the sane
cases. The tltlo is "Collapse at High Altitudes", written by Mashlend,
and nppoared in the Air Surgeon, Movcaber 1944, on urge 3, However, you
did not soe the paper in this periodical)

A. Hot in that periodical.

Q. Sow, let ae put a few casos froa this to you and ask you
whether ve are talking about the seao cp.sos. The first cose did not
happen in the low pressure shea bar but in a asdlcal cvocriDcnt in an
aeroplane. Tho director of the exporlaor.t had the subjocts enrry out
gyanastie oxercises in tho plane at 35,000 foot. Following this ovor-
ciso bends occurred; there vns a collapse; when they returned to earth,
there were sevore hoadcches and subscroont death. Ie this one of the
coses you are also referring when vo talk about those five or six
fatalities)

A. I aa -quite sure that ve rrc referring to the srae renort,
except I believo I sev it in aiaeogrrphud fora and not in the publica¬
tion "The Air Surgeon".

Q. Then another collapse is describcdnot In e training flight
but a high altitude flight for aedicnl purposes which had the sane cut-
cocv as the first; then tho third cose is an ascent in o low pressure

chaaber to 36,000 feet j;nd at that eltitude there ves collapse and

^ •

various other syzptocs and finally death. Kashi-nd in the rarer I

Just sectioned writes about tho history an d trwrtcent of such collrrce

es =ey arise in su c h cases as these. The other two fatalities were

91G1


Court So. I

13 Jun 47-A-25-t-iS.-Love (Provn)

such of the sane nature end I need not go Into then. 1 ’ov, I only hove
'hi# one cueetIon. Are you faalllrr with t-n unpublished ronert by John
3roy frc= the AAl School of Aviation Hedicino, Sandolph Jleld, Tores, of
3 Cctobor 1S44, "The Present Steto of Decccpression Sickness"? This is
not a publication but en internal resort. Do you know this resort?

A. Dr. Jrey has subnitted quite a large nunfcor of resortc froa
the School of Aviation kodicinc at Eoadolph 7iold. I do not have in
=ind the content! of the particular resort to vhich you ere referring.

Q. X did actually nans the title, and I aetuno that you have your¬
self •specially concerned yo-rself with dvcooprecsion sickness end con-
■owiently are feniliar with the uodwrn literature on tho subject. This
is a report "The Present Status of the Problon of Tec agression Sickness".

A. I hrvc probably read the rrtide but I do not rocall tho con¬
tents undor that ©articular title.


91*32


13 June 47-A-I jC_26-l~Meehan (let., 3rowr.)
Court X


<4 Sow, do you not recall birring been able to eoo a.t least
between the Unee In thle report something about fatalities or
poasible fatalities?

A Sell, I know that the subject of col’apse after routine ex¬
posure to high altitude In the performance of high altitude teste was
of special Interest to the field of physiology at the school of medi¬
cine at Randolph Held. I also know of one of the occasions, »t the
meeting of the sub-ccanlttee on deeoapresslon eieknoes at which this
matter of most hlgh-aUit-de collapso was under discussion, Dr. Gray
received his training in physiology under ay instructions.

MR. EJBDTt Tour Honor, If the witness Huff dislron to quostlon
Dr. Iry on this particular report of Dr. Gray, then I ask that he sub¬
mit r copy of the report to Dr. Ivy so ho can refresh his rccolloctlon.

TO VRSSXXSS*! Has the witness hie copy of tho report by Dr.
Gray? If go, he should submit It to Dr. Iry for Identification.

3T ra xsnnuKT rutf;

Wo would h*ro put thle In as evidence If wo had It. At the
Aere~-Medical Center of Heidelberg thle report was available) to me In
1945 and I only have the excerpt fron It that I made at that tioo. Wo
arc trying to get the original a-d will t*en put It in />■ cridonco.

Sr. Iry, whoa y-u spoke of thoso six fatalities during training
this m-rnlng, I said that not all of theso fatalities took place in
training or Indoctrination, but let us not that In the Indoctrination
or training six fatalities did take place; Is that not so?

“ Shat la ay recollection.

^ She ptcTlc who were used for such training Indoctrination
were for the most part acabcrs cf the «ir lorco; were they not?

a Yes, cadets, In the process of training.

Who were being trained, th-t they were under training sc»r.e
also that theretofore they had received a very careful aedical examina¬
tion; Isn't t v at so?

A Yes, that Is correct.

91-3


13 Jure 47_2_TjC_3£_2-J'.echa.r- (ir.t., Brown)
C-urt I


t* Sow, you said this morning that In these rcry healthy young
persons who were subjected to such *n experiment fr.r the sake of their
ind ctrlnatirn there ves n fetelity thut would timply h«vc tc he taken
ns something done t7 fete. Ib you know tfant in C-cranny that we carried
out thousands of experiments and exrjsinatlrns for training purposes
ar.d that we hare not had one fatrllty at all?

A I did net know that you had n* fatalities. I knew that you
carried out training experlnents in altitude chanhers, hut not nearly
on the srae scale * t * r » carried on in the United States.

<s In the point of numbers the United States carried out prob¬
ably ere experlnents as c-cparcd to Germany, thrt lo truo, but wo too
carried rut thousands af experlnents without one singlo death. Tho
difference in the experimnts in tho United States and in Gornany wae
that lr. the United State, the person being trained were subjected
to 13,(XT meters f-r a o->nsidorablr length of tl-ic whllo in Gcraany
they were subjected to that altitude f^r -nly ten *r fifteen minutes,
and I personally as«uso that in ...

THl FS1SI3S": You not be«n asking the witness questions, y-u
hare bcor. lr. effect tcstlf-irg, making statements yourself. If you
hare * question t* ask the witness, pr-pund tho question t" hlo.

BY EUISI^-U BUI:

"Do y-u k^'w wherein possibly the difference lies froa tho fact
that y u had fatalities in acerica »r.d in Germany wo did not?

a The fine factor w*s prcb"bly significant. Vo wore training
-ur acn in long flights 't high altitude and in Vabero f>r 3, 4 and
5 hours.

S Sow, let -as turn to the last f»taiity, the one you mentioned
yesterday, in which a major descended by parachute from a great heiaht
and died thereby. I unfortunately did a t take d'.wn his r.aac at the
ti-e. Y~u caid. that this unf-rturato aan cf course s carefully ex¬
amined after hie death; what killed hia n the descent, what was the


C"U8* af that?


9ICi


13 June 47 -a—TJ C -26—3-Kcthan (let., 3r*n)

Court I

A That was uncertain, »nd on the Vila of my knowledge -f
the circumstances surrounding thla unfortunate death and ay know¬
ledge -f the phyall'gy changes associated with free fall through
the air, I inspect tha» he fainted. He -r* vtry fatigued before
he went to altitude and had beer, advised th-t the Jump should be
postponed to another dry, but he vent on through with the Jump.

S *"s this ar. experiment lr. which at the bog Inning the para¬
chute was n~t to be opened at the beginning of the ascent?

A Tii, s called free falling; he did not have with his an
autoaatic parachute pening devise. *'v perhapo It would have been
possible and already yu have Intimated that he w-s urconsci us a n d
c-uld n t operate his parachuto; wasn't It Just possibly namely that
the opposite happened, tha* he rpined his chute Immediately or that
It -pened by sletakc and fr thlo reason the man foil 111 of altltudo
sickness?

a fo, in this ease the parachute did n-t open, it w«o the caoo
of Xajor Bajrton.

*4 Before this nractleal experiment, had you carried ~ut a low
pressure chaaber experiment to determine the oxygen problem Involved?

A Its, a® . cattcr of fact before the pre-fall experiment, which
I porf-rsed In 190 and 191, we studied the question of oxygon re¬
quirements during free fall and we supplied our Jump- rs with a mask
and a. bail—aut—b’ ttlo of oxygen.

S I should like to anticipate a bit, hr. Ivy, yestorday y- u
told the Tribunal when you were asked whether our experiments f r re¬
search at great height were necessary, and I shall repeat ycur answer
are cr less in Its moaning, jru said nr that was not necessary, it
could all have been calcul' ted at the time, but ycu y urself carried
out such experiments la -rder t* ascertain how the oxygen situa.ti-n
is; why did y u not rely cn yur caleulatl-ns?

a That answer 'no* pertained -nly to one portion of the experi¬
ments, which you did and that »•$ slow descent fros high nltitudo, that

9135


13 Jur.t 47-&Jj3-2£-4-!iMfcAn (1st., Brown)

Court I

to descent by early orer-log of the parachute.

^ >.en X cleunderstnod yen yesterday, I understand you to
nsan that the free falling experiments that sy colleague Bonbcrg
carried cut in Dachau ar.d arc stationed la Do ease at Ho. b'C_402
y-u consider aeccotrry for th* clarification of thlo problem?

A I qualified sy ar-wcr In this -ay an d I raid the Blow dea¬
con! expert-tats vert unnecessary la sy opinion because of the hazards
they entailed aad that lastead of doing that particular experiment on
husar. beings mi that I should r«ly an results on anlsalo and sake the
necessary calculations with the human being* In order to determine the
a»*.uat of 'xygtn It —uld be accessary to supply under these conditions.

I did not bjcct to the other experiments y-u did, which I did not feel
they were nearly as hazardous as the slow dccccrt frno high altitude.

Very well, I shall return shortly to this question. *'ow you
said previously to sy ©ounscl, Dr. Snutcr, that so far as you knew
explosive dcccsprcssl-'U experiments were carried out In America to the
height of roughly 50,COO foet; did X understand y-u e rrcctly?

A I recall, I said 47,500. which Is a little below 50.C00, but
approximately 50,000.

K Can you clto me the n-ot recent American paper on this sub¬
ject?

a There arc esc prollulnrry reports published In the Federation
proceedings f-r Biology In Medicine by Dr. Hitchcock. All of the re¬
sults on that subject will n-t boc-me rrallabc until the Committee on
Dee-=prcstl-n Sickness cf the Satlonal Bceea-eh Council publishes a
non-grarh -n the subject of dcc-up.rcstl'n elckrese and the findings
-ade by American scientists during the war.

^ a* I understand frr-n sy exaainatien by ay counsel and by
the pr-aecutl^n, you were an active member of the Conalttoc; lo that so?

A Yes.

"Hen for ccrtoln the expert In bright Field lo know to you?

A Its, that Is right.

9136


13 June 4 7-iS jC_2£_5-Mcthan (lot., Brown)
Court I


W Would you please nane hla to set

1 >, J. J. Solth did the first vcrk on decoopreoslon sick¬
ness, Dr. Hitchcock of the University rf Iowa collaborated with the
Wright Tield group and, I believe, Dr. Deapscy - I do not recall hla
military title. I bcllcvt he la a Lloutonsnt Colonel, - was lntorcatcd
particularly In explosive decoepreaalcn.

<i Do y:.u kr.'w that In 19M H. M. Sweeney reported fren Wright
Held «n dac'-nprcaaion?

A That la the orn's nane when I acid Dtnpacy, I got Bwoeney ar.d
Despaey nixed up.

\ So far aa wt know that la the a-at recent Aocrlcan publica¬
tion on explosive ducsprcaal n and the Halt there la etat6d to he
roughly 50.0CO.

A Taa, and It la the no§t coapletc Aacrlcnn report and covers
tha aoat experiments, except thcao f Dr. Hitchcock, which have not
yet been reported. Dr. Sweeney followed Dr. Solth on tho work cn ex¬
plosive docoaprcsalon In the laborat ry at Wright Held.

4 Dr. Ivy, vc have been saying new for s-bc tine that explosive
dee-sprcsal-n experiments arc made during Indoctrination and for other
purp'sess would you please describe briefly to the Tribunal why this
Is done and why flylrg practise nakes such cxpl-slvc dcc-uprcsaicn cx-
pcrlncrts naccasTy?

A The Tribunal, I believe, Is fanillrr with the expression
pressure cabins in airplanes; pressure cabins arc being uaod to son©
extent ~n prossurc planes In the United States In ormcrclal aviation.
In the pressure cabin the pressure la salntalned at an altltudo oqulvc-
lent t'. that f gr-und or some prcdetcrair.ed altitude at which tho ad¬
ministration f auppllaental oxygen la unnecessary, such as 10,COO
feet. W e shall aosuae we have passengers.In a pressure cabin In which
pressure is being selntrincd at an eltitude equlvclant to 10,000 feet
and the plane it flying at an altitude of 40,000 feet; the question

arises what w-uld happen t<- the passengers or occupants f the plane If

9107


13 June 47_-L-JjC_3&-6-y.ech*r. (Ir.t., r-rw.)

Court I

the seal of the pressure ewhln «m suddenly fractured end what v-uld
he the relation of the site of the fracture In this se-'l t- tho dan¬
ger nf the passengers. Zs tfcet clear?

THZ PPiSIOiT: It ie tine for the evening recess. The Tritu-
ni»l »»m v c In recess until 09:30 o'clock: tonorrrv nornlng.

(The Tri v unnl adjourned until 14 June 19*7 at 0930 h urs.)


'ICG


14 J«e (1st., vcn Scfcoa)

Court I


Official transc-lpt of the American Military
Tribunal in the natter of the United States
of iccrlce against Karl Brandt, et el,
defendants, sitting at auraherg, Gcrsany, on
14 June 19^7, C930, Justice Seels presiding.

CHi. >C»SSHaLs Persons in the court rooa will please find their

seats.

The Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal I.

Military Tribunal I is now in session. God earo the Unitod
States of aecrica and this honorable Tribunal.

There will be order In the court rooa.

?Ki PRISIHSTs Kr. Marshal, viSl you ascertain if the defend¬
ants are all present lr. court.

"S. MA R S H AL: Kay it please your Honor, all the defendants arc
present in the Court.

"HI FRXSII&L*?; The Secretary General win note for the record
the presence of all defendants in court.

Counsel, how long do you anticipate that y-ur further cross
exaalnation of this witness win take?

IH. Hr. President, I estimate that Dr. Ruff will roqulro

perhaps half an k*ur, If the "Tibunal pomits. Following Dr. Huff, I
sysolf, should like to ask two or three sore questions, so t’-at wo will
bo finished in about three-quarters of an hour.

TE1 PHLSIB-Tt Very wall, you cay hare that tiac allccatod to

you.


ask Lr. Stclnbaucr — you say rcsaln at your scat. Doctor.
I bellere I need about an hour.

Very well, an h.ur will '< allocated to Dr.


th-t Lr. Scrratius will conduct the c-oss exar.ina_
on at leas*, sour o' the general su v Jecte. Will any


other counsel cress exacts*. the witness upon any general natter?


9199


lii <fatt-*Mfi-l«-2-Poster (Int. Von Schon)

Court 2fo. I.

DR. F IS? IXit I will need about ten ainutes,

THE HBSnBHT: That will be allocated to you,

DR. NZLTE: I will need about a quarter of an hour.

THE FRESHEN? > Vary well, that nay be allocated.

Counsel aay proceed.

DR. S.VjTSR: I should like to have Dr. Ruff ask a few noro

• a

nodical questions.

THE PRESIDENT i Dr. Ruff aay propound the questions to

the witness.

DR. ANDRS: C. 371 - Res used
CROSS RXAiJHATIOH (Continued)

BY DR. RUFF (Defendant)i

3 Dr. Ivy, yesterday you explained to tho Tritwnal that

conditions and practice cxploeivo docoaprossion ccocs about and you

had said that if a piano is flying at high altitude ard tho pro scare

cabin is daragod, this explosive doccoprosrion occurs. Hcm, what

hap;x«s"to t;» persons in the piano if th y have survived this oxplo-

sivo docon.rossior.? What happens i- lho.3 after that? To oako the

quostlon smtj precise 1 night add tho followingi L«t us ascuro that

tho piano is flying at 17,000 rotors.

A They can either take n dive to the ground or they oan
%

bail out. In the American Air Forces they bail out, they disconnoot
fron tho oxygon supply of tho plane end plug in with tho oxygen supply
of tto bail-out bottle before leaving the piano. •

Q Profossor Ivy, if this explosive dcconprossion occurs
at 17,OCO aoters then tte crew hrs coiy a very short period of tinw
for bailing out, is that correct?

A Tcs, that is correct.

Q Beca'jse even with oxygen tho ennr *>econe8 N unconscious
very quickly at 17,000 alters, is that right?

A Tos, that is correct.

Q Could you perhaps I- iicatc how mch tiro passes fron tho


3-1-3-Fos tar (Int. 7on Schon)

Court Mo. I.

sostnt of explosive deccepr-S'ic;: ur. i unconsciousness sets in —
still at 17,000 alters?

4 That rill depend upon the size of the fracture or damage

•

of tfo piano, the rate at which tic explosivo decompression occurs. If
it occurs relatively slowly they will bo able to connect with thoir
oxygen supply and rill be ablo to get out of tlx* plane before they
loco consciousness in the course of perhaps 30-35 seconds. That period
of time will very.

Q las, I quite agreo/with you. Now, if ir u assume that a
■holo pano of glass is brokon, if thoru is a comparatively largo hole
In tho cabin, would you agree with mo that this tioo which »»c in Gor-
mon aviation c<-.ll time ro8_*rvo at this altitudo is about 10 or 20
seconds?

a

A I agree with thit uncLr those conditions.

Q Now, Profossor Ivy, ' for reasons cf aviation nodicino
one sakes oxporiaonts with oxplosivu deconurossion is it not sonsiblo
to carry out experiments on thj courso of tho parachuto descent fol¬
lowing explosive docco^ression?

A Tos, I think up to a cortain point.

Q Do you agreo with so if I say that only explosivo do-
cooprosaicn oxporiajnt3 for 17,0CC motors again, are sonscloss in
practico if ono does not at thu same tlx» investigate tho question
of r-.scuo explosivo decompression?

A Tus, that is correct.

Q Now, ftofessor Ivy, in America explosive decompression
experiments w^rc carried out through about 17,0CO raters—U7,000 fo-t.
Can you confim this second part of tho problem, oxporirants f rr para¬
chute descent fren such altitudes ware also carried out?

A Tos, up to a certain ~oint they were carried out but
were not carried out the way you carried out your dow descents from
15 kilonat-rs or approximately li?,000 fout, which requires subjecting

tho subjects to a long period of oxygon lack.

9191


14 J une-Ji-i. J-2-l-amiager (VonS Aon)

C ourt I

^ . 2i® experiments to this end war not carried out in iaorioa

because the A uerlcan air forced oxygen equipment is available for
parachutes to that the person is equipped vita oxy-en after bailing
out, in that correct?

i. Tea, that is correct.

Z . Hov in order to avoid any risuaderetandlng which night tr-
A ae on the basis of one question ashed oy the prosecutor, I ask you
on the basis of theoretical calculations can binding finds be code an
to the ea*et altitude free which oxygen equipcent for a parachute is

necessary?

A. Ah approximately correct answer can be obtained by calcula¬
tions.

Q . 3y calculations. Would you please briefly explain to the
Tribunal vfcat physiol ogled factors would have to be consldorod in
such a calculation?

A Ono has to consider the questions of partial prossuro of
o^'iea in the inspired air at tfco various altltudoo, when the subject
is bro^thing 100 »t oxygen st high altitudes, you would havo to consi-
dor tho osbiant pressure In Baking the calculations of tha prossuro
of the 100 # oxygon as I have indicated previously in siy testinony;
in ordor to obtain a IOC# saturation of the blood with oxygen nboro
an approuianto altitude of 12,000 cotroe it ia cocossary to breath
tho 100 , 1 - o^y-on under pressure, so that breathing 100 > oxygen between
an altitude of 12 kiloeotres and 15 kilocctres thoro would be st*»o
undei'-saturati n of the blood with oxygon, even though the subject
were bronthing 100# oxygmn. That would have to bo tjeon into condi-
dorctioa one tho rate of fall with tho parachute open would havo to
be taken into consideration. Tho only place that tho blood would not
be 10 C£ saturated would be in tho region above 12 kilceeters. I bo-
11370 that is ae sioplc as I c_n make the a a tter.

Q. Hot?, Professor Ivy, you eentioned two factors which have to bo

9193


1 •-J-&-2-*ni^er(Tcn Schon)

Court I

coasidorei la these calculations. Do you agree with ne if I say that
la addition to those two factor*, the carbon dioxyde in tho lungo hac
to bo coaaidored because this influences tho arrant of oxygon in tho

lung*?

Am Shat will influence. Tho percentage composition by tho par¬
tial pressure oxygen when you breath 10 # oxygen can be doteminod
the carbon dioxide and wotor vtgior content would hare to bo taker, into
consideration in tho calculations.

^ . Tos, you nentionod a fourth factor. That ie the watorvepor
which also has to bo considered. How the speed of occurrence of olti-
tudo sickness nay be influenced by the circulation too.

1 . Sy altitude sickness do you coon tho sycptces duo to lack of
oaygon only?

' Tos, only the jynptoms of lock of oxygen othorwiso that "bo-
caaos too oajplicated.

1. Yes, tho circulation is a factor, but thore is no reason why
tho circulations should bo significantly dleturbod duo to thogo cox>-
ditiono vhich wo ^ro discussing.

% • Z boll ore you cisundorstood no, ?r of osnor Ivy. Z atkod vhoth-
or this circulation tine, that is tho tine a -’ortido of blood noaio
to jo through tho ontlro circulation onco and back to tho lungs,
whethor this tino is not also a factor.

a . Tos, that's always c factor, whether wo are up in tno .~ir or
on tho ground.

Shea that would ba tho fifth factor. Hew would you agroo
with no again that tho respiration of tho aviator in question, that
is, tho frequency and depth of respiration is rosponsiblo, would also
influonco tho results of tho calculations?

a . Yes, that influences results of such c leolations whether
you arc in the air or on the ground.


ITow, would one dso not have to consider tho so-chLlcd odap-

9193


0 curt I


tatica to altitude?

i. To*, fcere la a variation in suseeptiblity to the o^gon lack
in dir for oat individuals, but that can bo deterainod at ultitudco of
18,000 foot only.

?rofosaor Ivy, do you knov the Goman tern, "Vomobilisation *
praiobili ration? In Gemazv we neon the aattitude of hue an organism
that in cseont to altitude ho reacts difforontly to tho lack of ouy-
goa than in doacent free altitude. To. giro a practicle oxample, in
ascent to 7,000 or 8,000 nctrea a person bocoooa uneonaciour if ho in
then token up to 12 or 13 kUoBStres and then down again ho boctxaoa
conscious at 9,00 netres and la enable of acting. Do you find this
fact in your work too?

▲ • I hare not autdlod that, but I c«nunderstand ita explanation
physiologically.

4 • Do you ogroc with no th n ‘. this praaobilixatlon oust bo in¬
cluded in tho calculations if one wants to ccsio to reasonably wolid
rosults?

1 . Jos. X ogroo with that question tho way ycu have worded it.

How, one noro brief quostion about rospirrfion. Vo Just sold
that tho character of tho respiration of tho aviator in quostion is a
factor in this c-lculation. Tou no doubt know that tho tioo, roservo,
for oxanplo, at 15,000 aotres can bo incroasod two orthroo tioos by
holding ones broath. Tou know that, don't you?

i. V hat do you aeon by ■holding onos broath?" Tou noan
holding oao*s broath in exorting pressuro?

Q. I ooan by not breathing, if oao has been breathing puro
oxygen beforo,

. Tos, to saoe extent, a very ainor factor.

Q . Sow, if on avisitor broothos very quickly, because ho is
excited, fcaa this tine reserve con bo reduced to a fraction of nomol,


is thet true?


9194


14 J ~g-^-4-L*T~2—4-a miager (Von Sehor.)
Court I


A. Yoa, -that 1 a trie.

Q. . Very wall. Sow. if we consider the reaction of a pcreon at
15,020 nctrea and want to calculate, we have about ten factorc end
the BO ten fcctor# vary Individually. Bo you believe that in view of
all theoo factors one en coco to a reasonably reliable picture
throng edchlution of what the conditiona are.

2 . Yos, I do, because cany of the factors are very clnor, not
important, or signifleant. I had such snail factors in oind when I
Mplrl.iod ny opinion in previous toatiaony that I boliovc that it was
• unnocoeoary to placo subjects to tho hajard of that part of your a»-
poriacntcl .irogr^n in which tho subjocts wero oxposod toilow doecont.

X olao atc-tod that I should bo roluctant to perform such ejporiaonto
oa nyaolf or other •ubjeett,

q. 0 on you undorstnnd that Ooraun aviation codiclno non hold
o view very different free your opinion saying that thoso calculations
oro too unsatisfactory and wo aro not to t<fco tho ro*>onaibloity for c
conslusions dr Q vr. froc those calculations?

A I eon understand that and X c an also understand tho fact
that scuo pocplo eight bo Q s roluctant as I would bo to porfora thoso
cajjcr iaoats. *.


9195


lh Jxrv-::-!2-3-l-Grosr (Int. Von Schon)
Court So. I.


5 lior, frofo85or Ivy, cr.othor question - a question on
a n i na l experiments. ?roc tie record you have, no doubt, seen that
befero our experiments wo carried out orientation experiments on
animals. Yesterday you yourself nentionod tho work of lutz and Wendt
and, if I understood you correctly, in answer to a question of Prosec¬
ution you cane to th3 conclusion that tho slight difference botrton
results of animal experiments ard hixa^n oxporir.ants does not completely
justify experiments on hucan beings. Did I understand your correctly?


stance.


A That was ay opinion as applied to this'particular in¬


Q !'ow, Professor Ivy, do you consider tie diffcrcnco bet¬


ween lii,OOQ motors and 21,000 swters as o anxlsuo altitude from which
one can rescue '.viators for sur~? Do you consider that so slight?

A Hill you ivpoat those figuros again?

•

si 1U,000 ajt-.rs which ..rs tho xaxiruan hoight ns tho ro-
sult of aninal experiments, and 21,000 notors which wac th. result cf
our hvxnnr. oxperirajnt*. Do you consider this difference botreen
Ui.OCO aoters and 21,000 aot-rs really so slight?

A Kot when that applios to slow doscont with an open
porachuto. That doesn't apply there. Ifo ono would roconmond, for
oxaaplc, that an aviator bail out at 21 kilometers, open up his para¬
chute and descend. The oxporlrxnts which wo havo under discussion
involve slow doscont from 15 kilocut.rs. That's what wo arc talking


about.


Q Professor Ivy, 1 quite agree with you that one cannot -


ono should not - carry out slow sinking or.vrir.ontr from 21 Idlosot. rs
without oxygon and that one should roconrend this to pilots. You have
r_ad our document IC2 very c-r.fully that no slow axporltonts without
oxygen w^re performed free 21,003 -tors.

A That's right - 15 ups tho height froa which you performed


such experiments.


□ The altitude at which wo stopped and at *ich wo said in

9196


lii Juri-!'-i3
Co'-rt Ho. I


ss (Int. Von Schor.)


a report: "slow sicking experiments without oxygen froc high altii-ivio
I aha I I cuotc: This is on page 82 of tho English Bocr^ page 1?

of tho report, page. 97. I quota: "Slew sinking fron hieher altitude
wore not carried out since in practice them is no nocossity to doscond
frro such altitude with an open parachute and expose onos-.1T to tho
danger of suvoro frosting."

A Yes, on page 83 cf doc\=wnt h02 you say "descending ex¬
periments wore : ado in lirgor nu.lx.rs froa 15 kilometers nltitudo since
it bo cam evident that at this altitude tho npjrroiaato li*dts for what
was possiblo in omorgorveios had alio ad y b^on reached essentially sur¬
passed. n

How, tho only point that 1 an asldfg is that wh«n thooo experiments
worn. boing dam you had reached th> physiological li=ite and w„ro work¬
ing in u Tv-ry dangorous and hacard jus so no insofar as the wulfaro of
your subjeots was coneovnod. And I said that I should be reluctant to
perform such oxparinonts arti that I should p*cfor to depend upon that
dtgr-o TS accuracy which I could obtain fr<« calculations of tho results
of anim’*! ox-'eri.- it«.

Cl Professor Ivy, do you know tho stato of tochnical dovol-
o point of high altitude flying in Germany in 15U1 and 19U2, That is
tho tine whon thoso exporin^its woro oarriod out.

A Yob, I town sooothing of that.

Q T"xm you no doubt krvr.r that at this tino wo had n _
fightor piano, Ifcssorsctaidt 163 which had tlie quality of having a
rocket drive.

A That is correct and 1 knc.; that you wore ahoad of us
in our developments as for as the ejection Boat is concerned.

q Do you also agree with no that with those rocket plonks
one can roach any altitude desired and that tho altitude roachnl de¬
pends only on tho "count of fuel?

A Yes.

Q rrofossor Ivy, you knc*', you surely know, of modern do-

9197


Hi JtsH§-33-3-X-rrSE (tot. Von Schon)

Court Bo. I.

volcpoents in Irarica in this field. Do you know the Aaaric.an plane

type I 81 ?

A Yes, I knew scao thing about it.

THE ^RESIDENT: Can the tra.islr.tors got the question?

Q Frofosscr Ivy, do you know the Anoricnr. plane tyro :£1?

A I do not knerr it by that mnbor.

Q It is a rocket plmo with ft 'rerrrro cabin which is
built for a ceiling altitude of 30,7xx foot.

m

A I knew southing cf that.

Q Is this a plane which in principle has ths sen propul¬
sion as tho HcssorschrAdt 163 rtilch wo had in 19U1 and 191*2?

A I can't say yos or no to that. You are Just asking .a
atatojjr.t without asking cc a question.

Q I asked you, Frofesser Ivy, whothor this XS1 in principlo
hr s tho 3---.0 pro pulsion, that is rockot drive, as tho Jfacsorcchnidt 163
which wo had in 19U1 aal 19l2?

*“ A !<y kncvlodgc ?f tho engineering factors af tho two
planes docs net .orr.it 00 to nay yes or no. I know that the is-oblcras
of avi-tion nodicino involved nro ossurtially tho nano.

Q Very well. Your Hon,re, perhaps I n-y refer to Decunont
5 in tho Rosburg Dccucont Book, Exhibit 5 in roepoct to this typo XS1.
Far tho statu of Goman tochx)logical dovolo.rajnt in tho year 19)»? I
should likn to r,for to affidavit in Ruff Doctrrunt Book No. 20, Exhibit
8, it is an affidavit of tho technicrl oficor, tho Goneral of tho
Fightern at tho tlrw. I r-ay also refer to tho affidavit of tho Chiof
of the Geram Fighters Major General who speaks of the dovolopnont .at
that ti.ro. This docuaint has not been submitted yet. It will bo offorod
to the Tribunal later.

No*., frefossor Ivy, I should like to ruad you a few sent¬
ences fror. tho G>:r an expert who coir.ontod on these exp: rlDonts des¬
cribed in dccuxnt LC2 and I should like to ask you whether you agroo

with tho st-.tottjnts of tho Geraan export. This expert is the lecturer,

* 9198


Ui Jun- -i£~3-«.-Groas(lnfc. Von Schon)
Court ::o. I.


Dr. Gauor when we unfortunately arc naabl* to hoar £ Lice ct this tire
ho is ir. the United States as c scientist, the statesont -f this ex¬
pert is oa page 1*3 of the Ruff Docuaont 3ook, Document 10, that is llx-
nibit Uj. The export ceres ■to !&6 following siiay.ry of his opinion
on these oxixjrlrBntsi

"1) Th. question of rescue frera extrcrxly high -ItitixL-s constituted
a prcblon of the uteest inportor.ee for aviation nedicine. The cxp.ri-
rsen- a yielded unexpected rosults which wore of inport once for toclmical
devdlopaant.

•2) Experiments with anlml s yield no quantitative, binding values.

"3) Tho oxporinonts wore o-rried out or. a scientific basis. The ex¬
periments woro discontinued after a certain Tactical iin had boo;
attained, ilo casualties ensued.

"li) Tho a-Ajcctivo troubles during ox.orironts with lor procruro
chambers in high altitides without oxygon are slight."

Dc you agree with this opinion of tho Qoraan expert?

A I -.groo with too opinion of tho Gonaan oxp. rt that you
Just xoad with tho oxooption of tha oxperii-.onts of slow descent frai
altitudo of 35 kilorote re.

* Vor y w '- u * w ° ‘"'■avo already discussed that. Uok, Prof¬
essor Ivy, I have a few brief questions on our docuaont liCC in anothor
connoction. You said day before yosterday that tho sinking oj^jrijxnts
woro norc dangorous than tho froo falling oxporiaonts fras 21,00C
swters. Ycu said that in tho sinking oxporiivnts as in all other ox-
porinants, tharo was no danago to th. ho art but that there, was tho
possibility of damage to the brain c-lle. Did I understand ycu cor¬
rectly?

A Yes.

Q You also sajd that tho possible datago to t.xj brain colls
could havu been chocked.

9199


KH. HAHTT: V e ere cot jetting Sr. Ivy'e answers, Tour Honor.
?HZSir^7: V ill the interpreters check the syaten?

3T^5H. H777

' Professor Ivy, would oyopl pi eese repent your reaver* to the
previoua question? I asked you vhether 1 = the exanination by Kr. Karay
you said that there vas the possibility of d-c?-e to bra,in cclla, la it
true that you said fart?

A Tea.

e

' Professor Ivy, you also said that possible drarge to the brain
cells by lack of oxygen could hare been tested by asking intelligence
questions before and after the experirents. Did I understand you
correetly?

A By uekin,; the appropriate tests for ability, capacity to 1earn.

* "*n you cite any vork where the possibility of teotinr brain coll
through lack of oxygen by an intelligence test is reported on?

A That has been reported on only insofar as anlaals are concerned.

I know of no one who has performed learning ability tests on huaon
subjects and then have exposed thee to prolonged periods of oxyjen
lack, such ns your subjects in slow descent fros high rltltudos ware
exposed, and then follow it through with intelligence tests. But lcnrrv-
inr ability tests in aniaals before and after exposure to oxygon lack
have been done, red it has been found that their learning ability lo
drsagtd.

' Then I ni sunder stood you the dry before yesterday. It ao t an
Intelligence test, it was q United field of learning ability W.ich to
e certain extent con be tested on nnlncls too?

A Tee, bec-uso an intelligence testa* apjlied by psychologists is'
nothing core than e Wet of ability to liom.

Professor Ivy, I io not know whether tls* psychologists would quite
agree “1 th your opinion, but we will ler*e that aside.

S'

A You fceve quite a nunbef of then to agree with that str.tocent when


I cade it.


920 0


1 ir^? C *”^ ? " 5ox,Ic (Jot. Yon dchofa)


X Projector Ivy, di you know of any cue la literature where after

' ' rl6? Uek ° f 0Xysea - *» ala “ t « «t the uoet. any provable organic
<2aaa«e to the brain was observed?

A So. rou know as veil a. I do that that depenis upon the extent of
oxygen lac* and It. duration. Pemanent dasage of the husrn cerebrus
vlll occur If It 1. cocpletely deprived of oxygen tror. five to .even
=lRute«. Th-t 1. lethal re far a. the husan, and I eight alco eay
the dog cere true l. concerned. Jt.le not aeccrrily lethal insofar ne
the vital nedullrry center, ere concerned.

.* fro ft cor Ivy. do you know the woric of Bueehner and hi. echool
on thl. .ubject?

A To.

a m* r •

* ProfeMor Bueehner found, and I an certrfn that .inllar vork wp.
carried out In Arerlc. too. that If one leave, ar.laal. for dry. and
hour. In S'Jah a .trong lack of oxygen that they are Just barely kept
*1 vo,-that even after these dry. one can find no dosage to th«
cerebrrl eortex-.vith the* anlonls.

• * Ml, thet U :pod upon the exton* of nnoxle to vhlch they to.
boon exped. Be probobl;. determined just the thre.hold nt which no
‘ ma * occurred, end I hew. In nlnd, for exxhple. erperlncr.u of
Profe.enr V.ndoll rt Korth »e.tem Vnlrer.lty -here the extent of
oveen eeturr.tion of the blood for r period of eevor*l BtM t„ vr . „ nl} .
20 - 15, 20 or 30 per eent.

0

' But r. frr .. I r.oeober thl. wort In „ *ort lech of oxygon. by

thl. I oero e ooxloun of ten oloute. euch o. occurred In our experiment,

In nth .hort experiments no dooog. to the brrln wn. obxerved. In -.hot
correct?

A So, I as not frslllar with that. There axo two factors concerned.
Or,: 1. the degree of oxygen lack, and the tine, “hose two fectors h>ve
to be considered, end a. you .tried in your ov* report, you were working
at the vpier Unit, of vhat you considered to be safety.

* Sow. Professor Ivy, j re nre joujenow thet the flr.t dosage to the


Jua# lU_*i-3J^-3-Eox«ic (xnt. Ton Sohoen)

Coart To. 1

trp.ia froa moxir ml usurliy after r ion' Interruption of the oxygen
wpol;.- Is dcvaga ;o the gr=.-lir, cad eapecirlly the corpus atriatua.
.r.«#e thia-rs pre known to r frr exteat froa chronic carbon nonoxide
poisonin' end froa liter* tura.

A let, that is Bozphologicdl? speAlns. In such experinents lerra-
ia,: rtility testa, to =y knowledge, have not been applied. There is
pprtieulrr reference to cuboa ronoxlde poi sonic,;.

5, Professor Ivy, you will no doubt rrfee with ae thrt in those coses
of brrla 4enr#p in the prop of the corpus strlrtua there are so-c-llcd
Pprkir.sonipr.ir-.si, P-rklnooalr.niaaa*.

A Thrt is correct. I happen to be very fanillrr with that subject.
?or exranls, this week rt the nestin,; of the Anericrm Kedlcpl Associa¬
tion in Atlrntlc City, I here rn exhibit on the subjoct of rciruscltr-
tion froc; carbon conoxlde poisonimr. I happen to bo the expert con¬
sultant on thrt subject for the Council on Physicrl Therety of tl»
Anerlcfn Xedical Assoclption.

e

i row. Professor Ivy, since you nre especially well inforned in

this field,* do you ivtrcc vitfc =» that this drar.* which rppenrs rftcr

n Ion,: period of raoxlr., those Porklnsonlnnlsna,, that they can bo

found in neurolo-dcrl tests rod In the cliaicrl aspect of the person

ouch better than in m lntelll.eacc test?

* All patients do not ernifest the synptoaa of Pnrklnsonlrtisn or

pprrlysis v,iteas. I should like to also indicate thrt tone of the

hu=pa bein'® end nnlr.*lo who hrve been subjected to carbon soaoxido

poisoain.-, hua-.r. beln-s, of course, accidentally, will show n elerr

Period after they recover consciousness of frou five to ten drys in

which they rre apparently nomrl. Then they win develop vrrious

r.inifestrtions of ir^rct to the n*rvous system or neuroloclcta sequela

vhlch cry take the fora of treaors in P; rkiason* a disease, nry teke the

fora of enaasir, loss of consciousness, rnd nay be followed ty depth.

So one night reasonably ask whether or not rny of these subjects thrt

vere exposed to this nnoxia rs a result of slow descent showed any

9202


Jane lMt-3E-!-U-Hoxsie (Xfi. *^on Sehoen)

Coart 5o. 1

syrptons ftfter ft period of froc five to ten drys hed peesed.

\ I -ieolutely e^ree with you on this point. Professor Ivy. 2 Cm tell
you rs fur rs I recell, that v.»s r.ot aentioaed cxrctly in the report,
thrt the experinentr 1 subjects who went through these sink*::- expcriaent3 ••
were under observntioa for fthout six weeks ftfterwnrde, pad thrt rfter
six weeks the nervous systen ftnd the cllaicrl espeet of these experiment¬
al subjects showed nothing whatever, rad I believe you will njrce with
=e if I sry thrt with the probrbility bordering on certrinty, thrt is
probrbility which is the cost which we rs doctors cm rive, it era not
be expects! thrt these people suffered dr nr-re r.t ray other point in the
brain.

HE. KCEASJTi I object to the rearrks of Br. Huff. Ec- is not now
testifying. He is enra ;ed in the examination of Br. Ivy, nad I cubr.it-
that he should restrict hie remarks to direct questions to the vitneoo.


°203


Court I


. . ..7: object It-kuii Th .t .. : inertly .a

ii7- ac itcacnt la testiiio^".

I .;oul£ l3o c..U Zr. 3xff*s .tt.nfcion to th- f ct th 1 h- h s
lr- -^c-c—d the thee which h- 8t eei* . 1 - —air-d to be .oc ... to

hie. Ter t: -a ataainition.

Counsel.

i«*. d.-ij?-R: Ur, Pre3ie-:;t, I should like to sk you to ruL.it this

loaf • u-ction. It is c point Iixch a aot erouy.t out expressly in the

Ruf f-io.h . acher report, . c. :r a bro pit up only fcrin: th- tritl.

SOw, ur. "iifi .oust h v- n opportunity to inf or- th- -j.-rt - tc qu-stio.n

tbw export on this point. 1 h vc rstood this question correctly, the

point xrr.a Ur t th- -Xpert h'.fl to o':* bout the stdi-euit oi cy client th'.t

. these . t .ala . -re un-cr obsevt -Ion for six .-e-ha ni Ur.fc there uas not

j ^hteot ohngi. In their psychical ocndltion. This cquixv

•

: certvui ... or*, no. in th- coivae ol this tri.l,

ril -...SU'SKT* I do not til t.xr. -3 nythuv. in t. ir-cord on th t
question. ?.»e .fitness ary be hypothetic -j. question, out lr. Rufl

w.s hmoolf finking c at -e..-n- s r. Itneso. H- is no 1 ot -nd.

He e;" ah . hypothetic tl question of t;- ..itneaa.

... XUZa: I b.s your p-i\lor., UT. President, I did t . iac tint.
sy j:;. ar.?:

Ivy, v-ry ori-f questions.

I -Liev- you s — ^ -at-x* th t, ccori^ to pres-it d ;• opinion,
bends xa r.sult of .ir bub ole ... bl blood. ix> you r - - or

r - -r I on* . ak - qu-sticn. Ar- -civ not ir bubbles in t..- blood
Yeaocis : c.. .o not c ua- ay : flCeB to th- syaUxi .ml not c-use

-•«y P -in?

..: . --ich do.

... other r.-nl, is thcr- . — in bonds or tr • • tine

hubbl-a i_. blood v_ss-ls or e_ -^nsu- wr.ee-. ca Oe found - ..non -

cubbL.s -cl: c\nnot b- found?


I


320 *


V* J*ino-?5-:!:-5-2-£-rr«» (Ten Scfaor.)
Court 1


- -a ccurs aos prclycis occurs _ r-es *-r- grs imbbl-s cm not
fc. via- L_i^_ c th- i-r y -* -'-3, bus io-s not u_ t th-r- era


n® - -1-0 present. Thu o..iy c:.ciucion . -r.-.tJ la i. t tec. ”-r .y

technique To -3 not ICV- I thus.. xfc . _s aa f*.r -s - = a : ,_t.. tiios-
facts.

teoftssor I ry, uhnt I .. inter* tal in th- folio, an/. Is
there p .in or re then, syuptccs occur. ry .;itha:t 5 .5 l<ub;>i-3 to. blood
vessels?


"o, so : r - : know, it is \.-.-ec.. th t, . ,... ixs-nt t,....,

<■ emnot c —/oric.lly ms -r ••yes a- ».io».

: Vary ell.

r.._n, you ;r-c at;-. that the /action of buuls is .x>l -.t. cl. ir.
c-rtain ,oet 3?

•

Tea, j.n that to. bubble. cfceary iv.a not a«..n absolutely -otbliar.-d.
but it is tli. theory th-.t tea the i~oot -videnc- in eta sup. ort nd it ic th.
onl^- ry, in -r opinion, th*.t u c .1 c.lUi; tlx ;r-v-r.tio. t .£ rvocur. drop
sickness b-/ tiie pre-tr-nthi^ of oxy^er. *or t.x purpose of ..-ohxv; out th. -
nibro.cn fxo~ tho b^dy.

In -- 1 in.' 1 c.u-ation I a; -1 cc_o to t.is point. Let first I diouil
Uix to n.thur .aation.

j.. Iv. , .» it custo. ry :.c I aci-nc-, in lorJdn o . - eh problems,

Co Bet ir theories .a. es-hi... . ^otheseo and iirot to .or- .tn ties,
hypotheses ..t I005 -a tncr. ic no cbvlaua objection to tliu.?

l’.ai

So , Frof-seor Ivy, you . Uot c'il fch t or— of the ;rc re :<o:i3

ir. favor of ci:- bub i. t.a-ory -n t.iu :.v, aa er-atians of ouy-..i, n.i you
3.L; yestusM y X. .t previous .. tiling o. pur- oy>n for ti to tin-— hour.

air. xxthod tc .-.void the formation of bubbles in the blood or in trx
tissue, i;id I uni-rat mi you correctly?

*fc=.


!io.., Frof-3Scr Ivy, in c enaction r.ith your _x nine ti on 3 j*. H rJy

520^


J


'J* JtxAc-L-a>5-3-S -rrcti (Vor. idoc;

09«t 1

Sic..:, a jocui-uit :C-C20 oi - 1 — vc-.c_ic-. cl p 62 of

Dccie_..t :oo:: 2. Ddcoaunb IB 22C, ? 74 in Hw Saji ook.

Th. is: ;• - of .... _La s.cr.t report fra.- .. c...r to

... of iisy, .her. L’, ;..y .. .. _s 1 s'. . Z- of ocufi.t L;

you y, n ..up* rig. nt a. .. c.-r .a reports or. -h-i*., l-.r 2^ ha

of orc..tainr oxysui, n .x.arirenfc J. sue,;»=t ii~- - 15 kilo.,dthin
six —utt-s th. vetopay =-:o .a th t th-r. ;:-rj ir —in th.
V. 3 -L. 3 . uosa this at of rr.sd-r'o, \ttici. ytu r.ot . z-ci to

ywt.r., : ..... the -ociiisr.t v/ o .o_a b.ir n.t d.: "jut

tcatt-or^* _uat no.*.ad dc-.a it .;o.. a..a: c.;. nr. *- ..c uni ->f co/.itnicn in
th. l’i.lii of Cocaupr-Mior. siclx-ar?

. t obaerv tio;. Cooor.'t coufuso t.c ui. Dhflcualj’ you know
'.a ell o I Co tr.-.t if th- Ji.c..t \.\a -.ctu'iiy conduct.‘ •• nt t.d lk.ro

would be ao -,vr\,ci'bl. ..cent of ,_xir -r. in tha .a -*C h.ncc -:oj. ; a
bubbles souiC consist prier.rily c rbin . flood .. Yu.- ; :or

exupi., ci. V it of oitrosui by rolo., .1 hr. '-.in; of 1.0, x-y tile. th
c.t to ItituC- of 15 kilo—t.;j, s— ul t- th. ...uucl_:» .. «»1 .b

. . . .

.: Professor Ivy, i .. • uifco ,.:j. iciojuoi in ...- -i.i. boo, : don't
kno you .'.no; th t ir. 1?15 *n- 1VA6, to#.th.r ..-it.: c;- .l.r.l nt

-ng, 3 isorkoi .or o«c r or. this docc.j.rDflaicn E.c^i,3a. ’,'o
Frofwator, j l-.v. .xu ---.ui these r-.-orce of 1 .ocher c refuL‘. , ,.o- on.;/ far
t.. .3 tri'i hut .I 30 Hork.C or. t— -o o u. v cci-nti-ic . o_;:t e. vies
%. :* 'J possible on t.;_ husic of the r.cor-3 t;~r lir.-s/nr.-. for

oci.r.tiat, it s-C t_- uc L. __ u.ls _r.3.rii—nt hich I .. v. c uat

tntl t_ ."c-sch-r :-r.. v 5 - ... f-scov-r-, ti.„ 3i-.^;ic nee. of
which .. CiC not r^'.Lizu, but .c 3 - - .3 . .to b. ^ult. i_ortr»t hd now
wo h-.v. r-ru-st to ;,-ou. ilui you o c.. t. th. Unit.i Jt t.r.,tcst t,ii8

thir^ ~ -in \n \n nisr.l _ey_r_xn. nl a., to it tr..t th. ouxi*3titior. of

•

brcr.thin . of pur. axy^.n is r-.nv-^ _f r. s linfir^s r. ^ustil'll. .

9236


V* mo-»-R>5--*'JTOw (vor. Sehon)
Court 1


lithe Ger.rn Luft*.:f-, by - fcetiratc coincidence, fro- th- beginning of
air invcsfclg'.cions or. ieca^pres. is. oicitn.ss i or fighter pi _-.-o, fro.. the
k— e ..... ... a. -obil. io.. oar. d. ..b.ra -r. put i.t: use ir. 1941, •'<-
s-t tiac for the atr.y t 12 .ilia .t_rc .c 10 eJnut. 3 . If you in the
United .jS its .. Jc_ th. ti-4. 10 .0 20 aL.'ites, I b.li.v you .ill ..ct hwv
ay .ore deaths hid., ..3 ye. 3 __ ; si-r . y -f. u.. d y bef or ., you
consif-red *. .r.tt.r of F-to.

I re no further <ju -tit,..3,

9Y J?.. S.UZ2:

... Ficdduitj I h •. r_: qu.rtic*i3.

Uitneoa, ;-ou spole. yece-rd y . ‘ nv. j.r of wq>„r — nta c rri-U out in
United .t-.tw3 Ad In oth_r countries out si... 01 s-r ..ny. For ... .yi ,
pellogv , s. ..^ f-v-r, B-ri-^ri, .... .u., -tc. j;o 1 should like to h.ve
rcl. :• ..a...r fro., you to th. folio in? qu-ation. I.. tlu.oc
..•.idT ;.:w rd of p rtly ir.. ..ret... '..voiv-d in th. . :u . rtly lroj..
int.rn tion 1 lit.r.tur., wil enthc occur .urin t... wtpj*; ml s
of ui. 1—nfcs or not? Prof. wor, X s: ; ou thia qu.atloc. b„c u 3 - you

o.i.-. y.oterd jp tt; t b.c iov cf t.e .3 qu-ciao.. you ... . ; .-.Urn Lloir.l

litj- tttU jU th. r.for. h v_ •. cert er. sp.ee liz-- L. .. „.d..


.


I loo 0 i- th .t ere :.vs. n t.. lit,..- tur. c..not L>.


tir.fc .. _


.


S-> - ~ 'l th. reports I


- 1 . pr-s-nt.. ycaUrd t,;.r. tr.


-• thS —. .4 -:. . tj e,

~~ - teci. on pell.gr:. .


-.ecx.onp.ei.yr-.. f....

ir. t,._ rtlcL. on Bvreo.ri, ... . ... ere no .Ui6 an th. _ ej.cJ._, ccori

• i- ' -, -• Coioiel Sore.: » rixclo os ; 1 . Uc. 1 - .. .»t testify

ti.-.t I v. ;- ta w d:e .rticl.s ..ic'i lie.r-tui .jjvuIvji^ the .

•

01 huxv. _in,d .3 sioj^cts if. ix.dic .1 ocp.rLa.nts.

-end, in th. liter.-.tur- -.rich you .:\v. r- jitn.se, t:._r- 1 3 nol
“ "i-v;lc c 0 . ; h.re Laths occurr.d? jil I unier3t.ine you correctly?

°2(y»


t


14 Jur-^-iMlfr*5-5-£' rros {?oc Sehco)
Court 1


-cs. In the yellow f-v_r cxp.ri=-nt.s 3 indie ~tod thtfc Cr. CrroU
*ixx! ^r. ‘-.zo.re died.

Ife'.t is the only cist you Piwv of?


dad \ second question, ,rofw 3 ?or^

lou 3 -.it; y-st-ri.y th'.t you yairseif h'.e c.'..*rf_J out ,nts in

the fiwld in question. I £;ou.. 2*2 c to knos ...,o oupp-.... _yL:. r.t-.1

aiij jweta dor your -xp-riti.fi.c?

fl;\t h a varied cor^l lly. Jiu; _ re — i.v.r.r. rv. j'.cts for

exp-rif-itr in .y young-r . ; a _ .. t or n Instructor,

I ,«ul: Invite tb* atet. ierv- 3 cubj etc -ya-lf. L - . did not

4

thinic it proper for .t to -.ok t... students to s-rv. -a cubj.c. so th.

X'.oor ;cr; .aaiat nt. did t.io. I did .nt .a:; thua b.c\u-, in position,

- - -- ~-r ,u:\.:r or urd-r influ-nc..

I testified y.et.j\V\y th t « coed 30._ c aci.riioua upplie

to tx Civili-n public Service . to., for t.,.. .uoj.cta,

three :i tio..-i 2-c- .rch council

: iirat -gaicy - -iC I vuv-r.- r«ctly, ..'3 . j>olicy

^-rcy?

Ho, the Civil!.:; Public d-rvio. ..;-:.c . i r»_v-r .y.-,„lf uaei
priaon-rr.

: - - i-bor edf-ce. It use r. .v. b. or oifitf.,

civill m Public d-rvicc -noy ma division of 3 -i.ctiv.

Servict c. net si: ctiviti- .

ita-as, ho, did you the .--col- fro- thin s-r.cy? -jj’ you .i.k_

“n . Ut iioa? ,-.r- cl- p.o;>l. o ; ._r.» Co you s.-ont-.^ouciy? Ho-.. -id it
h-.p ; xn?

•’»: ritUn pplic.tian -s —- tc th- co.on-i in eh'.* at'-tin*

the sublet cf ti_ .xp-ri —nt to 0- y-rferi-d, its ohj-ctiv., its b '.ckgrcund

the uir .-inn of the .xpji.~nt, cxctly bos- the -xp.ri-_.it tt.b to b-

Perfor.- i. -.nd its pcssiti- ir.z jia, .k: sft-d the number of subj-cts dcairoe.

9C0 ;


lU June-too has-(7ar. Schcor. )-
Court 1

^ *ad this nucfc r of subjects wts a:do evaileblo to you by this

-.roccy thor.?

a Yes,

v. '.titr.oss, you srid y.st.rdcy thet the -risor.-rs -ho ordinarily
hnd to siyr. r reiver neoerdirv-. tc «hich, if - understood you oorrootly,
thet they jars. u r cny olnlr if it trored n fttolity, did I understand
you oorrcotly?

I. YoBj they s'-r.cd n effoowet, if I roorll it correctly they
would a ke plans for t'.sonsolvcs in o sc of ccoidor.ts.

k Lot only if thoy nor.. injured, but if tho •'-tior.t -hould fca

s fetality?

A X bcl i.vo thj JJWrossion " heirs *r.d ' eslf.as" • Inolrdod, yos.


0300


1L June li7-:^.3-J-l-:uU7 (Int. von Scfcon)
Court Jfe. 1


1 Then the people gave up all claims for their heirs, too. Van,
inncss, in your experibsints did you hava such valve's signed by the
subjects?

A Jfo. Cur subjects, conscientious objectors, .’era pi van insurar.ee
si ins t /O3si;lo dazare or injury*.

q Insurance, "hy did your subjects pet iM.3 insurance, r.nd why
did the prisoners have to pive up all claims? hy thi3 distinction?

/• A I do not know.

3 itnoss, or. the basis of your ro’.t o-periencc, don't vou have
any idea why there .’a* this distinction? You arc ar. erpert iin all those

.. ' 'ellj I presume that it uxs out c y for the ccnscion-

tious < ters. Tbs soldi ore *.n the .ry fera insured by tbs Povemwmt,

and I thou ht — I should believe t’vt :ai ht hava boon thought to bo a
*ood idea to insure the consciontd^ n c' loc^ors for tho save ranror. tlir.t

that stnll aroount of hattrd in

1 *'as this sy.-pathy no. fait in the caso of the prisovrs who
volur.tsorod for oxpori onts on bo'volf of tho gomral public?

1. DY: : by it plee3*» unal. Dr. Sautor discuss si this

point for bo -tor than an hour yosteriv-. T thirtc '.v has covered tha
subject u.f ; so that ro eon srooaod another .olnt.

BT n. O.VJT r.:

o Doctor, yu can answer this quostion veiy brlofly, ’as thin
s ya pftthy not felt ith tb: riser, r;, too, ;ho volunteered for ezperi—
aer.ts in tha interest of the -anaral 7a'lie? CorietMr.r co'jld have
happened to thor, too, nr.' they could nva oor hairs, tcc. iy did no
ono think of thru?

.. : had nr. : • Ding tho c- . ,

I can't answer the question yes’ or *'no .

"i Iy fin al question. Professor. Iron t .e point of vie.: of badical

ethic? io you believe whether in .^nerioa or in any ottor civilized nation

9210


11; Jane L 7 ~:^.r 3 eP-’-ty (int. von scfaoc) 7-2

Court 1

that It la ir. accord sith nodical ethics to caiy out experiments rdth
a certain degree of dar.-er on prisoners who are first asked to sirn a
•aiver jivine up all claims, even for tbsir hairs? In you opinion, can
that be reconciled with nodical ethics?

A Yes, I believe it can bo reconciled ;d.th thi basic nodical ethics.
D?. S..V7T.: Than I have no further questions. Thank y u vary much,
and t h a nk you ir. tho nans of 'Jr. Duff that you ave hin an opportunity
to aak specialised \viical question' from th export witness.

:r?. t Your !5>nor, I request that If Dr. Ivy wishes to finish

his answer, ho nay bo allo wed to do 30 .

T!E FllSET'.T: Ye3, if the itness lid not co -.pl to his cno-: or, ho
nay complete it.

TS 17:7" "t I said enc-.r h.

.0 Tribunal ”111 be in rock's lor a few inutos.


(i. recess was taker..)


14 June 4?-4t-S MS-l-Sasps r. Brcm)
Court ?«c. 1


THE HAR3HAL: The Tribunal is again in session.

THE PE5SID37: Defense Counsel aey proc cd.

9T DR, SZRV.'.7I:'jS(. ttorney f. r defendant Earl Brandt)

C., “itr.vss, yesterday y u tc-tificd that voluntary consent is the
first prerequisite fer huonn experimentation, Previ usly y..u had cnid
that y.u yourself had been reluctant t- apply f. r volunteers; is that
sc?

» !> ,

Q. Didn't y u ary Just n v» th-1 you didn't want to ask y ur students
t*~ volunteer but left thrt t ether agencies s. th t y.ur authority
ni^ht net c nstitute s. .-vj f.m f c .crei n?

... Yes, that is insofar as ry p«rs r.al direct requo t to the
individual is c r.c< rr.cd, I th ught, because f ry p. aiti-.n no n
pr fessar, it rlprt unduly influence the student t say yoo,

Y.u wcr. pr*br.bly f the pini n that y.ur authority sight
persuade his tc c ■ a -.o thing thrt he oth- r dao * uld not rf .

A. Yoa — thr ugh ndivic ,, l o-r.t ct.

I s-.y, Pr fees r, d n't y.u kn x that in general the v lur.toer
aspect f th*. pcr3 r.'a c r.scnt has been und. r suspici r.?

A. I d-r.'t understand th't quest!< r., "Ill y u repent it?

C. Is it r. :t a thrt in r. .dic-l circle-' -r.d ala in public circles
that those dec! rati ns f v lur.tary c nsont an. scon with certain
ancunt f yj3rici'r.; that it is d ubtod whether the person actually
did vt luntcer?

A. y u be core specific?

0, In y ur c nrissi.n y.u or b'bly debated h.w the v lux.tocro should
bo contacted; i3 that n t sc?

A, Yos, ,

C, Cn this occasion was there net discussi.'r.s 'f the question that
ycu should assure yourself that n'' coercion was being ex- rci.ed , or
that the particular situation tc which the person found hinself who
applied was being exploited?


9212


11 June 4?-»-SM020SDep»cft(9rcwi)
Court So. 1


A. Yes, I ncs c ncomed ab.ut that question.

Q. There were discuss! ns abcut that?

A. Not necessarily with others, but there was always emsiderr.ti. r.
rf th t in ny wn mind.

"Titntss, uu-abor -f documents ware brought forth yor.erdy, Friday,
fr.-n which it was t. bo seen th't v luntev.*s did volunteer, fur
instance eight hundred r acre pris ners applied for a nnlarln-expcr-
incr.t; and there was a r.-di rep rt; nil of these pers ns had n motive
for declaring thenaolvua ready, “hst nro the motives f a prisoner that
p-irsundo him t- v lur.teer?

A. Thcso pris nets said they v luntcercd in >rri.r to help people
who '\ight have snlr.ri".

f'. In this rep rt tho individual pexe n- were r.rkcd, five ir six cf
thus were — no says th-t ho has v;luntc«red because ho is c nderned
to life inr> ris naont, nnd h- h*s appli d to tbligo the nx r^’, An tlur
s.ays that ho is dc'ng it b.n.ausc his br ther is a ». Idler m th. ft\ nt
and has rvalnrla. And on thor no says — twe cf cy br.-thors in tho r.rry
had malaria; end n third no says in the last war —

IK. HARDYs Dr. Scrv-tius refers to Pr secuti n Exhibit Me. 519 fir
identification, and request that ho aup.pli d tho pm ages n that Dr.

Ivy cm pr porly testily.

BY DR. STRV.THJSt

°. ’*'itness, from this rftdi. report I shall read tho *nswore « f tho

experiment~1 subjects U y u. Cnc '/r. *.uall is asked and he says:

"I expect Captain Janes, ttot these men have rrnny re-ns ns for their

v. lur.tcering f.r t is war. Captain Jones: Yes, they have. Many have

sens .and brothers in the t need services, thor have thor patriotic

e tives, but I an not the one to toll abcut then. Cjur.ll says — I get the

point, Capt. Jcr.cs: '.'ith the aenaissi n of T-rden Hangen vec are going

to talk to several of these v. luntoers right n~w. Here is a nan who is

older than sc cx of tho others, 'hrt is ycur name 1 ? Johnson, I am Gtcrgo

9213


14 June 47-!5-o^-€-3-Sa^c»n( B rom)

C urt No. 1

Johnson, numb' r so and so. Quail: Johnson, I have heard you have a
pretty high fever as a result of those tests'. Johnson: That is right;
at one tine =y temperature was 1C8 degrees, rualls 108 ceg:-ees, and
you are here to tell the story. Jones? ’.hat was your main reason for
volunteering for these tests. Johnson: I served in the U.S. «ray
during the first “orld 'ter, and here by going through with these
tests I helped some of ay buddies in the war just ended. Quail: Thanks,
Johnson. Now, here ie Charles Eirtz, number so and so. Eirtz: Hy brother
was killed in the crossing of the Saar River; that cade ip ry nind
for ne; we weren't being shot at here; it was the least wc could do.
Quail: And here is George Storr.; George Stom, nuzfror so and so. Store:
Two of cy brothers in the servico caught Malaria. If 1 can help the
anay, I can holp cy brothers. Owll: Here is a can who is ono of the
cany inmate nurses helping out in the war. '.hat is your wae?

Leopold: Nathan Leopold, number so and so. I was a malaria volunteer,
and now I an acting as a nur e. Quail: How do cost -f tl • patients
react under theso testa? Leopold: All the non are geed cildiero;
their noralo is high. Quail: two inmates wh* are r.o strangers t»

malaria — "alkor: !'y nano is George 'alkor, number so ana so, and my
nephew is a malaria patient ir. an army hospital. McCormack: I an Junes
McCormack, number so and so. !'y broth r is in the arey teo. If those
tests will help cure hin of nalaria, it will all be worth while.

Quail: Medical officors are particularly interested in this next
case. Tour name? ?'oraan; Al Korean, number so nnd so. <>xnll: ’h.y is
your case unusual, Korean? Norton: Because I have had five relapses
einco I first contracted malaria; that is the highest number any
patient had. I will stop hero.

I shall stop reading; I believe this gives the general impression.

Is it correct that all ef then are giving idealistic reasons as the
motive—

MR. HARDY: Prior to the question I sugg -t that the documu.t be

handed to Dr, Ivy if he wishes to refer bo other sections of it in

9214


14 June ..7-*?- f r’'-6-4-Sanrsc« (=rown)
Court Vo. 1


his answer.

DR. SIHVATIUS: I shall do so irr.ediatoly; however, I hrvt one
question first.

.. Are these not all idealistic points of view as the person's motive?

A. Yes, on the basis of .my discussions with people who observed these
experinents at Stateville, Illinois, the idealistic notivaticn of this
group was very high. As a natter of fact, t h i effect of this public
service rendered by th se prisoners is being followed to see* whether or
not th"t special reformative value, end up to tho present tine this
question indicates tht this public service has boon of great reform¬
ative value, in that the incidents of return to crlainellty under
parole is markedly decreased.

Do you know Hathan Leopold , or do you know who hu is?

A. Yes.

r <« Is it true that ho was condicnd to fifteen years in tho
penitentiary for nurncr?

A. For much no re than that.

’ . Do you think he is tho right p* rsor. to give an opinion regarding
the high morale status cf the inmates of a penitentiary?

A. He can r.cv.r ur;peot to got cut of the penitentiary, rnd I sco
no reason why he should r.ot express himself 'without any duress or
coercion accurately and ns he feels.

. I ah-11 shew you this report, and pleaso ascertain if you have
any remarks to make about it.

A. No, I have none.

The idealistic points of vi-.w arc associated with the war — the
state of war, -re they not, aside free, the Last or.c?

A. Vo, I do not agree, because if any coercion wire brought to bear
I^n these prisoners to serve in cftriical experiments, th: t would soon —
witi.in a week — ccce to the attention of t' e newspaper rcpc.-turs end
would appear on the front pag_ of every paper — cost every paper in
the United States.


9215


i_ Jen. :b-( trora)-


Sourr 1

c I should like to tell ;-ou " hr * J °o°* s 'l' s '"~ ro * K -

"others fc-.vo patriotic ooti-r-s ... sroqr hero sons and brothers in thp r.r»od
so-Tioos." 3fcpt. Jonas piv.s font s tfco s.-in r-sson. thin otV-r
ltdiTiduila tre brought u who rako stotonoats ir. tho =o». sense to the


a -x> effest. Is that cot so.

* : l li-^c that Is entire';’ rwosoneblu, bec-uso on individual
a r prisec.r ir • penit-nti-xy is r.o re- son thy he should not to r -trio-
tio or love his country.

c. "orhoos you Mill ndnit thr-t no one '.ould -iv- th--t r.s his mtivo
; r : .for. - S^rsan dor.asific' cion court. no nol”, that ho

to holy the -rry.

.. I <\.i n-t q‘jostion. ••Ill you pl«"oc rs."o't it*

h Sov-r led. »o , vitnoss, of thw oxruri^nt. wo h vo boro there
wore none of those, voluntocrod -bo wore outside th- r oriUrM r. ,
why did cot p:rscr.s outside tho runlt-nti'.ry volun'o-r. tnsinoss
or such in t* 1 ri- -x : srimttt, for <o«lot 3-o'u.o vo’au.t

• hr.t cot only inrat.s of penitentiary WoRlo,

.. i.s i oxpln&nod yosterdoy, oonooioBtiouo'ob^otcro troro uood,

• iso prisoners -r.r, used ir.sterd of t-tohero 'nd business non huowo
those lcdi’ .'u-ls h f no other *uties to - rfora. Th-ir tl»

ilrbl. for purpscs c ! ex; erirx.n* tier.

h Is it cot n ovil to o-rry out atnoripwts*

* - So.

s You don't thlr': so.


It is net nn -vil to o rry out exporlsants.

W But it isn't 'c .ril to h*r« to ;o throu^ *.n ox-erirv.-t • s

cn jxpjrlsetit suh'oet'

„ I ,h.ul? not. I Krrod n-.oir =3 -r. .utjoot

racy tlacs, *nd I do r.ot socsi' *r it or. evil.

V won't ou think It is r.ry mplorssirt to beoo^ infected with

n'.lcrin, to hrre fcv.rs. end other undo.irrblo =T’^tc« cf thet s-rt?

0316


V* June - :-jJ-9~2-Schrcfc-(ir err- )-
Court 1


f

i. T , it is ucploesant, but not cr. aril.

Portep* wo don't icier*tend . cdi othor. You don't tront to B'.y
it is r plo^a’ire to haro erlorlftt
Ho, it is not a plonauro.

(* Is It not c Tory ur.pleoannt end soricus diso'.so thr.t 1-ats Tor
may ye' ra?

a t ia ur.plo sort, yoa.

V If -11 cf these reraons -pp y for idoaliatic r.nsor.a, why *iro

/

they offorod jconr-i ry recover-et

.. I sup-. it to serro esc arcll reward for the unnlcnsant-

r.caa of tho oxpcrlonoc.

V Lon' t you bollovo that the Honor w '» tho *>tiva 'or mny of
thoa—a hundred doll'rat

That ia r th&r an il: r ron the point of vie. of trisoncra in tho
ir. the Unite; 1 St&tSos /. hux*^- « >llara ian't nuoh nohoy,

V. y„ r r. oriaon.r thrt would bo c.uito • lot of taon&y, it soono
to », Ttt aonsono ot liberty: it ia cot ao auoh. v

ik Hoj our nriaorora ir. tho ponitcntlory in tho Vnitot Stat *>,
who: tb^y work in fcctcrioa in tho prisons, r-ooiro pcouninry oesrpen-
sntlon f r tvt work.

V I belie TO th'.fc ia thro^-hout tho rirld.

i. That ia rut 1 rust fund for the* to m whon they out.

L Ink h t tho - new is auTficiont roojnoor* r o : —

s"ti .c f-r wh't the ox>ri -r.t* 1 auVJcot hra to .y. through*

„ I should not consider it so, ard I don't bolioTo th't any of tho
prisoners did. ^ e mttoi f f;ot,-1 w-.s told thot moo of thoa would
not c coupt th. ooncy.

V If ore d-clcr s one’s self to be - Toluntcar, nust >no not
we-ipht tho tdT nt'rcs crcinst the disr.dvr-ct pcs?

A I « -liC-Ti so.

V The dis'dT'nVre hero is the risk of a aoricua diaocao, tho

921'*


lU Jun:-. -jJ-£-3-3ebHtb-(3rc*T:)-


Ccurt 1

ciTactego :s fifcy-or r. husdrod dcll'-ra.

„ 1 should s’y tho ed-rrntc*c is boinr rblo to s.rvo for the rood
of hunr.nlty.

W For whr.t renaon w r.s the aor.-y not p: id i-cediatol;—but Jr. two
pnyaor.tB? So f'r r.s I renrtfccr frea n docunor.t yostordoy, tho hundred
dollar* wo* r Id r* fellows: Fifty dollr-ra 'ft r thj fir at wonth, and tho

;thor fifty ■ ft-r or.e yo=r. In other w.rds, r priaor.er h « to do his Job

•

first. Kew, why wta thr.t a-?

a I pr ®uc» thrb that is Juat the c -oa n wry of c oir.g business

A

in tho Uritod States when rn rrroeamt is involved. 1 r>r .sune tho lawyers
hrd sene thin; tc d.: with th'.t.

W hes tho rentes n.'t this: thr.t tho oriscser would I s-, his
entiiuslrsa for tha cxojriwmt r.d would corse to oocnorrte? C-uld th»t
hove boon • j rer* n fer bain; n littl- cirouaspoot in tho p-.ynu-.t.?

4. X dvubt that.

i* r. you tei w. f cr«e where the cxp.rirnt'l sub.';Oot did n t wih
to c ntir.uo tho exporina-t?

a Ih't hr* not boon -?/ ox r rionoo. .uid cooording ta tho ros« ns.

that I a tc thet questi-n when I out it tc Ir. In*in-,.ho told thot

no >no expressed r. doairu t 'ithdrew at nny tiw..

V. Fr.foss r, 1 hero soon r. d our*nt on experiments in hur.;or

that woro o'rriod -ut cn oensoientiau* objooter*. Thr.t nppeorod ir. n

periodic 1. It is dosoribod h w th-so oonsoiemti us objoot- rs w.nt

through consider?ble u\plocs'ntnoss end did net want to continue the

exyericent. They did only ctffo-t 'ttort to o-tinuo with their rrordse.

/

Is thet taviwn to you?

UP.. Ha. -T: I sur-cst thr.t C-unaol refer to tho doouaent th-.t he is

tnlkir-c rVut ot this tine and -. to it -rrilr.blc fer It. Ivy. or o-.to

%

the foot-, reliable, the pirtloulrr detr, an that Dr. Ivy "ill be fully
aware of the oirounatanoe*. "


9218


14 Jjr.-.-::-5J-c-4-5cbtb-(3rcr-)-
Ccurt 1


TH2 FRiilLUrT: Does counsel teto - dooirent which ho c n =r Ico ovci-
l&blo? Then he will usv it.

Da, 32EV..riU5: X* hero only one copy in Sr.-liah bore, (Prosontod to
witness). I shall hrvo to find tho pcssnfe I cn r ferriap to.

1 o'n't aooc to find it. "his is a long doouaeat and so-rcwhoro thoro
is tho atetosint thrt tho cxperi?»ntnl subjoots hrvo to summon all thoir
forces to rexeir. in the -xperiner.t. Kowevor, I shrll drop tho aub;»cot for
the norwnt.

BY LH. 5SRV*7I’JSi

9

^ witness, is there not cnethor intuooaant that p rsu-.dos
prisenirs to volunteer for expwrirents? !s n.'t tho rros-'oot of -"rdon or
other edv-ntr-ges tho reason for applying?

.. ».hor. these rrl'.rln oxperiaonts sterted, that prosocot sms not
held out to ho prisoners, hsnoo the possibility of o reduction ir
sor.tor.ee, in being pieced on parole sooner th*n otherwise, w-s not
c prospoot. It'wevar, sinoo soevo of th-so rwl-vrin experiments hrvo boon
tornln'-ted o ruduotion of sentences ir. rdditior. to thr.t *llowod for
ordinary "good tia," h- s boon granted by the pr.rolo board.


9219


LL Jur.e-i:-?T>-10-l-Ar.airxer (Iat. sratti)

Court No. 1


Far that reason Governs Green of the State of Illinois appointee' a
comlttoe with ae a3 Chari.oan to consider this question -hioh you have
ir. nind: Ho* ouch reduction of sentence can be aliened in such instan¬
ces so that the redaction ir. sentence will not be treat enough to exert
undue influence or constitute duress in obtaining volunteers. I fceve
ay conclusions ready and can read thea to you, if you desire to hear
then.

C..— Please 'o so. Ifcy I asTc when, this cosnittce was formed?

A.- The for as ti on of the committee, according to the host -1 ijy re¬
collection occurr d in Dccuaber, 1916, when the prisoners with indeter¬
minate sentences \tcro up for consideration for pox ole. This was the
first time the question of reduction in sontix.ee care \xp.

G.- One aor- question, witness. Did the formation of thio corv.'ittco

have anythin to do with t!.o face that this trial is going on, or »ith

the fact that this a&larir. cas« wns published in LIFE ILAGAZIiJZ rnd

•

that it was or.olicitly stated that the -xpcrix-ental sublets woro recei¬
ving no coap-nantion, no vrclon, reduction of sont.r.co? Is thorc any
connection bctwocr. those things?

A.- : re is no cxn.ction between tho action in this canittoo
betwuen the ointoont of this crmittcc nr.d this trial, for tlds r-r-
son : that there- is a division of opinion r-^rreing tho work th t tl*.
parole boards do. Sr.a boiievo that tho vrolc boarcs ar- too soft;
others bJllwVo that they 8TO too hard* 3 tl >n in swtonoo -ro

too groat, parol- boards eould b« critizec in the newspapers. Obviously
the per. 1 - bvrr ants to act on the oasis cl tho bejt opirdon on co-
dic-.l -thics tho;* cm obtain. Accordingly, this committee ves ap¬
pointed.

f..- Valid olease bo so od as i* r;*.d what you intended fc--

forc?

„.- Tr.-r~ r- two conclusions:

■Conclusion i: Tho s-rvic- of prisoners rs sublets in io J ical ox-

9223


IL Juno-:£-FI/-lC-2-Ar-inger (let. Brown)

Court ::o. 1

periatnts should be rewarded tn addition to the ordinary good tLiO
allowed for good conduct, i nod us try, fidelity, and courage, but the ox-
cess tine rower* cd should not be so great as to court undue influence
ir. obtaining the consent of the prisoners. To rive an cxcessivu reward
would be contrary to the ethics of nedicino .and would debase one’ Jeo¬
pardise r. ret hod for doing good. Thus the aacunt of reduction of senten¬
ce in prison should bo dctoralnod by the foreboarnr.ee required, by the
expcrinxnt, and the character of the prisoner. It is believed that a
100 i incruaso ir. ordinary good ti-oo during the duration of tho experi-

.aents would not bo wxcessivv in those erioerrts requiring the vj:t-

•

ain forth oro tco.

"Conclusion 2: A prisoner ircavable of becoming r Low abiding ci¬
tizen *culd be tol in cdvance, if he desires to s-rv- as o subject in
a audio el e:y*rla..r£, not to expect any reduction in s-nter.ce. A 'hsr.er
who perxtrte- -r. treci-us cria ., even thouji c-ocblu of b-co.iir.g c
lew abiding citizen, should be told in advance, if he desires to nerve
a a subject in r. a-ij.cal oxpuriaont, not to exjxjct any drastic roduo-
ti jr in Sentence. 11

I night explain, when I use' - the exrecoi n "ro'‘ucti^n in wiitenco

ir. prison," that that Ltplios t.v.t when the .-risonur in ruleaned on n-

role, he is still ur. r sup-rvisiati, cbServ.-tien, or sonteaco utsido

of prison. H- is subject to rxr-nt nd n-turr. to orison at any tine;

So »h-n We say reduction of sentence in orison, w- do not xnn that

ther- is on actual reduction of s-r.t.nco prescribed by the court. T!s*t

is the lav ?n tie State of Illinois.

Q.- -3s, io the ux-erioi.ntal subjects are prisorurn, era they

told about tliis policy ahead of tlx?

A'.- They will obviously have to bo told of this policy fro* n» on,

since tr.- oat ter .as c-o. up f:r tie iirst tlx.

Q.- fester-'ay a pros-cut i or. d-cu--nt u.as shown to you. Th t vas

exhibit pit, D- -rt:o.nt of Justice, Bur -u of Prisons, a d.cuiwnt fraa

9221


li. Jttn --U-? Ij- \5s~y~ Ar linger (Int . 3 rows)
C:urt Ko. 1


Tut*. This was in no docoaoct boak but was put in only yesterday. I
s h all i--Y_ this Bhesr. to you ini-diatcly. Ir, it it stc.t*s the folinj-
lr.£: This is a :-ra irco the Doprrtjunt of Justice, Bureau of Friacr.s,'

= str.te&eab of volir.tary c^.sent and it s-ys her. the following:

■I agree to cooperate to the fullest ext.nt with the physicians coi>-
ducting the study during on over-.all observation -voriad of noproxitr.-

t-ly 18 a-. nt:j. 1 understand th- ; at the conclusion of the observation

period, I -a to be furnished with on appropriate Certificate of :;.rit
end a sta.tc.aent of uy voluntary cx a-raticn in th-. study and the fact
that I have thus r-nder-d voluntarily an outstanding service to humanity
uill be placed in :iy official record."

Is that not a rather extensive pronis. which right indue- a -rioojier
t« apply *i tut having a purely idealistic n;tive?

a.- A C. -tificr.tc of Xrit is an attraotivu little certificate)
thet the rxs -ner c-vld have ftr.au: and ho could hang on tho wall of
his prison c-ll. .iter he was released, he could take it hone and. show
it to his friends, and I tldnk it .drht serve as an incentive to load
the pr.vious wr.t<- oer not to go into the ways >f n ru doin a-ain,

Q.- D; you not think that it has a very practical usefulness? i)o
y>u nit think that it w.uld load the oolice to treat ono a little -aore
l-rleRtly:

a.- I i£>t it, .although I can't tostify xe c eri*r.s what th- polico
Right do.

Q.- Don't you think that it would be el son -id when lojHng for
r. J?b aft.r htt r-leasL.?

her. r. :ris r,_r is released on *rl., bcf.Te he is release;,'
a. i.-b is f- *n£ for nin.


9322


1U Jute L7-T-».T!>-1 1-1 -Cress (Int. ^rom)
Court So* 1


T Ion tr--• to got such a Job. Do you always find one?

1 Bb weald not bo released unless a Job bad boon found for bin.

That la port of the penal system.

q But, If this is a prisoner who is In prison for a specific and

dofinito scntor.ce and ..ho after bavin servod his tor.-, is roloasod, -bos

0

not this certificate of rerit stand Ms: in very c.ood stead in his search
for a Job?

A I do not know tbet such ever occurred because vo have agonoios
whos-i function it is to find Jobs for prisoners reljasod fron the poni-
tontiary so that they vill not bo touted to 'o back into the ways of
cri.ee because the najor purpos- of the penal syston in the Uni tod States
today is r;for»tivo rather than punitivo.

Q Tbo prisoner tokos tMs cortificate of .-writ with Mn hons in
order to oho that ho has inprovod and that ho has voluntarily done
atorwcwr.t. So this do os play a rolo, doosn*t it?

A That nay bo one way of loolcin" at it.

3 os ttero not such a oaso in tho first docunont that I showed
to you, tho radio r.port whore the lottor .Titer says, "I an oondounod
for life and I want to help bocauao tho Ar$r wants w to." 'as this
not, ol3o, the thou-.ht of atonoaont?

• « I would say it was tho thought of bain, able to do a good dood

for hx unity h.rcas in th. C3t tho individual prisoner had not per*-
forced good deeds. It sty in that ay bo considorod an atoneraont or
oxpatiation or expiation.

'i 13 that not on. of the eain thoughts that the the publlo has,
r.anily it is ncro or less iaaaniod that a prisoner oako hi ’solf availablo
for axp-jrirwnts? Is ret public opinion th_ place where you find this
viow roprosoutod?

• A !!o, not at all.

3 I want to put two articles to ycu. Tou know tb newspaper, Tho

Stars and Stripes, the Arry newspaper?

9233


1U Jxaa ,7-li-i-ii^.r>Cro33 (mt. 3ro*n)
Court So. 1


a I knc w such a paper oxisto, yes.

Q And do you know that it is tbo newspaper with the largoet
circulation onong soldiers horo in tho continent?

A I don*t know that but I should pro sure so.

^ I '..111 put a document to you. . or identification purposos it
will set Exhibit rsebur 73 113.

Iff!. &VOTi Tour /Jonors, I lust object to tho aiisslon of this
document in evidence. This is :nrcly -in opinion of a Staff Sor'oant in
the Uni tod States .xz? In what r± at be tho 5 bag soction. It looks to
ns like a natter of that sort. I donH think it would have any valuo
hero. I night pass it up to tbo Tribunal for your perusal.

TIC .''-3SIDT;;Ti That is ycur theory', counsel, in considering this
pnpor joriccd 301 and 113?

IR. SZIVATIUSi I «ot this oxcorpt fren tho newspaper which is
published horo in Oor-any. I rocoivod it, it was used in another trial
and I an puttin it ir. booauso it scone to no its cont j-.ts aro natorial.
Thu question ia bother expo risen to oan bo oarriod out on prisoners
froa tho point of view of their doing otono;jont. I an of tho opinion that
oxpsrirv-nts carried out in Cjt>ujv could bo ordjrod by the Ota to bocauso
urgontly ncodod by tho Stato and that they could bo carriorl out as
atoncivnt in vrisor^r's sontonoos. And, in order to provo a general view
and not coafired to th. Third “etch I an puttin in this newspaper articlo
and I also want to put in an articlo froa an English newspaper, "Tho
pooploto the sar.o affect. Htwrovor, tho English writer Uowollyn is
axprossinc; tho opinion of other pooplo without criticising it and also
ways that tho olenent of atoitoaont playG a part.

JJDG2 SEBPiyr-t Or. Servutius, to you maintain that the naao that is
supposed to bo signed'to this articlo is the nano of sonoeno who is
supposod to bo on authority in thi3 subject or is supposod to represent
soul considerable sogncr.t of world opinion? j

\J

m. SEEVATIOS* I cannot naku that statenont because I do not know tho

non. Her evor. this is a periodical with a -rout circulation and this

9234


li* Jar-o li7-H-uTi>-l 1-0-Oros 3 (Int. Brown)
Court Sd # 1


article went through tha censorship. TJri.3 then is an article regarded as

partioont in authoritative dr cl os. Of c cur sc, this thing hero aroused

great cxeitecant in SS circles an’ is not an article just sent in.

• •

JTDGE S3ann» I3 it 7 our view that you cro of the opinion that
this represents sooc (xnsitkrablo so^aant of .\n~rican thought.

nr.. SEOkflUSi It was so 3 trikin th. t it could go through tho
censorship which is h^ro for tho soldi-rs a*v! could appear in the country
whoro rcadUr of such an article would causo groat axciterunt. Tho
inpertant thin^ is not *0 wrote it but tho noin tMr<j is it passed the
consors.

JUCG2 SZanTi hat is th- proveoatlvo fact sought to bo olicitod

in presentin', this thin*, h:ro to tho vitnoss?

m. S HV.’.TISSj I wish to jxit it to tho witross in ordor to hoar

fren hin nhothor this also is on expression of tho idoa of atoncaont of
•

which tho witness has already spokon. lead. I should like to add tho

thought is expressed in this noirsynp^r which is well known to uc dofonso

counsel frer. tho aair trial L\V. Again and again wo rocoivod lottors in

which such thin-? wore expressed, frai Ckjrnny and Aaorica. So that I

say tho rctivo of .atonu-vint is not sanothin I pulled out of riy hat but

an idoa readily circulated an ’ Mch has vide circulation* I do not havo

tho actual newspaper h.ro 'xit I ha to a certified copy. I an not offering

it as a docuunt I ju3t iant to road it.

TH5 PTSSUBJflt Tho Tribunal will aosirw that this is a corroot copy

of what purports to bo a ljttor urintod in tho Star3 and Stripes. Tho

natter is ontiraly without probative value. Tho opinion of tho witnoso

on thu otter would not aid tho Tribunal on tho natter which is a oat tor

of sccao sensational letter that was written. Tho Tribunal do os not

desire to waste any tiao at all on the natter. Objoctior. is sustained*

Q !>♦ President I ask ^mission to pit to tho writer a snail

mwspapor re tic a fren ttu newspaper “Tho ?aoplo“ of 3 ‘torch 19U6. This

is an Snslish Newspaper. Rosar-ing -» «iofendanta boforo tho TT tho

9225


lU jam i-7-i^u7>il-i--Gro9a (ln% Bro*n)

Coart So. 1

following was stated* Tho opinion of oaae people is that th>y should be
condemned Tory soon. Thin it says: "Others believe that they should bo
mdo to oxplato their crires by balping; to cure cancer, leprosy and
tuberculosis as bolioo for oxpcrinsnts."

Is the thought of a toner*: nt contained thjrein?

A Yes, but it is exprossod in a hysterical remnor.

Q Yos, I agree with you.

'.fitness, do you baliovo that if a person doos not volunteer for
an oxperinont the Stato can or for such atononent?

A Ho.

Q Do you not boliovo that you can oxpoct scuothing of a prisonor
that coos beyond his actual sent one o if at tho sano tine people out. si do
a prison aro subject to such burdens?

A Ho. Those idoas u^ro ^.v-jn up ar.ry years ago in tho scionco and
study of ponolo:y. The prianry objoctivo of punolo y today Ln rnforrativo
not purltivo, not oxpiativo.


LL June-: '-Tu- 12-1-Kx<ie (Irt. 5r.im)

Court to. 1

Q.- -i toe a a, ia th*t tho recognized theory :.f penology throughout
the who Id world today?

A.- It nay not be tho recognized theory throughout tho -./holo world
to!ny, but it ia tho prevailing theory in the United Stnte?. Trwrc ia
°n- othor ‘ST-oct thr.t ia quite Largo rod oss-ntial, end thr.t ia tho
protective aspect of Lapriaonoent, to protect aoci-ty froa a habitual
criminal.

9

Q.~ ’..'itrwaa, if e soldier at th- front is caeposod to an •epidermic
end cen be -la:at certain that h- will c^.tch typhus ard d.a.rts rml
hides behind the or.tecting walla j i Q prif. n, would you not consider
it justifiable if ho ia persuaded to volunteer for an cxocrirwnt that
concerns itself with typhus?

A.- hUI you road tho question again?

r .*- If o soldier dosurts frx» the front where typhus ia raging
for fear that to too will contr-ct typhus and nrefers to be lupriaon-d
in order thua to save hizaelf, do you think it is right for hin to bo
porai-.dod while he ia serving hia sentence to subject hloaelf to c
typhus exportaont?

A.- As a volunteer? Tea.

I see. And would you not t'ku r. step further, if this arisonor

"No, I refuse, because if I do this there wouldn't have been any
point in ij dusertinfcj I debited in order to save ayself. Uy buddioa
aay dio but I Juat would prefer not to."

a.- Tho answer to that question ia no.

C.- Don't you adait that one can hold a different view in this
natter?

A.- Tea, out I don 't boliovo it could be Justified.

Q.- ‘litnoas, take the f-Ll-aing case. Y-u are in a. city in which
plague is racing. Y:u, aa a doctor, have a drug that y-u could use to

•

coAat the plague. However, you uuat Uat it on sonwbody. The ewatt'or,

er let's say tlu onyor of th. city, ones to you and s ys, "Hero ia a

9227


U J one —H—F Ir- 22 - 2 -i ; rxaio (Int, 3 r «n)
Court to. 1


criainnL coodcanod to death. Save ns bj earring sot the - xperi^nt. :*i
this aan." Would yA refuse to do so, or would you do It?

A.- I wield refuse to do so, because I do not boliove that duross
f thr.t s rt icrfanta the broiJdnt of othical ar»d aoral principles.

That is why ‘-ho K to Convention and Genov- Convention wore foraul-tod,
to acke war, - barbaric cnt-ipriso, q little a ire fanaene.

Q.- Do you b-UoV- that the population of c city would h-vc r.ny
understanding fa* your action?

A,- Thoy hevo no under standing f.r tbo importance of tl>o 'rinter.r*nco

of tho prlnciolos of aedic.-l ethics which apply over a Ions period of

years, rather thru'. a nh.rt period <f years, Physicians oad radical scion-

^_^iats should Cn nothing with the idea of to poraril j doing good which

when carried out ropoatcdl? .v.r a period of tiau would debase and Joo-

p'rdito n .arthod for Coins go:d. If n aedioal scientist breaks the coc’.o

A axlical ethics an will say, "Kill the Sors n," in order t do what

he thinks any be ^ooc., in tho c.urso of tLie that will gr and will

c-uow a 1 <80 of 1 ' 1 th l the public in tho ae ic -1 or Session, and hence

destroy the crpr.cdty >f the .sedic-i pr.fessi<n to do its giod for socle- .
ty. The r«as>n that we aust be very careful in the u»e <f hu-ian beings

as suMects in studied experLsonta is r. t to debase and Jeopardise this
■aoth d f.r lng _rent . by caur < . tho public to re'et against it.

Q.- .itnoss, do you n<t believe that /Air Ido -1 attitude hero Is
airs r l.ss a sin_,lo pers<n st-nding against the b.^y of public opi-
nim?

a.- No, I d. not. That is why I rend the principles of .nodical y
ethics yesterday, and th't is why the American Medical Ass-elation has
agreed oss.rfiti.aUy aith those principles. That is why the orinci->lcs,
the ethical >rir*i ilos f.r tb. us- of hurra beings in .oe-’ical -wpori-
a-nts have been quite unif.ra throughout tho w.rld in the past.

-Q.- Then you do not buU-ve that the ur^.cy, the necessity of this

city would make a revision of this attitude a-c-saary?

, * ‘ ° 23 ?


^ *®“2-rL-12-£-Hia (let. 3r»a)

C-ort It,. 1


A.- IT-, nut il th.y were In esngor >f killing tuoplo in the cjutso
- f testing -Ot the -"ru, r r-.o&dy. 7b.ru is n- justification in
Idliir. -iv psopl. in -r’.r to snv- the liv_a ,f five hundred.

Q.- Then you m j1 the spin! n thf.t the life A the .-no prit ncr

sast be .rus.rv. 1 ov.n ii thu ah it city perish.fl?

•*

r BT t: atint l . ot the f ;r. a , ;-.s.

Q.- ra the oolnt .1 vie* X the politician, d: y.-u consider it
?•>■ i k° r -l «« -he city t.» perish in the int-r-ats of presorting
this prirci io n pr-Sei-vinc th. life X the -no prisoner?

•

politician, unless hu kn vs ie-'icine u£ wSiosl .tides,

has n> rtas-.n t a.-Jco a duels! «n -r. that p int.

q.- But rj r. politician h- .aust v.ke a focisl-n about whr.t is

t hr ? )-n. SI *U he c.erce the ct -r t: oarry -ut th. exp.ri'.nt, or

si-all hu ir toct thi C ct;r Xr rz the r^u A the multitude?

r^u cor.»t eaoBor that qo.sUon. I should my this, that there

is n stitu a no politician under the sun that c-old X rce a- to :er-

r ^ Leal -.';.-rL>ent which I th ught * rally un.lustiXl. .

Q.- Y u tnen, -a^itu the order, w «ld n t c*rry ut thu on’or,
end would profar to be jxucutet a® e mrtvr?

i

A.- That is cjrrect, end I kn * there are thTmtands of poaplo
in the Unite.' States »h . wuuld have to da likewise.

Q.- And o yj'i not -Is bvli.ve that in th us-rels of cities thu

*

*>opulatl o n v -til kill the \ct-r «h j X-une hloself in that position?

A.- I - t belieVe 3 bceruso they » uL not kn». H'.: Valid
they kn w ViH-ti*.or th- '1 at r h ’ - -'ru that •» old r would n’t relieve?

fc “ ^ •

The ct r ?r?al n t kr.-w hLaseli, bocauae he w-uL: have t oo 'erinont
lirst.

Q.'itfv-ss, I put a hyp.thetical ense to y u. IX are- to turn to
reality other quest! ns w uld arise. I si..ply w^t to h_*r nxt y.ur
„e!v»r-l attitu.e t; this pr^jlea. I u nro tb-n X the jpini -n that .a

d ct.r sh -ilh not carry ut the rA-r. .'av y u 'Iso of the pini n that

5229


I"*


1 L Jon«-i-Pt-22-Jr-&r:3ie (Int. 2rown)

Court '.<>• 1

the politician should net give such an order?

A.- Tea, I relieve ho should not cive such an order.

Q.- Is this not a purely political decision which auet be left at
the discretion of the .political leader?

A.- Kot necessarily. He should sock the best advice that he can
obtain.

Q.- If he is informed that this one eroeriner.t on this one oriconer
*.ould save the whole city, he cay yve the order despite the fact that
the doctor doea not wish to carry it out, is that what you think?

A.- Ho then.could «ive the order, but if the doctor still believed
that it was contrrr* to his ooral responsibilities then the doctor should
not cerrv out the order.

That is mother cuostior., -.hetber or not he carris* it out,
but in each cooos -ou consider it is peraicr i v le to give tl-nt ordor, is
that what I understood you to say?

A.- Aftor .0 has obtained tho best advice on the subject which
he can obtain*

Q.- Then he car. rive the order, yes or no?

A.- Yes.

DR. SSP.VATI-S: !*. President, I aa turning now to another thece.
Perhaps this Mould be a ^ood tine to roceos.

THE FttaSU. T: Your estimate of the tiao you would take to cross
exaaine this witnesa waa fartjsdive ainutes, which you have now cncooted.
Hon auch longer wall yeer croso-oxauination continue?

SR. saivmus: "x. President, ay questions were short, but the
answers were lor. . I iave a nuaber of questions, not too may . It roes
not deoond on -*>, but I car. assure tb.t I shall be done in telf an hour.

!?. HAR^T: Your Honor, I eight state, if you would try to deter¬
mine the length of ci.ne ..;ich it id U be necessary to keep Dr, Ivy on
tta atness Stan: , t at the Prosecution's redirect examination will be
very, vory brief, 11 any at all.

0330


1 L JonsFI/-12-5-Baxsie (Int. Browr.)

Court Vo. 1

THE WJSSOSPi. T: I understand that Dr. ;.elte, on behalf of the Dg-
l end ant ilar.cloeor, desires to ask scae questions which he estreatat at
fiitten minutes. Dr. Fle-toing on behalf of tho defendant i!ru?cr:nky ••ill
croes-cruLaina the rri.tr.oss, the doctor str-ted, to tho extent o' about fif¬
teen oinutos. Dr. St<_nbauer, of course, or. oc ha If of tho Defendant
3ciirlbock will hevo croas-oxaniratior. of tho witness which tho doctor
estimated at an hour, is that correct?

DR. STuSfiAlJ?.s An ho<ir to an hour and a half. It depends upon the
answers.

TIC FRdSID.1T: It appear that this counsel ——

Dft. FRITZ (For Dolt reant P.oso) : >tr. President, I too wish to put
c nations to tho er^rt witness. Roughly an hour is what I*shall need.

!£*.. HARJI: I thought tret would be tho Jnport of the questions put
to tho witness hr the dwfunso counsel lor Rose. I thought ho would toko
up general questions for aU counsel.

LR. 7I?P (For Defendant Backor-Fre/sang): I shall wish to aok a
fuw questions for 3eCker-F“.73anf, to be sure not too esny. Tils, hor-
-v.r, will to: - half ar. hour.

THi ?«ei3IDu:T: Unless tho Tribunal is to sit this afternoon, counsel
sust be prorare to confine tk-nsolvea to tna tiaw. which they have cs-
tl-nted for examination on Monday. Counsel unierstands that if wo do
not hold r.r. aft-rnoon session today that they oust be United on their
cross-oxaainatior. bn- ay to tJv tire which they bivo e3tl^tud. Do do-
l<-nse ccunsv .1 understand that? Ih.ru wiU be time lioaday to couplet. tlx-
oross-exaiination with tlx. und .retarding that defense couns.l will U-
Ut thuasoiv.s to the ti-Ce which th-y have estimated. They wiU be told
to that Uait.

DF.. riJJPr.'&.Zi (For Defendant Rudolf &*»ndt)i 1lr. President, I do not
know whether you have Included the tine that I n-ed. I shall newd roughly
t-n ednutes for r.udclf Brandt.

Tlih .-PJSLI.T: I did not know that Dr. Xaulfoam was goint to jerti-

9231


14 Jar.c-tt-Flr-12-©-Hflxsic (Mt« Browrj
Court Ho. 1

cipete in the exarl nation.

It will bo ci.'oratooa the Trlbur.il will r.ot hold a session this
afternoon. It will bo uraierstood the dof^aec counsel will United to
available tine cr. '.onday in which all deferac counsel sust co.inL.to
tfctiir cross- axa-tlnation of th- witr. as hall an hour before clocin ti.uo
Monday aft moan.

Thv. Tribunal -ill now b. in r.c-.as until rlr.«-thirty o'clock Hon¬
ey "ornin/.

TIC fl.bSHAL: The Tribunal will b. in receaa until nim-thirty
o'clock Skrdajr »nxr.= .

(Th, Tri goal ocjourn.d until 16 Jun. 1947, at 0930 houra.)


9232


MICROCOPY


ROLL
