JANU UAM

onau RANARINSAPEAR AN MA
dui

E socer OF BOMBAY

 TOWN HALL, BOMBAY 400 023,

AR RARAR

Digitized with financial assistance from the
Government of Maharashtra
on 15 June, 2016

HONGKONG: -
. Im a
‘Preven ‘Ae m3 Loxvox Missron ary. SOCIETES

o PRINTING Omes, “i

nT

0005814

ADVERTISEMENT.

ace to the former volume, the author related how he had
raged and enabled to undertake the publication of the
rk by the manificent assistance of the late Hon. Joseph
sq. He has now to record another instance of generosity,
on with it, on the part of another of the merchant-princes
nd. By an arrangement with the Hon. John Dent, Esq.,
s will be sold at half price to missionaries;—to Protestant
an Catholic missionaries equally. .

g the Works of Mencius, the author is glad to refer to
tion of them, published by Stanislaus Julien, in Paris,
He is not conscious of much obligation to it, because
rsion was made in the first place without having seen it,
n of his notes differs. materially from that of Julien’s
y. He has hardly ever consulted it, however, without
on to admire the nice discrimination and accurate scholar-
translator. The wish has often arisen that Monsieur
spent his life in China, and devoted himself exclusively
studies;—in which case the author ‘would probably not
ccasion for his dial toil,

GKONG, 21st November, 1861.

\

+ HONGKONG ;,
‘Passe AT $e Losv0N Miséroxaxr. Society's

n

 parering Once,

ADVERTISEMENT.

ace to the former volume, the author related how he had
raged and enabled to undertake the publication of the
rk by the munificent assistance of the late Hon. Joseph
sq. Ile has now to record another instance of generosity,
on with it, on the part of another of the merchant-princes
id. Dy an arrangement with the Hon. John Dent, Esq.,
s will be sold at half price to missionaries;—to Protestant
an Catholic missionaries equally. .

g the Works of Mencius, the author is glad to refer to
tion of them, published by Stanislaus Julien, in Paris,
He is not conscious of much obligation to it, because
rsion was made in the first place without having seen it,
n of his notes differs. materially from that of Julien's
y. He has hardly ever consulted it, however, without
on to admire the nice discrimination and accurate scholar-
translator. The wish has often arisen that Monsieur
spent his life in China, and devoted himself exclusively
,studies;—in which case the author would probably not
casion for his present toil.

KONG, 21st November, 1861.

€ - —

CONTENTS.

I. THE PROLEGOMENA.

CHAPTER I.

' OF THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.,

ir Recognition under the Han dynasty, and before it, s.. se se o
ou K'e, and his Labours upon Mp. Si. a w was we me S ar
er Commentators, ... px

CHAPTER II.

MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES.

ODE DICTIONUR, E T"

e Disciples of Mencius, ... oh HE OW eee. te RA. oe
pendix, Ñ, That the Nature i is ‘Evil. By the philosopher Seun,... ..

CIIAPTER III.
OF YANG CHOO AND MIH TEIH.
e Opinions of Yang Gnog > Sy SA. BD We. Go a ae xx» m
Opinions of Mih Teih, Sk. WD. GASH GR eX) m disc soppy ral few
CHAPTER IV.
WORKS CONSULTED IN THE PREPARATION OF TIIS VOLUME.

hinese Works, ... €— — kalat sai at
anslations and other Works, BWR ERE: RRR Jue) ONUS tate

°H. THE BODY OF THE VOLUME.

e Works of Mencius, S "T
lil. INDEXES.

bject$, see see ee He em e mer ee cH m Hee He omea
oper Names,

———— M

grity ; Authorship; and Reception. among the Classical Books,. v* i vu is

Influence and Opinions, M M AE UR w« De AE NR CAR DM DUREE.

An Examination of the Nature of Man. By Hau Wan-kung, ... ois ae

iene Characters ind DURER, rN e a a wel dX» ef Me

PAGE

10

o5
103

126
127

1—378

ERRATA. “Vil

. ERRATA.
. ,
I. IN THE CHINESE TEXT.

Page Column. Page. Column.

7, 4, fr TP. read =F.) 140, 6, ET is inverted,
11,&146, 5&2, , 3 » qus 1, for EPA read ir.

r

15, 2, after 27 dele the comma. 147, 10, » Eo. R8
18, 10, for FA red JA 19, 1, » ER oo» B
53, 10, » A » A 53 9, » BÈ » B
67, 7, after T == put a stop. 162, 3, 8 $8 5 Sif.
72, 6, for K read — t£ 174, 1, » » js.
75, 6, » SE .. Be. vs 4, » BB oo» JR
78, 8, SOM a grs i; » E , x
90, 5, Ex 9t Es 210, 5, » ME » BE
96, ' 9 .aE . Hos 5, » HE n ft
102, ae UU.» FB 207, 9, bis, n HM. dd.
106, 8, dele f- 226, — 8, after H dele the comma.
115, 1,&innote,for If read Zyl. 226, & 250, S, & T, for FA read =P.
122, 10, » Wo. H 262, 1, after Tt put a comma.

126, 4, " bu 5 1]. 382, 8, 3 ir dele the comma,
136, & 363, 9, & 6, 7 liii » Ppa. 369, 3, for JX read D

Page. 140, between the 7th and 8th columns, i is inverted.
» 1983 4 4 Isand2d y for == read [fi].

i CHINESE CHARACTERS IN THE NOTES.

Page. + Line. Column. Page. Line. Column,

10, 19,20, I, for jf read JW. 208, ^ 13,” IL, for JE read $E
^5 2, 1, » $., rj 2), 3, — Los. He it
BA, 12 Do fs 230, 1, D, » Ph » W
95, 9, H, » E» 3 256, — 6, m, » Fi» Fi
12, 3 L » Tdi. (Hs 9 Hoo. WK » Fe
192, 16, m, » JẸ » BR 358,78, Lo. Ww. $i.
140, 13, II, transpose B e 250, 9, t BE» S
12, HL, IL, for ^ JA read fii. In prol, p. 5, note 6, » Ben K

155, — 10, IL, 97K IT 2 $i

HL IN THE PROLEGOMENA. .

42, 6, after Inferior dele comma... a 79, 35 for 115 read 1,115................

48, 35, for it read 1t............ 91, bef. and aft. Keu-keuch ins. a com.

66, 3, insert between before sovereign, Jud 104, sd line of uote, for exulity read equality.
and dele i$ in line 4.........

viii a ERRATA. EET

IV. IN Tiie TRANSLATION , AND NOTES.

Pr. 1.

Page. Line, "o (4. Page. Line. Column.

25, ^6, + after pigs 'ánser&' dogs. 4, 3, , forhe& ,. read ho.
94, 9, & in note, for Chaon. ^ "read: Chíaot. gq ] IL. x EN th, =z
DE ea -y Gisching » Yod-ching. : j RU NE ? Nt
69, 19;-et ab, » E-yun ., “Yin. 739, 10, 1L, , 3d 2d.
110, E Qin note, n Kan, i Keen. 207, 19, I, bef. signification. ‘insert widest,
432, 14, « after by: insert. i the, 234, 1, IL, » 2d read 3d:
131, By, eral, for Seu read. Shoo: 282, 5, `L, , loo » too.
132, 6, o» hanks » kinds; 901, 3, Ji, , man » men,
M 4. transpose. mugwort ind for. 304, 1, — IT, „ Suxo Spe.
$035, Q.- for woh ^" — read tsew. 2275 1, IL, transpose hands .and feet.
212, 19, after Kwang insert Chang. 858, 5, I., „after much insert ns.
295. 2 & in note, for taou read tow. In the trans., dele comma,—p. 11, l 12, after
QW, 6, ETE x » emperor. States ; 30, 1. 14, after Ts'e; 47, 1.6, after him;
= ^ » Mo ena 91, 1.9, after Chung; 227, L5, after what. In
248, 12, E » thousand ps hundred, the notes, dele comma,—p. 61, } 18, IL, after
308, à - x dew v. g bow: bere; 69, 23, Iņ after Fis; 139, 210, I., after
822, 6, . bo 1e » «othe. :
33) 9, ? dove ^ respect. Hp: 192, 7. 22, Iņ, after E: 841, 1.10, I.,
B52, 10, after Yaou insert and. icc. i

“B68, 5, '& in note, for Pwan read P'un, Y Hi.

&c., &c.

In the heading, P+ 225-231, for Pr. n... ,,
0» yp . 925, . ou. vr. n Cu. H.

PROLEGOMENA.

CHAPTER L
OF THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

SECTION I.
THEIR RECOGNITION UNDER THE HAN DYNASTY, AND BEFORE IT,

1. In the third of the catalogues of Lew Hin,! containing a list

_of the Works of Scholars? which had been collected up to his time

(about A.D. 1), and in the first subdivision, devoted to authors of

the classical or orthodox School, we have the entry—“‘The Works

of Mencius, in eleven Books? At that date, therefore, Mencius’

writings were known and registered as a part of the BUraMe of
: China.

» 2. A hundred years before Hin, we have the testimony of the
historian Sze-ma Ts‘een. In the seventy-fourth Book of his “ His-
torical Records,” there is a brief memoir of Mencius,* where he says
that the philosopher, having withdrawn into private life, * with his
disciples, Wan Chang and others, prefaced the She and the Shoo,
unfolded the views of Confucius, and made ‘The Works of Mencius,
in seven Books.’ "5

The discrepancy that appears between these testimonies, in regard

to the number of the Books which went by the common name of

: Mencius, will be considered in the sequel. In the mean while it is
shown that the writings of Mencius were recognized by scholars a

1 Seé Vol. L, proleg., pp. 4, 5. Tr st FF -+— fs. 4 yh pg
+H 3g S8 +, st AS BES Te IF FB EH
SEE ER

PROLEGOMENS.] THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. (em x.

hundred years before the Christian era, which takes us back to little
more than a century and a half from the date assigned to his death,

3. Among writers of the Hau dynasty earlier than Sze-ma Ts‘cen,
there were Han Ying,® and Tung Chung-shoo,? contemporaries, in
the reigns of the emperors Wan, King, and Woo,* (n.c. 178-86).
Portions of their Works remain, aud j in them are found. quotations
from Mencius,’

4. But we find cens to Mencius and his Works anterior to the
dynasty of Han. In the literary remains of Kime Foo, to whose
concealment of many of the classical Works on the issuing of the
edict for their destruction posterity is so much indebted,! there are
accounts of Mencius, and many details of his history.!!

Between Mencius and the rise of the Ts‘in dynasty flourished the
philosopher Seun K'ing,!? of whose writings enough is still preserved

to form a large volume. By many he is regarded as the ablest of all

the followers of Confucius. He -several times makes mention of
Mencius, and one of his most important chapters,— —“ That ITuman
Nature is Evil, ™ seems to have been written expressty against Men-
cius’ doctrine of its goodness. He quotes his arguments, and en-
deavours to set them aside.

5. I have used the term recognition in the heading of this section,
because the scholars of the Han dynasty do not secin to have had
any trouble in forming or settling the text of Mencius such as we
have seen they had with the Cona Analects.

And here a statement made by Chaou K'e, whose labours upon
our philosopher I shall notice in the next section, deserves to be con-
sidered. He says:——* When Ts‘in sought by its fires to destroy the
classical books, and put the scholars to death in pits, there was an
end of the School of Mencius. His Works, however, were included
under the common name of * Philosophical,’ and so the tablets con-
taining them escaped destruction. 15 Ma Twan-lin does not hesitate

QUU TEMA Sde A G a i nr de lb
Ge 9 So WUE YR OR tae Porc REGE EE

jE E. Notes to Chaou K'e's preface, 10 Sce Vol I. proleg., p. 36. 1i I have not been
able to refer to the writings of K*ung Foo themselves, but extracts from them are given in the

notes, td Choo Ile's preface to Mencius in tlie py = m ut 4& BS. 12 A je-
18 aj TPE Ri 0 4 A E DE A RH To HK ai AA fq 4^ d

i; see Chaou K*e's preface to Mencius,

2)

SECT. L] THEIR RECOGNITION UNDER THE HAN DYNASTY. [PROLEGOMENA

to say that the statement is incorrect; and it seems strange that
Mencius should have been exempted from the sweep of a measure
intended to extinguish the memory of the most ancient and illustri-
ous sovereigns of China and of their principles. But thesame thing
is affirmed in regard to the writings of at least one other author
of antiquity, the philosopher Yuh;!$ and the frequent quotations
of Mencius by Han Ying and Tung Chuus: shoo, indicating that his
Works were a complete collection i in their times, give some confirma-
tion to K*e's account.

.. On the whole, the evidence seems rather to preponderee i in its
favour. Mencius did not obtain his place as “a classic” till long
after the. time of the Ts5a dynasty; and though the infuriate
emperor would doubtless have given special orders to destroy his.
writings, if his attention had been called to. them, we can easily
conceive their being overlooked, and escaping with a mass of others
which were not considered dangerous to the new rule.

6. Another statement of Chaou K'e shows that the works of Men-
cius, once recognized under the Han dynasty, were for a time at
least kept with a watchful care. He says that, in-the reign of the
emperor Heaou-w&u (s.c. 178-154), “the Lun-yu, the Heaou-king,
. Mencius, and the Urh-ya were all put under the care of a Board of
‘Great Scholars! which was subsequently done away with, only
‘The Five King’ being left under such guardianship."7 Choo He
has observed that the Books. of the Han dynasty supply no evidence .
of such a Board; but its existence may be inferred from a letter
of Lew Hin, complaining of the supineness with which the scholars
seconded his questof thescatteredmonumentsof literature. Hesays:—
“Under the emperor Heaou-wán, the Shoo-king reappeared, and the
She-king began to sprout and bud afresh. Throughout the empire,
a multitude of books were continually making their appearance, and
among them the Records and Sayings of all the Philosophers, which
likewise had their place assigned to them in the Courts of Learning,
and a Board. of Great Scholars -appointed to. ae charge:"18

a E s FB, Be. p Sion Moncius, — 16 31 fii gm FRE "
ERA 3 d b d mi BLA » Z fi E nia T AE
2 Notes n Chaou K‘e’s preface, . 17 x x Eg am ^ pn Si z BE ae EH,
Xm j Jie ER ug WM S BE DI E
ui a. 18 See the X Ie sii 3H H, Bk, clxxiv., pp. 9, 10,.

3]

Vz
KE

ER

fnovroowa.] . ` THB WORKS OF MENCIUS. [cn. 1..

As the Board of Great Scholars in charge of The Five King was
instituted p.c. 135, we may suppose that the previous arrangement
hardly lasted half a century. That it did exist for a time, however,
shows the value set upon the writings of Mencius, and confirms the
point which I have sought to set forth in this section, —that there
were Works of Mencius current in China before the Han dynasty,
and which were eagerly recognized and cherished by the scholars
under it, who had it in charge to collect the ancient literary produc-
tions of their ‘country.

SECTION II.
CHAOU K'E AND HIS LABOURS UPON MENCIUS.

1. It-has been shown that the Works. of Mencius were sufficiently
well known from nearly the beginning of the Han dynasty ; ; but its
more distinguished scholars do not.seem to have deyoted themselves
to their study and elucidation. ‘The classics claimed their first
attention. There was much labour to be done in collecting and
collating the fragments of them, and to unfold them meaning was
the chief duty of every one who thought himself equal to the task.
Mencius was -but one of the literati, a scholar like themselves He
could wait. We must come down to the second century of the
Christian era to find the first commentary on his writings.

In the prolegomena to the Confucian Analects, Section i. 7, I have
spoken of Ch‘ing Heuen or Ch‘ing K'ang-shing, who died at the age
-of 74, some time between A.D. 190—220, after having commented on
every ancient classical book. It is said by some1 that he embraced

1 the ‘Books of the Say dynasty ' (A.D. 589-617), Bk, xxxix., KE $E x Re =, we find
that there were then in the national Repositories three Works on Mencius,—-Chaou K'e's, one by
Ching Heuen, and one by’ Lew He d me ), also a scholar of Han, but probably not earlier than
Chaou K'e. The same è Works were oxisting under the T'ang dynasty (024—907); see the ‘Books
‘of T'ang,” Bk, xlix., EOS WR e" ee By the rise of the Sung dynasty (A.D. 975), however,
the two last were both lost, The entries in the Records of Suy and T'ang would seem to prove that
, Ching Heyen had written on Mencius, but in the sketches of his life which I have consulted, —
and that in the “Books of the After Hau dynasty,’ zj (i i iu + do must be the’ basis
of all thé fest, —there is no mention made of his having done so.

4]

SECT. 11,] CHAOU K‘E AND. HIS LABOURS UPON MENCIUS. [PROLEGOMENA

the Works of Mencius in his labours. If he did so, which to me is
very doubtful, the result has not come down to posterity. To give
to our. philosopher such a treatment as he deserved, and compose a
commentary that should descend to the latest Dostermyy, was the
work of Chaou K'e.

2. K'e was born a.p. 108. His father was a censor about the
court of the emperor Heaou-gan,? and gave him the name of Kéa,
which he afterwards changed into K‘e for the purpose of conceal-
ment, changiug also his original designation of T‘ae-k‘ing into Pin-
kaüng.3 It was his boast that he cond trace his descent from the
emperor Chuen Heüh,* p.c. 2510.

In his youth K*e was distinguished for his intelligence and diligent
study of the classics. ` He married a niece of the celebrated scholar
and statesman Ma Yung, but boré himself proudly towards him
and her other relatives. A stern independence and hatred of the
sycophancy of the times were from the first characteristic of him,
and proved the source of many troubles.

When he was over thirty, K‘e was attacked with some severe and
lingering illness, in consequence of which he lay upon his bed for
seven years. At one time thinking he was near his end, he addressed
a nephew who was with him in the following terms:—“ Born a man
into the world, in retirement I have not displayed the principles ex-
emplified on mount Ke,8 nor in office achieved the merit of E and
Lcu.' Heaven has not granted me such distinction. What more
shallIsay? Set up a round stone before my grave, and engrave on
it the inscription, — Here lies a recluse of Han, by surname Chaou,
and by name Kea. He had the will, but not the opportunity. Such
was his fate. Alas!"

Contrary to expectation, K‘e PE and in A.D. 154 we find
him again engaged in public life, but in four years he is flying into
obscurity under a feigned name, to escape the resentment of T'ang
Hang,’ one of the principal ministers, and his partizans. He saved
his life, but his family and relatives fell victims te the vengeance of

Cee o CS DERIT ETT.
KA RAF 4 BH IH 5 BS pi CET e Be It was to mount

Ke that ip and 8t EE two ancient worthies, are. said te have withdrawn, wher Yaou
wished to promote them to honour. 7 These are the well known E Yin (ff 2n and T'de-

kung Wang OK AEE). 8 jE 15 F
5]

PRoyegoussh ye C007 THE. WORKS. or Aixcros. * (feu

his, enemies, “end for some time, he wandered . aboutythe eountry of
the Keang.aud Hwae,, or among the mountains and by the sea-coast
9n the north of the present Shan-tung. One day as he was selling
- eskesin & marketplace, his. noble, presence attracted “the attention
. of Sun Ts'ung? a young gentleman of Gan-k‘ew, wha was passing
by in a carriage, and to him on being questioned he made known his
history. This: proved & fortunate rencontre for him. Sun Tsung took
hin. home; and, kept, him for several years concealed somewhere ‘in
the centre’ of a double, wall." And now it was that he solaced his
hard. lot: with . literary studies, He wooed, the muse in twenty-
three poetical éompositions, which he called “Songs of Adversity,"!
_and achieved. his commentary, on, Meneius.
, On the fall of the. T'ang faction, when a political amnesty was
proclaimed, K'e emerged, from. his friendly confinement, but only to
fall a victim again to the intrigues of the time. The first year of the
emperor. Ling, a:p: 168, was, the commencement of an imprisonment
‘which lasted. more:than.ten, years, but nothing could crush his elasti-
ity, or. daunt his perseverance, In 185, when he had nearly reached
fourscóre, he was. active as'ever in the field of political strife, and
wrought loyally to sustain the fortunes of the falling dynasty. He died
at last in A.D. 201, in King-cliów, whither he had. gone'on a mission
in behalf of his imperial master. Before his ‘death, he had a tomb:
prepared. for himself, which was long shown, or pretended to be
shown, in what is now the, district city of Keang-ling in the depart-
‘ment of King.chow in Hoo-pib.12
$, From the above account of Chaou K'e it will be seen that his.

commentary on Mencius was: prepared under great disadvantages.
"Thát'he, a fugitive and in such close hiding, should have been able
*o produeo- a ‘work ‘such as it is, shows the extent. df his reading. and
‘acquirements in-early days. I have said so much about him, be-
eatis his nome should be added to the long roll of illustrious men
who have found: Cómfort in'sore adversity Fom the pursuits of litera-
“tare and philosophy." As to his mode of dealing with his subject,
ue sin M sufficient to give. his own account :—

^ d Hot.

. $ y E E Bg ‘ths name Gan-k'ew still remains in the district so called of tho depart-

` ment of Ts'ng-chow Ch: Li io $B RE 1 ES
E pu NECS

6].

Nu

sscm mt] — OTHER COMMENTATORS. roseis;

“I wished to set my mind ‘on some literary work, by which I
might be assisted to the government of my thoughts, and forget the.
approach of old age. But the six classics had al been explained
and carefully dlucideted by previous scholars. Of allthe orthodox
school there was only Mencius, wide and deep, minute and exquisite,
yet obscure at times and hard. to see through, who seémed to me to
deserve to be properly ordered and digested. . Upon this I brought.
forth whatever I had learned, collected testimonies from the elassies

' and other books, and divided my author into chapters and sentences.
My annotations are given along with the original text; and of every
chapter I have separately indicated the scope, . The Books I have
divided into two Parts, the first and second, making i in all Fourtoek
sections.

*t On the whole; with regard to my: labour, I do not venture to
think that it speaks the man of mark, but as a gift to the learner, it
may dispel some doubts and resolve-perplexities. It is not'for me,
however, tò pronounce ‘on’ its excellencies or -defects. Let men of.
discérhment who come after me observe its errors and oxülssións
and correct them;-—that will be a good service. ns

13 See the i F a ak

i SECTION à TL
OTHER COMMENTATORS.

. 1. All the comentarios. on Moncins: made prior to the Sung ui
Xu (a.D: 975)! having perished, excepting that of Chaou K'e, I
will not therefore make an attempt to enumerate them eodd
Only. three names deserve to be mentioned, as frequent, referduce is
made to them in Critical Introductions to.out philosopher. They
were all of the Tang dynasty, extending, if we embrace in it what à is,
called “The after T‘ang,” from A.D, 624 to 936. "The first is that

: of Luh Shen-king,? who declined to adopt Chaou K'e's division of
the whole into fourteen sections, and many of whose interpretations,
differing from those of the older authority, have been. received

1 Some date the- commencement of the Sus due in “Dy sooi E [23 = L3

1]

PROLEGOMENA] —. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. fom t.

into the now standard commentary of Choo He. The other two
names are those of Chang Yih? and Ting Kung-chó,* whose principal
object was to determine the sounds and tones of characters about
which there could be dispute: All that we know of their views is
from thé works of Sun Shih and Choo He, who have many referen-
ces to them in their notes.

3. During the Sung dynasty, the commentators on Mencius were
a multitude, but it is “only necessary that I speak of two.
» The most distinguished scholar of the early reigns was Sun Shih,5
who is now generally alluded to by his posthumous or honorary epi-
thet of “The Hlustrious Duke.” We find him high in favour and
reputation in the time of T‘ae-tsung (977-997), Chin-tsung (998—
1022) and. Jin-tsung (1023-1063).7 By imperial command, in associa-
tion with several other officers, he prepared a work in two parts under
the title of * The Sounds and Meaning of Mencius,” and presented it
to the eourt.§ Occasion was taken from this for a strange imposture.
In the edition of “ The Thirteen King,” Mencius always appears with
* The Commentary of Chaou K'e” arid “The Correct Meaning of Shun
Shih.”? Under the Sung dynasty, what were called “correct meanings"
were made for most-of the classics. They are commentaries and
annotations on the principal commentator who is considered as the
expounder of the. classic, the author not hesitating, however, to in-
dicate any peculiar views of his own. The genuineness of Shih's
“Correct. Meaning of Mencius" is questioned by few, but there seems
to be no doubt of its being really a forgery, at the same time that
it contains the substance of the true work of “ The Illustrious Duke,”
so far as that embraced the meaning of Mencius and of Chaou
K'e. Theaccount of it given in the preface to “An Examination of
the Text im the Commentaty and Annotations on Mencius," by Yuen
Yuen of the present dynasty, is—“Sun Shih himself made no ‘Correct
Meaning; but some one—I know not who—supposin gthat his Work

DH A a
RE TAR RW CHA ORR E
LEA á 8 d + = Fs o aS. -—In or about the year 1008, a book was found, at one
of the » palace gates, with the title of "Tbe Book of Heaven’ C ). The emperor at first was

inclined to go in state and accept it, but he thought of consulting Shih. Shih replied according
to a sentiment of Mencias (V. Pt. I. v. 8) that ‘Heaven does not speak,’ and asked how then there
could be any Book of Heaven. Was this Book of Heaven, thus rejected on Shih’s counsel, a
copy of our Sacred Scriptures, which some Nestorian Christian was endeavouring in me manner

indicated to bring. before the court of China? 9 pes x Ka Ae E t. we Hit
8]

beor, mL] , MODERN. COMMENTATORS: 2000 [rsonsaomuma; >

was really of that akaraia and that there were many things in the.

commentary which were not explained, and passages also of an un-
satisfactory nature, he transcribed tlie while of Shih’s Work on ‘The `
Sounds and Meaning,’ and having interpolated some words of his '

- own, published it under the title of ‘The Annotations of Sun Shih.’
He was the same pore who is styled by Choo He «A scholar of
Shaou-woo? "10 ,

In the 12th century Choo He appeared upon the stage, and enters.
ed into the labours of all his predecessors. He published one Work
separately upon Mencius;!! and two upon Mencius and the Confucian

: Analects.2 The second of these,“ Collected Comments on the .
Analects and Meneius,” is now the standard authority on the subject;
and has been the test of orthodoxy and acholiathtp in the iterat l
examinations since A.D. 1315.

3. Under the present dynasty two important. yoatea fave
been made to the study of Mencius. They are both published in the
* Explanations of the Classics under the Imperial dynasty of Tsing. "e
The former, bearing the title of “ An Examination of the Text in the -
Commentary and Anmotations.of Mencius,” forms the sections from *
1039 to 1054. It is by Yuen Yuen, the Governor-general. ünder
whose auspices that compilation was published. Its simple aim is -
to establish the true reading by a collation of the. oldest and: best.
. manuscripts and editions, and of the remains of a series of stone tablets
containing the text.of Mencius, which were prepared in the reign of.
Kaou-tsung (A.D. 1128-1162), and are now existing iu the Examina--
tion Hall of Hang-chow. The Second Work, shich i is still more
` important, is embraced in the sections 11171146. Its title is—“ The -
Correct Meaning of -Meneius, by Tseaou Senn, a Kew-jin of Keang« ^
too."* Jt is intended te be stich a Work as Sun Shih would. have:
produced, had he really made what has been so long current in the’ ’
world under his name. F must regret that I was not earlier ae- `
.quainted with it. ,

UU TTX4 i^ "Ta n IST Lr

E st 19 Ses Vol. Ey profess p. 183, ". EX De

SEH: JE RE
PTASIE dU.

9]

_PROLEGOMENA.},. . `> FHE WORKS OF MENCIUS [om 1.

SECTION IV.

MYTEGHITY; AUTHORSHIP; A AND RECEPTION AMONG THE CLASSICAL BOOKS,

nc We have seen how the Works of Mencius were catalogued by
io Hin as being in “eleven Books,” while a century mier Sze-ma
'. Fs‘een referred to them as consisting only of “seven.” The question
has very*much vexed Chinese scholars whether there ever really
were four additional Books of Mencius which have been lost.

'2. Chaou K'e saysin his preface:—'* There likewise are four addi-
tional Books, entitled ‘A Discussion of the Goodness of Man's Nature,’
‘An Explanation of Terms,’ ‘The Classic of Filial Piety,’ and ‘The
. Practice of Government, But neither breadth nor depth marks their
composition. It is not. like that of the seven acknowledged Books.

1t may be judged they are not really the production of Menetus but
have been palmed upon the world by some subsequent imitator of
— him." As the four Books in question are lost, and only a very few
quotations from. Mencius, that are not found in his Works which
we have, can be fished up from ancient authors, our best plan is to
 acquiesce, in the conclusion of Chaou K'e. The specification of
^ “Seven Books" by Sze-ma Ts'een is an important corroboration of
it. In the two centuries preceding our efa, we may conceive thnt
the four Books whose titles are given by him were made and publish-
' ed under the name of Mencius, and Hin would only do his duty in
including them in his catalogue, unless their falsehood was generally
acknowledged. K'e devoting himself-to the study of our author, and
` satisfied from internal evidence that they were not his, only did his
_ duty in rejecting them, There is no evidence that his decision was
. called in question by any scholar of the Han or the dynasties im-
mediately following, when we may SHppose that the Books were still
in existence.

The author of * Supplemental Observations on the Four Dooks,"2
says upon this subject :-—' f It would be better to be without booka
- than to give entire credit to them';— this is the rule for reading

ZA A HH ELILE AR
St fy eh HAD) BE ae FA LG UL fk Bc i BE i

_2 See Vol. 1, proleg., p8132. 8. Mencius, VII Pt. I. ii

* io

ES

e

SECT. iv.] THEIR INTEGRITY AND AUTHORSHIP. . rein

ancient books laid down by Macki himself, and the rule for as
. after men in reading about what purport to be lost books of his. The
seven Books we have-* comprehend the doctrine of heaven and earth,.
examine and set forth ten thousand topics, discuss the subjects of
benevolence and righteousness, reason and virtue, the nature of man
and the decrees of.Heaven, misery and happiness.’ Brilliantly are
these things treated of, in a way far beyond what any diseiple of
Kung-sun Ch‘ow or Wan Chang could have attained to. What is
‘the use of disputing about other matters? Ho Sh& has his ‘Ex-
purgated Mencius,’> but Mencius cannot be expurgated. Lin Kin-
sze has his ‘ Continustion of Mencius, but Mencius needs no coh-
tinuation. I venture to say — Besides the Seven Books. there were no -
other Works of Mencius?” .
8. I have said, in the note at the end of this volume, that Chaot Ke i
gives the total of the characters in Mencius as 34,688, while they
are now found actually to amount to 35,226. This difference has
been ingeniously accounted for by supposing that the. continually
recurring * Mencius” and “Mencius said” were not in his copies.
There would be no use for them on his view that the whole was
composed by Mencius himself, If they were added subsequently,
they would about make up the actual excess of the number of char-
acters above his computation. The point is riot one of importance,
and I have touched on it simply because it leads us to the question :
of the authorship o£ the Works. `
4. On this point Sze-ma Ts‘een and Chaon Ke are agreed. Thy
say that Mencius composed the seven Books himself, and yet that he
did so along with certain of his disciples, Thewords of the latter are:
—* He withdrew from public life, collected and digested the conversa-
tions which he had had with his distinguished disciples, Kung-sun.
Ch'ow, Wan Chang, and others, on the difficulties and doubts which
they had expressed, and also compiled himself his deliverances as ex
cathedra ;—-and so published the Seven Books of his writings.”
‘This view of the authorship seems to have been first called in
question by Han Yu,* commonly referred to as “Han, the duke of »

4 This is the language of Chaou Ke. . 5 Ma Twah-lin mentions two authors who had. taken.
in hand to expurgaté Mencius, but tieither of them is called 4 43 25. He mentions Lin Kin- «82e,

calling him Liu Shin-sze dk TH FB), ana his Work, ." 6 [71 fr 5 Zz

41]

- PROLEGOMENA.J THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. [cn s.

Literatare,”? a famous scholar of the eighth century, under the T'ang
dynasty, who expressed himself in the following terms:—“ The books

-of Mencius were not published by himself. After his death, his dis-
“ciples, Wan Chang and Kung-sun Chíow, in communication with
“gach other, recorded the words of Mencius."$

5. If we wish to adjudicate i in. the matter, we find that we have a
difficult task in hand, One thing is plain—the book is not the work
of many hands like the Confucian Analects. “If we look atthe style
_ of the composition,” says Choo He, “it is as if the whole w ere melted
together, and not composed by joining piece to piece.”"9 This
 Janguage i is too strong, but there is a degree of truth and force in it.
(No principle of chronology guided the arrangement of the differ-
ent parts, and a foreigner may be pardoned if now and then the
* pearls" seem to him “at random strung;" yet the collection is char-
acterized by a uniformity of style, and an endeavour in the separate
-Books to preserve a unity of matter, This consideration, however,
3s not enough to decide the question. Such as the work is, we can
-Conceive it proceeding either from Mencius himself, or from the
‘labours, of a few of his disciples engaged, on it in, concert.

`The author of the Topography of the Four Dooks"!9 has this ar-
gament to show that the works of Mencius are by Mencius himself:

— The Confucian Analects,” he says, “were made by the disciples,

and therefore they record minutely the appearance and manners pf
ihe sage. But the seven Books were made by Mencius himself,
and therefore we have nothing in them excepting the, words and
public movements of the philosopher." This peculiarity is certainly
.tonsonant with the hypothesis of Mencius own authorship, anc so
- far may dispose us to adopt it,

` Qn the other hand, as the princes of Mencius’ time to whom any
reference is made are always mentioned by the honorary epithets
conferred on them after their death, it is argued that those at least’
must Have been introduced by his disciples, There are many passages,

M EE LE LZ NE 3 PCR EG TE
bed à Ay ) Bru fe 3 see- note by ond soa in his a notice

 TTE EXT OR a

i: see E Tr E fig. sect, xxiv., at we end.

B
SE
" dl
ye
>

{

secr, 1v.] THEIR RECEPTION AMONG THE CLASSICS. [RROLEGONENA,

again, which savour.more of a disciple or other narrator than of
the philosophia himself. There is, for instance, the commencing sen- ©
tences of Book III. Pt. I:.—** "When the duke Win of. "ra ding was.
crown-prince, having to go to Ts‘00, he went by: way of Sung, and `
visited Mencius (lit., the philosopher Mang). " Mencius discoursed to *
him how the nature of maii is good, and when: ‘speaking, always-made
laudatory reference.to Yaou and Shun. When the crown -prinee was
returning from Ts‘00, he again visited Mencius. -Mencius said to him, .
‘Prince, do you doubt my words? The path is one, and only one.’”
6. Perhaps the truth after all is as the thing is stated by Sze-ma.
Ts‘een,—that Meéncius, along. with some of his disciples, compiled
and poriposed the Work. It would be in their hands and under their
guardianship after his death, and they may have made some slight
alterations, to prepare it, as we should say, for the press. Yet al-
lowing this, theré is nothing to prevent us from accepting the sayings
and doinss as those of Mencius, guaranteed by himself. N
7. It now only remains here that I refer to the reception of Men-
cius’ works among'the Classics. "We have seen how they were not .
admitted by Lew Hin into his catalogue. of. classical works. Men-
cius was then only one of the many scholars or philosophers of the
orthodox school The samie ‘classification obtains in the books of ^
the Suy and T‘ang dynasties; and in fact it was only under the
dynasty of Sung that the works of Mencius and the Confucian ,
Analects were authoritatively ranked. together. The first explicitly i
to proclaim this hónour as due to our philosopher was Ch4n Chih-
chae, !2 whose werds are—“Since the time when: Han, the duke of-
‘Literature, delivered his eulogium, ‘Confucius handed the schéme of
doctrine to. Mencius, on whose death the line of transmission was
interrupted,’!8 the scholars of the empiré have all associated Confu- `
„cius and: Mencius together. , The Books of Mencius are certainly

12, bi zy 3 'Phe name and 1 the aecount-I take from: the j*Bupglmentef. Observations en
the Four Books," art, I. on Mencius, É. I. apprehend, is a misprint for JE the individual
‘veferred to being probably, p jf R. & great scholar and: officer of the 12th. century, known

also by the designations of z pu and IE pis 18 This eulogy of Han Yu is to be found
subjoined io the brief introduction in the common éflitions of Mencius, The whole of the
ssage there quoted isi‘ Yaou handed the scheme! of docirine down to Shun: Shun handed itto
u; Yu to Tang; lang to Win, Woo, and the-duke of Chow ;, Wan,’ Woo, ‘and the duke of Chow
to Confucius; and Confucius to Mencius, on whose death there was no farther transmission of it.
In Seun and Yang there are snatches” of it, but. without E nice discrimination: they. talk about
it, but within a definite particularity,” $

13]

PROLEGOMENA] THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. [cu. x

superior to those of Seun. and Yang, and others who have followed
them. Their productions are not to be spoken of in the same day

. with his.” Choo He adopted the same estimate of Mencius, and by

his * Collected Comments" on him and the Analects bound the two
sages together in a union which, the government of China, in the

“several dynasties which have succeeded, has with one temporary ex.
ception approved and confirmed.

14]

sees MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. . [PROLEGOMENA,.

jM APTER II.

MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES.

SECTION L .
LIFE OF MENCIUS.

1. The nad: for a Memoir of Mencius are very scanty. The
birth and principal incidents of Confucius’ life are duly chronicled
Pancity and uncertainty in the various annotated editions of the Ch'un
ofangterids: Ts‘ew, and in Sze-ma Ts‘een. His not soin the
case of Mencius. Ts‘een’s account of him is contained in half a dozen
columns which are without a single date. That in the “ Cyclopedia
of Surnames” only covers half a page. Chaou K‘e is more particular
in regard to the early years of his subject, but he is equally indefinite,
Our chief informants are K‘ung Foo, and Lew Heang in his ** Record
of Note-worthy Women,"! but what we find in diez has more the «
character of legend than history.

It is not till we come to the pages of Mencius himself that we are
treading on any certain ground. "They give the principal incidents of
his public life, extending over about twenty-four. years. We learn
from them that in the course of that time he was in such and such
places, and gave expression to such and such opinions; but where he
went first and where he went last, it is next to impossible to determine.
I have carefully examined three attempts, made by competent scholars `
of the present dynasty, to construct a Harmony that shall reconcile
the statements of the * Seven Books” with the current chronologies
of the time, and do not see my way to adopt entirely the conclusions
of any one of them.? The value of the Books lies in the record
which they furnish of Mencius’ sentiments, and the lessons which

D

1 za mj zl Hc fi. 2 The three attempts are—one by the author of ‘ Supplemental
Observations on the Four Books,’ an outline of which is given in his Notes on Mencius, Art. IIT.;
one by the author of the ‘Topography of the Four Books,’ and forming the 24th section of the
* Explanations of the Classics under the Ts‘ing dynasty; and one prefixed to the Works of Mencius,
in ‘The Four Books, with the Relish of the Radical Meaning’ (vol. L proleg., p. 181). ‘These

15]

PROLEGOMENA.] LIFE OF MENCIUS. [em it

these supply for the regulation of individual conduct and national
policy. Tt is of little importance that we should be able to lay them
. down in the strict order of time.

With Mencius withdrawal from public life, all traces of him dis-
appear. All that is said of him is that he spent his latter years
along with his disciples in the preparation and publication of his
Works.

From this paragraph it will be seen that there is not much to
be said in this section. I shall relate, first, what is reported of the
éarly years and training of our philosopher, and then look at him
as he comes before us in his own pages, in the full maturity of his
character and powers.

2. Mencius is the latinized form of Máng-tsze,! “The philosopher
Mig." His surname thus connects him with the Măng or Măng-

sun family, one of the three great Houses of

His surname; birth-place; . ^
parents; the year of his Loo, whose usurpations were such an offence

irth, Bc. 374. " lie . . . "nm.

to Confucius in his time, Their power was
broken in the reign of duke Gae (n.c. 493—467), and they thenceforth
dwindle into comparative insignificance. Some branches remained
in obscurity in Loo, aud others went forth to the neighbouring
e
States,

The branch from which Mencius sprang found a home in the small
adjacent principality of Tsow,? which in former times had been
known by the name of Choo? It was afterwards absorbed by Loo,
and its name is said to be still retained in one of the districts of
the department of Yen-chow in Shan-tung.4 Confucius was a native
of a district of Loo having the same name, which many contend was
also the birth-place of Mencius, making him a native of Loo and not
three eritics display much ingenuity and research, but their conclusions are conflieting.—I may
be pardoned in saying that their learned labours have affected me just as those of the Larmonizers
of the Gospel Narratives used to do in former years,—bewildering more than edifying. Most cordi-
` ally do I agree with Dean Alford (New Testament, Vol. I. Proleg, I. vii. 5):—‘If (? since) the
Evangelists have delivered to us-truly and faithfully the Apostolic Narratives, and if ( ? since)
the Apostles spoke as the Holy Spirit enabled’ them, and brought events and sayings to their
recollection, then we may be sure that if we knew the real process of the transactions themselves, thar
knowledge would enable us to give an account of the diversities of narration and arrangement which the
gospels now present to us. But without such knowledge, all attempts to accomplish this analysis in

minute detail must be merely conjectural, and must tend to weaken the Evangelic testimony rather
than to strengthen it.’ i

jos dj 2 Ee (written also LI Ed. 8 KR. 4 ul pug a NF. 4y WS ER

16]

SECT. 1.] MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. [PROLEGOMENA,

of the State of Tsow. To my mind the evidence is decidedly against
such a view.®

Mencius’ name was Ko o.8 His designation does not appear in his
Works, nor is any given to him by Sze-ma Ts‘een or Chaou K'e.
The latter says that lié did not know how he had been styled; but
the legends tell that he was called Tsze-keu,? and Tsze- -yu.s The
same authorities—if we can call them such—say that his father’s name
was Keih,? and that he was styled Kung-e.'? They say also that
his mother's maiden surname was Chang.!! Nothing is related of the
former but that he died when his son was quite. young, but the
latter must have a paragraph to herself. “The mother of Mencius "
is famous in China, and held up to the present time as a model of
what a mother should be.

The year of Mencius' birth was probably the 4th of the emperor
Léé, s.c. 371.12 He lived to the age of 84, dying in the year s.c.
288, the 26th of the emperor Nan, with whom terminated the
long sovereignty of the Chow dynasty. The first twenty-three years
of his life thus synchronized with the last twenty-three of Plato's.
Aristotle, Zeno, Epicurus, Demosthenes, and other great men of the -
West, were also his contemporaries. When we place Mencius among
them, he can look them in the face. He does not need to hide a `
diminished head.

5 p ay Biba and 18 Z jt stoutly maintain the different sides of this question, the latter
giving five arguments to show that the Tsow of Mencins was the ''sow of Loo. As Mencius went
from ‘I's‘e on the death of his mother to bury her in Loo (Bk. IL, Pt. IL, vii.), this appears to
prove that he was a native of that State, But the conclusion is not necessary. Loo was the
ancestral State of his family, and on that account he might wish to inter his parent there,
according to the custom of the Chow dynasty (sce the Le Ke, Bk. H, Pt. I, i. 26). The way
in which Tsow alw ays appears as the residence of Mencius, when he is what we should say ‘at
home,’ appears to me decisive of the question, though neither of the disputants presses it into his

. service. Compare Bk. IIL, Pt. I, ii; Bk. VI, Pt. IL, i, ii, and v. The point is really of no

importance, for the States Of Tsow and Loo adjoined. ' The rattle of the watchman in the one
was heard in the other.’ 6 ifi. 7 -F- Hi and F HB. ihe one character taking the

place of the other from the similarity of the sound, 8 -F £ 9 iot. 10 Le

sr. I find ^E? Ei sometimes instead of H 11 AL KR. 12 zi a yu 4B, aqu.
18, Jj E = +H ay SE, +$ FH. —The ‘Genealogical Register of the Ming Family?

says that Mencius was born inthe year E pis the 37th of the SIBDUTOr Ting ( AED. on the 2d day
of the 4th month, and died in the year E EA, the 26th of the eypperor ^ Nan, on the 15th day of
the first month, (See pu sk ae Mi Ex B r3 F, art, HL) The last of these dates is to

be embraced on many round but the first is evidently a mistake. Ting only reigned 28 years,
and there is no e p year among them, Reckoning back 84 years from the 26th of Nan, we

come to a B cz year, the 4th of Lés, which is now generally acquiesced in as the year of Men-
cius birth.

17]

PROLEGOMENA. } LIFE OF MENCIUS. [cut 1

3. It was his misfortune, according to Chaou K'e, “to lose his
father at an early period;! but in his youthful years he enjoyed the
lessons of his kind mother, who thrice changed her
residence on his account.”

At first they lived near a cemetery, and Mencius amused himself
with acting the various scenes which he witnessed at the tombs.

“This,” said the lady, “is no place for my son” ;—and she removed to
a house in the market-place. But the change was no improvement.
The boy took to playing the part of a salesman, vaunting his wares,
and chaffering with customers. His mother sought a new house,
and found one at last -close by a publie school. There her child's
attention was taken with the various exercises of politeness which the
scholars were taught, and he endeavoured to imitate them. The
‘mother was satisfied. “This,” she said,” is the proper place for my
son."

Han Ying relates another story of this period. Near their house
was a pig-butcher’s. One day Mencius asked his mother what they
were killing the pigs for, and was told that it was to feed him. Ter
conscience immediately reproved her for the answer. She said to
herself, ** While I was carrying this boy in my womb, I would not
sit down if the mat was not placed square, and I ate no meat which
was not cut properly ;—so I taught him when he was yet unborn.2
And now: when his intelligence is opening, I am deceiving hiin;—
this is to teach him untruthfulness!” With this she went and bought
a piece of pork in order to make good her words.

.As Mencius grew up, he was sent to school. When he returned
‘home one day, his mother looked up from the web which she was
weaving, and asked him how far he had got on. He answered her
with an air of indifference that he was doing well enough, on which
she took a knife and cut through her web. The idler was alarmed,
and asked what she meant, nio she gave him a long lecture, show-
ing that she had done what he was doing, —that her cubi g through

Mencius’ mother.

I K'es words are— Jol, SIE H K- The legend-writers are more precise, and say that
Mencius was only three years old when his father died. This statement, and K‘e’s as well, are
difficult to reconcile with what we read in Bk, 1I, Pt. IT. xvi, about the style in which Mencius
buried his parents. If we accept the legend, we are reduced there to great straits, 2 See Choo
He’s A ` ) eR P = 3E 2 p ——, which begins with the educational duties of tlie mother,
while the child is yet unborn.

18]

secT. 1.] MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. [rnorEcowENA.

her web was like his neglecting his learniug. The admonition, it
is said, had its proper effect; the lecture did not need to be re-
peated. :

There are two other narratives in which Chang-she figures, and
though they belong to a later part of Mencius life, it may be as
well to embrace iheni in the present paragraph.

His wife was squatting down one day in her own room, when
Mencius went in. He was so much offended at finding her in that
position, that he told his mother, and expressed his intention to put
her away, because of “her want of propriety.” “It is you who
have no propriety,” said his mother, “and not your wife. Do not
‘The Rules of Propriety’ say, ‘When you are about to ascend a hall,
raise your voice; when you enter a door, keep your eyes low?’ The
reason of the rules is that people may not be taken unprepared; but
you entered the door of your private apartment without raising your
voice, and so caused your wife to be caught squatting on the gound
The impropriety is with you and not with her.” On this Mencius
fell to reproving himself, and did not dare to put away his
wife.

One day, when he was living with his mother in Ts‘ e, she was
struck with the sorrowfulness. of his aspect, as he stood leaning
against a pillar, and asked him the cause of it. He replied, “ I have
heard that the superior man occupies the place for which he is
adapted, accepting no reward to which he does not feel entitled, and
not covetous of honour and emolument. Now my doctrines are not
practised in Ts'e:—I wish to leave it, but I think of your old age,
and am anxious.” His mother said, “It does not belong to a woman
to determine anything of herself, but she is subject to the rule. of
the three obediences. When young, she has to obey her parents;
when married, she has to obey her husband; when a.widow, she has
to obey her son. You are a man in your full maturity, aud I am
old. Do you act as your conviction of righteousness tells you you
ought to do, and I will act according to the rule which belongs to
me. Why should you be anxious about me?”

Such are the accounts which I have found of the aome of Men-
cius. Possibly some of them are inventions, but they are devoutly
believed by the people of China;—and it must be to their profit. We
may well believe that she was a woman of very superior character,

19]

PROLEGOMENA. LIVE OF MENCIUS. fon 1,

and that her son’s subsequent distinction was in a great degree owing
to her influence and training.’

 . 4. From parents we advance to be under tutors and governors.
The moulding hand that has wrought upon usin the pliant years of

Mencius’ instue. youth always leaves ineffaccable traces upon the ehar-
tors; and early life. acter. Can anything be ascertained of the instruc-
tor or instructors of Mencius? The reply to this inquiry must be
substantially in the negative, though many have aflimned that
he sat as a pupil at the feet of Tsze-sze, the grandson of Con-
fucius. We are told this by Chaou K‘e, whose words are:—"'As
he grew up, he studied under Tsze-sze, acquired all the knowledge
taught by *The Learned,' and became thoroughly aequainted with
‘The Five King,’ being inore especially distinguished for his mastery
of the She and the Shoo.”! A reference to dates, however, shows that
this must be incorrect. From the death of Confucius to the birth
of Mencius there were 108 years, and supposing—what is by no means
probable—that Tsze-sze was born in the year his father died, he
must have been 112 years old when Mencius was born. The sup-
position of their having stood to each other in the relation of master
and scholar is inconsistent, moreover, with the stylo in Which Men-
cius refers to 'lsze-sze. He mentions him seven times, showing an
intimate acquaintance with his history, but never once in à manner
which indicates that he had personal intercourse with him.?

Sze-ma Ts‘een’s account is that * Mencius studied with the disciples
of Tsze-sze.”8 This may have been the case. There is nothing on the
score of time to make it impossible, or even improbable; but this
is all that can be said about it. No famous names out of the school
of Tsze-sze have been transmitted to posterity, and Mencius nowhere

. speaks as if he felt under special obligation to any instructor.

One short sentence contains all that he has said bearing on the
point before us:—“ Although I could not be a disciple of Confucius
myself, I have endeavoured to cultivate my character and knowledge
by means of others who were."* The chapter to which this belongs is

8 All these stories are given in the notes to the preteoo to Mencius in the py E $x RE

SR RE
1. Fe AL FZ SRF Be R Ws Z E E HE HR EE a

2 See the Index of Proper names, p. 395. AS A
4 See Book IV., Pt. IL, xxii. - i TH n x PA ^

20]

SECT, 1.] MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. [PROLEGOMERA,

rather enigmatical. The other member of it says:—' The influence
of a sovereign sage terminates with the fifth generation. "The'in-
fluence of an unsceptred sage does the same.” By “an unsceptred
sage” Mencius is understood to mean Confucius; and by extending
his influence all over five generations, he shows how it was possible
for him to place himself under it by means of others who had been
in direct communication with the Master. —

We must leave the subject of Mencius’ early instructors in the
‘obscurity which rests upon it. The first forty years of his life are
little more than a blank to us. Many of them, we may be sure, were
spent in diligent study. He made himself familiar during them with
all the literature of his country. Its classics, its histories, its great
men, had received his careful attention. Confucius especially became
to him the chief of mortal men, the object of his untiring admira-
tion; and in his principles and doctrines he recognized the truth
for want of an appreciation of which the bonds of society all round
him were being relaxed, and the empire hastening to a general
anarchy.

How he supported himself in Tsow, we cannot tell. Perhaps he
was possessed of some patrimony; but when he first comes forth
from his native state, we find him accompanied by his most
eminent disciples. He probably imitated Confucius by assuming
the office ofa teacher, —not that of a schoolmaster in our accepta-
tion of the word, but that of a professor of morals and learning,
encouraging the resort of inquiring minds, in order to resolve their
doubts and inform them on the true principles of virtue and society.
These disciples would minister to his. wants, though we may presume
that he sternly maintained his dignity among them, as he afterwards
did towards the princes of the time, when he appeared among them.
as a lecturer in another sense of the term. Two instances of this are
recorded, though we cannot be sure that they belonged to the earlier
period of his life.

“When Kang of Ting made his appearance in your school,”
said the disciple Kung-too, “it seemed proper that a polite con-
sideration should be paid to him, and yet you did not answer
him ;—why was that?” Mencius replied, “I do not answer him
who questions me presuming on his ability, nor him who presumes
on his talents, nor him who presumes on his age, nor him who .

21]

PROLEGOMENA.] LIFE OF MENCIUS. [i n. ar,

presumes on services performed to me, nor him who presitmes on old
acquaintance. Two of those things were chargeable on K&ug of
Taing.”5

The other instance is that of Kéaou of Ts‘aou, who said to Men-
cius, “I shall be having an interview with the prince of Tsow, and
can ask him to let me have a house to lodge in. I wish to
remain here, and receive instruction at your gate." “The way af
truth," replied the philosopher, “is like a great road. It is not dif
. ficult to know it. The evil is only that men will not seek it. Dó
you go home and search for it, and you will have abundance of teach-
ers."6 This was firmly said, yet not unkindly. It agrees with his
observation: —‘“ There are many arts in teaching. I refuse, as in-

‘consistent with my character, to teach a man, but I am only thereby
still teaching him.”7

5. The state of China had waxed worse and worse during the
‘interval that elapsed between Confucius and Mencius. The elements
- State of China in Mencius’ Of disorganization which were rife in the times
time, of the earlier sage had gone on to produce
their natural results. One feeble sovereign had followed another on
the imperial throne, and the dynasty of Chow was ready to vanish
away. Men were persuaded of its approaching extinction. The
feeling of loyalty to it was no longer a cherished sentiment; and the
anxiety and expectation was about ‘what new rule would takei its place.
. Many of the smaller fiefs or principalities had been reduced to a
helpless. dependence on, or been absorbed by, the larger ones. Of
Loo, Ching, Wei, Woo, Ch‘in, and Sung,! conspicuous in the Analects,
we read but little in Mencius. Tsin? had been dismembered, and its
fragments formed the nuclei of three new and vigorous kingdoms,
—Wei, Chaou, and Han.? Ts‘e still maintained its ground, but was
barely able to make head against the State of Ts'in* in the West,
and Ts‘oo in the South T he struggle for supremacy was between
these two, the former, as it was “ultimately successful, being the
. more ambitious and incessant in its aggressions on its neighbours.
The princes were thus at constant warfare with one another. Now
two or more would form a league to resist the encroaching Ts‘in,
and hardly would that object be accomplished before they were at

5 See Book VII., Pt. F., xlii, 6 Bk, VI., Pt. IL, ii. 6, 7. Bk, VL, Pt. IL, xvi,
EI7:27 TEL NET EET NEL

22]

BECT. 1] MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. [PROLEGOMENA,

war among themselves. Ambitious statesmen were continually in-
flaming their quarrels. The recluses of Confucius’ days, who with-
drew in disgust from the world and its turmoil, had given place to-
a class of men who came forth from their retirements provided with
arts of war or schemes of policy which they recommended to the con-
tending chiefs. "They made 1o scruple of changing their allegiance,
as they were moved by whim or interest. Kung-sun Yen and Chang
E may be mentioned as a speeimen of those characters, ** Are they
not really great men?” it was once asked of Mencius. “Let them ,
once be angry, and all the prinees areafraid. Let them live quietly,
- and the flames of trouble are extinguished throughout the Empire.”6

It is not wonderful that in such times the minds of men should
have doubted of the soundness of the ancient principles of the ac-
knowledged sages of the nation. Doctrines, strange and portentous
in the view of Mencius, were openly professed. The authority of
Confucius was disowned. The foundations of government were
overthrown; the foundations of truth were assailed. Two or three
paragraphs from our philosopher will verify and illustrate this
representation of the character of his times.

“A host marches in attendance on the ruler, and stores of pro-
visions are consumed. The hungry are deprived of their food, and
there is no rest for those who are called to toil. Maledictions are
uttered by one to another with eyes askance, and the people proceed
to the commission of wickedness. "Thus the imperial ordinances
are violated, and the people are oppressed, and the supplies of food
and drink flow away like water. The rulers yield themselves to the
dad current, or they urge their evil way against a good one; they
are wild; they are utterly lost.” l

“ The five chiefs of the princes were sinners against the three kings.
The princes of the present day are sinners against the five chiefs.
The great officers of the present day are sinners against the princes. ,
-.. The crime of him who connives at and aids the wickedness of his
prince is small, but the crime of him who anticipates and excites that
wickedness is great. The officers of the present day all go to meet
their Sovereigns’ wickedness, and therefore I say that they are sin-
ners against them.”8

6 Bk, IL, Pt. IL, i. 7 Bk. L, Pt. IL, iv. 6, 8. 8, Bk, VIL, Pt. IL, vii. 1, 4.
23]

FROLEGOMENA.] LIFE OF MENCIUS. - [en 11.

*Sage emperors cease to arise, and the princes of the States give
the reins to their lusts. Unemployed scholars indulge in unreason-
able discussions. The words of Yang Choo and Mih Teih fill the
empire. If you listen to people's discourses, you will find that they
have adopted the views either of Yang or of Mih. Now, Yang's
principle is—‘each one for himself, which does not acknowledge the
claims of the Sovereign." Mih's principle is—‘to love all equally,’
which does not acknowledge the peculiar affection due to a father.
But to acknowledge neither king nor father is to be in the state of
a beast. Kung-ming E said, ‘In their kitchens there is fat ineat.
In their stables there are fat horses. But their people have the
look. of’ hunger, and on the wilds there are those who have died of
famine. This is leading on beasts to devour men.’ If the principles
of Yang and Mih are not stopped, and the principles of Confucius
not set forth, those perverse speakings will delude the people and
stop up the path of benevolence and righteousness. When bene-
volence and righteousness are stopped up, beasts will be led on to
devour men, and men will devour one another.”

6. It is in Ts‘e that we first meet with Mencius as a counsellor of
the prinees,' and it was in this State that he spent much the greater

~ _ part of his public life. His residence in it,
Mencius the first time in " Hen E
Tse; some time between however, appears to have been divided into two
B.C. 832 and 323. : s
portions, and we know not to which of them to
refer many of the chapters which describe his intercourse with the
prince and his ministers; but, as I have already observed, this
is to us of little moment. Our interest is in what he did and said.
It matters little that we cannot assign to each saying and doing its
particular date.

That he left Ts‘e the first time before 5.c. 323 is plausibly inferred

from Bk. H., Pt. IL, xiv. 4;? and assuming that the conversation in
E : 9 Book IIL, Pt. IL, ix. 9.

1 In the ‘Annals of the Empire’ (vol. I. proleg., p. 134), Mencius’ visit to king Hwuy of Lóang
is set down as having occurred in m.0.335, and under m.c. 318 it is said—“ Mencius goes from
Léang to Ts'e The visit to Léang is placed too early, and that to ''s'e too late. The disasters

of king Hwuy, mentioned Bk. I, Pt. L, v. i, had not all taken place in g.c. 318; and if Mencius

remained 17 years in Léang, it is strange we have only five conversations between him and king
Hwuy. So far from his not going to Ts‘e till B.c. 318, it will be seen from the next note that ho
was leaving Ts'e before n.c. 323. 2 Mencius words are— From the commencement of the
Chow dynasty till new more than 700 years have elapsed. It was to the purpose of his argument
to make the time appear as long as possible. Had 800 years elapsed, he would surely have said so.
But as the Chow dynasty commenced in mc. 1321, the year B.c. 322 would be its 800th anniver-
sary, and glencius departure from Ts‘e did not take place later than the year before Bu. 828.

24]

Seer. 1] MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. [PROLEGOMENA,

the same Book, Pt. I. ii., took place immediately before or after his
arrival,3 we'can determine that he did not enter the State before B.c.
331, for he speaks of himself as having attained at forty years of age
to “an unperturbed mind." The two chapters contain the most
remarkable expressions indicative of Mencius estimate of himself.
Iu the first, while he glorifies Confucius as far before all other men
who had ever lived, he declines having comparisons drawn between
himself and any of the sage's most distinguished disciples. In the
second, when going away sorrowful because he had not wrought the
good which: he desired, he observes:—** Heaven does not yet wish
that the empire should enjoy tranquillity and good order. If it
wished this, who is there besides me to bring 1t about?"

We may be certain that "Mencius did not go to Ts'e uninvited.
His approach was waited for with curious expectation, and the king,
spoken of always by his honorary epithet of Seuen, “The Illustrious,"
sent persons to spy out whether he was like other men.* They had
their first interview at a place called Ts‘ung, which was so little
satisfactory to the philosopher that he resolved to make only a short
stay in the State. Circumstances occurred to change this resolution,
but though he.remained, and even accepted office, yet it was only
honorary ;—he declined receiving any salary.5

, From Ts‘ung he appears to have retired to P‘ing-luh, where Ch‘oo,
the prime minister, sent him a present, wishing, no doubt, to get
into his good graces. I call attention to the circumstance, though
trifling in itself, because it illustrates the way in which Mencius car-
ried himself to the great men. He took the gift, but subsequently,
when he went to the capital, he did not visit the minister to acknow-
ledge it. His opinion was that Ch‘oo might have come in person to
Pʻing-luh to see him. “There was a gift, but no corresponding
respect.”6

With the governor of P‘ing-luh, called K'ung Keu-sin, Mencius
spoke frecly, and found him a man open to conviction. “If one of
your spearmen," said Mencius to him, “ were to lose his place in the
ranks three times in one day, would you put him to death or not?”

3 This chapter and the one before it have very much the appearance of having taken place on
the way from Tsow to Ts‘e. Mencius has been invited to a powerful court. He is emerging
from his obscurity. His disciples expect great things for him. Kung-sun Ch‘ow sees him inves-
ted with the govt. of Ts‘e, and in the elation of his heart makes his inquiries. 4 Bk. IV, Pt, IL
xxxii. 5 Bk. IL, Pt. IL, xiv. 6 Bk. II, Pt IL, v. i

2 5]

PROLEGOMENA. ] l LIFE OF MENCIUS. [en. 11.

* I would not wait for three times to do so,” replied Keu-sin. Mencius
then charged home upon him the sufferings of the people, saying
they were equivalent to his losing his place in the ranks. The gov-
ernor defended himself on the ground that those sufferings were a
consequence of the general policy of the State. To this the other
replied, ** Here is a man who receives charge of the sheep and cattle
of another, undertaking to feed them for hin ;—of course he must
search for pasture-ground and grass. If, after searching for those,
he cannot find them, will he return his charge to the owner? or
will he stand by and see them die?" The governor's reply was,
“Herein I am guilty."7

When Mencius presented himself at the capital of the State, he
was honourably received by the king. Many of the conversations
with the sovereign and officers which are scattered through the seven
Books, though the first and second are richest in them, must be
referred to this period. . The one which is first in place,® and which
contains the fullest exposition of the philosopher's views on govern-
ment, was probably first likewise in time.® It sets forth the
grand essential to the exercise of imperial government, —a heart on
the part of the sovereign impatient of the sufferings of the people,
and eager to protect them and make them happy; it brings home
to king Seuen the conviction that he was not, without such a heart,
and presses on him the truth that his not exercising it was froin a
want of will and not from any lack of ability ; it exposes unsparingly
the errors of the course he was pursuing; and concludes by an exhi-
bition of the outlines and happy issues of a true royal sway.

Of this nature were all Mencius’ communications with the
sovereign ; but he lays himself open in one thing to severe censure.
Afraid apparently of repelting the prince from him by the severity
of his lessons, he tries to lead him on by his very passions. “I
am fond of beauty," says the king, “and that is in the way of my
attaining to the royal government which you celebrate." “Not
at all" replies the philosopher. * Gratify yourself, only do not
let your doing so interfere with the peoplé's getting similar en-
joyment for themselves."9 So the love of money, the love of

7 Bk. IL, Pt. IL, iv. 8 Bk, L, Pt. I, vii. 9 I judge that this was the first se? conversation
between king Seven and Mencius, because of the inquiry with which the king opens it, — May
I be informed by you of the transactions of Hwan of T‘se, and Wan of Tsin?' A very brief
acquaintance with our philosopher would have taught him that he was the last person to apply to
about those characters. 10 Bk. L, Pt. IL, i, iiL, v.: et ad

26]

secr, 1.] MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. [PROLEGOMENA

war, and the love of music are dealt with. Mencius thought that
if he could only get the good of the people to be recognized by Seuen
as the great aim which he was to pursue, his tone of mind would be
so elevated, that the selfish passions and gratifications of which he
‘was the slave would be purified or altogether displaced. And so it
would have been. Where he fails, is in putting his points as if
benevolence and selfishness, covetousness and generosity might exist
together. Chinese moralists rightly find fault with him in this respect,
andsay that Confucius never condescended to such a style of argument.

Notwithstanding the apparent cordiality of the king’s reception
of him, and the freedom with which Mencius spoke his mind at
their interviews, a certain suspiciousness appears to have been main-

ained between them. Neither of them would bend to the other.
Mencius would not bow to the royal state; Seuen would not vail
bonnet to the philosopher's cloak. We have one amusing instance
of the struggles to which this sometimes gave rise, One day Men-
cius was preparing to go to court of his own free will, when a
messenger arrived from the king, saying he had intended to come .
and see him, but was prevented by a cold, and asking whether
Mencius would not appear at the audience next morning. Mencius
saw that this was a device on the part of the king to avoid stooping
to visit him, and though he had been about to go to, court, he re-
plied at once that he was unwell. He did not hesitate to meet the
king's falsehood with one of his own.

He did not wish, however, that the king should be ignorant of the
truth, and went out next morning to pay a visit of condolence. . He
supposed that messengers would be sent from the court to inquire
about his health, and that, when they took back word that he had
gone out visiting, the king would understand how his sickness of the
day before was only feigned.

It happened as he expected. The king sent a. messenger, and his
physician besides. Mencius being out, they were received by Mang
Chung, either his son or cousin, p» complicated the affair by an
invention of his own. “To-day,” he said, “he was a little better,
and hastened to go to court. I don't know whether he has reached
it by this time or not." No sooner were the visitors gone with this
story, than he sent several persons to look for the philosopher, and

. urge him to go to the court before he returned home.

27]

5

PROLEGOMENA, ] LIFE OF MENCIUS. l [cu. 1.

It was now necessary that a full account of the matter should
reach the royal ears; and to accomplish this, Mencius neither went
home nor to court, but spent the night at the house of one of the
high officers. They had an animated discussion. The officer accused
Mencius of showing disrespect. to the king. The philosopher replied
that no man in Ts‘e showed so much respect for the sovereign as he
did, for it was only he who brought high and truly royal subjects
under his notice.

“That,” said the officer, “is not my meaning. The rule is—
*When the prince’s order calls, the carriage must not be waited for,
You were going to the court, but when you heard the king's message,
you did not do so. "This seems not in accordance with that rule.”
Mencius explained:—“ There are three things universally acknow-
ledged to be honourable,—nobility, age, and virtue. In courts,
nobility holds the first place; in villages, age; and for helping one's
generation and presiding over the people, the other two are not
equal to virtue. The possession of one of the three does not autho-
rize the despising of one who who has the other two.

“ A prince who is to accomplish great deeds will have ministers
whom he does not call to go to see him. When he wishes to consult
with them, he goes to them. The prince who does not honour tle
virtuous, and delight in their ways of doing, to this extent, is not
worth having to do with.

“There was T'ang with E Yin :—he first learned of him, and then
made him his minister; and so without difficulty he became emperor.
There was the duke Hwan with Kwan Chung :—he first learned of
him, and then made him his minister; and so without difficulty he
became chief of all the princes.

*So did T'ang behave to E Yin, and the duke Hwan to Kwan
Chung, that they would not venture to call them to go to them. If
Kwan Chung might not be called to him by his prince, how much
less may I be called, who would not play the part of Kwan Chung !"11

We are to suppose tha these sentiments were conveyed to the
king by the officer with whom Mencius spent the night. Itis a
pity that the exposition of them could only be effected in such a
roundabout mi&nner, and was preceded by such acts of prevarica-
tion, But where the two parties were so suspicious of each other,

11 Bk. IL, Pt. IL, ii.
28]

RECT. 1.] MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES, [PROLRGOMENA,

we necd not wonder that they separated before long. Mencius
resigned his honorary appointment, and prepared to return to Tsow.
On this occasion king Seuen visited him, and after some compli-
mentary expressions asked whether he might expect to see him
again.” “TI dare not request permission to visit you at any particular
time,” replied Mencius, * but, indeed, it is what I desire.”!?

The king made another attempt to detain him, and sent an officer,
called She, to propose to him to remain in the State, on the under-
standing that he should have a house large enough to accommodate
his disciples, and an allowance of ten thousand measures of grain to
support them. All Mencius’ efforts had not sufficed to make king
Seuen and his ministers understand him. They thought he was really
actuated like themselves by a desire for wealth. He indignantly
rejected the proposal, and pointed out the folly of it, considering
that he had already declined a hundred thousand measures in holding
only an honorary appointment.!?

So Mencius turned his back on Ts‘e; but he withdrew with a
slow and lingering step, stopping three nights in one place, to
afford the king an opportunity to recall him on a proper understand-
ing. Some Tepron ded him with his hesitaney, but he sufficiently
explained himself. **'The king,” he said, “is, after all, one who may
be made to do good. If he were to use me, would it be for the
happiness of Ts‘e only? It would be for the happiness of the people
of the whole empire. I am hoping that the king will change; I am
daily hoping for this.

i

12 Bk. IL, Pt. IL, x. I consider that this chapter, and others here rcferred to, belong to Men-
cius’ first departure from Ts‘e. I do so because we can hardly suppose that the king and his officers
would not have understood him better by the end of his seeond residence. Moreover, while
Mencius retires, his fanguage in x. 2 and xi. 5, 6 is of such a nature that it leaves an opening
for him to return again. ^" 13 I have said in a note, p. 103, that 100,000 chung was the
fixed allowance of a fJEif, which Mencius had declined to receive, When we look narrowly
into the matter, however, we see that this could hardly be the case. It is known that four measures.
were used in Ts‘e,—the F, ER 2 and $i, and that à chung was = 10 foo, or six 4 and
four tow, 10,000 chung would thus — 64,000 stone, and Mencius declined 640,000 stone of grain.
No officer of T's‘e could have an income so much as that, The measures of the Han dynasty are
ascertained to have been only one-fifth the eapacity of the present. Assuming that those of Chow
and Han agreed, and bringing the above computations to the'present standard, Mencius was
offered an annual amount of 12,800 stone of grain for his disciples, and he had himself refused
in all 128,000 stone. With this reduction, and taking any grain we please as the standard of
valuation, the amount is still much beyond what we ean suppose to have been a jy's salary, —
II it PE supposes that Mencius intends by 100,000 cheng the sum of the income during all

the years he had held his honorary office. i

29]

PROLEGOMENA] LIFE OF MENCIUS. (er. u.

* Am I like one of your little-minded people? They will remon-
strate with their prince, and on their remonstrance not being ac-
cepted, they get angry, and, with their passion displayed in their
countenance, they take their leave, and travel with all their strength
for a whole day, before they will rest."!4

7. After he left Ts‘e, Mencius found a home for some time in the
small principality of T'áng, on the south of Ts‘e, in the ruler of

Mencius in Téing;—from Which he had a sincere admirer and docile pupil.
his leaving Tse 02,215. Ho did not proceed thither immediately, how-
ever, but.seems to have taken his way to Sung, which consisted
mostly of the present department of Kwei-tih in Ho-nan.! There
he was visited by the crown-prince of T'üng, who made a long
detour, while on a journey to Ts‘oo, for the purpose of seeing him.
The philosopher discoursed on the goodness of human nature, and
the excellent ways of Yaou and Shun. His hearer admired, but
doubted. He could not forget, however, and the lessons which he
received produced fruit before long.

From Sung Mencius returned to Tsow, by way ofSéé. In both
Sung and Séé he accepted large gifts from the rulers, which
help us in some measure to understand how he could maintain
an expenditure which must have been great, and which gave
occasion alsó for an ingenious exposition of the principles on
which he guided his course among the princes. “When you
were in Ts‘e,” said one of his disciples, “you refused 100 yih of
fine gold, which the king sent, while in Sung you accepted 70
yi, and in Së% 50.2 If you were right in refusing the gift in the
first case, you did wrong in aecepting it in the other two. If you
were right in accepting it in those two cases, you.were wrong in
refusing it in Ts‘e. You must accept one of these alternatives.” “I
did right in all the cases," replied Mencius. ‘ When I was in Sung,

14 Bk. IL, Pt. IT., xii.

1 This is gathered from Bk. IIT., Pt. 1, i. I, where the crown-prince of T‘ing visits Mencius,

and from Bk. IL, Pt. IL, ili, where his accepting a gift in Sung appears to have been subsequent

to his refusing one in Ts‘e. 2 I have supposed in the translation, p. 91, that the metal of
these gifts was silver and not gold. fal X P however, seems to make it clear that we ought
; E Ju 7 v3 47

to understand that i yis gold. (See BB fpi HE i, FA eI AE aA {E A aS, p. 6)
Pressed with the objection that 2,400 ounces of gold seems too large a sum, he goes on to make it
appear that under the ‘Bin dynasty, a yik or 24 ounces of gold was only equal to 15,000 cash, or

15 taels of silver of the present day! This is a point on which I do not know that we can attain
any positive certainty.

30]

SECT. L] MENCIUS: AND HIS DISCIPLES. . [FROLEGOMENA,

I was about to undertake. a long journey. Travellers must be
provided with what is necessary for their expenses. The prince's
message was—‘a present against travelling-expenses;’ why should I
have declined the gift?" In Séé I was under apprehensions for my
safety, and taking measures for my protection. The message was—
‘I have heard you are taking measures to protect yourself, and send
this to help you in procuring arms! Why should 1 have declined
the gift? But when I was in Ts‘e, I had no occasion for money.
To send a man a gift when he has no occasion for it is to bribe him.
How is it possible that a superior man should be taken with a
bribe?” x 7

Before Mencius had been long in Tsow, the crown-prince of Tang
succeeded to the rule of the principality, and, calling to mind the
lessons which he had heard in Sung, sent an oflicer to consult the
philosopher on the manner in which he should perform the funeral
and mourning services for his father.! Mencius of course advised
him to carry out in the strictest manner the ancient regulations.
The new prince's relatives and the officers of the State opposed, but
ineffectually. Mencius’ counsel was followed, and the effect was
great. Duke Win became an object of general admiration.

By and by Mencius proceeded himself to T'áng. We may suppose
that he was invited thither by the prince as soon as the rules of
mourning would allow his holding free communication with’ him.
The chapters which give an account of their conversations are really
interesting. Mencius recommended that attention should be chiefly
directed to the encouragement of agriculture and education. He
would have nourishment secured both for the body and the mind of
every subject. When the duke was lamenting the danger to which
he was exposed from his powerful and eneroaching neighbours,
Mencius told him he might adopt one of two courses;—either leave
his State, and like king T'ae go and find a settlement elsewhere, or
be prepared to die for his patrimony “If you do good," said he,
* among your descendants in after generations there will be one who
shall attain to the imperial dignity. But results are with Heaven.

8 Bk. IL, Pt. II, iii. 4 Bk. TIL, Pt. I. ii. The note of time which is relied on as enabling
us to follow Mencius here is the intimation Bk. L., Pt. IL, xiv., that ‘Ts‘e was about to fortify Se."
This is referred to B.C. 320, when king Seuer appointed his brother iHi BR over the dependency
of $éé, aud took measures to fortify it. 5 Bk. HL, Pt. I, iii.

31]

PROLEGOMENA.] LIFE OF MENCIUS. fom, 1.

What is Ts‘e to you, O prince. Be strong to do good. That is all
your business.”6

After all, nothing came of Mencius’ residence in Ting. Weshould
like to know what made him leave it. Confucius said that, if any of
the princes were to employ him, he should achieve something con-
siderable in twelve months, and in the course of three years, the
government would be perfected.” Mencius taught that, in his time,
with half the merit of former days double the result might be ac-
complished. Here in Ting a fair field seemed to be affor ded him,
but he was not able to make his promise good. Possibly the duod
purposes and docility of duke Wán may not have held out, or Men-
cius may have found that it was easier to theorize about government,
than actually to carry it on. Whatever may have been the cause,
we find him in B.¢. 319 at the court of king Hwuy of Leang.

Before he left Ting, Mencius had his rencounter with the disciples
of the “shrike-tongued barbarian of the South," one Heu Hing, who
came to T'ang on hearing of the reforms which were being made at
Mencius' advice by the duke Wan. This was one of the dreamy specu-
lators of the time, to whom I have already alluded. He pretended
to follow the lessons of Shin-nung, one of the reputed founders of
the empire and the father of husbandry, and came to Ting with
his plough upon his shoulder, followed by scores of followers, all
wearing the coarsest clothes, and supporting g themselves by making
mats and sandals. It was one of his maxims that “the magistrates
should be labouring men.” * He would have the sovereign grow his
own rice, and cook his own meals. Not a few of “The Learned?
were led away by his doctrines, but Mencius girt up his loins to
oppose the heresy, and ably vindicated the propriety of a division
of labour, and of a lettered class conducting the government. It is
just possible that the appearance of Heu Hing, aud the countenance
shown to him, many have had something to.do with Mencius' leav-
ing the State.

» 8. Leang was another name for Wei, one of the States into which
Tsin had been divided. King Hwuy, early in his reign, B.c. 364,

Mencius in Leang;~n.c. had made the city of Tae-leang, in the present
IS department of ‘K‘ae-fung, his capital, and given
its name to his whole principality. It was the year before his death,

6 Bk. L, Pt. IL. xiii, xiv., xv. 7 Confucian Analects, XII., x. 8 Bk. IL, Pt. L, i. 13.
32]

sacr. 1.] MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. [PROLEGOMENA.

when Mencius visited him.! A long, stormy, and disastrous rule was
about to terminate, but the king was as full of activity and warlike
enterprise as ever he had been. At his first interview with Mencius,
he addressed him in the well-known words, “ Venerable Sir, since
you have not counted it far to come here, a distance of a thousand
le, may I presume that you are likewise provided with counsels to
profit my kingdom?" Mencius in reply starts from the word profit,
and expatiates eloquently on the evil consequences that must ensue
from making a regard to profit the ground of conduct or the rule of
policy. As for himself, his theme must be benevolence and right-
eousness, On these he would discourse, but on nothing else, and in
following them a prince would obtain true and sure advantages.
Only five conversations are related between king Hwuy and
the philosopher. They are all in the spirit of the first which has
just been described, and of those which he had with king Seuen of
Ts‘e. There is the same freedom of expostulation, or, rather, boldness
of reproof, and the same unhesitating assurance of the success that
would follow the adoption of his principles. The most remarkable
is the third, where we have a sounder doctrine than where he tells
king Seuen that his love of beauty and money and valour need not
interfere with his administration of royal government. Hwuy is boast-
ing of his diligence in the government of his State, and sympathy
with the sufferings of his people,-as far beyond those of any of the
neighbouring rulers, and wondering how he was not more pros-
perous than they. Mencius replies, “ Your Majesty is fond of war;
—let me take an illustration from it. The drums sound, and the
weapons are crossed, when suddenly the soldiers on one side throw
away their coats of mail, trail their weapons behind them, and run.
Some of them run a hundred paces, and some run only fifty. What
would you think if those who run fifty paces were to laugh at those

1. There are various difficulties about the reign of king Hwuy of Eéang. Sze-ma Ts'cen makes .
it commence in 369 and terminate in 334, He is then succeeded by Séang di whose reign ends
in 318; and he is followed by Gae ORD till 295. What are called ‘The Bamboo Books’ 4E
extend Hwuy's reign to B.c, 318, and the next 20 years are assigned to king Gae. "The Annals of
the Empire’ (which are compiled from ‘The General Mirror of History’ Gi SED follow the
Bamboo Books in the length;of king Hwuy's reign, but make him followed by Seang; and take no
note of a king Gae.—From Mencius we may be assured that Hwuy was succeeded by Stang, and

the view of his Life, which I have followed in this sketch, leads to the longer period Aene fo
his reign.

33]

PROLYGOMENA.] LIFE OF MENCIUS. : [en. 11.
d E l

"who run a hundred paces?” “They may not do so,” said the king;

' “they only did not run a hundred paces, but they also ran.” “Since
your Majesty knows this,” was the reply, “ you need not hope that
your people will become more numerous than those of the neigh-
bouring kingdoms.” The king was thus taught that half measures
would not do. Royal government, to be effectual, must be carried
out faithfully and in its spirit.

King Hwuy died in s.c. 319, and was succeeded by his son, the
king Séang. Mencius appears to have had but one interview ‘with
him. When he came out from it, he observed to some of his friends:
—‘ When I looked at him from a distance, he did not appear like a
sovereign; when I drew near to him, I saw nothing venerable about
him."?

It was of no use to remain any longer in Leang; he left it, and
we meet with him again in Ts‘e.
 ... 9. Whether he returned immediately to Ts‘e we cannot tell, but
the probability is that he did, and remained in it till the year B.c,
^. Meneius the second time in 911. When he left it about seven years
Deep tone Sn. before, he had made provision for his return
in case of a change of mind in king Seuen. The philosopher, I
apprehend, was content with an insufficient assurance of such an
alteration. Be that as it may, he went back, and took an appoint-
ment. again as a high noble.

If he was contented with a smaller reformation on the part of the
king than he must have desired, Mencius was not himself different
from what he had been. In the court and among the high officers his
deportment was equally unbending; he was the same stern mentor.

Among the officers was one Wang Hwan, called also Tsze-gaou,
a favourite with the king, insolent and presuming. Him Mencius
treated with an indifference and even contempt which must have
been very provoking. A large party were met one time at the house
of an officer who had lost a son, for the purpose of expressing thcir
condolences. Mencius was among them, when suddenly Wang Hwan

"2 Bk. L, Pt. L, vi. .

1 This conclusion is adopted because it was in 311 that Yen rebelled, when the king said that
he was very much ashamed when he thought of Mencius, who had strongly condemned his policy
towards the State of Yen.—This is another case in which the chronology is differently laid down
‘by the Authorities, Sze-ma Ts‘een saying that Ten was taken by king Min ( jas EU ), the son and
successor of Seuen. ;

34]

secr. 1.] MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. [PROLEGOMENA,

made his appearance. One and another moved to do him honour

and win from him a smile,—all indeed but Mencius, who paid no

regard to him. The other complained of the rudeness, but the phi--
losopher could show that his conduct was only in accordance with
the rules of propriety.?

Another time, Mencius was sent as the chief of a mission of con-
dolence to the court of T'áng, Wang H wan being the assistant com-
missione Every morning ST evening he waited upon Mencius,
who never once exchanged a word with him on the business of their
mission.?

Now and then he locatis the object of unpleasant remark and cen- -
sure. At his instigation, an officer, Ch‘e Wa, remonstrated with the
king on some abuse, and had in consequence to resign his office. The
people were not pleased with Mencius, thus advising others to their
harm, and yet continuing to retain his own position undisturbed.
“In the course which he marked out for Ch‘e Wa," they said, “he
did well, but we do not know as to the course which he pursues for
himself" .The philosopher, however, was never at a loss in render-
ing a reagon. He declared that, as his office was honorary, he could
act “freely and without restraint either in going forward or retir-
ing. In this matter we have more sympathy with the condem-
nation than with the defence.

Some time during these years there occurred the death of Mencius’
excellent mother. She had been with him in Ts‘e, and he carried
the coffin to Loo, to bury it near the dust of his father and ancestors.
The funeral was a splendid one. Mencius perhaps erred in having it
so from his dislike to the Mihists, who advocated a spare simplicity in
all funeral matters.5 His arrangements certainly excited the aston-
ishment of some of his own disciples, and were the occasion of general
remark./ He defended himself on the ground that * the superior man
will not for all the world be niggardly to his parents," and that, as he
had the means, there was no reason why he should not give all the
expression in his power to his natural feelings.

Having paid this last tribute of filial duty, Mencius returned to
Ts‘e, but he could not appear at court till the three years of his

2, Bk. IV. Pt IL, xxvii, — 3 Bk. II, PtIL, vi 4 Bk. IL, Pt. IL, v. — 5 Bk.IIL, Pt L,
v, 2. 6 Bk. II. Pt. IT, vii. 7 Bk. L, Pt. IT, xvi.

35]

PROLEGOMPKA,] k LIFE OF MENCIUS. tom. 01.

“mourning were accomplished.® ‘It: could not be long after this when
trouble and confusion arose in Yen, a large State to the north-west
of Ts‘e, in the present Chihe. Its prince, who was a poor weakling,
wished to go through the sham of resigning his throne to his prime
minister, understanding that he would deelne it, and that thus he
‘would have the credit of playing the part of the ancient Yaou, while

-ať the same time he retained his kingdom. The minister, however,

‘accepted the tender, and, as he proved a tyrannical ruler, great dissatis-
faction arose. Shin T‘ung, an officer of Ts‘e, asked Mencius whether
‘Yen might be smitten. He replied that it might, for its prince had

"no right to resign it to his minister, and the minister no right to

receive it.’ “Suppose,” said he, “there were an officer here with

: whom you were pleased, and that, without informing the king, you
‘were privately to give him your salary and rank; and suppose that

“this officer, also without the king’s orders, were privately to receive

"them' from you:—would such a transaction be allowable? And

"where is the difference between the case of Yen and this?"9

Whether these sentiments were reported to king Seuen or not, he
“proceeded to attack Yen, and found it an easy prey. Magpgius was

“charged with having advised the measure, but he ingeniously re-
^pudiated the accusation. “I answered Shin T‘ung that Yen might
be smitten. If he had asked me— Who may smite it?' I would
“have answered him-—' He who is the minister of Heaven may smite
BU ~ Suppose’ the casé of a murderer, and that one asks me May
‘this man be put to death?” I will answer him—‘He may.’ If he
"ask ómé—* Who may put him to death?’ I will answer him.—' The
“chief criminal judge'may ‘put him to death. But now with one
Yen to smite another Yén:—how should I have advised this?" This
‘teference to ‘The’ minister “of Heaven’ strikingly illustrates what
^was said” about thé state of China in Mencius’ timè. : He tells us in
‘one place that hostile states do not correct one another, and that
"only the. supreme authority can: : punish “its subjects by force of
aris. 10 But there was now no supreiné authority in umm He
‘saw 'in "the emperor "but “the shadow’ of. án empty name.” + His
“conception of a minister of Héaven was not ee He was one

" el
(dore ra “Ul yt "E

8 Some are of opinion that Menctus stopped all the period of mourning i in Loo, but the more
natural conclusion, Bk. II; Pt. IL, vii. I, seems to me that he returned to Ts'e, and stayed at
Ying, without going to court. ' 9 Bk. H., Pt. IL, viii. 10 Bk. VI, Pt. II. ii.

36] E

ect.) C MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. [PROLEGOMRKA.

who, by the distinction which he gave to talents and virtue, and by his
encouragement of agriculture and commerce, attracted all people to
him as a parent. He would have no enemy under heaven, and EOS
not help attaining to the imperial dignity.!!

King Seuen, after conquering and appropriating. Yen, tried to
get Mencius’ sanction of the proceeding, alleging the ease and
rapidity with which he had effected the conquest as an evidence
of the favour of Heaven. But the philosopher was true to himself.
The people of Yen, he said, had submitted, because they expected
to find in the king a deliverer from the evils under which they
groaned. If they were pleased, he might retain the State, but if he
‘tried to keep it by force, there would simply be another revolution.i?

The king's love of power prevailed. He determined to keep his
prey, and ere long a combination was formed among the neigh-
bouring princes to wrest Yen from him. Full of alarm he again
consulted Mencius, but got no cómfort from him. * Let him restore
his captives and spoils, consult with the people of Yen, and appoint -
them a ruler—so he might be able to avert the threatened attack."18 ,

The result was as Mencius had, predicted. The people.of Yen
rebelled. The king felt ashamed before the philosopher, whose
second residence in Ts'e was thus brought to an Baplcaiant termina-
tion. "m pra
. 10. We do not know iat Mencius visited. any of the princes after
this. On leaving Ts‘e, he took his way again, to Sung, the duke, of

. Mencius in Loo;— which. , had taken the title of king in 2. C. 817. A
LI report.also had gone abroad that he’ was seiting
about to practise the. true royal government, but. . Mencius, goon
, satisfied himself of its incorrectness.! —. V

, -The last court at which. we find him is that;of Loo, B.C. 309.. The
, duke P‘ing had there called:Yð-ching, one of the. philosopher's dis-

. ciples, to his councils, and indeed committed to him the administra-

.tion of the government. When. Mencius heard of it, he was, $0
overjoyed that he could not sleep.? .

The. first appearance (in point of time) of this Ys. ching i in ‘the
Seven Books is not much to his credit. He comes to Ts‘e in, the
train of Wang Hwan, the favourite who was an offence to o the phi-

e ore th ie BE f
11 Bk. IL, Pt. Lo v. 12 Bk Ln PtIL x. ` 18 Bk. M Pt. IL, ixis -
1 See Bk, TH., Pt. Il, v, vi / — 2.Bk. VI, PtH xiii . ^ «

37]

PROLEGOMENA,] LIFE OF MENCTUS. [enc r.

losopher, and is very sharply reproved for joining himself to such a
character “for the sake of the loaves and fishes"? Other references
to him are more favourable. Mencius declares him to be “a good
man," “a real man.”4 He allows that “he is not a man of vigour,”
nor “a man wise in council," nor “a man of much information,” but
he says—“he isa man that loves what is good," and “the love of
what is good is more than a sufficient qual aeation for the govern-
“ment of ‘the empire ;—how much more is it so for the State of Loi pus

Either on his own impulse or by Yó-ching's invitation, Mencius
went himself also to Loo, hoping that the prince who had committed
his government to the disciple might be willing to listen to the
counsels of the master. The duke was informed of his arrival by
Y6-ching, and also of the deference which he exacted. He resolved
to go and visit him and invite him to the ‘court, The horses were
put to the carriage, and the duke was ready to start, when the in-
tervention of his favourite, a worthless creature called Tsang Ts‘ang,
diverted him from his good purpose. When told by the duke that
he was going to visit the schólar Mang, Ts'ang said, * That you
demean yourself to pay the honour of the first visit to a common
man, is, I apprehend, because you think that he is a man of talents
and virtue. From such men the rules of ceremonial proprieties and
right proceed ; but on the occasion of this Mang's second mourning,
his observances excedeed those of the former. Do not go to see him,
my prince.” "The duke said, “I will not;”—and carriage and horses
were ordered back to their places.

As soon as Yó-ching had an audience of the duke, ho explained
the charge of impropriety which had been brought against Mencius;
but the evil was. done. The duke had taken his course. “I told
him,” said Yó-ching, “about you, and he was coming to see you,
when Tsang Ts‘ang stopped him." Mencius replied to him, “A
man's advancement is effected, it may be, by others, and the stopping
him is, it may be, from the efforts of others. But to advance a man or
to stop his advance is really beyond the power of other men; my not
finding in the prince of Loo a ruler who would confide in me, and put
my counsels into practice, is from Heaven. How could that scion of
the Tsang family cause me not to find the ruler that would suit me? "6

8. Bk. IVY., Pt L, xxv. 4 VIL, Pt. IL, xxv. 5 Bk. VI, Pt. IL, xiii. 6 Bk. L, Pt.
IL, xvi. Ped

38]

SECT. 1.] MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. , [PROLEGOMENA

Mencius appears to have accepted this intimation of the will of
Heaven as final. He has a remarkable saying, that Heaven con-
trols the development of a man’s faculties and affections, but as there
is an adaptation in his nature for these, the superior man does not
say—" It is the appointment of Heaven." In accordance with this
pr inciple he had striven long against the adverse circumstances
which threw his hopes: of inlencine the rulers of his time again
and again in the dust. On his first leaving Loo we saw how he
said:—‘ Heaven does not yet wish that the empire should enjoy
tranquillity and good order." For about fifteen years, however, he
‘persevered, if peradventure there might be a change in the Heavenly
councils. Now at last he bowed in submission. The year after and
he would reach his grand climacteric. We lose sight of him. He
retired from courts and great officers. We can but think and con-
jecture of him, according to tradition, passing the last twenty years
of his life amid the more congenial society of his disciples, discoursing
to them, and compiling the Works which have survived as his
memorial to the present day.

11. I have endeavoured in the preceding paragraphs to put to-
gether the principal incidents of Mencius' history as they may be
gathered from his Writings. "There is no other source of informa-
tion about him, and we must regret that they tell us nothing of his
domestic lifeand habits. In one of the stories about his mother there
is an allusion to his wife, from which we may conclude that his mar-
riage was not without its bitternesses. It is probable that the Maing
Chung, mentioned in Bk. IL, Pt. IL, ii, was his son, though this is
not easily reconcileable with what we read in VI, Pt. I, v, of a
Ming Ke, who was, according to Chaou K'e, a brother of Mang
Chung. We must believe that he left a family, for his descendants
form a large clan at the present day. He-wiin, the 56th in descent
from Mencius, was, in the reign of Kea-tsing "d D. 1522-1566), con-
stituted: a member of the Handin college, and of the Board in charge
of the Five King, which honour was to be hereditary in the family,

and the holder of it to preside at the sacrifices to his ancestor.t
China's appreciation of our philosopher could not be more strikingly
shown. Honours flow back in this cupa ae descendant ennobles

7 Bk. HL, Pt., IT. xiv.
1 See Morrison s Dietionary, on Mencius, character r^

39]

PROLEGOMENA. } l HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS, (cr. 11.

his ancestors. But in the case of Mencius, as in that of Confucius,
this order is reversed. No excellence of descendants can extend to
them; and the nation ackowledges its obligations to them by nobility
and. distinction conferred through all generations upon their pos-
terity.

SECTION II..

HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS.

1. Confucius had hardly passed off the stage of life before his
merits began to be acknowledged. The duke Gae, who had neglect-
ed his counsels when he was alive, was the first to pronounce his
eulogy, and to order that public sacrifices should be offered to him.
His disciples proclaimed their estimation of him as superior to all
the sages whom China had ever seen. Before long this view of him
took possession of the empire; and since the Han dynasty, he has
been the man whom sovereign and people have delighted to honour.

The memory of Mencius was not so distinguished. We have seen
that many centuries elapsed before his Writings were received among

Acknowledgment of Mencius’ the classics of the empire. It was natural
merita byi Hie government, that under the same dynasty when this was
done the man himself should be admitted to share in the sacrifices
presented to Confucius. . i

The emperor Shin-tsung,! in A.D. 1083, issued a patent, constituting
Mencius “ Duke of the kingdom of Tsow,”? and ordering a temple to
be built to him in the district of Tsow, at the spot where the philo-
sopher had been interred. In the following year it was enacted that
he should have a place in the temple of Confucius, next to that of
Yen Yuen, the favourite disciple of the sage.

In a.p. 1330, the emperor Wan-tsung,?. of the Yuen dynasty, made

. an addition to Mencius’ title, and styled him “Duke of the kingdom `
of Tsow, Inferior Sage."4 This continued till the rise of the Ming

1 jill Se, av. 1068-1085. — 24228 B] FA. 3 BE aw. 1830-1333. — 4 HI
[55 Hg E A^. _ The "B has been translated * second-rate,' but it is by no means so depreci-

ating a term as that, simply indicating that Mencius was second to Confucius. The title hi Hr
was first applied to him by Chaou K'e.

40]

sect. IL] MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. (pxoLecomens.

dynasty, the founder of which, Hung-woo, had his indignation’
excited in 1872 by one of Mencius' conversations with king Seuen.
The philosopher had said:—-“ When the prince regards his ministers'
as his hands and feet, the ministers regard their prince as their belly
and heart; when he regards them as his dogs and horses, they regard
him as any other man; when he regards them as ground or as grass,
they regard him as a robber and an eńemy.” To apply such names
as robber and enemy in any case to sovereigns seemed to the imperial
reader an unpardonable outrage, and he ordered Mencius to be
degraded from his place in the temples of Confucius, declaring also
that if any one remonstrated on the proceeding he should be dealt
with as guilty of * Contempt of Majesty." j

The scholars of China have never been slow to vindicate the
memory of its sages and worthies. Undeterred by the imperial
threat, Ts‘éen T'ang, 8 a president of the Doard of Punishments,
presented himself with a remoüstrance, saying—" I will die for Men-
cius, and my death will be crowned with glory." The emperor was `
moved by his earnestness, and allowed him to go scathless. In the.
following year, moreover, examination and reflection produced a
change of mind. He issued a second proclamation to the effect
that Mencius, by exposing heretical doctrines and overthrowing per-
verse speakings, had set forth clearly the principles of Confucius, and
ought to be restored to his placé as one of his assessors.”

In 1530, the ninth year of the reign Kea-tsing, a general revision
was made of the sacrificial canon for the sage's temple, and the title

5 Bk. IV. Pt. IL, ii, 6 GE EE. — t Ihave taken this account from ‘The Sacrificial
Canon of the Sage’s Temples’ (vol. 1., proleg., p. 108). Dr. Morrison in his Dictionary, under the
character [m adds that the change in the emperors mind was produced by his readiug the

remarkable passage in Bk. VIL, Pt. IL, xv., about trials and hardships as the way by which
Heaven prepares men for great services. He thought it was descriptive of himself, and that he
could argue from it a good title to the erown;—and so he was molhfied to the philosopher. It
may be worth while to give here the concluding remarks in ‘The Paraphrase for Daily Lessons,
Explaining the Meaning of the Four Books’ (vol. I., proleg., p. 181), on the chapter of Mencius
which was deemed by the imperial reader so objectionabie:— * Mencius wished that sovereigns
should treat their ministers according to propriety, and nourish them with kindness, and there-
fore he used these perilous words in order to alarm and rouse them. As to the other side, the
part of ministers, though the sovereign regard them as his hands and feet, they ought notwith-
Standing to discharge most earnestly theirduties of loyalty and love. Yea, though he regard them
as dogs ‘and horses, or as the ground'and grass, they ought still more to perform their part in
spite of ali difficulties, and oblivious of their persons, They may on no account make the manner
in which they are regarded, whether it be of appreciation or contempt, the standard by which
they regulate the measure of their grateful service. The words of Confucius, that the ruler shouid
behave to his ministers according to propriety, und the ministers serve their soveret: gn with faithfulness,
contain the unchanging rule for all ages. ‘The authors of the ‘Daily Lessons’ did their work by
imperial order, and evidently had the fear of the eourt before their eyes. ‘Their language implies
a censure of our philosopher. ‘There will ever be a grudge against him i in the minds of despots,

and their creatures will be'ready to depreciate him. .

41]

PROLEGOMENA, ] HIS. INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. (cu. 1.

of Mencius was changed into—‘ The philosopher Ming, Inferior,
"Sage." So it continues to the present day. His place is the second
on the west, next to that of the philosopher Tsing. Originally, we
have seen, he followed Yen Hwuy, but Hwuy, Tsze-sze, Tsing, and
Mang were appointed the sage's four assessors, and had their relative
positions fixed, in 1267. l

2. The second edict of Hung-woo, restoring Mencius to his place

in the temples of Confucius, states fairly enough the services which
Estimate of Mencius sy he is held to have rendered to his country. The
himself and by scholars. — philosopher's own estimate of himself has partly
appeared in the sketch of his Life.! He seemed to start with astonish-
ment when his disciple Kung-sun Ch‘ow was disposed to rank hin
as a sage;? but he also said on one occasion—** When sages shall
rise up again, they will not change my words." Evidently, he was
of opinion that the mantle of Confucius had fallen upon him. A
work was to be done in his generation, and he felt himself able to
undertake it. After describing what had been accomplished by the
great Yu, by Chow-kung, and Confucius, he adds:—* I also wish
to rectify men's hearts, and to put an end to those perverse doctrines,
to oppose their one-sided actions, and banish away their licentious
expressions; and thus to carry on the work of the three sages."*

The place which Mencius occupies in the estimation of the literati
of China may be seen by the following testimonies, selected from
those appended by Choo He to the prefatory notice of his Life in the
* Collected Comments."

Han Yu? says, * If we wish to study the doctrines of the sages,
we must begin with Mencius.” He also quotes the opinion of Yang
Tsze-yun,® “ Yang and Mih were stopping up the way of truth, when
Mencius refuted them, and scattered their delusions without difficul-
ty; and then remarks upon it:—“ When Yang and Mih walked
abroad, the true doctrine had nearly come to nought. Though
Mencius possessed talents and virtue, even those of a sage, he did
not occupy the throne. He could only speak and not act. With all
his earnestness, what could he do? It is owing, however, to his
words, that learners now-a-days still know to revere Confucius, to
honour benevolence and righteousness, to esteem the true sovereign

1 See above, p. 25. 2 Bk. II. Pt. I, ii. 18. 19. — 3 Bk. IIT., Pt. IL, ix. 10. 4 Zb, par.
13. . 5 See above, pp. 11, 12: 6 P P2 4€ j;—-died a.D. 18.

42]

sect. n] . MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. [PROLEGOMENA:

and despise the mere pretender. But the grand rules and laws of
the sage and sage-emperors had been lost beyond the power of
redemption; only one in a hundred of them was preserved. Can it
be said in those circumstances that Mencius had an easy task? Yet
had it not been for him, we should have been buttoning the lappeis
of our coats on the left side, and our discourse would bave been all-
confused and indistinet;—it is on this account that I have honoured
Mencius, and consider his merit not inferior to that of Yu.”
One asked the philosopher Ch'ing? whether Mencius might be
pronounced to be a sage. He replied, “I do not dare to say alto-
gether that he was a sage, bpt his learning had reached the extremest
point.” The same great scholar also said:—“ The merit of Mencius in
regard to the doctrine of the sages is more than can be told. Confu-
cius only spoke of benevolence, but as soon as Mencius opens his
mouth, we hear of benevolence and righteousness. Confucius only
spoke of the will or mind, but Mencius enlarged also on the nourish-
ment of the passion-nature. In these two respects his merit was great."
* Mencius did great service to the world by his teaching the good-
ness of man's nature." “Mencius had a certain amount of the
heroical spirit, and to that there always belong some jutting corners,
the effect of which is very injurious. Yen Yuen, all round and
complete, was different from this. He was but a hair's-breadth re-
moved from a sage, while Mencius must be placed in a lower rank,
a great worthy, an inferior sage." Ch‘ing was asked where what he
called the spirit heroical of Mencius could be seen. “ We have only to
compare his words with those of Confucius," he said, *and we shall
perceive it. It is like the comparison of ice or crystal with a precious
stone. Theiceisbright enough, but the precious stone, without so much
‘brilliancy, has a softness and richness all its own"? The scholar Yang?
DP Ý; see vol, L, proleg., p. 24. 8 This is probably the original of what appeare in
the “ Memoires concernant les Chinois," in the notice of Mencius, vol. IIL, and which Thornton
(vol. IL, pp. 216, 217) has faithfully translated therefrom in the following terms :—‘ Confucius,
through prudence or modesty, often dissimulated; he did not always say what he might have said:
Mang-tsze,on the contrary, was incapable of constraining himself; he spoke what he thought,
and without tlie least fear or reserve. He resembles ice of the purest water, through which weean
see allits defects as well as its beauties: Confucius, on the other hand, is like a precious gem,

which, though not so pellucid as ice, has more strength and solidity.’ The former of these sén-
tences is quite alien from the style of Chinese thinking and expression. 9 9 E. This is H

HF. styled FH 3b but more.commonly referred to as 7] E ul He was one of the great

scholars of the Sung dynasty, a friend of the two Ch‘ing. He hae a place in the temples of
Confucius. i ` :

43]

PROLRGOMEN A. HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. fer. n,

says:—“ The great object of Mencius in his writings is to rectify men's
hearts, teaching them to preserve their heart and nourish their na-
ture, and to recover their lost heart. When he discourses of bene-
volence, righteousness, propriety, and knowledge, he refers to the
principles of these in the heart commiserating, feeling shame and
dislike, affected with modesty and complaisance, approving and disap-
proving. When he speaks of the evils springing from perverted
speakings, he says—‘ Growing first in the mind, they prove injurious
to government.’ When he shows how a prince should be served, he
says—' Correct what is wrong in his mind. Once rectify the prince,
and the kingdom will be settled.’ With him the thousand changes
and ten thousand operations of men all come from the mind or
heart. If à man once rectify his heart, little else will remain for
him to do. In ‘The Great Learning,’ the cultivation of the person,
the regulation of .the family, the government of the State, and the
tranquillization of the empire, all have their root in the rectifying
of the heart and the making the thoughts sincere. If the heart be
rectified, we recognize at once the goodness of the nature. On this
account, whenever Mencius caine into contact with people, he testi-
fied that man's nature is good. When Ow-yang Yung.shuh!? says,
that in the lessons of the sages, man's nature does not occupy the
first place, he is wrong. There is nothing to be put before this.
Yaou and Shun are the models for ten thousand ages simply be-
cause they followed their nature. And to follow our nature is just
to accord with Heavenly principle. To use plans and arts, away
from this, though they may be successful in great achievement, is
the selfishness of human desires, and as far removed from the mode
-of action of the sage, as earth is from heaven." I shall close these
testimonies with a sentence from Choo He himself. He says:—
* Mencius, when compared with Confucius, always appears to speak
in too lofty a style; but when we héar him proclaiming the goodness
of man’s nature, and celebrating Yaou and Shun, then we likewise
perceive the solidity of his discourses.” !
4, The judgment concerning our philosopher contained in the
above quotations will approve itself to every one who has carefully

10 ER BG E m . This was one of Chins's greatest scholars. He has now a place in the

^ temples of Confucius. n ‘Seo TK P 4 = T A +-

44)

$8cT. 11] MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. {PROLEGOMENA,

Correctness of the shove perused his Works. The long passage from
e os appes n Ma Yang Kwei-shan is especially valuable, and
$5800 ORAL DE MOC EE: puts the principal characteristic of Mencius’
‘teachings in a clear light. Whether those teachings have the in-
trinsic value which is ascribed to them is another question. I will
endeavour to show in the present section that they have not. But
Mencius’ position with reference to “the doctrines of the sages” is
correctly assigned. We'are not to look for new truthsin him. And
this does not lead his countrymen to think less highly of him. I
ventured to lay it down as one grand cause of the position’ and
influence of Confucius, that he was simply the preserver of the
monuments of antiquity, and the exemplifier and expounder of the
maxims of the golden age of China. In this Mencius must share
with him.

But while we are not to look to Mencius for new truths, the pecu-
liarities of his natural character were more striking than those of
his master. There was an element of “the heroical” about him.
He was a dialectician, moreover. If he did not like disputing, as
he protested that he did not, yet, when forced to it, he showed him-
self a master of the art. An ingenuity. and subtlety, which we
cannot but enjoy, often mark his reasonings. We have more sym-
pathy with him than with Confucius. He comes closer to us. He
is not so awe-ful, but he is more admirable. The doctrines of the
sages take a tinge from his mind in passing through it, and it is with
that Mencian character about them that they are now held by the
cultivated classes and by readers generally.

I will now call attention to a few passages illustrative of these
remarks. Some might prefer to search them out for themselves in
the body of the volume, and I am far from intending to exhaust the
subject. There will be many readers, however, pleased to have the
means of forming an idea of the man for themselves brought within
small compass. “My next object will be to review his doctrine con-
cerning man’s mental constitution and the nourishment of the passion-
nature, in which he is said to have rendered special service to the cause
of truth. That done, I will conclude by pointing out what I conceive
to be his chief defects as a moral and political teacher. To the
opinions of Yang Choo and Mih, which he took credit to himself for
assailing and exposing, it will be necessary to devote another chapter.

45]

aaa HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. (en. 1t.

5. It was pointed out in treatm of the opinions of Confucius,
that he allowed no “ right divine” to a sovereign, independent of
Boutin ot Monete his exercising a benevolent rule. This was one
ete "sonet of the topics, however, of which he was shy.
i “With Mencius, on the contrary, it was a favourite
theme. The degeneracy of the times and the ardour of his disposi-
tion prompted him equally to the free expression of his convictions
about it:
“The people,” he said, “are the most important element ina
nation; the spirits of the land and grain are the next; the sovereign
On donent EE c is the lightest. When a prince endangers the
ple more important than the altars of the spirits of the land and grain, he
ids is changed, and another appointed in p pns i
When the sacrificial victims have been perfect, the millet in its
vessels all pure, and the sacrifices offered at their proper seasons, if
yet there ensue drought, or the waters overflow, the spirits of the
: land and grain are ehanged, and others appointed in their place."
“The people are the most important element in a mation, and the
sovereign is the lightest ;’—that is certainly a bold and ringing aftirma-
An unworthy sovereign may tion. Mencius was not afraid to follow it to
be dethroned or put to death. the conclusion that the sovereign who was
exercising an injurious rule should be dethroned. His existence is
not to be allowed to interfere with the general good. Killing in
such à case is no murder. King Seuen once asked, “ Was it so that
T'ang banished Kéé, and that king Woo smote Chow?” Mencius
replied, “It is so in the records." The king asked, “May a minister
then put his sovereign to death?" Our philosopher's reply was:—
* He who outrages the benevolence proper to his nature is called
a robber; he who outrages righteonsucss is called a ruffian. The
robber and ruffian we call a mere fellow. I have heard of the
eutting off of the fellow Chow, but I have not heard in his case of
the putting a sovereign to death.”? -
With regard to the ground of the relation between ruler and
people Mencius refers it very clearly to the will of God. In one.
The ground of the relation Place he adapts. for his own purpose the lan-
between ruler and popl-— onage of king Woo in theShoo-king:—‘“ Heaven
having produced the inferior peuple, appointed for them rulers and

1 Bk. VIT, Pt. IE, xiv. 2 Bk. I., Pt. IL, viii..
46]

SECT. 1.) MENCIES AND HIS DISCIPLES. . [PROLEGOMENA,

teachers, with the purpose that they should be assisting to God, and
therefore distinguished them throughout the four quarters of the
empire." But the question arise s How can this will of Heaven be
known? Mencius has endeavoured to answer it. He says:——'' Heaven
gives the empire, but its appointment is not conferred with specific
injunctions. Heaven does not speak. It shows its will by a man’s
personal conduct and his conduct of affairs.” The conclusion of the
whole matter is:—‘ Heaven sees according as the people see; Heaven
hears according as the people hear.”*
It may not be easy to dispute these TRI I for one have
no hesitation in admitting them. Their application, however, must
Pee ere always be attended with difficulty. Here is 8 so-
may pe dethroned by vereign who is the very reverse of a minister of
God for good. He ought to be removed, but who
is to remove him? Mencius teaches in one passage that the duty
is to be performed by his relatives who are also ministers. The
king Seuen asked him about the office of chief ministers. Mencius
said, “ Which chief ministers is your Majesty asking about?" “Are
there differences among them,” inquired the king. “There are,” was
the reply; ‘there are the chief ministers who are noble and relatives
of the prince, and there are those who are of a different surname.”
The king said, “I beg to ask about the chief ministers who are noble
and relatives of the prince.” Mencius answered, “If the prince
have great faults, they ought to remonstrate with him, and if he do
-not listen to them after they have done so again and again, they
ought to dethrone him." The king on this looked moved, and
changed countenance. Mencius said, “Let not your Majesty be
offended. You asked me, and I dare not answer but according to
truth.” .
This plan for disposing of an unworthy sovereign has been acted
on in China and in other countries. It is the best that can be adopt-
Carona dud ed to secure the throne in the ruling House.
the minister of Heaven, may But where there are no relatives that ‘have the
dethrone a ruler.
virtue and power to play such a part, what
is to be done? Mencius has two ways of meeting this difficulty.
Contrary to his general rule® for ‘the conduct of ministers who are

. 8 Bk. I, Pt. IL 7 — 4 Bk. V, Pt L, v. 5 Bk. V., Pt. IL, ix. 6 Bk. V., Pt.
IL, ix. 2.

47]

PROLEGOMENA. } HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. [cn. n.

not relatives, he allows that even they may, under certain conditions,
take summary measures with their sovereign. His disciple Kung-sun
Ch‘ow said to him, * E Yin said, ‘I cannot be near and see him so
disobedient to reason,’ and therewith he banished T‘ae-ked to T*ung.
The people were much pleased. When T‘ae-kéi became virtuous,
he brought him back, and the people were again much pleased.
When worthies are ministers, may they indeed banish their sover-
eigns in this way, when they are not virtuous?” Mencius replied,
“If they have the same purpose as E Yin, they may. If they have
not the same ‘purpose, it would be usurpation.” His grand device,
however, is what he calls “the minister of Heaven." When the
sovereign has become worthless and useless, his hope is that Heaven
will raise up some one for the help of the people;—some one who
shall so occupy in his original subordinate position as to draw all
eyes and hearts to himself. Let him then raise the standard, not of
rebellion but of righteousness? and he cannot help attaining to the
highest dignity. So it was with the great T'ang; so it was with the
kings Wan and Woo. Of the last Mencius says:—“There was one
man”—7.e., the tyrant Chow— pursuing a violent and disorderly
course in the empire, and king Woo was ashamed of it.» By one
display of his anger, he gave repose to all the people."9? He would
have been glad if any one of the princes of his own time had been
able to vault in a similar way to the imperial throne, and he went
about counselling them to the attempt. ` “ Let your Majesty,” said he
to king Seuen, “in like manner, by one burst of anger, give repose
to all the people of the empire.” This was in fact advising to re-
bellion, but the philosopher would have recked little of such a
charge. The House of Chow had forfeited in his view its title to the
empire. Alas! among all the princes he had to do with, he did not
. find one who could be stirred to so honourable an action.

We need not wonder that Mencius, putting forth the above views
so boldly and broadly, should not be a favourite with the rulers of
. China. His sentiments, professed by the literati, and known and
read by all the people, have operated powerfully to compel the good
_ behaviour of “the powers that be." If may be said that they en-
courage the aims of selfish ambition, and the lawlessness of the

. 7 Bk. VIL, Pt. LE, xxxi. 8 Bk. IT, Pt.v. 9 iki BE Fe; * a raising of righteous

soldiers ;'—this is the profession of all rebel leaders in China.. ^ 10 Bk. I, Pt. IL, iii. 7.
A8]

tact, i] MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. [pRoLEGOMENA,

licentious mob. I grant it. They are lessons for the virtuous, and
not for the lawless and disobedient, but the government of China
would have been more of a grinding despotism, if it had not been
for them.
On the readiness of the people to be NE Mencius only differs
from Confucius in the more vehement style in which he expresses
The influence of personal his views, He does not dwell so much on the.
Shanicier ewer: influence of personal virtue, and I pointed out,
in the sketch of his Life, how he all but compromised his character
in his communications with king Seuen, telling him that his love of
women, of war, and of money might be so regulated as not to inter-
fere with his exercise of true reyal government. Still he speaks at
times correctly and emphatically on this subject. He quotes Con-
fucius’ language on the influence generally of superiors on inferiors,
—kthat “the relation between theni is like that between the wind and
grass; the grass must bend when the wind blows upon it;"!!.and he
says himself:—“ It is not enough to remonstrate with a sovereign on
account of the mal-employment of ministers, nor to blame errors of
government. It is only the great man who can rectify what is
wrong in the sovereign’s mind. Let the prince be benevolent, and
“all his acts will be benevolent. Let the prince be righteous, and all
his acts will be righteous. Let the prince be correct, and all his
acts will be correct. Once rectify the prince, and the kingdom. will
be firmly settled.”!2 -
But the misery which he saw around him, in consequence of the
prevailing anarchy and constant wars between State and State, led
Benevolent government, Mencius to insist on the necessity of what he*
anddta epus called “a benevolent government, The king
Seang asked him, “ Who can unite the empire under one'sway?" and
his reply was, * He who has no pleasure in killing men can so unite
it."3 His being so possessed with the sad condition of his time
likewise gave occasion, we may suppose, to the utterance of another
sentiment, sufficiently remarkable. “Never,” said he, “has he who
would by his excellence subdue men been able to subdue them. Let
a prince seek by his excellence to nourish men, and he will be
able to subdue the whole empire. It is impossible that any one
should become ruler of the empire to whom it has not yielded the .

11 Bk. HI, Pt. Iii 4. — 12 Bk. IV, Pt, L, xx. — 13 Rk. L, Pt. L, vi.
49}

PROLEGOMENA, } HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. (cu. 1,

subjection of the heart.”14 The highest style of excellence will of
course have its outgoings in benevolence. Apart from that, it will
be powerless, as Mencius says. His words are akin to those of Paul:
 —*Searcely for a righteous man will one die: yet peradventure for
& good man some would even dare to die."

On the effects of a benevolent rule he says:—“ Kéé and Chow's
losing the empire arose from their losing the people; and to lose the
people means to lose their hearts, There is a way to get the empire:
—-get the people, and the empire is got. There is a way to get the
people:—get their hearts, and the people are got. There is a way
to get their hearts:—it is simply to collect for them what they like,
and not to lay on them what they dislike. The people turn to a
benevolent rule as water flows downwards, and as wild beasts fly to
the wilderness. As the otter aids the deep waters, driving the fish
into them, and as the hawk aids the thickets, driving the little birds
to them, so Kéé and Chow aided T‘ang and Woo, driving the people
to them. If among the present sovereigns of the empire there were

one who loved benevolence, all the other princes would aid him by .
driving the people to him. Although he wished not to become
emperor, he could not avoid becoming so."!5

Two principal elements of this benevolent rule, much insisted
on by Mencius, deserve to be made prominent. They are to be
found indicated in the Analects, and in the older classics also,
but it was reserved for our philosopher to set them forth, sharply

do pita tae epi Wann defined in his own style, aud to show the

and to-educate them, are important -conpection between them. They are:—

that the people be made well off, and that

they be educated; and the former is necessary in order to the
efficiency of the other.

Once, when Confucius was passing through Wei in company with
Yen Yew, he was struck with the populousness of the State. The
disciple said, “Since the people are thus numerous, what more shall
be done for them?” Confucius answered, “Enrich them.” “ And
when they have been enriched, what more shall be done for them?”
The reply was——“ Teach them."!6 This brief conversation contains
the germs of the ideas on which Mencius delighted to dwell.

14 Bk. İV., Pt.ILggvi 15, Bk. IV, Pt. I, ix. — 16 Con. Ana, XIIL, ix.
50] ` l l

SECT. I1,] MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. [PROLEGOMENA.

We read in one place :—* Let it be seen to that their fields of grain
and hemp are well cultivated, and make the taxes on them light:—
so the people may be made rich.

* Let it be seen to that they use their resources of food seasonably,
and expend their wealth only on the prescribed ceremonies:—so
their wealth will be more than can be consumed.

“The people cannot live without water and fire; yet if you knock
at a man’s door in the dusk of the evening, and ask for water and
fire, there is no man who will not give them, such is the abundance of
these things. A sage governs the empire so as cause pulse and
grain to be as abundant as water and fire. When pulse and grain
are as abundant as water and fire, how shall the people be other
than virtuous? "17

Again he says:—“ In good years the youth of a country are most
of them good, while in bad years they abandon themselves to evil."

It is in his conversations, however, with king Seuen of Ts‘e and .
duke Win of T‘Xng, that we find the fullest exposition of the points
in hand. “It is only scholars"—officers, men of a superior order—
“who, without a certain livelihood, are able to maintain a fixed:
heart. As to the people, if they have not a certain livelihood, it fol-
lows that they will not have a fixed heart. And if they have not
a fixed heart, there is nothing which they will not do in the way of
self-abandonment, of moral deflection, of depravity, and of wild
license. When they have thus been involved in crime, to follow
them up “and punish them :-—this is to entrap the people. There-
fore an intelligent ruler will regulate the livelihood of the people, so
as to make sure that, above, they shall have sufficient wherewith to
serve their parents, and, below, sufficient wherewith to support.their
wives and children; that in good years they shall always be abun-
dantly satisfied, and that in bad years they shall escape the danger of
perishing. After this he may urge them, and they will proceed to
what is good, for in this case the people nu follow after that with,
ease.”19

It is not necessary to remark here on the measures which Mencius
recommends in order to secure a certain livelihood for the people.
They embrace the regulation both of agriculture and commerce.??

17 Bk. VIL, Pt. I, xxiii. 18 Bk. VI., Pt. L, vii. . 19 Bk. I„ Pt. L, vii. 20, 21; Bk. IIL,
Pt. I, iii. 3. 20 Bk. III., Pt. I. iii.; Bk, L, Pt. IL, iv.; Bk. IL, Pt. I, va et al

51]

PROLEGOMENA. } l HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. {em m.

And education would be directed simply to illustrate the human re-
lations.! What he says on these subjects is not without shrewdness,
though many of his recommendations are inappropriate to the pre-
sent state of society in China itself as well as in other countries,
But his principle, that good government should contemplate and
will be seen in the material wellbeing of the people, is worthy of all
honour. Whether government should interfere to secure the educa-
tion of the people is questioned by not a few. The religious denomi-
nation to which, I have the honour to belong has distinguished
itself by opposing such a doctrine in England, —more zealously per-
haps than wisely. But when Mencius teaches that with the mass
of men education will have little success where the life is embitter-
ed by a miserable poverty, he shows himself well aéquainted with
human nature. .Educationists now seem generally to recognize it,
but I think it is only within a century that it has assumed in Europe
the definiteness and importance with which it appeared to Mencius
here in China two thousand years ago.

We sáw how Mencius, when he was residing in T'Áng, came into
contact with a class of enthusiasts, who advocated a return to the
primitive state of society,

2 * When Adam delved and Eve span."
"They said that wise and able princes should cultivate the ground
equally and along with their people, and eat the fruit of their la-
 Necessity for a division Dour,—that ‘‘to have granaries, arsenals, and
ret be conducted py a treasuries was an oppressing of the people." Men-
lettered class. cius exposed these errors very happily, show-
ing the necessity to society of a division of labour, and that the con-
duct of government should be in the hands of a lettered class.
“I suppose,” he said to a follower of the strange doctrines, “ that
Heu Hing sows grain and eats the produce. Isit notso?” “Itis
so,” was the answer, “I suppose that he also weaves cloth, and wears
his own manufacture. Isit not so?” ‘No; Heu wears clothes of hair-
cloth.” “Does he wear a cap?” “He wears a cap." ** What
kind of cap?" * A plain cap." *Is it woven by himself ?" “No; he
gets it in exchange for grain." “ Why does Heu not weave it him-
self?” «That would injure his husbandry,” “Does Heu cook his
food in boilers and earthen-ware pans, and does he plough with an iron

21 Bk. III. Pt. I, iii. 10,
52] ü

*

RECT, I.] ^ MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. _ [PROLEGOMENA

share?” ‘ Yes.” * Does he make those articles himself?” “No;
he gets them in exchange for grain.” On these admissions Men-
cius proceeds :—“ The getting those various articles in exchange
for grain is not oppréssive to the potter and the founder, and the pot-
ter and the founder in their turn, in exchanging their various arti-
cles for grain, are not oppressive to the husbandman. How should
such a thing be supposed? But why does not Heu, on his principles,
act the potter and founder, supplying himself with the articles which
he uses solely from his own establishment? Why does he go con-
fusedly dealing and exchanging with the handicraftsmen? Why
does he not spare himself so much trouble?" His opponent attempted
a reply:—' The business of the handicraftsman can by no
means be carried on along with the business of husbandry.”
Mencius resumed :—“ Then, is.it the government of the empire
which alone can be carried on along with the practice of husbandry ?
Great men have their proper business, and little men have their
proper business. Moreover, in the ease of any single individual,
whatever articles he can require are ready to his hand, being pro- .
duced by the various handicraftsmen ;—if he must first make them
for his own use, this way of doing would keep the whole empire run-
ning about upon the roads. Hence there is the saying :—‘Some
men labour with their minds, and some with their strength. Those
who labour with their minds govern others; those who labour with
their strength are governed by others. Those who are governed
by others support them ; those who govern others are supported by
them. This is a principle universally recognized."22

Sir John Davis has observed that this is exactly Pope's line,
* And those who think still govern those who toil.”28

Mencius goes on to illustrate it very clearly by referring to the
labours of Yaou and Shun. His opponent makesa feeble attempt at the
end to say a word in favour of the new doctrines he had embraced:
—* If Heu's doctrines were followed there would not be two prices
in the market, nor any deceit in the kingdom. Ifa boy were sent
to the market, no one would impose on him; linen and silk of the
same length would be of the same price. So it would be with
bundles of hemp and silk, being of the same weight; with the differ-
ent kinds of grain, being the same in quantity; and with shoes

22 Bk. III, Pt. iv. `- 23 The Chinese, vol, II, p. 56.
53].

Ld

PROLEGOMENA. ] HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. [cn. ut.

which were the same in size." Mencius meets this with a decisive
reply: It is the nature of things to be of unequal quality; some
are twice, some five times, some ten times, some a hundred times,
some a thousand times, some ten thousand times as valuable as
others. If you reduce them all to the same standard, that must
throw the empire into confusion. If large shoes were of the same
price with small shoes, who would make them? For people to
follow the doctrines of Heu would be for them to lead one another
 on to practise deceit. -How can they avail for the government of a
State?”

There is only one other subject which I shall here notice, with
Mencius’ opinions upon it,—the position namely, which he occupied

Mencius’ podion as himself with reference to the princes of his time.
fee He calls it that of “a Teacher,” but that term in
our language very inadequately represents it. He wished to meet
with some ruler who would look to him as “ guide, philosopher, and
friend,” regulating himself by his counsels, and thereafter commit-
ting to him the entire administration of his government. Such
men, he insisted, there had been in China from the earliest ages.
Shun had been such to Yaou; Yu and Kaou-yaou had been such
to Shun; E Yin had been such to T'ang; T'ae-kung Wang had
been such to king Wan; Chow-kung had been such to the kings
Woo and Shing; Confucius might have been such to any prince
who knew his merit; Tszesze was such, in a degree, to the dukes
Hwuy of Pe and Muh of Loo.2# The wandering scholars of his
own day, who went from, court to court, sometimes with good
intentions and sometimes with bad, pretended to this character; but
Mencius held them in abhorrence. They disgraced the character
and prostituted it, and he stood forth as its vindicator and true
exemplifier. l

Never. did Christian priest lift up his mitred front, or show his
shaven crown, or wear his Geneva gown, more loftily in courts and
palaces than Mencius, the Teacher, demeaned himself. We have seen
what struggles sometimes arose between him and the princes who
would fain have had him bend to their power and place. “Those,”
said he, “who give counsel to the great should despise them,

21 See Bk. x, Pt. IL, iii, vii.: et al,
$54]

SECT, I1.] MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. [PROLEGOMENA.

and not look at their pomp nd display. Halls I fathoms
high, with beams projecting several cubits:—these, if my wishes
were to be realized, I would not have. Food spread before me over
ten cubits square, and attendant girls to the amount of hundreds:
—these, though my wishes were realized, I would not have. Plea-
sure and wine, and the dash of hunting, with thousands of chariots
following after me:—these, though my wishes were realized, I
would not have. What they esteem are what I would have nothing
to do, with; what I esteem are the rules of the ancients.—Why
should I stand in awe of them?” Before we bring a charge of
. pride against Mencius on account of this language and his conduct
in accordance with it, we must bear in mind that the literati in
China do in reality occupy the place of priests and ministers in -
Christian kingdoms. Sovereign and people have to seek the law
at their lips. The ground on which they stand, —* the rules of the
ancients,”—affords but poor footing compared with the Word of God;
still it is t them the truth, the unalterable Jaw of light and duty,
and, as the expounders of it, they have to maintain a dignity which
will not compromise its claims. That “scholars are the first and
head of the four classes of the people" is a maxim universally
admitted. I do desiderate in Mencius any approach to humility of
soul, but I would not draw my illustrations of the defect from the
boldness of his speech and deportment as “a Teacher,”
But in one respect I am not sure but that our philosopher failed
to act worthy of the character which he thus assumed. The great
The charge against M men to whom he was in the habit of referring as
of living on the prince. — his patterns nearly all rose from deep poverty
to their subsequent eminence. “Shun came from among the
channeled fields; Foo Yué was called to office from the midst of his
building-frames; Kaou-kih from his. fish and salt."26 “E Yin was
a farmer in Sin. When T'ang sent persons with presents of silk, to
intreat him to enter his service, he said, with an air of indifference -
and self-satisfaction, ‘What can I do with those silks with which
Tang invites me? Is it not best for me to abide in the channeled
fields, and there delight myself with the principles of Yaou and

25 Bk. VIL, Pt. IL xxxiv. This passage was written on the pillars of a hall in College
steet, East, where the gospel was first preached publicly in their own tengue to the people of
Canton, in February, 1858. 26 Bk. VL, Vt. H. xv. 1.

55]

 rüoimenunu.] HIS. INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. (en. 1

. Shun??”27. Tt:does not appear that any of those worthies accepted
- favours while they were not in office, or from men whom they dis-
approved. With Mencius it was very different: he took largely:
from the princes whom he lectured and denounced. Possibly he
might plead in justification the example of Confucius, but he carried
the practice to.a greater extent than that sage had ever done,—to an
extent which staggered even his own disciples ‘and elicited their
frequent i inquiries. For instance, * P‘ang King asked him, saying,
‘Is it not an extravagant procedure to go fr om one prince to another
and live upon them, followed by several tens of carriages, and at-
tended by several hundred men?'" Mencius replied, “ If there be
not a proper ground for taking it, a single bamboo-cup of rice may
not be received from a man. If there be such a proper ground, then
Shun's receiving the empire from Yaou is not to be considered ex-
cessiye. Do you think it was excessive?” “No,” said the other, * but
for & scholar performing no service to receive his support notwith-
standing is improper.” Mencius answered, “If you do not have an
ántercommunication of the productions of labour, and an interchange
of men’s services, so that one from his overplus may supply the de-
ficiency of another, then husbandmen will have a superfluity of grain,
_and women will have a superfluity of cloth. If you have such an inter-
change, carpenters and carriage-wrights may all get their food from
you. Here now is a man who, at home, is filial, and, abroad, respect-
-ful to his elders, and who watches over the principles of the ancient
qaa awaiting the rise of future learners;—and yet you ‘will refuse
to support him, How is it that you give honour to the carpenter
and carriage-wright, and slight him who practises benevolence and
righteousness?” .P'ang King said,. “ The aim of the carpenter and
carriage-wright i is by their trades to seek for a living. Is it also the
aim of the superior man in his practice of principles to seek for a
' diving?" “What have you to do," returned Mencius, “with his
purpose? .He is of service to you. He deserves to be supported,
and should be: supported., And let me ask—Do you remunerate a
man’s intention, or do you. remunerate his service?" To this Kang
replied, “I remunerate his intention.” Mencius said, “There is a
man here who. ‘breaks your tiles and draws unsightly figures on your
vom purpose miay be thereby to seek for his living, but will
Q3 Bk. Vo Ph Ly i28

Sej >

sect. 11] : MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. . [eroLecomenda -

you indeed remunerate him?” No,” said Kang; and Mencius then’
concladed, “That being the case, it is not the puspose which. jw
remunerate, but the UE done.”28

The ingenuity of Mencius in the above conversation vill. hot be
questioned. The position from which he starts in his defence, that
society is based on a diviston of labour and an interchange of services, _
is. sound, and he fairly hits and overthrows his disciples on the point
that we remunerate a man not for his aim but for his work done. But
he does not quite meet the charge against himself. ' This will better:
appear from another brief conversation with Kung-sun Ch‘ow on the’
. same subject. “It is said, in the Book of Poetry," obyerved ouo

* * He wiil not eat the bread of idleness?

How is. it that we see superior men eating without labouring?”
Mencius replied, “ When a superior man resides in a country, if the
sovereign employ his counsels, he comes to tranquillity, wealth,
honour, and glory; if the young in it follow his instructions, they
become filial, obedient to their elders, true-hearted, and faithful.—
What greater example can there be than MUS of not eating the bread:
‘of jdleness?"29

The argument here is based on the supposition that the superior
man has free course, is appreciated by the sovereign, and venerated
and obeyed by the people. But this never was the case with Meneius.-
“Only once, the short time that he was in Ting, did a ruler listen
favourably to his counsels. “His lessons, it may be granted, were’
. calculated to be of the greatest benefit to the communities where he’
was, but it is difficult to see the “work done,” for which he could
claim the remuneration. His reasoning might very well be applied
to vindicate a government's extending its patronage to literary men, .
where ‘it recognized in a general way the advantages to be derived
from their pursuits. Still more does it accord with that employed
in western nations where ecclesiastical establishments form one of
the institutions of a country. The members belonging to them must
have their maintenance, independently of the personal charactér of
the rulers. But Mencius’ position was more that of a.reforiner.
His claims were of those of his personal merit, It seems to me that
P‘ang Kang had. reason to doubt ihe propriety of his course, and
characterise it as extravagant. i

28 Bk. IH., Pt IL, it. 29 Bk, VIL, Pt I, xxxi.
517]

PROLEGOMENA.] HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. (on. x1.

Another disciple, Wan Chang, pressed him very closely with the
: inconsistency of his taking freely the gifts of the princes on whom
he was wont to pass sentence so roundly. Mencius had insisted that,
where the ‘donor ‘offered his gift on a ground of reason and in a
manner accordant with propriety, even Confucius would have receiv-
ed it. “Here now,” said Chang, “is one who stops and robs people
outside the' city-gates. . He offers his gift on a ground of reason and
in a proper manner;—would it be right ‘to receive it so acquired by
robbery?” The philosopher of course said it would not, and the
other pursued:-—“ The princes of the. present day take from their
people just as a robber despoils his victim. Yet if they put a good
face of propriety on their gifts, the superior man receives them. 1
venture to ask: you. to explain this." Mencius answered :—“ Do you
think that, if there should arise a truly imperial sovereign, he would
collect the’ princes of the present day and put them all to death?
- Or would he admonish them, and then, on their not changing their
ways, put them 'to death? Indeed to call every one who takes
what does not properly belong tó him a robber, is pushing a point
of reseniblanéé to the utmost, and insisting on the most refined idea
of righteousness.”8¢

Here again we must admire thei ingenuity of Mencius; but it amuses
us more ‘than it' satisfies. It was very well for him to maintain
his dignity’ as “a Teacher,” and not go to the princes when they
called him, . but his ‘refusal would have had more weight, if he
had kept liis hands clean from all their offerings. Ihave Edid above
that if less:awe-ful than Confucius, he is more admirable. Perhaps
it would bé better to say he is more brilliant. There is some truth
in the saying of the scholar Ch'ing, that thé one is the glass that
glitters, and the other the gem that is truly valuable. '
OW ithóut dwelling or other’ characteristics of Mencius, or culling from
him other striking sayin gs,—of which there are many,—I proceed to
exhibit and discuss his doctrine of the goodness of human nature.
a 5 the remarks Which T have jüst made on the intercourse of
Mencius with the princes, of his day have lowered him somewhat
TE ites dn. in the estimation’ of my readers, his doctrine of
nature; ith identity with ' human nature, and the force. with which he
that of. Bishop; Butler;

' advocates: it, will not fail to produce, a high

ito 7

m ' 30 Bk. V., Pt. I, i
58]. - :

sect. 11.] , MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES, rpopaoomes A

appr eciation of him as a:moralist and thinker. In. Sda my
exhibition of tlie opinions of Confucius in the former volume, I have
observed that “he threw no light on any of the. questions . which
have a world-wide interest." This Mencius did. The constitution of
man’s nature, and how far it supplies to him a rule. of conduet, and
a.law of duty, are inquiries than. which: there.can hardly be any
others. .of more importance. They, were: largely. discussed in the
Schools.of Greece. „A hundred vigorous and acute minds of modem
Europe have occupied themselves with, them. It will hardly. be
questioned in England that the palm for clear and just thinking on
the subject belongs to Bishop Butler, but it will presently be seen

- that, his views. and those of Mencius are, as nearly as. possible,
identical. There is a difference of nomenclature anda combination
of parts, in which the advantage.is with the Christian prelate. Felicity
of illustration and charm of style pelong to the Chere philorspher
The doctrine in both is the same.

The utterances of Confucius on the subject of our ‘nature were dew
and brief. The most remarkable is where he saysi“ Man is born
for uprightness., Ifa man be without, uprightness

and yet'live, his escape from death is the effect of

mere.good, Pocus "1 This is in entire accordance with Mencius’ view,
and as he appeals to the sage in his own support,” though. we cannot .
elsewhere find the words which he quotes, we may "believe that
Confucius would have approved of the sentiments, of his follower,
„and frowned on those, who, have: employed. some of hig sayings in -
; confirmation of other conclusions. 5 [am satisfied i in my own mind
on this point. . His repeated enunciation of “the golden, rule,” though
only in a negative form, is sufficient evidence of it. .
The opening sentence of “The Doctrine: of the Mean," — n What
‘Heaven. has conferred is called THE NATURE; ah accordance with this.
Lad nature is called THE PATH; the regulation, of ‘the path
jew of Tsze-sze. 3
s called iNsrRUeTION," finds a much, better illustr: ration.
asin Mencius T from Tsze-sze himself, The germ « of his. doctrine
lies in it. , We saw reason, to discard, the hotion that he was a pupil
of "Tsze-sze; but he was acquainted with, bis, treatise just named, and —
. as he has used some other parts of it, we may be' surprised that in

fe Misha aos $
` View of Confucius.

E Ana, VI, vil. - 1 2 Bk. VI, Pt. E, vi. 8; viit.4. ; 8 See the annotations of the editor

‘of Yang-thze s da s 2) works, 18 E 1 in a the + x La do I., profeg., p. 158).

59]

fROLEGOMENA.] HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS, [cn. 1

his discussions on human nature he has made no reference to the
above passage.
‘What gave occasion to his dwelling largely on the theme was the
prevalence of wild and injurious speculations about it. In nothing
' Prévalént view of mans; did the disorder of the age more appear. Kung-
nature in Mencius’ time, too. one of his disciples, once went to him and
said, “The philosopher Kaou says:—‘ Man's nature is neither good
nor bad.’ Some say:—f Man's nature may be made to practise good,
and it may be made to practise evil; and accordingly, under Wán and
Woo, the people loved what was good, while, under Yew and Le,
they loved what was cruel.’ Othersssay :—' The nature of some is
‘good, and the nature of others is bad. Hence it was that under
such a sovereign as Yaou there yet appeared Séang; that with such
a father as Koo-sow there yet appeared Shun; and that with Chow
for their sovereign, and the son of their elder brother besides, there.
were found Ke, the viscount of Wei, and the prince Pe-kan." And
now you say:—- The nature is good. ' Then are all those opinions
wrong?" . i Ki l
. “The nature of man is dites was Mencius doctrine. By
.many writers it has been represented as entirely antagonistié to
Christianity; and, as thus broadly and briefly enunciated, it sounds
startling enough: As fully explained by himself, however, it is not
so very terrible. Butler's scheme has been designated “the system
‘of Zeno baptized into Christ."5 That of Mencius, identifying closely
‘with the master of the Forh; is yet more ‘susceptible of a similar
- transformation.:
‘But before endeavouring to make this statement good, it will be
wall do: make some: observations on the opinion of' the philosopher
1 NHiew'of the philosopher ‘Kaou. He was'a contemporary of Mencius, and
Few. 5. 0b they. came.‘into’ argumentative collision. One
does not see immediately the difference. between his opinion; as
ustated by Kung-too, and the next. Might not mami’ snature, though
-neither good hor badj be' made to practise" the one or the other?
Küoh's view: went to deny any-essential distinction between good
' and evil, virtue: ant: vice.: A man might be ‘made to act in a
"way: commonly called virtue: and ina‘ way commonly’ called ‘evil,
but- in the one action there was really nothing more approvable than
» 4 Bk, VI, Pt. I, vi. 174, , 55 Wardlaw’s Christian Ethics, edition of 1833, p. 119.
UK set 60] ` ;

seoa] MENCIUS AND: HIS;DISCIPLES. ©. [PROLEGONENA

in the other. : 4 Life,” he said, “was what was meant/by -nature/6 -
The phenomena of benevolence and Tighteounap were akin to those
of walking and. sleeping, eating: and seeing: -This extravagance
afforded scope for: Mencias’ favourite mode of argainent; the puo!
ad. gbsurdum.. » He showed, on Kaoü's principles, that." the nature of
a dog was like the: nature of an ox; and the nature of dà Ox Nike the:
nature of a man.’
The. two first E tis between: them are: more ‘particularly
worthy of acapan becansé,..while they:are. a' confutation of his
' Mencius’ pd of Khou’s opponent, : they: indicate clearly our philoso-
irrork, aud stabeuent pf hia ony pher’s. own’ theory: Kapu compared ‘man's
; +, « nature to a willow tree, and benevolence and
righteonsness to the:cups and bowls that might be fashioned from its
-wood. Mencius-replied that it»was not the nature of the willow to pro-
-duce cups.and bowls; they.might be made from it indeed; by bending
and cutting and otherwise injuring it;- but must humanity: be done
such violence: to’ in order to/fashion the virtues froin it? Kaou again
compared the nature to water whirling round in a corner open a
passage for it in, any. direcion; and: it will fow forth accordingly.
* Man's nature,” said he,“ is indifferent to good. and evil, just as the
„Water is indifferent. to the east and west." ;. Mencius answered. bint:
-=r Water indeed will flow indifferently: to’ thé east-or-west, but will
it, flow indifferently up or dowa? . The.tendeney of inán's nature to
good is like the tendency.of-.water to flow! downwards... Theré are
mone but have.this.tendency. to good, justas: dH water. flows down-
wards. By striking water and causing it to leap up; uyou may make
it go over your forehead, and; by. damming and leading it; you may
„force it. up a. hill; byutvare such: movements:according te the nature.
rot, water? It is-the force applied: which causés them. When. men
N^ made. todo what is not goed, their nature: is dealt with iw ‘this
Quit oo opt er ee ee ode Gupla. aua ee oe
a e has r no, stronger. language, than this, a indeed, it ;wonld
de difficult, to find. any. stronger; to deelare his. belief ih. the gocdness
of human nature. , To many: Christian readers it proves;a. atumbling.
„block anq offence,; But J venture to- hink:- that: this- is without
sgufficient. reason, He is, speaking, of our riatüré in its ideal, and not.
„Agit actually; i ig gas: We may. dscertain - fromm ithe. study : of itithat: dt

C8 o5, 08 6 Bk VISIPUE Ty dike" uicti Pt. LG SO AA A
61)

d ea HIS INFLUENCE. AND OPINIONS: . [cu. u.

ought to be, and not as it is PNT to become. My rendering of the
sentences last: quoted may be objected to, because of my in troduction
of the term tendency; but I have Mencius’ express sanction for. the
representation I give of his meaning. Replying to Kung-too's ques-
tion, whether ETE the other opinions prevalent about man's nature
were wrong, and: his owh, that it is good, correct, he said:—* From
the feelings proper to it, we see that it is constituted for the practice
of what js good. This is what I mean in saying that the nature is good.
If men do what is not good, the blame cannot be imputed to their
natural powers."5 Those who find the, most fault with. him, will
, hardly question the truth of this.last declaration. When a man
does wrong, whose is the blame,—the sin? He might be glad to
roll the guilt on his Maker, or upon his nature,—which is only an
indirect charging of his Maker with it;—but it is his own burden, ,
which he must bear himself. , ‘
` The proof by which Menetus supports his view of human nature
as formed only for virtue is twofold. First, he maintains that there
"profs that human nature 919 2 Man a natural principle of benevolence,
fom a od virtue First, a natural principle of righteousness, a natural
" principle of propriety, and a natural principle
of apprehébding moraj4ruth. .* These,” he says, “are not infused into
us from without. . We are'certainly possessed of them; and a different
view is’simply from want of reflection.”9 In further illustration of
this he argued thus:—“ All men have a mind which cannot bear to
see the sufferings of others;—my meaning may be illustrated thus;
«~Even now-a days,” ĉe., in these degenerate times, “ if men suddenly
see a child about to fall into a well, they will without exception
experience a feeling of alarm and distress. They will feel so, not as
& ground on which they may gain the favour of the child's parents,
nor as à ground on which they may seek the praise of their neigh-
bours and friends, nor from a dislike to the reputation of having
been unmoved by such a thing: From this case we may see that
the feeling « of commiseration is essential to man, that the feeling of:
shame and dislike is essential to man, that the feeling of modesty
and complaisance is esseritial to man, and that the feeling of approval
and disapproval’ is 'essential to man. "These feelin; gs are the principles
i - respectively of benevolence, righteousness, propriety, and the know-

8 Bk, VI, PLI, vi, 6. 9 Bk. VL, Pt I, vi. T.
e 623].

‘sect. ' . MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. ` [rnoriGoxtsA,
ledge of good and. evil. ` em have these four principles just, as’ ‘they
have their four limbs."
Let all this be een with the language m Butler in his three -
famous Sernions upon Human Nature. He shows in the first of these:
— First, that there is à natural principle of benevolence i man;
secoridly; that the several passions and affections, which are distinct
both' from benevolence and self-love, do in general contribute and.
lead: us to public’ good as ‘really ‘as' to private; and thirdly, that
there is a ‘principle of reflection in men, by which they’ distinguish
between; approve and disapprove their owa actions.” ` Is there any-
thing more in this than was apprehended and expressed by Mencius? .
Butler says in tlie conclusion of his first discourse that ** Men follow
their nature to' a certain degree but not entirely’; ; their actions do not
come up to the whole of. what ‘their nature léads them to ; and they.
often violate their nature." This also Mencius declares in his own
forceful manner:—“ Whei men having these four principles, yet say
of themselves tliat they éannot develope them, they play the thief
with themselves, and he who says of his prince that. he cannot
develope them, plays tlie thief with his prince.” “+ Men differ from
one another ini regard to the principles of their wature;—some as
much again'as others,some five times às much, ‘and somé to'an
incalculable amount:—it is because they cannot carry out Stony their
natürál powers" ti ;
So much for the um or preliminary view vof hunian nature insist:

Fi : l 4
10 Bk. n, P. I vi. 3, 4, 5, e 11 1 am indebted to Butler t fully qidersionding Men-
cius’ fourth feeling, that of approving and disapproving, which he calls ‘the principle of know-
ledge,’ or wisdom. In ‘the notes, p. 79, I have said. that he givés to this term “a moral sense.’
It is- the same. with ;Butler's principle of reflection, by which men distinguish between, aud
approve or ‘disapprove, their own actions. —1 have heard gentlemen speak contemptuously of Men»
cius’ case in point, to prove the existence of a feeling of benevolence in man.” “Ehis,* they have
“said, ‘is Mencius’ idea of. virtue, to save a child fron failing intoa well. A mighty display of virtue,.
truly!’ Such language arises from misconceiving Mencius’ object in putting the case, ‘I£
there be,’ says Butler, ‘any affection in human nature, the object and end of which is the
good of another, this is itself benevolence. ' Dé'it ever ‘go: short, be £t iirever sa tow a degree, or
ever so unhappily confined, it proves the assertion and points out what we were designed, for, as
really as though it were in a higher degree and more extensive, ‘It is sufficient that the seeds of
it be’ imptanted in ‘ur nature? ‘The illustration: from 4 child falling into 4 well’ nist be prie
nounced $ happy one. How much lower-Mencius could: go, may be seen from his conversa+
tion with king Seuen, Bk. 1, Pt. L, vii, whom he leads to: a. “Consciousness of his gommiserating G
mind from tlie fact that he had hot been able to beat the frigtitened appearance of an ox whieh wae
being led by: to: be killed, and ordered itto be spated. ‘She’ kindly heart that was moved by .
the suffering of an dnimal had only to be carried out, to suffice for the love and protection of all
within the four seas. ` 12 Bk.H;, PU L; vi. 6. ^ -— 13 Bk. VL, Pt. 1; vi. T.

63]

PROLEGOMENA, ` HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. [cn. 1.

1

ed on by: ‘Mencius, that it contains principles which are disinterested
' "Second proof that human nature and virtuous. But there wan ts something
user iet ee ie e more to make good the position that virtue
principles should serve the lower. Ought to be supreme, and that it is for
it, in opposition to vice, that our nature is formed. ‘To use some
of the *licentious talk" which Butler puts into the mouth of an
 opponent:—“ Virtue and religion require not only that we do good
to others, when we are led this way, by benevolence and reflection
happening to be stronger than other principles, passions, or appetites;
but likewise that the whole character be for med upon thought and
reflection; that every action be directed by some determinate rule,
some other rule than the strength or prevalence of any principle or
passion. What sign is there in our nature (for the inquiry is only
about what is to be collected from thence) that this was intended by its:
Author? Or how does so various and fickle a temper as that of man
appear adapted thereto?......As brutes have various instincts, by:
which they are carried on to the end the Author of their nature in-
- tended them for, is not man in the same condition, with this difference
only, that to his instincts (i.e., appetites and passions) is added the
principle of reflection or conscierice? And as brutes act agreeably to
their nature in following that principle or particular instinct which for’
the present is strongest in them; does not man likewise act agreeably
to his nature, or. obey the law of his creation, by following that
principle, be it passion or conscience, which for the present happens
to be strongest in him?......Let every one then quietly follow his
nature; as passion, reflection, appetite, the several parts of it, happen
to be the strongest; but let not the man of virtue take it upon him:
to blame the ambitious, the covetous, the dissolute; since these,
equally with him, obey and follow their. nature.”!4
To ali this Butler replies by showing that the Mum of reflec-
tion ot conscience is “not to be considered merely as a principle in
‘the heart, which is to have some influence as well as others, but as
a faculty, in kind and in nature, supreme over all others, and which
ears its own authority of being so;” that the difference between
this and the other constituents of human nature is not “a difference
in: strength or degree, " but “a difference in nature and in kind;"
that “it was placed within to be, our proper governor; to direct and ,

" 14 See Sermon Second.
64)

spor. n.) -— . MENCIUS AND HIS ‘DISCIPLES: ^ oe E _Eeoxngonnes, N
stanite all under principles, passions and motives. of action lits `
is its right and office; thus sacred is itsiauthority.” Jt follows from ^
the view of human nature, thus established, that“ ‘the inward frame "
‘of man is a. system. or constitution; whose several paris ate united, not

by a physical principle.of.individuation,., bat. by the respects they ^

have to each other, the chief of which is the subjection, which the
appetites, passions, and particular affections have to the one nptme
principle of reflection or conscience.” <. i
Now, the substance of this reasoning is to he found: in Menclus, Hu
man nature—the inward frame of man—sis with him. æ, system. ov cone:
stitution as much as with Butler. He says, for instance:— “There
is no: part of himself which a man does not love; :and-as he loves. -
all, so he must nourish all .There is not an inch of skin which he. .
does not love, and so. there. is not an inch of skin which he will. not,
nourish. For EXAMINING WHETHER HIS WAY OF NOURISHING BE GOOD
OR NOT, WHAT OTHER RULE IS.THERE BUT THIS, THAT, HE. MEE
BY REFLECTING ON.HIMSELF WHERE IT SHOULD BE APPLIED? . ho ex
* Some parts of the body are noble, and some ignoble ;. some pm
and some. small. The great must not be. injured for: the small, nor.
the noble-for the ignoble. He who nourishes the little belonging to: .
him is alittle man, and he.who. nourishes the great is a great man.”16. -
- , Again:— Those who follow. that part of themselves which is great: -
are great, men ;, those. who follow that part which. is giia are iion
men T.. da i -
The great pant of ourselves i is the moral lets of our constitu:
tion;.the lower part. is the appetites and, passions that centre in:
self, He says finely:—'* There is a. nobility of Heaven, and there is:
a nobility of man. Benevolence, righteousness, self-consecration, -~
and fidelity, with unwearied joy in..what is good;—these constitute .
. the ‘nobility of Heaven, To be à duke,.s noble, ora A officer -—
this constitutes the. nobility of man.”
_Theré is one passage very striking — For the month to desire :
sweet tastes, the eye. to desire. beautiful. colours; the ear to: desire...
pleasant. sounds, the nose to desire fragrant. odours, and. the four.
limbs to desire ease and rest j—these things are natural. Buf there. .
is the appointment of Heaven in eno with, them; and the:

15 Sec note to Sermón Third. l 16 6 Bk VL, Pt. Lus) PT) di xv. 2 18 Ibs ch.
_ xvi,

— HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. [cu. a.

superior man, does not say of his pursuit of them, ‘It is my nature.’

` * Phe exercise of love between father and son, the observance of right-
eousness sovereign and minister, the rules of ceremony between host
and between guest, the display of knowledge in recognizing the -
worthy, and the fulfilling the heavenly course by the sage;—these are
the appointment of Heaven. But there is an adaptation of our na-
ture fór them ; and the superior man does not say, in reference to
them, *Itis the appointment. of Heaven,’ "1?

From these paragraphs it is quite clear that what Mencius con-
sidered as deserving properly to be called the nature of man, was
not that by which he is a creature of appetites and passions, but
that by, which he is lifted up into the higher circle of intelligence
and virtue. , By the phrase, ‘the appointment of Heaven,’ most
Chinese scholars understand the will of Heaven, limiting in the first
case the gratification of the appetites, and in the second the exercise
of the virtues,, To such limitation Mencius teaches there ought tò
be a cheerful submission so far as the appetites are concerned, but.
where the virtues are in question, we are to be striving after them

notwithstanding adverse and opposing circumstances. T HEY ARE OUR
NATURE, what we were made for, what we have to do. I will refer
but to one other specimen of his teaching on this subject. “The
 will,” he said, using that term for the higher moral nature in activity,
— the will is the deudor of the passion-nature. The, passion-nature
pervades and animates the body. The will is first and chief, and the
passion-nature is subordinate to it.”20
_. My readers can now judge for themselves whether I exaggerated l
at all in saying that Mencius doctrine. of human, nature was, as
nearly as possible, identical with that.of Bishop Butler. Sir James
Mackintosh has said of the sermons to which I have made reference,
and his other cognate discourses, that in them Butler “taught truths
more capable of being exactly distinguished from ,the doctrines of
his predecessors, more satisfactorily established by him, more com-
prehensively applied to particulars, more rationally connected with
each. other, ‘and therefore more worthy of the name of discovery,
than any with which, we are acquainted; if we ought not, with some
hesitation, to nd the first. steps. of the. Grecian philosophers to-

1

— A49 BRi vu, Pi: IL, xxite 30 Bk, IL, Pt. I. ii. 9.

66).

**

+

bor, nl MENCIUS AND HIS Discretes. E. nosci,

“wards a Theory of Morals. be It is to be. wihed ihat the attention
of-this great scholar had beet called £o 'the writings “of our ` philo-
&épher: Mencius ` was senior to’ Zeno, though a portion: ‘of their lives
$yhchronizéd. Butler certainly: was not’ indebted to him for the
views which he advocated; but it seems. tò „me that ‘Meneina had
Rf lim nothing to discover. ^ ^'^"
' But the ‘question iow. arises-—"Ís the ' view of TERA nature
propounded by Mencius correct?” So far as yet appears, I see not
"he proper Tn ten how the question , ‘ean be answered otherwise -
iut views thus far con- than in the affirmative. Man was formed for
pidered. "e m
‘virtue.’ Be it that bis conduct i is very far from .
being conformed to virtue, that simply fastens on him the shame of
uilt. Fallen as he may be, —fallen as I believe and know he is,—
his nature'still bears its testimony, "when properly interrogated,
against’ all unrightedusness: Man, heathen man, a Gentile without
the law, ‘is Still a law to himself. ` So the apostle Pail affirms;’ and to
‘nd! moral teacher of Greece’ or. Romie can we ‘appeal for 86 grand an
illustration of the averment as we find in Mencius. I: would ask
thosé whom, his sayings offend, whether it would have been better
for his countrymen if hé had taught a contrary doctrine, and told.
‘them that man's nature is bad; and that the ‘more they obeyed ali
its lusts and passions, the more would they be in sccordance with it,
‘and the more pursuing the right path? Such a question does not
peed a reply, ` The proper tse of Mencius", principles is to reprove
” the Chinese—and ourselves as wellt—of the thonsand atts of sin of
which they and we are. guilty, that, ome "within: their sheep. and
under ‘their: condemnation. c 2
“From the ideal of ‘man’ to his slicilisi there i isa vast de-
rx Between what he’ ought to be and what he is, the contrast
ae oa ; is melancholy, “ Benevolence,” said our philo-
E rd sopher, “ is’ "s characteristic of man? It is
l “the wide house: in ‘which the. world should .
“dwell,” while propriety is “the éorrect! position: in which the world
should ‘ever be found,” and righteousness i is “ the great path which
‘Yuen should, ever’ be pursuing”? In opposition to this, however,
Hatred, ‘improprieties, unrighicoüsncis, are ‘constant phenomena of .

21 Booyelopeiia Britannica, Second Preliminary: Diseno, on Butler 22 Be vn
PRIL, xvi 28 Bk HL, PEL, ii, 3.-

67]

spore) 3 HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS.. ' fen. n,

“human life, : : We find. men hateful and hating one another, quench- `
ing the light that is in them, and walking in darkness to perform
all deeds of shame. “There is none that doeth good; no, not one,”
"Mencius would have denied this last sentence, claiming that the sages
‘should be excepted from it; but he is ready enough to admit the
fact that men in general do evil and violate the law of their nature
"They sacrifice the noble portion of themselves for the gratification of
the ignoble; they follow that part which is little, and not that which
‘is great.. He ean, say nothing further in explanation of the fact.
He points out indeed the effect of injurious circumstances, and the
power of evil example; and he has said several things on these sub-
. jects worthy of notice :—“ It is not to be wondered at that the king
is not: wise! Suppose the case of the most easily growing thing in
the world; —if you let it have one day's genial heat, and then
-expose it for ten days to cold, it will not be able to grow. It is
‘but seldom that I have an audience of the king, and when I retire,
.there.coxe all those who act upon: him like the cold, Though I
succeed in bringing out some buds of goodness, of what avail is it?”24
“Tn. good, years, the children of the people are most of them good,
while in bad years the most of them abandon themselves to evill di
is not. owing to "their. natural powers conferred on them by
‘Heaven that they are thus different: the abandonment is owing to,
‘the cireumstances through which they allow their minds to be en-
-snared and drowned in evil. There now is barley: let it be sown
‘and covered up; the ground being the same, and the time of sowing
:Hkewise.the same, it grows rapidly up, and when the full time is
come, it is all found to be ripe. . Although there may be inequalities
~of produce, that is owing to the. difference of the soil as rich or poor,
‘the.unequal ‘nourishment afforded by the rains and dews, and to
THE different ways in which. man has performed, his business,"25
"Phe inconsistencies in human conduct. did not escape his obser-
= Fas After. showing. that there.is that in human nature which
will’ sometimes: make men part with, life sooner than with right-
eousness, he: goes on: And: yet a man will accept of ten, thoi
-sand chung haat ai. consideration of propriety, and rightcous-
;ness; ‘What.can: they add to him ?., When he takes them, is it not
~ ‘that: he may: obtain beantiful mansions, that he may secure. the ser-

SP Bk. VL, Pel, ix.” 25 Zb, ch. vii
. 68]

SECT, n] i -MENCIUS ‘AND HIS; DISCIPLES: EM -fesonnomenn,

vices of wives and sencabihes, of that’ the poor and needy Tay be
helped by: him.?2”. : The scalpel is used here with a bold and skilful
hand. The lust of the flesh, and. the lust. of the eyes, : and the pride
of life are. laid. bare,. nor does he. stop, till: he has: exposed the
‘subtle workings of the delusion that: the end may sanctify. the
means, that evil . Xnay be- wrought that good may.come. He pur-
sues :—— In’ the former case the offered bounty was. not received,
though ‘it would have saved’ from death, and now the. emolu-
ment is taken for the sake of beautiful mansions. The bounty that
would have preserved: from death was riot received, and the emolu-
ment: is ‘taken toget: the services of wives and coneéubines. - "The
"bounty that. would: have saved: from’ death was not received, and
the emolument is taken’ that one's poor and needy acquaintance
may be.helped. Was it then nof possible likewise to decline this?
"This is # case of what i is called. M the: proper Una of one's
mind.’ 26 !
To the principle implied in the oondluding sentenves of this dod
myer Mencius most pertinaciously adheres. He will not. allow
S Orginal tances enn TPA? original badiess: ean be predicated of human
ey So eatin from ature. from any amount of actual: wickedness.
“The trees,” said he, “of the New Mountain were
-once beautiful: ^ Being: situated, however, im’ the. borders - of a
large State, they: were hewn down with’ axes: and. bills mand
:sould” they‘ retain ‘their beauty? . Still, ‘through the: activity of the
. vegetative life day and night, and thé nourishing influence -of the
‘rain and’ dew, they were mot without buds and sprouts springing
‘forth ;—-but thew came thé cattle and goats, and browsed upon them.
To these things is owing the bare and stript appearatice of the monn- `
‘tain, which when people see, they think it was never finely wooded...
But is this the. proper nature of the mountain? . And so' also of what
‘properly belongs to’ man:—shall it be-said that the. mind ofany
‘man: was without bénevolence and righteousness? The way in: ‘which
à man. loses his proper goodness of mind is like the: way-in which -
"the trees are denuded by axes and, bills. Hewn down day after day,
can the’ inind retain its beauty? But there is a development of its
life day ànd- ‘night, and in the calm air of the morning, just between
MEE and. d doy, the mind feels in a degree. the conte and aversions

a 26 Bk. YL, Pi. Ey xt,
69]

. seorsim] HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. [eu. n. .

hs which are proper to humanity; but the feeling is not strong, and it
ds fettered atid destroyed by what takes place ‘during the day. * This -
fettering takes place'again; and again; the restorative influence’ of
the sight i is not sufficient to preserve the proper goodness of the mind;
and when this: proves insufficient for that” purpose, the nature be:
comes not much different from that of the irrational animals, which
"when people see, they think that it never had those powers which I
assert. ‘But does this condition represent the feelings propre to
humanity? ”27
Up to this point T fail to perceive anything in Mencius’ view of
“human nature that is contrary to the teachings of our Christian scrip:
` tures, and that may not be'employed with advantage by the mission-
. ary in preaching the Gospel to the Chinese. It is far from ‘covering
what'we know to: be the whole duty of man, yet itis defective rather
than ‘erroneous, Deferring any consideration. of this for a brief
‘space; ' I now inquire whether Mencius, ‘having an ideal of the
2 goodness of human: nature, held ‘also ‘that it had been and ‘could
Ta IM perfection o£ the PE realized? The answer to it is that he did.
Tu and possible: ween: The actual realization he' found in the
" k sages, and he contended that it was within
the’: teich of every individual. “AH things which are the same
in kind," he says, “are like one another;—why should we doubt
EE: regard $0 man, as if he were a solitary exception to this? "The
„sage and "we are the same in kind."3 : The feet, the mouths,
the eyes ‘ofthe sages were not different from those of other *
people,” neither were their minds. ‘Is it so," he was once asked,
m all men maybe Yaous and Shuns?" and he'answered, “It
is" adding by way of explanation :—* To walk slowly, keeping :
behind his elders; is to perform the part of à younger brother, and
to walk quickly and precede his elders is to violate that duty. Now,
ieit what e man cannot do,—to walk slowly? It 15 WHAT HE DOES:
wor pd. ‘The course of Yaou and Shun’ was simply that of filial piety
aud fraternal duty. Do yeu wear the clothes of Yaou, repeat the
words of Yaou, tad do the actions oi Yaou en you will just be —
a Yaou. oe ge oh I
` Among the sages, howe ever; "Mencia: made a distinction. Yaou .
ind Shun exceeded all the rest, arles: it might be Confucius. Those
E mee Pt. Leh, vii. ua. 38 Ih, Yi.3." 7 29 Ib, Pt IL; ii. 1,4, 5.

70] . 7 :

seer) .MENCIUS AND His, DISCIPLES, : “Prnonenouee

dires. neyer came short of, never went beyond, the law of: their
nature. ‘The idéal and the. actual were in them always one and the
same. The others had only attained: to perfection by vigorous effort
and culture. Twice at least he has told us fhis.. “ Yaou and Shun

were what. they were by nature; Tang and Woo were $0 by returning
to natural virtue,” 90 The actual result, however, was the. same, and
therefore he could hold them ail up as. models to his countrymen of
the style of man that, they, all ought to beand inight be. “What the
compass and square. were in the hands of the workman, enabling
him. to form perfect circles and squares, that, the. sages, * perfectly
exhibiting the human relations," might be to every earnest individual,

enabling ; him to perfect himself as they were perfect.?t .

Here we feel that the doctrine of Mencius wants an. element which
Revelation supplies., He knows.nothing of the. fact’ that , ^ by. one
«= Mencius’ doctrine iontais vo MAT sin entered into the world, and death
acknowledgment of the universal by. sin; and so. -death passe ” (passed. on,

proneness to evil: His ideal has
been realized by sages, and may extended, 124») “to, all men, because all

Bee M sinned,” , We.have our ideal as well as he;
but for the living: reality of it.we must go back to Adam, as he was
made by God in "His own image, after His likeness, In him the
inodel is. soon, shattered, and we do not discover it again, till God's
own Son, appears in, the, world, made in the likeness of sinful flesh,
yet without sin..,. While He died for our transgressions, He Jeft us
also an, example, : that-we should. walk. in His steps; and as we.do
sò, we-are carried on. to glory and virtue. At: the same time we
find a law. in our, members: warring against the law’ jn our minds,
and bringing us into. captivity to, sin, . However. we may, strive”
after our ideal, ; we. do, not succeed in reaching it. The. more we grow
in, the knowledge of Christ, and see in Him the glory. of humanity
in its true, estate, the greater... do we feel our, own distance: to. be
from it, and that of ourselves we. cannot attain. to it. There is some-
thing wrong about us; we need. help from without in, order, to
become even what our nature, apart from Revelation, tells, us we
ought, to: ‘be, "e , M

When Mencius therefore points i o Yaou, Shun, and TOR AR
and says that they were perfect, we cannot accept. his statement.
Understanding that, he is speaking of, them only i in ihe. sphere of

:80 Bk; VIL, Pt, L, xxx. 1; j Ph Hy xsi f. 75 231 Bk IV, Pr I dl
71]

reorsdommu.] . HIS INFLUENCE AND. OPINIONS,, fen,

human relations, we must yet believe that in many things they came.
short, One of them, the greatest of the three in Méncius' estimation,
Confucius, again and, again confesses so of himself. He was seventy
years old, he says, before he could follow what his heart desired,
without transgressing what was right.?? It might have been possible
to convince the sage that he was under a delusion in this important
matter even at that advanced age; but what his language allows is
sufficient to upset Mencius’ appeal to him. The image of sagely
perfection i is broken by it. It proves to be but a brilliant and un-
 substantial phantasm of our philosopher's own imagining. ;
- When he insists again, that every individual may become vba
he. fancies that the sages Were,—i.e., perfect, living in love, walking
in righteousness, observant of propriety, approving whatsoever is,
. good, and disapproving whatever is evil,—he is pushing his doctrine
beyond its proper limits; he is making a use of it of which itis not
capable, It supplies a law of conduct, and I have set. it.forth as
entitled to our highest admiration for the manner in which it does.
/'soj but law only gives the knowledge of what we are required to
do: it does not give the power to do it. We have seen, how when..
B was necessary to explain accurately his statement that the nature
of man is good, Mencius defined it as meaning that “it is constituted
for the practice of that which i is good.” Because it is so constituted,
. it follows that every man ought to practise what is good. But some,
3 disorganization may have happened to the nature; some sad change
may have.comé over it. The very fact that man has, in Mencius’
own words, tò recover his “lost mind, "9? shows that the object of the
constitution of the nature has not Baan realized. Whether he can:
recover it or not, therefore, is a question altogether different from
that of its proper d design.
 In oné place, indeed, Mencius has said that “ the great man is he
_who does not lose his child’s-heart.”3t I can only suppose that, by that
: expression" the child’s-heart,” he intends the ideal goodness which
he affirms of our nature. . But to attribute that to the child as ac-
`. tually existing in it is absurd. It has neither done good nor evil.
“Tey possesses the capacity for either. It will by and by awake to the
consciousness that it ought, to follow after the one, and eschew the
ether; but when it does 90,1 should rather say when he does so,

s Con. Ann, IL, iv. 6. 38 me YT Pt. I, xi 4, _ 34 Bk. IV. Pt. I, xii
79] E à

-SECT. I] - - 3MENCIUS AND His DISCIPLES. S [rior bGoaixA,

for the child has now emerged from a mere creature existencé; and.
assumed the functions of a moral being, he will find that he has already
given himself to inordinate affection for the objects of sense; and in -
the pursuit of gratification he is reckless’ of what must ‘be. acknow-
ledged to be the better and nobler part, reckless also of the interest
and claims of others, and whenever thwarted glows into passion and
fury. The youth is more pliant than -thé man in whom’ the do-
minion òf self-seeking has become ingrained às a habiti but no sooner
does hé become a autbject of law; than he is aware of the fact that’
when he would do good, evil is present with him." The boy has to
go in search’ of his'“lost beart,” as’ iruly as the man of fourscore,
"Even in him tere is an “old inan, corrupt aceording to’ the deceit-
ful lusts,” which he has to put of. '
. Butler had an immense advantage over Mencius, arising from. his.

knowledge of the truths of Revelation. Many, admirin g his sermons, '

Butler's advantage over " Meneius, have yet expressed d measure of dis
and that he does not make the same satisfaction, because he does not in ‘them `

application of their common principles,

- ' make explicit reference to the condition `
of man as fallen ‘and depraved. ' That he fully admitted thé fact we
know. He says elsewhere:—“ Mankind arë represented i in scripture
to be in a state of fuin.” “If mankind are corrupted and depraved
in their móral character, and so are ‘unfit for that state which Christ
is gone to prepare for his disciples; and if the’ assistance of God's.
Spirit be necessary to renew their nature, in the degree requisite `
to their being qualified for that state; all which is implied i in the
express, though figurative’ declaration, Except à man bé born. ef
the Spirit, he cannot see the kingdom of God”,....% How is it, then,
that there is no mention of this in the sermons ? ‘Dissatisfaction, : Í
have said, has been expressed ot account of this silence, and it would’
have taken the form of more pointed utterance, and more decided
condemnation, ‘but for the awe of his great name, and the general
appreciation E the service he rendered to Christianity in his work
om The Analogy of Religion. But, in trath, dissatisfaction at all is
out of place. Butler wrote his sermons as he'wrote his Analogy,
in consequence of the ‘peculiar necessity of his times. More par-
ticularly: against Hobbes, denying all moral ' sentiments "und sò-
cial affections, and making a regard to personal gis the nd

? S35-The Analogy of Religion ; Part IE, chap. I.
18]

PROLEGOMENA] HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. for. u.

.. duotive of human action, it was his business to prove that man’s na-
ture is of à very different constitution, comprehending disinterested
affections, and above all the supreme element: of conscience, which,

. * had it strength as it has right, would govern the world." He proves
this, and so accomplishes his work. He had merely to do with the
ideal of humanity. 'It did not belong to him to dwell on the actual
feebleness of man to perform what. is good. He might have added
a few paragraphs to this effect; but it was not the. character of his
mind to go beyond the task which he had set himself. What
is of importance tó be observed here is, that he does not make the
application of their common principles which Mencius does. He
knows of no perfect men; he does not tell his reaslers that they
have merely to set about following: their nature, and without
any aid from without, they will Paray: and easily go on to perfed-
tion.. ` s

.: . Mencius is not to be blamed for his ignorance of what i is to us tlie
'Doéteine of the Fall. He had no means of becomin g acquainted ivith
‘it. We have to regret, however, that his study of human nature

! Menetus Wein du b produced. in him no deep feeling on account of

ont pid oo with men's proneness to go astray. He never betrays
- any consciousness of his own weakness. In this

"respect he is again inferior to Confucius, and far from being, as I
have said of him in another aspect of his character, “more ad-
mirable” than he. In the former volume I have shown that we
‘may sometimes recognize in what the sage says of himself the
expressions of a genuine humility. He “acknowledges that he

 éomes short of what he knows he ought to be. We do: not

‘meet’ with ‘this-in Mencius. His merit is that of the speculative
thinker." His glance is searching and. his penetration deep ; but

there is wanting that moral sensibility which would draw us to‘him,
~ir our beat moments, as & man of like passions with ourselves. The

“absence of humility is naturally accompanied with a lack of sym

“pathy. There is a hardness about-his teachings. He is the professot, ,

performing an operation in the class-room, anid a throng of pupils
who are admiring bis science and dexterity, and w hó forgets in

“the triumph: of his skill the suffering of the patient. The transgres-

‘sors of their nature are to Mencius the “ tyrants of themselves,” or
K = self: abandoned.” " ; The utmost stretch of his commiseration is a

¥

E

spon} —— ^" — , MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES: /' “frnotzcomms. -

-contemptuous “Alas for ghem!"6. The radical defect of the orthodox
moral school of China, that there only-needs a knowledge of duty to
insure its performance, is in him exceedingly apparent, Confucius,
Tsze-sze, and Mencius, most strangely. never thought of calling. this
principle in question.: : It is always as in the formula. of "Taze-sze: —
“Given the. sincerity, and there shall be the intelligences given ‘the
intelligence, and there shall be the sincerity.” oe
I said above that Mencius’ doctrine of human nature was defective,
inasmuch as even his ideal does not cover the whole field of duty.
acsi Mes cimus natum LES says ‘very little. of what we owe ‘to
‚does not embrace duty to Go... God: There is no glow of natural piety,
in his pages: Instead of the, name God, containing in itself a. re-
 cognition;of the divine personality and. supremacy, ‘we hear from
hin nore commonly, as from Confucius, of, Heaven. Butler has
said:—" By the love of God, I would understand all those regards,
all those affections of mind, which aré due immediately to Him from
such a creature as man, and which rest in Him as their end."57 Of
such affections, Mencius knows nothing. In one place he speaks of
“delighting in. Heaven,” but he is speaking, when he does so, of
the sovereign who with d great State serves a small ‘one, and the
déliglit is seen in certain condescenstone to the weak and unworthy.
Never. once, where he is treating of the nature of man, does he make
mentiow.of any exercise of the mind as due directly to God, The
services of religion come in China under the principle of. propriety,
and are only a.cold formalism; but even here, othét things come
with Mencius'before them. We are told:—" The richest fruit
of love is. this —the service of one's parents; the richest. fruit of
righteousness i is this,—the obeying one’s-elder brothers; the richest -
fruit of wisdom is this, —the knowing those two things, and. not de- .
parting from them; the richest. frait « of propriety is this, —the order-
‘ing and adorning those two things."9. How different is this from
the reiterated declaration of the. Scriptures, that * the fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom!" The first and great command.

à
D

36 Bk. IV, Pt, I, x. , 787 First Sermon Upon the Love of God. 88 Bk. L, Pt. IL, ii. 8.
‘39 Bk. IV, Pi, I, xxvii. My friend, the Rev. Mr. Moule, of Ningpo, has supplied me with thé
following interesting coincidence with the sentiments of Mencius in this passage, from one of the «
"letters.of Charles Lamb to Coleridge, dated Nov. 14th, 1796:—' Oh, my friend, eultivate the. fial
feelings; and let Ro one think himself relieved from the kind charities of relationship: these shall
give him peace at the fast; these ure die best Joundation for every species of' benevolence,” ]

i . 15]

abia HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. ` [on. n.

i ment “Thou shalt Jove the Tonk thy God, with all thy heart and
soul and mind and strength," was never thought of, much less
delivered, by any Chinese philosopher or sage. Had Mencius

apprehended this, and seen how all our duties to our fellowmen are
to be performed as to God, he could not have thought so highly as
he did of man's powers; a suspicion might have grown up that there
3s a shadow on the light which he has in himself.

- This absence of the recognition of man’s highest obligations from
Mencius ideal of our nature is itself a striking illustration of man's:
estrangement from God. His talking of Heaven has combined with
the similar practice of his master to prepare the way for the grosser
conceptions of the modern literati, who would often seem to deny
the divine personality altogether, and substitute for both God and
Heaven a mere principle of order or fitness of: things. It has done

' more: it has left the people: in the mass to become an easy prey to

'the.idolairousfooleries of Buddhism. Yea, the wereligiousness of the

"teachers has helped to deprave still móre the religion of the nation,

“such ás it is, and makes i its services a miserable pecus ui irreverent
orm 4!

 Itis time to ken due with. this portion of my: denda It may

: be thought that I have done Mencius more than justice in the first
part of my remarks, and less than justice at the last; but: I hope itis :
notso. A very important use is to be made both of what he succeeds

' 4n, and where he fails, in his discoursing upon human nature. His

"i prineiples may be, and, conceive, ought to be, turned against himself.
They should be pressed to produce the conviction of sin. There is

“enough in.them, if the conscience be but quickened by the Spirit of

 Ged; to make the haughtiest scholar cry out, “O wretched man that
Tam! who shall deliver me from this body of death?” Then may it

‘he said to him with effect, “Behold the Lamb of God who taketh

away: the'sin of the world!” . Then may Christ, as a new and true ex-

-emplar of allthat man should be, be displayed, ^: altogether lovely;" to
‘the trembling mindi Then may a new heart be received from Him,

: that shall thrill in the acknowledgment of the claims both of men
‘and God, and girding up the loins of the mind, address itself to walk

Fn all His commandments and ordinances blameless! One thing
"should be plain. In Mencius’ lessons on human duty there is no
hope for his countrymen. - 1f they serve as a schoolmaster to bring

16]

d u)oc í MENCIUS AND. HIS ‘DISCIPLES. u E

' them to Christ, they: wil have done their part; but it is ti from Christ
alone that the help of the Chinese can come.
7. Besides giving more explicit, expression. to the deie of the

. goodness of. man’s nature than had been. done, before him, Mencius.

-has the credit also of calling attention to the nourishment of the pas-
sion-nature. lé may be questioned whether 1 translate his language.
exactly by this phrase. . What I render the passion-nature, Julien
renders by “vitalis spiritus." . The philosopher says himself that it is

. difficult to describe what he intends, Attempting: such ‘a descrip-
tion, he says :—~“ This is it:-—It'is exceedingly great and exceedingly -
strong. . Being nourished: by rectitude, .and sustaining no- injury,
it fills up all between heaven and. earth: . This is it:—-It-is the mate -

; and assistant of righteousness and reason. Without it man is in a
state of starvation. If is produced by the accumulation.of righteous
deeds; it. is not to be taken, as by. surprise, by incidental acta,of
righteousness. Ifthe mind does not feel complacency in the. conduct,
this is starved.” . From such predicates we may be'sure that it is
not anything merely or. entirely physical-of which he is speaking.
“The righteous,” said Solomon, “are bold as a lion." The Hebrew
-saying is very:much in;Mencius' style... That beldness is: the result.
-of the nourishment for which he thought: he had a peculia, aptitude.
, Strong in it and in a knowledge of: CM -ai faculty of- discovering
the moral, aberrations: of others from their forms of speech, he was .
; able to boast of possessing: “an unperturbed mind ;” he could “sit
‘in: the centre’ of his being, “and enjoy ne day,” vhabene: clouds.
and storms gathered. sound hime 4

: ^ The nourishment, therefore, of. “ the passion nature,” w the vital.

spirit,” or whatever name we.choose to: give to the subject; is.only -

ian effect of general good-doing. This is the practical lesson: from.
oe Mencius high-soünding words.: .He has dltustrated it amusingly:

‘There was a man-of Sung, who was grieved that his growing corn

“was not longer, and pulled it up: Having done this; he- returned.
home, looking very wearied, and said to’ his: péople, ‘I. am tired

; to-day... I have been helping the corn to.grow long. ' His son ran

to look at it, and found the corn all withered. ‘There are few in the
world, who do not assist the corn of their passion-nature to grow
long. Some consider it of no benefit to them, and let it alone :—they ,

a TO É 11 Bk. IL, Pë L ii. 13—15.

7

 PmorkooxEsa HIS INFLUENCE AND OPINIONS. fen. n.

do not weed their corn. Those who assist it to grow long, pull out
their corn. What they do is not only of no benefit to the nature,
but it also injures it.”2

"This portion. of Mencius’ teaching need not detain us. He has
at a simple truth in a striking way. Thatis his merit. It hardly
seems of sufficient importance to, justify the use which has been
made of it in vindicating a piace for hiin among the sages of his
country. AC

.&. I said I should end the discussion of Mencius’ opinions by
pointing out what I conceive to be his chief defects as a moral and
political teacher. . His defects, however, in the former respect have
been already not lightly touched on. So fur as they were the con-
sequence of his ignorance, without the light which Revelation sheds
on the whole field of human duty, and the sanctions, which it discloses,
ofa fature state of retribution, I do not advance any charge against
his character. That he never indicates any wish to penetrate futurity,
and ascertain what comes after death; that hé never indicates any
consciousness of human weakness, nor moves. his mind Godward,
longing for more light:—these are things which exhibit strongly
the contrast between the mind of the East and the West. -His self:
sufficiency is his great fault. To know. ourselves is commonly sup-
posed to be an-important step to humility; but it is not.so with
him. -He has spoken remarkably. about the effects of calamity and
difficulties. He says:—“ When Heaven is about to confer a great -
office on à man, it first exercises his mind with suffering, and his siuews
and bones with toil; it exposes his body to huhger, and subjects him
io extreme poverty; it confounds his undertakings. By all these
"methods it stimulates his mind, hardens his nature, and supplies
his incompetencies.”! Such have been the effects of Heaven's exer-
ising some men with calamities ; but if the issue has been a fitting
- for the highest offices, there has been a softening of the nature rather
than.a hardening of it. Mencius was a stranger to the humbling of
the: lofty looks ef man, and the bowing down his haughtiness, that
the Lord alone may be exalted. ;

His faults as a politieal teacher are substantially the same “as
those of Confucius. . More than was the case with his sayings of a

2 BETI, Pt L, ii. 16.
1.Bk. Vi, Pt. H^ xy."

EB

sent] ss MENÓIUS AND. BIS DISCIPLES. > [enotin

political éhaiacter the utteratices of Mencius: have reference to
the condition and needs of his own age: ‘They were for ‘the time
then being, and not for all time. He knew as little as Confucius
of aiy other great and independent’ nation besides his own; and
he has left one maxiia’ which is deeply treasured: by the rulers -
and the people of China at the present day, aud ‘feeds the super-
cilious idea which they are so unwilling to give up of théir- own .
superiority to foreigners, “I have heard,” said he, “of nien using .
the doctrines of our great land to ehange barbarian, but I have never
yet heard of any being changed by barbariins" “Ihave heard of.
birds leaving dark valleys to rémove tó lofty trees, but I have.
not heard of their descending from lofty trees to enter into dark val
leys.”2 “Mongol and Tartar sway have not broken the charm of this.
dangerous flattery, because only in warlike energy were the Moiigols:
and "Tar tars superior to the Chinese, 4nd when they conquered the
country they did homage to its sages. - During the last five- and-bwénty
years, Christian Powers have come to ask admissioi into China,’ and:

' to claim to be received as her equals, - They do not wish to conquer `
her territory, though they have battered and broken her defenecs; *
With fear and ‘trembling’ their advances’ are contemplated. "The .
feeling of dislike to them arises fromi the dread of their power, and
suspicion of their faith. It is feared that they ‘come to subdue;
it is known that they come to change. “The idol of Chinese: super:
ority’ is about to be broken. Broken ít must be ere long, ‘and a’

new generation ‘of thinkers will aise to” Whom: Ménéius. will bei a
andy but: not a guide. d

1
oca st

2 Bk. In, Pt. I, iv. E "n.

SECTION 1 I.

k 4
, THE. piscrPLES or MENCUUS. x:

+The disciples of Mencius were much fewer in TE and of less
distinction than those of Confucius. - The longest list does not make!
them'anioünt to twenty-five; and it's ‘only to ‘complete my ‘plan ©
that I devote a page or two here to ‘their naines and surnathes, ^ —
. The chief authority in reference to them is Chaou K'e., In A.D.
115, the then emperor of the Sung dynasty conferred titles on all

wy

` C FROLRAONERAJ "E ILE BIS- DISCIPLES. l Com. 1: `

mentioned by K'e as disciples or pupils of Mencius, and enacted that
they should share in the sacrifices offered to their master in his temple

jn the district of Tsow. Choo He gives his verdict in the “ Collected

Comments "against two of thein, and .no subsequent scholar has

. ventured to restore them to their place in the Mencian school. Other :

names, however, have been found by different writers to supply their

room. It isnot worth our while to:take notice of their discus-

sions.

1.. Yó-ching K'ih, styled Tsze-gaou (4% 1E 955 F mF r), a native
of Loo. He was titled i in 1115 as the “State-advantaging Prince”
(Fil E] f). Under the present dynasty, in 1724, he had a place
assigned him in the temples of Confucius, the 35th on the west, in

. the outer court, with the common: title of “The Ancient Worthy,

 the Philosopher Yi-ching. z

2. Wan Chang (Ej 33). He was titled. in 1115 as the “Baron

of Extensive Arousing,” (HB $4 ffl). He has now the next place

 . to the preceding in the Confucian temples.
8, Kungsun Chow (Z& f$ FE), a native of Ts‘e. He was also ;

r

. . elevated to the temple of Confucius, and has now the place, east, ©

. corresponding to that of Wan Chang, on the west. His title con- `
. ferred in 1115 was—“ Baron of Longevity and Glory”. Jk 4H).

4, Kung-too (Zs df); immediately precedes Kung-sun Ch'ow in.

"the temples. In the temple of Mencius he was the “ ‘Baron’ of Tran-

....quillity and Shadiness,” (7 f 44).

The above four are the only disciples of Mencius w ho have places

m. assigned to them in the temples of Confucius.

5. Ch'in Tsin (Bii $&). 6. Ch'ung Yu Fe JE). 7. Kesun (3,

RB). 8. Tszeshuh E (F AL FE). -

These two last are held by Choo He not to have been discipu of

. Mencius,

9, Kaou (By 3. This is to be distin guished from ee scholar

. of the same name, referred to in Bk. VI, Pt. IL, iii.

+

10. Seu Peih (# F$). 11. Hëen-k'ew Mung (a, E Be).

12, Chin Tae (BE FR). 18. Pang King ( Mi). 14. Uh-loo.

— Leen (Bí HE 3). 15. Taon Ying (Bk J).

‘These fifteen are said. by Chaou K'e to have been disciples of

 Mencius. ' The four that follow are said to have studied under him,

or to have been his pupils.

80] .

SECT. 1L] . MENCIUS AND HIS DISCIPLES. [rnorEGOMENA,

16. Mang Chung (G£ 4p F). 17. Kaou (Hp). This Kaou
can hardly be said to have studied under Mencius; he only argued
with him. 18. T ng King, or Kang of Tang (is Bi) 19. P'un-
shing Kwoh (4 JK #5).

These nineteen rest on the authority of Chaou K'e. Others
have added to them—20. Kung-ming Kaou (A). 21. Kwang

Chang (EÉ Æ). 22. Chán Chung (BH ff). 24. Le Low (RE 3.

APPENDIX.

I lave thought it would be interesting to many readers to append
here the Essays of two distinguished scholars of China on the subject
of Human Nature. The one isin direct opposition to Mencius’ doc-
trine; according to the other, his doctrine is insufficient to explain
the phenomuns The author of the first, Seun K‘ ing (8j [al. $$]
$i) was not much posterior to Mencius. He is mentioned as in
office under king Séang of Ts‘e (p.c. 271-264), and he lived on to
the times of the Ts‘in dynasty. His Works which still remain form
a considerable volume. The second essay is from the work of Han
Yu, mentioned above, Ch. I., Seet. IV.; 4. I shall not occupy any
space with criticisms on the style or sentiments of the writers. If.
.the translation appear at times to be inelegant or obscure, the fault
is perhaps as much in the original as in myself. A comprehensive

_and able sketch of “The Ethics of the Chinese, with special reference
to the Doctrines of Human Nature and Sin," by the Rev. Griffith
John, was read before the North-China Branch of the Royal Asiatic
Society, in November, 1859, and has been published separately. The
essays of Scun and Han are both reviewed in it. `

P

81]

PROLEGOMENA. ] THE PHILOSOPHER SEUN. [cn. nr.

I THAT THE NATURE IS EVIL. BY THE PIILOSOPHER SEUN.

The nature of man is evil; the good which it shows is factitious. There belongs to it, even at his
birth, the love of gain, and as actions are in accordance with this, contentions and robberies grow
up, and self-denial and yielding to others are not to be found; there belong to it envy and dislike,
and as actions are in accordance with these, violence and injuries spring up, and solf-devoteduess
and faith are not to be found; there belong to it the desires of the ears and the eyes, leading to
the love of sounds and beauty, and as the actions are in accordance with these, lowdness aud
disorder spring wp, and righteonsness and propriety, with their various orderly displays, are not
to be found. Jt thus appears, that the following man’s nature and yielding obedience to its feel-
ings will assuredly conduct to contentions and robberies, to the violation of the duties belonging
to every one's lot, and the eonfounding of all distinctions, till the issue will be in a state of
savagism; and that there must be the influence of tcachers and laws, and the guidance of propriety
and righteousness, from which will spring self-denial, yielding to others, and an observance of
the well-ordered regulations of conduct, till the issue will be in a state of good government.—
From al] this, it is plain that the nature of man is evil; the good which it shows is factitious.

To illustrate.—A erooked stick must be submitted to the pressing-frame, to soften and bend it,
and then it becomes straight ; a blunt knife must be submitted to the grindstone and whetstone,
and then it becomes sharp: so, the nature of inan, being evil, must be submitted to teachers and
Jaws, and then it becomes correct; it must be submitted to propricty and righteousness, and then
it comes under government. If men were without teachers and laws, their condition would be
one of deflection and insecurity, entirely incorrect; if they were without propriety and righteous-
ness, their condition would be one of rebellious disorder, rejecting all government. The sage
kings of antiquity understanding that the nature of man was thus evil, in a state of hazardous
deflection, and incorrect, rebellious and disorderly, and refusing to be goverued, they set up the
principles of righteousness and propriety, and framed laws and regulations to straighten and
ornament the feelings of that nature and correct them, to tame and change those same feclings

ZMH BH Hk Hi a PE AA
AV Z FELLATE S RH OZ Mis
fe R s AE T Jis, A Bs, JA E.
ite VA me ae YS A th aa

AM

Sopa
lr Ct

25]

<=
=
B
Ez
d
zi
=!
$3

ü
SS

és
zA

Az f i VE

aS £ JA d A fe tk nu

th. A 3€. 23 3e 3€ de Ai x dE dg tk HK IE F
WAR PIE ENGESEITEE.
<li HS Be Me eS BL fe GE SS:
Ave Ei Bii. A Rh LRA AAR d
fL VÀ Rod A x AR Big Sh

E. AK

Lk 4 3

E

E

SEE
SHAS

3 4 na HA : a i r
TMERRE AKA OCT ud
Z

ix
SERENE
Bp

Ei:

a
Bs
ul

coi

e n

Ha.

=

a
EENS
2n
(NT

Vm ES
d E-EBNE
ENE
e
ERD
^.
€
user
H
‘

r

ij
-

ZHEN EK
=
Y

€ E Uy
E Hi T j 4 H^ Tis, As, l
EL LU PE Ye, fp e ^ HEP A d qm ihi ng
Ae Jim EE, wth à E

xj

mS

ox
t

i
EHER
zi

EA AY

zl

‘=o
us
diis
-N
Pro,

oo
nN
Lee

APP, 1.] THAT TIE NATURE IS EVIL, [PROLEGOMENA.

and guide them, so that they might all go forth in the way of morat government and in agreement
with reason. Now, the man who is transformed by teachers and laws, gathers on himself the
ornament of learning, and proceeds in the path of propriety and righteousness, is a superior mau;
and he who gives the reins to his nature and its feelings, indulges its resentments, and walks
contrary to propriety and righteousness, is a mean man. Looking at the subject in this way, we
8ee clearly that the nature of man is evil; the good which it shows is factitious.

Mencius said, ‘Man has only to learn, and his nature becomes good’; but I reply,—tit is not.so,
'To say so shows that he had not attained to the knowledge of man's nature, nor examined into
the difference between what is natural in man aud what is factitious. ‘Mhe natural is what the
constitution spontaneously moves to:—it needs not to be learned, it needs not to be f llowed hard
after; propriety and righteousness are what the sages have given birth to:—it is by learning: that
men become capable of them, it is by hard practice that they achieve them. ‘That which is in man,
not needing to be learned and striven after, is what I call natural; that in man which is attained
to by learning, and achieved by hard striving, is what I call factitious. This is the distinction þe-
tween those two. By the nature of man, the eyes are capable of seeing, and the ears are capable
of hearing. But tlie power of seeing is inseparable from the eyes, and the power of hearing is in-
scparable from the ears;—it is plain that the faculties of seeing and hearing do not need to be
learned. Mencius says,’ ‘The nature of man is good, but all lose and ruin their nature, and there-
fore it becomes bad;’ but I say that this representation is erroneoüs. Man being born with his nature,
when he thereafter departs from its simple constituent elements, he must lose it. From this con-
sideration we may see clearly that man's nature is evil. What might be called the nature's being
good, would be if there were no departing from its simplicity to beautify it, no departing from its ele»
mentary dispositions to sharpen it. Suppose that: those simple elements no more needed beautify-
ing, and the mind's thoughts no more needed to be turned to good, than the power of vision which
is inseparable from the eyes, and the power of hearing, which is inseparable from the ears, need to
be learned, then we might say that the nature is good, just as we say that the eyes: soe and the
ears hear. It is the nature of man, when hungry, to desire to be filled ; when cold, to desire to be
warmed; when tired, to desire rest :—these are the feelings and nature of man. But now, a man
is hungry. and in the presence of an elder he does not dare to eat before him:—he is yielding to
that elder; he is tired with labour, and he does not dare to ask for rest :—he is working for some
one. A son's yielding to his father and a younger brother to his elder, a son's labouring for his .

Hee FAST ik eg d
ET 2 BE iet £t dí IA Br K, Ji

\

MA

SERO
note

v

ze
ZEN

-^-

82) eS A HE
AKERS
E

ES
gg

o
v”

SHEN

e
-

NJ a SE BERTI e RET

DEDERE
WEE
HEA

2
Ri
SD

<, fht
ZR PE
IU! fis,

ERRORS duca
WHEN

e

*

1

T SEN > HEH

v
N
y)

ESS

sw
ESE
Nek etch

NEE >A AES

-

i

NX
BHL Bn os
BIN Hes

o

BE
R
E

BN

BSE

-

TE NE

o
Ld

NI
B

E
= -
»

ui
hi

=
PARNE
=
z

XEF

A
c

o Ab PE E Br a TE » p

in

Rae

WEBER Sry

JEN

NER
BE

EROR

ID
D
E

~~
«
v

1

ais

Š
Pkk

=

EN

LESER
Nee

g
NI came

ENL
DEFN
zR

o

SENSE

WASHES ae

eet
>

Cc"
P
A

t

E
>
&

\
4
V
4

oc
e
LL

PROLEGOMENA. THE PHILOSOPHER SEUN. fon. m

father and a younger brother for his elder :—these two instances of conduct are contrary to the
nature and against the feelings ; but they are according to the course laid down for a filial son,
and the refined distinctions of propriety and righteousness. It appears that if there were an ac-
cordance with the feclings and the nature, there would be no self-denial and yielding to others.
Self-denial and yielding to others are contrary to the feelings and the nature. In this way we
come to see how elear it is that the nature of man is evil; the good which it shows is factitious.

An inquirer will ask, ‘If man’s nature be evil, whence do propriety and righteousness arise?’ I
reply,—All propriety and righteousness are the artificial production of the sages, and are not to
be considered as growing out of the nature of man. It is just as when a potter makes a vessel
from the clay ;—the vessel is the product of the workman’s art, and is not to be considered as grow-
ing out of his nature. Or it is as when another workman cuts and hews a vessel out of wood ;—it
is the product of his art, and is not to be considered as growing out of his nature. The sages pon-
dered long in thought and gave themselves to practice, and so they succeeded in producing pro-
priety and righteousness, and setting up laws and regulations. Thus it is that propriety and
righteousness, laws and regulations, are the artificial product of the sages, and are not to be con-
sidered as growing properly from the nature of man. `

If we speak ofthe fondness of the eyes for beauty, or of the mouth for pleasant flavours, or of
the mind for gain, or of the bones and skin for the enjoyment of ease ;—all these grow out of the
natural feelings of man. ‘The object is presented and the desire is felt; there needs no effort to
produce it. But when the object is presented, and the affection does not move till after hard
effort, I say that this effect is factilious. ‘Those cases profe the difference between what is pro-
duced by nature and what is produced by art.

Thus the sages transformed their nature, and commenced their artificial work. Tlaving com-
menced this work with their nature, they produced propriety and righteousness, When propriety
and rightcousness were produced, they proceeded to frame laws and regulations. It appears, there-
fore, that propriety and righteousness, laws and regulations, are given birth to by the siges.

Ro dE EE [HR UR ER P PE EU
FREUT EA WEB RE
3

xs
mhz
ques

peas
NAHE
M
ex
wi

SRE RNESHERNEEE
BH
a
sm

XE
"NER

M

Perm
CURA

(hm;
REReNEH

v

SRE
ee
AS
3m

XU

BAH

Mas

-

E

NYRR AHH
ae
LL ER

RE
N

-
v

mE

NI Su
m
IA
z

iis eT E

-
hi
toy

e

ESR EMEA HSH ERS

aub
72 OO

Ns

E
i
M

=

— =

Shh

= Ni
Ss
ree
i Spey
c
ert

ATBRRUWES

e

hice

zie

wt"

Brae

= EN
(iN
gn

(NT
Ec ds
[n3

E

&
SHY
D-
Hh
N-

E
BRAT
uolia 4 —

3

Ne
Reads
SST RSH

eat
È
z

~~
«
P4

RE

o

SANNA

Dies ES Sets aS

-

EL
“al
ee
NER

S
EIE

SEPRIÉ EIE
vm
EF ee

ZUM
= Us
= SÀ

a
=
z
=
Ss

9

-ERS
PRSES INER

$i
SERE AS

=

[

th
5

: ER F, RER ql d^ ar ds
BAB pie ERE > We be
: Bk Ek desk

SPS

v
Zu

FNT
p Vae
b due
N
ST
Skea

sal

CROKE
$

r

HE

-

BERANE
NERS!

id

U-HRERNCXIBIEXENTH

SEXE MUERE

T

so

NX
zt

ZU
n
ec
= 3 "
“TN

at VARA
*

T

& .

S
MEEDER

ec
a
pour)

avr, 1,] THAT THE NATURE IS EVIL. . [PROEEGOMENA.

Wherein they agree with all other men and do not differ from them, is their nature; wherein they
differ from and exeeed other men, is this artificial work.

Now to love gain and desire to get ;—this is the natural feeling of men. Suppose the case that
there is an amount of property or money to be divided among brothers, and let this natural feeling
to love gain and desire to get come into play ;—why, then the brothers will be opposing, and snatch.
ing from, one another. But where the ehanging influence of propriety and righteousness, with
their refined distinctions, has taken effect, a man will give up to any other man. Thus it is that
if they act in accordance with their natural feelings, brothers will quarrel together; and if they
have come under the transforming influence of propriety and righteousness, men will give up to

' other men, to say nothing of brothers. Again, the fact that men wisi to do what is good, is be-
cause their nature is bad. ‘The thin wishes to be thick ; the ugly wish to be beautiful; the nar-
row wishes to be wide; the poor wish to be rich; the mean wish to be noble :—when anything is
not possessed in one's self, he seeks for it outside himself. But the rich do not wish for wealth ;
the noble do not wish for position :—when anything is possessed by one's self, he does not need
to go beyond himself for it. When we look at things in this way, we perceive that the fact of
men’s WisuinG to do what is good is because their nature is evil. It is the case indeed, that man’s
nature is without propriety and benevolence :—he therefore studies them with vigorous effort and
seeks to have them. It is the case that by nature he does not know propriety and righteousness:
—he therefore thinks and reflects and seeks to know them. Speaking of man, therefore, ashe is by
birth simply, he is without propriety and righteousness, without the knowledge of propriety and
righteousness. Without propriety and righteousness, man must be all confusion and disorder; .
without the knowledge of propriety and righteousness, there must ensue all the manifestations of
disorder. Man, as he is born, therefore, has in him nothing but the elements of disorder, passive
and active. It is plain from this contemplation of the subject that the nature of mantis evil; the
good which it shows is factitious. 3 `

When Mencius says that ‘Man’s nature is good,’ I affirm that it is not so. In ancient times
and now, throughout the empire, what is meant'by good is a condition of correctness, regulation,
and happy government; and what is meant by evil, is a condition of deflection, insecurity, and
refusing to be under government:—in this lies the distinction between being good and being evil,

And now, if man’s nature be really so correct, regulated, and happily governed in itself, where

Ul ee SEB Bok Oe

mt
x
Iz!

E

ei. FIEU A R Bh A OOS Le
ds ELS TRAC Aat a TEES A A RUN
hu 2 y BE Fu te b pr

N>

— 65
i
j

E
S

=
SNS SS

fa
FHEIN

HE

HEINE

sm

E
BEES SRN

zi

E
RE

o

SN Aas

iL

i}
di
^

Sk
TX
èm
E

E

SN URN

9

Aum

FI

zm
c
KiS

feal

—
dh
(iH
E
=
=

`
-
eee
M

he
E

7

BERE
SES Yes

&

i
»

Uh zm
^ NP SES

ZI m
D CRAT Se
Ner

ER
El
=

IV
=
at

ee

-

ES
FN HRS BR

x ká jeu 7 :
cipe Bod
s

math

Bo>+NREE

a

TE

h
SS DRT:
E

zzi

Kg

«ui
+,

E.

Fm
v
a

ith) M j
SEN
"
zi
b

č
vi
-
^
°
N
?

ES are

CAE
Gu
n
T
BE
[cx
o

—
EE
RNV

NGS

Pe =
or
be

EI

x
sep

ESI

o
`
<
om

RER
:
Ban

o
za 1
di

XS an
s
E

3t
ce e

t

ashe
MERE ASS
ox
=

u
Zu

EE
2t

Sind
3
d
m.
y d—
5
=
ss

FZ
»

tH
zB
Gea

ES
gs KIE
v
ZN

Nut

>NER=
EX

ao

SWEN
E
g
s

ms

BWE AR CAE IP SF

85]

PROLEGOMENA. ] THE PILOSOPHIER SEUN. fer, n.

would be the use for sage kings? where would be the use for propriety and righteousness? Al-
though there were the sage kings, propriety, and righteousness, what could they add to the nature
so correct, regulated, and happily ruled in itself? But it is not so; the nature of mau is bad. It
was on this account, that anciently the sage kings, understanding that man’s nature was bad, ina
state of deflection and insecnrity, instead of being correct, in a state of rebellious disorder, instead
of one of happy rule, set up therefore the majesty of princes and governors to awe it; aud set
forth propriety and righteousness to change it; and. framed laws and statutes of correctness to
rule it; and devised severe punishments to restrain it: so that its outgoings might be under the
dominion of rule, and in accordance with what is good. This is the true account of the governance
of the sage kings, and the transforming power of propriety and righteousness. Let us suppose à
state of things in which there shall be no majesty of princes and governors, no influeuce of pro-
priety and righteousness, no rule of laws and statutes, no restraints of punishment: —what would
be the relations of men with one another, all under heaven? The strong would be injuring the
weak, and spoiling them; the many would be tyrannizing over the few, and hooting thein; a universal
disorder and mutual destruetion would speedily ensue. When we look at the subject in this way,
we see clearly that the nature of man is evil; the good which it shows is factitious.

He who would speak well of ancient times must have certain references in the present; he would
speak well of Heaven must substantiate what he says out of man. In discourse and argument it
is an excellent quality when the divisions which are made can he brought together like the halves
ofa token. When itis so, the arguer may sit down, and discourse of his principles; and he hag
only to rise up, and they may be set forth and displayed and carried into action. When Mencius
says that the nature of man is good, there is no bringing together in the above manner of his
divisions. He sits down and talks, but there is no getting upto display and set forth his principles,
and put them in operation:—is not his “error very gross? "To say that the nature is good does
away with the sage kings, and makes an end of propricty and righteousness; to say that the na-
ture is bad exalts the sage kings, and dignifies propriety and righteousness. As the origin of the
pressing-boards is to be found.in the crooked $vood, and the origin of the carpenter's marking-
line isto be found in things’ not being straight ; so the rise of princes and governors, and the illus-
tratiowof propriety and righteousness, are to be traced to the badness of the nature. It is clear from
this view of the subject that the nature of man is bad; the good which it shows is factitious.

PRGEARR GUE SU eu EY!

^ x ge

zi
E

KE

Hee EH
ERGO RE ERN

WR MEN
È
ANH

HERNDENE
ar
*
E

DRE

v

ep
pe
«T
AZ
SHAHN

MG alate
dj
ja

m

-
©

€

SR CTS gl

`
i
i
+

FNE

SVE
3
REN Rie

-
v

DREE

—

vm
=

e

-

(eh EH Sate

Ae
b

Nasica

-

fic gene PEE
ENT.

Vv
i
BONS Oko} oll

=
eat
RE

{
P

MEME
F
dk

>

-
NE
-
M
See

-
-

Dk Hal
k
` }

PE ae R. AA HS LU I IE a
A d Be Hu A ok Pate EH) LA.
È, 4; d FX EY

9j ia

1

mm
XEBBN
S

&

S
Ii
BSE ES ELAS
En
NDESA

a
M

5
au Ri

REL

1
ni Hots
pu
ü
E
S
re
i

fall
SN > RWS

PORES
EBEN

i i DE
$ a Mine x, XT]
d 4 HS AS HE d nA We SE DI HL ate 8j T A

MU
ud

6 yp
-
=

f
LJ

i
l

w
il

n

Li
-
o

(NS

&
a

2
i
ig
ur
“fe
n

es
&
BE
Ag
SE
EE Nal
FEN
(NE
E

+
B

SRN

o

EHRE
d
n
=

7 MP V
oe
DN

7

o

[o]

[Der
EA
E
X

arr, L] i THAT THE NATURE IS EVIL. [ PROLEGOMENA.

A straight piece of wood does not need the pressing-boards to make it straight ;—it is so by its
nature. A crooked picce of wood must be submitted to the pressing-boards to soften and straighten
it, and then it is straight; it is not straight by its nature. ‘So it is that the nature of man, being
evil, must be submitted to the rule of the sage kings, and to the transforming influence of pro-
priety and righteousngss, and then its outgoings are under the dominion of rule, and in accordance
with what is good. This shows clearly that the nature of man is bad; the good which it shows
is factitious.

An inquirer may say again, “Propriety and righteousness, though scen in an accumulation of
factitious deeds, do yet belong to the nature of man; and thus it was that the sages were able to
produce them.” Ireply,—It is not so. A potter takes a picce of clay, and produces a dish from
it; but are that dish and clay the nature of the potter? A carpenter plies his tools upon a picce

of wood, and produces a vessel; but are that vessel and wood the nature of the carpenter? So it
is with the sages and propriety and righteousness; they produced them, just as the potter works
with the clay. It is plain that there is no reason for saying that propriety and righteousness,
and the accumulation of their factitious actions, belong to the proper nature of man. Speaking

of the nature of man, it is the same m all,—the same in Yaou and Shun, and in Küé and the
robber Chih, the same in the superior man aud in the mean man. If you say that propriety and
righteousness, with the faetitious actions accumulated from them, are the nature of man, on what
ground do you proceed to ennoble Yaou and Yu, to ennoble generally the superior man? The
ground on which we ennoble Yaou, Yu, and the superior man, is their ability to cbange
the nature, and to produce factitious conduct. That factitious conduct being produced, out of it
there are brought propriety and righteousness ‘The sages stand indeed in tbe same relation to
propriety and righteousness, and the factitious conduct resulting from them, as the potter does to
his clay :—we have a product in either ease. This representation makes it clear that propriety
and righteousness, with their factitious results, do not properly belong to the nature of man. On
the other hand, that which we consider mean in Kgg, the robber Chih, and the mean mah generally,
is that they follow their nature, act in accordance, with its feelings, and indulge its resentments,
till all its outgoings are a greed of gain, contentions, and rapine.—lIt is plain that the nature of
‚man is bad; the good which it shows is factitious. ' `

SENE JH AR PS T l MA A A
JIT7PS T4 LE.
Dp E ey AB, Bet
A LA ERA,

E
z

haosa
T
Sh >t

SDH

o

ah
NESE
(NH
(VS

iB
DS

 v

Yet

3g
YEE (NSE se

N
A

SH
er

È
&

the

E

HE
A a
a

-
*
-
sa
-

NHHESER ER

=
sl

HE

E

pus
Azo

1i

A>

È

=
REDS

Ki

EET

Fi

E

o

N

4

ENG

NE
or
H

(
+

5

E=
ARS

lil
Yi

Y-
g
HERE
«UL
e
TRAE

Re VE fi 18, HE Su iE +
SG d E ip

AL
i
d e Ss a
ME
S

mY

NTERENSExG
5i
ECAR ASE
ir

SSRN y
HE

©

EE
u
E
Nd
-3h
hig
ASHES
BS
Ej
Soar

-

ek:
t
-
t
=
li
HS
T
1
wy
v
ai

EE
NS

=

B

ES

SE

ab Schr
AREE n

SDR THY
ESSE
eR NEE
SNF
nae HFS GE
R=
ES
&

+k
\

TEM
>h
&

TE
MES
SRE
ENE
SEE Ph
SS
> DEEN
SPS SH

M nim
TON

mm

Sr
-—
EE
bd
Hr
V
E

E
cur

Ul
kg

.
nD

hal
TL

>

TEE

pen
—-—
NEN
"us
—
i 8
an
B
T
—
T
t

r

FROLEGOMENA.] THE PHILOSOPHER SEUN. (ou. 11.

Heaven did not make favourites of Tsing, K‘éen, and Ieaou-ke, and deal unkindly with the
rest of men. Wow then was it that they alone were distinguished by the greatness of their filial
deeds, that all which the name of filial piety implies was complete in them? ‘The reason was that
they were subject to the restraints of propriety and righteousness.

Heaven did not make favourites of the people of Ts‘e and Loo, and deal unkindly with the
people of T's‘in. How then was it that the latter were not equal to the former in the rich mani-
festation of the filial piety belonging to the righteousness of the relation between father and son,
and the respectful observance of the proprieties belonging to the separate functions of husband
and wife? The reason was that the people of T's‘in followed the feelings of their nature, indulecd
its resentments, and contemned propriety and righteousness. We are not to suppose that they
were different in their nature.

What is the meaning of the saying, that * Any traveller on the road may become like Yu?" I
answer,—All that made Yu what he was, was his practice of benevolence, rightcousness, aud his
observance of laws and rectitude. But benevolence, righteousness, laws, and rectitude, are. all
capable of being known and being practised. Moreover, any traveller on the road has the capacity
of knowing these, and the ability to practise them:—it is plain that he may become like Yu. If
you say that benevolence, righteousness, laws, and rectitude, are not capable of beiug known and
practised, then Yu himself could not have known, could not have practised them. If you will have
it that any traveller on the road is really without the capacity of knowing these things, and the
ability to practise them, then, in his home, it will not be competent for him to know the righteous-
ness that should rule between father and son, and, abroad, it wil not be competent for him to
know the rectitude that should rule between sovereign and minister. Butit is not so. There is no one
who travels along the road, but may know both that righteousness and that rectitude:—it is plain

that the capacity to know and the ability to practise belong to every traveller on the way Let

him, therefore, with his capacity of knowing and ability to practise, take his ground on the
knowableness and practicableness of benevolence and righteousness;—and it is clear that he may
become like Yu. Yea, let any traveller on the way addict himself to the art of learning with all his
heart and the entire bent of his will, thinking, searching, and closely examining ;—let him do this

a ZEN PW. PRS RRL

a

mE
Ea

X

y
-
r

m
zu

sz

Mi ie "t
MEE zu
11

NET
x

TON SEN SS

ROH RS SP Sa

NM
Ee
E
E-
a

SN GIA
manenz
NÉ
ann
Sal
SES

$
(NERSERKTT
HETE D)

-
SENETI

ww

Nm
ER
AN
SEN
AH
a

i
5
e
we

M
a

n
2053

ie

PRES ES ARH

l

S
X
RE
!
i
ZEE
X
uu
Putz:
Wu
Ep

Ti

e

NESE RSM HAS
aj

SÓN-

22

XONEPBEECNGNX
E:

E
TTS

-

EN
ETIEN

v
t
m
xX

Eu
Six in

cM
i

Nau

m
A

zx m
EUESR(N

c
u
- i `
N
[9
SINN
d —
B:

iz >
SERESo

NN

Sd
SSNS ess
esed

Ez

Tes

agay
2x

-

a
u

o

BB

v d

(NEP ERE A
DES
pe she fa

>
F

ay

pr A 3$

ZR ýk PE 4 R

y 3 o AG EAS
HA, 1E < AB, JE hii $E A TA E
ERER MEMS Th RRS MA
KAW ARE SW OA E EOE ay

88]

APP. L] THAT THE NATURE IS EVIL. [PROLEGOMENA,

day after day, through.a long space of time, accumulating what is good, and he will penetrate as
far as a spritual Intelligence, he will become a ternion with Heaven and earth. It follows that
the characters of the sages were what any man may reach by accumulation.

It may be said:— To be sage may thus be reached by accumulation;—why is it that all men
cannot accumulate £o this extent?’ I reply,—They may do so, but they cannot be made to do so.
The mean man might become a superior man, but he is not willing to be a snperior man. The
superior man might become a mean man, but he is not willing to be a mean man. It is not that '
the mean man and the superior man may not become the one tlie other; their not becoming the
one the other is because it is a thing which may be, but cannot be made to be. Any traveller on
the road may become like Yu:—the case is so; that any traveller on the road can really become
like Yu:—this is not a necessary conclusion. Though any one, however, cannot really become
like Yu, that is not contrary at all to the truth that he may become so. One’s fect might travel
all over the world, but there never was one who was really able to travel all over the world. There
is nothing to prevent the mechanic, the farmer, and the merchant, from practising each the business
of the others, but there has never been a case when it has really been done. Looking at the subject
in this way, we see that what may be need not really be; and although it shall not really be, that `
is not contrary to the truth that it might be. It thus appears that the difference is wide between

what is really done or not really done, and what may be or may not be. It is plain that these
two cases may not become the one the other.

Yaou asked Shun what was the character of the feelings proper to man. Shun replied, ‘The
feelings proper to man are very unlovely; why need you ask about them? When a man has gota
wife and children, his filial piety withers away; under the influence of lust and gratified desires,
his good faith to his friends withers away; when he is full of dignities and'emoluments, his loyalty
to his sovereign withers away. The natural feelings of man! The natural feelings of man! They
are very unJovely. wy need you ask about them? It is only in the case of men of the highest

worth that it is not so.’
Ja SE SE 3E (B br M mi At A a

T
3
X.

B
IT

Waly

z,

Soe NS
X

=

-

Res
mi

ms
JESN
a

zu

Pt

8

SHE MOH SUS a Sle
ES

bag Se NES

REM
meu"

SME
Ri]
zi

-

Ett
>%

PENES
zaj S
Sagaen

>>
DEN EY Hogs SS
i

r
-

3

=
$

SAZASA,
x
x
3pEN

EN Td

LÀ
-

ES EN EI

-

=
MGDENEUNEE

Hie

z
E
SES
ux

SoH
qas

Whe
Bb č
S

ri:

SSN NR

v

v
.
-

b
T
-

NS
NIE

[—
br
I
bee
t
E dc

à

)

d
=

En

Eire kb hg

ROME ae exec
:
z

k
N

MM GE I
EE P EG

=
=

v

EET

v

i
=
EATS A> NBS

ra

HERE CE SHS

-
EU xap

AHA

-

dicke

v

E NET
FEIRAN

NXE BERE de
SNERIST:

7
NE

-
-

DEES

`

G
E

.
-

mS Sh
JEDAL

=
Svea

pert

89]

i

PROLEGOMENA. "THE PHILOSOPHER SEUN. [cn n.

There is a knowledge characteristic of the sage; a knowledge charactcristic of the scholar and
superior man; a knowledge characteristic of the mean man; and a knowledge characteristic of the
mere servant. In much speech to show his cultivation and maintain consistency, and though he
may discuss for a whole day the reasons of a subject, to have a unity pervadiug the ten thousand
changes of discourse ;—this is the knowledge of the sage. ‘To speak seldom, and in a brief and
sparing manner, and to be orderly in his reasoning, as if its parts were connected with a string;—
this'is the knowledge of the scholar and superior man. Flattering words and disorderly conduct,
with undertakings often followed by regrets;—these mark the knowledge of the mean man.
Hasty, officious, smart, and swift, but without consistency; versatile, able, of extensive capabili-
ties, but without use; decisive in discourse, rapid, exact, but the subject unimportant; regardless
of right and wrong, taking no account of crooked and straight, to get the victory over others the
. guiding object:—this is the knowledge of the mere servant.

There is bravery of the highest order ; bravery of the middle order ; bravery of the lowest order.
Boldly to take up his position in the place of the universally acknowledged Mean; boldly to carry
into practice his views of the doctrines of the ancient kings; in a high situation, not to defer to a
bad sovereign, and in a low situation not to follow the current of a bad people ; to consider that
there is no poverty where there is virtue, and no wealth where virtue is not ; when appreciated by
the world, to desire to share in all men’s joys and sorrows; when unknown by the world, to stand
up grandly alone between heaven and earth, and have no fears :—this is the bravery of the highest
order. To be reverently observant of propriety, and sober-minded ; to attach importance to ad-
herence to fidelity, and sot little store by material wealth; to have the boldness to push forward
men of worth and exalt them, to hold back undeserving men, and get them deposed ;—this is the
bravery of the middle order. To be devoid of self-respect and set a great value on wealth; to
feel complacent in calamity, and always have plenty to say for himself; saving himself in any wry,
without regard to right and wrong; whatever be the reak state of a case, making it his object to
get the victory over others :—this is the bravery of the lowest order.

The fan-jö, the keu, and the shoo, were the best hows of antiquity ; but without their regulators,
they could not adjust themselves. The tsult of duke Hwan, the keuč of 'T'ae-kung, the [uA of king

ATRE HM EXPE
A ay Hh Be EH Fe EA ot hn T
w ^ LES x.

FR
ÙN
2
a

e
©

ERE
S
c

HEZ

Se
e
SEE
z
zi
AU
iN

Ud
3
2
SE
=
E
RE
ze.
ALL
ie
! gy:
Ez
iN

Bem
E
(N

gu
X
Se
NS.
ne
brr
ML
LA
2x
o

1

xr
Ce
ddia, sae N

EN

LI AP
Hi HE 4E
Va Wh SE VI ab,
Hj iti zm fi
DX
Ju Ur 2

Ion
= Hz
Ah.

SRG

m
EQ S ER HH
2dORC-E ZR

NU
x
m
=
I

Ne
pat
a l
=
Bull
H-

LI

NEH
Be
SNTTHN

per
zd
AE
S
Ex
we
AL
—

c
N
P
“

-

MSH

n

=
i
E
(NR

s
3N
VG

JES SAS eS

S

=
E
ur
}

1
J
Sede
REE ES
Se
=

PEÉI(NT GBA

B

NC
ET
FIRANY

M

x
BARES

o

p
EF

y:
5
SEND
ug
Ps
A
-

x
Eu
p

.-

br Gi xS c a
SEED
JATE

NHH
N>

Im
bee
ai
x
em

>
t

n ld

w
z
i

NKIRE

M AHE
Rè
Nt
La
zT
S
tc
\>
"4
UNSER

ieu
mz
=
>
=

=
Ki

Brt
ae

iE

TEX
ADF
Š ENA
3

3
(NE
EQ
x
\
4
iN
x
2E
=

\
í

-

APP. L] THAT THE NATURE IS EVIL. , [PROLEGOMENA,

Win, the dwuh of prince Chwang, the kan-tseang,.mdh-yay keu-keueh and p‘eih-leu of Hop-leu—
these were the best swords of antiquity; but without the grindstene and whetstone, they would
not have been sharp; without the strength of the arms that wielded them, they would not have
cut anything.

The kwa, the lew, the le, the ke, the séen, the lei, the lwh, and the urh :—these were the best horses
of antiquity ; but there were still necessary for them the restraints in front of bit and bridle, the
stimulants behind of cane and whip, and the equestrianship of a T'saou-foo, and then they could
accomplish a thousand Ze in one day.

So it is with man :—granted to him an excellent capacity of nature and the faculty of intellect,
he must still seek for good teachers under whom to place himself, and make choice of friends with
whom he may be intimate. Having got good masters and placed himself under them, what he
will hear will be the doctrines of Yaou, Shun, Yu, and T‘ang; having got good friends and become
intimate with them, what he will see will be deeds of self conscration, fidelity, reverence, and com-
plaisance :—he will go on from day to day to benevolence and righteousness, without being con-
scious of it: a natural following of them will make him do so. On the other hand, if he live with
bad men, what he will hear will be the language of deceit, calumny, imposture and hypocrisy ;
what he will see will be the conduct of filthiness, insolence, lewdness, corruptness, and greed :—he
will be going on from day to day to punishment and disgrace, without being conscious of it;a
natural following of them will make him do so.

The Record says “If you do not know your son, look at his friends; if you do not know your
prince, look at his confidants.’ Allis the influence of association ! AH is the infiuence of association!

a T BE 35, RI Br i Se VA um S5 7, EC ED IE.
hl = TIL £7 fei) TH
ERR E) A

te

E
mi
D

N -
[*

2
—

-

m
iN?

.

Burn

ex
N
SE
TRN
NE

g
=
TRN
nee
-4

-

shite Wid

v

OLI

M

ST

3
NX SR RN E E
E

”
*
-
“

k
4

Sax
SB ENESEE
Dee BION ER
èE

SENED ESE
RE
=
T
>

mS
SE PER
CERE

BN
em

aT
xr
br

E
Son
(X $

Woz
\
4

FEAR

zm
Te
aul

nd

is

-
>
—À

e
EN
T
E
TAT
Sa
=

See
gi
ES

o

mS

EEN SRE

be
F

Se

o
Y
HQ

al OPER
EX
Xu
E
FH

fees

TTS fi

tts
NHESIS SERE HEI RH AE
ex

myI%
XE

REG

BREED
Se

—

zu

E)
E:
E:
N
X
=
Nat
Nk

91]

PROLEGOMENA, HAN WAN-KUNG. [en. i1.

IL AN EXAMINATION OF THE NATURE OF MAN. DY HAN WAN-KUNG.

THE NATURE dates from the date of the life; THE rxELINGs date from contact with external
things. There are three GRADES of the nature, and it has five cHAnacTERISTICS. There are also
three GRADES of the feelings, and they have seven CHARACTERISTICS. To explain myself;—The
three grades of the nature are—the Superior, the Middle, and the Inferior. "Phe superior grade is
good, and good only; the middle grade is capable of being led: it may rise to the superior, or sink to
the inferior; the inferior is evil, and evil only. The five characteristics of the nature are—Bene-
volence, Righteousness, Propriety, Sincerity, and Knowledge. In the Superior Grade, the first of
these characteristics is supreme, and the other four are practised. In the Middle Grade, the first of
these characteristics is not wanting: it exists, but with a little tendency to its opposite; the other
four are in an ill-assorted state. In the Interior Grade there is the opposite of the first character-
istic, and constant rebelliousness against the other four. The grade of the nature regulates the
manifestation of the feelings in it. Aguin:—The three grades of the feelings are the Superior, the
Middle and the Inferior; and their seven characteristics are—Joy, Anger, Sorrow, Fear, Love,
Hatred, and Desire. In the Superior Grade, these seven all move, and each in its due place and
degree. In the Middle Grade, some of the characteristics are in excess, and some in defect; but
there is a seeking to give them their due place and degree. In the Inferior Grade, whether they
are in excess or defect, there is a reckless acting according to the one in immediate predominance.
The grade of the feelings regulates the influence of the nature in reference to them.
Speaking of the nature, Mencius said :—‘ Man's nature is good; the philosopher Seun said :—
. ‘Man’s nature is bad ;' the philosopher Yang said:—‘In the nature of man good and evil are mixed
together. Now, to say that the nature, good at first, subsequently becomes bad; or that, bad at
first, it subsequently becomes good; or that, mixed at first, it subsequently becomes, it may be,

itt HG zb aed m nur PE

r1

u
u

de,

o

-r
a

N
p
CHEM

5 LH
ae

©
A

t
ci

-

BN ASHE

-
T

o
dos
Guy
ZN

-
ab ad
uy

-

v

aM
"

5 SEEKS

3
HRI

TESA
E
Fix

AS =
bu,

aes
RK
z:

v

v
—
ai

*
ei
=

u
-

A P
Vt Sy

ILE 3r ee2
HE

E

PRADESH RC
x
IIT IE
katie

uil:
zü

©

— uT

MED

pex Pz Skee
SERS

te

(N

x
Op

Sj.

=
N

\
eis
NE

I
ai
=
t

-
— s

a]
MEEPS Bech
ECL EA DS LE EHI

Gok

o

das-

T

ZNE

TEEF
 E RÜEN2RER
Na

—
=k
wait
o
^!
N
.

i

ki
HEN
Hk

GRAS Ses

ioral pcan

Sate dem
Anak:

i roe
mater
KERT

ZN
EIC
3
DIESE
2k

MET
(Fre HL

E
ES aad
a
zm

9

bead

Sit

Ld

4
uy

-

Ies
=
DEN
DEIN

A
‘
2x
x
E

e

ve)
NO
[mn

APP, 11.) AN EXAMINATION OF THE NATURE OF MAN. [PROLEGOMENA

good, it may be, bad :—in each of these cases only the nature of the middle grade is dealt with,
and the superior and inferior grades are neglected. Those philosophers are right about one grade,
and wrong about the other two. `

When Shuh-yu was born, his mother knew, as soen as she looked at him, that he would fall a
victim to his love of bribes. When Yang Sze-go was born, the mother of Shuh-heang knew, as
soon as she heard him cry, that he would cause the destruction of all his kindred.. When Yué-
tserzou was born, Tsze-win considered it was a great calamity, knowing that through him the
ghosts of the J5-gaou family would all bg famished.—With such cases before us, can it be said
that the nature of man (4e., all men) is good? .

When How-tseih was born, his mother had no suffering; and as soon as he began to creep, he
displayed all elegance and intelligence. When king Win was in his mother's womb, she experi-
enced no distress; after his birth, those who tended him had no trouble; when he began to learn,
his teachers had no vexation:—with such cases before us, can it be'said that the nature of man
(i.e, all men) is evil?

Choo was the son of Yaou, and Keun the son of Shun; Kwan and Ts‘ae were sons of king Win.
They were instructed to practise nothing but that was good, and yet they turned out villains.
Shun was the son of Koo-sow, and Yu the son of K‘win. They were instructed to practise no-
thing but what was bad, and yet they turned out sages.—With such cases before us, can it be said
that in the nature of man (i.e; all men) good and evil are blended together?

Having these things in view, I say that the three philosophers, to whom I have referred, dealt
with the middle grade of the nature, and neglected the superior and the inferior; that they were
right about the one grade, and wrong about the other two.

It may be asked, ‘Is it so, then, that the superior and inferior grades of the nature can never
be changed?’ I reply,—The nature of the superior grade, by application to learning, becomes more,
intelligent, and the nature of the inferior grade, through awe of power, comes to have few faults.
The superior nature, therefore, may be taught, and the inferior nature may be restrained; but the
grades have been pronounced by Confucius to be unchangeable. i

TETIT.
$ f fü th

3k th

a
»t

UN

S

=
Ec
me

Ed
TON
(zd

^ e
HE
`
E
o
[es
4

ne

aliki]

pitas
ENHED
abi

È

HE
NYLENDE

v

HR SE A BROBAYS

dk

WIN Xe
RES

Ld

`d
Nur
Nu:
~

*.
E

DRS SH NS

er Oo SE

-

n

-

o
4
4

BEN
Meath

v

HHS Re

o

SRS Okh it

zr

=
e
co

[9]

EN

Hae
Sabra

°

WEE

ebbe EARS

-

v

-

&
SRS ENS

[4

SNEER
RARE

-

MENIBMÉ

PINGERE RE
ARSE SE.

v

oe Soh
VES ease et

"EE

LJ

*

NIE

E:

Ez
Es

\
é

est

IUEN bau BETA

PhRoLEGOMENA.] =~ : HAN WAN-KUNG. (en. n.

It.may be asked, ‘Tow is it that those who now-a-days speak about the nature do so differ-
` ently from this?’ T reply,—Those who now-a-days speak about the nature blend with their other
. Views: those of Eaou-tsze and Buddhism; and doing so, how could they speak other wise than
differently fromme?

AMS Ge BGS

in $ tF ABJIR EZH,
A^ Mam H

Uk ESO Ef A S

94]

sect. L] THE OPINIONS OF YANG CHOO. [PROLEGOMENA.

CHAPTER III

OF YANG CHOO AND MIH TEIH.

SECTION I
THE OPINIONS OF YANG CHOO.
` .

1. “The words of Yang Choo and Mih Teih," said Mencius, “ fill
the empire. If you listen to people's discourses throughout it, you
will find that they have adopted the views of the one or of the other.
Now, Yang's principle is—‘Each one for himself, which does not
acknowledge the claims of the sovereign. Mih’s principle is-—* To
love all equally,’ which does not acknowledge the peculiar affection
due to a father. To acknowledge neither king nor father is to be in
the state of a beast. If their principles are not stopped, andthe
principles of Confucius set forth, their perverse speakings will delude
the people, and stop up the path of benevolence and righteousness.

“I am alarmed by these things, and address myself to the defence
of the doctrines of the former sages, and to oppose Yang and Mih.
I drive away their licentious expressions, so that such perverse
speakers may not be able to show themselves. When sages shall
rise up again, they will not change my words."!

His opposition to Yang and Mih was thus one of the great labours
of Mencius' life, and what he deemed the success of it one of his
great achievements. His countrymen generally accede to the justice
of his claim; though there have not been wanting some to say—
justly, as I think and will endeavour to show in the next section
that Mih need not. have incurred from him such heavy censure.
For Yang no one has a word to say. His leading principle as stated
by Mencius is certainly detestable, and so far as we can judge from
the slight accounts of him that are to be gathered from other quar-
ters, he seems to have been about “ the least erected spirit,” who
ever professed to reason concerning the life and duties of man.

1 Bk, IIT, Pt. IL, ix. 9, 10.
95]

PROLEGOMENA] YANG CHOO AND MIH TEIH. fon. nr.

2. The generally received opinion is that Yang belonged to the
period of “The Warring States,” the same era of Cinjee history as
Mencius. He was named Choo, and styled Tsze-keu.t In a note, p.
159, I have supposed that he was of the times of Confucius and
Laou-tsze, having then before me a passage of the Taouist philoso-
pher iang, in which he gives an account of an interview between
Laou-tsze and Yang Choo.2 That interview, however, must be an
invention of Chwang. The natural impression which we receive

from all the references of Mencius is that Yang must have been
posterior-to Confucius, and that his opinions had come into vogue
only in the times of our philosopher himself. This view would be
placed beyond doubt if we could receive as genuine the chapter on
Yang, which is contained in the writings of the philosopher Lc.
And so far we may accept it, as to believe that it gives the sentiments
which were attributed to him in the Ist century before our era.
The leading principle ascribed to him by Mencius nowhere appears
in itin so many words, but the general tenour of his language is
entirely in accordance with it. This will appear from from the
following specinens:—

“Yang Choo said, ‘A hundred years are the extreme limit of longevity; and not one man in
a thousand enjoys such a period of life. Suppose the case of one who does so:—infancy, borne in
the arms, and doting old age, will nearly occupy the half; what is forgotten in sleep, and what is
lost in the waking day, will nearly occupy the half; pain and sickness, sorrow and bitterness,
losses, anxieties, and fears, will nearly occupy the half. ‘There may remain ten years or so; but
I reckon that not even in them will be found an hour of smiling self-abandonment, without the
shadow of solicitude.—What is the life of man then to be made of? What pleasure is in it?

* Is it to be prized for the pleasure of food and dress? or for the enjoyments of music and beauty?
But one cannot be always satisfied with those pleasures ; one cannot be always toying with beauty
and listening to music. And then there are the restraints of punishments and the stimulants of

» rewards; the urgings and-the repressings of fame and laws:—these make one strive restlessly for
the vain praise of an hour, and calculate on the residuary glory after death; they keep him, as
with body bent, on the watch against what his ears hear and his eyes see, and attending to the
right and the wroug of his conduct and thoughts. In this way he loses the real pleasure of his

1 75 2R. X F p: 2 See HE F. AE Fa 7 qi. the am =, at the end.

3 Dt, Morrison says of Léé (Dict., char. ):—' Léé-tsze, an eminent writer of the Taou sect;
lived about the same time as Laou-tsze, the founder of the sect. (m.c. 585.)' Lëws Works are
published, with the preface of Lew Heang written B.c. 13. Heang says Lét was a native of Ching

Hp, and a contemporary. of duke Muh dé or i. But Muh’s reign extended from Bc. 625
“to 604. There is evidently a gross anachronism “somewhere. Heang goes on to speak of Lüv's
Writings, specifying the chapter on Yang Choo, in which there are references to Confucius and
his acknowledged fame. Another of Léé’s chapters is all devoted to Confucius’ sayings and doings,
—This is not the place to attempt an adjustment of the difficulties. The chapter about Yang
Choo was current in Lew Heang's time, and we may cull from it to illustrate the character of the
man.

96]

SECT. 1.] THE OPINIONS OF YANG CHOO. [PROLEGOMENA

years, and cannot allow himself for a moment.—In what does he differ from an individual mana-
cled and fettered in an inner prison? The people of high antiquity knew both the shortness of
life, and how suddenly and completely it might be closed by death, and therefore they obeyed the
movements of their hearts, refusing not what it was natural for them to like, nor seeking to avoid
uny pleasure that occurred to them. They paid no heed to the incitements of fame; they enjoyed
themselves according to their nature; they did not resist the common tendency of all things to
sclf-enjoyment; they cared not to be famous after death. They managed to keep clear of punish-
ment ; as to fame and praise, being first or last, long life or short life, these things did not come
into their calculations." "4 ` ]

“Yang Choo said, ‘Wherein people differ is the matter of life; wherein they agree is death.
While they are alive, we have the distinctions of intelligence and stupidity, honourableness and
meanness ; when they are dead, we have so much stinking rottenness decaying away :—this is the
common lot. Yet intelligence and stupidity, honourableness and meanness, are not in one's power;
neither is that condition of putridity, decay, and utter disappearance. A man’s life js not in his
own hands, nor is his death; his intelligence is not his own, nor is his stupidity, nor his honour-
ableness, nor his meanness. All are born and all die ;—the intelligent and the stupid, the hon-
ourable and the mean. At ten years old some die; at a hundred years old some die. The virtu-
ous and the sage die; the ruffian and the fool also die. Alive, they were Yaou and Shun; dead they
were so much rotten bone. Alive they were Kéé and Chow; dead, they were so much rotten bone.
Who could know any difference between their rotten bones? While alive, therefore, let us hasten
to make the best of life; what leisure have we to be thinking of any thing after death 2'"5

Jt BS BE pr Sk Ep s ABS ORO BEES A
uuo d. JL) dm S XE uon im E
j i

p

Ded
SE ct

d.

e+
duis

ME
ESO

SETS

+

St
i-
d
u
a
F

INER
Euseb dE

MAS
E:

und
-— i

SEND

SENE
Sars
NE

PNR ON SESE =

>
`
[eti
B

3

NE
Sit Sia SSS

PS

P

1 he ATF
o
v

HENA

m
RA

v

-
-
v

Sr

iu
its

Es
The

 i

NH
ev
BABS
SAE

xR

ARRENA

uL
Tr

X

«i D

Z

Ly

-

wy
Ft
ae
AB By Br BE ARIS Ho
mE pi Re Pr Se PT HE PE Bg wr JE UF PI REAR
Kj 4E JE RE KS SR te Iv IL tb tg
KS OR We ATA o xL SALE uL de BA.
"HEURES UAE — 25 We d TES BL nes to in DR
EP fo ok E et, 3E GE AE AE BAD Ao GR js
4 Bim JE TBI —Br SET RA
ELSE A BAN SSR It JB aE
RHI ABA WARS M EG K
X vb ME: Fi HT
AE A d IE

vex
dac
SER

H
E
X
Sm

3
EN

a
mg
Lt

sa

g
NH
EAE
e
en
BL
E
C
v
—

x

-
N
4

awk
ES
mE

geg

rge

HRY

T SHEDS
Si

A
RD
SS
eg

v

EEE el
Ee

EZGNG
ces
EN

na:
=
E
A
Beane
WT n ad uko
Mm
¢
n
C
I
NH

SR
ivi Eas

BE

W
zu
N

Ha
pi
rol

cs
no
NT
P
—
Volt
Ari
NL p T
Tir Goa
CUN

(x
-

d

i

PROLEGOMENA, YANG CHOO AND MIH TEIH, (or. ur

* Mäng-sun Yang asked Yang-tsze, saying, ‘Here is a man who sets a high value on his life,
and takes loving care of his body, hoping that he will not die:—does he do right’? ‘There is no
such thing as not dying,’ was the reply. ‘But if he does so, hoping for long lite, is he right?’
Yang-tsze answered, * One cannot be assured of long life. Setting value upon life will not preserve
it; taking care of the body will not make it greatly better. And, in fact, why should long life he
made of? There are the five feelings with their likings and dislikings,—now as in old time;
there are the four limbs, now at ease, now in danger,—now as in old time; there are the various ex-
‘periences of joy aud sorrow,--now as in old time; there are the various changes from order to
disorder, and from disorder to order,—now as in old time:—all these things I have heard of, aud
seen, and gone through. A hundred years of them would be more than enough, and shall X wish
the p2in protracted through a longer life?’ Mang-sun said, ‘If it be so, early death is better
thar/long life. Let a man go to trample on the pointed steel, or throw himself into the caldron
or flames, to get what he desires Yaug-tsze answered, ‘No. Being once born, take your life as
it comes, anfi endure it; and seeking to enjoy yourself as you desire, so await the approach of
death. When you are about to die, treat the thing with indifference and endure it; and seeking to
accomplish your departure, so abandon yourself to annihilation, Both death and life should be
treated with indifference; they should both be endured:—why trouble one's-self about earliness or
lateness in connection with them?’ "6 '

“ K'in-tsze asked Yang Choo, saying, ‘If you could benefit the world by parting with one hair
of your body, would you do it?’ ‘The world is not to be benefited by a hair,’ replied Yang. The
other urged, * But suppose it could be, what would you do?’ To this Yang gave no answer, and
K‘in went out, and reported what had had passed to Mang-sun. Yang. Mung-sun said, ‘You do
not understand our Master’s mind:—let me explain it to you. If by enduring a slight wound in
the flesh, you could get, ten thousand pieces of gold, would you endure it?’ ‘I would? ‘If by
cutting off one of your limbs, you could get a kingdom, would you do it?’ Kn was silent; and
after a little, Mang-sun Yang resumed, ‘To part with a hair is a slighter matter than to receive a
wound in the flesh, and that again is a slighter matter than to lose a limb:—that you can discern.
But consider:—A hair may be multiplied till it become as important as the piece of flesh, and the

LEVELS b A f uE f
VY rra

X

SBE

dy

Bl
HR
5

-

e

cS Rea

7 xh ox 55 6

ANE E Z RFEA EA ir R R Ni IAE
DX FEL H ta TA ESAE UR EE
-BRE HZ TF BA S. El. BEA aA HE
ER I A EE EEUU S:
— ffi BR A EE As RS Fe ee i HE He
-E dp Mh ie as Er A HAEE ELSE EL Z5 A TES E
UE SR eT ERSBPSq EG. ZA
us 2 LS C Hi — F de feb P for JU LY JE DL
Be SU ade EL aif 6 AB HE ain Bk OS ak oe BB Se BEAN
f ul CM EAA MAR SAR

tr Th Bp — Jt SMW ABB, fa AE I,

Wh
or

M
D

dei
=
UE

Tz
em

DH eS

o

ci. [ ERER
x
RENES

=

BeII-G
Jis

GESXNSUHENIBS

-

zb
ou
m
REP
S

ee
[Xe BE
SgenEN HESS

of

SE
BTH

S

ENESE S
HSNI

SHS
HSE SS Eu

fia] A

ee — n m i,
EPUEXA E AER, fit A
WUJLIS ae on ek Fas Oe th ae RO uy
98] Jr K, FL hii AE

SECT. L] THE OPINIONS OF YANG CHOO. [PROLEGOMENA’

piece of flesh may be multiplied till it becomes as important asa limb. A single hair is just one
of the ten thousand portions of the body ;—why should you make light of it?’ K‘in-tsze replied, ‘I
cannot answer you. If I could refer your words to Laou Tan or Kwan Yin, they would say that
you were right; but if I could refer my words to the great Yu or Mih Teih, they would say that I
was right, Ming-sun Yang, on this, turned round, and entered into conversation with his disciples
on another subject."7

“Yang Choo said, ‘The empire agrees in considering Shun, Yu, Chow-kung, and Confucius, to
have been the most admirable of men, and in considering Kéé and Chow to have been the most
wicked. `

“t Now, Shun had to plough the ground on the south of the Ho, and to play the potter by th
Luy lake. His four limbs had not even a temporary rest; for his mouth and belly he could not
find pleasant food and warm clothing. No love ef his parents rested upon him; no affection of his
brothers and sisters. When he was thirty years old, he had not been able to get the permission
of his parents to marry. When Yaou at length resigned to him the throne, he was advanced in age;
his wisdom was decayed; his son Shang-keun proved without ability; and be had finally to resign
the throne to Yu. Sorrowfully came he to his death. Of all mortals never was one whose life
was so worn out and empoisoned as his. K‘win was required to reduce the deluged land to order;
and when his labours were ineffectual, he was put to death on mount Yu, and Yu, Ais son, had to
undertake the task, and servé his enemy. All his energies were spent on his labours with the
land; a child was born to him, but he could not foster it; he passed his door without entering;
his body became bent and withered; the skin of his hands and feet became thick and callous.
When at length Shun resigned to him the throne, he lived ina low, mean house, while his sacri-
ficial apron and cap were elegant. Sorrowfully came he to his death. Of all mortals never was one
whose life was so saddened and embittered as his. On the death of king Woo, Ais son, king Shing
was young and weak. Chow-kung had to undertake all the imperial duties. The duke of Shaou
was displeased, and evil reports spread through the empire. Chow-kung had to reside threé years
in the east; he slew his elder brother, and banished his younger; scarcely did he escape with his
life. Sorrowfully came he to his death. Of all mortals never was one whose life was so full of
hazards and terrors as his. Confucius understood the ways of the ancient emperors and kings.
He responded to the invitations of the princes of his time. The tree was cut down over him in
Sung; the traces of his footsteps were removed in Wei; he was reduced to extremity in Shang and

ft n mmu
ETES

Hp E

z
>
1
"
Hy

iN
3
T

 Fra NEN

E:
Mica Sg OREN

SE
=
Æ

i

t

“WHER

SS HH SGP AR ERN T 2H

x
E
Ean

pis:

cz
rd

POSE
EEA

o

4

-
-

> MESURE HS
Cone ye

-

WBN

-
E.
-
o
e”

HREN
SH Ss
IR SS Sd EHNE
SENET
Ded
COE REED

=

&
N
c

SHSASHS

F

jia H

 d a

REPRE AEE REX xk

M .* EU x) E HE
ft : ji ME a 3 z 7 . Tu

[3 py E R HY A jj

Bal ue +h

is T inj a

ni
E
-

1
j

-

IKIF]
J

RNR

Say

M

v
.
vr v
CST
ec
v

Rea
SRE,

SHH Ee
X Baa

SE Beall zi ss e pl
-

SH ERR

NEE AH aS wes
NAA SS ER

ARASH SSS

WES
$F] Ses

-
-

XN
SEE AEE SS SEA dalli

EKJS

VES

ne
ES
CERAR Ke

e
Cctv

el
(i=)
[C

FROLEGOMENA.] ` YANG CHOO AND MII TEIII. [en. nt.

Chow; he was surrounded in Ch‘in and Ts‘ae; he had to bend to the IIead of the Ke family; he
was disgraced by Yang Hoo. Sorrowfully came he to his death. Of all mortals never was one
whose life was so agitated and hurried as his.

“< Those four sages, during their life, had not a single day's joy. Since their death they have
had a grand fame that will last through myriads of ages. But that fame is what no one who cares
for what is real would choose. Celebrate them ;—they do not know it. Reward them;—they do
net know it. Their fame is no more to them than to the trunk of a tree or a clod of earth.

“s On the other hand, Kéé came into the accumulated wealth of many generations; to him belong-
ed the honour of the imperial seat; his wisdom was enough to enable him to set at defiance all
below; his power was enough to shake the empire. He indulged the pleasures to which his eyes
and ears prompted him; he carried out whatever it caine into his thoughts to do. Brightly came
he to his death. Of all mortals never was one whose life was so luxurious and dissipated as his.
Similarly, Chow came into the accumulated wealth of many generations; to him belonged the
honour of the imperial seat; his power enabled him to do whatever he would; his will was every-
where obeyed ; he indulged his feelings in all his palaces; he gave the reins to his lusts through
the long night; he never made himself bitter by the thought of propriety and righteousness.
Brightly came he to his destruction. Of all mortals never was one whose life was so abandoned
as his.

* €These two villains, during their life, had the joy of gratifying their desires. Since their death,
they have had the evil fame of folly and tyranny But the reality of enjoyment is what no
fame can give. Reproach them:—they do not know it. Praise them;—they do not know it.
Their W fame is no more to them than to the trunk of a tree, or to a clod of earth.

* "To the four sages all adiniration is given; yet were their lives bitter to the end, and their
common lot was death. To the two villains all condemnation is given; yet their lives were pleasant
to the last, and their common lot was likewise death. "8

3. The above passages are sufficient to show the character of
Yang Choo’s mind and of his teachings. It would be doing injustice
to Epicurus to compare Yang with him, for though the Grecian
philosopher miade happiness the ‘chief end of human pursuit, he
taught also that * we cannot live pleasurably without living virtu-
ously and justly.” The Epicurean system is, indeed, unequal to the

2309 RARE Ta EG E

U

T
ga.
T
SN

E
RN
Els

 SE
RRN ME X

`~
7

4
-

rm

44 XT z^
TE v jr à

°-
-

Bie
m
fe
rr Ee ee a

WERE NE
SHS ASE

ENAR
SEN

Deore

Seite
See
SEE
*

iN

AGI
mil
x
esoee WN
SESE

m

7 ote

Sz
DSONGEGE

SWAF
\OHEWWIES
guts hott} S Shae

by
ÉFERS

EECUEWN
eu

pou NECI
à D fik HK, ix Ie
r AR ` HE jae py

wS

IRNEK]
w

Ne
=
Xe:

Wr
5

NINE
B

i

E

Ef
1 m H 4v UL NE di 25 Jia
DPERPEPUETESELEEEN
SE oe GS SEE LS HO I
3 4
ws

ES EGike
=

X
zh
8

ASS

Nr
EINE
X

gx

Mis
ss
zie
NC

Woy,

SECT. 1L] THE OPINIONS OF YANG CHOO: [PROLEGOMENA,

capacity, and far below the highest complacencies of human nature;
but it is widely different from the reckless contempt of all which is
esteemed good and great that defiles the pages where Yang is made
to tell his views.

We are sometimes reminded by him of fragmentary utterances in
the Book of Ecclesiastes.—“ In much wisdom is much grief; and he
that inereaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow.” “ As it happeneth to
the fool, so it happeneth even to me; and why was I then more wise?
Then I said in my heart, that this also is vanity. For there is no
remembrance of the wise more than of the fool for ever; seeing that
which now is in the days to come shall all be forgotten. And how
dieth the wise man? As the fool. Therefore I hated life; because
the work thàt is wrought under the sun is grievous to me: for all is
vanity and vexation of spirit." “There is a man whose labour is in
wisdom, and in knowledge, and,in equity....All his days are sorrows,
and his travail grief; yea, his heart taketh not rest in the night:—
this is also vanity. There is nothing better for a man than that he
should eat and drink, and that he should make his soul.enjoy good
in his labour.” “That which befalleth the sons of men befalleth
beasts; even one thing befalleth them: as the one dieth, so dieth the
other; yea, they have all one breath; so that a man hath no preemi-
nence over a beast: for all is vanity. All go to one place; all are

. of the dust, and all turn to dust again....Wherefore I perceive that

. there is nothing better than that a man should rejoice in his own
Works; for that is his portion: for who shall bring him to see what
shall be after him?"

But those thoughts were suggestions of evil from which the He-
brew Preacher recoiled in his own mind; and he put them on record
only that he might give their antidote along with them. He van-
quished them by his faith in God; and so he ends by saying, “Let
us hear the conclusion of the whole matter.—Eear God, and keep
His commandments: for this is the whole duty of man. For God
shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whe- -
ther it be good, or whether it be evil.” Yang Choo has no redeem-
ing qualities His reasonings contain no elements to counteract the
poison that isinthem. He never rises to the thought of God. There
are, he allows, such ideas as those of propriety and ‘righteousness,
but the effect of them is merely to embitter and mar the enjoyment

101] * 58145

PROLEGOMENA. 7 YANG CHOO AND MIH TEIR. for. m.

of life. Fame is but a phantom which only the fool will pursue. It
is the same with all at death. There their being ends. After that
there is but so much putridity and rottenness. With him therefore
the conclusion of the whole matter is:—“ Let us eat and drink; let us
live in pleasure; gratify the ears and eyes; get servants and maidens,
music, beauty, wine; when the day is insufficient, carry it on through
the night; EACH ONE FOR HIMSELF.”

Mencius might well say that if such “licentious talk” were not
arrested, the path of benevolence and righteousness would be stopped
up. If Yang's principles had been entertained .by the nation, every
bond of society would have been dissolved. All the foundations of
order would have been destroyed. Vice would have become rampant,
and virtue would have been named, only to be scorned. There
would have remained for the entire State only what Yang saw in
store for the individual man—“ putridity and rottenness.” Doubtless
it was owing to Mencius opposition that the foul and dangerous
current was stayed. He raised up against it the bulwark of human
nature formed for virtue. He insisted on benevolence, righteous-
ness, propriety, fidelity, as the noblest attributes of man’s conduct.
More was needed, but more he could not supply. If he had had a
living faith in God, and had been in possession of His revealed will,
the present state of China might have been very different. Ie was
able to warn his countrymen of the gulph into which Yang Choo
would have plunged them; but he could direct them in the way of
_ truth and duty only imperfectly. He sent them into the dark cave
of their own souls, and back to the vague lessons and imperfect ex-
amples of their sages; and China has staggered on, waxing feebler
and feebler, to the present time. Her people need to be directed
above themselves and beyond the present. When stars shine out to
them in heaven and from eternity, the empire will perhaps renew
its youth, and go forward from strength to strength.

SECT. 11.] THE OPINIONS OF MIH TEIH. [PROLEGOMENA.

SECTION II.

` THE OPINIONS OF MIH TEIH.

1. Very different from Yang Choo was Mih Teih. They stood at
the opposite poles of human thought and sentiment; and we may
wonder that Mencius should have offered the same stern opposition
to the opinions of each of them. He did well to oppose the doctrine
whose watchword was—'Each one for himself; was it right to
denounce, as equally injurious, that which taught that the root of all
social evils is to be traced to the want of mutual love? l

It is allowed that Mih was' a native and officer of the State of
Sung; but the time when he lived is a matter of dispute. Sze-ma
Ts‘een says that some made him to be a contemporary of Confucius,
and that others placed him later. He was certainly later than Con-
fucius, to whom he makes many references, not always compliment-
ary, in his writings. In one of his Treatises, moreover, mention is
made of Wan-tsze,? an acknowledged disciple of Tsze-hea, so that he
must have been very little anterior to Mencius. This is the impres-
sion also which I receive from the references to him in our philoso-
pher.

In Lew Hin’s third catalogue the Mihist writers form a subdivi-
sion. Six of them are mentioned, including Mih himself, to whom

` 11 p'een, or Books, are attributed. So many were then current un-
der his name; but 18 of them have since been lost. He was an

* vriginalthinker. He exercised a bolder: judgment on things than

Confucius or any of his followers. Antiquity was not so sacred to

him, and he did not hesitate to condemn the literati —the orthodox

—for several of their doctrines and practices. l

Two of his peculiar views are adverted to by Mencius, and vehe-
mently condemned. The one is about the regulation of funerals,
where Mih contended that a spare simplicity should be the rule.3

On that I need not dwell. The other is the doċtrine of “ Universal

a BILE DY, se FHF rg at tne end. 2 EF
103]

PROLEGOMENA, J THE OPINIONS OF YANG CIIOO. [ou. no

Love." A lengthy exposition of this remains in the Writings which
go by Mih’s name, though it is not from his own pen, but that of
‘a disciple. Such as it is, with all its repetitions, I give a translation
of it. My readers will be able, after perusing it, to go on with me
to consider the treatment which the doctrine received at the hands
of Mencius.

UNIVERSAL LOVE. PART I.

It is the business of the sages to effect the good goyernment of the empire. They must know,
therefore, whence disorder and confusion arise, for without this knowledge their object cannot
be effected. We may compare them to a physician who undertukes to cure a man’s disease :—he
must ascertain whence the disease has arisen, and then he can assail it with effect, while, with-
out such knowledge, his endeavours will be in vain. Why should we except the case of those
who have to regulate disorder from this rule? They must know whence it has arisen, and then
they can regulate it.

It is the business of the sages to effect the good government of the empire. They must examine
therefore into the cause of.disorder; and when they do so they will find that it arises from the
want of mutuallove. When a minister and a son are not filial to their sovereign and their father,
this is what is called disorder. A son loves himself, and does not love his father;-—he therefore
wrongs his father and advantages himself: a younger brother loves bimself, and does not love his
elder brother;—he thérefore wrongs his elder brother, and advantages himself: a minister loves
himself, and does not love his sovereign;—he therefore wrongs his sovereign, and advantages him-
self :—all these are cases of what is called disorder. Though it be the father who is not kind to
his son, or the elder brother who is not kind to his younger brother; or the sovereign who is not
gracious to his minister:—the case comes equally under the general name of disorder, The father
loves himself, and does not love his son;—he therefore wrongs his son, and advantages himself:
the elder brother loves himself, and does not love his younger brother;—he therefore wrongs his

BEL US Hi te wR ah te SS ol e
BL 4m pl da xk p SA
Z d dA HN
A

a
g
E
E
EU
Biz NEE
x>g

m
SEMRAL

UDER E

<
-
X

He

X
HN
x
TEAR SP REND

wor
LI
we,

(Neu NR
E
RAT

N
fo.

ZETA

AID
SAH

LIE x Ri e B

o
uU.
=

: i
E ap a a at as Tala S
z RE d 7 i ARE Z,

Jaj A

E
E E. 3 Jm Xu gu
F3 33 "NS a T pr BF B

43 ER P Fe represents a hand grasping two stalks sf grain. 3fr zm * is *a love that grasps
or unites many in its embrace’ I do not know how to render it bester. nae by“ universal love?

Mencius and the literati generally find the idca of exulity in it also, and aft "ANS is with them—
‘To love all equally, ie >

: 104]

3

`

BA
pa

RE
T
Se
MB
N
sa

SNe
EE

pau
EE
=

g m
j mn

L]

SECT, IL] THE OPINIONS OF MIH TEIH, [PROLEGOMENA.

younger brother, and advantages himself; the sovereign loves himself, and does not love his minis-
ter ;—he therefore Wrongs his minister, and advantages himself. How do these things come to
pass? They all arise from the want of mutual love. Take the case of any thief or robber :—it is
just the same with it. The thief loves his own house, and does not love his neighbour’s house ;—
he therefore steals from’ his neighbour’s house to advantage his own: the robber loves his own
person, and does not love his neighbour ;—he therefore does violence te his neighbour to advan-
tage himself. How is this? It all arises from the want of mutual love. Come to the case of great
officers throwing each other's families into confusion, and of princes attacking one another's
States :—it is just the same with them. The great officer loves his own family, and does not love
his neighbour's;—he therefore throws his neighbour's family into disorder to advantage his own:
the prince loves his own State, and does not love his neighbour's;—he therefore attacks his
neighbour's State to advantage his own. Ali disorder in the empire has the same explanation.
When we examine into the cause of it, it is found to be the want of mutua! Iove.

Suppose that universal, mutual love prevailed throughout the empire;—if men loved others as
they love themselves, disliking to exhibit what was unfilial...... 1 And moreover would there
be those who were unkind? Looking on their sons, younger brothers, and ministers as themselves,
and disliking to exhibit what was unkind...... the want of filial duty would disappear. And
would there be thieves and robbers? When every man regarded his neighbour’s house as his
own, who would be found to steal? When every one regarded his neighbour's person as his own,
who would be found to rob? ‘Thieves and robbers would disappear. And would there be great
oflicers throwing one another's families into confusion, and princes attacking one another's States?
When officers regarded the families of others as their own, what one would make confusion?
When princes regatded other States as their own, what one would begin an attack? Great officers
throwing one anothor's families into confusion, and Princes attacking one another’s States, would
disappear.

If, indeed, universal, mutual love prevailed throughout the empire; one State not attacking
another, and one family not throwing another into confusion; thieves and robbers nowhere exist-
ing; rulers and ministers, fathers and sons, all being filial and kind:—in sion 2 condition the

GLE EL BLA RE E ik A S

RA
a

ve Oh oe A RG A a d 7

pti
GE BR

-

Es
P

EE
HE
E
it E>
M
m"

ok
CEN Et

HEM

>L
wm
WENO ERR

NG

Rp
SORS ENTE

YA

idet

SBE
igh
Nd:

we

y!
EE E:
St
Le Nil
ZW
z

ul
m
I
L -—

-
»

c
.

SERRE
iae

FADS
il
\

SÉ:
k
>E
=<

mae PRE Sh
an

-

SSMS
MASSES

i
3

v
°
-

EAEE

NIS
Ni

PRS

ESL MEE aE A
be NESS es
P
SNARE DADS REE

SAE li E ine

4
i

PA Eo
gu ni
P p e H `

BREEN Xe
aE

NR
LN Yon Si

SNARE
ib

o
v

iN
z
CHE BIN TREE

k

\ m
"

>
json;

wi
X& Xx gau ES 2
Ih Se TARR PRR db di Be BE
UR ERRERA mR L S E b
KK HEC OKI WR AA SE
PA A BL WL Se AF REL RL XL ARE

1 There are evidently some omissions and confusion here in the Chinese text.

105]

l PROLEGOMENA.] . YANG CHOO AND MIH TEIH. [em. xr. ,

empire would be well governed. On this account, how may sages, whose business it is to effect
the good government of the empire, do other than prohibit hatred and advise to love? On this
account it is affirmed that universal mutual love throughout the Empire will lead to its happy
order, and that mutual hatred leads to confusion. This was what our master, the philosopher Mih,
meant, when he said, ‘We must not but advise to the love of others.’

BAKES T BE OER J H.
x Nj PEST Pea ce ITE
eM EF Wa XO) 45 e BG B

UNIVERSAL LOVE. PART II.

Our Master, the philosopher Mih, said, ‘That which benevolent men consider to be incumbent
on them as their business, is to stimulate and promote all that will be advantagcous to the empire,
and to take away all that is injurious to it. This is what they consider to be their business,’

And what are the things advantageous to the empire, and the things injurious to it? Qur mas-
ter said, ‘The mutual attacks of State on State; the mutual usurpations of family on family;
the mutual robberies of man on man; the want of kindness on the part of the sovereign and of
loyalty on the part of the minister; the want of tenderness and filial duty between father and son:
—these, and such as these, are the things injurious to the empire.’

And from what do we find, on examination, that these injurious things an produced?1 Is it
not from the want of mutual love?

Our Master said, ‘Yes, they are produced by the want of mutual love. Here is a prince who
only knows to love his own State, and does not love his neighbour's ;—he therefore does not shrink
from raising all the power of his State to attack his neighbour. Here is the chief of a family
who only knows to love it, and does not love his neighbour’s;—he therefore docs not shrink
from raising all his powers to seize on that other family. Here is a man who only knows to love
his own person, and does not love his neighbour's;—he therefore“does not shrink from using all
his strength to rob his neighbour. Thus it happens, that the princes, not loving one another, have
their battle-fields; and the chiefs of families, not loving one another, have their mutual usurpa-

=
~n

Ss
+h

LI LI

i)

^
z

ull
H
SK:
Èz
he

>
R
=
EUN
NM
A
E
TE
hy
-A
RS
A
c CREER
yo ae (i
Ej E»

1 Ju

HSE BAH EE

~ A
I F
it

ic
s

Nd
ASNE
~
N

[i

NR
PNE

mu
ka
STIL ial hes

-

&

Yel NH
BNP RAE
n
i
OS

o
`
£

EENDENIHE

1
ind

VENRESNBENES

o

XEMENHH SE
HF
FREE NS

i

Yi

ig
EKO

$

OED

FHANN

NERA)
By
NERA
2m

-
ehe IO
=
Ver
bine

—

i

Qu
MEN
IX

j wee
Meis

i

xà

S-HCE
=

Y
ihr
X
==
—
D
M

asi
=
at =

È
EHAA
D

"
k

ET
Ye
i
E
b dE
D
$

>
NE "
7
{i
i!
X
brad
=
-
be dim

Migs NARS

“a

OF> as
Pi
^ mpm

"Ex

-
Shes
*
LT
4

2 -

ui

cuts

se mal
Bx

Vet
di

1 Here I would read, in the Chinese text, p for E sud EH for HIER EA

Jk fii E AE rie The translation is ae

106]

PA

SECT, IL] THE OPINIONS OF MIH TEIH. [PRorEcoxENA.

tions; and men, not loving one another, have their mutual robberies; and sovereigns and minis-
ters, not loving one another, become unkind and disloyal; and fathers and sons, not loving one
another, lose their affection and filial duty; and brothers, not loving ene another, contract irre-
concileable enmities. Yea, men in general not loving one another, the strong make prey of
the weak; the rich do despite to the poor; the noble are insolent to the mean; and the deceitful
impose upon the stupid. All the miseries, usurpations, enmities, and hatreds in the world, when
traced to their origin, will be found to arise from the want of mutual love. On this aecount, the
benevolent condemn it? ' `

They may condemn it; but how shall they change it?

Our Master said, ‘They may change it by universal, martual love, and by the interchange of
mutual benefits.’

How will this law of universal mutual love and the interchange of mutual benefits accomplish
this?

Our Master said, * 7t would lead to the regarding another kingdom as one's own; another family
as one’s own: another person as one’s own. That being the case, the princes, loving one another,
would have no battle-fields; the chiefs of families, loving one another, would attempt no usurpa-
tions; men, loving one another, would commit no robberies ;2 rulers and ministers, loving one ano-
ther, would be gracious and loyal; fathers and sons, loving one another, would be kind and filial;
brothers, loving one another, would be harmonious and easily reconciled. Yea, men in general! loving
one another, the strong would not make prey of the weak; the many would not plunder the
few; the rich would not insult the poor; the noble would not be insolent to the mean; and the
deceitful would not e upon the simple. The way in which all the miseries, .usurpations,

WEAR MA BA HE BN Bee BE AE EH A, ok FB
BR EL F NA

=6

Paty
oy,
r

E
+

ae R A

tS SONUHNS SMS

S
AN
Ey

A>
HENEN
2H

-

Ea

zd

v

WEG Nk

s

BIH

$3872

ARTT Nan ee E NA
Ej SES

“1
3j
e

È
Wiak Se Soe
I:

ca

=
Sau
ae
Ce

Tall -HER Wa

>

x
— (05

s
v
o

SESS BE
SEIN

-

IRR ORES SRT

k
7!

SRS RE

Se
SSeS

>»
oe
o
a

WEE ROMSAS SV SS

o

A DI SN
asus

v

pad
"

ENTE ABA
CNET.

.-
`
b

PERE HAE

Batt

2
IWY

-

ETE

HA
eats

ž
HENARE

A

Y D

x

¥

Gà

Foug

^

E
= EAR
Wa NEN AHS NENAS

E> EN

epe
Us
NE

X

aj

i

E I3t

2 The Chinese text is here very confused for several sentences. There are evidently transposi-
tions, omissions, and additions. I have ventured to correct and arrange it in the following manner:—

After FR A Hk I reaa, Ea 35. B] BBE B. FAH? 25 Rl E p^
AT He BAB eS Å IT:
E SET RH JU
th EWE 5 OH E >

JCN
HEN
NRE

3
TATE
ENS
Segun
NE
Mi
z
3
»
 NIA
= k
SK J
- d

En
NI
E iig
Sac
Sy zeta
es

k
ÈE
Niky
alll
n
H
7
N
H
E
<n
at
x
EE
E:
=
3t
Òt
=
e

- PROLEGOMENA.] ` YANG CHOO AND MIU TEIH. [cur nir.

' enmities, and hatreds in the world, may be made not to arise, is universal mutual love. On this
account, the benevolent value and praise it?

Yes; but the scholars, of the empire and superior men say, ‘ True; if there were this universal
love, it would be good. It is, however, the most difficult thing in the world,’

Our Master said, ‘This is because the scholars and superior men simply do not understand

- the advantageousness of the law, and to conduct their reasonings upon that. Take the case of
assaulting a city, or of a battle-fleld, or of the sacrificing one’s life for the sake of fame :—this is
felt by the people everywhere to be a difficult thing. Yet, if the sovereign be pleased with it,
both officers and people are able to do it:—how much more might they attain to universal mutual
love, and the interchange of mutual benefits, which is different from this! When a man loves
others, they respond to and love him; when a man benefits others they respond to and benefit him;
when a man injures others, they respond to and injure him: when a man hates others, they respond
to and hate him:—what difficulty is there in the matter? It is only that rulers will not carry
on the government on this principle, and so officers do not carry it out in their practice.

t Formerly, the duke Win of Tsin liked his officers to be badly dressed, and, therefore, they
all wore rams’ furs, a leathern swordbelt, and a cap of bleached cotton. Thus attired, they went
in to the prince’s levee, and came out and walked through the court. Why did they do this? The
sovereign liked it, and therefore the ministers did it, The duke Ling of Ts‘oo liked his officers
to have small waists, and, therefore, they all limited themselves to a single meal. They
held in their breath in putting on their belts, and had to help themselves up by means of the
wall. In the course of a year, they looked black, and as if they would die of starvation. Why
‘did they do this?3 The sovereign liked it, and, therefore, the ministers were able to do it.
Kow-ts‘een, the king of Yué, liked his ministers to be brave, and taught them to be accustomed
to be so. Ata general assembly of them, he set on fire the ship where they were, and to try
them, said, * All the precious things of Yué are here? He then ith his own hands beat a drum,
and urged them on. When they heard the drum thundering, they rushed confusedly about, and
trampled in the fire, till more thanza hundred of them perished, when he struck the gong, and
called them back.4

xu
Sha
SH

Ss
B
hs

aH

Bei
NY
ERN
NET

ut
D

.-
kay
—

d

SCRRISNEDAHERD

v

EN
RN
i
Se
E

BIS CNAN HER

o

FREE ABE ES RERBA.

v

be OS EE EER SS
SRAM

HSS Sh HaSV

Ti RR 4 Hi Hu Hj
, tk i i
Hel ry o A »

m
Nui Ya
Hote Re H

-
^
°

-
o

xl

ENHA paT
HAREE

E
t
*

SS EARNED

Ši
N

v
v
°

BESS es ApS et
HAS Sa

N
BES
sx

[4

2
—

SRE
=

\
4

zi
TE

FAS Wark} Get

r
r

DEES ee

SEMAN HERTHA
HEKRA PH Dell he

RS HH

ky
LU

ES

Pug een EN ES ER REN AGER
è

MHH
ae
ela
E
>
was
$E
=e

9 In E H nd th the second fi is plainly a misprint for faj. 4 Here a

sentence or two are wanting, to complete the ee in harmony with the two which precede.

The characters which follow— El mK Ff E d S = zi should also be expunged. I have
omitted them in the translation.

108]

SECT. 11.) n THE OPINIONS OF MIH TEIH. {FROLEGOMENA,

‘Now, little food, had clothes, and the sacrifice of life for the sake of fame ;—these are what it is.
difficult for people to approve of. Yet, when the sovercign was pleased with it, they were all able,
in those cases, to bring theniselves to them. How much more could they attain to universal mutual
love, and the interchange of mutual benefits, which is different from such things! When a man
loves others, they respond to and love him; when a man benefits others, they respond to and
benefit him; when a man hates others, they respond to and hate him; when a man injures others,
they respond to and injure him. It is only that rulers will not carry on their government on this
principle, and, so, officers do not carry it out in their practice.’ -

Yes; but now the officers and superior men say, * Granted; the universal practice of mutual love
would be good; but it is an impracticable thing. It is like taking up the T‘ae mountain, and
Aeaping with it over the Ho or the Tse) D

Our master said, ‘That is not the proper comparison for it. To take up the T'ae mountain,
and leap with it over the Ho or the 'Tse, may be called an exercise of most extraordinary strength ;
it is, in fact, what no one, from antiquity to the present time, has ever been able to do.
But how widely different from this 1s the practice of universal mutual love, and the interchange
of mutual benefits!

* Anciently, the sage kings practised this. How do we know that they did so? When Yu re-

duced the empife to order:—in the west he made the western Ho and the Joo-tow, to carry off the
waters of ICeu-sun-wang; in the north, he made the Fang-yuen, the Koo, How+che-te, and
the Tow of Foo-t‘o; setting up also the Te-ch‘oo, and chiselling out the Lung-mun, to benefit
Yen, Tae, Hoo, Mih, and the people of the western Ho; in the east, he drained the waters to Luh-
fang and the marsh of Ming-choo, reducing them to nine channels, to limit the waters of the east-
ern country, and benefit the people of K‘e-chow; and in the south, he made the Keang, the Han,
the Hwae, the Joo, the course of the eastern current, and the five lakes, to benefit King, Ts‘oo,
and Yué, the people of the wi'd south. These were the doings of Yu; and I am now for practising
the same universal mutual love.

Ti

Fl
x
a
s

v

+
=i]
$
=
uit

NE
eNi

ï
VES SNARES

y

Vr Ez.
ates

HESS Raa ESHA Rat wo
a

E
SANH

SHS HSS CRN
4E
NARS RA SESH INE]

[t

V
*
-
o

mh Hatta BISA

-

č

ERGs E
E

ASEARRÉV

v
.-

-

aN

D:

SSuNGHUENRDE

3B
SEs
Tak AR > Bl

e

£z

)

3m
SOE AME OWEN

=
=

o

BEER
HOSA

DRS

Noes
REESE

o

-
-

SHS CES ERE

uk
E
id

HED ye ERE

v
-
.-

SPEAN

v

i

Sb ty
(rur js;

Ea

“A 4
&

ZSERIES

-ox
ae
N
dd

$

*
t
wi

SS SSH LITT] dE

9

BIBENDUM

Ee
2
E
5
ASPRA EE

-

WEAN
m
=

a Past
Top
Dawe

DO TB YEE NA dS

-

= i
HERE

E

E:

» -—5b.
REA

=
EHNGSH

"Ib rcp SENE dd
hE WOE

$5

A
ini
ia

Ni
E

M iS

$

NECS
HAAREN H

DB Za
Bull

x
MEIN
N :

Ss

Ae
upg

-

BEN
BM

N
d!

un
c
Seo
[90]

PROLEGOMENA.) YANG CHOO AND MIH TEIH. [cn. 1x.

‘When king Win brought the western country to good order, his light spread, like the sun or
the moon, over its four quarters. He did not permit great States to insult small ones; he did not
permit the multitude to oppress the fatherless and the widow; he did not permit violenee and
power to take from the husbandmen their millet, pannicled millet, dogs, and swine. Heaven, as if
constrained, visited king Wan with blessing. The old and childless were enabled to complete
their years; the solitary and brotherless could yet mingle among the living; the young and pa-
rentless found those on whom they could depend, and grew up. These were the doings of king
Wan; and I am now for practising the same universal, mutual love.

‘King Woo tunneled through the Tae mountain. The Record says, ‘There is a way through
the mountain, made by me, the descendant of the kings of Chow:—I have accomplished this
great work. Ihave got my virtuous men, and rise up full of reverence for Shang, Hea, and the
tribes of the south, the east, and the north. ‘Though he has his multitudes of relatives, they are
not equal to my virtuous men. If guilt attach to the people anywhere througbout the empire, it

_ is to. be required of me, the One man.’ ‘This describes the doings of king Woo, and I am now for
practising the same universal, mutual love.d f

If, now, the rulers of the empire truly and sincerely wish all in it to be rich, and dislike any
being poor ; if they desire its good government, and dislike disorder; they ought to practise uni-
versal mutual love, and the interchange of mutual benefits. ‘Chis was the law of the sage kings;
it is the way to effect the good government of the empire; it may not but be striven after.

EXTIPSES

ES
EB

>
&

Se

EIE

T

\

H»

in

7

EM

atm

X

R

(iN:

ni
SH EEG

e

SR
ak

-

HE

4^»

x
BRR CREST
EN
—€—
is
%
gt
Mn

E
ENS

SHOR ANDES EON S

c
v

9
pip nu
AS T

v

HET
ENHL

had
AD>

v
-
tz

=
TEE
YDA
TE

Hr EISE

-

-
-
r4

PERAH ER
zi

X x
UKE
Ae \\

»
Y

Ns
eS
RE

-

KENAD Erit t Gn
1» abe AHH BERE >

e.

TAREN

v

mau
RE

d
1

GSKA ENE

X

Y
:

Bta PIRE:
RER

v
.

i]
Ruso Hc Besa Ec]
SAREE EES
2
M
E

E
y
ES
V

-

Eas SE

x
E
ARANAK

RT OHÉ e xe

5 I do not recollect to have read elsewhere of king Woo's tunneling the T‘ae mountain. In what
Mih quotes from some Record, we have sentences from different parts of the Shoo-king brought
together. The account of the labours of Yu contains names also not elsewhere found. ‘There are,

ET me AN many errors in the text.—I omit the iE sx d Ed F = EH. which follow 1T

110]

secr. 1-] THE OPINIONS OF MIH TEIH. [PROLEGOMENA,

UNIVERSAL LOVE. PART II.

Our master, the philosopher Mih, sáid, *The business of benevolent men requires that they
should strive to stimulate and promote what is advantageous to the empire, and to take away
what is injurious to it.’

Speaking, now, of the present time, what are to be accounted the most injurious things to the
empire?1 They are such as the attacking of small States by great ones; the inroads on small
families of great ones; the plunder of the weak by the strong; the oppression of the few by the
many; the scheming of the crafty against the simple; the insolence of the noble to the mean. To
the same class belong the ungraciousness of rulers,2 and the disloyalty of ministers; the unkind-
ness of fathers, and the want of filial duty on the part of sons. Yea, there is to be addeđ to these
the conduct of the mean men,3 who employ their edged w eapons and poisoned stuff, water and
fire, to rob and injure one another.

Pushing on the inquiry now, let us ask w Shencè all these injurious things arise. Isit from loving
others and advantaging others? Tt must be answered ‘No’; and it mast likewise be said, ‘They
arise clearly from hating others and doing violence to others. ‘If it be further asked whether those
who hate and do violence to others hold the principle of loving all, or that of making distinc-
tions, it must be replied, ‘They make distinctions” So then, it is this principle of making distinc.
tions between man and man, which gives rise to all that is most injurious in the empire. On this
account we conclude that that principle is wrong.

Our master said, * He who condenins others must have whereby to change them? To condemn
men, and have no means of changing them, is like saving them from fire by plunging them in
water. A man’s linguage in such a case must be improper. On this account our màster said,
‘here is the principle of loving all, to change, that which makes, distinctions.’ If, now, we ask,

Jum Lm om d A JI X. ANE EUM
El Wb tis, 3

d
vi

ES
dy

A> TI Dll - RE

VERS
4

Es
iig
Nub
TT
x

 At ERE
DEAR eas R Tae HE FH,
A 2 H, LI. d px Z A m:
dM. E EN Wa oe fas al bay ^ `

e. ERD
‘MOF

J.
rt

CHN

xL
a

o

AA
Sa ase

4
g
FAN

MT

-

BART
SN

©
-

Mr
3

=

~~
oe

EREC
SEAM

D
=
Nu
TU
x
ERE

mH
(NT RE?

M
7.

Le SSE

-

No PRSE CD
É
E

ELT

BNA HE
è

=

= =

ct SS
‘eb tke OEE
rhe SE

lj

m
T
L4
he
E
-

PHN

TEDEN e

m
SEM
Asie

M
4

un

v
-

EON GH Ns HBR Sek SY
IHRE

-

ONZRREGRE

1

:S
E
fer

SE
—
PA
Nu
Tr

v

be \ SE Butt ay
SENES

i
t5

Em
GHA
WEN S

E
=
3
=
a
n
Hi

`

HES

E

1 I suppose that the compiler—the disciple of Mih—begins to speak here. "Throughout this
part, however, the changes in the argument are indistinctly marked. 2 A Du should here

be expunged from the Chinese text. 3 X. fit should here be expunged. 4 Ltranslate
4p y by ‘clearly.’ pA is probably a misprint for HH.
111]

PROLEGOMENA.] YANG CHOO AND MIH TEIH. [cu m.

* And how is it that universal love can change the consequences of that other principle which makes
distinctions?’ the answer is, ‘If princes were as much for the States of others as for their own,
what one among them would raise the forces of his State to attack that of another ?—he is for that
other as much as for himself. If they were for the capitals of others as much as for their own,
what one would raise the forces of his capital to attack that of anotherf—he is for that as much
as for his.own. If chiefs regarded the families of others as their own, what one would lead the
power of his family to throw that of another into confusion?—he is for that other as much as for
himself. Tf, now, States did not attack, nor holders of capitals smite, one another, and if families
were guilty of no mutual aggressions, would this be injurious to the empire, or its benefit? It
must be replied, ‘This would be advantageous to the empire.’ Pushing on the inquiry, now, let
us ask whence all these benefits arise. Is it from hating others and doing violence to others? 1t
must be anwered, ‘No’; and it must likwise be said, *''hey arise clearly from loving others aud
doing good to others.” Jf it be further asked whether those who love others and do good to others
hold the principle of making distinctions between man and man, or that of loving all, it must
be replied, ‘They love all? So then it is this principle of universal mutual love which really gives
rise to all that is most beneficial to the empire. On this account we conclude that that principle
is right.5

Our master said, a little ago, ‘The business of benevolent men requires that they should strive
to stimulate and promote what is advantageous to the empire, and to take away what is injurious
to it” We have now traced the subject up, and found that it is the principle of universal love
which produces all that is most beneficial to the empire, and the principle of making distinctions
which produces all that is injurious to it. On this account what our master suid—‘ The principle

CRHURR MA NT eR RR
pr TS 5 Be dE Ba Jj Wb ab Z7 4S HEA A
ARX HEA A RH oe.
IS Ae AE Api) Sid
x En
ZW.
A) H.
fd

e^ v

HK

1
E ^

S

—

nM

my

L>

emer
\
di
L4

[ois
E

SEA
M

4

>

ar

=

‘EN>SSE
>

bales
at
ROHEBBSMEN

SNARE
MANAH

o

Syris E

zi +

LI

Mn
>
a

^
2

NT ES

v

SRE

o

(ea

D
NM

$
ER
WY
wt
E
RE
do

bie

tij
EMT €)

j
TREX

ye

(s

DSR
2

-

Ee
Fia

IN HERE UMS a
ee
E
2D
S
NL 2S

£s OX Dif

ux
exa
>
=

wy

Ri

cee
—
ws

ie
=

TT
E
,

N BED

Ss)
zs
NSBIH

v
-
te
e

RANS
h
d

, WES
X

M
EH
viti

r

EN
z IRE
5 Merc

SVS Soe

E

Ne
Gr
4

e

Mz
4

5 I here m PE Bs F Ef. and put it puis & Hy . This is required by the
preceding argument, which ends simply with d Hx} Hi iE 1i; With this transposition,
however, some other liberties must still be taken-with the next paragraph. In f VN cH EL

po Ha should evidently be 5 In the concluding phrase— Hi aS x dt bo, the adoption of

an old gloss, that 44+ should be 24, enables us to make sense of it. Wh: at follows, from A

i LES down to Bl x dad H ES is confuséd and difücult. fil. in fit KR T Z Hil.

is a misprint for ; but there must be other corruptions and omissions as well. One can sve the
author's drift; and 1 jus tried to translate accordiugly.

112}

is

SECT, IL) THE OPINIONS OF MIH TEHI. : [PROLEGOMENA,

of making distinctions between man and man is wrong, and the principle of universal love is
right,’ turns out to be correct as the sides of a square.

If, now, we just desire to promote the benefit of the empire, and select for that purpose the
principle of universal love, then the acute ears and piercing eyes of people will hear and see for
one another; and the strong limbs of people will move and be ruled for one another; and men of
principle will instruct one another. It will come about that the old, who have neither wife nor
children, will get supporters who will enable them to complete their years; and the ‘young and
weak, who have no. parents, will yet find helpers that shall bring them up. On the contrary, if
this principle of universal love is held not to: be correct, what benefits will arise from such a view?
What can be the reason that the scholars of the empire, whenever they hear of this prineiple of
universal love, go on to condemn it? ‘Plain as the case is, their words in condemnation of this
principle do not stop;—they say, ‘It may be good, but how can it be carried into practice?’

Our master said, *Supposing that it could not be practised, it seems hard to go on likewise to
condemn it, But how can it be good, and yet incapable of being put into practice?'

Let us bring forward two instances to test the matter.—Let any one suppose the case of two
individuals, the one of whom shall hold the principle of making distinctions, and the other shall
hold the principle of universal love. The former of these will say, ‘Mow can I be for the person
of my friend as much as for my own person? how can I be for the parents of my friend as much
as for my own parents?' Reasoning in this way, he may see his friend hungry, but he will not
feed him; cold, but-he will not clothe him; sick, but he will not nurse him; dead, but he will not
bury him. Such will be the language of the individual holding the principle of distinction, and
such will be his conduct. The language of the other, holding the principle of universality, will
be different, and also his conduct. He will say, ‘I have heard that he who wishes to play a lofty
part among men, will be for the person of his friend as much as for his own person, and for the
parents of his friend as much as for his own parents. It is only thus that he can attain his dis-
tinction? ‘Reasoning in this way, when he sees his friend hungry, he will feed him; cold, he will
clothe him;-sick, he will nurse him; dead, he will bury him. Such will be the language of him
who holds the principle of universal love, and such will be his conduct.

YK BALM EESE DE. aE He Me VA ite,

PASE, LDESISCERIE:
Xe] Jt © HA Y

-
v

SHED SE
SIS Wa SEH

See
NESEN-W
pases Sess Ty he

SEO Witte
separ

ne
KESH

az
zu
=e

o
-

PANES
SEMIS

E teehee

NDS SNR
SES
PSS

PRESE

EHR A HE

E

vi

PREND ER
nisi

scene

-

BEI
zx

gi
=> ABIES

SSS HAY
Boise

Sols)

\
4

h
V

BEC EE BE ull

dXHOALM UE

SEM
ES

NT

-
SE:
*

\ Hi
Li

DELENE

aR CSRS DH xd ENS
2 Sb SEALE ATEN

3
T

Ld

Sita

(NORRIS
EE

-

ST rS
call ESE NE

Sas

St
DESH AR

AASHI
ENTER
bun

 ve
pv

-

\

4
ic
f

H
E

ZB NH EE Stas

L4

s
Ex

Tg
She NN

r

te eH
> (EE

E
SE
ee

t

ERRORS AE

B

ARS
Y
THESES

V
¢

REDE ARR
DS
SH E

T
OÓ
co

ad

PROLEGOMENA,] [cu. n.

YANG CHOO AND MIH TEIH.

The words of the one of these individuals are a condemnation of those of the other, and their
conduct is directly contrary. Suppose now that their words are perfectly sincere, and that their
conduct will be carried out,—that their words and actions will correspond like the parts of a token,
every word being carried into effect; and let us proceed to put the following questions on the case:—
Here is a plain in the open country, and an officer, with coat of mail, gorget, and helmet, is about
to take part in a battle to be fought in it, where the issue, whether for life or death, cannot be
foreknown; or here is an officér about to be dispatched on a distant commission from Pa to Yue,
or from Ts‘e to King, where the issue of the journey, going and coming, is quite uncertain :—on
either of these suppositions, to whom will the officer entrust the charge of his house, the support
of his parents, and the care of his wite and children?—to one who holds the principle of universal
love? or to one wlio holds that which makes distinctions? I apprebend there is no one under
heaven, man or woman, however stupid, though he may condemn the principle of universal
love, but would at such a time make one who holds it the subject of his trust. ‘This is in words
to condemn the principle, and when there is occasion to choose between it and the opposite, to
approve it;—words and conduct are here in contradiction. I do not know how it is, that, through-
out the empire, scholars condeinn the principle of universal love, whenever they hear it.6

Plain as the case is, their words in condemnation of it do not cease, but they say, ‘This prin-
ciple may suffice perhaps to guide in the choice of an officer, but it will not guide in the choice
of a sovereign.’7

Let us test this by taking two illustrations:—Let any one suppose the case of two sovereigns,
the one of whom shall hold the principle of mutual love, and the other shall hold the principle
which makes distinctions. In this case, the latter of them will say, ‘How can I be as much for
the persons of all my people as for my own? ‘This is much opposed to human feelings. The life
of man upon the earth is but a very brief space; it may be compared to the rapid movement of à

n

ud

mt
za

We tb, Be ii E ap HE

gs

r 11 XZ,

Ñ a J^

LE JE: A E S EEZ aI EE I
m) E Eon eA US Be Pau db
Fe ie WRTA CP GE RA UL 2$ 25 f
Hou A AL ECKE Oh Se a g
ye ME IERRA 18 PARA H di w^ — Z,
Jug Ý ran i, fr AS E ren DA HI Fe BR OK SIE ET.
a Ae ELI eA XE REL VI OTT T uw $6
HEU BO RU i Z th iy RUN EE:
We dx d — BY ER Dow Asst ERA DU Cb EA A DE Hil
Nm With < mm mE 2 EN fe v EH Bü mp c.
oe AE EGE FE pim Ht EL TE HX up TOME
Xo o Oe ELDGEOGR WEEDS E BUSTT AH E
Pet mMeCURSURKRSH SERS
aoa IEE a TRE
ERE H H j S A É 4 ^ 2 19 ey x
tHE 6 VAG AR ae IE ERR UP Bk ee e,

6 From F ES F ET JH mi ^ Li down to this, the general meaning is plain enough.
But there must be several corruptions in the text. ik for instance, after yj AT AA dE
3E. is, plainly, for E 7 Here there should follow, *Our master said,' aud some observations
introductory to the two illustrations of the sovereigns. This has been lost, however, and all that

remains of it is the solitary Y 5 in -F- F A jx pne xr ZG
114]

SECT. 11.] THE OPINIONS OF MIH TEIH. . [PROLEGOMENA,

team of horses whirling past any particular spot. Reasoning in this way, he may see his people
huugry, but he will not feed them; cold, but he will not clothe them; sick, but he will not nurse
them; dead, but he will not bury them. Such will be the language of the sovereign who holds
the principle of distinctions, and such will be his conduct. Different will be the language and
conduct of the other who holds the principle of universal love. He will say, ‘I have heard that he
who would show himself a virtuous and intelligent sovereign, ought to:make his people the first
consideration, and think of himself only after them.’ Reasoning in this way, when he sees any of
the people hungry, he will feed them; cold, he will clothe them; sick, he will nurse them ; dead, he
wil bury them. Such will be the language of the sovereign who holds the principle of universal
love, and such his conduct, If we compare the twe sovereigns, the "words of the one are con-.
demnatory of those of' the other, and their actions are opposite. Let us suppose that their
words are equally sincere, and that their actions will be made good,—that their words and actions
will correspond like the parts of a token, every word being carried into effect; and let us proceed
to put the following questions on the case:—Here is a year when a pestilence walks abroad among
the people; many of them suffer from cold and famine; multitudes die in the ditches and water- `
channels. Ifat such a time they might make an election between'the two sovereigns whom we
have supposed, which would they prefer? I apprehend there is no one under heaven, however stu-
pid, though he may condemn the principle of universal love, but would at such a time prefer to
be under the sovereign who holds it. This is in words to condemn the principle, and, when there
is occasion to choose between it and the opposite, to approve it;—words and conduct are here in
contradiction. I do not know how it is that throughout the empire scholars condemn the princi-
ple of universal love, whenever they hear it.

Plain as the case is, their words in condemnation of it do not cease; but they say, ‘This univ er-
sal, mutual love is benevolent and righteous. That we grant, but how can it be practised? "The
jlupraeticability of it is like that of taking up the T‘ae mountain, and leaping with it over the
Keéang or the Ho. We do, indeed, desire this universal Iove, but it is an impracticable thing !’

Our master said, ‘To take up the Te mountain, and leap with it over the Keang or the Ho, is

T RRE L BE SARRE A
E H H IE X B HE 1
LER SS
Ei, t,
sk c jit
EN Wy E

=z od x
2j RA.

p

ox
Ix

aN
 FRENZ R

ge z

eae

SQ FERRE
ees
xs

See

-

SEHR DERE

z]
gi i>

-

giulia

zj ea

T

n
H^

e

Rozas

Ai
bh

eH

-
`
^

Se Mn EA a

Y

(NX EE

^. <<

-

ü
>

^o

Cea
Boy LH

i

T

i
TTS
ARRES

NT
4
‘Bc
c
gemi
:

mV Eat

L4

S
we
=M

*
-

li ML xi
T THT Br Shei
Spee ( NERS

-
o

aa
Re
Es:

ae Meee
x

im

AXE SEDES RU EE

>

Sr
XN
NE

i
i

pe
HERE

ait
TEL AER S

1

REO) Eal
Nik ee 3r

NAE
EE
SSRN

.-
-
v

m
Qx
T.
s

-
v

ENMANE

Me
xe
BS
=

\ Ache

o

1

(SESS

È
cri
E

-

pen

ga
2s

rH
a era

EXPE

-
-

Gral (NOS

zh
a ole Sad Ig ENC
=

TA ZESE-H
c

m
SS ERE ES REDE TM SS

ES
iN
E

Ex SEE

t

SAS

i
&

(Are ull 2t

zx
E»
ws

Ed
Soe SU SES Sd Bl
ENN

(NzEUETH REESE

È
H SH ull

x
SVS
NS

TE
Sth

pad
=
an
[

FROLEGOMENA.] YANG CHOO AND MIH TEM. [en. m.

a thing which never has been done, from the highest antiquity to the present time, since men
were; but the exercise of mutual love and the interchange of mutual benefits,—this was practised
by the ancient sages and six kings.’

How do you knew that the ancient sages and the six kings practised this?

Our master said, ‘I was not of the same age and time with them, so that I could myself
have heard their voices, or seeh their faces; but I know what I say from what they have transmit-
ted to posterity, written on bamboo or cloth, cut in metal or stone, engraven on their vessels.’

“It is said in ‘The Great Declaration,—'King Win was like the sun or like the moon; suddenly
did his brightness shine through the four quarters of the western region.’8

* According to these words, king Win exercised the principle of universal love on a vast scale.
He is compared to the sun-or moon which shines on all, without partial favour to any spot under
the heavens ;—such was the universal love of king Wan.’ What our master insisted on was thus
exemplified in him.

‘Again, not only does ‘The Great Declaration’ speak thus;—we find the same thing in ‘The
Declaration of Yu.’ Yu said, ‘Ye multitudes, listen all to my words. It is not only I who dare to
say a word in favour of war;—against this stupid prince of Meaou we must execute the punish-
ment appointed by Heaven. I am therefore leading your hosts, and go before you all to punish
the prince of Meaou.’9

‘ Thus Yu punished the prince of Meaou, not to increase his own riches and nobility, nor to ohtain
happiness and emolument, nor to gratify his ears and eyes;—he did it, seeking to promote what
was advantageous to the empire, and to take away what was injurious to it. It appears from
this, that Yu held the principle of universal love? What ovr master insisted on may be found iw
hinm. E

‘And not only may Yu thus be appealed to;—we have ‘The words of T'ang’ to the same effect.
Tang said, ‘I, the child Le, presume to use a dark-coloured victim, and anncunce to Thee, O
supreme Heavenly Sovereign.—Now there is a great drought, and it is right I should be held

vr cR HUGG EME APSE

YN
ar

pvt

EN

Al
v

BE

Igi
Ex COR
REA

x

Eo E
RS
ERE
Bags
ERES
w
CT
al

-
x
E

ae ah At OE) ERES:

tena

—
HH
-
~
&
o

v
-

Erb
us

EE
a
ahs

e

DB ENSE

¥
XEO
RRR EHR

.

SALSA VE

mis:

$ T, $E
=

zs
pnus
E

FAR TES Ah

>`
EC
>,
o
e

SPESE

ats
Li

«Nob U

Puasa
SS ha
Ed
SEN SH
E n

a
BS SaaS

n
D

= Mom mo HUE St
=
PEEK AWE SDH OT bly

urgere Se af SH

SS
(N-RER-R
FERES DES Hay

T
“Sein

SE
--i

FDS SSS
NOTIS
Eas

ver

"m
Eu

v

SER ES
eg nr ai E

as Y

E

a
SNIENE RS IONNS

RN
AENOR ESHA EN:

-
`
Si
*
r

Mak
EAH R LR

SmE

à T. um E A Jb sis»
RTE Z Hl, Xe BE BR

}

Sg
Sate

MU

GE
E:

4 Püss TT 2C 4. X os HL th

8 See The Great Declaration, HI. 6. The language is somewhat different from the citation.
9 ‘The Declaration of Yu,’ is what is called ‘The Counsels of Yu? In the 20th paragraph we
find the passage here quoted, or rather we find something like it. `

116}

e

SECT. IL] THE OPINIONS OF MIH TEIH. ÍPROLEGOMENA.

responsible for it. X do not kuow but what I have offended against the Powers above and below.
But the good I dare not keep in obscurity, and the sinner I dare not pardon. The examination of
this is with ‘hy mind, O God. If the people throughout the empire commit offences, it is to bé
required of me. 1f I commit offences, it does not concern the people.10 From these words we
perceive that T'ang, possessing the dignity of emperor, and the wealth of the empire, yet did not
shrink from offering bimself as a sacrifice which might be aeceptable to God and other spiritual
beings. Jt appears from this that T‘ang held the principle of universal love. What our master
insisted on was exemplified in 4ang. i

And not only may we appeal in this way to the ‘Declarations,’ ‘ Charges,’ and,‘ The words of
T‘ang.—we find the same thing in ‘The Poems of Chow.'11 ‘ One of those poems says,

* Wide and long i is the Royal way, Tt is straight as an arrow,
Without deflection, without injustice. Kt is smooth as a whetstone.
The Royal way is plain and level, The officers tread it;
Without injustice, without deflection. The lower people see it.’

. Is not this speaking ofthe Royal way in accordance with our style?12 Anciently, Wan and
Woo, acting with exact justice and impartiality, rewarded the worthy and punished the oppressive,
allowing no favouritism to influence them towards their own relatives. It appears from this that
Wan and Woo held the principle of universallove. What our master insisted on was exemplified
in them.—How is it that the scholars of the empire condemn this universal love, whenever they
hear of it? Plain as the case is, the words of those who condemn the principle of universal love do *
not cease. ‘They say, ‘It is not advantageous to the entire devotion to parents which is required ; —
it is injurious to filial piety18 Our master said, ‘Let us bring this objection to the test:—A filial
son, having the happinsss of his parents at heart, considers how it is to be secured.’ Now, does he,
so considering, wish men to love and benefit liis parents? or does he wish them to hate and injure
his parents?’ On this view of, the question, it must be evident that he wishes men to love and
benefit his parents, And what must he himself first do in order to gain this object? If I first

=

Ss
R8
+
E
zr
zi
N
N
Er

ni

*

SNPS BRAKES

.-

BUREAU I Np

LI

s

S
Er
se

-
~

RE
n
=

(N

:

TREF
X

-0

ERREA

BST TES N

ü
TET
pre
s
uult
pul

-

dax

I gae s

v

Sk
!
4»

zi
zu

ET
mi

.-
^S
I

i

=
i:

PELE

3i
Nis

-

SERN

SEENEN

- Aj

è

>t

es
Ew
E
=
HARFO

-

KEDHI

i

o

MESI ite WS
$

:
SEES Ep Ul

BASS
[n
Pih

T

dicte
AN DA IN
en tert to

`
E
-

SEBO
ats

\
4

v

- d$

ALA
ind $3 HE ik us 5 j

WA ROT MR TS y

 10 Sed "The announcement of T'ang’ A A»i in various places. Compare also more ; particu-

SES
STR RSE AE

i

fs
ahh

BEAN

o

pores

1

larly the Analects XX,. i.3. 11 In the jug aion which is immediately: subjoined, the first
four lines are from à rhythmical passage of the Shoo-king, V. iv. 13. The remaining four a are in
the She- -king, II. v. Ode ix. st. 1. 12 Such I suppose to be the meaning of d zu = JE

BH 3 ics HH t, if it were amended. 18 The sentence is not clear,— if E. i ud
Z E [íi] E T3 x 5p. I have done what I could with it. The scope of the whole para-

‘graph is sufficiently plain. The TI is supposed to be for 1.

117]

`

"PROLEGOMENA.] YANG CHOO AND MIH

TEIH. fem. m.

address myself to love and benefit men's parents, will they for that return love and benefit to my
parents? or if I first address myself to hate men’s parents, will they for that return love and bene-
fit to my parents? It is clear that I must first address myself to love and benefit men’s parents,

and they will return to me love and bencfit to my parents.

The conclusion is that a filial son has

no alternative.—lle must address himself in the first place to love and do good to the parents of

others.

It it be supposed that this is an accidental course, to Be followed on emergency by a filial

son, and not sufficient to be regarded as a gencral rule, let us bring it to the test of what we find

in the Books of the ancient kings.—It is said in the Ta Ya,

*Every word finds its answer;

Every action its recompense.

These words show that he who loves others will be loved,

hated. How is it that the scholars of the empire condemn
they hear it?

He threw me a peach;
I returned him a plum.’

and that he who hates others will be
this Banc’ of universal love, when

Is it that they deem it so difficult as to be impracticable? But there have been more difficult

things, which yet have been done.

For instance, king Ling of King was fond of small waists.

In

his time, the officers of King restricted themselves to a handful of rice, till they required a stick

to raise themselves, and in walking had to hold themselves up by the wall.

Now, it is a difficult

thing to restrict one’s-self in food, but they were able to do it, because it would please king Ling.
~—It needs not more than a generation to change the manners of the people, such is their desire to

* move after the pattern of their superiors.

Again, Kow-ts‘een the king of Yué, was fond of bravery.

Ile spent three years in training

his officers to be brave; and then, not knowing fully whether they were so, he set fire to the ship

where they were, and urged them forward by a drum into the flames.

They advanced, one rank

over the bodies of another, till an immense number perished in the water or the flames; and it

was not till he ceased to beat the drum, that they retired.
To sacrifice one's life in the flames is a difficult thing, but they

nounced to be full of reverence.
were able to do it, because it would please their king.—It

T BOUES:

n
3
NC
p

HY ER AA E 46 OF ARUN
uH i xU Da SL fa T it ELA
HAA th, Et EE a He
RP IREA in ke Be 3
We o Ju EE X m xx A pA du
26 WA A B EH AH
F KA MEITE ia ES
fà ES BR Be it tee Ly. HN BH Bd Ae
JE ite wn Jt big dB] 2s ae xe d
li xe [E 3 E ita th,

=
En
r

Nu.
qr
=

L4

EDD
REA

LESE ROTE:

AHH SSS NEM

Those officers of Yué might be pro-

needs not more than a generation to

iH

oe No

Eds
MD
EI y

if

er

Kx
=
Ie
id ia

NS
>
>

popu
ERE

uk

Lb
MEGN
z
is
TA
ced
o
g
ce

[ty

YE
Me

aru
Cae

i
FA

2n
R44
—

Rm
T

»
CRAP

„A Ji f£ A
zd id
AR S5 Ao Sk puo
Ay ps

$
s
=
AANA:
a
HE

 z "33 5
(sdb dH Fe sms GERA AU
EPELI iin HR EE BLE eS
i TR VIRES up gb KR F Fi) SH He
23 3x 80 JU VA 4b, Aa ihe ok PLC de. A BEBE itn
AN SOE Gt FL BES LS BB Se
HEE RB Ge — ah oe ay eS eS Ee
HER CER EM BERER RAGS
Hig KR oNN Ta RS oa yy te an = pp ds YR yn
11: ^ AE d OS gd

0c
Lu

SECT, IL] THE OPINIONS OF MIH TELE. [PROLEGOMENA.

change the manners of the people, such is their desire to move after the pattern of their superiors.
Once more, duke Win of Tsin was fond of garments of coarse flax. fi his time, the officers of
Tsin wore wide clethes of that fabric, with rams’ furs, leathern swordbelts, and coarse canvas
sandals, Thus attired, they went in to the duke’s levee, and went out and walked through the
court. It is a difficult thing to wear such clothes, but they were able to do it, because it would
please duke Wan.—It needs but a generation to change the manners of the people, such is their
desire to move after the pattern of their superiors.

Now, little food, a burning ship, and coarse clothes,—these are among the most difficult things«
to endure; but because the sovereign would be pleased with the enduring them, they were able
in those cases to do it. It needs no more than a generation to change the manners of the people.
Why? Because such is their desire to move after the pattern of their superiors. And now, us
to universal mutual love,14 it is an advantageous thing and easily practised,—beyond ali calcula-
tion. he only reason why it is not practised is, in my opinion, because superiors do not take
pleasure in it. If superiors were to take pleasure in' it, stimulating men to it by rewards and
praise, and awing them from opposition to it by punishments and fines, they would, in my opinion,
move to it, —the practice of universal mutual love, and the interchange of mutual benefits;—as fire
rises upwards, and as water flows downwards:—nothing would be able to check them. This
universal love was the way of the sage kings; it is the principle to secure peace for kings, dukes,
and great men; it is the means to secure plenty of food and clothes for the myriads of the peo-
pie. The best course for the superior màn is to well understand the principle of universal love,
and exert himself to practise it. It requires thé sovereign to be gracious, and the minister to be
loyal; the father to be kind, and the son to be filial; the elder brother to be friendly, and the
younger to he obedient... Therefore the superior man, with whom the chief desire is to see gracious
sovereigns and loyal ministers; kind fathers and filial sons; friendly elder brothers and obedient
younger ones, ought to insist on the indispensableness of the practice of universal love. It was
the way of the sage kings; it would be.the most advantageous thing for the myriads of the people.

TEBE Z TEITZITPES)
tH 8 A DA
E R

AE
3
BERE

HAIEN JHN

-
-

M

eu
e
bre
ze
TERN

INS
S
E

IZAIN DEA

SENN

t
u
8
&
5s

IT

ir
ZUM M Hut ge saa eS

inu
ES

B
d

Frag eua

-
-

-

SERI DH NE

-

EIOH
Rk

SANHS
$
Suh} RES
=

SN

I 4
EG LS Hike »

3

St
TURENE
BAHE

BINEN

ex
=>

v

Ld

SAAR RSS

-
-

BNARERSU ER [MGE

WEABVALSN

SN

S
T

NÉE
ew

T ` A Ay P "iii Re : dE AL y d
sp. üt A ae Dr be FE A il 5.23 E m
è 5 it Bl th, Z Ep CR

E m » yh iit 9

-
`
-
-

MSHS
SWNT HERES

y

NARHA
So SAVE SE RIUR

ais}
—

o

NANAH
è

È

RENT

e

e

e
ree

o

.-

RS NNEEUE

-

yam Se An
ag

Shae
PRR
NSH

BA i )
. yu
tà IS $m

TBNAS

Or tee

Re HE
ris EES

ui
PE
£n
mu
denn

-

14 For 3t AH Fi] we should read P Ai Se.
119] "

PROLEGOMENA,] YANG CHOO AND MIH TEIN, [ou, ur.

2. Notwithstanding the mutilations and corruptions in the text
of the preceding Essay, its general scope is clearly discernible, and
we obtain from it a sufficient account of Mih’s doctrine on the subject
of “ Universal Love.” We have now to consider the opposition of-
fered to this doctrine by Mencius. He was not the first, however, to
‘be startled and offended by it. The Essay shows that it was resented
as an outrage on the system of orthodox belief during all the life-
time of Mih and his immediate disciples. Men of learning did not
cease to be clamorous against it. From the allusions made by Men-
cius to its prevalence in his days, it would appear that it had over-
come-much of the hostility which it at first encountered. He stepped
forward to do battle with it, and though he had no new arguments
to ply, such was the effect of his onset, that * Universal Love” has
ever since been considered, save by some eccentric thinkers, as be-
longing to the Limbo of Chinese Vanity, among other things *abor-
tive, monstrous, or unkindly mixed.’

We may approach the question conveniently by observing that
Mih’s attempts to defend his principle were in several points far from
the best that could be made. His references to the examples of Yu,
T'ang, and the kings Wan and Woo, are of this nature. Those
worthies well performed the work of their generation. They punish-
ed the oppressor, and delivered the oppressed. Earnest sentiments
of justice and benevolence animated their breasts and directed their
course. But they never laid down the doctrine of * Universal Love,”
as the rule for themselves or others.

When he insists, again, that the people might easily be brought
to appreciate and practise his doctrine, if their rulers would only

‘set them the example, he shows the same overweening idea of the
influence of superiors, and the same ignorance of human nature,
which I have had occasion to point out in both Confucius and Men-
cius. His references to duke Wán of Tsin, duke Ling of Ts'oo, and

` Kow-ts'een of Yué, and his argument from what they are said to
have effected, only move us to smile. And when he teaches that
men are to be awed to love one another “by punishments aud fines,”
we feel that he is not understanding fully what he says nor whereof
he affirms. ,

Still, he has/broadly and distinctly laid it down, that if men would
only universally love one another, the evils which disturb and embitter

- 190]

SECT. 11.] THE OPINIONS OF MIH TENI. [rkorrcoxrNA.

human society would disappear. Ido not say that he has taught
the duty of universal love. His argument is conducted on the
ground of erpediency.! Whether he had in his own mind a truer,
nobler foundation for his principle, does not immediately appear.
Be that as it may, his doctrine was that men were to be exhorted to
love one another,—to love one another as themselves. - According
to him, * princes should be as much. for the States of others as for
their own. One prince should be for every other as for himself.”
So it ought to be also with the heads of clans, with ministers, with
parents, and with men generally.

Here it was that Mencius joined issue with him. He affirmed
that “to love all equally did not acknowledge the peculiar affection
due to a parent.” It is to be observed that Mih himself nowhere says.
that his principle was that of loving all zQvArLv. His disciples drew
this conclusion from it. In the third Book of Mencius’ Works, we
find one of them, E Che, contending that the expression in the Shoo-
king, about the ancient kings acting towards the people, “as if they
were watching over an infant," sounded to him as if love were to
be without difference of degree, the manifestation of it simply commenc-
ing with our parents? To this Mencius replied conclusively by.
asking, “ Does E really think that a man’s affection for the child of
his brother is merely like his affection for the child of his neighbour?"
"With still more force might he have asked, “Is a man’s affection for
his father merely like his affection for the father of his neighbour?"
Such a question, and the necessary reply to it, are implied in hís
condemnation of Mih's system, as being “without father,” that is,
denying the peculiar affection due to a father. If Mih had really
maintained that a man’s father was to be no more to him than the

father of any other body, or if his system’ had necessitated such a
consequence, Mencius would only have done his duty to his country
in denouncing him, and exposing the fallacy of his reasonings. As
the case is, he would have done better if he had shown that no such:
conclusion necessarily flows from the doctrine of Universal Love, or
its preceptive form that we are to love our neighbour as ourselves.

Of course it belonged to Mih himself to defend his views from the
imputation. But what he has said on the point is not satisfactory.

Y This and several other points are well put by the Rev. Mr. Edkins, in Iris Essay, referred to
p. 183. See Journal of the North-Chiua Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. No. IL May, 1859,
2 See Bk. ILL, Pt. L, v. 3.

121]

`

PROLEGOMENA.) . YANG CHOO AND MIH TEIH. : [cn. 11.

In reply to the charge that his principle was injurious to filial piety,
he endeavoured to show, that, by acting on it, a man would best secure
the happiness of his parents:—as he addressed himself in the first
place to love, and-do good to, the parents of others, they would re-
compense to him the love of, and good-doing to, his parents. It
might be so, or it might not. The reply exhibits strikingly in what
manner Mih was conducted to the inculcation of “universal love,” and
that really it had in his mind no deeper basis than its expediency.
This is his weak point; and if Mencius, whose view of the constitution
of human nature, and the obligation of the virtues, apart from all
consideration of consequences, was more comprehensive and correct
than that of Mih, had founded his opposition on this ground, we
could in a measure have sympathized with him. But while Mih
appeared to lose sight of the other sentiments of the human mind
too much, in his exclusive contemplation of the power of love, he did
not doubt but. his principle would make sons.more filial, and ministers
more devoted, and subjects more loyal. The passage which I have
just referred to, moreover, does not contain the admission that the
love was to be without any difference of degree. The fact is, that he
hardly seems to have realized the objection with which Mencius
afterwards pressed the advocacy of it by his followers. If he did do
so, he blinked the difficulty, not seeing his way to glve a full aud
precise reply to it.

This seems to be the exact state of the case between the two phi-
losophers.—Mih stumbled on a truth, which, based on a right foun-
dation, is one ofthe noblest which can animate the human breast,
and affords the surest remedy for the ills of society. There is that
in it, however, which is startling, and liable to misrepresentation aud
abuse. Mencius saw the difficulty attaching to it, and unable to
sympathize with the generosity of it, set himself to meet it with a
most vehement opposition. Nothing, certainly, could be more absurd
_ than his classing Yang Choo and Mih Teih together, as equally the
enemies of benevolence and righteousness. When he tries to ridi-
' cule Mih, and talks contemptuously about him, how, if he could
have benefited the empire, by toiling till he rubbed off every hair
of his body, he would have done it,s—this only raises up a barrier

3 Bk. VIL, Pt. L, xxvi.
122]

SECT, 11.] “THE OPINIONS OF MIH TEIH. [PROLEGOMENA.

between himself and us. It reminds us of the hardness of nature
which I have elsewhere charged against him.

3. Confucius, I think, might have dealt more fairly and generously
with Mib. In writing of "Hine I called attention to tis repeated
enunciation of * the Golden rule” in a negative form, —* What you do
not wish done to yourself, do not do to others.'! in. one place, indeed,
he rises for a moment to the full apprehension of it, and recognizes
the duty of taking the initiative, —of behaving to others in the first
instance as he would that they should behave to him.? Now, what
is this but the practical exercise of the principle of universal love?

* All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you; do.

ye even so to them”:—this is simply the manifestation of the re-
quirement, “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” Confucius
might have conceded, therefore, to Mih, that the rule of conduct
which he laid down was the very best that could be propounded.
lf he had gone on to remove it from the basis of expediency, and
place it on a better foundation, he would have done the greatest
service to his countrymen, and entitled himself to a place among the
sages of the world.

‘On this matter I am happy to find myself in agreement with the
“prince of literature,” Han Yu? “ Our liter ati,” says he, “find
fault with Mih because of what he has said on ‘The Estimation to
be attached to Concord,’* on ‘Universal Love,’ on * The Estimation
to be given to. Men of Worth,” on ‘The Acknowledging of Spiritual

1 Vol.I. proleg., p. 110. 2 See proleg. on the Doctrine of the Mean, pp. 48, 49. 8 See

n NS Han Win. R ERi BRA he Wins
‘The Works of Han Wün-kung, T - ee B E F Fa 4 This is the title of one
of Mil’s Essays, — fü] jaj forming the third Book of hig Works. Generalizing after his fashion,
he traces all evils up to a want of concord, cr agreement of opinion; and goes on to assert that the
emperor must be recognized as the *Infallible Head, to lay down the rule of truth and right,

ern FZ fp He He Jk LF SIE JE cce

emperor approves, all must approve; what the emperor condemns, all must condemn. It is an
unguarded utterance; and taken absolutely, apart from its connection, may be represented very
much to Mih’s disadvantage. See ‘Supplemental Observations on the Four Books,’ on Mencius,
Book. I., art. lix. The £oincidence between this saying and the language of Hobbes i is remark-
able.—‘ Quod legislator proeceperi£, id pro bono, quod vetuerit, id pro malo habendum esse? (De *
Cive, cap. xii, 1). 5 This is another of Mih’s pieces, fis] "ER Be the second Book of his
Works. He finds a cure for the ills of the empire in princes’ honouring and employing only
men of worth, without paying regard to their relatives. This is contrary to the third of Contu-
cius’ nine standard rules for the government of the empire, set forth in his couversation with
duke Gue, as related in the ‘Doctrine of the Mean,’ ch. xx. But Mih would only discountenance
nepulism, where it ought to be discountenanced.

123

j

PROLEGOMENA] c YANG CHOO AND MII TEIA. {en. n.

‘Beings,’6 and on ‘Confucius’ being in awe of great men, and, when
he resided in any State, not blaming its great officers." But when
the Ts‘un Ts‘ew finds fault with assuming ministers, is not'this attach-
ing a similar value to concord?. When Confucius, speaks of ‘ over-
flowing in love to all, and. cultivating the friendship of the good,’
and of how ‘the extensive conferring of benefits constitutes a sage,’
does he not teach universal love? When he advises ‘the esteem of
the worthy;' when he arranged his disciples into * the four classes,’ so
stimulating and commending them; when he says that ‘the superior
man dislikes the thought of his name not being mentioned after
death:’'—does not this show the*estimation he gave to men of
worth? When ‘he sacrificed as if the spiritual beings were present, :
and condemned ‘those who sacrificed as if they were not really sacri-
ficing;'? when he said, ‘When I sacrifice, I shall receive blessing:'—
was not this acknowledging spiritual beings? The literati and
Mih equally approve of Yaou and Shun, in. equally condemn Kéé
and Chow; they equally teach the cultivation of the person, and the
rectifying of the heart, reaching on to the good government of the
empire, with all its States and families:—why should they be so
hostile to each other? In my opinion, the discussions which we
hear are the work of their followers, vaunting on each side the say-
ings of their Teacher; there is no such contrariety between tlie real
doetrines of the two Teachers. Confucius would have used Mih;
and Mih would have used Confucius. If they would not have used
each other, they could not have been K*ung and Mih."

4: It seems proper, in closing this discussion of Mih’s views, to no-
tice the manner in which the subject of “universal love" appears
in Christianity. Its whole law is comprehended in the one word
—Love; but how wide is the scope of the term compared with all
which it ever r entered into the mind of Chinese sage or philosopher
to conceive t

‘ ;

6 This is found in the 8th Book of Mih. The first and second parts of the essay, however. are
unfortunately lost. Fn the third he tells several queer ghost stories, and adduces other proofs,
, to show the real existence of spiritual beings, and that they take account of men's ‘actions to re-
* ward or to punish them, He found anather panacea for the ills of the empire in this truth. His
doctrine here, however, i is held to be inconsistent with Confucius’ reply to Fan Chie, Ana. VI. xx.,
that wisdom consists in respecting spiritual beings, but at the same time keeping aloof from them.
As between Confucius and AMih, on this point we would agree rather with the latter. He holds an
important trath, mingled with superstition ; ‘the sage is sceptical. 7 Han avoids saying any-
thing on this point, ‘The author of : Supplemental Observations' is equally silent. 6 Han is

here quoting Ana. IL, xij, 2, Ze A S Bit x. p m 2x. which he points and interprets after
a way of his own, He does not read E but Sid, i in the sense of at , ‘to grant to,’ ‘to approve af;

,

: 124]

BCT. IL} THE OPINIONS OF MIH TEIH, [PROLEGOMENA,

It is most authoritative where the teachers of China are altogether
silent, and commands:—‘“Thou shalt love the Lord, thy God, with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with ell thy strength, and with
all thy mind.” For the Divine Being Christianity thus demands from
all men supreme love;—the love of all that is majestic, awing the
soul; the love of all that is beautiful, wooing the heart; the love ofall

' that is good, possessing and mastering the entire nature. Such a love,
existing, would necessitate obedience to every law, natural or reveal-
ed. Christianity, however, goes on to specify the duties which every
than owes, as the complement of love to God, to his fellow-men:—
“Owe no man anything, but to love'one another, for he that loveth
another hath fulfilled the law. For this—‘Thou shalt not commit
adultery,’ ‘Thou shalt not kill,’ ‘Thou shalt not steal,’ ‘Thou shalt
not bear false witness,’ ‘Thou shalt not covet; and if there be any

“other commandtnent:—the whole is briefly comprehended in this
saying, * Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.” This command-
ment is “like to” the other, only differing, from it in not requiring

. the supreme love which is due to God alone. The: rule which it pre-

scribes,—such love to others as we feel for. ourselves,—is much more
definitely and intelligibly expressed than anything we find in Mih,
and is not liable to the cavils with which his doctrine was assailed.

Such a love to men, existing, would necessitate the performance of

every relative and. social duty; we could not help doing to others
as we would that they should do to us.

. Mih's universal love was to find its scope and consummation in the

good government of China. He had not the idea of man as man,
any more than Confucius or Mencius. How can that idea be fully
realized, indeed, where there is not the right knowledge of one living
and true God, the creator and common parent ofall? The love
which Christianity inculeates is a.law of humanity; paramount to
all selfish, personal feelings; paramount to all relative, local, national
attachments; paramount to all distinctions of race or of religion.

Apprehended in the spirit of Chirst, it will go forth even to. the love

of enemies; it will energize ina deamination to be always increasing’
the sum of others’ happiness, limited only by the means of doing so.
But I stop. . These prolegomena are the place for disquisition; but

I deemed it right to say thus mach here of that true, universal love,

which at once gives glory to God and siesta peace on earth.

*

[PROLEGOMENA, WORKS CONSULTED. e [enoay.

CILAPTE R IV.

. WORKS WHICH HAVE BEEN CONSULTED IN THE
PREPARATION OF THIS VOLUME.

Tur Works which have been consulted are mostly the same as those
used in the preparation of the first volume, of which a list is there
given. Ihave only to add to that: —

"

.I—OF CHINESE WORKS.

aT tR H-I, «The Philosopher Mih, in fifteen Books,
with one Book on the Titles of his Essays." This Work was edited aud:
annotated in the 48th year of K‘éen-lung (A.D. 1781), by Peih Yuen
GE p, lieutenant-governor of Shen-se. From the notes appended
to Mih’s Essay on “ Universal Love” in the last chapter, it will be
seen that the task of editing has been very imperfectly executed. I
. suppose it is vain to express a wish that some foreign scholar would
take it in hand.
AR EG HEB AES fi, “The Collected Writings
of Han Ch'ang-le, with the Verbal and Critical Notes of five hundred
Scholars." Ch‘ang-le is another designation for Han Yu, or Han
Wán-kung. I have said, p. 12, that he was a scholar of the 8th
century, but he extended on into the 9th, dying a.p. 824. He stands
out as perhaps the most distinguished scholar of the long space be-
tween the Han.ánd Sung dynasties. The edition of his Works which
I have, with such a collation of commentators, was first published
by a Heu Taou-ke GT GE 3 Jb, in the 28th year of Kéen-lung (a.D.
1761).

IL—-—OF TRANSLATIONS AND OTHER WORKS.

Mexe Tsgv, vel Mencrum, inter Sinenses Philosophos, Ingenio,
Doctrina, Nominisque Claritate, CONFUCIO PROXIMUM, edidit, Latina
interpretatione, ad interpretationem Tartaricam utramque recensita,
instruxit, et perpetuo commentario, e Sinicis deprompto, illustravit
Stanislaus Julien. Paris; 1824-1829.

126]

THE’ WORKS: OF MENCIUS:

THE WORKS.

OF MENCIUS.

BOOK I. `

KING HWUY OF LEANG. PART I.

4i WA +

Cuarrer L 1. Mencius went to see king Hwuy of Leang.

2. The king said, “Venerable sir, since you have not counted
it far to come here, a distance of a thousand /e, may I presume that
you are likewise provided with counsels to profit my kingdom ?"

TITLE OF THE WORK. . F The phi-
losopher Ming.” The Work thus simply bears
the name, or surname rather, of him whose
conversations and opinions it relates, and is
said to have been compiled in its present
form by the author himself. On the use of

F, after the surname, see on Ana. I.i. The

surname and this were combined by the Ro-
mish Missionaries, and latinized into Mencius,
which it is well to adopt throughout the trans-
lation, and thereby avoid the constant repeti-
tion of the word ‘philosopher, Ming not being
distinguished, like K‘ung (Confucius), by the

crowning epithet of ‘The Master." €:

4 Wi i

TrrLe or THis Boox. Ye HR E f ^i]
b- King Hwuy of Leang, in chapters and
sentences, Part L' Like the books of the Con-
fueian Analects, those of this Work are headed

by two or three characters at or near their com-
mencement. Each Book is divided inte two

parts, called E F ‘Upper and Lower.’ This

arrangement was made by Chaou K'e ( io. A

a scholar of the eastern Han dynasty (died a. p.
202), by whom the chapters and sentences were

also divided, and the E ^nj E A ^j Te

remain to the present day, a memorial of his
work. `

Cu. I. BENEVOLENCE AND RIGHTEOUSNESS
MENCIUS’ ONLY TOPICS WITH THE PRINCES OF

*
HIS TIME; AND THE ONLY PRINCIPLES WHICH
CAN MAKE A COUNTRY PROSPEROUR. i ‘King
Hwuy of Leang,—in the time of Confucius, `

Tsin CAD was one of the great States of the
empire, but thé power of it was usurped by.

six great families. By B, c. 452, three of
those were absorbed by the other three, viz.

Wei; Chaou, and Han (Fifi 18. and HED,
which continued to encroach on the small re-
maining power of their prince, until at last they
extinguished the royal house, and divided the
whole territory among themselves, ‘The em-

peror Wei L&& (y Fl), in his 23rd year, n.
c. 402, conferred on the chief of each family
the title of Prince qu Wei, called likewise,

from the name of its capital, Leang, occupied
the south-eastern part of Tsin, Han and Chaou
lying to the west and north-west of it. 'l'he
Leang, where Mencius visited king Hway, is.
said to have been in the present department of
Kae-fung. Hwuy— The Kindly'— is the pos-
thumous epithet of the king, whose name was
Yung eR. The title of king had been usurp-

ed by Ying, at some time before Mencius first
visited him, which, it is said, he did in the.
35th year of his government, B. C. 335. Men-
eius visited him on invitation, it must be sup-

posed, and the simple M-RE 18 ít R.

2. Mencitis was a native of Tsow (MI), in
Loo, the name of which is still retained in the

l 4

ho

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK I.

a

mo
ERN TS

x
wp
&
Ld

jl

`
k
°

>

Son
zy
oem
bes

N
x

Sean
Eus

l.

V

A

m

SON
LN

v

Tita

c Xx E , ed, Hk LAY
i C fot Fil, ip fip Ed, Fl,

3. Mencius replied, “W hy must vour Majesty use. that word
‘profit?’ What I am ‘likewise’ provided with, are counsels to bene-
volence and righteousness, and these are my only topics. +
4. “If your Majesty say, * What is to be done to profit my king-
dom ?' the gre at officers will sav,- ‘What is to be done to profit our
families ?' and the inferior officers and the common people will say,
Mhat.is to be done to profit our persons?’ Superiors and 'infe-
riors will trv to snatch this profit the one trom the other, and the
-kingdoms will be endangered. In the kingdom of ten thousand
chari lots, the murderer of his sovereign shall be the chief of a family
ofa thousand chariots. In a kingdom of a thousand chariots, the
murderer of his pince shall be the chief of a family of a hundred
‘chariots.’ ' To have'a thousand in ten thousand, and 'a hundred in a
thousand, cannot he said not to be a large allotment, but if ripht-
cousness be put last, and profit be put first, they w ill not be satisfied
without snatching all. i i
- fey LI M
sew district. of the department of Yen-chow Then, when Mencius, in par. 3, replies— AR FF
($F jj )in Shan-tung. "he king, in compli- tX. they say that he refers to Yaou, Shun,

tmeutiy stwie calis the distance from ‘sow to
. Leung a thousand, dæ. It is diflieulg to say what
was the exact length of the ancient Ze. p At pre-
sent, it i$ a little more than-onc-third of an Eng-
lish mile: Fhe: 3e *ulso,! cogcasions $ "some:diffi-

culty D reference ‘to whit is'it spoken?

Some epipapé: the. js AF with x AF,

Analects, T. i7 ‘But the cases are not parallel.
Others say that the king refers to the many
scholars who at the time made it their business
, to wander fronrcoantry to country, as advisers to

,&e. as his models.—' I, like them,’ &c. But this

is too far-fetched. ‘The 'kingis Jy. L suppose,
follows the clause—* You hafe'éome a thousand
&, and means: That is sone favour, but xou `
pi obably have others to confer also. > Then Mén-

cius’ JR refers to tlie king’s, and—' You say

T likewise have counsels to profit you. WhatI
likewise have, is beneyolence, &c. Observe the

force of yg, delicately and suggestively putting

the question. 3. of .—marking the answer

the prinees:—: You also, like other scholars,’ &c. of an inferior; used from respect to the ding.

Pr. I. Cr. I—II.

TEL

nis

is
ERI

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. " “3

BHO

pex
Sape lea

v

ERO

e

REM
SH ree Py ot

AN

A y ZEE! P " ' :
5.. “There never has been a man trained to benevolence who

«d K aS $ .
neglected his parents. There never has been a man trained to right-
eousness who made his sovereign an after consideration. .

6. “Let your Majesty also say, ‘Benevolence and righteousness,

and these shall be the only themes.’

profit?”
CHAPTER II.

Why must you use that word

1. Mencius, another day, saw king Hwuy of Leang.

The king went and stood with him by a pond, and, looking round at.
the large geese and deer, said, * Do wise and good princes also find

pleasure in these things ?”
ui PA

Mencius replied, “Being wise and good; they have pleasure

“in these things. If they are not wise and good, though they have

"these things, they do not find pleasure.

Ei ‘to say,’ followed directly by the words
spoken. It is not ‘to speak of? im B X

mark very decidedly Mencius’ purpose to con-
PR : À

verse only of m and E 4.. fi E, here
=J, ‘to take.’ ZE {iE ‘mutually to take ;'
Bey superiors from inferiors, and inferiors from
“superiors, He, low. 8d' tone, ‘a carriage or

' chariot.’ ‘The enperor's domain,—1,000/e square,
produced 10,000 war chariots. A kingdom pro-
ducing 1,000 chariots was that of a how, or prince.

-Ho is here called a FE Zz RR instead of
A 5E Z d. because the emperor has just

, been denominated by that term, 1$ and AJ are
Sce Ana. VI. xx. 5. "Phe 4— and

^x : e
E: here are supposed to result from the sove-
“ reign's example. 7
. Cu, 2. RULERS must SHARE THEIR PLEASURE
WITH THE PEOPLE, THEY CAN ONLY BE HAPPY
‘WHEN THEY RULE OVER HAPPY SUBJECTS. L

* verbs.

Fin— The king stood;’ and the meaning is
not that Mencius found him by the pond, The
king seems to have received him graciously, and
to have Ted him into the park. KR Z E-
comp. Ang. VI. vii., but for which passage J should
translate here—‘over a pond,’ ie., in some build-
ing over the water, such as is still very common
in China. vB means ‘large geese,’ and E isthe
name for a large kind of deer, but they are joined

here, as adjectives, to Kes and pi EX 4 =
SUR zi *worthy princes. It docs not

refer to Mencius, as some make itout ‘fhe re-
ply makes this plain. The king’s inquiry is
prompted by a sudden dissatisfaction with him-
self, for being o¢capied so ntuch with euch ma-
terial gtatifications, and—* Amid all their cares
of govt. do these pleasures find a place with
good princes?" 3. See the She-king, TIE i.
Ode VIIE. stt. 1,2. The ode tells how his peo-

ple delighted in king’ Win. For mH the She-
king reads aa, J is read 200, an interjection.

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK T. -

Hg BZ Aint PE FE E ZR
H R eT Ze te he, JE,
ae fe It a ERIE Be a
DX NEGO BR.
Ti BE ae ey HS We END:
BOE € 3:5 E OK Ai
SE ONE ug fig c Hs
Tun dd EA 2C hg BOE

3. “Tt is said in the Book of Poetry,
‘He measured out and commenced his spirit-tower ;
He measured it out and planned it.
‘The people addressed themselves to it,
'' "And in less than a day completed it.
"When he measured and began it, he said to them—Be not so
earnest : l NN
. But the multitudes camé as if they had been his children.
"The king was in his spirit-park ;
' + The does reposed about,’
` +The does so sleek and fat :
" — ~ And the white birds shone glistening.
The king was by his spirit-pond ;
How. full was it of fishes leaping about!’ ,
* King Wan used the strength of the people to make his tower
“and ‘his pond, and yet the people rejoiced to do the work, calling
the tower ‘the spirit-tower, calling the pond ‘the spirit-pond,’ and

if
1
D

dts . s ` + "
hr rd K refering to king Wan, but put gen- sun, thus expressed their hatred of the tyrant,
-erally. ^ ^ 4. See the Shoo-king III. i. 3;— preferring death with him to life under him.
""T*ang's announcement of his reasons for pro-

ceeding against the tyrant, Kéé. The words
quoted are those of the people. Kéz had point-
-ed to the sun, saying that, as surely as ¢he sun
was in heaven, so firm was he onhis throne. The

people took up his words, and pointing.to the.
: 9n x oa

l5: -R- E read Acá. me. up. 2d tone. Chaou

K'e gives quite another turn to the quotation,
making the words an address of the ppople to
T'ang:—'This day he (Kë) must die. We
will go with you to kill him.’ Choo He's view

Pr. I. Cu. TI. — III. = THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. : ` D

j

Nz
ES

zn

al

-

Ze
ES

W
EM
zm

NEJN DT

ine
pu
»:
HN
oS

pr
S
N

y
HANS

*
F,

WEH
7
E:
\

d

~
I

NWH

—
Or

e
^.
t
w
[ d

o

2S NEES
al RES

gm

`
-
v
Ld
v

f.

XE]
2 X%

Ee

v

- ysmsmkk

pem

rejoicing that he had his large deer, his fishes, and turtles. - The
ancients caused, the people to " have pleasure as well as themselves,
E therefore they could enjoy it. PS

4» “In the Declaration of T'ang it is said, ‘O sun, when wilt thou
expire? We will die together with thee” The people wished for
Ks death, though they should die with him. Although he had
towers, ponds, bir ds, and animals, how could he have pleasure alone?"

Cuarrxn III. 1. King Hwuy of Leang said, “Small as my virtue
is, in the government of my kingdom, I do indeed: exert, my mind
to the utmost. If the year be bad on the inside of the river, I re-
move as many of the people as T can to the East of. the. river, and
convey grain to the country in the Inside. ; When, the, year is bad
on the East of the river, I act on the, same plan. On ,examining
the government of the neighbouring kingdoms, I do not find that
there is any prince who employs his mind as I do. And yet the
people of the neighbouring kingdoms do not decrease, nor do my
people increase. How is this?’ ;

o

' g

is to be preferred. I don't think that the last ]? ‘it by. Ga Leang was on ‘the south of the river,
two clauses are to be understood generally :— i. e., the Ho, or Yellow river, but portions of the
t When the people wish to die with a prince,’ Wei territory lay on. the other side, or north of
&c. They must specially refer to Këč. the river» This was called the Inside of the

Cu. 3. HALF MEASURES ARE OF LITTLE USE. river, because the ancient imperial capitals Had

"Tug GREAT PRINCIPLES OF ROYAL GOVERNMENT Mostly been there, in the province of K'e(

MUST BE FAITHEULLY AND IN THEIR SPIRIT CAR- hi comprehending the present, Shan-se; and

BE OE Ss É sive combmation ys parti- the country north of the Ho, looked at from
eles— bs HE gives great emphasis to the; "ag was of course ‘within,’ or on this.'side of

king's profession of his. own 'devotedness to t Brow used commonly for millet and

his kingdom. 3 A was the designation of maize, but here for grain generally, Im A ^,
themselves used d by the princes, in speaking to

their people, = = fihi Z A “I, the man of mE Zi lit, ‘add few, add many? To explain
small virtue.) I shal] hereafter simply render the Jil. it is said the expressionsz- Ae A^

TUE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

300K I,

tor XE FE fil £6 rp TY,

(0)

ull
TERR

NEIN
%

opa
LAM

mir

ES

Ld
or

Fe du]

Ee Oh du IE
 BE ALY, di dZ
Jr PS BEL UL Tr 02 R
yJ, mu^ Eng" Ih FA n
d$ fa WPS Ea op xk ui
A QE a ON EA
ili 2^ f p Au Ebr T un sx
M, WT do, du ut, 2b 2p. 27 2E a

Am

8X SEDI E, E] up sc Je

Mencius replied, * Your Majesty is fond of war;—let me take
aii illustration from war.—The soldieis move forwar d to the sound
of tlie drums; and after their weapons have been crossed, on one side
they throw away their coats of mail, trail their arms behind them, and
ran, Some rur a hundred paces : and stop; some run fifty paces and
&top. What would you think if those who run fifty paces were to
laugh at those who run a hundred paces? ”, The king said, ‘They
máy not do so. They only did not run a hundred paces ; $ but thev
also ran away." “Since your Majesty knows this," replied Mencius,
“you need not hope that your people will become more numerous
than those of the neighbouring kingdoms.

(038. “Tf the seasons of husbandry be not interfered with, the grain
will be more than can be eaten. If close nets are not allowed to
enter the pools and ponds, the fishes and turtles will be more than
ean be consumed, ifthe axes and bills enter the hills and forests

y" A AMz ZB» ‘not fewer, nor larger, than
they should for such States be.’ 2. Hi i9
is said to express the sound of the drum. In

Bt Z, By i is used as a verb, and Z refers

to Bil +, or soldiers. It was the rule of war
to advance at the sound. of.the drum, and retreat

n

ede

ative=‘do not.’ The first clauses of the various
sentences are conditional. In spring there was
the sowing ; in summer, the weeding ; and in au-
tumn, the harvesting :—those were the seasons
and works of husbandry, from which the people

might not be called off. m. up. lst tone. The
dict. explains it by ‘to bear,’ ‘to be adequate

at the sound of the gong. REF ZEAL, E

lit., ‘this also,’ 7. c., the fifty paces, ‘was running .

awiy? 3. Here we have an outline of the
- first principles of royal government, in contrast
with the measures on which the king plumes

himself’ in the 1st par. The pa is not imper-

> BD "R4 ! ;
t EX A BE =‘ therc is no eating
power adequate to eat the grain. jy, here

read is‘vh, *close-meshed. The meshés of a
net were anciently required to be large, of the
size of 4 inches. People might only eat fish a

foot long. [LL] =wooded hills. Ahi=torests in

Pr. I. Cu. UL THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 0

2

za

\
4

ERA

SER

wc

i: LE M

E M

HVS

ms E
Soi yall ST

i 1
=
=r
ba
zu
=

MX
ME

NE

STAAN
mie

N

ES

=
NINDS
a 7177
a
-
v

E

VE YE X? JH dE

only at the proper time, the wood will be more than can be used.
When the gram and fish and turtles are more than can be. eaten,
and there is more wood than can be used, this enables the people to
nourish their living and bury their dead, without any feeling: against
any. This condition, in which the people nourish their living and
bury their dead w ithout any feeling against any, is the first, step. of
Boy al Gov ernment. vg mitad
* Let mulherry trees be planted about the homesteads, with
their five mov, and. persons of fifty, years may be clothed. with, silk.
In keeping fowls, pigs; dogs, and swine, let, not their times of, breed-
ing be neglectéd, and persons of seventy years may eat fles he „Let
there not be taken away the time that is proper for the cultivation
of the farm with its hutidved mow, and the family of several, mouths
that is supported by it shall ‘not suffer from hunger.. Let careful at-
tention be paid to education in schools, inculeating i init especially the
filial and fraternal duties, atid gray-haired men will not be seen

^

divisis
in

the plains: The time to work in the'forests was,

aceording to Choo He, in the autumn, when the
.growth'of.the trees for the year was stopped.
But in the Chow-le; we find various rules about
cutting down trees,—-those on the south of the
hill for instance, im midwinter, those on the’
pap in summer, &c., which may be alluded to,

Jie 4i ox Ihave translated, ‘without any feeling
against any,’ the ruler being specially intended.

47 The higher principles: ‘which complete
royal government. We can hardly translate
FWA by ‘an acre,’ it consisting, at present at
least, only of 240 square paces, or 1200 square
eubits, and anciently it was much smaller,

100 square paces, ‘of 6 cubits each; making: &
mow. The ancient theory for. allotting the land
was to mark it off in squares of 900. mow, the
middle square being called, the a "m or
‘government fields? The other diu were aay

. signed to eight husbandmen and their families,

who cultivated the public field in common. But
from this 20:mow were cut off, and, in ‘portions
of 23 mow, assigned to the farmers to build onj
who had also the same amount of ground i in
their towns or villages, making 5 mow in all for
their houses. And to have the ground all, for
growing grain, they were required to plant mul-
berry irces about their houses, for the nour:

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS, BOOK I.

i

WE
H
SARS

v

ag

[d

PSU RUE el ES

w

N

4
D

EM

`
F,
v.

v

DSRS ROS SH

[ d

v
v

Se
3

m
SESAR

BIEN HSER

v
[ d

BRASS
=

Ld
[ d

~
b 4
-
o

»

EPIRI
X

»
*
»
r

SEMIH
RHEEN
fae

7
IE:

upon the roads, carrying burdens on their backs or on their heads.
It never has been that the ruler of a State, where such results were
seen,— persons of seventy wearing silk and eating flesh, and the black-
haired people suffering neither frc om hunger nor "cold, — did not attain
to the Imperial dignity.

5. “Your dogs and swine eat the food of men, and you do not
know to make any restrictive arrangements. There are people dying
from famine on the roads, and you do not know to issue the stores
of your granaries for them. When people die, you, say, *It is not
owing to me; it is owing to the year. In what does this differ i
stabbing a man and killing him, and then saying—‘ It was not I;
was the weapon?’ Let your Majesty cease to lay the blame ‘on
the year, and ionem oy from all the empire the people will come
to you.

(iocus IV. 1. King Hwuy of Leang said, “T wish quietly to
receive your instructions,”

ishment of silk worms. jk eg K (a young pig) king. E A $fr—the second E is read

žij (the grain-fed, or edible dog) Be (the sow) tsze, low. 3d tone. Tz = Fill “to regulate.’ The

CF it. *as to the nourishing of the fowl,’ phrase pea a Ts is not easy. The transla-

j L^» istin. tion given accords with the views of most of the
se : H ZK- the ground rays distn commentators.
guished into three kinds ;—best, medium, and Cu. 4

inferior, feeding a varying number of mouths,

To this the ex ressión alludes JE iF See CHAPTER, CARRYING ON THE APPEAL, IN THE LAST
. P c. Am PARAGRAPH, ON THE CHARACTER OF KING HwuY's

vh Book If. Pt. Li 10. JÉ ‘low. 3d tone, owx GOVERNMENT, 1. Ze. ‘quietly,’ i e,

to come to reign, ‘to become regnant em- } sincerely and without constraint. It is said
Menetus now boldly applies the 2 MU consum

i and erum home his faults upon the fe p. F A H H F zd E

A CONTINUATION OF THE FORMER

Pr, I. Cu. IV. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 9

NAR
T
TEN

SEHR

M
4

T
Ñ

a>
$
S
z
E

ane oe
x
ay

oe
EN
E

\
F
X

PESER

aw

xz

DE
3e
T8
»

PARE

DR

n
SERE ES AERE

E

ees

zu
Ne
NS

E
TEES
iz
\

Ld

TERE

x K JEX A BE
Khe FE KEYRA I Le

2. Mencius replied, “Is there any difference between killing a
man with a stick and with a sword?” The king said, “There is no
difference.” l i

 3. “Is there any difference between doing it with a sword and
with the style of goveriment?” “There is no difference," . was the
reply. .
4. Mencius then said, *In your kitchen there is fat meat ; in your
stables there are fat horses. But your people have the look of hunger,
and on the wilds there are those who have died of famine. This is
‘leading on. beasts to devour men. ;

_ 5. “Beasts devour one another, and men hate them for doing so.
When a prince, being the parent of his people, administers his
government so as to be chargeable with leading on beasts to devour
men, where is that parental relation to the people?”

: 6. Chung-ne said, “Was he not without posterity who first
made wooden images to bury with the dead? So he said; because

2, 8. HA J -ý Hr yA FE ! 1E-à8. up. Ist tonc, — fT. * Being the pa-
3f. lit, ‘Is there whereby they are different?" Tent of the people, —ie, this is his designation,
and what he ought to be. 6. Aff. —in ancient

times, bundles of straw were made, to represent
: , nea Afi SIE RRR

men imperfectly, called py By, and carried to

the grave, and buried with the dead, as atten-

and outside the muh were the HF, (yay), wilds, dants upon them. In middle antiquity, i.e.,
$t after the rise of the Chow dynasty, for tliose
5. H has the force of ‘and yet,’ ie., tho’ bundles of straw, wooden figures of men were

they are beasts, So that à *how much more' used, having springs in them, by which they
is carried on, in effect, to the'rest of the par. could move. Hence they were called I. as

AE Ae, up. 8d. tone, the verb, E ! if {A= Fh. By and by, came the practice
: 2 l

\

4. Vf. —outside a town were the 4
(keaou), suburbs, but without buildings ; outside
the Leaou were the aX (muh), pasture-grounds ;

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK 1.

d
a>

 Slee
P

fines
SR

ecu
SET

à
-
-
~
v

SiN
I
(€
SNS

E An ul “i= ay » i5 pii
DPA REESE SE p

M qe Wc Sa K uon
EUN Ja
that man made the semblances of men, and used them for theat pur-
pope what shall be thought o£ him. who causes his people to die of
hynger : -

Cuarrkn. V. King Hwuy of Leang said, “There was not in
the empire a Nes State than Tsin, as vou, venerable Sir, know,
But since it descended to me, on the east we have been defeated by
Ts‘e, and then my eldest son pe vished; on the west we have lost seven
hundre dle of territory to Tsin; and on.the south we have sustained
disgrace at the hands of Ts‘oo. J have brought shame on my de-
parted. predecessors, and wish on their account to wipe. it away, once
We ph W hat course is to be pursued to accomplish this?”

; Mp nejus replied, “With a territory whieh is only ENG DL

«which

inven!

&qui are, it is possible to attain tlie
S M ing living persons wit th
TS THE was ane Bde
Siete

ty Dow AE ded he i
n Santen ie cil if £ is partly.
‘ Baie Si nd partly an, Prts

 —low. tone bare IMS. Hy is by
S6 ba Lh aul hé, (Viz, enti
win b thidughity ve? : Pprete lide itas
ion. Phe. designation of Conta
^l neds to be observed. Bee ctrine
Pm ii Ai si 03 bins «P usur n OR
EMO FAM, ARE A MAY WEST TAKE SATIS-
7OEAGTION FOR LOSSES WHICH, H12 445; SUSTAINED,
UTSYQUENT;Gf9Y, WRNMENT. WILE, RAISE
MIM HIGH ABOVE HIS ENEMIES,
the partitioi of the state of sin By” I
opa of W els; AURA A etai a "rh M
nét koke n a8. il: Mein Un
iy wouldlBere seem ind príate t5
m h incipalitg.the: p of the whole St
ite
‘i oe. oe partitions

s not, however, refer to the rede
tainderghts to pre-
Ihe sors fhe sane Pu
 ders Jae pand
le Med; p xpi wo loto

It was in thej anth

to, tha tthe defeat

ot «e di PA ^

Imperial diguity.

was received fr

Ww E [n

täkt c: aptive, : eb and s quss
Tsjin »year D.
eiat dr 4, Mer (s d en, ae Era
péied Watt to be! secitééd By va
Sende rid tai biis Hi Ire wi
attended w t XN

P som E pads EE ms -
dm. to dieses B SE ad s doe uus
pear to be ff A EAEN A ái

xw ay De tratistati qo me a

Jm uw ot EAE

pp putqnort eonim: : nk e
Am Nor prolecenons hen Era i
asiu the OE dE T maaan ael
also gi yu.
“phe dea v
wars. refo h

MENS JM it I
the ge ám w

een yan

xo^
` $5- AN TAL
Maa dug Mae k
Io

yy. FL Cm. V. TUE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 11

c Ww pna pf fit 33 ji Au 6

EE
FE np SLA JJ DE f yi
A 4E i faa e EVE
aa Wee A F

FaN your Majesty will indeed dispense 2 bencyolent goyern-

ment to the people, being sparing in the use of punishments and
fines, and making the't taxes and levies light, so vausitig that the
fields shall be ploughed deep, and the weeding of them he earefülly
attended to, and that the strong-bodied, during their days of leisure,
shall cultivate their filial pie tv, fraternal respeetfuluess sincerity,
and trutlifuliess, serving ther eby, at home; their fathers and, elder
brothérs, and, abroud. their elders and superiors: —vou will then
hive a people who can be employed, with sticks which they have
e pared, to oppose the strong mi wil and sharp weapons of the tr vops
of Tsin and Ts‘oo,
COURS “The rulers of those States, vob their people of their time, so
that they cannot plough and w ced their fields, in order to support
their p: atents. ‘Their parents suffer from eold and hunger. Brothers,
w ives, and children, are — ated aid scattered abroad.

P a) Bat fy : 1n
[en do ÉD. rm h à. See, pul ii ii, js but sit Ves P jc A the. proportionjof the. loid-pro-

atin iW heces fry 1 ‘to take the Fr. in ‘this’ ‘nd düce paid to thief govt. eat BE EN
BU paresan) in. the; transl. There i is ai pause trilnitions By' vost ime is ful

ie ah Wo ?Nehidli is, “key "Dhis reversed.” A Mors party nike BE "Bb Be! A

T SUE ) d ie wal
pur Uh ppt i ke ^is fOr counei hie tax ‘of oa Wed und pd the, ae 3 ‘called
p. T a rU thereat, This last view, suits the connection

UT) ! pind f wy
a DE i ofl of the : Sant here: Mj, redde tow! sd once. soe

ni the; next par, —at 30, a man is said io ih. eli oe

T are the two gii mar inse septena Ni he! youl! but thy
' benevolent et St OE e: mein is the! Strong ite. this WItó'Gb

n FORMEN sake ufa 89 h eat am Ue caiiployed tö take thie field against che enini, 5
p ur Pel ent wastes ce) E] HJ fili aos not appear, to berr ‘yon, can ma

 ARMUT. p Leid y y or employ,’ but to! be passive with Reishi

lie ‘tlie penerul ime] or oji OTE perpetim my i

xag sw 360 must! be m the . "T4 erra , Pea Li

{ 26 "M a^ iis "o m.
on js He redémiptioi: pier Hc Hs eri towne esto epp

ony t An .; P evel fort eee

Grimes. ed Bs fedt tober tote Reth, pomi ? ir B Wri they" or those,’ Le. ese as

Uu [IL

taxes fl'erences tain as of di in » and / Too deste Jow. E tone. Wh is
the s CIR IE FUR Tw non Ae ' go toned in the is of children supporting their.

^
du

S
fie

&
>

-
v

E
S

[ d

oa

'
.

EI
wk

X
mE:

q THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK 1,
A5 He Tr JN ELS] CHE: Mv YA
fie H6 xe SL EE hH, fh SE ae
EETRLTDRIA
SUE nro a VR IE L, Ms BE,
HG EJ. T A55 A. BE i; IS DEEL
ELIR B
yl
Lo

Mp 7: Ayu
Xp OA IJ
I3, A. — KR m A X&.

“Those rulers, as 4t were, drive their people into pit-falls; or

5
drowh thein. Your Majesty will go to punish ‘them. In such’ a
case, who will oppose your Majesty ? '

`

.,G. * In accordance with this is the saying, — The benevolent has
no enemy. I beg your Majesty not to doubt what T say.” i

ıCnaprter VI 1, Mencius went to see the king Seang of Leang;
e12, ,On coming out from the interview, he said to some persons;
* When I looked: at him from a distance, he did not appear like n
sóvereign; when I drew near to him, I sawndthing venerable about
him, Abruptly he asked me, ‘How can the empire bó settled? ™* I
replied, ‘It will be Settled.by being united under one sway? i» wu
+ 3.- ** Who can so unite it?” AE rernm
riá “I replied, f He who has no pleasure in: killing men,.caniisd
unite it, TE "

nob
1 5,1 ** Who can give it to him?'" . TE bap i

tul

Hiis, and inferiors their superiors. See in
Ana. II. vii, 5. Je, low, 1st tone, here= Bi].

. 6, dif not ‘therefore ;’ it may indicate a

deduction from what precedes, or be simply an
T Ri

iflustration of it. , ‘Do not doubt?
Jt is strange that Julien, in his generally ac-
cyrate version, should translate this by ‘ne cune-
feris Hesitancy would, indeed, be an effect of
doubting Mencius’ words, not the proverb just
quoted, but specially tlie afifrmation in par. 2.
But the words may not be so rendered.

CH. 6. DisavrpixTAENT Or MENCIOS WITI
THE KING SEANG. i By WHOM THE TORN EMPIRE
MAY BE UNITED UNDER ONE SWAY, 1. On

the death of king Hwuty,he was sueebéddi b his
son Hih ( Fria called here by his Ronin d epi-
thet, Secang, = The land-enlarger, and Virtuous.’
The interview here recorded seems to Have takes

place immediately after Hih’s accession; dnd
Mencius, Ít is said, was so disappointed by it that
he soon left the dountryy! EE ER low, 3d

tone. The A probably reférs to some friends
of the “philosophef, and is not to beitaken
generally, AA, read ituh. K.—coinp:

Aa H Analects, XI. xxiv. 4. On 4 x.
Wh x comp. “Ana, XIX. 14. Chaou Ke

THR WORKS OF MENCIUS:
^ AL AC Y
WI. WR

Pr. 1. Cn. VI.—VII.

zi

Y

ze
i d

"wl
Si

pi
=
Sr

[ d
VE
/

ont
$

SSA

A

S:
2
PÜ

ENHETEN
been,

ak aS

i--

LL
Amt
ting
=

\
>- d

zb

GG

Xd

IX

R

Dar
E

sun ANH
RANA

[ d
;
— k
- W
z
b, maw

2

=
is
n

RE

Or

Vemb
ERESRÉ
ZH

 œ

—/—
=
>
24

\
*

Y
E

E

zv HI è
y '

v4 ^
o " l »
pem , WA. B xL YE X T

6. “T replied, ‘All the people of the empire will unanimously
giveJit:‘to him. Does-your Majesty understand the way of the grow-
ing grain?” , Daring the seventh and eighth months, when drought!
provails,'the:plants become dry. ‘Then the clouds colléct denselyin
the heavens; they send down torvents:of rain, and the graih) er&ts
itself, as if'by a shoot! Whenit,does so, who can keep kt bilok ?
Now:among the.shepherds of men throughout the empire, there is
tot one who does not find pleasure in killing ‘men: Ifithere werd
one who did not find pleasure in killing men, 'all the peopte inithe
empire would look towards him with out-stretched mets" Stich
being indecd the case, the people would flock to hii, as water fidws
downwards with a rush, which no one can repress.” dedi’

NRS
DW

-

N

Cuarrer VII.

1. The king Seuen of Ts'e asked, saying, “ May I

'

be informed by you of the transactions of Hwan of Ts‘e, and Wan,
!

of Tsin ?"

iri tify ley . .
makes ; F — to=‘It will be settled by
lim who makes benevolent government his

one, object.’ But this is surely going beyond
the text. 5. The Bil is here explained, by
Ghog, We and others, as equivalent to Fr
founding, no doubt, on the E En in the
endo But in Book V. Pt. I. v., wehaven plain
ingtanodof, Bi , used in connection ith the

festowlnent of the empire, as in the translation
which I have ventured to give, Which Seems, to

~» TY nA

me, moreover, to accord equally swell if! not
better, with the rest of the chapter... . 316.
The 7th and sth months of Chow, were, the
5th and 6th of the Hea dynasty, with which the
months of the present dynasty agree. A: +

—gk. in lower 1st'lone, is ysed i$ in the Ana

XI. ix. 3. The Z at the end is tó be refer
abe rstel

u t nit
red to JK. the whole, from th GI. heing
an illustration of the» peóple's e turning »wittr
resistless energy to a/beuevolent miler! an Yi o)

14 è THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK. I.

2» R W FR die s 4E T 3b
th, vin VA Peal, él d d p
AL B EA
i yJ da 44 fal
Jv — H, Au, E m EX Xx JU F,
KERMES EZZ m”
= replied, * There were none of the disc ‘iples of Chang:
ne po spoke about the affairs of Hwan and Wáàn, and therefore

they hive not been transmitted to these after ages j—vour xehyunt
labes heard them. lf you will have ime speak, let it be about

TOA
XA
zX
pim d

Imjféáal governme tit.”
3* The King sanl, * What virtue must there be in order to ‘the
attdinment, of Tinperial sway?" Mencius answered, “The love and

prb ection of the people; with’ this there is no power which! ¢an
prefet a kuler from attaining it.”

"Tlie^king asked again, “Js. such ‘an one as I competent to

WR i hi NE ee Fo Gic ai
SM

H
4

“ERIAL GOV ed f
ed he 2.
Dea SURE PATITO em IMPERIAL DIG- ured t cir approval. 3 M verb, =

Be and interesting c Apter has i * to speak of! itt Hble i Hacnijti

in five parts. In) the rst; part, tone different: from its’ usagé: ds ERU
: LE Mencius unfolds the principle of Imp.,

th and tll the kii f Tate that He poss j JH 2H rad lac cuia rei
ma "to. deeds pare 6-1 he: loi she " Doral M uic ise li FUSE

n to un RUE. his’ id mind; ap.
nd how lie ight’ a reise an! iid ‘gov M er d ‘for the al fa des iin

third upfdlda boy the king, í if ohio
bra: oue asy ne kid d tart which ‘of making any senseo the’ passayelit hal

tH
} eds Ini ithe Dasa rr? 198—235; WAY. 1 Fe» tlow. 8d tone; arid pores
eY th i I
ae T “he iy ofthe “ii pu ET thd Rope Sdn "s "
Ips n Mm vesica pide pee eT mme
cit thal, “a saa ne ects the ble tin fal full its ioverns T Ree ee Mica
development, on ui pce éd with Imperia enr ius! ‘mean’ hint at )
king uen (‘1 The Distinguished, í Engle tym. Ra gum fere the OE
ore
Ls E Lu d ond, gt sod P His 1443 til trv ah ‘just
tia s P Ms X begat the pürpbáe b f our points 9t iqu i
à vere PER aan date’ óf hid RE to. preserve,’ seer) 2: translated
is ac ^ n * ^
Send Visit to Vii i6 alio nisté ny ees kare to Choo, Hes acco account, ers
"aus Life of. ue be baee sj The, zuler, eiers ES Pen 1

was;preperly. only: a, J oria tot der o
ore here mentioned, va EPIS nw n
he'k s giving: men ng
and; Wiin,--see Ana; XIV.xvi- They’! to thé a n E ihe, ,
hi

phi oi PFO ‘the title of king was a usurpation,
were tlid greatest of the five ledders'of the Sp Hairs Of ROYEN

Ngihad played: sovicdnspivadustanpartiin: 18/the yerbue eL. - Mi oae
er, time of qe Choxt dynasty, but to’ tone EE zat Cina üt ^the samet

Pid. Cu. Vir, THE

fi " EL,
<L. ME NL, TE
‘iy VA, Uh, Bb OS

Pa
Aa

love and protect the people?”

incident from Hoo Heih :— The king,’

WORKS OF MENCIUS.

v

v

Nu
-p

l

D

—
=)

o

2810 HN
d

v

ux

diss
d

iy

Mencius said, ** Yes.
you know that I am competent to that?”

said he,

INH

are:

!
-—
=

i

r

F3, uf

TH
TH

”

* From what do

ST heard 'the following

‘was sitting aloft

in the hall, when a man appeared, leading an ox past the lower part

of it.

king said, -Let it go.

kiiy said, How can that be omitted?

-

J-

The king saw him, and asked, Where is the ox going ?
an replied, We are going to consecrate a bell with its blood.

The
The

J cannot bear its frightened appearance, as
if it were an innocent person going to’ the place of death,
answered, Shall ave then omit tho consecration of the bell?
‘Change, it for a sheep.’
do mot know, whether this incident really: ovcurred:” i

The king veplicd, “ It did,” and thòn Meéencius said, “The —
seengin this is, sufficient. to carry you to the Imperial sway.

The màn
The
od

The

people all supposed that your Majesty, grudged — the animal, but
your servant knows surely, that it was your Majesty" 8 not being able

tor bear lhe sight, which mude s you do us you did.”

eat the d in
ii. Pt. IL. 38." "The.

sa ea montar au
"isis DESC cn

ity
^ TAE TU
r xt ie ‘crevices.’

ito ate his
dae " ‘is—} a sacrifice: el e HS def

" EDEN echt ids Med ed ith t a aa on

ligious rite; Thé only thing is tliat, in using i n

worship, To o ng. F a
oat acenSie emple

em Se he Toke a 1

bell, the prince. of Ve

x im

usurping an. Imperial privilege.!.;
salmostall pasiant be taken as the finite verb-— you loved,

Lond
$

è

16 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

SFA.

A
v

E-
=< ur
res
RE
z
BN

BH SN E

BHIEN

v
[ d

SSH S

SaaS
X
IX

THN
I:

TSS

erg RE

RST
EL

4
T
c
”
UH
RHO

e

De

=
V
4

v

=

-

FPES SETS Aa

TAH
=
XA

ae
Shines ls

NER
jte

tS ERA
SL EEN ak Ae BEA hi, EN ee

6. The king said, “You are right. And yet there really was an
appearance of what "the people condemned. But though Ts'e be a
small and narrow state, how should I grudge one ox. Indeed it was
because I could not bear its frightened appearance, as if it were an
innocent person going to the place of death, that therefore I changed
it for a sheep.”

`q. Mencius pursued, “Let not your Majesty deem it strange
that the people should think you were grudging the animal. When
you changed a large one for a small, how should they know the true
reason. If you felt pained by its: being led without guilt to the
ed of death, what was there to choose between an ox and a sheep?"

The King laughed and said, “ What really was my mind in the mat-
ter? I did not grudge the expense of it, and changed it for a sheep!
—There was reason in the people's saying that I grudged it."

8. “There is no harm zn their saying so,” said p Mencius. “Your
conduct was an artifice of benevolence. You saw the ox, and had not

grudged the aviinal,’ ‘or as=‘to be niggardly, requiring the supplement which I have’ given. `
— you were parsimonieus," 6. It is. better gji acknowledges the truth of Mencius’ ex-

to make a panse after SK, and give. the mean- planati on, 7. K- JA ER ak af n

é
ing as in the translation. Chaou K‘e runs it > expresses the king's quandary. He is now

on to.the next clause. BK A a Re E: quite perplexed by the way in which Mencius
is elliptical, and the particle a denotes this, has- -put the ¢ case, 8. t-il gj — comp. Ana. VE

ee
"RR

Pri Cu. VIL THE WORKS OF MENCIUS, 17

X S

Ios
S
hee het

J

SER
NR
z
=

N
N
È

ame
id

M

NER

¢

Ve
E

a

nar

v

QIS E

N
(tO
SHE

=%

SIR

EXE

v
d
p

ZEN

m
Da

1
J.

4

à
ES
st
b

ons
MRENE

Bh
DEN

Gu

Tli

i
be

HSI SSH

4
1

sso
DENSE
SON TOS

f

f d
pem
3A

AS
g
3
\
"

qw
z

qui
 NYSA
a
t
zm

a
E T a4 AB,

seen the sheep. So is the superior man affected towards animals,
that; having seen them alive, he cannot bear to see them die; having
heard their “dyi ing cries, he cannot bear to eat their fiesh. Therefore e.
he keeps away from his cook-róom."

9. The king was pleased, and said, “It is said i in the Book of
Poetry, ‘The minds of other s, T am able by reflection to measure ; —-
this is verified, my Master, in your discovery of my motive. I
indeed did the "thing, but when I turned my thoughts inward, and
examined into it, I “could not discover my own mind. When you,
Master, spoke those wor ds, the movements of compassion began, to
work in my mind. How is it that this heart has in it what is
equal to the Imperial sway ?”

10. Mencius replied, “Suppose a man, were to make this state-
ment to your Majesty : i‘ My strength is sufficient to lift three thou-
sand catties, but it is not sufficient to lift one feather ;—any eye-sight
is sharp enough to examine the point of an autumn hair, but I "do

xxviii. 2,— IL Jii ina. thekilling-place special reference. ES X Z E th, Hit,

of the animals more especially, but we must take ‘This was a speaking about you, my master.’

the two words JS] together. 9. i= 10. Aff, read fuh, up. 4th tone," often
t For the ode, see the Book of Poetry, meaning to report the execution of a missin, as

AL iv. Ode IV. st. 4, where the Ai A has a! in the phrase—Fi dy. Here it is= to inform,’
k d g 3 ' ^

I THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK L

En
z
DR

C
= By
ERE PRIM TT e NEU AH

NI
mum

SECOS

zm
MSE

2

wes

ERAH

w
v
v

S
^
TT
m

FERS ET RINGS

(6)

-
--
ow BP

Soy Sah
Ey

o

STERA
SINR

v
v

3

EOE

v

rex xg

-Enp
"ORS RT

Q

See
POS (N EO

Ld
v

Pss
bis
P
3E

o

SNS

ANS
PRINS HN Se

uL

Qa

SE
ETE

(11 m

5, Si VL AE S € € AU

not see a waggon-load of faggots ;'—would your Majesty allow what
he said?” “No” was the answer, on which Mencius proceeded, “ Now
here is kindness sufficient to reach to animals, and no benefits are
extended from it to the people.—How is this? Is an exception to be
made here? The truth is, the feather’s not being lifted, is because
the strength is not used; the waggon-load of firewood’s not being
seen, is because the vision is not, used; and the people's not being
loved -and protected, is because the kindness is "ot: employed.
Therefore your Majesty's not exercising the Imperial sway, is be-
cause you do not do it, not because you are not able to do it." T
“IL: The king asked, * How may the difference between the not
doing ‘a thing, and the not being able to do it, be represented?”
Muneius replied, “In such a thing as taking the 'l'ae mountain
undér your arm, and leaping over the north sea with. it; if you say
to people—‘I am not able to do it, that is a real case of not being
able. In sucka matter as breaking off a branch from a tree at the
order of a superior, if you say to people—'I am not able to do it,
that is a case of not doing it, it is not a case of not being able to do
it. Therefore your Majesty's not exercising the Imperial sway, is not
$9 Gi Bid, —inorder to bring out the force of it is detter to add nothing to the simple text.
the ftij ‘only,’ it is necessar y to make two hé mee aere, ep nd famous distinction 2
2 MM EE E moral’ and ‘physical’ ability. i JÉ.
sentences of this in English, RE: itis Lethe form,’ ‘or figure;’—lit., ‘How mry the

suid = AN ü y^" "not willing to do it,’ but figure. . . be differenced?’ Bn yo low,

SNES GE

dà
A

Pr. Y. Cr. VIL THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

HEE el
3
3

er

2 2

Vu
i.
eu
sN%
v-
cw

(CR

Shs
HSN TRS
sah

v

FRR CSS

AAAS
= BUE
alle
a

v

SERE

3e
ZI

-
v

IE
SSH
e

i

APER

E fO
Ld

"m

SL
TT
im

=y
SNARES

> IES
See:

s SRO
BS

V.
t
v
v
v

ET

such a case as Dur of. m the Te mountain under, your arm,
and leaping over the north sea with it. Your Majesty's not exercis:
ing the Imperial sway isa case like that of breaking off a branch
from a tree: :

12. "Treat with the reverence due to age’ the elders in your
own family, so that the elders. in the ffamilies of others , shall
be similarly treated ; "treat with the kindness due to youth the
young in your own family, so that the. young in the families of
others shall be similarly treated.:—do this, and the empire may be.
made to go round in your palm. It is said in. the Book of
Poetry, ‘His example affected his wife. It reached, to his brothers,
and his family of the State was governed by it. '—The language
shows how king Wan simply took this.kindly: heart, and exer-
cised it towards those parties. Therefore the. carrying out his
kindly heart by a prince will suffice for the love and protection of all
within the four seas, and if he do not carry it out, hé will not be

te e

x "E ls rac $ xs l] TE E.
3d tone, = 4, 12. Chaou K'e makes the and not the means, which is thus represented.
opening Tera! Trent as their age requires your For the ode, see the She-king, III. i. Ode VI. st.
own old (Eng. idiom seems to require the 2d 2. The original celebrates the virtue of king

person), and treat the old of others in the .
same way, but there seems to be a kind of WAS ane we mnst tranelatein-the thira person,

i
constructio pregnans, conveying all that appears and not in the first. FST. but the ee
in the translation, K P zl ii H 2 is disputed. Here Choe He explains it by y i

is made by most comm. to mean—‘you may

pervade the empire with your kindness so The philosopher now introduces a new element

, easily’ But I muet believe that it is the eect, into his discourse.’ It is no longer the m Z

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK I.

2

*

IM

v
oo.

ENTE

FA
TENIR

PIE
ATS ARCS HRS ST
Re SS) NON

O

TSN HOES
=

v

a
Se
Pa *

AE. $ BN te B dn
apy UV FUR 4M D
Je

HEH EH ORE

E

ChE eH SEES! C

=
SN
2+0
BST
REZE

AK A
à 4 Hi ’ íi :
able to protect his wife and children. The way in which the
ancients came greatly to surpass other men, was no other than this:—
simply that they knew well how to carry out, so as to affect, others,
what they themselves did. Now your kindness is sufficient to reach
to animals, and no benefits are extended from: it to reach the people.
—How is this? Is an exception to be made here?

13. “By weighing, we know what things are light, «ind what
. heavy. By measuring, we know what thingy are long, and what
short. The relations of all things may be thus determined; and it
is of the greatest importance to estimate the motions of the mind. I
beg your Majesty to measure it. ->

14. “You collect your equipments of war, endanger your soldiers
and officers, and excite the resentment of the other princes ;—do
these things cause you pleasure in your mind? "

15. The kingreplied *No. How should I derive pleasure from
these things? My object in them is to seek for what I greatly desire.”

16. Mencius said, “May I hear from you what it is that you
greatly desire? The king laughed and did. not speak. Mencius

Z NM ‘the heart that cannot bear,’ i.e, the instrument for measuring. But both it, and
humane heart, which is necessary to raise to the uk are equivalent to active verbs. DW Ad
Imperial sway, but it is HE iv A ‘the carry- means, that the mind, as affected from without,
ing out of this heart” All may have the heart, and going forth to affect, may be light or heavy,
but all may nof be gifted, so to carry it out that i$ long or short, le, may be right or wrong, aud
shall affect all others. We cannot wonder that that in different degrees ;—and that it is more

the princes whom Mencius lectured should have important to estimate the character of its action,
t than to weigh or measure othor things. 14.

M
thought his talk 3 fa: transcendental. 13. Here Mencius helps the king to measure his
The Ist E is low. 3d tone, toô, ‘a measure,’ the i mind. Pil —avout the same as aur ‘come, naw,’
LES

No

Pr I Cu. VIL * (TIE WORKS OF MENTIUS, l

S
i

ma

=
E
Sens

RIDH
EHS ES
Sie) id ass

SUN HS
zi

TOREM
ur
ay

d
E
See
S5

Q €
es

-
pad
-—

LAX

E

ayy
T ,
rend

O

EINE
3

ora
x
MRES
HES

ng

a

=
Bee i
Comma

E
À

E
ES
ea St

>

RE

u%
wf V4

V
dus
Acre
S
N
EDO

v
Ld

IDE B

ve

*
t
e m
v
v

a.
©
v

v

e

L4

E
E

Bich +0
m

NI:

v

XR
NO HE
net
ath
Ser SNH
RI

FLEA

ri

resumed, * Are you led to desire 4t, because you have not enough
of rich and sweet food for your mouth? Or because you have not:
enough of light and warm clothing for your body? . Or because
you have not enow of beautifully coloured objects to-delight your
eyes? Or because you have not voices and tones enow to please your
ears? Or because you have not enow of attendants and favourites to
stand before you and receive yeur orders? Your Majesty's various
officers are sufficient to supply you with those things How can
your Majesty be led to entertain such a desire on account of them ?"
“No,” said the king; "my desire is not on account of them?” -
Mencius added, “Then, what your Majesty greatly desires may be
known. You wish to enlarge your territories, to have Tsin and
Ts‘oo wait at your court, to rule the Middle kingdom, and to attract
to you the barbarous tribes that surround it. But to do what you
do to seek for what you desire, is like climbing a tree to seek for fish."

17. The king said, “Is it so bad as that?” “It is even worse,”
was the reply. “If you climb a tree to seek for fish, although you

or‘wellthen.” 16. The fü are all interrog., the assertion. Ree read as, ad= Ed. Xi.

low.1st tone, and the Fs arealllow. 3d tone. TE , from the use of the phrase here, has come to be
ead p'een, low. 1st tone, joined with the next used for ‘ to climb a tree, but it simply is— from

char. — EF, gives a positiveness to a tree,’ 17. The an inroduct. part, ==
BRIEL EL ean Hs m.

2 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

te
2
R
r
ma

R>+

EIJAN

$
24m E DANE
m

ESSERE

SSH
Z

HP
ST S EE

zA

AP]

zs

ES
RINA

b
1
v

Se

O
O

t
»
-
[d

E

a SNES

e
E

«Tu
EE

RE

[ d
td

A
«X

DUE

SCs] NEM Es Ws

v

REREN ^
s

e

as
SSS

v

WEA HATT
EESSI SEE

v
v

ny

HES
Pra aS
SHINS

g
NI Sr
— (t

T

Z BR RAT Bop Bl SER

do not get the fish, you will not suffer any subsequent calamity.
But if you do what you do to seek for what you desire, doing it
moreover with all your heart, you will assuredly afterwards meet
with calamities.” The king asked, “ May I hear from you the proof
of that?" Mencius said, “If the people of Tsow should fight with
the people of Ts'oo, which of them does your Majesty think would
conquer?” “The people of Ts‘oo would conquer." ** Yes ;—and so
it is certain that a small country cannot contend with a great, that
few cannot contend with many, that the weak cannot contend with
the strong. The territory within the four seas embraces nine divi-
sions, each of a thousand /e square. All Ts‘e together is but one of
them, ‘If with one part you try to subdue the other eight, what is the
difference between that and Tsow’s contending with Ts‘oo? For,
with the desire which you. have, you must likewise turn back to the
radical course for its attainment. — M

18. “Now, if your Majesty will institute a government whose
action shall all be benevolent, this will cause-all the officers in the

à

* yes, and.’ ZER BEX, is spoken with back to the root of success.’ 18, H$.— fields,"

reference to the king’s object of ambition :-— : ‘wilds.’ : in?
‘By the course you are pursuing you cannot suc- 275? 2° wilds. tH P~ to come forth in,

ceed, for, if you wish to do so, you must also turn Ze, to pass from their own States into yours.

Ww.
e

Pr. I. Cu. VII. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

dit ME OWE A, EN
A T E <PH
AM JUN FG +)
tL. 49 BE, IE
Jk dm y du
Fe

[d

EWH

v

»

v

u
RE

ERREN

ibe Soa
ERR hata

y
^"
eme

-

HN THE

See
SE
(HERE E

SHS

ris
Pay

PS WA
Ke BA on EE

A i ME sà à ; 3
empire to wish to stand in your Majesty’s court, and the farmers all
to wish to plough in your Majesty's fields, and the merchants, both
travelling and stationary, all to wish to store their goods in your
Majesty's market places, and travelling strangers all to wish to make
their tours on ‘your Majesty's roads, and all throughout the empire
who feel aggrieved by their rulers to wish to come and complain to
your Majesty. And when they are so bent, who will be able to
keep them back ?” AA l

19. The king said, “I am stupid, and ot able to advance to
this. I wish you, my Master, to assist my intentions. Teach me
clearly ; although I ain deficient in intelligence and’ vigour, I will
essay and try to carfy your instructions into effect."

' 20." Mencius replied, “They are only men of education, who,
without a certain livelihood, are able to maintain a fixed heart. As
to the people, if they have not a certain livelihood, it follows that
they will not have a fixed heart. And if they have not'a fixed
heart, there is nothing which they will not do, in the way of self-
abandonment, of moral deflection, of depravity, and of wild license.
When they thus have been involved in erime, to follow them up and
punish them ;—this is to entrap the people. How can such a thing as
entrapping the people be done under the rule of a benevolent man?”

NS

xu

T

ES

Fai
X
m

i
Zu
tH
(Y
2

SK ae wishing to be aggrieved, but must and-- ftf. ra en-net,’ ùe., to entrap. fat

restrain their feelings, 20, ke read as, BLA ju B-B. see on par, 17. 2L Lid

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK E

»
u
E

BAN SERS

©

[ 4

BOE

asa ye
nom uad

E
deme
Pire

v
v

MEN SASH:

-

Ae SASS

[od

x
SSE

[ od
v

SJA

v

re

>
PR HE oe

v

oy

TIR

ji
3
SNANAR
S

N

L3

ww
-
Cá

v

v

EMSRS IN

REENERT
ot RDN

PER --i
Dh Se
EDAD

[ d

mM de HJ] A.

J

b

REESE NASAREN

=

E AME j T ajo

21. “Therefore an intelligent ruler will regulate the livelihood
of the people, so as to make sure that, above, they shall have suffi-
cient wherewith to serve their parents, and, below, sufficient where-
with to support their wives and children; that in good years they
shall always be abundantly satisfied, and that in bad years they
shall escape the danger of perishing. After this he may urge them,
and they will proceed to what is good, for in this case the people
will follow after that with ease. ^a

22. “Now, the livelihood of the people is so regulated, that,
above, they have not sufficient wherewith to serve their parents,
and, below, they have not sufficient wherewith to support their
wives and children. Notwithstanding good years, their lives are
oontinually embittered; and, in bad years, they do not escape perish-
ing. In such circumstanees they only try to save themselves
from death, and are afraid they will not succeed. What leisure
have they. to cultivate propriety and righteousness?

x t H, — Julien censures Noel here for

NES
ESSEN

RUE

zie
a

PS

[9]
pt

Shs BTL IS
AE LEN
x

I

"x

, gen. means *the whole life? Perhaps we

should translate, ‘If some years be good, they
will all their lives have plenty ;’ ie, they will
in those years lay by a sufficient provision for
bad years. This supposes that the people have
felt the power of the instruction and moral
training that is a part of Royal govt., which,
however, is set forth as consequent on the
regulation of the livelihood. Similarly, below.

x H-Z is the verb, - fL. RI

rendering ft Z by ‘ipsi (principi) obsequentury
and rightly. But Iam not sure that the error
is not rather in the rendering of $t than in

that of xs 'The prince is supposed to exem-
plify, as wellas to urge to, the good course, and
the well-off people have no difficulty in follow-
iug him. 28. Xi LZ. as in par, 17, but

ae

u
i

uv
DR

ev

EEK HZ En mik.
i Val, fi H Ao B A Lm Es
L3 4 FALE BETA.
< RR A AZ BS mE
ff AN EE: H, hat $
EL AL HE t BL ZI

A ra TÈ

; 3E pk

7H

x)
wf iv

JP SS [b e - ER
(VSS C
SN

REDRA SES
TR

m
pha REN:

e
A i "xL H Pj AE R,

23. “If your Majesty wishes to effect this, regulation of the
livelihood of the people, why not turn to that’ which is the essential
step to it ? l

24. “Let mülberry-trees be planted about the homesteads with

*their five mow, and persons of fifty years may be clothed with silk.
In keeping fowls, pigs, and swine, Jet not their times of breeding
be neglected, and persons of seventy years may eat flesh. Let there
not be taken away the time that is proper for the cultivation of the
farm with its hundred mow, and the family of eight mouths that is
supported by it shall not suffer from hunger. Let careful atten-
tion be paid to education in schools,—the inculcation in it especially
of the filial and fraternal dutics, and gray-haired men will not be
seen upon the roads, carrying burdens on their backs or on their
heads. It never has been that the ruler of a State where such
results were seen,+—the old wearing silk and eating flesh, and the
black-haired people suffering neither from hunger nor cold,—did
not attain to the Imperial dignity.”

is

*
with reference to the immediate subject. — 24, eight mouths being the number which 100 mow
See ch. ili, the only difference being that, for of medium land were computed to feed.

4 H Z ze there, we have A H X»

^ d

n

. nese have done well in refusing to rank him with . i
. Confucius. ^ 1. Chwang Paou appears to of the chap., but Mencius proceeds to substitute

that suits, the manners of the present age.” .

‘duce his owm notions, and would win princes

26 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. ^ .* BOOK L

(5 BOOK L
KING HWUY OF LEANG. PART IL

pss

A
7

v
o

TEEN
em

DEAD Hee
NH ONES

am
a
DAH

ien
HIA
-

EH
a ae

“H
ren
CE
Se
NE

L iw 7

DS Les
CmarrER I. 1. Chwang Paou, seeing Mencius, said to him, “I

‘had an audience of the king. His Majesty told me that he loved music,.

and I was not prepared with anything to reply to him. What do
you pronounce about that love ,of music?" Mencius replied, “If
the king’s loye of music were very great, the kingdom of Ts'e would
be near tp a-state of good government”, ,
set n $-- ? f : NO . ' ‘e ' L .
. 2. Another day, Mencius, having an audience of the king, , said,
“Your Majesty, „E have: heard, told the officer Chiwan g, that you love
music ;—was it so?" ' The king changed colour, and said, “I am un-
able to love the miusi¢,of the ancient sovereigns; I only love the music

.
wufor P

i Pe fie aa AEN (ad? : : AME NN
, Cir. 1. "How THE Love or MUSIC MAY RE JE E (up. Ist tone) is a phrase, signifying
MADE SEBSENRYIÉNTITO GOOD GOVERNMENT, AND Lr EN :

TO A PRINCE'S OWN ADVANCEMENT. "The chap- ‘Near to;’ sometimes we find jit alone, as in
ter ie a good oe of Mencius manner,— Ana. XI. xviii. i. The subject, nearness to
how he slips trom the point in hand to intro- which is indicated, is often left tb be gathered

over to benevolent government by their very from the context, as here. The £E x A
vices. He was mo' sterii moralist, and the Chi- 4 A H isa platitude. It should be the text

have been a.minister at the court of Ts‘e. The 4, loh for Á d ngoh, in his own manner. 2,

— »edine- x i
H preceding Af E- "m dif aptid Tae as in last Pt. ch. iii. 3; observe how the

sary. If we translate it, we must render—‘ He
then said’ But the paraphrasts aH neglect it. final Bf adds to the force of ‘only? ‘Ancient

id
-

Pr. II. Cu. I. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

N
panj
w
* &ill

à
SNH

Ba (NRE EEO S
vl zh
us ;

o

v
v

ESANI RER

o

ZDERE SN A

v
e

-

ASS

N
(

Soft se

-

ISRN
DUSIEMIDNENEÉ

b
*
—

aS
"1
v

v
b
o

XE
SN

i
HE:

[ d

V2

RES] TAR EEN HNT
SEI

: M 253 os > As WATS
Mi te y Me NU Se XE np 3e

B

3. Mencius said, “If your Majesty’s love of music were very
great, Ts‘e would be near to a state of good government! ' The music
. of the present day is just like the music of antiquity, in regard to
effecting that." .

4. The king said, “May I hear from you the proof of that?”
Mencius asked, “ Which is the more pleasant,—to enjoy ‘music by
yourself alone, or to enjoy it along with others?" “To enjoy it along
with others,” was the reply. “And which is the more’ pleasant, —
to enjoy music along with a few, or to enjoy it along with many ?”
* To enjoy it along with many." l

5. Mencius proceeded, “Your servant begs to explain what I
have said about music to your Majesty. ' ,

6. ‘Now, your Majesty is having music here.—The people hear
the noise of your bells and drums, and the notes of your fifes and pipes,

. and they all, with aching heads,, knit their brows, and say to one
another, ‘Thats how our king likes his music! But why. does he
reduce us to this extremity of distress ?—Fathers and sons cannot

,
sovereigns, i e., Yaou, Shun, Yu, T'ang, Win
and Woo, is a better translation of p; E than

‘former kings? 3. HI= 3h. ED FY 79
Bi Ea, as in prec. ch, 7 is GE — the

second xni is loh, ‘joy,’ ‘pleasure. So, in the
next clause, and after Bh. 5. “Fay (low. 3d

tone) F. ‘for the sake of your Majesty? `G.

[74 Sie BF is a verb, -- 4E. The ancient
diet., the at pa makes a difference between
this, and the same word for ‘drum,’ saying this

is formed £rom £ named pi, while the other
is formed from x*. The difference of form is

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK I:

N
t

ZAAR

BNET Hd] A

HON To

m

d

(e

EE

[ d

Wa DSSS

EJ

(SES

im

RESA HAE

c

bi
e
ww

=

a

b

SPENN
> HEN

NES

HEHSERE

ae

SS
zu
me

N
d

QU
TN

SEHA
-

St

FAS

i
SERZZR(N

E.

Seo

MANAS

[ 4

aad
Sy d
Pd

PSS
Ex

ES

zub
SG

mE

SEDE
HEN

-

E
ys
est

a H
see one another. Elder brothers and younger brothers, wives and
children, are separated and scatteréd abroad. Now, your Majesty is
hunting here.—The people hear the noise of your carriages and
horses, and sce the beauty of your plumes and streamers, and they all,
with aching heads, knit their brows, and say to one another, ‘That's
how our king likes his hunting! But why does he reduce us to
‘this extremity of distress ?—YV'athers and sons cannot see one another.
Elder brothers and younger brothers, wives and children, are separat-
ed and scattered abroad. Their fecling thus is from no other
reason, but that you do not give the people to have pleasure as well
as yourself. .

7. * Now, your Majesty is having music here. The people hear
the noise of your bells and drums, and the notes of your fifes and pipes,
and they all, delighted, and with joyful looks, say to one another,
‘That sounds as if our king were free from all sickness! If he were
not, how could he enjoy this musie?’ Now, your Majesty is hunt-

now not regarded. p^ itp, ‘here,’ used as we ps Z HF [14 Ed is incomplete, The

use here in English, putting a case with little local A -

Vom nsh, ii E, nion z ji paraphrasts add, to complete it, fa] LAS B.
i e E is used synonymously with nr. ‘to hunt.’

expresses anguish, not anger. xk is here the

imtrod. particle, and is better rendered by but
than sow. It will be seem that the preced. zm

FE and É are to each, other much as our
Sound or noise and tone or note. T is applied

BPO Are THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

to
S.

n
P»

MT
a

ex
SARR HON)

Lx
E
HH

AD
Hite St
Ñ
-
E:

NS
HH

}10

ty

S
Shp SE

ME d

"ion
A

"
p
C

[ d

\

4

=

"

=

o

p
poe
ai

E

Y
BENE
SEUSS Svs

BE
"ges
Hen
E NRAN

DB
a
EE

Ji
m
zz
E
m
ix

Oo M

ing here. The people hear the noise of your carria ges and horses,
and see the beauty of your plumes and streamers, and they all, de-
lighted, and with joyful looks, say to one another, "That looks as if our
king were free from all sickness! If he were not, how could he
enjoy this hunting?’ Their feeling thus is from no other reason but
n you cause them to have their pleasure as you have yours,

“If your Majesty now will make pleasure a thing common to
T people and yourself, the Imperial sway awaits you.'

Cuaprer II. 1. The king, Seuen, of Ts'e asked, “Was dt. '80,:
that the park of king Win contained seventy square le?” Mencius
replied, ‘It is so in the records.”

2. “Was it so large as that?” exclaimed the king. “The. peo-
ple,” said Mencius, “ still looked on it as small" ‘The king added,

appropriately to the fifes and pipes, and also to events to futurity qub Ko. F -E
+

the iran 9 pied having gea to , must be understood— containing says
the music of the bel/s with which these were enty sq square le not ‘seventy le square.’ In the

Ja .
adorned. Of Wj lize Choo He simply says that Hag ip» the meaning of Fr here (not similerly,

they were VE ES, “belonging to the banners.” however, in Pt. I. v. 2; vii. 17) is given by yy
The AY were feathers adorning the top of the

, ‘in circumference? The glossarist on Chaoy
flag-staff ; the JE , a number of cows’-tails sus-

Kee 'o explains it by Jr E » which, I think,
pended from the top. fü ER fal is, see confirms the meaning I have given. The book
Yt. I. ch. ii.. or books giving account, of this park of king Wün

Cu, 2. How, A RULER MUST NOT INDULGE are nów lost. 2. 18 E: FE E: are dis:
HIS LOVE FOR PARKS AND HUNTING TO THE DIS- tinguished thus :—‘gathererso nes Ao food ani-
COMFORT OF THE PEOPLE.’ l. f H, low. 3d tone, mals, and gatherers of grass. for fuel.’ . Observe

*a record,’ an historical narration handing down how those nouns, and Ff and EA that follow are

Skt EAEE KLZ
Tir JE BY Ki A tE a, i,
B25 A [A HG a COT
Æ. BE Pc EE
El JH IT
Eo AA A Si A AE,
ZR Ft HW b
Ah RJU Fat i.
A AWT bet t y]
A f AE Æ, Ao A K He
i KW HE eS E ES
S3, SE BAR xs

“My park contains only forty square le, and the people still look on
it as large.. How is this?" ‘The park of king Wan,” was the reply,
“ contained seventy square le, but the grass-cutters and fuel-gather-
ers had the privilege of entrance into it; so also had the catchers
of pheasants and hares. He shared it with the people, and was it
not with reason that they looked on it as small?

3. “When I first arrived at the borders of your State, I enquired
about the great prohibitory regulations, before. I would venture to
enter it; and I heard, that inside the border-gates there was a park
of forty square le, and that he who killed a deer in it, was held guilty
of the same crime as if he had killed a man.—Thus those forty
square le are a pitfall in the middle of the kingdom. Is it not
with reason that the people look upon them as large?” :

CuaPrER III. 1. The king Seuen of Ts'e, asked, saying, “Is

there any way to regulate one's
made verbs by the * 3—the fodderers, the pheas

santers, &c. 3. is used here in the sense
simply of ‘borders,’ and on the borders ef the
various states there were ‘ passes’ or * gates,’ for
the taxation of merchandize, the examination
of strangers, &c. E see Pt. Iii. These
forest laws of Ts‘e were hardly worse than those
enacted by the first Norman sovereigns of Eag-

maintenance of intercourse with

land, when whoever killed a deer, a boar, or
even a hare, was punished with the loss of his
eyes, and with death if the statutes were repeat-
edly violated.

Cn. 3. How FRIENDLY INTERCOURSE WITIE
NEIGHBOURING KINGDOMS MAY BE MALNTAINED,
AND THE LOVE OF VALOUR MADE SUBSERVIENT TO
THE GOOD OF THE PEOPLE, AND THE GLORY OF

THE PRINCE. 1. The two first H differ in

Pr. IL Cn. HL THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

oo
nen

DR
ES

Sino
Uu

MS
bias
obse

x
TRA SERES

DHA
ae
na

5

SEE

WEBS! jn

v

=
[ d

v

bs
R

v

ae

L4 HH
Ru

=
"

T
f

j^ FS. ;

JE EKR BA E XS d

neighbouring kingdoms?” Mencius replied, “There is. But: it
requires a perfectly virtuous ‘prince to be able, with a great country,
to serve a small one,—as, for instance, T'ang served ‘Ks, and king
Win served the Kwan barbarians. And it requires a wise prince to
be able, with a small country, to serve a large one,——as the king T‘ae
served the Heun-yuh, and Kow-tseen served Woo. _. j

2. “He who with a great State serves a. small one, delights in
Heaven. He who with a small "State "serves a large one, stands in
awe of Heaven. He who delights in Heaven, will affect with ihis
love and protection the whole empire. He who.stands in awe of
Heaven, will affect with his love and’ protection his own-kingdom.

-EL TH
cum Hse

3. “It is said.in the Book of Poetry, .“J: fear the Majesty of

Heaven, and will thus-preserve its favouring decree.

. : 3 ks va
meaning considerably from the two last, and

exi 4^ p à
they are explained by Hg pra Ja hit and He
4 Ak T ie, ‘cherishing, and, * obeying,’

respectively, but the translation need not be
varied. For the affairs o£ Img with KO, sée
HL Pt. II. v. Of those of king Win with the
Kwin tribes we have nowhere an account,

which satisfies Mencius” reference to thein: .

Both Chaou K‘e and Choo Fle make refer. to
the She-king, IH. i. Ode IIT: st. 8; but what is
there said would seem to be of things ante-

cedent to king Win. Of king T'ae and the
Heun-yuh, see below, ch. xv. A very read-
able, though romanced account of. Kow-Tseen's
service of Woo is in the Lëč Kwó Che qn
E AD Bk. Ixxx. Hu and a *there-
fore,’ introducing illustrations of what has been
said, are=our ‘as.’ 2. Es says Choo He,

zm] im B m. *Heaven is just principle,

and nothing more. It is a good instance of

+999

E Sete tke a g e
the way in which he and others often try to
expunge the idea of a governing Power and a.
personal God ;from their classics. Heaven is
here evidently the superintending, loving, Power
of the universe. Chaou K'e sayson the whole
paragraph :—' The sage delights to pursue the
way of Heaven, just'as Heaven overspreads
every thing jas was evidenced in T'ang and
Win’s protecting the whole empire. The wise
measure the time and revere Heaven, and so
preserve their States;—as was evidenced in
king Tae and Kow-ts‘cen.’ This view.givés to
K 2 positive, substantial meaning, though the
personality of the Power is not sufficiently pro-
minent. The commentator Bi E says:
—— The Heaven here is indeed the Supreme
Heaven, but after all it is equivalent to princi-
ple and nothing more!’ , as in Pt. L vii.

3. See the She-king, IV. i. Bk. I. Ode
VIE. st. 3. e ‘to preserve,’ ‘to keep.’ Hy is

here takene- E ; not so in the ode. The final

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK I.

os

BENNEN C
xil
we
sts
eS
Secs
rie Sr

N
Ke
fe
ER
Bo»

pi

™

NSS
Sh
=
cw

-H NI zii
pd BY
SENE
UE
Sus
er

BS
SS SHH TT]
zy 2-38 ll

o
-w

(NRO
UN TE
NH E

Tu
=H
NHI

za

!
R
=

WERE

o
Av
-
!

 HFE

v

3
ARA:

=

v
bad
[-
A
v
v

Iani
Pero

zü
oe

NA AX] o E d

4. The king said, “A great saying! But I have an infirmity;
—1 love valour.” -

5. “I beg your Majesty,” was the reply, “not to love small
valour. Ifa man brandishes his sword, looks fiercely, and says,
‘How dare he withstand me? ’—this is the valour of a common man,
who can be the opponent only of a single individual. I beg your
Majesty to greaten it. l

r6» Tt is said in the Book of Poetry, "
J. c-t The king blazed with anger,
-, And he marshalled his hosts,
To stop the march to Keu, ^
- To consolidate the prosperity of Chow,
4 ` Fo meet the expectations of the empire.’
This was the valour of king Wan. King Win in one burst of his
anger, gave repose to all the people of the Empire.
`. “In the Book of History it is said, ‘Heaven having produced
the inferior people, appointed for them rulers and teachers, with the
purpose that they should be assisting to God, and therefore distin-
refers to the decree or favour of Heaven. that in the ode is called jk. y 33 4B E.

B5. Observe the verbal meaning of R 6. *to stop the march to Keu, unless we take, with
See the She-king, III. i, Ode VII. st. 5. where some, (Ej also to be the name of a place. — 7.
we have $è for Xy, and [fe for EX. EX is See the Shoo-king, V. i. Sect I. 7, but the pass-
the name of à State or place, the same probably age as quoted by Mencius is very different fruia

Pr. IL Cu. HL—IV. THE WORKS

U

MU
aee za SR DT HH

NL
"DT

a

iS

Fis
CNS

LYFEBERM EAD
RE A I wR A
Ko, MN BKB KEK
SAL EEK DP pA
Vit y) RS AE

y

3-

OF MENCIUS:

e

HESE
eH

x
t
~~

v
ez

v

:
 SHDN

&

LU
È
w
[ d

X

*
f>
4

VENUE mE =N
ALIAE

whe
T

HEN
B

a d ;

guished them throughout the four quarters of the empire. Who- .
ever are offenders, and whoever are innocent, here am I to deal with
them. How dare any under heaven give indulgence to their refrac-
tory wills?’ There was one man pursuing a violent and disorderly
course in the empire, and king Woo was ashamed of it. This was
the valour of king Woo. He also, by one display of his anger, gave
repose to all the people of the empire.

8. “Let now your Majesty also, in one burst of anger, give repose.
to all the people of the empire. The people are only. afraid that
your Majesty does not love valour.”

Cuarrer IV. J. The king Seuen of Ts‘e had an interview with
Mencius in the Snow palace, and said. to him, “Do men of talents
and worth likewise find pleasure in these things?” Mencius replied,
“They do, and if people generally are not able to enjoy themselves,
they condemn their superiors.

2. “For them, when they cannot enjoy themselves, to condemn
their superiors is wrong, but when the superiors of the people do

the original text. ^E E HW Lin

‘just saying, They shall be aiding to God.’ The
sentiment is that of Paul, in Rom. XIII. 1—4,
t The powers ordained of God are the ministers

ot Ga” In Fe Po HAT RE WA A
there is an allusion to the tyrant Këč, who is
the —. J in Mencius’ subjoined explanation.

8. HE ZU is, by some, taken—' The
people would only be afraid, the prec. clause

being=‘ If your Majesty, &c. I think the pre-
sent tense is preferable.

Cu. 4. A RULER'S PROSPERITY DEPENDS ON
HIS EXERCISING A RESTRAINT UPON HIMSELF,
AND SYMPATHAZING WITH THE PEOPLE IN 'FHEIR
JOYS AND SORROWS. 1. ‘The Snow palace”
was a pleasure-palace of the princes of ‘I's‘e,
and is said to have been in the present district
of Lin-tsze, in the department of Ts‘ing-chow.
Most comm. say that the king Seuen had lodged .
Mencius there, and went to see him, but it may

not have been so. , Perhaps they only had their

interview there. EC KIRA yt Mis SB,

‘ is different from the question, in nearly the same

5

.

-3 THE WORKS. OF MENCIUS. BUOK I.

3
ipe
>
>
IX
=

~
wd
r

v

TYE ^
v - i D :
REO
A
S
-
S
X%
S
w
NN
”
ev

Y
wu
EE

=

ZRNI
I

Ws

a
v

se
is

SNS

BRE

ENTER
IMEN

+RES
y:
F4

=
jos und
n

v

SEH Sess
SoS
mic

$m
(NIB HL SEY

aS
d
%
4
win
v
c
v

RHEES

v
m
LO

vv

^
I^
o , Se
a m ECT

m “PH
notimake enjoyment a thing common to the people and themselves,
they also do wrong. j :

r$. *Whenia ruler rejoices in the joy of his people, they also
rejoice in his joy ; when he grieves at the sorrow of his people, they
also grieve at hrs sorrow. A sympathy of joy will pervade the em-
pire; a sympathy.of sorrow will do the same:—in such a state of
things, it cannot be but.that the ruler attain to the Imperial dignity.

4, “Formerly, the duke, King, of Ts'e, asked the minister Ngan,
saying, *I wish to pay a visit of inspection to Chuen-foo, and Chaou-
woo, and then to bend my course southward along the shore, till
Lcome to Lang-yay. What shall I do that my tour may be fit to
be compared: with the visits of inspection made by the ancient
emperors ?"

5. “The minister Ngan replied, ‘An excellent inquiry! When
the emperor visited the princes, it was called a tour of inspection,
worde; in Pt. I. ii, E FF being there ‘worthy T Ta u K T^ which sum up the pre-
princes, and here ‘scholars,’ men of worth gen- ceding part of the par., and are not to be under-
erally, with a reference to Mencius himself. EN stood as spoken of the ruler only. The Lia
X-A is to be taken as=fẸ, ‘the peo- says :— These two sentences are to be explain-
ple’ men generally, and p^ it is said, H ed from the four prec. sentences, The phrase

TER pe i, 3E m $ E, al K T is only a forcible way of saying what

: > » H H H
«do not get the pleasure of quiet living and en-' !$ said by E. The A is to beexplained as if
jeyment, not referring to the Snow palace." 3E we read — JR p— Ép, T4 KTH
ex is used as a vorb,—' to blame,’ ‘to the joy and sorrow is' not with (ie, from) one
condemn. So in the next par. 3. I have ?ndividual, but from the whole empire.’ $E low.
‘given thé meaning of the phrases in A X 3d tone. 4. Bey see Conf. Ana., V. xvi.

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

i

Pr. IÍ, Cu. IV.

oo

c

HESE
x
=
=
m

EN

.-

S

JERAS

Th

i

IS Sth

FE

v.

[ d
r

(c

Ss
23:

.
v

e

zli
Y

aaie
A

P

PERLY

Av XE è AJlL jut
’ AS E Wt FF,

E

a.

CE
a
v

FS

. v

Ny
H

SR
SHOR

Mes
(=

5

segs
ES$
NA

ETUR
SER
E

EE

tum
2

ME Ge tat ZO mn Ie

that is, he surveyed the States under their care. When the princes
attended at the court of the emperor, it was Called a report of office,
that is, they reported their administration of their offices. :. Thus;
neither of the proceedings was without a purpose. And mareover,
in the spring they examined the ploughing, and supplied’/any def-
ciency of seed ; in the autumn they examined the reaping, and sup:
plied any deficiency of yield. There is the saying of the Hea
dynasty,—If our king do not take his ramble, what will become of
our happiness? If our king do not make his excursion, what will
become of our help? That ramble, and that LT were a pet
tern to the princes.'

6. “ ‘Now, the state of things i is different.-—A host marches in
attendance on the ruler, and stores of provisions are consumed. .The
hungry are deprived of their food; and there is no rest for those

f IDE

The duke King, occupied the throne for 58 years,
from m.c. 546-488. Chuen-foo and Chaou-woo
were twohills, which must have beenon the north
of Ts‘e, and looking on *the waters now called
the Gulf of Pih-chih-le. Lang-yay was the name
both of a nee ns and an adjacent city, re-
ferred to the present department of Choo-shing,

in Ts‘ing-chow. : (B="F y ‘to do.’

5. FRG see the Shoo-king, IL i. 8,9. FFF is
4

used ast

peat the X oee WK Aya and yl fe i inthe translation.

This tour ofi inspection appears to have been made,
under the Chow dynasty, once in 12-years, while
the princes had to present themselves at court,

dj. read ch‘aow) once in 6 years, From 1g.

. Itdoesnot seem necessaryto re-

* in the spring,” the practices appropriate to the
various princes, as well as the emperor, are de-
scribed, tho', as appears from the last clause, with

special reference to the latter. YR or jH-
JE- By— If — rime spring and autumn

visitations are intended, each called —. 6.
Pas *

fin. "properly a body of 2,500 men, "but heré gene

erallyz-a host; E multitude, , HH BEI 45 ah.

RISK m. are Yelcirel. to the people, and

the next two clauses to the princes. Yet the
75 after ER. would rather indicate a different

subject for the clause before: ES ea x

BE De by Choo He and ari) is explained as

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

AR HE

I.

e

MEREXENGQSEERH

B
TSVI

=
=r
A
^

b

Rohe =

ay
2

EE:
p?
=
SNES
onse
WOLA

TM
Sg
BH
(VEE
tS
iL:

IAS
ton]
M OAS
EE
Nis V
sp
d

s Ms
B+0
I

Sa RUE
(NCERENE
(NS

;

Sto EEE

E
E

=
mo

[ d

ae

NHA

t
TM
ex
(Ni

mu

ln
PE

[ d

P

u
a

who are called to toil. Maledictions are uttered by one to another
with eyes askance, and the people proceed to the commission of
wickedness. Thus the Imperial ordinances are violated, and the
people are oppressed, and the supplies of food and drink flow away
like water, The rulers yield themselves to the current, or they
urge their way against. it; they are wild; they are utterly lost:—
these things proceed to the grief of their subordinate governors.

7. “* Descending along with the current, and forgetting to return,
is what I call yielding to it. Pressing up against it, and forgetting
‘to return, is what I call urging their way against it. Pursuing the
chase without satiety is what I call being wild. -Delighting in wine
without satiety is what I call being lost.

8. “<The ancient emperors had no pleasures to which they gave
themselves as on the flowing stream; no doing# which might be
so characterized as wild and lost. E

9. “< TIt is for you, my prince, to pursue your course.”

10. “The duke King was pleased. He issued a proclamation
throughout his state, and went out and occupied a shed in the
borders. From that time he began to open his granaries to supply
the wants of the people, and calling the Grand music-master, he said
in the translation, This view certainly puts things in which they delighted were a ‘ grief’ to
force on the characters, yet we seem driven to them? 10. K Éifi.—see Ana. VIIL xv.

it. Chaou K‘e makes them refer to the princes
proper, who also are with him the subject in the PAX read che, up.2¢ tone) and 5 are the name of

clause BB H H but how can it be said that these twoof the 5 notes in the Chincse scale, the 4th and

Pr. II. Ca. IV.—V. THE: WORKS

[ d

SHEH
NSA

SEN RENI

eH

: REDER H
MN

us

eZ

u

E NSO

-OF MENCIUS.

in
t

Were
€

-.

SS FH FH

4

4 eii

e

=

NE

We

>m
Grane:
TAMIN ee

TIEN
EL m

b

ASA

d

tL iT

to him—‘Make for me music to suit a prince and his minister pleased

- with each other.’

And it was then that the Che-shaou and K8ó-shaou

were made, in the poetry to which it was said, ‘What fault ‘is it to

restrain one's prince ?’

He who restrains his prince lovés his prince.”

CuaPrER V... The king Seuen of Tse said; “People all tell

me to pull down and remove the Brilliant palace:

Shall I pall it

down, or stop the movement for that object?”
2. Mencius replied, * The Brilliant palace is a palate appropriate

to the emperors. If your Majesty

government, then do not pull it down.”

wishes to practise the true Royal
A. de

3. The king said, “May I hear from you what the true Royal

government is p

3d. a" ia used for , the name given to the
music of Shun. This was said to be preserved in
Ts‘e, and the same name was given to all Ts‘e
music. The Che-shaou and Ké3-shaou were, I
suppose, two tunes or pieces of musie, starting

with the notes 7X and gi respectively,

Cu. 5. TRUE ROYAL GOVERNMENT WILL AS-
SUREDLY RAISE TO THE IMPERIAL DIGNITY, AND
‘NEITHER GREED OF WEALTH, NOR LOVE OF
WOMAN, NEED INTERFERE WITH ITS EXERCISE.
However his admirers may try to defend him,
here, and in other chapters, Mencius, if he does
not counsel to, yet suggests, rebellion. In his
days, the Chow dynasty was nearly a century
distant from its extinction. And then his ac-
cepting the princes, with all their confirmed
habits of vice and luxury, and telling them
those need not interfere with the benevolence of
their government, shows very little poh gan

of man, or of men’s affairs. 1. gj ut ,—not

*the Ming or Brilliant Holl^ It was = name
given to the palaces occupied in different parts
of the country by the emperors in their tours
of inspection mentioned in the last chapter.
See the Book of Rites, Bk. XIV. The name
Ming, was given to them, because royal govern-
ment, &c., were ‘displayed’ by means of them.

tí Formerly,” was the reply, “king Wăn’s govern-

The onein the text was at the foot of the "Tae
mountain in Ts‘e, and as the emperor no longer
made use of it, the suggestion on which he con-
suited Mencius, was made to king Seuen. In

By E e E2 we have two questions, 7! Shall

I destroy it Gk. the interrog. of hesitancy, 8
common in Mencius), or, ‘Shall I stop?” R
the 1st and 2d here have the low. 1st tone;
they quite differ from the 2d, which is merely
the style of king Seuen. I may give here a
note from the SER (Pt. I. i, 1.) on the force

of the terms X and =f .—‘He who is follow-
ed by the people till they form a flock (ZA) i is
a keun. He to whom they turn and go GE

yi is a wang, Thus the title wang expresses

the idea of the people's turning and resorting to
him who holds it, but the possessor of a State
can barely be called a keun. It is only the pos-
sessor of the Empire, who can be styled wang,
8, K'e was a double peaked hill, giving its
name to the adjoining country, the old state of
Chow. Its name is still retained in the distriet
of K'e-shan, in Fung-tseang, the most western '
department of Shen-se, bordering on Kan-suh,

THE. WORKS OF MENCIUS. DOORS

DR
NE

E
2

BETS] TSS HH S

F

NIC

v

E
 FRSE

Raat

A
Ld

=

Tt
E RS

v

IN]

ai

—
=)

D
SH TAIR HH

= ASSO

iS

»
HERBA Oe

BERGEN Hae
EAE

X

J^ APR =
h hi Ed è
1T. A H ZA 32>) tt
È » BS 23) Ji. Wi Jr Kr
H, yt ny yt ME A 22 T
X A Tín iu "a NY AE Jie,

ment of K'e was as follows:—The husbandmen cultivated for the
government. one-ninth of the land; the descendants of officers were
salaried ; at the passes and in the markets, strangers were inspected,
but goods were not taxed: there were no prohibitions respecting
the ponds and weirs; the wives and children of criminals were not
involved in their guilt. There were the old and wifeless, or widow-
ers; the old and husbandless, or widows; the old and childless, or
solitaries; the young and fatherless, or orphans :—these four classes
are the most destitute of the people, and have none to whom they
can tell their wants, and king Wán, in the institution of his govern-
ment with its benevolent action, made them the first objects of his
regard, as it is said in the Book of Poetry, , I
` . ‘The rich may get through.
' ‘But alas! for the miserable and solitary
‘4, , ‘The king said, “O excellent words!" Mencius said, “ Since
your Majesty deems them excellent, why do you not practise them ?”,
. “I have an infirmity,” said the king; “I am fond of wealth." The

"n »

iA square le was divided into ponds were artificial. Hu y

9 parts, each containing 100 mow; eight farm-
ing families were located upon them, one part
being reserved for govt., which was cultivated
by the joint labours of the husbandmen. See

mb].
TIL Pei, 4E RE THERE ofticers, heredi-
tary emolument ; that is, descendants of meri-
torious officers, if men of ability, received office,
and, even! if they were not, they had pensions,
in reward of the merit of their fathers. ‘Ponds,

, and weirs,’—it is not to be understood that the

yj? is the,
verb. For the ode, see the She-king, TI. iv. Ode
VIIL. st. 13, where for 34 we find Ji. 4. ^

2, ‘The duke Lew,’ was the great-grandson

of How-tseih, the high ancestor of the Chow
family. By him the waning fortunes of his

 house were revived, and he foundcd a settle-

ment in Eg (Pin), the present” Pin-chow Jt
» in Shen-se. The. account of his doing Sot
is found in the ode quoted, She-king, III. ii, Ode

Pr. IL Cu. V. THE WORKS OF MEXCIUS.

e.

mp:

Bet
>
ae

e

TSH
Sd
BR

v

1t
HE
v

v

kN Z

AT HA

RnS
a

v

a

v

a
SS
SENONCHETRE
FIRN

sem
SAIS
SEM Sy HERE TI
isa

NS)
C
zi

Rene
BAHAT

[BE T Mp -

v

=
SHI
WRA

[ d

»]
’ yar TA

$

ERE
Ed

Bec eos

\w

“eo ee
SS

E:
e

4

reply was, “Formerly, Kung-lew was fond of
the Book of Poetry,
‘He reared his ricks, and filled his granaries,
He tied up dried provisions and grain,
In bottomless bags, and sacks, l
That he might gather his people together, and glorify his State.
With bows and arrows all-displayed, —
With shields, and spears, and battle-axes, large and small,
He commenced his ‘march.’ a
In this way those who remained in their old’ seat had their ricks
and granaries, and those who marched had their bags of provisions.
It was not till after this that he thought he could commence his
march. If your Majesty loves wealth, let the people be able to’
gratify the same feeling, and what difficulty will there be in your.
attaining the Imperial sway ?” test
5. The king said, “I have an infirmity; I am fond of beauty.”
The reply was, “Formerly, king T'ae was fond of beauty, and loved
his wife. It is said in the’ Book of Poetry,
* Koo-kung T‘an-foo
Came in the morning, galloping his horse, F
By the banks of the western waters, . e

n
o
gE
e. O
SB

>
E wok

. Iti

z
[e]
$$
pas
co
D

IV. st. 1. For 75 we have in the She-king, —‘stores in the open air? The king Tae, (sce,
1G tok unn 23 » ag the Doctrine of the Mean. ch. xviii) was the 9th
V9. and for FY, Lire , rend ts‘ze, up. 3d in descent from Kung Lew, by name 'l'an-foo

tone, ‘to store up,’ ‘stores? Choo Heexplains:! (up. 2d tone). He removed from Din to K'e, as

THE. WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK I,

EN

EI

bun
—w
»
cr

ho 5E BE B Gt yu

LA AE A F Ik

fuf, FASE XE ke, FR ah
td 8
eg

mS

.
v
v
v
v

v

RSH
ae

p:
Eee OUR ER za ER

HH EI HHR TEREN

grona}

HANS
JHN

Aaya wy wn b
pi T ! HIJ » »

RERNA RE HN

se H y
£ BI Aw Wm A.
As far as the foot of K'e hill,
Along with the lady of Keang;
They came and together chose the site of settlement.’
At that time, in the seclusion of the house, there were no dissatisfied
women, and abroad, there were no unmarried men. If your Majesty
loves beauty, let the people be able to gratify the same feeling, and
what difficulty will there be in your attaining the Imperial sway ?"
Cuarrer VI. 1. Mencius said.to the king Seuen of Ts‘e, “ Sup-
pose that one of your Majesty’s ministers were to entrust his wite
and children to the care of his friend, while he himself went into
Ts‘oo to travel, and that, on his return, he should find that the friend
had caused his wife and children to suffer from cold and hunger ;—
da ought he to deal with him?" The king said, “ He should cast
im off."
2. Mencius proceeded, * Suppose that the chief criminal judge
could not regulate the officers under him, how would you deal with
him?" The king said, ** Dismiss him.”

is celebrated in the ode, She-king, III. i. Ode III.

hiphil verbs. It is better to prefix ‘suppose
st. 2. rz AJ Zw *the ancient duke,

that, or ‘if, to the whole sentence, in the
translation, as the cases in the remaining par.

"T'an-foo's title,before it was changed into R
+=. ‘the king, or emperor, Tae,’ ;

Cu. 6, BRINGING HOME HIS BAD GOVERN-
MENT TO THE KING OF Ts‘E, 1.
Z is fhe verb f. EE low. 3d: tone, = 7$,

4 a "I :
as iu Ana. XT. xxv. 4, 5. a and g are active,

»

cannot well be put directly, as this might be.
'The replies suggest the renderings of An Z

4 , which I have given. ` 2. + Rii: see
on Ana, XVIIL ij. Y4 is low. Ist tone. In the

next par., it is low. 3d. The two instances well
illustrate the difference of signification, which
the tone makes.

Pr. II. Cu. VI—VII. l THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

D
un

E
WS
RE
T

=
US RES A

xj
DE E

v

v

HAt
SN.

+

Herh

il]
zb

N
Sakae PH

[ d

” RHO

ONT

ENERE
HORN
(NE

rr
SER
= EEE

Taro
SMS
XS
ys NIH
=
S
z
m

=

v

Mim

[v
GS
zN
ET

e
Dr
t
.-
w^
[d

: ESN OH
Ha

E.

3. Mencius again said, “If within the four borders of your king-
dom there is not good government, what is to be done?" The king
looked to the right and left,and spoke of other matters. .

OnarrER VIL 1. Mencius, having an interview with the king
Seuen of Ts‘e, said to him, * When men speak of ‘an ancient kingdom,’
it is not meant thereby that it has lofty trees in it, but that it has
ministers sprung from' families which have heen noted in it for genera-
tions. Your Majesty has no intimate ministers even. Those whom you -
advanced yesterday are gone to.day, and you do not know it.”

2. The king said, “How shall I know that they have not ability,
and so avoid employing them at all?"

3. The reply was, “The ruler of aState advances to office men of
talents and virtue, only as a matter of necessity. Sindée ‘he’ will
thereby cause the low to overstep the honourable, and strangers to:
overstep his relatives, may he do so but with caution ? i

4. “When all those about you say,‘ This is a man of talents

Cu. 7. THE CARE TO BE EMPLOYED BY A might be omitted, and yet it adds something in
PRINCE IN THE EMPLOYMENT OF MINISTERS ; AND the turn of the sentence. As opposed to AN H :
THEIR RELATION TO HIMSELF, AND THE STABI- 4. 23
LITY OF HIS KINGDOM. 1. On the idiom El H = yesterday.’ Chaou K'e strangely
x 8H. see Premare, on char. Z: but the mistakes the meaning of the last clause, which
examples which he adduces are net quite simi- he makes to be:—''Ihose whom you advanced
lar to those in this passage. Lit, the opening' on the past day, do evil to-day, and you do not

+6 Pha Soh i Mire
sentence would be:—‘That which is said—aa know to cut them off .9, Be = th, up.
ancient kingdom, is not the saying CZ SED of
,saying it has lofty trees; it is the saying d
has hereditary ministers? The sH in JE BH

2d tone, ‘to let go,’ ‘to dismiss.’ 8. an.
pa f D... ‘as a thing in which he

6

43 ` c THE- WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK I.

i S
NS:

grt
et. 2
9e
-
v
ES

ES
¢
- =
Ki ae
jee an:
+

E p
=
s
DIY
Ary
[v
gun
MACH ard,

T
"—
ma

hod
> E
4 Meee se um
nd

i

wee

oR
=

v

XR
I
BHC
2x
v Eu d
i

TR
m

=
Se
3
salon NE
SE

A
cm
v
y.

TNS
SHEE

<

J

a

SN

=À «
ENS

*

Tae

(reve v
= y vc S
me
om
& t
&"
v
Zh
et
F
Xr
v

4

Ls reed mmn

SENSN
= X
S4 IUE

x

hao

Jn
E zu pes
Ss
b

v

>
w
wf
um d:

sl
4

UN
$
T
uf

ae

Sy
AAY
i

E [jo í
BE: A TE Tye tt i. Li
I —
HY = COH ay Y el A
ayo om Pf TE ^9». Moh te iit Yi i. Ud w
y » H Je" p 3 K
; x "NEL SC voi od T iN eg

S anon 5
"and-werth;! you may- not for that'believe it. : When your great offi-
seors bib sayj-oThis id amen of'talents and virtue? neither may ‘you
tfdrithat believe dt. Wlienall the peoplesay,— This isa man of talents
and virtue, then examine into: thencdse rand when yow find; that
«thé min is suchzémploy him. :Mhéen.all those about vou sayyz This
man won't; dbfcdén’t listew to them. 1! When! all lyour: great officers
sayfan! Thisiman won'endo]^ don't. listen to:themU When the people
-ralllsayju* Phis man wWoln't-do,then:examine into the case, and: whdn
: Y0u.find, that, the, man won't do, send him away. -ana lui,
Ha RCM When'allthose.about you say,—- This man deserves death,
v dont listen, £o them... When all yoür gréat officers saya — This tan
?deserves'death?' don't listen to them, . When the people all say,-—
val This nian. deserves death,’ then inquire. into the case, and whenryou
‘see that thé man deservés death, put him to«death. {In accordance
with this we have.the saying, iThe'pébple killed him.’ EP
2600'S You must act in this way in order to be the parent of the
"people" s o o
; jeannot, stop, Comp. tlie Chung Yung, xx. 13. 6. Compare the Great’ Learning, Comm.' X! 3.
t 4. AE BY, ‘you may not yet believe that We may usé the-sccond person in translating,
othe man is so and'so? See on Ana; XIL: xxiv. OF more indefinitely , the third, UP

a

Q

iN

HK»
ee

Pr. HH. Cu. VIII.—IX. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

Li
p

= Sud
ruis
E ! DI

v

x
ea

Nag

.

A-L SEEEN
Vee

ZRNI

E
*»

TINA
ZHUR

1 zu X
. 9

x

Ie
Ras
zx

»
NES
pes

s

SENANTET

m

> mh

Wee
i
Em t
xb

wore

Dx»
5

Cuarrver VIII 1. The king Seuen’ pt Ts'é asked, 's saying grt Was
it so, that T'ang “banished” Kad, and that king Woo smote ‘haw ?”
Mencius replied, “It is goin the records.” E P b i

Ž. The king Said, “ May a ininister then "put his soveréign to
death? "

3. Mencius said, “He who ‘outrages the’ Benevolnce proper to
his nature, is called a robber; he who outr ages righteousness, is
called a ruffian. The robber and ruffian we call a mere fellow. Ihave
heard of the cutting off of the fellow Chow, but I have not heard;bf
the putting. a sovereign to death, in his case.” lon

CuarrER IX. 1. “Mencius, having an interview with. the king
Seuen of Ts‘e, said to him, *: If you are going to build a large man-
siou, you will surely cause the Mises of the workmen to look out
for large trees, and when he has found such large trees, you will; be

Cn. 8. Kinane A SOVEREIGN IS NOT NECES- Cu. 9. Tire ABSURDITY OF ^i nULER'S NOT
SARILY REBELLION NOR MURDER. l. Of ACTING ACCORDING TO THE COUNSEL OF THE MEN

"]'ang's banishment of Ké%, see the Shoo-king, OF TALENTS AND VIRTUE, WHOM MHE CALLS TO
IV. ii., iii ; and of the smiting of Chow, see the AMD IN HIS GOVERNMENT, BUT REQUIRING THEM

: 4 : FOLLOW HIS WAYS, In one important point
same, V. i. . T is the word appropriated 70?
y usi 2. eg the word approp Mencius’ illustrations fail. A prince is not

4 to regicide, which Mencius in his reply ex- supposed -to understand either house-building

changes for uk B. —a minister, ie, here, or stone-cutting; he must delegate those mat-
) ters to the men who do. But g government he
a subject, 8. Wk, as a verb, B E ought to understand, and hemay not delegate it

€ to hurt and injure, as in the Analects, several to any scholars or officers. 11. The TERI
times. “To outrage’ answers well for it here, Was a special officer having charge ofall -
. In the use of ESL Mencius seems to refer to the #tizans, &. See the Le-ke, VI. ii. 29;

i S, upper Ist tone, —see Pt. E iit. 3. P
expression By X Ae ere Y.i See- . 5 idi f
tion UL 4. —- f f Genes 3d tone),— —~‘its use,’ Le. ; tlie building

THE WORKS

E s
e

v

vina

SASHES
PERSE

LÀ

aum

OF MENCIUS:

MM

N
pen
dorg

\
"

RH

LA
[
v
v

$ 4 JA
Hp H. i »
pow J n
d ’ m hi

m
ney

[ d

QST Rm SAS
FAS

SPATE
SE>HERS

uw. "

StH Saat

vu,

B5

EE

*

M
=

/

+

J

——N
^b. s

2 *

AE

EMER S >a

e

íT:

glad, thinking that they will answer for the intended object. Should
the workmen hew them so as to make them too small, then your
Majesty will be angry, thinking that they will not answer for the. pur-

pose.

Now, a man spends his youth in learning the principles of right

government, and; being grown up to vigour, he wishes to put them

1n practice;—if your Majesty says

to him, ‘For the present put aside’

what you have learned, and follow me,’ what shall we say?
:2, “Here now you have a gem unwrought, 2n the stone. Although

o

it may. be worth 240,000 taels, you will surely employ a lapidary to
cut.and polish it. But when you come to the government of the
State, then you say,—-' For the present put aside what you have learn-
ed, and follow me.’ How is it that you herein act so differently from
your conduct in calling in the lapidary to cut the gem!” *

of the house. The Z after £e and {T are
tọ be understood as referring to f and 3,

or as in the translation. H denotes the ma-
turity of 30 years; when one was supposed
to be fit for office, 2.. "Phe #7 was 24
Chinese ounces or taels (of gold.) Choo He, after
Chaou K'e, erroneously makes it 20 ounces.
‘The gem in question, worth so much, would be
very dear to the king, and yet he would cer-
tainly confide to another the polishing of it ;—
why would he not do so with the State? je

2 —the kingdom, embracing the families and

possessions of the nobles. l k-k- ESA up.

t,
 1st tone, — [iH or $2 ‘to make,’ not ‘to teach.’
From Æ H. however, was explained by

Chaou K*e (and many still follow him) thus :—
‘But in the matter of the, government of your
State, you say,—For the present put aside what
you have learned, and follow me. In what does
this differ from your teaching—i.e. wishing to
teach—the lapidary to cut the gem ?' This is the
interpretation which Julien adopts in his trans-
; lation. The other upon the whole appears to

 me the better. The first mi is a difficulty in

Chaou K'e's view; the second, in the other.
But the final üt turns the balance in its fae
vour, and accordingly I have adopted it.

Pr. II, Cu. X, TIE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

RES
4

tn

a
P 2

j

Ld
Ri

$1

E
HES SS

e
a
v

[d

WEES SN aes TI

mt

x25!

v

FFA

v

Pal
EWN

v

u

Ss
SEE MH ERAI

1

v

sy

-

p
E

Hakata >

$

DŠ

S
facie

v

BuO

I
zzHENNSEBOS UB

NUN

AE JG » H, "
“r D
_ CHAPTER X. 1. The pdple of T Ts'e attacked Yen, and condneres
ss The king Seuen asked, saying, “Some tell me not to take

possession of it i for myself, and some tell me to take possession of it.
For a kingdom of ten thousand chariots, attacking another of ten
thousand ‘chariots, to complete the conquest of it in ‘fifty days, is an
achievement beyond mere human strength. If Ido not take posses-
sion of it, calamities from Heaven will surely come upon me! What
do you say to my taking possession of it?” Jd

3. Mencius replied, * f the people of Yen will be pleased with
your taking possession of it, then: do so.—Among the ancients there’
Was one who acted on this principle, namely king: Woo, If: the:
people of Yen will not be pleased with your taking “possession of it,
then do not do so.—Among the ancients there was one who acted
on this principle, namely king Wán.

Cx. 10. THE DISPOSAL OE KINGDOMS RESTS appearance of the troops of T's‘e, and made no

WITH THE MINDS OF THE PEOPLE. VOX POPULI
vox DEL We shall find this doctrine often put

forth very forcibly by Mencius. Here the king
of Ts‘e insinuates that it was the will of Heaven
that he should take Yen, and Mencius sends
him to the will of the people, by which only the
other could be ascertained. 1. The state of
Yen (up. Ist tone), lay north-west from Ts'e,
forming part of the preseht province of Chih-le.
Its prince, a poor weakling, had resigned his
throne to his prime minister, and great con-
fusion ensued, so that the people welcomed the

resistance to them. 2. xi is explained

as =j x ‘to conquer it ;’ but p has not

thissignification. Lit, we might render *and
up with it? 8. The common saying is that,

king Wan =FRP RH — had

possession of two of the three parts of the em-
pire.’ Still he did not think that the people were
prepared for the entire extinction of the Yin
dynasty, and left the completion of the fortunes
of his house to his son, king Woo, 4, f

r

OF MENCIUS. BOOK I.

THE WORKS

a

2$: 0

=

b IÈ

ee
EIE.

IE

-

ru

Oda = E ÉA ò y
TT EX jf

eu
(i
xS

v

HER

w

j

PAE

Blt

ee
Eis

e

ae"

EE ER

Ld

SSE SSeS
(SE

mUS

PE WS oe AFE Fil
D» : An Rt. Tx: pi o oer Az.
Wr AM
4. ! “When, with all the strength of your country of ten thousand

chariots, you ‘attacked another country of ten thousand chariots,
and the people brought baskets of rice and vessels of congee, to meet
your Majesty's host, was there any other reason for this but that
they hoped to escape out of fire and water? If you make the water
more'deep and the fire more fierce, they will just in like manner
inaké dnóther revolution.”

:"CnarrER XI. 1. The people of Ts‘e, having smitten Yen, took
possession of it, and upon this, the princes of the various States deli-
bétated together, and resolved to deliver Yen from their power.
"Thé king Setien said to Mencius, “The princes have formed many
plans to attack: me :—how shall I prepare myself for them?” Men-
cius replied, “I have heard of one who with seventy le exercised
all the functions of government throughout the empire. "That was
'l'àng:' I Have never heard of a prince with a thousand le standing
in fear of others.” i

Cu. 11. AMBITION AND AVARICE ONLY RAISE

ENEMIES AND BRING DISASTERS. SAFETY AND
PROSPERITY LIE IN A BENEVOLENT GOVERNMENT.

1. yg. before a RE indicates the exe-

cution of the plans to be still in the future.
E in By tX s A- makes the clause like

read isze, low. 8d tone, rice." a is properly
congee, but here used: generally for beverages ;
some say wine. » *à goblet, ‘a jug, ‘a
vase,’ a vessel for liquids. generally.—The first

par. is. constructed according to the rules of
‘composition employed” by Confucius in his

‘Spring and Autumy The; A refuses honour
to the king of Ts‘e, 4 expresses the ill

deserts of Yen. And B. 7^ intimates that

the conquest was from thé disinclination of Yen
to fight, not from-the power of 'T's'e.

.one in English beginning with a nominative
absolute. slit., ‘await them.’ 2.
See the Shoo-king, IV. ii. 6. Mencius has in-
‘troduced the clause KR Se Z, and there
are some other differences from the orig. text.

Pr. IL Ca. XI. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

s

47.
$ > * s
t M d
Hi, y di n 7 q An
T C9 \ EJ 4

€^

(10

ww

DERE
I

a

t

RE
ivo» wt

v
"4

N

vi

je

CNET
IRE

RP
iP

ede

NE
E

FHESA

4

(UR:
EH CERTE

=
Dh SUS aks

y

A

EN

=
FANER

4

A

RRS

fi

PS

SS

@
v
: 4
4

»»/ plo} t Th, ; ^ :
E [i = yh ble [s
i . "v i AK a d "
i'2:11 "Its said in ithe Book of History, \As soon,,as, Tiang began
his work óftexecuting justice, he commenced with, Kö., The, whole
empirerhad, confidence in him, When he. pursued his work, in the
east, the rude tribes on: the west murmured: So, did those on the
nérth, when. he was engaged. int, the-south: oT heir.cry; wags Why
‘doesihe make'us-last!?:., Thus, the looking of the people, to, him, was
like the looking in a time of great drought to the-clouds and.rainhgyws,
The frequenters of the marketsistoppe not. The husbandmen made
no change in: their operations, While he punished their rulers, he
consoled: the people: » (His progress was like the falling of: opportune
rain; ahd the people were: delighted, , It. istsaid ganan. fhe Book sof
‘History, *{Weéshave: waited for.our Iprinte Jong ; the prince's, coming
will beourreviving!) 5; — ^ — «(0078 dendi E olg cg be
+88. taf Now aeuler of. X en, Wass tyrannizing over his people; and
your: Majésty; rwentland -panished him, 5 The people supposed, that
_ you were going to deliver them out of the water and theifiré and
brought baskets of rice and vessels of congee, to meet your Majesty's
host. 'But'you'havé slain their fothiersand ‘elder ‘brothétsy and put

oq atrod tobate draet ETT IT

A
TR.

a

4

ak

ot

"Ko was a small territory, which is reférrédito tlie ,
preserit district of Ning-ling( 29 )in Kwei- .

sort;

n. s zi " b , E»!
tin CB QD. in Honan. CE SE pst
modern comm. ingeniously intetpret::—* The
“people look for rain in drought, and’ murmured.
at his not/cóming; as they dread the appearance!
of a rain-bow, on, which the rain (-will' stop.’
"This 3s perhaps, over-refining, and making too

much of the "EE." Chaou Ej soysi— The

rainbow appears when it rains, so people, in time
of drought; long to see it^ ‘The second quota-
tion js from the same paragraph of the Shoo-
be tbt, ary pu 7 hone Uf:
Jing, where, we have =F, for FR. 3. Comp.
dasy che FE, ip BE Bp zd d
di Me :

iif,’ but rather.^sineg" They say E4 Ezd
$ z— T PET re a s

uA Bi]. pa MER Em Zr tit is demons

EER E oA Rae ae
e, hot c j . E
ausu ot conditional Bx mig ob

! 48 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. ^ BOOK I.

al
RS

EPEE
He

Ode
Bv
aR
us

v
4

RS
REH

ind

FIT aS
2

Sh
Nm
mug
i NS

SIER
7 .
SA
A

d

mS

v

ERE

LON TEES 3
EE»
DME RES
N

calc

&
=P aa

ROE DEAS
A
ype
aaa VS es

\
"

ad sons ids younger brothers in chains.' You have pulled down
the ancestral temple of the State, and are removing to Ts‘e its precious
"Vessels. "How ¢an such a course be deemed proper? The rest of
the empire is indeéd jealously afraid of the strength of Ts‘e, and now,
‘when with a doubled territory you do not put in practice a benevo-
"lent government; jit d is this which sets the arms of the empire in
"motion.
E A “If your Majesty will make haste to issue an ordinance,
restoring your captives, old and young, stopping the removal of the
pom vessels, and: saying that, after consulting with the people of
en, a will appoint them a ruler, and withdraw from the country;
rin this way you „inay still be able to stop the threatened attack.”

' CHAPTER" "XIr ,;l. There had been a ‘brush between Tsow ‘and
"Loo, when thé duke Muh asked Mencius, ‘saying, “Of my officers
there were killed thirty-three men, and none of the people would die
“in their defence." If T put them to death for their conduct; it is impos-
sible’ to put bo a multitude td death. If I.do not put them to

Em on
fathers. only, but. males a as well. H = j, Cm., 12.. Tur AFFECTIONS OF THE PEOPLE

MER ^S CAN ONLY RE SECURED THROUGH A BENEVOLENT
“Ht E BE Hits or his,’ ie, the king- GOVERNMENT, [LAS THEY ARE DEALT WITH BY
at :

1 h the people's, THEIR SUPERIORS, 50. WILL THEY DEAL BY

Kd or the prince's; not: their, p T i . tuem; © 1. Tsow, the native state of'Mencihs,
n 4. p low, 3d tone, used for $E. £ peo- was a small territory, whose name is still retain-
plé of ES eel e clauses ater the fret ed, in the district of Tsow-heen, in Yeh-chow,
"are to be understood as.the substance of the . x aimed. PEE
„order or ordinance, which Mencius advised, the . aes Bg ìs SpIMBOL- the noise of
"king: to issue. a struggle.’ It is a brush, a skirmish. - Tsow

^

7
sy Soa iy E : i *

ye
e

Pr. IL Cu. XII. ^. Tike WORKS OF MENCIUS.

-

\
(=
pumps)

pa

TRS sla} Se
Sak St

v.

EN
ERZ

[ d
Sis,
NW

=
coy

m

ES
*

xm
RN EROR

v

iav
ENË
HAE

ae
NORIN

`
=
ijo

en
TS
BENS

3
P

Eum
ARNAN
DAREA
N=
PH

=
ig
$ cm

» Hà

‘death, then there is the crime unpunished of their looking angrily
on at the death of their officers, and not saving shen. How is the
exigency of the case to be met 2”

2. Mencius replied, “ In calamitous years and years of. famine,
the old and weak of your people, who have been found lying in the
ditches and water-channels, and the able-bodied who have been scat-
tered about to the four quarters, have amounted to several thousands.
All the while, your granaries, O prince, have been stored with grain,
and your treasuries and arsenals have been full, and not one of your
officers has told you of the distress. Thus negligent have the superiors
in your State been, and cruel to their’ inferiors. The philosopher
Tsing said, ‘ Beware, beware, What proceeds from you, will return
to you again.’ Now at length the people have returned their con-
duct to the officers. Do not you, O prince, blame them,

3. “If you will put in practice a benevolent government, this
people will love you and all above them, and will die for their
officers.”

could not stand long against the forces of Loo. is to the crime that had taken place. 2.
4
Muh,— the Dispenser of virtue, and Main- ixj =years of pestilence, and other cala-

tainer of righteousness, outwardly showing e
inward feeling, —is the posthumous epithet of mities. qui 3E Js AR =have tossed and
the duke A n] are to-beitaken LU _ turned about in, &c. Fe low. Ist tone, indicates
‘officers ; see Con. Analects, VIIL iv. AI the application of the saying. A mi B=
p ;
5t is to be completed L3 (er E hb IA ‘now at last’—They had long been wishing to
Z JE: ; comp. Analects, XIV. xvii. Hj Jk Show their feeling, but only now had they found
mi EA Z is not to be translated,—‘ they will the opportunity. Xx Z-z refers to the
hereafter look angrily on, &c.; the referenee A [i 8. HE E —embraving the prince

T

-€-

50. THE WORKS OF ,MENCIUS,

JR
Ed

x
-
IZ

TN
i
E

=

SHY

Ns

ja
WIESEN

va
SESON ERA

Zen

t
S
P"

t.

Dan

p
fis

IEEE

ZEB

e

Eu
mm

mus
E
BER
GSS:
ae

-

+

TM

UR

ser
gs
I

T$: Fi za
T NN.

tt} ma our?
fn €naprer XIII; 1. The duke: Wan of. Ting asked Mert aay
jng, “Ting isa. small kingdom, and lies betw: een T$) and. Ds‘bb.
Shall I serve Ts‘e? Or shall I serve Ts'oo?* i ^u, pod
^ 2," Mencius replied$ * This plan whick you propose’ is m ime.
“Ifyou will- have medounsel you, there is one thing I eanl suggest.
Wig deeper. yout moats ; build higher. your walls ; guard them along
-Avith your: people. : Zw casé of” attack; 'be prepared ‘to dio in your: ode
fence, and have the people so that they will not leave you j—this i is
l8'proper course," ca d
E CHAPTER XIV. E "The duke Win of TX áug asked Aeneis, sav-
wine, lj & “The people. of Tst j are going to fortify- Seč- Thé movement-
, OCE astons we g great alain. P Whati is theproper ‘course for ma to take
“he the case? i at BA k
1 heer - Meticlits replied ai oe when- king. T Tae id welt, in, Pin,
5 the Barburiungt: of:the.north were continually making quedirgions
Tapón it; He'therefore left it, ices to. the foot of mount K'e,. and

(d

Im
x
vnm

and officers generally ; EH pid (up. 2d tone), "ihe, soüth ‘of Shaf-tung. North of it was “he,
AUIS Los v and, in the time of Mencius, T's*oo had extended
mi ofticers, only, ^t 3 a f —to be © supple- i ‘its, power so far north, as to threaten it from
sented, as in par. Ji ne, ‘to deaupy a space

Cu. 13. Ir 1s BETER) TOR A PRINCE’ TO sU the south, fal "up. 3d tone, py a ep

YPEXD OK IDMsEQIU PUAN: TO.RELY ON; OR TRY "between? ^c A Ho "n —
To rroptrlate, OTHER POWERS. X. TS ‘ang fen t ass
“still gives its name tda district of Yen-chow in comp, Pt. I. "n 2 HED MEHRA

Ca
um

Prt Cu. XIV.—XV. TUE “WORKS OF MENCIUS.

A

i s

ABS

EINE
ERS
zs
D
Pim
s

uu
a

pi
ud
ve
E
eat
NT
ed

BRUN

am Y
E
VI

iy
tay

@

-

sØ.

>r
jw. UC

M

T
SS
s
i

NEB
g

i

~~
te
o

-

uio

a
as

NA

<

ye
may
SEES

Im
: F
© =
bins
deccm

HEH
S
n

d

TES
d

haan

RES

" %,

A 4 m ae NE s ats ja :
theré took, up his residence. ' He~did not take {that Lifuatidp- as
having ‘sé gtd ts, Ti was'a matter of necessity'with hing 4,
3. “IE you do-good, among your descendants, ‘in after generations,
there shail pe qne Wwho ‘will attain to the Imperial dighity, A'pfince
lays the foundation of. the inheritance, and hands-down; the begin-
ning which hå has made, doing what may be céntinudd by his’ suc-
‘cessors, ‘As to:the accomplishment of the great result, that is with
‘Heavens! What ds that Ts'e to you, O prince ?i «Be strong to do good.
That is all your business.” v ADR errans [9
CHAPTER. XV.. 1. The duke Wán of: T'ang ‘asked: Mencius, say-
ing, “Ting is a small kingdom. Though I:do-my utmost to. serve
uthose large kingdoms on ‘either side of it, we cannot escape suffering
from them. What course shall I take that we may dd,so?” . Men-
"s -— iT d TAL 7 +
li erue mons. Mt HE- m T seai e vl maan
- ££. as that is used, in Ana., T. vii, et ol. A good town, as a, basis of operations against T'áng.

deaf
aa
Ey

^w

v

p

: i : A to led. nhi ses : ! E
deal must be supplied here in the translation, 2. See ch. iii, and also the next. + "a
to bring out Mencius' counsel, ik noi SC PPS T
ks "it : Teen ul Í ~~it is best to take "a hére as
J À' Ci. 14. Al PRINCE THREATENED BY HÍSNEIGH- p E ae ee
BOURS, WILL FIND HIS BEST DEFENCE AND CON- the verb, =fẸ. 3. a F —generally, ‘a

SOLATION IN DOING WHAT IS GOOD AND RIGHT. . , Ý P

v Meheiis was'at his wit’s end; I suppose, to give Prince.’ EK ‘ the end of a cocoon, or

~ duke Wan an answer. It was all very well to .) s... sans k BES ae

"tell him to do good, but the ‘promise of an Im- "clue; a. beginning. . ar gi tie de is Hot a
perial descendant would hardly be much com: mere expletive, but is used as'in Ana, XI. ix.
fort to him. The reward to be realized in this 3, et al.: ‘as to this—the accomplishing,’ &c.

world in,the person of another, and the refer- PHÍ low, oq ton

DEUS T : n, = . 2d. tone, the verb.

' eie to Heaven, as tó a fate more than to a "^ : 2 . i

+ personal God;—are melancholy. Contrast Psalm, Cu. 15. Twa cóunsES OPEN TO A PRINCE
xxxvii. 3.—""Frust in the Lord and do good; so PRESSED BY HIS ENEMIES ;—FLIGHT OR DEATH,
«shalt thou: dwell in the land, and verily thou 1. Comp. ch. iii. JB —reaa chuh, up. 4th

shalt be fed? , 1. fix was the name of an
ancient principatity, adjoining Ting. It had : M Hn
"long beem incorporated swith "se, which now! agenarian’ = == —y-,—see Ana. VIL xxiii,

tone, ‘to assemble,’ ‘meet with. AE a sex-

Ras i
NA

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK f;

d

" -

ie
CE
=

SSS AVENE

yet
ST
(E
oe

Ff

RN
HELE
—

n
DRIN RT

Ex
is
NS

Ib ha BH

Ld

AFE

SH

=
N
a w
D

ASL

TT

SNS

oe

T=
be Ss

^

T

CNN SSN

Pron
REINO:
(NS
eas

SASH AES NEE

v

wI
REN
Ss

E4

s
=
mS

il
I

y

. 4.
v

EDF

v
N
peat

n».
eae
SHI!

— ——

pamar

*-. Y
YT

E

cius replied, “Formerly, when king T'ae dwelt in Pin, the barba-
rians of the north were constantly making incursions upon it. Hel
served them with skins and silks, and still he suffered from them.’
He.served them with dogs and horses, and still he suffered fromi'
them. He served them with pearls and gems, and still he suffered!
from them. Seeing this, he assembled the old mèn, and announced
to them, saying, ‘What the barbarians want is my territory. Ihave.
heard this,—that a ruler does not injure his people with that where-
with he nourishes them. My children, why should you be troubled"
about having no prince. I will leave this.’ Accordingly, he left Pin,!
crossed the mountain Leang, built a town at the foot of mount KG!
and dwelt there: The people of Pin said, ‘He is a benevolent man.,
We must not lose him.’ Those who followed him looked like érowds.
hastening to market.
9. “On the other hand, some say, ‘The kingdom is a thing to be:
képt from generation to generation. One individual cannot under-

+

* m
etal, Any HE 3E fi seems to mean: When I am gone, whoever ean secure your res’
—*1f I remain here, I am sure to die from the Pose, will be your prince and chief. I will
barbarians. I will go and preserve your ruler leave this, and go elsewhere.’ E nil is dif-
for you. So, the paraphrast in the iii ü ferent rather from the same phrase in ch. vii,
The H ae however: says Myichiidren. wh ‘There it means traders, here market-goers gen“
ieee ey Se ys s WAY erally. '. 2. "This par. is‘ to be understood

you: be troubled about haviug.ne prince 2 as spoken to a ruler, in his own person. Come.

Pr. II. Cn. XV.—XVI. THE WORKS OF: MENCIUS: 53

4
um
m

SEXE
“NEN

o7

la
HK
S

oH
iN-
B
DA

a
ZR

x3

iN
OEHPOCSR
ERYR

ma

H Ty
N
x

3

m ]

N
5

ve

TUITE
it

à
E

zi
SY SIDS Aria
ES

xu
CERE mie
*

Ld

T

Pa

oN
= OES

NN, UI

art
E[2 B

.. .M

PRAHI
Ix
SEDES
ES

YA

EHE

E
=
v

mu

n rand’

E
=
£*

Li

take to dispose of it in his own person. Let him be prepared t "die
for An Le him not quit it.’ E sem E jd i)
3. 4“T ask you,-prince, to make your election between’ these, So
courses.” = ^ Nata a. be & 2 cU [a AS
Cuarrer XVI. 1. The duke Ping of Loo was about to leave Ait
palace, when. his favourite, one Tsang Ts‘ang, made a request to hii:
saying, ‘On other days, when you. have gone.out, you have givens
instructions to the officers.as to where you were going.;; But. nowjf
the horses have been put to the carriage, and the officers dpinot;yet
know, where you are going, I venture to ask." The duke said, fola
am going to see the. scholar Maing.” . “ How is this!” said the other
“That you demean yourself, prince, in paying the honour of the hrsti
visit.to a common man, is, I apprehend, because. you think,that jhe,
is a man of talents and virtue.. By such men the rules of ceremonial;
proprieties and right are observed. But on the occasion ofthis,

L

=

e
EB
me

: ] E . wm . f wh 3
ch, vii. A- , ‘to take the whole disposal ïs ONLY SUBORDINATE, DI The duke ing:
of,’ to deal with, It is not to be referred to the g ‘The Pacificator’) had been informed) of
pem encius' worth, it appears, by Gó-chiug, ang
^j. ‘The paraphrasts make the whole spoken was going out, half-ashamed at the same time tu
by the ruler;—thius:—' The territory of the State do s0, to offer the due respect to him'as a profes-
was handed down by my ancestors to their.de- sor of moral and political science, by visiting him y
scendants, that they should keep it from gener- and asking his services. The author of the pi
ation to generation. It is not what I, can as- =
sume in my person the disposal of. If calami-: = at et am approves of the view that»
ties and difficulties come, my course is to fight the incident in this chapter;is to be referréd;to
to the death to keep it. I may not abandon it, m
and go elsewhere.’ The meaning comes to the the 4th year of the Emperor Jiu Be: 910,

game. But the /] is against this construction, but the chronology of the duke Ping ig'váry ?

Cu. 16, .A MAN'S WAY IN LIFE I8 ORDERED gy Confused. Br hee bat so At A ais T.

Haven. THEINSTBUMENCALITY OF OTHER MEN. an exclamation of, surprise, extending a9 fap:

i
1

54 THE WORKS QF MENCIUS. , BOOK.
EJ hi EI, = Hg. BY. Er
Jr JE RA Hmh, B giu
: RZ. Sy

. 3
č
Bey

¢

`
-—

EX
Ld
RE

ine

~

E dA 5

E
EA

8 BUCH.
ws Jt; Fl JA AR, SL fe H

ace SM pet od ion ah or. yht
Miüng's wy mourning, 'his observances exceeded those of. a

former. Do not go to see him, my prince." The duke said, «I will
notu tortufanp tio t6 unte on 7 H T8 de anm 1 Inm
2. Thé officer Gó-ching ‘entered ‘the tourt, "and had an anions
He'said, ** Prinée; why have you not gone to see Mang Ko?” 17e
dike'sdid, i£ pé told me that'on the decasion of the scholar Mig
second mourning, his observances exceeded those of the former. A
is on that account that I have not gone to see him.” * How is this!”
“ By what you 1 call * exceeding,’ you mean, I sup-

Mm
m

j
to

SH
n

i Pac
D "" M. TEL EXIT.

answered Gó-ching.
pose, that, on the first occasion, he used the rites appropr iate to a
scholar, and, on the second, those appropriate to a great officer ; that
he first used. three tripods, and afterwards five tripods." The dule
said, * No; I referto the greater excellence of the coffin, the shell, the
grave-clothes, and the shroud.” G-ching said, “That cannot be
called ‘exceeding.’ That was the difference between being poor and
being rich.”

.9. After this, Gó- ching saw Mencius, and said to him, *I told
the prince about you, and he was consequently coming to see you,

as jm. In mu 8 BH JẸ, the JẸ i is name was K‘ih GE. See par. 3), was a disciple
hardly so much as an interrogation. I have of Mencius. The surname probably arose from

given its force by--'I apprehend.’ does

not indicate the origin of rites and right, but
only their exhibition. The first occasion of
Mencius’ mourning referred to was that, it is
said, for his father.. But his father died, accor-
ing to the received accounts, when he was only
& child of three years old. We must suppose
that the favourite invented the story. I have
retained the surname Máng here, as suiting the

paragraph better than Mencius. 2.
is a double surname. This individual, whose

one of his ancestors having been the Music-
master of some State, and so the name of his
office passing over to become the designation
of his descendants. The tripods contained the
offerings of meat used in sacrifice. The empér-
or used nine, the prince of a State seven, a great
officer five, and a scholar three.. To each tripod

belonged its appropriate kind of flesh. 8.

g B AC — FR, low. 3d tone,‘ therefore,’

ie, in consequence of what Gó-ching had said,
the duke'was going to visit Mencius, ke is

St

Pra: Cu. XVI] THE “WORKS OF'MENCIUS. 5

: ^. : ir : t
: wheh pone: m his. fatourites, n pihed ‘Bing c T s‘ang,” oppå hibad

th qrefo re ihe "did not come according g itor hispur pose! AMenciug. Said,
e A hi ipan's jadvahPement ; is effected, it, may. be, bý othétá, aridthe
stopping hin i is, it maybe, fromthe efforts ot£others, at Bitto adyance
a Me or to stops advanice is, ‘really bi yond.the p power of othernen.
My t finding 4 ip gthe~prince of d ruler who would confid in
me “hd id my ye piri A Í froni front Héayen, "How would
that scion of the’ Tsang family cause me not to find the oe that

buld suit mé 2"

i " dons ord

read low 2d tone, and low. 3d tone, both with veys all the meaning in the translation, however
the same meaning, [f, *to stop. au^ iR periphrastie that may.,sceiiti n With this ‘refe-
HR gi is: pot, poken merely with reference rence of Mencius to Heayen,:gompare the- låne
to the duke’ s not coming, ag he had purposed, . guage of; Confucius, Ans ar xxi; PEA N XIV,

ut

>
ips him, PS cS x SBE really con- „xxxyii, P N acteur E ioia

ex

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK IL

gy

BOOK II.

KUNG-SUN CHOW. PART I.

m Nu
mae VN

b
4

[d

ERIS IR SESS

N

y

`

RANI Has

~

ERNEA aN N

-
SRI
ww
w4 4

N
"i

Sah > nih Lin
T

ALF

E

CHAPTER I. 1. Kung-sun Ch‘ow asked Mencius, saying, “ Master,
if you were to obtain the ordering of the government in Ts‘e, could
you promise yourself to accomplish anew such results as those
realized by Kwan Chung and Gan?"

2. Mencius said, “ You are indeed a true man of Ts‘e. You know
about Kwan Chung and Gan, and nothing more. ` ;

. 8. “Some one asked Tsáng Se, saying, ‘Sir, to which do you

give the superiority, —to yourself or to Tsze-loo ?’

Tsing Se looked

uneasy, and said, ‘He was an object of veneration to.my grand-

‘Titte or tus’ Book. The name of Kung-
sun Ch‘ow a disciple of Mencius, heading the
first chapter, the book is named from him ac-

cordingly. On E ^n] E; ‘see note on the
title of the first Book.

CH. 1. Waie MENCIUS WISHED TO SEE A
TRUE IMPERIAL GOVERNMENT AND SWAY IN THE
EMPIRE, AND COULD EASILY HAVE REALIZED IT,
FROM TNE PECULIAR CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE
TIME, HE WOULD NOT, TO DO 80, HAVE HAD RE-
COURSE TO ANY WAYS INCONSISTENT WITH ITS
IDEA. 1. Kung-sun Ch'ow, one of Mencius'
disciples, belonged to Ts'e, and was probably a
cadet of the ducal family. The sons of the princes
were generally ZF ; their sonsagain, BE
‘ducal grandsons,’ and these two characters
became the surname of their descendants, who
mingled with the undistinguished classes of the

people. rc ES. lit, ‘in away.’ Chaou K'e
says,— Er ft ES. ‘in an official way,’ and

Choo He, E 5.0 ‘to occupy an important

position. The gloss in the wE says:— EP

5&8 is fie ER Jg. to grasp the handle of

government. Theanalogous phrase—‘E¥ id is
used now to describe an officer's appointment.
fef fip. see Con. Ana. III. xxii: XIV. x ; xvii;
xviii. ,—See Con. Ana. V. xvi; Men. IL
Pt. 1L iv. 9. Tsing Se was the grand- `
son, according to Chaou K'e and Choo He, of

Tsing Sin, the famous disciple of Confucius.
Others say he was Sin’s son. It is a moot-point,

4
L] y

L THE WORKS OF MENCIUS:

E ct
E]

Su
=

pu

i
i

EH ;
=
=

ad

So

+>
R
PE
ERES

E

AE

v

-^

SESS
Gee at
TE Hehe

o`

AS-i

IA
>

t Bio
PAI
N
d
"ESO

2j
TRO
VAJN

amt
AN

a
TE
EM

s
By
ini

XRO
SUE
E
=

* S30

iN

4

Ned

ce

i nimm

SEI
Ns
2 HEE

2

v

Ep
78 T

- yu

> eae

ie
YE
P

E ‘Then,’ “pursued the-other, * Do you gie the Viperiority
to yourself or to Kwan Chung?” Tsing Se, flushed with- anger and
dişpfeased, &aid, ‘How dare you compare ine with! Kwan, Ching?
Considering how entirely Kwan Chung possessed the confidence “of j
his prince, how long he enjoyed the direction of the governiriént ‘of
the ‘kingdom, and how low, after all, was what lie accomplished, =
how is it that. you liken me to him?’ l

4, “Thus,” concluded Mencius, “Tsing Se would not play Kwan
Chung, and is it what you desire for me, that I sliould do so?”

5. Kung-sun Cl/ow said, “Kwan Chung raised his prince to be
the leader of' all the other princes, and Gan made his prinec illustri-
ous, and do you still’ think it would not be chough for gon to do
what they did?” id
6. Mencius answered, “To raise Tate to the Imperial dignity

>
x

^5. c
za
=

real

. yong „be as easy asit is to turn round the hand.” * $^, , po
“So!” returned: the other. “The perplexity, of your disciple

wits 1. Apre
Sk An XI xe aR Miis: than 40 years Kwan Chung possessed the entire
to- Choo, is A^ xe 2 as in the translation. confidence of the duke Hwiny 4,4 y
The dict. gives it i Ei *the appearance R- s low. 3d tone, ‘on my behalf,’ , Sm
- of reverence.’ KF: —ive see what awideap- Shih FR gi. the paraphrast of Chaon Ke
plication this charactor F has., -4T c takes it. a=) f: — Do you think dut
i di is not to be taken as if it were the sign of I desire to doo?" This des not hips to be
the present eomplete tense, tho' in the diet. K'e's own interpretation, $t Fa

this passage is quoted under that signif. of the E Fig xX Æ AE Ba. —lit., ae are Kwan

character. It is bere RU] or 7. For more f Chung and Gan still not sufficient to be played?".

8

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

v

MN SH Hoe

GEAR
2
"inl

YEHE

k

-
ia

[ d

Du Sess
Natt

ESRHN

e
SIR

c Es HN ERE

*
JEN
dam
‘
9
tome à
SN
T-N
!
Y

e

Ep 2:

AS
>"
[d
ww.

UN
A

[ d

=

TERS H

Repo HS
poh

M
y

»

aan He
S

WE
ENS

-p

‘is hereby very much increased. There was king Wăn, with all the
virtue which belonged to him; and who did not die till he had
. reached a hundred years :—and still his influence had not penctrated
‘throughout the empire. It required king Woo and the duke of Chow
to continue his course, before that influence greatly prevailed. Now
you say that the Imperial dignity might be so easily obtained :—is
king Wan then not a sufficient object for imitation ?”
8. Mencius said, * How can king Waa be matched? From T'ang
' to Woo-ting there had appeared six or seven worthy and sage sove-
reigns. The empire had been attached to Yin for a long time, and
this length of time made a change difficult. ‘Woo-ting had all the
princes coming to his court, and possessed the empire as if it had
been a thing which he moved round in his palm. Zhen, Chow was
removed from Woo-ting by no great interval of time. There were
- still remaining some of the ancient families and of the old manners,
_of the influence also which had emanated from the earlier sovereigns,

T $e Ii—i this case;' but by using
our exclamatory So! the spirit of the remark
is brought out. H introduces a new subject,

and a stronger one for the point in hand. King
Win died at 97.-—Ch*ow uses the round num-

me ASE ED RRA E
E FE x E SR "Nes goueer

that Ts'e might be raised to the Imperial sway
thus easily.’ 8. From 'l"ang to Woo-ting.
(s.c. 1765—1323), there were altogether 18
emperors, exclusive of themselves, and from
Woo-ting te Chow (1323—1153) seven. Bi.
ch‘aou, low. Ist tone, used as in I. Pt. Y. vi. 6,

et al. 19k We Hk EE 4b Pe Con.

Ana, XVIIL i The latter two are EF: as

Pr. I: Ci. I. TIE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

a
e

d
Ts

exui SE

v

zd

DEA

k

fv -
se
PES

t
He

SAE ED

T

e

He TEN SREY
is
SA

ED

ti

n
/

bz

RaW S d
zb
S

oH WR a Jr ys d
ns F HLE% MENS] HL,
f E

EX
:
"Mis

XS

zie

Aj
AB UL, GE E.
EET DERT E.

and of their good government. Moreover, there were the viscount of
Wei and his second son, their Royal Highnesses, Pe-kan and the vis-
count of Ke, and Kaou-kih, all, men of ‘ability and.virtue, who gave
their joint assistance to Chow in his government. In consequence
of these things, it took a long time for him to lose the empire.. , There,
. was not a foot of ground which he did not possess, . There was, not

one of all the people who. was not his subject. So it was. on, his
side, and king Wn made his beginning from a territory of- only: one
hundred square /e. On all these accounts, it was difficult for: him
immediately to attain the Imperial dignity.

9. “The people of 'Fs'e have a saying-—‘A man may have w isdom
and discernment, but that is not like embracing the favourable op-
portunity. A man may have instruments of husbandry, but that;is
not like waiting for the farming seasons.’ The present time is one
in which the Imperial dignity may be easily attained.

10. “In the flourishing periods of the Hea, Yin, and Chow
dynasties, the imperial domain did not exceed a thousand le, and
‘Ts‘e embraces so much territory. Cocks crow and dogs bark to.

RHE SE

w

being uncles of Chow, ‘Imperial sons, [4 A. up. 3d tone. ` A Z-Z refers to the —

; 4h was the second son (some say brother) empire. EMA the opp,

of, [i F- Kaou-kih was a distinguished of former Hn takes the place of

man and minister of the time,—whose worth sae

was first discovered by' king ‘Win, but who By H, written variously d d BE
continued loyal to the house of Yin. Hp- '—was the name for a hee

*

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

6 BOOK IL

Er

SROCTERRG NOR

b

d

Ado
RD
Ea

a
(ERES
= BEES
Dol
SN

~,
-
-
-

HERT

aN,
Re s
Sn
NE
-

=
(a
WENA SEAS

T
HERE SSS

Ns

=p
ai

Bl! +0
WIRE RES
XE

o »
5) ít
fü MU — S

-prta IB
N
39]

No ERE

RENE
SHSM STS

pue
S

ip fi,
ALITE EE EAT HR

each other, all the way to the four borders of the state :—so Ts'e
possesses the people. No change is needed for the enlarging of its
territory : no change is needed for the collecting of a population.
If its ruler will put in practice a benevolent government, no power
will be able to prevent his becoming Emperor.

11. “Moreover, never was there a time farther removed than the
present from the appearance of a true sovereign: never was there
a time when the sufferings of the people from tyrannical government
were inore intense than the present. The hungry are easily sup-
plied with food, and the thirsty are easily supplied with drink.

12, *'Confutius said, ‘The flowing progress of virtue is more
rapid than the transmission of imperial orders by stages and. couriers.'

18. “At the present time, in a country of ten thousand chariots,
let benevolent government be put in practice, and the people will
be delighted with it, as if they were relieved from hanging by the
heels, With half the merit of the ancients, double their achievements

I

‘Jes, BUS, Ji]. see Con. Ana, TIT. xxi. R=

- The last sentence, as in I. Pt. J. vii. 3.

11, The F in ARR APSR

is perplexing. We might put it, in the 3d tone,

and & and Pr in the same. But in VII. Pt.

I. xxiv, we have the expressions gl $ H
E ; Ba fk. Where £f and fk must

have their ordinary tones. Stress therefore is
not to be laid on the jur Perhaps the ex-
pressions easily do eating, easily do drinking.’

12. The distinction between fa and $R

is much disputed. Some make the former a
foot post, but that is unlikely. It denotes the
slower conveyance of despatches, and the other
the more rapid. So much seems plain. Sce the

fo BH. in loc. 18. Lu f fal WE —

n

Pr. I. Cu. L.—II. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

61

is sure to be realized.
case" 0o
CHAPTER II. 1. Kung-sun Ch*ow asked Mencius, saying, “ Master,
if you were to be appointed a high noble and the prime minister of
Ts‘e, so as to be able to carry your principles into practice, though
you should thereupon raise the prince to the headship of all the .
other princes, or even to the Imperial dignity, it would not be to be
wondered at.—In such a position would your mind be perturbed or .

It is only at this time that such could be the

not?"
ed mind."
2.

beyond Mang Pun."
‘Choo He simply says =f] ad Vit m LU

«fil mi expresses bitter suffering. Lit., it is
—‘as if they were loosed from being turned
upside down and suspended.’

Cu. 2. Tuar MENCIUS HAD ATTAINED TO AN
UNPERTURBED MIND; THAT THE MEANS BY WHICH
HE HAD DONE SO WAS HIS KNOWLEDGE OF WORDS
AND THE NOURISHMENT OF HIS PASSION-NATURE 3
AND THAT IN THIS HE WAS A FOLLOWER OF CONFU-
€1US. The chapter is divided into four parts :—
the ist, parr. 1—8, showing generally that there
are various ways to attain an unperturbed mind ;
the 2d, parr. 9, 10, exposing the error of the way
taken by the philosopker Kaou; the 3d, parr.
11—17, unfolding Mencius’ own way ; and the
Ath, parr. 18—28, showing that Mencius followed
Confucius, and praising the sage as the first of
mortals. It is chiefly owing to what Mencius
says in this chapter about the nourishment of
the passion-nature, that a place has been accord-
ed to him among the sages of China, or in im-
‘mediates proximity to them. His views are
substantially these.—Man's nature is composite.
Xie possesses moral and intellectual ' powers,

(comprehended by Mencius under the term x
‘heart,’ ‘mind,’ interchanged with ie * the
will’), and active powers (summed up under

Mencius replied, * No. At forty, I attained to an unperturb- `

Chow said, * Since it js so with you, my Master, you are far
“The mere attainment,” said Mencius “is not

the term SA , and embracing generally the emo-

tions, desires, appetites). The moral and intel-
lectual powers should be supreme and govern,
but there is a close connection between them
and the others which give effect to them. ‘The
active powers may not be stunted, for then the
whole character will be feeble. But'on the
other hand, they must not be allowed to take
the lead. They must get their tone from the
mind, and the way to develope them in all their
completeness is to do good. Let them be vig-
orous, and the mind clear and pure, and we
shall have the man, whom nothing external to
himself can perturb,—Horace’s justum et tenacem
propositi virum. In brief, if we take the sanum
corpus ef the Roman adage, as not expressing `
the mere physical body, but the emotional and
physical nature, what Mencius exhibits here,
may be said to be *mens sana in corpore sano.’
The attentive reader will, I think, find the above

thoughts dispersed through this chapter, and
be able to separate them from the irrelevant
matter (that especially relating to Confucius),
with which they are put forth. 1, Jn.
‘to add,’ and generally ‘to confer upon,’ is here
to be taken passively,—‘ If on you were confer-

red the dignity of, &c^ EP, up. 3d tone, ff

62

=

NRE ERE

iA,
$

v

MOS NC E e
NERIS

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

v

MSS NA St

J^ 7H. EI
We Ib
Eu W

~~
s

m>
=

Sen
"Dez

e

dy

`

CE

NE
Er
a
Se

difficult. The scholar Kaou had attained to an unperturbed mind,

at an earlier period of life than I did.”

3. Ch‘ow asked, “Is there any way to an unperturbed mind?”
The answer was, “ Yes. . i

4. “Pih-kung Yew had this way of nourishing his valour :—He-
did not flinch from any strokes àt his body. He did not turn his
eyes aside from any thrusts at them.. He considered that the slightest
push from any one was the same as if he were beaten before the
crowds in the market-place, and that what he would not receive from
& common man in his loose large garments of hair, neither should he
receive from a prince of ten thousand chariots. He viewed stabbing-
a prince of ten thousand chariots just as stabbing a fellow dressed
in cloth of hair.. He feared not any of all the princes. A bad word
addressed to him he always returned.
5. “Mang She-shay had this way of nourishing his valour:—

HP are not to be separated by an or, as BE
must be. Seeon ASSEN Ana, IX. xv. Ch'ow's
meaning is that, with so great an office and heavy
‘a charge, the mind might welt be perturbed :—
would it be so with his master? With Mencius’
reply, comp. Confucius’ account of himself, Ana.
IT. iv. 3. 2, Mang Pun was a celebrated
bravo, probably of Ts‘e, who could pull the horn
‘from an ox's head, and feared no man. Kaouis
'the same who gives name to the 6th Book of
Mencius, which see. ys TE is not to
:be understood so much ‘with reference to the
ease of Ming Pun, as to the mere attainment of

an unperturbed mind, without reference to the
‘way of attaining toit. 3. i here= Ys.
'*way, er ‘method? ^ 4. Pih-kung Yew was
& bravo, belonging probably to Wei GRD and

connected “with its "ruling family, A Jv

E Cow. 1st tone), pé H x5 lit., ‘not

skin bend, not eye avoid! The meaning is not
that he had first been wounded in those parts,
and still was indifferent to the pain, but that he-

would press forward, careless of all risks. IH

Covers down to Ji. — E »=* the leas
push,’==disgrace. Chaou K'e says—‘to have a
hair pulled from his body,’ but Tb does not agree-

with this. BA (ch‘aou, low. 1st tone), are

not 'to be separated, and made—* the market
place or the court. The latter char: is used,
because anciently the diff. parties in the mar-
kets were arranged in their respective ranks.

and places, as the officers in the court. But
comp. Ana. XIV. xxxviii. 1. ^ % ET }i=
23 8b H Z X (or AS. 5. There

is a difficulty with the fff, iv

ii

*.

Pr. I. Cu, IL

ES

SHELTER RE

SEUNG eH
~

Ü
YaN

v

«E
E

ETTE?
ii > x > E
M J

Lic es

Qa

DER

&-
eo
w

v
4

EX W

v

Ser

Ser
v4 *

Sy
Nay

j

=

E:

e
E:
yn
TER

i

ind
"all
LE

5T

TA

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS..

HS

EISE

st] [BR

for)
eo

im
SESS
sittar
TENS

V.
[d
w
v

[ d

PEN)

[d
v

SS
PER ETE

ew
c»
*

eee ak
IVS SFARS!

Y oZ. A
Susie yin EF
A Jii 1 8 A
Ls Aa ar Jp

He said, ‘ï look upon not conquering and conquering in the same
way. To measure the enemy and then advance; to calculate the
chances of victory and then engage :—this is to stand in awe of the

opposing force.
rise superior to all fear.’
6.

Yew resembled Tsze-hea.

How can I make certain of conquering? I can only

“ Mang She-shay resembled the philosopher Tsang. Pih-kung
I do not know to the valour of which of

the two the superiority should be as¢ribed, but yet Ming She-shay
attended to what was of the greater importance.

T.
you love valour?
Master.

“Formerly, the philosopher Tsang said to .Tsze-seang, ‘Do
I heard an account of great yalour from the
It speaks thus:—'1f, on self-examination, I find that I am

not upright, shall I not be in fear even of a poor man in his loose

garments of hair-cloth ?

If, on self-examination, I find that. 1 am

upright, I will go forward against thousands and tens of thousands.’

this gentleman in the end of the par. simply
. calls himselt Hence the hii is made
^ Jike our ‘h’m;’—Ming H'm-shay. The use of
4 before the name, especially in the south of
China, is analogous to this. Notwithstanding the

jr in the 1st clause of this par., we need not
translate difftly from the lst clause of the pre-
ceding. == Fi —see Ana. VII. x.; used here
simply for ‘the enemy.’ 6. Bas in
last ch. Pih-kung Yew thought of others,—of
conquering; Mang Shay of himself, —of not being

afraid. Ht is on this account that Men. gives him
the preference. ‘I'he basis of the ref. to the two
disciples is the commonty received idea of their
several characters. 'Tsăng Sin was reflective, and
dealt with himself. Tsze-hea was ambitious, and
would not willingly be inferior to others. T.

Tsze-seang was a disciple of "sáng. fid. —pro-

perly, the straight seams, from the top to the
edge, with which an ancient cap was made, meta-

phorically used for ‘straight,’ ‘upright E:

A dmi E-2 E pa ia 35. the inter-

rogation being denoted by the tone of the voice.

a
Prd

THE WORKS

Y
i

vs
e

x

T

No

bus
"4
v

H

eh
Na

e

ONS

Ca
—N

XEM

peres
T
~~

x.
-
æ
v

v

Aa
S

a
I

v

PaaS I

=!

a

XS

A
I

Rus
Fal ONY

NES)

aS

aj
bry

Nel
=

OF MENCIUS. BOOK 11.

=

o

dS NH
I

M BNO
E

EIS

w
"4

[d

Ng

}

SHV ROE

Sul
=

Ld

V
«
c

im

IS RC BD E 8)

` 8. Yet, what Mäng She-shay maintained, being his merely phy-
sical energy, was after all inferior to what the philosopher Tsing
maintained, which was indeed of the most importance.” :

.9. Kunq-sun' Ch'ow said, * May I venture to ask an explanation
from you, Master, of how you maintain an unperturbed mind, and how
the philosopher Kaou does the same?" Mencius answered, ** Kaou
Says, ——' What is not attained in words is not to be sought for in the
wind; what produces dissatisfaction in the mind, is not to be helped
by passion-effort.’ This ast,— when there is unrest in the mind, not
to. seek for relief from passion-effort, may be conceded. But not to
seek in the mind for what is not attained in words cannot be conceded.
The wil is the leader of the passion-nature. The passion-nature
pervades and animates the body. The-will is first and chief, and the
passion-nature is subordinate to it. Therefore J say, —Maintain firm
the"will, and do no violence to the passion-nature.

"V

Still: the E is the final particle, and not relate to XD ‘the mind,’ taken in connection

the initial ‘how,’ with a different tone, as
Julien supposes. 8. Here we first meet
the character SEP, so important in this chap-
ter, Its different meanings inay be seen in the
dictioharies of Morrison and Medhwrst. Ori-
ginally it was the same as b *eloudy va-

pour’ With the addition of 3e ‘rice,’ or k,
fire, which was an old form, it should indicate
‘steam of rice,’ or ‘steam’ generally. The
sense in which Mencius uses it, is indicated in
the translation and in the preliminary note.

„with the idea of ‘energy’ inherent in it, from

its composition. Thus it signifies the lower,
but active, portion of man's constitution ; and

‘ja this paragraph, that lower part in its lowest

sense,—animal vigaur or courage. Observe the
force of the PE referring to what had been con-
ceded to Shay in par. 6. I translate as if there
were a comma or pause after the two zw.

9, Kaou's principle seems to have been
this, —utter indifference to every thing ex-
ternal and entire passivity of mind. Modern
writers are fond of saying that in his words

"T'hat.sense springs from its being used as cor- i is to be found the essence of Duddhism,—that

Pr. I. Cu, II.

xul mw
iE IX

n
TSO ey

SHER
NENS

-
Lu
A

Nass
vei

e

NaH

TMN
A
Se

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

-e

v

nE:
è
23

.-

ps

ford
Gt

p
Yat

139r

Èh

Y

=

;

zlo
è

w
”
v
v

HISA
a
m

!

j

ii
HSS

è
m

v

V i
<=
emm

~.
w
w
v

En
zip
y
Sm

n
in

10. Ch‘ow observed, “ Since you say—‘ The will is chief, and the
passion-nature is subordinate,’ how do you also say,—‘ Maintain firm
I , J y,
the will, and do no violence to the passion-nature?'" Mencius replied,
“ When itis the will alone which is active, it moves the passiou-
nature. When it is the passion-nature alone which is active, it moves

the will.

For instance now, in the case of a man falling or running;

—that is from the passion-nature, and yet it moves the mind.”

11. “IT venture to ask," said Ch‘ow again, “wherein you, Master,
surpass Kaou.” Mencius told him, “1 understand words. I am skil-
ful in nourishing my vast, flowing passion-nature.”

12. Chow pursued, ** I venture to ask what you mean by your
vast, flowing passion-nature!" The reply was, “It is difficult to’

describe it.

the object of his attainment was the Bud-
dhistie nirvana, and perhaps this helps us to a
glimpse of his meaning. Comm. take sides on
KER LE whether the *words' are Kaou's
own words, or those of others, 'lo me it is
‘hardly doubtful that they must be taken as the
words of others. Mencius’ account of himself
below, as ‘knowing words,’ seems to require this,
At the sametime, a reference to Kaou's argu-
ments with Mencius in Bk. VI, where he chan-

ges the form of his assertions, without seeming

to be aware of their refutation, gives some plau-
sibility to the other view.—Chaou K'e is all at
sea in his interpretation of the text here. He
understands it thus:—: If men’s words are bad,
I will net inquire about their hearts; if their
hearts are bad, L will not inquire about their

words? The j is not an approval of Kaou’s
second proposition, but a concession of it sim-
ply as not so bad as his first. Mencius goes on
to show wherein he considered it as defective.
From his language here, and in the next pars-

graph, we sce that he uses pant NY synony-

mously. SU ly Pa the E] is the fill-

ing up of the body." might seem here to
be little more than the ‘breath,’ but that mean-
ing would come altogether short of the term
throughout the chapter.: 10. Ch‘ow did not
understand what his master had said about the
relation between the mind and the passion-na-
ture, and as the latter was subordinate, would
have had it disregarded altogether:—hence his
question. Mencius shows that the passion-nature
is really a part of our constitution, acts upon the
mind, and is acted on by it, and may not be dis-
A "Ty
regarded. ig —. The meets
Ch*ow's disregard of the passion-nature, as not
worth attending to. It. Fhe illustration
here is not a very happy one, leading us to
think of E] in its merely material significa-

i i ar. =
tion, as in the fast par On ^at pro see par.

17. On yE ER Z E there is much vain

babbling iu the Comm., to show how the SR.

RC

9

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK IL

E
oF
sat
Ee

E
Ne

È

RO
xk
ML
TIT

EEN
T
US

i
we
zs
E»
Por
B+

ES
Im
‘meray
NP

=
Zu
HEA

3
Eu

uu
Em

A T. is jus passion-riature i is is gre:
m tingly strong. Being nourished by rectitude,'and sustaining
no injury,-it. fills up all between heaven and earth.

* 14 “This is the passion-nature :—It is the mate and assistant, of
righteousness, andreason. Without it, man is in a state of star vation,
J15,, .“ It is produced by the accumulation of righteous deeds ; it is
not to be obtained by incidental acts of righteousness. If the mind
does. not feel complacency i in the conduct, the nature becomes starved,
L.therefore said, ‘Kaou has never understood righteousness, because
hie, makes it somethin g external.’
. 16. “There must be the constant practice of this righteousness,
but without the object of the 'eby nourishing the passion-nature, Let
mot; the mind forget zts work, but let there be no assistin g the growth
of that nature; "let us not be like the man of Sung. Ther e was

e man. of. Sung, who was grieved that his growing corn was not

f heave and earth is the E: al&o of man. BESSA: BR refers tog Hw. in GE ox. J6

Menciüs, it seems to me, has before his mind j inpar. 9. Itis better, however, in the translation,

the idéal of a perfect man, complete in. all to supply ‘man,’ than ‘body.’ 18. 36—, to
the parts of his constitution. It is this ns dali aw Snony by Sutone: and X
gives its, elevation to his language. ; y Py surprise; a gi-

vi i $$ in paragraphs 7, 15; fi $ ‘incidental acts of righteousness.’ [74 here
refers to the passion-nature itself. The analysis
of conduct and feeling here is very goed,
here in the sense of *to fill up,’ not ‘ta stop ay Mencius’ sentiment is' just —’ Tis conscience

‘Still the 3€ E K sh x ij is one of. makes cowards of us all. On the latter sen-

tence, sce Bk. VI. v. et al. 16. I have given
those heroic expressions, which fill the ear, but
‘do not inform the mind, 14. A pause mus the meaning of the E JV» JH 8g E, nm

be made after the FE: which refers to the Pk YA iE: m FI 7j xn. 7] Hl fe! after

—as in the latter part of par. 15.

Sa
~

Pr. I. Ct. IL THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

: 1
t

noH

TY
=
ü

`
^-
v
r

Saa RN P S

sj

x

PER

Bi aka E.

ce” E

\

aay

d

See
DN

¢

JY

E

"m

=<
5

v

eN
pa “4
er

v

SHINE

+

»

"X

a
E
g
n
4

ERES

aR

e

xt
SON TE SESS

Zim HN

E

Re

(s

Br as
an Re, 4 HL, R,
Jf, Fn Jt HE BP. BH
pF. V SUE

i NI I. s B 435v 4i di, KA

donner and.so he pulled it up.' Having done this, hé Fitendd homé,
looking very stupid, and i t to his people, ‘I am fired to- day. I
have been helping the corn to grow long.', His son Tan to’ look at
it, and found the corn all withered. There are few in the world,
who do not deal with their passion-nature, as if they were "ussibting
the corn to grow long. Some indeed consider it of nó' benefit" to
them, and let it alone :—they'do not weed their corm: They who
assist it to grow long, pull out their corn. W hat they do is: ‘Hot only
of no benefit to the nature, but it also injures it.” ud

` 17. Kung-sun Chow further asked, “ What do yon mean By’ m
ing that you understand whatever words you hear?” Mencius replied,
* When words are one-sided, I know how the nad of the speaker "is
élouded over, When’ words are extravagant, I know'how the mind
is fallen and sunk. When words are all-depraved, I know how. the
Anind has departed from principle. When words are evasive, I know
how the mind is at its wits’ end. These evils. growing in the. mind,

aE S adh

ing a question. by Mencius’ interloentor, and

}

Chaou K'e, to whom Choo He also inclines.

But for their help, we should hardly know what
to make of it. 3E is taken in the sense of
TR HH, ‘to do with anticipation of, or a‘view
-to, an ulterior object,’ This meaning of the
‘term is supported by an example from the

3k ik. $A =t tired.’ Y

17. Here, as some-

the same omission is frequent in all, the; rest; df
the chapter. I have supplied the laennm, dftér
Choo He, bid himself follows Lin Che-K'e

dk Pi. "nf ) a scholar, who died A.D. 1116.

Chaou K*e sometimes errs egregiously in the last
part, through not distinguishing/the speakers.
With regard to the first ground of Mencius’
superiority over Kaon, —his ‘knowledge of
words,’ as he is bricfer than on the other. so

times before, we miss d preliminar , not- he is still less satisfactory,—to my . mind at
, y

mS

SSS eS SS emt

e

THE WORKS

v

ot

v

TAS

v

v

I ke

v

Hemd

ry
v

E

OF MENCIUS. BOOK 1I.

d a
WS rub
By 2 BA a
AN Fe i

do injury to government, and, displayed in the government, are
hurtful to the conduct of affairs. When a Sage shall again arise,
he will certainly follow my words.” E

18. On this Ch‘ow observed, **'Tsae Go and Tsze-kung were skilful
-in speaking. Yen New, the disciple Min, and Yen Yuen, while their
words were good, were distinguished for their virtuous conduct.
Confucius united the qualities of the disciples in himself, but stil
he said, ‘In the ‘matter of speeches, I am not competent. —Then,
Master, have you attained to be a Sage?"

19. ` Mencius said, “Oh! what words are these? Formerly Tsze-
kung asked Confucius, saying, ‘Master, are you a Sage?’ Confucius
answered him, ‘A sage is what I cannot rise to. I learn without

satiety, and teach without being tired? — Tsze-kuug said, * You learn

least. Perhaps he means to say, that however
great the dignity to which he might be raised,
his knowledge of words, and ability jn referring
incorrect and injurious speeches to the mental
defects from whith. they sprang, would keep
him from being deluded, and preserve his mind
unperturbed. One of the scholars Ch'ing
< uses this illustration :—' Mencius with his know-
ledge of words was like a man seated aloft on the
dais. who can distinguish aH the movements
of the people below the hall, which he could
not do, if. jt were necessary for him tó descend
ard mingle with the crowd” ‘The concluding
remark gives rise to tlie rest of the chapter, it
seeming to Ch'ow that Mencius placed himself
by it on the platform of sages. 18. Comp.
Ana. XI. ii. 2, to the enumeration in which of
the excelleücies of several of Confucius’ üis-

ciples there seems to be here a reference. There,
however, it is said that Yen New, Min, and Yen

"OLPC 4

Yuen were distinguished for fihi (RE and here
we have the addition of E T 1 Nn give a
good deal of trouble. Some take = as a verb,

—' were skilful to speak of virtuous conduct.
So the ‘Fartar version, according to Julien. Sun
Shih makes it a noun, as I do. ‘The references
to the disciples are quite inept. The point of
Ch'ow's inquiry lies in Confucius’ remark,
found nowhere else, and obscure enough. He
thinks Mencius is taking more to himself than

Confucius did. Chaou K'e however, takes jt
RK BE A Ze as a remark of Mencius, but

it is quite unnatural to do so. Observe the force
of the Buon have come to be. . 19. v

up. Ist tone; an exclamation, not interrogative,
This convers. with 'T'sze-kung is not found in the

Pr. f. Cn 11. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS,

ca

e

rm

FEE
SERS e meu

NE EUM
«X
 ad

zi

v

NENN

yoo
dor

b

ne

[d

HRN
ROS
HSS Ny eo

Ld

zum
 Nat

Ld

mpg

ou
&
a
[d
L d

SD SEES MPN
ee

-
v

E
HS

wv

IS
i5

Bik
EBS

Q

FS

v
38:

a
PRU et

po

ò B

without saticty:—that shows your wisdom. You teach without
being tired :—that shows your benevolence. Benevolent and wise:
. —Master, you ARE a Sage.’ Now, since Confucius would not have
himself regarded a sage, what words were those?" i
20. Ch‘ow said, “Formerly, Y once heard this :——Tsze-hea, Tsze»
yew, and Tsze-chang, had each one member of the sage. Yen New,
the disciple Min, and Yen Yuen, had all the members, but in. small
‘proportions. I venture to ask,— With which of these are you pleased
to rank yourself? " l l
21. Mencius replied, * Let us drop speaking about these, if you
lease.” j os f
5 29. Ch'ow then asked, “ What do you say of Pih-e and E-yun?"
“Their ways were different from mine,” said Mencius. “Not to serve
a prince whom he did not esteem, nor command a people whom. he
did not approve; in a time of good government to take office, and
on the occurrence of confusion to retire :—this was the way of Pih-e.
To say—‘ Whom may I not serve? My serving him makes him my
prince. What people may I not command? My commanding.them

v

Analects. Compare Ana, VIL ii. ; xxxili., which
Jatter chapter may possibly be another version

of. what Mencius says here. 20. Sf,

is used with other verbs to give a deferential
tone to what they say. 21. Comp. Bk. I,
Pt. If. ix. Does Mencius here indicate that he
thought himself superior to all the worthies
teferred to—even to Yen Yuen? Hardly so.

much as that; bit that he could not bé content
with them for his model. 22. Pih-e,—see
Con, Ana. V. xxii. E-yun,—see Con. Ana. XII.

"xxii. JE E p: 3E H EQ, —tine empha- :

tic his, ie, as paraphrased in the translation,

LELIRE LIE)

" à > Y
7 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK! If.

E

se SERE en

Ae
is

WARASE
=

ab
GG
Ne pem pst
V
=

En

E
2x

E

e)
-

SENSOR NOE

BM

v

FEZ;

Sagu
E

aus

(0)

SR
Bree
E

HRS p
zi

Pay
RFA oe

[ d

lesen aec.

zi
L3

jR,
AENA TIE

makes them my: fed In a'time of good government to ‘take, office,
and when disorder prevailed, also to také office -that was the wai
of E-yun. » When it was proper.to go into office, then to gulitito ity
whenit was proper to keep retired from office, then to keep’ ‘detired
from it; when it was proper to continue in it long, then to continué
init long g; when it was proper to withdraw from it quickly, then to
withdraw quickly :—that was the way of Confucius. These were all
sages of antiquity,'and I have not attained' to do what they did.
E what I wish to do is to learn to be like Confucius." MA
: Chow said, * Comparing Pih-e and E-yun with Confucius, drd
T ‘to.be placed in the samerank? Mencius replied, -“ No. iSirice
theré were living men: until now, there never was another Confucius!
124, Chow said, “Then, did they have any -pointsof agreement
with him?” . The reply was,—“ Yes. If they had been sovereigns
overa hundred le of territory; they would, all of them, have brought
all thei princes to attend in their court, 'and.-have obtained thé
empire. And none of them, in order ta obtain the empire, , would
have’ cotamitted’ one act óf unrighteousness, or. put. to ‘death * *oné
innocent person. In these: ‘things “they agreed. with him.” driw aP

ERTA DE EEA EDE a T1 oft
E Ry fi. ur pr ob im JE R i nif qs ob SDA ER H jd: that

I have given the meaning, but the conciseness
of the text makes it difficult toa learner. The 9f the third was what! the time requir ea—yT
different ways of Pih-e, E-yun, and Confucius. Has
nre thus expressed := The principle of the first us fs Ht tu e 3 is to be taken

*

MT
E
zc

P L Cu, II. THE WORKS OF-MENCIUS. -

N
M

e

da

i
SPEEEII SA TE B SS

amb
GC

da
;

[ i d Ha

i

Y
T

am

p
eh
LI
Steps

ish

Cs

zN

mec
Sis

3
I

RE

Vet £4PAC
d C €

T
af
w

2 X.
HW EEG TIT T dod
HE Kr

SAF

X

v

D-K

A
RI ED

A

BREA
paoe

[ d

; Wan

[mA

v
wv
v

pd

AS
Br

zz

E

Yor ba TT tk

= pays

infi, . R IK An
Pak X: ; f

4 $i [i Ji... . f

NAE Ch'ow it “I venture to-ask wherein he differed from

hema: Mencius replied, “ Tsae Go, Tsze-kung, and Yew Jd had wis-
dom, sufficient to know "the sage. Even had.. they been ranking them-
gelyeslow, they would not have demeaned themselves to flatter their
favourite. ' i
-26,°, * Now, Tsàe Go. said, ‘According to my view of our Master,
he is. far superior to Yaou and Shun.’ ‘ds
Pepa “Tsze-kung said, ‘By viewing the ceremonial ordinances of
a prince, we know the characier of his government. By hearing his
music, wé know the ‘character of his virtue. From the distance: of
a hundred ages after, I can arrange, according to their merits, the
kings;of-a: hundred ages;—not one of them can escape.me, From
the ;binth of. mankind : till now, there has never been another like our
Mastery poal ay
128. dYew.J6 said, ‘Is it only among men that it is so? There ‘is
the K‘e-lin. among quadrupeds ; the., Fung-hwang among birds, the

{rrp 3*0 " Lm
uz Bib the connective. 25. yf Confucius. We look for the being his diş

or wa Thaw dei ing water, used here simply for ciples describe, as vainly as we do for the
‘low,’ " with reference to the wisdom of Tsae Go fabulous K‘e-lin and Fung-hwang, to which

and Tsze-kung, in thelr own estimation. —see Con. Ana.
h XI, vili, The ke is properly the male, and =
lin, the female of the animal referred to ;—i

monster, with a deer’s body, an ox’s tail, and K
horse’s feet, which appears to greet the birth of
a sage, or the reign of a.sage sovereign: Both

in yat [i23 “and ja. the nalnés. of tho

ci JE

in the sense of ‘partini, =‘ to flatter,’ 26, ,

With this and the two next parr., comp. the

eulogium of Confucius, in the Chung Yung,

Ch, 30—32, and Con. Ana. XIX. xxiii.—xxv,

ft is in vain the western reader tries to quicken

himel to, any corresponding appreciation of
* M .

they compare him. A Jet.

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.” . BOOK T.

ES

I:

gessi
SSeS

M

=

I
A

i
l

m

gi
»
x:
NE

Hier

v
x
d

Se
T
M
m

[d

[ d

ARN ESSERE

e

rah
SSSI He

ww

HERR

I

SH}
SSAA

[ d

SEn
MAEN
SR
SUE
ESI

o

AAT TRES

T'ae mountain among n and ant hills, and rivers and seas
among rain-pools. 7 "hough different in degree, they are the same in
kind. So the sages among mankind are also the same in kind. But
they stand out from their fellows, and rise above the level, and from
the birth of mankind till now, there never has been one so com-
plete as Confucius.”

Cuarter III. 1. Mencius said, “He who, using force, makes a
pretence to benevolence, is the leader of the princes. A leader of
the princes requires a large kingdom. He who, using virtue, prac-
tises benevolence—is the sovereign of the empire. To become the
sovereign of the empire, a prince need not wait for a large kingdom.
Her did it with only seventy le, and king Wan with only a hun-

re

2. When one by force subdues men, they do not submit to him
in heart. They submit, because their strength is not adequate to resist.

-——
tol

male and female are put together, to indicate E] and E are here the recognized titles and
one individual of either sex. ‘The image in not =‘4o acquire the chieftainey,’ ‘to acquire
3 E B: E is that of stalks of grass the sovereignty.’ In the $6 SE we find much
or grain, shooting high above the level of the idon uissneanits GPS two charäciers E "
waving field. X 8 EX H XL F- SRGD: EE .

‘there has not been one more complete than from three strokes ( — ), denoting heaven, earth,

Confucius.’ But this would be no more than ny n
putting Confucius on a level with other sages. dnd man, atic dali Stroke, J 9r unity,
I have therefore translated after the example going through: them, grasping and uniting them

NE together, thus affording the highest possible
of Ohoo, hó siye B [rj ae A lil conception of power or ability. i55] is KE:
A PA RA A^ ES A an AY ; mous with fH. and of kindred meaning with the
e TES ames BETWEEN A CHIEF- Sonde dE RATS the E sound, jt. ‘to grasp

TAIN OF THE PRINCES AND A SOVEREIGN OF THE with the hand,’ and 3H, ‘to urge,’ ‘to press.’
EMPIRE} AND BETWEEN SUBMISSION SECURED BY , iH
FORCE AND THAT PRODUCED BY VIHIUE. Li 2 . J] rs Wei is tr anslated by Julien, —

Pe, EF. Cii. II—IV.

ea

N

LXX
i=
IPA

MS
TIH

v
*.
t
r

me So
AARE

PR

E

m
dey

E
(^

P

zS
TTAR

[3 EDESTHOREÉERRIDRUR
PAL

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

E

-1
ee

<

w^

>

a-

Y
Diy

e

Se

EE

“i
E

[ d
e

PERSEN N
Ire

c

v

HA ESNE

FIN

When one A men s virtue, in their hearts’ core they are
pleased, and sincerely submit, as was the case with the seventy
disciples in their submission to "Confucius. What is said in the Book
of Poetr x ,
Tm the west, from the east, "
From the south, from the north, i

nm

There was not one who thought of refusing submission,’ is

an illustration of this.”
CHAPTER IV.

4
n

1. Mencius said, “Benevolence brings glory to a
prince, and the opposite of it brings disgrace..

For the princes of

the present day to hate.disgrace and yet live complacently doing
what is not benevolent, is like hating moisture and yet living in a

low situation.
2,

“Ifa prince hates disgrace, the best course for him to pursue,

is to esteem virtue and honour virtuous scholars, giving the worthiest

among them places of dignity, and the able offices of. trust.

When

throughout his kingdom there is leisure and rest from external

‘quia nempe vires (i.e., vis armorum) ad id obtinen-
dumnon sufficiunt. Possibly some Chi. comm, may
have sanctioned such an interpretation, but it
has nowhere come under my notice. The *sev-
enty disciples’ is giving a round number, the
enumeration of them differing in different works.
We find them reckoned*at 73, 76, &c, See in
the prolegomena to vol, I. For the ode see the
She-king, III. i. Ode IX. st. 6, celebrating the
influence of the kings Wain and Woo. The
four quarters are to be viewed from Kaou,

GB king Woo's capital. JH, is not to bė.
taken as an abstract noun, =‘ thought." Pr,

a statesman and- scholar of the 11th cent., says
on this chapter:—‘He who subdues men by
force, has the intention of subduing thew, and

“NESS ARE MEN'S OWN SEEKING.

they dare not but submit. He who subdues
men by virtue, has no intention to subdue them,
and they cannot but submit. From antiquity
downwards, there have been many dissertations
on the leaders of the princes, and the true sove«
reign, but none so deep, i incisive, and perspieu-
ous as this chapter.’

Cu. 4. GLORY IS THE SURE RESULT OF BENE-
WXOLENT GOVERNMENT. CALAMITY AND HAPTI-

1. RA
4 lit., ‘to dwell in not-benevolence,' ie., com-
placently to ge on in the practice of what is not
benevolent. ky covers as far as ta

X Fil: and I Fs 5 ^£ and the nexi

44 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK M.

AN, IK ES) » ea K AME Ze
ANGE, ZNSSSYS XL, JUR

Ran

oe
Spas
b
E
A

ARI

er

APEDTREÉRRCR

v

A
ZN

rd

5i
Ru

—

EO

RU
: N
T
SN
1S

su dL
z, Wat Ht dt Hy D za dg
3k xm f T Anu XM xm Jl

troubles, taking advantage of such a season, let him clearly digest the
pr inciples of his government with its legals sanctions, and then even
great kingdoms will be constrained to stand in awe of him.
3. "It is said in the Book of Poetry,
* Before the heavens were dark with rain,
' I gathered the bark from the roots of the mulberry trees,
And wove it closely to form the window and door of my
nest ;
Now, Í thought, ye people below,
P erha ps ye will not dare to insult me.’
Confucius said, ‘Did not he who made this ode understand the wa Ly
of governing?” Ifa prince is able rightly to govern his kingdom,
w bp. will dare to insult him?
." But now the princes take advantage of the time when through-
M. their kingdoms there is leisure and rest from external t) uubles,
to abandon themselves to pleasure and indolent indifterence ;—they
in fact seek for calamities for themselves.
5. “Calamity and happiness in all cases are men’s own seeking.

ul
=

clause’ are to be taken as in apposition simply have A zt. m ER. £he difference not affect-
with the one ipai Vu the Doctrine of ; ing dd sense. The ode is an appeal by some

the Mean, ch. xx. The FE f=) x ie FE fr. nore small bird to an owl not to destroy its nest,

corresponds to the En there, and the BE which bird, in Mencius’ application of the words,
is made to represent a wise prince taking all

f may embrace both the i K =I precautionary measures. 4. pe, —reaa
and the H E BA B. Fh) — punishments, p*wan, low. ist tone, hes synonymous with.
but penal iene 3.: See the She-king, T, the next character,—4 i, doh. 6. For the ode

xv. Ode IL st. 2, where for Sit TER We ' see the She-king, IIL i, “ou I. st. 6. =m.

Pr. I. Ci IV.—V. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS, yi

X
sl

!
G

Rs

=
ie
Baws
EUMEZR
RIS
2
[xd

LS
4
v
VrTIT
‘=
da.

ENN

v

Q 73

RE
EM
SH
I
hame
TN
URS
z
m
i

perditis

Ipa

SEEMS
ra

HH:
E
=
z
=

6. “This is illustrated by what is said in.the Book of Poetry,—
‘Be always studious to be in harmony with the ordinances
of God,
So you will certainly get for yourself much happiness ;’
and by the passage of the Ta‘e Kei, —' When Heaven sends down
calamities, it is still possible to escape from them; when we occasion
the calamities ourselves, it is not possible any longer to live."

COnuarrER V. Mencius said, “If a ruler give honour to men of
talents and virtue and employ the ‘able, so that offices shall all be filled
by individuals of distinction and mark ;—then all the scholars of the
empire will be pleased, and wish to stand in his court.

2. “If, in the market-place of his capital, he levy a ground rent
on the shops but do not tax the goods, or enforce the proper regu-
lations without levying a ground . rent; -— then all the traders of the
empire will be pleased, and wish to store their goods in his market-
place.

‘to think of.” For the other quotation, see such a shop.’ . Acc. to Choo He, in the BB rds
the Shoo-king, IV. v. pe I. 3, where we have we are to understand the market-place ere as
TES, *to escape, for y ; but the meaning is that in the capital, which was built on the plan
the same. of the division of the laud, after the figure of

Cu. 5. VARIOUS POINTS OF TRUE ROYAL the character J- The middle square behind
GOVERNMENT NEGLECTED BY THE PRINCES OF
MENCIUS TIME, ATTENTION TO WIHCH WOULD
SURELY CARRY ANY ONE OF THEM TO THE IMPE-
RIAL THRONE. 1. Comp. last ch., par. 2. The

was the ih 3 the centre one was occupied by
the palace; the front one by the ancestral aad -
other temples, govt. treasuries, arsenals, &c.;
and the three squares on each side were occu-
pied by the people. He adds that, when tra-
among 10 is called fh. Numbers, however, do ders became too many, a ground-rent was levied ;
R Sok eaa Ste “el ow y were few, it was remi!

not enter into the signification of the terms here. When they were few, it was remitted, and only
f a surveillance was exercised of the markets

A ^ x Tomum mire vii. 3 :
by the proper officers. ‘That surveillance ex-
00$, ; ‘a shop, or market-stance,’ is tended to the inspection of weights and mea-
= here as a verb, ‘to levy ground-rent for sures, regulation of the price, &c. See its duties

wisest among 1,000 men is called fe the wisest

ei HE WORKS OF MEXCIUS. BOOK M

Vo
i

2
SM

EASES

a
v
Y
w

I
dmucsmxms

b
<
v

ENN
XE
zu

T
NEST

BRO

SEER
Havas Semis

REN
ET
A

v

7
i l id l
TA 7t. An R E TIT "n K

3. “If at his frontier-passes, there be an inspection of persons, but
no taxes charged: on goods or other articles, then all the travellers
ofthe empire will be pleased, and wish to make their tours on'his
roads.

4. “Tfhe require that the husbandmen give their mutual aid
to cultivate the public feld, and exact no other taxes from them;
——then all the busbandmen of the empire will be pleased, and wish
"to plough in his fields. l

5: “If from the occupiers of the shops in his marketplace he do
‘not exact the fine of the individual idler, or of the hamlet's quota
of cloth, then all thé people of the empire will be pleased, and wish
to come and be his people. :

6. “Ifa riler can truly practise these five things, then the peo-
ple in the neighbouring kingdoms will look up to him as a parent.
From the first birth of mankind till now, never has any one led

M

t

detailed in the Chowsle, XIV. vii — 8. Comp, was the FE Tfj? And what the Fl. 4?
Re fe

Ki Pt iI. v. &; Pt r vii. 18. Al e refer for It appears from the Chow-le, that there was a

the illustration of this rule to the account of fine, exacted from idlers or loafers in the towns,

the duties of the tfi] BS in the Chow:le, XV. called Je Th» and itis said that the family

xi But from that it would appear that the which did not plant mulberry trees and flax ac-
_ levying no duties at the passes was only in bad cording to the rules, Was condemned to pay one
Years, and hence some have argued that Men- hamlet, or 25 families’, quota of cloth. But

cius’ lesson was only for the emergency of the . H i
Th may be taken in the sense of money, sim-

time. To avoid that conclusion, the author of
. the pu E jl eR si contends that the ply= $s, Which is a signification attaching to
it, We must leave the passage in the obscurity

Chow-le has been interpolated in the place,

rightly, as it seems to me. & The rule of which has always rested on it. Mencius is
Him x Be is the same a$ that of at E evidently protesting against some injurious

exactions of the time. Uk&- EG. but the

addition of the character Èf seems intended
to convey the idea of the people of other
states coming to put themselves under a new

tule > 6. A-R ‘truly? ‘Observe the

—, L. Per. v. d. 5. It is acknow-
fedged by commentators that it is only a vague
notion which we can obtain of the meaning of
this paragraph. ‘Is HH to be taken as in the
‘translation, or verbally as in the 2d par? What

————— — eee

Pr. I Cit, V.—VI,

Fl

TILE WORKS OF MENCIUS: 7t
v a d ,
vA FI iy [PS YE. $^
A DA H Pad Em ? 3
lii,

BA

Ug

S SEI

ACH ous JA

xL x p : PAS P, (FA

JU ft, E ’ i
^H

TES

ASE
E

LÉz

we
SSS SEI RR ES

f, 5 * WE,
ARAS RPH
Birs; VB Z TH HE b

wv ARK

>

. yu Ek, AUN

A

children to attack their parent, and succeeded in his design. Thus,
such a ruler will not have an enemy in all the empire, and he who
has no eneny in the empire is. the minister of Heaven. Never has
there been a ruler in such a case who did not attain to the Imperial
dignity.” : l ' to

Cuaprer Vl. 1, Mencius said, * All men have a mind which
cannot bear to see the sufferings of others. EM

2. “The ancient kings had this commiserating mind, and they,
as a matter of course, "had likewise à commiserating government.
When with a commiserating’ mind was practised a comuniserating .
government, the government of the empire was as easy a matter as
the making any thing go round in the palm.

reciprocal influence of “Hf in 2&8 HE
(‘sons and younger brothers "zchildren) and

PA” — qu Re
Be ASE Hb Je Bë The minister
‘or officer of Heaven.’ On this designation the
comm. i i% observes :—‘ An officer is

one commissioned by his sovereign; the officer
of Heaven is he who is commissioned by Heaven.
He who bears his sovereign’s commission can
punish men and put them te death. He may
deal so with all criminals. He who bears the
commission of Heaven, can execute judgment
‘on men, and smite them. With all who are
oppressing and misgoverning their kingdoms,
he can deal so.” Z
Cu, 6.7 Tuat BENEVOLENCE, RIGHTEOUSNESS,

_ PROPRIETY, AND KNOWLEDGE, BELONG TO MAN
AS NATURALLY AS HIS FOUR LIMBS, AND MAY
AS EASILY BE EXERCISED.' The assertions
made in this chapter are, universally true,

but they are to be understood us spoken here
with specíal reference to the oppressive ways
and government of the princes of Mencius’ time.
1. HR, alone is used in Bk I. Pt I. vii, 4,
5, 6. is added here, because the discourse
is entirely of a man's feelings, as exercised to-

wards other men. A the mind,’ embracing
the whole mental con3titution. The fi ti after
Chaou K*e, says that x SA A means—cannot
bear to injure others? But it is not only cannot
bear to inflict suffering, but cannot bear to see
suffering. "The examples in I. Pt. II. vii..make
this plain. 2. ,— used adverbially, as iu

Ana. X.x.1, E — must be taken gen«

erally, =‘a thing,’ or as giving a passive signifi

we

7

Fh

SNS

As
T

S

F d
xl
>

y

5

a

gaan

NL ese
(x
San
mu
ESS

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS,

BOOK TL
ZE YA ER AN a

p

e

HE

N JUw dux qub Fat Be ih N fe
HOA Take ae ae te an Be
BAN JUS bee dee Zee SG NN GE OK
WE m qa
L TE A. ots PS IKE EA
Jy, Ae A, JE di, Be Ar is A E
JE dit AL HeH bg Jr? d

C BE A, db

An
iB

v

i 3. “When I say that all men
see the sufferings of others, my m

have a ia which cannot bear fo
eaning may be illustrated thus:—

even now-a-days, if men suddenly see a “child about to fall into a well,
‘they will without exception experience a feeling of alarm and dis-

tress, They will feel so, not as

a ground on whic h they may gain

the favour of the child's parents, nor as a ground on which they
may seek the praise of their neighbours and friends, nor from a dis-
like to the reputation of having been unmoved bj y such a thing.

4. -“ From this case we may
miseration is essential to man, th

perceive that the feeling of com-
at the feeling of shame and dislike

is essential to man, that the fecling of modesty and complaisance is
essential to man, and that the feeling of approving and NOPPDIOURS

is essential to man.

cation to the verb.—‘ The government of the em-
pire could be made to go round,’ &c. Perhaps the
latter construction is to be preferred, See the

Ek TR $e in loc. The whole is to
be translated in the past sense, beinig descriptive
of the ancient kings. 3. ¥ , (an infant
at the breast here—a very young child.’

Pb read as, and =. IAS 2E ;— to form a

friendship with,’ ‘to get the favour of,’

B

‘up: Ist tone, sf, Sif usé Ha, —comp. Con. Ana,

VE iti. 4. The object of this par, is to show
that the feeling of commiseration is instinctive

and natural. A is to be joined to F
* men of the present time,’ in opp. ‘to the former
kings. ' 4. The two negatives AEF

in the difft, clauses make the strongest possible
affirmation, Lit., ‘Without the feeling of com-

miseration there would not be man,’ &c., or ‘if
a person be without this, he is not a man,’ &c.

Ag] B. pain and distress,’ but as it is in illus-
tration of the P a fer A xi DW we may render

it by ‘commiseration? ‘Shame and dislike,—
the shame is for one's own want of goodness,
and the dislike is of the want of it in other men.
‘Modesty and comptaisance,’-—modesty is the
unloosing and separating from onc’s-self, and
complaisance is out- -giving to others. *Approv-
ind and disapproving,’—approving is the know-
ledge ôf goodness, and the approbation of it
accordingly, and disupproning is the knowledge
of what is evil, aud disapprobation of it accord-
ingly. Such is the account of the terms in the
text, given by Chow He and others, The feel-

Pr. I Cu. VI, THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

-1
2

o

NRW
(x
HE
SE

~
c
^
=

.

Nera
x

a
=
-
v.
ow
[ d

SRE

k-i
JE

S
Qus
4x
RDH

E
um

par
WRS

y
"nd

i
.-
v: j

SHIPS SE G0
ass

E%

>

E

sees

THN
be

iom
V

t

Iit

E

SE
SENSE

LU

HL,
TIE Cn AE E

5. “The feeling of commiseration is the principle of eR w
The feeling of shame and dislike is the principle of righteousness.
The feeling of modesty and complaisance is the principle of pro-
priety: The feeling of approving and disapproving is the principle .
of knowledge.

6. “Men have these four principles just as they have their four `
limbs. When men, having these four principles, yet say of them-
selves that they cannot develope them, they play the thief with them-
selves, and he, who says of his prince that he cannot develope them,
plays the thief with his prince. `

7. “Since all men have these four principles in themselves, let
them know to give them all their dévelopment and completion,
and the issue will be like that of fire which has begun to burn, or
that of a spring which has begun to find vent. Let them have their
complete development, and they will suffice to love and protect : all

VS

ings described make up, he says, the mind of moral elements of our nature. It will be seem how
man, and Mencius ‘ discoursing about commiser-
ation goes on to enumerate them all? This i fn B
seems to be the true account of the introduction Sense. Comp. Gen, ii. 17 ; ili. 5, 6; Job. xxxviii,
of the various principles. They lie together, 28. 6. lic. —comp. I. Pt. IL viii. 3, bnt

merely in apposition. In his E Rg and pa we ean retain its primitive meaning in the.

XA however, Choo He labeurs to AB. n translation, . 7. JL A p4 Jis A E

other three from the first.—Observe that *the EL not ‘all who have, &c., but ‘all having, &c.,
feeling of shame and dislike,’ &c., in the original, ^F x , . e
is— the mind that feels and dislikes,’ &c.. B. A dE dicat, ‘in their ego-ity. at

Wi is explained by I iia Ab» ‘the end of a clue,’ BE belongs to the ju below,'and refers
that point outside, which may be laid hold of, and ys aa
will guide us to all within. From the feelings to the pg Dit —The tii Fy Uv: ay EE ;
which he has specified, Mencius reasons to the : E F ‘the character Fi i isto have weight

to ZEB, ‘knowledge,’ ‘wisdom,’ he gives a moral

oo
e

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK II.

5

i

eS PETTHESBUN

iuo

&l

BRE SAS

3

S
^B

EROR

v

RNO

LÁ

meee

SAT TRESS.

DISTT
ENS

ook EN

M d y
Ht. fiy Mé
pi a E 7AM M M a

my

E
BEP HEN

TAR

v

Ways
>

*-

Mm

w

EX Ke PED AR AN

within the four seas. ` Let them be denied that development, and
jc will not suffice for a man to serve his parents with."

HAPTER VII. 1. Mencius said, “Is the arrow-maker less be-
“hevolent than the maker of armour of defence? And yet, the
iarrow-maker's only fear is lest men should not be hurt, and the

armour-maker's only fear is lest men should be hurt. So it is with
the priest and the coffin-maker. The choice of a profession, thercfore,

is a thing in which great caution is required.

41,2. “Confucius said, ‘It is virtuous manners which constitute the
‘excellence of a neighbourhood. If a man, in selecting a residence,
do not fix on one where such prevail, how can he be wise?’ Now,
benevolence is the most honourable dignity conferred by Heaven, and
‘the quiet home in which man should dwell. Since no one can hin-

der us from being so, if yet we are not benevolent ;—-this is being
not wise.

m

WE

>

= TTE

:

3.

"E
, Attached to it. ‘This is true, Mencius may well
say—‘ Let men know,’ or ‘ If men know. How
is it that after all his analyses of our nature to
prove its goodness, the application of his prin-
fiples must begin with an IF?
CH. 7. , AN EXHORTATION TO BENEVOLENCE
"RROM.THE DISGRACE WHiCH MUST ATTEND THE
«WANT OF It, LIKE THE DISGRACE OF A MAX
«WHO DOES NOT KNOW HIS PROFESSION.

. E A a AE Ite J belongs not z

"the EB, but to the f=. df we might construe
it with the B we sheuld have an instance
Parallel to Be FH in ii. 28.—' benevolent as,’

the B being =< fff. E —in the sense of 38

“From the want of benevolence and the want of wisdom will

tall armour of ‘defence.’ AK. —see Con. Ana,
XIII, xxii., where I have translated it ‘ wizard."
As opposed to Dr. (here—'a coffin-makcr’),

one who makes provision for the death of men,
it indicates one who prays for men’s life and
prosperity. But Mencius pursues his illustra-
tion too far. An arrow-maker need not be in-
humane. 2. See Con. Ana, IV. i. The
comm. begin to bring in the idea of a profes-
sion at xX I but the whole quota-

tion must be taken first in its proper sense,
The Hr ES at the end refer to the same char-

3. fü succeeding
ps shows that the second clause ensues from

acters in the quotation.

ee]
nes

Pr. I. Cu. VIL— VIII. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

aa T pe.
em Ji

l
iv

RNR

see

vi

i
i

zl
ER>

v

=

TE
uz

=

BE
Xu
rd

e

ERR

vw

aa
Ser

v

EE

v

Er
È

[ d

+
a

B

(NUTS
E

TRS GEN)

Am Er
p lal, Hi g PE,

SES FEV K4 Em A

ensue the entire absence of propriety and righteousness’ ;—he who
is in such a case must be the servant of other men.- To be the ser?
vant of men and yet ashamed of such servitude, is like a bow-maker's
being ashamed’ to make bows, or an arrow-maker's being ashamed
to make arrows.

4. “If he be aiino of his case, his best course is to practise
benevolence.

5. “The man who would be benevolent is like the archer. The
archer adjusts himself and then shoots. If he misses, he does not
murmur against those who surpass himself. He simply turns round
and seeks the cause of his failure in himself.”

Cuarrer VIII. 1. Mencius said, “ When any one told Tsze-loo
that he had-a fault, he rejoiced.

2, “When Yu heard good words, he bowed to the spate

3. “The great Shun had a still greater delight in what was good.
He regarded virtue as the common property of himself and others,
giving up his own way to follow that of others, and Aelaig to
learn from others to practise what was good.

` the first, H —used for ^j. 5. t # is said — By FF Hx F , Yu bowed at these

za $3 {£ xt A Comp: Ana. JIL ‘vii: excellent words.’

. xvi.

E 8. How SAGES AND Mieres DELIGHT-
ED IN WHAT 18 GOOD. . T'sze-loo's ardour
in pursuing his ib eaa appears in
the Ana. V. xiii; XI. xxi. But the particular
point mentioned in the text is nowhere else
related of him. 2. In the Shoo-king, IL.
ii. 1, we have an example of this in Yu. It

Br:
is explained by Choo He A^ X aS P
n ri ^ TS x. 4h, ‘He considered as

public—common—the good of the whole world,
and did not think it private to any.’ Shun's
distinction was that he did not think of him-
self, as ''sze-loo did, nor of others, as Yu did,
but only of what was good, and unconsciously

M

8

w

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK II.

a

-
dew
*
8
ME.

i See

~
i4
[4
a
S
L4
v

See TEI

l

HBE R

x
 Reb or NE

~
x

PESAN

EIERHE
mE

EN

mE
MORE

ume
FS
HEE
A

E
E

NS
TUR
wA

K
AIR AA US
CR. (iy Ca Ca Dp. Ii
JL P En gn Ib o Un Ahh]
Jt HE 2m 3r HS Jr
X ous VA Ju R ES

4. “From the time when he ploughed and sowed, exercised the
potter’s art, and was a fisherman, to the time when he besan e em-
peror, he was continually learning from others.

5. “To take example from others to practise virtue, is to help
them in the same practice. Therefore, there is no attribute of the
superior man greater than his helping men to practise virtue.”

CuarrER IX. 1. Mencius said, * Pih-e would not serve a rince
whom he did not approve, nor associate with a friend whom he did i ot
esteem. He would not stand in a bad prince's court, nor speak w th
a bad man. To stand in a bad prince’s court, or to'speak with a
bad man, would have been to him the same as to sit with his court
robes and court cap amid mire and ashes. Pursuing the examina-
tion of his dislike to what was evil, we find that he “thought at neces.
sary, if he happened to be standing with a villager whose cap was
not rightly adjusted, to leave him with a high air, as if he were go-

was cafried to it, wherever he saw it. 4. sense of Bh, ‘to help, The meaning is that
Of: Shun in his early days at is related in the others, seeing their virtue so imitated, would he

Historical Records,’ that ‘he ploughed at the stimulated to greater diligence in the doing of
Leih (RE) mountain, did potter’s work on the it.
banks of f the Yellow River, fished in the Luy Cu. 9. Pictvres or Pru-r AND Hwrr or

hak à 1 1 ‘ LEW-HEA, AND MENCIUS’? JUDGMENT CONCERN-

ake E E DR e various implements Ie rHEM. 1. Comp. ch. 3i. 22. Iu cst) A
5 il (== d of i ; EH

on the Show hi CHF E» and often resided d Bp, JA sere tolo proe. zt. and may

A»
at Foó-hea ( )' ‘There will be occasion L

Ed 3 be translated prince, but in Hil Ee. A
to consider where these places were, in connec- pg dn Ap

tion with some of Mencius’ future references to refers to the prec. X. and must be translated
Shun. Dr. Medhurst supposes them to have

A Ma $ ,
-been in Shan-se. See his Translation of the 7” VE Met mire and charcoal. HE
Slioo-king, p. 332. 5. fi is here in the Eo T E Z i XD: —HE i is Mencius’ speaking

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

x
Q3

pr. I. Cu. VII.

=
zs
=

v

Nmr
RENH

aE(\ ESSE RS ses Se
eats
-

PORE SERS

HEF

ae

w

; Qu mI AX
KR RSSEES ERES

^.
w

-
v
©
kos
F
v.
w

Nr
wie

v

SNEIN
ERIR

-

wv
v

pr
n
SS DSRS

4E iS m SUN

SSS Mt

DE
Sa

erm
NN
RADR SS RIES

i
à
E

Té, fd BB,
Pe eee

ing to be defiled. Therefore, although some of the princes made
application to. him with very proper messages, he would not receive
their gifts.—He would not receive their gifts, counting it inconsis-
.tent with his purity to go to them.

: 2. "Hwuy of Lew-hea was not ashamed to serve an: impure prince,
nor did he think it low to be an inferior officer. When advanced
to employment, he did not conceal his virtue, but made it a point
to carry out his principles. When neglected and left without office,
he did not murmur.. When straitened by poverty, he ‘did not
grieve. Accordingly, he had a saying, ‘You are you, and] am `J, Al-
though you stand by my side with breast and arms bare, or with your
body. naked, how can you defile me?’ Therefore, self- possessed, he
companied with men indifferently, at the same time not losing him-
self. When he wished to leave, if pressed to remain in office he would
remain.—He would remain in office, when pressed to do so, not
counting it required by his purity to go away.”

in his own person, M, is the ‘thought’ of positiveness to the affirmation of the preceding
Pih-e. oy wy YR, acc. to Choo He, is ‘ the ap- clause. 2. Hwuy of Benen te Con,
rab : : , Ana. XV. xiii, XVIL ii; vii Bid 74 —

_ pearance of going away without looking round. . T :
Chaou K'e makes it *the appearance of being the x properly refers to the party addressed,
ashamed ;'—not so well The final EB gives —‘you are you.’ 3. Comp. ii. 22. af

THE WORKS OF MEXCIUS. BOOK 11,

uE E SHE E ida T
H Y 2s 2, Bi aN AS, Iy E We H,

3. Mencius said, “ Pih-e was narrow-minded, and Hwuy of Lew-
hea was wanting in self-respect. The superior man will not follow
either narrow-mindedness, or the want of self-respect.”

F—by this term we must suppose that advises men to imitate X and Hwuy, but he is

Mencius makes a tacit reference to himself, as
having proposed Confucius as his model. The

comm, aie 7E Jo says i— elsewhere Mencius

we

there speaking to the weak and the mean,
When here he advises not to follow E and
Hwuy, he is speaking for those who wish t€ do
the right thing at the right time’

Annan

BOOK I,
KUNG-SUN CHOW. PART It,

Z Z A il Js
R LFR 34 Au A; PH

Cuarrer I. 1. Mencius said, * Opportunities of time. vouchsafed

by Heaven are not equal to advantages of situation afforded by the

l Yon. and advantages of situation are not equal to the union idi
from the accord of Mencius.

2. “There is a city, with an inner wall of three le in circum:

ference, and an outer wall of seven.—The enemy surround and attack

it, but they are not able to take it. Now, to surround and attack

 Cu, 1, No ADVANTAGES WHICH A RULER CAN
` OBTAIN TO EXALT HIM OVER OTHERS ARE TO-BE
€OMFARED WITH HIS GETTING THE HEARTS OF
MEN. Because of this chapter Mencius has got
a place in China among the writers on the art
of war, which surely he would not have wished
to claim for himself, his design evidently being
to-supersede the necessity of war, —the recourse

'. to arms altogether.’ 1, In the K Hh,

; we have the doctrine of the = LE or
‘Three Powers,’ which is brought out so dis:

tinctly in the 4th part of the Chung Yung; and
to show this in a translation requires it to be
diffuse. As to what is said at much lengthein
Chin. commentaries about ascertainiug. the
*time of Heaven' by divination and astr ology, it
is to be set aside, as foreign to the mind of Men-
cius in the text, though many examples of the

resort to it may be adduced from the records of
antiquity. 2. The city here supposed, with
its double circle of fortification, is a small
one, the better to illustrate the superiority of

advantage of situation, just as the next is a

Pr Il Ci. Lo THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 85

NL
Am
ps

EW

e

HEY
p

-

iri

1

Ss
lw ie

e

ESS.

AN
-
N

EEN
ae

THE SNRES
Er]
ER

Sho

NL
mE

RIRES
TERS SE

Em%
Em

x E
Ze Jl Ah BAB Ay EIS RI

it, there must have been vouchsafed to them by Heaven the oppor-
tunity of time, and in such case their not taking it is because oppor-
tunities of time vouchsafed by Heaven are not equal tó advantages
of situation afforded by the Earth. eT
3. “ There is at city, whose walls are distinguished for their height,
and whose moats are distinguished for their depth, where thefarms
of its defendants, offensive aud defensive, are distinguished for their
strength and sharpness, and the stores of rice and other grain are
very large. Yet it is obliged to be given up and abandoned. This
is because advantages of situation afforded by the Earth are not
equal to the union arising from the accord of Mar n
. 4, “In accordance with these principles it is said, ‘A people is
bounded in, not by the limits of dykes and borders; a kingdom is
‘secured, not by the strengths of mountains and rivers; the empire
is overawed, not by the sharpness and strength of arms.’ He who
‘finds the proper course has many to assist him. He who loses the
proper course has few to assist him. When this,—the being assisted

Ld

aces NEP

husk. i grain,’ generally, in the husk.
in add
4, gh ‘a boundary, ‘a border,’ is used
E c dd
verbally. $7 E— to bound a people, [IN
to separate them from other states. Bap is ‘a

-large one to bring out the still greater superior-
„ity of the union of men. As to the evidence.
that a city of the specified dimensions must be

the capital of a baronial State(-- 5 XR
see the W ae: in, loc. 3. 3E p the

repeated negation, not only affirms, but with
emphasis.— pa ip *the wall is not

not (but) high,’ ie., is high indeed. Fe,—sharp

dyke,’ or ‘mound,’ The commen. :
says :—' Anciently, in every state, they made a
dyke of earth to show its boundary dg i

. weapons of offence. RA «leather, intending,
principally, the buff-coat, but including all other

armour of defence, JE — ries! without thc The. HEE or ‘proper course, intended is that

js HD: BR —a valley with a stream in

it;’ here, in opposition to rivers or stredms.

a

a3

8

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK. IL

=i
Fin

v
v

DE

Take

v
zl

RS

5

=

SN
EWN Se

»
4

v

Yayan SC
DE

À

Syg

N
ini

Pr t

by few,—-reaches its extreme point, his own relations revolt from the
prince. When the being assisted by many reaches its highest point,
the whole empire becomes obedient to the prince.

5. “When one to whom the whole empire is prepared to be obe-
dient, attacks those from whom their own relations revolt, what must
be the result? Therefore, the true ruler will decline to fight; but if
he do fight, he must overcome.” i

. Cuarrter II. 1, As Mencius was about to go to-court to see the
king, the king sent a person to him with this message,—“ I was wish-
ing to come and see you. But I have got a cold, and may not ex-
pose myself to the wind. In the morning I will hold my court. I
do not know whether you will give me the opportunity of seeing
you then.” Mencius replied, * Unfortunately, I am unwell, and not
able to go to the court.”

style of government,—benevolence and right-

but if the king wished his counsel, it was for
eousness,—which will secure the ‘union of

him to show his sense of his worth by going to

men,’ ,—relatives by blood and by affin- him, and asking him for it. 1. The 1st, 2d,
ity. 5, The case put in the two first 3d, and 4th a are ch‘aou, low. Ist tone,=‘ to

clauses is here left by Mencius to suggest its
own result. The keun-tsze is the prince intend-
ed above, ‘who finds the proper course? Choo

He and others complete AR ^-^ inb by Hy
p. ‘If he do not fight, well;’ but the transla-

tion gives, I think, a better meaning,
Cu. 2. How MENCIUS CONSIDERED THAT IT
WAS SLIGHTING HIM FOR A PRINCE TO CALL HIM

go to, or wait upon, at court.’
other paragraphs. The 2d is chaou, upper 1st
tone, ‘the morning.’ The morning, as soon as
it was light, was: the regular time for the em-
peror, and prinees to give audience to their no*
bles and officers, and proceed to the adminis"
tration of business. The modern practice cor^

responds with the ancient in this respect. hu

So in all the

BY MESSENGERS TO GO TO SEE HIM, AND THE

SHIFTS HE WAS PUT TO TO GET THIS UNDERSTOOD.’

1t must be understood that, at the time to which
this chapter refers, Mencius was merely an hon-
oured guest in Ts'e, and had no official situa-
tion or emolument. It was for him to pay his
respects at court, if he felt inclined to do so,

is said to be here—? yw *to wish, which sense
seems to be necessary, tho' we don't find it in
the dict. Xe read ts‘aou, up. 3d tone, ‘to go

to” The king's cold was merely a pretence.
He wanted Mencius to wait on him. Mencius’
cold was equally a pretence. Comp, Confucius’

Pr. IL Cu. IL

=)
de
^

a
F
v
N
d

ix

mu

RSN

EEAS
PAD Hunni m BEL

v

SPEC

DENS SSX
Mx

Nem
1

REO
ag
AT

unb
KE

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

[ d

v

v

akoi

o5
~j

P%
Da

v

yta

Eo
Sasa

v

zu

 s
wc
v

we TD RI

HEROS

T-

SINS
Nx
=

x
=

2. Next day, he went out to pay a visit of condolence to some
one of the Tung-kwóh family, when Kung-sun Ch‘ow said to him,
“Yesterday, you declined going to the court on the ground of being
unwell, and to-day you are going to pay a visit of condolence. May

this not be regarded as improper?”

”

* Yesterday," said Meneius, '

“I was unwell; to-day, I am better:—why should I not pay this

visit? "

8. In the mean time, the king sent a messenger to inquire about:
his sickness, and also a physician. Mang Chung replied to them,
“Yesterday, when the kings order came, he was feeling a little un-
well, and could not go to the court. To-day he was a little better,
and hastened to go.to court. I do not know whether he can have
reached it by this time or not." Having said this, he sent several
men to look for Mencius on the way, and say to him, “I beg that,

before you return home, you will go to the court

conduct, Ana. XVII. xx. 2. 'Tung-kwóh is
notexactly a surname. ‘The individual intended
was a descendant of the duke Hwan, and so sur-

named: Keang ( É ), but that branch of Hwan's

descendants to which he belonged having their
possessions in the *eastern' part of the king-
. dom, the style of 'Tung-kwóh appears to have
been given to them to distinguish them from
the other branches. In going to pay the visit
of condolence, Mencius’ idea was that the king
might hear of it, and understand that he had
merely feigned sickness, to show his sense of
the disrespect done to him in trying to invei-
gle him to go to court. 8. It is a moot-
point, whether Mang Chung was Mencius’ son,

”
.

or merely his nephew, The latter is more likely.

FR xj X did it, * sorrow of gatbering fire-

wood, =a little sickness. See a similar expres-

sion in the Le-ke, L Pt IL. i. 3—3F fili. -£
JT. 2 BE: WBE. SEARA
A ZZ d. On this the JE E says :—
* Carrying firewood was the business of the chil-

dren of the common people. From the lips of:
2n officer, such language was indicative of hu-

mility.' 35, upper. Ist tone,= 3R- Ming
Chung, having committed himself to a false-
hood, in order to make his words good, wag an- -

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

N
c

-
E

V
A

TE
EHI
=

o

HES

s

tHe TT

'C«
og

ST SS MER

uj
m

AE
Hn

v
v

piia

Secs An
ar

IN
S Na A
NE

Am

[ d

4 i y

pratet gete aly A GLA i
this, Mencius felt himself compelled to go to K

and minister,,,; [hese are, the.two great relations among men.
tween father and son the ruling principle is kindness, Between
prince and, minister the. ruling principle is respect. 1 have. seen the
respect iof, the king to. you, Sir, but I have not seen in what way
you show respect to him." Mencius replied, “Oh! what words are
these? ; Among the people of Ts‘e there is no one who speaks to
the, king about beneyolence and righteousness. Are they thus silent
hecause they do.not think that’ benevolence and righteousness are
admirable? Np, but in their hearts they say, ‘This man is not
fit to, be spoken, with about benevolence and righteousness.’ Thus
-they.manifest;a disrespect than which there can be ,none greater.
I;do.not:dare to set forth before the king any but the ways of Yaou `
and Shun. There is therefore no man of Ts'e who respects the king

so'much as Todo?! 6) Se

!
Bim co ga 005 oe te Mr frg
xious that Mencius should go to court. 4.
‘What compelled Mencius to go to King Ch‘ow’s
was his earnest wish that the king should know
that his sickness was.merely feigned, and that
he had, not gone to court, only, because he would
not Je cALUED to do so. As Ming Chung's false-
hood -interfered with ,his first plan, he wished
fax his motive should get to the king through
King Ch'ow who was dn officer of Ts‘e. After

*

t

Fa Chaou Ke appends a note,—‘ when
he told him all the previous incidents.’ No

doubt, he did so. EUN up. Ist tone, ‘oh!’ as

in Pt. I, ii. 19. ys KK observe thè
force of the "7, carrying on"the clause
to those following for an explanation of ‘it,

as if there were a Ay a after ^ Zz

*

Pr. IH. Cu. IT. THE WORKS

$e E
ETON SHON Ses
SED

e

Hi

v

BNET

Sas

B

o
e

OF MENCIUS.

=
de
=~

wi
He

RT
Ue
ERO

Ser
D

M Lu
N
c

mye

as

=

v

\
"
Ld

m

a

v
eT

EE

Pen
T
v

`

RERNE NRE
PHEES

u
EE

oe ERES HS

Biz( cul
T Naps ane
“NEP a

Bp

A Soie BRE t
ME

Vas Ln

 DLA it Coa,

&. King said, “Notso. That was not what I meant. In the Book
of Rites it is said, ‘When a father calls, the answer must be without
& moment’s hesitation. When the prince’s order calls, the carriage
must not be waited for. You were certainly going to the court, but
when you heard the king's order, then you did not carry your pur-
pose out. This does seem as if it were not in accordance "with that
rule of propriety."

6. Mencius answered him, “How can you g eive that meaning to
my conduct? 'The philosopher Tsang said, ‘The wealth of Tsin and
Ts‘oo cannot be equalled. Let their rulers have their wealth:—I
have my benevolence. Let them have their nobility :—I have my
righteousness, Wherein should I be dissatisfied as inferior to them $ ?
Now shall we say that these sentiments are not right? Seeing that
the philosopher Tsang spoke them, there is in them, I apprehend, à
real principle.—In the empire there are threc things universally
acknowledged to be honourable. Nobility is one of them ; ; age is

one of them ; virtue is one. of them. In courts, nobility holds the
TH ,—see Con. Ana, VII. xvii. 5. Dif- ER
ferent passages are here quoted together from

the Book of Rites. Au fll SE. —see Bk I.
Pt L ii14,— A son must ery nfé to his father,
and not LAN which latter is a lingering re-
sponse, za T] B x f 7 is found sub-
stantially in Bk. XIIL iii. 2. Fe, low. 1st tone,
=H, as in Ana. XL ix. 3, et al 6.

5H E a, (low. 1st tone),—lit., ‘how
means (it) this?’ if has two opposite mean-
ings, either ‘ dissatisfied,’ or ‘satisfied,’ in which
latter sense, it is also ëg. Choo He explains.
this by making it the same as IRẸ, ‘something
held in the mouth,’ according to the nature of
which will be the internal feeling. In the text,

the idea is that.of “ef BR non. Be EEO

ie
A € is here Ee

Ne w a is

2 S

CS
=

-- --

Ss
IH :

wv
3$
be

i

Cer

€

zh
RE,

3

>y

i

Jh

An

if
niu

c

Rigs

pf plasty ik the. eth

elping ones 's generation and p

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS:

M

NWS

hiree i i in i ed age

-

'" BOOK IH
l3 JADRE p^
^H uec Y Py
=.
" An gin Ane! n
9. q

WARE
BR

EB 1

>
E

DA ers
FETE
3 E. E dn
NS EN poe M or
Eh i AN A f.

e folds hy firgt ilace; and

residing over the people, the other

"56 dre Not equal to lto virtue! "How cah the: possession of-only one of

these bepresimed’ on td déspiise on
1955 os Therefore h pritice who,

e'who possesses thé bther^twoó 27

fis to comp bat g gre ht dedds) will

Yettainly! ‘have’ {iinlisters whom he- does not ell to go »td liil, When

Wiel vtsilies"tó, consult. with! then; he ‘Pes: tovtlidm. ^

THe brine ce who

does not Honour the „virtuous, and delight i in their ways of doing, to

this extent, iw not hyorth A having t

d do ith. "bu

RUE MAT s Aécotiinglv, there was the behavior of T'ang to E-yun':-- 1
derivat léarned'of. anit and then employed him as his minister; and

"Scavithérdit: ‘difficulty: he: Became: ‘emperor! -

'There' was ‘the beline t-

LO the ‘duke Hwat "to: "Kwan Chung! he first learned ‘of him,
tend then éniploved him, As" his ininister; and so Without difficulty" Ke

‘beeitine chief? of all the Princes:
DISIT pep * an 23M ds
»gprepor ‘and ie the ere heli the remarks
-i Esing ESTE eu PAL IVA is exc
panded thus in the ie t Fi :—* And, Tsing-

de speaking ther, they contin’ perhaps, another
“pile different from the vulgar view.’ HS

kee bi. Ana, xi^ $ ‘teeth,’ age.

4 Ev o Ee BH & Ñi is by some interpreted

otis not fit to have to do with. them,’ ie. the
„virtuous, butt prefer the meaning adopted in the
1 translation. . 8. In the “Historical Records,’

BE Kal ; dne “óf ‘the ‘accounts ‘of -E-yuin's

r

mM M ME

Pe] 7 i un" 4 bÌ 1t ud I
; Hecoming minister, te T'ang 4g, that it was, ly
after being five times solicited, by. perat meş-
sengers thaf‘he went to thé prinee's presence.

See the JE REA on Ana- XIL xxii. "Khe tdr-
fidence reposed by the duke Iwan in Kwan
-Chung appears in Pt I. ii. 838. Kwan was
brought to "Tee originally as a prisoner to be
put to death, but the duke, knowing his ability
and worth, had determined to employ him, and
therefore, having first caused him to be relieved
of his fetters, and otherwise honourably treated,
he drove himself out of his capital to meet aud
receive him with all distinction, listening to a

long díscoursé “in governinént.” See ‘the’ E

ee cet, n

? i fU

Pr. JL, Oni. IL.—IIL. THE WORKS OF .MENCIUS. 91

T$.
Hj S Ap

1
LEN

Aam

AW

BERI
"S
Ri

=
rx
Westen

~~

dar
c

N
4

Nip

«

+S

it

n! ' o6 QU. pu "nn e Sou dg A n
, 4, “Now throughout, the empire, the;teryitorieg, «
re of, equal extent, and. in their achievements, they are on a leygl.

o

EA i . 4o FY . Do i
295, oii Ana. TIT. xxii ^" o5 E Lust asa 3E deer double metal” (Lauppose HS
verb. 10. Comp. Pt'l 4. ie Te S

Cu. 8.. By wat Princip.es’ Mencrus was' as much as the ordinary.’ See Ana. Xixi.
GUIDED IN DECLINING OR ACCEPTING! THE: GIFTS (ttu fand V 0. Ta dm A
e pr ue ! de du EA wa PM vf, rar , $e. 100 yi d GE. which; gsi "Pr

eneius' disciples, but this isa abis kiown 437. "5 p uin We tache (S da
tof him. - At whit time of: the:philosopher's life! it p nope eL tien. $ iv n Mie
this conversation! ecourréd, we are unáble:to Present Kwei-tih In Ho-nan.' Séé,—be BEL Pt.

If, xiv.: Thereference here, however; foliidon-

‘say. . f2u— to! present an offering : of ‘food’? sistent with whatis stated in the notgthere, that
Aere, umore generally, ‘to send g gift,’= ik Sé had long heen, incorporated with T$. DE

92 l ‘TUR WORKS OF MENCIUS.

t
2
>
$5
E
-

3

EL

BEER]

m
ied

=
Si

1

w
EY
-
ww

SEUS
a}
BISBEEG

cB eus
x

J

"S

ERA

3

RS
TE

B

A

SERM
EDO
AL

m
mo

e

i

er
-
Q-

v

St
$
2

p
w

alg

A
is

$

inl
oe b
mint

Fé,
vind A Hil
fe ek EEE

‘ing itin ex lattéF cases was ‘wrong: (f£! your accéptings it’ in ‘the
datter tasesowas right; your declining ito do'so"in the first case whs
wrong: You must accept, ? Mastery :onevof these alternatives.) (rl
v2. ’yMencius said, 4 tdid. right in ‘all the cases. pr aeda?
3. “When I was in Sung, I was about to take a long: jqurney.
fIrayelleis must‘be provided with what is néeéssüry for their expenses.
ffhe; „prince's: messagoi wasii present against ‘travelling-expensds,’
Why should I: lavé declined: the pift? Prot few le ek ird tn
cng, .b& When wabt in Seč] was: “apprehensive fortiny safety, aud
‘taking measuves: for my: protection. T The'méssage was, 5. “have
thedrd thatsyouw ars: taking” measures-to protect yourself, dand send
this to hep you in procuring Arms. ! Why shduld { have'deélined
lie!gift3 do y aso ae nuria c] 5 anol E gs ril 5
gt Butiwhen Ewasün'Ts'e; I-had nd ‘occasion: for! money: To
send a man,a gift when he has no occasion for it, is to bribe him.
“How is jt possible t that a superior man should be tüken with a ‘bribe; p^

pii Suma SO iW £ ap
DEC
3H RS H. mark the relation of time’ between of.view of the prince of "Sung; In regard to
"the caset si imply.-! A pi is noto Be taken a= travellers, he eonsidered it was requisite. to «se
jfto-day, Ws B HEF, lié, ihust öcčupy pe oe n : d aper d
a¢dwell in) one in thèse (places), The- meaning i phrase Jk AO? consider: ably, to bring “out! the
js that on either. of. the suppositions, he w ould meaning. de low. 3d tone. En. ‘g weapon
De judged to have done, wrong, 3 ie oF 5 of war,’ or the character may be taken here for

vu gift t tog l traveller. against the expenses ‘a weapon-bearer,’ Sa soldier." 5,

Jf his journey? `} DA A ER, —it is difficult to Jil —J4ulien says, — sicut nos Gallice; il.n'y

DN its preeise.forae to the E . 1 consider a pas lieu a, but if it were so, £^ would be the
` Rd P con i : : - z : . ` co
ili whelé cliüse to be written as from the point ' noun, in the 54-tone, whereas it is the verb- in

m i

THE

WORKS OF MENCIUS.

2.
FINGER

>

5.
NENGON

^w
f

?

si CHaPRERS TV. s tin Mädeius having- gonesto Ring-lulty addressed
the governor of ity saying, * If one óf your spearmen- should: lose; bis
place inthe ranks», three: nee in one!day, would you; Sir, put him
to death or not?” - i. would not wait: for three times;10,dd 5o," vas
ther replys ic! 40 Ant Gr bods enn Pi am te OS
Req Mencites gaidy: SW ell. then, -you, Sin}: hava Jikewise- lost. poit
‘placen thewanks many::times.-.1y bad-calamitous;years, and yegi
of famine, the old and feeble of your peoplepiwho: Have ‘beef fot
dying ini the ditches. and: water-channels,- andi ther able-hodied, jvho
„have .beensscattered..about to the:foun-quartersy have: amounted tp
;several thousands.": Tha governor replied, Phat i is astate.of things
tin: wwhich.it does hot belong to me Kew-sin te. pet.” Ur , doll ot edt
3. "Here," said Mencius, “is a man who receives charge;ofsthe
ceattle, andusheep 10f. another; and undertakes;ta MEAE for kim;

id adiu ote HY ry ul TUE n EN a brega
the, 24, st to to manage,’ < to dispose of" R "HI doubt, its form varied, «Pd tone Tati o

2 H Poe dn away wir Cmi. iden i ds meaning
i-k iB.

EXTA £t eds

^1 Og A A] "Meseius BROUGHT CONVICTION
EOF THEM FAULTS HOME? TO. THE KING ARI AN

orricer:0n Ts: 1, id ig the-verb= fE

,Püng-uh was acity on the southeri- border of
^Js'e. It is referred to the present department
-of Yen-chow in Shan-tung, tho’ some, with less
„reason, find it in P'ing-yang in Shan-se, "The
` officer's name, as we leant from the last par.,

iwas K‘ung Keu-sin, K k here= SZ, *Gov-

ernor’ or ‘Commandant,’ ‘The nk is variously

^ described. Some say it had three points; others
- that it had a branch or blade on one. side..

No!

xen in. the translations it ip 2, pi AER
Ferrcomp. Bk 1. PETI, e

difficulty i ia the.‘ severa il thousand „as Men !
cable? tô the: population of Pant. uh Bat it

.was Mencius way to talk roundly. v To. make

+ VN ‘one thousand,” we mer read ES S

1st tone, and suppose the preposition up.

pressed. The meaning of the offitdi's' repii
that to provide for such ‘a state of, things, hy
opening the granaries ‘and other measures, de-
volyed on ime authority:of the. State,

and not on him. 3. Comp. JE E X Br

bo "
A.
=

ENE
m

D
y
p
Kai

TES

x

v
=

EBEN

EE

Ó

S
HNHH
4

~ ae
^

EN
etel

> 3 E R
i Gna
Ld

aa

=a

di

ie He ME

Qe m ? ze
AL
pr

EA V
€ A
T

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

NR

~
wv

<

v

z
NHH
:

SERI

Ir

as]
2
2
3 A
v

H ’ s JL je

p BLA Hj

R WT. Kay
Hl É

=
TH

SS
SPSS

2
bers

=J]
[quil
V

d

—

N
v

Ye

l

BAM i ES

= eour&d he A scA ch ae pasfitid.g eróünd and. grass for “then.

If, biter wearthifi gor those,

e'ĉannot find them; will he return his

charge 1o, the, owner?,, or "will lie stand, by and see them, die ?.3
“Herein,” said the officer, “I am guilty." . :
4.. Another day,. Mencius had an audisnes of the. king, and uid

to hi im,“ Of the governors of:

your Majesty's cities I am acquainted

with; five, ^W e only one, of them who knows his faults is K'ung
Keu-sin.” then, repeated the conversation to the king, who said;

* Ii this Nx
CHAPTER V.

am the guilty
1. Mencius said to Ch'e Wa, « There Seemed ta be

one.’

reagan in your declining the governorship of Lin g-k'ew, and request-

gto, be appointed
would

chief. criminal, judge, because the latter offica
“afford you, the, opportunity of, speaking your views. Now.

}
BE f 1. Pt I xv 2" "hi f first’ 4x is the’ thers of the princes were called Rr; ; in fact,

verb; the 2d,a _poun,=pasture-grounds, E
i
=f. H tA — the man,’ heey their owner.

di 3p. force of the is e chere
is another supposition—will he, &c ? ?' ` Mencius
means that Keu-siw should: not hold office in

such circumstances, 4, low. 3d tone.

y: #8 #- y: has the sense of ‘to admin:

ister,’ fto govern! comp. Ana. IV. xiii, RB
—properly * a capital city,’ but diso üsed more
generally, In the dict., we find :—(1) Where the
emperor has his palace is called Ef. (2) The
cities conferred on the sons and younger bro-

\tthe. tablets of former rulers.

every city with an ancestral temple containing
(3) The cities
from: which nobles and:great officers derived

their support were called an Fy E. -$5

low. 3d tone.

'-Cn, 5. Tuk FREEDOM BELONGING TO MEX-
CIUS IN RELATION TO THE MEASURES OF THE
KING or Ts'E FROM HIS PECULIAR POSITION,
AS.UNSALARIED. .. 1. Of Che Wa we only
know what is stated here. Ling-k'ew is sup-
posed to have been‘a city.on the borders of

' T's'e, remote from the court, Ch'e Wa having

declined the governorship of it, that he might
be near the king. s ÉI[I,—see Bk. I, Pt. IL

vi 2. AH "H Us = yit, ‘because

Pr. I. Ci. V.—VL

y
^.

E3

idi
is

zd
rp anie
zum

D
JR

ae

[ d

QNEM
TN
AU

3
TORREA

=
w
ww.

T
SE

IN
d

g MIN
hill

owl
Hy
Hm
Hm
Lim
d
zzi

Hs

T
^

a you might speak? uc d
j "On this, Ch'è

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

Ag

v

at Z FH Bj ze È

od A have elapsed, and have’ you Ly fi'n

sail nt

eo
ex

ISB}

BRNO
uu

"SEHE

T4

ean
a Wit. I

 qe

proe LOS

i

r

"DE L4
ET
ee a]

-i

Qu
s

Wa reinonátrated on som matter wit th the king

į

ind his counsel not: being taken, resigned his'office, arid went away
' The peopled of Ts‘e’ said’ “Tn: the course which he marked ‘ou
f Chie’ Wa,-hé did well, but we do not know à as tot ‘the course which

he pursues for himself.”

“'4:' -His disciple Kurig-toó told hini these rériarks.,

t 5s, Mendtus’ said; “ [* have heard that he: Who.
office, when lie is prevented from’ fulfilling its dù tici Bight tE ‘take
his: departure, and that hë on whom is the’ resporisibility! of bh

9 10 i 3

anys) ars Con
J aaru

is ni^ thief iit

A UO E
ving

his opinion, when he finds, his words. unattended tog ought to do the
same, ‘But Tam i in charge, of, no office ; "on me. exolyes PQ. ditty.“

speaking ‘out. amy; opinion :—may: ‘not I therefore act free lyyand wi h-
out any constraint, either in goiñg forward or in "Fetiring?24 Ti
4: Mencius, occupying ‘thé, position of anb

i CHdPter 'VI.

ac tr f

H^N

dignitary i in Ts'e, went, oh, à mission ot condoleneé, to: Tg. The

of the ‘possibility to speak." As criminal "judge,
€h'e Wa would be often in communication
with the king, and could remonstrate on any

failures in the administration of justice, that
came under his notice. 2. , ‘to resign,’
‘give up, as in Con. Ana. I. vii, % al. 8.

Wr u y (low. 3d tone), lit., ‘whereby for,”

4. Kung-too was a disciple of. Menditide
See Bk. IIL. Pt, IL; 4 et a al,* ,9. We find

the phrase fa a g a with the same

meaning as the more , enlarged form in the
text.

Cu. 6. MENCIUS BEHAVIOUR ‘WITH . AN UN»
WORTHY ASSOCIATE. J. Occupied the posis
tion of a high dignitary : "—so I translate he Le

EB j js Z p: as in the translation. ` A fli. Mencius’ situation appears io have

96 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS, BOOK II
DESEE EE
d i a <P Ue way

BARA
I
SZN
HSN

Hs Za y/u KS EI ER
 ZE ZB SR 4T A fi. f£ Ix

5

Ld
LS
v
v
d

Hà

5 SSN

e"
Ir.

yz

king also sent Wang Hwan, eh governor of um as assistant-com-
inissioner. Wang Hwan, morning and evening, waited upon Men-
cius, who, during all the way to Tang and back, never spoke to him
about the business of their, mission.

2, Kung-sun Ch‘ow said to Mencius, “The position of a high
dignitary of Ts'e is not a small one; the road from Ts‘e to Ting is
not short. How was it that during all the way there and back, you
never spake to Hwan about the matters of your mission ?" Mencius
replied, “There were the proper officers who attended to them.
What occasion had I to speak to him about them ? "

Cuaprer VIL 1. Mencius went from , Ts'e. to Loo to bury his
mother, On his return to Ts'e, he stopped at Ying, where Ch'ung
Yu begged to put a question to him, and said, * Formerly, in ignor-
ance of my incompetency, you employed me to superintend the

-à

been only honorary, without emolument, and
the'king employed him on this occasion to give
weight by his-character to the missien. The of-

ficer of i (read bà) was an unworthy favoux-"

A

ite óf the king. , not ‘to assist him on

the journey ,; but with reference to what was the

business (Ay 1 Tp of it. E —low. 3d tone.

implies the E, or ‘going,’ as well as ‘rer

turning, i dis Pos fr. refers to

Wang Hwan, whe had been temporarily raised
to that-dignity for the occasion. X (low. Ist

tone) BE R

Now. there were some, —i ""

the proper officers —/ Ze , ‘who attended ta

 them. The glossarist of Chaou K'e under-
stands this as spoken of Wang:—* He perhaps
attended to them, Ze, he thought that he
knew aH about them, and never put any ques-
tions to me; but the view adopted is more
:natural, and gives more point to Mencius’ ex-
planation of his conduct.

Cn. 7. THAT ONE OUGHT TO DO HIS UTMOST
IN THE BURIAL OF HIS PARENTS ;—ILLUSTRATED
A MENCIUS BURIAL OF Ws MOTHER. Comp.
E . Pt. H. xvi. l. The tradition is: that

Mencius had his mother with him in Ts'e, and
-that he carried her body to the family sepulchre
in Loo. How long he remained in Loo is
uncertain ;—perhaps the whole three years

 proper to the mourning fora parent. Whether

Yr.IL Cu, VIL

v

>

Eee

5

L3
we
v
ow i

ah
Ser
w4 ie

So
ANTON

Vege ii masa,

BARS

+

joa
J n
ae”

JA

be

ne

P" " d
poa E
es
=
24

as
"PS

eh

"9

~

o

BOX

THE WORES.OF MENCIUS, +

a

" A ps 4 aiy EN RI ny
Asi you were then pigsséd bysthe TNI e.

to
e4

vr we

rn
u

"alli
n

=~
NT
‘en
"AT

zE

k CE grt,

ta PIDE Nn EAE

FR, ES ELE:
TV 1 "vg

ber

peo-'

plé.and not simply for the béauty. of thé appedrahes, “bat! because,

yen a

4 ^

:S.7 “Tf prevented ‘by statutory regulations” from "making their cof."
fins in this way, men cannot have the feeling of pleasure. If they"!
.have not' the money to' make them. in this way, they: cannot. ‘have’
the feeling of pleasure. "When they were not prevented, ard had:

the money, the ancients all used

not:dosó?" s « E

n ; j f ,

his stopping at Ying was for a night merely,

or“a longer period, is also disputed.

Yu was oue of his disciples. It has appeared

strange that Yu should have cherished. the

matter so long, and submitted it to his master

after a lapse of three years. (Fhis Is on the sup-

position that Mencius' return to Ts‘e was after

the completion of the three years’ mourning.)

. But itis replied in the yu E TE Ah. that
` this only itlüstrates how fond Mencins’ disciples
were of applying to him for a solution of their

doubts, and the instance of Ch'in Tsin, ch. iii. is

another case in point of the length of time they

would keep things in mind.

s '

Hija in I Pt.
ee ‘ ’ soy Bhp
YI. xvi. 1, ‘to beg to put a question. By =

Ñ, ‘to attend to,’ lr. as in Pt. I. vii. 1. xX

Ch/uug:

iliis style. í Why
{

ud Gob hd

tg . ps >
&hóuld I slone
pod d vote ef
Meus af tub ovas Th e : ta fd
as in the translation... But.for the eomm, L ;
Shodld render,‘ fn the gravity of your sorrow,’
Aseo Pt. I ii 20. 2. ‘Middle anti- ,
quity’ commences with the Chow dynasty;. Hp l.

up.'3d tone; ‘to correspond, or be equal, to.’

BE TA AC ADJ is not what they*eatl 5
an ‘empty character,’ merely.:completing the .
rhythm of the sentence, ‘The whole==‘ they ,
felt complete (that they had dorie their utmost)
in their human hearts, Mencius’ account of ^
the equal dimensions of the outer and inner,
coffin does not agree with what we find in tho. ,
Le-ke, XXIL ii. 31. It must be borne in mind .
also, that the seven inches of the Chow dynasty
were only=rather more than four inches of the i

present: day... 3. am 183. being opposed

fe Chung Yung, ch. iv, E isexphined ! to fu Hj. requires to be supplomented, a3."

13

te

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK i.

E

Ur

As
"3
EAH

IE

=
Sr

v

z
w
x

NERS

4

SNES
JEES

Bfn
ES

v

E

SM
qo

SESH at

kaS
or
~
7

NSHSRE RASH

SERRA
uj
"

3:0

H

=

Tod Ht lj; 3i
Hp, xk. Js 4r PN HH
4. ," And moreover, is there no satisfaction to, the aka feblin gs

of a man; iti preventing the. earth from getting near to. the“bodies
of his dead ?

5. «I have heard" that the superior man will not for all the
world be niggardly to his parents.”

Cuarrer VIII. 1. Shin T ung, on his own impulse, asked Mencius,
saying, “May Yen be smitten?” Mencius replied, “It may. Tsze-
.k'wae had-no right to give Yen to anothér man, and Tsze-che had
‘no right to receive Yen from Tsze-k‘wae, Suppose there were an
“officer here, with whom you, Sir, were pleased, and that, without
informing the king, you were privately to give to him your salary
and rank; and suppose that this oflicer, also without the king's
“orders, were privately to receive them from you :—would such a
transaction be allowable? And where is the difference , between the

case of Yen and this?” : :

in the translation. For T8 A " some
would give ii 4 BY. ‘The fij inm reads bet-

‘ter, but the meaning is the same,

be
que 3d tone), 4 ET —the same. as " ^t

nt PCI v.1, 4L i is used appropriately
E reference to the dissolution of the bodies of
„the dead. ` JE * skin '—the bodies.
ET tone, heóou. fj ftp S, —the meaning

is—‘shall this thing alone give no satisfaction

eS) aa

, low.

‘to a sows feelings 2"

. $ 1
— — H "
.-—Chaou K'e interprets this :—* will not
deny anytling in all the world which he can
command to his parents! So, substantially, the
modern paraphrasts. 7

Cu. 8. DESERVED PUNISHMENT MAY NOT RE
INFLICTED BUT BY PROPER AUTHORITY. A NA-
TION MAY ONLY BE SMITTEN BY THE MINISTER
or Heaven. The incidents in the history of
Yen referred to are briefly these :— Tsze-k^wae,
a weak silly man, was wrought upon to resign
his throne to his prime minister 'l'sze-che, in
the expectation that Tsze-che would decline the
honour, and that thus he would be praised us
acting the part of the ancient. Yaou, while he

em
em

Proll: Cu. VII. THE WORKS OP MENCIUS.

zu

p
ew"
LÀ
w

Es
=
egt

Ex
n

HH
NASAS SR

[ d

de

ER

m

RI

TN
eT Beat

oe ue
SNA

$
ON

al
st

DR
aa SINS

wr

e

3
1

Eum

B
SON

=

=
STAIRS

RE
pike:
A

v e
i [ d
ri TH
(comme 4

SH
on
a
eamm

D
z
ym
essem
EM
zm

; NES
Nxt
EE
RES

FESS]

2
ks

Rar PNR

-

x
Sas

 IGE

Z

KERE

, 2, „The people of Ts'e smote Yen. Some, one asked Mencius,
“saying, “Ts it really the case that you advised Ts‘e to smite Yen?”
He’ replied, “No. Shin Ttung asked me whether Yen might be
‘smitten, and I answered him, ‘It may.’ They accordingly wert
and smote it. If he had asked me—‘Who may smite it?’ I would
have answered him; ‘He who is the minister of Heaven may smite
‘it? Suppose the case of a murderer, and that one asks me— ‘May this
, “man be put to death?’ I will answer him—: He may.’ If’ he, ask
,me—' Who may put him to death?’ I will answer him,—‘ The thief
‘criminal judge may put him to death.’ But now with one Yen to
smite another Yen :—how should I have Poe this?"
J 14
,reteined his kingdom. ‘Psze-che, however, ac- it t literally i in uud. kt Hk low.
«epted the tender, and Tsze-k‘wae was laid up- det tone, UE +i is the ‘same ‘person as ft

on the shelf. By and by, his son endeavoured to és ‘a scholar seeking official employment.’

+wrest back the throne, and great confusion and 7 ,
suffering to the people ensued. Comp. Bk L 2.: RE, up. 3d tone. QUA — (RN refers

‘Pt Ilx, xi 1. Shin (so read, as a surname) to the king and people of Te'e. 1 pi H.
. Tung appears to,have been a high minister of __ OR re refers only to Shin Tung. X 5. see
ithe, State. If is dificult to find a word by E
Pt. L $ 6. The one, Yen is of course "Ts'e, as
w whith to translate 4, which implies the idea ue ; na
oppressive às Yen itself, 5:0 d
is ‘of Yen's deserving to be punished. E AF — cx $: How Musxcin BRAT NONI SUE AT:
veferring to Shin T'ung, but we can't Hiandeie TEMPT TO ARGUE IN EXCUSE OF ERRORS AND

Hc
HE
I

10 ;
0 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK tt.

TH

Se
=
9e

ps
ni:

c
xm
=

ao

a3
A

AS
~
wr

NS
m

E

Mest
T
EU ule

v

a
 EL \
malate

TERNA
Z
TH

v

xt
fas

ie]

sa

E
unitis

ah

v

oT SS
EH

=

SET He
SHE

m
HH
S

" "x -
om x 7 ve a > :
78 53-0 E €
ABI SEJS p: vay “Bo
" À D Di $ 2 r1 ba & n " d ^ . " Å
"OnmarrkR IX. "1, The people of Yen having rebelled, the king
of Ts'e said, “1 feel very mùch ashamed when J think of Mencius.’
/9. 'Ch'in' Kea said 'to him, “Let not your Majesty be grieved:
Whether‘ does your Majesty consider yourself or Chow-kung the
more benevolent and wise?". The king replied, “Oh! what words
are those?” “The duke of Chow", said Kea, “appointed Kwan-
shuh to oversee the heir of Yin, but Kwan-shuh with the power of the
Yin State rebelled. If knowing that this would happen he appoint-
ed Kwan-shüh, he was deficient in benevolence. If he appointed
him, not knowing that it would happen, he was deficient in know-
“ledge. 1f the duke of Chow, was not completely benevolent and
wise, how much less can your Majesty be expected to be so! I beg
to go and see Mencius, and relieve your Majesty from that feeling.”
. 3. Chin Kea accordingly saw Mencius, and asked him, saying,
* What kind of man was the duke of Chow?” “An ancient sage,”
, was the reply. “Is it the fact, that he appointed Kwan-shuh to
.« MISCONDUCT: 1. The people of Yen set up } and Too ( E one óf them older, and the other
„the son of Tsze-k‘wae\as king, and rebelled i `
“against the yoke which Tse had attempted to younger, than his brother Tan CH» who‘ was
.impese on them. ‘Ashamed when J think of Chow-kuug: Seen has come down to us under the
Mencius,’ —ie, because of the advice of Mencius title of Kwan-shuh, Kwan being the name of
in regard to Yen, wbich he had neglected. See the principality which he received for himself.
'OBELPCILx,xh 2. Chün Kea was anofficer After Woo's déath, and the succession of his

- of Ts‘e.. Chow-kung,—see Con. Ana. VIL v., son, Seen and Too rebelled, when Chow-kung
etal, The case Kea refers to was this:—On king took action against them, put the former to

AWoo's extinction ef the Yin dynasty, sparing ND ZA
the life of Chow’s son, he conferred on him the death, and banished the other. E (up. ist

small State of Yin from which the dynasty had tone) Bib —tne BE here is the son of the em-
. taken its name, but. placed him under the peror Chow, .That below is the name of the

' Surveillance of his own two brothers, Seen (RE) state. fz x take f in the sense of

a.
v
v
v
~
5

m

Nd

H
pas

Pr. TE Ca. IX, THE WORKS OF MENCIUS: ‘101

5

-—

x

=
EEA

ta
[d

RIDE

Q

[v
Ee

Naa ze
N

v
[d

i

SNES
Te

E
nane

E A :
Hij "d ot^ +o M

zi :
’ n » 716

v
e

PSE

v

al
ERE

le]

y
RESTEN

v

Becas
SNNT

x
TES

Es
ec

-
vi

\
/

¢

HNP YS

g
- v

SSN

NT
a

Zn
deemed

v
V
J

=
ic.
ERE
BA
:R

v
4,

ose
sem
is

v

EJ.

oversee the heir of Yin, and that Kwan-shuh with the State of Yin
rebelled?” “It is" “Did the duke of Chow know that he would
rébel, and pur posely appoint, him to that office?” Mencius said, “He
did not know." “Then, though a sage, he still fell into error?"

* The duke of Chow,” answered Mencius, “was the younger brother.
Kwan-shuh was his elder brother. ` Was not the error of Chow- -kung
in accordance with what is right ?.

4. “Moreover, when the superior men of old had errors, they
reformed them. The superior men of the present time, “when ‘they
have errors, persist in them. The errors of the superior men of
old were like eclipses of thesun and moon. All the people witnessed
them, and when they had reformed them, al the people ~ looked

. up to.them with their former admiration. : But do the superior:men
of the present day only persist in their errors? They. go-on a Tape
apologizing discussions about them likewise.” -

- *to loose,’ ‘to free from,’ with reference to the
feeling of shame, not ‘to explain.’ 3. Before

SR pij, there should be a E ,as it is the retort

of Chin Kea, HP A Hf 38 -H

implies a ancotedtng clause—‘ how much more

may one inferior to him !’— Bb RFAG

‘Sf. What. Mencius means in conclusion js,

that brother ought not to be suspicious “of
 brother: that it is better to S deceived thaii to

impute evil. 4. In 4 A. ay F. the
uH X must be taken vaguely. Hi. up. lst

tone, - y. Shall we refer it to the sun and
moon, or to the ancient worthies? Primarily,

"its application is to the heavenly bodies, jq

T
iN

Sai

M
M

102 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK Ih
ES JR WRT LE
Ri E H, , = Y E di
BA HRM tr ^ Y

ED
z

Q
-

EO

Bea

BH oes
X

hi.
AN A ri Ih ane pa wi
e yu Ae AN nj Er b enr.
pr i HH K A i bs

ae

3

AR? 2

CüAPreR X. 1. Mencius gave up his office, and made arrange-
sinl for returning to his native State.
"2! The king came to visit him, and said, “ Formerly, I wished
to see you, but in vain. Then, I got the "ópportunity of being by
your side, and all my court joyed exceedingly along with me. Now
again you abandon me, and are returning home. B do not know if
‘hereafter F máy expect to have another opportunity of seeing you.'
Metjus replied, “I dare not request permission’ ‘to visit you at any
pu Vücular time, but, indeed, it is what I desire."
'8i "Another day, the king ‘said to the officer She, *I wish to give
Mencius a house, . somewhere in the middle of the kin gdom, and to
‘sip port his dixciples with axi allowance of 10,000 chung, that all the
'officérs' and the people may, have such an example to reverence and
‘imitate. ' Had you not better tell him this for me?”
«45... She took advantage to convey this message by means of the
poe Oh'in, who reported his words to Mencius. :

$ ier 3

LZ Be the doyble object after The
iens was 4 severe tas at Chin Ken’ s own
conduct. i a

"Cu. 108 MENCIUS m Leiva A COUNTRY OR
REMAINING IN-IT WAS ‘NOT INFLUENCED BY PE-
CUNIARY CONSIDERATIONS; BULT BY THE OPPOR-
“runitt DENIED OR ACCORDED VO HIM OF CARRY-,

ine its PRINCIPLES INTO’ PRACTICE.

zt A E. -Fk as in‘ch: v. 2, only it is hess
siihply:* resignation, "with little of the idea of
sacrifice, ,. im i ‘and returned.—Chaou K'e
Bays ‘to his house,’ and in accordance with this,

;he interprets YS FEES] Em) H below, ‘I do not.

venture to ask you to come in person to see mè,”
which is surely absurd enough. e meaniug
must be what I bave given. 2. BT H.: —
referring to the time before Mencius first came
to Ts‘e. fal (ch‘aou, low. 1st tone)= i]

, ‘all the officers of the court with

E
himself. £z k=" iy Ri, ‘in continua-

tion of this seeing.” Mencius sees that the king
with his complimentary expressions is really
bidding him adieu, and answers, accordingly, jn
as complimentary a way, intimating his purpose
to be gone. 9. The king after all does nyt

Pr. II. Cu. X.

2b
Cues

3

EE
TRAER Des

Y
4

SH
Misi

=

d
x
a

V
¢

iustis
T

-

TE

AN

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

-

v

he Z- [D
ek T: rH yJ

ET
CRBRERER
“hist

SO

Wee

\
"

a

.

v
PA

H
-

Penis

rage

e

v
vw
v

5. Mencius said, “ Yes; but how should the officer She know

that the thing may not be?

Suppose that I. wanted to.be rich, hay-
ing formerly declined 100,000 chung, would ,my, now,
10,000 be the conduct of one desiring riches?

, agcepting

pet

6. “Ke-sun said, ‘A strange man was Tsze-shuh Y. He: ‘pushed
himself into the service of government. His prince: declining to
employ him, he had to retire indeed, but he again schemed hat „his
son or younger brother should be made a high officer. . Wh 9. in-
deed is there of men but wishes’ for riches and honour? But h e
only, among the seekers of these, tried to monopolize. the conspicu-

ous mound.

"m

(.

“Of old time, the market-dealers exchanged the articles, which

they had ‘for others which they had not, and simply had ‘certain

officers to keep order among them.

like the idea of Mencius’ going, and thinks of
this plan to retain him, which was in reality
what Mencius, in ch. iii, calls ‘bribing’ him.

3 low. 3d tone. 3. Ch‘in here is the Ch'in

Tsin of ch, iii. Al is explained by Tk 8t

‘entrusted to” But it is more, and=‘to take
advantage of, with reference to Ch‘in’s being a
disciple of Mencius. 4. Mencius does not
tind it convenient to state plainly his real rea-

son for going,—that he was not permitted to see
his principles carried into practice. and there-
fore repels simply the idea of his being accessible
to pecuniary considerations. 100,000 chung was
the fixed allowance of a fff, which Mencius had
declined to reecive. ,

5. Of Ke-sun and Tsze- !

It happened that theré ACCES

shuh E we know only what i$ nientioned' “here.
Chaou K‘e says that they were disciples of Men-
cius, and that Ke-eun made his remark with a
view to induce Mencius to push forward his dis-
ciples into the employment which he eould not
get for himself. But such a view is inadmissible

ff a. HE LY Per —the Ist fifi ies is ‘said,

merely refers to the prince’s employment. of
him, and the 2d to his contriving and bringing
about the employment of his sow or younger

-brother, but why should we not give the char-

acter the same force in both cases? HE low,

2d' tone, read as and= BÉ, ta mound. Ep
up. 2d tone, ‘cut, ‘abrupt,’ ‘well defined? — /

6. blow. lst tone. Observe the force [2

104 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

s
»
i5
I
D

ES
4
9
>
a
re
D
i
i

SERM

ko

[ d

v

SLANA d

N

a

Sa)
=

EM
+t
mmn

ht
hrada aS

(0)

AIAR

v

URSE
PISS.

ca

zx

1B
Shara Sant

P4
T
i bow
EN
m)
XA
—

I
Fea (N

NER

ES DIE
2 ERRAN
a2 SES

EE
3 m
ane
i
He
m

 BA
mean fellow, who made it a point to look out fór a conspicuous
mound, and get up upon it. Thence he looked right and left, to
catch in his net the whole. gain of the market. "The people all
thought his conduct mean, and therefore they proceeded to lay a
tax upon his wares. The taxing of traders took its rise from this
mean fellow."

CHAPTER XI. L Mencius having taken his leave of Ts‘e, was
passing the night in Chow.

2. A person who wished to “detain him on behalf of the king
came and sat down, and began to speak to him. Mencius gave him
no answer, but leant upon ‘his stool and slept.

3. The stranger was displeased, and said, “I passed ,the night
in careful vigil, before I would venture to speak to you, and you,
Master, sleep and do not listen to me. Allow me to request that I
may not again presume to see you." Mencius replied, “ Sit down,

HR. ‘only,’ which also belongs to it in par. 2, himself to follow his counsels. FA Gow, 3d

weakening the ES amB- AE: the x tone), RN the king, ie, knowing it

hould be referred to tl individual :
x shag e reforred to the mean individual spo- would please the king. JE, —upper 8d tone,

Cu. 11. How MENCIUS REPELLED A MAN, [S ,—upper $d tone, ‘to lean upon. The
WHO, OFFICIOUSLY AND ON HIS OWN IMPULSE,

TRIED TO DETAIN HIM IN Ts'x. 1. = was
a city on the southern border of Ts‘e. Some
think it should be written i and refer it toa

JL, was a stool or bench, ‘on which individuals
might lean forward, or otherwise, as they sat
upon their mats. It could be carried in the

hand. e~ i. 1— Ek
place in the pres. distr. of r- 75 but this 2P See the Leke b BIO Dh d at PA

would place it north from Loo, whither Mencius fe Hi DA EJL M yi HEX x. 3.

was retiring. Mencius withdrew leisurely, hop- ;
ing that the king would recal him and pledge HK, chae, upper 1st touc= yin ‘to lecp a vigil,

Pr. IL Cu, X1.— XIE THE WORKS

ee

ERRA

3

aH

4

v

ZA

ao py Ie
HE iW EH o:
AN jin b

OF MENCIUS. 105

E

=

^c

uy
is
=

w
L4
v

pr

E-HAY

5

EN

È

WE

-

MANEN

aa ee

(Y

Ly

D

-
i

nasa
D
SH

E

=
*

=
NER

DA
4

UR

poem
oe
2

b

OS
WS

uji
d

bind
c

N

H

f

>A

He.

[7]

and I will explain the ease clearly to you. Formerly, ifthe duke

Muh had not kept à person by the

induced Tsze-sze to remain with him.

side of Tsze-sze, he could not have:
If Seč Lew and Shin din

had not had a remembrancer by the side of the duke Muh, he woul

not have
him. :
4.

do not treat me as Tsze-sze was treated, Is it

me? Or is it I, who cut you?"

been able to make them feel at home and remain with:

“You anxiously form-plans with reference to me, but you .

you, Sir, who cut:

Cuarter XII. 1, When Mencius had left Ts‘e, Yin Sze spake.
about him to others, saying, “If he did not know that the king
could not be made a T'ang or a Woo, that showed his want of intelli- -

‘to fast,’ 7K {Ae fasted and_ passed ‘the

night.’ Ag p 18 (low. 3d tone) Ki KF is
merely the complimentary way of complaining
of what the guest considered the rudeness of his
reception, Ef, low. 3d tone= 4>, ý , here
BH r1 nz
read Muh, was the honorary epithet of the duke
Heen (RÄ), B.C. 408—375. Tsze-sze,—the grand-
sonof Confucius. Shin Ts'eang,—the son of Tsze-

chang. Ff ike)» one of Confucius’ disciples.
Séé Lew was a native of Loo, a disciple of the
Confucian school. See the Le-ke, II. Pt, Lit, 34;

PLILiii.26. IRE or ZEP. HF issaidto
=% , simply ‘to detain,’ but its ferce is more-
than that, and=‘to make contented, and so in-
duce to remain.’ Great respect, it seems, was
shown to T'sze-sze, and he had an attendant from
the duke to assure him continually of the respect
with which he was cherished. Séé Lew and
Shin Ts‘eang had not such attendants, but they

 knew that there were one or more officers by

the duke's side, to admonish him not to forget
them .and other worthies, The stranger calls

himself jfi su ‘your disciple.’ 4, y"

low, 3d tone, Mencius calls himself fe (up, .

2d tone) zs ‘the elder.’ SREB a

“Zy the stranger was anxious for J) Mene ` `
cius to remain in Ts'e, but the thing was entire-
ly from himself, not from the king; and his:
thinking that he could detain him by such a
visit showed the little store he set by him ;—was, -
‘in fact, a cutting him. ; ‘
CH. 12,- How MENCIUS EXPLAINED His
SEEMING .TO LINGER IN '"Üs'E, AFTER HE HAD
RESIGNED HIS OFFICB, AND LEFT THE COURT,
1. All that we know of Yin Sze is that
he was a man of Ts'e, Julien properly blames

Noel for translating F + by ‘literatus eoge
nomine Yin,’ as if a were here the noun—'a

M

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK H.

RSH
4
E
RE
NIE DY
matt at
:

oad

C doe
Ga
ah
N
SE
>
TM

a

v
H
EN
<
XE

PARSE
us D
DERE
€—
eS ESE SHAH
t
Sx 18

NS
* aS
mt

n

;0

"e

zx
vee}

e

m "d

Heel
aE

im
SN
3 OK
[3
m
ig
ng
LE
HIT

»
gence. If e knew that he could not be made such, and came not-
withstanding, that shows he was seeking his own benefit. He came
a thousand /e to wait on the king; because he did not find in him
a ruler to suit him; he took his leave, but how dilatory and linger-
ing was his departure, stopping three nights before he quitted Chow!
I am dissatisfied on account of this."

2. The disciple Kaou informed Mencius of these remarks.

9. Mencius said, “How should Yin Sze know me! When I
came a thousand Je to wait on the king, it was what I desired to
do, When I went away because I did not find in him a ruler to
suit me, was that what I desired to do? I felt myself constrained
to. do it.:

.4. * When I stopped ‘three nights before I quitted Chow, in my

own mind I still considered my departure speedy. I was hoping

that the king might change. If the king had changed, he would
‘ Eu

eertáiüly. have recalled i me.

scholar.” But when he adds that it is here to be HE, ae gist tone) gr c lit, ‘The king
pronounced che, to mark that it isa name, this is fortunately near to change it,’ This wa the

"omnmen-
wlrit neither the dictionary nor any e en- thought at the time in Mencius’ m nd, aud

EN =.
tary mentions, EE, low. 3d tone, = EE pir a1 a ' EY was "eoi for? ER
$ ‘to seek for favours,’ če. his own ae s m KK

See Ana. IL xviii. J 3B see Bk. L Pt IL a then? pE moe ura

: i PCENAS 1
xvi. 3. z&-ilt. on What Sze chiefiy = +4, up. 2d tone. h= 35. JB is
means. to charge against Mencius is . the
lingering character of his departure, 3. by many taken as simply= YJ ; — the king
Mencius was constrained to leave by the con-
viction forced on him that he could not in Ts‘e i$ after all competent to do good, but JH

‘carry his principles into „practice, E fit ; expresses more than that. T H 4 Z

‘then, and not

Pr. IL. Cu. XIL—XUT THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 07

=
it
N

SS
SI

N
«

Em.

v

Eag
FS

} :

my

zi
HN IEHXERR
;

Bebo

Hii

\
V
4

xo

=
GH

mates
HH PSE

WE
SSS

Manni ER
n

(VEEH RE

"w
HH XM

b
Ime
damy

M

EHS

Nag

IN
Kome

»

m
E
v

EEE SANE

;

E.
Ñ

Ras

ii

5. ‘When I quitted Chow, and the king had not sent after me,

then, and only till then, was my mind resolutely bent on returning
io Tsow. But, notwithstanding that, how can. be said that I give
up the king? The king, after all, is one who may be made to do
what 1s good. If he were to use, me, would it be for the happiness
of the people of Ts'e only? It would be. for the happiness of the
people of the whole empire. I am hoping that the king will change.
I am daily hoping for this.
"6. “Am I like one of your little-minded people? They : will
remonstrate with their prince, and on their remonstrance not being
accepted, they get angry, and, with their passion displayed in their
countenance, they take their leave, and travel with all their strength
for a whole day, before they will stop for the night."

7. When Yin Sze heard this explanation, he said, *I am indeed
a small man.’

Cuapter XIIT.

3

1. When Mencius left Ts‘ e, Ch'ung Yu quein:

conveys in itself no more than the translation, [

but the king's change of course involved Men-
~ eius! recal to Ts‘e. I am inclined to think that
the verbs in this par. should be translated in
the past tense, and that we have in it merely
an amplifieation of Mencius thoughts before
he quitted Chow. Compare with this
SE Confucius’ defence or Kwan Chung, Ana.
V. 18.

Cu. 13. MENCIUS’ GRIEF AT NOT FINDING AN
OPPORTUNITY TO DO THE GOOD WHICH HE COULD.
1. Ch‘ung Yu,—the same mentioned in

ch. vii. Though Ch'ung Yu attributes the ma-

xim ^ A" K RHA to his master, we -

find it in Confucius: see Ana. XIV. xxxvi.
3. ‘500 years, —this is speaking in very round
and loose numbers, even if we judge from the

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK fi.

4
T

EPEN

SF EE
On

Ld
-

Och

zx

v

M
Fg an

B

A.
g
L4

Er
EO
Lm

SIT

wv

ROR ENPE
Sm

Ds

set
THEO EER ath

ris
A

um
ay
“RO.
HEE oo

DS TON

AARSE HAHA

4»

ed him upon the way, saying, ** Master, you look like one who car-
ties an air of dissatisfaction in his countenance. But formerly I
heard you say+«‘The superior man does not murmur against Hea-
ven, nor grudge against men,’ " l ,

9. Mencius said, * That was one time, and this is another.

3. “Itisarule that a true Imperial sovereign should arise in the
course of five hundred years, and that during that time there should
be men illustrious in their generation.

4. “From the commencement of the Chow dynasty till now,
more than 700 years have elapsed. Judging numerically, the date
is past. Examining the character of the present time, we might
expect the rise of such individuals in dt.

5. “But Heaven does not yet wish that the empire should enjoy
tranquillity and good order. : If it wished this, who is there besides
me to bring it about? How should I be otherwise than dissatisfied ? "

history of China prior to Mencius. E ig from the extinction of the dynasty. 9 HW

* during them,’ but the meaning is—at the same
time with the sovereign shall arise men able to
assist him. 2alb- d or E K FAE-

4. The Chow dynasty ‘lasted altogether
867 years, and Mencius died, according to some
accounts, at the age of 102, in the 2d year of the
last century, little more than 50 years removed

HX x Rij Wf m. lit., “By the time ex-
amining it, then may,’ i.e., such things may be.

5. B: ME lit., * Letting me go,
then who?' Comp. last chap. p: 4, and many
other places, where Mencius speaks of what he
could accomplish. On the reference to the will
of Heaven, comp. Ana. VIIL v, 8,

THE WORKS

>

A d

CHAPTER XIV.

MORONS

OF MENCIUS. 109
à (=)
pza
o [Ss

TREN
SSF

IK
TERNS

ud
=

Ig yd

NL
T
AB

H

n
al

Yu

1. When Mencius left Ts'e, he dwelt in Hew.

- There Kung-sun Ch'ow asked him, saying, * Was it the.way of the
ancients to hold office without receiving salary?”

. 2. Mencius replied, “No; when I first saw the king in Ts'ung, it
was my intention, on retiring from the interview, to go away. Be-
cause Í did not wish to change this intention, I declined to receive
any salary.

3. "Immediately after, came orders for the collection of troops,
when it would have been improper for me to beg permission to leave.
But to remain so long in Ts'e was not my purpose." i

Cu. 14. THE REASON OF MENCIUS” HOLDING
AN HONORARY OFFICE IN 'l'eE WITHOUT SALARY,
THAT HE WISHED TO BE FREE IN HIS MOVE-
MENTS, 1. Hew was in the present dis-

trict of T'ang (Re in the department of Yen-
chow. Kung-sun Ch‘ow’s inquiry was sim-
ply for information, 'This appears from the

with which it is answered. 2. Ts'ung
must be the name of a place in Ts‘e, which can-

not be more exactly determined. I¢ is not to
be confounded with the ancient principality or

barony of the same name, is evidently

=f A 3. ém a may be as in the -

translation, or—*the appointment to the position
of a Tutor,’ ie, honorary adviser to the king.
This is the interpretation of the glossarist of
Chaou K'e, and is perhaps preferable to the
former. i

110

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

BOOK MI.

BOOK III.

TANG WAN KUNG. PART I.

EE

zi
SH mea

ri

p

. CuarrER I. 1. When the duke Wán of T‘ăng was Crown-prince,
having to go to Ts'oo, he went by way of Sung, and visited Mencius.

2. Mencius discoursed to him how the nature of man is good,
and, when speaking, always made laudatory reference to Yaou and `

Shun. .

.8. When the Crown-prince was returning from Ts‘oo, he again
visited Mencius. Mencius said to him, “ Prince, do you doubt my
words?. The path is one, and only one.

4. “Shing Kan said to the duke king of Ts‘e, ‘They were men.
Iamaman. Why should I stand in awe of them?’ Yen Yuen said,

TITLE or THIS Boox.—Hig pa A. “The
duke Win of Ting.’ The Book is so named
from the duke Wan, who is prominent in the
first three chapters. Chaou K‘e compares this
with the title of the 15th Book of the Analects,

Cx. 1. How ALL MEN BY DEVELOPING THEIR

_ NATURAL GOODNESS MAY BECOME EQUAL TO THE
ANCIENT SAGES. The duke Win of

T*tng,——see I. Pt. II. xiii. Wn isthe posthumous
The Crown-prince’s name appears to'

title.
have been Hwang GE. Previous to the Han

dynasty, the heirs-apparent of the emperors
and tbe princes of States were called indifferent-

ly Ti: and X F Since then, Jk

has been confined to the imperial heir.
— The title of was given, it is said, aR

RI HEJ fi. “to indicate the wish that

the succession should be unbroken from genera-
tion to generation.’ Ts‘oo and Tang bordering
on each other, the prince must have gone out
of his way to visit Mencius. In the *'lopogra-
phy of the Four Books, Cont.’, it is said ;— Since
Tang and T's‘oo adjoined,.so that one had only
to lift his feet to pass into Ts‘oo, why must
the crown-princé go round about, a distance of
more than 350 /e, to pass by the capital of Sung?
The reason was that Mencius was there, and
the prince's putting himself to so much trouble,
in going and returning, shows his worthiness."

2. X =F: a verb, ‘to speak or discourse
about.’ DS not ‘ necessarily,’ but ‘he made it

& point.’ is taken by Choo He and others
in the sense of ‘to appeal to” ‘This is supported
by par. 3, but the word itself has only the
meaning in the translation, with which, more-

—
—

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

él
w
ES
El

F
Ve ea T

b
v

>=]

v
e

SETAN

SEM

why HE

e
E
A

v

e

d

Ja

Á

tS
SUP ENDRUR 7

yet RSet

IEPA
SERME

Sur
yy

SE
E

v

LN th Sle
RES
SHH

NOSE
Es
Rm
ES
u

>
»
=
Side
=

"D
x
1 SS

‘What kind of man was Shun? What kind ges man am I? He
who exerts himself will also become such as he was.’ Kung-ming E
said, ‘King W&n is my teacher. How should the duke of Chow đe-

ceive me by those words ?'

5. “Now, T'áng, taking its length with its breadth, will amount;
I suppose, to fifty le. It is s small, but still sufficient to make a good
kingdom. It is said in the Book of History, ‘If medicine do not
raise a commotion in the patient, his disease will not be cured by it.”

CuaPTER II. 1. When the duke Ting of Táng died, the Crown-
priuce said to Yen Yew, * Formerly, Mencius spoke "with me in
Sung, and in my mind I have never forgotten his words. Now, alas!

ov rer, Chaou K'e agrees, 3. iá— m t» x x Jk m] would appear to have been a

d I remark originally of Chow-kung, which E ap-
8 seems here to be as in the Chung propriates and vindicates on that high authority.,

Yung, i. 1—‘ an- accordance with this nature

is called the .Path, but viewed here more 5 Til HE cutting the long

in the consummation of high sageship and to supplement the Tn ^ Observe the force of

distinction to which it leads, which may be n ; : ; ix EN

reached by treading it, and which ean be reach- 43" as in the tranelation. pun implying

ed in.no other way. We have here for the first ‘It is small, but still’ E: Ed. comp. ch. iii :—

time the statement of Mencius’ doctrine, which , . 352 Tr. :

he subsequently dwells so much on, that ‘the ? good kingdom’ is snch ANODE 38.30 there

nature of man is good.’ 4. Of Shing č described. X E Dy Tyr see the Shoo-
5

Kan we only know what is here said. 1k Ex king, IV. viii. Sect. T. 8. Ja. read méen, low.

l X ik referring to-the sages.
used for ‘man’ or ‘men,’ with the NE dst
and capability. Kung-ming E was a disciple
first of Tsze-chang, and then of Tsang Sin.

Cu. 2. How MENCIUS ADVISED THE DUKE
or ‘Sane TO ou THE MOURNING FOR HIS '

FATHER. l. o is the proper term to

-
t2

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

5
Pr

1 BOOK IM.

lex

Sides m i-i

o

ALVES

-e

NE

(SERES
ZI

FIRE

Uga
Ec

Sez
veis

v

YESS

v

AE EOR

Sa
vole
BRO
[9]

=!
RNS

N

HJ
wa
HLF
t
F

-

QNSE SS

e
-

Pet

t
=

2 HEH
FERNS

JAHTE

ERUN

HENRI

, Rl
*3
ITE LEX TY

this. m duty to my father devolves upon me; I wish to end you
to ask the advice of Mencius, and then to proceed to its various
services."
2. Yen Yew accordingly proceeded to Tsow, and consulted Men-
cius. Mencius said, “Is this not good? In discharging the funeral
duties to parents, men indeed feel constrained to do their utmost.
The philosopher Tsăng said, ‘When parents are alive, they should
be served according to propriety ; ; when they are dead, they should
be buried according to propriety; and they should be sacr ificed to
according to propr iety this may be called filial piety.’ The cere-
. monies to be observed by the princes I have not learned, but I have
heard these points :—that the three years’ mourning, the garment of
coarse cloth with its lower edge even, and the eating “of congee,
were equally prescribed -by three dynasties, and binding c on all, from
the emperor to the mass of the people."
3. Yen Yew reported the execution of his commission, and the
prinee determined that the three years’ mourning should be observed.

3:

abcd

express the death of any of the princes of the
empire. Yen Yew had been:the prince's Grand-

tútor Ck fii» I suppese that Ki is the sur-
hame. is a phrase applied to the fun-
eral of, and mourning for, parents ;—' the great

cause, or matter.’ 2. pats -Z is the

verb, ft p Z E Spa — spoken with

reference to the prince’s sending to consult him

_ on such a subject. ALE Sp B iat

comp. Ana, XIX. xvii. The words attributed to
Tsing Sin were originally spoken by Confucius;
see Ana. il. v. Tsing, may have appropriated
them, and spoken them, 80 as to make them be
regarded as his own, or, what is more likely,
Mencius here makes a slip of memory. FE, up.

Ist tone, read tsze. See Con. Ana. IX. ix. P
as used in the text, read like and= Bi, denotes
congee, like my but made thicker. 3.

Pr. E. Cit. IL THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

Land
pt
oo

rem

ES
1 SSNS

E

N

HM
SEY

a
fe
Ld

(v
E
B

a
E
N1

a
Cc
v
[d

`

PREE
SNAS

HES

le

RR D

N
(x

ES
eR

o

BSc
«S

o

PNT:

at
e(l
3
g

-

i RB
A
=

SN ES Ro
=

(VES

“Yer
Hot St eR i
eS 0

EUN

PC

$ Ru

. DNE
iun

His aged relatives, and the body of the officers, did not wish that it
should be so, and ‘said, “The former princes of Loo, that kingdom
which we honour, have, none of them, observed this practice,
neither have any of our own former princes, observed it. l'or you
to act contrary to their example is not proper. Moreover, the
History says,—‘In the observances of mourning and sacrifice, ances-
tors are to be followed, meaning that they received those things
from a proper source to hand them: down.”

4, The prince said again to Yen Yew, “Hitherto, I have not
given myself to the pursuit of learning, bnt have found my pleasure
in horsemanship and sword-exercise, “and now I don't come'up to
the wishes of my aged relatives and the officers. I am afraid I may
not be able to discharge my duty.in the great business that I have

p ‘returned the commission,’ ze. reporte by descendants of king Win were supposed to
k x P" look up to Loo. That Chow-kung aud the first

ed his execution of it and the reply. {it TX rulers of T'ang had not observed the three years’
20 4X. ga mourning is not to be supposed. ‘The crown-
must be understood as the subject of Æ X prince’s remonstrants are wrong in attributing

X. this fathers and brethren,’ e. his uncles to them the neglect of later dukes. Fp what

and elderly ministers of the ducal family. The particular ‘history’ they refer to is not known.

phrase is commonly applied by Chinese to the 3a. 3 E — R.i tood
elders of their own surname, y Deere be the F3 A Br X Z r1 18 to be-understo

f th i hi as spoken in the person of the ancestors, and I
degrees of their relationship. = [ed 77 have therefore rendered it by * they? Chaou
the ducal house of T'ang was EU from K'e, however, says that some made this a reply

one of the sons of king Wan (Shuh-sew, AL e / TS prince said, 1 have one
3.

ti». but by an inferior wife, while Chow-kung, o jk = o A HE A jq dH HE

the ancestor of Loo, was in the true imperial Zhi I
line, the author of all the civil institutions of 35 in the translation. M aE amt

the dynasty, and hence all the other States ruled afraid of the not belig ablo Že? i is the seue

i5

" THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK Hi

[ng

4

eu

Ah
=

i

m

-
>
-9i
S

E
TNE
yy

ENAR
SNS

RINNE ADR
EA SNES ES

=
Ei

v
>
¥
+

GR
>

SUM
SEA

ame
LENNE

Idi
“i

e

E
EBENE

[d
v

al
w+
Seen

v

i

Eres

sei

Sse Se
i DARE

=
IE
irat:

Seu

E
" Se he vie vy)

entered on; do you again consult Mencius for me.” On this, X Yew
went again to Tsow, and consulted Mencius. oe said, “It is
so, hut “he may not seek a remedy in others, but only in himself. Con-
fucius said, ‘ When a prince dies, his successor entrusts the admin-
istration to the prime minister. He sips the congee. Iis face is of
a deep black. He approaches the place of mourning, and weeps. +
Of all the officers and inferior ministers there is not one who will pre-
sume not to join in the lamentation, he setting them this example.
What the superior loves, his inferiors will be. found to love exceed-
ingly. The relation between superiors and inferiors is like that
between the wind and grass. "The grass must bend, when the wind
blows upon it.’ The business ‘depends on the prince.’

5. Yen Yew returned with this answer to his commission, and
the prince said, “It is so, The matter does indeed depend on me.”
So for five mouths he dwelt in the shed, without issuing an order or
a caution. - All the officers and his relatives said, “ He 3 may be said
to understand the ceremonies.” When the time of interment dr-

al

timent of the prince himself, ang Re niust be ed different places of the Analects together, and
translated in the first person, and not in the enlarged them to suit his own purpose, or, it

may be, the text of the Ana. was different in
third, as Julien does. In the H there,is a]... 5 " 3 :

a his time. See Con. Ana. XIV. xviii: XII. xiv.
reference to his antecedents, as occasioning

an š
the present difficulty. pea Ay u ih, xi is Ef AL im BE —the f is the place where the
taken by Chaou K'e, ‘You may not seek (to coffin lay, during the five months that elapsed
overcome their opposition) by any other way, between the death aad interment. 5. The
(bat carrying out what you have begun) Choo E was a shed, built of boards and straw, out-
He's view, as in the translation, is better. In the side the centre door of the palace, against the
quotations from Confucius, Mencius has blend- / surrounding wall, which the mourning prince

Pr. E Cn. II.—IHII. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

T EN

Žž
4

VESTS

Lat REZ,
AT Al oie ff ON NEED BS

rived, from all quarters, of the state, they came to witness it. Those
whe had come Jrom other. states to condole with him, were greatly
pleased with the deep dejection of his ‘countenance and the mourn-
fulness of his wailing and weeping. . $
Cndvrer III. 1. ‘The duke Wan of Ting asked Mencius,about
the proper way of g governing a kingdom.
2. Mencius said, “The business of the people may not be remissly
attended to. It is said in the Book of Poetry,
‘In the day-light go and gather the grass,
And at night twist your ropes ;
Then get up quickly on the roofs ;-—
"o Soon must we begin sowing again ‘the grain.’
3. “The way of the people is this.—If they have a certain
livelihood, they will have a fixed heart, If they have not a certain

"E

tenanted till tlie interment: see the Le-ke,
XXII. ii. 16. HI B zi El Alf. is supposed

by Choo He, with MU to be corrupted or
defective. I have translated as if it were E

Wy E Af. — Choo He introduces here the
following remarks from the commentator Lin
Go :— In the time of Mencius, although the

rites to the dead had fallen into neglect, yet
the three years’ mourning, with the sorrowing
heart and afilictive grief, being the expression
of what really belongs to man's mind, had not
quite perished. Only, sunk in the 'slough of
-manners becoming more and ‘more corrupt, men
were losing all their moral nature witheut be-
ing conscious of it When duke Win saw
Mencius, and heard him speak of the goodness of
man's nature, and of Yaou and Shun, that was
the oecasion of moving and bringing forth his
better heart, and on this occasion,—of the death
of his tather,—he felt sincerely all the stirrings
of sorrow and grief. Then, moreover, when his
older relatives and his officers wished not to
act as he desired, he turned inwards to ‘reprove ,
himself, and lamented his former conduct which

. made him not be believed in his present course,

not presuming to blame his officers and relatives:
—although we must concede an extraordinary
natural excellenceand abilit y to him, yet his ener-
gy in learning may not be impeached. Finally,
when we consider how with what decision he
finally acted, and how all, near and far, who saw
and heard him, were delighted to acknowledge
and admire his conduct, we have an instance of
how, when that which, belongs to all men's minds
is in the first place exhibited by one, others are
brought, without any previous purpose, to the
pleased acknowledgment and approva of èt :—
is not this a proot that, it is indeed true that
the nature of man is good? á
Cu. X. MENCIUS' COUNSELS TO THE DUKE oF
TANG FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF HIS KINGDOM.
AGRICULTURE AND EDUCATION ARE THE CHIEF
THINGS TO BE ATTENDED TO, AND THE FIRST AS AN
ESSENTIAL PREFARATION F jus 'THE SECOND,

1. Fe in the sense of v xa , ‘to govern,’

2. By R 4#, ‘the business of the people,’ is
intended husbandry. por the ode, see the She-
king, I. xv. Ode I. st. 7, written, it is said, by
Chow-kupg, to impress the emperor Ching with

‘

116

5

"e

dg

Ia
Sgt
Ld
w v

<=
ay

$

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

BOOK IIl,

RE
RN
Bs

-
w

35A
“a

,

H

bz
tæ
v

cada En
m
m

PR Trae a
X

PRET Ed
zi

>
bu

fan 4 n aa "n
A Jf] 3s WE
i
E

JAIE
2
E

“mR

=
ny
H
H

M

livelihood, they have not a fixed heart. And if they have not a
fixed heart, there is nothing which they will not do in the way of
self-abandonment, of moral deflection, of depravity, aud of wild
license. _When they have thus been involved in crime, to follow
them up and punish. them :—this is to entrap the people. How can
such a thing as entrapping the people be done under the rule of
a benevolent man?

4. “Therefore, a ruler who is endowed with talents and virtue
will be gravely complaisant and economical, showing a respectful
politeness to his ministers, and taking from the people only in
accordance with regulated limits.

5. ' “Yang Hoo said, ‘He who seeks to be rich will not be bene-
volent. He who wishes to, be benevolent will not be rich.’ `

6. “The sovereign of the Hea dynasty enacted the fifty mow allot-
ment, and the payment of a tax. The founder of the Yin enacted

‘the seventy mew allotment, and the system of mutual aid. The

M

course ‘ beneath’ the ruler.

2 sense of the importance and toils of husbandry.

8. Comp. I. Pt. I. vii. 19. In BR x

p 4. the i is to be takèn lightly, as if
the expression were E Z y R t=

t As to the people's being the people,’ Ze, the
character of the people is as follows.. 4,

4f not ‘must be,’ which would be inconsist-
ent with the EX, put ‘will be,’ te, will be sure
to be. The two last clauses are exegetical of
as and f&- T must be understood of E.
«ministers, in contradistinction from the ER.
«people in the next clause, tho’ all are of

5. This Yang
Hoo is the Yang Ho, of the Con. Ana. XVII.
i. ‘To aecord with his unworthy character,
the observation is taken in a bad sense, as à
dissuasive against the practice of benevolence,
while Mencius quotes it to show the incompati-
bility of. the two aims. -Great stress is laid on
the js i B Eg 5 £-— He who makes
riches, —benevolence,—his business. This force
of the character would be well brought out by
putting it low. 3d tone, but that would give the

ebservation a good meaning. 6. Jes

K. BA Ja Jo see Con. Ana. III. xx.

By the Hea statutes, every husbandman,—head
of a family,—received 90 mow, and paid the pro-

Pr. I. Cn. IH. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 117

Eres
«

Ba

[ d

o

SINEN
PEI

EN
“Neg

RI
ec

x
TIER.
Dp
X

RNS
5

S oe E
X

NALS EE BSS
SE
REXUER

v

v
vi
d

Shin
ab nt

Tare
$ NER
Jpn

i»
A

mer eee

a

RR
pa
yi

oe

ibe
aS

TH
uth
founder of the Chow aie the hundred mow allotment, and the
share system. In reality, what was paid in all these was a tithe.
The share system means mutual division. The aid system means `
mutual dependence.. l

7. “Lung said, ‘For regulating the lands, there is no better
system than that of mutual aid, and none.which is not better than
that of taxing. By the tax system, the regular amount was fixed by
taking the average of several years, In good years, when the grain lies
about in abundance, much might be taken without its being oppress-
ive, and the actual exaction would be small. But in bad years,
the produce being not sufficient to repay the manuring of the fields,
this system still requires the taking of the full amount. When the
parent of the people causes the people to wear looks of distress, and,
after the whole year’s toil, yet not to be able to nourish their parents,
so that they proceed to borrowing to increase their means, till the

pm
IE
ia

»

duce of five of them to the government. This to Peih Chen. 7. Of the Lung quoted
payment was the I By those of Yin, 630 here, all that Chaou K‘e and Choo Ie say, is that

mow were divided into 9 equal allotments of 70 he was ‘an ancient worthy.’ JEPE issid to be

mow each, the central one being reserved for the synonym ih XE pO inet ,
sre ous with meaning ‘abundant.’ .
government, and 8 families on the other allot- ynony i JR H' g

ments uniting in its cultivation. By those of That this is the signification is plain enough,
Chow, to one family 100 mow were assigned, and but how the characters come tọ indicate it is
ten families cultivated 1000 acres in common, not clear. jR means ‘a wolf,’ and Zh is given
dividing the produce, and paying a tenth to . 5 * $
government. Such is the account here given 72 Connection with that character as meaning
‘the appearance of things scattered about in
t

by Mencius, but it is very general, and not to be
taken, especially as relates to the system of the confusion.” I can’t find any signification of Bé,
‘crooked, perverse, &c,' from which, as joined to

Chow dynasty, as an accurate exposition of it.
More in accordance with the accounts in the
1 we can well bring out the meaning. HES

Chow Le is his own system recommended below

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK lH.

>,

A
ET
zu

RENAIS

9E

yos

P217 44]
IN
P4

ez

E

N

ANNA

dg
v

v
A”

REESE
EHE

[ d

S
BE
parus
zi

Pa
EB
ENF

n
zi
Hi

N

ub
3
=

old people and children are found lying in the ditches and water-
BEER :—where, in such a case, is his parental relation to the
eople
P 8. * As-to the system of hereditary salaries, that is already ob-
served in Ting.’
.9.. “It is said in the Book of Poetry,
‘May the rain come down on our public field,
And then upon our private fields!’
It is only in the system of mutual aid that there is a public field, and
from this passage we perceive that even in the Chow dynasty this
system has been recognized.

10. “Establish ts‘éang, seu, hed, and heaou,—all those educational
institutions, —for the instruction of the people. The name ts'éang in-
dicates nourishing as its object; heaou indicates teaching; and sew
indicates archery. By the Hea dynasty, the name Aeaou was used ;
by the Yin, that of seu; and by the Chow, that of ísfdang. As to
the hed, they belonged to the three dynasties, and by that name.
The object of them all is to illustrate the human relations. When

Jg is taken by Chaou Ke as in the translation,
and by Choo He as==‘ an angry-looking appear-
ance,’ which does not suit so well. pit a ‘to

lift up,’ =‘ to proceed to.’ e (up. 1st tone),

XE E A ER 4 Bee I. Pt. I. iv. 15.
SE

low. 1st tone. TH je —see I. Pt
TI. v.3.

9. See the Slie-king, I. vi. Ode VIII.
st. 3, a description of husbandry under the Chow

. dynasty. RS. the verb, up, 3d tone. The object
‘of the quotation is to show that the system of

mutual aid obtained under the Chow as well as
under the Yin dynasty, and the way is prepared
for the instructions given to Peih Chen below.

10. After the due regulation of hus-
bandry, and provision for the *certain liveli-
hood’ of the people, must. come the business of
education. The é mentioned were schools of a
higher erder in the capital of the ,empire and
ether chief cities of the various States, ‘The

others qa. heaou, low. 3d tone) were schools
in the villages and smaller towns. In the Le
Ke, V. v. 10, we find the ts'éang mentioned in

connection with the time of Shun; seu in con-
+

Pr L Cu. UL THE WORKS OF MEXCIUS.

RUPES
2b

YA
nva

Hr

MER
VAISS
(HH?
BER RII

n, fl 1 ^ VN.
EF EFIR EET)

<T Jy V P ES 3.
^4 RAAT EHK KH
1E, 6, m T GJ s Bali r3

Se

b
JF IA l »
Ji, ae OR BR
d. ’ M è -h BM er
those are thus illustrated by superiors, kindly feeling will prevail
among the inferior people below. s
11. “Should a real sovereign arise, he will certainly come and
take an example from you; and thus you will be the teacher of the
true sovereign.
12. “It is said in the Book of Poetry,
* Although Chow was an old country,
It received a new destiny.’ i
That is said with reference to king Wan. Do you practise those
things with vigour, and you also will by them make new your king-
dom.” l
13. The duke afterwards sent Peih Chen to consult Mencius about
. the nine-squares system of dividing the land. Mencius said to him,
“Since your prince, wishing to put in practice a benevolent govern-
ment, has made choice of you and put you into this employment,
you must exert yourself to the utmost. Now, the first thing towards
a benevolent government must be to lay down the boundaries. If

nection with the Hea dynasty; 4é in connection , pith of Mencius’ advice is— Provide the means
with the Yin; and Kecou (HZ) in connection of education for'alH, the poor as well as the
with the Chow. There is thus a want of har- rich.’ 12. See the She-king, IIL. i. Ode I.

niony between that passage and the account in : š ; E E
the text. Entertainments were given to the aged St. 1. E [in ;—' the appointment,’ ie, W hich
lighted on it from Heaven. 13. To under- .

at different times, and in the schools, as an
stand the *nine-squares division of the land,’ the

example to the young of the reverence accorded
the govt. to age. th t 1 lected ; :
by the govt, to age: EO the'sehoole were selec fórm of the character 3t needs only to be looked
at. If we draw lines to enclose it—thus, —

- = SN

E

è

No

NC

for the practice of archery, as a trial of virtue

and skill. yx: AA Pe bns can hardly

mean, ‘when the human relations have been

illustrated by the example of superiors,’ but
must have reference to the inculeation of those
relations by the institution of schools. The

we have a square portion of ground divided
into nine equal and smaller squares. But can
we suppose it possible to divide a territery in

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK II,

:

Rane
>

38
el

ves
ARI

NI eee ee
 => Se
Are
Hn
Ly

ASI alse

b
"4

M
SE
Sr

3
K

HO

SRE
=
is

E

EMPE
KE

ja
E HI, H A A j Has
thé boundaries be not defined correctly, the division of the land
into squares will not be equal, and the produce available for salaries
"vill not be evenly distributed. On this account, oppressive rulers
and impure ministers are sure to neglect this defining of the bound-
aries. When the boundaries have been defined correctly, the division
of the fields and the regulation of allowances may: be determined
by you, sitting at your ease.

14. “Although the territory of T'áng is narrow and small, yet
there must be in it men of a superior grade, and there must be in
it country-men. If there were not men of a superior grade, there
would be none to rule the country-men. If there were not country-
men, there would be none to support the men of superior grade.

15. “I would ask you, in the remoter districts, observing the
nine-squares division, to reserve one division to be cultivated on the
system of mutual aid, and in the more central parts of the kingdom,
to make the people pay for themselves a tenth part of their produce.
. 16. “From the highest officers down to the lowest, each one
must have his holy field, consisting of fifty mow.

`
*

\

this way? The natural irregularities of the

tion. as opposed to must be un-
surface would be one great obstacle. And we

find below the ‘holy field,’ and other assign-
ments, which must continually have. been
requiring new arrangement of the boundaries.

14. ,—here, generally, for officers,
men not earning their bread by the sweat of
their brow, and the toil of their hands; see
next chapter. gj Ae country-men,’= by

their toil self-supporting people generally. He.

» i y
= Fe; Wee a= FS DIA FR. 15. Here
the systems of all the three dynasties would
seem to be employed, as the nature of the coun-

try permitted, or made advisabie, their applica-

derstood, as in the translation, —' the country,’
‘the remoter districts. ‘The JL refers to JN

H in par. 13, and the — to En TE The
former would be the best way in such positions
of supporting the B A and the latter of.
supporting the pis F. Similarly, the other
16. E is explained by Chaou
K'e by PR and Choo He follows him, though
we do not find this meaning of the term in the
dictionary. The zE HH. then is ‘the clean
field, and as its produce was intended to sup-

clause.

121

Pr. Í. Cu. TIL THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

v

RENA
ESHt

v

T
AX

zi DIE

sre
+m

Sees
FARG,

DAT
=

a
cr +0

TiS Mee
a

i
SS

TAN

Iy
"NUR

E>

Pu

3

N
E

V
dm
—

er

e

=
+11

eres
a
JS

A eins
ies
DB

H

17. “Let the supernumerary males have their twenty-five mow.

18. . “On occasions of death, or removal from one dwelling to
another, there will be no quitting the district. In the ficlds of a
‘district, those who belong to the same nine squares render all friendly
offices to one another in their going out and coming in, aid one
another in keeping watch and ward, and sustain one another in sick-
ness. Thus the people are brought to live in affection and harmony.

19. “A square le covers nine squares of land, which nine squares
contain nine hundred mow, The central square is the public field,
and eight families, each having its private hundred mow, cultivate
in.common, the public field. And not till the publie work. is finish-
ed, may they presume to attend to their private affairs. This is the
way by which the country-men are distinguished from those of a
superior grade,

20, “Those are the great outlines of the system,

Happily to
modify and adapt it depends on the prince and you, ;
ie, in burying, 19, Under the Chow
dynasty, 100 poo or.‘ paces’ made a mow’s length,
but the exact amount of the pace can hardly be `

ply the means of sacrifice, I translate it by ‘the
oly field,’ It was in addition to the hereditary
salary mentioned in pax. 3. 17. A family
was supposed to embrace the grandfather and

grandmother, the husband, wife, and children,
the husband being the grandparents’ eldest son.
The extra fields were for other sons whom they
might have, and were given to them when they
were sixteen, When they marricd and became
heads of families themselves, they received the
regular allotment for a family. This is Choo
He's account of this paragraph. . 18. The
moral benefits flowing from the nine-squares
division of the land. ‘On occasions of death,’

ascertained. Many contend that the 50 mow of
Hea, the 70 of Yin, and the-100 of Chow, wera
actually of the same dimensions. g, low. 3d
tone, so spoken always, when the subject is 2
support of a superior by an inferior.

dc (low. 1st tone), = E M. 3B] "

a softening and nivistening,’ ie. the modi:
fying and adapting.

16

N
t3

NE
my

go

h
j

"m

—
p
«5

ERY

\
"

De

\
d
NS
/

um»

EUN

CnarrER IV.

o

SPB

E

THE WORKS OF

To de 1E, it 4

MENCIUS. BOOK H,

a
MR
v
E
zN ii

3I

AMENS
S

-AN I )
=!
MZ.

v
Ner
pe

& SEIT
DS yates

n

(HE

BNE

lf

AJ H, Es S ri

1. There eame from Ts‘0o to T'ang one Heu Iling,

who gave out that he.acted accordiug to the words of Shin- nung.

Coming right to his gate, he addressed the duke Wán,

5

TUN

Suy ing,

man of a distant region, I have heard that you, Prince, are practising .
a benevolent government, and I wish to reccive a site for a house, and

to become one of your people."
ing-place.

The duke Wan gave him a dwell-
His disciples, amounting to several tens, all wore clothes

of haircloth, and made sandals of hemp and wowe mats for a living.
2. Atthe same time, Ch*in Seang, à disciple of Ch*in Leang, and
his younger brother, Sin, with their plough-handles and shares on

Ca. 4. "Mrxorus? REFUTATION OF THE DOC-
TRINE THAT THE RULER OUGHT TO LABOUR AT
HUSBANDRY WITH JUS OWN HANDS. He VINDI-
CATES THE PROPRIETY OF THE DIVISION OF LA-

BOUM, AND OF A LETTERED. CLASS CONDUCTING
GOVERNMENT, The first three paragraphs, it is

said, relate how Iing, the heresiarch, and Seang
his follower, wished secretly to destroy the
arrangements advised by Mencius for the divi-
sion of the land. ‘The next cight parr. expose
the head error of Hing, that the ruler must
labour at the toils of husbandry as well the
people. From the [2th par. to the 16th, Seang
is rebuked for forsaking his master, aud taking
up with Hing's heresy. In the last two parr.

Mencius proceeds, from the evasive replies of

Seang, to give the coup de g grace to the new
Ves H $
pernicious e L Fi is is explained,

by Chaou Ke, by y wy ya fuv and zy Ej asmi,
$0 that Si A. tone who cultivated
the doctrines.’ pe others take = fk
E: ‘making a false - pretence of” Shin-nung,
* Wonderful husbandman’ is the style of the
2d of the five famous a or radi of

Chinese history. He is also called Yen ey. He)

Te, ‘the Blazing emperor” He is placed be-
tween Fub-he, and Uwang Te, though separat-
ed from the latter by an intervention of seven

rr a i a a

reigns, extending with his own over 515 years.
If any faith could be reposen in this chrono-
logy, it would place him s.c. 3272 — lu the
appendix: to the Yih-king, he is celebrated
as the Father of husbandry. Other traditions
make him the Father of medicine also.

TR Z is the verb,= ff. pif, iu the dict.,
after Chaou K‘e, is explained by Æ, ‘came to.”
Choo He says that mg "T = ie E: PH: ji
and tk. see Pt. IL v. 5, but the meaning of pii
here is different, denoting the ground assigned
for the dwelling of a husbandman. K (up. 8d
tone), $5 would appear from par. 4, that
this ‘haircloth’ was a very inartificial structure,
not woven at least with any art. Ki sandals
of hemp,’ opposed to BE, which were made of
ID,’ OPE Bie whi y

grass, and which were made of leather.

HA is explained by du 1X, ‘to beat and
hammer.’ m properly denotes single mats
made of rushes E : 7B This manufacture

of sandals and mats is supposed in the fii t

to.have been only a temporary employment of
Hiug's followers till lands should be assigucd

Pr. I. Ca. IV.

-THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 23

&
EH
S:

pS SS SE Te

ex

1

-

un e me iis

DR T EE Ier:

=e e H 40 2 d

M bL y qe EE dni SE Bee

UPPIPLTUE

P GEB T3
rj

>
PEO SNA Y

v

TESHA
PISS

a

S

e
Ld

SOMMER

IBS

-

She TI
Ee
SS In atv

xi
=
Sh

4^

their backs, came from Sung to Ting, saying, * We have heard that
you, Prince, are putting into practice the government of the ancient
sages, showing that you are likewise a sage. We wish to become
the subjects of a sage." .

3. When Chín Seang saw Heu Hing, he was greatly pleased
with him, and, abandoning entirely whatever he had learned, became
his disciple. Having an interview with Mencius, he reláted to him
with approbation the words of Heu Hing to the following effect :—
‘The prince of T'íng is indeed a worthy prince. He has not yet
heard, however, the real doctrines of antiquity. Now, wise and able
princes should cultivate the ground equally and along with their
people, and eat the fruit of their labour. They should prepare their own
meals, morning and evening, while at the same time they carry on
their government. But now, the prince of T'ang has his granaries,
treasuries, and arsenals, which is an oppressing of the people to
nourish himself.—How can he be deemed a real worthy prince?"

4. Mencius said, “J suppose that Heu Hing sows grain and eats

them. 2. Of the individuals mentioned

here, we know nothing more than can be
gathered from this chapter. The 3B. or

, Share, as originally made by Shin-nung, "was
of wood. In Mencius’ time, it had come to

be made of iron; sce par, 4, Z Hi
DET

Wi P dre

as above. 8.

—iá is the verb, = fi

in L Pt, I ii, 1.
IE.

denote the moruing

and evening meals, but must be taken here as
verbs, signifying the preparation of those meals.
If B and ja are to be distinguished, the latter
is a granary for rice, the former for other grain.
2s low. 3d tone.. The object of Heu Hing in.
these remarks would be to invalidate Mencius'
doctrine given in the last chap., par. 14, that
‘the ruler must be supported by the country-
men, 4. Observe the force of D ve AB,

-

 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK IFL
124
» m
tS AY e
D » > > D ` mU n

D
EE E NS ENS

J
Se

N
*

ORE

v

Q
v

HW NN
THS
EE

=

v

HE

cM
^
*

DAAA Sede TT

w

ct

v

MES
m

N
4
4

À

v
v

mA
RUNE.
DM

i

L3
v
v

&

we.
-
r.

Q

T
SP

T
zi

SS ah
Wu
~

ENI

SENNEN
T
NDE
Ay

^x o^ wo = : 4
D AS, H, p AES: JA TER W

the produce, Isit notso?” “It is so,” was the answer. “I sup-
pose also he weaves cloth, and wears his own manufacture. Isit not
so?” “No. Heu wears clothes of haircloth.” “Does he wear a
cap?" “He wears a cap.” “What kind of cap?” ‘A plain cap,”
“Ts it woven by himself?” “No. He gets it in exchange for grain."
* Why does Hu not weave it himself?" * That would injure his
husbandry.” “ Does Heu cook his food in boilers and earthen-ware
pans, and does he plough with an iron share?” “Yes.” “Does he
make those articles himself?” “No. He gets them in exchange
for grain."

5. Mencius then said, “The getting those various articles in ex-
change for grain, is not oppressive to the potter and the founder, and
the potter and the founder in their turn, in exchanging their various
articles for grain, are not oppressive to the husbandman. How should

as in the translation. ‘stocks,’ but also used synonymously with

20 I have added a sentence to bring out
shy. ERE —— moe
the force of p in = OS Z z
_Choo He puts a point at (i and taking dr
(up. 3d tone) in the sense of IE ‘only,’ con-

strues it with what follows. This is better
than to join it, in the sense of house or shop,

EE millet,’ but here==
=

grain generally. K. 3d tone. 76b x.

t His cap is plain,’ Ze, undyed and unadorned
"The distinction given by Choo He between E
and p is, that the former was-used for boiling,

nnd the latter for steaming. Their composition
indicates that they were made of iron and clay

respectively. The 2e was distinguished from
other iron boilers by "having no feet. 5.
z'he who gets, &c.' R—properly

with Kna Seang is here forced to make an

admission, fatal to his new master’s doctrine,
that every man should do every thing for hime

Pr. I. Cn. IV. TIE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 25
"
b

BR ^ E eA JN

BY ZA Py Ses du DA BE

A» R fh 4A, A
Hi ey euo Ih

Ti, h w yRsE L

l A PS

BITE

v

IS
[4
-

a
ST

RREY

(VH
VSS aps

s

*

> spat
rab

v

EN

v

DKON

3)

HPS EPH AN

v

EH

cu

NÆ
(VAS > m
cua

S/R

AES

"EP JUN

4
such a thing be supposed? And moreover, why does not Heu act
the potter and founder, supplying himself with the.articles which he
uses solely from his own establishment? Why does he go confusedly
dealing and exchanging with the handicraftsmen? Why does he .
not spare himself so much trouble?" Ch'in Seang replied, “The
business of the-handicraftsman can by no means be carried on along
with the business of husbandry.” m

6. Mencius resumed, “Then, is it the government of the empire
which alone can be carried on along with the practice of husbandry ?
Great men have their proper business, and little men have their pro-
per business. Moreover, in the case of any single individual, what-
ever articles he can require are ready to his hand, being, produced
by the various handicraftsmen :—if he must first make them for his
own use, this way of doing would keep the whole empire running .
about upon the roads. Hence, there is the saying, ‘Some labour
with their minds, and some labour with their strength. Those who
labour with their minds govern others; those who labour with their

self. The only difficulty is with the H. which. Some take 48 in the sense of ‘are all required,’
here‘ but.’ The two preceding sentences are which would make the construction simpler :—

Mencius’ affirmations, and he proceeds—‘ But
Heu Hing denies this. Why then does he not
himself play the potter and founder, &c ?'

ma A Si EELS Hr (A.

the construction is not easy. The correct mean-
jug seems to be that given in the translation.

‘for a single person even, all the productions
j of the handieraftsmen are necessary. So, in
the paraphrase of the H HE; Reckoning
in the case of a single individual, for his clothes,
his food, and his dwelling-place, the productions
of the various workers must all be completed

126 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK III.

E, a e E dt A A
Hy A wp zr 7k n 4
Be UL eS RIE BE SE A.
Tue YH "P i B xL
ii, vi Js. BI A, S JE HAS
(m A Fe SE ER Ee CA A
a ca Ti A] LUNA p p T
ae ey KML f
PET TIE. BINE SESS

Xt XX, ER ZA T3 É

strength are governed by others. Those who are governed by others
support them; those who govern others are supported by them.’
This is a principle universally recognized.

. 1. :*In the time of Yaou, when the world had not yet been per-
fectly reduced to order, the vast waters, flowing out of their channels,
made a universal inundation. - Vegetation was luxuriant, and birds
and beasts swarmed, The various kinds of grain could not be grown.
The birds and beasts pressed upon men. The paths marked by the
feet of beasts and prints of birds, crossed one another throughout
the Middle kingdom. To Yaou alone this caused anxious sorrow. He
raised Shun to office, and measures to regulate the disorder were sot .
forth. Shun committed to Yih the direction of the fire to be em-
ployed, and Yih set fire to, and consumed, the forests and vegetation
on the mountains and in the marshes, so that the birds and beasts
fled away to hide themselves. Yu separated the nine streams, cleared
the courses of the Tse and T‘%h, and led them all to the sea. He
in sufficiency, and then he has abundantly every , confused, chaotic, state, on which the successive
thing for profitable employment, and can with- sages had been at work, without any great
out anxiety support his children and parents.’ amount of success. Then in the next par. we

‘This gives a good enough meaning in the con- have How-tscih doing over again the work of

nection, but the signification attached to tis is Shin-nung and teaching men husbandry. We
i f can hatdly go beyond Yaou for the founding of
hardly otherwise authorised. [i] Bea and the Chinese empire. The various questions

: 2 which would arise here, however, will be found
road them =p i: -: È —low. 3d discussed in the first part of the Shoo-king.
tone, tsze. 7. KR 38 ES z It is only necessary to observe inreference to the

ealamity here spoken of, that it is not presented
‘Karri back to th eced ?
ies us back to the time antecedent to Faou, as the consequence of a.deluge, or sudden ac-

and R aS is to be-taken in the sense of cumulation of water, but from the natural river-
* world, or ‘earth. There is the idea of a wild channels being all broken up and disordered

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

ow

SH.

HGUET HSER
nu

mH

v

ER

v
v

I RAE BE SOIR IK

D WX PE M ED MA $

DEKRXULIPIIAS

ul m Zt. o AN pr
H Au A

R

T Ties EAR PSH,

—

GaN ait AE

Bo

N

E JN A FE ia

opened a vent also for EH Joo and Han, and regulated the course
of the Hwae and Sze, so that they all flowed into the Kéang. When
this was done, it became possible fór the people of the Middle king-
dom to cultivate the ground and get food for themselves. ` During that
time, Yu was eight years away from his home, and though he thrice’
passed the door of it, he did not enter. Although he had wished
to cultivate the ground, could he have done so?

8. ©The Minister of agriculture taught tlie people to sow ‘and
reap, cultivating the five kinds of grain. When the five kinds of
grain were brought to maturity, the people all enjoyed a comfort-
able subsistence. Now men possess.a moral nature; but if they are
well fed, warmly clad, and comfortably lodged, without being taught
at the same time, they become almost like the beasts. “This was a
subject of anxious solicitude to the sage Shun, and he appointed Seč
to be the Minister of instruction, to teach the relations of humanity:
—how, between father and son, there should be affection ; between

(i

Fi ow. 3d tone, ‘disobedient,’ ‘unreasonable, pos ==read T‘th. The nine streams all belonged
^ E eax =

m. ‘the five kinds of grains, are FA RE.

q BE, and 35b ‘paddy, millet, panicled
millet, wheat, and pulse,’ but each of these terms
must be taken as comprehending several varie-

ties under it. HA ed. in opposition to K

" is the portion of country which was first.
^ settled, and regarded as a centre to all surround-
2 : : TH H
ing territories. 2E fj p Z thé Jaj
seems to refer to Yaou’s position as emperor, in

which it belonged to him to feel this anxiety.
For the labours of Shun, Yih and Yu, see the

Shoo-king, Parts I, IL, HIL 2h up. 2d tone,

to the Ho, or Yellow river. By them Yu led offa
portion of its vast surging waters, ‘The Keang
is the Yang-tsze. Choo Ie observes that of the
rivers mentioned as being led into the Keang only
the Han flows into that stream, while the Elwae
receives the Joo and the Sze, and makes a direct
course to the sea. He supposes an error on the
part of the recorder of Mencius’ words. 8.
How-tseih, now received as a proper name, is
properly the official title of Shun’s Minister of
agriculture, K'e( b) 3, (read Sëč) was the
name of his Minister of instruction. For these

' men and their works, see the Shoo-king, Pt, IL
Fe, —used synonymously with

a

t

m"
bo
on

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK UL

=

a
WERN

v
[ d

a
Y
D

a

AWS

BN

e

*

v

HNA NY

gr

SAd

w

WENER

K i
v

TSN

ER

TANANEN

E
[ d
w

WEDA S

-

JRSM
(N

San
WE

EC

! b

F h EI E:

sovereign, and minister, righteousness; between husband and wife,
attention to their separate functions ; between old and young, a proper
. order; and-between friends, fidelity. .The highly meritorious em-
peror said to him, ‘Encourage them; lead them on; rectify them ;
straighten them ; help them ; give them wings :—thus causing them
to become possessors of thémselves. Then follow this up by stimu-
lating them, and conferring benefits on them. When the sages
were exercising their solicitude for the people in this way, had they
leisure to cultivate the ground? r

9. “What Yaou felt giving him anxiety, was the not getting
Shun. What Shun felt giving him anxiety was the not getting Yu
and Kaou-yaou. But he whose anxiety is about his hundred mow
not being properly cultivated, is a mere husbandman.

2

Hi

ddi» E

SONS HOS

plant,’ or ‘sow,’ A x Ei iB ,—Ihave

 understood with reference to Shun only. What
translated according to Choo He’s view of the

has made HH A be taken as plural, is that the

meaning, in which he is now universally follow-
ed, so far as I know. It requires the understand-
ing, however, of HH ‘or wm before the next

clause, which does not appear to me to be ad-
missible. Chaou K'ʻe, orat least his paraphrast,
understands it thus:—‘Thus, men were provided
with a proper course for their nourishment,
' They might be well fed and clothed, but with all
this, if they arenot taught, they become, &c.' This
avoids the harshness of understanding any thing

before iil, but the interpretation, otherwise, is

not natural. May we not take A x A
1l as synonymous with the clause RZ $3

3d th, inch.iii.par.2? "The translation would
then be—'* Now, the way of men is this:—if
they are well fed, &c. m is supposed to
be plural;—‘thẹ sages.’ This, however, cannot
be, as the fü immediately following must; be

*

instructions addressed to Sëč are said to be

from Visa (up. 2d tone) Sy, which are two

of the epithets applied to Yaou in the opening
sentence of the Shoo-king, who is therefore
supposed to be the speaker. Yet it was Shun
who appointed Sé%, and gave him his in-
structions, and may not Mencius intend Aim
by ‘The highly meritorious’? The address

itself is not found. in the Shoo-king. # X and

3k are both low. 8d. tone. In X ik A

Mj. 3j is the up. 4th tone, —' separate func-
tions, according to which the husband is said
to preside over all that is external, and the wite
over all that is internal, while to the. former it
belongs to lead, and to the latter to follow.

9.
Anillustration of the 8 KR A Z HR, AZ
ay A Hs. in par. 6. À —read e, low. 3d

 tone, in the sense of ya (low. Ist tone).

~~

is
cau

vy
à
[Nd

sv

Pr. I. Cu. IV. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 139
Zr SU ETYCK m pz
AL AN SN 4 ni
$5 o. 25, 0,35 EL X HEAR
LIX UP. Au
y
Zi

SES

M nhe z
ra AS Da XE A EIN =
> »
BB. MEI p 7 c Hr, L3
"n X TRY: zi

HFEA

n
Saws p»

RERRRTTUNE

A

Seis

SEES
NS
=
nea

HSN

Į

pies

3

NE
CX

AY)
rH

Jo TW A.

10. “The imparting by a man to others of his wealth, is called ‘a
kindness. The teaching others what is good, is called *the exercise
of fidelity.” The finding a man who shall benefit the empire, is
called ‘benevolence.’ Hence to give the empire to another man
would be easy ; to find a man who shall benefit the empire is difficult.

11. “Confucius said, ‘Great, indeed was Yaou as a sovereign.
It.is only heaven that is great, and only Yaou corresponded to it.
How vast was his virtue. The people could find no name for it.
Princely indeed was Shun! » How majestic was he, having possession
of the empire, and yet seeming as if it. were nothing to him!’ In
their governing the empire, were there no subjects on which Yaou:
and Shun employed their minds? There- were subjects, only they

* did not employ their minds on the cultivation of the ground. `’

12. “I have heard of men using the doctrines of our great land to

change barbarians, but I have never yet heard of any being changed

"

~

SHON Ec Pr

virtue, the combination of all possible: virtues.
Comp. Ana. VI. xxviii. 11. See Con. Ana.
Vili. xvii. and xix, which two chapters

10. jsp ov 3d tone, ‘on behalf of;/—who

shall benefit. D —read as above, but mean-

ing ‘easy.’ The difficulty spoken of arises from
this, that to find the man in question requires
the finder to go out of himself, is beyond what
is in his own power. ‘The reader must bear in

mind that {= is the name. for the highest

Mencius blends together with omissions and

alterations. Observe the force of JR in the

last clause. It==‘there were subjects, on which

they employed their minds, but still, &c.’

I2. H. and FAY ,—used as in Con, Ana, HL
17

130 . THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK Ut

Se
w4 0.
y
G
5

a
Xu
penn
‘AS

^N

S

QS

Da

PU
EARS

St
Net I
ES

SNR

AE

TM
WAGNER ESSE

ms

zz
=
ee
S

-NS
Ta
aA

g

AASF

v
e

EEFDE

Ld

Ke RPS RTI

RE
ausis

TRAE

=

LES
k BII EE
H FRA LRZ HK,

by barbarians. Ch'in Leang was a native of Ts‘oo. Pleased with
the doctrines of Chow- kung and Chung-ne, he came northwards to
the Middle kingdom and studied them. Among the scholars of the
northern regions, there was perhaps none who excelled him. He
was what you call a scholar of high and distinguished qualities.
You and your brother followed him some tens of years, and when
. your master died, you have forthwith turned away from him.

» 13. “ Formerly, when Confucius died, after three years had
elapsed, his disciples collected their baggage, and prepared to return
to their several homes. But on entering to take their leave of Tsze-
kung, as they looked towards one another, they wailed, till they all
lost their voices. After this they returned to their homes, but
Tsze-kung went back, and built a house for himself on the altar-
ground, where he lived alone other three years, before he returned
home. On another occasion, Tsze-hea, Tsze-chang, and Tsze-yew,

c
thinking that Yew Jò resembled the sage, wished to render to him

v Fe, —the verb, up. 3d tone. -F- x X HALo low. 1st tone, ‘looked after their

mur your "brothers, but as inthe transla- burdens. Tsze-kung had acted to all his co-
disciples as master of the ceremonies. Hence

E ; f Middle ki they took a format leave of him. p is a flat
pre Oe i6 here excluded irom “Fhe” Middle king- place, an area scooped out upon the surface, and

PE .
dom of Mencius’ time. 13. On the death used primarily to’ sacrifice upon. Here it de-

2.

SRE
“AND

v

ERU

tion; comp. par, 2. fa-. —ÜObserve how

of Confucius; his disciples remained by his grave notes such an area formed upon the sage" s grave,
for three years, mourning for him as for a i On Yéw Jó's resemblance to Confucius, see tlie

father, but without w caring the mourning dress. Book of Rites, II. Pt. I. iii 4. "nb —low, 2d

Pr. T. Cu. IV. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 31

XM CI.
isl

3n

ES

SEN ESS

AN
HENAN HANA
=

&

a mn
PES
SEHN

oe

wv
H

v

EAM

"T
C EX.

ye
a

DES
= x=
+N

Ml.

v

SHENA
S:
RA
BEES
-

n
aN

LS
-
»
-
~
t
r.
[ d

.
WE
V
c
SLE

EEUN yn

RHO

a Ke
SIG
BE

RE+O
2v

X

EM
ns

[ d
v

BENE
w

So
M
DE
A
INA
b

N

rh
S
i
Š%

w
E
LZ
Ae
E

1

v

a
=

T

igne

Ux rb zz.

the same observances which they had rendered to Confucius. They
tried to force the disciple Tsíng to join with them, but he said,

*'This may not be done. What has been washed in the waters of
the Keang and Han, and bleached in the autumn sun :—how glisten-
ing is it! Nothing can be added to it.’

j4. “Now here is this shrike- tongued barbarian of the south,
whose doctrines are not those of the ancient kings. You turn away
from your master and become his disciple. Your conduct is different
indeed from that of the philosopher Tsing. -

15. “I have heard of birds leaving “dark valleys to remove to
lofty trees, but I have not heard of their. descending from lofty trees
to enter into dark valleys.

16. “In the Praise-songs of Loo it is said,

‘He smote the barbarians of the west and the north,
He punished King and Seu.”
Thus Chow-kung would be sure to smite them, and you become
their disciple again ; it appears that your change is not good.” `

tone. -Æ ke —low. 4th tone, puh. fij rend haou, FZ, —as above. 15. NT as a verb, low,

9 >. ; 3d tone. 16. See the Book of Poetry, IV. ii.
Jove ZA tOn Or kadr Up: 2d; fa jm Comp. Ode IV. st. 6. The two clauses quoted refer to the
EVA fig x Ana, IV. vii. 1. 14. že- achievements of the duke He. Mencius uses

Lay s " z at a þa i 1
“the shrike, or butcher bird,’ a strong epithet of them as if they expressed the ee of his

contempt or dislike, as applied to Heu Hing. ancestor Chow-kung. 17. ji »—read kea,

4

TUE WORKS

peat

oo
bho
i

"d

zu

iw
ANATA

T

do
s

=
pes
CS

E

RE

d
v

ONE SUES

N

v

SAŠ

J

ES

v
e

AMEA

bu

TENS

E

KASN

gd
Emm

n

17.
there would not be two prices in
kingdom.
would impose on him; linen and

T^h

JS, JC AH ET ij

UN S

Ch'in Seang said, “If Heu’s doctrines were followed, then

OF MENCIUS. BOOK Itt.

d

*.

3g

us
NI
ENG
=
Š

N

"E
„fl, 2 HME T
AHI] RE x^

Sa
[

:

pad
mn

v

HAMAN

v

NANG

TENA

V
4

J

ZR

Ste

=
>-
yy

w

hu], Ze. n Be
SO e Ji i.

vu
thy
an!

v
v

the market, nor any deceit in the

If.a boy of five cubits were sent to the market, no one

silk of the same length would be

of the same price. So it would be with bundles of hemp and silk, being
of the same weight; with the different hanks of grain, being the same
‘in quantity; and with shoes which were of the same size.”

18: Mencius replied, “ It is the nature of tliings to be of unequal
quality. Some are twice, some five times, some ten times, some a hun-
dred times, some a thousand times, some ten thousand times as
valuable as others. If you reduce them all to the same standard, that
must throw the empire into confusion. If large shoes and small shoes

were of the-same price, who would make them?

For people to

‘follow the doctrines of Heu; would be for them to lead one another

‘on to practise deccit.
State?”

“up. 3d tone (B. RR Pu Ti see Con.
' Alia. VIH. vi. PRE KR BR must be joined

together, Y think, in pairs, in opposition to the
hi t above, the manufactured articles. [d

is explained, in the at Bs by 15 ‘threads,’

and may be used of silk or flax. Bs is explain: -
ania

How can they avail for the government of a

ed, also in the st pe by (hi Luna ‘spoiled,
oy bad, floss? Its general application is to floss
of an inferior quality. 18. (different
from that in parr. 12, 15, meaning ‘as much
again.’ AH —3JH d are separated from each
other,’ or ‘are to each other as? The size of the
shoes is mentioned as a thing more palpable

Pr. I. Cn. V. ] THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 1 3 3

H

.

ELS Shh

-

is
e
ow

ACESS
fr

ns
T
,

:

muU
ZI

EEEN
SA N DT] EN NEA

AMS

!

f

v
v

e
H
PINT

-

BH
ien
ARTE
i

iS
=

=
Sz
a
B

NL
BEIA

e ERN REN S
CF

Ri
Nae

Cuartrer V. 1. The Mihist, E Che, sought, through Seu Peih,
to see Mencius. Mencius said, “ I indeed wish to see him, but at
present I am still unwell. When Iam better, I will myself. go and’
see him. E need not come here again.”

2. Next day, Æ Che again sought to see Mencius. Mencius: said,
“To day I am ‘able to see him. But if'I do not correct his errors,
the true principles will not be fully evident. Let me first correct
him. I have heard that E is a Mihist. Now Mih considers that in
the regulation of funeral matters a spare simplicity should be ‘the
rule. E thinks with Mih’s doctrines to change the customs of the
empire ;—how does he regard them as if they were wrong, and not

than their quality, and exposing more easily ness, and told E Che that he need: not come
the absurdity of Heu’s proposition. again to see him fo try his sincerity. It is to
Cu. 5. How MENCIUS CONVINCED A MiHrsT be understood that Che had intimated that he
OF HIS ERROR, THAT ALL MEN WERE TO BE LOVED was dissatisfied with his Mihism, and Mencius
EQUALLY, WITHOUT DIFFERENCE OF DEGREE. would be guided in his judgment of his really
1. Mih, by name 2A, (read Teih), was a being se, by testing his desire to get an inter-
heresiarch between the times of Con. and Men, YOW with him. it is difficult to express, the
His distinguishing principle was that of univer- force of the particle aS ‘Myself’? comes near

sal and equal love, which he contended would , i
remedy all the evils of society. See next part, it. Be pa xi is Menciu? remark, and
Chaou K‘e is wrong, when he carries it on to

ch.ix,etal. (It has bsen contended lately, how-

ever, by the Rev. Joseph Edkins, that Mencius’ the next par., and construes—‘ E in consequence
account of Mih’s views is unfair. See Journal of did not then come, but another day, Res 104
4th, H: ‘another day; probably, ‘next day."

the North-China Branch of the Royal Asiatic
Society, No. II. Some of Mih’s writings remain,

The repetition of the application satisfied. Men-
cius that Che was really anxious to be instructed.

and I hope tọ be able to procure a copy, in time
I8. Choo Ie says, =# = = VIE; ‘to

to give some notice of them in the prolegomena.)
fk hé (read Peih or P'eih) was a disciple of
expound the truth fully to correct him.’ He
Paso Yd

Mencius. The philosopher, acc. to the opinion
of Choo He, was well enough, but feigned sick-

\
\

H

THE WORKS

S

`
RED am:
Ld
-

D

EBS `

OF MENCIUS. BOOK it

` What does this expression mean ?

2t yy te
JA uh ve H x
E USE m g Ei
LY TES A t,
FSM Ph we yr
dy He EE AE. fl
Al FAG PE BS x
a TTOTERIB j.
EA RG UE EA ER.

honour them? Notwithstanding his views, E buried his parents in a
sumptuous manner, and so he served them in the way which Jus
doctrines discountenance."

3. The disciple Seu informed E of these remarks. E said, “ Even
according to the principles of the learned, we find that the ancients
acted towards the people, ‘as af they were watching over an infant."
To me it sounds that we are to
love all without difference of degree; but the manifestation of love
must begin with our parents." Seu reported this reply to Mencius,
who said, * Now, does E really think that a man's affection for the
child of his brother is merely like his affection for the infant of a

neighbour?

What is to be laid hold of in that expression is simply

this :—-that if an infant crawling about is about to fall.into a well,

H-H, low. 3d tone. REE Z

EENE
LA

H. is here HE, ‘will’? "The tit E says A

that Bt ACE 5j x *jt is used with refer-
encé to the not readily granting E an interview.’
Mencius wanted to put the applicant right, bo-
fore conversing with him. We are to suppose
that, after the acknowledgment in the concl. par.,
he admitted E to his presence. ‘This principle
about conducting funerals, or mourning generat-
ly, ina spare and inexpensive manner, was a sub-
ordinate point of Mih’s teaching, and Mencius
knowing that E Che had not observed it, saw
how he could lead him on from it to see the error

‘of the chief principle of the sect. H and Hg

'are both verbs. - 8, Che attempts to show
, that the classical doctrine likewise bad the

ot

See the
LEAK fF quoted in the ‘Great Learu-

ing,’ Comm. ix, 2. Z BY =Z is the name
»

of the speaker. zÉ read ts‘ze, * uneven.’ ze

principle of equal and universal love.

ee uneven degrees. E Che does not at-

tempt to vindicate the sumptuous interment of

his parents ;—he says hdi, EH kf i not know-
ing what to say. ge—ov. 1st tone. RA
IK T (=) 1l with what follows, re-

quires to be supplemented by the reader :— The
child's falling into the well being thus from no
perverse intent, but the consequence of its help-
lessness, people will all try to save it; aud the

a

Pr. I. Cn. V. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 135

<

J
v

al

ERES Lote
A

E
PEH

NATAN
IN

M

vé

er
o

1
x.
i

`

[ d

=
=
eek

ae

—
abu
EIE
=
 NASSEN
T EENS

Ha Ay AN
A th Wi EI.
DL, Ay ni zn it Ze HL
KR P OL Za Ze BE BE,

it is no crime in the infant. Moreover, Heaven gives birth to crea-
tures in such a way- that they have one root, and E makes them to
have two roots. "This is the cause of his error.

4. “And, in the most ancient times, there were some who did not
inter their parents. When their parents died, they took them up
and threw them into some water-channel. Afterwards, when passing
by them, they saw foxes and wild-cats devouring them, and flies and
gnat biting at them. The perspiration started out upon their fore-

eads, and they looked away, unable to bear the sight. It was not on
account of other people that this perspiration flowed. The emotions of

people, liable to offend in ignorance, are to be) given by Noel. Reference is made indeed to the

* dealt with in the same way ;—to be instructed

and watched over. This is all that we can
find in the words which he quotes; Chaou K'e

makes H7 refer to E Che:—'he only takes a

part of the meaning. He loses the scope of the
whole, and clings to the word infant, This is
ingenious, but does not seem sound. The ‘one
root’ is the parents (and the seed in reference
to inanimate things, but the subject is all about

men, and hence the fii H sys that Pi is to
be taken as— Ad. to whom therefore should be
given a peculiar affection. Mih saying that

other men should be loved as much, and in the
same way, as parents, nade two roots. The

ax is quite enigmatic, but it is explained as.I

have done, 4. , not exactly ‘for,’ but

as a more general continuative. J ulien trans-
lates the first clause : — Porro in superioribus sec-
ulis nondum erant qui sepelirent suos parentes,
and he blames Noel for rendering—' quidam
Jilü parentes suos tumulo non mandabant’ Men-
cius, he says, ‘is treating of all men, and not of
some only.’ I cannot, however, get over the

pom which would seem to require the rendering

highest antiquity an Iii». when the sages
had not yet delivered their rules of ceremonies,

but from the clause 3E 6: A y p, we may

infer that even then all were not equally unob-
servant of what was proper.
tone.

Sup. Ist
The passing by is not to be taken as
‘fortuitous. Their natural solicitude brought
them to see how it was with the bodies. ‘The

HK i is ‘ the fox.’ TH or gi isa name given

to diff. animals. We have the SPE, or ‘wild

 cat;’ the M pu which appears to be the * rac-

 coon ;' aud others, hE says Choo He, has no

 meaning, but is a drawl between the words be-
fore and after it. Some would take it for hih,
a kind of cricket. v },—comp. :

QUA.
JE Br EX PLE

HH. A —‘their middie heart,’ the very centre

of their being, E m -# = =‘ and forthwith,

NEU $ y TEM c Rh envi. Me LU Sed
136 THE WORKS Of MEXNCIUS. BOOK IN,

Be PUL eS
H4

ak TF Hid
Ze Fe VA ea BLN HU
XB FG BPS.

their hearts affected thee faces and. eyes, aid instantly’ they went:
homc and é came back with baskets and spades and covered,the bodies.
Ifthe’ cover ing them thus was indeed wight, you may see that the filial
son.'and virtuoüs man, in interring i a Ei manner their
arents, act according to a proper rule."
E The disciple Sen informed E of what M e died sid E
was thoughtful for a short time, and then said, “He has instructed

mé."

bit, what follows. ‘contains a z UE of viisi is’: tuous exhibition in the progress of civilization.

said before FEF KOZ ZA JR ie If any interment was right, a handsome one
area mache and: Ba te, ot darth, Must be right also. , 9. MIE BR: insthe
dict., is explained, as ‘the nppenrance of being
[A at dei la enjoined io tho: tonal surprised. ^ In Ana? XVII. vi. 4, Chub He
motes tin most edd, of Mencius), Tow. 1st tone: explains the phrase b $ T BR, * yexed-like,’
"he meaning of ás'obseure; that.of a spade p Tm y °
ot "shoyel rooden of course) is given, how- , T bave there translated—‘with a sigh." fu
ever, ‘bo it. , hë conclusion of the argument is
áhis, that: what affection prompted ‘in the first z -Z is is again the spe: aker's namg: fj i ”
cise was prompted similarly in its more sump-, in the sense of Zo ‘to instruct,’

«

Tr Th. Cm, L * "aii WORKS OF MENCIUS: 137

BOOK UL
s TANG WAN KUNG. PART IL -

—
BE
EY
3
E
Im
N

C

it
>
>
=
BS
(N
p
=

zh hy
AER
mfn
psu
i

X
NC
IR
=
Uu

=

H p

Cuarrer I. 1. Chin Tae said to Mencius, “In not going to wait
upon any of the princes, you seem to me to be standing on a small
point. If now you were once to wait upon them, the result might
be so great that you would make one of them emperor, or, if
smaller, that you would make one of them chief of all the other,
princes. Moreover, the, History says, ‘By bending only one cubit,
you make eight cubits straight. It appears to me like a thing
which might be done.” l

2. Mencius said, * Formerly, the duke King of Ts‘e, once when
he was hunting, called ‘his forester to him by a flag. . The forester
. would not come, and the duke was going to kill him, With
, Cu, 1, How MENCIUS DEVENDED TIE DIG- : were greatly employéd,' and LEES FA. It

NITY OF RESERVE, BY WHICH HE REGULATED HIS is better to take these terms as in the transta~

INTERCOURSE WITIL THE PRINCES OF HIS TIME, , T
To understand the chapter, it must be borne in , ton. he clauses must be expanded— R Hij

mind, that there wera many wandering scholars p> Á p d p E
in the days of Mencius, men who went from A H: E n EU a ZX il
court to court, recommending themselves to the ' `’ TF low. 8d tone. AE. see Pt, I. ii. 3. The

various princes, and trying to influence the pm ed x ; — ;
3 FN B Sit F Me s f
course of events by their counsels, ‘They would thing that might be done’ is Mencius’ going to

atoop for place and employment. Not so with ! wait on the princes, 2. The ie A vas an
eee philosophes yor that merg ahotiko officer as old as the time of Shun, who appoints

»e shown to himself’ a portion of the respec : N . S BREED
which was due to the principles of which he Yih ( 41 > Shoo-king, II. i. 22, saying that ‘he
was the expounder. 1. Chin Tae was one i could rightly superintend the birds and beasts
ine) deni 4. of the fields and trees on his hills, and in his

M : E A d = A Aon P AE 2.

of Mencius’ disciples > St C fk EJ forests” In the Chow Le, XVIL vi, we have
He T Ay BR, = in reason is as if it were an account of the office, where it appears, that,
r y £ j » on occasion of a great hunting, the forester had
sinall-like,’ K is said to be X HH . ‘If you , to clear the paths, and set up flags for the hun-

18

138 , THE WORKS OF, MENCIUS. BOOK UL

m

CM
5a
AE
SAH
Pea
EXER

>

LLLA EE!

\
/,

$us
&l

ote dt td this ineidenb, nfug ius said, * The: dete Ainet oficer never
ford S ihig h is end a Wi d ditch or stream x ; ‘the bre ave gfticer
ney fovea thi iU the may lose ibis hend." wW hat tn ds it inthe , Po
ko aw t
that*Con inst tirus sipproved ? s He approved, bis "fot. going to
the ke, kbón summoned by. ‘the atticle which wag n japprdp spiate
to hint. ‘If éne Bote sed the princes withoüt w: dting to be in\ited,
what can ibe thought: of him? i
n3. « Moreover, that sentence, ‘By - bending only one cubit, you
make, eight cubits straight, is- spoken with reference to the gain that
may. be got. ‘Tf gain be the object, then, if it cau be got by bend-
ing eigh it cubits to make one cubit straight, may we likewixe do that?
1. ee Formerly, the officer Chaou Keen made Wang Leang act as

charioteer for- his. favourite He, when, in the course of a whole day;
E x 1 .

ters to collect around, "There Hie charges’ are. fucius are found nowhere else. FU —hero= Pf,

the, ^hills and “marshes,’ and here, acc. to ^ g Ys

Chaow K'e and Choo He, they were'the *pre- {the head. JI E is a difficult phrase in the

serves and parks. Jn those times, the various connec tion. I have made, the best.of it I could,

officers had "their. several tokens, which the p : `
prince’s messenger. bore,-when she - was -sent to The first H 474 » plain enough the: eum

call any of them." ‘A forester's tokën, was a fur mons appropriate to him, Ae, to, a forester.
cap, and ‘the ongin” the. text would aiot: answer‘ We cannot lay so thuch: stress, however, on the

tpa summons v P it o See the incident i in Him the same phrase iv tle last sontende,:the
the- Jr Tit. HE A >+ 4B, where the subject of the chapter being tlie questioni bf
details however, 2 ‘Coane Judgment on Mencius’ waiting on the princes without being

it, are different. It is there said :— The prince called hy them atallo ,.,8 C llow. lst
of ‘Ese MASDAR SAARE ME irn cua a Ra H. Ae :
forester, w ih -a arto. As tho forester did hot one) i is more forcible and argumentative than

come, therprince had him seized, when he ex- E alone.. an VANI- Ju y St ÀJ $3
éuised’ hiniselt saying; Jn the hunting gs of former As

AAS The question in AK Ay Fo fi is an
princes, X X have been summoned with a ban- "wc
ye Peas : * k appedl to Tae’s ow ‘nh sense pf what Wa ; tight.
aS ef, aith a bow; and the forester with a fur admit what he asked in par. 1, any amount. uf
čap. As T did not sce the fur cap, T didnot vene evil might be done that good might come,
ture to approach, The duke on this dismissed Wis he prepared to allow that?

thé man. Chung-ne said, Me observed the law
of his office; tather than the ordinary rule of an? Chaou Keen (n was the posthumous opita

swering the summons. Superior men will approve His nanie was ; Yang) was a noble f T sjn,

f his act. H} —used for Mé or fn- "Theob- in’ the tiines* of Confucius, and Wanestle ihg
servations which must be taken as made by cpi wib Ma OE for his skill. Lcáng

Pr. IT. Cn. I. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

ER.

N
d

*

-
--
-
om

Sy
Hae

AE

mme

AN
d

ree
> `

AN

£

Ri 2

A

v
>

& I
a

—
Eien

'"Z E BY A
pH Je mp H, wf
HE L

BL

Hs did not get a.single hird. The favourite He téported this
result; saying, «He is the poorest charioteer in the’world.’, Some
one told this to Wang'Leang, who said; ‘I beg leave to try ‘again?

By dint ‘of pressing, this was accorded to him, "when in one mori
they got tem birds. The favourite,’ ‘reporting this result, said, "Hé 18
the best charioteer in the world.” Kéeén shid, T will lüske him'al-
‘ways drive your carriage for you? W hen'lie told "Wang Leang 86,
however, Leang refused, saying, ‘I drove for him, strictly observing
ihe proper rules for driving, "and in the, whole day. he did not. get
one bird. I drove for'him so às deceitfully ‘to intercept thg birds
and in one'morning he got ten. ;, It is said in. the Book of i Poetr y
"oc There ts no failure i in the management of tlietr horšej ees

^. The arvows are discha ged’ surely, like ithe blows. "of ümogatedios n
I am not accustomed to drive: for a èat mái. T beg skate ta to Ma edling
the office." T PE Hi

t 3
augen fn bi , E E "T ae "m 1 ET m Es n «b alii at

y dier fD ern iM

ihe
appears int the Histories oí thé dini ihi S n atte iinage the. charioi-driving far; you? -It is

tobt gta i TT

mepa s ames, Heis » calle
App BE UT d it R
ER Seo, the, PU
Bl fy tior,” and fj
a

un fj

ie 81 tory Ciel

d dris od tinun, QE
riage is used as Verbs te drive a panna. p

SperSes Pe, ii. 9.; Itis a phi offora. E;
mechanic,’ ‘an artist ; Hheper-' aghar ripieen
ES 5i (8. (low. 3d tone), pae iT beg. to, again. it,”

Big low, 2d.-tone,- ae fü kepok

' the arrows yagit

not common in twn to^ separate, “ap het,

bjeg R. Ac. Teang

might Ro not, des might Rot sb, induced - -to take
the office.

ye (SN re) (low, 3 8d torie), Pod Fè

2 {1 for him lawred my.raeing my horses
and ‘whi Bing thei?) ! EPA -— = age ‘Hh à, She

Jupe

king," jl. Ali, Qde, Y. at 6 ein the two lines
are ‘They: err not-inthe galloping y thay tlet gó

rebiling? tfr hiper 3d tonè,
HE. Nou for tit. 5. Hoo Sd tone, in

140 . THE WORKS OF MEXCIUS, BOOK TIL

“BY

e
= n
—

s

9

E SHES

E
am

e

1
Ld
=

*

A a
nee
Sanane
NAE

wv

La

AN aes
SHSM
SH
Sey
IRBs
EE

"E IO

zz

v

m
si
PS WAY
Sees

-

-—

Aet
cr

“KEN?

r

5. "* Thus this charioteer even was ashamed to bend improperly
to the will of such an archer. Though, by bending to it, they would
have caught birds and animals enow to form a hill, he would not do
so. If I were to bend my. principles and follow those princes, of
what kind would my conduct be? And you are wrong. Never
has a man who has bent himself been able to make others straight.”

' Cuaprer IL. 1. King Ch‘un said to Mencius, ** Are not Kung-
sun Yen and Chang E really great men? Let them once be angry,
and all the princes are afraid. Let them live quictly, and the
flames of trouble are extinguished throughout the empire.”

_. 9." Mencius said, * How can such men be great men? Have you
not read the Ritual Usages?—‘At the capping of a young man, his

- the sense of ‘to flatter’ É I.e be taken State, seeking employment, and embroiling the
together, ‘a mound,"*a hill.’ ‘The fk— that, or princes, See the * Historical Records,’ Book cH

' those,’ referring to BE in par. 1. We must 4. ch. x. A Xe Pt.Li.4. The phrase
. ; y ENS vd is used, however, in tlie next par., for *a grown

supply J, as the nominative to FE The con- ! ; . :

f ; noi : : i up youth, XB has the opposite meanings of

eluding remark is just, but hardly eonsistent i t^ e eke à

with the allowances for their personal miscon- ‘feeding a fire, and ‘extinguishing a fire? The

duct which Mencius was prepared to make to latter is its meaning here. 2. ,—refer-

o Mes Sits CORGRETION Or THÉ arein Ing to Yen and E with what is said about them

MAN. 1. King Ch'un was a man of Mencius’ above. i ,—the interrogative, up. 1st tone. The
days, ‘a practiser of the art of up-and-across’ Rites? or ‘Book of Rites, to which Mencius
CR ftc HED i.e., one who plumed here chiefly refers, is not the compilation now
himself on his versatility. Kung-sun Yen and received among the higher classics, under the
Chang E were also men of that age, natives of name of the Le Ke, but the Le E qui tí He
Wei (2311), and among the most celebrated of throws various passages together, and, according
‘the ambitious scholars, who went from State to to his wont, is not careful to quote correctly.

+

Pr. IT. Cu. IH. THE WORKS .OF MENCIUS.

24 A £x
KJ Ait Wi ae oe
A No b ^ ww .

i Je`. 3 9
ATS)
ya

E
ab Se

5

E
=e SS

NAHEN

w

ay

v

x
HSSINEER

u)
s Niph

^.
Cc

w
oe

©
-
»
v

OE
I
Ex

RES

N
zZ

Nd SN eH

DU

"a

EKN

Q

“K
CAO

©
C
e

S
/

(tik

N
"A

FrEE SAT

Ra

aH
Nc
Y
N

q

father admonishes him, At the marriage of a young woman, her
mother admonishes her, accompanying her to the door on her leav-
ing, and cautioning her with these words, You are going to your
home. You must be respectful; you must be careful. Do not disobey
your husband. Thus, to look upon compliance as their correct
course is the rule for women. . a
3. “To dwell in the wide house of the world, to stand in the
correct seat of the world, and to walk in the great path of the world ;
when he obtains his desire for office, to practise his principles, for
the good of the people; and when that desire is disappointed, to
practise them alone; to be above the power of riches and honours
to make dissipated, of poverty and mean condition to make swerve
from principle, and of power and force to make bend :—these char-
acteristics constitute the great man."

af

In the Le E, not only does her mother admon-
ish the bride, but her father also, and his con-
cubines, and all to the effect that she is to be
obedient, though the husband (here called

X "2 is not expressly mentioned. See the
4% i RE GR Bk 11. pp. 49. 50. For the

ceremonies of capping, see the same, Bk. I. In

ik Zz P8. and, more especially, in £t x
c qip 2k the x^ joins the verbs and
nouns, as if it were==‘to,’ or the verb Ff.
= ie are to be taken together,—'a con-
 Nubinc-woman, Mencius uses thé term zx
*

‘and ‘the great path’ is righteousness.,

in his contempt for Yen and E, who, with
all their bluster, only pandered to the passions
of the princes. Obedience is the rule for all
women, and specially so for secondary wives.

8. ‘The wide house of the world'.is .
benevolence or love, the chief and home of all
the virtues; ‘the correct seat’ is propriety s

UEAN n
H A (the Z refers to the virtues so

metapherically indicated),-—‘ walks according to
them, ateng with the people.” he paraphrase
in the H a says:;— Getting his. desire, and

being employed in the world, he comes forth,
and carries out these principles of benéyoleiiee,
propricty, and righteousness, towards, the peo-

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK Ih

a ES
[i
A

REAN

S
=
+0

 BhEEEUER

e

Sa Ex

E
ja
ofi

=. ah bl
T
Fi
ft

e;

H,
m
XL
dü HA

Mencius eris “ They d,
ie Record’ "says; ‘If. A'ónfücius was three months without being
employed by some sovereign, he looked anxious and unhappy. When
he passed! ‘from the ‘boundary’ of a State, he was sure to carry with
him his. proper gift of introduttion.’ ‘Kung-ming E said, M
thé anciefits? if ‘an offieéi was three months unemployed by a os
reign; he swiis leondoled. with. "7" ^*

12. 4 Seaow said; “Did ‘hot this ‘condoling, on being’ three montlig

1

ENG

unemployed ‘by a 'sovereigit; show a too great urgency ? "'
do ehelüs answered, "Thé loss of his place to an. officer is like

feat

the loss-of: kis kingdom to & prince. - Tt is said in the Book of Rites,

BT E

"ES.

di od pda
plajand, pursues themi along with! them. c JEP,

XZ, BE. — this is what'id dalled! OF c foc

,; CH. 3. OFFIC 18 TO BE. EAGERLY, DESIRED,
Á&b YËT IT MAY NOT BE SOUGHT BUT.BY ITS PRO-
BER-PATH. "It will be'seen that the questioner
of Mencius in this ehapter, a man of, Wei, and
né ofthe wanderiiig.séhólars of the time; Wish:
ed, to condemn the philosopher, ifor: the, dignity
of reserve which he*tiaintained in his inter-
courseWith the various: ‘princes. Menelus:does
not, evnile any of his questions, and yery satis-
tadtorily ' vindicates Nimeelf! SEL. f „ow.
3d fonditlle ‘Record #4vhatever'it was, itia now
lost. HEA cm! „without a- soverign, isiy s

our-officenis TE Artis the appearence of

Gne who is seckinig-for somethifig and chin Hid
it. Tt is appropriate.te &, mouraer in-thé- first

stages; of igsief:iafter ;bereavemehton i qi-
read; che, dp. 8d tonej'syhonyifóus^ with
Every person. waiting on. another Stan's eret

‘A prince plonge"? himself; ‘arid is assisted: by the people, to’

ES M

-belonging to if.

supply

--was supposed to! ‘pave his way by somá
introductory gift, and each official rank had its

roper article to be-uséd for that purpose by alt
js See the Le-ke, I. Pt. IL iii,
18., Confucius. earried this with him, that he
might not lose any opportunity of getting to ba
in office ` again. _Kung-ming . E, we are told by

' Chaou K'e, was ‘a worthy,’ but of what time

and what state, we do,not, know. An indivi-
dual of the same surname is mentioned; Ana.

XIV, xive. ‘Julien. ‘translates A, Ud incór2

ur

rectly by! tunc in luciu grant! The lobe
of the H F1 says t Then people’ ail cain

; to condole with and ,to,comfort-them.’ 13 Y, i

yis fo, ke taken. ae synonymous; with

dé Be hb State, “embraging the,
amnilies.o ‘of the, noblest: Jn his quotationssfroiv
oe ‘KepMenciusicombines' ahd adapts té his:

; : purpose, with more, i however; than: his ‘usiiat
i freedom, :diffenerit passages.) See Bk! XXIV: ii.

parr. 5, Fvand ‘Bk, V2 iiipar.9;. {Choo He,-td

Pr, IL Cir; I, THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. . 143.

an

[ :
o

al
w
Ae
pues
x
v.

"aam -
W
Z)
RS.
aay es d

PANE
E
tpg
aS
T eni
xg
=>

C5 Amram 7

-

=]
"iP
FUOD a
& -

SEN Tht
Ka

ZS

aie

 ni 23

 wem
Du

SUME

2 re
> All Jay, Ele ^l S a

the millet for ‘sacrifice. His wife keeps i and urfivindà
their cocoons, to make the garments: for sacrifice. Tf the, victims be
not, perfect, the millet not pure, and the dress not complete). he does
not presume to sacrifice. ‘And the scholar who, eut of, fice, «has: nó
holy field, in the same way, does not sacrifice. ac Thez victima for
slaughter, the vessels, and the garments, not, being. all complete; he
does not presume to sacrifice, and. then neither; may the, dare. to feel
BoD Is there not here sufficient, ground also. for condolence 2.2;
Seaou again asked, “What was the, meaning of, Confucius’
alaja carrying his proper gift of introduction with! him; when he
passed over the boundaries of t the State, where, Ae, head; been? ooi At
5. “An officer’s being in office," was the reply, “is like the
ploughing of. a. chusbandman:> Does, a husbandman- part" with. his
plough, because hé goes from one State to another vee u uor - E. 7!

Cogim T
jllüstraté the text; gives another summary of worn in sacrificing to the, fornier’ kings and

the-passages in the Le Ke, thus :—— It is said in Jow. lst «
the Book of Rites, The princes had their special dukes.” & jov. de tone, the millet P laced i m

ficld of 100 mow, in which, wearing their crown, the sacrificial vessel, TE AE, the victim,
with its blue ffaps turned up, they held the
plough to commence the ploughing, which Whatever it might bë; 9 ‘the victiin, as pus

was afterwards completed with the help of the :
common people. ‘The produce of -this field was and perfect, The officer’ field i » ‘the hie

reaped ‘and stored in the ducal granary, to Pt I. iii..16.' toretl erc vessels, pd
supply the vessels of millet in the ancestral tem- LE T

ple. "They also caused the family women CHEE

DL drum i mtus
Ji of their harem to attend to the silkworms, au 5A_.—‘to feast, =tó feel happy: The argü-
int Fac silkworm louse attached to the State ment is that it was not. the m mere "loss of office
miilberry trees, and to bring the cocoons toj which was, a - proper: subject for grief. ‘and
them. These were then presented to their wives, condolence, but the con&equeneesiof it, espe-

who received them in their sacrificial headdress '. A : i: : :
and robe, soaked them, and thrice drew out a Cally in not being able:to contiiiue his: proper

thread. They then distributed the cocoons sactifices, as here set forth) u : 5. RE
among the ladies of the three palaces; to prepare Pa
the threads for the ornaments on the robes to be non i ES: shee Pt Livip.3.' 6 The

*
&

He says the, [fff were the covers of the

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS, BOOK ni

iN
—,

wee
ih
e.

HN:
2
EB

TIT E RA TAE
Ka 4E Na xt. A. xm, rad 7n ke.
zB, NH em BE TT 36 JE 1r
LE Le
F

LES
ES

Seer
DER

FA

as
E pak Ér —— An
it fac. Be 3H PT bul

N
Je

E

ter

E
DHF
E

TN
KEER

VON
y m

Sany
SN

=
AE

Ane
NM.
m
ay

~
E
s

UR
E
i

SEN
de

NIS
bh»
HV
iN

Y
WS

a
M
eed
PEE

6. Eon d eT eke. of Tsin is one, as well a5 Aa
of official employments, but I have not heard of any being thus earnest
about being in office. If there should be this urgency about being
in office, why does a superior man make any difficulty about the
taking it?" Mencius answered, “ When a son. is born, what is de-
sired for him is that he may have a wife; when a daughter is born,
-what is. desired for her is that she may have a husband. This feel-
ing. of the parents is possessed by all men, If the young people,
without waiting for the orders of their parents, and the arrangements
of the go-betweens, shall bore holes to stéal a sight of each other,
or get “over the wall to be with each other, then ‘their parents and
all “other people will despise them. The ancients did indeed always
“desire to be in office, but they also hated being so by any improper
way. To go to get office by an improper way is ofa class with young

people's boring holes.”
kihgdom of Tsin,'—see I. Pt. I. v. 1. HEL ‘to have a family,’ or ‘home.’ TAA ERA
—see the Chow Le, XIV. vii; the She-king, I.

y—-by the 7 ka Seaou evidently in-
y y viii. Ode VI. st. 6. The law of marriage here
tengs, Mencius. himself, who, however, does not ' MEAE n ^
referred to by Mencius still obtains, and seems
notice tl the insinuation, RK: and fr to have been the rule of the Chinese race from
1 + . -haj V
here simply ‘ason, ‘a daughter.” By rat ad ‘time immemorial. AB 4t —fit- Ji" HE

AS
E tto have —up. 3d tone, tbe verb. ny aa tt
an apartment aud a woman marrying, AG zx

-«
-

tone, a man marrying issaid

Ji 88 De

Pr. IF. On: iV,

THE WORKS

~
Fa

>

`
a

NÈ:

š

SOME
ER ed
RHIN

Sig

Eu

IN
p

!
+

=

ENS
po 3j

-

SENSE

e

EE
SEINE

reme
Bi =>
S
zt

i

[his

Fi

v
b
f,

us
2
is

OF MENCIUS.

fend
fae
or

ud.
LI
EX
a

of

THRONES

4

EN

mz

;

yo
uM Pil
Ese
roars

Li

94
gv

ww

LL

5

Iw]
«x

>

Wee
Tee

m

PERRA

X T
“>
>
we

Hr

Leanne

B

CuarrER IV. 1. Pang Kang ee Mencius, saying, “Is it not
an extravagant procedure to go “from one prince to another and
, live upon them, followed by several tens of carriages, and ‘attended
by several hundred men ?” Mencius replied, “If there be not a

roper ground for taking it, a single bamiboo-cup of rice may not
he received from aman. If there be such a proper ground, then.
Shun's receiving the empire from Yaou is not to be considered. ex.
cessive. Do you think it was excessive? "

2. Kang said, “No. But for a scholar penforminy no service to
receive his support notwithstanding, is improper. 6

3. Mencius answered, “If you "do not have an intercommuni#
cation of the productions of labour, and an interchange of men’s ser-
vices, so that one from his overplus may supply the deficiency of
another, thén husbandmen will have a superfluity of grain, and

Cu, 4.
RIRE, AND THERE I8 NO LABOURER SO WORTHY

vi

THe LABOURER IS WORTHY OF HIS port from the princes, and his’ chariots: and
disciples got their support from Mencius. It

AS THE SCHOLAR WHO INFORMS MEN TO VIRTUE.

1. P*ang Küng was a disciple of Mencius.
His object in addressing him. as in this chapter,
Seems to have been to stir him up to visit the

prinees, and go into officc. 3fe.—ov. 3d tone,
following W, as a numeral or classifier. {E
P low. 3d tone, ‘an attendant,’ ‘a
follower,’ not in a moral sense. ` Hi

tone; explained i in the diction. by XB *to con-

nect,’ ‘succeed:to.” y

The phrase is felt to be a difienlt-one..
Shin explains it thus :— Mencius get his sup-

*by succession," —

—low. 38

Sun
"guards the principles of bencvolence aud right.

came to this that the support of all was from
the contributions of the princes, and hence it is .

said that by their mutual connection they ail

lived on the princes.’ TR H- £e tsze, low.

Bd tone, ‘rice cooked.’ Comp. Ana. VI. ix. E:

Z Kp. ‘Yaou’s empire, Le, the empire

from Yaou. Zaft may be conatruoa very well ag

the nominative to V3 3. 5
FZ "Cr ZG

paraphrase ` int the Zik ig ~' Ile firmly

19

“146 ; THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK IN.

S
=

M

=

E
E

v

A

v

BE
D

pete Be
AN.

v
=
jee

med
vi

ÈL
"p

^ D
-

è
deus
EN

Q
ic
v
~

IA
>j
+x
cae
E

pass
=

yi

=

E
in:

$
£
w?

-

e
a3
y *—

A rs

n N

2
Seq

Ho
(sr
in
: =F

[ d

><
eo

Li

T

` t
Nep ES ah d of "P ind ki such aliter"
l

EUER

Pies

qup M 3
ids

daigo, carpetes and carridgë wrie its Way allocd their’ food Thom
loue: Wm now ded arían,: avhioy: ati hone, nis filial, and abroad, re-
Bpeetéal to his: elders 5 qvholavatches ov erthe principles of the ancient
ince awaiting the «ise of. future learners meind: yet you will refuse
tosupport: bii. 1, How islitithat you give honour Xowthe. cadpdater
“anh be uviage-wright, and slight him who practises benevolence -and
(d cg Ere. eae tied Seba deu rt
awst Piang Kdng said, s The aim vofuthe: car penter and carriage-
owright isc diy. their trades, tal seek. for a living. Js- it also the aim
of the supor ior man in his practice of pr inciples thereby to seek! for
d wing 273 off Wikhtrhavevou.to do,” returned: Mencius, «with: his
Ignarpose 2 He is of Seryicdito. your .He deserves *to be supported,
BT yb should; be: supporteds Aud let ma: axki- De you remunerate.a
genii itantiolso or «lo oni remuperate = service.» To this! tang
stepie of Linemnaerate-diis: durtentious ^s u— ae i

+

“ eoushase ‘teahiamiite od "by the ancient kings, so and articles of Yiciibuns and the Ur Asi in
that they do not et obscured or obstructed by
perve ‘dist onr $es e jut iuri await future large; such as building houses, &c. The dics A

made the wheels and also the cov: er of a carriage;

ay énter into ir uth. aud right.. Thus he pie [d EN the other parts, 4. Observe
s epptiitues t the “past anid opens: the wa , for the how appropriately M expressiye of futurity or

fo and, oes service to the, world. lA object, follows 3 a HI fe ii 42 x
SP, then, = for the benefit, of,’ - The. E gad "here Loe and the t ee that follow, are read as

` aré: both. workers iw wood,” the TEX in Eb, but with a different meaning,
"work. being. in ginaller ‘things, such as vessels, cing=' £0 teed’ (active of passis e), "po give

Pr. M. Gu. IV.— y,

At

L4

"
«b

=

AS
T

EN

NEM
s

E
adc X
-
ow

aS C

a
r

he
aa

ow

»
u

=

€

P

jaa

ae

zx

RE

»
fe

ee yy a.
JA tE, Aa

v
&

mb
E

í d]

b LN ^
z 3 ) JE
ve g m n
JT TA PSI

THE. WORKS OF iIMENCIES,

v
y Š
d».

 =
v

=

jJ TTE ; D a dae "
bue QE: LEA. itl oct,

Zt sy
A SUE TAL

MC
nS 3
ES & a
E = UG

DN
j

S:
è

Ae
l
mc dien
zx
* Bis

iy

"Fl
f E E.

Cola:

»

SE
schist : :

>

ST
=

Pry Lt EQ U^
oi hk NIA t
Zh (C T Ü: Ly d
3

E
pt
~

Se e:

s. SE

a Oly Mencius said; Fhereds 4 man here, who breaks your ‘tiles, and

idraws unsightly figures on tyour: walls ;z-his purpose may ‘be thereb
to secki tor his living; but willryou indeed remunerdte himn??s “No;

)»

said. King; and UMenciusrthenseoncladedsi “That being’ the ease,

litis not the purpeseitwihich í
CHAPTER V.

w remhnerate; butithe work dore" .
1. Wan Chang asked Mencius, saying; t Sungiis-

. asmall State. Ztspuleristnow setting about to practise ‘the ‘true
woyal government, and: Tste and?Ts*oe hate and’ attacky him. Wit

di this-case is! to: be done 2 ^ vore

qoid eror orraene slide

«ul Qui Mencius replibdy t When: Tang: dwelt;ini.P5/ he adjoired to
the State of KS, the chief of which was:living inia dissbluté state‘and
sneglectingihis proper sacrifices. `- T'ang sentimessengérs lto inquire
why he did not sacrificer He replied, ff have mo means'of supplying

the necessary victims.’

D E

DENTS, d r3 ta

Apa B. Fiap Gow, 94 tono) -di

means ‘ornaments on walls? He must there-
1 MES r

ieee e ri i
fore take ES in a bad sense, to correspond té

14

" 25] UNO OP e eee
the EU. A man wishes to mend‘tlie roof, bu
he only breaks it; to orriament the wall, but hé
only distigureg it. r. 2x Pto tat
"Cu. 5° THE PRINCE wud WILL SET HIMSELF,
TO' PRACTISE A BENEVOLENT’ GOVERNMENT ON
THE PRINCIPLES OF THE ANCIENT KINGS Nas
NONE TO-PEAR, 1. Wan Chang Was a disci-
ple of Mencius, the fifth book of whose Works

On this, Tang caused oxen and slieep-ta be
sent to him, but he ate them, and still eontinued not to sacrifice.
" i y aio C (mecs t b EE . iv oe attis dd i

uie Trade s t Han

ue berensq i uu bh eter ot Ghocruca eils
is named, from, bin. What he says here may
surprise us, perane we küow that the duke pf
Sung ‘its ‘capital was in (hé pres. district’ of
ede ONG IES px e a Cot lc QE S JNR AT
“Shing: ew [rj pp» the Kwei-tih depart-
yo oe mna, bet eoo t ng t reper y or ay
menf of Ho-nen), or king, as he styled himself,
was onüfély worthless and oppressive. “See tlie
{+ Historitt Rélords, Bod X XX VII, "Re (f
ix (TES, towntds 'the'end ‘3 [67 i
‘LPG M. iit, and xi:2. ‘PS, the capitabof Thig
though there were three places of the same
name), is referred to the sume department of Ho-

*

148 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. LOOK ML

RE

=

ESS

BENED
i

+

es

y
zN

wet

2:
5

K

yu
Su
3

sft aoa
n»
au

TZ

TUEHEERESXS

2

SEE
S

AE

Ex

4

v
©

ENRERE
u ienaa

ZEN RENS

v
4
e

ii

zi

HNA

aa

3
FORDER Ee

zi

Em

=

il

e

EEN
in

rt

man

Iu:

(Y
m

1$

E

Jeu

v

4

« sn NC e , : i
” Trang again Sent messengers tocàsk hint the same question as before,
when he replied, “I have no means of obtaining the necessary millet.’
Qn this, Tang sent the, mass;of the people of Pò to go and till the
ground for him, while the,old and feeble carried their food to them:
The chief of Kö led.his.people to intercept those who were thus
charged with wine, cooked rice, millet, and paddy, and took their
stores from them, while they killed those who refused to give them up,
There was a. boy who had some millet and flesh for the Jabourers,
who was thus slain and rohbed..; What is said.in.the Book of History; '
‘The chief of Kö, behaved as an enemy to the provision-carriers, has
reference to this. MG

3. ‘Because of his murder of this boy, T'ang proceeded to puny
ish him. All within the tour seas said, ‘It is not because he desires
the riches of the empire, but to avenge a common man and woman.

Gu od we be à
15 R-E. as above, low. ad tone. EA

Ee the Shod-king, LV, ii. 6.—In the py
à y = 5 ' : :

E EE BR Bt, in es TE JB RC ie quoted,
to the effect that i£ Mencius had not been thus

particular in explaining what is alluded to in
the words of the Shoo-king, the interpretrtions

of them would have been endless, But that in
his time there were ancient books which could

be appealed io, — 3. Ry low. 3d tone. un
ES pu dig — common men and women ;’ sée

4

D Tyg ttn ESL * toe tye
nan ae the ountry. of K, viz., that of Kwel-
tih. “Its site is said to'hàYé been distant from
thé ‘site’ of the supposed. capital of Kö only
about 100 Je, so that "I'ang might edsily render
‘the services here mentioned to the ^

H chief
, BE VA fk no niem of
38. low. 8d tone,

My “aes pore, whips
x WX, (low: 1st tone),—see låst th.

di diii od bane” BH GEE,

Atsze, low. 84 tone. , BE, up.

‘or baron’ of’ Kö:
P A

supplying, se. of obtaining.

(SAL, up. Jat tone. , We find
it defined in the dict, by ‘to ineet with,’ ‘to
extort,’ which approximate to the meaning here.

Ana. XIV. xviii, 3, The phrases are understodif
here, however, with a special application to the
father ind mother of the murdered boy. A

Pr. 1I. Cn. V. ‘THE WORKS OF MENCIUS, 149

-~

Sal

[ d

Nn
bres

y

AE a d

2ER
i

^
NY
zt.
=

v
ak
ww

ne,
v
3

ANM
msi

*.
Es

RH
$
BS

Eee Ao

=

=

=
a
Am
ak

[Eze
A
PS
x

xxu

v

E

RE
ees

atl
am
EN
E

im
iP
Um N
b»
Ee
TS
Dom

NM hát
nc A Ry PE f gupk c xv8yyba do Xs ý mihe prs debut
UL Wheii T'ang bégan his: sik of éexecütingr justice, é Gorm!
menved with K5,’ and though. he yptinished' eleven princes, lega
hot'an' enemy’ iii ‘the’ empire: « hein” he pursued ^ "his 'svóvkm: the
east; the rude: tribes in the west mutinüred. 7 So: did: ‘those "ofthe
north’ when ‘he was: engaged i in thé soutli! "Their egy Twas Gewe
does he make us last,’ T has, the people's! lohging for! hir Wad like
their longing for rain'ih à time of great Aboubht. nihe’ freqhenters
of the markets’ Stopped riot. Those: engaged in weeding iv the filets
made no change in their operations. While he punished - theii Tulers
he eotisoled the people. His progress was likethé falling of épportine
rain, and the people were delighted. It js said? in khe Book lof
History, ‘We have’ waited for our prince Whéh "our! piine
comes, we may escape from the, „puni Pipeta, under. which we suffer.’
“There being soine aho! would nof become the subjects ‘97
Chote, "king: ‘Woo proceeded fo 15 them on, the. past. Ae oak
eran ithen" jeep e, EN welcomed dim witht baskets fulkof

Bt H dU ut Hsdoiiftout star! sistaan uif

43. `

Compare I. Pa Ii xi. 2, . "There: ate, TEES —the .substance ‘of ib pat. is found, in the
some maristions-in the phrases. = Bay =A Shoo-king. See-¥. iii. T, but this book of the

: . Shoo-king.is. confessed to require much emenda-
The quotation in the end is‘from a different part
ofthe Shoo-king, See IV. v. Section IL. 6 tion, in jts arrangement, -fz Jee Bek.
‘The'eleven punitive expéditions of ‘T'ang cannot 2 P ij;
all- be edotermineda » From the Slie-king: aid SIE « BE Wik ZE $i PX a

Shoo-king six only are made out, while by some ketéd their az ure and yellow silks.” Itis said
their number. is given as 22, an d 27. See the L7 Heaven is azure, and Earth is yellow. King

Woo was-able to put away the evils of the. Yin
4E 3 Fi RD locs, . & Down PANE eu, p rule, and gave the people rest, lle might.be

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOR tif.

i

NEC
PORE
dy
S

ral

n

is
x:
^E
m

Pra
SHRINE
me
mE

Tias di

Jd

P2:
v

d

NS
Eat
=
So
=

oH

(N

ab
OPEN
SERERE

Sem
tls
Rie
GS

x HE ELEM AZ A
Tü Pe X BIH H, 3 E
"mE Te m"
thei hack ‘ana? yen silks, gayin is: Eom henvefop A wotshall
servé the" Sovérelgn of our dynasty of Chow, that we may be made
happy by him. So they joined: themselves, as subjects, to the great
city of, Chow.. Thus, themen ofstation of Shang took baskets full
of black and yellow. silks to meet the men of station of Chow, ‘and
tha; lower. classes. jof the one met those of the other, ‘with baskets’ of
rice and; vessels of congee. Woo saved the people from the midst
of fire arid water, seizing r only their oppressors, and destroying them,”
iir BO: 5 In the Great, Declaration it is said, ‘My power shall be pit
forth;;aud invading £he territories of Shang, I will seize the oppressor.
J will, :put him to death to punish hnn :—so shall the greatness of my
work, appear, more. glorious. than. that of T'ang.’
n Tea $ Sargi Is not, as you say, practising true royal g government, arid
so forth. If it were. practising royal government, all within the
four.seas would. be lifting up:their heads, and lookin g for tts prince,
‘wishing, to have him for their sovereign. Great as Ts'e and Ts'oo
Msc What would there be to fear from them?" :

l . ?

=

Tae. M H i ie 5 ty tak . at 2j. d ‘t
aiwa to Heaven and Earth, overshadow- Me to the end, Mencius explains
ing and sustaining. all thing$ in order‘to nour- the meaning of the Shoó-1 king: 16, ox
ish’ men?» X cwe- tave: Ja: in. the Shoo- quotation. from. the Shoo-king, V, i. Sect. I
king), — to AB we ? We. must " ylerstand 8, is to illustrate the last cls ruse of the pre-
PX ie ceding par. T. zB +~see' Copies
a 'saying, and bring: ouf the. meaning of is. t
XB itus Formerly we served: Shang, and Ana, VIL. xviii. uv however, does not here
now we continue to serve, but our service is to simply] act as à particle Closing the yo.

å = J 2 : but also réfers tó the’ ho of Wan Ch: ug's
Chow," Vet, Ji its great city (of statement at the commengement ‘of the con-

citied) ‘Chow, ig "an, drregular phrase. Fromversation, ape sat k N Ut ix

Pr. If. Cr. VI. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

»

—
z
Pan

£T
3

Sued

dy ot
Rt

NO

`

\
rf

SS

v

;

i £1
s <r, ub
Ke mi hé

E EE oe F
=. 2
~

=>
a
eng
“NSF

ZK ME BH ae T

ii aln V I. 1. -Mencius said to: Tae: Puh-shing,:1“ I: see that
you, are. desiring your king to. be-virtuous, and I will: plaitily tell
you haw he. may ‘be made so... Suppose that there is a great officer of
SS 00, here; who-wishes his son.to learn the speech of Ts‘e. Will ‘lie
an that case,employ a man of Ts'e as his tutor, or a man of Ts‘00?*
* He will employ. a man of T's‘e to teach — him,” said Puh-shing.
Mencius went on, “If but one man of Ts‘e be teaching hiin, dnd there
be a multitude of men of Ts'oo continually shouting out about liini,
although Ais father beat him every ‘day, wishing hint’ to! fedri the
speech « of Ts‘e, it will be impossible for him to “do so. “But in the
same, way, ,if he. were to be taken and placed for'several years in
Chw: rang or Y óh, though. Ars father should beat hiin, ‘wishing : hii to
speak. the language: cof Ts‘ oo, it. would be impossible for himztó doaot
COS i You ‘supposed ` that. Se& Keu-chow was à scholar’ bf virt tue,
and you have got him placed in attendance on the king. Sup-
pose that all in attendance on the king, old and young, high and

Cu. 6. - THE INFLUENCE OF EXAMPLE AND Ts‘e specch'of his son,’ i.e., ‘wishes bis son, to
ASSOCIATION, ‘THE IMPORTANCE OF HAVING

VIRTUOUS MEN ABOUT A SOVEREIGN'S PERSON,

1. Tae Puh-shing was a minister of Sung, `
the descendant of one of its dukes who had

received the posthumous epithet of Tae, which
had heen adopted as their surname by a branch

f his posterity. F dk. b Bg, —B. low. 1st

one, mei interrog., implying an Z afirmative

Tepl y. gH LJ LÀ

 clus.

Hi "up “wishes the

learn 'T's'e. SB. interrog, as elsewhere in Men-

nk read hew,= on ‘shouting, ‘clam-
orous.”’ -Chwang and Yo were two well knowin

quarters in the capital of T's‘e, the former being
the name of a street, and the latter the name

of a neighbourhood ; seé the py $ HE Er

Bit in loc. 2. 'S& Reu-cliow was alio-a

152 THE, WORKS OF .MENCIUS. BOOK THs

i

BS Sot SH Ae

So
m
7
TM
and

Lo
g
d
5

KS
! DA:
zm
Us
TUR
S

TM
RE
He

te
——cmr
u——
mA €.
N
-i

SNE
5

s

TUUM
d
mo

a
HI
>
ET.

ca
Jes
$
2
x
=
Bs

š
SKi

Aj

3%
m

NS
Y

à

low, s were Sad Keu-chows, vlom wonld the king have in E ei
with? And su pose that all in attendance on the king, old and
. young, high ad low, are not Séé Keu-chows, whom w ill the king
rave to do good with? What can one Seč Keu-chow do alone fot
the king of “Sung ?”

CHAPTER VIL 1. Kung-sun Chow asked Mencius, say ing, * What
is,the point of righteousness involved in your not going to sce the
princes?” - Mencius replied, “ Among the ancients, if one had not
been a minister 22 a State, he did riot; go to see the sovereign.

2.. “Twan Kananuh leaped over. his wall to avoid the prince.
Sé& Lew. shut his door, and would not admit the prince. These two,
_ however, carried their serupulosit ty to excess. When a prince is urgent,
it is not improper to see him. '

o>
uet
> X
E
uil
i»
As
‘a
is
$ M
D
UE

*

minister of Sung, a descendant of one of the í rightness? Mencius, however, does not state
princes of Sé, whose family had adopted the distinctly the principle of the thing, but appeals

e of their "NB S State as their surname. 4, prescription and precedent. a É H=
n the E pen a we read :—''Tae Puh-

KE it ES ES J^
shing said to Sé Keu-chow, It is only the vir- $3 Er. or tt M L [s]. In the

Con. Ana. XIV. xxii, we have àn example of
tuous scholar E3 d who can set forth what is kow Confuci ius, not then actually in office, but

virtuous, and shut up the way of what is corrupt. having fees so, went to see the duke of Loo.
You are a scholar of virtue ; cannot you make the
king virtuous?’ But this and what follows was
probally constructed ae Mencius’ remark, dip. who refused to see the prince Win
and so Í prefer to take 8 8H as== ‘supposed,’ ( X ) Wan wasthe posthumous title of

* blieved,' not ‘said? 4e —up..2d tone. E B.C, 426—386. In the ‘Historical Records, it

A Xx Fi: itto dwell in the king’s place’ is mentioned that he received the writings of
g's place, Tsze-hea, and never drove past Kan-muh’s
lea to be about him, .

house, without bowing forward to the tront-bar

Cu. 7. MENUIUS DEFENDS WIS NOT GOING TO er ae PRIM
SEË THE PRINCES BY THE EXAMPLE AND MAXIMS of his carriage. p= iE, low. 3d tone. "A
OF THE ANCIENTS. 2.. Any BS is not sim- refers to the prince Wan. : Sëč Lew was a scholar
ply—' what is the meaning? but ‘what is the © of Loo, who refused to admit (AyD the

. Twan Kan-muh was a scholar of. Wei:

Pr. IL Cu. VII.

-
ct
oo

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

RS

zu]

NS

E INL
NS SIS

—.

URS

wat
pa

SiN
gj

zi

T

Ee

Eat
shah
(Ese

zen
bes

zem
ci

EE
pS Rs tt

y

C
nn

iH sra
T

n -

mee

TER

RH
RI
-Hes

>

e

=

»«u

V N
IRELE):

2

ie
f Ld

SN

se

=
a

o

“hig
PoE
SN

NE
Ni
»

Æ JE FH; H, a T PES JA.

}

FH RAID ZC AX.

3. “Yang Ho wished to get Confucius to go to see him, but
disliked doing so by any want of propriety,- As tt is the rule, there-
Jove, that when a great officer sends a gift to-a scholar, if the latter
be not at home to reecive it, he must go to the officer’s to pay his
respects, Yang Ho watched when Confucius was out, and sent him
a roasted pig. Confucius, in his turn, watched when Ho was out,
and went to pay his respects to him. At that time, Yang Ho had
taken the initiative ;—how could Confucius decline going to see him?
4. “The philosopher Tsang said, ‘They who shrug up their shoul-
ders, and laugh in a flattering way, toil harder than the summer
lubourer tn the fields.’ "Tsze-loo said, ‘There are those who talk with -
people with whom they have no great community of feeling If you
look at their countenances, they are full of blushes. I do not desire
to know such persons.’ By considering these remarks, the spirit which
the superior man nourishes may be known.”

Fe Ay BB Ze Zee the Le-ke, XIIL

jit. 20. Mencius, however, does nót quote the

duke Muh (Z); sce II. Pt. II. xi. 3. ‘The in-
cident referred to here must have been pre-

vious to the time spoken of there. 34

Hy H[ A Bu 2R iit, * being urgent, this
5 Auba

(or, then) may be seen. 9. TK Fa

Sf, it is noted here, should he read low. 3d

tone, with a Aiphil sense. - Comp. Con. Ana.

XviLi Ba-

exact words. {= fit, andsoread. 4. Tl
jz ‘to rib,’ i.e. to shrug, ‘the shoulders.’ 3h :
asin IE Pt. Lipie B pE- Hyd
HE Pd A Choo Ife makes at to mean

‘those two superior meu,’ referring to Tsang

HH the verb, up. 3d. tone. X and T'azc-loo, but this seems to be unnecessary,

20 T

E

THE WORKS

OF MENCIUS.

BOOK II,
spe 4 rx :
el Spe. TF 33, i: ELTE ES
des HK AE ib, bs

v

We

RE
SSN

=>

v

wees!

Ab xk a ox Jnd. M
FLIES Ae oe S
AR, La " 4x He rH

fuf t. H

MoT (oR

[78k
NE
-N

!zzb

A fr n JE TE up git —, R,
E K A — A AR Wt Ge De
T o AE ie T my Es]

NE

ES JE T VA
; — A i S J
. OnarrER VII. 1. Tae Ying-che said to Mencius, “I am not
able at present and immediately to do with the levying of a tithe
only, and abolishing the duties charged at the passes and in the
markets. With your leave I will lighten, however, both the tax
and the duties, until next year, and will then, make an end of them.
What do yeu think of such a course?"

2. ‘Mencius said, * Here is a man, who every day appropriates
some of his neighbour's strayed fowls.’ Some-one says to hin, ‘Such
is not the way of a good man ;' and he replies, ‘ With your leave I
will diminish my appropriations, and will take only one fowl a
month, until next year, when I will make an end of the practice.

3. “Ifyou know that the thing is unrighteous, then use all
dispatch in putting an end to it:—why wait till next year?"

OnarrER IX. 1. The disciple Kung-too said to Mencius, “ Mas-
ter, the people beyond our school all speak of you as.being fond of

Cu. 8. WHAT IS WRONG SHOULD BE PUT AN
END TO AT ONCE, WITHOUT RESERVE AND WITH-
OUT DELAY. i. Tae Ying-che was a great
officer of Sung, supposed by some to be the
same with Tae Pah-stting, eh. vi. Mencius had

^no doubt been talking with him on the points
indicated ; see I. Pt. IL v. 3; IT. Pt I. v. 3; IIL“
Pt. I. iii. ET here and below, is simply the
speaker's polite way of indicating his resolu-
tion. 2. Tf here as jn Con. Ana. XIII.
xviii. 3 ,—here,—*a good man.’ . x
‘diminish it,’ îe., the amount of his captures.

3. 3r is used adverbially, tat once? i

E in all the paragraphs is the verb=‘have
done with it,’ ‘put an end to it."
Cu.9. MENCIUS DEFENDS HIMSELF AGAINST
THE CHARGE OP BEING FOND OF DISPUTING.
: WHAT LED, TO HIS, APPEARING TO BE SQ Was YB
NECESSITY .OF, THE TIME., Comp, II. Pt. E ii.
Mencius would appear from this chapter to have
believed that the mantle of Confucius had fnll-
en upon him, and that his position was that of
a sage; on whom it devolved to live and labour

for the world. 1. A^ A outside men,’
ùe., people in general, all beyond his school, as
the representative of orthodoxy iu the tmpire,

Pr. IH. Cu. IX. TIIE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

ERES

JHS
HEMERR

v
E:

[XU REGNIS BD aT
beu MF aR Ie B E m Ped ee

EE a
pe

ij
cabs
Eja

`a
v
v
v

Ni
4,

SIME

CER
gm

Ld

Onus

SEATS
LS

3

v

-

Zn.

HE SRO
ei

Rae

disputing, I venture to ju Ks it be sod p Menu um
di Indeéd,I am riot fond of disputing, but I am compelled to do it.

2 6A long time has elapsed since this world of men received its
being, and there has been along its history now a period of good order,
and now a period of confusion.

3. ‘In the time of Yaou, the waters, flowing out of their chan-
nels, inundated the Middle kingdom. Snakes and dragons occupied
it, and thé people had ‘no place where they could. settle themselvés,
In the low grounds they made nests for themselves, and in the high
grounds they made caves. It is said i in the Book of History, ‘The

waters in their wild course warned me.’ Those ‘waters in their! wild
course’ were the waters of the great inundation. '
4. Shun employed Yu to Tedube the waters to order.' Yu dug

open their obstructed channels, and conducted them’ to the sea. He
drove.away the snakes and dragons, and forced them into the grassy

TEL FE] FE, ac. tothe gloss in the fle

ʻI venture to ask why you are so fond of disput-
ing,’ as it Kung-too admitted the charge of the
outside people. But it is better to interpret

as in BR translation, The spirit of TE

Af - seems to be ‘better given in
ak by Propping the interrogation. 2.
Commentators are unanimous in understanding

Kh x a not of the material world, and
taking- a= 4E ER. Tt is remarkable,
then, that Mencius, in his review of the history
of mankind, does not go beyond the time of
Yaou (comp. Pt. L iv.) and that at its com-
mencement he places a períod not of good order,

Gu. low, 8d tone) but of confusion. 3.

Mark the variations of phraseology here from
Pt. I. iv. 7 = FY see the Shoo-king,

IL. iii. 14, where for £ Š we have . The

‘nests’ were huts on high-raised platforms.
In the Le-ke, IX. i. par. 8, these ‘are said to
have been the summer habitations of the earli-

est men, and = R. the winter. 4

‘artificial caves,’ ùe. caves hollowed out from
»

heaps of earth raised upon the ground. V

is the same as the ` IK ‘above. Chao

He explains it by ‘deep and shoreless.” “4.

HE Hi— dug the earth,’ but with the mean-

ing in the translation. EL is read by Choo He

tseu, but wrongly. With the meaning in the

x

TIE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK HE.

Wi 4$ EL e zr SEAT, er gH
fy AL pk dit (K FE YAS IH Jit
ES Fal AY BE HR BhA EUN 1h
K UE. PX
ee Wu EH Ve Eu n
Shih 45 VL 25 38 Wü SE DE
A ie Bt Be E oye

N

*

Ab D 2.2 De AR ae di,

marshes, . On, this, the waters pursued their course through the
country, even the waters of the Keang, the Hwae, the Hd, and the
Han, and the dangers and obstructions which' they had oceasioned
Were. remoyed. - The birds and beasts which had injured the people
also disappeared, and after this men. found the plains available for
Mens Ocean ky pU
TL? ^ After the death of Yaou and Shun, the principles that mark

res fell into decay, Oppressive sovereigns arose one after another,
who pulled. down houses to make ponds and lakes, go that the pco-
ple knew not where they could rest in quiet, and threw fields out
of cultivation to, form gardens and parks; so that the people could
not get clothes and food.

(E

Jtérwar ds, corrupt.speakings and òp-
pressive deeds became more rife; gardens and parks, ponds and lakes,
thickets and marshes, became more numerous, and birds and beasts
swarmed. By the time of Chow, the empire was again in a staté of
great confusion, f ' i

6. ,“ Chow-kung assisted king Woo, and destroyed, Chow. . He
smote Yen, and after three years. put its ‘sovereign to. death. He

4 seems to ignore the sageship of ‘T'ang, and of the

text, it is read tseay. JK FY Hh FH Tp
“the waters travelled in the middle or bosom of
the earth,’ ie, were no longer. spread abroad
over its surface. Choo He makes jiji H=

[27] JE x Fa. ‘between their banks,’ but
that is not so much the idea, as that the waters
pursned a course to the sea, through the land,
Anstéad of being spread over its surface. 5.
In describing this period of confusión, Mencius

kings Win and Woo ;—especially that of T'ang.
4 P vs vij i ith fot
TT:—ov- 8d tone. vit as associated with i
means thick marshy jungles, where beasts could
find shelters , The a in its composition re-

quires that we recognize the marshiness of the
thickets or cover. But this account of the
empire down tothe rise of the Chow dynasty
implies that it was thinly peopled. . 6. The
kingdom of Yen is referred to a portion of the

Ow
a1

Pr IL Cw IX, THE WORKS OF MENCHS,

[ d

Na

«q
S
zh
=

$
on
JN
xj
Xr
et .

I

z

N
aa
a
Sars

es
=

N
XE
SERA
RI

T

3

gil
a

E

\
d

SE
DA
"n
H
2

SORTEM
RDH
T
SERRE
FRA
TREES
(APSR
hES
pcm

B.
>
Rm
+

>

"

x

4 dE S

drove Fei-leen to a corner by the, sea, and slew him. The Statés
which he extinguished amounted to fifty. He drove far away also
the tigers, leopards, rhinoceroses, and elephants;—and the empire
was greatly delighted. RU is said in the Book of History, ‘Great
and splendid were the plans of king Win! Greatly were they cat-
ried out by the energy of king Woo! They are for the assistance
and instruction. of us who are of'an after day. They are all in prin-
ciple correct, and deficient in nothing. uM
T., “Again the world fell into decay, and principles faded away.
Perverse speakings and oppressive deeds waxed rife again, There
were instances of miinisters who murdered their sovereigns, and of
sons who murdered. their fathers, — e.
, 8; t Confucius was afraid, and made the ‘ Spring and Autumn,’
What the ‘Spring and Autumn’ contains are matters proper to the
emperor. On this account Confucius.said, ‘Yes! - It is the” Spring

5

chow in 'Shan-tung. Chaou K'e connects cem tinguished: - The Be HK in par: H, inueé be
_ = o
4E. E] Ht Ef witn RR Hef, but it seems [thoes leoparda, de” are the animale kept by
to belong more naturally to fX: ^. Feideün Chow, not those infesting the country, as in.the
wis a favourité minister of" hows “Who aided more ancient periods, +- fF] seethe Shov-
hiw fà his:enormitiési, Sie - tie etlistorioal Xing, V, xxiv eð: 75 va ff bw. 8a tone.
Hearse Book IV., 3 As: gb ethene PE FF: EE an d= X. "m
ginning, he appears as E Bie but without «Spring and Autumn:*2annals of Loo for 242
mention of his banishment and death. The place years (5.c. 721-479), with Confucius’ annota- -

called ‘a corner by the sea’ cannot be deter- tions, or rather all adapted by him to express a `
mined, And it would be vain to try to enumer- correct judgment on every event and actor, "hey

M at Past hae Wi s; D 2e E so te y : g
present district of Keuh:fów CHA S in Yen- Is the ‘fifty kingdóms;” which: Chow-kung ex-

`

.or of Mih.

158 THE WORKS. OF MENCIUS.

BOOK IIT.

N
E

R
alis

gms

v

SE

EX

CE

Di RS
=

RUM

w
e
`
tw
w
Ld

u
t

=

©
Po
[f

y

s

»

`
&

N
f

Ax

v

Im
essct

v

a

w
[d

Sa um

oR

©
s

em
=

E
:

v
I

E

$

hu:
EE

v

J

Sie
EAN
"

e

ats !
UN Roa HEROIN RS

i

(Ege Pe
S%

€

HL, HE

ay
at

P x BH
and Autumn which will make men know me, and it is the Spring

and Autumn which will make men condemn me.’

9.. “ Once more, sage emperors cease to arise, and the princes of
thé States give the reins to their lusts. Unemployed scholars in-
duige in unreasonable discussions. The words of Yang Choo and
Mih Teih fill the empire. If you listen to people's discourses through-
-out it, you will find that they have adopted the views either of Yang
Now, Yang's principle is—‘ each one for himself,’ which
-does not acknowledge the claims of the sovereign. Mih’s principle
is—‘to love all equally, which does. not ackhowledge the peculiar
affection due to afather. But to acknowledge neither king nor father
is to be in the state ofa beast. Kung-ming E said, ‘In thcir kitchens,
there is fat meat. In their stables, there are fat horses. But their
people have the look of hunger, and on the wilds there are those
who have died of famine, This is leading. on beasts to devour men.’

* I t i i *

are composed as an emperor would have com-
posed them. As Confucius was & sage without
the. imperial throne, had one of the imperial
sages written annals, hé would have done $o, as
Confucius has done. ‘Choo He quotes from the

.commén. Hoo ai 2 E ):—‘ Chung-ne made
She Spring and Autumn, to ledge in it the true
royal laws, There are the firm exhibition of
‘the constant duties ; the proper use of -ceremo-
nial distinctions ; the assertion of Heaven’s de-
cree of favour to the virtuous ; and the punish-
ment of the guilty :—all these things, of which
it may be said in brief that they are the busi-
ness of the emperor.’ (Comp. on Hoo’s language
the Shoo-king, IL. iii. 7.) lt was by the study of^

this book, therefore, that Confucius wished him-

"self to be known, tho’ he knew that he exposed

himself te presumption on account of the im-
perial point of view from which he looked at

every thing init. This is the meaning of

E
jt GZ + HE: dk TK We, and not —' Those

who condemn me (1.e., bad ministers and prince)
will do so on aecount of my condemnations of
them in it,’ which is the view of Chaou K'e. I
have dropt the interrogations in the translation.

9. > —up. 2d tone, applied to a virgin
dwelling in theseclusion of her apartments, and
here to a scholar without public employment.

Lord
RA
Seo

Pr. H. Ci. IX. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

[ d

Ex
=
3e
E
pal

— ,
bias
Sl
elt

€
eu
IN
ZR
e
gli

ERE
SESH
RE

RUSSE
:
m
«M
C

inl
4

ER

[ d

ORE

aye
NS

Th uj

wore
D
SSTT

w

9E

Ug
Tr
{ENN

mut

E[-o

NS
iu
IRS SSeS

is

s
m
i>

ONS
+

"EST
ASA GE JE LX

If the principles of Yang and Mih are not stopped, and the principles
of Confucius not set forth, then those perverse speakings will delude
the people, and stop up the path of benevolence and righteousness.
When benevolence and righteousness are stopped up, beasts will be
led on to devour men, and, men will devour one another. :

10. “I am alarmed by these things, and address myself to the
defence of the doctrines of the former sages, and to oppose Yang
and Mih. I drive away their licentious expressions, so that such per-
. verse speakers may not be able to show themselves. Their delusions
spring up in men's minds, and do injury'to their practice of affairs.
Shown in their .practice of affairs, they are pernicious to their
government. When sages shall rise up again, they will not change
my words. : : i

11. “In former times, Yu repressed the vast waters of the in-
undution, and the empire was reduced to order. Chow-kung’s
achievements extended even to the barbarous tribes of the west and
north, and he drove away all ferocious animals, and the people enjoyed
repose. Confucius completed the ‘Spring and Autumn,’ and rebel-
lious ministers and villainous sons were struck with terror.

Yang Choo, called also Yang Shoo gx» and 3d tone), as Mih’s was the transcendental, Jéi
Yang Tsze- keu Ga Æ) was an heresiarch of AZ ye PI A Tose, I. Pt. L iv.4.

the times of Confucius and Laoutsze, of which 10, ^ —1 » v^
Te .O7ES,—low. 3d p H AJ

. last he is said to have been a disciple. In — — Ja pe VE y LAS
the days of Mencius, his principles appear to Zx Zy> see IL. Pt. I. ñ. 17, il Af, —

have been very rife. We may eall his school the ‘embraced,’ ‘comprehended,’ i.c, among the 50

selfish school of China ( ju R-i low, States referred to above. Wk ue parri-

160 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK IË.
Mure zu TZ M XL
We mm M BRE, AK f TES
E EE UR A oos Je]. HIE ss
ER l » 4 yy ^v fü
2H
sF

EM

«1

a B =

12. “Tt is said in the Book of Poetry,

‘He smote the barbarians of the west and the north ;
He punished King and Seu;
And no one dared to resist us,’
These father-deniers and king-deniers would have been smitten by
Chow-kung. ESQ. .

13. “I also wish to rectify men’s hearts, and to put an end to
those perverse doctrines, to oppose their one-sided actions and banish
away their licentious expressions ;=-and thus to carry on the work
of the three sages. Do I do so; because I am fond of disputing ?
I am compelled to do it.

14. * Whoever is able to oppose Yang and Mih is a disciple of
the sages."

Charrer X. 1. K^wang Chang said to Mencius, “Is not Ch'an
Chung a man of true self-denying purity? He was living in Woo-
ling, and for three days was without food, till he could neither hear

ay AL RA

je ae js] Hl s
R A Se AG SEZ,
We AZ E = AB NH Fe ke As
d^ PR 4E UL HE at JE BBE AK,
ES, ^h du Best BR. HL OK, Ae Mi
ER Ei EE: atk JES fal
Hx HRARTLnJRA JB Br
AMAN Ok I ur.

Wk ^ 5S BEE IE Bat E

-

and Chán Chung, called also Chn Tsze-chung
Ga Po 9! were both men of 'Ts'e, the former

high in the employment and confidence of
the prince, the latter, as we learn from thia

cides, mentioned in par. 7. 12. See Pt. I. iv.
13. The remark in the note there is equally ap-

plicable to the quotation here. ` 18. ak

GFT; low. ad tone. Comp. II. Pt. I. ii. 17.

` 14. This concluding remark is of a piece with
the hesitancy shown by Mencius in II. Pt. I. ii,
.to claim boldy his place in the Hne of sages
along with Confucius,

Cu. 10. Tae MAN WHO WILL AVOID ALL
ASSOCIATION WITH, AND OBLIGATION TO, THOSE
OF WHOM HE DOES NOT APPROVE, MUST NERDS
GO OUT OF THE WORLD. AL Kwang Chang

chapter, belonging to an old and noble family
of the State. His principles appear to have
been these of Heu Hing (Pt. I. iv), or even
more severe. We may compare him with the
zecluses of Confucius’ time. Woo-ling d^ .
read woo) appears to have been a poor wild
lace, where Chung and his wife, like-minded
with himself, lived retired, itis referred either

Pr. IL Cu. X.

+

m

er

zB

as
S5

v

d
v
M

SSE

*

S

fe

=a
Nene DS

SSS eae

tS ole Bt

:

RSS

FOIS

C

M

T
s

M
4

RIHO

RHEA
2e

Te Br n s gl,

nor see,

had been more than half-eaten by worms.

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

161

Pl
*

^

Li

za

d

wo

*-

Ww

wees
ay

4.

Y

Sar

P
w
r

ai

~
v

E

jum

=
-€—
--
v
vii.

5
a

at

BN

v.

Me

uyo

go

joe NaN R

MT
HS SEY
Si

Fe O
h »

ram

-

AY

[ d

BA

fh

Over a well there grew a plum tree, the fruit-of which:

He crawled to it, and ,

tried to eat some of the fruit, when, after swallowing three mouthfuls,

he recovered his sight and hearing."

9

ade

Mencius replied, ** Among the scholars of Ts‘e, I must regárd.. l
Chung as the thumb among the fingers. But still, where is the self-
denying purity he pretends to? To carry out the principles which -

he holds, one must become an earth-worm, for so only can it be done.

3.

“Now, an earthworm eats the dry mould above, and drinks .

the yellow spring below. Was the house in which Chung dwells —

built by a Pih-e? or was it built/by a robber like Chih ?

Was the

millet which he eats planted by a Pih-e?. or was it planted by a.

.robber like Chih ?

to the district of Ch‘ang-shan‘or that of Tsze-:
ch'uen in the department of Ts‘e-nan. The
ie a worm proper to excrementitious mat-
ter. The term here is used, I suppose, to
heighten our sense of the strait to which Chung
was reduced by his self-denial. . WA. read yen, -

up. 3d tone, = Pe, ‘to swallow.” s.

, x ‘to carry out fully.’ 3.
Pih-e,—-see Con. Ana. V. xxi, et of Chih

These are things which cannot be known.”

was a famous robber chief of Confucius’ time, a'
younger brother of Hwuy of Lew-hea. ‘There
was, however, it is said, in high antiquity in
the times of Hwang-te, a noted robber of the _
same name, :whieh was given to Hwuy’s bro-
ther, because of the similarity of -his course.
Taou Chih (the robber Chih) has come to.be +
-like a proper name,—As Chung. withdrew from.,
human society, lest he should be defiled by it,
Mencius shows that, unless he were a worm, he
could not be independent of other men. Even the
house he lived in, and the millet he ate, might "

E

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK Il.

La
e
LS

- ia
mi
A

m

e
v
L3
v
w
v

A
SN
2
A=

TUM

Sh
TN

EE

Oi, Bl oL V :

E.
ve

Fee

ee

$
FI

v

AN ERRORS

=]

-

ERREUR
[Un
ax

NP

\
4

ENEROREE

v

PME

i
RE

OF
X3

"ERO

Em
isl
En
2%

-

\
s
=
€
v:

SENEN
Sr

NS.

EDO

ORNS

.e

EB CVESEESN

Besos

FRA
Hes WI
ET
SE
>
it
zn

`
(N
(v
rss)

b

4. “But,” said Chang, “what does that matter? He himself
weaves sandals of hemp, and his wife twists hempen threads, to bar-
ter them,”

5. Mencius rejoined, “ Chung belongs to an ancient and noble
family of Ts‘e. His elder brother Tae received from KS a revenue of
10,000 chung, but he considered his brothers emolument to be
unrighteous, and would not eat of it, and in the same way he con-
sidered his brother’s house to be unrighteous, and would not dwell
init. Avoiding his brother and leaving his mother, he went and
dwelt in Woo-ling.. One day afterwards, he returned to their house,
when it hap »ened that some one sent his brother a present of a live
goose. He, knedi his eye-brows, said, ‘What are you going to use
that cackling thing for?’ By-and-by his mother killed the goose,
and gave him some of it to eat.. Just then his brother came jnto
the house, and said, ‘It’s the flesh of that cackling thing, upon
which he went out and vomited it.

be the result of the labour of a villain like Taon- the dict. 5 x ,—Uwup. 4th tone as in II
chih, or of a worthy like Pih-e, for anything L3 i Dp

he could tell.’ — . 4 HB —see 1. i. Poison Je $ il see I. Pt. IT. x. 3
: : hi ak >
Pt. I. vii. 8. fk Tii —see Pt, Liv. )72 Jig, —the same: as t. JARA nsed for "i.
j z: A : [S] —read meih
read pei, ‘to twist, as threads of hemp Ng neih, the sound made by a

on the knee. This meaning is not found in goose, jii Bu 8n y this cackley,’

Pr. H. Cu. X. THB WORKS OR:MENCIUS. .. ^ 168

. d? . nol ” DE. 2 wo
r dies
6, * Thus, what his motke gave him he- edt not edi, but what
his wife gives him he eats, He- will pot dwell i in his brothers “honse,
but, lie dwells Jm Woo- ding. How can ‘he in süch cireynistinces

complete, the style of-life which he professes ? With: such princi-
ples‘as' Chung holds; a man must. be añ earthavorm, ‘and. then. he

can carly. them, ott.”

6. A TE Bj xX £i is expanded by Choo mot ‘to te vigitesis,* tand Would not en, it.

He EERE EH a& D» s Ê les the. Brings out the force of thë- JA in

the other eláuses, ‘Phe glossanist. of Ghaoy Ke
she ‘considered. what his mother gavé hint to eat ‘treats it move glos dy; as in the: en
t 3

6

rer rat rt Pe s

164 THE WORKS

OF MENCIUS. BOOK Iv.

BOOK IV.

LE.LOW.

THEY FRR,

(Pp

a

CHAPTER I. 1. Mencius said,

zE fh

PART I.

“The power of vision of Le Low,

and skill of hand of Kung-shoo, without the compdss and square,
could not form squares and circles, . The acute ear of the music-
master K‘wang, without the pitch-tubes, could not determine cor-
rectly the five notes. The principles of Yaou and Shun, without a
benevolent government, could not secure the tranquil order of the

empire.

With this Book commences what is commonly
called the second or lower part of the works of
Mencius, but that division is not recognized in
the ¢ritical editions, It is named Le Low,
from its commencing with those two characters,
and contains twenty-eight chapters, which ate
most of them shorter than those of the preced-
ing Books.

Cu. l. THERE IS AN ART OF GOVERNMENT,
AS WELL AS A WISH TO GOVERN WELL, TO BE
LEARNED FROM THE EXAMPLE AND FRINCIPLES
OF THE ANCIENT KINGS, AND WHICH REQUIRES
TO BE STUDIED AND PRACTISED BY RULERS AND
THEIR MINISTERS. }. Le Low, called also

Le Choo (AR): carries us back to the highest
Chinese antiquity, He was, it is said; of the
time of Hwang-te, and sq acute of vision, that,
at the distance of 100 paces, he could discern
the smallest hait, The authority for this is the
philosopher Chwang an». Some say that Le
Low was'a disciple of Mencius, but this is alto-
gether unlikely. Kyng-shoo, named Pan (wrtt-
ten HE and FRE), was a celebrated mechanist of
Loo, of the times of Confucius He is fabled
to have made birds of bamboo, that could con-

- tinue flying for three days, and horses of wood,
moved by springs. which could draw carriages,

 He is now the god of carpenters, and is wor-
shipped by then. See the Le-ke, TII. Pt. IL ii.
^21. There are some, however, who make two
men of the name, an earlier and a later.

Kwang, styled Tsze-yay CY Hf was Music-
master and a wise counsellor of Tsin, a little
prior -to the time of Confucius. See the

seta p .
EREA HHE DN b cuo
pitch-tubes,’ put by synecdoche for -+ Aen qt.
or ‘twelve tubes, invented, it is said, in the
earliest times, to determine by their various
adjusted lengths the notes of the musical scale.
Six of them go by the name of Jeu ( B ) which
are to be understood as comprehended under
i the phrase in the text. The five notes are the
! five full notes of the octave, neglecting the

 semitones, They are called "AS ja fü : tk

Ghe), Jj. See on the Shoo-king, IT. i. 24. 3e

AE Zz iid. is to be taken 'emptily,
meaning the benevolent wish to govern well,
guch as animated Yaou and Shun. jum ix is

the same finding its embodiment,—the right
art of government, having the same relation
to it as the compass to circles. &c. 2.

*

Pr. Cul. THE WORKS OF'MENCIUS. 165

Sho
Exd
1
"
A
E

ESO

2
SPE

[ d

wa

e
le
`

SNE
SERN

`
T

RES
NM
Eat

FER
TORE
nS EH

Ske

i SSR

a
(-
v
v

TERN
d

e

PX
ph

+
KANEN
‘ea y
BESSER HS
TENS

9: “There are now princes who ‘hae: benevolent hearts and a
reputation for benevolence, while yet the people do not receive any
benefits from them, nor will they leave any example to fu: ure.ages ;
—all because they do not put into practice the. ways of: the. ancient
kings.

3. “Hence we have the saying :— Virtue alone is not ‘sufficient
for the exercise of government; laws.alone cannot carry themselves
into practice,’

4. “Tt is said in the Book of Poetry,

‘Without transgression, without forgetfulness, E 4 :

Following the ancient canons.’
Never has any one fallen into error, who followed the laws of the
ancient kings.

5. “When the sages had used the vigour of their eyes, they
called in to their aid the compass, the square, the level, and the
line, to make things square, round, level, and straight the use of
the instruments is inexhaustible. When they had used their power

fig] —low. 3d tone. Observe the correlation of have a terievolént reputation Yet the heart
A $ MES of the one did not advantage the state, nor
ES and th, the last clause assigning the rea- the reputation of the other the empire. 8.

son of what is said in the preceding ones. p," [53 382 —here ‘simply being good,’ iey Virtue
3B —here, and below, the iB must be without laws, and «E $k=laws without
taken differently from its applica, in the last. virtue, the virtae, however, being understood of
= * 4, See the She-

par., and= the of that. The commen. the ‘benevolent heart. 4.
EK king, Pt. IIL ii. Ode v. st. 2. $$ Z YY —
lit., ‘continued it with? The line must be wm-
derstood of the plumb-line, as well as of tlie

E refers to king Seuen of Ts'e (see I. Pt. I.
vii.) as an instance of the princes who have a

benevolent heart, and to the first emperor of M ds ME.
the Leang dynasty (A.D. 502—537), whose Bud- marking-line. HE is rightly translated, —‘ the
histic scrupulosity. about taking tife made him level,’ but I have not been able to ascertain its

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK IV.

E

J

EF
s

[ d

=

=

\

/
os

2

t

ra

*.i
t
-

LER BW BL BS
d BW gg XJ Y
UE a RANA

a
t-
-

I NL:

B

*-
[d
v
I.

SF

I

-
TE
Sm

-

ase
T
— 3
iN

He [- 27 AREE dj
DSLISTSESE Z
H 3a) Aut, ^et A j55 4 L T— js FY

of hearing to the utmost, they called in the pitch-tubes to their aid
to determine the five notes :—the use of those tubes is inexhaustible.
When they had exerted to the utmost the thoughts of their hearts,
they called in to their aid a government that “could not endure to
witness the sufferings of men :—and their benevolence overspread
the empire.

6. “Hence we have the saying:—''To raise a thing high, we
must begin from the top of a mound or a hill; to dig to a great depth,
we must commence in the low ground of a stream or a marsh.’ Can
he be pronounced wise, who, in the exercise of government, does not
proceed according to the ways of the former kin gs?

7. “Therefore only the benevolent ought to ‘be in high stations:
When a man destitute of benevolence is in a high station, he there-
by disseminates his wickedness among all below him.

8. “When the prince has no principles by which he examines
his administration, and his ministers have no laws by which they
keep themselves in the discharge of their duties, then in the court

original form in China. In the i TR =, the whole of what precedes from ie.

As T=, Bk. I., we read :— From the adjustment 2M, A see II. Pt. II. vi. 1.

ae

of weights and things sprang the lever di.
The lever revolving produced the circle. "Phe
circle produced the square. The square produced
the dine. "Phe line produced the level? On the

last sentence ig. BH says :— —' They set up the
level to look at the line, using water as the

equalizer.’ p [i i (up. Ist tone) FA: —

Beo I, Pt. I. iii, 3. The nominative to HÌ is

, ‘to conform to,’ ie, here to take advan-

tage of, The saying is found in the Le-ke, X.
ii. 10. 8. ‘This par. is an expansion of the
last clause of the prec., illustrating how tbe wick-
edness flows downwards, with its consequences, .

L-— the highest,’ ie, the prince. T the

next ‘below,’ his ministers.

,—ch'aou, low.

lst tone, ‘the court, and T, as opposed to it,

 the various officers. as havino thoin t warb’ ta an

Pr, I Cu. L’ THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 167

EN

NULL
Tr
E

cmd

O
Zi
v
*.
œ
w
v
.

LETRES Host

.
v
L4
v

[ d

Sr EtNE

wikis?
Soe

[ d

RE

(Sinn

de
A^

SS
Va

X
Um

B
FRE

t

[d
v
e

e
[d
-

cL
PS
N
is

T

E-
a
ee
à
E:
z

E
UEM

zii

NEN
NE

NIT
=
Ez

Tm
Dar
TIT

gh

obedience is not paid to principle, and in the office obedience is.
not paid to rule. 'Superiors violate the laws of righteousness, and
inferiors violate the penal laws. It is only by a fortunate chance that
a kingdoin in such a case is preserved.

9. “Therefore it is said, ‘ Itis not the exterior and interior walls
being incomplete, and the supply of weapons offensive and defen-
sive Tot being large, which constitutes the calamity of a kingdom.
It is not.the cultivable area not being extended, and stores and
wealth not being accumulated, which occasions the ruin of a king-
dom.’ When superiors do not observe the rules of propriety, and
inferiors do not learn, then seditious poop spring up, and that
kingdom will perisli in no time.

2°
M
PEN
ies

10. “It is said in the Book of Poetry,
‘When such an overthrow of Chow is being produced by
Heaven,
Be not ye so much at your ease!
11. ‘At your ease ; —that is, dilatory.
12. “And so dilatory may those officers be deemed, who serve

their prince without righteousness, who take office and retire from

HY and ^ NA — with reference to station.

The Al at the end of the two clauses shows that

they are both equally assertive, though the
prince, governed and governing by principles of
righteousness, wil be a law to his ministers.

9. Sk S] —seen. penje p-ga

as in I. Pt II. vii. 16. IH By — fields and
wilds.’ HE, —up. 3d tone, 10. Sce the

She-king, III. ii, Ode X. 2. Jj rena kwei,
up. 3d tone. je. low, 8d tone.—From this
par. it is the ministers of a prince who are con-
templated by Mencius. They have their duty
to perform, in order that the benevolent govt,
may be realized. 1. zie A. ve
are to understand that this phrase was com:
monly used in Mencius’ time with this ac-
Ceptation. 12. 3E.—usea as a verb, ‘to

. THE WORKS. OF MENCIUS, BOOK IV.

=

[d

T
RREH

Eugene
zs

v

TNN

v
Y
vY

x
n

Y

INESS

v
7v
[ d

x

SANS >

E
HEARANN

`
banse

‘wim

EO

e.

SS SARE DESK

Em

X.

ud

X»

Miis SR (NC RS
HE

Q
a t
i tif
it without regard to propriety, and who in their words disown the
ways of the ancient kings. " uM

13, ‘Therefore it is said, ‘To urge one's sovereign to difficult
achievements may be called showing respect for him. To set before
him what is good and repress his perversities, may be éalled showing
reverence for him. He who does not do these things, saying to himself,
—My sovereign is incompetent to this, may be said to play the
thief with him.’” AN. ít

CHAPTER II. 1. Mencius said, “The compass and square produce
perfect circles and squares. By the sages, the human relations are
perfectly exhibited. l a

2. “He who as a sovereign would perfectly discharge the duties
of a sovereign, and he who as & minister’ would perfectly discharge
the duties of a minister, have only to imitate—the one Yaou, and the
other Shun, He who does not serve his sovereign as Shun served
Yaou, does not respect his sovereign, and he who does not rule his
people as Yaou ruled his, injures his people.

E

f ’ st

slander,’ or ‘disown,’ 18, Comp. II. Pt.
IL.ii.4. We are obliged to supply considerably
in the translation, to bring out the meaning of.
the last sentence, He may be taken as a verb
— to injure,’ or as I have taken it.
," CH. 2. A CONTINUATION OF THE LAST CHAP-
TER ;—TUAT Yaoy AND SHUN ARE THE PERFECT
MODELS OF SOVEREIGNS AND MINISTERS, AND THE
CONSEQUENCES OF NOT IMITATING THEM. 1.
*'l'he compass and square are the perfection of
: squares and circles ;’—but we.must understand

the meaning as in the translation. So with the
ad clause. AÅ 4fj,—see IIL Pt, IL iv. 9.

257. To these two’ things, putting
the above clauses abstractly, but we cannot do

that so well in English. The force of mnm oe.

acc. to the ti tb is *to show that there is no
other way for the sovereign and minister to
pursue.'—Of ‘the human relations’ only that of
sovereign and minister is here adduced, because

Pri CnlL—HL THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 169

-RU

EMASE

a
Ei
RER Fr

Nd
HERRY

JET
ipis n
PHE
hes

Dt
 E

QV

ar
4

jns
LIT RE

v.
or

E

A

Wey
Peet

TORT
e

S

ae

\
+
/

(

E SERE RT
NRE
x

> 85 x8 I
:

2
A: FED

ui
as

oe

mRNA

PANS e

i-
T
NS
EY
E

= o
3. “Confucius said, ‘There are but two courses, which can be
pursued, that of virtue and its opposite.’
4 “A sovereign. who carries the oppression of his people to the
highest pitch, will himself be slain, and his kingdom will perish. If
‘one stop short of the highest pitch, his life will notwithstanding be
in danger, and his kingdom will be weakened, He will be styled
‘The dark,’ or ‘The cruel,’ and though he may have filial sons and
affectionate grandsons, they will not be able in a hundred generations
to change the designation,
5. “This is what is intended in the words of the Book of Poetry,
‘The beacon of Yin was not remote,
It was in ird time of the sovereign of Hea.'
Cuarrer III. 1. Mencius said, “It was by benevolence that the
three dynasties an the empire, and by not being benevolent
that they lost it

bkd

Mencius was speaking with reference to the sense of ‘weakened’ (dict, B5 which it else-
rulers of his time. 3. If the remark were where has in Mencius. ^ 5. See the She-
Mencius’ own, we should translate £ by ‘be- king, ILL iii. Ode I. st. 8, an ode of the time
nevolenee The term in Confucius rather of the emperor Le ( b intended for his
denotes ‘perfect virtue. By the course Of] warning, The sovereign of Hea is the tyrant
virtue is intended the imitation of Yaou and Käg, and by Yin is intended the tyrant Chow,
Shun; by its opposite, the neglect of them py whose fate, neglecting the lesson furnished
as modcls. i. By sovereigns, who carry pim by that ‘of Kee, it is suggested that Le
their oppression to the highest ‘pitch, Mencius should be admonished.

intends, as his examples, Kéé and Chow, the Cn. 3, THE IMPORTANCE TO ALL, AND SPECI-
last emperors of the Hea and Yin dynasties. ALLY, TO RULERS, OF EXERCISING BENEVOLENCE,
By ‘The dark’ and ‘The cruel,’ he intends the a.’ The three dynasties,’ are the Hea,
32th (e.c. 780) and 10th (Bc. 877) emperors of the Shang, and the Chow. It is 2 bold utter-
the Chow dynasty, who received those posthn- ance, seeing the Chow dynasty was still exist-

mous indelible designations. I take $i the. ing in the time of Mencius, tho’ he regarded

22

&

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK IV.

T
ds
LES
JH.

E
2j

i 4 Tt is by the same means that the decaying and flourishing,
the preservation and perishing, of States are determined.

3. “If the emperor be not benevolent, he cannot preserve the
empire from passing from him. If the sovereign of a State be not
benevolent, he cannot preserve his kingdom. Ifa high noble or great
officer be not benevolent, he cannot preserve his ancestral temple.
If a scholar or common man be not benevolent, he cannot preserve
his four limbs.

4. "Now they hate death and ruin, and vet delight in being not
benevolent j—this is like hating to be drunk, and yet being strong
to drink wine."

CuarrER IV. 1. Mencius said, “If a man love others, and no
vesponsive attachment is shown to him, let him turn inwards and
examine his own benevolence. . If: he rs trying to rule others, and

his government is unsuccessful, let him turn in wards and examine
his wisdom. m he treats others poney and they do not return his

EA aus?

PE

ks
P4
= MTM
EAS

RE

ey

~
E
a

it as old and ready to vanish away. He has a
reference, ace. to Choo He, to the emperors Le

and Yew, mentioned in the last ch. 2. S
AE— the four seas,’ ùe. all with them, as sub-
ject to the emperor's jurisdiction. There is aspe-
cial reference, however, to the emperor's right to
offer all sacrifices :——those peculiar to himself,
and those open to others. Dis Tfe— — the

spirits of the laud aud the grain,’ ic, the spirits
securing the stability and prosperity of a par-
ticalar State, which it was the prerogative ef
the ruler to sacrifice to. Hence the expression
is here used figuratively. See the Le-ke, Pt. 11.

iii. 6. 3. Fit the verb, up. 3d tone, ‘to
hate, dislike.’ Bit (up. 2d tone) jf, —like the

Hebrew idiom. Is. v. 22. This is spoken with
reference to the princes of Mencius' time.

Cu, 4, WiTH WHAT MEASURE A MAN METES
IT WILL BE MEASURED TO HIM AGAIN, AND CONS
SEQUENTLY REFORE, A MAN DEALS WITH OTHERS,
EXPECTING ‘THEM TO BE AFFECTED RY HIM, lE
SHOULD FIRST DEAL WITH HiMSELE. The sen-
timent is expressed quite generally, but a par-
ticular reference is 'to be understood to the
princes of Mencius’ time, 1. Jz is used
in a manner common in Moencius,— to turn
back from the course being pursued, and then
to turn inwards to the work of examination
and correction." In the next par. we have it

A à »
followed by another verb, p In Y A
B
VG is Jow. lst tone, ‘to regulate,’ ‘to try to
eno FL, OA: :
rule; in pa y is low. 3d tone, ‘to be re~
gulated." the government being effective. The

M NUS art .
clauses: - ni A o X &ey ire very concise.

Pr. E. Cr. IV—VI. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 111

APT —Ó—— HP A
Ek dE EL S iit D. 112
FRR KA Ae
Ai ff JE Fe

PEEL
=
DR

J>
-

M
Yar

m
E

v

aN
MORE
SUM T

T
NSD RSH

To

zl
IN

‘OWED '»*s
is own feeling of

l^»

politeness, let him turn inwards and examine
respect.

2. “When we do not, by what we do, realize what we desire, we
must turn inwards, and examine ourselves in every point. When
„a man’s person is correct, the whole empire will turn to bin with
vecognition and. submission.

3. “Tt is said in the Book of Poetry,

‘Be always studious to be in harmony with the ordinances
of God, ime
' . And you will obtain much happiness. "

Cuarrer V. Mencius said, * People have this common saying, —
‘The empire, the State, the family.’ The root of the empire 1s in
the State. The root of the State is in the family. The root of the
family is in the person of tis head." "A

CuarrER VI. Mencius said, “The administration of govern-
ment is not difficult ;—it lies in not offending the great families. Hé

The paraphrase,in the fir < thus expands; Cu. 5. PERSONAL CHARACTER I8 NECESSARY
TO ALL GOOD INFLUENCE. Comp, ‘The supe-

.
FARE Wie A E 3E VN rior Learning,’ text of Conf, par. 4. The com-
y, e z Ex - , i qa mon saying repeated by all probably means :—
ZRA Ze iin GAA x r5] BÉ Ry the empire is made up of its component States,
J 7 v PAL. 2 and of their eomponent families ;—ie. the fami-
WREE E dk x en ^ ^H ES lies of the great ofoofe. But Mencius takes its
2th, ZZ * He who administers govern- meaning more generally, and carries it out a
s step farther. .
Cu. 6, THE IMPORTANCE TO A RULER OF SE-
CURING THE ESTEEM AND SUBMISSION OF THE
GREAT HOUSES. ‘Fhe ‘not offending’ is to be
taken in a moral sensé;—the ruler’s doing
nothing but what will command the admiring
approbation of the old and great familics in the

ment embodies benevolence to love men, and it
may beexpected men willlove him. Should he
find however that they do not, he must turn in
and examine his benevolence, lest it should be

imperfect,’ &e., &c, 2. xX fO 1H

A^ che i
Ht pr tiv “does not get what he wishes." T State. In illustration of the sentiment, Chow
—‘all,’ with reference to the general form of He refers to a story: related of the duke Hwan
the preceding clause. ' 3. See IL Pt. Liv. 6. of Ts‘e. Lighting one day in hunting, on an old

d

-1
t3

zi

e.
w
"i wi

PRF
de

RASA

as

i

z
=

Ru
HRS

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS,

dk

X
TERRA
SENA HT RENEE

TE>

300K IV,

GA
au

2m

e
a
Á

w

zi

SS KAS

i9)

*

e
N

ENS

z

lg
=
x

v
b
wi

NEHN
Se ERES

NN
Si
=

whoin the! great’ families affect, willbe affécted by ‘the whole State,
* and he whom any one State affects, will be affected by the whole em-

pire. When this is the case, such: ‘an’ one’s virtue and teachings

will spread over all within the four seas like the rush of water."

Cuaprer VIL — 1; Mencius said, ** When right goverhment'pfte-
‘wails inthe empire, princes’ of little virtue aré submissive to those
of great, and those of little worth, to those of grèat, When-bail
government prevails in the! empire, princes of small: power are
submissive to those of great, and the weak to the'strong. ‘Both these
cases are the rule of' Heaven. They who aċcord with Heaven are
preserved, and they who rebel against Heaven perish:

2, “The duke King of Ts'e said, ‘Not to be able to command
others, and at the same time to refuse to receive their commands,
is to cut one's-self' off from aH intercourse’ with others" His tears

4 sdb og * r

man of 83, the. duke sought his. blessing, that }.‘whom they affect,’ not what. ‘Observe the
he might attain a like longevity. The old man

„then prayed, ‘May my sovereign enjoy great
longevity, despising gems and gold, and making
men his jewels.” ' At. the duke's réquest he pray-
ed a second tiñe that te miglit'not be ashamed

. tolearneven from his inferiors;and a third thie,

, ‘May my sovereign not offend against his niine

“Asters and the people!’ ‘This answer offended
the duke, 5A son,’ he said, ‘may offend against

. his father, and d ininister against his sovereign.

„But how can a sovereign offend against his

ministers?” The old inan replied, ‘An offend-
ing son may get forgiveness thro’ the interces-
sions of aunts and uncles. An offending minis-
ter may be forgiven by the intercession of the

'Bovereigu's favourites and attendants. But when
Këč offended against Tang, and Chow offended
against Woo ;—those were casesin point. There

Was, no forgiveness for them?

Br dk

force of ;

Cu: 7, How tux sunsectron OP ONE STATE
NA ANOTHER 18 DETERMINED AT DIFFERENT

"TIMES, A PRINCE'S ONLY SECURITY FOR SAFETY

AND. PROSPERITY 18 ÍN BEING BENEVOLENT. X
‘L. Many conmen. Xf a
.. Many conen. say that by (ih an
jo reference is made to the emperor, but the
Y H

declarations may as well be taken generally.
Wy FG Kb Heaven, it is said, ‘em
braces here the ideas of what must be in reason,
and the different powers of the contrasted
States Fit EU at ==). This is true, but
why sink the idea of a Providential govèrn-

ment which is implied in ‘Heaven?’

2
EA D
x BA see Con, Ana. XIT xi, Ti By

Pr, I. Gus VIT. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 173
N = t 1 vide:
ya T P :
Hh, Ja M E Ht To hee

SE
HEA

A !

tt p Bii Hib 4
i JE Re pa li " La HL, Ht,
Je] Ay p, E, oe im 2S D
Whe me } KR f Jan ed H
CRX TT E HEMM
Uk i 2s BC He h AR A
TO RE M ARR

a led forth while’ he gave hisida
of Woo. ane
B. “ Now the small States imitate the Jarge,.and yet-are, ashanied
to. receive their commands. ' This is, likea scholar's being ashamed +
10. receive the commands of his master.. HO yug
4.. “ Fop, a prince who is ashamed. of this, the best plan j£ to
‘imitate king Wăn. Let one imitate king Win; and in five years, if
his State. be large, orin seven years, if A. be small he will ;be. sure
4o gire Jaws to the empire. uc fà o Aa berg Vv
5... It is said in the Book: pf, Poetr * or tss "yeu
E “The descendants of the: emperors of the Shang dinis yug
; Are i in. number:more than hundreds of thousands,

pred

enmt
But, God having passed His decree, . LES. HRT

ratt They are all submissive to Chow. ' (Up the te
no, ,They are submissive.to, Chow, « nyt Fass poda
zo + Because the decree of Heaven is not unchahging.. uni ol ae

The officers of Yin, admirable and alert,
«+ Pour out the libations, and assist in the’ ‘capital: of Choi arun

fi wid

the grave by ler husband. The old. king

Py ig taken as used for Ae men,’ but the
Woo, barbarian as-he ‘was, . show ed. inüch 3 p? cof

phrase,js.a gontracted one,, and= fü A Be
‘sepirated froni other men,’ or’ it may,

„be taken actively, which I'préfer, and similarly
Supplemented. ~Zy’,-—lower 8d tone, ‘to give à

daughter in marriage.’ Woo, corresponding to

the northern part of the present Ché-keang,
und the south of Keang-soo,-was in Confucius’
tine still’ reckoned a barbarous territory, and

the princes df the Middle Kingdom were ashamed

to enter .into relations with it. ‘The duke
King, however, yielded to the force'of circum-
stances and so saved himself. ‘Che ‘daughter
so married soon died. She pined away for her
tather and her native Ts‘e, and was followed to

pathy, for his young, daughter-in-law, mon
Bil. —fio imitate? ‘to:niake a.master of. Men-

cius” meaning is that the smaller States followed
the example of the larger ones in ‘what Was evil,

and yet did not like to submit ‘to them,.. Po

E2 ty youth,’ here,==a pupil. EN Fa

EK: — be exercising government, "esgiving law
: 0. . 5. See the She-king, III. i. Ode L st.

5. J= p EPHE ‘not hundreds
of es only, f F Jà] HR isan in-

version for. f AR F Jal fi is herean

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOR IV.

E

—
=

JA

ne
zz)
SaL er

LEN
; : pup
xis

HE
nt
eux
B

e

w

v
v
e

REEE
SRS

\
4

sies

Oo

EU CE NAE
A

SITS

sara

BIRTA
z]

FNSEA

M
I3 Jh 22)
H AN AN VY Wit. FA n
(d Bir a 5 jes d. PAL Wh
UY. EAE dd

Confucius said, ‘As against so benevolent a sovereign, they could
not be deemed a multitude.’ Thus, if the prince of a State love
benevolence, he will have no opponent in all the empire.

6. - * Now they wish to have no opponent in all the empire, but
they do not seek to attain this by being benevolent. This is like a man
laying hold of a heated substance, and not having first wetted his
hands. It is said in the Book of Poetry,

‘Who can.take up a heated substance,
Without wetting his hands? '" `

CuarrkR VIII. 1, Mencius said, * How is it possible to speak
with those princes who are not benevolent? Their perils they count
safety, their calamities they count profitable, and they have pleasure
in the things by which they perish. If it were possible to talk with
them who so violate benevolence, how could we have such destruc-
tion of kingdoms and ruin of families ?

introduct. particle, = fff. f Auf ^s 5n.

is to be understood as a remark of Confucius
on reading the portion of the She-king just

quoted ;—against a benevolent prince, like king -

Wan, the myriads of the adherents of Shang
ceased io be myriads. They would not act
against him,’ 6. See the She-king, ITI, iii.
Ode III. st, 5, The ode is referred to the time
of the emperor Le, when the empire was has-
tening to ruim, and im the lines quoted, the

author deplores that there was no resort to pro-
per measures. X" is taken as a mere particle
of transition.

Cn. 8. ‘THAT A PRINCE IS THE AGENT OF IIIS
OWN RUIN BY HIS VICIOUS WAYS AND REFUSING
TO BE COUNSELLED. 1. Stress must be laid

always on the x in AE The expression

does not denote the want of benevolence, but

the opposite of it. a= jid =z ‘to give

pr. I, Cn. VIIL—IX. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 175

í

$

Ri 49

"
v

In !
M
P
rue:

NEY

Ei

SIME
(NI

EPI
+
>
>

NIB
INE
EAS

RPI
TSA VER

fy GE
ix
UA
s YE
ER
x
E
SX

3
S

s>

HANA

Ruo

aS
—

er

N

w

wed
SECs RAN

RS

\

E

(vx

Je

x

RS SPH
Shes

Ld

She,
N-
ns

ae
=
=
BEL

* There was a boy singing

‘When the water of the Ts! ang-lang is clear,

It does to wash the strings of my cap;

. When the water of the Ts ang-lang is muddy,
It does to wash my feet.’

3. “Confucius said, "Hear what he sings, my children. "When
clear, then he will wash lis cap-strings, aud when muddy, he will
wash his feet with it. This diferent application is brought by the
water on itself.’

4. “A man must first despise himself, and then others will de-
spise hin. A family must first destroy itself; and then others will
destroy it. A kingdom must first smite itself, and then others will
smite it.

5. “This is illustrated in the passage of the Tae Ké&, ‘When
Heaven sends down calamities, it is still possible to escape them.
When we occasion the calamities ourselves, it is not possible any
longer to live.”

l Guaprer IX, 1. Mencius said, “ Kéé and Chow’s losing the em-
pire, arose from their losing the people, and to lose the people means -

P?

faithful advice to," 2. The name Ts‘ang- —when clear, then it serves to wash the cap
lang (lower Ist tone) is found applied to difft. strings, &e.’ 4, See TI. Pt. I. iv. 6. `

streams in difft, places. That in the text was Cu, 9. ONLY BY BEING BENEVOLENT CAN A
probably in Shan-tung. o2 HL < PRINCE RAISE IIIMSELF TO BE ere OR EVEN

i E AVOID RUIN. L imul
referring to the words of the song. Bi ZK aK X Bit
tthis; intensive, or we may take it adver Mally Z= Fes FR: Chaou Re PODES itL— A2

176 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS: BOOK IV,

N
2

NBE#R
=
m

AR
EN
eg
ER

v
d

N
eal

RINO
v

ORTT at

UR

DE sit

RE ed
res
a
ENERSÉ
DEW

NH
s:
ARIA
>
E

EE

U

NETS
H

\
"

ps
IE
BN
ERES AU
iN
4

SaaS

zs
am

=
SN
ERST

B
t
ees
NE

©
DAH
SFNA

Ex di.)
my dL EBD. o

to lose their hearts. There is a way to get the empire :—get the
people, and the empire is got. "There is a way to get the people: —
get their hearts, and the people are got. There isa way to get their
hearts :-—it is simply to collect for them what they like, and not to
lay on them what they dislike.

2. “The people turn to a benevolent rule as water flows down-
wards, and as wild beasts fly to the wilderness.

3. “Accordingly, as the otter aids the deep waters, driving the
fish into them, and the hawk aids the thickets, driving the little birds
to them, so Kad and Chow aided T‘ang and Woo, driving the people
to them.

4. *]f among the present sovereigns of the empire, there were
one who loved benevolence, all the other princes would aid him, by

H Wr oh iy 8 fa x taking fi in the ! It is best to take 4— here in the vinee 4.

sonse of ‘to give, ” put this does not appear to be itis marked, is in the up. 2d ee The dict gives
admissible here. ‘Fo collect for the people what it in the same in I. Pt. I. iii, —_
MW

they like, is to govern in such a way that they : a 7

shall enjoy their lives. Choo He illustrates./ low. 3d sone, [3i — lis Ak t

the meaning from te (Ch‘aou) $e, of the Han —‘he or that which drives the fish for the deep
waters? The Ha is the otter. For a curious

H
3

dynasty, who did service in the recovery of the
icular about i : fA
E particular about it, see the Le-ke, IV. CH qr)
i

i

i

; EN
: D
=

-ancient books, thus :—‘ Men like long life, and
s of th asties cheri jeg T Her
the founders of the three dynasties cherished i8 g is given in the dictionary as & A
‘the name of a bird? Choo He takes it, how-

men's lives and kept them from harm: Meu
Jove wealth, and those Kings enriched them,

and kept them from straits; &c., &e.’ 2. ever, asf, a general name for small birds.
P : , B

Pr. I. Cu IX—X. l THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

BS
aS)
*
Hi
dT
=
EN
 À [€
a
Sg

SEES

NAG
SE
mula
NE
2

=
ü
H

o

Ma

DR

TER

ages
NHR -

sil
un
Ix

ES

zm

NAN
Ld
-

*

N
u

[73

v

I

ey
4

: EZŠ
p
"Pl

AR

ot to become ems

5

driving the people to him. Although he wished
peror, ‘he could not avoid be coming so.

5. “The case of one of the present princes wishing to become em-
peror, is like the having to seck mugwort for three years old, to
cure à seven years’ sickness. If it have not been kept in store, ‘the
patient may all his life not get it. If the princes do not set their
wills on benevolence, all their days will be in sorrow and disgrace,
and they will be involved in death and ruin.

6. “This is illustrated by what is said in the Book of Poetry,

‘How otherwise can you improve the empire?
You will only with it go to ruin."

Cuarrer X. 1. Mencius said, “ With those who do violence to
themselves, it is impossible to speak, With those who throw them-
selves away, it is impossible to do anything. To disown in his
conversation propriety and righteousness, is what we mean by doing
violence to one’s-self. To say—‘ I am not able to dwell in bene-

4. E, —low. 3d tone, and in next p also. poses of wi The older the plant, the bet-

5. aj EX GF E E KF r4 H is by : ter. . The quotation from the She-king is
i

of the'two ize immediately foliowing the last
most commen. interpreted.— If you now, feeling

A ; e " 1 —9 pi =
its want, begin to collect it, it may be available quotation:in ch; Yate HN a particle, = y.

for the cure. You can hold on till it is so. If
you do not at once set about it, your case is hope-

CH. 10. A WARNING TO THE VIOLENTLY EVIT,,

AND THE WEAKLY EVIL. t B AP

less, Perhaps the FR and pa should deter- ‘Those who are cruel to ineke i.e, those
mine in favour.of this view. Chaou K‘e inter- who deny, and act contrary to their own nature.
prets'as in the translation. The down of the > a verb, ‘to disown,’ ‘to condemn.’ BUR

mugwort, burnt on the skin, is used for pur- T {i {f Ty —'to have conversation (words),

23 .

v
TT
e

ERANS

178 ; THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK Iv.
^ d^ ESTE Up 3e x UL
3 AX ie è P dX LG
E, m" Ji TE
La Fx l

an
use:
Tre

eo

Dee 84d
SURED

e
peres
Lr
H
THES

zs

à
=

>> Sess
HE

So >

iS Ray
HENKE

VCI
ta
wr

1
à

idm
nx
EUER

o

I.
ie
=

volence or pursue the path of righteousness,’ is what we mean by >
throwing one's-self away.

2, “Benevolence is the tranquil habitation of man, and right-
eousness is his straight path.

3. “Alas for them, who leave the tranquil dwelling empty,
and do not reside in it, ‘and who abandon the right path and do not
pursue it!”

Cuaprer XI. Mencius said, “The path. of duty lies in what is
near, and men seek for it in what is remote. The work of duty
lies in-what is easy, and men seek for it in what is difficult. If éach
man would love his parents and show the due respect to his elders,
the whole empire would enjoy tranquillity.”

CnarrER XIT. Mencius said, ** When those o-cupving infe-
rior situations do not obtain the confidence of the sovereign, they

annot succeed in governing the people. There is a way to obtain
the confidence of the sovereign :—if one is not trusted by his friends,
to have action (doing) with them.’

COMMON RELATIONS OF LIFE.

3. de

up. 2d tone. The lamentation is to

—for tA

be understood as for the B3 AR and the

BÉ En A —]1t is observed Md *this chapter

shows that what is right and true ( xD do
really belong to man, but he extirpates them
himself, Profound is the admonition, and
learners should give most earnest heed to it.'
Cn, 11. THE TRANQUIL PROSPERITY OF THE
EMPIRE DEPENDS ON THE DISCHARGE OF THE

srs M3 :
Bid =j; , with
! EA
which it was anciently interchanged. je

2d tone. It comprehends elders and superiors.

35s in the Chung Yung, i. 1.

Cu. ]Z. Tur GREAT WORK OF MEN SHOULD
BE TO STRIVE TO ATTAIN PERFECT SINCERITY.
See the Chung Yung, xx. 17, 18, which are
here substantially quoted. As the 20th chapter
of the Chung Yung, however, is found also in

’ the- Family Sayings,” Mencius may have had

^

Pr. I. Cu, XIL.—XIII. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 19

a AW ES ^H lr 3d, 5j [UA
SLE y. LB
E i 19 ap pe b

mE.

ME d

S
ull

[d

NEE REN

^
NEN

LÀ

EENS

BROKE
ail

Bs
SES

w

ur
“o>

e
X
1
,

SRE

wv

apk
do »

dm 0 he:
a} SE

(ii

ow

Za
FRB
m.
NY
=

cE

\
4

a
=
Een Ep RE

'
b
r
v

I
i
$

BRI)
Z
NË

Seite

v
[od

e DEDKI
DRE

tum
zu

-
CN
TRE

v

RE

he will not obtain the confidence of his sovereign. "There is a way
of being trusted by one’s friends :—if one do not serve his parents
so as to make them pleased, he will not be trusted by his friends.
There is a way to make one's parents pleased ;—if one, on turning:

his thoughts inwards finds a. want of sincerity, he will not give

pleasure to his parents. There is a way to the attainment of sin-
cerity in one's-self:—if a man do not understand what is good, he-
will not attain sincerity in himself. l aun

2. “Therefore, sincerity is the way of Heaven.
to be sincere is the way of man.

3. “Never has there been one possessed of complete sincerity,
who did not move others. Never has there been one who Had not
sincerity who was able to move others."

Cuaptrer XIII. 1. Mencius said, .*Pih-e, that he might avoid
Chow, was dwelling.on the coast of the northern sea. When he
heard of the rise of king Wán, he roused himself, and said, ‘Why `
should I not go and follow him? I have heard that the chief of the
West knows well how to nourish the old.' T'ae-kung, that he might

To think how

that, or the fragmentary memorabilia of Con-
fucius, from which it is compiled, before him,
and not the Chung-yung. .
Cu. 18, THE INFLUENCE ‘OF GOVERNMENT
LIKE THAT OF KING WAN. 1. Pih-e,—see
Con, Ana. V. xxii, etal. 'I*ae-kung was Leu

kings, Win and Woo. He was descended from .
one of Yu's assistants in the regulation of the
waters, and on his first rencontre with king
Wan, when he appeared to be only a fisherman,

he said £c VA = PE VN AX. ‘My

grandfather looked for you long ago. This led.

S hang da fan. à great counscllor of the to his being styled Ik A^ E or Grandfa-

180 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK IV.
E x HE WE
RI ea [73 E ~ ) pre b he
c» ~ i
HU ; JAN Z HE HL J sj,

dst

Ter NES

SESH

ESTARES.
gx R VE ft. Dt T8
Ain 4E ři if Ancor

t

P

AREEN

aS

a

v

avoid Chow, was dwelling on the coast of the eastern sea.

-

AHN MLN
SHOES ceo

When

he heard of the rise of king Wán, he roused himself, and said, * Why

should I not

go and follow him?

I have heard that the chief of

the West knows well how to nourish the old.'

2.

“ Those two old men were the greatest old men of the empire.

"When they came to follow king Wu, it was the fathers of the einpire
coming to follow him. When the fathers of the empire joined hin,
how could the sons go to any others ?

D

o9.

* Were any of the princes to practise the government of king

Wan, within seven. years, he would be sure to be giving laws to the

empire."
CHAPTER XIV.

I. Mencius said, ** K‘ew acted as chief officer to

. the head of the Ke family, whose evil ways he was unable to change,

ther Hope.’ See the ‘Historical Records,’ Bk.
XXXII, JT A^ HE RR, at the beginning,
Tho’ Pih-e and T'/ae-kung were led in the
‘game way to follow king Wan, their subse-
quent courses were very different. hf- sue.
‘Wan was appointed by Chow chief or baron
«i» his viceroy in the West, to be leader of
. all the princes in that part of the empire. The

comm, say this is referred to in X Æ fF.

I should rather interpret w of Wiiu's < move-
ments,’ style of administration, With E 3

' EA T comp. the account of king Wün's govt.
mirva P8 BA We aR- BS BF

ak 442, Still the AS is somewhat embar-
rassing. 2. I like the expansion of this
par. in the H EY :— Moreover, these two old

men were not ordinary mén. Distinguished
alike by age and virtue, they were the greatest
old men of the empire. Fit to be so named,
the hopes of all looked to them, and the hearts
of all were bound to them. All in the empire
looked up to them as fathers, and felt as their
children, so that when they: were moved hy
the govt. of king Wan, and came from the
coasts of the sez to him, how could the children
leave their fathers and go to any others ?'

:8. A EY —as in ch vii. 4. Comp. Analects,

XHL v.—vii. Confucius thought he could have

accomplished a similar result in shorter time.
Cu. 14. AGAINST THE MINISTERS OF HIS

TIME WHO PURSUED THEIR WARLIKE AND OTHER

Tr. 1. Cn. XIV,

i

K
*«

`
js

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS B 181

Hf
=
ons
=R
Be
=

=!
A

e

r [sf
RUE

ze
cus
>a.

ya I

SA
2

v

à
=
BEES > Bes
x
x

UNET

Nas sets
jp SSN ere

Eh
NA
TRIN E

=F

= TN
C
YOU
ES

dm
i"
E
de
LTT
F aj

while he exacted from the aa double the grain ani 7 paid.
Confucius said, ‘He is no disciple of mine. Little children, beat
the drum and assail him.’
2, “Looking at the subject from this case, we perceive that when
a prince was not practising benevolent government, all his ministers
who enriched him were rejected by Confucius:—how much more
would he have rejected those who are vehement to fight for theif
: prince! When contentions about territory are the ground on which
they fight, they slaughter men, till the fields are filled with them.
When some struggle for a city is the ground on which they fight,
they slaughter men till the city is filled with them. This is what
is called * "leading on the land to devour human flesh.’ Death i is mot
enough for such a crime.. Mur
“Therefore, those who are skilful to fight should suffer the
igh punishment. Next to them should be punished. those who
unite the princes in leagues; and next to them, those who take in

SCHEMES, Sopa OF THE HAPPINESS OF
THE PEOPLE. + See Con. Ana. XI. xvi.
Here is a plain instance of {ita used in a bad

sense, 2. ALZ ph Big, — low. 3d

tone. PB I take as in the up. 2d tone, and

the phrase in m after the analogy of Eun
Pr ch. iii. 3. Choo He and others take [n

` in the low. lst tone, and make the phrase—
*who fight trusting in the powerfulness of

weapons and strength CE JE Ji x pp

m igh), The proposed interpretation seems
much preferable, With the whole phrase comp,

T3 x AK feo Ana. XI. xvi. The force of

the Fa , it seems to me, must be to make

the whole equal to the rendering of Noel,
which Julien condemns—'qui suum principem
ad arma adstimulant. "To be strong to fight for
his prince, is à minister's duty. But to encour-
age a warlike spirit in him, is injurious to

the country. JE X Z j^ e=- 3E
Ke $E J AS AE. VA AE ‘his crime

is 80 great that even capital punishment is not
sufficient to contain it’ 3, Mere we
have three classes of adventurers who were
rife in Mencius’ times, and who recommend-
ed themselves to the princes in the ways
deseribed, pursuing their -own ends, regardless

182 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK IV.
Pr, [4 M [EJ
f ZS IN E
 PA ee un AN xin R
We x Han" ng. ze, ;

-

SER

o

FI HEA
SEE e nid

aper

v

b
v.

Due

[d

abd

grassy commons, imposing the

people,” l
CHAPTER XV.

cannot be used to hide a man’s

all be correct, the pupil is bright.

rcu the pupil is dull.

w

* Listen to & man's words an

x ERESER

TER
SE

v

3

v

1
i

D

n

[e]

SHEAR

ot a

He

cultivation of the ground on the

Lj

1. Mencius said, “ Of all the parts of a man’s body
there is none more excellent than the pupil of the eye.

The pupil
wickedness. If within the breast
If within the breast all be not

d look at the pupil of his eye.

How can a man conceal his character ?"

_Cuaprer XVI. Mencius said, “The respectful do not despise
others. The economical do not plunder others. The prince
who treats men with despite and plunders them, is only afraid
that they may not prove ‘obedient to him:—how can he be re-

'

of the people. Some advanced themselves by
their skill in war; some by their talents for
intrigue; and some by plans to make the most
of the ground, turning every bit of it to ac-
count, but for the good of the ruler, not of the

people. hf ps. Bea kind of creeper,’

*weeds--fields lying fallow or uncultivated.

4f + Jii.—the ++ Hh is what had been

oecupied by the E aR. Cheo He expands

the phrase thus :— f£ d Sh means,—to
divide this land and give it to the people, mak-
ing them undertake the charge of cultivating
it.’

CH. 15, THE PUPIL OF THE EYE THE INDEX

OF THE HEART. 1. F- 3E VN dE

, ‘the things that are in man,’ ze. in his
body. The excellence of the pupil is from its

truthfulness as an index of the heart. The
whole is to be understood as spoken by Mencius
for the use of those, who thought they had only
to hear men's words, to judge of them. 2.
comp. Con. Ana. Il. x.

Cu. 16. DEEDS NOT WORDS OR MANNERS,
NECESSARY TO PROVE MENTAL QUALITIES. ES
T 16 p tho' I have translated them
generally, are yet spoken with a reference to
the that follows. The princes of Mencius'
time made great pretensiona, of which their
actions proved the insincerity. ffi. and Xr
fr are to be understood of the disposition:

— not wish to contemn, &c.’ f directly
governing A is remarkable. Ja ŽS fí.—
4a-VÀ p or 4d I: ‘to be regarded,’

Pr IL Cu, XVE—XVIL THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. .

FERRE br.

Ze LZ TE A TE, Hi Jis 15-* 558 Bi,

y ES E Ai VM n NES

35, He, AiL, Ht i,
fuj JR

NEY

eS
RAKE RES TT A

*

HENS
=
ae LI

ale

X y
exu
3d
eo
©
oe

illo

H

=
J

-x

2
SS

oe

v

V

Ki AEG

S

ENR

5
m
Ss
Ag
I

TUA F SUB

garded as respectful or economical? How can respectfulness and
economy be made out of tones of the voice, and a smiling manner?"
CnarrER XVIIL 1. Shun-yu K‘w&n said, “Is it the rule that

4

A

- males and females shall not allow their hands to touch in giving
or receiving any thing?” Mencius replied, “It is the rule.” Kwăn

asked, “ If a man’s sister-in-law be drowning, shall he rescue her with
his hand?” Mencius said, * He who would not so rescue a drowning
woman is a wolf. For males and females not to allow their hands to
touch in giving and receiving is the general rule; when a sister-in-
law is drowning, to rescue her with the hand is a peculiar exigency,”

2. lCwün said “The whole empire is drowning. How strange
it is that you will not rescue it!”

3. Mencius answered, * A drowning empire must be rescued with
right principles, as a drowning sister-in-law has to be rescued with
the hand. Do you wish me to rescue the empire with my hand?”

‘to be styled? The final h-E Ta and in
' SAR -

" - byte
the passive, ‘to be made.’ ES Ej; tones -—
words.

Cu. 17. HxrtP-—EFFECTUAL HELP—CAN BE
GIVEN TO THE WORLD, ONLY IN HARMONY WITH
RIGHT AND PROPRIETY. 1. Shun-yu K^ván
was a native of Ts‘e, a famous sophist, and other-

, wise a man of note in his day ;'see the * His-

torical Records,’ Bk. CXXVI, Al fi. Ixvi.
He here tries to entrap Mencius into a confes-
sion that he did not well in maintaining his
dignity of reserve. For the rule of propriety

referred to, see the Le Ke I. ii. 31. x ži =

: D > zE
ARF A BL, Ese Con.
Ana. IX. xxix; XVIII. viii Ais may be
taken togéther as==‘a wolf? The names belong
to difft. animals of the same species. See on

VI Pt. I xiv. 4. 2 is compli-

 mentary, as K‘wiin was not a disciple of Men-
cius. 3. Choo He expands here :— The
drowning empire ean be rescued only by right
principles ;—the case is different from that of
a drowning sister-in-law who ean be rescued’
by the hand. Now, you wishing to rescue the
empire, would have me, in violation of right
 principles, seek alliance with the princes, and so
i begin by losing the means wherewith to rescue

184 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK 1V.

Vi
fai

e
E
HRE-

HAHH

G

b
d
dng

m
8

>i

aS
p

€
s

AM
EZ

zX
Nnn

SIA

b
S deam
donss

`
d
v

Bro

MERK
SNNT RN

FARAT

SEHFE NH
SEV

Bic

=
NIS e

b

g

Sabet LN SA
NES
FSH

’

REND
NEE
NS

HY

Cuarter XVIII 1. Kung-sun Ch‘ow said, * Why is it that the
superior man does not himself teach his son?”

2. Mencius replied, .* The circumstances of the case forbid its
being done. The teacher must inculcate what is correct. When
he inculeates what is correct, and his lessons are not practised he
follows them up with being angry. When he follows them up with
being angry, then, contrary to what should be; he is offended with
his son. At the same time, the pupil says, ‘My master inculcates on
me what is correct, and he himself does not proceed in a correct
path. The result of this is, that father and son are offended with
each other. When father and son come to be offended with each
other, the case is evil.

3. “The ancients exchanged sons, and one taught the son of
another.

wounded,’ that is, to be offended. We might take
it actively in the first instance ;—' contrary to

* . ,
what should be, he wounds—i.e. beats——his son.

But below, in KF AB Ba we cannot give

it such an active signification as to suppose
that the son will proceed to beat his father.
aise may well be taken passively, as in the comm.

CIR LOG. FBR
Fy this is to be understood as the resentful
“murmuring of the son, whose feeling is strongly
indicated by the use of -¥, ‘my master,’
as applied to his father. 3. The comm. all
say, that this only means that the ancients sent
out their sons to be taught away from home by
masters, . But this is explaining away the

it. Do you wish to make me save the empire
with my hand?’ I do not see the point of the
last question.

Cn. 18. How A FATHER MAY NOT HIMSELF
TEACH HIS SON. But this proposition is not to
be taken in allits generality. Confucius taught
his son, and so did other famous‘ men their
sons. We are to understand the first clause of
the second parh cM th, as referring
to the case of a stupid or perverse child. As to

what is said in the 3d par. of the custom of the
ancients, I have seen no other proof adduced of

it. 2. J— contrary,’ &e., to the affection
which should rule between father and son. Ba

—in the sense of 45, which, however, we must
take passively; not ‘to wound, but ‘to be

Prl Cu. XVIL—XIX. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

or

“wi =

NR
DEP

we

\
"

HN
XE
” 3H

D

1

O

HAS

SSSR BEI

MEG

pes

ADVISE

eee vik a an
E e HG Ha XL BE
ULUNC EE, NES
A Wh ^p xe dt mA K, A^
Bn A BIE TSO,
A EE ES PE ia

N
i

ABN S 8

4. ‘Between father and son, there should be no reproving ad-
monitions to what is good. Such reproofs lead to alienation, and
than alienation there is nothing more inauspicious.”

Cuaprer XIX. 1. Mencius said, * Of services which is the great-
est? The service of parents is the greatest. Of charges which is
the greatest? The charge of one’s-self is the greatest. That those
who do not fail to keep themselves are able to serve their parents
is what I have heard. But I have never heard of any, who, having

‘failed to keep themselves, were able NEY to serve their
parents.

2. ‘There are many services, but the service of parents is the
root of all others. There are many charges, but the charge of one’s-
self is the root of all others.

3. “The philosopher Tsing, in nourishing Tsing Seih, was al-
ways sure to have wine and flesh provided. And When they were

A *hE-USHKSE

(1

guard and keep. The keeping one's-self is from
all that is contrary to righteousness,

è

, ‘laying what is good on them, and causing
them to do it." i
Cu. 19. THE RIGHT MANNER OF SERVING PA-

' RENTS AND THE IMPORTANCE OF WATCHING OVER

ONE’S SELF, IN ORDER TO DO 80. 1.

l Sh f K —lit., ‘of services—i.e., duties of

service which a man has to pay to others—which
‘is great?’ Sf —charges, what a man has te

* what is not a service ?’ ie.

RBH

the services a man has to perform are many.

—in the sense of ‘root, according to the Chinesa
way of developing all other serviees from filial

piety; see the Heaou king 2% £o passim.

There is more truth in the 2d part of the par.
3. Seih was Tsing Sin's father; see Con, `
Ana, XL xxv. Fow. 3d tone. ‘Nourish-

24

186 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK IV.
kel in ae os
pn > eee) of » b

b
G

GER

eau
BE

©

EE
SEE RE

"pA

v

HIRI

GER
XD

-
v

s

uu
e e wey, Se,

AUN Aro. i
Z A, ff Hi zH IZ tik Ju
JE JE j Ws I FE
HX di. uH D Aun ur

being removed, he would ask respectfully to whom he should give
what was left. If his father asked whether there was any thing left,
he was sure to-say, ‘There is.’ After the death of Tsang Seih, when
Tsang Yuen came to nourish the philosopher Tsing, he was always
‘sure to have wine and flesh provided. But when the things were
being removed, he did not ask to whom he should give what was
left, and if his father asked whether there was anything left, he would
answer *No';intending to bring them in aguin. This was what
is called—‘ nourishing the mouth and body. We may call the philo-
sopher Tsáíng's practice—‘ nourishing the will."
4, “To serve one’s parents as the philosopher Ts
may be accepted as filial piety.” ;
Cuapter XX. Menċius said, “It is not enough to remonstrate
with a sovereign on account of the mal-employment of ministers, nor
to blame errors of government. It is only the great inan who can
rectify what is.wrong in the sovereign's mind. Let the prince be

‘ang served his,

Ang the will,’ &e., gratifying and carrying out the always leading them on in what is right and
father's wishes. , 4. The E! 4h, at the true. Iam only one who nourishes his parents,
end occasions some difficulty. Choo He quotes How can I be deemed filial?"

from one of the brothers Ch‘ing these words :—
t To serve-one’s parents as Tsing Sin did his,
may be called the height of filial piety, and yet
Mencius only says that it might be accepted as

such—'H[

.was something supererogatory in Tsăng’s ser-
vice?" Possibly, Mencius -may have been
referring to Tsing’s disclaimer of being deemed
-a model of filial- piety. See the Le-ke, XXI

( S E ii. 14, where he says:—' What the

‘superior man calls filial piety, is to anticipate
the wishes, and carry out the mind of his parents,

1: did he really think that there ,

Cu. 20. A TRULY GREAT MINISTER WILL BE

 SEEN IN HIS DIRECTING HIS EFFORTS, NOT TO THE
CORRECTION OF MATTERS IN DETAIL, BUT OF THE

1. $j —read
chih, = 278 “to reprehend." n ,—kien, up. 3d
tone. and
objective governed by E and ni and xX

! A as used impersonally. Sil — fit pi

' (with the sovereign.’ Chaou K'e introduces Bil

SOVEREIGN’S CHARACTER,

are to be taken asin the

Tr Cn. XX.—XXIV.

E:
JE

NIAE

K
i

8

V
v
v
v

N>
Dp

a

p An
c 4 — BH

benevolent, and all Ais acts will be benevolent.
righteous, and all his acts will be righteous.
rect, and everything will be correct.

the kin gdom will be firmly settled.’
CHAPTER XXL Mencius said,

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

187

IE

tal

SSN a ITI HEH

fg
dl

irn
TT eat

v

-Dè
 AS

v

ENAR
ge

I:

is

[ d

a

i De

ck

è
Let the prince þe
Let the prince be cor-
Once rectify the prince, and

“There are cases of praise which

could not be expected, and of reproach when the parties have been

seeking to be perfect.”

Cuarrer XXII. Mencius said,

* Men's being ready with their

tongues arises simply from their not having been 3 repr oved.”

Cuaprrer XXIII.
like to be teachers of others.”

Cuarrer XXIV.

.Tsze-zaou to Ts'e.
n e

before ni as well. He seems to interpret dif-
ferently, from the transl, making X (= yv

^ ‘little men,’) the subject of pe A

‘little men are not fit to remonstrate with their ,
sovereign.’ This is plainly wrong, because we

i
cannot carry it on to the next clause, = iF.

‘to correct.’ —The sent. of the ch. is illustrated
by an incident related, of Mencius by the philo-

_sopher ži (B.C. 250).—' As Mencius thrice visit-
ed Ts‘e, ions speaking to the king about the i

`, errors of his government, his disciples were

surprised, but he simply said, J must first eor-
-rect his evil heart.
, Cm.21. Praise AND BLAME: ARE NOT AL-

WAYS ACCORDING TO DESERT. ia. in the sense

of RE, “to calculate, ‘to measure. For 23 in '

Mencius said, “The evil of men is that they

1. The disciple Yð- -ching went in the train of

the sense heré; HON i is often used in modern lan`
guage.

Cn. 22. "Tug BENEFIT OF REPROOF. y
 read e, low. 3d tone, ‘easy.’ Choo He supposes
that this remark was spoken with some par-
ticular reference. This would acount for the

H RR, ‘simply.’

Cu. 28. Br nor MANY MASTERS. Comm,
; suppose that Mencius’ lesson was that such a
 liking indicated a self-suiticiency which put an
end to self-improvement,

Cu. 24. How MENCIUS REPROVED Y8-cHING
FOR ASSOCIATING WITH AN UNWORTHY PERSON,
AND BEING. REMISS IN WAITING ON HIMSELF.

1. Yó-ching,—see Í. Pt. II. xvi, 2. "'J'sze-gaou
was the designation of Wang Hwan, mentioned
Il. Pt. IL. vi. From that chapter we may under- _
stand that Mencius would not be pleased withone
of his disciples associating with such a person,

188 ` . THE WORKS OF MENCIUS, :

oo

BOOK IV,

(6)
gO

DEN
PIHS
Aak I a
yar

[e]

SRE

L od
v
o
e

v

ERRAN

v

TA
erar

v

b
=

[*]

Seo

ERIS

-©

Se
sete

w

RE

o

-

DATS

o

See Sees
EHS

T KEK

v

SUFER

v

o

»

Neh TT HERS NEALE
TI SoSH TD ll

v

FEE
NOD GF bee

(T

B] OH HD

2. He came to see Mencius, who said to him, * Are you also
come to see me?" Yó-ching replied, * Master, why do you speak
such words?” -“ How many days have you been here?” asked Men-
cius. “I came yesterday." “Yesterday! Is it not with reason
then that I thus speak?” “My lodging-house was not arranged."
* Have you heard that a scholar's lodging-house must be arranged
before he visit his elder? " .

9. Y6-ching said, “I have donè wrong."

Cuaprer XXV. Mencius, addressing the disciple Yó-ching, said to
him, “Your coming here in the train of Tsze-gaou was only because
of the food and the drink. l could not have thought that you,
having learned the doctrine of the ancients, would have acted with
a view to eating and drinking."

X the verb; fL. 2. The name is
repeated at the begin. of this paragraph, the
former being narrative, and introductory mere-

dy.. Jy 3G the ris ‘also’ is directed against
Tegin Choo He explains if E by
BY d + Which, in common parlance, means ‘the
day before yesterday,’ But I do not see that it

ET

the time separated from the present by one
rest — &, as if the same sound of the two

characters FF A determined the miedning:
f (up. 2d tone) E: is used by Mencius of

himself before :—II. Pt. II. xi. 4.
Cu. 95. A FURTHER AND MORE DIRECT RE-

PROOF OP YS-CHING. fü "Ims are both con-

‘should have that meaning here. = properly
means ‘formerly,’ and may extend to the re-

motest antiquity. It is used also for yesterday,

temptuous terms,=our application of ‘the
loaves and fishes." imn a B S -Wm u
Bi BSS eg t-

*

Pr. I. Ca. XXVL—XXVIH. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

S à FE, T
DE 4E A,
X JH Av

aa

JmAPrER XXVI. .1. Mencius said, “There are three things which
are unfilial, and to have no posterity is the greatest of them,
2. “Shun married, without informing his parents, because of this,
—lest he should have no posterity. Superior men consider that his
doing so was the same as if he had informed them.”

CuarrER XXVII.

1. Mencius said, “The richest fruit of bene-

volenee is this,—the service of one's parents. The richest fruit of
' righteousness is this,—the obeying one's elder brothers.

Cu, 26. SHUN’S EXTRAORDINARY WAY OF
CONTRACTING MARRIAGE JUSTIFIED BY THE MO-
TIVE. 1. The other two things which are
ünfilial are, according to Chaou K'e, ist, By a
flattering assent to encourage parents in un-
righteousness; and 2d, Not to succour their
poverty and old age by engaging in official
service. To be without posterity is greater

than those faults, because it is an offence

against the whole line of ancestors, and ter-
minates the sacrifices to them.—In Pt, II. xxx.,
Mencius specifies five things which were com-
monly deemed unfilial, and not one of these
three is among them. It is to be understood

that here ^ zx "B = is spoken from the

point of view of the superior man, and, more-
over, that the first par. simply lays down the
ground for the vindication of Shun. 2.

B fit H- fap low. 3d tone. Zi. implies

tct
getting the parents’ permission, as well as
informing them. But Shun's parents were so
evil, and hated him so much, that they would
have prevented his marriage had they been
told of it.
Cu. 27. FILIAL PIETY AND FRATERNAL OBE-
DIENCE IN THEIR RELATION TO BENEVOLENCE,
RIGHTEOUSNESS, WISDOM, PROPRIETY, AND MUSIC.
l. i is sometimes opposed to ;

"what is solid to what is.empty, shadowy ;’

sometimes to, ‘what is real to what is no-

minal ;’ and sometimes to , ‘what is substan-
tial to what is ornamental,’ ‘fruit to flower.’
In the text, it is used in the last way, and I can-
not express it better than by the ‘richest fruit.’
FER, is emphatic ;— the fruit of benevolence
is the service of parents;—i is? So in the
other instances. Benevolence, righteousness,

r3
AE tH,

&c., are the principles of those, the capabilitiea
of them in human nature, which may have end-
less manifestations, but are chiefly and prim-
arily to be seen in the two virtues spoken of.—
What strikes us as strange is the subjeet of
music. The difficulty has not escaped native

E y E
commentators, The author ef the Se at AS

X p B says, in loc, :—-* Benevolence, right-

eousness, propriety, and knowledge, are the four
virtues, but this ch. proceeds to speak of music.
For the principles of music are really a branch
of propriety, and when the ordering and adorn-
ing, which belong to that, are perfect, then
harmony and pleasure spring up as a matter
of course. In this way we have propriety. meni- -
tioned first, and then music. Moreover, the
fervency ef benevolence, the exactness of right-
eousness, the clearness of knowledge, and the
firmness of maintenance, must all have their
depth manifested in music. If the ch. had not
spoken of music, we should not have seen the
whole amount of achievement. The reader
may try to conceive the exact meaning of this
writer, who also points out another peculiarity

in the chapter, which many have overlooked.

Instead of E 1, after US Nr put X, a8

at the end of the other clauses, we have

Bu AE A, TIS ‘showing,’ $ays he, ‘mos
vividly how his admiration was stirred, It is
as if from every sentence there floated up à
upon the paper, so true is it that per-
fect filial piety and frater. duty reach to spirit-
ual beings, and shed a light over the world,
and then do we know that in the greatest
music there is & harmony with heaven and

earth." 2 Julien translates dw abjicere,

19 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

BOOK IV,
FA
LZ]
n Eee] :

v
EI

&
ud

IHR
SEEN

excu
ESN

wag

ore

>
A
E

D
USS
M

b:

WI

S>
HO
RI

wI

[d

sega toe

E RT

X
f

Ne
iz P

Sr
Xm
>
V
"—
ensem

BVVHNENRSS
er!

` 3 o All RR, ye .

2. “The richest fruit of wisdom is this, —the knowing those two
things, and not departing from them. The richest fruit of propriety
is this, —the ordering and adorning those two things. The richest
fruit of inusic is this,—the rejoicing in those two things. When they
are rejoiced in, they grow. Growing, how, can they be repressed ?
When they come to this state thàt they cannot be repressed, then
unconsciously the feet begin to dance and the hands to move."

Cuarter XXVIII. 1. Mencius said, “Suppose the case of the
whole empire turning in great delight to an individual to submit to
him.—To regard the whole empire thus turning to him in great
delight but as a bundle of grass;—only Shun was capable of this.
He considered that if one could not get the hearts of his parents
he could not be considered a man, and that if he could not get to
an entire accord with his parents, he could not be considered a son.

Hia
zi
ean

=
at
N

To have that meaning, it must have been in the
up. 2d tone, which it is not. The first gh is

95, ‘music;’ the other two are Wh, ‘to enjoy.’
pa An is used absolutely,—* unconsciously,’
though we might make ^al personal also,— we

do not know.’ A x BS Z the feet’s

stamping it.’ So the next clause.

Cu. 28. How SHUN VALUED AND EXEMPLI-
FIED FILIAL PIETY, 1. The first sentence
is to be taken generally, and not with reference
to Shun simply. It is incomplete. The con-

clusion would be something like—'thia would
be accounted the greatest happiness and glory.’
FF is properly ‘the mustard plant,’ but it is
sometimes, as here, only synonymous with
nay AH. = anes

FA. AE: ZZ all this is the reason-
ing of Shun’s mind. x 4 Af, like p^
JE J^. in ch. 16, o AB. ‘not to obey,’ ‘not

to accord with,’ but Choo He and others labour
hard to make it out to mean,—‘to bring the
parents to accord with what is right, so as to
be able then fully to accord with them.’

Pr L Csi XXVII. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. `. 191

Ti
 AC Hx Jn]
FR iG BK ZF
BH d IAN o
2. “By Shun’s completely fulfilling everything by which a
parent could be served, Keo-sow was brought to find delight én what
was: good. When Koo-sow was brought to find that delight, the
whole empire was transformed. When Koo-sow was brought. to
find that delight, all fathers and sons in the empire were established
in their respective duties. This is called great filial piety.”
t . A iis
2. Shun's father is known by the name of Koo- ; tion. ‘AH fathers and sons, &o.,—i.£; all sens
sow,-but both the characters denote ‘blind,’ and were made to see, that, whatever might be the
.he was so styled, i¢ is said, beeause of his men- characters of their parents, they had only to
tal blindness and opposition to all that was imitate Shur, and fathers, even though they
good. Y V, in the sense of ‘to be pleased,’ might be like Koo-sow, were shamed to refor-
‘joyful,’ understood here with a moral appliea- mation, .

m

192 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK IV,

BOOK IV.
LE LOW. PART II.

»

AUR EH BOE T

Caarter I 1. Mencius said, “Shun was born in Choo-fung
moved to Foo-hea, and died in Ming-t‘eaou ;—a man near the wild
tribes on the east.

2. “King Wan was born in Chow by mount K‘e, and died in
Peih-ying ;—a man near the wild tribes on the west.

3 “ Those regions were distant from one another more than a
thousand le, and the age of the one sage was posterior to that of the
other more than a thousand years. But when they got their wish,

Cu. 1. THE AGREEMENT OF SAGES NOT AF-
PECTED BY PLACE OR TIME, 1. The com-
mon view derived from the * Historical Records,"
Book IL, is, that Shun was a native.of K'e-
chow, eorresponding to the modern Shan-se, to
which all the places in the text are accordingly
referred. Some, however, and especially Tsang

"Tsze-koo ( Y [al of the Sung dynasty,

find his birth-place in T's'e-nan in Shan-tung,
and this would seem to be supported by Men-
cius in this passage. ‘There is considerable dif-
fic: with Miug-t'eaou, as we read in the *His-
torical Records,’ that in the 39th year of his
reign, Shun died, while on a tour of inspec-
tion to the south, in the wilderness of Ts‘ang-

‘woo OR TE. and was buried on the Kew-e
duse hills in Keang-nan, which are in Ling-
ling dx 15:31 The discussions on the point
are very numerous. See the 4 E and py
= T BR Bt in loc ; see also on the Shoo-
king, Pt. I, No doubt, Mencius was not speak-
ing without book. gi E > lit, ‘a
man of the eastern E, or ‘barbarians,’ but
the meaning can only be what I have given in

the translation. So py : Z A Chow,

the original seat of the house of Chow, was in
the present department of Fung-ts‘eang, in
Shen-se. Peih-ying is to be distinguished from
Ying which was the capital of Ts‘oo, and with
which the paraphrast of Chaou K'e strangely
confounds it, Choo He says it was near to

Fung € and Kaou p. the sucessive cap-
itals of king Woo. The former was in Ling-
heen cen y" and the latter in Heen-yang

Om 15721 both in the dept of Se-ngan ; Peih-

ying was in the dist. of Heen-ning ( y, E: of
the same dep., and there the grave of king Woo,
or the place of it, is still pointed out. fü EOS

TR [i]. — when they got their wishes
carried out in the Middle kingdom.' We are to
understand that their aim was to carry out
their principles, not'to get the empire. 4}
should be called a tally or token perhaps, rather
than ‘a seal.’ "Anciently, the emperor deliver-
ed, as the token of investiture, one half of a tul-
ly of wood or some precious stone, reserving the
other half in his own keeping. It was cut right
through a line of characters, indicating the com-

Pr. H. Cn. L—II.

3

v
aS
--

w€

a +

RAO

a

 ENS
nd
wes

SSO

\
?

SEAS
E
vB
X
x:

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

=
yd

m
Ti

D»

193
pem EIN
= à

HE

IUO

RENER
-

"S
DESI?

ow

\

x

and carried their principles into practice throughout the Middle king-
' dom, it was like uniting the two halves of a seal.

4, “ When we examine the sages,—both the earlier and the later,
—their principles are found to be the same.”

CHAPTER Il.

1. When Tsze-ch‘an was chief minister of the State

of Ch'ing, he would. convey people across the Tsin and, Wei in his

own carriage.
2. Mencius said,

“It was kind, but showed that he did not

understand the practice of government.
3. “When in the eleventh month of the year the foot-bridges
are completed, and the carriage-bridges in the twelfth month, the

people have not the trouble of wading.

.
i

mission, and their halves fitting each other -‘ was hearing the govt., ie, was chief minister

when occasion required, was the test of truth
and identity. Originally as we see from the

formation of the character qa the taliy must*

have been of: bamboo. 3. p? feum

is to be understood generally, and not of Shun
and Win merely. HPS —,-P§s is taken

as a verb— *to reckon,’ ‘to estimate,’ and
is understood of the mental exercises of the
sages. Hp- ‘their mindings, the prin-
ciples which they cherished.

Cu. 2. GOOD GOVERNMENT LIES IN EQUAL

MEASURES FOR THE GENERAL GOOD, NOT IN ACTS
OF FAVOUR TO INDIVIDUALS. 1. T'sze-ch‘an,

FE, —low. 3d tone. Choo He explains YE
He SA vy A HE Ejr FE << SAL. bu 3fe

so used is low. Ist tone. He so expands, how-
ever, probably from remembering a conversation
on 'l'sze-ch'ah between Confucius and Tsze-yew,
related in the Kea-yu, Bk. 1V. iv, near the end,
and to which Mencius has reference, ‘The sage
held that T'sze-ch‘an was kind, but only as a
mother, loving but not teaching the people, and,
in illustration of his view, says that ''sze-ch'an,

A BT HE Hi. 35 zw zb. * used the

carriage in which lie rode to convey over those
who were wading thro' the water in the winter."
2. The subject here is the action, not the man.
The practice of govt. is to be seem not in acts

—see Con. Ana. V.xv. The Tsin and Wei were - of individual kindness and small favours, but.

two rivers of Ch‘ing, said to have their rise in
is

the Ma-ling ( & Am hills, and to meet at a laws. 3.

certain point, after which the common stream
seems to have borne the name of both the
feeders. They are referred to the department

of Ho-nan in Ho-nan province. Er i

in the administration of just and beneficent
‘Khe 11th and 12th months here
correspond to the 9th and 10th of the present
calendar, which follows the Hea division of the
year;—see Ana. XV. x. Mencius refers to a
rule for the repair of the bridges, en the termina-

tion of agricultural labours, 4, yy-

25

n

194 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK IV.

EN.
zu
HE

HER
s
c

(Nou
Goth Ss
poe
Ni
oN

ET
ez

Nit>
ERE
m
ae
yeu
=

Boas

=
m xx

zm
=

jx
=]
me

t
w
w

ov

Ei in, s EF o H- p

4. “ Let a governor es his rule on principles of equal justice,
and when he goes abroad, he may cause people. to be removed out
of his path. But how can he convey everybody across the rivers?

5. * [t follows that if a governor will try to please everybody,
he will find the days not gnaet for his work.”

Cuarrks HI, 1. Mencius said to the king Seuen of Ts‘e, “ When
the prince regards his ministers as his hands and feet, his ministers
regard their prince as their belly and heart; when he regards them

‘as his dogs and horses, they regard him as any other man; when he

regards them as the grouud oras grass they regard him as a rob-
ber and an enemy. i

. The king Said, * According ‘to the rules of propriety, a min-
Ne wears nour ning when he has left the service of a pr ince. How

must a prince behave that his old ministers may thus go into mourn-
ing?”

3. Mencius replied, “ The admonitions of a minister having been

Fh a. ‘a chief minister.’ E read as wate hfulness and T HS *As his dogs and
 horses/—e. without respect, but feeding them.
ee ; Removing people from the way,.when i< As any other man,'—lit. *as a man of the king-
the prince went forth, was likewise ‘a rule of dom,’ i.e, without any distinction or reverence.
the Chow dynasty ; and not only did it extend ; ‘As ground or as grass, —ie. trampling on them,
to the prince, but to many officers and women, cutting them off. 2. The Le here referred
See the Cliow-]e, VI ix. 5. “Phe days to is mentioned in the* Ritual Usages? See Bk.
not sufficient’ —i e. he will not have time for XL, about the middle. The passage, however,
all he has to do. ` is obscure. A rid At for an old prince,’
Cu. 3. WHAT TREATMENT SOVEREIGNS GIVE a I ex TF un
TO THEIR MINISTERS WILL BE RETURNED To Le. prince whose service he has left. The
THEM BY A CORRESPONDING BEHAVIOUR, king falls back on this rule, thinking that
* As'bis hands and feet.-—i.e.. with kindness ee Mencius had expressed himself too strongly.

attention, * As their belly and heart, — ie. with ' 3. [E BE— fat aud moistening

SD
e

Pr. H. Cu. ITI, TIE WORKS OF MENCIUS; 1
z M AT dd ROSE d
— a An =) > E
AT E ie
 E 7 » AR Er CE

Vr
Ce
—
i al
P d D

re

HERD

cv

EA
SN

~

=
EE

mem
EEN &

SRE

*

zi

1
Bi
EN
sn

e
w
v.

w
.

vi

Bougie

VERA
cg Tt
OMNE

=

Ha

gb

e
e

MIT
P we

LZ Buon

SY

V

d mer
ees
E

SNES EAU

> Eas

followed, and his dd to, so that odes have descend-
ed on the people, if for some cause he leaves the country, the prince
sends an escort to conduct him beyond the boundarics. He also
anticipates with recomimendatory intimations his arrival in the country
to which he':is proceeding. When he has been gone three years .
and does not return, only then at length does he take back his fields -
and residence. This treatment is what is called ‘a thrice-repeated
display of consideration.’ When a prince acts thus, mourning will
be worn on leaving his service.

4, “Now-a- days, the remonstrances of a minister are not follow-
ed, and his advice is not listened.to, so that no blessings descend on
the people. When for any causé he leaves the country, the prince
tries to seize him and hold him a prisoner. He also pushes him
to extremity in the country to which he has gone, and on the very
day of his departure, he takes back his fields and residence. This
treatment shows him to be what we call ‘a robber and an enemy."
What mourning can be worn for a robber and an enemy?”

' influences, —blessings. pis VN A Br ft

‘must be supplemented by pu ii HL E

v 3 K
Ak BH We A Z ; ‘mentions and com-
PES ;
mends his worth, wishing him to be received
and used.’ Hl „— fields, —emoluments.

-—Uused for an individual residence. We have

 not had the character in this sense before.
The ‘thrice-repeated display of considera-
tion,’ refers, Ist, to the escort as a protection
from danger; Yd, to the anticipatory recom-
mendations; and 3d, to the long continued
emoluments, in expectation of the minister’s

return, 4. Here and above,

 is not to be taken as AK nx iu LI. Pte

THE WORKS

196 . OF MENCIUS. BOOK IV.
It cA!
— ="

EH
Das > TN

ta

+h

t

a
v

bat

mE

E

al

YSE
iN

LY

w-

v
o

AS OT aE AT

HES S CORE
Ex

"

[ d

CuAPTER IV. Mencius said, “When scholars are put to death
without any crime, the great officers may leave the country. When
the people are slaughtered without any crime, the scholars may

,

remove.
CHAPTER: V.

Mencius said, “If the sovéreign be benevolent, all

will be benevolent. If the sovereign be righteous, all will be right-

eous.” .

CuaAPTER VI. Mencius said, “ Acts of propriety which are not really

proper, and acts of righteousness, which are not really righteous, the
great man does not do."

CuaAPTER VII. Mencius said, “ Those who keep the Mean, train
up those who do not, and those who have abilities, train up those
who have not, and henee men rejoice jn having fathers and elder -
brothers who are possessed of virtue and talent. If they who keep

1.i.1. We must understand ‘wishes to,’ or

“tries to,’ before z^, for if the minis-

ter were really imprisoned, he could not go to
another kingdom.

, Cu. $. PROMPT ACTION 18 NECESSARY AT THE
RIGHT TIME; Al y. ‘may,’=it is time to.
If the opportunity be not taken, while the.
injustice of the ruler is exercised on those:
below them, it will soon come to themselves,
and it wil be too late to escape. The

H BEE concludes its paraphrase thus :— We

may see how the ruler should prize virtue,
and be slow to punish; and how he should be
cautious in execution of the laws, ever trying
to practise benevolence. If he ean indeed em-
body the mind of God, who loves all living
things, and make the compassion of the ancient
sazes his rule, then both officers and people will

*
be grateful to him as to Heaven, and long
repose and protracted good order will be the
result.’

Cu. THE INFLUENCE OF THE RULER’S EX-
AMPLE. See Pt. I. xx., where the same words
are found, but their application is to stimulate
ministers to do their duty in advising, or re-
monstrating with, their sovereign.

Cu. 6. THE GREAT MAN MAKES NO MISTAKES
IN MATTERS OF PROPRIETY AND RIGHTEOUSNESS.

Ee x n. #3% Z E expressions
in themselves contradictory, must be taken with
some latitude. ‘Respect,’ it is said, ‘belongs
to propriety, but it may be carried se far as to de-
generate into flattery,’ &c., &c. f

Cu. 7. WHAT DUTIES ARB DUE FROM, AND
MUST BE RENDERED BY, THE VIRTUOUS AND TA-

5.

LENTED TO THE YOUNG AND IGNORANT. ,

i A Aly =‘siven the Mean, ‘given abilities."

i Ir MENCIUS.
Pr. I. Ca. VIL—-XT. . THE WORKS OF MENCIUS

ETE. ramp p
=] Es n ears LXI sF
en (eee EN o "

x
zz

ae

TREN

RE

zs
SO alt EX

TRENE

v
*-.

3

PATAR
PERN KEN

v

er

SAES

>

X
C dk
EM

j

SRS BN

UR

*«uil

i= me)

the Mean spurn, those who do not, and they who have abilities spurn
those who. have not, then the space between them—those so gifted
and the ungifted—will not adinit an inch."

CuarrER VIII. Mencius said, * Men must be decided on what
they will nor do, and then they are able to act with vigour in what
they ought to do.” ' ` :

Cuarrer IX. Mencius said, “ What future misery have they and
ought they tó endure, who talk of what is not good in others!”

CHAPTER X.
things.”

Cuarter XI." Mencius said, “ The great man

rH,—the Mean, the rightly ordered course of
*

conduct, Both it and F must be taken here

fes in II. Pt. L i. 3.

3t FA th, Z Zby neglecting their

duty, the one class bring themselves to the
level of the other. E embraces both the rH

&nd the x above. ^ $3 —see the Doctrine
of the Mean, iv. u Sp with an inch,"

ie, be measured with an inch.

Cu. 8. CLEAR DISCRIMINATION OF WHAT IS
"WRONG AND RIGHT MUST PRECEDE VIGOROUS
RIGHT DOING. Lit., ‘men have the not-do, and
afterwards they can have the do.’ I
implies vigour in the action. Chaou K*e's comm.
is:—‘If a man will not descend to take in any
irregular way, he will be found able to yield a
thousand chariots.’

Cu. 9. -EVIL SPEAKING IS SURE TO BRING

y fuer i
WITH IT EVIL CONSEQUENCES. The T here, {

in the conerete.

Mencius said, “ Chung-ne did not do extraordinary

does not think be-

followed by pi 4a ; Creates a difficulty. Choo
He supposes the remark was made with some
peculiar reference. If we knew that, the diffi-
culty would vanish. The original implies, I
think, all that I have expressed in the transta-
tion. ‘

Cu. 10. THAT CONFUCIUS KEPT THE MEAN.
ae RA Hie, ‘excessive things,’ but *ex-
traordinary’ rather approaches the meaning.
It may strike the student that the meaning is
— Confucius’ inaction, (—slowness to aet) was
excessive but in that case we should have
had A. and not , at the end, We may

comp. with the sentiment the Doct. of the Mean,
xi, xiii. ; Ana. VIII. xx. ; et al.

Cu. ll. WHAT IS RIGHT 18 THE SUPREME
PURSUIT OF THE GREAT MAN. Comp. Con. Ana.

IV. x. a IM. does not must ;' he is beyond

the necessity of caring for that. HE x py

FE only that in which righteousness is; that

, *
198 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK IV.

NOEL ER
X

forehand of his words that they may be sincere, nor of his actions
that they may be resolute ;—he simply speaks and does what is right."

CuarTER XII. Mencius said, “ The great man is he who does not
lose his child’s-heart.”

Cuapter XIII. Mencius said, * The nourishment of parents when
living is not sufficient to be accounted the great thing. It is only
in the performing their obsequies when dead, that we have what
can be considered the great thing.” l

Cuaprer XIV. Mencius said, “The superior man makes his
advances in what he is learning with deep earnestness and by the
proper course, wishing to get hold of it as in himself. Having got

only is his concern. In fact he can hardly be ! his original simplicity and freedom from hypo-
said to be concerned about this. It is natural to crisy. Carrying this out, he becomes omniscient
him to pursue the right. and omnipotent, great to the extremest degree.’
CH. 12. A MAN I$ GREAT BECAUSE HE IS We need not suppose that Mencius would him-
CHILDLIKE. Chaou K'e makes ‘the great man’ self haye expanded his thought in this way.

to be ‘a sovereign,’ and A JR F this chil- Cua. "%13. FILIAL PIETY SEEN IN THE OBSEQUIES
EX

= "p Lo
dren,’ ie, his people, and the sentiment is that OF PARENTS. Jis LE E Ay 5e dá 7e

the true sovereign is he who' does not lose his EN, Z

people's hearts. I mention this interpretation, 4E T thecharicter = Ie bip
as showing how learnéd men have varied and Ways by which the living may be nourished.’ It
may vary in fixing the meaning of these books. belongs to the phrase JE 4, and not to Æ
It is sufficiently absurd, and has been entirely pis :
.displaced by the interpretation which is given alone. $4 =F — to be considered,’ ‘to con-
in the version. ‘The sentiment may suggest titute? 33 lit, “t m 1
the Saviour’s words,—' Except ye be converted, SY Sute. git, "Ao "accompany the
and become as little children, xe shall not enter dead,’ but denoting all the last duties to them.
into the kingdom of heaven.’ But Christ speaks =i i Ñ i

of the child's-heart as a thing to be regained ; 5 TR qu Ana. I ix. The sentiment needs
Mencius speaks of it as a thing not to be lost.
With Christ, to become as children is to display

a good deal of explaining and guarding. The
obsequies are done, it is said, once for all. If

certain characteristics of children. With Men- done wrong, the fault cannot be remedied,
cius, ‘ the child’s-heart’ is the ideal moral con- Probably _the remark had a peculiar reference.

dition of humanity. Choo He says :— The mind The H =y supposes it was spoken against
of the great man comprehends all changes of + hist nrache i :
phenomena, and the mind of the child is nothing the Mihist N A M SIS
but a pure simplicity, free from all hypocrisy. "Tes oae "Tu y ae mee. Pease ile "

Yet the great man is the great man, just as he Heus SHE VALUE OF LEASING THOROUGH:

ssie

n -L
‘is not led astray by external things, but keeps LY INWROUGHT INTO THE MIND, PA xr a Y

¢
Pr. H. Cx. XIV.—XVI.

»
Xy
- > Lez

PL
>

DEREN X

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

AH 4
E fF

Jt
uh xc E
F dur
A, Æ
BR
REN

’ oR

Wr dn A dust Exe

hold of it in himself, he abides in it calmly and firmly. Abiding in it

'almly and firmly, he reposes a deep reliance on it, Reposing a
deep reliance on it, he seizes it on the left and right, ineeting every-
where with it as a fountain from which things flow. It is on this
account that the superior man wishes to get hold of what he is learn-
ing as in himself.”

CuarrkR XV. Mencius said, “In learning extensively and dis-
cussing minutely what is learned, the object “of the superior man is
that he may be able to go back and set forth in brief what is essential.”

Cuaprer XVI. Mencius said, “ Never has he who would by his
excellence subdue men been able to subdue them. ‘Let a prince seek
by his excellence to nourish men, and he will be able to subdue the
whole empire. It is impossible that any one should become ruler
of the empire to whom it has not yielded the subjection of the heart.’

— RE, read ts‘aou, up. 3d tone, ‘to arrive at;’
Z must refer to the z, or principles of the

subject which is being learnt. A i is
understood of the proper course or order, the

successive a of study, =f% z K R-

d El 4 44 gives the key to the chapter ;—

This self-getting,’ &e, his getting hold. of the
subject so that his knowledge of it becomes a
kind of intuition. A= He ‘to rely on? ‘Fhe
subject so apprehended in its principles is
capable of indefinite application. ‘He seizes
it on the right and ieft,'—4Le., he no longer needs
his early efforts to apprehend it. It underlies
numberless phenomena, in all which he at once
detects it, just as water below the earth is found
easily and any where, on digging the surface.—
One may read scores of pages in the Chinese
‘commentators, and yet not get a clear idea in bis
own tind of the teaching of Mencius in this ch.

Chaou K'e gives is] a more substantive mean-
ing than in the translation ; thus :—- The reason
why the superior mau pursues with earnestness
to arrive at the depth and mystery of 37, is
from a wish to get hold for himself of its source
and reot, as something belonging to his own
nature. Most comm. understand the subject
studied to be man’s own self, not things ex-
ternal to him, We must leave the subject in
its own mist.

‘Ch, 15. Choo He says, apparently with reason,
that this is a continuation of the last chapter,
showing that the object of the superior man
in the extensive studies which he pursues, is
not vain-glory, but £o get to the substance and
essence of things. XJ conveys the two ideas
of condensation and importance.

Ch. 16. The object of this chapter, say com-
mentators, is to stimulate rulers to do good in
sincerity, with a view, that is, to the good of
others. I confess it is to me very enigmatical.

200 ; THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK Iv.
Zi T ER NÉ. CE
ie S ia RIZ

S

EAE >a
SRS

zx

1.9 &

_Cuapter XVII.

Mencius said,

(ved
>

TN
v

X
AER

SMI
SYNAR

ie)

ERN
Sy

* Words which are not true are

inauspicious, and the words which are most truly obnoxious to the
name of inauspicious, are those which throw into the shade men of

talents and virtue."

Cuaprer XVIII.

1. The disciple Seu said, “Chung-ne often

praised water, saying, ‘O water! O water!’ What did he find in

water to praise?”

2. Mencius replied, “There is a spring of water; how it gushes

out!

It rests not day nor night. It fills up every hole, and then

advances, flowing on to the four seas. Such is water having a spring!
Tt was this which he found i it to praise. :

Paul's sentiment, —' Scarcely for a righteous man
will one die, yet peradventure for a good man
some would even dare to die,’—occurs tothe mind
on reading it, but this is clashed with by its being

insisted on that 2e A A E has no

reference to the nourishing men's bodies, but is
the bringing them to the nourisher’s own moral
excellence. Chaou K‘e takes the first E as
meaning kX yit *majesty and strength? But
this is inadmissible. The point of the ch. is
evidently to be found in the contrast of AR

and dee .
Cu. 17. The translation takes THE a as an
44M n

adjective qualifying 5, and there is a play
on the term in the use of BB in the two parts,

Choo He mentions another view making SE

E an adverb joined to X WE— there are

speaking, ‘only those are obnoxious to be re-
garded as really inauspicious which throw into,"
&c. Hesays he is unable to decide between
the two*interpretations, and thinks the text

has reference to ==

may be mutilated. H'

not to ^ to ‘words,’ not to ‘men,’

., Cu. 18. How MENCIUS EXPLAINED Conru-

clus’ PRAISE OF WATER. 1. RR, —read k'e

up. 3d tone, * often.’ (in the sense of ‘to

praise), j^ K-A marking the objective

case, or=found something to praise in water-
See Con. Ana. IX. xvi, tho’ we have not there

the exact words—JIC ak Ik [3 2. F}

=k, ‘a pit, ie, every hollow in its course,

E Z JK BS. it was just the seizing of

this’ One commen. brings out the is x. in

no words really inauspicious;” Lej generally this way—YJ E <i X x.

Ys IL Cs. XVIL XIX. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. ` 201

E

Beh Ss (a

-

HEDA

v

ZSRR

Hi
EEA d
ATI daa wT A

3. * But suppose that the water has no spring.—In the seventh
and eight months when the rain falls abundantly, the channels in
the fields are all filled, but their being dried up again may be expect-
, ed in a short time. So a superior man is ashamed of a reputation
beyond his merits." l

Cuarter XIX. 1. Mencius said, “That whereby man differs
from the lower animals is but small. The mass of people east it
away, while superior men preserve it. l
` 2. “Shun élearly understood the multitude of things, and close-
ly observed the relations of humanity: He walked along the path of
benevolence and righteousness ; he did not need to pursue benevolence
and righteousness.” Ps

3. Here, again, the nionths are those of Chow, material. Chaou K'e says SEA, fr 3%
HH,

corresponding to the present 3d and 6th. Hj 1b, at X gy xX Ait AS Z RE H
‘

f&— the raine are collected." ny VAT were

channels belonging to the irrigation of the lands
‘divided on the nine-squares system. - By 3L
ifi fg. —ve might translate as=‘one may stand

means not much.« It is simply the

interval between the knowledge of righteous+
ness, and the want of that knowledge. This.
is so far correct, but the difference which it
indicates cannot be said to be ‘not great.—
But is it not the object of Mencius to indicate

1
and wait till they are dry,’ but Tr is often TECUM

: > AL the character of that which differences men
used ==‘ quickly." T5 =f. as in the Great and animals, and not its amount? š% Z=

Learning, Comm. ch, iv.

Cu, 19. WHEREBY SAGES ARE DISTINGUISHED
FROM OTHER MEN ;—ILLUSTRATED IN SHUN.
It is to be wished that Mencius had said dis-

tinctly what the small di. up. lst tone, d

point distinguishing men from birds and beasts
was, According to Choo He, men aud creatures

have the HH Gutellectual and moral principle)
of Heaven and Earth to form their nature, and
the E) (matter) of Heaven and Earth to form

is something minnte, A commen. Ch'in quib
refers us to an expression in the Shoo-king, —

A TWO f f, forming & key to the

passage. In that, An? is the mind prone to

err, in distinction from the ii T *the mind
of reason,’ which it is said is minute, 2,
Shun preserving and cultivating this distinc-
tive endowment was ted fo the character and
achievements whieh are here briefly described.

The phrase ji My. itis said, EA f8 p , Jù

their bodies, only men’s 5R ig more correct than
that of beasts, so that they are able to fill up

ut Be zm f covers a wide
the capacity of their nature. This denies any X xit Aj 3 tA E d
essential difference between men and animals, extent of meaning, embracing all matters an
and what difference it allows is corporeal or : things between heaven and earth. The H E

E >
26

^ 20 - THE WORES

H tz

Saves

©
p.
v

EN

Ld
`

E
*

BSH

Weal

(Nt

SAIN
SHS

v
-—

a>
- HBSS LI
t

=
ba

N

Q
d

fi

j mms

WESS
XE

CHAPTER XX.
and loved good words,

IIS

f

=

m

pu
pL”

1. Mencius said, “ Yu hated the pleasant wine,

OF MENCIUS. BOOK IV.

—
EM

SARS

Eek

e

eum

K

D

mo
Psia i

È

HAI
peg

zi

[9]

ji,

2, “Tsing held fast the Mean, and employed men of talents and
virtue without regard to where they came from.

3. “King Wn looked on the people as he would on a man who
“was wounded, and he looked towards the right path as if he could
not see it.

4. “King Woo did not slight the near, and did not forget the
distant.
5. “The duke of Chow desired to unite in himself the virtues of

those kings, those founders of the three dynasties, that he might display
in his practice the four things which they did. Ifhesaw any thing
in them not suited to his time, he looked up and thought about it,
from day-time into the night, and when he was fortunate enough to
master the difficulty, he sat waiting for the morning.’

- refers to it all the governmental achievements

of Shun related in the Shoo-king.
'Cu. 20. TAE SAME SUBJECT ;—ILLUSTRATED
IN Yu, 'l'ANG, Was, Woo, axb Citow-K Unc.
1. In *'The Plans of the Warring States’

cmt Ey a book continuing the Ch'un-

Ses on to the Han dynasty, it is said, *E-teih
made wine which Yu tasted and liked, but he
said, n after ages there will be those who +
throug gh wine lose their Lingdoms;--so he de-
graded E-teih, and refused to drink pleasant
wine. From the Shoo-King, HI. iii. 6, we
may infer that there was some foundation for

 derness. i is to be read as an. with which,
i according to Choo He, it was anciently inter-
 chauged. See the Shoo-king, V. xvi. 9, 10,
‘for illustrations of Wan's care of the peo-
: es and the She-king, HI. i. Ode VÍ, for
 illustration of the other characteristic.
4. j H, read sip, *to slight. The adjec-
tives are to be understood both of persons and
things. = = +. —i.e., Yu, ‘Tang, and
! the kings "vu and W Woo who are otten classed
i together as the founders of the Chow dynasty,
‘The four things’ are what have been stated in

this story. Af (up. 3d tone), ae SS == ,—see II.
Pt. I. viii. 2. 2.

siar

stood with reference to class or place. Comp. !
the Shoo-king, IV. ii. 8, 5. :9. ‘As he

would on oue who was wounded,—ie., he
regarded the people with compassionate ton-

; may be under- ;

' the prec. parr. HE has t. for its antecedent.
——
i fü c apprehended it,’ i.e., understood the
matter in its principles, so as to be able to bring
p pies,

, into his own practice the spirit of those ancient
sagts -

Pr. IL Cu. XXL—XXIL THE WORKS OF MENCIUS: 03

j

EN o

4

EE
n
ul

E

zi =!
[FEE

z

e

E
ae

EO
WE
Nath

e

WH

ji
HU
"Ee Sean
REGN UR
Ct

ost

(v
a
xx
un

mi
N
-
ee
Sate
gir

j

Em
ET
SHR

i
x
DASS

a

Is
i
at
Ñ
dà

PY

Cuaprer XXI. 1. Mencius said, “The traces of imperial rule
were extinguished, and the imperial odes ceased to be made. When
those odes ceased to be made, then the Ch‘un-Ts‘ew was produced,

2 “The Shing of Tsin, the Taou-wuh of Ts‘oo, and the Ch'un-
Ts‘ew of Loo, were books of the same character.

3 “The subject of the Ch*un-wuh was the affairs of Hwan of
Ts‘e and Win of Tsin, and its style was the historical Confucius
said, ‘Its righteous decisions I ventured to make.’”

CuaPrTER XXII. 1. Mencius said, * The influence of a sove-
reign sage terminates in the fifth generation. The influence of a
mere sage does the same.

Cu. 21. THE SAME SUBJECT ;—ILLUSTRATED Autumn,’ two seasons for the whole. 8.

IN CoxrvciUS 1. The extinction of the S
A cone : refers on o the Loo. T
true imperial rule of Chow dates from the X ly t annals of Loo hey

transference of the capital from Fung-kaou to did not contain only the affairs of Hwan and
Loh, by the emperor P‘ing, p.c. 769. From that Win, but these occupied an early and promi-
time, the sovereigns of Chow had the name nent place in them. if, seo IL. Pt. I. ii, 20.

without the rule. By the RF is intended not H makes the expression still more humble, as

the Book of Poems, but the Nga afe portion if Confucius had *taken' the judgments from
of them, descriptive of the Imperial rule of the historians, and not made them himself.

Chow, and to be used on Imperial occasions, by Cu. 22. THE SAME SUBJECT ;—ILLUSTRATED
does not mean that the Nga were lost, but that IN MENCIUS HIMSELF. L Here E E
generated into mere records of the past) and 72d EF E] i s ‘the sage and worthy,
were no longer descriptions of the present. Con- who has position,’ ie., who occupies the throne,

fucius edited the annals of Loo to supply the En EX —. EC don
place of the Nga. See III. Pt. H. ix. T ! 2, ard JAE ET fE dL dae sage
Each state had its annals. "hose of Tsin were and worthy, who has no position) We might
compiled under the name of Shing (low. 3d tone), suppose that the influence of the foriner would
. ‘The Carriage ;’ those of Ts‘oo under that of be more permanent, but Mencius is pleased to
Taou-wuh, which is explained as the name of a See x n Ug.
ferocious animal, and more anciently as the de- SAY their influence lasts the same time. Es is
nomination of a vile and lawless man. ‘The to be taken as==‘ infiuence; it being under-
annals of Loo had the name of ‘Spring and ! stood to be of a beneficial character, 2;

RS:
e
wx

ERN
Hee
SANSA

`a
C
=
v

`
v

EAS
SSAU

ww

aay

a.
t
w

-
[e]

+8
HS

NS

\

2

Eu
=
-

RES

}
PIA

v

- DEREN

”

were.

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

Ab, "p VI

* Although I could not be a disciple of Confucius himself, I
have endeavoured to cultivàte my virtue by means of others

BOOK IV,

RI

EU

F

`
v
w
v

E

SHADIA

e
v
4
v

e
alo

T-
PECNEREN

v

k-i
HRS RAE

o

erst

-—
2u

Bate ae
NE

z

v

zS

d

who

CuaPrreR XXHI. Mencius said, “When it appears proper to
take a thing, and afterwards not proper, to take it is contrary to
moderation. When it appears proper to give a thing and afterwards

not proper, to give it is contrary to kindness.

proper to sacrifice one's life, and
it is contrary to bravery.”
CnarrER XXIV. 1.

When it appears
afterwards not proper, to sacrifice
w

P‘ang Mung learned archery of. E. When

he had acquired completely all the science of E, he thought that in
all the empire only E was superior to himself, and so he slew him.

 Mencius said, “In this case E also was to blame.

Kung-ming E

indeed said, ‘It would appear as if he were not to be blamed,’ but he

From the death of Confucius to the birth of
Mencius could hardly be 100 years, so that, tho’
Mencius could not learn his doctrines from the
sage himself, he did sò from his grandson `
Tsze-sze, or some of his disciples. M-

in last ch, W-E taken actively. F4 A

= A the A referring to Tsze-sze and
his school.—This and the three preceding chap-
ters should be considered as one, whose pur-
pose is much the same as III. Pt. 1I. ix., showing
us that Mencius considered himself the suc-
cessor of Confucius in the line of sages.

Cu. 23. FIRST JUDGMENTS ARE NOT ALWAYS
CORRECT. IMPULSES MUST BE WEIGHED IN THE
BALANCE OF REASON, AND WHAT REASON DIC-
TATES MUST BE FOLLOWED. Such is the mean-
ing of this chapter, in translating the separate

clauses of which, we must supplement them bY
introducing ‘afterwards.’

Cn. 24. THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING CARE-
FUL OF WHOM WE MAKE FRIENDS. The senti-
ment is good, but Mencius could surely have
found better {lustrations of it than the second
one which he selected. 1. Of E, see Con.

Ana. XIV. xiv, ME (P'ang, as formed with Eun

not ee E is said both by Chaou K'e and
Choo He to refer to E's servants Ge SP),
but one man is evidently denoted by the name,
E’s servants did indeed make themselves par-
ties to his murder, but P‘ang Mung is the same,
I suppose, with Han Tsuh, the principal in it.

A fag —see II. Pt. If. ii. 4, and Con, Ana

vi. wii E RRR zy Bj me

Pr. IL Cu. XXIV. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 205

zb
NM.

v
o

NOUS 3

et

~.
te

&

ww

-
b
4

1

Ld

ANN

v

EAN ot

SEBS WEN SEE
=a

I
mu
i

ut

-
v
[ d

Sue
Soom

a

v

WI
sw
H
NATE
JAT

PD
aN]

N
Y

wy)
z}

ADT
SEE T

e
v

Sars
Ax - Po

M
FPO EINE

-
fe
v

r

Ji EE NE VS I
ES
Tea

m

DE
=
ER
x

AK
’ o “$A L o

thereby only meant that his blame was slight. How can he be held
without any blame?”

. 2. “The people of Ch'ng sent Tsze-chó Yu to make a stealthy
attack on Wei, which sent Yu-kung Sze to pursue him. Tsze-chó
Yu said, ‘To-day I feel unwell, so,that I cannot hold my bow. I am
a dead man!’ At the same time he asked his driver, ‘ Who is it that
is pursuing me?’ The driver said, ‘It is Yu-kung Sze,’ on which he
exclaimed, ‘I shall live.’ The driver said, * Yu-kung Sze is the best
archer of Wei, what do you mean by saying—I shall live?’ Yu repli-
ed, ‘Yu-kung Sze learned archery from Yin-kung T‘o, who again
learned it from me. Now, Yin-kung T‘o is an upright man, and the
‘friends of his selection must be upright also. When Yu-kung Sze came
up, he said, ‘Master, why are you not holding your bow?’ Yu an-

(meaning to say), It was slighter than...simply.’ Bs Z 1E are mere vocal particles. 1.—

2. BR — to attack stealthily.’ An in- 2
: read t'o. The elsewhere found Ft AN
eursion made with music, and the pomp of war, ka AREO RS A

is called t and one without these, 44°. The {E In the E {Bf under the 14th year of

P in the names— Ji a Z Jj and F duke 5e. we have a narrative bearing some

2

oS
[2

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS: BOOK IV,

7
u

R
M

NEBR

RUPOR SE
PUE

~
S
wo

Em
NaS
Sep

[ d

HS elt

FN
WANED

Saz
RIER

N
S

zz
EU
zh

Be ft. F3.

swered him, * To- day I am en d and cannot hold my bow.'
On this Sze said, *I learned archery from Yin -kung T‘o, who again
learned it from you. I cannot bear to injure you with your own
science. ‘The business. of to-day, however, is the prince’s business,
which I dare not neglect. He then took’ his arrows, knocked off
their steel-points against the carriage-wheel, discharged four of them,
and returned.”

CHAPTER XXV. 1. Mencius said, “If the lady Se had been
covered with a filthy head-dress, all people would have stopped their
noses in passing her.

2. “Though a man may be wicked, yet if he adjust his thoughts,
fast, and bathe, he may. sacrifice to God."

likeness to this account of Mencius, and in.

which FA AN fu and A^ Æ figure as
famous deco) of Wei. is AE possible,
however, to suppose that is two accounts are
` of the sáme thing. FE,—low. 3d tone, ‘a team
of four horses,’ here used for a set of four
arrows.

Cu. 25. Ir IS ONLY MORAL BEAUTY THAT IS
TRULY EXCELLENT AND ACCEPTABLE, 1.
Se-tsze, or * Western lady,’ was a poor girl of
Yué, named She E ( ), of surpassing
beauty, presented by the king of Yué to his
enemy thé king of Woo, who became devotedly
attached to her, and neglected all the duties of
his government, She was contemporary with
Confucius. The common account is that she
was called ‘The western lady,’ because she lived

on the western bank of a certain stream. If
we may receive the works of , however,

as ‘having really proceeded from that scholar
and statesman, there had been a celebrated
beauty named Se-tsze, two hundred years be-

fore the one of Yuč. In translating & zd XT

ER. I have followed Chaou K'e. AE ER ha,

both by Chaou K'e and Choo He, is taken in
the sense of * ugly,’ in opposition to the beauty of
the lady Se. Icannot but think Mencius intend-
ed it in the sense of ‘ wicked,’ and that his object
was to encourage men to repentance and well-

doing. HK. —rend chae, See Con. Ana. VII.

vii. et al By the laws of China, it was compe-
tent for the emperor only to sacrifice to God.
'The language of Mencius, in connection with
this fact, very strikingly shows the virtue he
attached to penitent purification. ;

Pr. Hl. Cu. XXVI. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS..

A l
ri : EFA jM
UE Ht, iE ^N,

x

v
[ d

NIN
Lil

Stor see
Eugen
iux

Jo `
EE

Bere ee

NM
"

[RIDES

o
te
&
*
eo
p
E

*
f
ez

>

^

EN
«d
pai Said hee

ame

SINO
nal
4

ISR
aa

e

c p ám odd). RL y) p

ee XXVI. 1. Mencius said, “All who speak about the
natures. of things, have in fact only their phenomena fo reason from,
and the value of a phenomenon is in its being natural.
2. “What I dislike in your wise men is their boring out their
conclusions. If those wise men would only act as Yu did when he

conveyed away the waters, there would be nothing to dislike in their

wisdom. The manner in which Yu conveyed away the waters was
by doing what gave him no trouble. If your wise men would also

do that which gave them no trouble, their cho wiedge: would also be

great.

3.

Cu. 26. How KNOWLEDGE OUGHT TO BE
‘PURSUED BY THE CAREBUL STUDY OF PHENO-
XENA. Mencius here points out correctly
the path to knowledge. The rule which he
lays down is quite in harmony with that of
Bacon. Itis to be regretted that in China,
more perhaps than in any other part of the

world, has it been disregarded. 1.4

here to be taken quite generally., Julien aad
fault with Noel for translating it by rerum
natura, which appears to be due correct. Choo

Ile makes it— Å H Br B 4. Pa 3y.

than which nothing VAS be more general,
Possibly Mencius may have had in view the
disputes about the nature of man which were
rife in his time, but the references to Yu's
labours with the waters, and to the studies of
astronomers, show that the term is used in its

signification. dior ‘phenonemon,’ the na-

ture in its development. The character is often:
used as synonymous with $, ‘facts.’ By is
more than a simple conjunction, and is to be ,

“ There is heaven so high; there are the stars so distant.

If
taken in close connection with the Hj C

Chaou K‘e explaims— Efi] gs ex m B.

‘can only do so by the ye ^ And phenomens,

to be valuable, must be natural R= IE
 ‘following easily,’ ‘unconstrained.’
E ae is the would be wise==‘your wise
men. H Be, ‘poring,’
TM ^ *
ie, their forcing things, instead of ‘waiting’
0) ich ‘i ae ‘dow
for themy Which is a Ty H Air Hs do
ing that im which they have many affairs, or
much to do? Yu is said FF jk rather than,
according to the commen phraseology about
Uu —
his labours, 35 Jk because TT more appro-
priately represents the mode of his dealing .
with the waters, according to their nature, and `

not by a system of force, 3. + 3 x

H Æ, aec. to modern comm., refers to the
winter solstice, from the midnight of which, it -

` ‘their chiseling,’ or

BOOK IV,

908 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.
2 —L +
F de BL EE
^9 D [ez pa"

[d

DEB
=)

[ d

“skin Se
Hiatt
SRE

SSS RENNIE M. -

o

NEHGS
A

\
4

MPES RIE
HES bN oN

sm

Riko IDE ESSI

a
"d

i
à

A Wa mo ey m bu fib nn

we have investigated their phenomena, we may, while sitting in our
places, go back to the solstice of a thousand years ago."

CuarrER XXVII. 1. The officer Kung-hang having on hand the
funeral of one of his sons, the Master of the Right went to condole
with him. When this noble entered the door, some called him to them
and spoke with him, and some went to his place and spoke with him.

2. Mencius did not speak with him, so that he was displeased,
and said, “ All the gentlemen have spoken with me. There is only
Mencius who does not speak to me, thereby slighting me." l

3. Mencius, having heard of this remark, said, “ According to the
prescribed rules, in the court, individuals may not change their places
to speak with one another, nor may they pass from their fanks to

yg zE, ‘had the funeral duty that devolves

on a son,’ ze, was occupied with the funeral of
one of his parents, and nearly all commentators
have since followed that view, The author of

the E bs BR gi in loc., shows clearly,

however, that it is incorrect, and that the true

is supposed, the first calculation of time began ;

BYE He Bh jj FEL ve may ca.
culate up to and get it? Chaow K‘e, however,
makes the meaning to be simply :—‘We may
sit and determine on what day the solstice

occurred a thousand years ago. See the py

E TH & Bt: where this view is approved.
[o

u. 27. How Mencivs WOULD NOT IMITATE
OTHERS IN PAYING COURT TO A FAVOURITE.

1. Kung-hang (low. Ist tone, ‘a rank,’ ‘a row?
Various accounts are given of the way in which
the term passed along with A\ into a double
surname) was an officer of 'T's^e, who ‘had the

funeral of a son.’ Neither Chaou K'e nor Choo

He offers any remark on the phrase, but some
Scholars of the Sung dynasty, subsequent to-

Choo. He, explaiued it as meaning,

interpretation is the more natural one given in
the translation, The master of the Right
here was Wang Hwan; see II. Pt. IL vi.
At the Imperial court, there were the high

nobles, called Ik bin and Ap Bil * Grand

Master,’ and ‘Junior Master.’ In the courts
of the Princes, the corresponding nobles were

called Fe Éj and Ai fifi. ‘Master of the

Left,’ and ‘Master of the Right.’ SfE,—as in
Con. Ana, VII. xxx. 2. Ht is to be under-

P2 stood that all the condolers made their visit by

Pr. If, Cr. XXVIII. ' THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 209

i
xs

5

=<
Z

Dx
RSR
NES
QP
a
oe

e
i
ly

=
p

E

zi

Nee

o
d

i"
d
.

=
WSs
xi
E

a
A
Lu
A

BUO
E

N

4

ERO

ET?

p

(RR
eS ee Se

Mc

In
e
SENT
maid
ASNAN

`]
WINS Hay
GEN

E

e
w
Er

y

NE
=>
tS

^0
R— NN
SUE

A

TTIR
[EE
an

bow to one another. I was rr to observe this rule, and Tsze-
gaou understands it that I was slighting him :—is not this strange?"

Cuaprer XXVIII 1. Mencius said, That whereby the superior
man is distinguished from other men. is what he preserves in his
heart ;—namely, benevolence and propriety.

2. “The. benevolent man loves others. The man of propriety
shows respect to others.

8. “He who loves others is constantly loved by them. He who
respects others is constantly respected by them.

4. “Here is a man, who treats me in a perverse and unreason-
able manner. The superior man in such a case will turn round upon
hünself—'I must have been wanting in benevolence; I must have
been wanting in propriety :—how should this have happened to me?'

5. “He examines himself, and is specially benevolent. He turns

the prince’s order; and were consequently to REACH OF CALAMITY + 1. 1f PW must not
observe the court rules, This is p explana- pe ynderstood—‘he preserves his heart. The
tion of Mencius’ conduct. 3. fig gi Tefersto first definition of ff in K'ang-he's dictionary

the established usages of the court; see the is 1E ‘to be in’ Itis not so much an active

Chow Le, XXII. iii. 1, e£ al. hae steps,’ or S M 4
* stairs,’ but here for the ranks of the officers verb, ‘to preserve,’ as=‘ to preserve in.’ .

arranged with reference to the steps leading up PE (low. 3d tone) 3f presuppose the excr-

to the hall. cise. of love and respect, which are done de-
Cn. 28. How THE SUPERYOR MAN IS DISTIN- spite to, yt y= Yt g. 5. i i is
GUISHED BY THE CULTIVATION OF MORAT, EXCEL-

LENGE, AND 1$ PLACED THEREBY BEYOND THE uscd for Af. as often elsewhere. A. in the

“7

2

p
e

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK IV.

X
E
ERE
RR

N TEE

js
= .

=
N
NV
"
FE

d NS
»

zy
=

Ex
=
MSS
uu
v3

38

>

an omies

EN
IT

ED

m

-
v

d
 $$ Jh noB S SAT)
Be WA 75 FE Se Seah iff
h EU oe A AE EE
D Hy HE Wr JA UA Jn d x je
Ae By St, Sb QUEUE
E fü YE c B Re, Pa 1t
UV NET AA Wh Aye
X E fil J^
^ ife fs
Bj 15

>ENRE

ys
H

Jh
HL TENERE A, Pc din

round upon himself, and is specially observant of propriety. The
perversity and unreasonableness of the other, however, are still the
same. The superior man’ will again turn round on himself—‘I
must have been failing to do my utmost.’

6. “He turns round upon himself, aud proceeds to do his utmost,
but still the perversity and unreasonableness of the other are repeat-
ed. On this the superior man says, ‘This is a man utterly lost indeed!
Since he conducts himself so, what is there to choose between him
and a brute? Why should I go to contend with a brute?’

7. “Thus it is that the superior man has a life-long anxiety and
not one morning’s calamity. As to what is matter of anxiety to
him, that he has.——He says, ‘Shun was a man, and I also am a man.
But Shun became an example to the empire, and Ais conduct was
worthy to be handed down to after ages, while I am nothing better
than a villager.” This indeed is proper matter of anxiety to him.
. And in what way is he anxious about it? Just that he may be like

3i

sense of E b. * doing one's utmost.’ He —

low. 3d tone,—JVJ, ‘to compare with. Itis
explained in the dict, with reference to this
. passage, by dp ‘to charge,’ ‘to reprove.’

6, did proceeding from within; XH, —coming

from without. .— Es rd EB must be under-
a

stood from the expressions below. There may
be calamity, but the superior man is superior

to it. , ‘bat? We must: supply.—' He
should be without anxiety, but he has anxiety."

A KK: low. Ist tone. [= fiic.

Pr, II. Cu. XXIX. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 211

-k
>
F
n
RIT
2

yu

»

=
c
z

v

a
E

T
E
m

e
=

Xs
EENE

EE
ERIS

BAT ERES
in

N
*

j

i
Pes OH
SEED

fie
Sit

-—
tam]
bs

=

sid
ys
PROURRRIM
ex
ws
^W

R
zi
E

ak

B
SCENE
ih
E

E
SER
wee

DEX
JS BENE

Shun :—then only willhe stop. As to what the superior man would
feel to be a calamity, there is no such thing. He does nothing which
is not according to propriety. . If there should befal him one morn-
ing’s calamity, ‘the superior man does not account it a calamity.”

‘Cuarrer XXIX. 1. Yu and Tseih, in an age of tranquillizing
government, thrice passed their doors without entering them. Con-
fucius praised them.

2. The: disciple Yen, in an age of confusion, dwelt in a mean
narrow lane, having his single bamboo- -cup of rice, and his single
‘gourd-dish of water; other men could not have endured the distress,
n he did not allow his j joy to be affected by it. Confucius praised

im.

3. Mencius said, “Yu, Tseih, and Yen Hwuy agreed in the prin-
ciple of their conduct..

4, “Yu thought that if any one in the empire were dovod
it was as if he drowned him’ Tseih thought that if any one in the
empire suffered hunger, it was as if he famished him. It was on
this account that they were so earnest.

E
Gm

CH. 29. A RECONCILING PRINCIPLE WILL BE { ‘to pronounce a worthy,'—' to praise.’

FOUND TO UNDERLIE THE OUTWARDLY DIFFER- Soo Con, Ana. VL ix. 2p. ftt. and al HE
ENT CONDUCT OF GREAT AND GOOD MEN;—IN:

HONOUR OF YEN Hwux, WITI A REFERENCE TO are contrasted, but a tranquil age was nota

ire Meee ] E Hr. Te I. iv. 6, characteristic of Yu and Tseih’s time. It was
, 8. e thrice passing his door without en- Mo af e
tering it was proper to Yu, though it is here 3P 8e of tranquillization. 3. ii

attributed also to Tseih, Ef —used as a verb, Ñ- py Patios Kx DAS ‘what was proper in

pæ
w

2

TE
1i
AT

ti

Sanh TT HES

R

oe

Ni
v
ci

SESS RE
RE SHS

M

o

IN TEARS

ERN

pj Bio nm

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

f

BOOK IV.

.-
Ser

ww. r
a

E
MESNA

xs

J

N

ZNAE:

=)

d AG ET Tak

5: “If Yu and Tseih, and the philosopher Yen, had exchanged
places, each would have done what the other did.
6. "Here now in the same apartment with you are people fight-

ing:—you ought to part them.

Though you part them with your

eap simply tied over your unbound hair, your conduct will be allow-

able.
1.

“Tf the fighting be only in the villagé or neighbourhood, if

yeu go to put an end to it with your cap tied over your hair un-

ound, you will be in error.
an such a case,
CHAPTER XXX.

the whole kingdom every body pronounces K‘wang unfilial.

Although you should shut your door
our conduct would be allowable.”
1. The disciple Kung-too said, “Throughout

But

you, Master, keep company with him, and moreover treat him with
politeness. I venture to ask why you do so?” -

principle” . 4. y—used for 3. 5.

i R lit, ‘then all so,’ the menie
Ful E EA.

being as in the translation. Yen Hwuy, in the
circumstances of Yu and Tseih, would have
been found labouring with as much energy and
selt-denial for the public good as they showed ;
and Yu and Tseih, in the etreumstances of
Hwuy, would have lived in obscurity contented
as he was, and happy in the pursuit of the
truth and in cultivation of themselves. 6.

,—read p'e, low. lst tone. The rules ancient-

dy prescribed for dressing were very minute.
Much had to be done with the hair before the
final act of putting on the cap, with its strings
GERD tíed under the chin, could be performed.
. In the case in the text, all this is neglected.
The urgency of the case, and the intimacy of
the individual with the parties quarrelling,

justify such neglect. y—lit., ‘to save
them,’ ie, to part them, ‘This was the case of
Yu and Tscih, in their relation to their times,
while that in the next par. is supposed to illus-
trate the case of Yen Hwuy in relation to his.
But Mencius’ illustrations are generally hap-
pier than these.

Cu. 30. How MENCIUS EXPLAINED HIS
FRIENDLY INTERCOURSE WITH A MAN CHARGED
WITH BEING UNFILIAL, 1. K'wang Chang
was an officer of ‘'s‘e. His name, acc. to

RA Ek +. was Chang, and designation

Chang-tsze, so that Kung-too calls him by his
name, and Mencius by his desig. In opp. to
this, Be ie g5 says that Kung-too merely
drops a part of the designation, just as when
Yen Hwuy is called Yen Yuen, instead of Yen
Tsze-yueu, But both these explanations are

13

Pr. II. Cn. XXX. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

v

AES (SRNR

Se

sia

v

SERED TAER -

v

&N am RERO

R

ah
BLO

ERBEN

[ d

MEZ

BSNS

io

-
si
TERS ek

b d è
ym ’ p
2
E

REN
 areis
Š

HSE M HER

Nc

y
d

NER
ER
m

5

HRS
TERREA EDS

fX
x

NE
Ce

i

Ltd eie Sensi

P YE

2. Mencius replied, * There are five td which are said in the
common practice of the age to be unfilial. The first is laziness in
the use of one's four limbs, without attending to the nourishment
of his parents. The second is gambling and chess-playing, and being
fond of wine, without attending to the nourishment of his parents.
The third is being fond of goods and money, and selfishly attached
to his wife and children, without attending to the nourishment of
his parents. The fourth is following the desires of one’s ears and
eyes, so as to bring his parents to disgrace, The fifth is being fond
of bravery, fighting and quarrelling so as to endanger his parents. Is
Chang guilty of any one of these things ? "

9. "Now between Chang and his father there arose disagreement,
he, the son, reproving his father, to urge him to what was good.

4. “To urge one another to what is good by reproofs is the way
of friends. But such urging between father and son is the greatest
injury to the kindness, which should prevail between them. `

see Con. Analects, XVII. xxii. d$. EJ T. l

2S

meee

to be rejected, Chang was the name, and the

in H my i is simply equivalent to our Mr.
Bl JE -— ramble with him,’ ic., as com-"
oniy understood, ‘allow him to come about
your gate, your school.’ X 4 ,—' and moré-
over from that, ùe., in addition to that. 2. 18
Zh, may be taken together, simply =‘ chess-
. playing,’ or separately, as in the translation ;.

—'selfishly—ie, partially putting them out of
their due place, above his parents,—loving wife
and children,’ I cannot see why some should

give a sensual meaning to x. here, The ad-
vance of meaning from 2k to N shows that
the former is to be taken in the lighter sense
of ‘disgrace.’ 3, 4. Comp. a xviii, F

a KA € -F precedes f

Č here to show

2

—

4

=
fezi
te
=
o
Es
$5
o
©
5j
z
ti
A
a
Ln
e
wa

h . BOOK IV.

N.
F

DEUDA

ie
+
IE

THI:

Ug
e—
Sand

3

dele E
"

h
$

E

AM
2

e

~~
-

-
[e

\

AE

w

yen
iss

X
Coa
wes
2t

v
e

MY NEZ

DEA
PARTED

EIS
9

o

aS.

~
V
IL
ccu

v
bs
5

Ne

Ed

w

rd
a.
t
oo
el
v.

AS

pel
iu al

[d

V
em
dama

Nts
LUSH AR Ne

s

MEER

RO

~.
J
e

KIDS IAE

zm

e
w

»

$0
x2
ü
AHN
NS

E

d a)

5. * Moreover, did not Chang wish to have in his family the re-
lationships of husband and wife, child and mother? But because he
had offended his father, and was not permitted to approach hin, he
sent away his wife, and drove forth his son, and all his life receives
no cherishing attention from them. He settled it in his mind that
. 3f he did not act in this way, his would be one of the greatest of
crimes.—Such and nothing more is the case of Chang."

Cuaprer XXXI. 1. When the philosopher Tsing dwelt in Woo-
shing, there came a band from Yué to plunder it. Some one said to
him, * The plunderers are coming :—why not leave this?" Tsing on
this left the city, saying to the man in charge of the house, “ Do not
lodge any persons in my house, lest they break and injure the plants
and trees." When the plunderers withdrew, he sent word to him,
saying, “Repair the walls of my house. I am about to return."

R

that K‘wang Chang had been the aggressor.
5. ,—upper 2d tone, Readers not

Chinese will think that Chang's treatment of
his wife and som was more criminal than his

conduct to his father. E Bj 3E Z K
E m ‘this? embracing the two things,
his giving offence to his father, and still con-
tinuing to enjoy the comforts of wife and son.
Cs. 31. How MENCIUS EXPLAINED THE DIF-
FERENT CONDUCT OF THE PHILOSOPHER TSANG
AND OF TSZE-SZE IN SIMILAR CIRCUMSTANCES.
1. Woo-shing,—see Con. Analects, VY. xii. It
appears below that Tsingihad opened a school

or lecture-room in the place. Many understand
that he had been invited to do so,—to be a

24 Im ‘guest and teacher/—by the com-

mandant, Woo-shing is probably to be referred
n K see e.,

to a place in the dis., of Sa ie in the dep. of

Yen-chow. It was thus in the south of Shan-
tung. South from it, and covering the present
Keang-soo .and part of Ché-keang, were the

possessions of Woo OR and Yui, all in Tsíng-
tsze's time subject to Yu&. See in the SERB,
in loc., a somewhat similar incident in 'l'sáng's'
life (probably a different version of the same),

Pr IL. Cu. XXXI. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 915

H

~
c
td
fe.
E
[ d

E STS
MEE

=
Suis

spar!

eae
mE
ENIM
Noa}

da

i»

Hi rS

v

SSRN

RES
TAREE
 EN SPLEEN
em

a

RSI

©
sy,
=

EE
uM
IR

i

\ Ds y
P ncs
=

-
e

SR

Qa

eB
zi

ang

\
"

ht
DE

T
3
e

x. 4)» M o p}

pn — »
HF EE Tere db vp S.
When the plunderers retired, the philsopher Tsang returned accord-
ingly. His disciples said, * Since our master was treated with so
much sincerity and respect, for him to be the first to go away on the
arrival of the plunderers, so as to be observed by the people, and then
to return on their retiring, appears to us to be improper.” Shin-
yew Hing said, “You do not understand this matter. Formerly,
when Shin-yew was exposed to the outbreak of the grass-carriers,
there were seventy disciples in our niaster’s following, and none of
them took part in the matter.”

2. When Tsze-sze was living in Wei, there came a band from Ts‘e
to plunder. Some one said to him, * The plunderers are coming ;-—
why not leave this?" Tsze-sze said, “If I go away, whom will the
prince have to guard the State with ? ^

3. Mencius said, * The philosopher Tsáng and Tsze-sze agreed in

S

oy

in hoe ue phibdetéte are from Loo. EL the point is doubtful. See the fE 52 in
{E H zy zy the translation needs to be /ec.)-yew Hing is supposed to have been a

supplemented here considerably to bring out the disciple of 'lsüng's, a native of Woo-shing.
meaning. a is explained in K‘ang-he’s Die- The Shin-yew whom he mentions below was
tionary, with reference to this passage, by ie another person of the same surname with whom
onar 1 refer Ez] :
73 E i s iR " Tsang and his disciples HE -= Æ $r
‘grass,’ or small plants generally. FẸ 3 oa
grass, p g Y FEA RIJ , above) were living. fi. —tow. 3d tone. Shin-

H ;—this E must=‘ sent word to. Wnt Æ yew Hing adduces this other case, as analogous

"T R na. f to Tsing’s leaving Woo-shing, intimating that lie
we should iren expect ES m I f be acted on a certain principle which justified his

Mats Ree EE A res 4 = ii jov conduct. 2. i was Tsze-sze’s name, ‘Was
ati ‘ 3 A

inative—‘ the governor of the city” Shin yi living in Wei,—ic., was living and sustaining

, ps s RR 3

is pronounced as 2E. So, commonly, , But office. 3. Comp. ch. xxviii 3,5. The

pa

916 “THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK IV.

S:
tal

E>
dll
= ;

Ee

ow

N
© be
demas

— Ir
Zl
bs
tS
Comey
t.
E

rire ee
m
SR

v

T

d .
Sz
vei
Oo

2

=

TS

-

w

IRURE
Nat av omui
Sas >
NE Sat

RED
m

— ie

9
er

PII

\
"

EE NIE

SEN

3]
ee
E

è

nsa Q

^
EJ pg 5m BL p:

the principle of their conduct. -'Ts%ng was a teacher ;- ;—in the place -
of a father or elder brother. Tsze-sze was a minister ;—in a meaner
place. Ifthe philosophers Tsing and Tsze-sze had exchanged places,
the one would have done what ‘the other did.”

CuarrzR XXXII. The officer Ch‘oo said to Mencius, “Master,
the king sent persons to spy out whether you were really different
from other men.” Mencius said, * How should I be different fr om
other men! Yaou and Shun were just the same as other men."

CuaprrER XXXIIL 1. A man of Ts‘e had a wife and a concu-
bine, and lived together with them in his house. When their
husband went out, he would get himself well filled with wine and
flesh, and then return, and, on, his wife's asking him with whom
he ate and dr ank, they were sure to be all wealthy and honourable
people. The wife informed the concubine, saying, “ When our good
man goes out, he is sure to come back having partaken plentifully
of wine and flesh. I asked with whom he ate and drank, and they
are all, it seems, wealthy and honourable people. And yet no people

ENNER
P
OSE

reader ean judge how far the defence of Tsăng’s Ca. 33. THE DISGRACEFUL MEANS WHICH
copduct is satisfactory. . MEN TAKE TO SEEK FOR WEALTH AND HONOURS.
Cu. 89. SAGES ARE JUST LIKE OTHER MEN. l. As Choo He observes, there ought to

This Choo was a minister of Ts‘e. We must pe, at the beginning of the chapter, dE ET 2
suppose that it was the private manners and s m

way of living ef Mencius, which the king want- ‘Mencius said, The phrase m já (up. 2d
ed to spy out, unless the thing occurred on : a S :
Mencius’ first arrival ia Ts‘ e, and before he had tone) E3 5j is not easily managed in trans-
any interview with the king. ` (dating. The subject of it is the ‘man of Tse

mM
-~J

Pr. II. Cn. XXXIII. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

a
S

e EN JE ' H » SH
ok i Bh eI
AM

SUN

e

=
“nb

>= DST aN

v

SN SRR

Eny

Ex
REND DDE

=

[ d
e

pss

d
SE

ASSES >
ISARR

SN Bik

SSE
T

m

$9

E
ES

=

SES
ESIE

-

(VEE

[ d

3

v
[ d

PSE

-

STEAN

bd
-
~
Pd
er

N
Soh SE

Vm

d

HASN SENERE
REVS TRE

AREE
RD

of distinction ever come here. I will spy out’ where our good man
goes.” Accordingly, she got up early in the morning, and privately
followed wherever her husband went. Throughout the whole city,
there was no one who stood or talked with him. At last, he came
to those who were sacrificing among the tombs beyond the outer
wall on the east, and begged what they had over. Not being satis-
fied, he looked about, and went to another party :—and this was the

way in which he got himself satiated. His wife returned, and in-'

formed the concubine, saying, “ It was to our husband that we look-
ed up in hopeful contemplation, with whom our lot is cast for life;
—and now these are his ways!" On this, along with the concubine
she reviled their husband, and they wept together in the middle
hall. In the mean time the husband, knowing nothing of all this,
‘came in with a jaunty.air, carrying himself proudly to his wife and
concubine.

and not ‘the wife and concubine.’ It is descrip-
tive of him as living with them, and being the

head of a family, —Ay H Re x Hj as is

said in the fif tb * having the duty of setting
an example to its members? EE A ,—corre-

sponding to the Scottish term of ‘goodman’ for

husband. Ar Bit &k £ ,—not ‘who

gave him to drink and eat,’ as Julien makes
it. Z- xS the verb, as also below,

Br
and in ZZ BC Xf. Ji 4 JP, read

28 5

218 . THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK V.

as we LE
dE iv. Js di, AS 3E s

2. In the view of a superior man, as to the ways by which men
seek for riches, honours, gain, and advancement, there are few of

their wives and concubines who would not be ashamed and weep to-
gether on account of thèm.

rates

€, either low. Ist, or low. 3d tone. a
plainly used for ‘city,’ See IL Pt. IL i.
2. Z 1i. ‘went to another place, =‘ another

party.’ 2. 3 di as in ch. xix. 1, but
it is here an adjective, ‘few,

AAR AR PISIS I PIA PISIS ARAM AAA ann

BOOK V.
WAN CHANG. PART I

&
E

TET
VHR

j

a
NER
heh

EK REGE Y £m ma
Fl, Jl 3 a) E, A, FE yy F3, ^ij

«BLE ON

Cuaprer J. 1; Wan Chang asked Mencius, saying, When “Shun
went imto the fields, he cried out and wept towards the pitying hea-
vens, Why did he cry out and weep ?" Mencius replied, * He was
dissatisfied, and full of earnest desire,"

2. Wan Chang said, “ When his parents love him, a son re joices
and forgets them hot. When his parents hate him, though -they

punish “him, he does not murmur.

This Book is named from the chief inter-
locutor in it, Wan Chang (See HII. Pt. IL v.).

The tradition i is that it was im company with

Wan Chang's disciples, that Mencius; baffled in
his hopes of doing public service, and having
retired into privacy, composed the seven Books,
which constitute his Works. The first part of
this Book is occupied with discussions about
Shun, anc other ancient wor thies.

Was ‘Shun then murmuring

‘Cu. 1. HUN’S GREAT FILIAL PIETY :—HOW
IT CARRIED HIM INTO THE FIELDS TO WEEP AND?
DEPLORE HIS INABILITY TO SECURE THE AFFEC-
TION AND SYMPATHY OF HIS PARENTS. 1.

J — low. 1st tone, ‘to ery out.’ It has another
signification in the same tone, — to weep,’ which.
would answer equally well. See the incident
related in the Shov-king, IL. ii. Zl. from which

Pr. I. Cu I. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 19

v
<

DME
z
DE
N

yes

*-
e
Ld

o

v

` ot

-

v

F
be sat on
wom

MESS HESS

IEEE.

i

Wk
=

XN

PODS

Pi TI ESP
REHNE
S>EE SOR

ï

LN

È

v
v

NUL
TT
NE
S
TASS

SAADAB

ER

v

EP

Ay A i Hj,
fig A nz H,
against his parents?” Mencius answered, “ Ch'ang Seih asked Kung-
ming Kaou, saying, ‘As to Shun's going into the fields, I have re-
ceived your instructions, but I do not know about his weeping and
crying out to the pitying heavens and to his parents.’ Kung-ming
Kaou answered him, * You do not understand that matter. Now,
Kung-ming Kaou supposed that the heart of the filial son eould not
be so free of sorrow. Shun would say, ‘I exert my strength to
cultivate the fields, but I am there by only discharging my office-as à
son. What can there be in me that my parents do not love me?’
3. “The emperor caused his own children, nine sons and two
daughters, the various officers, oxen and sheep, storehouses and

we learn that such behaviour was a character- Ana. IV. xviii, Kung-ming Kaou is generally
istic of his earlier life, when he was ‘ploughing’ ; understood to have been a disciple of Tsing

at the foot of the Leih hill. a. -—the Sin, and Ch'ang Seih, again to have been a
2e K; disciple of Kaou.. -A Br 1H RH i ‘I

name given to the autumnal sky or heavens. : "ee X i

: ON 2d have received your commands ;’—‘ commands,
Tio M have been assigned to x we said deferentially for ‘instructions,’ as in Ilf.
variegated,’ with reference to the beautiful tints t Pe. Lv. 5. AM is also from the Shoo-

= t ‘ - y
V4 Fe) of matured nature; and ‘the com xing, though omitted above in par. 1. In trans-
passionate,’ as if it were RA, with reference to lating we must reverse the order of Us i :
the decay of nature. This latter is generally ‘he wept and cried out,—to heaven, to his pa-

acquiesced in. I have translated +F by ‘to- rents? iE JE [25] Br 4 {H,.—see IV.
wards, but the paraph. in the f ai is :—He Pt. IL. xxxi, 1. xX AY Fe a — not so
cried out and called upon pitying Heaven, that i without sorrow,’ ie., not so, as common people
lovingly overshadows and compassionates this would have it, and as Ch'ang Seih thought
lower world, weeping at the same time? ZE would have been right, kp er refrain from
, ; 7 a i weeping and crying out. 13 F are

X. —simply, ‘he was murmuring and desiring.’ H m "we i 1ng Nus 3 Ip rs
A H O: $ roug “8

The murmuring was at himself, but this is ! pud VD POSU M preis. OM

purposely kept in tlie back ground, and Chang ; mind. Jt-Ht up. Ist tone. 3, See
supposed that he was murmuring at his pa- the Shoo-king, I. par. 12, but the various

rents, 2. 4 +f n o A see Con, ineidents of the partieular loneurs conferred

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

v

s»
NG

~
fw’

ral
v

n
ORR NSH

LR
SES
-—

S
SE

n
ES

"pomum
ESQ (A

IREA
E:
=
a
s

Ns y

AN
m
3

Ea
-i
=

v

l
,

SER(NEEGENMESS P

KE C
DIET
Ey —— ye 1
He dL KB bP

y

tá Mn XP S8 WW uc

granaries, all to be prepared, to serve Shun amid the channeled
fields. Of the scholars of the empire there were multitudes who
flocked to him. The emperor designed that Shun should super-
intend the empire along with him, and then to transfer it to him
entirely. But because his parents were not in ‘accord with him,
he felt like a poor man who has nowhere to turn to.

.4. “To be delighted in by the scholars of the empire, is what
men desire, but it was not sufficient to remove the sorrow of Shun.
- The possession of beauty is what men desire, and Shun had for his
wives the two daughters of the emperor, but this was not suflicient
to remove his sorraw. Riches are what men desire, and the empire
-was therich property of Shun, but this was not sufficient to remove
hissorrow. Honours are what men desire, and Shun had the dignity
of being emperor, but this was not sufficient to remove his sorrow.
The reason why the being the object of men's delight, the possession

have been put under the command of Yaou.
They are mentioned however in the ‘ Historical

recor TEES EPA

on Shun, and his influence, are to be collected
from the general history of him and Yaou.
There is, however, an important discrepancy
between Mencius account of Shun, and that in
the Shoo-king. ‘There, wheh he is first recom-

mended to Yaou by the high officers, they base
their recommendation on the fact of his having
overcome the evil that was in his parents and
brother, and brought them to self-government.
The Shoo-king, moreover, mentions only one

son of Yaou, Tan Choo gj FD and says

nothing of the nine who are here said to
yE i

LE CADR D
XS C-E RE VI BU. TIER
Sé fit —see IV. Pt. I. xxviii. —— 4 fi.
— is here—our ‘a beauty,’ * beauties.’ 3t,
—up. 2d tone, here as a verb, ‘to wive, ‘to have

for wife) Observe.the force of J leading

Pr. I. Cn. L—II. TIIE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 221

e
p
z b

-

=

RE

™

Eee
SRRI

v
"oe
Sr aaa
X

n

ET

v

Ses NES
an
ERE
SPEECH Sab bay
Ee Te MNT
RUE Jab eiim

v

v
m
Soy
N
ANN

AE
zi
NS

Su
N
£
N

Cv

oN
ES

gu

BE
Z&du m — zd: BU uw

of beauty, riches, and honours, were not sufficient to remove his sor-
row, was that it could be removed only by his getting his parents to
be in accord with him.

5. “The desire of the child is towards his father and mother.
When he becomes conscious of the attractions of beauty, his désire is
towards young and beautiful women. When he comes to have à wife
and children, his desire is towards them. When he obtains office, his
desire is towards his sovereign :—if he cannot get the regard of his
sovereign, he burns within. But the man of great filial piety, to
the end of his life, has his desire towards his parents. In the great
Shun I see the case of one whose desire at fifty years was towards
them.”

Cuapter II. 1. Wan Chang asked Mencius, saying, “It is said
in the Book of Poetry,

*In marrying a wife, how ought a man to proceed ?

He must inform his parents.' .
If the rule be indeed as here expressed, no man ought to have illus-
trated it so well as Shun. How was it that Shun's marriage took
place without. his informing Ais parents?” Mencius replied, “If he
had informed them, he would not have been able to marry. That

on to what follows as the explanation of the Cu. 2. DEFENCE or SHUN AGAINST THE
CHARGES OF VIOLATING THE PROPER RULE IN
THE WAY OF HIS MARRYING, AND OF HYPOCRISY

tone, ‘ young,’ ‘little.’ Af & the term hasa IN HIS CONDUCT TO HIS BROTHER, 1, 2
different acceptation from that in the prec. par., Comp. Pt. I. xxvi. EE the She-king,
tho’ I have translated it in the same way. M , L viii. Ode VI. st, 3, 05. —1ow. 8d tone, as in

~in the sense of PR ‘beautiful’ - ` Ana. III xvii, 4s - SR “if indeed.’ Viet

preceding circumstances. ` $, Ay —up. 8d

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK V.

TIUS
L

SRST ES

^-
uu ^
-
vi
E d

v
=

GSR SSS

v
o

iX ERER

HERA

SEN

ayaa *
See LLL SRIN SSP REESE

-

TAHEA

3

Ts
ERN
of

ESSERI
i

SSN a

[d

is

:

guo

—
LI
Le

b
<

N
f

FLEES

EER
phate

B

Seth
REM
ARE ID Haat
pS
Wigs
a

NERS

» El]

male and female should dwell together, is the greatest of human
relations. If Shun had informed’ his parents, he must have made
void this greatest of human relations, thereby incurring their resent-
ment. On this account, he did not inform them.”

2. Wan Chang said; “ As to Shun’s marrying without informing
his parents, I have heard your instructions; but how was it that the
- emperor gave him his daughters as wives without informing Shun’s
parents?” Mencius said, “ The emperor also knew that if he in-
formed them, he could not marry his daughters to him.”

3. Wat Chang said, * His parents set Shun to repair a granary,
to which, the ladder having been removed, Koo-sow set fire. They
also made him dig a well. He got out, but they, not knowing that,
proceeded to cover him up. Seang said, * Of the scheme to cover up
the city-forming prince the merit is all mine. Let my parents have
his oxen and sheep. Let them have his storehouses and granaries.

NS

i
x

tradition, and not from the Shoo-king. Shun

Ux "Bii ‘he had not married, then his
covered himself with two bamboo sereens, and

parents would have had cause to be angry with
him, for allowing the line of the family to ter-
minate, 'This seems to be the meaning of the

phrase. Fal [T S iu the last chap. ape

im x E here is understood as==‘re-.

quiring Shun to inform his parents.’ . 38.
- Shun's half brother is understood to have been the
instigator in the attempts on his life here men-
tioned. The ineidents, however, are taken from

'the wall, and got away by means of it.

made his way through the fire. In the second
case, he found a hole or passage in the side of
+h
—it is mentioned in the last chapter, how the
scholars of the empire flocked to Shun. They
say that if he lived in one place for a year, he
formed a Ag, or *assemblage:; In two years,

he formed a &, or ‘ town,’ and in three, a Af,

Pr. I. Cu. II, THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

bo
ot
Gs

N
t

RATHER

7 A
EEN
NALS

be

v

> evo
SAS SEK

ww

ARREK
TA

a
%

e
Bound

NIE
PEE

Y

*
&

Ln
v
v

Nu
cx
sis
ES

3»

\

d

E
X

[9)
v

my
PRIN HEA
SR E

=
Na
a>
ean
—

EU
ARCU

E
T

EN
zi
EB

-—
EA
w
SU
e

Fates Imi

t
&
u
=
I
[9]

Se
=
uh
SE
m

e
v

ASR SS

-

i
EO
3S
>
TUUN e,
Ee»

L3 x

"we
A

[ d
[ d

T BE! à] án A ES

His shield and spear shall be mine. His lute shall be mine. His

bow shall be mine. His two wives I shall'inake attend for me to.
my bed. Seang then went away into Shun's palace, and there was

Shun on his couch playing on his lute. Seang said, ‘I am come

simply because I was thinking anxiously abont y you. At the same

time, he blushed deeply . - Shun said to lim, ‘There are all my offi-

cers:—do you undertake the government ‘of them forme, Ido.
not know whether Shun was ignorant of Seang's wishing to kill

him." Mencius answered, How could he: be ‘ignorant ot that?

But when Seang was sorrowful, he was also sorrowful ; when Seang

was joyful, he was also joyful. d

4. "Chang said, *In that case, then, did not Shun rejoice hypo-

critically ? " Mencius replied, “No. F ormerly, some one sent a

present of a live fish to’ Tsze-ch‘an of Ching. Tsze-ch‘an ordered

his pond-keeper to keep it in the pond, but that officer cooked

it, and repor ted the execution of his commission, saying, ‘When

or ‘capital? With reference to this, Seang lit, ‘the ny sisters-in-law.’ PJFE— 7M, ‘a bed,’

im ER - Y 2*3 $
calls him KB ay : Ik now nbn to the 1 or «couch? ee P [f] 1H. Zr fig H=
emperor, wE, was anciently used by high and as a- final particle, ‘only? ‘The expression
low. Ha carved bow, said to have been literally is,— with suppressed anxiety thinking

given to Shun by Yaou, as a token of his asso- 9f you only? £. K (read leuou, low. 8d -

ciating him with him on the throne. =H tone) A is taken by all the commentators,

9 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

rz
ps

+

les]

N, Q
y 8
La]

<

D
iN

HS

PANES Se EER

\
V
4

XN eb
x Xin

Sa NOS

I

TARE
E

MUS a PN H,

—. v ZH:
AL St qo TF
> An AJ o He. dL

TA

=
ERERESI

V
/

No:
Ig

N
PANTA E

=

M
j a

" ] Pk.

I first let it go, it appeared embarrassed. In a little, it seemed to
be somewhat at ease, and then it swam away joyfully.’ Tsze-ch'an
observed, ‘It had got into its element! It had got into its element !
The pond-keeper then went out and said, * Who calls Tsze-ch'an a wise
man? After I had cooked and eaten the fish, he says,—It had got
into its element! it had got into its element!’ Thus a superior man
may be imposed on by what seems to be as it ought to be, but he
cannot be entrapped by what is contrary to right principle. Seang
came in the way 1n which the love of his elder brother would have
made him come; therefore Shun sincerely believed him, and re-
joiced. What hypocrisy was there? "

Carter IH.. Wan Chang said, “Seang made it his daily busi-
ness to slay. Shun. When Shun was made emperor, how was it
that he only banished him?" Mencius said, * He raised him to be
a prince. Some supposed that it was banishing him."

> >

HTS Seve
TBS

S OSE NE
SRS HIE

=>
=)
XE

Lom d

as E 1h YH ^ Hm, ‘a small officer over
the ponds, but I do not know that this mean-
ing of the plirase is found elsewhere, KN:

H:
—as in HI Pt. I i. 8. HE Y By H
Zr compare Con. Ana. VI. xxiv. A
H H— by its class,’ the meaning being as

in ‘the translation.—Choo. He says :—‘ Mencius
says that Shun knew well that Seang wished
to kill him, but when he saw him sorrowful. he
was sorrowful, and when he saw him joyful, he

was joyful. The case was that his brotherly
feeling could not be repressed. Whether the

things mentioned by Wan Chang really occur-
red or not, we do not know. But Mencius was
able to know and describe the mind of Shun,
aud that is the only thing here worth discussing
about."

Cu. 3. EXPLANATION AND DEFENCE OF SHUN’S
CONDUCT IN THE CASE OF HIS WICKED BROTHER

 SEANG 7)—HO0W HE BOTH DISTINGUISHED HIM,

AND KEPT HIM UNDER RESTRAINT. 1.
H= H ‘to place, with the idea of keeping

in the place,—'to banish? Chang’s thought
was that Seang should have been put to death,

and not merely banished. BK E. seems
best to understand E-[ as meaning ‘supposed,’

to
Ww
e

Pr. II. Cu. HI. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

RAR

TEREE

beu
La
PA

FEAH HSNI aie

v

NSE mS
:

AC

SEP

E
=>
> NEA

HN

\
/

RE
I
re
3
LZ
TT SS = XL

EN
SONNEN

"a

3

v

e
`
te
Lad
v
o
-

ERR

AHS SSE

ss
PM

DYN ERE Bp
SRE

kit, ET Ba Sil JE
id UL IR ck Eu AS Y
Je Ue CAB OP = MM,

Pou

Wan Chang said, “Shun banished the superintendent of works
to Yew-chow ; he sent aws ay Hwan-taou to the mountain Ts‘ung ; he
slew the prince of San Meaou in San-wei ; and he imprisoned K‘wăn
on the mountain Yu. When the crimes of those four were thus
punished, the whole empire acquiesced :—it was a cutting off of men
who were destitute of benevolence. But Seang was of Fall men the
most destitute of benevolence, and Shun raised him to be the pruna
of Yew-pe;—of what crimes had the people of Yew-pe been guilty ?

Does a benevolent man re ally act thus? In the case of other men,
he eut them off; in the case of his brother, he raised him to be a
prince.” Mencius replied, ** A benevolent man does not lay up anger,
nor cherish resentinent against his brother, but only regards him
with affection and love. ‘Reg: arding him with affection, he wishes

him to be honourable: regarding him with love, he wishes him to
berich. The appointment ; of Seang to be the prince of Yew-pe was
to enrich and ennoble him. If while Shun himself was emperor, his

and not ‘said.’ 2. The different indivi- these two were confederate in evil. Z T is
duals mentioned here are all TE of in the to be understood, ip the text, as * the pri ince of
Shoo-king, Pt. II. i. 12, which see. dtr is San-meaou,’ w hich was the name of a State,
a name of office. ‘The surname or nine of the near the Tung-t‘ing lake, embracing the pre-
holder of it is not found in the Shoo-king, sent dep. ot Er). and extending towards Woo-

Hwan- taou was the name of the E * min- ch‘ang, K^wán was the name of the father of

ister of instruction.’ He T in the Shoo- Yu. The places mentioned are difficult of
king, as the friend of the tk PT. recommend- identification. Yew-pe is referred to the pres,
ing him to Yaou; hence lho He says that 3á JH. and the dis. of Ling-ling, in the dep.

29

Es < AS m die DB, WT.
EE AMA 4X E. EN =
BH x2 W We HRA
g $

x 413d «13 pE
pa yt b E H T

brothet had been a common man,

him with affection and love?”

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

u
c
=
we
x

ims

xh
c

N
s

E
E

NM
»

WES

2

iE

v

Ne! SE, Ath
ü mure
sud

Ñ

ERAH
AASHI HAS

»-
v
-
x

Ts
N
Pd

NEES HE ORE

could he have been said to regard

3. Wan Chang said, “I venture to ask what vou mean by say-

ing that some supposed that it was a banishing of Seang ? " ` Men-
eius replied, *Seang could do nothing in his State. "The emperor
appointed an officer to administer its government, and to pay over
its revenues to him. This treatinent of him led to its being said that
he was banished. How indeed could he be allowed the means of
oppressing the people? Nevertheless, Shun wished to be continually
seeing him, and, by this arrangement, he caine incessantly to court, as
is signified in that expression—‘ He did not wait for the rendering of
tribute, or affairs of government, to receive the prince of Yew-pe.’”

Cuarrer IV. 1. Héen-k‘ew Mung asked Mencius, saying, ** There
is the saying,—‘ A scholar of complete virtue nay not be employed

of ER 8. in Hoo-nan. d» issaid by Choo
He to=# x, ‘te cut off,’ but that is too strong.
yu JE=/G tk Pa x] 3 , taking JE
as meaning ‘crimes.’ Ak.— submitted,’ ie.,

acknowledged the justice of the punishments

inflicted. HE fili ASK Pas appears to

be incomplete, as if Mencius had not permit-
ted his disciple to finish what he had to say.
fü ZE, — to lodge, as if for a night, resent-

ment;' comp. if EL Ana. XII. xii. 2.

3. pa $8 AG da did not get to have do-

ing, ie, was not allowed to act independently.

E H Tt = [ex] Er it (taking A as
„2 verb) FR: Ju yp the uninterrupted
fiowing of a stream.’ o F HAY J.

is a quotation by Mencius from some book that
is now lost. There were regular seasons for
the princes in general tò repair to court, and
emergencies of government which required
their presence, but Shun did not wish his bro-
ther to wait for such occasions, but to be often

with him. The M extends over the two
clauses, which= JV AR H Hy [rii A Xr
VA SF it Je

Pr. II. Cu. IV.

zu
[0] di
w
z
=
vv

mtv

ek

:

Ny
oF
ull

ees
En

v

WSLS

-

TUE
EN TEES
HIRST EDN KEY

m

ut,

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

v
SE
:
—

v

REE AE

sN

8

Nu

T d

pH

"

KS
RSs
SMH .

PRESS

—
m

d
zl

Nis
Be

y

S
™
=

Hk
SRFS

Su
EN

-

y

YES

as a minister by his sovereign, nor treated as a son by his father.
Shun stood with his face to the south, and Yaou, at the head of all
the princes, appeared before him at court with his face to the north.

Koo-sow also did the same.

When Shun saw Koo-sow, his counte-

nance became discomposed. Confucius said, At this time, in what,
a perilous condition was the empire! . Its state was indeed unsettled.’
—I do not know whether what is here said really took. place.”

Mencius replied, “No.

These are not the words of a superior man.

They are the sayings of an uncultivated person of the east of Ts‘e.
When Yaou was old, Shun was associated with hiin in the govern-

ment.

It is said in the Canon of Yaon, ‘After twenty and eight

years, the Highly Meritorious one deceased. The people acted as if

Cu. 4, EXPLANATION or SHUN’S CONDUCT
WITH REFERENCE TO THE EMPEROR, YAOU, AND
HIS FATHER Koo-sow. 1. Héen-k‘ew Mung
was a disciple of Méncius. ‘The surname Han-
k'ew was derived from a place of that name
where his progenitors had resided. ‘The saying

which Mung adduces extends to » » ye.

Two entirely contrary interpretations of it have
been given. One is that given in the translation.
It is the view of Chaou K'e, and is found in the

modern Pe-che ( fii 8 or ‘Complete Digest of

Annotations on the Four Books.’ Most modern
commentaries, however, take an opposite view:
— The scholar of complete virtae cannot em-
ploy his sovereign as a minister, or treat his
father as a son’ This view is preferred by Ju-
lien, who styles the other very bad. I am sat-
istied that the other is the correct one. If it
were not, why should Meucius condemn the
sentinent as that of an uninstructed man.

ple of the principle announced. Shun was the
scholar of complete virtue, and therefore the
emperor Yaou, and his father Koo-sow, both
appeared before him as subjects. JE R. Zz
JT and the remarks of Confucius are to be
taken as a protest against the arrangements
described in the preceding parr. Pa] ia JE
[iT Con. Ana. VI. i. uy is to be jeined
as an adj. with yv and not as a noun with
H . The passage quoted from the Shoo-king
is now found in the canon of Shun, and not that

ef Yaou;=see IL i, 13. * lower 3d tone,’

Ri — upper 2d tone, *a year.’ yr (upper
2d tone; see III. Pt. T. iv. 8.) ESI is not in the

DE B3 HT TUA follows as a direct exam- classic. fH. Cip YE — Choo Ile makes

228

FAH

Paco hi

rat
HEEN

v

rH

SD
z

&N
TAS (38 AG

~
[i
ww
4
[ d

e

wr

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

ea

KN Hats

BOOK V.

de

ia

NE

n
zb

Rm
Einem

peres
m

—L
sa
^-

er

7

-
i
wa

a

MIN.
=

v

a
a
-
v

K
rath
(amen
NAS Sh
HO
ER
E

v
V
©
v
4

B
ASS

BSL
Bo
$

oN?

r2

’ Tt.

they were mourning for a father or mother for three years, and up
to the borders of the four seas every sound of music was hushed.’
Confucius said, ‘There are not two suns in the sky, nor two sove-
reigns over the people.’ Shun having been emperor, and; moreover,
loading on all the princes to observe the three years' mourning for
Yaou, there would have been in this case two emperors.”

2. Héen-k‘ew Mung said, “On the point of Shun's not.treating

è

SU

ei

Yaou as a minister, I have received your instructions.

said in the Book of Poetry,
* Under the whole heaven,

But it is

Every es is the sovereign’s ground ;

To the

orders of the land,

Every individual is the sovereign’s minister ; '

—and Shun had become emperor.
that Koo-sow was not one of his ministers."

3l -1fF. *to ascend.’ The animus ascends at
death, and the anima y. ‘descends ;’—hence
the combination— dissolution,’ ‘ decease.’ The
dict, however, makes XH simply {E and
the phrase=‘ vanish away, Bt is the
people within the imperial domain ; the py ¥

denotes the rest of the empire, beyond that.
Some, however, approved by the H a make
raj y- B ‘the officers,’ and py AE

gall the people.’ # ,—the terms for

I venture to ask how it was
Mencius answered,

a deceased father and mother. = AE, —

for 4E the classic has En The ya" H

‘eight sounds, —are all instruments of music,
formed of metal, stone, cord, bamboo, calabash,
earthenware, leather, or wood. —The meaning is
that up to the time of Yaouw's decease, Shun
was only vice-emperor, and, therefore, Yaou
never could have appeared before him in

the position of à subject. 2. p Z

x . SEE js not to be tak vi
a hr. 3E js no aken with reference

_ to the phrase H x f3 if RB. but to the

M9
Do
peor)

Pr. H. Cn. IV. TIE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

N
3

pe
EE

Gk

jo
NE AINT

i

sora

i

f ; ER [^]
ZL EPA DUE d ue
Seo fa < f BLS

E

lh

= pear a oa
TENE

IIF NAR

Hol

zi RU EE NE
Trilha

v
~

W

[ d
v

BH SES UNG

o

NRH I

SHS
É

M

ESPN NAR

=
a

-
-
Ld
v
-

ü

EE
5 ea mp

>
H
=H

~

OSS

5

DE
XE
E

[z

42] o

“That ode is not to be understood in that way :—it speaks of being
laboriously engaged in the sovereign's business, so as not to be able
to nourish one's parents, as if the author said, ‘This is all the sove-
reigu's business, and how is it that Y alone am supposed to have ability,
and am made to toil in it?’ Therefore, those who explain the odes,
may not insist on one term so as to do violence to a sentence, nor on
a sentence so as to do violence to the general scope. They must try
with their thoughts to meet that scope, and then we shall apprehend
it. If we simply take single sentences, there is that in the ode called
‘The Milky Way, — ;
* Of the black haired people of the remnant of Chow,
There is not half a one left.’ `
If it had been really as thus expressed, then not an individual of
the people of Chow was left.
9. “Of all which a filial son can attain to, there is nothing great-

er than his honouring his parents.

general scope of the prec. par, and especi-
ally to Mencius’ explanation. ‘The restricting
it to the former, in opposition to the maxim—

x MI Ar = AR Tias led to the erroneous

view of the wliole passage animadverted on
above. Mung is now convinced that it was
only on Yaou's death that Shun became full
emperor, but after that event there still re-
mained the relation between him and Koo-sow,
and how could he be at once sovereign and son

And of what can be attained to

to him? How was it that Koo-sow would be
at once father and subject to him? & Dy
-—see the She-king, IL. vi. Ode I. st.2. 212
YA x dp see the She-king, III iii. Ode
IV. st. 3. ALS the scope, ie, the mind or
_ aim of the writer. 8. Fr E. e thé

She-king. HT. i, Ode IX. st. 3. celebrating the

de
—
z

['

WORKS

Tm
A

b

Bl

ENS

(0)

SREP ALS) SREE

[ d

EHS

[ d

aN
S

Sing Seer

zh

> ARA
FER WÉ PE

in the honouring one’s parents,

"

t
D
z
F

S

OF MENCIUS.

*

X

v

Coes HE
ENE

*-
T

REKAH

[d

zy

~
f>
LÁ

IM
Nae

—

v

e A

N
4

[ d
-

N

v

RER

=
n

Me

v

MEE

v

S
i

SHNS
uS T

à

is

there is nothing greater than the

nourishing them with the whole empire. Koo-sow was the father of

the emperor ;—this was the height of honour.

Shun nourished

him with the whole empire ;—this was the height of nourishing.
In this was verified the sentiment in the Book of Poetry,

‘Ever cherishing filial thoug

hts,

[o]

Those filial thoughts became an example to after ages.'

4. *Itis said in the Book of

his duties, he waited on Koo-sow,
Koo-sow also believed him and conformed to virtue.— This

awe.
is the true case of the scholar of co
son by his father. "

CHAPTER V.
gave the empire to Shun?"

History, “ Reverently performing
and was full of veneration and

mplete virtue not being treated as a

1. Wan Chang said, * Was it the case that Yaou
Mencius said, ** No.

The emperor

cannot give the empire to another."

2
* Heaven gave it to him," was th
praises of king Woo,—This par. shows that

Shun, by his exaltation, honoured his father
only the more exceedingly. He was the more

*& son' to Koo-sow. 4. E FE] see the
Shoo-king, IL. ii. 15. 7K (read chae) p

(the classic has Tio —tnis seems to be a.

supplement by Mencius, as if he said, ‘There
is indeed a meaning in that saying that a scho-
lar of complete virtue cannot be treated as a
son by his father, for in the case of Shun and

* Yes;—but Shun had the empire. Who gave it to him?”

e answer:

r

Koo-sow we see that the father was affected by
the son, and not the son by the father.’

Cu. 5. How SHUN Got THE EMPIRE BY TIE
GIFT or Heavex. Vox Poruni vox Dre.

L AR 3K see I. Pt. IL i= ZF.

X Bu Zis it not plain that by ‘ Heaven’ in
A

this chapter we are to understand Gop? Many

commentators understand by it xi. * reason,"

or ‘the truth and fitness of things, saving in

 the expression— f] EI R in par. 7, where

2

E

Pr. IL Cu. V. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 231
KR, St ES BE a TS in Be Be
MAAK E Um U Xx
XOU FERERAE
Be af BLS Hie ti Alt a ig
Lb tac A 5 EJ Ls
As 44, A ah IK AT AT HK
ZEB RK MF a MH
BEÉRTE HHS
BoE aT A AN A E OR om OF,
Wü i te fe fie PA Z 2 AP

3. “ ‘Heaven gave it to him’:—did Heaven confer its appoint-
ment on him with specific injunctions ?”

4. Mencius replied, “No. Heaven does not speak. It simpl;
showed its will by his personal conduct, and his conduct of affairs.”

5. ‘It showed its will by his personal conduct and his conduct
of affairs’ : —how was this?” Mencius’ answer was, “The empire
can present a man to Heaven, but he cannot make Heaven give that `
man the empire. A prince can present a man to the emperor, but
he cannot cause the emperor to make that man a prince. <A great
officer can preserit a man to his prince, but he cannot cause the prince
to make that man a great officer. Yaou presented Shun to Heaven,
and the people accepted him. Therefore I say, ‘Heaven does not

tas HM, « " ; 9; ay YR — : aire vor
they take it as= Hi, ‘fate.’ On this the author (up. 2d tone) BEI with repetitions.-—The

of the pu E E TR HE Hm, ‘A collection

of the most important comments of the Learned
on the Four Books, says— Ji 72532] VA Wt
-RPE RE 3o REA

HR Ae WKS LT
Ee Be eh,

‘Heu-chae supposes that in this one case (

FI jo the word Heaven means fate. But
this is a great error. In this chapter ‘ Heaven’
signifies the government of God, within which
are included both reason and fate.’ 3.

Bi & FG =as to what you say.’ Fa

paraphrase in the H an is ;—' As to what you

say, Heaven gave it to him, did Heaven indeed
express its instructions, and commands to
him again and again? If it did not do so,
where is the ground for what you say ?'

4. Tp-ov. 3d tone, * conduct," as opposed to
E ‘the conduct of affairs.’ aye
ed it,’ ie. its will to give him the empire. The
char. FR takes here the place of fn: because

Z . ‘show-

to fj would require the use of language, where-
as 2k is the simple indieation of the will.
5. B lp. ‘the hundred’ (==all the) ‘spirits,’

is explained as X uh ul JI I Pa nl. ‘the

t3
C
E
wy
<

932 AS THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

>
eN:
RT

T4

>
MN RAE

-

RARE

2E
5

TEN
n
EN

HH
Ww

v

di HN EINER
us
Wid IS St

{oS
E

AAS
ioe PN
EN
SHO

v

RE

RATHER

=
DE

RH

nj

AN
‘La
=

[ d

M
a>
SHH

F fe Su NT
du fie AKRI Hl 47
speak. It simply indicated its will by his personal conduct and his
conduct of affairs.” l

6. Chang said, “I presume to ask how it was that Faou present-
ed Shun to Heaven, and Heaven accepted hin; and that he exhibited
him to the people, and the people accepted him.": Mencius replied,
* He caused him to preside over the sacrifices, and all the spirits
were well pleased with them;—thus Heaven accepted him. He
caused him to preside over the conduct of affairs, and affairs were
well administered, so that the people reposed under him ;—thus the
people accepted him. Heaven gave the empire to him. The people
gave it to him. Therefore I said, ‘The emperor cannot give the
empire to another.’

7. “Shun assisted Yaou in the government for twenty and eight
years ;—-this was more than man could have done, and was from

RE
RID
Nx

spirits of heaven, earth, the mountains, and the But such views were long subsequent to Men-

rivers,’ ùe. all spiritual beings. real or supposed. eing ti = i T i
In the Shoo-king, IL i. 6, a distinction is made ^"? "me. € BB [As very pamily
between the a jp. *host of spirits,’ and E the singular notwithstandmg the fý =‘ one

am puros and Ll Jil but the phrase here 0f the princes? I leave the Uu d for-
is to be taken as inclusive of all. The emperor Merly, out of the translation. Ak. read pul,

is Ta d. and Shun entered into all the ‘to manifest, ‘to exhibit. T. ye a

duties of Yaou, even while Yaou was alive. How up. 3d tone. Bl,» 2d tone. =f —
the spirits signified their approbation of the AE
sacrifices, we are not told.—Modern commen. low. 3d tone. In KR Ah. F it ds

take the a jn here as exclusive of Heaven said, II E: Eod =, ‘Heaven means des-
and subordinate to it, being equivalent to the tiny” But why suppose a different meaning of
pes! ‘the energetic operations of Heaven.’ the term? 28 years were, indeed, a long time,

Pr. I. Cu. V. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

h

Qo
go

Í

HEEF

S
4
i
H

un

p

am
m

Tl
E
xz

N

ET

S
S
EF

HEN

un
aiv

:

riz nn
mbi:
=

v
[ d

(NaN SOS

v,

SEE
NATAN

NS

v

aaun
HANAI

TER
CRON SERCH

EE
on

:

ae

ES
SN SE
SHEN SEVEN (NR

S
E
N
NS
x

Ny

zm
=
N

B

Heaven. After the death of Yaou, when the three years’ mourning
was completed, Shun withdrew from the son of Yaou to the south
of South river. The princes of the empire, however, repairing to
court, went not to the son of Yaou, but they went to Shun. Liti-
gants went not to the son of Yaou, but they went to Shun. Singers
sang not the son of Yaou, but they sang Shun. Therefore I said,
‘Heaven gave him the empire.’ It was after these things that he went
to the Middle kingdom, and occupied the emperor’s seat. If he had,
before these things, taken up his residence in the palace of Yaou, and
had applied pressure to the son of Yaou, it would have been an act
of usurpation, and not the gift of Heaven.

8. “This sentiment is expressed in the words of The great De-.
claration,—‘ Heaven sees according as my people see; Heaven hears
according as my people hear.’”

for Shun to occupy the place of vice-emperor as PA diee Ana. XII. xiii, but Choo He

he did, and showed wonderful gifts. I consider POLES EE
: sia! ; 2 stion b rm
that this is an additional illustration of the makes no distinction between the terms here,

f1 above, by which Heaven intimated its and explains BA jak zi FAT dt in BA

will about Shun. 'The south of the South Z. Fike ape these two terms must be
river (probably the most southern of the nine B.
streams which Yu opened) would be in the taken together. aK is the more general name

present Ho-nan. 'Thither Shun retired from of the two.. The = says that ZIE is IE
K‘e-chow, the present Shan-se, where Yaou’s Bil X nee ae

É Bh iuo =
capital was. For the difference between mjjv ‘the singing of many together’ The 4-
3 (ch'aou, low. Ist tone) and af, see the Le- Lr i makes E Lj to be the several tunes of
ke, L Pt. II. ii, 11, and notes thereon. Z the singers. m- or fi. 8. ey

E IE. Z rH [at] — x-ft the verb. 2 EL the Sboo-king, IV. i. Scet. IL 7.

20

234 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK V.
^ —F Al [2 3x1
A IN A s IA
X E M X » E Lozej

bad

AN
IRS
e i
H

NS
m

J SEES

N

SENE
ee

uw

LA
LA
d

S
PER

m

SHINS

zH
“hE HR

SENTI NEW

Fes at
Ty
eT

4

Ss"

b
4

in
—

A

3
m
SoD

-
3
*

RON)

S
v.
\
/

-
-—
wer) wm

zz I ==
HA b è "4 O’

d
$
inda
mE

i
TUER

e

dier SRSA ES

Ex
à
al

TENS
NE:

v

LL
dao

N
4

"

HS No

NES
Kat SE

iN
N
~

H VN
CHAPTER VI. 1. Wan Chang asked Mencius saying, “ People say,
‘When the disposal of the empire came to Yu, his virtue was inferior
to that of Yaou and Shun, and he transmitted it not to the worthiest
bet to his son? Was itso?” Mencius replied, ** No; it was not so.
When Heaven gave the empire to the worthiest, it-was given to the
worthiest. When Heaven gave it to the son of the preceding emperor,
it was given to him. Shun presented Yu to Heaven. Seventeer,
years elapsed, and Shun died. When the three years’ mourning
was expired, Yu withdrew from the son of Shun to Yang-shing.
The people of the empire followed him just as after the death of
Yaou, instead of following his son, they had followed Shun. Yu
presented Yih to Heaven. Seven years elapsed, and Yu died. When
the three years’ mourning was expired, Yih withdrew from the son
of Yu to the north of mount Ke. The princes, repairing to court,

AB

N
"

d

ference may be drawn as well from the special
cases. Ei — was itso?’ ie., was his virtue
inferior, and his transmitting the throne to his

t By — omitted

in translating, as before. Choo He says,‘ Yang-
shing and the north of mount Ke were both at
the. foot of the Sung mountains, pices fit for
retirement, within deep valleys” By many
they are held to aye been the same place, and

Cu. 6. Tow THE THRONE DESCENDED FROM
Yu to HIS SON, AND NOT TO HIS MINISTER Yin;
THAT YU WAS NOT TO BE CONSIDERED ON THAT
ACCOUNT AS INFERIOR IN VIRTUE To YAOU AND

Suey, 1. - Fy. coming to;’ we

must understand, ‘From Yaon and Shun,’ or
translate somehow as I have done. Some say

that fü Ex, fi , are hot to be taken

with special reference to Shun and Yu, and to
Ke, but it sceims best to doso A general in-

son a proof that it was so?

Pr. I. Cu. VI. TIE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 235.

of. a MY
Jit, b Ji Á BA » Anm
-f

SDS

NNOHON TINH

6

SN
XB
3 Ct
Sry
KN

ES

SNY
Bi

oe
Q

zi
iil
(us mi

d]
a
B
iT
one,
M.

uz
&

v

AH
zx
m

\
"

DENN

.-

w
-

wy
as

NES
=

N
Billie
a

DAME RN

zZ
pas
om
IM

RH
zm
TE

N
a)
9

Y

a
e

DHONI SESS
p

iz s
E

IS
gsm
BANS

IS
P

Sei
È
EE
pr
SCR

Eig
xum

[ d

SER Xe

=
EM

ber
Pr,
í

Edi
$3

E E Hig uu

A A A BR

d d à , HS
went not to Yih, but they went to K‘e. Litigants did not go to Yih,
but they went to K'é, saving,. ‘He is the son of our sovereign ;'
the singers did not sing Yih, but they sang K'e, saying, * He is the
son of our sovereign.’

2. “That Tan-choo was not equal to his father, and Shun's son
not equal to him; that Shun assisted Yaou, and Yu assisted Shun,
for many years, conferring benefits on the people for a long time;
that thus the length of time during which Shun, Yu, and Yih,
assisted in the government was so different; and that the sons of the
emperors were—the one'a man of talents and virtue, and the other
two.inferior to their fathers:—all this was from Heaven, and what
could not be produced by man. That which is done without man's
doing it is from Heaven. That which happens without man’s caus-
ing it to happen is from the ordinance of Heaven.

SHES

zs

that Ex is a mistake for Hg . They were The son of Shun is not mentioned in the classic.
certainly near each other, and are referred to the His name was E-Keun (3 r3. and often ap-
district of Tang-fung CS ip m the depart- pears as Shang Keun, he having been appointed
ment of Ifo-nan, in Ho-nan. Yih was Yu's , to the principality of Shang (JJ) In Z Aq.
great minister, raised to that dignity, after the 5 f .
death of Kaou-yaou. His merit is attributed the AH is up. 3d tone. Tn this par., we have a
to the instructions of his mother. See the longer sentence than ig commonly found in
Shoo-king, Il. iv. K'e was Yws son, who suc- 3 iun EE in EB J
: 7 ; se nposition, tl zE in EE +H,

ceeded him on the throne, 2. Tan Chao Chinese compo: > Ne UU TEN X *
was the son of Yaou; see the Shoo-king. L 9. resuming all the previous clauses, which are in

. : A

N
Qə
fox)

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

rid
=
UE

=
ES

s
=

v
[ d

A
S

i
E

&
g
v

SSE
z

V
$
E

XN

©

A
RD

FR
EP

Sz

EN
R
-

FEX
zr
—

ox

NS

3. “In the case of a private individual obtaining the empire,
there must be in him virtue equal to that of Shun or Yu, and more-
over there must be the presenting of him to Heaven by the preceding
emperor. It was on this account that Confucius did not obtain the
empire.

4. * When the empire is possessed by natural succession, the em-
peror who is displaced by Heaven must be like Kéé or Chow. It
was on this aecount that Yih, E Yin, and Chow-kung did not obtain
the empire.

5. “E Yin assisted T'ang so that he became sovereign over the
empire. After the demise of T'ang, Tae-ping having died before he
could be appointed emperor, Wae-ping reigned two years, and Chung-

jin four. T'ae-këă was then turning upside down the statutes of
T'ang, when E Yin placed him in 'l'ung, for three years. There
T'ae-kéá repented of his errors, was contrite, and reformed himself.

3d tone. m NOR Uu 4g. have translated
here according to Chaou K‘e. One of the
Ch'ngs gives a different view :—‘On the death
of 'I*ang, Wae-ping was only two years old, and

apposition with one another :— Tan Choo's not
being like his father, Shun’s son’s not being like

s him,’ &c. dH E Aii = HE 4E ZA Hd

zd RA -A
(=F) p Yay , the first T3 js active;
implying the purpose of man, the second is
passive; $0, as is indicated by the terms, with
ES and E in the next sentence. 4. E

Yin was the chief minister of T'ang, (sée Con.
Ana. XII. xxii. 6.), and Chow-kung or the duke
of Chow, the well known assistant of hjs brother,

king Woo. 5. JH.—«. 3dtone. -[.,—1low.

Chung-yin was but four. 'T'ae-keá was somewhat
older, and therefore was put on the throne;'
and between this view and the other, Choo He
professes himself unable to decide. The first
view appears to me much the more natural,
ahd is founded moreover on the accouut in the
‘Historical Records,’ though the histories have
been arranged according to the other, and Tae-
k'e& appears as the successor of T'ang. This
arrangement of the chronology seems indeed
required by the statements in the Sloo-king,

Pr. I. Ca. VL—VII.

pepe
a

 Sem

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

wo

37

VSS Hat

v

Hah SS
SSRI EHGETT .

S
=

e)

. In T'ung he came to dwell in benevolence and moved towards right-

eousness, during
him by E Yin.

6. “ Chow-kung's not

g those three years, listening to the lessons given to
Then Æ Yin again returned with him to Pd.
getting the empire was like the case of

Yih and the throne of Hea, or like that of E Yin and the throne of Yin.
7. “Confucius said, ‘T‘ang and Yu resigned the throne to their

worthy ministers.
transmitted it to their sons.

same 2n all the cases.’”
CHAPTER VII.

The sovereign of Hea and those of Yin and Chow
The principle of righteousness was the

1. Wan Chang asked Mencius, saying, “ People

say that E Yin sought an introduction to T'ang by his knowledge of

cookery. Was it so?”

IV. iv., which do not admit of any reign or
reigns being interposed between T'ang and Tae-

kéi. The author of the yu E HE Ex at.

proposes the following solution :— Chaou K'e's
view is inadmissible, being inconsistent with
the Shoo-king. The scholar Ch‘ing’s view is
also to be rejected. For how can we suppose
that T‘ang, dying over a hundred years old,
would leave children of two and four years? And
moreover, on this view Chung-yin was the elder
brother, and Mencius would have mentioned
him first. But there is a solution which meets
ali the difficulties of the case. First, we as-
sume, with the old explanation, that Wae-ping
and Chung-jin were both dead, when 'T'ae-kéá
succeeded to thethrone. Then, with Ch'ing, we

take ap in the sense of BE years of life, and
not of reign ;—and the meaning thus comes out,
that T‘ae-ting died before his father, and his
brothers Wae-ping and Chung-yin died also,
the one at the age of two, and the other of four

years.’ Jit]. — the sense of laws. ‘Tung

was the place where ‘Tang had been buried,
and Pò the name of his capital. There is some
controversy about the time of ''ae-kéá's deten-
tion in Tung, whether the three years are to be
reckoned from his accession, or trom the con-
clusion of the three years of mourning. The

‘Historical Records’ sanction the latter view,
but the former is generally reeeived, as more
in aecordanee with the Shoo-king. T.
We must understand Confucius’ saying—the
second clause of it,—as referring to the first
sovereigns of the dynasties mentioned, and

ii. opposed to jit. -- (85. ‘to transmit to,’

ie, their sons. and are Yaou and

Shun: see the Shoo-king, I., II. E tee

Ana, IL xxxi 1. Yu originally, was the { H
or Baron, of Hea, a district in the pres. dep. of
Kae-fung. The one principle of righteous-
ness was accordance with the will of Heaven,

as expressed in par. 1, X fü Bil Bu
KR Ws O

Cu. 7. VINDICATION OF E YIN FROM THE
CHARGE OF INTRODUCING HIMSELF TO THE SER-
VICE OF T‘aNG BY AN UNWORTHY ARTIFICE.

1. BE, up. ist tone, = 3g, or =; ‘to
seek,’ ie., an introduction to, or the favour of.
E (ft is the surname) Yin GE, the ‘regula-
tor, is the designation) was the chief minister
of T'ang. The popular account (found also
in the ‘Historical Records") in the times of

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

t2
eo

FE SR as ^
NS

m
fx

s
*

TEN
Mtm
TTS

A

v

pns
E

Fas

a

NS:
FEN aa SS

3S
SSN T REA

SF
Nin

Be
(v
[v
AL
TT
=

v
v

Mim

io

NS
ONS

(NR

EE

HONS

N
RE
4

€
HAN

cn
A
=

gen
pu:

TE

 mar
if

-

3

HX dit, BN,

2. Mencius replied, “ No, it was not so. E Yin was a farmer in
the lands of the prince of Sin, delighting in the principles of Yaou
and Shun. In any matter contrary to the righteousness which they
prescribed, or contrary to their principles, thongh he had been
offered the empire, he would not have regarded it; though there
had been ‘yoked for him a thousand teams of horses, he would not
have looked at them. In any matter contrary to the righteousness
which they prescribed, or contrary to their principles, he would
neither have given nor taken a single straw. S

3. “T'ang sent persons with presents of silk to intreat him to
enter his service. With an air of indifference and self-satisfaction he
said, ‘What can I do with those silks with which Tang invites me?
Is it not best for me to abide in the channeled fields, and so delight
myself with the principles of Yaou and Shun?’

4. “Tang thrice sent messengers to invite him. After this, with

as

Mencius was, that © Yin came to Pò, in the

train of a daughter of the prince of Sin, whom
'l'ang was marrying, carrying his cooking in-

struments with him, that by 5a HS * cutting
and boiling, he might reconimend himself to
favour. 2. 26 Pa iE Yin was
a native of Sin, the same territory which under
the Chow dynasty was called Kih (qu the
present Shen-chow que HD of Ho-nan. It was
not far distant from ‘Tang's original seat of Pd,

also in the present Ho-nan. AG AE

+, ‘the surname, 7.e., the prince, holding Sin.

3E EË EAU JE dE ds are in apposi-

tion, the one explanatory of the other. p

 xit, * emolument him.’ en a team of
 four horses." 4r- A .

3. ma. * to ask’,
often used for ‘to ask in marriage p here, ‘to

4. BX H may be

ask to be minister’

Avil THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

39

d
T
Q
z

yr. +

rd

-—
Pd
ERU

e
(Negli E
AU (NSS RRS
Ñ
=

NARR

v

[mE
uncis
mafun

ADEN
DARN

NES
E
Mic
M VES

Lh

NAH
:
=
S

eu
Eee HE ERE
h

*.
I i-i
a

DX

s
HO

TUI

MERIT

EMER
NOH

ARG
E

E

ai

(v

ug

KEINSS

MIEDR SS
HEINES RET AS

the change of resolution displayed in his countenance, he spoke in a
different style, —* Instead of abiding in the channeled fields and there-
by delighting myself with the principles of Yaou and Shun, had I
not better make this prince a prince like Yaou or Shun, and this
people like the people of Yaou or Shun? Had I not better in my
own person see these things for myself? .

5. *'Heaven's plan in the production of mankind is this :—that
they who are first informed should instruct those who are later in
being informed, and they who first apprehend principles should in-
struct those who are slower to do so. I am one of Heaven’s people
who have first apprehended ;—I will take these principles and in-
struct this people in them.. If I do not instruct them, who will do
80?’

6. “He thought that among all the people of the empire, even
the private men and women, if there were any who did not enjoy

ug E st Ef. ‘changed his plan, and said, spoken by E Yin. The meaning of zb *to
or ai dE = =f ‘changed his words, and apprehend,’ ‘to understand,’ is an advance on
-x

. 2 that of 4, simply ‘to know.’ The student
Said." E: ‘ i =li ,
i XC HF, ‘a prince of, like to, will observe also that it is used actively three

Yaou aiid Shun? Ido not see exact]
BT y the force ü NE >
J ; imes,=‘to instruct. In
of TA z E in the last sentence, and have . Æt R, the yu

. y

N ; » AIA
therefore simply translated the phrase literally. E ‘this people, =“ mankind. 6
9. This par. is to be understood as j read as, aud - XA Bib. —read shwvy, wp, 2d

2

w=
EC

CEE

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK V,

GEHL eL het

[ d

TSE
Sats

ASN

SENE

Sero

Tee

EM
pe SHE

v

v

SINAN
Penes dead iie

DERI SESS IX IIT Mc
BEX
(NSS EELS
-

Ld

!li

o
v

SS ESL

kes

such benefits as Yaou and Shun a it was as if he himself
pushed them into a ditch. He took upon himself the heavy charge
of the empire in this way, and therefore he went to T‘ang, and pressed
upon him the subject of attacking Hea and saving the people.

7. “Ihave not heard of one who bent himself, and at the same
*time made others straight ;—how much less could one disgrace him-
self, and thereby rectify the whole empire? The actions of the sages
have been different. Some have kept remote from court, and some
have drawn near to them ; some have left their offices, and some have
not done so :—that to which those different courses all turn is sim-
p» the keeping of their persons pure.

“I have heard that E Yin sought an introduction to T'ang by
the doctrines of Yaou and Shun. Í have not heard that he did so
by his knowledge of cookery.

9. “Tn the ‘Instructions of E,’ it is said, ‘Heaven destroying
n commenced attacking him in the palace of Müh. I commenced
in :

3

SERT
sel
[mien

que s)
mul

tone, * to advise,' *to persuade.’ it Z YJ, some form of the book referred to which Con-

‘advised him about,’ 7. Comp. III. Pt.-II. fucius disallowed. The meaning is that Kéé’s
=m [3 ‘if we seek where they atrocities in his palace in Muh led Heaven to

destroy him, while E Yin, in aecordance with
the will of Heaven, advised T'ang in Pd to

take action against him. Ps and HX: both

came to, Where they centered.’ 8. —
as in paf. 1. 9. See the Shoo-king, IV.iv.

any suppose Mencius to quote from HA, ‘to begin.’

t
im
~~

Pr. I. Cu. VIII THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

ZI
3I

v

Ñ
IN
RS
m Sk

v

PA ai
aks

2
=

O

ds
xen

KSB EH

ZR
BSHS
KeS rr E

-

NE
isin Sg
E

HER
=

-
A
^
^

THEE
a

€
i

DA

Ric
IX

[ d

EE EIS

[PERS 2 EX Z2

Cuapter VIII. 1. Wan Chang asked Mencius, saying, “Some
say that Confucius, when he was in Wei, lived with the ulcer-doctor,
and when he was in Ts‘e, with the attendant, Tseih Hwan ;—was it
so?” Mencius replied, “No; it was not so. Those are the inven-
tions of men fond of strange things.

2. * When he was in Wei, he lived with Yen Ch‘ow-yew. The
wives of the officer Me and Tsze-loo were sisters, and Me told Tsze-
loo, ‘If Confucius will lodge with me, he may attain to the dignity
of a high noble of Wei.’ Tsze-loo informed Confucius of this, and
he said, ‘That is as ordered by Heaven.’ Confucius went into
office according to propriety, and retired from it according: to right-
eousness. In regard to his obtaining office or not obtaining it, he
said, "That is as ordered. But if he had lodged with the attendant

Cu. 8. VINDICATION OF Coxrucitus FROM men referred to were unworthy favourites of

THE CHARGE OF LODGING WITH UNWORTHY their respective princes. pi (up. 3d tone) E:
CHARACTERS. 1. Pia swelling, ‘an

(Nai

au
AES

ah
“at

s
A

^r, —one who is fond of raising trouble,’ and
, SN t : s
ples, end 3H. (rend tsen, upper Ist tone,) ‘a in a lighter sense, as here, ‘one who is fond of
deep-seated ulcer? Choo He, after Chaou K'e,

m . H , » Rn
takes the two terms, as in the translation. 92158» and doing, strange things, E-e
Some, however, take the characters as a maws “EH 2, ‘lodged in his house,’ lit., ‘hosted

> — J^ px
name, called also SHE Ys HE MÉE ona SÉ in tn par. VA FE Bip EQ s “by tore
$(É. They are probably right. The ‘Historical + som they are hosts? YEME y
>x 2

l. »
Recorda’ make $ff to have been the eunuch those whom they host, ie. make tligir hosts,

in attendance on the duke of Wei, when he , 9 ee M

rede through the market place, with the duch- 2.: Yen Ch'ow-yew, called also yg
ess, followed by the sage,—to his great disgust. 3R, was a worthy officer of Wei. One agcount
ft A- A ‘the eunuch.” Eunuchs were has it, that he was brother to Tsze-loo’s Wife,

employed during the Chow dynasty. Both the butsthis is probably incorrect. Me, with the
31
¥

i
IN

242 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK V,
as yu =

Ez ga Amy, J A
E s A nv J We
vj » ò ð 25) * fT
pit Wr inp

^ ee TE PR,

ig

Y

s

See

HHS
EAS

A
Tay

4

$e) BS

J& E
4r. (dE
AMIL dp dur

e

SHEENA

.

~
v
v

HSH SREE

ABE HH

slate

e
gm

BF EL H Be ak a

Tseih mR that would neither have been according to righteous-
ness, nor any ee of Heaven.

3. “When Confucius, being dissatisfied in Loo and Wei, had left
. those States, he met with the attempt of Hwan, the Master of the
horse, of Sung, to intercept and kill him. At that time, though he
was in circumstances of distress, he lodged with the city-master Ching,
who was then a minister of Chow, the prince of Ch‘in.

4. “I have heard that the charac ters of ministers about court
may be discerned from those whom they entertain, and those of
stranger officers, from those with whom they lodge. If Confucius
had lodged with ‘the ulcer- doctor, and with the attendant Tseih Hw an,
how could he have been Confucius?”

Cuarrkg IX. 1. Wan Chang asked Mencius, * Some say that
Pih- le He sold himself to a cattle-keeper of Ts'in, for the skins of

name Hea, FED. was an unworthy favourite ie hére have a different application from what

of the duke Ling. 3. Comp. Con. Ana. belongs them in the last chapter, par. 7.
Mn xxii; Hwan is the Hwan "uy there. Cu. 9.. Vixpication or Pin- He FROM

‘ 1 H THE CHARGE OF SELLING HIMSELF AS A STEP TO
m. upper 1st tone,— J dd to intercept.
[1 Hs. —' small clothes; ie., the dress. of a

common man, HB. ‘the Pure,’ is the honorary
epithet of the officer who was Confucius' host,
aud J was the proper name of the prince of

Chin, with whom indeed the independence of
the State terminated. Ching, it is said, after-
wards hecame *eity-master' in Sung. and was
known as such ;—hence he is so styled here at

‘au earlier period of his life.

1. ik aud ,

HIS ADVANCEMENT. 1. Pih-le He was chief
minister to the duke Muh (SR ‘the diffuser

of virtue, and maintainer of integrity’), Bc.
659--620. His history will be found interest-
ingly detailed in the 25th and some subsequent
Books of the i id of the Divided States,’

C zi p] x Am though the incidents there are,

sone of them, different from Mencius’ Heenan
about him, With regard to that in this par.
; isnot easy to understand the popular Laie
referred to, The account in tlie ‘ Historical

Pr. I. Cr. IX.

v

EM

(UT
uu
HE

2

Sul SHE
Se Stat

NH

H

TRE)

v

. ANIMEN

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

S
4

S

Tae CS SA

ao
xm
eS

v

v

EFRR

e

a
SO TI RER

PAE

te

x
Ae
=

`

a

e

—
aiii

g

RF,

five S and fed his oxen, in order to find an introduction to the

duke Muh of Ts'in ;—is this the case?" Mencius said, ** No
This story was invented by men fond of strange thin
9. *'Pih-le He was a man of Yu.
inducement ofa gem of Chuy-keih,
breed, borrowed a passage through Yu to attack Kih.

not so.

; it was
gs.

The people of “Tsin, by the
and four horses of the Kouč

-On that occa-

sion, Kung Chi-k‘e remonstrated against granting their request, and

Pih- Je He ‘did not remonstrate.

3. “When he knew that the duke of Yu was not to be remon-

strated with, and, leaving that State, went to '

sin, he had reached

the age of seventy. If by that time he did not know that it would
be a mean thing to seek an introduction to.the duke Muh of Ts'in
by feeding oxen, could he be called wise? But not remonstrating
where it was of no use to remonstrate, could he be said not to be

Records,’ BB. is, that, after the sub-

version of Yu, He followed its captive duke to
Tsin, refusing to take service in that State, and
was afterwards sent to Tsʻin in a menial capacity,
in the train of the eldest daughter of the honse
of Tsin, who was to become the wife of the
duke Muh. Disgusted at being in such a
position, He absconded on the road, and fleecing
to Ts‘oo, he became noted for his skill in rear-
ing cattle.
his great capacity, and sent to 'l's'oo, to reclaim
him as a runaway servant, offering also to pay
for his ransom five rams’ skins, He was afraid
^ to offer a more valuable ransom, lest he should
awaken suspicions in J's'oo that he wanted to
get He on account of his ability ; and on obtain-

ing him, he at once made him his chief minister.

The duke Mah somehow heard of

£e —read tsze, low, 8d tone,=4 gap tto feed?

Ba, —as in ch. 7, up. 1st tone. HY- F >
—as in last chapter. 2. Chruy-keih and
Keué (so read) were the names of places in Tsin,
the one famous for its gems, the other for its
horses. »—low. 3d tone, ‘a team of four
horses? Kih and Yu were small States, adjoin-
ing each other, and only safe against the attacks

of their more powerful neighbour, Tsin, by their
nratual union. Both the officers of Yu, Kung
Che-k'e and Pih-le He saw this, but He saw
also that no remonstrances would prevail M
the ue of Yu against the bribes of Tsin — 3.

E as Be £e the verb. rii Jt

.

RE

2

B»
uw

3
(v

m

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

=
SaN

v
[ d

=

See

Wil, B
ZB
»

or

[ d

xU
Z3

S
a a

MGE
JENA

o

EUH ER
EADS

p
a

\
4

2
BE EEz [MN BUR

S

=a;

wise? Knowing that the duke of Yu would be ruined, and leaving
him before that event, he cannot be said not to have been wise.
Being then advanced in Ts‘in, he knew that the duke Muh was one
with whom he would enjoy a field for.action, and became minister

to him’;—could he, acting thus, be said not to be wise? Having:

become chief minister of Ts‘in, he made his prince distinguished
throughout the empire, and worthy of being handed down to future
ages ;—could he have done this, if he had not been a man of talents
and virtue? ‘As to selling himself in order to accomplish all the
aims of his prince, even a villager who had a regard for himself
would not do such a thing, and shall we say that à man of talents
and virtue did it?”

$ Z this may haye been prudent, but strance, while he remained himself to be with the
was not honourable. It is contrary to other duke in the evil day which he saw approaching.
accounts ot He’s conduct. He is said to have

urged Che-k‘e to leave Yu after his remon- S d are to be taken together.

Pr. I. Cu. I. ‘THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 245

BOOK V.
WAN CHANG. PART II.

EA K M Br Hil M ’ Es
4, IB i aN me
5i T

3

Has
ETE

E (a

SEES.
Mmmm

iv
anke

v
-

3i.
e

HORS RUNGE E
C

ESTRENO RE
EHH

SSE SH

E

Sowa

eru
Em

NREREN
St
&
E
oS
Sa
penn

Se
>a

rs
NH
z
E

Ly

CuaPTER I. 1. Mencius said, * Pih-e would not allow his eyes
to look on a bad sight, nor his ears to listen to a bad sound. He
would not serve a prince whom he did not approve, nor command
a people whom he did not esteem. In a time of good government he
took office, and on the occurrence of confusion he retired. He
could not bear to dwell either in a court from which a lawless govern-
ment emanated, or among lawless people. He considered his being
in the same place with a villager, as if he were to sit amid mud and
coals with his court robes and court cap. In the time of Chow he -
dwelt on the shores of the North sea, waiting the purification of the
empire. Therefore when men now hear the character of Pih-e, the
‘corrupt become pure, and the weak acquire determination. :

Cu. 1. How CONFUCIUS DIFFERED FROM AND people stop.’ 74 is properly ‘stupid,’ ‘ obsti-
WAS SUPERIOR TO ALL OTHER SAGES. 1.
m E nate,” but here as opposed to. we must take
Comp. II. Pt. I. ii, 22, and ix; IV, Pt. I. xii 1. — ^ PP Be ee
it in the sense of ‘corrupt. Julien, indeed,

d
d BC Z Br IH ;—'the place whence a takes fie in the sense of * habere vim discernendi."
Nerse government issues;’ ie, a court. Tü But itis better to retain ifs propersignif., and to

R Z Br IE- the place where perverse alter that of JH. with the gloss in the fii t

246: THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

m
Heb

i:

StS H

EIE
Zr

o
wx

C
v

—

es
Amr

SEES
BEDS

zd
enses

I zm

BG

P2
sio

A

n

[ d

v
Ld

BED

Mm
SS

G

RSNA
MIRE AS

NNI
NM
"DT

=

SESE
NIE
ns

ER

ieu =
$2 INE ER

=~
Gy

v A

(DE Th Æ.

2 “E a said, ‘Whom may I not serve? My serving him
makes him my sovereign. What people may I not command? ? M y
commanding them makes them my people.’ In a time of good govern-
ment he took office, and when confusion prevailed, he also took
office. He said, ‘Heaven’s plan in the production of mankind is
this :—that they who are first informed should instruct those who are
later in being informed, and they who first apprehend principles
should instruct those who are slower in doing so. I am the one of
Heaven's people who has first. apprehended I will take these prin-
ciples and instruct the people in them.’ He thought that among all
the people of the empire, even the common men and women, if there
were any who did not sharein the enjoyment of such benefits as Yaou
and Shun conferred, it was as if he himself pushed them into a ditch;
—or he took upon "himself the heavy charge of the empire.

3. *Hwuy of Lew-hea was not ashamed to serve an impure prince,
nor did he think it low to be an inferior officer. When advanced
to employment, he did not conceal his virtue, bué made it a point to

XE f T n s. WS Hig Fi), ix TR Aut there we re any who did not have

BERE. 2 Comp. IL Pé 1 ii. 22; ana Pt ÎR the enjoyment,’ &e. 3. Come: —
>" 1 Lix 2 The clause fi ZB A: Am

V., Ps. I. vii. 5,6, Obs, that here instead of which is wanting there, ake the ak E] of

AE FER. Xen TDI BE that place more plain. 3H is ‘to have the

MENDES

eH
FAEN
ats

(N

Pa

m

Pr. II. Cu. I. TIIE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 247

Vc
d

xj
E
=
KN
=
=
=
DE

d
RE
=
mx
Dz

^

E

Soy
VLL
=

[ d
v

EE ac

REBI
Pea

KEN
Ez

HNN
N
E

ism

EENS

M
©
ERE

v
~
~

~
-
~~
“4

v

gm
mr,
BAS.

Ty

KS

DSA NE BSE NS
=

~a
Se
v

X NIN Fe aA d
Sais SES
S
TE

xs
n

i

R
AS

F
RSS

Es
eM

v

HL BE

E E m
D tn A Ba Edi UA
carry out his principles. When dismissed and left without office,
he yet did not murmur. When straitened by poverty, he yet did
not grieve. When thrown into the company of village people, he
was quite at ease and could not bear to leave them. He had a say-
ing, ‘You are you, and I am I. Although you stand by my side
with breast and arms bare, or with your body naked, how can you
defile me?’ Therefore when men now hear the character of Hwuy
of Lew-hea, the mean become generous, and the niggardly become
liberal.

4. “When Confucius was leaving Ts'e, he strained off with his
hand the water in which his rice was being rinsed, took the rice, and
went away. When he left Loo, he said, ‘T will set out by and by:’.
—it was right he should leave the country of his parents in this
way. When it was proper to go away quickly, he did so; when it
was proper to delay, he did so; when it was proper to keep in retire- *
ment, he did so; when it was proper to go into office, he did so :—.
this was Confucius.” l

5. Mencius said, * Pih-e among the sages was the pure one; E Yin

arms bare, and 17 ‘to put off all the upper washed. The latter is the sense here. Hid
garment, gg. together, is ‘to have the body JE z Tp was the answer given by Con-

naked.’ Here and in par. 1, M is expressed fucius to Tsze-lpo, who wished to hurry him

away. 5. [have invented the adjective
more nearly by ‘character, than by any i <timeous? to translate the HF here, meaning
other English term, t. Ap — to rinse that Confucius did at every time what the

or wash vice,’ ‘the water in which rice 1s circumstances of it required, possessing the

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

le
S
ud
c
zi S
<

SW
ESSER ONE E
EPRE Seb

==
=
RRNA

~ Be

REN
HE

E
r,
[ d

AER
NOSE

>
RESY

[9
=
SHEDS

IENS
3

d
So

NL
TIE

INE
wie

NER
ERASE

SUN
NAHE

v

v

SERS NE

Bei REHH
AS
N

edes

=
HS
=

o B

was the one most inclined to take office; Hwuy of Lew-hea was the
accommodating one; and Confucius was the timeous one.

6. “In Confucius we have what is called a complete concert. A
complete concert is when the large bell proclaims the commencement of
the music, and the ringing stone proclaims its close. The metal sound
commences the blended harmony of all the instruments, and the wind-
ing up with the stone terminates that blended harmony. The cont-
mencing that harmony is the work of wisdom. The terminating it
is the work of sageness.

7. ‘As a comparison for wisdom, we may liken it to skill, and as
a comparison for sageness, we may liken it to strength ;—as in the
case of shooting at a mark a thousand paces distant. ‘That you reach
it is owing to your strength, but that you hit the mark is not owing
to your strength.” ;

qualities of all other sages, and displaying them, music of the various instruments blended to-
at the proper time and place. 6. 'The gether. e EE and Hr Z are not parts of ,
illustration of Confucius here is from a grand the concert, but the signals of its commence-
performance of music, in which all the eight ment and close, the x referring to EREE-

Finds of musical instruments are united. One 2: Obeta the codi adco p. and HB,
instrument, would make a ay WM ‘small per- S EE
f ^ Joined, th : k FEF IK ‘a Hi Ai. ‘The other three worthies,’ it is
See be ee i observed, ‘carried one point to an extreme, but
collected great performance, = a concert.’ Be. Confucius was complete in every thing. We
may compare each of them to one of the sea-
pis and $t, are all used as verbs. 1 xy » } sons, but Confucius was the grand, harmonious,
“discriminated rules, indicates the separate air of heaven, flowing through all the seasons,

Yr IH. Cu. IL

t2

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 19

iw

Air, ers

"P fi JL
T

bot
uo
ERE
ill

E
T
in

y
4

HUN
V

I

i

i
SI
Em
t.
[^
81

b
"

E 4
=

aS
zs

POSTRE Se
yee
Da

N
bas

(v "
zh

4

©
v

realis

v

=]

v

“NEW

F YE

HL
JH
ji

BEN

ER

AL,

JL,

Cuapter II 1. Pih-kung E asked Mencius, saying, “ What was
the arrangement of dignities and emoluments determined by the
house of Chow?”

2. Mencius replied, “The particulars, of that arrangement can-
not be learned, for the princes, disliking them as injurious to them-
selves, have all made away with the records of them. Still I have
learned the general outline of them.

3 o“ The : EMPEROR constituted one dignity ; the KUNG one; the How
one; the rin one; and the 'rsze and the wan each one of equal rank:
—altogether making five degrees of dignity. The SOVEREIGN again
constituted one dignity; : the CHIEF MINISTER one; thé GREAT OFFICERS
one; the SCHOLARS OF THE FIRST CLASS one ; THOSE OF THE MIDDLE CLASS
one; and THOSE OF THE LOWEST CLASS one :—altogether making six
degrees of dignity.

*m
E

Cu. 2. THE ARRANGEMENT OF DIGNITIES

AND EMOLUMENTS ACCORDING TO THE DYNASTY
or Cuow. l. Pih-kung E was an officer
of the State of Wei. The double surname,
‘t Northern-palace,' had probably been given to
the founder of the family from his residence.

2. Many passages might be quoted from
the Le-ke, the Chow Le, and the Shoo- king, il-
lustrating, more or less, the dignities of theem-
pire and their emoluments, but it would serve
little purpose to do so, after Mencius’ declara-
tion that only the general outline of them could
be ascertained. It is an important fact which
he mentions, that the princes had destroyed

GE, up. 2d tone) many of the records before
his time. The founder of the Tsin dynasty
had had predecessors and patterns. Re —up,

TUI

3d tone, *to hate.'

t

B, have been rendered ‘duke, marquis, ‘earl,

viscount, and baron,’ and also ‘duke, prince,
count, marquis, and baron,’ but they by no
means severally correspond te those dignities.
It is better to retain the Chinese designations,
which no doubt were originally meant to indicate

certain qualities of those bearing them. A=

‘just, correct, without selfishness,’ fe ‘taking
eare of; = m in the sense of * guarding the bor-
ders and important places against banditti ; pos-
sessed of the power to govern." H conveys the
idea of ‘elder and intelligent,’ ‘one capable of

presiding over others,’ Pa ‘to nourish,”

5

(from. H , ‘field,’ and yi *strength;) ‘one

* one who genially cherishes the people."

32

t»
qa
ee

wea
vam

v

e

Ne
TEE
poene d

Ex
 RO
RBH SERS RA

"
22 INSEE

E
aot
4

p

4.
sahd le square.

Tl WORKS OF MENCIUS.

Im"
RI

-

=-
Hm d

©

N
7

—
C7 h
Term

v
}
ei
So

-
v

SEESE}

Ss
Ny

uzb
GG
Le

NEE

i

5 UN
=

“To the emperor there was allotted a territor y of a thou-
A Kung and a How had each a hundred le square.

The

A Pih had seventy le, and a Tsze and a Nan had each fifty le.
assignments altogether were of four amounts. Where the territory
did not amount to fifty le, the chief could not have access himself to
the emperor, His land was attached to some How-ship, and was
called a Foo-yune

5. “The chief ministers of the emperor received an amount of
territory equal to'that of a How; a great officer received as much as
a Pih; and a scholar of the first class as much as a Tsze or a Nan.

6. In a great State, where the territory was a hundred le square,
the sovereign had ten times as much income as the chief ministers;

square le For instance, we are told by the
minister Tsan that, at the western capital of
Chow, the territory was 800 ie square. ‘Phe mean-
jug is that there were so many squares of 100
le. At the eastern capital again, the territory
was 600 le square, or so many squares of 100 le.
Putting these two together, we get the total of
' a square of 1,000 le square. So in regard to the
various States of the princes, we are to under-
stand that, however their forin might be varied
by the hills and rivers, their area. in round num-
bers, amounted to so much. See in the Le-ke,
Hi, 1. 2, where the text, however, is not at all
perspicuous. d.— attached ;’ ha ,—meri-
toriousness. These states were too small to bear
the expenses of appearing before the emperor, and
therefore, the names and surnagnes of their chiets
were sent into court by the great princes to whom
they were attached, or perhaps they appeared
m their train. See on Ana. XVI i. 1.

IC +. ‘head scholar,’ could only be ap-
) we are not to think of pied to the scholars of the first class in the
an exact square, but simply that, on a. calcula- Jit Ea 's immediate government. 6.
„tion, the amount of territory is equal to so many y + Fe iE E Ey would be runners, clerks, and

adequate to office and labour? ‘The name of;
4, ‘ruler,’ ‘ sovereign,’ is applicable to all the
dignities enumerated, and under each of them
are the secondary or ministerial dignities, fé

=H, ‘one who can illustrate what is good and

right.’ AB ‘to support, ‘to sustain.
—' a great sustainer.' +. a scho-

KR
lar,’ ‘an officer,’ tE Z ps ‘the designa:

i
i
tion of one intrusted with business.’ 4. Ah !

Ht —this Mies aec. to iet comm.

E: rid * 1,000 le in new ro 1,000 le
in length, making an area of 1,000,000 le? On
thir, however, the following judgment is given
by the editors of the imperial edition of the five
king, of the present dynasty :— Where we find

the word square ( h

Pr. IE. Cm. TI. TIE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

3

A>
trot

Sate
=I
atc
"Tr

K]
aa
STEELE SEA
DRIT
ls

ames

SEL SLL RHE
-E
Sl

IT YW AN fa

a chief minister four times as much as a great officer; a great of-
ficer twice as much as a scholar of the first class; a scholar of the
first elass twice as much as one of the middle; a scholar of the mid-
dle class twice as much as one of the lowest; the scholars of the
lowest class, and such of the common people,as were employed about
the government offices, had the same emolument ;—as much, namely,
as was equal to what they would have made by tilling the fields.

7. “In a State of the next order, where the territory was seventy
le square, the sovereign had ten times as much revenue as the chief
minister; a chief minister three times as much as a great officer; a
great officer twice as much as a scholar of the first class; a scholar of
the first class &wice,as much as one of the middle; a scholar of the
middle class twice) as much as one of the lowest; the scholars of
the lowest class, and such of the common people as were employed
about the government offices, had the same emolument ;—as much,
namely, as was equal to what they would have made by tilling
the fields. - ;

8. "In a small State, where the territory was fifty le square, the
sovereign had ten times as much revenue as the chief minister; a
chief minister had twice*as much as a great officer; a great officer
twice as much as a scholar of the highest class; a scholar of the
highest class twice as much\as: one of the middle; a scholar of the

other subordinates, which appear in the Cho all who had lands received their incomes from.
p p R them, as cultivated on the system of mutual aid,
Le, as KF A, Ej: and t€. Choo He gives

while the landless scholars and other subordi-
his opinion, that, from the sovereign downwards, nites received according to the income from the

25

c
t3

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK V.

v

NEm

Se

abr
aR

«gs
ila

yu:

ar
-AANER E

w

DHA

v

INS as

RE ORES
AOS
a

BY H+

zm

E
v

SESS
Bao

i

M
f

mx

MSE e
Ew}

NE
WP

o

PEERS > SO >
ATR
SIN

=
eH
da
a
A

» JL — Xk P

middle class twice:as much as one of the lowest; scholars of the
lowest class, and such of the common people as were employed about
the government offices, had the same emolument ;—as much, namely,
as was equal.to what they would have made by tilling the "fields.

9. “As to those who tilled the fields, each husbandman received
a hundred mow. When those mow were manured, the best husband “
men of the highest class supported nine individuals, and those raking
next to them. supported eight. The best husbandmen “fcne second.
class supported seven indiv iduals, and those rapxing next to them
supported six ; while husbandmen of the lowest c.ass only supported
five. The salaries of the common people who were employed about
: the government offices were regulated accordiyg to these differences.

CHarrer II. 1. Wan Chang asked Mencius saying, “I venture
to ask the principles of friendship.” Mencivs replied, “ Friendship
should be maintained without any presumption on the ground of one's
superior age, or station, or the circumstances of his relatives. Friend-
ship with a man is fr iendship with his virtue, and does not admit of
assumptions of superiority.

Jand. 9. FE read tsze. FE read own do ota GR 1l. RA A =} 2

ts‘ze, ‘uneven,’ ! different." s x k i
WB- :—up. 2d tone. QN refer-
CH. 3. FRIENDSHIP,MUST HAVE REFERENCE Hal P. 2 g

TO THE VIRTUE OF THE FRIEND. THERE MA
BE NO ASSUMPTION ON THE GROUND OF ON}

ence to age. 5 P. — one's brethren,’ in the
. widest acceptation of that term. Observe how

an
ie)

Pr. II. Cn. III. TIE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

gi

H
Say

v

NNE
à
VS
mS od
4 Nas

Beto
(ESTHER ek
ae

aS > N
= T
z, N
Ld
IN
ey -
P

An

=
d

SENET

SINSEN

SNAS

ad
IE
z
>

EE
DESSY

TEDE
REE
HARFNI

e
v

ANES
=
=>

ERA EI

r

2. “There was Mang Héen, chief of a family of a hundred cha-
riots. He had five friends, namely Yð-ching K‘ew, Muh Chung, and
three others whose names I have forgotten. With those five men Heen
maintained a friendship, because they thought nothing about his
family. If they had thought about his family, he would -not have
maintained his friendship with them.

3. “Not only has the chief of a family of a hundred chariots
acted thus. The same thing was exemplified by the sovereign of a
small State. The duke Hwuy of Pe said, ‘I treat Tsze-sze as my
master, and Yen Pan as my friend. As to Wang Shun and Ch‘ang
Seih, they serve me.’ i

4. “Not only has the sovereign of a small State acted thus. The
same thing has been exemplified by the sovereign of a large State.

id $

th E takes up the preceding f, and goes on ‘Great Learning, Comm. x. 22. 8. Jf,
“read Pe,—see Con. Ana. VI. vii We must.
: ) à . g suppose that, after the time of Confucius, some
who is the object of the pa friendship with chief had held this place and district with
him as virtuoys will tend to help eur virtue. the title of Kung. ‘The Kind CB) is the
"HH k~ to have presumptions,’ with refer- honorary epithet, Tsze-sze is Confucius’ grand-
ence of course to the three points mentioned, son. fg read par. Yen Pan appears to have
but as of those the second most readily comes been the son of the sage’s favourite disciple.
into collision with friendship, it alone is dwelt.. 4. Ping (‘The Pacificator) was the
upon in the sequel. 2. Mang Héen,—see [honorary epithet of the duke ES EC. 5G

to its explanation, E refers to, the individual

M
N

THE WORKS OF MENCITS,

t2
Roi
k

©

ass

Hi

TNN SARNA P

è

Se
SH
2n

Ld
v

v

S

E

AH SIN HAE HAN Be
Bie

PPS
zt

>-
Ll
r.

©

AR

=
PSS

TEMES ERAS

à
zb
if
E
»
>
yp
>

Ay SESH
E

Ld
v

RENH HEN

\
/

AS
Neh

NE

There was the duke Ping of Tsin with Hae T'ang:—when T'ang
told him to came into his house, he came; when he told him to be
seated, he sat; when he told him to eat, he ate. There might only
be coarse rice and soup of vegetables, but he always ate his fill, not:
daring to do otherwise. Here, however, he stopped, and went no
farther. He did not call him to share any of Heaven’s places, or to
govern any of Heaven's offices, or to partake of any of Heaven's
emoluments. His conduct was but a scholar’s honouring virtue and
talents, not the honouring them proper to a kingtor a duke,

5. “Shun went up to court and saw the emperor, who lodged
him as his son-in-law in the second palace. The emperor also enjoy-
ed there Shun’s hospitality. Alternately he was host and guest.
Here was the emperor maintaining friendship with a private mau.

another step, and exemplifies the highest style

531. Hae T'ang was a famous worthy of his Pss wr Dem M tete s
State. tee enter being said.’ ea R of friendship. wo He, after Chaou K'e, ex-
A zy hy EX? F » 88 if it were ‘to go up to,’ i.e.,

—&. read tsze, low. 3d tone. The xt after
2R A and ES A^ is wanting in many copies.
l BN K Tr. zm Zz would seem to be a

Pda 1e
Complaint that the duke did not share with the

scholar his own rank, &c., but the meaning in
the translation, which is that given. by the
conimen, is perhaps the correct one. Rank,
Stallion, and revenue, are said to be Heaven's, as
intrusted to the sovereign to be conferred on
individuals able to occupy them for the public
good. 5. In this par, Mencius advances,

plains fat by ;
to court. i = fal] ur *attached or
supplemental palace.’ 4% HR BL DE Er im

e K> Z^ E means that he went to
Tt X
Shun’s palÁce; and partook of his food? The
more common meaning of Ay however, is ‘to
2 "e E
entertain,’ YE Fae —the subject is only Yaou.

-—made a guest’ of Shun, was the host,

Nu
ec made a host’ of Shun, was the guest,

Pr. II. Cs. HL—IV. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

«

AR E
[E24]
fi JU Eel è

EM
Be

Ld

Ld
v

SASHES

ET

N

*

e

Vag
B

[

s
EENH RHES

a
w

H
E

BS
EDSR

HO

a`
ben

x
[ d
o

e

A aE

w
ww.

TREN E

v

IE
WN
kw

&
E ond

RLÓ

N
EN

o

m

xi
a!
ESSAI ES

[ d

eo ESPERE IL VS

v
"RI

TEN

H
ak fS d BE, B.
VI SEC BH

"SEDED

“Respect shown by inferiors to superiors is called giving to
the noble the observance due to rank. Respect shown by superiors
to inferiors is called giving honour to talents and virtue. The right-
ness in each case is the same."

CuarrER IV. 1. Wan Chang asked Mencius, saying, “I venture
to ask what feeling of the mind is expressed in the presents of friend-

ship" Mencius replied, “ The feeling of respect.”

2. “How isit,” pursued Chang, “that the declining a present is ac-
counted disrespectful ?” The answer was, “ When one of honourable
rank presents a gift, to say in the mind, ‘Was the way in which he
got this righteous or not? I must know this before I can receive
it; —this is deemed_ disrespectful, and therefore presents are not
declined.”

9. Wan Chang asked again, ** When one does not take on him
in so many express words to refuse the gift, but having declined it in

6. M=. ‘for, 36-8 x H petition of An

xZ. It has probably crept into

‘the rightness or propriety of things.’

Cu. 4. How MENCIUS DEFENDED THE AC-
CEPIING PRESENTS FROM THE PRINCES, OPJ)RES-
JN -nlal
1. [js is explained

by T but that term is not to be taken in the

SORS OF THE PEOPLE.

sense of ‘to receive,’ but as a synonym of aE .
If we distinguish the two words, we may take
Ad as=the E of ‘the last Chapter. and
D the gift, expressive of the friendship.
Choo lle says he does not understand the re-

2.

the text through the oversight of a transcriber,
unless we suppose, with the t E that the

repetition indicates the firmness and decision
with which the gift is refused, but the introduc-

tion of that element seems out of place. ET.

E (referring to pj TD By Ar y» t

E is the reflection passing in the mind,

3

asin the next par. also. We must suppose A

i
fee 4 " naive i DJ
i as the nominative in WE y» 3.

is not to be understood of Wan Chang, but

vo0 :
THE WORKS OF MENCIUS,

e

Muss am
zx
d
nl

wv
a
zi

eem
DECSEE(N- CT

XS

WS
I

e

[MI

RES
SEIS RH

MU MT

E

P N
Zn
M AN We, A, ’
Z^ EL

\
"

er

S

Pa a mi-

SHAS
Ec)

Uum

SES

Ex

^

Y Yo

PIERS

B
his heart, saying, ‘It was taken by him unrighteously from the peo-
ple,’ and then assigns some other reason for not receiving it ;—is not
this a proper course?” Mencius said, “ When the donor offers it on
a ground of reason, and his manner of doing so is according to pro-
priety’;—in such a case Confucius would have received it.” ,

4. Wan Chang said, “ Here now is one who stops and robs peo-
ple outside the gates of the city. He offers his gitt on a ground of
reason, and does so in a manner according to propriety ;—would
the reception of it so acquired by robbery be proper?" Mencius
replied, * {t would not be proper. In ‘The Announcement to K‘ang’
it is said, ‘When men kill others, and roll over their bodies to take
their property, being reckless and fearless of death, among all the
people there are none but detest them : '—thus, such characters are to
be put to death, without waiting to givethem warning. Yin receiv-
ed this rule from Hea, and Chow received it from Yin. It cannot be

as indicating the hesitancy and délieacy of the E Z Hd — Hy, as in last par., adverbially,

scholar to whom à gift is offered. B 7
Ii ii—H still referring to 7 ET and
NE] to the deservingness of the scholar, or some-
thing in his circümstances which renders the
gift proper and seasonable. Comp. II. Pt. II.
iii. 3, 4. The meaning of r2 is determined
(contrary to Chaou K'e) by the f which takes

its place in the next par.

+ BP I

—'in this case.’ bi ES Ey —see the Shoo-
king, V. x. 15, tho’ the text is somewhat altered
in the pida ou Ed and ES take the
place of Re and Re. F = for the sake of,’
ie, to take, fit... is a passage of which

the meaning is much disputed. Choo He
supposes it a gloss that has crept into the
text, I have given it what seemed the most

Ah- as in IV. Pt. IL xxxiii, iy Ay likely translation. H p d is the

Proll, Ca. IV,

or
-å

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

v

4

>
P.,

MHASH eS

I
J
A

inte
ES

el

x
=

aw

b»

-
NS

xb
s NIN i

ZEN:

(sik
eH
NATRI

d
Ed

8
à

T

SASS

NB
HNN

EE:
e

me
b
a
o

eu
S
EU

v

MN
s

e

V
"

NINE SSR

uy

ERSE

v

SR
SESS

EA T

NES

RNO

NER

TET
pk EE ES

questioned, and to the present day is clearly acknowledged. How
can the gift of a robber be received ?”

5. Chang said, ‘The princes of the present day take from their
people just as a robber despoils his victim. Yet if they put a good
face of propriety on their gifts, then the Superior man receives them.
I venture to ask how you explain this" Mencius answered, “Do
you think that, if there should arise a truly imperial sovereign, he
would collect the princes of the present day, and put them "all to
death? Or would he admonish them, and then, on their not chang-
ing their ways, put them to death? Indeed, to call every one who
takes what does not properly belong to him a robber, is pushing a
point of resemblance to the utmost; and insisting on the most refined
idea of righteousness, When Confucius was in office in Loo, the
people struggled together for the game taken in hunting, and he
also did the same. If that struggling tor. the captured game was
proper, how much more may the gifts of the princes be received!”

e
TE

e
roe

v

party to whom the gift is offered, and x intelligible to Choo He, I have given the not
i, ; unlikely explanation of Chaou K'e. But to get

the fruit of robbery. 5. Mf — above. M of the declaration that Confucius himself
. s 2 oined in the struggling, the comm. all say it
By a F Chang alludes to Mencius himself. only means that he allowed the custom.—The
PX ‘ , A introduction ef this yielding on the part of
Jb lower 3d tone, ‘ to take together. FEM Confucius to a vulgar practice is an adroit ma-
E: X Zz zt, iit. ‘filling up a resemblance næuvre by Mencius, The offence of the people
du. ] : against propriety in struggling for the game,

to the extremity of righteousness ;’ the meaning and the offence of the princes in robbing their

ig. as in the translation. JA i (koh) is un- ! people, were things of a different class, Yet
33

958 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

[9]
N
d
fal
Ser
v. 4

a
me
A
:
=

-w

hey
dee Ex TT

«M

 mE

DE MES

v

BOVMES

CA
Ei

N
^
*

ZS}

Ce
amaA
iij

o

ore OE
irme reU

SEPA PEN S

=
zi
IR

NI
aco
IHS
R
BES

D
8
m
EX

Seay
NB

Rz p
Foss

>

L4

"s
r`

bel
aZ
ax
a

srt
P
<i

v

TER
SEEN
Rao
Al

6. Chang urged, “Then, are we to suppose that when Confucius
held office, it was not with the view to carry his doctrines into
practice?” “It was with that view," Mencius replied, and Chang
rejoined, “If the practice of his doctrines was his business, what
had he to do with that struggling for the captured game?” Mencius
said, “ Confucius first rectified his vessels of sacrifice according to
the registers, and did not fill them so rectified with food gathered
from every quarter." “ But why did he not go away?” “He
wished to make a trial of carrying his doctrines into practice. When
that trial was sufficient to show they could be practised, and they
were still not practised, then he went away, and thus it was that he
never completed in any State a residence of three years.

7. “Confucius took office when he saw that the practice of his
doctrines was likely; he took office when his reception was proper ;
` he took office when he was supported by the State. In the case of
his relation to Ke Hwan, he took office, seeing that the practice of
Mencius’ defence of himself in the preceding every quarter, —i.e. gathered without discrimi-
part of the paragraph is ingenious. It shows nation. It would appear that the practice of
PEE MR Hic Aer ih at vay FR BS. had some connection with the offering
may be pursued will always depend on circum- of sacrifices, and that Conf. thought that if he

xix Mei only rectified the rules for sacrifice, the prac-
stances. 6. JE HI uu Clow. Ist tone, tice would fall into disuse. But the whole pas-

3 poA n P en sage and its bearing on the struggling for game
interrog.)= JE u TT id y Ez fü. 7 ` : E : E ]
zs OE VUA YO IAS 5 ; is obscure. Jk— a prognostic,’ ‘an omen,
4 Nel xe is die is evidently a question . a :

3L EC used figuratively. 7. See the ‘Life of Con-

of Chang. yis! IE SE d is unintelligible fucius though it is only here that we have

p Seed : mention of the sage’s connection with the duke
to Choo He. The translation is after the com- Yeaou. Indeed no duke appears in the annale

mentator Scu (i EO ‘Food gathered from t of Wei with such a posthumous title. Choo He

Prt. Ca. Iv. — v. THE WORKS OF MKNCIUS. 259

> Oh
=
uy
ge
m

2} LI PHN Oh
“aE

ip
T

at :
mam
aa
2
>

"
=

v

i
)

e

FED
BH

= Br
FEN
Es

$5
y
$
A

JE de M d

^

zi
ok
“A
3g
En
En

his doctrines was likely. With the duke Ling of Wei he took office,
because his reception was proper. With the duke Heaou of Wei he
took office, because he was maintained by the State." . à

CuarrER V. 1. Mencius said, * Office is not sdught on account of
poverty, yet there are times when one seeks office on that account.
Marriage is not entered into for the sake of being attended to by the’
wife, yet there are times when one marries on that account.

2. * He who takes office on account of his poverty must décline an
honourable situation and occupy a low one; he must decline riches
and prefer to be poor.

3. “ What office will be in harmony with this declining an hon-
ourable situation, and occupying a low one, this declining riches and »
preferring to be poor? Such an one as that of guarding the gates,
or beating the watchman's stick. l

4. “Confucius was once keeper of stores, and he then said, ‘ My
calculations must all be right. That is all I have to care about.’

supposes that the duke Ch‘uh (see Ana. VII. the voice. $g- low. 3d tone, ‘the being sup-_
xiv, note) is intended, in which the author of ported,’ but we may take it generally, as in the

the yu pi fe at acquiesces, The text translation. 2. X9. —ie, Pa E tan

(T

mentions Ke Hwan, and not duke Ting, be- : "n DL E A
: j 2 ion; and X == "Sa" WZ, ‘ric
cause the duke and his govt. were under the honourable situatio . and Hj ite rich
control of that nobleman. ] ‘emolument.’ 3. fut,—up. Ist tone, ‘how,’
Cu. 6. How OFFICE MAY BE TAKEN ON AC- 5 um .
COUNT OF POVERTY, BUT ONLY ON CERTAIN CON- The first if as above, and helping the rhythm
DITIONS; 1. (t and BA 3t sit is as of the sentence. Bit) Ba (going round the

well to translate here abstractly, ‘office,’ and

. pij
‘marriage.’ Falow. 3d tone, ‘for,’ ‘on ac-

count of. The proper motive for taking Office Lis are to be taken together, and not as two .
is supposed to be the carrying principles—the things, or offices; see the Yih-king, App. I. Pt.
truth, and the right—into practice, and the pro- gf, ii. 8, 4. In Sze-ma "Is'een's History of

per motive for marriage is the begetting of chil- y 3 > =
dren, or rather of a son, to continue one’s line. Confucius, for ge (upper 2d tone) Du we

fot interrog, but serving as a pause for have E RK bat in a case of this kind the:

barrier -gates, ‘embracing’ them, as it were,) ipe

}

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS, BOOK Y

2

ex
T

= E >»

— ^ y
I as E j " * se

p diem SR .

d
MK
PN HELE

v

T D UI
Dee

e

HKF Y

BE ie FH w, ‘=
wie du S, T Sia Ak we

ANH IS

He was once in charge of the public fields, and he then said, ‘The
oxen and sheep must be fat and strong, and superior. That is all I
have to care about.’ . :

5. ‘When one is in a low situation, to speak of high matters is
a crime, When a scholar stands in a prince's court, and his princi-
ples are not carried into practice, it is a shame to him."

CuarrER VI. 1. Wan Chang said, * What is the reason that a
scholar does not accept a stated support from a prince?" Mencius
replied, “He does not presume to do so. When a prince loses his
State, and then accepts a stated support from another prince, this is
in accordance with propriety. But for a scholar to accept such sup-
port from any of the princes is not in accordance with propriety."

authority of Mencius is to he followed. i, emolument, but the connection is somewhat

—read kwae, upper 2d tone, ‘entries in a book?
Annual calculations of accounts are denominated

i $m and monthiy, Fag when a distinction is
made between the terms. dup. 3d tone.
p4 (ow. 3d tone) H-E we its] ES "a i
ZH, but I don’t understand the usẹ of aje
in this sense, Here again the history has ja

ii T (yi Mo Ba These were the first

offices Confucius took, before the death of
his mother, and while they were yet struggling

with poverty. 5. a B (=P) X i

x AS al (ch‘aou, lower Ist tone),—it d

difficult to express the force of the Æ

3 ‘tO TO A SCHOLAR MUST BE MADE.

difficult to trace The uu zx BE TR ER
says :—‘ Why did Conf. confine himself to hav-
ing his calculations exact, and his cattle sleek
and fat? Because in his humble position he
had nothing to do with business of the State,
and he would not incur the crime of usurping
a higher office. If making a pretence of pover-
ty, 4 man keep long clinging to high office, he
stands in his prince’s court, but carries not
principles into practice :—can he lay his hand
on his heart, and not feel, the shame of making
his office of none effect? This is true, but it is
not necessary that he who takes office because
he is poor should continue to occupy it simply
with the desire to get rich.

Cm. 6. How A SCHOLAR MAY NOT BECOME A
DEPENDENT BY ACCEPIING PAY WITHOUT OFFICE,
AND HOW THE REPEATED PRESENTS OF A PRINCE

1. + is

stand in a man’s proper court,’ ie. the court of here the scholar, the candidate for public office *
the prince who has called him to office, and : SÉ ados tot
Mal — does

where he ought to develope and carry out his : and use, still unemployed.

principles. “It is said that this par. gives the depend on,’ ie., assure himself of a regular sup-
reasons why he who takes office for poverty port by receiving regular pay though not in
Xpust be content with a low situation and small office. On one prince, driven from his State,

Pr. TI. Cu, vy,

à à E
> >

9

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

=

ESR ERS

C.
me"

at

v
ed
v
w-
er

EES

ng

aw

4I

D»)

im)

ANE

-

NEN

INHA

I

RÀ

pé
—

b

(E SEQ RAO RS

*' Bio

>
E

o

o

a
(RÀ

.-

e

w

Wan cs said, “If the prince send him a present of grain
“ He accepts it,” answered Mencius,
* Why—the

for instance, does he accept it? "
“On what principle of rightness does he accept it?”
prince ought to assist the people i in their necessities.”
3. Chang pursued, “Why is it that the scholar will thus accept
the prince’s help, but will not accept his pay?” The answer was,
“4 He does not presume to do so.” “I venture to ask why he does
not presume to do so.” “Even the keepers of the gates, with their

watchmen’s sticks, have their regular offices for which they can take

their support from the prince.
should receive the pay of the pri

“He who without a regular office
nce must be deemed disrespectful.”

4, Chang asked, “If the prince sends a scholar a present, he ac-

cepts it. I do not know whethe

repeated."

finding an assured and regular support with.

another, see the Le-ke, IX. i. 13. It is only
stated there, however, that a prince did not
employ another refugee prince as a minister.
We know only from Mencius, so far as I am
aware, that a prince driven from his own

dominions would find maintenance in another
State, according to a sort of law. 2.
i A— what is the principle of righteous-
hess?’ or simply—' what is the explanation
of? R=, ‘to give alms,’ and generally
to help the needy. UK .—-see IL Pt. I. vi. 4. A
Scholar not in office is only one of thè people.

& BI “if he give him,’ ie AB x

Mencius answered, * There was the con

be constantly

r this present ma
ct of the duke

idu

'givehim pay. This brings out all the

meaning that is in st BB Ws $B is
passive, or—'to receive pay.’ x 2S. * dis-
respectful,’ is to be taken in its implication of a
want of humility in the scholar, who is only
one of the people having no office, and yet is

content to take pay, as if he had.’ 4. j
—read k'e, up. 3d' tone, (below, the same) *fre-
quently, ji E *ealdron flesh, ùe, flesh

cooked. FE —peaou,- up. Ist tone, ‘to motion .

with the hand." ff d 1, up. 3d tone.
{Jk was Teze-sze’s name. To bow, raising the

9
»
4

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

ce
1%

>
n
ta

BES
zs

SS

v

SPAS

KA
T.

v

ey

=
T s

v

RNA RM
Se

yar
w

Sr

ERS

=
==

bh
v
[ d

v

TO Rte SLES]

ENS

v
`
Z

sime

-

TE Ste REPETI ER
Zr NORE RRSP

Mets mea
NEEN

pu

dB
ERR

*

e .

basi
w
A
y

] FJ, 3 aH Hj

Muh to Tsze-sze—He made frequent inquiries after Tsze-sze's health,
and sent him frequent presents of cooked meat. Tsze-sze was dis-
pleased, and at last having motioned to the messenger to go outside
the great door, he bowed his head to the ground with his face to the
north, did obeisance twice, and declined the gift, saying, ‘From this
time forth I shall know that the prince-supports me as a dog or a
horse. And from that time a servant was no more sent with the
presents. When a pus professes to be pleased with a man of ta-
lents and virtue, and can neither promote him to office, nor support
him in the proper way, can he be said to be pleased with him?”

5. "Chang said, “I venture to ask how the sovereign of a State,
when he wishes to support a superior man, must proceed, that he
may be said to do so in the proper way?” Mencius answered, “At
Jirst, the present must be offered with the prince's commission, and
the scholar making obeisance twice with his head bowed to the
ground will receive it. But after this the store-keeper will continue

SEH
i ol

y
us

^

hands to the bent forehead, was called FEF; priate place in the case of declining the gifts.

lowering the hands in the first place to the
ground, and then raising them to the forehead,
was called FE; bowing the head to the earth

was called ¥§ =o Teze-sze appears on this
occasion to have first performed the most pro-
found expression of homage, as if in the prince’s
_ presence, and then to have bowed twice, with
hig hands to the ground, in addition. AH this
he did, outside the gate, which was the appro-

If they were received, the party performed his
obeisances inside. It is difficult to bring out
the meaning of ‘for,’ that properly belongs to

(At : H
zi A, —the designation of an officer or ser-

vant of a very low class. 5. au a án dg
HG = BE. at ma message from

the prince, reminding of course the scholar of

his obligation. 4¥ fX Bj. adverb, ‘ the

Pr. IL Cu. VL—VIL

y

j

g

[e

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 68

v

v

TH

i]

NN

SH Re
Rak NNO DE
SPIN

Vest eR
SRP RUBS

e

pscing

4
T

EA EEA
Se Foe} OH

E

a

I
Ry

mO

NW

[d
[ d

MRR
KN

ER
+a

o

Se

cS SRRANSS

ya Na

zb
ER HL, IH

E

ES
X

FER
FFENS

m

MERN
NS

Ey;
AM. Jx h
to send grain, and the master of the kitchen to send meat, presenting
it as if without the prince's express commission. Tsze-sze considered,
that the meat from the princes caldron, giving him the annoyance
of constantly doing obeisance, was not the way to support a superior

man.

6. “There was Yaou's conduct to Shun :—He caused his nine

, Sons to serve him, and gave him his two daughters in marriage; he
caused the various officers, oxen and sheep, storehouses and gran-
aries, all to be prepared to support Shun amid the channeled fields,
and then he raised him to the most exalted situation. From this
we have the expression—‘ The honouring of virtue and talents proper
to a king ora duke." .

Cuarrkg VII. 1. Wan Chang said, “I venture to ask what prin-
ciple of righteousness is involved in a scholars not going to see the
princes" Mencius replied, ‘A scholar residing in the city, is called
‘a minister of the market-place and well,’ and one residing in the
country is called ‘a minister of the grass and plants, In both cases
he is à commou man, and it is the rule of propriety that common

FE
N
=

abd rab

appearance of being troubled.’ 6. See Pt, verbs; Wan Chang evidently intends Mehciue -

Lis Z E/4 * HR -—the second X is

read joo, low. 8d tone.

oH. 7. WHY A SCHOLAR SHOULD DECLINE
GOING TO. SEE THE PRINCES, WHEN CALLED BY
THEM. Comp. HI. Pt. IL i. et al 1. We

supply + as the nominative to AR and other fa

himself, E — city,’ asin ch. iv., par. 4. AR—
here as a synonym, in apposition with 5B. E

in i Ff, RIAR, A B is difft. from the

$, below, Every individual may be calleda ,

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. i x

=
[x
E
—

EN
P

SEV
m
Mx
REI
x

à
RH eo
Em

ray

ae

REESE
mp
E2
St

=.

Bg

E

(V
SES
E E

ec

pietre AONE

S
REO
=

o
S
at

\
Se

d
Aea
o

(Sahin
m

EWE

FEYER IZ S
De
BARS

4B
AN B A, B SL 3 SA

men, who have not presented the introductory present and become
ministers, should not presume to have interviews with the prince.”
2. Wan Chang said, “If a common man is called to perform any
service, he goes and performs it ;-—how is it that a scholar, when the
M ince, wishing to see him, calls ‘him to his presence, refuses to go?”
fencius replied, “It is right to go and perform the service ; it would
not be right to go and see the prince."

8. " And,” added Mencius, “on what account is it that the prince
wishes to see the scholar?” “ Because of his extensive information,
or because of his talents and Virtue,” was the reply. “If because
of his extensive information,” said Mencius, “such a person is a
teacher, and the emperor would not call him ;—how much less may
any of the princes do so? If because of his talents and virtue, then
] haye not heard of any one wishing to see a person with those
qualities, and calling him to, his presence.

4. * During the fr equent interviews of the duke Muh with Tsze-

B. as being a subject, and bound to serve the and perform the service, ze, it is right in
govereign, and this is the meaning of the term the common man, to perform service being hia

in those two phrases In the other case it de- fi. or office. And so with the scholar. He
xai one oncle icy ta minister. will go when called as a scholar should be
=. E ;—ehe, up. 2d tone; see ITI. Pt. IT. iii. called, but only then. 3. The Fa are all
l and notes. There is a force in the JA, in low, 3d tone. It must be borne in mind that
RP SH BE. which it is difficult to indicate the conversation is all about a scholar who is
in another language. 2. * It is right to go not in office : comp. par. 9. 4. +E fow.,

Pr. H. Cx, VIL. ; -THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

c2
Gx

d

des
EAN
ME

=

RN
SNENA .

ENA
RASERAS
X

oe

EHE

SEO

(NRI
X

*-—
E
w

«E
iN
Su

a

RES

Tt
ace

oo
i

v
*

\
[4

NIN OE
aN

e
€
er
o

e

E

V
x
m

o

NEE
qu
SAS STH

ON WO ine Fe

sze, he one day said to him, ‘Anciently, princes of a thousand chariots
have yet been on terms of friendship with scholars ;—what do you
think "of such an intercourse?’ Tsze-sze was displeased, and said,

‘The ancients have said, The scholar should be served: how should
they have merely said that he should be made a friend of?! When
Tsze-sze was thus displeased, did he not, say within himself, —' With
regard to our stations, you are sovereign, and I am subject. How
can I presume to be on terms of friendship with my sovereign?
With regard to our virtue, vou ought to make me vour master.

How may you be on terins of “friendship with me?’ Thus, when a
prince of a thousand chariots sought to be on terms of friendship
with a scholar, he could not obtain his w ish how inuch less could
he x him to his pr esence!

. “The duke King of Ts‘e, once, when he was hunting, called
his forester to him by a flag. The forester would not come, and
the duke was going to kill him. With refer ence to this incident, Con-
fucus said, ‘The determined officer never forgets that Ais end may
bein a ditch or a stream ; the brave officer never forgets that he

3d tone) zgj- FPR CH. helow, E ar responds to = The'paraphrase in the H.
s=with all his dignity, * yet.’ Zaz 2 is:— m^ AS E AR At
IV. Pt. II. xxiv. 1, et al, but the second E! ad E & fin E: xd LE 4H hu H BA

34

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK. V.

OVA IS A JE,
Ld AA

266

o

E

!

S

aa
s

QE
p

£
"4
Seo

ER
5

x=
B

N
gv

N

Se ae
E>
:

n ANS

v
v

SSDS EE

Fs

v

BESS

SS

zu
SaN HEE

[S

m:
zs

anie Gone

RHE ENS
er SNS SNS >t

d
me
mr

LI
f) Lx XE 7 $ , je
Hi seu FE d8 E Wd, a
may lose his head.’ What was it in the forester that Confucius thus
approved? He approved his not going to the duke, when summoned

by the article which was not appropriate to him.”

6. Chang said, “May I ask with what a forester should be sum-
moned?” “Mencius replied, “With a skin cap: A common man
should be summoned with a plain banner ; a scholar who has taken office,
with one having dragons embroidered on it ; and a great officer, with
one having feathers suspended from the top of the staff.

7. “When the forester was summoned with the article appro-
priate to the summoning of a great officer, he would have died rather
than presume to go. Ifa commou man were summoned with the
article appropriate to the summoning of a scholar, how. could he
presume to go? How much more may we expect this refusal to go,
when a man of talents and virtue is summoned in a way which is
inappropriate to his character! '

8. “ When a prince wishes to see a man of talents and virtue, and
does not take the proper course fo get his wish, it is as if he wished
him’ to enter Ais palace, and shut the door against him. Now, right-

zz 5. See IEPER ILi 2 6. The, ‘shut him the door? S Lee the She-
explamation of the various flags here is from Choo king, II. v. Ode IX. st.1. Julien condemns the
He, after the Chow Le. The Dict. may be con- translating hij $ ‘the way to Chow,’ but
: — ; z M ,
sulted about them, A= try n. 7. A that is the meaning of the terms in the ode;
man of talents and virtue ought not to be called *nd, as the imperial highway, it is used to in-

Ne g dicate figuratively the great way of right-
at all. The. prince ought to go to him. 8. F x :
se i EAEE Ká PJ ' eousness. Ii —in the ode A che, upper 2d

XC PA this is another case of a verb followed tone. The ode is attributed to an officer of ,
by the pronoun and another objective ;—lit., one of the eastern States, mourning over the

Pr, It. Cn. VIL—VIIH.

jj

“KEKE
N= Fa

*

ow

\
4

tinc

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.*

v

KS

67

ES
oe dg
ae

=
"4

-

S
E

\
r

E-T
eu

Eis n zat

s
=

N

pu
m"

Qa

n
SUG Sao SEE SSA

FREI AeS TT en

3S
Foam}
“itt

wr

LESE

eousness is the way, and propriety is the door, but it is only the
superior man who can follow this way, and go out and in by this
door. It is said in the Book of Poetry,
<The way to Chow is level like a whetstone.
And straight as an arrow.
The officers tread it,
And the lower people sce it.
9. Wan Chang said, “When Confucius received the prince's
message calling him, he went without waiting for his carriage. And
so—did Confucius do wrong?" Mencius replied, * Confucius was
in office, and had its appropriate duties. And moreover, he was
summoned on the business of his office."

Cuaprer VIII. 1. Mencius said to Wan Chang, “The scholar
whose virtue is most distinguished in a village shall make friends of
all the virtuous scholars in the village. ‘The scholar whose virtue is
most distinguished throughout a State shall make friends of all the
virtuous scholars of that State. The scholar whose virtue is most
distinguished throughout the empire shall make friends of all the
virtuous scholars of the empire. n

NE SRE
 ERU RSE ah

IHREN oot

À
ait

»7

oppressive and exhausting labours whieh were
required from the poople. ‘Khe ‘royal highway ’
presents itself to him, formerly crowded by
officers hastening to and from the capital, and
the people hurrying to their labours, but now
toiled stowly and painfully along. 9. See
Con. Ana. X. xiii. 4.

Ch. 8. THE REALIZATION OF THE GREATEST
ADVANTAGES OF FREENDSHIP, AND THAT IT IS
DEPENDENT OX ONE's-S&ELE, — l. ‘The virtuous

seholar of one village, —he shaH make friends
of £he virtuous scholars of (that) one village":
—the first RA 15 in the superlative degree, and

is not only ‘te be friends with,’ but also ‘to
realize the uses of friendship. The eminence

attained by the individuat attracts all the
ethers to him, and he has thus the opportunity
of learning from them, which no inflation be-

268 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

o

SE
RS
z

papi

[d
-

EN

ie

KIM
\
EU EE
ZU EXE
BEDA

E
DALI

A
will vm
=

NEEE
Sea SN ESI
oH

EEE EE

^U
Me
AS

$]

aH Den SSS H
z>
Pal Nata

v

Ne
kii

E ECC RET

Zt

a
Osa

My o AN

PRES OE V BRS

2. “When a scholar feels that his friendship with all the virtu-
ous scholars of the empire is not sufficient to satisfy him, he proceeds
to ascend to consider the men of antiquity. He repeats ‘their poems,
and reads their books, and as he does not know what they were as
men, to ascertain this, he considers their history. This is to ascend
and make friends of the men of antiquity.

CHAPTER IX. 1. The king Seuen of Ts‘e asked about the office of
chief ministers. Mencius said, * Which chief ministers is your ma-
jesty asking about?" * Are there differences among them ?” inquired
the king. “There are," was the reply. ‘There are the chief minis-
ters who are noble and relatives of the prince, and there are those
who are of a different surname.” "The king said; “I beg to ask
about the chief ministers who are noble and relatives of the prince.”
Mencius answered, “If the ‘prince have great faults, they ought to
remonstrate with him, and if he do not listen to them after they have
done so again and again, they ought to dethrone him.”

2, The king on this looked moved, and changed countenance.

 enuse of his own general superiority prevents Mencius seems to have had in his eye the Book

: ; zx of Poetry, and the Book of History.
him from doing. 2. fal= Cu. 9. THE DUTIES OF THE DIFFERENT

fu i -—'he proceeds and ascends,’ AH-5 CLASSES OF CHIEP MINISTERS. 1.

‘to repeat, ‘croon over.’ H 3p-u ul a5. X SH .—such ministers will overlook small

* proper or not ?' + jtk, ‘their age,’ Ze, what faults. To animadvert on them would be in-

consistent with their consanguinity. No dis-
they were in their a age-We are hardly to un- tinction is made of faults, as great or small,
derstand the poetry and books here generally. ! when the other class of ministers is spoken of.

Pr. IL Cu. IX,
H pz
E37

v

Ao i

FHE WORKS

X R i

OF: MENCIUS: — . — 949.

YR BH 3 p
CES SER.

de,
VE

ET

3. Mencius e M Lats not your shee be offended. You asked
me, and I dare not answer but according to truth.”
' 4. The king’s countenance became composed, and he then beg-
ged to ask about chief ministers wha were of a different surname
from the prince. Mencius said, “When the prince has faults, they
ought to remenstrate with him, and if he do not listen to them after
they have done this again and again, they ought to leave the State."

‘Great faults,’ are such as endanger the safety
of the state. 3 7 „m don't think
it strange,’ but—*don't be offended’—-We may
not wonder that duke Seuen should have been
moved and surprised by the doctrines of Men-
eius as announced’ in this chapter. Ft is true
that the members of the family of which the
ruler is the head have the nearest interest in
his ruling well, but to teaeh them that it be-
longs to ‘them, j in case. of his not taking their

advice, to proceed to dethrone hin, 4s likely to
produce the most disastrous effects. Choo. tte
notices that the able ‘and virtuous relatives of

the tyrant Chow os p were: not able to ‘do

their duty as herelaid down, while Hoh Kwang,
.& minister of. another, surname; was able to-do it

in the case of the king of Gh‘ang-yih g e,

} whom he dethroned. “This last event
took place, n.c. $3. l

270 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. ` BOOK VI.

BOOK. VI.
KAOU TSZE. PART. L

+

Ei
EP CE Al OL A BE, Al
CULES AMS Be E

Cuarrer I. 1. The philosopher Kaou said, “Man’s nature is like
the ke willow, and righteousness is like a cup or a bowl. The
fashioning benevolence and righteousness out of man’s nature is like
the making cups and bowls from the ke willow.”

2. Mencius replied, “Can you, leaving untouched the nature
of the willow, make with it cups and bowls? You must do violence
and injury to the willow, before you can make cups and' bowls with

Kaou, from whom this book is named, is the
same who is referred to in II. Pt. L ii. His name

was Puh-hae vea SED, a speculatist of Men-

cius' day, who is said to have given himself
equally to the study of the orthodox doctrines
and those of the heresiarch Mih (III, Pt. I. v.;

Pt. IT. ix.) See the JU] SE HE e BP, on

Mencius, vol. L, art. xxix. He appears from
this book to have been niuch perplexed respect-
ing the, real character of human nature in
its relations to good and evil. This is the
principal subject discussed in this Book. For
his, views of human nature as here developed,
Mencius is mainly indebted for his place among
the sages of his country. ‘In the first Part,’

says the py E ik TR $$ *he treats first-

of the nature; then of the heart; and then of
éistruction, the whole being analogous to the
lessons in the Doctrine of the Mean. ‘The
second Part continues to treat of the same
subject, and a resemblance will generally be
found between the views of the parties there
combated, and those of the scholar Kaon?

CH. 1. THAT BENEVOLENCE AND RIGHTEOUS-
NESS ARE NO UNNATURAL PRODUCT OF HUMAN
NATURE. There underlies the words of Kaou

here, says Choo He, the view of the philosopher
Seun e ) that human nature is evil CPE RE)

TU
This is putting the case tóo strongly. It is an

induction from his words, which Kaou would
probably have disallowed. Seun (see the prolego-

mena., and Morrison, under char. ), accounted

by many the most distinguished scholar of the
Confucian school, appears to have maintained
positively that ai! good was foreign to the nature

st mai AZ e BE E E S d

, ‘man’s nature is bad ; his good is artificial."

1. The AE, and the Tp are taken by some
as two trees, but it is better to take them
together, the first char. giving the species of the
other. It is described as *growing by the wa-
ter-side, like a common willow, the leaf coarse
and white, with the veins small and reddish.’

2. Jl.— according with,’ ‘following,’ ie.,
‘leaving untouched,’ ‘doing no violence to.’
HE Be A A= A p , man's nature,"
‘humanity.’ Kaou had said that man's nature
could be made into benevo. and right, and Mencius

Pr. I, Cx, LIL. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

b
{
b

l
S

1218
35
=

SN

Ji

AYN f

Im

it Ifyou must do violence and injury to the willow in order to
make cups and bowls with it, on your principles you must in the same
way do violence and injury to humanity in order to fashion from it
benevolence and righteousness! Your words, alas! would certainly
lead all men on to reckon benevolence and righteousness to be `
calamities.” l

Cuarrer IT. 1. The philosopher Kaou said, “ Man’s nature is
like water whirling round Zn a corner. Open a passage for it to the
east, and it will flow to the east; open a passage for it to the west, .
and it will flow to the west. Man’s nature is indifferent to good
and evil, just as the water is indifferent to the east and west.”

2, Mencius replied, * Water indeed will flow indifferently to the
east or west, but will it flow indifferently up or down? The ten-

of our era, We have the following sentence
from him :—‘In the nature of man good and
evil are mixed. The cultivation of the good in

exposes the error by here substituting HE kek

for FS, in doing which he is justified by the

nature of the action that has to be put forth on
the wood of the willew. Hi FE SE calami-
tize benevolence and righteousness.’ I take
the meaning to be as in the translation. If
their nature must.be hacked and bent to bring
those virtues from it, men would certainly
account them to be calamities,

Cu. 2. MAn’s NATURE IS NOT INDIFFERENT
TO GOOD AND EVIL. Irs PROPER TENDENCY IS
TO coop. That man is indifferent to good and
evil, or that the tendencies to these are both
blended in his nature, was the doctrine of Yang

Heung d Eb, a philos. about the beginning

it makes a good man; the cultivation of the
evil makes a bad man. The passion-nature in
its movements may be called the horse of good

orev’ CBE FB
fa) A fiit A J ED is the sum of the.

chapter on Mencius’ part. His opponent’s views
were wrong, but neither did he have the whole

truth. 1, Ys IK is explained in the Dict.
‘water flowing rapidly,’ and ‘water rippling
over the sand. Chaou K'e. followed by Choo
He, explains it.as in the translation, which is
certainly better adapted to the passage, 2.

{8 ,--a8 an adverb, ‘truly.’ ARE Z 3

272

I8

i

I Note

= SA
SEH ier xui

~

TT tl

[e]

zz.
ze NE

A^
*-
v

e

E:
HN

- Ax
NDS

1

E

f

COINS Op
AH

i=
4

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

"
m

BOOK VI,

EM
a
ES

B
Eb rap

iE

dency of man's nature to good is like the tendency of water to flow

down wards.
as all water flows down wards.

3.

There are none but have-this tendency to good, just

* Now by striking water and causing it to leap up, you may

make it go over your forehead, and, by damming and leading it, you
may force it up à 'hill;—but are such movements according to the
nature of water? It is the force applied which causes them. When
men are made to do what is not good, their nature is dealt with in

this way.”
Cuarvrer II.
to be understood by nature.”
2. Mencius asked him, *Do

life, just as you say that white is white 2" «Y es, I do,"

1. The philosopher Kaou said, “ Life is what is

you say that by iN you mean
as the > reply.

Mencius added, “Is the whiteness of a white feather like that of white

lit., ‘the goodness of man's nature,’ but we must

take 3. Bt to
provoke,’ ‘to fret,’ the consequence of a dam.
Uh ttn 4 n iT Z— — dam and^walk it,’ ie, by
gradually leading it from dam to dam, Choo He
says:—‘ This chapter tells us that the nature is
properly good, and if we accord with it, we shall
do nothing which is not good; that it is properly
without evil, and. we must violate it therefore,
before we can do evil. It shows that the na-
ture is not properly without a decided charac-
ter, so that it may du good or evil indifferently.’

M-
E ass=‘ tendency to good.’

"

ED WITH THE PHENOMENA OF LIFE. 1. ‘By
a ; says Choo He, ‘is intended that whereby
men and animals perceive and move,’ and the
sentiment, he adds, is analogous to that of the
Buddhists, who make FA ‘doing and

using,’ to be the nature. We must understand
by the term, I think, the phenomena of life, and
Kaow’s idea led to the ridiculous conclusion
that wherever there were the phenomena of
life, the nature of the subjects must be the
sane. Atany rate, Mencius here makes him

Cu. 3. THE NATURE I8 NOT TO BE CONFOUND-

 allow thia.

2, 3. The Fad, low. 3d tone, all
an

Pr, I Ca. II—IV. THE WORKS ÒF MENCIUS.

[ d

v

v

(NERS SIDER

snow, and the whiteness of white snow like that of a white gem?”
Kaou again said “ Yes."

3. “Very well,” pursued Mencius. “Ts the nature of a dog like the
nature of an ox, and the nature of an ox like the nature of a man ?”

Cuaprer IV. 1. The philosopher Kaou said, * To enjoy food and
delight in colours is nature. Benevolence is internal and not external ;
righteousness is external and not internal.” 4"

2. Mencius asked him, * What is the ground of your saying that
 benevolence is internal and righteousness external?” He replied, -
“ There is a man older than I, and I give honour to his age. It is
not that there is first in me a principle of such reverence to age.
It is just as when there is a white man, and I consider him white ;—
according as he is so externally to me. On this account; I pronounce
of righteousness that it is external.”
interrogative, and=‘you allow this, I suppose.’ the breast, and to look at fire, which illustrates

—We find it difficult to place ourselves in sym- the text f fa iy It is important to
pathy. with Kaou in this conversation, or to fol-

low Mencius in passing from the second par. to
the third. His questions in par. 2 all refer to
qualities, and then he jumps to others about
the nature. `

Cu. 4. THAT THE BENEVOLENT AFFECTIONS
AND THE DISCRIMINATIONS OF WHAT IS RIGHT

ARE EQUALLY INTERNAL. r S &-
te We might suppose that here

denoted ‘the appetite of sex. But another
view is preferred. ‘Thus the commentator Re

HA observes s=‘ The infant knows t9 drink

Observe that by E i denoted E: D Z

ü , ‘the determining what conduct in reference

to them is required by men and things exter-
nal to us, and giving it to them.’ Kaou contends
that as we are moved by our own internal
impulse to food and colours, so we are also
in the exercise of benevolence, but not in that

of righteousness. 2. fe —always up. 2d
tone. In f i] itis the adjective, but in the

other cases it is the verb. 3E AE R i

 JE2CH RC C VER Te

35

Lj
THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VE

Hy
AR

2

x
A
lu

&
“a
v

zi
i
TIED ERE

=
zm

>E

m:
EX PW
NSIS

EV

Lu
v
w
e uiuo

K
zi
eS

aN eM

wl 24
B

zt

A

(NONI SERT 7 BE
ak
>q
RN

INER

RE
NS
$3 NERIS

qe
HE
N

iz
I
m,

EE OE:

3. Mencius said, “ There is no difference between our pronouncing
ofa white horse to be white and our pronouncing a white man to
be white. But is there no differenee between the regard with which
we acknowledge the age of an old horse and that. with which we
acknowledge the ¢ age of : an old man? And-what is it which is call-
ed righteousenss ?—the fact of a man’s being old? or the fact of
our giving honour to his age?”

4. Kaou said, “There i is my younger brother ;—-I love him. But
the younger brother of a man of Ts‘in I do not love: that is, the
feeling is determined by myself, and therefore I say that benevolence
is internal. On the other hand, Y give honour to an old nian of Ts‘oo,
and I also give honour. to an old man of my own people: that is, the
feeling is determined by the age, and. therefore I Say that righteous-
ness is is external.

second É is also a verb. 3. A Td. at the age of a horse.’ 4. BS AG ji E A=

the commencement, have erept by some over- indifferent people, strangers. u AR X Zn iu "
sight into the text. They must be disregarded. ir

u ERA Tte meaning is, no doubt, as

El B ELA, BB e AB ; á i
! in the translation, but the use of T in both
are the verbs, the fe Pas below. H cases occasions some difficulty. Here again I
BD ae ze ‘and do you say? &¢.. but the may translate from the H Hie which at-
‘meaning comes out better by expanding the tempts to bring out the meaning of pet io
words a little. The [ E: saysi—'The re- . p Jove my younger brother and do not love

cognition of the whiteness of a horse is not the younger brother of a man of Tsn; that

different from the recognition of the whiteness is, the love depends on me. Him with whom
of a man, So indeed itis. But when we ac-

H T al
knowledge the age of a horse, we simply with my heart is pleased, I love CBE “Ff. F Z

the mouth pronounce that it is old. In acknow- AA, Fu] it xt and him with whom my
Jedging, however, the age of a man, there is at Ses art 2 lexced. I d love. B
the same time the feeling of respect in the mind, heart is not pleased, E do not love. But the

"Phe case is different from our recoguitiun of revercuce is in both cases determined by the

‘Pr. Cu. IV.—V.

—
—

-—

E

" ral

[d

ub

Wer

d

O

SEIN

er

Q

ze:

o

REB

an

Sof

NESS
TER

ER
A
AN

SE
m

a
"Bl

e

HIE

EN
c

Q

’

Ner
p»

hr J
JE
BL we

e

Zaun

FUE

Siu

H 7E

5
92.

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

in Yi

x

-1

B

v

CNS INS

sath

NI

OES .

EN
© BHO

-—

v

X%

v.

.

SEMEN

eX
O>

b
s

<H
DRIN
SEN Fiu

[ d
-

H
fnj

wv
-

Em

&
>
v
Ld

Mencius answered him, “Our enjoyment of meat roasted by

- a man of Ts'in does not differ from our enjoyment of meat roasted.

by ourselves.
of such things, and will you say
roast is external ? ”

CuarrreR V. 1. The disciple

Thus, what you insist on takes place also in the case

likewise that our enjoyment of a

Ming Ke asked Kung-too, saying,

* On what ground is it said that righteousness is internal?

2.

Kung-too replied, ** We therein act out our feeling of respect,

and therefore it is said to be internal.”

3.

The other objected, “Suppose the case of a villager older than

your elder brother by one year, to which of them would you show

the greater respect ? "

“To my brother," was the reply.
which of them would you first pour out wine at a feast?”

* But for
* For

the villager.” Jing Keargued, * Now your feeling of reverence rests

on the one, and now the honour due to age is

—this is certainly determined by
ceed from within."

age, Wherever we meet with age, there we

have the feeling of complacency JL B f
Ek XE Br Nb, aud it does not necessarily

proceed from our own mind? After reading
all this, a perplexity is still felt toattach to the
use of pe. 5. AE =F —Mencius si-
lences his opponent by showing that the same
difficulty would attach to the principle with
which he himself started ; namely, that the en-
joyment of fóod was internal, sprang from the
+ inner springs of our being.

rendered to the other ;
what is without, and does not pro-

Cu. 5. THE SAME SUBJECT;—THE DISCRIMI-
NATIONS OF WIIAT IS RIGHT ARE FROM WITHIN.
1, Mang Ke was & younger brother of
Mang Chung, mentioned IL Pt. IL. ii. ‘Their
relation to each other in point of age is deter-
mined by the charaeters, 4h and aR. Ming

Ke had heard the previous conversation -with
Kaon, or heard of it, and feeling some doubts
on the subject he applied to Kung-too (IE
Pt. I. v.) for their solution. ‘On what ground
is it said ?,’—i¢, by our master, by Mencius.

3. The questions hore are evidently

976 "THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VI.

PUR

eo
A

mmk
See

YON
MEN
CK

ww

2

v

m
a

SE

SESS Be
PS

P= ON

RS

>S
REFER
zm

m4
"
Eu
v—

ERO
SSeS

zz

R

[e]

"SET VST

Se
4%

L d

=
Nake Ss

v

2L
y3
RER

a
€
v

à

: HABI TE ie fe 9 Tus

4. Kung-too was unable to reply, and told the conversation to
Mencius. Mencius said, * You should ask him, ‘Which do you re-
spect most, —your uncle, or your younger brother ?' He will answer,
'* My uncle! Ask him again, ‘If your younger brother be personat-
ing a dead ancestor, to which do you show the greater respect,—to
him or to your uncle?’ He will say, ‘To my younger brother. You
can go on, ‘But where is the respect due, as you said, to your un-
cle?’ He will reply to this, ‘I show the respect to my younger brother,
. because of the position which he occupies, and you can likewise
say, ‘So my respect to the villager is because of the position which he
occupies. Ordinarily, my respect is rendered to my elder brother ;
for a brief season, on occasion, it is rendered to the villager.’ "

5. Mang Ke heard this and observed, “ When respect is due to my
uncle, I respect him, and when respect is due to my younger brother,
Yl respect him ;—the thing is certainly determined by what is with-
out, and does not proceed from within." Kung-too replied, “In
winter we drink things hot, in summer we drink things cold; and

Se
E^

by Ming Ke, 4 H is in the general sense of one—a certain one of the descendants, if possi-
, ‘elder,’ 4. The translation needs to be ble, —was made the P. or ‘corpse, into whose
Supplemented, to show that Mencius gives his body the spirit of the other was supposed to

decision in the form of a dialogue between the descend to receive the worship. CEJ yin E

two disciples. FL Aa father's younger $t —the Ios you said.' Hy Za =H

brother,’ but used generally for ‘an uncle.’ E HE comp. the ‘Doctrine of the Mean,’ i. 2.
js P sin sacrificing to the departed, some 5. at a hot water, or ‘ soup,”

Pr. T. Ca. V—VI. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 277

L5] E i ES Bll

J

NM
as

RM

ma
ent

dU Fe y $E 2) f

Foe Je SEB OK Hh E

WS 13:4 Ve F op

ET. B FA, OM RUNS

Urry ea

F EET EX:
En NE BE, ioe

Xj

4
v

np
Nm

*

SE

Ld

zu
<=

“$0, on your
external ” l
.. Cuarrer VI. 1. The disciple Kung-too said, “The philosopher
Kaou says ‘ Man’s nature is neither good nor bad.’ .

2. “Some say, ‘Mans nature may be made to practise good,
and it may be made to practise evil, and accordingly, under Wan
and Woo, the people loved what was good, while under Yew and Le,
they loved what was cruel.’

3. “Some say, ‘The nature of some is good, and the nature of
others is bad. Hence it was that under such a sovereign as Yaou
there yet appeared Seang; that with such a father as Koo-sow there

‘yet appeared Shun; and that with Chow for their sovereign, and
the'son of their elder brother besides, there were found K'e, the vis-
count of Wei, and the prince Pe-kan.

principle, eating and drinking also depend on what is

and ‘water ;’ must be taken as ‘cold’ name of the viscount of Wei; see Ana. XVIIL i.

water. Kung-too answers after the example of
his master in the last paragraph of the preced-
ing chapter.

Cu. 6. EXPLANATION or MENCIUS own
DOCTRINE THAT MAN'S NATURE tS GOOD. 1.
Choo He says that the view of Kaou, as here
affirmed, had been advocated by Soo ‘Fung-po,

a HE) and Hoo, styled Win-ting Kung
ay AED) near to his own times.

2. This is the view propounded by Kaou in the
2d chapter. Ta is explained by 72, and E

VAS - Fy AES 3. Ek was the ]

Both he and Pe-kan are here made to be uncles
of Chow, while K'e, according to the Shoo-king,
was his half-brother. Choo He supposes some
error to have crept into the text, For conveni-
enee in translating, I have changed the order of

Ja LC: AU EF

as the sons of the princes of States were called
BS onis view of human nature found
an advocate afterwards in the famous Han

Wan-kung die pä A of the T'ang dynas-

ty. 4. 5. 75 Hb ‘as to,’ ‘looking at,’

EX

NM

(NER
«(NES

SACR

Lu

NA
RAREST T
Numen.

"
v

w
~~

=
KES

a

v

«(x

c
PON ake >

SNH

wD
E
-
y.

nempe

NULL
T

=
BH
=

S<
SR eh
>N

-

r
Y

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

DUE

[s

t.
G
v

Nam

gv

ps

[d

ye

VI

AE

&
uw
A
v

YSTA

a

qme» y
RRE

V
‘=
—
ML
Tr

>

à
d

EER RS

Ss!

9)

4.. “And now you say, ‘The nature is good.’ Then are all those

wrong?”
5. : Mencius said, “ From. the

tuted for the practice of what is good.

ing that the nature is good.

feelings proper to it, it is consti-
This is what I mean in say-

6. “If men do what is not good, the blame cannot be imputed

to their natural powers."

7. “The feeling of commiseration belongs to.all men; so does

that of shame and disliké; and that of reverence and respect; and
that of approving and disapproving. The feeling of cominiseration
implies the principle of benevolence; that of shame and dislike, the

principle of righteousness; that of reverence and respect, the princi-

-ple of propriety ; and that of approving and disapproving, the prin-

ciple of knowledge.

knowledge, are not infused into us from without.

Choo He ealls them an initial particle. The, E,

of course, refers to + H or ‘nature,’ which is the

subject of the next clause-- FA] Ii Fa 3B.

‘This being the amount of Mencius’ doctrine, that
by the study of our. nature we may see that it
is formed for goodness, there seems nothing to

object to in it. By WF is denoted Pee i,

‘the movements of the nature,’ ie, the inward
feelings and tendencies, ‘stirred up.—Chaou
K'e takes here in the sense of JB.
*to obey, *to accord with, on which the
translation would be—‘If it act iu accor-
dance with its feelings, or emotional ten-
dencies^ The meaning, however, is the same

on the whole, By a p^ E is not so

Benevolenee, righteousness, propriety, and

We are certainly

definite as we could wish. Choo He expands
tA Zi. AS 4H. n] YA Jo 38^
im p By a fa m, ‘the feelings of man

may properly be used only to do good, and may
not be used to do evil! This seems to be

e A= us, x
BE t ‘man’s MU HA s
ers.’ A gd (low. lst tone),—‘as to, ‘in
the case of? — 7. Comp. IL Pt. I.iv. 4,5. JẸ
at XD however takes the place of By ae

x A there. gb HH E is the apodosis of

a sentence, and the protasis must be supplied
^ e

the meaning.

w
-l
©

Pr. L Cu. VI. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS

e

MTER

v
V
m
E aiit
o

[ d

40

v

feu

4

T
d

zi

i
DSS
PN

[ d
LS
w
»
v
v

B
Sy Oe

M
4S
omg
e

2H
1
op

v

EsspeN ERE

a
C.

v

KANA
aa
ANH

er
.-

N
$
V
d
Panal

a
`
LA
€

ta
^

nep:

ett
*
v

AEn eS se T]

=>
A à

EN
zu

O-
E3
y
[oi

Sai
ro

gom

W WK L Bk
A PA FM i

furnished with them, And a different view is simply from want of
reflection. Hence it is said ‘Seek and you will find them. Neglect
and you will lose them.’ Men differ from one another in regard to
them ;—some ‘as much : again as others, some five times as much, and
some to an incaleulable amount :—it is because they cannot carry
out fully their natural powers.
8. ‘It is said in the Book of Poetry,
‘Heaven in producing mankind,
Gave them their various facalties and relations with their
specific laws.
These are the invariable rules of nature for all to hold,
And ail love this admirable virtue.’
Confucius said, “ The maker of this ode .knew indeed the principle
of our nature! ' We may thus see that every faculty and relation
must have its law, and since there are invariable rules for all to
hold, they consequently love this admirable virtue." :

as in the translation [n up. P tone.

-—. aif
RA fen zs BUE ET pi T BK
EPVY a They lose them till they
Apul from what is? good, some as far again
as others, &e.' 8. 8 E ,—see the Shoo-
king, III. Pt. III. Ode VI. st. i. where we have

ES for pd and fR for BS A Hj vel ]

Hil. —'have things, have laws,’ but the things
specially intended are, our constitution with
reference to the world of sense, and the various
circles of relationship. The quotation is de-
signed specially to illustrate par. 5. but the
conclusion. drawn is stronger than the statement
there. It is said the people actually love dif.
up. 3d: tone), and are not merely constituted to
love, the admirable virtue.

m

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VI.
= v as)
Y uj WY JL» mci
J N

Dx
ZEE

nM
en

v

>)
gkg m HEE

Q
we!
v
s.
o
®
te
w
ww.

v

FROH EANN EE

So
&
V
4

a
v

SASANN
RS

Ld

kn
Ems
FAREN
N

\
4

E

Cuaprer VIL 1. Mencius said, “In good years the children of
the people are most of them good, while in bad years the most of
them abandon themselves to evil. It is not owing to their natural
powers conferred by Heaven that they are thus different. The
abandonment is owing to the circumstances through which they
allow their minds to be ensnared and drowned in evil.

2. “There now is barley.—Let it be sown and covered up; the
ground being the same, and the time of sowing likewise the same,
. it grows rapidly up, and when the full time is come, it is all found
to beripe. Although there may be inequalities of produce, that is
owing to the difference of the soil, as rich or poor, to the unequal
nourishment afforded by the rains and dews, and to the different
ways in which man has performed his business in reference to it.

3. “Thus all things which are the same in kind are like to one

Bethy. —the use of FF here is peculiar. Most
take it as= Fy IP, ‘thus? Some take it in
its proper pronominal meaning, as if Mencius
in a lively manner turned to the young.—‘It is
not from the powers conferred by Heaven that
you are different,’ E ‘so,’ referring specially
to the Stit-abandonment? 2. xt 2 go

together barley,’ m Tif. (up. 2d tone, the

Cu. 7. ALL MEN ARE THE SAME IN MIND ;—
BAGES AND OTHERS. Ir FOLLOWS THAT THE
NATURE OF ALL MEN, LIKE THAT OF THE SAGES,

18 GOOD. 1. 435 — rich years,’ HL

ap, ‘plentiful years,’ piz] is given by Chaou
K'e as= 38, ‘good,’ and Ak. ‘tevil? But
Fh =the Mencian phrase— Z] LS t self-aban-
donment, and there is the proper meaning of
HB, ‘to depend on’ also in that term. ‘In

xich years, PE
the young whose characters are plastic,) depend
on the plenty and are good. Temptations do

not lead them from their natural bent. HE

T

»B (sons and brothers, ie.

noun),—‘ sow the seeds." Hb —Prop. ‘a kind of
harrow.’ H ZÆ, not ‘the solstice,’ but ‘the
days (£e. the time, harvest-time,) are come.’

9. fi-H. ‘all’ Ai f. Ba

Py. I. Cu. VIL THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

281
x

A

Hato s Lr
E
E

zip
=

wo
w
w
c

res
=

v

A
Iib
ER

v
yes] E
à -
Sis as

ww

WS Vo Sah

SEEN
MAAN

SSE EEN

OSS

ae
a
REO
7

=

e

i WEF INURRIA

v

SPSS mee]

ow

NAHEN
ARREN
po

m
Y erani

V
*

MBN Dena

j JE ANTS
A H Fe We HF
" v
another why should we doubt in regard to man, as if he were a
Erw. exception to this? The sage and we are the same in kind.
4. “In accordance with this the scholar Lung said, ‘If a man.
make hempen sandals without knowing the size of people's feet, yet I
know that he will not make them like baskets.’ Sandals are all like
one another, because all men’s feet are like one another.

5. “So with the mouth and flavours ;—all mouths have the same
relishes. Yih-ya only apprehended before me what my mouth relishes. —
Suppose that-his mouth in its relish for flavours differed from that
of other men, as is the case with dogs or horses which are not the
same in kind with us, why should all men be found following Yih-
yain their relishes ? Tn the matter of tastes the whole empire models

Itself after Tig that is, the mouths of all men are like one
another,

nek
RET
au

‘ — only come £o man ahd doubt it?’ 4,

it illustrating, not inferring. So, bolow ; ex-.

cept perhaps in the last: stance of its use. of
the Lung who is quoted nothing seems to be

known. fis see HI. Pt. I, vi. 1. 5. G=
OC E do
. ‘The relation of mouths to tastes is that they

have the same relishes? Yih-ya was the cook
of the famous duke Hwan of Ts‘e (s.c. 664—

642), a worthless man, but great in his art.

yi? 18. > TY Zo is better transtated tappre- `

hended before me,’ than ‘was the first to appre-
hend,’ &c., aud only is evidently to be supplied.

pi qh H ZR J^ uk —the E] heeisto —
d

be understood with reference to Yih-ya.

PE, ‘its nature, ùc., 'its likings and dislikings

in the matter of tastes. Kh Hy, VA 5
P E -3l “to fix a limit, or ‘to aim at,

36

ow
wo

2 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VI.

n

e
v

a
SEH
A

il

e

HSI

s

s
g

LES
pex T

MAUS
Bch

AT

>

= =
ji .
I
RHO

IDSES
ERS
SOS NEE

[ 4
cad
ad

BSN
SEN Eo
a
È
SM
-

v
v

S00
Gu
3M

imi
ue penu

zr
wa

Ae
im
v
r.

FaN
tds
ay
EN
zew oz

ist
iN

FEHN
NE
THY

^ SNAS Hee alee MS
SER
=
1#
=

VEA ETAPA

» 6. “And so also it is with the ear. In the matter of sounds,
the whole empire models itself after the music-master K*wang; that
is, the ears of all men are like one another.

7. .“ And so also it is with the eye. In the case of Tsze-too,
there is no man but would recognize "that he was beantiful. Any
one who would not recognize the beauty of Tsze-too must have no
eyes
8. “Therefore I say i Men’s mouths agree in having the same
_ telishes ; their ears agree in enjoying the sanie sounds ; “their eyes
agree in recognizing the same beauty :—shall their minds alone be
without that which. they similarly approve? What is it then of
which they similarly approve? It is, I say, the principles of our
nature, and the determinations of righteousness, The sages only
apprehended before me that of which my mind approves along with
other men. Therefore the principles of our nature and the deter-

€ HE HR aR BR WE is here in the sense Ti tE Wr zl YR ¥-, YR is to be

of our but, from botan, the connective particle, ae as a verb, ‘to approve.’ EM merely indi-
though it often corresponds to our other but, à cates the answers to the preceding question. It
disjunctive, or inr eure only." Ein gu. see is i: so much as ‘I say’ in the translation.
IV. Pt. Li. 1. 7. ''sze-loo was the desig- ES =) <= iu , ‘the mental constitution,’
nation of Kung-sun 6 me [sp an officer $
of Ching about s.c. 700, distinguished for his S moral nature, ‘and B=) x FA: ‘that
beauty. See his villany and death in the 7th constitution or nature, acting outwardly. $5.
chapter of the ‘History of the several States. ‘hay,’ ‘fodder, used for 'grass-fed animals,

Pr. I. Cn; VIL—VrII. THE WORKS OF MENCÍUS.

*

= Ti Was
d T1 ATS pes

SI

SEN ASS

My i-r

(VENE

[ d
v

SHS

So
n
um

R

ree SAN

E
m

FEES

j
3"

HE
BSS is
MR MNSS A

ARE ESE She
(NEF KE

3

Notas
d
+e

{10
Ner
~va $

E

SVR EE

OEP

HES

hii:
lily
m:

x.
d
-

w

>

C
*
[d

9

HNS

J4
2

VA F 7H Y8 AB
lx AM due REAL A

minations of righteousness are agreeable to my mind, just as the
flesh of grass and grain-fed animals is agreeable to my mouth."

Carrer VIII. 1. Mencius said, “The trees of the New moun-
tain were once beautiful. Being situated, however, in the borders
of a large State, they were hewn down, with axes and bills;—and
could they retain their beauty? Still through the activity of the
vegetative life day and night, and the nourishing influence of the rain
and dew, they were not without buds and sprouts springing forth,
but then came the cattle and goats and browsed upon them. ‘To these
things is owing the bare and stript appearance of the mountain, which
when people see, they think it was never finely wooded. Butis this
the nature of the mountain?

2. “And so also of what properly belongs to man ;—shall it be
said that the mind of any man was without benevolence and right-

T
o

Lum

E zw e
such as sheep and oxen. S= ‘corn or rice-

fed animals,’ such as dogs and pigs.

Cu. 8. How IT 15^THAT THE NATURE PRO-
PERLY GOOD COMES TO APPEAR AS IF IT. WERE
NOT SO ;—FROM NOT RECEIVING ITS PROPER NOU-
RISHMENT. 1. The New mountain was in
the south-east of Ts‘e, It is referred to the

present district of Lin-tsze qi 7 in the

department of Ts‘ing-chow. na E H

~ NG

X l-1A EHEZ EF

KE. TARR SI^. —' could they be

beautiful ?' ie., ‘could they retain their beauty ?”

E EHA Z Hr eme TE is aim-

cult;—' there is what they grow day and night,’

the & referring to the AY, t I. what

we may eall ‘vegetative life. The use of

T here is peculiar. $ -» JR. “trees

of materials,’ fine trees. 2, The connection
indicated by i ‘although,’ may be thustraced:

284 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK Vl,

u
4

NS

e

2

pira Mh oN ai
RU

~
E

MING
quu

Evi:
Meer

às
J

w
v

pas ZS

adil iat
SR

2

NC
Hee

FATE
re Ny
»

N
"

a
SEN

v

A

oo

ta

b

u

sj

V
s

Saat

Nd
m

i

Es
B

f
{

WNR

N

—
i

éousness? The way in which a man loses his proper goodness of
mind is like the way in which the trees are denuded by axes and
bills. Hewn down day after day, can it—-the mind—retain its beauty ?
But there is a development of its life day and night, and in the calm
air of the morning, just between night and day, the mind feels in a
degree those desires and aversions which are proper to humanity,
but the feeling is not strong, and it is fettered and destroyed by
what takes place during the day. This fettering taking place again
and again; the restorative influence of the-night is not sufficient to
preserve the proper goodness of the mind; and when this proves in-
sufficient for that purpose, the nature becomes net much different
from that of the irrational animals, which when people see, they
think that it never had those powers which I assert. But does this
condition represent the feelings proper to humanity ?

— Not only is such the case of the New moun-
tain. Although we speak of what properly be-

longs to man d£ ) we shall find that
the same thing obtains, ‘The next clause is to

and day. It is difficult to catch the exact idea
conveyed by SEU iu this clause, and where it.
occurs below, the calm of the air; the correspond-
ing calm of the spirit, and the moral invigora-

be translated in the past tense, the question
having reference to a mind or nature, which
Tias been allowed to run to waste. 2 ‘he =

*a man/ Kak. R NS the good men-

tal constitution or nature.’ , ‘even,’ indi.
.entes the time that lies even between the night

tion from the repose of the night, being blended
init. ‘The next clause is difficult. Chaou Ke
makes it:— The mind is not far removed in its
likings and dislikings HF, nm, both upper 3d
tone,) from. those which are proper to human-
ity? he more common interpretation is that

which I have given. 3k d Iv. Pt. II.

Pr. I. Cu. VIIL—IX, THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. -> 285

(Y

>

mmy S
En
XAHS
Se
sa

KE

TT
Lj

NNNM

7
SS
rs

UNEREN aN
Ic
TRU aE:
N
B
TIN
a

e
Nc

 &

w

SSS
S
zr
=
S
ates

zi
m
`

aaa

zin

Mass
MH
1
rura
Sis
\ }
d
ay

A
we
E p Hi] ge, H
: HEC SIE
à Daas b
3. “Therefore, if it receive its proper nourishment, there is no-

thing which will not grow. If it lose its proper nourishment, there
is nothing which will not decay away.

4. “Confucius said, * Hold it fast, and it remains with you. Let
it go, and you lose it. Its outgoing and incoming cannot be defin-
ed as to time or place.’ It is the mind of which this is said 1"

- CHAPTER IX, 1. Mencius said, “It is not to be wondered at that
the king is not wise!

2. "Suppose the case of the most easily growing thing in the
world ;—if you let it have one day's genial heat, and then expose it
for ten days to cold, it will not be able to grow. It is but seldom
that I have an audience of the king, and when I retire, there ‘come

o»
xix. 1. H = H [i] . B ft .— 9 will the mind always bé preserved,' and every-

embraces both things in nature, and the nature where and jn all circumstances its manifesta-
of man. 4. This is a remark of Confucius tions will be those of benevolence and right-
for which we are indebted to Mencius. d eousness.'

ia "uk ; Cu. 9. ILLUSTRATING THE LAST CHAPTER
42. H A Z Zy “its outgoings and How THE KING OF ''s'g's WANT OF WISDOM WAS
incomings have no set time; nọ one knows OWING TO NEGLECT AND BAD ASSOCIATIONS. L
its dissection.’ Bü, low. Ist tone, is it not?” BR is used for Be, ‘to be perplexed,’ 3f. ia
or an exclamation. This paragraph is thus ex- an exclamation. The king is understood to be
panded by Choo He:—Confucius said of the the king Seuen of Ts*e ; see I. ii, 2. Zi
mind, If you hold it fast, it is here; if you let it sy
go, it ts lost and gone: so without determinate time püh, often written BR. ‘to dry in the sun,’ here
ds tts outgoing and incoming, and also without de- "Ho. : ; — —
terminate place. Mencius quoted his words to {yn ‘t° warm genially." RA D A.
illustrate the unfathomableness of the spiritual
and intelligent mind, how easy it is to have it
or to lose'it, and how difficult to preserve and truth as an inference from the past, AR ,—low.
keep it, and how it may not be left unnourished PAP d
for an instant. Learners ought constantly to 3d tone, keen. Choo He points the last clause—

be exerting their strength to insure the pure- 5 -— JE AD
ness of its spirit, and the settleduess of its pas- 337 7m AT Hj E 1j a. ‘though there :
sion-nature, as in the calm of the morning, then may be sprouts of goodness, what can Ido? In

-—the X ‘not yet,’ ‘never,’ puts the general

286 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VI.
d H PR BX
—-

ESN
TA
REI

HHN

v
v
`
C

TeS
TLRS

Sl Steno

a
e

~
w^

=

(0)

dii

at

SOURS ANDS

v

DERS
6

~~
^
d

M
se

N
pen

Xi
7

; S>1 ES

(ez

Ni
4

=
Seah

v
v
^.
we
ï
Ld

Sie
dEMEE

PS

guo

DA EAI
Ira

zv

all those the act upon him like the cold. Though I succeed in bring-

ing out some buds of goodness, of what avail is ‘it!
B. "Now chess-playing i is but a small art, but without his whole
ee being given, and his will bent to it, a man cannot succeed at
- Chess Ts'ew is the best chess- player in all the kingdom. Sup-

S that he is teaching two men to

te]
play.-—The one gives to the

subject his whole mind and bends to it all his will, doing nothing

but listening to Chess Ts‘ew.
listening to him, h
thinks is approaching,
to the arrow, and shoot. it.

The other, although he seems to be
as his whole mind running on a swan which he
and wishes to bend’ his bow, adjust the string
Although he is learning along with the

other, he does not come up to him. Why ?—because his intelli-

gence is not equal? Not so.

this way, z and ^if ik are connected, and

there is the intermediate clause between them,
which is an unusual thing in Chinese. Feeling
this difficulty, Chaou K'e makes = the nom-
inative to Al 8j and interprets,—* Although I
wish to encourage the sprouting of his goodness,

how can I de so?’ -Ihave followed this con-
struction, taking the force of the terms, however,

aA X (low. 1st tone),

differentiy, 4

P Rm now the character of chess-playing:

as‘an art, is that it is a small art.’ BE D RK: —
Ts‘ew was the man's name and bie us was era
Chess Ts‘ew from his skill at the game, PESE A

‘a great kith,’ which is also called ‘the heavenly

goose'—the swan. i (chò) mj (shih) a
—see Ana, XII. xxvi, FS (low. 3d tone) Hn
CER 3b ee f (low. Ist tone), —'Is it be-
cause of this, the inferiority of his (natural)
intelligence ?” HR 'and the folowing words
being in apposition.

UF

E
2

Pr. I. Cs. X. THE WORKS OP MENCIUS. 287

E Br SEES BA MZ

Jt Je Bip We 2b HT 9x HB dia us
i AH A T4 ’ Jm

zm
m

luo

RRS Stet

D
+

XM
mod

B
QF

SSAA ER
ure cann

a
EX

d

pen
Eo

Si

zl
=

SHE

»

De
ugs

e.

ESS

Ld

SSS Ske

v

UN WEES
SN SESS S+

se +h

v

E
LE

e

n"
mig

N

a

GOA D E dud E JE

CHAPTER dt . Mencius said, “ I like fish and I also like dii
paws. IfI uno have the two together, I willlet the fish go, and
take the bear's-paws. So, I like life, and I also like righteousness.
If I cannot keep the two together, I will let life go and choose right-
eousness.

2. “I like life indeed, but there is that which I like more than
life, and therefore, I will not seek to possess it by any improper
ways I dislike death indeed, but there is that which I dislike more
than death, and therefore there are occasions when I will not avoid
danger. :

3 “Tf among the things which man likes there were nothing
which he liked more than life, why should he not use every means

Cr. 10, THAT IT ES PROPER TO MAN'S NATURE

TO LOYE RIGHTEOUSNESS MORE THAN LIFE, AND
HOW IT I$ THAT MANY ACT AS IF IT WERE NOT SO.
1. * Bear's palms’ have been a delicacy

‘in China from the earliest times. They require
a long time, it seems, to.cook them thoroughly.
The king Shing of 'Ts'oo, B.c. 625, being be-

sieged in his palace, requested that he might
have a dish of bear's-palms before he was put
to death,—hoping that help would come while
they were being cooked, 2. ZR

FIRR Ye —the JR is retained from the preced-
ing par- We may render it by ‘indeed, Br
(SA Ux Zo is to be translated indicatively.

_It is explanatory of the conclusion of the tast

par.,— ZF Tg W X. pa TA (empha-

tic) Aj 12. ‘I won't do improper getting,’

ie, of life, ‘The paraphrasts mostly euy— Jr
à] ALVA (S 4E. 1 will not act impro-
perly to get life’
danger of death, Wa SRE It seems better

€ + ¢ H $
m. sorrow,’ ‘calamity,’ =s

' to construe as F have done making m govern-

ed by fjX5 than to make HR =a quM by
itself, and suppose 5E as the object: of hf.

983 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VI.

oo
eo
an

i
HH,

a

N
Su
y
=
um
ev

!

Na
TRN

x
ay

v

aS

v

NE
zEMAE XPER

m
K

ES qu ell

EEEN

ISN
MEER

fij YA
BY à "I * 8 J?
n Aq Abe AE H

(v

\
d

«qu

=
>

a ce ey
Sz

:

Tr
ENS
ety St
cS

STKE RNAS

EE

UE A ae
» UL, RE iB BL

»

AN
S

Spe

OK We A ES:
—À E f-

& A, AU ^H Radda ^H Hr,

by which he could preserve it? If among the things which man
dislikes there were nothing which he disliked more than death, why
should he not do every thing by which he could avoid danger?

4. “There are cases when men by a certain course might pre-
serve life, and they do not employ it; when by certain things they
might avoid danger, and they will not do them.

à. “Therefore, men have that which they like more than life,
and that which they dislike more than death. "They are not men of
distinguished talents and virtue only who have this mental nature.
All men have it; what belongs to such men is simply that they do
not lose it. i

6. ‘Here are a small basket of rice and a platter of soup, and
the case is one in which the getting them will preserve life, and the
want of them will be death ;—if they are offered with an insulting

4. I translate here differently both from
Chaou K‘e.and Choo- He. They take H A

to be==‘ From this righteousness-loving nature
so displayed,’ as if the par. were merely an
inference from the two preeeding. I under-
stand the par. to be a repetition of the two
preceding, and introductory to the one which

follows. HE FE Ry 4, ‘by this course
(any particular course) there is life,’ inm "H

Pa A , ‘and yet in cases it is not used.’ This
gives a much easier and more legitimate con-

struction. 5. BE 77] HE, (up. 3d tone),

stress must not be laid on the BE. 7j is

simply negative, not prohibitive, 6. Ug.
—low. 8d tone. pg EB is explained p DAE
x ZA, ‘the appearance of reproachful cla-
mour,’ . but the gk B shows that more than
the idea of ‘appearance,’ or demonstration is
intended. TT iü x A-e A: below,
and not simply ‘any ordinary man upon the

way, as Choo He makes it. AN Jet, see II.
Pt. I. ix. 1.—' This par. is intended to illustrate

the A EB ESI x of the preceding. Even

Pr. I. Cn X. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

t2
oc

9

ow

T
BAAN HN (NH Fab Br

e

= Se SN NAE

v

2

NE

nO

Tl
E

TUR
ES

v

>

fet
ERES

-

SI EIE
EP

Bad Ra ra

Spur SSH
RAS s See.

(Cad PAS Se

rie DEO ya 2N
TPELAFP
5 Ji iy S M We e

` voice, even a tramper will not receive them, or if you first tread
upon them, even: a beggar will not stoop to take them, .

T. “And yet a man will accept of ten thousand chung, without
any consideration of propriety or righteousness, What can the
ten thousand chung add to him? When he takes them, is it not that
he may obtain beautiful mansions, that he may secure the. services
of wives and concubines, or that the poor and needy of his acquain-
tance may be helped by him?

8. “In the former case the offered bounty was not received,
though it would have saved from death, and now the emolument is
taken for the sake of beautiful mansions, The bounty that would
have preserved from death was not received, and the emolument is taken
to get the service of wives and concubines, The bounty that would

in the poorest and most distressed of men, the

E3 A x x will show itself. 7

4

Hiem. BS SATE Hy
J Rat do they add tome?” There

is here a contrast with the case in the preced.
par, which was one of life or death, The large
emolument was not an absolute necessity. But
also there is the lofty, and true, idea, that a
man’s personality is something independent of,
and higher than, all external advantages, The
- meaning is better brought out in English’ b
changing the person from the first to the third,

A si X x i, because of the services

of wives and concubines,’ E is plural as well

as e though aecording to the law of China

there could be only one wife, however many

concubines there might be, Wr Pk T Z
AG Ft BEI he BSG RR

fey’ ‘that the poor of his acquaintance may
be grateful for his kindness.’ A gloss in the uj

E Uk AR k says :— The thinking of the

poor would seem to be a thought of kindly
feeling, but the true nature of it is shown in

the f į "ay get ME. The idea is not of
benevolence, but selfishness,’ 8. HR; up.

E tone, [ti] . dy (low. 3d tone), & 9b.

—‘for the body dying,’ ie., to save from dying.

31 i

290 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

BOOK VI.

EX po M Em lane
[essel v JUM RC 3 Yo

Í

LOE SEINE HES

RIO

zm
Rv
SE
t eee SON

=
emma

v

p
a

ww

SERN

F

*

Sop THEA
Sh ES
wx

veu

wel
E

V
t-
ww
Ld
e

v

«RE

=
"4

(vox

b
4h K

have saved from death was not received, and the emolument is taken
that one’s poor and needy acquaintance may be helped by him.,

v

à OS - (v

Was it then not possible likewise to decline this?

This is a case of

what is called—‘ Losing the proper nature of one's mind. 1

CHAPTER XI.
righteousness is man's path.

1, Mencius said, * Benevolence is man's mind, and

3. “How lamentable is it to neglect the path and not pursue it,
to lose this mind and not know to seek it again!

3. “When men's fowls and dogs are lost, they know to seek
for them again, but they lose their mind, and do not know to seek

for it.

4. “The great end of learning is nothing else. but to seek for

the lost wand =
CHAPTER XII.

BORK AU B PE ts om

phatic,=this large emolument, taken for such
purposes.—For an example in point to illustrate
par. 6, see the Le-ke, II. Pt. II. iii. 17.

Cu. 11. How MEN HAVING LOST THE PRO-
PER QUALITIES OF THEIR NATURE SHOULD SEEK
TO RECOVER THEM. 1. ‘Benevolence is man’s
mind, or heart,’ ie, it is the proper and unir
versal characteristic of man’s nature, as the

ns 3 on Chaou K'e says,— A MA Pa

“all men have it? ‘Benevolence’ would seem
to include here all the other moral: quali-

ties of humanity, Choo He says t E: A

x (di ; yet we have the usual Mencian speci- !

1. Mencius said,
finger is bent and cannot be stretched out straight.

“Here is a man whose fourth
It is not painful,

ae of ‘righteousness’ along with it.

E p] SS] SE, nes
ine is most important in. VT he Chinese sages
always end with the recovery of ‘the old heart;’
the idea of ‘a new heart’ is unknown to them.
One of the Ch‘ing says :— The thousand words
and ten thousand sayings of the sages and wor-
thies are simply designed to lend men to get
hold of their lost minds, and make them again
enter their bodies. This accomplished, they
can push their inquiries upwards, and from the
lowest studies acquire the highest knowledge.’

Cu. 12. How MEN ARE SENSIBLE OF BODILY,
AND NOT OF. mE NTAL OR MORAL, DEFECTS.

1. E: e x di ‘the nameless finger,’ i.e.,

44V

ec
m

Pr. I. Cu. XIL—XIIT., THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

ag
li

x
4

DUSSRNTESEI HEE

>it
i

v

ERN

ESSAS

o

zu
mme

V
4

o
[ d

ue

FNH

(CERE

Hur
d SG SST Ste S.

ay

RN
E
v

Ree,
ANSE

mn
dome

EON
E

Stee

zi
(x

>k
TRE
7

NIHSS
SENS
Sd
>t
TM

gi
[x

[e] >x

nor does it incommode his business, and yet if there beany one who
can make it straight, he will not think the way from Ts‘in to Ts‘oo
far to go to him ;-—because his finger-is not like the finger of other

eople.
i » “When a man’s finger is not like those of other people, he
knows to feel dissatisfied, but if his mind be not like that of other
people, he does not know to feel dissatisfaction. This is called—
‘Ignorance of the relative importance of things.”

Cuarrer XIII, Mencius said, * Anybody who wishes to culti- -
vate the ung or the tsze, which may be grasped with both hands, -
perhaps with one, knows by what means to nourish them. In the
case of their-own -persons, men do not know by what means to
nourish them. Is it to be supposed that their regard of their own
persons is inferior to' their regard for a tung or a'tsze? Their want
of reflection is extreme."

the fourth, reckoning from the thumb as tho Cn. 18. MEN'S EXTREME WANT OF THOUGHT

first. It isso styled, as of less use than the
others, and less needing a name. fired
as, and with the meaning of, fh. shin. pa
JE R E L =E R E AE AE
E x ER, ya au hs te, ‘though he
should pass over all the way between Ts‘in and
2. A

aa A not knowing kinds,’ or degrees.

Ts‘oo, he will not think it far.’

=
4

IN REGARD TO THE CULTIVATION OF THEMSELVES,

The tung and tsze resembie each other.
'The latter is called by the Chinese * the king of
trees, and its wood is well adapted for their
block-engraving.. Of the tung there are various
arrangements, some making three kinds of it,
some four, and some seven. ‘The wood of the

first kind, or white t‘ung e Hip is the best

for making musical instruments like the lute.
Both the tung and the tsze belong probably to

the euphorbie, 3B yy gÉ, ‘the body,”

but here ‘the person, ‘the whole human being.
H. gesis it to be supposed?’ A supple-

2

B

Bru

NS

V

gps

SNAUT

zx
RE

E
ER

N

awe ^
>

Sh

kun

e
ef

Hau
>> Ha

WUO
S>
Jd
e
e

RT

`
©

v
r

»

XE

V
/

NE
(=

-

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

ES

SEE SSE Se

v

b

g

BOOK VI.

Mise
TENN
:

[d
[d

ema

RECS
ae eS

v

`
V
pem
mq

>

:
EMI
b Aay

te
v
r

en

V
e
v
[4d

N
a
=

CuaPrER XIV. 1. Mencius said, “There is no part of himself
which a man does not love, and as he loves all, so he must nourish
all. There is not an inch of skin which he does not love, and so

there is not an inch of skin which he will not nourish.

For examin-

ing whether his way of nourishing be good or not, what other rule
is there but this, that he determine by reflecting on himself where

it should be applied?

2. “Some parts of the body are noble, and some ignoble; some
great, and some small. ‘The great must not be injured for the small,
nor the noble for the ignoble. He who nourishes the little belonging
to him is a little man, and he who nourishes the great is a great man.

3. ‘Here is a plantation-keeper, who neglects his woo and kea, and
cultivates his sour wild date-trees;—he is a poor plantation-keeper.

mentary note in the Tii I says that *by nour-

ishing the here is intended the ruling of
- the mind, to nourish our inner man, and paying

gareful attention to the body, to nourish our
outer man?

Cu. 14. THE ATTENTION GIVEN BY MEN TO

THE NOURISHMENT OF THE DIFFERENT PARTS OF

 THEIR NATURE MUST BE REGULATED BY THE

RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF THOSE FARTS. 1l.

,—as in the last ch., but with more special

NA BI anal
reference to the body. 3 pr pu unites
what he loves,’ ie, loves all. A. vL one cubit
er an inch,’ but the meaning is—the least bit of,==

our ‘an inch.’ pry x; T requires to
be supplemented a good dealin translating. The
meaning is plain:—A man is to determine for
himself, by reflection on his constitution, what
parts are more important and should have the
greater attention paid to them. Compare the
two last parr. of Con. Ana. vi. 28. 2. B,
— the members of the body,’ but the character,
like 5 is to be understood with a facit refe-
rence to the mental part of our constitution as
The A f
well. 3. The Bye il] was an officer under

the Chow dynasty, who had the superinten-
dence of the sovereign’s plantationsand orchards.

See the Chow Le, XVI. xx.l, The woo and the

Pr. L Cu, XIV—XV. THE WORKS
hth JEN == We
He d Heel Jm

BR

Sh
M d
3i mI
Ever

iS
ww
ra
wa

3

he
`~

=]
7

b. 25

J

HOD HSB
RE

v

Wei

o

c

Jd

TENE

E

RUS

o

OF MENCIUS. 93

RE
j FR E

THI

er

NORE>
HES

~.
*
w

zl
AE

3 we
¢ (oo

zi

(v
Si
=

4. “He who nourishes one of his fingers, neglecting his shoul-
ders or his back, without knowing that he is doing so, is a man who
resembles a hurried wolf. $ i y

5. “A man who only eats and drinks is counted mean by others;
—because he nourishes what is little to the neglect of what is great.

6. “Ifaman, fond of his eating and drinking, were not to neglect
what is of more importance, how should his mouth and belly be con-
sidered as no more than an inch of skin?” l

CHAPTER XV. 1. The disciple Kung-too said, “ All are equally-
men, but some are great men, and some are little men;—how is this?” .
Mencius replied, * Those who follow that part of themselves which
is great are great men; those who follow that part which is little

are little men."

2. Kung-too pursued, “All are equally men, but some follow

kea are the t‘ung and the tsze of the last chapter.

Tail go together, T indicating the species.
D is generally used with the general meaning
of thorns. But it here indicates a kind of small

wild date tree, The date-tree proper is Á ; this

wild tree, Tli, the difít. forms indieating the

high tree and the low bushy shrub respectively.

See the Sf ae inbe — 4. A. JR

E a wolf hurried,’ 7.2, chased, and so unable

to exercise the quick sight for which it is

`

famous. 6. The meaning is that the parts
considered small and ignoble may have their
due share of attention, if the more important
parts are first cared for, as they ought to be.
Cu. 15. HOW SOME ARE GREAT MEN, LORDS
OF REASON, AND SOME ARE LITTLE MEN, SLAVES

OT SENSE, 1. 23-34 ‘all equally.’ n2
-— the members,’ but here, more evidently than
in the last chapter, it is spoken of our whole
constitution, mental as well as physical. 2.

RH H x [m the offices of the ears and.

eyes? We might suppose that the senses are
so styled, as being conceived to be subject to
¥

2

e
Rog
ii
sd
E

E!
E:
p»
R

rt

X
4

5

TS >See

a
4
et

Bi

mie

v

TNE
Biz

-

-

ORES at
SORE

‘OF MENCIUS.

gia
Š

e

d
M
IIo
et
yan
a

w, ae

BOOK Vi,

O

Aura

v

ui A EEE
PSST
ES mz OE

E
bus
EC

WS
zi

As Hx

5
E

Æ

al

that part of themselves which is great, and Some follow that part
which is little; —how is this?" Mencius answered, “ The senses of
hearing and seeing do not think, and are obscured by external things.
When one thing comes into contact with another, as a matter of
course it leads it away. To the mind belongs the office of thinking.
By thinking, it gets the right view of things; by neglecting to think,
it fails to do this.’ These-—~the senses and the mind—-are what Heaven
has given to us. Let a man first stand fast in the supremacy of the
nobler part of his constitution, and the inferior part will not be
able to take it from him. It is simply this which makes the great

man." -
CHAPTER XVI.

the control of the ruling mind. We have below,

: " Y ttn Pd
however, the czpřession AS Z [ED and B
is to be taken in both cases as=‘ prerogative,’

‘business, Chaou K'e and his glossarist do
not take gs H Z B as the subject of JH,

in I8. but interpret thus:—''The senses,
if there be not the exercise of thought by the

„mind, are obscured by external things. But the-

view of Choo He, as in the translation, is prefer-
able, It is very evident how jV indicates our

whole mental constitution. Wy 2E My

the first //] is the external objects, what is
heard and seen; the second denotes the senses

themselves, which are only things. z
emselves, only things. i] Z
=‘as a matter of course,"

rà Gei
fE ZH. P Z BE sve mina

apprehends the true nature of. the objects of

“OF THE LATTER.

1. Mencius said, “ There is a nobility of Heaven,

sense,’ and of course can guard against their
deluding influence. /j— his what

" -
is great, the nobler “part of his constitution
ie. the mind.—Kung-too might have gone on
to inquire, —' All are equally men. Some stand
fast in the nobler part of their constitution,
and some allow its supremacy to be snatched
away by the inferior part. How is this?’ and
Mencius would have tried to carry the difficulty
a step farther back, and after ali have left it
where it originally was. His saying that the
nature of man is good may be reconciled with
ihe doctrines of evangelical Christianity, but
his views of human nature as a whole are open
to the three objections stated in the note to

tlie 21st ch. of the Chung Yung.

Cu. 16. THERE IS A NOBILITY THAT IS OF
HBAVEN, AND A NOBILITY THAT IS OF MAN, THE
NEGLECT OF THE FORMER LEADS TO TUE LOSS

1. A is the heart true

in itself, loyal to benevolence and righteousness.

Pr. 1I Om XVI—XVII. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 95

ii

[d

TS HRS
ZTro

-

BAFRA

=
TESTES SATT

><a]
KEH
Sts
ae

o

SNES SSW
eat
SS

E>

DER

m

Qe
SE
NEY

v

 o
v

v
-v

v

-

Uma E
E

(> ka

and there is a nobility of man. Benevolence, righteousness, self-
consecration, and fidelity, with unwearied joy in these virtues ;—these
constitute the nobility of Heaven. To be a kung, a k‘ing, or a ta-foo;
—this constitutes the nobility of man.

2. “The men of antiquity cultivated their nobility of Heaven,
and the nobility of man came to them in its train.

3. “The'men of the present day cultivate their nobility of
Heaven in order to seek for the nobility of man, and when they
have obtained that, they throw away the other :—their delusion is
extreme. The issue is simply this that they must lose that nobility
of man as well.” l :

Cuaprer XVII. 1. Mencius said, “To desire to be honoured is
the common mind of men. And all men have in themselves that
which is ¿ruly bonourable. Only they do not think of it. l

+
ia Y .
BP the conduct true to them. A. pu man has been got, to throw away the nobility

SY. 8s = of Heaven, exhibits conduct after attainment
KR see V. Pt: IL ii. 3—7. 3. Sh— not equal to that in the time of search, so that

up. 1st tone,= 5. ‘Their delusion is extreme,’ the delusion js extreme,’ 4 JR is px m .
—this is well set forth in the H ax B R-C has reference to the nobility of
P" » ^ = - H H
B K : 9 3 3, f ^ man, and is best translated as an active verb, to
T Fan TE which the JR also points.—Many commenta-

> Ly A x A» B A tors observe that facts may be referred to, ap-
NEG AH `- " s; A Y ; CLOS
S SS BR, zm fF A E m E e parently inconsistent with the assertions in this
pow ZH » Y ot chapter, and then go on to say that such incon-
BJ: dé T xt f£. Dig XK y4 28 EN is but a lucky accident; the issue
D 72 should always be as Mencius says. Yes; but
Z Z ay. Ju Be Z i +h, Now all moral teachings must be imperfect where f
when the nobility of Heaven is cultivated in the thoughts are bounded by what is seen and
order to seek for the nobility of man, at the temporal.
very time it is cultivated, there is a previous Cm. i7. Tae mue FONO UE WHICH Mt EN
mind to throw it away;—showing the exis- SHOULD DESIRE, L ft in the last ch. is
tence of delusion. Then when the nobility of ! the material dignity ; E in this is the honour,
+

296 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VI.

>

S
S

T RENH
N

ub
GG

l

R

ERIN SS
SNS

ER
EN

v
a
e

[EAD

em
fe
w
[ d
"lo

zm

ui
je

Pay
5 Js. fi
732. AGIS "ER F EE Iu x
gee HIIS
X v c EH
2 xt VL QR F

ACA du — UN du 9r EE c dE

. 9, The honour which men confer is not good honour. Those
whom Chaou the Great ennobles he can make mean again.

8. “Itis said in the Book of Poetry,

: * He has filled us with his wine,

He has satiated us with his goodness.'
* Satiated us with his goodness,’ that is, satiated us with benevolence
and righteousness, and he who is so, consequently, does not wish
for the fat meat and fine millet of men. A good reputation and far-
reaching praise fall to him, and he does not desire the elegant em-
broidered garments of men."

CuaerzR XVIII. 1. Mencius said, “Benevolence subdues its
‘opposite-just as water subdues fire. Those, however, who now-a-
days practise benevolence do it as if with one cup of water they
could save a whole waggon-load of fuel which was on dire, and when

such as springs from such dignity. 2. X

NL

entertained them. Mencius’ application of it

x B = XK here and in the next par.;

refers to those who confer dignities. It is not
to be understood—‘ what men consider honour."
Hf] Giz ‘Chaou, the chief? This title was
borne by four ministers of the family of Cliaou,
who at different times held the chief sway in
Tsin. They were a sort of ‘king-making War-
wicks. In the time of Mencius, the title had
become associated with the name of the house.

3. B > ,—8see the She-king, IM. ii, Ode
TII st. 1. ` The ode is one responsive from ‘his
fathers and brethren’ to the emperor who has

is a mere accommodation.
Cu. 18. Ir IS NECESSARY TO PRACTISE RENE-
VOLENCE WITH ALL ONE'S MIGHT. ‘THIS ONLY

WILL PRESERVE IT, 1. X A8. Ful aH
Z-a La ‘were to say of it? Bi is
said by Choo He tox Ff, ‘ta aid? The $k ia

joined to fä, and not to ES Bad men
seeing the ineffectiveness of feeble endeavours
todo good are only encouraged in their own
course. This meaning of Hif is found clise-

where. Chaou K'e interprets :— This also is
worse than the case of those who practise what

Pr. Y Ca. XVIIL—XX.

—

PE%
KEE

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

BS

i

RS
BAS
Š

d

SERRE
SEK

2

URS:

= :
WAEN TI]

[ d

©

ACE

o

RENTAS

i

aN

AWEL EE Jiu, X,

the flames were not extinguished,

were to say that water cannot

subdue fire. This conduct, moreover, greatly encourages those who

are not benevolent.
2.
amount of benevolence."
Cuarter XIX. Mencius said,

“The final issue will simply be this—the loss of that small

« Of all seeds the best are the

five kinds of grain, yet if they be not ripe, they are not equal to the

t'e or the pae.
being brought to maturity."
CHAPTER XX.

5o, the value of benevolence depends entirely on its

1. Mencius said, “E, in teaching men to shoot,

made it a rule to draw the bow to the full, and his pupils also did

the same.

2. -“A master workman; in teaching others, uses the compass

and square, and his pupils do the same.

is not benevolent.’ But both the sentiment and
construction of this are more difficult than the
: other, 2. Comp. chapter xvi. 2.
Cu. 19. BENEVOLENCE MUST BE MATURED.
1. ‘The five kinds of grain ;—see III. Pt.
X.iv.7. ‘The t'e and pae are two plants closely
resembling one another. They are a kind of
spurious grain, ‘yielding a rice-like sced, but
small. They are to be found at all times, in
wet situations and dry, and when crushed and
roasted, may satisfy the hunger in a time of
famine.’ One kind of pae is called in the north

; F *bird-paddy. Mencius’ vivacity of
mind and readiness at illustration lead him at

times to broad unguarded statements, of which
this seems to be one.

AMAA

a
Cu, 20. LEARNING MUST NOT BE BY HALVES,
1, E,—see IV, Pt. IT, xxiv, 1. Ane

used as H8. in ch. vii, 5. ah AUS found it

necessary to,’ or simply the past tense emphatic,

KE - EE à
master-workman. Choo He says:—' This ch.
shows that affairs must be proceedod with
according to their laws, and then they can be
completed. But if a master neglect these, he
cannot teach, and if a pupil neglect these, he
cannot learn. In small arts it is so:—how
much more with the principles of the sages !’

So, in the next par,

Án

38.

*.

298. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VI.

BOOK VL

KAOU TSZE. . PART IT.

2] J^ as Bj Fl, x Iz {E
THIS

T 3&1 V ys LE: i
AA Z Ji ER JEEE

CHAPTER 1, i man of Jin asked the disciple ie saying,
“Ts an observance of the rules of propriety in ae to eatiny, ov
the eating, the more important?" The answer was, “ The obser-
vance of the rules of propriety is the more important. »

2. “Is the gratifying the appetite of sex, or the doing so only
according to the rules of propriety, the more important?” The an-
swer again was, “ Zhe observance of the rules of propriety in the
matter is the more important.”

9. The man pursued, “If the result of eating only according to
the rules of propriety will be death by starvation, “while by "dis-
regarding those rules we may get food, inust they still be observed
in such a case? 1f according to the rule that he shall go in person
te mect his wife a man cunnot get married, while by c disr egarding
that rule he may get married, must he still observe the rule in such
a case?”

CH. 1. THE IMPORTANCE OF OBSERVING THE
RULES OF PROPRIETY, AND, WHEN THEY MAY BE
DISREGARDED, THE EXCEPTION WILL BE FOUND

TO PROVE THE RULE, XTREME CASES MAY NOT
BE PRESSED TO INVALIDATE TIE PRINCIPLE.

L ff (low. Ist tone) was a small State,
referred to the present Tse-ning ( CEs Jf iid) chow,
of the department Yen-chow, in. "eM EN It

of Laou-tsze, was a native of the State of
Tsin, His name was Leen Gab. His

i

! questions are not to be understood of pro-
 priety’ in the abstract, but of the rules of
 propriety understood to regulate the other
 things which he mentions. 2. is to be
 understood as in the translation, and this
[i

is its common signif. in Mencius. Y include
was not far from Mencius native state of Tsow, the EL m Hr, in this par. 3. i DR
the distance being only between tw enty and

thirty le. The disciple Uh-loo, who is said fee the Le-ke, XXVI 26; ef al. D 3u
to have published books on the doctriues (lower 3d tone),—see the Le-ke, IX. ii. 8.

bo

Pr. H. Ci. I. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 99

E

em

8

yip

 pss

DEN
(SG

zu
z

N
DW
p
ue
IgE SEM

Ld

SEHR

ww

INS
RE
KERN
FIPA

WN
SNe
ENN
i>
-—
joa
3b

TE
bel
m
TN

LY
ei
i

malls)
[ig

b
ST

-

SO HAIN Hiss
a(S REXEN SROER
xxl
We

i Ks enin
HPNZ N I

2 iS i K,

4, Uh-loo was unable to reply to these questions, and the next
day he went to Tsow, and told them to Mencius. Mencius said,
“ What difficulty is there in answering these inquiries?

5. “Ifyou do not adjust them at their lower extremities, but
only put their tops ou a level, a piece of wood an inch square may
be made to be higher than the pointed peak of a high building.

6. “Gold is heavier than feathers; —but does that saying have
reference, on the one hand, to a single clasp of gold, and, on the
other, to a waggon-load of feathers?

4. “If you take a case where the eating is of the utmost import-
ance and the observing the rules of propriety is of little importance,
and compare the things together, why stop with saying merely that
the eating is more important? So, taking the case where the grati-
fying the appetite of sex is of the utmost importance and the ob-
serving the rules of propriety is of little importance, why stop with
merely saying that the gratifying the appetite is the more important?

8. “Go and answer him thus, ‘If, by twisting your elder bro-

ba
aL
nu

[o]

4. x th —x- ft Chaou K‘e the phrase. The view of Choo He, which
vidi j£ as ÉB, woo, up. 1st tone, makingitan I have followed, is better. — 6, 4 E
exclamation—' oh !* 5. Ti to measure, E indicates the clause to be a common say- `

or feel with the hand." Ax and * emer ing, and Suerte us on to some explanation of

" j j it. Ex age <a How does it say (mean)

for T^ and E ze (sin), — a high and the saying (meaning) of the gold of one hook,

pointed small hill! Chaou K'e takes AL p and the feathers of oue waggon? Comp. I. Pt.
T E . PERN "

‘together as meaning ‘a peaked ridge of a hill, H. vii. 1. i. 3 2H Cdp 1H.

and the dictionary gives this signification to. 8, XA (read ch'in or t'een, up. 2d tone), both

200 THE WORKS

SNE ~ ka
m MES
FN

SS aps

iV
jm

e

ELEA
Na OH SEE

VL
md

Fish

Fiz, JL El, n
AER

OF MENCIUS. BOOK Vi.

ER
Sy
zx

v
b
4

VL e!
NS
ve
=k
zm

vi

SS

M
-
D

AN

FENERE
>q

Ks

Na

200
ES

-
.-
~
-—
r.

P Bound
LE
—

Si Seen
Oe =,

b
<

TE SE,

A

Ae 13

TM
4
—-—

ther's arm, and snatching from him what he is eating, you can get
food for yourself, while, if you do not do so, you will not get any thing
to eat, will you so twist his arm? If by getting over your neighbour's
wall, and dragging away his virgin daughter, you can

"while if you
you so drag her away? '"
CHAPTER II.

get a wife,

do not do so, you will not be able to get a wife, will

1. Keaou of Tsaou asked Mencius, saving, “ It is

said, * All men may be Yaous and Shuns;’'—-is it so?” Mencius re-

plied, “ It is.”
2.

Keaou went on, * I have heard that king Wan was ten cubits

high, and T‘ang nine. Now I am nine cubits four inches in height.

But I can do nothing but eat my millet.

that saying?”

by Chaou K'e and Choo He, is explained by ye.
‘to bend.’ I prefer the first meaning of the
character given in the dictionary,—that of

Hi ‘to turn,” here=‘to twist? ilm E x
$i. —here d i$ followed by two objectives,

being=‘fromhim, Julienerrs strangely in
xendering—* Si, rumpens fratris majoris brachium,
rapias illud comedendum." p He. Nj— the
wall of the house on the east,’ i.e, a neighbour's
wall. E Z is a common designation for the
master of a house, but the phrase is not to be
traced to Mencius expression, EB Cup. 2d tone)
Mes virgin daughter, one dwelling in the
harem,

WS as sometimes elsewhere, is femi-
mine.

What am I to do to realize

Cu. 2. ALL MAY BECOME YAOUS AND SHUNS,
AND TO BECOME 80, THEY HAVE ONLY SINCERELY,
AND IN THEMSELVES, TO CULTIVATE YAOU AND
SNUN’S PRINCIPLES AND WAYS. 1. Chaou
Ke says that Keaou was a brother of the prince
of ‘Tsaou, but the principality of 'Psaou had
been extinguished before the time of Mencius,
The descendants of the ruling house had pro-
bably taken their surname from their ancient
patrimony. ‘Tsaou is referred to the present

district of Ting-t'aou GE Wap in the depart-

ment of Taaou-chow, in Shan-tung. T ae
—comp. I. Pt. TI. ii. 15 et al. 2. Qn the

heights mentioned here, see Con. Ana., VII. vi.

VER for my height, The ug. however,

may be taken as simply euphonic. Keaou's
idea is, that physically he was between Wan
and Tang, who might be considered as having
become Yaous or Shuns, and therefore he also

 might become such, if he were shown the right

Pr. U. Cu. IL THE WORKS

ec, a
oe Je ES
pa CES
Een H A

dem

Ld

Nim eS
"ul

oe

SE Sp HERRON RES

>N
“=
NS

`
Hn

w

KRR

B

é

fad Roser ess
JN

tie J^

c
e
men

OF MENCIUS.

i
E
dear

bi

Le
>
v

3

PY

JUN
c

b

NE
B

[d

PESE
MEE

(Ep Sata

amt
NS

v

SAD
EY

ESE
BEI.
SIS
Pe

M

x

[DE NE x

s hi
3. Mencius answered him, “ What has this—the question of sizes

to do with the matter? It all lies simply in acting as such.

Here is

a man, whose strength was not equal to lift a duckling :—he was-
then aman of no strength. But to-day he says, ‘I can lift 3,000
catties’ weight,’ and he is a man of strength. And so, he who
can lift the weight which Woo Hw lifted is just another Woo Hw.
Why should a man make a want of ability the subject of his grief?

It is only that he will not do the thing.

4.

part of a youngor.

«To walk slowly, keeping behind his elders, is to perform the -
To walk quickly aud precede his elders, is to

violate the duty of a younger brother. Now, is it what a man can-

not do—to walk slowly? Itis what he does not do.

'The course

of Yaou and Shun was simply that of filial piety and fraterna] duty.

way.

3, EE Æ referring to the
height, or body generally, pe-z Te-
ferring to Yaou and Shun, ; , is said to be
an abbreviation for -is ‘a wild duck,’
I do not see why it should not be taken simply
as a numeral or classifier, and — fl p=: a
chicken? Woo Hw? was a man noted for his
strength. He is mentioned in connection with
the king Woo of Ts‘in (n.c. 309-—306). Ac-
counts go that he made light of 30,000 catties!
4, Te and pr (up. 3d tone) are verbs;

-ph Choo He her» quotes from the

commen, Ch'in qu FR) :— Filial piety and
fraternal duty are the natural out-goings of the
nature, of which man have an intuitive know-
ledge, and for which they have an intuitive

ability (FS 3b FE AE). Yaou and Shun .
showed the perfection of the human relations,

but yet they simply acted in accordance. with
this nature. How could they add a hair’s point
to it? He also quotes another die FR) who
says :— The way of Yaou and Shun was great,
but the pursuit of it lay simply in the rapidity
er slowness of their walking and stopping, and
not in things that were very high and dificult.
It is present to the common people im their

302 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VI.,

“
x
2
Se
sat
-AN
al N

v

=H

APH

n
A
rik

Ng
M
i

ERO

EXTA IDEA Ig
E
us
=
( k

IK
N
= b
=
Yu

SS cru]: Meer

zu

SN

FAT

x

T

xa Own Ne:

NE
Qm

eu P

tH
2
(v

[

ANOS
=

zz

ENEE

v

ESRT

EN ES W
Fi ar De J Fe, XE

5. “Do you wear the clothes of Yaou, repeat the words of Yaou,
and do the actions of Yaou, and you will just bea Yaou. And, if
you wear the clothes of Këš, repeat the words of Kéé, and do the
actions of Kéé, you will just be a Keš.” '

6. Keaou sard, “I shall be having an interview with the prince

of Tsow, and can ask him to let me have a house to lodge in. I
wish to remain here, and receive instruction at your gate."
. *. Mencius replied, “The way of truth is like a great road. — It
is not difficult to luos it The evil is only that men will not seek
it. Do you go home and search for it, and you will have abun-
dance of teachefs."

Cuaprer lil. 1. Kung-sun Ch‘ow asked about an opinion of the
scholar Kaou, saying, “ Kaou observed, ‘The Seaou P‘wan is the
ode of a little man." Mencius asked, “Why did he say so?”
* Because of the murmuring which it expresses,” was the reply.

daily usages, hut they do not know it, 5. [ Kaou appears to have been a disciple of Tsze-
The meaning is simply—Imitate the men, do hea, and lived to Mencius’ time. From the ex-

what they they did, and you will be such as pression 5j ga in par. 2, it is plain, he is not

Zu 4H. "

they were, 6. X tr Bh (low. od tone), to be confounded with Mencius’ own disciple of

~it is better not to translate this conditionally, the same surname, mentioned IL Pt. IL xii. 2.
s it shows how Keaou was presuming on his : :

a is ws à d s i : xi Ay Rok the She-king, IL v. Ode III. 3,

. . d X = o Way —12.€. d :

d m ry Mag ps T: ii ee The ode is commonly understood to have been
1e way of Yaou and Shun, or genera o ; B i

cu. 5 ut ST written by the master of E-k‘ew (H. fq)
Cu, 3. EXPLANATION OF THE ODES SEAOU the son and heir-apparent of the emperor

Piwan Ax» Kiat Fung, DISSATISFACTION wirtu Yew (s.c. 780—770). Led away by the arts

A PARENT I8 NOT NECESSARILY UNFILIAL, 1. of a mistress, the emperor degraded K-kew

Pr. TI. Cu. HI.

=

E

D
ETA

[ d

-

SH%

RN

j

* REO
kaf

ul

HE

3E
is
b

iuo

dg

HE
N

“3

AFER

v

Smee
Š

A)
4

aN

se
N
M.

v
w

i
"

GENS
VS

JS

of

a

$

pigs

cd
"4

L d

DR

aS

2.
ing with the ede!

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

-

à ^
Hi] fi b
EK

IU

SEM
TEN
>
N 7

e
w
tr
er

u

v
e

uu

~

E

Naks

SEH
=

*&l9

Sled

ec

Ve

3t
iN

a
e

iG
SEE SEE

Xm
—
us
v

DRE
À

uU
AC
£5

n
E

V
4

Mencius answered, “How stupid was that old Kaou in deal-
There is a man here, and a native of Yué be . ls

his bow to shoot him., I will advise him not to do so, but speaking
calinly and smilingly ;—for no other reason but that he is not rela-
ted to me. But if-my own brother be bending his low to shoot the
man, then I will advise him not to do so, weeping and crying the

while;--for no other reason than that he is related to me.

The

dissatisfaction expressed in the Scaou-P‘wan is the working of rela-
tive affection, and. that affection shows benevolence. Stupid indeed

was old Kaou’s criticism on the ode.
Chow then said, “How is it that there is no dissatisfaction

3.
expressed in the K‘ae Fung?”

"

4, Mencius replied, “The parent’s fault referred to in the K‘ae

and his mother, and the ode expresses the sor-
row and dissatisfaction which the son could not
but feel in such cirenmstances. Chaou K'e,
however, assigns it another authorship, but on
this and other questions, connected with it,

see the She-king, in loc.- 2.
plained by Chaou K'e by I ‘narrow,’ and by
Choo He hy 3L nn xX 3f. * bigoted and
not penetrating. y ER ya] ae ^H
AJR XC here, th is to be under-

stood of the speaker or beholder, and ` t

Ü “is ex-

of his—the speaker's—brother, In i

eF the verb,) x. Sit par Nx x
Z refers to the shooter. s, read wan=
f. The paraphrast of Chaou Ke points,

(——— ''O'———

however, and understands differently—' Here is
is a man of Yué, who is about to be shot by
another man. I see it and advise the man not
to shoot, but coolly and smilingly, becuase I
am not related to the man of Yu, But if my
brother is about to be shot, -&c. This is inge-
nious, but not so apt to the subject of the
Seaou P'wan. When native scholars can con-
strue a passage so differently, we may besureit
is not very difinitely expressed. 3. gl >
—see the She-king, F iii, Ode VIE. The ode is
supposed to be the production of seven sons,
bewailing the conduct of their widowed mo-
ther, who could not live qnietly and chastely
at home, but they take all the blame to them-
selves, and express no dissatisfaction with her.

4. We must think there was room
enough for dissatisfaction in both cases. And
indeed, many commentators say that the re-
ceived account of the subject of the K‘ae Fung
must be wrong, or that Meucius’ decision on it

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

3

N
&

(Vee
MEDHEÉ

$

RME

RER AN

»
XM c
=F

Em
:
E
:
p

Nvv.
v)

T
Em

SONS
M
E

Haste

ad

SES NSSS *

Fung is small; that referred to in the Seaon P^van is great. Where
the parent’s fault was great, not to have murmured on account of
it would have increased the want of natural affection. Where the
parent's fault was small, to have murmured on account of it would
have been to act like water which frets and foams about a stone that
interrupts its course. To increase the want of natural affection would
have been unfilial, and to fret and foam in such a manner would
also have been unfilial.

5. “Confucius said, ‘Shun was indeed perfectly filial! And yet,
when he was fifty, he was full of longing desire about his parents.’”

CuaPrER IV. 1. Sung K‘ang being about to go to Ts'oo, Menci-
us met him in Shih-k'ew. —

2. “Master, where are you going?” asked Mencius.

3. Kang replied, “I have heard that Ts‘in and Ts‘oo are fight-
ing together, and I am going to see the king of Ts‘oo and persuade

‘him to cease hostilities.

is absurd, But here again, see the She-king,
in loc. fu Hie mores’ (if we had sucha verb)
‘the distance. The father’s act was unkind;

if the son responded to it with indifference, that

would increase the distance and alienation be-

tween them, E eS ri 3& 11, the three

characters a ups are to be taken together.

The mother is compared to a rock or stone in
a stream, and the sons to the water fretting

about it. But the case jn the text is one
where the children’s affections should flow on
undisturbed. 5. Comp. V. Pt. E i,

If he shall not be pleased with my advice,

Cn. 4. MENCIUS WARNINGS TO Suno K'ana
ON THE ERROR AND DANGER OF COUNSELLING
THE PRINCES FROM THE GROUND OF PROFIT, THE
PROPER GROUND BEING THAT OF BENEVOLENCE
AND RIGHTEOUSNESS. Comp.I. Pt. Li;et al.

1. K‘ang was one of the travelling scholars of
the times, who went from State to State, making

it their business to cdunsel Gin shwuy, up. 3d
tone) tlie princes, with a view for the most part,

though not apparently with him, to exalt them-
selves. Shih-k‘ew was in the State of Sung.

Here, and also in the next par., Z is the verb,

: —hh teraddi s
3. fi&c-hip FE,=‘crossing weapons,

Pr. Il. Ca. IV. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 908
^t z)
p4

R
My

iNSESORES

Lx
ow
ow

zb
=

y
ib
E

SRISS

-

mes
SN

[ d

CREE EH CERERI

wr
v

EA
NHR

Ld

EE:

B
eset TT SHES

SSH

BNO

u
Im

wed
a
NESW
RTO LOS RR

e

Set
Git

enr
1
r

xL
=

[ d

FH

ast

3j 25 ALAN A
E yJ BEV s vH AR

I shall go to see the king of Ts‘in, and persuade him in the same way.
Of the two kings I shall surely find that I can succeed with one of
them." ' j i

4, Mencius said, *I will not venture to ask about the particulars,
but I should like to hear the scope of your plan. What course will
you take to try to persuade them?” ‘ang answered, “I will tell -
them how unprofitable their course is to them." “Master,” said
Mencius, “your aim is great, but your argument is not good.

5. “Ifyou, starting from the point of profit, offer your persua-
sive counsels to the kings of Ts‘in and Ts‘oo, and if those kings are
pleased with the consideration of profit so as to stop the movements
of their armies, then all belonging to those armies will rejoice in
the -cessation of war, and find their pleasure in the pursuit of profit.
Ministers will serve their sovereign for the profit of which they
cherish the thought; sons will serve their fathers, and younger bro-
thers will serve their elder brothers, from the same consideration :—
and the issue will be, that, abandoning benevolence and righteousness,

SONGS

dca
nly

an
=
d

-

Ld
Sv
ww

eu

Ih

is
mds

BE xL— make an end of it,’ B3B see I. to the two States, Je take the word *argu-
Pt. IL xv. 3. 4, Aj out ‘if you'll allow ment’ from Julien, The gloss in the AN ti is

me. Then follows— not asking the particu- m H X K Z 4 Re, Be is. the
E

lars, I should like, &c. EZA- refers name and title of unprofitable? 5. =

rs 39

N
A

v
-

NASR

306 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK vr

E mA T o TE OV E

Jit, pr f^ D ^H Hi,
fal 5

egt
MT Shree

a>

Wi LX 44 NES
PE 5€ 4, - EE Se. i

ur
LT

AN MATEY
p

—
ar
hs
TEN
NS

(i
H
3
o
zl
Ne
C

SAT See TH

ae
wro
--
ma

ER

H
ys
ESERATT

x

LS
i

eh
SrA

D

$

ORSEENTT

A

v

DRE
$

v
v

 hs 3m WN ae uL,
sovereign and minister, father and son, younger brother and elder,
will carry on all their intercourse with this thought of profit cherished
in their breasts.’ But never has there been such a state of society,
without ruin being the result of it.

6. “If you, starting from the ground of benevolence and right-
eousness, offer your counsels to the kings of Ts‘in and Ts‘oo, and if
those kings are pleased with the consideration of benevolence and
righteousness so as to stop the operations of their armies, then all
belonging to those armies will rejoice in the stopping from war, and
find their pleasure in benevolence and righteousness. Ministers will -
serve their sovereign, cherishing the principles of benevolence and
righteousness ; sons will serve their fathers, and younger brothers
will serve their elder brothers, in the same way :—and so, sovereign
and minister, father and son, elder brother and younger, abandoning
the thought of profit, will cherish the principles of benevolence aid
righteousness, and carry on all their intercourse upon them. But
never has there been such a state of society, without the State where
it prevailed rising to imperial sway. Why must you use that word

39 ,

‘profit.
xp „— the multitudes of the three armies ; } Æ (low, 3d tone) pA ES Z AF —here the

see Con. Ana, VIT. x. + embraces both translation needs to be supplemented consider-

‘officers and soldiers’ 6, BR ifi XK ably.

Ci Serr
T

M

Se HO

M
wl

UBI
AER EE

i

»

=
Menn,

EN
Aa
i
=
E

307

Pr. II. Cu. V. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

w
v

4
em

um

si

P x .
ZB

=

REA

"EUR
=
J
F

\
y

w
e

E d

RUH
FERA

NR AE Mt
SENNA

HT H fH,
XE EH HIA
ZB AC Sh, ak, ESN EE Y

St

f JN xL 26.
fA xL BR, ke hk

CuaPrER V. 1. When Mencius was residing in Tsow, the younger
brother of the chief of Jin, who was guardian of Jin at the time,
paid his respects to him by a present of silks, which Mencius received,
. not going to acknowledge it. When he was sojourning in Ping-
luh, Ch'oo, who was prime minister of the State, sent him a similar
present, which he received in the same way.

2. Subsequently, going from Tsow to Jin, he visited the guar-
dian, but when he went from P'ing-luh to the capital of Ts‘e, he did
not visit the minister Ch‘oo. The disciple Uh-loo was glad, and
said, “I have got an opportunity to obtain some instruction.”

3. He asked accordingly, “ Master, when you went to Jin, you
visited the chief’s brother, and when you went to Ts‘e, you did not
visit Ch‘oo. Was it not because he is only the minister ? "

4. Mencius replied, “No. It is said in the Book of History, *In
. presenting an offering to a superior, most depends on the de-
monstrations of respect. If those demonstrations are not equal to

and in next par. fr. X ‘went to 'T's'e,"

i.e., to the capital of the State, as Ping-luh was

Cn. 5. How MENCIUS REGULATED HIMSELF
IN DIFFERENTLY ACKNOWLEDGING FAVOURS

WHICH HE RECEIVED, 1. zZ% ff and z%

below, look much as if the former were the
surname and name of the individual spoken of,

yet Chaou K‘e’s explanation of the terms, which
is that followed in the translation, is no doubt

correct. {f-,—see ch: i. u Dii D ,—see V.
rats RAR b BL ERE

sce IL Pt.ILvi.l, 2, The two 47 here,

in Ts‘e. JE keen, up. 3d tone. 3B (Uh-loo's

name) 15 f] - 3:8 453 FL Fi] [ii Wa d].
‘Ihave got an opportunity, (Ht. crevice) ‘to
aşk.’ 4. a FI see the Shoo-king, V.
xiv, 13, but iu the classic the last elause
ME OR x =F FB. is not explanatory

of the preceding, but is itself the first clause of

e
e

8 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VI,

y EE pe EE

A
rales”

er

k
E
a

E

NERAN
Sid

{
KEY

Eg TTC PH

Ld

S
EN

[ d
v

PELEWENKE >
Mc Se een

SHON NS RH

Lit
=
ae

SSA

X
=
NRK

dii

the things offered, we say there is no offering, that is, there is no act
of the will in presenting the offering.’

5. “This is because the things so offered do not constitute an
offering to a superior.”

6. Uh-loo was pleased, and when some one asked him what
Mencius meant, he said, “The younger of Jin could not go to Tsow,
but the minister Ch‘oo might have gone to P‘ing-luh.

CnarrER VI. 1. Shun-yu K‘win said, “He who makes fame
and meritorious services his first objects, acts with a regard to others.
He who makes them only secondary objects, acts with a regard to
himself. You, master, were ranked among the three chief ministers
Of the State, but before your fame and services had reached either to
the prince or the people, you have left your place. Is this indeed
the way of the benevolent?”

2. Menciús replied, “There was Pih-e ;—he abode in an inferior
a new sentence. See the Shoo-king, i Joc. 5.

'U'his is Mencius’ explanation of the passage
quoted. 6. ‘Fhe guardian of a State could

to others, ie, such a man’s motive in public

life is to benefit others. E d sg a.

hot leave it to pay a visit in another. There
‘wag no reason, however, why Ch‘oo should not
have paid his respects-to Mencius in person.
Ca. 6. How MENCIUS REPLIED TÓ THE IN-
SiNUATIONS or Suux-xu K'WAN, CONDEMNING
HIM FOR LEAVINN OFFICE WITHOUT ACCOMPLISH-
ING ANY THING, 1. Shun.yu K*wiün,—see
IV. Pt. I. xvii. That chapter and the notes
should be read along with this, p A and = are
not here opposed to each other, as often,—
Sname’ and ‘reality’ The ‘name’ here is the
fame of the ‘reality? Te A

,- witha regard

‘with a regard to himself, 4e. such a man’s
motive is to cultivate his own good and excel-

Tence, E refers to the prince ; aS refers to

the people. Heit is assumed that the

fact of Mencius’ being among the high minis-
ters of the State took him out of the category
of those who made themselves their aim in life,

and the t£ E therefore is a hit of the ques-

tioner. Throughout the ch., has perhaps

more the idea of perfect virtue, free from all
selfishness, than'of benevolence. 2. Pih-e,

Pr. II. Ca. VI. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 09

a
Re

\
"

=
SB UE

T

=

c
= ?
=

e

=
TOE
HST

aw
P

p

z
ee

CA
P4

Fred

D^
EE

WES ESE

ANa

e

TIA

“RUO

HR
KAE

m
WE
e
dh

"REO
“ea
e

S

BRT
ak

[ d

V
"

Ru
EE:

By
=e

RN

“8 [EEE
Tee

v

+S
E

A

m
iS
mS

i
;

SVS

i
>
4

H

x

d

Ne

PETS
sx

s

d>

4 t fi Be, fip. Y 2

situation, and would not, with his virtue, serve a ine. prince.
There was E Yin ;—he five times went to T'ang, and five times went
to Kéé. There was Hwuy of Lew-hea;—he did not disdain to
serve a vile prince, nor did he decline a small office. The courses
pursued by those three worthies were different, but their aim was
one. And what was their one aim? We must answer—‘To be
perfectly virtuous.’ And so it is simply after this that superior men
strive. Why must they all pursue the same course? "

8. Kwan pursued, “In the time of the duke Mth of Loo, the
government was in the hands of Kung-e, while Tsze-lew and Tsze-
sze were ministers. And yet, the dismemberment of Loo then in-
creased exceedingly. Such was the case, a specimen how your men
of virtue are of no advantage to a kingdom!”

4. Mencius seid, “ The prince of Yu did not use Pih-le He, and '
thereby lost his State. The duke Muh of Ts‘in used him, and became

S
AIS

AA ;

&c., see V. Pt. II. i, with the other references
there given, That E Yin went five times to
Tang, aud five times to Kéé is only mentioned
here, however.
in consequence of the pressing urgency of his
solicitations, and then T'ang sent him to the
tyrant to warn and advise him. Nothing
could be farther at first from the wish of

them both than to dethrone Kéé, 2.) — to

run,’ used figuratively, up. 3d tone. 3. In
this par., K^wàn advances in his condemnation
of Mencius. At first he charged him with haying

He went to T'ang, it is said,

left his office before he had accomplished any
thing. Here'he insinuates that tho’ he. had
remained, he-would not have served the State.
Tsze-lew is the Séé Lew of II. Pt. IL. xi; comp.

that ch, with this, Kung-e (named fio was

prime-minister of Loo, a man of merit and
principle. Mencius might have denied the fact
alleged by K‘w4n, of the increased dismember-
ment of Loo under duke Muh. 4. Pih-le

He,—see V, Pt. I. ix. Hi: pa FA the

‘using ’ means following the minister’s counsels

*

BOOB vi.

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

m
©

3

gv

Aa

te
im
E:
(eats

NS
-

s

WY
Hits
E

MN
=

Ld
SER
E zu

SUN

tr
k

fang

E
t

Nee Ell
Lu

ES See
SSRIS A

à

N
A
J

EA
EE

e.

4 edi
"
CEN
=

SENS SESE
zh
» l
i
q
Sz]

mahal
om

e
I
ot
*.
t
z
v

SAC
=
us is

v
y

8
, T
=

bul
Dui

i

JIAN
Aber pu
E
zt

5
n
EX
x

Lm d

chief of all the princes. Ruin is the consequence of not employing
men of virtue and talents;-—how can it rest with dismemberment
merely ? " -

5. Kwan urged again, “Formerly, when Wang P'aou dwelt
on the K‘e,.the people on the west of the Yellow River all became
skilful at singing in his abrupt manner. When Méen K*eu lived in
Kaou-t‘ang, the people in the parts of Ts‘e on the west became skil-
ful at singing in Ais prolonged manner. The wives of Hwa Chow
and Ke Leang bewailed their husbands so skilfully, that they chan-
ged the manners of the State. When there is the gift within, it
manifests itself without. I have never seen the man who could do
the deeds of a worthy, and did not realize the work of one. There-
fore there are now no men of talents and virtue. If there were, I
should know them,” f

6. Mencius answered, “When Confucius was chief minister of
Justice in Loo, the prince came not to follow his counsels. Soon
after was the solstetial sacrifice, and when a part of the flesh presented

and plans. Bi 48r BY 48 Bd Clow, 1st tone), of Ts‘e denotes all about the western borders of

bef A x «zg the State? How Hwa (up. 3d tone.) and Ke
~~betore i} we must understand 3kE— Leang were officers slain in battle, whose wives
you seek for dismemberment merely, as the bewailed their loss in so pitiful a manner, as to
consequence,’ &c. 5. The individuals named affect the whole State. ‘Their cries, it is said,
here all belonged to Ts‘e, excepting the first, even rent the wall of the capital of Ts‘e. See

who was of Wei, FIK is the general name for the $f 278 and the [Jl] SEE HE fs Bit, in

thi
inoi E i 1 loc.—The object of K^wün is simply to insinu-
9. za 2 F
SA and Rib a partieular style, said to be ate that Mencius was a Science for that
4 , ‘short,’ ‘abrupt.’ d it is said, wherever ability was, it was sure to come
Lu =x”. out. 6. Mencius shields himself behind
jt 45 7 py E mnm EP? he» ‘The Right mfucius, implying that he was beyond the

‘Pr. I. Ca. VI—VII,

i

m
(NP

SNP ENS

:

st

js

f

Ud

ull
DK

By)

Ld
v

ü ui

ae NAPE PSE

path
ima
4
ES RH LIT

2x
ceu
DUE

[d

i

—

H Hi, Q ;

ae
doy”
sa

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

7

“NE

E
SNR

We ERIL A Ts
A fa T AA

SEE
DERZ
Sees

ERD

e

ze y APR
T
BH AY

A
=

Lz
FT
SUIS

EN
2

w
wv

y

GREE BRIE

in sacrifice was not sent to him, he went away even without takin
off his cap of ceremony. Those who did not know him suppose
it was on account of the flesh. Those who knew him supposed that
it was on account of the neglect of the usual ceremony. The fact was,
that Confucius wanted to go away on occasion of some small offence,

AS y

V
4

not wishing to do so without some apparent cause.

All men may

not be expected to understand the conduct of a superior man."

Cuaprer VII.

1. Mencius said, “The five chiefs of the princes

were sinners against the three kings. The princes of the present

day are sinners against the five chiefs.

The great officers of the pre-

sent day are sinners against the princes.

2.

“The emperor visited the princes, which was called ‘A tour

of inspection.’ The princes attended at the court of the emperor,

knowledge of K‘win.—The state of ‘T's‘e,
afraid of the influence of Confucius, who was
acting as prime minister of Loo, sent to the
duke a present of beautiful singing girls and
horses. The duke accepted.them, and abandon-
ed himself to dissipation. Confucius determined
to leave the State, but not wishing to expose the
bad conduct of his prince, looked about for
some other reason which he might assign for
going away, and found it in the matter men-

tioned, The 2 is the E aK. Tib. —used for

Pu
wi! Jl
away.

Cu. T. THE PROGRESS AND MANNER OF DE-
GENERACY FROM THE THREE KINGS TO THE FIVE
CHIEFS OF THE PRINCES, AND FROM TUE FIVE
CHIEFS TO THE PRINCES AND OFFICERS OF MEN-
CIUS' TIME. - 1.. The ‘three kings’ are the
founders of the three dynasties of Hea, Shang,
and Chow. The ‘five chiefs of the princes*
were the duke Hwan of Ts‘e (nm.c. 684—642), '

s—‘to do a disorderly going

the duke Win of Tsin (635—627), the duke,
Muh of Ts‘in (659—620), the duke Seang of
Sung (650—636) and the king Chwang of
Ts‘oo (613—590). There are two enumera-
tions of the ‘five leading princes,’ one called

= £e x E {E or chiefs of the three
dynasties, and the other d Tk x 3i. sich

or chiefs of the Ch‘un-ts‘ew. Only Hwan of
Ts‘e, and Wan of Tsin are common to the
two, But Mencius is speaking only of those
included in the second enumeration, and though -
there is some difference of opinion in regard to
some of the individuals in it, the above list
is probably that which he held. ‘Sinners
against,’—z.¢c. violating their principles and

ways, 2. KF IH Nyy see I. Pt. 1I,
iv. B. l R= BA: see E, Pt. I. vii. 16, 18 BE

os
T
tz

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VI.

n
Sie
Ms

zm
zz
ER

RE
JOS HOM RES HES)
E FA

= E

EE su

DES
E
m

nen
2S RRR Se!

ad

3
NS

"mn

3
2

x
E
aae
v

v
d
v

"
ON

=
ESR

v

Arni
JV

245
a
tomy
xt

ow

A

zm
peas!
MP
gu
SI
acm
Ms
=

oa

:
quc

"m
v E
NÈ
3

ne
Ù

ʻi
3e
E

-

NHN EE
mll
cnr
2

— Hi
—— P

ER
IE
TEM

ERN

~
=

which was called ‘Giving a report of office It was a custom in
the spring to examine the ploughing, and supply any deficiency of
seed, and in autumn to examine the reaping, nd assist where there
was a deficiency of the crop. When the emperor entered the boundaries
of a State, if the new ground was being reclaimed, and the old fields
well cultivated ; if the old were nourished and the worthy honoured ;
and if men of distinguished talents were placed in office: then the
prince was rewarded,—rewarded with an addition to his territory.
On the other hand, if, on entering a State, the ground was found left
wild or overrun with weeds; if the old were neglected and the worthy
unhonoured ; and if the offices were filled with hard tax-gatherers :
then the prince was reprimanded. If a prince once omitted his at-
' tendance at court, he was punished by degradation of rank; if he
did so a second time, he was deprived of a portion of his territory ;
if he did so a third time, the imperial forces were set in motion, and
he was removed from his government. Thus the emperor com-
manded the punishment, but did not himself inflict it, while the
princes inflicted the punishment, but did not command it. The five

dE fps UL. Pt. Lv, n ERATES ce HE. KS BB CH. see Con, Ana. VIL
ward, JE LA Bx fü > “impost-col- x. JE =‘in harmony with these things,’
lecting minister's ;’ literally, perhaps, ‘grasping all power being lodged with the emperor, and

and able men,’ Down to EA is explicatory the princes being dependent on him. Sj-Y5
of Eid FF. What follows belongs to pit ‘to superintend, or order, punishment y 4X

Pe tE Cus OF MENCIU
TIL Cit, Vit, THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

AE
EREN
D&E
K
PR
a

Ld

`
ve
æ
[d

-
an

Hm
SNR

AS
ERESI

MIN}
SÈ
PER
A
uj
ER

A
zum
=

g
*-
tw.
w
ad
Q
f
v

SE

e

Wis
EN
a
i

ND
SSL
IÈ
DY
m

=

Ld
Ld
a
te
T y.
v

SRG:
Pr Rad

ay
bu
SR stupid
en
xa

Eu
IET
=>
Ws
a
=
b
NH

a
©
vi
v
w
*-
w
v

j IREF
Tm a ELTE ELA

chiefs, however, dragged the princes to punish other princes, and hence
I say that they were sinners against the three kings.

3. “Of the five chiefs the most powerful was the cuke Hwan. At
the assembly of the princes in K4vei-k‘ew, he bound the victim and
placed the iunge aren it, but did not slay it to smear their mouths
with the blood. "The first injunction in their agreement was,‘ Sla
the unfilial ; change not the son who has been appointed heir; exalt
not a concubine to the rank of wife. The second was,—‘ Honour
the worthy, and maintain the talented, to give distinction to the vir-
tuous.’ The third was, Respect the old, and be kind to the young,
Be not forgetful of strangers and travellers.’ The fourth was,—
* Let not offices be hereditary, nor let officers be pluralists. In the
selection of officers let the object be to get the proper men. Let
not a ruler take it on himself to put to death a great officer. The

‘to inflict the punishment.’ 3. The duke thë whole covered up, This was. called BX
Hwan nine times brought together an assembly 1 z in I h x
of the princes, the chief gathering being at! TE See the jk fey Oc On the occa-
R^wei-k'ew, n.c. 650. At those meetings. the usual sion in the text, Hwan dispensed with some
custom was first to dig a square pit, over which $e ceremonies. e was erm

the victim was slain. Its left ear was cut off, ot tbo i ^ a was the t appro
and its blood received in an ornamented vessel. Priated to the articles of agreement a£ such
“The president then read the articles of agree- solemn assemblies, indicating that they were en-
ment, with his face to the north, as in the joined by the emperor. Bij. the son who
-presence of the spirits of the sun and moon, :
after which ail the members of the meeting
took the blood, and smeared the sides of their officers from other countries, -+EH B.

mouths with it. This was called ak (shih) —‘ officers no hereditary offices ; see I. Pt. IL v,

fr The victim was then placed in the pit, 3. IKE DA fa $8 3t A- ES

the articles of agreement placed upon it, and Hh 5722 no crooked embankments,’ ill has

has been tree-ed,’ de, set up. ,—' guests,"
p.

49

914 HE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

BOOK VI,
PA 2 E
[x Peu A

Noe
MRN

T

[ d

DH

Avy
[v

(‘SE HI
"

NP OR

v

oe
ER
a
=
PS HEINE S

v
v

ES FE

{
‘oy
v

BR
ESENS

TENS

[ d

E
D

Ad
Au

o
Ld
Tv
À D R

3T

na

[ d

Jovi

O

(NE

f
k

E

— Follow no,crooked policy in making embankments. Im-
pose no restrictions on the sale of grain. Let there be no promotions
without first announcing them to the emperor. Tt was then said, ‘AN
we who have united in this agreement shall hereafter maintain ami-
cable relations. The princes of the present day all violate these
five prohibitions, and therefore I say that the princes of the pre-
sent day are sinners against the five chicfs.

4, “The crime of hin who connives at, and aids, the wickedness
of his prince is small, but the crime of him who anticipates and
excites that. wickedness is great. The officers of the present day all
go to meet their sovereigns’ wickedness, and therefore I say that the
great officers of the present day are sinners against the princes.”

Cuaprer VHI. The prince of Loo wanted to make the minister
Shin commander Be his ar my.

nd

Un

RN

fifth was,

a moral application. No embankments must be
made selfishly to take the water from others,

or to inundate them. HE X tdo not

aud
ETE E
repress thé sale of grain, e. tà other states in
famine or distress. Bl — appointments. to

territory or to office, 234 xA Se

— to lengthen the suas of the raler,’ ùe. a

to connive at and to aid it. iH Hu OB E
—-' to meet the wic kedness of the ruler,’ &e., to

&uticipate and excite it.

Cu. 8. MENCIUS’ OPPOSITION "TO THE WAR-
LIKE AMBITION OF THE PRINCE OF Loo AND HIS
MINISTER Sui KuH-Lg.
Loo wanted to take advantage of diffieulties in
‘Tee, and get possession of Nan-yaug. That

l. At this time’

was the name of the region on the South of
mount 'P*ae, which had originally belonged to
 Loo. On the north of the mountain was the
territory of Tsʻ‘e. Between the two States
there had been frequent struggics for the dis-

trict, which the duke Ping of Loo ( AN>

now hoped to recover. Shin, below, calls himself
Kih-le, but some say that that was the nime of
a Mihist under whom he had studied. His pro-

per name was Taon (lp. He was a native of

, and not of Loo, but having a reputation
for military skill the duke of Loo wished to
employ his services, Hey. H, now the com-

mon term for general, appears to have come
inte vogue, about Mencius time. In the text

: ASHES

Pr, II Cu. VILL THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 315

i

HE
"A

S

`
Ae€—

ww
ow.
æ”

“RHO
fie

I

CRSS

SEU Ca
PA
TRN

ow

SVE
Yas

ETSEN

EDO
M
oS

IRE
Ea

a

SERN M

N
4

i

dr
P

SEOs}

t
E

v

LËNIA
rel

PAS
4
x
>
Ld
w^

iy

uum
EIL
T

mie

Eni. :
ASHEN Ao

oa
a,

Mu
SNE

im

Wf

3
yp
$i

v

NSS

RE
i
E

ACE.

xim

EW
pbs ae (NSS

ee
AS
E

5

LE
Mencius said, “To employ an uninstructed people in war may
be said to be destroying the people. A destroyer of the people:
would not have been tolerated in the times of Yaou and Shun.

8. “Though by a single battle you should subdue Ts‘e, and get
possession of Nan-yang, the thing ought not to be done."

4. . Shin changed countenance, and said in displeasure, * This is
what I, Küh-le, do not understand." ,

5. Mencius said, “I will lay the case plainly before you. The-
territory appropriated to the emperor is 1,000 le square. Without a.
thousand le, he would not have sufficient for his entertainment of
the princes. The territory appropriated to a How is 100 le square.
Without 100,le, he would not have sufficient wherewith to observe
the statutes kept in his ancestral temple.

6. "When Chow-kung was invested with the principality of Loo,
it was a hundred le square. * The territory was indeed enough, but
it was not more than 100 le. When T'ae-kung was invested with
the principality of Ts‘e, it was 100 le square. The territory was
indeed enough, but it was not more than 100 le.

a

jt—' commander-in-chief.' 2. Comp. Con. $E — the statute-records of the ancestral tem-
Ana, XIII. xxx.—We may infer from this par., ple" Those records prescribed every thifig to

that Shin had himself been the adviser of the he oberved in the publie sacrifices, interviews
with other princes. &e.. and were kept in the

" : "E : " T "u
projected enterprise, 5. 7 Ja x Hu ` temple. - § Comp. Con. Ana. VE xxii.

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS, BOOK VI.

(PST

el

bed
v

Bhd
aE

Hm ^

e

Stan
Ea
TRI

ul
EK

ANAS
PE

TEE

(vr

EE
Seen

.-

Sur

=

tf

zii
hui:

Nel

T
SF

HSN ES

~
[d

eMe
Au
ze

a

SSR

v
e

Jub i

v

a
YYTE = se

v

Nan it

s

peu
DHSS SEIS;

č

n
HEL ES

Ap

7, “Now Loo is five times 100 le square. If a true imperial ruler
were to arise, whether do you think that Loo would be diminished
or increased by him? l

8. “Jfit were merely taking the place from the one State to give
it to the other, a benevolent man would not do it ;—how much less
will he do so, when the end is to be sought by the slaughter of men!

9. “The way in which a superior man. serves his prince con-
templates simply the leadiug him in the right path, and directing
his mind to benevolence.”

Cuapter IX. 1. Mencius said, “Those who now-a-days serve
their sovereigns say, ‘We can for our sovereign enlarge the limits
of the cultivated ground, and fill his treasuries and arsenals.’ Such
persons are now-a-days called ‘Good ministers,’ but anciently they
were called ‘Robbers of the people,’ If a sovereign follows not the

8. E~ mere-

ly,’ ce, if there were no struggle and no slaugh-
3. Aid here is quite
difft. from the phrase d ES. in II, Pt. I. i, 1.

Cu. 9. How THE MINISTERS OF MyNcIUS'

=
a
HH

zb
GG

o i9)

a, —‘ Sparingly,’=only, + Hp —it is to be understood that this was
to be done, at the expense of the people, taking
their eommons from them, and making them
labour. Otherwise, it does not seem objection-

‘able.—Chaou K'e however, gives the phrase an-

other meaning, making it— 4 2^ I]. *appro-

ter in the matter,

IME PANDERED TO THEIR SOVEREIGNS’ THIRST
IR
FOR WEALTH AND POWER, 1, FERR

priate small States, but this is contrary to ana»
jogous passages, and confounds this par. with

317

pr I. Cu. EX.—X. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

>
a

xm
m

:

mu
FE

\

aS ee

zu
Pa Sa

D
CEE RS

= a.
i
>E

BUO
re

EA
Hr
ZR

E
SR
E:

}

^
"S a Yt «mH WW Z Lm
EY LAR SUSCI
Fo KE BEWEER
Z, P, A

ux
= c St
Ne

a
w
v
w

ih
oh ARM
N

ES

ES
Gu

H,
right way, nor has his mind bent on benevolence, to seek to enrich
him is to enrich a Kd.

2. “Or they will say, ‘We can for our sovereign form, alliances
with other states, so that our battles must be suecessful! Such

' persons are now-a-days called ‘Good ministers,’ but anciently they
were called ‘Robbers of the people. If a sovereign follows not the
right way, nor has his mind directed to benevolence, to seek to
enrich him is to enrich a Keéé,

8. “Although a prince, pursuing the path of the present day, and
not changing its practices, were to have the empire given to him,
he could not retain it for a single morning." C23

Cuaprer X, 1. Pih Kwei said, “I want to take a twentieth of
the produce only as the tax. What do you think of it?”

2. Mencius said, * Your way would be that of the Mih,

the next; compare IV. Pt. I. xv. i 2, X^
Ba fx. — ally with other States. Here Chaou
wan

K'e differs again, making X^] - HB. ‘to deter-

umb
(SG

styled Tan (see next ch.), was a man of Chow,
ascetic in his own habits, and fond of innova-
tions. Hence the suggestion in this chapter.—
So, Chaou K'e, and Choo He has followed him.

The author of the yy zE THE Er at. how-

mine beforehand,’ ‘undertake,’ and joining fü

Ims] ig, ‘undertake in fighting with hostile
countries to conquer.’ This also is an inferior

construction, 3. BH -8H EE

ri. ays ;
4j , ‘occupy the position for a morning,’

.Cu. 10. Ax ORDERED STATE CAN ONLY SUB-
SIST WITH A PROPER SYSTEM OF TAXATION, AND
THAT ORIGINATING WITH YAOU AND SHUN Is
THE PROPER ONE FOR CHINA.

L Pj Kwei,

ever, coutends that the Pih Kwei, described.as
above, on the authority of the * Historical Re-
cords, Jj fii. lxix, was not the same here

intreduged, See that Work, im foc, 2. $4 i

or was a common name for the barbarous
tribes on the north. They were a pastoral
people, and the climate of their country was
cold. No doubt their civilization was inferior

"

BOOK VI.

218 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.
xi du dn — (x SK 4 3d
AGB KEA T We EE Tn Ath,
Af yw m e Be
34 OP SEAM — X8 ox S nog
re HAL iit a JBL AE, as
A FE AIG SE ME A> Be,
E LEONE ES

PENI

y
D

VEREN
THS

EJER]

nj E ^N d 2> "A ,
x vL nj Bis s Bk. nj

3. “In a country of ten thousand families, would it do to have
only one potter?” Awei replied, “No. The vessels would not be
enough to use.”

4. Mencius went on, “In Mih all the five kinds of grain are not
grown; it only produces the millet. There are no fortified cities,
no edifices, ne ancestral temples, no ceremonies of sacrifice; there
are no princes requiring presents and entertainments; there is no
system of officers with their various subordinates. On these accounts
a tax of one twentieth of the produce is sufficient there.

5. “ But now it is the Middle kingdom that we live in. To banish
the relationships of men, and have no superior men ;—how can such
a state of things be thought of?

6. “ With but few potters a kingdom cannot subsist ;—how much

less can it subsist without men of a higher rank than others?

7. “If we wish to make the taxation ligher than the system of
Yaou and Shun, we shall just have a great Mih and a small Mih.

to that of China, but Mencius’ aecount of them
must be taken with allowance, 4. UE 5p
—see II, Pt. II, i, 2. E E: go together as

' a general designation of edifices, called ü as

*four-walled and roofed, and ES iD as

, ‘furnished,’ So Bs mE go together as synony-

M :
mous, and also Bie Bi , *pieces of silk, given as
presents.’ zi E —‘the morning meal; yí.—
‘the evening meal? together=-‘ entertainments.

5, 6. 3 FF —reterring to the BH B,

-H] 3 7. The meaning is, that, under
such systems, China would become in the one
case a copy of the Mih, and in the other of its
state under the tyrant Kc.

Pr. IL Ca, X.—XIII. - THE WORKS OF MENCIUS, 319

!

[3 Se - thy =
CERERII
2 BH GY d

T NENG

ov

NEEN T
SE

er
-

i
RRNTT

br
"

©
v

in
SNET RID
SPAREN St

zu

!
j

vi

ST NB
E

eus
iE np
ARS
a

PNAS

N4
7

D
ERE MSN

AETR

t

AEA
5

ge

ity
p
3

o

»
FS

If we wish to make it heavier, we shall just have the great Kéé and
the small Kee.”

CHAPTER XI. 1, Pih Kwei said, ^ My management of the wa- .
ters is superior to that of Yu."

9. Mencius replied, “You are wrong, Sir. Yu’s regulation of
the waters was according to the laws of water.

3. “He therefore made the four seas their receptacle, while you
make the neighbouring States their receptale.

4. “Water flowing out of its ehannels is called an inundation.
Inundating waters are a vast waste of water, and what a benevolent
man detests. You are wrong, my good Sir."

Craprer XII. Mencius said, “If a scholar have not faith, how
shall he take a firm hold of things?”

CuarrER XIM. 1. Fhe prince of Loo wanting to commit the
administration of his government to the disciple Yó-ching, Mencius
said, “ When I heard of it, I was so glad that I could not sleep.”

Cu. 4i. Pan Kwer’s PRESUMPTUOUS IDEA
THAT HE COULD REGULATE THE WATERS BETTER
THAN Yu pip. 1. There had been some
partial inundations, where the services of Pih
X wei were called in, and he had reduced them
by turning the waters into other States, saving
one at the expense of injuring others. 2.

KZB=WAK CPE 4 Seo UL.

Pt. IT. ix. 8, but pis IK hag there a particular
application.
Cu. 12.
FIRMNESS IN ACTION, ae

FAITH IN PRINCIPLES NECES SARY TO

oy
used as B Choo

TN a

He explains it by E
Cn. 13. Or WHAT IMPORTANCE TO A MINIS-
TER—TO GOVERNMENT—IT IS TO LOVE WHAT I8

GOOD. 1, y Bp to administer the

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VI

n

NIST
ul
[zi-
>
nae,

3
ih AE QU Ts 35 A
Jh AL TE Nu Apre 4

E

x
EENN

Q

ot TT Se
STA

\
4
9

3

NE-AR H

WX

(LN

za

hn

gA
r;

E>
z

DX
e

A JA zn sie HL AP (E

2. Kung-sun Ch'ow asked, “Is Yó-ching a man of vigour?” and
was answered, * No." “Is he wise in council?” “No.” “Is he
possessed of much information?” “No” .

.8. “What then made you so glad that you could not sleep?”

4. ‘He is a man who loves what is good.”

5. “Is the love of what is good sufficient ?”

6. “The love of what is good is more than a sufficient qualifi-
cation for the government of the empire ;—how much more is it so
for the state of Loo!

7. “Ifa minister love what is good, all within the four seas will
count 1,000 le but a small distance, and will come and lay their good
thoughts before him. .

8. “Ifhe do not love what is good, men will say, ‘How self-
conceited he looks? He is saying to himself, I know it. The lan-
guage and looks of that self-conceit will. keep men off at a distance
of 1,000 le. When good men stop 1,000 le off, calumniators, flatter-
ers, and sycophants, will make their appearance. When a minister

government,’ asin ch, vi 8. . 2 AG An administratiom of govt. the most excellent
is Ff is in the low, 3d tone ;—<‘has he quality is without prejudice and dispassivnately
pes,

wisdom‘ and deliberation ?'——The three gifts C Hb to receive what is good, Now in

mentioned here were those considered most im-
portant to goverument in that age, and Kung-
sun Ch‘ow knowing Yó-chiug to be deficient in
them, put his questions accordingly, 4.

On this par. it is said in the [T itg :— In the

regard to all good words and good actions, Yó-
ching in his heart sincerely loves them.’ .

PI.
is what is simply sufficient, f is what

"rr

is sufficient and more.

Pr IL Cu XIIL—XIV. ^ THE WORKS. OF MENCIUS.

VA Me SEAT =U A Th a

[9]
1
mi
-

o

FE

ENHI
HSN REEN

N.
E

i

—

m. md JH M
MAA AA tH

lives among calumniators, flatterers, and sycophants, though he may
wish the State to be well governed, is it possible for it to be so?”

Cuarren XIV. 1. The disciple Ch‘in said, * What were the prin-
ciples on which superior men of old took office?" Mencius replied,
“There were three cases in which they accepted office, and three in
which they left it.

2. “If received with the utmost respect and all polite obser-
vances, and they could say to themselves that the prince would carry
their words into practice, then they took office vidi him. Afterwards,
although there might be no remission in the polite demeanour of
the prince, if their words were not carried into practice, they would
leave him. n

3. “The second case was that in which, though the prince could
not be expected at once to carry their words into practice, yet being
received by him with the utmost respéct, they took office with him.
But afterwards, if there was a remission in his polite demeanour, they
would leave him. -

SSN
bs

S

S
Sa

Gefined by Choo He, is— É Æ EE m, Fe place. 1. The Ch‘in is the Chin Tsin, IT.
Wy 35 S I Pi, ‘the a ance of being Pt IL. iii 2. MJ] is simply Be fS, not
$ E , ppearance o ing RE p

*4ogoeuttomeet? 3. mit X 1T 4 =
LX

satisfied with one's own kuowledge, and having

no relish for good words.’ E :

Cu. 14. GROUNDS OF TAKING AND LEAVING
OFFICE. Comp. V. Pt. IL iv. The: three cases
mentioned here are respectively the TT nf

x TE the [x E aud the PAS pc of that

.

js to be understood as thought in the scholar's

mind, corresponding to FF TET d = in

zip, 078 A
the prec. par. In the H nig indeed, the
there is made to be the language of the ruler,

but see the gloss of the qi] Fy, in loc. 4,

=
=
==

£l

422 THE WORKS*OF MENCIUS. BOOK VI.

SS
Bll
i

1
SI
(Ndi

Sh TESA RM

ie]

SNEEN

sty

Nm,

pid
M

BU

meet
TAs Meh

e

iN SERS
XM

P i-e

ZN
dac

-

~

=
SESE

xl
ot
D
iv
m

eu
DE

b

“o>

ORT TNE
SAFED IN

m

TENBA
NES

\
/

[zx
E
>

è

4. “The last case was that of the superior man who had nothing
to eat, either morning or evening, and was so famished that he could
not move out of his door. Ifthe prince, on hearing of his state,
said, ‘I must fail in the great point, —that of carrying his doctrines
into practice, neither am I able to follow his words, but I am
ashamed to allow him to die of want in my country. The assistance
offered in such a case might be received, but not beyond what was
sufficient to avert death." `

Cusaprer XV. 1, Mencius said, “Shun rose from among the
channeled fields. Foo Yué was called to office from the midst of
his building frames; Kaou-kih from his fish and salt; Kwan E-woo
from the hands of his gaoler; Sun-shuh Gaou from his hiding by the
sea-shore ; and Pih-le He from the market-place.

.
"The assistance is in the shape of employment the surname was given in the dream as 13. and

offered, If not, then pa Hy pa would not the name as M. Kaou-kih is mentioned II.

e t " A . . >
be a case of Kit A Pt. I. i. 8, where it is said in the notes that his
Cn 13. Teiars AND HARDSHIPS tue way in Worth, when living in retirement, was discovered
WHICH HEAVEN PREPARES MEN FOR GREAT SER- edt d on Wins i AORA » bg a d
VICES. 1. With Shun, Kwan E-woo, and Pih- 8355 3 ^ se z was-rase

le He, the student must be familiar. Foo Yuă%, D a the a d feithfy o ia oi
— see the Shoo-king, Pt. IV, Bk. vii, where it UNESE CONS 11 s 2 DUNS wa acu
ic related that theenmnaror Kaouenn havi was prime minister to Ch wang of Tsʻon, the
is related that the emperor Kaou g having last of the five chiefs of the princes. So much

‘dreamt that God gave him a good assistant,’ is beyond dispute, but the circumstances of his
enused a picture of the man he had seen in his elevation, and the family to which he belonged,

t

‘dream to be made, and ‘search made for him are uncertain. See the p4 EPER EUR in loc.

through the empire, when he was found dwell-
hrough the empire, e R wi hu S — planks and building. Most of the

Sa Ser X
ing in the wilderness of Foo-yen 18 x X :
i š ] f yen ( ` B Z houses in China are built of earth and mortar
EION In the ‘Historical Records,’ it is said beaten together within a moveable frame, in

Pr. IL Cs. XV. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

e

SENS > BERN
SPR HEHEHE S

md

e)

NU

emmy
ca
C4

v

*rr
zz
HREH

a
b
ww
y
NV
4

1 BRO
EE

V.
Ld
w

pR NA

4%

Fu Wik AME, HE di di H
A: fad Hu) Be Be, FE r ye
Wk Jb dit Te pj Bp Ze,
ie HE Ye 6 R xp Ze

2. “Thus, when Heaven is about to confer a great office on any
man, it first exercises his mind with suffering, and. his sinews and
bones with toil. It exposes his body to hunger, and subjects him
to extreme poverty. It confounds his undertakings. By all these
methods it stimulates his mind, hardens his nature, and supplies his
incompetencies.

3. “Men for the most part err, and are afterwards able to re-
form. They are distressed in mind and perplexed in their thoughts,
and then they arise te vigorous reformation. When things have
been evidenced in men’s looks, and set forth in their words, then
they understand them.

4, “Ifa prince have not about his court families attached to the
laws and worthy counsellors, and if abroad there are not hostile
States or other external calamities, his kingdom will generally come
to ruin. ;

5. “From these things we see how life springs from sorrow and

‘calamity, and death from ease and pleasure."

which the walls are formed. $A -P,—-- i
the officer who was in charge of him. 2.

fk H ae JE, —‘hunger his members and
skin,’ Z x E Ey empty his person.'

TY Hh. x D as to his doings, confound
" . — 2e —
what he is doing." 1T is taken as 1T% and

Ja as YY Br Er fa fi, —used for Kg.

8. The same thing holds true of ordinary

men, Theyare improved by difficulties, ij,
th 4 S TET i
used for Js. (4 RÉ Zy Zy the mean-
ing is, that, though most men are not quick of
apprehension, yet when things are clearly before
them, they ean lay hold of them. 4, The
n : Mb
sme thing is true abe State. xk Ae ydaw
families,’ če., old families to whom the laws of
SR d
the State are familiar and dear. , yh is used for

Uff. Such families and officers will stimulate

*

824

Ah
Uu x
CHAPTER. p. 2

ing
ing.

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

ut, f 4

Mencius said, “ There are many arts in teach-
I refuse, as inconsistent with my character, to teach a man,

BOOK VIL

bnt I am only thereby still teaching him.”

the prince’s mind by their lessons and remon-
strances, and foreign danger will rouse him to
carefulness and exertion.

Cu. 16. How A REFUSAL TO TEACH MAY BE

` TRACING, The JR in IRR is not without

ees

its force, but we can py express it in a

translation. . T pa If x He dT
pa JB Zt a Eh A The GG carries us on

to the next clause for an explanation of what
has been said.

BOOK VII.

“TSIN SIN. PARTI

CHAPTER I. 1. Mencius said,

mental constitution knows his nature.

knows Heaven.

Tiree OF THIS Book «Like the previous books,
this 2 named from the commencing words

5 ras *'The exhausting of all the mental

constitution, It contains many more chapters
than any of them, being, for the most part, brief
enigmatical sentences, conveying Mencius’ views
of human nature. It is more abstruse also, and
the student will have much difficulty in satisfy-
ing himself that he has really hit the exact.
meaning of the philosopher. ‘The author of the

PU SEE Bh BE. i says = This book wa

made by Mencius in his old age. Its style is
terse, and its meaning deep, and we cannot dis-
cover an order of subjects in its chapters, He
had completed the previous six Books, and
this grew up under his pencil, as his mind was

—:

AUT.

“He. who has exhausted all his
Knowing his nature, he

affected, and he was prompted to give expression
to his thoughts. The first chapter may be regard-
ed, however, as a compendium of the whole."
2H. 1. By THE STUDY OF OURSELVES WE COME
TO THe KNOWLEDGE OF HEAVEN, AND Hes-
VEN IS SERVED BY OUR OBEYING OUR NATURE.

1. gk d DW is, I conceive, to make

=
one’s-self acquainted with all his mind, to arrest
his consciousness, and ascertain what he is.
"This of course gives a man the knowledge of his
nature, and as he is the creature of Heaven, its
attributes must be corresponding. It is much to
be wished that instead of the term Heaven, vague
and indefinite, Mencius had simply said ‘God.’
Ican get no other meaning from this par. Choo

-He, however, and all his school, say that there

Pr. IT. Cu. VI, THE WORKS

OF MENCIUS. E

Hj]
AN o : RR a»
IE. d, AL YK TE
e D d
2. “To preserve one’s mental constitution, and nourish one’s

nature, is the way to servé Heaven.

3. .“ When neither a premature death nor long life causes a man
any double-mindedness, but he waits in tlie cultivation of his per-
sonal character for whatever issue;—this is the way in which he
establishes his Heaven-ordained being.”

CnuarrER II. 1. Mencius said, * There is an appointment for

every thing.
rectly ascribed thereto.

is no work or labour in üt H DW ; that it is
the A ZB. of the Confucian chapter in the
‘Superior Learning,’ according to their view of
it; that all the labour is in Jf RN ME, which

is the hy Tk of that chapter, If this be

correct, we should translate:—* He who com-
pletely developes his mental ‘constitution, has
known (come to know) his nature,’ but I cannot
construe the words so. 2. The * preserva-
tion, is the holding fast what we have from
Heaven, and the ‘nourishing, is the acting in
harmony therewith, so that the ‘serving Heaven’
is just being and doing what it has intimated in
our constitution to be its will coticerning us.

8. ii is our nature, according to the

opening words of the Chung Yung FR ii x
; sup aL is to bea taken asan active verb,

YS B bk ‘causes no doubts,’ i.e., no
doubts as to what is to be done. IRA.
==

referring to BR 2.—It may be well to give

the views of Chaou K‘e on this chapter. On
the first paragraph he says:—‘To the nature
there belong the principles of benevolence, right-
eousness, propriety, and knowledge. The mind

is designed to regulate them ( iW A il <>
and having the distinction of being correct, a
man can put forth ali his mind to think of doing
good, and then he may be said to know his nature.
‘When he knows his nature, he knows that the
way of Heaven considers: what is good to be
excellent. On the second par. he says :—* When
one is able to preserve his mind, aud to nourish

his correct nature, he may be called a man of
perfeet virtue ( {= K ) The way of Heaven
loves life, and the ‘perfect man also loves life.

Hem

A man should receive submissively what may be cor-

The way of Heaven is without partiality, and
only approves of the virtuous. Thus the acting
of the perfect man agrees with Heaven, and hence
it is said,—this is the way by which he serves
Heaven? On the third par. he says:— The
perfect man in his conduct is guided by one law.
Although he sees that some who have gone be-
fore him have been short-lived, and some long-
lived, he hever has two minds, or changes his
way. Let life be short as that of Yen Yuen, or
long as that of the duke of Shaou, he refers
either case equally to the appointment of Hea-
ven, and cultivates and rectifies his own person
to wait for that. It is in this way he establishes

the root of Heaven’s appointments ( ilt BA

iL Ed x Aw: These explanations do not
throw light upon the text, but they show how .

that may be treated independently of the school
of Choo He. And the equal unsatisfactoriness
of his interpretation may well lead the student
—the foreign student especially—te put forth
his strength en the study of the text more than
on the commentaries.

Cu. 2. Man’s DUTY AS AFFECTED BY THE
DECREES OR AEPOINTMENTS OF Heaven. Wuat
MAY BE CORRECTLY ASCRIBED THERETO AND
WHAT Not. Choo He says this is a continuation
of the last chapter, developing the meaning of
the last paragraph. There is a connection be-

tween the chapters, but ss is here takeu moxe
widely, as extending not only to man's nature,
but all the events that befall him, na ie
‘the correct appointment,’ ie, that which is
directly the wiil of Heaven. No consequence

flowing from evil or careless conduct is to be
understood as being so. Choo He's definition

is— FL Bit FAG Ja AE B
‘that which comes without being brought on
is the correct appointment.—Chaou K'e says

there are three ways of speaking about the

Ex
=

Eve
aS
ow

PE ae

=
autan N

INFERS

E
Zu

peak

k
M

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS,

BOOK VII,

De
(=
[0]
zi
ER
BÓ
zl

>
ze

dy

vu
Cw

SERT
NLL
TT

z
X

2. “Therefore, he who has the true idea of what is Heaven's ap-
pointment will not stand beneath a precipitous wall.

2
e.

* Death sustained in the discharge of one's duties may correctly

be ascribed to the appointment of Heaven.

4.
ascribed."
Cuapter HI.

“Death under handcuffs and fetters cannot correctly be so

1. Mencius said, * When we get by our seeking

and lose by our neglecting ;—in that case seeking is of use to gettiug,
and the things sought for are those which are in ourselves.

2. ‘When the seeking is according to the proper course, and
the getting is only as ‘appointed ;—in that case the seeking is of no

use to getting, and the things sou

CuarTER LY.
jn us.

appointments or decrees of Heaven. Doing
good and getting good is called B. *re-
geiving what is appointed. Doing good and
getting evil is called 3 f * encountering
what is appointed.’ Doing evil and getting evil
is called ra mE *following after what is ap-

pointed. It is only the first of these cases that
is spoken of in the text. It must be borne in

mind, however, that by ri here Ch/aou under-

Stands death, and that only, and we should
acquiesce in this, if there did not seem to be a
connection between this chapter and the pre-

ceding. 2. ^it i de who knows,
or hás the true notion of, &c. B. *precipi-
tous’ and likely to fall. 4. The fetters are
understood to be those of an evil doer. RE are

ght are without ourselves.”

1, Mencius said, “ All things are already complete

fetters for the hands, and iE those for the feet,

Cu. 3. VIRTUE IS SURE TO BE GAINED BY
SEEKING IT, BUT RICHES AND OTHER EXTERNAL
THINGS NoT. This general sentiment is correct,
but truth is sacrificed to the point of the anti-
thesis, when it is said in the second case that
seeking is of no use to getting. The things
‘in ourselves’ are benevolence, righteousness,
propriety, and knowledge, the endowments
proper of our nature. ‘The things * without
ourselves’ are riches and dignities. ‘he * proper
course’ to seek these is that ascribed to Contu-
cius, advancing according to propriety, and retiring
according to righteousness, but yet they are not
at our command and control.

Cr. 4. MAN Is FITTED FOR, AND HAPPY IN,
DOING GOOD, AND MAY PERFECT HIMSELF TIERE-
IN. 1. This par. is quite mystical. The all

. things are taken only as the principles of all

things, which all things moreover are only tlie

Pr. I. Cn. IV—VH, THE WORKS

N

v

=
ASID

SS
Visum)

 i
i

\
J

>

aah

2.
on self-examination.

3.

e»
[o2]

-l

OF MENCIUS.

FE fe
Wu quA
is e

B

ii

v

M
4

E

^.
v

AR

4

SESS EI
sess

X

“There is no greater delight than to be conscious of sincerity

“If one acts with a vigorous effort at the law of reciprocity,

when he seeks for the realization of perfect virtue, nothing can be
closer than his approximation to it.”

OuarrER V. 1. Mencius said,

“To act without understanding,

and to do so habitually without examination, pursuing the proper
path all the life without knowing its nature ;-—this is the way of

multitudes.”

Cuavter VI. Mencius said, “

A man, may not be without shame.

"When oneis ashamed of having been without shame, he will after-
wards not have occasion for shame."

CuarrER VIT.
-of great importance.

relations of society. If we extend them far-

2, The aK

here is that so largely treated of in the Chung

ther, we only get embarrassed.

Yung. 8. Hu is the judging of others by

ourselves, and acting accordingly. Comp. the
Doctrine of the Mean, xiii. 3,

Cu. 5. How MANY ACT WITHOUT THOUGHT.

Comp. Conf. Ana., VIIL ix. 11x. Hx
— is to be understood of 4 ; buy HE i

=‘its nature,’ its propriety, which is the object
of FA and its grounds, which is the object of

Choo He defines E as ay Z HH

- ‘knowing clearly, and

$

$

He» TI

1. Mencius said, “ The sense of shame is to a man

‘knowing minutely and exactly” ‘There is
much activity,’ says the thi E- tin the two
verbs? This use is of is not common,

Cu. 6. THE VALUE OF THE FEELING OF
SHAME. The last -»shameful conduct.

Cu. 7. THE same SUBJECT. The former ch.,
it is said, was by way of exhortation JAR:
this is by way of warning aA 7o- The sec.
par. is aimed at the wandering scholars of
Mencius’ time, who were full of plots and
schemes to unite and disunite the various
princes, Fe springs of motion,’ ‘machinery,’
The third par. may also be translated, ‘If a

man be not ashamed at his being not like other
men,’ &c. -

528 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK Vn.

mar

-4

o

\

fea
ANM
eT

E

v

> A
{HO

>
Ie)

k
E !
Fe
E
ze
N

«x

>

FA
zi
sv
SIEHE
ARNG HEY
E
N

w
X
*-
æ
v
-

AU

eB

HRE
SA
ae

.

$

B

2. ‘Those who form contrivances and versatile schemes distin-
: guished for their artfulness, do not allow their sense of shame to come
into action.

3. “ When one differs from other men in not having this sense
of shame, what will he have in common with them ?"

Cuarrer VIII. 1. Mencius said, “The able and virtuous mon-
archs of antiquity loved virtue and forgot power. And shall an
exception be made of the able and virtuous scholars of antiquity,
that they did not do the same? They delighted in their own prin-
ciples, and weré oblivious of the power of princes. Therefore, if
kings and dukes did not show the utmost respect, and observe all
forms of ceremony, they were not permitted to come frequently and
visit them. If they thus found it not in their power to pay them
frequent visits, how much less could they get to employ them as
ministers ?" : i

Cuarrer IX. 1. Mencius said to Sung Kow-ts‘een, “Are you
fond, Sir, of travelling te the different courts? I will tell you about
such travelling. :

E
IN
>
"

zr

`
,Cm. 8. How THE ANCIENT SCHOLARS MAIN- tue CH ), and forgot the power of men, £e,
TAINED THE DIGNITY OF THBIR CHARACTER AND of thé princes. .
PRINCIPLES. E is not virtue in the abstract, Cu. 9. How .A PROFESSIONAL ADVISER OF
but the good which they saw in others, in the THE PRINCES MIGHT BE ALWAYS PERFECTLY

scholars namely, 29 is their own ‘power,’ SATISFIED, THE EXAMPLE OF ANTIQUITY.

As applied to the scholars, however, these things 1- Some make the party spoken to in this ch.
have to be reversed. They loved their own vir- ! to be Kow CH] read as Ai] ts een of Sung.

e»

29

Pi. I. Cu, nm. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

m

By
in

ER
Dc

em

spur

d

v

s>
dc

pm
de
M

b
pde
P

SUCHT

ams
Ni

J
a

m

[ d

"

Rin
SEL SSS

`
C
d
v

SS.
z

T

Ss

o

SHE esto
I

NSN
E

E

yS
SHES WORSE

Ri

w

>

g
i

eta

Bp
eo yy

2. “Ifa prince acknowledge you and follow your counsels, be per-
Saly satisfied. If no one do : so, be the same,’

Kow-ts‘een said, “ What is to be done to secure this perfect
ianeaont " Mencius replied, “Honour virtue and delight in
righteousness, and so you may always be perfectly satisfied,

XE “Therefore, a scholar, though poor, does not let go his right-
eousness ; though prosperous, he does not leave his own path.

5. “Poor and not letting righteousness go ;—it is thus that the
scholar holds possession of himself.. Prosperous and not leaving the
proper path ;—it is thus that the expectations of the people are not
disappointed.

6. “ When the men of antiquity realized their wishes, benefits were
conferred by them on the people. If they did not realize their wishes,
they cultivated their personal character, and became illustrious in
the world. If poor, they attended to their own virtue in solitude;

` if advanced to dignity, they made the whole empire virtuous as well.”

aS Ss
a
pat

wo

Nothing is known of him, but that he was one
of the adventurers, who travelled about tender-
ing their advice to the different princes.

To translate au Z as Y have done here, can
hardly be called a paraphrase. Choo He, af-
ter Chaou K'e, explains fi ii as * the appear-
ance of self-possession and freedom from desire."
‘Perfectly satisfied,’ conveys the idea of the
phrase. — — 3. It is to be understood that the
‘virtue’ is that which the scholar has in him-

self, and the ‘righteousness’ is the course
which he pursues. . 4. Ln AH Sd
Z: x is the'reverse. . ‘Holds pos-

session of himself, —i.e., has what i chiefly loves

and seeks. 6. = Ñ= +-

— Choo He observes :— This Shaptat shows how
the scholar, attaching weight to what is inter.
nal, and holding what is external light, will
approve himself ¢ good in all places and circum»
stances.’

330 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VIL.

E Ey
{== - Itl
[gx] = 5 Ezi]

H
SAFWE

.-

PAGE

EN

a
=e TONEY

pe

z

m

3

\

7
TNE

=

=

v
-
[d
v
w
v

à
NS

J
we
tS

I
BH

NERHIE

SH

F RANAS
hum
wR
SRS
=
Ns
d

fem
~
p=
an
me
ES
RR

d M
Cuarter X. Mencius said, “The mass e men wait for a king

Wăn, and then they will receive a rousing impulse. Scholars dis-

tinguished from the mass, without a king Wăn, rouse themselves,”

Cuaprer XI. Mencius said, “ Add to a man the families of Han
and Wei. If he then look upon himself without being elated, he is
tar beyond the mass of men.” ,

Cuarrer XII. Mencius said, “Let the people be employed in
the way which is intended to secure their ease, and though they be
toiled; they will not murmur. Let them be put to death in the way
which i is intended to preserve their lives, and though they die, they
will hot murmur at him who puts them to death.”

CumaPrER XIII. 1. Mencius said, ** Under a chief, leading all the
princes, the people bok brisk and cheerful Under a true sove-
reign, they have an air of deep. contentment.

` Cu. 10. How POPLE SHOULD cer THEIR — E SS hij E 4 * not being full of and

INSPIRATION TO GOOD IN TIIEMSELVES. Jt satisfied with one's-self^
$ a : XS. Cu. 12. WHEN A RULER’S AIM IS EVIDENTLY
BR, —"ali the people,’ Ze. ordinary people. Ze THE FEOPLE'S GOOD, THEY WILL NOT MURMUR AT

na A m anl HIS HARSIIEST MEASURES. The first part is
fi- (a fbi in IL Pt, I. v, t, When à dis- explained rightly of toils in agriculture, road-

tinction is made between the characters, he who making, bridge-making &e., and the second of
iu wisdom is the first of 10,000 men, is called the administration of justice, where I should

“th Anea alia . prefer thinking that Mencius had the idea of a
Jài the first of 1,090 is called f: the first just war before him. Comp. Ana, XX. ii. 2.

of 100 is called EX the first of 10 is called tk i, a way of ease ;’ AE ib—e way
: of life.

iM ` C » T ATTEND
H. 18. THE DIFFERENT INFLUENCE EXER-
Cu. ll. Nor TO BE ELATED BY RICHES IS A :
CISED BY A CHIEF AMONG THE PRINCES, AND BY
PROOF OF SUPERIORITY. Han and Wei,— ; j

-see I. Pt. I.i. 1, notes. ‘The families of Han and 4 TRUE SOVEREIGN, 1. I. is explained
Wei,’—i.z., the wealth and power of those families. in the dict.,-with ime ae A to this passage, by
ihe used for Q4, ‘to increase, indicates the ies. It is the same E (ig and E DE E - ER

externality of the additions, IRM is defined pm hs BR i is i Fe ES 2H yai ‘the

Pr. I. Cn, XIII.—XIV.

Sb
=

‘gs
eH

peak

zm
SESH BS

[d

dium

ESE SNE
west

Ld

SAEN VERRE

HIO

id
E

ui
Bo
AR
wi -

DE
i-r iz

A
>
TT
(Y

V

2. “Though he slay
benefits them, they do not think
they

makes them do so,

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

them, they do not murmur.

co
Im

E
Loo
=H.

xe
DEHE

uo

CE ME

ages.
SEN

a
p
v

MEM
ie
STE

"

When he

of his merit. From day to day

make progress towards what is good, without knowing who

3. “Wherever the superior man passes through, transformation
follows; wherever he abides, his influence is of a spiritual nature.
It flows abroad above and beneath, like that of Heaven and Earth.
How can it be said that he mends society but in a small way!”

CHAPTER XIV.

1. Mencius said, “ Kindly words do not enter so

deeply into men as a reputation for kindness.
2. “Good government does not lay hold of the people so much

as good instructions.

appearance of enlargement and self-posses-
sion. In iMustration of the condition of the

people under a true sovereign, commentators

generally quote a tradition of their state in
the golden age of Yaou, when ‘entire harmony
reigned under heaven, and the lives of the peo-
ple passed easily away. ‘Then the old men

smote the clods, ani sang, — H H m fe
H ATG, BEE n e ELE i
e am H RE At sb * At sunrise we

. rise, and at sunset we rest. We dig our wells
and drink; we cultivate our fields and eat.—

What is the strength of the emperor to us?’

2. is used in the sense of 3j.
‘merit,’ or meritorious work, and the analogy of
the other clauses determines the meaning of

F as in the translation, 3.

bas reference to the E e par. 1. It is used
here in its highest application, =‘ the sage.’ Br

i E A
32. RR Tp.-the latte? phrase is interpreted
morally, being—* when he has fixed his mind to
produce a result, This is unnecessary. mt.—
‘spiritual,’ *mysterious:;'—the effects are sure
and visible, but the operation ishidden. In the
influence of Shun in the time of his obscurity,
when the ploughmen yielded the furrow, and
the potters made their vessels ail sound, we

have an example, it is said, of the Ay » T
4V. In what it is presumed would have been

the influence of Confucius, had he been in the
position of a ruler, as described, Ana. XÍX.

xxv., we have an example of the Wy ff b
p if Xa an object for Z, I supply

‘society. It is understood that a leader of the
princes only helps the people in a small way.
Ca. 14. THE VALUE TO A RULER OF REPUTA-
THON AND MORAL INFLUENCES. Kindly words
are but brief, and on an occasion. A reputa-
tion for kindness must be the growth, of time

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS,

832 BOOK Vil.

TE AY rr 4A

al FR AE du HE An Tig FE RR
P iE SH, A
UL, fie All H —. i
Bt Jk Fk A E.

b

pasai
GG

M
4

EID
NE
SERIE

vi
ERI

V
/

Se

^

Sis
Se

Tm

V
"4

RUE

yE

zu
Em)
Eat

N
HSNO AEH

(ERES IKEA

MT
Es
E
=
=

b

3. “Good government is feared by .the people, while good in-
structions are loved by them. Good government gets the people's
wealth, while good instructions get their hearts."

Cuarter XV. 1. Mencius said, “The ability possessed by men
without having been acquired by learning is intuitive ability, and.
the knowledge possessed by them without the exercise of thought is
their intuitive knowledge.

32. “Children carried in the arms all know to love their parents,
and when they are grown 4 little, they all know to love their elder
brothers. ;

3. “Filial affection for parents is the working of benevolence.
Respect for elders is the working of righteousness. There is no other
reason for those feelings ;—they belong to all under heaven.”

Cuarrer XVI. Mencius said, “When Shun was living amid
the deep retired mountains, dwelling with the trees and rocks, and

and of many evidences. With the whole chap-
ter, compare Ana., H. jii.

Cu. 15. BENEVOLENCE AND RIGHTEOUSNESS
ARE NATURAL TO MAN, PARTS OF HIS CONSTITU-

" TION, 1. Itranslate R by ‘intuitive,’
but it serves also to denote the ‘goodness’ of
thenatureofman, Choo He so defines it :— R

A CREE th. 2. FF is de-

fined in the dict, by AY 5h a. *an infant
smiling. . When an infant has reached to this,

then it is A Bm TÉ 3p. ‘taken by people

in ‘their arms,’ 8. E x X

must be supplemented by H$ pa zi * extend

them (carry the inquiry about them) to all un-
der heaven, and they are the same.’ This is
just laymg down universality as a test that
those feelings are intuitive to us. Chaou K'e,
however, explains differently :—‘ Those who
wish to do good, have nothing else to do but to
extend these ways of children to all under hea-
ven.’

Cn. 16. How waar SHUN was DISCOVERED

ITSELF IN HIS GREATEST OBSCURITY,

7I. Yay —the it is the water itself bursting its

banks; the agency of man in the matter is not

aS to be supposed, Soin the fiá # —D vt

“PL Ca. XVI—XVII. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 33

Fel ge WY
VB Ee: DES 4 ES HU ie d

[ d

ate

T
E
sene
MENDES

4 ,
SN > IDEM
SEM
d
EM
Fn ESNEERHSV
st

=
a
i[ ME

TEN
ISS
=
mp
ENES
e

i

P
4

wandering among the deer and swine, the difference between him
and the rade inhabitants of those remote hills appeared very small.
But when he heard a single g good word, or saw a single good action,
he was like à stream or a river bursting its banks, and "flowing out
in an irresistible flood."

Cuaprer XVII Mencius said, “ Let a man not do what his own
sense of righteousness tells him not to do, and let him not desire

. what his sense of righteousness tells him not to desire ; ;—1o act thus is
all he has to do.”

CuarrER XVIIE 1. Mencius said, * Men who are possessed of
intelligent virtue and prudence in affairs will generally. be found to
have been in sickness and troubles.

2. “They are the friendless minister and concubine's son, who keep
their hearts under a sense of peril and use deep precautions against
calamity. On this account they become distinguished for their in-
telligence."

=H. Cm. 18. THE BENEFITS OF TROUBLE AND AF-
Hae LRA i A DS < di. FLICTION. Comp. VI, Pt, II. xv. fi and
YL. ral may be take generally, or with special e. p
reference to the Yang-tsze and Yellow river. I zx $y and Ff (up. 3d tone) go together,
prefer the former. “intelligence of virtue, and wisdom of arts.’ ff :

Cn. 17. AMAN HAS BUT TO OBEY THE LAW

IN HIMSELF. The text is literally—‘ Not. b
doing what he does not do,’ &c. Much must be: means properly ‘fever,’ ‘any feverish dis-

. supplied to make it intelligible in a translation. ease; but here Jc JK =distresses generally,
Chaou K'e interprets and supplies quite diffe- ^ b
rently :—‘Let a man not make another do what 2. ^E —not joined with Ih ut qual-

‘he does not do himself,’ &c. lifying E whole sentence, Jj- JA. ‘ father-

retains its' proper meaning of JE ‘to bein’

334 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK vi,

= = [3] E
E] UH ni. [25 Aui ER

i"

GRASS

ie
=

ND

&-

v
ia
CA

5h
E

ia

EN
NE
vm
Phase

v

EK

Nm
xg
EET
NAE
Bl
TF
u-i

D
aM
3
O
bu
of

=
Aes
A
€
nes

LL IER
SSR

Bes
B

D
Cu
m
2
ES

Q

Cuarrer XIX. 1. Mencius said, ‘There are persons who serve
the prince ;—they serve the prince, that is, for the sake of his coun-
tenance and favour. :

. 9. “There are ministers who seek the tranquillity of the State,
. and find their pleasure in securing that tranquillity.

3. “There are those who are the people of Heaven. They, judg-
ing that, if they were in office, they could carry out their principles,
throughout the empire, proceed so to carry them out.

4. “There are those who are great men.” They rectify them-
selves and others are rectified."

Cuaprer XX. 1. Mencius said, “The superior man has three

less,” friendless, not having favour with the in low. 3d tone. Jt is said, however, to have
sovereign, BE F is not the child of one who Hi 3$ i ‘the idea of aiming exclusively,’

is a concubine merely, but a concubine in dis- 2. iit LU Br. see Con. Ana., XVL i.

grace, or one of a very low rank. Be is n.
ei F 2, ipt, it will be seen, is not used here, as in
taken as if it were , the shooting forth of a is ý eg

n H & » *
tree after it has been cut down. the last par. 3. X ER Ileaven's
Cu. 19. Four DIFFERENT CLASSES OF MINIS- people,’ those who seem dearer to Heaven and

more favoured by it. Comp. V. I. Pt. I. vii.
TERS. 1, AF H ACÉothe Pu 5. . 4 ‘The great men’ are the sages,
is joined with A , and not to be taken with the highest style of men, Wy is to be under-

A. Mencius speaks of yv ‘persons,’ and stood of persons 2T Fe, *the sovereign and

 the people.'—The first class of ministers may

mo is ;
not Bi ministers, toindicàte his Contempt. be styled the mercenary ; the second, the loyal;
the third have no selfishness, and they em-

red H H A
BS! is difficult. The common view.
Fà 4F Ht 4, brace the whole empire in their regards, but

is what I have given. PN E rir Z they have their defined aims to be attained by
systematic effort, while the fourth, unconcious-

1 :
X t X fh Fes DU 5x ‘yung is tO ly but surely, produce the grandest results.

cause the prince to bear with—countenance— Cu. 20. Tne ad WHICH THE Seren
éi int y a MPERIAL SWAY IS N

them ;—yud is to cause the prince to be pleased MAN DELIGHTS IN í APERIA aR Te

j ; MON M. x X `

with them. — In this case, ^h should be read AMONG THE Kl

qi
&
a

Pr. L Ca. XX-XXI. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

i
i

ie
3

E

HANSINA

e.
w
&

w

S
aE

EF

REC

SN
=

E

i

 ]

BE
"T
ERE
=A
hs
S
SS

A

AGER

[ d

dus

w
r.

WH
aH

~
w

TE
Sz

En)

Vee

^.

\
4

i

Spes

a.
-
-

N
r

se [HOES 3
E

Ni
DE

S

Ni
a

TREIS
na

EO

E SE D
PE, Z P
things in which he delights, and to be ruler over the empire is
one of them. a
2. “That his father and mother are both alive, and that the
condition of his brothers affords no cause for anxiety ;—this is one.
delight. a
3. That, when looking up, he has no occasion for shame before
Heaven, and, below, he has no occasion to blush before men ;-—this
is a second delight. I i
4. “That he can get from the whole empire the most talented
individuals, and teach: and nourish them ;—this is the third delight.
5. “Thesuperior man has three things in which he delights,
and to be ruler over the empire is not one of them."
Cuarter XXI. 1. Mencius said, * Wide territory and a nume- -
rous people are desired by the superior man, but what he delights in

E
=

I]

is not here. +
2. “To stand in the centre of the empire, and tranquillize the

people within the four seas ;—the superior man delights in this, but
the highest enjoyment of his nature is not here.

taken as simply =f XR "The possession

of the sovereign sway is indicated, and not the
carrying out of the true imperial principles.

2. X, 95 dit HK may be understood

of every painful thing in the condition of his
brothers, which would distress him. 3.
We cannot but attach a personal meaning to
‘Heaven’ here.

Cu.. 21. Max's OWN NATURE THE MOST
IMPORTANT THING TO HIM, AND THE SOURCE OF
HIS TRUE ENJOYMENT. 1. This describes
the condition of the prince of a large State,’
who has thereby many opportunities of doing
good. ` 2. This advances on the meaning
of the first par. The individual indicated is the
emperor, who by his position can benefit the
myriads of the people, and therein he feels

delight, pr PE —what belongs to him by

336 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VII.

M
4

hl:

Wu

[V
beim KENE
EHTS

EXER
uj
M

{Wot

3

ell

«m
RH
Ee
SH

KS

E

EAS

MEERES BH

BAIT

>'
£e

x
m

Sep aS
vei
SEU

ERE
=

r AS
b
-
w.
[d

Sx
TU
mt

TEN

RAO

SR

^y
w

E
cR

RH SEE
I
z
ai

aH
ran
\
d
aH

3. “What belongs by his nature to the superior man cannot be
increased by the largeness of his sphere of action, nor diminished by
his dwelling in poverty and retirement ;— for this reason that it is
determinately apportioned to him by Heaven. `

4. “What belongs by his nature to the superior man are bene-
volence, righteousness, propriety, and knowledge. These are rooted

in his heart; their growth and manifestation are a mild harmony
' appearing in the, countenance, a rich fulness in the back, and the
character imparted to the four limbs. Those limbs understand to
arrange themselves, without being told.”

CnarrER XXII. Mencius said, “ Pih-e, that he might avoid Chow,
was dwelling on the coast of the northern sea when he heard of the
rise of king Wan. He roused himself and said, “ Why should I not go
and follow him? I have heard that the chief of the West knows
. well how to nourish the old.” T‘ae-kung, to avoid. Chow, was dwell-
ing on the coast of the eastern sea. When he heard of the rise of

yplthat moral and intellectual qualities indi-
cate themselves in the general appearance and

bearing. Hee BA is explained as Ya mwi
i x 2 *the appearance of what is pure,

harmonious, moistening and rich,’ and Be as

nature, 3. F is not to be interpreted
only of the prince of a State or the emperor.
Indeed in the two preceding paragraphs, though
the individuals indicated are in those positions,
the phrase, as well as here, has its moral sig-

nificancy. PZN (low. 3d tone) 7E wt
the nature is complete as given by Heaven. It
can only be developed from: within. Nothing
can be added to it from without. This seems

to be the idea. 4, E Æ f Ah extend

over all the rest of the par. AE and É are
' in apposition; É io not to be taken as under

the government of ZE. The meaning is sim-

pn JEA Fa Vix x EZ, ‘meaning what is
affluent, generous, full and overflowing.—The
whole description is rather strained.

Cu. 22. THE GOVERNMENT OF KING WAN
BY WHICH THE AGED WERE NOURISHED. 1.

Comp. IV. Pt, I. xiii. 1. 2. ‘This is to be

[^

Pr. I. Ci. XXII. 37

iV
5n
TR

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.
$.

E

N En
NESTEN

e

E
NSN SEE

[d

EN

da)

(Nd

EDAH

-

-

oe

NR
a poda

VES

v

NOS
DEAS BRUTY BRON SS 3 Sh

ww.
[ d

zu
p}

ER
I

abi
AERAR A

s

SS GARI EH EQ EN

a

No >
BY TESS HS BE

ily aay He
E EJ A fp
HAZ wh MIR W 5

king Win, he said, * Why should I not go and follow him? I have
heard that the chief of the West knows well how to nourish the old,’
If there were a prince in the empire, who knew well how to nourish

` the old, all men of virtue would feel that he was the proper object
for them to gather to.

2. “Around the homestead with its five mow, the space beneath
the walls was planted with mulberry trees, with which the women
nourished silkworms, and thus the old were able to have silk to wear.
Each family had five brood hens and two brood sows, which were
kept to their breeding seasons, and thus the old were able to have
flesh to eat. The husbandmen cultivated their farms of 100 mow,
and thus their families of eight mouths were secured against want.

3. “The expression, ‘The chief of the West knows well how to.
nourish the old,’ refers to his regulation of the fields and dwellings,
his teaching them to plant the mulberry and nourish those animals,
and his instructing the wives and children, so as to make them nourish

translated historically, as it deseribes. TI
Wün's government, Comp, I. Pt. I, iii. 4. pu

it, corresponding to pu X. below ;—*the
private woman,’ ‘the private man.’
` *silkwormed them,’ ie, nourished silkworms
with them, It is observed by HE
‘The silkworm eats and does not drink, going
through its transformations in 27 days. The,

pa

wife of the Yellow emperor (B.C, 2697-2597),
whose surname was Se-ling ( Hf Ke FR) first

taught the people to keep silkworms, and to
manage their silk, in order to provide clothes.

Future ages sacrifice to her as the i

Mencius has not mentioned before the numberof -

brood sows and hens apportioned to a family.

3 ae responds to DE By :

at the beginning. The whole paragraph is uie

43

338 IHE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VIL

SEN >
NL
Exe

ENS
um:
LE
ER.
—

NOE SETS
Em

N

H

E

s

ia
ill
A

s`

their aged. At fifty, warmth cannot be maintained without silks,
and at seventy flesh is necessary to satisfy the appetite. Persons
hot kept warm nor supplied with food are said to be starved and
famished, but among the people of king Wo, there were no aped
who were starved or famished. This is the e meaning. of the expres-
sion in question.”

Cnarrrg XXIIL 1. Mencius said, * Let it be seen to that their
fields of grain and hemp are well cultiv ated, and make the taxes
on them ‘light ;—so- the people may be inade rich.

2. * Letit be seen to that the.people use their resources of food sea-
sonably, and expend their wealth ouly on the prescribed ceremonies:
—so their wealth will be more than can be consumed.

8. “The people cannot live without water and fire, vet if vou
. knock at a man's door in the dusk of the evening, and ask for water
and five, there is no man who will not give them, such is the abund-
ance of these things. A sage governs the empire so as to cause pulse

explanation of that expression. tH m.- Hiis and H in par, 2, where 7 may be referred
the dwelling place, the 5 mow allotted for build-
ings. O as, " .
Cu. 93. To promote THE virree or THe Just indicated. PAW may be best explained
BIS. qn . A Pon E "PIA MENDA ET
KOPLE, THE FIRST CARE OF A GOVERNMENT from T, Pt, I. iii, 3, 4. ii TE. —the ue are
i E NSULT F E ZING WELL 2 f E ; `
SHOULD: BE ae EFOR THEN, PETIG the festive occasions of capping, marriage, &c.,
> us 3 3 à E !
orr. ,l. 277, &— low, 9d tone, as IL Pt. L v.3, extepting on which a strict economy should he
et al. i, -— grain fields.’ ie ,—'flax fields.’ enforced. 8. Comp. I. Pt. L vii. 19.

A and $ m are both in the imper., indicating a ER properly denotes half an hour after sunset,
or thereabouts EIL is H B. * the eveniug

to EH. or the resources arising from the ‘govt,

the work i the ruler or government. So f i

Pr I. Ca. XXIIL—XXIV. THE WORKS

M
TV

OF MENCIUS.

$

"idt

v

Ld
M

ta

36 d A HL OS ES ak £8 94
T Ki ri Pad hs LN week, A B
SEG REESE 43
An gar. ase Be yis r1, Fe L3 RE

Dico] VU Hi AL T AU RR,
Jk HZ Wm IT
é

SE
(sx

es I WK Pt b, X

=
Ei
MEAT
gr

- 88 >

R du Ze ie h um.

and grain to be as abundant as water and fire. When pulse and
grain are as abundant as water and fire, how shall the people be.
-other than virtuous? ™

Cuarrer XXIV. 1. Mencius T « Contacts ascended the east-
ern hill, and Loo appeared to him small. He ascended the Tae
mountain, and all beneath the heavens appeared to him small. So,
che who has contemplated the sea, finds it difficult to: think any
thing of other waters, and he who has wandered in the gate of the

sage, finds it difficult to think anything of the words of others.

3. “There is.an art in the contemplation of water.—lt is ne-
cessary to look at it as foaming in waves. The sun and moon being
possessed of brilliancy, their light admitted even through an orifice
illuminates.

3. “Flowing water is a thing which does not proceed till it has
filled the hollows im its course. The student who has set his mind

of the day? The time of the request is inop-
portune, and the manner of it not according to
propriety ;—and yet it is granted, is the
general name for all kinds of peas and beans.
RH asi in Ana, XI xi, 3.

Cu. 24, How THE GREAT DOCTRINES OF THE
SAGES ARE TO BE ADVANCED TO BY SUCCESSIVE
STEPS. 1. This par. illustrates the great-
ness of the sage’s doctrines. ‘The eastern hill
was on the east of the capital of Loo. Some iden-

tify it with a smal hill, called Fang qui Jin the

district of K'euh-fow qui FA), at the foot of
which Confucius’ parents were buried; others

with a hill named Mung (552), in the district
of Pe in the department of E-chow. The Tae
mountain is the chief of the five great moun-
tains of China. It lay on the extreme east of
Ts‘e, in the present district of 'I*ae-ngan, in the
department of the same name. In: ie p IK.

Fi, is used as in FF HY TV. Pt. I. vii, 5.

2. This illustrates how the very greatness of the
sages’ doctrines leads to the thought of their ele-
mentary principles. Who can lovk at the foam-
ing waves and suppose they are fortuitous and
sourceless? So light penetrating ev ery cranny
assures us of its source in the great luminaries.

8; ay + is here the aspiring student,

340

E?
ae

m

"i

EPH

RNO
So \

N

a
v
v
v

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

2
=
W

Bee
Š

e
em

E
w

3

DRINK
-
am

>
=
=
—

cer
E

DIES

IHO

Se EE

>
SEAN
Skok TER

Paa
=

i!

d
>
HJ Fi Ant 4A M
on the doctrines of the sage, does not advance to them but by com-
pleting one lesson after another."

CHAPTER XXV.. 1. Mencius said, “He who rises at cock-crow-
ing, and addresses himself earnestly to the practice of virtue, is a
disciple of Shun,

2. “He who rises at cock-crowing, and addresses himself earnestly
to the pursuit of gain, is a disciple of Chih.

8. "If you want to know what separates Shun from Chih, it is
simply this, —the interval between the thought of gain and the thought
of virtue."

dinum XXVI. 1. Mencius said, “ The principle of the philoso-
pur Yang was—' Each one for himself.’ Though he might have
enefited the whole empire by plucking out a single hair, he would
not have done it. :

2. “The philosopher Mih loves all equally. If by rubbing smooth
his whole body from the crown to the heel, he could have -benefited
the empire, he would have done it.

3

TE Ma ie

a
re

fan elegant piece,’ here for ‘one lesson,’

t one truth.’ i
Cu. 25, THE DIFFERENT RESULTS TO WHICH
THE LOVE OF GOOD AND THE LOVE OF GAIN
LEAD. 1. ‘A disciple of Shun,’—z.e, al-
though such a man may not himself attain to
be a sage, he is treading in the steps of one.
2. Chih, du being used for 475), is the
robber Chih ; see III. Pt, II. x. 3. ' 4 Fil], —

is used here as in ch. xix. 1. Isheuld prefer

myself to read it in the low. 3d tone.. It is ob-
served by the scholar Ch*ng that ‘by good and
gain' are intended the public mind and the sel-

fish mind AA AP ij ED? — 0s Ajo

E x ij is intended to represent the slight-

ness of the separation between them, in its

initial principles, and I therefore supply ‘the
thought of?

Cu. 26. THE ERRORS OF Yano, MIH, AND
TszE-MOH. OBSTINATE ADHERENCE TO A COURSE
WHICH WE MAY DEEM ABSTRACTLY RIGHT IS
PERILOUS. l. ‘The philosopher Yang,—
see ITI. Pt, IT. ix. 9, 10,14. Choo He says:—

RA {i H4 X ^ JR conveys the idea

of what is barely sufficient, This is not correct.

AEF HCM Bp UG ‘that which the
philosopher Yang chose, was'...In the writings
of the scholar Lëë ( ] -F-), Bk. VIL, ve find
Yang Choo speaking of Pih-shing Tsze-kaou

44 KK X Ep that *he would not pull out

one of his hairs to benefit others, and when
questioned himself ‘if he would pull out a hair
to help an age,’ declining to reply. 2, ‘The

Pr. I. Ca. XXVL—XXVIL THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

T
H

aS Ao

i:
NENESE

Sk uM
(v

©

S
Noy

v
v
v

<>

a
I

EX

"e
usce
TS

3.

SEP TES TI KEE
S

HE

.
te
4

 Se

v

“Tsze-mdh holds.a medium between these. By holding that

medium, he is nearer the right. But by holding it without leaving
room for the exigency of circumstances, it becomes like their holding

their one point.
4,

disregards a hundred others.”
Cuarren XXVII.

“The reason why I hate that holding
jury it does to the way of right principle.

to one point is the in-
takes up one point and

it

1. Mencius said, “ The hungry think any food

sweet, and the thirsty think the same of any drink, and thus they
do not get the right taste of what they eat and drink. ‘The hunger
and thirst, in fact, injure their palate. And is it only the mouth
and belly which are injured by.hunger and thirst? . Men's minds
are also injured by them. `

2. "Ifa man can prevent the.evils of hunger and thirst from

philosopher Mih,—see III. Pt I. v. 1; Pt. IL. ix.
9, 10, 14. We are not to understand the rub-
bing the body smooth as an isolated aet which
somehow would benefit the empire The
smoothness would arise from labours undergone
for the empire, like those of the great Yu, who
wrought and waded till he had worn away all the

hair on his legs, See the SES, in loc. 3.
Of Tsze-moh nothing seems to be known, but
that -he belonged to Loo, 3j , must be

clearly understood as referring to a Mean be-
tween the selfishness of Yang Choo and the

transcendentalism of Mih Teih, Nin Z=

ir Ñ, the i: mentioned in par. 4. The
necessity of attending to the exigeney of cir-
cumstances is illustrated by saying that a case
may be conceived when it would be duty to
deny a single hair to save the empire, and a

case when it would be duty to rub the whole
body smooth to do so. The orthodox way
GET) of China is to do what is right with re-
ference to the whole circumstances of every
case and time.

CH. 27. THE IMPORTANCE OF NOT ALLOWING
THE MIND TO BE INJURED BY POVERTY AND A

MEAN CONDITION, 1, +H perhaps is used
adverbially, +‘ readily ? comp, Xf, Pt. I. i. 11.

The two clauses E ys cand 8L p run

parallel to each other, the latter being ex-

planatory of the former, = XL—-

. With reference to the mind, hun-
ger and thirst stand for poverty and a mean

condition, 2. BE $E 8 E y can

WORKS

THE

342

N

E
Ez

2
OK
ax
ae
Ed

SENS

»

v
ep
-

bein
being up with other men.’

CHAPTER XXVIII. Mencius

pr

OF MENCIUS.

Sa ptr GF
zu vA E

BOOK VIL

* Fin

Te Sr X

; Ee EE
ER d

g any evils to his mind, he need not have any sorrow about not

said, *Hwuy of Lew-hea would

not for the three highest -offices of state have changed his firm pur-

pose of life."
Cuaprer XXIX.

Mencius said,

* A man with definite aims to
To dig

be accomplished inay be compared to one digging a well.
the well to a depth of seventy-two cubits, and stop without reaching
the spring, is after all throwing away the well."

CHAPTER XXX. 1.
were natural to Yaou and Shun.
own

Mencius said,

“ Benevolence and righteousness
T'ang and Woo made them their

The five chiefs of the princes feigned them.

2. “Having borrowed them long and not returned them, how
could it be. known they did not own ‘them; ?”

prevent being,’ fu being: emphatic, xX ya
A-— A refers to great men, sages, and wor-
thies. Such a man has himself really advanced
far in the path of greatness.
Ca. 28. Hwvy or’ LEW-HEA'S FIRMNESS.
l. ‘Hwuy of Lew-hea,—see II. Pt. I. ix.
2, 3: IV. Pt. IL. i. 3, 5: VI. Pt IL vi. 2.
KI], ‘ mildness, ‘friendly impressibleness,’ was
a characteristic of Hwuy, and Mencius, there-
fore, notices how it was associated with firnmess
of.mind. The ‘three kung, are the three high-
est officers about the imperial court, each equal
in dignity to the highest rank of nobility.
Ch. 29. THAT LABOUR ONLY IS TO BE PRIZED

WHICH ACCOMPLISHES ITS OBJECT. Ah —used
for RE. =f]. ‘eight cubits? In the
Ana., XIX. xxiii. 3, it is said, in the note, that
the $9 was seven cubits, while here its length is
given as eight. Its exact length is a moot point.

 See the fE ET. in loc, AT Ta i. one

who has that which he is doing? The applica-
tion may be very wide.

Cu. 30. THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN YAOU,
Suun, T'ang AND Woo, ON THE ONE HAND, AND
THE FIVE CHIEFS, ON THE OTHER, IN RELATION
TO BENEVOLENCE AND RIGHTEOUSNESS. J.

A no doubt refers to 4 xX, “benevolence

aud righteousness,’ and a translation ean hard-
lv be made without supplying those terns.
"Though Yaou and Shun stood on a higher plat-
form than T'ang and Woo, they agreed in sin-
cerity, which is the common point of contrast
between them and the chiefs, —‘ incor-
porated them’=made shen their own. 2.

Choo IIe explains Er% Da by X8: ‘returned.’ Ad-

mitting this, the meaning of

TE passes from
‘feigning’ to * borrowing?

He seems to prefer
p as-'how could they them-

viewing Ed
"nun

Pr. J. Ca. XXXL—XXXIL THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. ; 343

i

EA

ind

Stet
QO ESSE

El

SaaS

e

rN Sah

e

ET
a
F
oe

v
v

zA
HD

CHAPTER XXXI E Kung-sun Ch‘ow said, “ E Yin said, ‘T can-
not be near and see him so disobedient to reason,’ and therewith
he banished 'l'ae-ké& to T/ung. The people were much pleased.
When T'aekëă became virtuous, he brought him back, and the
people were again much pleased. A

2. " When worthies are ministers, may they indeed banish their
sovereigns in this way, when they are not virtuous?”

9. Mencius replied, “If they have the same purpose as. E
Yin, they may. If they have not the same purpose, it would be
usurpation.”

Cuarrer XXXII. 1. Kungsun, Ch'ow said, “It is said, in the
Book ot. Poetry,

‘He will not eat the bread of idleness!’
How is it that we see superior men eating without labouring?” Men-
cius replied, * When a superior man resides in a country, if its

selves know? but I much prefer the view in ; Cu. 32. Tne SERVICES WHICH A SUPERIOR
the translation. - MAN RENDERS TO A COUNTRY ENTITLE NIM, WITH-

Cn. 31. THE exp MAY JUSTIFY THE MEANS, OUT HIS DOING OFFICIAL DUTY, TO SUPPORT.
BUT THE PRINCIPLE MAY NOT BE EASILY APPLI- This is an instance of the oft-repeated insinua-
ep, Comp, V. Pi. I. vi, 5, A Ft tion against Mencius, that he was content to be
: H P i » fi H. supported by the princes, while he would not

see the Shoo-king, Pt. IV. v. Bk. I.9. The ake off á LP an Liv, Ek
words are taken somewhat differently in the take office; comp, IIT, Pt. L iv; Pt. IL iv. $5
comm. on the king, but I have followed what Efe the She-king, I. ix. Ode VIII. x
=i, ‘empty,’ without doing service. The
old comm. and the new differ somewhat in
their interpretations of the ode, but they agree
in understandiug its great lesson to be that peo-
ple should not be receiving emolument, who do

i
seems the most Jikely meaning of them. AR
is the purpose, not suddenly formed oi an emer-
gency, but the determination and object of .

i

the whole life, It is soid— iE I Hr EGE

3 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VII.

=
1

i

N
N%

v
Jj
j

vi

+ DBE
=

w

SE AIT?

ree LI
ThE

e gH
V
<=
eam

zx

v

6S
3

v

TEEN
2

e

E AIE
È

kaucap

(d
a
~+
--
v
v
oe
zi

JE

BH

weh TP ER
AEAEE

ML
TIT
C
[e]

o

TT Ash
m

4 M
kh VES
Se oe

um

Catan Vyasa
TT

\
"

e có

Dh i 7H
du Pt
sovereign employ his counsels, he comes to tranquillity, wealth, hon-
our, and glory. If the young in it follow his instructions, they be-
come filial, obedient to their elders, true-hearted, and faithful.—
What greater example can there be than this of not eating the bread
of idleness ? "

Cuarrer XXXII. 1. The king's son, Teen, asked Mencius,
saying, “ What is the business of the unemployed scholar ? "

2. Mencius replied, * To exalt his aim." .

.9. Teen asked again, “What do you mean by exalting the aim?”

The answer was, “ Setting it simply on benevolence and righteousness.
‘He thinks how to put a single innocent person to death is contrary
to benevolence ; how to take what one has not a right to is contrary
to righteousness; that one’s dwelling should be benevolence; and
one's path should be righteousness. When benevolence is the dwell-
ing-place of the heart, and righteousness the path of the life, the busi-

ness of a great man is complete.”
to his ideal of the scholar. 3. X

HTI

not actively serve their oountry. H-

‘ploughing’ labouring. This term is suggested
from the ode, where it occurs, H X, use
him,’ &e., his counsels, not as a minister.

Cn. 33. . How a SCHOLAR PREPARES HIMSELF
FOR THE DUTIES TO WHICH HE ASPIRES. 1.
Teen was the son of the king of Ts‘e. His
question probably had reference to the wander-
ing scholars of the time, whose ways he dis-
liked. They were no favourites with Mencius,
but he prefers to reply to the prince aecording

E th, represent the scholar’s thoughts, his

nursing his. aim. B Aa JE —‘the dwelling

what is it?’ but in translating we are obliged
to drop the direct interrogation. We can hard-

ly take A as in ch, xxx, 4, where it de-
notes the sages, the very highest style of men.
Here it denotes rather the individuals in the
various grades of official employment, to which
‘the scholar’ may attain.

Pr. I. Cx. XXXIV.— XXXV. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 345
: FH
m 5 ES X um
= Hx: ) b b T

À
es l
et
EST
WINS

e
4

ib

Sobre
HEA

=
IS
zy
ez
Ca

mo

*

e

sea

c
A

v

-—
w

RAKS A iH-
FESE
oa

>
KARHI

—

TN SET HEN
US SSS

=
ER

SAN ERR Kp ER p AN

xm
eer

ny

J
\
"

Cuaprer XXXIV. Mencius said, “Supposing that the king-
dom of Ts‘e were offered, contrary to righteousness, to Ch'in Chung,
he would not receive it, and all people believe in him, as a man of the
highest worth. But this is only the righteousness which declines a
dish of rice or a platter of soup. A man can have no greater
crimes than to disown his parents and relatives, and the relations of
sovereion and minister, superiors and inferiors. How can it be
allowed to give a man credit for the great excellencies because he
possesses a small one?” ; ONE

CuaprrER XXXV. 1. Tou Ying asked, saying, “Shun being
emperor, and Kaou-yaou chief minister of justice, if Koo-sow had
murdered a man, what would have been done in the case?” .

2. Mencius said, “ Kaou-yaou would simply have apprehended
him." - A
ter than this, ,—used for fit, but asa verb.

Cu. 85. Wiar SHUN AND HIS MINISTER OF
CRIME WOULD ‘HAVE DONE, IP SHUN'S FATHER
HAD COMMITTED A MURDER, 1. 'T'aou

Cu. 84. How MEN JUDGE WRONGLY OF
CHARACTER, OVERLOOKING, IN THEIR ADMIRA-
TION OF ONE STRIKING ẸXCELLENÇE, GREAT

FAILURES AND DEFICIENCIES. 1

is.the Ch'in Chung of III. Pt. IT. x., which see.
I substitute the surname to avoid translating

In the translátion of A [3 K Fo

ts is taken as used for 24, and what follows
is under the regimen of kK as if we were to
complete the construction in this way :— AZ

JERK wE x Jo Chaou K'e
interprets quite differently :— But what a man
should exalt is the greatest virtues, the pro-
priety and righteousness in the great relations
of life. He, however, denies them, &e? Per-

haps the solecism of taking ig for ¥- is bet-

Ying was a disciple of Mencius. This is all
that is known of him. + is not to be under-

stood here as merely=-}- Rin. Ana, XVII.
i; XIX, xix. The + of Shun’s time was the
same as the K ñj A of the Chow dynasty,

the officer of Crime, under whom were the +

tif: and other subordinates. See the JE ae
fn loc. 2. We must understand Kaou-

yaou as the nominative to 3t. x must

refer to Koo-sow though commen. now under-
stand yke as the antecedent, No doubt the

44

346

3s EE WT
EY
pensi T T I
T E n
PH rii

=
v P

X4
Gt
=
f

v

b

NN

w

n

PHM EMH
ate

ER

Hi ale RS

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

Q

PRN

BOOK VII.

aS

capa
[RE d Se SE HE
itt Se wi

<—

3m
WE WW EC

eS
a,
Ni
-—
sm

SAY.
isl
v

>
N,
E
Sh
WS.
Rk
d
iw

8. “But would not Shun have forbidden such a thing?"

. 4. “Indeed, how could Shun have forbidcen it? — Aaow-yaou
had received the law from a proper source."

5. “In that case what would Shun have done?”

‘6. “Shun would have regarded abandoning the empire as throw-
ing away a worn out sandal. He would privately have taken his
father on his back, and retired into concealment, living somewhere
„along the sea-coast. There he would have been all his life, cheerful
and happy, forgetting the empire.”

Cuaprer XXXVI. 1. Mencius, going from Fan to Ts‘e, saw the

. king of Ts‘e’s son at a distance, and said with a sigh, “ One's position

alters the air, just as the nurture affects the body.

Great is the in-

fluence of position! Are not we all men’s sons?”

meaning is, ‘He would simply have observed
the law, and dealt with Koo-sow accordingly.’

8. TÉ p EP ZZ comp. UL Pt. I. ii. 3.
It is here implied that the law of death for
murder was the will of Heaven, that being the
source to which a reference is made. Kaou-
yaou again must be understood as the nomina-

tive to ZET. He, as minister of Crime, had to

maintain its authority superior to the imperial
will.
. Cm. 36. How one’s MATERIAL POSITION AF-
FECTS HIS AIR, AND MUCH MORE MAY MORAL
CHARACTER BE EXPECTED TO DO $0. a
-Fan was a city of T's‘e, a considerable distance
from the Capital, to which we must understand
Mencius was proceeding. It still gives its name

department of Tung-ch‘ang Cu H ) Chaou
K‘e says that Fan was a city of Tse, the appa-
nage of the king's sons by his concubines. On
this view we should translate — in the
plural, but it proceeds from supposing that it
was in Fan that Mencius saw the £ qo
which the text does not at all necessitate, In

Z an I 0. zu fb. HG
PE ‘revenucs.’ ES 3E. AZ

BH, —some understand -E in the phrase

xN
between K and
sons all; &c. But I prefer to understand with

JE ‘now, are not king's

to a district of Puh-chow HA jii ) in the Chaou K'e, Jt ^ HEF and in English

Tri Cg XXXVL—XXXVIL. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

zi

k^

deg
=
IZ

RE

res Oy

co

47

ER

EET

or

ig

2
SE

-
—-
ww
ww
w

v

BS SRA
REDRN TH

v
er

eA

\
d

i
i

lg
-
a

oe hee

(NC RE:

oe

POENI
HENEN

ee ee

FIS

ES

i EE

2. Mencius said, “The residence, the carriages and horses,
and the dress of the king’ sson, are mostly the same as those of other
men. That he looks so is occasioned by his position. How much
more should a ‘peculiar air distinguish him whose position is in the
wide house of the world!

3. “When the prince of Loo went to Sung, he called out at the
T'&é-chih gate, and the keeper said, ‘This is not our prince. How is
it that his voice is so like that of our prince?’ This was occasioned `
by nothing but the correspondence of their positions.”

Cuarrer XXXVII. 1 Mencius said, “To feed a scholar and
not love him, is to treat him as a pig. To love him and not repect
him, is to keep him as a domestic animal.

2 o“ Honouring and respecting are what exist before any offer-
ing of gifts.

3. “Ifthere be honouring and respecting without the reality of
them, a superior man may not be retained by such empty demon-
str ations,”

An

to supply we rather than they. 2. $ xr

E seem here to be superfluons. R R x
E JE, —see ITI. Pt. II, iii, 3. E [3 *ant-

hill marsh, was simply the name of a poem in
the capital of Sung.

Cu. 37. THAT HE BE RESFECTED IS ESSEN-
TIAL TO A SCHOLAR’S ENGAGING IN THE SERVICE

OF A PRINCE. K ZE Z— having pig

HE or FE. ES

EG distinguished from E leads us to think of
dogs or horses, animals to which we entertain
sentiment higher than to those which we keep
and fatten merely for our eating. 2. ak

xt zh 4 ra=
Bt =i RAS MH. me ws
graph is an explanation of what is meant by
those terms. H? We =F, ‘presented,’ ‘ offered,’

2. Fil:

intercourse with him.’ 2E =

348

LPN
SUNDER Ss

SNH EH HEN
NSS

zuo
3

LÁ
TS

wE I Ss
SZN]

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

Mi
a
0

BOOK VII,

t
T

3

de
>K
Es

e

BEES

Tm
zT

SRI EN

v

sr

FRONS
SN

[ d

ass
DI
Xj
e

ei

RAE NS

a;
vv

=
Shit) Meu

=

an

by Stel uicat or SE
zx

RU

o o

Mencius said, * The bodily organs with
their functions belong to our Heaven-conferred nature.

But a man

must be a sage before he can satisfy the design of his bodily organi-

zation."

Cuaprer XXXIX.: 1. The King Seuen of Ts‘e wanted to shorten
the period of mourning. Kung-sun Ch‘ow said, “To have one’ whole

year's mourning is better than doing

away with it altogether."

2. Mencius said, * That is just as if there were one twisting the
arm of his elder brother, and you were merely to say to him—' Gently,

?

gently, if you please.

one filial piety and fraternal duty.”

Your only course

should be to teach such an

8. At that time, the mother of one of the king’s sons had died,
and his tutor asked for him that he might be allowed to observe a

Cu, 38. ONLY WITH A SAGE DOES THE BODY
ACT ACCORDING TO ITS DESIGN. This is
translated according to the consenting view of
the modern commentators, but perhaps not cor-

rectly, JÉ is taken for the bodily organs,—
the ears, eyes, hands, feet, &c.; and fü for
their manifested operations,—hearing, seeing,
handling, &c. EX is used as in the phrase

us =, ‘to tread upon the words, that is,
to fulfil them, to walk, act, according to
them. The use of iu ch. xxi, 4, is ana-
logous to this use of it here. One critic

en, fi Mb c JE EL
R EHE FE ANTE E A R

PE 4h, ‘The bodily organs with their opera-

tions belong to our Heaven conferred nature;
the meaning is that in these is our Heavenly
nature, not that they are that nature.’

Cn. 39. REPROOF or Kune-sun CHOW FOR
ASSENTING TO THE PROPOSAL TO SHORTEN THE
PERIOD OF MOTRNING. Comp. Con. Ana. XVII.
xxi. 1. The mourning is to he understood
as that of three years for a parent. 3.
The king’s son here must have been a son bya
concubine. Choo He, after Chaou K‘ `, supposes
that he was'not permitted to mourn the three
years, though the jealous of other opposition
of the full queen. In this case the son was
anxious to prolong bis mourning as much as he
could. This explanation, bringing in the op-
position of the-full Queen or wife, seems to be

incorrect, See the Se ve in loc. While the

Pr. I. Ca. XXXIX.—XL.

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

349

EM
OE SS

E

v
w ! N
JS

v

REO

g

E
x

~
*
4

MC E RS E S

4

z5

A

few months" mourning. Kungsun Ch‘ow asked, * What do you

say of this?”

4., Mencius replied, “This is a case where the party wishes to

complete the whole period, but finds it impossible to do so.

The

addition of even a single day is better than not mourning at all I
spoke of the case where there was no- hindrance, and the party

. neglected the thing himself.”
1. Mencius said, “There are five ways in which

. CHAPTER XL.

the superior man effects his teaching. :
2. “There are some on whom his influence descends: like sea-

sonable rain.

9. “There are some whose virtue he perfects, and some of whose
talents he assists the development.

4.

* There are some whose inquiries he answers.

5. “There are some who privately cultivate and correct them-

selves.

6. “These five ways are the methods in which the superior man

effects his teaching."

father was alive, a.son shortened the period of
mourning for his mother, , 4. 5H k-
has a pronominal force, :
Cu. 40. How THE LESSONS OF THE SAGE
REACH TO ALL DIFFERENT CLASSES. 1. The
wish of the superior man is in all cases one and
the same,—to teach. His methods are modified,
however, by the different characters of men.
2. This class only want his influence, like plants
which only need the dew of heaven. So was it,
itis said, with Confucius and his disciples Yen

Yuen and Tsing Sin. 8. wk f& Z- o.

Hm Ry: Soa E is to be understood before
2x

N uy

B cp. and Ri. So was it with Confu-

cius and the disciples Yen and Min. 4. So
wasit with Mencius and Wan Chang 5.
This is a class, who never come into actual
contact with their teacher, but hear of his doc-
trines, and learn them. His teachings though
not delivered by himself in person, do notwith-
standing reach to them. —

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS, BUOK Vit
j= S pu
EER n if Y a ums

D
gl

Nast
xe

©

His C

EAHA RE

REEI

a

s
ol Ne

wu

=

=
ELE

Jue

ijo
(rey “ES
 uy
M

is
T
Gu y
Na
v

v.

TE
I-A Hic

=

is
yi
iL

E eio e
SS
2 MERE

me
ipo 3

Ei
A

b
G
y
I

F SS

o

E
s
oan
SA

HU

CuarrER XLI. 1. ater e said, “Lofty are your
principles and admirable, but to learn them may well be likened to
ascending the heavens, something which cannot be reached: Why
nof adapt your teaching so as to cause learners to consider them at-
tainable, and so daily exert themselves."

2. Mencius said, “A great artificer does not, for the sake of a
stupid workman, alter or do away with the marking line. E did not,
for the sake of a stupid archer, charge his rule for drawing the bow.

3. “The superior man draws the bow, but does not discharge
the arrow. The whole thing seems to leap before the learner. Such
is his standing exactly in the middle of the right path. Those who
are able, follow him.”

Cuaprer XLII. 1. Mencius said, * When right principles prevail
thoughout the empire, one's principles must appear along with one's
person. When right principles disappear from the empire, one’s
person must vanish along with one’s principles.

culty here is with the words He 7t thy lit.,

t leaping-like? They belong, I think to the su-
perior man in all the action which is represented.
No man ean be taught how to hit. That is his
own act, He is taught to shoot, and that in so
lively a manner that the hitting also is, as it

Cu. 41. THE TEACHER OF TRUTH MAX NOT
LOWER HIS LESSONS TO SUIT HIS LEARNERS.

1. 4A fB HF. *those' refers

to learners, which antecedent has been implied

‘in the words ü A AU *it is right they

Should be considered,’ &c, y uj x Vio

FV. Fi ‘to consider,’ ‘regard,’ 2,

Ba string and ink,’ a carpenters’ mark-

7 Yi
ing-line, 5 p (read Teith),—‘the limit to
which a bow should be drawn?

3. The difi- ;

were, set forth before him. So with the teacher
and learner of truth. As the learner tries to
do as he is taught, he will be found laying hold
of what he thought unapproachable.

Cu. 42. ONE MUST LIVE OR DIE WITH HIS
PRINCIPLES, ACTING FROM HIMSELF, NOT WITH

REGARD TO OTHER MEN. L7 means ‘tu
bury along with the dead,’ to associate with in

Pr. I, Cu. AKLIL—XLIV. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. : 351

'

S
Pox

ans
EDS
=

=]

R
e

peu
poi
In

ERS Sure

Ho

4
es

‘ ri
Jj, Jn A ood 2 T A
di ER wy HE OU Et SH OA
Jt zi LB, JB OB du zx
m ^H DE md, dE d

=
Sh
P

. Fa, Wi de D]

2. “I have not heard of one's principles being dependent for
their manifestation on other men." Ea ;

Cuarrer XLII. 1. The disciple Kung-too said, “ When King of
T‘Xng made his appearance in your school, it seemed proper that a
polite consideration should be paid to him, and yet you did not
answer him. Why was that?”

2. Mencius replied, “I do not answer him who questions me
presuming on his nobility, nor him who presumes on his talents, nor
him who presumes on his age, nor him who presumes on services
performed to me, nor him who presumes on old acquaintance. Two:
of those things were chargeable on Kang of Ting.”

Cuarter XLIV. 1. Mencius said, “He who stops short where
stopping is not allowable, will stop short in every thing. He who
behaves shabbily to those whom he ought to treat well, will behave
shabbily to all. a

2. “He who advances with precipitation will retire with speed.”

death as in life, Another meaning is n8 E think that more than ordinary respect should
y ; have been shown to him, and yet it was no doubt
‘with the person to follow after things,’ ; ets

HE P ; => one of the things which made Mencius jealously

==to pursue, The first ki] is right principles watch his spirit. Comp. VI. Pt. II. ii. 6, 7.

z L T h SI h incipl Cu. 44. WHERE VIRTUES ARE WANTING, DE-

in general. ‘The other 3Ej are those principles CENCIES MAY NOT BE EXPECTED. PRECIPITATE

as held by individual men, z ADVANCES ARE FOLLOWED BY SPEEDY RETREATS,
Cu. 43. How MENCIUS REQUIRED THE SIM- The first par., it is said, has reference to errors

PLE PURSUIT OF TRUTH IN THOSE WHOM HE ` E fp '

TAUGHT. Kang was a younger brother of erdeea a RB rad ) and he second

the prince of Taing. His rank made Kung-teo to those of excess CR sa)» :

‘THE WORKS OF

352 MENCIUS. BOOK VII.
A, du dy cu om] in Be c
A dax Wp a

5
bs
F
=
^

ESANAHI

v

ION

Nya}
T-

Testi

v

3
ginis

v
t

er
4
v

HRS

STT
ER

y

>E
PSAS

*-
E
[4

o
»

a
E

xw M
uS

B

*

TREER

A
S

t
&
v
w
v

HS
(CREE
Nj
[REM

S

ANTATT
NTEM

í d

Cuarrern XLV. Mencius said, “In regard to inferior creatures,
the superior man is kind to them, but not loving. In regard to
people generally, he is loving tó them, but not affectionate. He is
affectionate to his parents, and lovingly disposed to people generally.
He is lovingly disposed to people generally, and kind to creatures.”

Cuarter XLVI. 1. Mencius said, “The wise embrace all know-
ledge, but they are most earnest about what is of the greatest im-
portance. The benevolent embrace all in their love, but what they
consider of the greatest importance is to cultivate an earnest affec-
tion for the virtuous. Even the wisdom of Yaou Shun did not
extend to every thing, but they attended earnestly to what was im-
portant. Their benevolence did not show itself in acts of kindness
to every man, but they earnestly cultivated an affection for the
virtuous. :

' Cu. 45. THE SUPERIOR MAN IS KIND TO CREA-
TURES, LOVING TO OTHER MEN, AND AFFECTION-
ATE TO HIS RELATIVES. This was intended, no

: doubt, against the Mihist doctrine of loving all
equally. Jr -animats, The second x is
not to be understood only of parents. Compare
FH KH, D.M., xx, 12.
Cu. 46. AGAINST THE PRINCES OF HIS TIME
WHO OCCUPIED THEMSELVES WITH THE KNOW-
LEDGE OF, AND REGARD FOR, WHAT WAS OF LIT-

TLE IMPORTANCE L jn Xr gl j {E
^ TA are not our ‘omniscient,’ and ‘all-lov-
ing,’ but show the tendency and adaptation of

follow, — e TR he E53 X, et x

Ta 35. Show in what way truly great rulers
come to an administration which appears to
possess these characters. The use of the

in those clauses is idiomatic. To reduce it
to the ordinary usages of the particle, we must

take the first as--/HE EY ot ae 4 Fa A

*but only are they earnest about the things
which it is most important £o know,’ and

ab 3g 4M. YAT OQ

HESS. = Ta x e x, but only are
they earnest about what is most important, the
cultivating affection for the virtuous.” The

teaching of the chapter is substantially the

the wise and the benevolent, ‘The clauses that same as that of Confucius, Ana, XIL xxii

Pr. IL Cu. L THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 358

Boa Dep ntm d = d
DEX ESSERE
4M fe BA [1f Bit xL e < f He

2. “Not to be able to keep the three years’ mourning, and to be
very particular about that of three months, or that of five months;
to cat immoderately and swill down the soup, and at the same time
to inquire about the precept not to tear the meat with the teeth ;—

„such things show what I call an ig norance of what is most import-
ant.”

Ht

2. a s coarse, unbleached, hempen see the Book of Rites, I. Pt. I. iii. 04, 55.—
eloth,’ worn in mourning the period of three These are cascs adduced in illustration of what
months for distant relatives, ^ 3j js the is insisted on in the prévious paragraph ;—the
name applied in the case of mourning which folly of attending to what is comparatively tri»

extends for five months, pj £k D - vial, while overlooking what is important,

AI

BOOK VIL

TSIN SIN. PART II:

E xs
PUE JE dt de sec ^n x

Jt at ET Br XB, Duty

Cuaprer L 1. Mencius said, “The opposite indeed of bene-
volent was the king Hwuy of Leang! The benevolent, beginning with
what they care for, proceed to what they do not care for. Those
who are the oppositè of benevolent, beginning with what they do not
care for, proceed to what they care, for.”

Cr. 1. A STRONG CONDEMNATION OF KING
Hwux or Luana, FOR. SACRIFICING TO HIS AM-
BITION HIS PEOPLE AND EVEN HIS son. Comp. Opposed to fi is used with reference to ani-
E. Pt. E. v, and other conversations with king mais, while here it expresses the feeling towards
Iwuy. 1. Re is more than ‘unbene- Children and people and animals, and I have
volent’ wonld mean, if we had sucha term rend redat by do cere for In the first ense

: l ? eee y — jin the text, the progress is from one degree of
H is nearly =‘ cruel,’ * oppressive, , APA , love to-another ; in the second, from one degree

cm Pt. I. 45. Only 2 XS, being there

45.

-

354 IHE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VIL

v

Tr
NE
T
S

=

=
TRE
Spay

VSS

ENS HH
3

ER
aN AD
-

P4
v

RN
SNES

S
=
zi
nu
E
ME
zx

HE. A B Í
4E 36 — dt Re 48 Bt Wu
DES META E

T “ha A p ZA AN Uae

2. Kung-sun Ch‘ow said, “What do you mean?" Mencius
answered, “The king Hwuy of Leang, for the matter of territory,
tore and destroyed his people, leading them to battle. Sustaining a
great defeat, he would engage again, and afraid lest they should not
be able to secure the victory, urged his son whom he loved till he
sacrificed him with them. This is what I call —' beginning with what
they do not care for, and proceeding to what they care for.’”

Carrer H. 1. Mencius said, “In the ‘Spring and Antumn'
there are no righteous wars. Instances indeed there are of one war
better than another. .

2. *** Correction’ is when the supreme authority punishes its sub-
jects by force of arms. Hostile States do not correct one another."

of infliction to another, 2 KE *to boil for Mencius himsclf uses the term 4X, in the
rice till it is ec 8. reduced to a pulpy mass,’ 8d par. In the Ch'un Ts‘ew itself there are
So did Hwuy seem to deal with the bodies mentioned of *fightiugs" (Bib) only 23, while
ot his Subject Br $e T Ww refers to the ! smitings, 52) amount to 213. There are
Hwuy's eldest son (I. Pt, I. v. 4} He is called specified in it also ‘invasions’ ( fb sieges’
a F pA as being one of the youth of the REAN tearryings away" Gas): ‘extinguishings’
kingdom: 7j comp. Pt. T, 45. GE: ‘defeats’ (Gs ‘takings’ (]fj); ‘sur-

Cu. 2, How ALL THE FIGHTINGS RECORDED x

IN TüE Ün'Ux-TS'EW WERE UNRIGHTEOUS:—a prises’ (BE); ‘pursuits’ GB» and * defences"
WARNING TO THE CONTENDING STATES OF MEN- S ! aS er

; fit BB Qo s gd all of which may likewise be comprehend-
CIUS’ TIME. 1. fi No my, —‘no right- mes
eous battles; Both Chaou K'e, and Choo He ed under the term gb. 3. Explains the
make Rig = p fX x $, ‘the affairs of assertion in the first. In the wars recorded by

Y= t : ae : 4

fighting and smiting, ie, all the operations of Confucius, one State or chief was said to 4 IE
war detailed in the Ch'un Ts‘ew. And rightly ; another, which could not be according to the

Fr. H. Cu. HI.—Iv, THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

Qe E

TUM
PAM

So

DP Se
EUH
EMI

HATT

a
te’
og

=
FASTI

r4
w

ST Sess
Bo

FRASE
=
CES

Cuaprer III. 1. Mencius said, “It would be better to be with-
out the Book of History than to give entire credit to it.

2. .“In the ‘Completion of the War’, I select two or three
passages only, which I believe. ;

3. “The benevolent man has no enemy under heaven. When.
the prince the most benevolent was engaged against him who was the
most the opposite, how could the blood of the people have flowed till
it floated the pestles of the mortars? ”

Cuaprer IV. 1. Mencius said, “There are men who say—‘I am
skilful at marshalling troops, I am skilful at conducting a battle ! '—
They are great criminals. — . ' i

2. “Ifthe sovereign of a state love benevolence, he will have no
enemy in the empire.

9. “When Zang was executing his work of correction in the

propensity to warfare which characterized his
contemporaries, $; 5 is the title

of the third Book in the 5th Part of the Shoo- .
king, professing to be an account by king Woo
of his enterprise against the tyrant Chow.
The words quoted in the next par. are found

in par, 8.. For TF there are diff, readings ;

see the fE WE in loc. Doubtless there is

much exaggeration in the language, but Men-

meaning of the term, By F is intended the

emperor; by P the princes. Comp, VI. Pt.
Il. vii. 2. $
Cu. 3. WITH WHAT RESERVATJON MENCIUS
Rian THE S$uoo:Kixc. This is a difficult chap-
ter fer Chinese commentators, Chaou K'etakes
of the Shoo-king, which is the only fair in-

terpretation. Others understand it of books in
. general. Thus Julien transtates—‘ Si omnino

Jidem udhibeas libris? Many say that Mencius
had in view only the portion of the Shoo-king
to which he refers in the next par, but such a
restriction of his language is entirely arbitrary.
The strangest view is that of the author of the

py E i &R E whose judgments gene-
rally are sound and sensible. But he says here
that Mencius is anticipating the attempts that
would be made in after ages to corrupt the
Classics, and testifying against them. e can
see how the remarks were directed against the

cius misinterprets the whole passage. The
bloodshed was not done by the troops of king
Woo, but by the forces of the tyrant turning
against one another.

Cu. 4. COENSEL TO PRINCES NOT TO ALLOW `
THEMSELVES TO BE DECBIVED BY MEN WHO
WOULD ADVISE THEM-TO WAR. 1. Comp.
IV. Pt. I. xiv. 8. 2. Comp. I. Pt. IT. xi. 2. '

It is spoken of T'ang, 8. E Hi—

*leathern carriages, or chariots,’ said by some
to be baggage waggons, but, more probably, by

856 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK vif.
gH f ^. } 1
E EA i ANS PE Enp Fe j b

up H Ji
BA J D Hi Ji

44

GEC ses raul

e

w

m

-'

->h
A

ev

MENDES
BEN

o
V

ub
INE v

$

DJEN
=

San’
nie

Ss

Bi
ze
Rd

ENO d

E

south, the rude tribes on the north murmured. When he was
exécuting it in the east, the rude tribes on the west murmured.

Their cry was—' Why does he make us last? '
4. “ When*king Woo punished Yin, he had only three hundred
chariots of war, and three thousand life-guards.

5. “The king said, ‘Do not fear.

am no enemy to the people!

* y

Let me give you repose. I

On this, they bowed their heads to
the earth, like the horns of animals falling off.’

6. “Imperial correction’ is but another word for rectifying.
Each State wishing itself to be corrected, what need is there for

fighting? "

CuaPrER V. Mencius said, “A carpenter or a carriage-maker
may give a man the circle and square, but cannot make him skilful

th the use of them."

Cuaprer VI. Mencius said, *Shun's nranner of eating his parch-
? 9 e Į
ed grain and herbs was as if he were to be doing so all his life.

others, chariots of war, each one of which had
19 foot soldiers attached to it, so that Woo’s
army would number 21,600, few as compared
with the forces of his opponent. p used for

p low, 2d tone, a numeral for carriages,

JR H (pun )—-these appear to have been of

the character of life-guards, named from their
tiger-like courage and bearing. 4. See the
Shoo-king, Pt. V. i. Sect. T1.9, But the text
of the Classic is hardly recognizable in Men-
cius’ version of it. The original is :— * Rouse
ye, my heroes. Do not think that he is not to

be feared, but rather hold that he cannot be
withstood. The people are full of awe, as if
their horns were falling from their heads,’

5. Perhaps it would be well to retain the sound

of fit in the translation, and say—' Now ching

means to rectify,’ ay (SN 3E BG. *each peo-

ple wishes the ching-er to correct itself’
Cu. 5. REAL ATTAINMENT MUST BE MADE BY
THE LEARNER FOR HIMSELF. Comp. Pt. Liv

41. TE br i fü. see III, Pt, II. 3.
33

Cu. 6. ‘Pur LQUANIMITY OF SHUN IN POVERTY
=the +
AND AS EMPEROR, E] must be taken as ER.

Pr. IT. Cn; VL—VIL

Acn TÆ M a5
27 wu 4 AR A
IN ESE y X m mel b

ha
ee

ve

- TN
VY 1
= De
enean wf

BuO
v

DN
NHI
os

E

e
v
©
ow
d

Em

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

Ne

“PORT ki

VAR

c
-

n

Ui
i
a

ou

Nar

[9]
a
i

Ix
PREPRI

ao
Ld
[ d

ape

=
»- SAS

iS
2/

AM.
s

yi

a

œ
[4
t^

RES SPN RARE

BREE
zx
HE

BAER
LEER
i

X X BT

When he became emperor, and had the enbroidered robes to wear,
the lute to play, and the two daughters ef Yaou to wait on him, he
was as if those things belonged to him as a matter of course,”
CuarrkR VII. Mencius said, * From this time forth I know the
heavy consequences of killing a man's near relations. When a man
kills another's father, that other will kill his father; when a man kills
another’s elder brother, that other will kill his elder brother, So
he does not himself indeed do the act, but there is only an interval

NM

between him and it.”
Cuarrer VIII.

1. Mencius said, * Anciently, the establishment

of the frontier-gates was to guard against violence.
2. * Now-a-days, it is to exercise violence."

Ai is a word used for fx , applied to eating

a S 4 v 4 i
herbs. Bo RE to eat. The ‘embroidered
robes’ are the imperial dress. On Shun’s Inte,

see V, Pt. T, ii, 3. HA used for pU wo, ‘a

female attendant.”

Cua. 7. How THE THOUGHT OF ITS CONSEQUEN-
CES SHOULD MAKE MEN CAREFUL OF THEIR CON-
pect. Choo He observes that this remark
must have been made with some special refer-

ence, — ZEA Ty f$ It is a maxim of Chi-

nese society, that *a man may not live under the
same heaven with the slayer of his father, nor in
the same State with the slayer of his elder bro-
ther,' but the remark does not seem to regard
that so much as to take occasion from it to

warn rulers to make their government firm in
the attachment of their subjects, and not pro-
voke their animosity by oppressive acts, ==

i5 H— thereis only one interval; tbat is,
the death of a. man’s father or brother is the
consequence of his previous conduct, the slayer
only intervening. .

Cu. 8. THE BENEVOLENCE AND SELFISHNESS
OF ANCIENT AND MODERN RULE CONTRASTED.
Comp. I. Pt. I. v. 8; IL Pt. I.v. 3. But one
does not see exactly how the ancient rule of
examining the person, and not taking the goods,
guarded against violence. Here, as elsewhere,
Mencius is led away by his fondness for anti-
thesis.

358 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.. BOOK VII.

4
i

Dt ou aA eu =

s

4

w

a
HRe

SERENO
2

a

F
vI

=>
E

[ d
v
w

E

v

SEEN EH:

xb >) EN

SEES

ay, %
 Æ Hie fT
- Cuarrer IX. Mencius said, “ If a man himself. do not walk in
the right path, it will not be walked in even by his wife and children.
If he do not order men according to the right way, he will not be able
to get the obedience of even his wife and children.”

Cuapter X. Mencius said, * A bad year cannot prove the cause
of death to him, whose stores of gain are large; an age of corrup-
tion cannot confound him whose equipment of virtue is complete.”

CuapreR XI. Mencius said, “A man who loves fame may be
able to decline a kingdom of a thousand chariots, but if he be not
really the man to do such a thing, it will appear in his countenance,
in the matter of a dish of rice or a platter of soup.”

OuarrER XII. 1. Mencius said, “If men of virtue and ability
be not confided in, a State will become empty and void.

Cu. 9, A MAN’S INFLUENCE DEPENDS ON HIS CH. ll. A MAN’S TRUE DISPOSITION WILL OF-
PERSONAL EXAMPLE AND QONDUCT. To the TEN APPEAR IN SMALL MATTERS, WHEN A LOVE OF

second 4°¢ we are to suppose Ñ as the nomi- FAME MAY HAVE CARRIED IMM OVER GREAT DIF-
FICULTIES, Choo He here expounds well :—

native, while the third is like a verb in the g; H ] --
Aiphil conjugation, ‘The A is not so much 4b, Ea A T Hn H Fi fg. m T Ht
A ‘other men,’ The whole f AOR VA i Rie ER ti By Wy R oN Br zc

‘A is se th in things
; as fadi 7 man is seen not so much in thing
3E simpl =H X t: 3A *if his orders I : : : ;
3d Dy "E bs FH ? P which require an effort, as in things which he
are not according to reason. might easily despise. By bearing this in mind
Cm. 10. CORRUPT TIMES ARE PROVIDED when we observe him, we can see what he
AGAINST HY ESTABLISHED VIRTUE, pa BE really rests in^
A kerei . Cu. 12. ‘THREE THINGS IMPORTANT IN THE
^ po
Tb ^ HE BL may be taken either actively ADMINISTRATION OF A STATE, ` l Ay Ap
or passively. ij j E: He he who is ‘be not confided ¢o;’ perhaps rather ‘confided
complete in gain,’ te, he who has gained much, in” * Will become empty and void,"— Chaou
and laid much by. K'e supplements thus, ‘Lf the prince do not

-

Pr. IL Cu. XIL—XIV. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 359

wi
b

n

Ei

di i

ea

TT
{DHE

oad JAS
F ZA, o AE n

V
4S
decima
\

d
Grag

2. “Without the rules of propriety and distinctions of right,
the high and the low will be thrown into confusion.
e
3. "Without the great principles of government and their various
business, there will not be wealth sufficient for the expenditure."
Cuaprer XIII Mencius said, “There are instances of indi-
viduals without benevolence, who have got possession of a single
State, but there has been no instance of tlie whole empire's being got
possession of by one without benevolence."
Cuarrer XIV. 1, Mencius said, “The people are the most im-
portant element im a nation; the spirits of the land and grain are
_ the next; the sovereign is the lightest.
2. “Therefore to gain the peasantry is the way to become em-

consort with and confide in the virtuous and l place of the spirit or spirits of the ground, and
able, then they will go away, and a country then used for the sacrifice to that spirit or those —

without such persons is said to be.empty and iri HH x icled millet,’ he A
void." 2, ‘The high and the low,’—that is, sp dr Be t QUÀ is : fe is i zs
noe ~ z erally the spirit or spir residing over grain.

the distinction of ranks, Fi X may be con- p, 7 p E E A E
A Together, the characters, ct T2 denote the
sidered a hendiadys, and so Lx 5 in the next *tutelary- spirits of a country, on whom its
paragraph. Ej is the right, or rightness, on Prosperity depends, and to sacrifice to whom
m: : > was the prerogatiye of its sovereign.--lt is

v nich the rules of propriety are founded, and i

m often said that the jif- was ‘to sacrifice to the
H} is the various business that flows from the is
3 e : spirits of the five kinds of ground, and the
right principles of government.

Cm. 13. ONLY BY BENSVOLENCE CAN THE T to sacrifice. to those of the five kinds of.

PR Sue x
MPIRE BE GOT, . x grain. But this is merely one of the numerical
EMPIRE Sor Many comm. put A fancies ef which Chinese writers are fond. The

in the potential mood, as if it were BK AR five kinds of ground are mountains and forests
3 a. " ` M
This is not allowable. Facts may be alleged ( tly Pho, rivers and marshes ( ] I Í Ó

that seem to be in opposition to the concludin : ' 2 R —
n opp p^ 5 mounds (Ur p. places of tombs aga Tp»
statement, The commentator Tsow e `
says :— From the dynasty of, Ts‘in downwards, and plains gi iA)» But it would be easy to
there have been cases, when the empire was got det another division, pe AX e p
] a : : : eight, and other ways of speaking about the
by men without benevolence, but in such taco kinds of grain. The regular sacrifices to these
tt has been lost again after one or two reigns? tutelary spirits were three:—one in spring to
Cu. 14. THE DIFFERENT ELEMENTS OF A pray for a good harvest; one in autumn, to give
‘NATION—THE PEOPLE, TUTELARY Spirits, AND thanks for the harvest; and a third in the first
SOVEREIGN, IN RESPECT OF THEIR IMPORTANCE. month of winter. On occasions of calamity there

L jc is properly the altar, or resting : were special services, 2. E R-H

860 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VIL

Je } À n EUREN

DN
Tee
— e TN
LT
T
5v Bes]
ISS
S
S
Bes

M

«V

NP
ae

Sn
ES
S
v "^

s

n] K JEN

f . oF
V

PiL

D E WHEI BH

peror ;'to gain the emperor is the way to become a prince ofa State ;

to gain the prince of a State is the way to become a great officer.

3. “When a prince endangers the altars of the spirits of the land
and grain, he is changed, and another appointed in his place.

4. * When the sacrificial victims have been perfect, the millet in
its vessels all pure, and the sacrifices offered at their proper seasons,
if yet there ensue drought, or the waters overflow, the spirits of
the land and grain are changed, and others appointed in their place."

CumaPrER XV. Mencius said, “A sage is the teacher of a hun-
dred generations :—this is true of Pih-e and Huy of Lew-hea. There-
fore when men now hear the character of Pih-e, the corrupt become
pure, and the weak acquire determination. When they hear the
character of Hwuy of Lew-hea, the mean become genorous, and the

EE
2X
(VEIN

ER. "the people of the fields and and grain cannot ward off calamities s

i : from the people, then their altars and fences
, N the Chow . peor odi

wida, the peasantry. -According o Mie Chow are thrown down and others in different places

Le, nine husbandmen, heads of families, formed erected? Chaou K'e is more brief. He simply

3 ; »r1rHE Ta A

a tsing di: four £sing formed a yih CELOS says that in such a ease Be Ds T2 Wn Eu
and four yih formed a kew (Fr) which would E Z. which may mean that they destroyed
thus contain 144 families, But the phrase E ‘the altars or displaced the spirits themselves.
LA Suum ] 1 2 * A changing of the altars merely docs not supply

, signifyiug the peasantry, is yet equivalent a parallel to the removal of the princes in the

to ‘the people, Mencius uses it, his discourse preceding paragraph. And there are traces of
being of the spirits of the land and grain deposing the spirits in such a case, and appoint-

4. "The change of the iit + B is taken by most ing others in their places. See the py EA

commentators as merely a destroying of the Ju e sib in loc.
altars and building others. This is Choo He's Cu. 15. Tat Pm-r anp Hwvx or Lew-

- = a 2 pR y > THE 2 CEN.

interpretation :— -H 228 Y E HEA WERE SAGES PROVED BY TIUS PERMANENCE

ji i tate " x vs i) OF THEIR INFLUENCE, Comp. V. Pt. IT. i:

Ed (te Dp É epo et al^. ‘A hundred generations’ is spoken gen-

Y AU ur Ri Bed ` PR aB w erally. Between the two worthies themselves,
b iü PE ‘when the spirits of the ground! several hundred years intervened.

=
e"

Pr. I. Cr, XV.—XVII. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

cm a

[——i —34—^ He
du EXEC 3
yoy AE uj Xe ta
on aN

x
IR

v
o

TEN
I

Ej un

Siem
DEEST ERE NE

sek
EM

SERE

TER ENG
SNI]
E

e
Q

RETO

:

poa bir
P Tr!
i ; :

-
Ld

=
ae

a

Eze

Eg

TANAR

ot

Fr
Soak RE

Teese > SSE

p
y

m
s

(KN
[ERN
ES

Ld
vv
iym
i

niggardly become liberal. Those two made themselves distinguished
a hundred generations ago, and after a hundred generations, those
who hear of them, are all aroused in this manner. Could such effects
be produced by them, if they had not been sages? And how much
more did they affect those who were in contiguity with them, and
were warmed by them!”

Caarrer XVI. Mencius said, “Benevolence is the distinguishing
characteristic of man. As embodied in mau's conduct, it is called
the path of duty.” `

Cuarter XVII. Mencius said, * When Coufucius was leaving
Loo, he said, ‘I will set out by-and-by ;'—this was the way for
him to leave the State of his parents. When he was leaving Ts’e,
he strained off with his hand the water in which his rice was being
rinsed, took the rice, and went away ;—this was the way for him to
leave a strange State.”

Cu. 16. THE RELATION OF BENEVOLENCE TO
MAN. This chapter is quite enigmatic.

& is taken s= ; um F A &, ‘unite

benevolence with man's person,’ and 33 as the

pa PE x i of the Chung-yung, "Phe
glossarist of Chaou K'e refers to Con. Ana.
XV. xxviii, which is very good. Choo He,

cius found in Corea, after Ath, there follow
accounts of ‘righteousness,’ ‘propriety, and
‘ wisdom E: 1t aA T 4, AA
If that was the original reading, the final clause
would be:—‘ These, all united and named, are
the path of reason.'

Cu. 17. How CONFUCIUS’ LEAVING Loo AND
Ts'k WAS DIFFERENT. Comp. V. Pt. IL i.

however, mentions that in an edition of Men- 4. ‘

46

THE WORKS OF MENCIUS, BOOK VIL

a

R T eG Bl a E JAA
Y c WN BS PM pn ZE
Ws FE DAW FA" b m

`

yr

EHNE

(03

Ets

ASS

=d
Z

~
ez

s

a=
gest

elisi
L d

"n HAE A

Crarrer XVII. Mencius said, “The reason why the superior
man was reduced to straits between Chin and Ts*ae was because
neither the princes of the time nor their ministers communicated
with him.” . l

Cuarter XIX. 1. Mih R'e said, “Greatly am I from anything
to depend upon from the mouths of men.”

2. Mencius observed, “There ix no harm in that. Scholars are
more exposed than others to suffer from the mouths of men. `

3. “It is said, in the Book of Poetry,

‘My heart is disquicted and grieved,
Tam hated by the crowd of mean creatures.’
This might have been said by Confucius; And again,
‘Though he did not remove their wrath,
: He did not let fall his own fame.’

This might be said of king Wn."
Cu. 18. THE REASON or CONFUCIUS BEING
IN STRAITS BETWEEN CHUN AND Ts‘ar. See
Con. Ana. XI. ii. The speaking of Confucius
simply by the term pi is to be noted;
comp. Ana. X. vi. 1, et al... Chaon We observes

that Confucius, in his exceeding modesty, said;
that he was not equal to the three-fold way of ;
the superior man (Ana. XIV, xxx.) aud. there- :

fore he might be spoken of as a superior man.
Xt: is difficult to see the point of this observation,
nor does it meet the difficulty which arises from

the use of the designation in the text, E =4F,

‘the sovereigns,’ and Te Bm. *their minis-
ters. The princes did not honour him and
seek his services.
our him, and recommend hint to employment.
This is the meaning of file E Pz ay.
The commentators, in their quest for profound
meanings, make out the lesson to be that

though a sage may be reduced to straits, the :

way of truth cannot be so reduced.

Their ministers did not hon- .

ij Cu. 19 MENCIUS COMFORTS Mii K'E uxper'
 CALUMNY BY THE REFLECTION THAT FE WAS THE
; ORDINARY LOT OF DISTINGUISHED MEN, .
‘Of Mih K'e, nothing is known beyond what is

‘here intimated. xp js used in the sense cf

dfi. *to depend on, "This is given to it in the
dict, with a reference to this passage. ‘The
meaning is that not only did he not have a good
word from men, but was spoken ill of by them.

27 jer. itis concluded, from tlie coinment
of Chaou Kte, is a mistake for yer, *to increase,’
: and ¥% has substantially the same meaning.
Retaining n. however, and taking Ye in
„its sense of this or these, we get a tolerable
: meaning, —* The seholar hates those many
mouths,’ 8. For the first quotation, see the
She-king, I. iii. Ode I. st. 4, a description of her
condition by the ill-used wife of one of the dukes
of Wei (according to Choo He), and which
Mencius somewhat strangely would apply to
; Confucius. For the second, sce HL i Ode IU.

D

c
oe

Pr. IL Ca. XX.—XXII. THE WORKS OF MENCIUS,

B.

$
4

m

MORBEdS
Soe

-
y Vil
be

i
i
4
i

 f
É
i

NH
REID
PH

ES

i-
ANER N
>
=
vy
xttl
ig

o

7

-

;
ER
TONS

ERT
S E

==
ib

-

M
I
ed
zur
x
sel
o

liv

n saine
mat
“Nie

TNE
Ia

g

N

ME d

E
AINS
I$:
"
HEN

d

a

a

EN
SSNS
-REJ
: )

Cuarter XX. Mencius said, “ Anciently, men of virtue and
talents by means of their own enlightenment made others enlightened.

Now-i a-days, it is tried, wile they are themselves in darkness, and by
means of that darkness, to make others enlightened.”

Cuavrer XX. Mencius said to the disciple Kaou, * There are
the foot-paths along the hills ; —if suddenly they be used, they become
roads; aud if, as suddenly thev are not used, the wild grass fills
them up. Now, the wild grass fills up your mind."

Cuaprrr NXIT 1. The dise ciple Kaou said, “The music of Yu
was better than that of king Wai.

2. Mencius observed, “On what ground do you say $0?" and
the other replied, * Because’ at the pivot the knob of Yu's bells is
nearly worn through.”

at, 8, descriptive of the king Iac, though applied give such a sound to the character, nor do we
to Wan. nj is in the sense of E ‘repurt,? find in it the meaning which suits this passage)

‘reputation. YR, — suddenly ; nearly= 43 fni . "(The Kaon
Cii. 20. How THE ANCIENTS LED ON MEN BY here must have been a disciple of Mencius,

THEIR EXAMPLE, WHILE THE RULERS OF MEN- diferent from the old Kaon, vr Pt. HL ii
^ d R sp T I T r
CIUS TIMB-TRIBD LO URGE: MEN “CONTRARY: TO- Chaoil Is‘ says that after studying with Men-

THEIR EXAMPLE. In translating, I suppl

qE xt before E 3 in MK. uc cius for some time, and before he fully under-
li À stood his principles, he went off and addicted

Æ below, To the two Jia very different

influence of example; the latter is the applica:
tion of pains and penalties.
Cu. 21. THAT THÉ CULTIVATION OF THE MIND

MAY NOT BE INTERMITTED. IR mi »—‘ spaces

for the foot,’=footpaths; ily FEZ Be cit

the ‘footpaths of the hill-ways,’ (read héd,
according to Choo He, tho’ the dict. does not

and its consequences.

Cu. 22. AN ABSURD REMARK OF THE DISCI-
pis Kaou ABOUT THE MUSIC OF Yu AND KING
Wax. 2. i H read tuy, ‘the knob, or loop,
of a bell, the part by which it is suspended.

aE. —low. 2d tone, an insect that bores through
wood; hence, metaphorically, anything having

the appearance of being eaten or worn away.

 himself to some other teacher, and that the.
force i is giten. The former is the constraining remark was made with reference to this course,

364 . THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VII.

Rie rb.
"

HE

.

C

PES
Ru

ar

M

E

N

4

wen !
qud
DEED
So

E Z [4

cu

=
zu
=

v

(NES

URN

zu net

Mis

El
EARS

o

T
im i
E mU
2 >
iN

c

Ese
ZE
m

(be -
» Fey KD

3. Mencius said, “ How can that be a sufficient proof? Are the
ruts at the gate of a city made e by a a single two-horsed chariot ? "

Cuaprar XXHI 1. When Ts'e was suffering from famine, Ch'in
Tsin said to Mencius, ®The people are all thinking that you, Master,
will again ask that the granary of Ttang be. opened for them. I
apprehend you will not do so a second time." l

2, Mencius said, “To do it would be to act like Fung Foo.
There was a man of that name in Tsin, famous for his skill in seiz-
ing tigers. Afterwards, he became a scholar of reputation, and going
once out to the wild country, he found the people all in pursuit of
a tiger. The tiger took refuge i in a corner of a hill, where no one
dared to attack him, but wheu they saw Fung Foo, they ran and
methim. Fung Foo diumediatel, y bared his arms, ; and descended from

3. The meaning is that what Kaou no- low. 3d tone, as in ch. iv, 4. See the py Ge
ticed was only the effect of time or long use,

Yu being anterior to king Win, and did not Hr [3 AR yin loc.

necessarily imply any superiority of the music Cn. 23. zd MENCIUS KNEW WHERE TO
of the one over that of the other. The street STOP AND MAINTAIN HIA OWN DIGNITY IN MIS
contracts at the gate, and all the carriages that INTERCOURSE WITH THE PRINCES. l. At

have been running over its breadth are obliged T'ang, whose name is still preserved in- the
to run in the same ruts, which hence are deeper il f Kanti in the district of "Tsel
here than elsewhere.—Theré is much contro- "age O Kan-t‘ang, in the district of ‘T'seih-

versy about the phrase Wj 6 Z Ji: Chaou mih (Éji E ) in the department of Lae-chow,

EE
. K'e understands ig Ms as meaning *two kinds

the princes of Ts'e, it would appear, kept grain
in store, and on some previous occurrence of
of horses ;'—the Es tE, levied from the State,
and employed on what we may call the postal

famine, Mencius had advised the king to open
ithe granary. In the meantime, however, some

service, and the PAS BB. or ‘public horses,’

principally used in “military serviee. On this

difference had occurred between him and the
view the meaning would De that the ruts in

prince. He intended leaving Ts'e, and would
not expose himself to a repulse by making an

question were not made by these two kinds of
` earpiages only. Choo He, after the Conimen-

heer which might be rejected. 2.
—‘a good scholar,’ or ‘officer,’ but

tator Fung CEE. RB takes the meaning as I Eit i$ cb * s

have given it in n the translation. Another view is not to be taken at all emphatically,

takes bby in the sense of EH, taking it in the E ay -Z= {E It did not belong to

Fa

Pr. IL Cn XXHL—XXIV. THE WORKS OF MEXCIUS. 363

t
b

$N
TH
ys
E

}

gl

bets
+e
BXH

st
SEIS 4a

TES

-”

z(vzm
Á
Sj

[d

-RHEERQIT
»
SEEN e (E

H

NiS
Ps
x
E.

X

si
*
SEE
zm

y? Uh, roe

the carriage. The multitude were pleased with him, but those who
were scholars laughed at him.”

Cuarrer XXIV. 1. Mencius said, “For the mouth to desire
sweet tastes, the eye to desire beautiful colours, the ear to desire -
pleasant sounds, the nose to desire fragrant odours, and the four
limbs to desire ease and rest ;—these things are natural. But there
is the appointment of Heaven in connection with them, and the superior
man does not say of his pursuit of them, ‘It is my nature.’

2. “The exercise of love between father and son, the observance
of righteousness between sovereign and-minister, the rules of cere-
mony between guest and host, the display of knowledge in recognizing
the talented, and the fulfilling the heavenly course by the sage ;—these
are the appointment of Heaven. But there is an adaptation of our

Fung Foo, now an officer, to be fighting with talented, but the exercise of wisdom in refe-
tigers, playing the part-of a bravo. — rence to them, recognizing and appreciating

Cu. 24. How THE SUPERIOR MAN SUBJECTS their excellence. The sentiment is well illus-
THE GRATIFICATION OF HI$ NATURAL APPETITES trated by the case of An Ying, the minister of
TO THE WILL oF HEAVEN, AND PURSUES THE Ts'e, able and wise, and yet insensible to the
DOING OF GOOD WITHOUT THINKING THAT THE Superior excellence of Confucius and his prin-

AMOUNT WHICH HE CAN DO MAY BE LIMITED BY ciples.— Choo He says well upon this chapter :—

*I have heard it observed by my master that the

—* . + .
THAT b bn : 1, nz VA the things mentioned in both of these paragraphs are
mouth’s to tastes ;" that is, its constitution so as in the constitution of our nature, and likewise
to be pleased with certain tastes. . So, all the ordained by Heaven. Mankind, however, con-
other clauses, AG ai E there is the ap- sider that the first five are more especially
int tof Heaven. i a tit t natural, and, though they may be prevented from '

ponunem of Heaven, ne, every appetite natt- obtaining them, still desire them ; and that the
rally desires its unlimited gratification, but a last five are more especially appointed by Hea-
limited amount or an entire denial may be the ven, sothatif they do not come to them readily,

will of Heaven. 9. pi A A 5 X they do not go on to put forth their strength to
3 i AG

x reach them. On this account, Mencius shows
is not ‘thé possession of knowledge by the ' what is mést important in each case, that he

dr,

866 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VII.

3:
(1

d
=
W
H
+
>H

mr

EE
sug
Til

>2
=
Pn

(C33
DEED
TUA LDE
WE ot
SSE >
tit TI ENE

v

HONS
cent
e
NE
EN

zo

Ms

Exo
I

Tl
We
REO

uilt—
hu

NS ID Bed
Es
=

ZUNE
ame

Nis Sl SALA a] Se
zik

zd

^
7
Fi

EX

nature for them. The superior man does not say, in reference to them.
‘It is the appointment of Heaven.’”

Crapter XXV. 1. Haou-sang Puh-hae asked, saying, * What
sort of man is Yó-ching?" Mencius replied, ** He is a good man, a
real man.”

2. * What do you mean by ‘A good man,’ ‘A real man?”

3. The reply was, “ A man who commands our liking, is what is
called a good man.

4. “He whose goodness is part of himself, is what is called a
real man. , l

5. “He whose goodness has been filled up, is what is called a
beautiful man. l

6. “He whose completed goodness is brightly displayed, is what
is called a great man. ] ;

7. “When this great man exercises a transforming influence, he
is what is called a sage.

8. ‘ When the sage is beyond our knowledge, he is what is called
2 spirit-man.

may induce a broader way of thinking in regard himself; ie, when a man has the goodness,
to the second’ class, and repress the way of without hypocrisy or pretence. Comp. VI. ii. 13.

thinking in regard to the first. Goodness is an attribute entering into all the
Cm. 25. THE CHARACTER OF THE DISCIPLE others, and I have therefore thrive expressed it

You-cninc. DirrERENT DEGREES OF ATTAIN- . s HB or oe

MENT IN CHARACTER, WHICH ARE TO BE AUMED in the translation. 8. Se rm ^ Ay

AT. 1. Chaou K'e teils as that Haou-sang 5 x Pd ZH x ji n ant

N P = —wi his we may com-

is the surname and Puh-hae the name and that nH jit 2 th this 7e

the individual was a man of ‘Fs‘e. This is all pare what is said in the Doctrine of the Mean,

we know of him. 3. It is assumed here that ED mH, ‘the individual possessed of
the general verdict of mankind will be on the E FK pui n. A

Pe a 2 > * rds : ASSET >
side of goodness. Hence when a man is desir- the most complete sincerity is nes dE In
able, and command suniversal liking, he must be the critical remarks in the yu zs e ip it
a good man, 4. "ER EH ato having in i is said, indeed, that the expression in the text

Pr. IL Cu, XXV.—XXVIL TIE WORKS OF MENCIUS. . 367

A CREW in iii WS Ei
E p fü 3h EL (gn —
R

m

>
BILO

SENSE

\
/

b

m
 DERS
NRAN
AE
Ne
=

2n

EJ
AREE

V
*

`
>
EAH
3

v
v

ANES
;
img

PH
aS
GN EHE(N:

o

-H
1
KR
SESS

=
MASS
—

MiS

A
ME TE

ling is between the two first characters, and below the

c

S PLUS d
four last." l . .

Cuavrer XXVI. 1. Mencius said, * Those who are fleeing from

the errors of Mih naturally turn to Yang, and those who are fleeing
from the errors af Yang naturally turn to orthodoxy. When they
so turn, they should at once and simply be received.
, 2. “Those who now-a-days dispute with the followers of Yang -
and Mih, do so as if they were pursuing a stray pig, the leg of which
after they have got it to enter the pen, they proceed to tie.

OnarrER XXVIT. Mencius said, “There are the exactions of
hempen-cloth and silk, of grain, and of personal service. The prince
requires but one of these at once, deferring the other two. If he
require two of them at once, then the people die of hunger. If he
require the three a£ once, then fathers and sons are separated." _
is stronger than that there, but the two are í tions are with those who had been Yangists and
substantially to the same effect. Some would yfinists, 'Phis sense of 18. ‘to tie the legs,’ is
translate p by ‘divine, a rendering which fond in the dict. with reference to this passage.

jt never can admit of, and yet, in applying Cu, 27. THB JUST EXACTIONS OF THE GOVERN-

to man the term appropriate to the aetiugs and MENT ARE TO BE MADE DISCREMINATINGLY AND

influence of Him whose way is in the sea, and coxsperarerY, Th is cloth, made from flax. `

bis judgments a great deep, Chinese writers

are guilty of blasphemy, in the sense of derogat-

ing from the prerogatives of God, . : ES .
Cu, 26. Recovgrep NEREFICS SHOULD BE Silk, spun or unspun. E grain unthreshed;*

RECEIVED WITHOUT CASTING THEIR OLD ERRORS > a
" Fe the same threshed :—here together, grain

eda pe TS 3 EE €
IN EUER EIOS 1 en UA fa they generally. The tax of cloth and silk was due
turn to the learned? +The learned’ in Chinese in summer, that of grain after harvest, and
phrase is equivalent to our ‘the orthodox” ‘Lhe persunal service was for the leisure of winter.
name is still claimed in China by the followers ; The pri iet 1 :
of Confucius and other sages, in opposition to the a MH. The prince might only require
Taouists and Buddhists. 2. The disputa- them, one at a time, and in their proper seasons.

pee

ce

-C

if, —‘silken fibres not spun,’ but here, probably,

368 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VIL

ze mn gU ep A CE
[RECS jj t » E] o [FZ]

=O

ay

E

m

Jd
SER Ink:
"T

v

EIDNEDBRESEDEPOS
-K

aker
S>

Ld

-y
vob,
ZEN

A N
as
gw
 a

TH

Sirhan es
Se tele -
-

-

a

pu

v

pN
N

[ d

Doe

v

RIAI
HELI

zy
E

xN

RO MAKAWE

Cuarrer XXVIII. Mencius said, “The precious things of a
princeare three;—the territory; the people, the government : and its
business. If one value as most precious pearls and stones, calamity
is sure to befall him."

Cnmarrzg XXIX. P‘wan-shing Kwoh having obtained an ofti-.
cial situation in Ts‘e, Mencius said, “He is a dead man —DP'wan-
shing Kwoh !" P*wan-shing Kwoh being put to death, the disciples
asked, saying, * How did you know, Master, that he would meet
with death?" Mencius replied, * He was a man, who had a little
ability, but had not learned the great doctrines of the superior man.
—He was just qualified to bring death upon himself, but for nothing
inore."

CHAPTER XXX. When Mencius went to T'áng, he was lodged
in the upper palace. E sandal in the process of making had been

He
ER

Cn. 28. THE PRECIOUS THINGS OF A PRINCE, , He is said to have begun learning with Men-
AND THE DANGER OF OVERLOOKING THEM FOR f cius, but to have soon gone away, disappointed
" by what he heard.
OTHER THINGS, + — the productive XY WH
4 P Cu. 30. THE GENEROUS SPIRIT OF MENCIUS
ground,’ and Hi-— land generally.’ A ag IN DISPENSING HIS INSTRUCTIONS. ‘This,
es a which is the lesson of the chapter, only comes
distinguished from Fe =‘ officers, but the out at the end, and has been commemorated,
‘ as being the remark of an individual, not of
extraordinary character, and at first pepe
? fi to find fault with M ina isci 2
Hy ; see ch. xii, ult with Mencius' disciples

Cu. 29. How MENCIUS PREDICTED BEFORE- x Ws —x -fL. "Er comp, te
HAND THE DEATH OF P^wax-sHING Kwou. Pt.lliv. This was evidently a palace nop
Comp. Conf. prediction of ,Tsze-loo's, death, ated by the duke of T‘ang for the lodging of hon-

Con. Ana, XL. xi. Little is known of this woh. ourable visitors. The first f is a verb, ‘was

terms are not to be taken separately. So of

Pr. Il, Cn XXX.—XX XI. THE- WORKS OF MENCIUS. 869

i
N

Al
zn
(Né
BIE
Ne
=
S
vit

D

BS

p
(v
3

m
A

vr

fors

SE
EH
M
um
ez
Bee
=<
HAE
ZA

eu
na
Say
aga Divas
pr

te
ge
"ENG

zd

NA
PB
peas

SIN
C
me
SINA
ENNS
N-A
è

U. La
Ay AT od

placed there in a window, and when the keeper of the place came
to look for it, he could not find it.

2. On this, some one asked Jencius, saving, “Is it thus that your
followers pilfer?” Mencius replied, “Do vou think that they
came here to pilfer the sandal?” The man said, “ I apprehend not.
But you, Master, having arranged to give lessons, do not go back
to inquire into the past, and vou do not reject those who come to
you. Ifthey come with the mind to learn, you receive them with-
out any more ado."

Cuarrer XXXI Mencius said, * All men have some things
which they cannot bear ;—extend that feeling to what they can bear,
and benevolence will be the result, All men have some things which
they will not do ;—extend that tecling to the things which they do,
and righteousness will be the result."

ot
p

^E
SESE

R
Ax
(VINES

À
Dey
uy
TT
vis (S
C

Se

Nee! o ~ QO

lodged.’ ‘The second makes a compound noun was read d T. ‘now, I, and Mencius was
: Me pE 1 as. with refe. Supposed to he himself the speaker. Choo Ie
with A- E [23 the diet, has, with refe eel : ser IREL- an EJU
a XE o; — -Ra is probably correct, SES is better than BX
fence to es passage, EFj. qi d yz mox
yv E pa ‘things being.done, but not com-
sted, are said to be BE,’ 2, Be — ^
pleted, are said tobe BE. - JA so, up
Ist tone, ‘to hide,’==to steal and hide, zi ;

Hy, T conveying the idea of ‘exercises’ suit-
ed to different capacitics, FA. o= ü 3i
sey xe: A= IH] SEL
x NY.

i Cu. 21. A MAN HAS ONLY TO GIVE DEYELOP-
6g EL H, * these! referring to ‘followers, MENT TO THE PRINCIPLES OF GOOD WIECH ARG
T. E RM o — : ! IN HIM, AND SHOW THEMSELVES IN SOME THINGS,
ES } b BX kp p Zr according tO ' TO BE ENTIRELY 600D AXD CORRECT. ‘This ig

Choo He, this is the observation of Mencius’ 2 sentiment whieh we have found continually
, ; à "o. i occurring in these analects. It supposes that

questioner, suddenly awaking to an understand- ian has much more power over himself than

ing of the philosopher, <Ancicutly, ES Şo he really has.

X

9 bus

p= 5 VI * to make
4

370 IHE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VIL
5 2 yf 452 R4
Ema = "Ka D; JU 4UN

ae AS 2 oe
! 3H Ak FE è 4E MI

=

O

PREN RISE

v
w

w
v

eww
coe \
—À V

[ d

sch penn

w

Dill - RE
XT

x
S
[ d

EN
H

Er
(1
=
È

dence

oe

TEEM
€ ln i
=
P
pana

AEN

pn 2 : T e EL ut,
(3 UN p JA 3E BY AN A
AE ri UL É

DK
zy

’ B

2. “If a man can give full development to the feeling which
makes him shrink from injuring others, his benevolence will be more
than can Be called into practice. If he can give full development
to the feeling which refuses to break through, or jump over, « wali,
his righteousness will bé more than can be called into practice.

3.. “If he can give full development to the real feeling of dis-
like with which he receives the salutation, ‘Thou,’ ‘Thou,’ he wall
act righteously in aH places and circumstanees.

4. “When a scholar speaks what he ought not to speak, by guile
of speech seeking to gain some end; and when he docs not speak
what he ought to speak, by guile of silence seeking to gain some
end ;——both these cases are of a piece with breaking through a neigh-

bows wall.”
Cuaprer XXX. 1. Mencius said, * Words which are simple,
while their meaning is far-reaching, are good words, Principles

which, as held, are compendious, while their application is extensive,

o

we must understand the person, who is spoken

a hole through,’ ze = 35. *to jump over
a wall? ‘The two together are equivalent to
tto play the thief. 3. Thou,’ ‘Thou’ is
a style of address greatly at variance with Chi-
nese notions of propriety. It can only be used
to the very young and the very mean. A mau
will revolt from it as used to himself, and ‘iF he
be careful to act so that men will not dare to
speak to him in this style, he will go nowhere
where he will not do righteousnessJ-—This is

rather far fetched. 4. &5— to lick with
the tongue.’ To find an antecedent to the Z.

to. or before whém silence is kept; or, perhaps,
"d merely gives effect to the verb in the gen-
eral sense of ‘to gain some end’

Cui. 82. AGAINST AIMING AT WHAT IS REMOTE,
AND NEGLECTING WIAT Is NEAR. WHat ARE
GOOD WORDS AND GOOD PRINCIPLES. 1.
Am Ie the Book of Rites, 1, Pt, JL iii,
14, The ancients did not look at a person below
the girdle, so that all above that might be eon-
sidered as near, beneath the eyes. The phrase
'words which are near ie, on

pe 1. Cu XXXIL-XXXIL THR WORKS OF MENCICS. 371
Pr i. [e ahah *
yy de Ka ET A
ER, = x
gu JE FV. No EE) Eu vo ae
Z9 ple JX z o Hs
AEL d

z5

E

H, #r a PL E,
ERE
us X UL, AE FE,
TA pis EA Jal PE
m A AE HE Ai
JF jul, Wn Hr UN

EI
Wi

JA 3E S

s
NN BER

mont

bed
~
ud

2

W,

H HTA"
f£ Br AT a
di KM L dL
BET d A.U
CA

Fre

»

di Ht di

are good principles. The words of the superior man do not go

below the girdle, but great principles are contained in them.

2. “The principle which the superior man holds is that of per-
, sonal cultivation, but the empire is thereby tranquillized."
3. “The disease of men is this:—that they.neglect their own

fields, and go to weed the fields of others, and that what they require

from others is great, while what tl
CuarrER. XXXIII.
what they were by nature; Tng
natural virtue.
2.

iey lay upon themselves is light.”
J n L o

1, Mencius said, “Yaou and Shun were

and Woo were so by returning to

“When all the movements, in the countenance and every turn

of the body, are exactly what is proper, that shows the extreme degree
of the complete virtue. Weeping for the dead should be from real sor-

row, and not because of the living.

` The regular path of virtue is to

be pursued without any bend, and from no view to emolument. The
words should all be necessarilyssincere, not with any desire to do.

what is right.

common subjects, simple, plain. So, Choo-He;
but the passage in the Le-ke is not so general
as his commentary. It gives the rule for looking

at the emperor. <A minister is not to raise his
eyes above the emperor’s collar, nor lower them
below the girdle. Chaou K'e tries to explain
the expression without reference to the ancient
rule for regulating the looking at men. Acc. to
him, ‘words not below the girdle are all from
near the heart.’ 2. This is the explanation

of F x i ii ti. The paragraph is a

good summary of the teaching of Fhe Great
Learning.

Cu. 33. THe PERFECT VIRTUE OF THE HIGH-
EST SAGES, AND HOW OTHERS FOLLOW AFTER IT,

1. Comp. Pt. I. xxx., but Z has not here

a special reference to certain virtues as there.

2. This is an exhibition of the highest
style of virtue—that of Yaou and Shun, which -
does every thing right, with no motive beyond
the doing so. ‘Weeping is from real sorrow,
and not because of the living,—4e. there is
nothing of show init, and no wish to make an

tm
wm
P ee)
«Mtm
XE i

=
E:

x
ENIM

NS

SER FESO
B
Z
gis

O

=
NN
c

T
MY
=>
Re

-
z

TNE WORKS OF MEXCIUS.

Wa H Gora JU

BOOK VIL.

p: ar BETEN y

Be Wd m ug
E Ao MUS UA

Ky JL BBL TY

TNF

v

cg

 EE
aO
>

as

DY
Say o td

Soe

‘equa
Ati

3. ‘The superior man performs the law of right, in order that
he may wait simply for what has been appointed.”

Cuarter XXXIV. 1. Mencius said, “Those who give counsel
to the great should despise thein, and not look at their pomp and

display.

LÀ

:2. “Halls several times eight cubits high, with beams projecting
several cubits;—-these, if my wishes were to be realized, I would

not have.

Food spread before me over ten cubits square, and

attendant girls to the amount of hundreds ;— ese, though my wishes

were realized, I would not have.

Pleasure ai jl, wine, and the dash

of hunting, with thousands of chariots followzrg after me ;—these,

though my wishes were realized,

I wouhl not have. What they

esteem are what I would have nothing to do with; what T esteem

D

are the rules of the ancients.— Why should I stand in awe of them ? "

impression on others. 3. Deseribes the vir-
tue that is next in degree, equally observant of

right, but by an intellectual constraint. ik :

- es. LUN 2 " k H
KR x 2 Gy SK, the proper course indi-
cated by Heavenly principles,’
Cr. 34. Hg WHO UNDERTAKES TO COUNSEL
THE GREAT, SHOULD BE MORALLY ABOVE THEM.
L R A great nien; The phrase
is to be understood not of the truly great,
as in eh. xxv. 6, et a£, but of the: socially
great, with an especial reference to the princes

of the time, dignified, by their position, but 4.

without corresponding moral qualities.

2.
Al. E re, t ;
ae fet: NC and all the corresponding

clauses, are under the government of some

words like Qe X A Ay — those great
men have,’ to which jt d Ad I would not
Pn

do, respound. T Ui, mese may be seen in
the more important temples and publie build-
ings throughout China, projecting all round,

"T" eaves. TRE SHA aoo iv
beneath the caves. bx A, see 1I, Pt, I, iv.

pus um H TÀ— spurring and gallyping

-~l
ow

Pr, I. Cu. XXXV.—XXXVIL THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

3

l
XE e

SPA

o

E

In
Hs
p

I

a ob
m

«^

~

ie
=

EXP ENA

si
3

Wc

DE
Mud

e

a
HO

2S
NEA

RISES

=
NM

E
zx

=
a
s dn

SN
ES

P d né
 No ES è b
T l =
à

des

=
E

Ld

S
SNPS

EN
3
D

AE

a

Dele
de
*

ue
-
de

TIER

SES
ein
+
T
>
O

BER

z

EU
VERO

eee IDE

3n

SER
TESS

J

CuarrER XXXV. Mencius said, ** To nourish the heart there is
nothing better than to make the desires few, Here is a man whose
desires are few:—in some things he may not be able to keep his
heart, but they willbe few. Here is a man whose desires are many:
in some things he may be able to keep his heart, but they will
be few.” l

Cuarter XXXVI. 1. Mencius said, “Tsing Seih was fond of
sheep dates, and his son, the philosopher Tsăng, could not bear to
eat sheep-dates.”

2. Kung-sun Ch‘ow asked, saying, ** Which is best, —minced meat
` and roasted meat, or sheep-dates?" Mencius said, “Mince adn roast-
meat, to be sure.” Kung.sun Ch‘ow went on, “Then why cid the
philosopher Tsang eat mince and roast-meat, while he would not eat
sheep-dates?" Mencius answered, ** For mince and roast sheep-meat

[e

1 : ^ . j
in bunting’ FE RAG what are in them,’ Cu. 36. THB FINAL FEELING OF ‘TsANG-

: : s x: TSZE SEEN IN HIS NOT EATING DATES. L
the things which they esteem so. iE i E Eu :
: : - 3É ieee sheep-dates,’ the small black north-
zthe things which I esteem. 4 K : ` :
ern date, so called from its resembling sheep's

Cu. 35. Tins REGULATION OF THE DESIRES IS E d Mise 1 ; LA
dirt. Such is Choo He's account of the fruit.

ESSENTIAL TO THE NOURISHMENT OF THE HEART. = pee
RR must be taken in a bad, or, at least an inferior The writer of the ya ET He ER at , TR loc.,
: ; ; : Over ; ME AS

senso, =the appetites, while AY is the heart nat- however, seems to make out a case for b]
Still, why call it

E E vnm ME — Jy being a kind of persimmon.

urally disposed to all virtue, Hie f X [22 a dute? 2. Scih’s liking for the.small dates.
IE ‘although there are’—virtues of the heart, Was peculiar, and therefore the sight of them
A. : ; brought him vividly up to his son, and he could
that is,— which are not preserved. Not bear to eat such dates. There are many

3

-J
H>

TUE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VII.

H

a
E

(34
Sm
zu
ret

ERA

cont
&l

er di
wey \ Ed

— €

e
a
f
w

BIC
muU
=]

em - uu - mV

Ct

zuo
SER

BES S EE ERE]

©

p E ES
NE

.-

34

v

DESE
AES)

ex
vai
"

E-
=
X

v

RARE SN EEE

aS
BESS
zm

E

>

A T E

there is a common liking, while that for sheep-dates was peculiar.
We avoid the name, but do not avoid the surname. The surname
is common ; the name is peculiar."

Cuarrer XXXVII. 1. Wan Chang asked, saying, “Confucius,
when he was in Ch'in, said, ‘Let me return. The scholars of my
school are ambitious but hasty. They arefor advancing and seizing
their object, but cannot forget their early ways. Why did Confu-
cius, when he was in Chin, think of the ambitious scholars of Loo ? "

2: Mencius replied, * Confucius not getting men pursuing the
true medium, to whom he might communicate Ais instructions,
‘determined to take the ardent and the cautiously-decided. The
ardent would advance to seize their object; the cautiously-decided
would keep themselves from certain things. It is not to be thought
that Confucius did not wish to get men pursuing the true medium,
but being unable to assure himself of finding such, he therefore
thought of the next class." )

3. “I venture to ask what sort of men they were who could be
styled ‘The ambitious? ' " `

ARRAS

v

EI
SSRN
BETIS ERIT SE

ne
yz
:

A zd o" . .
rules for FH Bo avoiding the name,’ of See Con. Ana. V. xxxi. The differences between
parents, ancestors, emperors, &c.; see the Le-ke, that text and what we have here will be noted-

. Pt. I. v. 15—20 ; et at. Perhaps Wan Chang was quoting from memo-
L Pt. L v. 13—20; e p g was quoting
37. CALL T E PURSES’ 3 - ;
Cu, 37 . On CALL TO THE RSEIT OR THE ry. 2. See Con. Ana. XIIL xxi. As
RIGHT MEDIUM WAS THE OBJECT OF CONFUCIUS : i ) ice tiat
» a H aby > > i
anp MENCIUS. Varrouscnaracteks wuo rau, Mencius quotes that chapter, some think tha

TO PURSUE THIS, OR ARE OPPOSED TO I. 1. there should be a FF] in the text after jV

Pr. II. Ca. XXXVII, THE WORKS OF MENCIUS.

rs:
«X
E:

EH

-

ae TO

4
e

br

Ta

»

+

>No

-i NOH

v

zN
We

j

t

a

P dt
a ME h ES
AN AK UN al Jc Bie BN
Hr Wit A HE SR ESAE Br dy
Li TBR HH TOT BH EE
nid AB E E EHE
Z Set Be FLA Ay EX
X PEN NEED UR
Be c. d EL D EA
A
Ht

5 READIN
IE

{SN

e

e SHEET

Bx

un
rN

4. “Such,”-replied Mencius, “as Kin Chang; Tsang Seih, id
Muh P'ei, were those whom Confucius styled ‘ ambitious ? ' "

5 “W hy were they styled ‘ambitious.’”
6. "The reply was, “Their aim led them to talk magniloquently,
saying, ‘The ancients!’ ‘The ancients!’ But their actions, com-

pared s ith their words, did not come up to them.”

7. ‘When he found also that he could not get such as were ilius
ambitious, he wanted to get scholars who would consider anything
impure as beneath: them. Those were the cartons decided, —a class
next to the former.”

8. Chang pursued his raya “Confucius aa. ‘They are only
your good careful people of the villages at whom I feel no indigna-
tion, when they pass iny door without entering iny house. Your
good careful people of the villages are the thieves of virtue?’ What
sort of people were they who could be styled ‘Your. good careful
people of the villages ? '

74, Kin Chang is the Laou mentioned Con.
Ana. IX. vi. 6.

Chwang's accounts of Confucius and his disci-
ples are not much to be trusted. The identifi-
cationof the individual in the text with Laon,
however, is no doubt correct, though Chaou K'e
makes him to be the Sze of the Analects, refer-

ring to XL xvii. 3, ‘Sze is specious,’ and adding ;

So-ace. to Choo He, who !
Quotes an instance from the Taouist philosopher ,
Chwang, of the waywardness of Laou. but ;
n Tu - y

that he played well on the £i», and was there-

fore styled Kn, See the t SE PHE ER Be

in loc, Of Muh Pei nothing is known,

—in the sense of F, teven? By ya -—
ML— to cover, —to make
good. 8. The first part of the saying here
attributed to Confucius is not found in the

Analects, For the secoud, see XVII xii. 9.

‘evenly examining,’

THE WORKS. OF MENCIUS. BOOK VIL

ae [2 =
yis HI de

E
v I
c

DERE
»
X
=
èu

tib on] s d.

Ning

m
Sali.
iad
ane
EET
J
="
aes
V
N

Z EZ i aw a A
 TER

sm
=

ma
sub

v
v

3

EQ
No
SAIF

w
Ws
Xr
w4 io
v
=i

v

d

p
Bub
Big 1 SS

u

SN
ic SER

ORI

a

ag

\

dy
Fý
bess
.

D
nic
ce

v

TT
Pu
ZAR Dl

S
aN
eb

al
ur
)
=
«
E-
y
EES

ER
^l
M

9. Mencius replied, * They are those who say, * Why are they so
magniloquent? Their words have: not respect to their actions, and
their actions have not respect to their words, but they say,—TZhe
ancients! The ancients! Why- do they act so peculiarly, and are
‘so cold and distant? Born in this age, we should be of this age, to
-~be good is all that is needed? Eunuch-like, flattering their genera-
tion ;—such are your good careful men of the villages.”

10. Wan Chang said, “ Their whole village styles those men good
and careful. In all their conduct they are so. How was it that
Confucius considered them the thieves of virtue ?”

11. Mencius replied, “If you would blame them, you find no-
thing to allege. If you would criticize them, you have nothing to
criticize. They agree with the current customs. They consent with
an impure age. Their principles have a semblance of right-heart-
eduess and truth, Their conduct has a semblance of disiuterested-
ness aud purity. AH men are pleased with ‘them, and they think
themselves right, so that it is impossible to proceed with them to

E ana F: s 3& Di =
Before this par; we must understand Y i F 4 bi fe t Ads E Dr Hy R
H á E " RO "i O be Sou is enoug 1,' 2.6., to be accounted goot
H. The EH in the text has for its subject YE- by the age in which’ they live is cnough for
eg or we may take it in the infinitive, making them. EE n— the appearance of waikiug

the whole par. down to w on the nominative alone,’ ic, acting peculiarly. i1. Vb ft :

Pr. IL Cir. XXXVII, THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. 37i

x
ND

w
a.
C
v

Sry
"4s

E

Ld
A
v
v

2s
[ itin
Ens
Ge

ei gr
RR ~

EX PI

E

ERES
Synch

ET

ER

zn

RA
EI

i

er
aw

ST
IEN

E
7

SSS te

a
{-
v
ES
E

m

S$
zi

4
t
v

EE
SEN

m
ID
r ok $

237
Sula T hi

PASS

ba
F
wv

Hn

pore
HN SBSH -RE
BH

MT
ay
4

o
m
sung

[C
w
E
v

us

x
SSN

2z
A

iw
aA

EZ
eue.
Sui
aie
wy
pM
mE

RRELA th,

On this account they are called

re i
Wiz. = BF

the principles of Yaou and Shun.
‘The thieves of virtue.’

12. “Confucius said, ‘T hate a semblance which is not the reality.
Thate the darnel, lest it be confounded with the corn. I hate glib-
tonguedness, lest it be confounded with righteousness. I hate sharp-
ness of tongue, lest it be confounded with sincerity, I hate the music
of Ching, “lest it be confounded with the true music. I hate the
reddish blue, lest it be confounded with vermilion. I hate your
good. careful men of the villages, lest they be confounded with the
truly virtuous.’

13.. * The superior man seeks simply to bring back the unchang-
ing standard, and that being rectified, the masses are roused to virtue,
When they are so aroused, forthwith perversities and glossed wick-
edness disappear.” .

Cuarrer XXXVIIT. 1. Mencius said, “From Yaou and Shun
down to T'ang were 500 yearsand more, As to Yu and Kaou-yaou,

is literally our ‘current customs, but Y ity 2t
the same time, stigmatizes the customs as bad.
Bi SoBe H Abl
t. 12. These are

AD ef Toine which are only found
here. Such a string of them is not in the sage’s
style, Au H al Fy lest it confound the
corn, =be confounded with it.

So in the other TIME.

phrases, Be Con. Ana. XV. x. Ey —

see Con. Ana. X. vi. 2. 13. This par. explains
the rest of the chap. The XK or “unchanging

standard,’ is the i. *the right medium;"

which the sage himself pursues, and to which
he seeks to recall others. .

Cu. 38. ON THE TRANSMISSION OF THE LINE
OF DOCTRINE FROM Yaou TO MENCIUS' OWN
Compare If. Pt. H. xii; III. Pt.

48

«MX
UU
7T

-

318 THE WORKS OF MENCIUS. BOOK VIL
Z A T Sa ih Sa AI A
"i p r^ D rn y. a dr
IN er We ese er BPO E tr
"pe me Dy
BR

Jau
DNN EH

SHEE

x
NIH

bs

D;

TM
4

i
o
Von
P And
ow

"

m
D

e
Ss

Ts
TES

zz
exi

s
NEJE
m
EO

ERN

Re gea m
IE
i sumen

Pa
das
BES

Sa

HS

ipe

]

they saw those earliest sages, and so knew their doctrines, while Tang
heard their doctrines as transmitted, and so knew them.

2. . “From T'ang to king W&n were 500 years and more. As to
E Yin, and Lae Choo, they : saw T'ang and knew his doctrines, while
king Wăn heard them as transmitted, and so knew them.

3. “From king Wan to Confucius were 500 years and more. As to
Tac kung Wang “and San E-sang, they saw ăn, and so knew his doc-
trines, while Confucius heard them as transmitted, and so knew them.

4. “From Confucius downwards until now, there are only 100
years and somewhat more. The distance in time from the s: age is so
far from being remote, and so very near at hand was the sa ges
residence. Iu these circumstances, is there no one £o transmit “his

doctrines ?

IL x: et al, 1. From the commence-`
ment of Shan’s reign to that of Jane's were
489 years, while from Fang to the rise.of the
Chow dynasty were 64£ years, Here, as be-
fore, Ik Pt. IL xiii, Mencius uses 500 as a

round number, In psi Z: the x refers to the

doctrines of the sages. 2. Lae Choo is not
exac tly i jdoutitied. Most make him the same with
"l'ang's minister, Chung-hwuy; sce the Shoo-
king. IV. ii. 3. "T'ae-kung Wang,—see IV,
Pao L sii, Of San E-sang more can hardly
be said to be known than that he was an able

Yea, is there no one tv "do so?”

minister of king Win. Choo Ile seems to be
wrong, however, in making San, instead of

San-e, to be the surname, See the y q EHE

g ane
&x pio. ài loc. 4. The concluding sentences
here wonderfully vex commentators. In the
t Supplemental Commentary? d = sb are
found five different interpretations ot them.

But all agree that Mencius somehow takes upon
himself the duty and responsibility of handing
down the doctrines of the sage.

INDEXES.

INDEX I.

OF SUBJECTS.

For Pt, I. and Pt. IH. the characters E and * [v are used in all the Indexes,

A

Absurdity of a ruler not following wise eoun-

sellors, I. fy. ix.

Acknowledged favours, how Mencius, VI. fy. v.

Action, faith necessary to firmness in, VI. T
xii. . :

Adherence to one course, against obstinate,
VIL fF. xxvi.

Advantages, the greatest, of friendship, V. T
viii.

Adviee of Mencius with regard to mourning,

uri, F.i. .
Adviser of the princes might always be perfectly
satisfied, how an, VII. Ae ix.

Affliction, benefits of, VII. JT xviii,

Aged the, were nourished by the government of
king Win, VII. E xxii, ;
Ages, different conduct of great men in differ-

ent, reconcileable, IV, TR. xxix.

Agreement of sages not affected by place or
time, IV. fy. i.

Agriculture, importance of a ruler attending to,
Til. d fii—a ruler should not labour at
with his own hands, III. Es iv.

Air, how one's material position affects his, VII.
E xxxvi,

Ambition, and avarice, evils of, I. fn. xi—of
Hwuy of Leang, VIIL Jy. i.

Ambitious, who are the, VIL . xxxvii.

Ancient(s), the, shared their pleasures with the
people, I,
what, I. F. vii.—the music of the, I. d
i.—emperors, tours of inspection made by, I.
Te iv: VI. T vii.—coffina used by the, II.

. ii.—surpassed other men in

n. vii—sages, how all men may become

equalto the, ITI. E i.—kings practised bene-
volent government, HI. fy. v.—Mencius
appeals to the example and maxims of the,
Tii. T vii.—kings, the example and princi-
ples of, must be studied, IV. A i; ii—the,
exchanged sons, each one teaching the son of
the other, IV, _[- xviii making friends of
the, V. T^ viii, —the, cultivated the nobility
that is of Heaven, VI. E xvi.ş—scholars
maintained the dignity of their characters,
how, VII. E viii,—and modern rule con-

trasted, VIL R. viii.—the, led men by their

: example VH. f\. xx.

Animals, man how much different from, IV.

v Xix, ;

Antiquity, the example of, VIE Bw ix, .

Appetites, the superior man subjects his to the
will of Heaven, VII. . xxiv.

Archer. he who would be benevolent is like au,
I beds c

Archery, learning, IV, E xxiv.: VI. E XX,

Arrangement of dignities and emokiments at-

cording to the dynasty of Chow, V. [y. ii.

 Association, influence of, UE fX. vi. YL F.

ix.—with those of whom one does not ap-
prove, unavoidable, ITI, [4. x. i
Attainment, real must be made by the learner
for himself, VIL fy. v.
Authority, punishment should be inflicted only
by the proper, II,

2n B

Barbarians, influence of the Chinese on, III.

Y. vii

E- iv; JN. ix,

Barley, illustration taken from, VI, E viL

380 i OF. SUBJECTS. INDEX I.
LM :

Beauty, the love of, compatible with royal go- Careful, the thought of consequences should
vernment, I. fy. v.—oniy moral is truly make men, VII. ^ vii.
excellent, IV, Ty. xxv Cattle and sheep, illustration taken from fecd-
3 , iV. : ; hee

Behaviour of Mencius with an unworthy as- ing, II. P- aye `
sociate, II T^ vi Character, how men judge wrongly of, VII.

: A ee E: xxxiv.—different degrees of attainment
Benefits of trouble and affliction, VII, E: oa
xviii. in, VIL fy. xxv.

Benevolence, and righteousness, I. F: i: VL Charge of one’s-self the greatest of charges. TV.
7.Xix,
E iv.—belongs naturally to man, IÍ, F. E

- Chess-playing, illustratiou from, VI. .ix.
qv. Foxe Vi boi: Vi. poxeag—]) 0022978 vr p
Chief ministers, the duties of, V. P- ix,

d xvi,—exhortation to, II. F. vii,—im- P
Chiefs of the princes, the five, VI. T vii

portance to all of exercising, IV. Fa ij.— UR Ue : .
, Chieftain of the princes not 2 sovereign of the

the only security of a prince, IV. E vii. Empire, 1I, E . iii. —influence of a, different
vii.; ix.--filial picty the richest fruit of, IV. from that of s ue sovereign, VII. E xiii.
E xxvii.—the superior man preserves, IV. Child-like, the great man is, IV. [X. xii.
R xxviii—and righteousness equally iv- Comfort under calumny, III. P xix,
ternal, VI, E iv.; v.—it is necessary to Common relations of life, importance of to the
practice with all ones might, VI, E xviii.-- prosperity of the empire, IV, aes xi.
must be matured, VL Jes xix.—and right- Compass and square, use of the, IV. Sa ii.

ousness, the difference between Yaou and Condemnation of Twuy of Leang, Vil. fa. i,
 Confidence of the Sovereign, how to obtain, IV.
. Xii.

Shun, "ang and Woo, and the five Chiefs in

relation to, VII b xxx,—the empire can
7 Consequences, the thought of should make men
be got only by, VII, fy. xiii. sarcful, VI.

Ts. vii.

Benevolent government, T, E . v.s vli. TIT, E + Consert, Wie character of Confucius a complete,
ii: IV, E i.—safety and prosperity lie in, v. Pi -

Comicus mound, mohopoliáne the, TI, T^

1. T^ . xi.—affections of the people secured by,

Goustitutlok: benevolence and righteousness
part of man’s, VII, ae xv.

Conviction, how Mencius brought home, II,

the prince who sets about practising has none

to fear, LIT, [d v. i
Bodily defects, how men are sensible of, VI.

R. xi,--organization, only a sage can satisfy -

?

d m 1

1. “fe. sii. glory the result of, 1T. ^ iv.—- i

1

(

iv. :
: *
. eur T Cookery, E Yin’s knowledge of, V. F . vii.
the design of his, VIT, E . xxxviii, S
; ow Corn, assisting, to grow, 1I. F. i.

t
Peale: Rites, quotations from, II, Te Hl. ! Corrupt times are provided against by esta-
qeu rv. E blished virtue, VIL "Tz. x.
Brilliant Palace, the, L fy. v. Counsellors of great men should be morally
above them, Vite Ñ. xxxiv,
 Counselling princes from the ground of profit,
 danger of, VI. Jy. iv.
t

Burial, Mencius’, of his father, If, fy viii:;—
of Milí's parents, HI. E. v.
, Counscls for the government of a kingdom, HH.
C iii.
Courses, two, open to a prince pursued by hia
enemics, I. as xv.—of Yaou and Shun, VI.
Calamity.and happiness, are men’s own seeking, En ii
1t E iv.--tbe superior mau is beyond the Court, Mencius would not pay to a favourite,
reach of, IV. P xxviii, IV. P xxvii.

Calumny, comfort under, VIL fy. xix. Cultivation, men’s disregard of self-, VI E- xiii.

+

INDEX I. OF SUBJECTS, 381

-—men may become Yaous and Shuns by the, Doctrine, of the Mihists refuted, TIT, E ae foe
of their principles and ways, VI. F ii——of heretical, III. Te ix.—of the Mean, quota-
the mind must not be intermitted, VII, "Ie tion from the, IV. B xii.—of the sages, to
xxi. .
. . be advanced to by successive steps. VII. EG

D . xxiv.—on the transmission. of, from Yaou to

Mencius' own time, VIL © a xxxviii,

Death or flight, whether should be chosen, I. Duties which the virtuous and talented owe to

T xv.—-there are things which men dislike the young and ignorant, IV. NT vii,—of

more than death, VT. .X.—how Mencius different classes of chief ministers, V, m ix.

predicted the, of P'wan Shing-kwoh, VIE Duty, man's, how affected by the decrees of .

TR. xxix.. Heaven, Vil, E ii,—benevolence the path
"Deceneies may not be expected, where virtues of, VH. fy. xvi, `

are wanting, VII, E: xliv. t d
iD rnasties, Hea, Yin and Choy, II. uE
Decrees of Heaven, man’s duty as affected by 4 dpi y: pi

the, VIL pai ; Ei : V. TP. vi—Chow, TI. P. xiii: V,
Deeds. not w Uds or manners, prove mental ; qs ii,—the three, II. dp. ii: TV. E jii;

qualities, IV, de xvi, T. xx.—Hea and Yin, 1V. f+. ii. Shang,
Defects, men are sensible of bodily, but not of He b 2.
Yin and Chow, 1V. TF vii,

mental or moral, VI, E xit,
Defence, of Shun’s conduct, V. E ji; ii.—of : !

is
E Yin. V. E: vii,—of Confucius, V, dii T
—of accepting presents from oppressors of the
people, V. I. iv. Earth, advantages of situation afforded by the,-

Degeneracy. the progress of, from the three 1L. [T i.
kings to the five chiefs of the princes, VI. ES Earth-worm, an ovorefastidious scholar com-
vii. pared to an, III. T x.
l Deluge, the Chinese, III. Es iv. note; ic ix.: Education, importance of a ruler attending to,
TIL E iii, i
Desires, the regulation of, essential, VIL T i pes x ai BOE S06 A proot ob superi

.

IV. fy.xxvi: VI, [y. xi

xi.
Deve oping their natural goodness may make Emoluments, arrangement of in the Chow
a X
men equal the ancient sages, III. E-i i: VIL dynasty, V. T th

frien with ROVS v.—
V xxxi. Emperor, frie adship with an m i

Dignities, arrangement of in the dynasty at equanimity of Shun as an, vi V vi,
v, R.i. Empire, by whom the torn, may be united, I.
Dignity, how the ancient scholars maintained E vi,—kiug Hwuy’s competence to obtain
their, VIL ips viii.--how Mencins maintain- - the, I. E vii, employment of Mencius
ed his with the princes, VII. F xxiii, "would be for the good of the whole, JI. P

Disappointment of Mencius with the king Seang xii—to the State, the Family, IV. E P
I. E vi, F
Discrimination of what is right and wrong must
precede vigorous right-doing, IV. A. viii. xiii.—tranquillity of dependent on what, 1V.
Disgraceful means which men take to seek wealtlr E. xi—a drowning, IV. E xvii, —how
and honour, IV. fn. xxxiii. : Shun got the, V. 3 v.—how Shun would
Disposition, a man's true, will often appear in have regarded abandoning the, VII, qo

vu. Xi, .
ee P = End, the, may justify the means, VH. Ex xxxi.

Disputing, Mencius, not fond of, IIT. ^. ix. Enjoyment, man’s nature the source of his true,
Dissatisfaction with a parent, not necessarily VU,

—the way to get the, IV. F. ix: VIL Și

XI,

unfilial, VI. Y iii, Equanimity of Shun in poverty, and as emperor,
‘ Division of labour, propriety of d Hi. Ev iv. YH, ^ vi,

382

Error of a Myhist refuted, IIT, des vey ^ ix,
Errors of Yang, Mih, and Tsze-móh, Vit. EG

xxvi: VII,
Evil, a warning to the violently, and the weak-

Ww. xxvi.

OF SUBJECTS.

INDEX I.

Five things which are unfilial, IV. fy. xxx.
—injunctions of the agreement of the princes,
VI. d vii— ways in which the sage teaches,

YI [xb

ly, IV. F. x.—speaking, brings with it evil Force, submission secured by, IT. E iii,

consequences, IV,
Exactions just, should be made with discrimina-
tion, VII. '

Example, influence of, III.

Ne ix.

v. xxvii,
x. vi, —influence of

a rulers’, IV, fq. v.—the ancients led men

by, VIL. fy. xx. .
Excellence, how a prince may subdue men by,
IV. WW. xvi.
Excusing of errors, how Mencius beat down
the, IL fn. ix.

Exhortation to benevolence, IT,

pont.
Explanation of friendly intercourse with Kwang’

Chang, IV. "ds: xxx.—of the different con-'

duet of Tsăng and Tsze-sze, IV. fy. xxxi.
—of Shun's conduct tewards his brother, V.
= iii.—id, towards the emperor Yaou, and

his father Koo- sow, V, cs iv.—of the Odes

Seaou Pavan and Kae Fang, VI. P. iii,
Extreme cases must not be pressed to invali-

date a principle, VI ^ i.

E

` Faith, the necessity of, VI. “Iy. xii.

Fame, a love of, may carry a man over great
difficulties, VIY. fv. xi.

Father, why a, does not himself teach his own
son, IV.

Favour to individuals, good government does
not lie in, IV, TV. ii. —how Mencius acknow-
ledged a, VI. VR. v.

Favourite, Mencius would not pay court to a,
IV. JN. xxvii, .

Filial picty, to have posterity, a part of, IV.
E xxvi—-in relation to benevolence, &c.,

. xviii,

IV. P a xxvii, —how Shun valued aud exem-
plified, IV. Ea xxviii,—seen in the obsequies
of parents, IV.
IV.
—of Tsăng-tsze seen, VIL AA. xxxvi.

Firmness of Hwuy of Lew-hea, VII. . Xxviii.
First judgments, are not always correct, IV.

m xxiii,

Forester refusing to come to the king of Ts‘e
when called by a flag, V. fy. vii.

Four limbs, principles of the mind compared

` to the, IL J. vi—different classes of min-
isters, VII.

Fraternal obedience, in relation to righteousness,
&c., IV. E xxvii.—affection of Shun, V, ds
iii.

Freedom of Mencius, as unsalaried, to speak
out his mind, II. Ñ. v.

B . xix.

Friends, carefulness in making, IV.

Friendship, the principles of, V. J. ii; vii.;
viii.

v, XXİV.

G

Gain, the love of, and the love of good, contrast-
ed, VIL fF, xxiv.
Generosity of Mencius in receiving pupils, VII.
vw. XXX,
Gifts of princes, how Mencius declined or ac-
cepted, 1I. R. iii,
Glory the result of benevolent government, II.
.iv.
v. lii —the or:
dinances of, lI. ES iv.: IV La the
* decree of, IV. E vii.—who may sacrifice to,
IV. fy. xxv.
Good, sages and worthies delighted in what is,
Ha os viii.—importance to a government of

loving what is, VI.

God, the people assisting to. I.

v. xiiii—man is fitted
for, and happy in doing; VIL -. iv. (Sce
Nature)—people should get their inspiration
to in themselves, VII. E . x.—the love of,
and the love of gain contrasted, VII. Æ:
xxv.—words and principles, what are, VII.

is . xxxii.

v. xlii.—of Kwang Chang, Goodness, different degrees of, VII. T^ xxv.

x». XXx,-—great, of Shan, V. E i;iv, Government, character of king Iwuy’s, I, E

iii; iv—the love of music subservient to
good, I, E i—bad, of the king of Ts‘e,
LM. vi.—of a kingdom, counsels for the,
IH. E iii—there is an art of, which

INDEX I.

s

requires to be studied by rulers and their
ministers, IV. E . i—the administration of,

not difficult, IV, E. vi.—the influence of
king Wün's, IV. $: xiii,—good, lies in equal
measures for the general good, IV. T ií—
the aged were nourished by king Wins, VIIL
“Be xxii—the well-being of the people the
first care of a, VII, f+. xxiii, i

Grain, illustration from growing, I. Ex vi.
Great, houses, a ruler should secure the esteem
of the, IV. B vi.—serviees, Heaven prepares
men for, how, VI. fy. xv.
Great man, Mencius conception of the, TIT,
ii-—-makes no mistakes in propriety and
x. Vi—simply pursues
v. Xi.—is child-like, IV.
V. Xil—in good men a reconciling prin-
ciple will be found for the outwardly dif-
ferent conduct of, IV. T xxix,—how some
are, VI. E- xv.—he who counsels, -should
be morally above them, VII, R. xxxiv.
Grief of Mencius at not finding an opportunity
to do good, IE, T xiii,

H

Half measures of little use, I. H p iii,

Hearts, of men importance of getting the, II.
P i. IV. Ex ix.—the pupil of the eye
index of the, IV, ips xv.—how to nourish
the, VII.

Heaven, mn in, and fearing, I,
attaining to the imperial dignity rests with,

L R. xiv.—a man’s way in life is ordered

by, L R. xvi: V. fF. viii—he who has

no enemy in the ‘empire is the minister of,

TI. d v.—opportunities vouchsafed by, II.
^ i—only the minister of, may smite a

righteousness, IV. `
what is right, IV.

. XXXV.

Ñ, ti

nation, IL [\. viiii—the superior man does
not murmur against, up. xiii.—submission
of States determined by, IV, JE: vii, —Shun

got the empire by the gift of, V. E v.
——s plan in the production of mankind,

v. E- vii; F i.——'s places, offices, and
emoluments, V, P iii—has given us, what,
VIL E xv, —the nobility of, VI. de xvi—

OF SUBJECTS.

383

prepares men by trials and hardships, VI. F
xv.—by the study of ourselves we come to the
knowledge of, VIL . i~what may be
correctly ascribed to the appointment of, VIT.

. ii.conferred nature, the bodily organs

a part of the, VIL

superior man regards the will of, Vil. T
xxiv.
Hire, the labourer is worthy of his, II. F

iv.
Hereditary monarchy, Mencius’ views on, V.

Vs vi,

. Xxxviii.—~how the

History, quotations from, III. Tf. i.
Heretics, recovered, should not have their old
errors cast in their teeth, VII. IN. xxvi..
Honour, the true, which men should desire, VI.

E xvii,
Husbandry, importance of, II. E dii: VIL
E- xxii; xxiii—2a ruler should not labour

F.i:

at, with his own hands, IIT, E iv,
Hypocrisy, Shun defended against a charge of,

v. pd

Imperial, government, characteristic of, I. E
vii.—dignity, attained by true royal govern-
ment, IL fy, V: i" £ v.—td, by doing
what is good and right, I, [y.xiv.—govern-
ment, Mencius wished to see, and could have
realised, a true, IT. E i~-sovereign should
arise every 500 years, JI. T xili,—sway,
not one of the things in which the superior
man delights, VII, [^. xx.
Impulses must be weighed in the balance of
reason, IV, i. xxiii. :

Inability, defined, I, EL vii,

Inauspicious words, what are most truly, IV.
xvii.

Influence of king Win’s government, IV. (E
xiii—a man's, depends on his personal ex-
ample and conduct, VIL IX. ix.—Pib-e &e., '
proved to be sages by the permanence of'
their, VII. y. xv.

Injunctions, five in the agreement of the princes,
VIL Revi.

Insinuations of Shun-yu K*wán, how Mencius
repelled the, VI. h. vi.

384

Inspiration to good, people should get in them-
selves, VII. Es x.

Instrumentality of others affects one's way in
life, how far, I e xvi.

Intercourse with neighbouring kingdoms, I. fy.
iii—of Meneius with the princes of his timo,
mk l

"s ‘the foundation of righteousness is, VI.

wiv, v.

J

Judgment concerning Pih-e and Hwuy of Lew-
hea, II,” ups ix,
Judgments, first, not always correct, IV. T

xxíii—of character, how men form wrong,
VII. E. xxxiv.

K

Kiling a sovereign not necessarily murder, I.
^. viii,—1en, a prince shouid not have

pleasure in, I, E vi,—the character of, does
not depend on the instrument used, I. E iv.
the innoeent, consequences of, IV, Bc iv.

Kings, the three, VI. R. vii,

Kingdoms, intercourse with neighbouring, I.
T ili.—the disposal of, rests with the people,
1. E x. ]

Knowledge ought to be pursued, how, IV. T.
xxvi.

L

Labour, propriety of the division of, IH, FẸ.
iv--only that, to be pursued, which accom-
plishes the object, VII, E: xxix.

T.abourer the, is worthy of his hire, III, T iv.

Law in himself, a man has but to obey, the, VII.

 Xvi,

Learner(s), teachers of truth must not lower
their lessons to suit, VII. E xli.—himself,
real attainment must be made by the, vi h.

NE i
Learning inwrought inte the mind, the value of,

IV. ÎN. xiv.—consists in seeking the lost
mind, VI, E a xi.—must not be by halves,

VI, E. XX.

OF SUBJECTS.

INDEX I.

Leaving Loo and 'Ts'e, Confucius’, VII, T
xvii. .

Lessons the, of the sage, reach to all classes,
vu b.x.

Lettered class conducting government, propriety
of a, Wf. iv.

Life, not nature, VI. ups iii.—there are things

which men like more than, VI. des x,
Limbs, the principles of the mind compared to

the, IL fF. vi.

Lingering, Mencius, in Ts‘e, IT. m xii,
Little men, how some are, VI. B . XV.
Lords of reason, how some are, VI. E XV

Losses, how a ruler may take satisfaction for

I. E v.

Loving what is good, importance of to govern-
ment, V. P- xiii,

M

`

 Man, the nobility. that is of, VI. "Tes xvi,.—

the honour that is of, VI. E- xvii.—the
duty of, as affected by the decrees of Hea-
ven, VII. JE ii-.—is fitted for, and happy
in doing good, VIL f+. iii—has but to
obey the law in himself, VII, de xvii,--bene-
volence in relation to, VII. fn. xvi.
Marriage of Shun justified, IV. Pewi: V.
Fs '
Masters, be not many, IV. Ss xxiii,
Mean, doctrine of the, referred to, IV.
— Confucius kept the, IV.
fast the, IV. T XX.
Means, the end may justify the, VII. E xxxi,
Measure, with what, a man metes, it will be

measured to him again, IV. B .iv.

v. vii.

^
v X.— Tang held

Medium, Confuciüs aad Mencius called to the
pursuit of the right, VII. T xxxvii.
Men, importance of a prince gaining the hearts

of, II P. i

Mental qualities proved by deeds not by words,

Iv. P. xvi.

Messenger, Mencius offended because a prince
sent for him by a, H. T ii,

INDEX I.

Middle kingdom, the, I. Lt vii: III, E

iv. Tix: Vv. Bu v.: VI
Mind, all men are the same in, VI. "EN vii—

in danger of being injured by. poverty and a
mean condition, VII. . xxvii, +the eul-

tivation of the, must not be intermitted, VII,
T. xxi -

Minister(s), care to be exercised in employing,
I.

nation,

v. vii.—the, of Heaven only may smite a
It. M. vit; —Meoncius condemns
the pursuit of warlike schemes by, IV, E
xiv. —the truly great, directs his efforts to
thé sovereign's character, IV, Ex xx,will
serve their sovereign according as he treats
them, IV. F ii :—the duties of chief,
v. pi ix.—of Mencius’ time pandered to
their sovereign's thirst for wealth and power,

. VI. fx. ix.—four different classes of, VIL.
cE: xix,

Moral, beauty alone truly excellent, IV.
xxv.—excellenco, the superior man cultivates,
IV. ^ xxviii,-—influences, the value of to
a ruler, VII, Jd xiv.

Mountain, illustration. from the trees of the
New, VL lviii.

Mouruing for parents, I, fy. xvi.: III. E ii:
V. Ez: iv; v; vi: VIL E. xxxix.; xlvi. ,

Mugwort, illustration taken from, IV. six,

Murder, what Shun would have done if his
father had committed a, VII, ob: XXXV.

Murmur, at the hardest measures, when the
people will not, VII, Ku xii,

Music, the love of, I, ^ i.—tbhe richest fruit
of, IV... - xxvii. —of Ywand king Win, VIL

x. XXli,

*

Music-master, the grand, I. fA. iv.

N
Nature, the, of man good, II. Ei i: VI.
i; i; vi.; vii.—not to be eonfounded with Ms

phenomena of life, VI. zB: ii—appears as if

it were not good, how, VL E- viii; ix.—to
love righteousness more than life is proper to
man’s, VI, de X,—how men should seek the

OF SUBJECTS.

385

lost qualites of their, VI. E xi,—relative
importance of the different parts of the, VI.
EL xiv,— Heaven is served by obeying our,
VH. ge i.—mau's own, the most important
thing to him, &c., VII. E xxi.—of man, and
the appointment of Heaven, VIL fy. xxiv.

Natural benevolence and righteousness of man,
only requires development to be more than

sufficient, VIT, fN. xxxi,
Neighbouring kingdoms, interceurse with, I.
v. iii,
Nobility that is of Heaven and that is of man,

vi. sTs xvi,

Nourishment, the nature of man stems bad
from not receiving its proper, VI, E: vii

of the different parts of the nature, VI. E
xiv.

0

Object of Confucius and Mencius, what was
the, VIL fy. xxxvii.

Obscurity, how what Shun was discovered itself
in his greatest, VII. [^ . xvi.

Obstinate adherence to a course deémed right,
against, VIL -. xxvi.

Odes, quotatious from the, I, E ii, pvi; F-

jii.; v.: IX. E iii; iv.: IIL _b..siis iv. Te
i, ix: IV. Ex i; d; iv,; vii; ix.: V. E:
ii; iv; ^ vii.: VI. E vi.; xvii; VIL de
xxxii; B xix,

Office, Mencius giving up his, I. E Xa xks
xii; xiii: VIL Te vi.—to be sought, but only

by the proper path, IIL Te iii: V. d viii,
—may be taken on account of poverty, when,
b^ T v.—grounds of taking and leaving,
Vif. xiv.
Officiousness, Mencius repelling, H. f. xi.
Opposition of Mencius to warlike ambition, VI.
fh . viii,

Ox, king Hwuy’s compassion for an, I. [i

P

Parents, burial of, III. E v (see Mourning).
—the right manner of serving, IV. de xix;

mq xiii,

Parks and hunting, the love of, &c. I, F i,

49

386 ` OF SUBJECTS. INDEX L

Parts of the nature, relative importance of
different, VI. E xiv,

Passion-nature, Mencius nourished his, H. E š
ii. l

People, rulers must share their pleasures with
the, I, E. ii—love of valour may subserve

the good of the, I. fR. iiii—the disposal of

kingdoms rests with the, I. fN. x.—the
affections of, only secured by benevolent
government, I. fn. xii: IV. „ix, "s
happiness disregarded by the ministers of
Mencius' time, IV. E xiv.—the part of the,

in making an emperor, V. E v,—how to
promote the virtue of the, VII. . Xxiii,.—
tbe most important element in a nation, VII.
v. xiv,
Pecuniary bondidoratione Mencius not influ-
enced by, II. R. x.

Personal character, importance of, IV. E v.

Pictures of Pih-e and Hwuy of Lew-hea, II. 3E:

ix.
Phenomena, importance of carefully studying,

IV. T xxvi,

Pleasure, rulers must share with the people, L
E ii; T i; iv.

Position, how one’s material, affects his air,
VII. E- xxxvi.

Poverty, when office may be taken on account
of, V. F v.—importance of not allowing the

mind to be injured by, VII. de xxvii,—
equanimity of Shun in, VII. R. vi.

Praise and blame not always according to

desert, IV. aps xxi,

Precious things, three, of a prince, VII, T
xxviii,

Precipitate advances will be followed by speedy
retreats, VII. AE: xliv.

Predietion of P*wan-shing Kwoh's death by
Mencius, VII, IX. xxix,

Prepares himself for the duties to which he
aspires, how a scholar, VII. E xxxiii,

Presents, Mencius defends accepting, from
oppressors of the people, V. UR iv.—of a
prince to a scholar, how to be made and ac-
cepted, V. MW vi.—how Mencius acknow-
ledged, VII TR v. i

Presumptuous idea of Pih Kwei, that he could
Rai the waters better than Yu did, VI.

3. Xl,

Prince, a, should employ ministers, how, IY, T

vii.—should depend on himself, not o n othe
powers I. f. xiii, —threatened by neighbours
should act how, I. ^ . Xiv.—two courses open
to, when pursued by his enemies, I. f}. xv.— ,
should get the hearts of men, uj. i.—slight-
ing Mencius, IT. a ii.—the, who sets about
practising benevolent government has none
to fear, II: PF. v.—benevolenee the only
security of a, IV. F . Vii—a vicious, the
agent of his own ruin, IV. E viii.—import-
ance of rectifying a, IV. oP: xx.— presents
_of a, to a scholar, how to be made and ac-
cepted, V. P- vi.—three precious things of
2, VIL f. xxviii.

Princes, the only topics of Mencius with, I. E
i——a chieftain of the, not a sovereign of the
empire, II. F . iii, —the, of Mencius’ time fail-
ed in true royal government, II. EL v.—Men-
cius declining or accepting gifts of, II. m
Viii: ^ .iv.—Mencius’ reserve with the, of
his time, III. Js -i—Mencius defends himself
for not going to see the, ITI, T vii.-—why a
Scholar should decline going to see, when
called by them, V. X. vii.—danger of coun-
selling from the ground of profit, VI. T iv.
-~influence of a chief among the, different
from that of a true sovereign, VII. y xiii,
—of his time, Mencius censures the, VII, E
xlvi.—how Mencius maintained his own dig-
nity with the, VII. j : xxxiii,

Principles, one must live or die with his, &c.,

VII, Ba xlii,

Profit, secondary to benevolence and rightcous-
` mess, I. E- i: VI. T iv.

Progress of degeneracy in successive ages, VI.

v. vii.

p E

Prompt action, necessity of, at the right time,
IV. P- iv.

Propriety, belongs naturally to man, II. E . vi.
—-parents should be served, &c., according to,
IH. d ii—help to the world should be

given according to, IV. E xvii.—the richest
fruit of, IV. E: xxvii.—the great man makes
no mistakes in, IV. ^ vi.—the superior
man preserves, IV. fa. xxviii.—importance

of observing the rules of, VL R.i

INDEX I.

Prosperity of a country, on what dependent, I.
ʻi, i
Pupil of the eye, the index of the heart, Iv. F-
xv. i

' Purity, pretended, of Ch'in Chung, III, fy. x

R ;

Record, quotation from a, YII. f. iii,

Remote, against aiming at what js, VII. F
xxxii.

Repelling officiousness, Mencius, H. "M xi,

Reproof, the benefit of, IV. Nw xxii.——Mencius
of Yó-ching, IV. E Xxiv,; xxv.—of Kung-
sun Ch‘ow, VIL E xxxix,

- Reputation, the value of, to a Yüler, VII L

xiv.
Reserve, Mencius defends his, with the princes

of his time, III.

Respected, that a ae be, is essential to his
engagingina prince’s service, VII, [^.xxxvii,

Riches, not to be elated by, a proof of superiority,
V. eee

‘Righteousness belongs naturally to man, II.
d vi: VÍ. E i.—the straight path, IV.
E x,--fraternal obedience the richest fruit
of, IV, E xxvii.—the great man makes no

mistakes in, IV. [\. vi.—internal, not ex-

terna], VI. E-i iv.; v.—to be loved more than

life, VI. fe. x.
Ripe grain, illustration from. VI. E xix.
Ritual Usages, quotation from the, III, T ii,
Royal government, the great principles of, I.
E iij; iv.—-will assuredly raise to the
imperial dignity, I.
neglected in Mencius time, IT. E v.

Ruin, a vicious prince the ageut of his own, IV.
ov TNN
Rulers, should share their pleasures with the peo-

ple. I. iE: ii, —should follow the advice of

the wise, I, "fe ix.—should sympathize with

, the’ people i in their joys and sorrows, I. as
iv.-should not labour at husbandry with
their own hands, IIT, .iv.—should study
the example and principles of the ancient
kings, IV. Ups i.; ii.—importance of benevo-

v. V.—varions points of,

lence to, IV. E „ iii, —'s example, influence of,

IV. R. v,—will not be murmured at when

OF SUBJECTS.

MM MM ——MMÀ MM MÀ— ——MÀ— MÀ ree ere

387

their aim is evidently the people's good, VII.
E- xii,—the value of reputation and moral

influences to, VII. I: xiv.
Rules, the necessity of governing according to,

IV. it
. S
Sacrifice, allusions to, III, Lu
v.: IV, T xxv. xxxiii: VI.
F xiv,
Sage, Mencius not a, If. de ji.—only with a,

does the body act according toits design, VII.
S. xxxvii —the lessons of the, reach to all

classes, VII. Jr. xl.
Sages, when they arise, will agree with Mencius,
Ii. d ix.—the human relations perfectly

exhibited by, IV. J+. ti.—the agreement of,
not affected by place or time, IV. T i—are
distinguished from other men, how, IV.

"EFE

v. vi: VIL

v. di;
XIX. Xx.; XXL; xxii.——juat like other men, IV.
T xxxii; VI. E vii—Confucius superior
to all other, V. R. ithe great doctrines of
the, to be stance to, by successive steps,
VIL. d xxiv.—Pih-e, &c. proved to be, by
the permanence of their influence, VIL F
xv.—definition of a, VII. T xxv.—the per-
-fect virtue of the highest, VIX. Jy. xxxiii. :

Satisfied, how an adviser of the princes mayb be
always perfectly, VII. E ix

Scholar(s), the, ought to be remunerated, IIT.
“Pei iv.—may. accept presents fromr @ prince,

on what principles, V, fR. vi.—should de-
cline going to see the princes when called by
them, why, V. F vii—forming friendships,
rules for, V, En viii,—ancient, maintained
the dignity of their character, &c., how, VII.
E viii.—-prepares himself for the duties to
which he aspires, VII, Eo xxxiii—cmust be
respected in order to his engaging in the sere
vice of a prince, VII, Ex xxxiii.

Self, the charge of, greatest, IV. Ex xix,

Self-oultivation, men's disregard of, VI, E
xiii.

Self-examination recommended, IV, F- iv.—

` the superior man practises, IV, e xxviii,

Self-restraint necessary to a ruler, I. P iv,

388.

Selling himself. Pih-le He vindicated from the
charge of, V. E ix.

Senses, all men have the same, VI, E. vii.—
some are slaves of the, VI, Jd xv.

Settling the empire, I. +. vi.

Shame, the value of the feeling of, YII. ^ . vis
vii,

Sheep-dates, ‘Tsimg-teze could not i VIL T
xxxvi. '

Shifts, Mencius put to, II, Pa.

Shoo-king, quotations from the, I. Esi

F iii; xi: I. E- iv.: HI E-i i; Ts Ya
ixa 1V. Povia v. p.ovsvL Rv —with
whatreservation Mencius read the, VII. Jy. iil.

Sickness, Mencius pretends, 3, [X. ii.

Sincerity, the great work of men should be to
strive after perfect, IV. JE; xii,

Slaves of sense how some are, VI. E xv.
Sorrow of Shun on account of his parents,
ʻi
Sovereign, TM a, not necessarily murder, I
“Tr. viii,.—of the empire, who is a, II. Bu . iii.
—importance of having virtuous men about a,
Ill. F vi—'s example, influence of, IV, T

v.—influence of a, true, VII. Ez xiii.—u,
the least important element of a nation, VII.
Ne xiv.,
Sovereigns, ‘will be served by their ministers
according as they treat them, IV. Eu ii,.—.
the ministers of Mencius' time pandered to

their, VI, P. ix.

Spirit-nfan, who is a, VIL fn. xxv.
Spirits, tutelary, the importance of to a nation,
VII. T xiv.
*Spring-and-Autumn,' referred to. HI, P ix.:
IV. VIL WA. d.
State, three things important in the administra-
tion of a, VIL B" xii,

States, intercourse of neighbouring, I. T ii—
rise and fall of, dependent on benevolence, IV.
E- iii,—subjection of, to one another, deter-
mined differently at different times, IV. E
vi

Straits, why Confucius was reduced to, VIL. T :
xviii.

Subjection of one State to another, how determin-

. ed, at different times, IV.

Successive steps, the doctrines of the sages to be

advanced to hy, VIL. JJ xxiv.

v.

LT XXi.:

B . vii, *

OF SUBJECTS.

———————————————————

INDEX I.

Superior man, the, keeps away from his cook-

room, I. .vii.— helps men to practise virtue.
II. F . viii, —will not follow narrow-minded-
ness, &c., II, £- ix.—will not take a bribe,
Il.

parents, II.

m iiii—will not be niggardly to his:
x- Vii.—of ancient and of modera

times contrasted. II. fn. ix.—does not mur-

mur against Heaven, &c, IT, ^. xiii.—makes
difficulty about taking office, why, IH.
iii—the spirit nourished by, may be known,
how, IIL fn. vii.—does not himself teach his
son, why, IV. F . xviii, — wishes to get hold of
what he learns, as in himself, IV, m xiv; xv,
—is ashamed of a reputation beyond his
merits, IV. IV. xviii.—cultivates moral ex-
cellence, &c., IV. EC xxviii.—may be de-
ceived, in what respects, V. `. ii, —all do not
understand the conduct of, VI, h. vi—
serves his prince, how, Vl. Jy. viii.--taking
and leaving office, grounds of, VI, . Xiv.—
has threethings in which he delights, VII. E .
xx.—finds his true enjoyment in his own na-
ture, VII, E xxi, —’s services to à country,
without his being in office, entitle him to sup-
port, VII, E. xxxii.—is kind to creatures,
loving to men; and affectionate to his rela-
tives, vil. . E . Xlv,—speaks of his nature,
and of the will of Lleaven, how, VI. [ . Xxiv,
—the words and the principles of, VII. ES
xxxii,

sympathy of a ruler with the people in their
joy and sorrows, I. Jy. iv.

Superiority, not to be elated by riches, a proof

of, VIL f+. xi
T

Talents, and virtue, how to know men of, I.
vii. —a ruler should be guided by men of, I.
Bm ix, —duties owing by men of, to those
who have not, IV,
Taxation, III. F. ii; IN. viii: VI. fP- x
Teacher a, in a higher place than a minister,
IV. Bm xxxi. —of truth. must not lower his
lessons to suit learners, VII, F . xli.
Teaching, refusing to teach, may also be a way
of, VI. q^ xvi.

v. Vii.

INDEX 1.

Territory, emotuments regulated according to
the extent of, in a State, V. T ii.

"Thought, how many act without, VIL Æ: Y.

Three, things universally acknowledged to.be
honourable, II, d ii—kings, the, VI.
vii.—things in which the superior man delights,
VIL Es xx.—things important in the ad-

ministration of a State, VII, fn. xii,.—pre-
cious things of a prince, VII. f. xxviii.

Throne, the, descended to Yu's son, and not to
his minister, why, V.

Thumb amongst the fingers,
compared to the, IH.

. vi.
Chiin Chung
v. X,
Topics of Meucius with princes, I. E. 1; vii:
n, Pr. i.
Touch, males and females must not allow their
- hands to, IV. E: xvii.
Tours of inspection of the ancient kings, I.
; v. iv.5 VL

Tranquillity of the empire dependent on the
discharge of the common duties of life, IV.

.Xi.
Transmission of doctrine from Yaow to Mencius,
VIL. R. xxxviii.
Trials and hardships, how Heaven prepares
men by, VI.
Trifles, Mencius censures the princes of his time
for occupying themselves with, VII, du xlvi,
Trouble and affliction, the benefits of, VII. E

xviii.
Truth, how Mencius required iie simple pur-

suit of, in his pupils, VII. E- xlii,
Tyrant, wliat will be the fate of a, IV. E ii.

U

Uleer-doctor, Confucius charged with lodging
vith an, V;

ve vii.

ve XV.

. viii,
Tnfilial, five things which are, IV. fv. xxx.
Unperturbed mind, Mencius had attained to an,
IL [.ii
Unsalaried, Mencins free to speak his opinion,
&c., because, IT. B v.s xiv.
Unworthy associate, Mencius’ behaviour with

an, H. T vi.
y

Valour, the love of, I. f. iii.—how nourished,
H. „ii

Villages, the good careful people of the, des-
eribed, VI, T xxxvii,

OF SUBJECTS.

389

 Vindication of E Yin, V; E .vii,—of Confucius”
from the charge of lodging with unworthy
characters, V. qos Pih-le He, V. d.
ix.—of Mencius from the charge of eating
the bread of idleness, VII. Je xxxii. `
Virtue, submission secured by, IT. E iii—
friendship must have reference to thé, of the
friend, V. Ñ. iii.—is sure to be gained by
seeking it, but external things not, VII. E
iii—man may attain to perfect, VII, «Iv.
iv.—of the people, how £o promote, VII,
xlii—corrupt times are provided against n
established, VII. NS x,—of tlie highest sages,

vH. T xxxiii,

Virtues, where are wanting, decencies may not
be expected, VII. E xliv,
Virtuous men, importance of having, about a

sovereign's person, IIT qd vi,
Vez populi vox Dei, V. F (y

W

Warlike and other schemes of thé ministers. of
his time condemned by Meucius, Woof. xiv.:
VI.

 Warning to the violently evil and the weakly
evil, IV. T x.—to Sung Kang, VL ^
to the contending States of Mencius’ time,
VII l

Wars, all the, in the Ch'an Tsew were unright-

eous; VIL. fy. ii.—counsels against, VI LR.

^ viii,
vive

p>. ii.

iv.
Way, a man's in life, ordered by Heaven, I.” is

xvi, —of truth like a great road, VI. P. ii,
Wealth, the love of, compatible with royal

government, I. P v.—disgraceful means

which men take to seek, IV. fy. xxxii.—

and power, the ministers of Mencius’ time

pandered to their sovereigns’ thirst for, VT.
y. ix.

Well-being of the people, the first care of a
government, in order to their virtue, VIT,
E xxiii.

Well, digging a, VIL _Ẹ . xxix.

Will, the, is the leader of the passion-nature,
m F.i.

Willow, man's nature compared to the £e, VI.

dq

i

390

"Wisdom the richest fruit of, IV, E xvii.
Words, Mencius understood, IL F ti.—what

are most truly inauspicious, IV. fn. xvii.
World, one cannot avoid all connection with

OF SUBJECTS.

INDEX 1.

those whom he disapproves, in the, TI. T
X.

Wrongs should be put right at once, III.
viii.

INDEX II.

OF

PROPER NAMES.

Names in Italics. will be found in their own places in this Index with additional references.

`

CH ax» CH.

Chang E, a celebrated scholar of Wei, TIT, T

ii. :
Chang, K‘wang Chang, a minister of Ts‘e, IV.
V. XXX,
Ch'ang Seih, a disciple of Kung-ming Kaou, V.

F- i; Is. jii.

Chaou Keen, a noble of Tsin, III, T i

Chaou the’ Great. à title borne by different
ministers of Tsin, VI. Ma xvii.» :

 : Chaou-woo, a hill on the north of Ts‘e, I, m
iv. E

Che-shaou the name of a piece of music, I. Ir.

Ts‘e, IL “ee A
Chih; a famous robber of Confucius’ time, HI

a ES x.: VIL Er m

Ch'in Chung, an ascetic of Ts‘e, TIL Rax X.:
Vit. p.xxxiv.

Chin Kea, an officer of Ts‘e, IL T ix.

Chin Leang, a philosopher, III, "ps iv;

Ch'in Seang, a disciple of Ch'in Leang, III, E
iv.

Chín Tae, a disciple of Mencius, HI. E i

Chín Tsin, a disciple of Mencius, II, P iii;
x: VL fy. xiv.: VIL
Ch'in, the State of, V. de viii; VII. IM

xviii; xxxvii,

^. xxiii,

iv.
Chie Wa, appointed: chief criminal judge of

Ch‘ing the State of, IV. v. ii; xxiv.: v. PF.
ii: VIL

Ch'ing, a minister of the State of Ch'in, v. Ze
viii, :

Choo, a minister of Tee, IV. T xxxii.: VI

Choo-fung, the birth place of Shun, IV. “ei

Chow, the State and dynasty, I. fy iii.: II.

E-i i; P xiii.: IIT, E- jii.; B v.: IV.
Es vil; Pei: v. boi; vhs [ds

3v ii.
e a city on the southern border of Ts‘e, II.

v. XXxvii,

d xl; xii,
is the last emperor of the Yin dynasty, I.

NE viii.: II. E- i: TI. Jy. ix.: 1v. E-
i; ix.; xili: V, E: vi.; 20 þei : VI. E vi:
VII. E- xxii.

Chow-kung, or the duke of Chow, II. E- 1;

Cdi n ES vix: TV. TK.
xx.: V. : VI. fy. viii.
Chow, the prince U^ Ch5n in Confucius’ time,

v. Es vili,

Chow Seaou, a scholar of Wei, III. T^ iii.

Chuen-foo, a hill on the north of Ts'e, I. "Te
iv.

Chung-jin, a son of the emperor T'ang, V. Es
vi.

Chung-ne, Confucius, Y, E- 23 vii; III. xps

ive: IV. R. xvii.

INDEX II.

Ch‘ung Yu, a disciple of Mencius, II.
xiii.
Chay-keih, a place in Tsin, famous for gems,
v. Es ix.
, Chwang, a street in the capital of Ts‘e, ITI. ^
vi.
Chwang Paou, a minister at the court of Ts'e,

AE Rei.

Confucius, II, Jes i—iv,: HL E iv.; T i;
jii; vit; Ex IV. aps ii; vii; xiv.; ag xviii;
xxl; xxii; xxix.: V, E iv.; vi.; viii; T
hriva viii VL p. vi; vii: PF iii, ; vi.:
Vit, fF. xxiv; R xvii; xix; xxxvii;

xxxviii,
E
p
4

E, a famous archer, B.c, 2150, IV. fn. xxiv.:

VI. APs xx.: VII, E s xli.

E Che, a follower of Mih, IIL f+. v.
E Yin, a minister of T'ang, II. E ii; ^ ii:

v. Ru vi.; vii.; T i: VI. qe VII,

E XXXi.5 “pf. xxxviii,
E.

Fan, a city of Ts'e, VII, ^, xxxvi.

Fei-leen, a favourite minister of the tyrant
Chow, III, h. ix.

Foo-hea, a place where Shun dwelt, IV. IS i.

Foo Yu£, the minister of the Emperor Kaou-
tsung, VI. T xv.

Fung-foo, a scholar of Tsin, famous for. seizing
tigers, VII. fX. xxiii.

G

Gan, or Ngan, the principal minister of Ts‘e, I.
“RA. ives TL E i. :
Gi-ching or Ys-ching, the double surname of

Kiih, a disciple of Mencius, I. E xvi.: IV.

Eon xev VI. Qi. xii: VIL T

XXV.

H

Hae T'ang, a famous worthy of Tsin, V. F

lii.

OF PROPER NAMES.

391

V vii; Han, one of the three families which governed

the State of 'Tsin, VII, qe xi,
Han, the name of a stream, IIT. E iv.
Haou-sang Puh-hae, a man of Ts‘e, VII. PF

XXV.
He, a favourite of Chaou Keen, III. R i.

Hea dynasty, I. lv. iv.: IL E- i: II. des
Hir, bouiv. Evi; vi; Rog.

Heaou, the duke of Wei, V. T iv.

Heen-k‘ew Mung, a disciple of Mencius, V. E
iv.

Heu Hing, a heresiarch, IH, Yd iv.

Heun-yuh, a tribe of barbarians, I. ^ iii,

Hew, a place in the district of T'ang, in the
department of Yen-chow, II, Ñ. xiv.

Ho, the name of a river, Yellow river, UI. .
ix.

Hoo Heih, a man, name, I, p. vii.

Hwa Chow, an officer of 'I's'e, slain in battle, VI.
Tes

Hwae, the name of a stream, III. AE iv.; TF

Dix.
Hwan, Hwan T'uy, a high officer of Sung, V.

Evi
Hwan, the duke of Ts'e, s.c. 683—642, I. F.
vii; PR. i.: IV. TR xxi: VIR. vii,
Hwan-taou, Yaou’s minister of instruction, V.
. Jii,
Hwuy, the posthumous epithet of Yung, king
of Leang, a State in Tsin, I, ep. i-v.; VIL

Fi :
Hwuy of Lew-hea, posthumous title of Chen
Hwg, an officer of Loo, II. Ee ix: V. E

i. VL FR. vie: VIL. xxxvii Pi. xv,

Hwuy, the duke of Pe, V. . iii,

J

Jin, a small State, VI.
Joo, the name of a stream, III, Je. iv.

K Axp K‘

Kä, or Kö, a city in Ts'e, IT. JR, vi.: DI. ^

' *

v. ij Y.

x.
Kang, younger brother of the prince of Ting,

VIL P. xti.
K‘ang, hon, ep, of Fung, brother of king Woo,
v. F. iv.

392

Kaou, the philosopher, named Puh-hae, II.

E iev baa

Kavu, a disciple of Md@acius, II,

Ec xxi.; xxii.
Kaou, a disciple of Tsze-hea, VI. Jy. iii.

Kaou-kih, a distinguished minister of the tyrant
Chow, I, fr. i: VI.

Kaou-t‘ang, a place in the west of Ts‘e, VI,
vi.

Kaou-yaou, a minister of Shun, III. Es iv.:
vi. E: xxxv,; [\. xxxviii.

Ke, a small State in Shan-se, II. +: io

Eu

K'e, the viscount of Wei i in ee VI. Bs
vi..

K'e, the son of the emperor Yu, V.

K'e, the name of a mountain, and also of the old^
State of Chow, I. f. v. ; xiv.; XV.: Iv. fe. i,

Ke, the name of a stream, VI. X. vi.
Ke family, the family of Ke K‘ang of Loo, IV.
. xiv.
Ke Hwan, the head of the Ke family in the latter
days of Confucius. V. Ñ. iv.
Ke Leang, an officer of Ts‘e, slain in battle, VI.
yvi,
Keang, the Yang-tsze river, III. F iv.; T
ix.
Keang, the lady of, I,
Keaou, a brother of the rine of T‘saou, VI.
xii

Kez, the tyrant, I. ii; as viii: IV. p.
ix: V. - Vij vii: VI fn. ii; vi; ix.; x.
Kéó-shaou, the name of a piece of music, I.

^ wiv.

Keu, the name of an aneient State, I.

x. Xii: VII

ye XY.

Ke, a mountain in Ho-nan, V.

F. . vi.

“fp. iii.

Keu-sin, the governor of P‘ing-luh, II. [y. iv.

Keut, a place in Tsin, famous for horses, V.

. ix,

Kew, the name of Yen Yew, a disciple of Con-
fucius IV, F. xiv.

Kih, a small State adjoining to Tsin, V. E xi.

Kün Chang, named Laou, a disciple of Con-
fucius, VII. P. xxxvii.

‘King, a place punished by the duke He of Loo,

UWI. E iv.; F ix.

King, the duke of Ts'e, s.c, 546-488., I DR iv.:

m. p. iki AIV, b.vü.sv. “TYR vii.

King Chow, an officer of Ts‘e, IL. Pä i.

OF PROPER NAMES.

INDEX Tf,

King Ch‘un, a man who plumed himself on his
versatility, II. . ii.

Kö, the name of a State in Ho-nan,..
xi.: HI.

Kö, or Kit, acity in Ts'e, II. jy. vis IIT,
Koo-sow, Shun's father, IV. E xxviii: V,
E ii; iv.: VI. Ew vi.: VIE. Ps XXXV,
Kow-ts‘een, the name of a prince in the Leg

Kwó, I.

Kung, Keu-sin, II. f. iv.
Kung Che-ke, an officer of the State of Yu, V.

v. lii;

x. lii,

ix,
Kung-e, prime minister of Loo, VI. fy. vi.
t t
Kung-hang, an officer of Ts‘e, IV. X. xxvii.

Kung-lew, the duke of Lew, an ancestor of the
Chow family, I. T v.

Kung-ming E, a disciple, first of Tszc-chang,
and then of Tsing. Sin, TIT. E i; F ji;
ix.: IV. Iv. xxiv. f

Kung-ming Kaou, a disciple of Tsing Sin, V.

Ji n

Kung-shoo, a celebrated mechanist of Loo,
named Pan, now the god of carpenters, IV.

ok

Kung-sun Ch'ow, a disciple of Mencius, II.
Eiis F ii; vi; xivs IL K. vii.:
IV, b.xei:vn QR. iii; xiii: vun F.
xxxi; xxxii; xxxix. xli; þf. í; xxxvi.

Kung-sun Yen, a celebrated scholar of Wei, ITI.

Kung-too, & disciple of Mencius, II. Td v.:

ni JÑ. ix.: IV. T xxx: VI. LE v vi;

xv.: VII, JE xliii.

Kwin barbarians, I. f. iii.

K‘win, the father of the emperor Yu, V. E.

iii,

Kwan Chung, by name E-woo, minister of
Hwan, duke of Ts'e, IL. F.i; T ii:
VI. Te xv.

Ewan-shüh, the elder brother of the duke of
Chow, II. fy. ix.

Kwang, music-master and wise counsellor of

Tsin, IV. f.i: vr [.vii

 K‘wang Chang, a minister of Ts‘e, III, Jd x

IV. UM xxx.

K‘wei-k‘ew, the place where the duke Hwan

i assembled the princes, VI. T vii.

b

l
INDEX IL

Lae Choo, the minister of T'ang, VII, T
xxxviii, ;

“Lang-yay, a mountain and city in Ts‘e, I.
iv.

Le, a cruel emperor of the Chow dynasty, VI.
qs
Le Low, a man of Hwang-te's time, of very
acute vision, IV, E i o
* Leang, the state of Wei in Tsin, so called from
its capital, I. È: i—vi.: VII. P i 7
_ Ling, the duke of Wei, V.
Ling-k'ew, a city on the border-of Ts‘e, IT, B

v.

v. iv,

Pr the native State of Confucius, I. Iv. xii.:

: IL F.. vii.: TH. ie ii: IV. Rl.
xxi: V, zu viii.; OM i; iv.: VI. F vi
vii; xii: VII, E- xxiv.; xxxvi; T

xvii, : xxxvii,
Lung, an ancient worthy, III. Es i: VE

E vit

Mang, Mang K‘o, Mencius, I, f. xvi.

Ming Chung, 4 nephew, or perhaps a son, of .

Mencius, II. JN. ii.

Mang a a worthy minister of Loo, V. F
iij.
Ming Ke, a younger brother of Mang Chung,

. VIL E Y

Ming Pun, a celebrated bravo of 'T's'e, it F-
i, l

Mang She-shay, a man of valour, II, EL ii,

Me, an unworthy favourite of the duke Ling,
v, Fo viii

Meën K'eu, a man of Ts'e, who taught a slow
style of singing, VI EI vi,

Mih Teih, a heresiarch, TH. pos v, fy. ix:

VIL E xxvi,
Mih, barbarous tribes of the North, VI.
Mih K‘e, a person whose words are quoted, VII.
V. xix, g
"Miu Tsze-k'een, a disciple of Confucius, IT.
E.

p- x.

OF PROPER NAMES.

393

í Ming-teaou, the-place where Shun died, IV.

vi
Muh, the residence of the tyrant Këg, V. Js
Mah, the’ posthumous epithet of the duke of
Loo, I, R. xii: IL RR. xi.: v vi. vii:
Vi. Pie vi,
Muh, the duke of Ts‘in, B.e. 659-620, V. Lc
ix.: VÍ.
Müh Chung, a friend of Ming Héen, Y. R iii.
Mih Pei, an ambitious man, VII, T xxxvii.

N

Nan-yang, the name of a place, VI.

New mountain, the, VI, E viii,

Ngan, ọr Gan, the principal minister of Ts‘e,
L Wa p.i

North Ses, the, V. fy. i.

Pu

Pang Kang, a disciple of Mencius, III, F iv,

P‘ang Mung, the pupil and murderer of the
archer E, IV; JN. xxiv. 7

Pe, a place in the State of Loo, V. [X. iii.

Pe-kan, an uncle of the tyrant Chow, II. E
i: VI E. vi,

Peih Chen, a minister of the State of P'ang,
III. Hi C

Peih-ying, the place where king Win died, IV.

vi ]

Pih-e, hon. epithet of a worthy of the Shang
dynasty, IL. ^. iis ix: HL Ty. x: IV.
E siie v. Rei ve Roxsvan p.
xxii; f>. Xv.

Pih Kwei, styled Tan, an ascetic of Chow, yL
UM X.; Xi.

Pih-kung E, an officer of Wei, V. P ii,

Pih-kung Yew, a bravo of Wei, I. ^. ii.

Pih-le He, a chief minister of the duke Müh of
Ts‘in, V. E ix.: VI. F vi.; xv.

Pin, a settlement founded by Kung-lew, I.
Tes

Png, the duke of Loo, I.

Ping, the duke of Tsin, s.c. 556-531, V.
iii,

v. vi.

v. viii.

v. XVI,

50

394

OF PROPER NAMES.

INDEX II.

P'ing-luh, a city on the southern border of Ts‘e, Shun, the emperor, II. È ii; viii; Te ii:

x. Ris: vr. Tv. `
Pó, a city in Ho-nan,'T'ang’s capital, ITI, T
v.: V. EL vi.; vii,
P'wan-shing Kwoh, an officer of Ts‘e, VIT. T
xxix. ;

S

San E-sang, an able minister of King Wan, VII.
P. xxxviii.

San Meaou, the State of, V. dq jii,

San-wei, a region in the West, V. s üi.

Se, the lady, a celebrated beauty of Confucius’
time, IV.

Séang, the half brother of Shun, V. E- ii;
iii: VIL. vi.

Seang, hon. epithet of Hih, king of Léang. I. dre.
vi.

^ . XXV,

Se, the name of an ancient principality adjoin-

ing T'ang, I. fy. xiv.: IL,

Sét, Shun's minister of instruction, IIL. ub: iv.

^- iv.

Se Keu-chow, a minister of Sung, TIT. fy. vi.

Sét Lew, T'sze-lew, a disciple of the Confucian
school, I, IN. xi: HI. NV. viii.

Seu, a place punished by the duke He of Loo,

nr F. iv; F ix.

Seu Peih, a disciple of Mencius, III. SES v.:
IV. NN. xviii. A

Seuen, the king of Ts'e, s.c. 332, I. d vii;
“Peis IV. i v. Ron: VIL
E XXXİX,

Shang, the dynasty, IIT. TR v.: IV. E- vii,

She, an officer of 'l's'e, IT, T x.

_ Shih-k‘ew, a place in Sung, VI. JN. iv.

Shin-ming, the second of the Five emperors,
ur. . iv.

Shin Kuh-le, minister of the prince of Loo, VI.

\. vili,

Shin Ts‘eang, a son of Tsze-chang, Confucius’
disciples, IT, aS xi.

Shin T‘ung, a high minister of Ts‘e, IL . viii,

Shin-yew, a friend of the philosopher Tsàng, IV.
T xxxi —— . =

Shin-yew Hing, a disciple of Tsing, IV. F.
xxxi `

Shing Kan, a person whose words arc quoted,
Wie p i

, IH. E-i. iv.; d iv; ix. IV, bis iis

xxvi; xxviii; fn. i; xix; xxviii; xxxii: V.

E- i—vii. fP. i; Hi, vi: VI. E. vi: P

ii; Hi; viii; x; xv. VIL E: Xvi; XxY.:

Xxx. xxxv.; xlvi; a vi; xxxii; xxxvii;
xxxvii.

Shun-yu K'*win, a famous sophist of Ts'e, IV.

E xvii: VI. T vi,
Sin, the native place of E Yin, in Ho-nan, V.
* Es vii,
Sin, younger brother of Ch5n Seang, III. des iv.

South river, V. a ot v.

Sun-shuh Gaou, prime minister of Ch‘wang of
Ts‘oo, VI. xv. -

Sung, the State of, I. iis T iim F.
i; ivy T va V. E viii: VII. E
xxxvi.

Sung Kang, a travelling scholar, VIO. iv.

Sung Kow-ts‘een, a travelling scholar, VII, ps
ix. `

Sze, the name of a stream, III. E iv.

T

Tae, elder brother of Ch'in Chung, III, R. x.

- T*ae an ancestor of the Chow family, the duke

T‘an-foo, who received from Woo the title of
king, I.
Tae mountain, on the border between Loo and
Tse L fF. vii I. Ẹ. ii: VIL eov.
T*ae-kéa, son and successor of Tang, II. E
te IV. F. viis v. F.v vin F.
xxxi.
T'ae-kung, a great counsellor of Win and Woo,

TV, P xii: VIL fF. xxii; ^M xxxviii,
Tae Puh-shing, a minister of Sung, IIL fn. vi.
Tae-ting, eldest son of the emperor T'ang, V.

. vi.

we Vo xiv. Xv. A. viii

Tae Ying-che, a great officer of Sung, III. ET

^ viii »

T áh, the name of a stream III. E- iv.

T'an-foo, Tae, the duke of Ts'e, I. Te v.

Tan Choo, the son of Yaou, V.

T'ang, the founder of the Shang dynasty, I.»
ii; .i;lii;
xii; III, T va IV, E ix; Re xx; V.

Es

m jii; viii: xi.; II. v dia

INDEX if,

«fF vi; vii: VI. fy. ji; viz VII. Lp. XXX
m. iv; xxxiii.; xxxviii,
Ting, the State of, I, fy. xiii; xiv. xv.: II,

T vie I, fiiv: VII px e

xxx.
T'ang, a place where grain was stored in Ts'e,

VII
Taou Ying, a disciple of Mencius, VII. E:
^ xxxv.

'fden, the son of the king of Ts‘e, VII. or

xxxiii.

Ting, the duke of Ting, IL F.i.
Tes‘ae, the State of, VII.
Tsae Go, a disciple of Confucius, III. E ii.

"I's'ang-leang, a stream in Shan-tung, LV. z E-

viii,

Fsiing Seih, Tsang Sin’s father, IV. E xix.:

VIL `
Tsing Se, the grandson of T'sing Sin, the dis-

v. Xxiii.

a

E xviii,

we Xxxvi.; xxxvil,

ciple of Confucius, and philosopher, It. s i,
Tsing Sia, the philosopher, I. F xii.: E

ii; Ti ji; III E iis iv; R- vìi: IV: Ne
xix; xxxi: VIE fn. xxxvi.
Tsang "Ts'ang, a favourite of the duke Páng of

Loo, I. E xvi.

Tsing Yuen, the son of the philosopher Tsing,
IV. F. xix.

Ts‘aou, the principality of, VI. T ii,

Tse, the name of a stream, III. LE iv.

Ts'e, the State of, I. P. v.i viis f i755

xii; xiv.: II. E i; ii; Pier : TU.

F- ij ] Qd; vj vig x: IV. B
xxiv.; fy. iti; xxi; Xxxi; xxxiii: V. E-
iv.; viii. ; Jy. is vii; viii: VI. Vg vi;

^
vii: VII, E- xxxiv;; xxxvi.; XXXİX.; m
xvii. $ xxiii; xxix.
Tseih, Hows tseih, the minister of agr iculture
of Yaou and Shun, IV. fy. xxix.
Tseik Hwan, a favourite of the prince of Ts‘e,
L 2
v. F. viii
Ts:ew, Chess Ts‘ew, a famous Chess-player, VE
. ix,

. vii;

Tsin, a river in the State of Ch'ing, IV, Ñ. ii.

Tsin, the State of, I ^ i notes v. vii: II,

^ iii, iV. d xxi: V. E ix; a iii:
VII, Tes.

OF PROPER NAMES.

395

Ts‘in, the State of, I. L v; vii.: IL, T ii:

Loy: d. ix.: VI. Ex iv; xii; FR. fv. vi,

Ts‘oo, the. State of, I. dm v.; vii; T vi;

xiii,: II, T ii: III. E ig ivy Revs
vi: IV. [x.xxi.: VI. E iv; xii Ti iv.

Tsow, the native State of Mencius, I. RT. vii;

T xii.: IL, T xii: IE E ii.: VI. T

i; ji; v.

‘Ts‘ung, a place in Ts‘e, II, F. xiv;

Ts'ung, the mountain, V. E iji.

Tsze-ch‘an, named Kung-sun Keaou, the chief

minister of the State of Ch'iag, IV. T ii:
v. E ii.

Tsze-chang, a disciple of Confucius, IT. d. iis;

Teze-che, prime minister of Tsze-k*wae of Yen,
u, ^f. viii.

'Tsze-chó Yu, an archer of Ch'ing, IV. V. xxiv,

Tsze-gaou, Wang Hwan, the governor of Ks
in Ts‘e, IV, E xxiv,; Xxv.; þh. xxvii.

Tsze-hea, a disciple of Confucius, II, E ii.;
iv.

Tsze-kung, a disciple of Confucius, II. E: ii,s
n, F.i.

Tsze-kAvae, a king of Yen, ITI, Toi viii, -

Tsze-lew, Séé Lew, VL `

Tsze-łoo, the designation of Chung Yew, a dis-
ciple of Confucius, IL E 1.5 viii; I. R
vii.: V. Æ: viii.

‘Tsze-moh, a pbilosopher of Loo, vit, r. xxvi,

Teze-séang, a disciple of Tsing, H. Ew ii,

Tsze-shuh É, a person who pushed himself into
the service of government, II, T x.

éd the grandson of Confucius, II. UR
xi.: IV. : VI,

v.e vi.

Tsze-too, an officer of Ching, s.c. 700, distin-
guished for his beauty, VI, EL vii,

Tsze-yew, a disciple of Confucius, m F: ii;

iv.
Tsung the place where the emperor T'ang was

buried, V. E vi: VH. E xxxi .
Tung-kwoh family, a branch of the family of
Hwan, duke of Ts'e, If. IX. ii.

 Twan Kan-muh, a scholar of Wei, III. P. vii,

x. Vi.

v xxxi: : V. f db; vi; vii:

396 -
U

Uh-loo, a disciple of Mencius, VI. T. i; v.

Wae-ping, a son of the Emperor T'ang, V, E.

vi. .

Wan, the king, I. [^.ii; vii; “Pi ii; tii. v.s
x: I fi; iii: IL fi; ii; Tvs
ix.: IV. Ew vit; xiii. ; s. i. xxu VI, p.
vi; E ii: VIL. E x xxii; Ñ. xix.;

xxii.; xxxviii.
Wan, the duke of Ting, I. Nu xiii; xiv.: III,

E- i; iiiz iv. (
Win, the duke of Tsin, Bo, 625—627, 1. f+.
vii: TV.
Wan Chang, à disciple of Mencius, 1 In.

v. ales i; i; iti; v.—ix.
viii, VIL, “Wy. xxxvii.
Wang Hwan, Tsze-gaou, the governor of K%, in
Tse, IL FN. vi.
Wang Leang, charioteer to Chaou Kéen, III.

T
Wang P'áou. a man of Wei, teacher of an ab-

rupt style of singing, VI. v. vi.

Wang Shun, an officer of the duke of Pe,
v. T iii,

Wei, the State of, IV, ES xxiv: V. E väi;
Pein

‘Wei, one of the three families which governed
the state of Tsin, VIL. fF. xi.

Wei, a small State in Shan-se, I, P. i: VI.
E vi.

Wei, a river in the state of Ching, IV. T^ ii,

Woo; the State of, I, T ji: IV. E- vib;

xxxi.
Woo, the founder of the Chow dynasty, I. T

TI. iii; viii; x.: IE Ei E T vii: III, E
ix.: IV. E ix; T xx, VI. ee vi; VII.

QXXX; fy. iv; xxxiii,
Woo Hws, a man noted for his strength, VI.

V. XX
we VU

a. di; iv. vi;

v.c

Woo-ling, a wild place in the department of

Tse-nan, Lil.
Woo-shing, a city in Loo, IV. X. xxxi.
Woo-ting, an emperor of the Shang dynasty.

BC. 1323, IL aw i.

we X.

OF PROPER NAMES.

INDEX II.

Y

Yang Choo, a heresiarch of the time of Confu-

cius, HI. Te ix. VII. E xxvi.: F

v. Xxvi,
Yang Hoo, the principal minister of the Ke
family, of Loo, III, E- iii T^ vii.
Yang-shing, a city in Ho-nan, V. E vi.
Yaou, the emperor, II. E ii; R. iis II.

Up iiv. T iv, ix.: IV. E i; iis R.
xxxii.; V. Eu iii,—vii.; Te i; vi; VI. d
vi; T vi; viii; x: VIL JT. xxx; xlvi;
F vi; xxxii., xxxvii.; xxxviii,

Yellow River, VI.

Yen, the kingdom of, III. T ix,

Yen, the State of; E. fn. x; xi: II. T^ viii;
ix. ]

Yen, Yen Hwuy, a disciple of Conf, IV. T
xxix.

Yen Ch‘ow-yew, a worthy officer of Wei, V.

. viii,
Yen New, a disciple of Confucius, II. Eu. ii,

Yen Pan, a son of Yen Hwuy, V. [X. iii,
Yen Yew, the Grand-tutor of the prince of

Ting, IL. fe. it,

Yeo Yuen, a disciple of Confucius, IL. [. ii:
uL F.i

Yew, a cruel emperor of the Chow dynasty, VI.

`

v. Vi.

. vi,
Yew Chow, the name of a place on the northern
border, V. L.iii.
Yew Jð, a disciple of Confucius, II. E ii, ; iv.
Yih, a minister of Shun, and of Yu, III. E-
iv.: V. d vi.
Yih-ya, the cook of the duke Hwan of Ts'e, VI.

. vii,
; NI ix,
In. E- jii.: IV. E ii; vii: V. -T iv.
VII NV. iv.
Yin-kung T“o, a famous archer, IV. T xxiv.
v. Xii.

Yin Sze, a man of Ts‘e, II, aS
Ying, the name of a place between Ts‘e and
Loo, IT.

Yó-ching, a disciple of Mencius I. fP- xvi.:

IV. EÈ xxiv. ; xxv.: VI. T xiii: VII.
TR. xv.

LJ

Yin, State and dynasty, II. dq

v. Vii,

 Yó-ching Ki ow, a Tend of Mang IHëen, V. T ii.

INDEX II. OF. PROPER NAMES; 890
Yóh.a quarter ih the capital of Ts‘e, HI. R: Yu,a small State adjoining Tsin, v. Ew ix, c
vj. l » (OV VV. y: i i
Yu, the emperor, IT, E: viii, : IÑ. Ea ix: ;Yu, the mountiin, V. E: jii.

A IV."K. Xx.; xxvi; xxix: V. Ew yi: VI. f Yuckang Sze, an archer of Wei; iv, F xxiv.
T xi: VH. B xxii xxxviii. Fug, the State of, IV. T xxxi.: Vf, "M iii

L
ve:
4 H e
i :
AAA Annee
. MCN wA.
E ^
Ek
^4 ` "
i
, 2 '
/ P
,
i
'
i
d
' f*
b ve
dta
H
r " Yo."
' f
n '
ie we
tern d i
] r i
L b.
`
B J yt
f 4: t i *
‘ t
us A [i 1 d
‘
A
hd t d ^
i E
1^ 4
Y Q9 i ' 1 ,
s 4 ‘ [M
à =

` INDEX IIT.

OF CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES;

INTENDED ALSO TO HELP TOWARDS THE FORMATION OF A DICTIONARY AND CONCORDANCE .
H b *

FOR THE CLASSICS,

Jn the references, Books are separated by a colon; Parts of the same Book, and Chapters, by a Semicolon.

ppt
ih
5

THE 1s» RADICAL, -—,

(1) One; sometimes =a, I, E vii.
6, 10, 17;
~~ FE, every single individual of all the
people, 1l, Ba i8 — li]. any one
State, and a whole State, IV. E vi, 1.
— AA all the heart, VII.
10. — Él vir. Tv. xxxvii, 19. —
A once with a reference tothe Emperor.

I T. iii. 7. Ju ~~, a ninth. ft —,

a tenth, bis - ~=; & twentieth, TT,
_E. iti. 6 15; "A v. 4;viii, 1: VL TR.
x.1,4, 32]. —-^, to hold to one point,
be obstinate, VII. E xxvi 3, 4. (2)
One and the same, exactly similar, VI.
he sin ts Pax, 8: VIL P. xx. 2:
et al. (8) To unite, to be united. I. E-
vi, 2, 3, 4.
Once, once for all, as soon as, I. Ed v.
1, s. di6 8;xi 2: n. fein; ii. 1:
IV. T: xx. 1: VIL ds xvi; xxx, 2:
[52x

X. Hi 5; iv. 5: et alibi, sepe,

v». xxxvii,

(4) As an adv, and conj.

et al, s =, one another,

. now...now. IL A. xiii 2: nt. ix. 2,

pu

chang (2) a E a man. its pu KR

Ik "T A son of the emperor T'ang.

v. E við. iT. An emperor of

the Yin dynasty, IT, Es i.8.

Seven, I E iii, 4 ; vii, 24; R i

1, 2; xi, 1: etal May be used for the

seventh, I. Je vi. 6.
(1) Ten cubits, VIL ÑN. xxxiv. 2.

=, II.

“Po ith. 4i vi 6 d Am E.

—
—-
san

í—————————————»——————————w————— ÉÁÁPRRM

E

i4; T ii. 1, 2, 8. =a son, III. T.
iii. 6.
(1) Three, I. H.

F. i. 2; ii, 6: I F. ii. 2, 3: etal,

sape. —— Hi. the armies of à great State.
L JX. xv. 1: TL o pedhsiea —
AR, the three dynasties of Hea, Shang,
and Chow, IIL, fF. iii, 10: etal —
xs the founders of the three dynasties.
Iv. T xx. 5. = Hu, the three sages,
Yu, Chow-kung, and Confucius, IIT. T
ix, 13. == > the three worthies,
Pilve. E Yin, and Hwuy of Lew-hea, —=
Sp. the three highest officers of a State,
VIL fi. viis == ZY, the three high-

vw. x, 1; xvi, 2:

est dignitaries at the imperial court.
eiu, — Xd
VII. E. xxviii, — A. VII. E
xx, == E. vin “Ys. xxviii. May be
used for the third. VI F. vii, 8: et al,
(2) Adverbially, thrice, II, “Py. iv. 1;
e == m
children, LT. xv, 1. (4) —
'The nage of a State. V. T^ jii, 2.

The name of a place. Zb.

(1) He, she, it, this, that, which is
above, with the corresponding plurals,—

xii, 1, 4: et al.

—
—

t shang spoken of place, time, and rank. Passim.
chang
8 F m constantly appear as correlntes,

=superiors and inferiors; high and low;

above and below. t P En T on

the high grounds on the low grounds, or
they who were above, they who were be-

low. UI [.ix.8. E HE, the high-

est antiquity, II f.v. 4 E Jf]

the severest punishment, IV. E: xiv.

& bd Y pis, 6.7.8, Lm.

INDEX III.

v. Nus fF fg. Nee
(2) A preposition, following the noun,
sometimes with Z between them,'and
the noun sometimes preceded by HA and
af upon, above, by. I. as vii, 4: II.
E vi, 2: HI, f.x. 1: VIL R. xv.;
xxx, l. (3) E m God, the most
High God, L [v.s 7: 1v. bii

5; T. xxv.2. (4) E u. Name of

a palace, VII [\. xxx, 1.
+ Up. 2d tone. To ascend. I. T iv.
shang T.
chang
T (1)-Anciently, up.2d tone. He, she, it,
this, that, which is below; with the cor-
het responding plurals, spoken of place, time,
1818

and rank, Passim, On E
relates, see E- uH
case, VI, fy. xiv. 4. Without tf. Vv.
Pis RE Vf. ii 3, 6, 7,
8. (2) A preposition, . used like E
above, (3) B" D to go below the

girdle, Fs Te to dig to a great depth.

Gv. poke (CK “FR: the world,
=the Empire. I. E iii. 5; v, 1; vi 2,
6: V. .i.3, 45 iii, 2; iv. 1,8; v. 1,2,

5, 6: et al, scepissime, ae K Z T

v», a8 cor-

TS the lowest

`V, uL iv. 2. (5). In the name SP f

HH. IL E. ix. 2, 8: etal,

A.verb, to descend. VII. fn. iii. 3,

hea X. : :
hsia 4. PT. iy to rain, I, T vi, 6. T
, to descend from a carriage. "VIT,

“Po. xiii. 2. So, R ZR, HL. po.

? y] Teu E iii. 16; and L
Pi. T.

(1) Not. Pia

tives, ES, dE TE
strong affirmative, à » A iB: a name,
Hi. T vi, L T also a name,
VIL... xxv. 1.

(1) The name of one of Menciüs' dis-
ciples, Kung-sun Chow. II. E- il;
fi. 1: TP ii, 2; vi. 2; xiv. 4: etal. (2).
The name of an officer of Ts‘e, King

Chow, I. Ss ii, 4.

r^ other nega-

pih fg. it makes a

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

399

AP W a son of the emperor T'ang,
n said, aec. to the interpretation of some,
to have reigned two years, V. F . Vi, b,

H. (1) And, and moreover. TI. E iH;

is‘tay ii, 19;

ch'jeh v. Vli, 4; ix, 2, 4: et al, sepe.

de i. m. WW. i3 (2) And
z-and if, and even if, carrying the mind
on to anticipate a reply, which is often

given by (Jl or rf BUF. I, E
iv. 4: IL fi. ix. 8: OL T i5: VI,
"e x. 6. With this meaning, we find HI,
Fi. u. E i7; Ty iii10: VIL E
vi ME AL. © Rouisvnh F.
vii.3,8. Obs. Jy AL. m F. iv.16.
(8) = will, or let me, II fF. v. 1,2.
Great, HI PR. ix. 6

pret

tit. (1) An age, a generation; ages. May
she Often be translated by—the world, Le
Sh vii, 2; PR. xiv. 8: II. TI. i. 6: IV.

„i, 2; R.i 83 xxii, 1: et al, sepe.

tit 4h, the manners of théage, I. T
i. 2: et al, Z tit T famous in their

generation. IL fy. xiii. 3; comp. VIT,
E- ix. 6. H HE z-their history and
V. jy. viii, 2, (2) Heredi-
tary; from age to age, T. T v, 3; vii,
1; xv. 2: III. E iii. 8; Px

tit Ii "H RK T to possess the

empire by hereditary succession. IV.
. vi. 4.

(1) A hillock, pe Egg [pu
28. fr s. Tt. f.i. 5. pe Be, the

peasantry, VII, ^ xiv. 2. (2) Thé
vw. XXL 3.

Character,

name of Confucius, IV. T^
(3) FX E a Page: surname, V, E
iv. 1, 2. OE m ne a city of Ts‘e, iT.
^ v. 1. HE a a place in Sung. VI,
^ iv. i, 2. 3k go the place of a

famous meeting of princes vi fvi 3.
HE Together. 1, iv. 3. i
THE 2p RADICAL. .

The middle.
after the noun, often with

(1) Used as a preposition,

i chung p or some

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

other proposition before the noun. Z
also is often between the noun and rH vA.

T i 85x13: IL x 6:0 F.
iv. 5); ft. v. 55ix. 4: et al, sepe. (2) rH
NS in the heart's core. II, JJ. iii. 2.:

II. up v.4 . FH [85] and ld FA, in
the middle of the kingdom, I. T x.
8: UL ff. ii 15; dv. i7: IV. T.
xxxiii, 1. d A the central one, III,
uie. 39 FH. to burn at heart.
Vv. E i 5. , an officer of the
middle class. V. fn. ii. In the same
chapter rH simply, of the middle quality
(3) A mean, average. IIL pf. iii. 7.

` (4) The Mean. IV. P. xx, 2, To keep

the Mean, IV. Ri. vä. (5) H KR
F im 3r TI A. to stand in the centre of
the empire, VII. Je xxi 2, Comp. xli,

Ç. xxxvi 2, (6) rn E].

The middle kingdom, II, F-. iv. 7, 12;

TP ix, 3: VI. T x, 5.

Up. 3d tone, To hit the mark, II.

us vo ein ri i vir T.

xxxiii. 2.

3; xxvi, 3;
:

THE 3p RADICAL, 4.

(1) F Zk the name of Yaou’s son,
V. E- vi, 2. (2) The name of É

Æ Vi. PR. xi. 1.

(1). To count—be counted—as the prin-
cipal thing. JI. “Fi. ii. 4. (2) To pre-
sideover, V. E v.6. (8) Ahost. V.
F ii. 5: VIL [v. xxiv. 2. (4) To
make one's host, ie, to lodge with. V.

s viii, 1, 2, Obs. parr. 8, 4, dt Bp
d E ma tE FE

THEY 4ru RADICAL, J.

(1) To be. I. _ FF. vii. 8.9; fi. iv. 6:

xiv. xv,: VIL.

INDEX HI.

xxviii, 7: VL _E. vi. 5; y vi, 6. Obs,

75- Ji OM iv, 6, where we can

hardly translate it,

A long time, for a long time; to bea

long time. II. E. i 3 85. 22; R
xiv.3: u Pa. ix.2:V. E viz R.

i4. VII. . Xxx, 2.

(1) Of, — the sign of the possessive
case. But it would often be very harsh

to translate it by of. I. ,1.45; iii, 1,
3, 4: et al, sepissime. The regent follows
the x and the regimen precedes it.
They may be respectively a noun, a
phrase, or a larger clause, Pr followed
by T^ is very common in Mencius ; e.g.,
VII. ES xxiv. (2). Hirn, her, it, them.
Passim. (3) It is often difficult to deter-

mine the antecedent to Z. It has to
be gathered from the context; and some-

„times Z merges in the verb; making it

an emphatic neuter, or =a passive. E. G.,
LẸ iii 25 v.8; vi 6; vi 4: 1V RR.
E iii as vs xii, 3;
xxx. l, (3). AR Z: as in (2), but also
impersonally, = there is...... I. T iii.
1; viii, i: et sape, So, the negative >

Z $ where the X attracts the a

to itself, The same is to be observed of

BE. (0 We have ££ 7 FEL s.
DEL pud PB UL. Pix 4; BL

XR II. E. iv. 1; and other similar

expressions, where we may suppose two
objectives, the being = to, for, &c.,

him, it, them. Obs. esp. A x ^L. I.
TR. xii 1 a Boe SY
T v. (5) xt Bd. is called, or is
d i zu

what is called, itt x BHD XI.

iv. 6. We might reduce this to (1), ......
is the saying of this. But this cannot be
done where = BEP followed by an adj n
or d words. £.G., VIL fN. xxv. ud

comes under (2) Compare 2

1v. bua ey B UE IV. T

iii. 4; trm x mj. v ^ Te ix. 1;
i and H3 Z Hn faa, IV. de xviii.
ice. Vf. x 054p fig now. Ln

n M E iv.i. (2) An initial particle,
; of varying power,—seeing this, but, now,

&c. L T xvi: I.

INDEX Ill.

1; xiv. 1: etsepe. (7) Obs. I fi]
XZ. nn poo (8) In names.
Ev poene fii es
x {l 1v. x. xxiv. 2; Tá 25
TII, “Fo vi 1; FUP. viii.
1; and Bà >, Jr [512.0
As a verb. To go, or come, to. V. Js
v. 6; vi. 15 ix. 8: et al, scpe.

Suddenly, IL fF. vi. 3.

Q) A particle of interrogation. Found
alone; preceded by another interrog., as

d EB ao Jf fetis
D. d i. 2; ij, 1: VI. F i. 8,8:
III, E: Hi. 2: IV. F xxvii. 3: v^.
v. 8: II, T ix. 2: V. E- vii, 7: et al,
sepe. Also in indirect interrogation. II.
F. ii, 3: IV. (2) A
particle of exclamation. I. E vii. 7;
Tr 4: III. JE: iv. 11: etal, Prec, by
i VH. E: xxxvi, 1; feli, by E I.
T viii, 4; prec. by Ary and foll, by
. II. T: ii. 6. (3) Partly interro-
gative and partly exclamatory, Alone;

preceded by H, E, and We 1. I.
as i. 1, 3; i. 2; xvi, 1: TL, ix. 8:
VI. R. vi, 1: VIL T xxxvii. 2, 7,
etal, Immediately preceded by m. II.
Eiie:9 — ? by 4] Te
€. (4) A preposition,—after verbs, and
=in, of, to, from, &c. I,

+ xxxii 1,

adjectives,

LIN
xii, 2; xv. 1: II. i8, 10; ii, 28: T

xi. 8; HI. E ili, 3, T:'et al, sepe, Obs.
4E SR. vi E. xix. (6) Than, in
comparisons, II. T ii. 4; ds viii, 5
2 IV. Roceiv. d. (6) Observe Ay
By AR. vk v. 1 E. v.
“Pe vit RRK Iv. E.

E 1; AR FH VII. T xxxviii,

Z
fa,

E

shing
shing

AEA Ene

aR Z to impoverish, VI. d xv.
To mount upon, MI, EÈ lii,
take advantage of II, E i. 9.

2, To

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

5
shing
shéng

sometimes preceded by

times not. Ry

401

Low, 3d tone, (1) A carriage. I,
LAIR HR HHS
Ed. the empire, a great State, the pos-
sessions of the chief of a large clan, I. E
i, 4: et al, The classifier of carriages.
HL "Fe iv. TV. RR. sii: VIL, PR.
xxxiv. 2, (2) To drive a carriage. III,
T i.4. (8). A team of four horses, V.
JES ix.2. (4) A setof four arrows, IV.
T xxiv. 2. (5) Name of a Book, IV,
M xxi 2. (6) 3E H. name of Con-
fucius' office, when in charge of the pub-

lic fields. V. R.v. 4

THE, 5ru, RADICAL. Z3-

Nine, VII, E- xxix: VI. F ii, 2: et

al. JL^ a ninth, I. T v. 8, But in

IH. E- ii. 15, JL etes to a mode

of territorial division,

To beg IV. F. xxxiii, 1. 7 ^ a
beggar. VI. E x. 6,

(1) & final particle, used both at the
end of sentences, and of clauses, or sepa-
rate members of a sentence. Sometimes
we miss it, where it might be ;'and gome-
times it might be dispensed with. I. -
ii. 2, 8: iii. i, 2, 3, 4: et passim. (2) Af-
ter the adverb Å; after proper names
(though rarely in Mencius) ; and very of-
ten after a clause in the first member of
a sentente: it ==quoad, now, or may often
be left untranslated. In these cases, it
is often, but far from always, followed by
other particles, I. . it, 1; vii. 8, 21, 22,
IV. E xiv 1: et passim, (3) As cor-
relate of 2A, concluding the explanation
of the character or sentiment which pre-
cedes A The $ however, is often
wanting. L fn. iv. 2.9; x. 2; xi. l; Ir.
E ii. 9: ur. F.i ii, 6, 10: et sepe, (4)
v th, isfound at the end of sentences,
T ‘and some-
however, may generally

be explained independent of the th .L

51

' E. ix, 1, VII. T

. with,

16. fli

LI

Eis; UR iii, 2, 5: et sepe. (5) 4h,
E in the first member of a sentence

resumes a wofd or subject, and the ex-
planation or account of it follows. V.

et al,

however at the com-

x». xxxvii 9:
We find th, 45
mencement of a chapter, where no dis-
course is resumed, VII, [y.xvi. obs VI.
i viii, 2. (6) It is often interroga-
tive, following 4rf, BE JẸ, &c. 1. D.

iii. L; iv. 5: as i, 6, 7; iv. 4: et sepe,
EA Ei, dry, drought, VIL iv.4
Biz, dry, drought, ; . xiv.4.

To confound HI. E». 18: VI. T
xv, 2,: VI. T. x. =to be confounded

VII. d xxxvii. 12, Rebellions,

HI. T ix, 11, To be in confusion; a

State of confusion, II. Ip: ji. 22: HI,

T ix, 2, 5: IV. T xxix, 2: V.

1,1,2: VIL 2. R. xii.

J.

I, me, we, my, I. SEs ii. 4; vii 9;
TP. xvi 8: IL pic 1, 16. 265 iv.
8: et al., sepe.

(1) Affairs; doings, achievements;

business. I, P. vii, 1,2: VIL p.

ee l, 3; "m xxviii : et al, sepe.

fut it JE E: Te were for special busi-

THE 6rg RADICAL.

“ness, I, “fp. iv. 5. 4 DR

there must be the practice of.,.II, Li ii,
Tit H, without doing service. III.
~- iv, 2.: without difficulty. IV.

xxvi. 2. JA Ta- HR. to make—the
business. v. E iii. 1. UF He x.

óne who is fond of strange things, V. T

-viii l; ix. 1, compare E and Jj in

II. “fi. iv. 2, and VI. T vi 5. (2).
To serve—parents, a sovereign, a teacher,
a greater State, &c. T, E v. 85 vii. 20,

22: et al, sape. a X Hm 2h, I

NT

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

INDEX II.

.

THE 7ra RADICAL,

Two; the second, III. E iii, 7; v.3:
et al, (2). Z == F see =, ©).

But —_. 445 = two or three pas-

— LL kW
sages. VII. nm iii, 2:
A preposition = by, to, in, on, for ; sepe,

It occurs commonly in quotations from
the older classics. Mencius himself. pre-
fers LA though he does also use a
(1) Says. In a quotation, V. E iv.
1. Obs. V. PR. di 4 2) Hg.
closing a sentence, or the member of a
sentence. It is difficult to translate, and

=so, just, so, only. IL TN. ii. 4: IL.

v. 7: IV, T xxiv. 1: VII, p xxxix,

2. So Z- Af. v. T^ vii. 4.

Five. Sepe. =the fifth. IV. v
xxx. 2. Adverbially, —five times. 1V.
mm vi. 2.

(1) Awell, IL L.via:nr b.v.
3: V. E uc ii. 3: VII. Ex xxix, n J}
Z B. 2 scholar living unemployed in

a city or market-place. (2) A system
of dividing the ground on a plan of nine

squares. III, E iii, 13, 18, 19.

In haste, quickly; to be in haste.
E iia: UL F.i.

Up. 3d tone. Frequently. IV. T-
xviii, 1: V. v. vie 4, 5; vii. 4: VII. F.

I.

- viii. 1.

wang

THE 8mm RADICAL, —,

(1) To expire, die. I. I. li, 4: VI.
gm vid. OE ULL E vii. 21, 22:
Iv. E iii. 4. To be utterly lost; to
X iv, 6, 7, 8:1V. F.i.
4; iii, 2; VIL 1; viii, 1; ix, 5; T xxi,
1: V. E ix. 2: VI. SEs viii, 4; xvi,
8; xvii. 2. Iv. xv.4. — not to be found,
gone away. I. T vii. 1.
to die or perish, VL fF. viii 2. 6)
Not at home. HI. P- viL lL

perish. I.

(2) To cause

INDEX III.

a Used for fit. not being, not having, IV.
gon Foix 3; PR. xxvii. 7. Used actively,
and = to disown. VII. E: xxxiv,

Za (1) Intercourse; to have intercourse

K ; Ts E :

fenou With, IL E ii. 1: V. T- iv. 2, 4: VI

chiao boxy 2; (R. v. 1: VILA. aril, =
mutually. I, fe i4 ZẸ ZE hy to deal
with and exchange, LI, T iv. 5. 2E
Bes, intercourse, and its expression by
presents, V. fy. iv. I. To be inter-

mingled, to eross one another, IU, E:

iv. 1. pz J^ ss to seck the favour

of... IL fF. vi 8. = to treat as. VII.
t- xxxvii 1, (2) A man'sname, VI.

CR. ii 1,2, 6,
Also. Sepe, It is difficult sometimes
to bring out the «/so in another lan-

yh ds Sia in I. E-i i. 2, 3; vii, 17. II.

"Bex 6 eal RIKA

-- Mn B are common phraseologies,

L T ii. 2, 3: IL F ix. 3: VE as
vi 2: VIL fF. xxxix. 2. Obs. n pis
IL PR. iv. 8: TL Tox 383 ZR AS,

where JjkR- still, III. P vil; VII.

P xix. 3; and EIDIN = yea, VIL v. -

xxxviii. 4.

x A surname, V, In. iii. 4.

zx (1) To present an offering; an offering.
heang VE ES v. 4,5. (2) To accept an offer-

hsiinging —ag a sacrifice, V. les v. 6,
Fl Aeapiak IV. P. vii. 5.

E CFohavefaith, VI. d xii,

Ei, The name of T‘ang’s capital, referred to
eet the present department of Kwei-tih in Ho-
po E x ae
po man UL fy.v. 2: v. d vi, 5; vii, 9,
qb The name of king T'ae, one of the
fu, aneestors of king Win, 1. fy. ¥. 5.

THE 9u RADICAL, A

(1) A man, men; other men. Passim. =
jin humanity, man’s nature. VI. E i, 2

jèn gy 3: VII. E xvi. P We all men, j

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

IL. fy. iii 7.

a E EA EEES E EA

.

IV. R.i. 4: etal (2) It indicates
Officers and rulers, in distinction from
ER. the people, I. E- ii. 8: IL als
i. 13: etal, So, perhaps, VII. Jy. xxvii,
— A with reference to the emperor.
(8) Following names of
States it = native, natives, people, So
73€ BAL, se. Be EA
and Fil ^ Hi n iii, 6. are dift.,

meaning the founders of the Yin and
Chow dynasties, So [xt] [Ed y the people
of the State, or merely a common man.

La. vii. 4, 5: I. EC viii, 2; x. 8: IV,

I xi; j . ii. 8; xxiv, 2: etal, (4)
With other characters, it forms concrete
substantives, especially nouns expressing
office or profession. We have i

.

and E Ne L po ix; and
Da KEE vii; i A, vP.
vi, 5; Ji , V. JY vii, 7; ^

(5) Observe sig so JE

AE AIB ÁS TR
A which means both country ded
and uncultivated people; R Ay =

husband, IV. T xxxiii, 1; Ti A
m yv IL b. 17, 20, 22, 25, 28;
esum fF. iv. 2, 8, 18; “fi. ix.
5,.10, 14: IV EoesrmuY. E.
vii, 7: VI. Ex. vii, 9, 8; VII. E xxiii,

3; xxiv,; xxxviii; f. xv.; xxiv. 2;
xxxviii,'4; A Jo the humble ‘I’ of
the prince ofa State, I. E: iii. 1; iv. 1;
v, 1; vii. 4: et al; A pu the wife of
a prince, IH. T iii, 8; K A III.
E iv. 6: IV, T xx. 1; T vi.; xi;
xi: VH. T xix. 4; xxxiii, 3; KW

xxxiv,; AY Aci P xz: np p.

-

ii, 4; iv. 6: et al; fir Ae the masses, .
av -

the people, I E i4:IL R. vii 2: V.

E ii, 5, 6, 7, 8: et al ; PH A disciples,
IH. d iv. 13: vn. h. xxix.; AB

AF AE AEA Si

the characters here aro. perhape not in

403.

404

fF
shih
f=
pn

jen

qu

krew

keae
chich

^
hid
‘chieh

Sze
shih

x52 IV. oxi: VIL T;

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

f/]

apposition, butinregimen. (6) Jug BA
"VIT, XXXV,

i es a tenth part, atithe,, FII. E

Benevolence, benevolent, to be bene-

f
i
I
volent, Passim. Mencius does not use
the term for ‘perfect virtue, as Con-
fucius does, though it may sometimes

have that meaning In VII, WX. xxiv,
2, love seems the proper rendering.
To show.one's-self an enemy to. MI,

m v. 2,

Now, the present, modern time: also, in
the same way as our logical use of wow,

in discoursing. Passim. We find A

E and A Ri A PE ES 13
BS 2 Hip ana $F Ax [Er
A iti 1$. from this dis forth. I.

ES xii. 2: et el.

(4) Firm purpose, VII. EL xxviii,
(2) Used for A a stalk of the mustard
plaut, a straw, V. E vii. 2.

Up 4th t HR, suddenly. VIL

Jp 1 tone. Ly HK, su en y. IL

. Xxi
To take—be in—office, II. d ii. 22;
` pM 1: TUL Ty. iii, 2, 5,6: et a£.
BE v esie 4E A
officers. 44 lod. 18; h.v. 8. So TU

alone, IL “PY. viii. 1.
m Pt another, I. yx vii9:

. 2i P iv, 8: VIL

T H , another day, other days. It
may mean d ad next day, and after-
R. i 2; xvi 1: IL

x, 3: TII, La 451v. 185 v. 2,

MA

Ne xvii,

wards, I

Ai. nothing else, for no other reason. F.

E wi 12; Bc i 6, 7: IL T ii.
9:VL b.xi4 T iti, ay

; xxv, 85; xxxvi. 3. So, &

P SA x. 4: VI. E-

Ali. spoke of something du I.
8.7 fii went elsewhere, IV. F-
xxxiii, 1, (2)Read to, a name IV. Bn
xxiv. 2 7

Ye vi

jin
Jèn

tue

EE)
ling

A
ling

“Hi, 6, 15: 2 viii, 1, a
x tal

= Rsi erv. poii 2
m b c xvii, 3

INDEX III.

A measure of cight cubits. VII. fP-
xxxiv. 2

(1) Alternate, one after another. III.
TYR: ix. 5. For, instead of. v. [Vd
6,7,8. (2) = 4, the three dynasties;
—Hea, Shang, and Chow, LI. E ii
2; iii, 10: IV. E iii. 1. (3) A name,
jg FR, nun.

To employ, {ii I qe to be employed,

I. EX vii. 1, 6,

Low, 3d tone,

Tei

(1) An order; to order,
(2) Good,

(1) To take, to use, But our idiom

requires for the most part, that it he
translated as a preposition,—by, at, with,
because of, according to, &e. 1t precedes
the principal verb of the sentence, as in I.

J^ X EARI Tit

ES. ‘king Wan used the people's strength
to make his tower, or “made his tower
with the people's strength ;' or in V.

v. 1, 3 Wu KR TH 4 XE. *Yaou

took the empire and gave it to Shun,’
or simply, ‘Yaon gave the empire to
Shun... It follows the principal verb,
and then its prepositional force is more

apparent, K.G. Y. Ws iv. 2, TX A

JA HE. ‘to kill a man with a stick,’

We might indeed translate, ‘to kill a
man, using a stick? Its regimen some-
times precedes it. X (7, V. fF . vii. 9,

AN “yr m hy AN A
Nm j n

FA A ANS NAR

Ur py ai ‘ Tus :

JA UY Tus Ke one straw he would
not have taken and given to men, or taken
and reecived from men,’ or simply, * he
would neither have given nor taken a
single straw. This position of the regimen
is for the sake of emphasis. Ex xamples,
of the first two usages especially, occur,
very frequently. Julien argues (See the
“Preatise on four Chinese Characters?
appended to his ‘Translation of Mencius)
that in many cases itis merely == a sign
of the accusative case. Andit is dificult .

_ Sometimes to give any other force to the

ye as in H. dz: i. 5: IL T iv. 10:
IV. E Xxvili,: cd al; yet a peculiar
signifivancy may be tracedinit, Obs, Br ‘
i , that by, for, from, which,—a foree
sometimes sustained by y alone; Ht
VA. hence; and {uf IA. whereby, or

INDEX LU.

* :
wherefore. 8 is found without any

regimen, joined to +e, I. P xii, 2:

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

et ul, sepe, AA B. and fnt d are 4E

abbreviations for AG Br JJ. fi fu : Br "a

9. E
which has no accessory, mu — to use, to

E.G. V.
3. au Fe and often with a regimen of

m intervening, frequently means to take
to be, to consider, to be considered. But by
no meausalways, Sometimes also the A
isomitted, (2) It often = the conjunction
because, Il. E ii, 15: etak (8) To, so
as to;—often forming with a verb follow-
ing our infinitive. Sometimes the A

v. 2,3: etal. In a sentence

act, according to, &c,

(om ‘wherewith to,’ ‘and thereby.’ I. Eo

i
chung

1h

gang

{£

ja
jen

i. 2; vii. 12, 15, 16, 21, 22: et al, sepe,

To this belong A BE, JA T and
I ES (4) It i$ often used after HT,

forming our potential mood, and == the
to, which is suppressed. after our auxili-

aries, Passim. (3) Used as = B, *to
stop., L b. vii, 2. (6) Observe pi
VA BA n bou 4$ YY
aa gr VAS YR

“Poe vii. 1; VW BE IV. E vii,; and

sọme other sporadic cases.
The second of brothers. It is used in
designations. V, E . Yi, 5.—1.

6; vii. 2: et al. It follows the surname,

F .dv.

j en

TK
heur
hsiu

or what is equivalent to it, without any fil

other character, and then máy be taken

as = the name, II. T ii, 3.—IHH. E
i&-IL b.i128545 ds

10,—V. fa. iii, 2—10. Rx 1, 2, 3,5,
6; VII. E xxxiv,

To look up to, II, “Es v.6;
IV. . xxv. fg d IV, Lh. xxxiii,
Used adverbially with the correlate 4i.
= above, below, I. de vii, 20,217 VIL:

.Xx. 3,
(1) A charge, office, VI. R xzxiii,

P ix, 4:

1, = business, purpose. I, Jem LAY

burden. VI. d ii, 2. (2) Asa verb,
To charge, to burden. "V. NE vii, 6;

 pih

po

405.

TRA Obs, TV. _Ẹ xiv 8, and Bẹ

Z EAR. EN

Low. Ist tone. (1) A burden, = bag-.
gage. HI "Te iv. 13. (2) The namé
of a small State. VI, d ili;v; ZX-
ff the younger brother of the chief. of
Jin, VL h.v L

A surname, fi Fr, the minister of
Tang. I. fr. ii, 22; 23; Pi ii 8, 10:
et ab, ft 3l. the name of a Book in

the Shoo-king. V. . vii, 9..
The name of Confucius! grandson, IV.

^ xxxi, 2: V, P. vi. 4.

Five men in rank or file.

B iv. 1, 2,

To be lying down, I, de HE

= ranks, IL.

(£) To E y attack ; = to punish.

I. R viii, 15x, T, £; xi, 1: IL x viii,
1, 2: mk v. 1, 6; ix. & IV. T.
viii, 4: V, dp vii, 65. ix, 2: VII. E:
i 25 ii giv & BJ Hg e
VEL NS vii. 2. .(2) To hew down, to.
lop—apyplied to trees, and! to the mind..
VE Topo

(1) Mappiness; to.be happy. I. T
v. 5: IU, (2) The name.of a
place, IL T. xiv. 1.

(1) The eldest of brothers; fH X.
VI. R v. 9. (2) A title of nobility...”
V. Rigt So $$ fff) L Ri
1; xi, 2: HII, R. v. 2: and Büj ff]. 1V-
F xiii, 1: VIT. dec xxii 1,8. (3) Pw

I m

the designation fü Be YW, E ji. 22,

23; ix. 1, 8: et al, sepe; (4) Must be
used for (à ahundred, HI, [-.iv.18.

As; to be like to, T. . vi, 2:1
Ei evir. J. xxvi 8; xli, 1; [e^
xxxvii, 11. JH Ay}, like one another,
similar, I y ii, 5: VI. I vii, 3, 4,
5,6, To be like what is right, H, M.
v.1. Ay} zT a semblarice, yit. Em

xxxvii, 12,

we V. 5,

- 406

Ae.

wei

Beth ab.

‘where are you going? ,- VI.

CHINESE CHARACTERS -

(1) Position, status, ie. of dignity. I. E
9 19: V. F.v 6v. E. e
x ` P > ya
Xii. 1: et al, sepe. Æ AE. is frequent.
na Tr. the correct place, ie., propriety. yin

n. Wu X AST. all dignities, 9*

v.a ZA po to dethrone. 4k

vy. T ix, 1, (2) Position, place, IIL yp
tso

ds ii, 4; IV. F. xxvii. 1, 2.

To assist, III, T ix, 6.

(1) What, why, what kind of. I. b.

2 B J . T s

La eeto. fap th BE

{a É >, at the end of sentences, gener-

ally = why is this? how is it? IL F. 4
iii, 1, 10: Ñ. xvi 1l. Bat sometimes 1%

4f Alt, simply = was what? VI. E fu
vii, 8; F. vi-Stetal, In VI þe. ix. 7e

chih
2. Any # = is of.what avail? Other

characters sometimes come between qaf
and the particles, and with the same

difference of usage, fuf YJ, whereby,

what to. I. E i. 4: et al, sepe, ^nf

Hf what from, how, I. SE wii, 4.

Ay Fa what do, why. I. T vy. 4:
Vu. T xxxvi 2, But observe {ñf
vvi 3. 4uf Z7.
F. iv. 2. fi

(2) Anta, generally with Z between, sze

z what, what is to be done. Difficulty,
surprise, or indignation is generally im-

AS
lue

plied, but not always. The phrase an

ia HT Bl FW, == how is the exigency lai
to be met, is very common. I. E
iv. 6; v.1; [N. vic 1,2,8: V. [N.i 1:
et al, sape. Other words are found also
between an and fq. and then the phrase
t what has ... to do with—? I. P

xiv.3:etal, (8) nf pis what sort of, dae
of what nature, in what manner. At the lai

end of a sentence, ^n] p = what do t£
you think of? What shall be said? L ch'e
„jii, 2; vii; 8; vi. 1: VIL, as xxxvi.
3, 8: et al, sape, (4) 4y TB what ft
She
difficulty is there, L Iv. v 5: VI. shil
P i bi

aR

cháh ^

AND PHRASES. INDEX III.

Me, HL fy. ix. 3.

(1) Ease, enjoyment. VII fy. xiis
xxiv, (2) To be without office, in ob-

Scurity. x4 TA II. E ix. 2: V, T
i. 8. * X

(1) To rise up, arise. II, Te i, 8, 11:
A, Te ix. 1, 5, 7, 9, 10: et al, To be
aroused, to rise, to act, VI. [y. xv. 3.
jk Pe 4 , I Have become ill, IV.
T xxiv, 2. (2) To make, to form; to
cause to be, I. E. iv. 6; T iii, 7; iv.
69,:IL p.i. 6: IV. p. vii. 3.

To be made, 1V. fy. xxi. 1.
Glib-tonguedness, VII. [ xxxvii. 12.

, C1) To cause, to make to; to ninke to
be. IL p.d3;iv06;v.3 4; vii, 28,
21: et al, sepe. Obs, TT E fh pa
I F- xvi. 3, = to send, (once, we have
the addition of AW.) IL fy. 1,33 vi. 1:
etul, sepe. (2) ‘Lo employ, to command ;

no other verb following, II. E . 4, 22;

ony
v.l. et al, (8) Au {ifixit, supposing
that, IL Rx 5: V. Kvi svi p.
Without the gf. VL E.
ix 3. ? VL Jv x iv. 4.

Up. 3d tone. To beconmissioned. ? I.

E . vii. 16, fiti p a messenger. V.

v. Vi, 4.
(1) To come, IL p.i 2;ii 3: etal

vii, 5; x. 5.

£ sæpe. Ii ae and im ak downwards,

m. L.i 23, 2728; v. 6;
VIL. PR. xxxvi. 4. Obs BF Ex SE.

zd IV. A xiii, 1,: et al, (2) The
coming, next, III. R. vii. 1, 2, 3.

Low. 3d tone, To lead on, III. E.
iv. 8.

v. xiii. 4:

Extravagant; wild license. I, . vii,
20. !

To be by, in attendance on, IT,

2, E: > an attendant, with a bad
f ^ HH 102 "n
meaning, V. E . vii, 2, 2, 3 f MES

m x,

INDEX II.

Hk

isi

TE

tsin
ch'in

preen
pien

fé

he

hai

(Ga
ésenn
tsun

fii
gung
7^
fa
su

TK

puou

pao

attendant girls, concubines, VIT. JV. iv.6.
To supply, to furnish.. I. . vii, 16:
IIL [..ii.8; v.2: V. fiiv. 6,

To despise, insult, i H. Es iv. 8: IV.

BEES
(1) A title of nobility, V. ESTE
3 prince,—following the name of the State.

P xvi, 8;—V. ulis viii. 3. stp
A princes of the empire. Sepe, It often
zone of the princes, a prince, IT. Ms ii.

4:1, pod:ieah Obs, LOR
(2) An introductory particle, i. q. HE,
IV. F. vii. 5. ,

To make incursions on; toattack stealth-
ily, IL FR. xiv. 2;xv. 1: OL f. v.
6: IV.

4h BE, attendants and favourites,

L f.. vii. 16.
To bind, ff LS xs xi. 8.

A man of distinction, A Bt, II.
qos vE Bu e

Wooden images of the dead, I. Eu
iv. 6,

Manners, practices, customs, II, E i,
8: VI. fy. vi, 6; ix. 8. y i R current
customs (with a bad meaning), VII.
xxxvii, 11, tH- 8, the manners of the
age, I. .i, 2: IV,

(1) To protect and love. I. Evi 3,
4, 10, 12; FR. di 2, 2: m. boi:
IH. E v. 8, (2) To preserve. IV.
Loa

To wait for, II. uv. ii, 5: Vv. Te
vii, 9: VIL p.i 8; PR. xxxii. 8,

(1) Truthfulness, fidelity, I. abs v.
3:1. piv 8: Vf. xvi, 1: VIL

. xxxii; Bm xxvii, 11, 12. True,
real, V, Six 1: VIL Ñ. xxv. 12,
4; xxxiii. 2. (2) To believe ; have confi-

dence in (it may be to obey or follow, as
principles; or to employ, as officers). I.

“fy, sh ety: Fiev posae

v. iv. 6,

v. xxiv. 2,

v. XXX, 2,

.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

d-
fri
shin
shén

15
4i
foo
fu

keu
chü

ts‘ang

pet

fA

407

Vit, pb. xxxiv.; T ji 1; xii 1,
To be believed; to-obtain the confidence
of, IV. . xii, 1; T xi (8)Asan
adverb, really, truly, 1l. E: v. 6; II
_b.%8:V. Eiiiz VE Fis.

Up. 1st tone. To stretch out straight,
to straighten. VI, E xii, 1.

See 15 .
To stoop, tsed adverbially, with the

correlate fi = below, I. LE vii, a,
22: VIL . XX, 8,

Together; = both, VI, E ix. 8: VIL
Ew xx, 2,

A granary; a storehouse for grain gener-
all. Commonly found along with E ;

à granary for rice, I. Tei. 2:. UE
Ew: v. F.i 8508; oe

6. Used as a verb. I, T^ v4, Q) A
v. Xvi, 1, 3.

name $i fr T
(1) To rebel against, revolt from, II.
E. iv. 12, 14.. (2) Double, as much

again as, I. T xi, 8: HI. E iv, 18:

IV. E. xiv. 1: v. Ro 6, 7,8: VI.
F vi, 7. In this second sense, the

‘char. is ‘aspirated, and low. 2d tone, in
the Canton dialect.

Inverted, upside down, Il. Eu i, 18.

taou
tao 7
To be tired, weary. I, f+. ii, 19:
keuen Hog l
chüan VI. E- xvi, 1,

Ba

e
yi

lun

q

yen

ies

kea,

chia

keae
chiel

Children and youths. L fy. xi. 4.

Always used with reference to K
; the relationships of human society.
In, PR. i. 4:07. F. iii. 105 iv. 8: IV.
E ii. 1; ne 2v. Lb. i. 1: VI.
» X. 5,
To bend. III, pas 4.

(1) To feign, pretend to, II. des iii,
1: VII. Æ: xxx, 1. (2) To borrow, V,
ix,2: VL Rodesvin poxeni
Together with, I. E ii, 3, 4. Asa
vab, IL. F. is.

2.

408 CHINESE

i AR “o, To press upon. III, E iv, 7.

ae

4l Side, the 'aide. TI, E ix, 2; ETa ix.
tih sov Uis.

tsé

Té A heroic character, "d ft II. Bur

hee r1: VES "A
thich " 1: VL» y. vii. 2. Ae I. E
v iv VIL [ex

18 (1) A tutor (ax official title), vi. F.

joo xxxix.38. To act as tutor; to teach. IH.

fu 3 oy Ake Re sie
F vi. 1. (2) 45 an, n ancient
statesman, VI. j«:xv. L.

43 All-complete; to be prepared, ready.

pé UL baee iis: v. F.i s

\. vi. 6: VH. . iv. 1; xxxiii, 3.
(1) To transmit, hand down (used both
el uen actively and passively). I. ES vii. 2:

ch'uanry. Ñ. xxviii. 7: V, . vi. 1; ix. 8.

(2) To communicate, deliver, as an order,

a pledge, II. Es 12: V. hv. vii. L

Low. 2d tone, ~ Records, a Record. I.

chum [À+ ii. 13 viii, 1: DL “Ys. iii. 1. Obs.

chuan y f £ j^ E Fs HI. P

4 To hurt, wound, IL. E vii, 1: IV.

shang F xxxi, 1, Wounded. IV. K.xx.
3. = to be contrary to. IV. [X. xxiii.

sir fnt 5, there is no harm, it does not

CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

INDEX III

limited to, only to amount to. VI. P-

viii. 6.

te BH E the name of a place. I, T
woo 1V. d.

wu $

ii Tf and fs cT the learned, the fol
yt — lowers of Confucius, the orthodox. III.
yü F.v a: vi T xxvi. L

os More than sufficient. VI. fn. xiii, 6.
yew

yu

23 The surname of a ier: of Ts‘e. IV.
bod T xxxii.: VI. T v. 1, 2, 3, 6.

chu

THE 10mm RADICAL. JL.

FE 2) Used for the head. IIL “Py. i. 2:
yuen no x ze) T ia.
Şüan V, F. vii. 5. JÙ + head officers, a

name appropriate to scholars of the first
class in the imperial domains, V. m ii,

5. (2) A name, fr JU IV. AES xix,

3.
y To believe, accord with. V, E. iv.
yun 4
jun
An elder brother. II. fn.ix 83: III.
heng > v. 8: et al, sape, 4H A tho
eldest brother, VI. Aux 8 ^ Vn

A
fathers and elder brothers; elder relativ in 3.

I. E v.3; T xi, 3: etal, sepe. Hh.

matter. I, . vii. 8: VIL [X. xix. 2. LU brothers, I. Is vii 19; Ti eae
So, 4f f ái. ni. Te 4 6: et al, sepe. Embracing cousins. V.
[E (1) A charioteer, driver, IV. a y. iii 1, = Sisters. V. f°. viii. 2
pul iv.2 y E 3 $ =- _ (1) To fill; to fill up, develope, carry
p'o xxiv, 2. (2) 3 a 3 RH. an ten x out, II. es vi. 7: III, P x. 3, 6: V.
a troubled manner, V, F við. . aS ive Be VI B GAME CES ey
; ` WIV, 9: Se {a 1X. 1: e Jw. XXV.
+5, Deceit; deceitfully. nr p. iv. 17, 18: mM A
itet ` 5, 6; xxxi. 2, 3. Jt Zi» to stop up.
v. boi HL FV. ix. 9. Full. IL YQ. xii, 9. The
Ba (1) Ceremonies, demonstrations of re- . A
ae \ filing up. lI. E ii. (2) A surname.

e pou VI. d v, 4 (2) A name. ie
t uL Tu i —BL BH fi. ur.
Ex i 4; EX. Hi 15 ix, 9: IV. P- xxiv.
1. (8) A di a double surname, VI.
T vi, 3.

Ts A hundred thousand, IV, eps vii. 5,
yh

Ais

te Economical, III, na Wi4iiv. F.
m xvi Niggardly to. IL F. vii 5. To be

I fy. viii, 1; xiii, 1.

Ik A prognostic, == a trial V m iv.
chaou 6.
chao

pj?

seen
hsien

(1) First (adv. and adj): before (prep);

former. V. dy ix. 8; T iv. 6; VI.

. Y. 8; vii. 5.8; xv. 2; FAL xv. 2

vi boxeigonn pins Jii.
former princes, III. E- ii. 3. piss cb

the former (ancient) sovereigns. I. m

INDEX III.

i. 2; iv. 4, 8: et al. y? E; our master,
you, master, IV. Ex xxiv. 2 vm xxxi,
1: VI. fs. iv. 2, 4, 5, 6. J^ my "n
grandfather. II, E i, 3. pj? Al. first néi
knowing; Ke Et, first apprehending. V.
E- vii. 5; F. i 2. yis the former
sages. TIT, F. ix, 4, (2) To make

first or chief. I. E. i 4: et al, 48
generally appears as correlate. To take
the initiative. I, fy. xvi. 1: HI. fy.
vii, 3; IV, T iis. Q) Jp > to

set the example, III. Bx ii, 4.

 nå

= to excel him, “IU. fF. iv. 12. na
Perhaps these examples, and those also
under (2) should be read AD up. 3d tone,
Me
WG . Up. 3d tone. To precede. VI. de
sien iit
hsien " ts'euen
N^ o Light. VII des xxiv, 2, = glory, WS
kwang glorious, IH, v. 6; VIE: . XXV,
kuar DU E T ^ E fg
JH3blTeee ta
pj b To conquer, VI. fy. ix, 9, zm
kih w= = grasping able ministers, ase EY SES
k'o
vii. 2, (2) The name of gé IET- I
w. xvi, 8: IV. f. xxiv. 3. :
Hh. To Pus from, avoid. Followed by JV
WivoA JA- Ez iv. 5; vii. 21, 22, Used pá
mien Me or ` actively. L R. xv. 1: P^
IV. R. xxviii. 7: VI. R. xiv, 4. a

too "Red . ii. 2.

fa es aS

yin Bie Huk, a minister of Shun, banished
tow him, V. f. ii. 2.

ióu by hin E

THE lira RADICAL. A.

To enter. LE iii. 8; P ii. 8; xvi.
2: et al, sæpe. Used metaphorically, AA
38 to go in and on to principles, VH.
T xxxvii. 11, Used in correlation

A

juh

gu

with HE at home, at court, and
abroad, I E- v. 8: HL 9: VI.

Rvd. Butignn F. ii ge MH

A= = going out and coming in; and in

v. dv.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

A rabbit, a hare, JU hare-catch- "4

409

VI. E viii, 4, they are spoken,of the

mind,
(1) Within. A preposition, following

the noun. I. F: iii. 1; vii. 17. When
the noun has an adjective joined to it, a

I. “Pee tie 85 vi, 3:
HL “Pi. v. 8, 7: etal, (2) With Ap, as

correlate. The seclusion of the house,
the harem, I, EM v. 5. The family,

generally, II, Te ji, 4. Internal, what
is internal, within, VL _Ẹ. iv. 1, 2, 4;
v. 1,2, 3,8; Tv. vi. 5.

Used for X. (2) To receive, III,

M vii, 2. = to push, V.' f+. vii. 6;
Fiz © ALE,

ship with, gain the favour of. II. EL
vi. 8.

To be complete, perfect, IV. E: xxi.

precedes . zs

to form a friend-

Two, VIL fy. xxii. 3.

Low, 3d tone. A numeral for carriages.
VII. T iv. 4.

THE 12mm RADICAL, JV.

Eight. L f+, vii. 17, 24: et aL, sepe.
zt eighth, I. Æ: vi, 6: IV, T xviii,

d Public, IT. f-. iii. 9, 19, A
- Z ti to take office sustained eo
the State, V. E iv. 7. (2) A title of
nobility, translated by duke. V. E ii.
2, 4; lii, 4; vi. 6: etal — A. the
three highest officers at the imperial '
court, VIL [^.xxviii.—1t often follows
ihe names of States, and honorary titles

of the dukes. fi] AN, fi. 7: et
al., scepe, HR y: WR ye S I. Te iv. 4, 9:
et aJ A, n Ts ii, 8, 10: et al—

+e. 2p. ZA AN; v. “fe iii 1—2 B

 A. V. I ix, 1, 8: et al—i BA,

IL “Pi. xi, 3: et al— KY a ZA on I.
Toe .—Ris AE ZA. UL ae ii,

aS X AS L Yu. sii 1 ct al ~
BEAL Pe. sit 1-F ue

on

410

keen

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

<

Es iv. L—48 ZEA, v, P. iv.

T iii, 8.— E
ix. 3. (8) Used in double
surnames, EAS gj. v. M ue i. 2.—III.

duke au A RE puta: et
alt, v. si. ZA HS, u. ns 3
4: IH, R. ix. 1: etal PAS f v
CR 3. A ify. IV. T il A
TT IV. M. xxvii. 1, Compare Jf
By, ana EF A, tv. xxiv. 2. (5
^A zaj, and 1 BBR
of the Chow family, I. ^ v. 4, b. Jk
PAS and Ik KE wy, a minister of the
kings Wan and Woo. IV. vi, xiii.

VI. a viii, 6; VII. ps xxii, 1; T

xxxviii. 3.

Six. TI. P i. 8. AME: the pitch-
pipes, IV. E s i16 DY KK the six
degrees of dignity. V. F. ii, 8 . +s
Ém: the imperial forces. VI, T vii. 2.

A particle, much used in poetry. IV.

ps viii. 2: VII, Eu xxxii. 1,

To have im common, III. E ii 2
iii, 10, To share, V, R. iii, 4,

Up. Ist tone, gt T, a name of
office;--the superintendent of Works. V.

En

Sharp weapons of war. I. E iii. 2,
5; v. 9; vii, 145 Ju, xi. 3: D TR
4; iii 4: IV. F, i9: VI de iv. 2

The- third personal pronoun; the
possessive pronoun of the third person;
the, that. Both singular and plural.
Passim.

Completely provided with, II nie ii.

20.

(1) A rule, a statute. Iit FF v. Eu
vis: Ji XS. VL. PR. vii. 5, (2) A
canon, ES BIL, name of a Book of the
Shoo-king. V. ib: iv. 1.

To unite, comprehend, embrace toge-
ther;together, IE EIS 18; IV, B

, ancestors

chien xxi, ; VE des x, 1; xiv. 1: VII, Dee ix.

6. Obs ILL. v. ix. 11. JE eene

8

yen

Ti

t$ae
tsai

E

men
mien

76b

INDEX IM

silver” II. fy. iii. 1. Flt 9$ "e, Mih’s
principle of loving 2 allequally. ILE, d

ix. 9: VIL E xxvi, 2

THE 18ru RADICAL. [].

A surname. Hi 2p, a disciple of

Confucius, II. fr. ii. 18, 20.
Twice, again. "V. R vi. 4, 5: VI,
P- vii, 2, 3.

A cap of full dress or ceremony. VI.

Ue vi. G.
THE lrn RADICAL, ^*.

A cap, a bonnet, Il. obs ix. I: IV.

kean T xxix, 6.7: V. R.i.1. To weara
cap. IH. F. iv. 4.

oF Up. 3d tone. To cap; the ceremony of

kwan Capping. UT. F. ii, 2.

kuan

ak æ 3E a prime minister, ITE, E-

SR ii.

KM
tung

JU

THE lita RADICAL, 7 S
Winter. VI. IS v. B.

More properly 35. How much more,—

hwang in the concluding member of a sentence.

h‘aangyy, E- xiv. 2

i chi

It is generally followed
by 5$ at the end of the clause. V. E-

vii, 7: VIL E . xxxvi. 2. p is some-

times immediately preceded by mn and
in the previous clause we have the par-

ticles H. AG, Jj. EA H. and H.

IL “YR. ii. 10; ix. 2. V. v. iv. 5; vii. 3,
4, di for 3o, 8 ULF... Je): Vi.
“PR. vil. 8; x. 6: VIL v. XY.

To melt, fuse. = a founder, III. E-
iv. 5.

To freeze. — to suffer from cold. I.
E vs FR. vied: VIL. poma

THE 16r RADICAL. JL.

À stool. II.

y. Xi, 2,

ENDEX Iit.

fan

All,—preceding the noun or clause to
which it belongs. IL "s vi, 7: V. T

ii 2, Syiv. 4: VL ft. vii 3; x. 35 E
vii 3: Vir. fh. x,
The female of the phoenix, B. El

pean the phoenix, II. 3s ii. 28,

gL

kue
k‘ai

n and joined to af or BE

hsiungog "Ty xii, 2: IL viv. 2: nr. E.

] (1) To go, or come, out. I. $ vi, 2;
chuh
pa . iv. 9; xvi, 1: et al, sepe, H 3E,

pg

Aan

4p
sun

fén
JR]
Aing
bsing

BL i the name of an ode, Vi. fi.

viii. 3, 4.

THE 17m RADICAL, f J.

Spoken of seasons,

L [vi 21,

Bad, calamitous.

iii, 7: V, E. vii, 1: VIL Te x. With-

, out Af or BE I E: iii, 1.

aud ipi pA to come out from. I. ET
xii. 2: IT, JB ii, 28; but H1 fd = vw

travel on, I. E vii, 18: et al, (2) To

send out, to issue. I. fy.xi, 4: IV.
xxiv. 2, = to put away, to divorce. IV.

v. xxxv. (3) To quit, leave, II.
xii. 1, £, 5: et al. (4) As correlate with
, abroad, in opp. to at home, I. “Ps

v. 8: HI, v. iv. 3; in opp. to at court.
VI. fy. xv. 4. See A.
A cuirass, defensive armour. d. E

yii. 5

THE 18ra RADICAL, JJ.

A sharp weapon, I, E iii, 2; iv. 2, 8.

Q) Todivide, HL L.iüi13. =
divide, impart, to. II, f+. iv.4. (2)
To distinguish. fut Af H indifferent
to, VI E i. 1,2. Difference. VIL

. XXV. 3,
Low. 3d tone. The lot, apportionment.

VII. E xxi, 3,
(1) To salah punishments, I. E

3; vii. 20: III, EU vii. 3: IV, E pa

xiv.3, Penallaws. IL E iv. 2: IV,

v,

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

a
choo
ch

3

péé
pieh

A

W

chih

pA

ts‘ze
ts'zü

Bil
s8ó
hsiao

mr
n]

ts en

chien

jl
tsih
tsé

411

Eis: v. poss @) To give an
example to. I, apes vii. 12,

First, VI. E vil, 3, Early ways,
VIL F xxxvii, 1.

Up. 4th tone. To distinguish, IIT, F:
iii, 19, A Bi. to have separate func-
tions. III. . iv, 8.

Q) Simp. 1 b. v2 APE,
sharpness of tongue, VI. Jy. xxxvii.
11. (2)Gain, profit; to profit, I, duc i,
2, 8, 4, 6: et aL, sepe, Fil] X. advance-

"ment. IV. Ñ. xxxiii, 2, th Fi,
advantages of situation. n^. i, 1, 2,3,

4, Tocount profitable, IV. f^. viii. I.
(3) Naturalness, being unconstrained.
IV. fy. xxvi. 1.

To make; to regulate. I E. v, 0;

vii, 21, 22: III. Eu ii 18: VIL F.
xxii 3, Regulations, rules. VIL Tv.
xxxiv. 2, AR nile to keep within certain
rules, IIT, f+. iii, 4, = an allotment,
v. Wale l

To stab, IL f+. ii 4, To eritieize..
VIL. [xxxvii 10, foro p.
where it means to wound, it is read ts‘eih,

in the up. 4th tone. ,
To cut, to pare, = to dismember; to

deprive of territory, IV, a ii. 4: VI.
x5 vi, 9, 4; vii, 2,

(1) Before, in front of, fW food
spread before me, VIE. (N. xxxiv. 2.

p Tif. before you. 1, Es vii, 16,
T^ E BY before your Majesty. II.

T ii. 4. (2) Former, I. E xvi. 1, 2,

Si H. formerly, II, gs iii. 1; vii,

1; x. 2; xiii, 1.

y ‘Then; denoting either a logical
sequence or a sequence of time, but gene-
rally the former. The sequence is often
in the course of the thought, and we find
it difficult€&o translate the character in

English. Passim, LAS Bl, well then,

-, 80 then, i is very common, So is hu

nf (or in {r Hr) Ri GE (2) A rule,

a pattern; an example, VI. E vi. 8;
v. E iv. 8, (3) To make a pattern of,

412

to correspond to, III. Is iv.11. These
two.usages are in quotations from the
older classics. In Mencius himself, Bul
is simply the particle.

Strong. 1I. E ii. 13.

To cut, ls] A = cookery, V. ps

kö vii. 1, 8.

fill To begin, to found, I. LE xiv, 3,

ch*wang >
ch'uang

fal

kéen
chien

Za

liu

Asword, I. [.iii 5: II. E ii. 4.
^ zaj, an ancestor of the Chow
dynasty, I, T v. 4,

THE 19m RADICAL. J}.

Strength, force; vigorously, I, ips
£i ii, 3; vii. 10: III. TS iii, 12; et al, IH,
] , todo one’s- utmost, I. f. xv. 1:

v. Foie XO Jpi E vi. 1s.
BDV. piso. A] tolabour
with the strength, = the sweat of the
brow, III. Pe iv. 6.. Ji fx. personal
service, VII, w. xxvii, l. $e H
] x yit to exert one's strength a whole

day. 1, 7. xii. 6. m mS < 7n

caused by a two-horsed carriage. VII.
xxii. 3.

(1) Achievement, work done, I, F
xiv. 8:10 f°. 4.8,18; VL. vi. 5. =
benefits, merit, X. f+. vii. 0, 12: III.
Te iv.4, 5, i Tjj, an interchange of
the productions of labour, IJI fN, iv. 3.
(2) 2) T: a period of mourning. Vil.

. xlvi, 2,

To add; to be added, VI. .X. 7:

VII. xxi, 3; xxxix. 4. NL ^, JJ E^

- to decrease, to increase, I. E iii.
1. To exercise to. I, E- vii, 12: VI
TP- vi 1: VIL F. ix. 6 To raise,
appoint, to; to be raised to, II, Jes ii
1: V. Roi. 6,

kung

n

kea
chia

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

INDEX I,

To help. I. PF. ii 7; iv. 53 If.
ii,-16; v. 4; JH i4: II. 7 s. iiia
(N.B.); VIL JR. vii. 2. The system of
mutual aid, on which the ground was
divided by the Chow dynasty. UI. E-
iii. 6, 7, 9, 15, 18.

JI YR, the appearanceof being moved,
or of changing countenance, V.
12: VI.

Valour, bravery ; brave,

v. ix,

I. F iii. 4,

\. viii. 4.

yg 56,78:1L f. ii 4, 5, 6 7: HII. T
i 2: IV. K. xxiii, 1; xxx. 2: V. T
vii. 5.

To urge. EX DA fih Z. you

méen must exert yourself, III. F.i i.13,
mien exert y. J as
ESI To move, excite, I. fy. xi. 3. To
tung

affect others. IV. F .xii.83, Tostimu-

late. vr. xv. 2. S movements
of the countenance, VII. v. XXxili,
8. Él xX iti); XN. to be perturbed,

unperturbed, in mind. II, Fou 2, 8,

` 9, 10, 3j Fh, laborious toil. II. M.

iii. 7.
To aim at, attend to chiefly. VI. T
viii. 9: VIL. xti. 1, 2
ies (1) To conquer, be superior to, subdue.
shing I. E- vii, 17; J. x. 1: II. s
shéng 5, Tee 5: VI. dod
8: VIL Tv. 1.2. (2) Inamame. Fi

A S un Ys. vi. VIL PR xxv.

15 Up. d. ne To be equal to, to
shing sustain, u. f. ix. 1. = to lift. VI.

sheng F- i3. A BY I5. foll. by a verb,

= more than can be...... I. . di. 3;

Ue xii. 1: IV. i. 5: VIL “Ee xxiii, 2;
To 2.

Tr

woo
wu

„ii. 5; vii.

v. viii.

E (1) To toil, I. fF. iv. 6: v. F.
aou i A 2.
lao iv.2, To make to toil. VI. B" xv.

A FG. the toiled. 1. FR. iv. €. So

in VII. E- xii, but in VI. E"

" A a -— punished. (2) Services,
VII. Js xliii, 2.

Low, 3d tone, To encourage. HI. ps

iv. 8. y

INDEX III.

2

VI. VI,

. viii.:

(1) Power, force,

viet E ii, 3. .(2) Opportunity, the circum-
stances of a case, II. E i,9: IV. 3E: pr
xviii. 2, tséang
! 39) Laborious. III, Je iii, 7,
kin
chin `
2 — (QD Meritorious. VIL fF. xii, 2. E
lan s . E k‘wang IV.
hsün (2) F 8. the highly meritorious, an k'uang .

epithet of Yaoü or Shun. IIL f+. iv. 8:
vE
To advise, encourage, Il. T viii. 2,

E

iv. 1.

wy

k'euen
ch'üan w
THE 207m RADICAL, /j preth
la * bi
Do not;—prohibitive. I. p>. ii. 3; iii,
with

4; vii. 24; [q.v. 2; vii. 4, 5; x. 2, 3;
xv. 2: IL Tes fi, 9, 16: V, IN. ix. 3:
VII, Sometimes the pro-

hibition is indirect, I. . v. 6: IL

p xi 3: VL b.x5 ?1v. f

ix. 1.
To walk with the hands,

wu
v. xxxiv. 1.

neth

,to

poo .crawl, as an infant, or one unable to

Pu walk, rn Ẹ.v.3; frx..

4] Lying on the ground ^] ^) see Shih
pth above

pei

ts‘éen
ch5en

THE 21s RADICAL. p.

4U To influence, transform; to be trans- pwan
oa formed, IV. f. xxvi 2: VIL fs pan
hua xi 8; xl. 2. (N.B); [v oov. 7. 4L, DU:

pe

a
tsu

; the dead, those whose bodies are in
course of decomposition, II. BY vii, 4,
(1) The north. IL p.i. 2. In the

north. III, E iv. 12 JE [A the

face to the north,—the position of min-
isters in the sovereign's presence. V. B

we vi. 4. Ab AK, the rude

tribes of the north. I. JÀ. xi. 2: LI

v.4: VIL "I. iva JU mao

vii. 11: et ak, (2) In a double surname.

m fi. 46.—-V. Rin

pei

ts‘uh
tst

H

nan

iv. 1;

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

413

THE 22b RADICAL, ^.

A workman,—properly in wood. : ITI.

AURA CE: XE

sie JE AGE feit. Ds

a master workman, VII. . Xli.

A surname, Fe $n IH. T x. l:
T xxx. 1.

A basket; to bring in baskets. ug.
v. 5.

THE 23» RADICAL. [7 .

pu X. a common man, one without

any rank, I. T iii, 5; xvi, 1: VI, E-

iii, 3; vi, 3; F. iii, 5. Joined with
PU ee. m. “fi. v. 8: Ve Evi. 6;
“Pe 2: VIL. xxi mvi R.

ii. 3, pu may be taken as a classifier for

, & wild-duck.

fowls, or as =
ál
= to hide themselves. ITI.

To conceal.
E . iv. 7T.

THE 24m RADICAL, - -.

Ten, tens. I. Ex iii, 2, 4: et al., sepe.
+ — H F FA, tne sith
month, the 12th month, IV. R. ii, 8,

A thousand, I. E- i, 2, 4; vii. 18:
et al., sepe.

The half, II. E i. 13: HII, T^ x,

Low, mean I. ft. vii. 3: IT, E i
3: HE vi 2: V. Vv 2,85. To
consider mean. II. "E ix, 2.

: (1) To die, IV. [v.i 1, 2. (2) At
last, IV. Ty. xxxiii, 1: VIL Toti

2, (afterwards). So, j^ L3 H,- V.

v. Vi, 4.

AS LAS abruptly. I, aps vi. 2,

(1) South, southern. II. T iii. 2:-
v. EC v. 7. = in the south, T, a v.
1. — to go southwards, I TM iv. 4,

414

B [Ef]: the imperial position, with the
face to the south, V. E iv. 1I. But I.
T xi, 2: ui. ft. v, 4: and VIL
iv. 8, are difft. (3) B5 the name of
. & place. VI. Ue viii, 3. [7] £55, a bar-
barian of the south, IH. E iv. 14,
(1) Extensive; extensively. IV. P

xv,: VII. F. xxxii. 1.

1

Applied to the
wide loose garments of poverty. dL E

i4, 7. (2) Ta gamble, IV.
0$. i

.. XXX,

THE 20$ RADICAL, [J

(1) To bein peril, I, foi 4: IV.

ig

14: IV, TR xxx. 2. Perils, IV. F.

viii. l. — is under a sense of peril. VII.
E xviii 2, (2) — fa; the name of
a place. V, E iii. 2,

(1) A particle, = that is, indeed. I.

teeth Evi.. (2) To approach, go to, III.
chi di4. 3
AB To refuse, decline. V. TR. iv. 2, 3.
E ^
ch'io

A noble; a high dignitary or chief
Hing Minister, IL F.i 1; PR. vi 1, 25 x.

eh‘ing 6; TIT. E iti, 16: IV. F. ii 3: V.

_E. väi. 8; Fh. i. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7; ix, 1, 2,
4& VL p.xvii; Tei

THE 27m RADICAL, y :

E per æ s i n III.

Bow . v. 2. Br J. where one should

hou L well. VII, Es xliv. 1,
An origin; a fountain. Seems to be

5E used for Yi. H. YA. xiv. 4; xviii, 2.

yüan R
s Low, 3d tome, i.q. JE. Your good,
yuen

4^ careful people, “VII. Te xxxvii, 7, 8, 9,
yn n

BR * His, their, It occurs only in quotations
from the She-king and Shoo-king. II.

ohh v. ifi. 7; v. 5: III, T: i.5; T v. 5
VIL, Te iv, 5; xix, 3.

E: ji, 4. To endanger. I. B vii

CHINESE CHARACTERS

yew

AND PHRASES. INDEX HI.

(1) To oppress, III. EX iv.$ 5. (2)
The title of an unworthy emperor. Vl.

Æ. vi. 2. ‘The Cruel, IV, E ii

4,
To be satiated. IL E ii. 19.

Up. 1st tone, 7, g. Ig. But the mean-
ing seems to be the saine as above,— to
be satisfied. I, T iv. 7.

THE 2814 RADICAL, A,

(1) To go away from; to leave. Both
active and neuter. I. f\. xi. 4; xiii, 23
xiv. 2; xv. 1, 2: et al, sepe. (2) To be

distant from, II. E- i. 8: IV. T i.
3 vii: V. fF. vi 2: vi. T xxxviii,
4.

Up.2d tone. To put away; to remove,

LR ia: u. T. iv. 1: urn. vili,

1: et al.
THE ?9m: RADICAL, Jf.

Moreover, further ;—continuing a narra-
tive by the addition of further particulars.

L Rosin Fi 8; ii 8, 10, 16:

et al, sepe, = and still ITI. T^ v. 2.
(1) To come to; to reach to; to attain
to. I R. xii. 2: II, [x. xi, 4: IIT,

ABs ii: 9: VIL A. v.4: VH. E- xxvii.
2; xxix; Jv. i, 1, 2; xxviii, 1, = to wait
for. V. Xs iii, 2 ~ VW Tz, 80 as to
reach to, I, +E. vii, 10, 12. ri Tk.
LORhasin PR, ii. 62 VIL fF. xu.

1. (2) At the commencement of clauses,
a conjunction, = and when, I,

1; vil, 20: IL. D^. iv. 2, 4; F ix. 4:
w. F.i. š; ii. 3; v. xavi. F.
xv, 2; xvi.; T vi. (3) Asa preposition
or conjunction, = and, I, E- ii. 4; along
with, IV. _Ẹ. ix. 6.

(1) A friend, friends, I. f\. vi. 1:
I. fF. ix. 8: e¢ ad Joined with Jj.
n. pvi r mr piv s: iv.
xxx. 4: V. JN. iil, 2. (2) Maintaining
friendship with; to be friendly. II. abs
diurno pp.l3u. 18: V.

7 Va

aoe ' -
v.d, 1,9, 55

INDEX UI.

X

Jan

Show

a
sow
sou

l vi. E. xv. 1—1,

. Y

vii 4 (8) A name, BR Jy. ur
. li.

(1) To return (neuter) I. F. iv. 7;
xii.^2. et al. Active; sometimes = to
recal, I. R. xi 4 UL hR. iv. 8; xii,
4: et al. E to report the execution

of a commission. IIT. E- ii. 5; T i.

4: etal, (2) To twrn back to, I. E vii.
17, 23: et al ? VIL. WA. xxxii, 1;
xxxvii. 13. (3) To: turn the thoughts

inwards, I, E vii. 9, Comp. E Ax
self-examination, II. EL i 7:IV, he
xxviii, 4, 5, 6.. Jx E. I v. F- xii-
uvm Fiv Je DEG, ee
IV. [.iv. (4) To turn round, II.
Es i6, = to change, Ti. E i. 2.
(5) On the contrary, yet, Il. E. ii, 10,
Contrary to what should be, IV.

v.xxiv.2,. (6) D "

repeat, again and again. V. F ix. 1,

xviii, 2;

A: Vif. vi 2 Obs, IL R. vi.

1, 2,

a) HL 4, a father's younger bro-
ther, an uncle, VI. Ju v. 4 5. (2)
f Jt an elder brother of Chow-
kung. II, T ix.2,8. (3) In surnames.
v. X. 6.

Totake, I
To obtain, receive, I,

v. xX. 2. 8: xi, 1; xiv. 2:
et al, sepe,
i.4. To find; choose; approve of, III.

. Fey. 8: IV. pov os xviii

1, 2; xxi. 3; xxiv. 2: etal To seize. YII.

E v. 5, 6: et al,
'To receive. II, xi ii, 4; ix, 1; pan

1, 8, 41[ V. JN. iv. 2, 85 vi. 4, 5: et al, sepe,

To accept. V. E v. 5. 6. Hy La

; those whose instructions they might

receive, I. f. io. ERE T.

jt was received from a proper source.
vir px

Venerable Sir, L P.i2;v.1

pa, that old Kaou. V. P. iii, 2.

E:

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.:

BE

ts'ung

A thicket, IV. D^. ix. 2

ts‘éng

LH

kow
kou

ko

, Ways.

THE 30m RADICAL. [f.

(1) The mouth, I. Ẹ. vii. 16: VI.
5, 8,
\. xix, 12; xxiv, 1; xxvii. 12,

vii, += the tongue, tongues.

Vil.

.H Be the mouth and bedy, = the

body, IV. E xix. 3 [J ig, vi
_f.xiv.6: vu. fF. xxvii, 1. © =

individuals, a sort of classifier. L p.
iti, 4; vii. 24: VIL, xxii 2,
To call, to summon, IL.

JL ^K. ii. 5. 7,10: V. F. vii, 2, 8, 4, 9.
To knock at. VIL }-. xxiii. 2,

P iv. 9:

' Antiquity, ancient, I, TV. i 8; IL

. ii, 23: et al, sape, W X KR is

of frequent occurrence, sometimes mean-
ing the ancients generally, but I the
ancient kings and worthies. I. Eä

8; vii, 12: I, I. i. 18: et al ET

the adici. anciently. II. E vii, 8:

IV. . xviii, 8: 01. R. vii 8. rz

PAS the ancient duke, £he title of g
As an ancestor of the Chow family. I,

T v. B.

May. Passim, Like may in English, pf
thay represent . possibility, liberty, -or

ability. Gil ga is very frequent,

_ may, The a may sometimes be ex-

plained by thereby, therewith, but not al-
[ri is not simply an auxiliary,
but often conveys a complete meaning.

Observe Wf and ^-^ By in III, [T

i. 4, &c., &c.
Up 1st tone, In the name 4j EB.

LẸ. ii vi. [oix ai

History; historical. IV.

(1) The right. ZE d tc—on—the

right and left, I, ES vil 8: I... x
7:1V. lh. xiv. Gi d the right —

v. XXi, 8.

416

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

the west—of Ts‘e. VI, T vi 5.) =

sze
szů

how
hou

2

gung

attendants, Lp. vii. 4,5. ? disciples,
IV. K.xxxil. (2) 7h Bii. the title

of & high officer at the courts of the

princes, IV. fn. xxvii. 1, 2.
To preside over.: The phrase ES] n]

== ‘the officers,’ generally those of inferior
rank, I. f\. xii. 1, 2; xvi. 1: III.

4: VL Aix A B]
T x. T. Bl ít. the minister of in-
struction, III, E iv. 8. t] AE the
minister of justice. VI. T vi. 6. ti]
3i the city-master, V. E viii, 3
7j H: the master of the horse, V, E
viii. 3.
Each, every. VII. F. iv. 6.

(1) To agree with, I, E. vii, 9: IV,
~. xxxvii, 11,

“Fe. xx. 85 VIL BR. (2)
To unite, IV. T i, 8. Obs. VII. F-

xvi. 1.

(1) The same, I. f\. xvi. 2 I. Ps

ii, 22: II, Jes iv. 17: et aL, sape, Often
== to be the same, to agree, in or with.

AB fal JẸ, there are points in which
they agree? II. E ii, 24, To make
the same, III. . iv. 18. To consider
as common. H, E vii, 3. Inj Ff,
agreeing with, VIL WW. xxxvii, 11,
fad EH = all in my court, II. F. x,
2. Adverbially,—together, in common,
nr p.i. 19: VIE. xii 3. (2)
To share, I. UR i 6,7; i
etal, (3) A name. II, 1, 2,

(1) A prince, a ruler, I. f\. xi. 2:

TL Prev. 4 (2) B JE EE ana

Is == the gréat Yu, the founder of
ihe Hea dynasty. Sometimes — that
dynasty. II. E i 10: VII. f.iii. 6:

Iv. E. ïs: v. bove. (Jg
FI, the title of Shun’s minister of agri-
culture, I. _Ẹ iv. 8: IV. JR. xxix.
1, 2, 8, 4.

(1) The name.

iii, 2; iv, 2:

v. viii,

VII. Te xxxvi. 2.

' To name, III. E iv. H: IV, JE ii.’

INDEX I.

4. fk dH the 4th finger. VI,

xii. 1. (2) Fame, VI, FW. vi.1:

; VII. ^ xi, Z {it p illustrious

men, II, fy. xii, 8.

An officer, & minister. III,
13: V. Ls . 8. AS W, the office
first held by Confucius. V, R. v. 4.

ku A ont

A prince, a ruler. Passim. It very
often occurs in correlation with Bia

minister. zt P the superior man, a

'designation of the individual high in
talents and virtue. Sometimes indicates

station, A i. sce on A EA pis
a designation of Shun, V. E ji. 8.
To bark. IL f-.i. 10.

(1) Ne I. [.vii 10, 15, 16: Pa.
xvi. 2: et al, sepe, (2) Ornot, II. tf:

ii. 1; E ii, 3; iv. L

The name of a State, I.

IV. L.vii.2.

To tell, inform, announce to, I. P
3. 6, 7; xii. 2; xv. 15 xvi. 2, 8: et al, sape.
fE a , the helpless, those who have
none to whom they can tell their wants.
L in. v. 3.

To announce respectfully and request.

IV. bxc v. pugna

V. iii, di

(1) Passim. 1; my. (2) In the name
ERE EP ent

(1) Complete. VIL f\. x. (2) Jd
PE, turning. VIL PR. xxxiii. 2. (3)
aq Hj. to help, give alms to. V. T
vi. 2, 8: VI. fn. xiv. 4. (4) Name of
the Chow dynasty, or its original seat.
L fi. iii. 6: IL fF. i. 10; Ec xiii, 4:
et al, sape. Ja A: the founders of the
Chow dynasty. Ii. E- jii, 6. iA A;
the famous duke of Chow, Il, TES i.
11: et aL, sepe. i 4, V. T vii, 8,
(5) A name. VI fi. vi 5—v. p.
vili, 3. (8) A surname. IU. P iii, 1.

INDEX III.

Bye
106
"E
hoo

hu

tit

ming

Taste, flavours.. VL ft. vii 5, 8;
xvii, 3: VIL
To call out, VII. JT: xxxvi. 3.

y. xxiv, 1],

(1) To charge, admonish; orders. III.
E ii, 2; iii, 6: IV, Eos 2,8: V.
s ii. 4: et al. To appoint. Applied
very frequently to the ordinances of a
sovereign or ruler, I, fy. iv. 6; xvi. 1:
et al, sepe. Applied also to the ordinan-
ces or appointments of Heaven or God.
It. 6: HL. [ii 12: etal =
the Heaven-ordained being, our nature.
vit, [poi $ Obs, GLO. xiv. 3.

KRG to return—ie,, report the execu-
tion of a commission, is common. (2)
To instruct; instructions, III. E. v.

5. V. fe. i 25 i 2: vn R. vi. 3.
(3) B für speeches, II. e ii. 18;
ix. 1.

Harmony, accord: harmonious, accom-

modating. Il. F i1 2: V. T i 5.
Q)An nt Kiev. pons
i2, (2) [27 JẸ, 5 double surname,

X. Fol,

To chatter and clamour about.
T vi. 1.

Up. 3d tone.
mouthful, Il, ][]w.x.l.

Sorrow; to lament, III,
VII. Alas for! I,

8. p ne alas!—at the end of the
sentence, IV. fe x, 8: VI. E xi, 2,

To vomit, IM.

IH.

To swallow, take a

. ii, 4, 5:

v. Xxxiii. 2,

A particle of exclamation, indicating
admiration or surprise. ‘The most eom-
mon use of it in Mencius is -at the close
of interrogative sentences. It is then

preceded by E E 4d. B[...5F.
^f. , E ut, iy and perhaps other
Characters, I. . lii, 4; vii, 4, 7, 16, 17,

4r d. is frequent.

. Xvi. 1, 2: V. [x. iv. 2: et al, Obs.

m 7 th, nov . fe vii. 3. It is

used at the end of sentences. V. ^ ii.
4: et al; and at the end of commencing

22: et al, sepe.

_ CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

417

clauses, the subject exclaimed about fol-
lowing, and the sentence often closing

with X. th, 3f. or some other particle.

L T iii. 4; iv. 5; v. 5: et al, scpe. ge

nb alas! VI. EG xi, 2: et al.

Things round, circles. IV, Lt: i, 1,

gue 5; ii 1.

yüan .

BE To wail; to bewail III. T8 A5;
KU iy 18: VL GR. vi: VIL [W xxxii 2.

ku

m May. e R= == may get aca
I. ^ v, 8.

JE (1) A name of Yaou, V. n vi, T.
čang (2) A name, V. WA. ii. 4. (3) B

jz. a place. VI. T
5

(1) Traders, travelling merchants.
shang

Ewin Rex FY, Ff
E v.2. (2) The Shang dynasty. IV.
E vis

(1) To ask; to ask about; a question.
Passim, Hil is often followed by T^. to

ask of or at; once, by 3E, IL E i. 3.
(2) e. AY = to study; learning, III,
Eit VI. E Xi. 4. (8) To send
to inquire for. V. "A vi, 4, H 35

IL PR. ii. 3. (4) Fame, VIL". xix,
8

vi. 5.

i

(1) To commence, I T v. 4. D

Eit

k'e To instruct, II. NV. ix. 6.

ch‘e

us 'Fo taste, to sip. LL IV. E
chué

ne

E: (1) Good, virtuous; what is good; ex-

shen cellent. I. E vii, 21; P. iv, 5; v, 41
IL f+. i. 8; viii. 2, 3, 5: etal, sape, (2)
Skilful; to be skilful, Lf. vii, 12:11.
E. ii 11, 18: e al, sepe. (3) To
approve, consider good, I, P xiv, 3.
To make good; to cultivate, II. JE. ix,
EV. R. iv. 5: VIL _Ẹ. ix. 6.

To joy, be glad; joyful. Lh. i. 7; ix,

he — 1. "AER " i
hsi 1: I E: viii. 1; v. X, 2: V. E i.
2; ii, 3,4: VI. R.v. 2; xiii. 1; 3.
pus n MB the sound of sighing. VIL

we . xxxvi, L..

e

418

Vig

vi

(1) To illustrate. L fF. iii, 2. (2)
To understand, VIIL UR xv. 8: VII.

© Pis

To mourn for, I, ii. 3: et al,
sang The period of, and all pertainirg to,
mourning. I. R xvi. 1, 2: VIL, EË:

xxxix. 1, 3; et al
Up. 3d tone. (1) To die, expire; ruin.

. Fonasrv. pios. (2) To lose.
pondo Ay V. vii,
8:VL [ox

Lofty, Fay FN. LPR. vi. 1: rrr.

treaou
teari E-i. t.

To find pleasure in; to relish, - I. E
“ vi. 4,6: VII. R. xxxvi. 1.

ES wg v, magniloquent. "VII. P

Keava xxxvi. 6, ui
hsiao
BE By with an insulting voice. VI.

p
d x6.
(1) To try. 4 I. E vii, 19,

a (2) Forming the past tense, Li i2
I. JE: ii, 7, 15; IN, vi, 1, 2: et al, seepe,
The combination is frequent,

pe In the designation X pe. mn.

k^wae viii. 1.

k‘uai '

51 To bite, gnaw, III. iE v. 4.

ehwae :

chum

B vessels; implements. ER. xi. 3, 4:
PS ve em ev xa i BE,

II. LE. iv, 5. #5 ML nr. f>. iii. a.
Over against, P^ £85 towards one

Le another. III, E e iv, 18,

Jg (D To dread. IL Eite 9

yen- Pressed by urgency of affairs, II. Eo

© vii. l.

5 TE EX indifferent and self-satisfied,
éaou V. Eu vii, 3: VII. E ix. 2,8.

A sack., I. R.v. 4

Lud

hsiao

D

nang

THE 31sr RADICAL. L1.

n Four Sepe. yu iE and yu XE

F FY aname for all subject to the
sat H

. CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

le]

hwuy
hui

E]

yin

x, 4: IL Eo AN

INDEX III,

imperial rule, LẸ. vii, 12: m. PR.

v. 8, 7: etal, sepe. Obs. IV. X. xviii,

2: VI. T^ xi, 8. pu; and yu Hi,

the four quarters of the empire or a
State, I JÑ. iii, 7; vi 8: H. F. i10:
eal PI BS, ESTE

the four limbs. IL. E vi. 6: IV, T

xxx, 2: VII. AE xxi 4; T xxiv. 1,
py Dii the four virtuous principles of
our nature, II. E vi, 6, 7. py JE
four criminals, V. f.iii.. PU R,

all the barbarous tribes about the Middle
kingdom. I. Ba vii, 16.

The name of Conf. favourite disciple.
IV. Nn xxix. 2,

(1) Then, therefore, I. . vii, 20,
(2) By means of, taking advantage of.
IL R. x. 4: HI E v. 1, (3) To
accord with, IV. F.i. 6.

To be distressed. VI, Jy. xv. 3.

(1) Firm; to be made strong, If.

i4 (2) Stupid. VL JR. iii. 2. (9)
As an adverb,—certainly, indeed, as a

matter of course. I. E. vii. 5, 17; T

xi 3: VIL JN. vi. 1: et al, sepe,

paa LN 1, 2, 3: HL
ix. 5. ES *ix [fi]. the name of king Wün's
park. I. Là 3.

Ea E the appearance of being em-
barrassed. V. E ii, 4.

A State. Passim. E 3E Z Bip
the imperial domain. "P E x Ed.
the State of a how. I. È. i. 4; but such
a State is called i E a Eip I. T
== the peo-
ple l fA. vii. 4, 5: VIL. Ñ. xxiii., but
also = a common man, IV. Tit . d.
[i] Be ZX, a State, with its component
great houses, I, [\. ix. 2: etal, sepe.

FH [al], the Middle kingdom, r. E.
vii. 16: et al.; but = in the middle of the

State, II. T x. 3. = city. IV. T

INDEX IIL

xxxiii, 1: V. Pi. iv. 4. Used for ZF.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES

419

(1) To hand down, I. "T xiv. 2. (2)

v. Te vii. 4. pi: Fd. to administer cee af n to shed tears, VI. T iii, 2,
a State, YI, iii. 1. (3) FE DU the name of a place, V.
f] Gardens, Ill, T ix, 5. afe . ix. 2, i
Saun NE Awad m R. vi. 2.
yuen
THE 320 RADICAL, T .yüan
JE (D An athi. I. J. ii, 28, $5
+ - The ground, soil, II. Ji. vii. 4: IV. teet Choo He explains it, but in the dict. its.
Pm EA . NM tieh sound with that meaning is chi. (2)
tu T iii, 1: V. E: iv. 2, Territory. VI. Hj ya, the name of a gate,- VEL E

m vii, 2. But for this meaning +
it iscommonly used, meaning also newly

cultivated ground, I. . vii. 16;

xv 1: IV. DL. xix, 2, 3: VI, gus F

xiv. He et al, Æ+ plains.. I1I. P

Bn" rk about the roots of the mulberry.

I. Pi iv. 8,

100

tu

3E To he in; to be on; to depend on ;—the
where, wherein, and whereon following.

1sae al oe ie ;

tsai sin. Asa preposition, —in, on, I, E:

vii, 20: IH, E iii. 3; in the case of, V.
de iii. 2. ES dp where is, how is.
I. E iv. 5: HIL ais iti, 7, Vil.

xxxiii. » Obs, He it {E1 4 T iii.
1i HE * Br TE. IV. d xi, 1; also

xxxvi. 3.

(1) City-walle, IL T ziji. 2: VIL
de P xxii. 9. 3 Bl: inner and outer
walls, II. Te i. 2, 8: IV. E- i. 9: VI.

xt (2) A city, cities, IV. p.
H] BY. v. E vii 3. oc
yt BÈ, the name of a city. IV, T

xxxi, 1, e H id, V. Jes vi. 1,

A boundary; to bound in, II. T i4

3

chiing

xiv. 2

To lay hold of, to hold;. to apprehend.
IV, [-.vii. 6; JN. iii, 4; xx. 2; xxiv.
00 2: VL OR. xii, 1: VIL [.oxxv.oz

Hh rH, to hold a medium; $t —5, to

hold to one point; VIL. -.xxvi. 8, 4.

$i; FE, ahoe, m pio

n. irr panssvm Fiz

xliii. 1. chi
Æ a) Æ HH , the holy fied, III. Nor 4e The hall or principal apartment in a
ar ii 16. (2) A name, VL T. x.; xi 1. Pang house. I. Pis: vih. xxxiv. 2.
34h (1) The earth, in correlation with (2) HJ ^, The Brilliant palace, built :
te heaven. If. E ii, 13: VIL E xiii, for the purpose of audience, I, T v. 1,
ti 38, = position, IL f. i. 1, 2, 8: VI.

E vii, 2. (2) The ground; territory.

IL E- üL& Pov. 1,2: V. ES ii.

4, 5, 6, 7, 8: ef al, sepe. = lands, IIT.

pozo Obs. J Jah, un pos

13. + hi is common in this sense.

See +. ER Hfi also occurs, Til. E.

ii, 14. (3) = place, L F. vii 4 7:

IV. jv. xxxi, 3. = regions, IV. d
i3. Equal. IIL f-. if. 15;

Vy

keun

chiin

A Tosite Lf. vii, 4: IL I ix.1;
tso

al.

F. xi.

Strong, I, E v. 8: II. uc i. 3.

keen
chien
us To endure. IV, fy. xxix. 1.
kan
E. The name of an ancient emperor. JI,
rire E ii, 26; T ii. 4: et i sopissime.
yao
xg To acknowledge, reply to. VI.
paou L
pao
JH. (1) An area for sacrifice. III, T iv,

22 ;
chang 13, (2) H fit. a plantation keeper,

VL qe xiv, 3.

Y
Vir

XE (D) Mire, mud, Ign fF. ix. 1: VI

T Li (2) Roads. I._f-. iii. 5; vii.
18.
JE Toft up. IL F.i. 13. Ft HE: to

fill up and stop, III, Tv. ix. 9. So Re

_3 = VIL. f
Ea R— B
hü E! dR, the sound of thedrum, I. ds
teen iii. 2.
tein
43 Ornaments on walls, = to disfigure.

2i ;
mwan m. m iv. 5.

w. xxi, 1.

oe A border, a boundary. I. fy. ii. 3.
SM yu H x P yu H, I. T vi.
3: IL Ec i, 10.

o Name of a prince of Ts'e, VII. Ex
ten xxxiii, 1.

tien

A (1) Ink, SE b a carpenter's mark-
mih ing line. VIL Ẹ. xi 2. (2) Black.

mo
HI. E ii. 4. (8) Surname of a heresi-
arch, HA Rp a Mihist. DHL F. v.
1,2. VII, T xxvi 1,2. Z2 p W.

vx 9, ZEE A, nr. TR. 9. 10, L.

Tombs. IV, jN. xxxiii, 1.
fan s
+35 :
AX A channel for water; a ditch. III. E.
y v.4: VI. WA. xi. 3. In other cases, al-

ways in combingtion with ia I. fy. xii.
2.0 Pi. iv. 2: Lf. ii, z [ei
2: V. fy. vii. 5, .

p A tract beyond cultivation, IV. E

kwang xi, 2.

k-uang ‘

EN (Mou. UL Ph. x. 3. (2) pid
Fang Qd territory, UL lodi 14.

Be To pull down, III. P ix. 5.

hwae
huai

THE 33» RADICAL. -lL.

(1) A scholar, a man of education and
ability. Passim. (2) An officer. I. E
i, 4: et sepe.
meaning run into each other, JP T

HA P E ovp

3,5,6, 8,8, = soldiers. Th, V JN. i.

£

sze

shih This and the preceding

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

INDEX III.

 E 4h E a son of the emperor T'ang.
 jen v. ee vi, 5.

jen
Strong. V. m v. 4, in vigorous

At
I. Es v. 8; Tem 1; xii,

chwand manhood.
2: II. q^ iv. 2,

ehuang

RE Solely employed, exclusively active, II.

yi ii. 1.

yi E ii, 1 :

ae A goblet, or jug; a vessel for liquids,

iy Sail x 4 xi. san fi v.5. Al-

hu vai Mk

B ways in the phrase GEN ay.

A Long life, VII. Es i, 3,

show

shou

THE 35rn RADICAL, X.

Yd (D Summer, IL Ye. viit: VIE E.

hea v.5. (2) Great;—a name for China. IH.

hsia ES iv. 12. (3) The name of a dynasty,
L [Kiv 5:111. poniiosv. F. vi
6; vii. 6; V. YR. iv. 4. n Ese
the great Yu, the founder of the Hea
dynasty. III. E iii. 6, H p a
sovereign, sovereigns, of the Hea. JI.
E-i 10: v. F.i. sv bom
(4) P HA. the designation of one of
Conf, disciples. IL f. i 6, 20: TIT.
E- iv. 13. (3) BR br the name of
a plece. IV. fil

ae, pete VES, the appearance of being re-

nece vwiter iste iv

kuei verential, V. ds iv. 4.

THE 3600 RADICAL, JJ.

M The evening. VI. fy. xiv. 4.

seth

hsi

Ath The outside; outside; without, III. f.
Wai iv. 7; s ix. 1; x. 5: V. Riv. 4; vi.

4 vr E. n vió VIL p.

iii. 2. (2) External: what is external.

vi. E. iv. 1,2, 4.5; ¥.3, 5; “PR. xv.
4. To make to be external. II. Es ii.
15. (3) = 4E Z Sh, after three
years; pA at a distance of...
v. Td i, 7; VI. T xiii. 8, (4) In
correlation with Pj: abroad. Lf. v.

INDEX III.

ta

5: Rie © Ap PA, a son of
the emperor T'ang., V. Es vi, 5.
Night. IV.

E . viii. 1, 2.

Many; much, L fF. i 4: ili, 1, 2;
etal., sæne. ‘To become many. IIE. Ra
ix. 5 In other cases, it contains the
copula in the same way. Many times. II.

wv. iv. 2, Mostly. VIL.

: zAdN N
2 Z Hj ana Ze Fig] gue exten
sive information, V. fy. vii. 3: VI. m
xiii. 2,

v. Xviii. 2; xx. 5: VI.

THE 87ra RADICAL. Fy.

To
make great, I, [\. ii, 5. = if the result
were great, III, Em iL K pp, the
nobler part of our nature, VI, E xv.

1, 2. , a master workman, VI.

vi. piz kR,
see Fe. yis y see NS
J FA, the name of a Book in the
‘Shoo-king, II. E iv. 6: etal, IGE
IMOR.6 V. Evn FT.
a son of the emperor T'ang, V. E vi,
5. K E, an ancestor of the House of
Chow, I. P. jii, 1; v. 5; xiv. 2; xv. 1.
X Bil: the grand Music-master. I,
P. iv. 9. TAS ana RA BY.
a minister of Wan and Woo, IV. E
xii, 1: VL Jẹ. vii 6: VIL fF. xxii
1; exi. 3. K LU. the T‘ae

mountain in Shantung. I. E- vii, 11:

1l, E: ii. 28: VIL E- xxiv, 1.

(1) Heaven;—the material heaven: the
heavens, the sky, IL ^. ii 18: IV.

T xxvi, 3: VIT. E: xvi, 8: I, E
vien fr. ivs: v, F. iv. 1,2: VIL
E xli. (2) Its more common use is

for the supreme, governing Power, with
more or legs of personality indicated. I.

R iii, 2, 8, 7; x. 2; xiv. 89; xvi, 8: H.

E. iv. 6: v. 6; vii, 2; m i 1, 2; viii.

Great, large; greatly. Passim.

?XXXVÀÓ

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

Shih

421

2; xiii. 1, 5: HL v. 8: IV. fF. i. 10;

vii, 1, 5; viii, 5; xi. 2: V. fF. v.2, 3, 4
5, 6, 7; vi. 1, 2, 4; vii. 5,9; T i. 2; iii,
4: VI. E vi 8: vii, 1; xv. 2; xvi, 1,
2,8; Tv. xv. 2: VIE P. £1.25 xix,
3; xx, 3; xxxviii, 1; v. xxiv. 2? IV.

Ewon Fite @ RF

A designation of the emperor, I. fP- iv.

-5: TL E vii, 11: e£ al, sape, K F

see Td :

0) A male, males, I. P. v. 5: III,
E iii, 17. A husband, Lf. v.3. — 8
fellow, I.” \. viii. 3. So, when joined
with 48 u. fF. i, 45 wish JB. v,

T i, 1; with iif v. T i, 3; with

yi, VII. T xv. EN he, ES 3t. i
ur fiv. s:1v. xxx. DU
see pL. pu LA see ak. Et Ae

ahusbancman, III. [^.iv. 5, 9: et. al

or. FE dean bes OK

Qa general name for the officers of a
court, below the chief minister. Sepe.
See especially, V. “Jy. ii. 3. (8)

„= our master,-—used in conversation,
Applied to Meneius. Passim. App. to Conf.
Supe, = your husband, Hi T i, 2,
Obs. IV. Ẹ. xviii, 2. My master,

generally, IV, T xxv. 3. (4) Je
p the wife of a prince. TTF. f. iii, 3.

Low, Ist tone, (1) An initial particle,

which may generally be rendered by now.
Sometinies, however, we must use then
or but: and sometimes it will hardly

admit of being rendered in English, Pase
sim. (2) A final particle, with exclama-
tory force, IV. f. xxiv. 2: VI. d

i 2; “Ty. vii. 2. (3) Intermediate in
sentences, with a demonstrative force.
L E viem Ra ave E

xxxix, 4. To this are to be referred A.

Je $F ge and H, Wes the two

former of which are.common. -

To lose, II Eis [i tiv. 1,

2:etal, sepe. To lose,—not to get, I. JE
ij. 4: vii. 24: et ad.” To fail of or in. LII.

“Pei de VIP, vii 2: et at, EER,

CHINESE

to lose one’s-self, II, +- ix. 2: comp.
IV. E . xix, 1. N
(1) Even; evenly, In the phrase p i
35, van. eoi, 6. (2) To wound, =
to be offended, IV, xs xviii,2, (3) Used
for X the invariable rules of virtue.
VI. dE vi.8, (4) Barbarous tribes;— .
properly thoge on the east, as in [o HK;
1H. M ix, 1l But used generally, UL.
.iv. 12. We have also EL [P i l
Paia; VY BY, 1. Evii; f
[n IV, T i, 1; nd plj Ba. Eu
I

xi, 2: et al, (5) A surname, III, JE:

v. (6) In the hon, epithet, 414 BY, II. j

k . i, 22, 23: et al, sepe. Also in the

DIAS

The name of a State, IH. p ix. 6
Services, VI. M x. 7, 8 :

In a name. zr x AD v. E- ix.

Shun's minister of instruction, III. E
iv. 8,

2.

(1) An interrogative particle. How,
why, what. I dr vii, 22; P. xi, 2:
HI. T à Aysv. 4: IV. [v. xxviii, 4,
6: V. b.i.3, 414.2; TR. iv. 6; vii.
4,5: vR i 7541.8: VIL F xxxiv:
R iv, 3; xxii, 3. 4% p^! T Bm xvi.
2: VI. T xiii, 3. Innames. fy Hi !
f& v. p.i. 2: VL “PR vi. 4; av.
L—HE {A mn. T: i4.

To snatch, take by force; to rob, I. is
i. 4; Hi, 4; v, 4; vii, 23: III,
IV. È. xvi, 1: VIL quoe Obs, VI.

. XV. 2..

{
To press forward; to make himself dis-
tinguished. -VIL ^y. xv.

THE 38rH RADICAL. Je.

A woman, a female; a bu I.

Tee 5: HL pi x.3; v. 5; IV. E

xvi 1: V. Fis 4i VES

vv:

CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

joo
ju

ch
x

tseé

' ch*ieh

VI

INDEX UL

VIL Bm vi. KF: a daughter. HI.
x. ii, 2; iii, 6.
Low. 3rd tone. To give a daughter
away in marriage, IV. E . 5. 2; 2: V,

V. vi. 6,

For Y; " you, your. I E ii. 4; ix.
12:11. 7k. i 4; i 2.

Up. 3d form. To love, be fond of. Sepe.
Jj 85, to be fond of ep things,

v. Es viii, 1; ix. 1. EU PP hy to

become friendly, VI. Tes 3. Men-

cius never uses Tj as an adj. 2d tone,

unless in V, E Bik

(1) As. Sape. We often find an E.
and pin itt. thus, such, so. (2) As
T. iil, 2: v, 8;

4, 5: et al, siepe. an fi. id.
i 2;ix. 2: etal (3) JI fuf.
an = ^u. uf Hyp, see on Gif. but

obscrve the difference between Any 7n.
at the beginuing and at the end of a sen-
tence. Observe also I. T xiv. 3. (4)
After adjectives, it — our termination ly.
VIL “Jo. xiii; xii. 2: et al.

A consort, a wife. The dict. says that

the most honourable inmate of the harem
next to the empress or queen was called

Jill, ut it seems to have the highest

meaning in I.

= if, though, since. I.

Sa Wo

» Y. S. y
Irregular, IV.
xxviii. 6.

pi x^) a go-between, a matchmaker. ,
Hr. “Ja. iii. 6.

utterly lost.

Ve

A deceased mother,

 AA v. E.
iv. 1.
A wife, I. E V. 4: et al., sape, ES

p wife and child, wives and children,
Sape.

Up. 3d tone. To give to wife, V. Es
'To have to wife, V. M Es i. 4.

A concubine, IV. B xxiii, 1, 2: VT.
T x. 7, 8; T vii. 3, In VII, Bn

xxxiv. 2, T pa should be ‘attendants

3e Hi

9

^.

and concubines,’

Wt. B ii, 9.

= women,

INDEX IIT.
ue To begin; beginning; first, I E ii
E 2; iii, 3; I: ii, 3; iv. 9; xi, 2: II,

db vi. ues Cp. d
(N.B), 18; v. 85 v. 4: V. eas fh.

i. 6.
(1) For i MA. if you please. T.

Te ix, 1, : IL pss ji, 21: VII. E
xxxix, 2, (2) In HL E v. 4, tbe
meaning is undetermined.

A or the surname, V. m

A

koo

ix, 1, 4:

We:

ging 7 xxvi 9

ting VIL. [y. xxxvi. 2 É p23 the people.
L _F-. vii. 5. 6, 7, 10, 12: et aL, sape.

Zs To give up; to cast away. II. [T i

wei giim, blvd

Ae Up. 3d tone. Public stores of grain,

wee 8o BE HT, the first office held by

Confucius, V. fy. v. 4.

Ed X d the wife of king Tae, ES

jung "

chiang? the surname, I T- v.5.

KE Beauty, VI. Es vii. 7.

kaou

chiao

p. Majesty, dread, Lm iii. 3: H^.
UG idi 8, Tooverawe, IL []v.i.4.

Er To marry (on the part of the man).
iw IV. Eviz v. panne
chi 1

hie (1) A married woman, ia wife. III.
iB s

Jo Ers pie pE ipu p
u

v.8: V, ps vii. 6; “fei i 4: VII. ds

xxii,2, See m (2) A name 5j Jas

VIL fy. xxiii,

E: $^]. a matchmaker, III, Bu
ie Bie oe IV. E- il

J8 To flatter, VII, Ty. xxxvii. 9.

P To marry (on the part of the woman).
hea OL f.i. 2.

chia

pi An elder brother's wife. IV. E xvii.
so pev, pis.

EE A favorite Gn a bad sense), I. E
re vii. 16; Ja. xvi 1,3: rt R.i 4.
[1 The name of a place. II. E vii. 1,
ging

Aisle DESCR ONERE SORT S ESCUDO E ACRES ASSURER ne A Se SR Ne ath es ee Sh Oe cet

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

F

tsze
íizü

THE 397m RADICAL. Y-

(1) A son. sPassim. But often it is
equivalent to child, children ;—~especially

in the frequently recurring phrase 3t

+. So, in JW d an infant, VI,
E v.8. (2) E P a daughter. IM.
{Ps iii, 6. JE Y. a virgin daughter.
Ma vii.3. (2) A general appellation
for virtuous men, which may be transiat-
ed by gentleman, disciple, philosopher, &c.
Sepe. In this sense, it is often used in
conversation, and is equivalent to Yow,
Sir. Obs. ze F, II. vi 3; and
LI T. my friends, my disciples.

—

I. xv. l. In this sense it is very
common after surnames, and honorary

epithets. We have yL F, ae F.
4 Y. &c. &c. It is used also after
the surname and name or epithet to-

gether, as in x jek PE etal. (83) A
title of nobility. V. T ii. 3, 4, 5. So,
in FX F, m. Eis vi bas
and $F F H. -€ i. 8. (4) It entera
often into designations, as in F px,
F IB. &e., &c. Into names also, as in
py PE IV. Te xxv. 1, and perhaps
Jy, IV. . xxiv. 2. F AL II.
T x, 6, and -F 112. IV. “fe xxiv, 2,

seem to be equivalent to surnames. (5)

Phrases formed with NX are— X PEL
namefortheemperor. Sæpe; C sons
and younger brothers == youths, I. x

v
xi. 3: IL p v. 6: et ak; BF: dis-
= I. [.i7; fa. x. 3; xi 8: IV.

. vii. 3; WX Jk descendants, I. B
xiv. I etal Obs. IV. F5; 4e F,
See He: {t F. the crown prince, III.
queat HÉ -F the pupil of the
eye, IV. E xv. 1.2; Bm the desig-

nated heir, VI. fR. vii. 3; SE » See

JA Z F, little children, said to the
disciples by Confucius, IV. E viii. 8;
" ES zi H z
xiv. l; ye T , a boy, H. abs n IV.
E vill. 2; Er d^ id, IL. I. v. 2,

FAS

8; and a 7. see zi.

ut CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

494
Helf-an-one. V. E iv. 2
kis f =
chieh A surname. That of Confucius. Passim hs
14

^ .iv.

(1) To be in. IV. E xv. l:et al. = to

¿sun abide. VIL E: xiii. 3. (2) To be pre-
gerved. II. abe i. 8: etal. sepe. = to be

nee
nieh

alive. VH. . xx. 2. To preserve.
IV. [K xix 1: etal Obs. FERM IV.
v. xxviii. `

(1) Filial piety; filial; to be filial, I. -
iii. 4: v. 3; vii. 24: et ul, sepe. (2). The

heaou 3
hsiao pon, epithet of a duke of Wei, V. F iv, ^^
Z 7. (1) In a name, IV. E; v. 1, 2, (2) fä
ke ‘A surname, VI, E xiv, 1.—V. T Ea
chi E tsi
e dv. ff. ze ,IL fy. x. 6. Observe chai

Z% 4f VI, F v.

That of Mencius. Pas-

F.L E ü. 5, 6, 8, and 2.
Young and fatherless, I.
friendless. VI, E. xviii, 2,
Said by Choo He to mean

wv. 9, =

Childrén,
° wives and children. I.

An infant, able to smile. £d TÉ

gan

V. v. 8.

Mo Hv poe
J (1) A grandson. Iv. E. ii, 4. Pa
sun

$$ descendants. I. T xiv. 3, Obs.

Fh Fe 1v. E. vii. 5. (2) In double
Surnames. H, E- i 1: et al.—IV. T

3. 1142 Rx 6—VL CN. xvn
Who, which:—interrogative, ' I.. JE-

shuh sung
shu Vi. 3, 5, 6; vii. 11.38; R. h 4: 1V. Fs
Xix, 1, 2: et al,

3E y SB, te be earnest and careful in, Pm

Sze =

tsü Vir, E xxv. l, 2; xdi, 1 Zu
van

ER. (1) To learn; learning. I. aT ix. l. 24

NT AN

hsio I. . ii. 19, 22: et al, sepe, XE 7

MU RN, to study. IIT. E ii, 4: VI.

INDEX HT.

xi.4. (2) A school, or college, of a higher
order, III. . iii. 10.

(1) i5 d^ & boy. If. Ts vi. 3:

IV. Es viii, 2, (2) In aname, IV,
F. xxiv. 2.

(1) The sons of concubines. VII, ie
2. (2) calamities, IL ft.
iv. 6: IV. ft. viii. 5. Is sometimes
written, but wrongly, EE

xviii,

TUE 40ra RADICAL. ma.

The sides of a house, below the eaves,

a settlement, I. f.v. 5.

A homestead, a dwelling, I. E
ii, 4; vi, 2,4: I, PF. vu. 2z: Iv. pF.
x. 2, 3: VIL TF. xxii. 2.

To guard, have the charge of; to ob-
serve, but with the idea of guarding. I.

T v, 5; xlii, 2; xv. 2: JT, ii 6, 8;
“YR. v. 6: m. E- iii. 18; F. iv. 3:
IV. i. 8; xix. 1, 2; M. xxxi, 2: VI. Te
v. li vii, 5: VIL 7S. xxxii, 1, 2. DE
p-7 a keeper. VII, pes xxxvi. 3.

(1) Ease, quiet. VI. [y.xv.5: VII.
B xxv, 1, (1) Tranquil; to be in
repose; to repose in, II, fn. vii 2:
IV. b.x.2, 8 n. ^N. xii 5:1.
_f. viii i: v. Eve vi p
L B. xxxii, 2, (3) To give repose to.
I ^ iii, 6, 7, 8: IL, fA. xi. 8: VIL
xi 3: VIL fF. xix. 2. (4) Quietly, in
tranquillity. I. fF. iv. 1: HL T
ii, 1: IV, AV. xiv. 1

(1) The name of a State, II, E ii
17; Te iii. 1, 3: III. E i l; ii 1; iv.
3:etal (2) A surname. VI. Jy. iv. 1.

—vit. F.ix i

Complete; to complete, IV. Jes i. 9:
v. pda
Pertaining to one's ancestors. In the
oka Pq
phrase a E the ancestral temple. I.

a xi 3: IV. E iii. 8: VI.

v. Ville

INDEX IIT.

ot ; :
5; x. 4. AN Ej. the kingdom which we

honour. III. of: ii. 3.

(Ey An offcer. H B: all the officers.

rran IH. [-. ii. 3,5, 6: etal. An ofice. V.
T ii. 6, 7, 8, 9: et al, In some cases it
is hard to say to which of these meanings
we should assign the character. Applied
to the senses and the mind. VI. Ex
xv. 2.

4E (1) To settle, compose; to be settled,

ting L E vie nL fF. ii. 85 ii 18; PR.

ix, 3 (N.B): IV. fF. xx; xxiv. 2;

xxviii. 2: V. [vix 4: VIL fh. xxi. 2,
3. (2) An honorary epithet. HI. E-
ii. 1.

Hr (1) To be right, reasonable; to seem to

» be; ought, ought to be. I. Eu vii. 7;

i

TF i. 2, 3: IL E ii. 5; ix, 8: IIL YR.
i 1: IV. b.i7;xdv.2; F- xxiv. l;
xxviii, 4: V. F.i. 1; f. v. 8: VIL
Joxon @ Ina name. VIL "UR

xxxviii. 3.

zn A visitor, a stranger. IL f\. xi. 3,
kh
k'o
E M Ahonse. LOR ix. 1: 1. Px
shih 3; o¢ al., sepe. zu =, houses, edifices.
HI PR. ix. 5: VE poa Rx:
VIL. LE xxvi 2. == a palace. V. E
iii. 5. = a family, a house. IV.
Lv Te ii 1: VLU(Me 8. rj
E , IV. P xxxiii. 1. (2) = a
wife. AG Er IL^N.i iii. 6. E: X
p EJ male and female dwell together.
v. E. ii. 1. `
a An hon. epithet. IE. £- I. E
seuen vii. 1: e£ al., sape.
hsiian
1) A palace. . 1i. 8; v. 6; vii.
ka i v. M B
kiung 9, = a house, an establishment. HI.

ips iv. 5. Lu See Et (2) A
surname. V. .ix.2. In the double
surname db T IT. BE ji. 4, 6.—V
Tero P and E

are the names of two palaces. VII. T
xxx. I: I. d iv. 1.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

425

(1) To injure; to be injured ; injury. I.
T xv. 1: lI. E ji. 13, 16: et al., sepe,

It is often followed by JA. HI. pte
4:etal. (2) Ina name. an 23 pa
$E. VIL JR. xxv. b

What, why. L fi. ii. 4. Choo He,

however, explains it here by when. The
note in loc. says wrongly that it is read
hiù

To be at éase, to feel happy. IE P
iii. 3.
At night. IIL. iii 2.

(1) A chief officer. VL F. xiv. 1
x Z, see Ed (2) A surname. II.
. ii. 18, 25, 26.
(A house, a home, III. un ii. 2.
(2) A family, families. I.
24: III. . iii. 19: VIT.

Ñ. iii. 4; vii.

E xxii. 2.

` (8) A family, a clan,—the possessions of

a great officer. Passim. This is the
most common use of the term in Mencius.

The combination [ES X isfrequent. See
Sometimes it = the chief of such

a Family. I .i4: v. [Ñ ui 2, 3.

(4) A husband. A z 2g UL Ta.

6.— Observe 2k FR I. E vii, 12; and
NAX VE Ps.

(1) Countenance, deportment. V. Ex
iv. 1: VILOb.xxxüi2. (2) To be to-
lerated. VI. [\. viii. 2. To get the
countenance of. VII. Eu xix. l. (8)
To be admitted (as light). VIL F.
xxiv.2. (4) JE RE ye HE, death
is not enough for the crime. IV. E
xiv. 2. ;

(1) To stop over night. IL fy. ii. 4;
xi 1,8 (N.B); xii. 1, 4 6. (2) =
cherish. V. E tii. 2.

nz] 22, tohush. V. E iv. 1

(1) A robber, plunderers. IV.
1, 4; xxxi 1, 2. (2) 7j L7 chief

minister of Justice. VI. þf. vi. 6.
(1) Riches ;rich; to become rich. I.
I" v. 8; xvi. 2; nh. ii. 6; x. o: el al,

» dii.

bt

426

shih

wan
kuan

puou
pao
wp
BE
chung

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

sepe, Often in the phrase dá B. =
abundant, good. VI. a a vii. 1. (2)
To make rich. IV. Es xiv. 2: vr.
ix.l. To desire the riches of. HI [d
v. 3. z

To sleep.

vI. Ñ. xiii. 1, 3.

To suffer from cold. . T. Es iii. 4; vii.
4. SE PE, acold, n Pit 1. To
subject to the influence of cold. VI. F
ix. 2.

To examine, to observe closely. I. oF.
iii, 1; vii. 10; Ñ. vii. 4,5: IV. T xix.
2: VII. E v. L = to be extremely
particular, VII. E xlvi. 2. (Observe
the idioms).

To lodge (active). IV. T xxxi. 1.

(1) Few, little, generally in correlation

to ZZ, or A. I. ps vii, 17: H. E

ii. 16: etal (2) Old and husbandless,
widowed. L Jv. 3. (8) E A, the
humble designation of themselves by the
prinees,—the opposite of our We. I. E

iii. 1; iv. 1; v. 1; vii. 4: etal. (4) Equal,
proper,—in the phrase B 3t which is
explained by Wi such a wife as seldom
is L f+. vii 12.

(1) To be fuil; to fil. I. d vii. 2:
Til: T v. 5. (= to put) Joined with
Jp Vus JR. xxv. 5, 6; xxxi 3. (2)
Sincerity. VII. E xxxvii. 3. HER,
in reality. III. E iii. 6. = meritorious
services. ^ V1. T 1. (3) Fruit. NI.
as x. 1, Metaphorically, IV. Eu xxvii.

1,2.
To enjoy repose; to give repose to. . III.
Jesu VIL BR iv. s.

(1) Wide and loose, IL f-. ii. 4, 7.
(2) Generous. V. fy. i. 3: VIL

*
1S.

Ne XV.

Precious things. VII. T xxviii.

To distinguish, to exalt. I. F- ii. 7.

THE 41st RADICAL. SF

sF An inch, inches. IL fy. vii, 3: IV.
F. vil, (NB): VI. T i o5; dX
Obs. R 3b VG boxed

(1) Dykes. zi] gii. the border-divi-
sions of a State, II. T i.4. (2) To
appoint, —to territory or office. V. E
iii. 1, 2: VI. WN. vii. 3; viii. 6.

To shoot with an arrow and string; to
shoot, VIL fe. ix.3: [vc

To shoot; archery. V. T i 7: VI.

she E xxi. 5j p an archer. II. E
vii. 5: UR. i. 5. So, sometimes, ay

alone.

(1) Shall will, should, would; to he
3 going to, to be about to. Passim, lt
ts€ang expresses a purpose, and often, especially
chiangin questions, puts it delicately. Will

be. HI. E us 1.5. (2) To offer, present.
V. fr. vi 5. (8) ? toassist. IV. dee
vii. 5. (5) Hey. BE , a general, VI. En .
viii. 1.

Hi Entirely, exclusively. B $: i 3.

y A DW with exclusive attention. VI.

ts‘un

E 3
fung
feng

. ix. 3.
self. VI.

To honour.

To presume, take on one's-
v. Vii. 3.
II.

E

v. iv. 2; v. 1: et al,

Koen spe. Ilonour; to be honoured. VII. E-
xxxil 1. Honourable, up. vii. 2: UI.
T vi. 2. An honourable situation. V.
qd v. 2, 3. Honourable things. II.
T^ i. 6, 7.
E A measure of eight cubits. Ur YA. i.
sin 1,2.
hsin F
EA] To reply. Sepe. Used properly of the
J reply of an inferior to a superior.
tuy
tui ;
REN To lead, conduct. IV. P ii. 3 To
ae lead on, influence. VII. En xxii. 8.
THE 420 RADICAL, jh.
E Small, little; a little (adv.). Sepe. =,
se;oy Mean creatures. VIL Te xix. 8. To

hsià0 consider small, VII. <p asin: 1. To make
smal. I. E ix. l. Of phrases with

INDEX III.

^. we have— fy T. see Xs 2h
A theoppositeof Xt and X AG
sepe; AY ae. the meaner part of our
constitution, VT. E xy. 1, 2. (comp.
xiv. 2, 5); ap E. the inferior people,
IH. E iii. 10; py Ñ, mean, small
valour, Up. iii. 5; ABE, asmall

man, II. fy. xii. 6; ^ Jj. the name
of the five months’ period of mourning

VII. E xlvi. 2; Ay FR jj name of an .chü

ode.
2 (1) Few, LUAS: .4: V. IF: vi. 2.
ur Jn Ap, N, to decrease. I. JE: ii. I. (2)
In a little. V. fr. iid.
AS Up. 8d tone. Young. V. qe: i. 5.
shaou ; s
shao

fà (su. mm. p.«nxe (2) To
shang exalt, VIL ft. xxxii. 2,3 (8) To

surpass. II. T ji. 9: VIL F xxii. 1.

(4) = to go up to court. V. T iii, 4.
To ascend. "V. Jy. viii. 3. (5) To add

to, be added to. X fu fr B IH.
dodeie Obs. 5 x Jj, the

grass, when the wind is on it...... IH.
ii. 4. .

THE 43» RADICAL, Jp.

(2) A fault. 7. T iv. 9. (2) To

su grudge against, to blame. I fy. xii. 2:
IL fy. xiii. 1.
Rt To go to, to approach. I. Js yi.2, 7;
“tsew vii, 4, 6, 7: et al, sepe.

THE dir RADICAL, FA.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

427

Re, 4 in R the apan of Confucius,

ne

ni L E iv. 6; vii. 2: et al,

F Q) fH F, the chief minjster of the
yin emperor T'ang. II. . if. 22, 28: et al,

sepe. (2) A surname. IL JQ. xii 1,3,
7. F A, apparently a double sur-
IV.

(1) To dwell, reside, in,—generally
applied to places, but sometimes to official
positions; residence, seat. Passim. It is
applied metaphorically also to virtues,

and their opposites, as in IT. E iv-
1: m i. 1, 8: IIT. Exi 8: comp.
I. ^K. ii. 19. Ia VIL F- xxxvi. lié
E Z= = their principles; comp. IV-
T- xiy. 1. E ——, to
ternative. IL JQ. dii In vn p.
xxvi, 1, 2, 8, B == status, position. In
V. T^ ix. 3, == to retain, B those
who stayed at home. I, Tee 4, (2)
In a name. IH, ^ vi, 2.

a) A house, TEL. E new p.

name. v. Xxiv. 2.

 B

keu

choose an al-

uh 7 9
"i xxxi 1 (N.B). (2) & B a double
surname, VI, Ri L
(1) To bend (act.) 111. E ii. 8. To
keuh : a
chai Debent VI E xii. 1. (2) The name
of a place in Tsin. V. E ix. 2.
JB Always in the phrase pa JB = not
sté to consider pure, uot to condescend or
hsieh

stoop to. II, t ix. 1, 3: VI. qe x. ô;
T xvi. 1: VIT. ET xxxvii. 6.

Up. 2d tone. To drive away. IV. fi.
Xxx. 5. :

Shees or sandals, made of woven ma-

Les terials, IH. fe. iv. 1,17, 18; Rx. 4s
chü K
P To personate the dead at sacrifices, vi. E vii. 4: y TM xxx. 1, 2.
f being a resting place for their spirits. Js To tread. V. he vii. 8.
she ; ;
shih V1 E v. 4. fe ;
: u
A cubit, I. P.i8:1H. F. ív: 175]
A HR + ; L " 2: Kk Belongings, == relationships. .IV. T
F i. 1, 3: VI. E xiv. 1, 6; f i2: UA XXX. Be
VII. fy. xxxiv. 2 shu
fe Low. 3d tone. To stop. I. Ss A. 3. To collect. L fy. xv. L

ne
ai

chuh.
chu

428

jl

chow
chou

THE 467TH RADICAL, Ll.

Hills, a mountain. IL fn. i. 4: III.

piv. te VL _ fifi. 35 viii. 1. = wood-
ed bills, T. b. i 3. ul f&. hin-
paths, VII, y. xxi. HELL, vir. E-
xxiv; Ik up LE vii, 11: IL os
ji. 28: vr E . XXiv. IA Wh up LU
n Él v - Eso A LL
v. b. ui 2; gE AE up v. E vie
ds Li. VI. Eo viii. 1; and ux Li.

LM xiv. 2; xv. l—are all names of

Ul

shun

T

kung

ee Ls
pi X m , dangerous, unsoettled. V. ES tao
kth dv. .
ko D
uk A mountain, by which was the original
n seat of the Chow family, giving also its
chi name to the adjacent country. SN
UN
s IX Ji] 1 whe ch'iao
see MI
small high hill, VLC E
A A small high hi ira E
chm ið
$B, (1) The name of a place in Ts‘e, IL _
ny Juez © SE bp eee lp, Æ
eh‘ nung wig
Ai ‘To die,—spoken of anemperor. II. E 3É
PON j 7i V. vi. 1, the i
péng E Xp Bi fi tea
' horns falling off. VII T iv. 5 i
hg) A corner or bend of a hill, VII. fn.
yu xxii. 2.
yü
gn ES gj. Majestic, II. E iv. an:
wei VIL fy. xxxiv. 1, . ai
Be Precipitous. VII, EL ii, 2.
yen : : i

B

THE 47ru RADICAL, K

A stream, IV. T i. 1.

JI

chiuen

ch‘uan

3t To perambulate, X& Ar. to make a

haan tour of inspection—spoken of the ancient
emperors, I. [v.iv.5: VI. . vii. 2.

E Nests, shelter-huts, HI. T ix, 3.

ch'aou i

clrao N i

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

OVLü

INDEX IH.

Q0) 14 JH, the name of a place, V.

Æ: iii. 2, (2) In a name, nr. p. vi.
9

THE 48ra RADICAL, T.

(1) Aworkman, VIL f+. xli.1,2, a
“TL. the various workmen, III. Jp. 5,
6. vVh47L
Ein. the master of the workmen, I, T
ix, 1, (2) In opp. to ii, = officers,
1v. F is. (3) HE T, the title of
an ancient high officer. V. JẸ: iii. 8,

The left, Æ F to—on—the left and
I. inet 3: IL Tye x, T: IV.
T. “To. xiv. = attendants, J,

? disciples. VIL fy. v.l,
Skill; skilful; to be skilful, Iv. P.

il: V. 7:VL f+. vil,23 [yw

Large, great. IL fy. ix. 1: III. Be

iv. 18: IV. fF. vie 2. E Ez. the

thumb. IIT. f.x 2.

A wizard,—one who prays and makes in-
eantations on behalf of others, II. IE:
vii. 1.

An order; a difference. III. E v.8:
V,

a charioteer, ILI,

right.

P. vii

Ñ. ii. 8.
THE 49ru RADICAL, È}.

Self.
plurals.

Himself, yourself,—and the

E Goa u F.

iv. Obs. IL A. x.5: VL b.c
vin fe. ix. 6.

(1) ‘To stop, end, IR v. 1: III. T
viii. 1, 2, 8: et al., sepe. fit D, iflmay

not stop. l. [X.xiii.2. Its most common
use is at the end of sentences in the phrase

im B x. and there stop, = and
nothing more. Passim, So ffy 4, alone.
. 2, Also without the jjj. IV.

B xxx. 5, ao 44 B. not to be

Passim,

„able to stop, what is the result of necessi-

ty, is also frequent, . vii, 3; xiv, 2
et al, sape. B. alone, at the end of

INDEX IH. -

AS

heang

hsiang b

ili

she
shih

r

fili

shwae
shuai

clauses and sentences, gives strong em-
phasis to the previous assertion, I. E:
vii, 16, 20: II. f+, ix. 1, 2: et sepe. (2)
= of decline, VI, F-. x. 8; to avoid, IV,
. ix. 4; to dismiss, I. "Te vi. 2. (3)
indicates the past tense. Must be trans- ^
lated sometimes by was, were, VI. T-
xiii, 8: IV, x 1:1. F xvi, 1.

i Alane. IV. AL xxix. 1

TIU

seth
lisi
aT
tae
tui

a

THE 50rn RADICAL. Hn

A market-place, markets, I, ok vii.

18: R.v. 3; xi. 2; xv. l:e al mr
A Br. V. R. viii. In m^
7, fa ii EA is AUT who
i"

established markets, rather than *mar-
ket-dealers,’ Obs. II, ES Y, 2.

Cloth,—of flax, IL f+. iv. 17; "Ts.

iv, 3: VIE [xxvii ? IE. v.s.

Always in the phrase ES 4d little:
few. IV. v. xix, 1; xxxii 2: VL F-

[s

pi

ti

fan

viii, 2: VII. E xvi,

Cloth,—of silk, I. fF. iii. 4; vii, 24:

III, LL iv. 17: VU. f. xxii, 2, 8.

Wk B4, v 1 Pe. x. 4; see HE,

(1) An emperor, the emperor ;—used
of Yaon and Shun, M. fF. viii. 9: V.

dpiseunqesuso E

Ay, God, the most High God. LPR.

iii, 7: IV, Ane vii. 5; UN xxv.2, .. ping
‘A leader. ll. J: i9. .

Tolead. V. [.iv.1.

(1) A military host, I fy. iv. 6; x.

4i xi. 3: VL fy. iv. 5,6. 2L fy, the
: T 2 ^ nn i
imperial armies, VI. fy. vii. 2. (2)
A teacher, master, III, Nu i.4; iii, 11;

iv. 12, M: et al. so At fif Iv. E.

vii. 3. (3) To make one's master, to fol-
lw. IV. f. vie (4) Xin e
plantation-keeper, VT. ae xiv. 3, Ý

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

alone, LE. vii, 3: VI.

429

kifi the master of the workmen. I. TF

ix yi fj. the grand music master,

I. ÑR. iv. 9. So E" alone, IV, ps
ir VL L.vie d fif the chief
criminal judge, I. T vi, 2: nf. M
1; xiii, 2, diii. title of a high officer,
IV,

A mat, mats, III. de iv. 1.

v. xxvii, 1, 2.

A girdle, a sash, VII T xxxii, 1.

Regular, V. T vi, 2, 4. Constant,

j Chang unchanging, 1V. F. vii, 5. = an ave-

e h

f

rage, IIT, aps iii, 7,

v. Lis.

v , constantly,

aie Hi: pieces of silk given as gifts
or presents. "VI, AN x, 4. So tig

v. VL 1: VIE

E xxxvii, 2 e
E q ili H. Dd E. duisi: slike. V,
. vii, 4,

TIE 51st RADICAL, T-

(1) A shield. I. T. v. 4: V, Ei

3. (2) To seek for, H, Em xii. 2: VII,

T xxxiii, (3) In names, Jk =F;

the uncle of the tyrant Chow, II, E. i.

8: VI. dots BY FR R,

vii.
( D To be brought to a state of perfect
order. Spoken of the physical condition

of the empire, HI E. iv, 7; of its
government, IH, ES ix, 11: IV. da
Toi 1: v Nx, 2, 7 Ez

ILfvexis:iv. pain ZR yx.

to make govt. even, to dispense equal

justice. IV, EG ii. 4. Comp. III, E-
i, 18, (2) Even, level, IV. F.i 5:

TH. fA. ix. 4., H, the day-break,
the time evenly between night and day.
VL [ovi 2. (3) An hon, epithet, "
v. T ii, BL WV. xvi, (4) 2p.
i52 the name of a plaec, II, P iv, 1:

VL T v. 1, 2, 6,

430

4p

néen
“nien

hing
hsing

ke
chi

chi

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

A year, years. Sepe.

‘Fortunate, tucky; fortunately. TIT.
_f. i 1: IV. f.i. 8. Observe the

idiom of 3 followed by Jf, IL F

ii, 1: IV. d xx. Š.
THE 52» RADICAL. f$.

Young; the young. I. . vii, 12;
TTv 85 ix. 1: OL. ivi; T vi.
vi 2: VL 7 Y. vii, 3.

(1) Dark, II, ^. iv. 15. (2) An
honorary or rather dishonouring epithet
of a sovereign, IV, Be ii, 4: VI. P

vi. % (3) uu Jl. the name ef a place,

v. Fiz.

Up. let tone, (1) Tohope VIL F.
xli. 1, (2) In the phrase 4% Ži little,

few, IV. Ñ. xix. 1: xxxiii, 2: VI

downs vno poxüas (3) m

the phrase Jit 4% near to, or expres-
sive of a wish, I, P i. 1, 3, 7: IL T

. Xii. 4, 5.

Several I, “Ty. xii 2:1. a iv. 2.
? how many. IV. E xxiv, 2,

THE 530 RADICAL, J-

(1) A kind of schoo, I, ^. ii. 4;

seu TP "n
hs 24: IM. Æ iii, 10, (2) A due
order, III, Ex iv. 8.
Js GQ) le. Ji whetstone, 'V. ^
t rii if E
ü vii, 2$ (2) = to come to, IV, s
xxviii 2.
E A kitchen; shambles. I E iv.4;
D vii, 8: IL JQ. ix. 9. Jj, the mas-
ter of the kitchen, ? purveyor. V. T
vi. 6.
Ke A treasury. KF H I, T xii, 2:
efo nmn Eis; vL ea
Mf ^ A kindof school, I, -.iü 4: vii, 24:
emoppL [oio
seang
ehdang

Mr Iram EA CC A AO A NOE E

KE

ting

k'ang

Ei
yu
yü.
E
sow
sou

4

gung

sou

p

kew
chiu

E
ch*oo
chu

chien
chau

INDEX TH,

The place below the hall or principal

apartment of a house. IV. fn. xxiii 1l,
(1) A measure for determining the
length. I. E- vii, 13. (2) A model,

rules. I, Eu iv. 5. II. fy. vii 2: IV
.i 8. y
To measure. I. EL vii. 9, 13.

An arsenal. KF Ji, see NF
AR Js. the name of a State. V. E

iji. 2, 34 ]

(1) Numerous. Jis Wy, the mul-
titude of things. IV. T xix. 2. pu
E. the masses of the common people,
L p.i vin oW xxxvii. 18. rv.
T xix. 1. Jr A: the common peo-
ple. I p.i4:m ^W. vii. 2: et al, sepe.

: * xl à
(2) In the phrase. PE ES see HE:

B Ek, the name ofa Book in the
Shoo-king. V. T iv. 4.

ai PAS appears to be a surname,
IV. fy. xxiv. 2.

To pilfer and hide. VII [\. xxx. 2.

(1) Ordinary. VI._f. v. 4. (2) Merit;
to think of one’s merit. VII. E xiii.
3. (3) Kr RD a name of certain small
principalities. V. T^ ii. 4..

Pure, disinterested; purity, moderation.
III. E x, 1, 2: IV. T xxiii: V.
F. il: VIL ^ IN. xv.; xxxvii. 10.

To be concealed, IV. Es xv, 2.

A stable, L ]-.iv. 4; IIL T ix. 9,
A kitchen, I. - s vii, 8.

(1) A house, a dwelling-place, III, a
iv. l. (1) A stance for a shop or booth,
i, E To levy a ground-rent on

such stance, II. Ee v. 2.

. v. 5.

INDEX TI,

ai A shrine or tempio Always in the
meuou Phrase zn "x Jj see E:
miao

; Ks 'To put aside, disregard; to make void.

Lop.ovasrvs WR xxiv. 2: v. p.
di, 1; vi, 4: VII, E xxvi. 4; xli. 2. To
decay ;—spoken of States, IV. E iii,
2.

Wide, IL Pi. ii. 3: vin p. xxi,
1; xxxvi, 2 ia HK, wide-reaching
vi. F.
A granary. Always in connection with

x. Xii. 2

oL T 2: III. E; iv, 8: V.
iss Pe vig. pA the

store-keeper. V. fy. vi. 5,
JE (1) The shed tenanted by a prince
jo. mourning for-his father, IIL. . ii. 5.

lu (2) E jE. see B.

THE 5401 RADICAL. f.

fei

i
B

kuang

praise, xvii, 3.

lin

In the phrase aH XE, the court, II

XE
ting T ii. 6: IV. ES xxvii, 8,

THE 5j: RADICAL. jf.

jt

ro She-king. VI. T iii 1,2, 4.7

Zr Chess-playing, IV. Ec xxx. 2: VI.
yih : ZR i
4 i Abs ix, 8. AR aK: a name or nickname,
VL Poin

THE 56ra RADICAL, “(.

To make a model, to imitate. Us fi. E
shih x.3.
at To murder; to be murdered. DAT
$ " with reference to a sovereign. ` I.

shih 4; T viii, 2 II. E ix, 7: IV. n

ii. 4.

THE 57r& RADICAL. H. /

A bow. I. T v, 4: IV, ^X. xxiv,

2:VI. Fixa; fii 2. RA.

a bow-maker. II. E vii, 3,

kung

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

ay $e the name of an ode in the:

431
5» (1) A younger brother, II. hix 3:
t nr JE. iv, 2: et al, sepe, Found often `

S along with X. But sometimes VE

= relatives, V. v. iii, 1; andin V, "
viii, 2, it = sisters, ` NX x y? x»
you and your brother, III. I iv. 12,
. F p: sous and younger brothers ==
youths, Sepe. In H. E- v. 6, it =
children; and in VII, [\.i.2, = son, (2)
Used for PHB, fraternal duty, VIL E-

xxxix,2, (3) y disciples, II, IP:
i 7: IML PR. x. 3; xi. 8: IV. fF. vii. 8.

(1) To condole with,—on occasions of
death and mourning. II. T ii, 2; vi.

oe ieri

T xxvii, 1. (2^ To console, I,
xi, 2: II. R.v. 4.
To draw; to lead on; to lead away. VI.

E xv. 2; P. viii. 9: VII, E xli. 3.
= to take, Ii. vil. H Hüte.

stretch out the neck, I. Ez vi. 6.
Not.

yn

Passim.

A bow, —the name of that belonging to
"oShun V. E ii. 3.

te

ti

E Weak, the weak, I. T vii, 17; F
jð Hi o9. : vd
xii 2: OIL, Tv. 2: IV. E vii, 1.
iB (1) To draw a bow. = to display, to
Than be displayéd, I. fN. v. 4: I, “fi. v,

6. (2) X je one of Conf, disciples,

n. F.iso:nr p.i: ZEE,

also one of Conf. disciples, VII. T
xxxvii, 4. (8) A surname, ibe fi Til,

v. li, 1.
ph Strong, vigorous, 'I. E v. 1: İV,
cea By vii, 1: VIL FR xii. 2.

Low. 2d tone. To make one's«self
Fang Strong to. IV. fF. ili, 4; xiv. 2: VE
eh‘iang V. ix. 2.

Ud Strong; strength. I, E vii, 17 ip.

kéang xi. 3.
chiang

t

T
kang
ehdan

ike
che.

chih

4,

hing
hsing

iB

teaou
tiao

2
chang

u^
o2
pang
péng

Ayu
yth
yi

{E

wang

{iF

ching
chêng

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASRS.

To act vigorously at. I. fN. xiv. 3:
VII. Jp iv. 8. Toforce. “III. Es iv.
3, == by dint of pressing. III. T i.4.

'Asurname, V, Jp viii. 2,

To draw a bow to the full, VIL E
xx, 1: VIL. F. xi 2

THE 58rn RADICAL, ==}.

A sow, swine, I, I: . lii, 4, 5; vii, 24:

VII. EY xxii, 2,

THE 59r: RADICAL, 2.

(1) The bodily organs, VIL F.
xxxviii (N.B). (2) To manifest, he
manifested, VI. E vi. 5, Appearance,

representation, I, s vii, 11,

To Cut, carve, I: XK, I. T^ ix. 2.

To display, give distinction to, vr

vii. 3.

A surname. III, [y.iv. 1.

THE 60m RADICAL. 4.

To serve, perform service. IV. E-
vii, 1: V. f. vii. 2. Jl T. personal
service, VII,

Teck s Ex

to serve. VI, R.v. 4.

(1) To goto, Passim. fit Br {E
im ^— 2. , In all places and. circum-
stances ..... i vif. xxxi, 3; xxxvii, 9.

(3) ft T the past, VII T xxx. 2,

(1) To exact duties; exactions, I. F.

v.5; h.v. 3: IL Ey: v. 2, 3; T. x.

7; III. Tv. vii. 1: vir f. xxvii 1.

(2) Totake. Ff Rr. Eit @

To punish, to execute imperial justice.
I. T xi.2,8: HT, y. v. 8, 4, 5: VH.

r5 ii, 2: iv. 8,

+x. xxvii, A servant, II.
d se to make the will

1H.
tsoo
tsu

4
fF
tae
tai

4
{Re
han
hén

- Posterity I. LL. iv. 6: IV. E

INDEX II,

(1) To go to; to march, I. ^s. iii, 6,
but the meaning is doubtful. (2) Seems
to be used for 2H. and ín. a = to
decease. V. E iv. 1. '

(1) To wait, to wait for, May some-

.times be translated by until. II els

9; iii. 1; iv. 1: ef al, sape. (2) To treat,
behave to, entertain, IV,
xxxi. 1: V. ^ iv.4. InL fy. xi. 1,
the two meanings seem to come together,

To be refractory and quarrelsome. IV.

f. XXX. 2. Is often written jg.

f- xxviii, 4;

Pitch-tubes, for determining the musi-
cal notes, $y {E IV. ps i. 1, 5.

That which is after. (1) As a noun.
. xxvi.
2. An after period. II, E. ii, 27.

Futurity, Here fé Z may be con-
sidered an adj, future, III. “Te
iv. 8. (2) As an adj. Future, coming,
after. I. Jy. xiv. 3; xvi. 1: et al, sep.
(3) As a verb. To make an after consid-
erationI [L.i4 [v xi 2: vir. fy.
iv. 3. et al. To follow, keep behind. VI.
M ii. 4, To follow after, succeed (neu-

ter) IV. [q.I.8. (4) As an adverb,
Afterwards. Passim. Especially when

preceded by t or R d f$, mean-
orn. Hp

ing afterwards, occurs once., (5) Asa con-
junction and preposition, after words and

' clauses, generally preceded boe After,

VI. T vii. 8: et al,

That, those. Sepe, It may be sometimes
rendered conveniently by the third per-
sonal pronoun.

(1) Slowly. VL y. ii. 4. ít ff

gently, VI. E xxxix. 2. (2) A sur-
name, III. JES v.1,38, 5: IV. Jy. xviii.

A foot-path, VI. f. xxi. 1.
LI

(1) Foot (adj.). IV. T i3. (2)
Merely, only. H. E- ii. 16; fy. ix. 4;

xiii, 5: IV, p.i 35 xav.: VIL fa. viii.
8. (3) A disciple, disciples, I. fF. vä.

e 2: III. d oc iv. 1, 2; f ix. 14: IV.

T. xxii, 2; YH. Ee xxv. 1, 2,

INDEX IM.

(1) To get, to be got; both with and
Sf without an objeetive following. Passim.
tih When Mbega is no objective, the sense of

i the £5 must often be supplied from
what precedes. T 3E. and 45 J^.
to gain, to get the regard of. VII. T
xiv. 1: IV. FP xxviii, 1: I, E iv.
Wh i 4E., must get the proper men. on
T vii. 3. 18 da. VI, E: vii. 5,

digbvt Ese RA

see B. (2) The auxiliary can, could.
Jit] comes frequently between 48 and
the verb. Sape .

ik To remove, III. E iii, 18: IV. uc

$6 — jv.].

hsi

{É To follow—both physically, and=to act

r .

ts‘ung according to. I, LE vii, 21; F. ix, 1,

25 et al., sepe, TE J^. to follow, be in
the train of. IV, E- xxiv. 1: xxv, 1,
Ait followed by jf means to follow up,
=: thereupon, thereafter, I. E vii, 20:

X f.x. iiet aL, sepe =from. Vi.

I5 iv, 2,

Up. 3d tone.
reins to, IV. f». xxx, 2. This is prin-
ted and translated, p. 213, as if it were

(tS To indulge, give the

tsung

the above. `

[jd Low. 3d tone. (t b followers in

tsung immediate attendance, III, [\. iv. 1.
IV. fy. xxxi. 1: VIL Of. xxx. 2,

rill fi) ET a Charioteer, III, ES i, 5

yu

Tu. 4

ti} E vii. 12. The meaning is doubt-

y« ful.

[i Al round, the whole of. IV. aS

ween i: VIL

pien xxxiii E xlvi. 1. .

(d ^ (D To report, Lf. vi 10. ©

uh pick ove

7 Mn (8 BE, to avenge. IL RN.
a

(8 Low, 3d tone, Again, m E Ei

fe ii. 17; JX. xi. 8: trt, iras T

ix. 10: IV. E six. ev. fF. vi s:

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

2m

433

(1) Small, slight; insmall degree. II.
E . Àj. 20: ur bh. ix, 7: IV. fy. xxxi.
8: VI. fa. vi. 6. 15i Bb. the dress of

a common man, V, E. viii 3. The
sentence to which this belongs has been

oinitted in the translation.— 154 Ak im

3 Ha, ‘He assumed, however, a private

dress, and passed by Sung? (2) The

name of a State, 1I, Je. i, 8: II, x
he v. d

a
o wait for. I F xi, 2: III. T
hsi

{Ek ‘To be evidenced. VI. a xv. 8
ching

chéng
ax

th

wet +

ÎR

BY IZ the name of a piece of music,

 cle Loewe
fi (3) To put away. II pe iv. 3; (2)
ch'á To remove,—as the materials of a meal.
IV. E. xix, 3. (3) The share-system
on which the Chow dynasty divided the
lands, II. F. iii, 6. l
qi Virtue, virtuous. Passim. Used for
die conduct in a bad sense, IV. JT iv. 1.

b Te fila Z: to stimulate and do them

good. JI. E iv, 8.

THE 61st RADICAL. jv

VY (1) The heart; the mind :—denotes the
uU a d
AD mental constitution generally. See note.

sin’ onIL jog (2) In a name, JL BE

ND, iv. 2 8, 4.
M
is assert also what is necessary. Often =
peih — whatwill ur ond certainly ; to be

Must; used as an anxiliary, and to
pi
sure to, Passim, Jp only occurs

once, VIL Ty. xxxvi 2.
Z (1) Fo 2i to endure, V. fy. i 1,

jin c Bret al, SA TA Z WAS a heart that

ên
J cannot bear the sufferings of others. So

Z A ZERI vig svi

P. i,5, (2) To harden, to make en-
during, VI. T xv, 2,

To reflect, consider. kr TRE, to

measure by reflection, I, [^. vii. 9.
(D) The will; aim, purpose. Passim.

ts‘un

VH. T xxiii, l. Asa verb, to gepeat. L3 In If. ds ii. 9, 10, it appears to be used

 chih synonymously with Y). In V. E iv,

io try again, HNi i4; VIL R. 12:3

55

2, it = the aim or scope of a writer, AWAY
VI X, the will bent

on or directed to is common. We have
the phrases— 4f. H. AR HL fy. ii. 3:

et al; Tea VIL fy. xv.: etal; fat

HE VL P. xxxii. 2, 3; FETE, VL 2B

urs
T v. 4; 3Y aE EU VI. E: ix. 2; AE il

+ a determined scholar, II. [\. i. 2:
v. T^ vii.5, (2). A Record, a History.
nn f. ii. 854.1.

To forget; to be forgetful of. I. T
iv. 7:1L F.i 16:01. F.i. 1; T
i. 2: IV, up: i. 4; F. xx. 4: V. E i.

wang

pë

2; IN. ii. 2; vii, 5: VL fy. vii. 8: VII. na
Nu viii, 1; xxxv. 6; T xxxvii. 1. ni h
th ‘True-hearted; true-heartedness, sin- T
N* " n
chung Cerity. I. E- v. 8: HI. d iv. 10: IV. IAs
B xxviii, 5, 6; xxxi, 1: VI. E- xvi ch'u
1: VIL _Ẹ. xxxii; PR. xxxvi. 11. We
qe To be cheerful, to find pleasure. I. 2E: hang
2: f hêng
L'wae vii. 14, 15.
k'uai
ht it He; to be ashamed, V. AE: ii, 8.

, nuh Hi
nu Kung
1E To blush. VII. E: xx, b.
esd
tso m
E: To be angry; anger. I. T iii. 6, 7, Be

caou
mo 83 ix. 1: IL v. xii. 6: rrr F. ii. 1: hsiao
IV, F. xvii 2: v. F.i. 2 Hu
M, (1) To thiuk; to think of. I. T v. Ee
8326 " ii PET EET "
ee AIL E ii, 4; iii, 2;ix, 1: HL. F. "32
2: IV. t ii. 2: et al, sepe. Thinking, keue
thoughts. IV. Ei»: V. E- ii. 3. (2) pu
F 4H. the designation of Confucius' rhe
pie II. d xi. 3, 4: IV. T xxxi, tzü
Y
His
3: VN. iii. 8; vi. 4, 5; vii. 4: VIO. s
s. chih

A Th A Xx indolent and indifferent, II.

m deve

Ak Urgent, earnest. ni Rn. iii, 2, 6: IV, pm
Ee vxxx 4s VEL fe xlvi 1 (NB) y
UE The nature,—generally used of that of ên
sing man, IM Ex i, 2: and especially in the

hsing 6th Book, Part Í. Applied generally, or Kung

CIHNESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES,

FR VW e To respect, honour.

INDEX III.

VI.

To be natural; to

away from man, IV, fy. xxvi. 1:

I ii. 3; viii. 1.
possess, to enjoy by nature. VII. d
xxi. 2, 3, 4; xxx. l; fẹ. xiv. 1, 2; xxiii.
1.

To murmur. IL [y. xi. 2: VI
Hi, 1, 2, 8, 4: et al, spe. EH 40, 1 to
murmur against ^ My become con-
trite. V. E. vi. 5. pA BR, II. Bm

xiii. 1; comp. II. E- vii, 5. = to be

dissatisfied, V. T. 1, l; cump. I. T

v. 5. Resentment. I. E vii, 14: V.
. lii. 2.

Ht ig. see TE.
Vc 15 to be alarmed. II. E vi, 3.

Constant, fixed; constantly, generally.
L p.vii:nur F. ii 3: 1v. F.
v. l; T xxvii. 3: VI. fy. xv. 3, 4:
VIL F. xviii.

To fear, be afraid; sometimes = our
lest. 1. E vii 22: II. fn. iii. 8; xiv.

‘1: IL _F. vii. 1: Hr p.a: Iv. E.

xvi. 1: VII.

Low. 3d tone. To feel pleased, i.
vii. 4.

v. 1. 2; xxxvi, 11.

The principle of reciprocity, making
our own feelings the rule for our conduct

to others. VII, E- iv. 3.
The appearance of being without sor-

row. V. F aj 2.

License. d xS Kay III. Te ix. 9,

The sense of shame; to feel ashamed
of; shameful. I. Jes v. Lp- iii. 7: 1.

Evis, 4:1V._f. vii. 3, 4 5 Jv. xviii
8: V. h.v 5: VI. fy. xiv. 4: VIL

F vi; vii. 1, 2, 3.

Kindness. I. Es vii. 10, 12 : II.

ii. 4: IV. as xxx. 4,

Iv. fi 13

(NB); xyis V. wpe A

INDEX IH

H, VI. E vi. 7: VII iE: xxxvii. 2,
3. = gravely complaisant, IIT, E E iii. 4.
AS wanting in self-respect. IL aps
ix. 8.

(1) Tostop (act. and neuter) If, P

ix. 9, 13. To rest from toil I. n iv.

6. 2c 8. to rest in quiet. ni^. ix.
5. (2) To grow, applied to trees and to
the mind. VI ft. vii 1,2. (8) A
name, V. E i2; f.iii. 3.
"n vey Tj. to be disquieted and grieved,
és‘éaou i
. chao NIL T aes
ie Brotherly duty; to be obedient as a
te younger brother, I, p: iii. 4; v. 3; vii.

IJV NMde»3 o
Nt a) To be pleased; to be Mises with.
?
I.

qué T- x, 3; xi, 2: II, s i 8, 13; iii,
yueh 2; v.1, 2, 8, 4, 5: et ad, sepe. Is some-

times followed by FA. V. F. viii. 3.

VI R. iv. 5. 6. (2) To please, give

pleasure to. IV, 3E xii. x f. ii, 5: VI.

E vii, 8,— Observe fa AZ" Ait; VII.
. xix, 5 YA dE IL, Ya vii 3:

t E xix, 2; and ga ik fa Nt

VI, d iv, 4,

To repent of, V. IE vi, 5.

i

seih

hsi

hwuy
hui
EH Calamities; what causes sorrow and
[t grief, IV. LES xxiii, ip. ix, 1; xxviii,

huan 7: Vl. fx. ii. 3; xv. 4, 5: VIL, E xviii,
2. What will endanger life. VI.
x. 2,3,4. To be grieved, I, T xv, 1
II. Ay ix, 2

fe Be, 1 famislied, to be. distressed,

lis

fe

sa We fei ue
TE UE lE HK, angry-like. II. JE: xii.
här ng 6.
héng :
Tii '(1) The foclings proper to humanity.
ts‘ing VI. Ex vi, 5; viii, 2, (2) = the truth,

ching or reality. IV. T xviii. 3. (2) = the

quality or proper nature, IIT, E ur iv. 18.

m To be deluded, perplexed, II. ES i

206 : VL Po xvi 3." i ror, IV.
huo 7: VI L xvi. 3 To bein error, I

m xxix. 6,

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

T»

ik 19. see py

teik
ti :
HE p A particle both initial and medial,
Passin. It almost always means only.
‘wet Observe its use in quotations from the
older elassics.
FA) To be kind; kindness, III. B

PIU

id iv. 10: IV, JA. ii, 2; xxxiii. (2) An

honorary epithet, Wh d E E IS
i 1; ii, 1: et PE Pe HA, , Il. E:
ix. 2, 8: et alH A, v. T iii,

8.
Wicked, bad; wickedness, II, T ii,

4U E

m 4; ix, 1: IV, E i. 7; sv, 1; xviii. 2;
“Po av 2: V. Ri VQ. vii 4

aR To dislike, detest, hate, I. E iv. 5: '

ean II. E- iv. 1, 2; ix, 1: et al, sope. x
RET em piss v E
Vi

Gi Updsttone (1) How. Lf. vii 75»

vu OM iii. 5: etal, sepe. It is sometimes

followed by JẸ, adding an exclamatory
foree to it, I, qe vi, 2: 1X. E ii. 11:
V. va VL PR. xt BB JE
where, how does it consist with, I, d
ivs; TL fii 7: vi p.v VIL
‘qo xxxiii, 3, A BA XE i$ both initial
and final (2)An exclamation. * Oh! IL.

_b. 19; Pu. ii. 45 ix.

5 To be lazy. IV. Te xxx, 2,

Ji To have mental anxiety, to be afraid,
 eed

chuy . E ii 7,

chui :

4j To commiserate. Aj m Z AD, Ih

ge dDotstsVvh pono

je. Unintelligent, stupid. I, E vii. 19,
hun f
huên

P
AU
K*é&en
ch‘ien

yü

Transgression, error. IV. bi 4,

(1) To be better, —spokén ef disease.
vdi2, 3: IL F.v. 1 (2) To
surpass, IV. Ñ. xxiv. Ll Foll by

Jf vi Ron vin F. xxxix, 1,

4, (8) To increase, Vi. TV. iii &.

hsien

A

moo
mo
RI
is'an

KE

meih

ni
ie

man

E
hwuy

hui

Ji.

Teu
là.

ran ing
ch'ing

bo:
yu

, desire with affectionate longing. V. ps

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

To think, IV. E xxv. 1. One’s own

ideas. V, fe. iv. 2.

To love: to care for. I. T v. 5: HI.
d v.$ IN. ix. 9: IV. Ex iv. 1; T
xxvii.2,3: V. F-.i.2;3. 44.2: vr. F.
iv, 4; xiii.; xiv. 1: VII. E xiv. 3; xv.
25 xxvi. 2; xxxvii.; xlv.; xlvi.; l; ET
1,2. = to grudge. I. Aes vii. 5, 6, 7.

To be hated. VII. ^ . xix, 3.

Fo be ashamed, VIL [-. xx. 3.

To complain, announce their wrongs.
Lf. vii. 18,
(1) To be careful, to be cautious. I.

Tvis fvi L (D A ses

VI.
To be kind to; affectionate. IV. E
fi. 4: VI.

(1) To be dissatisfied, 18. TW. ii 4.
(2) To be satisfied. Also read Aéé. II.

ES ii, 15.

'T'o desire, to affect. IV. E iv. 1. To

v. viii. 1, 4.

v. vii, 8.

i1,5:VIL IN. iii. 5.

To feel ashamed. II. v. ix. 1,

Wickedness; hidden wickedness, LR
iv. 6: VIL Te xxxvii, 18.

To despise; to neglect. I, 7
IL, Wenn fF iii, 18,

Intelligence, discernment, Il. abs i
9: VII. ss xviii. 1. '

To think anxiously; to be anxious
about. IL [t.i 5; R xi 4: Var
. xv, l; xviii. 2. Anxious ‘thoughts,

Ap fe, ve.

Congratulation; to be rewarded.

 . vii. 2.

‘To be sorrowful; to grieve for; sorrow,

cause of distress. I. T iv. 6: III. E
iv. 7, 8, 9: IV. M s. ix, 5; E xxviii. 7;

ve Xii. 2:

VE fy. xv. 3 v. xii.

VI.

 Jung

INDEX III.

xxix. 1: V. E-i £;ii.3: VI. h. xv.
: VIL F. ined xix, 3. 2

= eke little sickness,’ IL

EE

A i m

Tes. Om EE az Bt Te
iv. 3.
To hate. But the text is doubtful,

isang
tsêng

Ie

ts*éaou
chriao

VH. P xix, 2.
JE Jj. sec FR.

TI. ES iv,
To sorrow, II. E- ix. 2: vR nmi
Ak SK , the appearance of ‘being sur-

To dread, to shrink from,

ot

woo is , i 4i "
x prised, thougbtful-like, III. E ae v. 5
He To feel indignant, vexed. I. Bx: iii,
han 3: VII, x. xxxvii. 8.
HE A name. VII. E- xxxv, 1.
ying ‘
Up. 8d tone. To answer. IL fy. viii,
ying 2;xi. 11: VI. T i. 8.
ESI E incur the resentment of, V. "pb
tuy d.l.
tui
fax To repress; to punish. III, Ei. 15;
ching ix. 12.
eh‘éng IY ^"
E Admirable. VI." fF. vi. 8.
» :
i
KE Weak, timid. V. J.i. 1: VII.
joo — xw.
ju
To cherish in the thoughts. VI.

hwae iv. 4, 5.

huai
ith To be suspended, fs] ne >» hung up
heuen
hadai by the heels, 11. EL i. 13.

iJ To fear, be alarmed. II, E- ii, 5: HI,
E T: ii. 1; ix. 8, 10, 11.

THE 620 RADICAL. Ye.

Aspear. I, T v. 5

The wild tribes of the West. III, e
iv. 16;

AX.

v. ix. 12,

INDEX IM,

b
I
hin,
chóng

go
wo. Ys .
E xxvi. l; and 4 E) and 1H UE
in VI. E iv, 4; x. 7. (2) ux FR.
one of Confucius’ disciples. II. EÈ ii,
18, 25, 26.
(1) To caution; a caution. III,
keae ss p, Rr SEM
chieh b; T ii, 2. Jk Z. beware.
w. Xii. 2. Cautious, using precautions.
I. T iii 4 (2) 2 FE TK = to fast.
IV. R XXV. 2. un to the dict, this
meaning may be reduced to the preced-
ing. (3) To issue a proclamation. LM
iv. 9. :
To do violence to, VI, f+. i. 1. This
1s'ang character has several other pronuncia-
ch'iang tions.

BK
hwo
huo

. Shoo-king.

(1) To perfect, complete, I, JE ii. 8:

LI files Vz bus VI. FR. v.

1: VIL [extis Observe BY TH, L
T xiv. 8; and A VII. È xxiv,

3. To be perfect, III, F. jii. 3: VII,
B" xiv. 4. To become completed, IV.
Bc ii, 3: VIL v. xxi (2) Spoken
with reference to music. Confucius is
called 46 K WK a complete concert,
v, T i.6. (3) A surname, IIL. s i
4. Inadoublesurname. VII. [X.xxix.

(4) yt BX the name of a Book in the
VII.

(1) L we, me us; my, our. Passim.

Observe js FE i in UL A T ix. 9: VIL

v.d 2

(1) Some (both singular and plural).
I. T ii. 3; T^ x. 25 xv, 2; xvi, 1: et
al., sepe, (2) Perhaps. II. T ii. 6.
[dp L CTS ii. 2 This meaning
and the other are connected, and the dict.
gives them together, saying that X isa

word of uncertainty. Obs. I. fy. xvi.

OSI Erap vi 2: HI. F. iv

2, 17, 18: v. punvn Evir
e Used for FA, vi. fix.
(1) A kind of axe, I. T v. 5. (2)
Relatives by affinity. If. vii. 3: n. f.
i. 4, 5: V. ix. 1: VIL. fe. xxxiv. 1. Used

as a verb, p: Z, to consider him as a

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

437

relative. VI, fy. ii. 3. ei Sorrow,

grief. III, Æ: ii. 5. AR FRY; the ap-

pearance of being sorrowful, I, . vii.
9.
A kind of spear. IL as iv. 1,

keih

chi

HY To collect, I. E v. 4,

tseth

chi .

zx (1) To put to death, to slaughter. ITE
iuh [vix 6: LV, Te iv. (2) Disgrace.
ju Iy, TR. xxx. 2.

m (1) To fight, to conduct battles; fight-
chen ings, wars, LE. iii, 2; vii, 17: u^.
chan ij 5: IV, , xiv, 2, 3: VL fy. viii.

. vi, LIT,

3; ix. 2: VIL. ii 1; iv 1.6. o,
making tbem fight, leading them to bat-
tle, VIL. i2. (22 A name, HI F.
jii. 13.

(1) To carry on ‘the head, I. d iii.
4; vii, 24. (2) A surname, III, T^

v. viii I; (2) A name.

II fs. x. 5.
- THE 63» RADICAL, F-

A door,—properly an inner door, II

Eis IV. Rose PYG,

VL JR. xiv. 4: VIL. xxiii. 3.
To be distressed, reduced to straits. VIT,
aS xviii.

(1) A place, III, fy. vi. 2: V.

. $i. 4. (2). The compound relative what,

= that which, those which. Passim.
Sometimes it is sinply the relative, the
antecedent, if we may may so call it, be-

-ing expressed, as in Wr E Z E.

The idea of place as the antecedent often
enters into the phrase where it is thus

wel. SE và SE FAS EE B
and ZH BLA are to be marked, VII,

6 y. Xxxvii. 2, 10; xxxi. 1,3; i. 2: VII.

d. vii, 2: et al., sape, Wa whereby,

the whereby, is very common; and Jr.
alone, has sometimes the same force, Ob-

serve ZEST vr. Low l.(comp,

Li

=a

show
shou

ts‘ae
ts‘ai

dn

kow
k‘ou

Soo
fu

7K

ch'ing

ch'éng

PREF

us

pa

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES,

Iv. fi. xxxvii. 7); Á pr se Pan
x d em rel xxxv, 5 i
d VH. xiii. 3: T

E VI. T xiv. 1; 3ft Hr yr as,

vr È xiv, 1; kÉ PT XR pm
v. To 6 Br AS de rE
v. E- viii 4; 4f 21 Br ZE Iv.
TE xs RAG Hr SE He n
T 1.9; fjr 2 m. F.i. 20; jr
= I. T xvi l; HE 43 F fp I.

In the phrase Jf Jp, Iu. .iii 7.

THE 64rx RADICAL. F.

The hand, hands, II. E i6: IV.
E xvii, 1.3; xxvii, 2 (NB); F. iii,

"The T powers; abilities. I. T
vii. 2: VI. E vi 6,7; vii.l:, viii, 2:
VII. Te xxix, In the conerete, = men
of good talents, IV. [.vii VI. F:
vii, 8: VIL fF. xx. 4.

To rap, knock against, IV. [X. xxiv.

2.

T to support, sustain, III, E

iii. 18.
(1) To receive, I. ]-.iv.1. (2) To
receive and carry out, III. T ix, 6, 13.

E íi v. d vi.2. A passage here

has been Papin in the trauslation—

Bik Ei Be Fie AE TB AX iB

AS C HY ih th ARAB i
ZA s—‘that K'e was a
wise and worthy prince, able reverently
to receive and carry on the principles of
Yu, and that Yih assisted Yu only for a
few years, conferring benefits on the peo-
ple for a short time? (3) To resist. HI.

. ix, 12. This is the meaning assign-
ed by Choo He.

To grasp,—with one hand. Tt T :

YI. E xiii.

. ebih P. iv, 4: VU,

INDEX HI.

ph

(1) An initial particle, = come now,

yih m :

Ji I. Be vii.14, (2) Or. I. e vi. 16,
Followed by 7r. IL. iv. 3: n.

: x.8. (8)'Forepress. III, fy. ix. 11.

 Hr To break off. I. R vii. 11.

chá

ché

Hh To take out. IV. [\. xxiv. 2.

chow

ch‘ou

Hip To shake off, ib Bl to confound,

P VI. Ty. xv. 2. Read pe, i. q. TEE to

VI.
"To; enibrace, encircle, 18 Eg. to go

assist; able, v. XY. 4.

18

puou round the gates, ie, to guard them. V.
po sis.
1E To resist, to reject. VII. fn. xxx. 3.
keu `
chit .
HE (0 To pullout. VIIL F. xxvii. (2)
p To rise high. II. . ii. 98. In this
p meaning it should probably be read pð;
see the dictionary.
pi To detain. VII. E xxxvii. 3.
keu
chü
HH Stupid. VII. E- xli. 2.
chué
chiieh .
18 (1) To cal, to summon. III, T^ i
ehuow $. y Ty. vil. 5, 6, 7. (2) To tie the
chao
legs. VII. xxvi. 2.
Used for Hd. the name of Shun's
shaou aly
shao music. is 42, fü i. two pieces of
music. v. iv. 9.

To s an obeisance; to pay one's
pae respects, II. E vii. 2; n.n vii 3:

Pi y T^ vi. 4, 5.

Hk To deliver, rescue. I fy. xi. 3.
ching

ch‘éng

a To grasp with the two hands. VI. E
kung xiii.
TE To hold, to grasp. H. T iv. L Ap-

à dh plied to the will,—to maintain, II.

, 49160 R FA, see $F.
48 Afi T 2. xi

H nger. Vi. +- xii. 1, 2; xiv. 4.
che To point out, = meaning, scope. VI.

x. XXxii, 1.

Th

To pusk. A push, IL t- ii, 4,

iso
Jie — (0D To stimulate. nr Ẹ.iv.8. (2)
chin To bring te a close, to wind up, —in music.
chèna v Rig,

(1) To take under the arm, I. E
hee ^
chia vii, 11. (2) To presume on. vs iii.

1: VII. Eu xliii, 2.

FR Aname. VIL R. xxix. L
hwo f
kuo

H To ne and amie HA Ki, to

kwtin

Kuen make endale, III. 3E: iv. 1,

45 4 To remove. V. EZ ii, 3.

keuen

chüan s

12 To give,—properly, with the hand. IV.

‘show E xvii, 1, Generally, to give. I fy.
shou x. 8. To give up, surrender. IIT. T

vy. 2.

GEO y i dr Sex
p To collect imposts, qe FE = ex
pow n oh a2.
pou acting able ministers. VI. fP- vii, 2

(1) The palm, I, Hs: vii. 12: II. as

ES

chang 4, 8; vi. 2. Bé =, bears’-paws, VI. .
$4

n E x. 1. (2) To manage, direct, III.

E- iv- ts
HE

To arrange, = to regulate the course
pae et BE poem
pai

Hi ‘To dig. Hr. ix. 4: VIL E xxix.

Kewh 1.

chiüeh :
Be To eome into contact; to have inter-
* course with. (1) To receive, admit to

Sieh one’s presence, V. E ii. 3. (2) id
, to have intercourse with. VI.

i56. Butinl P. iii, 2, ear ee
being crossed, spoken of weapons. (8)
$ Nom. t let the water of rice strain
off through the hand, V. T i4: VIL
Te xvii. (4) Used of the manner in

which a present is offered.. V. B iv. 8.

(1) To push, V. 26 vii. 6;

(2) To push out, carry out, I. E vii,
J2. To consider, prosecute the study of.

s.l. 4.

v. d. 2,

II. B ix. 1. In these two (cases, we.

should read the character chuy.

CHINESE. CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

To cover. Applied to the bodies of the
dead, IH. Ec v. 4; to the nose, IV.
w. xxv. 1; to wickedness, IV. E
xv. 1. To cover = to make good, to
come upto. VII. T xxxvii, 6.
To examine, to caleulate. IV. E i
kwer

k'uei 8 vi t

+E To lift with the hand, to carry. £

Hie

yen

pu

Hi Ti Xd TH. children carried in the
arms. VI, E xv, 2,
To salute, with the hands joined before
yih the breast, = to bow to. IH, pe iv,
X5 as IV, Pre xxvii. 8,
H (1) To display, be displayed, put forth.
yang TE. Jv. v. 6. (2) A kind of battle-axe
I, F v. 4,
A on for tig to cover up. V. E: ii.
yer
H So pull up. - II, E ii, 16.
ya
ya
Ai To feel with the hand, = to adjust.
chuy VIL LT i. 5. ’
ch‘ui
1E (1) To draw,—spoken of a bow. VI.
guen E ix, 8. = to press, to hold fast, n.
yuan E: ix. 2. (2) To draw out, to rescue,
IV, E xvii, 1, 2, 8.
f (seems used for T JE 2e , to be
coto
kou fighting together. VI. TM iv. 8,
48 To diminish, to be diyninished. ITI.
sm pe Vi. 7: VIL E. x. 8.
PÈ To seize, IV. [V. iii, 4: VIL
pó. xxiii. 9. (2) To strike with the hand.
Po yI fF. ii. 3.
To drag, to ics away, VI. F i8;
lw vii.2.
lou
Æ To rub, ie, to rub smooth, VII. E
mo xxvi. 2.
or To beckon, to motion to. V. fy. vi,
peaou 4.
piao

i To bend, ja aE, to flinch from
nuou I i. A
nao strokes at the body. II. E ii. 4

Hg (1) To tranquillize, = to subdue, I. E
ye vii, 16, (2) To hold, to grasp. I.

iii. 5.

440

keth
chi
JR
ts‘aou
ts‘ao

iv. 5: VI,

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

To sow; to disseminate, IIT. tpe
2: IV. .À 7: VI.

To bent. TL ft. ii4: UL PA. vi L
Lbs

To choose, I. fy. xiv. 2; xv. 2: IL
E vik om inn F. ii 18: IV. R
xxviii, 6, E 4T #2. what was

there to choose between an ox and a

sheep? I. f+. vii. 7.
BE D. v.
3;

To beat, strike.
To hold fast, —spoken of the mind. VT.

vi. 3.
_F. vii. 4; VIL fr. xviii.

. vii. 2.

zz: to oppose,

2, == prin-

ciples. III. fy. x. 2,6. In this mean-
ing it should be up. 3d tone, according to
the dictionary.

H BE, the thumb, IIL RR. x. 2.

To stretch out and expand, He im

gms.
'lo encounter, to press near to.
v. xxiii. 2, :
(3) Ta steal,—apon occasion offered.
I. E viii, 2. (2) To bare. viR.
xxiii. 2.
To act for, undertake one’s duties.» V.
oie. =a plurality of offices. VI.

B vii. 3.

THE 6örm RADICAL, $.

Used for fk. px. the four limbs,

IV. fy. xxx, 2,

Vil.

THE 66ra RADICAL. b".

To take back. IV,

OL o Br. AT

v.5. (2) Appears to fite mere RU e.

I. E ii, 83, (3) AK LA the appear-

ance of a fish let go in the water. V.
iiL 4.

‘To alter, change (act. and neuter); to

reform, IE Te ix. 4: IV. Ex B. 4;

xiv. 1 ax Jj»: E xxix. 1: V. a

Nexy. 8: VIL pf. xii, 2

v. ii, 8, 4.
some, ni^

INDEX IIT.

Obs. HY 27 ana Ux SH UL. J. xii.
4, 5. ür Ef. ‘spake with an altered
mind, V. de vii, 4, In IL Jt i. 10,
x di == does not need more,

(1) To attack, II. E v.6; Tx.i.2,

WK

kung 5: vV, APS vii. 9. — to expose one’s errors.

IV. e xiv. 1, (9) To undertake, to
proceed to do, I, p. ii. 8.

(1) To banish,—spoken of men, animals,

fang and doctrines. I. T viii, 1: III. T

ix, 4, 10,18: V._f. ii 1, 2,35 vi 5:
VIL. Es xxxi. l 2, (2) To lose, let
stray; stray, lost.. VÍ. Es viii, 2; xi, 2,
8, 4: VII. T. xxvi. (3) Dissolute,
self-abandoned. I. "Ps vii. 20: m, p.

v. V.2. So BIA Kad III. T.

ix. 9. (4) AX Big, ta eat immoderately ;

but other meanings are given to the

9.

: jii. 8;

d phrase. VII. abs xlvi, 2.
hà Up. 2d tone. (1) To, going on to. T.
Jung Prive 5 IV. JN, xviii. 2: VII.

xxvi 2. (2) H By, a designation P

Yaou or Shun, III, T. iv. 8: V. db

iv. 1.
Government, Passim. IX d the
e principles and business of govt. VII,
chéng

xii. 3; xxviii, So EY Fil) j}, 11. ae iv.2,
fa IX: the administration of govern-
ment, is very common; but it = to give

law to, inl, fn. xi. 1: IV. E vii 4.

HE Be v. PiL FF E to

practise a government, is common. ie,

xt is also found, Obs, a noe v.
. iii, 3,

The cause or reason of a thing. (1)

t ik Hit a there being a cause,

there being no cause, IV. T iii, 3, 4:

VIE. T xx, 2 (N.B). X die the

great occasion, the death of a parent. V.

E- ii. 1. Observe ax alone. III, ds

v.3. At the end of a clause, ax = be-
VI. : VIL qp. xsi 3.

+ Ms VI. FR. i 2.
(2) P and H od in continuation of a

&ubject,—therefore, thus, Passin, (3)

[a

koo
ku

cause,

T

.
l

INDEX III.

Facts, phenomena, IV. fy. xxvi 1, 3. Wr
(4) Ancient, old, . Y, R vii. 1: IT. jm

u
i. 8. = old acquaintance, Vu. A xliii.

sno

shu
Ak Uk AE = to be prepared to die, to
4ecaou
listo strive to death. I, T xiii. 2; xv. 2,
He To teach. Sepe. Instructions; lessons.
Faou L _ fr iii. 45 vii, 24: IV, E xiv. 2, 8. Son
chiao Obs, IT. b. ii 19; and V. “Py. iv, 4, tsu
Pronounced in the up. Ist tone, it = to KK
call in, to employ, I, T ix. 2. ch
fü Alert, intelligent and active, I. Es [^
min” vii 19: IV, fs vil, 8.
$e To save. L fy. xi. 1; xi. 1: up.
kew Ke € s
chin V v. Ex vii, 6. == to put out, to
save from fire, VI, E xviii, 1, =
part, to stop from fighting, IV. f. ker B
xxix, 5, 6. 3 ^t , to save themselves gk
Írom death, I. E vii, 22. ching
iz EM j "T" R chóng
dk (1) HA Xx indolent indifference, idle A
25. sauntering, II, IL iv,4. (2) A name. igen
lien

VI. T xv. 1, (8) F a designa-
tion. 1V. E xxiv, 1; xxv, 1; T

xxvii. 3.
To ruin, IV. E viii, 1. To be

defeated, 1, LE vl: vil. P. i, 2.

pai X
RE Worn-out, VIL F. sxx. 6, vdd
pe wén
pi

HE To venture, dare, presume. Sepe.

Kk fii], * I venture to ask,’ is a common
yis - asking a question. Observe = aij

(quu
ISI

Gk To be scattered, I.

i. 6; xii 2: IL. JV. iv. 2. (2) A surname,

vH, v. xxxviii, 3. "s
Be (1) Generous. V. Kis: VIL
tun xy. (2) Lo manage; but this meaning is

not found in the dictionary, IE, R vii

hi
tik “To respect, revere; the feeling of rev- chin
king erence; reverential, II T ii, 4: HI, pe
ching Ss ji, 2: IV. L i 2; iv, 1: et al, $e
l g Joo
smpe, 2 aio VI , 9: et al, tu
On the diff. between the ii see IV.
E i, 13. chan

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

a

441

To set forth. Hy 34: TH. E iv, 7.

(1) Number. TL, v. xiii. 4, Several
I A. ii 4: IL
sepe. ?afew. VII. E xxxix, 3. 19)
=a art, VI. E ix. 8.

Close, close-meshed. I, 3b. iii. 3,

An enemy. I. E v, 5, 6: IL F
ii, 55 v. 6: IL, I. v. 4: IV, ft. vii.
5, 6: VIL 7. iii. 3; iv, 2, Hostile,
VL “JR. xv. 4: VIL P. ii, 3, To be
an enemy to, to oppose. I. E. vii, 17;
T. iii. 5: VII. fy. iv. 5.

^ q. 1 Bie: To drive, chase, IV, rts ix.

To marshal, I, d iii, 6.

Ñ. i. 3; v, 1: etal,

To ingather. The ingathering,—spoken
of the harvest, I. T iv. 5: vif. vii,

2. Ji BY all taxes and imposte. t.

Evs: va. posui

THE 67m RADICAL. 3.

(1) A character, as delineated, = a
word, VI, aps xvii, 3. (2) Style,
method of conposition, IV. T xxi,
8. (4) Elegant, adorned. V. [.iv.2,

To adorn, fii pa IV. E

. xxvii 2,

(5) An honorary epithet, X E I.

d ii. 3: et al., sepissime, -J

E väi, 2: 1v, P. ssi. 1:

A^ I. d xiii: et al,
THE 69ru RADICAL. Jf

A bill, —a general name of ali cróoked

knives, ZE Jy, L diii: VI. E

viii. 1, 2;

~
An axe. 2 Jr: see above,

To cut in two, = to terminate, IV, T
xxii, I. l

36

442
iy (1) This, these, I. f+. iv. 6; vii, 12;
Ms ve V. 2, 4: et al, sepe, (2) As a con-

junction, forthwith, then, thereupon, &c.

L p.unsin fF. vi. 2:017 hs vii
2; viii, 2: VIL “fA. xxxvii, 3, 8, 9. 13.
In several cases we can hardly tell whe-
ther to take the character as & conjunc-
tion, or as the demonstrative, following
its antecedent, to give emphasis to the
sentence, Observe also Il. fN. iii, 6. and

v. 4. where it seems a mere expletive.

(3) Hy ZH. i q Zü KR, an’ instant.
VI, fs v.4. (4)Ina name. IV T

xxiv. 2.
New. HL f-. iii, 12

3n
sin
hsin

Sr

ch
cho

To cut, hew, I. F. ix. 1,

In the phrase. Ut A a conspicuous

twan -
tun mound. IL fy. x. 6, 7,
THE Toru RADICAL. Fy.
(1) That which is square, IV.
fang i.l, 5,10: ii. 1. Square, the adjective, —

followed by the dimension, I. Pe v.23 vii.
17; et al, sepe. Obs the note on IT. E
ji. 1. (2) A quarter, des direction.

UI, iv.1; VI, .ji, 1. The phrase,

py F. is common, fit Jr without

reference to their where-from, IV.
xx. 2. (2) == class, a resemblance. v.

des ii,4, (4) To neglect, violate. LU

iv. 6. (5) As a conjunction. Jr H.

ni fiv 16; 2 Jr L T v. 4.

Passim. (1) A prep, in, at, on, But
after many verbs and adjectives we must
translate it variously,—by, to, from, &e.,
&c., and often it need not be translated at

all, ER. down to, coming to, &c., is

common, After the possessive c T^
zz: in relation to, and so, sometimes, when

not preceded by Z. = compared with,
ir fr. ios. After FE

a it is common,
and what may be called com posite verbs
such as 48: jE AR wy, &c. (2)
Than, forming the comparative degree
of preceding adjectives, Sepe. But obs.

1L P.iis&

H

yu
yä

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

INDEX HI.

T^ E. œ JARE

(1) How! I.

ide the name of a place, IH. gm x. 15,0,
Hi To give, to dispense; to be given to,
à to be shown. I, ie v. 3; vii, 19; T

v.83; IV. b.ixnv. fF. via; VE
E xvii, 3: VII. L pa xxxii 4;
(2) In the name. dir jii zh. If, s

ji. 5, 6, 8.

Fit Up ist tone. Titi fiti eomplacently,

xx IV. YR. xxxili. 1
Tie Dodgingly, = secretly. XV. fy. xxxiii.
e 1.
i
ii A flag, with dragons emblazoned, and
fa! bells attached. V. Tv. vii. 6.
ch'ü
Tt A flag,—of silk, unemblazoned. V,
Aes Pr: Vii. 6.
chan ^
je (1) A white cow's tail, —used to make
habe signals with. = streamers, I, T i. 6,
mao 7, (2) iq Æ, very old persons. I.
v. Xi, 4.

Q) uis Properly, 500 men make a

k i OR iii. 6, (2) A stranger, a
traveller. I, [.vii19:1t p.v:
VI. Ya. vii. 3.

l i he going round, the turnings of
the body. VII. F xxxiii, 2,

WE A flag,—made of feathers suspendeđ
tsing from the top of the staff. III. T i, 2:

ching y, T vii. 5, 6, :
The head of an arrow, III. E- ji. 5.

Di:
seuen
hsüan

tsuh
tsu

THE 7ist RADICAL. Fe.

y A particle of past time. May often be
f translated by have, having, having been.

i 1. poxis:in f. ii, 10, (NOB) 18,

19; T v. 1 (N.B); vi. 2 (N.B): IL
qe iii, 13; JX. ix, 4, 5: et al, sape.
Obs. EE dog. v. p. vii 3; HIE
i> vro E. xvi. 3; and BED, VE

R xiii. 8,

INDEX If.

H.

jü

ming

THE 72» RADICAL, f$.

(1) The sun, L pH 4: I [ix
4: V. E iv. 1: VIL E xxiv, 2, (2)

A day, days, the day, ll. R iv, 1: HIT.

Tes. E xxiv. 2; R. i. 5; ii.

4; xx. 5: et al, ih, H. see 1. 4

H. to-day, If. E ii, 16: et al. AA
H. to-morrow, JI, T ii, 2: et al
Tit H formerly, IL T vii, 1: et al.
Hy. all the day. UL Wi 4

N

4s

fuk H, JK H. inno time. IV. Eg

19:1 fiis ff 3B, the solstice,

IV. fy. xxvi. 3: but VL ps vii, 2 is
difft, A H. in winter, VI. Eu v.
5. n H ; leisure days. T. E v, 3
$e H Z Ji to exert the strength

the whole day, II, P xii. 6, Daily,

from day to day. IL "UM xii 5: III,

TPR. vi. 1; vii. 2: V. poniiseaL
The morning. IV. E xx, 5 H
H, from morning to morning, i.q. from

day to day. VI E. viii, 2, TH H.

the day-break, VI, EK viii, 2,

Good, pleasant. IV. fy. xx. 1.

A decade of days. I, Ty. x. 2,

Drought, season of drought. I. E
IL fA. ve 4. H y, vit.

vi. 6; xi,
v. xiv. 4,

A Fo the name given to the au-

tumnal heavens, = pitying. V, E i
1, 2.

Q) Brightness, VII. . xxiv, 2.
(2) Intelligent; to be intelligent about.
L E vie: LP. xi ctv. p.

xii. 1; fn. xix. 2. (3) To illustrate; to

` digest clearly. IL. iv. 2: zr. b.

iii, 10. (4) Clearly, plainly. JE fi. xi.

3: HL 7K, vied: VL Yu viii. 5. Obs,

Wy Wk FEL boss o

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

443

Power of vision. I. T vii, 10: IV, E
il (6) gj H. to-morrow; sce H *
(7) HH a see ai. (8) ^ HH; a
double surname. III. E i, 4; T ii.
1; ix. 9: IV. Te xxiv, LV. Je i, 2,

(1) To change; to exchange, barter, I,
doen Roxcüónn Fiv
4 5; v. 23 Th. ix. 10;x,4:1V. ft xviii,
8; fy. xxix. 5 CV.By; xxxi. 8: VIE fa.
vii, 3: VIL P. xvii gh ip =
to dethrone. V. ^ ix, 1, By #, an
interchange of services. IIL, fn. iv. 3,
(3) p 3F. a famous cook of antiquity,

_ VL _f. vis.

Low. 3d tone.’ (1) Easy; easily, readily ;
what is easy, IIT. f+. iv.9, 10:1V._f.

xi VL f+. ix, 2, E Msn. p.i
9; Obs, also 11, BE P oe SS.
= to use readily, IV. E xxii. (2)

To cultivate well. I, p.v.3: VIL f+.
xxiii. 1,

R Used for it. R By, the name of

kwdn a rude tribe of the West. I. TF iij, 1.

2
ps
yt

nbi:

küén :
Hu Formerly. III. fy. i. 2: wp. xxxi,
m 1. Instead of i alone, Mencius com-

monly uses ae. Hae IH. d iv. 4; v.

8, 4, 5; xiv, 2; xv. 1: at al, sape, Some-
times Ej ir x = yesterday, I fe vil,

1: "n mR. izv. p.
xxiv. 2. Sometimes I have left it un-
translated,

A star, Æ I IV.

E v. xxvi. 3.
sing

hsing

Z (3) The spring. = in the spring. T,

dus Tees vn Rovi 0 BEAK,

the title of a work by Confucius. HL,
"T ix. 8, Il: etal (3) A name. III,

T iL

How? I, fy. iii, 7.
hb
ho
Dusk, VIL D. xxiii. 3. EE ER,
uo darkness, = stupid ignorance, VII.
un

ax. 1.

444

7]
Hi
ch‘aou
chao

E

she
shih

nds
i y T
she
shih

‘CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

Ki Jm. ‘brightness,—clear intelli-
gence, VII. T xx. 1,

(1) This, these. Passim. It often has
the whole preced. clause or sentence for
its antecedent, == this is. It might often
be translated also —in this case. Ob-
serve its peculiar force at the end of a

sentence, affirming strongly what bas
been Said in it. I. d x. 8; VIL fy.
xv.et al. We have X Zi 3t (and

H) RL, and an Hal == thus,
such, Obs, IL fp. ii, 23. JE d
and H Vy = therefore. (2) To be
VL [xvi 2: et al (8) Right. IHR
Ey % 4: VIL [xxii To
approve, H. D. vi. 4, 5: et al.

(1) Time, times; at —in—the time. I.

dveeqeesae fi 9, 11, 18;

iv. 2, 4: et al., sepe. The proper times or
L Ẹ. ii. 3, 45 vil 24: VIL

. xxii, 2, Seasonable, I, Tes 2.
IH. R.v. 4s VIL
— a characteristic of Confucius. V.

seasons,

v. Xl 2. ‘Timeous,

Y

i. 5. fiit IRẸ, without reference to time,
44

II. E- viii 4, E i. sometimes, V.
P v. 1. K ie, opportunities of time
afforded by Heaven, Il. T i 1, 2.
(2) = Jii, this, L E it fi. ii,
3. (8) A surname, H. f.x. 3, 4.

The surname of a minister of T'sʻe,
P iv, 5,6: I F.i k 2,5.

The name of a State, 22 HH I. xps
vi: et al. -5 A v. E ix, 2: et al.

~— oe B A, Y. T iii. rupe
I. T. vii. 1, 2: et al. `

(1) The day-time, by day, IH. F.
iii 2: IV, A zi, id.
VI. E viii, 2. (2) The name of a

town, IL fy. xis xii

Great, vast. te X xt T under

the whole heaven, V, E- iy, 2,

I.

v. xviii, 2,

(1) The principle of, or man's capacity

for, knowledge. II. E- vi. 5: IV. ips
VL bonc a: viL F.

xxvii,

INDEX TL.

xxi. 4. (9) Knowledge, wisdom; wise;

to be wise, I. “fe iii, 1: If, Eg i9;

ji. 19, 25. et al, sepe.

E (1) An hon. epithet, IK A AM,

ee L fy. iv. 4,9: et al (2) A ‘surname,
ft FH UL J. i. $4 Æ EK.
IL fy. ii. 4, 5.

The designation of Tsing Siu's father,

T

geh ieo8R. Y Vice swVAT

hai IV. E xix, 3: VIL Jy. xxxvi,; xxxvii,

Ii Leisure I f+. vii. 22: n. E iv.

E . Um.
SA & jaj ll II. L iv. 2, 4. lll H ;
 L L.es
H. Hl He " ,

We We TE Ti laxuriant, WI. B iv. T.

sia

p The evening. II, vw. vi, 1: E

pn ZA. the dusk of the evening. VII E xs
xxiii. 3.

3k Violence, oppression, cruelty, VI. E

paot yi, 2: VII. T viii, 1. Oppressive. ILL.

pao
E ix, 5, 7: I, fii, 12. To oppress.
IV. b.ü4:v. pui. Applied to
the mind, IT. do 9, 10. A Fk. to
do violence to one's nature, IV, de x.
1. So àk alone, VI, E- vii. 1. (3)
A name. I. En i. 1.

JS (1) To dry or bleach in the sun, HI,

pih ^. iv, 13. = to warm geuially. VI,

mp arm geniall

dox (2) To exhibit, v. p.v.

5, 6. In the first of these paragraphs,
the sentence containing AS is omitted,
but it is the same as that in the second.

Empty; to leave empty. IV, Je X.

I. Bm

THE (3p RADICAL, Ff.

kar: ang & = unmarried.
k'uaug

'Tosay. Passim, Often the nominative
mi 3s not expressed, and must be supplied
yüeh from the context, In this case, E

sometimes = it is said. It is also used
in descriptive accounts, and = is called,
means.
Crooked, Obs. HE ih is jf. YL
. taar
beh “TY. vi, 3.
cha

INDEX NI.,

R

To.trail after one, L f.iii 2

e

È

Jp (1) To change, = to reform, II,

han A i g

Ls ix.4. Is properly written BF, from £
(2) A name, III. E iv. L—VIL F.
xlii, 1, 2.

= (1) A writing,—of a covenant, VI.

"s T wii, 8. Writings, books, V. B
viii. 2. (8) The Shoo-king, I. fq. iii.
Tixi, HI foi s: Pls ve 2, 4; ix.8,
6: V. p.iv 4 VL fi. v.5, Obs.
VIL fy. iii l

t A surname, T X. I, UB xii. 2:

mox, I E 1.6% 8: et al, sepe — BP
CE sve «Bi. - — f Fy JU IV. aps xix..
3, — f pa, rr. E i, 8, 4,

A A particle, indicating the present com--

hort plete tense. Il. E i. 3: V. E- ix. 3.

ts'êng

ir To assemble; the assembly of. VI.
Jwuy vii. 3. To meet, = to engage in battle,

hui H. E ii. 5.
x To calculate, enter accounts, "Y. T
wei

v. 4. :
kwei `

The name of an ancient principality,
tsaou Used as a surname, VE fy. ii. 1, 2; 6.
ts‘ao.

THE 74tu. RADICAL., H.

(1) The moon, II.

Vich E xxiv, 2, (2) A month, months, I.
E xi 6: IL fn. v. 1: et al; = every.
month. III, gu viii; 2.

"H (1) To have, possess. Passim (2)
The impersonal. substantive verb, there-

yew is, there was. Also passim. It is often,

yu difäcult to determine to which of these

meanings we shall refer particular ex-

amples. "E x and ES Z "He

at the end of sentences, are to be noted,

F: E iii, 4: vii. 5, 23: et al., sepe, "H

Fi, to. have doing, to be capable of :

achievement. n. h. i7: ur F. 1:4
IV. Jp. väi iv. Fii s: vu p.
xxix, "E ER = and more, VII. Te

xxxyiii, 1, 92,3, 4: et al. AT n]. see

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

a. ix. 4: VIL,

445.

f]. Observe YT wii; 2, (2) The
surname of one of Conf. disciples., II. E

ii, 25, 28: 0. P.v. 18: (8) fj Jif.

the principality: of: Shun’s brother. V.
aas
Low. 3d tone, And;again, HI. T
iV, bod; viL
Bj A friends, IL. Eos nt.
n o iv. 8: V. Ny XXX 4.
(1) Clothes. V. E viii. 3: VE, f.
fi ia. A I, UL sc vm p.
xxx. vi.2: (2) To.weaf. V. “fy. ii. 5.
To wear mourning.. IV. an iii. 2; 3, 4..
(3) Tosubdue. I. E vii, 17: H, Es
iii. 2: IV, F. xvi. L. (4) To: submit.,
W. boviossv. E. iti & (5) To
beobnoxious.to; 1V.. E xiv. 8
JRE The imperial Z V.. [d (N.B):

chin vii, 9..

shên:

ty To look to from a distance;:to look for,
=E to hope: expectation, example, what is
WANI looked for or to. T. . iii. 2; vi. 2, 65:

T 25 11. K-i b: A. “Pa. v. 4.

fUv. fa. xx, 2; xxxi: 1: VIL. JE: ix.
5, ur y VE.. E xxvi 1l; T
eit 3; s fp zx g, IV. JR. xxxiii, 1.
SF SY, ur E iii. 18, PE. $4
Bh, = = with a high air.. II. nen L.
(8) Ik A SY, a counsellor. of, Wan:
and Woo, VIL.
The morning; in. the morning. I.
tv5: I, Vy. ii. d;vi 1: HL Re 4:

Iv. T xxviii.. 7: VE P ix, 3; xiv..
F

ip (1) A sovereign’s.conrt, I, E vii. et;
c'haou. al. (2) To-appear in court, to do- hom-.
chfao. age to.. I. P- iv..5. IL fN. viil, 5;

v. Eivor vr Ri 89] 19.
Vz. E: v. 7 To make to appear at
court, to give audience to. L Ẹ vi. 16:.
U. F.i 8; ii. 24. (3) Court (adj.):,

I. fix v. f iL c E GE

the name ofa place.. I, T iv. 4.

weXXXvilio

446

Ak A round year, VII. E xxxix. 1.
tir

chi

3tj zs to model one's self on, "VI. d.
Ke — vii. 5, 6.

“ch

THE 75m RADICAL. ZK.

(1) A tree, trees. I. E vii, 16, 17;
v. Vil. 1; ix, 1; ef aj, Wood, a piece
of wood, IL ^. vii. 1: VI. Te i 5

Hf I supplies of wood, I. de iii.

8 (2) Jna name, IH, f. vii 2.

muh
mu

Not yet, Passim,

wet

zk The extremity; the point, the top. I.
mó i V i

itd E vii. 10: VI. P. í85. .

ZK — The xoot, The lower end. VI. Tae
pes = a spring, IV.^h. xviii, 2,3. Source,

origin, TH, fF. v. 8: IV. bovon

xix. 2, What is radical, essential, IV,
Pwi Obs, Jy At AK, p.
vii, 17, 28, (2) Proper, VI. F. x. 8:
v. No v. 5 (N.B.).

(1) Vermilion colour, VII,
19. (2) In names, Re HE, VIL. PR.
xxxviii. 2. FP HR V. Evi 2-45
3 w. Nom

AS Dt the name under which the

v, XXXVI

wuh ; an
Si annals of Ts‘oo were composed. IV. h.
xxi. 2.
a . Aplumtree, HI. P x, 1.
le l
li f
Aif Fine trees, vr P. väis JAR,
ts‘ae i
pis supplies of weod, I, Es jii. 3.
(3) A species of willow, VI. APS i
s 1,2. (2) A sername, VL i. si. 5.
Yi Tobia. VI. T vii, 3,
shuh
an
4L A small bridge, IV, "IN. ii, 3,
kéang i
chiang
$K o Ae VL Esia,
pet !

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

kwo

INDEX IH.

MF
"T
ch'u

pi

tung

A wooden pestle, VIL "e iii, 3.

(1) The east, on the east; eastern, I+
ok Sd Jd xi 2:1, fF. ii. 2:
HL fy. v. 4, 5: IV. [v. xxxiii. 1: V.
E iv x VE _F. i. 1, 2; Ris:
VIL Te iv. 3. Y Lp vu. E
xxiv, 1, 3t yf IV. poxiagsvarn
qo. 3X I. Kii Obs.
I zy Fe n. us.

'To bend, make crooked, III. T i,

wang 1,3,5: V. F. vii. 7.
$k A forest. I. sE iii, 3.
lin
R (1) Certainly, really, indeed. w.
xxxii. VI. È v, 8,5. (2) To carry
into effect; resolute to execute. I.
xvi.8: IL fy. ii. 5; VI.

Used for HR, a female attendant, VIL

kuo
F

v xi.

A

wo T vi.
jx A branch of a tree, I, up. vii, 11.
ih

Lii A watchman’s rattle. V. [ve v. 3; vi.
tS 3.

tío
3 (2) A willow tre, VI, fF. i. 1, 2
ns (2) In designations. Ap aS iB. II.

Ew ix, 2, 8: et al — iit Hp and
-F $h xr. R. xi 18: nr QR, vii. 2:

VL fy. vi. 8.
(1) A kind of seminary, III,

ia

F . lii,

eao 10. (2) JE AK a pond-keeper. V,
. li, 4,
M
RE To compare, III, E jii. 7,
héacu
ehiao

po p NL fullofawe, V, E- iv. 4,
To correct, IV, f+. xx.

To be rooted, VIL fF. xxi. 4.

INDEX IIL

Jt

tuon
t'ao

HE
AE
æhieh

AE

chih

H

tung

hwan
huan

if
37)
ae
lang
liang

‘ is sometimes = a tyrant, I. aS

8: IL

name of a State. T, E- i, 1; ii. 1: etal

A surname, VII. E xxxv. ].

Bi

=
k'e
chü

The last emperor of the Hea dynasty;
Ns viii. 1:

IV, ints: Vv. ponas wp.
ii. 5; vi. 2; ix. 1, 2; x. 7.

, handcuffs and fetters, VIL.
dl.

(1) A species of tree, probably belonging
to thé euphorbiæ WI. F. xiii. 1. (2)
The name of the ad where T‘ang’s
grave was, v. E. vi, 5: VII. x Ie xxxi.

The mulberry tree, I, E jii, 4; vii.
25H, [iv 3: VIL p.oxsii

(1) An hon. epithet, HK Ja and
JE ZN L bovino: IV.
v. di, 8, 10: VI.
zZ JE ¥,v. de iv.7. (2) A sur-
name, JH 7) B V, sp viii; 3.

Lg 4%. Acup, VL Eeiz

(1) A bridge, —of a large size, Iv. f.
ii, 8, (2) A weir. L Fi. ¥. 8. (8) The.

v. xxi.

v. vii, 3.—

Bi

le
hsi

TH
kwan
kuan

(4) A name, VI, as vi. 5. (5) m
M the name of à mountain, I. B
xv. 1.

A stick, a Staff, I, d: iv. 3; v. 8.

(1) Handcuffs, TÉ T5. 8ee AB. (2)
To fetter, VI. 2. Chaou K'e

explains it here by BlL-

The same as the ds]. above, VI. E

xiv. 3.

(1) A species of tree, the wood of
which is most valuable. VI, E xiii, 1.
(2) A carpenter, who makes articles of
furniture, IIL [\.iv. 3, 4: VII.

(1) eS z, ‘discriminated and re-
gulated,—spoken of a concert, and =
‘the blended harmony,’ v^. i6. (2)

ng f. the name of a place, IV. T
il

ko:

yang

. viii,

v. Y.

T AD various utensils, IIT. E iv. A
5. Ir: i and

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

H

k'euen
ch'üan

` vii, 16, 17;

d Ait. E vii, 17: IU. F vi, 1:

447

A spade, or shovel, Ill, E v. 4.

To abandon, throw away, spurn. 1.

Js ili. 2; I. vi 1: VIL Us xxix.j

xxxv. 6: et al. To be rejected. IV. E

xiv. 2, H. to throw fields out of
eultivation, IIL. “PR. ix. 5. E HE,

to throw one’s-self away, abandon one's-
self to work wickedness, IV. E x. 1,

The date, =, VII.
1,2. Butthis seems rather to be a kind
of persimmon.

qd) T fih, a sour date tree, VI. SE:
xivi, 3. (2) 3f dij. the name of a
place in Tsin. V, des ix, 2,

The name of a place, where the princes
of Ts‘e kept a granary. VII. T
xxiii, 1.

A wooden bowl VI, Ẹ.vi 1,2.

v, Xxxvi.

A bed, a couch, V. F.i..

An inner coffin. JH EH. T. "e
xvi, 2: 11 T vi. 2.

An outer coffin, fit B , 8ee above,

The surname of the heresiarch Yi

Zk. nt Noe»ie 4: Va. fF
xxvi, = Yangisrn and Yangists, VII. U^
xxvi. 1, 2,

The name of a State, I E v, 1, 3;

v. vi, 1; xiii, 1: et al, spe.

VI. . iv. 4.
(1) An inheritance, the foundation of
an inheritance, I, fy, xiv. 3. (2) =

instruction, 5e Be pA P4, VI. P
ii, 6, (3) Partly finished, VII. TT

xxx. 1.
An extremity (in a painful sense). I.

P- i. 6. To push to extremities, IV.

T iii, 4.

Glory, W. ft. iv. i: VIL _Ẹ. xxxi,

448

Hit Ta RH. the projecting ornaments T

VII.

suy
Shui

Jn
n
kou

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

round the eaves of great buildings.
v. Xxxiv. 2, 3
Ais Zu , to excite resentment. I. E x

vii. 14,

Dry; withered. I, E- vi, 6: II. E3
ii, 16: IV. “PA. x. 3.
A high gallery. A BE the pointed

peak of a high building, VI. T i. 5.
See note in loc.
A sour date tree, VI, E xiv, 3.

(1) To be happy, to rejoice; to delight
in, L p.354 Ri 4,6, 7, 8:
IV. E iii, 4; viii.. l: et al, sepe. A
delight, VIL _Ẹ. xx. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5: et al.
Pleasure, in a bad sense, I. Ñ. iv. 8:

JL
II. n £n p.
iv. 4: VIL I. xxiv. 5. D 4 Mig 3 3

good years. I. E vii. 21, 22: pid E
jii. 7.

(1) Music. IL Jy. i. 1, 2, 3, 4,5,6,7;

iv, 9: IL EL ii. 27: IV. xxvii 2:

„iv. 4: et al,

VIL. ^ xxxvii, 12, (2) Sith JE a

double surname, I.
—V.

(1) To plant,—of trees, I. JE; iii. 4;
vii, 24: VIL fF. xxii, 2, 3. ‘To sow, —
of grain, III, F. x.3: VI Ẹ.vii 2.

t Be, UL _[-. iv. 8. (2) Appointed,

legitimate, VI. h. vii. 3. The tone
with these meanings was difft. anciently
from that of the character in its common
acceptation of trees.

A spring, a contrivance. VIL E-
vii, 2.

P. xvi, 2, 3: et al

v. lii, 2.

A sack open at both ends, Lf. v. 4.

Perverse, lawless; unreasonable; un-
reasonably, lawlessl]y. ILL. Es T;

Pr ix. 9: v inL Ji SU, per-

versity and unreasonableness. IV, ^ v
xxviii. 4, 5, 6
The name of a tree, supposed to be the

same as the JE VI. E xiv. 8.

iv.

JE

INDEX HL.

To regulate, to restrict, I, ds iii, 5.

ES Jb see Ju IV. fy. xxi, 2.

Sprouts, VI. ip. viii, I.

Keen
chien
te
a=
Hd
t'aou
t'ao

EE

nee

nieh

{ok (2) a weight of a steel-yard. = to-
Po L E. vii, 13. (2) The exigency-

ch'üanof circumstances, IV. E: xvii, 1: VIL,
CE- xxvi, 3.

THE 76ra RADICAL. ^R.

weigh.

e Next,—in order or degree. vf ii. 7r
tsze 9, VI. fy. xiv. 3: VIL Ñ. xxxvii. 2,
tz‘û

7. To be next, to come next to, II, vE:
ii, 9.10: IV. ft. xiv. 8: VIL Jy. xiv. 1.

IR mK HR, smiling-like, I JK. i.

hin

yin

QR To desire, like, wish, T. Eis vi

yuh 15, 16, 17, 18, 23: et al, sæpissime. De-

yü sires, IV. Tv. xxx. 2: VIL fv. xxxv.

EX To impose on; to be imposed on. IIL.

be Lbiiewv pna

chü

4 &x ER. unelatedly. VIE. d xi..

kan

TN Hik fitt. to smear the sides of the.

sté ^ mouth with blood. “VI. Ty. vii. 8.

2 To sing, IV. E viii. 2: VI. d vi. 5

ko (indicating singing in some peculiar
style), Used actively. iba Spe v. I.
v. 7; vi. 1.

EUN To sigh. VII. E xxxvi. 1.

tan

Hck To drink, to sip, IIL fii 4. ype.

ed à fk to swill down, VIL _f. xlvi 2

Ek Pleased, Ek i, to rejoice in. I..

hwan ma

huan E- ii, 3.

THE 777 RADICAL. iE.

(1) To stop, desist, —spoken of walking,.
retiring from office, &c. I. . lii. 2;

Term E. ii. 27: III,

1; VL. f. xiii. 8. To stay, reside; to

che
chih

INDEX Il.

remain, I. m xi, 2: II. f- vii, 1: V,

“JR. iL. (2) Active, to stop. I. Te
xi. 4: IL .ix. 2.
nz (1) To correct, rectify ; to be rectified;
e correct; whatis correct, II. E vii. 5;ix.
chén£ 1: HI +. iii, 18; y ii. 2, 8; ix. 6, 13:
et al, sæpe. To make straight, V. de
vii. T. What may be correctly ascribed
to, VIL Ẹ.i.1,3,4. (2. To have
a purpose in the mind, II, Ë: ii, 16:
VII. Bc xxxii 2, (8) is nm
double surname, See mi,
This, these. Passim, Jt IE , and

Dx E: Ilt thus, so, such, are common.
2b A pace, I, Ex iii, 3: VII. T i, 7.
poo

pu

yt (1) Firmness, martiat vigour. bit.
woo JIT, R.i.. (2) 3A the first
iou P e) p: E

emperor of the Chow dynasty. I. [..iii,
6; viii, 1; x. 8: et al, sape. (8) j& T:
an emperor of the Shang dynasty, IT, E:
iS. (4) 57 n: name of a place, IV.

T xxx, 1, (5) ik SR. a Book of

the Shoo-king. VII. B iii. 2,

A year, the years; the character of a
year as good or bad, I, Bu lii, 5: II.
aS xiii. 4: VIL, Tv. xxxviii. 1. 2, 3, 4,

EA BE L fr. vii 21, 22:10. f. ii.
nv viL $e BR Ls. si.
2: I. P. iv. 2.

To pass over == to change, IV. T

suy
sul

deih m m i i

li xxvii. 8, = for a periodof. V. E vi. a
fA (D To return. ILẸ. ii. 16: UT. PR.
kwei X.1, 2: xii. 5: et al. sape. Used actively,
kuei

= to repay. VII. bs xiii, 2. To turn

to, come to. I. E . vi. 6: . Xi. 2; xv.

2: III. T v. 45 ix. 9: et al, sepe.
THE 7sru RADICAL. 4j.

To die; death; the dead. I, F. ii.
5: iv. 6: vii. 4, 6, 7, 8: et al, sepe. To

die for, I. Ty. xii. 3. 5t DET I. E.

vii, 21, 22: IV. E. iii, 4; ix, à.
*

‘CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

e
Tieuy
hui

449
To die at an early age, VIL EE i.8.

Vox on vin.

Calamities. I.
xxvii, 1. To bring calamities on, to de-

stroy. VII. T viii, 2.
To exhaust, extirpate, — to remove.

VII,

(1) Perilous, in a dangerous condi-
tion, V. E iv.1. (2) A particle, I
apprehend, is near to. I. E vii, 17:
VH. FR. xviii. 1; xxx, 2. Foll, by JA
IV.

To bury along with the dead, to sacri-

fice. VIL [\. i. 2, s to accompany.
vit F. xli. 1,2.
To be differens. VE fr. viit, 5.

v. xix, 9.

v. xxxi 1,

VIL X. xxvii, 1,

To die of hunger.

^d Li to swarm. III. E iv. 7.

To oppress, treat cruelly. I. F xii. 2,
= & ruffian, an oppressor, oppressors. I.

ES Eo

Acc. to Choo He, to cut off. ? to
imprison, V. [.ii.2.

THE 79m RADICAL, 3%.

The dynasty so called. IL E i, 8,
10: et aL, sepe. gu A the founder of
the Yin dynasty, HI F. iii. 6,

III.

A surname. v. vii, 2.

To kill, put to death, I. ff. iii. 5; iv.
2; vi. 4, 6: et-al., sepissime, Obs. um.
iii, 8, and VIL, “PR. x.

(1) To pull down; to break, I. P. v.

1,2: xi. 3: HII. TR. iv. 3 IV, Evä.

4; P xxxi 1, (2) Fo blame, reproach.

IV. Eu xxi,

e
~

450

pe

min

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

THE 80ra RADICAL. ff.

A mother. 4 A Bb parents, I. fv.
4; vii, 21, 22: et al, sape. ER 4t Bl.

the parent of the people,—spoken of a

ruler. I. E. iv, 5; jx. vii. 6: III. d
eT. Té AE Hi Eb brood heus,

brood sows, VII. af xxii, 2,
Every, IV. JQ. ii. 5.

THE 81st RADICAL. ff.

(1) To compare, II. Je i.3: VI. TR
i7. H T. to be compared with. I.

T iv. 4. (2) E Fan uncle of the

tyrant Chow, II. E: i. 8: VI. E x: vi.

a

D

Low. 3d tone. (1) For, on behalf of.
I F vl: H. 7. vi 4. (2) And
when... I [\. vi. 1, (3) To classify,
Hr ft. iv. 18, (4) To bend to the will
of, act as a partizan. HI. T i5. (5)

To join together, to collect. V, -
5. :

v.e iv.

THE 82» RADICAL. 3E.

Hair, VII, E xxvi, 1.

Fine hair. Tk Bs == what is very
small I. .vii. 10, —— EL, = the

least, one thread of ten filaments of silk

being called a eg. n, p.a
THE 83p RADICAL. Jt.

A family, I. Jy. xvi. 3. Bk.

the sovereigns of the Hea dynasty, the
reo ie., of the great Yu, the prince of

Hea, BE KK, Iv, E. xiv. 1. X
H ^n T. i4 WES.
T. i2 BG Noo

ix. 9.
The people,—usually in distinction

from rulers and superior men. Passim.
Observe the phrases Fr ER. VIL fi.

xiv, 2; XR VIL a xix. 85 JL
Fé, vu. bos be ve Pe iv, 45 JR

INDEX Il.

Revr pone FE E. ppl

2: VIL fy. xxxvii. 12 BY FEI "Ne
iii. 4; vii, 24, = MA Il. E ii,
23, 27, 98.

FOU geimai in a State from other
mang States. II. are v. 5: HI, F- iv. 1, 2:

méng v. F vi. 2.

THE 8£z RADICAL, +4

A.

2

E^
ke
chi

(1) The air, breath VI, p viii, 2;
(2) Air, = carriage, VII. Eu xxxvi, 1.
(3) Specially deserving of notice is its
use in II, fr. ii. 8 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,

14; = energy, the passion-nature.
THE 85:4 RADICAL. JK

I.

shieuy 3; et at, supe. = cold water,
shui

Kk

v. V. 55 x, 45; xi

XL E.

Perpetual, IE, qois: 6: IV. E-

Water, waters,

ying ix.3:V. fF. iv. 8

V à M ri ` y Je

1B Water overflowing. yU ee j^ to
Jar jyundate, III, E iv. 7;- h. dx. 3.
Ed (1) To seek for; to ask for; to seek. IT.
kew. D. vi. 9, 15 16, 17; [N ix 1: et als

chu sæpissime. (2) The name of one of Con-
fucius’ disciples, IV. EL xiv, 1,
YF (1) Impure, vile, mean. II. ds ix, 2: IIT.
Eii v plici Rd VE
w. vi. 2: VII, Jy. xxxviil 11. (2) A
yF jl IH. F- ix. 5, 7

Low. To rank one’s-sclf low, II. E-
ii. 25.

(1) You, thou, IV.
E is: VIL TPR. xxxi. s. (2) Name
of a stream, III. Ew iv. 7.

IL The river by eminence =the Yang-tsze.
law WI Ew 7, 18; Pp. is. 4. ? VIL
chiang j, xvi. L

Apond. L Ẹ. ii 4; iii 3: IL T
ix5:V, fii 4. Amoat, IL [vx
PLC has.

woo
wu

ix

joo
ju

v. XXXI, 1: V.

INDEX IIl,

(1) To lead forth a stream. III. E
iv. 7: VI. ES ii, 1, The waters of a
stream overflowing. VIL ie xvi (2)
To bite things through with the teeth.

pi
chüch

VII. . xlvi. 2,
Dk Properly, to wash the hair. Uk Az
muk to bathe, IV. f\. xxv. 2.
ix To die, pass away. IIT, pe iv. 13 iN
muh ix. 5
mei
VK A surname, II. T viii, 1, 2, yk
vd 2. a double surname, IV. R. xxxi.
zi T T dilatory, IV. E i. 11, 12.
va
ta
Fn s A thick marshy jungle, III, P.
pe . (2) 3 SR, vehemently, over-

dide like the sudden fall of rain,
or overflow of water, T. Le vi. 6: NS

NX vi, 1: VIT, E xvi,

Up. 2d tone, To stop. I T xvi, 3,

hà

E (1) The Yellow river. IL. Ty. ix. 4.

^ — May FRE ana Yay Bor posongsy
py, VI. T vi, 5, (2) JL yay, the
nine branches of the yey which Yu
regulated. II f+. iv. 7. Bini , the
most southern of these. V. E v. 7,
(2) May be used fora river generally.
n. p.ii.28: vu xvi,

Yd yi] SK, the appearance ef thick

cig clouds, I. P vi. 6.

7H A pond. I T pi S Yr the

AS Pp given to king Win’s pond. I. E

VA To govern, regulate; to manage; to

2H attend to. sb E vii, 22; F v. 3;
vi 23 ix. 2L F. iv. 2; vi 2; fh x.
T; xiii. 5 (2B i et aL, sape,

wily To be well governed; where manage-

Hu ment ae regulation me their elert. I

cn Poviem peir ur f.i?

EI
ix. 2: IV. E iv, 1: V. E v. 6; T

i1,2: VL RA, vii, 2; xiii. 8,

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES,

451

Pila jt n. to be at one's ease, IV. JI

e 4,10, ik.
1i.
(1) To slight, T IV, as xX.
hae 5 (2) A surname, ` IL. f. xi. 3: I.
Ru
m A spring of water, IL [^.vi 7: TEL
steuen ;
Ace x. 8: VIL px J,
IV. R. xviii, 2.
xk (1) Laws, IV. b.i348. = the
J x n
PN law of right, VII. T xxxiii, 3. s= to

enforce the laws, to tax. IL E v. 2.
l ik ZR. families attached to the laws
or constitution, VI. T xv. 4, (2)
An example; to serve as an example, be
imitated. IL ft. 7: TIL ft. tii ut
IV. [4 2; i 2; TJ. xxvii, 7.

The name of a stream, a tributary of
the Hwae, III. E iv. 7,

pin
sze

szü
Jt

tse

The perspiration starting. IIT, E v.

4.
chi-

v»
7i
keith
ch‘

To weep; the silent shedding of tears,
UL [.i. a: IV. FR, xxxii, 1, 2: V.
S. äi. 2.

Erev K

VE To lead, conduct, IH. E iv. 7; T
choo ix, 4, ;
chü

Extravagant, UI. JA. iv. 1.

tae
bai

FE TÉ roc == at ease, or in the abuu-
yang dant water, V. E ii, 4."

wy To wipe away. I. E v1
hsi

PE.

kéung 1
chiang yry, Td ix. 3: VI. Te xi, 4,

t Overflowing; vast. pis IK: used like

hung the above, III, E- iv, 7; [v. ix. 3; 11:
(ONE Roxit.

To live. II dos iv. 6: IV. ur viii,

5: VIL E xxiii. 3,
To permeate, imbue. Foll, by Va

IL ix i7.

Waters flowing out of their course.
Jk spoken of the great inundation.

A

seaou,
hsiao

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIRASES.

Apol, 7t, "s. is.

(D Toflow. TL p.i. 12: ur.

‘iv, 7: VL P. fi 1: VIL. xiii. 3;

xxiv. 8, ik 18- eurrent customs,—iu
a Bad sense, VIL, Ñ. xxxvii. 11; but
not so YES JE Gn E-i 8 Obs. I.
Tm 6, 7,8. (2) Te float. VIL fF.
xlvi, 1. (8 ) To banish, V. Es iii, 2,
(4) pit f see ih. VII, T iii. 3.

To dig, to deepen. V, ii. 3.

s E. rapidly; the appearance of

springing up. I. E. vi. 6: VI. E- vii.
2.
(1) The appearance of vast waters.

nE BK, resolutely, “IT.
hh S X xe FA: the vast flowing -pas-
sion-nature, II. E: ii. 11, 12, (2)

yas 4E, a Souble surname, VII. ES

iat 1.
! ver I the name of a stream, IV.

. eb 2.

VN to bathe. IV.

The sea; seas, IL. f+. ii, 28: I0, E
iv. T: et al, == the sea-shore, I. UK. iv.
EVL Raxy JU Ag ana [JU 7f
Pad P are expressions for the empire.
UL jvi£civ pois vi 1: v.
E iv, 1: vif. xiii, 6: VII.

2. So pus B without the pj. r UE
vii, 17. p ip Iv. E xiii, 1: VIL
Essi. Jt L E viam
IV. [. xiii: v. Rii vin.

xxii. 1.
IV.

v. XXY. 2,

The name of à stream, v. di. 1.

To defile, be defiled, JL f+. ix. 1, 2:

vis

- To diminish, to decay away. II.

X. ix. 4d: VEL E- viii, 3

jv xii 5.:

INDEX III.

FF To wade. IV, fy. ii. 3.
‘ shé
shé ]
d$ Tess IV. b.ovücsviT hound;
t'e ]
tü
ii] Tobe dried up. IV. Rv. xviii. 2.
ho 1
ku
yes s 7
7 5 A RE TA, cold and distant, VII. ^
leang Xxxvii. d
liang
E The water in which rice is being wash-
D €. V. [ede vin FR, xvii.
hsi
ut The name of a stream, a tributary of
be the Yellow river, VIL E vi. 5.
ch
HL Virtuous. Used actively, to make vir-
shih tous, to improve. HI, E ix, 6; s; Jr
shu

xxii,

: VIL Es xlv.

yao Licentious, unregulated. II. E: ii

ym 17: TIL, Tx. ix. 19, 13. To make dissi-
pated, NI, PR. ii. 3.

ved Deep (both literally and metaphorical-

Ps ly); deeply, L b.v3; Rx 4: IE

shén

qeres OE Lodo gv. siv
1; VIL FE. xiv. 1; xvi, 1; xviii, 2.

The name of a river, which
through E and Gan-hwuy.

flows
Lir.

hwae
huai E iv. n ix, 4.
D
A
rye vy. » a double surname, IV. E
shun xvii, 1: VL YR. vi L 5.
i3 (1) A gulf, an abyss, IV. b.ix&
yuen (2) The designation of Confucius’ favour-
yuan ite disciple. II. EG ii 18, 20; III. t
1.4.
 psu I.q. A 2h 7 the appearance of
 kwun water pout ing freely from a spring. 1V.
kuén M xviii,
Na Clear, pure; eta IV, As viii,
LM ing i x
hing 5 V. þ.i 1,5.
UE To reside long. V. Ñ. iv. 6
on
J mn To be thirsty, to suffer from thirst. Il.
^ OR i. 11: VIL Es xxvii. 1, 2.
1s .
p pel JK water whirling round, VI.
twan
 tuan E ii. 1l.

INDEX LI. CHINESE CHARACTE

iir.

-F- WE the designation 'of one of

Su Confucius’ diseiples, II, D ii. 20:
UL piv. is

y (1) Warm water, things hot, VIL

a aug v.5. (2) The founder of the Yin dynasty.

e nL E i4; T iii. 1; viii, 1; xi, 1. 2.
et al, sepe. `

` QU ope a à sis

pi Ji Ji incessantly. XL. jii. 3.

yon

yüan. n

Vee "Level. The instrument—the level. IV..

chun 21

n5 A ditch, —made in dividing the fields,

ny 4 feet wide, and tie same depth. V, e

kou

vii, 6 ads a. I. "Ts xii.
2: IL ^. nera oet 7; T;
2; V, T vii, 5 y ver, IV, gd

5.
xviii. 8.
'To overflow. To

2,

VIL UK. xiv: 4.

Vink

yh — spread forth,—spoken ofinstruction. IV..
yi vi L l
3 The name of a stream. IV. i2 ii, 1.
ts‘in

ch'ên

vé AS £

x Y f IPL. see ie. IV. m E- viii, 2..
isang

75 To drown, to be drowned, I. E v.
neu

ui 5: IV. T.. xxix. 8: VI. EX vii. 1. To

go to ruin, IV, E ix. 6, To be
drowning, IV. Ex xvii, 1, 2, 3.

To extinguish; extinguished.. TIT, P

IR

mee ix. 6.

mieh

PZA To increase, IL E i, 7: VL T
isze — vi. 8.

tzü

vy uy site aname, VI. T viii, £
huh

ku f

NR The name ofa State, I. Hh. xii 1;
vs © xxi: I fN. vi. 1,2. et al. -jk x

Åp L Ji xii bs xiv, di xvid w. F.
i. G dd, 1; iv. RAE: M Iit, F
ii, L fe Hi. vit. F. xii. 1 2.

nt 5 £ * Mz llt ila-.
fi Congealed, impeded, ii E dila
ORE i

chi tory. IL Bc xii. 1.

iif Banks, L Y. B.

hoo,

hu

ERS. AND: PIIRASES; 458.

ie The name of a stream. HI E iv. 7,

i : ;

E To be a fisherman, to. catch. fish. TI;

m qua.

yü.

WB The name of'a river, a large branch oft

D the Y; t Hi ih, IM,

has ne Yang-tsze, in-Hoo-pih, Ee iv.
7, 18; io 4: yop.

zz To be clean, pure; what is clean. JIL.

ES TY. iii a: IV. PA. xxv. 1: VIE

chieh xiv. 4; xxxvii. 7, 11.
. vii, 7.

z 2d Congee. ? any beverage. I, T X;

hatna

eod 4 xi. 5; HI. dee

3E 'To moisten and nourish, vi. F. viii,

Jun 4, sl 22 yt, = to modify and adjust,
HI. pe iii. 20.

EE FF ERI bei I. E ii. 28%,

To keep pure, V..

^^
laou:
lao
= (1).A marsh; marshy thickets. UL.
Le Ë- iv. z ix. 5: IV. E i6 =a ,.
chai pond. I. Te 8. (2). Favours, bene»
` fits; beneficial influence, I. A. ziti
1: IV. E i2; Jy. iii. 3, 4; xxii t:
V._f. viz; vii. 6; [R.i 2: VI fF.
+. oy LZ 8 n
ix. 6. (3) k T js the name of a gate,
VII. E xxxvi. 3,
ya A small ditch, tributary. to a Vir IV..
wae ott
Kua. F xviii, 3,
ie Todam up. VIL d ii; 3i
keth y
chi

yu] Mey. IV. fF. viii 2, 8

chuh

chu i
1A EL q. poa What is. low and wet. IT,
[T4311 y .
sak doma
ORE With the up. 2d tone. The name of a.
i stream. IH. E iv. 7.
chi ^c
3 Up. 3d tone. (1) To ferry, convey:
fA across. IE de ii 1, 4, (2) To succeed.,
chi IL ape v. 6.
hs Impeded. isi T see hh I. T
 joo xiil. :
i ju

454.

chi
cho

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES. INDEX III,

TE Jow. i JE A final particle. Passim. (1) At the
yÈ iE to overflow, inundate. II $ end of sentences, giving a liveliness to

E. iv. the style, especially where the closing
(I) To wash. IL fF. iv. 18: IV.

7; Kh. ix. 3.
: P member is brief, perhaps only one word, as
E. viii.2,3. Obs rv. vino. (2)

in IIL, .ii.4;—or where it is interroga-
. A
: tive, introduced by 4rf or 2o . (2) Cor-
P VRB, sleek and fat. Lf. ii. f
But the same phrase is used for the

denuded appearance of a bare mountain,

invi. L.vüii (3) 2 VER is used

relative clauses are men d etel by,

E. as in VI, . 8. (2) It is
common at the end of nor to which .
we expect a sequel, as in I. zs vii. 12;

w. Vli, 4: et al, sepissime. (4) Seems
to be used for AF. in VH, E xxxix,

~E often follows adjectives instead

as if it weré a surname, in IV. Iv.
xxiv. 2.

The brink of water, a const. IV. ce

PR xii 41: V. T i. 1: VII. E xxii. 1; of LA though not in Mencius, unless in
xxxvi 6. Obs. p + xt Vb v. . v. . li. 4; and it certainly partakes
E iv. 2. of the meaning of that character, and =

^ a lively affirmative so!

13 To clear the course of rivers. II. fr. a Up. Ist tone. An interrogative parti-

yó iv. 7. cle. How. It stands at the beginning of

yo yer thie clause ot member of the sentence to

R Large waves. VI, E. xxiv. 2. which it belongs, unless where another
un ] particle or the nominative immediately

i precedes, I, B vii. 20; dee 3: IL
Kee vii. 2; ix. 2; T iii 5: et al, sepe.
== whither, IV. Æ: xiii, 2,

No, not, without, Passim. fE is the

THE 86m RADICAL je.

Fire, I f\. x. 4; xi, 8: II. vi 7:

III. Eo iv. 7; EY ix, 5: VI. E us

xvi.1: VIL Ẹ. xxiii, 2.
$E Calamity. I b.vüaniv. ft. ive.

, opposite of , both in its personal and

impersonal usages, = not to have, to be

without, and there is—are—not. As in-

stances of the relation between it and
7, obs. I. A ee VII. 20, and IL,

x. T. fit Er and fit Br are com-

mon, HE x make a strong affirmation,
So, fitt LUE fi 3E. and 3E fn. Obs,
jit A, VI. "E. viii, 4, and HEF;
IV. WA. xx. 2

(1) To burn, to fame up. II, E vi,

(1) Roast meat, VI F. iv. 5: VIL
T xxxvi, (2) To be warmed—im-
mediately affected—by, VII.

Charcoal, E po I. E ix. 1: V.
Fia

(1) To set fire to, III. Æ: iv. 7.

M xv. 1,

ic (2) Enterprizing, energetic, EL. Tv. ix. jen — f. (2) So; justthe same; yes. Passim, Obs.
M a
(8) zi Ri, meritorious achievement. x IL fy. viii. 2, where Ek = according

ly, orthey approved. It often ap at the
end of a clause, beginning with -—. We

have the combinations— HR Ri, VII.

E xxxvii. 8: et passim; LAS fe YT.

IL F.i.2. (4) ? acknowledged, brightly
recognized Y. y. iv. 4.
A surname, VI. y. ii. 3.

a

a d xv. 3, 5: et sape; Ek if VIL

To boil, tocook, V, Lu ti. 4, ES j Ye xxxviii, 4: xiv, 4: VI. T iv.
ped on cookery. V. E ae vii, 1, 8. 5, 6: et sape: ER H., VL R. viii.
D To burn, consume with fire, IIT. ep : Fu BE FAX d. En

Aa iv. 2 Ve bos.

forms adverbs, or other adjectives, which

INDEX III.

in Eng. would end in lite. VIL "fk
xxxvii. 6, 9; xxxiv, 1: xxi. 1: e£ passim.
(4) A surname. HI,
JR Warm; warmly; to be warm,—spoken
mwan With reference to clothing. I, E vii.

mung Fiv. 8: VIL F. xxi. 8,
a Solitary; sorrowful I. dv v. 8.

Aeung
hung -
He To shine, iluminate, VII. F- xxiv,

D

What is toilsome, trouble. III. s
Jan — iv. Be E

To be extinguished. VI. f+. xviii, 1.

seth : . Y^ n4.

hsi Metaphorically, HL Jy. i.i: IV. T
xxi. 1.

3b à ;

Ae A bear. VI. p. x. 1.

-heung

hsiung .

E To be ripe; to be brought to maturity»

sauh M £ iv. 8: VI. des vii, 2; xix, 1,

Hot; what is hot LR. x, &: IV.

A E vii, 6. ale HI. to burn within,
V. ©: i. 8.

I.4. Hi the flesh of sacrifice, Vif.

fun vi. 6
ae . Up, Ist tone. The name of a State. T.
gen h.xX 1,8; xi, 1, 8 (NB), 4: IL

viii, 1,.2. ane A, n “Pa. ix. 1.
3 To plan,—a building, L p.i
ying e pr artificial caves, III. Em ix. 3.
Afi] f JE Abi , to boilto a mass. VII, E
dan i92.

To cook. Choo He says, ‘to light a

A fr LL f-. iv.4.
ts‘uan,

THE 87mm RADICAL. Jf.
E: To strive for, IV. E zs xiv. 2. wei

dsdng
chéng.

A

quen

A particle, found at the beginning of
clauses. Quoted from the She-king.

Yaan Amdso and. I JV. iii, 6; v. 4, 5.

fà Passim. (1) Tobe. I. E i. 4; vii,

cet 20; (M 1; iv. 5, 6: et al,
sepissime. Atthe beginning of clauses, f
continuing what precedes, often = who

3; iii,

LP E

‘CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES. 455

ds, who was. Before nouns of relation

and proper names, it = to play, to show
-one’s-self to be, I,

Zim pi
4; K. ii 4: etal, spe. Soin the phrase
U HM
E A y 4 y ud with and
without intermediate words, often — to
Xake to be, to regard, to consider, to be

‘considered. I, T vii, 5, 6; T ii, 2;

xi. 8: et sæpe, Often, however, 9g bat ‘
‘simply = to be, or to'use to make. (2)
To make, to do; to be done, I. E 4.3;
vii. 10, 11, 12, 18, 16, 17: et sepissime.

x Ta = why. I, R-
v. 4; xi. 2: 4 Ja see AR. =

to exercise, to administer, to govern. II,

T iv. 4; III, E iii, I. The phrase
dd EL to administer government, and
sometimes to give law to the empire, is

frequent, L f+. xi. 1: IL ft. x. 6: IV.

. i, 8; vi; vii, 4: et al. = to establish.
m LT x. 7. So Ap Fa m p.i
8; and BY FS, I. id. 10. = to
seek to be. III. + iti, 5. —Ohs. dà
f£ dtu Fu p
fs Rib, VII. T iv. "

n pw BR A E

et al,

nes

Low. 3d tone. For, in behalf of. Be-
fore clauses, it is most conveniently taken

as a conjunction, because, I. B . iv, 6;

vii. 10, 11, 16: et aL, sepissime, “FR AR,
for self, the principle of Yang Choo. ILI.

v. ix. 9: VIL E xxvi. l, Obs. B
Fay Vi. FR. vi. 1, ana Fey FF, vae.

vii. 8. But should not 4T Ta and E
d always have the jus low. 3d tone?
= consequently. I. T^ xvi, 3.

EE iv. 6.

456

^
ea)
{seo
chio

(2) Nobility, noble rank. . vii, 2;
F ii, 6; viii, 1: V. Ig ii, 1 (N.B):
vL Pesii 2, 5$ PR. vii, 2 (2)
‘The name of a bird, or birds in general.

IV. E ix. 8.
THE 898r: RADICAL. 4¥.

(3) A father, Passim. me combines
tions KT A HE and 4 4 are
common, A EE may denote the ruler,
as the parent of the people. I. E iv.
b; v. vii. 6. pad yi may denote all
elder relatives. HI. E ii, 3, 4. (2)

H Be (up. 2d tone), the name of one

of the remotest ancestors of the Chow
dynasty. I. ^ v. 3.

£M
K
Joo
fu

THE 89r: RADICAL, Re.

(1) You, your, I f. xii, 2:0 p.
is;aei v, panes Ria T: VOL
T iv.5; xxxi, 8. (2) After adjectives,
makes adverbs, i q. AR. VI. F. x. 6.
(8) A final particle, syn, with H,

urh

simply, just so, HI. p.v. 8: IV. Ex

ix. n Nox 2: V. fF. i 8: VIL

T xvxvili 4, —— RuqSe
LI. Ni v. 7: IV. fl. xxiv. 1: VIL
oxxüx 2 (4) Thus VIL E vi
1 —?IH f+. iii 2, where perhaps
TH = you, (5) Lg. i what is near,

IV. E Xi.
THE 90:8 RADICAL. d.

Acouch. V, ds.

At

ch*wang
eh*uang

po Aval IL Run 6: TV. QR, xsi.
ts‘éany 1 Zi): V i. 8: V. H
chiang, : Gi M E RYE qwe VIE E- "s

ed 2.

THE bius RADICAL, Jr

hi MR b building-frames. Vi +r.

Par

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

L

INDEX Hh

A window, VII. R. xxxi, 1. Hy.

yao P, spoken of a nest, II, E iv. 9.

yu

THE 920 RADICAL. Jf.

A

Ye

ZA IF, a famous cook of antiquity.,

vL þf vii 5.
THE 93» RADICAL. 2.

(1) A cow, an ox; cattle, I. LU vii,

4 6, 7, 8: IL, JR. iv. 2: TIL f. v.

etal, (2) HI. the name of a hill,

vn. p.vui 1. © Hf AE, one of,

Conf. disciples, IL f+. ii: 18, 20.

Full. I. ft. ii 3,

(1) To feed, to tend. II,
(2) To browse on. VI. Evini ©

IL Piva. 0 ACh a

shepherd of men, aruler. I, E vi, 1.
(5) a ER, name of a palace. V. As
vii. 9. (6) A surname, vo iii, 2,—
VII, T xxxvii. 4.

(1) Things, substances, I, Fe vii,
18:1. p.iv. 18; v. 8: IV.
2; xxviii, &: VI, È. iv. 3; vii. 8; ix. 2;
xv, 2 [y v. 4 (articles); VIL F^. iv. 1;
xxiv. 3; xlvi. 1. (2) The inferior crea-
tures. (This meaning is included in some-
of the above examples.) VII. A xlvi,

8) = others, IV. . vii, 2: VIL,
(8)

i;
as xix, 4.—Observe "H Jy. dl
Vr boss

(1) Cattle,—embracing oxen, sheep,
and pigs, and sometimes more kinds. V.

^". ix. 1. (2) Cattle set apart for

» dv. By

Pasture,

wuh Y. xix,

shang
shéng
sacrifice, victims, VI. fy. vii. 3. Gene-

rally in connection with 4, which

sce.
E Aname. VI. [x.iv L
Mang
kêng
To lead forward, to drag. I, pvi 4,
K*Pen

chien

INDEX Ii.

y gi

A rhinoceros, III. Bie 6.

sé »
hsi
T A victim, called T as being *spot- es
he fe keuen
hsi less.’ T yi, fy. Hi. 8; v. 2: VIL chium
v. xiv. 4, ym
qee FS
tuh

tu

THE 94mm RADICAL. Je.

R A dog, dogs, I. f. xv. 1: IV. ^ .
cuen mas HMM
iji. 1: V. . vi, 4: VI. „iii, 3; vii

P E ; fd

chi üan, ". z
BERE TRS
4 E 'To violate, IV. ES i 8: VL Iq. vii. ^ev

Jun 3.
JE Ambitious, ardent. VII.

Ewang1, 2, 8, 4, 5, 6.
k‘uang
žk The wild tribes on the North. I. P.

ae xiv, 2; xv. 1: VIL dE iv. 16 gu
fe ix, 11 Co HK), 12 gk apo.
IL, AK, I 2 P. xi. 2: TII. P. v. 4:

VIL fn. iv. 3.
To be near to. VIE E xxxi, 1,

v. XXXVii,

hid
hsia
I
hoo
hu
Aj
kow
kou
ay
show tion, L
shou :

The fox. LIT: epe v, 4,
A dog, dogs. L P. iii. 4, 5; vii, 24:
‘I. E i. 10,

PE T Jd? an imperial tour of inspec-

Wy. iv. 5: VL vii 2. Ay

is explained by SP and = the fiefs.

ji
ve

TE Joined with JJ. ? the wild cat, ILL fa
io Eve . V
FG) Awolf, IV. fp. xviii vn. e

Jang xiv. 4. (2) JRE FE = to lie about in

abundance. UI, f+. iii, 7.
XN " R
ERA Fieree. IIL fy. ix. 11.
mang zz
meng heuen
Ag (1) As;to be as, X f. vii 16: IL hsüan
yew i i i sd ZA
n E i. 8, 18; iy. 1; vi. 6: et al, sepissine. 33
` (2) Still, yet, I eiim xit: IL p. e

i 5, 7: et al, sepe, Obs. E] Aj pg l

OE, u. [ego van pii @

Tu a double surname, IY, T xxxi l

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

457

EN TA p litigants, V. E- v.
vi. 1.

Cautiossly-decided, VI,
2, 1.

"y

v. Xxxvii.

Only; alone, I. f+. di. 4; vii 10, 12;
T i, 4: IL T vin, 3, £; ct al, sepe.

. Old and childless, solitary. I, PF. v. 3.

In solitude, retirement, VII. E ix 6:

etal, Peculiar. VIL Jy. xxxvi, 2,
Ye : m. a tribe of northern barbarians,

I Wy. iii. 1.

(1) To get, obtain; catch, TH. [v.i
4: V. Tv. ii. 8. XO to get the
confidence of. IV. Ez xiii. (2) A
name. VI fy. ii. 3.

To hunt, Hy AS, B^ F i, 6,7:
VII. in. xxxiv, 2. ? est dos v. T
iv. 5, 6.

A brute animal; a wild animal, F. E-
iv. 5,6; fe iv. 7: HI. E». GP.
i i: IV. p.s BR Xm to

nourish as a dog or a horse, VII,

xxxvii, l. dr ER birds and beasts,

irrational animals, is common, I, Æ:

vii 8, 10. 12: HL Ẹ. iv. 7, 8: et al,

E Bi bana onn ved,

Æ ER, quadrupeds. IT. tr: ii, 28.
An otter. IV, E- ix, 3,

* An hon, epithet. V. TN. iii. 2

THE 935m RADICAL. xz.

Sky-colour, = dark silks, IIL V.

v. 5.

(1) To follow; following, along. I. Te

v51V bait GRE Ap v Js

iv.2. (2) To lead, I. E iv. 4, 5: 4I.

E us v.6:IL b.iw6,185 fA. v.2; l
ix 9: V. R xvi. 2: VE. E i2.

E á

ZA

leuh

wang

kin
chin

@ CIINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

B Zi, the limit to which a bow E

should be drawn, VIL L.»xii.2

THE 96ru RADICAL, =f.

A gem, a precious stone, I,
xv.: VL ft. iii 2: VIL
1. Used for the ‘musical stone, V. T
i. 6.

(1) A king, kings, Passim. =F,
the founders of the three ancient dynas-
ties, VI. R. vii, 1, 3: et al, -E E

one who is a true king. I, F v. 23

xiv. 8: IL. iid: et al, sepe, IE

Ki true royal government. IR. v. 3:

I. fi. v. 7 s E LLE

iii. 3, On the meaning of E see II,
lou oa
States and hon. epithets,
name, V. T iii, 3.—III,
VL R. vi 5—IL vii: IV. PR.
xxvii. 2.

Low. 3d tone. 'To'exercise the royal
authority (act. and neuter), I, T iii.
4; v. 2; vii, 2, 3, 5, 9, 10, 11, 24;

x. XXViii,

It follows the names of
(2) A sur-
T4

8; iv. 3. v. 4, 5: IL F.i. 6, 7, 105 ii 1.

v. 6; v. di. 8: DIE Vi 1: IV. E.
ix, 4, 5; ame a
“Fe iv. 6: Vi. pons

A pearl, LU xv. 1: vir. p.

xxviii.

To distribute, arrange, V. T. ii, 1.
Order, rank. II. E ii, 23,

Q) es JẸ, see (A. v. P. i6
(2) The mental constitution. VI. E
vii. 8. (5) To depend dn, VIL F-

xix. 1
To work up a gem. I T ix, 2,

3i pi the name of a place I F

iv. 4.
(1) The harpsichord or lute. "V. “E;

i3: VIL f. vi, (2) Asurname. VII.

w. Xxxvii, 4.

x. İX..2;

INDEX UL.

A gem unwrought. I, T ix. 2,

Do .
BE An auspicious gem, pas was fashion-
peah ed round, V. E ix.

pi

Fa

hwan A name,
huan:

(1) To surround, II. = i, 2, (2):
v. ft. vii 1, 24.
THE 97m RADICAL. JI.

ah

p'éaou 2.
p5ao

A gourd; a gourd dish. Iv. K. xxix,

THE 98rr RADICAL, Jt.

F

A tile, III. F. iv. 5..

wa

An. earthenware pot or pan, used for
tsang steaming, III. E- iv, 4.
tsêng

THE 99m RADICAL. $F.

Sweet, = sweet food. I. Jf. vii 16.

H

 kan — to count sweet, or readily. ax

xxvii. 1,
Excessive; an exceeding degree; exceed-

shin Ugly. I. a we vii, 17; Bc i l 3;xiv.
shén ; et al Sepe. . d p^ more, ina

greater degree, than..., II. Ex i, 11: VI,

F. x, 2, 3, 5. B tt ET extra-

ordinary things, IV. B x, Obs. I
ENS
THE 100z0 RADICAL, ZF.
(1) To produce; to be produced,—
shang spoken of men and things. II. As ii
shéng 15, 17, 93, 27, 28; v. 6: III. Les

R. ix. 2: et al, sepe, (2) Life; to live;

togrow;living. I, KE iii. 8: IV. ET
xxiv, 2: V. fF. ii 4: VLE. iii 2;

x, 1, 2, 8, 4, 5, 6: VII. E- xxi, 4; xxiii,
3: et al, i ; a way of life, ie,
calculated to foster life and happiness.
Vil. Æ: xii. 1. (8) To be born, to be
born in. III, ` iii. 6: IV.
VIL A. xxvii9. Jf I master, a
respectful way of speaking to or of am

T i 1,2:

e

‘yew

INDEX III.

individual, IV. fe. xxiv. 2; fẹ. xxxi.

1: VI. fy. iv. 2,4,5,6. (4) In a double
 summame, VIL v. xv. 1. (5) Ina
name, VII. fy. xxxviii. 3,

(1) Livelihood, I. E vii, 20, 21, 22:
ut. E iv. 12. (2) A native, III, E-
iii. 3. = breed. V. F. ix. 2 (5 F

iE a designation. IV.

E iii, 4,

A son-in-law, V. m $.

ie

san
ch'an

T3

sáng
shéug

THE 101st RADICAL, M.

(1) To use; to be used, I. E iii, 1,
yung 3; iv. 6; vii. 10: etal, sepissime, (2)
Used for y. Initial, — for, on the part

of. V. In. iii. 6; = ‘thereby,’ I.

4: TIL d v. 6,

THE 102» RADICAL. lg.

A

(1) A feld, fields, I. _f. ii. 4; vii.
24: II, b. iii. (N.B) 7, 9, 18, 18, 19:
et al, sepe. => HE]; the holy field, IIT.
Jodie AS, vit. posed.
Hj Hiv. p.i: vr. T vii, 2.

j E Iv. Ñ. iis, 4: Vu F. xxii,

3. He H , the office held by Conf. in
charge of the public fields, V. T v.

4. (2) IH and Hj T5 to bunt, I.
“Pr. i. 6 7: WL. Rim v. vä. 5:
VIL, Jy. xxxiv. 2.

(1) From, proceeding from. I E vii.
4; Pwi f.i 83 ii. 1, 27; vn
4; ix. 8: et al, sæpissime.
proceed by, to walk in. II. E- vii, 3:
IIL WN. ii 3; iii. 6; ix, 4: et al, sepe.
(3) Used for ži, in both its meanings of
as and stij, I. f+. vi. 6; P i 3: IL
Ei 65 [Y xi. 5: eta e EE
dK, at his ease, II JE ix. vk

i3. (5) The name of E " LL:

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

w. d. 1: V.

(2) By, to-

459

P vii, 4,—In the name Sit H v.
E viii,

(1) A coat tof mail; = defensive armour.

L foil 2v3; vi stv. pao

chia (2) kK H, the name of a Book in the
Shoo-king. 1I, E iv. 6: IV. E viii,

$:V. b.viarvmn fF. xxi. 1.

FH (1) To inculcate especially, repeatedly.
shin D . tii, 4; vii, 24, (2) A surname,

shén qq, x. xi 3

B (1) A male, IV. T. xvii. 1: V. E

nan i, 3; ii, 1; T vi. 6. (2) A title of no-

bility, V. T 3, 4, 5.
A ‘A border, boundaries,
a HL F.i. 13.
- To fear, to dread. I f+. vi. 2; F
wet iji, 2, 3; xi, 1, 8: IL Ex i3; ii 5; iv. 2:
m. pia Ronny Pirs:
VII. E xiv. 3; E iv. 5; xxxiv, 2,
B A small channel of water. BA Bi:
kerer the channeled fields. V. E i, 3; vii, 3,
t; Ty vie 6: vr Ya. xv. 1.
pp 'To rebel, to rebel against, II, ^ i

pwan 4,5; ix. 1, 2, 3.
 pan

IL [v.i 4:

(1) To stop, restrain. I, T iv. 9.
(2) To keep in store, have laid up. IV.
LE: ix. 5, (8) Read heuh, to keep, to

nourish, I. f+. iii, 4; vii. 21, 22, 24: V.

Eisa vi E. xi 3;

ch*uh
ch'u

xxxvii. 1.
Be . An acre. Its size has varied at different
HA times. Now 6.61 mow = an English
g acre, L f+. ii. 4; vii, 24: nno pu.
6, 46, 17, hi iv. 9: V. ^K. ii 8: VEL
E xxii. 2 BA HA see HK.

4 (D To be finished, It. J. iii. 19:
pe cv. E v.7; vi. 1. (2) A surname, IIT.
yer Joss. i
A A general summary, an outline. I.
vo Ev, Ria
uE A field of fifty mow. Used for fields
n generally, ILL d vii, 4,

i pay

460

aE To draw figures on. III. TR iv. 5.

hwa ` ,

hua A
A (1) Different, to be different. Foll. by
Å I^ from. L f>. ii. 5; iv. 2, 8; vii. 11,

i ret al, seepe. (2) Strange; to think it
strange, tó be offended, I, d vii 7:

IL p. ip. x. 6: IV. K. xxvii.
8: V. T ix. 3.
(1) To detain. II. To xi.2. (2) To

Pi

e remain, VI. a ii, 6, The character

is often, but improperly, written ýy er
ae (1) To sustain, be equal to, correspond
tang 10. IV, JR, xiii, 17. To be matched,

II. Bs i, 7% (2) To oppose, withstand.
. The meaning is associate with the above.

I, fy. iii. 5. (2) In, at; to be in,—ap-

plied to time and circumstances, LT.

v.5:IL F.i (WB), 18; e. ii. 2,

4; xiii, 5: et al, sepe. (3) Ought. IV.

Rm: VH. xlvi. 1, What ought to

ight, VI. . viii, 9.
be right, VL "fs.
Up. 8d tone, "To be correct. V.

tang v.4.
5i Borders, boundaries, If. i. 4: III,
ang `

S. iii, 1, & 5; v, 6: IV, T iii, 8: VI.
v. vii, 2.

‘A flax field, He see Hg.

chiang

chow
ch'ou

THE 1080 RADICAL. JE.

(1) Distant, distance, IL f.i 11
Spoken of relationship. I. T vii. 3
VI WN. iii. 4, With verbal force, VI.

"une. (2) Coarse, rnm fr. ii, 2:

V. [v ili, 4, (8) To separate. III.

Bit

$00
shu

viv, T.

Ke (1) To doubt. ngee ur E.

: La: VE pnis. (2) A name. H.
Tes

THE 10472 RADICAL, J-

Any feverish distemper.
chm == sickness and distress generally.

ch‘én E- xviii 1,

But HY

VIL

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

tseih
chi

Hi
tung
Jü
tseih
chi

IM

22
chow
,ch'ou
p:

yang

` INDEX II.

(1) Sickness; aching, painful, I.
i. 6.7:IL AV. ii. 1, 2, 3: IL

IV. WN. xxiv o Iz) VI. I
xil JE x LR Ec u E.
iii, 13. TX Jk. see above, A moral
infirmity. I. a iii, 4,5, (2) Quickly;
hurried, VL fe. xiv. 4; Nd (8)
To be aggrieved with. Lf. vii, 18,
Angrily, I. fN. xii. L

An old, ulcer. Hi 3H. == an uleer-
doctor, or perhaps a name, V, E viii,
1. 2, 4.

(1) A disease; to be unwell, H.

LT
423 UL fv. Iv. F. ix s.
Ji Jj I. Tir m. ponas
Under stood in a moral sense, = infirmity.

VLORGRT: VIL PR xxxii 3. (2)
To be troubled with, distressed by. III.

Ims 4: 1V. Wy. di. 2. = tired, 1I.
. li, 16,

‘Lo be pained, Jk Js 8ee I.

A surname, V. E . viii, 1, 2, 4

T

To be cured, II f.i 5.
EE «3t
THE lom RADICAL JS.

F. xT: VIL. E.

== to be made to grow.

To ascend, II.
xxiv. 1: xli. 1,

ni [.iv.7.

(1) To send forth,—as in discharging

arrows, II. E- vii, 5: IV. P xxiv,

2: VIL Na xli. 3; or in exercising govt.
I. ip: vii. 18; 3. 'To be sent
forth, manifested, IL. ]-.i. 17: VI.
de xv. 8. (2) ‘To rise, eome forth.
VIL fy. xv. 1. (3) To open a granary,
to cause it to open.—to send forth the
stores. L ‘F. ii 5; T iv, 9: VIL
Js. xxiii 1.

v V.

INDEX IIL.

THE 106m RADICAL, ff.

(1) White; to pronounce to be white. I.

fii 8: VE Ei 2; iv. 2, 8. aA

p^

pat ÉI Y grey-haired. , Í E iii. 4; vii.
24. (2) A surname, VI. A. xs xi

rs (1) A hundred. Passim. It is used

pi as a round number, signifying all of a

pai class, We have A t I. £: it, 27:
i et als H ‘fe, UL bos
et al; B ail V aps v. 6; BH zt.

v. E v. 6: et al.; B Ib II. Es
iv.5,6; Fy zb, nn Pb. 2 o

A Hi. a double surname. V. E ix.

une v, Vi. 4; xv. 1.
EB & A. anxious-like, III, E
kwang i Hd
huang
ih Passim. All. At the commencement
- of clauses, with reference to preceding
Mr statements, If it have a noun with it,

the noun precedes, A 2. VII, ^
xxiii 2; xxxvii. 11. Obs, IT. Le vi.7;
III. E- iv. 5.
fi His fif. white and penne HI,
haou E iv. 13.

hao

BR a HEE Hit, placid ande content-like,

haou yyy, Jes xiii, 1.

hao
THE 107ru RADICAL, E.

(1) The hides of animals; the skin
with thehairon, I. f\. xv. 1: VI. E
ix. 11; JN. vii, 6. (2) A name. VII.

p- xxvii. 4.

THE 108mm RADICAL. [IL

AX

pe

Ji

ming ~

A

Avessel, JE p WL f.i 3.

(1) To fill: full, IIl fy. ix. 9: IV.

xxiv.3. The full amount. HL [-. iii,
7. (2) Inaname, IH. fy. viii. 1.

4k 4 Jk a double surname, VIL
pun P xxix. 1.

p én

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES. g

3, 4, 5:

ging de xiv 5 M xviii, 2, 3: VII. E É.

46t

(1) Toadd to; more. I. F x. 4: VI,
^ viii, T; xv. 2, (2) Of advantage,
profitable, Tl. E ii 16: VI F vi,
3:VIL f+, ifi.1, 2. (2) A minister of
Shun and Yu, III. E iv. 7: V. E-

vi. 1, 2, 4, 6.
Why not; would it not be better to....

L F, väi 28: DR xoxgv. Fe

tit
yih

-

ho xii, 1; K. aad 1, 2: VIL fF. xxii
1; AN. xxvii, 1.
An appearance of fulness. VII. Es
yan xxi. 4.
BÈ Complete, great; flourishing state. II.
ds E8104. v. poids vi P.

shéng vii, 3: VIL T xxxiii, 2,
Up. ist tone, A vesselful, III. T
shing ji 8;v,2; VIL E xiv. 4.

shéng

Yt A robber, ur. LETRA S iv. 5,
taou

tao

A
mang
méng

kéen

chien

 To exhaust, to carry out to the utmos$
degree, in the way of doing or thinking.

L Ft. iii, 2; vit. 17: nem
E ïv. TR iv. 5: vL boxes
VII. -L 1; ii. 8; viii, Obs.

IT. t. ii, 2, and BE PP AO} IL
T vii 2, (2) AH. IV. T xxxiii. 1:
viL ft. xxxvi. 1. Entirely, UL p.
iv. 3: VH.

To covenant solemnly. Rwa..
of

To oversee. IL. t ix. 2, 3.

tsin
chin

v. dii. 1,

THE X9-: RADICAL. KH.

 Theeye. I. E- vit. ue: om à
4:1 F.v desi TV. F. i5; Kk.
xxx, 2: V. Ue idl vr L.vi 7, 8;

xv. 2: VIL fA. xxiv. 1, ^

(1) Straight; to be straight; to make
straight, WI. T i185.IV. F.
i, 6: V. NV. vii. 8. Metaphorically, to
correct; rectitude. IL E ii 13: TI.

nr p.iv.13;v.2. (2) Only, L F.

iii, 2; T i, 2: H. T vii 2,

muh

chih

462

dH (1) Mutually; may often be translated
Seang by one another. I, [^.iv. 5;
Slang 7; iv. 9: etal, sepissime. (2) A name.
nr “RR. iv. 2, 3.

A To assist, to act as prime minister to;
Seang & prime minister, II, ake i, 8: ii. 1:

hsi
siang Try, TR- ix 6: Y. E. v 6 vi 25;

. ix.2: VL NN. v. 18.

d HB HS BR, distressed-like. n.

há . lii, T.

E To inspect, I, TR. ji. 5: yv v. Vii,
sing 2. `

tT To be sparing of. I, E. v. 8,

Sáng

shéng

BG Dul, tobe dull. IV. Ẹ.xv.1
maot :

mao

He — HEHA see Hit. ur b.ns
heuer :

hsiian

Ae Bg F, the pupil of the eye. Iv.

. X7. $ 2.
pye

Many, iD a multitude; the

chung multitude, I. IL vii. 17;
4: et al, sepe.

HE IR, mild-like, VII. E xxi, 4.

To be harmonioys, III, E iii. 18,

v1. 4; xi,

Tolook aside, III. E v. 4,

fusion,-—medicine in its beneficial opera-

mind tion, yet causing distress, ILE, “i. 5.
y is Hi with eyes askance; I. mle
jen i iv. 6.
sf

" To be clear, IV. E xv. 1.
kast
yac oS qa. the name of Shun’s father,
ihe IV. [xxviii 2: V. _E. it. 3; iv. 1, 2,
B E
gou 4: VI. E- vi. 8: VII. M s xxxv.

See above,
foo : `
yu To watch, to spy. IV. F. xxxii;
Hj xxxxiii. 1
Ace:

nsien

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

NEXT

Hi Hj, to throw into a state of con-.
Ji

INDEX III.

To watch. II. T- vii, 3.

Had

kan

THE 110m RADICAL, Jf.

» To reverence, Y. x; XI. T x. 3,

king
ching

THE lim RADICAL, AX.

An arrow. I. B v, 4: IL E vii,
she ‘1, 3: HL w.1, 4; IV. fy. xxiv. 2: V,
shih

v. vii. 8. —

X A final particle, found passim. It
4 gives definiteness and decision to state-
e ments. Where the last clause of a sen-

i tence or paragraph is introduced by RIJ,

Hy. or JR it generally ends with A.
After rfj B it may belooked for. After

single adjectives and other words, its

force is both decisive and exclamatory.
‘To know, to understand. Passim. = to

acknowledge, ù. ¢., to know and employ.

chih VIL fe. ix.2.

Up. 3d tone, Used for 28, to be wise;
wise; wisdom, VA ET VII, E c xlvi,
EXE. d m “Fe. ali. 2. Adi aie
VII, . xviii, 1

A square,—the instrument so called.

B

fen’ IV. fi), 55 iii VL fp. xx. 2:
chit vILTK. v.
FG. Short, L þvi imm. b.ns
iwan 23 1
tuam NB.) iw. 17, Toshorten. VIL È.

xxxix. l.

THE 112m RADICAL. 45.

(1) A stone, a rock, VII. . Xvi

shih

(2) Ay fp. the name of a place. VI.

v. iv. 1.

9t To break, to split. Used for the blows
of an axe, strong and well aimed. UI.

Pe Ria
FE Stony ground; poor in soil, VI, E
Ieaou vii. 2. .
ch‘iao

Stones in a river, interrupting and fret-
te“ ting the carent, VI. “Ji. ii, 4. JR

chi Hy M. what will adinit of no contra-
diction.

E

INDEX IH. CIIINESE

`. THE 1ł3ru RADICAL,

FF

E 'To show, indicate, V. E v. 4, 5.
she :

shih g

ït The spirits of the land, or their altars.
shay Always in the phrase, mt TR. the
Shé — tutelary spirits of a country, and may be

used for the country itself, IV, Eur iii,

8: VIL. xix. 2; xiv. 1, 3, 4.
To sacrifice; to sacrifice to. IIT.

Te v, 2: IV. T xxv. 2. áx At
sacrifices, VI. [y.x.4.: VII. fX. xiv.
4,

Happiness, prosperity, I, PF iii, 6.

Reverent, reverently, V. Ei. 4.

A AH: ancestors, III, E ii, 3.

(1) A spirit, Fy Jl, all spiritual
beings who are sacrificed to, vE v. 6,
Spiritual,—mysterious. VII, F. xiii,
3; Jy. xxv, 8. (2) jl I-7 one of the

most ancient emperors, HE Js iv, 1,

Hn Auspicions, IV. E xviii, 4; T
ts'éang xvii.

hs'iang

x To sacrifice; to sacrifice to; sacrifices;
te sacrificial, IIL f°. ii, 2,3; Wii 8:
chi yy, vw. xxxiii, 1: V. E v. 6; "he

iv. 6: VL "v vi. 6. (N.B). SS wp,
see pe ,
I, q. üt. To pour out a libation
IV. F. vii. 5.
Emolument, revenue, salary. I. P.
v. 8: I. A, viii. 1; xvi, t: IL F. ii.

lu
i 8,13; [\.x.5:V. f. ii. 1, 6, 7, 8, 9;
Hi 5: VIL þf. xxxiii. 2. To grant to,
to endow, v. E vii, 2,
Yo forbid, prohibit; prohibitions, I.
FEN TR- i. 3; v. 3: VIL vina: var. E
chin xyvy, 9, 4; xxxix, 4,
ie Calamity. II. E iv. 4, 5. — an out-
M , break, attack. IV. Ñ. xxxi, 1.. Used

as a verb, YI. E 132.

CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES.

463
Happiness. m. 2 iv. 5 6: IV. Er

iv. 3.

To withstand, oppose; to hinder; to
ward off. I, ft. vi 6; vii. 2, 18: H
E i. 10; vii, 2: VIT. E xvi; D. vii
1. Tostopandrob, V. fy. iv. 4,5.

To resign, give over to another, V.
E vi. 7.

(1) What is proper; the principle of

propriety; the rules of ceremony and
politeness in aecordance therewith, I.

evii 22; [v. xvi. 1: II. . li, 27;
vi. 5; vii. 8: et qal, sepissime. To be polite

to I: f+. iii 4: VIL f+. xiii, 1: ez

al. TEZA, a polite demeanour, VI,
xiv. 3. ‘The same, used as a verb. IV.

TF xxx, 1, (2) The Book of Rites, II.
T ij 5: IH. "JV. ii. 2, The Ritual
Usages, III [\. ii. 2.

THE 11418 RADICAL, A]

: +

The great Yu, the founder of the Hea
dynasty, IL F. vii 2:0 p.iw.7
9; T ix, 4. 11: et aL, sepe.

Birds, III, T 4. In the phrase

> BR birds and beasts, irrational
Lia urs sometimes applied metaphorical-
ly tomen I E vii, 8, 10, 12: TH.

iv. 7,8; FR. i. 5; ix, 5, 9: IV, Tes

1; xxviii, 6: VI. E viii, 2,
THE irr RADICAL, b e

Private; privately, III, E iii, 9, 19:
HL T. xxii, 2 (NB): VIL fe. x1. 5.
ui YE T. up. viii. 1, Asa verb,
to be selfishly attached to, to LE
Iv. fi. xxx, 2: u p. X, 6.

To grasp, maintain.. Lu p VI. E.

vi. 8.
(1) The autumn; in the autumn; au-

tumnal I. [-.vii 10; Bm iv, 5: HL

E wevi pR. vi: 0) REGE

ahistorical Work, compiled by Confucius,
UL “Pi. ix. 8,11: IV. TPR. xxi. 1, 2:

VIL, E ii, 1. (8) A name, VI E
ix. 3. 3 .

464 CHINESE

Ti (1) A hollow,—in the bed of a stream.

ko IV. fx. xviii, 2: VIL JE: xxiv. 8. (2)
= lessons, BX ix Tb YII, T xxx. 2.

E. 'The name ini a State. I. E v..1, 8;

tu viie: V. f+. ix. 1,38: VL. xii. 1;

“Pav. 3,56. BE A, VI. E i
4 5—V. Fixa, 3: VI y. vie 4.
To remove, I .[.iii. 1: IIT, T ii

é : "
i 8: VI. Te vii, 2, To alter, VIL ES

xxxvi. l.

To be taxed, JL f.v.t JE BK

shwuy all taxes, I, EL v.3: VIL E. xxiii.

shui

` 1. H Jib = revenues, v. cL. fii. 8.
T I. q. By. To loose, put off. VI. T^
td vi. 6.

t'o

E: A kind of spurious grain. T3 ct

Pun VI. E xix,

yt The young. III, E iii, 7, ‘

che
chih

FE

chung

Tosow. HK f-. iv. 4.

Up. 2d tone, Seed, VI, E: vii. 2

chung xix.
(1) To style, to pronounce, to speak

ching Of ULL. etis IV. T- xxx, 1: VIE
ch‘éng UR xxxvi. 10, (2) To praise. III. E
i, 2: Iv. Rh. xviii. 1, (3) To lift up, =

to proceed to, HI, J. iii 7.
"Up. 8d tone. To correspond, to be

ch'ing equal to, ILẸ. vii, 2.

ch'éng
(69) The spirits presiding over the grain

5, or agriculture of a country. i
see fit. (2) Jg Pe the title of Shun’s
minister of agriculture. ITI. ee iv. 8,
The = is dropt, and B becomes a
proper name, IV. “Pe xxix. 1, 2, 8, 4.

Paddy, IIl T y2

tset
chi

To sow, IT. fA. viii. 4: II. E. iv. 8.

. (I) To bow down, í8 t to bow
the head to the ground, v^. vi. 4, 5:

xix. I.

CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

VH, K.iv.5. (2) A name. VIL RR.

"INDEX 11H.

E ‘A general name for grain, I. E iii.

3; generally spoken of as Fy. a, the
five kinds of grain, III. “Fe iv. 7, 8, 17:

VIL Ps xix; M x.4. But we have
also Fy £ nr piia By

ER, the grain available for salaries, IH,

EN SC
Ve xii. 1,

An honorary epithet. I. T

muh ; , :
mh y, _f. ix. 1, 8: VIL a vi, 4.
fü Stores of straw, grain, &c,, in the open
[r7 o as. ue
tena air; ricks, I. T v. 4.
T8 To reap. III, a iv. 8.
sih :
sé

THE lióm RADICAL, 5.
ZA hole IIL, TR. iii. 6.
heud
hsüeh
ZR Empty. VIL Pi. xii.
kung

zy

Up. 3d tone. yard Z to impoverish.
vi.
To dig through. VII. F xxxi 2,4.

v. Xv. 2,

ch*uen
chuan
A cave artificially excavated. IIT. T^
kuh ix. 3.
ku
Z To leap over,—as if it were 9 VII.
7 ü Eus xxxi 2. 4. The dict, explains it
differently, however, and makes it =
‘an opening in the wall’
pee

To peep, to. steal a sight. III, ds

wei ii. 6.
k‘uei
ot (1) Poor, in poverty and distress. I.

Being v y.8; V, Eis: VIE Pig,

chiungs 6; xxi, 3, E: Bx VL px
8. la, 9. II. "E ix.2: V. T ix,
3. (2) To exhaust. IX fn. xii. 6. See
Ji . (3) To be at one's wit's ends. II,
ria.

1) To steal, VIL fy. xxx.2 (2)
Privately. VIL fF. xxxv, 6. (8) Join-
ed with other verbs so as to qualify them

[274
ch5eh

INDEX UL

wh.
AL
leih
li

deferentially. I, Æ ii, 20; Ee vii.

1: IV. TR. 8,

THE 1l7vH RADICAL, a

(1) To stand; to stand erect, L E
i 1; vii, 18: IL. F. v. 1; ix, 1: HL
ii. 39: IV. fN. xx, 2; xxxii 1: V.
dE iv. 1; ge v. 5: VL F ii, 2;
xxi 2; xli $. JE Hi] = quickly,
IV. T. xviii, 3; = with indifference,
IL NV. iv. 3. To stand fast, to be estab-

lished. VI.
to appoint, to establish; to be set up, ap-
pointed, 1V, f+. iii 1; vi, 5; T 1:
vil, F.is; R.xv. 1

(1) Any thing definite and complete,
a lesson, a piece, "VII. Ex xxiv, 8. (2)
= rule, canons. IV. E: i. 4. (8) A

name, BÉ n. T. ve v. E
i. 1, 2: et al, sape —[E, X ni. Te

x LIV. A. xxx 1. X S 1v.
T xxx, 2, 8, b, is lias

Boys under fifteen, A child, VII.
È- xv. 2 Alaa, OL fF siv. 47. So

ae ee BveiÓcx
To exhaust, to carry to the utmost. I.

T xv. 1: IV. E i. 5: V. E i, 2,

(1) A principle, ‘principles, IT. E
vi. 5, 6, 7. (2) Correct, upright. IV. P.

xxiv. 2.

THE 118ru RADICAL, m

To laugh, to smile; smiling. t. Eu
vii, 7, 16: III, T. vii,-4: IV. E Xvi,
1: VL fa. ii. 2. Tolaughat, L F.
iii, 2: VIL y. xxiii. 2.

A check, or token, T ; the two

halves of such a token, the fitting of
which was an evidence of the holder's

authority. IV. f.i. 3.
A degree, a class, III. E v, 3: V.

m i 2.

according to merit. IL Ei. 27.

To graduate, to arrange

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

. Xv. 2. (2) Fo set up;

465

m A sinew, a muscle. VI: [\. xv. 2.

kia

chin :

^ : i. 4:

T To answer, VI. E v. 45 T id:

A VIL E xl. 4; xliii, 1, 2, To respond
to, ~» in conduct, IV. E iv. 1.

t A slip of bamboo containing writing.
uh = passage, a piece. VII, F iii, 2.
ts‘e
$i. To reckon, fr $6. faeslate VI.
swan 1.
suan E nl
4E ^ 7 (1) The name of a State, $f F
JA À :

k Ake.
ke n Ei. o 4% Ly the name of

ahilk v. F.vi n
ft (1) A fife or flute, I, fy. i 6, 7.

(2) An hon. epithet in f FL IL.
ix, 2, 8, A surname in t fh, and
[53 Be zn F.i 1, 2,8, 4,5; f-

ii. 7, 10: VI. fy. xv. 1,
(1) To regulate, to order according
to the proper divisions, IV. f. xxvii.

tseé
chieh 2, (2) 1 f fii. see f
ai A law, a rule. Used às & verb, III.
m Pis
To beat, as in forming mud walls. = to

A ~ I, JR. xiii, 2: mno f. iv. 13;
ehu P x, 3. = to fortify, I P xiv, i.

TX R e MK
44, To usurp; usurpation, y. E. v. 6:
tswa? VIJ, f“. xxxi. 3.
tsuan
Ai 5 To consolidate, I. fn, tii 6.
hio à
tuk
tu f
4 A sniall basket or dish for holding rice.
"neg Always in the phrase g- L P

x 4; xi 8: uL. iv. 15 v. 5: v.f.
xxix, 1: VI. A x. 6: VII IL xxxiv.;
Tex:

(1) Fo slight, us V. xxvii. 2, 3.

Lcd (2) Hasty. VIL d xxxvii, 1. (3)
bie

" An hon. epithet. III. "Ri i, 4,

$i A register, V. “fr. iv. 6 .

ba

p A record. V, fy ik 2: VETT. vii
pee 5. ]

chi

er
e

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

A musical instrument, pipes. I. T
_ 4,6, 7

THE 119ru RADICAL, -

Rice hulled, ITR. i. 8: TEL. iii
 7. VH.

See Bg.

Grains of rice, III. f: iii, 7.

v, xxvii, 1.

Rice in the husk. JK S, 1. JR. i.

8. Be A VII. PR. xxvii, 1 BE
alone, I. F iii, 1: IML. iv. 4, 5;
PF. iv, 8; x, 8&: IV. F. xiv. 1: V. T
vi 2,5: VL ii 2: vi... P. xvii. 3.
Medhurst translates it as above, and
apparently after K'ang-he's dict.; still the

i AK A Xi H says that anciently Be

was the general name for all glumaceous
grain. It is now commonly spoken of
millet. Y have translated it sometimes
by ‘grain,’ and sometimes by ‘millet.’

Barbadoes millet. VI. E- xvii, 3.

A kind of millet. Aiways in the phrase

Os BE. IH. Jy. ili. 3; v. 2: VIL R.
E Denn Y. E

Congee, HL ]-.ii.2,4.

Parched grain, rice or wheat, vi.

vi.

To boil rice to a mass, EE p = to

tear and destroy, VII. F i2.

To manure; the manuring. III. Js

ili. 7: V. fR .ii.8. The rendering of the
sentence in the first of these instances is
in accordance with the commeniaries, but
jt may be doubted.

Provisions of grain. I. FR. iv, 6; v. 4.

To purchase grfin, VI, i. vii. 3.

AH the commentaries explain here as if
,3$ meant ‘to sell grain’

The meaning is
Do not prevent our sale and their que
chase.’

INDEX IH,

THE 120r8 RADICAL, I

ESI Epithet of the last emperor of the Yin
M dynasty, I. fn. viii. 1, 3: vu. F. xxii.
chou 1: e£ al., sepe.

X^] — (D To form alliances, VI.

» (2) What is most important, 1I, Ru ii,
6, 8. (8) Compendious. VII.

1—In IV. f. xv. the term combines
the ideas of condensation and importance,

v. ix, 2,

M xxii,

Xn To pay over. N; G iii, 3,

nă

na

E gh M E^, confusedly. III. L

fun iv. 5.

fén

3E — (0 OF white, undyed, silk. III, ps

eid iv. 4, (2) For nothing, without doing
service, VIL E- xxxii, L

5R Ropes, III. . iii, 2,

só £

so "

XE Reddish blue VII. JR. xxxvii. 12.

tsze

tszü `

E I. q. m. f$ Lr to put in chains,

by LUN xS

lèi x

E To continue. = to continue to serve

shaow It, MN. 5,

shao

LO To twist, VI. P i 8: vi F.

da xxxix. 2.

chén

(1) The end. Finally, as the final

qund issue. VI. E xvi. 3; xviii. 2; d iv.

5. (2) To complete. V. T iv. 6: VII.

. xxxix. 4, To stop, end, (act, and

, neuter), v. x.i. 6; Hi, 4, (2) Per-

petual, the whole, X& H » the whole

dy. UL Pid. $i p.

iii. 7. eH neve, IH, fe. ii i

Pod E. all the life, IV. f+. ix. 5;

"lhe xxviii, 7; xxxiv.: V, LE i, 5: VIL.

E- v. 1; xxxv. 6; Observe

this phrase in I, de vii. 21, 22, and IV,
v. xxxiii, 1.

To cut short. HI Ẹ.i 5. To cut,

to stop intercourse with, II, T xi, 4;

Iv. þvi z.

de vi, È

3

tseué
chieh

INDEX Hi.

LA
E
teih
chi
ES
seu
hsü
Xt
tung

Jk

_ Sze
szü
Wee
suy
sui
Y;
HE
king
ching

We

z wan

0

chow
chou

HE

wei

44
aou
t'ao

ch'S

saou
sao

MOW
. mou

. To supply. XI L2 a deficiency in .

the crop. I Te iv. p: VL T vii, 2,

Spoiled or old floss, 15 x II, de

„iv. 17.

A thread of connection. = a beginning.

IL WV. xiv. 3.

Silk from the silk-worm. See Ra,

To give tranquillity to. HI JR. v, 8.

(1) To define, to plam. I. Es ii. 8;

nur p.i 13.

standard. VII.

(2) The unchanging
v. xxvii, 12,

To delay; not to be urgent about. IH.

E iii, 2; VIL

v. xxvii, 1,

ae to intertwine, weave together.

n. Ë iv. 3.

A particle, —used as the copula. III.

donas v. F. ives.
To twist, 5e dj nr pun;

fg fü " ER. freely, at ease. II. T

v. 5.

A surname, VI. f\, vi. 5.

From, = to climb a free,
kok

L _[.- 16,17.

The mourning worn for three months,

vit. [xd 2.

= upright, II. E s ii, 7.

Threads. ieee It. she iv. 17.

i T.

w. xxvii, 1. Here it

probably means cloth of silk.
Merit, doing. V. f°. ii. 3.

To abound, f yÉ Ii. E iy. 7.

To unwind a cocoon, III, f.iii. 3,

Wi [s see X93. (2) An hon. epithet,

interchanged with

Bg and read mah. n

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES. ` 467

aevo ques vii, 4: VI, T

vi. 3.
Ek 'To weave, III. IL iv.1,4; R
chih 4, "E

td Embroidered garments, VI, E: xvii,
sew 8. E
hsiu

A line, string, —used with ref. to a car-

Kod penter's line. IV. E i, 5: VII. Lk
shéng xli. 2.

To bind. = to yoke, V. f+. vii. 2.

i To adjust a string £o an arrow, to draw
t back after it has been discharged. V.

cho iE: ix, 3.
s .. Tocontinue; to be continued. F T

Be dv 82 IL EiT: iv. b.isixen
vxx5:V. b.vi2,4 b y

7; AT vi. 4, EP Itt. fub

na T x. 2. HA ffi] immediately

after, IL NV. xiv. 3.

s Strings to tie on a cap. IV. de viii;

YY 93, Totieon, IV. T xxix, 5. 6.

fa Hempen threads. YII. T x. 4,

lu
THE 121sr RADICAL. 4.
To be wanting, TIL fn. ix. 6.
k*eué `
chrüeh

THE 1220 RADICAL, bx

FA ^ (Tecum anet. nox.
wang To entrap, I f+. vii, 20:10L f+. iñ.
3: V. fii (2) None, not. f

e V. T iv. 4.

ZÉ Seldom, vr L.ix2.

HL . Avnet for catching fish, I, F- iii. 3.

JE C1) A crime, offence; a fault. I. E-
tsuy vii, 4, 6,7,20; Tr. ii. 18: HI, Te iv. 8,
4: et al, sepe. 3E A and sometimes

alone, sinners, criminals, LU iii.
7; v. 3: V. E iii. 2: VI.. fẹ. vii. 1, 2,

3, 4. 48. JE j^ =»; 60 offend against.

468 CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

I. VE: vb; h.xxx.5. (2) To con-

demn, I L.üis:rv. F. ix. 8.
nm (1) To place, HI. F. vi. 1l, Toap-
che A : £ I

- Chih point. Ip. xi, 4. Kk E to displace

and appoint others. VII. T xiv. 8, 4.

(2) A stage, a post station, i. a JU.

pond
ES Punishment, III f\. v. 4. Jh] 5h
a ;
fi L E. v. 8.
PE 'To make to cease, to stop. VI. aS
pa iv. 3, 5, 6. .

‘THE 123p RADICAL, 24. i

26 The sheep or goat. I. E. vii. 4, 6, 7,
Ve9 8: IL FR, iv, 3: TH “ema: v. F.
i, 8; ii, 3; ix, 1; fy. v. 4; vi, 6: VE E
vii, 1. 3É E, sheep-dates, a kind of

persimmon, VII, .Xxxvi. I, 2,.
(1) Good, admirable; beautiful; beauty.
m L ienai zm vi 2 Pe
ii, 4; vä, (38 DAS too good), 2: VI.
_Ẹ vi. 85 väi. 1, 25x. 7; xix. 1: VIL
.xli. 1; [. xxv. 5; xxxvi. 2.
x To bé ashamed; the feeling of shame.
qu IL E vi 4, 85 ix 2: nn [ds
hein yy, Y, xxxiii. 2: V. Pu. i 8: vE P.
vi, T ^
aa A flock, a company. VII, T xix. 8.
kieun x
ch'ün .
3E . An overplus, IT. T iv, 3.

Seen

hsien

24 Righteousness; our consciousness of
334 what is righteous, and the determitrations
e thereof; what is right. Possim. The

combinations of f£ 3, and AB 4
are very commen, f
z Sow. V. KR. Hi 4. T$ BS, VIL
ng : xxxiv; i
ee E x. 6: VIL ft. xxxiv; T xi.
p Meagre, feeble, Il, “Jy. iv. 2.

luy
léi
THE 124ta RADICAL. Z 7]. .

AY (1) Feathers, a feather. I s vii

a 10: F i. 6, 7: VL E üi 25 PR. i

INDEX If.

6. (2) 2H ily , the name of a mountain,
v. [ung
A famous archer of antiquity. IV. h.

xxiv: 1: VI. _Ẹ. xx. 1: VIL E xli, 2,
Only. VI. F i7.

To practise, do habitually. vii de: Y,

The name of the heresiarch Mih. Il.

T ix, 9, 10, 14,

Wings. Used as a verb, to give wings
to, to assist, III F- iv. 8.

THE 125ra RADICAL, A

To be old; old; the old, I, E vii.
12, 24; T v. 8: xii, 2; xv, 1: II. T

Có n n, opos 75 Tov 2: IV. Je

xii. 1,2: V, P. iv. i: VI T vii. 2,
8: VIL P. xxii 1, 2, 8. i
(1) A deceased father. V. me iv. 1.

(2) To examine. II. Jy. xiii, 4: VI.

E xiv, 1: VII PT- xxxvii, 6 BS

e

Passim. (1) He (or they) who; this
(or that), these (or those), who (or which).
lt is put after the words (verbs, adjec-
tives, nouns) and clauses to which it

belongs. L [F.i 4; ii 1, 4; iv. 6; v.

1, 3, 6: et al, sepissime, Obs, ier H
[onm JK. iv. 1; xvi. 1: etal;

I.

{ii Žo v. Ju. vie 45 AS n
E- v- 1, 2: èt simitia, (2) After $E
with intervening words, phrases where a
numeral is used, and many other cases,
E is equivalent to one, this, these; E. 95

tra ^.
db Lg ^r, ‘such an one as I,’ I.

c pois 6 Bay 45 Bb H ibn 6;

AE A ESI X ZB 3 there was ane
Tsang Ts‘ang, Lh. xvi. 3; EE
IV. ix. 18; Z 7T Iv. qeu
—This seems to be the proper force of
the character, so that it is an emphatic

demonstrative by whieh the mind is made
to pause on what has just been said. (2)

: It stands at the end of the firss member

INDEX HI.

urh

of a clause or sentence, when the next
gives a description or explanation of the
subject of the other, terminated generally
by the particle EUA but not always, I.

E. vii 9, 12; 2: III.
6, 7: et passim. (4) 1l A at the end

of the first member of a sentence, resume
a previous word or statement, and lead on
toan explanation or account of it. E. g.

v. iv, 2,

IL L.ix.i Obs. VIL. Ja. xvi.—This-

case and the preceding may easily be
brought under (2). (5) A occur
continually at the end of sentences, pre-
ceded generally in a previons clause by
a and for the most part the force of
K in (1) is apparent. I. E i. 5f-
iii. 2: II.
ith H
forms adverbs with E and Tr è Lp.
iv. 4: IL T vii. 2: et alọ, sepe.
Old, aged. L v. xv. L

Low. 3d tone. To relish; a relish. VI.

E iv. 5; vii. 5, 8.
THE 120mm RADICAL. Hg.

Passim. A conjunetion, meaning and,
and yet, which latter signification is often
nearly or altogether = but. Its use,
however, is very idiomatic, and it cannot
always be literally translated into Eng-

lish. m EB, and Hg B Bes are
very common, So iè H Hm. = 80,
and yet.'... Observe Ed ni I.N. xiv.
3; PE mv. poueddim VE
LE viii, 1: e£ sim. ; also Ay "n aR,
IL Pi. xiii. 4: et als ifp AE, V. E.
viii, 5. Its use after 1H is to be noted,
Eg, IV, Ki. 4:V.. fie &

THE 1?7r& RADICAL. qm

A plongh-handle. ES Li IH,

iv. 2; iii. 5,

To plough; to cultivate the ground. I.
*E: v.3,4; Riv 0L p.iv. 84
5, 6, 7, 8, 11: et al, sape, At 4á-

husbandmen. I. E vii. 18: Td v. 8;

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

. i. 10, 11: et passim, (6) It

469

xi, 2: H, . V. 4, = to labour, to do

work, VII. uM xxxii, 1.
To weed, II. E ii, 16.

A ploughshare. . ES p: see zn

To weed, I. E v. 8. ü-

xz
yun

Ah

fs'ze
tat

y

naow
nao

TR

"m

A harrow. = to cover the seed. VI.

E vii. 2,

THE 128tu RADICAL. F.

H Œ Theear, 1, E- vii. a6: m. F
wh x1gyv bns; Rxx 2v R.

i l: VL F.vii 6, 8; xv.2: VIL
xxiv. 1. (2) A final particle, simply,
only, just. I. T: ii, 2; T i 2: IL

af % 7: UE E. ivanav. p.

xxii; is xxxii, 1: VI, E. vi 7; x. 5;

xvii, 57k. ii. 3, 7: VIL, IN. vi, =
indeed, I. . lii, 1.
To invite or call forth men of worth by
“ing Presents. V. f. vii 3. 4,

p
Sage (= ‘great and capable of trans-

shing forming. VII. P. xxv, 7); sageness;
shéng a sage, IT, Fi 8; ii, 18, 19; IIT. T
ix. 9,10, 18: 1V. R. i 4: V Pe 5,
6,7: VIL “Py. xsv. 7, 8, BE A, m.
. ii. 17, 20, 22, 25, 28: et al, sape.
To collect, to be collected. II, IL i

K

tsen yp IV. F.i 95 ix. 1.

chit

Ri] To hear; to become acquainted with

wăn by report, I. E. vii. 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 17;

wén v. i, 4, 6, T: et al, sepissime. Z fij
extensive information, V. Ñ. vii, 3.

& fu] Mihi vi. PR. sii. 2,

Low. 3d tone. Reputation, notoriety.

IV. E i 2; P xvii, 8: VG P.

wan

wên i, 2; [i xviii. 3: VI fF. xvii. 3,
Im Acuteness of hearing. IV. Æ: Ll.
ts'ung ] 9
ER A sound; a voice. I. E vii. 8; P-
shi A C
shag 4. 6, TIL Eien piv as: v.

vw XY ài

ders vi E. vii. 6, 8;

470

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

INDEX lit.

VIL E xxxvi, 3; E xiv, I, RE ü The back, VIL E- xiv, 4: VII. E-

I5 I E- vii, 16: VI, T xii 8 (=
language). = music. VII. B xxii, 1;
xxxvii. 12. Reputation, II. E- vi. 3:

IV. R. xviii. 3 RE Rib: vu. F

xiv, 1.

An office; the duties of office. I.
F iv, 6; I E. iv. 2.1; F v. B.
(N.B): V. Ẹ.i 2; T ii. 45 vi. 3;
vii, 9. (N.B): VI. ^K. vii, 2.

To hear, to listen to; to hear and fol-

lw. L F. vii. 16; as vii, 4, 5; IL

Lis

chih

ting f
T xi, 3: IV, E viii, 8: xv. 2; T
jii. 8, 4: et al, Ha EX, to administer
the government. IV, Ñ. iii 1;—com-
pare HI. ES ii. 4.

THE 129mm RADICAL. iK.

So,—a continuative particle. Y, "TV
guh v. 5. The diet, however, explains the
yü char, here by i , himself,

Ej And so. VIE, R. six. &
sze
S2ü

THE 130mm RADICAL. PRY.”

Flesh, meat, I. «iii. 4; iv. 45 vii
8, 24: IL R.v- 2 ix, 95x.6: IV. P.
xiv. 2; xix. 3; Ñ. xxxii, 1: V. F
vi, 4, 5: VI. UR vi, 6; VII. E xxii.
2, 3. l

pa B: not equal to, degenerate; in-
competency, IL JN. vii. 1: IV. F vii.

1: V. . vi. 2: VIL I. vi. 2.
HE A limb. pu Hk. vu. “fi. xxiv. 1.
che
chih :
jE Fat (adj). L E iv, 4: HE, “Ty. chiao
Sei

spoken of soil. VE. E vii. 2.

The shoulders, IUI T vii, 4: VI,

kéen ;
chien As xiv. 4,
a
yü

E iv. 8.

pa xxi 4.
Fj Mutually. LM ix. 4; v. 5: IV. E-
seu i " i
Be dxev. Ei 8 (N.B).
ij Asurname, I, E vii, 4.
hoo
hu
Al 4. q. Jl. The breast, IV. E xv. 1,
eung
hsiung .
4 The ribs. = to shrug up. ur M. vii.
A 4
hsieh à :
{5 I.q. E. To cultivate, improve. I.
sew " T : i
um does và _Ẹ. xvi. 2, 8: VIL an i
8;ix, 6; þf. xxxii 1. To repair, IV.
“WN. xxxi. 1. = todo. L fy. iv. 4.
aE To be able;.can. ^As the auxiliary,
Hi passin; but'it is often used absolutely.
 Meng E. 9. I. Us vii. 10, 11; P. xvi. 8: V.

E ix. 3: et al, sape, He alone, and

BE % men of ability, II. E iv. 8;

v.i Ability. VIL [-.xv. 1. = to
amount to, V. fn. ii. 4.
The belly, IV. "Fi. di 1: Vi. E.

h ; z R
Ta xiv. 6: VII, ES xxvii, 1.
= fat meat, VI. Bae xvii, 8. E
pus $ rich favours, IV, RR. iii. 2, 4.
jz @) The skin. VI. Es xiv 1, 6. H2
me JE and Je alone, — the body. II. E
4; fA. vik 4: VLA. xv.2. (2) Admira-
ble IV. Fr. vii. 5.
To smite, IIL. f-. iv. 16; Ty. ix, 12.
ying
ig Minced meat, VII, [X. xxxvi. 2.
kwae
kuai
iB A surname. II. E i.8: VI. F xv. 1,

keaow

ix. 9. Rich food. I. E vii. 16, Rich, BE The arm, the lower arm. VI, F i

Sei 8: VIL E xxxix. 2; JY. xxii, 2.

THE 18isr RADICAL. ER.

A minister, an officer of a court. I.

To cherish and train, . VI. R. vii. 8: Fi. F. vi. 14, 16; m iv. 10; vi. 1; vii. 1;
i . chin
VI. I .XX.4. To be subsisted. IIT. ché? viii, 2: et al, sæpissime.

in cor-
relation often ocenr. In the first person,

INDEX UT.

TE

isin
chin

‘I, your minister,’ I. E. vii, 2, 4, 5:
et al. In a wider ior subjects. II.
E i, 8: IJI, . To employ as a
minister. II, . li. 8, 9: et al

To rest, to is II. T xi. 2, 3,

à f

go
wo as
Pon A surname, I.- fy. xvi. 1,3, M
tsang
THE 132p RADICAL, Éj.
A (1) From, as a preposition. l Lf. xi.
teze . m 23 9. fe
tn 2: II. Es di. 28, 27; iii, 2: et al., sapis
sie. According as, V, L v. 8. (2)
Self, of all ‘persons. Generally joined
with verbs in a reflex a We have
EA EIA El 4B B 35 ee.
&e, IL . ii. 7; iv, 4, 5, 6; vi. 6; ix. 2:
et al., sæpissime, Obs, É y" il. T
v. 3: VI. Te vi. 1.
Smells, odours, VII, T xxiv. 1,
chow
ch‘ou
E H K, a minister of Shun, III. E yu
kaou ` iv. 9: et ad. y
kao
THE 133» RADICAL, Æ.
(1) Wo come, to arrive at; sometimes ==
ze to Ul. LẸ. iis; vii, 12; Re. 6: y
chih qy, Ti ii, 4; ix, 1: etal, sapissime, E: yü

J^ to come to, as to, is very common,

 E.ga I. [NL di. 3; iz. 2; x, 12: VIL. f.
xxxviii. 1, 2, 8, 4: et al. (2) Most, form-
ing the superlative degree; the. utmost

degree. I. Ex vii 10: IL, P. ii. 18:

n b.iüs:iv. F. ii 1; xii, 8: etal

Chief, IL. f+. ii 9. (3) FJ Æ, the

solstice, IV. h.xxvi. 3.
(1) To carry to the utmost degree.

VIL “ff. xiv. 2, 8: VIL p. vii. x

HE VL pois (2) To bring about

by effort, V. E un vi, 2. = to calculate.
IV. N.xxvi.3, (3) To resign, If.

v. 2; x. 1. fü

Q)Atower, L b.i24 ER in
the name of king Wan's tower. Jb. (2) chu
The designation of a low officer, a servant.

v. Fs

B

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

411.

. À name. I, f\. iii, 1: VII,

l.

v. xxiii,

THE 134ra RADICAL, fj.

(1) With, along with. Passim. E.g.
LL. 8; K. i. 4, 6, 7, 8: IL IL ix.
12; ^ ii, 4, 5, 7: VIL. xiii. 3;

w. Xxvi 2, Another preposition, as
` from or to, is sometimes oe in our

idiom, Observe 18 Lu fe, v LM
T ix, 2; and flit UE HE

iv. R xxviii, 6. (2) And, I. ti ii.

8; iv. 2, 9; v. B5 vii. 115 et al, scepissime.
Sometimes it is better to translate by or.

1i, Ees vi. Men 2, 6, T: et al.

(3) For. H.R. i 4: IV. due

(4) To give, to give to. I. D. vi. 5, 6:

V. F^ 1, 2, 3,4, 5, 6: etal, sape. (5)
To help, III, F viii, 5 (6) Than.

ty, Fia.

Low.8d tone. 'To share in; to be con-
cerned about. III, ps iv, 11: IV,

xxxi. 1: V, Py. i 2: VIL . xx, 1, 5.
VI. fF. xviii, 1 is marked with this

tone, but Choo He explains by gy. *to

assist,’ as in (3) above.

Low. Ist tone. Passim. A final patticle,
interrogative, and also with exclama-
tory force. It implies generally that the
speaker has a well formed idea on the sub-
ject of the question ja his own mind, and
that he wishes to express his own surprise, _
or to involve an opponent in difficulty,

L [.vii 4, 10,12, 14, 16, 17; F L.

4, 7; v. 8; vii, 8; xvi. 1: et al, sepissime.

(1) Toarise, II. Ty. xiii. 3: IV, ps

hing
haing i. 9: VI, E vi, 2: (2) To rouse one’s

self, to be aroused. IV. E ziii. 1:
VI. » x.; xxii. 1; fw. xv.; xxxvii. 12..
fi x to raise itself,—spoken of
grain, I, ps vi, 6, (3) To raise, I.
E vii, 14. fL [52 to open the

granaries, I, [W.iv.9. (4) To flourish.

IV. L.dis.
(1) To lift, to 1 raise, I. E vii, 10:

Mm F.v. 4; E v, 7: VI. F ii. 8.

= to promote; to be lifted up, promoted,

m pf. tv Fk ixNUAR

\. Vi,

4702

shé

pwan
p'an

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

4,6: VI, ÑR.xv.1. = to allege, insist

on, VIL E xxvi. 4; PF xxxvii, li
= to take, I. E vii. 12. = to com-
plete, I. (x.x. 2. (2) Al. I
6.7: IL Jv xi.: VI. F. vi. 3.
Old, ancient, III. "pose 12: IV.

E-i i 4. = former. IV. Td iii. 2,

THE 135m RADICAL. Fy.

The tongue. III. E iv, 14,

(1) To lodge in abooth. I, fy. iv. 9.
& BR alodging-house. IIL _f-. iv.
5. (2) Only, IV, fF. xxix. 2 (5A
name, IL P. ii, 5, 6, 8.

(1) To neglect, pass over. I.
ix, 1, 2: II. . Hi, 16, 21: et al, sape.
e Bg. to give up his own views, IT,
T xiii, 5. To give over, to cease, IV,
F. xviii, 2. (2) Tolet go. LE: vii,
4: V. E ii, 4. (8) ‘To discharge, as

arrows, IIT. [x.1.4. The dict. gives
this instance under the 3d tone.
The name of a State, IIT. Bs iv, 16;

T^ ix. 12.

THE 136ra RADICAL. Aj.

ve vii. 2;

The ancient emperor, so called. n b.
ii. 6; viii, 3; UR ii. 4: et passim,

To make postures. =f rd T Z
IV. _Ẹ. xxvii. 2,

THE 137r& RADICAL. FH.

To be abandoned to pleasure. Pps a 4,
I. fh. iv. 4: VIL, xxxiv. 2. Read

. without the aspirate, it is the name of

` Yen Hwuy’s son, v.

T iii, 4,

THE 188mm RADICAL. HL.

(1) Good. nt. ES i4 tv, E.
xv 1: VEO F. vin 3 CFE XS the

ytin

mao

INDEX Hr.

good natural heart); xvii, 1;
2. = Intuitive. VII, E xv. 1. (3)
R A^ the goodman, a husband. IV,
qe». 1 (8) A name, II P

v. ix. 1,

i. 4.

THE 13971 RADICAL. &.

(1) The countenance, the looks. LE.
iv. 4; “Pe. 1. 6, 7: HL
VOWS. ix. 2, 4: VI Ñ. xv. 3: vn
XH ff, » IL “Jy. xiii, 1: VI
xiii. 8. (2) Colour, colours; sights, I.
E vii. 16; V. T i.1: VL s iv. 1;
vii. 8: VIL. [x. xxiv. 1, (2) The ap-
petite of sex, VI. po 12,7. Beauti-
ful women,—a euphemism, I. Te v. 5:

v. F.i45—o» vmi. p. xxi 4.

where = manifestations; and xxxviii, `
where it = functions?

3 ER. flushed-like. IL .i.s.

v. vii. 4; ix. 9;

THE 140m RADICAL, yn.

` (1) The d or moxa, IV. de
ix. 5. (2) Beautiful, APE, beautiful
young women, V. Jt i.5, (3) To rule,

to correct, V. E: vi, 5: VII, Ls xi.

5. In this sense, it is Merchant with
, and shonid be read e.

The mustard plant. But it is used
as simply = grass, IV. f+. xxviii. 1;
“fy. di 1.

PRU! DAS tired-like, ? stupid-like.
I. Tx ji. 16,

I.q. ESA To weed. VII. T xxxii,
3.

(1) Grass, pasturage. II.

28 EL grass-cutters, LA

H grass-earriers, IV. ^ [x. xxxi
1. (2) The flesh of prantedadunun. VI.
. vii. 8.

v. iv, 3.
. ii. 2.

. vi. 6: IL
w. xxxvii 12. (2)

(1) Growing corn. I. €
ii. 16: VIL.

INDEX III,

pez [^7 the name of an ancient State,

- near the Tung-t‘ing lake, "V. E: iii, 2.

AJ

kow
kou

HE
ES
jö
jo

MAOU
mao

J
$%
tsze
iszü

PRA
E
joo
ju
di
king
ching

W L F.i 4; vii, 20; PR. xiv.
et al, sepe. (2) Improper, without some
Vi, pozo

(V) As, such as; to be as (7. e., like, and
sometimes equal to), L l Es vii 4, 16,
17,18: et passim.” Asif; seeming to be.
L bev: Fix us;

al.; sepe. rep Bh IR. ‘may rightly be

apparent cause,

A pig pen, VIL F xxvi. 2. j

v. di. D: et

HAS

deemed to LAs sy,’ occurs several times.

Asto IL þvi 19; FA. xiv. 2: IL
P. iii, 6: VIL T xxxviii, 1, 2, 3: e
al., passim, 75 #. IV. P xxviii, 7: -
VI. up vi. 5. eH, FEE SS HR
i SES all == is it not, the better
pilan to a L Jy. i 4: IV. . vii, 4:
v. _f. vita, 4 $y Bef. iv.
x. bas BRO $b, vir, F. xxix,
(2) If L E.vit “Pie xi. 8: et al,
sepe, (3) = to conform to virtue. V,
Hz iv. 4. (1) The name of one of Con-
fucius' disciples. IE. des 25, 28: et al.
To embitter, to be embittered, I. E

vii. 22: VI, e Xv, 2

Surpassing, the first among a thousand.

VII. E xx. 4,

Vigorous-looking. V, Te v. 4,

Wi FE luxuriant, III. Es iv. T.

'The name of a city of Ts'e. VII. E
xxxvi. 1.

Coarse, wild grass, III. E ili, 2:
HL fy. xxi. 1 (N.B.).

"This, these, IL TV. xii, 1: III. F-
viii (A E Vir. T xix, 2.
Toeat, VIL y. vi.

The name of .a rude tribe or State.
ni ff. iv. 16: Roux

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

E

418
Ér Grass, I p.i 4 Yi K =
ts‘aou Hi -
His vegetation, HI EIE iv. T. Hi. Be
see BE. K FR An» Aw, IV. afte xxviii. 1,
BEAR see A = = herbs, VII,

A kind of spurious grain, PS »
VI. ES xix,
wt
Jib (i) HEAR overgtown with grass and -
hwang weeds, VL Tv. vii.2. (2) Wild, ruin-

huang
ously addicted to hunting, X. [v. iv.
7, 8.

a

t'e
ʻi

m

Et 'lo come forth and descend to, =, to
Ja govern I, E vii, 16.,

li . l

DIA (1) A surname, I. fy.i. 1, 2. (2)

chwangThe name of a street in the capiti of

ehuangqs ie. d vi, L.

E The name of an ancient State, I. T
keu iii 6
chü
ae An ancient name for the territory of
hsin
zk rs useless plant growing amid corn and
yew like it. ? darnel, VII. ps xxxvii, 12,
yu E EM
E Le toa, fiin E.
*éaou

P dan iii, 5; iv. 4: IJJI, T iv. 9, l

(1) Not; not to be, not tohave, , q. HE.
ee [ovs Pii I Eit 55

v. ji. 4, 9: et.al, seepissime, Often it
= no one, and in this case it generally
attracts the object of the following verb `
to itself. I. E vii. 8; T xii, 2: II,
digo 11. 27; vii, 22 ns fF. iit. M;
iv. 17: et al, scepe. AN x and p

E are strong affirmat-ons, = there is

F
nothing (or none) but ... I. E. vi. 6;

II. ore i. 8: IV. E xx.; NT v: el al.
EL 4b, see F, So, [3 tn. 1I.
d iv. 2; vii, 4: et al. (2) P2 A. a
worthy and thinker of Loo, VIL d
xxvi. 2, :

= grass,

plants, V. T vii, I.

‘Tq Hf. Calamities, 1V. F. viii

ray T

E i, 13; ii. 4, 7; T
5: I. F. iv. 18; x. 5: vi, Fx

7; R. x. 8. In several of these examples,

the phrase is 3 3 Ei]. applicable

properly only to the imperial domain, but
used pretentiously of the great fiefs. =

all VII. E: iv. 1, (2) A surname,

HB gem Weev bira -Po

et al, sepe.

To as 1H; = to decease.

E». 1,
(1) To be manifested, II. T ix, 9.

tang

P

3

oe (2) To know clearly, VII. E v. hsieh
59 The name of av ancient State, 5 and ie
bu 8 4H. I. Bn u^ iii. 1; xi, 2: uL Fov tsden
chien

Eid BEE. the name of a place. vr 3

INDEX HI.

(1) To cover. V. ff. i5. DA

continuative and sometimes

illative, I. -. vii. 17; d iv. 9: IL
ELeev “YR. ii. 45 vi. 4,

The name of a place, II, d vi, 1:
Five times, five fold, III, iË: iv, 18:
VH.

v. xviii,

To obscure, cloud over, keep in the

shade. II, F ii, 17: IV. J. xv. 2.
36 E: grass-fuel gatherers. I. F

A straw-basket. VI. E vii. 4.

474 CHINESE: CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.
ZR Vegetables. V. (K.i. 4. EG
tsue : kae particle,
. tsai kai
7 Grassy marshes, ? bogs. IIL fix.
tésay 4. :
tsé : E
ET ass
5d ‘Pulse, VII. . xxiii. 3. kă u. T p
shu AE
ME Phe appearance of grass, II, a s yr E viii, 7.
ts‘uy 28. hsi o a CR
ts'ui ’ pa ‘ The name of a State.
2k (4) Fields lying fallow; commons. IV. 73%
lae Jes xiv.3. (2) A surname, VII. T. ts‘ai
lai xxxviii. 2. flit
Wj . Buds; to bud, VIL b.viiijix 2. pe
andng i : . pi -
méng E
B Low, 3d tone. A surname, VI. T jaou
hwa vi, 5. : Jao
hua . f
EJ (1) Ten thousand. I, E i, 4; B Ewei
wan iy 2; x, 2, 4: II,

Great. Ui pz Ff, how vast! nr.

iv. 11,
" pr nandi

X with weeds. t PE, see

Thin. = mean, shabby. v. v. 138:
VIL p. xliv. 1; T xv. 1. = slight.
IV. Ñ. xxiv. 1. =a spare simplicity,
III, des v. 2, = to make light. I. LE
v.3: VIL ft. xxiii. 1.

(1) The name of a State. I.
1:10, f. iii. 1, 4. (2) A surname. III,

v. Vi, 2.

To present, to introduce, "V. E v.
5, 6; vi, 1, 2.

(1) Firewood. I f. vii.10: vI. F.

x xiv,

run vii. 3. e xviii, 1, EN 3ir x dd == ‘a little

st To bury, inter, II, T viL 1: DIL sickness? II, F. ii. 3. (3) Grass,

tsang E fi, 2, 5; v. 2, 4. plants, a 4 VM - 1,
3! = mut b ing o

ae (1) To wear on the head, IV. P 35 as "E "E dd Bee

mung xxv, 1. (2) A naine. YE Be work tséay e . Hi, 6.

méng FE BO ths pe 66

xxiv, 1; p E AV . iv. 1, 2, To lay up, to deposit, I, s vii, 18:

sug Y, F.v zv. psi

p AR. Jk Er pss (2)

ching 7
chéng ©

I. g. Zi, to steam. IH. WN. vii. 2. Here Ri
‘cooked,’ would be better in the transla- meaou
“tion than ‘ roasted." miao

To despise, VI. Re jai 1.

INDEX III.

T. q. zi E ah, to cultivate. HI,
E iv. 18.

Physic, III. Eis.

To revive, I, [y. xi. 2.

A kind of basket, III. EU v. 4.

THE 141sr RADICAL, , J&.

(1) A tiger. HII “fr. ix. 6: vin.
xxiii, 3. BR x == life-guards.
“Fe iv. 4. (2) Aname. TH Los

To oppress, tyrannize over; oppressive.

eee Os

. lii, 7.
Up. 2d tone, à verb. (1) To reside in,
to dwel, III, f.x. 5: CE: vii. 3,

4; fi. i 1,3: viR. vi. 5: vu. F.
xxxv, 6. Obs, JR ^p vR. v. 1,
Be. IV. F xxxii, 1, là L

to dwell in love. V. JE: vi. 5; but the
same in IL f°. vii.2 is different.’ (2)
To live in retirement; unemployed, V,

“Pa VIL Ro © 328.

an unmarried daughter. VL fi. i 8.

'(4) To manage, = business, an occasion

for, IL FR. iif, sr m. TL. iv. 1,
Bü Z p^ , ‘gave him a place to reside
in,’ perhaps B is up. 3d tone,

Empty. vL p. xii. 1. Used adverbi-
aiy, VIL _Ẹ. xxxvii. 3.

' (0 ER iE 7t. joyful and pleasant-
dike, VII. cp “iii. 1. (2) To measure,
to reckon, Ea 1. unexpected, that
cannot.bereckoned on. IV. dox. (8)
a A a forester, III, P- i. 2: V,
F. vii. 5,6, 7, (4) = Shun,—said in the
dict. to be the surname that arose from
him. V. dE vi. 7. (5) The name of a

State, V. E x vr vi. 4.

EA V. E ix. 3. E

IL Jv. vii 1; xiii 1,

_ CHINESE. CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

Vit,

475

A name or mark. = argument. VI.

P iv. 4.

Up. Ist tone, To ery out. ZE üt
v. E i:1,2,

The name of a State. v. L ix. 2.

Be

haou
hao

3)

haou `
hao

QE
 kih
ko

THE H2» RADICAL. i.

hij Lq. dr A gnat. III. te 4.

ju
jui
jj] ^ An earth-worm. nno. x. 2, 3, 6.
yin . r
BS Intterchanged with FA. Early in the
5599! morning. IV. Ñ. xxiii. 1,

A snake, III. f\. ix. 3, 4,
shay
shê

A surname. IL R.v. I, 2, 3. But
ch'e the dict. does not mention the character -

chh as such.
Dung-worms, III. d x. i,

ts*aou

ts‘ao ;

WB Asy. nL p.v

ying A i

Tu An insect that-eats through wood. ==

the appearance of being worn away. VII.

le oe ' ;
li M xxii. 2,

fhe silk-worm, To keep silk-worms,
IH. NV. iii, 8. To nourish silkworms on.
vin boss

The wild tribes of the South, TIL. f-.
iv, 14.

E

A

man

THE 143» RADICAL. fi i

Blood. -VI. “Jr. vii. 3: vi ii,

heué 3.
hsieh

s THE 144ru RADICAL, 7T.
A 1) To go; to set ont; to wroeeed. 1.
i ff (1) To g p

hing T iii. 7; iv. 6: II. E. i. 7, 12: et al.,

Hsing sepe, Tomake to go, tolead, VI. F.
ii, 3; ^ xiv, 2. To advanee; in con-
trast with tE ‘to stop.’ I. E xvi,
: fT fe. rain-peels. IL d ji. 28.

476

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

-$9
Til 4 fp to assist cn the journey, or
expedition, IL "fX. vi, 1. (2) To do, 1
perform; to carry out, to practise; to be
practised, carried out. L £- iv. 5; vii. i
9, $3; — M. v. 2, 4; ix, I: et. al, sape. shuae
; shuai
This meaning is kindred to the above,
$ Ax
and derived trom ity The- way regulates f
cue
the conduct. TT: T , ‘to carry out prin- ciun

INDEX HI.

Up. 3d tone, To wear. L F. iii, 4;

vii 24: I fe. iv. 1,4: VIL P. xxii
2.
To decay, become small and feeble.

HL Jy. ix. 5, 7: V. s vik VI, Ty.
xiv. 2, 3.

A shroud, I. fy. xvi. 2.

ciples,’ often occurs, but 1T i x Z 1H To zn up the sleeve, to bare the arm.
— 9. V
A vi. de X, 6, is literally ‘a tram- tan qu 177 H. ARs ix, &: V. Ti i. 3.
` PL red robe i
per' Observe the two meanings in IV. 2 Embrvidered robes, VH. E vi.
= : E chin
“Poe ix. 2.—0Obs, also fT fiih, VI K. enin "
xv. 2; (T F, IV. a i3, and IL, BY Low. 3d tone. To be covered with, =
. GL :43 j qire to be zffected by, to receive, IV. F.i.
l Eais MATEY bos AE pei 8: V, fF. vii e; k.i 2 = to wear
A ff TT] pé fp and fT RJ. v j ae ,
to have to wear, VII, T vi.
iv. 6, 7, (3)A ie. I, Fiv. =, 4
pe Q namg n 4 Lew, Ist tome, Zq. Ji. Ay Z2,
3.—IV. . xxxi. 1. f
P > P Pe the hair dishevelled, unbound. IV. T
TT Low, 3d tone. Actions, conduct;—al- PI iy 5.6.
hing PORE x a ET -ulzk RIA PUT
Nani ways a noun. I, ES 8: IL E- ii, 3S A name. V, fy. iii. 2.
18: HL JA. ix 57.12: IV. [oxi Aem - .
.V. T v. amy T: IV. pon d Naked, QU Ah omn fe. ix. 2: v.
5: VII ES xvi 1; Jw. xxxii. 2; a en x. i, 3 —There must be a difference in
xxvii, 6, 9. Medhurst, Williams, and SYS he meaning of the two terms, but I have
Wade give the pronunciation, as here uot found it indicated.
fepresented ; but according to K'aug-he's -yu — Abundance of Clothes, Abundance
dict. it shoud be expressed by hang, d rally a g d
hêng. yu generally, AT i E f == ‘yea, an
1j Low. ist tone, BS fT: adoublesur- YË more? 1L fy. v.
tang name. IV. v xxvii. 1. iai 'To mend nee "To mend or repair
fii Aname, ate Td poo generally; to supply; to assist, I, fy.
yeis Pu iv. 8, 10: I... 5; T iv. 8: VI.
fis An art, a contrivance. I. E vii, 8: N T vii, 2: va p. ziii: 3 CN.B.).
d VLR- xvi VIL xviii 1; xxiv. 2. = A Naked. f FG, see d
a profession, II. oF; vii, 1. : PR i
- i z i Y . I . v. 4.
15 The name of a State, IV. T^ xxiv. a Totie df apap P i
VHS 2.xxxy, 2: V. E viia, 2. (5 uis kao .
dE BAW. Toin y B To put off the upper garment. dH
ie , seth Fit wn 2
fai I, g. ji. Jrosswise; = disorderly; hsi Tor AES 4H.
Hee perplexed, I. fy. iii, 7: VI. Te xv. 8, thi Narrow. {im ay, I. d vii, 6: III.
pen
ee pien E- iii, 14.
ILE Höra RADICAL. K- fij Cloth cf hair; coarse cloth. IL E ii,
d m
2^ Clot bes TL fois LR jo Bai p une
Yothes; robes, " ix. 1: í 8 qeosum :
K ica Á . Hg (1) An hon, epithet. ru 2 HE E,
M iv. 8; R ix. 5: V ET 1: VH. P sang 3 B
. b 2 hsian J B 1. (2) = ai. the designa-
vi K HB un Pe. it a: vi fr. Bsiang

xxxvi. 2, = grave-clothes. Lexi

tion of a disciple of Tsing Sin, JI. EG
ii. 7.

INDEX IIl.

ES
Et
sth
hsi

py
se
hsi

To take by surprise. 1I, E i15.
(N.B)

THE 146TH RADICAL. pa

The west: om the west; western. ].

Evi vs: m poa vr
Eta, Ross pij ff]. the
chief of the West,--king Wan, IV.

xiii, T: VH. E us xxii, 1,3. ply ^

X N.x)í2: IL. R.v. 4: IV.

D

gaou
yao

- with, an audience of....I, E

2: VIL "fv. iv. 3. @) pij y. a
famous beauty. IV. fy. xxv. 1. (3),
Part of the designation of the grandson of
Tsing Sin, IL fF. i. 3, 4.

Up, Ist tune (1) To seek for, IL.
vi, 3: VI. E xvi 3, = to seek an in-
troduction to, V. E vii, 1, 7; ix. 1,
(2) = to intercept, WL fy. ii; 3: HE
Kvv, kovis.

(1) EX E repeatedly; to repeat,
vq 1, 4: VIF. vi, 2. (2)
a 1i: to overturn, v. Ew vi 5.

ave

. Yo cover, overspread, VI, E . i, 5.

TUE 14771 RADICAL. A.

Passim. EY Jd: to see from
a distance, VII xxxvi, 1; [W. xxiii, 2.
Very often it = to visit, £.g, I. L- i
IL Revi 1: ULB, vä. 1 2,3

J Re to have an interview with,

To see,

—spoken of a ruler, V. T vii, 4 It -

forms the passive voice. ILL T: v5
VIL

(1) To appear, to be seen. i^. xii.
6:1H, F.v avr b. xxi. 4; R
xi: (2) To become illustrious. VIL
E ix, 6. (3) To have an interview
v. Í, L, 2; xvi.

v. XXix,

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES, 4

477

A coinpass,—the instrument so ezlled.

‘iL IV. Ea i.1,5; nob VI. ET VIL

Aricei

k'uei Š. v. i.

ni ‘To regard, to look at,—. ften = to
she ‘consider. IE, EÈ ii, 4, 5: v. tii,
shih 1; xx, 3: etal To see, I Wn. iil. 3;

xi, 1: V.

TERT
Poe ie de vii. Stet ad. m int ab

to hold a court, to give awlicnee. ps
i m isl = equal to, V. R.i. 3.

E

To see, VI T vi. 5,

too

u

yH (1) To love, show affection to. I.
tsin 4 9. IH V3: SB
iris xii, 8: IH, des v. 9:11V. E xi, 1: et al,

sepe. Mutual affection,
jii. 48 (G4 Hele): iv. 8

IV. die. iv. 1. (2) To be near, to ap-
proach, II, 4: VII.
To tóuch one another, IV. de xii, 1
Intimate, I. T vii. 1 (8) In person,

personally, V. ft. vii. 4: vi. ^ i, 3.
(4) Relatives. Very often it is used of

parents, E LE 8. IL T vii, 5: IV.

[issii ty xix. 1,2, 4:etal Butitis
also usod mote widcly. vi. E .XXxiv.;

mae vi, 3H gu nn fenes

To wait on a superior, to appear at

ur p.i;

To be loved,

v. vilis V. XV,

a ~

kin court, pon EUR V. E- vG viL —

chin

hi Aname. HL f.i 4,

kien :

chien : i
E To understand, apprehend; to make to
D

Q4 wnderstand, to instruct. V. E vii. 55
chiao "TJ. i9

mg To view, contemplate; to discern. II.
peus E 865 vi 4s Jovis ur pans

kuan jj 9; T vii, 4: IV. E xiv. 2; xv. 23

* F. xxxiii, 2: V. P viid: VIL ES

"xxiv. 1, 2. To makea visit of inspection.

L “fr. iv. 4
THE 148ta RADICAL f

yiv 5, (3) ^

(1) Ahorn. VII,

2: NE fh. iv. 5 vi, B V. E iv. 4 xd ME zt the namo of a piece of music Ife

(N. BJ.

iv. 9.

"

478

kéae i i

chich Ei 4, " To relieve, to unloose, n p.

pR Ex pi the appearance of fearing

suh T

n death, 1. E: vii. 4, 6.

at See above,

huh

hu
THE 1491s RADICAL, E,

= A word, words: a saying. I. [X..i5:

gen ili. 4; v. 4: et passim. To speak, say; t9
speak of. I, E. vii, 9, 16: F. vi. 35
et sæpissime. * EU VIL TF. xxxiii.
2. =to mean, meaning. I. E o vii, 12:
VI. fV. xvii, 8. Ta = - means,
VIL “JR. iv, 6; but in VIL F. xxiv.
1, the same phrase = to think anything
of the words of others. = tocherish. I.
T iv. 1: et al This usage is' only
found. in some quotations from the She-
a "TS = to have a saying, or to

Sepe; but in IV. E x. 1, it = to
. bs Speech.

E: To calculate. V. R.v. 4.

kse :

cha

ER To punish; to order to be punished.

taou VIL fy. vii. 2. To put to death. III

t'ao

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

To remove, IL E- ix, 2, (N.B.): V.

TR ix, 6.

Eu au the appearance of being self-
conceited,, VI. fy. xiii. 8,

(1) To instruct, V. fF. vi. 5. ©
fp , the name of a Book in the Shoo-
king. V. . vii, 9.

To revile. IV. T xxxiii, 1.

. To entrust, I. Ñ. vi. 1. = to ac-

cept a stated support from. Vf. vill.

Tocontend, wrangle, BA fk ET liti-

gants, V, . V. V5 vi, 1,

, 9 BR, cheerfully, VIL F. xxxv.
Pe establish. aay p IH. Sp iii,

10. ER T i. to institute instruction.
vil. Bx XO: ta settle i in
one's mind, IV ^N. sxx. 5°

x. XXX, 2,

[2 *
kwei
kuci

Ra

ts'éang
hsiang

hwuy
hui

E

ching xij 1
chàng ^^

INDEX Il.

(1) To allow, to accede to. I.
vii. 10. To promise. IL it (2)
A surname, ur F. iv. 1, 3, 4, 5, 17, 18.
One-sided, only half the truth. ur.

ii. 17: IH, JN. ix. 13.

To try. "gis x to try to follow,

En Sill, o Ir. E ii, 4.

A piece of poetry; an ode. Generally,
with reference to some piece of the She-

king. L f. iv.9:1L. [-. iv. 3: IV.
T xxi 1: V. b.iv. 2; Jy. vii 2:
VI. ps "Pt 2. BRE
and ay E are the forms of quotation
from the She-king. Passim.

Deceitful; deceitfully. III. T i4.

'

(1) Particulars, v^. ii, 1: VL.
iv.4. Minutely, IV. E xv. l. (2)
II. fy. xi, 8.

To cut off, to put to death, IL, f\. viii.
3; xi, 1: HL R ix. 6: v. Luo
vig FR. iv. 45: VL TN. vi. 3. Inr
ue xi. 2 and III. F v. 4, the transla-
tion—‘ punished ’—is too light.

o tr and K zm are the names of -
Books in the Shoo-king. I. D d ii, 4.—

ul. OB v.6: V, F.v.

= sn. words, VII,
A saying, V. Eu iv 1.
guage, III. ^ vi, 1.

To tell speak to about .... I. “Bs vi,

A name.

n . XXxiii. 2,

== speech, lan-

2; vii, 32; R.i. 1,2: 1I... IN. x1. 2; xii.
nva poa
To delude, III, jy. ix. 9

To repeat, croon over, VI. T ii 5
IX. Riv. 4.
To instruct, to teach, VI: F ix. 3;

XX, 2;

To relate.

v. Xvi.
(1) To be sincere; sincerity. IV. E
2 (N.B), 3: VO F.v 2 O

" Really, truly, indeed, I. L vi, 6; vii.

INDEX III.

6 5,151L L.is iti. 2; T i 7:
ni [.45;i3;v4 V. F.i s
iv. 1.

‘To speak of, discuss,

HI R. ix. 10

Med
shuo

Ei ii, 18. To explain, explanation, V.

E iv, 2; Tx 5. “Speakings, =
. ' doctrines. III fy. ix. 5, 7, 9, 13.
E To counsel, V, E: vii. 6: VI. T

Slory iv. 3, 4, 5, 6: VIL ^N. xxxiv. 1.
shuy

Ai Iq. A To be.pleased. I. E: vii,
Such 9; f\. iv. 9.

Ate Who, whom. I. TR v. 5; vi. 6: II,

shwuy
sin E iv. 3; F. xiii, 5: III,

et ai.
E! : is
vd Abbreviated for E To flatter; flat

xd teringly, III. F vii. 4: VI, T xiii,

8.
REI 22 23 BR. repeatedly and specifi-
chur ally, V, cL v. 8,
BA To talk with, converse, IV.

vw. Vi. 2;

chien

v. xxxiii.

fom «3. VLC iit 2.
sin To discuss, to consider. V. fR. viii.
lun — 2.

Ex To request, to beg; to beg leave. Some-

HIJ times, especially in the first person, it is
is'ing merely a polite way of expressing a pur-

pose. I, Jes iii, 2; v. 6; vii, 18, 19; R.
i. 5: iii. 5; xv. 8; xvi. 1: et al, sape. Obs.
IL [\. x. 2; x13: V. f\, iv. 8.

To flatter. E a x A^ 8yco-

phants. VI. 7k. xiii. 8.

"Toreprove, toremonstrate; admonitions,

i4 :
Ege, Tt is often followed by J- II. T v.

chien 2; xii, 6: IV. T. ii. 3, 4: V. J^. ix. 2,

3; fi. ix, 1, 4.

ER
y
yü

zd : ;
HE To avoid, to conceal, vn. f. xxxvi.
hwuy 2. ; .
hui.

B2 A common saying. I. E iv. 5.

en y
3 A reply, affirmative and immediate. I.

T xvi. 1: II. E ii. 5.

ET (1) Not merely one; all I. E vii.
choo 16; vii, 4, 5: IL x.3. Q)A
chu F PF ( )

GR d: IV. fi. xv. Be

preposition, In, from, on, to, &e, I. d :

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES

ini

700
mu
zin
nh
gow
ou

.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Sometimes, where P d

419
e
vii, 12;

(8) As an interrogative., Generally, E

= Z 3E. Yet once we have the 3E.
expressed, V, T viii, 1; and E Te-
mains = 7; which it is in TL. v. xii.
4, where there is no interrogation, LE.
vii.4; [y.i 2; ii. 1; v. 1 (W.B.); viii, 1:
et aL, sepissime, (4) E: te see fi
(5) SH 485. the name of a place, IV.

x. l.l.

v. Vil, 55 viii, 5: et aL, seepissine.

To consult, take counsel, I. fy. xi.
1,4. A counsel, a plan. I.
Counselling. HN Té T.
(1) To address, to say to. I,
vi 1;x.2:10L þin, 16; Riv. Lv.
1; x. 3; et al, sepissime. To tell to, to in-
form. HL Te i 4. (4) Lo say; to
speak of. L b. vi 16: n. ft. vi.3,
6: et al, sepe, == to suppose, III. T
vi. 2. (8) To call; to be called. T. fr.
iii, 3; DM iv. 7; viii, 8: VII. M xxxvii,
8, 4, 5, 8: et passim, Obs, 7 ZB, which
occurs continually, E. g., I. Evi 9:
H. [ii 25 iv. 6: Vir. Ẹ. xxv. 2, 3,
ziH
BH.
followed by a particle, terminates the
sentence, we can explain the characters
without insisting on a peculiar idiom.
At other times, we can explain them by
understanding Br before B but in a
multitude of cases we have simply to
accept the idiom, 5H x which also
is frequent, is different. = to mean,

meaning, II. T^ ii. 6: VI. E vii, 8:

et al, 4 ET what do you mean, what

a. xiii, 8.

avl;

_ is meant, u. pagninnmn pee

IV. Jy. xxiv, 2: et al.—Obs, I. F vii.
1: VI. JR. i. 6.

To plan; plans; n ki ix. 6: V. d
ii. 3.

To sing,—in some peculiar, abrupt

manner. VI. ^ vi. 5. E BK to
sing (act. and neuter). V. E v, 6; vi,
1. * :

480 CHINESE’ CHARACTERS AND PHRASES. INDEX IIl.

EL To give careful attention to. I. Js ZA A mountain stream; a river. IL T.

Eh dii 4; vii 24. BN du

ehin i chi i

ES To detest. V. fi. iv. 4. ^ A

tu) THE 151sr RADICAL, Ef.

tui E

ze% 7 my; EK y 4 - RO NE :
9 To inspect, 2j nm A Aik: L T u A wooden vesselor dish. EI z$, VI
re ; ; z-
chi v. 8: IL. qe v. 8. tew E x. 6: VII, E- xxxiv.; ^ xi,
ink To know, I. E- vii. 4; T vii 2: ya, How. Passim. It is generally follow-
shih yy. Te ii. 1, 8; x. 2; xii. 1: V. JE: ii, p^. ed by # >, at the end of the’ sentence,

3;iiv. 1; K.vi. 42 VL. F.is.2;x7, 03 Eg, bodie; Pex

E om g ? ? ?
8; [v vi. 5, 6. To understand, VI.
ee 42 BH Ob ] : 52D 'AL., BK.
T. ko 4. zg Ri] E of much. in- " THE 1520 RADICAL, ZR
formation, VI. f. xiii. 2,

a ee - 2 Jd

dE

king m Zi to treat one as a pig. VII, E
ching xxxvii. 1,

ja
q

To compare, BE TJ... v. T i7. HK A young pig. I E. iii, 4; vii, 24:
: čun pp, TN. vii 3: Vi, Ty. xxvi. 2.
To discuss, indulge in discussions. IIT, Fa (1) The elephant. Ii Ya. ix. 6. (2)

T ix. 9. . seang ‘Yo resemble, to make to resemble. I.
hsiang es iv. 6. (8) The namé of Shun's

brother, V. [r.i 85 i. 1, 2, 3: VI.

S ve S
De EE EX

Ne

Praise, IV. "xv. xxi: VI, E xvii.
yu 3.

yü E {is
b To read. V. T Pius $ ^ Graiu-fed animals, VI. es vii, 8.
tu hwan à à

P ! huan

ah To ehange; to be changed, E, [i.i j a. ;
- i j g F ae The first among a hundred, ae fat
peer $:xi 9: iL F.i8; Tes 2: Ur, 2 M

pien i acu x +. Ii. m iv. 12: VII. Es v.
LL iv. 12, 16; T v. 4: V, T ix. 2: , lao
v aris ; Ë (1) To be pleased, satisfied. II. T

VI. F vi. 5; ix, 3: VII. E vi. 2 (= N à

yu n ; svi 2, (2) T
versatile); xli, 2; T xiv, 3,4 l yü xiii, 1, 5: IV. E xxviii 2. (2) To
To calumniate, Vl, fy, xiii. 8. To make an excarsion, I fy. iv. 5.
ch'an revile, f. Tv. iv. 6,

$ 15 L x "
fit (D An enemy. IV. Rii 1,4 QI THE He BADICATS 24

chow Aq f£ f :
chon (E TER toavenge, (3)Inamame, V. 4] (0 The leopard, HI fix. 6, Q)

. viii. 2,—* „i itteni., ;
E jii. 2,-The char. is also written Eff paou A name, VL Ty. vi 5

51 To reprimand; reproof, VI. T vii, S AAS - div

jang 9,” (2) To yiekt, to decline. VIL Tv. M. E D UT A Jj tv. E
í ABA sete i chae xvii. 1.

xi. ava fe, modesty and complaisance, ch'ai :

(1). A general name for the barbarous

xz I Du 35 tribes of the north, VI. T x, 2, 4, 7.
THE 150ru RADICAL. 2 . mai (2) A surname, VII. as xix, 1.

- 2 Aspect, demeanour, 1V. Jovi iz

p: A valley. III. E iv, 15 2 Zi a polite demeanour, VI, T xiv, 2,
cid g l 3; used verbally, IV. Td xxx. L

INDEX III.

B

ching
chan

foo

Éica n

kuan

. more or less of reprocf,

THE 1540 RADICAL. H.

An hon, epithet. V, E viii. 3,

(1) To carry on the back. I. E iii

4; vii, 24: HI. E iv, 2: IV. P xxxi,

(N.B): VIL . xxxv.$. (2) To take

refuge in. "VII. TR xxiii. 2. (3) f4

53, the name of a place. Iv. T i 1,
(1) Wealth, money; expense, I. F
vii, 3: IL “JR. vii. 8: DI. F. iv.-10: e
B JH. Vit E. xii. 3, ^ B.

IV. fi. i9; Tv. xxx. 2. (2) Lg:

LE Talents. VII. T: xl. 3.

(1) To levy a tax, HE. f-. iii. 6, 7.

H Bi revenues, V, ES iii 3. (2)

5281 EH: the designation of one of Cou-

facius’ disciples H. E ii. 18, 19, 25,

27: TW, E iv. 18;

Poverty. I. PR. wi. 2: III,

sv. v. 12,5
(1) Goods, property; wealth, I UR
vids WY. iva. b: TM (x)
To bribe; a bribe, IL [.ii5. (3) A
name, III fẹ vii. 3,
TQ. JH- To be accustomed,

TP. Lt

To reprove, to be reproved, IV. E
xxi. The seepon of reproving.
i, TF iv. 5, ‘Lv urge to—inplying

IV. E i, 13;
xviii. 4; v, iii. 3, 4.

Double, III. p. iv. 17. Double-
minded, VH, ES i. 3, = supplement-
al. V. [yiii 5.

(1) Noble, being in an honourable con-
dition; honour, V, ES i. 4; iii. 2; he
ili, 1; ix 1 VL fF. xvii, 1, 2: VIL
p

E i: we - H . . le H P1
5
T. xxxiii, 12. B He, VI. E xiv,
2. (2) To esteem noble, to give honour

v. li

IH.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

Hz

peen

pien

AN
E

E
fue

SH
FH

pun

boo

-ku

gtts
s
kea
chia
Hik
tsih
isei

D

4i

pin

I ü

tsz‘e
tzů

 EX

hen
hsien

Hè

ts-en
chien

481

to, II. E iv. 2: III, E v.2: V,

v. iii, 6, etal
'To diminish, degrade. VI, F vii, 2,

To borrow, HI /+. iii, 7. The dict,
however, says that the character, mean-
ing to borrow, should be read čih, and
that, pronounced fae, it means to lend,

a) JE H = life-guards, VIL R,
iv.4. (2) Aname, UL f. i 2

Torelyon, IV. f. xiv. 1,

A stationary trafficker or merchant, I.
Evä. as.

(D A price, HL ft. iv. 17,18, (2)
A name. IL fy. ix. 2. !
To injure. do violence tò; to play the
thief with, I, vi 1; IV. Fi;
T xxx, 4: VI. d i-2: VII. E
xxvi. 4. Seditious; villainous, IV. E
ji.9: IH.
may be rendered by ‘a thief? IV, F- i,
18: VI 7f. ix n: VIL Fase 8,
1,1. He HZ A, 1 YR. viii.
A guest, V, fR- iii, 5: VIL
xxiv, 2, EA hk. VL
To give, present a gift; a gift. TII,
Pe. vi. 3: V, Ty. iv. 2,5. = to give
pay, and pu Js -to receive pay. V,
Jesi; ;
(1), Admirable, possessed of talents

and virtue; to be talented and virtuous;
the possession of talents and wirtüe.

Dassin. E, g., Y. T vii. 8, 4; xvi, 1:
II. E- iv, 2; v. 1; ix. 2. Asa verb, =
to praise, IV.” (2) To
surpass, be superior, II. al i, 3; ii, 6,
26.

Mean; a mean condition, NI,

3 (4% Hi: VL fF xiv 2,3 = bad,

the worst, III. [y.i. 4. Asa verb, to

consider mean; to make mean, II. P-

zb 2; f. iii. 6: VI, E

xiv. 5; xvii. 2.

v, ix, 11. An injurer,—

v. vii 3.

». xxix. 1,

v. li,

6i

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

Te exact. IV. i xiv. ł. Fo pay #8

atax, IH, F. iii 15.
A pledge, an introductory present. HI.
TZ. 1, 4: V. ^ vii, 1.
‘To depend on, = be good, ME Sp
vii. 1.

t

To avait for, be adequate to. I. E.
vii. 22: n.

A gift to a traveller for the expenses:
of his journey. II. B iii. 3.

. lii, 2.

THE 155ra RADICAL JR

JR YF. ii infant. III. E v. 8.
Dy F X NY the child-heart, IV.

v. Xii.

Jk Jk LA red and blushingly. III,
“Po tii

To blaze with anger, I. f.iii. 6.

THE 156mm RADICAL. ik.

To run; to run to, I . lii, 8: IV.

iu ix. 2. 'Togalop. I. [x. v. 5. x
B quadrupeds, II, F- ij. 28.

To come, I. d vii, 18,

. i, 17: YII.

v. XXxiii.

To arise; to rise, I,

quon TR. ix. 19: 1V.

1: VII. .XXv. I, 2. To begin with.

I, E i, 8. St it to be aroused.

VH, W.xv.
Toléap over. I, Ev vii 11.

(1) To go beyond, exceed with. I OT

iii, 7, (2) = to roll over (fifi sph. v.
pi iv. 4. (3) The name of a State,

IV. R. xxxi, L— A VIC
2

“The name of a part of Tsin, and the
clan name of its chief, VI. . xvii. 2.

v. dii,

In tr, "Ri. 3 BB AF is, perhaps,

‘the officer Kéen of Caaou. `

tsten
chü

AE

tsuk

tsu .

P

chung

‘of Yuğ, I.

INDEX HI.

To run, to hasten. n.p. ii, 10, 16; l

“Yr. ti. s: vir H g,

their aim, VI. P. vi, 2.

\. Xxiii. 2,

THE 15/THM RADICAL. fj.

(1) The foot, IV. f+. viii 2, 3; F
jü. 1: VI. F vii. 4. (2) To be sufficient;
enough. I. f. vii. 5, 10, 12, 16, 21, 22:
et passim. May sometimes be convenient-
ly translated by ‘to be able? E. g., VIL
È. xxi. 2 = abundant. VI pF.

xxiii. 3. J^ JE to satiate one's-self,
IV. h.xxxiii1. Asa verb, aS R
AE do noi count me sufficient to...... Hi.
Eis

The name of a famous robber. Ys

ER IL. “PR. x. 8

To resist, to keep at, or banish to, a
distance. TIL JX. ix 10, 13, 14: VI.

R- xiii. 8.

Foot-prints. III. d. iv. 7,

(1) A road, a path, Tf. iii. 4; vii.
24: II. E v. 3; T fi, 3; vi 1, 2: et
al, sepe, On the way, JI. fy. xiii, 1.
As a verb,... Hj BS. and run about on

! E n.
the roads, II. E iv. 6, H BB =
to obtain the management of the govern-

met, IL F.ir (2) -F ja. a
disciple of Confucius, II. E i. 3; viii,
1: etal.

(1) To tread upon, = to fulfil, satisfy
the design of. VII, E xxxviii, 1, HE
Pr. to occupy the throne, vr. Ns
(2) ^nj E. the name of a famous prince
{y. iii. 1; and of an adventurer
of Mencius’ time. VII. d ix. I.

To cross over; to leap over. “I. B
xv, 1: HI. “A, iii. 6; vii 2; IV. s.
xxvii.3: VI. R i, 8. To overstep, to
exceed. I. “PR. vii. 3; xvi.l, 2.

(1) The heel. VH. E xxvi. 2. (2)

To come to. I E iy. L

INDEX IIL.

i5

ES ES, the appearance of walking

k'eu alone, če., of acting peculiarly; unsociable.
ch'ü wr ^K . xxxvii. 8. !
Ws 'The foot-prints of animals, III. Bx
te iv. 7.
ti d
RS — to dance. A x RS Z IV.
taou s m
tao E xxxvii, 2.
ER BRA [t]. foot-paths, VIL A. xxi l..
he 2
hsi
AX Urged, embarrassed, I. T i, 6: V.
tsuh : ;
diu E iv. 1.

A shoe or sandal of straw, VII. E
se XXXV. 6.
hsi ' `
DEE I.q. Jf VII, Tes xxv, 2. 8,
chth :
BA To tread on. gi fij having tram-
tsuh =
tii pied oh: VI. h. x..6.
E RE EA. uneasy-like, II, pes i, 3.
tsuh The uneasiness would be indicated by
tsü some motions of the feet.

V ^ (0 To stumble. Ir. P. ii, 10. (2)
keu To overturn, IV. Ex i. 10. In the

erue tonal notes on. this latter passage, we are
told to read the character kwei but in
the dict. the meaning—‘ to overturn'—is
given under the other pronounciation,

To leap. I [.ii3: Vit. fF. xii.
3. To make toleap. VI. E ii, 3.

THE 1581m RADICAL, 5

(1) The body. VI. E x, 8; xiv, 1;
T xv, 2. (2) Ones person, one’s-self,
I. eps i 4;v. I; T xv, 2; xvi. 1: Il
E. ii. 35 iv. 6; “Yo. ix. 5; x. 4: et al,
sæpissime. 1% E. to cultivate one’s
‘person; EX E
^Y 2 to keep one's-self, E. g., VII,
E i. 3; ix, 6;—iv. 2: IV, E xii, 1,—
xix. 1, 2, » = to acquire by
effort, be virtuous by endeavour. VII.

E un xxx. l, (3) E Ey, all the life.
See XK.

HI = ‘The body. VIL. T xxix. 1.
Kk*eu
cht

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

, self-examination; and ching

tps
a
[SE]

THE 19m RADICAL. Hi.

A carriage. LR .1.6, 7: UL Rh. iv,
1: VIL E xxxvi, zR. iv. 5 G&
Hi, ‘chariots of war’); xxxiv, 2. Read
ch'ay, with nearly the same meaning. A
waggon-load. "VI. E xviii. 1.

Wheelrute VIL “JR. xxii. 3.

keu

cer
kuei.

(1) A host, — E the armies of a
great State, I f+. ii 5: VI. R. iv,
5,6. (2) ug. 4, a general, a com.

mander-in-chief, VI. FM. viii. 1.
I.q. (JJ. Eight cubits. vir. xxix,

keun
chün

ym

jén ;

jj The name of Mencius. I. Ñ. xvi. 2;
ko y, Kd; Vr. BR. iv. 4,

To struggle. XR B v. uc iv. 5,
kes 6; But the meaning is not well under.
chiao stood.
ay (1) To carry with one in the same
tsae Carriage. TH, fn. iii 1, 4. (2) To be-
tsai

gin, UL Pvt Vv. fF. vii, 9. (8)
A particle, = Fil. 1v. f.ix.6, (D
To serve, perform duties to, V. [*. iv. 4,

(5) ay &. to write articles of agreer,
ment, and place them on the victim of
the covenant. VI. Ñ vii. 3.

Up. 2d tone. A year. V. E iv. 1;

isae — Y. T.
tsai
1 To support, to aid, I, E vii. 19: IT,
A bis ds TB. th 65 vie 2.
N.B): UL _f iv. 8: Vi R. ix 2
int (1) Light. I, E vii, 18: IIT. E iv,
Bing yu VL Ẹ.i7 = small. VIL WA.

xxxii, 3, = least important, VIL P.
xiv, = light clothing, I. . vii. 16. =
readily, easily, I, E vii, 21, (2) As
» & verb, To consider smal, VI ,
xiii. 7. To lighten, III.
VIL A. x. 7. To make light of, to

slight, UL “FR. iv. 3. HE Ép, to

demean one’s-self, I. ^. xvi. 1,

v. vilis l;

484.

hwuy
hui

Ld

lun

chuen
chuan

Bright. X pi brightly ener
VI. Pa. xxv. 6.

(1) The wheel of a carriage. VI,
xxiv. 2. (2) A wheel-wright, PaL
earriage-wrights, III. “fi. 8,4: VIL
T v. 1l.

PAS iffy, a double surname, IV. E
i. 1.

(1) Properly, the bottom or frame of
a carriage or waggon. A carriage; a wag-

gon-load. I. KE vii; T xvi. 1: III.

Je 1, 2. (adj): vr i6 (20A
carriage-wright. See iG. .

(1) To turn over, In the phrase
J^ or SE) ERS LP. n2:
m. FR. iv. 2: WL fF. iii. 7. (Qd

Ap. the name of a place. I F iv. 4.
THE 160rq RADICAL, JÆ.

A name, III. E iv, 2.

A transgression. pa EE, innocent.
J ff. ii. 24.

(1) Lg. ig. Depraved; moral de-
flection. L p. vi. 19: D [p.i
8. (2) Lg. ea: To open up, to bring
under cultivation. I, . vii, 16; TY,
Ei 10: Iv. Fi 95 xiv. 8: VI.
vii. 2; ix. 1. (3) To remove from the
way. IV. F ii,4, (4) Aname, III.

oet E

` To twist, HI. fẹ x. 4. The pro-
nunciation and meaning axe taken from

the tonal notes and Choo He. The dict.
does not give them.
I.q. Ht. To avoid, IIL. R. vii 2;

x. 5: IV. E xiii, 1: VI, sb: x,2,8,4:
VII. E xxii.

Iq. 2 hf —, may be Shika!
ed to. VII. E xxxix,

To discriminate, "VI, P e x7.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

Lis

ts‘ze
tat

Ie

, shin
ch‘én

ER
jh
ju

INDEX II.

(1) Language, words, II. ii, 17:
IH. XV. ix. 10, 12. = a sentence, V.
E iv, 2, Ii fae in express words,
v. T iv. 8. The words of a message,
I. T iii. 8, 4. Be fit messages,
speeches, u. p. ii, 185 ix. 1. dà "d

B to frame apologies for. II ^i ix,
4, (2) To decline, refuse, n. ii. 2;
v. 1; x. 5: HI, F. i, 4: V.

2,8: VL JR. vi. 2. BE ES

To dispute. III. T ix. 1, 18: VIL

m xxvi. 2,

THE 161sr RADICAL. FR.

v. 1. 3; v,

:

H Ix. the planets and constellations
of the zodiac; or perhaps the stars gene-
rally. IV. TP xxvi, 3,

To suffer disgrace. I. E v. 1: HI. E
iv. 1: IV. E ix. 5. To disgrace. V,

E. vit. .

- (1) Husbandry. L E iii, 3. E
alone, and = mA. husbandmen, II. E
v. 4: IH. E iv. 5, 9; F- ii, 5; iv. 3:
v. T ii, 9. (2) jn JB, an ancient

emperor, the father of husbandry. III.

Ex iv. 1. i

THE 162» RADICAL. ZT.

To meet, to receive, I. fy. x. 4; xi. 3:
IL RN. v.5: VL T xiv. 2,3: VIL

. ^. xxiii. 2, -

To go out to meet. VI. T i8.

Hn
v. XXX,

To be near, to approach; near.

T vi. 2: XII f+. iv. 8: IV.

5:v. [vii gs vro f. vii 2: VIL

. " "» »
E- iv, 3; xxxii, 1; P- xxviii. 4. Tre

B. ministers belonging to a court. V.

$s

qoia
Until. 3 è

E iv. 3. .

before. II,

INDEX IIT.

To urge, be urgent, III.”

34 seri &. 3
pih suh
pai . su
YE Alternately. V. T ili, 5.
tëë i
tieh yE
pit — xiu e to give a report of office. E 12
shuh ; : 7 T tsao
Han ^ iv. 5: VI. fy. vii. 2. va
3h Footsteps, traces. IV. F xxi, 1. AX
tseth ts‘ao
chi
iB (1) To pursue, follow after. II, x
ohn bel Ags. te 2
chat xii, 5: IV. A. xxiv, 2: VII. En xxvi. fes
2. (2) Togo back upon. vi. xxx, ng
2. XE
ih The knob, or ring, of a bell. VII. fi. p'ang
tuy xxii. 2. . 3$
tui T E Y 2 len
3E o retire,—from a place, an interview, ion
^ es
tuy office, &c, II. E ii, 22; T v. 5;
tui xiv. 2: Iv, i, 12; [y xxxi, 1: V.

Pd
tsin
chin.

_E- viii. 2; “Bek Vi fe a:

VH. Fs xliv, 2.
To. accompany, escort, III. TR ii. 2.

iK 4t. to perform all the obsequies to

the dead, IV. Jy. xiii, 1. .
EA To run away; to run away from. III. f

E iv. 7: VII. Ex XXXV, 6; hv. xxvi,

H xt = to turn the eyes away,
- li. 4,

X

yh
when thrust at, II. »

Mh (1) To oppose, rebel against, Iv. F. 4
- t ; thy
Balk vii. 1, Spoken of water in a state of in- bi

SUE,
tun.
D
Xk
suy .
sui

undation. III. B ix, 8: VI.
4. Unreasonableness. Jis Sfi. IV.
y. xxxiii, 4, 5, 6. (2) To meet with
the mind, anticipate. V. Ex iv. 2.
Ax To pursue, chase, "VII. T xxiii. 2.

ehu ;
3f — (0D Throughout, =a. IV. “fi. ye
Hung xxx, 1: VI fF. ix, 3. = universally

acknowledged, III. E iv. 6. (2) To
communicate, 38 zi. an intercom-
munication of the productions of labour.
TH.

(1) To go away.
An introductory and continuative parti- [

"cele, IV. E- vii, 6. L.

x

v. iv, 3. E

v. bue y

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

ts‘aou SE

485

To. be quick; quickly, rapidly.. Ii.

gs & IL poi 125 ii, 22; Te

xii, 4: HL. viii 3: V. T i 4: VIL.
- . xliv, 2,
To-begin. V, F. vii. 9.

To go to, arrive at, IL “J. ii. 1, s
y x —1to make advances in study..
IV. vR xiv..

To. meet with, IV. T xiv. To,

anticipate and excite. VI. v. viid.

‘Iv.

A surname,, y.. xxiv, L,

(1) Tounite, IV, dos (3) =
reckless perseverance in;a badscourse. I..
E iv. 6, 7, 8. (3) A name, VL Te
v. 2.

To advance, go forward. T. E

I. Ps ii. 5, 22: et ali, sepe. = whem
advanced, 7. ¢,,.in office, IF, E ix, 23 V.
T 8. Actively, to advance, bring for~
ward, I. T vii, 1.3, Spoken of pro-
visions, IV. dox 8.

= comfortably. IH, f+. ivs,

, vii; 192:

To urge, press, "V. E v. 6..

Evasive. IL È ilz.

A continuative particle. And them

nt. p.i. 9:1v. edis 4: VIO.
viii, 3. nj eun Ras n.r.

iv. 12:

(1) To meet. VL A. iv, h = to
intercept. III. [\.i. 4. (2) To. meet

and succeed with, I, fn, xvi. 3: II.
xii, 1, 8: VIL A. iv. 3. TREO
disagree. IV. T zxr 3

To wander; to travel IL f\. vi, 1:

IV. T xxx, 1: VII. E ix, 1; xvi,
An imperial tour, I, fR. iv. 5. = to

be a student of, VII. d xxiv,

wet

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

To make to go round. I. E vii. 12:
iL Y i, 8; vi, 2. To go round, makea
revolution, I, jy. x. 4.

Up. 2d tone. (1) To go beyond; to
exceed; more than, I, as vii, 12: IL
E i 10; i. 2; xiii. 4: IL 7 x.
1: IV. T xviii, 3; ? VL p. ii. 3:
VII. Six xi, (2) To err; faults, trans-
‘gregsions, II. EL vii 1; f\. ix. 3, 4:
nL pisav, banev bow.
5; b. ix, 1,4: VL dii 4; xi. 2, 4;
xv, 3. :

Up. 1st tone. To pass by, I kb vii.
4:10, pig 75.4: IV. Ju. xxv.
A; xxix,i:V. ft. viii, 3: VIL, JI xiii,
8; ES xxxviii, 8,

To stop, to restrict, I. TR jii, 0: V.
Eivi vi RR via.

(3) To reach to. II. E. i 10; F
vii. 2: TIT, fF. i 25 v.42 v. R. i. 8:
VII. E xxiv. 3. To carry out, to ex-
tend, VII. . xv. 3; xl. 3; w. XXX,
(2) To obtain advaneement; to be in office.
IV. JN. xxxiii, 9: VII, Ex ix. 4, 5, 6;
xix. 8, To find vent. IL. [^.vi.7. (8)
To be intelligent. VII. E xviii. 2.
(4) Universally acknowledged, Il, d
ji. 6.

(U A road, a path. LE. iii, 4; vii.
24:00 [dv 7: IV. J. viii, 5: V.

Six oin VL ff, viz VIL p.
xl 8 It occurs everywhere with a
moral application, meaning the way or
course to be pursued, the path of reason:
of principle, of truth, &c, £.g., I B
d I fF. ii, 3, 12; iv. 8; Roi

ii. 4, 6, 7; xiv. 1. (2) Doctrines, prin-
ciples, teachings, Alsopassin. E.g, WI.

. iv. 3, 12, 14,18; TW. i 5; ii. 2; iv,
2; ix. 5, 7, 9, 10—This usage and the
preceding run into each ofter. The
principles underlie the course, and the
course follows from the principles. (2)

To speak about, discourse. I. E vii

2:HL fi. 2; iv. 3: VL T ti. 2.
(1) To oppose, go contrary to, I. db.

ii 3; [v.i 2. (2) To avoid, escape

INDEX WI.

from. IL E iv, 6: IV. E- viii, 5.

To escape notice, II. E: ii, 27. (3)
To be distant from. VI. E- viii. 2.

im 'To be distant; distant, far, II, E Hc

ma 2,26; Riis: m. F. iv. 5h. ix,
4: etal. To keep at a distance. V. E
vii 7. i B. ministers from a dis-
tance, V. . viii, 4, To consider far.
Lo F.i: vr poni

m To put away to a distance; to keep

fered away from. I, E vii, 8: IH, Pix

yüan 6. :

XÀj Œ Togoto L W.iv.s:nn p.

shih iy 17: VI. JR, vii. 2, (2) Only, merely,

VIL M xiv, 6.

3 Tq. E To blame, remonstrate with.

dh iv, posed.

3 To meet with. V. Evii. 8.

tsou

tsao

3E SE SEE slowly, by-and-by. V. T^

che + 4. T
chih 4; VII. B xvii,

E To follow. IV. fF. i4. To follow

tsun the line or course of, I. T iv. 4: VH,
d. xxxv. 6,

T

ts‘éen

chrien

To remove. I. fs. xi. 8. To remove

to, IH, L.iv.15: IV. K.i 1 To
transfer to. V. E i, 18, Applied mor-
ally;—to move towards, V. des vi, 5:

vnu. F. xiii. 2.
332 To choose. ee JE, IH. de iii, 13.

SEUEN
hsüan

xa It is also pronounced e.

gect. L Ẹt.i 5: VIL.

(1) To ne-
w. vii. 2, To

wei
be neglected, 3X tK. II. Js ix.2:
v. T i, 3. (2) To be left; remaining.
X b.isv. bageaà
um Low. 3d tone. To make a present, to
wei present. III fn. v.2.
3E To withdraw from, V. E. v. Ti vi
pe i n
^i 1. To avoid, escape from, I. P x.4

3E] What is near; the near, IV. y. zx
urh A, ee f ;

INDEX III.

THE 163» RADICAL,

&.

e, A city or town, I. f.v. 5. To
% iy build a town. X, [\. xv. 1.
The name of the ancient seat ofthe
"pin family of Chow. I, T xiv. 2; xv. I.

A State, a country. II, . lii. 12.

pang Observe Re 3j I. iles vii. 12,

(1) Corrupt, depraved ; what is not cor-

seay rect, perversity. I, de vii, 20: IT. Je
hsieh jj 17: III, T iji. 3; fi ix. 5, 7, 9, 10,

13: IV. E i. 13: VIL

13. (2) Read yay. 3i RR, the name of
a place, I.

^ . X, i; xxxvii,

EM iv. 4.

Z The borders of a country; to be situat-

' Keaou €d in the borders. I Td ii. 3; iv, 9:
chiao yy, ^. viii, 1.
(D An P wall of fortification. 3k
Eie sce Bh alone, IV. T
xxxiii, 1. (2) d a double surname,
IL. R.i.2.

E En » the name of a place. IV,

ging R.i 2.
at A post-station. Ha af, 1. des i12.
yow, ;

(1) A capital, but used for any princi-
ioo palcity. IL ^ iv. 4, (2) ab bs
tu name give to Shun, V. eps ii, 3. (3)

+ KB the design. of an ancient officer,
distinguished for his beauty, VI. ^.
vii, 7. (4) Z^ i a double surname,
belonging to a disciple of Mencius. IL.
S.v. &: XII, [NL ix. 1: et af,
ab The name of the State of which Men-
ij
7» cius was a native, I, EL vii, 17; T

tsou yi; 1: III È ii, 2,4: VL Ñ. i 4; v.

1, 2, 6, PE Arx E vi 17. ^
Fi VI. M ii, 6,

A village, a neighbourhood. IIT. E

M. xxix. 7: et al, SBA,
a villager, II, [*,ix.1:1V. DE xxviii.
7: V. F. i 1, 8: etal 38i dé. II.
i g^ vi. 8; [v. di. 6: ef al. 5 ER

your good people of the villares, VII.

Aéang iii, 18: IV,
hsiang

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

487

F. xxxvii, 12. = place, VI. E viii,

4.—In this last instaiice ought we not to
read the character in the upper third tone?

Up. 3d tone, I. q. $85. (4) Towards;
no to be directed to,

9
hsiang . VIO is 1. 2 @)
Forti in the former case. VI, E-

e EA niggardly. a Xs. v. F i

DA 8: VII, F xv,
The name of a State. IV. fy. ii 1:
hig V. fii 4: vi. R. xxvii. K.
IS IV. h. xxiv. 2.
BAN A neighbour, ur E . v.83; Em viii,
lin — 2, Neighbouring. TIL ^. v. 2. pa

è Ej]. 1 . des iii, 1, 2; DÀ 1: IL, d*

v6: VI. fA. xi. 3. A neighbourhood,
s BS IV. Rh. xxix. 6.—H is also
written jE-

THE 16iru RADICAL, p-

py

To pour out wine into a cup. VI. Ps

chó v.3.
cho
PEE To agree, be in harmony, with. II. ds
pet iy 6: IV. „E. iv. 8, Tobe the mate of.
m. Ẹ. ii. 14. l
i Wine, spirits, LM. iv.7: HL. v.
tse sss ^ per :
£e) at IV. E iii, 4 SE T: xix. 3: ot al,
M% ^ Tobedrmk, IV. l.i. 4. To be
isuy " E id ii. ; `
593 filled, exhilarated. VI. E xvii. 8..
Fellows, = of equal extent, TI.
ckow ii, 9.
ch‘ou :
Be A physician, 1L [dia
e
i .
n: To consecrate by smearing with blood,

A Lo pou

THE 165m RADICAL. ZÈ,

[69] E &. variegated colours. I. E

vii. -16. (2) To gather, Obs. ES 9

rap "Es

R

ts‘ae
ts'ai

488

THE 166m RADICAL, HH.

E: (3) A neighbourhood; a hamlet. IL
ic E- ¥- 5; vii. 2. (2) In the phrase HJ

li H. m = a residence, IV, EM iii, 3,
4: VII. . xxii. 8. (3) A measure of
length. At present it is a little more than
one-third of an English mile. Jr is
a square de, III. d jii. 19; but square les

. are often meant, where the Jr is omitted.

I. fi. 25 v4, 25 vii. 17; UR ii, 1, 2,

8; xi 2: et al, sepe. (4) B FA, a

double surname., V. E ix, 1,2: VI.

T vi. 4; xv. 1,

Heavy. I, E vii, 13: MI. E: iv.
7: VL P. i. 6. Applied metaphori-
cally;—heavy consequences. VII.

vii, Heavy charge VIL f. vii. 6;

\. i 2, Great, important; precious.
vir, R. xxxii. 3: VI. F i 1, 2, 3, 7:
I. P xi, 3, 4. Asa verb, —to make

heavy. VIL fy. x. 7.
Wild country, wilds; the country as
opposed to the town, the fields, I. -.iv.

chung

E

yay

yeh 4; viis: IL p.v OL Pix.
9: IV. ips xiv. 2: V, E vii 2; N.
vi. 1: VIL PA. xxiii 2. pp BE rv.
Eois v F vi 2. B A,
countrymen, men rude and uncultivated.
Hp fe. iii. 44, 19: V. + iv. 1: VIL

. xvi. l.

dE To measure, IT, E ii. 5.

leang

liang

In a name. VI. R. viii. 4.
le
li

THE 167rn RADICAL. &-

Metal, metallic. V. R.i. 6." In VT.

T i6, = gold, In IV, F. xxiv. 2,

== steel In IL þf. iii. 1, I have trans-

lated by silver, but many contend that
gold is meant.

An iron boiler, without feet, IIT. E
iv. 4.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

i43

INDEX HI.

(1) A weight of 30 catties, I, f. vii,
10: VE. Pi © Lepa
equally, VI. E xv, 1, 2. ;

A hook or clasp. VI, T 1.6. In

keun
chiin

EAS

kow

io the text it is printed $5. which, mure
used, is not correct.

gt Vigorously, with precipitation. vir

py Hive 2.

jui

"The name of a measure, containing 64

chung tow c2 or nearly seven hundred

weight, according to present measures.

pss HL Nx vn pax
7.—See a note on the Life of Mencius.

[34 £A M+ ne. Hn 569

tsze
tza

A

ds v. “fe 1.

A weight, vainly estimated at 20,

24, and 30 taels, or Chinese ounces. I.
"n P, CR 221 f. iii. 1.
Abell, I [.vii4; Bd i. 6, 7.

' Tron, = an iron share. III. I: iv.

= a mitror; or a beacon.. IV. E ii.
keen g i ; Be
chien © 2 is more commonly written gu.

aah
shod
shao

$H
tswan
tsuan
£1.
E
tsó

tso

To melt. = to infuse, VI. E vi 7

To bore. HI. Ny. iii. 6.

To chisel, or bore. == to dig. I. ^

xiii, 2. Used metaphorically, IV. F-
xxvi. 2. l

THE 165m RADICAL. fe.

a= (1) Long; length. I. f+. vii, 13: IM.
eh‘ang _f.i.5; iv. 17. Tal VI
(2) To excel, II. E- ii 1l

surname, V, E- i, 2; " iii. 8.

(1) To be grown up, age; old; elders.

Ñ. ii. 2.
(3) A

chang UI. E iv. 8; Ñ. vi. 2: IV. E xi. 1:

V. Pii vi pense

ii, 4: VIL. f\. xv. 2, 3; xliii 2. Eldest

INDEX III.

T v.3. Asa verb, to give the hon-
our due to age, 1v. pF. xi. i: VI. iE:

iv. 2, 3, 4. fe zs an elder, I, de

vii. 3. It is twice used by Mencius for

` himself, up. xi. 4: IV. E xxiv, 2.

(2) To grow. IL E i. 16: VL F.
viii. 3. Well grown, superior. V. d
v. 4. (8) To preside over. II.
1. Superiors, officers, I. oft vii, 11;
T xii. 1, 3. (4) To make long, = to

» ii.

connive at and aid, VI. T vii, 4.

F1

mun
mên

P

pe
pi

ES

min

THE 169rx RADICAL, PH.

A. door; a gate, III. E- iv. 1, zf.
ii, 2; vii, 2, 3: et al, sape, PH Fy, VI
“Pee aiv. 4. = school, VL Ji: di 6:

VIL _[, xxiv. 1; xiii PH A ais-

ciples, III. tk iv, 18: VIL R. xxix.

To shut, u pR. vi. 2: TV. E xxix.
7: V. T vii, 8. Torepress, IV. Jp
x. 18. t `

(1) To be grieved, TI. [^.ii. 16. (2)
Appears in a quotation from the Shoo-

king for RA, violent, reckless, V, T

 jv.4. (8) The surname of one of Con-

hieu
hsien

“VIL.

fucius’ disciples. IT, E
== to defend, III,

„ii. 18, 20.
Jy. ix 10,

pj HER. to be at leisure. II. E. iv.
iv. 2, 4.

A space, an interval, II, R. xiii. 3:
IV. KV. vii. 1: VIL T d ng.
the space between, I. E vi. 6: III,
T vi. 1: IV, . xviii. 4; f- xviii, 3:
VII. E xxv, 3. So, J^ (or P EES
eji poungssvn R. xv. 1:
VIL p.xviio Among. Iv. fi. xxxiii.

Ta fij ina little. UL F.v. 5:
w. xxi. But in some editions,

[5 in these two instances is put in the
third tone.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

.v. 1. fe older than. VI. di E.

489

(3) To occupy the space between, I.
ih won (8) To blame, IV. P.
chien xx, (3) — Mi < one interval, VII.

Fii W4 3 E to find an
opportunity, VI. f. v. 2.—It is more
correct to write n and not [B
Fa] kal BR, eunuch-like, VIL fẹ. xxvii,
yen
A frontier gate; a pass, IL. fy. ii. 3;
kwar y, 3: II

BN l eee
kuan : : E: v. 3: III. T viii. 1: V,

v. Y.8; vi. 8: VIL IN. viii. 1,
ES To benda bow. VL p iii, 2.
wan "EE,

THE 170ru RADICAL, B.

Straits; to be in circumstances of dis-

tress. V. Fe viii, 8. BE Be u. E

gih i

e ix.2:V. h.i. 3.

Dr A pit-fall. I, FQ. ii. 3.

tsing

ching

ba A raised dyke, an embankment. VI.
fang rr Vie’.

REL An obstruction, a difficult pass, er
tsoc Dd

zoe BE, WL. [six 4.

To flatter, IL. È. i. 25.

(1) To be attached to. Mt H, the

name of certain small principalities. V,
T ii, 4. To join one's-self £o. III,

Tv Toaddto, VIL boxe (2)
‘ig iy: the name of a place. I, N.iy.

bir Mean and low. IV, F xxix. 2.
low

lou

Ka (1) To send down, to confer, —spoken.
keang of Heaven. VI. E el vii. 1; T xv, 2.

ehiangTo produce. I.

scend, comes down,

v. lii, 7. '(2) To de-

I P xi, 2: III.

^ v. 4.

; KE (2) To be dark and cloudy. II. E

J^ — jv8. (2) = thenorth side, V; fvi
(1) A high mound, a height. [257

feg i. Ri 8: IV. bie @) ih.

KE, the name of a place, u^. x, ,
5, 8. .

sey
€

490 CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.
PR) To set forth, rt. v i 4: IV. [ir
ch'in : T ILE an teen Tien
ch'ón Ec i.13. (2) A surname, ME ii, a
1; x. 49: VL “PR. xiv. 1: VIL YA, xxiii, (1) To conceal,
LUT, ^R. à LIE PR. ix, 2m. po

“PR. x. L 2,3, 5, 6: VIL E iva

—IIL Te iv.2, 3, 12. (3) The name
of a State. VIL f. xviii; xxxvii, 1: V.
E. viii. 3.

py The marshalling of an army. VIL. F

chin iv.l.
A ae
ehén viet

[sy (1) To make pottery. II. E viii. 4:

taou ] n $
taou VI Rx fide Apottér. HL f. iv.
4 (2) Bee J anxiously. v. Fis. SB
fs eal m minister of Shun, III, =
eni
ji - "
: on .iv. 9: VIL E XXXV, p. XXX.
F L
 To fall into a pit, = to be involved, `
lga to be sunk, I, ES «20:1, P. i. Hi
* ‘ e
bsen 17:117, P. iii 8: IV. e ix.5. Used chih
actively, — fg Ph . 8: VI. Bi
. vii. 1, suy
sul

Pe. the name of a place, II. T
iv. 1: VI. T v. 1, 2,6

(1) The sun, IV. f+. iv. 18, (2) A
nn p.i; TẸ. vis,
(2) Bj E. the name of a place. VI.

vw. vili, 3,

A corner. III. T ix, 6,

ke
luh
lu

p

JanJ surname.

yu

yü

ny Steps, or stairs, leading up to a hall. .

keae IV. [i xxvii, 8. Aladder. V. p.d Be

chieh 3. ] le
[i ‘To fall down; to let fall, VII ESL

yun xix. 3. 2

yün

: [eae Narrow-minded, I. abs ix. 3.

yue

ai HE
v» n ps 14 sss le
ba A crevice, 5e bs. HI. T ii. 6. .
kei

chi Ei
, mh rire :

[px 2E [ox and Js IBS, gifts of princes to 20%
tse secure friendship, or procure intercourse.

chi

V.UN. iv. 6 5. [px a. a proper re-
ception, V. E iv.

INDEX IH.

Difficult and dangerous positions. II.

v. ix, 4,

IL, E ix. 2: V.

T i.3. (2) To be pained by, sympa-

thize with, L p. vii 7. Al E

Z RO the feeling of commiseration,

n b.3 8, 4,5: vr bro
To lean upon. IL Rh. xi. 2. In this

meaning, it ought to be read in the 3d
tone.

THE 172p RADICAL. 1f.

To collect; to be collected. IL. E ii,

15: IV. ÑR. xviii, 2. ` Altogether. I.
E vii, AT. 4f A y a complete
concert, v. v. i. 6,

Pheasants, HH x, Vsssónt- Blois

ers, I. ^. ii. 2.

Though. Passim, l Sometimes, espe-
cially when no verb is expressed, we may
translate conveniently by even, even in
the case of. E.g, U [IE ii, 7; iv. 2:
nri [.aio -

A chicken, But — [JU HE is under-
Stood of a duckling. VI. E ii, 3.

Fowls, L Ẹ. ii. 4; vii. 24: II,
viie: vr F. xi 13: vu. p.
xxii. 2 d 2b. “brood hens’), 58
pg, cocks crow, II. s i. 10; but =
at cock-crowing, VII. T xxv, 1, 2,

(1) To be separated, I. E v. 4;

T. i 6: VIL T^ xxvii. I. = to be

alienated, IV. Ẹ. xviii. 4. (2) To

_ leave, forsake, II. E ii, 17: VIL iE

ix.4, 5. (8) A surname. IV. E i1.

To go away from. in. T. iv. 5,
But the character may be read in the
same tone as above.

To be difficult; to find it difficult; what
is difficult, IL [-. i. 8; ii.2,12: ILL

E. iv. 103 PR. iio: IV. fiis
vi. xi: V. E ii, 4: i d ii, 7:
vu. Bg 6

INDEX Iil.

Aie

nan

Low. 8d tone. To dispute IV. T

xxviii, 6.
THE 173» RADICAL. RW.

Rain, L . vi. 6;

R xi. 2:

E f

Sa quies Rv 4: 1V. R. xvii,
SNL DPR e

RB Low. 3d tone. To rain upon. IIN
E iii, 9.

Tu 1 -

E KS Snow. VL p. ii 2. (2) SH

Seud

heüch E , the name of a palace, I. E iv. 1.

E (i) Clouds, L Eie Po. xi 2

fin (2) ER m3 ‘The Milky Way,’ the name
of an s ede i in the She-king. v. Ei iv 2,
E A rainbow, I. ET xi, 2
e
i
A Aname, 1m. J, iif. 1.
sedow
hsiao : f
TÈ Dew. ij ER VI E vii, 2; viii, 1,
doo . i
lu
8 To become chief and arbiter among the
pa princes, II. E iii, 1: VI, fy. vi. 4.
To raise to become such, v.i 55
ü L Wii PD such a
“chiet. VIL F.si Jy VI.
T vii, dd VII. Ex xxx, 1,
5 (1) phe va Fr the nameof a place, If.
AA
fing Tni 1. (2) FT pa E YA, Ba

Hay. the names of king Wan’s tower,
pond, and park, E fF. ii. 3. (3) An
hon. epithet, V. E iv. 7.

. THE 175z: RADICAL. JE.

Passim. (1) No; mot; not to be. Very
often it = it is not, it is not that; if not,

if there be not. E.g, I. t. ii. 5; vii.
7, 10, its ES 2; vii. 1; xiii. 2; xiv. 2; xv.
2; xvi. 2: II, . ii. 15, 16,22; v. li. 4.

3L 3 E JE xX fit 3E are all strong
affirmations, Lj. VR 5: IL p

JE

fa

xiv, 5

Ti.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES,

me

meen
mien

OY. Ev REF,

491

i 8; vili, 4: VI. "I viii, 6: vir. Fi.
.6. (2) To be contrary to; what is con-
trary to. E.g, IV. IX. vi. 1; xxviii, 7:

0X. d ii, 4, (8) To be wrong; what.is

wrong. E.g, L B iv, 29: IL v. iii.
1:IV. des xx. (4) To blame; to disown,
IR. iv. 1, 2:0 F.i Iv. E.
i,12;x.1: VIL P xxxvii, 10. JE
ams Evis: VE pvir
Obs, II. E: ii. 22: V. Wed 2; and,

VIL fy. xxxvii. 11.

Not, IV. Jesi: v. five

I

THE 1f6rn RADICAL, [fff

The face,’ IL fn. xii 6: IIT, Ï,

svia WAZA —
phants, VI. E xiii, 8. B mi. on

the South, I. d xi, 2: HL I v.4:

VIL. fa. iv. 3. So, d PAT but pj T

in V. . iv. lis the face to the South,
the position of a sovereign giving audience,

AL iip v- poses R. vi. 4, is to

position of a minister.

THE Wis RADICAL, Hf.

Skins freed from the hair, but not
tanned, Stilt i i$ used as = leather.

, chariots of war, VIL “fq. iv.
4. The buff-coat, helmet, and other
armour of defenee, RE H. N.i
8, 4.

THE 178m RADICAL, EEN

Thenameof a powerful family in Tsin,
vH. p.a

Ry
[=] .

A note in music. Fy zx IV, E
i.l. 5. The sound or notes of musical

instruments. I. T i 6, 7. A az

THE 180ru RADICAL,

—spoken of instru-
ments and the voice. I, d vii, 16; IV,

^ . xiii, 8.

492

TH

ting

AR

shan

te
ti

pA

yuen
yüan

BA

yen

sang

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

THE 18łsr RADICAL. A.

The top ef the head. VII, ps xxvi. 2.

(2) To obey; to aceord with; obedience;
agreeably to reason, submissively, IL.
i4, 5: IU [dics IV. fe. vi. 1;
xvi: VI. Eg i, 2: VII. E- ji 1; xxxi.
1, To persist in, 1L “Pu. ix. 4. Obs.
IV, Ẹ. xxvii; ana v. F.i 3,4. (2)
A nanic. V, iii. 3.

Hf ZH. a brief season, VI. E ut v. 4.

(1) Interchanged with aii. To repeat,
croor over, V. T viii. 2. (2) $8
AB. the name of a Book of the She-king.
n, b.aie —

jA ÉT zi gray-haired people. I.

Eoi 4; vii. 24. See the dict, on the
usage.

Obstinate. Et seems, however, to be ^

used in the. sense of corrupt, Vv. fp. i, 1:
VH.

'The root of the nose. RR 1H = to
knit the brows, I, T i. 6.

Used for AA IHE] means to turn
rp the nose. "To BR RR brows,’ which
appears in the translation, is wrong. III.

. . X. 5. E

TE HA, the ornamental wood-work
under the caves of public buildings. VII.

m xxxiv. 2.

Yo wish, desire, I. y
1:1. fh. i 4; ii. 22; v. 1 2, 3, 4, 5, Je
vii. 1; x. 2: IHE E iv. 1, 2; v. 1; F
iii 6: YL.. È. xvii. 3; TRO Hi. 6; iv. 4.

(1) PA fa, the countenance. IFE. E
ji. 5: VI. fy. xiii. 8. (2) A surname,
m. fii. 18,20: HL bla: Ivf.
xxix 1,2, 4—-V. [. viii. 2—v. F-
iii. 3.

The forehead, MIL f+. v. 4: VI. ^

ài. 3. J

. iv. 1; v. 1; vii.

hsien

` ideaof influence implied, II. E

INDEX Hli,
HA 2s to overturn, V, E vi. 5.

A class, sort: kinds, I. E: vii, 11:
IL . 8. 28: IL f\. iii. 6; x. 6: V.
qe: VI, E. via 5 xi 2: VIL

T xxxi, 4.

Lo RE. Jf He D

To look about, L [L.iii; P E

38: IV. ÑR- xxxiii, 1 To regard, think
of, have reference to. IV.
v. Ẹ. vii. 2: vn. QR. xxxvii 9.

To he distinguished, III, T ix. 6:

IV. Jy. xxxiii. l, To make illustrious,

m. b.i5: v. b.ix.5. .

THE 182» RADICAL. it.

v. Xxx, 2:

(1) The wind, IL fy. ii 4. To
expose one’s-self to the wind, LH. ii,
1. (2) Manners; character,—with the
.i 8:

. V, Ping VIL E. xv, (8) Bl

shih

ine the name of an ode in the Sho-king;
VI [x. iit. 3, 4.
THE 183 RADICAL ji.

(1) Tofly. JE Ef, birds. rr. P.
28. (2) is Tni. a supporter of the
tyrant Chow, IIl, T ix. 6.

THE 1847 RADICAL. £-

(1^ To eat; to consume, devour; to be

consumed. I, E . iii, 3, 4, 5, 1v. 4, 5; vii,
. è P

8, 24: et passin, y p £e to

be a living, UI f+. iv. 1. $E not
unfrequently has this meaning, = to get

a living, to support life, (2) Viands,,

food to eat, IV. Jy. iv. 4, 5; ix. 8: V.
vp. iv. 6: vin TPR. sxaiv. xo (8)
An eclipse, IL ix, 4,

. INDEX II.

(1) Rice cooked ; food generally. EE:
T x. 45 xi 8: (To
feed, to support; £e Je to be süp-
ported by. III. E iv. 6 i fe iv. 4,6

et al, sepe, To feed cattle, V. foe ix,
1, 3.

fil Interchanged with e. Tol be hungry.
Mi to suffer from hunger. I. E jii. 4; ivt

` 4, 6; vii. 24; [x. iv. 6: etal, sape.

£f . A kind of thick congee. Bf po,

ii, 5;

cheen

Oo X dar

IE The evening meal. P. y. nt E

sun iv. 3: VI. fA. x.4 In the first instance
the characters have a verbal force.

Ek To drink, L PR. iv. 6: IL Ie

ye qnn Kx et al., scepe.

EX To eat.: vap. vi, RR to eat
Jun — jmmoderately, VIL. E xlvi, 2.

fi To eat to the full, to be filled; to the
pao, full I. E vizan E. iv. 8: v.
pao’ aS iii, 4: VII. ne xxii, 8, ? actively.

VI. E x xvii, 3.

wien 4. In the diet, it is explained by ‘to

tien take with a hook.

fii] To carry provisions to the labourers in
héang fields; provision-carriers, iil, T^
h XAR `

To nourish,—spoken guisisily of per-
sons, the body, the mind, &c. Passim, To.

keep cattle. V, d ix 8. Nurture,
VIL. zb xxxvi. 1,

3g Low. 3d tone. To support. —used with
t reference to the support of parents, scho-
YeI we and superiors generally, I. E v
4; IH, des iii, 7, 14, 195 iv. 3 (?): IV.
: B ix. 1: et al., sepe.
7 To swallow, to eat and drink, XA
ts'an

to eat the bread of idleness. VII. E
xxxii. 1.

£z To befamished, I ii 14, 15. a
C muy, BR OM vi. 1 (used actively): VII,

nói
. XXii, 3,
To be hungry, to suffer from hunger.

BR epi possc ofer
e Eri GRAB Or t ps

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

- .'Togain some end with. VEE Jy. xxxi. f Bi

493

5; iv, 4: III. F. ix. 9. To expose to
hunger, VI, T xv, 2.

To eat, fifi (9g, Iv. Fx xxv,

poo
pu
BR : That which is over; a remnant, the
l be ^ remains, IV. Jd iv; 3; T xxxiii. 1;
yw v, Nu iv, 2. Supernumerary, III, .

Up. iii. n. 7H D
and to spare; and more. II. T v. 95
xiii, 4: IL Ya. iv. 8: VL 7I. ihe 7:
VIL n xxxviii, 1, 2, 3, 4.

A lodging-house. IV. ER xxiv, 2:
VL JA. ii, 6: VIL To
lodge (act); to be lodged, IV. p.
xxiv, 2: VII. T xxx, 1.

Dried provisions. I. F v. 4.

v to have enough

kwan

kuan Ye XXX. d.

how
hou
Bi To present or send as a gift. ^ IT, EL
LS HH 1, 8.4, 5 V. Rividia 4
To offer as a gift, i q. £5 fi. cR
uo y. 23 vii, 8; x, 5: V. qe ii 4.
` To suffer from famine;—interchanged
ke’ also with fi. I J. sä. 2: H,
chi iv. 9: VIL. F. xxii 2; Ñ. xxiii. i.
E The morning meal, xe yg. see yg.
gung ,
Generally, to entertain. But: to be
leang entertained by, V, Jy. di. 5.
hsiang f

m To get satiated, to partake plentifully
yen of. IV. Jv. xxxiii, 1, Tobe satisfied,

I de i, 4.
THE 185m RADICAL, Pj.

. $o

The head. L f.i 6: IL F- Y. 7:
y. T vi. 4, 5: VIL

show

iv. 5,
shou, a

THE 187m RADICAL, ff.
E (1) A horse, horses. T. p.i

"a Pee 6 7; 8 xv XE

nourish as 2 dog or a borse. V.,

v. 4;
,te
F vi,
4, (2) 7) i. the master of the horse,

494

m
fung

féng

ch'e
chh

CHINESE CHARACTERS

but used as a sort of surname, V. Ee

viii. 3.
(1) A surname, VIL

(2) BB 5. the name of a place. IV,
Ta

To gallop. BU E- = Wende

n. p. BB Sia

A team of four horses, V. E vii. 2,

2,

a. XXlii,

The yoking of a carriage, I. fy. sa, En

1:1 T i5: V. T vii. 9. -

Aname, VI T vi. 5.

(1) To drive away. III. F. ix. 4,
1L (2) Tourge. I, [vii 20: VII

r

TF i2. (8) To urge a horse; Bil D: tow

^ Te i. 4 Bis un, vir. T xxxiv. tou

^ mo carry one’s-self proudly to. IV.
wv, xxxiii, 1

(1) I. q. E iE E d dm, cheerful-

criminal banished by Shun, V. Eu iii,

ie

chang

2, (3) A name.

o E d 8: VIL

Il, wv *h li IV. T

xxvii, 2,

To gallop, [T M Hh, see see Bs.

PP.

THE 18818 RADICAL. B

The bones, VI. h.xv.2.

The body, I fe. vii 16:1 pe. d

9: IV. E. xix, 3: VIL F xxxvi. 1.

py ge. the four limbs, IL Evi. 6:

BAS Bu, VL E. xiv, : xv. 1, 2.

— “ai, one member; HR a, all the
members. Il. eit 20,

THE 199m RADICAL. £j.

KEk
yuh

" like. vn. F. xiii. 1. OS X a yü

fa

kik
ko

e

yuh
yü

Bi
Esis Fe]

LITT

yu.
yü

(QD High lofty, IL R.isiiv. b. fü

i6 7; F xxvi, 3: V. F. v. 5: VI. Sad

AND PHRASES.

17
MI

INDEX 1H.

Eis vi. boua
(2) A surname, I, T xii, 2: VIL
“Ys. xxi; xxii VET. ii. (8) A
name, V. Es i.2. (4) is jE, the

name of a place, VI. - við

x. XXXİV, 2, :

THE 190:)3 RADICAL. EA,

More correctly written £z. A name,

a LV. Ex xvii. 1: VI, ROS 1, 5.

The hair, IV. fy. xxix, 5, 6,

THE 191sr RADICAL, fF).
i

To quarrel, IV. Te xxix, 5, 6. Ed

ZH. IV. fy. xxx. 2.

THE 192» RADICAL, PH.

K. anxiously. V. Js ii, 3.

To fight, to have a brush, v. Xii,

hung 1.

THE 193p RADICAL. fj.

n A a distinguished minister at
the close of the Yin dynasty, II. Eu
8: VI. WW. xv. 1. :

(1) To sell. V. ix 12. oğ

S the name of a barbarous tribe, I.
T- iii. 1,

THE 194r RADICAL, Hi

ZU

The name of a great family in Tsin.

vit J. xi.

THE 195m RADICAL. fü.

* A fish, fish. I, B ii, 35 iii, 3; Vii, 16,

L7
i7: MES ix, 3: v. pana: vi f.
x. 1; xv, L
(X) The name of a State, » xii,

1; xvi,

3: et al, sape. ey $8 v. "

INDEX 1I.

CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES.

495

iv. 5. [i [o A. t, T xi, 3: et E The female deer, a doe, JE HE. I.

al. D AA LP. wi
$5 AH. the name of a Book in the Shee
king, HL ft. iv. 16,

He The father of the great Yu. V. P.

kwăn jii 2.
kuén
iin
REK
kwan
kuan

A widower, I. T v. 8,

THE 19628 RADICAL. ff.

A Birds, L E ii, 3, 4: IL E ii, 28:

mar n pies Yh. ix

H. A EL a sort of Chinese phoenix, II,
nn ee

tong

mE (1) The sound of a bird Fe BEL, see
ming BE. To beat, IV. P. xiv.1. (2)

pes f. the name of a place, IV. Bc
i. 1.

The shrike or butcher-bird, III, de
ry)

keih iv. M.
chi

yen

pE
hing

A wild goose. I. E ii, 1.

Large. Joined with ke and HB, I.
bit: ve. ix.

$5 A goose, I, [\. x. 5.
go

d ;
ib Theswan. VI. E ix, 8.

huh : »
hu

Be The cackling of agoose, EUR E
a i, fy. x. 5.

(8 1B pi = glistening. I. E ii. 9.
hò

ho ` ;

pa A kind of hawk. IV, E ix, 3.

chen . .

chan

THE 197» RADICAL, Ed.

Salt. VI. [\. xv. 1.

yer

THE 1981 RADICAL. HE.

E The deer, I E ii, 1, 3; F ii, 3:

[2A y m
lu VIT. E xvi.

` mow

yew . ji. 3,

M

[53 A species of deer, distinguished for its
size and strength, and that sheds its horns

me E

in winter. HR Bé. I. JT. iil; T .

mi
ji. 3.
ER The male of the k‘e-lin, a fabulous
animal, the chief of all quadrupeds. II
ke ;
chá Es ii. 2. 8,
BE Number. IV. E vii. 5.
le z
ni :
4 The female of the k‘e-lin, See jt.
n

THE 199m RADICAL, BK.
Wheat; all bearded grain, Is BE
mih ` gee Zt.
mai
X BEDS, ene vr pou.
meu j :

THE 200m RADICAL, jj.

Nik -

Hemp. Il. E. iv. 17.

ma
THE 201sr RADICAL. Ff.
: Yellow. II; fA. x, 3. = yellow
hwang si j
huang silks, IIL R.v. 5.

THE 202» RADICAL, RE.

Millet. HL. fX. y. 2: vp. x. 4.

Black. 3M Fe, the black-haired
le i 1
i people. V. E. iv. 2.

AME 2080 RADICAL, m.

A name, „TI. È ii. 4, 6.

yew
yu
neta (1) Properly, a village of 500 families.
tang Hi Tu a neighbourhood; neighbours,

nm F. vi, 3; P- ii, 6: V, F. ix 8

(2) Aparty,aschool, VIL fy. xxxvii.
l. ;

06 a CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PIIRASES. INDEX III.

THE 2008 RADICAL. fff. adjust evenly, VI. [v.i.5. (2) The
-— E . . : name wo. Jh I. f v. 15 vii, 6, 17:
E, ^ A name. H. D.v*5123. — f et al, sape. - HK SOLO fy. x. 1; xiv,

wa

BE ‘The turtle. I. _Ẹ. i. 3584 3, hd 8k AES UL þe xxi 1,
pet j Hig eR E E vii. L: et al., sape,

pieh Jl x; tt DB, I ^ iv. 5. 9: et al, Ji

THE 200m RADICAL, IHI, jd. L -P vii, 1, 2: IV, f. xxi, 3.
ps To adjust one's thoughts, —in comee-
chae tion with fasting. iod v. xi. 8: IV,

[ A tripod, a. boiler with three feet and

7i , £X 1

tiug two ears, lI. Is. xvi. 2. E IE flesh m xxv. 2, xe n. the appearance
from the pot. V, m vi. 4, 5. of respect and dread. V. Is iv. 4.

HK The loweredge of a mourning garment,
"not hemmed, but even and not frayed.

"THE 20770 RADICAL. jy. ta BL [ges

m * i Lbs Fie THE 21171 RADICAL, if.
3 t
ko 7:.3V, F. xiv. 1. (2) To strike, to BY — (D The teeth. = with the teeth, VIL
play on. VIL fẹ. vi, che p.xiz (2) Age IL Pe. ii. 6

s
Aname. I, E via.
THE 209r RADICAL. 5

heih l
ho *
The nose, IV. Jv. xxv. 1: VIL Rs. THE 212mm RADICAL, WE.
pt xxiv. 1. .
pi WE (1) The dragon, I. TR. ix, 3, 4.
THE 210rH RADICAL. HK. lung (2) A surname. III E iii, 7: VI.
E vis.
(1) On a level, equal. II, F. ii. 9 li: Low. 24 tone. used for YË, a mound,
ung

po 4
ne H E. iv, 18: VL È. vii 2. To

te B I. A. x. 6, 7:

OMISSIONS.
—(2) In the double Page 428. After num, insert—

.xvii, 1: VI, T EN The name of a neighbonrhool in the
o capital of Ts'e, IIL "y. vi. 1.
~—(2) Themameof Page 430. Under fife, adi—(2) AK Hie a
of the viscount supporter of the tyrant Chow, IIL T ix, 6.
“Page 474. After js. insert—

d—(3) = to wish. ES ‘Yo devease,—spoken of the death of a
jung prince, II _.. i 8, 4.

ert—-(1) The great, Page 479, Under zi add—(2) 4if We an
ii, 3 (2) ancient statesman, VIL fy. xv, 1,

“foes WES 4 CHINESE CHARACTERS AND PHRASES. id

*

: E Page 481, After Pe ie Page 482. Under Bis a add--(2) In anahe, `
: T T The name of a city and smalt territory. di. "M iv. 2, 3, 4..

A TER
ERRORS.

P age 446, ` u "for LUE read d Page 480, eol. II. 10th character,
uM m: L. - X o- E » for- 4b read. By
404. ~- H. 5th cligtacter, ` £90). ee 5th: Vlintàcter,,- ]

à Ane xs Ru
uL RP ELI Lu LH

E
' Nlors. Aecording to the ‘caloutation of Cháou K'e, di Mv Books. of Mencf ius mem a.
20 1 chapters; and 33,685 characters... "Fsenow Seun, à scholar of the present dynasty, gives, as the -

: xe ult of a careful reckoning, 258 chapters, and: 35,2 3o hariter.: (See di 5 Bk E Y
Be on Chaou K‘e’s Introduction.)
ee iere be no mote omissions in. the above eee ees what have deem noted, He different .

the Aneli the Grent ES and the Doctrine xf. the Mean (counting: ih ree eliamsétàr ae
, to which my attention has been called as omitted in. tlie Iudex Hu Vo; 3a. there ate I048
" T
. diflferent characters.. i Ld
eter the different characters. in the Four Books athount to about 2500, certamly not: s
2600, :

. Nb OP yon TÅ -

ELIT,

Digitized with financial assistance from the
Government of Maharashtra
on 15 June, 2016

ENG

i en
