Destiny  Books

One  Park  Street

Rochester,  Vermont  0 5 7 67

www.DestinyBooks.com

Destiny  Books  is  a  division  of Inner  Traditions  International

Copyright  ©  1 9 60  by  Ed  itions  Gallimard

Originally  published  in  French  under  the  title  Le  Matin  des  Magiciens  by  Editions

Gallimard, Paris

This  edition  published  in  2 0 09  by  Destiny  Books

A ll  rights  reserved.  No  p a rt  of this  book  may  be  reproduced  or  utilized  in  any  form

or  by  any  means,  electronic  or  mechanical,  including photocopying,  recording,  or  by

any  information  storage  and  retrieval  system,  without  permission  in  writing  from

the  publisher.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Pauwels,  Louis,  1 9 20  Aug.  2-

[Matin  des  magiciens.  English]

The morning of the magicians : secret societies, conspiracies, and vanished civilizations

/  Louis  Pauwels  and Jacques  Bergier  ;  translated  from  the  French  by  Rollo  Myers,

p.  cm.

Includes  index.

ISBN 9 7 8 - 1 - 5 9 4 7 7 - 2 3 1 -3 (pbk.)

1.  Occultism.  I.  Bergier, Jacques,  1 9 1 2-  II. Title.

B F 1 4 1 2 . P 3 8 13  2 0 09

0 0 1 . 9 — d c 22

2 0 0 8 0 4 1 7 67

Printed  and  bound  in  Canada  by  Transcontinental  Printing

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

21

Text  design  and  layout  by  Priscilla  Baker

This  book  was  typeset  in  Garamond  Premier  Pro,  with  Trajan  and  T h r o h a nd  used

as  display  typefaces

To  the  fine  soul,  to  the  warm  heart  of  Gustave  Bouju,

a  worker,  a  realfather  to  me.  In  memoriam.

L.  P.

C O N T E N TS

Preface

P A RT  O NE

The  Future  Perfect

xv

I.  Salute  to the reader in a hurry—A resignation  in  1875—Birds of

ill  omen—How  the  nineteenth  century  closed  the  doors—The

end  of science  and  the  repression  of fantasy—Poincares  despair—

We are our own grandfathers—Youth, Youth!

2

II.  Bourgeois delights—A crisis for the intelligence, or the hurricaneend  of science  and  the  repression  of fantasy—Poincares  despair—

We are our own grandfathers—Youth, Youth!

2

II.  Bourgeois delights—A crisis for the intelligence, or the hurricane

of unrealism—Glimpses  of another  reality—Beyond  logic  and

literary philosophies—The  idea  of an  Eternal  Present—Science

without  conscience  or conscience without  science ?—Hope

10

III.  Brief reflections  on  the  backwardness  of sociology—Talking

cross-purposes—Planetary  versus  provincial—Crusader  in  the

modern world—The poetry of science

17

An  Open  Conspiracy

I.  The  generation  of the  "workers  of the  Earth"—Are  you  a  behind-

the-times  modern,  or  a  contemporary  of the  future?—A  poster

on the walls  of Paris  1622—The  esoteric  language  is  the  technical

language—A  new conception  of a  secret  society—A  new  aspect

of the "religious spirit"

23

II.  The  prophets  of the  Apocalypse—A  Committee  of Despair—

A Louis  XVI  machine-gun—Science  is  not  a  Sacred  Cow—

Monsieur Despotopoulos would like  to  arrest progress—The  legend

of the Nine  Unknown Men

3 3

III.  Fantastic  realism  again—Past  techniques—Further  consideration

on  the  necessity  for  secrecy—We  take  a voyage  through  time—The

spirit's  continuity—The  engineer  and  the  magician  once  again—

Past  and  future—The  present  is  lagging in  both  directions—Gold

from  ancient  books—A new vision  of the  ancient world

41

IV. The  concealment  of knowledge  and  power—The  meaning  of

revolutionary war—Technology brings  back the  guilds—A  return  to

the  age  of the  Adepts—A  fiction  writer's  prediction,  "The  Power-

House"—From  monarchy  to  cryptocracy—The  secret  society  as  the

government  of the  future—Intelligence  itself a  secret  society—

A knocking at the door

60

The  Example  of Alchemy

I.  An  alchemist  in  the  Cafe  Procope  in  1953—A  conversation  aboutgovernment  of the  future—Intelligence  itself a  secret  society—

A knocking at the door

60

The  Example  of Alchemy

I.  An  alchemist  in  the  Cafe  Procope  in  1953—A  conversation  about

Gurdjieff—A  believer  in  the  reality  of the  philosopher's  stone—

I  change  my ideas  about  the value of progress—What we  really

think  about  alchemy:  neither  a  revelation  nor  a groping in  the

dark—Some reflections on  the "spiral"  and on  hope

73

II.  A  hundred  thousand  books  that  no  one  reads—Wanted:  a  scientific

expedition  to  the  land  of the  alchemists—The  inventors—Madness

from  mercury—A  code  language—Was  there  another  atomic

civilization?—The electric  batteries  of the  museum  of Baghdad—

Newton  and  the  great  Initiates—Helvetius  and  Spinoza  and  the

philosopher's  stone—Alchemy  and  modern  physics—A  hydrogen

bomb  in  an  oven—Transformation  of matter,  men,  and  spirits

79

III.  In which  a little Jew is  seen  to prefer honey to  sugar—In which

an alchemist who  might be the mysterious  Fulcanelli speaks of

the  atomic  danger  in  1937,  describes  the  atomic pile  and evokes

civilization  now extinct—In which Bergier breaks  a safe with  a

blow-lamp  and  carries  off a  bottle  of uranium  under  his  arm—In

which a nameless American  major seeks  a Fulcanelli now definitely

vanished—In  which  Oppenheimer  echoes  a  Chinese  sage  of a

thousand years  ago

90

IV.  The  modern  alchemist  and  the  spirit  of research—Description  of

what  an  alchemist  does  in  his  laboratory—Experiments  repeated

indefinitely—What  is  he  waiting for?—The  preparation  of

darkness—Electronic  gas—Water  that  dissolves—Is  the

philosopher's  stone  energy in  suspension?—The  transmutation

•

of the  alchemist himself—This  is where  true  metaphysics  begin

99

V.  There  is  time  for everything—There  is  even  a time  for  the  times

to come together

110

The  Vanished  Civilizations99

V.  There  is  time  for everything—There  is  even  a time  for  the  times

to come together

110

The  Vanished  Civilizations

I.  In  which  the  authors  introduce  a  fantastic  personage—Mr.  Fort—

The  fire  at  the  "sanatorium  of overworked  coincidences"—Mr.  Fort

and universal knowledge—40,000 notes on a gush of periwinkles,

a  downpour  of  frogs  and  showers  of  blood—  The  Book  of  the

Damned—A  certain  Professor  Kreyssler—In  praise  of

"intermediarism"  with  some  examples—The  Hermit  of Bronx,

or  the  cosmic  Rabelais—Visit  of the  author  to  the  Cathedral  of

Saint Elsewhere—Au revoir,  Mr.  Fort!

113

II.  An  hypothesis  condemned  to  the  stake—Where  a  clergyman

and  a biologist  become  comic  figures—Wanted:  a  Copernicus  in

anthropology—Many  blank  spaces  on  all  the  maps—Dr.  Fortune's

lack  of curiosity—The  mystery  of the  melted  platinum—

Cords  used  as  books—The  tree  and  the  telephone—Cultural

relativity

131

III.  In which  the  authors  speculate  about  the  Great  Pyramid—•

Possibility  of "other"  techniques—The  example  of Hitler

—The  Empire  of Almanzar—Recurrence  of "ends  of the  world"—

The  impossible  Easter  Island—The  legend  of the  white  man—The

civilization of America—The mystery of Maya—From the "bridge

of

light"

to

the

strange

plain

of

Nazca

139

IV.  Memory  older  than  us—Metallic  birds—A  strange  map  of the

world—Atomic  bombardments  and  interplanetary vessels  in  "sacred

texts"—A  new  view  of machines—The  cult  of the  "cargo"—Another

vision  of esoterism—The  rites  of the  intelligence

150

P A RT  T WO

A  Few  Years  in  the  Absolute  Elsewhere

I.  All  the  marbles  in  the  same  bag—The historian's  despair—Two

amateurs  of the  unusual—At  the  bottom  of the  Devil's  Lake

—An  empty  antifascism—The  authors  in  the  presence  of the

Infinitely Strange—Troy,  too,  was  only a legend—History lagsamateurs  of the  unusual—At  the  bottom  of the  Devil's  Lake

—An  empty  antifascism—The  authors  in  the  presence  of the

Infinitely Strange—Troy,  too,  was  only a legend—History lags

behind—From  visible  banality  to  invisible  fantasy—The  fable  of

the  golden  beetle—Undercurrents  of the  future—There  are  other

things besides soulless  machinery

164

II.  In  the  Tribune des Nations  the  Devil  and  madness  are  refused

recognition—Yet  there  are  rivalries  between  deities—The  Germans

and Atlantis—Magic  socialism—A secret religion and a secret

Order—An  expedition  to  hidden  regions—The  first  guide  will

be a poet

179

III.  P. J.  Toulet  and Arthur  Machen—A great  neglected genius—A

Robinson  Crusoe  of the  soul—The  story  of the  angels  at  Mons—

The  life,  adventures,  and  misfortunes  of Arthur  Machen—How we

discovered  an  English  secret  society—A Nobel  Prize winner in  a

black mask—The  Golden  Dawn  and  its  members

182

IV. A  hollow Earth,  a  frozen  world,  a New M a n— " We  are  the  enemies

of the  mind  and  spirit"—Against  Nature  and  against  God—The

Vril  Society—The  race  which  will  supplant  us—Haushofer  and

the  Vril—The  idea  of the  mutation  of man—The  "Unknown

Superman"—Mathers,  chief of the  Golden  Dawn  meets  the

"Great  Terrorists" — Hitler  claims  to  have  met  them  too—An

hallucination  or  a  real  presence?—A  door  opening on  to

something  other—A  prophecy  of Rene  Guenon—The  Nazis'

enemy No.  1:  Steiner

190

V.  An  ultimatum  for  the  scientists—The  prophet  Horbiger,  a

twentieth-century  Copernicus—-The  theory  of the  frozen  world—

History  of the  solar  system—The  end  of the  world—The  Earth

and  its  four  Moons—Apparition  of the  giants—Moons,  giants,

and men—The civilization of Atlantis—The five cities 300,000

years  old—From  Tiahuanaco  to  Tibet—The  second Atlantis—

The  Deluge—Degeneration  and  Christianity—We  areand men—The civilization of Atlantis—The five cities 300,000

years  old—From  Tiahuanaco  to  Tibet—The  second Atlantis—

The  Deluge—Degeneration  and  Christianity—We  are

approaching another era—The law of ice and fire

199

VI.  Horbiger still has  a million followers—Waiting for the

Messiah—Hitler and political esoterism—Nordic science and

magic  thinking—A  civilization  utterly different  from  our own—

Gurdjieff,  Horbiger,  Hitler,  and  the  man  responsible  for  the

Cosmos—The  cycle  of fire—Hitler  speaks—The  basis  of Nazi

anti-Semitism—Martians  at  Nuremberg—The  antipact—The

rockets'  summer—Stalingrad,  or the fall of the M a g i — T he prayer

on  Mount  Elbruz—The  little  man victorious  over  the  superman—

The  little  man  opens  the  gates  of Heaven—The  Twilight  of the

Gods—The  flooding  of the  Berlin  Underground  and  the  myth

of the  Deluge—A Chorus by Shelley

223

VII.  A hollow Earth—We  are living inside  it—The  Sun  and Moon

are  in  the  center  of the  Earth—Radar  in  the  service  of the  Wise

Men—Birth of a new religion  in America—Its prophet was  a

German  airman—Anti-Einstein—The  work  of a  madman—

A hollow Earth,  Artificial  Satellites  and the  notion  of Infinity—

Hitler as arbiter—Beyond coherence

2 43

VIII.  Grist  for  our horrible  mill—The  last  prayer  of Dietrich  Eckardt—

The  legend  of Thule—A  nursery  for  mediums—Haushofer  the

magician—Hess's silence—The swastika—The seven men who

wanted  to  change life—A Tibetan  colony—Exterminations  and

ritual—It is  darker than you  thought

2 51

IX.' Himmler  and  the  other  side  of the problem—1934  a  turning

point—The  Black  Order  in  power—The  death's-head warrior

monks—Initiation in the Burgs—Sievers' last prayer—The strange

doings  of the  Ahnenerbe—The  High  Priest  Frederick  Hielscher—

A  forgotten  note  of  Jiinger's—Impressions  of  war  and  victory  2 63

P A RT  T H R EE

That  Infinity  Called  Man

..

.doings  of the  Ahnenerbe—The  High  Priest  Frederick  Hielscher—

A  forgotten  note  of  Jiinger's—Impressions  of  war  and  victory  2 63

P A RT  T H R EE

That  Infinity  Called  Man

..

.

I.  A  New  Kind  of  Intuition:  The  Fantastic  in  fire  and  blood—The

barriers  of incredulity—The  first  rocket—Bourgeois  and  "Workers

of the  Earth"—False  facts  and  true  fiction—Inhabited  worlds—

Visitors  from  Beyond—The  great  lines  of communication—

Modern  myths—Fantastic  realism  in psychology—Toward  an

exploration  of the  fantastic  within—The  method  described—

Another conception of liberty

•

2 80

II.  The Fantastic  Within:  Some  pioneers:  Balzac,  Hugo,

Flammarion—Jules  Romains  and  the  "Great  Question"—The

end of positivism—What is parapsychology?—Some extraordinary

facts  and  experiences—The  example  of the  Titanic—Clairvoyance

—Precognition  and  dreams—Parapsychology  and

psychoanalysis—We  reject occultism  and  the pseudosciences—

In  quest of machinery for sounding the  depths

295

III.  Toward  a  Psychological  Revolution:  The  mind's  "second  wind"—

Wanted:  an  Einstein  for psychology—A  renaissance  of religion—

Our  society is  at  death's  door—Jaures  and  the  "tree  buzzing with

flies"—We see little because we are little

306

IV.  The  Magic  Mind  Rediscovered:  The  green  eye  of  the  Vatican—

The  "other"  intelligence—The  story  of the  "relavote"—Is  Nature

playing a  double  game?—The  starting-handle  of the  supermachine

—New  cathedrals  and  new  slang—The  last  door—Existence  as  an

instrument—A new view of symbols—All  is  not everything

312

V.  The  Notion  of  an  "Awakened  State":  After  the  fashion  of

theologians, scientists, magicians, and children—Salute to an

expert  at  putting  spokes  in  wheels—The  conflict  between

spiritualism  and  materialism:  the  story of an  allergy—The  legendtheologians, scientists, magicians, and children—Salute to an

expert  at  putting  spokes  in  wheels—The  conflict  between

spiritualism  and  materialism:  the  story of an  allergy—The  legend

of tea—Could  it  be  a  natural  faculty?—Thought  as  a  means  of

travel  on  the  ground  or  in  the  air—A  supplement  to  the  Rights  of

Man—Some  reflections  on  the  "awakened"  Man—Ourselves  as

honest savages

332

VI.  Three  True  Stories  as  Illustration:  The  story  of a  great

mathematician  "in  the  raw"—The  story  of the  most  wonderful

clairvoyant—The  story  of a  scientist  of the  future  who  lived  in

1750

344

VII.

The

"Awakened"Man:  Some  Paradoxes  and  Hypotheses:  W hy  our

three  stories  may have  disappointed  some  readers—We  know very

little  about levitation,  immortality,  etc.—Yet  Man  has  the gift of

ubiquity, has long sight,  etc.—How do you  define  a machine ?—

How  the  first  "awakened"  Man  could  have  been  born—A  fabulous,

yet  reasonable  dream  about vanished  civilizations—The  fable  of

the panther—The writing of God

353

VIII.  Some  Documents  on  the  "Awakened  State":  Wanted:  an

anthology—The  sayings  of Gurdjieff—When  I  was  at  the  school

for "awakening"—Raymond Abellio's  story—A striking extract

from  the works of Gustav Meyrinck,  a neglected genius

358

IX.  The  Point  Beyond  Infinity:  From  Surrealism  to  Fantastic  Realism

—The  Supreme  Point—Beware  of images—The  madness  of

Georg  Cantor—The  Yogi  and  the  mathematician—A  fundamental

aspiration  of the  human  spirit—An  extract  from  a  story  by Jorge

Luis Borges

374

X.  Some  Reflections  on  the  Mutants:  The  child  astronomer—A

sudden  access  of intelligence—The  theory  of mutation—The  myth

of the  great  Superior  Ones—The  Mutants  among  us—From  Horla

to  Leonard  Euler—An  invisible  society  of Mutants?—The  birth  of

the collective being—Love of the living

Index

385

4 04of the  great  Superior  Ones—The  Mutants  among  us—From  Horla

to  Leonard  Euler—An  invisible  society  of Mutants?—The  birth  of

the collective being—Love of the living

Index

385

4 04

P R E F A CE

Physically  I  am  a  clumsy person  and  I  deplore  the  fact.  I  think  I  would  be

a  happier  man  if  I  had  worker's  hands—hands  capable  of making  useful

things,  of plunging  into  the  depths  of nature  to  tap  sources  of goodness

and  peace.  My  adopted  father  (I  always  refer  to  h im  as  my  father  because

it  was  he  who  brought  me  up)  was  a  journeyman  tailor.  He  was  great

hearted  and  possessed  a  truly  questing  mind.  He  used  to  say,  with  a  smile,

that  betrayal  by  the  intellectuals  began  with  the  first  artist  who  depicted

a  winged  angel—it  is  by  our  hands  that  we  attain  Heaven!

In  spite  of my  lack  of manual  dexterity  I  did  once  manage  to  bind  a

book.  I  was  sixteen  at  the  time,  a  student  at  a vocational  class  in  a  suburb

of  Juvisy.  On  Saturday  afternoons  we  had  the  choice  between  wood  and

metal  work,  modeling,  and  book  binding.  Poetry  was  then  my  favorite

reading,  Rimbaud  my  favorite  poet.  A nd  yet—after  an  inner  struggle,

I  admit—I  abandoned  the  idea  of  binding  his  Une  Saison  en  Enfer  {A

Season  in  Hell).  My  father  possessed  some  thirty  books  arranged  in  a  nar

row  cupboard  in  his  workroom  along  with  bobbins,  chalk,  shoulder  pads,

and patterns.  There  were  also,  in  this  cupboard,  thousands  of notes,  which

he  had  jotted  down  in  his  scholar's  hand  at  a  corner  of his  bench  during

innumerable  nights  working  at  his  trade.  Among  these  books  I  had  read

Flammarion's  Le  Monde  avant  la  Creation  de  I'Homme  (The  World  before

the  Creation  of M a n)  and  was  just  discovering  Walter  Rathenau's  Ou  VaFlammarion's  Le  Monde  avant  la  Creation  de  I'Homme  (The  World  before

the  Creation  of M a n)  and  was  just  discovering  Walter  Rathenau's  Ou  Va

la  Monde?  (Where  is  the  World  Going?).  I  set  out  to  bind  Rathenau's

book,  not  without  difficulty.  Rathenau  was  among  the  first  victims  of the

Nazis,  and  the  year was  1936.  So,  each  Saturday,  I  struggled  over  my  task

in  the  little  workshop  of the  vocational  school,  and  on  the  first  of M ay

XV

xvi

P R E F A CE

I  presented  my  father  with  the  finished  book,  and  a  spray  of lilies  of the

valley  out  of regard  for  him  and  the  working  class.

My  father  had  underlined  in  red  pencil  in  this  book  a  passage  I  still

remember:

Even  the  most  troubled  epoch  is  worthy  of respect,  because  it  is  the

work  not  just  of a  few  people  but  of humanity;  and  thus  it  is  the

work  of creative  nature—which  is  often  cruel  but  never  absurd.  If

this  epoch  in  which  we  are  living is  a  cruel  one  it  is  more  than  ever

Our duty  to  love  it,  to  penetrate  it with  our love  till  we  have  removed

the  heavy  weight  of matter  screening  the  light  that  shines  on  the

farther  side.

"Even  the  most  troubled  epoch  .  .  ."

My  father  died  in  1948  without  ever  having  ceased  to  believe  in  cre

ative  nature,  without  ever  having  ceased  to  love  and  to  penetrate  with  his

love  the  sad  world  in  which  he  lived,  without  ever  having  lost  the  hope

of  seeing  the  light  behind  the  heavy  weight  of  matter.  He  belonged  to

the  generation  of romantic  socialists  who  had  as  their  idols  Victor  Hugo,

Romain  Rolland,  Jean  Jaures,  wore  wide-brimmed  hats,  and  kept  a  little

blue  flower  in  the  folds  of the  red  flag. Just  at  the  edge  of pure  mysticism

on  the  one  hand  and  the  cult  of social  action  on  the  other,  my  father  (heblue  flower  in  the  folds  of the  red  flag. Just  at  the  edge  of pure  mysticism

on  the  one  hand  and  the  cult  of social  action  on  the  other,  my  father  (he

worked  fourteen  hours  a day  at his  bench:  and yet we  lived  in  near  misery)

succeeded  in  reconciling  an  ardent  trade  union  activity  with  a  search  for

an  inner  liberation.  He  had  introduced  into  the  humble  actions  demanded

by  his  work  a  sort  of  method  of  concentration  and  purification  of  the

mind  on  which  he  left  hundreds  of pages  of notes.  Stitching  buttonholes

or  pressing  cloth,  his  face  yet  bore  a  radiant  expression.  Every  Thursday

(a  school  holiday  in  France)  and  Sunday  my  friends  would  gather  around

his  workbench  to  listen  to  him  and  to  savor  his  strength,  and  nearly  all  of

them  felt  their  life  changed  in  some  way.

Full  of confidence  in  progress  and  science,  believing  in  the  coming

to  power  of the  proletariat,  he  had  constructed  a  powerful  philosophy  for

himself.  The  reading  of Flammarion's  study  of prehistory  had  been  a  sort

PREFACE

xvii

of revelation  for  him.  Guided  only  by  feeling he  went  on  to  read  books  on

paleontology,  astronomy,  and  physics.  Although  with  little  formal  educa

tion,  he  yet  managed  to  penetrate  to  the  heart  of  these  subjects.  W h en

he  talked  it  was  as  if it  might  have  been  Teilhard  de  Chardin  (whom  we

hadn't  even  heard  of in  those  days):

The  experience  of our  century  is  going  to  be  something  consider

ably  more  than  the  birth  of Buddhism!  It  is  no  longer  a  question

of endowing  such  and  such  a  god  with  human  faculties.  The  reli

gious  power  of the  Earth  will  undergo  in  us  a  final  crisis:  that  of its

own  discovery.  We  are  beginning  to  understand,  and  for  ever,  thatgious  power  of the  Earth  will  undergo  in  us  a  final  crisis:  that  of its

own  discovery.  We  are  beginning  to  understand,  and  for  ever,  that

the  only  acceptable  religion  for  man  is  the  one  that  will  teach  him

first  of all  to  recognize,  love  and  passionately  serve  this  Universe  of

which  he  is  the  most  important  element.*

My father believed  that  the  evolutionary process  is  not  to  be  confused with

selection,  which  is  a  purely  superficial  process,  but  that  it  is  all-inclusive

and  ascendant,  augmenting  the  "psychic  density"  of our  planet,  preparing

it  to  make  contact  with  the  intelligences  of other  worlds,  to  draw  nearer

to  the  very  soul  of the  Cosmos.  For  him  the  human  species  is  not  some

thing completed.  By virtue  of the  spread  of communal  living  and  the  slow

creation  of a  universal  psyche,  it  is  progressing  toward  a  state  of super-

consciousness.  He  used  to  say  that  man  is  not  yet  perfect  and  saved,  but

that  the  laws  of condensation  of creative  energy  permit  us  to  nourish,  at

the  cosmic  level,  a  tremendous  hope.  A nd  he  never  lost  sight  of this  hope.

It  was  from  that  viewpoint  that  he  judged,  serenely  and  with  a  religious

dynamism,  the  affairs  of this  world,  seeking  far  and  high  an  immediate

and  truly  effective  optimism  and  courage.  In  1948  the  war  was  over,  and

new  battles—atomic  ones,  this  time—were  threatening.  Nevertheless  he

considered  the  disquieting  and  painful  times  to  be  no  more  than  the  neg

ative  of a  magnificent  image.  It  was  as  if he  were  in  communication  with

""Teilhard  de  Chardin  tel  que  je  l'ai  connu"  (Teilhard  de  Chardin  as  I  knew  him),  by

G.  Magloire,  in  Synthhe,  November  1 9 5 7.

xviii

P R E F A CE

the  spiritual  destiny  of  the  Earth,  and  for  the  troubled  epoch  in  whichG.  Magloire,  in  Synthhe,  November  1 9 5 7.

xviii

P R E F A CE

the  spiritual  destiny  of  the  Earth,  and  for  the  troubled  epoch  in  which

he  ended  his  life  of labor,  and  despite  numerous  personal  setbacks,  he  felt

nothing  but  confidence  and  love.

He  died  in  my  arms  during  the  night  of  December  31,  and  before

dying  he  said  to  me:  "One  must  not  count  too  much  on  God,  but  perhaps

God  counts  on  us.  ..  ."

How  did  things  stand  with  me  at  that  moment?  I  was  twenty-eight  years

old.  I  was  twenty  in  1940  at  the  time  of France's  collapse.  I  belonged  to

a  critical  generation  which  had  seen  a  world  fall  apart,  which  was  sun

dered  from  the  past  and  mistrustful  of the  future.  I  was  certainly  far  from

believing  that  our  shattered  world  was  worthy  of respect  and  that  it  was

my duty  to  penetrate  it  with  love.  Rather  it  seemed  to  me  that  a  clear  head

led  to  refusal  to  participate  in  a  game  where  everyone  was  cheating.

During  the  war  I  sought  refuge  in  Hinduism—that  was  my  way  of

resisting,  and  I  lived  in  absolute  Resistance.

Don't  look  for  help  in  a  study  of history,  nor  among  people—they'll

let  you  down  every  time.  Look  for  it  in  yourself.  Live  in  this  world  with

out  being  of it.  One  of my  favorite  images  was  the  Bhagavad  Gita  diving

bird:  "down,  skim  the water,  and  up—without  having even wet  its wings."

Act  in  such  a  way  that  events  too  powerful  to  be  modified  by  us  will  at

least  not  affect  us.  I  existed  in  a  rarefied  air,  sitting—lotus  fashion—on

a  cloud  borne  from  the  Orient.  .  .  .  W h en  I  had  gone  to  sleep  my  father

would  quietly  thumb  through  my  bedside  reading,  trying  to  understand

the  source  of my  strange  ideas,  which  yawned  like  a  gulf between  us.would  quietly  thumb  through  my  bedside  reading,  trying  to  understand

the  source  of my  strange  ideas,  which  yawned  like  a  gulf between  us.

Some  time later, just  after the  Liberation,  I  found  a new master to  model

myself on  and  to  live  for.  I  became  a  follower  of Gurdjieff.  I  worked  hard

to  separate  myself  from  all  emotion,  sentiment,  impulse,  hoping  to  find,

beyond  them,  a  state  of—how  shall  I  say  it?—of immobility  and  of perma

nence,  a silent  presence,  anonymous,  transcendent, which would console  me

for  all  that  I  lacked  and  for  the  world's  absurdity.  I  thought  of my  father

with pity.  I possessed  the  secrets of controlling the  mind;  all knowledge was

mine.  In  fact,  I  possessed  nothing  except  the  illusion  of possessing,  and  an

overwhelming  contempt  for  those  who  did  not  share  my  illusion.

P R E F A CE

xix

My  father  despaired  of me.  I  despaired  of myself.  I  steeped  myself to

the  very  bone  in  a  position  of  refusal.  I  was  reading  Rene  Guenon,  and

believed  it  was  our  disgrace  to  be  living  in  a  completely  perverted  world

bent  on  the  Apocalypse.  The  words  spoken  by  Cortes  to  the  Spanish

Chamber  of Deputies  in  1849  became  mine:  "The  cause  of all  your  mis

takes,  gentlemen,  is  your  unawareness  of  the  direction  being  taken  by

civilization  and  the  world.  You  believe  that  civilization  and  the  world

progress.  No,  they  go  backwards!"  For  me  our  modern  age  was  the  dark

ages.  I  spent  my  time  listing  the  crimes  committed  by  the  modern  mind

against  Mind.  Since  the  twelfth  century  the  Western  World,  having  aban

doned  the  Principals,  had  been  rushing  to  disaster.  To  have  any  hope,

however  small,  was  a  betrayal.  I  had  energy  only  for  refusal,  for  the  breakdoned  the  Principals,  had  been  rushing  to  disaster.  To  have  any  hope,

however  small,  was  a  betrayal.  I  had  energy  only  for  refusal,  for  the  break

ing  of contact.  In  this  stricken  world  where  priests,  thinkers,  politicians,

sociologists,  and  manipulators  of all  kinds  seemed  to  me  like  dung  eaters

the  only  dignified  behavior  lay  in  traditional  studies  and  unconditional

resistance  to  the  spirit  of the  age.

Looked  at  from  such  a  point  of  view,  evidently,  my  father  appeared  the

veriest  simpleton.  His  sense  of belonging,  of affection,  of vision  irritated

me  as  something  unbelievably  absurd.  The  hope  he  placed  in  a  growing

communal  life  inspired  by  infinitely  more  than  purely  political  motives

incited  my  deepest  contempt.  My  standards  were  those  of  the  ancient

theocracies.

Einstein  founded  a  "committee  of despair"  of  atomic  scientists;  the

menace  of total  war  bore  down  on  a humanity  divided  into  two  blocs.  Yet

my  father  died  with  his  faith  in  the  future  intact;  I  no  longer  understood

him.  I  do  not  intend  to  raise  the  problems  of the  existence  of social  classes

in  this  book—it  isn't  the  place.  But  I  know  very  well  the  reality  of these

problems:  they  crucified  the  man  who  loved  me.

I  never  knew  my  real  father.  He  belonged  to  the  old  bourgeoisie  of

Ghent.  My  mother,  like  my  second  father,  came  from  the  working  class.

It  was  the  inheritance  from  my  Flemish  ancestors,  sensualists,  artists,  lay

abouts,  and  proud,  that  separated  me  from  a  generous,  dynamic  way  of

thinking,  forcing  me  into  myself and  into  a  misapprehension  of the  vir

tue  of participation.  The  barrier  between  my  second  father  and  me  had

xx

P R E F A CE

already  existed  a  long  time.  He  who  had  never  wished  other  child  thantue  of participation.  The  barrier  between  my  second  father  and  me  had

xx

P R E F A CE

already  existed  a  long  time.  He  who  had  never  wished  other  child  than

me  (who  came  of another's  blood),  solicitous  for  me,  sacrificed  much  so

that  I  should become  an  intellectual.  Having given  everything,  he  fell  into

the  trap  of t h i n k i ng  that  we  were  kindred  spirits.  He  saw  in  me  a  bea

con,  someone  capable  of lighting  a  way  for  others,  of giving  them  courage

and  hope—of showing  them,  as  he  used  to  say,  the  light  within  us.  But

I  knew  of  no  sort  of  light—except  some  sort  of  dark  lamp,  perhaps—in

me  or  in  humanity.  I  was  simply  one  intellectual  among  a  multitude  of

intellectuals.

I  pushed  the  conviction  of  being  an  outsider  and  of  the  need  for

revolt—ideas  reflected  in  the  literary  reviews  around  1947  when  they

wrote  of "metaphysical  disquiet"—to  their  extreme  limits.  Such  ideas were

the  difficult  heritage  of my  generation.  How,  then,  to  be  a  beacon  in  such

circumstances?  This  typical  Victor  Hugo  thought  only caused  me  to  smile

sneeringly.  My  father  reproached  me  with  having  sold  the  past,  gone  over

to  the  side  of the  mandarins  and  those  proud  of their  very  powerlessness.

The  atom  bomb,  for  me  the  sign  of the  end  of everything,  was  for  him

herald  of a  new  dawn:  matter  was  spiritualizing  itself and  man  was  dis

covering  in  his  surroundings  and  within  himself completely  unsuspected

forces.  The  bourgeois  sentiment,  which  sees  this  world  as  nothing  but  a

comfortable  habitation,  was  to  be  swept  away  in  the  gale  of a  new  spirit—

the  spirit  of  the  "workers  of  the  Earth"  for  whom  the  world  is  a  going

machine,  an  organism  in  process  of becoming,  a  unity  to  be  achieved,  athe  spirit  of  the  "workers  of  the  Earth"  for  whom  the  world  is  a  going

machine,  an  organism  in  process  of becoming,  a  unity  to  be  achieved,  a

Truth  to  be  realized.  For  h im  humanity  is  only  at  the  beginning  of its

evolution.  It  has  received  only  its primary instruction  on  the  role  assigned

to  it  by  the  Intelligence  of the  Universe.  We  are  only  now  beginning  to

understand  the  meaning  of the  phrase  "love  of the  world."

The  human  adventure  had  a  direction  for  my  father.  He judged  events

as  they  moved  or  not  in  this  direction.  History made  sense:  it was  leading

to  some  k i nd  of  ultrahuman  being  and  promised  a  superconsciousness.

But  this  cosmic  philosophy  did  not  isolate  him  from  his  century.  He  was

a  "leftist"  in  his  day-to-day  living.  This  irritated  me;  particularly  as  I  did

not  then  understand  that  he  put  more  spirituality  in  his  progressiveness

than  I  of progressiveness  in  my  spirituality.

P R E F A CE

xxi

I  was  suffocating  within  the  closed  system  of my  thinking;  I  some

times  felt  myself to  be  no  more  than  a  little,  arid  intellectual  and  envied

him  his  large  free-ranging thoughts.  Evenings,  sitting by  his  bench,  I  used

to  contradict  him,  provoke  him,  yet  hoping  inwardly  that  he  would  man

age  to  confound  and  change  me.  But,  tired,  he  would  lose  his  temper

with  me  and  with  a  destiny  that  had  given  him  such  splendid  conceptions

without  giving  him  the  means  to  pass  them  on  to  this  child  of another,

mutinous,  blood.  We  would  quit  each  other  in  anger  and  sadness,  I  to  my

meditations  and  my  literature  of despair,  he  back  to  his  work  under  the

raw  electric  light  that  yellowed  his  hair.  From  my  little  bedroom  I  could

hear  his  breathing,  his  mutterings.  Then  suddenly,  between  his  teeth  heraw  electric  light  that  yellowed  his  hair.  From  my  little  bedroom  I  could

hear  his  breathing,  his  mutterings.  Then  suddenly,  between  his  teeth  he

would  begin  to  whistle  quietly  the  opening bars  of Beethoven's  "Hymn  to

Joy"—saying to  me  in  my little  bedroom  that love will  always  find its way

back.  Each  evening,  around  about  the  hour  when  we  used  to  have  those

arguments,  I  think  of him  and  I  hear  again  those  mutters  which  invari

ably  terminated  in  song,  in  that  sublime  hymn.

He  has  been  dead  twelve  years.  If I  had  understood  then  as  I  under

stand  now  I  would  have  managed  my  intelligence  and  my  heart  more

skillfully.  Then,  I  was  an  incessant  seeker.  Now  I  have  rallied  to  him  after

many  often  sterile  and  dangerous  journeys.  I  would  have  been  able,  much

sooner,  to  conciliate  the  attraction  subjectivity  has  for  me  with  an  affec

tion  for  the  world  in  all  its  movement.  I  would  have  been  able  to  throw

up—and  perhaps  with  greater  success  in  the  vigor  of my  youth—a  bridge

between  mysticism  and  the  modern  mind.  I  would  have  been  able  to  feel

myself at  once  religious  and  yet  part  of the  great  drive  of history.  Earlier,

much  earlier,  I  would  have  acquired  faith,  hope,  and  charity.

This  book  sums  up  five  years  of  questing,  through  all  the  regions

of consciousness,  to  the  frontiers  of science  and  tradition.  I  flung  myself

into  this  enterprise—and  without  adequate  equipment—because  I  could

no  longer  deny  this  world  of  ours  and  its  future,  to  which  I  so  clearly

belong.

Yet, every extremity illuminates.  I  should have  found  a means  of com

munication  with  my  epoch  more  quickly,  yet  it  may  be  that  in  approach

ing things  in  my own way  I  did  not  altogether waste  my time.  Men  get  not

xxii

P R E F A CEmunication  with  my  epoch  more  quickly,  yet  it  may  be  that  in  approach

ing things  in  my own way  I  did  not  altogether waste  my time.  Men  get  not

xxii

P R E F A CE

what  they merit  but what  they resemble.  I  have  always  been  seeking for,  as

Rimbaud  expressed  it,  the  "Truth  in  a  soul  and  a  body."  I  have  not  found

it.  In  the  pursuit  of this  Truth  I  lost  sight  of numerous  small  truths  which

would  have  made  of me,  certainly  not  the  superman  I  yearned  to  be,  but

at  least  a  better  and  more  integrated  person  than  I  am.  However,  I  did

learn  some  things  about  the  fundamental  behavior  of the  mind,  about  the

various  possible  states  of  consciousness,  about  memory  and  intuition—

some  precious  things  I  would  not  have  otherwise  learned  and  which  one

day  may  help  me  to  comprehend  those  things  that  are  grandiose,  essen

tially  revolutionary,  in  the  modern  mind  at  its  peak:  its  questionings  on

the  nature  of consciousness  and  the  urgent  need  for  a  sort  of transmuta

tion  of the  intelligence.

W h en  I  came  out  of my  yogi's  retreat  to  take  a  look  at  the  modern

world—I  knew  of its  existence,  of course,  but  did  not  understand  the  first

thing  about  it—I  was  immediately  struck  by  its  air  of the  marvelous.  My

backward-looking  preoccupations,  fed  on  pride  and  hate,  had  at  least  this

useful  result:  I  no  longer  saw  this  world  from  its  bad  side,  from  the  point

of  view  of  a  "beat-up"  nineteenth-century  rationalism,  of  a  demagogic

radicalism.  They  had  also  stopped  me  from  simply  accepting  the  world

just  because  it  was  there,  the  place  where  I  happened  to  live,  in  that  semi

conscious  way  most  people  accept  it.  My  viewpoint  refreshed  by  the  long

visit  I  had  made  outside  the  frontiers  of my  period,  I  saw  this  world  toconscious  way  most  people  accept  it.  My  viewpoint  refreshed  by  the  long

visit  I  had  made  outside  the  frontiers  of my  period,  I  saw  this  world  to

be  as  rich  in  a  real  fantasy  as  I  had  supposed  the  traditional  world  to  be.

Better  still,  my  fresh  way  of looking  at  the  modern  world  reacted  back  on

and  deepened  my  understanding of the  ancient  mind.  Old  and  new,  I  saw

both  from  a  fresh  angle.

I  met  Jacques  Bergier  just  about  the  time  I  was  finishing  my  book  on

Gurdjieff's  little  group.  Our  meeting  (something  more  than  chance  I  have

always  thought)  was  to  prove  of great  consequence.  I  had just  devoted  two

years  to  a  study  of an  esoteric  school  and  my  experiences  in  it.  But  new

experiences  were  beginning  for  me  and  this  is  what  I  explained  to  read

ers  of that  book  on  taking  my  leave  of them.  W i th  the  story  of a  certain

method  of  trapping  monkeys  in  mind  (a  handful  of  nuts  in  a  narrow-

mouthed  gourd  attached  to  a  tree,  the  monkey  slides  in  his  paw,  balls

it  into  a  fist  around  the  nuts,  and  so  cannot  withdraw  his  paw,  and  is

trapped)  I  wrote:

P R E F A CE

xxiii

Examine  the  bait  by  all  means,  test  it  with  your  hand,  then  dis

creetly  disengage.  Curiosity  satisfied,  return  your  attention  to  the

world,  resume  your  liberty,  your  lucidity,  your  place  on  the  route

leading  into  our  world  of Man.  The  important  thing  is  to  discover

the  extent  to  which  the  rhythms  of the  so-called  traditional  mode  of

thinking  merge  with  the  movements  of contemporary  thinking.  At

their  present  farthest  limits  physics,  biology,  mathematics  touch  on

certain  traditional  concepts:  certain  aspects  of esoterism,  visions  of

the  Cosmos,  of the  relation  between  energy  and  matter.  Modern  scicertain  traditional  concepts:  certain  aspects  of esoterism,  visions  of

the  Cosmos,  of the  relation  between  energy  and  matter.  Modern  sci

ence,  once  freed  from  conformism,  is  seen  to  have  ideas  to  exchange

with  the  magicians,  alchemists,  and wonder-workers  of antiquity.  A

revolution  is  taking  place  before  our  eyes—the  unexpected  remar

riage  of reason,  at  the  summit  of its  victories,  and  intuition.  For  the

really  attentive  observer  the  problems  facing  contemporary  intelli

gence  are  no  longer  problems  of progress.  The  concept  of progress

has  been  dead  for  some  years  now.  Today it  is  a  question  of a  change

of state,  of a  transmutation.  From  this  point  of view  those  concerned

with  the  domain  of the  interior  life  and  its  realities  are  in  step  with

the  pioneering  savants  who  are  preparing  the  birth  of a  world  that

will  have  nothing  in  common  with  our  present  world  of laborious

transition  in  which we  have  to live  for just  a little while  longer.

And  that  is  the  precise  argument  we  shall  develop  in  this  present

book.  Before  launching  into  the  undertaking  I  told  myself that  as  a  pre

liminary  to  understanding  the  present,  one  must  be  capable  of projecting

one's  intelligence  far  into  the  past  and  far  into  the  future.  Formerly  I  had

felt  a  dislike  for  those  described  as  "moderns,"  but  I  had  disliked  them

for  the  wrong  reasons.  They  are  to  be  condemned  because  their  minds

are  occupied  with  so  small  a  portion  of the  time  scale.  Scarcely  have  they

arrived  on  the  scene  than  they  are  anachronisms.  Only  a  contemporary  of

xxiv

PREFACE

the  future  can  truly  be  of the  present.  Even  the  distant  past  may  be  con

ceived  of  as  an  undertow  tending  toward  the  future.  Thus  interrogatingxxiv

PREFACE

the  future  can  truly  be  of the  present.  Even  the  distant  past  may  be  con

ceived  of  as  an  undertow  tending  toward  the  future.  Thus  interrogating

the  present  from  this  point  of view  I  received  some  strange  but  promising

replies.

The  American  writer, James  Blish, wrote  that  Einstein's  glory was  to  have

swallowed  Newton  alive  and  kicking.  An  admirable  formula!  A  prelimi

nary  to  any  raising  of our  sights  toward  a  higher  vision  of life  is  that  our

thinking  should  have  absorbed—alive  and  kicking—the  truths  of the  pre

vious  level.  T h is  is  the  one  certainty  that  has  emerged  from  my  studies.

Does  this  sound  banal?  But  when  one  has  been  living  with  methods  of

thinking  that  claim  to  be  on  the  very  peaks  of human  endeavor,  such  as

Rene  Guenon's  wisdom  and  the  Gurdjieff system  with  their  contempt  for

the  greater  part  of social  and  scientific  reality,  this  new  way  of looking  at

things  changes  the  intentions  of the  mind  and  its  needs.  "Lower  things,"

said  Plato,  "will  be  found  again  in  higher  things—though  in  another

form."  I  am  convinced  that  any  advance  in  philosophy  which  does  not

vitally  include  in  itself the  realities  of the  level  it  claims  to  have  super

seded,  is  an  imposture.

So  I  passed  a  long  exploratory  period  in  the  domain  of physics,  of

anthropology,  mathematics,  biology  before  m a k i ng  any  attempt  to  fash

ion  an  idea  of M a n,  his  nature,  his  force,  his  destiny.  Formerly  I  sought

to  comprehend  the  "totality  of the  concept  M a n"  and  was  contemptuous

of science.  I  suspected  the  mind's  ability  to  scale  the  highest  summits.

A nd  yet,  what  did  I  know  of its  advances  in  the  field  of science?  H ad  it

not  there  manifested  its  power  in  certain  ways  that  I  might  be  inclinedA nd  yet,  what  did  I  know  of its  advances  in  the  field  of science?  H ad  it

not  there  manifested  its  power  in  certain  ways  that  I  might  be  inclined

to  accept?  A nd  so,  I  reflected,  the  need  is  to  surmount  the  apparent  con

tradiction  between  the  material  and  the  spiritual.  But  was  the  scientific

approach  the  way  to  achieve  this?  The  least  I  could  do  was  to  investigate

the  possibility—a  more  reasonable  attitude  after  all,  for  a  twentieth-

century  man  than  undertaking  a  barefoot  pilgrimage  across  India!  The

territory  to  be  explored  lay  immediately  around  me.

It  was  my  simple  duty  to  discover  whether  scientific  thinking  at  its

extreme  limit  resulted  in  a  revision  of  the  idea  M a n.  I  further  decided

P R E F A CE

XXV

that  any  conclusions  I  might  henceforth  come  to  about  the  possibilities

of  intelligence  and  the  significance  of  the  human  adventure  were  to  be

retained  only  in  so  far  as  they  did  not  run  counter  to  the  overall  move

ment  of modern  consciousness.

I  discovered  an  echo  of my  attitude  in  Oppenheimer's  reflection  that

nowadays  our  poets,  historians,  and  philosophers  are  actually  proud  of

their  ignorance  of anything  to  do  with  the  sciences;  our  philosophy—in

so  far  as  we  still  have  one—is  anachronistic,  completely  out  of step  with

the  times  in which  we  live.

Now,  for  one  whose  intellectual  muscles  are  in  good  condition  it  is  no

more  difficult  to  attain  to  the  attitude  that  has  inspired  nuclear  physics

than  to  appreciate  Marxist  economics  or  Thomism,  no  more  difficult  to

grasp  the  theory  of cybernetics  than  to  analyze  the  causes  of the  Chinese

revolution  or  the  nature  of Mallarme's  poetics.  Our  mandarins  refuse  to

make  the  effort  not  because  effort  as  such  intimidates  them  but  becauserevolution  or  the  nature  of Mallarme's  poetics.  Our  mandarins  refuse  to

make  the  effort  not  because  effort  as  such  intimidates  them  but  because

they  prefer  their  present  modes  of thinking,  their  present  values.

As  Oppenheimer  suggested,  a  more  subtle  understanding  of  the

nature  of human  knowledge  and  of Man's  relations  with  the  Universe  is

necessary  and  has  been  necessary  for  some  time  now.

So  I  commenced  my  ransacking  of the  treasures  of science  and  mod

ern  technique,  inexpertly,  certainly;  with  an  ingenuousness  and  a  sense  of

wonder  perhaps  dangerous  but  yet  productive  of illuminating  comparisons,

correlations,  and  attunements.  In  this  way  I  rediscovered  some  convictions

concerning  Man's  infinite  grandeur  that  I  had  held  when  I  was  immersed

in  esoterism  and  mysticism.  But  I  found  them  wearing  a  new  look.  T h is

time,  these  convictions  had  absorbed—alive  and  kicking—the  style  and

drive  of  a  contemporary  intelligence,  an  intelligence  bent  on  the  study

of realities.  They  were  no  longer  backward  looking;  they  smoothed  out

antagonisms  instead  of exciting  them.  Erstwhile  massive  antagonisms—

the material versus  the  spiritual,  individual versus collective life—fused as

under  a  tremendous  heat.  So  conceived  they  were  no  longer  expressions  of

a  choice  (that  is  to  say,  of  a  rupture),  but  of  a  becoming,  an  overtaking,  of

a  renewing,  so  to  speak,  of existence.

xxvi

PREFACE

The  apparent  incoherence  of bees  in  flight,  the  dances  executed  by  them,

are,  so  it  is  thought,  precise  mathematical  figures  and  constitute  a  lan

guage.  I  would  like  to  write  a  novel  wherein  all  the  experiences  of a  life,

the  fleeting ones  and  the  significant  ones,  chance  ones  and  inevitable  ones,guage.  I  would  like  to  write  a  novel  wherein  all  the  experiences  of a  life,

the  fleeting ones  and  the  significant  ones,  chance  ones  and  inevitable  ones,

would  equally  compose  precise  figures—would  in  fact  disclose  themselves

for  what  they  may  well  be:  a  subtle  discourse  addressed  to  the  soul  to

help  it  accomplish  itself:  a  discourse  of which  the  soul  comprehends,  in

its  entire  life,  only  a  few  disjointed  phrases.

There  are  moments  when  it  seems  that  I  comprehend  the  inner  mean

ing  of the  human  ballet  surrounding  me,  that  someone  is  speaking  to  me

by  means  of this  ceaseless  movement  of people  approaching,  people  paus

ing  for  a  second,  and  then  moving  away.  A nd  then  I  lose  the  thread,  as

who  does  not,  until  the  next  equally  fleeting  moment  of illumination.

At  the  time  I  left  the  Gurdjieff  circle  I  had  a  very  great  friend  in

Andre  Breton.  Through  him  I  met  Rene  Alleau,  the  historian  of alchemy.

One  day  I  was  looking  for  a  scientific  journalist  to  contribute  to  a  cur

rent  events  series.  Alleau  introduced  me  to  Bergier.  (It  was  bread-and-

butter  work,  and  in  any  event  science,  popularized  or  not,  interested  me

little.)  T h is  chance  meeting  was  to  shape  my  life  for  many  years.  Under

its  influence  I  rearranged  and  orientated  the various  intellectual  and  spiri

tual  experiences  which  I  had  exposed  myself  to—from  Vivekananda  to

Guenon,  to  Gurdjieff,  to  Breton—and  found  myself at  the  point  where  I

had  started:  my  father!

T h o u gh  dissimilar  in  many  ways  Bergier  and  I  worked  closely  and

happily  together  during  five  years  of  study  and  speculation,  arriving

at  a  point  of view  which  I  believe  is  novel  and  rich  in  its  possibilities.happily  together  during  five  years  of  study  and  speculation,  arriving

at  a  point  of view  which  I  believe  is  novel  and  rich  in  its  possibilities.

T h is  was  how  the  surrealists  worked  thirty  years  ago.  But  unlike  them

we  were  exploring  not  the  regions  of  sleep  and  the  subconscious  but

their  very  opposites:  the  regions  of  ultraconsciousness  and  the  "awak

ened  state."  We  call  our  point  of  view fantastic  realism.  It  has  nothing

to  do  w i th  the  bizarre,  the  exotic,  the  merely  picturesque.  There  was

no  attempt  on  our  part  to  escape  the  times  in  which  we  live.  We  were

not  interested  in  the  "outer  suburbs"  of reality:  on  the  contrary  we  have

tried  to  take  up  a  position  at  its  very hub.  There  alone,  we  believe,  is  the

P R E F A CE

xxvii

fantastic  to  be  discovered—and  not  a  fantastic  leading  to  escapism  but

rather  to  a  deeper  participation  in  life.

Artists  who  seek  for  the  fantastic  outside  reality  in  the  clouds  lack

imagination.  They  return  from  their  explorations  with  nothing  more

than  counterfeits.  As  it  is  with  rare  minerals  so  with  the  fantastic;  it  has

to  be  torn  out  from  the  very  bowels  of the  Earth,  from  the  heart  of  real

ity.  True  imagination  is  something  other  than  a  leap  into  the  unreal.  "No

other  aspect  of the  mind  dives  as  deeply  as  the  imagination."

The  fantastic  is  usually  thought  of as  a violation  of natural  law,  as  a  ris

ing up  of the  impossible.  That  is  not  how we  conceive  it.  It  is  rather  a mani

festation  of natural  law,  an  effect  produced  by  contact  with  reality—reality

perceived  directly  and  not  through  a  filter  of habit,  prejudice,  conformism.

Modern  science  has  shown  us  that  behind  the  visible  there  is  anperceived  directly  and  not  through  a  filter  of habit,  prejudice,  conformism.

Modern  science  has  shown  us  that  behind  the  visible  there  is  an

extremely  complicated  invisible.  A  table,  a  chair,  a  starry  sky  are  in  fact

radically  different  from  our  ideas  of  them:  they  are  systems  in  motion,

suspended  energy.  .  .  .  T h is  is  what  Valery  meant  when  he  said  that  "the

marvelous  and  the  actual  have  contracted  an  astonishing  alliance"  in  the

modern  mind.  As  we  hope  to  show  in  this  book  the  alliance  between

the  marvelous  and  the  actual  is  meaningful  not  only  in  the  fields  of

physics  and  mathematics  but  equally,  for  example,  in  anthropology,  con

temporary  history,  or  sociology.  T h at  which  is  effective  in  the  physical

sciences  should  be  fruitful  in  the  humanities—but  there  w i ll  be  diffi

culties  of  application.  The  humanities  have  become  the  last  refuge  of

prejudice  (as  well  the  prejudices  long  since  abandoned  by  the  physi

cal  sciences).  Not  only  that,  but  in  this  field,  still  so  fluid,  there  have

been  attempts  to  reduce  everything  to  a  system:  Freud  explains  all,  Das

Kapital  explains  all,  etc.  W h en  we  say  "prejudice"  we  are  really  saying

"superstition." Just  as  the  ancients  were  superstitious  so  are  we.  For  some

people  every  phenomenon  of civilization  finds  its  origin  in  the  existence

of  Atlantis.  For  others  M a r x i sm  has  a  complete  explanation  of  Hitler.

Some  see  the  motive  force  of genius  as  the  breath  of God;  others  t h i nk

it  is  sex.  Our  task  then  is  to  fashion  this  alliance  between  the  marvelous

and  the  actual  in  the  individual  and  in  social  man  as  it  already  exists  in

biology,  physics,  and  mathematics  (which  openly  and  quite  directly  refer

xxviii

P R E F A CEand  the  actual  in  the  individual  and  in  social  man  as  it  already  exists  in

biology,  physics,  and  mathematics  (which  openly  and  quite  directly  refer

xxviii

P R E F A CE

to  such  concepts  as  an  "absolute  elsewhere,"  the  "forbidden  light,"  the

"quantity  strangeness  number").

As  Teilhard  de  Chardin  has  stated,  only  the  fantastic  is  likely  to  be

true  at  the  cosmic  level.  We  believe  that  human  phenomena  must  also  be

measured  against  the  cosmic  scale.  The  thinkers  of  antiquity  said  this.

Our  modern  world,  with  its  planetary  rockets  and  its  efforts  to  contact

other  intelligent  beings,  is  saying  it.  So  then,  Bergier  and  I  are  no  more

than  witnesses  to  the  realities  of our  epoch.

•  A  close  scrutiny  w i ll  show  that  our  point  of view—the  extension  of

fantastic  realism  as  it  exists  in  the  physical  sciences  to  the  humanities—is

by  no  means  original.  Nor  do  we  claim  originality.  The  idea  of  apply

ing  mathematical  method  to  the  sciences  was  not  a  particularly  shattering

one  but  its  consequences  were  novel  and  important.  The  idea  that  the

Universe  may  not  be  quite  what  it  seems  is  not  original:  but  see  what

Einstein  did  with  that  idea!

It  follows  from  our  attitude  that  a  book  such  as  the  present  one,  pre

pared  with  scrupulous  honesty  and  a  minimum  of naivete,  may well  spring

more  questions  than  answers.  A working method  is  not  a  system  of thought.

We  do  not  believe  that  even  the  most  ingenious  of systems  could  completely

illuminate  life  in  its  totality,  which  is  our  subject.  You  can  work  over your

Marxism  as  much  as  you  wish  without  managing to  fit  into  it  Hitler's  con

viction  that  the  Unknown  Master had visited  him  on  occasion.  ManipulateMarxism  as  much  as  you  wish  without  managing to  fit  into  it  Hitler's  con

viction  that  the  Unknown  Master had visited  him  on  occasion.  Manipulate

the  medical  theories  previous  to  Pasteur  as  you  will:  they  have  absolutely

nothing  to  say  about  illness  being  caused  by  animal  life  too  minute  to  be

seen.  Yet  it  is  possible  that  there  is  an  overall,  final  response  to  the  ques

tions  we  are  posing—and  that  we  have  not  yet  heard  it.  For  Bergier  and  I,

nothing is  excluded,  neither the yes  nor the  no. We  have  not  discovered still

one  more  Eastern  sage;  we  have  not  become  the  disciples  of a new  Messiah;

we  are  not  expounding  a  doctrine.  We  simply  propose  to  open  the  greatest

possible  number  of doors  to  our  readers,  and  as  most  of these  doors  open

outward  we  have  stood  back  a  pace  so  that  the  reader  may  enter.

Let  me  repeat:  the  fantastic  is  not  to  be  equated  with  the  imaginary.  But

a  powerful  imagination  working  on  reality  w i ll  discover  that  the  fron-

P R E F A CE

xxix

tier  between  the  marvelous  and  the  actual—between  the  visible  and  the

invisible  Universe,  if you  wish—is  a  very  fine  one.  There  may  be  other

Universes  parallel  to  our  own.  Indeed,  perhaps  this  book  would  not  have

been  written  if Bergier  and  I  had  not  on  more  than  one  occasion  had  an

impression  of being in  contact—actually,  physically—with  another world.

Bergier  had  one  such  experience  when  he  was  in  Mauthausen.  Something

similar  happened  to  me  when  I  was  a  Gurdjieff disciple.  In  each  case  the

circumstances  were  different  but  the  essential  facts  the  same.

The  American  anthropologist  Loren  Eiseley,  whose  attitude  is  some

what  similar  to  ours,  tells  a  story  which  perfectly  illustrates  what  I  have

been  trying  to  say.The  American  anthropologist  Loren  Eiseley,  whose  attitude  is  some

what  similar  to  ours,  tells  a  story  which  perfectly  illustrates  what  I  have

been  trying  to  say.

He,  too,  believes  that  the  impression  of  being  in  contact  w i th

another  world  is  not  always  the  result  of  a  too-fertile  i m a g i n a t i o n.

People  have  had  such  experiences.  Not  only  people,  animals  too!  For

the  space  of a  moment  the  frontier  dissolves;  it  is  simply  a  question  of

being  there  at  that  moment.  Eiseley  was  actually  present  when  such  an

experience  befell  a  crow.  Although  the  crow was,  so  to  speak,  a  neighbor

of his  it  took  good  care  to  avoid  all  contact  with  humanity,  keeping  to

the  treetops  and  the  upper  air,  keeping  to  its  world.  But  one  unusu

ally  foggy  morning  our  anthropologist  was  feeling  his  way  to  the  sta

tion  when  suddenly,  at  eye  level,  two  great  black  w i n gs  preceded  by  a

cruel  beak  loomed  up  in  front  of  h im  and  then  swept  by  w i th  a  great

cry  of anguish.  The  cry  haunted  Eiseley  for  the  rest  of the  day;  he  even

found  himself  before  his  mirror—wondering  whether  indeed  he  could

be  so  repulsive  a  sight!  A nd  then  the  explanation  for  that  terrible  cry

dawned  on  him.  The  frontier  had  slipped  its  position  because  of the  fog.

Suddenly,  before  the  eyes  of the  crow  (which  reasonably  believed  itself

to  be  flying  around  at  its  usual  height)  there  surged  up  a  fact  contrary  to

nature—a  man  w a l k i ng  on  air,  in  the  very  heart  of the  crow's  domain.  A

veritable  manifestation  of the  marvelous  from  the  crow's  point  of view:  a

flying man!  Ever  after,  when  it  saw  Eiseley  m a k i ng his  normal  way  along

the  ground  it  would  give  little  cries  of distress,  of regret  for  a  Universeflying man!  Ever  after,  when  it  saw  Eiseley  m a k i ng his  normal  way  along

the  ground  it  would  give  little  cries  of distress,  of regret  for  a  Universe

that  could  never  be  the  same  again.

•

xxx

P R E F A CE

This  book  is  not  a  romance,  although  its  intention  may well  be  romantic.  It

is  not  science  fiction,  although  it  cites  myths  on which  that  literary form  has

fed.  Nor  is  it  a  collection  of bizarre  facts,  though  the  Angel  of the  Bizarre

might  well  find  himself at  home  in  it.  It  is  not  a  scientific  contribution,  a

vehicle  for  an  exotic  teaching,  a  testament,  a  document,  a  fable.  It  is  simply

an  account—at  times  figurative,  at  times  factual—of a  first  excursion  into

some  as  yet  scarcely  explored  realms  of consciousness.  In  this  book  as  in  the

diaries  of Renaissance  navigators,  legend  and  fact,  conjecture  and  accurate

observation  intermingle.  Lacking  the  time  and  the  means  we  were  not  able

to  push  our  exploration  far  inland,  so  all  we  do  here  is  suggest  hypotheses

and  rough  out  a  scheme  for  communication  between  those  various  regions

which  are  still  for  the  most  part  forbidden  territory.  Later,  fuller  investiga

tion  may  well  make  hay  of some  of our  impressions,  as  happened  to  Marco

Polo's  narrative.  We  willingly  face  this  eventuality,  "There  certainly  were

some  howlers  in  that  book  of Bergier's  and  Pauwels!"  So  be  it.  But  if it  is

this  book  that  has  inspired  our  critics  to  themselves  take  a  firsthand  look,

we  shall  have  done  what  we  set  out  to  do.

The  words  of  Fulcanelli  might  well  have  been  ours:  "I  leave  to  the

reader  of  these  enigmatic  notes  the  task  of  comparing,  of  coordinating

versions,  of extracting verity  from  its  allegorical  setting."reader  of  these  enigmatic  notes  the  task  of  comparing,  of  coordinating

versions,  of extracting verity  from  its  allegorical  setting."

However,  our  documentation  owes  nothing  to  esoteric  masters,  hid

den  books,  or  secret  archives.  Vast  it  may  be  but  it  is  accessible  to  every

one.  But,  so  as  not  to  weigh  down  the  book  too  much,  we  have  avoided

a  multiplicity  of  references,  footnotes,  and  bibliographies.  A nd  some

times  we  have  developed  our  argument  by  way  of image  or  allegory—but

always  for  the  purpose  of  more  efficiently  m a k i ng  our  point  and  never

for  the  sake  of  that  mystification  beloved  of  the  esoterists  and  which

makes  one  t h i nk  of the  M a rx  brothers'  story:

"Say,  there's  a  million  bucks  buried  in  the  house  next  door."

"There  isn't  a  house  next  door."

"No?  Then  let's  build  one."

As  I  have  said,  this  book  owes  much  in  its  general  theory  and  its  docu

mentation  to Jacques  Bergier.  Everyone  who  has  met  him  and  experienced

P R E F A CE

xxxi

his  extraordinary  memory,  his  insatiable  curiosity,  his  (a  rare  quality,  this)

invariable  presence  of mind,  will  at  once  believe  me  when  I  say  that  five

years  with  Bergier  have  saved  me  perhaps  twenty  years  of private  read

ing.  His  brain  includes  a formidable  library:  selection,  classification,  com

plex cross-references  take  place  with  an  electronic  rapidity.  Watching him

thinking  out  a  problem  never  failed  to  produce  in  me  an  excitation  of

my  own  faculties  without  which  I  would  have  found  the  conceiving  and

preparing  of this  book  impossible.

We  brought  together  an  imposing  collection  of  books,  reviews,

reports,  and  newspapers  in  various  languages,  at  an  office  in  the  rue  de

Berri  in  Paris  and  dictated  thousands  of pages  of notes:  quotations,  transreports,  and  newspapers  in  various  languages,  at  an  office  in  the  rue  de

Berri  in  Paris  and  dictated  thousands  of pages  of notes:  quotations,  trans

lations,  reflections.  The  weekend  we  met  at  my  place  at  Mesnil-le-Roi  to

continue  our  discussions,  breaking  off from  time  to  time  only  to  refer  to

some  book  or  other.  The  evening  I  would  spend  in  noting  down  our  con

clusions,  fresh  ideas  that  had  occurred  to  us,  fresh  lines  of research.  For

five  years  I  was  at  my  desk  every  day  at  dawn  (the  greater  part  of the  day

being  spent  in  bread-and-butter  work).  Things  being what  they  are  in  this

world we  yet  so  stubbornly cleave  to,  the  question  of time  becomes  a ques

tion  of energy.  Had  we  had  ten  years  before  us,  better working conditions,

and  a  team  of assistants,  we  would  certainly  have  produced  a  vastly  supe

rior  book.  One  day  (should  we  ever  have  the  money,  got  from  whatever

source!)  we would  like  to  set  up  and  direct  an  . ..  institute,  perhaps,  is  the

word,  to  continue  the  studies  here  initiated.  I  hope  this  book  may prove  of

sufficient  worth  to  help  us  in  that  aim.  As  G.  K.  Chesterton  has  it,  if an

idea  does  not  strive  to  express  itself in  words  then  it  is  an  inept  idea,  and

if words  do  not  result  in  action  it  is  because  they  too  are  inept.

Both  Jacques  Bergier  and  I  are  caught  up  in  a  multitude  of  other

activities—mine  being very  demanding.  This  despite  the  fact  that  when  I

was  young  I  knew  people  who  literally  died  from  overwork;  so,  "How  do

you  manage  it  all?"  I  don't  know;  perhaps  these  Zen  words  are  some  sort

of explanation:  "I  go  on  foot  and  yet  I  am  mounted  on  an  ox."

Difficulties,  obligations  to  be  met,  obstructions  of all  kinds  continuof explanation:  "I  go  on  foot  and  yet  I  am  mounted  on  an  ox."

Difficulties,  obligations  to  be  met,  obstructions  of all  kinds  continu

ally  rose  up  on  every  side  to  the  point  where  I  almost  despaired.  I  am  not

one  of those  geniuses  who  pretend  a  vast  indifference  to  everything  not

xxxii

P R E F A CE

to  do  with  their  work.  My  responses  are  large  and  wide;  a  concentration

of passion,  however  splendid  the  result,  strikes  me  as  somehow  being  a

mutilation.  Agreed,  if one  participates  in  life  to  the  full  one  risks  being

swamped.  I  fall  back  on  a  thought  of Vincent  de  Paul:  "The  greatest  aims

suffer  continuing  distraction.  Flesh  and  blood  insist  on  abandoning  the

mission.  Listen  to  them  not.  God,  once  resolved,  does  not  change  his

mind  whatever  the  occasional  seeming  to  the  contrary."

W h en  I  was  a  student  at Juvisy  (I  referred  to  this  period  of my  life  earlier

in  this  preface)  I  one  day  had  to  comment  on  a  phrase  of Vigny:  'A  life

that  has  achieved  itself is  a  dream  of adolescence  realized  in  maturity."  At

that  time  my  dream  was  to  serve  and  to  deepen  my  father's  philosophy

of progress.  After  many  retreats,  side-trackings,  and  equivocation,  this  is

now,  finally,  what  I  am  trying  to  do.  May  my  struggle  bring  peace  to  his

ashes  long since  scattered  in  the  thought  that  "matter  is  no  more  than  one

of the  masks  worn  by  the  Great  Visage."

P A RT  O NE

T HE  F U T U RE  P E R F E CT

I

Salute to the reader in a hurry—A resignation in i8j$—Birds of ill

omen—How the nineteenth century closed the doors—The end of science

and the repression of fantasy—Poincare's despair— We are our own

grandfathers—Youth, Youth!

How  can  an  intelligent  man  today  not  feel  in  a  hurry?  "Get  up  sir;  you'veand the repression of fantasy—Poincare's despair— We are our own

grandfathers—Youth, Youth!

How  can  an  intelligent  man  today  not  feel  in  a  hurry?  "Get  up  sir;  you've

got  important  things  to  do!"  But  one  has  to  rise  earlier  every  day.  Speed

up  your  machines  for  seeing,  hearing,  thinking,  remembering,  and  imag

ining.  Our  best  reader,  the  one  we  value  the  most,  will  have  finished with

us  in  two  or  three  hours.

There  are  men  I  know who  can  read  with  the  greatest  profit  one  hun

dred  pages  of mathematics,  philosophy,  history,  or  archaeology  in  twenty

minutes.  Actors  learn  how  to  "place"  their  voice.  W ho  will  teach  us  to

"place"  our  attention?  At  a  certain  height  everything  changes  speed.  So

far  as  this  work  is  concerned,  I'm  not  one  of  those  writers  who  want  to

keep  their  readers  with  them  as  long  as  possible  and  lull  them  to  sleep.

I'm  not  interested  in  sleep,  only  in  waking.  Get  on  with  it  quickly;  take

what  you  want  and  go.  There's  plenty  to  do  outside.  Skip  chapters  if you

want  to;  begin  where  you  like  and  read  in  any  direction;  this  book  is  a

multiple-use  tool,  like  the  knives  campers  use.  For  example,  if  you're  afraid

of  arriving  too  slowly  at  the  heart  of  the  subject  that  interests  you,  skip

these  first  pages.  You  should  understand,  however,  that  they  show  how

the  nineteenth  century  had  closed  its  doors  against  fantasy  as  a  positive

element  in  man  and  the  world  and  the  Universe,  and  how  the  twentieth

has  opened  them  again,  although  our  morality,  our  philosophy,  and  our

2

T HE  F U T U RE  P E R F E CT

3

sociology,  which  ought  to  be  contemporary  with  the  future,  are  nothing

of  the  kind  and  remain  attached  to  the  out-of-date  nineteenth  century.T HE  F U T U RE  P E R F E CT

3

sociology,  which  ought  to  be  contemporary  with  the  future,  are  nothing

of  the  kind  and  remain  attached  to  the  out-of-date  nineteenth  century.

The  bridge  between  the  era  of muskets  and  that  of rockets  hasn't  yet  been

built;  but  it's  being  thought  about.  And  the  object  of this  book  is  to  make

people  think  about  it  harder.  If we're  in  a  hurry,  it's  not  because  we're  cry

ing  over  the  past  but  are  worried  about  the  present,  and  getting  impatient.

There  you  have  it.  You  know  enough  now  to  be  able,  if necessary,  to  skim

through  this  introduction  and  push  on  further.

His  name  is  not  recorded  in  the  history  books—unfortunately.  He  was  a

director  of the  American  Patent  Office  and  it  was  he  who  first  sounded

the  alarm.  In  1875  he  sent  in  his  resignation  to  the  secretary  of the  Board

of Trade.  What's  the  good  of going  on,  is  the  gist  of what  he  said;  there's

nothing  left  to  invent.

Twelve  years  later,  in  1887,  the  great  chemist  Marcellin  Berthelot

wrote:  "From  now  on  there  is  no  mystery  about  the  Universe."  To  get  a

coherent  picture  of the  world  science  had  cleared  everything  up:  perfec

tion  by  omission.  Matter  consisted  of a  certain  number  of elements,  none

of which  could  be  turned  into  another.  But  while  Berthelot  in  his  learned

work  was  rejecting  the  dreams  of  the  alchemists,  the  elements,  which

knew  nothing  about  this,  continued  to  transmute  themselves  as  a  result

of natural  radioactivity.  In  1852  the  phenomenon  had  been  described  by

Reichenbach,  but was  immediately  repudiated.  Scientists  before  1870  had

referred  to  a  "fourth  state  of matter,"  observed  in  gases.  A ny  kind  of mys

tery,  however,  had  to  be  suppressed.  Repression  is  the  right  word;  somereferred  to  a  "fourth  state  of matter,"  observed  in  gases.  A ny  kind  of mys

tery,  however,  had  to  be  suppressed.  Repression  is  the  right  word;  some

nineteenth-century  thinking  ought  to  be  psychoanalyzed.

A  German  named  Zeppelin,  returning  home  after  fighting  with  the

Southerners,  tried  to  get  the  industrialists  interested  in  a dirigible  balloon.

.  .  .  "Unhappy  man!  Don't  you  know  that  there  are  three  subjects  which

can  no  longer  be  the  subject  of a  paper  submitted  to  the  French  Academy

of Science:  the  squaring  of the  circle,  the  tunnel  under  the  Channel,  and

dirigible balloons."

Another  German,  Herman  Gaswindt,  had  the  idea  of building  flying

machines  heavier  than  air  to  be  propelled  by  rockets.  On  his  fifth  blueprint

4

P A RT  O NE

the  German W ar  Minister,  after consulting the  technicians,  wrote,  with  the

habitual  moderation  of his  race  and  office:  "How  long will  it  be  before  this

bird  of ill-omen  is  finally  bumped  off?"

The  Russians,  on  their  side,  had  got  rid  of another  bird  of ill-omen.

Kibaltchich  who  was  also  in  favor  of rocket-propelled  flying  machines:  a

firing  squad  saw  to  that.  It  is  true  that  Kibaltchich  had  used  his  techni

cal  skill  to  fabricate  the  bomb  that  had  just  cut  up  into  little  pieces  the

Emperor Alexander  II.  But  it wasn't  necessary  to  execute  Professor  Langley,

of the  Smithsonian  Institute,  who  had  imagined  flying  machines  propelled

by  the  recently invented  internal  combustion  engine.  It was  enough  for him

to  be  dishonored,  ruined,  and  expelled  from  the  Smithsonian.  Professor

Simon  Newcomb  proved  mathematically  the  impossibility  of  a  heavier-

than-air  machine.  A  few  months  before  the  death  of Langley,  who  died  ofSimon  Newcomb  proved  mathematically  the  impossibility  of  a  heavier-

than-air  machine.  A  few  months  before  the  death  of Langley,  who  died  of

grief,  a  little  English  boy  came  back  from  school  one  day  in  tears.  He  had

shown  his  companions  the  photograph  of a  design  that  Langley  had  just

sent  to  his  father.  He  declared  that  men  would  one  day  be  able  to  fly.  His

comrades  had  laughed  at  him.  And  the  schoolmaster  had  asked  him  how

his  father  could  be  such  a  fool.  The  name  of this  "fool"  was  H.  G.  Wells.

A nd  so  all  the  doors  were  closing  with  a  bang.  There  was,  in  fact,

nothing  left  to  do  but  to  resign,  and  Mr.  Brunetiere  in  1895  was  able

calmly  to  speak  of the  "bankruptcy  of science."  The  celebrated  Professor

Lippmann  told  one  of his  pupils,  about  the  same  time,  that  physics  was  a

subject  that  had  been  exhausted  and  was  finished  and  done  with,  and  that

he  would  do  better  to  turn  his  attention  in  other  directions.  This  pupil's

name  was  Helbronner  who  later  was  to  become  the  greatest  authority  in

Europe  on  physical  chemistry  and  make  remarkable  discoveries  relating

to  liquid  air,  ultraviolet  rays,  and  colloidal  metals.  Moissan,  a  chemist  of

genius,  was  forced  to  recant  and  declare  in  public  that  he  had  not  manu

factured  diamonds,  but  had  made  a  mistake  during  an  experiment.  It  was

useless  to  seek  any  further:  the  great  discoveries  of the  century  were  the

steam  engine  and  the  gas  lamp,  and  no  greater  human  inventions  were

possible.  Electricity?  A  mere  technical  curiosity.  A  mad  Englishman,

Maxwell,  had  pretended  that  invisible  light  rays  could  be  produced  by

means  of electricity:  this  couldn't  be  taken  seriously.

T HE  F U T U RE  P E R F E CT

5Maxwell,  had  pretended  that  invisible  light  rays  could  be  produced  by

means  of electricity:  this  couldn't  be  taken  seriously.

T HE  F U T U RE  P E R F E CT

5

A  few  years  later  Ambrose  Bierce  wrote  in  his  Devil's Dictionary,  "No

one  knows  what  electricity  is,  but  in  any  case  it  gives  a  better  light  than  a

horse-power  and  travels  quicker  than  a  gas  jet."

As  for  energy,  this  was  something  quite  independent  of  matter  and

devoid  of mystery.  It  was  composed  of fluids.  These  fluids  filled  every

thing up,  could  be  described  in  equations  of great  formal  beauty,  and  were

intellectually  satisfying:  they  could  be  electric,  luminous,  calorific,  etc.

Here  was  a  continuous  and  obvious  progression:  matter  in  its  three  states:

solid, liquid,  and gaseous;  and  the various  energy fluids,  more  elusive  even

than  gases.  To  preserve  a  "scientific"  image  of the  world  it was  only  neces

sary  to  reject  as  philosophic  dreams  the  theories  about  the  atom  that  were

beginning  to  take  shape.  Planck's  and  Einstein's  "grains  of energy"  were

still  a very  long way  off.

The  German  Clausius  maintained  that  no  source  of energy  other  than

fire  was  conceivable.  And  though  energy  may  be  preserved  quantitatively,

it  deteriorates  in  quality.  The  Universe  has  been  wound  up  once  and  for

all,  like  a watch,  and  will  run  down  when  the  spring  is  worn  out.  No  sur

prises  are  to  be  expected.  Into  this  Universe,  whose  destiny  is  foreseeable,

life  entered  by  chance  and  developed  according  to  the  simple  laws  of natu

ral  selection.  At  the  apex  of this  evolution  came  man—a  mechanical  and

chemical  compound  endowed  with  an  illusion—consciousness.  Under  the

influence  of this  illusion,  man  invented  time  and  space:  concepts  of thechemical  compound  endowed  with  an  illusion—consciousness.  Under  the

influence  of this  illusion,  man  invented  time  and  space:  concepts  of the

mind.  If you  had  told  an  official  nineteenth-century  scientist  that  physics

would  one  day  absorb  space  and  time  and  would  study  experimentally  the

curvature  of space  and  the  contraction  of time,  he  would  have  summoned

the  police.  Space  and  time  have  no  real  existence;  they  are  the  mathema

tician's  variables  and  subjects  for  philosophers  to  discuss  at  their  leisure.

There  can  be  no  connection  between  man  and  such  immensities.  Despite

the  work  of Charcot,  Breuer,  Hyslop,  extrasensory  or  extratemporal  per

ception  is  an  idea  to  be  rejected  with  scorn.  Nothing  unknown  in  the

Universe,  nothing  unknown  in  man.

It  was  quite  useless  to  attempt  any  internal  exploration;  nevertheless

there  was  one  fact  that  defied  simplification:  hypnotism.  People  like  the

naive  Flammarion,  the  skeptical  Edgar  Poe,  and  the  suspect  H.  G.  Wells

6

P A RT  O NE

were  interested  in  this  phenomenon.  And  yet,  fantastic  as  this  may  seem,

the  nineteenth  century  proved  officially  that  there  was  no  such  thing  as

hypnotism.  Patients  tend  to  tell  lies  and  pretend  in  order  to  please  the

hypnotizer.  That  is  true.  However,  since  Freud  and  Morton  Price,  we

know  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  split  personality.  Thanks  to  a  gener

ally  critical  attitude  this  century  succeeded  in  creating a  negative  mythol

ogy,  in  eliminating  any  trace  of the  unknown  in  man  and  in  repressing

any  suggestion  of mystery.

Biology,  too,  was  finished.  M.  Claude  Bernard  had  exhausted  its  pos

sibilities,  and  the  conclusion  had  been  reached  that  the  brain  secretedany  suggestion  of mystery.

Biology,  too,  was  finished.  M.  Claude  Bernard  had  exhausted  its  pos

sibilities,  and  the  conclusion  had  been  reached  that  the  brain  secreted

thoughts  as  the  liver  secretes  bile.  Doubtless  it  would  soon  be  possible  to

analyze  this  secretion  and  write  out  its  chemical  formula  to  fit  in  with

the  pretty  patterns  of hexagons  for  which  M.  Berthelot  was  famous.  As

soon  as  we  discover  how  the  hexagons  of carbon  combine  to  create  mind

the  last  page  will  have  been  turned.  Let's  get  on  with  the  job!  and  have

all  the  madmen  shut  up.  One  fine  day  in  1898  a  certain  seriously minded

gentleman  forbade  the  governess  to  allow his  children  to  read Jules Verne.

These  false  ideas  would  only  deform  their  young  minds.  The  gentleman's

name  was  Edouard  Branly.  He  had  just  decided  to  abandon  his  experi

ments  with  sound waves  as  being devoid  of interest,  and  take  up  the  career

of a  general  practitioner.

Scientists  have  to  give  up  their  throne.  But  they  also  have  to  get  rid

of  the  "adventurers"—that  is  to  say,  people  who  think  and  dream  and

are  endowed  with  imagination.  Berthelot  attacked  the  philosophers—

"fencing  with  their  own  ghosts  in  the  solitary  field  of abstract  logic"  (a

good  description  that,  of  Einstein,  for  example).  A nd  Claude  Bernard

declared  that  "a  man who  discovers  the  simplest  fact  does  a greater  service

than  the  greatest  philosopher  in  the  world."  Science  can  only  be  experi

mental;  without  it  we  are  lost.  Shut  the  gates;  nobody  will  ever  be  the

equal  of the  giants  who  invented  the  steam  engine.

In  this  organized,  comprehensible,  and yet  doomed  Universe  the  place

assigned  to  man  was  that  of an  epiphenomenon.  There  could  be  no  UtopiaIn  this  organized,  comprehensible,  and yet  doomed  Universe  the  place

assigned  to  man  was  that  of an  epiphenomenon.  There  could  be  no  Utopia

and  no  hope.  Coal  deposits  would  be  exhausted  in  a  few  hundred  years,

and  humanity  would  perish  by  cold  and  starvation.  Men  would  never  fly

T HE  F U T U RE  P E R F E CT

7

and  would  never  travel  through  space.  Nor  would  they  ever  explore  the

bottom  of the  sea.  Strange  that  this  ban  should  have  been  imposed  on  any

investigation  of  the  ocean  depths!  From  a  technical  point  of view  there

was  nothing,  in  the  nineteenth  century,  to  prevent  Professor  Picard  from

constructing  his  bathyscaphe.  Nothing  but  an  extreme  timidity  and  con

cern  that  man  should  "stay  in  his  proper  place."

Turpin,  who  invented  melinite,  was  promptly  jailed.  The  inventors

of  the  internal  combustion  engine  were  discouraged,  and  an  attempt

was  made  to  show  that  electric  machines  were  merely  forms  of perpetual

motion.  Those  were  the  days  when  the  great  inventors  were  persecuted,

isolated,  and  in  revolt.  Hertz wrote  to  the  Dresden  Chamber  of Commerce

that  research  into  the  transmission  of the  Hertzian  waves  should  be  dis

couraged,  as  they  could  not  be  used  for  any  practical  purpose.  Napoleon

Ill's  experts  proved  that  Gramme's  dynamo  could  never  function.

As  for  the  first  automobiles,  the  submarine,  the  dirigible  balloon,  and

electric  light  ("one  of  that  fellow  Edison's  swindles"),  the  learned  soci

eties  were  not  interested.  There  is  an  immortal  entry  in  the  Minutes  of

the  Paris  Academy  of  Sciences  recording  the  reception  of  the  first  pho

nograph:  "No  sooner  had  the  machine  emitted  a  few  words  than  the

Permanent  Secretary  threw  himself  upon  the  impostor  (presenting  it)nograph:  "No  sooner  had  the  machine  emitted  a  few  words  than  the

Permanent  Secretary  threw  himself  upon  the  impostor  (presenting  it)

seizing  his  throat  in  a  grip  of  iron.  'You  see,  gentlemen,'  he  exclaimed,

'what  it  is  .  .  .'  But,  to  the  stupefaction  of everyone  present,  the  machine

continued  to  utter  sounds."

Nevertheless,  some  great  minds,  profoundly  discontented  with  the  situ

ation,  were  secretly  preparing  the  most  formidable  revolution  in  human

knowledge  in  the  history  of mankind.  For  the  time  being,  however,  every

avenue  was  barred.

Barred  in  every direction—in  front  and  in  the  rear.  The  fossils  of pre

human  creatures  that  were  beginning  to  be  discovered  in  large  numbers

were  not  taken  seriously.  Did  not  the  great  Heinrich  Helmholtz  prove

that  the  Sun  derived  its  energy  from  its  own  contractions—that  is  to  say,

its  own  combustion—from  the  only  force  existing  in  the  Universe?  A nd

did  not  his  calculations  show  that  the  Sun  had  not  been  in  existence  for

8

P A RT  O NE

more  than  about  a  hundred  thousand  years?  How,  then,  could  there  have

been  a  long  process  of evolution?  Moreover,  it  would  never  be  possible  to

fix  a  date  for  the  beginning  of the  world.  In  the  short  interval  between

two  states  of  nothingness  we  human  "epiphenomena"  must  be  serious.

Facts,  facts!—nothing  but  facts!

As  their  researches  into  matter  and  energy  had  met  with  little

encouragement,  the  best  among  the  inquiring  minds  turned  to  explore

an  impasse—the  ether,  a  substance  that  permeates  matter  in  all  its  forms

and  acts  as  a vehicle  for luminous  and  electromagnetic  waves.  It  is  at  once

both  infinitely  solid  and  infinitely  tenuous.  Lord  Rayleigh,  who  at  theand  acts  as  a vehicle  for luminous  and  electromagnetic  waves.  It  is  at  once

both  infinitely  solid  and  infinitely  tenuous.  Lord  Rayleigh,  who  at  the

end  of the  nineteenth  century  represented  official  English  science  in  all

its  splendor,  formulated  the  theory  of  a  gyroscopic  ether—an  ether  con

sisting  of a  mass  of spinning  tops  turning  in  all  directions  and  reacting

on  one  another.  Aldous  Huxley  has  remarked  since  that  "if it  is  possible

for  a  human  invention  to  convey  the  idea  of absolute  ugliness,  then  Lord

Rayleigh's  theory has  succeeded."

Scientists  everywhere  were  engaged  in  speculations  on  the  ether  on

the  eve  of  the  twentieth  century.  Then  in  1898  came  a  catastrophe:  the

Michelson-Morley  experiment  shattered  the  hypothesis  of the  ether.  All

the  work  of  Henri  Poincare  bears  witness  to  this  collapse.  Poincare,  a

mathematician  of  genius,  felt  crushed  by  the  enormous  weight  of  this

nineteenth-century  prison,  the  destroyer  of  all  fantasy.  He  would  have

discovered  the  theory  of relativity,  had  he  dared.  But  he  did  not  dare.  His

books—La  Valeur  de  la  Science,  La  Science  et  I'Hypothese  {The  Value  of

Science,  Science  and  the  Hypothesis)—are  expressions  of  despair  and  abdi

cation.  For  him,  a  scientific  hypothesis  is  never  true  and  can  at  best  be

useful.  Like  the  Spanish  inn—you  only  find  there  what  you  bring  your

self.  According  to  Poincare,  if  the  Universe  contracted  a  million  times

and  ourselves  with  it,  nobody  would  notice  anything.  Such  speculations

are  therefore  useless  because  they  have  no  connection  with  reality  as  we

perceive  it.

T h is  argument,  up  to  the  beginning  of  this  century,  was  cited  as  a

model  of profound  reasoning.  Until  one  day  a  practical  engineer  pointedperceive  it.

T h is  argument,  up  to  the  beginning  of  this  century,  was  cited  as  a

model  of profound  reasoning.  Until  one  day  a  practical  engineer  pointed

out  that  the  butcher,  at  any  rate,  would  notice  it,  as  all  his  joints  would

T HE  F