The Project Gutenberg eBook of Mysteria
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Mysteria
        History of the secret doctrines and mystic rites of ancient religions and medieval and modern secret orders

Author: Otto Henne am Rhyn

Translator: J. Fitzgerald


        
Release date: December 24, 2025 [eBook #77541]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: Stockham Publishing Company, Inc., 1895

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/77541

Credits: Richard Tonsing, Peter Becker, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MYSTERIA ***




                                MYSTERIA
    HISTORY OF THE SECRET DOCTRINES _and_ MYSTIC RITES _of_ ANCIENT
                               RELIGIONS
                                  AND
                   Medieval and Modern Secret Orders


                                   By
                         DR. OTTO HENNE AM RHYN

                     _State Archivist of St. Gall_
                              SWITZERLAND


                  STOCKHAM PUBLISHING COMPANY, _Inc._
                           CHICAGO, ILLINOIS


                            COPYRIGHT, 1895,
                            By J. FITZGERALD




                          _TRANSLATOR’S NOTE._


The Mysteries of the Ancient Grecian religions; the cryptic teachings
and occult interpretations of the popular religious beliefs communicated
to disciples by the priests in the temples of ancient Egypt, Assyria,
and India: the interesting, half fabulous, half historical episode of
Pythagoras and the Pythagorean League in Magna Graecia; the mystic,
ascetic, and semi-monastic communities of the Therapeutae and the
Essenes in Palestine a century before the birth of Jesus Christ; the
later developments of Mysticism in the time of the Roman Empire, as seen
in the history of Apollonius of Tyana and in Isis worship, Mithras
worship, worship of the Great Mother, etc.; the secret creed and rites
of the Knights Templar and the usages of the lodges of the Stonemasons
in the Middle Age; the constitution and procedure of the Femgerichte of
Westphalia in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries; the origin and
history and the aims of Freemasonry, Rosicrucianism, Illuminism, and a
swarm of honest and fraudulent secret organizations in modern times: all
these topics have before been made subject matter of numerous learned
tractates or of popular compends; but hitherto these doctrines, rites,
associations, have not been studied in their unity, in their mutual
relation. One service which the author of this work renders to the
student of this particular phase of human psychology—the longing for
mystery and secret associations—is that he develops this relationship,
thus enabling the reader to get a clear understanding of the whole
subject.

But the author does very much more than to co-ordinate the facts of
mystic associations. He is both a scholar and an artist. Having amassed
whatever information regarding the Mysteries and allied phenomena is
accessible in universal literature, he handles his materials with the
skill of a consummate master of style and of the art of popular
exposition. The result is a history of the ancient Mysteries and of
their counterparts and imitations in later times, as authentic as the
most painstaking research could make it, yet possessing all the charm
and grace of a literary masterpiece.

                                                      JOSEPH FITZGERALD.




                              _CONTENTS._


 PART FIRST.—MYSTERIES OF THE EAST AND OF BARBAROUS NATIONS.
                                                                    PAGE
  1. Introduction                                                      1
  2. The Gods                                                          5
  3. Egypt                                                             9
  4. The Higher Development of Egyptian Religion                      12
  5. A Reformation in the Land of Nile                                16
  6. The Egyptian Realm of the Dead                                   18
  7. The Secret Teaching of the Priests of Nileland                   20
  8. Babylon and Ninive                                               26
  9. Zoroaster and the Persians                                       32
 10. Brahmans and Buddhists                                           33
 11. Secret Leagues of Barbarous Peoples                              36

 PART SECOND.—THE GRECIAN MYSTERIES AND THE ROMAN BACCHANALIA.
  1. Hellas                                                           38
  2. Hellenic Divine Worship                                          41
  3. The Hellenic Mysteries                                           45
  4. The Eleusinian Mysteries                                         49
  5. The Mysteries of Samothrace                                      57
  6. The Mysteries of Crete                                           59
  7. The Dionysia                                                     60
  8. The Roman Bacchanalia                                            62
  9. Debased Mysteries from the East                                  65

 PART THIRD.—THE PYTHAGOREAN LEAGUE AND OTHER SECRET ASSOCIATIONS.
  1. Pythagoras                                                       72
  2. The Pythagoreans                                                 79
  3. The Orphici                                                      84
  4. Mysterious Personages of Ancient Times                           86

 PART FOURTH.—SON OF MAN. SON OF GOD.
  1. Hellenism and Judaism                                            91
  2. The Essenes                                                      94
  3. Christianism                                                     96
  4. Jesus                                                           102
  5. The Early Christians                                            107
  6. The New Testament                                               110
  7. The Elements of the Church                                      114

 PART FIFTH.—A PSEUDO-MESSIAH. A LYING PROPHET.
  1. Apollonius of Tyana                                             117
  2. Alexander, the False Prophet                                    124

 PART SIXTH.—THE KNIGHTS TEMPLAR.
  1. The Middle Age                                                  129
  2. The Templars                                                    132
  3. The Secrets of the Templars                                     136
  4. The Downfall of the Knights Templar                             140

 PART SEVENTH.—THE FEMGERICHTE.
  1. Courts of Justice in the Middle Age                             147
  2. The Secret Tribunal                                             152
  3. The End of the Feme                                             160

 PART EIGHTH.—STONEMASONS’ LODGES OF THE MIDDLE AGE.
  1. Medieval Architecture                                           162
  2. The Stonemasons’ Lodges of Germany                              164
  3. French Craftsmen                                                169
  4. The English Stonemasons                                         172
 ASTROLOGERS AND ALCHEMISTS                                          174

 PART NINTH.—RISE AND CONSTITUTION OF FREEMASONRY.
  1. Rise of Freemasonry                                             178
  2. Constitution of the Order                                       184
  3. The Lodge                                                       188

 PART TENTH.—SECRET SOCIETIES OF THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.
  1. Miscellaneous Secret Societies                                  193
  2. Obscurantist Influences                                         196
  3. The “High Degrees” Swindle                                      199
  4. Apostles of Nonsense                                            203
  5. The Swedish Rite                                                210
  6. The New Rosicrucians                                            211

 PART ELEVENTH.—THE ILLUMINATI.
  1. The Illuminati                                                  216
  2. Imitations of Illuminism                                        226

 PART TWELFTH.—SECRET SOCIETIES OF VARIOUS KINDS.
  1. Societies of Wits                                               230
  2. Imitations of Ancient Mystic Leagues                            232
  3. Imitations of Freemasonry                                       234




                               MYSTERIA.




                             _PART FIRST._
           _Mysteries of the East and of Barbarous Nations._


                            1. INTRODUCTION.

In all ages mystery has had a special attraction for mankind. Curiosity
is innate in us. The child asks about everything, What is this, what is
it for, why is it made so, or so? The child fairly harries its parents
with questions, never wearies of raising new ones, often so unexpected
and so difficult, that it would puzzle the wisest philosopher to answer
them. And this instinct of inquiry is dominant in the adult, too. The
grown man wants to know what is to be found behind every curtain, every
locked door, in every sealed letter. And when sated with such trifles he
must push inquiry further, into the infinite; must lift the veil that
hides the wondrous image at Sais; must pluck from the forbidden tree of
knowledge the tempting golden fruit. He would with the Titans storm
heaven, and ascend to heights “where stirs no breath of air, where
stands the boundary-stone of creation.” At last when Faust, after
manifold crosses and disappointments, sees that “we can know nothing,”
the thought “consumes the heart within him.”

And so we must ever be worried by the reflection that the great riddle
of existence will not be solved; nay, never can be solved. Why, we ask,
why does anything exist at all? and what does exist, whence comes it,
and whither does it go? And though oceans of ink were written on worlds
of paper to define the relation between the Here and Beyond, we should
not know, after it all, the lot of the thought-endowed tenant of the
narrowest human brain-case after its term of living is reached. Never
shall we be able to comprehend Being as having a beginning and an end,
but neither shall we ever understand how, without beginning or end, it
may endure for ever, and extend limitless ever farther and farther into
the shoreless ocean of the All. The thinker must by force refrain
himself from such inference, lest his brain should be seized by
delirium; and the progressive man of action turns to what is sure and
clear and understandable, while the listless disciple of Buddha,
despairing of ever comprehending existence, longs for nirvana, the
soul’s state of everlasting rest and freedom from cares.

Mankind, then, is encompassed by a vast mystery which never has been
discovered, though it presses upon us with force all around, and though
we know it exists and are conscious that it attends us at every step we
take. But man is too proud to endure the thought that anything is beyond
his powers: man must in all things do what the primordial creative power
does. The Eternal Incomprehensible created worlds that no mortal eye can
see: man with the help of glasses sees them. The Eternal set worlds
circling around worlds in such wise that for long we mortals were led
into error, and took the earth to be the centre of the universe: but men
made calculations and measurements, and discovered that their giant
sphere was but a grain of sand among colossal worlds. The Eternal caused
mountains to rise and rivers to flow, man, too, piled up mountains and
scooped out river-beds and seas. Immense oceans separated the
continents: man navigated the oceans and discovered shores never seen
before. The lightning, issuing from the clouds, rends asunder great
trees that have stood for centuries: man imitates the lightning, and
employs the electric current for sending messages across continents and
oceans, and for illumination. Steam, vapor of water, he harnesses to his
car, or employs it to propel ships across the seas. He takes the sun’s
rays and makes of them a limner’s pencil. Even the Eternal himself man
fashions after his own thoughts, and gives to him a name and attributes,
a throne and a court, a form, and even a son. And lest he should in any
point fail of acting like the Unsearchable, man sets over against the
grand everlasting mystery of creation and eternity, which he cannot
comprehend, other mysteries of his own invention—the mystery of the
Incarnation, the Resurrection, Redemption, the Trinity, and the rest;
and requires his fellow men to acknowledge and reverence these things as
mysteries, and to worship as truth what man’s own self-conceit has
devised in rivalry with the Eternal.

Thus are mysteries of man’s invention propagated from generation to
generation. The love of mystery is contagious; the one who hears of
mysteries will himself invent more, and with them impose upon others.
And the Initiates shut themselves up in secret chambers, swear fearful
oaths never to betray to anyone what others know already, employ emblems
which they interpret in one sense or another, speak in language peculiar
to themselves, exchange special signs with one another, whisper to each
other mysterious words, admit persons to their secret associations with
direful or with harmless tests and rites, and form aristocracies of
intellect, of creed, or of benevolence, of art or of science, even of
humor and of folly. Such is the origin of mystic teachings and secret
societies, the teachings designed to hold the societies together, and
the societies to propagate the teachings: one hand washes the other. In
all ages, among all races we find these mysteries existing under the
most various forms, and for ends the most diverse, but they all have
this in common that they shut out the profane (outsiders), and that
their end is to win and hold power and influence. But they have also had
secondary aims such as could be attained without secret doctrines or
secret association; and these aims have been of all kinds. Now the
purpose may be to promote social freedom and religious or scientific
enlightenment, anon to repress these; again, it may be to enrich the
members, or, on the other hand, to stimulate them to self-sacrificing
charity; or a society will have for its object the Beautiful, and will
create works of art to glorify the Eternal, but another society will
despise whatever is ideal, professing contempt for the world and
themselves; or the aim may be nothing short of the destruction of all
human society and a return to Chaos.

A variegated picture and full of life! At the head of the moving
procession stalk priests in long robes, begarlanded, carrying the sacred
image of Isis or chanting hymns to the Eleusinian Demeter. Then come the
wild-eyed troops of the Bacchantes, and in sharp contrast to these,
philosophers of the Pythagorean League, in white cloaks, looking down on
the populace with a smile of mild scorn; after these the unpretending
Essenes, who shoulder the cross of suffering, the Roman brotherhoods
(collegia), and then the English and German gilds of stonemasons, with
hammer, compass, and square; the Knights Templar, in white cloaks
blazoned with the red cross, their haughty mien betraying contempt of
all authority; the Fathers of the Company of Jesus, in black cassock and
four-cornered hat, eyes sanctimoniously downcast, every man of them a
corpse in the hands of his superiors; then come seigneurs and scholars
and men of every condition, in white aprons and blue ribbons, and last
of all an indistinguishable multitude of variously-clad figures. Let us
contemplate the several groups of this picture. First, the priests of
the so-called heathen religions of antiquity. Here we have men using a
twofold manner of speech. To the people they gave out a teaching
different from that communicated to the Initiates of their secret
associations, their mysteries. How came that about, how is it accounted
for, and how can it be justified?


                              2. THE GODS.

To answer these questions we must study the origin of religious ideas
and the forms they assumed in different periods. Here we meet a phase of
thought which stands related to the vain attempts to fathom the Eternal,
to scrutinize the Unsearchable, and which, therefore, is necessarily
connected with the earliest expression of man’s love of the mysterious.

In the dim ages before the dawn of civilization, when the cave-dweller,
or the lake-dweller, had completed his day’s work, and his children were
in safety for the night, and their hunger stilled, then, in the glad
consciousness of duty discharged, he would rise above mere sense, and
would contemplate his surroundings with greater attention than would be
possible amid his hard labors as breadwinner. Then, surely, what most
profoundly impressed his imagination was the blue vault of the sky
across which by day the sun, source of light and warmth, or of blazing
and scorching heat, and at night the mild-faced moon, diffusing her
witching beams, and the innumerable twinkling stars glided in strange
unalterable series. Beneath the arch lay extended the surrounding
country, and the man gazed on the diversified panorama of snow-decked
alp, roaring cataract, mirror-like lake, and verdant daisy-gemmed
prairie. Or he contemplated the tossing billows of the sea, the dread
phenomena of the thunder clap and the lightning flash, the ravages of
the hurricane, the crash of mountains rent by internal forces, the
pitiless, headlong sweep of the river that has overflowed the plain.

These manifestations of the forces of nature, whether winsome or
fearsome, impressed the man; and acknowledging his nothingness and
impotence he prostrated himself before them and worshiped them. But in
worshiping the forces of nature, he must needs think of them as a
personality; and the process of personification necessarily began with
the phenomena which possess the most pronounced individuality, viz., on
the earth, rocks, mountains, trees, animals, rivers, lakes; in the sky,
the sun, moon, and stars; between earth and sky, the clouds, winds,
thunder, and lightning; finally, fire, the production of which was the
first step in human culture.

The further observation of nature led man from particular to general
concepts: those were formed more easily, these were hard to compass, and
to understand their import required a greater power of reflection.
Mythology had its origin in the simple worship of nature, and in this
wise.

In the mind of the man who knows nothing of the true relations of the
heavenly bodies, all existence must be divided into two principal
categories, heaven overhead, earth underfoot. Heaven and Earth—that is
the beginning of all mythologies and cosmogonies. Heaven and Earth are
for the Israelite the first works of the Eternal; for the Chinese they
are “father and mother of all things”; for the Hellenes and the Teutons
the first divine beings (Uranos and Gaea, Wodan and Ertha). As men
further considered the question how this whole scene of nature, both in
its grateful and in its terrible aspects, came to be, Heaven and Earth
were regarded as sexed beings, Heaven as fructifying, noble, lofty,
male, controlling the lightning and thunder; Earth as prolific,
conceptive, passive, female. Heaven and Earth formed a union, and Sun,
Moon, and Stars were reputed their children. Among the heavenly bodies
the first place is held by the Sun, god of day, who, at his rising in
the East by magic power compels his brother and sister deities to obey
him: he reigns alone in a sea of light and splendor. Sister and consort
of the Sun is the Moon, and the course of these two across the heavens,
their rising and their setting, their shining and their obscuration are
the source of endless fanciful myths: in these myths, however, there are
frequent transformations, the same hero being now the Sun, again Heaven,
and the same heroine being now the Moon, anon the Earth. And phantasy
discovered in Sun and Moon so many diverse properties that it separated
these from one another, and by degrees formed out of them distinct
personalities. The Sun, rising out of the ocean and again sinking into
it, became Poseidon (Neptune), and the invisible Sun that through the
night tarries in the underworld became god of the world of shades,
Pluto; and so with other phenomena of the sun. The Moon, too, in her
different forms of waxing, full, and waning moon, rising and setting
moon, gives rise to groups of three or four sisters (Graces, Fates,
Furies), and to many other forms of goddesses, and these are sad,
austere, chaste, or alluring, winsome, complaisant; or the Moon assumes
the form of some fair daughter of man, who, being loved by some god,
becomes mother of gods and heroes. Hence god-descended races and
dynasties, whose fortunes and wars are the subject of epics, tragedies,
and romances, and the innumerable host of the stars, in the fanciful
shapes in which imagination grouped them, afforded inexhaustible
material for story and myth. Here was seen a herd faithfully guarded by
the herdsman, there a chase conducted by bold hunters, or a company of
daring mariners going to win the golden fleece, or the golden apples of
the Hesperides, or the thousand eyes of the watchful Argus. On the
mantle of the goddess of night phantasy saw pictured Aries, Taurus,
Capricornus, Capella, Ursus Major, Orion, Bootes, Draco, Hercules, and
all the other figures of the endless web of poesy in which are told the
wondrous deeds of gods and heroes.

Such is the light in which mythology appeared when, in the beginnings of
scientific inquiry, the forces of nature were personified. As centuries
passed the true sense of these myths, transmitted from father to son,
was lost, and the whole was taken to be actual fact. But the master
minds discerned the true state of the case, and soon regained the real
meanings. Such men as Aristotle, Plutarch, and others often told in
their writings what they thought regarding the traditions, but not so
the wily priests within the walls of the temples. Their secret doctrines
doubtless conveyed a more or less rationalistic interpretation of the
myths and a purer theology, though it must be admitted that, in order to
guard the mysteries of the secret associations, and to save the
priesthood from becoming superfluous, this teaching was tricked out in
mysticism, symbolism and allegory; and above all that it was accompanied
by certain dramatic representations and certain moralizing ceremonies.

The countries of antiquity whereof we know with certainty that they
possessed “mysteries,” i. e., secret associations under priestly
guidance, are Egypt, Chaldaea, and Greece.


                               3. EGYPT.

As the sources of the Nile were undiscovered till a very recent date, so
do the sources of Egyptian civilization remain hidden still. We know
fairly well how the population of Egypt was made up. It consisted of an
aboriginal stock, whose physical characters, as given in writings or in
sculptures, show that it was of negro origin, and of a conquering people
belonging to the same race as the inhabitants of Europe in high
antiquity: this race invaded the Nile land probably from Asia, made
themselves masters of it, and in time mingled with the aborigines. The
great moving cause of Egyptian civilization was always the Nile, called
in Egypt Hapi; for the Nile was the essential factor, by the annual
overflow of its fertilizing waters in Summer and Autumn, in determining
the conformation of the land, the climate, the seasons, and,
consequently, the manners and usages of the inhabitants. Hence in the
language of the natives, Egypt was called Kemt, the dark land, because
of the rich deposits of loam left after the floods of the Nile.

But this name attached only to the Nile valley, bounded on the East and
West by stony deserts, which the Egyptians did not reckon as belonging
to their country. The Semites called the land Misr, or Misraim; the
Greeks gave first to the river, then to the region, the name Egypt (on
what grounds we know not), and finally to the river the name Neilos. It
has ever been a land of enigmas, this Nileland. Whence comes its river?
Why does it overflow the country in Summer and Autumn? Why those mighty
pyramids? What were the doings in those temples, planted so close
together? What mean those strange characters, the hieroglyphs? Why do
the gods wear heads of animals, and why, on the other hand, have the
sphinxes a human head on a lion’s body?

In order to exercise undisputed mastery over the country the conquerors
divided among themselves all the land and all the authority. They formed
two hereditary classes or estates—Priests, who controlled the minds, and
Warriors, who controlled the bodies of the conquered people. Of the
subject race there were several classes, most probably six, though the
accounts we have are mutually contradictory. These classes are: Artists,
mechanics, traders, mariners, agriculturists, herdsmen; in the latter
class of the swineherds, most despised of all Egyptians, because of the
unclean animal which they tended.

Now, while the warrior class had the management of military affairs and
the executive government, and as a rule supplied the occupants of the
throne, the priests possessed the legal lore and the scientific
knowledge, and prescribed to the people what they must believe, while
among themselves and in the company of Initiates they thought very
differently.

The Egyptian religion has its foundation in astronomy. The regular
overflow of the Nile, which involved a precise division of the year into
seasons, must at an early period have led to a diligent observation of
the course of the stars, in order to make timely preparation for the
floods; and the splendor of the starry sky in that region, near the
tropics, where hardly a single constellation is out of sight through the
whole year, favored the study of astronomic science. The Egyptians
contemplated the glories of the heavens, not with the stolidity of the
Chinese, who therein see only objects to be counted and measured; nor
yet with the idealist imagination of Europeans. Hence their
personifications of the world of stars are uncouth, confused, without
grace or charm.

The heavenly body that for us is mightiest of all, the sun, must have
been for the Egyptians the most ancient and the mightiest of gods. Their
sun-god was named Re. But even as among the Hellenes, so in Egypt the
several attributes of the sun were assigned to different personalities.
Thus, the rising sun, as the youthful warrior-god Horos, was early
distinguished from Re; over against Horos stood his opposite and his
twin-brother, Set, spirit of darkness. For mothers the sun-god had Isis,
Hathor, and Neit, goddesses of heaven. To these deities were added Aah,
the moon-god, and the gods of the several stars and constellations.
Besides these gods of the whole land, particular places and regions had
their own gods; thus Ptah was lord and god of Memphis, Amon of Thebes,
and so on.

Very often certain worshipful objects, as trees and animals inhabited by
spirits, were developed into local deities. In this way the fetichism of
the black aboriginal people got entry into the more cultured religion of
the light-complexioned conquerors, and had a very powerful influence on
it. Few were the indigenous animals that were not worshiped in one place
or in many as the wrappages of deities. That worship was paid to animals
not for their own sake, is best seen from the way in which the gods are
portrayed, namely, for the most part with a human body and the head of
the animal sacred to them, though in some cases entirely in human form.
Thus Amon, god of Thebes, has the head of a ram, Hathor of Anut the head
of a cow, Anubis that of a jackal, Bast that of a cat, Sechet of a
lioness, Sebak of a crocodile, and so on. And inasmuch as it was
believed that gods dwelt in them, such animals were themselves made
objects of worship; for example, the ox Hapi (Gr. Apis) at Memphis, the
goat at Mendes, and so forth. This honor belonged to the entire species,
and as representing the species, certain individual animals were
maintained in the temples by the contributions of the faithful, and had
servitors to wait upon them. Any harm done to these fetiches was sternly
punished: to kill one of them was death. Not so when a god did not grant
the prayers of the faithful, e.g., for rain: in that case the priests
made the fetich pay the penalty. First, they threatened the animal, but
when menaces were vain, they killed the sacred beast, though in secret;
the people must not know of it.


            4. THE HIGHER DEVELOPMENT OF EGYPTIAN RELIGION.

As Egypt advanced in civilization and the government became more
concentrated, the local deities and zoolatry were less regarded, while
the light-gods, the sun-gods, Re and Horos, with their associate
deities, became more prominent. The lives and fortunes of these
light-gods, and in particular their wars with the powers of darkness,
became the subject of myths. The inhabitants of the Nile valley imagined
to themselves the sun’s course not as the progress of a chariot like
that in which the Mithra of the Persians and the Helios of the Greeks
were borne, but as the voyage of a Nile bark on which Re navigates the
ocean of the heavens. In the battle with dark Set he falls and drops
into the netherworld in the West, but the youthful Horos, sun-god of the
coming day, takes his place and begins his career across the sky. This
ever-rejuvenescent sun-god, who through all transformations remained
still the same deity, so that the self-same goddess was now his mother,
anon his consort, was so truly the supreme god, nay, the sole god of
Egypt, that his hieroglyph, the sparrowhawk, came to be the sign of the
idea “god,” and in writing that sign was attached to the names of gods
to indicate that they were such. On the other hand, the names of the
mothers and consorts of the sun-gods had appended to them the sign for a
cow.

From this it is seen that the religion of Nileland—that is to say, the
religion of the priests—was slowly progressing toward monotheism. Unlike
the beliefs of the commonalty, the secret teachings or mysteries of the
priests, as gradually developed, regarded not simply the existence of
the gods, but, above all, what the gods stood for. For a while this
development halted at the sun-god, and reached its first stage in the
city Anu (in lower Egypt), called by the Greeks Heliopolis (city of the
sun), where they incorporated the god of the place, Tum, in the sun-god
Re. This took place under the fourth dynasty, whose monarchs built the
great pyramids of Ghizeh at Memphis. But one of the greatest of these
transformations was in giving the name of Osiris, god of the city Abdu
(Gr. Abydos) in upper Egypt, to the god of the sunset, ruler of the
netherworld and of the kingdom of death. Isis became his sister and
consort, Set at once his brother and his slayer, Horos his son, who, as
a new sun, takes his place after sunset, and also his avenger on Set.
Horos gives Set battle, but as he cannot destroy him utterly, leaves to
him the desert as a kingdom, while Horos himself holds the Nile valley.
This story of gods was represented scenically on public holidays, but
only the Initiated, i. e., the priests and their followers who had been
let into the secret, knew the meaning of the representation. Even the
name of Osiris and his abode in the realm of the dead were kept secret,
and outsiders heard only of the “great god” dwelling in “the West.”
Besides the mysteries of Osiris, the most famous of all, there were
other mysteries of local Egyptian gods transformed into sun-gods; and so
the sun mythos was further developed. Thus Thot, god of Hermopolis,
whose sacred animal was the bird Ibis, became Horos’s auxiliary in the
war with Set, and also became the moon-god, the god of chronometry and
of order, inventor of writing, revealer of the sacred books. Memphis
alone, capital of the ancient kingdom, held her god Ptah too exalted a
being to share in the transformation of the rest; for Ptah was regarded
by his worshipers as father of all gods, creator of the world and of
men, and more ancient than Re; besides, he was the god of the royal
court. Nevertheless, he did not escape the fate of becoming a sun-god.
The most celebrated object of Egyptian zoolatry was sacred to Ptah,
namely, Apis (Hapi), the sacred bull of Memphis, symbol of the sun and
also of the fructifying Nile. This bull must be black with a white spot
on the forehead, and with a growth under the tongue having the form of
the sacred beetle. The bull was kept in the temple at Memphis from
calfhood till death; the body was then mummified, laid out in state, and
honored with inscriptions as a god. The behavior of Apis in various
conjunctures and circumstances was reputed to be oracular.

Another form of the sun-god was the Sphinx, a half-human, half-brute
figure in stone, repeated a thousand times in the Nile valley. The most
famous sphinx of all is seen at the great pyramids of Ghizeh. Regular
avenues flanked by sphinxes formed the approaches of the great temples.
In Egypt the sphinx was thought of as male; the head was that of some
king, and the whole figure represented the sun-god Harmachis, a name
compounded of Re and Horos (Ra-Harmchuti). In later times the sphinx was
introduced in Asia and Greece; the Grecian sphinx is always female.

When the local deities of Egypt were reduced to system, Re was still
supreme, but now Re had a father, Nunu, god of Chaos, source of all
being—clearly a product of priestly meditation, quite alien to the
popular mind. Re was the first divine ruler of the earth. The stars were
his companions. He was succeeded by his son Shu (represented with a
lion’s head), god of air, who made the props that sustain the sky. Shu
was followed by the god Keb and the goddess Nut, parents of Osiris and
Isis, who then became the earth’s rulers. To them, after Set’s
usurpation, succeeded Horos the avenger and the goddess Hathor. A second
class comprises the inferior gods, as Thot, Anubis, etc.; and in a third
class are the local deities. The number of gods and of daemons
subordinate to them was enormous. But in their gods the Egyptians looked
not at all for the perfection of goodness, nor did they regard right
behavior as essential for gaining heavenly favor; they rather looked on
the practices of religion frankly as a means of advancing their
individual interests with the gods.

Now, the greater the number of gods the less was the difference between
them, and the easier became the transition to the belief in the sun-god
as supreme and only true deity—a belief entertained by the priesthood,
not by the people. Re became for the priests the one god, creator of the
universe; and this was due to the fact that the priests of the foremost
cities, following the example of those of Heliopolis, praised the local
god as supreme over all, and at the same time made him identical with
Re, whose name was appended to the original name, thus, Tum-Re, Amon-Re.
When Thebes became the capital of the kingdom its god Amon naturally
took the foremost place, and while Thebes flourished, in the beginning
of the so-called new empire, it was known to all Initiates that the
sun-god was the one true god, self-created, sole object of the worship
paid to the innumerable host of other gods. Nay, the evil deity Set came
to pass for a form of Re, and was allowed a place in the Sun’s bark.
Self-creation was also attributed to the moon-god. The king, as lord of
the whole country, prayed in identical words in every place to the local
deity as lord of heaven and earth.


                 5. A REFORMATION IN THE LAND OF NILE.

But now the secret doctrine of the priests was to be published to the
people. The pharao Amenhotep IV., of the 18th dynasty (about 1460 B.
C.), saw in the power of the priesthood a menace to the dignity of the
crown. He therefore proclaimed as the sole god the sun, not under any
human form, as had been the custom, but in its own proper shape of a
disk (in Egyptian, aten), as had been the usage at Heliopolis. Amenhotep
ordered all images of other gods associated with the sun to be
destroyed, assumed for himself the name Chuenaten, “Splendor of the
Sundisk,” quit Thebes, and built in middle Egypt, east of the Nile, a
new royal seat, Chutaten, “abode of the Sundisk.” The priests of the
deposed gods in Thebes and in certain other cities (not in all) lost
their places, and the great estates of the priestly corporations were
confiscated. Of course the court officers and civil functionaries
loyally followed the example of their master; but only a very small
fraction of the priesthood gave up their convictions for the sake of
livelihood.

Hardly was Chuenaten gathered to his fathers after a reign of twelve
years, when his reform was undone. His sons-in-law, who succeeded him,
returned step by step to the religion of Amon, and again fixed the royal
seat at Thebes; nevertheless, they were held to be heretics by the
priests, now reinstated in their ancient power. The temples erected to
the Sundisk were leveled with the ground, the half-completed city of the
sun was obliterated, the confiscation of the estates of priestly
corporations reversed, and the temples, images, and priesthood of Amon
reinstated. The intellectual life of Egypt was thenceforth paralyzed,
and the ancient mystic teachings of the priests were never again
disturbed by any wave of movement or progress. The people went back to
stupid formalism, and sank even deeper into daemonism and sorcery. To
draw them away from the true god the priests taught them to worship
deceased kings and queens, at the same time amusing them with gorgeous
sacrifices, processions, and festivals. The distance separating the
priesthood from the people—and the Pharaos were, though not of the
priestly class, reckoned as compeers of the priests—was signalized by
the temples with their various compartments in the inmost of which, the
holy of holies (adyton), were guarded the mysteries of the priests,
while the people were admitted only to the temple proper and its
forecourt. In all probability the famed Labyrinth near Lake Moeris, at
Crocodilopolis, was designed for priestly ends. The labyrinth was an
underground maze of chambers. Herodotus tells that there were 1,500
chambers above ground and as many under the surface, and that the
underground chambers were not shown to the profane, for they contained
the remains of Pharaos and of sacred crocodiles. Not Herodotus only, but
Diodorus, Strabo, and Pliny celebrate the glory of this vast palace, in
whose hidden compartments, no doubt, fit quarters were found for the
mysteries.


                   6. THE EGYPTIAN REALM OF THE DEAD

Finally, the secret teaching of the priests played a part in the
people’s ideas regarding death and the other life. According to the
Egyptian teaching, man is made up of three constituent parts, viz.,
besides the body, the soul (ba), conceived to be of purely material
essence, which at death quitted the body in the form of a bird; and the
immaterial spirit (ka), which held to the man the same relation a god
held to the animal in which he dwelt: at death the spirit departed from
the body like the image of a dream. The gods, too, had their ka and
their ba. The continued existence of both soul and spirit was contingent
on the care the corpse received; if the ka and the ba were to live on,
the body must be embalmed and laid in a chamber hollowed in a rock, or
in a sepulchral edifice (of such buildings the pyramids were the most
notable), and the relatives must supply to the dead meat and drink and
clothing. The spirit of the deceased went to Osiris, lord of the other
world—a luxuriant plain (Aaru) in the West, where the earth’s products
required no toil, but grew spontaneous. By means of the magic formula
with which Horos recalled to life the slain Osiris, the dead is not only
in like manner revivified, but is even made one with Osiris; and hence
in the formulas of funeral service which constitute the so-called “Book
of the Dead,” the deceased is addressed as Osiris with addition of his
own name. Therefore, he may now sail in the sun-bark, and lead a
glorious life in the other world, and walk amid the stars like other
gods. The pictures on the walls of the sepulchral chambers show that the
Egyptians conceived the other life to be much like the present, only
pleasanter and fuller. The deceased is portrayed surrounded by such
enjoyments as were attainable in Nileland—banquets, property, the chase,
voyaging, music, and the like. But from the texts of the “Book of the
Dead,” which used to be laid with the dead in the sepulchre, we see that
these representations had a more spiritual import in the “middle” than
in the “old” empire. In these texts the deceased himself speaks,
identifying himself with some god, or with one god after another; no
longer with Osiris only, for according to the developed teaching of that
time all the gods are one god. The route of the dead toward the other
world is the sun’s track from East to West; but on his journey he needs
the help of the sorcerer’s art against the host of daemons and monsters
that threaten him. Arrived there, he acquires the power of revisiting
the earth at will in the form of god, man, or animal, or even, should he
so choose, in his own former body. At this period puppets made of wood
or of clay, and sundry tools and utensils, were laid in the grave with
the dead for their service. Under the “new empire” the representations
of the other life and of the way thither are more detailed and more
fanciful. Here, too, we find representations of the famous “judgment of
the dead,” an event belonging to the life beyond, and not, as the Greeks
mistakenly supposed, to the present state and to the time immediately
before burial. Osiris presides over the tribunal with two-and-forty
assessors, in whose presence the newcomer has to prove himself guiltless
of any one of two-and-forty sins, thus, for example: “Never have I done
an injustice, never have I stolen, never have I craftily compassed the
death of any man, never have I killed any sacred animal,” etc. Yet all
this was rather a magic formula for attaining blessedness according to
Egyptian notions than a truthful protestation of guiltlessness in order
to establish the postulant’s moral purity. Nevertheless, in a picture of
the Judgment of the Dead in the “Book of the Dead” the deceased is
brought by the goddess of truth and righteousness (Ma) into the palace
of Osiris, and his sins and his good deeds are weighed in a balance. The
hippopotamus is present as accuser and the god Thot as defender.


           7. THE SECRET TEACHING OF THE PRIESTS OF NILELAND.

Though from the foregoing we get a general notion of the relation
between the priests and the people, still we are not clear as to the
nature of the secret teaching and the mode of its organization. Here we
have to depend almost entirely on the accounts given by Greek writers,
not always trustworthy, and on conjecture or inference.

Unquestionably the secret doctrine necessitated a species of secret
society which presumably consisted of the higher orders of priests, and
which comprised subdivisions only loosely held together. It is stated
positively that the pharao for the time being was always admitted to
membership. Hence the king was the only Egyptian outside of the priestly
order that was acquainted with the secret doctrine, and thus was all
danger of betrayal at home most effectually averted. But as the priests
had less to fear in this regard from foreigners, because foreigners went
away again; and as in the indoctrination of foreigners the priests saw
an opportunity for cultivating their own reputation for erudition,
therefore they often willingly admitted to initiation men of distinction
from abroad, and especially Greeks. Among the fabulous personages who
were believed to have been impelled by thirst for knowledge to visit
Egypt, there to learn the secret wisdom of the priests, were the bards
Orpheus, Musaeus, and Homer; among the historic characters were the
lawgivers Lycurgus and Solon, the historian Herodotus, the philosophers
Thales, Pythagoras, Plato, Democritus, the mathematician Archimedes, and
very many more.

But it was not always easy for these to lift the veil that hid the
mysteries. Pythagoras, for example, though recommended by King Aahmes
(Amasis), applied in vain to the priests of Heliopolis and Memphis, and
only after he had submitted to the circumcision prescribed for
postulants did he receive from the priests of Diospolis instruction in
their recondite sciences.

In the form of admission to this secret doctrine were long and tedious
but significant ceremonies, and the Initiates had at certain intervals
to ascend a number of degrees, or stages of knowledge, till they
mastered the sum of the wisdom taught by the priests. But with regard to
the mode of this progression and the difference between the degrees we
have unfortunately no reliable testimony.

Of the contents of the Egyptian secret teaching we know little more than
we do of its forms, for all Initiates were pledged to strictest silence
regarding the subject matter of instruction. Yet we are not without
scattered hints from competent authorities, and in the light of these we
cannot go seriously astray. According to the Greek historian Diodorus,
who lived in the time of Julius Caesar and Augustus, and who had himself
been initiated in Egypt, Orpheus, or rather the Orphic mystae named
after him, owed the Grecian mysteries to the priests of Egypt; and to
the same source were Lycurgus and Solon beholden for their legislation,
Pythagoras and Plato for their philosophical systems, and Pythagoras
furthermore for his mathematical knowledge, and Democritus for his
astronomical doctrine. Now, as for the exact sciences here mentioned,
the Egyptian secret teaching could not have comprised anything
thereanent which was not attainable by anybody with the scientific helps
of the time; nor anything in the way of astronomic knowledge not
relating to the calculation of time; and if with regard to this
knowledge nothing fundamental was taught to the people, then that was a
base huckstering of mysteries and not a secret teaching. As for
legislation, the systems of Lycurgus and Solon differ so much from each
other, and are so pronouncedly Spartan and Athenian, respectively, in
spirit, that from them we cannot infer what the teaching was in that
department. The probability is that the two Grecian lawgivers merely
used the Egyptian laws as a basis, and for the rest adapted their ideas
to the needs of their respective countries. Nor is it to be assumed that
because the Egyptian priests were also judges, therefore their ideas on
legislation, which assuredly they must have applied freely and above
board, belonged to their mysteries.

From the hieroglyphic remains, however, it appears that there existed in
Egypt high-grade schools conducted by the priests, and hence we may
infer that in these institutions the Greek searchers after knowledge
obtained instruction in lawgiving and in the exact sciences of the
Egyptians.

It is true that the hieroglyphs, a species of Egyptian writing which
consisted of figures of actual objects, were known only to the priests;
but in early times that was so only because the rest of the people could
not read and write. Afterward there was a special popular form of
writing (demotic) derived from the hieroglyphs and resembling an earlier
abbreviated form of hieroglyphic writing, the hieratic or writing of the
priests.

It is different with philosophical and religious speculation, in which
positive, unimpeachable conclusions such as may be had in the exact
sciences, are out of the question, and which has no practical
application as in jurisprudence and diplomatics; which, in fact, gives
play rather to hypothesis and arbitrary opinion, to mysticism and
symbolism. This, therefore, was the subject matter of the teaching
conveyed to Initiates in the Egyptian mysteries, but for good reasons
then withheld from the vulgar, because here the very existence of the
priestly class was at stake: the priesthood would lose all its
importance once the people were aware that the priests had no regard for
the received religion.

Hence there is no doubt that the secret doctrine of the Egyptian priests
was at once philosophic and religious; that is, that it tested the
traditional belief, analyzed it, and accepted what it found to be
reasonable and rejected what appeared irrational; and it was sharply
distinguished from the popular belief, which took tradition for absolute
and indubitable truth.

What, then, were the principles underlying the philosophic religion of
the Egyptian priests? Putting aside all arbitrary and fine-drawn
theories, we infer from various clear indications that it was of a
monotheistic character, i. e., that it postulated one personal god, and
that it rejected polytheism and zoolatry, as well as the materialistic
conceptions of the popular creed with regard to what takes place after
death. Indeed, we hold it not improbable that the secret doctrine was
often more radical than the views of the royal reformer Amenhotep IV.,
or Chuenaten, and that, unlike him, the priests believed the true god to
be, not a material thing, the sun’s disk, but the unseen creator
himself, called by them Nunu, father of Re, and source of all things.
Thus we find in the “Book of the Dead” and in later writings mention of
a “demiurge (or architect) of the universe,” to whom no special divine
name is given. Plutarch, too, in his ingenious work, “Of Isis and
Osiris” (cc. 67, 68), says: “The godhead is not any mindless or soulless
creature subject to man,” an allusion to zoolatry; and again: “There is
only one rational being that orders all things, but one ruling
providence, and subordinate powers which are set over the several things
and which in different nations receive through traditional usage,
distinctive worship and distinctive appellations. And hence Initiates
employ now symbols obscure, anon more obvious, whereby they guide the
understanding to the divine being, yet not without danger of falling
into the mire of superstition or the abyss of unbelief. Therefore must
one take philosophy for his mystagogue (guide to the mysteries), in
order to have a true understanding of all the teachings and all the
rites of the mysteries.”

The belief in one personal creator having been accepted, the Egyptian
mythology was naturally declared erroneous, and its true signification
was expounded by the priests to the initiated. That this interpretation
of the myths as allegorical accounts of personified natural phenomena
was the essential part of the mysteries appears from the testimonies of
learned Greeks, some of them Initiates, e. g., Plutarch (“Isis and
Osiris,” c. 3) writes: “Not the white vesture and the shaven beard make
the servant of Isis: he alone is truly that, who receives due
instruction upon the rites and ceremonies used in that divine service,
who investigates judiciously, and meditates upon the truth therein
contained.” Again (c. 8): “There is in the rites of the Egyptian priests
nothing irrational, nothing fabulous or superstitious. Instead of
irrationality we find principles and precepts of morality; instead of
fable and superstition, authentic history and facts of nature.” And c.
9: “The image of the goddess Neit at Sais, regarded also as the image of
Isis, bears this inscription: ‘I am the All that was, that is, that is
to be; my veil no mortal has ever raised.’” Finally, c. 11: “When we
hear the Egyptian myths of the gods, their wandering about, their
dismemberment and sundry other like incidents, we must recall the
remarks already made, so as to understand that the stories told are not
to be taken literally as recounting actual occurrences.” The more
cautious Herodotus (II., 61) agrees with Plutarch, though he expresses
himself more enigmatically: “On the festival of Isis in the city of
Bubastis, after the sacrifice all, both men and women, thousands of
them, beat themselves. But for me to name the one for whose sake they
beat themselves were impiety.”

All the traditions and rites of the Egyptian popular religion then were
explained in a rationalist sense to the initiated. Many particulars of
this explanation have been lost, but what has been lost can hardly have
been of any real value for us, and is little to be regretted.


                         8. BABYLON AND NINIVE.

In the traditions of classic antiquity the secret wisdom of the Egyptian
priests was not held in greater esteem than that of their fellow-priests
in Chaldaea or Babylonia, the enlightened empire on the lower Tigris and
Euphrates, of which Assyria, land of the upper Tigris, was only a
colony. Recent research has brought up the question which civilization
was the earlier, that of the Nileland or that of Western Asia, in the
region of the twin rivers. But as we possess with regard to the
Babylonian religion even less information than with regard to the
Egyptian, we must be content with a brief account of it.

The Chaldaean religion beyond a doubt had its origin in the country
around the lower Tigris and Euphrates among a people of Turanian or
Ural-Altaic stock (akin to the Turks), called Sumerians, or Akkadians:
its root was Shamanism, a form of religion peculiar to the Turkic races.
The most ancient religious writings of this people (among whom cuneiform
writing originated) consist in formulas for exorcising evil spirits;
these spirits are usually represented as coming from the desert in
groups of seven. Over these daemons presided the spirit of the heavens
(In-lilla, afterward called Anu, i. e., sky); after Anu greatest
reverence was paid to the spirit of the earth (In-kia or Ea), who was
afterward spirit of the waters also. From the higher spirits were
evolved gods and goddesses innumerable. The most ancient goddess was
Ba-u, a name signifying “primordial water,” or chaos. After Ba-u came
the “daughter of the heavens,” named at first Anun, later Ninni or
Ninna, and afterward Istar.

The Sumerian groundwork of Chaldaean civilization and religion was built
upon by a Semitic people, the Babylonians and Assyrians proper, traces
of whom are found nearly 4000 years B. C., and whose domination seems
established B. C. 2500. The highest god of this race was called simply
“God” (in their language Ilu), or “Lord” (Baal). Sun and moon were
worshiped as his images. The scene of the life after death was laid in
the realm of shades (shualu, in Hebrew Sheol). This religion was blended
with that of the Sumerians. The gods Anu and Ilu became one god of the
sky, Bel; and Istar became Bel’s wife. Other Sumerian gods were
associated with the planets worshiped by the Semites: Marduk with
Jupiter, Nindar with Saturn, Nirgal with Mars, Nabu with Mercury, while
Istar was specially related to Venus. There was a sort of trinity made
up of Samas (sun), Sin (moon), Ramman (god of storms). Similarly, Anu,
spirit of the sky, and Ea, spirit of the earth, were placed side by side
with Bel. This system was completed about 1,900 B. C., and it remained
unchanged in Assyria, save that there the autochthonous god Assur held
the first place among the gods.

Among the Babylonians and Assyrians the priests were held in great
reverence. In Assyria they stood next after the king, and the king was
high priest; in the Babylonian kingdom they occupied a more independent
and more influential station. Like the priests of Egypt, they probably
had a secret doctrine withheld from the vulgar. From the meanings of the
Babylonian deities’ names, as given above, it is easy to infer the
nature of this secret doctrine. The Chaldees were throughout all
antiquity known as observers of the heavenly bodies. And though probably
they were astrologers rather than astronomers, at least they knew enough
about the stars, the heavens, and the facts of meteorology to regard
them for what they were instead of holding them to be gods. We therefore
believe that the Chaldaean priests among themselves looked on the
objects which before the people they held to be gods as simply sky, sun,
moon, planets, lightning, thunder.

Besides the early cuneiform writings already mentioned (forms of
exorcism), there have been found amid the ruins of Babylon great
“libraries” of writings on tiles, in the cuneiform characters. Among
these are “penitential psalms” and hymns to gods. In the following
psalm, deciphered from the tile tablets, a priest, in the name of a
penitent sinner, entreats the goddess:

          O Lady, for thy servant the cup is full.
          Speak the word to him, “Let thy heart be tranquil.”
          Thy servant—evil have I done—
          Give him assurance of mercy.
          Turn thy countenance himward.
          Consider his entreaty.
          Thy servant, thou art angry with him,
          Be to him gracious.
          O Lady, my hands are tied.
          I cling to thee.

Many of the mythological poems, indeed, most of them, and great part of
the less sacred literature of the tablets, are so obscure and
unintelligible that for their understanding a “key” was necessary, and
the priests held the key. Of special interest are the fragments
containing portions of the Babylonian cosmogony; and as our Bible (Gen.
xi., 31) tells that Abraham was of Ur in Chaldaea, his descendants would
inherit from him (supposing him to have been an historical personage)
some portions of the ancient traditions and folklore of the Chaldaeans.
Here is a fragment of the Babylonian story of the Creation:

              When the sky above was not yet named,
              Earth beneath had yet no name,
              and the watery deep, the never-beginning,
              was their producer,
              the chaos of the sea, genderess of them all,
              for her waters united together in one.
              The darkness was not yet done away,
              not a plant had yet budded.
              As of the gods none had yet gone forth,
              and they yet had no name,
              then the great gods, too, were created, etc.

The Chaldee Noah, called Samas-Napishtim (sun of life), tells the story
of the deluge in this form: The god Ea having made known to him the
punishment decreed for mankind on account of their sins, he built a
great ship at the god’s command, and into it brought all his
possessions, his kinsmen, his servants, also domestic and wild animals.
Then the gods let a great tempest loose, and with the spirits entered
the combat to destroy all living things. But the flood rose up to the
sky and threatened even the lower gods, who had to take refuge with the
higher gods. The gods, therefore, repented of what they had done. But
after seven days the storm was quieted, and the waters were abated;
Samas-Napishtim opened the window of his ship, now resting on the
mountain Nizir, and after other seven days freed a dove, but the dove
found no resting place. Then a swallow, which did in like manner; then a
raven, which preyed on the bodies of the drowned. It was now possible
for Samas-Napishtim to let the animals out; he erected an altar and
offered sacrifice, whereto the gods gathered “like masses of flies.”
Then the god Bel, who had ordered the flood, became reconciled with the
other gods, who were angry with him on that account; he led
Samas-Napishtim forth with his wife, and made a covenant with them and
the people. But the pair were taken afar to live for evermore.

This Chaldaic history of the deluge is but one section of a great poem,
an epos contained in twelve earthen tablets, wherein are recounted the
fortunes and exploits of a hero, apparently the Nimrod of the Hebrew
Bible. This poem is reputed to date from the twenty-third century, B. C.
The deeds of this hero, Gishdubarra, or Namrassit, as he is called,
forcibly recall the story of the Hellenic Herakles, and the Heraclean
myth, perhaps, had its origin in the Chaldaean epos. Gishdubarra is a
descendant of Samas-Napishtim, whom he seeks out in his retreat to
obtain a cure of his disease, and who takes that occasion to narrate to
him the history of the flood. Now, his disease was a visitation of the
goddess Anatu, because that he had spurned the love of the goddess
Istar. A short poem graphically and effectively tells of how Istar in
her distress over this repulse sought help in the netherworld. “Istar’s
Descent into Hell” impresses one like Dante’s “Inferno”; indeed, in the
opening verses it employs nearly the same words as the great Florentine.
Istar goes, says the poet,

 To that house whence none comes forth that enters,
 On that path that allows advance, but regress never;
 To that house whose inmates light shall see nevermore,
 To that place where dust is their victual and ordure their meat, etc.

In the netherworld the goddess Allatu reigns as queen. She is Istar’s
counterpart: as Istar (daughter of the moon-god) is the rising moon, or
the morning-star, so is Allatu the setting moon, or the evening star.
The two are the mutually conflicting opposite sides of one being; and
here, perhaps, we have an intimation of a deeper ethical interpretation,
according to the secret doctrine of the Chaldaeans. The hell of the
Chaldaean theology is divided into seven compartments separated by
gates. At each gate Istar must surrender to its keeper some portion of
her paraphernalia; at the first the crown, at the second the earrings,
at the third the necklace, at the fourth the mantle, at the fifth the
girdle, crusted with precious stones, at the sixth the armlets and
anklets, and at the seventh the last vesture. Possibly, we have here a
symbolic allusion to the Chaldaean mystic teaching, which may have had
seven degrees of initiation into as many orders of mysteries, till all
were disclosed. The queen of the nether world not only renders to Istar
no assistance, but, contrariwise, treats her as an enemy, and heaps
bodily injuries upon her. Meanwhile on earth, Istar being the goddess of
love, all union of the sexes, whether among men or animals, ceases, and
at last the gods request of Allatu the liberation of Istar. Reluctantly
she consents. Istar is made whole and set free, and at each gate gets
back again what had been taken from her. The poem was intended to be
recited by the priest at the obsequies of the dead, to give assurance to
the mourning survivors that the gates of the netherworld are not
unconquerable, but that there is still a possibility for the shades to
reach the land of the blest, the abode of Istar.


                     9. ZOROASTER AND THE PERSIANS.

If in Chaldaea the traces of actual secret teaching seem faint and
indistinct, they quite disappear the further we go from the centres of
ancient culture in Northern Africa and Western Asia, though analogies
are found everywhere. In Persia, whose culture for the rest was an
offshoot of that of Chaldaea, the priests (athravan) of Zarathustra’s,
or Zoroaster’s, religion were the highest of the three classes of the
population, and the priestly class was considered further removed from
the other two (warriors and farmers) than they from each other. Sprung
originally from a Median stock, the priests married only women of their
own race, and alone of the population possessed high culture. As in
Egypt, the King was adopted into the priestly class. The priests went
about the country as teachers, but gave religious instruction only to
those of their class. The chief priest was styled Zarathustrotema, i.
e., the one nearest to Zarathustra, and had his see in the holy city
Ragha (now Rai), whose inhabitants, like those of modern Rome, had the
name of being unbelievers. The priests alone held rule in Ragha, and no
secular power had right to give orders. Even elsewhere throughout the
kingdom the priests regarded themselves as subject only to the commands
of the Zarathustrotema.

Further, they were physicians, astrologers, interpreters of dreams,
scribes, judges, officers of state, etc. The duties they sought to
impress upon the minds of the people were these exclusively: That they
should reverence the holy fire, listen to the reading of passages from
the sacred books, and perform no end of ceremonies of purification on
account of their sins against the precepts of their religion. All this
points to the existence of a mystic gild of the priests, which withheld
the real teachings of their religion from the uninitiated, and the
members of which alone understood what was the original of the strife
between the good world of Ormuzd and the evil of Ahriman, namely, in all
probability, the alternation of night and day, Summer and Winter.


                      10. BRAHMANS AND BUDDHISTS.

The case was much the same in India. There the priests, then as now, the
highest caste (Brahmans), were separated from the people by even a
deeper gulf than in Persia. They can have no communication with people
of any other caste, and can take nothing from any one not belonging to
their own caste. They stand outside of the state and its laws, and have
laws of their own. By the people they are regarded as gods: they and
their pupils, the Bramatsharin, as is said in the “Atharva-Beda” (book
of ceremonial laws), give life to both worlds; nay, they it is that made
sky and earth fast on their foundations, that introduced religion, the
gods, and immortality, that produced the world, that brought the daemons
into subjection. Thus they indoctrinated the people; but as they
themselves of course knew that things were not so, a secret doctrine
naturally sprung up among them, and so they instituted a mystic society,
whose members alone knew how the matter really stood, and that the
people were hoodwinked. Accordingly, the basis of religion was totally
different for the Brahmans from what it was for the rest of the people.
The latter were idolaters, the former pantheists. This pantheism is
taught in all their sacred books; but these books the second and third
castes (warriors and farmers) did not understand, and the fourth caste,
the servile (which was also the most numerous), durst not read them at
all.

According to this doctrine, all gods and the whole creation are sprung
from Eternity (Aditi). Penitents and solitaries were esteemed by the
Brahmans above kings and heroes, even above gods. But the life of a
hermit was not perfect enough for them, for that was attained by the
next two castes. Therefore, as their own peculiar specialty, they
concocted the idea of a sort of a soul of the universe, the
Atman-Brahman (the All-Me, or Me-All). This dogma was originated by the
Brahman Yadshnavalkya: but Brahmans themselves say that no man can
comprehend it, and that no man can instruct another in it. Thus,
despairing of a solution of life’s enigma, the Brahmans hit upon the
idea that the universe is only a phantasm, a Dream of the Soul of the
Universe, and as a consequence that the earth, with all that it
contains, is nothing: this is pessimism. They imagined enormous aeons of
time, in the lapse of which the world grew ever worse and creatures were
born only to suffer, to die, and either to awaken to suffering in the
soul’s migration, or to do penance in the unspeakable torments of hell.
Now, as of all this the people could understand only what was said about
the hell torments, the Brahmans contrived for them also a supreme deity
under the same name as their own Soul of the Universe, Brahma, and for
Brahma they provided a wife, Sarasvati. Brahma they made the creator,
but the part played by him was only passive and the people, not content
with such a do-nothing, paid more attention to other gods, specially to
resplendent Vishnu and dread Siva. Long afterward the three gods were
united in a sort of trinity, or, rather, were represented by a
three-headed figure, which had neither temple nor sacrificial worship.
Thus the Brahmans went on refining and refining in their theological
speculations, while the people became divided into parties, Vishnuites
and Sivaites, and the religion of the Hindus reached at last the state
of debasement in which we find it to-day.

Before degeneration had gone so far Buddha, in the sixth century, B. C,
endeavored to save the Hindu religion. Buddhism was not a new religion,
only a reform of Brahmanism. Though it failed to strike root deep in its
native soil, the more westerly countries of India, on the other hand it
won a great following in farther India, Tibet, China, and Japan: it has
since assumed a peculiar composite character by fusion with the ancient
religions of those countries. It grew out of a monastic society founded
by Siddhartha, afterward Buddha, surnamed the Perfect One. His doctrine
was wholly ethical, and its profoundest principle was that only in
complete renunciation of all things can man find safety and peace.
Buddha himself was rather strict with postulants for admission to the
society, so that in his time the teaching was in many respects a secret
doctrine. But after the death of Buddha, when first himself, then
several other Buddhas believed to have lived before him, and expected to
come after him, had been raised to the rank of gods; and when to these
had been added the Hindu gods and the gods of other peoples; the
religion of the founder having thus degenerated into a polytheism, the
learned began to interpret the original doctrine now in one sense, again
in another, opinions differing on the question whether the Nirvana
(literally, extinguishment) preached by Buddha meant Death and
Nothingness, or a Blest State. Thus the Buddhism of the priests assumed
a strong likeness to a secret doctrine, though we know not of any formal
organization to that end.


                11. SECRET LEAGUES OF BARBAROUS PEOPLES.

Even among Savages so-called are found secret doctrines and secret
societies of priests analogous to those of more cultured peoples. The
priests of Hawaii, who in this respect perhaps rank highest among savage
races, had a theory of their own regarding creation which shows great
elevation of thought. The sorcerers, or priests, of savage races
wherever they still remain, are banded in secret societies, which
withhold from the people all knowledge of their tricks. The Angekoks of
the Eskimos, the Medicine Men of the North American aboriginals, the
Shamans of Siberia, as well as the sorcerers, however named, of African
and other races, nearly all form close castes, hand down their pretended
arts of weather-making, of healing disease, discovering thieves,
counteracting spells, etc., to their successors, and prepare themselves
for their office by undergoing strange tests and performing outlandish
rites; they also wear fantastic togs. Among the Zulu Kaffirs the one who
desires to become a sorcerer (usually a descendant of a sorcerer) gives
up the customary mode of life, has strange dreams, seeks solitude, hops
and jumps about, utters cries, handles serpents that other Kaffirs will
not touch, at last receives instruction from some aged sorcerer, and is
formally admitted by the assembly of those charlatans. There are also
witches, or sorceresses, who go through a like form of consecration.

There exist also among savages other species of secret societies. In the
Society Islands the chiefs, called Areoi or Erih, form an association,
the origin of which they trace to Oros, god of war. They are divided
into twelve classes under as many grandmasters, each class distinguished
by a peculiar tattoo, the members are united by the firmest ties, show
unbounded hospitality to one another, live without marriage, kill their
own children, and refrain from all work. There are similar societies in
Micronesia, called Klobbergoll, which assemble in special houses, and
serve their chiefs in war as bodyguard. On the isle of New Britain (now
a German possession, and named New Pomerania) there exists a secret
society called the Duk-Duk, whose members, wearing frightful masks, care
for the execution of the laws, collect fines, and inflict punishment on
incendiaries and homicides. They are known to each other by secret
signs, and outsiders are denied admission to their festivals under pain
of death. In West Africa there are many secret societies whose members
are distinguished by a chalk line, with which they are marked at their
initiation. Their office is to pursue and punish criminals, and to
collect the tribute. In each locality these associations possess houses
for their special use, and their members are bound to the strictest
secrecy. Thus even savages have their secret police and their privy
tribunals.




                             _PART SECOND._
           _The Grecian Mysteries and the Roman Bacchanalia._


                               1. HELLAS.

Grecian religion is worship of the beautiful. Its origin was as that of
the other polytheistic religions: its basis was a personification of
nature’s forces and of the heavenly bodies, but in its evolution it
differed essentially from the religions of the Oriental peoples, who had
no sense for the beautiful, and who ascribed to their gods forms quaint,
or unnatural, or hideous. In the dawn of their history the Hellenes did,
undoubtedly, worship the forces of nature under the form of animals,
especially of serpents. In time the human and animal forms were united,
and there were deities with heads of animals or the bodies of horses
(centaurs) or the hoofs of goats (satyrs). But the native genius of
Greece asserted itself at an early period, and the figures of gods came
by degrees to express the highest physical perfection with which they
were acquainted—the human form. True, the Hellenes, like the Easterns,
forgot the astronomic and cosmic signification of their myths; but,
whereas, for their neighbors oversea—at least for the mass of the
people—the natural powers transformed into gods were simply fetiches
existing only in the matter out of which they were made—objects of dumb
reverence or of mad terror; for the man of Hellas they became changed
into moral forces, into ideas which he represented to himself in
beautiful forms that were to him not objects of fear at all, but beings
with whom he might converse as with fellowmen, and of whom his poets
sang as though of mortal heroes. Here we have the distinguishing
characteristic of Grecian religious worship.

The Hellenes knew nothing of dogma, creeds, catechising, or revelation.
In their eyes, if a man did but honor the gods as representing the
groundwork of morality, he satisfied all the requirements of religion:
the how, the when, the where, the how often, were matters left to the
discretion of each one; and nobody else judged him concerning them. Of
course, we must not apply our modern ethical yardstick to the principles
of morality for which the gods stood sponsor, after the origin of the
gods had been forgotten. The Greeks were, with regard to matters that we
nowadays hold to be within the sphere of ethics, not at all
scruple-ridden; and in truth we need to bear in mind their great
services on behalf of the beautiful if we would look with some measure
of allowance on their shortcomings with regard to virtue. In two points,
specially straightforwardness (honesty, candor, truthfulness) and
chastity, they left much to be desired; but what else was to be
expected, seeing that in their gods, as in course of time they came to
conceive of them mistakenly, they had by no means edifying exemplars of
the moral principles to which those deities were supposed to give
sanction. Nevertheless, history will, even to the Hellenes, forgive
much, because they loved much.

Of so little obligation was the Grecian belief regarding the gods, that
the several divisions of the Hellenic race were by no means agreed as to
the number of the gods and their respective ranks. Of the twelve gods of
Olympus, one would be disowned here, another there. In one place greater
honor would be paid to this god, in another place to that; the case is
exactly that of the saints in Catholic countries to-day. Nay, local
deities, e. g., Athene in Athens, often received more homage than Zeus,
father of the gods and lord of the thunderclouds. The worship of the
beautiful went even so far as to multiply gods, and to divide them among
the different localities that possessed renowned statues of them: these
statues then came to be regarded as distinct individuals, so that even a
Socrates could be in doubt whether the Aphrodite Urania (Aphrodite in
the sky) and Aphrodite Pandemos (the popular Aphrodite) were or were not
one person. Nay, when the known gods did not suffice, they made gods
that had no name: thus we find a “greatest” god, also “pure”, and
“reconciling”, and “ruling”, and, as we learn from the “Acts of the
Apostles”, “unknown” gods. And now as regards the character of all these
deities: for the Greeks, who in all things studied the beautiful, they
were neither monsters like the gods of Egypt, India, and Phoenicia, nor
incorporeal spirits like the gods of the Persians and the Israelites,
but human existences that never could die, mighty beings with human
feelings, inclinations, and passions. The Greeks knew no Yahve: but then
neither did they know any Devil. Their gods were neither faultless nor
virtueless, just like the Greeks themselves. Of course there are to be
found in Hellenic religion survivals from that period of mythology in
which human and beast forms were mingled. This we see in the Centaurs,
the Chimaera, the Minotaur, the Satyrs, etc.; but such beings were
become merely figures in folk-tales, and there they enacted parts
ranging from terror to farce: they no more received divine honors. And
the same is to be said of daemons and malign spirits, relegated to the
domain of superstition and the realm of poesy.


                      2. HELLENIC DIVINE WORSHIP.

Grecian religion was a function of state. Its adogmatism, it is true,
abated the apprehension this fact might inspire for freedom of thought:
but, on the other hand, religion came to be a cloak for the designs of
political parties. Thus, for example, Socrates was put out of the way by
the party opposed to him on the pretext that he had apostatized from the
religion of the state. Heresy trials, except as stirred up by
politicians, had no place among the Greeks. Philosophers and Initiates
of the mysteries fearlessly expressed their convictions, however much
opposed the same might be on one side or the other to the official
theology: nay, comedy, and even the comedies of the tory Aristophanes
introduced the gods in the most ridiculous and most disgraceful
situations on the stage. It was enough for the state if the public
worship of the gods, whose festivals were commanded, and whose
sacrifices were prescribed by public authority, went on: for the state
what individuals thought was of no consequence: the state cared neither
for the upholding of positive nor for the putting down of negative
beliefs. The public worship was regarded as a sort of legal transaction
between the gods and the people: the gods were entitled to sacrifices,
and the people to divine aid, and the two parties were held to make
faithful exchange. Violation of temples and profanation of sacred things
were, therefore, grievous crimes. One need not believe in miracles
wrought by images of gods: but one must leave the images alone. And,
inasmuch as the gods were officially recognized as vested with rights
before the law, therefore, upon complaint made—and then only—denial of
their existence, scoffing, and blasphemy were punished with banishment
as the worst sort of crimes. Nor was there in this any fanaticism or any
intolerance, simply an idea of right and wrong. That this is so is
proved by the fact that there was no prohibition of the bringing in of
alien gods or of the worship of such, provided only the customs of the
land were not infringed; nay, alien gods, if their religion gained
vogue, might be adopted into the religion of the state.

Such freedom of religion could, of course, exist only where no priestly
caste existed, nor, in fact, any special priestly class. It was
competent for persons in various walks of life to perform religious
ceremonies. In the name of the state, the king (or other head of the
government) “transacted business” with the gods, for example, conducted
the sacrifices. Only in temples and other localities consecrated to
divine worship were priests as such employed: but outside the walls of
these they had nothing to do; for instance, they had nothing to do with
men’s consciences. In Hellas the priest had no privileges, no influence
such as he had in Egypt, and priestly societies and priestly secret
doctrine were out of the question. The service of some of the gods was
conducted by women, and in the worship of certain deities only unmarried
priests could engage; there were also certain other restrictions put on
the priest’s mode of life.

Among the Greeks religious ministration was no more restricted to
certain places than to certain persons. The gods were everywhere, the
highest inhabiting Olympus, others the sea, the netherworld, certain
groves, trees, streams, mountains, grottoes, etc. Not in temples alone,
but everywhere stood altars: in houses, in the streets, in forests. All
consecrated places, whether temples or sacred groves, etc., were Asyla,
places of refuge for offenders against law. The honor done to the gods
consisted in:

1. Invocation, comprising Prayers addressed, whether to the images of
the gods or to their supposed abode, and pronounced low or loud or in
song; Oaths, summoning the gods as witnesses of truth—this at times
degenerated into a species of Ordeal; Imprecations, calling on the gods
to punish evildoers.

2. Votive Offerings (anathemata), objects of all kinds laid at the feet
of the gods’ images: the offering might be an animal, fattened specially
for the god, or it might be a person dedicated for life to the service
of the god by himself, his father, or his master.

3. Sacrifices, mostly meat and drink offerings, but sometimes living
animals immolated to the gods, in atonement for sin, or to ratify
treaties, or to obtain an intimation of the divine will or
foreknowledge. In the earliest times human victims were immolated.

If religion consists in a belief in superterrestrial powers and in
worship of them, so, on the other hand, the belief in miracle has its
root in the conviction that this worship is answered by action of the
heavenly powers on the physical world. One instance of this action of
the supersensual world is called Revelation. Here the Grecian religion
was distinguished from other forms of belief in that it accepted no
official standing revelation which every one was required to believe,
while it maintained the possibility of a revelation from the gods for
emergencies. This belief was firmly held even by the most eminent
Grecian philosophers, in particular by Socrates and the Stoics. And if
the granting of prayers and the decision of questions by ordeals was a
first feeble step toward revelation, the same mistaken belief led to
still further degeneration of the religious idea in the forms of
Seership, Oracles, and Conjuration.

Seership (in Greek, mantike, seer’s art) was unintentional or
intentional. Unintentional seership we see in dreams, and in trance.
Intentional seership was practiced by interpretation of signs or omens
(sign-reading). A seer (mantis) was one who practiced sign-reading,
whether self-deluded or simply pretending to be under divine
inspiration. Folklore and history tell of famous seers who foretold the
future from observation of the flight of birds, atmospheric phenomena,
the position of constellations, and the entrails of animals; or who
interpreted dreams and on occasion had ecstasies and visions. Then there
were unprofessional practicers of the art who divined the future by
other means; thus one would write the letters of the alphabet in a
circle on the ground, lay on each letter a grain of corn, then let a
cock pick up the grains, the operator meanwhile carefully noting the
order in which the grains were picked up: this was known as alectromancy
(Gr., alektor, cock; manteia, seership, divination).

Oracles are properly divinations obtainable only in particular places
(as temples and other sanctuaries), and practiced only by duly qualified
persons. There were several kinds of oracles, viz.:

1. Oracles from Signs. The most ancient oracle of this class was that of
Zeus at Dodona, in Epirus, mentioned by Homer. The priests of the
sanctuary at Dodona divined by observation of the rustling of the leaves
of the sacred oak; they also cast lots on the altar, or questioned a
sacred bronze basin.

2. Sententious Oracles. These were all sanctuaries sacred to Apollo, and
were numerous in Hellas and Asia Minor. The most notable of them was one
at Delphi. The minister of the oracle of Delphi, a virgin priestess
called the Pythia, while questioning the oracle sat on a tripod which
stood over a crevice in the ground; thence issued a gas, and,
intoxicated by inhaling this, the Pythia uttered words which the priests
dressed up in verse or in sententious form.

3. Dream Oracles. Of these there were many, in sanctuaries dedicated to
Asklepios (Aesculapius, god of leechcraft) to which the sick were taken
in order that through interpretation of the dreams they had on the spot
they might obtain from the priests of Asklepios counsel upon the healing
of their complaints. The most renowned of this class of oracles was at
Epidaurus, in Argolis.

Conjuration, which developed into magic, was much used in ancient
Greece, especially after the Greeks had come in contact with the
Oriental world; but the gods and daemons concerned in this practice were
all taken from foreign mythologies. People believed in conjuration of
the weather, in transformation of men into animals, in love potions,
etc., and employed magic formulas expressed in words that no one
understood and that belonged to no earthly language.


                       3. THE HELLENIC MYSTERIES.

Such was the theology, and such the thaumatology[1]—image and
reflection—of Grecian religion. The two elements constitute the popular
religion, the religion of feeling, worship of the gods, as far as
sensibility is concerned. But in the most ancient times there stood over
against the popular religion (in Greece as in Egypt) a religion of
priests, their Initiates, and Elect; over against the religion of
feeling a religion of reflection; over against the naif, sensorial view,
the sentimental, romantic, mystical one, the one which aims to acquire
for belief an ethical side, and to subordinate that to faith. This phase
of religion results from the mystic consideration that the individual is
essentially different from the divine nature, subject thereto, and
dependent on it; in short, it results from the idea of “alienation from
God,” toward which the superstitions of seership, oracles and magic were
already showing the way. It was the impulse, given by reflection, to
“seek the lost god” that led to the institution of mysteries in Greece:
men were no longer satisfied with gods that were but man’s equals. The
mysteries contradict the origin of religion in feeling, they deny its
dependence on art and the beautiful; they ponder and brood over the lost
god, and are ever seeking him. They would subordinate life and all its
interests to his service; they would regulate all man’s acts, and hence
morality, according to faith; they hold in contempt either man’s power
or his knowledge. The Grecian mysteries, indeed, borrowed from the
popular religion its art, and turned it to account, but in them art was
not cultivated for itself, and science was completely ignored. As
science was free in Hellas and not tied to any priestly order, the
mysteries could there render no service: there was nothing for them to
do. Of all the many philosophers of Greece, not one employed the
doctrines of the mysteries in his system: not one showed any regard for
them. The mysteries were then what they had ever been, and still are, to
wit, self-introspection, interpretation of divine things, a mourning
over the lost god, and search after the same, an endeavor for union with
God, for grace and salvation, a sensible delight in the thought of a god
suffering and dying, in meditation on the soul’s state after death, on
revelation, incarnation, and resurrection; and a representation of all
these ideas in dramatic forms and ceremonies the main effect of which is
to make an illusive and blinding impression on the senses.

Footnote 1:

  The original has Goetterglaube, belief in gods, and Wunderglaube,
  belief in miracles, in allusion to the preceding section 2.
  Goetterglaube is of course equivalent to “theology,” and if so, then
  Wunderglaube is equivalent to “thaumatology” from Greek thaumata,
  miracles, and logos, discourse.

Thus, the Grecian mysteries were the exact opposite of genuine
Hellenism. Cheerfulness, joyousness, clearness of perception and of
thought, absence of all mists and vapors, were the notes of your true
Hellene: his statues of gods with their grand, bold, full, rounded
contours to this day demonstrate this; and his superstition even took
things just as they looked to him. On the other hand, gloom, ruefulness,
a morbid, overweening, owlish phantastry, symbolry, mysticism, with
every shallow trick of strained interpretation, and all the smugnesses
of pharisaic piety are the earmarks of your mystic. On the one side day
on the other night, there action here quest and longing, there fact here
makebelieve, there alertness here moping, there a hearty meal off what
is at hand here a hungering and thirsting after truth that never can be
attained. The mysteries were therefore in every way ungrecian,
outlandish, and abnormal. They had no fit place on Hellenic soil, nor in
that age; they were the propaedeutic of a future age when one should
come upon the scene who was to hurl Olympos, Okeanos, and Hades into the
everlasting night of oblivion.

And yet from the difference between the Grecian mysteries and the
ordinary life of the people it by no means follows that the Initiates
did not find satisfaction, at least a partial satisfaction, in these
mystic exercitations. The man who nurses the feeling of a want for
something other than what his times and his surroundings afford, finds
at the last in his very brooding the satisfaction of his need.
Sentimental, romantic, fanciful, and mystical characters, therefore,
must find uncommon delight in mysteries, while practical, clear-sighted,
undistorted, and strictly logical minds are unmoved by them. Let us then
listen to the testimony of two celebrated mystae, a Grecian and a Roman,
both, it is true, living in a time when their respective nations had
begun to decline. The tragic poet Euripides sings: “O blest is he whose
fortune it is to have learned the divine initiations; he sanctifies his
life.” And Cicero (De Legibus II., 14) makes Marcus say to Atticus: “Of
all the grand, and as I fain would think, the divine elements imported
by thy Athens into human life, there is nought better than those
Mysteries whereby we have been developed out of rudeness and savagery
and trained to the human manner of life. And we, too, even as the
Mysteries are called Initia (beginnings) so in them have found the
principles (a play on words, “initia” and “principia,” principles, being
homonyms) of right living, and have learned not only to live joyously,
but also to die with better hope.” Then, as shadow follows light, he
adds: “The thing I do mislike in the nocturnal rites, is told in the
comic poets. Were such liberties permitted in Rome, what had not that
infamous wretch (Clodius) done, who brought lewdness into the presence
of certain sacred rites upon which ’twere sin even to glance
unwittingly.”

The Grecian mysteries were no monopoly of the priests or of any other
class: no man was excluded except such as by their life proved
themselves unworthy of initiation. The origin of these mysteries is
found in the rites of Purification and Atonement. In the earliest times
the purifications were nothing but bodily cleansings prescribed to those
who took part in religious ceremonies: later they took on a moral
significance, as the sense of alienation from God gained ground. With
the consciousness of sin, with the need of obtaining forgiveness, and,
to that end, of knowing a deity free from all sin, and hence totally
unlike man, mysticism begins and develops. Expiations came into vogue
little by little, especially for bloodguiltiness, and were used in the
popular religion. These consisted of certain ceremonies in which the
blood of animals and incense were employed; in the case of individuals
such rites might lessen the punishment under mitigating circumstances;
they might, in the case of cities and states, efface the stains of
murderous crimes committed during revolts or civil strifes. In all the
mysteries purifications and expiations played a great part. Whatever has
been handed down with regard to these mysteries is found in the sections
following.


                      4. THE ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES.

The most ancient, most celebrated, and most venerable among the Grecian
mysteries were those instituted at Eleusis, in Attica, in honor of the
goddess Demeter (called by the Latins Ceres) and her daughter Persephone
(Proserpina), and later of a male deity also, known in the mysteries
under the name of Iacchos; and though there is no affinity between the
letters I and B, Iacchos came in time to stand for Bacchus. The original
Iacchos would seem to have been a god in the people’s religion, and this
name is probably related to Jao (found in Jovispater, Jupiter) and to
the Hebrew Yahve. Diodorus (I., 94) gives the name Jao to the God of the
Hebrews; and an oracular utterance of the Apollo of Claros says:

  Know thou that the highest of all the gods is named Jao, and In Winter
  Aides, and Zeus in opening Spring, then Helios in Summer, and once
  more Jaos in Fall.

The fact that Jaos was the harvest-god tended strongly to identify him
with Bacchus, personification of the sun which ripens the grape; and,
besides, Bacchus was allied to Demeter (originally Gemeter—Earthmother)
who was the patroness of husbandry. The name of the city, Eleusis, means
in Greek “advent”, and it commemorates the stay of Demeter there in the
course of her wandering in search of her daughter: a like story is told
of Isis in Egypt. In gratitude for their hospitality, Demeter bestowed
on the people of Eleusis the bread-grain and the mysteries. From Eleusis
the cult of the two deities spread all over Greece and part of Asia
Minor, and in a modified form passed into Italy: in several places arose
affiliated institutions resembling that at Eleusis, having the same
festivals and the same secret cult; but Eleusis always held the
supremacy. The buildings at Eleusis, in the pure Doric style, consisted
of the temple of Demeter and the Mystic House, in which the secret
festivals were held. They were connected with Athens by the “Sacred
Way”, a road flanked by temples and sanctuaries: in Athens itself was an
Eleusinian building (Eleusinion) in which a portion of the mysteries was
celebrated. In front of the city gate toward the Piraeus was also a
sanctuary dedicated to this cult, and furthermore an Eleusinion at
Agrae. The buildings at Eleusis stood till the fourth century of our
era: they were then destroyed by the Goths under Alaric, at the
instigation of monkish fanatics.

The Eleusinia were always under the direction of the Athenian
Government. When Athens became a democracy the functions till then
performed by the King, as protector of the Eleusinia, devolved on the
head of the executive, the Archons, who, therefore, bore the title
Basileus (king) because the most important duties of the King had been
concerned with Eleusis and its Mysteries. The Basileus was assisted by
four councilors (epimeletae), of whom two were chosen from among the
Athenians, and other two from the two Eleusinian gentes, Eumolpidae, and
Kerytae. The report on the celebration of the Mysteries was always
rendered to the Grand Council (Boule) of Athens, assembled in the
Eleusinion. The function of priest in the institutions at Eleusis was
always the exclusive privilege of the Eumolpidae and Kerytae. The chief
of the priests was the hierophant, and with him was associated a
hierophantess. Next to these in dignity were the torchbearer (daduchus),
the sacred herald (hierokeryx), and the “altar-priest.” These officials
constituted the Sacred Council, which had the immediate direction of the
mysteries.

It would be a great mistake to regard the Eleusinian Mysteries as a
result of illuminism or rationalism. Rather were they an institution not
less religious, not less faithful to the ancient traditions than the
popular religion itself; with this difference only, that the latter
contented itself with honoring the gods contemplated in the human form,
while the mysteries emphasized the infinite pre-eminence of the divine
nature over the human. Hence the mystic religion was guarded by the
state authorities with the same zeal as the anthropomorphic religion of
the vulgar.

No one saw in the one any danger to the other. The two forms of religion
were branches of one tree, Pantheism, and herein only differed, that the
one saw the Divine in all earthly things, the other sought for it there
and strove for union with it. It is equally vain to look in the
Eleusinia for either Rationalism or Monotheism. Monotheism, i. e.,
absolute severance of the earthly from the divine without hope of union,
was a purely Oriental idea, quite incomprehensible to the Grecian mind:
no ancient Greek writer ever dreamed of a creative demiurgus, in the
Egyptian sense, nor of an angry and revengeful Yahve, like the Hebrews.

So great was the veneration for the Eleusinia among the Grecian states,
that during the mystic festivals hostilities were suspended between
opposing armies; and despisers of the mysteries, betrayers of the secret
doctrine, and unbidden witnesses of the rites, were punished capitally
or with lifelong banishment. In the year 411 B. C. the poet Diagoras of
Melos, who threw a figure of Herakles into fire, to put the hero to his
thirteenth labor, and who had betrayed the mysteries, was banished for
his irreligion. Even after the death of Hellenic liberty the Roman
emperors took an interest in maintaining the Eleusinian sanctuaries.
Hadrian sought and obtained the initiation, Antoninus erected edifices
at Eleusis, nay, some of the early Christian emperors, as Constantius
II. and Jovian, in their decrees forbidding nocturnal festivals made an
exception of the Eleusinia; and after the destruction of the sacred
buildings, the rites seem to have been still practiced.

The sum of all that is known of the doctrine taught at Eleusis is as
follows: The myth underlying these mysteries was the rape, by Pluto, of
Persephone, daughter of Demeter. Pluto, god of the netherworld in the
popular belief, lord of the abode of the damned, in other terms, the
personification of the sun that goes down in the west, hence of the sun
of the nighttime, or of the Wintertime, carries off Persephone
(personification of the world of plants), as she is plucking flowers
(for as the cold season comes on the flowers wither and die), and takes
her with him to the realm of shades, where she occupies the throne with
him. But her mother Demeter, being, as goddess of the earth, the mother
of the plant-world, and so too protectress of husbandry, wanders about
lamenting, for indeed the earth loses its adornments, its loveliest
features, in Winter. But at last the gods take pity on the hapless
wanderer and bring about an agreement between her and Pluto, whereby
Persephone is permitted to live in the upperworld in Summer, returning
to the netherworld for Winter: here is signified the fecundity of the
soil, and also the resurrection of man after his body has been dropped
like a grain of corn in the earth. The union of Persephone with Bacchus,
i. e., with the sun-god whose work is to promote fruitfulness, is an
idea special to the mysteries, and means the union of humanity with
godhead, the consummation aimed at in the mystic rites. Hence in all
probability the central teaching of the mysteries was Personal
Immortality, analogue of the return of the bloom to plants in Spring.

Now the festivals at Eleusis have reference to this myth. Of these
festivals there were two, the Lesser Eleusinia in Spring (the month
Anthesterion, March), when the ravished one came up out of the
netherworld into the sunlight; these festivals were observed at Agrae;
and the Greater Eleusinia in Autumn (the month Boedromion, October),
when she must follow her sullen spouse again to Hades; they were
observed at Athens and Eleusis. There was a preliminary celebration at
Athens, and at Eleusis the high celebration. The preliminary solemnity
lasted six days, Boedromion 15th to 20th. On the first day Initiates
from every region wherever the Greek language was heard and Grecian
hearts beat for the gods, assembled in the Poecile at Athens and there
heard the order of the exercises proclaimed by the Hierophant, after his
aides had first in a loud voice bidden the bloodguilty to depart. On the
second day the mystae were summoned to go down to the seashore and to
perform in the sacred brine the act of purification, requisite for a
worthy observance of the solemnity. The remaining days were spent in
performing the prescribed sacrifices, sharing in the sacrificial
banquets, and making the customary solemn processions. On the sixth day
came the grand Iacchus Procession, numbering thousands of mystae, of
both sexes; these, issuing from the Sacred Gate, wended along the Sacred
Road to Eleusis. They wore crowns of parsley and myrtle, and in their
hands carried ears of corn, implements of husbandry and torches; for
though the procession set out betimes it moved slowly, and reached the
destination late, to celebrate the festival in the hallowed night.
Iacchus himself was believed to be the leader of the procession, which
was headed by his image in the form of a babe with costly toys and
cradle. The line of march lay along the brink of the sea over the same
flowery fields and grassy meadows of the Thriasian plains, which had
been the scene of the rape of Persephone. The route was fourteen miles
long, but to the participants in their festive mood it was short, and
besides they made frequent halts at the various sanctuaries on the way,
practicing mystic rites and offering sacrifices. The rude wild chorus of
the Hymn to Iacchus resounded, with intervals of animated dances and
flute-playing, and frequent shouts of Io, Iacchus, hail! But as we learn
from the “Frogs” of Aristophanes, the processionists meanwhile indulged
freely in merriment, chaffing their fellows, and making love to the
women and girls. It was customary for women to make the journey in wains
till a demagogue in the time of Demosthenes procured the abolition of
this “privilege of the rich.”

In the evening of the first day at Eleusis the mystae in common drank of
the sacred potion Kykeon, by which Demeter was comforted at Eleusis
during her wandering. It was a decoction of barley, wine, and grated
cheese; to these afterward were added, one by one, honey, milk, certain
herbs, salt, and onions. During the three succeeding nights the
performing of the mystic rites and the initiations took place, the
principal feature being the torch-processions representing Demeter’s
search for Persephone: during the day the Initiates seem to have fasted.
After the initiations the festival was transformed into a scene of
merriment and gymnastic competition. Probably the mystae returned to
Athens processionally, and there the report on the festival was made to
the Boule, whose non-initiated members had first to retire.

It was at these festivals that the rites of initiation into the
Eleusinian mysteries were performed. Initiation was in two degrees,
viz., that of the Lesser, and that of the Greater mysteries. Initiation
into the Lesser mysteries took place during the preliminary festival,
and that into the Greater mysteries either at the greater festival next
ensuing or at the greater festival of a subsequent year. The Initiates
of the Lesser mysteries were called Mystae, those of the Greater
mysteries, Epoptae (those who have seen). It is probable that at both of
the annual festivals the mystae took part only in the external
ceremonies, and that only the Epoptae (or adepts) were admitted into the
Sacred House at Eleusis, or inducted into the occult meaning of the
festivals and ceremonies: this we infer from the exceedingly large
number of the mystae.

The one who wished to be admitted to the mysteries had to apply to an
initiated citizen of Athens, who by appointment of the authorities
served as mediator between him and the priests: hence he was called
Mystagogos, guide or sponsor of the postulant. As a rule the postulant
was required to be a Hellene. Foreigners were admitted only when they
were men of distinction, such, for example, as the Scythian philosopher
Anacharsis. After the conquest of Greece by the Romans, Roman citizens
stood on equality with Hellenes. There was no discrimination on the
ground of sex. But no one stained with bloodguiltiness could be
admitted.

Those who came up for admission to the degree of Epoptes, and who, as we
suppose, had never entered the “Mystic House,” were left to wander
through its mazes, in profound darkness, meeting toils and hindrances
and dangers. Then followed rites in which the courage of the candidates
was subjected to the severest tests, so as to fill them with “fear and
trembling and dread amaze.” It is very probable that the terrors of the
test were borrowed from the Grecian ideas of the netherworld. But after
the darkness came brightness, after Tartarus Elysium, the Field of the
Blest. The epoptes was suddenly gladdened by a miraculous light; smiling
plains and meadows invited his footsteps, whence we must infer that the
Mystic House was furnished forth with most ingenious scenic mechanisms,
as trapdoors, magic lanterns, and other optical contrivances. Celestial
voices and harmonies were heard, charming dances were executed, eye and
ear were flattered by a display of the uttermost resources of Grecian
art; and last came the most impressive scene of all, when the hierophant
threw open the door of the inmost shrine of Demeter, bade the epoptae
enter in, withdrew the veils from the images of the gods (whose true
meaning was thus made known), and showed godhead in its most radiant
splendor.

That the Initiates of the mysteries regarded their chances in the
netherworld as better than those of the profane we learn not only from
the sarcastic Aristophanes, who in the “Frogs” scores the mystae as in
myrtle groves they revel amid fluting and dancing, while the profane
wander in darkness and mire, lapping water like dogs; but the
serious-minded Sophocles tells us the same thing in a fragment quoted by
Plutarch: “O, thrice blest the mortals who have witnessed these solemn
rites, when they go down to Hades: for them alone is there life in the
netherworld; for all others bootless affliction and misery.”


                    5. THE MYSTERIES OF SAMOTHRACE.

Next after the Eleusinia, the most ancient and renowned of the Grecian
mysteries were those of the Cabiri in the island of Samothrace. Who the
Kabeiroi were—men, or intermediate beings half human, half divine, also
how many they were, no satisfactory conclusion has yet been reached on
these points. But they date from very high antiquity, before the
evolution of the several Grecian deities. In Egypt, according to
Herodotus (III., 37), they were “worshiped as sons of Hephaestus (he
means Ptah, god of Memphis); and were, like their father, figured in the
shrine as Pygmies.” That in the language of Phoenicia Kabirim means “the
great, the mighty ones,” is of no consequence, for here “great” is not
used in the sense of bodily largeness. Neither is it any objection that
in Greece the Kabeiroi are regarded as beings subordinate to the gods:
for the earlier gods ever do take second place when new gods get
footing. In early Egyptian mythology and religion the Cabiri were
personifications of the stars; and the mysteries of Samothrace were
originally an astromythology, though in time their astral significations
were forgotten. From a remark of Herodotus (II., 51) that the Athenians
got from the Pelasgians inhabiting the island of Samothrace their custom
of figuring Hermes with the Phallus (and everyone who has acquaintance
with the secret cult of the Cabiri knows what that means), we are led to
infer that in the Cabiric mysteries the reproductive forces of nature
played an important part: the symbol of those forces, the Phallus, was
employed by the nations of the East and from them passed to the Greeks,
who originally had no leaning toward such obscene imaginings. The same
inference is suggested by Juvenal’s remark that in love affairs it was
the fashion to swear by the Cabiri. For initiation into the Samothracian
mysteries the novice was required to submit to a purification by fire
and to fumigation, and to make a sort of confession. Plutarch tells of a
Spartan who at his initiation inquired of the priest whether he should
confess his sins to him or to the gods; and on the priest replying, “To
the gods.” “Then,” said the penitent, “give way, I will tell it to the
godhead alone.” Men, women, even children were initiated, and the
professed received a purple band, which they wore around the body, in
the assurance that by this means they would be safe against perils by
sea.

The Greeks used to tell of their fabled heroes, Orpheus, Agamemnon,
Odysseus, etc., that they were Initiates of these mysteries; and Philip
II. of Macedon and his queen Olympias, parents of Alexander the Great,
underwent this initiation. There were Cabirian mysteries also in several
other Grecian islands, and in several places on the continent, both in
Greece and in Asia Minor.


                       6. THE MYSTERIES OF CRETE.

In the island of Crete were celebrated the mysteries of Zeus. According
to the myth, the father of the gods and lord of all the world, to foil
the designs of his father Cronos, who had devoured all his other
children, was, while yet a child, taken by his mother Rhea to that
island for refuge, and there guarded in a grotto of Mt. Ida and
nourished with milk and honey by the people, who meanwhile, by dealing
blows on each other’s shields, kept up such a din as drowned the wailing
of the babe. In Crete was also shown a sepulchre of Zeus. Regarding the
Cretan mysteries we know this only, that in the Springtime the birth of
the god was commemorated at the grotto and his death at the sepulchre,
and that the while the young people (who represented the Curetae), in
armor, with dance and song and with loud beating of cymbals and drums,
enacted the story of the childhood of Zeus.


                            7. THE DIONYSIA.

An ancient national cult among the Hellenes, into which a mystic element
was imported from without, was the worship of Dionysos or Bacchus, i.
e., of the sun as promoting the growth of the vine: its end was plainly
to glorify the physical world, the material world, in all its
manifestations of life and force. Hence the Bacchus cult is one
predominantly materialistic, addressed to the sense of bodily pleasure,
the appetite for food and the sexual desire; and yet, inasmuch as
viticulture, like agriculture, is one of the factors of civilization,
and as the Drama had its origin in these Dionysiac festivals, it cannot
be denied that for many elements of our intellectual and spiritual
culture we are indebted to this cult. Of the festivals of Dionysos some
belonged exclusively to the popular religion, but others were connected
with mysteries. Those of the former class had their chief seat in
Attica, the others elsewhere. Of these non-mystic festivals of Dionysos
in Attica there were seven, occurring in different months of the year,
from the season of the vintage in Autumn till toward Spring, or while
the new wine was in fermentation; and some of these festivals were held
in the country, others in the city. On such occasions gymnastic sports
of a ludicrous sort were carried on, as dancing on one leg, leaping on a
leathern bag blown up with air and greased with oil outside, and trying
to maintain equilibrium, etc. At the head of a procession composed of
men and women of all ranks and degrees were borne the sacrificial
implements, then followed the victim, a he-goat, and soon came the image
of the Phallus, borne aloft with great pomp. So little did the Greeks
possess of our peculiar sense of shame that they looked on this symbol
as something entirely proper, not scrupling even to sing satirical
verses about it. After the sacrifice came jesting, banter, travesty, and
with travesty pantomime, in which was enacted the history of the god,
including of course his fabled adventures. The stage had its rise in
such festivals as these. The Spring festival, held in the month
Anthesterion (month of flowers) was kept with special solemnity. It
marked the time when the wine was racked off into the earthen pots. It
was at this festival that the Basilissa (wife of the Basileus),
accompanied by fourteen other women, entered the holy of holies of the
ancient temple of Dionysos (at all other times women were forbidden to
enter it), and there made a secret offering with mystic rites and vows.

But we have the genuine “mysterium” in the Dionysia Trietera, or
triennial festival of Dionysos. Festivals of this class seem to have
originated in Thrace, and hence among a people of Pelasgian stock. The
spirit of the Thracians, which was naturally of a gloomy cast, but when
their slumbering passions were awakened became wildly enthusiastic,
seemed in these festivals, or rather these transports of moral frenzy,
to pass into the persons of the lighthearted and selfcontrolled
Hellenes. The mad extravaganza of this phenomenon in the history of man
and his ways is seen in the Grecian hero-myth, which tells of the great
singer Orpheus and Pentheus, king of Thebes, being torn limb from limb
by the furious Maenads at festivals of Bacchus, the former because after
the death of his beloved Eurydice he never more would hear of woman’s
love, and the latter because he had spied on the festivals. For these
festivals were observed by women exclusively, who, drunken with wine,
knew no restraints of reason or humanity: they were called maenades
(madwomen) or Bacchae, and their festivals Orgia (orgies). The orgies
were conducted on mountain sides or in mountain gorges at night under
the light of torches, the fair participants, clothed in fawnskins, armed
with the thyrsus wreathed with ivy and vine leaves, with hair
disheveled, and, as the story goes, snakes tangled with its locks, or
held in the bacchantes’ hands. This festival, which occurred in the mild
midwinter of Hellas, the time of shortest days and longest nights,
continued over several days, during which the maenads, shunning all
association with the male sex, sacrificed, drank, danced, jubilated,
made noise with the double-pipe and the brazen tymbal, nay, as the
(manifestly improbable) story runs, with their own hands tore asunder
the bull, symbol of the god, and destined to the sacrifice, and gloated
over the victim’s bellowing for pain. This feat was to show forth the
death of Zagreus, one of the forms under which Dionysos appeared, and in
which he was torn asunder by the Titans because he had been chosen by
Zeus for his successor as ruler of the universe. The flesh of the bull
was torn in shreds with the teeth by the maenads and devoured raw. Then
the raving Bacchae invented a fable about the death of their god, and
how he was lost and how he must be found again. But all the anxious
searching was vain, and hope was centered in the finding again of the
all-quickening Springtide. The observance of the Dionysia was not marked
with these extravagances everywhere: in Attica such excesses were never
seen. But Athenian women would attend the secret festival on Parnassus
near Delphi, heedless of the mantle of snow on the summit.


                       8. THE ROMAN BACCHANALIA.

The worst disorders of Bacchus worship, as practiced in Greece, would
seem to have been equaled, or even surpassed, in the Roman Commonwealth.
The historian Livy (xxxix., 8–20) compares the introduction of the cult
into the city and its rapid spread to a visitation of plague. According
to Livy the cult was brought to Rome from Etruria. In its Etruscan and
Roman form the worship of Bacchus was simply debauchery, under the
thinnest possible cloak of religion. The festivals or orgies were at
first observed by women; but a certain priestess of Bacchus, by command
of the god, introduced the innovation of admitting men, and instead of
three Bacchic festivals a year, instituted five festivals for each
month; and whereas in Etruria the rites had been practiced in the day
time, they now began to be held at night. From considerations of
prudence the abominations of the Bacchanalia were guarded from public
view by a hedge of ceremonial, and postulants for admission were
required to practice for several days the strictest continence. But the
term of probation being over, and the postulant admitted to the company
of the Bacchanals, he or she found themselves surrounded by all
conceivable incitements to the gratification of lust, in every way that
the depraved instincts of man or woman had ever before, or perhaps has
ever since contrived. According to Livy the Initiates of these mysteries
numbered several thousand persons in the city, many of them belonging to
the most distinguished families. In addition to the abominations of
their secret meetings the Initiates were charged with conspiring against
the commonwealth, with forgery of last testaments, with poisonings and
assassinations, with the most revolting rapes. In the year 186 B. C. the
Consul Spurius Postumius Albinus, having privately made inquiries into
the doings of the sect, resolved to employ all the resources of the
state for its suppression. The circumstances which led to this
resolution were as follows: A youth of noble birth, Publius Aebutius,
whose father was dead, was the ward of his stepfather, Titus Sempronius
Rutilus. Now Sempronius had mismanaged the estate of Aebutius, and was
unable to give an account of his guardianship, and therefore wished
either to have the youth put out of the way, or to get him under his
power. The easiest way was by debauching him in the Bacchanalia.
Aebutius’s mother, devoted to her husband, pretended to the son that
during his illness she had made vow to the gods to consecrate him to
Bacchus in the event of recovery. Aebutius, nothing suspecting, told of
this to one Hispala, a damsel of questionable reputation, with whom he
had for some time been very intimate; but she entreated him for all the
gods’ sake not to have anything to do with the Bacchanalia: that she
herself, as maid, had been initiated with her mistress, and knew what
shocking deeds were done in those assemblies. Having promised her that
he would not seek initiation, he made his resolution known to his
parents, and was by them turned out of their house. Aebutius made
complaint to his aunt Aebutia, and by her advice to the Consul
Postumius. The Consul summoned Hispala to his presence, and from her,
not without difficulty, for she feared the vengeance of the sect,
learned what she knew of the proceedings at the secret assemblies. Then
he brought the matter before the Senate, who gave to him and his
colleague, Quintus Marcius Philippus, full powers for the suppression of
the evil. Rewards were offered for trustworthy testimony, measures were
taken to prevent the escape of guilty ones, and there were numerous
arrests. Seven thousand persons in all were implicated, and all Italy
awaited the outcome of the prosecution intently and with alarm. The
ringleaders and a multitude of their accomplices were put to death,
others were condemned to imprisonment or were exiled. Aebutius and
Hispala received a large money reward; and Hispala furthermore was
admitted to all the rights and privileges of a Roman-born freewoman,
without prejudice from her previous disreputable career. A decree of the
Senate forbade forever the holding of the Bacchanalia in Rome or in
Italy. The decree provided that if any one should consider such rites
obligatory and necessary, or should think that he could not omit them
without incurring the guilt of irreligion, he must lay the case before
the Praetor Urbanus, and the Praetor must consult the Senate. If leave
were granted in a senate having not less than one hundred members
present, he (the person desiring to practice the worship of the god)
might perform the rites, provided that not more than five persons were
present at them, and that there was no common fund, nor any master of
the ceremonies, or priest. All places sacred to Bacchus worship were
ordered to be destroyed, “except there be here or there an ancient altar
or consecrated image” of the god. But the prohibition of the Bacchanalia
could not be kept in force perpetually. The abuses of the Bacchus cult
went on unchecked outside of Italy, and by degrees sprung up again even
on Italian ground, till they reached the pitch of absolute shamelessness
in imperial times, as when the notorious Messalina, and other imperial
strumpets, celebrated the most shocking orgies in the very palace.


                  9. DEBASED MYSTERIES FROM THE EAST.

Near akin to the Dionysos cult, in many points coinciding with it, as
well as with one another, and also, like the depraved forms of that
cult, surreptitiously introduced from the Orient into Greece and then
into Rome, we have the mysteries of the mother of the gods Rhea or
Cybele, those of Mithras, and those of Sabazios—cults and deities that
were finally grouped together by the Orphic sect, of which anon.

Rhea was sister and spouse of Cronos and mother of the king of the gods,
Zeus, whom she took to Crete, as we have already seen, to save him from
his father’s violence. She is the Earth deified, like her mother Gaea,
and is therefore often confounded with other goddesses answering to the
same element, specially with the earth-goddess Kybele (Cybele), named
after Mt. Kybelos or Kybela in Phrygia, who, according to Phrygian myth,
when exposed by her father, King Maeon, was suckled by panthers and
brought up by herdsmen, and afterward fell in love with the youth Attis
(afterward Papas, both meaning “father”), of whom she exacted a vow of
chastity as her priest. Attis having broken his vow for the sake of a
lovely nymph, the goddess in her wrath deprived him of reason, and in
his frenzy he castrated himself. The goddess thereupon ordained that in
future all her priests should be eunuchs. There are countless other
stories told of Attis and Cybele, but they nearly all agree in telling
that Attis with manhood lost life also, and that Cybele, frenzied by
grief, thereafter roamed about disconsolate and despairing. Like
Dionysos, she was always followed by a long human and animal retinue
(the moon with the starry host!), and rode in a wain drawn by lions, a
mural crown circling her veiled head; while Attis was always represented
as an ecstatically sentimental youth beneath a tree, with the Phrygian
cap on his head and wearing white bag trousers. In Phrygia Cybele was
worshiped under the form of a simple stone. The scene of her feats and
sufferances was laid in gorgeous wildernesses, in fragrant groves, among
the hillsides and glades known to the shepherd and the hunter. As in
Dionysos we see the wild abandon of a jovial spirit, so in Cybele we
have the recklessness of a soul weary of life; hence at her festivals
all centred in the loss of Attis, and a pine tree was felled, because
his catastrophe took place under a tree of that species. All this was
accompanied by a hubbub of wild music, and the winding of horns on the
second day announced the resurrection of Attis. In the ecstasy of joy
the participants were seized by a wild frenzy. With shouts and cries,
their long locks disheveled, and in their hands bearing torches, the
priests danced and capered like madmen, roaming over hill and dale,
mutilating themselves, even emasculating themselves (as the myth
required), and bearing about, instead of the figure of the Phallus, the
proofs of their compliance with the precept of the goddess. The cult of
Cybele was for the first time formally organized as a mystic society in
Rome, but the orgiast frenzy clung to it at all times. The processions
did not move with measured steps and in orderly ranks, as those of other
cults, but the Initiates ran in confused troops, shouting their
religious songs, through hamlets and towns, armed with curved blades,
tokens of castration. At Rome the priests of Cybele were called Galli,
that is, cocks. In the time of the emperors purifications in the blood
of bulls and rams were introduced, apparently in honor of the
Springtide, when the sun enters the constellations Taurus and Aries, and
the vegetable powers of nature reappear. That is the theme of all the
ancient mysteries, and indeed of all mysticism from the earliest times
to this day. In all of them the vicissitudes of the vegetal world, its
sickening, decline, and death in the Fall, its new-birth and
resurrection in the Spring, are allegorized into the sufferances, the
death and the resurrection of a god. Out of this nature-cult are little
by little developed the feeling of alienation of man from God, the quest
for the god, the finding of him, and the consequent reunion, with the
result of strengthening the assurance of the soul’s immortality. The
excess of sensual delight found in the Bacchanalia, and the extreme
renunciation of delights by the castrate ministers of Cybele, are only
variations of one same theory of human life.

Now, as this suffering godhead—which was the prime inspiration of all
these sensualists and adventurers—was an importation from Thrace in the
form of Zagreus-Dionysos, and from Phrygia as Attis, so was Mithras an
importation from Persia. Among the ancient Persians Mithras was the
light, conceived as a personality, and hence was the highest
manifestation of the good god Ormuzd, while the darkness represented
Ahriman, the evil god. Hence the worship of Mithras is worship of the
light, and, therefore is the purest cult that heathendom could imagine;
in the later times of the Persian empire Mithras worship was combined
with sun-worship, and Mithras, as sun-god, found a place in the religion
of European peoples. In those later times also came belief in a female
deity called Mithra: but Mithra was unknown to the primitive Persians,
and the name was a transformation of the Babylonian Mylitta, the
moon-goddess. Of the existence of secret cults among the Persians we
know nothing whatever, hence nothing about any mysteries sacred to
Mithras. To the Greeks Mithras was unknown, but in the latter days of
the Roman empire, among many mysteries those of Mithras made their
appearance and even gained great pre-eminence, as is proved by numerous
monuments still extant. These monuments all consist of representations
in stone of a young man in a cave, wearing the Phrygian cap, in the act
of slaying with a dagger a bull; all around are figures of men and
animals, all symbolical of constellations, as the scorpion, dog,
serpent, etc. The groups have been variously interpreted, but the most
probable view is that the youth stands for the sun-god, who, on subduing
Taurus (in May), begins to develop his highest power.

The mysteries of Mithras, like their symbolic representation in the
monuments, were celebrated in grottoes, and had for their original end
worship of light and of the sun, and the glorifying of the sun’s victory
over the darkness; but this lofty idea gave way, in these as in other
mysteries, to vain reveries and subtilities; and in the corrupt age of
the Roman emperors it had, in all probability, some very ugly
developments, such as were seen in the Bacchanalia. The rites of
initiation were more elaborate than in the Grecian mysteries. The
postulants were subjected to a long series of probationary tests—eighty
in all, it is supposed—which grew more and more severe till they became
actually dangerous to life. Among the initiatory rites the principal
ones were a baptism and the drinking of a potion of meal and water.
Admission to the highest secrets was reached through several degrees,
probably seven, each having its special ritual and its special
doctrines. At times the Initiates were required to fast, and those of
the highest degree were vowed to celibacy. Such abstinences were all
unknown to the ancient Persians; on the other hand human sacrifices came
in with Mithraism from the East, and, despite the decrees of the Emperor
Hadrian, such sacrifices were offered in the Mithras cult. Commodus with
his own hand immolated a man to Mithras, and his successors, in
particular the monster Heliogabalus, carried the abomination farther,
and made of the pure god of light a bloodthirsty Moloch. Nay, after the
empire had been christianized, Julian the apostate consecrated in
Constantinople a sanctuary to Mithras. But after the death of Julian the
cult was forbidden in the empire (A. D. 378) and the grotto of Mithras
at Rome destroyed. Coins were struck in honor of Mithras, and he was
honored with public inscriptions in the words, Soli Invicto (to the
unconquered sun); a festival also was instituted in his honor, called
the Natal Day of the Unconquered Sun: it fell on December 25th and was
publicly observed: the same day was in Persia New Year’s. In the
monuments already mentioned, which commemorate the worship of Mithras,
are seen inscribed alongside the neck of the bull the words “Nama
Sebesio,” supposed by some to be a mixture of Sanskrit and Persian, and
to signify Worship to the Pure; but in these words we have an allusion
to a new god and his cult. In the latter Graeco-Roman time, when the
mystery craze possessed all minds, a combination of Zagreus, Attis, and
Mithras was made, and the result was dubbed Sabazius. The name Sabazius
is given by sundry writers to various gods and sons of gods, and the
word comes probably from the Greek verb Sabazein (to smash, break to
pieces), indicating the wild disorder of this cult. Diodorus gives this
name to the inventor of the use of oxen in ploughing, other authors
confound Sabazius, as discoverer of the vine, with Bacchus. There
existed in Greece a public and a secret cult of Sabazius, both
resembling the Bacchic cult, with ludicrous dances, uproarious singing,
and loud thumping of cymbals and drums. The orator Aeschines, rival of
Demosthenes, was an enthusiastic Sabazist. At initiation into the
Sabazian mysteries the postulant had snakes dropped into his bosom, was
robed in fawnskin, his face daubed with clay, then washed in token of a
mystic purification; he was now to exclaim: From evil I am escaped and
have found the better. There was much hocuspocus and absurd jugglery
withal, but the real object was to give opportunity to Initiates of both
sexes to indulge in the most shameless gluttony and lewdness. The
priests of this cult were the most impudent of mendicants. Aristophanes
exhausted on Sabazius, the “trumpery god,” all the resources of his
caustic sarcasm.

And thus in time, as Grecian philosophy began to undermine the thrones
of the Olympian gods, and to banish the phantoms of the netherworld, and
the educated people to look on the fair forms of the world of gods as
fictions of imagination; simultaneously the mysteries began to be stript
of the glory of a heavenly origin, and it was seen that their rites were
not only of the earth earthy, but as time went on, that they were become
mischievous: yet the Initiates, lost to all shame and all moral sense,
persisted nevertheless in their sacred hypocrisy, till heathendom as a
whole had passed out of the bloody, hideous night of the gods.




                             _PART THIRD._
        _The Pythagorean League and Other Secret Associations_.


                             1. PYTHAGORAS.

The mysteries so far considered had for their foundation the worship of
the gods. They were accessible only to the initiated; but candidates for
admission were not carefully selected; and in Athens anyone of fair
repute was eligible for initiation into the Eleusinia. Nor do we discern
in the mysteries any “end” aimed at—any idea to be realized, any thought
to be embodied in action. From all that we can learn with certainty
regarding the mysteries, their object was either simply to illustrate or
interpret certain ideas (such as we have already characterized) by means
of elaborate ceremonies; or—in their state of decay and degeneration—to
minister to unbridled sensuality. For this reason we cannot regard the
mysteries we have been studying as true “secret societies,” for the
distinctive note of such societies is that they make a special selection
of their members, and have a specific aim. The earliest historic
instance of such a secret society is afforded by the Pythagorean League.

The great philosopher Pythagoras was a sort of Grecian Moses or Jesus, a
Messiah to whom were ascribed supreme wisdom, far-reaching plans, ideas
of worldwide reform; who proclaimed new ideas, quite unknown in the
previous history of his nation, and preached a new system of nature and
of life; who gathered around him disciples that swore in his words and
pursued peculiar ends disconnected from the interests of this world; who
on that account was, with his disciples, persecuted, prisoned, and
martyred for his principles, by a world which deemed itself outraged;
and whose history, because of its extraordinary character, became deeply
incrusted with fable and fiction, till at last there was left only a
figure in which, if not quite impossible, it is certainly difficult, to
decide how far it conforms to the truth.

Pythagoras was born in the island of Samos B. C. 580, or, according to
some authorities, 569. He is represented as of distinguished presence
and imposing stature. That he possessed uncommon intellectual power is
shown by his scientific discoveries and by his wonderfully organized
discipleship. Even in his youthful years, it is related, he busied
himself with his favorite sciences, mathematics and music, the mutual
relations of which and their mutual influence he is, in fact, believed
to have discovered. His years of study ended—of them we have no definite
knowledge—his years of travel followed. And whither should a man in his
day, athirst for wisdom, direct his steps if not to the land of wonders
on the Nile, where the veiled image at Sais sat enthroned, and where the
mystic silence of the priests suggested to the visitant treasures of
knowledge hidden in their temples? Whether the counsel to visit Egypt
came from Thales, first of Grecian philosophers to seek the land of
Nile—tradition, which gives the glamour to everything, likes to bring
renowned men together; whether Polycrates, tyrannos of Samos, commended
him to his friend the Pharao Amasis—of this we have no certainty, though
the thing is not improbable, for the chronology is consistent,
especially when we bear in mind the discrepancies between authors as to
the year of Pythagoras’s birth: at all events, Pythagoras voyaged to
Egypt. The serious difficulties he met with on the part of the priests
of Osiris, then not so complaisant as they afterward became, we have
described already when giving account of the Egyptian mysteries. By hook
or by crook he obtained, whether at Thebes, Heliopolis, or elsewhere, we
know not, indoctrination in the theology of the One God. But of what
avail could that be to him? His countrymen had already fashioned their
own ideas of the divine nature. They based their theology on nature and
spiritualized nature: the Greeks knew nothing of an impassable gulf
yawning between god and world; for them these two were bound together
and pervaded each other: to such a people one could not preach an
“architect of the universe.” Pythagoras, therefore, fain would
communicate to the Greeks of the Egyptian wisdom whatever seemed adapted
to their use; and he the more willingly complied with the Initiate’s
oath to observe lifelong silence regarding what he had seen and heard in
the temples, as his countrymen would not have understood even a
monotheism specially designed for them. For the Greeks the intimate
association between god and universe was not only an idea, it was flesh
of their flesh, bone of their bones: it was gloriously immortalized in
the imperishable masterworks of their architecture and sculpture, and
surely Grecian sculptors must not go to school in Egypt to learn how to
carve cows’ horns and hawks’ heads. Nevertheless, the doctrine of the
one god must necessarily have impressed the mind of Pythagoras deeply:
he must have recognized therein a profound philosophy, though it may not
have satisfied him completely; and hence it was his task, as it was the
task of Plato and of all other Greeks initiated in the Egyptian
mysteries, to expound the doctrine of the one god according to Grecian
ideas—to couple Oriental wisdom with Grecian fancy.

The traditional story represents Pythagoras as tarrying in Egypt when
the Persian king Cambyses conquered the country, and tells how that
tyrant had the Grecian philosopher deported, with other captives, to
Babylon, where Pythagoras became acquainted with Zoroaster, and to his
knowledge of the Egyptian wisdom now added a mastery of the wisdom of
the Persians. Pythagoras was undoubtedly contemporary with Cambyses; but
the time of Zoroaster is so undecided that the story must be regarded as
fiction.

When he returned to his native Samos, purposing to set up as a master,
he found to his chagrin that independent science is a plant that does
not thrive under tyranny, and, compelled by force of circumstances to
change his abode, he settled in Magna Graecia—Southern Italy. On the
eastern coast, in what became afterward Calabria, were two Achaean
cities, Sybaris and Crotona. Pythagoras intended at first to make his
home in Sybaris, but Sybaris could be no congenial home for such a
philosopher. Crotona afforded a more promising field for his work, and
there the labors of Pythagoras before long were abundantly rewarded. The
Greeks ever were eager for novelties (novarum rerum cupidi), and whoever
brought anything new was welcome. As yet, philosophy was a thing unknown
among the Crotoniats; therefore they received its apostle with gladness
and enthusiasm. Pythagoras commenced by giving public lectures in the
council hall; as these awakened more and more interest every day, the
philosopher was employed by the authorities to give counsel to the
citizens; he then established a school, thus adding to his public
functions the duties of a private instructor. Pythagoras used three
agencies in his work, viz., his Doctrine, his School, and the League
instituted by him.

The Doctrine of Pythagoras holds a distinct place among the philosophic
systems of the Greeks. With regard to the opposition existing between
the spiritual and the physical, and the uncertainty and obscurity that
reigns as to the relations between them and the true constitution of
each, the doctrine solves all difficulties by the theory that Number is
at once the form and the substance of all things. All things consist of
Numbers, corporeal elements as well as spiritual (mental, or
intellectual) forces, and henceforth Pythagoras’s philosophy became
mathematics. But the silly tricks with numbers that occupied the
ingenuity of later Pythagoreans possess no interest for us. It is
probable that the master contented himself with the undeniable fact that
the matter and essence of things rest on mathematical relations—a view
of great profundity, considering the age in which the philosopher lived.
To Pythagoras and his school are credited the distinction of numbers
into even and odd, the decimal numeration, square and cubic numbers, as
also the famous Pythagorean theorem, the triumph of geometry.

Pythagoras brought music into closest relation with mathematics. As in
numbers he recognized the most perfect “harmony,” so he must needs
regard harmony of sounds as a necessary part of the harmony of numbers.
By this association he became the discoverer of our present scale of
seven musical notes—the octave. But his idea of harmony found most
perfect embodiment in the universal creation, and in astronomy he was
the first to surmise that the earth does not stand still, but has a
revolution around a centre; hence, that it is not the principal
existence in the universal frame of things, that all things do not exist
for its sake, that Earth is not twin sister of the Heavens. True,
Pythagoras had no idea, nor could have in the then existing lack of
astronomical instruments, how the heavenly bodies were related: that was
the discovery of Copernicus and Kepler. He took for the mid-point of the
universe a “central fire” out of which were formed all the heavenly
bodies—this the seat of the power that sustains the world, the centre of
gravity of all things. Around this central fire revolve the “ten”
heavenly bodies—farthest off the heaven of the fixed stars, then the
five planets known to antiquity, then the sun, moon, earth, and lastly
the “counter-earth”, which revolves between the earth and the central
fire. Revolving along with the earth, the counter-earth is always
interposed between the earth and the central fire: light comes to the
earth only indirectly, by reflection from the sun. When the earth is on
the same side of the central fire as the sun we have day; when it is on
the other side, night. Thus, Pythagoras may be said to have surmised a
central sun, though his theory did not contemplate the actual sun as
that centre. He was also the first to explain the vicissitudes of the
seasons by the obliquity of the earth’s axis to the ecliptic. Further,
he discovered the identity of the morning and evening star. His school
held the moon to be the home of fairer and larger plants, animals, and
human creatures, than those of earth. In accordance with his doctrine of
harmony he ventured to express the bold idea that the heavenly bodies by
their movement produce tones which together constitute a perfectly
harmonious music—the music of the spheres. We do not hear this harmony,
being so wonted to it.

Nor did he fail to apply to the soul of man this doctrine of harmony. By
harmony the opposition between reason and passion was to be reconciled.
But as this consummation is never to be achieved as long as soul and
body are tied together, the sage of Samos regarded this union as a
measure of probation, destined to endure till man shall have made
himself worthy of liberation from the same; and when he fails of this
during his span of life, then his soul must migrate through the bodies
of other men and animals till it shall become worthy of leading, in a
higher region of light, an incorporeal life of purity and perfection.
His disciples, furthermore, cherished the fantastic idea that the master
was able to recognize in another body the man whose soul had
transmigrated into it. That Pythagoras himself ever pretended or
believed that he himself was in his fifth metempsychosis, or that he was
son of Apollo, or that he had a golden hip, or a golden thigh, are
either ridiculous extravaganzas of imaginative disciples or the
sarcastic stories of his enemies. But noble and beautiful are the
conclusions which he draws from his doctrine regarding purity of life,
namely, the moral precepts which he laid down for the attainment of the
supreme end. They required an absolutely stainless life. Pythagoras
enforced the duty of reverence toward parents and the aged, fidelity in
friendship, strict self-examination, circumspection in all our acts,
patriotism, etc. Further, his disciples were required to be cleanly of
body and cleanly in attire; they were to abstain from all “unclean”
food, especially fleshmeat, and from intoxicating liquors, and hence to
live on bread and fruits only, but beans were an exception to this rule;
for some not fully explained reason beans were an abomination to the
Pythagoreans. And that which was unfit as food was unfit also as matter
for offerings to God: for the god our philosopher reverenced was a god
of light and purity. His clear intellect rejected polytheism, though
what his view of the unity of godhead was we know nothing save that his
faith was an eminently pure and exalted one.


                          2. THE PYTHAGOREANS.

The life of Pythagoras was devoted entirely to his School and his
League. The School was the seedfield or seminary of the League, and the
League was the practical application of the School’s teaching. Thus the
School was preparatory to the League, whose members were educated in the
School.

Pythagoras enjoyed the boundless reverence of his disciples: when they
wished to assert any proposition as indisputably true, they would say,
He himself said it (Gr., autos ephe, Lat., ipse dixit). And this
reverence for the Master increased as in time the School was changed
from an open institution to a secret one. For at first everybody, even
the most learned and most eminent of the citizens, attended the lectures
of the Philosopher. Those who were simply hearers of the lectures were
called Acusmatics (akusmatikoi). But those who were of proper age for
receiving a further education, and who had leisure to devote themselves
to learning, were afforded opportunity for pursuing higher studies under
the personal direction of Pythagoras, and were known, not as simple
Hearers, but as Students, or Mathematici. These were the nucleus of the
Pythagorean sect. This class of disciples having grown considerably in
numbers and influence, it became possible for Pythagoras, helped by the
contributions that flowed in, to erect for his academy a special
building, or, rather, group of buildings, in which he and his disciples
might live secluded from the influences of the outerworld. This
institution, called the Koinobion (coenobium, place where people live in
community) was a world in itself, and embraced all the conveniences of
plain living—gardens, groves, promenades, halls, baths, etc., so that
the student did not regret the hurlyburly of the world without.
Henceforth the Acusmatici, or Acustici, were no longer persons of all
classes and degrees, admitted to attend the lectures, but the newly
admitted pupils, who received instruction in the elements of the
sciences, and were preparing themselves for the higher studies. They had
to observe strict silence and to yield blind obedience, and were not
permitted to see the Master’s face: at the lectures a curtain screened
him from view. The advanced students were admitted behind the screen,
and hence were called esoterikoi (esoterici, insiders): those before the
curtain, exoterikoi (exoterici, outsiders). To gain admission to the
esoteric class a pupil was required to spend from two to five years in
study, and then had to undergo severe tests. If a student failed to
answer the tests he was rejected: but if he passed successfully, he was
no longer required to observe silence and to be content with listening
only: he might now see the Master face to face, and under his direction
might pursue a study chosen by himself, as philosophy, mathematics,
astronomy, music, etc. Gymnastic exercise was practiced diligently, and
was made the cornerstone of the Pythagorean therapeutic, which for the
rest was a science of dietetic.

These approved and tested students formed the core of the celebrated
League, which, in conformity with the division of the pupils in the
School, comprised Exoterics and Esoterics. The Esoteric members of the
League were, no doubt, the students admitted to the higher classes, as
well as the graduates of the school: probably the number of these never
exceeded 300. But to become an Exoteric member of the League, anyone was
qualified who was a follower of the Philosopher, and who was ready to
live according to his teaching and to spread the knowledge of the
doctrine abroad: of these there may have been several thousand. Their
mode of life was left to their discretion, while, on the contrary, the
Esoterici were bound by strict rules. They lived in the Coenobium,
always wore clothes of white linen, washed and bathed daily in cold
water, at their common board abstained from the meats and drinks
forbidden by the Master, and put in practice his doctrine. They divided
the day among their various duties, meditating, mornings, how they might
employ the hours most profitably, and evenings questioning themselves
how their good resolutions had been kept. Harmony, that foundation-idea
of the Pythagorean doctrine, was the lodestar of their lives. They
studied to be just toward all men, toward the erring strict and kindly,
faithful to friends and yokemates, to the law submissive, toward the
unfortunate charitable, temperate in their pleasures; to keep their
plighted word, and in their behavior to set a good example to all men.
The League is said to have comprised several sections, but whether the
sections were “degrees” rising one above another, or whether they were
co-ordinate branches, is not clear. We hear of Mathematici, who devoted
themselves specially to the sciences, of Theoretici, who were professors
of ethics, of Politici, concerned with government, of Sebastici, whose
province was religion. The religion of the Pythagoreans seems to have
been compounded of doctrines of the ancient popular religion of the
Greeks, of the mysteries, and of the monotheism of the Egyptian priests;
and it had a secret cult, with elaborate ceremonial of initiation, the
purpose of which, however, was to enforce the teaching of the Master.

The political principles of the Pythagoreans favored a transformation of
the Dorian oligarchism into an aristocratism of culture. Democracy they
hated. Their aim was to acquire for themselves powerful influence in the
state, to fill the public offices with their own members, and to
administer government according to their Master’s ideas. As matter of
fact, they appear to have attained these ends fully or approximately in
Crotona, Locri, Metapontum, Tarentum, and other cities of Magna Graecia.
There is no doubt that the secrets that the Pythagoreans were sworn to
keep had reference to these political aims. To bar out the uninitiated
the members are said to have had a badge, a five-pointed star
(pentagrammon, pentalpha) and to have employed a symbolic form of
speech, by means of which they concealed their secrets under cover of
apparently trivial words, or words not to be understood by outsiders.

But the League of the Sage of Crotona, after a glorious, though brief,
ascendency, had a tragic end. The cities of Magna Graecia had grown rich
by commerce, and with wealth and ease had come great corruption of
manners. In Sybaris the lower classes of citizens—artisans and
shopkeepers—rose in revolt, and five hundred patricians were banished,
their property seized by the people, and the popular leader Telys
administered the government in their stead. The exiles took refuge in
Crotona, and there, according to Grecian custom, sitting around the
altar in the agora, or market-place, implored the aid of that city, then
ruled by the Pythagoreans. Thus for two reasons the rulers of Crotona
were objects of hate to the tyrannos of Sybaris: they were the enemies
of democracy, and they were protectors of the exiled oligarchs. He,
therefore, demanded of Crotona surrender of the fugitives. The demand
having been refused (at the urgent instance of Pythagoras it is said),
war followed. A desperate battle was fought, and the Crotoniats, though
inferior in number, were victorious (510 B. C.). Sybaris fell into their
hands, and was looted without mercy, and the town leveled with the
ground: in fact, a stream was made to flow through the once magnificent
city.

This atrocious deed, which though no consequence of Pythagorean
teaching, was nevertheless a consequence of Pythagorean exclusiveness
and Pythagorean contempt for the people, had its nemesis. The democratic
spirit, so mortally offended, took an equally atrocious revenge. In
Crotona, too, as before in Sybaris, the democracy took action, and
demanded a division of the conquered Sybarite territory among all the
citizens of Crotona, and equal suffrage for all in the election of the
rulers. At the head of the democracy stood Cylon, an enemy of the
Pythagoreans. The aged Master, because of the hostility manifested
toward him personally, was obliged to flee from the scene of his great
labors. It is supposed that he died at Metapontum, hard on a hundred
years old. In Crotona the strife of parties went on. The government
unwisely rejected the demands of the democrats, and thereupon, about the
middle of the fifth century B. C., the storm burst. The rage of the
oppressed and despised people was vented first upon the Pythagoreans, a
great number of whom were assembled in the house of Milo. The house was
taken by storm, the assemblage butchered either on the spot or in
flight, and their property distributed among the people. Aristocracy was
also overthrown in Tarentum, Metapontum, and Locri. The Pythagorean
League was annihilated, and its religious and political labors
disappeared, leaving no trace.


                            3. THE ORPHICI.

The scattered fragments of the Pythagorean League attached themselves to
another association, that of the Orphici, named after the fabled singer
Orpheus. This curious association, a fantastic compound of the mysteries
and Pythagorism, is rightly credited to Onomacritus, apostle and
reformer of the Eleusinian and Dionysian mysteries, who lived in the
time of the Athenian tyrannos Pisistratus: he was high in the favor of
Pisistratus, and enjoyed much celebrity. By some of his contemporaries,
men of sense and not easily imposed on, he was suspected of palming off
his own compositions for poems of Orpheus (who never existed); but
probably he did this without intent to deceive, but simply because of
his irresistible passion for the mummery of secret societies and
mysteries. This adventurer and mystic, who understood very well the
meaning of the mysteries and the uses to which they could be turned, was
one of the first to speak out the thought hidden in them: that man was
born in sin and fallen away from God, and that he cannot be saved till
grace shall be afforded him. His doctrine was just Pietism, with this
exception, that instead of “the lord Jesus” we have here the god
Dionysos, or the Iacchos of the mysteries, or Orpheus. Such inane
babblement as this, and such doctrines as that the soul of man is
confined in the body as in a prison, that the world is for it a vale of
tears and a place of banishment, that it is pining and longing to return
to its true home, Heaven, are an offense to the joyous spirit of Greece,
an outrage against her religion of beauty, truth, and virtue, the last
blow dealt at Grecian art and science. The outcome of them was a
tedious, voluminous “Orphic literature” consisting of mythological poems
full of mysticism and sentimentality.

The Orphic societies were not, like the mysteries, great assemblages of
people in temples, but, after the Pythagorean pattern, secret schools or
clubs; and they followed, at least ostensibly, the Pythagorean rule of
life, abstaining from fleshmeat, beans, and wine; but with this they
coupled two cults in themselves incompatible, that of the ideal god
Apollo, and that of the sensual deity Dionysos. But being stript of the
semi-public and official character attaching to the mysteries, and of
the philosophic dignity of the Pythagorean sect, the Orphic societies
became simply nests of swindlers and mendicants; and vagabond priests,
Orpheotelestae, admitted to their ridiculous degrees, for a
consideration, every credulous aid marvel-gobbeting postulant; there
were even victims who had themselves with wife and children initiated
every month. Other tricksters combined the Orphic cult with the Phrygian
cult of Cybele, mother of the gods, and with that of Sabazios: these
were known as Metragyrtae (mother-beggars) or Menagyrtae (monthly
beggars). These and their like were regular mountebanks, giving out that
they had the power of curing the insane, their method being to dance and
caper around the patient to the sound of timbrels, the while
flagellating themselves: for this they took up a little collection. One
of these metragyrtae was capitally punished at Athens in the middle of
the fifth century B. C.: but the judges, seized by remorse, questioned
the oracle, and got response that in atonement they should build a
temple to the Great Mother: thereupon the followers of the dead juggler
were set free. A priestess of Sabazios, Ninus by name, was also put to
death for brewing philters: she was the one sole victim of witchcraft
trials in all antiquity. Thus did the Orphic sect in Greece degenerate
to the same low estate as the mysteries, despised by all honest and
enlightened men.

But both the mysteries and the Orphic as well as Pythagorean societies
were links in a chain of phenomena that reached all through Grecian
antiquity, indicating plainly a reaction against the popular religion,
and an effort to introduce essentially different religious views—views
which in aftertimes, in an improved form, were to triumph definitely
over the Olympian gods.


               4. MYSTERIOUS PERSONAGES OF ANCIENT TIMES.

In antiquity we are able to distinguish three religious systems, viz.,
polytheism, monotheism, mysticism. The first was a deification of
nature: and as nature manifests herself in various forces, the religion,
too, had to postulate a multitude of deities. This is the system of the
Oriental and Graeco-Roman popular religion; and in these its two
branches it is again differentiated by the fact that on the one side it
assumed a gloomy, awe-inspiring character, while on the other side it
wore a joyous aspect, inviting to mirth and pleasure. The second system
rested on a total separation of God from nature, and thus it acquired a
monotonous, one-sided character of abstruseness, without any feeling for
form and beauty: it was the system of the Egyptian priests and of the
Israelites, and in after times passed over into Mohammedanism and some
Christian sects as Unitarianism, etc. The third system also postulated
the separation of God and nature, but it was not a definitive
separation, for there was hope of a reconciliation; it consisted,
therefore, in a sense of alienation from God, and in an incessant
longing for reunion with him. This system found embodiment in the
Grecian mysteries and the Pythagoreo-Orphic societies, and later in
“positive” Christianity: it was neither absolutely polytheistic nor
absolutely monotheistic, but compact of these two systems, in that it
contemplated many gods embraced under one form, or one god manifested in
sundry forms. Even in the myths underlying the Eleusinian mysteries we
have a conversion of the gods, especially Demeter and Dionysos, into
human form and a resurrection and ascension of Persephone; an important
part was played in the same mysteries by the bread and wine employed for
religious purposes, by the purifications in water, and by the fasts
observed; in the Bacchic mysteries Orpheus, Zagreus, and others appear
as suffering and dying demigods; in the Orphic rites there is allusion
to the natural sinfulness of man, and to grace and redemption; in the
mysteries of Cybele sexual continence is commended as highly
meritorious; in the mysteries and in the Pythagorean sect, even as in
Christianity, the bodily life is regarded as an evil, an incorporeal
immortality of the soul as true bliss, stress is laid on the soul’s
delights, and on the punishment of the wicked, whereas, in polytheism
the soul after death is but a shadow; and many are the other points of
contact between those systems and Christianism, which, being of a more
general nature, have not yet been mentioned in these pages, for example,
certain mysterious and enigmatical personages who have remained hitherto
quite unnoticed, except by the learned.

Commonly schools and the books give information only about the
officially recognized Olympian gods, and perhaps the gods of sea and
netherworld; but the “Best God,” in Greek Aristaios, is passed over in
silence, just because one knows not what to make of him. This Aristaios
passed for a son of Apollo the god of light. Held apart from the
“scandalous chronicles” and naughty gossip that was in circulation
around the rest of the gods, he was represented as inventor of
sheep-husbandry, bee-keeping, the production of oil from the olive,
etc., as man’s helper in drought and aridity, practicer of leechcraft
(like his brother Aesculapius), subduer of the winds, originator of
rites, laws, and sciences. As the little vogue of his name would
indicate, he was less honored on the Grecian terra firma than in the
Hellenic islands and colonies, and there ofttimes was joined with the
father of the gods, as Zeus-Aristaios (particularly in his role of
protector of the bees), with the god of light as Aristaios-Apollon, with
the god of fertility as Aristaios-Dionysos. In the island Ceos he was
the most highly reverenced of all the gods. Thus we see in Aristaios a
conception of one almighty, allwise god, transcending all the
conceptions of polytheism, and all the gods in human form worshiped by
ancient Greece.

Now plainly Aristeas and Aristaios are one same name. Among the ancient
Greeks there was a mythical personage named Aristeas. He was Apollo’s
priest, as his paronymus was Apollo’s son. According to Herodotus (IV.
13–15) Aristeas was of Proconnesus, an isle in the Propontis (sea of
Marmora), son of Castrobius; in the sacred trance received the
inspiration of Apollo, journeyed into Scythia (north of the Black Sea),
and died in his native place, in a fulling-mill. The place having been
closed after his death, a citizen of the neighboring town of Cyzicus who
happened to be passing, declared that he had just before met Aristeas in
that town and spoken with him. The mill door was then opened, but no
trace of Aristeas was there. Seven years afterward he appeared again in
Proconnesus, there composed poems on his journey to Scythia (which
Herodotus read), and disappeared a second time. But 340 years later he
was seen at Metapontum, in lower Italy, where he ordered the citizens to
erect to Apollo a statue with his name; then he disappeared for good. On
questioning the oracle at Delphi what they should do, the burghers of
Metapontum were counseled to obey the precept of Aristeas; which they
did. Herodotus saw the statue surrounded by laurel trees. This “Best of
Men,” ever reappearing, and anon disappearing, without leaving any
vestige of bodily presence, is no doubt evidence of a pre-Christian need
of a son of god rising from the dead and ascending into heaven; as far
as it goes, it is also an argument for the reality of resurrection from
the dead and for the union of the divine and human.

But not only occurrences which call to mind the Christian Son of God,
but even his very name appears in Grecian antiquity; and indeed the name
antedates the occurrences. Homer (Odyssey, V. 125), and Hesiod (Theogony
969) mention Jasion or Jasios (names closely resembling the Hebrew
Joshua and Jesus), a son of Zeus, who had a sister Harmonia, and who
with the goddess Demeter (the earth, or fertility) produced out of a
thrice-plowed field Plutus (wealth): meaning that the discoverer of
husbandry became discoverer of thrift. But in punishment of his
sacrilegious love of a goddess Zeus struck him dead with a thunderbolt,
yet at the same time assigned him a place among the gods. As beloved of
the Eleusinian goddess, Jasios, after initiation into the mysteries by
Zeus himself, became the indefatigable herald of the mystic doctrines.
Says Diodorus (V. 49): “Wealth is a gift imparted through the
intermediation of Jasios.... It is known of all that these gods
(Demeter, Jasios, and Plutos), when invoked amid dangers by the
initiated straightway offered them help; and whoso hath part in the
mysteries, the same will be more devout, more upright, and in every
respect better.” Thus does Jasion figure as son of the highest god, as
himself raised to divine honors, as a wandering apostle of religion, and
as the source of all good fortune. His name is equivalent to “savior,”
“healer,” being from the same root as iatros (healer), and the verb
iaomai (to heal, cure). Compare Iao, the Greek form of the Hebrew divine
name Yahve or Jehova; also Iacchos, and Jason (i. e., Iason).

Thus in mystic Hellenism we find the basic ideas of the later system of
divine incarnation and human deification, of redemption, etc.; and there
can be no doubt that we must seek in the Grecian mysteries for one of
the sources of Christianism.




                             _PART FOURTH_.
                       _Son of Man. Son of God._


                       1. HELLENISM AND JUDAISM.

If one attends solely to the fact that the founder of the Christian
religion was a Jew, and that not only he executed his mission in Judea,
but took Judaism for the basis of his teaching, the assertion made in
the preceding section, viz.: that the sources of Christianism are to be
sought in the Grecian mysteries, may appear singular. But the apparent
contradiction disappears at once when we reflect that long before
Christ’s day Judaism was thoroughly yeasted with Grecian elements; and
that after his death the work of propagating his system was done far
more largely by Greeks and men of Grecian education than by Jews. We
will not only prove that this was so, but also will show that the
Christianism of Christians is at root and in substance a totally
different thing from the Christianism of Jesus.

Sharper contrast can hardly be than that between the Grecian and the
Jewish character. On one side closest union between God and world: on
the other, widest divulsion; on one side most untiring research and the
finest sense of art-form: on the other only theology and religious
poetry; on the one side a priesthood that makes no pretension, and has
little or no influence: on the other a nation ruled by priests; the
Greeks maintaining an active commerce with all the world, their ships
traversing the seas, from the Strait of Gibraltar to the remotest angle
of the Euxine: Judea sealed against all access from without, against
every ship that touched at Joppa, against every caravan from the desert;
in Greece eager seizing of everything new and readiness to reject what
is antiquated: in Judea holding fast to what is old and mistrust of all
change.

These fundamentally different elements were fated to come in mutual
contact. Ever since their liberation from Babylonian captivity by the
decree of Cyrus, the Jews, both those who remained in the region of
Euphrates and Tigris and the small number of them who returned to the
native land, had lived under the Persian sceptre, and therefore after
the conquest of Persia by Alexander, were exposed to the powerful
influence of Grecian culture. The Jews were scattered still more in
consequence of the wars between Alexander’s successors: soon they were
to be found in every port and every isle of the Mediterranean as far as
Spain; on the edge of the Asian and African deserts; and after this
dispersion (in Greek, diaspora), they became a shopkeeping or mercantile
race. But nowhere outside Palestine were they so numerous as in Egypt
and its splendid new capital, Alexandria, seat of Grecian art,
literature and learning. They enjoyed large privileges in Egypt; and
they erected at Leontopolis a temple, after the model of the temple at
Jerusalem. But though the Jews of the Diaspora, thanks to their laws
regarding foods and the Sabbath, their possession of the Scriptures,
their undiminished reverence for the Temple of Jerusalem, and the
obligation laid on every Jew to pilgrim thither once at least, remained
most firmly attached to the religion of their fathers, nevertheless in
many places they adopted the language (usually Greek) of the locality in
which they lived, so that a special “Hellenist” synagogue had to be
erected at Jerusalem for the sake of visiting Jews who understood only
Greek. But nowhere did Jews adopt the Grecian customs and language so
unreservedly as at Alexandria, and it was there that between the years
B. C. 280 and 220 the Pentateuch was translated into Greek. This
translation still is styled the Septuagint (Latin, Septuaginta, Greek,
Heptekonta, both meaning seventy), in accordance with the old fable that
in the work were employed seventy-two translators, being six from each
of the twelve Israelitish tribes; and that while each of the seventy-two
translated the whole of the five “books of Moses,” the several versions
agreed verbatim, literatim, punctatim. In later times the remainder of
the Hebrew Bible was translated (about 125 B. C.).

In Alexandria scholars who were not Jews found in the Septuagint an
introduction to Jewish theology; the Hellenist Jews, from their
acquaintance with the literature of Greece, became conversant with
Grecian philosophy. Greeks began to admire the wisdom of Moses, Jews to
study Plato and Aristotle; and the enlightened polytheism of the one
concurred with the monotheism of the others, in developing a new
mysticism. In this mysticism of the Alexandrines it was that the idea of
Divine Revelation had its origin—an idea before unknown, but now
suddenly taken up by these enthusiasts, and applied, on the one side to
the Old Testament, and on the other side to the Greek philosophers. The
Jew Aristobulus, founder of this school of thought, by means of an
allegorical interpretation of the Old Testament, traced to that source
all the wisdom of the Greeks; and Philo, greatest of the Jewish
philosophers, contemporary with Jesus, though he knew nothing of his
life or doctrine, so spiritualized the tradition of his race as to see
in the four rivers of Eden the four cardinal virtues, in the trees of
Paradise the other virtues, in the patriarchs and heroes of Israel only
personifications of various moral conceptions: all in the Grecian
manner. According to Philo, before he created the world, God made a
world of ideas, which found its centre of unity in his Word (logos); the
corporeal world was made after the model of this ideal world. The logos
was God’s first work, the world his second: this passed afterward into
the gospel called of John: “In the beginning was the word,” etc. He
understood the history of man’s creation to mean that the first human
creature was immortal, ideal, perfect, but that by the creation of woman
he was made sinful, imperfect. Philo took the idea of immortality from
the Grecian philosophy rather than from the ancient Jewish doctrines;
and with Pythagoras he regards the soul’s union with the body as a
punishment. He therefore taught that man should free himself as much as
possible from this burdensome association, that is, should despise sense
and live entirely in the thought of God, that so he might obtain
release. One should think such views are inconsistent with the laws of
man’s nature, and so in truth they are; but nevertheless in Philo’s day
there existed a society that aimed to fashion their life in accordance
with these opinions.


                            2. THE ESSENES.

Such a society was the order or sect of the Essenes, who traced their
origin back to high antiquity, but whose doctrines really were first put
forth about the year 100 B. C. The Grecizing Jew Josephus makes them a
“third party,” standing between the Pharisees and the Sadducees. But the
Essenes, as such, had nothing to do with the political questions at
issue between the two principal parties. The Essenes constituted a
secret society.

The name, Essenes, Essenii, is of unknown derivation. But as they
practiced the healing art they got the name of Therapeutae (healers,
physicians). Josephus says that they lived in special settlements in the
country parts; Philo, that they lived in the hamlets, avoiding the
cities; Pliny the elder plants them on the western shore of the Dead
Sea, in settlements apart. Their number is stated at 4,000. Their
occupations were husbandry and handicraft, but they sternly refused to
have anything to do with whatever served the uses of warfare, as the
manufacture of arms; they also declined all trades engaged in for
individual profit, as traffic, seafaring, innkeeping. They had no
private property, but community of goods; among themselves they neither
bought nor sold, but each to each gave according to the need. They
repudiated not alone servitude, but mastery in general, and whatever in
anywise annuls the natural equality of mankind. Their food was such as
necessity required, and was prepared strictly according to the rules of
the order. On this point we know with certainty only that they held oil
in abomination, whether for anointing or for use with victuals. But from
the circumstance that they condemned bloody offerings and always
practiced great abstemiousness in food, we must infer that they
abstained totally from fleshmeat and intoxicating liquors. Sexual love
also they condemned, and a party among them (the leading party),
abstained from marriage and maintained its numerical strength by
adopting outside children; another faction, however, deeming this
strictness to be fatal to the sect, retained the institution of
marriage, though under severe restrictions. The members observed the
most scrupulous cleanliness, taking the bath daily in cold water, and
wearing white garments. Their daily tasks were minutely prescribed.
Before rise of sun they spoke no word, only the prayers, in which they
paid honor to the sun as symbol of God. Then they went about their work,
coming thence back to the common meal, first washing themselves and
putting on clean garments. No one tasted anything till the priest had
made prayer. The meal concluded, they offered prayer in unison, laid off
their clean garments, and went back to work. At the last meal of the day
the same customs were observed: at meat only one person spoke at a time.
They did nothing without orders from the superiors, practiced moderation
in all things, studied to control the passions, to be faithful to all
obligations, to be at peace among themselves and with all the world, and
to be helpful to the poor. There was a twelve-month term of probation
prior to admission into the order. During that time the postulant
conformed to the Essenian rule of life: he received a small hatchet
(borne by all Essenes, as an emblem of labor), a loincloth for the bath,
and a white gown. If the result of probation was satisfactory, a second
term of probation (two years) followed; if found worthy, the postulant
was admitted to membership. The rite of admission consisted of a meal in
common, preceded by the pronouncing of the vow by the new brother. The
tenor of the vow was that he obligated himself to be ever faithful to
the rules of the order and to lead a virtuous life; to observe secrecy
regarding the doings of the order and the names of members: this with
reference to the world without; but with regard to the society itself,
to keep nothing secret from the brethren. After admission, the Essenes
were classed in four degrees. Unworthy members were expelled—a terrible
punishment, indeed, for the outcasts were not released from their vow,
and yet could not in the world comply with it; and so were doomed to
perish.

Their religious views have been already stated in part. With Judaism
their only bond of union was in their practice of sending to the temple
at Jerusalem offerings; but by reason of their condemnation of bloody
sacrifices they were self-excluded from the temple. Nor was their belief
in immortality of Jewish origin, for they held that soul, formed of most
tenuous aether, is attracted and appropriated by a body, within which it
lives as a prisoner; but that after liberation through death it soars to
heaven, where it lives for evermore in a blest land, without rain, or
snow, or heat, while the wicked are tortured in a remote region of cold
and darkness. This recalls the views of the Pythagoreans. Less honorable
to the Essenes are the frauds practiced by many of them in pretending to
read the future, to interpret dreams, to conjure disease away, etc. Of
later Christian notions we are reminded by the Essenian nomenclature of
the angels, and the obligation imposed on new members to keep the names
secret. The Essenian order survived till the early days of Christianism:
it then died out, the Christian asceticism having made it superfluous.


                            3. CHRISTIANISM.

Essenism is one of those phenomena which make but a small figure in
general history, but which have mighty results, and which reconcile
contrarieties in human nature. For in Essenism we have the middle term
between the Grecian mysteries and Christianism, as also between the
Grecian philosophy and Judaism. As appears from what has gone before,
the Essenian society was a Judaic imitation of the Pythagorean league,
and that league, again, represented in philosophy what the Grecian
mysteries represented in religion, namely, humiliation of man by showing
him that there exist higher powers that far transcend humanity; and then
the elevation of man by inculcation of the thought of immortality and of
future union with the Creator. With this mysticism was associated, in
Greece, the lofty morality of a Socrates, a Plato, an Aristotle; and in
Judea the belief in One God. The combination of all these elements could
have but one result, to wit, to call forth that great power which
transformed the world—Christianism.

This new power was bound to arise, to reconcile contraries that
confronted each other in that time, after the Roman Empire had brought
under its universal sway the lands that had cradled all the diverse
religions and philosophies. Those religious and philosophical systems
were no longer, as before, separated: brisk inter-communication favored
by the commerce and the wars of the vast empire, brought them daily into
contact. The result was twofold: first, a certain indifference for
religious opinions, the diversity of which gave men occasion to judge
that in supersensual things no direct knowledge is possible; and the
mischief of it all was that nothing was done for the education or
enlightenment of the people, and, in fact, science existed only for the
higher orders, and the people found no substitute for their ancient
belief. But secondly, the result also was that people began to be
conscious of the feeling, implanted by the Grecian philosophers, and
particularly by the Stoics, that in spite of national and religious
differences, all men are brothers, and that mankind is one great whole.
However beautiful and noble this idea, it had to lie dormant so long as
no bond of spiritual kinship save that of political unity held together
the peoples who within the empire jointly obeyed one law and one will.
This missing bond of spiritual union could not be other than a religious
one; for so long as the sciences were so undeveloped no other spiritual
guidance but that Godward could lead all hearts, however educated, of
whatever nation, to the one end toward which men were being forced by
the consciousness that, above all, they were men. And if it be asked
what sort of a religion that must be which shall satisfy all nations at
once, first of all it is very clear that it could be no polytheistic
religion. That form of religion had outlived its usefulness. The various
national religions—Egyptian, Chaldaean, Syrian, Grecian, Roman—had
completely exhausted themselves in the production of deities: polytheism
could give forth no more new shoots, as was shown by the fact that the
Romans, all the forces of nature having been worked up, had gone and
made goddesses of the virtues, e. g., Pudicitia, Concordia, Pax,
Victoria, and the rest, had no recourse but to admit to their Pantheon
all the gods of the conquered nations, and paid now to Isis, Cybele,
Mithras, and Baal the same worship as before they had paid to Jupiter
and Juno. Into such disrepute had polytheism fallen in the estimation of
all educated men, who if they were persons of serious character despised
such gods; but if they were frivolous, ridiculed worship and sacrifice
and oracles and priests. The priests themselves smiled when they met,
and by their irregular lives and their superstitious practices forfeited
all respect. At last every honest man must have been transported with
indignation when the emperors in the paroxysms of their despotic frenzy
had themselves worshiped as gods and a race of hounds in human form
burned the incense of adulation before them.

Hence, the new religion for which mankind sought, to give true
expression to the sentiment of a common humanity, could not be any of
the heathen systems. Rather, by insisting on the oneness of Godhead, it
had to make an end of polytheism, of godmaking, and of Olympian
wantoning, and at the same time, of scorn and derision of the gods.

Thus, then, what was wanted was a god who should have vanquished all
other gods, and he a god of definite outline and fixed character—no
nebulous, lackadaisical, inert deity such as the Grecian philosophers
preached: no abstract “world-soul,” signifying nothing to the uneducated
people; but a god like unto man himself, and whom man should have “made
after his own likeness”; one with human feelings, sentiments, and
passions, with human wrath and human lovingness. And this god must stand
for a doctrine of personal immortality to the end the precious Ego of
every man might have infallible and trustworthy assurance that his title
to a Mansion in the Skies will stand unchallengeable for ever and for
ever. And again, this god must be no abstract entity, alleged to have
existed somewhere, somewhen, but a personality associated with definite
localities, and possessing very definite traits. And so the problem was
to find this one god, this doctrine of immortality, to find a
personality that would be the middle term between the two.

Nowhere was a monotheism to be found save in Judaism, and there it was
plain and open to view. We have already seen how the Jews were scattered
all over the world. Their synagogues were everywhere, and (noteworthy
fact) they had proselytes in every large city, especially in Rome. In
this we see the first steps in the dissemination of monotheism: but it
could not be propagated on the large scale by Jews. Few were the persons
who took a liking to the strictness of the Mosaic religion, and the God
of the Jews was too spiritual a being to be grasped; besides, very many
turned away from Judaism because of the indefiniteness of the Jewish
notions of immortality, or the strange rites and the peculiar usages of
the Jewish people.

From Judaism, then, the idea of monotheism was the only feature that
could be borrowed: what was demanded else was the mystic element; that
is to say, men wanted a system of religious conceptions that would
reflect back upon them their own sentiments as the infallible truth. But
the material best fitted for that end was to be found in the mysteries
and in the Pythagorean and Essenian doctrines. The diverse ideas of the
several secret leagues with regard to the separation of the divine from
the human and their reconciliation, must find their unity in the Jewish
God—a thing not difficult to accomplish in the times immediately
preceding the advent of Christ, because of the intermingling of Grecian
and Jewish ideas: and this unity had to be established by some personage
of imposing figure on the stage of history, who should impress his seal
upon it and surround it with the prestige of deity.

Now, at that time there was both among the heathen and the Jews an
expectation of some such divine intervention as this. Thus, in the early
years of the Roman Empire the belief was widespread that a new kingdom
was to be founded in the East, and that a new Golden Age was about to
begin. More definite was the expectation entertained by the Jews of a
Messiah to come, who would restore the kingdom of Israel, and the
worship of Jehova. This longing of the Jews coincided with the desire of
heathendom for a new religion to take the place of a dying and
degenerate polytheism.


                               4. JESUS.

At this juncture appeared Jesus. He lived and died in obscurity. Of his
career not one word of mention is found in contemporary Greek and Roman
writers, eagerly as they investigated everything. But this obscurity
wrought no detriment, for it left those who were longing for a new
religion free to make of him whatever they thought best for their cause;
that is to say, they made of him a personality very different from what
he really was. Out of a circumcised son of a Jewish carpenter, who rose,
indeed, above the bigotry of his people, and who suffered death for his
revolt against the rule of priests and scribes, was developed the longed
for Messiah. He was no longer merely human, but the Son of God, born of
a virgin; a thaumaturge; his death was formally and intentionally a
sacrifice for the “redemption” of mankind; after death he rose again,
and then ascended into heaven: in a word, Jesus the man had become a
god. And thus on the Jewish branch were grafted quite unjewish,
Graeco-mystical shoots till the branch was no longer recognizable.

We thus have in the life of the founder of the Christian Church, as
handed down to us, two elements, truth and fiction. The element of truth
is whatever is consistent with historical research and psychological
fact and nature’s laws; and the element of fiction comprises whatever is
in conflict with these. Jesus himself never pretended to be more than a
man. Virtue was the burden of his teaching, and he never propounded a
creed. To the many names of God he added that of “Father”—father of all
mankind. He was no dogmatist, but a moral reformer, and as such occupied
common ground with the Essenes and with John the Baptist, though he
differed from them, and particularly from the Essenes, with regard to
methods and measures: the Essenes would save men’s souls by withdrawing
them from human society; Jesus sought to save men living in the world—to
save human society itself.

Jesus taught the people in parables, enforcing his doctrine of virtuous
living by the use of similes that no hearer could fail to understand.
Those who afterward essayed to write the history of his life and work,
in like manner made a free use of figurative language, and the
personality of Jesus was glorified, and his “mission” magnified till the
world saw in him, indeed, “the desired of all the nations,” the Messiah
longed for by Israel, the reconciler of the divine and the human, toward
whom all the mysteries had pointed.

The miracles of Jesus, namely, acts and occurrences that contradict the
laws of nature, are not actual events; for as they are recorded in the
New Testament they show a needless abrogation of natural law—needless,
because the truths which Jesus preached could not be made more true by
miracles. And thus, as the rationalists of the 18th century explained
them as actual occurrences indeed, but yet as in accordance with the
natural law, so now they are held to be quite needless juggleries
altogether unworthy of Jesus. Hence the rational interpretation of the
miracles is, that they represent the effort of the evangelists to
portray the life and person of the Master in such colors as their
notions of his supereminent dignity required. We divide these miracles
into three classes—the miracles of the birth, the life, and the death of
Jesus.

The birth of Jesus, as narrated in the gospel story, is itself a
miracle. The legitimate son of Joseph, the carpenter of Nazareth, and of
Mary—for such he was, according to the genealogy found in Matthew and
Luke—had to be transformed into the Son of God, nay, made God himself,
if his doctrine was to appear as of divine origin. Of types of such
transformation there was no lack in heathendom. The first Christians, it
is true, knew nothing of the sun-god Buddha, born again of a woman, but
they were acquainted with Grecian and Roman mythology. Apollo, himself a
god, walked on earth as a shepherd. Herakles, son of Zeus, and Romulus,
son of Mars and of a virgin, were founders of states and cities, and
progenitors of nations; then why should not the founder of a religion
and of a church be also son of God and of a virgin? Nay, why might not
God himself walk on earth in human form? That such was the actual origin
of the story of the Divine Birth is not doubtful: all the rest is mere
embellishment—as when the angel announces to the virgin the coming birth
of the Son of God; when another angel, accompanied by the heavenly
hosts, tells the shepherds of his actual birth; when a star conducts the
“wise men of the East” to the wondrous babe, and they, with the
shepherds and Simeon and Anna, pay him homage; and when Herod, purposing
to take the life of the predestined Messiah, in order to compass that
end orders the slaughter of the innocents.

The miracles of the life of Jesus are either abrogations of natural
laws, or cures of diseases, or resuscitations from the dead, or
apparitions. All these different kinds of miracles are fictions with a
purpose. We have already seen how in the Grecian mysteries bread and
wine were employed as consecrated viands for the gods, and how at
Eleusis divine honors were paid to Demeter and Dionysos as givers of
bread and wine. Jesus, too, had to be made lord and giver of these two
sacred viands: hence the change of water into wine, and the
multiplication of the loaves; and later, in the last supper, bread and
wine were made the object of the Christian Mysteries. The walking on the
waters of the lake of Gennesareth, the stilling of the winds, the
blasting of the fig tree, the finding of the penny in the fish’s mouth,
and Peter’s draught of fishes are pictures of the imagination designed
to show the power of the Son of God over the waters, the air, the world
of plants and of animals. So, too, his power over bodily diseases is
made something real for the common understanding by such stories as the
healing of paralytics, lepers, the blind, the deaf and dumb; over mental
diseases by the freeing of the possessed, over death itself by the
raising of the dead. Among the apparitions we reckon those of the Holy
Spirit as a dove at the baptism of Jesus, of Satan at Jesus’ temptation,
and of Moses and Elias at the transfiguration: this is all allegory. The
“Holy Spirit” is an idea distinct from God only in thought; the dove is
the symbol of purity and gentleness. The Devil is a personification of
evil, and the failure of his attempt was the triumph of the good. As for
the transfiguration, that typifies the vast superiority of the new law
over the old: the old must do homage to the new.

The miracles of Jesus’ death, viz., the darkening of the sun, the
rending of the veil of the Holy of Holies in the Temple, the
resurrection of the dead, were occurrences quite inomissible at the
death of a god; they betoken the mourning of nature and of religion. But
the miracles that followed his death, the resurrection and the
ascension, together with the apparitions of the Crucified in the mean
time, were imagined purely and plainly to confirm the belief in an
everlasting redeemer and in the personal immortality of each individual
one of the faithful.

Of far greater importance than the miracles of Jesus are his teachings,
and in particular his fine discourse on the mountain, also his beautiful
parables. But his utterances contain nothing that is essentially new,
the same thoughts having been often expressed by religious teachers and
sages of other times and in other lands; and yet they possess a charm
all their own, by reason of their unassuming simplicity. It was not the
doctrine of the unity of God and of love for the neighbor that wrought
the propagation of his teachings—the Jews possessed that doctrine
already; nor was it his call to a higher life than that of sense—the
Grecian philosophers preceded him in that respect; nor his alleged
divinity, nor the miracles ascribed to him—his contemporaries in every
land had had experience of miracles in every shape: it was the
forcefulness, the grandeur, the simplicity of his discourse, speaking to
the heart of man and mastering it, and calming its unrest. Here he was
self-based and individual, supreme and irresistible. His teaching, and
in particular the sermon on the mount, is the most emphatic, blistering
condemnation of those who, for the last nineteen hundred years, have
called themselves not only Christians, but the only Christians; who,
nevertheless, in open contempt of their supposed Master, not only take
oaths, and require an eye for an eye, cherish mortal hate for their
enemies, trumpet their almsgiving abroad, offer their prayers aloud at
the street crossings, fast ostentatiously, lay up for themselves
treasures on earth, which are eaten by the moth and the rust; serve two
masters or more, see the mote, though blind to the beam, throw the holy
thing to the dogs, when one asks them for a loaf give him a stone, do
not unto others as they would that others should do unto them: who not
only do all this, but who even enact laws which oblige men to do all
this. He whom they hypocritically call Master, but whom they never have
understood, were he to appear among them, would anathematize them in the
noble words, I know you not. Depart from me, ye doers of evil! Such
language was unheard before his day; therefore wondered the people, for
he spake with power, and not like the scribes and pharisees.


                        5. THE EARLY CHRISTIANS

What, then, is the difference between the Christianism of Jesus and the
Christianism of Christians? The former, as seen in the discourses of the
New Testament, and above all in the ever beautiful sermon on the mount,
is a simple and unpretending, yet world-transforming doctrine of God,
Virtue, and Love of Man: a monotheism borrowed from the Jews for the
behoof of all men, but purified of ceremonialism, sabbatism, sacrifices,
high-priesthood: in short, the Christianism of Jesus meant the coming
“Kingdom of God,” in which the virtuous man would enjoy happiness and
peace. But the Christianism of Christians is a Mysticism ingrafted on
this monotheism, comprising the dogmas of the Incarnation, Atonement,
Redemption, Resurrection, and Second Coming, and the Miracles invented
to buttress these dogmas. The Christianism of Jesus fell when he and his
first disciples died: they had no hair-splitting theology, only a devout
heart: that system was too simple, too unadorned, too little flattering
to sense and to man’s vainglory to cut any figure in the world. But the
Christianism of Christians, which had for its mother the Grecian
mysteries, borrowed from Jesus, its father (without whose personality
and name it never could have lived at all), what little was known
concerning him, but swaddled it in a thick wrappage of mystic dogmatism.
Let us see how this dogmatic Christianism succeeded in erecting itself
upon the simple ethic-religious system of Jesus, and in making itself a
power in the world by evolving new mysteries.

Were it not for the grafting on it of the Graeco-mystical elements,
Christianism would never have grown to be even a church, to say nothing
of its prospects of becoming a power in the world. Its adherents in the
beginning were good, zealous, believing folk, but among them were no men
of education or of commanding ability. The first congregation in
Jerusalem, therefore, unable to comprehend the lofty views of the
Crucified, took their stand on a narrow ground not essentially different
from that of Judaism; for example, they held that no one was worthy to
be baptized who would not first undergo circumcision, thus becoming by
adoption a Jew. The Apostle James, a devout ascetic, was the head of
this school, the adherents of which were called Jewish Christians. The
first to demand repudiation of Judaism was Stephen, a man of Grecian
education; but he paid the penalty of his ambitious plans by a martyr’s
death. The congregation at Antioch adopted Stephen’s view, according to
which the “Gentile Christians” and the “Jewish Christians” stood on an
equality. The intellectual leader of the Gentile-Christian school was
Paul, a man who, in talents and in force of character, stood high above
all the original apostles of the Nazarene. Through Paul’s exertions
Christianism overstepped the narrow limits of Palestine and Syria. Well
schooled, both in Grecian philosophy and Jewish theology, he was at the
first a fanatical persecutor of the Christians, but had a sudden
conversion while journeying to Damascus on a persecuting raid, and
thenceforth was a zealous apostle of the new religion. Being a victim of
epilepsy, Paul had frequent fits and visions, and he spoke of them
often, thus implanting in the minds of the Christians a firm belief in
such occurrences. Of course, the way was thus made ready for the
introduction of the legends of a resurrection, an ascension, etc.
Furthermore, a foundation was in this way laid for a great theological
superstructure, which very soon was seen to rise. As the foundation, so
was the superstructure—mystical. Over against the first man, Adam,
representing the sensuous life, sin, servitude, and death, Paul set up
the God-man Christ, representing the spirit, grace, freedom, and life;
man was to crucify the “old Adam,” and to be born anew in Christ, even
to become one with him. By this union, he said, the law of Moses is done
away, being superseded by “faith,” whereby alone the sinner is justified
and made worthy of God’s grace. For true faith, he added, carries with
it good works, and the true believer cannot be otherwise than righteous.

Paul thus stood, in a certain sense, on the Protestant ground as
contradistinguished from the Judaeo-Christian (which is partly also the
Catholic) ground of Peter, James, and John, who upheld the Mosaic law,
and received into the Church only circumcised converts. Peter wavered,
being a Jew among Jews, but often forgetting the Mosaic law in the
company of Gentile Christians; but Paul would never consent that Gentile
converts should be obliged to conform to the Jewish rites: hence Paul
was the real founder of the Christian Church, which, had his opponents
been victorious, would have remained a Jewish sect. The Church was split
into two parties. To the Jewish-Christian party adhered the numerous
converts from Essenism, with whom the tie of blood was stronger than the
spiritual bond which united them with the school of Pythagoras. This
party did not regard Jesus as God, but classed him with the angels.

Between the two parties, Judaeo-Christian and Gentile-Christian, arose a
third party, that of the Alexandrine Christian Jews. Their leader was
Apollos (properly Apollonius), of whom it is related in the Acts of the
Apostles, that he recognized only the baptism of John, and not that of
Jesus, but that he was converted to belief in the latter by certain of
Paul’s disciples at Ephesus. He it was that imported into Christianism
the Alexandrine doctrine of the Logos or Word.


                         6. THE NEW TESTAMENT.

With such a distribution of parties, the New Testament literature arose.
It may now be affirmed without hesitation that not one piece of this
literature was composed by any of the disciples of Jesus, who were all
uneducated men. The early Christians had at first no Sacred Scripture
other than the Old Testament; with regard to the doctrine of Jesus they
depended on oral instruction. Even the language in which the New
Testament was written, the Hellenistic (or literary dialect of the
Alexandrines) is proof that it was the work of men of Greek education.
As far as can be determined now the earliest New Testament writer was
Paul. The Pauline epistles that are his indisputably, are those to the
Romans, the Corinthians, and the Galatians; the most dubious among them
are the epistles to Timothy, Titus, and Philemon. There are epistles of
some of the other apostles, as James, Peter, John, and Jude, and these,
of course, according to the party stand of their writers, represent
views opposed to those of Paul. They are of later date than Paul’s
epistles, and are hardly to be credited to the apostles whose names are
prefixed to them. To the Alexandrine school is to be referred the
epistle to the Hebrews, distinguished from the Pauline writings by the
fact that it holds the Old and New Testaments to be, not opposites, but
complements of each other.

Apart from the Epistles the Revelation of John (Apocalypse) is the
oldest book of the New Testament. Written in the spirit of an Old
Testament prophet, it expresses the indignation of a Jew against the
Romans during the siege and shortly before the destruction of Jerusalem,
A. D. 70; it contains the prediction that not Jerusalem, but the whore
of Babylon (Rome), together with the entire heathen world, will perish
amid fire, blood, and ruin; but that there will be let down from Heaven
a new and glorious Jerusalem, abode of the blest, seat of the “bride of
the lamb.” After the destruction of Jerusalem the Apocalypse was written
anew by an unknown hand, in the Christian sense. As every one knows, the
prophecies of the book did not come true; but its fantastic, morbid
imaginings have ever since been interpreted by enthusiasts as infallible
forewarnings of things to come; and many a searcher of its pages has
lost what modicum of sense they ever had in working out its meaning.

The other historical writings of the New Testament consist of four
Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles. It is now evident that, when in
the course of time the oral traditions were committed to writing, Jesus’
discourses, which, with an admirable simplicity and admirable clearness,
expressed a good deal in a few words, must have been handed down in far
more authentic form than the history of his deeds; and that among his
discourses, those which contained truths of general application were
more faithfully remembered than those which expressed personal views—as,
for example, those in which he claims to be Messiah. The oldest written
accounts of his life and work are lost to us forever; they were, without
doubt, written in the language which was used by Jesus and his
disciples, Aramaic, a sister tongue of Hebrew. Of the existing Gospels,
written in Greek, the first three, called “synoptics” (i. e., agreeing),
are based on one older original gospel or account; the third Gospel,
John’s, stands by itself. The new criticism regards Mark’s Gospel as the
most ancient: it contains almost exclusively narratives of facts,
written down from memory, with the accruing embellishments and
modifications; but Mark gives little of the discourses of Jesus; he says
nothing, knows nothing of any supernatural birth of Jesus, and regards
him simply as man. Mark’s Gospel is the basis of the other two
synoptics, which draw on him for narrative, while they both add the
discourses. The Gospel according to Matthew gives the discourses a
Judaeo-Christian tinge; that according to Luke (who also wrote the Acts)
a Gentile-Christian coloring: but they both waver between the opinions
that Jesus is God and man, and that he is only man. But the Gospel
literature was lifted out of this state of hesitation by the fourth
Gospel. This Gospel bears the name of the Judaeo-Christian apostle John,
but erroneously, for it had its origin in the Alexandrine school, and
was written probably A. D. 160 to 170. The Alexandrines, as we have
seen, were wont to resolve all accounts of facts, whether real or
fictitious, into mental concepts, and, therefore, lived in a cloudworld
of ideas. Whereas, the first apostles regarded the Nazarene merely as
man, and while for Paul and the evangelists Matthew and Luke he was a
god-man, the Joannine Gospel makes him God, and represents his existence
on earth in palpable human form, as a mere passing incident. Hence it
proclaims him the “Word” (logos), which Philo Judaeus discovered; which
Logos not only was “in the beginning” with God, but was God himself. For
the author of the fourth Gospel the narrative of occurrences in the life
of Jesus is a secondary matter, serving only as a setting for his own
peculiar doctrines. Thus the doctrine of the godhead of Jesus is the
result of Grecian influence.

Besides these four generally received Gospels several others, in one
place or another, at one time or another, have passed for revealed
writings. They are written, some in Aramaic, some in Greek, some in
Latin, and, since their uncanonical character was decided, have been
classed as Apocrypha. Their contents, barring a few passages that show
some elevation of thought, are mostly in the jejune and tasteless vein
of those trivial accounts of miracles which we find in the canonical
Gospels, such as the changing of water into wine, the cursing of the
figtree, Peter’s draught of fishes, etc.; or they are of a still more
paltry sort, and tell of a number of miracles wrought by Jesus in his
childhood. There are also apocryphal Acts of Apostles, apocryphal
Apocalypses, and apocryphal Epistles, all of them what we should now
call “pamphlets” composed in the interest of parties in the church.

But the “Word” of the Joannine Gospel became the password for the
reunion of all parties. The influences that had brought thousands of
Gentiles into the Church were all too strong for the resistance of the
Judaeo-Christian party to overcome. The little Judaeo-Christian fold had
no choice, therefore, but either to go back to Judaism or to become
Gentile Christians—unless they were ready to suffer excommunication by
the latter. Only small fractions of the Jewish-Christian body held out
as sects apart, while the union of the ever-multiplying Gentile
Christians, now styled the “Catholic” church, unchurched the “heretics,”
and set up the “new law” in opposition to the old, as its own inviolable
foundation. Thus came into being the present collection of New Testament
books, the “Church Catholic” having, about the end of the second
century, separated the apocryphal from the canonical Scriptures. But
still for a long time the character of individual books was in dispute,
and John’s “Revelation,” together with several of the Epistles, was till
recent times regarded by different persons or parties as apocryphal. To
the decrees of councils and popes alone is it owing that there exists
to-day a canonical collection of Scriptures, and that the books of the
Canon are held to be inspired.


                     7. THE ELEMENTS OF THE CHURCH.

In this wise was Christianism developed out of the secret associations
of the ancient world. The early Christians themselves were, while under
persecution, in a certain sense a secret society. Their worship
possessed an essentially mystic character. It was not so from the
beginning. In Jesus’ teachings there is not one word about divine
service or cults; his surviving disciples knew of no other cult than the
Jewish, and they assembled for “breaking bread” in their houses without
any parade. Not until the Christians had been excluded from the
synagogues were distinctive rites developed among them. There arose
among them prophets whose inspired words were the principal feature of
the religious service. Psalms were sung, not yet in the grand,
impressive melodies of the Middle Age, but in “the long-drawn, partly
nasal moaning tones, still usual in Eastern lands—tones that defy all
musical harmony.” Besides, men then “spake tongues,” or at least uttered
“heaven-storming words” pell-mell in the heat of enthusiasm, which no
one, speaker or hearer, could well understand; and men “prophesied,”
especially about the end of the world, the too slow oncoming of which
caused much wonderment in those days. All these stupidities, by degrees,
gave way before the efforts of strong-willed men like Paul. The “words
in meeting” and the Lord’s Supper (or Love Feast), fell into the
background, and the supper came to be simply a souvenir of the Saviour’s
death, and at last was developed into a sacrament possessing the
character of a “mystery;” i. e., a performance that must remain
inscrutable to men, though it was men that contrived it. Baptism was
associated as a sacrament with the supper, and the mysteries were
multiplied. We have already seen how the mysteries of the Incarnation
and Resurrection arose, namely, out of the necessity of giving to Jesus
the stamp of deity, for without that Christianism never would have
attained a commanding place in the world. How to these mysteries, by the
purely human decrees of the Nicaean Synod, the supreme and most
incomprehensible mystery of all was added, the mystery of the Trinity;
how, because of the impossibility of coming to agreement regarding this,
the Church Catholic was split into the Roman and Greek, or Western and
Eastern churches; how in the Western Church the bishops of Rome achieved
supremacy; all this belongs, not to the history of the mysteries, but to
the history of the Church.




                             _PART FIFTH._
                  _A Pseudo-Messiah. A Lying Prophet._


                        1. APOLLONIUS OF TYANA.

Great must have been the amazement of the Greeks when of a sudden, in
different localities within the broad Roman Empire, communities arose
which announced the suffering and dying God Jasios as the savior of a
new age—a Jasios who, under the form of a Jew, all unknown outside his
own country, had but lately been crucified; whereas, Jasios, as all
Initiates of the Eleusinia and of the mysteries of Samothrace well knew,
was ages and ages before slain by the thunderbolt of Zeus. And still
populations were passing day after day over to the crucified Jew, the
Son of God, the wonderworker, who rose from the grave, who went up to
heaven. And, in consequence of his teaching, though, after all, that did
but complement the teaching of a Pythagoras, a Socrates, a Plato, the
noble statues of the Grecian gods were falling from their bases. Ought
the Beautiful to fall in order to make room for the Good? Might not both
stand side by side? And if a son of God and a thaumaturge was required,
might not one be found without making of Zeus the Thunderer a victim to
that fearful Jewish Yahve of Mt. Sinai?

And such a son of God and wonderworker they found. The heathen prophet
Apollonius of Tyana was a contemporary of Jesus, and was deeply
venerated. And, as it chanced, a certain learned Greek, Flavius
Philostratus, wrote a heathen gospel of the life of this Grecian saint,
not as one hostile toward the Christians, nor as one who would prove
their doctrine false, but with intent to come to the aid of decaying
heathendom, and prevent for a time its overthrow by Christianism. To
attain this end there must be no mention of Christianism or its author,
so that Olympus might tower again in all its ancient glory and triumph
over Sinai and Tabor. Philostratus composed his work, as he states, out
of the notes of a disciple of Apollonius, one Damis, native of Ninive,
by order of Julia Domna, wife of the Emperor Septimius Severus. What
part of his work consisted of matter drawn from Damis’s notes, and what
he added out of his own fancy, we can never determine. But he showed
true insight in making out his hero to have been a Pythagorean. He
therefore represents Apollonius as deriving his wisdom indirectly from
the most ancient mysteries, those of Egypt, and from the venerated
Grecian sacred leagues.

Apollonius was born in Tyana, a town in Cappadocia. Previous to his
birth, says Philostratus, the god Proteus appeared to his mother and
told her that the child soon to see the light was the God himself. This
happened in a meadow, where, after gathering flowers, she had fallen
asleep, while swans gathered round her and intoned their song. When the
child was grown up he became a strict observer of the Pythagorean rule
of life, abstaining from fleshmeat and wine, and wearing linen garments.
His abode was a temple sacred to Aesculapius, god of healing. Unworthy
offerers of gifts to the god he drove out, and healed such of the sick
as repented of their transgressions. He rejected the Grecian mythology
as fabulous, preferring far to it the fables of Esop, and his only
prayer was addressed to the sun. He refused to take possession of an
estate inherited from his father, and imposed on himself a silence of
several years’ duration. During his extensive travels he always lodged
in temples, corrected abuses in the conduct of the divine service,
couched his teachings in brief sentences, gathered around him disciples,
of whom one was false and a traitor; sided with the persecuted and
righted the wrongs of the oppressed. Everywhere he understood the
languages of the natives without learning them, and even read the
thoughts of men; but the language of the beasts he learned from the
Arabs of Mesopotamia. On entering that country the publican asked him
whether he had with him anything subject to toll. The answer of
Apollonius was that he carried about righteousness, temperance, a manly
soul and a patient spirit—and many another virtue named he. The sullen
taxman, who had no mind for anything that lay outside his own duties,
took the names of virtues for names of women, saying: “There, your maids
are all down in the book.” But Apollonius calmly went his way, with the
brief remark: “They are not maids, but high-born dames;” nor paid he
impost on his ideal goods. In spite of his frankness of speech he was
treated with great distinction by the king of that country. He told the
king that he would best strengthen his royal power by honoring many and
putting trust in but a few. The king, who was ill, having been comforted
by the prophet, confessed that he had been freed from anxiety, not only
with regard to his kingdom, but also with regard to death. From Babylon
Apollonius bent his steps toward India, and there, according to the
highly embellished story, saw men four or five ells in height, also men
who were half white and half black; dragons, too, of various size he
saw. He constantly carried on with Damis, the one disciple who
accompanied him, instructive conversations about the animals and the
people whom they met. An Indian king, dazzled by the splendor of the
prophet’s genius, would not wear the crown in his presence. With the
Brahmans, many of whose conjurfeats are recorded, e. g., flitting
through the air, or at touch of their wands causing the earth to spring
aloft, Apollonius swapped wisdoms; and as, in the opinion of Damis, the
wisdom of the Brahmans was derived from Pythagoras, it was from
Pythagoras also, of course, that they got their doctrine of
metempsychosis. We learn that Apollonius also entertained that curious
idea, and that he imagined himself to have been once an Indian
tax-gatherer, and was wont to tell of many incidents of that phase of
his life. Furthermore, in his presence the Brahmans cured the possessed,
the lame, the blind, and women in difficult labor, by imposition of
hands, and by giving good counsels—practices resembling those used in
our day by sympathists, so-called. Apollonius returned to Babylon and
Ninive, passing through fabulous lands, and then journeyed to the
Ionians of Asia Minor. Apollonius banished from Ephesus an epidemic
which was there raging, by requiring the citizens to stone a beggar in
whom he discerned the daemon who was the cause of the disease; the
culprit, under the storm of stones, was changed into a dog. Voyaging by
sea to Greece, the Sage Apollonius imposed on his shipmates with the
story that Achilles had appeared unto him five ells in height, and
before his eyes had grown to twelve ells. At Athens, where he arrived
during the Eleusinian mysteries, the priests refused to initiate him,
because he was a conjurer; whereupon the Sage of Tyana told them that
already he knew more about the mysteries than the priests. This alarmed
them, and they wished to recall their refusal; but it was Apollonius’s
turn now to refuse them, so he deferred to another time his initiation,
but in public discourses let his light shine before the Athenians. In
Athens, too, there was a youth possessed, who laughed and cried without
cause. Apollonius having detected the true nature of the ailment, of
which no one else had any suspicion, with stern looks and words of
menace confronted the daemon, who thereupon fled away, and in token of
his passage overturned a statue that no one had touched. But the youth,
rubbing his eyes as though waking from sleep, was seen to be cured. At
Corinth the Sage detected in the bride of a comely youth a lamia or
empusa; i. e., one of a class of spectral beings that used to haunt
people, and under pretense of being in love with them, would eat the
flesh off their bones. In the presence of Apollonius all her arts and
all her imps disappeared, and the spectre was unmasked and confessed her
evil intent. At the Olympian Games also this apostle of the Pythagorean
philosophy preached. His following was increased by the accession of
several members with their slaves; these he called his “congregation.”
With them he went to Rome, where the infamous Nero then reigned, who had
prohibited philosophy, which he classed with soothsaying. But one who
was in the service of the tyrant, impressed by the wisdom of the
traveler, allowed him to lecture in the temples, and to these lectures
there was great concourse. But one of his disciples who had accompanied
him from Corinth, and who in Rome had ventured to condemn publicly the
conduct of Nero and the prevailing immorality, was expelled from the
city by Tigellinus, captain of the emperor’s bodyguard, and trusty tool
of the tyrant, while Apollonius himself was kept under surveillance. But
not only could nothing be proved against him; his wisdom filled even the
sanguinary minions with admiration, though he spoke to them only the
stern truth. For example, being asked by Tigellinus why he had no fear
of Nero, he answered: “The God who makes him an object of fear made me
fearless.” Asked what he thought of Nero, “Better than you do,” he
replied; “ye think him gifted for singing, I for silence.” Whereupon
Tigellinus: “Go wherever you please; you are stronger than any power of
mine.” A bride in Rome having died, the body was on the way to the place
of interment. Apollonius bade the bearers to halt, touched the damsel,
uttering some secret words, and called her back from death. Philostratus
himself is in doubt whether the death was not apparent only. The
philosopher then journeyed to the Strait of Gibraltar, whence he
traversed Spain, Sicily and Greece, and then revisited Egypt. At
Alexandria he recognized the innocence of one among eight criminals,
interceded for him and had the man’s execution put off till the last
moment; then arrived the order to spare his life; he had confessed only
under torture. The story is also told that Apollonius, on paying a visit
to Vespasian, in Alexandria, “made him Caesar,” thus giving to the Roman
Empire once again, after a long interval, a just ruler; but after
Vespasian’s elevation to the throne, the philosopher frankly spoke the
truth to him, when the Emperor annulled, as an unjust privilege, the
liberties of Greece, which Nero had in a capricious humor granted on the
occasion of the Olympian Games. Leaving Egypt, Apollonius journeyed to
Ethiopia to visit the Gymnosophists, who dwelt in a sort of little
republic of their own, on a mountain, and conducted a famous school.
Probably because they were less conceited, went naked, and performed no
magical feats, our Sage deemed them less wise than the Brahmans, and had
resultless controversies with them about the relative superiority of
Grecian and Egyptian art, the former representing the gods as resembling
man, the latter as resembling animals. In that region Apollonius
exorcised a satyr that was said to have killed two women. About the time
of the taking of Jerusalem by Titus, Apollonius happened to be in the
neighborhood of that city, and praised the Roman general for his
“moderation” (though it was a curious sort of moderation which leveled a
great city with the ground). Titus answered: “I have made conquest of
Solyma; you have made conquest of me,” and thereafter employed
Apollonius as his adviser. At Tarsus he not only cured a young man of
hydrophobia, but the dog also that had bitten him.

Having boldly denounced the Emperor Domitian at Ephesus, Apollonius was
betrayed by his disciple Euphrates, and a plot was laid against him.
Straightway he took ship for Rome, to confront the tyrant in his palace.
In Rome he was thrown into prison, and treated with much harshness; but
he defended himself with great spirit against the charges brought by his
accuser, and was acquitted. Thereupon he uttered a tirade of reproaches
against Domitian’s satellites, and suddenly vanished miraculously from
the judgment hall, appearing the same day in the vicinity of Naples,
where he had friends. From Naples he went to Ephesus; there, in ecstasy,
he saw the assassination of Domitian, at that moment taking place in
Rome; then he died. None knew what age he had attained, whether 80 years
or 100, nor the time, nor the place, nor the manner of his death.
According to Philostratus he appeared after his death to a young man of
his native town, Tyana, who doubted the immortality of the soul, and
invoked Apollonius to explain the matter; but he was invisible to the
other persons present.


                    2. ALEXANDER THE FALSE PROPHET.

It is no matter of surprise that the cold, austere virtue and wisdom,
the rather hollow religion, and the clumsy miracles of Apollonius
neither built up a school for him nor kept the heathen religion on its
feet; and though the emperors of the third century, from Caracalla to
Diocletian, consecrated temples to him, and one of them, Alexander
Severus, placed his bust, with those of Moses, Socrates and Jesus, in
his private chapel, nevertheless the Sage of Tyana was soon forgotten,
and with him, alas! the memory of his noble courage in the presence of
tyrants. On the other hand, the charlatanry he practiced became more and
more the order of the day, till at last it threw off all disguise.
Whether this result is chargeable to his disciples, who, like the
disciples of another master, prized his miracles more than his
teachings, is a question that cannot be decided; but the fact is that
soon after his death (the close of the first century) a number of
impostors, wearing the cloak of religion, began to ply their trade. The
satirist Lucian, who lived in the second century, and who made sport of
everything—religion and philosophy, gods and men, heathen and
Christians—has immortalized the tomfooleries of these pseudoprophets.

Of these the best known was Alexander of Abonotichus, in Asia Minor, a
man greater in fraud, says Lucian, than his namesake, the son of Philip,
in heroism. He was a large, handsome man, and by scrupulous care of his
complexion, his hair, and his beard, enhanced the advantage nature had
given him. But his character was “a compound of mendacity, fraud,
perjury, and low tricks of every kind.” In his boyhood he was
apprenticed to a quack of Tyana, a renegade disciple of Apollonius
(whose life, by the way, Lucian, who lived nearer to him than
Philostratus, calls a “comedy”), and by him was instructed in all the
artifices whereby one can outwit and defraud his fellows. After his
master’s death Alexander went into business on his own account. In
Macedonia he procured one of the large harmless serpents found in that
province and went back to his native town—Abonotichus—there to set up an
“oracle factory,” as Lucian calls it. At Chalcedon he secretly placed on
a roadside a tablet bearing the inscription that the god Aesculapius,
with his father, Apollo, was soon to be at Abonotichus; the finding of
this tablet caused great excitement. Meanwhile Alexander, in his native
place, went about with his long, curling locks falling over his
shoulders, wearing a purple robe with white stripes, and armed with a
sabre. His stupid fellow townsmen, though they knew his parents, who
were poor, believed him when he claimed descent from Perseus, and when
they heard of the tablet set about erecting a temple to Aesculapius.
Between the foundation stones of the temple Alexander secretly placed a
goose-egg shell containing a newly-hatched snake; then with the wild
gesticulations of a god-inspired enthusiast, hastened to the
market-place, and there announced to the people that Aesculapius had
just been born at the temple in the form of a serpent. To prove his
oracle true he held up before them the egg with the snake. On the
publication of this wondrous news, the populace flocked to the
market-place. Alexander had a hut of boards erected, within which he
seated himself in a reclining chair; then taking up the large snake
already mentioned, which he had kept out of sight, he laid it on his
breast, drew over its head a linen mask, painted to resemble a human
face, the mouth of which would open and shut on pulling a string, and
gave out to the people that the newborn god had already grown to that
great size, and was now ready to give oracles. From all Asia Minor and
Thrace the people came in thousands to witness the miracle. The mystic
semi-obscurity of the hut and the magical effects of artificial light
magnified the impression that the charlatan and his snake made on the
people. Whoever wished to receive an oracle of the god had to write his
question on a tablet, which was then to be sealed with wax and handed to
the prophet. When the people had retired he melted the seals, read the
questions, wrote the answers, then sealed the tablets again, and gave
them back (with the answers) the seals apparently intact. The tariff for
oracles was a drachma and eight oboli (about 25 cents), and the annual
receipts amounted to seventy or eighty thousand drachmas (say $15,000),
but he had out of this sum to pay a host of assistants and confederates.
When the temple was completed Alexander carried on his business there.

But his title to public regard did not pass unchallenged. The
Epicureans, who detested all trickery, and who believed that enjoyment
was the only end in life worth thinking of, manifested their hostility
to the prophet, and were, in turn, denounced by him as atheists and
Christians. To safeguard his reputation he added to his repertoire.
First, he began to give oracles viva voce, a confederate behind a screen
speaking the responses into a tube terminating at the mouth of the
snake’s mask. But the charge for such oracles was higher, and they were
elicited only for the behoof of persons of eminence. Alexander’s fame
spread even to Rome, and dupes from that seat of enlightenment came to
consult the serpent-god. One of these addle-pate pilgrims from Rome
asked the oracle what manner of woman he should take to wife. The oracle
named the daughter of Alexander; so he married her, and offered
hecatombs to his mother-in-law, his bride’s mother, in her capacity of
moon-goddess, for such Alexander gave her out to be. Encouraged by many
successes not inferior to this, the prophet instituted many mystic
festivals, from which he excluded all unbelievers in God, as Epicureans
and Christians. At these festivals the birth of Aesculapius and the
nuptials of Alexander and the Moon-Goddess were represented
dramatically, though perhaps a trifle too realistically. The prophet
also claimed to be a reincarnation of Pythagoras, and in proof showed
his thigh encased in gilded leather. His life was a continuous debauch.
In time he began to hold what we should now call “dark seances;” that
is, he would sit in absolute darkness and make response to questions
submitted in writing on sealed tablets. As he could not read the
questions at all, his answers (the oracles) were expressed for the most
part in unintelligible language. Lucian once tested his powers by
submitting to him the one question, “When will Alexander be caught at
his tricks,” written on eight tablets; he got eight different answers,
all irrelevant. He missed no opportunity of unmasking the rogue, and of
teaching the people by the evidence of their own senses that the man was
a vulgar impostor. The knave affected a mild friendship for his
adversary, but he bribed the helmsman of a vessel on which Lucian sailed
to throw him overboard; this the man had not the courage to do. Lucian
wished to have the impostor put on trial for this crime, but the
proconsul advised him not to invoke the help of the law, Alexander being
too high in favor with the officials and the public. The city of
Abonotichus had coins struck bearing the effigy of the Aesculapius
serpent, and the pseudoprophet attained the age of seventy years,
enjoying to the end the undiminished respect of the people.

Many were the impostors that sprang up after Alexander, and wherever
there was any lack of real ones, fictitious pseudoprophets were imagined
by satiric writers, Lucian’s Peregrinus, for example, a renegade
Christian who devotes himself to a death by fire to win fame. It was a
mad world then. New mysteries were invented in plenty, and people came
in crowds for initiation. The “Golden Ass” of Apuleius is a striking
satire on this mystery furore. To this period belong the Gnostics, whose
doctrines were a mixture of Judaism, heathenism and Christianism; the
Manichees, who gave a Christian varnish to the Persian fire worship; the
Kabbalists, who heaped a vast amount of rubbish together, got out of the
Hebrew Bible by juggling with its sentences, words, letters and numbers.
Amid this tangle of doctrines the heathen religions sank, Judaism lost
its native land, and Christianism fell into an incalculable number of
sects—an evil that was not to be corrected even by the artificial unity
of the Church under the Apostolical See.




                             _PART SIXTH._
                         _The Knights Templar._


                           1. THE MIDDLE AGE.

With the spread of Christianism the heathen mysteries came everywhere to
an end, and the Christian mysteries took their place. The Christians, it
is true, no longer constituted a secret society, after their faith had
become the creed of the state; but there was plenty of mystic doctrine,
nevertheless, and incessant strife of parties and sects, Arians and
Athanasians, Pelasgians and Semipelagians, Nestorians, Monophysites and
Monothelites, Adoptionists, Priscillianists, and Donatists, to name no
more, over Christ’s nature, on the question whether the Holy Ghost
proceeds only from the Father or equally from him and the Son; whether
the soul is saved by good works or by grace of God, and so on
interminably. This wrangling so occupied the minds of all that there was
no longer need of secret societies. Theology, i. e., the struggle for
creed, and war, i. e., the struggle for power, were the occupations of
the Middle Age. Monks and knights were the two great classes of that
time, with the Pope as supreme head on one side, and the Emperor on the
other.

All the available knowledge was in the Middle Age employed in the
service of the Church, and hence science slept from the migration of the
barbarians till the invention of printing. During that period of a
thousand years no addition was made to the sum of human knowledge.
Arabian and Jewish physicians alone labored to save the intellectual
wealth inherited from the ancient Greeks. As for Christendom, it was
involved in profound intellectual darkness, and the Doctrine of Light
that had been published by the Carpenter’s Son, was lost amid petty
controversies and inane interpretations, till at last its strictly
monotheistic groundwork was forgotten, and there remained visible only
the superstructure of ethnic mysticism and of doctrines, as the Trinity,
Incarnation, Resurrection, and Ascension, borrowed from Egyptian and
Grecian mythology.

And this ethnico-mystic structure acquired a splendor and a power never
before equaled, so that the system was credited to divine intervention,
whereas its purely human origin might easily have been traced. The root
idea of the ethnic mysticism was to seek the supposedly “lost deity,” to
find him, to be unified with him. And the self-same idea underlay the
Christian mysticism, and it was by calling that idea into play and by
giving it expression in brilliant achievement, that this mysticism won
its highest triumph, and, aided by the Papacy, its widest influence.
This new embodiment of the mystical idea was seen in the Crusades, in
which the Christian mystics joined, going forth to seek the lost
sepulchre of their God, and to obtain control of it. Possession of the
sepulchre would be the surest guarantee for the unification of godhead
and humanity.

In this undertaking the two most powerful estates of the Middle Age took
part—the monks and the knights. The monks, under orders from the Pope,
joined the armies of the cross; the knights, commanded by the Emperor,
marched to the Holy Land and conquered it. After the conquest, when
there was a kingdom of Jerusalem after the model of the kingdoms of the
West, there arose, as the necessary summit of medieval aspiration, the
union of monkery and chivalry, in the monkish orders of knights, whose
members wore the sword of the knight and took the monastic vows of
poverty, chastity, and obedience.

These organizations had their origin in the gradual assumption of
knightly elements by the monastic orders. Some merchants of Amalfi,
oldest commercial emporium of Italy, had, as early as 1048, founded a
monastery and a church at Jerusalem, and in conjunction with these a
hospital in honor of John the Baptist. There the monks cared for
pilgrims who were poor or ailing. Pope Paschal II. granted them a
monastic constitution in 1113, and Godfrey of Bouillon, soon after the
capture of Jerusalem, endowed them with considerable properties.

They took the title of Brothers Hospitalers of Saint John of Jerusalem;
their habit consisted of a black mantle with a white cross. A few years
later (1119) the Knights Hugo of Payns, and Godfrey of Saint Omers,
associated themselves and six other knights, all French, in a military
league, under the style “Poor Knights of Christ,” pledging themselves to
keep the highways of the Holy Land safe for pilgrims, and to observe the
rule of Saint Benedict. The members were favored by King Baldwin I. and
the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and came to be called Templars, because
their convent stood on the site of the Solomonic Temple. The Templars
received from the Synod of Troyes in 1128 recognition as a regular
order, a monastic rule, a monastic habit, a special banner, etc. About
the same date the Hospitalers, Johannites, or Knights of Saint John of
Jerusalem, became invested with the knightly character. After the
Hospitalers came the German Knights, whose theatre of action was
principally the region of the Baltic Sea, but they also saw service in
Spain in the war against the Saracens. Other knightly orders were those
of Calatrava, of Alcantara, of Santiago de Compostella, in England the
order of the Knights of the Holy Sepulchre, etc.


                            2. THE TEMPLARS.

None of these orders rose to higher distinction than the order of the
Templars, or of “the Poor Companions of the Temple of Jerusalem,” as it
was styled in its rule. In those days it was full of the spirit of
lowliness, but the time came when the knights were no longer called
themselves “Poor Companions,” but “Knights Templar.” At first the
brethren begged their bread, fasted, were diligent in attendance on
divine worship, performed the duties of their religion, fed the poor,
cared for the sick. Plain and unadorned was their attire, in color
either black, white or brown; and the brother who tried to get the
finest habit got the shabbiest. The hair and beard were close cropped.
The chase was not permitted, except for the extermination of beasts of
prey. Women were not allowed to live in the houses of the order; the
brethren might not so much as kiss their female relations. But their
mode of life became in time very different. They became rich in worldly
goods, and so broke the vow of poverty. As an order and as individuals
they followed their own inclinations, and thus was their vow of
obedience made nought; and their vow of chastity fared not better; while
the specific vow of the order—protection of pilgrims to the Holy
Land—became a nullity through their negligence, or even by their
treasonable surrender of posts to the Saracens.

The candidate for admission to the order was required to be of noble
birth, though sometimes illegitimate sons of knights were received.
Furthermore, the candidate must be unmarried and unbetrothed; but this
rule was circumvented by taking married candidates as “affiliate”
members; they also admitted minors and even small boys. Lucre was the
impelling motive of this disregard of their rule; money was their god.
No other order of knights was in such disrepute for lewdness, duplicity,
even treason. Originally all Templars were of one rank and degree—that
of knights. But in time ecclesiastics were admitted to attend to the
spiritual affairs, and these ecclesiastics were made independent of the
ordinary jurisdiction of diocesans. Thus was formed a second rank or
degree, subordinate to the knights, and mere dummies on festival and
ceremonial occasions. Then was added still another class, Servientes,
who were the personal attendants of the knights, or were otherwise
employed for the benefit of the order, as mechanics, laborers, etc. The
class Affiliates comprised persons of all ranks in life and of both
sexes. They were not bound by all the vows of the order; they were
required to make the order heir of their property; but they did not live
in the houses of the order. These several classes were distinguished by
their attire. Knights wore a white mantle with an eight-pointed red
cross over the left breast. Clerics wore the cassock, with brown mantle
(the mantle of the higher clerics was white). Servientes wore a brown
garb. The members called each other Brother, and indeed they stood by
each other like brothers; in battle their personal bravery was
irreproachable.

All these religious orders of knights possessed great power in the
Middle Age, their grandmasters ranking next after Popes and monarchs. In
fact they recognized no emperor or king as their lord, but only the
Pope. The orders were favored by the Pontiffs, who loaded them with
praise and privileges, though they feared them. If the Popes had now the
arm of the flesh and not of the spirit only to defend them against the
secular power, they owed that advantage to the knightly orders. And
specially were they beholden to the Templars in this regard. The
Templars were free from all Church tribute, and by the Pope’s favor had
the right to harbor excommunicated knights, to conduct divine service in
churches that were under interdict, to found churches and churchyards;
which privileges brought down upon them the enmity of the clergy. As the
order was exempt from all episcopal jurisdiction and subject only to the
Roman See, the bishops endeavored to have that and other like privileges
abated by the Lateran Council in 1179. At the time of their suppression
the Templars possessed an empire of five provinces in the East and
sixteen in the West, with 15,000 houses of the order. In possession of
such resources, they aimed at nothing short of making all Christendom
dependent on their order, and to set up a sort of military aristocratic
commonwealth, governed ostensibly by the Pope, but really by themselves,
with their grandmaster at the head. The grandmaster of the Templars was
elected by a college of eight knights, four servientes and one cleric.
The Grandmaster was only president of the Council and its
representative; but in war he had supreme command; as the Pope’s deputy
he had jurisdiction over the clerics. A splendid retinue attended him,
and he had a treasury at his disposal. Next in rank after him stood the
Seneschal, his deputy for civil affairs, and the Marshal for military,
the Treasurer, the Drapier. The Council (Conventus) consisted of the
Grandmaster, his assistants (i.e., the grand officers just mentioned),
Provincial Masters who might be present, and such knights as the
Grandmaster might summon. By addition of all eminent Templars the
Council became the General Chapter; this was the legislative body. The
other knightly orders were organized on a plan not essentially
different. What interests us most at present is those features of the
Templar order which marked it as in some respects a secret society.

The order took its first steps in this direction in the thirteenth
century, moved thereto by desire to safeguard its riches and power. Its
secret doctrines or tenets were borrowed from the heretical sects of the
time—Albigenses and Waldenses—or were such beliefs as were held in
secret by many of the most enlightened men. Such views were shared by
religious men, scholars, and worldlings alike, by the first class out of
indignation against the moral degeneration of the rulers of the Church;
by the second, because they suspected that the Church’s dogmas were but
inventions of Popes and councils, and by the third, because in rejecting
the Church’s authority and accepting the heretical doctrines, they
fancied that they were freed from the obligations of morality. But the
Templars, who were neither pious nor learned, but of whom many were very
worldly indeed, found the enlightened new opinions to coincide well with
their interest, which prompted them to care rather for their numerous
possessions in the West than for the few they held in lands occupied by
the Moslem. God, said they, showed his favor to the Mohammedans in the
Crusades, and evidently willed the defeat of the Christian arms. So by
adopting the more enlightened views, they prepared the way for a
withdrawal from the useless Crusades, and a return with bag and baggage
to Europe, where they could rest from their glorious but hard and
thankless martial labors, and devote themselves to the service of
princes, or pass the time in the splendid houses of their order, amid
Oriental luxury, and surrounded by gardens like Fairyland, beguiling the
hours with gaming and the chase, with songs and lovemaking, the while
not neglecting their political interests. But the Templars were rapidly
nearing their downfall.


                    3. THE SECRETS OF THE TEMPLARS.

The Arcana of the Templars consisted of a secret doctrine and of a cult
based on the same. The doctrine, which had no ground in scientific
research, seems to have been akin to the doctrine of certain sects,
specially the Albigenses, who worshiped a superior god of heaven and an
inferior god of earth, and ascribed to the latter the origin of evil.
For the Templars, Christ was no Son of God, had worked no miracles, had
neither risen from the dead nor ascended into heaven; he was, in fact,
often spoken of as a false prophet. The Church’s doctrine regarding the
transubstantiation of the bread in the mass was for them crass
superstition, the eucharist only a commemorative rite, the sacrament of
penance a priestly imposture, the Trinity a human invention, veneration
of the cross an act of idolatry. That the opposition of the order to the
last-mentioned custom led on festival occasions, and particularly when
new members were admitted, to overt acts of contempt for the cross, to
spitting on the cross, for example—accusations like that are grave not
only from the point of view of the Church, but even of common propriety,
and they played an important part in the prosecution of the Templars.
That postulants were compelled by force of arms and other violent means
to perform such highly reprehensible acts is not to be discredited
entirely, for they may have been part of a test of the postulants’
willingness to obey superiors: and besides, the objectionable ceremony
was not practiced everywhere, but only in France. More excusable was the
offense of the Templars in looking on the cross broidered on their
mantle, not as the sign of redemption, but as a double T, the initial
letter of the name of their society. They were said also to have
substituted John the Baptist in the place of Jesus as the order’s
patron, because John did not pretend to miraculous powers nor declare
himself the Messiah. The clerics of the order must have approved these
heretical opinions and practices. There were at that time many
enlightened churchmen, and it is to be presumed that the Templars would
adopt such of them as were at variance with the hierarchy and took
refuge in the order.

The Templars’ secret rites, introduced in the middle of the thirteenth
century, were practiced as part of their peculiar religious service, and
at the admission of new members: for though the Catholic liturgy was
used in their chapels, the initiated performed a cult of their own in
the chapter house, or chapel, before break of day. This consisted of
confession and communion, as understood by Templars. This confession
they regarded on the one hand as an act of brotherly trust, and on the
other of brotherly counsel: hence, they confessed only to the chaplains
of the order; in the latter times of the order the members were
forbidden to confess to priests that were not Templars. By them the
communion was taken in the natural species and substance of bread and
wine, and in token of brotherly love, not as commemorative of any
sacrifice.

Two images played a part in the Templar rites. The image of John the
Baptist typified the order’s opposition to the Church’s creed. The other
image, jealously guarded from the eyes of outsiders, has been called an
“idol.” It was made chiefly of copper, gilt, and represented now a human
skull, anon the countenance of an old man heavily bearded
(makroprosopos), again a very small face (mikroprosopos), which would be
now the face of a man, then of a woman, anon male and female at once; it
would have now one, again two or three, heads, with bright shining eyes
of carbuncles. The idol was by some Templars called “Bassomet,” but why,
does not appear. From the statements of members of the order it would
seem that this idol was a kind of talisman that brought all manner of
good fortune; that it was set up for veneration as rival to the cross,
and that they called it “the savior of the order.”

There were two forms of admission, the general and the special (or
secret) form: the latter was used only at the admission of postulants
that could be trusted with the secrets of the order. The Scribe, acting
as Receptor, first asked the brethren, in chapter, if they had any
objection to make the admission of the postulant. If none objected the
postulant was led into an adjoining room and questioned as to his
purpose in seeking entrance to the order, whether he knew of any
impediment on his part, whether he owed debts that he could not pay,
whether he was married or engaged to be married, and so forth. The
questions having been satisfactorily answered, and the minutes of the
replies reported to the brethren, the matter was again put to vote.
Next, the candidate was brought before the chapter, and, after more
questioning, took the vows and was formally admitted. In the secret rite
of admission the Receptor showed to the candidate the Idol, with these
words: “Believe in this, put your trust in this, and all will be well
with you.” Then he girded the candidate with a cord of white wool
fibres, the Baptist’s girdle, as it was called, which he was to wear
over the shirt. The obligation of secrecy was very sternly enforced.
Those who betrayed any of the secrets of the order were cast into
prison, and the candidate was threatened with dungeons and death should
he communicate to an outsider any information about the ceremony of
initiation.

Thus did the Templars, an order instituted for the purpose of guarding
the Church’s interests, in the end reject the Church’s doctrines, and
adopt principles that tended inevitably to the overthrow, not only of
the Papacy, but of Christianism itself. Such was the irreconcilable
opposition between the avowed and the secret convictions of the
Templars, and such was the hypocrisy of the order: for, though they had
apostatized from the creeds of the Church, they would not formally quit
her communion; and though they regarded as true many points of
anti-Christian doctrine, they veiled these with mystery, or even on
occasion made sport of them, instead of publishing them, as so many
poor, unarmed heretics did; and hence their aspirations were foiled, and
the most powerful association of that time perished, not in glorious
battle, but in ignominious dungeons and at the stake.


                4. THE DOWNFALL OF THE KNIGHTS TEMPLAR.

The Crusades having failed utterly, the Holy Land having again come
under the power of the “infidels,” and the occupation of the knightly
orders having gone, the Popes cast about for a remedy for this
undesirable state of things. The order of German Knights had already
forestalled the problem by choosing as their theatre of action the
countries on the Baltic Sea, and the Spanish orders by waging continual
wars against the Moors; and the Knights of Saint John (Hospitalers)
later found a place for themselves by occupying Rhodes. But the Templars
were without any fit employment, and that circumstance was the occasion
of their downfall. About the year 1305 Pope Clement V. proposed a union
of the Templars with the Hospitalers, and, if possible, with other
orders, but both Templars and Hospitalers rejected the advice.

Philip IV. (the Fair) of France found in the Templars a serious
obstacle to his ambition, and in the early years of his reign sought
to compel them by force to aid him in his schemes; but failing in that
design, tried to win them by loading them with favors. Many different
explanations have been offered to account for another change of policy
on the part of Philip, but none of them is historically sound.
Probably the change noticeable in the king’s attitude toward the order
in 1305 was in some way connected with the outrageous doings of the
Inquisition in the South of France; doubtless rumors of heresy in the
Templar order had come to the omnipresent ear of the Holy Court. The
Inquisitor-General of France, William Imbert, prior of the Dominicans
in Paris, begged the King to call the Templars to account. The King,
on Nov. 14, 1305, informed Clement V. of the accusation, but Clement,
notwithstanding this, invited not only the Grandmaster of the
Hospitalers, but also the head of the Templars, to meet with himself
in conference about the project of a new Crusade. Yet in his letter to
the Templars’ Grandmaster, James Molay (who resided in his palace in
Cyprus), he counseled him to come without escort, “lest the news of
his departure should give occasion to enemies (of the order) to make a
sudden onslaught.” The Master of the Hospitalers was unable to come,
being busied with the siege of Rhodes, and Molay, contrary to the
Pope’s advice, came to France escorted by his entire council, sixty
knights, and bringing the treasure and the archives of his order. In
May, 1307, the Pope and the King met at Poictiers, and, it is
supposed, discussed thoroughly the question of the Templars: about the
same time the Templars informed the Pope of the dangers that
threatened them, and asked for an investigation of the charges brought
against them: such investigation the Pope decided to institute. It
cannot be determined whether it was with the Pope’s approval, or
against his wishes, that Philip on Oct. 13, 1307, had all the Templars
in France arrested and their goods seized.

Five heads of complaint were alleged against the order; viz.,
profanation of the cross, worship of an idol, indecent rites of
initiation, omission of the sacramental words (i.e., the words of
consecration or of transubstantiation, Hoc est corpus meum) in masses
performed by priests belonging to the order, and indulgence of unnatural
lusts. Two days after the arrests the people of Paris, whose partiality
for the Templars was feared, were assembled before the royal palace, and
there were labored with by monks and royal officials, to turn them
against the order. The King took up his residence in the “Temple,” the
Paris house of the order, in which was hid the treasure of the
Grandmaster (150,000 gold florins, and twelve horseloads of silver
pence). It was not quite 500 years later when the Temple became the
prison of a descendant of the King. In that same building, in presence
of the masters and bachelors of the university, the trial of the
Grandmaster and his brethren was commenced, and proceeded under the
direction of Imbert. The procedure was the same as in the ordinary
trials for heresy and witchcraft in the court of the Inquisition.
Confessions were obtained by use of the torture, and it is impossible at
this day to tell how much in those confessions was due to the employment
of that peculiar method of eliciting truth, and how much, if any part,
was prompted by the desire to atone for past offenses by truthful (even
if forced) admission of guilt.

The Pope was not pleased with this turn of affairs. He claimed for
himself the right to proceed against the Templars, declared that the
King was infringing the privileges of the See of Rome, and attributed
the action taken against the Templars to a desire to get possession of
the order’s treasury and to annihilate a society whose existence was a
cause of anxiety to the King. He, therefore, protested against the whole
proceeding, and demanded that the arrested Templars and their property
should be surrendered to him as judge of the questions at issue. The
King refused, but he came to an understanding with the Pope in the
matter of the prosecution, and Nov. 22 the Pope, by the bull “Pastoralis
Praeeminentiae,” ordered the arrest of all the Templars throughout the
Christian world. The King of England, Edward II. who was Philip’s
son-in-law, obeyed this precept, though he had previously expressed
disbelief of the guilt of the Templars. A like change of mind was seen
in Aragon. In Cyprus the Templars attempted resistance, but submitted.
Denis, King of Portugal, refused to institute a prosecution against
them.

Inasmuch as the measure was one that affected all countries, the case of
the Templars belonged of right to the Papal jurisdiction. Even Philip
admitted this; but he mistrusted the Pope, and feared that the Templars
might be acquitted, and then take revenge on the King. Negotiations were
opened. The King demanded the death of the Templars, but the Pope would
not consent to this till their guilt was fully proven; and again he
demanded the surrender to him of their persons and their possessions.
The King at last acceded to the demand, for he had need of the Pope’s
assistance in procuring the election of his brother as successor to the
assassinated German King, Albert.

Under the Papal jurisdiction the trials were conducted with more lenity:
torture was not employed. But the Pope became convinced of the guilt of
the accused; till then he had been in doubt. Molay made, without
compulsion, many very important admissions, as did several high
officials of the order, but on sundry points they contradicted one
another. Nevertheless, the Pope was still firmly of the opinion that
only individual Templars were on trial, not the order, while for the
King the annihilation of the order was the main thing. August 8, 1308,
the bull “Faciens Misericordiam” ordered a prosecution of the Templars
in every country of Christendom; and on the 12th of the same month, by
the bull “Regnans in Coelis,” a council was summoned for the year 1310,
to determine the question of the Templars. Further ordinances of the
Pope had to do with the surrender of the properties of the order to the
Church.

Meanwhile the Pope had forgotten to aid the French King’s brother in his
pretensions to the crown of the Roman Empire. On the contrary, he
favored the election of Henry VII. of Luxemburg, and was glad to find in
him a prince who would strenuously oppose the overweening ambition of
Philip IV. The tension between the Pope and the French King was
increasing, and the trials of the Templars went on sluggishly for two
years more. There was much arbitrary ill-usage of Templars. The bishops,
to whom the Pope had committed the prosecution of the individual members
of the order, in many places gave loose rein to their ancient enmity
toward the Templars, and freely used the torture; nevertheless, very
many of the accused maintained the innocence of their order, and
declared the prior confessions false. This can be explained only by
supposing that the abuses in the order did not extend to all the houses.
Molay’s behavior on his trial was neither firm nor dignified, ever
balancing between self-accusation and vindication. He was never sure of
his ground, sought to retard procedure, used equivocal and obscure
phrases, and continually protested his orthodoxy; and the other members
for the most part acted in like manner: but their excuse is the hard
usage they endured, and Molay was not permitted to complain of that.

All the Templars arrested in Paris, numbering 546, were on the 28th of
May, 1310, mustered in the garden of the Bishop’s palace, and there the
accusation was read to them. Six of the accused—three knights and three
clerics—protested in the name of all against the treatment they had
received, and demanded the release of all Templars and arrest of their
accusers. In vain! During the investigation thirty-six members of the
order died in prison at Paris. May 12, 1310, those who had retracted
their confessions, to the number of 54, were burned alive: to these were
afterward added eight more, and at Rheims nine met the same fate: they
all protested their innocence at the supreme moment. It is worthy of
note that the Pope, who till then had favored delay in the proceedings,
was now for instant action. He sharply reproved the English authorities
for refusing to employ the torture; and he did his best to accomplish
the destruction of the Templars at Avignon, who had taken up arms to
defend themselves; but, though defeated, they were adjudged innocent;
and it was the same in Castile. In Germany, where the order, though weak
in numbers, made a resolute stand, the Pope offered no convincing proof
of the charges; and in England, too, nothing could be proved against the
accused members. But throughout the greater part of Italy the Templars
fared as in France, except that they were not condemned to the stake. In
vain did the celebrated Raymond Lully, at the Council of Vienne (1312),
plead for the preservation of the order by a consolidation of all the
military orders in one, whose Grandmaster should be that French prince
who happened to be King of Jerusalem: for he hoped thus to conciliate
the good will of Philip. The Pope, who had long been urged by the King
to suppress the order, now made haste to save the property of the
Templars from falling into secular hands, and so, by the bulls “Vox in
Excelso” and “Ad Providam Christi Vicarii,” published April 3 and May 2,
1312, respectively, he made over to the Hospitalers all the estates of
the Templars, estates in Spain excepted.

The unfortunate Grandmaster Molay, who received a pittance of four sous
per diem to alleviate his misery, bore his imprisonment with great
fortitude; but March 11, 1313, he and Godfrey de Charney, an official of
the order, having retracted their confessions, were slowly burnt to
death on an island in the Seine, by order of the King, without any
judicial process. Molay, it is said, cited the two murderers of his
brethren, Philip and Clement, to appear before the judgment seat of God.
They both died, one of colic, the other in consequence of a fall from
his horse, eight and thirteen months, respectively, after the death of
Molay. The order was suppressed everywhere except in Portugal, where it
took the name “Order of Jesus Christ,” and continued in existence. Its
Grandmaster, Prince Henry the navigator, a hundred years afterward,
employed its wealth in promoting the high ends of civilization. In other
countries the Templars either wandered about as fugitives, or entered
the order of Hospitalers. The seizure of the order’s estates in France
was annulled by the bull of suppression, but Philip, nevertheless,
maintained his hold on the house of the order in Paris, and on the
treasure there stored. The remainder of the property was plundered by
the nobility and the Church; and the Pope surely was not forgetful of
his own interest. The Hospitalers afterward succeeded to their rights,
but that did them hardly less harm than good, for it cost them a great
sum to release the estates of the Templars from the grasp of the
robbers; besides, many a small piece of property was made away with by
princes, great lords, orders, churches, and monasteries.




                             _PART SEVENTH_
                           _The Femgerichte._


                1. COURTS OF JUSTICE IN THE MIDDLE AGE.

The wild disorder attending the irruption of the Gothic nations having
subsided, society, which had lost its bearings, had to organize itself
anew. The first step toward this end was taken when society’s task was
distributed among innumerable fractional parts of itself, each fraction
trying to do its own share of the work; the next step was the uniting of
all these fractional parts under one religious idea—that of
Christianism, and under one political law—that of feudalism. The Pope
and the Emperor represented the religious and the political ideas
respectively. As long as one was true to Pope and Emperor—i.e., was a
good Christian and a good subject—all was well with him, and he might,
in all other matters, do as he pleased. The principle of Justice was not
regarded: no wrong act was punished as violating right, but always as
doing harm. Even murder was not regarded as infringement of human right
to life, but simply as harm done to the people of the murdered one. If
one was without relatives, his slayer went unpunished; but if the
murdered man left a family or kinsmen, the murderer, on paying to them a
certain sum, went forth free. Thus, the utmost unrestraint prevailed in
the several small aggregations of people, and the utmost diversity
between one little community and another. Of bureaucratic, centralized,
cast-iron government there was no faintest foreshadow; nor was
government a function assigned to any one, but, like the administration
of justice, an acquired right. In a given province this one had acquired
the government, that one the civil and a third the criminal judiciary;
one was obeyed in peace, another commanded the people in war.
Jurisdictions were undefined and inextricably mixed up—a consequence of
the feudal system, under which the King granted rights now to one man,
again to another, as favors, never inquiring how these might consist
with rights previously granted to others. In this way it became possible
in the Middle Age for such juristic abnormities as the Femgerichte to
come into existence. The Femgerichte resulted from the confusion
existing in judiciary affairs, just as the religious abnormity of the
monastic orders of knights resulted from the very opposite condition of
things in the Church—the excess of regulation. For the confusion
(absence of regulation) and the excessive regulation were near akin;
they both sprang out of the unrestraint of private life in the Middle
Age, which unrestraint naturally produced, under the rule of the Church,
a multitude of monastic rules (e.g., the Rule of St. Augustin, of St.
Benedict, of St. Columba, etc.); while, on the contrary, the feebleness
of the Empire, due to the jealousy of the Popes and the ambition and
avarice of the feudal lords, was fatal to any organization of the
administrative and judicial functions, and though there were many codes
of law, there could be no standard for distinguishing right and wrong.

The cause of this difference of development between State and Church
was, that the Church had grown from the top downward, from the hierarchy
down to the people; while the State, on the contrary, had grown from
below upward. During the process of migration and settlement, each
nation or horde was self-governed, perfectly free and independent:
hence, the popular, genial, oftentimes even jovial and humorous cast of
Teutonic law, as compared with the hard, pedantic, abstruse, austere
character of the Jus Romanum. Roman law has only a corpus juris;
Teutonic law has Wise Saws, Juristic Proverbs, Juristic Drolleries,
Juristic Myths (Weistuemer, Rechtssprichtwoerter, Rechtsschwoernke,
Rechtssagen).

Originally, among the Germans, the freemen themselves were the court and
chose their president, the Graf (graf now equals count). Not until the
time of Karl the Great (Charlemagne) did the grafs become standing
officials, and later an hereditary order and lords proprietary. As the
functions of government were by degrees entrusted to fewer and ever
fewer hands, being transferred from the people to favored feudal lords,
and from them passing finally into the hands of an individual
sovereign—a quite natural process, for while the people increased in
number they did not become better educated, and therefore grew ever less
fitted for self-government—so, too, judgment, quitting the open,
embowered courts amid the lindens, with heaven’s breezes whispering
among the leaves, and heaven’s blue dome overarching all, withdrew
behind dank and frowning walls, from the countenance of the whole people
to a meeting of a small bench of stern judges.

Thus gradually were the rights of the freemen diminished. The freemen
was less and less frequently called to sit in judgment, for the
president of the court, the graf, was no longer an equal, but a great
lord, their superior, who made up the court as to him seemed best, and
who even cared nothing for the Emperor.[2]

Footnote 2:

  What follows regarding the Femgerichte is based on Theodor Lindner’s
  work, “Die Femgerichte,” Münster and Paderborn, 1888. (Whatever may
  have been the original meaning of the word “fem” in “femgericht,” it
  is enough to know that in usage it is equivalent to “secret”; hence
  femgericht—secret judgment, or secret tribunal.)

Westphalia was the original home of the Femgerichte, and they owed their
rise to the fact that there the royal ban (Koenigsbann), that is to say,
the right possessed by the King alone, of conferring the grafship on the
grafs, was still alive, in modified form indeed, yet with its substance
unimpaired. Owing to the granting of various privileges to
ecclesiastical and secular magnates the jurisdiction of the grafs was in
time divided up. Besides, there were special courts for freemen, and
special courts for the half-free and the unfree, the former courts being
under the free grafs, and the other under the gaugrafafs (district
grafs). Now, as the majority of the population were under the gaugrafs,
the possession of a gaugrafship developed into sovereignty; while the
position of the free grafs became peculiar: the office was often sold
and passed from hand to hand. The free grafs, who were often persons of
little means, in order to maintain their dignity, had to lean on the
King’s ban, or warrant, obtainable from the King alone. But often the
free grafships died out, or they were consolidated with gaugrafships.
But nowhere did they retain so much of their original character as in
Westphalia—a geographical expression of various meanings, indeed, but in
general it denoted the region between the Rhine and the Weser. The term
Freigraf dates from the twelfth century.

Not only the King but the duke also had influence over the free
grafships. After the break-up of the ancient duchy of Saxony, every
princely land proprietor within its territory was duke of Westphalia;
this is specially true of the Archbishop of Cologne, and also of the
bishops of Muenster, Osnabrueck and Minden, and of the Duke of
Saxe-Lauenburg—dukes of Westphalia all, but with more or less
limitation. Probably the duke was entitled to preside over any free
court, and to summon to his own tribunal, the “botding,” the free grafs.
So, too, the stuhlherr (lord of the manor) possessed the right of
presiding, even when he was no prince, but only a graf; and often he
assumed that the free graf gave judgment only in his (the lord’s) name,
and so granted release from the jurisdiction of the free courts, to
cities, for example. The free graf and his assessors, the schoeffen (a
lower grade of judges), afterward called freischoeffen, constituted the
freigericht (free court), afterward known as femgericht. These offices
might fall to any freeman—and any one was reckoned a freeman who had
“his own smoke,” i. e., a house of his own.

In the latter half of the 14th and the first half of the 15th century
the emperors bestowed on the archbishops of Cologne, as dukes of
Westphalia and lieutenants of the Emperor, the right of investiture of
all free grafs and supervision of them all over Westphalia. A chapter of
free grafs was held yearly at Arnsberg, and hence the Arnsberg tribunal
obtained the first rank.

As the free grafs held their investiture from the king, they looked on
themselves as king’s officers, and little by little went on extending
their jurisdiction over the whole empire—a design favored by the
confusion reigning everywhere, and even approved by the emperors
themselves. At last the free grafs began to think that they were higher
than the emperor, and had no need of his meddling: this arrogance was at
its height in the reign of Sigmund, and it was still to be seen under
Frederic VII.; in fact, Frederic, for having taken steps to punish some
insubordinate free grafs, was summoned by free grafs to stand trial.

Some of the emperors did, indeed, set up free graf tribunals outside the
limits of Westphalia; but these never prospered. In the 15th century it
was an axiom that such courts could exist only in Westphalia, or, as the
saying was, “on red earth,” a phrase that does not occur prior to 1490,
and the sense of which is not quite clear; for neither is the soil of
all Westphalia red, nor is red soil confined to Westphalia: and the same
criticism may be made if “red earth” be taken for “blood-stained earth.”


                        2. THE SECRET TRIBUNAL.

The early “free courts” were in a certain sense “private” courts,
inasmuch as they were not open to all like the courts of the gaugrafs
(or judges of districts). The associate judges (Freischoeffen) were
called “wissende” (wisemen, knowing ones), which, in old times, meant
“judges.” The “private” tribunal of the Feme became by degrees a
“secret” tribunal about the middle of the 14th century, as the free
grafs became more conscious of their ambitious aims. The Schoeffen were
now required to bind themselves by oath to observe secrecy: the one who
proved false to his oath was first to have his tongue plucked out, and
then he was to be hanged, either three or seven feet higher than a
thief. The penalty was exacted very rarely, and probably never the first
item of it. The obligation of secrecy extended over all the proceedings
of the secret courts, even their letters and summonses. But the most
important secret was the countersign, by means of which the initiated
recognized each other. This was made up of four words (taken from the
oath), Stock, Stein, Gras, Grein; and as the words were pronounced one
laid his right hand on the others’ left shoulder. Poetry and romance
have made the Feme courts sit in subterranean chambers, at night, the
faces of the judges masked. The fact is that the tribunals of the Feme
were set up at the ancient seats of the free tribunals, and of such
places there were in Westphalia more than a hundred; and the trials were
always held in the open air, in broad daylight. Whether in certain cases
they were also public, so that any one might be present, is not known.
In all cases where testimony was taken the proceedings were secret;
whoever willingly or unwillingly was present unbidden at the secret
deliberations was straightway hanged from the nearest tree.

Very remarkable was the universal recognition throughout Germany of the
power of the Femgerichte. In 1387 the most distinguished people of
Cologne were “wissende”; about 1420 the Rhineland was full of wissende
belonging to every grade in society; and soon after the same might be
said of Bavaria, Tyrol, Switzerland, Suabia, Franconia, Saxony, Prussia.
Every manor lord and every free city needed the advice of wissende.
Princes and cities had their judges admitted as schoeffen; archbishops
and princes, even the Emperor Sigmund, were initiated: in the middle of
the 15th century there must have been more than 100,000 freischoeffen in
the empire. To be initiated became a craze, a fad; the native
Westphalians were amazed at the folly of their southern and eastern
countrymen.

And the long arm of the Femgericht jurisdiction reached as far as the
host of wissende: the localities in which the activity of the secret
tribunals was manifested were scattered all over the empire; in fact,
the proceedings of these courts which affected Westphalia itself became
a very small fraction of the whole.

But with the spread of the Feme jurisdiction arose opposition to the
same. There were seen faint beginnings of opposition even in the early
part of the 14th century, when Bremen decided not to allow members of
the Feme courts to reside within its jurisdiction; toward the close of
that century other cities took more effective measures, and in the 15th
were even formed leagues of cities for self-defense against the
encroachments of the Feme. Brunswick appealed to the Pope and the
Emperor, and Hildesheim and Erfurt to the Council of Basel. In the
middle of the 15th century several cities, especially in Southern
Germany and in Holland, were freed from the jurisdiction of the secret
courts by the supreme ecclesiastical and civil authorities. Then the
dukes of Bavaria and of Saxony forbade their subjects laying complaints
in the Westphalian courts, and some cities punished that offense with
death, imprisonment, or banishment.

A Feme court consisted of a free graf and at least seven schoeffen. The
graf was required to be a freeborn Westphalian of stainless reputation,
whatever his station in life, for peasants were often chosen to be
grafs. The schoeffen also had to be freemen born, and if not of
Westphalian birth, were required to present proofs of their fitness.
There was a fee for admission to the Feme. As time went on the
examination of applicants became less and less strict, and often very
questionable characters, even serfs and men accused of crimes, were
admitted: such admissions were illegal, and the men chosen under such
circumstances were called notschoeffen (makeshift schoeffen).

The free graf sat at a judgment-board, on which lay a naked sword and a
rope as symbols of avenging justice, and the schoeffen took oath on
these instruments. Each free graf and each schoeffe of a given court was
required not only to be present at a trial, but to take part in
pronouncing sentence. When the trial was one of special importance
several hundred schoeffen would be in attendance.

The Femgerichte had their special codes and statutes, which were from
time to time amended. In these the competence of the courts was defined,
and this had to do with matters purely criminal, at least so far as the
trials were held in secret. The crimes of which the Femgerichte took
cognizance—vemewrogige punkte (points for femic animadversion)—were,
according to the list drawn up at Dortmund in 1430, as follows: 1,
robbery and acts of violence against ecclesiastics or churches; 2,
larceny; 3, robbery of a woman in childbed or of a dying person; 4,
plundering the dead; 5, arson and murder; 6, treachery; 7, betrayal of
the Feme; 8, rape; 9, forgery of money or of title to property; 10,
robbery on the imperial highway; 11, perjury and perfidy; 12, refusal to
appear in court on summons. Apostasy from the Christian faith was put at
the head of the list in an assembly held at Arnsberg 1437, and in 1490
heresy and witchcraft were added. For the person found guilty there was
but one punishment, death, and only one manner of death, by the rope.
This penalty could be inflicted without sentence if the offender were
taken in the act, or if he confessed guilt, or if there were
eyewitnesses of the crime.

That among the offenses punishable by the Feme heresy and witchcraft
held almost the first place shows that these tribunals were no object of
apprehension to the ecclesiastical power. This secret association,
therefore, differed from that of the Templars, as also from that of the
Stonemasons (which will be next considered) especially in this, that the
Feme was no league of Illuminati, but that their specialty was
opposition to the law of the stronger and to the rule of petty states,
and that their aim was to uphold and exaggerate antiquated judicial
institutions.

The procedure of the Femgerichte was entirely in accord with the
principle of ancient Teutonic law, that “where no complainant appears,
neither is there any judge.” It was not the inquisitorial court
procedure of the 16th–19th centuries, in which the judge made
investigation on his own account, but a procedure founded entirely in
the practice of civil courts, and one that agreed well with the
independent spirit of the Middle Age, and the view that then prevailed
that law was a matter of personal rights.

The free tribunals took up the complaint from whatever quarter it came.
All schoeffen, too, were under obligation to bring to the attention of
the free courts, and to prosecute all doings coming under the
animadversion of the Feme. Hence were a schoeffe to give information
regarding such offenses to any other court, he was liable to be hanged;
and the same fate befel the one who, having been entrusted with a bill
of accusation, should open the same and betray its contents. Accusations
were not entertained unless when submitted by wissende. The accuser had
to stand betwixt two fellow schoeffen, his sponsors, in front of the
tribunal in kneeling posture.

In every case the first thing done was to decide whether the crime was
one meet for animadversion by the Feme. That decided, the accused was
summoned to appear, if he was a wissender, before the secret tribunal,
if not a wissender, before the open court. The first summons to a
wissender to appear before the secret tribunal was drawn up in writing
by two schoeffen, and allowed the accused a delay of six weeks and three
days. If he did not obey the summons, then four schoeffen summoned him
in person; and this proving ineffectual, six schoeffen and one free graf
repeated the summons, which now was called the “warning.” The delay
allowed was the same as at first. If the accused was a free graf the
number of schoeffen employed in each of the three processes of summoning
was 7, 14 and 21, respectively, and of free grafs 2, 4 and 7. The
schoeffe, on receiving the summons, could appear at any time within the
three delays before the free court and demand a statement of the charges
and the names of the accusers; then he might on his sword swear to his
innocence, and obtain his freedom; but he was liable to be summoned
again. Outsiders were summoned once only, and usually by only one
schoeffe. When the whereabouts of an accused person was unknown, four
summonses were prepared, and these were posted in four places where he
might possibly be found. If the accused was one who inspired fear, the
summons might in the night time be posted or left at the gate of the
castle or of the city in which he lived. In such cases the schoeffen
walked or rode up before the gate, hacked off the crossbeam three chips,
which they kept, put a penny of the realm in the notch, affixed the
summons, and cried out to the castellan or the burgomaster, “We have
stuck a king’s brief in the notch and taken the proof with us: say you
to him that is in the castle that he must on his appointed day present
himself before the free tribunal, on behalf of highest law and the
Emperor’s ban.” When the opposition to the Femgerichte began to gain
force, the summoners were in greater peril often than the summoned:
often they lost their lives.

The day of the trial having arrived, if the accuser was not on hand the
accused was discharged. But if the accused failed to appear, the
accusation was repeated and testimony taken. The free graf then thrice
called the accused by name, and asked if any one was there as his
attorney. If there was no appearance of the accused, the accuser could
demand judgment “after a se’ennight.” In making this demand, he knelt,
laid two fingers of the right hand on his naked sword, affirmed the
guilt of the accused, and six schoeffen, as his sponsors, maintained the
truth of what he swore. If the verdict was against the accused, the free
graf arose, and outlawed the accused, in words like these: “The accused
(name and surname) I except from the peace, the laws and the freedom (of
the empire) as the same have been stablished and decreed by popes and
emperors; and I cast him down and place him in uttermost unquiet and
disgrace, and make him illegitimate, banned, outside the peace,
dishonored, insecure, loveless; and I do outlaw him according to the
sentence of the secret tribunal, and devote his neck to the rope, his
carcass to the birds and beasts to devour; and I commend his soul to the
power of God in heaven; and his fiefs and goods I give up to the lords
of whom the fiefs are held; and I make his wife a widow and his children
orphans.” Then the free graf threw a twisted cord out over the bounds of
the court, the schoeffen spat out, and the name of the outlaw was
written in the book of the condemned. Among the persons thus condemned
were numbered some men of high station, as the dukes Henry and Louis of
Bavaria (1429), John, bishop of Wurtzburg, and others. All free grafs
and schoeffen were henceforth under obligation to arrest and to execute
sentence upon the outlaw (but three members of the Feme were required);
and executing sentence meant hanging the culprit from the nearest tree.
Often the relatives of executed outlaws of the Feme accused the
executioners in the free courts as assassins, and the court could outlaw
its own ministers for carrying out its own decrees. Many were the abuses
that arose, assassination of innocent persons, for example. Murderers,
too, pretended to be schoeffen; and highwaymen robbed under pretense of
sequestering the property of persons condemned by judgment of the Feme.

If ever the condemned, being a wissender and not having overstayed the
se’ennight of grace, appeared in court with six compurgators he was set
free; but if he confessed his guilt, or was convicted, he was executed
forthwith in the usual way. The ban of the Feme could never be lifted;
but the number of death sentences actually carried out was, says
Lindner, “so very small that one might readily allow the Feme’s decree
of outlawry to be pronounced upon him.” Pope Nicolas V. in 1452
condemned the capital executions done by the Feme.

If a man under sentence of death should be proved innocent before he
fell into the hands of the executioners, he was, if a wissender, brought
before the court, with a rope around his neck, wearing white gloves,
carrying a green cross, and attended by two schoeffen; falling on his
knees before the free graf he pleaded for mercy. The free graf, taking
him by the hand, bade him rise, removed the rope from around his neck,
and restored him to the grace and favor of the Feme. But one who was not
a wissender had no rights! He merely escaped death, but there was no
amend. The Emperor gave him “a reprieve of 100 years, 6 weeks and a
day”—that was all; he was forever ineligible to become a schoeffe. Both
processes were called the “entfemung” (“unfeming,” undoing of the Feme’s
judgment).

Many of the condemned, unable to procure the entfemung, ventured to
appeal to the Emperor, the camera, the Pope, or a Church Council. But
the Femgerichte never recognized such appeals, and protested strongly to
the Emperor against them. They regarded the condemned as dead, and said
that no one had the right “to awaken the dead.” The Emperor Sigmund
could think of no means of saving a man under condemnation, except by
taking him into his own service, for the Femgerichte did not care to
take measures against officials of the Kaiser and the empire. Women,
too, as well as aged men and children, were excepted from the cognizance
of the Feme, also, in theory, Jews, for Jews were “servants of the
Emperor’s bedchamber”; ecclesiastics, also, for they could in the Middle
Age be tried only in the spiritual courts; but in the 15th century the
Feme disregarded these provisions, and summoned both Jews and
ecclesiastics.


                        3. THE END OF THE FEME.

But the Initiates of the Red Earth league met the fate that overtakes
all movements that lag behind the times. The Feme did by no means render
in the days of “faustrecht” (fist-right, the rule of the stronger) so
great services as it has been credited with: never was the insecurity of
life and property so great as when the Femgerichte were most
flourishing. If the extension of the Feme beyond the borders of
Westphalia was a wrong, that wrong became aggravated through the
excessive secrecy of the tribunals. The Feme degenerated steadily, and
the respect in which it was held declined in equal degree. The free
grafs forgot the fair promise of their original institution—that their
function was to protect innocence against the machinations of bad men.
They, and especially the presidents of courts, enriched themselves with
fees for admission of new members, with costs of court, with fines and
fees, and even with moneys got by extortion and oppression. They delayed
trials, condemned innocent persons, overstepped the limits of their
jurisdiction so as to condemn to death the entire male population (over
18 years) of a town, for not obeying a summons. The opposition to the
Femgerichte culminated in the decree of the Emperor Maximilian I.
creating the supreme court of judicature (kammergericht), which left no
further excuse for protecting the free courts. The applications for
admission to the Feme soon grew less, and at last ceased. The princes
changed the free courts into ordinary tribunals, or abolished them. At
the end of the 16th century a capital execution by a Femgericht was a
thing unknown; at the end of the 17th these courts had nearly all
disappeared. But even when Westphalia was a Napoleonic kingdom there
were still living some schoeffen, and not till the decade 1880–90 did
the last free graf disappear, “taking with him to the grave the secret
of the countersign.” The existence of the Feme is still commemorated by
the stone judgment seats under the lindens; and the branches overhead
are still whispering the story of the redoubtable Wissende of the Red
Earth country.




                             _PART EIGHTH._
               _Stonemasons’ Lodges of the Middle Ages._


                       1. MEDIEVAL ARCHITECTURE.

We have already noted as a prominent characteristic of the Middle Age
this, that freedom of action, except so far as it interfered with the
interests of the clergy or the nobles, was left unrestricted and that
individuals formed social unions for the exercise of it. Thus we have
seen these two dominant classes uniting to form associations which
finally were crowned by the institution of the military orders. But the
medieval world had not followed the arts of peace very long after the
stormy times of the barbarian invasions, before it became conscious of a
need not only of a union of swordsmen and penmen, but also and still
more of a union of handicraftsmen. True, the Middle Age could not rise
to such an intellectual height as would enable it to see that work is
more to be honored than indolence, peace than war: hence the worker had
to take a subordinate place. Of the agricultural laborer this is true
without any reservation: but the artisan was more favorably situated as
soon as the cities had begun to develop.

But the progress made by the artisans was due to their union in
corporations or gilds. The constitutions of the trade gilds derive
partly from the “collegia” of artisans in ancient Rome and partly from
the monastic orders. The “collegia” had secret rites, mysteries, but of
these we have no reliable information; and it is certain that the
medieval gilds had their mysteries, too. Of not all the gilds is this
true; in some of them the secret ceremonial consisted only of passwords
and countersigns by which craftsmen recognized their fellows. The most
elaborate of these mysteries was that of the Stonemasons. And the reason
if this is obvious, for of all trades that of the builder not only makes
most demands on the thinking faculty, involves most details, is the
first to require new methods of facilitating operations, new “wrinkles,”
and these easily are made trade secrets: besides, as builders of
temples, the masons acquired a sacred and mystical character.

After the great migrations the mason’s trade had its home in the
monasteries. As long as architecture or the builder’s art was thus under
monastic guidance, it affected the Romanic style—simple columns, rounded
arches, squat towers; but when the monks forsook art and science, in the
11th and 12th centuries, the craftsmen no longer saw why they should
serve under the direction of men who had no taste for anything but wine,
the chase, and war. And so there arose unions of masons outside of the
monasteries, especially in the cities, and henceforth the monastic
churches were inferior to the city churches in size and splendor. The
change in the circumstances of the builders’ unions, which were now
selfcontrolled, was seen in the development of a new style. Instead of
the single columns rose clustered columns, symbol of free union, and of
the strength that comes of harmonious action between equals; in the
place of rounded arches, pointed ones, to show that the forces that
conspired to raise the structure did not sacrifice their several
individualities, but freely contributed each its share toward the
attainment of the end; in place of squat, close towers, tall spires
aspiring to infinitude, and open on all sides, as much as to say, “Here
we stand free and open, acknowledging no laws but those of heaven.” Then
came decoration of the window arches, which showed a different design in
each, thus entering a protest against all stereotyped uniformity. This
was the true Germanic or Gothic architecture, the triumph of the free
Teutonic spirit, which favors the unhindered development and the
unrestricted independence of individual genius. It was also the
expression of mysticism, with innumerable spirelets striving heavenward
to find the Divine. Hence the Gothic style has somewhat of gloom and
melancholy in its vast arches and narrow windows. It invites the free
spontaneous spirit of man to sound the depths of his own nature, and so
is as adverse to obtrusive dogmatism as to reckless investigation and
illuminism, which disturb prejudices. Hence as the Romanic style is the
architecture of the popedom, so is the Gothic that of free church life;
and then the architecture of illuminism followed as the style of the
Renaissance.


                 2. THE STONEMASONS’ LODGES OF GERMANY.

The meeting places of the masons’ unions in the cities were the board
huts that stood on the site of churches in process of construction,
affording shelter to the masons or stone cutters while at work. These
huts, or “lodges,” were at an early period leagued together, and the
members of the leagues, in memory of their formerly having been inmates
of monasteries, called one another Brother, and their unions
Brotherhoods; they also bestowed on their chief officers such tokens of
respect as are found in the clerical epithets “reverend” and
“worshipful.” The date of the formation of this league cannot be
determined. It appears to have been in full swing in the 13th century,
and the credit of its definitive organization is usually given to Albert
the Great, Count of Bollstadt, a celebrated Dominican friar (b. 1200, d.
1280). Albert lived nearly all his life in Cologne, and therefore the
famous Cathedral of Cologne is to be regarded as the cradle of the great
league of stonemasons’ lodges.

For the government of this league an assembly of delegates from the
lodges, which came together “in chapter” (another reminiscence of the
monastic origin of these unions) at Ratisbon in 1459, drew up a trade
constitution entitled “Ordnung und Vereinigung der gemeinen Bruderschaft
des Steinwerks und der Steinmetzen” (Regulation and Combination of the
general brotherhood of stonework and stonemasons): it was revised and
amended at Basel in 1497, and at Strasburg 1498. From this and other
ancient documents relating to the organization of the brotherhood we
gather that the Brethren were classed as Masters, “Parleyers” and
Comrades (meister, parlirer, gesellen), and to these were added, though
not as brethren, yet as dependents, Helpers,—that is, apprentices. At
the head of a lodge stood the Master of Works, or Master-Builder. The
masters of the three lodges at Strasburg, Cologne and Vienna were the
Chief Judges of the league, and he of Strasburg held the foremost rank
among these. To the judicial district of Strasburg belonged the left
bank of the Rhine down to the Moselle, and on the right bank Suabia,
Franconia, Hesse; to the district of Cologne belonged the region on the
other side of the Moselle; and to that of Vienna, Austria, Hungary,
Italy. Switzerland stood apart under a separate master, who had his seat
at Berne; Zurich afterward succeeded to the place of Berne. The masons
of Northern Germany, on the right bank of the Rhine (Thuringia, Saxony,
etc.), were only nominally members of the league: as matter of fact they
were subordinate to none of these lodges, but they adopted a special
“order” for themselves at Torgau in 1462. In these regulations we find
many striking evidences of the sturdy good sense of the masons. For
example, they were forbidden to disparage deceased masters and their
works; also to teach others their art for money, for they ought to deal
with each other as friends; one master was not to expel a fellowcraft;
to do so he must not only take counsel with two other masters, but also
a majority of the fellowcrafts must approve; differences between masters
should be settled by arbitrators chosen from members of the league.

In the brotherhoods brotherly comradeship played an important part.
Meetings were held monthly, and the business ended with a feast. Each
General lodge yearly held a grand assembly; and the festivals of Saint
John the Baptist, and of the so-called “Four Crowned Ones,” were
holidays for the league. Each meeting of a lodge was opened and closed
with questions and answers of the master and the comrades. To the
journeyman, as soon as he began to travel, were communicated the secret
signs of the brotherhood—passwords, grip, etc. With these he identified
himself as a brother mason wherever he went, and so had the right to
learn the trade gratis. On coming to a hut where stone-cutting was going
on, he first shut the door, so as to knock on it after the masonic
fashion; then asked, “Are German masons at work here?” Forthwith the
comrades made search through the hut, shut the doors, and ranged
themselves in a right angle; the visitor placed his feet at right
angles, saying, “God bless the worthy masons;” to which the answer was
“God thank the worthy masons,” and so on, questions and answers many,
among them these: “Who sent you forth”? “My honored master, honored
sureties, and the whole honored masons’ lodge at X.” “What for?” “For
discipline and right behavior.” “What is discipline and right behavior?”
“The usages of the craft and its customs.”

Of the rites of initiation in those times we know nothing: what Fallou
has on that head regarding the usages of the German stonemasons is
simply borrowed from the Freemasons’ ritual of the present time. It is
highly probable that in the medieval masons’ lodges the technical
details of the craft and its secrets played the chief part in the
ceremonies of initiation. The medieval stonemasons also employed as
symbols of their craft the hammer, the circle, the square, etc., also
mystic figures, e. g., the flaming star (which was the Pythagorean
pentagram, or the magic hexagram—two triangles laid across each other),
the two pillars of Solomon’s temple, wine skins, ears of corn,
interlaced cords, etc. The only other point of any consequence of which
we have certainty is that the postulant swore to observe secrecy. But
there is no doubt that the drinking usages as handed down to us are
authentic. For example, the glass was never to be handed to the
banqueter, but set on the table before him; then, he must not touch it
save with the right hand—covered with a white glove or a white napkin,
when a special toast is drunk.

The masons’ brotherhoods were a distinctly Christian institution: the
members were required by the “Ordinances” to comply with all the usages
of the Church. This was a survival from the time when the lodges had
their origin in monasteries. The sects that arose on every side despite
bloody persecutions, and the illuminism spread abroad by them,
contributed to bring about a change in the spirit of the masons which
was noticeable in the 14th and 15th centuries: many, perhaps a majority,
of them acquired a spirit of opposition to Roman ecclesiasticism, and it
was very plainly manifested in their sculpture. More bitter satire
cannot be imagined than they employed; and what is most significant is
that it found expression in the churches themselves. Thus in a
representation of the Last Judgment in the Berne minster a pope wearing
a glittering tiara of gold is seen tumbling headlong into Hell; and in
the vestibule the Wise and the Foolish Virgins are shown keeping vigil,
but the foolish ones wear cardinals’ hats, bishops’ mitres and priests’
caps. The Doberan Church in Mecklenburg shows a mill in which church
dogmas are ground out. At Strasburg was seen a procession of all manner
of beasts with blazing torches and an ass performing the mass; at
Brandenburg was shown a fox preaching to a flock of geese, etc.

Illuminism is the foe of knighthood and ecclesiasticism, for illuminism
knows no privilege of birth or of rank or of vocation. Hence, in so far
as such bodies as the Templars and Stonemasons favored illuminism, they
undermined the institutions to which they owed their existence, and so
were working for their own extinction. The downfall of the Stonemasons’
brotherhood had its causes even in the age before the Reformation, in
that there was no lack now of churches, and that hardly any new churches
were erected. What the relation was of the lodges to the Reformation we
shall see later on. The savageries of the 16th and 17th centuries,
particularly the Thirty Years’ War, dealt a severe blow at the
building-craft; but the deathblow to the Stonemasons’ league was the
treacherous seizure of the seat of the principal lodge, Strasburg, by
Louis XIV. Naturally, the German princes interdicted communication of
their subjects with foreign associations, and, of course, with the
principal lodge in Strasburg, 1707. And as the discords of the German
masons and their weakness prevented them from instituting a new head
lodge, the Emperor at one stroke did away with all lodges, principal and
subordinate, and forbade the oath of secrecy, the use of the
“nonsensical form of salutation” (so ran the text of the decree), and
the distinction between “salutation-masons” and “letter-masons”
(grussmaurer, briefmaurer). Nevertheless, the lodges remained as secret
societies until modern freedom of industrial trades stripped them of all
meaning, and cut the ground under their feet.


                          3. FRENCH CRAFTSMEN.

Very different from the German societies of craftsmen were those of
France. Whereas, in Germany we find strenuous endeavor toward perfection
in the craft, cultivation of the beautiful, and a disposition no less
elevated in a moral sense than devoutly religious; in France we see only
rude, undirected effort, with here and there some encouraging features.
In France there is sharp distinction between the gilds of the masters
and the lodges of the journeymen. The masters have neither a common bond
of union, nor any common property; the craftsmen form strong societies,
with secret constitutions and usages.

There are several societies of French craftsmen (compagnonnages), but
they are not distinguished according to locality, but according to the
supposed manner of their first institution and the branch of the craft
which they represent. They are divided, first, into two great sections,
the Compagnons du Devoir (companions of duty), and the Compagnons de la
Liberte (companions of liberty). The former are again divided into the
Enfants de Maitre Jacques (Master James’s children), and the Enfants de
Maitre Soubise (Master Soubise’s children), but the latter commonly
called themselves Enfants de Salomon. Between the Compagnons du Devoir
and the Compagnons de la Liberte, as well as between the children of
James and those of Soubise, there exists the bitterest enmity which is
mirrored in their myths and traditions. According to the story of the
Devoir comrades, at the building of Solomon’s temple, Hiram,
master-builder, to maintain discipline and order among the workmen,
instituted societies with special passwords and secret ritual. But that
act was the occasion of his death, for some workmen slew him because he
refused to give them the countersign of the masters: those evildoers
were the founders of the Compagnonnage de la Liberte! Now among the
faithful workmen were two Gaulish masters, James, stonemason, and
Soubise, carpenter: these, after the completion of the temple, returned
home, and landing, one at Marseilles, the other at Bordeaux, founded
societies after the pattern of those instituted by Hiram; and these
societies, little by little, admitted craftsmen other than builders, but
the two bodies lived in perpetual hatred of each other, each claiming
priority. Each of them refers its own institution (on what grounds is
unknown) to the years 558 B. C. and 550 B. C., respectively, and each
possesses authentic documents in proof, though none has ever seen them.
The Liberte tradition is the same as that of the Devoir, only the
respective parts of the chief actors are reversed. In the bosom of La
Liberte are gathered four crafts—stonemasons, carpenters, joiners,
locksmiths. The Devoir includes 28 crafts, and of these the children of
Soubise comprise the carpenters, roofers and plasterers; to the children
of James belong the stonemasons, joiners, locksmiths, and 22 other
trades, introduced in later times, but all connected with housebuilding,
except hatmakers. All other craftsmen whose work is the production of
clothing and foodstuffs are excluded from the compagnonnages, and form
separate societies of their own. The shoemakers and the bakers, in
particular, are held in contempt, and persecuted in every way by the
compagnons; while among James’s children even the members of the
building crafts despise their juniors (trades of less ancient lineage),
and in their ignorance derive the word compagnon from “compas” (a pair
of compasses), the symbol of the art of building; hence in their eyes
the other trades are quite destitute of art or skill.

Even craftsmen of the same trade, but belonging to different leagues,
whether Devoir or Liberte, oppose each other in every way. The
carpenters of Paris have made an end of this strife by dividing the
cosmopolitan city between themselves, the compagnons du Devoir taking
the left and those of La Liberte the right bank of the Seine. With the
other trades and in the provinces the case is worse, the hostile leagues
often engaging in street fights and pitched battles. Even in the same
trade and in the same league hostilities often break out.

Of the French corporations of craftsmen, those of the building trades,
especially the stonemasons, probably arose about the same time as the
German masons’ lodges: at least there existed in the Middle Age in
southern France, a society of bridge-builders, who, for the behoof of
pilgrims to the Holy Land and wayfarers in general, maintained bridges,
roads and inns. The earliest known charter was granted in 1189, by Pope
Clement III., who, like his third predecessor, Lucius III., took them
under his protection. As emblem they wore on the breast a pointed
hammer. The other compagnonnages can show no authentic records of
earlier date than the 14th century. The most ancient of them is the
society of the Dyers, dating from 1330. Admission to these societies
involves many ceremonies derived from the ritual of the Catholic Church;
hence, the Tailors and Shoemakers were in 1645 denounced to the
ecclesiastical tribunals, and their meetings forbidden by the
theological faculty of Paris.


                      4. THE ENGLISH STONEMASONS.

While the German societies of handicraftsmen were oppressed by the
imperial power, and the French societies lived in obscurity, the English
masons’ lodges, on the contrary, attained high importance. Tradition
traces English (operative) masonry back to King Alfred the Great
(871–901), and his successor, Athelstan, whose younger son, Edwin, is
said to have called meetings of masons, and to have given laws to their
lodges. However that may be, it is certain that in England, as in
Germany, important edifices were erected by the clergy, and that
Dunstan, archbishop of Canterbury, was an accomplished architect; but
after the rise of Gothic architecture the builders were laymen, and in
all probability many of them Germans. In the early English societies of
masons we find rules and usages that clearly follow German precedent,
and the lists of master masons contain many decidedly German names.
Nevertheless, English masonry showed some peculiar features, e. g., the
station of the master in the east, the holding of the lodge meetings in
open air in fair weather, the posting of guards around the lodge, the
drenching of peepers with the drip from the roof “till the water ran out
of their shoes,” etc.

The English Freemasons may have got their name from the fact that the
original founders of lodges were workers in freestone—freestone masons,
as distinguished from workers in rough stone; freestone mason, it is
supposed, was afterward contracted to the form “freemason.” In an act of
parliament of the year 1350 the word freemason is found for the first
time. By that act congregations and chapters of masons were forbidden.
But the masons survived this persecution. Among themselves all masons
were equals, comrades or fellows; in the lodges no distinction was made
of master and fellow, though, of course, the actual master of a lodge
presided over the meetings. The members studied mutual improvement in
technical knowledge, and aided one another in misfortune. In the reign
of Edward III. the laws prohibiting assemblage of masons was relaxed so
as to permit meetings when held in presence of the sheriff of a county
or the mayor of a city. Out of these societies of operative masons arose
the modern institution of “speculative” freemasonry.




                     _Astrologers and Alchemists._


The epoch of the Reformation closed with the recovery to the Catholic
Church of a large proportion of its lost territory through the labors of
the Jesuits. Long before the Thirty Years’ War the zeal for religious
creeds had died out; people had grown weary of theological strifes,
though they had little taste for other serious matters; and thus it came
about that in the transition from the 16th to the 17th century such
pseudo-sciences as Alchemy and Astrology had great vogue. The study of
Astrology had for its aim only fame and glory, and, therefore, was
pursued openly; while Alchemy being inspired mainly by avarice, had its
laboratories in dark cellars, and made a strict secret of its processes.

Hence, it was natural that Alchemy, or the pretended art of producing
gold and silver, should give rise to secret associations, especially as
it employed sundry mystic, theosophic, and kabbalistic means for
attaining its ends, such as were used by the pupils and followers of the
famous Theophrastus Bombastus Paracelsus, reformer of the medical art,
and one of the most zealous of astronomers and alchemists. That was the
era of a Jacob Boehme, shoemaker and philosopher, who, though he had
none of the “accurst hunger” for the precious metals, gave an impetus to
fatuous investigations of divine things.

At the beginning of the 17th century a multitude of writings about this
mystic and superstitious business appeared, pro and contra. In this
battle of goosequills the Lutheran theologian, John Valentine Andraea of
Tuebingen (b. 1586, d. 1654), took a very prominent part. Andreae in
1614 conceived the thought of playing a trick on these mystics by
publishing two satirical pieces, in which was given an account of an
alleged secret society designed to promote studies of that kind; to this
society he gave a name suggested by the design of his own family seal (a
Saint Andrew’s cross, with roses at the ends of its four
arms)—Rosicrucians. These writings, “Fama Fraternitatis Roseae Crucis”
(Fame of the Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross) and “Confessio
Fraternitatis” (Confession of Faith of the Brotherhood) traced the
pretended society back to a monk named Christian Rosenkreuz, who, in the
14th and 15th centuries, visited the holy land, was instructed in the
occult sciences in the East, founded among his fellow-monks the
brotherhood called by his name, and died at the age of 106 years. After
a lapse of 120 years, in his tomb, which, in accordance with the rule of
the order, was kept secret, but which was a magnificent structure in a
vault, was found resting on his incorrupt body a parchment book
containing the constitution and the secrets of the order. A later
document “Chymische Hochzeit Christiani Rosenkreuz” (alchymic nuptials
of Christian Rosenkreuz), which appeared in 1616, span the story out to
greater length. Now, so great was the alchemistic furore of that time
that the tale passed for solemn truth, and a swarm of writings followed,
championing or battling against the Society of the Rosicrucians. To the
opponents of the Rosy Cross belonged the theologians, who sniffed
heretical tenets in the “documents,” and the medical men who scented
danger to their close gild; while the alchemists, and particularly the
followers of Paracelsus, inquired diligently after the Rosicrucians, and
maintained the authenticity of their Constitution. Nor was there lack of
attempts at interpreting in a mystical sense the symbol of the Rosy
Cross: it signified Holiness joined with Silentiousness; it typified the
rose-colored Blood of Christ poured out on the cross. Astounded by the
war of no-wits against little-wits occasioned unintentionally by
himself, Andreae tried to undo the mischief by putting forth two pieces,
“Mythologia Christiana,” and “Turris Babel,” to prove that the whole
thing was a joke, that the Brotherhood was a fiction and non-existent.
But as he neglected to name himself as author of the first two writings,
in vain did he pour out on the Rosicrucianistic partisans all the
vitriol of his contempt. In vain, with a view to lead men’s fancy in
other directions, did he found a “Christian Brotherhood” for the purpose
of purging religion of abuses and planting true piety. The insanity
persisted. Alchemy, barely alluded to in Andreae’s writings, became the
subject of a multitude of new books, whose authors gave out that they
were members of the alleged society. The incident was also turned to
account by adventurers and by factions of every sort; the thing went so
far that in the Rhineland and the Low Countries secret alchemistic
societies were founded under the name of Rosicrucians, which also took
the style Fraternitas Roris Cocti (Brotherhood of Boiled Dew), that is,
of the Philosophers’ Stone; but these societies had no general
organization among themselves. Many a wight was choused out of his money
by these schemers. There were branch societies in Germany and Italy. In
England Dr. Robert Fludd, an ardent mystic and alchemist, propagated the
singular order by publishing a number of writings. With regard to the
usages of the societies, we are told that the members roamed about
meanly clad, with hair cropped close near the forehead, wearing as a
token a black silken cord in the top buttonhole, carrying, when several
went together, a small green banner. They claimed that their society was
an offshoot of the great knightly order of St. John (Hospitalers). At
their lodge meetings they wore a blue ribbon, on which was a gold cross
inscribed with a rose, and their president (styled Imperator, emperor)
was dressed in priestly togs. They observed strict secrecy as toward
outsiders. They disappeared little by little in the 18th century, and
there is no means of determining the relation between them and the
masonic Rosicrucians, of whom more anon.




                             _PART NINTH._
                _Rise and Constitution of Freemasonry._


                        1. RISE OF FREEMASONRY.

The Reformation and the events connected with it had given people much
matter of meditation. But the intolerance shown by the authorities and
by the members of both creeds, in maltreating and persecuting their
opponents, so alienated all humane minded men that secretly people began
to care neither for the interest of Protestantism nor for that of
Catholicism, and in the common brotherhood of mankind to disregard all
differences of creed. Illuminism, which had been “good form” though in a
frivolous sense among the Templars, and in a satiric sense among the
Stonemasons, took a more dignified shape, not of incredulity but of
earnest desire to build up, and to this consummation the English masons
contributed materially. In England people had had enough of strife over
creeds, enough of persecution of Protestants under “Bloody Mary” and of
Catholics under the inflexible Elizabeth, and they longed for tolerance.
They derived the principles of tolerance from renascent literature and
art, which made such impression that as in an earlier age the Romanic
architecture, so now the Gothic, as the expression of a definite phase
of belief, lost its following, and the so-called Augustan or
“Renaissance” style—an imitation of the ancient Grecian and Roman
styles—won the day with all who knew anything of art. The Renaissance
style was brought to England by the painter Inigo Jones, who had learned
his art in Italy, and who, under James I., became in 1607 superintendent
general of royal constructions, and at the same time president of the
Freemasons, whose lodges he reformed. Instead of the yearly general
meetings he instituted quarterly meetings: such masons as adhered to the
manual craft and cared nothing for intellectual aims were permitted to
go back into the trade gilds; while, on the other hand, men of talent
not belonging to the mason’s trade, but who were interested in
architecture and in the aspirations of the time, were taken into the
lodges under the name of “accepted brethren.” Under the altered
circumstances a new, bold spirit awoke among the Freemasons, and it
found support in the sentiment of brotherliness, irrespective of creeds,
then everywhere prevalent. This disposition of minds was promoted in an
incalculable degree by the pictures drawn by Sir Thomas More in his
“Utopia,” and by Sir Francis Bacon in his “New Atlantis,” of countries
existing, indeed, only in their imagination, but which presented ideal
conditions, such as enlightened minds might desire to realize upon this
earth; also by the writings of the Bohemian preacher, Amos Komensky
(latinized Comenius), who, during the Thirty Years’ War was expelled
from his country by the partisans of the Emperor, and came to England in
1641—writings that condemned all churchly bigotry and pleaded for
cosmopolitanism. As men of the most diverse views, political and
religious, were in the lodges, the order suffered severely during the
civil commotions of the first and second revolution, but on the return
of peace it more than recovered lost prestige. The rebuilding of London,
and in particular St. Paul’s Cathedral (1662), added greatly to the fame
of English masonry: Sir Christopher Wren, builder of Saint Paul’s, was
of the brotherhood. But about the time of the death of William III.
(1702), owing to slackness of occupation in the building trades, the
Freemason lodges became conscious of a serious defect in their
organization. The members who were practically connected with the
operative craft of masonry were steadily declining in number, and the
“accepted” masons had become the majority. The lodges, therefore, had
come to be a sort of clubs, and this transformation spread rapidly in
London.

Another influence that came in to affect the development of English
freemasonry was the diffusion of deistical opinions by Locke’s school in
philosophy. Though the lodges then, as now, made loud protestations of
orthodoxy, they could not withdraw themselves out of the deistical
atmosphere of the period.

The resultant of these different influences gained the upper hand in the
clubs or lodges of the quondam masons, now Freemasons. They now aimed at
a more thorough betterment of morals on a conservatively deistical
basis. But the necessity of a closer organization was recognized. Two
theologians, Theophilus Desaguliers (who was both a naturalist and a
mathematician) and James Anderson, together with George Payne,
antiquary, were the foremost men of those who, in the year 1717,
effected the union of the four lodges of masons in London in one Grand
Lodge, and procured the election of a Grand Master and two Grand
Wardens, thus instituting the Freemasons’ Union as it exists at this
day. What Jerusalem is to Jews and Mecca to Mohammedans, and Rome to
Catholics, that London is to Freemasons.

Henceforth the masons of England were no longer a society of
handicraftsmen, but an association of men of all orders and every
vocation, as also of every creed, who met together on the broad basis of
humanity, and recognized no standard of human worth other than morality,
kindliness and love of truth. The new Freemasons retained the symbolism
of the operative masons, their language and their ritual. No longer did
they build houses and churches, but the spiritual temple of humanity;
they used the square no more to measure right angles of blocks of stone,
but for evening the inequalities of human character, nor the compass any
more to describe circles on stone, but to trace a ring of brother-love
around all mankind. It was, perhaps, a picture of the young league of
the Freemasons that Toland drew in his “Socratic Society” (1720), which,
however, he clothed in a vesture the reverse of Grecian. The symposia or
brotherly feasts of this society, their give-and-take of questions and
answers, their aversion to the rule of mere physical force, to
compulsory religious belief, and to creed hatred, as well as their mild
and tolerant disposition and their brotherly regard for one another,
remind us strongly of the ways of the Freemasons.

Though differences of creed played no part in the new masonry,
nevertheless the brethren held religion in high esteem, and were
steadfast upholders of the only two articles of belief that never were
invented by man, but which are borne in on the mind and heart of every
man, the existence of God, to wit, and the soul’s immortality.
Accordingly every lodge was opened and closed with prayer to the
“Almighty Architect of the universe”; and in the lodge of mourning in
memory of a deceased brother, this formula was used: “He has passed over
into the eternal East”—to that region whence light proceeds. Political
parties, also, were not regarded among Freemasons: one principle alone
was common to them all—love of country, respect for law and order,
desire for the common welfare.

Inasmuch as the league must prize unity, one of the first decrees of the
Grand Lodge was one declaring illegitimate all lodges created without
its sanction. Hence to this day no lodges are recognized as such which
are not founded originally and mediately from London. Despite this
restriction there sprung up even in the first years after the
institution of the Grand Lodge a multitude of new lodges, which received
authorization from the Grand Lodge. With these numerous accessions the
need of general laws became pressing, and at request of the Grand Lodge,
Anderson, one of the founders, undertook to compare the existing
statutes of the order with the ancient records and usages of the
Stonemasons, and to compile them in one body of law. The result was the
“Book of Constitutions,” which is still the groundwork of Freemasonry.
It has been printed repeatedly, and is accessible to every one. Another
foundation stone of Freemasonry was laid by the Grand Lodge in 1724,
when it instituted the “committee for beneficence,” thus giving play to
one of the most admirable features of the order—that of giving help to
the needy and unfortunate, whether within the order or without.

The inner organization of the order, finally, was completed by the
introduction of the Degrees. Brothers who had filled the post of
Masters, on retiring from office, did not return to the grade of
Fellows, but constituted a new degree, that of Masters: on the other
hand, newly admitted members were no longer forthwith Fellows, but only
apprentices: these degrees were instituted probably in 1720; at that
time no other higher degrees were known. The right to promote
apprentices to the degree of Fellow, and Fellows to that of Master,
previously a function of the Grand Lodge, was accorded to the
subordinate lodges in 1725.

Soon Freemasonry spread abroad. Lodges arose in all civilized countries,
founded by English masons or by foreigners who had received masonic
initiation in England; these lodges, when sufficiently numerous, united
under Grand Lodges. The Grand Lodge of Ireland was created in 1730,
those of Scotland and of France in 1736, a provincial lodge of England
at Hamburg in 1740, the Unity Lodge of Frankfort-on-the-Main in 1742,
and in the same year a lodge at Vienna, the Grand Mother Lodge of the
Three World-spheres at Berlin in 1744, etc. A lodge was instituted at
Boston, Mass., in 1733, and from Boston the order spread to
Philadelphia. Thus in the space of thirty years from its origin
freemasonry existed in all civilized lands, and so did not lag behind
its opposite pole, Jesuitism, in respect of rapidity of propagation.
Opposite poles these two societies are, for each possesses precisely
those qualities which the other lacks. The Jesuits are strongly
centralized, the freemasons only confederated. Jesuits are controlled by
one man’s will, Freemasons are under majority rule. Jesuits bottom
morality in expediency, Freemasons in regard for the wellbeing of
mankind. Jesuits recognize only one creed, Freemasons hold in respect
all honest convictions. Jesuits seek to break down personal
independence, Freemasons to build it up.


                     2. CONSTITUTION OF THE ORDER.

The Society of Freemasons, because of its historic propagation, through
sets from the English stock and through further budding and branching of
these, forms no unitary organic whole. It has no central or supreme
authority, no common head, whether acknowledged or unacknowledged. Its
sole unity consists in a common name and a common end, in the common
recognition signs, in agreement as to the general internal polity, and
in a general uniformity of usages, though these show marked differences
also. But very different between one country and another are the methods
employed for attaining the ends of Freemasonry; different also is the
organization of the lodge and the arrangement of the work.

Regarding the common end and aim of Freemasonry there is lack of perfect
definiteness. In this regard Freemasonry presents a strong contrast to
its rival, Jesuitism, which has only too clear perception of its aim.
But so much is absolutely indisputable, that the end of Freemasonry is
neither religious nor political, but purely moral. “Freemasonry labors
to promote the wellbeing of mankind”: here all Freemasons are at one,
though some of them may lay more stress on material wellbeing, some on
purely moral, some on spiritual welfare, while again others will
consider the wellbeing of the whole, and still others, the wellbeing of
individuals as the object of the society. But as these several views are
by no means mutually exclusive, but, in fact, complementary of one
another, this lack of definition in the end of the society cannot be any
hindrance to the society’s beneficent labors. And as matter of fact the
society has wrought much good. Not only does it help its own members in
need; no worthy person in need ever appeals to the order for relief in
vain.

But as it is impossible that in so widely diffused a society the members
should know one another personally, it became necessary to establish
tokens by which a mason may be able to recognize the masonship and the
degree of a fellow mason. These tokens consist of a word uttered in a
peculiar way, a sign made by various motions of the hand and a peculiar
pressure given in shaking hands (the grip). The mason is also recognized
by his knock on a door, his way of drinking, etc., provided he cares to
make use of these methods of intimating his masonry.

Besides these peculiarities common to all Freemasons there are
specialties shared only by particular sections of the masonic body. The
whole body of Freemasons, because of its diffusion among diverse
nationalities, is divided into a number of “systems” differing one from
another in the ceremonies of initiation, of promotion to higher degrees,
of the lodge of sorrow, and of other occasions. The differences consist
largely in the form and tenor of the solemn addresses and
counter-addresses, or questions and answers with which the meetings are
opened and closed: these forms are an imitation of the rituals of the
ancient stonemason lodges, and of other secret organizations. The ritual
for the reception of an applicant into the first degree, that of
apprentice, is modeled on the stonemasons’ ritual; and the ceremonies of
the higher degrees are amplifications of the same originals, with
embellishments. In brief, the ritual of admission is such as was used by
the monkish and the knightly orders; but the prototype of all these
rituals was undoubtedly the ceremonial of baptism in the Catholic
Church.

No doubt many persons are desirous of knowing what takes place on the
admission of a would-be Freemason. For the sake of such persons it may
be remarked that these ceremonies are different in different systems,
and that consequently an exposition of them would require a more than
ordinarily voluminous work; that, furthermore, when communicated in
writing, they lose all the effect they have when employed in the act of
initiation; and that they would be likely to make no impression whatever
on one who should desire to know them out of mere curiosity.

In the ceremonial of Freemasonry symbols or emblematic devices hold a
prominent place. Of these the most ancient are borrowed from the
stonemasons’ lodges, and, therefore, represent masons’ tools and
implements; other symbolic devices are reminiscent of various secret
societies or of ecclesiastical rites. But both in symbolism and in
ceremonial many abuses have, in the course of time, crept in, and
innovations have been made which mar the native simplicity of the order
and divert it from the pursuit of more useful ends.

The recognition signs, the ceremonial, and the symbols are the only
secrets in Freemasonry. Mysteries, that is to say, knowledge of things
that are hidden from all other persons, the order has none, and the
claims that have been made in that regard are without foundation.
Discretion, with respect to the business of the lodges and the
membership, Freemasonry enjoins in common with many other societies; and
so far the order is a close society, or a private society, and not a
secret society. Of secret machinations and intrigues such as are hatched
in the Jesuit order and in the secret political associations of our
time, there is no trace in Freemasonry.

The masonic organization of each country exists for itself and in entire
independence of other countries. A minor union of Freemasons, consisting
of members, all of whom, as a rule, attend its meetings, is called a
Lodge. The place (city, town, village, etc.,) in which there are one or
more lodges is called Orient; the presiding officer of a lodge is the
Master, and with him are associated two Wardens besides other officers.
The assemblage of the members, as well as the place in which they meet,
is called a lodge. A lodge may be an isolated one, that is, entirely
independent; but that is rarely the case; as a rule each lodge belongs
to a union of lodges, called Grand Lodge, or Grand Orient. The several
lodges of such a union work sometimes on one common system, sometimes on
different systems. Again, the grand lodges differ greatly in their
organization. As a rule they have a Grand Master, with several Grand
Officers, and these are either elected by delegates from all the
associate lodges, or are named by certain specially privileged lodges.
The freest masonic constitution is that of Switzerland, adopted in 1844:
there the seat of the Grand Lodge is changed in every five years. In
monarchical countries the royal residence city is usually the seat of
the Grand Lodge. There are in Germany eight grand lodges, whose
jurisdictions overlap one another, so that often there may be in a given
city several lodges belonging to as many different grand lodges: but
that does no prejudice to fraternal harmony. France, Belgium, Spain, and
Brazil have each two grand lodges, each with a distinct system of
ritual. But in Holland, Switzerland, Denmark, Sweden, England, Scotland,
Ireland, Hungary, Italy, Portugal, and Greece all the lodges of each
country belong to one grand lodge. In each of the states of the American
Union there is a grand lodge, and the same is to be said of the larger
states of Central and South America. In the British colonies and
dependencies, India, the Cape, Australasia, etc., the lodges are under
the jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of the United Kingdom: British
America, however, has its own Grand Lodge. The grand lodges of the world
number more than 90, the subordinate lodges more than 15,000, and the
members, perhaps, one million, reckoning only those in good and regular
standing; but this is only a rough estimate; precise figures are not
obtainable in default of a unitary organization.


                             3. THE LODGE.

The several lodges are named after persons, virtues, masonic emblems,
historic events, etc. In America and England they are often designated
by numbers indicative of the time of their foundation. A lodge may be
erected wherever a certain number of resident accepted brethren, among
them at least three masters, desire to effect an organization, and
obtain the approval of the grand lodge having jurisdiction. An
indispensable requisite for a lodge is a “well tiled” apartment—one well
protected against the intrusion of outsiders, spies, or eavesdroppers.
Usually the lodge is a square oblong hall or room, furnished after the
manner of the time and country, and decorated with the masonic insignia.
The attire of the assembled brethren is usually black, with white gloves
(emblematic of hands not soiled by unjust gain) and a short white
leather apron, a memento of the stonemasons and of the obligation to
labor. The use of other insignia and of tokens to indicate the rank of
the officials is left to the discretion of the several lodges. In
England and her colonies, in the United States, Belgium and France on
festive occasions Freemasons appear in public and on the streets in full
masonic regalia, bearing the emblematic insignia of the order: in
Germany and Switzerland such parade is frowned upon by Freemasons as
unbecoming.

A Freemason lodge is an Apprentice Lodge, a Fellowcraft Lodge, or a
Masters’ Lodge, according to the degree of its members. In the
Apprentice lodge, masons of all degrees take part: its business is to
deliberate upon the affairs of the lodge, and to admit new apprentices.
In the Fellowcraft lodge the Fellows and the Masters take part: its
function is simply to promote members from the first to the second
degree. The Masters’ lodge is for masters exclusively: the masters
direct the work of the apprentices and promote Fellowcrafts to the
master’s degree. Besides, in each degree there is given instruction upon
the symbolism and work of the same—this is called a “Lodge of
Instruction.” Each degree has its special meaning, a sum of doctrines
and a certain number of symbols. The purport of the Apprentice degree is
the seeing of the light in the spiritual sense—the spiritual birth of
man: an explanation is given of the nature of the order, its aims and
its constitution. The Second degree deals with the life of man, its
joys, its griefs, its fears: teaches to withstand passion and
temptation, to know oneself, and to form an idea of the model human
career. Finally, the teaching of the master’s degree treats of the end
of life, death, its inevitableness; proposes for imitation the examples
of great men who have given up their life for humanity; suggests
thoughts concerning the immortal life. Sometimes, also, the three
degrees are explained as the embodiment of the masonic motto: Beauty,
Strength, and Wisdom. These degrees are also known as the Saint John
degrees, and the lodges as lodges of St. John, the Baptist being the
chosen patron of the order, as he was also of the medieval stonemasons
and of the Templars. The fact that the masons are under the patronage of
Saint John the Baptist is interpreted to mean that the order is the
forerunner of a happier condition of mankind, as John was the forerunner
of Jesus. On the feast of Saint John (June 24th) or thereabout, in the
year 1717, the first meeting of the Grand Lodge of London was held; and
on that same day there is held in every masonic lodge throughout the
world a festival at once grave and joyful.[3]

Footnote 3:

  We make no mention here of the so-called “higher degrees,” which are,
  in fact, but amateurish fabrications, without any practical aim. They
  are distasteful forms of the true freemasonry; they differ as to name
  and number between one system and another; and the true lodges of
  Saint John freemasons recognize no such “supergraduation.” The higher
  degrees are considered in another part of this work.

All males who have attained legal majority, and who are of good repute
and their own masters, are eligible for admission to the order, without
regard to race, station, calling, or creed. Unfortunately, Freemasons
have not always and everywhere been free from antiquated prejudices in
the admission of new members. Down to this day lodges in the United
States shut their doors in the face of men of color, i. e., of those who
are not whites; and many German, Danish, and Swedish lodges, both grand
and particular, exclude Jews; in consequence, there are very many lodges
of colored men and in Germany some Jewish lodges, whereas in the British
colonies brethren of all colors and creeds work together in the same
lodges.

Women and children are not altogether shut out from Freemasonry
everywhere. It is the almost universal custom to admit, before the
attainment of majority, masons’ sons, who may have been instructed by
their fathers as to the meaning of Freemasonry. There are also special
meetings which the wives, the betrothed, the sisters, and the daughters
of masons are permitted to attend. But we have an unmasonic excrescence
and an abuse when, as in French lodges, with doors open to the public, a
masonic baptism and a masonic marriage ceremony are performed with
special ritual; still more worthy of reprobation are the Adoption lodges
or Women’s lodges, instituted at various times in France: in these women
were initiated with a ceremonial adapted to the occasion, and were
promoted to various degrees; thus, before the Revolution the luckless
Princess de Lamballe, in the time of Napoleon the Empress Josephine, and
under the Restoration the Duchess de Larochefoucauld were presidents of
lodges. In other quarters also the cry has been raised for the admission
of the fair sex: but needless to say that such an innovation would very
seriously compromise the gravity, the dignity, and the secrecy of the
order, and breed trouble, both in the lodges and in the families of the
members. Once a woman was unwittingly admitted to the secrets of
Freemasonry. Elizabeth Aldworth, daughter of the Irish viscount
Donneraile, in whose house a lodge used to hold its meetings, on one
occasion, in her young girlhood, peeped through a crack in a partition
and witnessed the admission of a mason. She was caught in the act, and,
to prevent betrayal, was herself initiated. In her after life she was
noted for her acts of benevolence, and once, wearing the masonic togs,
headed a public walk of the brethren. The Empress Maria Theresa also, it
is said, dressed in man’s apparel, once stole into a lodge in Vienna,
having been informed that her husband, the Emperor Francis, was in the
habit of meeting women there; but as she saw no women in the lodge, she
withdrew in haste. Quite recently a Hungarian lodge admitted to
membership a countess resident in its locality; but the Grand Lodge of
Hungary canceled the act.




                             _PART TENTH._
             _Secret Societies of the Eighteenth Century._


                   1. MISCELLANEOUS SECRET SOCIETIES.

Conditions in the 18th century were specially favorable to the vogue of
secret organizations: illuminism was making headway, but at the same
time there remained many a relic of medieval barbarism. The manifest
contrasts of opinion naturally inclined men of like mind to come
together in secret societies for the advancement of their favorite
principles. These societies copied the methods of Freemasonry, and were,
in a greater or less degree its rivals. Some of them admitted women to
membership.

The societies of both sexes were intended to compensate women for their
exclusion from the Freemason lodge. The “Order of Woodsplitters”
(fendeurs), founded in 1747 by the Chevalier Beauhaine, a distinguished
Freemason, took its symbolism entirely from the work of the woodsplitter
or woodchopper; the lodges were yards (i. e., woodyards, chantiers), the
members were cousins (cousins, cousines; i. e., male and female
cousins), the candidate was a Steel (used to strike fire from a flint),
and so forth. The “Order of Hope” (esperance) was founded expressly for
the behoof of Freemasons’ wives, and they alone were admitted; but
masons of the higher degrees could visit the lodges without initiation.
The president was a woman. There were Esperance lodges in several cities
of Germany; at Goettingen the university students joined the order for
the sake of the refinement of manners got from association with the
ladies. There is some doubt as to the true character of the “Order of
Saint Jonathan” (afterward of Saint Joachim), qualified as “for True and
Perfect Friendship,” or “for the Defense of the Honor of Divine
Providence.” Its end would seem to have been to propagate belief in the
Trinity, to refrain from the dance (especially the waltz), and from
games of chance; also (this for the female members) to nurse their own
children. It was founded by some German nobles, and its first
grandmaster was Christian Francis, Duke of Saxe-Coburg. Though
Protestants and Catholics were members of the order, it took on a
strongly Catholic character, and in 1785 adopted the style of “the
knightly Secular Chapter of the Order of Saint Joachim, the blessed
Father of the Holy Virgin Mary, Mother of Our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ” (ritterlich-weltliches ordenskapitel von St. Joachim, etc.) The
society passed quietly out of existence. The “Order of the Pilgrims’
Chain” (Kette der Pilgrime), in Germany and Denmark, whose members
belonged to the higher classes, had for its motto “Courtesy,
Steadfastness, and Silence” (Willfaehrigkeit, Bestaendigkeit,
Stillschweigen), and wore in a buttonhole a white ribbon bearing the
initial letters of those three words. The members, male and female, were
called Favorites (favoriten); to admit a new member was “to add a link
to the chain”; and any member could add any “link” whom he might have
known for half a year. The symbolism was borrowed from travel. The
“Order of Argonauts” was founded in 1772 by Conrad von Rhetz, a
Brunswick Freemason. On an islet in a pond leased to him by the state he
built a temple in which the members were initiated. They approached the
temple in barges and there were entertained by the Grand Admiral, as the
founder was styled. There was no fee for admission. The motto was “Long
Live Gladness”; the badge of the order was a green-enameled anchor of
silver. The officers, besides the Grand Admiral, were the Pilot, the
Ship’s Chaplain, and so forth, and the members were Argonauts. After the
founder’s death the order went to wreck, and the temple disappeared,
leaving no vestige. The renowned Fenelon founded at Douai an order
called “the Palladium,” its secret dialect was taken from his romance
“Telemasque.”

The “Order of the Mustardseed,” said to have been founded in England in
1708: it spread over Holland and Germany: it assumed the form of a
Protestant clerico-knightly order, and concerned itself chiefly with
religious affairs: its emblem was a gold cross, with mustard tree in the
middle. This society was reputed to be connected with the Herrnhuters
(Moravian brethren).

The “Order of the Leal” (Orden der Echten), founded in 1758, at
Landeshut, by Bessel, a Prussian military officer, had for its end
simply good-fellowship: it labored to win over to Prussia the Silesian
nobility.

The “Society of the Ducats” (Dukatensocietat) had for its founder (1746)
Count Louis of Neuwied, colonel in the Prussian Army. The members
contributed one ducat a month; but when a member induced outsiders to
join the society, then for the first outsider his own contribution for
the month current was remitted; for the third, fifth and each following
odd-numbered new accession procured by him he received a ducat. This
vulgar swindle, which was the sole end of the society, worked finely,
and the membership grew rapidly: but the Society of the Ducats was
suppressed by the government after an existence of two years.

Attempts to establish other fraudulent orders were made by a swindler
who understood the foible of his contemporaries for mysteries. Matthew
Grossinger, or as he styled himself, Francis Rudolf von Grossing, son of
a butcher, born 1752, at Komorn, in Hungary, would seem to have been
once a Jesuit. After the suppression of his order, he offered to sell to
Frederic the Great some Austrian official documents, but met with a
repulse; then he represented himself to Joseph II. as a victim of the
reactionary policy of the preceding reign, and in 1784 founded in the
interest of his own pocket the “Order of the Rose,” and again in 1788,
donning women’s clothes, the “Order of Harmony,” both orders admitting
members of either sex. He named “Frau von Rosenwald,” a non-existent
personage, as head of the order, with the title Stiftsrose (The
Institute’s Rose). The several local societies were known as Roses, and
their presiding officers as Rosylords and Rosyladies (Rosenherren,
Rosendamen). But in fact Grossing was all in all, and he appropriated to
himself the very liberal contributions and all other income: for that
end alone were the societies established. He died in wretched
circumstances, having always squandered his gains in luxury and
extravagance.


                      2. OBSCURANTIST INFLUENCES.

The daybreak of illuminism in the 18th century gave to the partisans of
the ancient despotism of creed and privilege matter of most serious
concern. They saw all their contrivances for keeping the people ignorant
and submissive baffled. For them, as for the Papacy at the daybreak of
the Reformation the question was, To be or Not to be. But theirs was a
war with a far more redoubtable foe than Protestantism ever was.
Illuminism did not aim merely at separation from the Roman Church: it
declared a war of extermination against Rome, it aimed at abolition of
all authority that presumed to determine the beliefs of men or to
dictate their opinions. To down this hateful spirit of illuminism with
one blow—what satisfaction that would afford to the obscurantists of
that time! But where should they begin? It was vain to think of
silencing the literary champions of illuminism. The age of witch trials
and courts of Inquisition was past. The problem was to find an organized
institution in which the odious spirit of illuminism was, as it were,
incorporated, and that could be no other than the society of the
Freemasons. But the experience of the Popes and the Inquisition had
shown that Freemasonry was not to be overmastered by persecution, by
prisons, or by the stake. Hence, other champions must take the place of
the Dominican inquisitors: the Freemasons must be won over to the good
cause by flatteries and cajoleries. Among the illuminists of that day
the Jesuits were regarded as the agents chosen for carrying out this
plan; and though it cannot be demonstrated that they had an actual part
in the business, the scheme surely was one quite consonant with the
spirit of their order. The plan was shrewdly contrived. It dealt with
political considerations affecting England, the native home of
freemasonry; and thus the conspiracy aimed, so to speak, at capturing
the den of the “dragon” of illuminism. The Stuart dynasty, which had
returned to the Catholic fold, was in exile from the end of the 17th
century, but, aided by France materially and by Rome intellectually, was
ever striving to regain the lost throne. The efforts of kings and kings’
sons in exile possess a poetical and romantic quality. It was possible
to win over all sympathetic enthusiasts by exploiting their foibles, the
nobles and legitimists (the Tories) by preaching legitimacy, and the
whole body of the Catholics by appealing to their loyalty to the Church.
Now, the masonic order was a secret society, and as such, of course, was
a rallying point for all enthusiasts, mystics, and dreamers. Besides,
the nobility was strongly represented in the society: after the first
four grandmasters of the Grand Lodge of England, who were all practical
masons (architects), all the succeeding grandmasters belonged to the
highest nobility of the realm. Among them we find dukes of Montague,
Richmond, Norfolk, Chandos, to say nothing of a long series of
viscounts, earls, and marquises. As for the Catholic element, it had
many things in common with Freemasonry—ceremonies and mysticism,
hierarchic degrees, and cosmopolitan extension; hence, with a little
Jesuit finesse, the order might gradually and insensibly be made
Catholic, as had been done with the Buddhist ceremonial in India: in
this way the Society of Saint John might be transformed into a
preparatory school for the Society of Jesus. And now, if we consider
what a scandal it must have been to the coronetted chiefs of Freemasonry
that their order originated among mechanics, we can see how easy it
would be, by dishing up a few fables in proof of a nobler origin, to
make converts of them for any ends whatever. In the event of success,
the stronghold of illuminism would be captured, and with the help of its
former champions the most powerful kingdom in Europe, and a great centre
of illuminism, would be given back to a Catholic King, and thereby the
road to conquest opened for the Church of Rome. Of course, these vast
designs could not be carried out all at once. The work had to proceed by
stages, as thus: 1. Aristocratic sentiment would be gratified by the
institution of higher masonic degrees; 2. These degrees would be
connected with the religious orders of knighthood by a chain of fable;
3. Obstinate Protestants would be quieted by the offer of a cryptic
Catholicism which apparently would be in accordance with their own
beliefs; 4. Persons inaccessible to religious considerations would be
influenced by hopes of riches to be acquired through the secret arts of
alchemy, and the like; 5. The whole purpose of the order would be
directed toward spiritual and Catholic ends; finally, 6. when the
process was completed, there would stand forth in all its nakedness the
savage fury of the Inquisition.


                     3. THE “HIGH DEGREES” SWINDLE.

Without any sufficient reason assigned, there arose in England between
the years 1741 and 1743 a new degree, Royal Arch, at first as a higher
division of the master’s degree afterward as an independent degree. Its
content was a hotchpotch of New Testament passages, religious dogmas,
and masonic, or, rather, unmasonic fables. Its tradition went back to
the building of the second Temple of Jerusalem, after the return from
Babylonian captivity; hence the president of a Royal Arch lodge took the
name of Zerubbabel, and wore a vesture of scarlet and purple. The
meeting was called a “chapter”; the three masonic degrees were dubbed
“probationary degrees”; and soon, on the title page of the rules of the
degree was represented an ark, with the inscription “Nulla Salus Extra”
(no safety outside), whereby we are reminded that according to Catholic
doctrine the ark of Noah was a type of the Church. Afterward the Royal
Arch degree published a program of its work, in which masonry is divided
into Operative and Speculative, and the former subdivided into manual,
instrumental, and scientific; the aim of the “order” was defined to be,
to gather the human race in one fold under the great Shepherd of souls.
For the rest, the work of this degree was childish play.

Even before this fruit was borne in England, there came into circulation
in France, how or why nobody knows, a statement that Freemasonry arose
in Palestine during the Crusades, and was there consolidated with the
Knights of St. John (Hospitalers), wherefore the lodges came to be
called Saint John’s lodges; that after the Crusades the order was
established in Scotland, was thence afterward introduced into England,
and later into other countries. This historic lie was, of course,
welcomed by the nobles who were members of the order; as for the many
uneducated members who had been admitted into the French lodges, they
were easily deluded. Thenceforward there were High Degrees of all sorts
in France. And as the fable assigned to Scotland the foremost place in
the history of masonry, the highest degrees began to be known as
Scottish, or, after the name of Scotland’s patron, Saint Andrew, Saint
Andrew’s degrees, and the lodges Scottish or Saint Andrew’s lodges. In
their rites of admission they adopted from the traditions of the English
and French stonemasons a lot of myths about the death of Hiram, and
taught the aspirants for admission to avenge that death, the meaning
being that they were to avenge the expulsion of the Stuarts, and the
wrongs done the Catholic Church by the Reformation and by illuminism.

But as degrees were multiplied the Hiram myth no longer sufficed, and
for the higher steps it was necessary to have recourse to other myths.
Meanwhile it was seen that the story of the consolidation of the
Freemasons and the Knights of Saint John would not work, for that
knightly order was still in existence; therefore, if the aristocratic
brethren were to have their vanity flattered, recourse must be had to a
suppressed order of knighthood. True, that was not pleasing to strict
Catholics, but there was no alternative—and a bond of connection had to
be formed between Masonry and the order of the Templars—the heretical
Templars.

So here is the story of the relation of the Freemasons to the Templars:
A few Templars, fleeing from papal and royal persecution—among them
Grand Comptroller Harris and Marshal Aumont—reached Scotland, and in
that country, in order to gain a livelihood, worked as common masons.
Advised of the death of the Grandmaster Molay, and of his last will,
wherein he had directed the brethren to perpetuate the order, these
fugitive knights that same year established the “Freemasons’ league,”
and on the Scotch Isle of Mull held the first “chapter” in 1314. Now, to
say nothing of the fact that, as we shall see, the story took more than
one different shape afterward, it is on other grounds quite unworthy of
belief. It is beyond question that documentarily the Freemason league
can assign for itself no other origin but the constitution of the Grand
Lodge of England in 1717. But, besides, the story is ridiculous, not
only in that Harris and Aumont are purely fictitious personages, but
also in that the Grand Lodge of Scotland and the oldest lodges of that
ancient kingdom know nothing of any such creation of a society; and,
furthermore, the objects and the sentiments of Templarism and masonry
differ too widely for any unification to take place between them. In the
one body free thinking through levity of temperament: in the other
repudiation of odium theologicum out of love of fellowmen; on one side
egotism: on the other regard for the general weal; on one side pride of
aristocracy: on the other regard only for the dignity of manhood.

And yet the most eminent men of the 18th century were fooled into
believing that the Freemasons are descended from the Templars. The first
serious and formal introduction of spurious Templarism into masonry took
place in France. The Chevalier de Boneville, on November 24, 1764,
founded at Paris a chapter of the high degrees called (apparently in
honor of the then grandmaster of Freemasons, Louis de Bourbon, count of
Clermont) the “Clermont chapter”; its members were, for the most part,
partisans of the Stuarts, and therefore of the Jesuits also. Here it was
that the story of the wondrous transformation of Templars into
Freemasons in Scotland was invented, taught, and employed as part of the
ceremonial of admission to the higher degrees. The members wore the
masonic togs, and in their ritual the death of the Grandmaster Molay
took the place of that of Hiram; and, in fact, by Hiram, as some
asserted, Molay was meant. From this chapter the influence of the
Jesuits extended soon over the whole field of French Freemasonry.
Surely, it was not by accident nor out of patriotism that the very next
year the French Grand Lodge, till then dependent on England, declared
itself independent, and adopted statutes according to which the
“Scottish Masters” (unknown both in England and Scotland) were to have
oversight of the work.


                        4. APOSTLES OF NONSENSE.

Soon the craze spread further still, and first, of course, through
Germany, where, in those degenerate days, whatever bore the French stamp
was received with reverence and conscientiously aped. The Scottish
lodges got entrance into Berlin as early as 1742. The dubious honor of
this importation belongs to Baron E. G. von Marschall, who had been
initiated into the new Templarism at Paris. Dying soon afterward, he was
succeeded by a man who presented the curious spectacle of noblest and
most strenuous endeavor toward a fantastic goal, of the nature of which
he knew nothing. Charles Gotthilf, Imperial Baron of Hund and
Altengrottkau (so he was styled), born in 1722, was a nobleman of
Lusatia and actual privy councilor of the Emperor; he was a man of
narrow mind, without high education, but he was an idealist, a
chivalrous, hospitable and kindly gentleman. At Paris he was received
into the Catholic Church and into the spurious order of Templars, to
which he was devoted heart and soul: he was commissioned “Master of the
Host” in Germany. He founded a lodge on one of his estates, which bore
the ominous name of Unwurde (unworth), and soon had several subordinate
lodges under his jurisdiction.

“About this time,” says a contemporary writer, “the Seven-Years War
broke out. The French troops came into Germany, and with them many
Jesuits. With the French Army, and particularly in its commissariat,
were a great many Freemasons of the higher degrees, and some of those
gentlemen had calculated to make a good deal of money by the sale of
merchandise in Germany. I knew one French commissary who had a whole
wagonload of decorations for some forty-five degrees, and these he
peddled all the way from Strasburg to Hamburg. Thereafter no German
lodge was any longer content with the three symbolic degrees, but nearly
every one of them had a series of higher degrees of one brand or
another, according to the particular windbag each fell victim to; and so
they dropped one system and took up another when a new apostle came that
way and reformed them.”

Such an apostle of fraud was the Marquis de Lernais or Lerney. Taken
prisoner of war to Berlin, he there made known the Jesuitical doctrine
of the Chapter of Clermont, and even founded a chapter in the Grand
Lodge of the Three World-Spheres. To spread these chapters over the rest
of Germany, or, in plain terms, to give the whole country into the hands
of the Jesuits, a character by no means ambiguous, one Philip Samuel
Rosa, once a Protestant clergyman, counsel to the consistory, and
superintendent, but afterward deposed for immorality, was employed.
Rosa’s whole endeavor was to make money. Joining the Chapter of Clermont
he got the title “Knight of Jerusalem and Prior of the Chapter of
Halle.” As he traveled up and down the land, the lodge at Halle paid his
expenses. The eyes of the deluded brethren were at last opened, on the
discovery of the relations between Rosa and another swindler, one
Leuchte, who palmed himself off as an Englishman, Baron Johnson, and who
founded a Grand Chapter, admitted novices and knights, boasted of armies
and fleets at his command, and sent forth to all Templars in Germany an
encyclical letter summoning them to his standard. Many were his dupes,
among them Rosa, who visited him at Jena, humbled himself before him,
and consented to the expulsion of the Berlin chapter from the “order.”
But as Rosa was loth to admit at Halle his submission to Johnson, and
counseled the “knights” there not to recognize Johnson, his
double-dealing was betrayed to his dupes at Halle by the “Baron,” and he
was dismissed from their service in disgrace. The “Baron” himself, after
the discovery of his frauds, was repudiated by his followers, and in
1765 was imprisoned in the famous castle of Wartburg, and there remained
till his death in 1775.

This was the opportunity of the Baron von Hund, the Don Quixote of the
18th century. He became now the acknowledged head of the “order,” and
ruled it as his fancy dictated. He always spoke of “Unknown Superiors”
of the order as though his policy was guided by them; but the
“Superiors” who imposed on the guileless gentleman were the intriguants
at Paris. Because of the unconditional obedience required of the
members, Hund called the system of the order that of “Strict
Observance,” in contradistinction to the “lax observance” of ordinary
Freemasons. The Strict Observance comprised seven degrees; viz., the
three masonic degrees, the degree of the Scottish Master, that of the
Novice, that of the Knight-Templar, finally the degree of the Eques
Professus, or Professed Knight (one who has “professed” or taken the
monastic vows!). All knights assumed Latin names or surnames. Hund was
Eques ab Ense (Knight of the Sword); others were Knight of the Sun, of
the Lion, of the Star, even of the Whale, of the Chafer, of the Golden
Crab, of the Mole, etc. Soon Strict Observance was dominant in the
German lodges, while genuine Freemasonry was forgotten. No less than
twenty-six German princes joined the order, and so puffed up were its
directors in consequence that forthwith they divided Europe up into
provinces, after the manner of the Templars and the Jesuits, naming for
each province a Master of the Host. The subdivisions of provinces were
called, as among the Templars, Priories, Prefectures, Comptrollerships,
etc. To give these subdivisions something more than an existence on
paper, Hund dispatched the Baron G. A. von Weiler, Knight of the Golden
Ear (of wheat, barley, etc.) to France and Italy, where he founded
several chapters: even the Grand Orient of France united itself with the
Strict Observance. Toward those German lodges which held aloof from this
bastard masonry the Hundian Templars were supremely disdainful, and but
few of the lodges had the spirit to speak out against the “obscurantist
innovations.” Chief among the few was the gallant old Lodge of Unity, at
Frankfort-on-the-Main, which declared itself an English provincial
lodge, to show its independence of pseudo-Templarism.

A zealous apostle of the Strict Observance was John Christian Schubart
of Kleefeld, Knight of the Ostrich, who was constantly on the road
converting lodges to that system. Schubart devised a plan by which the
order was to acquire great wealth. Hund’s financial affairs were in
confusion, in consequence of the war, and he proposed to bequeath his
property to the order, in consideration of a certain sum in cash: but
the order had not the money. Schubart now proposed to exact enormous
fees for initiations and admissions to high degrees (for example, 350
thalers for admission). But the scheme could not be worked, and Schubart
withdrew from the order.

The order had no longer any use for Hund. The time had come for the
Jesuit influence to assert itself: it would have no more fooleries with
helmets, swords, accoutrements, and Templar’s mantles. It was seen by
the original projectors of the “order” that if they would succeed in
their design of winning over Freemasonry to the plan of catholizing
Germany, they must betimes provide a clerical directorate for the
organization, which till now had worn the mask of knighthood. They found
a convenient instrument in the person of the Protestant theologian, John
Augustus von Stark, born at Schwerin in 1741. While a student in
Goettingen Stark was admitted (1761) to the masonic order; then he was a
teacher in Petersburg, where he adopted the mystic system of one
Melesino, a Greek. The ceremonial of Melesino’s system comprised a
number of prayers and genuflections, and even a mass; the high-degree
meetings were called Conclaves, and the members wore surplices. Later,
at Paris, Stark took an interest in Oriental manuscripts, and joined the
Catholic Church, but all the same, on his return home he served as
professor of theology at Koenigsberg, and then as court preacher and
general ecclesiastical superintendent in the same city, and afterward in
Darmstadt. Through some acquaintances, who were members of the Strict
Observance, he got an introduction to Hund, to whom he revealed the
great secret which he had learned at Petersburg, namely, that the grand
mysteries of the Templars were revealed not to the knights, but only to
the clerical members, and that these mysteries had been kept and handed
down to that time; further, that the true chief of the order of Templars
was none other but the Knight of the Golden Sun, Charles Edward Stuart,
the Pretender, then resident in Florence. Delighted at the prospect of
an enhancement of what he fancied to be his sciences, Hund recognized
Stark and two of Stark’s friends as Clerics of the Order of Templars.
These clerical Templars thereupon drew up a ceremonial and created
degrees of their own, and as a special favor initiated some secular
knights into their mysteries. But because Hund declined to accommodate
Stark with a loan of two hundred thalers to defray the expenses of a
journey to Petersburg, where Pylades, head of the Templar clerics,
resided, the two fell out, and Stark announced his purpose to keep the
“Clericate” independent of the “Order.” Nevertheless, he begged a friend
to negotiate on his behalf with the secular Templars. This friend was a
noble personage, Ernest Werner von Raven, Knight of the Pearl, a wealthy
landowner, “prior” in the “order,” member of a Chapter under Rosa and
Hund, and also an initiate in Stark’s own clerical order of Templars.
Like Hund, he was a man of honor, but vain and narrow-minded, a mystic
and an alchemist. Raven, in 1772, attended a convention held at Kohlo,
in Lusatia, for the purpose of bringing about an understanding between
the Knights and the clerics. He appeared in the costume of the Templar
clerics, viz.; white cassock with red cross on the breast and a hat like
that of a cardinal. He presented to the meeting a project of union drawn
up by Stark, which the knights received with plaudits of satisfaction.
Hund was deposed from his high office, and appointed one of the Masters
of the Host, while Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick was made Grandmaster, and
other princes were named to be Superiors and Protectors under him.

But the ritualistic pomp of the Clerics had already awakened suspicion
in the minds of the Protestant members, and they began to cry out
against mysteries of foreign origin and against the dictation of unknown
Superiors. This discontent found expression in the convention held at
Brunswick in 1775. There Hund was questioned as to the legitimacy of his
appointment as a Master of the Host and the Clerics as to the
authenticity of their mysteries. Hund was deposed from office; the
following year he died of a broken heart, and, clothed in the regalia of
Master of the Host, was interred in the church at Melrichsstadt in front
of the altar. The seat of the Grandmaster was fixed permanently at
Brunswick.

Thus the machinations of the Jesuits seemed to have come to naught. But
now they sent forth a new apostle, a man who was an enigma, whose place
of birth and of death are unknown, and who himself admitted to his
confidants that he was an agent of the Jesuits. Gugomos—such was his
name—styled baron and professor of art, and as a member of the Strict
Observance Knight of the Triumphant Swan, in 1776, in his capacity as
dignitary of the order of Templars with a long string of titles, invited
the Grandmaster, the Directorate, and the Prior of the Clerics to attend
a convention at Wiesbaden, in order, as he said, to instruct them in the
genuine Templarism. And many “Knights” obeyed this singular invitation,
among them several princes. Gugomos made loud boasts of the great number
of mysteries into which he had been initiated, and in telling of them
used phrases and terms that remind us strongly of the “Exercitia
Spiritualia;” he exhibited his insignia and the commission of a “Most
Holy See” in Cyprus; and declared that the Order to which he belonged,
and of which the ancient order of Templars was only an offshoot, was
founded by Moses, whose successors in the office of Grandmaster had been
Egyptian, Judean, and other kings, Grecian philosophers, Christ himself
and his apostles, finally popes. The Templar succession, he said, had
been perpetuated in Cyprus (not in Scotland, then), and the archbishops
of Cyprus were the successors of the Grandmasters. The degrees of
Freemasonry (thus he driveled on) were a later innovation on the
original clerical and knightly system, which in its organization was, he
said, exactly the same as the Jesuit order. The one thing needed in
order to instruct men in the occult sciences was a holy temple. On the
completion of such a temple the “natural fire” would fall from heaven,
etc. Many persons recognized the fraud; others walked into the trap, and
were initiated. But seeing how little confidence was placed in him,
Gugomos absconded, and that was the end of Jesuit Freemasonry.

But the farce of Templarism lived a few years yet, though people were
growing tired of it. Some of the members went back to the old-fashioned
masonry; others turned to new lights of mysticism that had for some time
been looming on the horizon—the Swedish Rite and the New Rosicrucianism.


                          5. THE SWEDISH RITE.

Swedish Freemasons, as early as the middle of the 18th century, had
found the genuine English masonry too simple and inornate: they longed
for more glitter and pomp, mysteries and degrees. King Gustavus III.
attempted to satisfy this want by concocting a new system, the
ingredients being genuine freemasonry, the Strict Observance, and the
system then known at “Rosicrucianism,” and in largest proportion the
Clermont system: the doctrines of the famous mystic and seer,
Swedenborg, may also have given a flavor to the compound. In founding
the Swedish Rite or System, Gustavus counted on obtaining the help of
the members in his effort to rid himself of the party of the nobles. The
Swedish Rite has ten degrees. It is founded on two stories, one that
certain secrets have descended to it from Christ through the Apostles,
the clerical Templars, and the Freemasons; the other, that a nephew of
the Grandmaster Beaulieu, a predecessor of Molay, visited Molay in
prison, and, at the suggestion of Molay, went down into his uncle’s
sepulchre, where, in a casket, he found the insignia and the records of
the order; that from Paris he took these into Scotland, and thence into
Sweden. The symbols of the higher degrees refer to Templarism and
Catholicism. The ceremonies of the highest degree are said closely to
resemble the mass. Other alleged usages are, the wearing of the red
cross of the Templars on the breast, reciting every night Saint
Bernard’s prayer to the Lamb of God, fasting on Good Friday till
sundown, then eating three slices of bread, with oil and salt. The title
of the head of the System is Vicar of Solomon. Several distinguished
members of the Swedish System, among them the celebrated poet J. H.
Voss, have characterized its ceremonies as “vain, useless and
ridiculous.”


             6. THE NEW ROSICRUCIANISM AND ALLIED SYSTEMS.

The New Rosicrucianism had its rise in Southern Germany about the year
1760, while Rosa and Johnson were busy with their systems. Its
originators had no connection with Freemasonry, and of its nine degrees
not even the first three were named after the masonic degrees. Several
discontented members of the Strict Observance joined the new order. The
members assumed fanciful names, as Foebron, Ormesus, Cedrinus; the
lodges were called “Circles.” Unquestioning obedience was to be rendered
to the Superiors. The members learned only the mysteries of their own
particular circle. The motto was: “May God and His Word be with us.”
They claimed to possess a cryptic Book containing a sacred history of
events prior to the creation of the world, especially of the Fall of the
Angels.

Their specialty was a mystical, kabbalistic, and totally absurd
interpretation of the Bible, and of other alleged sacred or occult
writings, whence they deduced an explanation of the universe. For
example, they taught that the planets and the other heavenly bodies
reflect back on the sun the light they receive from him, thus conserving
his might and his splendor. They also practiced necromancy,
exorcization, alchemy, the art of making gold, of preparing the elixir
of life: they studied such problems as the production of the noble
metals from rain water, urine, and other bodies, and even of evolving
human beings by chemical processes. In their assemblies the members wore
white and black scarfs, but those of the higher degrees wore priestly
vestments, with crosses of silver or gold. At the initiation the
candidates swore fearful oaths. Aspirants to the ninth degree were
assured that once they should attain that eminence they would understand
all nature’s secrets and possess supreme control of angels, devils, and
men. The first prophet of the New Rosicrucianism was John George
Schrepfer, coffeehouse keeper in Leipsic. In 1777 he founded in his own
shop a lodge of the Scottish Rite, to afford his customers a better
style of masonry than was found in the ordinary lodges. The Duke of
Courland, protector of one of the masonic lodges, had the man publicly
bastinadoed: but Schrepfer shortly afterward inspired both him and the
Duke of Brunswick with a curiosity to be instructed in the mysteries,
and visited them at Dresden and at Brunswick. In his lodge he gave
demonstrations of his supernatural powers as a magician and a
necromancer: for example, he would summon up spirits of the dead. Puffed
up by success, Schrepfer indulged in all manner of debauchery, and at
last was reduced to penury. He died by his own hand, aged 35 years.

But Rosicrucianism was yet to reach its highest point, which it did in
the person of John Christopher Woellner (born at Spandau, 1732, ordained
preacher 1759, a councilor in the Prussian service in 1766, and Minister
of State 1788; deceased 1800), and John Rudolf Bischofswerder (born in
Thuringia 1741, chamberlain to the Elector of Saxony; major in the
Prussian army 1772; minister at war 1768; deceased 1803). Not content
with the honor of being Knight of the Griffin in the Strict Observance,
Bischofswerder went in search of an order that practiced the magic art,
and was so fortunate as to find it in the New Rosicrucianism. He was
initiated into the mysteries by Schrepfer, and it was he who converted
the Duke of Courland from an enemy into a friend of the coffeehouse
Rosicrucian. After the death of Schrepfer, whose most zealous supporter
he had been, Bischofswerder obtained promotion in the Prussian service
through the favor of the crown prince Frederic William, nephew of
Frederic the Great, and shared his good fortune with Woellner, Knight of
the Cube, who like himself had seceded from Templarism. The pair won the
crown prince over to Rosicrucianism, and enjoyed his confidence both
then and after his accession to the throne of Prussia in 1786, as
William II. At last, as ministers of state, they succeeded in
substituting obscurantism and state religionism in the place of the
illuminism and toleration that had prevailed under old Fritz. It was
they that dictated the odious Edict of Religion of 1788, which was
expected to prove a deathblow to illuminism and free thought: but the
death of the King upset all their calculations. That was the end of the
New Rosicrucianism.

Simultaneously with the order of the Rosicrucians arose two variant
forms of the same, the society of the Asiatic Brethren, and that of
the African Buildingmasters (Asiatische Brueder, Afrikanische
Bauherren). The Asiatic Brethren’s order was founded in Vienna by
Baron Hans Henry von Eckhofen, an ex-Rosicrucian: it admitted only
Freemasons, but did not exclude Jews, and its aims were the same as
those of the Rosicrucians. Its chief seat was at Vienna, called by
them Thessalonica, for they gave a foreign name to every place. Its
head officers were styled Inquisitors. There were five degrees, viz.,
two probationary—those of Seekers and of Sufferers—and three superior
degrees. The members in the two lower degrees wore round black hats
with distinctive feathers for each degree, black mantles, and white or
black ribbons, broidered with different emblems; those in the higher
degrees wore red hats and mantles; the attire of those in the highest
degree was all rosy-red. Ten members constituted a Mastership, ten
masterships a Decade, and so on. The order became shockingly corrupt
in Austria.

The African society, founded by War Councilor Koeppen in Berlin, had
rather higher aims than the Rosicrucians and the Asiatic Brethren: they
studied the history of Freemasonry, admitted to their order only
scholars and artists, conducted their business in Latin, and offered
prizes for scientific researches: but they indulged in farfetched and
absurd symbolism, kabbalism, magic, and mysticism. Their degrees were
five inferior or preparatory, and five higher or esoteric. The order
lived for a few years only.

There were many other societies, instituted mostly for the purpose of
fraud and moneymaking: of these we give no account here. But there still
remains one society which is worthy of mention—that of the Brethren of
the Cross (Kreuzbrueder) or Devotees of the Cross (Kreuzfromme), founded
by Count Christian von Haugwitz (1752–1832), who was at one time Knight
of the Holy Mount in the Strict Observance, afterward belonged to a
German imitation of the Swedish rite, and at last founded a society
which was described by a contemporary as “a conspiracy of despotism
against liberty, of vice against virtue, of stupidity against talent, of
darkness against enlightenment.” The Devotees of the Cross observed the
strictest secrecy, corresponded in cipher, inveigled princes, in order
to rule in their stead (after the manner of Bischofswerder and Woellner)
and practiced all manner of superstitions to make an end of science.
They had no connection whatever with Freemasonry.

Unfortunately this multiplication of mystical orders was not without
effect on the fortunes of the masonic body, in that it has led to a
vicious growth of “high degrees.” It was a French adventurer, Stephen
Morin, who, in 1761, introduced into the United States the 33 degrees:
they entered France again in 1803, and were regarded as a novelty,
having been forgotten during the Revolution. The titles of these degrees
are at once bombastic and unmeaning: Grand Scots, Knights of the East,
High Princes of Jerusalem, Princes of Grace, Grand Inquisitors, Princes
of the Royal Secret, etc., and in some of the variations of these
ridiculous degrees we have Knights of the Ape, and of the Lion, and
Emperor of East and West.




                            _PART ELEVENTH._
                    _The Illuminati and Their Era._


                           1. THE ILLUMINATI.

By the suppression of the Jesuit order by Clement XIV., the results of
two centuries of painful toil in the interest of a universal
ecclesiastical dominion were undone. Then it was that an ingenious mind
conceived the thought of employing on behalf of enlightenment such
instrumentality as the Jesuits had employed against it. It was a pupil
of the Jesuits to whom this thought first occurred: their mechanical,
soul-stifling method of education had made him their enemy; but besides
he had learned the artifices and the secrets of the Jesuits, and hoped
that by imitating them in a Catholic country likely to be influenced by
such arts, he might thereby promote the very opposite interests. Adam
Weishaupt was born in 1748, and when only 25 years of age was professor
of canon law and jurisprudence in the university of Ingolstadt, and also
lecturer on history and philosophy, being the first in that institute to
deliver lectures in the German language, and in consonance with the more
enlightened spirit of the age. The intrigues of the ousted Fathers
against their successor in a professorial chair which they had held for
nearly a century forced to maturity the thought which he had cherished
from his student days: and the founding in the neighboring village of
Burghausen of a lodge of Rosicrucians, who were trying to attract to
themselves his students, decided him to carry his idea into execution.
On May 1, 1776, he founded the Order of Perfectibilists to which he
afterward gave the name Illuminists (Illuminati). To propagate this
institution and to strengthen it he adopted measures which, in the
circumstances of the time, seemed not unpractical. First, he adopted
entire the hierarchic system of government existing among the
Jesuits—despotic rule from top to bottom; secondly, he employed
Freemasonry to promote the ends of his order, just as the Jesuits had
attempted to do. Accordingly Weishaupt, who was full of vanity,
ambition, and desire of revenge, but knew nothing of the true
Freemasonry, only of its perversions, obtained admission to the order in
a lodge in Munich. Hence it is not true that the Freemasons founded the
league of the Illuminati, but rather than an order that arose outside of
the lodge simply made use of Freemasonry: and so to the defeated
reactionary movement against Freemasonry now succeeded an unmasonic
revolutionary movement. In executing his plan Weishaupt was assisted
mainly by Francis Xavier von Zwackh, of Landshut, councilor to the
government of the Bavarian Palatinate, a man initiated in the highest
degrees of masonry. Several years after its foundation the order of the
Illuminati was still confined to South Germany, or even to Bavaria; but
as Weishaupt desired that the north also, and Protestants no less than
Catholics, should take an interest in his institute, he sent the Marquis
Costanzo von Costanza, Bavarian chamberlain, to Frankfort-on-the-Main in
1779 to win over to the order the lodges in that city. Costanzo himself
had little success, the rich merchants of Frankfort being averse to
anything that would unsettle the peace of the world; but a young man
whose acquaintance he made was destined to be, after Weishaupt, the most
effective promoter of the new society. This was Baron Adolf von Knigge,
well known for his much-read book. “Ueber den Umgang mit Menschen.” He
was born in 1752, and from his youth up had been an amateur of spiritism
(ghostseership). He was already an Initiate of the higher degrees of the
Strict Observance; but, dissatisfied with that order, he adopted the
idea of Illuminism enthusiastically, and brought into the system a
number of men who became its apostles; for example, Bode, the
translator; Francis von Ditfurth, associate justice, of Weimar. With
these two Knigge attended the Conventus of Wilhelmsbad, and there
championed the cause of Illuminism stoutly, and helped to give the
deathblow to Templarism. And now as Knigge, who supposed the order to be
an ancient one, entered into a correspondence with Weishaupt, he was not
a little astonished on learning from him that the society was as yet no
more than an embryo: in fact, it had only the degree of the minor
Illuminates (Kleine Illuminaten). Nothing disheartened, however, he
journeyed to Bavaria, and was admitted to the order in splendid style.
But his lively fancy led him to develop the order further; and the
sober-minded Weishaupt, whose gifts were those of the thinker rather
than of the contriver of forms, left to Knigge the elaboration of the
several degrees and their Lessons, in which both were agreed that
allusions to the fireworship and lightworship of the Persians should be
employed, as typical of the spiritual fire and spiritual light of
Illuminism.

The groundwork of the polity of the Illuminati was as follows: A supreme
president ruled the whole, having next below him two officers, each of
whom again had two others under him, and so on, so that the first could
most conveniently govern all. The doings of the order were kept most
strictly secret. Each member took the name of some historic or mythic
personage of distinction: Weishaupt was Spartacus; Zwackh, Cato;
Costanzo, Diomede; Knigge, Philo; Ditfurth, Minos; Nicolai, Lucian, and
so on. Countries and cities also had pseudonyms: Munich was Athens;
Frankfort, Edessa; Austria, Egypt; Franconia, Illyria, and so forth. In
correspondence the members used a secret cipher, numbers taking the
place of letters; in reckoning time they followed the calendar of the
ancient Persians with the Persian names of months and the Persian aera.

The number of degrees and their designations were never definitely
fixed, hence they are different in different localities. But all the
accounts agree that there were three principal degrees. The first of
these, the School of Plants (Pflanzschule) was designed to receive
youths approaching adult age. The candidate for admission was at first a
Novice, and, except the one who indoctrinated him, knew no member of the
order. He was required, by submitting a detailed account of his life,
with full particulars as to all his doings, and by keeping a journal, to
prove himself a fit subject for admission, and one likely to be of
service to the order. From the grade of Novice he passed to that of
Minerval. The members of the Minerval class formed a sort of learned
society, which occupied itself with answering questions in the domain of
morals. The Minervals, furthermore, were required to make known what
they thought of the order, and what they expected of it, and they
assumed the obligation of obedience. They were under the eye of their
superior officers, read and wrote whatever superiors required of them,
and spied on each other, and reported one another’s faults to superiors
as in the Jesuit system. The leaders of the Minervals were called Minor
Illuminati; were taken by surprise at the meetings of their degree and
nominated to that dignity—a method that wonderfully stimulated ambition;
they were instructed in the management and oversight of their subjects,
and practiced themselves in that art; they were besides required to
report their experiences. The second principal degree was Freemasonry,
through the three original degrees of which and the two so-called
Scottish degrees the Illuminati passed; and strenuous effort was made to
have the masonic lodges adopt a system agreeable to the ideas of the
Illuminati, so that the membership of the order might be steadily
increased. The three original degrees of masonry were imparted to the
regular Illuminati without ceremonies. The members of the two Scottish
degrees were called Greater Illuminati, and the task of these was to
study the characters of their fellowmembers; and Dirigent Illuminati,
who presided over the several divisions of the illuministic masonry. The
third and highest degree was that of the Mysteries, comprising the four
stages of Priest, Regent, Magus and King (rex). This principal degree
was elaborated only in part, and was not brought into use. In these four
divisions of the third degree the ends of the order were, according to
Knigge’s plan, to be explained. The supreme heads of the several
divisions of the order were called Areopagites, but their functions were
never fully defined. It was proposed also to add a department for women.
The aims of this organization of the Illuminati remind us forcibly of
those of the Pythagorean League. They contemplated, not a sudden and
violent but a gradual and peaceful revolution, in which the Illuminism
of the 18th century should gain the victory. This revolution was to be
effected by winning for the order all the considerable intellectual
forces of the time, though the new associates were only little by little
to learn what the aims of the order were. And inasmuch as the members,
when they should have among their number all those forces, must
everywhere attain the highest places in government, the triumph of their
enlightened principles could not be for long delayed. In the superior
degrees the members were to be taught as a grand secret of the order
that the means whereby the redemption of mankind was one day to be
accomplished was Secret Schools of Wisdom. These would lift man out of
his fallen estate: these would, without violence, sweep Princes and
National boundaries from the face of the earth, and constitute the human
race one family, every housefather a priest and lord of his own, and
Reason the one lawcode of mankind. To imbue the minds of men with these
principles, illuminist books were prescribed to the members for their
reading. In sharp contrast to the masonic systems in which Jesuits had
had a hand, the Illuminati avoided all forms which might suggest
obedience to any religion or church, and welcomed whatever favored the
dominance of reason and the overthrow of revelation.

In the very short period of its existence the order of the Illuminati
attained a membership of 2,000, a result very materially promoted by the
rule that any member possessing authority from the superiors could admit
a candidate. Among the members were many men eminent, both socially and
in science, as the dukes of Saxe-Gotha (Ernest), Brunswick (Ferdinand),
of Saxe-Weimar (Charles Augustus, while yet only heir of the ducal
crown); Dalberg, who was afterward prince-bishop; Montgilas, afterward
minister of state; President Count Geinsheim; the celebrated philosopher
Baader; Professors Semmer of Ingolstadt, Moldenhauer of Kiel, Feder of
Goettingen; the educator Leuchsenring of Darmstadt; the Catholic
cathedral prebendaries Schroeckenstein of Eichstadt and Schmelzer of
Mayence; Haefelin, bishop of Munich; the authors Bahrdt, Biester,
Gedike, Bode, Nicolai, etc. Goethe, Herder, and probably Pestalozzi also
belonged to the order. The league in “Wilhelm Meister” reminds us
strongly of the Illuminati.

The order was not yet spread abroad beyond the German borders, though a
few Frenchmen had been admitted while visiting Germany; but its plans
were already reaching out farther. And now the head of the whole
organization was to be the General (as among the Jesuits); under him
there was to be in each country a head officer, the National; in each
principal division of a country a Provincial; in subdivisions of
provinces a Prefect, and so on.

This aping of Jesuit polity and the imprudent admission of objectionable
or indifferent characters proved the ruin of the order. Despotic rule
and espionage could never promote the cause of liberty and
enlightenment—and the founder of the order proposed to make
enlightenment the means of attaining liberty.

Then the dissensions ever growing more serious between Weishaupt and
Knigge. Whereas Weishaupt cared only for the ends of the society, all
else being in his eyes only incidental, mere formalism, Knigge, on the
other hand, being a man of the world, shrank in horror from the program
of his associate: religion, morality, the State were imperiled. He
dreaded Liberalist books, and would have been far better pleased to see
the order working on the lines of the Freemasons of that day, though
with an elaborate ceremonial and manifold degrees and mysteries, and
with some harmless, innocent ideal of human welfare and brotherly love
as the object of their endeavors. Weishaupt called Knigge’s pet
contrivance tinsel and trumpery and child’s playthings, and the pair of
“Areopagites” grew steadily ever more asunder.

This rising storm within boded less ill to the order than the attacks
from without growing from day to day more violent. Illuminism was
assailed by enemies of all sorts, that sprung up like mushrooms. First
there were the masonic systems of the reactionary or superstitious kind,
such as the Rosicrucians, the Asiatic Brethren, the African
Masterbuilders, the Swedish Rite, the remnant of the Strict Observance,
etc.; then such of the Illuminati as thought the hopes of the order had
been disappointed, or who expected to profit by a betrayal of the order
to the enemies of liberty and light; finally, and above all, there were
the sons of Loyola, ever laboring industriously in the dark though their
society had been suppressed, and now again, thanks to the licentious,
bigoted despotic Elector Charles Theodore, possessing great influence in
Bavaria, the country in which the membership of the Order of Illuminati
was of longest standing and most numerous. At that court, the seat of
corruption, some courtiers, professors, and clergymen who had been
members of the order, with the secret pamphleteer, Joseph Utzschneider,
at their head, played traitor, charging the order with rebellion,
infidelity, and all manner of vices and crimes, and at the same time,
without ado, classing with the Illuminati the Freemasons. By a decree of
August 2, 1784, the lodges of all secret societies established without
government’s approval, including the Illuminati and the Freemasons, were
banned. The masonic lodges submitted at once, and closed their doors;
but Weishaupt and his associates went on with their work, hoping to
change the mind of the Elector by bringing up for public discussion
their rules and their usages. Vain Hope. The Elector’s confessor, Father
Frank, an ex-Jesuit, who already had labored against Freemasonry,
procured on March 2, 1781, a second decree, by which the previous one
was confirmed, and all secret organizations that continued to exist in
violation of it, and specifically the Order of Illuminati, were
forbidden to hold meetings, and all their property was confiscated. The
Minister of State, Aloysius Xavier Kreitmayr, distinguished himself by
the rigor with which he executed the ukaz. Weishaupt was deposed from
his place at Ingolstadt, expelled from that city, and declared incapable
of legal defense; he had to flee the country. He first tarried in
Ratisbon; but soon, in consequence of the discovery of compromising
documents in a search of the houses of Illuminati, very grave charges
were brought against the members, and the Elector became alarmed for his
throne. Without distinction of class or station a prosecution was
entered against all persons accused of membership in the order, or even
suspected of sympathy with it, and they were imprisoned, deposed from
office, banished, and in the case of persons of the lower classes,
punished with stripes. This whole business was managed, without any
recourse to the regular tribunals, by a special commission under Court
direction. This persecution lasted till after the outbreak of the French
Revolution, and a refusal to condemn the French people was taken as
evidence of a revolutionary spirit. This system naturally fostered
ignorance among the lower classes, but among educated people it tended
to spread the principles of Illuminism, and to awaken opposition to
monkish rule in the state.

Weishaupt, no longer safe at Ratisbon, the Bavarian government having
set a price on his head, fled to Gotha, where Duke Ernest, a member of
the order, protected him, and made him Court councilor. Here he lived
till 1830, but he failed to resuscitate his order on an improved plan.
As for Knigge, he made haste to quit the incriminated order, and in his
prim, emasculate “Umgang mit Menschen,” strongly condemned all “secret
societies”—he, the old-time Templar, Freemason, and Illuminist. Few were
so stout-hearted and firm as Ignatius von Born, the naturalist, a native
of Transylvania, who had been a Jesuit, but who, after the suppression
of the Society of Jesus, had joined the Illuminati and become a
Freemason. After the suppression of the Bavarian lodges, Born, who was
then in the service of the Emperor Joseph II. at Vienna, sent back to
the Bavarian Academy of Sciences his diploma as member of that body,
accompanying it with a letter in which he bluntly declared that he would
rather be a Freemason than a member of a body with which he had nothing
in common. And thus was the cry of Voltaire, “Ecrasons l’Infame,” taken
up by the party against which it was first uttered, and by them given
effect in the shape of a most infamous persecution, before men of
enlightenment had made the first move toward “stamping out” what to them
seemed an “infamy.” For the rest it is said that the suppression of the
Illuminati was the result of an understanding with Frederic the Great,
whose policy was threatened by the order.


                      2. IMITATIONS OF ILLUMINISM.

Not long after the break-up of the Order of Illuminati in the South, a
similar order sprang up in Northern Germany. It originated in the brain
of a man unfortunately at once a zealous Illuminist and a morally
depraved vagabond, who made a deplorable misuse of the talents with
which nature had endowed him richly. This was Dr. Charles Frederic
Bahrdt, Protestant theologian, sometime preacher, professor, or teacher
in sundry places, and once even keeper of an eating house at Halle. In
1788 it occurred to him to found an association to promote enlightened
views, and his plan was to combine it with the masonic society, of which
he had become a member in England. The projected association he called
the “German Union of the XXII.” (Deutsche Union der XXII.), for the
reason, as he explained in a circular letter, that twenty-two men had
formed a union for the ends set forth. The Union was to be organized on
the plan of Jesus Christ, whom Bahrdt in a voluminous work portrayed as
the founder of a sort of Freemasonry, and of whose miracles he offered a
rather forced natural explanation. In accordance with this plan the
association was to be a “silent brotherhood” that was to hurl from their
throne superstition and fanaticism, and this chiefly by the literary
activity of the members. The literary labor was ingeniously organized in
such fashion that the Union would by diligent effort in time gain
control of the press and the whole book trade, thus acquiring the means
of insuring the triumph of enlightenment. Outwardly the Union was to
have the appearance of a purely literary association; but inwardly it
was to consist of three degrees, of which the lower ones were to be
simply reading societies, while the third alone would understand the
real purpose of the order, viz., advancement of science, art, commerce,
and religion, betterment of education, encouragement of men of talent,
remuneration for services, provision for meritorious workers in age and
misfortune, also for the widows and orphans of members. But inasmuch as
Bahrdt had painted this beautiful picture solely to make money, the
Deutsche Union existed only on paper; but it wrought for its projector a
protracted term of imprisonment, which he survived but a short time; he
died in 1792.

Another imitation of the Order of Illuminati, the League of the
Evergetes (Bund der Evergeten, or benefactors, or welldoers) which
sprang up at the close of the 18th century, had a longer term of life,
though but little expansion. Its activity extended over all the arts and
sciences, except positive theology and positive jurisprudence. The
members were designated after the manner of the Illuminati; but they
acknowledged no unknown superiors. Time was reckoned from the death of
Socrates, B. C. 400. The supreme head was called Archiepistat
(archiepistates, chief overseer); there were two degrees, of which only
the higher one had a political aim, popular representation. Fessler, by
his protests against such tendencies, brought about a split in the
association, and afterward his adversaries tried to convert it into a
sort of moral Femgericht by tracking and branding all offenses. One of
the three leaders betrayed the other two, and was with them put in
prison, but soon afterward released: that ended the association.


               4. FREEMASONRY AND THE FRENCH REVOLUTION.

That there was any alliance of the Freemasons, or even of the
Illuminists, with the men of the French Revolution, which broke out in
1789, can be affirmed only by those who are ignorant of history or
wilfully blind—by men like the Privy Councilor Grolman of Giessen,
friend of Stark (significantly named in the Strict Observance, Knight of
the Golden Crab), or, like the abbe and canon Augustin Barruel in
France, or the ship’s captain and professor, John Robinson, in England:
their allegations were received only with ridicule, and passed into
oblivion. As we have seen, the Illuminati were to be found only in
Germany, where no revolution took place: in fact, they were no longer in
existence when the French revolution broke out. As for the Freemasons,
we have already shown that they were opposed to the movement; but that
movement could have no other ground than the dissatisfaction of the
people of France with the shameful Bourbon dynasty, whose mischief could
not be repaired by the well-intentioned but narrow-minded Louis XVI. No
critical or serious work of history gives any justification of the
belief that Freemasonry had a hand in bringing about that Revolution:
but a decisive proof of the true relation of Freemasonry to the troubles
of those times is had in the fact that the Terror made an end of the
Grand Orient of France. All the clubs of the French Revolution were
open: the people would not tolerate secret clubs, not even private
assemblages, and hence as early as 1791 began to persecute the
Freemasons as aristocrats. The Grandmaster then existing, Louis Philip
Joseph, Duke of Orleans, gave up his title, as we know, and called
himself Citizen Equality, and at last, in 1793, declared that he had
given up the “phantom” of equality, found in Masonry, for the reality;
that in the Republic there should be no Mysteries; and, therefore, he
would no more have anything to do with Freemasonry. That same year his
head fell under the guillotine, and his blood sealed the “reality of
equality”; and most of the members of the two zealous lodges, those of
the “Contrat Social” and of the “Neuf Soeurs” were taught, when they met
with a like fate, that “real” equality was a more dreadful “phantom”
than those they had pursued in the lodges. Only three lodges continued
in existence through the Terror by extreme caution and secrecy, and not
till the fall of the Terrorists did Brother Roettiers de Montaleau come
forth from the prison in which he had been incarcerated simply because
he was a Freemason.

Thus did French Masonry weather the terrible storm of the Revolution;
the German lodges in the mean time were busy in reforming and
strengthening themselves; for a season they withdrew into retirement,
and exerted no longer any influence on public affairs. Superstition and
child’s play fell into disrepute: the Rosicrucians, the “Asian” and
“African” orders, the Templars, and their like, condemned by public
opinion, had to give up their absurdities and return to right reason.
The general league of German Freemasons projected in 1790 by Bode of
Gotha, failed of realization in consequence of the death soon afterward
of that enlightened mason (1793); but its purpose was served, though not
in its whole extent, by the sturdy Eclectic League of Masonry
(Ekletische Freimaurerbund) founded as early as 1783, with headquarters
at Frankfort. This League has ever since rendered notable service to the
cause of genuine Freemasonry.




                            _PART TWELFTH._
                  _Secret Societies of Various Kinds._


                         1. SOCIETIES OF WITS.

The Comic has a place everywhere in history: there is no lack of it in
secret societies; indeed, in such societies it assumes many different
forms. For there be secret societies that would be comic; there be
secret societies that are comic without knowing it; and finally there be
men and parties that by their action against so-called secret societies
make themselves comic without intending it.

While Goethe lived at Weimar, there was formed in that city a satirical
Society of Chevaliers. Curiously enough it was suggested by Frederic von
Goue, a Knight of the Strict Observance and a strong believer in the
descent of Freemasonry from Templarism, but a comical old soul withal,
and author of a parody of Goethe’s Werther. The members took knightly
names: Goethe, for example, was Goetz von Berlichingen; they spoke in
the style of chivalry, and they had four degrees. In sarcastic allusion
to the revelations promised (but never communicated) in the high
pseudomasonic degrees, the degrees of the Society of Chevaliers were, 1,
Transition; 2, Transition’s Transition; 3, Transition’s Transition to
Transition; 4, Transition’s Transition to Transition of Transition. Only
the initiated understood the profound meaning of the Degrees.

Another society of similar nature was that of the Mad Court Councilors
founded at Frankfort-on-the-Main by the physician Ehrmann in 1809.
Membership consisted only in the receipt from the founder (in
recognition of some humorous piece) of a Diploma written in burlesque
style in Latin, and bearing the impress of a broad seal. Among men
honored with the diploma were Jean Paul, E. M. Arndt, Goethe, Iffland,
Schlosser, Creuzer, Chladny, etc. Goethe earned his diploma by a parody
of his own “Westoestlicher Diwan,”—“Occidentalischer Orientalismus.”

Many societies of this sort have since arisen, but those of Vienna are
worthy of special mention. One of these was called “Ludlamshoehle,”
after a not very successful drama of Oehlenschlager’s. It had many
distinguished men in its membership. The members were called Bodies, the
candidates Shadows. Though mirth was the only object, the police thought
it best to suppress the society in 1826. In 1855 appeared the Green
Island, a comic-chivalresque society, though it rendered good service to
literature and art. Several writers and actors of note belonged to it. A
society, the Allschlaraffia was founded at Prague in the ’fifties,
which, in 1885, had eighty-five affiliated societies in Germany,
Austria, Switzerland and other countries. A congress of the leagued
societies met at Leipsic in 1876, and another at Prague in 1883. The
president of each Schlaraffenreich (or society) was called Uhu, but on
festive occasions was Aha, and in condemning offenses against the
Allschlaraffia, Oho.


              2. IMITATIONS OF THE ANCIENT MYSTIC LEAGUES.

There have been and still are in France secret societies that have
thought they could in our time transplant to Europe, under Masonic
forms, the Egyptian Mysteries. Once there was a Holy Order of the
Sophisians, founded by French military officers who had been with
Bonaparte in Egypt. The highest dignitaries were called Isiarchs, and
the rest of the officers of the society bore similar titles (mostly
fictitious) of Egyptian priests. The lodges were Pyramids, and their
aera began 15,000 years before Christ. Two orders which still subsist
are those of Misraim and of Memphis, both of which in downright earnest
trace their origin back to Egyptian antiquity and regard all the secret
associations mentioned in the present volume, except those having
political aims, as members of one grand association. The fact is that
the Misraim system had its origin in 1805, and was founded by some men
of loose morals, who contrived to get themselves received into a
Freemasons’ lodge in Milan, but who, because they were not promoted as
they had hoped to be, went out and formed a Freemasonry of their own.
The order spread first over Italy and in 1814 to France. The system has
no fewer than ninety degrees, grouped in seventeen classes, and three
series. Only the Grandmaster received the ninetieth degree: the
“content” of all the degrees is pure nonsense. The Memphis system was
introduced into France in 1814 by a Cairene adventurer. It held its
first lodge at Montauban in 1815, but has often since that time been
obliged to interrupt its work. The Grand Lodge of Paris was called
Osiris, the head of the order was Grandmaster of Light; the hierarchy of
officials was complex and showy. The degrees were more than ninety in
number, to which were added three supreme degrees, but the total was
afterward reduced to thirty. They comprised the Indian, Persian,
Egyptian, Grecian, Scandinavian, and even the Mexican mythologies and
theologies. Only two lodges exist to-day, and these the Grand Orient of
France took under its wing some years ago, they having given up their
silly ideas, and turned to sensible, beneficent work.

Another anachronism is the ghost of Templarism, which in the present
century, as in the last, walks abroad: but its connection with Masonry
is now rather loose, or even non-existent. Thus, there is no connection
between Freemasonry and the New Templars of Paris, whose traditions do
not differ from those of the New Observance. They reckon the years from
the founding of the order of Templars (1118), and their “learned men”
have imagined a succession of Grandmasters deriving from one Larmenius
of Jerusalem, nominated, they say, by Molay as his successor. But
Larmenius never existed. Here, then, is a new variant of the story put
forth by the Strict Observance, the Royal Arch, etc. A document is shown
to prove the nomination of Larmenius, but its Latin is not that of the
14th century; and, besides, only the Conventus of the Templars could
name a Grandmaster. After the Revolution the new Templars purchased a
splendid property in the Nouvelle France suburb of Paris, and from time
to time observed the anniversary of Molay’s death, having a solemn mass
of requiem performed. The Grandmaster, Raimond Fabre de Palaprat
(1804–1838) had under him four Grand Vicars for Europe, Asia, Africa and
America—indeed, the whole earth was parceled out among the members in
Grand Priories, Minor Priories, Comptrolleries, etc., and the wearers of
these titles were happy. There were Clerical Templars, too, the highest
grade being that of Bishop. The rules of the New Templarism permitted
none to be admitted to the order save men of noble birth: but many a
shopkeeper wore the white mantle with red cross.

There are New Templars also in England, Scotland, Ireland and the United
States, almost all of whom have received the so-called higher degrees of
Freemasonry. The English Templars are divided into two opposing parties,
from one of which came the Irish and the American Templars. No one is
competent for admission to any of these Templar societies who does not
believe that Christ came on earth to save sinners with his blood, and
the members must swear to defend this belief with their swords and with
their lives. But no one, alas, has yet heard of their deeds on behalf of
those imperiled articles of faith. Their lodges are called Commanderies.
They have Swordbearers, Bannerbearers, Prelates.


                     3. IMITATIONS OF FREEMASONRY.

The resuscitation of the ancient order of Druids is another example of
imitation of the secret societies of antiquity. Among the Kelts of Gaul
and Britain the Druids were, next after the nobles and the warriors, the
highest estate. Religion, art, and science were their exclusive
province: hence they were priests, poets, and scholars. Their head was a
Chief Druid, and they formed an order with special garb, a special mode
of writing, degrees and mysteries. The mysteries were certain
theological, philosophical, medical, mathematical, etc., dogmata, and
these were conveyed in three-membered sentences (triads). They believed
in the immortality of the soul and its transmigration, in one god,
creation of the world out of nothing, and its transformation (not
destruction) by water and fire. Their assemblies were held in caverns
and forests, on mountains, and within circles, ringed round with
enormous blocks of stone. The Roman emperors persecuted them as they did
Jews and Christians, because the Druidic mysteries seemed to them
dangerous to the state. In Britain the Bards, i. e., those of the Druids
who cultivated poetry and song, were the most influential division of
their order. There were three degrees of the Bards—Probationers, Passed
Scholars and Learned Bards.

In 1781 a society was formed in London whose members called themselves
Druids, and who practiced rites resembling those of Freemasonry. In 1858
there were twenty-seven mutually independent societies of Druids in
Britain, but by consolidation the number is now reduced to fifteen.
Druidism was introduced into the United States in 1833. Their local
organizations are called Groves, and the central organizations Grand
Groves. They have three degrees, to which are appended other higher
degrees, each with its own High Arch Chapter. There is no close
connection between British and American Druidism. In 1872 Druidism was
imported into Germany from the United States: there are in the German
empire forty Groves, with about 2,000 members. The order of Odd Fellows
is of English origin, but is very strong in the United States. It was
founded toward the end of the first half of the 18th century, but
appears to have been at first a convivial society of “goodfellows,” or
odd fellows, with mutual benefit as a secondary object. It was
reorganized in 1812, the feature of conviviality dropped, and the
beneficent ends made paramount; this is the Independent Order of Odd
Fellows. A rather similar organization, the Ancient Order of Foresters,
was founded in England about the same time with the Odd Fellows’ order.
Forestry also has been transplanted to the United States. American
Oddfellowship severed its connection with the British Grand Lodge in
1842. There were in the United States in 1889 more than 600,000
Oddfellows in 10,000 lodges. A society of American origin is that of the
Knights of Pythias, founded in Washington in 1864; its object is to
disseminate “the great principles of friendship, charity, and
benevolence”: it had in 1885 2,000 separate lodges and 160,000 members.
The Order of Red Men (Improved Order of Red Men) is of earlier origin
than the preceding: the members in their lodge meetings imitate some of
the customs of the American aboriginals, and wear an attire resembling
that of the Indians. Besides these there are in the United States very
many other secret societies having for their end mutual beneficence, as
Knights of Malta, Senate of Sparta, Knights of the Mystic Chain, Legion
of the Red Cross, Knights of Friendship, Royal Arcanum. The Grand Army
of the Republic was founded soon after the close of the civil war. Its
members are veteran soldiers of that war. Its ends are to perpetuate the
associations of comrades in arms, to relieve distress of members and
provide benefit funds, and to advance the interests of the members in
every honorable and lawful way. The badge of membership is a small
bronze button worn in the coat lapel.

THE END.




                                _INDEX._


 African buildingmasters, 214

 Akkadians, 26

 Alexander, a false prophet, 124 sqq.;
   his trick serpent, 125;
   his wife the moon-goddess, 126;
   he claims to be a reincarnation of Pythagoras, 127

 Amenhotep IV., reformer of Egyptian religion, 17

 Angekoks, 36

 Animals and trees as gods, 11

 Aphrodite Urania, and Aphrodite Pandemos, 40

 Apis, sacred bull of Memphis, 14

 Apollonius of Tyana, heathen saint, mystic, and thaumaturge, 117 sqq.;
   in Mesopotamia, 119;
   India, 120;
   Ethiopia, 123;
   appears after his death, 124

 Areoi among the Society Islanders, 37

 Aristeas, mysterious personage, his death and sundry reappearances, 89
    sqq.

 Asiatic Brethren, 214


 Baal, 27

 Babylonian religion, 26 sqq.

 Bacchanalia in Rome, Livy’s narrative, 62 sqq.

 Bible translated into Greek, 93

 Book of the Dead, 19, 24

 Brahma, soul of the universe, 35

 Brahmans, 33

 Brethren of the Cross, 215

 Buddha, Buddhists, 33 sqq.


 Chaldaea, 26;
   Chaldee astrology, 28

 Chimaera, 40

 Christianism an inevitable development of Hellenic mysteries, Hellenic
    philosophies, and Jewish religion, 99;
   its origin, 107 sqq.;
   Paul the Apostle, 109;
   the Christian church, how developed, 115

 Chuenaten, reformer of Egyptian religion, 17

 Clermont Chapter, 202

 Comic secret societies, 203 sqq.;
   Society of Chevaliers, 231;
   Ludlamshoehle, 231;
   Allschlaraffia, 231

 Cretan mysteries, 59

 Cuneiform writing, 28

 Cybele or Rhea, her mysteries, 65 sqq.;
   antics of her devotees, 67


 Daemons, Chaldaean, 27

 Dead, realm of the, 18;
   judgment of the, 20

 Death, existence after, with Osiris, 19

 Demeter, 49 sqq.

 Demotic writing, 23

 Devils unknown to the Hellenes, 40

 Diodorus on Egyptian mysteries, 22

 Dionysiac mysteries. 60 sqq.;
   the Dionysiac or Bacchic cult appealed to sensuality, 60;
   the phallus honored, 61;
   the Maenades and their orgies, 61

 Druids, 234

 Duk-Duk, 37


 Egypt, 9 sqq.;
   Nile, 9;
   priests and warriors, 10;
   religion grounded on astronomy, 11;
   Re, the sun-god, becoming the one god, ib.;
   worship of animals and plants, 12;
   mysteries, 20

 Egyptian gods: Shu, Set, Thot, Nunu, Tum, Horos Re, Isis, Osiris, Neit,
    Ptah, Amon, Hathor, Harmachis, 13 sqq.

 Eleusinian mysteries, 49 sqq.;
   basileus, basilissa, 51;
   Eumolpidae, Kerytae, 51;
   hierophant, 51;
   wars suspended during the solemnities, 52;
   the myth underlying the Eleusinia, 53;
   lesser and greater Eleusinia, 54;
   procession to Eleusis, 55;
   mystae, epoptae, 50;
   the Mystic House, 56

 Essenes, a Palestinian order or sect of puritans, 94 sqq.;
   called also Therapeutae, 95;
   rites of admission, 96;
   Essenism a middle term between the Grecian mysteries and
      Christianism, 98

 Evergetes, league of, 227


 Femgerichte of Westphalia, 147 sqq.;
   origin, 148;
   femic courts exercise jurisdiction all over the empire, 154;
   procedure, 165;
   death by the rope, 159;
   condemning to death a town’s population, 161;
   femic courts superseded, 161

 Fire Worship, 33

 Foresters, 236

 Freemasonry, 178 sqq.;
   grew out of the Stonemasons’ organization, 180;
   first grand lodge instituted 1717, ib.;
   recognizes human brotherhood regardless of race or creed, 181:
   institution of the three degrees, 182;
   diffusion of the order, 183;
   its aims, 184;
   signs, ritual, symbols, 186;
   grand and particular lodges, 187;
   women not admitted to the lodge, 190;
   Freemasonry in the French revolution, 228 sqq.


 German Union of the XXII, 226

 Gods, animals and plants as, 11;
   of Egypt, 130 sqq.;
   of Babylonia, 27 sqq.;
   of India, 33 sqq.

 Graces, Fates, Furies, 8

 Grecian religion, 38 sqq.;
   knew no dogma, 39;
   nor devils, 40;
   hospitable to foreign gods, 40;
   worship, a State function, 41;
   ritual and sacrifice, 43;
   seership and prophecy, 44;
   oracles, ib.;
   conjuration, 45

 Greek initiates of Egyptian mysteries, 21

 Gugomos, a mysterious personage, 209


 Heaven and Earth as gods, 7

 Hellenic mysteries, 45 sqq.;
   an anomaly, 47;
   Euripides, his praise of the mysteries, also Cicero’s, 48;
   their meaning—purification and expiation, 49;
   see “Eleusinian Mysteries.”

 Herodotus on the great Labyrinth, 18;
   on Egyptian mysteries, 26

 Hieroglyphs, 23

 Hierophant, 51

 “High Degrees,” 195 sqq.;
   Royal Arch, 199;
   mythic descent from Templarism, 200;
   Scottish (or Saint Andrew’s) degrees, 201;
   peddling high degrees, 203;
   Lernais (Marquis), Rosa (Phil. Sam.), 204;
   the new Templarism in Germany, ib.;
   Strict Observance, 205 sqq.;
   fantastic titles, “Knight of the Cockchafer,” etc., 206;
   John Aug. Stark invents clerical Templarism, 207;
   Gugomos traces the high degrees back to Moses, 209

 Hiram myth, 199, 202, 215

 Hund, Baron von, a Don Quixote, 203 sqq.


 Iacchos, 50

 Illuminati, 216 sqq.

 Imitations of ancient mystic leagues, 232 sqq.;
   Holy Order of Sophisians, 232;
   Order of Misraim, Order of Memphis, ib.

 Initiates, 5;
   initiation into Egyptian mysteries, 22

 Isis, 14

 Istar, Chaldaean goddess, her descent into the infernal realm, 31


 Jasios, son of Zeus, inventor of husbandry, 90

 Jesus, his personality, teaching, pretensions, miracles, 102 sqq.

 “Johnson, Baron,” a swindler, 204

 Judaism and Hellenism, 91 sqq.;
   exchange of ideas between Jews and Hellenes, its effects, 93


 Kings and queens, deceased, made gods, 17

 Klobbergoll, 37

 Knigge, Baron Adolf von, founder of Illuminism, 21;
   apostatizes, 225

 Knights Templar, 129 sqq.;
   origin, 131;
   degrees, 133;
   wealth and power, 134;
   secret aims and cryptic beliefs, 135;
   contempt for the cross, 136;
   worship of an idol, 138;
   accused of heresy and members tried by the Inquisition, 141;
   many convicted and burnt to death, the order dissolved, 145


 Labyrinth at Crocodilopolis, 18

 Lernais, an apostle of fraud, 204

 Lodge of Unity at Frankfort faithful to genuine freemasonry, 206

 “Lost God,” the, 46

 Lycurgus in Egypt, 21


 Man rivaling Deity, 2

 Mithras worship imported from Persia into Rome, 68;
   elaborate symbolism of the initiation, human sacrifices, 69;
   Heliogabalus an initiate, 70;
   Mithras coupled with Zagreus and Attis, and the compound deity called
      Sabazius, 70;
   initiation into the Sabazian mysteries, 71

 Mysteries, invention of, 3;
   of Egypt included Monotheism, 23

 Mythology of natural phenomena, 8


 Natural forces worshiped, 6

 New Testament, 110 sqq.;
   Joannine gospel a product of the Alexandrine school, 113

 Nile, maker of Egypt, 9

 Nirvana, 2


 Orpheus in Egypt, 22

 Orphic societies, 84 sqq.;
   secret schools or clubs, 85;
   became nests of mendicants and swindlers, 85

 Osiris, mysteries of, 14


 Pantheism of Brahmans, 34

 Persephone, rape of, 49

 Persian religion, 32 sqq.

 Philo, Hellenist Jewish philosopher, 94

 Plato in Egypt, 22

 Plutarch on Egyptian religion, 24

 Pluto, 7

 Poseidon, 7

 Priests, ancient, their oeconomy of religious truths, 8

 Priests of Assyria and Babylonia, 28

 Pythagoras, 72 sqq.;
   his visit to Egypt, 75;
   to Babylon, 75;
   life in Crotona, 76;
   his mathematical science, astronomical knowledge, 77;
   philosophical views, 78;
   his school and the Pythagorean league, fall of the league, 79 sqq.


 Re, Egyptian supreme god, 16

 Religious ideas, origin of, 5

 Riddle of existence, 2

 Rosa, Philip Samuel, promoter of the “High Degrees” fraud, 204

 Rosicrucianism, 174 sqq.;
   John Valentine Andreae its originator, 175;
   the mythical friar Christian Rosenkreuz, ib.;
   the order claimed to be an offshoot of the knightly order of the
      Hospitalers, 177

 Rosicrucianism, the new, 211 sqq.


 Sabazius: see “Mithras.”

 Sais, image at, 1

 Samothrace, mysteries of, 57 sqq.;
   Cabiri, ib.;
   phallic worship, 58;
   the initiation, ib.

 Satyrs, 40

 Schrepfer, founder of the new Rosicrucianism, 212

 Schubart, John Christian, promoter of the “High Degrees” fraud, 206

 Secret Leagues among savages, 36

 Secret Societies, miscellaneous:
   The Woodsplitters, 192;
   Order of Hope, 193;
   of Saint Jonathan (or Joachim), 194;
   the Pilgrims’ Chain, ib.;
   Order of Argonauts, ib.;
   of the Mustardseed, 195;
   of the Leal, of the Ducats, ib.;
   of the Rose, 196

 Shamanism, 26

 Siva, 35

 Solomonic Legend, 174, 199;
   see “Hiram Myth,” and “High Degrees.”

 Solon in Egypt, 22

 Sorcery among savages, 36

 Sphinxes, 15

 Spirit, soul, and body, 18

 Stark, promoter of the High Degrees delusion, 207

 Stonemasons’ lodges, 166 sqq.;
   of Germany, 168 sqq.;
   league of lodges organized by Albertus Magnus, 169;
   usages, rites, passwords, 170;
   hostility to ecclesiasticism, 172;
   stonemasons and other craftsmen in France, 173 sqq.;
   the Solomonic myth, 174;
   rival organizations—Compagnonnages, 175;
   English stonemasons, 176 sq.

 Strict Observance, 207 sqq.

 Stuart, Charles Edward, 207

 Sumerians, 26

 Sun and moon as gods, 7

 Swedish rite, 210


 Templarism and Freemasonry, 201, 233;
   see “High Degrees.”


 Vishnu, 35


 Weishaupt, Adam, father of Illuminism, 216 sqq.


 Zarathustrotema, 32

 Zoroaster, 32 sqq.

[Illustration: Ornamental horizontal divider with mirrored spiral
designs at the center]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            TWO GREAT WORKS

                      BY ALICE B. STOCKHAM, M. D.


                       TOKOLOGY      A BOOK FOR
                                     EVERY WOMAN

=Tokology= teaches possible painless pregnancy and parturition, giving
full, plain directions for the care of a woman before and after
confinement. The ailments of pregnancy can be prevented and the pains
and dangers of childbirth avoided

                      WITHOUT DRUGS OR MEDICINES.

                         Tokology is a popular

                            GUIDE TO HEALTH.

_Mrs. J. M. Davis, Sabula, Iowa_, says: “I have two dear _Tokology_
babies, and during the whole nine months, both times, had neither ache
nor pain.”

_Mrs. A. L. T._: “An hour after the labor-pain began the baby was
delivered. If I could not get another _Tokology_, I would not part with
mine for a thousand dollars.”

_Mrs. J. B. McD._: “I followed _Tokology_ and now, after fifteen years
of childless married life, a sweet baby boy has come as a gift from
God.”

The illustrations are accurate and carefully made. Nearly 400 pages.
Printed in English, German and Swedish.

                            =Cloth, $2.25=
                            =Morocco, $2.75=


                           THE LOVER’S WORLD

                            A WHEEL OF LIFE

        Supplies the hunger-cry of humanity upon Vital Subjects.

All of its teachings are based upon experience and philosophy.

For the first time definite instructions are put in print for the
training, mastery and transmutation of creative energy, the use and
appropriation of passion. Through this definite training one holds the
key to health, power and longevity.

_Prof. Oscar L. Triggs, University of Chicago_: “I have read _The
Lover’s World_ with great interest. At length there is a chance that the
world will take a right attitude toward sex now that so many voices,
such as yours and Carpenter’s, are raised in behalf of love and a true
interpretation of sex.”

_Samuel M. Jones_ (Mayor of Toledo, Ohio): “It is the most helpful work
on the subject of unity and the sacredness of all life that I have
seen.”

=400 pages.= Bound in Silk Cloth, =Prepaid, $2.25=.




                                KAREZZA

                           Ethics of Marriage


                      By ALICE B. STOCKHAM, M. D.

[Illustration: Small illustration of a book labeled “Karezza” with
“Stockham” printed beneath the title]

KAREZZA is written for married men and women who have lofty aims in
life, who are pure in heart and who seek best conditions for offspring.
KAREZZA gives instruction for the marital relation, and regards it as a
sacred function that may be employed either for propagation, or for
higher individual development of body, mind and soul, without
propagation.

It gives full and careful directions for the

                COMPLETE CONTROL OF THE CREATIVE POWER.

KAREZZA controverts the prevailing ideas of baseness and degradation
associated with the sexual nature, makes a plea for a better birthright
for the child, for a controlled and designed maternity.

Its teachings will lead individuals to purer lives, to right
understanding and appreciation of the sex functions, to intelligent
control of propagation, and finally, through right adjustment in the
most sacred relations, to the ideal marriage.

HEALTH CULTURE: KAREZZA is a book that all who are married and those
contemplating marriage will read with interest and profit.

DR. JAS. A. SMILLIE: I have received more actual benefit from the
practical application of KAREZZA than from all other books. My gratitude
knows no bounds. Every day I am stronger, happier and purer.

CHAS. MCCORMICK, M. D.: I regard KAREZZA as Divinely inspired. May a
suffering world appreciate and reward your efforts.


                   Extra Levant Cloth, Prepaid, $1.00




                          HOW TO LIVE FOREVER

                        THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE

                             By HARRY GAZE

This work shows exactly how to perpetuate life in physical embodiment.
By cooperation with known laws of change and growth, man may have
eternal health and immortal youth. Old age is a disease that may be
prevented and cured.

Harry Gaze is thoroughly scientific, and founds his theories on the
latest biological discoveries. Through knowledge he gives _life more
abundantly_. This is scientific optimism.


W. R. C. Latson, M. D., Editor of “Health Culture”, says:—The author of
this ingenious and suggestive book advances the somewhat startling claim
that somatic death—that is, the death of the body as a whole—is due to
causes which may be averted; and that, by proper means, one may so
control the bodily functions as to retain the body indefinitely. I do
not hesitate to say that, while Mr. Gaze’s conception of the possibility
of physical immortality is unique, there is nothing in the accepted
facts of physiological science by which his position can be refuted. I
can heartily recommend Mr. Gaze’s book.


Edward E. Purinton, Editor “Naturopath”:—You combine instruction and
inspiration in a way in which few thinkers encompass. I am familiar with
most of the New Thought theories, but I believe this book surpasses them
all.


             Elegantly bound in cloth and gold over 200 pp.
                         Price, Prepaid, $1.25

              STOCKHAM PUB. CO., 70 Dearborn St., Chicago




                        Stockham Publishing Co.

                             (Incorporated)

                 70 Dearborn Street,      CHICAGO, ILL.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                   BOOKS ON HEALTH AND SEXUAL SCIENCE

  =TOKOLOGY.= A Book for Every Woman. 373 pp., cloth, $2.25; morocco,
    $2.75.

  =THE LOVER’S WORLD.= A Wheel of Life. 500 pp., cloth, $2.25.


  =KAREZZA.= Cloth, 146 pp., $1.00.

  =KORADINE.= Cloth, 425 pp., $1.00.

  =TOLSTOI.= Cloth, 140 pp., $1.00.

  =CREATIVE LIFE.= Paper, 25 cents.

  =PARENTHOOD.= Paper, 25 cents.

  =HEALTH GERMS.= Paper, 25 cents.

  =MARRIAGE.= By GEORGE W. SAVORY. Over 400 pp., illustrated, cloth,
    $2.25; morocco, $2.75.

  =A VISIT TO A GNANI.= By EDWARD CARPENTER. Cloth, 134 pp., $1.00.

  =LOVE’S COMING OF AGE.= By EDWARD CARPENTER. Cloth, 162 pp., $1.00.

  =HEALTH FOR WOMEN.= By GEORGE H. TAYLOR, M. D. Cloth, 249 pp., $1.00.

  =CULTIVATION OF PERSONAL MAGNETISM.= By LEROY BERRIER. Cloth, $1.00;
    paper, 50 cents.

  =TRUTH IN SONG.= By CLARA H. SCOTT. Boards, 79 hymns, 64 pp., 30 cents
    each; $3.00 per dozen.

  =THE BETTER WAY.= By A. E. NEWTON. Paper, 48 pp., 25 cents.

  =PRENATAL CULTURE.= By A. E. NEWTON. Paper, 25 cents.

  =THE STRIKE OF A SEX and ZAUGASSENT’S DISCOVERY.= By GEO. N. MILLER.
    The two books now in one volume. Paper, 128 pp., 25 cents.

  =TRUE MANHOOD.= By E. R. SHEPHERD. Cloth, 314 pp., illustrated, $1.00.

  =HOW TO LIVE FOREVER.= By HARRY GAZE. Cloth, 205 pp., $1.25.

  =VICTORIA TRUE or the Journal of a Live Woman.= By HELEN VAN ANDERSON.
    Cloth, 154 pp., $1.00.

                 INTERPRETATIONS BY MARY HANFORD FORD:

  =PARSIFAL or The Holy Grail.= The Silent Teacher.

  =GOETHE’S FAUST.= The Growth of the Spirit.

  =BALZAC’S SERAPHITA.= The Mystery of Sex. Each $1.00. The three in a
    box, $2.50.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 Page           Changed from                      Changed to

   98 This now power was bound to      This new power was bound to
      arise, to reconcile              arise, to reconcile

  174 the beginning of the 17th        At the beginning of the 17th
      century a multitude of           century a multitude of

 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Used numbers for footnotes.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 ● HTML alt text was added for images that didn’t have captions.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MYSTERIA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


